# Chunk 1
Plain abdominal radiographs are obtained in the AP supine position. From time to time an erect plain abdominal radiograph is obtained when small bowel obstruction is suspected.
# Chunk 2
Many patients are given oral and intravenous contrast media to differentiate bowel loops from other abdominal organs and to assess the vascularity of normal anatomical structures. When intravenous contrast is given, the earlier the images are obtained, the greater the likelihood of arterial enhancement. As the time is delayed between injection and image acquisition, a venous phase and an equilibrium phase are also obtained.
# Chunk 3
The parasympathetic part of the autonomic division of the PNS (Fig. 1.47) leaves cranial and sacral regions of the CNS in association with: cranial nerves III, VII, IX, and X: III, VII, and IX carry parasympathetic fibers to structures within the head and neck only, whereas X (the vagus spinal nerves S2 to S4: sacral parasympathetic fibers innervate inferior abdominal viscera, pelvic viscera, and the arteries associated with erectile tissues of the perineum.
# Chunk 4
In the sacral region, the preganglionic parasympathetic fibers form special visceral nerves (the pelvic splanchnic nerves), which originate from the anterior rami of S2 to S4 and enter pelvic extensions of the large prevertebral plexus formed around the abdominal aorta. These fibers are distributed to pelvic and abdominal viscera mainly along blood vessels. The postganglionic motor neurons are in the walls of the viscera. In organs of the gastrointestinal system, preganglionic fibers do not have a postganglionic parasympathetic motor neuron in the pathway; instead, preganglionic fibers synapse directly on neurons in the ganglia of the enteric system.
# Chunk 5
Visceral nerve plexuses are formed in association with viscera and generally contain efferent (sympathetic and parasympathetic) and afferent components (Fig. 1.49). These plexuses include cardiac and pulmonary plexuses in the thorax and a large prevertebral plexus in the abdomen anterior to the aorta, which extends inferiorly onto the lateral walls of the pelvis. The massive prevertebral plexus supplies input to and receives output from all abdominal and pelvic viscera.
# Chunk 6
Fig. 1.42 Sympathetic part of the autonomic division of the PNS.

Abdominal visceraHeartOrgansPeripheralSympathetic nerves followsomatic nerves to periphery(glands, smooth muscle)Pelvic visceraGanglion imparEsophageal  plexusPrevertebral plexus
# Chunk 7
Fig. 1.46 Course of sympathetic nerves traveling to abdominal and pelvic viscera.

White ramus communicansGray ramus communicansSacral splanchnic nervesLumbar splanchnic nervesLeast splanchnic nervesLesser splanchnic nervesGreater splanchnic nervesPrevertebral plexusand gangliaParavertebralsympathetic trunkAbdominalandpelvic visceraAortaT5 to T9T12T9 to T10(T10 to T11)L1 to L2
# Chunk 8
A 50-year-old man was brought to the emergency department with severe lower back pain that had started several days ago. In the past 24 hours he has had two episodes of fecal incontinence and inability to pass urine and now reports numbness and weakness in both his legs.
# Chunk 9
A 45-year-old man was involved in a serious car accident. On examination he had a severe injury to the cervical region of his vertebral column with damage to the spinal cord. In fact, his breathing became erratic and stopped.
# Chunk 10
A 25-year-old woman complained of increasing lumbar back pain. Over the ensuing weeks she was noted to have an enlarging lump in the right groin, which was mildly tender to touch. On direct questioning, the patient also complained of a productive cough with sputum containing mucus and blood, and she had a mild temperature.
# Chunk 11
A 72-year-old fit and healthy man was brought to the emergency department with severe back pain beginning at the level of the shoulder blades and extending to the midlumbar region. The pain was of relatively acute onset and was continuous. The patient was able to walk to the gurney as he entered the ambulance; however, at the emergency department the patient complained of inability to use both legs.
# Chunk 12
Unfortunately, the dissection extended, the aorta ruptured, and the patient succumbed.

A 55-year-old woman came to her physician with sensory alteration in the right gluteal (buttock) region and in the intergluteal (natal) cleft. Examination also demonstrated low-grade weakness of the muscles of the foot and subtle weakness of the extensor hallucis longus, extensor digitorum longus, and fibularis tertius on the right. The patient also complained of some mild pain symptoms posteriorly in the right gluteal region.
# Chunk 13
The second type, which includes branches from the lower seven ganglia, consists mainly of preganglionic sympathetic fibers, which supply the various abdominal and pelvic viscera. These branches are large, also carry visceral afferent fibers, and form the three thoracic splanchnic nerves referred to as the greater, lesser, and least splanchnic nerves (Fig. 3.104).
# Chunk 14
Treatment is optimal with urgent surgical repair.

A 65-year-old man was admitted to the emergency room with severe central chest pain that radiated to the neck and predominantly to the left arm. He was overweight and a known heavy smoker.
# Chunk 15
A 53-year-old man presented to the emergency department with a 5-hour history of sharp pleuritic chest pain and shortness of breath. The day before he was on a long haul flight, returning from his holidays. He was usually fit and well and was a keen mountain climber. He had no previous significant medical history.
# Chunk 16
A 35-year-old man was shot during an armed robbery. The bullet entry wound was in the right fourth intercostal space, above the nipple. A chest radiograph obtained on admission to the emergency room demonstrated complete collapse of the lung.
# Chunk 17
A 62-year-old man was admitted to the emergency room with severe interscapular pain. His past medical history indicated that he was otherwise fit and well; however, it was noted he was 6’ 9” and had undergone previous eye surgery for dislocating lenses.
# Chunk 18
On examination the man was pale, clammy, and hypotensive. The pulse in his right groin was weak. An ECG demonstrated an inferior myocardial infarction. Serum blood tests revealed poor kidney function and marked acidosis.
# Chunk 19
A 35-year-old male patient presented to his family practitioner because of recent weight loss (14 lb over the previous 2 months). He also complained of a cough with streaks of blood in the sputum (hemoptysis) and left-sided chest pain. Recently, he noticed significant sweating, especially at night, which necessitated changing his sheets.
# Chunk 20
A 68-year-old man came to his family physician complaining of discomfort when swallowing (dysphagia). The physician examined the patient and noted since his last visit he had lost approximately 18 lb over 6 months. Routine blood tests revealed the patient was anemic and he was referred to the gastroenterology unit. A diagnosis of esophageal cancer was made and the patient underwent a resection, which involved a chest and abdominal incision. After 4 years the patient remains well though still subject to follow-up.
# Chunk 21
A 45-year-old woman, with a history of breast cancer in the left breast, returned to her physician. Unfortunately the disease had spread to the axillary lymph nodes and bones (bony metastatic disease). A surgeon duly resected the primary breast tumor with a wide local excision and then performed an axillary nodal clearance. The patient was then referred to an oncologist for chemotherapy. Chemotherapy was delivered through a portacath, which is a subcutaneous reservoir from which a small catheter passes under the skin into the internal jugular vein. The patient duly underwent a portacath insertion without complication, completed her course of chemotherapy, and is currently doing well 5 years later.
# Chunk 22
A 15-year-old girl presented to the emergency department with a 1-week history of productive cough with copious purulent sputum, increasing shortness of breath, fatigue, fever around 38.5° C, and no response to oral amoxicillin prescribed to her by a family physician. The patient was diagnosed with cystic fibrosis shortly after birth and had multiple admissions to the hospital for pulmonary and gastrointestinal manifestations of the disease.
# Chunk 23
Physical examination on the current admission to the ER revealed widespread inspiratory crackles, mild tachycardia of 105/min, and fever of 38.2° C. Diagnosis of infective exacerbation of bronchiectasis was made. Sputum was sent for microbiology, which later came back positive for Pseudomonas aeruginosa, a common pathogen isolated in such patients.
# Chunk 24
The inferior thoracic aperture forms the superior opening to the abdomen and is closed by the diaphragm. Inferiorly, the deep abdominal wall is continuous with the pelvic wall at the pelvic inlet. Superficially, the inferior limit of the abdominal wall is the superior margin of the lower limb.
# Chunk 25
The chamber enclosed by the abdominal wall contains a single large peritoneal cavity, which freely communicates with the pelvic cavity.
# Chunk 26
The abdominal wall consists partly of bone but mainly of muscle (Fig. 4.5). The skeletal elements of the wall (Fig. 4.5A) are: the five lumbar vertebrae and their intervening intervertebral discs, the superior expanded parts of the pelvic bones, and bony components of the inferior thoracic wall, including the costal margin, rib XII, the end of rib XI, and the xiphoid process.
# Chunk 27
The abdominal wall is continuous with the pelvic wall at the pelvic inlet, and the abdominal cavity is continuous with the pelvic cavity.
# Chunk 28
Because of the way in which the sacrum and attached pelvic bones are angled posteriorly on the vertebral column, the pelvic cavity is not oriented in the same vertical plane as the abdominal cavity. Instead, the pelvic cavity projects posteriorly, and the inlet opens anteriorly and somewhat superiorly (Fig. 4.10).
# Chunk 29
The peritoneum lining the abdominal cavity is continuous with the peritoneum in the pelvis. Consequently, the abdominal cavity is entirely continuous with the pelvic cavity (Fig. 4.11). Infections in one region can therefore freely spread into the other.
# Chunk 30
The bladder expands superiorly from the pelvic cavity into the abdominal cavity and, during pregnancy, the uterus expands freely superiorly out of the pelvic cavity into the abdominal cavity.
# Chunk 31
The abdomen communicates directly with the thigh through an aperture formed anteriorly between the inferior margin of the abdominal wall (marked by the inguinal ligament) and the pelvic bone (Fig. 4.12). Structures that pass through this aperture are: the major artery and vein of the lower limb; the femoral nerve, which innervates the quadriceps femoris muscle, which extends the knee; lymphatics; and the distal ends of psoas major and iliacus muscles, which flex the thigh at the hip joint.
# Chunk 32
The groin is a weak area in the anterior abdominal wall

During development, the gonads in both sexes descend from their sites of origin on the posterior abdominal wall into the pelvic cavity in women and the developing scrotum in men (Fig. 4.15).
# Chunk 33
In women, the gonads descend to a position just inside the pelvic cavity and never pass through the anterior abdominal wall. As a result, the only major structure passing through the inguinal canal is a derivative of the gubernaculum (the round ligament of the uterus).
# Chunk 34
The round ligament of the liver connects the umbilicus of the anterior abdominal wall with the left branch of the portal vein as it enters the liver. The small veins that accompany this ligament form a connection between the portal system and para-umbilical regions of the abdominal wall, which drain into systemic veins.
# Chunk 35
The abdomen is the part of the trunk inferior to the thorax (Fig. 4.21). Its musculomembranous walls surround a large cavity (the abdominal cavity), which is bounded superiorly by the diaphragm and inferiorly by the pelvic inlet.
# Chunk 36
The abdominal cavity may extend superiorly as high as the fourth intercostal space, and is continuous inferiorly with the pelvic cavity. It contains the peritoneal cavity and the abdominal viscera.
# Chunk 37
The abdominal wall covers a large area. It is bounded superiorly by the xiphoid process and costal margins, posteriorly by the vertebral column, and inferiorly by the upper parts of the pelvic bones. Its layers consist of skin, superficial fascia (subcutaneous tissue), muscles and their associated deep fascias, extraperitoneal fascia, and parietal peritoneum (Fig. 4.24).
# Chunk 38
The transversalis fascia is a continuous layer of deep fascia that lines the abdominal cavity and continues into the pelvic cavity. It crosses the midline anteriorly, associating with the transversalis fascia of the opposite side, and is continuous with the fascia on the inferior surface of the diaphragm. It is continuous posteriorly with the deep fascia covering the muscles of the posterior abdominal wall and attaches to the thoracolumbar fascia.
# Chunk 39
Deep to the transversalis fascia is a layer of connective tissue, the extraperitoneal fascia, which separates the transversalis fascia from the peritoneum (Fig. 4.34). Containing varying amounts of fat, this layer not only lines the abdominal cavity but is also continuous with a similar layer lining the pelvic cavity. It is abundant on the posterior abdominal wall, especially around the kidneys, continues over organs covered by peritoneal reflections, and, as the vasculature is located in this layer, extends into mesenteries with the blood vessels. Viscera in the extraperitoneal fascia are referred to as retroperitoneal.
# Chunk 40
In women, the ovaries descend into the pelvic cavity and become associated with the developing uterus. Therefore, the only remaining structure passing through the inguinal canal is the round ligament of the uterus, which is a remnant of the gubernaculum.
# Chunk 41
The cecum is continuous with the ascending colon at the entrance of the ileum and is usually in contact with the anterior abdominal wall. It may cross the pelvic brim to lie in the true pelvis. The appendix is attached to the posteromedial wall of the cecum, just inferior to the end of the ileum (Fig. 4.82).
# Chunk 42
The pelvic splanchnic nerves (parasympathetic root) are unique. They are the only splanchnic nerves that carry parasympathetic fibers. In other words, they do not originate from the sympathetic trunks. Rather, they originate directly from the anterior rami of S2 to S4. Preganglionic parasympathetic fibers originating in the sacral spinal cord pass from the S2 to S4 spinal nerves to the inferior hypogastric plexus (Fig. 4.136). Once in this plexus, some of these fibers pass upward, enter the abdominal prevertebral plexus, and distribute with the arteries supplying the hindgut. This provides the pathway for innervation of the distal one-third of the transverse colon, the descending colon, and the sigmoid colon by preganglionic parasympathetic fibers.
# Chunk 43
The superior hypogastric plexus contains numerous small ganglia and is the final part of the abdominal prevertebral plexus before the prevertebral plexus continues into the pelvic cavity.
# Chunk 44
The abdominal prevertebral plexus receives: preganglionic parasympathetic and visceral afferent fibers from the vagus nerves [X], preganglionic sympathetic and visceral afferent fibers from the thoracic and lumbar splanchnic nerves, and preganglionic parasympathetic fibers from the pelvic splanchnic nerves.
# Chunk 45
Parasympathetic innervation of the abdominal part of the gastrointestinal tract and of the spleen, pancreas, gallbladder, and liver is from two sources—the vagus nerves [X] and the pelvic splanchnic nerves.
# Chunk 46
The ilia, which are components of each pelvic bone, attach laterally to the sacrum at the sacro-iliac joints (Fig. 4.141). The upper part of each ilium expands outward into a thin wing-like area (the iliac fossa). The medial side of this region of each iliac bone, and the related muscles, are components of the posterior abdominal wall.
# Chunk 47
The sympathetic trunks pass through the posterior abdominal region anterolateral to the lumbar vertebral bodies, before continuing across the sacral promontory and into the pelvic cavity (Fig. 4.169). Along their course, small raised areas are visible. These represent collections of neuronal cell bodies—primarily postganglionic neuronal cell bodies—which are located outside the central nervous system. They are sympathetic paravertebral ganglia. There are usually four ganglia along the sympathetic trunks in the posterior abdominal region.
# Chunk 48
Throughout its length, the abdominal prevertebral plexus is a conduit for: preganglionic sympathetic and visceral afferent fibers from the thoracic and lumbar splanchnic nerves, preganglionic parasympathetic and visceral afferent fibers from the vagus nerves [X], and preganglionic parasympathetic fibers from the pelvic splanchnic nerves (Fig. 4.171).
# Chunk 49
Fig. 4.10 Orientation of abdominal and pelvic cavities.

Thoracic wallAxis of abdominal cavityAbdominal cavityPelvic cavityPelvic inletAxis of pelvic cavity
# Chunk 50
Fig. 4.11 The abdominal cavity is continuous with the pelvic cavity.

RectumPeritoneumPelvic inletBladderUterusShadow of ureterShadow of internal iliac vessels
# Chunk 51
Fig. 4.94 Small bowel malrotation. Radiograph of stomach, duodenum, and jejunum using barium.

Fig. 4.95 This radiograph of the abdomen, anteroposterior view, demonstrates a number of dilated loops of small bowel. Small bowel can be identified by the plicae circulares that pass from wall to wall as indicated. The large bowel is not dilated. The cause of the small bowel dilatation is an adhesion after pelvic surgery.
# Chunk 52
Umbilical hernias are rare. Occasionally, they are congenital and result from failure of the small bowel to return to the abdominal cavity from the umbilical cord during development. After birth, umbilical hernias may result from incomplete closure of the umbilicus (navel). Overall, most of these hernias close in the first year of life, and surgical repair is not generally attempted until later.
# Chunk 53
A perforated bowel (e.g., caused by a perforated duodenal ulcer) often leads to the release of gas into the peritoneal cavity. This peritoneal gas can be easily visualized on an erect chest radiograph—gas can be demonstrated in extremely small amounts beneath the diaphragm. A patient with severe abdominal pain and subdiaphragmatic gas needs a laparotomy (Fig. 4.58).
# Chunk 54
In gastrointestinal and abdominal medicine an endoscope is used to assess the esophagus, stomach, duodenum, and proximal small bowel (Figs. 4.72 to 4.75). The tube is swallowed by the patient under light sedation and is extremely well tolerated.
# Chunk 55
The diagnosis may be made using barium and conventional radiology or endoscopy, which allows a biopsy to be obtained at the same time. Ultrasound scanning is used to check the liver for metastatic spread, and, if negative, computed tomography is carried out to assess for surgical resectability. If carcinoma of the stomach is diagnosed early, a curative surgical resection is possible. However, because most patients do not seek treatment until late in the disease, the overall 5-year survival rate is between 5% and 20%, with a mean survival time of between 5 and 8 months.
# Chunk 56
Malrotation is incomplete rotation and fixation of the midgut after it has passed from the umbilical sac and returned to the abdominal coelom (Figs. 4.93 and 4.94). The proximal attachment of the small bowel mesentery begins at the suspensory muscle of duodenum (ligament of Treitz), which determines the position of the duodenojejunal junction. The mesentery of the small bowel ends at the level of the ileocecal junction in the right lower quadrant. This long line of fixation of the mesentery prevents accidental twists of the gut.
# Chunk 57
A functional obstruction is usually due to an inability of the bowel to peristalse, which again has a number of causes, and most frequently is a postsurgical state due to excessive intraoperative bowel handling. Other causes may well include abnormality of electrolytes (e.g., sodium and potassium) rendering the bowel paralyzed until correction has occurred.
# Chunk 58
The signs and symptoms of obstruction depend on the level at which the obstruction has occurred. The primary symptom is central abdominal, intermittent, colicky pain as the peristaltic waves try to overcome the obstruction. Abdominal distention will occur if it is a low obstruction (distal), allowing more proximal loops of bowel to fill with fluid. A high obstruction (in the proximal small bowel) may not produce abdominal distention.
# Chunk 59
Small bowel obstruction is typically caused by adhesions following previous surgery, and history should always be sought for any operations or abdominal interventions (e.g., previous appendectomy). Other causes include bowel passing into hernias (e.g., inguinal) and bowel twisting on its own mesentery (volvulus). Examination of hernial orifices is mandatory in patients with bowel obstruction (Fig. 4.96).
# Chunk 60
In the clinic

It is occasionally necessary to surgically externalize bowel to the anterior abdominal wall. Externalization of bowel plays an important role in patient management. These extraanatomical bypass procedures use our anatomical knowledge and in many instances are life saving.
# Chunk 61
Similarly the jejunum is brought to the anterior abdominal wall and fixed. The jejunostomy is used as a site where a feeding tube is placed through the anterior abdominal wall into the proximal efferent small bowel.
# Chunk 62
An ileal conduit is an extraanatomical procedure and is performed after resection of the bladder for tumor. In this situation a short segment of small bowel is identified. The bowel is divided twice to produce a 20-cm segment of small bowel on its own mesentery. This isolated segment of bowel is used as a conduit. The remaining bowel is joined together. The proximal end is anastomosed to the ureters, and the distal end is anastomosed to the anterior abdominal wall. Hence, urine passes from the kidneys into the ureters and through the short segment of small bowel to the anterior abdominal wall.
# Chunk 63
The easiest way to confirm the presence of gallstones is by performing a fasting ultrasound examination of the gallbladder. The patient refrains from eating for 6 hours to ensure the gallbladder is well distended and there is little shadowing from overlying bowel gas. The examination may also identify bile duct dilation and the presence of cholecystitis. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) is another way to image the gallbladder and biliary tree. MRCP uses fluid present in the bile ducts and in the pancreatic duct as a contrast agent to show stones as well as filling defects within the gallbladder and intrahepatic or extrahepatic bile ducts. It can demonstrate strictures in the biliary tree and can also be used to visualize liver and pancreatic anatomy (Fig. 4.118).
# Chunk 64
Simplified explanation to understanding the types of jaundice and their anatomical causes

When red blood cells are destroyed by the reticuloendothelial system, the iron from the hemoglobin molecule is recycled, whereas the porphyrin ring (globin) compounds are broken down to form fat-soluble bilirubin. On reaching the liver via the bloodstream, the fat-soluble bilirubin is converted to a water-soluble form of bilirubin. This water-soluble bilirubin is secreted into the biliary tree and then in turn into the bowel, where it forms the dark color of the stool.
# Chunk 65
Arteriosclerosis may occur throughout the abdominal aorta and at the openings of the celiac trunk and the superior mesenteric and inferior mesenteric arteries. Not infrequently, the inferior mesenteric artery becomes occluded. Interestingly, many of these patients do not suffer any complications, because anastomoses between the right, middle, and left colic arteries gradually enlarge, forming a continuous marginal artery. The distal large bowel therefore becomes supplied by this enlarged marginal artery (marginal artery of Drummond), which replaces the blood supply of the inferior mesenteric artery (Fig. 4.130).
# Chunk 66
Morgagni’s and Bochdalek’s hernias tend to appear at or around the time of birth or in early infancy. They allow abdominal bowel to enter the thoracic cavity, which may compress the lungs and reduce respiratory function. Most of these hernias require surgical closure of the diaphragmatic defect. However, large hernias can lead to pulmonary hypoplasia and the long-term outcome depends more on the degree of the hypoplasia rather than on the surgical repair itself.
# Chunk 67
In the clinic

A nephrostomy is a procedure where a tube is placed through the lateral or posterior abdominal wall into the renal cortex to lie within the renal pelvis. The function of this tube is to allow drainage of urine from the renal pelvis through the tube externally (Fig. 4.160).
# Chunk 68
In the clinic

From a clinical perspective, retroperitoneal lymph nodes are arranged in two groups. The pre-aortic lymph node group drains lymph from the embryological midline structures, such as the liver, bowel, and pancreas. The para-aortic lymph node group (the lateral aortic or lumbar nodes), on either side of the aorta, drain lymph from bilateral structures, such as the kidneys and adrenal glands. Organs embryologically derived from the posterior abdominal wall also drain lymph to these nodes. These organs include the ovaries and the testes (importantly, the testes do not drain lymph to the inguinal regions).
# Chunk 69
A 45-year-old man had mild epigastric pain, and a diagnosis of esophageal reflux was made. He was given appropriate medication, which worked well. However, at the time of the initial consultation, the family practitioner requested a chest radiograph, which demonstrated a prominent hump on the left side of the diaphragm and old rib fractures.
# Chunk 70
This patient underwent palliative chemotherapy, but died 7 months later.

A 44-year-old woman had been recently diagnosed with melanoma on the toe and underwent a series of investigations.
# Chunk 71
A 55-year-old man developed severe jaundice and a massively distended abdomen. A diagnosis of cirrhosis of the liver was made, and further confirmatory tests demonstrated that the patient had significant ascites (free fluid within the peritoneal cavity). A liver biopsy was necessary to confirm the cirrhosis, but there was some debate about how this biopsy should be obtained (eFig. 4.187).
# Chunk 72
Another issue is the presence of ascites.

Normally the liver rests against the lateral and anterior abdominal walls. This direct contact can be useful for care after a liver biopsy has been obtained. After the procedure, the patient lies over the region where the biopsy has been obtained and the weight of the liver stems any localized bleeding. When patients have significant ascites, the liver cannot be compressed against the walls of the abdomen and blood may pour freely into the ascitic fluid.
# Chunk 73
A good biopsy was obtained and the diagnosis was Hodgkin’s lymphoma. The patient underwent chemotherapy and 2 years later is in full remission and leads an active life.
# Chunk 74
A 35-year-old man had a soft mass approximately 3 cm in diameter in the right scrotum. The diagnosis was a right indirect inguinal hernia.
# Chunk 75
A 25-year-old man developed severe pain in the left lower quadrant of his abdomen. The pain was diffuse and relatively constant but did ease for short periods of time. On direct questioning the patient indicated that the pain was in the inguinal region and radiated posteriorly into his left infrascapular region (loin). A urine dipstick was positive for blood (hematuria).
# Chunk 76
A 27-year-old woman was admitted to the surgical ward with appendicitis. She underwent an appendectomy. It was noted at operation that the appendix had perforated and there was pus within the abdominal cavity. The appendix was removed and the stump tied. The abdomen was washed out with warm saline solution. The patient initially made an uneventful recovery, but by day 7 she had become unwell, with pain over her right shoulder and spiking temperatures.
# Chunk 77
The most common sites for abscess to develop are the pelvis and the hepatorenal recess.

When a patient is in the supine position, the lowest points in the abdominal and pelvic cavities are the posterior superior aspect of the peritoneal cavity (the hepatorenal recess) and, in women, the recto-uterine pouch (pouch of Douglas).
# Chunk 78
The patient made a slow and uneventful recovery.

A 45-year-old man developed a low-grade rectal carcinoma just above the anorectal margin. He underwent an abdominoperineal resection of the tumor and was left with a left lower abdominal colostomy (see below). Unfortunately, the man’s wife left him for a number of reasons, including lack of sexual desire. He “turned to drink” and over the ensuing years developed cirrhosis. He was brought into the emergency room with severe bleeding from enlarged veins around his colostomy. An emergency transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt was created, which stopped all bleeding (eFigs. 4.189 and 4.190). He is now doing well in a rehabilitation program.
# Chunk 79
The free end of the sigmoid colon was brought through a hole in the anterior abdominal wall. The bowel was then carefully sutured to the anterior abdominal wall to allow placement of a bag to collect the feces. This is a colostomy.
# Chunk 80
Fortunately, most of the other portosystemic anastomoses are of relatively little consequence. In patients with colostomies, small veins may develop between the veins of the large bowel (portal system drainage) and cutaneous veins on the anterior abdominal wall (systemic veins). If these veins become enlarged because of portal hypertension, they are subject to trauma as feces are passed through the colostomy. Torrential hemorrhage may ensue if they are damaged.
# Chunk 81
A 62-year-old man came to the emergency department with swelling of both legs and a large left varicocele (enlarged and engorged varicose veins around the left testis and within the left pampiniform plexus of veins).
# Chunk 82
A 65-year-old businessman came to the emergency department with severe lower abdominal pain that was predominantly central and left sided. He had pain radiating into the left loin, and he also noticed he was passing gas and fecal debris as he urinated.
# Chunk 83
A CT scan of his abdomen and pelvis was performed (eFig. 4.191).

The CT scan demonstrated a collection of fluid (likely a pelvic abscess) in the left iliac fossa. Associated with this collection of fluid was significant bowel wall thickening of the sigmoid colon and multiple small diverticula arising throughout the sigmoid colon. Gas was present in the bladder. An obstruction was noted in the left ureter and the left pelvicalyceal system.
# Chunk 84
At operation the colostomy was “taken down” and the rectal stump was identified. There was, however, a significant gap between the bowel ends. To enable the bowel to be sutured, the descending colon was mobilized from the posterior abdominal wall. An anastomosis was performed and the patient left the hospital 1 week later and currently remains well.
# Chunk 85
A 72-year-old man was brought to the emergency department with an abdominal aortic aneurysm (an expansion of the infrarenal abdominal aorta). The aneurysm measured 10 cm, and after discussion with the patient it was scheduled for repair.
# Chunk 86
The superior region related to upper parts of the pelvic bones and lower lumbar vertebrae is the false pelvis (greater pelvis) and is generally considered part of the abdominal cavity (Fig. 5.1).
# Chunk 87
The bowl-shaped pelvic cavity enclosed by the true pelvis consists of the pelvic inlet, walls, and floor. This cavity is continuous superiorly with the abdominal cavity and contains elements of the urinary, gastrointestinal, and reproductive systems.
# Chunk 88
The pelvic cavity is lined by peritoneum continuous with the peritoneum of the abdominal cavity that drapes over the superior aspects of the pelvic viscera, but in most regions, does not reach the pelvic floor (Fig. 5.8A).
# Chunk 89
Posteriorly, the anal triangle contains the anal aperture.

The cavity of the true pelvis is continuous with the abdominal cavity at the pelvic inlet (Fig. 5.10A). All structures passing between the pelvic cavity and abdomen, including major vessels, nerves, and lymphatics, as well as the sigmoid colon and ureters, pass via the inlet. In men, the ductus deferens on each side passes through the anterior abdominal wall and over the inlet to enter the pelvic cavity. In women, ovarian vessels, nerves, and lymphatics pass through the inlet to reach the ovaries, which lie on each side just inferior to the pelvic inlet.
# Chunk 90
The pelvic cavity projects posteriorly

In the anatomical position, the anterior superior iliac spines and the superior edge of the pubic symphysis lie in the same vertical plane (Fig. 5.11). Consequently, the pelvic inlet is angled 50°–60° forward relative to the horizontal plane, and the pelvic cavity projects posteriorly from the abdominal cavity.
# Chunk 91
Important structures cross the ureters in the pelvic cavity

The ureters drain the kidneys, course down the posterior abdominal wall, and cross the pelvic inlet to enter the pelvic cavity. They continue inferiorly along the lateral pelvic wall and ultimately connect with the base of the bladder.
# Chunk 92
The two inferior hypogastric plexuses are inferior extensions of the abdominal prevertebral plexus that forms on the posterior abdominal wall in association with the abdominal aorta. Nerves derived from these plexuses penetrate the pelvic floor to innervate the erectile tissues of the clitoris in women and the penis in men.
# Chunk 93
The pelvis is the region of the body surrounded by the pelvic bones and the inferior elements of the vertebral column. It is divided into two major regions: the superior region is the false (greater) pelvis and is part of the abdominal cavity; the inferior region is the true (lesser) pelvis, which encloses the pelvic cavity.
# Chunk 94
The bowl-shaped pelvic cavity is continuous above with the abdominal cavity. The rim of the pelvic cavity (the pelvic inlet) is completely encircled by bone. The pelvic floor is a fibromuscular structure separating the pelvic cavity above from the perineum below.
# Chunk 95
The pelvic bone above this line represents the lateral wall of the false pelvis, which is part of the abdominal cavity.
# Chunk 96
The pelvic inlet is the circular opening between the abdominal cavity and the pelvic cavity through which structures traverse between the abdomen and pelvic cavity. It is completely surrounded by bones and joints (Fig. 5.28). The promontory of the sacrum protrudes into the inlet, forming its posterior margin in the midline. On either side of the promontory, the margin is formed by the alae of the sacrum. The margin of the pelvic inlet then crosses the sacro-iliac joint and continues along the linea terminalis (i.e., the arcuate line, the pecten pubis or pectineal line, and the pubic crest) to the pubic symphysis.
# Chunk 97
The bladder is the most anterior element of the pelvic viscera. Although it is entirely situated in the pelvic cavity when empty, it expands superiorly into the abdominal cavity when full (Fig. 5.40).
# Chunk 98
Although the bladder is considered to be pelvic in the adult, it has a higher position in children. At birth, the bladder is almost entirely abdominal; the urethra begins approximately at the upper margin of the pubic symphysis. With age, the bladder descends until after puberty when it assumes the adult position.
# Chunk 99
The testes originally develop high on the posterior abdominal wall and then descend, normally before birth, through the inguinal canal in the anterior abdominal wall and into the scrotum of the perineum. During descent, the testes carry their vessels, lymphatics, and nerves, as well as their principal drainage ducts, the ductus deferens (vas deferens) with them. The lymph drainage of the testes is therefore to the lateral aortic or lumbar nodes and pre-aortic nodes in the abdomen, and not to the inguinal or pelvic lymph nodes.
# Chunk 100
The ductus deferens is a long muscular duct that transports spermatozoa from the tail of the epididymis in the scrotum to the ejaculatory duct in the pelvic cavity (Fig. 5.47A). It ascends in the scrotum as a component of the spermatic cord and passes through the inguinal canal in the anterior abdominal wall.
# Chunk 101
The reproductive tract in women is contained mainly in the pelvic cavity and perineum, although during pregnancy, the uterus expands into the abdominal cavity. Major components of the system consist of: an ovary on each side, and a uterus, vagina, and clitoris in the midline (Fig. 5.50).
# Chunk 102
Like the testes in men, the ovaries develop high on the posterior abdominal wall and then descend before birth, bringing with them their vessels, lymphatics, and nerves. Unlike the testes, the ovaries do not migrate through the inguinal canal into the perineum, but stop short and assume a position on the lateral wall of the pelvic cavity (Fig. 5.51).
# Chunk 103
The broad ligament is a sheet-like fold of peritoneum, oriented in the coronal plane that runs from the lateral pelvic wall to the uterus, and encloses the uterine tube in its superior margin and suspends the ovary from its posterior aspect (Fig. 5.59A). The uterine arteries cross the ureters at the base of the broad ligaments, and the ligament of the ovary and round ligament of the uterus are enclosed within the parts of the broad ligament related to the ovary and uterus, respectively. The broad ligament has three parts: the mesometrium, the largest part of the broad ligament, which extends from the lateral pelvic walls to the body of the uterus; the mesosalpinx, the most superior part of the broad ligament, which suspends the uterine tube in the pelvic cavity; and the mesovarium, a posterior extension of the broad ligament, which attaches to the ovary.
# Chunk 104
The inferior pole of the ovary is attached to a fibromuscular band of tissue (the ligament of the ovary), which courses medially in the margin of the mesovarium to the uterus and then continues anterolaterally as the round ligament of the uterus (Fig. 5.59A). The round ligament of the uterus passes over the pelvic inlet to reach the deep inguinal ring and then courses through the inguinal canal to end in connective tissue related to the labium majus in the perineum. Both the ligament of the ovary and the round ligament of the uterus are remnants of the gubernaculum, which attaches the gonad to the labioscrotal swellings in the embryo.
# Chunk 105
The obturator nerve (L2 to L4) is a branch of the lumbar plexus. It passes inferiorly along the posterior abdominal wall within the psoas muscle, emerges from the medial surface of the psoas, passes posteriorly to the common iliac artery and medially to the internal iliac artery at the pelvic inlet, and then courses along the lateral pelvic wall. It leaves the pelvic cavity by traveling through the obturator canal and supplies the adductor region of the thigh.
# Chunk 106
The internal iliac artery originates from the common iliac artery on each side, approximately at the level of the intervertebral disc between LV and SI, and lies anteromedial to the sacro-iliac joint (Fig. 5.64). The vessel courses inferiorly over the pelvic inlet and then divides into anterior and posterior trunks at the level of the superior border of the greater sciatic foramen. Branches from the posterior trunk contribute to the supply of the lower posterior abdominal wall, the posterior pelvic wall, and the gluteal region. Branches from the anterior trunk supply the pelvic viscera, the perineum, the gluteal region, the adductor region of the thigh, and, in the fetus, the placenta.
# Chunk 107
The iliolumbar artery ascends laterally back out of the pelvic inlet and divides into a lumbar branch and an iliac branch. The lumbar branch contributes to the supply of the posterior abdominal wall, psoas and quadratus lumborum muscles, and cauda equina, via a small spinal branch that passes through the intervertebral foramen between LV and SI. The iliac branch passes laterally into the iliac fossa to supply muscle and bone.
# Chunk 108
The first branch of the anterior trunk is the umbilical artery, which gives origin to the superior vesical artery and then travels forward just inferior to the margin of the pelvic inlet. Anteriorly, the vessel leaves the pelvic cavity and ascends on the internal aspect of the anterior abdominal wall to reach the umbilicus. In the fetus, the umbilical artery is large and carries blood from the fetus to the placenta. After birth, the vessel closes distally to the origin of the superior vesical artery and eventually becomes a solid fibrous cord. On the anterior abdominal wall, the cord raises a fold of peritoneum termed the medial umbilical fold. The fibrous remnant of the umbilical artery itself is the medial umbilical ligament.
# Chunk 109
In women, the gonadal (ovarian) vessels originate from the abdominal aorta and then descend to cross the pelvic inlet and supply the ovaries. They anastomose with terminal parts of the uterine arteries (Fig. 5.66). On each side, the vessels travel in the suspensory ligament of the ovary (the infundibulopelvic ligament) as they cross the pelvic inlet to the ovary. Branches pass through the mesovarium to reach the ovary and through the mesometrium of the broad ligament to anastomose with the uterine artery. The ovarian arteries enlarge significantly during pregnancy to augment the uterine blood supply.
# Chunk 110
Lymphatics from most pelvic viscera drain mainly into lymph nodes distributed along the internal iliac and external iliac arteries and their associated branches (Fig. 5.68), which drain into nodes associated with the common iliac arteries and then into the lateral aortic or lumbar nodes associated with the lateral surfaces of the abdominal aorta. In turn, these lateral aortic or lumbar nodes drain into the lumbar trunks, which continue to the origin of the thoracic duct at approximately vertebral level TXII.
# Chunk 111
eFig. 5.89 Sagittal MRI of the pelvic cavity. A. Measurement of a fibroid before the uterine artery embolization. B. Measurement of a fibroid 6 months after the embolization. The size of the fibroid has decreased.
# Chunk 112
Pelvic fractures may also disrupt the contents of the pelvis, leading to urethral disruption, potential bowel rupture, and nerve damage.
# Chunk 113
In the clinic

Iatrogenic injury of the ureters

Ureters can be injured during various surgeries within the abdomen and pelvis as they lie close to the dissection planes. The most common surgeries that can result in ureteric injury are total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (removal of the uterus, fallopian tubes and ovaries), laparoscopic vaginal hysterectomy, laparoscopic anterior resection of the rectum, and open left hemicolectomy. At increased risk of ureteric injury are patients with a bulky tumor (uterine, colonic, rectal) and those with a history of previous operations or pelvic irradiation, all of which make dissection of tissues more difficult. During surgery, the ureter can be crushed, cut open, devascularized, or avulsed. It can also be injured during cryoablation or electric cauterization to control intraoperative bleeding. Ureters can also undergo trauma during the course of ureteroscopy, a procedure where a small endoscope is introduced through the urethra and urinary bladder into one of the ureters to treat stones or tumors of the ureter (usually due to a tear or electrocauterization).
# Chunk 114
Ureteric injury leads to high morbidity due to infection and in most severe cases to renal impairment. The prognosis is improved when the diagnosis is made intraoperatively and the ureter is repaired immediately. Delayed diagnosis leads to urine leakage and contamination of the abdominal and pelvic cavity, development of sepsis, and in the case of injury near the vagina, a uretero-vaginal fistula can develop. When the diagnosis is made postoperatively, sometimes diversion of urine flow is required and percutaneous nephrostomy is performed.
# Chunk 115
In the clinic

Interrupted descent of testis leads to an empty scrotal sac and abnormal location of the testis, which can lie anywhere along the usual route of descent. Most commonly the testis is present in the inguinal canal, where it can be palpated. This condition is usually diagnosed at birth or within the first year of life. A higher incidence of ectopic (undescended) testis occurs in premature births (30%) than in term births (3–5%). Normally, the ectopic testis can complete its descent within the first 3 months after a child is born; therefore watchful waiting is recommended for the first couple of months. A specialist referral is usually made at 6 months if the testis is still absent from the scrotal sac. It is crucial to make the diagnosis early so that an appropriate management plan can be initiated to avoid or reduce the risk of complications such as testicular malignancy, subfertility or infertility, testicular torsion, and inguinal hernia (due to patent processus vaginalis). If surgical correction is required, the ectopic testis is moved from the inguinal canal into the scrotum (orchiopexy). During mobilization of the testis, dissection of tissues must be performed carefully to avoid injuring the ilioinguinal nerve adjacent to the spermatic cord. At the time of orchiopexy, the patent processus vaginalis is closed and any inguinal hernia, if present, is repaired.
# Chunk 116
In the clinic

Prostate cancer is one of the most commonly diagnosed malignancies in men, and often the disease is advanced at diagnosis. Prostate cancer typically occurs in the peripheral zone of the prostate (see Fig. 5.48) and is relatively asymptomatic. In many cases, it is diagnosed by a digital rectal examination (DRE) (Fig. 5.49A) and by blood tests, which include serum acid phosphatase and serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA). In rectal exams, the tumorous prostate feels “rock” hard. The diagnosis is usually made by obtaining a number of biopsies of the prostate. Ultrasound is used during the biopsy procedure to image the prostate for the purpose of taking measurements and for needle placement. Ultrasound can also be used to aid planning radiotherapy by placing special metal markers, called fiducials, under direct ultrasound guidance, through the rectal wall into or near the tumor. This allows maximization of the radiation dose to the tumor while protecting healthy tissue.
# Chunk 117
Benign prostatic hypertrophy is a disease of the prostate that occurs with increasing age in most men (Fig. 5.49B). It generally involves the more central regions of the prostate (see Fig. 5.48), which gradually enlarge. The prostate feels “bulky” on DRE. Owing to the more central hypertrophic change of the prostate, the urethra is compressed, and a urinary outflow obstruction develops in a number of patients. With time, the bladder may become hypertrophied in response to the urinary outflow obstruction. In some male patients, the obstruction becomes so severe that urine cannot be passed and transurethral or suprapubic catheterization is necessary. Despite being a benign disease, benign prostatic hypertrophy can therefore have a marked effect on the daily lives of many patients.
# Chunk 118
In the clinic

Urethral rupture may occur at a series of well-defined anatomical points.

The commonest injury is a rupture of the proximal spongy urethra below the perineal membrane. The urethra is usually torn when structures of the perineum are caught between a hard object (e.g., a steel beam or crossbar of a bicycle) and the inferior pubic arch. Urine escapes through the rupture into the superficial perineal pouch and descends into the scrotum and up onto the anterior abdominal wall deep to the superficial fascia.
# Chunk 119
In association with severe pelvic fractures, urethral rupture may occur at the prostatomembranous junction above the deep perineal pouch. The urine will extravasate into the true pelvis.
# Chunk 120
A 25-year-old man visited his family physician because he had a “dragging feeling” in the left side of his scrotum. He was otherwise healthy and had no other symptoms. During examination, the physician palpated the left testis, which was normal, although he noted soft nodular swelling around the superior aspect of the testes and the epididymis. In his clinical notes, he described these findings as a “bag of worms” (Fig. 5.86). The bag of worms was a varicocele.
# Chunk 121
A pelvic kidney can be explained by the embryology. The kidneys develop from a complex series of structures that originate adjacent to the bladder within the fetal pelvis. As development proceeds and the functions of the various parts of the developing kidneys change, they attain a superior position in the upper abdomen adjacent to the abdominal aorta and inferior vena cava, on the posterior abdominal wall. A developmental arrest or complication may prevent the kidney from obtaining its usual position. Fortunately, it is unusual for patients to have any symptoms relating to a pelvic kidney.
# Chunk 122
This patient had no symptoms attributable to the pelvic kidney and she was discharged.

A 19-year-old woman presented to the emergency department with a 36-hour history of lower abdominal pain that was sharp and initially intermittent, later becoming constant and severe. The patient also reported feeling nauseated and vomited once in the ER. She did not have diarrhea and had opened her bowels normally 8 hours before admission. She had no symptoms of dysuria. She was afebrile, slightly tachycardic at 95/min, and had a normal blood pressure. Blood results showed mild leukocytosis of 11.6 x 109/L and normal renal and liver function tests. She reported being sexually active with a long-term partner. She was never pregnant, and the urine pregnancy test on admission was negative.
# Chunk 123
A 65-year-old man was examined by a surgical intern because he had a history of buttock pain and impotence. On examination he had a reduced peripheral pulse on the left foot compared to the right. On direct questioning, the patient revealed that he experienced severe left-sided buttock pain after walking 100 yards. After a short period of rest, he could walk another 100 yards before the same symptoms recurred. He also noticed that over the past year he was unable to obtain an erection.
# Chunk 124
A 50-year-old woman was admitted to hospital for surgical resection of the uterus (hysterectomy) for cancer. The surgeon was also going to remove all the pelvic lymph nodes and carry out a bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (removal of uterine tubes and ovaries). The patient was prepared for this procedure and underwent routine surgery. Twenty-five hours after surgery, it was noted that the patient had passed no urine and her abdomen was expanding. An ultrasound scan demonstrated a considerable amount of fluid within the abdomen. Fluid withdrawn from the abdomen was tested and found to be urine.
# Chunk 125
A 25-year-old woman was admitted to the emergency department with a complaint of pain in her right iliac fossa. The pain had developed rapidly over approximately 40 minutes and was associated with cramps and vomiting. The surgical intern made an initial diagnosis of appendicitis.
# Chunk 126
The surgical intern asked a more senior colleague for an opinion.

The senior colleague considered other anatomical structures that lie within the right iliac fossa as a potential cause of pain. These include the appendix, the cecum, and the small bowel. Musculoskeletal pain and referred pain could also be potential causes. In women, pain may also arise from the ovary, fallopian tube, and uterus. In a young patient, diseases of these organs are rare. Infection and pelvic inflammatory disease may occur in the younger patient and need to be considered.
# Chunk 127
A 35-year-old woman visited her family practitioner because she had a “bloating” feeling and an increase in abdominal girth. The family practitioner examined the lower abdomen, which revealed a mass that extended from the superior pubic rami to the level of the umbilicus. The superior margin of the mass was easily palpated, but the inferior margin appeared to be less well defined.
# Chunk 128
The doctor pondered which structures this mass may be arising from. When examining the pelvis, it is important to remember the sex differences. Common to both men and women are the rectum, bowel, bladder, and musculature. Certain pathological states are also common to both sexes, including the development of pelvic abscesses and fluid collections.
# Chunk 129
The lower limb is directly anchored to the axial skeleton by a sacroiliac joint and by strong ligaments, which link the pelvic bone to the sacrum. It is separated from the abdomen, back, and perineum by a continuous line (Fig. 6.1), which: joins the pubic tubercle with the anterior superior iliac spine (position of the inguinal ligament) and then continues along the iliac crest to the posterior superior iliac spine to separate the lower limb from the anterior and lateral abdominal walls; passes between the posterior superior iliac spine and along the dorsolateral surface of the sacrum to the coccyx to separate the lower limb from the muscles of the back; and joins the medial margin of the sacrotuberous ligament, the ischial tuberosity, the ischiopubic ramus, and the pubic symphysis to separate the lower limb from the perineum.
# Chunk 130
Major flexor muscles of the hip (iliopsoas—psoas major and iliacus) do not originate in the gluteal region or the thigh. Instead, they are attached to the posterior abdominal wall and descend through the gap between the inguinal ligament and pelvic bone to attach to the proximal end of the femur (Fig. 6.12).
# Chunk 131
This gap between the pelvic bone and the inguinal ligament is a weak area in the abdominal wall and often associated with abnormal protrusion of the abdominal cavity and contents into the thigh (femoral hernia). This type of hernia usually occurs where the lymphatic vessels pass through the gap (the femoral canal).
# Chunk 132
Innervation is by lumbar and sacral

Somatic motor and general sensory innervation of the lower limb is by peripheral nerves emanating from the lumbar and sacral plexuses on the posterior abdominal and pelvic walls. These plexuses are formed by the anterior rami of L1 to L3 and most of L4 (lumbar plexus) and L4 to S5 (sacral plexus).
# Chunk 133
The obturator nerve, like the femoral nerve, originates from L2 to L4. It descends along the posterior abdominal wall, passes through the pelvic cavity and enters the thigh by passing through the obturator canal (Fig. 6.36 and Table 6.1). The obturator nerve innervates: all muscles in the medial compartment of the thigh, except the part of the adductor magnus muscle that originates from the ischium and the pectineus muscle, which are innervated by the sciatic and the femoral nerves, respectively; the obturator externus muscle; and skin on the medial side of the upper thigh.
# Chunk 134
Anteriorly, the thigh communicates with the abdominal cavity through the aperture between the inguinal ligament and pelvic bone, and major structures passing through this aperture are the iliopsoas and pectineus muscles; the femoral nerve, artery, and vein; and lymphatic vessels.
# Chunk 135
The psoas major and iliacus muscles originate on the posterior abdominal wall and descend into the upper part of the anterior compartment of the thigh through the lateral half of the gap between the inguinal ligament and the pelvic bone (Fig. 6.58).
# Chunk 136
The obturator nerve is a branch of the lumbar plexus (spinal cord segments L2–L4) on the posterior abdominal wall. It descends in the psoas muscle, and then passes out of the medial margin of the psoas muscle to enter the pelvis (Fig. 6.69). The obturator nerve continues along the lateral pelvic wall and then enters the medial compartment of the thigh by passing through the obturator canal. It supplies most of the adductor muscles and skin on the medial aspect of the thigh. As the obturator nerve enters the thigh, it divides into two branches, an anterior branch and a posterior branch, which are separated by the adductor brevis muscle:
# Chunk 137
In the clinic

The pelvic bones, sacrum, and associated joints form a bony ring surrounding the pelvic cavity. Soft tissue and visceral organ damage must be suspected when the pelvis is fractured. Patients with multiple injuries and evidence of chest, abdominal, and lower limb trauma should also be investigated for pelvic trauma.
# Chunk 138
A 45-year-old man with diabetes mellitus visited his nurse because he had an ulcer on his foot that was not healing despite daily dressings.
# Chunk 139
A 72-year-old woman was admitted to the emergency room after falling at home. She complained of a severe pain in her right hip and had noticeable bruising on the right side of the face.
# Chunk 140
A 28-year-old woman was seen by her family practitioner for a routine pregnancy checkup at 36 weeks’ gestational age. Neither the patient nor the family physician had any concerns about the pregnancy. However, the patient did complain of unilateral swelling of her left leg, which had gradually increased over the previous 2 days. Furthermore, the evening before her visit she developed some sharp chest pain, which was exacerbated by deep breaths.
# Chunk 141
Anticoagulation was instituted and the patient had an uneventful delivery.

A 45-year-old man had recently taken up squash. During a game he attempted a forehand shot and noticed severe sudden pain in his heel. He thought his opponent had hit him with his racket. When he turned, though, he realized his opponent was too far away to have hit him.
# Chunk 142
A 67-year-old man was noted to have a mass at the back of his knee. The mass measured approximately 4 cm in transverse diameter. The patient was otherwise fit and well and had no other history of note.
# Chunk 143
Fig. 7.75 Radiographs of elbow joint development. A. At age 2 years. B. At age 5 years. C. At age 5–6 years. D. At age 12 years.
# Chunk 144
As the elbow develops in children, numerous secondary ossification centers appear before and around puberty. It is easy to mistakenly interpret these as fractures. In addition, it is also possible for the epiphyses and apophyses to be “pulled off” or disrupted. Therefore, when interpreting a child’s radiograph of the elbow, the physician must know the child’s age (Fig. 7.75). Fusion occurs at around the time of puberty. An understanding of the normal epiphyses and apophyses and their normal relationship to the bones will secure a correct diagnosis. The approximate ages of appearance of the secondary ossification centers around the elbow joint are: capitulum—1 year, head (of radius)—5 years, medial epicondyle—5 years, trochlea—11 years, olecranon—12 years, and lateral epicondyle—13 years.
# Chunk 145
A 57-year-old woman underwent a right mastectomy for a breast cancer. The surgical note reported that all of the breast tissue had been removed, including the axillary process. In addition, the surgeon had dissected all lymph nodes within the axilla with their surrounding fat. The patient made an uneventful recovery.
# Chunk 146
A 25-year-old woman was involved in a motor vehicle accident and thrown from her motorcycle. When she was admitted to the emergency room, she was unconscious. A series of tests and investigations were performed, one of which included chest radiography. The attending physician noted a complex fracture of the first rib on the left.
# Chunk 147
A 45-year-old man came to his physician complaining of pain and weakness in his right shoulder. The pain began after a fall on his outstretched hand approximately 6 months previously. The patient recalled having some minor shoulder tenderness but no other specific symptoms. He was otherwise fit and well.
# Chunk 148
A 35-year-old woman comes to her physician complaining of tingling and numbness in the fingertips of the first, second, and third digits (thumb, index, and middle fingers). The symptoms were provoked by arm extension. Local anesthesia was also present around the base of the thenar eminence.
# Chunk 149
A 35-year-old baseball pitcher came to the clinic with a history of a recurrent dislocation of the shoulder (eFig. 7.129). An MRI scan was performed to assess the shoulder joint prior to any treatment.
# Chunk 150
A 35-year-old man was involved in a fight and sustained a punch to the right orbit. He came to the emergency department with double vision.
# Chunk 151
A 25-year-old man complained of significant swelling in front of his right ear before and around mealtimes. This swelling was associated with considerable pain, which was provoked by the ingestion of lemon sweets. On examination he had tenderness around the right parotid region and a hard nodule was demonstrated in the buccal mucosa adjacent to the right upper molar teeth.
# Chunk 152
.4. An 80-year-old man presented with impairment of intellectual function and alterations in behavior. His family reported progressive disorientation and memory loss over the last 6 months. There is no family history of dementia. The patient was tentatively diagnosed with Alzheimer disease (AD). Which one of the following best describes AD?
# Chunk 153
C. Hemoglobin structure and function

Hemoglobin is found exclusively in red blood cells (RBC), where its main function is to transport O2 from the lungs to the capillaries of the tissues. Hemoglobin A, the major hemoglobin in adults, is composed of four polypeptide chains (two α chains and two β chains) held together by noncovalent interactions (Fig. 3.3). Each chain (subunit) has stretches of αhelical structure and a hydrophobic heme-binding pocket similar to that described for myoglobin. However, the tetrameric hemoglobin molecule is structurally and functionally more complex than myoglobin. For example, hemoglobin can transport protons (H+) and carbon dioxide (CO2) from the tissues to the lungs and can carry four molecules of O2 from the lungs to the cells of the body. Furthermore, the oxygen-binding properties of hemoglobin are regulated by interaction with allosteric effectors (see p. 29).
# Chunk 154
3. 2,3-BPG effect on oxygen affinity: 2,3-BPG is an important regulator of the binding of O2 to hemoglobin. It is the most abundant organic phosphate in the RBC, where its concentration is approximately that of hemoglobin. 2,3-BPG is synthesized from an intermediate of the glycolytic pathway (Fig. 3.10; see p. 101 for a discussion of 2,3-BPG synthesis in glycolysis).
# Chunk 155
2,3-BPG binding site: One molecule of 2,3-BPG binds to a pocket, formed by the two β-globin chains, in the center of the deoxyhemoglobin tetramer (Fig. 3.11). This pocket contains several positively charged amino acids that form ionic bonds with the negatively charged phosphate groups of 2,3-BPG. [Note: Replacement of one of these amino acids can result in hemoglobin variants with abnormally high oxygen affinity that may be compensated for by increased RBC production (erythrocytosis).] Oxygenation of hemoglobin narrows the pocket and causes 2,3-BPG to be released.
# Chunk 156
c.

Oxygen-dissociation curve shift: Hemoglobin from which 2,3-BPG has been removed has high oxygen affinity. However, as seen in the RBC, the presence of 2,3-BPG significantly reduces the oxygen affinity of hemoglobin, shifting the oxygen-dissociation curve to the right (Fig. 3.12). This reduced affinity enables hemoglobin to release O2 efficiently at the partial pressures found in the tissues.
# Chunk 157
d. 2,3-BPG levels in chronic hypoxia or anemia: The concentration of 2,3-BPG in the RBC increases in response to chronic hypoxia, such as that observed in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) like emphysema, or at high altitudes, where circulating hemoglobin may have difficulty receiving sufficient O2. Intracellular levels of 2,3-BPG are also elevated in chronic anemia, in which fewer than normal RBC are available to supply the body’s oxygen needs. Elevated 2,3-BPG levels lower the oxygen affinity of hemoglobin, permitting greater unloading of O2 in the capillaries of tissues (see Fig. 3.12).
# Chunk 158
e. 2,3-BPG in transfused blood: 2,3-BPG is essential for the normal oxygen transport function of hemoglobin. However, storing blood in the currently available media results in the gradual depletion of 2,3BPG. Consequently, stored blood displays an abnormally high oxygen affinity and fails to unload its bound O2 properly in the tissues. Thus, hemoglobin deficient in 2,3-BPG acts as an oxygen “trap” rather than as an oxygen delivery system. Transfused RBC are able to restore their depleted supplies of 2,3-BPG in 6–24 hours. However, severely ill patients may be compromised if transfused with large quantities of such 2,3-BPG–depleted blood. Stored blood, therefore, is treated with a “rejuvenation” solution that rapidly restores 2,3-BPG. [Note: Rejuvenation also restores ATP lost during storage.] 4. CO2 binding: Most of the CO2 produced in metabolism is hydrated and transported as bicarbonate ion (see Fig. 1.12 on p. 9). However, some CO2 is carried as carbamate bound to the terminal amino groups of hemoglobin (forming carbaminohemoglobin as shown in Fig. 3.8), which can be represented schematically as follows:
# Chunk 159
5. CO binding: Carbon monoxide (CO) binds tightly (but reversibly) to the hemoglobin iron, forming carboxyhemoglobin. When CO binds to one or more of the four heme sites, hemoglobin shifts to the R conformation, causing the remaining heme sites to bind O2 with high affinity. This shifts the oxygen-dissociation curve to the left and changes the normal sigmoidal shape toward a hyperbola. As a result, the affected hemoglobin is unable to release O2 to the tissues (Fig. 3.13). [Note: The affinity of hemoglobin for CO is 220 times greater than for O2. Consequently, even minute concentrations of CO in the environment can produce toxic concentrations of carboxyhemoglobin in the blood. For example, increased levels of CO are found in the blood of tobacco smokers. CO toxicity appears to result from a combination of tissue hypoxia and direct CO-mediated damage at the cellular level.] CO poisoning is treated with 100% O2 at high pressure (hyperbaric oxygen therapy), which facilitates the dissociation of CO from the hemoglobin. [Note: CO inhibits Complex IV of the electron transport chain (see p. 76).] In addition to O2, CO2, and CO, nitric oxide gas (NO) also is carried by hemoglobin. NO is a potent vasodilator (see p. 151). It can be taken up (salvaged) or released from RBC, thereby modulating NO availability and influencing vessel diameter.
# Chunk 160
a. HbF synthesis during development: In the first month after conception, embryonic hemoglobins such as Hb Gower 1, composed of two α-like zeta (ζ) chains and two β-like epsilon (ε) chains (ζ2ε2), are synthesized by the embryonic yolk sac. In the fifth week of gestation, the site of globin synthesis shifts, first to the liver and then to the marrow, and the primary product is HbF. HbF is the major hemoglobin found in the fetus and newborn, accounting for ~60% of the total hemoglobin in the RBC during the last months of fetal life (Fig. 3.15). HbA synthesis starts in the bone marrow at about the eighth month of pregnancy and gradually replaces HbF. Figure 3.15 shows the relative production of each type of hemoglobin chain during fetal and postnatal life. [Note: HbF represents <2% of the hemoglobin in most adults and is concentrated in RBC known as F cells.] b. 2,3-BPG binding to HbF: Under physiologic conditions, HbF has a higher oxygen affinity than does HbA as a result of HbF only weakly binding 2,3-BPG. [Note: The γ-globin chains of HbF lack some of the positively charged amino acids that are responsible for binding 2,3BPG in the β-globin chains.] Because 2,3-BPG serves to reduce the oxygen affinity of hemoglobin, the weaker interaction between 2,3BPG and HbF results in a higher oxygen affinity for HbF relative to HbA. In contrast, if both HbA and HbF are stripped of their 2,3-BPG, they then have a similar oxygen affinity. The higher oxygen affinity of HbF facilitates the transfer of O2 from the maternal circulation across the placenta to the RBC of the fetus.
# Chunk 161
3.

Hemoglobin A1c: Under physiologic conditions, HbA is slowly glycated (nonenzymically condensed with a hexose), the extent of glycation being dependent on the plasma concentration of the hexose. The most abundant form of glycated hemoglobin is HbA1c. It has glucose residues attached predominantly to the amino groups of the N-terminal valines of the βglobin chains (Fig. 3.16). Increased amounts of HbA1c are found in RBC of patients with diabetes mellitus, because their HbA has contact with higher glucose concentrations during the 120-day lifetime of these cells. (See p. 340 for a discussion of the use of HbA1c levels in assessing average blood glucose levels in patients with diabetes.)
# Chunk 162
A. Sickle cell anemia (hemoglobin S disease)

Sickle cell anemia, the most common of the RBC sickling diseases, is a genetic disorder caused by a single nucleotide substitution (a point mutation, see p. 449) in the gene for β-globin. It is the most common inherited blood disorder in the United States, affecting 50,000 Americans. It occurs primarily in the African American population, affecting 1 in 500 newborn African American infants. Sickle cell anemia is an autosomalrecessive disorder. It occurs in individuals who have inherited two mutant genes (one from each parent) that code for synthesis of the β chains of the globin molecules. [Note: The mutant β-globin chain is designated βS, and the resulting hemoglobin, α2βS2, is referred to as HbS.] An infant does not begin showing symptoms of the disease until sufficient HbF has been replaced by HbS so that sickling can occur (see p. 36). Sickle cell anemia is characterized by lifelong episodes of pain (“crises”), chronic hemolytic anemia with associated hyperbilirubinemia (see p. 284), and increased susceptibility to infections, usually beginning in infancy. [Note: The lifetime of a RBC in sickle cell anemia is <20 days, compared with 120 days for normal RBC, hence, the anemia.] Other symptoms include acute chest syndrome, stroke, splenic and renal dysfunction, and bone changes due to marrow hyperplasia. Life expectancy is reduced. Heterozygotes, representing 1 in 12 African Americans, have one normal and one sickle cell gene. The blood cells of such heterozygotes contain both HbS and HbA, and these individuals have sickle cell trait. They usually do not show clinical symptoms (but may under conditions of extreme physical exertion with dehydration) and can have a normal life span.
# Chunk 163
1.

Amino acid substitution in HbS β chains:: A molecule of HbS contains two normal α-globin chains and two mutant β-globin chains (βS), in which glutamate at position six has been replaced with valine (Fig. 3.19). Therefore, during electrophoresis at alkaline pH, HbS migrates more slowly toward the anode (positive electrode) than does HbA (Fig. 3.20). This altered mobility of HbS is a result of the absence of the negatively charged glutamate residues in the two β chains, thereby rendering HbS less negative than HbA. [Note: Electrophoresis of hemoglobin obtained from lysed RBC is routinely used in the diagnosis of sickle cell trait and sickle cell anemia (or, sickle cell disease). DNA analysis also is used (see p. 493).] 2.
# Chunk 164
Sickling and tissue anoxia: The replacement of the charged glutamate with the nonpolar valine forms a protrusion on the β chain that fits into a complementary site on the β chain of another hemoglobin molecule in the cell (Fig. 3.21). At low oxygen tension, deoxyhemoglobin S polymerizes inside the RBC, forming a network of insoluble fibrous polymers that stiffen and distort the cell, producing rigid, misshapen RBC. Such sickled cells frequently block the flow of blood in the narrow capillaries. This interruption in the supply of O2 leads to localized anoxia (oxygen deprivation) in the tissue, causing pain and eventually ischemic death (infarction) of cells in the vicinity of the blockage. The anoxia also leads to an increase in deoxygenated HbS. [Note: The mean diameter of RBC is 7.5 µm, whereas that of the microvasculature is 3–4 µm. Compared to normal RBC, sickled cells have a decreased ability to deform and an increased tendency to adhere to vessel walls. This makes moving through small vessels difficult, thereby causing microvascular occlusion.] 3.
# Chunk 165
Possible selective advantage of the heterozygous state: The high frequency of the βS mutation among black Africans, despite its damaging effects in the homozygous state, suggests that a selective advantage exists for heterozygous individuals. For example, heterozygotes for the sickle cell gene are less susceptible to the severe malaria caused by the parasite Plasmodium falciparum. This organism spends an obligatory part of its life cycle in the RBC. One theory is that because these cells in individuals heterozygous for HbS, like those in homozygotes, have a shorter life span than normal, the parasite cannot complete the intracellular stage of its development. This may provide a selective advantage to heterozygotes living in regions where malaria is a major cause of death. For example, in Africa, the geographic distribution of sickle cell anemia is similar to that of malaria.
# Chunk 166
C. Hemoglobin SC disease

HbSC disease is another of the RBC sickling diseases. In this disease, some β-globin chains have the sickle cell mutation, whereas other β-globin chains carry the mutation found in HbC disease. [Note: Patients with HbSC disease are doubly heterozygous. They are called compound heterozygotes because both of their β-globin genes are abnormal, although different from each other.] Hemoglobin levels tend to be higher in HbSC disease than in sickle cell anemia and may even be at the low end of the normal range. The clinical course of adults with HbSC anemia differs from that of sickle cell anemia in that symptoms such as painful crises are less frequent and less severe. However, there is significant clinical variability.
# Chunk 167
D. Methemoglobinemias

Oxidation of the heme iron in hemoglobin from Fe2+ to Fe3+ produces methemoglobin, which cannot bind O2. This oxidation may be acquired and caused by the action of certain drugs, such as nitrates, or endogenous products such as reactive oxygen species (see p. 148). The oxidation may also result from congenital defects, for example, a deficiency of NADH-cytochrome b5 reductase (also called NADH-methemoglobin reductase), the enzyme responsible for the conversion of methemoglobin (Fe3+) to hemoglobin (Fe2+), leads to the accumulation of methemoglobin (Fig. 3.22). [Note: The RBC of newborns have approximately half the capacity of those of adults to reduce methemoglobin.] Additionally, rare mutations in the α-or β-globin chain can cause the production of HbM, an abnormal hemoglobin that is resistant to the reductase. The methemoglobinemias are characterized by “chocolate cyanosis” (a blue coloration of the skin and mucous membranes and brown-colored blood) as a result of the dark-colored methemoglobin. Symptoms are related to the degree of tissue hypoxia and include anxiety, headache, and dyspnea. In rare cases, coma and death can occur. Treatment is with methylene blue, which is oxidized as Fe3+ is reduced.
# Chunk 168
β-Thalassemias: In these disorders, synthesis of β-globin chains is decreased or absent, typically as a result of point mutations that affect the production of functional mRNA. However, α-globin chain synthesis is normal. Excess α-globin chains cannot form stable tetramers and so precipitate, causing the premature death of cells initially destined to become mature RBC. Increase in α2δ2 (HbA2) and α2γ2 (HbF) also occurs. There are only two copies of the β-globin gene in each cell (one on each chromosome 11). Therefore, individuals with β-globin gene defects have either β-thalassemia trait (β-thalassemia minor) if they have only one defective β-globin gene or β-thalassemia major (Cooley anemia) if both genes are defective (Fig. 3.23). Because the β-globin gene is not expressed until late in prenatal development, the physical manifestations of β-thalassemias appear only several months after birth. Those individuals with β-thalassemia minor make some β chains and usually do not require specific treatment. However, those infants born with β-thalassemia major are seemingly healthy at birth but become severely anemic, usually during the first or second year of life, due to ineffective erythropoiesis. Skeletal changes as a result of extramedullary hematopoiesis also are seen. These patients require regular transfusions of blood. [Note: Although this treatment is lifesaving, the cumulative effect of the transfusions is iron overload. Use of iron chelation therapy has improved morbidity and mortality.] The only curative option available is hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.
# Chunk 169
E. HbA2 appears early in fetal life.

Correct answer = A. HbA accounts for over 90% of the hemoglobin in a normal adult. If HbA1c is included, the percentage rises to ~97%. Because 2,3bisphosphoglycerate (2,3-BPG) reduces the affinity of hemoglobin for oxygen, the weaker interaction between 2,3-BPG and HbF results in a higher oxygen affinity for HbF relative to HbA. HbF consists of α2γ2. HbA1c is a glycated form of HbA, formed nonenzymically in red blood cells. HbA2 is a minor component of normal adult hemoglobin, first appearing shortly before birth and rising to adult levels (~2% of the total hemoglobin) by age 6 months.
# Chunk 170
Correct answer = B. Substitution of lysine by methionine decreases the ability of negatively charged phosphate groups in 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate (2,3-BPG) to bind the β subunits of hemoglobin. Because 2,3-BPG decreases the oxygen affinity of hemoglobin, a reduction in 2,3-BPG should result in increased oxygen affinity and decreased oxygen (O2) delivery to tissues. The relaxed form is the high-oxygen-affinity form of hemoglobin. Increased oxygen affinity (decreased delivery) results in a left shift in the oxygen-dissociation curve. Decreased delivery of O2 is compensated for by increased RBC production.
# Chunk 171
.5. A 67-year-old man presented to the emergency department with a 1-week history of angina and shortness of breath. He complained that his face and extremities had taken on a blue color. His medical history included chronic stable angina treated with isosorbide dinitrate and nitroglycerin. Blood obtained for analysis was brown. Which one of the following is the most likely diagnosis?
# Chunk 172
Correct answer = C. Oxidation of the ferrous (Fe2+) iron to the ferric (Fe3+) state in the heme prosthetic group of hemoglobin forms methemoglobin. This may be caused by the action of certain drugs such as nitrates. The methemoglobinemias are characterized by chocolate cyanosis (a blue coloration of the skin and mucous membranes and chocolate-colored blood) as a result of the dark-colored methemoglobin. Symptoms are related to tissue hypoxia and include anxiety, headache, and dyspnea. In rare cases, coma and death can occur. [Note: Benzocaine, an aromatic amine used as a topical anesthetic, is a cause of acquired methemoglobinemia.] .6. Why is hemoglobin C disease a nonsickling disease?
# Chunk 173
Choose the ONE best answer.

.1. A 30-year-old woman of Northern European ancestry presents with progressive dyspnea (shortness of breath). She denies the use of cigarettes. Family history reveals that her sister also has problems with her lungs. Which one of the following etiologies most likely explains this patient’s pulmonary symptoms?
# Chunk 174
Diagnosis of myocardial infarction: Measurement of blood levels of proteins with cardiac specificity (biomarkers) is used in the diagnosis of MI. Myocardial muscle is the only tissue that contains >5% of the total CK activity as the CK2 (MB) isoenzyme. Appearance of this hybrid isoenzyme in plasma is virtually specific for infarction of the myocardium. Following an acute MI, CK2 appears in plasma within 4–8 hours following onset of chest pain, reaches a peak of activity at ~24 hours, and returns to baseline after 48–72 hours (Fig. 5.22). Troponins T (TnT) and I (TnI) are regulatory proteins involved in muscle contractility. Cardiac-specific isoforms (cTn) are released into the plasma in response to cardiac damage. They are highly sensitive and specific for damage to cardiac tissue. cTn appear in plasma within 4–6 hours after an MI, peak in 24–36 hours, and remain elevated for 3–10 days. Elevated cTn, in combination with the clinical presentation and characteristic changes in the ECG, are currently considered the “gold standard” in the diagnosis of an MI.
# Chunk 175
2.

Lactose intolerance: Over 60% of the world’s adults are lactose intolerant (Fig. 7.11). This is particularly manifested in certain populations. For example, up to 90% of adults of African or Asian descent are lactase deficient. Consequently, they are less able to metabolize lactose than are individuals of Northern European origin. The age-dependent loss of lactase activity starting at approximately age 2 years represents a reduction in the amount of enzyme produced. It is thought to be caused by small variations in the DNA sequence of a region on chromosome 2 that controls expression of the gene for lactase, also on chromosome 2. Treatment for this disorder is to reduce consumption of milk; eat yogurts and some cheeses (bacterial action and aging process decrease lactose content) as well as green vegetables, such as broccoli, to ensure adequate calcium intake; use lactase-treated products; or take lactase in pill form prior to eating. [Note: Because the loss of lactase is the norm for most of the world’s adults, use of the terms adult-type hypolactasia or lactase nonpersistence rather than lactose intolerance is becoming more common.] Rare cases of congenital lactase deficiency are known.
# Chunk 176
For additional ancillary materials related to this chapter, please visit thePoint.

I. OVERVIEW

Some tissues, such as the brain, red blood cells (RBC), kidney medulla, lens and cornea of the eye, testes, and exercising muscle, require a continuous supply of glucose as a metabolic fuel. Liver glycogen, an essential postprandial source of glucose, can meet these needs for <24 hours in the absence of dietary intake of carbohydrate (see p. 125). During a prolonged fast, however, hepatic glycogen stores are depleted, and glucose is made from noncarbohydrate precursors. The formation of glucose does not occur by a simple reversal of glycolysis, because the overall equilibrium of glycolysis strongly favors pyruvate formation (that is, the change in standard free energy [∆G0] is negative). Instead, glucose is synthesized de novo by a special pathway, gluconeogenesis, which requires both mitochondrial and cytosolic enzymes. [Note: Deficiencies of gluconeogenic enzymes cause hypoglycemia.] During an overnight fast, ~90% of gluconeogenesis occurs in the liver, with the remaining ~10% occurring in the kidneys. However, during prolonged fasting, the kidneys become major glucose-producing organs, contributing ~40% of the total glucose production. [Note: The small intestine can also make glucose.] Figure 10.1 shows the relationship of gluconeogenesis to other essential pathways of energy metabolism.
# Chunk 177
2.2. A 5-month-old boy is brought to his physician because of vomiting, night sweats, and tremors. History revealed that these symptoms began after fruit juices were introduced to his diet as he was being weaned off breast milk. The physical examination was remarkable for hepatomegaly. Tests on the baby’s urine were positive for reducing sugar but negative for glucose. The infant most likely suffers from a deficiency of:
# Chunk 178
2.4. A 3-month-old girl is developing cataracts. Other than not having a social smile or being able to track objects visually, all other aspects of the girl’s examination are normal. Tests on the baby’s urine are positive for reducing sugar but negative for glucose. Which enzyme is most likely deficient in this girl?
# Chunk 179
V. G6PD DEFICIENCY

G6PD deficiency is a hereditary condition characterized by hemolytic anemia caused by the inability to detoxify oxidizing agents. G6PD deficiency is the most common disease-producing enzyme abnormality in humans, affecting >400 million individuals worldwide. This deficiency has the highest prevalence in the Middle East, tropical Africa and Asia, and parts of the Mediterranean. G6PD deficiency is X linked and is, in fact, a family of deficiencies caused by a number of different mutations in the gene encoding G6PD. Only some of the resulting protein variants cause clinical symptoms. [Note: In addition to hemolytic anemia, a clinical manifestation of G6PD deficiency is neonatal jaundice appearing 1–4 days after birth. The jaundice, which may be severe, typically results from increased production of unconjugated bilirubin (see p. 285).] The life span of individuals with a severe form of G6PD deficiency may be somewhat shortened as a result of complications arising from chronic hemolysis. This negative effect of G6PD deficiency has been balanced in evolution by an advantage in survival, an increased resistance to Plasmodium falciparum malaria. [Note: Sickle cell trait and the thalassemias also confer resistance to malaria.]
# Chunk 180
A. G6PD role in red blood cells

Diminished G6PD activity impairs the ability of the cell to form the NADPH that is essential for the maintenance of the G-SH pool. This results in a decrease in the detoxification of free radicals and peroxides formed within the cell (Fig. 13.10). G-SH also helps maintain the reduced states of sulfhydryl groups in proteins, including hemoglobin. Oxidation of those sulfhydryl groups leads to the formation of denatured proteins that form insoluble masses (called Heinz bodies) that attach to RBC membranes (Fig. 13.11). Additional oxidation of membrane proteins causes RBC to be rigid (less deformable), and they are removed from the circulation by macrophages in the spleen and liver. Although G6PD deficiency occurs in all cells of the affected individual, it is most severe in RBC, where the pentose phosphate pathway provides the only means of generating NADPH. Additionally, the RBC has no nucleus or ribosomes and cannot renew its supply of the enzyme. Thus, RBC are particularly vulnerable to enzyme variants with diminished stability. [Note: Other tissues have an alternative source of NADPH (NADP+-dependent malate dehydrogenase [malic enzyme]; see p. 186) that can keep G-SH reduced.] pentose phosphate pathway.
# Chunk 181
II. DIGESTION, ABSORPTION, SECRETION, AND UTILIZATION

The average daily intake of lipids by U.S. adults is ~78 g, of which >90% is triacylglycerol ([TAG], formerly called triglyceride [TG]), that consists of three fatty acids (FA) esterified to a glycerol backbone (see Fig. 15.1). The remainder of the dietary lipids consists primarily of cholesterol, cholesteryl esters, phospholipids, and nonesterified (free) FA (FFA). The digestion of dietary lipids begins in the stomach and is completed in the small intestine. The process is summarized in Figure 15.2.
# Chunk 182
II. FATTY ACID STRUCTURE

A fatty acid consists of a hydrophobic hydrocarbon chain with a terminal carboxyl group that has a pKa (see p. 6) of ~4.8 (Fig. 16.2). At physiologic pH, the terminal carboxyl group (–COOH) ionizes, becoming –COO−. [Note: When the pH is above the pK, the deprotonated form predominates (see p. 7).] This anionic group has an affinity for water, giving the fatty acid its amphipathic nature (having both a hydrophilic and a hydrophobic region). However, for longchain-length fatty acids (LCFA), the hydrophobic portion is predominant. These molecules are highly water insoluble and must be transported in the circulation in association with protein. More than 90% of the fatty acids found in plasma are in the form of fatty acid esters (primarily TAG, cholesteryl esters, and phospholipids) contained in circulating lipoprotein particles (see p. 227). FFA are transported in the circulation in association with albumin, the most abundant protein in serum.
# Chunk 183
3.

Fate of fatty acids: The FFA move through the cell membrane of the adipocyte and bind to serum albumin. They are transported to tissues such as muscle, enter cells, get activated to their CoA derivatives, and are oxidized for energy in mitochondria. Regardless of their levels, plasma FFA cannot be used for fuel by red blood cells (RBC), which have no mitochondria. The brain does not use fatty acids for energy to any appreciable extent, but the reasons are less clear. [Note: Over 50% of the fatty acids released from adipose TAG are reesterified to glycerol 3phosphate. WAT does not express glycerol kinase, and the glycerol 3phosphate is produced by glyceroneogenesis, an incomplete version of gluconeogenesis: pyruvate to OAA via pyruvate carboxylase and OAA to phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) via phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase. The PEP is converted (by reactions common to glycolysis and gluconeogenesis) to DHAP, which is reduced to glycerol 3-phosphate. The process decreases plasma FFA, molecules associated with insulin resistance in type 2 diabetes and obesity (see p. 343).]
# Chunk 184
6.4. A 6-month-old boy was hospitalized following a seizure. History revealed that for several days prior, his appetite was decreased owing to a stomach virus. At admission, his blood glucose was 24 mg/dl (age-referenced normal is 60–100). His urine was negative for ketone bodies and positive for a variety of dicarboxylic acids. Blood carnitine levels (free and acyl bound) were normal. A tentative diagnosis of medium-chain fatty acyl coenzyme A dehydrogenase (MCAD) deficiency is made. In patients with MCAD deficiency, the fasting hypoglycemia is a consequence of:
# Chunk 185
7.3. A 10-year-old boy was evaluated for burning sensations in his feet and clusters of small, red-purple spots on his skin. Laboratory studies revealed protein in his urine. Enzymatic analysis revealed a deficiency of αgalactosidase, and enzyme replacement therapy was recommended. The most likely diagnosis is:
# Chunk 186
E. Enterohepatic circulation

Bile salts secreted into the intestine are efficiently reabsorbed (>95%) and reused. The liver actively secretes bile salts via the bile salt export pump. In the intestine, they are reabsorbed in the terminal ileum via the apical sodium (Na+)–bile salt cotransporter and returned to the blood via a separate transport system. [Note: Lithocholic acid is only poorly absorbed.] They are efficiently taken up from blood by the hepatocytes via an isoform of the cotransporter and reused. [Note: Albumin binds bile salts and transports them through the blood as was seen with FA (see p. 181).] The continuous process of secretion of bile salts into the bile, their passage through the duodenum where some are deconjugated then dehydroxylated to secondary bile salts, their uptake in the ileum, and their subsequent return to the liver as a mixture of primary and secondary forms is termed the enterohepatic circulation (Fig. 18.11). Between 15 and 30 g of bile salts are secreted from the liver into the duodenum each day, yet only ~0.5 g (<3%) is lost daily in the feces. Approximately 0.5 g/day is synthesized from cholesterol in the liver to replace the amount lost. Bile acid sequestrants, such as cholestyramine, bind bile salts in the gut and prevent their reabsorption, thereby promoting their excretion. They are used in the treatment of hypercholesterolemia because the removal of bile salts relieves the inhibition on bile acid synthesis in the liver, thereby diverting additional cholesterol into that pathway. [Note: Dietary fiber also binds bile salts and increases their excretion (see p. 365).]
# Chunk 187
I. OVERVIEW

Unlike fats and carbohydrates, amino acids are not stored by the body. That is, no protein exists whose sole function is to maintain a supply of amino acids for future use. Therefore, amino acids must be obtained from the diet, synthesized de novo, or produced from the degradation of body protein. Any amino acids in excess of the biosynthetic needs of the cell are rapidly degraded. The first phase of catabolism involves the removal of the α-amino groups (usually by transamination and subsequent oxidative deamination), forming ammonia and the corresponding α-keto acids, the carbon skeletons of amino acids. A portion of the free ammonia is excreted in the urine, but most is used in the synthesis of urea (Fig. 19.1), which is quantitatively the most important route for disposing of nitrogen from the body. In the second phase of amino acid catabolism, described in Chapter 20, the carbon skeletons of the α-keto acids are converted to common intermediates of energy-producing metabolic pathways. These compounds can be metabolized to carbon dioxide (CO2) and water (H2O), glucose, fatty acids, or ketone bodies by the central pathways of metabolism described in Chapters 8–13 and 16.
# Chunk 188
C. Ammonia transport to the liver

Two mechanisms are available in humans for the transport of ammonia from peripheral tissues to the liver for conversion to urea. Both are important in, but not exclusive to, skeletal muscle. The first uses glutamine synthetase to combine ammonia with glutamate to form glutamine, a nontoxic transport form of ammonia (Fig. 19.13). The glutamine is transported in the blood to the liver where it is cleaved by glutaminase to glutamate and ammonia (see p. 256). The glutamate is oxidatively deaminated to ammonia and α-ketoglutarate by GDH. The ammonia is converted to urea. The second transport mechanism involves the formation of alanine by the transamination of pyruvate produced from both aerobic glycolysis and metabolism of the succinyl coenzyme A (CoA) generated by the catabolism of the BCAA isoleucine and valine. Alanine is transported in the blood to the liver, where it is transaminated by ALT to pyruvate. The pyruvate is used to synthesize glucose, which can enter the blood and be used by muscle, a pathway called the glucose–alanine cycle. The glutamate product of ALT can be deaminated by GDH, generating ammonia. Thus, both alanine and glutamine carry ammonia to the liver.
# Chunk 189
V. UREA CYCLE is the major disposal form of amino groups derived from amino acids and accounts for ~90% of the nitrogen-containing components of urine. One nitrogen of the urea molecule is supplied by free ammonia and the other nitrogen by aspartate. [Note: Glutamate is the immediate precursor of both ammonia (through oxidative deamination by GDH) and aspartate nitrogen (through transamination of oxaloacetate by AST).] The carbon and oxygen of urea are derived from CO2 (as HCO3−). Urea is produced by the liver and then is transported in the blood to the kidneys for excretion in the urine.
# Chunk 190
Fate of urea: Urea diffuses from the liver and is transported in the blood to the kidneys, where it is filtered and excreted in the urine (see Fig. 19.19). A portion of the urea diffuses from the blood into the intestine and is cleaved to CO2 and ammonia by bacterial urease. The ammonia is partly lost in the feces and is partly reabsorbed into the blood. In patients with kidney failure, plasma urea levels are elevated, promoting a greater transfer of urea from blood into the gut. The intestinal action of urease on this urea becomes a clinically important source of ammonia, contributing to the hyperammonemia often seen in these patients. Oral administration of antibiotics reduces the number of intestinal bacteria responsible for this ammonia production.
# Chunk 191
19.17) and GDH. In the kidneys, most of this ammonia is excreted into + the urine as NH4 , which provides an important mechanism for maintaining the body’s acid–base balance through the excretion of protons. In the liver, the ammonia is detoxified to urea and excreted. [Note: α-Ketoglutarate, the second product of GDH, is a glucogenic precursor in the liver and kidneys.] Ammonia is also generated by intestinal glutaminase. Enterocytes obtain glutamine either from the blood or from digestion of dietary protein. [Note: Intestinal glutamine metabolism also produces alanine, which is used by the liver for gluconeogenesis, and citrulline, which is used by the kidneys to synthesize arginine.] 2.
# Chunk 192
2.

Congenital: Genetic deficiencies of each of the five enzymes of the urea cycle (and of NAGS) have been described, with an overall incidence of ~1:25,000 live births. X-linked OTC deficiency is the most common of these disorders, predominantly affecting males, although female carriers may become symptomatic. All of the other urea cycle disorders follow an autosomal-recessive inheritance pattern. In each case, the failure to synthesize urea leads to hyperammonemia during the first weeks following birth. [Note: The hyperammonemia seen with arginase deficiency is less severe because arginine contains two waste nitrogens and can be excreted in the urine.] Historically, urea cycle defects had high morbidity (neurologic manifestations) and mortality. Treatment included restriction of dietary protein in the presence of sufficient calories to prevent protein catabolism. Administration of compounds that bind covalently to nonessential amino acids, producing nitrogen-containing molecules that are excreted in the urine, has improved survival. For example, phenylbutyrate given orally is converted to phenylacetate. This condenses with glutamine to form phenylacetylglutamine, which is excreted (Fig. 19.20).
# Chunk 193
VII. CHAPTER SUMMARY

Nitrogen enters the body in a variety of compounds present in food, the most important being amino acids contained in dietary protein. Nitrogen leaves the body as urea, ammonia, and other products derived from amino acid metabolism (Fig. 19.21). Free amino acids in the body are produced by hydrolysis of dietary protein by proteases activated from their zymogen form in the stomach and intestine, degradation of tissue proteins, and de novo synthesis. This amino acid pool is consumed in the synthesis of body protein, metabolized for energy, or its members used as precursors for other nitrogen-containing compounds. Free amino acids from digestion are taken up by intestinal enterocytes via sodium-dependent secondary active transport. Small peptides are taken up via proton-linked transport. Note that body protein is simultaneously degraded and resynthesized, a process known as protein turnover. The concentration of a cellular protein may be determined by regulation of its synthesis or degradation. The ATP-dependent, cytosolic, selective ubiquitin–proteasome and ATP-independent, relatively nonselective lysosomal acid hydrolases are the two major enzyme systems that are responsible for degrading proteins. Nitrogen cannot be stored, and amino acids in excess of the biosynthetic needs of the cell are quickly degraded. The first phase of catabolism involves the transfer of the α-amino groups through transamination by pyridoxal phosphate–dependent aminotransferases (transaminases), followed by oxidative deamination of glutamate by glutamate dehydrogenase, forming ammonia and the corresponding α-keto acids. A portion of the free ammonia is excreted in the urine. Some ammonia is used in converting glutamate to glutamine for safe transport, but most is used in the hepatic synthesis of urea, which is quantitatively the most important route for disposing of nitrogen from the body. Alanine also carries nitrogen to the liver for disposal as urea. The two major causes of hyperammonemia (with its neurologic effects) are acquired liver disease and congenital deficiencies of urea cycle enzymes such as X-linked ornithine transcarbamylase.
# Chunk 194
Correct answer = D. Glutamine, produced by the catabolism of branched-chain amino acids in muscle, is deaminated by glutaminase to ammonia + glutamate. The glutamate is deaminated by glutamate dehydrogenase to ammonia + αketoglutarate, which can be used for gluconeogenesis. Free amino acids are taken into enterocytes by several different sodium-linked transport systems. Healthy, well-fed individuals are in nitrogen balance, in which nitrogen input equals output. The liver converts ammonia to urea, and the kidneys use ammonia to buffer protons. Amino acid catabolism begins with transamination that generates glutamate. The glutamate undergoes oxidative deamination. Toxic ammonia is transported as glutamine and alanine. Arginine is synthesized and hydrolyzed in the hepatic urea cycle.
# Chunk 195
1.

Classification: MSUD includes a classic type and several variant forms. The classic, neonatal-onset form is the most common type of MSUD. Leukocytes or cultured skin fibroblasts from these patients show little or no BCKD activity. Infants with classic MSUD show symptoms within the first several days of life. If not diagnosed and treated, classic MSUD is lethal in the first weeks of life. Patients with intermediate forms have a higher level of enzyme activity (up to 30% of normal). The symptoms are milder and show an onset from infancy to adolescence. Patients with the rare thiamine-dependent variant of MSUD respond to large doses of this vitamin.
# Chunk 196
VII. CHAPTER SUMMARY

Amino acids whose catabolism yields pyruvate or an intermediate of the tricarboxylic acid cycle are termed glucogenic (Fig. 20.24). They can give rise to the net formation of glucose in the liver and kidneys. The solely glucogenic amino acids are glutamine, glutamate, proline, arginine, histidine, alanine, serine, glycine, cysteine, methionine, valine, threonine, aspartate, and asparagine. Amino acids whose catabolism yields either acetoacetate or one of its precursors, acetyl coenzyme A (CoA) or acetoacetyl CoA, are termed ketogenic. Leucine and lysine are solely ketogenic. Tyrosine, phenylalanine, tryptophan, and isoleucine are both ketogenic and glucogenic. Nonessential amino acids can be synthesized from metabolic intermediates or from the carbon skeletons of essential amino acids. Essential amino acids need to be obtained from the diet. They include histidine, methionine, threonine, valine, isoleucine, phenylalanine, tryptophan, leucine, and lysine. Phenylketonuria (PKU) is caused by a deficiency of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH), which converts phenylalanine to tyrosine. Hyperphenylalaninemia may also be caused by deficiencies in the enzymes that synthesize or regenerate the coenzyme for PAH, tetrahydrobiopterin. Untreated individuals with PKU suffer from severe intellectual disability, developmental delay, microcephaly, seizures, and a characteristic musty (mousy) smell of the urine. Treatment involves controlling dietary phenylalanine. Tyrosine becomes an essential dietary component for people with PKU. Maple syrup urine disease (MSUD) is caused by a partial or complete deficiency in branched-chain a-keto acid dehydrogenase, the enzyme that decarboxylates the branched-chain amino acids (BCAA) leucine, isoleucine, and valine. Symptoms include feeding problems, vomiting, ketoacidosis, changes in muscle tone, and a characteristic sweet smell of the urine. If untreated, the disease leads to neurologic problems that result in death. Treatment involves controlling BCAA intake. Other important genetic diseases associated with amino acid metabolism include albinism, homocystinuria, methylmalonic acidemia, alkaptonuria, histidinemia, tyrosinemia, and cystathioninuria.
# Chunk 197
B. Heme biosynthesis

The major sites of heme biosynthesis are the liver, which synthesizes a number of heme proteins (particularly the CYP proteins), and the erythrocyte-producing cells of the bone marrow, which are active in Hb synthesis. In the liver, the rate of heme synthesis is highly variable, responding to alterations in the cellular heme pool caused by fluctuating demands for hemeproteins. In contrast, heme synthesis in erythroid cells is relatively constant and is matched to the rate of globin synthesis. [Note: Over 85% of all heme synthesis occurs in erythroid tissue. Mature red blood cells (RBC) lack mitochondria and are unable to synthesize heme.] The initial reaction and the last three steps in the formation of porphyrins occur in mitochondria, whereas the intermediate steps of the biosynthetic pathway occur in the cytosol. [Note: Fig. 21.8 summarizes heme synthesis.] 1. δ-Aminolevulinic acid formation: All the carbon and nitrogen atoms of the porphyrin molecule are provided by glycine (a nonessential amino acid) and succinyl coenzyme A (a tricarboxylic acid cycle intermediate) that condense to form δ-aminolevulinic acid (ALA) in a reaction catalyzed by ALA synthase ([ALAS], Fig. 21.3). This reaction requires pyridoxal phosphate ([PLP] see p. 382) as a coenzyme and is the committed and rate-limiting step in porphyrin biosynthesis. [Note: There are two ALAS isoforms, each produced by different genes and controlled by different mechanisms. ALAS1 is found in all tissues, whereas ALAS2 is erythroid specific. Loss-of-function mutations in ALAS2 result in X-linked sideroblastic anemia and iron overload.] (Continued in Figs. 21.4 and 21.5.) a.
# Chunk 198
C. Porphyrias

Porphyrias are rare, inherited (or sometimes acquired) defects in heme synthesis, resulting in the accumulation and increased excretion of porphyrins or porphyrin precursors (see Fig. 21.8). [Note: Inherited porphyrias are autosominal-dominant (AD) or autosomal-recessive (AR) disorders.] Each porphyria results in the accumulation of a unique pattern of intermediates caused by the deficiency of an enzyme in the heme synthetic pathway. [Note: Porphyria, derived from the Greek for purple, refers to the red-blue color caused by pigment-like porphyrins in the urine of some patients with defects in heme synthesis.] 1. Clinical manifestations: The porphyrias are classified as erythropoietic or hepatic, depending on whether the enzyme deficiency occurs in the erythropoietic cells of the bone marrow or in the liver. Hepatic porphyrias can be further classified as chronic or acute. In general, individuals with an enzyme defect prior to the synthesis of the tetrapyrroles manifest abdominal and neuropsychiatric signs, whereas those with enzyme defects leading to the accumulation of tetrapyrrole intermediates show photosensitivity (that is, their skin itches and burns [pruritus] when exposed to sunlight). [Note: Photosensitivity is a result of the oxidation of colorless porphyrinogens to colored porphyrins, which are photosensitizing molecules thought to participate in the formation of superoxide radicals from oxygen. These radicals can oxidatively damage membranes and cause the release of destructive enzymes from lysosomes.] a. Chronic hepatic porphyria: Porphyria cutanea tarda, the most common porphyria, is a chronic disease of the liver. The disease is associated with severe deficiency of UROD, but clinical expression of the deficiency is influenced by various factors, such as hepatic iron overload, exposure to sunlight, alcohol ingestion, estrogen therapy, and the presence of hepatitis B or C or HIV infections. [Note: Mutations to UROD are found in only 20% of affected individuals. Inheritance is AD.] Clinical onset is typically during the fourth or fifth decade of life. Porphyrin accumulation leads to cutaneous symptoms (Fig. 21.6) as well as urine that is red to brown in natural light (Fig.
# Chunk 199
Hepatocellular (hepatic): Damage to liver cells (for example, in patients with cirrhosis or hepatitis) can cause unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia as a result of decreased conjugation. Urobilinogen is increased in the urine because hepatic damage decreases the enterohepatic circulation of this compound, allowing more to enter the blood, from which it is filtered into the urine. The urine consequently darkens, whereas stools may be a pale, clay color. Plasma levels of alanine and aspartate transaminases (ALT and AST, respectively; see p. 251) are elevated. If CB is made but is not efficiently secreted from the liver into bile (intrahepatic cholestasis), it can leak into the blood (regurgitation), causing a conjugated hyperbilirubinemia.
# Chunk 200
IV. CHAPTER SUMMARY

Amino acids are precursors of many nitrogen (N)-containing compounds including porphyrins, which, in combination with ferrous (Fe2+) iron, form heme (Fig. 21.20). The major sites of heme biosynthesis are the liver, which synthesizes a number of hemeproteins (particularly cytochrome P450 enzymes), and the erythrocyte-producing cells of the bone marrow, which are active in hemoglobin synthesis. In the liver, the rate of heme synthesis is highly variable, responding to alterations in the cellular heme pool caused by fluctuating demands for hemeproteins. In contrast, heme synthesis in erythroid cells is relatively constant and is matched to the rate of globin synthesis. Heme synthesis starts with glycine and succinyl coenzyme A. The committed step is the formation of δ-aminolevulinic acid (ALA). This mitochondrial reaction is catalyzed by ALA synthase-1 (ALAS1) in the liver (inhibited by hemin, the oxidized form of heme that accumulates when heme is being underutilized) and ALAS2 in erythroid tissues (regulated by iron). Porphyrias are caused by inherited or acquired (lead poisoning) defects in heme synthesis, resulting in the accumulation and increased excretion of porphyrins or porphyrin precursors. Enzymic defects early in the pathway cause abdominal pain and neuropsychiatric symptoms, whereas later defects cause photosensitivity. Degradation of heme occurs in the mononuclear phagocyte system, particularly in the liver and spleen. The first step is the production by heme oxygenase of biliverdin, which is subsequently reduced to bilirubin. Bilirubin is transported by albumin to the liver, where its solubility is increased by the addition of two molecules of glucuronic acid by bilirubin uridine diphosphate-glucuronosyltransferase (bilirubin UGT). Bilirubin diglucuronide (conjugated bilirubin) is transported into the bile canaliculi, where it is first hydrolyzed and reduced by gut bacteria to yield urobilinogen, which is further oxidized by bacteria to stercobilin. Jaundice (icterus) refers to the yellow color of the skin and sclerae that is caused by deposition of bilirubin, secondary to increased bilirubin levels in the blood. Three commonly encountered types of jaundice are hemolytic (prehepatic), obstructive (posthepatic), and hepatocellular (hepatic) (see Fig. 21.20). Other important N-containing compounds derived from amino acids include the catecholamines (dopamine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine), creatine, histamine, serotonin, melanin, and nitric oxide.
# Chunk 201
1.2. A 50-year-old man presented with painful blisters on the backs of his hands. He was a golf instructor and indicated that the blisters had erupted shortly after the golfing season began. He did not have recent exposure to common skin irritants. He had partial complex seizure disorder that had begun ~3 years earlier after a head injury. The patient had been taking phenytoin (his only medication) since the onset of the seizure disorder. He admitted to an average weekly ethanol intake of ~18 12-oz cans of beer. The patient’s urine was reddish orange. Cultures obtained from skin lesions failed to grow organisms. A 24-hour urine collection showed elevated uroporphyrin (1,000 mg; normal, <27 mg). The most likely diagnosis is:
# Chunk 202
A. Degradation in the small intestine

Ribonucleases and deoxyribonucleases, secreted by the pancreas, hydrolyze dietary RNA and DNA to oligonucleotides that are further hydrolyzed by pancreatic phosphodiesterases, producing a mixture of 3′and 5′-mononucleotides. At the intestinal mucosal surface, nucleotidases remove the phosphate groups hydrolytically, releasing nucleosides that are taken into enterocytes by sodium-dependent transporters and degraded by nucleosidases (nucleoside phosphorylases) to free bases plus (deoxy) ribose 1-phosphate. Dietary purine bases are not used to any appreciable extent for the synthesis of tissue nucleic acids. Instead, they are degraded to uric acid in the enterocytes. Most of the uric acid enters the blood and is eventually excreted in the urine. A summary of this pathway is shown in Figure 22.14. [Note: Mammals other than primates express urate oxidase (uricase), which cleaves the purine ring, generating allantoin. Modified recombinant urate oxidase is now used clinically to lower urate levels.]
# Chunk 203
2.2. A 42-year-old male patient undergoing radiation therapy for prostate cancer develops severe pain in the metatarsal phalangeal joint of his right big toe. Monosodium urate crystals are detected by polarized light microscopy in fluid obtained from this joint by arthrocentesis. This patient’s pain is directly caused by the overproduction of the end product of which of the following metabolic pathways?
# Chunk 204
3.3. A 39-year-old woman is brought to the emergency room complaining of weakness and dizziness. She recalls getting up early that morning to do her weekly errands and had skipped breakfast. She drank a cup of coffee for lunch and had nothing to eat during the day. She met with friends at 8 p.m.
# Chunk 205
XII. KIDNEY IN LONG-TERM FASTING

As fasting continues into early starvation and beyond, the kidney plays important roles. The renal cortex expresses the enzymes of gluconeogenesis, including glucose 6-phosphatase, and, in late fasting, ~50% of gluconeogenesis occurs here. [Note: A portion of this glucose is used by the kidney itself.] The kidney also provides compensation for the acidosis that accompanies the increased production of ketone bodies (organic acids). The glutamine released from the muscle’s metabolism of BCAA is taken up by the kidney and acted upon by renal glutaminase and glutamate dehydrogenase (see p. 256), producing αketoglutarate, which can be used as a substrate for gluconeogenesis, plus ammonia (NH3). The NH3 picks up protons from ketone body dissociation and is excreted in the urine as ammonium (NH4+), thereby decreasing the acid load in the body (Fig. 24.19). Therefore, in long-term fasting, there is a switch from nitrogen disposal in the form of urea to disposal in the form of NH4 . [Note: As ketone body concentration rises, enterocytes, typically consumers of glutamine, become consumers of ketone bodies. This allows more glutamine to be available to the kidney.]
# Chunk 206
II. TYPE 1

T1D constitutes <10% of the ~21 million known cases of diabetes in the United States. The disease is characterized by an absolute deficiency of insulin caused by an autoimmune attack on the islet β cells of the pancreas. In T1D, the islets of Langerhans become infiltrated with activated T lymphocytes, leading to a condition called insulitis. Over a period of years, this autoimmune attack on the β cells leads to gradual depletion of the β-cell population (Fig. 25.2). However, symptoms appear abruptly when 80%–90% of the β cells have been destroyed. At this point, the pancreas fails to respond adequately to ingestion of glucose, and insulin therapy is required to restore metabolic control and prevent life-threatening ketoacidosis. β-Cell destruction requires both a stimulus from the environment (such as a viral infection) and a genetic determinant that causes the β cells to be mistakenly identified as “nonself.” [Note: Among monozygotic (identical) twins, if one sibling develops T1D, the other twin has only a 30%– 50% chance of developing the disease. This contrasts with T2D (see p. 341), in which the genetic influence is stronger and, in virtually all monozygotic twinships, the disease eventually develops in both individuals.]
# Chunk 207
A. Diagnosis

The onset of T1D is typically during childhood or puberty, and symptoms develop suddenly. Individuals with T1D can usually be recognized by the abrupt appearance of polyuria (frequent urination), polydipsia (excessive thirst), and polyphagia (excessive hunger), often triggered by physiologic stress such as an infection. These symptoms are usually accompanied by fatigue and weight loss. The diagnosis is confirmed by a FBG ≥126 mg/dl (normal is 70–99). [Note: Fasting is defined as no caloric intake for at least 8 hours.] A FBG of 100–125 mg/dl is categorized as an impaired FBG. Individuals with impaired FBG are considered prediabetic and are at increased risk for developing T2D. Diagnosis can also be made on the basis of a nonfasting (random) blood glucose level >200 mg/dl or a glycated hemoglobin (see p. 340) concentration ≥6.5 mg/dl (normal is <5.7) in an individual with symptoms of hyperglycemia. [Note: The oral glucose tolerance test, in which blood glucose is measured 2 hours after ingestion of a solution containing 75 g of glucose, also is used but is less convenient. It is most typically used to screen pregnant women for gestational diabetes (see p. 342).]
# Chunk 208
When blood glucose is >180 mg/dl, the ability of renal sodium-dependent glucose transporters (SGLT) to reclaim glucose is impaired, and glucose “spills” into urine. The loss of glucose is accompanied by the loss of water, resulting in the characteristic polyuria (with dehydration) and polydipsia of diabetes.
# Chunk 209
C. Treatment

Individuals with T1D must rely on exogenous insulin delivered subcutaneously (subq) either by periodic injection or by continuous pump-assisted infusion to control the hyperglycemia and ketonemia. Two types of therapeutic injection regimens are currently used, standard and intensive. [Note: Pump delivery is also considered intensive therapy.] 1. Standard versus intensive treatment: Standard treatment is typically two to three daily injections of recombinant human insulin. Mean blood glucose levels obtained are typically 225–275 mg/dl, with a glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) level (see p. 33) of 8%–9% of the total hemoglobin (blue arrow in Fig. 25.4). [Note: The rate of formation of HbA1c is proportional to the average blood glucose concentration over the previous 3 months. Thus, HbA1c provides a measure of how well treatment has normalized blood glucose over that time in a patient with diabetes.] In contrast to standard therapy, intensive treatment seeks to more closely normalize blood glucose through more frequent monitoring and subsequent injections of insulin, typically ≥4 times a day. Mean blood glucose levels of 150 mg/dl can be achieved, with HbA1c ~7% of the total hemoglobin (see red arrow in Fig. 25.4). [Note: Normal mean blood glucose is ~100 mg/dl, and HbA1c is ≤6% (see black arrow in Fig. 25.4).] Therefore, normalization of glucose values (euglycemia) is not achieved even in intensively treated patients. Nonetheless, patients on intensive therapy show a ≥50% reduction in the long-term microvascular complications of diabetes (that is, retinopathy, nephropathy, and neuropathy) compared with patients receiving standard care. This confirms that the complications of diabetes are related to an elevation of plasma glucose.
# Chunk 210
III. TYPE 2

T2D is the most common form of the disease, afflicting >90% of the U.S. population with diabetes. [Note: American Indians, Alaskan Natives, Hispanic and Latino Americans, African Americans, and Asian Americans have the highest prevalence.] Typically, T2D develops gradually without obvious symptoms. The disease is often detected by routine screening tests. However, many individuals with T2D have symptoms of polyuria and polydipsia of several weeks’ duration. Polyphagia may be present but is less common. Patients with T2D have a combination of insulin resistance and dysfunctional β cells (Fig.
# Chunk 211
For additional ancillary materials related to this chapter, please visit thePoint.

I. OVERVIEW

Obesity is a disorder of body weight regulatory systems characterized by an accumulation of excess body fat. In primitive societies, in which daily life required a high level of physical activity and food was only available intermittently, a genetic tendency favoring storage of excess calories as fat may have had a survival value. Today, however, the sedentary lifestyle and abundance and wide variety of palatable, inexpensive foods in industrialized societies has undoubtedly contributed to an obesity epidemic. As adiposity has increased, so has the risk of developing associated diseases, such as type 2 diabetes (T2D), cardiovascular disease (CVD), hypertension, cancer, and arthritis. Particularly alarming is the explosion of obesity in children and adolescents, which has shown a threefold increase in prevalence over the last four decades. [Note: Approximately 17% of those age 2–19 years are obese.] In the United States, the lifetime risk of becoming overweight or obese is ~50% and 25%, respectively. Obesity has increased globally, and, by some estimates, there are more obese than undernourished individuals worldwide.
# Chunk 212
II. ASSESSMENT

Because the amount of body fat is difficult to measure directly, it is usually determined from an indirect measure, the body mass index (BMI), which has been shown to correlate with the amount of body fat in most individuals. [Note: Exceptions are athletes who have large amounts of lean muscle mass.] Measuring the waist size with a tape measure is also used to screen for obesity, because this measurement reflects the amount of fat in the central abdominal area of the body. The presence of excess central fat is associated with an increased risk for morbidity and mortality, independent of the BMI. [Note: A waist size ≥40 in (men) and ≥35 in (women) is considered a risk factor.]
# Chunk 213
About 80%–90% of human body fat is stored in subcutaneous (subq) depots in the abdominal (upper body) and the gluteal-femoral (lower body) regions. The remaining 10%–20% is in visceral depots located deep within the abdominal cavity (Fig. 26.2B). Excess fat in visceral and abdominal subq stores increases health risks associated with obesity.
# Chunk 214
VI. OBESITY AND HEALTH

Obesity is correlated with an increased risk of death (Fig. 26.9) and is a risk factor for a number of chronic conditions, including T2D, dyslipidemias, hypertension, CVD, some cancers, gallstones, arthritis, gout, pelvic floor disorders (for example, urinary incontinence), NAFLD, and sleep apnea. The relationship between obesity and associated morbidities is stronger among individuals age <55 years. After age 74 years, there is no longer an association between increased BMI and mortality. [Note: Obesity also has social consequences (for example, stigmatization and discrimination).] Weight loss in obese individuals leads to decreased blood pressure, plasma TAG, and blood glucose levels. HDL increase.
# Chunk 215
B. Caloric restriction

Dieting is the most commonly practiced approach to weight control. Because 1 lb of adipose tissue corresponds to ~3,500 kcal, the effect that caloric restriction will have on the amount of adipose tissue can be estimated. Weight loss on calorie-restricted diets is determined primarily by caloric intake and not nutrient composition. [Note: However, compositional aspects can affect glycemic control and the blood lipid profile.] Caloric restriction is ineffective over the long term for many individuals. Over 90% of people who attempt to lose weight regain the lost weight when dietary intervention is suspended. Nonetheless, although few individuals will reach their ideal weight with treatment, weight losses of 10% of body weight over a 6-month period often reduce blood pressure and lipid levels and enhance control of T2D.
# Chunk 216
VIII. CHAPTER SUMMARY

Obesity, the accumulation of excess body fat, results when energy (caloric) intake exceeds energy expenditure (Fig. 26.10). Obesity is increasing in industrialized countries because of a reduction in daily energy expenditure and an increase in energy intake resulting from the increasing availability of palatable, inexpensive foods. The body mass index (BMI) is easy to determine and highly correlated to body fat. Nearly 69% of U.S. adults are overweight (BMI ≥25), and >33% of this group are obese (BMI ≥30). The anatomic distribution of body fat has a major influence on associated health risks. Excess fat located in the abdomen (upper body, apple shape), as reflected in waist size, is associated with greater risk for hypertension, insulin resistance, diabetes, dyslipidemia, and coronary heart disease as compared to fat located in the hips and thighs (lower body, pear shape). A person’s weight is determined by genetic and environmental factors. Appetite is influenced by afferent, or incoming, signals (that is, neural signals, circulating hormones such as leptin, and metabolites) that are integrated by the hypothalamus. These diverse signals prompt release of hypothalamic peptides (such as neuropeptide Y and α-melanocyte– stimulating hormone) and activate outgoing, efferent neural signals. Obesity is correlated with an increased risk of death and is also a risk factor for a number of chronic conditions. Weight reduction is achieved best with negative energy balance, that is, by decreasing caloric intake and increasing physical activity. Virtually all diets that limit particular groups of foods or macronutrients lead to short-term weight loss. Long-term maintenance of weight loss is difficult to achieve. Modest reduction in food intake occurs with pharmacologic treatment. Surgical procedures, such as gastric bypass, designed to limit food intake are an option for the severely obese patient who has not responded to other treatments.
# Chunk 217
Choose the ONE best answer. For Questions 26.1 and 26.2, use the following scenario.

A 40-year-old woman, 5 ft, 1 in (155 cm) tall and weighing 188 lb (85.5 kg), seeks your advice on how to lose weight. Her waist measured 41 in and her hips 39 in. The remainder of the physical examination and the blood laboratory data were all within the normal range. Her only child (who is age 14 years), her sister, and both of her parents are overweight. The patient recalls being overweight throughout her childhood and adolescence. Over the past 15 years, she had been on seven different diets for periods of 2 weeks to 3 months, losing from 5 to 25 lb each time. On discontinuation of the diets, she regained weight, returning to 185–190 lb.
# Chunk 218
2.

Recommended dietary allowance: The RDA is the average daily nutrient intake level that is sufficient to meet the requirements of nearly all (97%– 98%) individuals in a particular life stage and gender group. The RDA is not the minimal requirement for healthy individuals, but it is intentionally set to provide a margin of safety for most individuals. The EAR serves as the foundation for setting the RDA. If the standard deviation (SD) of the EAR is available and the requirement for the nutrient is normally distributed, the RDA is set at 2 SD above the EAR (that is, RDA = EAR + 2 SDEAR).
# Chunk 219
3.

Adequate intake: An Adequate Intake (AI) is set instead of an RDA if sufficient scientific evidence is not available to calculate an EAR or RDA. The AI is based on estimates of nutrient intake by a group (or groups) of apparently healthy people. For example, the AI for young infants, for whom human milk is the recommended sole source of food for the first 6 months, is based on the estimated daily mean nutrient intake supplied by human milk for healthy, full-term infants who are exclusively breast-fed.
# Chunk 220
B. Using the dietary reference intakes

Most nutrients have a set of DRI (Fig. 27.3). Usually a nutrient has an EAR and a corresponding RDA. Most are set by age and gender and may be influenced by special factors, such as pregnancy and lactation in women (see p. 372). When the data are not sufficient to estimate an EAR (or an RDA), an AI is designated. Intakes below the EAR need to be improved because the probability of adequacy is ≤50% (Fig. 27.4). Intakes between the EAR and RDA likely need to be improved because the probability of adequacy is <98%, and intakes at or above the RDA can be considered adequate. Intakes above the AI can be considered adequate. Intakes between the UL and the RDA can be considered to have no risk for adverse effects. [Note: Because the DRI is designed to meet the nutritional needs of the healthy, it does not include any special needs of the sick.]
# Chunk 221
Physical activity: Muscular activity provides the greatest variation in the TEE. The amount of energy consumed depends on the duration and intensity of the exercise. This energy cost is expressed as a multiple of the RMR (range is 1.1 to >8.0) that is referred to as the physical activity ratio (PAR) or the metabolic equivalent of the task (MET). In general, a lightly active person requires ~30%–50% more calories than the RMR (see Fig. 27.7), whereas a highly active individual may require ≥100% calories above the RMR.
# Chunk 222
B. Nitrogen balance

Nitrogen balance occurs when the amount of nitrogen consumed equals that of the nitrogen excreted in the urine (primarily as urinary urea nitrogen, or UUN), sweat, and feces. Most healthy adults are normally in nitrogen balance. [Note: There is, on average, 1 g nitrogen in 6.25 g protein.] 1.
# Chunk 223
Percent daily value: The %DV compares the amount of a given nutrient in a single serving of a product to the recommended daily intake for that nutrient. For example, the %DV for the micronutrients listed, as well as for total carbohydrates and fiber, are based on their recommended minimum daily intake. Thus, if the label lists 20% for calcium, one serving provides 20% of the minimum recommended amount of calcium needed each day. In contrast, the %DV for saturated fat, cholesterol, and sodium are based on their recommended maximum daily intake, and the %DV reflects what percentage of this maximum a serving provides. There is no %DV for protein because the recommended intake depends on body weight (see p. 367). [Note: “Sugars” represents mono-and disaccharides. The remainder of the carbohydrate (total carbohydrate – [fiber + sugars]) is the oligo-and polysaccharides.] 2.
# Chunk 224
Dietary history: This is a record of food intake over a period of time. For a food diary, the specific types and exact amounts of food eaten are recorded in “real time” (as soon as possible after eating) for a period of 3–7 days. Retrospective approaches include a food frequency questionnaire (for example, what fruits were eaten and how often they were eaten in a typical day, week, or month) and a 24-hour recall of the specific foods and the amounts eaten in the last 24 hours.
# Chunk 225
A. Infancy, childhood, and adolescence

The rapid growth and development in infancy (birth to age 1 year) and childhood (age 1 year to adolescence) necessitate higher energy and protein needs relative to body size than are required in subsequent life stages. In adolescence, the marked increases in height and weight that occur increase nutritional needs. Growth charts (Fig. 27.26) are used to compare an individual’s stature (height) and/or weight to the expected values for others of the same age (≤20 years) and sex. They are based on data from large numbers of normal individuals over time. [Note: Deviations from the expected growth curve, as reflected in the crossing of two or more percentile lines, raise concern.] 1. Infants: Ideal infant nutrition is based on human breast milk because it provides calories and most micronutrients in amounts appropriate for the human infant. Carbohydrates, protein, and fat are present in a 7:3:1 ratio. [Note: In addition to the disaccharide lactose, human milk contains nearly 200 unique oligosaccharides. About 90% of the microbiota (the population of microbes) in the breast-fed infant’s intestine is represented by one type, Bifidobacterium infantis, which expresses all the enzymes needed to degrade these complex sugars. The sugars, in turn, act as prebiotics that support the growth of B. infantis, a probiotic (helpful bacteria).] Breast milk is low in vitamin D, however, and exclusively breast-fed babies require vitamin D supplementation. [Note: Human milk provides antibodies and other proteins that reduce the risk of infection.]
# Chunk 226
X. CHAPTER SUMMARY

The Dietary Reference Intakes (DRI) provide estimates of the amounts of nutrients required to prevent deficiencies and maintain optimal health and growth. They consist of the Estimated Average Requirement (EAR), the average daily nutrient intake level estimated to meet the requirement of 50% of the healthy individuals in a particular life stage (age) and gender group; the Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA), the average daily dietary intake level that is sufficient to meet the nutrient requirements of nearly all (97%–98%) individuals in a life stage and gender group; the Adequate Intake (AI), which is set instead of an RDA if sufficient scientific evidence is not available to calculate the RDA; and the Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL), the highest average daily nutrient intake level that is likely to pose no risk of adverse health effects to almost all individuals in the general population. The energy generated by the metabolism of the macronutrients (9 kcal/g of fat and 4 kcal/g of protein or carbohydrate) is used for three energy-requiring processes that occur in the body: resting metabolic rate, physical activity, and the thermic effect of food. Acceptable Macronutrient Distribution Ranges (AMDR) are defined as the ranges of intake for a particular macronutrient that are associated with reduced risk of chronic disease while providing adequate amounts of essential nutrients. Adults should consume 45%–65% of their total calories from carbohydrates, 20%–35% from fat, and 10%–35% from protein (Fig. 27.28). Elevated levels of cholesterol in low-density lipoproteins (LDL-C) result in increased risk for coronary heart disease (CHD). In contrast, elevated levels of cholesterol in high-density lipoproteins (HDL-C) have been associated with a decreased risk for CHD. Dietary or drug treatment of hypercholesterolemia is effective in decreasing LDL-C, increasing HDLC, and reducing the risk for CHD. Consumption of saturated fats is strongly associated with high levels of total plasma and LDL-C. When substituted for saturated fatty acids in the diet, monounsaturated fats lower both total plasma cholesterol and LDL-C but maintain or increase HDL-C. Consumption of fats containing ω-6 polyunsaturated fatty acids lowers plasma LDL-C, but HDL-C, which protects against CHD, is also lowered. Dietary ω-3 polyunsaturated fats suppress cardiac arrhythmias and reduce plasma triacylglycerols, decrease the tendency for thrombosis, and substantially reduce the risk of cardiovascular mortality. Carbohydrates provide energy and fiber to the diet. When they are consumed as part of a diet in which caloric intake is equal to energy expenditure, they do not promote obesity. Dietary protein provides essential amino acids. Protein quality is a measure of its ability to provide the essential amino acids required for tissue maintenance. Proteins from animal sources, in general, have a higher-quality protein than that derived from plants. However, proteins from different plant sources may be combined in such a way that the result is equivalent in nutritional value to animal protein. Positive nitrogen (N) balance occurs when N intake exceeds N excretion. It is observed in situations in which tissue growth occurs, for example, in childhood, pregnancy, or during recovery from an emaciating illness. Negative N balance occurs when N losses are greater than N intake. It is associated with inadequate dietary protein; lack of an essential amino acid; or during physiologic stresses such as trauma, burns, illness, or surgery. Kwashiorkor occurs when protein deprivation is relatively greater than the reduction in total calories. It is characterized by edema. Marasmus occurs when calorie deprivation is relatively greater than the reduction in protein. No edema is seen. Both are extreme forms of protein-energy malnutrition (PEM). Nutrition Facts labels give consumers information about the nutritional content of packaged foods. Medical assessment of nutritional status includes dietary history, anthropometric measures, and laboratory data. Each life stage has specific nutrition needs. Growth charts are used to monitor the growth pattern of an individual from birth through adolescence. Drug–nutrient interactions are of concern, especially in older adults.
# Chunk 227
C. has a serum albumin level above normal.

D. has markedly decreased weight for height.

The correct answer = B. Kwashiorkor is caused by inadequate protein intake in the presence of fair to good energy (calorie) intake. Typical findings in a patient with kwashiorkor include abdominal and peripheral edema (note the swollen belly and legs) caused largely by a decreased serum albumin concentration. Body fat stores are depleted, but weight for height can be normal because of edema. Treatment includes a diet adequate in calories and protein.
# Chunk 228
Correct answer = C. A treatment goal for the chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) caused by acute bronchitis is to insure appropriate nutrition without increasing the respiratory quotient (RQ), which is the ratio of carbon dioxide (CO2) produced to oxygen consumed, thereby minimizing the production of CO2. Less CO2 is produced from the metabolism of fat (RQ = 0.7) than from the catabolism of carbohydrate (RQ =1.0). Fat contains fewer oxygen atoms. Fat is calorically denser than is carbohydrate. [Note: RQ is determined by indirect calorimetry.] 7.7. A 32-year-old man who was rescued from a house fire was admitted to the hospital with burns over 45% of his body (severe burns). The man weighs 154 lb (70 kg) and is 72 in (183 cm) tall. Which one of the following is the best rapid estimate of the immediate daily caloric needs of this patient?
# Chunk 229
Correct answer = D. The percent daily value (%DV) compares the amount of a given nutrient in a single serving of a product to the recommended daily intake for that nutrient. The %DV for the micronutrients listed on the label, as well as for total carbohydrates and fiber, are based on their recommended minimum daily intake, whereas the %DV for saturated fat, cholesterol, and sodium are based on their recommended maximum daily intake.
# Chunk 230
B. Nutritional anemias

Anemia is a condition in which the blood has a lower than normal concentration of hemoglobin, which results in a reduced ability to transport oxygen (O2). Nutritional anemias (that is, those caused by inadequate intake of one or more essential nutrients) can be classified according to the size of the red blood cells (RBC), or mean corpuscular volume (MCV), observed in the blood (Fig. 28.3). Microcytic anemia (MCV below normal), caused by lack of iron, is the most common form of nutritional anemia. The second major category of nutritional anemia, macrocytic (MCV above normal), results from a deficiency in folic acid or vitamin B12. [Note: These macrocytic anemias are commonly called megaloblastic because a deficiency of either vitamin (or both) causes accumulation of large, immature RBC precursors, known as megaloblasts, in the bone marrow and the blood (Fig. 28.4). Hypersegmented neutrophils are also seen.] 1.
# Chunk 231
Folate and anemia: Inadequate serum levels of folate can be caused by increased demand (for example, pregnancy and lactation; see p. 372), poor absorption caused by pathology of the small intestine, alcoholism, or treatment with drugs (for example, methotrexate) that are dihydrofolate reductase inhibitors (see Fig. 28.2). A folate-free diet can cause a deficiency within a few weeks. A primary result of folic acid deficiency is megaloblastic anemia (see Fig. 28.4), caused by diminished synthesis of purine nucleotides and TMP, which leads to an inability of cells (including RBC precursors) to make DNA and, therefore, an inability to divide.
# Chunk 232
8.6. A 52-year-old woman presents with fatigue of several months’ duration. Blood studies reveal a macrocytic anemia, reduced levels of hemoglobin, elevated levels of homocysteine, and normal levels of methylmalonic acid. Which of the following is most likely deficient in this woman?
# Chunk 233
1. Calcium: Ca2+ is the most abundant mineral in the body, with ~98% being found in bones. The remainder is involved in a number of processes such as signaling, muscle contraction, and blood clotting. Ca2+ binds to a variety of proteins including calmodulin (see p. 133), phospholipase A2 (see p. 213), and protein kinase C (see p. 205) and alters their activity. [Note: Calbindin is a vitamin D–induced intracellular Ca2+-binding protein involved in Ca2+ absorption in the intestine (see p. 392).] Dairy products, many green vegetables (for example, broccoli, but not spinach), and fortified orange juice are good dietary sources. Although dietary deficiency syndromes are unknown, average Ca2+ intake in the United States is insufficient for optimal bone health. Toxicity is seen only with supplements (tolerable upper limit [UL] = 2,500 mg/day for adults). Hypercalcemia (elevated serum Ca2+) can result from overproduction of parathyroid hormone (PTH). This may cause constipation and kidney stones. Hypocalcemia (low serum Ca2+) can result from a deficiency of PTH or vitamin D. It can lead to bone demineralization (resorption). [Note: The hormonal regulation of serum Ca2+ levels was presented in the vitamin D section of Chapter 28 and is reviewed in 3. below.]
# Chunk 234
C. Sodium, chloride, and potassium

These macrominerals are considered together because they play important roles in several physiologic processes. For example, they maintain water balance, osmotic equilibrium, acid–base balance (pH), and the electrical gradients across cell membranes (membrane potential) that are essential for the functioning of neurons and myocytes. [Note: These processes are discussed in Lippincott’s Illustrated Reviews: Physiology.] 1. Sodium and chloride: Na+ and Cl− are primarily extracellular electrolytes. They are readily absorbed from foods containing salt (NaCl), much of which comes from processed foods. [Note: Na+ is required for the intestinal absorption (and renal reabsorption) of glucose and galactose (see p. 87) and free amino acids (see p. 249) by Na+-linked transporters. Cl− is used to form hydrochloric acid required for digestion (see p. 248).] In the United States, the average daily consumption of NaCl is 1.5–3 times the adequate intake (AI) of 3.8 mg/day (UL = 5.8 g/day). Dietary deficiency is rare.
# Chunk 235
1.

Menkes syndrome: In Menkes syndrome (“kinky hair” disease), a rare X-linked (1:140,000 males) disorder, efflux of dietary Cu out of intestinal enterocytes into the circulation by a Cu-transporting ATPase (ATP7A) is impaired. This results in systemic Cu deficiency. Consequently, urinary and serum free (unbound) Cu are low, as is the concentration of ceruloplasmin, which carries over 90% of the Cu in the circulation (Fig. 29.6). Progressive neurologic degeneration and connective tissue disorders are seen, as are changes to hair. Parenteral administration of Cu has been used as a treatment with varying success. [Note: The mildest form of Menkes syndrome is called occipital horn syndrome.] 2.
# Chunk 236
B. Iron

The adult body typically contains 3–4 g of Fe. It is a component of many proteins, both catalytic (for example, hydroxylases such as prolyl hydroxylase, see p. 47) and noncatalytic. Iron can be linked to sulfur (S) as seen in the Fe–S proteins of the electron transport chain (see p. 75), or it can be part of the heme prosthetic group (see p. 25) in proteins such as hemoglobin (~70% of all Fe), myoglobin, and the cytochromes. [Note: Free ionic Fe is toxic because it can cause production of the hydroxyl radical, a reactive oxygen species (ROS).] Dietary Fe is available as Fe2+ in heme (animal sources) and Fe3+ in nonheme sources (plants). Heme iron is less abundant, but it is better absorbed. Meat, poultry, some shellfish, ready-toeat cereals, lentils, and molasses are good dietary sources of Fe. About 10% of ingested Fe is absorbed. This amount, ~1−2 mg/day, is sufficient to replace Fe lost from the body primarily by the sloughing of cells.
# Chunk 237
Recycling: Macrophages phagocytose old and/or damaged red blood cells (RBC), freeing heme Fe that is sent out of the cells via ferroportin, oxidized by ceruloplasmin, and transported by Tf as described above. This recycled Fe meets ~90% of our daily need, which is predominantly for erythropoiesis.
# Chunk 238
RBC size. Treatment is the administration of Fe.

5. Excess: Fe overload can occur with accidental ingestion. [Note: Acute Fe poisoning is the most common cause of poisoning deaths of children age <6 years (UL = 40 mg/day for children, 45 mg/day for adults).] Treatment is use of an Fe chelator. Overload can also occur with genetic defects. An example is hereditary hemochromatosis (HH), an AR disorder of Fe overload found primarily in those of Northern European ancestry. It is most commonly caused by mutations to the HFE (high iron) gene. Hyperpigmentation with hyperglycemia (“bronze diabetes”) and damage to the liver (a major storage site for Fe), pancreas, and heart may be seen. In HH, serum Fe and Tf saturation are elevated. Treatment is phlebotomy or use of Fe chelators. [Note: Fe overload is seen with mutations to proteins of Fe metabolism that result in inappropriately low levels of hepcidin. It can result in hemosiderosis (the deposition of hemosiderin, an intracellular, insoluble storage form of Fe).]
# Chunk 239
9.7. Deficiency of which mineral can result in goiter and a decreased metabolic rate?

Correct answers = L, B, I, K, M, A, D. Hypernatremia (elevation of serum sodium) can lead to water retention that can cause hypertension in salt-sensitive populations (for example, African Americans). Chloride is the major extracellular anion. [Note: Sodium is the major extracellular cation, potassium is the major intracellular cation, and phosphate is the major intracellular anion. The concentration differential across the membrane is maintained by active transport.] Carbohydrate metabolism involves the generation of phosphorylated intermediates. Refeeding severely malnourished individuals traps phosphate and results in hypophosphatemia. Muscle weakness is a common symptom. Selenocysteine, an amino acid formed from serine and selenium, is found in proteins (selenoproteins) such as glutathione peroxidase, deiodinases, and thioredoxin reductase. Zinc fingers are a type of structural motif found in proteins (for example, transcription factors) that bind to DNA. Severe deficiency of zinc as a result of mutations to its intestinal transporter can result in acrodermatitis enteropathica, which is characterized by dermatitis, diarrhea, and alopecia. Calcium is required for bone mineralization, muscle contraction, nerve conduction, and blood clotting. Its deficiency will affect all of these processes. Thyroid hormones are iodinated tyrosines released by proteolytic digestion of thyroglobulin. Underingestion of iodine causes enlargement of the thyroid in an attempt to increase hormone synthesis. [Note: Goiter can also result if too much hormone is made, as in Graves disease, or if too little is made, as in Hashimoto disease. Both are autoimmune diseases.] Thyroid hormone increases the resting metabolic rate.
# Chunk 240
C. Hypercalcemia

D. Hyperphosphatemia

E. Keshan disease

F. Menkes syndrome

G. Selenosis

H. Wilson disease 9.9. A 28-year-old male is seen for complaints of recent, severe, upper-rightquadrant pain. He also reports some difficulty with fine motor tasks. No jaundice is observed on physical examination. Laboratory tests were remarkable for elevated liver function tests (serum aspartate and alanine aminotransferases) and elevated urinary calcium and phosphate. Ophthalmology consult revealed Kayser-Fleischer rings in the cornea. The patient was started on penicillamine and zinc.
# Chunk 241
9.10. A 52-year-old female is seen because of unplanned changes in the pigmentation of her skin that give her a tanned appearance. Physical examination shows hyperpigmentation, hepatomegaly, and mild scleral icterus. Laboratory tests are remarkable for elevated serum transaminases (liver function tests) and fasting blood glucose. Results of other tests are pending.
# Chunk 242
Choose the ONE best answer.

2.1. A 20-year-old man with a microcytic anemia is found to have an abnormal form of β-globin (Hemoglobin Constant Spring) that is 172 amino acids long, rather than the 141 found in the normal protein. Which of the following point mutations is consistent with this abnormality? Use Figure 32.2 to answer the question.
# Chunk 243
Mobile DNA elements: Transposons (Tn) are mobile segments of DNA that move in an essentially random manner from one site to another on the same or a different chromosome. Movement is mediated by transposase, an enzyme encoded by the Tn itself. Movement can be direct, in which transposase cuts out and then inserts the Tn at a new site, or replicative, in which the Tn is copied and the copy inserted elsewhere while the original remains in place. In eukaryotes, including humans, replicative transposition frequently involves an RNA intermediate made by a reverse transcriptase (see p. 424), in which case the Tn is called a retrotransposon. Transposition has contributed to structural variation in the genome but also has the potential to alter gene expression and even to cause disease. Tn comprise ~50% of the human genome, with retrotransposons accounting for 90% of Tn. Although the vast majority of these retrotransposons have lost the ability to move, some are still active. Their transposition is thought to be the basis for some rare cases of hemophilia A and Duchenne muscular dystrophy. [Note: The growing problem of antibiotic-resistant bacteria is a consequence, at least in part, of the exchange of plasmids among bacterial cells. If the plasmids contain Tn-carrying antibiotic resistance genes, the recipient bacteria gain resistance to one or more antimicrobial drugs.]
# Chunk 244
2.

Complementary DNA libraries: If a protein-coding gene of interest is expressed at a high level in a particular tissue, the mRNA transcribed from that gene is likely also present at high concentrations in the cells of that tissue. For example, reticulocyte mRNA is composed largely of molecules that code for the α-globin and β-globin chains of hemoglobin
# Chunk 245
A. Antithrombin III

B. FV

C. FVIII

D. Prothrombin Correct answer = A. Antithrombin III (ATIII) inhibits the action of thrombin (FIIa), a Gla-containing protein of clotting that activates the extrinsic, intrinsic, and common pathways. Excretion of ATIII in nephrotic syndrome allows the actions of FIIa to continue, resulting in a hypercoagulable state. The other choices are proteins required for clotting. Their excretion in the urine would decrease clotting.
# Chunk 246
5.10. Several days after having had their home treated for an infestation of rats, the parents of a 3-year-old girl become concerned that she might be ingesting the poison-containing pellets. After calling the Poison Hotline, they take her to the emergency department. Blood studies reveal a prolonged prothrombin and activated partial thromboplastin time and a decreased concentration of FII, FVII, FIX, and FX. Why might administration of vitamin K be a rational approach to the treatment of this patient?
# Chunk 247
Case 1: Chest Pain

Patient Presentation: BJ, a 35-year-old man with severe substernal chest pain of ~2 hours’ duration, is brought by ambulance to his local hospital at 5 AM. The pain is accompanied by dyspnea (shortness of breath), diaphoresis (sweating), and nausea.
# Chunk 248
Pertinent Test Results:

H = High; L = Low.

JS is sent to the regional children’s hospital for further evaluation. Ultrasound studies confirm hepatomegaly and renomegaly and show no evidence of tumors. A liver biopsy is performed. The hepatocytes are distended. Staining reveals large amounts of lipid (primarily triacylglycerol) and carbohydrate. Liver glycogen is elevated in amount and normal in structure. Enzyme assay using liver homogenate treated with detergent reveals <10% of the normal activity of glucose 6-phosphatase, an enzyme of the endoplasmic reticular (ER) membrane in the liver and the kidneys.
# Chunk 249
Case 4: Hypoglycemia, Hyperketonemia, and Liver Dysfunction

Patient Presentation: AK, a 59-year-old male with slurred speech, ataxia (loss of skeletal muscle coordination), and abdominal pain, was dropped off at the Emergency Department (ED).
# Chunk 250
TQ2.The blood glucose level has exceeded the capacity of the kidney to reabsorb glucose (via a sodium-dependent glucose transporter [SGLT]). The high concentration of glucose in the urine osmotically draws water from the body. This causes increased urination (polyuria) with loss of water that results in dehydration. TQ3.The NADH generated in FA β-oxidation inhibits the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle at the three NADH-producing dehydrogenase steps. This shifts acetyl CoA away from oxidation in the TCA cycle and toward use as a substrate in hepatic ketogenesis.
# Chunk 251
TQ4.MW was in negative nitrogen balance: More nitrogen was going out than coming in. This is reflected in the elevated blood urea nitrogen (BUN) level seen in the patient (see figure at top right). [Note: The BUN value also reflects dehydration.] Muscle proteolysis and amino acid catabolism are occurring as a result of the fall in insulin. (Recall that skeletal muscle does not express the glucagon receptor.) Amino acid catabolism produces ammonia (NH3), which is converted to urea by the hepatic urea cycle and sent into the blood. [Note: Urea in the urine is reported as urinary urea nitrogen.] TQ5.The Kussmaul respiration seen in MW is a respiratory response to the metabolic acidosis. Hyperventilation blows off CO2 and water, reducing the concentration of protons (H+) and bicarbonate (HCO3−) as reflected in the following equation: The renal response includes, in part, the excretion of H+ as ammonium (NH4+). Degradation of branched-chain amino acids in skeletal muscle results in the release of large amounts of glutamine (Gln) into the blood. The kidneys take up and catabolize the Gln, generating NH3 in the process. The NH3 is converted to NH4+ by secreted H+ and is excreted (see figure at middle right). [Note: When ketone bodies are plentiful, enterocytes shift to using them as a fuel instead of
# Chunk 252
III. Focused Cases

Case 1: Microcytic Anemia

Patient Presentation: ME is a 24-year-old man who is being evaluated as a follow-up to a preplacement medical evaluation he had prior to starting his new job.
# Chunk 253
Focused History: KL reports that the rash first appeared a little over 2 weeks ago. It started out small but has gotten larger. She also thinks she is getting the flu because her muscles and joints ache (myalgia and arthralgia, respectively), and she has had a headache for the last few days. Upon questioning, KL reports that she and her husband took a camping trip through New England last month.
# Chunk 254
Case 3: Blood on the Toothbrush

Patient Presentation: LT is an 84-year-old man whose gums have been bleeding for several months.
# Chunk 255
Case 4: Rapid Heart Rate, Headache, and Sweating

Patient Presentation: BE is a 45-year-old woman who presents with concerns about sudden (paroxysmal), intense, brief episodes of headache, sweating (diaphoresis), and a racing heart (palpitations).
# Chunk 256
Case 6: Dark Urine and Yellow Sclerae

Patient Presentation: JF is a 13-year-old boy who presents with fatigue and yellow sclerae.
# Chunk 257
Focused History: JF began treatment ~4 days ago with a sulfonamide antibiotic and a urinary analgesic for a urinary tract infection. He had been told that his urine would change color (become reddish) with the analgesic, but he reports that it has gotten darker (more brownish) over the last 2 days. Last night, his mother noticed that his eyes had a yellow tint. JF says he feels as though he has no energy.
# Chunk 258
Pertinent Findings: The physical examination was remarkable for JF’s pale appearance, mild scleral icterus (jaundice), mild splenomegaly, and increased heart rate (tachycardia). JF’s urine tested positive for hemoglobin (hemoglobinuria). A peripheral blood smear reveals a lower-than-normal number of red blood cells (RBC), with some containing precipitated hemoglobin (Heinz bodies; see image at right), and a higher-than-normal number of reticulocytes (immature RBC). Results of the complete blood count (CBC) and blood chemistry tests are pending.
# Chunk 259
Case 7: Joint Pain

Patient Presentation: IR is a 22-year-old male who presents for follow-up 10 days after having been treated in the Emergency Department (ED) for severe inflammation at the base of his thumb.
# Chunk 260
Diagnosis: Meconium ileus (obstruction of the ileum by meconium, the first stool produced by newborns) was confirmed by abdominal x-rays. About 98% of full-term newborns with meconium ileus have cystic fibrosis (CF). Diagnosis of CF was subsequently confirmed with a chloride sweat test.
# Chunk 261
Diagnosis: RL has a urea cycle enzyme defect with neonatal onset.

Treatment: Hemodialysis was performed to remove ammonia. Sodium phenylacetate and sodium benzoate were administered to aid in excretion of waste nitrogen, as was Arg. Long-term treatment will include lifelong limitation of dietary protein; supplementation with essential amino acids; and administration of Arg, sodium phenylacetate, and sodium phenylbutyrate.
# Chunk 262
The NH3, which is toxic, can be transported to the liver as glutamine (Gln) and alanine (Ala). The Gln is generated by the amination of glutamate by ATP-requiring glutamine synthetase. In the liver, the enzyme glutaminase removes the NH3, which can be converted to urea by the urea cycle or excreted as ammonium (NH4+) (see figure at right). Gln, then, is a nontoxic vehicle of NH3 transport in the blood. Ala is generated in skeletal muscle from the catabolism of the branched-chain amino acids (BCAA). In the liver, Ala is transaminated by alanine transaminase (ALT) to pyruvate (used in gluconeogenesis) and glutamate. Thus, Ala carries nitrogen to the liver for conversion to urea (see figure below). Therefore, defects in the urea cycle would result in an elevation in NH3, Gln, and Ala. The elevated NH3 drives respiration, and the hyperventilation causes a rise in pH (respiratory alkalosis). [Note: Hyperammonemia is toxic to the nervous system. Although the exact mechanisms are not completely understood, it is known that the metabolism of large amounts of NH3 to Gln (in the astrocytes of the brain) results in osmotic effects that cause the brain to swell. Additionally, the rise in Gln decreases the availability of glutamate, an excitatory neurotransmitter.]
# Chunk 263
Because of the close evolutionary relationship between all flowering plants, we can, once again, get insight into the cell and molecular biology of this whole class of organisms by focusing on just one or a few species for detailed analysis. Out of the several hundred thousand species of flowering plants on Earth today, molecular biologists have chosen to concentrate their efforts on a small weed, the common Thale cress Arabidopsis thaliana (Figure 1–38), which can be grown indoors in large numbers and produces thousands of offspring per plant after 8–10 weeks. Arabidopsis has a total genome size of approximately 220 million nucleotide pairs, about 17 times the size of yeast’s (see Table 1–2).
# Chunk 264
The figures on the right give data on protein—the α chain of hemoglobin. note that although there is a clear general trend of increasing divergence with increasing time for this protein, there are irregularities that are thought to reflect the action of changes of hemoglobin sequence when the organisms experienced special physiological demands. some proteins, subject to stricter functional constraints, evolve much more slowly than hemoglobin, time in millions of years others as much as five times faster. All this gives rise to substantial uncertainties in estimates of divergence times, and some experts believe that the major groups of mammals diverged from one another as if you were a mouse, preoccupied with the molecular biology of mice, humans would be attractive as model genetic organisms, because of one special property: through medical examinations and self-reporting, we catalog our own genetic (and other) disorders. The human population is enormous, consisting today of some 7 billion individuals, and this self-documenting property means that a huge database of information exists on human mutations. The human genome sequence of more than 3 billion nucleotide pairs has been determined for thousands of different people, making it easier than ever before to identify at a molecular level the precise genetic change responsible for any given human mutant phenotype.
# Chunk 265
The four elements highlighted in red constitute 99% of the total number of atoms present in the human body. an additional seven elements, highlighted in blue, together represent about 0.9% of the total. The elements shown in green are required in trace amounts by humans. it remains unclear whether those elements shown in yellow are essential in humans. The chemistry of life, it seems, is therefore predominantly the chemistry of lighter elements. The atomic weights shown here are those of the most common isotope of each element.
# Chunk 266
The opposite of an acid is a base. Any molecule capable of accepting a proton from a water molecule is called a base. Sodium hydroxide (NaOH) is basic (the term alkaline is also used) because it dissociates readily in aqueous solution to form Na+ ions and OH– ions. Because of this property, NaOH is called a strong base. More important in living cells, however, are the weak bases—those that have a weak tendency to reversibly accept a proton from water. Many biologically important molecules contain an amino (NH2) group. This group is a weak base that can generate OH– by taking a proton from water: –NH2 + H2O →–NH3+ + OH– (see Panel 2–2, pp. 92–93).
# Chunk 267
Photosynthesis (discussed in detail in Chapter 14) and respiration are complementary processes (Figure 2–18). This means that the transactions between plants and animals are not all one way. Plants, animals, and microorganisms have existed together on this planet for so long that many of them have become an essential part of the others’ environments. The oxygen released by photosynthesis is consumed in the combustion of organic molecules during aerobic respiration. And some of the CO2 molecules that are fixed today into organic molecules by photosynthesis in a green leaf were yesterday released into the atmosphere by the respiration of an animal—or by the respiration of a fungus or bacterium decomposing dead organic matter. We therefore see that carbon utilization forms a huge cycle that involves the biosphere (all of the living organisms on Earth) as a whole (Figure 2–19). Similarly, atoms of nitrogen, phosphorus, and sulfur move between the living and nonliving worlds in cycles that involve plants, animals, fungi, and bacteria.
# Chunk 268
Ionic substances such as sodium chloride H dissolve because water molecules are

C attracted to the positive (Na+) or negative Polar substances such as urea HO (Cl_) charge of each ion. dissolve because their molecules HH HH form hydrogen bonds with the OO HH surrounding water molecules.
# Chunk 269
How, then, can a DNA strand grow in the 3ʹ-to-5ʹ direction? The answer was first suggested by the results of an experiment performed in the late 1960s. Researchers added highly radioactive 3H-thymidine to dividing bacteria for a few seconds, so that only the most recently replicated DNA—that just behind the replication fork—became radiolabeled. This experiment revealed the transient existence of pieces of DNA that were 1000–2000 nucleotides long, now commonly known as Okazaki fragments, at the growing replication fork. (Similar replication
# Chunk 270
bubbles, the daughter duplexes lie side by side and cannot be distinguished from each other.

You pretreat the cells to synchronize them at the beginning of S phase. In the first experiment, you release the synchronizing block and add 3H-thymidine immediately. After 30 minutes, you wash the cells and change the medium so that the total concentration of thymidine is the same as it was, but only one-third of it is radioactive. After an additional 15 minutes, you prepare DNA for autoradiography. The results of this experiment are shown in Figure Q5–2A. In the second experiment, you release the synchronizing block and then wait 30 minutes before adding 3H-thymidine. After 30 minutes in the presence of 3H-thymidine, you once again change the medium to reduce the concentration of radioactive thymidine and incubate the cells for an additional 15 minutes. The results of the second experiment are shown in Figure Q5–2B.
# Chunk 271
Until then, a gene had been defined operationally as a region of the genome that segregates as a single unit during meiosis and gives rise to a definable phenotypic trait, such as a red or a white eye in Drosophila or a round or wrinkled seed in peas. The work on Neurospora showed that most genes correspond to a region of the genome that directs the synthesis of a single enzyme. This led to the hypothesis that one gene encodes one polypeptide chain. The hypothesis proved fruitful for subsequent research; as more was learned about the mechanism of gene expression in the 1960s, a gene became identified as that stretch of DNA that was transcribed into the RNA coding for a single polypeptide chain (or a single structural RNA such as a tRNA or an rRNA molecule). The discovery of split genes and introns in the late 1970s could be readily accommodated by the original definition of a gene, provided that a single polypeptide chain was specified by the RNA transcribed from any one DNA sequence. But it is now clear that many DNA sequences in higher eukaryotic cells can produce a set of distinct (but related) proteins by means of alternative RNA splicing. How, then, is a gene to be defined?
# Chunk 272
Figure 8–6 Cell fractionation by centrifugation. Repeated centrifugation at progressively higher speeds will fractionate homogenates of cells into their components. In general, the smaller the subcellular component, the greater the centrifugal force required to sediment it. Typical values for the various centrifugation steps referred to in the figure are: low speed: 1000 times gravity for 10 minutes medium speed: 20,000 times gravity for 20 minutes high speed: 80,000 times gravity for 1 hour very high speed: 150,000 times gravity for 3 hours steep(e.g., 5–20%) sucrose gradient (e.g., 20–70%) sample is sedimented through a steep density gradient that contains a very high concentration of sucrose or cesium chloride. Each cell component begins to move down the gradient as in Figure 8–7A, but it eventually reaches a position where the density of the solution is equal to its own density. At this point, the component floats and can move no farther. A series of distinct bands is thereby produced in the centrifuge tube, with the bands closest to the bottom of the tube containing the components of highest buoyant density (Figure 8–7B). This method, called equilibrium sedimentation, is so sensitive that it can separate macromolecules that have incorporated heavy isotopes, such as 13C or 15N, from the same macromolecules that contain the lighter, common isotopes (12C or 14N). In fact, the cesium-chloride method was developed in 1957 to separate the labeled from the unlabeled DNA produced after exposure of a growing population of bacteria to nucleotide precursors containing 15N; this classic experiment provided direct evidence for the semiconservative replication of DNA (see Figure 5–5).
# Chunk 273
Genomic and cDNA libraries were once the only route to cloning genes and they are still used for cloning very large genes and for sequencing whole genomes. However, a powerful and versatile method for amplifying DNA, known as the polymerase chain reaction (PCR), provides a more rapid and straightforward approach to DNA cloning, particularly in organisms whose complete genome sequence is known. Today, since genome sequences are abundant, most cloning is carried out by PCR.
# Chunk 274
Most current methods of manipulating DNA, RNA, and proteins rely on prior knowledge of the nucleotide sequence of the genome of interest. But how were these sequences determined in the first place? And how are new DNA and RNA molecules sequenced today? In the late 1970s, researchers developed several strategies for determining, simply and quickly, the nucleotide sequence of any purified DNA fragment. The one that became the most widely used is called dideoxy sequencing or Sanger sequencing (Panel 8–1). This method was used to determine the nucleotide sequence of many genomes, including those of E. coli, fruit flies, nematode worms, mice, and humans. Today, cheaper and faster methods are routinely used to sequence DNA, and even more efficient strategies are being developed (see Panel 8–1). The original “reference” sequence of the human genome, completed in 2003, cost over $1 billion and required many scientists from around the world working together for 13 years. The enormous progress made in the past decade makes it possible for a single person to complete the sequence of an individual human genome in less than a day.
# Chunk 275
ILLUMINA® SEQUENCING Several second-generation sequencing methods are now in wide use, and we will discuss two of the most common. Both rely on the construction of libraries of DNA fragments that represent—in toto—the DNA of the genome. Instead of using bacterial cells to generate these libraries, as we saw in Figure 8–30), they are made using PCR amplifcation of billions of DNA fragments, each attached to a solid support. The amplifcation is carried out so that the PCR-generated copies, instead of foating away in solution, remain bound in proximity to the original DNA fragment. This process generates clusters of DNA fragments, where each cluster contains about 1000 identical copies of a small bit of the genome. These clusters—a billion of which can ft in a single slide or plate—are then sequenced at the same time; that is, in parallel. One method, known as Illumina sequencing, is based on the dideoxy method described above, but it incorporates several innovations. Here, each nucleotide is attached to a removable fuorescent molecule (a different color for each of the four bases) as well as a special chain-terminating chemical adduct: instead of a 3’-OH group, as in conventional dideoxy sequencing, the nucleotides carry a chemical group that blocks elongation by DNA polymerase but which can be removed chemically. Sequencing is then carried out as follows: the four fuorescently labeled nucleotides along with DNA polymerase are added to billions of DNA clusters immobilized on a slide. Only the appropriate nucleotide (that is complementary to the next nucleotide in the template) is covalently incorporated at each cluster; the unincorporated nucleotides are washed away, and a high-resolution digital camera takes an image that registers which of the four nucleotides was added to the chain at each cluster. The fuorescent label and the 3˜-OH blocking group are then removed enzymatically, washed away, and the process is repeated many times. In this way, billions of sequencing reactions are carried out simultaneously. By keeping track of the color changes occuring at each cluster, the DNA sequence represented by each spot can be read. Although each individual sequence read is relatively short (approximately 200 nucleotides), the billions that are carried out simultaneously can produce several human genomes worth of sequence in about a day. Principle behind Illumina sequencing. This reaction is carried out stepwise, on billions of DNA clusters at once. The method relies on a color digital camera that rapidly scans all the DNA clusters after each round of modifed nucleotide incorporation. The DNA sequence of each cluster is then determined by the sequence of color changes it undergoes as the elongation reaction proceeds stepwise. Each round of modifed nucleotide incorporation, image acquisition, and removal of the 3˜block and the fuorescent group takes less than an hour. Each cluster on the slide contains many copies of different, random bits of a genome; in preparing the clusters, a DNA sequence (specifed by the experimenter) is joined to each copy in every cluster, and a primer complementary to this sequence is used to begin the elongation reaction by DNA polymerase. 100 µm A slide showing individual clusters of PCR-generated DNA molecules. Each cluster carries about 1000 identical DNA molecules; the four colors are produced by incorporation of C, G, A, or T, each of which has a different color fuorophore. The image has been taken just after a fuorescent nucleotide has been incorporated into each growing DNA chain. (From Illumina Sequencing Overview, 2013.) PPP PP fuor 3˜ block 5˜3˜ block incorporation into growing chain by DNA polymerase P 5˜free 3˜ end P DNA template OH fuor removed block removed next cycle no fuor photo taken 480
# Chunk 276
that are expressed at reasonably high levels, and it is difficult to quantify (or even identify) rare RNAs. A more accurate method is based on the principles of PCR (Figure 8–63). Called quantitative RT-PCR (reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction), this method begins with the total population of RNA molecules purified from a tissue or a cell culture. It is important that no DNA be present in the preparation; it must be purified away or enzymatically degraded. Two DNA primers that specifically match the mRNA of interest are added, along with reverse transcriptase, DNA polymerase, and the four deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates needed for DNA synthesis. The first round of synthesis is the reverse transcription of the RNA into DNA using one of the primers. Next, a series of heating and cooling cycles allows the amplification of that DNA strand by PCR (see Figure 8–36). The quantitative part of this method relies on a direct relationship between the rate at which the PCR product is generated and the original concentration of the mRNA species of interest. By adding chemical dyes to the PCR that fluoresce only when bound to double-stranded DNA, a simple fluorescence measurement can be used to track the progress of the reaction and thereby accurately deduce the starting concentration of the mRNA that is amplified. Although it seems complicated, this quantitative RT-PCR technique is relatively fast and simple to perform in the laboratory; it is currently the method of choice for accurately quantifying mRNA levels from any given gene.
# Chunk 277
seems inevitable that the sensitivity of detection of molecules will ultimately be pushed beyond the yoctomole 8–8 Tropomyosin, at 93 kd, sediments at 2.6S, whereas level (10–24 mole). the 65-kd protein, hemoglobin, sediments at 4.3S. (The sedimentation coefficient S is a linear measure of the rate 8–3 If each cycle of PCR doubles the amount of DNA of sedimentation.) These two proteins are drawn to scale synthesized in the previous cycle, then 10 cycles will give a in Figure Q8–1. How is it that the bigger protein sediments 103-fold amplification, 20 cycles will give a 106-fold amplimore slowly than the smaller one? Can you think of an fication, and 30 cycles will give a 109-fold amplification.
# Chunk 278
8–13 In the very first round of PCR using genomic DNA, the DNA primers prime synthesis that terminates only when the cycle ends (or when a random end of DNA is encountered). Yet, by the end of 20 to 30 cycles—a typical amplification—the only visible product is defined precisely by the ends of the DNA primers. In what cycle is a double-stranded fragment of the correct size first generated?
# Chunk 279
The limiting separation at which two objects appear distinct—the socalled limit of resolution—depends on both the wavelength of the light and the numerical aperture of the lens system used. The numerical aperture affects the lightgathering ability of the lens and is related both to the angle of the cone of light that can enter it and to the refractive index of the medium the lens is operating in; the wider the microscope opens its eye, so to speak, the more sharply it can see (Figure 9–6). The refractive index is the ratio of the speed of light in a vacuum to the speed of light in a particular transparent medium. For example, for water this is 1.33, meaning that light travels 1.33 times slower in water than in a vacuum. Under the best conditions, with violet light (wavelength = 0.4 μm) and a numerical aperture of 1.4, the basic light microscope can theoretically achieve a limit of resolution of about 0.2 μm, or 200 nm. Some microscope makers at the end of the nineteenth century achieved this resolution, but it is routinely matched in contemporary, factoryproduced microscopes. Although it is possible to enlarge an image as much as we want—for example, by projecting it onto a screen—it is not possible, in a conventional light microscope, to resolve two objects in the light microscope that are separated by less than about 0.2 μm; they will appear as a single object. It is important, however, to distinguish between resolution and detection. If a small object, below the resolution limit, itself emits light, then we may still be able to see or detect it. Thus, we can see a single fluorescently labeled microtubule even though it is about ten times thinner than the resolution limit of the light microscope. Diffraction effects, however, will cause it to appear blurred and at least 0.2 μm thick (see Figure 9–16). In a similar way, we can see the stars in the night sky, even though their diameters are far below the angular resolution of our unaided eyes: they all appear as similar, slightly blurred points of light, differing only in their color and brightness.
# Chunk 280
plant and fungal vacuoles are remarkably versatile lysosomes

Most plant and fungal cells (including yeasts) contain one or several very large, fluid-filled vesicles called vacuoles. They typically occupy more than 30% of the cell volume, and as much as 90% in some cell types (Figure 13–40). Vacuoles are related to animal cell lysosomes and contain a variety of hydrolytic enzymes, but their functions are remarkably diverse. The plant vacuole can act as a storage organelle for both nutrients and waste products, as a degradative compartment, as an economical way of increasing cell size, and as a controller of turgor pressure (the osmotic pressure that pushes outward on the cell wall and keeps the plant from wilting) (Figure 13–41). The same cell may have different vacuoles with distinct functions, such as digestion and storage.
# Chunk 281
Figure 13–52 The receptor-mediated endocytosis of LDL. note that the ldl dissociates from its receptors in the acidic environment of the early endosome. after a number of steps, the ldl ends up in endolysosomes and lysosomes, where it is degraded to release free cholesterol. In contrast, the ldl receptors are returned to the plasma membrane via transport vesicles that bud off from the tubular region of the early endosome, as shown. for simplicity, only one ldl receptor is shown entering the cell and returning to the plasma membrane. whether it is occupied or not, an ldl receptor typically makes one round trip into the cell and back to the plasma membrane every 10 minutes, making a total of several hundred trips in its 20-hour life-span.
# Chunk 282
The urea cycle is a central metabolic pathway in mammals that converts the ammonia (NH4+) produced by the breakdown of nitrogen-containing compounds (such as amino acids) to the urea excreted in urine. Two critical steps of the urea cycle are carried out in the mitochondria of liver cells, while the remaining steps occur in the cytosol. Mitochondria also play an essential part in the metabolic adaptation of cells to different nutritional conditions. For example, under conditions of starvation, proteins in our bodies are broken down to amino acids, and the amino acids are imported into mitochondria and oxidized to produce NADH for ATP production.
# Chunk 283
Life on Earth evolved in the presence of a daily cycle of day and night, and many present-day organisms (ranging from archaea to plants and humans) possess an internal rhythm that dictates different behaviors at different times of day. These behaviors range from the cyclical change in metabolic enzyme activities of a bacterium to the elaborate sleep–wake cycles of humans. The internal oscillators that control such diurnal rhythms are called circadian clocks.
# Chunk 284
The best understood circadian clock is found in the photosynthetic cyanobacterium, Synechococcus elongatus. The core oscillator in this organism is remarkably simple, being composed of just three proteins—KaiA, KaiB, and KaiC. The central player is KaiC, a multifunctional enzyme that catalyzes its own phosphorylation and dephosphorylation in a 24-hour cycle: it gradually phosphorylates itself sequentially at two sites during the day and dephosphorylates itself during the night. This timing depends on interactions with the two other Kai proteins: KaiA binds to unphosphorylated KaiC and stimulates KaiC autophosphosphorylation, first at one site and then, with a delay, at the other. The second phosphorylation promotes the binding of the third protein, KaiB, which blocks the stimulatory effect of KaiA and thereby allows KaiC to dephosphorylate itself, bringing KaiC back to its dephosphorylated state. This clock depends on a negative feedback loop: KaiC drives its own phosphorylation until, after a delay, it recruits an inhibitor, KaiB, that stimulates KaiC to dephosphorylate itself. Amazingly, when the three Kai proteins are purified and incubated in a test tube with ATP, KaiC phosphorylation and dephosphorylation occur with roughly 24-hour timing over a period of several days (Figure 15–67).
# Chunk 285
Figure 15–67 The core circadian oscillator of cyanobacteria. (A) KaiC is a combined kinase and phosphatase that phosphorylates and dephosphorylates itself on two adjacent sites. In the absence of other proteins, the phosphatase activity is dominant, and the protein is mostly unphosphorylated. The binding of KaiA to KaiC suppresses the phosphatase activity and promotes the kinase activity, leading to KaiC phosphorylation, first at site 1 and then at site 2, resulting in diphosphorylated KaiC. KaiC then dephosphorylates itself slowly at site 1, even in the presence of KaiA, so that KaiC is phosphorylated only at site 2. This form of KaiC interacts with KaiB, which blocks the stimulatory effects of KaiA, thereby reducing the rate of KaiC phosphorylation and allowing dephosphorylation to occur. Diphosphorylated KaiC increases in abundance during the day and peaks around dusk. It activates other proteins that phosphorylate a transcription regulator (RpaA), which then stimulates expression of some genes (the dusk genes that peak in early evening) and inhibits expression of other genes (the dawn genes that peak in the morning). When KaiC dephosphorylation gradually occurs during the night, these effects are reversed: dusk genes are turned off and dawn genes are turned on.
# Chunk 286
In many cell types, gene expression is governed by circadian clocks, in which delayed negative feedback produces 24-hour oscillations in the activities of transcription regulators, anticipating the cell's changing needs during the day and night.
# Chunk 287
Accessory proteins produce the remarkable uniformity in filament organization, length, and spacing in the sarcomere (Figure 16–34). The actin filament plus ends are anchored in the Z disc, which is built from CapZ and α-actinin; the Z disc caps the filaments (preventing depolymerization), while holding them together in a regularly spaced bundle. The precise length of each thin filament is influenced by a protein of enormous size, called nebulin, which consists almost entirely of a repeating 35-amino-acid actin-binding motif. Nebulin stretches from the Z disc toward the minus end of each thin filament, which is capped and stabilized by tropomodulin. Although there is some slow exchange of actin subunits at both ends of the muscle thin filament, such that the components of the thin filament turn over with a half-life of several days, the actin filaments in sarcomeres are remarkably stable compared with those found in most other cell types, whose dynamic actin filaments turn over with half-lives of a few minutes or less.
# Chunk 288
protein is shown in green, and glycosaminoglycan (GaG) in red.

Figure 19–32 The repeating disaccharide sequence of a heparan sulfate glycosaminoglycan (GAG) chain. these chains can consist of as many as 200 disaccharide units, but are typically less than half that size. there is a high density of negative charges along the chain due to the presence of both carboxyl and sulfate groups. the molecule is shown here with its maximal number of sulfate groups. In vivo, the proportion of sulfated and nonsulfated groups is variable. heparin typically has >70% sulfation, while heparan sulfate has <50%.
# Chunk 289
Figure 20–1 Metastasis. Malignant tumors typically give rise to metastases, making the cancer hard to eradicate. Shown in this fusion image is a whole-body scan of a patient with metastatic non-hodgkin’s lymphoma (NhL). The background image of the body’s tissues was obtained by CT (computed x-ray tomography) scanning. Overlaid on this image, a PET (positron emission tomography) scan reveals the tumor tissue (yellow), detected by its unusually high uptake of radioactively labeled fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). high FDG uptake occurs in cells with unusually active glucose uptake and metabolism, which is a characteristic of cancer cells (see Figure 20–12). The yellow spots in the abdominal region reveal multiple metastases. (Courtesy of S. Gambhir.) respiratorycancers of system epithelia: carcinomas breast blood: myelomas, leukemias, and lymphomas bones, connective tissue, new cases muscles, and vasculature
# Chunk 290
Fifty Percent of Cancers Could Be Prevented by Changes in Lifestyle

Tobacco smoke is the most important carcinogen in the world today. Even though many other chemical carcinogens have been identified, none of these appear to be responsible for anything like the same numbers of human cancer deaths. It is sometimes thought that the main environmental causes of cancer are the products of a highly industrialized way of life—the rise in pollution, the enhanced use of food additives, and so on—but there is little evidence to support this view. The idea may have come in part from the identification of some highly carcinogenic materials used in industry, such as 2-naphthylamine and asbestos. Except for the increase in cancers caused by smoking, however, age-adjusted death rates for most common human cancers have stayed much the same over the past half-century, or, in some cases, have declined significantly (Figure 20–39). Survival rates, moreover, have improved. Thirty years ago, less than 50% of patients lived more than five years from the time of diagnosis; now, more than two-thirds do so.
# Chunk 291
Figure 21–18 The origins of the Drosophila body segments. (a) at  3 hours, the embryo (shown in side view) is at the blastoderm stage and no segmentation is visible, although a fate map can be drawn showing the future segmented regions (color). (B) at 10 hours, all the segments are  clearly defined (t1: first thoracic segment; a1: first abdominal segment). See Movie 21.3. (c) the segments of the Drosophila larva and their correspondence with regions in the embryo. (D) the segments of the Drosophila adult and their correspondence with regions in the embryo.
# Chunk 292
In the posterior part of the presomitic mesoderm, the expression of certain genes oscillates in time. Snapshots of gene expression taken by fixing embryos for analysis at different times in the oscillation cycle reveal what is happening, and the oscillations can now also be observed in time-lapse movies of embryos containing fluorescent reporters of individual oscillating genes. One new somite pair is formed in each oscillation cycle, and, in mutants where the oscillations fail to occur, somite segmentation is disrupted: the cells may still break up, belatedly, into separate clusters, but they do so in a haphazard, irregular way. The gene-expression oscillator controlling regular segmentation is called the segmentation clock. The length of one complete oscillation cycle depends on the species: it is 30 minutes in a zebrafish, 90 minutes in a chick, 120 minutes in a mouse.
# Chunk 293
In other circumstances, erythrocyte production is selectively increased—for example, in response to anemia (lack of hemoglobin) due to blood loss, and in the process of acclimatization when one goes to live at high altitude, where oxygen is scarce. Thus, blood cell formation, or hematopoiesis, necessarily involves complex controls, which regulate the production of each type of blood cell individually to meet changing needs.
# Chunk 294
The erythrocyte is by far the most common type of cell in the blood (see Table 22–1). When mature, it is packed full of hemoglobin and contains hardly any of the usual cell organelles. In an erythrocyte of an adult mammal, even the nucleus, endoplasmic reticulum, mitochondria, and ribosomes are absent, having been extruded from the cell in the course of its development (Figure 22–33). The erythrocyte therefore cannot grow or divide, and it has a limited life-span—about 120 days in humans or 55 days in mice. Worn-out erythrocytes are phagocytosed and digested by macrophages in the liver and spleen, which remove more than 1011
# Chunk 295
Figure 22–33 A developing red blood cell (erythroblast). the cell is shown extruding its nucleus to become an immature erythrocyte (a reticulocyte), which then leaves the bone marrow and passes into the bloodstream. the reticulocyte will lose its mitochondria and ribosomes within a day or two to become a mature erythrocyte. erythrocyte clones develop in the bone marrow on the surface of a macrophage, which phagocytoses and digests the nuclei discarded by the erythroblasts.
# Chunk 296
22–7 The origin of new β cells of the pancreas—from stem cells or from preexisting β cells—was not resolved until a decade ago, when the technique of lineage tracing was used to decide the issue. Using transgenic mice that expressed a tamoxifen-activated form of Cre recombinase under the control of the insulin promoter, which is active only in β cells, investigators could remove an inhibitory segment of DNA and thereby allow expression of human placental alkaline phosphatase (HPAP), which can be detected by histochemical staining. After a pulse of tamoxifen that converted about 30% of β cells in young mice to microvilli 22–8 One of the earliest assays for hematopoietic stem cells made use of their ability to form colonies in the spleens of heavily irradiated mice. By varying the amounts
# Chunk 297
Drug-resistance genes acquired by horizontal transfer frequently come from environmental microbial reservoirs. Nearly all antibiotics used to treat bacterial infections today are based on natural products produced by fungi or bacteria. Penicillin, for example, is made by the mold Penicillium, and more than 50% of the antibiotics currently used in the clinic are made by Gram-positive bacteria of the genus Streptomyces, which reside in the soil. It is believed that microorganisms produce antimicrobial compounds, many of which have probably existed on Earth for hundreds of millions of years, as weapons in their competition with other microorganisms in the environment. Surveys of bacteria taken from soil samples that have never been exposed to antibiotic drugs used in modern medicine reveal that the bacteria are typically already resistant to about seven or eight of the antibiotics widely used in clinical practice. When pathogenic microorganisms are faced with the selective pressure provided by antibiotic treatments, they can apparently draw upon this immense source of genetic material to acquire resistance.
# Chunk 298
erythrocyte Small hemoglobin-containing blood cell of vertebrates that transports oxygen to, and carbon dioxide from, tissues. Also called a red blood cell.
# Chunk 299
leukemia Cancer of white blood cells.

leukocyte General name for all the nucleated blood cells lacking hemoglobin. Also called white blood cells. Includes lymphocytes, granulocytes, and monocytes. (Figure 22–27) ligand   Any molecule that binds to a specific site on a protein or other molecule. From Latin ligare, to bind.
# Chunk 300
recycling endosome   Organelle that provides an intermediate stage on the passage of recycled receptors back to the cell membrane. Regulates plasma membrane insertion of some proteins. (Figure 13–58) red blood cell Small hemoglobin-containing blood cell of vertebrates that transports oxygen to, and carbon dioxide from, tissues. Also called an erythrocyte.
# Chunk 301
Direct Coombs test—detects antibodies attached directly to the RBC surface. Indirect Coombs test—detects presence of unbound antibodies in the serum
# Chunk 302
Can be associated with vasculitis and systemic manifestations.

Serum sickness—the prototypic immune complex disease. Antibodies to foreign proteins are produced and 1–2 weeks later, antibody-antigen complexes form and deposit in tissues  complement activation • inflammation and tissue damage.
# Chunk 303
Examples:

Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis Fever, urticaria, arthralgia, proteinuria, lymphadenopathy occur 1–2 weeks after antigen exposure. Serum sickness-like reactions are associated with some drugs (may act as haptens, eg, penicillin) and infections (eg, hepatitis B).
# Chunk 304
Some Bacteria Encapsulated Produce No species with early Serious granules: complement Staphylococcus, deficiencies Burkholderia cepacia, Neisseria with late Pseudomonas complement (C5– aeruginosa, Nocardia, C9) deficiencies Serratia
# Chunk 305
Examples: Nocardia, Staphylococci, Serratia, Candida, Listeria, E coli, Burkholderia cepacia, Pseudomonas, Aspergillus, Helicobacter pylori, Bordetella pertussis.
# Chunk 306
Symptoms of botulism (the 4 D’s): Diplopia, Dysarthria, Dysphagia, Dyspnea.

Botulinum is from bad bottles of food, juice, and honey (causes a descending flaccid paralysis).
# Chunk 307
Leprosy Also called Hansen disease. Caused by Mycobacterium leprae, an acid-fast bacillus that likes cool temperatures (infects skin and superficial nerves—“glove and stocking” loss of sensation A ) and cannot be grown in vitro. Diagnosed via skin biopsy or tissue PCR. Reservoir in United States: armadillos. Leprosy has 2 forms (many cases fall temporarily between two extremes):
# Chunk 308
Causes gonorrhea, septic arthritis, neonatal Causes meningococcemia with petechial conjunctivitis (2–5 days after birth), pelvic hemorrhages and gangrene of toes
# Chunk 309
Extended-spectrum penicillins (eg, piperacillin, ticarcillin)

Yersinia enterocolitica Gram ⊝ pleomorphic rod/coccobacillus. Usually transmitted from pet feces (eg, puppies), contaminated milk, or pork. Can cause acute bloody diarrhea, pseudoappendicitis (right lower abdominal pain due to mesenteric adenitis and/or terminal ileitis), reactive arthritis in adults.
# Chunk 310
Curved, flagellated (motile), gram ⊝ rod A that is triple ⊕: catalase ⊕, oxidase ⊕, and urease ⊕ (can use urea breath test or fecal antigen test for diagnosis). Urease produces ammonia, creating an alkaline environment, which helps H pylori survive in acidic mucosa. Colonizes mainly antrum of stomach; causes gastritis and peptic ulcers (especially duodenal). Risk factor for peptic ulcer disease, gastric adenocarcinoma, and MALT lymphoma.
# Chunk 311
Mississippi and Ohio Macrophage filled River Valleys with Histoplasma (smaller than RBC)

Eastern and Central Broad-based budding US, Great Lakes of Blastomyces (same size as RBC)
# Chunk 312
Cysts in meat (most Serology, biopsy Sulfadiazine + common); oocysts (tachyzoite)

Plasmodium P vivax/ovale P falciparum P malariae A B Malaria—fever, headache, anemia, splenomegaly P vivax/ovale—48-hr cycle (tertian; includes fever on first day and third day, thus fevers are actually 48 hr apart); dormant form (hypnozoite) in liver P falciparum—severe; irregular fever patterns; parasitized RBCs occlude capillaries in brain (cerebral malaria), kidneys, lungs P malariae—72-hr cycle (quartan) Anopheles mosquito Blood smear: trophozoite ring form within RBC A , schizont containing merozoites; red granules (Schüffner stippling) B throughout RBC cytoplasm seen with P vivax/ovale Chloroquine (for sensitive species); if resistant, use mefloquine or atovaquone/ proguanil If life-threatening, use intravenous quinidine or artesunate (test for G6PD deficiency) For P vivax/ovale, add primaquine for hypnozoite (test for G6PD deficiency) Babesia C Babesiosis—fever and hemolytic anemia; predominantly in northeastern United States; asplenia  risk of severe disease Ixodes tick (also vector for Borrelia burgdorferi and Anaplasma spp) Blood smear: ring form C1 , “Maltese cross” C2 ; PCR Atovaquone + azithromycin
# Chunk 313
HBV, HCV Hepatocellular carcinoma

Serum tumor markers Tumor markers should not be used as the 1° tool for cancer diagnosis or screening. They may be used to monitor tumor recurrence and response to therapy, but definitive diagnosis is made via biopsy. Some can be associated with non-neoplastic conditions.
# Chunk 314
Salicylates NaHCO3 (alkalinize urine), dialysis

Warfarin Vitamin K (delayed effect), PCC (prothrombin complex concentrate)/FFP (immediate effect)
# Chunk 315
SA node AV node Bundle of His

Torsades de pointes Polymorphic ventricular tachycardia, characterized by shifting sinusoidal waveforms on ECG; can progress to ventricular fibrillation (VF). Long QT interval predisposes to torsades de pointes. Caused by drugs,  K+,  Mg2+, • Ca2+, congenital abnormalities. Treatment includes magnesium sulfate.
# Chunk 316
Stable—usually 2° to atherosclerosis (≥ 70% occlusion); exertional chest pain in classic distribution (usually with ST depression on ECG), resolving with rest or nitroglycerin.
# Chunk 317
Treatment: NSAIDs, colchicine, glucocorticoids, dialysis (uremia).

Myocarditis Inflammation of myocardium  global enlargement of heart and dilation of all chambers. Major cause of SCD in adults < 40 years old. Presentation highly variable, can include dyspnea, chest pain, fever, arrhythmias (persistent tachycardia out of proportion to fever is characteristic). Multiple causes:
# Chunk 318
Polyarteritis nodosa Usually middle-aged men. Hepatitis B seropositivity in 30% of patients. Fever, weight loss, malaise, headache. GI: abdominal pain, melena. Hypertension, neurologic dysfunction, cutaneous eruptions, renal damage.
# Chunk 319
ANTIdOTE Slowly normalize K+, cardiac pacer, anti-digoxin Fab fragments, Mg2+.

Antiarrhythmics— Slow or block () conduction (especially in depolarized cells).  slope of phase 0 depolarization. Are sodium channel state dependent (selectively depress tissue that is frequently depolarized [eg, tachycardia]). blockers (class I)
# Chunk 320
FUnction Regulates b1ood pressure (V1-receptors) and serum osmolality (V2-receptors). Primary function is serum osmolality regulation (ADH  serum osmolality,  urine osmolality) via regulation of aquaporin channel insertion in principal cells of renal collecting duct.
# Chunk 321
PTH  serum Ca2+,  serum PO43–,  urine PO43– ,  urine cAMP

RANK-L (receptor activator of NF-κB ligand) secreted by osteoblasts and osteocytes; binds RANK (receptor) on osteoclasts and their precursors to stimulate osteoclasts and • Ca2+ like PTH and is commonly increased in malignancies (eg, squamous cell carcinoma of the lung, renal cell carcinoma) serum Mg2+  PTH secretion  serum Mg2+  PTH secretion Common causes of  Mg2+ include diarrhea, aminoglycosides, diuretics, alcohol abuse ˛ ionized Ca2+, ˜ PO 3– , or 1,25-(OH)2 D 1,25-(OH)2 D3 Four para-thyroid glandsFeedback inhibition of PTH synthesis Vitamin D activity ˜ Ca2+ and PO4 3–˜ PTH released into circulation 25-OH D3 Bone Intestines 1,25-(OH)2 D3 1˜-hydroxylase ˜ Ca2+ and ˜ PO4 3– ˜ Ca2+ and ˜ PO4 3– released from bone ˜ absorption of Ca2+ and PO4 3– Renal tubular cells ˜ 1,25-(OH)2 D synthesis3 Urine Ca2+ , ˜ PO4 3– Reabsorption: ˜ Ca2+ , PO4 3–˜ ˜ ˜
# Chunk 322
Euvolemic hyponatremia with continued urinary Na+ excretion

Urine osmolality > serum osmolality Body responds to water retention with aldosterone and  ANP and BNP  urinary Na+ secretion • normalization of extracellular fluid volume  euvolemic hyponatremia. Very low serum Na+ levels can lead to cerebral edema, seizures. Correct slowly to prevent osmotic demyelination syndrome (formerly called central pontine myelinolysis).
# Chunk 323
aNo water intake for 2–3 hr followed by hourly measurements of urine volume and osmolality as well as plasma Na+ concentration and osmolality. ADH analog (desmopressin) is administered if serum osmolality > 295–300 mOsm/kg, plasma Na+ ≥ 145 mEq/L, or urine osmolality does not rise despite a rising plasma osmolality.
# Chunk 324
Undifferentiated/ Older patients; presents with rapidly enlarging neck mass  compressive symptoms (eg, dyspnea, anaplastic carcinoma dysphagia, hoarseness); very poor prognosis. Associated with TP53 mutation.
# Chunk 325
˜ 24-hr urine free cortisol, ˜ late night salivary cortisol, and/or inadequate suppression on 1 mg overnight dexamethasone test (consider adrenal CT to confrm)
# Chunk 326
Intestinal atresia Presents with bilious vomiting and abdominal distension within first 1–2 days of life. Duodenal atresia—failure to recanalize. Abdominal x-ray A shows “double bubble” (dilated stomach, proximal duodenum). Associated with Down syndrome. Jejunal and ileal atresia—disruption of mesenteric vessels (typically SMA)  ischemic necrosis of fetal intestine  segmental resorption: bowel becomes discontinuous. X-ray shows dilated loops of small bowel with air-fluid levels.
# Chunk 327
Ileus Intestinal hypomotility without obstruction  constipation and  flatus; distended/tympanic abdomen with  bowel sounds. Associated with abdominal surgeries, opiates, hypokalemia, sepsis. Treatment: bowel rest, electrolyte correction, cholinergic drugs (stimulate intestinal motility).
# Chunk 328
B , biopsy.

Hepatic adenoma Rare, benign liver tumor, often related to oral contraceptive or anabolic steroid use; may regress spontaneously or rupture (abdominal pain and shock).
# Chunk 329
Budd-Chiari syndrome Thrombosis or compression of hepatic veins with centrilobular congestion and necrosis  congestive liver disease (hepatomegaly, ascites, varices, abdominal pain, liver failure). Absence of JVD. Associated with hypercoagulable states, polycythemia vera, postpartum state, HCC. May cause nutmeg liver (mottled appearance).
# Chunk 330
Also called hepatolenticular degeneration. Autosomal recessive mutations in hepatocyte copper-transporting ATPase (ATP7B gene; chromosome 13) • copper incorporation into apoceruloplasmin and excretion into bile  serum ceruloplasmin. Copper accumulates, especially in liver, brain, cornea, kidneys;  urine copper.
# Chunk 331
CliniCal Use Weight loss.

aDVerse eFFeCts Abdominal pain, flatulence, bowel urgency/frequent bowel movements, steatorrhea;  absorption of fat-soluble vitamins.
# Chunk 332
A 12 Multilobed nucleus A . Specific granules A left shift with  band cells (immature contain leukocyte alkaline phosphatase neutrophils) reflects states of  myeloid (LAP), collagenase, lysozyme, and proliferation (eg, bacterial infections, CML). lactoferrin. Azurophilic granules (lysosomes) Important neutrophil chemotactic agents: C5a, contain proteinases, acid phosphatase, IL-8, LTB4, kallikrein, platelet-activating factor. myeloperoxidase, and β-glucuronidase.
# Chunk 333
Reticulocyte = immature RBC; reflects erythroid proliferation.

Bluish color (polychromasia) on Wright-Giemsa stain of reticulocytes represents residual ribosomal RNA.
# Chunk 334
Reticulocyte index Also called corrected reticulocyte count. Used to correct falsely elevated reticulocyte count in anemia. Measures appropriate bone marrow response to anemic conditions (effective erythropoiesis). High reticulocyte index (RI) indicates compensatory RBC production; low RI indicates inadequate response to correct anemia. Calculated as:
# Chunk 335
-thalassemia major (homozygote): β chain is absent  severe microcytic, hypochromic anemia with target cells and increased anisopoikilocytosis C requiring blood transfusion (2° hemochromatosis). Marrow expansion (“crew cut” on skull x-ray)  skeletal deformities (eg, “chipmunk” facies). Extramedullary hematopoiesis  hepatosplenomegaly.  risk of parvovirus B19–induced aplastic crisis.  HbF (αγ ), HbA (αδ ). HbF is protective in the infant and disease becomes symptomatic only after 6 months, when fetal hemoglobin declines. HbS/β -thalassemia heterozygote: mild to moderate sickle cell disease depending on amount of β-globin production.
# Chunk 336
For comparison, Indirect Coombs test—normal RBCs added to patient’s serum. If serum has anti-RBC surface Ig, RBCs agglutinate when Coombs reagent added.
# Chunk 337
Plasma cell dyscrasias Characterized by monoclonal immunoglobulin (Ig) overproduction due to plasma cell disorder. Labs: serum protein electrophoresis (SPEP) or free light chain (FLC) assay for initial tests (M spike on SPEP represents overproduction of a monoclonal Ig fragment). For urinalysis, use 24-hr urine protein electrophoresis (UPEP) to detect light chain, as routine urine dipstick detects only albumin. Confirm with bone marrow biopsy.
# Chunk 338
Hemophagocytic Systemic overactivation of macrophages and cytotoxic T cells  fever, pancytopenia, lymphohistiocytosis hepatosplenomegaly,  serum ferritin levels. Can be inherited or 2° to strong immunologic activation (eg, after EBV infection, malignancy). Bone marrow biopsy shows macrophages phagocytosing marrow elements
# Chunk 339
Neural tube defects Neuropores fail to fuse (4th week)  persistent connection between amniotic cavity and spinal canal. Associated with maternal diabetes and folate deficiency. α-fetoprotein (AFP) in amniotic fluid and maternal serum (except spina bifida occulta = normal AFP). acetylcholinesterase (AChE) in amniotic fluid is a helpful confirmatory test.
# Chunk 340
Osmotic demyelination Also called central pontine myelinolysis. Massive axonal demyelination in pontine white matter syndrome A 2° to rapid osmotic changes, most commonly iatrogenic correction of hyponatremia but also rapid shifts of other osmolytes (eg, glucose). Acute paralysis, dysarthria, dysphagia, diplopia, loss of consciousness. Can cause “locked-in syndrome.” Correcting serum Na+ too fast: “From low to high, your pons will die” (osmotic demyelination syndrome) “From high to low, your brains will blow” (cerebral edema/herniation)
# Chunk 341
4.

5.

Requires ≥ 1 month of active symptoms over the past 6 months; onset ≥ 6 months prior to diagnosis.
# Chunk 342
Brief psychotic disorder—≥ 1 positive symptom(s) lasting < 1 month, usually stress-related. Schizophreniform disorder—≥ 2 symptoms lasting 1–6 months.
# Chunk 343
Delusional disorder ≥ 1 delusion(s) lasting  > 1 month, but without a mood disorder or other psychotic symptoms. Daily functioning, including socialization, may be impacted by the pathological, fixed belief but is otherwise unaffected. Can be shared by individuals in close relationships (folie à deux).
# Chunk 344
Bulimia nervosa Recurring episodes of binge eating with compensatory purging behaviors at least weekly over the last 3 months. BMI often normal or slightly overweight (vs anorexia). Associated with parotid gland hypertrophy (may see • serum amylase), enamel erosion, Mallory-Weiss syndrome, electrolyte disturbances (eg,  K+ , • Cl−), metabolic alkalosis, dorsal hand calluses from induced vomiting (Russell sign). Treatment: psychotherapy, nutritional rehabilitation, antidepressants (eg, SSRIs). Bupropion is contraindicated due to seizure risk.
# Chunk 345
Sleep terror disorder Periods of inconsolable terror with screaming in the middle of the night. Most common in children. Occurs during slow-wave/deep (stage N3) non-REM sleep with no memory of the arousal episode, as opposed to nightmares that occur during REM sleep (remembering a scary dream). Triggers include emotional stress, fever, and lack of sleep. Usually self limited.
# Chunk 346
Alcohol Emotional lability, slurred speech, ataxia, coma, blackouts. Serum γ-glutamyltransferase (GGT)—sensitive indicator of alcohol use. AST value is 2× ALT value (“ToAST 2 ALcohol”). Treatment: benzodiazepines.
# Chunk 347
Syndrome of Apparent Mineralocorticoid Excess

Treatment: K+-sparing diuretics (• mineralocorticoid effects) or corticosteroids (exogenous corticosteroid • endogenous cortisol production • mineralocorticoid receptor activation) 0% 25% 50% 75% 100% % Distance along PCT length PAH Creatinine Inulin clearance = GFR Urea Cl−Glucose Amino acids HCO3 – K+ Osmolarity, Na+ 1.90 1.85 when solute is reabsorbed less quickly 1.80
# Chunk 348
ADH Primarily regulates serum osmolality; also responds to low blood volume states. Stimulates reabsorption of water in collecting ducts. Also stimulates reabsorption of urea in collecting ducts to maximizes corticopapillary osmotic gradient.
# Chunk 349
Nomenclature of glomerular disorders Glomerular diseases  GBM damage  loss of RBCs into urine • hematuria Hematuria, RBC casts in urine  oliguria, azotemia, release, HTN
# Chunk 350
Treatment: thiazides, citrate, low-sodium diet. Treatment: low-sodium diet, thiazides.

B Account for 15% of stones. Caused by infection magnesium with urease ⊕ bugs (eg, Proteus mirabilis, phosphate Staphylococcus saprophyticus, Klebsiella) (struvite) that hydrolyze urea to ammonia  urine alkalinization. Commonly form staghorn calculi
# Chunk 351
Treatment: alkalinization of urine, allopurinol.

opaque radiopaque which Cystine-reabsorbing PCT transporter loses function, causing cystinuria. Transporter defect also results in poor reabsorption of Ornithine, Lysine, Arginine (COLA). Cystine is poorly soluble, thus stones form in urine. Usually begins in childhood. Can form staghorn calculi. Sodium cyanide nitroprusside test ⊕.
# Chunk 352
“SIXtine” stones have SIX sides.

Treatment: low sodium diet, alkalinization of urine, chelating agents (eg, penicillamine) if refractory.
# Chunk 353
Proteus mirabilis—urine has ammonia scent Labs: ⊕ leukocyte esterase. ⊕ nitrites (indicate gram ⊝ organisms). Sterile pyuria (pyuria with ⊝ urine cultures) could suggest urethritis by Neisseria gonorrhoeae or Chlamydia trachomatis. Treatment: antibiotics (eg, TMP-SMX, nitrofurantoin).
# Chunk 354
Diuretics: electrolyte changes

Urine NaCl  with all diuretics (strength varies based on potency of diuretic effect). Serum NaCl may decrease as a result.
# Chunk 355
Cleavage 0–4 days: Separate chorion and amnion

Cleavage 4–8 days: shared Chorion

Cleavage 8–12 days: shared Amnion
# Chunk 356
SOURCE Syncytiotrophoblast of placenta. FUNCTION Maintains corpus luteum (and thus progesterone) for first 8–10 weeks of pregnancy by acting like LH (otherwise no luteal cell stimulation  abortion). After 8–10 weeks, placenta synthesizes its own estriol and progesterone and corpus luteum degenerates. Used to detect pregnancy because it appears early in urine (see above). Has identical α subunit as LH, FSH, TSH (states of  hCG can cause hyperthyroidism). β subunit is unique (pregnancy tests detect β subunit). hCG is  in multiple gestations, hydatidiform moles, choriocarcinomas, and Down syndrome; hCG is  in ectopic/failing pregnancy, Edwards syndrome, and Patau syndrome.
# Chunk 357
Pre-pubertal ~ 811.5 years ~ 11.5–13 years ~ 13–15 years Usually > 15 years

Precocious puberty Appearance of 2° sexual characteristics (eg, adrenarche, thelarche, menarche) before age 8 years in girls and 9 years in boys.  sex hormone exposure or production  linear growth, somatic and skeletal maturation (eg, premature closure of epiphyseal plates  short stature). Types include:
# Chunk 358
TyPE mAlIgNANT? CHARACTERISTICS arrow in E ). Tumor marker: AFP.

Endometriosis Endometrium-like glands/stroma outside endometrial cavity, most commonly in the ovary (frequently bilateral), pelvis, peritoneum (yellow-brown “powder burn” lesions). In ovary, appears  as endometrioma (blood-filled “chocolate cysts” [oval structures above and below asterisks in A ]). May be due to retrograde flow, metaplastic transformation of multipotent cells, transportation of endometrial tissue via lymphatic system. Characterized by cyclic pelvic pain, bleeding, dysmenorrhea, dyspareunia, dyschezia (pain with defecation), infertility; normal-sized uterus. Treatment: NSAIDs, OCPs, progestins, GnRH agonists, danazol, laparoscopic removal.
# Chunk 359
Nitrites (oxidize Hb • methemoglobin  binds cyanide • cyanomethemoglobin  less toxicity).

Sodium thiosulfate (• cyanide conversion to thiocyanate • renal excretion).
# Chunk 360
Use oral anticoagulants (eg, rivaroxaban, apixaban) for treatment and long-term prevention.

Pulmonary emboli V˙/Q˙ mismatch, hypoxemia, respiratory alkalosis. Sudden-onset dyspnea, pleuritic chest pain, tachypnea, tachycardia. Large emboli or saddle embolus A may cause sudden death due to electromechanical dissociation (pulseless electrical activity). CT pulmonary angiography is imaging test of choice for PE (look for filling defects) B . May have S1Q3T3 abnormality on ECG. Lines of Zahn C are interdigitating areas of pink (platelets, fibrin) and red (RBCs) found only in thrombi formed before death; help distinguish preand postmortem thrombi. Types: Fat, Air, Thrombus, Bacteria, Amniotic fluid, Tumor. An embolus moves like a FAT BAT. Fat emboli—associated with long bone fractures and liposuction; classic triad of hypoxemia, neurologic abnormalities, petechial rash. Air emboli—nitrogen bubbles precipitate in ascending divers (caisson disease/decompression sickness); treat with hyperbaric O2; or, can be iatrogenic 2° to invasive procedures (eg, central line placement). Amniotic fluid emboli—typically occurs during labor or postpartum, but can be due to uterine trauma. Can lead to DIC. Rare, but high mortality.
# Chunk 361
Abdominal pain, diarrhea, leukocytosis, recent antibiotic Clostridium difficile infection

Back pain, fever, night sweats Pott disease (vertebral TB)
# Chunk 362
Chest pain with ST depressions on ECG Angina (⊝ troponins) or NSTEMI (⊕ troponins) 307 fever following MI fibrinous pericarditis, 2 weeks to several months after acute episode)
# Chunk 363
Multiple colon polyps, osteomas/soft tissue tumors, Gardner syndrome (subtype of FAP)

Abdominal pain, ascites, hepatomegaly Budd-Chiari syndrome (posthepatic venous thrombosis) 392
# Chunk 364
Hyperreflexia, hypertonia, Babinski sign present UMN damage 529

Hyporeflexia, hypotonia, atrophy, fasciculations LMN damage 529
# Chunk 365
Bilateral hilar adenopathy, uveitis Sarcoidosis (noncaseating granulomas)  AFP in amniotic fluid/maternal serum Down syndrome, Edwards syndrome 63
# Chunk 366
Osteomyelitis with IV drug use Pseudomonas, Candida, S aureus

UTI E coli, Staphylococcus saprophyticus (young women) 181 Sexually transmitted disease C trachomatis (usually coinfected with N gonorrhoeae)
# Chunk 367
Nosocomial pneumonia S aureus, Pseudomonas, other enteric gram ⊝ rods

Pelvic inflammatory disease C trachomatis, N gonorrhoeae
# Chunk 368
T AB LE 2.1 -1. Bradyarrhythmias and Conduction Abnormalities

Sinus bradycardia Normal response to cardiovascular conditioning; can also result from sinus node dysfunction or from β-blocker or calcium channel blocker (CCB) excess. May be asymptomatic, but may also present with lightheadedness, syncope, chest pain, or hypotension. Ventricular rate < 60 bpm; normal P wave before every QRS complex. None necessary if asymptomatic; atropine may be used to ↑ heart rate; pacemaker placement is the def nitive treatment in severe cases. First-degree AV block Can occur in normal individuals; associated with ↑ vagal tone and with β-blocker or CCB use. Asymptomatic. PR interval > 200 msec. None necessary. Second-degree AV block (Mobitz I/ Wenckebach) Drug effects (digoxin, β-blockers, CCBs) or ↑ vagal tone; sinoatrial conduction disease; right coronary ischemia or infarction. Usually asymptomatic. Progressive PR lengthening until a dropped beat occurs; PR interval then resets. Stop the offending drug. Atropine or pacemaker placement as clinically indicated. Second-degree AV block (Mobitz II) Results from f brotic disease of the conduction system or from acute, subacute, or prior myocardial infarction (MI). Occasionally syncope; frequent progression to third-degree AV block. Unexpected dropped beat(s) without a change in PR interval. Pacemaker placement. Third-degree AV block (complete) No electrical communication between the atria and ventricles. Syncope, dizziness, acute heart failure, hypotension, cannon A waves. No relationship between P waves and QRS complexes. Pacemaker placement. Sick sinus syndrome (SSS)/ tachycardia-bradycardia syndrome A heterogeneous disorder consisting of abnormalities in supraventricular impulse generation and conduction that lead to intermittent supraventricular tachy-and bradyarrhythmias. 2° to tachycardia or bradycardia; may include syncope, palpitations, dyspnea, chest pain, TIA, and stroke. The most common indication for pacemaker placement.
# Chunk 369
TAB LE 2.1 -7. Comparison of Systolic and Diastolic Dysfunction

Patient age Often < 65 years of age. Often > 65 years of age. Comorbidities Dilated cardiomyopathy, valvular heart disease. Restrictive or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; renal disease or hypertension. Physical exam Displaced PMI, S3 gallop. Sustained PMI, S4 gallop. CXR Pulmonary congestion, cardiomegaly. Pulmonary congestion, normal heart size. ECG/echocardiography Q waves, ↓ EF (< 40%). LVH, normal EF (> 55%).
# Chunk 370
Echocardiography is diagnostic.

ECG may show nonspecific ST-T changes, low-voltage QRS, sinus tachycardia, and ectopy. LBBB is common.
# Chunk 371
Cardiac biopsy may reveal fibrosis or evidence of infiltration.

ECG frequently shows LBBB.

Therapeutic options are limited and generally are palliative only. Medical treatment includes cautious use of diuretics for ﬂuid overload, vasodilators to ↓ filling pressure, and anticoagulation if not contraindicated.
# Chunk 372
Clinical manifestations of CAD include stable and unstable angina, shortness of breath, dyspnea on exertion, arrhythmias, MI, heart failure, and sudden death. Risk factors include DM, a family history of premature CAD, smoking, dyslipidemia, abdominal obesity, hypertension, and male gender.
# Chunk 373
DEATH, MI, OR URGENT CHARACTERISTICS POINT RISK SCORE DEATH OR MI REVASCULARIZATION

History Age ≥ 65 years 1 0/1 3 5 ≥ 3 CAD risk factors (family history, DM, tobacco, hypertension, ↑ cholesterol) 1 2 3 8 Known CAD (stenosis > 50%) 1 3 5 13 ASA use in past seven days 1 4 7 20 Presentation 5 12 26 Severe angina (≥ 2 episodes within 24 hours) 1 6/7 19 41 ST deviation ≥ 0.5 mm 1 + cardiac marker 1 Risk score—total points (0–7)
# Chunk 374
T AB LE 2.1 -1 1. ATP III Guidelines for Risk Stratifcation of Hypercholesterolemia

CAD or CAD risk equivalentsa < 100 mg/dL (or < 70) > 100 mg/dL > 130 mg/dL 2+ risk factorsb < 130 mg/dL > 130 mg/dL > 160 mg/dL 0–1 risk factorb < 160 mg/dL > 160 mg/dL > 190 mg/dL a CAD risk equivalents = symptomatic carotid artery disease, peripheral arterial disease, abdominal aortic aneurysm, diabetes. b Risk factors = cigarette smoking, hypertension, low HDL (< 40 mg/dL), a family history of premature CAD, and age (men > 45 years; women > 55 years). An HDL > 60 mg/dL counts as a “negative” risk factor and removes one risk factor from the total score.
# Chunk 375
T AB LE 2.1 -1 2.  Lipid-Lowering Agents

HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins) Atorvastatin, simvastatin, lovastatin, pravastatin, rosuvastatin Inhibit the rate-limiting step in cholesterol synthesis. ↓ LDL, ↓ triglycerides ↑ LFTs, myositis, warfarin potentiation. Lipoprotein lipase stimulators (f brates) Gemf brozil ↑ lipoprotein lipase, leading to ↑ VLDL and triglyceride catabolism. ↓ triglycerides, ↑ HDL GI upset, cholelithiasis, myositis, ↑ LFTs. Cholesterol absorption inhibitors Ezetimibe (Zetia) ↓ absorption of cholesterol at the small intestine brush border. ↓ LDL Diarrhea, abdominal pain. Can cause angioedema. Niacin Niaspan ↓ fatty acid release from adipose tissue; ↓ hepatic synthesis of LDL. ↑ HDL, ↓ LDL Skin fushing (can be prevented with ASA), paresthesias, pruritus, GI upset, ↑ LFTs. Bile acid resins Cholestyramine, colestipol, colesevelam Bind intestinal bile acids lead to ↓ bile acid stores and ↑ catabolism of LDL from plasma. ↓ LDL Constipation, GI upset, LFT abnormalities, myalgias. Can ↓ absorption of other drugs from the small intestine.
# Chunk 376
Periodically test for end-organ complications, including renal (BUN, creatinine, urine protein-to-creatinine ratio) and cardiac (ECG evidence of hypertrophy) complications.
# Chunk 377
T AB LE 2.1 -1 5. Common Causes of 2° Hypertension 1° renal disease Often unilateral renal parenchymal disease. Treat with ACEIs, which slow the progression of renal disease. Renal artery stenosis Especially common in patients < 25 and > 50 years of age with recent-onset hypertension. Etiologies include f bromuscular dysplasia (usually in younger patients) and atherosclerosis (usually in older patients). Diagnose with MRA or renal artery Doppler ultrasound. May be treated with angioplasty or stenting. Consider ACEIs as adjunctive or temporary therapy in unilateral disease. (In bilateral disease, ACEIs can accelerate kidney failure by preferential vasodilation of the efferent arteriole.) Open surgery is a second option if angioplasty is not effective or feasible. OCP use Common in women > 35 years of age, obese women, and those with long-standing use. Discontinue OCPs (effect may be delayed). Pheochromocytoma An adrenal gland tumor that secretes epinephrine and norepinephrine, leading to episodic headache, sweating, and tachycardia. Diagnose with urinary metanephrines and catecholamine levels or plasma metanephrine. Surgical removal of tumor after treatment with both α-blockers and β-blockers. Conn’s syndrome (hyperaldosteronism) Most often 2° to an aldosterone-producing adrenal adenoma. Causes the triad of hypertension, unexplained hypokalemia, and metabolic alkalosis. Surgical removal of tumor. Cushing’s syndrome Due to an ACTH-producing pituitary tumor, an ectopic ACTH-secreting tumor, or cortisol secretion by an adrenal adenoma or carcinoma. (See the Endocrinology chapter for more details.) Surgical removal of tumor. Coarctation of the aorta See the Pediatrics chapter. Surgical repair.
# Chunk 378
■Presents with fatigue, dyspnea, anxiety, tachycardia, and tachypnea that can rapidly progress to shock and death.
# Chunk 379
Aortic aneurysms are most commonly associated with atherosclerosis. Most are abdominal, and > 90% originate below the renal arteries.
# Chunk 380
FIGURE 2.2-2.  Atopic dermatitis.

Erythema toxicum of the newborn resembles eczema, presenting with red papules/ vesicles with surrounding erythema. ↑ eosinophils will be seen on biopsy. This typically benign rash rarely appears after f ve days of age and is usually gone in 7–14 days; treatment is typically observation.
# Chunk 381
Treat lesions with topical selenium sulfide daily for one week, followed by application once weekly for prophylaxis.
# Chunk 382
TABLE 2.3-1.  Types of Insulin

Regular 30–60 minutes 2–4 hours 5–8 hours Humalog (lispro) 5–10 minutes 0.5–1.5 hours 6–8 hours NovoLog (aspart) 10–20 minutes 1–3 hours 3–5 hours Apidra (glulisine) 5–15 minutes 1.0–1.5 hours 1.0–2.5 hours NPH 2–4 hours 6–10 hours 18–28 hours Levemir (detemir) 2 hours No discernible peak 20 hours Lantus (glargine) 1–4 hours No discernible peak 20–24 hours a Combination preparations mix longer-acting and shorter-acting types of insulin together to provide immediate and extended coverage in the same injection (e.g., 70 NPH/30 regular = 70% NPH + 30% regular).
# Chunk 383
TABLE 2.3-2.  Complications of DM

Complications of treatment Dawn phenomenon Early-morning hyperglycemia caused by ↓ effectiveness of insulin and ↑ secretion of growth hormone (GH) and other hormones overnight. Move P.M. insulin closer to bedtime to treat. Acute complications Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) Hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state (HHS) Hyperglycemia-induced crisis that most commonly occurs in type 1 DM. Often precipitated by stress (including infections, MI, trauma, or alcohol) or by noncompliance with insulin therapy. May present with abdominal pain, vomiting, Kussmaul respirations, and a fruity, acetone breath odor. Patients are severely dehydrated with many electrolyte abnormalities and may also develop mental status changes. Treatment includes f uids, potassium, insulin, bicarbonate (if pH is < 7), and treatment of the initiating event or underlying disease process. Presents as profound dehydration, mental status changes, hyperosmolarity, and extremely high plasma glucose (> 600 mg/dL) without acidosis and with small or absent ketones. Occurs in type 2 DM; precipitated by acute stress (dehydration, infections) and often can be fatal. Treatment includes aggressive ﬂuid and electrolyte replacement and insulin. Treat the initiating event. Chronic complications Retinopathy (nonproliferative, proliferative) Diabetic nephropathy Neuropathy Macrovascular complications Appears when diabetes has been present for at least 3–5 years. Preventive measures include control of hyperglycemia and hypertension, annual eye exams, and laser photocoagulation therapy for retinal neovascularization. Characterized by glomerular hyperfltration followed by microalbuminuria. Preventive measures include ACEIs or ARBs and BP/glucose control. Peripheral, symmetric, sensorimotor neuropathy leading to burning pain, foot trauma, infections, and diabetic ulcers. Treat with preventive foot care and analgesics. Late complications due to autonomic dysfunction include delayed gastric emptying, esophageal dysmotility, impotence, and orthostatic hypotension. Cardiovascular, cerebrovascular, and peripheral vascular disease. Cardiovascular disease is the most common cause of death in diabetic patients. The goal BP is < 130/< 75; ↓ LDL to < 100 mg/dL; ↓ triglycerides to < 150 mg/dL. Patients should also be started on low-dose ASA.
# Chunk 384
Exam reveals warm, moist skin, goiter, sinus tachycardia or atrial f brillation, fine tremor, lid lag, and hyperactive reﬂ exes. Exophthalmos, pretibial myxedema, and thyroid bruits are seen only in Graves’ disease (see Figure 2.3-1).
# Chunk 385
Hyperfunctioning nodules present with hyperthyroidism and local symptoms (dysphagia, dyspnea, cough, choking sensation) and are associated with a  family history (especially medullary thyroid cancer).
# Chunk 386
TABLE 2.3-4. Types of Thyroid Carcinoma

Papillary Represents 75–80% of thyroid cancers. The female-to-male ratio is 3:1. Slow growing; found in thyroid hormone–producing cells. Ninety percent of patients survive 10 years or more after diagnosis; the prognosis is worse in elderly patients or those with large tumors. Follicular Accounts for 17% of thyroid cancers; found in thyroid hormone– producing cells. Ninety percent of patients survive 10 years or longer after diagnosis; the prognosis is worse in elderly patients or those with large tumors. Medullary Responsible for 6–8% of thyroid cancers; found in calcitonin-producing C cells; the prognosis is related to degree of vascular invasion. Eighty percent of patients survive at least 10 years after surgery. Anaplastic Accounts for < 2% of thyroid cancers; rapidly enlarges and metastasizes. Ten percent of patients survive for > 3 years. a Tumors may contain mixed papillary and follicular pathologies.
# Chunk 387
A common metabolic bone disease characterized by low bone mass and microarchitectural disruption, with bone mineral density > 2.5 SDs below normal peak bone mass. Most often affects thin, postmenopausal women (17%), especially Caucasians and Asians, with risk doubling (30%) after age 65.
# Chunk 388
Imaging: Radionuclide bone scan is the most sensitive test.

Labs: Abnormalities include ↑ serum alkaline phosphatase with normal calcium and phosphate levels; urinary pyridinolines may be helpful. Must be differentiated from metastatic bone disease.
# Chunk 389
Chronic renal insufficiency and gout are also associated with 1° hyperparathyroidism.

Relative surgical criteria for hyperparathyroidism include age < 50, markedly ↓ bone mass, nephrolithiasis/renal insuff ciency, profoundly elevated serum calcium or life-threatening hypercalcemia, and urine calcium > 400 mg in 24 hours.
# Chunk 390
T AB LE 2.3-5. Functions and Mechanisms of PTH

Chief cells of parathyroid ↑ bone resorption of calcium and phosphate. ↑ kidney resorption of calcium in the distal convoluted tubule. ↓ kidney resorption of phosphate. ↑ 1,25-(OH)2 vitamin D (cholecalciferol) production by stimulating kidney 1α-hydroxylase. PTH ↑ serum Ca2+, ↓ serum (PO4)3–, and ↑urine (PO4)3–. PTH stimulates both osteoclasts and osteoblasts. ↓ in free serum Ca2+ ↑ PTH secretion.
# Chunk 391
Diagnosis is as follows (see also Table 2.3-6):

Begin with a screen: An elevated 24-hour free urine cortisol or evening salivary cortisol or a  overnight low-dose dexamethasone suppression test is considered abnormal if A.M. cortisol is persistently elevated following overnight suppression.
# Chunk 392
Diagnose on the basis of a urine osmolality > 50–100 mOsm/kg with concurrent serum hyposmolarity in the absence of a physiologic reason for ↑ADH (e.g., CHF, cirrhosis, hypovolemia).
# Chunk 393
Demeclocycline can help normalize serum sodium by antagonizing the action of ADH in the collecting duct.
# Chunk 394
T AB LE 2.4-2. Stages of Change in Behavioral Counseling

Precontemplation Denial or ignorance of the problem. A 51-year-old smoker has not even thought about cessation. Contemplation Ambivalence or conﬂicted emotions; assessing benefits and barriers to change. A 43-year-old crack cocaine addict considers treatment for her addiction. Preparation Experimenting with small changes; collecting information about change. A 28-year-old heroin addict visits his doctor to ask questions about quitting. Taking direct action toward achieving a goal. A 33-year-old enters a rehabilitation facility for treatment of addiction to prescription narcotics. Maintaining a new behavior; avoiding temptation. A 41-year-old continues to visit Alcoholics Anonymous meetings to gain support and reinforcement against relapse. Action Maintenance ■Live vaccines should not be administered to immunosuppressed patients. Such vaccines are also contraindicated in pregnant women owing to a theoretical risk of maternal-fetal transmission.
# Chunk 395
T AB LE 2.4-3. Health Screening Methods by Age

Birth–10 years Height and weight, BP, vision and hearing screening, hemoglobinopathy screen (at birth), phenylalanine level (at birth), TSH and/or T4 (at birth), lead level (at least one time before six years of age). 11–24 years Height and weight, BP, Pap test, gonorrhea and chlamydia (GC) screen (if sexually active), rubella serology or vaccination (women only); screen for risky behaviors, including substance abuse. 25–64 years Height and weight, BP (every two years), cholesterol (every five years), Pap test and bimanual pelvic exam, fecal occult blood test (FOBT) or fecal immunochemical test (FIT), sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy, mammography, rubella serology or vaccination (women only); screen for alcohol abuse and depression. ≥ 65 years Height and weight, BP, FOBT or FIT, sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy, Pap test, vision and hearing screening, osteoporosis (DEXA) scans for women; screen for alcohol abuse and depression.
# Chunk 396
Colonoscopy Flexible sigmoidoscopy Once every five years in patients ≥ 50 years of age (or ≥ 40 years of age for high-risk patients). FOBT or FIT Once every year in patients ≥ 50 years of age (or ≥ 40 years of age for high-risk patients). Bimanual pelvic exam Once every 1–3 years in patients 20–40 years of age; once yearly in patients ≥ 40 years of age. Pap test Mammography Once every 1–2 years in patients ≥ 40 years of age; once yearly in patients ≥ 50 years of age (controversial). Endometrial tissue sampling Not recommended as a screening test; indicated for postmenopausal bleeding. CXR Not recommended as a screening test. Skin exam Insufficient evidence. DRE Offer every year to high-risk patients at 40 years and to others at 50 years of age (controversial). PSA Offer every year to high-risk patients at 40 years and to others at 50 years of age (controversial). Clinical breast exam
# Chunk 397
Esophageal dysphagia: Barium swallow followed by endoscopy, manometry, and/or pH monitoring. If an obstructive lesion is suspected, proceed directly to endoscopy with biopsy.
# Chunk 398
Upper endoscopy can visualize the gastric lining.

H. pylori infection can be detected by urease breath test, serum IgG antibodies (which indicate exposure, not current infection), H. pylori stool antigen, or endoscopic biopsy.
# Chunk 399
Damage to the gastric or duodenal mucosa caused by impaired mucosal defense and/or ↑ acidic gastric contents. H. pylori plays a causative role in > 90% of duodenal ulcers and 70% of gastric ulcers. Other risk factors include corticosteroid, NSAID, alcohol, and tobacco use. Males are affected more often than females.
# Chunk 400
Campylobacter The most common etiology of infectious diarrhea. Ingestion of contaminated food or water. Affects young children and young adults. Generally lasts 7–10 days. Fecal RBCs and WBCs. Frequently bloody diarrhea. Rule out appendicitis and IBD. Erythromycin. Clostridium difficile Recent treatment with antibiotics (penicillins, cephalosporins, clindamycin). Affects hospitalized adult patients. Watch for toxic megacolon. Fever, abdominal pain, possible systemic toxicity. Fecal RBCs and WBCs. Most commonly causes colitis, but can involve the small bowel. Identify C. difficile toxin in the stool. Sigmoidoscopy shows pseudomembranes. Cessation of the inciting antibiotic. PO metronidazole or vancomycin; IV metronidazole if the patient cannot tolerate PO. Entamoeba histolytica Ingestion of contaminated food or water; history of travel in developing countries. Incubation period can last up to three months. Severe abdominal pain, fever. Fecal RBCs and WBCs. Chronic amebic colitis mimics IBD. Steroids can lead to fatal perforation. Treat with metronidazole. E. coli O157:H7 Ingestion of contaminated food (raw meat). Affects children and the elderly. Generally lasts 5–10 days. Severe abdominal pain, low-grade fever, vomiting. Fecal RBCs and WBCs. It is important to rule out GI bleed and ischemic colitis. HUS is a possible complication. Avoid antibiotic or antidiarrheal therapy, which ↑ HUS risk. Ingestion of contaminated poultry or eggs. Affects young children and elderly patients. Generally lasts 2–5 days. Prodromal headache, fever, myalgia, abdominal pain. Fecal WBCs. Sepsis is a concern, as 5–10% of patients become bacteremic. Sickle cell patients are susceptible to invasive disease leading to osteomyelitis. Treat bacteremia or at-risk patients (e.g., sickle cell patients) with oral quinolone or TMP-SMX. Extremely contagious; transmitted between people by the fecal-oral route. Affects young children and institutionalized patients. Fecal RBCs and WBCs. May lead to severe dehydration. Can also cause febrile seizures in the very young. Treat with TMP-SMX to ↓ person-to-person spread. Salmonella Shigella
# Chunk 401
Tx: Treatment includes octreotide (for symptoms) and debulking of tumor mass.

An idiopathic functional disorder that is characterized by changes in bowel habits that ↑ with stress as well as by abdominal pain that is relieved by bowel movements. It is most common in the second and third decades, but since the syndrome is chronic, patients may present at any age. Half of all IBS patients who seek medical care have comorbid psychiatric disorders (e.g., depression, anxiety, fibromyalgia).
# Chunk 402
■Patients present with abdominal pain, a change in bowel habits (diarrhea and/or constipation), abdominal distention, mucous stools, and relief of pain with a bowel movement.
# Chunk 403
Defined as blocked passage of bowel contents through the small bowel. Fluid and gas can build up proximal to the obstruction, leading to ﬂuid and electrolyte imbalances and significant abdominal discomfort. The obstruction can be complete or partial, and ischemia or necrosis of the bowel may occur. SBO may arise from adhesions from a prior abdominal surgery (60% of cases), hernias (10–20%), neoplasms (10–20%), intussusception, gallstone ileus, stricture due to IBD, or volvulus.
# Chunk 404
Abdominal exam often reveals distention, tenderness, prior surgical scars, or hernias.

Bowel sounds are characterized by high-pitched tinkles and peristaltic rushes.
# Chunk 405
Abdominal films often demonstrate a stepladder pattern of dilated small-bowel loops, air-f uid levels (see Figure 2.6-3), and a paucity of gas in the colon. The presence of radiopaque material at the cecum is suggestive of gallstone ileus.
# Chunk 406
A second-look laparotomy or laparoscopy may be performed 18–36 hours after initial surgical treatment to reevaluate bowel viability if ischemia is a concern.
# Chunk 407
Presenting symptoms include diffuse, constant, moderate abdominal discomfort; nausea and vomiting (especially with eating); and an absence of fatulence or bowel movements.
# Chunk 408
Exam may reveal diffuse tenderness and abdominal distention, no peritoneal signs, and ↓ or absent bowel sounds.
# Chunk 409
Other symptoms may include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and bloody stools.

Early abdominal exam is often unremarkable; later findings may include peritoneal signs (suggest bowel infarction).
# Chunk 410
T AB LE 2.6-3. Characteristics of Small and Large Bowel Obstruction

History Moderate to severe acute abdominal pain; copious emesis. Cramping pain with distal SBO. Fever, signs of dehydration, and hypotension may be seen. Constipation/obstipation, deep and cramping abdominal pain (less intense than SBO), nausea/ vomiting (less than SBO but more commonly feculent). PE Abdominal distention (distal SBO), abdominal tenderness, visible peristaltic waves, fever, hypovolemia. Look for surgical scars/hernias; perform a rectal exam. High-pitched “tinkly” bowel sounds; later, absence of bowel sounds. Signif cant distention, tympany, and tenderness; examine for peritoneal irritation or mass; fever or signs of shock suggest perforation/peritonitis or ischemia/necrosis. High-pitched “tinkly” bowel sounds; later, absence of bowel sounds. Etiologies Adhesions (postsurgery), hernias, neoplasm, volvulus, intussusception, gallstone ileus, foreign body, Crohn’s disease, CF, stricture, hematoma. Colon cancer, diverticulitis, volvulus, fecal impaction, benign tumors. Assume colon cancer until proven otherwise. Differential LBO, paralytic ileus, gastroenteritis. SBO, paralytic ileus, appendicitis, IBD, Ogilvie’s syndrome (pseudo-obstruction). CBC, electrolytes, lactic acid, AXR (see Figure 2.6-3); contrast studies (determine if it is partial or complete), CT scan. CBC, electrolytes, lactic acid, AXR (see Figure 2.6-4), CT scan; water contrast enema (if perforation is suspected); sigmoidoscopy/colonoscopy if stable.
# Chunk 411
Left-sided lesions: Typically “apple-core” obstructing masses (see Figure 2.6-5). Patients complain of a change in bowel habits (e.g., ↓ stool caliber, constipation, obstipation), colicky abdominal pain, and/or blood-streaked stools. Obstruction is common.
# Chunk 412
Determine the degree of invasion in rectal cancer with endorectal ultrasound.

Order a CXR, LFTs, and an abdominal/pelvic CT for metastatic workup. Metastases may arise from direct extension to local viscera, hematogenous spread (40–50% go to the liver, but spread may also occur to bone, lungs, and brain), or lymphatic spread (to pelvic lymph nodes).
# Chunk 413
T AB LE 2.6-5. Features of Upper and Lower GI Bleeding

HIGH-YIELD FACTS History/PE Hematemesis (”coffee-ground” emesis), melena > hematochezia, depleted volume status (e.g., tachycardia, lightheadedness, hypotension). Hematochezia > melena, but can be either. Diagnosis NG tube and NG lavage; endoscopy if stable. Rule out upper GI bleed with NG lavage. Anoscopy/sigmoidoscopy for patients < 45 years of age with small-volume bleeding. Colonoscopy if stable; arteriography or exploratory laparotomy if unstable. Etiologies PUD, esophagitis/gastritis, Mallory-Weiss tear, esophageal varices. Diverticulosis (60%), IBD, hemorrhoids/f ssures, neoplasm, AVM. Initial management Protect the airway (may need intubation). Stabilize the patient with IV fuids and PRBCs (hematocrit may be normal early in acute blood loss). Similar to upper GI bleed. Long-term management Endoscopy followed by therapy directed at the underlying cause (e.g., high-dose PPIs for PUD; octreotide and/or banding for varices). Depends on the underlying etiology. Endoscopic therapy (e.g., epinephrine injection), intra-arterial vasopressin infusion or embolization, or surgery for diverticular disease or angiodysplasia.
# Chunk 414
T AB LE 2.6-6. Features of Ulcerative Colitis and Crohn’s Disease

Site of involvement The rectum is always involved. May extend proximally in a continuous fashion. Infammation and ulceration are limited to the mucosa and submucosa. May involve any portion of the GI tract, particularly the ileocecal region, in a discontinuous pattern (“skip lesions”). The rectum is often spared. Transmural inﬂ ammation is seen. History/PE Bloody diarrhea, lower abdominal cramps, tenesmus, urgency. Exam may reveal orthostatic hypotension, tachycardia, abdominal tenderness, frank blood on rectal exam, and extraintestinal manifestations. Abdominal pain, abdominal mass, low-grade fever, weight loss, watery diarrhea. Exam may reveal fever, abdominal tenderness or mass, perianal fissures, fistulas, and extraintestinal manifestations. Extraintestinal manifestations Aphthous stomatitis, episcleritis/uveitis, arthritis, primary sclerosing cholangitis, erythema nodosum, and pyoderma gangrenosum. The same as ulcerative colitis, as well as gallstones, nephrolithiasis, and fstulas to the skin, bladder, or between bowel loops. Diagnosis CBC, AXR, stool cultures, O&P, stool assay for The same lab workup as ulcerative colitis. Upper GI
# Chunk 415
Dramatically ↑ ALT and AST and ↑ bilirubin/alkaline phosphatase are present in the acute form.

In chronic hepatitis, ALT and AST are ↑ for > 6 months with a concurrent ↑ in alkaline phosphatase/bilirubin and hypoalbuminemia. In severe cases, PT will be prolonged, as all clotting factors except factor VIII are produced by the liver.
# Chunk 416
Abdominal ultrasound with Doppler can assess liver size, the presence of ascites, and the patency of splenic and hepatic veins. The etiology of ascites can be established through measurement of the serum-ascites albumin gradient (SAAG = serum albumin – ascites albumin); see Table 2.6-9.
# Chunk 417
Glucose intolerance and mildly elevated AST and alkaline phosphatase can be present.

Perform a liver biopsy (to determine hepatic iron index), hepatic MRI, or HFE gene mutation screen.
# Chunk 418
Weekly phlebotomy; when serum iron levels ↓, perform maintenance phlebotomy every 2–4 months.

Deferoxamine can be used for maintenance therapy.
# Chunk 419
Pathophysiology Leakage of pancreatic enzymes into pancreatic and peripancreatic tissue, often 2° to gallstone disease or alcoholism. Irreversible parenchymal destruction leading to pancreatic dysfunction. Time course Abrupt onset of severe pain. Persistent, recurrent episodes of severe pain. Risk factors Gallstones, alcoholism, hypercalcemia, hypertriglyceridemia, trauma, drug side effects (thiazide diuretics), viral infections, post-ERCP, scorpion bites. Alcoholism (90%), gallstones, hyperparathyroidism, hypercholesterolemia, cystic f brosis. May also be idiopathic. History/PE Severe epigastric pain (radiating to the back); nausea, vomiting, weakness, fever, shock. Flank discoloration (Grey Turner’s sign) and periumbilical discoloration (Cullen’s sign) may be evident on exam. Recurrent episodes of persistent epigastric pain; anorexia, nausea, constipation, f atulence, steatorrhea, weight loss, DM. Diagnosis ↑ amylase, ↑ lipase, ↓ calcium if severe; “sentinel ↑ or normal amylase and lipase, ↓ stool elastase, Removal of the offending agent if possible. Standard supportive measures: IV f uids/electrolyte replacement, analgesia, bowel rest, NG suction, nutritional support, O2, “tincture of time.” IV antibiotics, respiratory support, and surgical debridement if necrotizing pancreatitis is present.
# Chunk 420
Roughly 85–90% are mild and self-limited; 10– 15% are severe, requiring ICU admission. Mortality may approach 50% in severe cases.
# Chunk 421
equate levels. Factor IX has a half-life of 24 hours, so daily transfusion is needed.

The length of treatment varies with the lesion, extending up to several weeks after orthopedic surgery.
# Chunk 422
A diagnosis of exclusion, as the test for platelet-associated antibodies is a poor one.

Once other causes of thrombocytopenia have been ruled out, a diagnosis can be made on the basis of the history and physical, a CBC, and a peripheral blood smear showing normal RBC morphology. Most patients do not require bone marrow biopsy, which would show ↑ megakaryocytes as the only abnormality.
# Chunk 423
Anemia is a disorder of low hematocrit and hemoglobin. There are several subtypes, which are classified according to red cell morphology (MCV, RDW, color, shape) and reticulocyte count (see Figure 2.7-3). Once anemia has been diagnosed by a low hemoglobin/hematocrit, the approach starts with the MCV. An MCV < 80 fL indicates microcytic anemia; between 80 fL and 100 fL is normocytic; and > 100 fL is macrocytic.
# Chunk 424
Peripheral blood smear shows hypochromic and microcytic RBCs with a low reticulocyte count.

Low serum ferritin reﬂects low body stores of iron and confirms the diagnosis. However, ferritin is also an acute-phase reactant and may thus obscure evidence of iron deficiency.
# Chunk 425
Treat with replacement iron for 4–6 months. Oral iron sulfate may lead to nausea, constipation, diarrhea, and abdominal pain. Antacids may interfere with iron absorption.
# Chunk 426
Patients are typically jaundiced, with low haptoglobin and elevated indirect bilirubin and LDH. Urine is dark with hemoglobinuria, and there is ↑ excretion of urinary and fecal urobilinogen. Reticulocyte count is elevated.
# Chunk 427
T AB LE 2.7 -5. Differential Diagnosis of Thalassemias β-thalassemia major 0/2 β Patients develop severe microcytic anemia in the frst year of life and need chronic transfusions or marrow transplant to survive. β-thalassemia minor 1/2 β Patients are asymptomatic, but their cells are microcytic and hypochromic on peripheral smear. Hydrops fetalis 0/4 α Patients die in utero. Hemoglobin H disease 1/4 α Patients have severe hypochromic, microcytic anemia with chronic hemolysis, splenomegaly, jaundice, and cholelithiasis. The reticulocyte count elevates to compensate, and one-third of patients have skeletal changes due to expanded erythropoiesis. α-thalassemia trait 2/4 α Patients have low MCV but are usually asymptomatic. Silent carrier 3/4 α Patients have no signs or symptoms of disease.
# Chunk 428
Physical exam reveals tachycardia, skin erythema and blisters, aref exia, and a nonspecifc abdominal exam.
# Chunk 429
Heme is necessary for the production of hemoglobin, myoglobin, and cytochrome molecules.

The telltale sign of porphyria is pink urine.
# Chunk 430
The classic case of porphyria involves a college student who consumes alcohol and barbiturates at a party, and then has an acute episode of abdominal pain and brown urine the next day.
# Chunk 431
Based on examination of the patient’s bone marrow, obtained by biopsy and aspiration, or peripheral blood if circulating blasts are present. Marrow that is infiltrated with blast cells (> 20–30%) is consistent with a leukemic process. In AML, the leukemic cells are myeloblasts; in ALL they are lymphoblasts. These cells may be distinguished by examination of morphology, cytogenetics, cytochemistry, and immunophenotyping (see Table 2.7-6).
# Chunk 432
T AB LE 2.7 -6. Myeloblasts vs. Lymphoblasts

Size Larger (2–4 times RBC) Smaller (1.5–3.0 times RBC) Amount of cytoplasm More Less Nucleoli Conspicuous Inconspicuous Granules Common, f ne Uncommon, coarse Auer rods Present in 50% of cases Absent Myeloperoxidase
# Chunk 433
Leukocyte alkaline phosphatase is low; LDH, uric acid, and B12 levels are elevated.

Varies with disease phase and is undergoing rapid change, particularly since the introduction of targeted therapies:
# Chunk 434
T AB LE 2.7 -8. Presentation of Non-Hodgkin’s Lymphoma

Painless peripheral adenopathy. Cytopenia from bone marrow involvement. Fatigue and weakness. Peripheral adenopathy, splenomegaly, hepatomegaly. Adenopathy. Extranodal disease (GI, GU, skin, thyroid, CNS). B symptoms (temperature > 38.5°C, night sweats, weight loss). Mass formation (e.g., abdominal mass with bowel obstruction in Burkitt’s lymphoma; mediastinal mass and SVC syndrome in lymphoblastic lymphoma). Bulky adenopathy, splenomegaly, hepatomegaly. Masses (abdominal, testicular, mediastinal). Skin f ndings. Low Intermediate to high (CHOP: cyclophosphamide [Cytoxan], Adriamycin, Oncovin [vincristine], and prednisone).
# Chunk 435
Five-year survival rates are very good and are 90% for stage I and II disease (nodal disease limited to one side of the diaphragm), 84% for stage III, and 65% for stage IV.
# Chunk 436
Patients present with anemia, plasmacytosis of the bone marrow, lytic bone lesions, hypercalcemia, and renal abnormalities. They are prone to infection and have elevated monoclonal (M) proteins in the serum and/or urine.
# Chunk 437
The classic triad of diagnostic criteria are > 10% plasma cells in the bone marrow and/or histologically proven plasma cell infiltration, M protein in serum or urine, and evidence of lytic bone lesions.
# Chunk 438
Patients should be evaluated with a skeletal survey, a bone marrow biopsy, serum and urine protein electrophoresis, and CBC.
# Chunk 439
Bone marrow biopsy and aspirate are required to establish the diagnosis. Marrow shows abnormal plasma cells, classically with Dutcher bodies (PASIgM deposits around the nucleus). Serum and urine protein electrophoresis and immunofixation are also used.
# Chunk 440
Timing after transplant Within minutes. Five days to three months. Months to years. Pathomechanism Preformed antibodies. T-cell mediated. Chronic immune reaction causing f brosis. Tissue fndings Vascular thrombi; tissue ischemia. Laboratory evidence of tissue destruction such as ↑ GGT, alkaline phosphatase, LDH, BUN, or creatinine. Gradual loss of organ function. Prevention Check ABO compatibility. N/A N/A Treatment Cytotoxic agents. Confrm with sampling of transplanted tissue; treat with corticosteroids, antilymphocyte antibodies (OKT3), tacrolimus, or mycophenolate mofetil (MMF). No treatment; biopsy to rule out treatable acute reaction.
# Chunk 441
Classic symptoms: Sudden onset, fever, productive cough (purulent yellow-green sputum or hemoptysis), dyspnea, night sweats, pleuritic chest pain.
# Chunk 442
Chlamydia pneumoniae: Serologic testing, culture, PCR.

TABLE 2.8-1. Common Causes of Pneumonia

Atypical Nosocomial (hospital acquired) Immunocompromised Mycoplasma, Legionella, Chlamydia Gramrods (GNRs), Staphylococcus, anaerobes Staphylococcus, gramrods, fungi, viruses, Pneumocystis jiroveci (with HIV), mycobacteria Aspiration Anaerobes Alcoholics/IV drug users S. pneumoniae, Klebsiella, Staphylococcus Cystic fbrosis (CF) Pseudomonas, Burkholderia, S. aureus, mycobacteria COPD H. inﬂ uenzae, Moraxella catarrhalis, S. pneumoniae Postviral Staphylococcus, H. inﬂuenzae Neonate Group B streptococci (GBS), E. coli Recurrent Obstruction, bronchogenic carcinoma, lymphoma, Wegener’s granulomatosis, immunodefciency, unusual organisms (e.g., Nocardia, Coxiella burnetii, Aspergillus, Pseudomonas) Viruses (RSV) Mycoplasma Chlamydia pneumoniae Streptococcus pneumoniae Mycoplasma C. pneumoniae S. pneumoniae S. pneumoniae H. inﬂ uenzae Anaerobes Viruses Mycoplasma S. pneumoniae Viruses Anaerobes H. inﬂ uenzae Gram-rods Special groups:
# Chunk 443
Mycoplasma: Usually clinical. Serum cold agglutinins and serum Mycoplasma antigen may also be used.

Streptococcus pneumoniae: Urine pneumococcal antigen test, culture.
# Chunk 444
Outpatient community-acquired pneumonia, patients ≤ 65 years of age, otherwise healthy S. pneumoniae, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, C. pneumoniae, H. inﬂ uenzae, viral. Macrolide (azithromycin), doxycycline, or f uoroquinolone. Patients > 65 years of age or with comorbidity (COPD, heart failure, renal failure, diabetes, liver disease, EtOH abuse) S. pneumoniae, H. inﬂ uenzae, aerobic GNRs (E. coli, Enterobacter, Klebsiella), S. aureus, Legionella, viruses. Macrolide or f uoroquinolone. Consider adding a second-generation cephalosporin or β-lactam to the macrolide. Community-acquired pneumonia requiring hospitalization S. pneumoniae, H. inﬂ uenzae, anaerobes, aerobic GNRs, Legionella, Chlamydia. Extended-spectrum cephalosporin, β-lactam/β-lactamase inhibitor, or fuoroquinolone. Add a macrolide if atypical organisms are suspected. Community-acquired pneumonia requiring ICU care S. pneumoniae, H. inﬂ uenzae, anaerobes, aerobic GNRs, Mycoplasma, Legionella, Pseudomonas. Fluoroquinolone or extended-spectrum cephalosporin or β-lactam/β-lactamase inhibitor + macrolide. Institution-/hospital-acquired pneumonia—patients hospitalized > 48 hours or in a long-term care facility > 14 days GNRs (including Pseudomonas and Acinetobacter), S. aureus, Legionella, mixed f ora. Extended-spectrum cephalosporin or β-lactam with antipseudomonal activity or carbapenem. Consider adding an aminoglycoside or a f uoroquinolone for coverage of resistant organisms (Pseudomonas) until lab sensitivities identify the best single agent. Patients who are critically ill or worsening over 24–48 hours on initial antibiotic therapy Methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA). Add vancomycin or linezolid; broader gram-coverage.
# Chunk 445
Presents with cough, hemoptysis, dyspnea, weight loss, fatigue, night sweats, fever, cachexia, hypoxia, tachycardia, lymphadenopathy, an abnormal lung exam, and a prolonged (> 3-week) symptom duration. TB is a common cause of fever of unknown origin (FUO). HIV patients can present with atypical signs and symptoms and have higher rates of extrapulmonary TB.
# Chunk 446
Always consider occult sinusitis in febrile ICU patients.

Diagnosed by clinical evaluation, rapid GAS antigen detection, and throat culture. With three out of four of the Centor criteria, the sensitivity of rapid antigen testing is > 90%.
# Chunk 447
Patients present with fever, anorexia, headache, chest pain, cough, dyspnea, arthralgias, and night sweats. Disseminated infection can present with meningitis, bone lesions, and soft tissue abscesses.
# Chunk 448
T AB LE 2.8-6. Prophylaxis for HIV-Related Opportunistic Infections

P. jiroveci pneumonia CD4+ < 200/mm3, prior P. jiroveci infection, unexplained fever × 2 weeks, or HIV-related oral candidiasis. Single-strength TMP-SMX or dapsone +/– pyrimethamine. Discontinue prophylaxis when CD4+ is > 200 for ≥ 3 months. Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC) CD4+ < 50–100/mm3. Weekly azithromycin or daily clarithromycin. Discontinue prophylaxis when CD4+ is > 100/mm3 for > 6 months. Toxoplasma gondii CD4+ < 100/mm3 + IgG serologies. Double-strength TMP-SMX. — M. tuberculosis PPD > 5 mm or “high risk” (see TB section). Sensitive: INH × 9 months (+ pyridoxine) or rifampin +/– pyrazinamide × 2 months. Include pyridoxine with INH-containing regimens. Candida Multiple recurrences. Esophagitis: Fluconazole. Oral: Nystatin swish and  swallow. — HSV Multiple recurrences. Acyclovir, famciclovir, or valacyclovir. — All patients. Pneumovax. Give every fve years or when CD4+ is < 200. All patients. Infuenza vaccine annually. — S. pneumoniae Inf uenza
# Chunk 449
Tx: ■IV amphotericin B + f ucytosine × 2 weeks; then give f uconazole 400 mg × 8 weeks. Lifelong maintenance therapy should be administered with fuconazole 200 mg QD, or until CD4+ is > 200 for > 6 months.
# Chunk 450
The urine and serum polysaccharide antigen test is the most sensitive test for making the initial diagnosis, monitoring response to therapy, and diagnosing relapse. Culture is also diagnostic (blood, sputum, bone marrow, CSF).
# Chunk 451
Chronic cavitary lesions: Give itraconazole for > 1 year.

Severe acute pulmonary disease or disseminated disease: Amphotericin B or amphotericin B liposomal × 3–10 days followed by itraconazole × 12 weeks or longer. Maintenance therapy with daily itraconazole.
# Chunk 452
Virus isolation, culture, tissue examination, serum PCR.

Treat with ganciclovir or foscarnet. Treat underlying disease if the patient is immunocompromised.
# Chunk 453
Obtain mycobacterial blood cultures ( in 2–3 weeks).

Labs show anemia, hypoalbuminemia, and ↑ serum alkaline phosphatase and LDH.
# Chunk 454
Diagnosis is usually clinical.

Culture is the gold standard.

Urine tests (PCR or ligase chain reaction) are a rapid means of detection, while DNA probes and immunofuorescence (for gonorrhea/chlamydia) take 48–72 hours.
# Chunk 455
Urine dipstick/UA: ↑ leukocyte esterase (a marker of WBCs) is 75% sensitive and up to 95% specif c. ↑ nitrites (a marker of bacteria), ↑ urine pH (Proteus infections), and hematuria (seen with cystitis) are also commonly seen.
# Chunk 456
Urine culture: The gold standard is > 105 CFU/mL.

Uncomplicated UTI: Treat on an outpatient basis with PO TMP-SMX or a f uoroquinolone × 3 days, or nitrofurantoin × 7 days. Note that resistance to TMP-SMX and fuoroquinolones has been increasing.
# Chunk 457
T AB LE 2.8-8. Sexually Transmitted Genital Lesions

Lesion Papule becomes a beefy-red ulcer with a characteristic rolled edge of granulation tissue Papule or pustule (chancroid; see Figure 2.8-12) Vesicle (3–7 days postexposure) Papule (condylomata acuminata; warts) Papule (chancre) Appearance Raised red lesions with a white border Irregular, deep, well demarcated, necrotic Regular, red, shallow ulcer Irregular, pink or white, raised; caulif ower Regular, red, round, raised Number 1 or multiple 1–3 Multiple Multiple Single Size 5–10 mm 10–20 mm 1–3 mm 1–5 mm 1 cm Pain No Yes Yes No No Concurrent signs and symptoms Granulomatous ulcers Inguinal lymphadenopathy Malaise, myalgias, and fever with vulvar burning and pruritus Pruritus Regional adenopathy Clinical exam, biopsy (Donovan bodies) Diffcult to culture; diagnosis is made on clinical grounds Tzanck smear shows multinucleated giant cells; viral cultures; DFA or serology Clinical exam; biopsy for conf rmation Spirochetes seen under dark-f eld microscopy; T. pallidum identifed by serum antibody test Doxycycline (100 mg BID) or azithromycin (1 g weekly) × 3 weeks Doxycycline (100 mg BID) or azithromycin (1 g weekly) × 3 weeks Acyclovir or valacyclovir for 1° infection Cryotherapy; topical agents such as podophyllin, trichloroacetic acid, or 5-FU cream Penicillin IM Diagnosis Treatmentd a Previously known as Calymmatobacterium granulomatis. b Some 85% of genital herpes lesions are caused by HSV-2. c HPV serotypes 6 and 11 are associated with genital warts; types 16, 18, and 31 are associated with cervical cancer. d For all, treat sexual partners.
# Chunk 458
2.

Tachypnea: > 20 breaths per minute or PaCO2 < 32 mmHg on ABG.

3.

Tachycardia: HR > 90 bpm.

4.
# Chunk 459
Obtain a CBC with differential, serum creatinine, BUN, and transaminases; order blood, urine, lesion, and stool cultures.
# Chunk 460
A tick-borne disease caused by the spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi. Usually seen during the summer months, and carried by Ixodes ticks on white-tailed deer and white-footed mice. Endemic to the Northeast, northern Midwest, and Pacif c coast.
# Chunk 461
Fever (≥ 38.3°C) + Neutropenia (< 500 neutrophils/mm3) PO IV (outpatient) Vancomycin not needed Reassess after 3–5 days Vancomycin needed Intermediate/High Risk High-dose chemo? Hematologic malignancy? Neutropenia > 14 days? Combination Therapy: Aminoglycosides + antipseudomonal, penicillin, cefepime, ceftazidime, or carbapenem Vancomycin + cefepime, ceftazidime, or carbapenem ± aminoglycoside Monotherapy: Cefepime, ceftazidine, or carbapenem Ciprofloxacin + amoxicillin/clavulanate (adults only) Low Risk Solid tumors treated as outpatient with conventional chemotherapy? Minimal comorbidity? Neutropenia < 7 days?
# Chunk 462
Cutaneous: Presents 1–7 days after skin exposure and penetration of spores. The lesion begins as a pruritic papule that enlarges to form an ulcer surrounded by a satellite bulbus/lesion with an edematous halo and a round, regular, and raised edge. Regional lymphadenopathy is also characteristic. The lesion evolves into a black eschar within 7–10 days.
# Chunk 463
GI: Occurs after the ingestion of poorly cooked, contaminated meat; can present with dysphagia, nausea/vomiting, bloody diarrhea, and abdominal pain.
# Chunk 464
Splint the wrist in a neutral position at night and during the day if possible. Administer NSAIDs.

Conservative treatment can include corticosteroid injection of the carpal canal.
# Chunk 465
Shoulder dislocation Anterior dislocation: Most common; the axillary artery and nerve are at risk. Patients hold the arm in slight abduction and external rotation. Posterior dislocation: Rare; associated with seizure and electrocutions; can injure the radial artery. Patients hold the arm in adduction and internal rotation. Reduction followed by a sling and swath. Recurrent dislocations may need surgical repair. Hip dislocation Posterior dislocation: Most common (> 90%); occurs via a posteriorly directed force on an internally rotated, fexed, adducted hip (“dashboard injury”). Associated with a risk of sciatic nerve injury and avascular necrosis (AVN). Anterior dislocation: Can injure the obturator nerve. Closed reduction followed by abduction pillow/ bracing. Evaluate with CT scan after reduction. Colles’ fracture Involves the distal radius. Often results from a fall onto an outstretched hand, leading to a dorsally displaced, dorsally angulated fracture. Commonly seen in the elderly (osteoporosis) and children. Closed reduction followed by application of a long-arm cast; open reduction if the fracture is intra-articular. Scaphoid fracture The most commonly fractured carpal bone. May take two weeks for radiographs to show the fracture. Assume a fracture if there is tenderness in the anatomical snuff box. Thumb spica cast. If displacement or navicular nonunion is present, treat with open reduction. With proximal third scaphoid fractures, AVN may result from disruption of blood f ow. Boxer’s fracture Fracture of the ffth metacarpal neck. Due to forward trauma of a closed fst (e.g., punching a wall). Closed reduction and ulnar gutter splint; percutaneous pinning if the fracture is excessively angulated. If skin is broken, assume infection by human oral pathogens and treat with surgical irrigation, debridement, and IV antibiotics (covering Eikenella). Humerus fracture Direct trauma. May have radial nerve palsy leading to wrist drop and loss of thumb abduction (see Figure 2.9-1). Hanging-arm cast vs. coaptation splint and sling. Functional bracing. “Nightstick fracture” Ulnar shaft fracture resulting from self-defense with the arm against a blunt object. Open reduction and internal fxation (ORIF) if signif cantly displaced. Monteggia’s fracture Diaphyseal fracture of the proximal ulna with subluxation of the radial head. ORIF of the shaft fracture (due to poor fracture diaphyseal blood supply) and closed reduction of the radial head.
# Chunk 466
T AB LE 2.9-1. Common Adult Orthopedic Injuries (continued)

Femoral fracture Direct trauma. Beware of fat emboli, which present with fever, change in mental status, dyspnea, hypoxia, petechiae, and ↓ platelets. Intramedullary nailing of the femur. Irrigate and debride open fractures. Tibial fracture Direct trauma. Watch for compartment syndrome. Casting vs. intramedullary nailing. Open fractures An orthopedic emergency; patients must be taken to the OR in < 6 hours owing to ↑ infection risk. OR emergently to repair fracture. Treat with antibiotics and tetanus prophylaxis. Achilles tendon rupture Presents with a sudden “pop” like a rif e shot. More likely with ↓ physical conditioning. Exam shows limited plantar f exion and a  Thompson’s test (pressure on the gastrocnemius leading to absent foot plantar f exion). Treat surgically followed by long leg cast for six weeks. Knee injuries
# Chunk 467
FIGURE 2.9-3.  Osteosarcoma.

“Sunburst” appearance of neoplastic bone formation in the femur of a 15-year-old girl. Amputation was required owing to the size of the tumor. (Reproduced, with permission, from Skinner HB. Current Diagnosis & Treatment in Orthopedics, 2nd ed. Stamford, CT: Appleton & Lange, 2000: 272.)
# Chunk 468
■↑serum CK and anti-Jo-1 antibodies are seen (see Table 2.9-4).

■Muscle biopsy reveals inﬂammation and muscle fibers in varying stages of necrosis and regeneration.
# Chunk 469
Ultrasound may be helpful, especially after 10 weeks of age.

Radiographs are unreliable until patients are > 4 months of age because of the radiolucency of the neonatal femoral head.
# Chunk 470
If a 25-year-old male wakes up repeatedly during the night with unilateral periorbital pain associated with ipsilateral lacrimation, think cluster headache.
# Chunk 471
If a 30-year-old female complains of headaches at the end of the day that worsen with stress and improve with relaxation or massage, think tension-type headache.
# Chunk 472
If you see a 27-year-old male who presents with vertigo and vomiting for one week after having been diagnosed with a viral infection, think acute vestibular neuritis.
# Chunk 473
Presents with ﬂ uctuating fatigable ptosis or double vision, bulbar symptoms (e.g., dysarthria, dysphagia), and proximal muscle weakness. Symptoms typically worsen as the day progresses but f uctuate dramatically.
# Chunk 474
A 55-year-old male presents with slowly progressive weakness in his left upper extremity and later his right, associated with fasciculations but without bladder disturbance and with a normal cervical MRI. Think ALS.
# Chunk 475
If a 43-year-old male patient presents with sudden onset of chorea, irritability, and antisocial behavior and his father experienced these symptoms at a slightly older age, think Huntington’s disease.
# Chunk 476
Intracranial neoplasms may be 1° (30%) or metastatic (70%).

Of all 1° brain tumors, 40% are benign, and these rarely spread beyond the CNS.
# Chunk 477
ECG: Evaluate for rhabdomyoma of the heart, especially in the apex of the left ventricle (affects > 50% of patients).
# Chunk 478
Fetal heart tones: Can be heard at 10–12 weeks by Doppler.

Ultrasound: Measures fetal crown-rump length (CRL) at 5–12 weeks and measures biparietal diameter (BPD), femur length (FL), and abdominal circumference (AC) from 13 weeks. Ultrasound measurement of GA is most reliable during the f rst trimester.
# Chunk 479
To screen for fetal aneuploidy.

Still UNDERage at 18: trisomy 18 = ↓ AFP, ↓ estriol, ↓β-hCG, ↓ inhibin A.
# Chunk 480
TABLE 2.11-1.  Standard Prenatal Care

Weight gain Guidelines for weight gain in pregnancy: ■Recommended gain: An additional 100–300 kcal/day; 500 kcal/day during breastfeeding. ■Excessive gain: > 1.5 kg/mo. ■Inadequate gain: < 1 kg/mo. Guidelines according to prepregnancy body mass index (BMI): ■Underweight (BMI < 19.8): 12–18 kg gain. ■Acceptable (BMI 19.8–26.0): 11–16 kg gain. ■Overweight (BMI 26.1–29.0): 7–11 kg gain. ■Severely overweight (BMI > 29.0): 7 kg gain. Nutrition Guidelines for nutritional supplementation: ■Folic acid supplements (↓ neural tube defects for all reproductive-age women): 0.4 mg/day, or 4 mg/day for women with a history of neural tube defects in prior pregnancies. ■Iron: Starting at the frst visit, 30 mg/day of elemental iron (or 150 mg of iron sulfate). ■Calcium: 1300 mg/day for women < 19 years of age; 1000 mg/day for those > 19 years of age. Additional guidelines for complete vegetarians: ■Vitamin D: 10 μg or 400 IU/day. ■Vitamin B12: 2 μg/day. Exercise Thirty minutes of moderate exercise daily is recommended.
# Chunk 481
Trisomy 18: All four are ↓.

Trisomy 21: ↓ AFP and estriol; ↑ β-hCG and inhibin A.

2 up, 2 down: trisomy 21 = ↓ AFP, ↓ estriol, ↑β-hCG, ↑ inhibin A.
# Chunk 482
T AB LE 2.1 1 -2. Prenatal Diagnostic Testing Schedule

Prenatal visits Weeks 0–28: Every four weeks. Weeks 29–35: Every two weeks. Weeks 36–birth: Every week. Initial visit 9–14 weeks Offer PAPP-A + nuchal transparency + free β-hCG +/– CVS. 15–20 weeks Offer MSAFP or quad screen (AFP, estriol, β-hCG, and inhibin A) +/– amniocentesis. 18–20 weeks Ultrasound for full anatomic screen. 24–28 weeks One-hour glucose challenge test for gestational diabetes screen.
# Chunk 483
T AB LE 2.1 1 -3.  FDA Risk Classifcation of Drugs for Use During Pregnancy

Category A Adequate and well-controlled studies in women fail to demonstrate a risk to the fetus in the frst trimester (and there is no risk in later trimesters). The possibility of fetal harm seems remote. Vitamin B6, vitamin E, folic acid (within the recommended daily allowances). Category B Either animal reproduction studies have not demonstrated risk to the fetus but no adequate and well-controlled studies in pregnant women have been reported, or animal reproduction studies have shown an adverse effect that was not confrmed in controlled studies in women in the frst trimester (and there is no evidence of risk in later trimesters). Ampicillin, acetaminophen, bupropion. Category C Either studies in animals have revealed adverse effects on the fetus but no controlled studies in women have been reported, or studies in women and animals are not available. Drugs should be given only if the potential benef t justifes the potential risk to the fetus. Diphenhydramine, rifampin, zidovudine (AZT). Category D Positive evidence of human fetal risk exists, but the benefts from use in pregnant women may be acceptable despite the risk. Alcohol, phenytoin, tetracycline. Category X Studies in animals or humans have demonstrated fetal abnormalities, or evidence exists of fetal risk based on human experience, or both, and the risk in pregnant women clearly outweighs any possible benef t. Isotretinoin, thalidomide, warfarin.
# Chunk 484
T AB LE 2.1 1 -4. Common Teratogenic Agents and Their Associated Defects

ACEIs Fetal renal tubular dysplasia and neonatal renal failure, oligohydramnios, intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR), lack of cranial ossif cation. Alcohol Fetal alcohol syndrome (growth restriction before and after birth, mental retardation, midfacial hypoplasia, renal and cardiac defects). Consumption of > 6 drinks per day is associated with a 40% risk of fetal alcohol syndrome. Androgens Virilization of females; advanced genital development in males. Carbamazepine Neural tube defects, fngernail hypoplasia, microcephaly, developmental delay, IUGR. Cocaine Bowel atresias; congenital malformations of the heart, limbs, face, and GU tract; microcephaly; IUGR; cerebral infarctions. Diethylstilbestrol (DES) Clear cell adenocarcinoma of the vagina or cervix, vaginal adenosis, abnormalities of the cervix and uterus or testes, possible infertility. Lead ↑ spontaneous abortion (SAB) rate; stillbirths. Lithium Congenital heart disease (Ebstein’s anomaly). Methotrexate ↑ SAB rate. Organic mercury Cerebral atrophy, microcephaly, mental retardation, spasticity, seizures, blindness. Phenytoin IUGR, mental retardation, microcephaly, dysmorphic craniofacial features, cardiac defects, f ngernail hypoplasia. Radiation Microcephaly, mental retardation. Medical diagnostic radiation delivering < 0.05 Gy to the fetus has no teratogenic risk. Streptomycin and kanamycin Hearing loss; CN VIII damage. Tetracycline Permanent yellow-brown discoloration of deciduous teeth; hypoplasia of tooth enamel. Thalidomide Bilateral limb defciencies, anotia and microtia, cardiac and GI anomalies. Trimethadione and paramethadione Cleft lip or cleft palate, cardiac defects, microcephaly, mental retardation. Valproic acid Neural tube defects (spina bifda); minor craniofacial defects. Vitamin A and derivatives ↑ SAB rate, microtia, thymic agenesis, cardiovascular defects, craniofacial dysmorphism, microphthalmia, cleft lip or cleft palate, mental retardation. Warfarin (wages war on the fetus) Nasal hypoplasia and stippled bone epiphyses, developmental delay, IUGR, ophthalmologic abnormalities.
# Chunk 485
T AB LE 2.1 1 -5. Diagnosis and Treatment of Common Congenital Infections

Toxoplasmosis Serologic testing Pyrimethamine + sulfadiazine Avoid exposure to cat feces during pregnancy. Spiramycin prophylaxis for the third trimester. Rubella Serologic testing Immunize before pregnancy; vaccinate the mother after delivery if serologic titers remain . CMV Urine culture, PCR of amniotic f uid Postpartum ganciclovir HSV Serologic testing Acyclovir Perform a C-section if lesions are present at delivery. ELISA, Western blot AZT or nevirapine in pregnant women with HIV; perform elective C-section if viral load is > 1000; treat infants with prophylactic AZT; avoid breastfeeding. Dark-f eld microscopy, VDRL/RPR, FTA-ABS Penicillin Penicillin in pregnant women who test . HIV Syphilis thrive, bacterial infections with common organisms, and an ↑ incidence of upper and lower respiratory diseases may appear early or may be delayed for months to years. HIV-mothers should be counseled not to breastfeed their infants.
# Chunk 486
Chromosomal abnormalities: A factor in approximately 50% of SABs in the frst trimester, 20–30% in second-trimester losses, and 5–10% in third-trimester losses.
# Chunk 487
T AB LE 2.1 1 -6. Types of Spontaneous Abortion

Complete POC is expelled. Pain ceases, but spotting may persist. Closed os. Ultrasound shows an empty uterus. POC should be sent to pathology to conf rm fetal tissue. None. Incomplete Some POC is expelled. Bleeding/mild cramping. Visible tissue on exam. Open os. Ultrasound shows retained fetal tissue. Manual uterine aspiration (MUA) or D&C. Threatened No POC is expelled. Uterine bleeding +/– abdominal pain. Closed os + intact membranes + fetal cardiac motion on ultrasound. Pelvic rest for 24–48 hours and follow-up ultrasound to assess the viability of conceptus. Inevitable No POC is expelled. Uterine bleeding and cramps. Open os +/− ROM. MUA, D&C, misoprostol, or expectant management. Missed No POC is expelled. No fetal cardiac motion. No uterine bleeding. Brownish vaginal discharge. Closed os. No fetal cardiac activity; retained fetal tissue on ultrasound. MUA, D&C, or misoprostol. Septic Endometritis leading to septicemia. Maternal mortality is 10–15%. Hypotension, hypothermia, ↑ WBC count. MUA, D&C, and IV antibiotics. Intrauterine fetal demise Absence of fetal cardiac activity. Uterus small for GA; no fetal heart tones or movement on ultrasound. Induce labor; evacuate the uterus (D&E) to prevent DIC at GA > 16 weeks. Recurrenta If early in pregnancy, often due to chromosomal abnormalities. If later in pregnancy, often due to hypercoagulable states (e.g., SLE, factor V Leiden, protein S def ciency). Incompetent cervix should be suspected with a history of painless dilation of the cervix and delivery of a normal fetus between 18 and 32 weeks. Karyotyping of both parents. Hypercoagulability workup of mother. Evaluate for uterine abnormalities. Surgical cerclage procedures to suture the cervix closed until labor or ROM occurs with subsequent removal prior to delivery. Restriction of activities. a Defned as two or more consecutive SABs or a total of three SABs in one year.
# Chunk 488
Patients without complications: Review FHR tracings every 30 minutes in the frst stage of labor and every 15 minutes in the second stage of labor.
# Chunk 489
Modified biophysical profile (mBPP): Combines the NST with the amniotic fuid index (AFI, or the sum of the measurements of the deepest cord-free amniotic fuid measured in each of the abdominal quadrants). The test is considered normal with a reactive NST and an AFI > 5 cm.
# Chunk 490
Maternal use of a once-daily dose of low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) within 12 hours

Skin infection over the site of needle placement ■↑ ICP caused by a mass lesion
# Chunk 491
Mild preeclampsia Usually asymptomatic. BP ≥ 140/90 on two occasions > 6 hours apart. Proteinuria (> 300 mg/24 hrs or 1–2 urine dipsticks). Edema. Severe preeclampsia BP > 160/110 on two occasions > 6 hours apart. Renal: Proteinuria (> 5 g/24 hrs or 3–4 urine dipsticks) or oliguria (< 500 mL/24 hrs). Cerebral changes: Headache, somnolence. Visual changes: Blurred vision, scotomata. Hyperactive ref exes/clonus. RUQ pain. Hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, thrombocytopenia (HELLP syndrome). Eclampsia The most common signs preceding an eclamptic attack are headache, visual changes, and RUQ/epigastric pain. Seizures are severe if not controlled with anticonvulsant therapy.
# Chunk 492
Premature (before delivery) separation of normally implanted placenta. Abnormal placental implantation: ■ Total: Placenta covers the cervical os. ■ Marginal: Placenta extends to the margin of the os. ■ Low-lying: Placenta is in close proximity to the os. 1 in 100. 1 in 200. Risk factors Hypertension, abdominal/pelvic trauma, tobacco or cocaine use, previous abruption, rapid decompression of an overdistended uterus, excessive stimulation. Prior C-sections, grand multiparity, advanced maternal age, multiple gestation, prior placenta previa. Symptoms Painful, dark vaginal bleeding that does not spontaneously cease. Abdominal pain, uterine hypertonicity. Fetal distress. Painless, bright red bleeding that often ceases in 1–2 hours with or without uterine contractions. Usually no fetal distress. Diagnosis Primarily clinical. Transabdominal/transvaginal ultrasound sensitivity is only 50%; look for retroplacental clot; most useful for ruling out previa. Transabdominal/transvaginal ultrasound sensitivity is > 95%; look for an abnormally positioned placenta. Pathophysiology Incidence
# Chunk 493
Labs show markedly ↑ serum β-hCG (usually > 100,000 mIU/mL), and pelvic ultrasound reveals a “snowstorm” appearance with no gestational sac or fetus present (see Figure 2.11-9).
# Chunk 494
> 34–36 weeks’ gestation: Labor induction may be considered.

< 32 weeks’ gestation: Expectant management with bed rest and pelvic rest.
# Chunk 495
T AB LE 2.1 2-1.  Contraceptive Methods

Most effective: > 99% (1 in 100 women will become pregnant using these methods) Implanon (“the implant”): Progestin-only implant Lasts up to three years. Immediate fertility with removal. Safe with breastfeeding. Associated with weight gain, depression, irregular bleeding (no period; spotting; heavier, more frequent periods). Intrauterine device with progestin (Mirena): Inf ammation from foreign body; cervical thickening and endometrial decidualization with progesterone Effective for up to f ve years. Lighter periods; less cramping. Immediate fertility with removal. Safe with breastfeeding. Spotting (up to six months). Associated with acne. Risk of uterine puncture (1/1000). Intrauterine device— ParaGard (Copper T): Infammation from foreign body; copper exerts a spermicidal effect Effective for up to 10 years. Immediate fertility with removal. Safe with breastfeeding. ↑ cramping and bleeding (5–10%). Risk of uterine puncture (1/1000). Surgical sterilization (vasectomy, tubal ligation) Permanently effective. Safe with breastfeeding. Tubal ligation: Irreversible; ↑ ectopic pregnancy. Vasectomy: Most failures are due to not waiting for two semen samples.  Very effective: 90–99% (1–10 in 100 women will become pregnant using these methods) Depo-Provera (medroxy-progesterone): IM injection every three months Lighter or no periods. Each shot works for three months. Safe with breastfeeding. Associated with irregular bleeding and weight gain. Decreases in bone mineral density (reversible). Delayed fertility after discontinuation (one shot can last 10 months). Ortho Evra (“the patch”): Combined weekly estrogen and progestin dermal patch Can make periods more regular. Not administered daily. Risk of thromboembolism (especially for smokers and those > 35 years of age). NuvaRing (“the ring”): Combined low-dose progestin and an estrogen vaginal ring Can make periods more regular. Can improve acne. Used continuously for three weeks; then one week without the ring. Safe to use continuously to skip periods. May ↑ vaginal discharge. Spotting occurs in the frst 1–2 months.
# Chunk 496
T AB LE 2.1 2-1.  Contraceptive Methods (continued)

Oral contraceptive pills (combination estrogen and progestin): Inhibit FSH/LH, suppressing ovulation; thicken cervical mucus; decidualize endometrium ↓ risk of ovarian and endometrial cancers.a Predictable, lighter, less painful menses. Often improve acne. Immediate fertility upon cessation. Require daily compliance. Breakthrough bleeding (10–30%). Risk of thromboembolism (especially for smokers and those > 35 years of age). Progestin-only “minipills”: Thicken cervical mucus Safe with breastfeeding. Requires strict compliance (taking pill at the same time each day). Moderately effective: 75–90% (up to 10–25 women in 100 will become pregnant using these methods) Male condoms: A latex sheath covers the penis The only method that effectively protects against pregnancy and STDs, including HIV. Possible allergy to latex or spermicides. Diaphragm with spermicide Some protection against STDs. Must be ftted by provider. Female condom Some protection against STDs. Can be clumsy and diff cult. Fertility awareness methods No side effects. Often used by women who have a cultural, religious, or personal preference for “natural” contraception. Requires partner’s participation. No STD/HIV protection. Less effective: 68–74% (26–32 women in 100 will become pregnant using these methods) Withdrawal No side effects. No STD/HIV protection. Spermicide Frequent use may protect against HIV. May be used as a 2° method. Not recommended as a 1° method. a Other combined hormonal methods (e.g., patch, ring) may also protect against endometrial, breast, and ovarian cancer; however, data are still lacking given their relatively recent introduction.
# Chunk 497
Saline prep for sperm.

Gonorrhea and chlamydia smear/culture (including rectal if appropriate).

T AB LE 2.1 2-2.  Emergency Contraceptive Methods “Morning-After Pill”—used within 120 hours of unprotected sex Combined estrogen/progestin (75% effective) Progestin only (80% effective) Available over the counter. Does not disrupt embryo postimplantation. Can be used as bridge contraception. Safe for all women. Same as above. Fewer nausea/vomiting side effects than combined EC. Nausea, vomiting, fatigue, headache, dizziness, breast tenderness. No protection against STDs. Same as above. Copper T IUD—used within 7 days of unprotected sex (99% effective) Can be used as EC and continued for up to 10 years of contraception. High initial cost of insertion. Must be inserted by provider. No protection against STDs.
# Chunk 498
Serologic testing for HIV, syphilis, HSV, HBV, and CMV.

Serum pregnancy test.

Blood alcohol level; urine toxicology screen.
# Chunk 499
Look for pathology. Patients may have a palpable uterine mass, cervical motion tenderness, adnexal tenderness, a vaginal or cervical discharge, or visible vaginal pathology (mucosal tears, masses, prolapse). However, normal abdominal and pelvic exams do not rule out pathology.
# Chunk 500
If the endometrium is ≥ 4 mm in a postmenopausal woman, obtain an endometrial biopsy. An endometrial biopsy should also be obtained if the patient is > 35 years of age, obese (BMI > 35), and diabetic.
# Chunk 501
PCOS Irregular menses, slow-onset hirsutism, obesity, infertility, hypertension, a family history of PCOS or DM. Fasting glucose, insulin/lipid prof le, BP, ultrasound for ovarian cysts. 21-hydroxylase def ciency—nonclassic (late-onset) CAH Severe hirsutism or virilization, a strong family history of CAH, short stature, signs of defeminization. More common among Ashkenazi Jews. 17-hydroxyprogesterone (17-HP) levels before and after ACTH stimulation test > 10 ng/dL; CYP21 genotype. 21-hydroxylase def ciency—classic (congenital) CAH Same as above but with congenital virilization. 17-HP levels > 30 ng/dL. Hypothyroidism Fatigue, weight gain, amenorrhea. TSH. Hyperprolactinemia Amenorrhea, galactorrhea, infertility. Prolactin. Androgen-secreting neoplasm Pelvic mass, rapid-onset hirsutism or virilization, > 30 with onset of symptoms. Pelvic ultrasound or abdominal/pelvic CT. Cushing’s syndrome Hypertension, buffalo hump, purple striae, truncal obesity. Elevated BP plus dexamethasone suppression test.
# Chunk 502
Infertility14% of reproductive aged women 5 million couples in the U.S. Female causes 58% Male causes 25% Unexplained 17% Amenorrhea/ ovulatory dysfunction 46% Hypothalamic/ pituitary causes 51% Polycystic ovary syndrome 30% Premature ovarian failure 12% Tubal defect 38% Primary hypogonadism ( FSH) 30–40% Secondary hypogonadism ( FSH, LH) 2% Disordered sperm transport 10–20% Unknown 40–50% Endometriosis 9% Other 7% Uterine or outflow tract disorders 7%
# Chunk 503
TABLE 2.12-6.  Infertility Workup

Male causes Testicular injury or infection Medications (corticosteroids, cimetidine, spironolactone) Thyroid or liver disease Signs of hypogonadism Varicocele TSH Prolactin Karyotype (to rule out Klinefelter’s syndrome) Semen analysis Treatment of hormonal def ciency Intrauterine insemination (IUI) Donor insemination In vitro fertilization (IVF) Intracytoplasmic sperm injection Ovulatory factors Age (incidence ↑ with age) Symptoms of hyper-/ hypothyroidism Galactorrhea Menstrual cycle abnormalities Basal body temperature Ovulation predictor Midluteal progesterone Early follicular FSH +/– estradiol level (ovarian reserve) TSH, prolactin, androgens Ovarian sonography (antral follicle count) Endometrial biopsy (luteal phase defect) Treatment depends on the etiology (e.g., levothyroxine, dopamine) Induction of ovulation with clomiphene, gonadotropins, and pulsatile GnRH IUI IVF Tubal/ pelvic factors History of PID, appendicitis, endometriosis, pelvic adhesions, tubal surgery Hysterosalpingogram, endometrial biopsy Laparoscopic resection or ablation of endometriomas or f broids IVF Cervical factors Abnormal Pap smears, postcoital bleeding, cryotherapy, conization, or DES exposure in utero Pap smear Physical exam Antisperm antibodies IUI with washed sperm IVF
# Chunk 504
TABLE 2.12-7.  Causes of Vaginitis 15–50% (most common). 5–50%. 15–30%. Refects a shift in vaginal f ora. Protozoal f agellates (an STD). Usually Candida albicans. Risk factors Pregnancy, > 1 sexual partner, female sexual partner, frequent douching. An STD. Unprotected sex with multiple partners. DM, broad-spectrum antibiotic use, pregnancy, corticosteroids, HIV, OCP use, IUD use, young age at f rst intercourse, ↑ frequency of intercourse. History Odor, ↑ discharge. ↑ discharge, odor, pruritus, dysuria. Pruritus, dysuria, burning, ↑ discharge. Exam Mild vulvar irritation. “Strawberry petechiae” in the upper vagina/cervix (rare). Erythematous, excoriated vulva/ vagina. Discharge Homogenous, grayish-white, f shy/stale odor. Profuse, malodorous, yellow-green, frothy. Thick, white, curdy texture without odor. Wet mounta “Clue cells” (epithelial cells coated with bacteria; see Figure 2.12-6); shift in vaginal f ora (↑ cocci, ↓ lactobacilli). Motile trichomonads (fagellated organisms that are slightly larger than WBCs). — KOH prep whiff test (fshy smell). — Hyphae (see Figure 2.12–6). Treatment PO or vaginal metronidazole or clindamycin. Single-dose PO metronidazole or tinidazole. Treat partners; test for other STDs. Topical azole or PO f uconazole. Complications Chorioamnionitis/endometritis, infection, preterm delivery, miscarriage, PID. Same as for bacterial vaginosis. Oral azoles should be avoided in pregnancy. a If there are many WBCs and no organism on saline smear, suspect Chlamydia. Incidence Etiology
# Chunk 505
are also seen.

Diagnosed by the presence of acute lower abdominal or pelvic pain plus one of the following:
# Chunk 506
The most common benign neoplasm of the female genital tract. The tumor is discrete, round, frm, and often multiple and is composed of smooth muscle and connective tissue. Tumors are estrogen and progesterone sensitive, so they often ↑ in size during pregnancy and ↓ after menopause. Malignant transformation to leiomyosarcoma is rare (0.1–0.5%). Prevalence is 25% among Caucasian women and 50% among African-American women.
# Chunk 507
TYPE I: ENDOMETRIOID TYPE II: SEROUS

TABLE 2.12-8. Types of Endometrial Cancer

Epidemiology 75% of endometrial cancers. 25% of endometrial cancers. Etiology Unopposed estrogen stimulation (e.g., tamoxifen use, exogenous estrogen-only therapy). Unrelated to estrogen; the p53 mutation is present in 90% of cases. Precursor lesion Hyperplasia and atypical hyperplasia. None. Mean age at diagnosis 55 years. 67 years. Prognosis Favorable. Poor.
# Chunk 508
≥ 35 years of age, endometrial cancer factors, or abnormal bleeding: Add an endometrial biopsy.

Atypical squamous cells of undetermined signif cance (ASC-US): ≤ 21 years of age: Repeat Pap smear at 12 months. If Pap smear is or reveals ASC-US or LSIL, repeat at 12 months.
# Chunk 509
CIN II and III:

Untreated CIN II will regress in 43% of patients, progress in 22%, and persist in 35%. Untreated CIN III will regress in 32% of patients, progress in 14%, and persist in 56%.
# Chunk 510
If margins are unknown, obtain a Pap smear at 6 months and HPV DNA testing at 12 months.

■ Invasive disease: Treatment based on biopsy results for invasive carcinoma is as follows (for staging, see Figure 2.12-8):
# Chunk 511
Stage IB-IIA: 80–90%.

Stage IIB: 65%.

Stage III: 40%.

Stage IV: < 20%.

Almost two-thirds of patients with untreated carcinoma of the cervix die of uremia when ureteral obstruction is bilateral.
# Chunk 512
Table 2.12-10 differentiates the benign and malignant characteristics of pelvic masses.

Tumor markers (see Table 2.12-11): ↑ CA-125 is associated with epithelial cell cancer (90% of ovarian cancers) but is used only as a marker for progression and recurrence.
# Chunk 513
OCP use ↓ risk.

Risk factors for pelvic organ prolapse include vaginal birth (particularly with use of forceps), genetic predisposition, advancing age, prior pelvic surgery, connective tissue disorders, and ↑ intra-abdominal pressure associated with obesity or straining with chronic constipation.
# Chunk 514
TABLE 2.12-12.  Types of Incontinence

Total Uncontrolled loss at all times and in all positions. Loss of sphincteric eff ciency (previous surgery, nerve damage, cancer inf ltration). Abnormal connection between the urinary tract and the skin (f stula). Surgery. Stress After ↑ intra-abdominal pressure (coughing, sneezing, lifting). Urethral sphincteric insuff ciency due to laxity of pelvic f oor musculature; common in multiparous women or after pelvic surgery. Kegel exercises and pessary. Vaginal vault suspension surgery. Strong, unexpected urge to void that is unrelated to position or activity. Detrusor hyperrefexia or sphincter dysfunction due to inf ammatory conditions or neurogenic disorders of the bladder. Anticholinergic medications or TCAs; behavioral training (biofeedback). Chronic urinary retention. Chronically distended bladder with ↑ intravesical pressure that just exceeds the outlet resistance, allowing a small amount of urine to dribble out. Placement of urethral catheter in acute settings. Treat underlying diseases. Timed voiding. a Etiologies include inhibited contractions, local irritation (cystitis, stone, tumor), and CNS causes. b Etiologies include physical agents (tumor, stricture), neurologic factors (lesions), and medications.
# Chunk 515
Cancer localized to the breast has a 75–90% cure rate. With spread to the axilla, the fve-year survival is 40–50%.
# Chunk 516
Table 2.13-1 highlights major developmental milestones. Commonly tested milestones appear in bold.

T AB LE 2.1 3-1.  Developmental Milestones 2 months Lifts head/chest when prone. Tracks past midline. Alerts to sound; coos. Recognizes parent; social smile. 4–5 months Rolls front to back, back to front (5 months). Grasps rattle. Orients to voice; begins to make consonant sounds; razzes. Enjoys looking around; laughs. 6 months Sits unassisted. Transfers objects; raking grasp. Babbles. Stranger anxiety. 9–10 months Crawls; pulls to stand. Uses three-finger (immature) pincer grasp. Says “mama/dada” (nonspecif c). Waves bye-bye; plays pat-a-cake. 12 months Cruises (11 months); walks alone. Uses two-finger (mature) pincer grasp. Says “mama/dada” (specif c). Imitates actions; separation anxiety. 15 months Walks backward. Uses cup. Uses 4–6 words. Temper tantrums. 18 months Runs; kicks a ball. Builds tower of 2–4 cubes. Names common objects. May start toilet training. 2 years Walks up/down steps with help; jumps. Builds tower of six cubes. Uses two-word phrases. Follows two-step commands; removes clothes. 3 years Rides tricycle; climbs stairs with alternating feet (3–4 years). Copies a circle; uses utensils. Uses three-word sentences. Brushes teeth with help; washes/dries hands. Hops. Copies a square. Knows colors and some numbers. Cooperative play; plays board games. Skips; walks backward for long distances. Ties shoelaces; knows left and right; prints letters. Uses f ve-word sentences. Domestic role playing; plays dress-up. 4 years 5 years a For premature infants < 2 years of age, chronological age must be adjusted for gestational age. For example, an infant born at seven months’ gestation (two months early) would be expected to perform at the four-month level at the chronological age of six months.
# Chunk 517
Fifty percent of patients present with FTT or chronic sinopulmonary disease.

Characterized by recurrent pulmonary infections (especially with Pseudomonas and S. aureus) with subsequent cyanosis, digital clubbing, cough, dyspnea, bronchiectasis, hemoptysis, chronic sinusitis, rhonchi, rales, hyperresonance to percussion, and nasal polyposis.
# Chunk 518
Correct any volume or electrolyte abnormalities and check CBC (for leukocytosis).

Abdominal plain films are often normal early in the disease, but later they may show small bowel obstruction, perforation, or a soft tissue mass. Ultrasound may show a “target sign.”
# Chunk 519
Plain abdominal radiographs may show dilated bowel loops, pneumatosis intestinalis (intramural air bubbles representing gas produced by bacteria within the bowel wall), portal venous gas, or abdominal free air. Serial abdominal plain films should be taken every six hours.
# Chunk 520
T AB LE 2.1 3-4.  Pediatric Immunodeficiencies

B cell X-linked agamma-globulinemia (Bruton’s) Common variable immunodef ciency IgA def ciency A B-cell def ciency in boys only. Immunoglobulin level drops in the 20s and 30s; usually a combined Band T-cell defect. Mild; the most common immunodef ciency. Life threatening; encapsulated Pseudomonas, Streptococcus pneumoniae, and Haemophilus infections after six months (passive immunity through maternal antibodies wanes). ↑ pyogenic upper and lower respiratory infections; ↑ risk of lymphoma and autoimmune disease. Usually asymptomatic; patients may develop recurrent respiratory or GI infections. Anaphylactic transfusion reaction due to anti-IgA antibodies is a common presentation. Quantitative immunoglobulin levels. If low, conf rm diagnosis with Band T-cell subsets (absent B cells; T cells are often high); absent tonsils and other lymphoid tissue may be a clue. Treat with prophylactic antibiotics and IVIG. Quantitative immunoglobulin levels; confrm with Band T-cell subsets; treat with IVIG. Quantitative IgA levels; treat infections. Do not give immunoglobulins (can lead to the production of anti-IgA antibodies). T cell Thymic aplasia (DiGeorge syndrome) See mnemonic. Presents with tetany (2° to hypocalcemia) in the f rst days of life. Variable risk of infection. ↑↑↑ infections with fungi and Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia (formerly P. carinii). Absolute lymphocyte count; mitogen stimulation response; delayed hypersensitivity skin testing. Treat with bone marrow transplantation and IVIG for antibody def ciency; PCP prophylaxis. Thymus transplantation is an alternative. Combined Ataxia-telangiectasia Severe combined immunodef ciency (SCID) Oculocutaneous telangiectasias and progressive cerebellar ataxia. Caused by a DNA repair defect. Severe lack of B and T cells. ↑ incidence of non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, leukemia, and gastric carcinoma. Severe, frequent bacterial infections; chronic candidiasis; and opportunistic organisms. No specifc treatment; may require IVIG depending on the severity of the Ig def ciency. Treat with bone marrow transplant or stem cell transplant and IVIG for antibody def ciency. Needs PCP prophylaxis.
# Chunk 521
T AB LE 2.1 3-4.  Pediatric Immunodeficiencies (continued)

Combined (continued) Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome An X-linked disorder with less severe Band T-cell dysfunction. Patients have eczema, ↑ IgE/IgA, ↓ IgM, and thrombocytopenia. The classic presentation involves bleeding, eczema, and recurrent otitis media. ↑↑ risk of atopic disorders, lymphoma/leukemia, and infection from S. pneumoniae, S. aureus, and H. inﬂ uenzae type b. Phagocytic Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) Leukocyte adhesion def ciency Chédiak-Higashi syndrome An X-linked (2/3) or autosomal-recessive (1/3) disease with def cient superoxide production by PMNs and macrophages. Anemia, lymphadenopathy, and hypergamma-globulinemia may be present. A defect in the chemotaxis of leukocytes. An autosomal-recessive disorder that leads to Chronic skin, pulmonary, GI, and urinary tract infections; osteomyelitis and hepatitis. Infecting organisms are catalase . ↑ risk of infection with Aspergillus. May have granulomas of the skin and GI/GU tracts. Recurrent skin, mucosal, and pulmonary infections. May present as omphalitis in the newborn period with delayed separation of the umbilical cord. ↑↑ incidence of overwhelming infections with S. pyogenes, a defect in neutrophil S. aureus, and Pseudomonas chemotaxis/microtubule species. polymerization.
# Chunk 522
Meningococcal vaccine and appropriate antibiotics.

B-cell def ciencies: Most common (50%). Typically present after six months of age with recurrent sinopulmonary, GI, and urinary tract infections with encapsulated organisms (H. inﬂ uenzae, S. pneumoniae, Neisseria meningitidis). Treated with IVIF (except for IgA deficiencies).
# Chunk 523
An acute inﬂammatory illness of the small airways that primarily affects infants and children < 2 years of age, often in the fall or winter months. RSV is the most common cause; others include parainﬂ uenza, inﬂ uenza, and metapneumovirus. Progression to respiratory failure is a potentially fatal complication. For severe RSV, risk factors include age < 6 months, male gender, prematurity, heart or lung disease, and immunodeficiency.
# Chunk 524
RSV prophylaxis with injectable polyor monoclonal antibodies (RespiGam or Synagis) is recommended in winter for high-risk patients ≤ 2 years of age (e.g., those with a history of prematurity, chronic lung disease, or congenital heart disease).
# Chunk 525
Prodromal URI symptoms are typically followed by low-grade fever, mild dyspnea, inspiratory stridor that worsens with agitation, a hoarse voice, and a characteristic barking cough (usually at night).
# Chunk 526
T AB LE 2.1 3-5. Characteristics of Croup, Epiglottitis, and Tracheitis

Age group affected 3 months to 3 years 3–7 years 3 months to 2 years Incidence in children presenting with stridor 88% 8% 2% Pathogen Parainf uenza virus H. inﬂ uenzae Often S. aureus Onset Prodrome (1–7 days) Rapid (4–12 hours) Prodrome (3 days) leading to acute decompensation (10 hours) Fever severity Low grade High grade Intermediate grade Associated symptoms Barking cough, hoarseness Muffed voice, drooling Variable respiratory distress Position preference None Seated, neck extended None Response to racemic epinephrine Stridor improves None None CXR fndings “Steeple sign” on AP flm “Thumbprint sign”’ on lateral f lm Subglottic narrowing
# Chunk 527
T AB LE 2.1 3-6. Comparison of Retropharyngeal Abscess and Peritonsillar Abscess

Age group affected Six months to six years. Usually > 10 years of age. History/PE Muffed “hot potato” voice; trismus; drooling; cervical lymphadenopathy. Usually unilateral; may see mass in the posterior pharyngeal wall on visual inspection. Muffed “hot potato” voice; trismus; drooling; displacement of the affected tonsil medially and laterally. Pathogen Group A streptococcus (most common); S. aureus; Bacteroides. Group A streptococcus (most common); S. aureus; S. pneumoniae; anaerobes. Preferred position Supine with the neck extended (sitting up or fexing the neck worsens symptoms). None. Diagnosis On lateral neck x-ray, the soft tissue plane should be ≤ 50% of the width of the corresponding vertebral body. Contrast CT of the neck helps differentiate abscess from cellulitis. Usually clinical. Treatment Aspiration or incision and drainage of abscess; antibiotics. Incision and drainage +/− tonsillectomy; antibiotics.
# Chunk 528
Labs show an elevated WBC count with lymphocytosis (often ≥ 70%).

Culture is the gold standard.

Hospitalize infants < 6 months of age.
# Chunk 529
Give erythromycin × 14 days to patients and close contacts (including day care contacts).

Patients should not return to school or day care until five days of antibiotics have been administered or until three weeks have elapsed if no therapy has been initiated.
# Chunk 530
Erythema infectiosum (f fth disease) Parvovirus B19 Prodrome: None; fever is often absent or low grade. Rash: “Slapped-cheek,” erythematous rash. An erythematous, pruritic, maculopapular rash starts on the arms and spreads to the trunk and legs. Worsens with fever and sun exposure. Arthritis, hemolytic anemia, encephalopathy. Congenital infection is associated with fetal hydrops and death. Aplastic crisis may be precipitated in children with ↑ RBC turnover (e.g., sickle cell anemia, hereditary spherocytosis) or in those with ↓ RBC production (e.g., severe iron def ciency anemia). Measles Paramyxovirus Prodrome: Low-grade fever with Cough, Coryza, and Conjunctivitis (the “3 C’s”); Koplik’s spots (small irregular red spots with central gray specks) appear on the buccal mucosa after 1–2 days. Rash: An erythematous maculopapular rash spreads from the head toward the feet. Common: Otitis media, pneumonia, laryngotracheitis. Rare: Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis.
# Chunk 531
Physical exam may reveal signs of hepatic or GI dysfunction (abdominal distention, delayed passage of meconium, light-colored stools, dark urine), infection, or hemoglobinopathies (cephalohematomas, bruising, pallor, petechiae, and hepatomegaly).
# Chunk 532
Tracheoesophageal f stula Tract between the trachea and esophagus. Associated with defects such as esophageal atresia and VACTERL (Vertebral, Anal, Cardiac, Tracheal, Esophageal, Renal, Limb) anomalies. Presentation: Polyhydramnios in utero, ↑ oral secretions, inability to feed, gagging, aspiration pneumonia, respiratory distress. Diagnosis: CXR showing an NG tube coiled in the esophagus identifes esophageal atresia. The presence of air in the GI tract is suggestive; confrm with bronchoscopy. Treatment: Surgical repair. Congenital diaphragmatic hernia GI tract segments protrude through the diaphragm into the thorax; 90% are posterior left (Bochdalek). Presentation: Respiratory distress (from pulmonary hypoplasia and pulmonary hypertension); sunken abdomen; bowel sounds over the left hemithorax. Diagnosis: Ultrasound in utero; confrmed by postnatal CXR. Treatment: High-frequency ventilation or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation to manage pulmonary hypertension; surgical repair. Gastroschisis Herniation of the intestine only through the abdominal wall next to the umbilicus (usually on the right) with no sac. Presentation: Polyhydramnios in utero; often premature; associated with GI stenoses or atresia. Treatment: A surgical emergency! Single-stage closure is possible in only 10% of cases. Omphalocele Herniation of abdominal viscera through the abdominal wall at the umbilicus into a sac covered by peritoneum and amniotic membrane. Presentation/diagnosis: Polyhydramnios in utero; often premature; associated with other GI and cardiac defects. Seen in Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome and trisomies. Treatment: C-section can prevent sac rupture; if the sac is intact, postpone surgical correction until the patient is fully resuscitated. Keep the sac covered/stable with petroleum and gauze. Intermittent NG suction to prevent abdominal distention. Duodenal atresia Complete or partial failure of the duodenal lumen to recanalize during gestational weeks 8–10. Presentation: Polyhydramnios in utero; bilious emesis within hours after frst feeding; associated with Down syndrome and other cardiac/GI anomalies (e.g., annular pancreas, malrotation, imperforate anus). Diagnosis: Abdominal radiographs show the “double-bubble” sign (air bubbles in the stomach and duodenum) proximal to the site of the atresia. Treatment: Surgical repair.
# Chunk 533
An L/S ratio < 2:1 indicates a need for maternal glucocorticoid administration.

Not present until 72 hours after birth. Present in the frst 24 hours of life. Bilirubin ↑ < 5 mg/dL/day. Bilirubin ↑ > 0.5 mg/dL/hour. Bilirubin peaks at < 14–15 mg/dL. Bilirubin ↑ to > 15 mg/dL. Direct bilirubin is < 10% of total. Direct bilirubin is > 10% of total. Resolves by one week in term infants and two weeks in preterm infants. Persists beyond one week in term infants and two weeks in preterm infants.
# Chunk 534
Usually occur in children between six months and five years of age who have no evidence of intracranial infection or other causes. Risk factors include a rapid ↑ in temperature and a history of febrile seizures in a close relative. Febrile seizures recur in 30% of patients.
# Chunk 535
chemotherapy regimen.

An embryonal tumor of neural crest origin. More than half of patients are < 2 years of age, and 70% of patients have distant metastases at presentation. Associated with neurofibromatosis, Hirschsprung’s disease, and the N-myc oncogene.
# Chunk 536
Patients may have anemia, FTT, and fever.

More than 50% of patients will have metastases at diagnosis. Signs include bone marrow suppression, proptosis, hepatomegaly, subcutaneous nodules, and opsoclonus/myoclonus.
# Chunk 537
Psychotherapy and support groups are useful.

Affect memory, orientation, judgment, and attention.

An impairment in cognitive functioning with global deficits. Level of consciousness is stable. Prevalence is highest among those > 85 years of age. The course is persistent and progressive. The most common causes are Alzheimer’s disease (50%) and multi-infarct dementia (25%). Other causes are outlined in the mnemonic DEMENTIAS.
# Chunk 538
Double depression: MDE in a patient with dysthymia. Has a poorer prognosis than MDE alone.

Pharmacotherapy: Effective in 50–70% of patients. Allow 2–6 weeks to take effect; treat for ≥ 6 months (see Table 2.14-5).
# Chunk 539
T AB LE 2.1 4-5. Indications and Side Effects of Common Antidepressants

SSRIs Fluoxetine, sertraline, paroxetine, citalopram, f uvoxamine Depression and anxiety. Sexual side effects, GI distress, agitation, insomnia, tremor, diarrhea. Serotonin syndrome (fever, myoclonus, mental status changes, cardiovascular collapse) can occur if SSRIs are used with MAOIs. Paroxetine can cause pulmonary hypertension in the fetus. Atypicals Bupropion, venlafaxine, mirtazapine, trazodone Depression, anxiety, and chronic pain. Bupropion: ↓ seizure threshold; minimal sexual side effects. Contraindicated in patients with eating disorders as well as in seizure patients. Venlafaxine: Diastolic hypertension. Mirtazapine: Weight gain, sedation. Trazodone: Highly sedating; priapism. Nortriptyline, desipramine, amitriptyline, imipramine Depression, anxiety disorder, chronic pain, migraine headaches, enuresis (imipramine). Lethal with overdose owing to cardiac conduction arrhythmias (e.g., long QRS). Monitor in the ICU for 3–4 days following an OD. Anticholinergic effects (dry mouth, constipation, urinary retention, sedation). Phenelzine, tranylcypromine, selegiline (patch form available) Depression, especially atypical. Hypertensive crisis if taken with high-tyramine foods (cheese, red wine). Sexual side effects, orthostatic hypotension, weight gain. TCAs MAOIs
# Chunk 540
Childhood disintegrative disorder: Severe developmental regression after > 2 years of normal development (e.g., language, motor skills, social skills, bladder/bowel control, play).
# Chunk 541
Check urine and blood toxicology screens, LFTs, and serum EtOH level.

The management of intoxication for selected drugs is described in Table 2.14-10.
# Chunk 542
T AB LE 2.1 4-1 0. Signs and Symptoms of Substance Abuse

Alcohol Disinhibition, emotional lability, slurred speech, ataxia, aggression, blackouts, hallucinations, memory impairment, impaired judgment, coma. Tremor, tachycardia, hypertension, malaise, nausea, seizures, DTs, agitation. Opioids Euphoria leading to apathy, CNS depression, constipation, pupillary constriction, and respiratory depression (life threatening in overdose). Naloxone/naltrexone will block opioid receptors and reverse effects (beware of antagonist clearing before opioids, particularly with long-acting opioids such as methadone). Dysphoria, insomnia, anorexia, myalgias, fever, lacrimation, diaphoresis, dilated pupils, rhinorrhea, piloerection, nausea, vomiting, stomach cramps, diarrhea, yawning. Opioid withdrawal is not life threatening, “hurts all over,” and does not cause seizures. Amphetamines Psychomotor agitation, impaired judgment, hypertension, pupillary dilation, tachycardia, fever, diaphoresis, anxiety, angina, euphoria, prolonged wakefulness/attention, arrhythmias, delusions, seizures, hallucinations. Haloperidol can be given for severe agitation and symptom-targeted medications (e.g., antiemetics, NSAIDs). Postuse “crash” with anxiety, lethargy, headache, stomach cramps, hunger, fatigue, depression/dysphoria, sleep disturbance, nightmares. Cocaine Psychomotor agitation, euphoria, impaired judgment, tachycardia, pupillary dilation, hypertension, paranoia, hallucinations, sudden death. ECG changes from ischemia are often seen (“cocaine chest pain”). Treat with haloperidol for severe agitation along with symptom-specifc medications (e.g., to control hypertension). Postuse “crash” with hypersomnolence, depression, malaise, severe craving, angina, suicidality, ↑ appetite, nightmares, “cocaine bugs.”
# Chunk 543
T AB LE 2.1 4-1 0. Signs and Symptoms of Substance Abuse (continued)

Phencyclidine hydrochloride (PCP) Assaultiveness, belligerence, psychosis, violence, impulsiveness, psychomotor agitation, fever, tachycardia, vertical/horizontal nystagmus, hypertension, impaired judgment, ataxia, seizures, delirium. Give benzodiazepines or haloperidol for severe symptoms; otherwise reassure. Acidifcation of urine or gastric lavage can help eliminate the drug. Recurrence of intoxication symptoms due to reabsorption in the GI tract; sudden onset of severe, random violence. LSD Marked anxiety or depression, delusions, visual hallucinations, fashbacks, pupillary dilation, impaired judgment, diaphoresis, tachycardia, hypertension, heightened senses (e.g., colors become more intense). Supportive counseling; traditional antipsychotics for psychotic symptoms; benzodiazepines for anxiety. Marijuana Euphoria, slowed sense of time, impaired judgment, social withdrawal, ↑ appetite, dry mouth, conjunctival injection, hallucinations, anxiety, paranoia, amotivational syndrome. Barbiturates Low safety margin; respiratory depression. Anxiety, seizures, delirium, life-threatening cardiovascular collapse. Benzodiazepines Interactions with alcohol, amnesia, ataxia, somnolence, mild respiratory depression. (Avoid using for insomnia in the elderly; can cause paradoxical agitation even in relatively low doses.) Rebound anxiety, seizures, tremor, insomnia, hypertension, tachycardia, death. Restlessness, insomnia, diuresis, muscle twitching, arrhythmias, tachycardia, fushed face, psychomotor agitation. Headache, lethargy, depression, weight gain, irritability, craving. Restlessness, insomnia, anxiety, arrhythmias. Irritability, headache, anxiety, weight gain, craving, bradycardia, diff culty concentrating, insomnia. Caffeine Nicotine
# Chunk 544
Central sleep apnea (CSA): A condition in which both airf ow and respiratory effort cease. CSA is linked to morning headaches, mood changes, and repeated awakenings during the night.
# Chunk 545
Suicide is the third leading cause of death (after homicide and accidents) among 15to 24-year-olds in the United States.
# Chunk 546
Presents with cough, episodic wheezing, dyspnea, and/or chest tightness. Symptoms often worsen at night or early in the morning.
# Chunk 547
Medications for Chronic Treatment of Asthma

Mild intermittent ≤ 2 days/week ≤ 2 nights/month ≥ 80% No daily medications. PRN short-acting bronchodilator. Mild persistent > 2/week but < 1/day > 2 nights/month ≥ 80% Daily low-dose inhaled corticosteroids. PRN short-acting bronchodilator. Moderate persistent Daily > 1 night/week 60–80% Lowto medium-dose inhaled corticosteroids + long-acting inhaled β2-agonists. Severe persistent Continual, frequent ≤ 60% High-dose inhaled corticosteroids + long-acting inhaled β2-agonists. Possible PO corticosteroids. PRN short-acting bronchodilator.
# Chunk 548
PFTs: Restrictive or obstructive pattern and ↓ diffusion capacity.

Other findings: ↑serum ACE levels (neither sensitive nor specif c), hypercalcemia, hypercalciuria, ↑ alkaline phosphatase (with liver involvement), lymphopenia, cranial nerve defects, arrhythmias.
# Chunk 549
Acute: Dyspnea, fever, malaise, shivering, and cough starting 4–6 hours after exposure.

Chronic: Patients present with progressive dyspnea; exam reveals f ne bilateral rales.
# Chunk 550
Farmer’s lung Spores of actinomycetes from moldy hay. Bird fancier’s lung Antigens from feathers, excreta, serum. Mushroom worker’s lung Spores of actinomycetes from compost. Malt worker’s lung Spores of Aspergillus clavatus in grain. Grain handler’s lung Grain weevil dust. Bagassosis Spores of actinomycetes from sugarcane. Air conditioner lung Spores of actinomycetes from air conditioners.
# Chunk 551
Presents with acute-onset (12–48 hours) tachypnea, dyspnea, and tachycardia +/− fever, cyanosis, labored breathing, diffuse high-pitched rales, and hypoxemia in the setting of one of the systemic infammatory causes or exposure. Additional fndings are as follows:
# Chunk 552
Presents with dyspnea on exertion, fatigue, lethargy, syncope with exertion, chest pain, and symptoms of right-sided CHF (edema, abdominal distention, JVD).
# Chunk 553
Dyspnea, tachycardia, and a normal CXR in a hospitalized and/or bedridden patient should raise suspicion of pulmonary embolism.
# Chunk 554
ECG: Not diagnostic; most commonly reveals sinus tachycardia. The classic triad of S1Q3T3—acute right heart strain with an S wave in lead I, a Q wave in lead III, and an inverted T wave in lead III—is uncommon.
# Chunk 555
Serum sodium > 145 mEq/L. Usually due to water loss rather than sodium gain.

Presents with thirst (due to hypertonicity) as well as with oliguria or polyuria (depending on the etiology).
# Chunk 556
Serum sodium < 135 mEq/L. Almost always due to ↑ ADH.

May be asymptomatic or may present with confusion, lethargy, muscle cramps, hyporeﬂexia, and nausea.
# Chunk 557
Can progress to seizures, coma, or brain stem herniation.

Hyponatremia can be categorized according to serum and urine osmolality as well as by volume status (i.e., by clinical exam). Osmolality is classified as follows:
# Chunk 558
Twenty-four-hour or spot urine potassium may distinguish renal from GI losses.

ECG may show T-wave fattening, U waves (an additional wave after the T wave), and ST-segment depression, leading to AV block and subsequent cardiac arrest.
# Chunk 559
Presents with abdominal muscle cramps, dyspnea, tetany, perioral and acral paresthesias, and convulsions.
# Chunk 560
Magnesium repletion.

Administer oral calcium supplements; give IV calcium for severe symptoms.

Serum magnesium < 1.5 mEq/L. Etiologies are as follows: ■↓intake: Malnutrition, malabsorption, short bowel syndrome, TPN.
# Chunk 561
Check serum electrolytes. Examine the urine for RBCs, WBCs, casts (see Table 2.16-4), and urine eosinophils.
# Chunk 562
Patients with ARF may have a normal urine volume.

An FeNa < 1% indicates that the kidneys are trying to conserve sodium, suggesting a prerenal etiology.
# Chunk 563
T AB LE 2.1 6-5. Mechanism of Action and Side Effects of Diuretics

Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors Acetazolamide Proximal convoluted tubule. Inhibit carbonic anhydrase, ↑ H+ reabsorption, block Na+/ H+ exchange. Hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis, sulfa allergy. Osmotic agents Mannitol, urea Entire tubule. ↑ tubular fuid osmolarity. Pulmonary edema due to CHF and anuria. Loop agents Furosemide, ethacrynic acid, bumetanide, torsemide Ascending loop of Henle. Inhibit Na+/K+/2Cl– transporter. Water loss, metabolic alkalosis, ↓ K+, ↓Ca2+, ototoxicity, sulfa allergy (except ethacrynic acid, hyperuricemia). Thiazide agents HCTZ, chlorothiazide Distal convoluted tubule. Inhibit Na+/Cl– transporter. Water loss, metabolic alkalosis, ↓Na+, ↓ K+, ↑ glucose, ↑Ca2+, ↑ uric acid, sulfa allergy, pancreatitis. K+-sparing agents Spironolactone, triamterene, amiloride Cortical collecting tubule. Aldosterone receptor antagonist (spironolactone); block sodium channel (triamterene, amiloride). Metabolic acidosis; ↑ K+; antiandrogenic effects, including gynecomastia (spironolactone).
# Chunk 564
Immune complex Postinfectious glomerulonephritis IgA nephropathy (Berger’s disease) Classically associated with recent group A β-hemolytic streptococcal infection, but can be seen with any infection (usually 2–6 weeks prior). The most common type; associated with upper respiratory or GI infections. Commonly seen in young males; may be seen in Henoch-Schlein purpura. Oliguria, edema, hypertension, teaor cola-colored urine. Episodic gross hematuria or persistent microscopic hematuria. Low serum C3 that normalizes 6–8 weeks after presentation; ↑ASO titer; lumpy-bumpy immunoﬂ uorescence. Normal C3. Supportive. Almost all children and most adults have a complete recovery. Glucocorticoids for select patients; ACEIs in patients with proteinuria. Some 20% of cases progress to end-stage renal disease (ESRD). Pauci-immune Wegener’s granulomatosis Granulomatous inf ammation of the respiratory tract and kidney with necrotizing vasculitis. Fever, weight loss, hematuria, hearing disturbances, respiratory and sinus symptoms. Cavitary pulmonary lesions bleed and lead to hemoptysis. Presence of c-ANCA (cell-mediated immune response). Renal biopsy shows segmental necrotizing glomerulonephritis with few immunoglobulin deposits on immunof uorescence. High-dose corticosteroids and cytotoxic agents. Patients tend to have frequent relapses. Anti-GBH disease Goodpasture’s syndrome Alport’s syndrome Rapidly progressing glomerulonephritis with pulmonary hemorrhage; peak incidence is in males in their mid-20s. Hereditary glomerulonephritis; presents in boys 5–20 years of age. Hemoptysis, dyspnea, possible respiratory failure. Asymptomatic hematuria associated with nerve deafness and eye disorders. Linear anti-GBM deposits on immunof uorescence; iron def ciency anemia; hemosiderin-f lled macrophages in sputum; pulmonary infltrates on CXR. GBM splitting on electron microscopy. Plasma exchange therapy; pulsed steroids. May progress to ESRD. Progresses to renal failure. Anti-GBM nephritis may recur after transplant.
# Chunk 565
Presents with generalized edema and foamy urine. In severe cases, dyspnea and ascites may develop.

Patients have ↑ susceptibility to infection as well as a predisposition to hypercoagulable states with an ↑ risk for venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism.
# Chunk 566
Calcium oxalate/ calcium phosphate 83% The most common causes are idiopathic hypercalciuria and 1° hyperparathyroidism. Alkaline urine. Radiopaque. Hydration, dietary sodium and protein restriction, thiazide diuretic. Avoid ↓calcium intake (can lead to hyperoxaluria and an ↑ risk of osteoporosis). Struvite (Mg-NH4 -PO4) or “triple phosphate” 9% Associated with urease-producing organisms (e.g., Proteus). Form staghorn calculi. Alkaline urine. Radiopaque. Hydration; treat UTI if present; surgical removal of staghorn stone. Uric acid 7% Associated with gout, xanthine oxidase defciency, and high purine turnover states (e.g., chemotherapy). Acidic urine (pH < 5.5). Radiolucent. Hydration; alkalinize urine with citrate, which is converted to HCO3 – in the liver; dietary purine restriction and allopurinol. Cystine 1% Due to a defect in renal transport of certain amino acids (COLA—cystine, ornithine, lysine, and arginine). Hexagonal crystals. Radiopaque. Hydration, dietary sodium restriction, alkalinization of urine, penicillamine.
# Chunk 567
May be asymptomatic, or may present with ﬂ ank/back pain, ↓ urine output, abdominal pain, and UTIs.

■ Ultrasound or CT scan to detect dilation of the renal calyces and/or ureter. ■↑ BUN and creatinine provide evidence of 2° renal failure.
# Chunk 568
A VCUG should be obtained in all boys presenting with their f rst UTI, girls < 3 years of age with their f rst UTI or < 5 years of age with febrile UTI, and older girls with pyelonephritis or recurrent UTIs.
# Chunk 569
Response rates from radiation or chemotherapy are only 15–30%. Newer tyrosine kinase inhibitors (sorafenib, sunitinib), which ↓ tumor angiogenesis and cell proliferation, have shown promising results and have recently been approved by the FDA for the treatment of renal cell carcinoma.
# Chunk 570
Testicular ultrasound.

CXR and abdominal/pelvic CT to evaluate for metastasis.

Tumor markers are useful for diagnosis and in monitoring treatment response.
# Chunk 571
Cx: Respiratory compromise is a complication due to underlying pulmonary contusion.

The spleen and liver are the most commonly injured organs following blunt abdominal trauma. Symptoms are consistent with signs of blood loss and include hypotension, tachycardia, and peritonitis. Suspect spleen or liver injury when lower rib fractures are present.
# Chunk 572
Consider embolization of bleeding vessels, emergent external pelvic fixation, or, in a hemodynamically stable patient, internal fixation. Give blood early. Hemorrhage results in death in 50% of patients.
# Chunk 573
Never explore a pelvic or retroperitoneal hematoma. Follow with serial hemoglobin and hematocrit.

Table 2.17-1 summarizes the basic management of cardiac arrhythmias in an acute setting.
# Chunk 574
Obtain a complete history, including the elements indicated in the mnemonic OPQRST.

Obtain a full gynecologic history for females (including last menstrual period, pregnancy, and any STD symptoms). If a female has abdominal pain with cervical motion tenderness, there should be a low threshold to treat for pelvic inﬂammatory disease (PID).
# Chunk 575
Inﬂ ammation leads to gradual onset (over 10–12 hours) of constant, illdefined pain.

Associated symptoms include the following: ■Anorexia, nausea, vomiting, changes in bowel habits, hematochezia, and melena suggest GI etiologies.
# Chunk 576
Obtain electrolytes, LFTs, amylase, lipase, urine or serum β-hCG, UA, and a CBC with differential.

Consider a CXR for suspected perforation or pulmonary pathology. AXR may be useful for obstruction, but CT is more sensitive and specific. CT is used to diagnose appendicitis, diverticulitis, abscess, renal stones, AAA, obstruction, and other pathology. Ultrasound is the best tool for diagnosing gallstones and gynecologic pathology. Bedside ultrasound (FAST and aortic views) can diagnose hemoperitoneum and AAA in unstable patients.
# Chunk 577
Hemodynamically unstable patients must have emergent surgical management.

In stable patients, expectant management may include NPO status, NG tube placement, IV ﬂuids, placement of a Foley catheter (to monitor urine output and ﬂuid status), and vital sign monitoring with serial abdominal exams and serial labs.
# Chunk 578
Use the “rule of 9’s” to estimate % BSA in adults:

Parkland formula: Fluids for the first 24 hours = 4 ×patient’s weight in kg × % BSA. Give 50% of ﬂ uids over the first eight hours and the remaining 50% over the following 16 hours.
# Chunk 579
Check an ABG and serum carboxyhemoglobin level (normal is < 5% in nonsmokers and < 10% in smokers).

Check an ECG in the elderly and in patients with a history of cardiac disease.
# Chunk 580
TABLE 2.17-4.  Specifc Antidotes (continued)

Black widow bite Calcium gluconate, methocarbamol. Carbon monoxide 100% O2, hyperbaric O2. Copper, arsenic, lead, gold Penicillamine. Cyanide Amyl nitrate, sodium nitrate, sodium thiosulfate. Digitalis Normalize K+ but avoid giving Ca++, Mg++, or lidocaine (for torsades), antidigitalis Fab. Heparin Protamine sulfate. INH Pyridoxine. Iron salts Deferoxamine. Lead Succimer, CaEDTA, dimercaprol. Methanol, ethylene glycol (antifreeze) EtOH, fomepizole, dialysis, calcium gluconate for ethylene glycol. Methemoglobin Methylene blue. Opioids Naloxone. Salicylates Urine alkalinization, dialysis, activated charcoal. TCAs Sodium bicarbonate for QRS prolongation; diazepam or lorazepam for seizures; cardiac monitor for arrhythmias. Theophylline Activated charcoal. Consider repeat doses. tPA, streptokinase Aminocaproic acid. Warfarin Vitamin K, FFP.
# Chunk 581
T AB LE 2.1 7 -6. Symptoms and Treatment of Drug Withdrawal

Alcohol Tremor (6–12 hours). Tachycardia, hypertension, agitation, seizures (within 48 hours). Hallucinations, DTs—severe autonomic instability leading to tachycardia, hypertension, delirium, and possibly death (within 2–7 days). Mortality is 15–20%. Benzodiazepines (can require massive doses); haloperidol for hallucinations; thiamine, folate, and multivitamin replacement (do not affect withdrawal, but most alcoholics are def cient). Barbiturates Anxiety, seizures, delirium, tremor; cardiac and respiratory depression. Benzodiazepines. Benzodiazepines Rebound anxiety, seizures, tremor, insomnia. Benzodiazepines. Monitor for DTs. Cocaine/ amphetamines Depression, hyperphagia, hypersomnolence. Supportive treatment. Avoid pure β-blockers (may lead to unopposed α activity, causing hypertension). Opioids Anxiety, insomnia, fulike symptoms, piloerection, fever, rhinorrhea, lacrimation, yawning, nausea, stomach cramps, diarrhea, mydriasis. Antiemetics, muscle relaxers, and NSAIDs for mild symptoms; clonidine, buprenorphine, or methadone for moderate to severe symptoms.
# Chunk 582
A 65-year-old woman with left bundle branch block and severe osteoarthritis has unstable angina. Target LDL in a patient with diabetes.
# Chunk 583
Nikolsky’s sign. Nikolsky’s sign.

A 55-year-old obese patient presents with dirty, velvety patches on the back of the neck. Dermatomal distribution. Flat-topped papules. Iris-like target lesions. A lesion characteristically occurring in a linear pattern in areas where skin comes into contact with clothing or jewelry.
# Chunk 584
A 15-year-old pregnant girl requires hospitalization for preeclampsia. Is parental consent required?
# Chunk 585
A 25-year-old Jewish man presents with pain and watery diarrhea after meals. Exam shows fistulas between the bowel and skin and nodular lesions on his tibias.
# Chunk 586
Post-HBV exposure treatment.

Classic causes of drug-induced hepatitis.

A 40-year-old obese woman with elevated alkaline phosphatase, elevated bilirubin, pruritus, dark urine, and clay-colored stools.
# Chunk 587
The most common inherited cause of hypercoagulability. The most common inherited bleeding disorder. The most common inherited hemolytic anemia. Diagnostic test for hereditary spherocytosis. Pure RBC aplasia. Anemia associated with absent radii and thumbs, diffuse hyperpigmentation, café au lait spots, microcephaly, and pancytopenia. Medications and viruses that lead to aplastic anemia.
# Chunk 588
A 14-year-old girl presents with prolonged bleeding after dental surgery and with menses, normal PT, normal or ↑ PTT, and ↑ bleeding time. Diagnosis? Treatment?
# Chunk 589
A 60-year-old African-American man presents with bone pain. Workup for multiple myeloma might reveal? Reed-Sternberg cells. A 10-year-old boy presents with fever, weight loss, and night sweats. Exam shows an anterior mediastinal mass.
# Chunk 590
Microcytic anemia with ↓ serum iron, ↓ ferritin, and ↑ TIBC. An 80-year-old man presents with fatigue, lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, and isolated lymphocytosis. Suspected diagnosis? The lymphoma equivalent of CLL. A late, life-threatening complication of chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML). Auer rods on blood smear. AML subtype associated with DIC.
# Chunk 591
Virus associated with aplastic anemia in patients with sickle cell anemia.

A 25-year-old African-American man with sickle cell anemia has sudden onset of bone pain. Management of pain crisis?
# Chunk 592
Findings in 3° syphilis.

Characteristics of 2° Lyme disease.

Cold agglutinins.

A 24-year-old man presents with soft white plaques on his tongue and the back of his throat. Diagnosis? Workup? Treatment?
# Chunk 593
A 55-year-old man who is a smoker and a heavy drinker presents with a new cough and ﬂulike symptoms. Gram stain shows no organisms; silver stain of sputum shows gram-negative rods. What is the diagnosis?
# Chunk 594
Arthritis, conjunctivitis, and urethritis in young men. Associated organisms?

A 55-year-old man has sudden, excruciating first MTP joint pain after a night of drinking red wine. Diagnosis, workup, and chronic treatment?
# Chunk 595
The most common pituitary tumor. Treatment? A 55-year-old patient presents with acute “broken speech.” What type of aphasia? What lobe and vascular distribution?
# Chunk 596
Annual screening for women with a strong family history of ovarian cancer. A 50-year-old woman leaks urine when laughing or coughing. Nonsurgical options?
# Chunk 597
A 30-year-old woman has unpredictable urine loss. Examination is normal. Medical options? Lab values suggestive of menopause. The most common cause of female infertility.
# Chunk 598
↑ serum FSH. Endometriosis.

Nontender abdominal mass associated with elevated VMA and HVA.

The most common type of tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF). Diagnosis?
# Chunk 599
A 17-year-old girl has left arm paralysis after her boyfriend dies in a car crash. No medical cause is found.
# Chunk 600
Conversion disorder.

Neuroleptic malignant syndrome. Anorexia.

A 35-year-old man has recurrent episodes of palpitations, diaphoresis, and fear of going crazy.
# Chunk 601
Proteinuria, hypoalbuminemia, hyperlipidemia, hyperlipiduria, and edema. The most common form of nephritic syndrome. The most common form of glomerulonephritis. Glomerulonephritis with deafness. Glomerulonephritis with hemoptysis. Presence of red cell casts in urine sediment. Eosinophils in urine sediment. Waxy casts in urine sediment and Maltese crosses (seen with lipiduria). Drowsiness, asterixis, nausea, and a pericardial friction rub. A 55-year-old man is diagnosed with prostate cancer.
# Chunk 602
Treatment options?

Low urine specific gravity in the presence of high serum osmolality. Treatment of SIADH? Hematuria, ﬂank pain, and palpable ﬂank mass. Testicular cancer associated with β-hCG, AFP. The most common type of testicular cancer. The most common histology of bladder cancer. Complication of overly rapid correction of hyponatremia. Salicylate ingestion occurs in what type of acid-base disorder? Acid-base disturbance commonly seen in pregnant women. Three systemic diseases that lead to nephrotic syndrome. Elevated erythropoietin level, elevated hematocrit, and normal O2 saturation suggest? A 55-year-old male presents with irritative and obstructive urinary symptoms. Treatment options?
# Chunk 603
Colleges ABG arterial blood gas ABI ankle-brachial index ABVD Adriamycin (doxorubicin), bleomycin, vinblastine, dacarbazine AC abdominal circumference ACA anterior cerebral artery ACC American College of Cardiology ACE angiotensin-converting enzyme ACEI angiotensin-converting enzyme (protocol) ACTH adrenocorticotropic hormone AD Alzheimer’s disease ADA American Diabetes Association,
# Chunk 604
Americans with Disabilities Act ADH antidiuretic hormone ADHD attention-defcit hyperactivity disorder ADPKD autosomal-dominant polycystic disease 5-aminosalicylic acid acetylsalicylic acid atypical squamous cells atypical squamous cells suspicious of high-grade dysplasia atypical squamous cells of tachycardia abdominal x-ray British anti-Lewisite (dimercaprol), cytoplasmic antibody CBC complete blood count CBT cognitive-behavioral therapy, computer-based testing CCB calcium channel blocker CCS computer-based case simulation CD cluster of differentiation CEA carcinoembryonic antigen CF cystic f brosis CFU colony-forming unit CGD chronic granulomatous disease cGMP cyclic guanosine monophosphate CHF congestive heart failure CHOP cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan), hydroxydaunorubicin (Adriamycin), Oncovin (vincristine), prednisone
# Chunk 605
Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure juvenile rheumatoid arthritis jugular venous distention jugular venous pulse potassium hydroxide Kaposi’s sarcoma Kaposi’s sarcoma–related herpesvirus kidney, ureter, bladder left anterior descending (artery) left atrial enlargement left bundle branch block large bowel obstruction low back pain lateral collateral ligament lactate dehydrogenase low-density lipoprotein loop electrosurgical excision procedure lower esophageal sphincter liver function test lymphogranuloma venereum luteinizing hormone left lower quadrant lower motor neuron last menstrual period low-molecular-weight heparin lumbar puncture lactated Ringer’s, likelihood ratio low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion latent tuberculosis infection left upper quadrant left ventricular hypertrophy membrane attack complex, concentration medial collateral ligament metacarpophalangeal (joint) mean corpuscular volume,
# Chunk 606
Population MuSK muscle-specif c kinase MVA motor vehicle accident NaHCO3 sodium bicarbonate NBME National Board of Medical disorder oral contraceptive pills overdose operating room open reduction and internal f xation obstructive sleep apnea over the counter partial pressure of carbon dioxide in cytoplasmic antibody partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood pregnancy-associated plasma protein A period acid–Schiff posterior cerebral artery percutaneous coronary intervention polycystic kidney disease posterior cruciate ligament partial pressure of carbon dioxide polycystic ovarian syndrome phencyclidine hydrochloride polymerase chain reaction polycythemia vera, pneumococcal vaccine pulmonary capillary wedge pressure patent ductus arteriosus phosphodiesterase pulseless electrical activity positive end-expiratory pressure positron emission tomography pulmonary function test prostaglandin protease inhibitor posterior inferior cerebellar artery pelvic inf ammatory disease proximal interphalangeal (joint) polycystic kidney disease phenylketonuria point of maximal impulse promyelocytic leukemia polymorphonuclear (leukocyte) paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea per os (by mouth) partial pressure of oxygen product of conception tuberculin) PPI proton pump inhibitor PPROM preterm premature rupture of vaccine, positive predictive value PR per rectum, progesterone receptor PRBC packed red blood cell PRN pro re nata (as needed) PROM premature rupture of membranes PSA prostate-specif c antigen PT prothrombin time PTCA percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty PTH parathyroid hormone PTHrP parathyroid hormone–related protein PTSD post-traumatic stress disorder PTT partial thromboplastin time PUD peptic ulcer disease PUVA psoralen plus ultraviolet A PVC premature ventricular contraction PVR peripheral vascular resistance PVS persistent vegetative state QD once a day RA rheumatoid arthritis RAIU radioactive iodine uptake RBBB right bundle branch block RBC red blood cell RDS respiratory distress syndrome RDW red cell distribution width REM rapid eye movement RF rheumatoid factor RLQ right lower quadrant ROM range of motion, rupture of
# Chunk 607
Laboratory vascular endothelial growth factor ventricular f brillation vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia very low density lipoprotein vanillylmandelic acid vaso-occlusive crisis vestibulo-ocular ref ex ventriculoperitoneal ventilation/perfusion (scan) vancomycin-resistant S. aureus ventricular septal defect ventricular tachycardia von Willebrand’s disease von Willebrand factor varicella-zoster virus white blood cell World Health Organization
# Chunk 608
Hemoglobin, plasma

Mean corpuscular hemoglobin Platelet count Prothrombin time Reticulocyte count Sedimentation rate, erythrocyte (Westergren) Proteins, total 1–4 mg/dL 0.16–0.62 μmol/L 4500–11,0 00/mm3 4.5–11.0  109/L 54–62% 0.54–0.62 3–5% 0.03–0.05 1–3% 0.01–0.03 0–0.75% 0–0.0075 25–33% 0.25–0.33 3–7% 0.03–0.07 25.4–34.6 pg/cell 0.39–0.54 fmol/cell 150,000–400,000/mm3 150–400  109/L 11–15 seconds 11–15 seconds 0.5–1.5% of red cells 0.005–0.015 Male: 0–15 mm/h 0–15 mm/h Female: 0–20 mm/h 0–20 mm/h < 150 mg/24 h < 0.15 g/24 h
# Chunk 609
The abdomen should be inspected for signs of an intra-abdominal mass, organomegaly, or distention that would, for example, suggest ascites or intestinal obstruction. Auscultation of bowel sounds, if deemed necessary to ascertain the nature of the bowel sounds, should precede palpation. The frequency of intestinal sounds and their quality should be noted. In a patient with intestinal obstruction, “rushes,” as well as the occasional high-pitched sound, can be heard. Bowel sounds associated with an ileus may occur less frequently but at the same pitch as normal bowel sounds.
# Chunk 610
The abdomen is palpated to evaluate the size and configuration of the liver, spleen, and other abdominal contents. Evidence of fullness or mass effect should be noted. This is particularly important in evaluating patients who may have a pelvic mass and in determining the extent of omental involvement, for example, with metastatic ovarian cancer. A fullness in the upper abdomen could be consistent with an “omental cake.” All four quadrants should be carefully palpated for any evidence of mass, firmness, irregularity, or distention. A systematic approach should be used (e.g., clockwise, starting in the right upper quadrant). Percussion should be used to measure the dimensions of the liver. The patient should be asked to inhale and exhale during palpation of the edge of the liver. Areas of tenderness should be evaluated after the examination of the rest of the abdomen.
# Chunk 611
D.

The pelvic organs can be outlined by bimanual palpation; the examiner places one hand on the lower abdominal wall and the finger(s) (one or two) (see Fig. 1.3) of the other hand in the vagina (or vagina and rectum in the rectovaginal examination) (see Fig. 1.4). Either the right or left hand may be used for vaginal palpation. The number of fingers inserted into the vagina should be based on what can comfortably be accommodated, the size and pliability of the vagina, and the weight of the patient. For example, adolescent, slender, and older patients might be best examined with a single finger technique.
# Chunk 612
2.

Press the abdominal hand, which is resting on the infraumbilical area, very gently downward, sweeping the pelvic structures toward the palpating vaginal fingers. Coordinate the activity of the two hands to evaluate the body of the uterus for: a.
# Chunk 613
7.

In patients who have an intact hymen, examine the pelvic organs by the rectal–abdominal technique.
# Chunk 614
Figure 1.1 The lithotomy position for the pelvic examination.

vagina.” The vulva and perineal area should be carefully inspected. Evidence of any lesions, erythema, pigmentation, masses, or irregularity should be noted. The skin quality should be noted as well as any signs of trauma, such as excoriations or ecchymosis. Areas of erythema or tenderness are noted, particularly in women with vulvar burning or pain, as might be seen with vulvar vestibulitis or localized provoked vulvodynia. The presence of any visible lesions should be quantitated and carefully described with regard to their full appearance and characteristics on palpation (i.e., mobility, tenderness, consistency). A drawing of the location of skin lesions is helpful. Ulcerative or purulent lesions of the vulva should be evaluated and cultured as outlined in subsequent chapters, and biopsy should be performed on any lesions. It may be helpful to ask the patient if she is aware of any vulvar lesions and to offer a mirror to demonstrate any lesions.
# Chunk 615
After the speculum is removed and the pelvis palpated, lubrication is applied to the examination glove, and one or two (the index or index and middle) fingers are inserted gently into the vagina. In general, in right-handed physicians, the fingers from the right hand are inserted into the vagina and the left hand is placed on the abdomen to provide counter-pressure as the pelvic viscera are moved (Fig. 1.3). In patients with pelvic pain, a stepwise “functional pelvic examination” involves the sequential palpation of anatomic structures, including the pelvic ﬂoor muscles, bladder, rectum, cervix, and cul-de-sac. These areas are assessed for tenderness and a specific source of pain. Pelvic ﬂoor muscle spasm is a common concomitant of pelvic pain. The vagina, its fornices, and the cervix are palpated carefully for any masses or irregularities. One or two fingers are placed gently into the posterior fornix so the uterus can be moved. With the abdominal hand in place, the uterus usually can be palpated just above the surface pubis. In this manner, the size, shape, mobility, contour, consistency, and position of the uterus are determined. The patient is asked to provide feedback about any areas of tenderness, and her facial expressions are observed during the examination.
# Chunk 616
Adolescent Patients A pelvic examination may be less revealing in an adolescent than in an older woman, particularly if it is the patient’s first examination or if it takes place on an emergency basis. An adolescent who presents with excessive bleeding should have a pelvic examination if she had intercourse, if the results of a pregnancy test are positive, if she has abdominal pain, if she is markedly anemic, or if she is bleeding heavily enough to compromise hemodynamic stability. The pelvic examination occasionally may be deferred in young teenagers who have a classic history of irregular cycles soon after menarche, who have normal hematocrit levels, who deny sexual activity, and who will reliably return for follow-up. A pelvic examination may be deferred in adolescents who present to the office requesting oral contraceptives before the initiation of intercourse or at the patient’s request, even if she has had intercourse. Newer testing methods using DNA amplification techniques allow noninvasive urine testing for gonorrhea and chlamydia (57). Current guidelines recommend that cervical cytology testing in most adolescents be initiated at age 21 (58).
# Chunk 617
About 75% of all iatrogenic injuries to the ureter result from gynecologic procedures, most commonly abdominal hysterectomy; risk is increased with distortions of pelvic anatomy, including adnexal masses, endometriosis, other pelvic adhesive disease, or fibroids.
# Chunk 618
Clinical Considerations Studies using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or computed tomography (CT) pelvimetry found an association between the architecture of the bony pelvis, specifically a wider transverse inlet (distance between the most superior aspects of the iliopectineal line) and a shorter obstetric conjugate (shortest distance between the sacral promontory and the pubic symphysis), and the occurrence of pelvic ﬂoor disorders (2,3). A loss of lumbar lordosis and a pelvic inlet that is less vertically oriented is more common in women who develop genital prolapse than in those who do not (4,5). A less vertical orientation of the pelvic inlet is thought to result in an alteration of the intra-abdominal forces that are normally directed anteriorly to the pubic symphysis such that a greater proportion is directed toward the pelvic viscera and their connective tissue and muscular supports. It is theorized that women with a wide pelvic inlet are more likely to develop pelvic organ prolapse (2,3). It is speculated that women with these characteristics may be more likely to suffer neuromuscular and connective tissue injuries during labor and delivery, predisposing them to the development of pelvic neuropathy, pelvic organ prolapse, or both. One MRI study, in which only white women were enrolled to remove race as a potential confounder, found that bony pelvis dimensions were similar at the level of the muscular pelvic ﬂoor with and without pelvic organ prolapse (6).
# Chunk 619
The levator ani assists the anterior abdominal wall muscles in containing the abdominal and pelvic contents. It supports the vagina, facilitates defecation, and aids in maintaining fecal continence. During parturition, the levator ani supports the fetal head while the cervix dilates. The anterior portion of the levator ani complex serves to close the urogenital hiatus and pull the urethra, vagina, perineum, and anorectum toward the pubic bone, whereas the horizontally oriented posterior portion (levator plate) serves as a supportive diaphragm or “backstop” behind the pelvic viscera. Loss of normal levator ani tone, through denervation or direct muscle trauma, results in laxity of the urogenital hiatus, loss of the horizontal orientation of the levator plate, and a more bowl-like configuration. These changes can be bilateral or asymmetric (8). Such configurations are seen more often in women with pelvic organ prolapse than in those with normal pelvic organ support (9).
# Chunk 620
Blood Vessels The pelvic blood vessels supply genital structures as well as the following:  Urinary and gastrointestinal tracts  Muscles of the abdominal wall, pelvic ﬂoor and perineum, buttocks, and upper thighs  Fasciae, other connective tissue, and bones  Skin and other superficial structures
# Chunk 621
External iliac Lateral bifurcation of Along the medial border of the psoas femoral artery common iliac, begins muscle and lateral pelvic side wall; opposite the becomes femoral artery after passing lumbosacral joint under the inguinal ligament to supply lower extremity 1. Superficial epigastric—supplies skin and subcutaneous tissue of lower anterior abdominal wall 2. External pudendal—supplies skin and subcutaneous tissue of mons pubis and anterior vulva 3. Superficial circumﬂex iliac—suppliesskin/subcutaneous tissues of theﬂank 4. Inferior epigastric—supplies musculofascial layer of lower anterior abdominal wall 5. Deep circumﬂex iliac—suppliesmusculofascial layer of lower abdominal wall
# Chunk 622
To avoid injury to vascular structures and resultant hemorrhage while inserting a trocar into the anterior abdominal wall during laparoscopy, the surgeon should keep in mind certain anatomic relationships. The inferior epigastric artery is a branch of the external iliac artery, arising from the parent vessel at the medial border of the inguinal ligament and coursing cephalad lateral to and posterior to the rectus sheath at the level of the arcuate line. It lies about 1.5 cm lateral to the medial umbilical fold, which marks the site of the obliterated umbilical artery. During laparoscopy the inferior epigastric artery almost always can be visualized between the obliterated umbilical artery medially and the insertion of the round ligament through the inguinal canal laterally. This artery can be traced visually cephalad, allowing for safe insertion of lateral port site. The aortic bifurcation occurs at the level of L4 to L5, just above the sacral promontory. Palpation of the sacral promontory to guide trocar insertion allows the surgeon to avoid the major vascular structures in this area (see Fig. 23.4 in Chapter 23). The left common iliac vein lies medial to the artery and is at risk of injury during umbilical laparoscopic trocar insertion and during dissection for sacrocolpopexy.
# Chunk 623
Somatic Innervation The lumbosacral plexus and its branches provide motor and sensory somatic innervation to the lower abdominal wall, the pelvic and urogenital diaphragms, the perineum, and the hip and lower extremity (Fig. 5.8). The nerves originating from the muscles, the lumbosacral trunk, the anterior divisions of the upper four sacral nerves (sacral plexus), and the anterior division of the coccygeal nerve and fibers from the fourth and fifth sacral nerves (coccygeal plexus) are found on the anterior surface of the piriformis muscle and lateral to the coccyx, respectively, deep in the posterior pelvis. In Table 5.5 each major branch is listed by spinal segment and structures innervated. In addition to these branches, the lumbosacral plexus includes nerves that innervate
# Chunk 624
S2 to S4.

Afferent fibers from the pelvic viscera and blood vessels traverse the same pathways to provide sensory input to the central nervous system. They are involved in reﬂex arcs needed for bladder, bowel, and genital tract function. The afferent fibers reach the central nervous system to have their first synapse within the posterior spinal nerve ganglia.
# Chunk 625
Presacral neurectomy, in which a segment of the superior hypogastric plexus is divided and resected in order to interrupt sensory fibers from the uterus and cervix, is associated with relief of dysmenorrhea secondary to endometriosis in about 50% to 75% of cases in which it was used (18,19). Efferent fibers from the adnexa travel with the ovarian plexus; thus, pain originating from the ovary or tube is not relieved by resection of the presacral nerve. Because this plexus contains efferent sympathetic and parasympathetic nerve fibers intermixed with afferent fibers, disturbance in bowel or bladder function may result. An alternative surgical procedure is resection of a portion of the uterosacral ligaments; because they contain numerous nerve fibers with more specific innervation to the uterus, it is postulated that bladder and rectal function is less vulnerable to compromise (20).
# Chunk 626
The posterior vaginal fornix is separated from the posterior cul-de-sac and peritoneal cavity by the vaginal wall and peritoneum. This proximity is clinically useful, both diagnostically and therapeutically. Culdocentesis, a technique in which a needle is inserted just posterior to the cervix through the vaginal wall into the peritoneal cavity, is used to evaluate intraperitoneal hemorrhage (e.g., ruptured ectopic pregnancy, hemorrhagic corpus luteum, other intraabdominal bleeding), pus (e.g., pelvic inﬂammatory disease, ruptured intra-abdominal abscess), or other intra-abdominal ﬂuid (e.g., ascites). Incision into the peritoneal cavity from this location in the vagina, known as a posterior colpotomy, can be used as an adjunct to laparoscopic excision of adnexal masses, with removal of the mass intact through the posterior vagina.
# Chunk 627
The bladder is positioned posterior to the pubis and lower abdominal wall and anterior to the cervix, upper vagina, and part of the cardinal ligament. Laterally, it is bounded by the pelvic diaphragm and obturator internus muscle.
# Chunk 628
Blood Supply The vascular supply to the rectum and anal canal is from the superior, middle, and inferior rectal arteries. The venous drainage is a complex submucosal plexus of vessels that, under conditions of increased intra-abdominal pressure (pregnancy, pelvic mass, chronic constipation, ascites), may dilate and become symptomatic with rectal bleeding or pain as hemorrhoids.
# Chunk 629
The Genital Tract and Its Relations

The genital tract is situated at the bottom of the intra-abdominal cavity and is related to the intraperitoneal cavity and its contents, the retroperitoneal spaces, and the pelvic ﬂoor. Accessing it through the abdominal wall or the perineum requires a thorough knowledge of the anatomy of these areas and their relationships.
# Chunk 630
Characteristically, the transversalis fascia continues along blood vessels and other structures leaving and entering the abdominopelvic cavity and contributes to the formation of the visceral (endopelvic) pelvic fascia (32). The pelvic fascia invests the pelvic organs and attaches them to the pelvic sidewalls, thereby playing a critical role in pelvic support. In the inguinal region, the fascial relationships result in the development of the inguinal canal, through which the round ligament exits into the perineum. The fascia is separated from the peritoneum by a layer of preperitoneal fat. Areas of fascial weakness or congenital or posttraumatic and surgical injuries result in herniation of the underlying structures through a defective abdominal wall. The incisions least likely to result in damage to the integrity and innervation of the abdominal wall muscles include a midline incision through the linea alba and a transverse incision through the recti muscle fibers that respects the integrity of its innervation (33).
# Chunk 631
Figure 5.24 Schematic sectional drawing of the pelvis shows the firm connective tissue covering. The bladder, cervix, and rectum are surrounded by a connective tissue covering. The Mackenrodt ligament extends from the lateral cervix to the lateral abdominal pelvic wall. The vesicouterine ligament originating from the anterior edge of the Mackenrodt ligament leads to the covering of the bladder on the posterior side. The sagittal rectum column spreads both to the connective tissue of the rectum and the sacral vertebrae closely nestled against the back of the Mackenrodt ligament and lateral pelvic wall. Between the firm connective tissue bundles is loose connective tissue (paraspaces). (From Von Peham H, Amreich JA. Gynaekologische Operationslehre. Berlin, Germany: S Karger, 1930, with permission.) anterior wall of the bladder. It is separated from the paravesical space by the ascending bladder septum (bladder pillars).
# Chunk 632
Peritoneal Cavity The female pelvic organs lie at the bottom of the abdominopelvic cavity covered superiorly and posteriorly by the small and large bowel. Anteriorly, the uterine wall is in contact with the posterosuperior aspect of the bladder. The uterus is held in position by the following structures: 1.
# Chunk 633
About 75% of all iatrogenic injuries to the ureter result from gynecologic procedures, most commonly abdominal hysterectomy (46). Distortions of pelvic anatomy, including adnexal masses, endometriosis, other pelvic adhesive disease, or fibroids, may increase susceptibility to injury by displacement or alteration of usual anatomy. Careful identification of the course of the ureter before securing the infundibulopelvic ligament and uterine artery is the best protection against ureteric injury during hysterectomy or adnexectomy. Even with severe intraperitoneal disease, the ureter can always be identified using a retroperitoneal approach and noting fundamental landmarks and relationships.
# Chunk 634
Figure 5.27 The double-layered muscular support of the pelvic diaphragm.

membrane (urogenital diaphragm) anteriorly and the perineal body joined to the anococcygeal raphe by the external anal sphincter posteriorly. This double-layered arrangement, when intact, provides optimal support for the pelvic organs and counterbalances the forces pushing them downward with gravity and with any increase in intra-abdominal pressure (Fig. 5.27). Dynamic imaging techniques, such as MRI, CT, and ultrasonography, increasingly are used to provide additional information in the evaluation of pelvic ﬂoor problems by visualizing anatomic landmarks during different functional phases.
# Chunk 635
Amplification Amplification refers to an increase in the copy number of a gene. Amplification results in enhanced gene expression by increasing the amount of template DNA that is available for transcription. Proto-oncogene amplification is a relatively common event in malignancies of the female genital tract. The HER2/neu proto-oncogene, also known as c-erbB-2 and HER2, encodes a 185 kDa transmembrane glycoprotein with intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity. It belongs to a family of transmembrane receptor genes that includes the epidermal growth factor receptors (erbB-1), erbB-3, and erbB-4. HER2/neu interacts with a variety of different cellular proteins that increase cell proliferation. Overexpression of HER2/neu was demonstrated in about 30% of breast cancers, 20% of advanced ovarian cancers, and as many as 50% of endometrial cancers (66). High tissue expression of HER2/neu is correlated with a decreased overall survival, particularly in patients with endometrial cancer.
# Chunk 636
Point Mutations Point mutations of a gene may remain without any consequence for the expression and function of the protein (gene polymorphism). However, point mutations can alter a codon sequence and subsequently disrupt the normal function of a gene product. The ras gene family is an example of oncogene-encoded proteins that disrupt the intracellular signal transduction system following point mutations. Transforming Ras proteins contain point mutations in critical codons (i.e., codons 11, 12, 59, 61) with decrease of GTPase activity and subsequent expression of constitutively active Ras. Point mutations of the p53 gene are the most common genetic mutations described in solid tumors. These mutations occur at preferential “hot spots” that coincide with the most highly conserved regions of the gene. The p53 tumor suppressor gene encodes for a phosphoprotein that is detectable in the nucleus of normal cells. When DNA damage occurs, p53 can arrest cell cycle progression to allow the DNA to be repaired or undergo apoptosis. The lack of function of normal p53 within a cancer cell results in a loss of control of cell proliferation with inefficient DNA repair and genetic instability. Mutations of the p53 gene occur in approximately 50% of advanced ovarian cancers and 30% to 40% of endometrial cancers but are uncommon in cervical cancer.
# Chunk 637
2. Luteal phase—the time from ovulation to the onset of menses has an average length of 14 days.

A normal menstrual cycle lasts from 21 to 35 days, with 2 to 6 days of ﬂow and an average blood loss of 20 to 60 mL. However, studies of large numbers of women with normal menstrual cycles showed that only approximately two-thirds of adult women have cycles lasting 21 to 35 days (54). The extremes of reproductive life (after menarche and perimenopause) are characterized by a higher percentage of anovulatory or irregularly timed cycles (55,56).
# Chunk 638
In the typical 28-day cycle, ovulation occurs on cycle day 14. Within 48 to 72 hours following ovulation, the onset of progesterone secretion produces a shift in histologic appearance of the endometrium to the secretory phase, so named for the clear presence of eosinophilic protein-rich secretory products in the glandular lumen. In contrast to the proliferative phase, the secretory phase of the menstrual cycle is characterized by the cellular effects of progesterone in addition to estrogen. In general, progesterone’s effects are antagonistic to those of estrogen, and there is a progressive decrease in the endometrial cell’s estrogen receptor concentration. As a result, during the latter half of the cycle, estrogen-induced DNA synthesis and cellular mitosis are antagonized (61).
# Chunk 639
Dating the Endometrium

The changes seen in secretory endometrium relative to the LH surge were thought to allow the assessment of the “normalcy” of endometrial development. Since 1950, it was felt that by knowing when a patient ovulated, it was possible to obtain a sample of endometrium by endometrial biopsy and determine whether the state of the endometrium corresponds to the appropriate time of the cycle. Traditional thinking held that any discrepancy of more than 2 days between chronologic and histologic date indicated a pathologic condition termed luteal phase defect; this abnormality was linked to both infertility (via implantation failure) and early pregnancy loss (63).
# Chunk 640
Rising estrogen levels have a negative feedback effect on FSH secretion. Conversely, LH undergoes biphasic regulation by circulating estrogens. At lower concentrations, estrogens inhibit LH secretion. At higher levels, estrogen enhances LH release. This stimulation requires a sustained high level of estrogen (200 pg/mL) for more than 48 hours (84). Once the rising estrogen level produces positive feedback, a substantial surge in LH secretion occurs. Concomitant to these events, the local estrogen–FSH interactions in the dominant follicle induce LH receptors on the granulosa cells. Exposure to high levels of LH results in a specific response by the dominant follicle—the result is luteinization of the granulosa cells, production of progesterone, and initiation of ovulation. Ovulation will occur in the single mature, or Graafian, follicle 10 to 12 hours after the LH peak or 34 to 36 hours after the initial rise in midcycle LH (85–87).
# Chunk 641
Neck: adenopathy, thyroid Dietary/nutrition assessment

Pelvic examination: for ages 19–20 years, when indicated by the Psychosocial Evaluation medical history; age 21 or older, periodic pelvic examination
# Chunk 642
Fasting glucose testing (every 3 years after age 45 years) Aspirin prophylaxis to reduce the risk of stroke (ages 55–79 years)¶
# Chunk 643
Cervical cytology: consider discontinuing at age 65 years or Obesity 70 years if patient has had three or more normal results in a row, no abnormal results in 10 years, no history of cervical cancer, no history of diethylstilbestrol exposure in utero, is human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) negative, is not immunosuppressed; if cervical cytology has been discontinued, annual review of risk factors to evaluate need for reinitiation of screening. If cervical cytology is needed: may screen every 3 years after three consecutive negative test results if no history of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia 2 or 3, immunosuppression, HIV infection, or diethylstilbestrol exposure in utero or every 3 years after negative human papillomavirus DNA test and negative cervical cytology.‡
# Chunk 644
Table 8.5 High-Risk Factors

Bone mineral density screening∗ Postmenopausal women younger than age 65 years: history of prior fracture as an adult; family history of osteoporosis; Caucasian; dementia; poor nutrition; smoking; low weight and BMI; estrogen deficiency caused by early (age younger than 45 years) menopause, bilateral oophorectomy, or prolonged (longer than 1 year) premenopausal amenorrhea; low lifelong calcium intake; alcoholism; impaired eyesight despite adequate correction; history of falls; inadequate physical activity All women: certain diseases or medical conditions and certain drugs associated with an increased risk of osteoporosis
# Chunk 645
Obstetricians-gynecologists typically see adolescents in crisis to provide care for unintended pregnancies or STDs, including pelvic inﬂammatory disease. The urgency for preventing these crises is evident. The GAPS report extends the framework of services provided to adolescents. The impetus for developing GAPS was the belief that a fundamental change in the delivery of adolescent health services was necessary. This concept is strongly supported by the Society for Adolescent Medicine, the American Academy of Pediatrics, and the American Academy of Family Physicians (27). Gynecologists could easily provide most, if not all, of the recommended services. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists developed a “Tool Kit” on primary and preventive health care for female adolescents in recognition of the needs of this population, and recommended that the “first visit to the obstetrician-gynecologist for health guidance, screening, and the provision of preventive health care services should take place between the ages of 13 years and 15 years” (28,29). Subsequent annual visits are recommended by ACOG to provide preventive guidance and services including contraception and STD treatment as required. The guidelines and recommendations for adolescent health care address the delivery of health care, focus on the use of health guidance to promote the health and well-being of adolescents and their families, promote the use of screening to identify conditions that occur relatively frequently in adolescents and cause significant suffering either during adolescence or later in life, and provide guidelines for immunizations for the primary prevention of specific infectious diseases. Considerable barriers exist to adolescents’ accessing these services, including barriers inherent in the US health care system and legal barriers (30).
# Chunk 646
The recommendations for adolescent preventive services stem from the conclusion that the current health threats to adolescents are predominantly behavioral rather than biomedical, that more of today’s adolescents are involved in behaviors with the potential for serious health consequences, that adolescents are involved in health-risk behaviors at younger ages than previous generations, that many adolescents engage in multiple health-risk behaviors, and that most adolescents engage in at least some type of behavior that threatens their health and well-being (26). Gynecologists are in a good position to detect high-risk behaviors and to determine whether multiple risk-taking behaviors exist; for example, the early initiation of sexual activity and unsafe sexual practices are associated with substance use (30,31). Adolescents who are sexually active are much more likely than are adolescents who are not sexually active to have used alcohol (6.3 times greater risk), to have used drugs other than marijuana (four times greater risk), and to have been a passenger in a motor vehicle with a driver who was using drugs (nearly 10 times greater risk) (32). Thus, by being aware of comorbidities, gynecologists can screen for these behaviors and potentially intervene before serious harmful health consequences occur. In recognition of the role that obstetricians-gynecologists could play in providing preventive services for adolescents, ACOG issued guidelines that suggest an initial visit (not necessarily including gynecologic examination) to the obstetrician-gynecologist for health guidance, screening, and the provision of preventive health care service between the ages of 13 and 15 years and subsequent annual preventive health care visits (29).
# Chunk 647
Exercise Exercise can help control or prevent hypertension, diabetes mellitus, hypercholesterolemia, and cardiovascular disease and helps to promote overall good health, psychological wellbeing, and a healthy body weight. Moderate exercise along with calcium supplementation can help retard bone loss in postmenopausal women. During early menopause, weight-bearing exercise alone is not sufficient to prevent bone loss, although it will slow the rate of bone loss (45). Exercise helps promote weight loss, strength and fitness, and stress reduction. Federal exercise guidelines from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services note that “regular physical activity reduces the risk of many adverse health outcomes; some physical activity is better than none; for most health outcomes, additional benefits occur as the amount of physical activity increases through higher intensity, greater frequency, and/or longer duration; most health benefits occur with at least 150 minutes (2 hours and 30 minutes) a week of moderate-intensity physical activity, such as brisk walking. Additional benefits occur with more physical activity; both aerobic (endurance) and muscle-strengthening (resistance) physical activity are beneficial; health benefits occur for children and adolescents, young and middle-aged adults, older adults, and those in every studied racial and ethnic group; the health benefits of physical activity occur for people with disabilities; and the benefits of physical activity far outweigh the possibility of adverse outcomes” (46). To sustain weight loss in adulthood, 60 to 90 minutes of daily moderate-intensity physical activity are recommended. Cardiovascular conditioning, stretching exercises for ﬂexibility, resistance exercises, or calisthenics for muscle strength and endurance are recommended for most people. Most healthy adults do not need to see a physician before starting a moderate-intensity exercise program, although those with chronic diseases and women over 50 who plan a vigorous program have been advised to do so (40). Women should be counseled about safety guidelines for exercise. Factors that should be considered in establishing an exercise program include medical limitations, such as obesity or arthritis, and careful selection of activities that promote health and enhance compliance (1).
# Chunk 648
Broad antibiotic coverage of common aerobes and anaerobes is necessary but should be limited to patients with acute pain, especially unilateral maxillary tooth, facial, or sinus pain, and purulent discharge, particularly if the symptoms initially improved and then worsen. This cluster of symptoms is more suggestive of bacterial rather than viral acute sinusitis. It should be noted that the majority of acute bacterial sinusitis cases resolve in 7 to 10 days without antibiotics, similarly to the viral form. For acute bacterial sinus infections, amoxicillin (500 mg three times a day) or trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (1 tablet twice a day) remains the treatment of choice. Amoxicillin is inexpensive, penetrates the sinus tissues well, and can be changed to another antibiotic if symptoms have not improved in 48 to 72 hours. If these give only a minimal or no response after 7 days, consider broader spectrum antibiotics. If beta-lactam resistance is likely, amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (875 mg twice daily) or azithromycin (5-day course once a day) may be used. Other second-line drugs include cefuroxime (250 mg twice daily), ciproﬂoxacin (500 mg twice daily), clarithromycin (500 mg twice daily), levoﬂoxacin (500 mg once a day), and loracarbef (400 mg twice daily). The usual treatment course is 10 to 14 days, and patients should be informed that relapses might occur if the full course of treatment is not completed.
# Chunk 649
Bacterial pneumonia is classified as either community acquired or nosocomial, and in many cases the classification determines prognosis and antibiotic therapy. Risk factors that contribute to mortality are chronic cardiopulmonary diseases, alcoholism, diabetes, renal failure, malignancy, and malnutrition. Prognostic features associated with poor outcome include greater than two lobe involvement, respiratory rate greater than 30 breaths per minute on presentation, severe hypoxemia (<60 mm Hg on room air), hypoalbuminemia, and septicemia. Pneumonia is a common cause of adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), with a mortality rate between 50% and 70% (9,10).
# Chunk 650
Corticosteroid therapy (>10 mg of prednisone per day)

Broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy for >7 days in the past month
# Chunk 651
Regular aerobic exercise (at least 30 minutes per day of brisk walking most days of the week) Decrease salt intake to less than 2.4 g of sodium or6gof sodium chloride per day
# Chunk 652
Individuals who are normotensive at 55 years of age will have a 90% lifetime risk of developing hypertension.
# Chunk 653
Therapy Nonpharmacologic interventions or lifestyle modifications should be attempted before initiation of medication unless the systolic blood pressure exceeds 139 mm Hg or the diastolic blood pressure exceeds 89 mm Hg. Drug therapy should be initiated for systolic blood pressure greater than 130 mm Hg or diastolic blood pressure greater than 80 mm Hg in those with diabetes or chronic renal failure. An important element in lifestyle modifications is to modify all contributors to cardiovascular disease. In obese patients, weight loss, especially in individuals with truncal and abdominal obesity, can play a significant role in the prevention of atherosclerosis (14,21). A loss of just 10 pounds was reported to lower blood pressure (22). Inquiries into dietary practices should be made to eliminate excess salt in the diet, specifically certain food groups that are high in sodium, such as canned goods, snack food, pork products, and soy sauce (23). Cholesterol and fat intake in the diet should be limited. Dietary interventions that use calcium, magnesium, and potassium supplementation did not make a clinically significant reduction in pressure (24). An exercise program, weight loss, and moderating alcohol intake (to no more than two alcoholic beverages per day) contribute to overall cardiovascular health. Aerobic exercise alone may prevent hypertension in 20% to 50% of normotensive individuals (14).
# Chunk 654
Use of alpha1-adrenergic drugs became popular in men because of their minimal effects on potency and unique relationship to lipids. They may contribute to stress urinary incontinence in women because of altered urethral tone. As single agents, they decrease total cholesterol and low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol while increasing HDL cholesterol, in contrast to the metabolic effects of beta-blocking agents. Their mode of action is to promote vascular relaxation by blocking postganglionic norepinephrine vasoconstriction in the peripheral vascular smooth muscle. Prazosin and doxazosin are two preparations available in this class. A serious side effect of these drugs, which is commonly described in the elderly patients, is called the “first-dose effect.” In susceptible individuals, severe orthostasis was reported when therapy was initiated but subsided after several days. When alpha1-adrenergic drugs are used in combination with diuretics, hypotension may be further exacerbated. Therapy should begin with small doses taken at bedtime followed by incremental increases. Other side effects that may limit the usefulness of these agents in some patients include tachycardia, weakness, dizziness, and mild ﬂuid retention.
# Chunk 655
Hydralazine is a potent vasodilator used for years in obstetrics for severe hypertension associated with preeclampsia and eclampsia. The mechanism of action is direct relaxation of vascular smooth muscle, primarily arterial. Major side effects include headaches, tachycardia, and ﬂuid (sodium) retention that may result in paradoxical hypertension. Several combinations are used to counter the side effects and enhance antihypertensive effects. Diuretics may be added to reverse ﬂuid retention caused by excess sodium. When used in combination with beta-blockers, tachycardia and headaches may be controlled without compromising the objective of lowering blood pressure. Drug-induced lupus was widely stated as a potential side effect but is rare with normal therapeutic doses of 25 to 50 mg three times daily. Minoxidil is another extremely potent drug in this class but is of limited use to the gynecologist because of its side effects in women (beard growth). Because of minoxidil’s potency, only experienced practitioners should use it.
# Chunk 656
A summary of the compelling indications for individual drug classes is listed in Table 9.7.

Once antihypertensive medications are initiated, monitoring should be instituted at approximately monthly intervals to determine blood pressures and to assess side effects. Patients with stage II hypertension or with complicated comorbid illnesses may need more frequent monitoring. The serum creatinine and potassium levels should be monitored 1 to 2 times per year. When blood pressure goals are reached, patients may be seen in the office at 3-to 6-month intervals. Patients capable of home blood pressure monitoring should be encouraged to measure blood pressure at the same time twice weekly (20). If intolerable side effects develop, a different class of medications should be used and the patient’s progress monitored. Patients whose blood pressure is difficult to control with two agents should be considered for referral. Causes of resistance to therapy include diseases missed during the initial evaluation, unrecognized early end-stage disease, and poor compliance. Patients with evidence of target organ disease should be considered for referral to the appropriate specialist for more intensive diagnostic workup and therapy.
# Chunk 657
Low-density lipoprotein (LDL) is mainly composed of the cholesterol ester and is associated with B-100 apoprotein. LDL cholesterol is approximately 60% to 70% of total cholesterol. Elevated levels of LDL cholesterol are associated with increased myocardial infarction in women older than 65 years of age. There is a structural class called LDL (a ) that is associated with myocardial infarction.
# Chunk 658
When a meal is eaten, cholesterol is transported as dietary fat. The average daily American diet contains approximately 100 g of triglyceride and approximately 1 g of cholesterol. Triglycerides are found in the core lipoprotein particles and are removed through the capillary endothelium and the chylomicron. Theories suggest that hypo-and hyperresponses to dietary cholesterol may occur secondary to the liver’s ability to recognize and metabolize apoprotein E. In the animal model, populations with large numbers of liver receptors for apoprotein E easily metabolize cholesterol and are labeled hyporesponders. Individuals with a reduced number of apoprotein E receptors are unable to metabolize cholesterol as readily, which increases the number of lipid particles. These individuals are considered hyperresponders. Despite dietary cholesterol modification, these individuals continue to have high serum cholesterol levels.
# Chunk 659
Intrapersonal variation is well described. If multiple samples are taken within a given day, weekly and monthly variations can be as high as 6%. At least two specimens should be taken 1 month apart and should be collected in the same dietary state in order for a lipid value to be considered accurate.
# Chunk 660
Exercise is an important variable in the overall risk management of heart disease.

Moderate levels of exercise are as important in overall cardiovascular health as control of hypertension and cessation of cigarette smoking. Strenuous exercise lowers the concentrations of triglycerides and LDL and increases HDL in the serum. Because of these acute blood changes, vigorous exercise should be avoided within 12 hours of drawing the blood for testing.
# Chunk 661
Patients with hypothyroidism have increased levels of total cholesterol and LDL.

Because of the diurnal variation of blood triglycerides, blood samples should be collected in the morning after a 12-hour fast. Excessive quantities of water should not be consumed before blood is drawn. After 2 minutes of venous occlusion, serum cholesterol levels can increase 2% to 5%. Therefore, the sample used for cholesterol testing should be collected first if multiple blood samples are required. One of the most important aspects of overall standardization of lipoprotein measurements is the laboratory used. It may be worthwhile to consult a clinical pathologist to determine if the laboratory complies with Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) standards for cholesterol and lipoprotein measurements.
# Chunk 662
Figure 9.4 is a suggested algorithm for cholesterol control based on LDL levels. Cholesterol fat-lowering diet books abound in most bookstores and allow the patient to choose a diet she will best follow. The role of exercise and cigarette cessation should be stressed to all patients. Patients with a family history of cardiovascular disease (history of premature coronary artery problems and strokes) should be tested and started on conservative programs in their 20s. After 3 to 6 months, if the LDL remains above 160 mg/dL with zero to one risk factor or above 130 mg/dL with two or more risk factors, then medical therapy should be initiated. Any woman with coronary heart disease or equivalents such as diabetes or other forms of atherosclerotic disease (peripheral arterial disease, abdominal aortic aneurysm, and symptomatic carotid artery disease) should initiate lifestyle changes if her LDL is 100 mg/dL or more and drug therapy if her LDL is 130 mg/dL or more. Anyone with an LDL 190 mg/dL or higher should be considered for drug therapy (33).
# Chunk 663
The bile acid-binding resins cholestyramine and colestipol were the mainstay of therapy. Their usefulness is limited by side effects such as constipation, bloating, nausea, and heartburn, and by their tendency to interfere with the absorption of other drugs. Nicotinic acid (500 mg three times daily) decreases triglycerides, LDL, and lipoprotein (a ) and increases HDL more than any other drug. Flushing, pruritus, gastrointestinal distress, and, rarely, hepatotoxicity are a few of the adverse effects of nicotinic acid. Starting at a low dose and pretreating with aspirin 325 mg or ibuprofen 200 mg can minimize the facial ﬂushing. Fibric acid derivatives like clofibrate and gemfibrozil are used to lower triglycerides and increase HDL but may increase LDL in some patients. The HMG-CoA (3-hydroxy-3methyl-glutaryl-coenzyme A) reductase inhibitors (statins) include atorvastatin, ﬂuvastatin, lovastatin, pravastatin, and simvastatin. These medicines inhibit HMG-CoA reductase, the enzyme that catalyzes the rate-limiting step in cholesterol synthesis. Several clinical trials showed that pravastatin, simvastatin, and lovastatin have a beneficial effect in cardiovascular disease. Statins are better tolerated than other lipid-lowering drugs, but reported side effects include severe myalgias, muscle weakness with increases in creatine phosphokinase, and, rarely, rhabdomyolysis, leading to renal failure.
# Chunk 664
The only acceptable method for assessment of glycemic control is determination of blood glucose by direct enzyme analysis, not by measurement of urine values, which do not correlate. Glucometers with memory storage made home glucose monitoring more reliable. Physician treatment guidelines are in Table 9.10 and patient guidelines in Table 9.11. In a 10 multicenters’ study, the diabetes control and complication trial (DCCT), performed under the auspices of the National Institutes of Health, showed a marked reduction (40%–50%) in complications of neuropathy, retinopathy, and nephropathy when patients with type 1 diabetes received intensive therapy (accomplished by a team approach) as compared with those who received standard therapy.
# Chunk 665
Place patient on ADA diet with appropriate caloric, sodium, and lipid restrictions.

Establish cardiac risk factors, kidney function (serum creatinine, urine for microalbuminuria).
# Chunk 666
Follow chronic glycemic control by HgA1c every 2 to 3 months in the office.

Initial general health evaluation should consist of a complete history and physical examination and the following laboratory tests: CBC with differential, chemistry profile, lipid profile, urinalysis, thyroid function tests, urine for microalbuminuria, and ECG (baseline at age 40 or older, repeat yearly).
# Chunk 667
Administer the ﬂu vaccine every fall and the pneumococcal vaccine every 6 years.

ADA, American Diabetic Association; HgA1c, hemoglobin A1C; CBC, complete blood count; ECG, electrocardiogram. Adapted from The Expert Committee on the Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes Mellitus. Report of the Expert Committee on the Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes Mellitus. Diabetes Care 2000;23:S4–S42.
# Chunk 668
Table 9.11 Patient Guidelines for Treatment of Type 2 Diabetes

Initiate an ADA reducing diet (50% CHO, 30% fat, 20% protein, high fiber) with three meals a day.
# Chunk 669
More than 99% of circulating T4 and T3 concentrations are bound by plasma proteins, predominately to thyroxine-binding globulin (TBG), and the remaining 1% of thyroid hormones are free. Free levels of thyroid hormones remain constant despite physiologic or pharmacologic alterations. Regardless of total serum protein levels, active thyroid hormone remains stable. In healthy women, transitions from puberty to menopause do not alter free thyroid hormone concentrations. Excess endogenous or exogenous sources of estrogen increase TBG plasma concentration by decreasing hepatic clearance. Androgens (especially testosterone) and corticosteroids have the opposite effect by increasing hepatic TBG clearance.
# Chunk 670
Hypothyroidism Overt hypothyroidism occurs in 2% of women, and at least an additional 5% develop sub-clinical hypothyroidism. This is another disease that disproportionally impacts women five-to eightfold more commonly than men. This is especially true in the elderly, in whom many of the signs and symptoms are subtle. The principal cause of hypothyroidism is autoimmune thyroiditis (Hashimoto’s thyroiditis). A familial predisposition is observed in many cases, but the specific genetic or environmental trigger is unknown. The incidence of autoimmune thyroiditis increases with age, affecting up to 15% of women older than 65 years. Many have subclinical hypothyroidism, which is defined as an elevated serum TSH concentration with a normal serum free T4 level. It is uncertain whether treatment will improve quality of life in otherwise healthy patients who have subclinical hypothyroidism (41,42). Chronic autoimmune thyroiditis (Hashimoto’s) is the more common cause of hypothyroidism in countries without iodine deficiency. In this process one has both cellular and antibody-mediated destruction of the thyroid, which can result in either a goiter or atrophic thyroid. Autoimmune thyroiditis may be associated with other endocrine (e.g., type 1 diabetes, primary ovarian failure, adrenal insufficiency, and hypoparathyroidism) and nonendocrine (e.g., vitiligo and pernicious anemia) disorders (43). When autoimmune diseases are present, there should be a high degree of suspicion for concurrent thyroid disorders. With postpartum thyroiditis there will be a hyperthyroid phase followed by a hypothyroid phase that can last for months. Iatrogenic causes of hypothyroidism occur after surgical removal or radioactive iodine therapy for hyperthyroidism (Graves) or thyroid cancer. Radiation was used to treat acne and other dermatologic disorders 45 years ago; patients undergoing such treatment have an increased risk of thyroid cancer and require close monitoring. Although worldwide iodine deficiency goiter is the most common form of hypothyroidism, this is uncommon in North America given the iodine supplementation in salt as well as other dietary sources. Hypothyroidism rarely occurs secondary to pituitary or hypothalamic diseases from TSH or TRH deficiency, but this must be considered if symptoms occur after neurosurgical procedures.
# Chunk 671
Clinical Features Symptoms of thyrotoxicosis include fatigue, diarrhea, heat intolerance, palpitations, dyspnea, nervousness, and weight loss. In young patients there may be paradoxical weight gain from an increased appetite. Thyrotoxicosis may cause vomiting in pregnant women, which may be confused with hyperemesis gravidarum (50). Tachycardia, lid lag, tremor, proximal muscle weakness, and warm moist skin are classic physical findings. The most dramatic physical changes are ophthalmologic and include lid retraction, periorbital edema, and proptosis. These eye findings occur in less than one-third of women. In elderly adults, symptoms are often more subtle, with presentations of unexplained weight loss, atrial fibrillation, or new onset angina pectoris. Menstrual abnormalities span from regular menses to light ﬂow to anovulatory menses and associated infertility. Goiter is common in younger women with Graves disease, but may be absent in older women. Toxic nodular goiter is associated with nonhomogeneous glandular enlargement, whereas in subacute thyroiditis the gland is tender, hard, and enlarged.
# Chunk 672
Diagnosis Most thyrotoxic patients have elevated total and free T4 and T3 concentrations (measured by radioimmune assay). In thyrotoxicosis, serum TSH concentrations are virtually undetectable, even with very sensitive assays (sensitivity measured to 0.1 units). Sensitive serum TSH measurements may aid in the diagnosis of hyperthyroidism. Radioiodine uptake scans are useful in the differential diagnosis of established hyperthyroidism. Scans with homogeneous uptake of radioactive iodine are suggestive of Graves disease, whereas heterogeneous tracer uptake is suggestive of a diagnosis of toxic nodular goiter. Thyroiditis and medication-induced thyrotoxicosis have diminished glandular radioisotope concentration.
# Chunk 673
Therapy Antithyroid medications, either propylthiouracil (PTU 50–300 mg every 6–8 hours) or methimazole (10–30 mg per day) are used for initial therapy. After metabolic control is achieved, definitive therapy is obtained by thyroid ablation with radioiodine, which results in permanent hypothyroidism. Both antithyroid drugs block thyroid hormone biosynthesis and may have additional immunosuppressive effects on the gland. The primary difference in oral medications is that PTU partially inhibits extrathyroidal T4-to-T3 conversion, whereas methimazole does not. Methimazole has a longer half-life and permits single daily dosing, which may encourage compliance. Euthyroidism is typically restored in 3 to 10 weeks, and treatment with oral antithyroid agents is continued for 6 to 24 months, unless total ablation with radioiodine or surgical resection is performed. Surgery is less popular because it is invasive and may result in inadvertent parathyroid removal, which commits the patient to lifelong calcium therapy.
# Chunk 674
Therapy with iodine-131 provides a permanent cure of hyperthyroidism in 90% of patients.

The principal drawback to radioactive iodine therapy is the high rate of postablative hypothyroidism, which occurs in at least 50% of patients immediately after therapy, with additional cases developing at a rate of 2% to 3% per year. Based on the assumption that hypothyroidism will develop, these patients should be given lifetime thyroid replacement therapy. Beta-adrenergic blocking agents such as propranolol or atenolol are useful adjunctive therapy for control of sympathomimetic symptoms such as tachycardia (51). An additional benefit of beta-blockers is the blocking of peripheral conversion of T4 to T3. In rare cases of thyroid storm, PTU, beta-blockers, glucocorticoids, and high-dose iodine preparations (intravenous sodium iodide) should be administered immediately, and referral to an intensive care unit is advisable.
# Chunk 675
Thyroid Nodules and Thyroid nodules are common and found on physical examination in up to 5% of patients. Cancer Nodules may be demonstrated on ultrasound in approximately 50% of 60-year-olds. The vast majority of nodules when discovered are asymptomatic and benign; however, malignancy and hyperthyroidism must be excluded (52). Ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration is recommended in the presence of the following factors: history of radiation to the head, neck, or upper chest; family history of thyroid cancer; ultrasound findings suggestive of malignancy; or a nodule larger than 1.5 cm in diameter (53).
# Chunk 676
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a common problem, affecting about 10% to 15% of the population, with women being twice as likely to have the diagnosis (56). Given that its primary symptom is typically crampy chronic abdominal pain, IBS is often in the differential diagnosis for patients with chronic pelvic pain. Stress and certain foods will often trigger the pain, and defecation often will provide some relief from the pain. Other gastrointestinal symptoms include diarrhea and constipation, gastroesophageal reﬂux disease, nausea, bloating, and ﬂatulence. What makes this a more difficult diagnosis is the spectrum of additional symptoms, including dysmenorrhea, dyspareunia, fibromyalgia complaints, urinary symptoms of frequency and urgency, and even sexual dysfunction.
# Chunk 677
Management General management of IBS can be extremely difficult. Often, the first step is to reassure the patient that this is a functional disease and is not related to cancer or malignancy, assuming those were eliminated by history and examination. Many individuals have some underlying concerns that diagnostic testing needs to be performed or that something is being missed. Constant reassurance is an important aspect of management. The patient needs to be an active participant in her care and understand the chronic nature of the disease. A symptom diary for several weeks may show a link between various foods and stressors that may be modifiable. Some individuals are able to link various stressors in their lives to symptoms while others will not have identifiable causes. Common triggers include stress, anxiety, medication (antibiotics, antacids), menstrual cycles, abusive relationships, certain foods (lactose, sorbitol), and travel. Patients should be counseled about dietary interventions, including increasing dietary fiber, decreasing total fat intake, and avoiding foods that trigger symptoms. Stool softeners are recommended for individuals with hard stools, and bulk aiding agents may be helpful for those individuals with constipation. The overuse of laxatives is to be discouraged. Good bowel habits should be discussed. Patients with poor habits should set aside a quiet time every day to attempt defecation. Many individuals get into a habit of ignoring stooling symptoms, leading to further problems with lower gastrointestinal disease.
# Chunk 678
Several compounds were studied that interact with serotonin receptors in the bowel (5 HT-3 and 5 HT-4). The 5-HT-3 antagonist, alosetron, was introduced to treat patients with diarrhea. Patients with other symptoms, including alternating diarrhea and constipation, and individuals with primary constipation received the drug, resulting in severe constipation in approximately one-third of patients. There were reports of ischemic colitis with the use of this drug. Although the drug was withdrawn for a time period, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration allowed its reintroduction. Tegaserod is a 5-HT-4 receptor (serotonin receptor) agonist that is approved for short-term use in patients with constipation. It has gastrointestinal stimulatory effects facilitated by intercolonergic transmission as its primary mode of action. There are many 5-HT drugs under development that will be introduced over the next 2 to 5 years.
# Chunk 679
Mitral Valve Prolapse Syndrome, Dysautonomia, and Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome

The terms mitral valve prolapse syndrome (MVPS), dysautonomia, and postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS) all refer to a syndrome in which the patient has problems with palpitations, hypotension, syncope, dyspnea, panic/anxiety disorder, numbness, hyperﬂexible joints, pectus excavatum, and gastric emptying disorders. Initially patients (typically fivefold times more likely to be women) who presented with these symptoms were thought to be somatizing their anxiety disorder. It is now accepted that it is a syndrome that appears to involve the autonomic nervous system (64). This often will present first in early adolescence with gradual worsening of the symptoms. The patients are very slender in build and lose weight to a low body mass index over a number of months as the syndrome evolves. This weight loss is the probable cause of the secondary amenorrhea that prompts these women to seek gynecologic care. The symptoms are not clearly explained by the degree of mitral valve prolapse, so many feel MVPS is a marker for individuals at risk for this complex of symptoms. Increased sympathetic activity is the common pathway for most of the proposed mechanisms for POTS or MVPS. There appears to be a genetic component, with over 10% of patients reporting the diagnosis in family members with orthostatic intolerance (65,66).
# Chunk 680
Ovulation is suppressed during lactation. The suckling of the infant elevates prolactin levels and reduces gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) from the hypothalamus, reducing luteinizing hormone (LH) release and thus inhibiting follicular maturation (14). Even with continued nursing, ovulation eventually returns but is unlikely before 6 months, especially if the woman is amenorrheic and is fully breastfeeding with no supplemental foods given to the infant (15). For maximum contraceptive reliability, feeding intervals should not exceed 4 hours during the day and 6 hours at night, and supplemental feeding should not exceed 5% to 10% of the total amount of feeding (16). Six-month pregnancy rates of 0.45% to 2.45% are reported for couples relying solely on this method (17). To prevent pregnancy, another method of contraception should be used from 6 months after birth or sooner if menstruation resumes. Breastfeeding reduces the mother’s lifetime risk of breast cancer (18).
# Chunk 681
Gonorrhea, ureaplasma, and pelvic inﬂammatory disease (PID) and its sequel (tubal infertility) are reduced with consistent use of barrier methods (28–30). Tested in vitro, Chlamydia trachomatis, herpes virus type 2, HIV, and hepatitis B did not penetrate latex condoms but did cross through condoms made from animal intestine (31). Follow-up of sexual partners of HIV-infected individuals showed that condom use provides considerable protection (32). Consistent condom use provides more protection than inconsistent use (33). In one study, couples who use condoms 0% to 50% of the time had an HIV seroconversion rate of 20.8 per 100 couple years, whereas those who used condoms 100% of the time had a conversion rate of only 2.3 per 100 couple years (34). Nonoxynol-9 should not be used with condoms for HIV protection because it is associated with genital lesions. Nonoxynol-9 does not add to the protection afforded by condoms alone (35).
# Chunk 682
Female Condom The original female condom introduced in 1992 was a polyurethane vaginal pouch attached to a rim that partly covered the vulva. The recently FDA approved FC2 female condom is an improved version made from softer synthetic latex that does not require hand assembly during manufacture and is therefore less expensive (38). It is recommended for prevention of pregnancy and STDs, including HIV. Breakage may occur less often with the female condom than the male condom; slippage appears to be more common, especially for those new to its use (39). Exposure to seminal ﬂuid is slightly higher than with the male condom (40). Initial US trials showed a pregnancy rate of 15% in 6 months. Subsequent analysis found that with perfect use, the pregnancy rate may be only 2.6%. This rate is comparable to perfect use of the diaphragm and cervical cap, the other female barrier methods (41). As with the male condom, failure rates fall with increasing experience. Colposcopic studies of women using the female condom demonstrate no signs of trauma or change in the bacterial ﬂora (42).
# Chunk 683
The FemCap

This new version of the cervical cap made of silicone rubber was approved by the FDA in 2003. It looks like a sailor’s hat with the dome covering the cervix and the brim fitting into the vaginal fornices (51). It is made in three sizes—22-, 26-, and 30-mm diameter—and is expected to be reusable for 2 years. It is used with spermicide and should be left in place for at least 6 hours after intercourse, but it may be left in place as long as 48 hours at a time. Additional acts of intercourse require insertion of more spermicide. Femcap requires a clinician’s fitting and prescription for use. The only available efficacy study compared the FemCap to the vaginal diaphragm. The 6-month pregnancy rate for the FemCap was 13.5%, substantially higher than the 7.9% rate for the diaphragm. Both groups used N-9 spermicide with the devices (52).
# Chunk 684
Lea’s Shield, approved by the FDA in 2002, is another vaginal barrier device made of silicone rubber. It is intended for use with a spermicide. It is shaped like an elliptical bowl with a central air valve approximately the size of a diaphragm, featuring an anterior loop to assist its removal. The posterior end is thicker and therefore less likely to rotate when in place. It comes in one size; proper fitting requires only that it cover the cervix, sit behind the symphysis, and be comfortable. The shield needs to be inserted prior to each act of intercourse and should not be left in the vagina for longer than 48 hours (53). A prescription is required. Approximately 87% of those responding to a question about their use of the shield stated that they would recommend its use to a friend (51). Of 59 women who used the device with N-9 spermicide, the 6-month pregnancy rate was 15% (54).
# Chunk 685
The Sponge The Today sponge is a polyurethane dome-shaped device containing nonoxynol-9. It is moistened with water and then inserted high in the vagina to cover the cervix. It combines the advantages of a disposable barrier with spermicide and provides protection for 24 hours. The contraceptive efficacy appears to differ with parity. Nulliparous women are reported to have a perfect use pregnancy rate of 9% per year, whereas parous women have a pregnancy rate of 20% (Table 10.2). Rates with typical use are estimated as 16 per year in nullipara and 32% in multipara (55). A trial comparing the sponge with a vaginal spermicide preparation used alone without barrier showed the sponge had a slightly lower pregnancy rate (56).
# Chunk 686
Figure 10.5 Levonorgestrel T (Mirena™) intrauterine device.

The levonorgestrel in the T device is much more potent than natural progesterone and has a strong effect on the endometrium. The hormone is released at an initial rate of 20 μg daily, which declines to half this rate by 5 years. Blood hormone levels are significantly lower than with other progesterone-only contraception and remain stable at approximately 150 to 200 pg/mL (61). About 85% of cycles are ovulatory. The contraceptive effect of the levonorgestrel intrauterine device is a result of thickened and scant cervical mucus, endometrial atrophy, and an intrauterine inﬂammatory response (62).
# Chunk 687
Exposure to sexually transmitted pathogens is the more important determinant of PID risk than is wearing an IUD. In the Women’s Health Study, women who were married or cohabiting and who said they had only one sexual partner in the past 6 months had no increase in PID (75). In contrast, previously married or single women had marginal increase in risk, even though they had only one partner in the previous 6 months (77). The only pelvic infection that was unequivocally related to IUD use is actinomycosis (78). It appears that PID with actinomycosis was reported only in women wearing an IUD. Rates of colonization with actinomycosis increase with duration of use for plastic devices but appear to be much less for copper-releasing IUDs. Actinomyces may be found in cervical cytology of up to 7% of women with an IUD. Because of the low positive predictive value and a lack of sensitivity and specificity of cervical cytology to diagnose this organism, antibiotic treatment and IUD removal should be reserved for symptomatic women (79).
# Chunk 688
When PID is suspected in a woman wearing an IUD, appropriate cultures should be obtained, and antibiotic therapy should be administered. Removal of the IUD is not necessary unless symptoms do not improve after 72 hours of treatment (80). Pelvic abscess, if suspected, should be ruled out by ultrasound examination.
# Chunk 689
Clinical Management Contraindications to IUD use listed by the World Health Organization include pregnancy, puerperal sepsis, PID, or STDs current or within the past 3 months, endometrial or cervical cancer, undiagnosed genital bleeding, uterine anomalies, and fibroid tumors that distort the endometrial cavity (87). Infection with HIV is not considered a contraindication for IUD use. No increase in pelvic infection, female-to-male transmission, or viral shedding was found among HIV-1 infected women (89,90). Copper allergy and Wilson’s disease are contraindications to the use of copper IUDs.
# Chunk 690
Antibiotic prophylaxis is not beneficial, probably because the risk of pelvic infection with IUD insertion is so low. A large randomized trial of 1,985 patients receiving either oral azithromycin or placebo found no difference in rates of IUD removal during the first 90 days after insertion and no difference in rates of salpingitis (97). These women were screened for STDs only by self-history. Screening for gonorrhea and chlamydia at the time of insertion is recommended for adolescents, but it is not necessary to wait for the results before insertion because patients with positive results have no adverse effects if treated promptly (98). PID, puerperal sepsis, or postabortion sepsis within the past 3 months are considered contraindications and patients with purulent cervicitis should be tested and treated before insertion.
# Chunk 691
Duration of Use

Annual rates of pregnancy, expulsions, and medical removals decrease with each year of use (102,103). Therefore, a woman who has no problem by year 5, for example, is very unlikely to experience problems in the subsequent years. The copper T380A is FDA approved for 10 years and the levonorgestrel T for 5 years, though as previously noted, good data support use of the copper T380A through 12 years and of the levonorgestrel T through 7 years (66,86).
# Chunk 692
Management of Bleeding and Cramping with Intrauterine Devises

The most important medical reason that women give for requesting removal of an IUD is bleeding and pelvic pain. These symptoms are common in the first few months, but diminish. Nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs are usually helpful. When pain and bleeding occur later, the patient should be examined for signs of PID, partial expulsion of the device, or an intracavitary fibroid. Two ultrasonographic studies comparing women with these symptoms after 6 months to women with no bleeding complaints show downward displacement of the IUDs into the cervical canal in many of the symptomatic women and in some cases, intracavitary fibroids (104,105). When the patient wishes to continue with an IUD, removal of the displaced device and insertion of a new one is advisable. In situations where IUDs are inexpensive and ultrasound is expensive or not available, the best course is to offer immediate removal and replacement of the IUD without ultrasound proof of displacement.
# Chunk 693
Hormonal contraceptives are female sex steroids, synthetic estrogen and synthetic progesterone (progestin), or progestin-only without estrogen. They can be administered in the form of OCs, patches, implants, and injectables. The most widely used hormonal contraceptive is the combination OC containing both estrogen and progestin. Combination OCs can be monophasic, with the same dose of estrogen and progestin administered each day, or multiphasic, in which varying doses of steroids are given through a 21-day or 24-day cycle. Combination OCs are packaged with 21 active tablets and 7 placebos, or 24 active tablets and 4 placebo tablets. The inclusion of placebos allows the user to take one pill every day without having to count. The medication-free interval while the user takes the placebo tablets allows withdrawal bleeding that mimics a 28-day menstrual cycle. To begin OC use, the user takes the first pill any time from the first day of menses through the Sunday after menstruation begins and thereafter starts a new pack as soon as the first pack is completed. The 7-day medication-free interval was standard for years, but studies showed that a shorter medication-free interval is adequate to trigger cyclic withdrawal bleeding and maintains better suppression of ovulation. Ovarian follicles mature more during the 7-day medication-free interval than during the 4-day interval. Hence the new 24/4 combination theoretically could be more effective in preventing pregnancy than the 21/7 combination, but this has not been demonstrated. Other variations of OC administration are the extended cycle and the continuous cycle methods. Users take active pills containing an estrogen–progestin combination for 3 months at a time (extended cycle) or indefinitely for a year or more (continuous cycle). Users on these regimens have more unscheduled days of spotting or bleeding than those on 28-day cycles in the beginning, but become amenorrheic. As a result they experience fewer cycle triggered symptoms such as headache and menstrual pain. Continuous-combined regimens are preferred for women with chronic pelvic pain or when dysmenorrhea is not relieved by OCs taken in 28-day cycles (106).
# Chunk 694
Figure 10.6 Schematic representation of the expected pharmacokinetic profiles of progestogens administered in different formulations. (From Landgren BM. Mechanism of action of gestagens. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 1990;32:95–110, with permission.) had no increase in pregnancies. Few heavy women were studied with the etonogestrel implant because the studies excluded women of body weight greater than 130% of ideal body weight. Pregnancy rate does appear to increase with weight in women using the levonorgestrel implants at weight 70 kg or more but it is still low. There were no pregnancies in any weight group during the first 3 years of use in a large study (125,126).
# Chunk 695
Caucasian population. It codes for a one amino acid mutation in the factor V protein, inhibiting cleavage of the protein by activated protein C, which is an essential step in maintaining the balance between coagulation and fibrinolysis (109,132). Risk for a first thromboembolic episode among women using OCs was 2.2 per 10,000 woman-years for women without the factor V mutation and 27.7 per 10,000 woman-years for women with the mutation (133). Cigarette smoking did not affect this risk. There are pronounced ethnic differences in the presence of this mutation. The Leiden allele is found in 3% to 5% of whites but is rare in Africans, Asians, Amerindians, Eskimos, and Polynesians (134). A similar mutation is found in the prothrombin gene at position 20210 and is described as prothrombin G20210A. This mutation occurs in 3% of the European population and is strongly associated with venous thrombosis in women taking OCs (135). Many more genetic conditions predisposing to thrombosis were described. Pregnancy is an even greater challenge for women with inherited defects of anticoagulation (136). A woman who sustains a venous event while using OCs should be evaluated thoroughly after she has recovered. Assessment should include at minimum the measurement of antithrombin III, protein C, and protein S levels, resistance to activated protein C, serum homocysteine, factor V Leiden mutation, the prothrombin G20210A mutation and testing for antiphospholipid syndrome. It should not be assumed that hormonal contraception was the unique cause of the thrombotic episode.
# Chunk 696
Endometrial Cancer and Ovarian Cancer Combination OCs reduce the risk of subsequent endometrial cancer and ovarian cancer (159,160). Two-year use of OCs reduces the risk of endometrial cancer by 40%, and 4 or more years of use reduces the risk by 60%. The evidence for this benefit continues to accumulate (161). A 50% reduction in ovarian cancer risk for women who took OCs for 3 to 4 years and an 80% reduction with 10 or more years of use was reported (162). There was some benefit from as little as 3 to 11 months of use. A review of all available studies in the world published in English through 2008 concluded that ovarian cancer risk decreased by 20% for each 4 years of use and was seen for carriers of the BRCA1 and 2 mutations as well. The benefit persisted for at least 30 years after last use (163). A similar reduction of risk of ovarian epithelial cancer was found in a prospective study from Norway and Sweden, with borderline tumor risk equally reduced. Combination OCs with less than 50 μgof EE, or less than 100 μg of mestranol and reduced doses of progestin, provided as much protection as higher dose pills (164). Today’s lower-dose 20 μg EE pills were not separately studied. Whether or not they provide the same benefit remains unproven; however, progestinonly contraceptives are reported to provide risk reduction equivalent to that of combined OCs (165).
# Chunk 697
Cervical Cancer There may be a weak association between OC use and cancer of the cervix. A systematic review of 28 epidemiologic studies of cervical cancer in OC users compared with those who never used OCs reported summary relative risks of 1.1 (95% CI, 1.1–1.2) at less than 5 years of pill use, 1.6 (1.4–1.7) at 5 to 9 years, and 2.2 (1.9–2.4) at 10 or more years (166). A 2007 update by these same authors reported a pooled relative risk for all studies of 1.9 (95% CI, 1.69–2.13) for invasive cervical cancer or CIN3/carcinoma in situ (CIS) with 5 or more years of OC use. Risk declined after use ceased and by 10 years returned to that of never users. Too few had used progestin-only pills to provide a conclusion as to their effect. For injectable progestins, the relative risk was very slightly increased to 1.22 (95% CI, 1.01– 1.46), which was just statistically significant (167). Critics of these studies argued that causation is not proven because few adequately control for the key behavioral factors of partners, use of barrier contraception, and adequacy of cervical cancer screening (168). Important risk factors for cervical cancer are early sexual intercourse and exposure to HPV. Women who used OCs typically started sexual relations at younger ages than women who have not used OCs and, in some studies, report having had more partners. These factors increase one’s chance of acquiring HPV, the most important risk factor for cervical cancer. Because barrier contraceptives reduce the risk of cervical cancer, use of alternative choices for contraception compounds the difficulty in establishing an association with OC use alone (169). The presence of HPV types 16 or 18 is associated with a 50-fold increase in risk for preneoplastic lesions of the cervix (170). Adenocarcinomas of the cervix are rare, they are not as easily detected as other lesions by screening cervical cytology, and the incidence appears to be increasing. One study found a doubling of risk for adenocarcinoma with OC use that increased with duration of use, reaching a relative risk of 4.4 if total use of OCs exceeded 12 years (171). The results of this study were adjusted for history of genital warts, number of sexual partners, and age at first intercourse. Another summary of case-control studies that includes testing for HPV. HPV types 16 or 18 were present in 82% of the patients, yielding a relative risk of 81.3 (95% CI, 42.0–157.1) for the disease. Cofactors identified with adenocarcinoma included longer-term use of hormonal contraception. Intrauterine device use was associated with reduced relative risk of 0.41 (95% CI, 0.18–0.93) (172). Use of hormonal contraception by women from aged 20 to 30 years is estimated to increase the incidence of cervix cancer (any cervix cancer, or CIN3/CIS) diagnosed by age 50 from 7.3 to 8.3 per 1,000 women in lesser-developed countries and from 3.8 to 4.5 in developed countries (172). Use of OCs is, at most, a minor factor in causation of cervical cancer; these findings emphasize the need to immunize against HPV and to provide cervical cancer screening worldwide. To reduce risk, women who are not in mutually monogamous relationships should be advised to use barrier methods in addition to hormonal contraception.
# Chunk 698
Oral contraceptives have the potential to alter a number of clinical laboratory tests as a result of estrogen-induced changes in hepatic synthesis; however, a large study comparing OC users with pregnant and nonpregnant controls found minimal changes (209). Hormone users took a variety of OCs containing 50 to 100 μg of estrogen, higher doses than are used today. Compared with nonpregnant women who were not using OCs, the OC users had an increase in T4 that is explained by increased circulating thyroid-binding protein, no change in creatinine and globulin levels, slight reduction in mean fasting glucose values and serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase, and a decrease in total bilirubin and alkaline phosphatase.
# Chunk 699
Choice of Oral Contraceptives

Recently introduced OCs include those containing drosperidol, more preparations with only 20 μgof EE, new multiphasic preparations, cyclic OCs with 24 days of active medication and 4 days of either placebo or 10 μgof EE, and extended-cycle and continuous cycle preparations plus branded generic versions of most OCs. A combination OC containing estradiol valerate with a new progestin, dienogest, was approved in 2010. There is new evidence that 20 μg EE pills offer reduced risk for venous thrombosis (130). An approach to OC selection for new patients is to begin with a 20 μg EE combination and then adjust depending on the patient’s symptoms after the first 2 to 3 months. As reported in a large systematic review of 20 μg EE OCs compared to 30 to 35 μg EE pills, women taking the lower dose OCs more often report changes in vaginal bleeding, episodes of irregular bleeding and heavy bleeding, and more amenorrhea (210). If a 20 μg pill is offered, the patient should understand that bleeding may be a problem and that she should return if this persists and try a different OC rather than stop the pill. The progestin component may become more important in determining cycle control when 20 μg EE is used. A comparison of 20 μg EE OCS, one containing 100 μgof levonorgestrel, the other with 1 mg of norethindrone acetate (NEA) found the NEA to have about twice as many days of unscheduled vaginal bleeding during the first 3 months, a critical time period for new users, which might be expected to lead to discontinuation (211). In a three-way trial, the 35-μg EE/norgestimate triphasic OC (Tri-Cyclen) was compared with two 20-μg EE pills, one containing 100 μgof levonorgestrel (Alesse), the other containing 150 μg desogestrel, followed by 2 hormone-free days and 5 days of 10 μg EE per day (Mircette) (212). Contraceptive efficacy was not significantly different. In the first two pill cycles more women taking Alesse had breakthrough bleeding and bleeding in the second half of the cycle than those taking the other two OCs in the first two cycles, but thereafter there was little difference. Women taking the higher estrogen Tri-Cyclen consistently experienced more frequent estrogenic side effects—bloating, breast tenderness, and nausea—than did women taking either 20-μg EE OC. These authors concluded that for the specific OCs evaluated, changing to either one of the 20 μg preparations would be beneficial.
# Chunk 700
For the average patient, the first choice of preparation for contraceptive purposes is a very low estrogen OC (20 μg EE) unless there are other considerations, for example, previous pregnancy while taking the pill. Patients with persistent break-through spotting or bleeding could be offered a pill with the same low estrogen dose, but a more potent progestin, for example levonorgestrel. Patients with apparent weight gain from ﬂuid retention while taking OCs, or with hirsutism or acne that did not respond to other OCs, may benefit from a change to the drospirenone/EE pill. The lower estrogen drospirenone combination is FDA approved for treatment of PMDD and should be considered for women with these symptoms who want hormonal contraception. Women with acne often benefit from the reduction in circulating testosterone that occurs with all combination OCs. Women who experience continuing pelvic pain, dysmenorrhea, or other menstrual triggered symptoms or who simply prefer fewer menstruations may be offered an extended-cycle or continuous cycle-OC regimen.
# Chunk 701
The OrthoEvra patch and the NuvaRing both provide combinations of ultrapotent progestins with EE. Both patch and ring provide almost constant low levels of the contraceptive steroids that are less than the peak levels seen with OCs. Both offer greater convenience to the user, which improves compliance. The patch has a surface area of 20 cm2. It delivers a daily dose of 150 μg norelgestromin, the active metabolite of norgestimate, and 20 μgof EE. The patch is worn for 1 week then replaced with a new patch for 7 days, continuing for 3 consecutive weeks followed by a week with no patch. The patch was compared with a multiphasic OC containing levonorgestrel 50 to 125 μg,and 30to40 μg EE (Triphasil) in a randomized trial of 1,417 women (122). The overall and method failure Pearl indices were 1.24 and 0.99 pregnancies per 100 woman-years in the patch group and 2.18 and 1.23 in the OC group, respectively, numerically less in the patch group but not statistically significant. Patch users had more breakthrough bleeding or spotting in the first two cycles, but thereafter this did not differ from OC users. Patch users reported more breast discomfort, dysmenorrhea, and abdominal pain than the OC users, but other adverse events were uncommon and did not differ. Perfect compliance was reported for 88.2% of patch users’ cycles versus 77.7% of the pill users’ cycles (p <.001). Pregnancy risk with the patch appears to be higher for women weighing more than 90 kg.
# Chunk 702
DMPA 150 mg every 3 months. (From Schwallie PC, Assenzo JR. Contraceptive use-efficacy study utilizing medroxyprogesterone acetate administered as an intramuscular injection once every 90 days. Fertil Steril 1973;24:331–339, with permission.) of the menstrual cycle and have initial spotting and bleeding at irregular intervals. Eventually, total amenorrhea develops in most women who take DMPA; with continued administration, amenorrhea develops in 50% of women by 1 year and in 80% by 3 years (Fig. 10.8).
# Chunk 703
The most important medical reason women discontinue use of DMPA and other progestinonly methods is persistent irregular vaginal bleeding. A variety of medications are used to stop this bleeding. Many are effective in terminating individual bleeding episodes, but a systematic review concluded that none improved continuation rates long term (222). New approaches include mifepristone and low-dose doxycycline. Mifepristone is of interest because irregular bleeding with DMPA was related to the down-regulation of endometrial estrogen receptors. Treatment with 50 mg of mifepristone every 2 weeks increases endometrial estrogen receptors and reduces breakthrough bleeding in new users of both DMPA and the levonorgestrel progestin implant (223). Another line of investigation concerns endometrial matrix metalloproteinase, which appears to play a regulatory role in the breakdown of the endometrium to produce normal menstruation. Treatment with doxycycline inhibits matrix metalloproteinase production in the endometrium in women after insertion of levonorgestrel subdermal implants (224). Five-day courses of either mifepristone 25 mg twice a day for one day, followed by EE 20 μg per day for 4 days, or doxycycline 20 mg twice a day for 5 days, reduced bleeding days by about 50% when compared to placebos during a 6-month randomized trial in women treated for prolonged or frequent bleeding occurring with etonogestrel subdermal implants (225). Capsules of 20 mg doxycycline are sold in the United States for treatment of periodontal disease.
# Chunk 704
DMPA use is commonly associated with weight gain, and that is one of the principal reasons women discontinue use. A large study is representative of the literature. Three cohorts of women who chose their method of contraception were followed for 36 months with measurements of weight and body fat. DMPA users gained an average of 5.1 kg. The cohort using OCs over the same interval gained only 1.47 kg, slightly less than the 2.05 kg gained by the cohort not using any hormonal contraception. Total body fat increased 4.14 kg in the DMPA cohort, while the increase in the OC users was 1.9 kg, only slightly more than the 1.17 kg in the nonhormonal contraceptive cohort. Many women were followed for 2 years after discontinuing DMPA. Those who chose nonhormonal methods after discontinuing DMPA lost a mean of 0.42 kg each 6 months. Those who chose to use oral contraceptives gained a mean of 0.43 kg each 6 months during the follow-up interval (226).
# Chunk 705
DMPA persists in the body for several months in women who used it for long-term contraception, and return to fertility may be delayed. It is reassuring that 70% of former users desiring pregnancy conceive within 12 months, and 90% conceive within 24 months after terminating DMPA use (228).
# Chunk 706
DMPA suppresses ovarian estrogen production. Prospective studies demonstrated bone loss during DMPA therapy, with recovery of bone mass after DMPA use is discontinued (229). Similar bone loss and then recovery occurs with lactation. Adolescents are of special concern because they normally gain bone mass; most of adult bone mass is attained by age 20. Estrogen injections prevent the bone loss and allow adolescent women to gain bone density despite use of DMPA (230). A long-term study in adolescents documented bone density loss and confirmed recovery of lumbosacral bone mineral density to baseline by 60 weeks after discontinuation of DMPA and significant gain above baseline by 180 weeks. Recovery of density at the hip was slower, 240 weeks to significant gain (231). A systematic review of DMPA clinical trials could find no studies where fracture was an outcome, so whether long-term use leads to fractures is still not known (232). The FDA black box warning added to DMPA labeling proposes that DMPA treatment be limited to 2 years at a time, unless the patient has no other good options for contraception. For many women, especially in third world countries, DMPA is often the only option for highly effective contraception because it is inexpensive and easy to administer. The issue should be discussed with women who are considering DMPA, but DMPA should not be routinely discontinued after 2 years unless the patient wants to conceive or wants to change to another contraceptive method for other reasons.
# Chunk 707
There is widespread support for use of DMPA during lactation when the DMPA is initiated at or after 6 weeks postpartum. There is good evidence that neither infant growth nor lactation is impaired by DMPA or progestin-only oral contraceptives (240). There is continued controversy as to how early DMPA should be given after delivery. Because lactation occurs in response to falling maternal estrogen and progesterone levels after birth, administration of DMPA in the first few days theoretically might interfere with the initiation of lactation. There is concern about the possible neonatal effects of the progestin, but investigators were unable to demonstrate the presence of DMPA or its metabolites in the urine of infants whose mothers received DMPA or any other suppression of reproductive hormones (240). In the United States, DMPA is commonly started at the time of hospital discharge, 48 to 72 hours after delivery. There is urgent need for controlled trials of immediate DMPA compared to other contraceptive options to determine whether this practice has an adverse effect on the initiation of lactation. The “U.S. Medical Eligibility Criteria for Contraceptive Use 2010” considers DMPA use prior to 1 month postpartum as category 2: the benefit is thought to exceed the theoretical risk (7).
# Chunk 708
Subcutaneous DMPA Depo-subQ Provera 104, a lower-dose DMPA preparation for subcutaneous administration, received FDA approval in 2005. The total dose is 30% less than that of the older DMPA intramuscular preparation. Because the dose is administered subcutaneously, blood levels are adequate to completely suppress ovulation for more than 13 weeks in all subjects tested, with a mean time of 30 weeks for return to ovulatory function (246). Contraception efficacy is superb, with no pregnancies in a total of 16,023 woman-cycles in the phase III studies done in the United States (247). Blood levels were lower in very obese women but still sufficient to completely suppress ovulation. The weight gain reported with the 150 mg DMPA remains a problem with the lower dose DMPA. Mean weight gain was 1.59 kg in the first year of use. Loss of bone density was observed with this dosage of DMPA, as with the larger intramuscular dose.
# Chunk 709
The original levonorgestrel implant (Norplant™) six-rod system was replaced with a two-rod version (Jadelle™), which is identical in its release rate and clinical activity to Norplant™ and is easier to insert and remove (250). Jadelle™ is widely used around the world. It is approved by the FDA but is not marketed in the United States. It is approved for 5 years. The Sino-Implant II™ is a less expensive two-rod levonorgestrel system manufactured in China and available in several countries. It is effective for 4 years (251). Implanon™ is the only subdermal implant sold in the United States. It is a single rod system containing etonogestrel, the active metabolite of desogestrel. Because of the greater potency of etonogestrel, the single rod releases enough to completely inhibit ovulation for at least 3 years. The single-rod system is most easily inserted and removed. In a United States trial, mean time for insertion was only a half minute and removal required a mean time of 3.5 minutes (252).
# Chunk 710
In 923 women followed for 20,648 treatment cycles in 11 studies there were no pregnancies with Implanon™ in place. Six pregnancies occurred within 14 days of removal of the devices. When these are included, as required by FDA, the cumulative Pearl index was 0.38 pregnancies per 100 woman-years at 3 years (254). Irregular bleeding was a problem, but occurred most frequently in the first 90 days of use and decreased over time. In a randomized comparison with the six-rod Norplant™, Implanon™ users had less frequent vaginal bleeding, but more became amenorrheic (255). Other commonly reported side effects are headache, weight gain, acne, breast tenderness, and emotional lability (254). Only 2.3% of subjects discontinued because of weight gain. Most women can use Implanon™. The US MEC lists only a small number of conditions as category 3, and these are based on theoretical concerns without actual evidence of harm (7). Insertion in the immediate postpartum period appears to have no adverse effects on mother or infant (256).
# Chunk 711
Postcoital use of sex steroids to prevent pregnancy began in the 1960s with high-dose estrogen taken daily for 5 days (262). This was replaced with the combination OC containing EE and levonorgestrel for greater convenience (263). More recently levonorgestrel alone became the method of choice after the World Health Organization showed its superiority in a large randomized trial with 1,998 women. The pregnancy rate was 3.2% with the EE/levonorgestrel method and only 1.1% with levonorgestrel alone (RR for pregnancy, 0.32; 95% CI, 0.18–0.70) for women treated within 72 hours of intercourse. Nausea and vomiting occurred much less frequently with levonorgestrel alone (23.1% vs. 50.5%, and 5.6% vs. 18.8%, respectively) (264). The efficacy of both methods declined as the time after intercourse increased. But even after 72 hours, the pregnancy rate with the levonorgestrel treatment was only 2.7% (Fig. 10.9) (265). A single dose of 1.5 mg levonorgestrel is just as effective as two doses of 0.75 mg, has no more side effects, and is more convenient for the patient. Both dosing regimens are FDA approved. Because levonorgestrel is almost as effective at 3 to 5 days after intercourse,
# Chunk 712
Figure 10.9 Emergency contraception: pregnancy rates by treatment group and time since unprotected coitus. LNG, levonorgestrel, 0.75 mg × 2. Yuzpe method is ethinyl estradiol, 0.100 mg plus levonorgestrel 0.50 mg × 2, 12 hours later. (From Randomized controlled trial of levonorgestrel versus the Yuzpe regimen of combined oral contraceptives for emergency contraception. Task Force on Postovulatory Methods of Fertility Regulation. Lancet 1998;352:430 [modified from Table 3], with permission.) the World Health Organization recommends 1.5 mg of levonorgestrel as a single dose, given up to 120 hours after intercourse (266). Research suggests that the main mechanism of action is delay of ovulation. Noe and colleagues established that levonorgestrel works only if it is administered prior to the day of ovulation (267). No pregnancies occurred to 87 women who received levonorgestrel from 1 to 5 days prior to the day of ovulation. Seven pregnancies occurred to 35 women treated on the day of ovulation or later. Postcoital levonorgestrel is not an abortifacient because it is effective only when taken before ovulation.
# Chunk 713
Ulipristal, a new progesterone-receptor modulator developed at the U.S. National Institutes of Health was approved by the FDA and the European Union for emergency contraception to 120 hours after intercourse. It is at least as effective as levonorgestrel 1.5 mg up to 72 hours, and may be superior between 72 and 120 hours (270). When Ulipristal is administered prior to the luteinizing hormone (LH) peak, it delays rupture of the preovulatory follicle for 5 days or more, which may be its primary mechanism of action (271). Ulipristal is primarily metabolized by the CYP3A4 enzyme system; hence, patients on drugs such as barbiturates, rifampin, and several of the anticonvulsants may have reduced protection from pregnancy with it. It is a prescription drug, while levonorgestrel 1.5 mg is available over the counter in the United States for women 18 years of age and over.
# Chunk 714
The Copper Intrauterine Device for Emergency Contraception

Postcoital insertion of a copper IUD was first reported by Lippes et al. in 1976 (272). In initial trials the device was inserted within 7 days of intercourse and was more effective than steroids for emergency contraception. Studies included women only within 5 days from intercourse. The multicenter trial by Wu and colleagues is an example of the superb efficacy offered by the copper T380A (273). Of 1,893 women who returned for a follow-up visit, there were no pregnancies within 1 month of IUD insertion. Efficacy for emergency contraception is 100% when the device is inserted up to 5 days after intercourse, and almost 100% up to 7 days after intercourse (273). An added benefit was that 94% of the patients were continuing with the IUD at the 12-month follow-up. There were no uterine perforations. Zhou and colleagues reported similar excellent results in a large study with a different copper device, the Multiload Cu-375 IUD (274). In much of the world, copper IUDs are very inexpensive. Even in the United States where IUDs are costly, the benefit to the patient of extremely effective emergency contraception, and long-term contraception with one intervention, makes emergency IUDs cost-effective. Whether the levonorgestrel IUD would work for emergency contraception is not known.
# Chunk 715
Laparoscopy Laparoscopy is the most common method of interval sterilization in the United States. In the standard laparoscopy technique, the abdomen is inﬂated with a gas (carbon dioxide) through a special needle inserted at the lower margin of the umbilicus (281). A hollow sheath containing a pointed trocar is then pushed through the abdominal wall at the same location, the trocar is removed, and the laparoscope is inserted into the abdominal cavity through the sheath to visualize the pelvic organs. A second, smaller trocar is inserted in the suprapubic region to allow the insertion of special grasping forceps. Alternatively, an operating laparoscope that has a channel for the instruments can be used; thus, the procedure can be performed through a single small incision. Laparoscopic sterilization is usually performed in the hospital under general anesthesia but can be performed under local anesthesia with conscious sedation. Overnight hospitalization for laparoscopy is rarely needed.
# Chunk 716
Tubal sterilization is remarkably safe. The Collaborative Review of Sterilization (CREST) study, a 1983 review of 9,475 interval sterilizations from multiple centers in the United States, reported a total complication rate of 1.7 per 100 procedures (281). Complications were increased by use of general anesthesia, previous pelvic or abdominal surgery, history of PID, obesity, and diabetes mellitus. The most common significant complication was unintended laparotomy for sterilization after intra-abdominal adhesions were found. In another series, 2,827 laparoscopic sterilizations were performed with the Silastic band using local anesthesia and intravenous sedation (286). Only four cases could not be completed (a technical failure rate of 0.14%), and laparotomy was never needed. Rarely, salpingitis can occur as a complication of the surgery. This occurs more often with electric coagulation than nonelectric techniques. Risk of death with female sterilization was 1 to 2 per 100,000 sterilizations in the last national study that was based on data from 1979 to 1980 (281). Almost half of the deaths were from complications of general anesthesia, usually related to the use of mask ventilation. When general anesthesia is used for laparoscopy, endotracheal intubation is mandatory because the pneumoperitoneum increases the risk of aspiration. International data from the Association for Voluntary Surgical Contraception show a similar record of safety from third world programs: 4.7 deaths per 100,000 female sterilizations and 0.5 deaths per 100,000 vasectomies (287).
# Chunk 717
Over the years since the CREST study began, sterilization by unipolar electrosurgery was abandoned because of the risk of bowel burns and was replaced with bipolar electro-surgery or the nonelectric methods (tubal ring, Hulka-Clemens clip, and the Filshie clip). An important later analysis of the CREST data found that bipolar sterilization can have a very low long-term failure rate if an adequate portion of the tube is coagulated. CREST study participants who were sterilized with bipolar electrosurgery from 1985 to 1987 had lower failure rates than those sterilized earlier (1978–1985). The important difference was in the application technique of the electric energy to the tubes. Women whose bipolar procedure involved coagulation at three sites or more had low 5-year failure rates (3.2 per 1,000 procedures), whereas women who had fewer than three sites of tubal coagulation had a 5-year failure rate of 12.9 per 1,000 (p = .01) (288).
# Chunk 718
Essure™ and Adiana™ devices can be installed under local anesthesia in an outpatient setting. No incision is needed. A nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drug is given 1 to 2 hours before the procedure to decrease tubal spasm. Over time fibrous tissue grows into both devices, occluding the tubes permanently. Because of this mechanism of action, these methods depend on scar formation, and women who are immunocompromised from HIV infection, medication, or chemotherapy should be advised that their success may be lower (293,294). The FDA requires a 3-month follow-up x-ray hysterosalpingography examination to document tubal occlusion for both methods. The hysterosalpingogram (HSG) for Essure™ should document bilateral placement of the devices at the uterotubal junction and a lack of peritoneal spillage of dye. Off-label and outside of the United States, plain x-ray, ultrasound, computerized x-ray tomography, and magnetic resonance imaging were used to confirm the presence and position of the Essure™ devices (295,296). The Adiana™ matrix is not radio opaque, so successful occlusion is documented only by lack of dye spillage. The patient with transcervical sterilization should continue to use a reliable method of contraception until successful occlusion is documented.
# Chunk 719
Risks of Hysteroscopy Adverse events or side effects were reported on the day of procedure in 3% of the initial Essure™ patients. These consisted of vasovagal responses, cramping, nausea, and vaginal spotting (297). Possible but uncommon risks of the hysteroscopic tubal sterilization methods include perforation by the device at insertion and expulsion of the device. In the initial clinical trials tubal perforation was reported in 1% of Essure™ placements. None were reported with Adiana™. There is theoretical risk of mutagenic or carcinogenic effect to the fetus from nickel alloy in Essure™ should pregnancy occur, although no such injury was reported (297). Other potential combinations with transcervical sterilization are related to the hysteroscopy procedure, not the tubal occlusion process. These include hypervolemia, injury to surrounding organs, bleeding, and infection and occur in less than 1% of cases. Excessive ﬂuid absorbance leading to hypervolemia is more of a concern with Adiana™ and the nonionic solution that must be used to distend the uterine cavity because of the electrical energy applied. With Essure™ the distending medium is normal saline (293,294). An extensive 2009 review of the first 6 years of Essure™ use reported in publications, industry sources and the Manufacturer and User Facility Device Experience (MAUDE) database maintained by the FDA, found 20 reports of pelvic pain, which in some cases responded to hysteroscopy or laparoscopic removal of the device. An additional 20 women had second-look hysteroscopy because of persistent abnormal vaginal bleeding. During this time period more than 172,000 Essure™ devices were shipped, so such problems are quite rare (298).
# Chunk 720
Sterilization Failure with Hysteroscopic Methods

The Essure™ microinsert was successfully placed in 86% of patients after the first procedure, which increased to 90% after a second procedure using the initial insertion catheter. (298). Reasons for failure of insertion were tubal obstruction, stenosis, or difficulty in accessing the tubal ostia. Correct placement was confirmed at 3 months in 96%, and complete bilateral occlusion occurred in 92%. Of those patients with complete occlusion, there were no pregnancies in 5,305 woman-months of use. A subsequent study of an improved catheter design in 2004 reported a 98% successful placement rate (299). The Adiana™ trials reported a 94% successful placement rate with the first procedure, which increased to 95% after a second procedure (301).
# Chunk 721
The number of abortions reported each year in the United States—1.2 million in 2006—has been declining since the peak level of 1.61 million in 1990. In 2006, the national abortion ratio was 22.4 abortions for every 1,000 live births, and the national abortion rate was 19.4 per 1,000 women aged 15 to 44 years (318). While abortion rates for all racial and ethnic groups have declined, they are significantly higher for black and Hispanic women. Non-Hispanic white women have 22% of all abortions, black women have 37%, and Hispanic women 22%. Most women who obtain abortions are unmarried, 83.5% in 2006 (316). Use of abortion varies markedly with age. In 2006, 16.9% of women obtaining abortions were between 15 and 19 years of age, and 49.6% were 24 years of age or younger. In 2006, the abortion ratio for women younger than 15 years of age was 759 per 1,000 live births, almost as many abortions as births (Fig. 10.1). The lowest abortion ratio, 141 per 1,000 live births, is for women aged 30 to 34 years.
# Chunk 722
Mifepristone (RU486), an analogue of the progestin norethindrone, has strong affinity for the progesterone receptor but acts as an antagonist, blocking the effect of natural progesterone. Given alone, the drug was moderately effective in causing abortion of early pregnancy; the combination of mifepristone with a low dose of prostaglandin proved very effective, producing complete abortion in 96% to 99% of cases (330). The FDA approved a protocol of mifepristone, 600 mg orally, followed 2 days later by misoprostol, 400 mg, taken orally in women no more than 49 days from start of the last menstrual period. In the years before FDA approval, investigators established the superiority of the evidence-based protocols that are used. These protocols used 200 mg of mifepristone rather than 600 mg, because the lower dose is just as effective. Misoprostol, 800 μg is given by vaginal or buccal routes, which provides higher efficacy than the 400 μg oral dose (331–334). The misoprostol can be taken at 24, 48, or 72 hours after mifepristone with equal efficacy (333). Women may safely self-administer the misoprostol at home (334). It can be taken by buccal or vaginal routes with similar blood levels and similar areas under the plasma concentration curve (AUC) (335,336). After case reports of death from Clostridium sordelli, a large cohort study was published by Planned Parenthood describing use of prophylactic doxycycline 100 mg twice a day for one week, and buccal rather than vaginal administration of misoprostol (337).
# Chunk 723
Complications of Medical Abortion

Heavy or prolonged bleeding is the principal complication, with up to 8% of women experiencing some bleeding for as long as 30 days. Need for surgical curettage is predicted by the gestational age when the mifepristone is administered. Two percent of women treated at 49 days or less, 3% of those treated at 50 to 56 days, and 5% of those treated at 57 to 63 days needed curettage for bleeding or failed abortion in a large study with 200 mg of mifepristone and 800 μg of vaginal misoprostol (342). Late bleeding, at 3 to 5 weeks after expulsion of the pregnancy, accounted for more than half of the curettages. The complications reported to the manufacturer of mifepristone from the first 80,000 patients treated were published (343). One woman died of ectopic pregnancy after refusing care. Another patient survived severe sepsis, and another, a 21-year-old woman with no risk factors, survived an acute myocardial infarction. Other severe sepsis cases have since occurred. A 27-year-old woman participating in a clinical trial in Canada died of multiple organ system failure from Clostridium sordelli sepsis after complete expulsion of a 5.5-week pregnancy despite receiving excellent care (344). Five other similar sepsis deaths were reported in the popular press. The five deaths in the United States occurred among approximately 500,000 women treated with mifepristone/misoprostol, allowing estimation of a case fatality rate of 1 per 100,000, comparable to the rate of death with surgical abortion and much less than the risk of childbirth (345). There were no further cases of clostridial sepsis among the large number of women treated in the Planned Parenthood clinics when the new protocol of buccal misoprostol plus routine antibiotic prophylaxis was followed (337).
# Chunk 724
Selective Fetal Reduction Multifetal pregnancies are at risk for extremely preterm birth and major neonatal complications. To prevent this, selective reduction of higher-order multiple gestations often is practiced. The largest series describes 3,513 pregnancies treated with ultrasound-guided fetal intracardiac injection of potassium chloride (0.2–0.4 mL of a 2-mmol solution in the first trimester, 0.5–3.0 mL in the second trimester). The rate of fetal loss fell as operators gained experience. Loss was greater with higher starting number of gestations (starting number greater than six, 15.4% loss, decreasing to 6.2% loss for starting number of two gestations), and greater if more fetuses were left intact (finishing number three, 18.4% loss, decreasing to 7.6% for finishing number of gestations of one) (368). Another indication for selective reduction is the presence of one anomalous fetus in a multifetal gestation. In a series of 402 patients treated for this indication, rates of pregnancy loss after the procedure by gestational age at the time of procedure were 5.4% at 9 to 12 weeks, 8.7% at 13 to 18 weeks, 6.8% at 19 to 24 weeks, and 9.1% at 25 weeks or more (369). No maternal coagulopathy occurred, and no ischemic damages or coagulopathies were seen in the surviving neonates. Maternal serum α-fetoprotein remains elevated into the second trimester after first-trimester procedures (370). Because of the possibility of embolic phenomena and infarction in the surviving twin, a different technique is needed for selective reduction of monoamniotic twins or with monochorionic twin–twin transfusion syndrome. He and colleagues describe ultrasound guided bipolar coagulation of the umbilical cord of the affected twin in such cases (371).
# Chunk 725
The Invisible Condom™ is a novel barrier/germicide/spermicide combination in human trials. It is a polymer gel that adheres to the vaginal and cervical mucosa when inserted into the vagina through a special applicator, forming a nondetectable physical barrier. One version has sodium laurel sulfate (SLS) incorporated in to the polymer film. The gel by itself blocks entry of HIV and of herpes virus into target cells in vitro. Daily vaginal application of the polymer plus SLS prevents pregnancy in rabbits (379).
# Chunk 726
Another critical area for contraceptive development is nonsurgical means of sterilization of both men and women. Intrauterine quinacrine is the most promising method for nonsurgical female sterilization, but the method is embroiled in controversy because it was developed in the third world and moved quickly to widespread use without adequate proof of safety (386). Approximately 100,000 women were treated with it (387). The technique is very simple: pellets containing 252 mg of quinacrine are inserted into the uterus through an IUD inserter during the proliferative phase of the cycle and again 1 month later. Intrauterine quinacrine produces sclerosis of the proximal fallopian tube. In a large trial in Vietnam, the cumulative pregnancy rate for 1,335 women who received 2 doses was 3.3 at 1 year, 10.0 at 5 years, and 12.1 at 10 years (388). Another study of almost 25,000 women found the rate of ectopic pregnancy to be 0.26 per 1,000 women treated, which was similar to surgical sterilization and the IUD, OC pills, and condoms (0.42–0.45 per 1,000) and less than nonusers of contraception (1.18 per 1,000) (389). Concern was raised that quinacrine would lead to reproductive tract cancers. Two epidemiologic studies found no apparent increased risk for cancer from previous quinacrine sterilization in humans (390,391). A study of lifetime risk in rats sterilized with intrauterine quinacrine as young adults did find an increase in reproductive tract cancer in those rats treated with eight times the human dose, but not in the rats exposed to lower doses (392).
# Chunk 727
Sexual Activity Sexual activity among adolescents in the United States increased during the past 20 years (3). The average age for first intercourse for both men and women is 16 years. By 19 years of age, as many as three-quarters of women have had intercourse. Most young men and young women have multiple serial sexual partners but use condoms inconsistently, thereby exposing themselves to sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) and unintended pregnancies. A recent study of North American women, using a large and diverse community-based sample, shows that of the 3,205 women aged 30 to 79 years almost one-half were not sexually active in the previous 4 weeks, with 52% of those citing lack of interest and 61% citing lack of partner as the major reasons. Of those who were sexually active recently, 13.7% noted sexual problems and dissatisfaction with their overall sexual lives (4).
# Chunk 728
Simple Hysterectomy Despite speculation that there might be different sexual outcomes depending on whether hysterectomy was vaginal, subtotal, or total abdominal, this difference is not supported by study (71,72). In a large prospective observational study of 413 women undergoing three different types of hysterectomy (vaginal, supracervical, and total abdominal hysterectomy), sexual pleasure improved in most women, independent of the type of hysterectomy (72). The prevalence of one or more bothersome sexual problems 6 months after vaginal, supracervical, and total abdominal hysterectomy was 43%, 41%, and 39%, respectively. The results of another prospective trial of 158 women randomized to total abdominal hysterectomy and 161 to supracervical abdominal hysterectomy showed no difference in sexual outcomes (71). A retrospective study of 108 women undergoing classic intrafascial supracervical hysterectomy and 125 undergoing total hysterectomy did not find any sexual benefits of classic intrafascial supracervical hysterectomy over total hysterectomy (73). There was no difference between groups in time from surgery to first intercourse, change in libido, sexual frequency, or frequency or degree of orgasm. Overall, two-thirds of the women in the study experienced either no change or an improvement in sexual function, regardless of which procedure was performed. Both this study and a study comparing total laparoscopic hysterectomy with laparoscopically assisted vaginal hysterectomy found similar effects on sexual function (74).
# Chunk 729
There is marked synergy between cancer of the cervix and sexual abuse as a cause of sexual dysfunction (79). An absence of sexual satisfaction was reported by 20% of women with neither abuse nor cancer of the cervix, by 31% of women who were sexually abused and did not have cancer of the cervix, by 28% of women with cancer of the cervix and who were not abused, but by 45% of women with a history of both abuse and cancer of the cervix. The lack of sexual satisfaction resulted in a decrease in well-being in 18% of women with neither a history of abuse nor cancer of the cervix, 39% of women who were abused and did not have cancer of the cervix, 23% of women with cancer of the cervix who were not abused, and in 44% of women with a history of both abuse and cancer of the cervix. Dyspareunia was extremely rare in women without cancer of the cervix, but it was reported by 12% of those with cancer of the cervix and by 30% of those with cancer of the cervix and past sexual abuse.
# Chunk 730
3.

Institute self-touch on a daily basis for a few minutes as close to the vaginal opening as possible. This may be done while the woman is in the bathtub or relaxing by herself on the bed. This is not sexual, and at first it will be highly anxiety provoking. Providing she does this daily, the anxiety will quickly decrease.
# Chunk 731
stimulus) on localized areas around the outer edge of the hymen and inner edge of the labia minora where the two meet. The whole introital circumference may be affected: typically the lower part (lower horseshoe or 4 to 8 o’clock location) is involved along with the areas immediately around the openings of Skene’s ducts. Typically pelvic muscle tone is heightened. This is the most common cause of dyspareunia seen in clinics, with at least 50% of women reporting lifelong symptoms and others acquiring them after possibly multiple occasions of painless intercourse. PVD is considered a chronic pain syndrome, with features suggesting both central and peripheral sensitization within the nervous system. This means that there are physical changes within the nervous system that perpetuate the pain cycles, and these can be targeted both by medications (chronic pain drugs) and mind skills including CBT and mindfulness. The cause of the sensitization within the nervous system is not established with certainty, but internal stress appears to be a likely cause. Women with PVD report higher levels of perfectionism, reward dependency, fear of negative evaluation, and harm avoidance, higher levels of trait anxiety, and shyness (55). Higher rates of depression and anxiety disorders are found in women with PVD compared to controls. Women with PVD have more catastrophic thoughts about intercourse pain and the negative consequences on the partner and durability of the relationship than women with other types of dyspareunia (55). There is evidence of hyper-vigilance for pain. Many women with PVD have other pain syndromes such as irritable bowel syndrome, temporomandibular joint pain, interstitial cystitis, dysmenorrhea, and, especially for midaged women, fibromyalgia (55).
# Chunk 732
Oral, vaginal, or rectal penetration with a penis, finger, or object

The National Women’s Study provides the best statistics available about the incidence of forcible rape in the United States (132). This study revealed that 13%, or one of eight adult women, are survivors of at least one completed rape during their lifetime. Of the women they surveyed, 0.7% were raped during the past year, equaling an estimated 683,000 adult women who were raped during a 12-month period. Of the women surveyed, 39% were raped more than once. Most rapes occurred during childhood and adolescence; 29% of all forcible rapes occurred when the survivor was younger than 11 years of age, and 32% occurred between the ages of 11 and 17 years. “Rape in America is a tragedy of youth” (132). Twenty-two percent of rapes occurred between the ages of 18 and 24 years, 7% between the ages of 25 and 29 years, and only 6% occurred when the survivor was older than 30 years of age. Although women of all ages and cultures are vulnerable to sexual assault, prisoners, adolescents, drug users, the elderly, those who experienced sexual assault as children, women in abusive relationships, and women with emotional and physical disabilities are at most risk (138–140).
# Chunk 733
Samples should be obtained from any sites of contact (vagina, rectum, or mouth) and tested for gonorrhea and chlamydia. A vaginal wet prep examination should be performed for evidence of trichomonas. A urine or serum pregnancy test should be performed, and baseline testing for syphilis, hepatitis B (surface antigen and immunoglobulin M antibodies to hepatitis B core antigen), and HIV. Urine and blood samples should be collected to screen for the presence of any date rape drugs.
# Chunk 734
Mifepristone as a single 10 mg dose (161) 5.

Placement of a copper-containing intrauterine device

These regimens are highly effective if administered within 120 hours after the sexual assault (159,162). The sooner the medications are taken, the more effective they are. Most regimens have a failure (pregnancy) rate of about 1.5%. Emergency contraception failure poses little teratogenic risk if the pregnancy continues (163). Some patients experience nausea and vomiting when given emergency contraception containing estrogen, which can be controlled with an antiemetic agent such as promethazine (12.5 mg every 4–6 hours) or ondansetron (4 mg every 6 hours). Emergency contraception should be repeated if vomiting occurs within 2 hours of taking the initial dose. Most women who take emergency contraception usually experience their next menstrual period within 3 days of the expected date. Women using mifepristone for emergency contraception may experience delayed onset of the subsequent menstrual period (161). Emergency contraception may delay but not prevent ovulation; for this reason, patients receiving emergency contraception should be encouraged to use contraception if further coital episodes occur during the cycle.
# Chunk 735
Hepatitis B vaccination should be offered if the sexual assault survivor has experienced vaginal, oral, or anal penetration. Hepatitis B is 20 times more infectious than HIV during intercourse (114). Vaccination is recommended at the time of the initial evaluation. Subsequent doses are provided 1 month and 6 months after the first dose is administered. It is not necessary to treat the patient with hepatitis B immune globulin (167). Vaccination is not necessary if the patient has documented hepatitis B immunity.
# Chunk 736
4.

Conversion of HIV through sexual assault, although reported, is low and similar to conversion from occupational exposure (0.1% to 0.3% per episode) (168). The probability of transmission depends on the type of assault, presence of trauma and bleeding, site of ejaculation, HIV viral load in the ejaculate, presence of a concomitant STD or ulcerative lesions in the assailant or survivor, and the community prevalence of HIV/acquired immune deficiency syndrome (153,168). The risk of HIV transmission may be greater in children because of the thinness of the vaginal epithelium. Factors to consider when discussing HIV postexposure prophylaxis with patients include the likelihood of exposure to the virus, the risks and benefits of treatment, the toxicity of routine antiretroviral prophylaxis, the interval between the sexual assault and the initiation of therapy, and the patient’s desire to be treated. All survivors of unprotected vaginal or anal sexual assault presenting within 72 hours should be offered HIV prophylaxis unless the assailant is known and tests negative with rapid HIV testing (169). Treatment should be initiated as soon as possible. The usual regimen is Combivir or its equivalent (300 mg zidovudine [AZT] and 150 mg lamivudine [3TC]) administered twice daily for 4 weeks). Administration of a protease inhibitor (nelfinavir, five 250 mg tablets twice a day for 28 days) should be considered for high-risk exposures, such as when the assailant is known to be HIV infected. Providers should also consider consulting an HIV specialist or calling the National Clinicians’ Post-Exposure Prophylaxis Hotline. Side effects of HIV prophylaxis include nausea, malaise, headache, and anorexia. About 33% of survivors who elect to take antiviral medication discontinue therapy prematurely (168). Patients should be aware that the efficacy of prophylactic treatment for HIV after sexual assault is unknown, and they will have to be carefully monitored if they initiate treatment with antiretroviral medication.
# Chunk 737
Depression is the single most common reason for psychiatric hospitalization in the United States.

As many as 15% of individuals with severe depressive disorders eventually commit suicide (37). Depression is a significant risk factor for cardiovascular disease and for noncompliance with essential treatments for other diseases, including diabetes. Depression is a recurrent disorder; of those who experience a major depressive episode, 50% have a second one. Of these, 70% have a third, and the incidence continues to increase with each subsequent episode. In the past diagnostic criteria were not standardized, so it is difficult to know whether the incidence of depression has increased over recent years, as has been asserted in the popular press.
# Chunk 738
For premenstrual dysphoric disorder, several selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) proved effective in clinical trials (62–65). Although SSRIs and all other antidepressants require about 2 weeks of daily administration to achieve therapeutic effect for other depressive disorders, it appears that ﬂuoxetine is effective for PMDD when taken in the usual daily doses for the 1 to 2 weeks preceding menstruation. The medication is packaged for this specific indication and dosage. It is thought that the mode of action of SSRIs when used in this fashion differs from that which alleviates major depression (65). Other medications for the treatment of PMS and PMDD are shown in Table 12.2. There is some interest in the role of oral contraceptives in management of PMDD, and for patients interested in contraception, trials of oral contraceptives are a reasonable approach (66). Symptoms must be carefully monitored to determine whether the hormonal intervention improves or exacerbates the problem mood changes.
# Chunk 739
Table 12.5 Compounds Used for Anxiety aLong ≥2 hours; Intermediate = 1–2 hours; Short ≤1 hour. bLong >20 hours; Intermediate = 6–20 hours; Short <6 hours. From Gilman AG, Rall TW, Nies AS, et al. The pharmacological basis of therapeutics. 8th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1990; Stotland NL. Psychiatric and psychosocial issues in primary care for women. In: Seltzer VL, Pearse WH, eds. Women’s primary health care: office practice and procedures. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1995.
# Chunk 740
This national survey was repeated 7 years later and established the use of CAM in the United States as a significant and growing trend (N = 2,055). When compared with use in 1990, the use of CAM increased from 33.8% to 42.1%. Extrapolations suggest a 47.3% increase in total visits to alternative medicine providers, from 427 million in 1990 to 629 million visits in 1997, again exceeding visits to primary care providers. Most of these users again were women, with 48.9% of women having used CAM that year, compared with 37.8% of men (1). There was no significant improvement in disclosure, with only 39.8% of users disclosing this information to their physicians. Most users were again found to be paying entirely out of pocket, with no significant change between 1990 (64%) and 1997 (58.3%). Estimated expenditures for alternative medicine services increased 45.2%, and total 1997 out-of-pocket expenditures related to alternative therapies were conservatively estimated at $27 billion, which is comparable to the out-of-pocket expenditures for all physician services that year. More recently, the CDC reported that in 2002, 75% of adult Americans reported having used CAM approaches, and 62% had used them in the past year (3). A study of gynecologic oncology patients revealed that 56% were using CAM, and surveys of menopausal women showed that 80% were using “nonprescriptive therapies” (4). The Study of Women’s Health Across the Nation (SWAN) found that approximately one-half of women were actively using herbal, spiritual, or manipulative therapies (4). A study examining the use of CAM by women suffering from nausea and vomiting during pregnancy found that 61% reported using CAM therapies, with the most popular being ginger, vitamin B6, and acupressure (5). A study evaluating the use of CAM therapies by women with advanced-stage breast cancer revealed that 73% of patients used CAM, with relaxation or meditation techniques and botanicals being used most often (6). The reason most often given for the use of CAM was immune support, followed by the second treatment of cancer. A survey in Washington state exploring use of alternative therapies for menopause revealed that 76% of women were using alternative approaches, with 43% of these women using stress-reduction techniques, 37% using over-thecounter alternative approaches, 32% using chiropractic medicine, 30% massage therapy, 23% dietary soy, 10% acupuncture, 9% naturopathy or homeopathy, and 5% herbalists (7). Of these women, 89% to 100% found these approaches to be somewhat or very helpful. Current users of hormone therapy were 50% more likely to use CAM than those who never used hormone therapy.
# Chunk 741
The reluctance of patients to inform their physicians of their use of CAM creates barriers to the best practice of medicine. Included in the realm of CAM are potentially harmful practices and products and potential interactions between effective CAM and conventional approaches. In a 5-year prospective cohort study following women in San Francisco with newly diagnosed breast cancer, 72% were using at least one form of CAM in the management or treatment of their breast cancer. Of these women, 54% disclosed their use to their physician (much higher than the national average), whereas 94% discussed their conventional treatment with their CAM provider (9). Three reasons were given for the patients’ lack of disclosure: 1.
# Chunk 742
Clinical hypnosis Basic certification requires a minimum of 40 hours of ASCH approved workshop training, 20 hours of individualized training, and a minimum of 2 years of independent practice using clinical hypnosis. The advanced level, called approved consultant, requires a minimum of 60 additional hours of ASCH-approved workshop training and 5 years of independent practice using clinical hypnosis.
# Chunk 743
American Society of Clinical Hypnosis (ASCH) certification in clinical hypnosis is distinct from other certification programs in that it ensures that the certified individual is a health care professional who is licensed in his or her state to provide medical, dental, or psychotherapeutic services. Certification by ASCH distinguishes the professional practitioner from the lay hypnotist. There are two levels of certification, each is simply called certification, which requires, among other things, a minimum of 40 hours of ASCH-approved workshop training, 20 hours of individualized training, and a minimum of 2 years of independent practice using clinical hypnosis. An advanced level, called approved consultant, recognizes individuals who obtained advanced training in clinical hypnosis and who have extensive experience in using hypnosis within their professional practices. Certification at this level requires a minimum of 60 additional hours of ASCH-approved workshop training and 5 years of independent practice using clinical hypnosis (14).
# Chunk 744
Transcendental meditation (TM) is a simple, natural, effortless procedure practiced for 15 to 20 minutes in the morning and evening while sitting comfortably with the eyes closed. During this technique, the individual experiences a unique state of restful alertness. Transcendental meditation is useful in the treatment of hypertension.
# Chunk 745
Calcium Calcium, 900 to 1,200 mg per day in divided doses, has at least some effect on the symptoms of PMS, premenstrual dysphoric disorder, and dysmenorrheal, specifically negative affect (mood swings, depression, tension, anxiety, crying spells), water retention (edema of extremities, breast tenderness, abdominal bloating, headache, fatigue), food cravings (changes in appetite, cravings for sweet or salt), and pain (lower abdominal cramping, generalized aches and pains, low backache) (22). One of the largest studies to date examined the effect of calcium, 1,200 mg per day, and reported a 50% decrease in PMS symptoms (24). In addition, the Women’s Health Study showed that higher intakes of calcium and vitamin D may be associated with a lower risk of developing breast cancer in premenopausal women, particularly with more aggressive breast tumors (25).
# Chunk 746
Chasteberry Chasteberry (Vitex agnus-castus) is a botanical with a long history of use for “menstrual disorders.” Many small studies have shown promising results, and one larger study examined the effectiveness of chasteberry on PMDD (34,35). In this randomized controlled trial, the active arm received 20 mg of chasteberry daily. Compared with placebo, the patients receiving chasteberry had a significant improvement in the combined symptom score (35). A multicenter noninterventional trial examined the experience and tolerance of chasteberry in 1,634 patients. After use in three cycles, 93% of women reported a decrease in or cessation of symptoms, and 94% of patients reported good or very good tolerance to this botanical. Adverse drug reactions were suspected by physicians in 1.2% of patients, but there were no serious adverse reactions (36). A randomized, single-blind trial comparing Vitex and ﬂuoxetine showed equal symptom reduction at 2 months (58% and 68%, respectively) (37). In both arms, there were significantly improved symptoms. Two of the three randomized controlled trials evaluating chasteberry for PMS showed some benefit on symptoms such as irritability, mood swings, anger, breast tenderness, and headaches. In the study with no benefit, the placebo arm was a soy-based product, which may reduce symptoms of PMS. Because chasteberry contains iridoids and ﬂavonoids, the mechanism of action is believed to be stimulation of dopamine D2 receptors, which decrease prolactin levels. In vitro, it inhibits opioid, mu, and kappa receptors. It has no effect on luteinizing hormone or follicle-stimulating hormone levels (38). Vitex restores progesterone levels and in Germany is used to treat menstrual irregularities and undiagnosed infertility. No significant toxicities were reported with Vitex extracts when used in appropriate dosages.
# Chunk 747
Mind–Body Interventions Relaxation techniques showed some very promising results for women with PMS/PMDD. One study examined the effect of the relaxation response for 15 minutes, twice a day, for 3 months, compared with women who read for the same amount of time, and women who charted their symptoms. Of women in the relaxation response group, 58% experienced improvement in their symptoms, compared with 27% for the reading group, and 17% for the charting group (46). Given that there are many other health benefits to the relaxation response, with no cost and no risk, it is a good technique to recommend to patients. Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) and group therapy were of benefit in several small studies. In one study, CBT was effective in reducing psychological and somatic symptoms and impairment of functioning when compared to controls. In two additional studies, the authors found that CBT reduced PMS symptoms compared to the control group (47).
# Chunk 748
There was one small but methodologically sound trial of acupuncture in the treatment of primary dysmenorrhea. This trial followed 43 women for 1 year and showed significant effectiveness of acupuncture when compared with placebo (91% of women showed improvement, compared with 10% to 36%, 18%, and 10% in the other groups) (23). In a study that randomized 201 patients, acupuncture improved dysmenorrheal and quality of life compared to usual care (50). In addition, there is some preliminary evidence that acupressure can be an effective, cost-free, and safe therapy for menstrual pain and anxiety. The study taught patients to self-administer 20 minutes of acupressure on Sanyinjian (SP6), which is an acupressure point located above the ankle. In a review on Chinese herbal presentations and their effectiveness on dysmenorrhea, 39 randomized controlled trials were included, involving 3,475 women. Chinese herbal medicine resulted in pain relief, and a decrease in overall symptoms and use of additional medications when compared to the use of pharmaceutical drugs. Individualized Chinese formulations resulted in significant improvement when compared to Chinese health products. Chinese herbal medicine produced better pain relief than acupuncture (51). More research is needed, but this is a promising and safe modality, and if a woman is fully informed and interested in pursing these approaches and has access to a qualified provider, it is appropriate to support.
# Chunk 749
The use of homeopathy in the treatment of PMS and PMDD is not well studied, and neither is its effectiveness in the treatment of related disorders such as depression or anxiety. One study did claim positive results but was fairly weak in design and in showing improvement (46). In one small but well-done study on individualized homeopathic remedies, 90% of patients had at least 30% improvement in their symptoms, compared to 37.5% having that degree of improvement in the placebo arm (47).
# Chunk 750
In a study of infertility patients, two group psychological interventions were compared with routine care. The two groups who received group support and cognitive behavioral therapy had fertility rates of 54% and 55%, respectively, compared with the control group, which had a pregnancy rate of 20%. There were large and disparate dropout rates, which complicate the interpretation of these results (52). In Austria, physicians are required to prescribe psychotherapeutic therapy for every patient undergoing assisted reproductive techniques. These approaches include psychotherapy, hypnotherapy, relaxation, and physical perception exercises. A review of its success associated with pregnancy rates found that of the 1,156 women, the cumulative pregnancy rate of those who utilized the mind–body techniques was 56% and in those who intended to use these approaches were 41.9%, higher than those who refused (53). In a case control study examining the impact of hypnosis on pregnancy rate in in vitro fertilization (IVF), the pregnancy rate in those cycles where hypnosis was used was 53% versus 28% in the controls, and the implantation rate 30% versus 14% (54).
# Chunk 751
The use of acupuncture was studied in the treatment of infertility and overall shows promise. Auricular acupuncture was studied as an alternative therapy for female infertility secondary to oligomenorrhea or luteal insufficiency, and the authors concluded it was a valuable therapy (55). Another study used electroacupuncture in anovulatory women with polycystic ovarian syndrome and found that regular ovulation was induced in more than one-third of the women. After early positive results, there were several recent studies on acupuncture and IVF. In a study of 228 women examining acupuncture and IVF, while the difference did not reach statistical significance, the pregnancy rate in the acupuncture arm was 31% versus 23% in the control arm, and ongoing pregnancy rates at 18 weeks gestation was 28% versus 18% (56). In a randomized controlled trial of 225, women undergoing IVF or intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) with acupuncture had clinical pregnancy rates of 33.6% versus 15.6% in the control group, and ongoing pregnancy rates of 28.4% versus 13.8% (57). In a trial of 182 women comparing usual care versus acupuncture 25 minutes before and after embryo transfer versus acupuncture before and after transfer and 2 days after the transfer, there was again a significant increase in pregnancy rates with acupuncture, but no additional benefit was found in the patients who also received acupuncture 2 days after transfer. The clinical pregnancy rates in the acupuncture group were 39% versus 26% in the controls, and the ongoing pregnancy rate was 36% versus 22% (58).
# Chunk 752
In a randomized controlled trial comparing usual care to usual care plus 25 minutes of a standard acupuncture treatment pre-and postembryo transfer, the pregnancy rates were 43% in the intervention arm as opposed to 26% in the control arm (59). In a meta-analysis including seven trials and 1,366 women, the authors concluded that the evidence suggests that embryo transfer done with acupuncture improved pregnancy rates and live births among women undergoing IVF (60). At the same time, a meta-analysis including 13 trials and 2,500 women concluded there was not sufficient evidence to conclude that acupuncture improves IVF clinical pregnancy rates (61). The acupuncture protocols are typically designed to promote sedation, uterine relaxation, and increased uterine blood ﬂow. The basis for the effect of acupuncture is hypothesized to be potentially related to modulating neuroendocrinological factors, increases in uterine and ovarian blood ﬂow, modulating cytokines, and reducing stress, anxiety or depression. Blood ﬂow impedance in uterine arteries, measured as the pulsatility index, was considered useful in assessing endometrial receptivity to embryo transfer. A study was performed assessing the effect of electroacupuncture on the pulsatility index of infertile women. After treatment twice a week for 4 weeks, the mean pulsatility index was significantly reduced both shortly after the last treatment and also 10 to 14 days after the treatments. The skin temperature of the forehead was increased significantly, suggesting a central inhibition of sympathetic activity (62). In a study of women undergoing IVF, the women who received acupuncture had increased cortisol levels and increased prolactin levels when compared to the controls, trending toward more normal cycle dynamics (63). More studies are needed both in the efficacy of acupuncture and infertility and in the mechanisms of action. Clinically speaking, there is provocative evidence that acupuncture appears safe in early pregnancy and is reasonable to support if patients are interested.
# Chunk 753
Kava (Piper methysticum) is native to the South Pacific, and one of its traditional uses is to reduce anxiety. It is often recommended for menopausal symptoms, particularly irritability, insomnia, and anxiety. Studies showed that 100 to 200 mg, three times daily, standardized to 30% kavalactones, decreases irritability and insomnia associated with menopause. It often is used in combination with other components, such as black cohosh and valerian, for the management of menopausal symptoms. One study that examined the use of kava in addition to hormone therapy for the treatment of anxiety showed that the combined use resulted in a significant decrease in anxiety when compared with hormone therapy alone (80).
# Chunk 754
Although its mechanism of action is unclear, St. John’s wort does appear to be beneficial in relieving mild to moderate depression, with 60% improvement in mood, energy, and sleep with a dose of 300 mg three times daily. Standardization is controversial, but it is believed to have at least two active ingredients, namely hypericin and hyperforin. Most research was done on products standardized to 0.3% hypericin. The first trial to examine its use for menopausal symptoms was done in 1999. Patients not taking hormone therapy were given 300 mg of St. John’s wort three times daily, and symptoms were evaluated at baseline and at 5, 8, and 12 weeks by both the patients and physicians. At baseline, 80% to 90% of all symptoms were moderate to marked in severity. By 12 weeks, 20% to 30% remained at this level, whereas most patients had only slight symptoms or were symptom free. There was no change in vasomotor symptoms; 80% of patients reported that their sexuality was substantially enhanced. Of 106 patients, 4 reported adverse effects. These effects included skin rash with sun exposure, gastrointestinal upset, headache, and fatigue (82). In a randomized trial of 301women using a combination of black cohosh and St. John’s wort, the treatment was superior to placebo for both climacteric and psychological symptoms (83). St. John’s wort induces the cytochrome P450 complex. Specifically, lower levels of oral contraceptives, theophylline, cyclosporine, and antiretroviral drugs were reported. Interactions were described with buspirone, statins, calcium channel blockers, digoxin, and carbamazepine. There are no apparent significant interactions with Coumadin.
# Chunk 755
Mind–Body Interventions Mind–body therapies for the treatment of menopausal symptoms were studied in several domains, but the trials are often small and not always high quality. In a small prospective trial of 30 women, applied relaxation was compared to estradiol. The women in the relaxation group had a 76% reduction in hot ﬂashes at 6-month follow-up versus 90% in the estradiol arm, which was reached at 12 weeks (86). In another study by Nedstrand et al., 38 women with breast cancer showed improvement in vasomotor symptoms with both applied relaxation and electro-acupuncture (86). In one randomized controlled trial, symptomatic menopausal patients who had at least five hot ﬂashes per 24 hours were randomized to either the relaxation response, to reading, or to a control group. The relaxation response group had significant reductions in hot ﬂash intensity, tension– anxiety levels, and depression compared with the control group, which had no significant changes (87). In another randomized controlled trial of symptomatic menopausal patients, women with frequent hot ﬂashes were randomized to paced respiration, muscle relaxation, and alpha-wave feedback. In the paced respiration group, there was significant reduction in the hot ﬂash frequency, whereas muscle relaxation and biofeedback showed no differences. The proposed mechanism of action is decreased central sympathetic activity (88). In a trial with 76 breast cancer patients, an intervention of counseling and emotional support was associated with an improvement in both menopausal symptoms and sexual function compared to the control arm (89). In a trial of 102 women the effect of acupuncture, applied relaxation, estrogens, and placebo were examined. Both acupuncture and applied relaxation reduced the number of hot ﬂashes significantly better than placebo (90).
# Chunk 756
Estriol, or E3, the weakest of the estrogens that occurs naturally only in high circulating levels during pregnancy, is very popular in the alternative community. It is often promoted as the ideal estrogen, a natural alternative providing all of the benefits of hormone therapy with none of the risks. This assumption is not supported by the literature, as the research on estriol is limited. In one study examining the use of estriol over 12 months, 53 women were given 2 mg daily. They reported good symptom relief and satisfaction, and histiologic evaluation of the endometrium revealed no hyperplasia or atypia. Bone mineral density showed no change (98). In another study examining the effect of estriol, 64 women were followed for 24 months. There were four treatment arms: 2.0 mg E3 plus 2.5 mg medroxyprogesterone acetate, 0.625 mg of conjugated estrogen plus 2.5 mg medroxyprogesterone acetate, 1 μg of 1-alpha hydroxy vitamin D3, and 1.8 g calcium lactate containing 250 mg of elemental calcium. Outcome measures were taken at baseline, 6, 12, 18, and 24 months, and included the following assessments: bone mineral density at third lumbar vertebrae, serum levels of osteocalcin, total alkaline phosphatase, and urinary ratios of calcium/creatinine and hydroxyproline/creatinine. The findings revealed decreased bone mineral density in the vitamin D and calcium groups and no decrease in the conjugated estrogen and E3 groups. Osteocalcin and alkaline phosphate was decreased or without change in the conjugated estrogen and E3 groups, and was increased in the vitamin D3 and calcium groups. Urinary calcium/creatinine ratios were decreased with E3 and conjugated estrogen, and there was no decrease with the use of vitamin D3 and calcium. Urinary hydroxyproline/creatinine ratios were decreased in the conjugated estrogen group, unchanged in the E3 and vitamin D3 groups, and increased in the calcium group. Uterine bleeding was significantly less in the E3 group compared with the conjugated estrogen group, with 2.4 days compared with 13 days per person. In conclusion, the study supported the finding that a bone-preserving effect occurred with E3 when compared with conjugated estrogen (99).
# Chunk 757
The effect of vaginal estriol cream on the endometrium was evaluated in a study examining long-term use for urogenital atrophy. Patients were given 0.5 mg of estriol cream vaginally for 21 days, then twice weekly for 12 months. Hysteroscopic and histologic examinations were performed at baseline, 6 months, and 12 months. Complete endometrial atrophy occurred in all patients (N = 23) (103). This pilot study needs to be performed in a larger patient population, but its findings are promising.
# Chunk 758
Wild yam creams (which refer to the genus name Dioscorea villosa, rather than the fact that they are grown in the wild) are applied topically. They contain steroidal saponins, including diosgenin, and claim to affect estrogen steroidogenesis. Although these are interesting products, studies of their safety and efficacy are needed. In one double-blind, placebo-controlled crossover study, after a 4-week baseline period, patients received 3 months of active treatment and 3 months of placebo. Symptom diaries were maintained at baseline and then for 1 week of each month. Blood and salivary hormone levels as well as serum lipids were assessed at baseline, 3 months, and 6 months. At 3 months there were no significant side effects and no change in levels of blood pressure, weight, lipid levels, follicle-stimulating hormone, glucose, estradiol, or progesterone. In terms of symptom relief, the placebo and yam cream had a minor effect on the number and severity of ﬂashes. Wild yam creams appear to be free of side effects, and they appear to have little effect on menopausal symptoms (107).
# Chunk 759
In terms of progesterone creams, a randomized controlled trial of 223 women with severe menopausal symptoms using progesterone cream found the progesterone arm to be no more effective than placebo (108). In another randomized controlled trial, transdermal progesterone was compared to placebo. One-quarter teaspoon of 20 mg of progesterone was used daily for 12 months. In addition, all patients took a multivitamin plus 1,200 mg of calcium. Outcomes evaluated included dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) results, serum thyroid-stimulating hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone, lipids, chemistry, and symptom diary. The group that received the progesterone cream reported 83% improvement in hot ﬂashes compared with 19% improvement in the placebo group. There was no difference in bone density (109).
# Chunk 760
When examining what patients are using that may affect their surgical course, the greatest concern and awareness needs to be in the domain of biologically based therapies. A survey of 2,560 surgical patients in five California hospitals revealed that 68% of patients were using botanicals, 44% of them did not consult their physician, 56% did not inform their anesthesiologists, and 47% did not stop them before their surgery. Variables that were associated with use included female gender, age 35 to 49 years, higher income, Caucasian race, higher education, and problems with sleep, joints, back, allergies, and addiction (110). A survey based in a tertiary care center examined the use of botanicals and vitamins in patients preoperatively (N = 3,106). Of the patients studied, 22% were using botanicals and 51% were using vitamins. The typical users were women in the age range of 40 to 60 years. The most commonly used compounds were echinacea, ginkgo biloba, St. John’s wort, garlic, and ginseng (111). In another study based in a university medical center that surveyed patients undergoing outpatient surgery, 64% of patients were using supplements: 90% of them were using vitamins, 43% were using garlic extracts, 32% ginkgo biloba, 30% St. John’s wort, 18% ma huang, 12% echinacea, and others were using aloe, cascara, and licorice (112).
# Chunk 761
Valerian, kava, ginseng, and St. John’s wort are among the more commonly used botanicals that may prolong the effects of anesthetic agents. Valerian has sedative effects that are believed to be mediated by benzodiazepine and γ -aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors. For patients who use valerian on a daily basis, it is suggested that it be tapered off over the weeks preceding the surgery. Kava is mediated by GABA receptors and potentiates the sedative effects of anesthetics. The general recommendation is to discontinue its use 24 hours before surgery. St. John’s wort induces cytochrome P450 enzymes (cyclosporin, indinavir, and warfarin). It modulates the GABA receptor and inhibits the reuptake of serotonin, dopamine, and noradrenaline. The recommendation is to discontinue it 5 days preoperatively.
# Chunk 762
Benefit the Surgical Patient

A review of the use of acupuncture as the sole source of anesthesia for patients undergoing cesarean delivery in China reviewed 12 years of experience with success rates of 92% to 99%. Blood pressure, heart rate, and respiratory rate remained stable throughout the surgery, which is a significant advantage over pharmaceutical anesthesia (113). Although it is unlikely that acupuncture will readily be used as the only source of anesthesia in this country, it demonstrates the effectiveness of this approach and encourages its consideration as an adjunct. In one randomized controlled trial in patients undergoing upper-and lower-abdominal (gastrointestinal) surgery, acupuncture was given 2.5 cm lateral to the spine before induction. Postoperatively, patients who received the acupuncture had decreased postoperative pain, nausea and vomiting, analgesic requirement, and sympathoadrenal responses. Supplemental morphine use dropped by 50%, and postoperative nausea was reduced by 30%. Cortisol and epinephrine levels were reduced 30% to 50% during the recovery phase and the first postoperative day (114). Several studies specifically looking at nausea and vomiting in women undergoing gynecologic surgeries showed benefit in both acupuncture and acupressure (115–117).
# Chunk 763
In a sham-controlled trial, the intensity of transcutaneous acupoint electrical stimulation (TAES) was studied in women undergoing lower-abdominal surgery. In patients receiving high-intensity TAES (9–12 mA), there was a 65% decrease in analgesia requirement, decreased duration in patient-controlled anesthesia therapy, and decrease in nausea, vomiting, and pruritus (118).
# Chunk 764
A meta-analysis of mind–body interventions and surgery included 191 studies and more than 8,600 patients. The use of mind–body approaches, including such interventions as hypnosis, imagery, and relaxation, was associated with reduced blood loss, decreased pain, decreased medication use, increased return of bowel function, decreased psychological stress, and decreased hospital stay by 1.5 days. In a study of 241 patients undergoing invasive medical procedures randomized to standard care versus structured attention versus self-hypnosis, the hypnosis has the most pronounced effects on pain and anxiety and improved hemodynamic stability (122). In a study designed to examine the impact of preoperative instructions, patients undergoing spinal procedures involving fusions or instrumentation (surgeries associated with significant blood loss) were enrolled. All subjects received a 15-minute interaction with a psychologist. The subjects were randomized into one of three groups receiving either direct simple information alone, information plus instruction in muscle relaxation, or information plus instruction in previsualization of the blood moving away from the surgical site during surgery. Controlling for the length of surgery and incision length, the estimated blood loss in the first two groups averaged 900 mL and in the third group was 500 mL (123).
# Chunk 765
In a study of women undergoing hysterectomy, patients received standardized anesthesia and were randomized to music during surgery, music plus positive suggestions, or the sounds of the operating room. On the day of surgery, both the music group and the music-plus-suggestion groups received significantly less rescue anesthesia. On postoperative day 1, the patients who had heard music during surgery had more effective analgesia and early mobilization. At the time of discharge, both intervention groups had less fatigue. There was no change in nausea and vomiting, bowel function, or length of stay (126).
# Chunk 766
In another study with patients undergoing abdominal hysterectomy, patients were randomized to listen intraoperatively to one of four tapes: positive suggestions regarding pain, or nausea and vomiting, or both, or white noise. The positive suggestions had no beneficial effects in reducing nausea and vomiting or the consumption of analgesics or antiemetics (127). In another randomized controlled trial in patients undergoing thyroidectomy under general anesthesia, patients were randomized to listen to taped positive suggestions during surgery versus a blank tape. The group receiving the suggestions had less nausea and vomiting (47% vs. 85%), and less antiemetic treatment (30% vs. 68%) (128). In a study exploring the timing of listening to taped suggestions, patients who received the suggestions preoperatively had a 30% decrease in estimated blood loss. Patients receiving the suggestions both pre-and perioperatively had a 26% decrease in blood loss, and in the group listening to the suggestions only intraoperatively, there was a 9% decrease in blood loss. The authors suggest that the preoperative suggestions may be the critical factor (129).
# Chunk 767
Figure 14.5 Foreign body (plastic toy) in the vagina of an 8-year-old girl.

Figure 14.6 Straddle injury—vulvar hematoma in a 13-year-old girl.
# Chunk 768
Figure 14.7 Pelvic ultrasound (transabdominal) of a premenarchal 10-year-old girl.

Diagnosis of Prepubertal Bleeding
# Chunk 769
Presentation of Prepubertal Pelvic Masses

The probable causes of a pelvic mass found on physical examination or through radiologic studies are vastly different in prepubertal children than they are in adolescents or post-menopausal women (Table 14.4). A pelvic mass may be gynecologic in origin, or it may arise from the urinary tract or bowel. The gynecologic causes of a pelvic mass may be uterine, adnexal, or more specifically ovarian. Because of the small pelvic capacity of a prepubertal child, a pelvic mass very quickly becomes abdominal in location as it enlarges and may be palpable on abdominal examination. Ovarian masses in this age group may be asymptomatic, associated with chronic pressure-related bowel or bladder symptoms, or may present with acute pain caused by rupture or torsion. Abdominal or pelvic pain is one of the most frequent initial symptoms. The diagnosis of ovarian masses in prepubertal girls is difficult because the condition is rare in this age group and, consequently, there is a low index of suspicion. Many symptoms are nonspecific, and acute symptoms are more likely to be attributed to more common entities such as appendicitis. Abdominal palpation and bimanual rectoabdominal examination are important in any child who has nonspecific abdominal or pelvic symptoms. An ovarian mass that is abdominal in location can be confused with other abdominal masses occurring in children, such as Wilms’ tumor or neuroblastoma. Acute pain is often associated with torsion. The ovarian ligament becomes elongated as a result of the abdominal location of ovarian tumors, thus creating a predisposition to torsion. Adnexal torsion is more likely to occur with an ovarian mass than with a normal size ovary. While torsion of a normal ovary is rare in adolescents and adults, it is more likely to occur in prepubertal girls.
# Chunk 770
Figure 14.8 Management of pelvic masses in premenarchal and adolescent girls.

3 to 6 months; thus, they do not require surgical management with oophorectomy or oophorocystectomy. Close observation is recommended, and there is a risk of ovarian torsion that must be discussed with the child’s parents (27). Recurrence rates after cyst aspiration (either ultrasonographically guided or with laparoscopy) may be as high as 50%. Attention should be directed to long-term effects on endocrine function and future fertility; preservation of ovarian tissue is a priority for patients with benign tumors. Oophorectomy should be avoided if at all possible for benign masses (28). Premature surgical therapy for a functional ovarian mass can result in ovarian and tubal adhesions that can adversely affect future fertility. Solid masses, those larger than approximately 8 cm, and enlarging masses require surgical intervention, as the likelihood of neoplasm is high.
# Chunk 771
Other genital abnormalities may be noted at birth, although few obstetricians or pediatricians carefully examine the external genitalia of female neonates. It is argued that careful inspection of the external genitalia of all female infants should be performed, with gentle probing of the introitus and anus to determine the patency of the hymen or a possible imperforate anus. If patency is in doubt, a rectal thermometer may be used to gently test the patency. It is suggested that this examination should be performed on all female infants in the delivery room (31,32). Various types of hymenal configurations in the newborn are described, ranging from imperforate to microperforate, to cribriform, to hymenal bands, and to hymens with central anterior, posterior, or eccentric orifices (33). An examination during the neonatal period would prevent the discovery of an imperforate hymen or vaginal septum after a young woman experiences periodic pelvic and abdominal pain with the development of a large hematometra or hematocolpos (34).
# Chunk 772
To assess vaginal bleeding during adolescence, it is necessary to understand the range of normal menstrual cycles (see Chapter 7). During the first 2 to 5 years after menarche, most cycles are anovulatory. Despite this, they are somewhat regular, within a range of approximately 21 to 45 days, in contrast to adult women, whose cycles typically range between 21 and 38 days (51–55). In more than one-fourth of girls, a pattern of plus or minus 10 days and a cycle length of 21 to approximately 45 days are established within the first three cycles; in one-half of girls, the pattern is established by the seventh cycle; and in two-thirds of girls, such a pattern is established within 2 years of menarche (53) (Table 14.5).
# Chunk 773
Differential Diagnosis of Adolescent Abnormal Bleeding

Cycles that are longer than 42 days, bleeding that occurs more frequently than 21 days, and bleeding that lasts more than 7 days should be considered abnormal, particularly after the first 2 years from the onset of menarche. Bleeding occurring less frequently than an internal of 90 days is abnormal, even in the first gynecologic year after menarche (51). The variability in cycle length is greater during adolescence than adulthood; thus, greater irregularity is acceptable if neither significant anemia nor hemorrhage is present. However, consideration should be given to an evaluation of possible causes of abnormal menses (particularly underlying causes of anovulation such as androgen excess syndromes or causes of oligomenorrhea such as eating disorders) for girls whose cycles are consistently outside normal ranges or whose cycles were previously regular and become irregular (60,61). Conditions that are associated with abnormal bleeding are listed in Table 14.6 and more fully discussed in Chapters 29–31.
# Chunk 774
Studies of adolescent menses show differences in rates of ovulation based on the number of months or years postmenarche. The younger the age at menarche, the sooner regular ovulation is established. In one study, the time from menarche until 50% of the cycles were ovulatory was 1 year for girls whose menarche occurred when they were younger than 12 years of age, 3 years for girls whose menarche occurred between 12 and 12.9 years of age, and 4.5 years for girls whose menarche occurred at 13 years of age or older (62).
# Chunk 775
Pregnancy-Related Bleeding The possibility of pregnancy must be considered when an adolescent seeks treatment for abnormal bleeding (Table 14.7). Bleeding in pregnancy can be associated with a spontaneous abortion, ectopic pregnancy, or other pregnancy-related complications, such as a molar pregnancy. In the United States, 30% of 15-to 17-year-old adolescent girls have had sexual intercourse, as have 70.6% of those 18 to 19 years old (63). Issues of confidentiality for adolescent health care are critical to an adolescent’s willingness to seek appropriate reproductive health care (see Chapter 1).
# Chunk 776
Examination A careful general physical examination can reveal signs of androgen excess such as acanthosis nigricans or facial, chest or periareolar, or abdominal terminal hair growth. Because body hair is felt by many to be culturally unacceptable in women and girls, sensitive questioning about specific hair removal techniques (bleaching, waxing, use of depilatories, shaving, plucking, threading) is warranted during an examination. A complete pelvic examination is appropriate in patients who are sexually active, are having severe pain, or may have an anatomic anomaly. Testing for gonorrhea and Chlamydia trachomatis infection is appropriate during a speculum examination if the patient is sexually active. Some young teens who have a history that is classic for anovulation, who deny sexual activity, and who agree to return for follow-up evaluation may be managed with a limited gynecologic examination supplemented with pelvic ultrasonography.
# Chunk 777
If a pelvic ultrasonographic examination does not lead to clarification of the anatomy when vaginal septa, uterine septa, uterine duplication, or vaginal agenesis is suspected, MRI can be helpful in delineating anatomic abnormalities (88). This imaging technique is useful in the evaluation of uterine and vaginal developmental anomalies, although laparoscopy can still play a role in the clarification of abnormal anatomy (89). CT scanning may be helpful in detecting nongenital intra-abdominal abnormalities.
# Chunk 778
Anovulation: Mild Bleeding

Adolescents who have mildly abnormal bleeding, as defined by adequate hemoglobin levels and minimal disruption of daily activities, are best managed with prospective menstrual charting, frequent reassurance, close follow-up, and supplemental iron. If the patient is bleeding heavily or for a prolonged interval, an apparent decrease in the bleeding does not necessarily mean that therapy is not required. Intermittent bleeding characterizes anovulatory bleeding and is likely to continue in the absence of therapy.
# Chunk 779
Moderate Patients who are bleeding acutely but in a stable condition and do not require hospital admission will require doses of hormones that are higher than those in oral contraceptives to effectively stop anovulatory bleeding. An effective regimen is the use of combination monophasic oral contraceptives (every 6 hours for 4 to 7 days). After that time, the dose should be tapered or stopped to allow shedding of the dyssynchronous endometrium and withdrawal bleeding. With this therapy, the patient and her parents should be given specific written and oral instructions warning them about the potential side effects of high-dose hormone therapy—nausea, breast tenderness, and breakthrough bleeding. The patient should be instructed to call with any concerns rather than discontinue the pills, and she must understand that stopping the prescribed regimen may result in a recurrence of heavy bleeding. Both the patient and her mother should be warned to expect heavy withdrawal ﬂow for the first period. It will be controlled by the institution of combination low-dose oral contraceptive therapy, given once daily and continued for three to six cycles, to allow regular withdrawal ﬂow. If the patient is not sexually active, the pill may be discontinued after the recommended course of therapy and the menstrual cycles may be reassessed.
# Chunk 780
2.

Estrogen-progestin therapy in the form of combined oral contraceptives given as one or two pills twice a day for 5 to 7 days is typically effective within 12 to 24 hours. Alternatively, conjugated estrogens, either 25 to 40 mg given intravenously every 6 hours or 2.5 mg given orally every 6 hours, will usually be effective (98).
# Chunk 781
If intravenous or oral administration of hormonal therapy controls the bleeding, oral progestin therapy should be instituted and continued for several days to stabilize the endometrium. This therapy can be accomplished by using a combination oral contraceptive, usually one with 30 to 35 mg of estrogen, or by using the tapering regimen previously described. The medication can be tapered and ultimately must be stopped to allow withdrawal bleeding, which may be heavy, given an excessively built-up endometrium. Low-dose combination oral contraception once daily should be continued for three to six cycles, or longer if desired, to provide normal menstrual cycles. Manipulation of the regimen by increasing or decreasing the dose of oral contraceptives to twice a day or three times a day after the initial high dose therapy should be discouraged.
# Chunk 782
5.

Levonorgestrel intrauterine system (IUS) (107).

The choice of regimen depends on the presence of any contraindications (such as active liver disease precluding the use of estrogens) and the clinician’s experience. Although the goal of these long-term suppressive therapies is amenorrhea, all of these regimens may be accompanied by breakthrough bleeding. At 1 year, rates of amenorrhea approach 90% with extended cycle combination oral contraceptives, 50% with DMPA, and 50% with the levonorgestrel IUS (73,108,109). Because both DMPA and GnRH analogues are associated with disadvantageous effects on bone mineral density, the potential risks must be weighed against their medical benefits. Regular follow-up visits and continued patient encouragement are required with all of these options. Episodes of spotting and breakthrough bleeding that do not result in a lowered hemoglobin level may be managed expectantly. When breakthrough bleeding affects the hemoglobin level, it should be evaluated with respect to the underlying disease. For example, in a patient with underlying platelet dysfunction, breakthrough bleeding may reﬂect a lowered platelet count. Bleeding in a patient with hepatic disease may reﬂect worsening hepatic function. NSAIDs and supplemental low-dose hormonal therapy can be helpful in the management of excessive breakthrough bleeding that has no specific cause other than the hormone therapy (110).
# Chunk 783
Differential Diagnosis of Adolescent Pelvic Masses malformations. MRI can be useful for evaluating this group of rare anomalies (88). Adolescents who present with abdominal pain should be evaluated with some type of imaging procedure because an unexpected finding of a complex uterine or vaginal anomaly requires careful surgical planning and management.
# Chunk 784
Ovarian Masses in Adolescents Many studies of ovarian tumors in the pediatric and adolescent age group do not distinguish between prepubertal or premenarchal girls and menarchal adolescents. The findings of some reports are based on age group, although this is less helpful than a distinction by pubertal development. In evaluating a pelvic or abdominal mass, the clinician must take into consideration the patient’s pubertal status because the likelihood of functional masses increases after menarche (Table 14.4). The risk of malignant neoplasms is lower among adolescents than among younger children. Germ cell tumors are the most common tumors of the first decade of life but occur less frequently during adolescence (see Chapter 37). Mature cystic teratoma is the most frequent neoplastic tumor of children and adolescents, accounting for more than one-half of ovarian neoplasms in women younger than 20 years of age (112). Epithelial neoplasms occur with increasing frequency beyond adolescence.
# Chunk 785
Endometriosis is less common during adolescence than in adulthood, although it can occur during adolescence. In one study of adolescents referred with chronic pain, 50% to 65% had endometriosis (119). Although endometriosis can occur in young women with obstructive genital anomalies (presumably as a result of retrograde menstruation), most adolescents with endometriosis do not have associated obstructive anomalies. In young women, endometriosis may have an atypical appearance characterized by nonpigmented or vesicular lesions, peritoneal windows, and puckering (120).
# Chunk 786
Other causes of pelvic masses, such as uterine abnormalities, are rare in adolescence.

Uterine leiomyomas are not often seen in this age group. Obstructive uterovaginal anomalies occur during adolescence, at the time of menarche, or shortly thereafter. Frequently, the correct diagnosis either is not suspected or is delayed (121). A wide range of anomalies can occur, from imperforate hymen to transverse vaginal septa; from vaginal agenesis with a normal uterus and functional endometrium to vaginal duplications with obstructing longitudinal septa, and obstructed uterine horns (Fig. 14.13). Patients may seek treatment for cyclic pain, amenorrhea, vaginal discharge, or an abdominal, pelvic, or vaginal mass. A hematocolpos, hematometra, or both frequently will be present, and the resulting mass can be quite large (34).
# Chunk 787
Of all age groups of sexually active women, adolescents have the highest rates of PID (83). Thus, an adolescent who has pelvic pain may have an inﬂammatory mass. Such masses may consist of a tubo-ovarian complex (a mass of matted bowel, tube, and ovary), tubo-ovarian abscess (a mass consisting primarily of an abscess cavity within an anatomically defined structure such as the ovary), pyosalpinx, or, chronically, hydrosalpinx.
# Chunk 788
The diagnosis of PID is primarily a clinical one based on the presence of lower abdominal, pelvic, and adnexal tenderness; cervical motion tenderness; a mucopurulent discharge; and elevated temperature, white blood cell count, or sedimentation rate (see Chapter 18). The risk of PID is clearly associated with that of acquiring STDs, and methods of contraception may either decrease the risk (male latex condoms) or increase it (the intrauterine device in the interval immediately after insertion) (122,123).
# Chunk 789
In adolescents, pregnancy should always be considered as a cause of a pelvic mass. In the United States, nearly half of adolescent women have experienced sexual intercourse (124). Most pregnancies in adolescents are unintended; 100% of pregnancies in adolescents younger than age 15, 87% in women aged 15 to 17, and 79% in women aged 18 to 19 are unintended (94). Adolescents may be more likely than adults to deny the possibility of pregnancy because of wishful thinking, anxiety about discovery by parents or peers, or unfamiliarity with menstrual cycles and information about fertility. Ectopic pregnancies may cause pelvic pain and an adnexal mass. The increasing incidence of ectopic pregnancies in the United States is strongly associated with rising rates of PID. With the availability of quantitative measurements of β-hCG, more ectopic pregnancies are being discovered before rupture, allowing conservative management with laparoscopic surgery or medical therapy (see Chapter 20). The risk of ectopic pregnancy varies by method of contraception; users of no contraception have the highest risk, whereas oral contraceptive users have the lowest risk (125). As with older patients, paraovarian cysts and nongynecologic masses can appear as a pelvic or abdominal mass in adolescents (Fig. 14.15).
# Chunk 790
When symptoms persist in a patient with the clinical diagnosis of PID or tubo-ovarian abscess, laparoscopy should be considered to confirm the diagnosis. A clinical diagnosis may be incorrect in as many as one-third of patients (118). The surgical management of inﬂammatory masses is rarely necessary in adolescents, except to treat rupture of tuboovarian abscess or failure of medical management with broad-spectrum antibiotics (see Chapter 18). Some surgeons advocated laparoscopy to perform irrigation, lysis of adhesions, drainage of unilateral or bilateral pyosalpinx or tubo-ovarian abscess, or extirpation of significant disease (126). If surgical management is required because of failed medical therapy, conservative, unilateral adnexectomy usually can be performed in these situations, rather than a pelvic clean-out, thereby maintaining reproductive potential. Percutaneous drainage, transvaginal ultrasonographic drainage, and laparoscopic management of tubo-ovarian abscesses are being done more often, although evidence supporting this approach is sparse. As with the laparoscopic management of ovarian masses, the surgeon’s skill and experience with this procedure are critical, and prospective studies on its effectiveness are lacking (127). Laparoscopic management is associated with a risk of major complications, including bowel obstruction and bowel or vessel injury (128).
# Chunk 791
Use of tampons is associated with both microscopic and macroscopic ulcerations. Healing of the macroscopic ulcerations occurs within several weeks without specific therapy if tampon use is suspended. A follow-up examination to demonstrate healing is appropriate, with biopsy of any persistent ulcerations to rule out other lesions.
# Chunk 792
regularity (irregular, regular, or absent), frequency (frequent, normal, or infrequent), duration (prolonged, normal, or shortened), and heaviness of bleeding episodes (heavy, normal, or light) (Table 14.11) (141). Prospective charting of bleeding can be helpful in characterizing abnormal bleeding. The mean duration of menses is 4.7 days; 89% of cycles last 7 days or longer. The average blood loss per cycle is 35 mL (56). Menses is a suspension of blood-and tissue-derived solids within a mixture of serum and cervicovaginal ﬂuid; the blood content of menses varies over the days of bleeding, but on average is close to 50% (142). Recurrent bleeding in excess of 80 mL/cycle results in anemia.
# Chunk 793
Anatomic Causes Anatomic causes of abnormal bleeding occur more frequently in women of reproductive age than in women in other age groups. Uterine leiomyomas and endometrial polyps are common conditions that most often are asymptomatic; however, they remain important causes of abnormal bleeding (162). Uterine leiomyomas occur in as many as one-half of all women older than age 35 years and are the most common tumors of the genital tract (151,152,162). The incidence varies from 30% to 70%, depending on criteria for study, whether clinical symptoms, ultrasound, or histologic assessment (163). One study of a randomly selected population estimated a cumulative prevalence of greater than 80% in black women and nearly 70% in white women (164). Abnormal bleeding is the most common symptom for women with leiomyomas. Although the number and size of uterine leiomyomas do not appear to inﬂuence the occurrence of abnormal bleeding, submucosal myomas are the most likely to cause bleeding. The mechanism of abnormal bleeding related to leiomyomas is not well established (see Chapter 15 for further discussion of uterine fibroids).
# Chunk 794
Endometrial polyps are a cause of intermenstrual bleeding, heavy menstrual bleeding, irregular bleeding, and postmenopausal bleeding and are associated with the use of tamoxifen and with dysmenorrhea and infertility. As with leiomyomas, most endometrial polyps are asymptomatic. The incidence of endometrial polyps increases with age throughout the reproductive years (162). The diagnosis may be suspected on the basis of endometrial thickening on transvaginal pelvic ultrasound, and patterns of feeder blood vessels may aid in distinguishing endometrial polyps from intracavity fibroids and from endometrial malignancy (162,165,166). Visualization with hysteroscopy or sonohysterography or the microscopic assessment of tissue obtained by a biopsy done in the office or a curettage specimen is required for confirmation. Whether and when to recommend removal is not well established, particularly if a polyp is asymptomatic and is found incidentally. One study of randomly selected Danish women using transvaginal ultrasound and sonohysterography found polyps in 5.8% of asymptomatic premenopausal women and 11.8% of asymptomatic postmenopausal women, In this study abnormal bleeding was present in 38% of those without polyps versus 13% with polyps (167). Endometrial polyps can regress spontaneously, although it is not clear how frequently this occurs. In one study of asymptomatic women, the 1-year regression rate was 27% (168). Smaller polyps are more likely to resolve, and larger polyps may be more likely to result in abnormal bleeding (169). Whereas polyps may resolve spontaneously over time, a clinically important question is whether they are likely to undergo malignant transformation. Because even asymptomatic polyps usually are removed at the time of identification, this question is difficult to answer. The chance of malignancy or premalignant changes in endometrial polyps appears to be quite low in premenopausal women and higher among postmenopausal women, with bleeding reports range from premalignant change in 0.2% to 24% and malignancy in 0% to 13% (170).
# Chunk 795
Imaging Studies Women with abnormal bleeding who have a history consistent with chronic anovulation, who are obese, or who are older than 35 to 40 years of age require further evaluation. A pelvic ultrasonographic examination may be helpful in delineating anatomic abnormalities if the examination results are suboptimal or if an ovarian mass is suspected. A pelvic ultrasonographic examination is the best initial technique for evaluating the uterine contour, endometrial thickness, and ovarian structure (172,173). The use of a vaginal probe transducer allows assessment of endometrial and ovarian disorders, particularly in women who are obese. Because of variation in endometrial thickness with the menstrual cycle, measurements of endometrial stripe thickness are significantly less useful in premenopausal than postmenopausal women (174). Sonohysterography is especially helpful in visualizing intrauterine problems such as polyps or submucous leiomyoma. Although these sonographic techniques are helpful in visualizing intrauterine pathology, histologic evaluation is required to rule out malignancy. Other techniques, such as CT scanning and MRI, are not as helpful in the initial evaluation of causes of abnormal bleeding and should be reserved for specific indications, such as exploring the possibility of other intra-abdominal pathology or adenopathy. MRI can be a secondary step in evaluating location of uterine fibroids with relationship to the endometrial cavity, staging and preoperative evaluation of endometrial cancer, detecting adenomyosis, and delineating adnexal and ovarian pathology (175).
# Chunk 796
Nonsurgical Management Most bleeding problems, including anovulatory bleeding, can be managed nonsurgically. Treatment with NSAIDs, such as ibuprofen and mefenamic acid, decreases menstrual ﬂow by 30% to 50%, but is less effective than tranexamic acid, danazol, or levonorgestrel IUD (93). Antifibrinolytics such as tranexamic acid were effective in reducing menstrual blood loss, and this indication was approved by the FDA in late 2008 (183).
# Chunk 797
During the reproductive years, the most common ovarian masses are benign. Ovarian masses can be functional or neoplastic, and neoplastic tumors can be benign or malignant. Functional ovarian masses include follicular and corpus luteal cysts. About two-thirds of ovarian tumors are encountered during the reproductive years. Most ovarian tumors (80% to 85%) are benign, and two-thirds of these occur in women between 20 and 44 years of age. The chance that a primary ovarian tumor is malignant in a patient younger than 45 years of age is less than 1 in 15. Most tumors produce few or only mild, nonspecific symptoms. The most common symptoms include abdominal distension, abdominal pain or discomfort, lower abdominal pressure sensation, and urinary or gastrointestinal symptoms. If the tumor is hormonally active, symptoms of hormonal imbalance, such as vaginal bleeding related to estrogen production, may be present. Acute pain may occur with adnexal torsion, cyst rupture, or bleeding into a cyst. Pelvic findings in patients with benign and malignant tumors may differ. Masses that are unilateral, cystic, mobile, and smooth are most likely to be benign, whereas those that are bilateral, solid, fixed, irregular, and associated with ascites, cul-de-sac nodules, and a rapid rate of growth are more likely to be malignant (196).
# Chunk 798
Figure 14.21 Mature cystic teratoma (dermoid cyst) of the ovary.

Neoplastic Masses Most benign cystic teratomas (dermoid cysts) occur during the reproductive years, although dermoid cysts have a wider age distribution than other ovarian germ cell tumors; in some case series, up to 25% of dermoids occur in postmenopausal women, and they can occur in newborns (213). Histologically, benign cystic teratomas have an admixture of elements (Fig. 14.21). In one study of ovarian masses that were surgically excised, dermoid cysts represented 62% of all ovarian neoplasms in women younger than 40 years of age (197). Malignant transformation occurs in less than 2% of dermoid cysts in women of all ages; most cases occur in women older than 40 years of age. The risk of torsion with dermoid cysts is approximately 15%, and it occurs more frequently than with ovarian tumors, perhaps because of the high fat content of most dermoid cysts, allowing them to ﬂoat within the abdominal and pelvic cavity. As a result of this fat content, on pelvic examination a dermoid cyst frequently is described as anterior in location. They are bilateral in approximately 10% of cases, although many have advanced the argument against bivalving a normal-appearing contralateral ovary because of the risk of adhesions, which may result in infertility. An ovarian cystectomy is almost always possible, even if it appears that only a small amount of ovarian tissue remains. Preserving a small amount of ovarian cortex in a young patient with a benign lesion is preferable to the loss of the entire ovary (214). Laparoscopic cystectomy often is possible, and intraoperative spill of tumor contents is rarely a cause of complications, although granulomatous peritonitis was reported (215–217). Laparoscopic removal may be associated with a higher risk of recurrence (216).
# Chunk 799
Other Studies Endometrial sampling with an endometrial biopsy or hysteroscopy is mandatory when both pelvic mass and abnormal bleeding are present. An endometrial lesion—carcinoma or hyperplasia—may coexist with a benign mass such as a leiomyoma. In
# Chunk 800
Figure 14.23 Transvaginal pelvic ultrasound demonstrating multiple uterine leiomyomas.

a woman with leiomyomas, abnormal bleeding cannot be assumed to be caused solely by the fibroids. Clinicians differ in recommendations about the need for endometrial biopsy when the diagnosis is leiomyomas with regular menses.
# Chunk 801
Imaging Studies Other studies may be necessary or appropriate. The most commonly indicated study is pelvic ultrasonography, which will help document the origin of the mass to determine whether it is uterine, adnexal, bowel, or gastrointestinal. The ultrasonographic examination provides information about the size of the mass and its consistency—unilocular cyst, mixed echogenicity, multiloculated cyst, or solid mass—which can help determine management (Figs.
# Chunk 802
Transvaginal and transabdominal ultrasonography are complementary in the diagnosis of pelvic masses, particularly those that have an abdominal component. Transvaginal ultrasonography has the advantage of providing additional information about the internal architecture or anatomy of the mass. Heterogeneous pelvic masses, described as tubo-ovarian abscesses on transabdominal ultrasonography, can be differentiated as pyosalpinx, hydrosalpinx, tubo-ovarian complex, and tubo-ovarian abscess with transvaginal ultrasonography (Fig. 14.26).
# Chunk 803
Figure 14.24 Transvaginal ultrasound of a unilocular ovarian cyst.

CT seldom is indicated as a primary diagnostic procedure, although it may be helpful in planning treatment when a malignancy is strongly suspected or when a nongynecologic disorder may be present. Abdominal ﬂat-plate radiography is not a primary diagnostic procedure, although if used for other indications, it may reveal calcifications that can assist in the discovery or diagnosis of a mass. Pelvic calcifications (teeth) consistent with a benign cystic teratoma, a calcified uterine fibroid, or scattered calcifications consistent with psammoma bodies of a papillary serous cystadenoma can be seen with abdominal radiography (Fig. 14.28).
# Chunk 804
Presence or absence of ascites

Unilateral vs. bilateral

Presence of other intra-abdominal pathology (liver, etc.) pelvic mass. Such findings rarely provide an indication for surgical intervention for otherwise asymptomatic leiomyomas.
# Chunk 805
Biopsy is easily performed in the office using a local anesthetic. Typically, 1% lidocaine is infiltrated beneath the lesion using a small (25-to 27-gauge) needle. Disposable punch biopsy instruments come in a variety of sizes from 2 to 6 mm in diameter. These skin biopsy instruments, along with fine forceps, scissors, and a scalpel, should be available in all outpatient gynecologic settings. For smaller biopsies, it is usually not necessary to place a suture. Topical silver nitrate can be used for hemostasis. Multiple tissue samples may be appropriate to obtain representative areas of a lesion if the lesion has a variable appearance or is multifocal. Although the vulvar biopsy procedure involves minimal discomfort, the biopsy sites will be painful for several days after the procedure. The prescription of a topical anesthetic such as 2% lidocaine jelly, to be applied periodically and before urinating, is appreciated by patients who require this procedure. Infection of the site can occur, and patients should be cautioned to report excessive erythema or purulent drainage.
# Chunk 806
Infectious Folliculitis Shaving may be associated with an infectious folliculitis, commonly caused by Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus pyogenes. Shaving and other methods of pubic hair removal are associated with razor burn, contact dermatitis, and the transmission of other infectious agents such as Molluscum contagiosum, HPV, and herpes simplex along with other bacteria including Pseudomonas aeruginosa (234).
# Chunk 807
Diagnosis of Postmenopausal Abnormal Bleeding

Pelvic examination to detect local lesions and a Pap test to assess cytology are essential first steps in finding the cause of postmenopausal bleeding. Pelvic ultrasonographic examination and, in particular, transvaginal ultrasonography or sonohysterography can suggest the cause of bleeding (250,254). Endometrial sampling, through office biopsy, hysteroscopy, or D&C, is usually considered essential. An endometrial thickness of less than 5 mm measured by transvaginal ultrasonography is unlikely to indicate endometrial cancer, although some authors suggest that the diagnostic accuracy is overestimated and recommend a cutoff of 3 mm (250,255).
# Chunk 808
Endometrial Hyperplasia The terminology used to describe endometrial hyperplasia is confusing, and the clinician must consult with the pathologist to ensure an understanding of the diagnosis. The World Health Organization (WHO) system classifies endometrial hyperplasia as simple hyperplasia, complex hyperplasia, simple atypical hyperplasia, and complex atypical hyperplasia (259). Approximately 40% to 50% of women with atypical hyperplasia have concurrent carcinoma. The management of endometrial hyperplasia is based on an understanding of the natural history of the lesion involved. The risk of progression of hyperplasia without atypia is low but is approximately 30% among those with atypical hyperplasia (259). Hysterectomy is recommended for treatment of atypical endometrial hyperplasia in postmenopausal women. Management of endometrial cancer with surgical staging and multidisciplinary review of pathology and treatment planning is addressed in Chapter 35.
# Chunk 809
Progestin therapy (oral, parenteral, or intrauterine device delivery) may be used in women with atypical endometrial hyperplasia who are poor operative candidates. These women should have an endometrial biopsy every 3 months to check for recurrence, with recurrence risks approaching 50% (185). A suggested scheme of management is outlined in Figure 14.34. This treatment is discussed in more detail in Chapter 35.
# Chunk 810
Differential Diagnosis Ovarian Masses During the postmenopausal years, the ovaries become smaller. Ovarian volume is related to age, menopausal status, weight, height, and use of exogenous hormones (260). A large body habitus and uterine size make it more difficult to palpate and assess ovarian size, particularly among postmenopausal women, and transvaginal ultrasonography is significantly more accurate than clinical examination. Transvaginal ultrasonography is suggested in addition to annual pelvic examination among overweight postmenopausal women (261). Although ovarian cancer is notoriously difficult to diagnose at any early stage, the concept that it is frequently asymptomatic is challenged. Symptoms may include back pain, fatigue, bloating, constipation, abdominal pain, and urinary symptoms; these symptoms are of greater severity and more recent onset in women with ovarian malignancy (262). Thus it is argued that among primary clinicians, the possibility of an ovarian mass (either benign or malignant) in women with these symptoms warrants further diagnostic investigation. However, the positive predictive value of these symptoms is not high for the prediction of early-stage disease, and the use of symptoms to trigger an evaluation for ovarian cancer is noted to result in diagnosis of the disease in only 1 in 100 women in the general population with such symptoms (263). Ovarian cancer is predominantly a disease of postmenopausal women; the incidence increases with age, and the average patient age is about 56 to 60 years (see Chapter 37).
# Chunk 811
CHAPTER 14 Benign Diseases of the Female Reproductive Tract

Perform D&C to rule out endometrial carcinoma in symptomatic patients Desire to retain uterus Persistent atypical hyperplasia Normal or atrophic endometrium  Continue Provera 5 mg/day 10 days/month for 12 months  Consider annual endometrial biopsy  Ovulation induction if childbearing desired Provera 10–20 mg/day for 11 to 14 days per month Repeat endometrial biopsy in 3 to 6 months Trial of high dose progestins (e.g., Provera 40–100 mg/day for 3 months) No desire to retain uterus Hysterectomy
# Chunk 812
In postmenopausal women with a pelvic mass, a CA125 measurement may be helpful in predicting a higher likelihood of a malignancy, which may guide decisions regarding management, consultation, or referral. A high index of suspicion by both women and their clinicians represents the best way to detect early ovarian cancer. Persistent symptoms such as an increase in abdominal size, bloating, fatigue, abdominal pain, indigestion, inability to eat normally, urinary frequency, pelvic pain, constipation, back pain, new onset of urinary incontinence, or unexplained weight loss require evaluation and consideration of the possibility of ovarian cancer. A physical examination, transvaginal ultrasonography, and CA125 measurement are appropriate.
# Chunk 813
For the majority of postmenopausal women with fibroids, hormone therapy will not stimulate fibroid growth. If fibroids do grow, progesterone is likely to be the cause (32). One study evaluated postmenopausal women with fibroids who were given 2 mg of oral estradiol daily and randomized to 2.5 or 5 mg of medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA) per day (32). One year after starting treatment, 77% of women taking 2.5 mg MPA had either no change or a decrease in fibroids diameters and 23% had a slight increase. However, 50% of women taking 5 mg MPA had an increase in fibroid size (mean diameter increase of 3.2 cm).
# Chunk 814
Uterine Sarcoma Women found to have uterine sarcoma are often clinically suspected of having a pelvic malignancy (54,55). Women with pain and bleeding and who are closer to menopause or postmenopausal may have a rare sarcoma. Of nine women found to have uterine sarcomas, all were postmenopausal and eight were admitted with abdominal pain and vaginal bleeding (55). All eight had presumed gynecologic malignancies: uterine sarcoma in four, endometrial carcinoma in three, and ovarian cancer in one. One additional woman had surgery for prolapse and a sarcoma was found incidentally (55). Between 1989 and 1999, the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) database reported 2,098 women with uterine sarcomas with an average age of 63 years, whereas a literature review found a mean age of 36 years in women subjected to myomectomy (54,56).
# Chunk 815
Pelvic Examination Clinically significant subserosal and intramural fibroids can usually be diagnosed by pelvic examination based on findings of an enlarged, irregularly shaped, firm and non-tender uterus (57). Uterine size assessed by bimanual examination, even for most women with BMI greater than 30, correlates well with uterine size and weight at pathological examination (58). Routine sonographic examination is not necessary when the diagnosis is almost certain. However, a definite diagnosis of submucous fibroids often requires saline-infusion sonography, hysteroscopy, or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (59).
# Chunk 816
Imaging For symptomatic women, consideration of medical therapy, noninvasive procedures, or surgery often depends on an accurate assessment of the size, number, and position of fibroids. Transvaginal sonography (TVS), saline-infusion sonography (SIS), hysteroscopy, and MRI were all performed on 106 women scheduled for hysterectomy and the findings were compared to pathologic examination (59). Submucous fibroids were best identified with MRI (100% sensitivity, 91% specificity). Identification was about equal with transvaginal sonography (sensitivity 83%, specificity 90%), saline-infusion sonography (sensitivity 90%, specificity 89%), and hysteroscopy (sensitivity 82%, specificity 87%). MRI is not technique dependent and has low interobserver variability for diagnosis of submucous fibroids, intramural fibroids, and adenomyosis when compared with TVS, SIS, and hysteroscopy (61,62).
# Chunk 817
Figure 15.3 MR images. A: Degenerating fibroid. Left to right. Preenhanced T1 image, T2 image, and no enhancement on T1 Gd-DPTA at 60 seconds. B: Leiomyosarcoma. Left to right, preenhanced T1 image, T2 image (arrow to dorsal part of tumor), and enhancement of dorsal part of tumor (arrow) on T1 Gd-DPTA at 60 seconds. (From Goto A, Takeuchi S, Sugimura K, et al. Usefulness of Gd-DTPA contrast-enhanced dynamic MRI and serum determination of LDH and its isozymes in the differential diagnosis of leiomyosarcoma from degenerated leiomyoma of the uterus. Int J Gynecol Cancer 2002;12:354–361.) women had no increase in fibroid volume throughout pregnancy (69). In the 31% of women noted to have an increase in volume, the greatest increase occurred before the 10th week of gestation. There was no relationship between initial fibroid volume and fibroid growth during gestational periods. A reduction in fibroid size toward baseline measurements was observed 4 weeks after delivery.
# Chunk 818
Rupture of Myomectomy Scar during Pregnancy

Following abdominal myomectomy, uterine rupture during pregnancy appears to be a rare event. Two studies comprising 236,454 deliveries reported 209 instances of uterine rupture, with only 4 cases attributable to prior myomectomy (78,79). Because the number of women who had a previous myomectomy was not known, the incidence of rupture in these studies could not be determined. However, a retrospective study of 412 women who had abdominal myomectomies reported only one woman with uterine rupture (0.2%) (80).
# Chunk 819
Treatment with GnRH-a decreases uterine volume, fibroid volume, and bleeding. However, the benefits of GnRH-a are limited by side effects and risks associated with long-term use (87,88). Monthly GnRH-a given for 6 months reduced fibroid volume by 30% and total uterine volume by 35% (87). Reduction in uterine size occurs mostly within the first 3 months of treatment (88). Menorrhagia responds well to GnRH-a; 37 of 38 women had resolution by 6 months. Following discontinuation of GnRH-a, menses returns in 4 to 8 weeks and uterine size returns to pretreatment levels within 4 to 6 months (89). In this study 64% of women remained asymptomatic 8 to 12 months after treatment.
# Chunk 820
Side effects occur in 95% of women treated with GnRH-a (89). Seventy-eight percent experience hot ﬂushes, 32% vaginal dryness, and 55% have transient frontal headaches. However, during 6 months of treatment only 8% of women discontinued GnRH-a because of the side effects. Arthralgia, myalgia, insomnia, edema, emotional lability, depression, and decreased libido are reported. The hypoestrogenic state induced by GnRH-a causes significant bone loss after 6 months of therapy (90).
# Chunk 821
The levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system (LNG-IUS) may be reasonable treatment for selected women with fibroid-associated menorrhagia. In women with fibroids, uterine size no larger than 12 weeks, and a normal uterine cavity, LNG-IUS substantially reduces menstrual bleeding (97). Twenty-two of 26 (85%) women with documented fibroid-related menorrhagia returned to normal bleeding within 3 months. By 12 months, 27 of 67 (40%) women had amenorrhea and 66 women had hemoglobin levels above 12 g/dL.
# Chunk 822
One study examined 32 women with at least one fibroid less than 5 cm in diameter and less than 50% of the tumor volume projecting into the endometrial cavity (type II) who had insertion of an LNG-IUS (98). After 12 months, mean estimated blood loss, measured by pictorial blood loss assessment, decreased from 392 to 37 mL with an associated increase in hemoglobin levels. There was no change in uterine volume over the course of the study. Some studies show that LNG-IUS expulsion rates are higher in women with fibroids than in women without fibroids (99).
# Chunk 823
Abdominal myomectomy was long employed as a conservative treatment for uterine fibroids, and much of the literature predates the use of prospective, randomized controlled trials. Although myomectomy is stated to relieve symptoms in 80% of women, there is scant literature documenting its efficacy and many large series have not reported data for relief of symptoms following surgery (102–104). A prospective, nonrandomized study comparing myomectomy with uterine artery embolization did report that 75% of women in the myomectomy group had a significant decrease in symptom scores after 6 months (105).
# Chunk 824
GnRH-a may be used preoperatively to mitigate abnormal bleeding, with a resultant increase of hemoglobin concentration. Women with fibroids and initial mean hemoglobin concentrations of 10.2 g were randomized preoperatively to GnRH-a plus oral iron or placebo plus oral iron (109). After 12 weeks, 74% of the women treated with GnRH-a and iron had hemoglobins greater than 12 g compared with 46% of the women treated with iron alone.
# Chunk 825
Myomectomy should be considered a safe alternative to hysterectomy. Victor Bonney, an early advocate of abdominal myomectomy, stated in 1931 that “The restoration and maintenance of physiologic function is, or should be, the ultimate goal of surgical treatment.” Case-controlled studies suggest that there may be less risk of intraoperative injury with myomectomy when compared with hysterectomy (111). A retrospective review of 197 women who had myomectomies and 197 women who underwent hysterectomies with similar uterine size (14 versus 15 weeks) found operating times were longer in the myomectomy group (200 versus 175 minutes), but estimated blood loss was greater in the hysterectomy group (227 versus 484 mL) (111). The risks of hemorrhage, febrile morbidity, unintended surgical procedure, life-threatening events, and rehospitalization were no different between groups. However, 26 (13%) women in the hysterectomy group suffered complications, including 1 bladder injury, 1 ureteral injury, 3 bowel injuries, 8 women with ileus, and 6 women with pelvic abscesses. In contrast, complications occurred in 11 (5%) of the myomectomy patients, including 1 bladder injury, 2 women with reoperation for small bowel obstruction, and 6 women with ileus.
# Chunk 826
Myomectomy may be considered even for those women who have large uterine fibroids and wish to retain their uterus. A study of 91 women with uterine size larger than 16 cm (range 16– 36 cm) reported one bowel injury, one bladder injury, and one reoperation for bowel obstruction, but no women had conversion to hysterectomy (112). The cell saver, which is a devise used to collect blood intraoperatively and reinfuse, was used in 70 women, and only 7 required homologous blood transfusion. A retrospective cohort study compared 89 women having abdominal hysterectomy for fibroids (mean uterine size 15 cm) to abdominal myomectomy in 103 women (mean uterine size 12 cm) (113). Although selection bias was likely, the hysterectomy group suffered two ureteral, one bladder, one bowel, and one nerve injury and two reoperations for bowel obstruction, while there were no visceral injuries in the myomectomy group.
# Chunk 827
Submucous fibroids, sometimes associated with increased menstrual bleeding or infertility, often can be removed hysteroscopically. Classification of submucous fibroids is based on the degree of the fibroid within the cavity; class 0 fibroids are intracavitary; class I have 50% or more of the fibroid within the cavity; and class II have less than 50% of the fibroid within the cavity (60) (Fig. 15.6). A meta-analysis of the effect of fibroids on fertility found that submucous fibroids with distortion of the uterine cavity decreased ongoing pregnancy/live birth rates by 70% (RR 0.32; 95% CI, 0.12–0.850) and resection increased ongoing pregnancy/live birth rates (RR 1.13; 95% CI, 0.96–1.33) (66).
# Chunk 828
No meta-analysis of the association of submucous fibroids and abnormal uterine bleeding was performed. However, most studies show a reduction in bleeding following resection. Using pictorial assessment to estimate menstrual blood loss prior to and for 41 months following hysteroscopic resection of submucous fibroids, a significant decrease in bleeding was reported in 42 of 51 (82%) women with submucous pedunculated (type 0), 24 of 28 (86%) with sessile (type I), and 15 of 22 (68%) with intramural fibroids (type II) (140). A study of 285 consecutive women with menorrhagia or metrorrhagia who had hysteroscopic resection of submucous fibroid(s) found that additional surgery was required for 9.5% at 2 years, 10.8% at 5 years, and 26.7% at 8 years (141).
# Chunk 829
In selected women not desiring future childbearing, endometrial ablation with or without hysteroscopic myomectomy may be efficacious. Pad counts following ablation with or without fibroid resection found that 48 of 51 (94%) women had resolution of abnormal bleeding after a mean follow-up of 2 years (range, 1 to 5 years) (147). A study of 62 women followed for an average of 29 months (range, 12 to 60 months) found that 74% of the women had hypomenorrhea or amenorrhea, and only 12% required a hysterectomy (148).
# Chunk 830
Clinical Follow-Up Self-reported diagnosis based on symptom questionnaires has reasonably good correlation with sonographic or pathologic confirmation of significant fibroids and may be the most appropriate method of gauging clinical evidence of new appearance (22). One study of 622 patients ages 22 to 44 at the time of surgery and followed over 14 years found the cumulative new appearance rate based on clinical examination and confirmed by ultrasound was 27% (155) (Fig. 15.7). An excellent review of life-table analysis studies found a cumulative risk of clinically significant new appearance of 10% 5 years after abdominal myomectomy (156).
# Chunk 831
Sonographic Follow-Up Routine ultrasound follow-up is sensitive but detects many clinically insignificant fibroids. One hundred forty-five women, mean age 38 (range, 21 to 52), were followed after abdominal myomectomy with clinical evaluation every 12 months and transvaginal sonography at 24 and 60 months (sooner, with clinical suspicion of new fibroids) (153). However, no lower size limit was used for the sonographic diagnosis of fibroids and, thus, the cumulative probability of new appearance was 51% at 5 years. A study of 40 women who had a normal sonogram 2 weeks following abdominal myomectomy found that the cumulative risk of sonographically detected new fibroids larger than 2 cm was 15% over 3 years (157).
# Chunk 832
Meaningful information for a woman considering treatment for her fibroids is the approximate risk of developing symptoms that would require yet additional treatment. A study of 125 women followed by symptoms and clinical examination after a first abdominal myomectomy found that a second surgery was required during the follow-up period (average 7.6 years) for 11% of women who had one fibroid removed initially and for 26% of women who had multiple fibroids removed (151). Crude rates of hysterectomy after myomectomy vary from 4% to 16% over 5 years (158,159).
# Chunk 833
New appearance of fibroids is not more common following laparoscopic myomectomy when compared with abdominal myomectomy. Eighty-one women randomized to either laparoscopic or abdominal myomectomy were followed with transvaginal sonography every 6 months for at least 40 months (160). Fibroids larger than 1 cm were detected in 27% of women following laparoscopic myomectomy compared to 23% in the abdominal myomectomy group, and no woman in either group required any further intervention.
# Chunk 834
Tissue hypoxia secondary to UAE causes postprocedural pain that usually requires pain management in the hospital for 1 day. NSAID medications are usually taken for 1 to 2 weeks, and many women return to normal activity within 1 to 3 weeks. Approximately 5% to 10% of women have pain for longer than 2 weeks (165). Ten percent of women require readmission to the hospital for postembolization syndrome, characterized by diffuse abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, low-grade fever, malaise, anorexia, and leucocytosis. Treatment with intravenous ﬂuids, NSAID medications, and pain management usually leads to resolution of symptoms within 2 to 3 days (165). Persistent fever should be managed with antibiotics. Failure to respond to antibiotics may indicate sepsis, which needs to be aggressively managed with hysterectomy.
# Chunk 835
A prospective, randomized trial comparing hysterectomy and UAE in 177 women with symptomatic fibroids found that major complications were rare (167). Hospital stay was significantly shorter for UAE (2 versus 5 days), but UAE was associated with more readmissions (9 versus 0) for pain and/or fever in the 6-week postoperative period. Significant complications included one woman who required resection of a submucous fibroid and one who had sepsis in the UAE group and one woman who had a vesico-vaginal fistula following hysterectomy.
# Chunk 836
Alternative methods of uterine artery occlusion were developed, both more and less invasive than UAE, including laparoscopic uterine artery occlusion and nonincisional transvaginal uterine artery occlusion. Fifty-eight patients were randomized to UAE or laparoscopic uterine artery occlusion (177). After a median follow-up time of 48 months clinical failures and symptom recurrence occurred in 14 women after laparoscopy (48%) and in five women after UAE (17%). Laparoscopic occlusion requires general anesthesia, is invasive, and requires a skilled laparoscopic surgeon. Transvaginal occlusion is performed by placing a specially designed clamp in the vaginal fornices and, guided by Doppler ultrasound auditory signals, is positioned to occlude the uterine arteries (178). The clamp is left in place for 6 hours and then removed. Results of this approach are not yet known.
# Chunk 837
Ultrasound energy can be focused to create sufficient heat at a focal point so that protein is denatured and cell death occurs. Concurrent MRI allows precise targeting of tissue and monitoring of therapy by assessing the temperature of treated tissue (179). The advantages of this procedure are a very low morbidity and a very rapid recovery, with return to normal activity in one day. The procedure is not recommended for women wishing future fertility (179). Initial studies had treatment limited by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to approximately 10% of fibroid volume, and while a 15% reduction in fibroid size was reported 6 months following treatment, only a 4% reduction was noted at 24 months (180). More recent studies with larger treatment areas reported better results; 6 months after treatment, the average volume reduction was 31% (+/−28%) (181).
# Chunk 838
An evaluation of clinical outcomes 6 months after treatment found that 71% of women had significant symptom reduction, but at 12 months about 50% still had significant symptom reduction (180). Twenty-three of 82 (28%) evaluable patients had undergone subsequent hysterectomy, myomectomy, or UAE. Women actively sought out magnetic resonance–guided focused ultrasound (MRgFUS), and no control group (sham MRgFUS) was included, so a placebo effect cannot be ruled out. One woman had a sciatic nerve injury caused by ultrasound energy and 5% had superficial skin burns. It remains to be seen whether increased treatment volumes will be associated with increased risks. As the technology continues to develop, further studies will be needed to evaluate the risks and efficacy of MRgFUS in the treatment of uterine fibroids.
# Chunk 839
For a symptomatic woman who desires future fertility and her primary symptom is abnormal bleeding, baseline hemoglobin measurement should be considered because accommodation to anemia can occur. If indicated, further evaluation of the endometrium with endometrial biopsy can be performed. Evaluation of the uterine cavity with saline-infusion sonography, hysteroscopy, or MRI can help determine the appropriate treatment options.
# Chunk 840
For a symptomatic woman who does not desire future fertility, observation (watchful waiting) can be considered if no treatment is desired at that time. A symptomatic perimenopausal woman may desire observation until she enters menopause, when symptoms often diminish. Baseline hemoglobin measurements should be obtained and if a significant anemia exists, then treatment should be considered. If metrorrhagia is present, evaluation of the endometrium with sonography or endometrial biopsy should be considered. If the endometrium is normal, a levonorgestrel-IUS or endometrial ablation may be appropriate treatment. Myomectomy (hysteroscopic, abdominal, or laparoscopic), hysterectomy (vaginal, laparoscopic, or abdominal), or uterine artery embolization can be considered.
# Chunk 841
Acute pain is intense and characterized by sudden onset, sharp rise, and short course. Cyclic pain refers to pain that occurs with a definite association to the menstrual period. Dysmenorrhea, or painful menstruation, is the most common cyclic pain phenomenon and is classified as primary or secondary on the basis of associated anatomic pathology (1). Chronic pelvic pain is defined as pain of greater than 6 months in duration, localized to the anatomic pelvis, and severe enough to cause functional disability or necessitating medical care (2).
# Chunk 842
The first perception of visceral pain is a vague, deep, poorly localizable sensation associated with autonomic reﬂex responses. When the pain becomes localized to a region of the abdominal wall, the pain is called referred pain. Referred pain is well localized and more superficial and is appreciated within the nerve distribution or dermatome of the spinal cord segment innervating the involved viscus. The location of the referred pain provides insight into the location of the primary disease process (9). The innervations of the pelvic organs are outlined in Table 16.2. The upper vagina, cervix, uterus, and adnexa share the same visceral innervations with the large intestine, rectum, bladder, lower ureter, and lower small intestine. Pain from the reproductive organs, genitourinary (GU), and gastrointestinal (GI) tracts are therefore referred to the same dermatomes (10,11).
# Chunk 843
Evaluation of Acute Pelvic Pain

In the evaluation of acute pelvic pain, early diagnosis is critical because significant delay increases morbidity and mortality. Central to correct diagnosis is an accurate history. The date and character of the last and previous menstrual periods and the presence of abnormal bleeding or discharge should be ascertained. The menstrual, sexual, and contraceptive history and any history of sexually transmitted conditions and previous gynecologic disorders are relevant. Pain history should include how and when the pain started, pregnancy-related symptoms (amenorrhea, irregular bleeding, nausea, breast tenderness), GI symptoms (anorexia, nausea, vomiting, constipation, obstipation, absence of ﬂatus, hematochezia), urinary symptoms (dysuria, urgency frequency, hesitancy, hematuria), signs of infection (fever, chills, purulent vaginal discharge), and symptoms attributable to a hemoperitoneum (orthostasis, abdominal distention, and right upper quadrant or shoulder pain). Document any past medical and surgical history, and current medications.
# Chunk 844
Baseline laboratory studies will include, at the least, a complete blood count with differential (CBC), clean catch mid-stream routine urine analysis (RUA), sensitive urine or serum pregnancy test, gonorrhea and chlamydia screening, and a transvaginal pelvic ultrasound. Other tests such as computerized tomography (CT) with and without contrast, chemistry panel, or blood type and screen (if transfusion is likely) may be indicated depending on the patient’s symptoms and the specific differential diagnosis.
# Chunk 845
Symptoms of Ectopic Pregnancy

Implantation of the fetus in the fallopian tube produces pain with acute dilation of the tube. If tubal rupture occurs, localized abdominal pain tends to be temporarily relieved and is replaced by generalized pelvic and abdominal pain and dizziness with the development of a hemoperitoneum. A period of amenorrhea followed by irregular bleeding and acute onset of pain compose the classic triad of symptoms. A mass in the cul-de-sac may produce an urge to defecate. Referred pain to the right shoulder often develops if the intra-abdominal blood collection transverses the right colic gutter and irritates the diaphragm (C3 to C5 innervation).
# Chunk 846
Abdominal examination is notable for tenderness and guarding in one or both lower quadrants. With the development of hemoperitoneum, generalized abdominal distention and rebound tenderness are prominent and bowel sounds are decreased. Pelvic examination generally reveals mild tenderness on motion of the cervix. Adnexal tenderness is present, usually more pronounced on the side of the ectopic pregnancy, and a mass may be palpated. The diagnostic approach and the medical and surgical management of ectopic pregnancy are discussed in Chapter 20 (12,13).
# Chunk 847
An ovarian cyst that is not undergoing torsion, rapidly enlarging, infected, or leaking does not usually cause acute pain. A corpus luteum cyst is the most common cyst to rupture and leads to hemoperitoneum. Symptoms of a ruptured corpus luteum cyst are similar to those of a ruptured ectopic pregnancy. The patient is in the luteal phase or can have delayed menses due to the persistently functioning corpus luteum. The onset of pain is usually sudden and is associated with increasing pelvic then generalized abdominal pain and dizziness or syncope with development of significant hemoperitoneum.
# Chunk 848
Orthostasis resulting from hypovolemia is present only when there is intravascular volume depletion, such as with a hemoperitoneum. Fever is rare. The most important sign is the presence of significant abdominal tenderness, often associated with localized or generalized lower quadrant rebound tenderness because of peritoneal irritation. The abdomen can be moderately distended with decreased bowel sounds. On pelvic examination, a mass is often palpable if the cyst is leaking and has not completely ruptured.
# Chunk 849
The pain of torsion is usually severe and constant or, if the torsion is partial and intermit, the pain can wax and wane. The onset of the torsion and subsequent abdominal pain frequently coincides with activity such as lifting, exercise, or intercourse. Autonomic reﬂex responses (e.g., nausea, emesis, tachycardia, and apprehension) are usually present.
# Chunk 850
All cases of PID are polymicrobial, involving gram-negative and -positive aerobic and anaerobic bacteria; however, PID initiated by Neisseria gonococcus or chlamydia is manifested by the acute onset of pelvic pain that increases with movement, fever, purulent vaginal discharge, and sometimes nausea and emesis. Subclinical PID can be seen with chlamydial salpingooophoritis, with more insidious symptoms that can be confused with the symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome. Bacterial vaginosis has been commonly associated with PID (19).
# Chunk 851
Elevated temperature and tachycardia are typical. Abdominal examination may show distention and decreased bowel sounds caused by secondary ileus. Direct and rebound abdominal tenderness with palpation are marked. The most important signs of acute salpingo-oophoritis are cervical motion tenderness and bilateral adnexal tenderness. Evaluation of the pelvis may be difficult because of pain and guarding, but lack of a discrete mass or masses differentiates acute salpingooophoritis from tubo-ovarian abscess or torsion. Right upper quadrant can be a distinct sign of PID-related perihepatitis involving the liver capsule and peritoneal surfaces, called Fitz-Hugh– Curtis syndrome.
# Chunk 852
Leukocytosis and elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), a nonspecific, although more sensitive, sign of inﬂammation, are found in patients with acute PID. Pregnancy test is usually negative because PID as co-existent intrauterine pregnancy (IUP) is rare. If the pregnancy test is positive, an infected or very inﬂamed ectopic pregnancy, or instrumented IUP or infected, incomplete abortion should be suspected. Appendicitis and diverticulitis can be mistaken for PID. Laparoscopy can be useful if the diagnosis is uncertain. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines for diagnosing PID state that PID should be suspected and treatment started if the patient is at risk for PID and she has uterine, cervical, or adnexal motion tenderness without any apparent cause (19a). Findings that support the diagnosis include cervical or vaginal mucopurulent discharge, elevated ESR or C-reactive protein (CRP), laboratory confirmation of gonorrhea or chlamydia, oral temperature of 38.3◦C or higher, or white blood cells on wet mount of vaginal secretions or culdocentesis ﬂuid. Most specific criteria for the diagnosis include endometritis on endometrial biopsy, laparoscopic evidence of PID (tubal edema, erythema, and purulent discharge), or thickened, ﬂuid-ﬂuid fallopian tubes on pelvic ultrasound or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
# Chunk 853
Vital signs reveal fever, tachycardia, and low blood pressure if the patient is septic. Tuboovarian abscesses can often be palpated on bimanual examination as firm, exquisitely tender, bilateral fixed masses. The abscesses can be palpated or “point” in the pelvic cul-de-sac and are appreciated on rectovaginal examination. Approximately 90% of patients will have abdominal or pelvic pain and 60% to 80% will present with fever and/or leukocytosis (21).
# Chunk 854
Vital signs are usually normal, although a low-grade temperature and mild tachycardia can be present with degeneration. Abdominal or bimanual examination and ultrasound reveal an irregular solid mass or masses arising from the uterus. If degeneration occurs, the inﬂammation can cause abdominal tenderness in response to palpation and mild localized rebound tenderness.
# Chunk 855
Gastrointestinal Tract Causes of Acute Pelvic Pain

Appendicitis The most common intestinal source of acute pelvic pain in women is appendicitis. Lifetime incidence in the United States is 7%, and it is the most common cause of emergent abdominal surgery (28). The symptoms and signs of appendicitis can be similar to those of PID, but the nausea and emesis are often more prominent with appendicitis.
# Chunk 856
A low-grade fever is generally present, but the temperature may be normal. High temperatures are typically seen with appendiceal perforation. Local tenderness is usually elicited on palpation of the right lower quadrant (McBurney point). The appearance of severe generalized muscle guarding, abdominal rigidity, rebound tenderness, right-sided mass, tenderness on rectal examination, positive psoas sign (pain with forced hip ﬂexion or passive extension of hip), and obturator signs (pain with passive internal rotation of ﬂexed thigh) indicate appendicitis. The pelvic examination usually does not show cervical motion or bilateral adnexal tenderness, but right-sided unilateral adnexal area tenderness can be present.
# Chunk 857
Many patients with acute appendicitis have normal total leukocyte counts but a left shift is usually present. Ultrasound examination of the pelvic organs is normal, whereas the appendix may appear abnormal on ultrasound or CT with contrast. CT with oral contrast with normal filling of the appendix rules out appendicitis. Diagnostic laparoscopy can be useful to rule out other sources of pelvic pathology, but it may be difficult to visualize the appendix sufficiently to rule out early appendiceal inﬂammation, so appendectomy can be indicated if the diagnosis is uncertain.
# Chunk 858
Bowel sounds are hypoactive and are substantially decreased with peritonitis related to a ruptured diverticular abscess. Abdominal examination reveals distention with left lower quadrant tenderness on direct palpation and localized rebound tenderness. Abdominal and bimanual rectovaginal examinations may reveal a poorly mobile, doughy inﬂammatory mass in the left lower quadrant. Leukocytosis and fever are common. Stool guaiac may be positive as a result of inﬂammation of the colon or microperforation.
# Chunk 859
Fever is often present in the late stages. At the onset of mechanical obstruction, bowel sounds are high pitched and maximal during an episode of colicky pain. As the obstruction progresses, bowel sounds decrease and, when absent, suggest ischemic bowel. Marked abdominal distention often ensues.
# Chunk 860
An upright abdominal x-ray series shows a characteristic gas pattern, distended loops of bowel, and air ﬂuid levels; and it helps to determine whether obstruction is partial or complete (no colonic gas seen). CT can be useful. White blood cell count will be elevated in patients with ischemic bowel. Complete obstruction requires surgical management, whereas partial obstruction often can be managed with intravenous ﬂuids, bowel rest, and selective use of nasogastric suction. The cause of the obstruction should be determined and treated if possible. Underlying GI or reproductive tract malignancy may be present.
# Chunk 861
Urinary Tract Causes of Acute Pelvic Pain

Ureteral colic due to ureteral lithiasis is caused by a sudden increase in intraluminal pressure and associated inﬂammation. Urinary tract infections producing acute pain include cystitis and pyelonephritis. The most common microbes causing urinary tract infections are Escherichia coli followed by Proteus, Klebsiella, and Pseudomonas (31).
# Chunk 862
Acute Pelvic Pain: Summary

Diagnosis of stone can be made by urinalysis revealing red blood cells and demonstration of the stone via abdominal ultrasound, CT urography, or intravenous pyelography (uric acid stones may not be detected by CT). There is pain with firm pressure over the costovertebral angle in the case of lithiasis or pyelonephritis. Peritoneal signs are absent. Suprapubic tenderness may accompany cystitis.
# Chunk 863
The diagnosis of UTI is based on RUA revealing bacteria and leukocytes with or without leukocyte esterase and nitrites, in the absence of squamous epithelial cells. Findings can subsequently be confirmed by culture. The diagnostic thresholds for white blood cell count (WBC) and vaginal squamous cells vary with each laboratory. An elevated number of squamous cells in the urinary specimen suggests contamination of the urine specimen with vaginal secretions and can result in false-positive urine analysis and culture.
# Chunk 864
All women of reproductive age with acute pelvic pain should have a complete blood count with differential, ESR, urinalysis, and a sensitive qualitative urine or serum pregnancy test. If not diagnosed expeditiously, an acute process can often result in significant morbidity or mortality. For patients who have chronic pelvic pain and develop acute exacerbation, it is important to rule out a superimposed acute process. Symptoms of fever, chills, diaphoresis, abnormal vaginal bleeding, dizziness, syncope, emesis, significant diarrhea, obstipation, dysuria, hematuria, and hematochezia, and/or signs of elevated temperature, tachycardia, orthostasis, abdominal distention, abnormal bowel sounds, ascites, peritonitis, or abnormal pregnancy are all indicative of an acute process.
# Chunk 865
Laboratory tests for the evaluation of acute pelvic pain include a CBC with differential, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, clean catch midstream RUA, gonorrhea and chlamydia nucleic acid amplification testing (NAAT) from cervix or urine, and urine or serum pregnancy test. The sedimentation rate is nonspecific, but often is the only abnormal laboratory finding in women with subacute PID. If the pregnancy test is positive, a quantitative β-human chorionic gonadotropin (βhCG) should be ordered. Other studies that are recommended include transvaginal pelvic ultrasound, or if imaging is not available, culdocentesis. The ﬂuid from culdocentesis can be sent for hematocrit if bloody ﬂuid is obtained or Gram stain with culture if the ﬂuid is purulent. The presence of a mass in the cul-de-sac precludes culdocentesis. CT with and without contrast, abdominal x-rays, or upper or lower Gastrografin studies help rule out gastrointestinal pathology when gastrointestinal symptoms predominate. CT is useful for evaluation of retroperitoneal masses or abscesses related to the gastrointestinal tract. Pelvic MRI can be diagnostic if the pelvic ultrasound cannot determine whether a mass is uterine or adnexal.
# Chunk 866
Diagnostic laparoscopy is reserved for establishing the diagnosis in patients who have acute abdomen of uncertain cause, for elucidating the nature of an ambiguous adnexal mass, or for delineating whether a pregnancy is intrauterine or extrauterine (if ultrasound results and βhCG are equivocal). Visualization is hampered if diagnostic laparoscopy is performed for a large pelvic mass (>12 cm) and is relatively contraindicated in patients with peritonitis, severe ileus, or bowel obstruction. In these settings, laparotomy is preferable. The majority of patients with pelvic pain and a normal pelvic ultrasound have improvement or resolution of symptoms with conservative therapy and do not require surgical intervention (33).
# Chunk 867
Cyclic Pain: Primary and Secondary Dysmenorrhea

Dysmenorrhea is a common gynecologic disorder affecting as many as 60% of menstruating women (34). Primary dysmenorrhea refers to menstrual pain without pelvic pathology, whereas secondary dysmenorrhea is defined as painful menses associated with underlying pathology. Primary dysmenorrhea usually appears within 1 to 2 years of menarche, when ovulatory cycles are established. The disorder affects younger women but may persist into their 40s. Secondary dysmenorrhea usually develops years after menarche and can occur with anovulatory cycles. The differential diagnosis of secondary dysmenorrhea is outlined in Table 16.3 (2).
# Chunk 868
The pain of primary dysmenorrhea usually begins a few hours before or just after the onset of a menstrual period and may last 48 to 72 hours. The pain is similar to labor, with suprapubic cramping, and may be accompanied by lumbosacral backache, pain radiating down the anterior thigh, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and rarely syncopal episodes. The pain of dysmenorrhea is colicky in nature and, unlike abdominal pain that is caused by chemical or infectious peritonitis, is relieved by abdominal massage, counter-pressure, or movement of the body.
# Chunk 869
On examination, the vital signs are normal. The suprapubic region may be tender to palpation. Bowel sounds are normal, and there is no upper abdominal tenderness and no abdominal rebound tenderness. Bimanual examination at the time of the dysmenorrheic episode often reveals uterine tenderness; severe pain does not occur with movement of the cervix or palpation of the adnexal structures. The pelvic organs are normal in primary dysmenorrhea.
# Chunk 870
Secondary dysmenorrhea is cyclic menstrual pain that occurs in association with underlying pelvic pathology. The pain of secondary dysmenorrhea often begins 1 to 2 weeks before menstrual ﬂow and persists until a few days after the cessation of bleeding. Underlying causes include endometriosis, adenomyosis, subacute endometritis and pelvic inﬂammatory disease, copper intrauterine devices (IUDs), ovarian cysts, congenital pelvic malformations, and cervical stenosis. Whereas the diagnosis of primary dysmenorrhea is based on history and presence of a normal pelvic examination and ultrasound, the diagnosis of secondary dysmenorrhea may require review of a pain diary to confirm cyclicity and, in addition to a transvaginal ultrasound examination, laparoscopy and/or hysteroscopy may be indicated.
# Chunk 871
In women with endometriosis, endometrial glands and stroma are found outside the uterine cavity, especially at the cul-de-sac, ovaries, and pelvic visceral and parietal peritoneum. Given that confirmation requires visual diagnosis, the prevalence of endometriosis is unknown. It is thought to occur in approximately 10% of the general female population, 15% to 20% of infertile women, and more than 30% of women with chronic pelvic pain. In some cases, regression can occur spontaneously (50). (See the section below on endometriosis under the heading of chronic pelvic pain and also Chapter 17.)
# Chunk 872
Patients typically complain of severe dysmenorrhea and cyclic pelvic pain that starts up to 2 weeks prior to menses. The pain can be sharp or pressurelike, localized to the midline or involving the lower abdomen, back, and rectum. Other symptoms include deep thrust dyspareunia, subfertility, irregular bleeding despite ovulatory cycles, and nongynecologic symptoms such as cyclic dyschezia, urinary urgency, frequency, bloating, and rarely hematochezia or hematuria.
# Chunk 873
The clinical diagnosis of endometriosis is accurate in approximately 50% of cases. Though a definitive diagnosis of endometriosis cannot be made on image studies, endometriomas are generally distinguishable from hemorrhagic corpus lutea by the appearance on ultrasound. Homogenous hemorrhagic appearing cysts that fail to resolve after one to two menstrual cycles are suspicious for endometriomas. CA125 can be elevated but is a nonspecific and nonsensitive marker for endometriosis. Definitive diagnosis is made by direct operative visualization either laparoscopically or via laparotomy. Active red ﬂame, or colorless vesicles or petechial lesions usually indicate early disease, while powder-burn, fibrotic lesions suggest more longstanding lesions. Suspicious findings should be biopsied for confirmation. Deep infiltrating lesions and peritoneal windows are most often found within the posterior cul-de-sac, especially at the uterosacral ligaments, and may cause pain by penetrating the many nerve endings in this area (51). Patients with endometriosis have nerve fibers in their endometrial tissue, and studies show endometrial biopsy is a potential but as yet unproven diagnostic tool. A double-blind study of 99 women undergoing laparoscopy and endometrial biopsy for evaluation of endometrial nerve fibers found that the biopsy was just as effective as laparoscopy for diagnosing endometriosis (52).
# Chunk 874
GnRH agonist and add-back treatment can be used as pharmacologic treatments for endometriosis (58). A randomized-controlled trial of GnRH agonist therapy for 6 months in cases of confirmed endometriosis showed decreased size of endometriotic lesions and pain symptoms. Side effects are related to the hypoestrogenic state and include vasomotor symptoms, mood swings, vaginal dryness, decreased libido, myalgias, and, eventually, bone loss. These side effects can be reduced with supplemental calcium and hormonal add-back therapy with norethindrone acetate 2 to 5 mg daily with or without low-dose estrogen (0.625 mg of conjugated estrogen or 1 mg of 17 β-estradiol) (58). Given the side effects, GnRH agonists usually are not used for more than 8 to 12 months, but with add-back hormones and/or bisphosphonate, GnRH therapy can be considered for use for more than 1 year. Recurrence of symptoms after discontinuation of GnRH agonist ranges from 36% to 70% 5 years after completion of treatment.
# Chunk 875
Laparoscopy and laparotomy are appropriate and for some patients, they are the preferred treatment for the management of secondary dysmenorrheal pain related to endometriosis that is unresponsive to hormonal agents (see also Chapter 17). Excellent operative skill is required to manage endometriosis surgically. Endometriotic lesions should be ablated or resected. Endometriomas must be removed with their capsule. Resection of endometriomas by ovarian cystectomy improves pain and fertility in women with chronic pelvic pain and endometriosis when compared to fenestration, drainage, and coagulation. In a randomized controlled trial of laser ablation for minimal to moderate endometriosis, over 90% of women felt improved at 1-year follow-up, and 87% of women with stage III to IV endometriosis were satisfied with the results at 1-year follow-up. Recurrent pain after 24 months is close to 50% (61).
# Chunk 876
There are limited data regarding outcomes for repeated conservative surgical procedures, including pelvic denervating procedures (61). The authors conclude that although re-operation is often considered the best option, the long-term outcome appears suboptimal with a cumulative probability of recurrent pain between 20% and 40% and of a further surgical procedure of at least 20%. Hysterectomy with BSO decreased the need for re-operation to treat pelvic pain by sixfold. Postoperative medical treatment with OCs can be effective (62). Re-operation in a symptomatic patient after previous conservative surgery should take into account the psychological state of the patient, desire for future fertility, and whether the pain responded to prior surgical therapy with at least 1, but preferably 3 to 5 years of pain relief.
# Chunk 877
(63) reviewed hormonal therapy in 217 patients: 68 in five observational studies, 59 in a cohort study, and 90 in a randomized controlled trial (63). The study compared aromatase inhibitor, vaginal danazol, GnRH agonist, intrauterine progestin, and two estrogen-progestin combinations, transvaginally or transdermally and an oral progestin. With the exception of an aromatase inhibitor used alone, the pain relief with medical therapies was satisfactory over the 6-to 12-month course of the treatment, with 60% to 90% of women reporting substantial decrease or complete relief from pain symptoms.
# Chunk 878
Chronic pelvic pain (CPP) is defined as pelvic pain that persists in the same location for greater than 6 months’ duration, causing functional disability or requiring treatment (64). CPP is an inclusive, general term that encompasses many more specific causes, ranging from reproductive, gastrointestinal, and urinary tract etiologies to myofascial pain and nerve entrapment syndromes. Chronic pelvic pain affects 12% to 20% of women in the United States. The differential diagnosis of CPP is outlined in Table 16.3. Nongynecologic causes of pain, such as irritable bowel syndrome, interstitial cystitis/bladder pain syndrome, abdominal wall or pelvic ﬂoor myofascial syndrome, or neuropathy, are frequently overlooked but common causes of chronic pelvic pain. This can in part explain why 60% to 80% of patients undergoing laparoscopy for chronic pelvic pain have no intraperitoneal pathology (2).
# Chunk 879
Patients with CPP are often anxious and depressed. Their marital, sexual, social, and occupational lives are disrupted. These patients frequently have poor treatment outcomes from traditionally effective gynecologic and medical therapy and may undergo multiple unsuccessful surgical procedures for pain. About 12% to 19% of hysterectomies are performed for pelvic pain, and 30% of patients who present to pain clinics have had a hysterectomy (65).
# Chunk 880
On the first visit, a thorough pain history should be performed, taking into consideration the nature of each pain symptom: location, radiation, severity, aggravating and alleviating factors; effect of menstrual cycle, stress, work, exercise, intercourse, and orgasm; the context in which pain arose; and the social and occupational toll of the pain (Table 16.4). A visual or verbal analog pain scale to record pain severity 0 through 10 and stating “no pain” and “worst possible pain” is important in assessing the severity of pain and comparing the changes in severity over subsequent visits. The evaluation should include a comprehensive questionnaire that addresses depression, anxiety, emotional, physical and sexual trauma, quality of life, and criteria to assist with the diagnosis of irritable bowel syndrome and interstitial cystitis or bladder pain syndrome. The International Pelvic Pain Society published a comprehensive pain assessment tool in order to facilitate the history and physical examination, which can be found on the International Pelvic Pain Society’s Web site and reprinted and reproduced (68).
# Chunk 881
A complete physical examination should be performed, with particular attention directed to the abdominal and lumbosacral areas, vulva, pelvic ﬂoor, and internal organs via vaginal, bimanual, and rectovaginal examination. The examination should include the Carnett test, which is an evaluation of the painful sites on the abdominal wall before and after tensing of the abdominal muscles (head raised off the table or with bilateral straight leg raise) to differentiate abdominal wall and visceral sources of pain. Abdominal wall pain is augmented and visceral pain is diminished with palpating the tender points after these maneuvers (74). While standing, the patient should be examined for hernias, both abdominal (inguinal and femoral) and pelvic (cystocele and enterocele). An attempt should be made to locate by palpation the tissues that reproduce the patient’s pain. If abdominal wall sources of pain are noted, it is useful to block these areas with injection of local anesthetics and then perform the pelvic examination (74). Neuropathic symptoms (sharp or lancinating or electrical pain, burning, or tingling sensations) should be localized to the peripheral nerve subserving the involved area.
# Chunk 882
Endometriosis can be demonstrated in 15% to 40% of patients undergoing laparoscopy for chronic pelvic pain. Endometriosis is a surgical diagnosis based on identification and histology of characteristic lesions (75). Endometriosis produces a low-grade inﬂammatory reaction; over time this results in adhesions between conﬂuent pelvic organs (76). However, the cause of the pain is not well established. There is no correlation between the location of disease and pain symptoms (77,78). There appears to be no relationship between the incidence and severity of pain or the stage of the endometriotic lesions, and as many as 30% to 50% of patients have no pain regardless of stage. Similarly, 40% to 60% of patients have no tenderness on examination regardless of stage (78). Deeply infiltrating endometriosis lesions that involve the rectovaginal septum and the bowel, ureters, and bladder are strongly associated with pain (76,79,80). Pelvic adhesions related to endometriosis are a predictor of pelvic pain (81). Vaginal and uterosacral deep lesions are associated with dyspareunia and dyschezia.
# Chunk 883
Adhesions Adhesions noted at the time of laparoscopy may be in the same general region of the abdomen as the source of the pelvic pain; however, neither the specific location (i.e., adnexa structures, parietal, visceral peritoneum, or bowel) nor density of the adhesions correlates consistently with the presence of pain symptoms (85,86). In one nonrandomized, noncontrolled study of adhesion lysis, a subgroup of women with anxiety, depression, multiple somatic symptoms, and social and occupational disruption responded poorly to adhesiolysis. The group without these characteristics had significant improvement in pain (87). Prospective randomized controlled trials do not support adhesiolysis for women with CPP. A randomized controlled trial of laparoscopic adhesiolysis showed an improvement in both the groups (i.e., laparoscopy with and laparoscopy without lysis of adhesions), suggesting a large placebo effect (88–90). One randomized controlled trial that did not consistently demonstrate a significant long-term reduction in pain did find some improvement if the adhesions were dense and involved the small bowel (91).
# Chunk 884
The causal role of adhesions in the genesis of pelvic pain is uncertain, and surgery will lead to further adhesion formation and perhaps organ injury. Therefore, lysis is not recommended unless there is intermittent partial bowel obstruction or infertility. Although some observational studies showed that laparoscopic lysis of adhesions can alleviate chronic pelvic pain, randomized controlled trials have not revealed any long-term benefit. If surgery is performed, barrier materials such as oxidized regenerated cellulose or hyaluronic acid with carboxymethylcellulose can be used for prevention of adhesion re-formation. Repeated surgical procedures for lysis of adhesions are not indicated.
# Chunk 885
Pelvic congestion affects women of reproductive age. Typical symptoms include bilateral lower abdominal and back pain that is increased with standing for long periods, secondary dysmenorrhea, dyspareunia, abnormal uterine bleeding, chronic fatigue, and irritable bowel symptoms (97). Pain usually begins with ovulation and lasts until the end of menses. The uterus is often bulky, and the ovaries are enlarged with multiple functional cysts. The uterus, parametria, and uterosacral ligaments are tender.
# Chunk 886
Treatment of suspected pelvic congestion ranges from the less invasive hormonal suppression and cognitive behavioral pain management to the more invasive ovarian vein embolization or hysterectomy and salpingo-oophorectomy (93–97). Low-estrogen, progestin-dominant continuous oral contraceptives, high-dose progestins, and GnRH analogues often provide pain relief (94). Hormonal suppression should be the initial mode of treatment for women with suspected pelvic congestion. Medroxyprogesterone acetate, 30 mg daily, is useful (95). A multidisciplinary approach incorporating psychotherapy, behavioral pain management, or both is highly recommended. Percutaneous transcatheter embolization can be considered for women who do not respond to medical or hormonal therapy (96,97). Technically more invasive, transcatheter embolotherapy selectively catheterizes the ovarian and internal iliac veins, followed by contrast venography and embolization. This treatment showed some promise in small uncontrolled studies, but larger randomized controlled trials are necessary to validate its benefits. For women who have completed their childbearing, hysterectomy with oophorectomy is a reasonable option if multidisciplinary management has failed (97).
# Chunk 887
Patients with salpingo-oophoritis usually present with symptoms and signs of acute infection. Atypical or partially treated infection may not be associated with fever or peritoneal signs. Subacute or atypical salpingo-oophoritis is often a sequel of chlamydia or mycoplasma infection. Abdominal tenderness, cervical motion, and bilateral adnexal tenderness are typical of pelvic infection (see Chapter 18).
# Chunk 888
The patient usually reports lateralizing pelvic pain, often cycling with ovulation or the luteal phase that is described as sharp and stabbing or constant, dull, and nonradiating, occasionally with associated genitourinary or gastrointestinal symptoms. Symptoms tend to arise 2 to 5 years after initial oophorectomy. A tender mass in the lateral region of the pelvis is pathognomonic. The patient may report deep dyspareunia, constipation, or ﬂank pain.
# Chunk 889
Ultrasonography usually confirms a mass with the characteristics of ovarian tissue. The accuracy of ultrasound can be improved by treating the patient with a 5-to 10-day course of clomiphene citrate, 100 mg daily, to stimulate follicular development. In a patient who has had bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and is not taking hormone therapy,estradiol and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) assays reveal a characteristic premenopausal picture (FSH <40 mIU/mL and estradiol >20 pg/mL), although on occasion the remaining ovarian tissue may not be active enough to suppress FSH levels (98). The patient may have a persistent estrogenized state based on the vulvar and vaginal examination and lack postmenopausal symptoms such as hot ﬂashes, night sweats, and mood changes. Medical therapy that suppresses ovarian function can be diagnostic and therapeutic.
# Chunk 890
The uterus, cervix, and adnexa share visceral innervation with the lower ileum, sigmoid colon, and rectum. These pain signals travel through sympathetic nerves to spinal cord segments T10 to L1. It is often difficult, therefore, to determine whether lower abdominal pain is of gynecologic or enterocoelic origin. Skillful medical history and examination are necessary to distinguish gynecologic from gastrointestinal causes of pain. Inﬂammatory bowel disease, such as Crohn’s disease or ulcerative colitis, infectious enterocolitis, intestinal neoplasms, appendicitis, and hernia must be ruled out with appropriate history and physical examination, complete blood cell count, and stool cultures and visualization of colonic mucosa when appropriate.
# Chunk 891
IBS is one of the more common causes of lower abdominal pain and may account for up to 60% of referrals to the gynecologist for chronic pelvic pain. An estimated 35% of patients with chronic pelvic pain have a concurrent diagnosis of IBS (102,103). Women who had a hysterectomy for chronic pelvic pain are twice as likely to have IBS. The pathophysiology of IBS appears to be inﬂuenced by central nervous system sensitization and decreased descending inhibition, which ultimately leads to the visceral hypersensitivity. Visceral hypersensitivity and abnormal reﬂex responses, demonstrated in both animal and human studies, results in an increased intensity of pain, lowered threshold for sensation, and an enlarged viscera-somatic region of pain referral, all of which lead to the IBS symptoms (104,105).
# Chunk 892
The predominant symptom of IBS is abdominal pain. Other symptoms include abdominal distention, excessive ﬂatulence, alternating diarrhea and constipation, increased pain before a bowel movement, decreased pain after a bowel movement, and pain exacerbated by events that increase gastrointestinal motility, such as eating, stress, anxiety, depression, and menses. The pain is usually intermittent, occasionally constant, cramp-like, and more likely to occur in the left lower quadrant. The patient with IBS can be placed into one of three categories: constipation-predominant, diarrhea-predominant, and pain-predominant (alternating bowel habits) depending on their main symptoms. The new Rome III criteria for diagnosis
# Chunk 893
Table 16.5 Rome III Criteria for Irritable Bowel Syndrome

At least 3 days per month of recurrent abdominal pain or discomfort for the previous 3 months, has associated with two of three features: 1.
# Chunk 894
Onset associated with a change in form (appearance) of stool.

(Table 16.5) includes at least 3 days of recurrent abdominal pain or discomfort per month over the past 3 months with at least two of the following features: relief with defecation, onset associated with change in stool frequency, or onset associated with change in form and appearance of stool (106).
# Chunk 895
Treatment consists of reassurance, education, stress reduction, bulk-forming agents and other symptomatic treatments, and low-dose tricyclic antidepressants. A multidisciplinary management approach consisting of medical and psychological approaches is recommended. Patients should eliminate triggers in their diet, such as food containing lactose, sorbitol, alcohol, fat, and fructose. Products that contain caffeine can cause abdominal bloating, cramping, and more frequent bowel movements. After the patient has tried these lifestyle changes, if she remains symptomatic, a short-term trial of antispasmodics such as dicyclomine or hyoscyamine can be given (105). Multidisciplinary therapy addresses the cognitive, affective, and behavioral components of the pain. Therapy may decrease the intensity of nociceptor stimulation as well as change the patient’s interpretation of the meaning of pain (105).
# Chunk 896
A clean catch or catheterized urine specimen for routine urinalysis and culture should be obtained to rule out urinary tract infection. As indicated, urethral and cervical studies for chlamydia should be obtained, and a wet prep for vaginitis should be performed. Urethral syndrome should be considered if infection is ruled out, the evaluation does not disclose vulvovaginitis, and no allergic phenomenon causing contact dermatitis of the urethra can be detected. The possibility of ureoplasma, chlamydia, candida, trichomonas, gonorrhea, and herpes should be eliminated. Cystoscopic evaluation should be performed to rule out urethral diverticulum, stones, and cancer. Pelvic ﬂoor muscles should be evaluated, as spasm of these muscles can lead to urethral pain and tenderness. The urethral pain can also be a manifestation of bladder pain syndrome.
# Chunk 897
Various forms of therapy are suggested for urethral syndrome. Those patients in whom no infectious agent is present but who have sterile pyuria may respond to a 2-to 3-week course of doxycycline or erythromycin. Long-term, low-dose antimicrobial prophylaxis often is used in women with urgency and frequency symptoms who had careful documentation of recurrent urinary tract infections. Some of these women may continue to have symptoms when their urine is not infected, and bacterial infection redevelops over time. Posttreatment test of cure cultures are useful. It is recommended that all postmenopausal women with this condition be given a trial of local estrogen therapy for at least 2 months. If there is no improvement after antibiotic or estrogen therapy, physical therapy, and cognitive-behavioral therapy, then urethral dilation can be considered but recent studies are lacking. Positive results were noted with biofeedback techniques. Other treatments including acupuncture and laser therapy proved successful (108). Psychological support is very important in this group of women. Management requires a multidisciplinary approach, as is true of chronic pelvic pain in general.
# Chunk 898
The etiology of IC/PBS is unknown, but several hypotheses exist. A defective glycosaminoglycan (GAG) epithelial layer, which allows irritating substances in the urine to penetrate the urothelium to the subepithelial nerve endings, may be responsible for the syndrome (110). This theoretical mechanism is based on the fact that many IC sufferers have a positive potassium diffusion test and are sensitive to certain foods and beverages. Immunological mechanisms were proposed because abnormal mast cell activity, increased substance P expressing nerve fibers and increased nerve growth factor, were all found in bladder biopsies of IC affected individuals (110). Autoimmune mechanisms may be responsible in some individuals given that there is a higher incidence of systemic lupus erythematosus, allergies, inﬂammatory bowel and irritable bowel disease, and fibromyalgia in patients with bladder symptoms. Another possible mechanism is central sensitization with altered sympathetic and hypothalamic adrenal axis, substantiated by the existence of “phantom” bladder pain even after surgical removal of the bladder (110).
# Chunk 899
Patients can be evaluated with cystoscopy with hydrodistension and biopsy. Petechial bladder mucosal hemorrhages (glomerulations) are characteristic of IC. The use of a pelvic pain and urgency or frequency symptom scale and a bladder potassium intravesical test can promote early diagnosis; it is still debatable whether a positive potassium test is definitive for interstitial cystitis or if a positive test is a manifestation of bladder hyperalgesia (112).
# Chunk 900
Although there is no definitive cure for IC/BPS, patients can achieve remission with multidisciplinary therapy. First-line treatments are primarily behavioral modification such as bladder training and stress management, cognitive-behavioral therapy, dietary modifications or restriction of acidic, spicy, and fermented foods, and pelvic ﬂoor muscle physical therapy. Urinary alkalinization can be useful (113). TCAs have been efficacious. Amitriptyline 10 mg can be taken at bedtime and titrated as tolerated up to 150 mg or to relief of symptoms. Amitriptyline has antihistaminic, anticholinergic, and sodium channel blocking properties that are potentially therapeutic for opposing the histamine from mast cell degranulation, the urinary frequency, and the neuropathic pain, respectively. Oral pentosan polysulfate sodium (PPS) is the only U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved oral therapy for IC and is modestly beneficial (114). Pentosan polysulfate is a heparinlike moiety that resembles the GAG layer, but should not be used with NSAIDs because of the bleeding risk.
# Chunk 901
Intravesical therapy can be first or second-line. With an intravesical mixture of lidocaine, bicarbonate, and heparin instilled three times a week for 3 weeks, 57% of women reported resolution of pain (115). Dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) is the only FDA approved intravesical treatment of IC. Intravesical 50% DMSO showed significant symptomatic improvement compared to placebo in two randomized controlled trials. Intravesical solutions containing dissolved PPS showed some promise but are not FDA approved and are under investigation (116).
# Chunk 902
On examination, the point of maximal tenderness or pain should be localized with the fingertip. The maximal point of tenderness in an iliohypogastric or ilioinguinal injury is usually at the rectus margin, medial and inferior to the anterior iliac spine. For the pudendal nerve the maximal tenderness is usually near the ischial spine. A tentative diagnosis can be confirmed by a diagnostic nerve block with 3 to 5 mL of 0.25% bupivacaine. Patients usually report immediate relief of symptoms after injection, and at least 50% of patients experience relief lasting longer than a few hours over a week or two.
# Chunk 903
Myofascial Pain Myofascial syndrome is documented in about 15% of patients with chronic pelvic pain (120). These patients are noted to have numerous trigger points, hyperirritable areas within a tight band of skeletal muscle or within its fascia (123,124). Trigger points are possibly initiated by pathogenic autonomic reﬂex of visceral or muscular origin and are painful on compression (124–126). The referred pain of the trigger point occurs in a dermatomal distribution and may be caused by nerves from the muscle or deeper structures sharing a common second-order neuron in the spinal cord. The patient can experience weakness and restriction in range of motion of the affected muscle. Physical therapy is a mainstay (127). Painful trigger points characteristically can be abolished with the injection of local anesthetic into the painful area, and topical lidocaine patches or creams can be useful (123). Trigger points can be present in women with chronic pelvic pain irrespective of presence or type of underlying pathology. In one study, 89% of women with chronic pelvic pain had abdominal, vaginal, or lumbosacral trigger points (123). In the absence of the initial or ongoing organic pathology, various factors are theorized to predispose to the chronicity of the myofascial syndrome, including psychological, hormonal, and biomechanical factors (124). A multidisciplinary approach to myofascial pain must include cognitive behavioral and relaxation approaches.
# Chunk 904
Abdominal wall and pelvic ﬂoor myofascial pain is often exacerbated during the premenstrual period or by stimuli to the dermatome of trigger points (e.g., full bladder, bowel, or any stimulation to organs that share the dermatome of the involved nerve) (125).
# Chunk 905
Fibromyalgia Fibromyalgia is a myofascial pain syndrome, made up of the triad of diffuse pain, fatigue, and nonrestorative sleep. Women with abdominal wall or pelvic ﬂoor myofascial pain, bladder pain syndrome or interstitial cystitis and IBS often have fibromyalgia. Women are affected more commonly than men. To diagnose the syndrome, the patient must have tender points in all four quadrants. The cause is thought to be a central nervous system sensitization that results in abnormal perception of chronic pain. Fibromyalgia is closely associated with chronic fatigue syndrome, a combination of regional myofascial problems including infections and autoimmune disorders or dysautonomias. The management includes education, environmental changes (well-balanced diet, adequate time for sleep, and an environment conducive to restful sleep), exercise and stretching, and counseling or cognitive behavioral therapy for relaxation and maximizing coping mechanisms. Medications used include NSAIDs, low-dose TCAs, selective serotonin/norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors, anticonvulsants, and benzodiazepines to improve sleep (129).
# Chunk 906
Management of Chronic Pelvic Pain

Multidisciplinary The approach to women with chronic pain must be therapeutic, optimistic, supportive, and Approach sympathetic. The patient should be instructed to complete a daily pain ratings form after her first office visit. This form provides the clinician and patient with important information for pain management. Pain level (0–10), vaginal bleeding, and events that trigger pain such as stress, foods, and certain physical activities are recorded. The pain ratings can encourage the patient’s sense of control and decrease feelings of helplessness. Daily recording improves self-efficacy and compliance, allows for diagnosis of atypical cyclic pain (luteal as opposed to menstrual), and helps the patient to recognize the connection between pain and stressors. The ratings should be reviewed at follow-up visits.
# Chunk 907
The role of opioid therapy in chronic pain is controversial and randomized controlled trials are lacking. Long-term management of chronic pelvic pain with narcotic medications is considered a last resort after failure of all other treatment modalities. Opioids should be given on a scheduled basis, and patients should have consistent follow-up with evaluation of the extent of pain relief, level of function, and quality of life. Physicians should carefully document failure of other treatment options and patient counseling. Narcotics should be prescribed only with a narcotic contract. The patient should sign a written contract agreeing to obtain pain medications from only one provider and describing other expectations with respect to treatment. Some other points that the patient should agree to include no early refills or increasing dosage of medication without discussion with the doctor, no alcohol or illegal drugs, random blood or urine drug screens if needed, and psychiatric or psychological evaluation if needed (140).
# Chunk 908
Physical Therapy Physical therapy (PT) procedures restore tissue and joint ﬂexibility, improve posture and body mechanics, restore strength and coordination, reduce nervous system irritability, and restore function. PT is an important component of the management of patients with myofascial pain in the abdominal wall, pelvic ﬂoor, or lower back (141).
# Chunk 909
Women with disabling pain that is premenstrual and or menstrual and that does not respond to NSAIDs or hormonal contraceptives should be considered for laparoscopic evaluation. Diagnostic laparoscopy is a standard procedure in the evaluation of patients with chronic noncyclic pelvic pain; however, laparoscopy is generally withheld until other nongynecologic somatic or visceral causes of pain are excluded. Nonrandomized retrospective and prospective studies suggest that diagnostic laparoscopy provides a positive psychological effect on the treatment of chronic pelvic pain, but this should not be the main goal of laparoscopy (142). During diagnostic laparoscopy, endometriotic lesions should be excised for biopsy, and if infection is suspected, cultures should be performed. The laparoscopy is essentially a debulking procedure, and all visible endometriosis may not be able to be removed safely; but if possible the implants should be excised or electrocoagulated.
# Chunk 910
Although 19% of hysterectomies are performed to cure pelvic pain, 30% of patients presenting to pain clinics have already undergone hysterectomy without experiencing pain relief. A multidisciplinary approach including a gynecologist, physical therapist, and a psychologist decreased the frequency of hysterectomy in one study from 16.3% of patients with chronic pelvic pain to 5.8% (145).
# Chunk 911
Hysterectomy is particularly useful for women who have completed childbearing and have secondary dysmenorrhea or chronic pain related to endometriosis, to uterine pathology, such as adenomyosis, or to pelvic congestion. Before recommending hysterectomy for pain or unilateral adnexectomy for unilateral pain, it is useful to apply the PREPARE mnemonic in discussions with the patient (146): the Procedure that is being done, Reason or indication, Expectation or desired outcome of the procedure, Probability that the outcome will be achieved, Alternatives and nonsurgical options, and Risks as well as Expense (see Chapter 3). Hysterectomy for central pelvic pain in women with dysmenorrhea, dyspareunia, and uterine tenderness provided relief of pain in 77% of women in one retrospective study and in 74% of women in one prospective cohort study (147,148). Nevertheless, 25% of women in the retrospective study noted that pain persisted or worsened at 1-year follow-up (147). Persistent pain in the prospective study was associated with multiparity, prior history of PID, absence of pathology, and Medicaid payer status (148). The Maine Women’s Health Study, a prospective cohort study, studied outcomes of 199 women with frequent pain at baseline who underwent hysterectomy. In this cohort, only 11% reported persistent symptoms after their surgery (149).
# Chunk 912
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists outlined criteria that should be met before performing a hysterectomy for pelvic pain (150). They require at least 6 months of pelvic pain without any otherwise correctable pathology. When deciding on the surgical approach, consideration should be given to a vaginal or laparoscopic hysterectomy over an abdominal approach if there are no extensive adhesions expected or large uterine/fibroid size does not preclude it. There are many studies that confirm less morbidity and shorter hospital stays with vaginal compared with abdominal hysterectomies (151). A prospective study of abdominal versus vaginal versus laparoscopically assisted surgery did not find any statistical difference or worsening of outcomes of urinary or sexual function between the different approaches at 6 months (151).
# Chunk 913
102.

Williams RE, Hartmann KE, Sandler R, et al. Prevalence and characteristics of irritable bowel syndrome among women with chronic pelvic pain. Obstet Gynecol 2004;104:452–458.
# Chunk 914
103.

Williams RE, Hartmann KE, Sandler RS, et al. Recognition and treatment of irritable bowel syndrome among women with chronic pelvic pain. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2005;192:761 104.
# Chunk 915
123.

Slocumb JC. Neurological factors in chronic pelvic pain: trigger points and the abdominal pelvic pain syndrome. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1984;149:536–543.
# Chunk 916
150.

ACOG Criteria Set. Hysterectomy, abdominal or vaginal for chronic pelvic pain. Number 29, November 1997. Committee on Quality Assessment. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 1998;60:316–317.
# Chunk 917
Endometriosis is defined as the presence of endometrial tissue (glands and stroma) outside the uterus. The most frequent sites of implantation are the pelvic viscera and the peritoneum. Endometriosis varies in appearance from a few minimal lesions on otherwise intact pelvic organs, to massive ovarian endometriotic cysts that distort tubo-ovarian anatomy and extensive adhesions involving bowel, bladder, and ureter. It is estimated to occur in 10% of reproductive-age women and is associated with pelvic pain and infertility. Considerable progress in understanding the pathogenesis, spontaneous evolution, diagnosis, and treatment of endometriosis has occurred. The European Society for Human Reproduction and Embryology (ESHRE) guidelines for the clinical management of endometriosis are published and regularly updated to present emerging clinical evidence (1).
# Chunk 918
In women with pelvic pain or infertility, a high prevalence of endometriosis (from a low of 20% to a high of 90%) is reported (5,6). In women with unexplained subfertility with or without pain (regular cycle, partner with normal sperm), the prevalence of endometriosis is reported to be as high as 50% (7). In asymptomatic women undergoing tubal ligation (women of proven fertility), the prevalence of endometriosis ranges from 3% to 43% (8–13). This variation in the reported prevalence may be explained by several factors. First, it may vary with the diagnostic method used: laparoscopy, the operation of choice for diagnosis, is a better method than laparotomy for diagnosing minimal to mild endometriosis. Second, minimal or mild endometriosis may be more thoroughly evaluated in a symptomatic patient given general anesthesia than in an asymptomatic patient during tubal sterilization. Third, the interest and experience of the surgeon is important because there is a wide variation in the appearance of subtle endometriosis implants, cysts, and adhesions. Most studies that evaluate the prevalence of endometriosis in women of reproductive age lack histologic confirmation (8–10,14–19).
# Chunk 919
Transplantation Theory The transplantation theory, originally proposed by Sampson in the mid-1920s, is based on the assumption that endometriosis is caused by the seeding or implantation of endometrial cells by transtubal regurgitation during menstruation (30). Substantial clinical and experimental data support this hypothesis (5,31). Retrograde menstruation occurs in 70% to 90% of women, and it may be more common in women with endometriosis than in those without the disease (8,32). The presence of endometrial cells in the peritoneal ﬂuid, indicating retrograde menstruation, is reported in 59% to 79% of women during menses or in the early follicular phase, and these cells can be cultured in vitro (33,34). The presence of endometrial cells in the dialysate of women undergoing peritoneal dialysis during menses supports the theory of retrograde menstruation (35). Endometriosis is most often found in dependent portions of the pelvis—the ovaries, the anterior and posterior cul-de-sac, the uterosacral ligaments, the posterior uterus, and the posterior broad ligaments (36). The menstrual reﬂux theory combined with the clockwise peritoneal ﬂuid current explains why endometriosis is predominantly located on the left side of the pelvis (reﬂuxed endometrial cells implant more easily in the rectosigmoidal area) and why diaphragmatic endometriosis is found more frequently on the right side (reﬂuxed endometrial cells implant there by the falciform ligament) (37,38).
# Chunk 920
Endometrium obtained during menses can grow when injected beneath abdominal skin or into the pelvic cavity of animals (39,40). Endometriosis was found in 50% of Rhesus monkeys after surgical transposition of the cervix to allow intra-abdominal menstruation (41). Increased retrograde menstruation by obstruction of the outﬂow of menstrual ﬂuid from the uterus is associated with a higher incidence of endometriosis in women and in baboons (42–44). Women with shorter intervals between menstruation and longer duration of menses are more likely to have retrograde menstruation and are at higher risk for endometriosis (45). Menstruation is associated with intraperitoneal inﬂammation in both women and baboons, but a limited quantity of endometrial cells can be identified in peritoneal ﬂuid during menstruation in women, possibly because endometrial–peritoneal attachment is reported to occur within 24 hours (46–48). Ovarian endometriosis may be caused by either retrograde menstruation or by lymphatic ﬂow from the uterus to the ovary; metaplasia and bleeding from a corpus luteum may be a critical event in the development of some endometriomas (49–51).
# Chunk 921
A number of studies investigated genetic polymorphisms as a possible factor contributing to the development of endometriosis. About 50% of the studies in one review demonstrated positive correlations between different polymorphisms and endometriosis (71). This relation was seen most clearly in groups 1 (cytokines and inﬂammation), 2 (steroid-synthesizing enzymes and detoxifying enzymes and receptors), 4 (estradiol metabolism), 5 (other enzymes and metabolic systems), and 7 (adhesion molecules and matrix enzymes). Group 8 (apoptosis, cell-cycle regulation, and oncogenes) seemed to be negatively correlated with the disease, whereas groups 3 (hormone receptors), 6 (growth factor systems), and especially 9 (human leukocyte antigen system components) showed a relatively strong correlation. As many results were contradictory, the review concluded that genetic polymorphisms might have a limited value in assessing possible development of endometriosis (71). Future studies should include large numbers of women with laparoscopically and histologically confirmed endometriosis and women with a laparoscopically confirmed normal pelvis as controls, taking into account ethnic variability.
# Chunk 922
The subclinical pelvic inﬂammatory status associated with endometriosis is reﬂected in the systemic circulation. Increased concentrations of C-reactive protein, serum amyloid A (SAA), TNF-α, membrane cofactor protein-1, interleukin-6 (IL-6), IL-8, and chemokine (C-C motif) receptor 1 (CCR1) are observed in peripheral blood samples of patients with endometriosis when compared with controls (113). This observation offers a basis for the development of noninvasive diagnostic tests.
# Chunk 923
The average delay between onset of pain symptoms and surgically confirmed endometriosis is quite long: 8 years or longer in the United Kingdom and 9 to 12 years in the United States (160). Similar durations were observed in Scandinavia and in Brazil (161,162). A delay in diagnosis of endometriosis of 6 and 3 years in women with pain and women with infertility, respectively, was reported. Over the past two decades, there was a steady decrease in the delay in diagnosis and a decline in the prevalence of advanced endometriosis at first diagnosis (163). Patient awareness of endometriosis was increased. Many patients’ quality of life is affected by pain, emotional impact of subfertility, anger about disease recurrence, and uncertainty about the future regarding repeated surgeries or long-term medical therapy and its side effects (164).
# Chunk 924
Treatment of extragenital endometriosis will depend on the site. If complete excision is possible, this is the treatment of choice; when this is not possible, long-term medical treatment is necessary using the same principles of medical treatment for pelvic endometriosis (1). Appendicular endometriosis is usually treated by appendectomy. Surgical treatment of bladder endometriosis is usually in the form of excision of the lesion and primary closure of the bladder wall. Ureteral lesions may be excised after stenting the ureter; in the presence of intrinsic lesions or significant obstruction, segmental excision with end-to-end anastomosis or reimplantation may be necessary. Abdominal wall and perineal endometriosis is usually treated by complete excision of the nodule (1).
# Chunk 925
Imaging to Assess Intestinal and Urologic Involvement

If there is clinical evidence of deeply infiltrating endometriosis, ureteral, bladder, and bowel involvement should be assessed. Ureteral involvement may be asymptomatic in up to 50% of patients with deeply infiltrative endometriosis (208). Consideration should be given to performing ultrasound (transrectal, transvaginal or renal), a CT urogram, or an MRI. A barium enema study might be useful, depending on the individual circumstances, to map the extent of disease present, which may be multifocal (1). There is no proof that one technique is superior to another; it is recommended that the technique that is most familiar to the radiologist involved be used.
# Chunk 926
The specificity of CA125 is reported to be higher than 80% in most studies. This high level of specificity is achieved in selected women with infertility or pain, who are known to be at risk for endometriosis. The low level of sensitivity of CA125 (20% to 50% in most studies) poses limitations for the clinical use of this test for diagnosis of endometriosis. Theoretically, the sensitivity might increase during the menstrual period, when the increase in CA125 level is more pronounced in women who have endometriosis. Studies using cutoff levels of 35 U/mL or 85 U/mL did not find a significant improvement in sensitivity (221,222,224). A sensitivity of 66% was found when the CA125 level was determined during both the follicular phase and the menstrual phase in each patient and when the ratio of menstrual versus follicular values (>1.5) was used instead of one CA125 level (222). Other studies reported that the value of CA125 in diagnosis of endometriosis is limited but higher for moderate to severe disease, especially if serum CA125 concentrations are measured during the midfollicular phase (223,225).
# Chunk 927
Figure 17.1 Pelvic endometriosis.

The diagnosis of ovarian endometriosis is facilitated by careful inspection of all sides of both ovaries, which may be difficult when adhesions are present in more advanced stages of disease (Fig. 17.5). With superficial ovarian endometriosis, lesions can be both typical and subtle. Larger ovarian endometriotic cysts (i.e., endometriomas) usually are located on the anterior surface of the ovary and are associated with retraction, pigmentation, and adhesions to the posterior peritoneum. These ovarian endometriotic cysts often contain a thick, viscous dark brown ﬂuid (i.e., “chocolate ﬂuid”), composed of hemosiderin derived from previous intraovarian hemorrhage. Because this ﬂuid may be found in other conditions, such as in hemorrhagic corpus luteum cysts or neoplastic cysts, biopsy and preferably removal of the ovarian cyst for histologic confirmation are necessary for the diagnosis in the revised endometriosis classification of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine (ASRM). If that is not possible, the presence of an ovarian endometriotic cyst should be confirmed by the following features: cyst diameter of less than 12 cm, adhesion to pelvic sidewall or broad ligament, endometriosis on surface of ovary, and tarry, thick, chocolate-colored ﬂuid content (245). Ovarian endometriosis appears to be a marker for more extensive pelvic and intestinal disease. Exclusive ovarian disease is found in only 1% of endometriosis patients, with the remaining patients having extensive pelvic or intestinal endometriosis (246).
# Chunk 928
Microscopic endometriosis is defined as the presence of endometrial glands and stroma in macroscopically normal pelvic peritoneum. It is important in the histogenesis of endometriosis and its recurrence after treatment (253,254). The clinical relevance of microscopic endometriosis is controversial because it is not observed uniformly. Using undefined criteria for what constitutes normal peritoneum, peritoneal biopsy specimens of 1 to 3 cm were obtained during laparotomy from 20 patients with moderate to severe endometriosis (254). Examination of the biopsy results with low-power scanning electron microscopy revealed unsuspected microscopic endometriosis in 25% of cases not confirmed by light microscopy. Peritoneal endometriotic foci were demonstrated by light microscopy in areas that showed no obvious evidence of disease (255).
# Chunk 929
Figure 17.4 (continued) C: Cul-de-sac after resection of deep nodule with CO2 laser.

In serial sections of laparoscopic biopsies of normal peritoneum, 10% to 15% of women had microscopic endometriosis, and endometriosis was found in 6% of those without macroscopic disease (241,256,257). Other studies were unable to detect microscopic endometriosis in 2-mm biopsy specimens of visually normal peritoneum (258–261). Examination of larger samples (5–15 mm) of visually normal peritoneum revealed microscopic endometriosis in only 1 of 55 patients studied (262). A histologic study of serial sections through the entire pelvic peritoneum of visually normal peritoneum from baboons with and without disease indicated that microscopic endometriosis is a rare occurrence (95). Macroscopically appearing normal peritoneum rarely contains microscopic endometriosis (262).
# Chunk 930
Spontaneous Evolution Endometriosis appears to be a progressive disease in a significant proportion (30% to 60%) of patients. During serial observations, deterioration (47%), improvement (30%), or elimination (23%) was documented over a 6-month period (265,266). In another study, endometriosis progressed in 64%, improved in 27%, and remained unchanged in 9% of patients over 12 months (267). A third study of 24 women reported 29% with disease progression, 29% with disease regression, and 42% with no change over 12 months. Follow-up studies in both baboons and women with spontaneous endometriosis over 24 months demonstrated disease progression in all baboons and in 6 of 7 women (268–270). Several studies reported that subtle lesions and typical implants may represent younger and older types of endometriosis, respectively. In a cross-sectional study, the incidence of subtle lesions decreased with age (271). This finding was confirmed by a 3-year prospective study that reported that the incidence, overall pelvic area involved, and volume of subtle lesions decreased with age, but in typical lesions, these parameters and the depth of infiltration increased with age (6). Remodeling of endometriotic lesions (transition between typical and subtle subtypes) is reported to occur in women and in baboons, indicating that endometriosis is a dynamic condition (272,273). Several studies in women, cynomolgus monkeys, and rodents showed that endometriosis is ameliorated after pregnancy (273–276).
# Chunk 931
Adhesiolysis The removal of endometriosis-related adhesions (adhesiolysis) should be performed carefully. Adhesions lysed at surgery can form again (296). Routine use of pharmacologic or liquid agents to prevent postoperative adhesions after fertility surgery cannot be recommended based on a systematic review, including 16 randomized controlled trials, with the following indications for surgery included myomectomy (five trials), ovarian surgery (five trials), pelvic adhesions (four trials), endometriosis (one trial), and mixed (one trial) (297). No studies reported pregnancy or reduction in pain as outcomes (297). The absorbable adhesion barrier Interceed reduced the incidence of adhesion formation following laparoscopy and laparotomy, but there are insufficient data to support its use to improve pregnancy rates (297). The substance expanded polytetraﬂuoroethylene (Gore-Tex Surgical Membrane, Preclude; WL Gore, Flagstaff, AZ) may be superior to Oxidised regenerated cellulose (Interceed; Gynecare, Somerville, NJ) in preventing adhesion formation, but its usefulness is limited by the need for suturing and later removal (297). There was no evidence of effectiveness of chemically derived sodium hyaluronate and carboxymethylcellulose (Seprafilm, Genzyme Corporation, Cambridge, USA) or sheet-type fibrin sealant (Fibrin sheet, Tacho Comb, Tokyo, Japan) in preventing adhesion formation (297). In a randomized trial in patients with surgically treated stages I to III endometriosis without endometrioma, postoperative adnexal application of Oxiplex/AP (FzioMed, San Luis Obispo, California) gel treatment was superior to surgery alone (control group) with respect to postoperative adhesion formation (defined as secondary outcome) 6 to 8 weeks later in a subgroup of patients with red lesions (298). This observation needs to be confirmed in other randomized trials with postoperative adhesion formation as primary outcome. In the same study, control patients with at least 50% red lesions had a greater increase in ipsilateral adnexal adhesion scores than patients with mostly black or white and/or clear lesions (298).
# Chunk 932
Outcome after Cystectomy Although as little as one-tenth of an ovary may be enough to preserve function and fertility, at least for a while, there is increasing concern that ovarian cystectomy with concomitant removal or destruction of normal ovarian tissue may reduce ovarian follicle reserve and reduce fertility (302). One study reported reduced follicular response in natural and clomiphene citrate– stimulated cycles, but not in gonadotropin-stimulated cycles, in women younger than 35 years of age who underwent cystectomy compared with controls of similar age with normal ovaries (302). According to a systematic review, there is good evidence that excisional surgery for endometriomas with a diameter of 3 cm provides a more favorable outcome than drainage and ablation with regard to the recurrence of the endometrioma, recurrence of pain symptoms, and in women who were previously subfertile or had subsequent spontaneous pregnancy (299). This approach should be the favored surgical approach, based on two randomized studies of the laparoscopic management of ovarian endometriomata of greater than 3 cm in size for the primary symptom of pain (303,304). Laparoscopic excision of the cyst wall of the endometrioma was associated with a reduced recurrence rate of the symptoms of dysmenorrhea (odds ratio [OR] 0.15; 95% CI, 0.06–0.38), dyspareunia (OR 0.08; 95% CI, 0.01–0.51), and nonmenstrual pelvic pain (OR 0.10; 95% CI, 0.02–0.56), a reduced rate of recurrence of the endometrioma (OR 0.41; 95% CI, 0.18–0.93), and with a reduced requirement for further surgery (OR 0.21; 95% CI, 0.05–0.79) than surgery to ablate the endometrioma. For those women subsequently attempting to conceive, it was associated with an increased spontaneous pregnancy rate in women who had documented prior subfertility (OR 5.21; 95% CI, 2.04–13.29).
# Chunk 933
A randomized study demonstrated an increased ovarian follicular response to gonadotrophin stimulation for women who underwent excisional surgery when compared to ablative surgery (weighted mean difference (WMD) 0.6; 95% CI, 0.04–1.16) (305). There is insufficient evidence to favor excisional surgery over ablative surgery with respect to the chance of pregnancy after controlled ovarian stimulation and intrauterine insemination (OR 1.40; 95% CI, 0.47–4.15) or treatment with assisted reproductive technology (299). It is controversial whether there is a potential negative effect of ovarian cystectomy on reproductive function. In a small prospective randomized clinical trial, 10 patients assigned to undergo laparoscopic cystectomy had a lower antral follicle count and a more pronounced reduction in serum anti-m¨ullerian hormone (AMH) levels (from 3.9 to 2.9 ng/mL) 6 months after surgery when compared to the 10 patients treated with a “three-stage procedure” as described above (reduction in AMH levels from 4.5 to 3.99 ng/mL) (306,307). More randomized trials are needed to assess the effect of ovarian cystectomy on ovarian reserve and on reproductive function, especially with respect to conception after treatment with medically assisted reproduction.
# Chunk 934
Surgical Treatment of Pain

Preoperative imaging is necessary to assess bowel and urological impact of deeply infiltrative endometriosis, as described above. CT urogram to exclude ureteral endometriosis and ﬂexible sigmoidoscopy or double-contrast colon radiography to exclude transmural rectosigmoidal endometriosis, supplemented with MRI in selected cases, are preferred (285). As endometriosis sometimes involves nongynecologic organs (i.e., the bowel, the urinary tract, or pelvic bones), other surgical specialists should be consulted as appropriate. These severe cases should be handled in centers with special expertise. Preoperative intestinal preparation may be recommended. Placement of ureteric catheters may facilitate the excision of periureteral endometriosis to facilitate ureterolysis and end-to-end ureteral reanastomosis that may be needed in cases of infiltrative periureteral endometriosis causing ureteral obstruction. The pattern of pain in endometriosis is complicated and pain does not always respond to treatment, so consultation with pain specialists may be useful.
# Chunk 935
There are very few methodologically valid studies evaluating clinical outcome after deeply infiltrative with colorectal extension, as demonstrated in a systematic review (313). In a review on the clinical outcome of surgical treatment of deeply infiltrating endometriosis with colorectal involvement, most of the 49 reviewed studies included complications (94%) and pain (67%); few studies reported recurrence (41%), fertility (37%), and quality of life (10%); only 29% reported (loss of) follow-up. Of 3,894 patients, 71% underwent bowel resection and anastomosis, 10% had full-thickness excision, and 17% were treated with superficial surgery. Comparison of clinical outcome between different surgical techniques was not possible. Postoperative complications were present in 0% to 3% of the patients. Although pain improvement was reported in most studies, pain evaluation was patient based in less than 50% (visual analog scale [VAS] in only 18%). Although quality of life was improved in most studies, prospective data were available for only 149 patients. Pregnancy rates were 23% to 57% with a cumulative pregnancy rate of 58% to 70% within 4 years. The overall endometriosis recurrence rate in studies (longer than 2 years follow-up) was 5% to 25%, with most of the studies reporting 10%. Owing to highly variable study design and data collection, a Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials (CONSORT)-inspired checklist was developed for future studies (313). Prospective studies reporting standardized and well-defined clinical outcome after surgical treatment of deeply invasive endometriosis with colorectal involvement with long-term follow-up are needed (313).
# Chunk 936
In a prospective, controlled, randomized, study, surgical therapy with ablation of endometriotic lesions and LUNA was shown to be superior to expectant management 6 months after treatment of mild and moderate endometriosis (295). In women with mild and moderate disease treated with laser, 74% achieved pain relief. Treatment was least effective in women with minimal disease. There were no reported operative or laser complications (295). One year later, symptom relief was still present in 90% of those who responded initially (268,295). Patients with severe disease were not included because surgery resulted in pain relief in 80% of patients who did not respond to medical therapy (295,319). There is randomized evidence that LUNA is not a necessary part of this treatment because addition of uterosacral ligament resection to conservative laparoscopic surgery for endometriosis stages I to IV did not reduce the medium-or long-term frequency and severity of recurrence of dysmenorrhea (292,293). These data were confirmed in a second randomized trial in women with chronic pelvic pain lasting longer than 6 months without or with minimal endometriosis, adhesions, or pelvic inﬂammatory disease, where LUNA did not result in improvements in pain, dysmenorrhea, dyspareunia, or quality of life compared with laparoscopy without pelvic denervation (321).
# Chunk 937
In a systematic review assessing the efficacy of laparoscopic surgery in the treatment of pelvic pain associated with endometriosis and including five randomized controlled studies, meta-analysis demonstrated an advantage of laparoscopic surgery when compared to diagnostic laparoscopy only at 6 months (OR 5.72; 95%CI, 3.09–10.60; 171 participants, three trials) and 12 months (OR 7.72; 95%CI, 2.97–20.06; 33 participants, one trial) after surgery (291). Few women diagnosed with severe endometriosis were included in the meta-analysis and any conclusions from this meta-analysis regarding treatment of severe endometriosis should be made with caution. It was not possible to draw conclusions from the meta-analysis which specific laparoscopic surgical intervention is most effective (291).
# Chunk 938
The extent and duration of the therapeutic benefit of surgery for endometriosis-related pain are poorly defined, and the expected benefit is operator dependent (322). In a systematic review based on three randomized controlled studies, the absolute benefit increase of destruction of lesions compared with diagnostic only operation in terms of proportion of women reporting pain relief was between 30% and 40% after short follow-up periods (322). The pain relief ended to decrease with time, and the reoperation rate, based on long-term follow-up studies, was as high as 50% (322). In most case series on excisional surgery for rectovaginal endometriosis, substantial short-term pain relief was experienced by approximately 70% to 80% of the patients who continued the study. At 1-year follow-up, approximately 50% of the women needed analgesics or hormonal treatments (322). Medium-term recurrence of lesions was observed in approximately 20% of the cases, and approximately 25% of the women underwent repetitive surgery (322). It appears that pain recurrence and reoperation rates after conservative surgery for symptomatic endometriosis are high and probably underestimated (322).
# Chunk 939
Some randomized controlled studies suggest that postoperative hormonal treatment can be useful in delaying the recurrence of endometriosis and/or pelvic pain. One study supported the long-term postoperative use of OCs to reduce the frequency and the severity of recurrent endometriosisrelated dysmenorrhea (339). The prevention of endometriosis-related pain recurrence by postoperative long-term (24 months) cyclic and continuous administration of OCs was compared to no treatment in women after surgery for ovarian endometrioma. A significant reduction in recurrence rate and VAS scores for dysmenorrhea was evident in the continuous users versus the other groups at 6 months, and in cyclic users versus nonusers at 18 months postoperatively. No significant differences in recurrence rate and VAS scores for dyspareunia and chronic pelvic pain were demonstrated among the groups. The increase of VAS scores for dysmenorrhea, dyspareunia, and chronic pelvic pain during the postoperative follow-up of 6 to 24 months was significantly higher in nonusers than in the users (339).
# Chunk 940
In a third study, women who underwent conservative pelvic surgery for symptomatic endometriosis stages III and IV (r-AFS) were treated postoperatively during 6 months with either placebo, GnRH agonist (triptorelin or leuprorelin, 3.75 mg every 28 days), continuous estroprogestin (ethinylestradiol, 0.03 mg plus gestodene, 0.75 mg) or dietary therapy (vitamins, minerals salts, lactic ferments, fish oil) (341). At 12 months after surgery, patients treated with postoperative hormonal suppression therapy showed a lower VAS score for dysmenorrhea than patients in the other groups. Hormonal suppression therapy and dietary supplementation were equally effective in reducing nonmenstrual pelvic pain. Postoperative medical and dietary therapy allowed a better quality of life when compared to placebo treatment (341).
# Chunk 941
Evidence suggests a possible role for depot MPA in the treatment of endometriosis. In a randomized controlled study, depot MPA (150 mg every 3 months) was more effective in the relief of dysmenorrhea than treatment with a cyclic 21-day oral contraceptive (ethinyl estradiol 20 μg plus desogestrel 0.15 mg) combined with very low-dose danazol (50 mg per day) (370). In another multicenter, randomized, evaluator-blinded, comparator-controlled trial, depot MPA (150 mg) or leuprolide acetate (11.25 mg), given every 3 months for 6 months were equivalent in reducing endometriosis-associated pain during the study and the 12-month posttreatment follow-up period, with less impact on bone mineral density and fewer hypoestrogenic side effects but more bleeding being observed in the depot MPA treated group (371). Add-back therapy would prevent the negative effects on bone density and hypoestrogenic side effects associated with GnRH-agonist therapy. In a pilot study, pain relief, side effects, and treatment satisfaction were comparable during a 12-month treatment with etonogestrel implantate subcutaneous (68 mg) or depot medroxyprogesterone acetate 150 mg intramuscular depot MPA in 41 patients with dysmenorrhea, nonmenstrual pelvic pain, and dyspareunia associated with histologically proven endometriosis (372). Although depot MPA treatment is effective for the treatment of pain associated with endometriosis, it is not indicated in infertile women because it induces profound amenorrhea and anovulation, and a varying length of time is required for ovulation to resume after discontinuation of therapy.
# Chunk 942
The levonorgestrel intrauterine system releasing 20 μg per day of levonorgestrel reduces endometriosis-associated pain caused by peritoneal and rectovaginal endometriosis and reduces the risk of recurrence of dysmenorrhea after conservative surgery (375). Levonorgestrel induces endometrial glandular atrophy and decidual transformation of the stroma, reduces endometrial cell proliferation, and increases apoptotic activity (375). A systematic review identified two randomized trials and three prospective observational studies, all involving small numbers and a heterogeneous group of patients (376). The evidence suggests that the levonorgestrel intrauterine system reduces endometriosis associated pain with symptom control maintained over 3 years (377–380). Twelve months of treatment results in a significant reduction in dysmenorrhea, pelvic pain, and dyspareunia; a high degree of patient satisfaction; and a significant reduction in the volume of rectovaginal endometriotic nodules (377,378). After the first year of use, a 70% to 90% reduction in menstrual blood loss is observed.
# Chunk 943
Gestrinone is a 19-nortestosterone derivative with androgenic, antiprogestagenic, antiestrogenic, and antigonadotropic properties. It acts centrally and peripherally to increase free testosterone and reduce sex hormone–binding globulin levels (androgenic effect), reduce serum estradiol values to early follicular phase levels (antiestrogenic effect), reduce mean LH levels, and obliterate the LH and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) surge (antigonadotropic effect). Gestrinone causes cellular inactivation and degeneration of endometriotic implants but not their disappearance (388). Amenorrhea occurs in 50% to 100% of women and is dose dependent.
# Chunk 944
Resumption of menses generally occurs 33 days after discontinuing the medication (389,390). An advantage of gestrinone is its long half-life (28 hours) when given orally. The standard dose is 2.5 mg twice a week. Although 1.25 mg twice weekly is effective, a randomized study demonstrated in women with mild to moderate endometriosis that 2.5 mg gestrinone twice weekly for 24 weeks is more effective and has a better effect on bone mass (+7% vs. −7%) when compared with 1.25 mg gestrinone twice weekly for 24 weeks (391). The clinical side effects of gestrinone are dose dependent and similar to but less intense than those caused by danazol (391). They include nausea, muscle cramps, and androgenic effects such as weight gain, acne, seborrhea, and oily hair and skin.
# Chunk 945
In a multicenter, randomized, double-blind study, gestrinone was as effective as GnRH for the treatment of pelvic pain associated with endometriosis, with fewer side effects and the added advantage of twice-weekly administration (392). Pregnancy is contraindicated while taking gestrinone because of the risk for masculinization of the fetus.
# Chunk 946
The immunologic effects of danazol were studied in women with endometriosis and adenomyosis and include a decrease in serum immunoglobulins, a decrease in serum C3, a rise in serum C4 levels, decreased serum levels of autoantibodies against various phospholipid antigens, and decreased serum levels of CA125 during treatment (218,230–234,394,395). Danazol inhibits peripheral blood lymphocyte proliferation in cultures activated by T-cell mitogens but does not affect macrophage-dependent T-lymphocyte activation of B lymphocytes (396). Danazol inhibits IL-1 and TNF production by monocytes in a dose-dependent manner and suppresses macrophage-and monocyte-mediated cytotoxicity of susceptible target cells in women with mild endometriosis (397,398). These immunologic findings may be important in the remission of endometriosis with danazol treatment and may offer an explanation of the effect of danazol in the treatment of a number of autoimmune diseases, including hereditary angioedema, autoimmune hemolytic anemia, systemic lupus erythematosus, and idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (399–403). Doses of 800 mg per day are used frequently in North America, whereas 600 mg per day is prescribed in Europe and Australia. It appears that the absence of menstruation is a better indicator of response than drug dose. A practical strategy for the use of danazol is to start treatment with 400 mg daily (200 mg twice a day) and increase the dose, if necessary, to achieve amenorrhea and relieve symptoms (393).
# Chunk 947
Although GnRH agonists do not have an adverse effect on serum lipids and lipoproteins levels, their side effects are caused by hypoestrogenism and include hot ﬂashes, vaginal dryness, reduced libido, and osteoporosis (6% to 8% loss in trabecular bone density after 6 months of therapy). Reversibility of bone loss is equivocal and therefore of concern, because treatment periods of longer than 6 months may be required (408,409). The goal is to suppress endometriosis and maintain serum estrogen levels of 30 to 45 pg/mL. More extreme estradiol suppression will induce bone loss (408). The dose of daily GnRH agonist can be regulated by monitoring estradiol levels, by the addition of low-dose progestin or estrogen–progestin in an add-back regimen, or by draw-back therapy.
# Chunk 948
GnRH agonists should not be prescribed to girls who have not yet attained their maximal bone density, as some concern remains about the long-term effects of GnRH analogues on bone loss. In one report, bone mineral density reduction occurred during long-term GnRHagonist use and was not fully recovered up to 6 years after treatment (416). Use of add-back therapy (2 mg estradiol and1mg norethisterone acetate) did not affect this process (416). Drawback therapy was suggested as an alternative in a study showing that 6 months of intake of 400 μg per day of nafarelin was as effective as a draw-back regimen consisting of 1 month of intake of 400 μg per day of nafarelin followed by 5 months of 200 μg per day of nafarelin, with similar estradiol levels (30 pg/mL) but less loss of bone mineral density (417).
# Chunk 949
The role of selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) in the treatment of endometriosis is unclear. In animal models, raloxifene therapy resulted in regression of endometriosis. The effect was seen in a surgically prepared, rat uterine explant model and in Rhesus macaques diagnosed with spontaneous endometriosis before exposure (423). In a placebo-controlled randomized trial in women with chronic pelvic pain and surgically treated biopsy-proven endometriosis, postoperative treatment with raloxifene during 6 months resulted in a shortened time to return of pain (defined as 2 months of pain equal to or more severe than that at study entry) and to repeat laparoscopy, suggesting that raloxifene is not effective in the treatment of endometriosisassociated pain (424). Biopsy-proven endometriosis was not associated with return of pain, suggesting that other factors were implicated in recurrent pelvic pain after surgery in this study (424).
# Chunk 950
Surgery for Minimal to Mild Endometriosis

Surgical management of infertile women with minimal to mild endometriosis is controversial. Based on the results of a meta-analysis of two randomized trials, ablation of endometriotic lesions plus adhesiolysis to improve fertility in minimal to mild endometriosis is effective compared to diagnostic laparoscopy alone (191,192,435). One Canadian study reported that laparoscopic surgery enhanced fecundity in infertile women with minimal or mild endometriosis (191). They studied 341 infertile women, 20 to 39 years of age, with minimal or mild endometriosis. During diagnostic laparoscopy, the women were randomly assigned to undergo resection or ablation of visible endometriosis or diagnostic laparoscopy only. They found that resection or ablation of minimal and mild endometriosis increased the likelihood of pregnancy in infertile women. They were followed for 36 weeks after the laparoscopy or, for those who became pregnant during that interval, for up to 20 weeks of pregnancy. The study participants were recruited among infertile women scheduled for diagnostic laparoscopy with strict eligibility criteria. The women in the study had no previous surgical treatment for endometriosis, no medical treatment for endometriosis in the previous 9 months, and no other medical or surgical treatment for infertility in the previous 3 months. They had no history of pelvic inﬂammatory disease and no severe pelvic pain precluding expectant management. The diagnosis of endometriosis required the presence of one or more typical bluish or black lesions. The stage of endometriosis was determined according to the revised American Society of Reproductive Medicine classification. Both the monthly fecundity rate and the cumulative pregnancy rate after 36 weeks were significantly higher and twice as high after surgical excision of minimal to mild endometriosis (4.7% and 30.7%, respectively) than after diagnostic laparoscopy (2.4% and 17.7%, respectively). In the treated group, 31% of the patients became pregnant, compared with 18% in the nontreated group (p = 0.006). Limitations of this study include the lack of blinding of the patients, and the fecundity rate after surgery was below that observed in control groups from other studies (1,436).
# Chunk 951
Management of Adolescents

The most common presenting symptom in adolescents with endometriosis is cyclic pain (1). Less commonly acyclic pain, dyspareunia, gastrointestinal symptoms, irregular menses, urinary symptoms, and vaginal discharge are described (1,446–449). Similar presenting symptoms occur in adolescent patients evaluated for pelvic pain with and without endometriosis (449,450). It is hard to predict the presence of endometriosis in adolescents with pelvic pain merely from the presenting symptoms, because similar symptoms occur in patients evaluated laparoscopically for pelvic pain with and without endometriosis (1,449,450). Laparoscopy should be considered for adolescents with chronic pelvic pain who do not respond to medical treatment (NSAIDs, OCs) because endometriosis is very common (up to 70%) under these circumstances (446,449–456). Minimal and mild endometriosis, according to the revised ASRM classification, are the most common stages of the disease in adolescents. Gynecologic surgeons should pay special attention to red, clear, or white lesions, which are more prevalent in adolescents than in adults with endometriosis (1,446–458). Mild disease can be treated by laparoscopic surgical removal of implants at the time of diagnosis, followed by continuous administration of low-dose combination OCs to prevent recurrence. More advanced disease can be treated medically for 6 months, followed by continuous OCs to prevent progression of disease. Surgery is indicated if this hormonal treatment is not effective. GnRH agonists with add-back therapy can only be considered for adolescents older than 17 years of age who have completed pubertal and bone maturation, and then only if symptoms persist during other forms of hormonal suppression (1,459–461).
# Chunk 952
Management of Postmenopausal Women

Despite available studies supporting standard hormone therapy for women with endometriosis and postsurgical menopause, there is still concern that estrogens may induce a recurrence of the disease and its symptoms. The evidence in the literature is insufficient to suggest depriving symptomatic patients of this treatment. In a systematic review evaluating pain and disease recurrence in women with endometriosis who used hormone therapy for postsurgical menopause, two randomized trials were included (465). In one trial, recurrence of pain in women with a conserved uterus was not significantly different in 1 of 11 women treated with continuous tibolone (2.5 mg per day), or in 4 of 10 women receiving nonstop transdermal application of 17-β estradiol (0.05 mg per day) combined with cyclic medroxyprogesterone acetate (10 mg per day) for 12 days per month (466). In the second trial, recurrence of pain was not significantly different in any of 57 patients in the no-treatment arm, or in 4 of 115 women receiving sequential administration of estrogens and progesterone with two 22-cm patches applied weekly to produce a controlled release of 0.05 mg per day, combined with oral administration of micronized progesterone administered orally (200 mg per day) for 14 days with a 16-day interval free of treatment (5,329). In this study, the endometriosis recurrence and reoperation rate were comparable in both groups (2 of 115 of the treatment group; 0 of 57of the no-treatment group) (329).
# Chunk 953
Endometriosis tends to recur unless definitive surgery is performed. Pain recurs within 5 years in about one in five patients with pelvic pain treated by complete laparoscopic excision of visible endometriotic lesions (467). The endometriosis recurrence rate is about 5% to 20% per year, reaching a cumulative rate of 40% after 5 years. Medical treatment appears to have limited and inconsistent effects when used for only a few months after conservative procedures (468). Data on the benefit of prolonged drug regimens with OCs or progestogen are lacking. The current ASRM classification system has low value to predict pain recurrence and endometriosis relapse after conservative surgical treatment (469).
# Chunk 954
Prevention of Recurrence

After first-line surgery for endometriosis, women should be invited to seek conception as soon as possible. Alternatively, OC use until pregnancy is desired should be considered because several lines of evidence suggest that ovulation inhibition reduces the risk of endometriosis recurrence (477). A recurrent endometrioma developed in 26 of 250 regular users (10%; 95% CI, 7%–15%) compared with 46 of 115 never users (40%; 95% CI, 31%–50%), with a common odds ratio of 0.16 (95% CI, 0.04–0.65) (477).
# Chunk 955
Medical Treatment of Recurrence

In a randomized prospective clinical study, continuous treatment for 6 months with desogestrel (75 μg per day) (n = 20) versus a combined oral contraceptive (ethinyl estradiol 20 μg plus desogestrel 150 μg) resulted in a significant and comparable improvement of both pelvic pain and dysmenorrhea with breakthrough bleeding in 20% of the desogestrel-treated patients, and a significant body weight increase in 15% of the OC-treated women (478).
# Chunk 956
Conservative Surgery According to review papers, the long-term probability of pain recurrence after repeat conservative surgery for recurrent endometriosis varies from 20% to 40%, and a further surgical procedure will occur in 15% to 20% of the cases (470,479). These figures are probably an underestimate related to drawbacks in study design, exclusions of dropouts, and publication bias and should be considered with caution (479). No studies evaluated the association of presacral neurectomy to the surgical treatment of recurrent endometriosis among patients with recurrent disease (470). The spontaneous conception rate among women undergoing repetitive surgery for recurrent endometriosis associated with infertility is 20% (12-and 24-month cumulative pregnancy rates of 14% and 26%), whereas the overall crude pregnancy rate after a primary surgical procedure is 40% (12-and 24-month cumulative pregnancy rates of 32% and 38%) (470,479). Among infertile patients treated with repetitive surgery for recurrent endometriosis the spontaneous pregnancy rate was 19% (12-and 24-month cumulative pregnancy rates), whereas it was 34% for those untreated (12-and 24-month cumulative pregnancy rates of 25% and 30%). The probability of conception after IVF is not significantly lower after repetitive surgery (20%) when compared to primary surgery (30%) (hazard ratio [HR] 1.51; 95% CI, 0.58–3.91%) (479).
# Chunk 957
246.

Redwine DB. Ovarian endometriosis: a marker for more extensive pelvic and intestinal disease. Fertil Steril 1999;72:310–315.
# Chunk 958
Women with mild-to-moderate pelvic inﬂammatory disease (PID) can be treated as outpatients.

Trocar drainage, with or without placement of a drain, is successful in as many as 90% of patients with PID complicated by tubo-ovarian abscess that fails to respond to antimicrobial therapy within 72 hours.
# Chunk 959
2.

Metronidazole gel, 0.75%, one applicator (5 g) intravaginally once daily for 5 days, may also be prescribed.
# Chunk 960
Clindamycin cream, 2%, one applicator full (5 g) intravaginally at bedtime for 7 days 4.

Clindamycin, 300 mg, orally twice daily for 7 days
# Chunk 961
Treatment The treatment of trichomonal vaginitis can be summarized as follows: 1.

Metronidazole is the drug of choice for treatment of vaginal trichomoniasis. Both a single-dose (2 g orally) and a multidose (500 mg twice daily for 7 days) regimen are highly effective and have cure rates of about 95%.
# Chunk 962
4.

Women who do not respond to initial therapy should be treated again with metronidazole, 500 mg, twice daily for 7 days. If repeated treatment is not effective, the patient should be treated with a single 2-g dose of metronidazole once daily for 5 days or tinidazole, 2 g, in a single dose for 5 days.
# Chunk 963
Treatment The treatment of VVC is summarized as follows: 1.

Topically applied azole drugs are the most commonly available treatment for VVC and are more effective than nystatin (16) (Table 18.2). Treatment with azoles results in relief of symptoms and negative cultures in 80% to 90% of patients who have completed therapy. Symptoms usually resolve in 2 to 3 days. Short-course regimens up to 3 days are recommended. Although the shorter period of therapy implies a shortened duration of treatment, the short-course formulations have higher concentrations of the antifungal agent, causing an inhibitory concentration in the vagina that persists for several days.
# Chunk 964
3.

Women with complicated VVC (Table 18.1) benefit from an additional 150-mg dose of ﬂuconazole given 72 hours after the first dose. Patients with complications can be treated with a more prolonged topical regimen lasting 10 to 14 days. Adjunctive
# Chunk 965
Table 18.2 Vulvovaginal Candidiasis—Topical Treatment Regimens 2% cream, 5 g intravaginally for 3 daysa,b 1% cream, 5 g intravaginally for 7–14 daysa,b 2% cream 5 g intravaginally for 3 days 2% cream, 5 g intravaginally for 7 daysa,b 200-mg vaginal suppository for 3 daysa 100-mg vaginal suppository for 7 daysa,b 4% cream 5 g intravaginally for 3 days 1,200 mg vaginal suppository, one suppository for one day 100,000-U vaginal tablet, one tablet for 14 days 6.5% ointment, 5 g intravaginally, single dosea 0.4% cream, 5 g intravaginally for 7 daysa 0.8% cream, 5 g intravaginally for 3 daysa 80-mg suppository for 3 daysa aOil-based, may weaken latex condoms. bAvailable as over-the-counter preparation. Adapted from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines. MMWR 2006;55:[RR-11]:1–94.
# Chunk 966
The treatment of patients with RVVC consists of inducing a remission of chronic symptoms with ﬂuconazole (150 mg every 3 days for three doses). Patients should be maintained on a suppressive dose of this agent (ﬂuconazole, 150 mg weekly) for 6 months. On this regimen, 90% of women with RVVC will remain in remission. After suppressive therapy, approximately half will remain asymptomatic. Recurrence will occur in the other half and should prompt reinstitution of suppressive therapy (27).
# Chunk 967
Initial therapy is the use of 2% clindamycin cream, one applicator full (5 g) intravaginally once daily for 7 days. Relapse occurs in about 30% of patients, who should be retreated with intravaginal 2% clindamycin cream for 2 weeks. When relapse occurs in postmenopausal patients, supplementary hormonal therapy should be considered (28).
# Chunk 968
Azithromycin, 1 g orally (single dose), or Doxycycline, 100 mg orally twice daily for 7 days

Adapted from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines, 2010. Workowski KA, Berman S; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). MMWR Recomm Rep. 2010 Dec 17;59(RR-12):1–110. Erratum in: MMWR Recomm Rep. 2011 Jan 14;60(1):18. Dosage error in article text.
# Chunk 969
Pelvic organ tenderness, either uterine tenderness alone or uterine tenderness with adnexal tenderness, is present in patients with PID. Cervical motion tenderness suggests the presence of peritoneal inﬂammation, which causes pain when the peritoneum is stretched by moving the cervix and causing traction of the adnexa on the pelvic peritoneum. Direct or rebound abdominal tenderness may be present.
# Chunk 970
Endometrial biopsy showing endometritis Elevated C-reactive protein or erythrocyte sedimentation rate Temperature higher than 38◦C (100.4◦F) Leukocytosis Positive test for gonorrhea or chlamydia
# Chunk 971
Ceftriaxone, 250 mg intramuscularly, or

Plus:

Doxycycline, 100 mg orally 2 times daily for 14 days, or
# Chunk 972
Azithromycin, 500 mg initially and then 250 mg daily for a total of 7 days

Cefoxitin, 2 g intravenously every 6 hours, or
# Chunk 973
Clindamycin, 900 mg intravenously every 8 hours

Plus:

Ceftriaxone, 1–2 g intravenously every 12 hours, or Gentamicin, loading dose intravenously or intramuscularly (2 mg/kg of body weight) followed by a maintenance dose (1.5 mg/kg) every 8 hours aOutpatient treatment only, i.e., women treated for PID as an outpatient should also receive metronidazole gel for BV if they have BV. Adapted from Soper DE. Pelvic inﬂammatory disease. Obstet Gynecol 2010;116:419–428.
# Chunk 974
Tubo-ovarian Abscess An end-stage process of acute PID, tubo-ovarian abscess is diagnosed when a patient with PID has a pelvic mass that is palpable during bimanual examination. The condition usually reﬂects an agglutination of pelvic organs (tube, ovary, bowel) forming a palpable complex. Occasionally, an ovarian abscess can result from the entrance of micro-organisms through an ovulatory site. Tuboovarian abscess is treated with an antibiotic regimen administered in a hospital (Table 18.5). About 75% of women with tubo-ovarian abscess respond to antimicrobial therapy alone. Failure of medical therapy suggests the need for drainage of the abscess (45). Although drainage may require surgical exploration, percutaneous drainage guided by imaging studies (ultrasound or computed tomography) should be used as an initial option if possible. Trocar drainage, with or without placement of a drain, is successful in up to 90% of cases in which the patient failed to respond to antimicrobial therapy after 72 hours (46).
# Chunk 975
Recommended regimens for the treatment of chancroid include azithromycin, 1 g orally in a single dose; ceftriaxone, 250 mg intramuscularly in a single dose; ciproﬂoxacin, 500 mg orally twice a day for 3 days; or erythromycin base, 500 mg orally four times daily for 7 days. Patients should be reexamined 3 to 7 days after initiation of therapy to ensure the gradual resolution of the genital ulcer, which can be expected to heal within 2 weeks unless it is unusually large.
# Chunk 976
Latent syphilis is defined as those periods after infection with T. pallidum when patients are seroreactive but show no other evidence of disease. Patients with latent syphilis of longer than 1 year’s duration or of unknown duration should be treated with benzathine penicillin G, 7.2 million units total, administered as three doses of 2.4 million units intramuscularly each, at 1-week intervals. All patients with latent syphilis should be evaluated clinically for evidence of tertiary disease (e.g., aortitis, neurosyphilis, gumma, and iritis). Quantitative nontreponemal serologic tests should be repeated at 6 months and again at 12 months. An initially high titer (1:32) should decline at least fourfold (two dilutions) within 12 to 24 months.
# Chunk 977
It is estimated that almost 40% to 50% of individuals with HIV are women. Intravenous drug use and heterosexual transmission are responsible for most of the cases of AIDS in women in the United States (52). Infection with HIV produces a spectrum of disease that progresses from an asymptomatic state to full-blown AIDS. The pace of disease progression in untreated adults is variable. The median time between infection with HIV and the development of AIDS is 10 years, with a range from a few months to more than 12 years. In a study of adults infected with HIV, symptoms developed in 70% to 85% of infected adults, and AIDS developed in 55% to 60% within 12 years after infection. The natural history of the disease can be significantly altered by antiretroviral therapy. Women with HIV-induced altered immune function are at increased risk for infections such as tuberculosis (TB), bacterial pneumonia, and Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia (PCP). Because of its impact on the immune system, HIV affects the diagnosis, evaluation, treatment, and follow-up of many other diseases and may decrease the efficacy of antimicrobial therapy for some STDs.
# Chunk 978
Diagnosis Escherichia coli is the most common pathogen isolated from the urine of young women with acute cystitis, and it is present in 80% of cases (58). Staphylococcus saprophyticus is present in an additional 5% to 15% of patients with cystitis. The pathophysiology of cystitis in women involves the colonization of the vagina and urethra with coliform bacteria from the rectum. For this reason, the effects of an antimicrobial agent on the vaginal ﬂora play a role in the eradication of bacteriuria.
# Chunk 979
Treatment High concentrations of trimethoprim and ﬂuoroquinolone in vaginal secretions can eradicate E. coli while minimally altering normal anaerobic and microaerophilic vaginal ﬂora. An increasing linear trend in the prevalence of resistance of E. coli (>10%) to the ﬂuoroquinolones (e.g., ciproﬂoxacin) was noted. Despite a similar increase in E. coli resistance (9%–18%) to trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, therapeutic efficacy remains stable. In contrast, no such increase in resistance was noted with nitrofurantoin. Nitrofurantoin (macrocrystals, 100 mg orally twice daily for 5 days) or trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole 160/800 mg orally twice daily for 3 days) are the optimal choices for empirical therapy for uncomplicated cystitis (59).
# Chunk 980
In patients with typical symptoms, an abbreviated laboratory workup followed by empirical therapy is suggested. The diagnosis can be presumed if pyuria is detected by microscopy or leukocyte esterase testing. Urine culture is not necessary, and a short course of antimicrobial therapy should be given. No follow-up visit or culture is necessary unless symptoms persist or recur.
# Chunk 981
Acute Pyelonephritis The clinical spectrum of acute, uncomplicated pyelonephritis in young women ranges from gram-negative septicemia to a cystitislike illness with mild ﬂank pain. E. coli accounts for more than 80% of these cases (58). Microscopy of unspun urine reveals pyuria and gram-negative bacteria. A urine culture should be obtained in all women with suspected pyelonephritis; blood cultures should be performed in those who are hospitalized because results are positive in 15% to 20% of cases. In the absence of nausea and vomiting and severe illness, outpatient oral therapy can be given safely. Patients who have nausea and vomiting, are moderately to severely ill, or are pregnant should be hospitalized. Outpatient treatment regimens include trimethoprim/ sulfamethoxazole (160/800 mg every 12 hours for 14 days) or a quinolone (e.g., levoﬂoxacin, 750 mg daily for 7 days). Inpatient treatment regimens include the use of parenteral levoﬂoxacin (750 mg daily), ceftriaxone (1–2 g daily), ampicillin (1 g every 6 hours), and gentamicin (especially if Enterococcus species are suspected) or aztreonam (1 g every 8–12 hours). Symptoms should resolve after 48 to 72 hours. If fever and ﬂank pain persist after 72 hours of therapy, ultrasound or computed tomography should be considered to rule out a perinephric or intrarenal abscess or ureteral obstruction. A follow-up culture should be obtained 2 weeks after the completion of therapy (60).
# Chunk 982
The spontaneous regression rate of biopsy-proven CIN 1 is 60% to 85% in prospective studies. The regressions typically occur within a 2-year follow-up with cytology and colposcopy. For LSIL that persists longer than 2 years, the choice of treatment is optional. Expectant management is still appropriate in some patients, and ablative therapies, including cryotherapy and laser ablation, are acceptable treatment modalities.
# Chunk 983
Since HPV-16 and -18 are contained in 52% of CIN and 70% of invasive cancers, the data concerning cross-protection from the other high-risk types are important (33). The bivalent vaccine demonstrates protection from persistent infection with HPV types 31, 33, and 45 and protection from CIN-related HPV-31 (29). Quadrivalent vaccine data showing cross-protection against CIN 2 or greater and against HPV 31 exist, but this indication is not included in the FDA-approved labeling (34).
# Chunk 984
Pap Test Accuracy Screening for cervical cancer precursors using exfoliative cervico-vaginal cytology, the Pap test was successful in reducing the incidence of cervical cancer by 79% and the mortality by 70% since 1950 (50). However, 20% of women in the United States do not undergo regular screening and have not had a Pap test in the previous 3 years. The annual incidence rate dropped from 8 to 5 cases per 100,000 women, so approximately 8,200 women per year are diagnosed with cervical cancer (50–52). Some cases of cervical cancer continue to occur in patients who have regular Pap tests. A literature review of cervical cytology testing techniques was conducted by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (53). The conclusion was that the sensitivity of conventional cytologic testing in detecting cervical cancer precursor lesions was 51%, with an estimated false-negative rate of 49%. In three reviews of the accuracy of cervical cytology assessment, the sensitivity of the Pap test in detecting CIN 2 or 3 ranged from 47% to 62% and the specificity ranged from 60% to 95% (54–56). Nearly 30% of new cancer cases each year occur among women who underwent Pap testing. Errors of sampling, fixation, interpretation, or follow-up may be responsible for the missed cases (57). Prior overestimates of Pap test sensitivity of approximately 80% led to erroneous recommendations of screening frequency (58).
# Chunk 985
The ubiquitous use of liquid-based medium to collect the cytologic sample and preserve the collected cervical cells significantly decreased specimen sampling and preparation errors. With this technique, liquid samples are processed to provide a uniform, thin layer of cervical cells without debris on a glass slide. The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality assessment of liquid-based cytology improved the sensitivity of the Pap test to the stated goal of 80%. The cell sample is collected with an endocervical brush used in combination with a plastic spatula or with a plastic broom. The sample is rinsed in a vial containing liquid alcohol-based preservative. With this technique, 80% to 90% of the cells are transferred to the liquid media, as compared with the 10% to 20% transferred to the glass slide with conventional cytologic testing. Using liquid-based media eliminates air drying. The cells are retrieved from the vial by passing the liquid through a filter, which traps the larger epithelial cells, separating them from the small blood and inﬂammatory cells. This process yields a thin layer of diagnostic cells properly preserved and more easily interpreted by the cytologist. This technique reduces by 70% to 90% the rate of unsatisfactory samples encountered with conventional cytologic testing (59). Liquid-based cytology is commonly performed by most of the laboratories in the United States.
# Chunk 986
Another technology approved by the FDA for primary screening and rescreening samples of cervical cytology initially interpreted as normal is the automated image-guided slide screening system. This technique uses an automated microscope coupled to a special digital camera. The system scans the slide and uses computer imaging techniques to analyze each field of view on the slide. Computer algorithms rank each slide on the probability that the sample may contain an abnormality. The selected slides are reviewed by a cytotechnologist or a cytopathologist. This technique reduced the false-negative rate by 32% (60).
# Chunk 987
The 2002 American Cancer Society (ACS) recommended that screening with conventional Pap testing should occur every year. If liquid-based cytology is being used, screening can be extended to every 2 years. Beginning at the age of 30, women may be screened every 3 years using a combination of cytology and a high-risk HPV DNA test. Screening should begin at the age of 21 or within 3 years of the onset of sexual activity, and screening can stop at age 70 if there were no abnormal Pap test result in the previous 10 years. Under these recommendations, screening after hysterectomy for benign (non-HPV related) disease is not necessary (61).
# Chunk 988
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) updated its guidelines (62). The ACOG recommends that women not initiate cervical cancer screening until they are 21, regardless of the onset of sexual activity. This acknowledges the very low prevalence of invasive cancer in very young women, the long multiyear process of cervical carcinogenesis, and the very low but real risks for preterm birth associated with outpatient excisional procedures. Likewise screening frequency was revised to every 2 years from age 21 to 29 (with either conventional slide or liquid-based cytology), and every 3 years for women after age 30 years if three consecutive negative, i.e., negative for intraepithelial lesion or malignancy (NILM) Pap tests can be documented. More frequent screening continues to be recommended for HIV-positive women (twice first year and annually after), those who are immune-suppressed, diethylstilbestrol (DES) daughters, and for those with a history of CIN 2 or greater (screen annually for 20 years). Discontinuation of screening is reasonable between 65 to 70 years, with reassessment of risk factors annually to determine if reinitiating screening is appropriate. Likewise in the setting of posthysterectomy for benign indications it is reasonable to discontinue screening in the absence of a history of high-grade CIN or cancer (Table 19.3).
# Chunk 989
Comparison of Cervical Cytology Screening

In 2003, the FDA approved HPV DNA testing combined with cervical cytology as a screening technique for women older than age 30. When the results of both tests are negative, the woman does not have to be retested for 3 years. The negative predictive value of a double negative test exceeds 99% (19). Because most HPV infections are transient, clear spontaneously, and do not lead to real cancer precursors (especially in young women), it should not be used for screening in women younger than 30 (63). Women who have negative test results for both cytology and HPV have a 1 in 1,000 chance of having CIN 2 or worse detected in the following 6 months (64). Prospective studies report less than 2 per 1,000 women will develop CIN 2 or greater in the following 3 years (64–66).
# Chunk 990
The option of repeat Pap testing is suboptimal because of a false-negative rate of 20% to 50% for identifying CIN lesions and practical issues with patient compliance. About 50% of patients will undergo colposcopy because of subsequent abnormal Pap test results, making this option nearly as costly as immediate colposcopy (69). Immediate colposcopy is assumed to be the most sensitive method of detecting CIN 2 or 3 (69,72). Because 80% of patients will not have significant lesions, it is important to avoid overinterpretation of the colposcopic findings and to be conservative in performing biopsies. There is the risk that pathologists will overinterpret the biopsy results and the patient will be diagnosed with CIN when metaplasia is the only finding.
# Chunk 991
Several studies documented the usefulness of HPV testing in the assessment of ASC-US Pap test results (74–76). These studies demonstrate that HPV testing can identify 90% of the patients with CIN 2 or 3 lesions. To compare the aforementioned triage method in a prospective, randomized fashion, the NCI funded an ASC-US/LSIL Triage Study (ALTS) (77). Patients with ASC-US or LSIL were randomized to three triage arms: (i) immediate colposcopy, (ii) HPV test, and (iii) conservative management by repeat Pap test. There were 1,163 women in the immediate colposcopy group, and 14 refused the examination. The results of colposcopy are assumed to reﬂect the prevalent disease rates, which were as follows: CIN 1, 14.3%; CIN 2, 16.1%; and CIN 3, 5%. Thus, 75% of the women with ASC-US had negative colposcopy results and either did not have a biopsy (25%) or had a biopsy with negative results. The HPV test results were positive in 56.1% of the patients, and 6.1% of the patients did not return for colposcopy. Of the 494 who underwent colposcopy, the results were as follows: CIN 1, 22.5%; CIN 2, 11.9%; and CIN 3, 15.6%. The sensitivity of HPV test was 95.9% for the detection of CIN 2 and 96.3% for the detection of CIN 3.
# Chunk 992
The spontaneous regression rate of biopsy-proven CIN 1 is 60% to 85% in prospective studies. The regressions typically occur within a 2-year follow-up with cytology and colposcopy (4,75,85–88). Patients who have biopsy proven CIN 1 (after a cytologic finding of ASC, ASC-H, LSIL) with satisfactory colposcopy and who agree to the evaluation every 6 months may be followed with Pap testing performed at 6 and 12 months or HPV DNA testing at 12 months. After two negative test results or a single negative HPV DNA test, routine screening may be resumed (75). Colposcopy and repeat cytology at 12 months or a diagnostic excisional procedure may be necessary if the CIN 1 biopsy was preceded by an HSIL or AGC cytology (75). Regression of CIN 1 decreases after 24 months, with the regression rate becoming the same as for CIN 2 by 5 years (89).
# Chunk 993
Figure 19.16 (continued)

In recognition of the small but real risk for preterm birth, young women less than 20 years may be offered a program of surveillance with cytology and colposcopy at 6-month intervals with treatment only for persistence at 24 months (75). The heterogeneity of CIN 2 lesions is significant and regression rates are higher than for CIN 3. The histological distinction between CIN 2 and CIN 3 remains subjective and these diagnoses are combined in the 2006 Consensus Guidelines.
# Chunk 994
5.

If HPV DNA testing is negative or if two consecutive posttreatment cytology results are negative for intraepithelial lesion or malignancy, routine screening for at least 20 years is recommended, and should be annual for at least 5 years. A negative HPV DNA test is an excellent predictor of a normal posttreatment for CIN 2 or 3.
# Chunk 995
Adenocarcinoma In adenocarcinoma in situ (AIS), the endocervical glandular cells are replaced by tall columnar cells with nuclear stratification, hyperchromasia, irregularity, and increased mitotic activity (130). Cellular proliferation results in crowded, cribriform glands. The normal branching pattern of the endocervical glands is maintained. Most neoplastic cells resemble those of the endocervical mucinous epithelium. Endometrioid and intestinal cell types occur less often. About 50% of women with cervical AIS have squamous CIN. Some of the AIS lesions represent incidental findings in specimens removed for treatment of squamous neoplasia. Because AIS is located near or above the transformation zone, conventional cervical specimens may not be effective for detecting glandular disease. Obtaining good endocervical specimens by cytobrush may improve detection of AIS. If the focus of AIS is small, cervical biopsy and endocervical curettage may have negative findings. In such cases, a more comprehensive survey of the cervix by diagnostic conization may be necessary. This type of specimen allows exclusion of coexisting invasive adenocarcinoma. The term microinvasion should not be used to describe adenocarcinomas. After the gland is invaded, it is methodologically problematic to estimate a true “depth of invasion” because the invasion may have originated from the mucosal surface or the periphery of the underlying glands. The “breakthrough” of the basement membrane cannot be described; therefore, the tumor is either AIS or invasive adenocarcinoma.
# Chunk 996
With the recent apparent increase in invasive adenocarcinoma of the endocervix, more attention is directed toward AIS. There is evidence that AIS may progress to invasive cancer (108). In a series of 52 cases of adenocarcinoma of the uterine cervix, the results of 18 endocervical biopsies were interpreted as negative 3 to 7 years before the presentation with cancer (130). In five of these cases, AIS was found. In a study of the anatomic distribution of AIS in 23 women, all patients had AIS involving both the surface and the glandular endocervical epithelium, often with the deepest glandular cleft involved (131). The entire endocervical canal was at risk; nearly one-half of the patients had lesions 1.5 to 3 cm from the external os. Overall, 15 patients had unifocal disease, 3 had multifocal disease, and 5 had AIS of undermined type; 11 of the 23 patients had squamous intraepithelial lesions and AIS. In a study of 40 patients with AIS who had cervical conization, 23 of 40 patients (58%) had coexisting squamous intraepithelial lesions and 2 had invasive squamous cell carcinoma (128). Of the 22 patients who underwent hysterectomy, the margins on the cone specimen were positive in 10 patients, and 70% had residual AIS, including 2 patients with foci of invasive adenocarcinoma. One of the 12 patients with negative margins had focal residual adenocarcinoma in the hysterectomy specimen, and 18 women had conization only with negative margins and no relapse of disease after a medium interval of 3 years. Thus, positive margins on the conization specimen are significant findings in these patients (132).
# Chunk 997
Spontaneous Abortion Spontaneous abortion is a pathologic process resulting in unintentional termination of the pregnancy prior to 20 weeks’ gestation. About 8% to 20% of known pregnancies terminate in spontaneous abortion (2,3). About 80% of spontaneous pregnancy losses occur in the first trimester; the incidence decreases with each gestational week (4–6). In women who had one prior spontaneous abortion, the rate of spontaneous abortion in a subsequent pregnancy ranges from 13% to 20%; in women who had three consecutive losses, the rate is 33% (7). Patients should be reassured that, in most cases, spontaneous abortion does not recur. In women less than 36 years of age, when fetal cardiac activity is confirmed by ultrasound, the risk of spontaneous abortion is less than 4.5%. For women older than 36, the risk of spontaneous abortion rises to 10%, and above 40 years may approach 30% (8). Risk factors for spontaneous abortion include increasing maternal age, closely spaced pregnancies (less than 3 to 6 months apart), history of previous spontaneous abortion, maternal diabetes, and maternal smoking during pregnancy (9–13).
# Chunk 998
With pelvic ultrasound, spontaneous abortion can be differentiated into various categories, based on examination findings and ultrasound findings. Missed abortion is defined as a nonviable intrauterine pregnancy in the presence of a closed cervix and little or no abdominal cramping or vaginal bleeding and can be subdivided into anembryonic gestation and embryonic demise. Anembryonic gestation is a pregnancy where the embryo failed to develop and is confirmed
# Chunk 999
In the vast majority of cases, threatened abortion does not result in a pregnancy loss, but may be associated with poor outcomes later in pregnancy. In a study of 347 patients with a first-trimester pregnancy documented by ultrasonography, the overall rate of pregnancy loss was 6.1% to 4.2% in patients without bleeding and 12.4% in patients with bleeding (4). In a review of over 800 women presenting with first trimester vaginal bleeding or abdominal pain, nearly 14% with bleeding had spontaneous abortion compared with 2.5% in patients without bleeding (5). There is no effective therapy for a threatened intrauterine pregnancy. Bed rest and progesterone treatment, although often advocated, are not effective (16–18). Women with first trimester vaginal bleeding who do go on to have continuing pregnancies have nearly three times the risk of preterm birth between 28 and 31 weeks as women without bleeding, and a 50% higher likelihood of preterm birth between 32 to 36 weeks (19). First trimester bleeding may predict higher risk for intrauterine growth restriction, preterm premature rupture of membranes, and placental abruption (20). Bacterial vaginosis, if present, should be treated, as this is associated with increased risk for spontaneous abortion (21).
# Chunk 1000
The 10-year cumulative incidence of tubal pregnancy after any sterilization procedure is 7.3 per 1,000 procedures (41). The risk depends on the sterilization technique and the woman’s age at the time of sterilization: postpartum partial salpingectomy and unipolar coagulation have the lowest rates of ectopic pregnancy (1.5 and 1.8 per 1,000 procedures), while bipolar coagulation techniques had the highest incidence (17.1 per 1,000 procedures). Spring clip and band application techniques have 10-year ectopic rates similar to the general incidence, 8.5 and 7.3 per 1,000 procedures, respectively (41). Women younger than 28 years at the time of sterilization are more likely to have a failure than women over 34 years.
# Chunk 1001
Sterilization reversal increases risk for ectopic pregnancy. The exact risk depends on the method of sterilization, site of tubal occlusion, residual tube length, coexisting disease, and surgical technique. In general, the risk for reanastomosis of a cauterized tube is up to 17%, and it ranges from 6% to 9% for reversal of Pomeroy and 5% to 11% for reversal of ring procedures (42–47).
# Chunk 1002
The classic symptom triad of ectopic pregnancy is pain, amenorrhea, and vaginal bleeding. This symptom group is present in about 50% of patients and is typical in patients with a ruptured ectopic pregnancy. Abdominal pain is the most common presenting symptom, but the severity and nature of the pain vary widely. There is no pathognomonic pain that is diagnostic of ectopic pregnancy. Pain may be unilateral or bilateral and may occur in the upper or lower abdomen. The pain may be dull, sharp, or crampy and either continuous or intermittent. With rupture, the patient may experience transient relief of the pain, as stretching of the tubal serosa ceases. Shoulder and back pain, thought to result from hemoperitoneal irritation of the diaphragm, may indicate intra-abdominal hemorrhage.
# Chunk 1003
Physical Examination The physical examination should include measurements of vital signs and examination of the abdomen and pelvis. Frequently, the findings before rupture and hemorrhage are nonspecific, and vital signs are normal. The abdomen may be nontender or mildly tender, with or without rebound. The uterus may be slightly enlarged, with findings similar to a normal pregnancy (103,104). Cervical motion tenderness may or may not be present. An adnexal mass may be palpable in up to 50% of cases, but the mass varies markedly in size, consistency, and tenderness. A palpable mass may be the corpus luteum and not the ectopic pregnancy. With rupture and intra-abdominal hemorrhage, the patient develops tachycardia followed by hypotension. Bowel sounds are decreased or absent. The abdomen is distended, with marked tenderness and rebound tenderness. Cervical motion tenderness is present. Frequently, the findings of the pelvic examination are inadequate because of pain and guarding.
# Chunk 1004
There are three reference standards for β-hCG measurement. The World Health Organization introduced the First International Standard (1st IS) in the 1930s. Testing for hCG and its subunits improved over the years. The Second International Standard (2nd IS), introduced in 1964, has varying amounts of β-hCG and β subunits. A purified preparation of β-hCG is now available. Originally referred to as the First International Reference Preparation (1st IRP), the test standard is now referred to as the Third International Standard (3rd IS). Although each standard has its own scale, the 2nd IS is about one-half of the 3rd IS. For example, if a level is reported as 500 mIU/mL (2nd IS), it is equivalent to a level of 1,000 mIU/mL (3rd IS). The assay standard used must be known to interpret hCG results correctly (106). In several recent articles, attention was drawn to a problem known as phantom hCG, in which the presence of heterophile anti bodies or proteolytic enzymes causes a false-positive hCG result. Because the antibodies are large glycoproteins, significant quantities of the antibody are not excreted in the urine. In the patient with hCG levels less than 1,000 mIU/mL, a urine pregnancy test should be performed and confirmatory positive results obtained before instituting treatment (107,108).
# Chunk 1005
The hCG doubling time can help to differentiate an ectopic pregnancy from an intrauterine pregnancy—a 66% rise in the hCG level over 48 hours (85% confidence level) represents the lower limit of normal values for viable intrauterine pregnancies (111). About 15% of patients with viable intrauterine pregnancies have less than a 66% rise in hCG level over 48 hours, and a similar percentage with an ectopic pregnancy have more than a 66% rise. If the sampling interval is reduced to 24 hours, the overlap between normal and abnormal pregnancies is even greater. Patients with normal intrauterine pregnancies usually have more than a 50% rise in their hCG levels over 48 hours when the starting level is less than 2,000 mIU/mL. The hCG pattern that is most predictive of an ectopic pregnancy is one that has reached a plateau (a doubling time of more than 7 days). For falling levels, a half-life of less than 1.4 days is rarely associated with an ectopic pregnancy, whereas a half-life of more than 7 days is most predictive of ectopic pregnancy.
# Chunk 1006
Serum Progesterone The mean serum progesterone level in patients with ectopic pregnancies is lower than that in patients with normal intrauterine pregnancies (114,115). However, in studies of more than 5,000 patients with first-trimester pregnancies, a spectrum of progesterone levels was found in patients with both normal and abnormal pregnancies (35,116,117). About 70% of patients with a viable intrauterine pregnancy have serum progesterone levels higher than 25 ng/mL, whereas only 1.5% of patients with ectopic pregnancies have serum progesterone levels higher than 25 ng/mL, and most of these pregnancies exhibit cardiac activity (35,116,117).
# Chunk 1007
Relaxin is a protein hormone produced solely by the corpus luteum of pregnancy. It appears in the maternal serum at 4 to 5 weeks of gestation, peaks at about 10 weeks of gestation, and decreases until term (124). Relaxin levels are significantly lower in ectopic pregnancies and spontaneous abortions than in normal intrauterine pregnancies. Prorenin and active renin levels are significantly higher in viable intrauterine pregnancies than in either ectopic pregnancies or spontaneous abortions, with a single level of more than 33 pg/mL excluding the diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy (125). The clinical utility of relaxin, prorenin, and renin levels in diagnosing ectopic pregnancy is not yet determined.
# Chunk 1008
CA125 is a glycoprotein, the origin of which is uncertain during pregnancy. Levels of CA125 rise during the first trimester and return to a nonpregnancy range during the second and third trimesters. After delivery, maternal serum concentrations increase (126,127). Levels of CA125 were studied in an effort to predict spontaneous abortion. Although a positive correlation was found between elevated CA125 levels 18 to 22 days after conception and spontaneous abortion, repeat measurements at 6 weeks of gestation did not correlate with outcome (128). Conﬂicting results were reported—one study showed a higher serum CA125 level in normal pregnancies than in ectopic pregnancies 2 to 4 weeks after a missed menses, whereas another study found higher CA125 levels for ectopic pregnancies compared with normal pregnancies (129,130).
# Chunk 1009
Maternal serum α-fetoprotein (AFP) levels are elevated in ectopic pregnancies; however, the use of AFP measurements as a screening technique for ectopic pregnancy was not studied (131,132). A combination of AFP with three other markers—β-hCG, progesterone, and estradiol—has 98.5% specificity and 94.5% accuracy for the prediction of ectopic pregnancy (133,134). Serum placental growth factor may prove to be a diagnostic biomarker for ectopic pregnancy because it was shown to be undetectable in ectopic and nonviable pregnancies.
# Chunk 1010
The presence of an adnexal gestational sac with a fetal pole and cardiac activity is the most specific but least sensitive sign of ectopic pregnancy, occurring in only 10% to 17% of cases (135,152,153). The recognition of other characteristics of ectopic pregnancy improves ultrasonographic sensitivity. Adnexal rings (ﬂuid sacs with thick echogenic rings) that have a yolk sac or nonliving embryo are accepted as specific ultrasonographic signs of ectopic pregnancy (154). Adnexal rings are visualized in 22% of ectopic pregnancies using transabdominal ultrasonography and in 38% using transvaginal ultrasonography (137). Other studies identified adnexal rings in 33% to 50% of ectopic pregnancies (135,153). The adnexal ring may not always be apparent because bleeding around the sac results in the appearance of a nonspecific adnexal mass.
# Chunk 1011
A similar high-velocity, low-impedance ﬂow characterizes ectopic pregnancies. The addition of Doppler to the ultrasonographic evaluation of suspected ectopic pregnancy improves diagnostic sensitivity for individual diagnoses: from 71% to 87% for ectopic pregnancy, from 24% to 59% for failed intrauterine pregnancy, and from 90% to 99% for normal intrauterine pregnancy (154,158,166). Transvaginal color Doppler ultrasonography did not increase overall detection rates (167). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was studied for its possible uses in the diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy. The role of MRI in the detection of ectopic pregnancy is inconclusive. It was 96% accurate in detecting fresh hematoma associated with ectopic pregnancy. Further studies need to be done to assess its predictive value (168).
# Chunk 1012
Historically, if the culdocentesis results were positive, laparotomy was performed for a presumed diagnosis of ruptured tubal pregnancy. The results of culdocentesis do not always correlate with the status of the pregnancy. Although about 70% to 90% of patients with ectopic pregnancy have a hemoperitoneum demonstrated by culdocentesis, only 50% of patients have a ruptured tube (170). About 6% of women with positive culdocentesis results do not have an ectopic gestation at the time of laparotomy. Nondiagnostic taps occur in 10% to 20% of patients with ectopic pregnancy and are not definitive of the diagnosis. A study concludes that culdocentesis is an obsolete tool in the diagnosis of suspected ectopic pregnancy (171).
# Chunk 1013
IUP Signs and symptoms ofruptured ectopic Assess risk factors for ectopic pregnancy Quantitative hCG Vaginal ultrasound and hCG within 12−24 hours ≥15% decline in hCG Plateau or rising hCG hCG/USG in 48 hours Nonlaparoscopic methotrexate Laparoscopy IUP • No IUP • No mass or mass ≤3.5 cm • No IUP • Ultrasound consistent with unruptured ectopic pregnancy NonlaparoscopicMethotrexate D & C Repeat hCG in 48−72 hours • No IUP • Mass >3.5 cm IUP • No IUP • ≥50% rise in hCG Repeat hCG/USGwhen hCG is expected to be ≥2000 • No IUP plateau or rise≥50% hCG Repeat hCG in 48−72 hours Falling Completedabortion D & C Plateau or rising hCG IUP Ultrasound consistent with completed abortion Ultrasound consistent with incomplete abortion • No IUP • Mass ≤3.5 cm suspicious for ectopic• hCG rising• hCG <2000 • No IUP • Mass >3.5 cm suspicious for ectopic• hCG ≥2000 • No IUP • No mass, or mass ≤3.5 cm • hCG ≥2000 Immediate surgical treatment
# Chunk 1014
If the hemoperitoneum cannot be evacuated in a timely manner, laparotomy should be considered. Surgeon’s experience with laparoscopy and the availability of laparoscopic equipment will determine the surgical approach. Cornual or interstitial pregnancies traditionally were treated with laparotomy, although laparoscopic management was described and is becoming common among skilled surgeons (174). Laparotomy is chosen for the management of most abdominal pregnancies. In some cases, the patient may have extensive abdominal or pelvic adhesive disease, making laparoscopy difficult and laparotomy more feasible.
# Chunk 1015
In a study of 143 patients followed after undergoing laparoscopic procedures for ectopic pregnancy, the overall intrauterine pregnancy rates for laparoscopic salpingostomy (60%) and laparoscopic salpingectomy (54%) were not significantly different (188). If the patient had evidence of tubal damage, pregnancy rates (42%) were significantly lower than in those women who did not have tubal damage (79%). In another study, the reproductive outcome of 188 patients followed for a mean of 7.2 years (range 3–15 years) was reported after conservation by laparotomy for ectopic pregnancy (189). An intrauterine pregnancy occurred in 83 (70%) patients, with a recurrent ectopic pregnancy rate of 13%, suggesting that reproductive outcome after an ectopic pregnancy treated by laparotomy is similar to that of patients undergoing laparoscopic or medical management. A recent Cochrane review showed no difference in tubal patency rate, future intrauterine pregnancy rates, and recurrent ectopic pregnancy rates in those patients treated with salpingostomy by either laparoscopy or laparotomy approach (177).
# Chunk 1016
The multidose regimen is outlined in Table 20.3. Patients receive 1 mg/kg of methotrexate intramuscularly on days 1, 3, 5, and 7 with leucovorin 0.1 mg/kg intramuscular administered on days 2, 4, 6, and 8. As a result of the repeat dosing of methotrexate, side effects are more common. The leucovorin helps reduce these side effects and increases patients’ tolerance of the treatment. A patient may not require all four doses of methotrexate and her β-hCG levels should be monitored on days 1, 3, 5, and 7. If the β-hCG level drops 15% between two measurements, the regimen can be stopped and weekly β-hCG monitoring initiated. If the methotrexate is discontinued early, the patient should receive leucovorin after her final dose of methotrexate to help reduce potential side effects. If a patient’s β-hCG level plateaus or increases, a second round of methotrexate and leucovorin can be given 1 week later. Earlier studies indicated approximately 19% will require all four doses, and 17% of women will require only one dose with this regimen (195,196). A more recent meta-analysis showed 10% of women require only one dose, while nearly 54% will require all four doses.
# Chunk 1017
Call your physician if:

You experience prolonged or heavy vaginal bleeding.

The pain is prolonged or severe (lower abdomen and pelvic pain is normal during the first 10–14 days of treatment).
# Chunk 1018
You use oral contraception or barrier contraceptive methods.

About 4%–5% of women experience unsuccessful methotrexate treatment and require surgery. hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; SGOT, serum glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase; BUN, blood urea nitrogen; CBC, complete blood count; Rho-GAM, Rh0(D) immune globulin; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs; WBC, white blood cell; PO, by mouth; bid, twice daily.
# Chunk 1019
Side Effects Side effects of methotrexate therapy are dose and frequency dependent. The most commonly reported side effects are the gastrointestinal symptoms of nausea, vomiting, stomatitis, and abdominal pain. Because of these potential effects, women are cautioned against using alcohol and nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory medications while being treated with methotrexate (190). Other side effects include bone marrow suppression, hemorrhagic enteritis, alopecia, dermatitis, elevated liver enzyme levels, and pneumonitis (204). These side effects are usually mild and self-limited; few life-threatening side effects are reported with methotrexate treatment for ectopic pregnancy. The risk of these side effects does not appear to differ between single-dose and multidose regimens when adjusting for starting level of β-hCG at initiation of treatment. The frequency of reported side effects ranges from 30% to 40% (194). For those patients on prolonged therapy, leucovorin can reduce the incidence of these side effects and is included in the “multidose” regimen. Long-term follow-up of women treated with methotrexate for gestational trophoblastic disease shows no increase in congenital malformations, spontaneous abortions, or tumors recurring after chemotherapy (205). Treatment of ectopic pregnancy differs from that of gestational trophoblastic disease in that a smaller total dose of methotrexate is required and shorter treatment duration is used.
# Chunk 1020
Types of Ectopic Pregnancy

Spontaneous Resolution Some ectopic pregnancies resolve by resorption or by tubal abortion, obviating the need for medical or surgical therapy (221–225). The proportion of ectopic pregnancies that resolve spontaneously and the reason they do so while others do not are unknown. There are no specific criteria for patient selection that predict successful outcome after spontaneous resolution. A falling hCG level is the most common indicator used, but tubal rupture can occur even with falling hCG levels. Patients with low initial levels of β-hCG are generally the best candidates for expectant management, and there is a reported 88% success rate of spontaneous remission with an initial β-hCG level less than 200 mU/mL (226). These patients should be followed with serial β-hCG levels and active management initiated if these levels plateau or rise or the patient develops abdominal pain or signs of tubal rupture (190).
# Chunk 1021
Chronic ectopic pregnancy is a condition in which the pregnancy does not completely resorb during expectant management. The condition arises when there is persistence of the chorionic villi with bleeding into the tubal wall, which is distended slowly and does not rupture. It may arise from chronic bleeding from the fimbriated end of the fallopian tube with subsequent tamponade. In a series of 50 patients with a chronic ectopic pregnancy, pain was present in 86%, vaginal bleeding was present in 68%, and both symptoms were present in 58% (234). Ninety percent of the patients had amenorrhea ranging from 5 to 16 weeks (mean, 9.6 weeks). Most patients develop a pelvic mass that usually is symptomatic. The β-hCG level usually is low but may be absent; ultrasonography may be helpful in the diagnosis; rarely, bowel involvement or ureteral compression or obstruction exists (234,235).
# Chunk 1022
Because the pregnancy can continue to term, the potential maternal morbidity and mortality are very high. As a result, surgical intervention is recommended when an abdominal pregnancy is diagnosed. At surgery, the placenta can be removed if its vascular supply can be identified and ligated, but hemorrhage can occur, requiring abdominal packing that is left in place and removed after 24 to 48 hours. Angiographic arterial embolization was described (264). If the vascular supply cannot be identified, the cord is ligated near the placental base, and the placenta is left in place. Placental involution can be monitored using serial ultrasonography and assessment of β-hCG levels. Potential complications of leaving the placenta in place include bowel obstruction, fistula formation, and sepsis as the tissue degenerates. There are concerns regarding the use of methotrexate treatment in abdominal pregnancies. Specifically, there is
# Chunk 1023
Interligamentous Pregnancy Interligamentous pregnancy is a rare form of ectopic pregnancy that occurs in about 1 of 300 ectopic pregnancies (272). An interligamentous pregnancy usually results from trophoblastic penetration of a tubal pregnancy through the tubal serosa and into the mesosalpinx, with secondary implantation between the leaves of the broad ligament. It can occur if a uterine fistula develops between the endometrial cavity and the retroperitoneal space. As in abdominal pregnancy, with interligamentous pregnancy the placenta may be adherent to the uterus, bladder, and pelvic side walls. If possible, the placenta should be removed; when this is not possible, it can be left in situ and allowed to resorb. Cases of live birth are reported with this type ectopic gestation (272).
# Chunk 1024
Multiple Ectopic Pregnancies Twin or multiple ectopic gestations occur less frequently than heterotropic gestations and may appear in a variety of locations and combinations. Multiple ectopic pregnancies are thought to be rare, but with the advent of assisted reproductive technologies the incidence appears to be rising. A recent review of bilateral tubal pregnancies reported 242 cases between 1918 and 2007, with 42 cases in the past 10 years alone. Fifty percent of these twin tubal pregnancies were associated with assisted reproductive technologies (279). Another review of 163 cases of tubal ectopic pregnancies had a reported rate of twin tubal pregnancies of 2.4% (280). Although most reports are confined to twin tubal gestations, ovarian, interstitial, and abdominal twin pregnancies were reported. Twin and triplet gestations were reported following partial salpingectomy and IVF (281,282). Management is similar to that of other types of ectopic pregnancy and is somewhat dependent on the location of the pregnancy.
# Chunk 1025
Increasing age (approximately 50% of breast cancers occur after age 65)  Age of menarche less than 12 years  Nulliparity or first pregnancy at greater than 30 years of age  Late menopause (older than 55 years of age)  Family history of breast cancer (especially premenopausal or bilateral disease)  Number of first-degree relatives with breast cancer and their ages when diagnosed  Family history of male breast cancer  Inherited conditions associated with a high risk for breast cancer, including BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes, Li-Fraumeni syndrome, Cowden’s disease, ataxia telangiectasia syndrome, and Peutz-Jeghers syndrome  Other malignancies (ovary, colon, and prostate)  Pathology of previous breast biopsy showing atypia or lobular or ductal carcinoma
# Chunk 1026
Breast Self-Examination There is controversy about recommending breast self-examination (BSE). There is no evidence that doing BSE improves survival rates from breast cancer (7). Staunch opponents of BSE argue that it doubles a woman’s risk of undergoing a breast biopsy for benign pathology (8). BSE increases breast health awareness and helps promote early detection of cancer (9–11). Most breast cancers are detected by women themselves (48%), followed by breast imaging (41%), and by physician clinical examination in only 11% (12). Although young women have a low incidence of breast cancer, it is important to teach BSE early so it becomes habitual. Organizations such as the American Cancer Society sponsor courses in BSE. Reassurance, support, and patient education may encourage women to overcome psychological barriers to routine BSE (13). Such instruction is available through electronic resources (14).
# Chunk 1027
The American Geriatrics Society recommends annual or at least biennial mammography for women up to age 75 years, and after that age, every 2 to 3 years if the woman has a life expectancy of more than 4 years (36). The reasons for liberalization of the screening interval recommendations for older women include improved biology profile, slower growth rate, and lower risk for recurrence (37–41). The natural history of the disease in older women must be balanced against life expectancy as a function of overall health (42). For high-risk women, consideration can be given to earlier initiation of screening (5 to 10 years earlier than the age of the index case) and shorter intervals between screening, and the use of additional imaging modalities such as breast ultrasonography and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with dedicated breast coils. No screening test is perfect, and false-negative imaging studies or benign clinical examinations may lead the patient to an erroneous sense of well-being only to be confronted later with a subsequent cancer. Likewise, a false-positive result can lead to significant anxiety and unnecessary biopsy.
# Chunk 1028
Correlation of Findings

Biopsy must be performed on patients with a dominant or suspicious mass despite absence of mammographic findings (48). Mammography should be performed before biopsy so other suspicious areas can be noted and the contralateral breast can be checked (Fig. 21.2). Mammography is never a substitute for biopsy because it may not reveal clinical cancer, especially when it occurs in the dense breast tissue of young women with fibrocystic changes. The sensitivity of mammography is 75%, with a specificity of 92.3% depending on the patient’s age; breast density; use of hormone therapy; and the size, location, and mammographic appearance of the tumor (49). Mammography is less sensitive in young women with dense breast tissue than in older women, who tend to have fatty breasts, in which mammography can detect at least 90% of malignancies (50). Small tumors, particularly those without calcifications, are more difficult to detect, especially in women with dense breasts.
# Chunk 1029
Breast Tissue Evaluation: Histology and Cytology

The safest course is tissue or cytologic biopsy evaluation of all dominant masses found on physical examination and, in the absence of a mass, evaluation of suspicious lesions shown by breast imaging. Over 1 million women have breast biopsies each year in the United States. Between 70% and 80% of these biopsies yield a benign lesion (64). The diagnosis of a benign breast lesion versus breast cancer is often difficult to determine based on clinical examination and requires evaluation of tissue by fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC), core needle biopsy (CNB), or excisional biopsy (EB). Both FNAC and CNB are reasonable techniques for the evaluation of a palpable or image-identified lesion. CNB evolved as the diagnostic procedure of choice. More than half of all breast biopsies use a core-needle technique. The sensitivity of CNBs performed using either stereotactic or ultrasound guidance is 97% to 99% (65). CNB is used increasingly to diagnose breast cancer and to determine tumor histology, grade, and marker expression; select neoadjuvant therapy; and predict sentinel lymph node status (66). CNB and fine needle aspiration (FNA) are less invasive and achieve better cosmesis than excisional or even incisional biopsy. The main limitations of FNA are high rate of insufficient sampling and inability to distinguish invasive from noninvasive cancers. CNB is a well-accepted alternative to surgical biopsy and can avoid surgical biopsies in most patients (67). Investigators of the Fifth Radiologic Diagnostic Oncology Group demonstrated that image-guided biopsy of breast lesions provides high diagnostic accuracy. The sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy of CNB were 0.91, 1.00, and 0.98, respectively (68).
# Chunk 1030
About 30% of lesions suspected to be cancer prove on biopsy to be benign, and about 15% of lesions believed to be benign prove to be malignant (23). Dominant masses or suspicious nonpalpable breast lesions require histopathological examination. Histologic or cytologic diagnosis should be obtained before the decision is made to monitor a breast mass (69). An exception may be a premenopausal woman with a nonsuspicious mass presumed to be fibrocystic disease. An apparently fibrocystic lesion that does not completely resolve within several menstrual cycles should be sampled for biopsy. Any mass in a post-menopausal woman who is not taking estrogen therapy should be presumed to be malignant. Some clinicians will monitor a mass when results of the clinical diagnosis, breast imaging studies, and cytologic studies are all in agreement, such as with fibroadenoma. Many clinicians will not leave a dominant mass in the breast even when FNAC or CNB results are negative, unless the FNA or CNB shows fibroadenoma. Such cases require periodic follow-up. Some surgeons excise lesions when the sampling technique shows only fibrocystic disease. Figures 21.4 and 21.5 present algorithms for management of breast masses in premenopausal and postmenopausal patients. Simultaneous evaluation of a breast mass using clinical breast examination, radiography, and needle biopsy can lower the risk of missing cancer to only 1%, effectively reducing the rate of diagnostic failure and increasing the quality of patient care (70).
# Chunk 1031
When the diagnosis of fibrocystic change is established by ultrasonography or is practically certain because the history is classic, aspiration of a discrete mass, suggestive of a cyst, is indicated if the patient is symptomatic, the cyst obscures visualization of breast tissue on mammography and prevents adequate imaging, or if the ultrasonographic criteria are not met. In one study of a screened population, 1% of individuals developed a new cyst that resolved in more than 50% of cases (90). Aspiration may be performed with ultrasonographic guidance, but image guidance is usually not necessary if the cyst is palpable (91). FNA of a cyst is a minimally invasive procedure performed with a 21-or 22-gauge needle without local anesthesia and is not associated with significant risks or complications. There is minimal pain and little risk for infection or bleeding. Benign cyst ﬂuid is straw colored to dark green to brownish and does not need to be submitted for cytologic evaluation (6). Injection of air into the cyst cavity is reported to reduce the likelihood of cyst recurrence but generally is not performed. The patient should be reexamined at a short interval thereafter for cyst recurrence. Cysts will reoccur in 30% of patients, cause anxiety, and require repeated evaluations (84). Tissue biopsy should be performed in the presence of the following findings:
# Chunk 1032
A mass persists after aspiration.

A persistent mass is noted at any time during follow-up.

If a needle biopsy is performed and results are negative for malignancy, a suspicious mass that does not resolve over several months should be excised. Surgery should be conservative, because the primary objective is to exclude cancer. Simple mastectomy or extensive removal of breast tissue is not indicated for fibrocystic disease. Most patients do not require treatment for fibrocystic changes, just reassurance that fibrocystic change is a transient phenomenon of aging that is associated with hormonal effects on the breast glandular tissue that eventually subsides.
# Chunk 1033
Fibrocystic change is not associated with an increased risk of breast cancer unless there is histologic evidence of epithelial proliferative changes, with or without atypia (92–97). The common coincidence of fibrocystic disease and malignancy in the same breast reﬂects the fact that both processes are common events. Approximately 80% of biopsies show fibrocystic changes. In an evaluation of the relationship between fibrocystic change and breast cancer in 10,366 women who underwent biopsy between 1950 and 1968 and were followed for a median of 17 years, approximately 70% of the biopsies showed nonproliferative breast disease, whereas 30% showed proliferative breast disease (95). Cytologic atypia were present in 3.6% of cases. Women with nonproliferative disease had no increased risk of breast cancer, whereas women with proliferative breast disease and no atypical hyperplasia had a twofold higher risk of breast cancer. Patients whose biopsy results showed atypical ductal or lobular hyperplasia had an approximately fivefold higher risk than women with nonproliferative disease to develop invasive breast cancer in either breast. Patients with carcinoma in situ have an eight-to tenfold risk of developing breast cancer. This risk is bilateral for lobular lesions and ipsilateral for ductal lesions. A family history of breast cancer added little risk for women with nonproliferative disease, but family history plus atypia increased breast cancer risk 11-fold. The presence of cysts alone did not increase the risk of breast cancer, but cysts combined with a family history of breast cancer increased the risk about threefold (76,92–97). Women with these risk factors (family history of breast cancer and proliferative breast disease) should be followed carefully with physical examination and mammography. For such women, age-specific probability of developing invasive breast carcinoma in the next 10 years is 1 in 2,000 (age 20), 1 in 256 (age 30), 1 in 67 (age 40), 1 in 39 (age 50), and 1 in 29 (age 60) (93). The relative risk for developing breast cancer depends on the type of proliferative lesion diagnosed.
# Chunk 1034
Management of Fibrocystic Change

Fibrocystic change is a normal evolutionary change in breast development and involution and does not require a specific treatment other than a good clinical breast examination and age-appropriate mammographic screening or imaging studies directed to signs and symptoms. A number of nutritional and dietary supplements were investigated to relieve symptoms. The role of caffeine consumption in the aggravation of fibrocystic change is controversial (98– 101). Results of some studies suggest that eliminating caffeine from the diet is associated with improvement of symptoms (100,101). Many patients are aware of these studies and report relief of symptoms after discontinuing intake of coffee, tea, and chocolate. Similarly, many women find vitamin E (150 to 600 IU daily) or B6 (200 to 800 mg per day) helpful (102,103). Observations about these effects are difficult to confirm and are anecdotal (104–106). A recent review of nutritional interventions for fibrocystic breast conditions that evaluated evening primrose oil, vitamin E, or pyridoxine suggested that there are insufficient data to draw clear conclusions about their effectiveness (107). Exacerbations of pain, tenderness, and cyst formation may occur at any time until menopause, when symptoms usually subside unless patients are taking estrogen. A patient with fibrocystic changes should be advised to examine her own breasts each month just after menstruation and to inform her physician if a mass appears.
# Chunk 1035
Natural History of Mastalgia

Approximately 70% to 80% of women experience severe breast pain at some time in their lives (112,113). Mastalgia accounts for 30% to 47% of breast clinical evaluations (111,114). In 15% of the patients, the mastalgia is so severe that it alters lifestyle and requires repeated investigations and treatment (112). Mastalgia interferes with sexual (48%), physical (37%), social (12%), and work or school activities (8%) (115).
# Chunk 1036
Types of Mastalgia Breast pain is a distressing constellation of symptoms that is classified as cyclic, noncyclic, or extramammary (116). Cyclic mastalgia is related to exaggerated premenstrual symptoms beginning in the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle, associated with breast engorgement, pain, ache, heaviness, and tenderness that is bilateral and can last for more than 7 days in 11% of women (116–118). Cyclical mastalgia is more prevalent in women in their third and fourth decades of life and accounts for two-thirds of all breast pain symptoms (119). Noncyclic mastalgia is independent of menstrual cycles and is described as achy, burning soreness. It may be intermittent or constant, is usually unilateral, occurs in the fourth and fifth decades, and is more difficult to treat than cyclic mastalgia (116). Extramammary pain is perceived to be located in the breast but is related to an extramammary site. Chest wall muscular pain, costal cartilage symptoms, herpes zoster, radiculopathies, and rib fractures are among some of the more common causes of extramammary pain. Costochondritis (Tietze syndrome) is a manifestation of chest wall pain that is frequently interpreted as breast pain.
# Chunk 1037
Management of Mastalgia Breast pain is an unlikely symptom of malignancy, and when malignancy is excluded by a clinical breast examination and age-appropriate breast imaging for focal breast pain, the most important treatment is reassurance. Treatments include medications, such as anesthetics, diuretics, bromocriptine, and tamoxifen; vitamins and supplements, such as evening primrose oil; mechanical support with a well-fitting bra; local excision; and decreased fat intake and reduction in methylxanthines from caffeine, tea, and chocolate (108,116). Discontinuation of hormone therapy may be effective in some women. Maintenance of a pain score diary is important to understand the relationship of pain to factors such as the menstrual cycle, activities of daily living, and stress. External support may be effective for breast pain associated with generalized fibrocystic changes and is best treated by avoiding trauma and by wearing (night and day) a brassiere that gives good support and protection (120). One study evaluated resolution of symptoms in 200 women randomized either to a regimen of danazol (200 mg per day) or to mechanical support with a sports brassiere worn for regular activities for 12 weeks. The group using mechanical support had 85% relief of symptoms compared with 58% improvement in the danazol group. Symptoms recurred after discontinuance of treatment with danazol (113). The danazol group experienced drug-related side effects in 42%, which led to discontinuance of the medication in 15%. The breast has minimal structural support and is at significant risk for motion-related displacement resulting in mastalgia. The use of external support to minimize breast motion appears to be effective in reducing breast pain. The application of heat packs or cold packs and light breast massage may reduce symptoms in some individuals (116).
# Chunk 1038
Breast pain is increased in some individuals who have elevated prolactin (PRL) levels induced by thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) (116). Bromocriptine is a dopamine antagonist that inhibits the release of PRL. Bromocriptine (2.5 mg twice daily) given for 3 to 6 months is effective in reducing mastalgia in women who have TRH-induced elevation of PRL (123). Patients who have normal TRH levels, are resistant to bromocriptine, or do not tolerate the side effects of nausea, vomiting, and headache respond favorably to progesterone and systemic nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs).
# Chunk 1039
Nonhormonal therapies such as dietary restrictions, vitamins and supplements, and restriction of methylxantines were investigated as possible treatments for mastalgia because they are less likely to be associated with adverse drug-related side effects (116). Because mastalgia is one of the symptoms associated with fibrocystic disease, the treatments described for fibrocystic disease are relevant to mastalgia. A low-fat diet was effective in one randomized trial (136). Ninety percent of patients taking in 15% dietary fat experienced resolution of pain symptoms after 6 months compared with only 22% of those on a diet containing 36% fat (p = .0023). Evening primrose oil containing essential fatty acids (γ -linolenic acid [GLA]) was studied because of its affect on prostaglandin synthesis (137). It was used as first-line therapy, reserving danazol and bromocriptine for treatment of more severe symptoms (112). In a small prospective mastalgia trial, women were given eight capsules of evening primrose oil daily for 4 months (320 mg GLA) (138). Those who responded had a lower level of essential fatty acids at the time of initiation when compared with poor responders, suggesting that evening primrose oil increases essential fatty acids and that this increase may be associated with the improvement in symptoms in the responders. Two other trials failed to demonstrate efficacy of evening primrose oil capsules over placebo (139,140). In a Dutch trial, 124 women with cyclic or noncyclic pain lasting on average 7 or more days (minimum 5 days) were randomized to receive the following regimens: (i) fish oil and control oil, (ii) evening primrose oil and control oil, (iii) fish and evening primrose oil, or (iv) both control oils for 6 months (139). There was a statistically significant reduction in the number of days per month with pain but not in the pain score in the entire study population. There was a greater reduction in cyclic than noncyclic pain symptoms, and this finding was true for both the test oils and for the control oils. The authors concluded that neither fish oil nor evening primrose oil had a better effect than the less expensive wheat germ and corn oils. A second large double-blind randomized prospective trial was conducted in 555 women with cyclic mastalgia of moderate to severe degree present for at least 7 days of a menstrual cycle (140). The four groups were (i) GLA and placebo antioxidants, (ii) placebo fatty acids and antioxidants, (iii) GLA and placebo antioxidants, and (iv) placebo fatty acids and placebo antioxidants. The treatments were given in a blinded fashion for 4 months. All groups had a similar 35% reduction in symptoms. This treatment was followed by open treatment with GLA in all groups and blinded treatment with antioxidants. There was continued improvement of symptoms in all groups with a reduction in mastalgia by 50% over the next 12 months. This is the largest and best-controlled study to date evaluating GLA for relief of mastalgia, and GLA was not found to be superior to placebo. The results of this study were not consistent with those from previous smaller studies. The authors cannot exclude a significant psychologic impact that may confound the effect of GLA. GLA use was found to be safe, without any significant side effects, and was prescribed as therapy for mastalgia because of its lack of side effects. The randomized trials, however, bring into serious question the efficacy of these options.
# Chunk 1040
Fibroadenoma Fibroadenomas are the most common benign tumors of the breast. In one series, they accounted for 50% of all breast biopsies (141). They usually occur in young women (age 20 to 35 years) and may occur in teenagers (142). In women younger than 25 years, fibroadenomas are more common than cysts. They rarely occur after menopause, although occasionally they are found, often calcified, in postmenopausal women. For this reason, it is postulated that fibroadenomas are responsive to estrogen stimulation. A study reports the de novo occurrence of fibroadenoma in 51 women older than age 35 years who had no evidence of a palpable or mammographic visualized lesion in well-documented prior visits (143). Fibroadenomas may appear as single masses or as multiple lesions.
# Chunk 1041
Relation to menses 7.

8.

Unilateral, spontaneous, bloody, or serosanguinous discharge from a single duct is usually caused by an intraductal papilloma or, rarely, by an intraductal cancer. In either case, a mass may not be palpable. The involved duct may be identified by pressure at different sites around the nipple and at the margin of the areola. Bloody discharge is more suggestive of cancer but usually is caused by a benign papilloma in the duct. In premenopausal women, spontaneous multiple-duct discharge, unilateral or bilateral, is most marked just before menstruation. It often is caused by fibrocystic change. Discharge may be green or brownish. Papillomatosis and ductal ectasia are usually seen on biopsy. If a mass is present, it should be removed. Milky discharge from multiple ducts in nonlactating women presumably reﬂects increased secretion of pituitary prolactin; serum prolactin and thyroid-stimulating hormone levels should be evaluated to detect a pituitary tumor or hypothyroidism. Hypothyroidism may cause galactorrhea. Alternatively, phenothiazines may cause milky discharge that disappears when the medication is discontinued. Oral contraceptive agents may cause clear, serous, or milky discharge from multiple ducts or, less often, from a single duct. The discharge is more evident just before menstruation and disappears when the medication is stopped.
# Chunk 1042
The complications of breast implantation are significant. Rates of contracture vary in the literature from less than 10% to over 60%. Capsular contraction or scarring around the implant, leading to firmness and distortion of the breast, can be painful and sometimes requires removal of the implant and capsule. Implant rupture may occur in as many as 5% to 10% of women, and bleeding of gel through the capsule is even more common (201). In 2006, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved silicone gel filled implants for use in women 22 years or older for cosmetic purposes and for reconstruction after breast surgery or in women with traumatic or congenital breast defects (202). The agency recommends MRI scanning 3 years after the first implant surgery and then every 2 years for the detection of implant rupture.
# Chunk 1043
59.

Veronesi U, De Cicco C, Galimberti VE, et al. A comparative study on the value of FDG-PET and sentinel node biopsy to identify occult axillary metastases. Ann Oncol 2007;18:473–478.
# Chunk 1044
4.

Previous surgical procedures, and the patient’s course following those surgical procedures, should be reviewed to identify and protect against potential complications. The patient should be asked about specific complications, such as excessive bleeding, wound infection, venous thromboembolism, peritonitis, or bowel obstruction. Prior pelvic surgery should alert the gynecologist to the possibility of distorted surgical anatomy such as adhesions or ureteral stricture from previous periureteral scarring. In such cases, it may be prudent to identify any preexisting abnormality by performing computed tomography (CT) or other imaging. Many patients may not be entirely clear about the extent of the previous surgical procedure or the details of intraoperative findings. Therefore, operative notes from previous procedures should be obtained and reviewed.
# Chunk 1045
2.

Upper endoscopy, colonoscopy, barium enema, or upper gastrointestinal studies with small bowel assessment may be of value in evaluating some patients before undergoing pelvic surgery. Because of the proximity of the female genital tract to the lower gastrointestinal tract, the rectum and sigmoid colon may be involved with benign (endometriosis or pelvic inﬂammatory disease) or malignant gynecologic conditions. Conversely, a pelvic mass could have a gastrointestinal origin such as a diverticular abscess or a mass of inﬂamed small intestines (Crohn disease) or, rarely, a gastric or pancreatic carcinoma. Any patient with gastrointestinal symptoms should be further evaluated.
# Chunk 1046
Patients who have lost less than 6% of their ideal body weight do not need preoperative nutritional intervention. However, patients who have lost more than 10% of their ideal body weight in 6 months meet the definition of severely malnourished and should be considered for preoperative intervention (11). Patients who have lost between 6% and 10% should undergo further studies to determine if preoperative intervention is needed. Laboratory assessments of albumin, transferrin, and prealbumin may be obtained in addition to the routine preoperative tests. The degree of malnutrition can in part be determined by serum concentrations of albumin, transferrin, and prealbumin. The levels of these serum proteins are greatly inﬂuenced by the patient’s level of hydration. Prealbumin has the shortest half-life, at 2 to 3 days, and levels of this protein are depressed very early in comparison with serum transferrin and albumin, which have half-lives of 8 and 20 days, respectively (12). Serum albumin is a substitute for the Prognostic Nutritional Index, which is a time-consuming calculation, in assessing malnutrition in women with gynecologic malignancies (13). A serum albumin level of 3.5 to 5.0 is in the normal range, 2.8 to 3.4 is considered to indicate mild malnutrition, 2.1 to 2.7 moderate malnutrition, and less than 2.1 severe malnutrition (14). Hypoalbuminemia is correlated with morbidity, mortality, and increased postoperative complication rates in data from the National Surgical Quality Improvement Program (15). Decisions regarding the need for nutritional support should be based on several individualized factors. These factors include the patient’s prior nutritional state, the anticipated length of time in which the patient will not be able to eat, the severity of surgery, and the likelihood of complications. The nutritional assessment should determine whether the cause of the malnutrition is increased enteral loss (malabsorption, intestinal fistula), decreased oral intake, increased nutritional requirements as a result of hypermetabolism (sepsis, malignancy), or a combination of these factors. Severe malnutrition, if not corrected, can further complicate the postoperative problem by causing altered immune function, chronic anemia, impaired wound healing, and eventually multiple organ system failure and death.
# Chunk 1047
The patient’s nutritional requirements are increased by surgery for several reasons. First, there is a period following surgery during which oral intake is not allowed or is very limited. In addition, the operation itself causes increased protein catabolism, increased energy requirements, and a negative nitrogen balance. If the surgery is uncomplicated and the patient is without food for less than 7 days, this response is limited and patients usually recover without the need for nutritional support. An adequate diet is defined as providing 75% of estimated caloric and protein needs. Therefore, if an adequate oral diet is not expected for 7 to 10 days, perioperative nutritional support may be required to avoid progressive malnutrition and associated complications (14). Perioperative nutritional support reduces operative morbidity and decreases the length of hospitalization when commenced early in the postoperative course. Patients with either normal nutritional indices or mild or moderate malnutrition, who will be undergoing surgical procedures likely to require a prolonged catabolic period of more than 7 to 10 days, should have enteral or parenteral nutrition instituted in the early postoperative period as soon as the patient is hemodynamically stable. This type of management should be strongly considered in patients undergoing pelvic exenterations, urinary diversions, or multiple enterectomies (16). Preoperative nutritional support is indicated for patients who have significant preexisting malnutrition or require major elective surgery. According to the American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition (ASPEN) guidelines, evidence-based medicine supports the use of preoperative nutritional support for 7 to 14 days in moderately to severely malnourished patients undergoing major nonemergent gastrointestinal surgery (12). A Veterans Affairs Total Parenteral Nutrition Cooperative Study found that severely malnourished patients preconditioned with total parenteral nutrition (TPN) had fewer complications than did control patients, excluding infectious complications (17). In a meta-analysis review of 22 studies of preoperative TPN use, a 10% decrease in postoperative complications occurred in TPN-supported patients (18). In a prospective trial including 108 women with ovarian cancer who underwent surgical cytoreduction, 88 patients had prealbumin levels less than 18 mg/dL and 24 had prealbumin levels less than 10 mg/dL (19). All postoperative mortality (23%) and 61.5% of all complications occurred in women with prealbumin less than 10 mg/dL. Women who received preoperative TPN and had prealbumin levels that increased to greater than 10 mg/dL did not have significantly increased complications. These findings lend support to consideration of preoperative TPN or neoadjuvant chemotherapy with interval cytoreduction when the nutritional status improves. These findings are encouraging but not supported by all studies or meta-analyses (20). If preoperative TPN is prescribed, it should be tapered and stopped at midnight before surgery, restarted 24 to 72 hours after the procedure, and continued until the patient is able to meet nutritional requirements.
# Chunk 1048
4.

Fats. Lipids in a 10% to 20% emulsion can be given as further caloric supplement and supply the essential fatty acids, linoleic acid, and α-linoleic acids. More calories can be given in the form of free fatty acids, which are the major source of energy for most peripheral tissues. When lipids are used as a major source of calories, a minimum of 50 to 150 g per day of glucose should also be given to provide a substrate for the central nervous system. Most patients can tolerate up to 2 g of fat per kilogram of weight per day, and daily dosages should not exceed4goffatper kilogram of weight per day. In critically ill patients, the lipid content should not exceed 1 g/kg/day. These lipid emulsions are isotonic and can be delivered simultaneously with the protein and carbohydrate mixture in a 3-L bag over a 24-hour infusion. In general, 30% to 50% of nonprotein calories should be supplied in lipid form. Serum triglyceride levels should be monitored to ensure that the patient can metabolize the fat.
# Chunk 1049
5.

Electrolytes, vitamins, and minerals. In addition to calories and protein, nutritional support should be maintained in terms of electrolytes, vitamins, and trace elements. Daily maintenance requirements for electrolytes are as follows: sodium, 40 to 50 mEq; potassium, 30 to 40 mEq; magnesium, 8 to 10 mEq; calcium, 2 to 5 mEq; and phosphate, 13 to 25 mmol (24). A number of vitamins and trace elements must also be supplied to ensure that the patient is eumetabolic.
# Chunk 1050
The average adult daily ﬂuid maintenance requirement is approximately 30 mL/kg/day, or 2,000 to 3,000 mL per day (26). This level is offset partially by insensible losses of 1,200 mL per day, which include losses from the lungs (600 mL), skin (400 mL), and gastrointestinal tract (200 mL). Urinary output from the kidney accounts for the remainder of the ﬂuid loss, and this output will vary depending on total body intake of water and sodium. Approximately 600 to 800 mOsm of solute are excreted by the kidneys daily. Healthy kidneys can concentrate urine up to approximately 1,200 mOsm and, therefore, the minimum output can range between 500 and 700 mL per day. The maximal urine output of the kidney can be as high as 20 L per day, as seen in patients with diabetes insipidus. In healthy individuals, the kidney adjusts output commensurate with daily ﬂuid intake.
# Chunk 1051
Ultimately, the kidney plays the most important role in ﬂuid and electrolyte balance through excretion and retention of water and solute. Circulating antidiuretic hormone and aldosterone help modulate the process. Serum osmolarity affects hypothalamic release of antidiuretic hormone and aldosterone secretion in response to renal perfusion. Under states of dehydration or hypovolemia, serum antidiuretic hormone levels increase, leading to increased resorption of water in the distal tubule of the kidney. Increased aldosterone release promotes increased sodium and water retention. The opposite occurs in states of ﬂuid excess. Individuals with normal renal function and circulating antidiuretic hormone and aldosterone levels maintain normal serum osmolarity and electrolyte composition, despite daily ﬂuctuations of ﬂuid and electrolyte intake.
# Chunk 1052
The body adjusts to higher and lower volumes of intake by changes in plasma tonicity. Alterations in plasma tonicity induce adjustments in circulating antidiuretic hormone levels, which ultimately regulate the amount of water retained in the distal tubule of the kidney. In the preoperative and the early postoperative periods, it is usually necessary to replace only sodium and potassium. Chloride is automatically replaced, concomitant with sodium and potassium, because chloride is the usual anion used to balance sodium and potassium in electrolyte solutions. There are various commercially available solutions containing 40 mmol of sodium chloride, with smaller amounts of potassium, calcium, and magnesium, designed to meet the requirements of a patient who is receiving3Lof intravenous ﬂuids per day. The daily requirement can be met by any combination of intravenous ﬂuids. For example, 2 L of D5 (5% dextrose)/0.45 normal saline (7 mEq sodium chloride each), supplemented with 20 mEq of potassium chloride, followed by 1 L of D5W (5% dextrose in water) with 20 mEq of potassium chloride, would suffice.
# Chunk 1053
Appropriate replacement of gastrointestinal ﬂuid loss depends on the source of ﬂuid loss in the gastrointestinal tract. Gastrointestinal secretions beyond the stomach and up to the colon are typically isotonic with plasma, with similar amounts of sodium, slightly lower amounts of chloride, slightly alkaline pH, and more potassium (in the range of 10 to 20 mEq/L). Under normal conditions, stool is hypotonic. However, under conditions of increased ﬂow (i.e., severe diarrhea), stool contents are isotonic with a composition similar to that of the small bowel contents. Gastric contents are typically hypotonic, with one-third the sodium of plasma, increased amounts of hydrogen ion, and low pH.
# Chunk 1054
In patients with bowel obstruction, 1 to 3 L of ﬂuid can be sequestered daily in the gastrointestinal tract. This ﬂuid should be replaced with isotonic saline or lactated Ringer’s solution. Similarly, patients with enterocutaneous fistulas or new ileostomies should receive replacement with isotonic ﬂuids.
# Chunk 1055
The laboratory workup for patients who may have preexisting ﬂuid problems should include assessment of blood hematocrit, serum chemistry, glucose, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine, urine osmolarity, and urine electrolyte levels. Serum osmolarity is mainly a function of the concentration of sodium and is given by the following equation: 2[Na+] + glucose (mg/dL)/18 + BUN (mg/dL)/2.8
# Chunk 1056
Normal serum osmolarity is typically 290 to 300 mOsm. Blood hematocrit will rise or fall inversely at a rate of 1% per 500-mL alteration of extracellular ﬂuid volume. The BUN:creatinine ratio is typically 10:1 but will rise to a ratio of greater than 20:1 under conditions of extracellular ﬂuid contraction. Under conditions of extracellular ﬂuid deficit, urine osmolarity will typically be high (>400 mOsm), whereas urine sodium concentration is low (<15 mEq/L), indicative of an attempt by the kidney to conserve sodium. Under conditions of extracellular ﬂuid excess or in cases of renal disease in which the kidney has impaired ability to retain sodium and water, urine osmolarity will be low and urine sodium will be high (>30 mEq/L). Changes in sodium can give insight into the degree of extracellular ﬂuid excess or deficit. In the average person, the serum sodium rises by 3 mmol/L for every liter of water deficit and falls by 3 mmol/L for each liter of water excess. One must be careful in making these estimates because patients with prolonged water and electrolyte loss can have low serum sodium levels and marked water deficits.
# Chunk 1057
Because sodium is the major extracellular cation, shifts in serum sodium levels are usually inversely correlated with the hydration state of the extracellular ﬂuid compartment. The pathophysiology of hyponatremia is usually expansion of body ﬂuids leading to excess total body water (27,33). Symptomatic hyponatremia usually does not occur until the serum sodium is below 120 to 125 mEq/L. The severity of the symptoms (nausea, vomiting, lethargy, seizures) is related more to the rate of change of serum sodium than to the actual serum sodium level.
# Chunk 1058
Inappropriate replacement of body salt losses with water alone will result in hyponatremia.

This situation will typically occur in patients who lose large amounts of electrolytes secondary to vomiting, nasogastric suction, diarrhea, or gastrointestinal fistulas, and who received replacement with hypotonic solutions. Simple replacement with isotonic ﬂuids and potassium will usually correct the abnormality. Rarely, rapid correction of the hyponatremia is necessary, in which case hypertonic saline (3%) can be administered. Hypertonic saline should be administered very cautiously to avoid a rapid shift in serum sodium, which will induce central nervous system dysfunction.
# Chunk 1059
Hypernatremia is an uncommon condition that can be life-threatening if severe (serum sodium greater than 160 mEq/L). The pathophysiology is extracellular ﬂuid deficit. The resultant hyperosmolar state leads to decreased water volume in cells in the central nervous system, which, if severe, can cause disorientation, seizures, intracranial bleeding, and death. The causes include excessive extrarenal water loss, which can occur in patients who have a high fever, have undergone tracheostomy in a dry environment, or have extensive thermal injuries; who have diabetes insipidus, either central or nephrogenic; and who have iatrogenic salt loading. The treatment involves correction of the underlying cause (correction of fever, humidification of the tracheostomy, administration of desmopressin for control of central diabetes insipidus) and replacement with free water either by the oral route or intravenously with D5W. As with severe hyponatremia, marked hypernatremia should be corrected slowly, no faster than 10 mEq per day, unless the patient is symptomatic from severe acute hypernatremia (35).
# Chunk 1060
Total body ﬂuid postoperative volume may be altered significantly. First, 1 mL of free water is released for each gram of fat or tissue that is catabolized and, in the postoperative period, several hundred milliliters of free water are released daily from tissue breakdown, particularly in the patient who has undergone extensive intra-abdominal dissection and who is restricted from ingesting food and ﬂuids by mouth. This free water is often retained in response to the altered levels of ADH and aldosterone. Second, ﬂuid retention is further enhanced by third spacing, or sequestration of ﬂuid in the surgical field. The development of an ileus may result in an additional 1 to3Lof ﬂuid per day being sequestered in the bowel lumen, bowel wall, and peritoneal cavity.
# Chunk 1061
In contrast to renal sodium homeostasis, the kidney lacks the capacity for retention of potassium.

In the postoperative period, the kidneys continue to excrete a minimum of 30 to 60 mEq/L of potassium daily, irrespective of the serum potassium level and total body potassium stores (27). If this potassium is not replaced, hypokalemia may develop. Tissue damage and catabolism during the first postoperative day usually result in the release of sufficient intracellular potassium to meet the daily requirements. Beyond the first postoperative day, potassium supplementation is necessary.
# Chunk 1062
Correct maintenance of ﬂuid and electrolyte balance in the postoperative period starts with the preoperative assessment, with emphasis on establishing normal ﬂuid and electrolyte parameters before surgery. Postoperatively, close monitoring of daily weight, urine output, serum hematocrit, serum electrolytes, and hemodynamic parameters will yield the necessary information to make correct adjustments in crystalloid replacement. The normal daily ﬂuid and electrolyte requirements must be met and any unusual ﬂuid and electrolyte losses, including those from the gastrointestinal tract, lungs, or skin, must be compensated. After the first few postoperative days, third-space ﬂuid begins to return to the intravascular space, and ADH and aldosterone levels revert to normal. The excess ﬂuid retained perioperatively is mobilized and excreted through the kidneys, and exogenous ﬂuid requirements decrease. Patients with inadequate cardiovascular or renal reserve are prone to ﬂuid overload during this time of third-space reabsorption, especially if intravenous ﬂuids are not appropriately reduced.
# Chunk 1063
The most common ﬂuid and electrolyte disorder in the postoperative period is ﬂuid overload. Fluid excess can occur concomitantly with normal or decreased serum sodium. Large amounts of isotonic ﬂuids are usually infused intraoperatively and postoperatively to maintain blood pressure and urine output. Because the infused ﬂuid is often isotonic with plasma, it will remain in the extracellular space. Under such conditions, serum sodium will remain within normal levels. Fluid excess with hypotonicity (decreased serum sodium) can occur if large amounts of isotonic ﬂuid losses (e.g., blood and gastrointestinal tract) are inappropriately replaced with hypotonic ﬂuids. The predisposition toward retention of free water in the immediate postoperative period compounds the problem. An increase in body weight occurs concomitantly with the ﬂuid expansion. In the patient who is not allowed anything by mouth, catabolism should induce a daily weight loss as great as 300 g per day. The patient who is gaining weight in excess of 150 g per day is in a state of ﬂuid expansion. Simple ﬂuid restriction will correct the abnormality. When necessary, diuretics can be used to increase urinary excretion.
# Chunk 1064
With metabolic acidosis, the anion gap can be increased or normal. An increase in circulating acids will consume and replace bicarbonate ion, increasing the anion gap. The causes include an increase in circulating lactic acid secondary to anaerobic glycolysis, such as that seen under conditions of poor tissue perfusion; increased ketoacids, as with cases of severe diabetes or starvation; exogenous toxins; and renal dysfunction, which leads to increased circulating sulfates and phosphates (37). The diagnosis can be established via a thorough history and measurement of serum lactate (normal <2 mmol/L), serum glucose, and renal function parameters. Metabolic acidosis in the face of a normal anion gap is usually the result of an imbalance of the ions chloride and bicarbonate, which occurs under conditions leading to excess chloride and decreased bicarbonate. Hyperchloremic acidosis can be seen in patients who underwent saline loading. Bicarbonate loss will be seen in patients with small bowel fistulas, new ileostomies, severe diarrhea, or renal tubular acidosis. In patients with marked extracellular volume expansion, which often occurs postoperatively, the relative decrease in serum sodium and bicarbonate will result in a mild acidosis. A summary of the various causes of metabolic acidosis is shown in Table 22.4.
# Chunk 1065
Although satisfactory analgesia is easily achievable with available methods, patients continue to suffer unnecessarily from postoperative pain. Studies consistently show that 25% to 50% of patients suffer moderate to severe pain in the postoperative period (38,39). There are several reasons for the existing inadequacies in pain management. First, patient expectations of pain relief are low and they are not aware of the extent of analgesia that they should expect. In a study of the perception of pain relief after surgery, 86% of patients had moderate to severe pain after surgery, but 70% felt that the pain was as severe as they expected (40). Second, there is a lack of formal physician training in pain management. This lack is epitomized by the commonly written order prescribing a range of narcotic to be given intramuscularly every 3 to 4 hours as needed, leaving pain management decisions to the nursing staff, with no attempt made to titrate the dose of the prescribed narcotic commensurate with individual patient requirements. Third, attitudes continue to be inﬂuenced by the common misconception that the use of narcotics in the postoperative period results in opioid dependence. In one review, 20% of nurses responding to a staff questionnaire expressed concern that the use of opioid analgesics during the postoperative period could cause addiction (40). Studies confirm that nurses administer less than one-fourth of the total dose of narcotic that is prescribed on an as-needed basis. To facilitate acute pain management and reduce the number of adverse outcomes, the American Society of Anesthesiologists established practice guidelines for acute pain management in the perioperative setting (41).
# Chunk 1066
Compared with analgesics administered intramuscularly or intravenously, epidural analgesia is associated with improved pulmonary function postoperatively, a lower incidence of pulmonary complications, a decrease in postoperative venous thromboembolic complications (most likely secondary to earlier ambulation), fewer gastrointestinal side effects, a lower incidence of central nervous system depression, and shorter convalescence (47). A systematic review concluded that continuous epidural anesthesia is more effective than intravenous opioid PCA in reducing postoperative pain for up to 72 hours after abdominal surgery (48). Severe respiratory depression, which occurs in less than 1% of patients, is the most serious potential complication. A lower incidence of respiratory depression occurs with the more lipophilic drugs such as fentanyl, which is quickly absorbed within the spinal cord and is less likely to diffuse to the central nervous system respiratory control centers. Pruritus, nausea, and urinary retention are common but can be managed easily and usually are of little clinical significance. Cost is perhaps the main and most limiting drawback of epidural analgesia.
# Chunk 1067
Infections are a major source of morbidity in the postoperative period. Risk factors for infectious morbidity include the absence of perioperative antibiotic prophylaxis, contamination of the surgical field from infected tissues or from spillage of large bowel contents, an immunocompromised host, poor nutrition, chronic and debilitating severe illness, poor surgical technique, and preexisting focal or systemic infection. Sources of postoperative infection can include the lung, urinary tract, surgical site, pelvic sidewall, vaginal cuff, abdominal wound, and sites of indwelling intravenous catheters. Early identification and treatment of infection will result in the best outcome for these potentially serious complications.
# Chunk 1068
Although infectious morbidity is an inevitable complication of surgery, the incidence of infections can be decreased by the appropriate use of simple preventive measures. In cases that involve transection of the large bowel, spillage of fecal contents inevitably occurs. A thorough preoperative mechanical and antibiotic bowel preparation in combination with systemic antibiotic prophylaxis will help decrease the incidence of postoperative pelvic and abdominal infections in these patients. The surgeon can further decrease the risk of postoperative infections by using meticulous surgical technique. Blood and necrotic tissue are excellent media for the growth of aerobic and anaerobic organisms. In cases in which there is higher-than-usual potential for serum and blood to collect in spaces that were contaminated by bacterial spill, closed-suction drainage may reduce the risk of infection. Antibiotic therapy, rather than prophylaxis, should be initiated during surgery in patients who have frank intra-abdominal infection or pus. Elective surgical procedures should be postponed in patients who have preoperative infections. In an epidemiologic study conducted by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the incidence of nosocomial surgical infections ranged from 4.3% in community hospitals to 7% in municipal hospitals (77). Data confirmed this, with an incidence of 2% to 5% (78). Urinary tract infections accounted for approximately 40% of these nosocomial infections. Infections of the skin and wound accounted for approximately one-third of the infections, and respiratory tract infections accounted for approximately 16%. In patients who had any type of infection before surgery, the risk of infection at the surgical wound site increased fourfold. Rates of infection were higher in older patients, in patients with increased length of surgery, and in those with increased length of hospital stay before surgery. The relative risk was three times higher in patients with a community-acquired infection before surgery. These community-acquired infections included infections of the urinary and respiratory tracts.
# Chunk 1069
The assessment of a febrile surgical patient should include a review of the patient’s history with regard to risk factors. Both the history and the physical examination should focus on the potential sites of infection (Table 22.9). The examination should include inspection of the pharynx, a thorough pulmonary examination, percussion of the kidneys to assess for costovertebral angle tenderness, inspection and palpation of the abdominal incision, examination of sites of intravenous catheters, and an examination of the extremities for evidence of deep venous thrombosis or thrombophlebitis. In gynecologic patients, an appropriate workup may include inspection and palpation of the vaginal cuff for signs of induration, tenderness, or purulent drainage. A pelvic examination should be performed to identify a mass consistent with a pelvic hematoma or abscess and to look for signs of pelvic cellulitis.
# Chunk 1070
Patients with fever in the early postoperative period should have an aggressive pulmonary toilet, including incentive spirometry (80). If the fever persists beyond 72 hours postoperatively, additional laboratory and radiologic data may be obtained. The evaluation may include complete and differential white blood cell counts and a urinalysis. In one study, results from fever workups included positive blood cultures in 9.7% of patients, a positive urine culture in 18.8%, and a positive chest x-ray in 14%. These data support the need for a tailored workup based on the patient’s clinical picture (82). Blood cultures can be obtained but will most likely be of little yield unless the patient has a high fever (102◦F). In patients with costovertebral angle tenderness, intravenous pyelogram may be indicated to rule out the presence of ureteral damage or obstruction from surgery, particularly in the absence of laboratory evidence of urinary tract infection. Patients who have persistent fevers without a clear localizing source should undergo CT scanning of the abdomen and pelvis to rule out the presence of an intra-abdominal abscess. If fever persists in patients who had gastrointestinal surgery, a barium enema or upper gastrointestinal studies with small bowel assessment may be indicated late in the course of the first postoperative week to rule out an anastomotic leak or fistula.
# Chunk 1071
Symptoms of a urinary tract infection may include urinary frequency, urgency, and dysuria. In patients with pyelonephritis, other symptoms include headache, malaise, nausea, and vomiting. A urinary tract infection is diagnosed on the basis of microbiology and is defined as the growth of 105 organisms per milliliter of urine cultured. Most infections are caused by coliform bacteria, with Escherichia coli being the most frequent pathogen. Other pathogens include Klebsiella, Proteus, and Enterobacter species. Staphylococcus organisms are the causative bacteria in fewer than 10% of cases.
# Chunk 1072
Phlebitis Historically, intravenous catheter–related infections were common; the reported incidence is 25% to 35% in the 1980s (93). Because the incidence of catheter-related phlebitis increases significantly after 72 hours, intravenous catheters should be changed at least every 3 days according to the CDC (94). The institution of intravenous therapy teams decreased the incidence of phlebitis by as much as 50% in one study (95). In combination, these measures led to a dramatic decrease in peripheral catheter site infection.
# Chunk 1073
The intravenous site should be inspected daily, and the catheter should be removed if there is any associated pain, redness, or induration. Phlebitis can occur even with close surveillance of the intravenous site. In one study, more than 50% of the cases of phlebitis became evident more than 12 hours after discontinuation of intravenous catheters (96). Less than one-third of patients had symptoms related to the intravenous catheter site 24 hours before the diagnosis of phlebitis.
# Chunk 1074
Intra-abdominal and The development of an abscess in the surgical field or elsewhere in the abdominal cavity is Pelvic Abscess an uncommon complication after a gynecologic surgery. It is likely to occur in contaminated cases in which the surgical site is not adequately drained or as a secondary complication of hematomas. The causative pathogens in patients who have intra-abdominal abscesses are usually polymicrobial in nature. The aerobes most commonly identified include E. coli, Klebsiella, Streptococcus, Proteus, and Enterobacter. Anaerobic isolates are common, usually from the Bacteroides group. These pathogens arise mainly from the vaginal tract but can be derived from the gastrointestinal tract, particularly when the colon was entered at the time of surgery.
# Chunk 1075
Intra-abdominal abscess is sometimes difficult to diagnose. The evolving clinical picture is often one of persistent febrile episodes with a rising white blood cell count. Findings on abdominal examination may be equivocal. If an abscess is located deep in the pelvis, it may be palpable by pelvic or rectal examination. For abscesses above the pelvis, the diagnosis will depend on radiologic confirmation.
# Chunk 1076
Ultrasonography can occasionally delineate ﬂuid collections in the upper abdomen and in the pelvis. Bowel gas interference makes visualization of ﬂuid collections or abscesses in the midabdomen difficult to distinguish. Computed tomography scanning is more sensitive and specific for diagnosing intra-abdominal abscesses and often is the radiologic procedure of choice.
# Chunk 1077
Standard therapy for intra-abdominal abscess is evacuation and drainage combined with appropriate parenteral administration of antibiotics. Abscesses located low in the pelvis, particularly in the area of the vaginal cuff, can be reached through a vaginal approach. In many patients, the ability to drain an abscess by placement of a drain percutaneously under CT guidance obviated the need for surgical exploration. With CT guidance, a pigtail catheter is placed into an abscess cavity via transperineal, transrectal, or transvaginal approaches. The catheter is left in place until drainage decreases. Transperineal and transrectal drainage of deep pelvic abscesses is successful in 90% to 93% of patients, obviating the need for surgical management (99,100).
# Chunk 1078
The diagnosis is often difficult to make early in the disease course. Most patients with necrotizing fasciitis develop erythema, edema, and pain, which in the early stages of the disease is disproportionately greater than that expected from the degree of cellulitis present and characteristically extends beyond the border of erythema (105). Late in the course of the infection, the involved skin may be anesthetized secondary to necrosis of superficial nerves. Temperature abnormalities, both hyperthermia and hypothermia, are concomitant with the release of bacterial toxins and with bacterial sepsis (104). The involved skin is initially tender, erythematous, and warm. Edema develops, and the erythema spreads diffusely, fading into normal skin, characteristically without distinct margins or induration. Subcutaneous microvascular thrombosis induces ischemia in the skin, which becomes cyanotic and blistered. As necrosis develops, the skin becomes gangrenous and may slough spontaneously (104). Most patients will have leukocytosis and acid-base abnormalities. Subcutaneous gas may develop, which can be identified by palpation and by radiography. The finding of subcutaneous gas by radiography is often indicative of clostridial infection, although it is not a specific finding and may be caused by other organisms. These organisms include Enterobacter, Pseudomonas, anaerobic streptococci, and Bacteroides, which, unlike clostridial infections, spare the muscles underlying the affected area. A tissue biopsy specimen for Gram stain and aerobic and anaerobic culture should be obtained from the necrotic center of the lesion to identify the etiologic organisms (105). Although necrotizing fasciitis often is diagnosed during surgery, a high index of suspicion and liberal use of frozen-section biopsy can provide an early life-saving diagnosis and minimize morbidity (104).
# Chunk 1079
Traditionally, mechanical bowel preparation was advised before abdominal surgery, especially if colonic surgery was anticipated. Despite the infrequent need for colonic surgery (or injury) when performing gynecologic surgery, bowel preparation is part of the standard practice for many gynecologists. Advantages of mechanical bowel preparation include reduction of gastrointestinal contents, which facilitates the surgical procedure by allowing more room in the abdomen and pelvis. If a rectosigmoid colon enterotomy occurs, the mechanical bowel preparation eliminates formed stool and reduces the risk of bacterial contamination, thus reducing infectious complications.
# Chunk 1080
Randomized clinical trials questioned the need for mechanical bowel preparation in colonic surgery (116). Although somewhat controversial, a meta-analyses including almost 5,000 patients showed no statistical difference between the groups for anastomotic leakage (p = 0.46), pelvic or abdominal abscess (p = 0.75), and wound sepsis (p = 0.11). The use of different mechanical regimes did not inﬂuence primary and secondary outcomes. The authors concluded that this analysis demonstrates that any kind of mechanical bowel preparation should be omitted before colonic surgery. The main limitation concerned rectal surgery for which the limited data preclude any interpretation.
# Chunk 1081
Mechanical bowel preparation may be accomplished as presented in (Table 22.10). The traditional use of laxatives and enemas requires at least 12 to 24 hours and causes moderate abdominal distention and crampy pain. Randomized trials comparing traditional mechanical bowel preparation (magnesium citrate and enemas) with oral gut lavage (PEG electrolyte solution, GoLYTELY) found that the use of approximately 4 L of GoLYTELY (administered until the rectal efﬂuent is clear) provides more complete, faster, and more comfortable bowel preparation (118). However, the ingestion of 4 L of ﬂuid is problematic for many patients, so magnesium citrate may be preferable when mechanical preparation is to be used.
# Chunk 1082
Ileus Following open abdominal or pelvic surgery, most patients experience some degree of intestinal ileus. The exact mechanism by which this arrest and disorganization of gastrointestinal motility occurs is unknown, but it appears to be associated with the opening of the peritoneal cavity and is aggravated by manipulation of the intestinal tract and prolonged surgical procedures. Infection, peritonitis, and electrolyte disturbances may result in ileus. For most patients undergoing common gynecologic operations, the degree of ileus is minimal, and gastrointestinal function returns relatively rapidly, allowing the resumption of oral intake within a few days of surgery. Patients who have persistently diminished bowel sounds, abdominal distention, and nausea and vomiting require further evaluation and more aggressive management. Patients with symptoms of ileus or small bowel obstruction who underwent minimally invasive surgery are a different matter. Minimally invasive surgery should result in a daily improvement in GI function. An “ileus” in the case of minimally invasive surgery more likely represents GI injury, which should be evaluated immediately with a CT scan using GI contrast.
# Chunk 1083
Ileus is usually manifested by abdominal distention and should be evaluated by physical examination. Pertinent points of the abdominal examination include assessment of the quality of bowel sounds and palpation in search of distension, masses, tenderness, or rebound. The possibility that the patient’s signs and symptoms may be associated with a more serious intestinal obstruction or intestinal complication (such as a perforation) must be considered. Pelvic examination should be performed to evaluate the possibility of a pelvic abscess or hematoma that may contribute to the ileus. Abdominal radiography to evaluate the abdomen in the ﬂat (supine) position and in the upright position will aid in the diagnosis of an ileus. The most common radiographic findings include dilated loops of small and large bowel and air-ﬂuid levels while the patient is in the upright position. Sometimes, massive dilation of the colon or stomach may be noted. The remote possibility of distal colonic obstruction suggested by a dilated cecum should be excluded by rectal examination, proctosigmoidoscopy, colonoscopy, or barium enema. In the postoperative gynecology patient, especially in the upright position, the abdominal x-ray may show free air. This common finding following surgery lasts 7 to 10 days in some instances and is not indicative of a perforated viscus in most patients.
# Chunk 1084
2.

Fluid and electrolyte replacement must be adequate to keep the patient well hydrated and in metabolic balance. Significant amounts of third-space ﬂuid loss occur in the bowel wall, the bowel lumen, and the peritoneal cavity during the acute episode. Gastrointestinal ﬂuid losses from the stomach may lead to metabolic alkalosis and depletion of other electrolytes as well. Careful monitoring of serum chemistry levels and appropriate replacement are necessary.
# Chunk 1085
3.

Most cases of severe ileus begin to improve over a period of several days. This improvement is recognizable by a reduction in the abdominal distention, return of normal bowel sounds, and passage of ﬂatus or stool. Repeat abdominal radiographs should be obtained as necessary for further monitoring.
# Chunk 1086
5.

If a patient shows no evidence of improvement during the first 48 to 72 hours of medical management, other causes of ileus should be sought. Such cases may include ureteral injury, peritonitis from pelvic infection, unrecognized gastrointestinal tract injury with peritoneal spill, or ﬂuid and electrolyte abnormalities such as hypokalemia. With persistent ileus, the use of water-soluble upper gastrointestinal contrast studies (CT scan with oral contrast) may assist in the resolution, but prospective randomized data regarding this maneuver are lacking.
# Chunk 1087
Small Bowel Obstruction Obstruction of the small bowel following major gynecologic surgery occurs in approximately 1% to 2% of patients (123). The most common cause of small bowel obstruction is adhesions to the operative site. If the small bowel becomes adherent in a twisted position, partial or complete obstruction may result from distention, ileus, or bowel wall edema. Less common causes of postoperative small bowel obstruction include entrapment of the small bowel into an incisional hernia and an unrecognized defect in the small bowel or large bowel mesentery. Early in its clinical course, a postoperative small bowel obstruction may exhibit signs and symptoms identical to those of ileus. Initial conservative management as outlined for the treatment of ileus is appropriate. Because of the potential for mesenteric vascular occlusion and resulting ischemia or perforation, worsening symptoms of abdominal pain, progressive distention, fever, leukocytosis, or acidosis should be evaluated carefully because immediate surgery may be required.
# Chunk 1088
1.

Further evaluation after several days of conservative management may be necessary. Evaluation of the gastrointestinal tract with barium enema, an upper gastrointestinal study, or a CT scan with small bowel assessment is appropriate. In most cases, complete obstruction is not documented, although a narrowing (“transition point”) or tethering of the segment of small bowel may indicate the site of the problem.
# Chunk 1089
Colonic Obstruction Postoperative colonic obstruction following surgery for most gynecologic conditions is exceedingly rare. It is associated with a pelvic malignancy, which in most cases was known at the time of the initial operation. Advanced ovarian carcinoma is the most common cause of colonic obstruction in postoperative gynecologic surgery patients, and it is caused by extrinsic impingement on the colon by the pelvic malignancy. Intrinsic colonic lesions may be undetected, especially in a patient with some other benign gynecologic condition. When colonic obstruction is manifested by abdominal distention and abdominal radiography reveals a dilated colon and enlarging cecum, further evaluation of the large bowel is required by barium enema or colonoscopy. Dilation of the cecum to more than 10 to 12 cm in diameter as viewed by abdominal radiography requires immediate evaluation and surgical decompression by performing colectomy or colostomy. Surgery should be performed as soon as the obstruction is documented. Conservative management of colonic obstruction is not appropriate because the complication of colonic perforation has an exceedingly high mortality rate. In patients who are too ill to undergo surgery, the interventional radiologist may be able to place a cecostomy tube or the gastroenterologist may place a colonic stent (124).
# Chunk 1090
Diarrhea Episodes of diarrhea often occur following abdominal and pelvic surgery as the gastrointestinal tract returns to its normal function and motility. Prolonged and multiple episodes may represent a pathologic process such as impending small bowel obstruction, colonic obstruction, or pseudomembranous colitis. Excessive amounts of diarrhea should be evaluated by abdominal radiography and stool samples tested for the presence of ova and parasites, bacterial culture, and Clostridium difficile toxin. Proctoscopy and colonoscopy may be advisable in severe cases. Evidence of intestinal obstruction should be managed as outlined previously. Infectious causes of diarrhea should be managed with the appropriate antibiotics and ﬂuid and electrolyte replacement. C. difficile–associated pseudomembranous colitis may result from exposure to any antibiotic. Discontinuation of these antibiotics (unless they are needed to treat another severe infection) is advisable, along with the institution of appropriate therapy. Oral metronidazole is a suitable agent for instituting therapy and is less expensive than vancomycin. Therapy should be continued until the diarrhea abates, and several weeks of oral therapy may be required to obtain complete resolution of the pseudomembranous colitis.
# Chunk 1091
Fistula Gastrointestinal fistulas are relatively rare following gynecologic surgery. They are most often associated with malignancy, prior radiation therapy, intestinal resection with anastomosis, or surgical injury to the large or small bowel that was improperly repaired or unrecognized. Signs and symptoms of gastrointestinal fistula are often similar to those of small bowel obstruction or ileus, except that fever is usually a more prominent component of the patient’s symptoms. When fever is associated with gastrointestinal dysfunction postoperatively, evaluation should include early assessment of the gastrointestinal tract to confirm its continuity. When fistula is suspected, the use of water-soluble gastrointestinal contrast material is advised to avoid the complication of barium peritonitis. Evaluation with abdominal pelvic CT scan may assist in identification of a fistula and associated abscess. Recognition of an intraperitoneal gastrointestinal leak or fistula formation usually requires immediate surgery, unless the fistula drained spontaneously through the abdominal wall or vaginal cuff.
# Chunk 1092
An enterocutaneous fistula arising from the small bowel and draining spontaneously through the abdominal incision may be managed successfully with medical therapy. Therapy should include nasogastric decompression, replacement of intravenous ﬂuids as well as TPN, and appropriate antibiotics to treat an associated mixed bacterial infection. If the infection is under control and there are no other signs of peritonitis, the surgeon may consider allowing potential resolution of the fistula over a period of up to 2 weeks. Some authors suggested the use of somatostatin to decrease intestinal tract secretion and allow earlier healing of the fistula. In some cases, the fistula will close spontaneously with this mode of management. If the enterocutaneous fistula does not close with conservative medical management, surgical correction with resection, bypass, or reanastomosis will be necessary.
# Chunk 1093
Heparin dosage is adjusted to maintain activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) levels at a therapeutic level 1.5 to 2.5 times the control value. Initial APTT should be measured after 6 hours of heparin administration and the dose adjusted as necessary. Patients having sub-therapeutic APTT levels in the first 24 hours have a 15-fold increased risk of recurrent VTE when compared to patients who are adequately anticoagulated. Patients should be managed aggressively using intravenous heparin to achieve prompt anticoagulation. A weight-based nomogram is helpful in achieving a therapeutic APTT level (Table 22.12) (147). Oral anticoagulant (warfarin) administration may be started on the first day of heparin infusion. The international normalized ration (INR) should be monitored daily until a therapeutic level is achieved (2.0 to 3.0 times normal value). The change in the INR resulting from warfarin administration often precedes the anticoagulant effect by approximately 2 days, during which time low protein C levels are associated with a transient hypercoagulable state. Therefore, heparin should be administered until the INR was maintained in a therapeutic range for at least 2 days, confirming proper warfarin dose. Intravenous heparin may be discontinued in 5 days if an adequate IRN level is established.
# Chunk 1094
Diabetes Mellitus According to the American Diabetes Association, 9.3 million American women, or 10.2% of all women older than 20 years, suffer from diabetes (149). Approximately 50% of individuals with diabetes mellitus (DM) will require surgery during their lives (150). Many of these procedures are a direct result of the complications of DM: retinopathy, nephropathy, large-and small-vessel occlusive disease, and coronary artery disease. It is the direct effect of DM on the end organs that determines the risk of surgery, rather than the type or duration of surgery, or the management of the condition itself. Diabetes mellitus is a complicated medical disorder of glucose metabolism that is related to a lack of production of, or resistance to, insulin.
# Chunk 1095
Fasting glucose ≥126 mg/dL (in which fasting is defined as no food intake for 8 hours), 3. Two-hour oral glucose tolerance test of 75 g, with serum glucose ≥200 mg/dL, or 4. Hemoglobin A1c ≥6.5%.
# Chunk 1096
Diabetes is associated with increased perioperative infections (156). Preoperative evaluation should include examination of the skin and urine sediment to detect asymptomatic infection. Wound infections, skin infections, pneumonia, and urinary tract infections account for two-thirds of the postoperative complications in patients with diabetes (151). There is a known predisposition for patients with DM to have increased colonization by methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, increased infections by gram-negative and staphylococcal bacteria, and an increased incidence of gram-negative and group B streptococcal sepsis (157–159). Seven percent of individuals with diabetes will have postoperative gram-negative sepsis, a rate approximately seven times higher than that of the nondiabetic population. These complications occur more often in patients with poor glucose control, probably caused by impaired leukocyte function in the presence of hyperglycemia (160,161). Individuals with DM have an increased risk of wound dehiscence and wound infection, possibly related to an impaired immune function, with changes in phagocytosis, cell-mediated immunity, and intracellular bactericidal activity (162). Autonomic neuropathy was documented in patients with DM, and these autonomic impairments can lead to intraoperative hypotension, cardiac arrhythmias, sudden death and abnormal motility of the esophagus, stomach, and small intestine (151). Peripheral sensory and motor neuropathies may or may not be present. The presence of any manifestations of autonomic neuropathy intra-operatively should prompt close monitoring of the affected organ system in the postoperative period.
# Chunk 1097
Postoperative Management Postoperative monitoring of patients with DM includes careful monitoring of serum glucose levels. If an intravenous insulin regimen is used, blood glucose levels must be checked every 1 to 2 hours. If a sliding-scale insulin administration is used, blood glucose should be checked and documented approximately every 6 hours until the patient is eating and stable on her preoperative regimen. The serum glucose level should be maintained at less than 250 mg/dL, and ideally below 140 mg/dL when fasting and below 180 mg/dL with random draws (165,166). For type 2 diabetics, oral hypoglycemics can be restarted when the patient resumes eating, except with metformin, which requires normal renal and liver function (153).
# Chunk 1098
Diffuse toxic goiter (Grave’s disease) is the most common cause of hyperthyroidism and results from abnormal stimulation of the thyroid gland by antithyroid antibodies. Other causes of hyperthyroidism include multinodular goiter, excess thyroid hormone, or thyroiditis. Any signs or symptoms suggestive of weight loss, tachycardia, atrial fibrillation, goiter, or proptosis should initiate a more extensive laboratory evaluation of thyroid function. Total thyroxin, free triiodothyronine (T3), free thyroxin (T4), and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) tests are useful in diagnosis. In hyperthyroidism, the free T4 level will be elevated, and the TSH level will be suppressed (154). A new diagnosis of hyperthyroidism necessitates postponement of elective surgery until adequate treatment with antithyroid medication is received because of the risk of thyroid storm. Thyroid storm is associated with mortality of up to 40% (168). Stable thyroid conditions do not require any special preoperative treatments or tests. Ideally, an euthyroid state should be maintained for 3 months before elective surgery. In emergent situations, beta-blockers can be used to counter sympathomimetic drive such as palpitations, diaphoresis, and anxiety. Antithyroid medications such as propylthiouracil (PTU)or radioactive iodine do not render patients euthyroid quickly enough for urgent surgery. Radioactive iodine requires 6 to 18 weeks to establish a euthyroid state (154). When thyroid dysfunction is corrected and maintained for several months, elective surgery can proceed without additional perioperative monitoring. Antithyroid medications should be resumed with return of bowel function. If a prolonged delay in resumption of oral intake is encountered, PTU and methimazole can be administered rectally (169). When time does not permit establishment of a euthyroid state preoperatively, oral administration of PTU and a beta-blocker can be implemented for 2 weeks before surgery, and with careful monitoring, optimal results can be achieved (170). Alternatively, oral beta-blockers, glucocorticoids, and sodium iopanoate can be used for 5 days, followed by surgery on day 6 (169). In the emergent setting, close monitoring of the patient for tachycardia, arrhythmias, and hypertension is necessary. Beta-blockers can control these symptoms until definitive therapy can be initiated after recovery from surgery.
# Chunk 1099
Any signs suggestive of the development of thyroid storm—including hemodynamic instability, tachycardia, arrhythmias, hyperreﬂexia, diarrhea, fever, delirium, or congestive heart failure— mandate transfer to an intensive care setting for optimal monitoring and management in consultation with a medical endocrinologist. Such thyroid instability can be triggered by underlying infection, which requires diagnosis and treatment to facilitate management of this medical emergency. The mortality rate from thyroid storm is reportedly between 10% and 75% (169). Treatment of thyroid storm consists of beta-blockers, thioamides, iodine, iodinated contrast agents, and corticosteroids (151). Aspirin should not be given for fever in the patient with thyroid storm because it may interfere with the protein binding of T4 and T3, resulting in increased free serum concentrations (151).
# Chunk 1100
The incidence of hypothyroidism is approximately 1% in the adult population, and 5% in adults older than 50 years (154). In women older than 60 years, the incidence of hypothyroidism may approach 6% (168). Hypothyroidism is 10 times more common in women than in men (154). Many such cases are secondary to previous antithyroid therapy (radioactive iodine or thyroidectomy) for hyperthyroidism. The most common primary cause of hypothyroidism is Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, an autoimmune condition (154). A history of lethargy, cold intolerance, lassitude, weight gain, ﬂuid retention, constipation, dry skin, hoarseness, periorbital edema, and brittle hair can be indicative of inadequate thyroid function. In this setting, physical findings of increased relaxation phase of deep tendon reﬂexes, cardiomegaly, pleural or pericardial effusions, or peripheral edema should stimulate further investigation of thyroid function by assessment of TSH and free T4 levels. Hypothyroidism decreases cardiac output by 30% to 50% as a result of decreased stroke volume and heart rate (171). Hyponatremia may be associated with hypothyroidism because of the inability of the kidneys to excrete water (171). When elective surgery is planned for severely hypothyroid patients, surgery should be postponed until thyroid replacement therapy is initiated (154). In patients with mild or moderate hypothyroidism, the delay of surgery is controversial (154).
# Chunk 1101
In the immediate postoperative setting, T4 therapy can be held for 5 to 7 days while waiting for return of bowel function because the half-life of circulating T4 is approximately 5 to 9 days (170). If more than 5 to 7 days of decreased bowel function are expected, T4 can be given by the intramuscular or intravenous route at approximately 80% of the oral dose (171,172).
# Chunk 1102
For minor surgical stress, such as colonoscopy, the glucocorticoid target is approximately 25 mg of hydrocortisone equivalent on the day of the procedure (173). For moderate surgical stress, for example, open cholecystectomy, the glucocorticoid target is 50 to 75 mg of hydrocortisone equivalent on the day of the procedure and tapered quickly for 1 to 2 days (173). The patient should receive her normal daily dose preoperatively, followed by 50 mg of hydrocortisone intravenously administered intraoperatively. For major surgical stress, such as liver resection, the glucocorticoid target range is 100 to 150 mg hydrocortisone equivalent on the day of the procedure, tapering rapidly over the next 1 to 2 days to the usual dosage (173). The patient should receive her normal daily dose preoperatively.
# Chunk 1103
On physical examination, the presence of findings such as hypertension, jugular venous distention, laterally displaced point of maximum impulse, irregular pulse, third heart sound, pulmonary rales, heart murmurs, peripheral edema, or vascular bruits should prompt a more complete evaluation. Laboratory evaluation of patients with known or suspected heart disease should include a blood count and serum chemistry analysis. Patients with heart disease tolerate anemia poorly. Serum sodium and potassium levels are particularly important in patients taking diuretics and digitalis. Blood urea nitrogen and creatinine values provide information on renal function and hydration status. Assessment of blood glucose levels may detect undiagnosed DM. Chest radiography and electrocardiography are mandatory as part of the preoperative evaluation, and the results may be particularly helpful when compared with those of previous studies.
# Chunk 1104
Coronary Artery Disease Coronary artery disease is a major risk factor for patients undergoing abdominal surgery. In an adult population without a prior history of myocardial infarction, the incidence of myocardial infarction following surgery is 0.1% to 0.7% (175). In patients who had a prior myocardial infarction, the reinfarction rate is 2.8% to 7% (176). The risk of reinfarction is inversely proportional to the length of time between infarction and surgery. At 3 months or less, the risk of reinfarction is 5.7%, and from 3 to 6 months, the rate falls to 2.3%. Six months after myocardial infarction, the reinfarction rate is 1.5% (175). Careful perioperative management can lower the reinfarction rate in patients who had recent infarctions. Perioperative myocardial infarction is associated with a mortality rate of 26% to 70% (177).
# Chunk 1105
Table 22.15 Clinical Predictors of Increased Perioperative Cardiovascular Risk

Unstable coronary syndromes: acute (≤7 days) or recent (7 < days ≤ 1 month) MI, unstable or severe angina Decompensated congestive heart failure Significant arrhythmias (high-grade AV block, symptomatic ventricular arrhythmias, supraventricular arrhythmias with uncontrolled ventricular rate) Severe valvular disease
# Chunk 1106
Postoperative myocardial infarction is often difficult to diagnose. Chest pain, which is present in 90% of nonsurgical patients with myocardial infarction, may be present in only 50% of patients with postoperative infarction because myocardial pain may be masked by coexisting surgical pain and the use of analgesics (175). It is important to maintain a high level of suspicion for postoperative infarction in patients with coronary artery disease. The presence of arrhythmia, congestive heart failure, hypotension, dyspnea, or elevations of pulmonary artery pressure may indicate infarction and should prompt a thorough cardiac investigation and electrocardiographic monitoring. Measurement of creatinine phosphokinase myocardial band (CPK-MB) isoenzyme and troponin T levels are the most sensitive and specific indicators of myocardial infarction, and assessments should be obtained for all patients suspected of myocardial infarction (189).
# Chunk 1107
Most patients benefit from supplemental oxygen in the postoperative period, although special care should be exercised in patients with COPD. Oxygenation can easily be monitored by pulse oximetry. Anemia is detrimental because of loss of oxygen-carrying capacity and resultant tachycardia and should, therefore, be carefully corrected in high-risk patients. Although transfusion criteria are not absolute, all patients with a hemoglobin less than 6 mg/dL, and hemoglobin of 6 to 10 mg/dL with significant cardiac risk factors should be offered blood transfusion (193).
# Chunk 1108
Hypertension Patients with controlled essential hypertension have no increased risk of perioperative cardiac morbidity or mortality (208). Patients with concomitant heart disease are at elevated risk and should be completely evaluated by a cardiologist preoperatively. Laboratory studies should include an ECG, chest radiography, blood count, urinalysis, and serum electrolytes and creatinine measurement. Antihypertensive medications should be continued perioperatively. Beta-blockers should be continued, parenterally if necessary, to avoid rebound tachycardia, hypercontractility, and hypertension. Clonidine may cause significant rebound hypertension if withdrawn acutely. Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor agents and angiotensin II receptor antagonists are associated with increased intraoperative hypotension and perioperative renal dysfunction possibly resulting from a hypovolumic state. It may be prudent to withhold these agents on the morning of surgery and resume them postoperatively when good renal function and euvolumia is confirmed (155).
# Chunk 1109
Anemia Moderate anemia is not in itself a contraindication to surgery because it can be corrected by transfusion. If possible, surgery should be postponed until the cause of the anemia can be identified and the anemia corrected without resorting to transfusion. By tradition, anesthetic and surgical practice recommended a hemoglobin level of greater than 10 g/dL or a hematocrit of greater than 30%. Data suggest a lower tolerance for pre-and intraoperative transfusion threshold to improve intra-and postoperative morbidity and mortality (216–219). It remains that no universal “transfusion threshold” is agreed upon, but that a hematocrit of less than 24% should prompt strong consideration (219). The circulating blood volume provides oxygen-carrying capacity and tissue oxygenation. Usually this capacity is reﬂected by the hemoglobin level and hematocrit. Under certain circumstances this is not the case. After an acute blood loss or before plasma expansion by extracellular ﬂuid occurs, hematocrit measurements may be normal despite a low circulating blood volume. Conversely, overhydration may result in low hematocrit and hemoglobin levels despite adequate red blood cell mass.
# Chunk 1110
Disorders of the coagulation cascade often are diagnosed through a personal or family history of excessive bleeding during minor surgery, childbirth, or menses. Many women with menorrhagia are referred for surgical intervention and require a thorough preoperative evaluation for possible inherited disorders of hemostasis, such as factor VIII (hemophilia), factor IX (Christmas disease), factor XI deficiencies, and von Willebrand disease. Von Willebrand disease is the most common hereditary bleeding disorder, with prevalence in the general population of roughly 1% (231). Seventy percent to 90% of patients with von Willebrand disease have menorrhagia (231). Identified women can be treated effectively with desmopressin nasal spray, avoiding unanticipated or excessive bleeding during surgery (232). In the absence of a genetic diagnosis, the diagnosis of von Willebrand disease is difficult and involves a combination of clinical and laboratory assessments, including von Willebrand factor antigen and von Willebrand factor functional activity or ristocetin cofactor assay (232). Physiologic ﬂuctuations occur with von Willebrand factor levels, requiring repeat testing and consultation or referral to a hematologist. It is recommended that women presenting with menorrhagia without obvious pelvic abnormalities should be routinely screened for inherited bleeding disorders before undergoing invasive procedures.
# Chunk 1111
Packed red blood cells, which may be stored for several weeks, are used for most postoperative transfusions. Most clotting factors are stable for long periods. The exceptions are factors V and VIII, which decrease to 15% and 50% of normal, respectively. Most hematologic problems observed in the postoperative period are related to perioperative bleeding and blood component replacement. Although the primary cause of the bleeding is usually lack of surgical hemostasis, other factors, including deranged coagulation, may compound the problem. Such coagulopathy can result from massive transfusion (less than one blood volume) and is thought to be caused by dilution of platelets and labile coagulation factors by platelet-and factor-poor packed red blood cells (PRBCs), fibrinolysis, and disseminated intravascular coagulation.
# Chunk 1112
β2-adrenergic agonists remain the first-line drugs for acute asthma attacks. These drugs, inhaled four to six times daily, rapidly relax smooth muscle in the airways and are effective for up to 6 hours. Studies of beta2 agonists in chronic asthma failed to show any inﬂuence of these agents on the inﬂammatory component of asthma. β2 agonists are recommended for short-term relief of bronchospasm (“rescue inhalers”) or as first-line treatment for patients with very infrequent symptoms or symptoms provoked solely by exercise (239).
# Chunk 1113
In patients with severe COPD, maximum improvement in airﬂow limitation can be achieved with a therapeutic trial of high-dose oral corticosteroids followed by a 2-week trial of high-dose inhaled steroid (beclomethasone 1.5 mg per day or the equivalent) in addition to inhaled bronchodilator therapy. Ideally, oral and inhaled steroid therapy should be initiated 1 to 2 weeks preoperatively. Inhaled steroids, in particular, address the inﬂammatory component of COPD. Oral steroid therapy initiated preoperatively should be maintained throughout the perioperative period and then tapered postoperatively. Beta-adrenergic agonist therapy can be initiated at least 72 hours preoperatively and is beneficial in patients who demonstrate either clinical or spirometric improvement on bronchodilators.
# Chunk 1114
Clinically, ARDS passes through several stages. Initially, patients develop tachypnea and dyspnea with no remarkable findings on clinical evaluation or on chest x-ray. Chest x-rays eventually reveal bilateral diffuse pulmonary infiltrates. As lung compliance becomes impaired, functional residual capacity, tidal volume, and vital capacity decrease. The PaO2 decreases and, characteristically, increases only marginally with oxygen supplementation. An attempt should be made to maintain the arterial oxygen level above 90%. This may be achievable initially by administering oxygen by mask. For patients with severe hypoxemia, endotracheal intubation with positive-pressure ventilation should be instituted. Traditionally, the goal was to maintain normal arterial gases, with increased minute ventilation and pressure as needed to maintain these, with little insight into the long-term repercussions that this modality employs. Data over the past 5 to 10 years show that “normal” or increased tidal volumes and pressures are linked to significant barotrauma and injury to alveoli. Elevated positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) increasingly was used to recruit alveoli, with decreases in the amount of fraction of inspired oxygen (Fio2) and minute ventilation required to maintain oxygenation in this setting, with limited success when compared to lower PEEP levels, controlling for tidal volume and end-inspiratory pressures (246).
# Chunk 1115
Management of ﬂuid levels and cardiovascular hemodynamics in patients with acute or chronic renal impairment is paramount. Intravascular ﬂuid volume changes that lead to hypertension or hypotension are very common in these patients and often are difficult to manage secondary to autonomic dysfunction, acidosis, and other problems that are inherent to the underlying kidney disease. Patients undergoing dialysis in whom major abdominal or pelvic surgery is contemplated should be treated using invasive monitoring, both intra-and postoperatively. The results of physical examination and CVP monitoring correlate poorly with left cardiac filling pressures. Swan-Ganz catheter measurements will help guide ﬂuid replacement and avoid volume overload. Invasive hemodynamic monitoring should be continued as needed throughout the first postoperative week because third spacing will occur during this period.
# Chunk 1116
Laboratory Testing The biochemical profile (alkaline phosphatase, calcium, lactate dehydrogenase, bilirubin, serum glutamic–oxaloacetic transaminase, cholesterol, uric acid, phosphorous, albumin, total protein, and glucose) is not useful for routine preoperative evaluation (267). Mild abnormalities can result in further extensive testing that requires consultation, delays in surgery, and increased cost without net benefit. A possible exception is selected use of biochemical testing when the history or physical examination reveals abnormalities. Patients with known liver disease should undergo albumin and bilirubin testing using the Child’s risk classification (Table 22.21). This system
# Chunk 1117
Table 22.21 Child’s Classification of Liver Dysfunction was originally designed to predict mortality following portosystemic shunt surgery. It divides patients into three classes of severity based on five easily assessed clinical parameters. Measurement of prothrombin time may be helpful in patients with significant histories of liver disease. If a history of hepatitis is ascertained, the patient should be tested for serum aminotransferase, alkaline phosphatase, bilirubin, albumin levels, and prothrombin time. Serologic documentation of hepatitis is important. If a patient has a known malignancy, biochemical testing of the liver may be of some benefit as a screen for metastatic disease, although this was not proven conclusively.
# Chunk 1118
Determination of Operative Risk

Although it is well known that acute hepatobiliary damage results in increased morbidity and mortality in the surgical patient, estimating the operative risk in patients with hepatic dysfunction is difficult based on the history and physical examination. The most accurate method for risk assessment of surgery in patients with hepatic dysfunction is Child’s classification (Table 22.21). Using this system, accurate assessment of morbidity and mortality can be directly related to the degree of liver dysfunction (270). The Child’s classification is useful for patients undergoing a variety of different types of abdominal surgery. Data show operative mortalities of 10%, 30%, and 82% for each of the three Child’s classifications, respectively, while other data called this into question with operative mortality of 2%, 12%, and 12% (271,272). The major cause of perioperative death was often sepsis. This classification correlated significantly with postoperative complications such as bleeding, renal failure, wound dehiscence, and sepsis. Another method for determining operative risk in patients with cirrhosis is the Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD), which takes into account the patient’s prothrombin time, bilirubin, and creatinine with various iterations used to better predict perioperative morbidity and mortality (273,274). Originally designed to predict outcomes in cirrhotic patients undergoing the transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) procedure, it was further studied to include patients undergoing other surgical procedures. In patients with a MELD score greater than 15, elective surgery should be deferred (275).
# Chunk 1119
Acute Viral Hepatitis Acute viral hepatitis poses an increased risk of operative complications and perioperative mortality and is a contraindication for elective surgery (276). Elective surgery should be delayed for approximately 1 month after the results of all biochemical tests have returned to normal (277). In patients with ectopic pregnancy, hemorrhage, or bowel obstruction secondary to malignancy, surgical intervention must take place before normalization of serum transaminase levels (276). In these situations, the perioperative morbidity (12%) and mortality (9.5%) rates are much higher than when they are performed under ideal situations (269).
# Chunk 1120
Chronic Hepatitis Chronic hepatitis is a group of disorders characterized by inﬂammation of the liver for at least 6 months. The disease is divided by morphologic and clinical criteria into chronic persistent hepatitis and chronic active hepatitis. A liver biopsy is usually required to establish the extent and type of injury. The surgical risk in these patients correlates most closely with the severity of disease. The risk of surgery in patients with asymptomatic or mild disease is minimal in contrast to a significant risk for those patients who have symptomatic chronic active hepatitis (278). Elective surgery is contraindicated in symptomatic patients, and nonelective surgery is associated with significant morbidity (277). In the nonelective situation, patients taking long-term glucocorticoid therapy should be given appropriate stress coverage with a higher dose of glucocorticoids during the perioperative period. Preoperatively, patients who are not taking steroids should receive prednisone and azathioprine, which are shown to reduce the perioperative risk of complications and may result in remission in as many as 80% of patients (279). Asymptomatic carriers of the hepatitis B virus (HBV; individuals who test positive for the HBV surface antigen) are not at increased risk for postoperative complications in the absence of elevated aminotransferase levels and liver inﬂammation. There is a significant risk to the health care professional operating on these individuals. In cases of needlestick in which the patient’s hepatitis status is unknown, both the health care worker and the patient should be tested for hepatitis C virus (HCV) antibody and HBV serologic markers. If markers for HBV infection are present, hepatitis B immune globulin should be administered to unvaccinated medical personnel. A vaccination series should be initiated during the early postoperative period. If the health care worker is immune (surface antibody positive), no treatment is necessary (269). All medical personnel, and especially those in the surgical subspecialties, should receive a full course of recombinant hepatitis B vaccine as recommended by the CDC (280). Treatment for chronic hepatitis B in the 1990s centered around interferon-α with data in the 2000s showing increased benefit from the use of nucleoside analogues, including lamivudine and tenofovir (281,282). Pegylated interferon and ribavirin are used in the standard treatment of HCV (283). Consideration should be given to using these medications for patients in whom surgery cannot be avoided but is not emergent.
# Chunk 1121
Alcoholic Liver Disease Alcoholic liver disease encompasses a spectrum of diseases including fatty liver, acute alcoholic hepatitis, and cirrhosis. Elective surgery is not contraindicated in patients with fatty liver because liver function is preserved. If nutritional deficiencies are discovered, they should be corrected before elective surgery. Acute alcoholic hepatitis is characterized on biopsy by hepatocyte edema, polymorphonuclear leukocyte infiltration, necrosis, and the presence of Mallory bodies. Elective surgery in these patients is contraindicated (284). Abstinence from alcohol for approximately 6 to 12 weeks along with clinical resolution of the biochemical abnormalities are recommended before surgery is considered. Severe alcoholic hepatitis may persist for several months despite abstinence and, if any question of continued activity exists, a liver biopsy should be repeated (285). In cases of urgent or emergent surgery on patients with alcohol dependence, administration of tapered doses of benzodiazepine is appropriate as prophylaxis against alcohol withdrawal.
# Chunk 1122
120.

Markowitz GS, Stokes MB, Radhakrisnan J, et al. Acute phosphate nephropathy following oral sodium phosphate bowel purgative: an underrecognized cause of chronic renal failure. J Am Soc Nephrol 2005;16:3389–3396.
# Chunk 1123
Despite these advantages, there are potential limitations: exposure of the operative field can be reduced; instruments are small and can be used only through fixed ports; and the ability to manipulate the pelvic viscera is limited. In some cases, the cost of hospitalization increases, despite a shortened stay, because of prolonged operating room time and the use of more expensive surgical equipment and supplies. Efficacy may be reduced if a surgeon cannot adequately replicate the abdominal operation. In some patients, there is an increased risk of complications, which can be attributed to the innate limitations of laparoscopy, the level of surgical expertise, or both. With an adequate combination of ability, training, and experience, however, operative time is comparable to those of traditional abdominal surgery and complications may be reduced.
# Chunk 1124
Tubal Surgery Sterilization Laparoscopic sterilization has been used extensively since the late 1960s, and while it can be performed with local anesthetics, it is usually accomplished under general anesthesia. The fallopian tubes can be occluded by suture, clips, silastic rings, or with radiofrequency electrocoagulation, most commonly with a bipolar electrocoagulation instrument (see Chapter 10). When an “operative laparoscope” is used, only one incision is required because the sheath in such a system contains an instrument channel. Otherwise, a second port is needed for the introduction of the occluding instrument. Patients generally remain in the hospital only for a few hours; even when general anesthesia is used. Postoperative pain is usually minor and related to gas that remains in the peritoneal cavity (shoulder pain, dyspnea), and in the case of occlusive devices, pain at the surgical site. These effects normally disappear within a few days. The failure rate is about 5.4 per 1,000 woman-years (5,6). The use of laparoscopic tubal sterilization was impacted by the availability of office vasectomy, effective intrauterine contraception, and the development of office-based hysteroscopic sterilization techniques, discussed later in this chapter.
# Chunk 1125
Compared to vaginal hysterectomy, there is a slightly higher risk of complications with laparoscopic hysterectomy, but this risk is probably lower than for abdominal hysterectomy (51). As experience is gained with laparoscopic hysterectomy, these outcomes may approach those of vaginal hysterectomy. The procedural costs of laparoscopic hysterectomy are greater than either vaginal or abdominal hysterectomy but can be dramatically reduced when reusable instruments are employed (4,52). Most studies show less postoperative pain, shorter hospital stays, and faster postoperative recovery with laparoscopic hysterectomy than with abdominal hysterectomy (51,53). There is evidence that pain scores and quality-of-life measures, including sexual activity and physical and mental functioning, were significantly better for women who underwent laparoscopic versus abdominal hysterectomy (54). These differences were present at 6 weeks following surgery and remained at the 12-month follow-up visit. When the societal benefits of faster return to work or family are considered, the cost of laparoscopic surgery is significantly less (4).
# Chunk 1126
Pelvic Floor Disorders Laparoscopy can be used to guide procedures to treat pelvic support defects, including culdoplasty, enterocele repair, vaginal vault suspension, paravaginal repair, and retropubic cystourethropexy for urinary stress incontinence. Although these conditions can be treated vaginally, the laparoscopic approach may offer benefits, particularly with retropubic urethropexy. There is some evidence that the laparoscopic approach is effective when compared with the traditional methods, but, in most instances, vaginal or laparoscopic mesh-based techniques seem to be the most frequently used approaches (66,67). Using the same surgical principles applied during traditional pelvic ﬂoor repair, laparoscopy promises better access to key anatomical landmarks and potentially more accurate suture placement (68). Whereas apical and anterior compartment defects can be successfully corrected via laparoscopy, posterior and perineal defects are best visualized and repaired using vaginal techniques. The laparoscopic treatment of enterocele and vault prolapse may be useful in patients who require abdominal approaches after failure of a previous vaginal procedure. Because of the anatomical proximity of the pelvic ureter to the uterosacral ligament and anterolateral vagina, bilateral ureteral patency should be confirmed cystoscopically after laparoscopic vaginal vault suspension, enterocele repair, culdoplasty, cystourethropexy, or paravaginal repair.
# Chunk 1127
The expectations and risks of diagnostic laparoscopy, and those of any other procedures that may be needed, must be explained. It may be helpful to compare risks and recovery with the same procedure performed via abdominal surgery. The risks of laparoscopy include those associated with anesthesia, infection, bleeding, and injury to the abdominal and pelvic viscera. The possibility of conversion to laparotomy if a complication should occur or if the procedure cannot be completed via laparoscopic surgery should also be discussed. Infection is uncommon with laparoscopic surgery. For procedures involving extensive dissection, there is a higher risk for visceral injury. These risks should be clearly presented in a fashion that includes both the possibilities of immediate and delayed recognition. The patient should be given realistic expectations regarding postoperative disability. Because pain and visceral dysfunction normally continue to improve after uncomplicated laparoscopy, the patient should be instructed to communicate immediately any regression in her recovery. After diagnostic or brief operative procedures, patients can be discharged on the day of surgery and usually require 24 to 72 hours off work or school. If extensive dissection—a major surgical procedure performed laparoscopically—is necessary or if the surgery lasts longer than 4 hours, hospital admission may be necessary, and the period of disability may then be as long as 10 to 14 days.
# Chunk 1128
Patient Positioning Proper positioning of the patient is essential for patient safety, comfort of the operator, and optimal visualization of the pelvic organs. There may be advantages to positioning the patient while awake to reduce the frequency of positioning-related complications. Laparoscopy is performed on an operating table that can be tipped to create a steep, head-down (Trendelenburg) position that allows the bowel to move out of the pelvis to facilitate visualization after the cannulas is placed. The footrest can be dropped to allow access to the perineum. The patient is placed in the low lithotomy position, with the legs appropriately supported in stirrups and the buttocks protruding slightly from the lower edge of the table (Fig. 23.1). The thighs are usually kept in the neutral position to preserve the sacroiliac angle, reducing the tendency of
# Chunk 1129
Virtually all insufﬂation needles are modifications of the hollow needle designed by Verres (Fig. 23.5). In cases uncomplicated by previous pelvic surgery, the preferred site for insertion is the base of the umbilicus, where the abdominal wall is the thinnest and usually avascular.
# Chunk 1130
3.

Before insufﬂation, the operator should try to detect whether the insufﬂation needle was malpositioned in the omentum, mesentery, blood vessels, or hollow organs such as the stomach or bowel. The most direct approach is to use a specially designed insufﬂation needle that has an integrated cannula through which a small diameter (2 mm) laparoscope can be passed to visualize the point of entry. Otherwise, indirect methods are necessary. Using a syringe attached to the insufﬂation needle, blood or gastrointestinal contents may be aspirated. To facilitate this examination, a small amount of saline may be injected into the syringe. If the needle is appropriately positioned, negative intra-abdominal pressure is created by lifting the abdominal wall. This negative pressure may be demonstrated by aspiration of a drop of saline placed over the open, proximal end of the needle or, preferably, by using the digital pressure gauge on the insufﬂator.
# Chunk 1131
5.

The amount of gas transmitted into the peritoneal cavity should depend on the measured intraperitoneal pressure, not the volume of gas inﬂated. Intraperitoneal volume capacity varies significantly between individuals. Many surgeons prefer to insufﬂate to 25 to 30 mm Hg for positioning the cannulas, and a body of evidence exists supporting this approach (86). This level usually provides extra volume and enough counter pressure against the peritoneum, facilitating introduction of the cannula and potentially reducing the chance of bowel or posterior abdominal wall and vessel trauma. After placement of the cannulas, the pressure should be dropped to 10 to 15 mm Hg, which reduces the risk of subcutaneous insufﬂation leading to crepitus and essentially eliminates hypercarbia or decreased venous return of blood to the heart (84,86,87).
# Chunk 1132
prevent “overshoot” and resultant injury to bowel or vessels. The angle of insertion is the same as for the insufﬂation needle; adjustments are made according to the patient’s weight and body habitus (79). The laparoscope should be inserted to confirm proper intraperitoneal placement before the insufﬂation gas is allowed to ﬂow. Previous abdominal surgery increases the incidence of adhesions of the bowel to the anterior abdominal wall, frequently near the umbilicus and in the path of the primary trocar-cannula system (88,89). In such patients,
# Chunk 1133
Lateral placement of lower-quadrant cannulas is useful for operative laparoscopy, but the superficial and inferior epigastric vessels must be located to avoid injury (Fig. 23.3). Transillumination of the abdominal wall from within permits the identification of the superficial inferior epigastric vessels in most thin women. The deep inferior epigastric vessels cannot be identified by this mechanism because of their location deep to the rectus sheath. The most consistent landmarks are the medial umbilical ligaments (obliterated umbilical arteries) and the exit point of the round ligament into the inguinal canal. At the pubic crest, the deep inferior epigastric vessels can often be visualized between the medially located umbilical ligament and the laterally positioned exit point of the round ligament. The cannula should be inserted medial or lateral to the vessels if they are visualized. If the vessels cannot be seen and it is necessary to position the cannula laterally, the device should be placed 3 to 4 cm lateral to the medial umbilical ligament or lateral to the lateral margin of the rectus abdominis muscle. If the incision is placed too far laterally, it will endanger the deep circumﬂex epigastric artery. The risk of injury can be minimized by placing a 22-gauge spinal needle through the skin at the desired location, in order to directly observe the entry through the laparoscope. This provides reassurance that a safe location is identified and allows visualization of the peritoneal needle hole, which provides a precise target for inserting the cannula.
# Chunk 1134
Capacitance is the ability of a conductor to establish an electrical current in an unconnected nearby circuit. An electrical field is established around the shaft of any activated unipolar instrument (including the cord), a circumstance that creates a potential capacitor. This field is harmless if the circuit is completed through a dispersive, low-power density pathway (Fig. 23.21). For example, if capacitative coupling occurs between a monopolar laparoscopic instrument and a metal cannula positioned in the abdominal wall, the current is harmlessly dispersed in the abdominal wall at the point where it connects with the dispersive electrode (Fig. 23.21A). However, if the metal cannula is anchored to the skin by a nonconductive plastic retaining sleeve or “gripper” (a hybrid system), the current cannot access the abdominal wall because the sleeve acts as an insulator (Fig. 23.21B). Instead, the capacitor will have to “look” elsewhere to complete the circuit. The bowel or any other nearby conductor can become the target of a relatively high-power density discharge (Fig. 23.21C). This situation can occur when a unipolar instrument is inserted through an operating laparoscope that, in turn, is passed through a nonconductive plastic laparoscopic cannula. In this configuration, the plastic port acts as the insulator. If the electrode capacitively couples with the metal laparoscope, nearby bowel will be at risk for significant thermal injury (115). The circumstance occurs with the relatively new “single port” systems where the laparoscope and hand instruments, including monopolar instruments, are passed through the same concentrated array of ports. This situation is identical to that of the “operating” laparoscope with an increased risk that the laparoscope or other instruments function as capacitors.
# Chunk 1135
Figure 23.21 Capacitative coupling. A: All activated monopolar electrodes emit a surrounding charge, proportional to the voltage of the current. This makes the electrode a potential capacitor. B: Generally, as long as the charge is allowed to disperse through the abdominal wall, no sequelae result. However, if the “return” to the dispersive electrode is blocked by insulation, such as a plastic anchor (C), the current can couple to a conductive cannula or directly to bowel.
# Chunk 1136
The stomach, the small bowel, and the colon can be injured during laparoscopy. Mechanical entry into the large or small bowel can occur 10 times more often when laparoscopy is performed in patients who have had prior intraperitoneal inﬂammation or abdominal surgery. Loops of intestine can adhere to the abdominal wall under the insertion site and be injured (117,118).
# Chunk 1137
If the trocar of a primary cannula penetrates the bowel, the condition is usually diagnosed when the mucosal lining of the gastrointestinal tract is visualized. If the large bowel is entered, a feculent odor may be noted. However, the injury may not be recognized immediately because the cannula may not stay within the bowel or may pass through the lumen. Such injuries usually occur when a single loop of bowel is adherent to the anterior abdominal wall. The injury may not be recognized until peritonitis, abscess, enterocutaneous fistula, or death occurs (123,124). Therefore, at the end of the procedure, the removal of the primary cannula must be viewed either through the cannula or an ancillary port, a process facilitated by routine direct visualization of closure of the incision of the primary port.
# Chunk 1138
For small lesions, closure may be performed with layers of absorbable 2-0 to 3-0 sutures.

Postoperative catheterization with either a transurethral or suprapubic catheter should be maintained for 2 to 5 days for small fundal lacerations and for 10 to 14 days for injuries to the trigone. Cystography should be considered before the urinary catheter is removed.
# Chunk 1139
One of the most common causes of ureteral injury during laparoscopy is electrosurgical trauma (113,132,133). Ureteral injury can occur after mechanical dissection, including linear cutting and stapling devices (133–135). Although intraoperative recognition of ureteral injury is possible, the diagnosis is usually delayed (132,133). Ureteral lacerations may be confirmed intraoperatively, visually, or following the intravenous injection of indigo carmine. Thermal injury presents up to 14 days after surgery with fever, abdominal or ﬂank pain, and peritonitis. Leukocytosis may be present, and intravenous pyelography shows extravasation of urine or urinoma. Mechanical obstruction from staples or a suture may be recognized intraoperatively by direct visualization. Cystoscopy following the intravenous injection of indigo carmine may be used to confirm failure of the dye to pass through the ureter. Abdominal ultrasound may be helpful, but a CT urogram can more precisely identify the site and degree of the obstruction. Unrecognized ureteral obstruction may present a few days to 1 week after surgery with ﬂank pain and often fever (136).
# Chunk 1140
To help document and evaluate the results of hysteroscopically directed myoma surgery, a classification system was developed that is based on the proportion of the myoma that is in the uterine cavity. In patients with myomas that are entirely intracavitary (type 0), excision is feasible and in many instances relatively easy, depending in part on the diameter; whereas in larger type II lesions an abdominal approach with laparoscopy or laparotomy is frequently necessary. Small type 0 leiomyomas may be removed following transection of the stalk with scissors or an electrode attached to a uterine resectoscope. For larger type 0 lesions, or for type I myomas, mechanical or electrosurgical morcellation with a resectoscope is necessary before removal. For a limited number of type II myomas, careful dissection into the avascular plane interposed between the tumor and the myometrial pseudocapsule may be attempted, provided that satisfactory ultrasonography or MRI demonstrated an adequate margin of myometrium between the deepest aspect of the lesion and the uterine serosa. It may be preferable to undertake such procedures with laparoscopic monitoring to verify that bowel is not adjacent to the zone of dissection. Patients should be counseled that for some type I and many type II myomas, more than one procedure might be required to complete excision (178,187). The use of intrauterine prostaglandin F2α was described to facilitate extrusion of type II myomas (188).
# Chunk 1141
For many women, these procedures succeed in reducing or eliminating menses without hysterectomy or long-term medical therapy (51,200). Success rates vary and depend on the duration of follow-up and the definition of success. For many patients, amenorrhea is the goal, whereas for others, it is normalization of menses. About 75% to 95% of patients are satisfied with the surgical procedure after 1 year. Amenorrhea rates range from about 30% to 90% (depending in part upon the technique), but 40% to 50% of patients have amenorrhea, is a useful number to quote to patients considering the procedure. In comparative studies, there is no advantage of laser over electrosurgical techniques (198,201). The nonresectoscopic techniques have similar clinical outcomes, thus reducing the need for resectoscopic ablation. However, the nonresectoscopic approaches all have limitations defined by the size or configuration of the endometrial cavity. Consequently, for those women with heavy menstrual bleeding who are not suitable for nonresectoscopic techniques because of large uteri (>12 cm sounded length), resectoscopic endometrial ablation remains a viable option (161,202).
# Chunk 1142
Diagnostic Hysteroscopy: Risks

The risks of diagnostic hysteroscopy are few, and those complications that occur rarely have severe consequences (199). The uncommon adverse events that should be discussed with the patient include perforation, bleeding, and those related to anesthesia and the distention media. After diagnostic hysteroscopy, most patients have slight vaginal bleeding and occasionally, lower abdominal cramps. Severe cramps, dyspnea, and upper abdominal and right shoulder pain can develop if CO2 is used as the distension media and it passes through the fallopian tubes into the peritoneal cavity. Consequently, even in an office environment, the patient should be encouraged to have a friend or relative escort her home.
# Chunk 1143
There are a number of options available to facilitate cervical dilation. There is evidence that prostaglandin E1 (misoprostol) administered 400 μg orally or 200 to 400 μg vaginally, approximately 12 to 24 hours before the procedure facilitates cervical dilation (212–215). Misoprostol alone may not be effective in postmenopausal women, but one well-designed randomized trial demonstrated that vaginal estrogen, administered daily for 2 weeks before the procedure facilitates the effect of the prostaglandin in this group of patients (215). Alternatively, there is evidence that intraoperatively administered intracervical vasopressin (0.05 U/mL, 4 cc at 4 and 8 o’clock) substantially reduces the force required for cervical dilation (216). Regardless of the circumstance, the cervix should be dilated as atraumatically as possible. It is best to avoid using a uterine sound because it can traumatize the canal or the endometrium, causing unnecessary bleeding and uterine perforation.
# Chunk 1144
1.

Before undertaking anything but simple operative procedures using these agents, baseline serum electrolyte levels should be measured. Women with cardiopulmonary disease should be evaluated carefully. The selective preoperative use of agents such as GnRH agonists may reduce operating time and media absorption. Intracervical injection of 8 mL of a dilute vasopressin solution (0.01 U/mL) immediately prior to surgery is effective at reducing the amount of systemic absorption of distending media (229). The duration of this effect may be limited to approximately 20 to 30 minutes, so repeat dosing may be useful for optimal effect.
# Chunk 1145
Thermal Trauma Thermal injury to the intestine or ureter may be difficult to diagnose, and symptoms may not occur for several days to 2 weeks. Therefore, the patient should be advised of the symptoms that could indicate peritonitis.
# Chunk 1146
82.

Nezhat CH, Nezhat F, Brill AI, et al. Normal variations of abdominal and pelvic anatomy evaluated at laparoscopy. Obstet Gynecol 1999;94:238–242.
# Chunk 1147
Leiomyomas The proportion of hysterectomies performed for leiomyomas decreased over time (1) (see Chapter 15). Fertility-preserving surgical management (myomectomy) is possible in most patients with leiomyomas. The decision to perform a hysterectomy for leiomyomas is usually based on the need to treat symptoms—abnormal uterine bleeding, pelvic pain, or pelvic pressure. Other indications for intervention have included “rapid” uterine enlargement, ureteral compression, or uterine growth after menopause. There is no clearly reproducible definition of rapid growth. The concept of rapid growth was challenged because these patients did not demonstrate clearly malignant conditions (6). Refuted reasons for hysterectomy in patients with leiomyomas are size greater than 12 weeks of gestation without symptoms, inability to palpate the ovaries on bimanual examination, and increased morbidity at hysterectomy with increased uterine size. If the procedures are performed abdominally, there is no difference in surgical morbidity between patients with a 12-week-sized uterus and those with a 20-weeksized uterus (7). Therefore, hysterectomy for leiomyomas should be considered only in symptomatic patients who do not desire future fertility (7).
# Chunk 1148
Pelvic Pain In a review of 418 women in whom hysterectomy was performed for a variety of nonmalignant conditions, 18% had chronic pelvic pain. Preoperative laparoscopy was performed in only 66% of these patients. After hysterectomy, there was a significant reduction in symptoms that was associated with an improvement in the patient’s quality of life (13). In a review of 104 patients who underwent hysterectomy for chronic pelvic pain that was believed to be of uterine origin, 78% experienced improvement in their pain after follow-up for a mean of 21.6 months (14). However, 22% of patients had no improvement in or exacerbation of their pain. Hysterectomy should be performed only in those patients whose pain is of gynecologic origin and does not respond to nonsurgical treatments (12) (see Chapter 16).
# Chunk 1149
Genital Prolapse Hysterectomy for symptomatic genital prolapse accounts for about 14.5% of hysterectomies performed in the United States (1). Unless there is an associated condition requiring an abdominal incision, vaginal hysterectomy is the preferred approach for genital prolapse. Uterine prolapse typically is not an isolated event and most often is associated with a variety of pelvic support defects. Each defect must be corrected to optimize the surgical outcome and decrease the risk of developing future pelvic support defects.
# Chunk 1150
Pelvic inﬂammatory disease can be treated successfully with antibiotics. The uterus, tubes, and ovaries rarely need to be removed in a patient with pelvic inﬂammatory disease that is refractory to intravenous antibiotic therapy (see Chapter 18). Whether one proceeds with conservative surgical management, abscess drainage, or organ removal is a subjective decision that must be based on the individual. If accessible, some pelvic abscesses may be drained successfully by percutaneous catheter drainage guided by ultrasonography or computed tomography (CT) scanning. Surgical intervention is necessary if the patient has acute abdominal findings associated with peritonitis and signs of sepsis in the presence of a ruptured tubo-ovarian abscess. For the patient who desires future fertility, consideration should be given to unilateral salpingectomy or salpingo-oophorectomy or bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy without hysterectomy. For the patient in whom bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy is required, the uterus can be left in place for possible ovum donation and in vitro fertilization.
# Chunk 1151
Salpingo-oophorectomy is performed prophylactically to prevent ovarian cancer and to eliminate the potential for further surgery for either benign or malignant disease. Arguments against prophylactic salpingo-oophorectomy center on the need for earlier and more prolonged hormone therapy and the potential increase risk of cardiovascular disease and bone loss (24,25). There is no overall survival benefit of prophylactic salpingo-oophorectomy in women at average risk for ovarian cancer. In premenopausal women before age 50 years at average risk for ovarian cancer who underwent bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, there was a significant increase in mortality from cardiovascular disease compared to women who had ovarian preservation (25). A Markov decision analysis model was used to estimate the best strategy for maximizing a woman’s survival when salpingo-oophorectomy is considered in women at average risk for ovarian cancer who are undergoing hysterectomy for benign disease, and in the women who had salpingo-oophorectomy before age 55 years, there was an 8.58% excess mortality by age 80 (26). Both the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and the Society of Gynecologic Oncologists recommend carefully assessing risk, and consideration should be given to conservation of the ovaries in premenopausal women who are at average risk of ovarian cancer (21,22).
# Chunk 1152
Appendectomy Appendectomy may be performed concurrently with hysterectomy to prevent appendicitis and to remove disease that may be present. The former use is of limited value because the peak incidence of appendicitis is between 20 and 40 years of age, whereas the peak age for hysterectomy is 10 to 20 years later (34). There is no increase in morbidity associated with appendectomy performed at the time of hysterectomy (35). Incidental appendectomies in all abdominal hysterectomies could reduce the morbidity of appendicitis at a later time (35).
# Chunk 1153
Choice of Surgical Access: Vaginal, Abdominal, or Laparoscopic Hysterectomy

From 2000 to 2004, approximately 68% of all hysterectomies were performed abdominally and 32% were performed vaginally. One-third of the vaginal cases were performed with the assistance of the laparoscope (laparoscopically assisted vaginal hysterectomy) (1). There are no specific criteria that can be used to determine the route of hysterectomy. The route chosen should be based on the individual patient, but vaginal access is preferred. An alternative access is preferred if there is a narrow pubic arch (less than 90 degrees), and a narrow vagina (narrower than two fingerbreadths, especially at the apex), or if the there is an undescended immobile uterus. The presence of an adnexal mass, cul-de-sac disease, pelvic adhesions, or the assessment of chronic pain may require the addition of laparoscopy for assessment. A previous cesarean section or nulliparity does not contraindicate a vaginal approach (41).
# Chunk 1154
Abdominal Exploration Cytologic sampling of the peritoneal cavity, if needed, should be performed before abdominal exploration. The upper abdomen and the pelvis are explored systematically. The liver, gallbladder, stomach, kidneys, para-aortic lymph nodes, and large and small bowel should be examined and palpated.
# Chunk 1155
Small bowel injuries are the most common intestinal injuries in gynecologic surgery. Small defects of the serosa or muscularis may be repaired using a single layer of continuous or interrupted 3-0 braided absorbable suture. Although single-layer closure of the small bowel has proved adequate, it is safer to close defects involving the lumen in two layers using a 3-0 braided absorbable suture. The defect should be closed in a direction perpendicular to the intestinal lumen. If a large area is injured, resection with reanastomosis may be necessary. Because the bacterial ﬂora of the ascending colon is similar to that of the small bowel, injuries can be repaired in a similar manner. The transverse colon rarely is injured in normal gynecologic procedures because it is well outside the operative field. However, the descending colon and the rectosigmoid colon are intimately involved with the pelvic structures and are at significant risk for injury during gynecologic surgery. Injuries not involving the mucosa may be repaired with a single running layer of 2-0 or 3-0 braided absorbable suture. If the laceration involves the mucosa, it may be closed as with small bowel injuries.
# Chunk 1156
Diet As soon as the patient is alert, diet is resumed, offering solid foods as tolerated with return of appetite. This dietary regimen assumes minimal intraoperative bowel manipulation and dissection. Early postoperative feeding was shown to be safe and to speed return of bowel function and recovery. In patients who had pelvic and para-aortic lymphadenectomy, bowel surgery, or other extensive dissections, a slower return to normal bowel function may occur, so the diet is administered as tolerated when the patient’s appetite returns.
# Chunk 1157
Wound Care The abdominal incision normally requires little attention, except for ordinary hygienic measures. The wound is kept covered with a sterile dressing for the first 24 hours after surgery, by which time the incision has sealed. After the dressing is removed, the incision should be cleaned daily with mild soap and water and kept dry.
# Chunk 1158
Because patients with suspected pelvic adhesions or obvious pelvic disease are excluded as candidates for vaginal hysterectomy, bowel injuries do not occur often. Bowel injuries are associated with the performance of a posterior colporrhaphy and are usually confined to the rectum.
# Chunk 1159
Diet Although little manipulation of the bowel occurs during vaginal hysterectomy, there is some slowing of gastrointestinal motility. This slowing rarely occurs to a degree that limits some form of oral intake soon after surgery. Most patients experience some degree of nausea after surgery, which, combined with drowsiness from analgesics, usually makes them disinterested in food on the evening after surgery. A clear liquid diet is suitable during the first night after surgery, and on the first full postoperative day, a regular diet can usually be consumed. The patient is often the best judge of what she can tolerate as her appetite returns.
# Chunk 1160
Preoperative Preparation The main limitations to a laparoscopic approach are medical or anesthetic disorders that do not allow adequate pneuomperitoneum or proper ventilation (34). Extensive and dense pelvic abdominal adhesions from previous surgery and very large uterine size are relative contraindications, although this decision can be made after assessing the peritoneal cavity (see Chapter 23). If the uterine size limits access to the uterine vessels, laparoscopic hysterectomy may not be possible. Obesity is not a contraindication to laparoscopic hysterectomy. The increased morbidity from laparotomy in patients with high body mass (BMI) can be minimized with laparoscopy.
# Chunk 1161
Surgical Technique of Laparoscopic Hysterectomy Peritoneal Access

The most important technical consideration for all laparoscopic surgery is port placement (see Chapter 23). The umbilical site typically is used in patients without a previous history of surgery or intra-abdominal infection. In cases of previous surgery where there was a midline incision or a history of a pelvic-abdominal incision, an open laparoscopy is recommended or an alternative site is chosen to introduce the primary cannula. The open laparoscopy is essentially a mini-laparotomy at the umbilicus. The alternative site is the left upper quadrant. The standard closed technique involves the use of pneumoperitoneum needle (Verres needle), insufﬂation, and primary trocar insertion. An alternative technique is the direct trocar insertion (no insufﬂation prior to trocar insertion). A meta-analysis showed no advantage of one technique over the other (24). Gynecologists should use the approach with which they have most experience.
# Chunk 1162
In the patient with little vaginal bleeding in whom vital signs have deteriorated, retroperitoneal hemorrhage should be suspected. Input and output should be monitored. Hematocrit assessment, along with cross-matching of packed red blood cells, should be performed immediately. Examination may reveal tenderness and dullness in the ﬂank. In cases of intraperitoneal bleeding, abdominal distention may occur. Diagnostic radiologic studies can be used to confirm the presence of retroperitoneal or intra-abdominal bleeding. Ultrasonography is one option for viewing low pelvic hematomas; CT provides better visualization of retroperitoneal spaces and can delineate a hematoma.
# Chunk 1163
Another option is to perform abdominal exploratory surgery while the patient’s condition is stable. This approach adds the morbidity of a second procedure but avoids the possibility of the patient’s condition deteriorating with continued delay or the formation of a pelvic abscess. Once adequate exposure is obtained, the peritoneum over the hematoma should be opened and the blood evacuated. All bleeding vessels should be identified and ligated. If bleeding is difficult to control, consideration should be given to unilateral or bilateral ligation of the anterior division of the internal iliac artery. Once hemostasis is achieved, the pelvis should be drained using a closed system.
# Chunk 1164
Vesicovaginal Fistula Vesicovaginal fistulas occur most often after total abdominal hysterectomy for benign gynecologic disease (50). Intraoperative steps to avoid the formation of a vesicovaginal fistula include correct identification of the proper plane between the bladder and cervix, sharp rather than blunt dissection of the bladder, and care in clamping and suturing the vaginal cuff. The development of a postoperative vesicovaginal fistula after hysterectomy is rare; the incidence is as low as 0.2%.
# Chunk 1165
Patients who have a postoperative vesicovaginal fistula develop a watery vaginal discharge 10 to 14 days after surgery. Some fistulas resulting from surgery are noted as early as the first 48 to 72 hours after surgery. After vaginal examination with a speculum, the diagnosis can usually be confirmed with the insertion of a cotton tampon into the vagina followed by the instillation of methylene blue or indigo carmine dye through a transurethral catheter. If the tampon stains blue, a vesicovaginal fistula is present. If no staining occurs, the presence of a ureterovaginal fistula must be ruled out by the intravenous injection of 5 mL of indigo carmine dye. Within 20 minutes, the tampon should stain blue if a ureterovaginal fistula is present. A CT urogram should be performed to rule out ureteral obstruction.
# Chunk 1166
General Pelvic Symptoms and Quality of Life

Patient satisfaction after hysterectomy is related to the initial indication for surgery and patient expectation. The Maine Women’s Health Study evaluated the effect of hysterectomy for nonmalignant disorders on quality of life (13). They documented a marked improvement in pelvic pain, urinary symptoms, and psychological and sexual symptoms at 1 year in the majority of patients. In the Maryland Women’s Health Study patients were followed for up to 2 years after hysterectomy for nonmalignant conditions (64). Symptoms related to the underlying indication for surgery, and associated symptoms of depression and anxiety and quality of life, improved after hysterectomy. Each study reported that about 8% of patients had new symptoms, such as depression and lack of interest in sex or lack of improvement in quality of life. Although women with pelvic pain and depression did not show the same level of improvement as other groups, there was significant improvement over baseline. Patient satisfaction is very high after hysterectomy (64).
# Chunk 1167
For pelvic surgery the robotic column is commonly situated between the patient’s legs (Fig. 25.6), while for upper abdominal surgery it is positioned at the patient’s head. For procedures to the right or left of the abdomen, the robotic column is positioned at the opposite side of the patient. For instance, for extraperitoneal left aortic lymphadenectomy, the robotic column is at the patient’s right side. For procedures where easy access to the entrance of
# Chunk 1168
Previous laparoscopic experience was considered an advantage to learning robotics. Multiple reports show that transitioning from laparotomy to robotics is easier than transitioning from laparoscopy to robotics (15). A large number of gynecologic oncologists and gynecologists incorporated robotics into their daily practice without having incorporated laparoscopy into their practice or performing advanced laparoscopic procedures. In one study the initiation of robotics in a gynecologic oncology program reduced laparotomy from 78% to 35% in the first year of implementation and it increased the number of minimally invasive procedures from 22% performed by laparoscopy to 65% being robotic assisted (15). Thus, robotic technology is relatively easy to use, associated with a short learning curve, and comfortable for the surgeon (15– 17). It is less stressful to learn robotics than laparoscopy. Reduced stress and ease of learning with robotics compared to laparoscopy was demonstrated when 16 medical students were exposed to both techniques (5).
# Chunk 1169
Hysterectomy Laparoscopic-assisted vaginal hysterectomy was introduced in 1989. By 2005, only 14% of hysterectomies in United States were laparoscopic (18). By contrast, 3 years after FDA approval of robotic hysterectomy in 2005, 10% of hysterectomies were performed robotically in 2008 (Intuitive, Inc).
# Chunk 1170
Robotic myomectomy provided comparable perioperative results to laparoscopy in two retrospective studies of patients with symptomatic myomas (24,25). No significant differences were noted between both groups for blood loss, complications, and hospital stay. The robotic operating time was longer than laparoscopy in one of the studies and no different in the other (24,25). In our comparison study, we noted differences favorable to the robotic group relative to operating time (141 vs. 166 minutes), blood loss (100 vs. 250 mL), and hospital stay over 2 days (12% vs. 23%). There were no significant differences between groups when patients were adjusted for uterine size and myoma weight. There were no differences in intra-or postoperative complications. Postmyomectomy pregnancy rates, uterine rupture, and late operative complications using robotics remain undetermined.
# Chunk 1171
Adnexectomy Numerous studies show the benefits of laparoscopy over laparotomy for patients with an adnexal mass. Robotics provides similar perioperative outcomes when compared to laparoscopy for patients with an adnexal mass. Outcomes were improved with robotics for obese patients (body mass index [BMI] ≥30) with an adnexal mass. In a comparison series of 176 patients with an adnexal mass, 85 operations were by robotics and 91 by laparoscopy (26). The operating time was 12 minutes longer for the entire robotic group (83 vs. 71 minutes), but it was similar to laparoscopy when comparing only patients with a BMI 30 or more (80 vs. 71 minutes). Blood loss was similar for both groups (39.1 vs. 41.2 mL), but lower for the robotic group when comparing only obese patients (BMI ≥30) (39 vs. 60 mL). The length of hospital stay, as measured by the number of patients staying longer than 2 days (0 vs. 3) was similar for both groups.
# Chunk 1172
Robotic sacrocolpopexy may be preferable to laparotomy because of improved perioperative outcomes and similar anatomical results. A comparison of 73 robotic with 105 laparotomy sacrocolpopexies for vaginal and uterine prolapse revealed a longer operating time (328 vs. 225 minutes) but reduced blood loss (103 vs. 255 mL) and shorter hospital stay (1.3 vs. 2.7 days) for the robotic group. Anatomical improvement was similar for both groups as determined by pelvic organ prolapse quantification (POP-Q) C point (−9 vs. −8) (see Chapter 27) (32). Late complications, such as erosion rate and long-term anatomical results of robotic sacrocolpopexy are unknown.
# Chunk 1173
Another study evaluated the results of robotics and conventional laparoscopy for obese and morbidly obese patients (BMI 30–60) with endometrial cancer (42). Robotics was found to be preferable to the laparoscopic approach because of a shorter operative time, reduced blood loss, increased number of lymph nodes removed, and shorter hospital stay. The benefits of robotics for obese patients was noted with simple robotic hysterectomy, where the operating time remained unchanged in spite of the patient’s increased BMI (6). This may result from the absent awareness of the resistance of the robotic instruments being inserted through a thick abdominal wall because of the lack of tactile feedback.
# Chunk 1174
62.5 mL, no intraoperative complications, no blood transfusions, no conversions to laparotomy, and a median length of hospital stay of 1.5 days (63). The median number of pelvic lymph nodes removed was 20.
# Chunk 1175
A novel technique and the results of robotic transperitoneal infrarenal aortic lymphadenectomy in 33 patients with different gynecologic cancers was reported (72). The requirement of this technique was the placement of the robotic column at the patient’s head, which mandated the rotation of the operating table 180 degrees after completion of the robotic pelvic operation and the insertion of additional trocars in the lower pelvis (72). The mean console time was 42 minutes, the mean number of nodes 12.9, and the mean number of positive nodes 2.6. There was one conversion to laparotomy caused by bleeding. These results are comparable to those reported with laparoscopic aortic lymphadenectomy. Placing the robotic column at the patient’s head and inserting additional trocars in the lower pelvis were requirements to remove the infrarenal aortic nodes with robotics. Previous attempts to remove the left infrarenal aortic lymph nodes in a frozen cadaver were unsuccessful when the robotic column was stationed at the level of the patient’s feet.
# Chunk 1176
Ovarian Cancer Surgery for ovarian cancer requires access to all four abdominal quadrants. The ability to operate in all four quadrants using robotics can only be achieved by rotating the operating table and positioning the robotic column at the patient’s head. In this position it is possible to excise the aortic lymph nodes to the level of the renal vessels and to perform resection of upper abdominal metastases, including small bowel, diaphragm, liver, and supracolic omental disease. Initial experience with 21 patients with ovarian cancer who underwent operations by robotics was reported (76). Included were 12 primary, 4 interval, and 5 secondary cytoreductive surgeries for ovarian cancer. In addition to primary tumor excision, major procedures included modified posterior pelvic exenteration, rectosigmoid resection, small bowel resection, diaphragm resection, and resection of liver metastases. The operating times had a wide range (103 to 454 minutes) resulting from the extent of procedures. Blood loss was low (25 to 300 mL). Postoperative complications were low but increased with the number of procedures.
# Chunk 1177
The present robotic system has limited surgical field reach. It allows for pelvic or abdominal surgery, but not both, unless the robotic column is repositioned from the patient’s feet to the patient’s head. This repositioning increases surgical time and requires the insertion of additional trocars.
# Chunk 1178
31.

Daneshgari F, Kefer JC, Moore C, et al. Robotic abdominal sacrocolpopexy/sacrouteropexy repair of advanced female pelvic organ prolapse (POP): utilizing POP-quantification-based staging and outcomes. BJU Int 2007;100:875–879.
# Chunk 1179
Stress urinary incontinence occurs with increases in abdominal pressure (such as coughing, running, lifting) and can be treated with pelvic muscle exercises, vaginal devices, lifestyle changes, and surgery.
# Chunk 1180
Normal urethral closure is maintained by a combination of intrinsic and extrinsic factors. The extrinsic factors include the levator ani muscles, the endopelvic fascia, and their attachments to the pelvic sidewalls and the urethra. This structure forms a hammock beneath the urethra that responds to increases in intra-abdominal pressure by tensing, allowing the urethra to be closed against the posterior supporting shelf (Fig. 26.1). When this supportive mechanism becomes faulty for some reason—the endopelvic fascia has detached from its normal points of fixation, muscular support has weakened, or a combination of these two processes—normal support is lost and anatomic hypermobility of the urethra and bladder neck develops. For many women, this loss of support is severe enough to cause loss of closure during
# Chunk 1181
Figure 26.1 Lateral view of the pelvic ﬂoor drawn from a three-dimensional reconstruction with the urethra, vagina, and fascial tissues transected at the level of the vesical neck. Note how the urethra is compressed against the underlying supportive tissues by the downward force (arrow) generated by a cough or sneeze. (From Delancey J. Structural support of the urethra as it relates to stress urinary incontinence: the hammock hypothesis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1994;170:1718, with permission.) periods of increased intra-abdominal pressure, resulting in stress incontinence. However, many women remain continent in spite of loss of urethral support (1).
# Chunk 1182
The Bladder The bladder is a bag of smooth muscle that stores urine and contracts to expel urine under voluntary control. It is a low-pressure system that expands to accommodate increasing volumes of urine without an appreciable rise in pressure. This function appears to be mediated primarily by the sympathetic nervous system. During bladder filling, there is an accompanying increase in outlet resistance. The bladder muscle (the detrusor) should remain inactive during bladder filling, without involuntary contractions. When the bladder has filled to a certain volume, fullness is registered by tension-stretch receptors, which signal the brain to initiate a micturition reﬂex. This reﬂex is controlled by cortical control mechanisms, depending on the social circumstances and the state of the patient’s nervous system. Normal voiding is accomplished by voluntary relaxation of the pelvic ﬂoor and urethra, accompanied by sustained contraction of the detrusor muscle, leading to complete bladder emptying.
# Chunk 1183
Definitions Defining urinary incontinence would seem an easy task: women who leak urine must be “incontinent.” A joint report from the International Urogynecological Association and the International Continence Society made recommendations on the terminology of female pelvic ﬂoor dysfunction in an attempt to update the definitions by a female-specific approach and clinically based consensus. This report defined incontinence as “the complaint of any involuntary leakage of urine” (8). This definition does not take into account the wide variation in this symptom and the disruption it causes. For example, half of young nulliparous women report occasional minor urine leakage; for most this is neither a bother nor a symptom for which they would seek treatment. At the other extreme, 5% to 10% of adult women have severe leakage daily. These women often dramatically alter their lives because of leakage, curtailing activities, social outings, and intimacy. Many suffer marked deterioration in self-esteem. In between these two extremes lies another one-third of adult women who report leakage at least weekly, but without the same degree of life-altering severity as the women previously noted.
# Chunk 1184
Continuous urinary Continuous involuntary loss of urine incontinence

Frequency Number of voids per day, from waking in the morning until falling asleep at night
# Chunk 1185
After such fistulas develop, the lives of these young women (most of whom are younger than 20 years of age) are ruined unless they can gain access to curative surgical services. The constant, uncontrolled dribble of urine makes them offensive to their husbands and family members and they are often ostracized from their families. Most of them eventually become destitute social outcasts—and yet these are otherwise healthy young women. The social and economic costs of this problem are enormous, yet the world medical community largely ignores it. The morbidity associated with obstetric fistulas remains, along with the related maternal mortality, one of the single most neglected issues in international women’s health care.
# Chunk 1186
Figure 26.3 Posthysterectomy fistulas. Note three small fistulas in a row.

In the industrialized world, the most common causes of genitourinary fistulas are surgery, malignancy, and radiation therapy, alone or in combination. Most often a vesicovaginal fistula develops after an otherwise uncomplicated vaginal or abdominal hysterectomy in which a small portion of the bladder was inadvertently trapped in a surgical clamp or was transfixed by a suture. These fistulas most often occur at the vaginal apex and are no larger than 1 to 2 mm. The amount of urine that can leak through a fistula of any size, however, is enormous. Figure 26.3 shows a cystoscopic view of three small vesicovaginal fistulae, lined up where the cuff suture line would have been. With traditional vaginal and abdominal hysterectomy, many surgeons recommend universal cystoscopy at the completion of the surgical case to assess for urinary tract injury and potentially decrease the incidence of urinary tract fistula. A review of 839 patients undergoing hysterectomy for benign disease followed by universal cystoscopy at completion of the procedure revealed lower urinary tract injury in 4.3%, including bladder injury in 2.9% and ureteral injury in 1.8% (21).
# Chunk 1187
With the increase in minimally invasive techniques for pelvic surgery, including hysterectomy, the use of electrocautery devices is commonplace. This more frequent use of electrocautery for ligation of vessels and the resulting thermal spread increases concern about the possibility of ureteral damage that may lead to ureterovaginal fistula. When significant urine leakage occurs, often 10 to 14 days following a laparoscopic hysterectomy, ureterovaginal fistula should be strongly considered in the differential diagnosis. As with abdominal and vaginal surgery, careful attention to the location of the ureter, especially in proximity to the uterine arteries, must be a standard precaution. The incidence of ureterovaginal fistula after laparoscopic hysterectomy appears to be 1% to 4% (22).
# Chunk 1188
Nocturia Nocturia is the number of voids recorded during a night’s sleep; each void is preceded and followed by sleep. To sort out whether nocturia results from heightened urine production at night, the nocturnal urinary volume can be assessed from a bladder chart. Nocturnal urinary volume is defined as the total volume of urine passed between the time the woman goes to bed with the intention of sleeping and the time of waking with the intention of rising. Thus, it excludes the last void before going to bed but includes the first void after rising in the morning. Nocturia can be the result of nocturnal polyuria potentially related to delayed mobilization of ﬂuid especially in the elderly, sleep problems (e.g., sleep apnea), or low volume voids. Nocturnal polyuria is present when an increased proportion of the 24-hour output occurs at night.
# Chunk 1189
Pregnancy and delivery predispose women to stress urinary incontinence, at least during their younger years. Of women who have not borne children, those who are pregnant leak more often than their nonpregnant counterparts; about half of women report symptoms of stress urinary incontinence during pregnancy, but in most, the symptom resolves after delivery. In a prospective study, 32% of 305 primiparas developed stress urinary incontinence during pregnancy and 7% after delivery. By 1 year, only 3% reported stress urinary incontinence (24). However, 5 years later, 19% of women with no symptoms after the first delivery had stress urinary incontinence. Of women reporting stress urinary incontinence 3 months postpartum (in most of whom it had resolved by 1 year), 92% had such leakage 5 years later. Transient postpartum leakage may be a marker for future incontinence.
# Chunk 1190
Obesity deserves special mention for its role in causing or exacerbating stress incontinence. Many researchers report an association (that remains after adjusting for age and parity) between increased weight and body mass index (BMI) and urinary incontinence. For example, a dose–response relationship between BMI and severe urinary incontinence was described (30). Compared with women with a BMI less than 25 kg/m2, odds ratios (OR) for the following BMI groups were: 25 to 29, OR 2.0 (range 1.7–2.3); 30 to 34, OR 3.1 (2.6–3.7); 35 to 39, OR 4.2 (3.3–5.3); 40+ 5.0 (3.4–7.3). A prospective randomized study evaluating overweight and obese women with at least 10 urinary incontinence episodes per week undergoing an intensive 6-month weight-loss program versus structured education program found that women in the weight-loss program had a mean weight loss of 8.0% and decreased their leakage episodes by 47% compared to mean weight loss of 1.6% and 28% reduction in leakage episodes in the education program group (31).
# Chunk 1191
Voiding Diary A frequency/volume bladder chart (often termed a “bladder diary”) is an invaluable aid in the evaluation of patients with urinary incontinence. A frequency/volume chart is a voiding record kept by the patient for several days. Patients are instructed to write down the time of every void on the chart and measure the amount of urine voided. The time of any incontinent episodes, and the specific activities associated with urine loss, should be recorded. If desired, the patient can be instructed to keep a record of ﬂuid intake. Although the type of intake may guide management suggestions, in most cases volume of intake can be estimated with some accuracy from the amount of urine produced.
# Chunk 1192
A frequency/volume bladder chart provides vital information about bladder function that is not provided by formal urodynamics studies: 24-hour urinary output, the total number of daily voids, number of nighttime voids, the average voided volume, and the functional bladder capacity (largest volume voided in normal daily life). This information allows the clinician to confirm reports of urinary frequency with objective data and to determine whether part of the patient’s problem is an abnormally high (or low) urinary output. The chart can be used to calculate the volume of urine generated in nighttime hours versus daytime hours. Nighttime volume is calculated by adding output from voids that occur after the woman has fallen asleep for the night and the first morning void on awakening for the day. Older women sometimes have a marked shift in urine production, with more than half of their urine output generated during sleeping hours (Fig. 26.4). Demonstrating this on the voiding diary may lead to further treatment options.
# Chunk 1193
Figure 26.4 Voiding diary (also called bladder chart). Daytime frequency is seven. The patient has nocturia (gets up to void two times during sleeping hours) and also has nocturnal polyuria (an increased proportion of the 24-hour output occurs at night; note that nighttime urine output excludes the last void before sleep but includes the first void of the morning). She has urge incontinence, likely caused by the relatively larger bladder volumes voided at night, which in turn may be related to her greater ﬂuid, caffeine, and alcohol consumption in the evening.
# Chunk 1194
If hematuria and bacteriuria are found, the urine should be rechecked after eradication of the bacteriuria. Hematuria found in the absence of bacteriuria may need further evaluation to rule out kidney or bladder tumors; the necessity for and extent of the evaluation depends on concomitant risk factors and the clinical presentation. If malignancy is suspected, bladder biopsy should be performed by the surgeon who would treat the patient in the event a malignancy is discovered.
# Chunk 1195
A large PVR volume can contribute to urinary incontinence in two ways. If the bladder is overdistended, increases in intra-abdominal pressure can force urine past the urethral sphincter, causing stress incontinence (sometimes termed “overﬂow incontinence” in the context of a large PVR volume). In some cases, bladder overdistention may provoke an uninhibited contraction of the detrusor muscle, leading to incontinence. These conditions may coexist, further complicating the problem.
# Chunk 1196
Urodynamics At its most basic level, a urodynamic study is anything that provides objective evidence about lower urinary tract function (38). In this sense, measurement of a patient’s voided urine volume and catheterization to determine her PVR volume are urodynamic studies. A frequency/volume chart is also a valuable urodynamic study. Obtaining clinically valuable information does not always require the use of expensive, complex technology. After basic testing, further testing is recommended in the following circumstances: the diagnosis is uncertain (for example, because of major discrepancies between the history, the voiding diary, and symptom scales); surgery is being considered; an elevated PVR volume, a neurologic condition that may complicate treatment (such as multiple sclerosis), marked pelvic organ prolapse, or numerous prior surgical attempts at correction. Bladder and kidney imaging should be considered if the patient has hematuria in the absence of an infection. Current urodynamic definitions are summarized in Table 26.6.
# Chunk 1197
Figure 26.7 Leak point pressure. The abdominal leak point pressure (LPP) is 114 cm H2O (the abdominal pressure at which the patient leaked urine).
# Chunk 1198
Bladder training focuses on modifying bladder function by changing voiding habits. Behavioral therapy focuses on improving voluntary control rather than bladder function (51). The key component to bladder training is a scheduled toileting program. After reviewing the patient’s voiding diary, an initial voiding interval is chosen that represents the longest interval between voiding that is comfortable. She is instructed to empty her bladder when she awakes, and then every time during the day that the interval is reached (for example, every 30 to 60 minutes). When the patient feels the urge to void during that interval, she is instructed to use urge-suppression strategies, such as distraction or relaxation techniques, until she gets to the stated interval. Effective distraction strategies include mental exercises (such as mathematical problems), deep breathing, or “singing” the words to a song silently. The main goal is to avoid running to the bathroom at the moment of severe urgency. Another strategy is to quickly contract the pelvic muscle several times in a row (“freeze and squeeze”), which often lessens urgency. Gradually, the interval is increased (usually weekly) until the patient voids every 2 to 3 hours. Bladder training is most effective when women record every void and check in (by telephone or in person) with a health care provider weekly. This program lasts for about 6 weeks. Bladder training is effective; in a trial in which bladder training was compared with treatment with oxybutynin, 73% of women in the bladder training group were clinically cured (52).
# Chunk 1199
Patients with neurogenic detrusor overactivity, rather than idiopathic detrusor overactivity, do not respond as well to behavioral therapy because the problem is actually one of neural pathway destruction rather than the need to reestablish cortical control mechanisms. Frequently, these patients have a trigger volume of urine that sets off a contraction that they cannot control voluntarily. They may benefit from a timed schedule in which they void at regular intervals (such as every 2 hours) to keep their bladder volume below the trigger point. Attempting to lengthen the interval between voids often does not work well.
# Chunk 1200
Vaginal devices (pessaries) and urethral inserts are available for treating stress urinary incontinence. In a tertiary care population, approximately two-thirds of women with stress urinary incontinence offered a trial of vaginal devices chose to undergo pessary fitting (54). Most (89%) achieved a successful fit. Of those who took a pessary home to manage their stress urinary incontinence, approximately one-half used it for more than 6 months. Women who stopped using the pessary generally did so within the first month. In an intent-to-treat analysis of a recent large multisite randomized trial, 3 months after beginning either pessary or behavioral therapy, 40% of those randomized to pessary and 49% of those doing behavioral therapy were “very much” or “much” better. By 12 months there were no group differences in outcomes and patient satisfaction was greater than 50% for each group (55). Some women are pleased to be able to avoid surgery or to use a “crutch” while waiting for the effect of pelvic muscle training; others prefer a treatment option (like surgery) that does not require daily intervention. Examples of some vaginal devices are shown in Figure 26.9.
# Chunk 1201
relatively pure stress incontinence, no history of recurrent urinary tract infections, and no serious contraindications to bacteriuria (e.g., artificial heart valves). The FemSoft device was U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved in 1997 and is the only urethral insert that is available in the United States. Several other urethral inserts and urethral occlusion devices were marketed with good effectiveness but were withdrawn from the market. In a 5-year, multicenter trial involving 150 women with a mean follow-up of 15 months, a statistically significant reduction in incontinence episodes and pad weight were observed with 93% of the women having a negative pad test at 12 months. However, urinary tract infections were common and found in 31.3% of the subjects (56). Urethral inserts have not developed a widespread acceptance but may offer a viable treatment option for some select patients.
# Chunk 1202
An analogue of arginine vasopressin, DDAVP, is used extensively to treat children with nocturnal enuresis. Some studies suggest that it may be useful in adults (62,63). It is available as a nasal spray and as an oral preparation. When taken orally, the dose required is approximately 10 times greater because of the increased availability of the nasal preparation. Complications associated with the DDAVP include hyponatremia, particularly in patients with excessive ﬂuid intake; therefore, it is essential in higher-risk patients to measure serum sodium levels periodically.
# Chunk 1203
In a randomized, placebo-controlled study comparing nighttime doses of placebo and 1 mg of bumetanide (a loop diuretic), bumetanide decreased nocturia episodes by 25% compared with placebo (65). Patients who produce half of their total urine at night often benefit from the use of a diuretic (e.g., 20 mg furosemide) in the late afternoon to move ﬂuid through the system and decrease their nighttime urine production.
# Chunk 1204
Several shifts occurred in recommendations regarding surgical therapy in the past generation. In 1997, the American Urological Association convened a clinical guidelines panel to analyze published outcomes data on surgical procedures to treat female stress urinary incontinence and to produce practice recommendations to guide surgical decision making (67). The panel concluded that colposuspension (e.g., Burch, Marshall-Marchetti-Krantz [MMK]) and slings were more effective than transvaginal needle suspensions or anterior repairs for longterm success (48-month cure/dry rates). The median probability estimates for cure/dry rates at 48 months and longer were 84% (95% confidence interval [CI], 79%–88%) for colposuspension and 83% (95% CI, 75%–88%) for sling procedures, compared with 67% (95% CI, 53%–79%) for transvaginal needle suspensions and 61% (95% CI, 47%–72%) for anterior repairs. Thus, the latter two procedures are no longer recommended as adequate treatments for stress urinary incontinence.
# Chunk 1205
Needle suspension procedures are so named because they suspend the urethra and bladder neck through a technique that involves passage of sutures between the vagina and anterior abdominal wall using a specially designed long needle carrier. Although initial cure rates are between 70% to 90%, rates decrease significantly over time in many series, with 5-year success rates of 50% or less (67,74–77). Therefore, these operations are no longer recommended.
# Chunk 1206
A 2009 Cochrane review found that 69% to 88% of women treated with Burch colposuspension were largely continent, and 5 years after surgery the continence rate remained high at 70%. Twelve trials were available that compared colposuspension with various forms of suburethral slings; there were no significant differences in failure rates between slings and colposuspension at any time interval studied (85).
# Chunk 1207
Sling operations traditionally were performed using a combined vaginal and abdominal approach (Fig. 26.11). The anterior vagina is opened, the space of Retzius is dissected on each side of the bladder neck, and a sling is passed around the bladder neck and urethra and then attached to the anterior rectus fascia or some other structure to cradle the urethra in a supporting hammock. This supports the urethra and allows it to be compressed during periods of increased intra-abdominal pressure (87–97). The sling can be made of organic or inorganic materials. Organic materials can be autologous tissues harvested from the patient (e.g., fascia lata, rectus fascia, tendon, round ligament, rectus muscle, vagina), processed allografts from human donors (e.g., fascia lata, dermis), or heterologous tissues harvested from another species and processed for surgical use (e.g., ox dura mater, porcine dermis). Synthetic materials (e.g., Silastic, Gore-Tex, Marlex) are popular because of their consistent strength and availability, but historically these substances were plagued by problems with erosion and infection when used around the urethra (67,98,99).
# Chunk 1208
Another form of minimally invasive sling is the transobturator tape procedure (also known as a TOT) or transobturator suburethral tape. This modification was designed to reduce complications associated with retropubic needle passage. Inserting the trocar through the obturator space theoretically lessens the risk of bladder, bowel, or vascular injury because the procedure involves passing the polypropylene midurethral sling through the obturator membrane along its ischiorectal fossa path, bypassing the pelvic cavity altogether (104,105). In a multicenter trial, 183 women from seven sites underwent a transobturator tape procedure for stress and mixed urinary incontinence. At 1-year follow-up 80.5% patients were cured (defined as absence of subjective report of stress urine leakage and negative cough stress test). Perioperative complications included one bladder perforation, two urethral perforations, and one lateral vaginal perforation. Tape erosion necessitating removal occurred in five cases (three vaginal and two urethral) (106).
# Chunk 1209
Bulking Agents Injectable (so-called bulking) agents are less invasive than surgery, and although they are less likely than surgery to result in cure, they relieve symptoms in many women. In the United States, glutaraldehyde cross-linked bovine collagen (Contigen), carbon beads (Durasphere), cross-linked polydimethylsiloxane (Macroplastique), and calcium hydroxylapatite (Coaptite) are approved for use to treat stress urinary incontinence and can be injected either peri-or transurethrally. The newer agents were studied primarily by transurethral injection. Injecting a material around the periurethral tissues facilitates coaptation of the urethra under conditions of increased intra-abdominal pressure (111–116). In a 15-article review, the short-term cure or improvement rate was 75% (117). Contigen can be passed easily through small-bore needles under local anesthesia but requires preoperative skin testing to check for possible allergic reactions (3%). Durasphere is nonantigenic (thus no skin testing is required) and does not migrate. As compared with collagen, Durasphere appears to have similar reduction in leakage episodes and is more likely to require only a single injection (112). This bulking agent does require a larger-gauge needle for injection and is somewhat more difficult to inject than collagen. Macroplastique is approved for use in the United States. This material appears to offer better outcomes as defined by improvement and cure rates than Contigen at 12 months (113). A follow-up 24-month study revealed that 84% of patients maintained improvement from the 12-month assessment (114). A recent prospective randomized trial of Coaptite versus Contigen revealed similar improvement and safety profile at 12 months when compared Contigen. Coaptite required less material per injection (4 mL vs. 6.6 mL) and was more likely to require only a single injection (115). These techniques may require several injections to achieve continence, and the long-term success of these operations remains poorly studied.
# Chunk 1210
Complications In choosing surgical management, surgeons must weigh the chance of cure against the chance of severe complications. In the aforementioned randomized trial comparing TVT and Burch, women undergoing TVT were more likely to experience a bladder perforation than those undergoing the Burch procedure (9% vs. 2%, respectively) but less likely to have a fever (1% vs. 5%) or prolonged catheterization more than 29 days (3% vs. 13%) (118). Less common complications require a large sample size to detect differences. Severe complications reported on the FDA manufacturer and user facility device experience (MAUDE) database include vascular injuries, bowel injuries, and patient deaths after retropubic midurethral slings and groin and leg pain, visceral injuries, and severe infections from transobturator approaches (119). Even though these serious life-threatening complications are rare, surgeons must be cognizant of the risks and use intraoperative safety measures to prevent their occurrence.
# Chunk 1211
In a group of 96 patients with implants (who responded favorably during the test stimulation period), reductions in urge incontinence episodes and severity were still seen at an average of 31 months after implantation. The device was removed in 11 of the 96 patients because of lack of efficacy, pain, or bowel dysfunction. There were no permanent injuries (123). The technique for this procedure evolved to include the location of a generation implant site on the back and the performance of the procedure in two stages with initial percutaneous implantation of a quadpolar instead of a unipolar stimulator. These modifications may improve success rates and decrease the morbidity associated with these procedures. A recent systematic review evaluating eight randomized trials concluded that continuous sacral neural stimulation offers benefits for carefully selected patients with overactive bladder and urinary retention in the absence of obstruction, but many implants did not work or required revisions. The review recommended trials to assess effectiveness directly compared to other treatment options (124).
# Chunk 1212
Percutaneous tibial nerve stimulation (PTNS) was first described in 1987 to treat lower urinary tract symptoms and FDA approved in 2000 for overactive bladder. This therapy uses peripheral neurostimulation technique with small (34-gauge) needle electrode inserted at a 60-degree angle approximately 5 cm cephalad to the medial malleolus and slightly posterior to the tibia. The treatment course typically consists of a weekly 30-minute session for 12 weeks. A multicenter, double-blind, randomized control trial involved 220 women with overactive bladder symptoms randomized 1:1 to 12 weeks of treatment with weekly PTNS or sham therapy. The PTNS treatment group achieved statistically significant improvement in bladder symptoms, with 55% reporting moderate to marked improvement compared to 21% in the sham arm compared to baseline (125). The OrBIT (Overactive Bladder Innovative Therapy) trial compared PTNS to extended-release tolterodine in the treatment of OAB and found similar improvements in both groups (126). A large portion of responders in this trial (96%) had sustained improvement in OAB symptoms at 12-month follow-up when receiving periodic treatments (127,128). PTNS may represent a viable treatment option for patients who cannot tolerate side effects from anticholinergic medications, who do not responded to behavioral therapy, or who decline implantable neurostimulators.
# Chunk 1213
Vaginal and abdominal hysterectomies are associated with a 0.02% to 0.85% incidence of ureteral injury (137). The injury rate increases in reconstructive pelvic surgeries, reaching as high as 11% after uterosacral ligament suspension (138). In a study of 46 women who underwent proximal uterosacral ligament vaginal vault suspension, three of the five women with cystoscopic evidence of obstruction were treated successfully by removing and replacing the sutures. This finding emphasizes the importance of confirming ureteral integrity at surgery. The value of cystoscopy to evaluate ureteral injury after minimally invasive hysterectomy is unknown because this injury is often thought to occur in association with thermal injury, and it is unclear whether obstruction or decreased ﬂow will be apparent intraoperatively.
# Chunk 1214
Administering indigo carmine dye intravenously 5 minutes before cystoscopy aides in the assessment of ureteral patency. Quick efﬂux of stained urine should be seen bilaterally. Sluggish efﬂux should prompt further investigation. However, preexisting ureteral obstruction may be responsible for lack of ﬂow. In 157 women who underwent complex urogynecologic procedures, 5 cases (3.2%) of unsuspected ureteral obstruction were identified with intraoperative cystoscopy (139). One was caused by ureteral ligation, and the remaining four represented chronic ureteral obstruction resulting from pelvic organ prolapse (two cases), ureteropelvic junction obstruction (one case), and ureterovesical junction stenosis after prior transurethral resection of bladder cancer (one case).
# Chunk 1215
Figure 26.15 Cystoscopic view of normal-appearing trigone with left ureteral orifice visible.

Voiding Dysfunction Women are afﬂicted less commonly than men with voiding difficulties, but these disorders do occur in women and can be defined as emptying dysfunction resulting from relaxation of the pelvic ﬂoor musculature or failure of the detrusor muscle to contract appropriately. True outﬂow obstruction (defined as a detrusor pressure of more than 50 cm H2O in association with a urine ﬂow rate of less than 15 mL/sec) is rare in women and, when seen, is usually found in those who underwent obstructive bladder neck surgery for stress incontinence (140,141). For normal voiding to occur, the pelvic ﬂoor and urethral sphincter must relax, which should happen in conjunction with a coordinated contraction of the detrusor muscle that leads to complete bladder emptying. The bladder may be emptied by other mechanisms, such as by abdominal straining in the absence of a detrusor contraction or simply by relaxation of the pelvic ﬂoor. Complete bladder emptying is not the same as normal voiding. Some women may empty their bladders completely but only by expending great effort over several minutes. In such cases, voiding is clearly abnormal, even though the bladder is empty when voiding ceases. In the worst cases, voiding is both difficult and incomplete.
# Chunk 1216
Other causes of voiding difficulty include medications (such as antihistamines and anticholinergic agents), infections (in particular, herpes simplex virus, and urinary tract infections), obstruction (following bladder neck surgery, or in women with advanced pelvic organ prolapse), overdistension, severe constipation (particularly in the elderly), and, rarely, psychogenic factors. Fowler’s syndrome refers to unexplained urinary retention occurring as an isolated phenomenon (144). Such women usually are between 20 and 35 years of age. Commonly the first retention episode will be triggered by an event such as surgery or childbirth. Retention rarely resolves but is not associated with the development of other disorders.
# Chunk 1217
Evaluation Evaluation of a woman with voiding difficulty begins with a careful physical examination. Advanced pelvic organ prolapse may contribute to urinary retention, but it is unlikely that prolapse above the level of the vaginal introitus will be the sole cause of retention. When in doubt, the woman can wear a pessary for a week to see whether elevating the prolapse reduces the voiding difficulty. Occasionally pelvic masses—in particular, low anterior myomas—may cause urinary retention. Abnormal findings detected during neurologic examination of the perineum and lower extremities may suggest the need to focus on the spine. Urodynamic evaluation will help determine whether the woman has an obstruction (manifested by high detrusor pressures during voiding or by no urethral relaxation during voiding) or whether the detrusor muscle is not contracting. The latter is not necessarily indicative of a neurogenic disorder in women, because a large minority of normal healthy women void by urethral and pelvic ﬂoor muscle relaxation alone, with no detrusor contraction. Cystourethroscopy may reveal an obstructing lesion, such as a polyp, tumor, ureterocele, or ball-valve stone. Usually, the evaluation reveals no obvious source, and treatment can commence.
# Chunk 1218
In addition to decreasing urinary urgency and incontinence caused by detrusor overactivity, neuromodulation of the sacral nerve roots may help women with nonobstructive urinary retention (122). In a trial of 177 patients with idiopathic urinary retention, those who had greater than 50% improvement in baseline voiding symptoms during a test stimulation period qualified for surgical implantation of InterStim. Of these, 37 were randomly assigned to early implantation, whereas 31 in the control group delayed implantation for 6 months. Improved voiding occurred in 83% of the implant group compared with 9% of the control group at 6 months (146). It appears that the long-term success rates of InterStim for urinary retention remain high. In a trial following patients for 5-years after implantation, 71% of the patients with urinary retention had successful outcomes (147). Although this technology requires a surgical procedure, many women favor this therapy over lifelong self-catheterization.
# Chunk 1219
The prevalence of bladder pain syndrome varies widely depending on the diagnostic criteria utilized. When mild and moderately severe cases are considered, the syndrome is not rare (154). Estimates of prevalence in the United States range from 52 per 100,000 women in the population-based Nurses Health Study to as high as 1 in 4.5 women “with accurate diagnostic records” (155,156). The prevalence appears to be 6 to 15 times more common among women than men (155,157). The identification of risk factors for bladder pain syndrome is particularly challenging because of the typically long delay in diagnosis (154). The Interstitial Cystitis Database study confirms many of the previous epidemiologic observations: affected individuals are predominately female (92%), white (91%), and report an average age of symptom onset of 32.2 years (150,155).
# Chunk 1220
Hydrodistention of the bladder (usually under anesthesia) is recommended as a treatment option and can result in clinical improvement in some patients. Likewise, bladder installations are commonly used for acute treatment of bladder pain syndrome. The medications used range from local anesthetics to bladder specific medications including resiniferatoxin, dimethyl sulfoxide, BCG, pentosan polysulfate, and oxybutynin. Some patients benefit from the instillation into the bladder of 50 mL of a 50% solution of dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) for 20 to 30 minutes every other week for four or five sessions. A recent Cochran review found that evidence is limited and randomized controlled trials are needed to adequately assess outcomes. Intravesical installations of BCG and oxybutynin are reasonably well tolerated, and evidence is the most promising for these agents (157).
# Chunk 1221
Pentosan polysulfate (Elmiron) is an FDA-approved oral agent with heparin-like activity that attempts to replace the glycosaminoglycan sulfate layer that is believed deficient in these patients. The FDA-recommended oral dosage of pentosan polysulfate is 100 mg, three times a day. Patients may not feel relief from pain for the first 2 to 4 months, and it may take up to 6 months for a decrease in urinary frequency to occur.
# Chunk 1222
27.

Snooks SJ, Swash M, Mathers SE, et al. Effect of vaginal delivery on the pelvic ﬂoor: a 5-year follow-up. Br J Surg 1990;77:1358–1360.
# Chunk 1223
Studies are needed to determine the characteristics of those patients who would derive long-term benefit from vaginal versus abdominal approaches to the surgical repair of pelvic organ prolapse.
# Chunk 1224
In the United States, 11% of women up to the age of 80 years have surgery for pelvic organ prolapse or urinary incontinence, and nearly one-third of procedures are repeat surgery (3). Data from the Women’s Health Initiative revealed anterior pelvic organ prolapse in 34.3%, posterior wall prolapse in 18.6%, and uterine prolapse in 14.3% of women in the study (7). In this study, a significant risk factor associated with prolapse was vaginal delivery. After adjusting for age, ethnicity, and body mass index, women with at least one vaginal delivery were twice as likely as nulliparous women to have pelvic organ prolapse. Causes of pelvic support disorders are most likely multifactorial, however; factors other than vaginal delivery also are associated with the development of these disorders. One study found that the incidence of prolapse doubled with each decade of life between the ages of 20 and 59 years (8). In another study, each year of increasing age was associated with a 12% increase in the risk of developing prolapse (9). Other associated risk factors for the development of POP include history of hysterectomy (8), obesity (7,10,11), history of previous prolapse operations, and race (11).
# Chunk 1225
Pelvic organ prolapse results from attenuation of the supportive structures, whether by actual tears or “breaks” or by neuromuscular dysfunction or both. Support of the vaginal canal is provided by the enveloping endopelvic connective tissue and its condensations at the vaginal apex, which form the cardinal uterosacral ligament complex. The endopelvic connective tissue is the first line of support, buttressed intimately with the pelvic diaphragm, composed of the levator ani and coccygeus muscles. These muscles provide a supportive diaphragm through which the urethra, vagina, and rectum egress (Fig. 27.1). The muscular support provides basal tonicity and support of the pelvic structures; when contracted, as in the setting of increased abdominal pressure, the rectum, vagina, and urethra are pulled anteriorly toward the pubis.
# Chunk 1226
Definitions The more common pelvic support disorders include rectoceles and cystoceles (Fig. 27.2), enteroceles (Fig. 27.3), and uterine prolapse (Fig. 27.4); reﬂecting displacement of the rectum, small bowel, bladder, and uterus, respectively; resulting from failure of the endopelvic connective tissue, levator ani muscular support, or both (12).
# Chunk 1227
An enterocele is a herniation of the peritoneum and small bowel and is the only true hernia among the pelvic support disorders. Most enteroceles occur downward between the uterosacral ligaments and the rectovaginal space, but they may also occur primarily apically, especially in the setting of a previous hysterectomy.
# Chunk 1228
Although as many as 50% of women older than age 50 have some degree of pelvic organ prolapse (15), fewer than 20% seek treatment (16). This may result from a number of causes, including lack of symptoms, embarrassment, or misperceptions about available treatment options. Although pelvic organ prolapse is not life threatening, it can impose a significant burden of social and physical restrictions of activities, impact on psychological well-being, and overall quality of life.
# Chunk 1229
Data relating pelvic ﬂoor symptoms to the extent and location of prolapse are weak (17–19). Any symptoms associated with physical findings of lower stage prolapse require careful evaluation, especially if surgery is being considered. A recent retrospective study of 330 patients reported that women with more advanced prolapse were less likely to have symptoms of stress incontinence and more likely to use manual reduction of the prolapse to void. Therefore, careful consideration of lower urinary tract symptoms is important. Prolapse severity was not associated with bowel or sexual problems in this study (20).
# Chunk 1230
Physical Examination In evaluating patients with pelvic organ prolapse, it is particularly useful to divide the pelvis into compartments, each of which may exhibit specific defects. The use of a Graves speculum or Baden retractor can help to evaluate the apical compartment of the vagina. The anterior and posterior compartments are best examined with the use of a univalve or Sims speculum. The speculum is placed posteriorly to retract the posterior wall downward when examining the anterior compartment and placed anteriorly to retract the anterior wall upward when examining the posterior compartment. A rectovaginal examination may be useful in evaluating the posterior compartment to distinguish a posterior vaginal wall defect from a dissecting apical enterocele or a combination of both.
# Chunk 1231
The efficacy of biofeedback therapy in the treatment of impaired defecation associated with a rectocele has been determined (35). Thirty-two female patients, median age 52 years (range, 34–77 years), experiencing impaired rectal evacuation with a rectocele greater than 2 cm at proctography underwent a structured behavioral retraining. Immediate and medium-term follow-up results were reported (median 10 months; range 2–30 months). Fifty-six percent of patients (n = 14) felt a little and 16% (n = 4) felt major improvement in symptoms, including 3 (12%) with complete symptom relief. Immediately after biofeedback there was a modest reduction in need to strain (67; 50%), feeling of incomplete evacuation (73; 59%), and need to assist defecation digitally (79; 63%) that was maintained at follow-up. Bowel movement frequency was significantly normalized at follow-up (p = .02). These investigators concluded that behavioral retraining, including biofeedback therapy, may be an effective primary therapy for some patients with a rectocele associated with impaired defecation.
# Chunk 1232
Pessaries provide pelvic organ support within the vaginal vault. Two categories of pessaries— support and space filling—exist for prolapse (39). The ring pessary (with diaphragm) is a commonly used support pessary, and the Gelhorn pessary is a commonly used space-filling pessary. The ring and other support pessaries are recommended for stage I and II prolapse, whereas the space-filling pessaries are used for stage III and IV prolapse (40). It is unclear whether pessaries can prevent the progression of POP with regular use. A prospective cohort study addressed this issue in a series of 56 women who were fitted with a pessary, of which 33.9% (n = 19) continued use for at least 1 year (41). Baseline and follow-up pelvic examinations were performed using the POP-Q system (23). The women removed the pessary 48 hours before one visit, but there was no information to ascertain adherence to pessary use. No woman had worsening of the prolapse, and four women (21.1%; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.2%–43.7%) had an improvement. Improvement overall was noted in women with anterior compartment prolapse.
# Chunk 1233
In women with stages I and II prolapse with stress urinary incontinence, a continence pessary may be considered and has been shown to produce patient satisfaction above 50% at 12 months (42). There are no randomized controlled trials of pessary use in women with POP (43). Likewise, there are no consensus guidelines on the care of pessaries (i.e., intervals between changes), the role of local estrogens, or the type of pessary indicated for specific types of POP (43). Manufacturers recommendations and different pessary types can be seen in Figure 27.11. Effective and satisfactory outcomes have been reported for stage II or greater prolapse using the Gelhorn and ring diaphragm pessary (36). After 2 to 6 months, 77% to 92% of women with a successful pessary fitting were satisfied and, using intention-to-treat analysis, 44% to 67% of all women who were treated initially with a pessary for prolapse were satisfied. There are few other series describing pessary use for prolapse with greater than 4 weeks follow-up (36,38,44,45).
# Chunk 1234
After the initial fitting, the patient should return in 1 to 2 weeks and then at 4 to 6 weeks, depending on her independence with the pessary, her proficiency in placement and removal, and her cognitive and motor abilities (44). After this initial follow-up, follow-up should continue at 6-to 12-month intervals at the discretion of the provider and depending on the patient’s ability to insert and remove the pessary effectively. If the patient needs to return to the provider for removal and cleaning of the pessary, 4-to 12-week intervals are more appropriate.
# Chunk 1235
A therapeutic procedure in which the vaginal apex is suspended to the uterosacral ligaments above the level of the ischial spines had excellent success rates in an observational study of 302 participants (69). When access to the posterior cul-de-sac is attained, the uterosacral ligament remnant can usually be found adjacent to the pelvic sidewall peritoneum just cephalad to the palpable ischial spine. Up to three sutures are placed in each ligament and incorporated into the anterior and posterior fibromuscular layer of the vagina. Some surgeons approximate the ligaments in the midline to close the cul-de-sac with the intention to treat or prevent enterocele formation (70). Other surgeons suspend the right and left vaginal apex to the ipsilateral uterosacral ligament, leaving the cul-de-sac open to avoid impinging on the rectum and adversely affecting bowel function.
# Chunk 1236
Multiple sutures may increase the incidence of tissue devascularization and necrosis, thus resulting in failure of the suspension. One case series of bilateral single suture uterosacral suspensions demonstrated a 15% stage I and no stage II recurrence among 71 women with a mean follow-up of 21.3 months (72). Exposure can be accomplished through the vaginal cuff after hysterectomy, a transverse incision at the vaginal cuff in cases of vaginal vault prolapse or descent, and, rarely, through a posterior colpotomy when uterine or cervical conservation is desired. When the apical vaginal wall is attenuated, it is excised. The pelvic sidewall, lateral to the sigmoid colon, is exposed using Breisky-Navratil retractors and a pack to hold the small bowel cephalad and to place the sigmoid colon and sidewall peritoneum on stretch (Fig. 27.12A). After palpation of the ischial spine, single permanent sutures of 0 or 1 polypropylene are placed through the peritoneum and adjacent ligament approximately 1 cm cephalad to and at the same posterior level as the ischial spines. Traction on the sutures and palpation of the site should reveal that the sutures are firmly attached to the ligamentous structures. The sutures are tagged for use after repair of defects of the anterior compartment. The peritoneum is dissected off the vaginal fibromuscular wall posterior to the vaginal cuff. The suspension sutures are then secured with large bites into the posterior vaginal fibromuscular tissue and anterior fibromuscular tissue, then locked in place to approximate anterior to posterior connective tissue and to fix the suture to the vaginal apex so that it may be moved up to the ligament (Fig. 27.12B). If a rectovaginal enterocele is present, it is dissected, reduced, and closed, approximating the prerectal fascia or anterior rectal wall to the posterior fibromuscular vaginal tissue just caudad to the suspension sutures. Absorbable cuff closure sutures are placed at each cuff angle and one to two bites are taken to approximate anterior to posterior vaginal cuff over the suspension suture sites. When indicated, plication of the central cuff anterior to the posterior fibromuscular tissue with a box stitch is also performed. These sutures are secured after the suspension (pulley) sutures are tied, then cuff closure is completed from each side with the absorbable sutures in a running fashion. Cystoscopy is performed to document ureteral patency. Ureteral compromise has been noted in only 2 of 150 cases performed. The procedure provides adequate support of POP-Q point C and D in all 58 subjects evaluated more than 1 year postoperatively (72).
# Chunk 1237
Recurrence rates of traditional “fibromuscular plication” anterior repairs vary from 3% to 92%; however, studies define recurrence in numerous ways, from minimal prolapse to stage III descent (63,73–81). The clinical significance of recurrent mild cystoceles (stage I) that are asymptomatic is debatable because many of these defects do not progress to larger ones. When traditional anterior repairs are performed in patients with POP-Q stage II or greater cystoceles (frequently concurrently with other procedures), a 20% recurrence rate of stage II or greater prolapse is not uncommon, although overall recurrence rates as low as 3% have been reported (76). Many studies do not define how the participants were evaluated postoperatively and vary with respect to patient populations, type and severity of defects, presence of concurrent defects, surgical technique, and follow-up time and length. Some studies have suggested higher recurrence rates when these repairs are performed concurrently with sacrospinous suspensions and hypothesize that this type of apical suspension may predispose the repaired anterior wall to greater pressure transmission (63,64). These studies may show higher failure rates because patients having such concurrent repairs may be more likely to have more complicated forms of prolapse or more extensive pelvic ﬂoor defects than other patients.
# Chunk 1238
Paravaginal Repair The paravaginal or “lateral defect” repair involves reattachment of the anterior lateral vaginal sulcus to the obturator internus fascia and, in some cases, muscle at the level of the arcus tendineus pelvis (“white line”) (82,83). It is usually performed as a bilateral procedure via transvaginal or retropubic (abdominal or laparoscopic) access. The procedure essentially restores normal anatomy; however, because it is not practical to rebuild the defective endopelvic–fascial bridge to the pelvic sidewall, it attaches the vaginal wall itself. Observational studies have reported good success with this procedure (80%–95%); however, long-term data on durability and function are lacking (12,84–88). Most women with anteriolateral detachments usually have separation of the upper vaginal fornices from the arcus tendineus immediately adjacent to the ischial spine (Fig. 27.13) (89). Thus, it is important to resuspend those specific areas.
# Chunk 1239
A complete review of rectocele, anorectal functional disorders, and various repairs can be found elsewhere (92). Reported anatomic cure rates for traditional posterior colporrhaphy have ranged from 76% to 90% with variable follow-up intervals (93–97). Most studies show a benefit in ease of defecation if patients are using splinting preoperatively; however, overall defecatory dysfunction (defined as constipation) was not relieved in most patients and increased (approximately 30%) after the procedure in one study (95). These repairs appear to have little to no benefit in the treatment of fecal incontinence. It is not surprising that the repairs are not particularly effective for defecatory dysfunction related to disorders of constipation or for fecal incontinence because these problems have multifactorial causes. De novo dyspareunia is reported to occur in 8% to 26% of sexually active patients who have traditional posterior colporrhaphy and is not always associated with levator plication procedures (93–96,98,99). Potential causes for dyspareunia, other than vaginal strictures or introital tightness, include scarring with immobility of the vaginal wall, levator spasm, and neuralgia associated with sutures or dissection. Dyspareunia also may occur when a Burch procedure or other procedures that anteriorly displace the vaginal canal are combined with a posterior repair (96). Careful surgical technique and appropriate choice of procedure should decrease the incidence of postoperative dyspareunia.
# Chunk 1240
The aim of transanal rectocele repair, usually performed by colorectal surgeons rather than gynecologists, is to remove or plicate redundant rectal mucosa, to decrease the size of the rectal vault, and to plicate the rectal muscularis. The rectovaginal adventitia and septum are plicated as well, probably along with the posterior vaginal muscularis. The vaginal epithelium is not incised or excised with this procedure, which probably accounts for the reported lack of adverse affects on sexual function in contrast to the vaginal approach to posterior repair. Two randomized trials and several case series from transanal repairs with mean follow-up intervals of 12 to 52 months report anatomic cure rates of 70% to 98%, improved constipation and fecal incontinence, with less need for vaginal digitation to expel stool (104–108). Complications included infections and rectovaginal fistulas, which are surprisingly rare in the reported series. From the gynecologic perspective, transanal posterior repair is an option only when the procedure is performed for defecatory dysfunction and not for prolapse of the posterior vaginal wall. The question remains whether the transanal approach with defect excision and repair improves defecatory dysfunction better than a defect-specific transperineal or transvaginal approach with imbrication of tissues to correct palpable weakness in the rectal wall and its adjacent connective tissues.
# Chunk 1241
Synthetic transvaginal mesh kits have become commonplace in the treatment of pelvic organ prolapse. These devices were quickly adopted by many surgeons in an effort to improve outcomes, particularly in patients who had failed native tissue repairs. Studies have provided mixed results as to the effectiveness of these devices. There may be a lower recurrence rate in the anterior compartment when compared with native tissue repairs; however, mesh erosions occur in 2% to 19% of those treated (109–113). The severity of mesh erosions ranges from subclinical to severe dyspareunia requiring surgical resection. Small mesh erosions are sometimes successfully managed with vaginal estrogen alone. As with anterior compartment procedures, graft materials have been used to improve the success of posterior compartment repairs. One recent systematic review concluded that there is insufficient evidence to evaluate the use of synthetic mesh in the repair of pelvic organ prolapse (114). It is also notable that the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has recently released a warning about complications that may arise from the use of transvaginal mesh procedures for pelvic organ prolapse.
# Chunk 1242
Abdominal uterosacral colposuspension has been used prophylactically after hysterectomy and therapeutically for apical prolapse with cardinal/uterosacral defects (115). It can be performed through laparotomy incisions or by laparoscopic techniques. For the therapeutic procedure, a no. 1 polypropylene or delayed absorbable suture is placed cephalad and at the same level posterior as the ischial spines, which may be palpated transabdominally or with a vaginal finger to push a vaginal fornix to the spine under observation with a laparoscope. One technique is to place one or two permanent sutures through one ligament, then, after reefing across the culde-sac peritoneum at the sigmoid border, through the contralateral ligament, and then through the fibromuscular tissue just anterior to the vaginal cuff. Tying the suture suspends the vaginal cuff and obliterates any enterocele defect. Another technique employs separate sutures placed at the same level into each uterosacral ligament and anchored anteriorly and posteriorly to the ipsilateral side of the vaginal cuff, similar to procedures performed transvaginally. Cystoscopy is performed after the procedure to document ureteral patency. One study found subjective and objective recurrence rates to be low (12% and 5%, respectively) (115).
# Chunk 1243
Abdominal Approach to Posterior Repair

When abdominal sacrocolpopexy is planned for apical vaginal prolapse and concomitant rectocele is present, some have advocated extending the posterior graft down the posterior vaginal wall to correct the defect (116). The technique of sacral colpoperineopexy is used to replace the normal vaginal suspensory ligaments and to augment or replace the posterior fibromuscular plane with graft material that runs from the sacrum to the perineal body (116). Its purpose is to correct the posterior compartment defects and to suspend the perineal body, thus preventing descent and opening of the genital hiatus. It has been performed transabdominally or as a combined abdominal and vaginal procedure with both Mersilene mesh and dermal allografts (116,117). Mesh erosion occurred frequently when the vagina was open: 16% for vaginal placed sutures and 40% for transvaginally placed mesh (117). The use of dermal allografts results in an anatomical cure rate of 82% with short-term follow-up and a mean of 12 months following surgery (116,117). Significant improvements also were seen in bowel symptoms. One author reported results on 205 of 236 subjects who underwent an abdominal sacral colpoperineopexy with polypropylene mesh (Marlex) without opening the vagina (118). This procedure included two straps of mesh attached from the lateral anterior vagina to Cooper’s ligament. Ten-year satisfaction rates were 68%, and erosion rates were 5%.
# Chunk 1244
The standard approach to transabdominal apical vaginal suspension procedures is the abdominal sacrocolpopexy. A complete review of published data on these procedures developed by the Pelvic Floor Disorders Network, which is sponsored by the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD), has been published (121). These procedures use graft material attached to the prolapsed region of the anterior and posterior vaginal walls at or encompassing the vaginal apex and suspended to the anterior longitudinal ligament of the sacrum. Cervical sacral suspensions may also be performed when uterine or cervical conservation is desired. Surgical variations abound and include configuration of the graft on the vagina, the extent to which the anterior and posterior vagina are attached to the graft, variable graft and suture materials, presence or absence of peritoneal closure over the graft, and obliteration of the culde-sac for treatment or prevention of the enterocele or sigmoidocele. A thorough preoperative evaluation is important to exclude more distal defects or stress incontinence, which should be repaired concurrently, and other lower urinary tract or anorectal problems. In published reports, cure rates for apical prolapse range from 78% to 100% (most greater than 90%); when cure is defined as no postoperative prolapse, the range widens from 56% to 100%, although subsequent anterior or posterior vaginal prolapse has not been as consistently reported as has apical prolapse (122–131). Potential advantages of this procedure over transvaginal procedures are less paravaginal scarring and denervation than may be present with transvaginal approaches, and fixation of the entire vaginal apical area by a permanent piece of material to a stable structure (the anterior sacral ligament), which may be more durable than the transvaginal techniques that use the patient’s own connective tissue.
# Chunk 1245
Complications of these procedures include (i) erosions of graft material or suture material, which may be caused by graft or suture infection usually secondary to vaginal wall penetration, or performing the procedure adjacent to a vaginal incision, or securing the graft to an attenuated avascular wall with inadequate fibromuscular tissue (3.4%); (ii) significant intraoperative hemorrhage (especially in the presacral space) (4.8%); (iii) postoperative ileus, which may be secondary to the need for excessive packing of the bowel or to extensive Halban or Moschcowitz culdoplasty procedures (3.6%); (iv) small bowel obstruction, requiring reoperation (1.1%); (v) development of intra-abdominal adhesions with resultant pain and bowel dysfunction (unknown incidence); and (vi) wound complications, such as seromas and infections (4.6%) (120).
# Chunk 1246
Comparison of Abdominal versus Vaginal Approaches

In recent years there has been controversy as to whether transvaginal or transabdominal procedures are best for prolapse. One cannot discern which is optimal from reports of retrospective and prospective case series because of the considerable differences in numerous factors, including follow-up, characteristics of the subjects, definitions of success and failure, and the expertise or experience of the surgeons performing the procedures. Three prospective randomized trials have compared sacrocolpopexy and sacrospinous suspension procedures (136–138). All three trials showed some increased durability in the sacrocolpopexy group; however, in one of these studies the differences were not statistically significant (138). In the study in which sexual function was examined, there was a greater incidence of dyspareunia in the transvaginal group (137). Most case series reveal that the incidence of serious complications, such as small bowel obstructions, significant hemorrhage, presacral graft infections, pulmonary embolus, and short-term problems (i.e., ileus, hernias, wound seromas or infections, and longer hospitalizations), are more likely to occur in the group undergoing sacrocolpopexy. Vaginal scarring, strictures, and vaginal wall erosions or granulation tissue appear more likely in the group undergoing transvaginal surgery. To date, there is no randomized comparison of vaginal procedures using high uterosacral suspensions and innovative repairs of the fibromuscular tissues, which are less likely to produce strictures than was the case 10 or more years ago.
# Chunk 1247
Most pelvic surgeons would agree that (i) older, less healthy individuals who are more likely to have surgical and medical complications and cannot or will not tolerate a pessary would derive greater benefit from transvaginal approaches and occasionally obliterative approaches, and (ii) relatively healthy, sexually active women with relatively short vaginas and apical prolapse or with isolated apical defects would derive greater benefit from sacrocolpopexy. For the remainder of the patients with apical prolapse, with or without more distal defects, it would be ideal if surgeons were equally skilled, knowledgeable, and experienced in both abdominal and vaginal approaches to provide care that is truly individualized, rather than emphasizing one approach to the exclusion of another.
# Chunk 1248
6.

Brubaker L. Controversies and uncertainties: abdominal versus vaginal surgery for pelvic organ prolapse. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2005;192:690–693.
# Chunk 1249
136.

Benson JT, Lucente V, McClellan E. Vaginal versus abdominal reconstructive surgery for the treatment of pelvic support defects: a prospective randomized study with long-term outcome evaluation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;175:1418–1422.
# Chunk 1250
Colonic Transit as 5 L of water and associated electrolytes can be absorbed in one day. Parasympathetic-mediated peristaltic contraction of colonic smooth muscle transfers fecal material to the rectum. A delay in stool transit at the rectosigmoid region of the colon allows for maximal absorption of water and sodium.
# Chunk 1251
Evacuation Initiation of defecation is normally under cortical control. As previously discussed, delivery of stool to the rectum stimulates the rectoanal inhibitory reﬂex, permitting sampling followed by accommodation. Further rectal distention results in an urge to defecate. Evacuation occurs with voluntary relaxation of the pelvic ﬂoor muscles (puborectalis muscle and EAS) in conjunction with increased intra-abdominal and intrarectal pressure from Valsalva. This results in widening of the anorectal angle and shortening of the anal canal, which facilitates emptying. Coordinated peristaltic activity of the rectosigmoid assists evacuation. After this process is complete, the closing reﬂex is initiated, resulting in contraction of the pelvic ﬂoor muscles and activation of the continence mechanism.
# Chunk 1252
Defecatory Dysfunction The term defecatory dysfunction often is used synonymously with the symptom of constipation. Constipation is an imprecise term used by patients to report a variety of symptoms, including infrequent stools, dyschezia, straining, variation in stool consistency and caliber, incomplete emptying, bloating, and abdominal pain. The most common symptoms associated with constipation are straining and hard stools (2,3). Defecatory dysfunction is defined by many physicians as infrequent stools, typically fewer than three bowel movements per week. This definition is based on stool frequency studies in which 95% of women have more than three bowel movements per week. Using this definition, the prevalence of constipation should be 5% (4). However, the prevalence of constipation has been estimated to range from 2% to 28%, depending on the definition applied (5–7).
# Chunk 1253
Fecal Incontinence The reported prevalence of fecal incontinence varies between 2% and 3% for community-dwelling individuals, 3% to 17% for those of increased age, and 46% to 54% for nursing home residents (12). A prevalence of 28% has been reported among patients seeking benign gynecologic care and 36% of primary care patients surveyed (13,14). The prevalence of fecal incontinence in the United States is expected to increase 59% from 10.6 million in 2010 to 16.8 million in 2050 as the population ages (15). Epidemiologic studies of fecal incontinence are compromised by social stigmata and the lack of a uniform definition. Definitions of fecal incontinence vary with respect to the type of material passed (solid, liquid, or gas), the frequency and duration of events (once in a lifetime to twice a week), and the impact on quality of life. Most authors agree that the true prevalence of this condition is underestimated in the current scientific literature. A large health survey in the United States found age, female gender, physical limitations, and poor general health to be independent risk factors associated with fecal incontinence (16).
# Chunk 1254
Diabetes, hypothyroidism, and pregnancy are the most common endocrinologic systemic factors that cause constipation, and all have a component of decreased gastrointestinal motility and intestinal transit. In one study, gastrointestinal symptoms were present in 76% of patients with diabetes, including constipation, which occurred in 60% (18). In patients with diabetes, constipation is believed to be secondary to intestinal autonomic neuropathy, resulting in delayed or absent gastrocolic reﬂex and decreased bowel motility. This enteric neuropathy may also cause gastroparesis and diarrhea. Although diabetes has been classified with the endocrinologic causes, it should also be grouped with the enteric neuropathies. Pregnancy is not considered a disease state; however, there is an 11% to 38% prevalence of constipation that is believed to result from the effect of progesterone on smooth muscle (19,20). Iron supplements and prior constipation treatment are also associated with constipation during pregnancy (20).
# Chunk 1255
Structural abnormalities refer to the obstructive disorders, such as pelvic organ prolapse, perineal descent, intussusception, rectal prolapse, and tumors. Functional disorders are those that do not have an identifiable anatomic or systemic etiology. Most functional disorders are motility disorders, such as slow-transit constipation or colonic inertia, irritable bowel syndrome (constipation predominant), and functional constipation. The Rome III criteria created strict definitions for these idiopathic conditions that are believed to result from the complex interaction of psychosocial factors and altered gut physiology via the gut-braingut axis (27). Patients also may have functional limitations, such as decreased mobility and
# Chunk 1256
Combined Disorders of Defecation and Fecal Incontinence of fecal incontinence. Those with impaired resting tone from a defective IAS will have passive incontinence (incontinence at rest), which is worse during sleep because of decreased EAS activity (31). An inability to respond to sudden distention and to suppress defecation is often seen with external sphincter dysfunction. External and internal sphincter dysfunction often causes incontinence of liquid stool. Incontinence of solid stool is usually seen with widening of the anorectal angle from damage to the puborectalis muscles. Damage to the anal cushions usually causes minor soiling. Other anatomic and structural abnormalities associated with fecal incontinence include obstructive disorders such as pelvic organ prolapse, descending perineum syndrome, anismus, and intussusception; fistulas from diverticulitis, inﬂammatory bowel disease, cancer, or surgical trauma; and decreased rectal compliance from inﬂammatory bowel disease, cancer, and radiation. Decreased compliance results in higher intraluminal pressures with smaller volumes of stool, poor storage capacity, urgency, and incontinence (32).
# Chunk 1257
Several conditions have the potential to cause both defecatory dysfunction and fecal incontinence (Table 28.1). Most of these disorders cause combined symptoms through the development of fecal impaction followed by overﬂow incontinence. This situation can be seen with many of the neurologic conditions, pelvic outlet obstructive disorders, functional disorders of irritable bowel syndrome, decreased mobility, and decreased cognition. The cause of these symptoms is often multifactorial.
# Chunk 1258
Anismus/Rectosphincteric Dyssynergia Anismus is otherwise known as rectosphincteric dyssynergia, pelvic ﬂoor dyssynergia, spastic ﬂoor syndrome, and paradoxical puborectalis syndrome. The anorectal angle narrows as a result of paradoxical contraction of the puborectalis and external anal sphincter during defecation. Frequent symptoms include dyschezia, straining, hard stools, incomplete emptying, and tenesmus. A recent prospective study of 120 patients with dyssynergic defecation found a higher prevalence in women (77%) (33,34). The need for digital assistance (digital disimpaction or splinting) to evacuate the rectum occurs in up to 58% of patients. Psychosocial factors, such as a history of sexual abuse, depression, eating disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and stress, may play an important role in this disease. In this study, 22% reported a history of sexual abuse, and 31% reported a history of physical abuse. One-third believed the problem began during childhood, and 24% reported a precipitating illness or surgery was related to a particular event. Five percent of women claimed that pregnancy or childbirth was a precipitating factor. This condition also is seen in young children with constipation and dyschezia. The response to biofeedback and pelvic ﬂoor physical therapy, as well as the aforementioned patient characteristics, indicate a learned response mechanism is involved (33,34). Although this is often categorized as an outlet obstruction, the Rome III criteria for functional gastrointestinal disorders places this in the category of functional defecation disorders. The specific Rome III diagnostic criteria for dyssynergic defecation includes “inappropriate contraction of the pelvic ﬂoor or less than 20% relaxation of basal resting sphincter pressure with adequate propulsive forces during attempted defecation” (35).
# Chunk 1259
Pelvic Organ Prolapse Pelvic organ prolapse bears special mention because it is often seen by gynecologists but inconsistently associated with defecatory dysfunction. Prolapse is very common, although many women with this condition are asymptomatic. Those with symptoms may report incomplete evacuation and the need to apply digital pressure to the posterior vaginal wall or perineum to aid in evacuation of stool (digitation or splinting). It is important to rule out other causes of constipation, because these symptoms are nonspecific, and rectocele can result from chronic straining and increased intra-abdominal pressure due to other etiologies of defecatory dysfunction. Defecatory dysfunction related to pelvic organ prolapse can result from rectocele, enterocele, or perineal descent, either individually or in combination.
# Chunk 1260
Rectocele is a herniation of the rectal mucosa through a defect in the rectovaginal septum.

These site-specific defects can be transverse or longitudinal through the inferior, middle, or superior regions of the rectovaginal septum (36). Enterocele is a herniation of a peritoneal sac and bowel through the pelvic ﬂoor, typically between the uterus or vaginal cuff and rectum. It is more common following hysterectomy and retropubic urethropexy. There are two theories surrounding the formation of an enterocele. The first theory implicates a defect in the fibromuscular endopelvic fascia of the vagina, allowing peritoneum and bowel to herniate. The second theory attributes its formation to a support defect with full thickness protrusion, including endopelvic fascia (37). Ultimately, the mechanism might be attributed to a combination of the two theories because some support defects are secondary to superior breaks in the rectovaginal and pubocervical fascia. Patients with rectocele and enterocele may have similar symptoms, including pelvic pressure, vaginal protrusion, obstipation, fecal incontinence, and sexual dysfunction. Although associations have been made between defecatory dysfunction and advanced stages of pelvic organ prolapse, a causal relationship remains to be established. Controversy remains as to whether anatomic herniation is the cause of these symptoms or the effect of underlying colonic dysfunction, chronic constipation, and straining.
# Chunk 1261
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) has been estimated to have a prevalence of 10% to 20% and is more common in women and younger individuals. It accounts for 25% to 50% of all referrals to gastrointestinal clinics. Irritable bowel syndrome has distinct diagnostic criteria, including the exclusion of structural or metabolic abnormalities. These patients often have other gastrointestinal, genitourinary, and psychological illness, including gastroesophageal reﬂux disease, fibromyalgia, headache, backache, chronic pelvic pain, sexual dysfunction, lower urinary tract dysfunction, depression, and anxiety. Stressful life events seem to correlate with the onset and exacerbation of symptoms. A detailed history frequently reveals past physical or sexual abuse (46). Currently, specific criteria allow for classification of IBS into diarrhea-, constipation-, and pain-predominant categories (Table 28.4). The constipation variant is most commonly associated with defecatory dysfunction, whereas the diarrhea variant causes fecal incontinence. The pain or spastic variant causes predominantly abdominal discomfort but can also be associated with both defecatory dysfunction and fecal incontinence. After excluding
# Chunk 1262
Table 28.4 Irritable Bowel Syndrome

Recurrent abdominal pain or discomfortb at least 3 days per month in the last 3 months associated with two or more of the following: 1.
# Chunk 1263
Improved with defecation 2.

Onset associated with a change in frequency of stool 3.

Onset associated with a change in form (appearance) of stool a Criterion fulfilled for the last 3 months with symptom onset at least 6 months prior to diagnosis. b“Discomfort” means an uncomfortable sensation not described as pain. In pathophysiology research and clinical trials, a pain/discomfort frequency of at least 2 days a week during the screening evaluation is recommended for subject eligibility. From Drossman DA, Corazziari E, Talley NJ, et al., eds. Rome III: the functional gastrointestinal disorders. 3nd ed. McLean, VA: Degnon Associates, 2006:885–897, Appendix A, with permission.
# Chunk 1264
Surgical Trauma Iatrogenic injury follows obstetric trauma as the second most common cause of direct sphincter damage. Surgical procedures that have been associated with fecal incontinence include anal fistula repair, anal sphincterotomy, hemorrhoidectomy, and anal dilation. Fistulotomy is the most common procedure that results in fecal incontinence. Rectovaginal or anovaginal fistulas can develop after obstetric injury, operative complications during pelvic surgery, and inﬂammatory bowel disease exacerbations. Fistulas cause fecal incontinence, and the degree of postoperative dysfunction depends on the location of the fistula and the amount of sphincter that is disrupted during the surgical repair. It also depends on the preoperative level of sphincter function and pudendal nerve function. Anal sphincterotomy to treat painful anal fissures can lead to incontinence by disruption of rectal sensory innervation and anal cushions and transection of the anal sphincter (67,68). Hemorrhoidectomy often results in minor soiling as a result of resection of the anal cushions, which act as the final mucosal barrier. Similar to sphincterotomy, rectal sensory innervation can be disrupted, and injury to the internal sphincter can occur during sharp dissection (68,69).
# Chunk 1265
Pitfalls for the Pelvic Floor Surgeon

It sometimes is easy to overlook or misinterpret signs and symptoms of constipation and defecatory dysfunction. Any acute change in bowel habits must be evaluated thoroughly, and malignancy must be considered in the differential diagnosis. Even in the presence of chronic disease, malignancy must still be excluded. Persistent symptoms after an empiric trial of medical therapy should prompt further evaluation, including colonoscopy or ﬂexible sigmoidoscopy. It is also possible to mistakenly attribute symptoms of defecatory dysfunction and constipation to pelvic organ prolapse when prolapse is actually the result of an underlying bowel disorder. In this case, surgical treatment of prolapse will have little lasting benefit if the underlying bowel disorder remains untreated.
# Chunk 1266
Physical Examination The evaluation of anorectal dysfunction requires a basic general examination as well as a focused abdominal and pelvic examination. The general physical survey should include a global assessment of mobility and cognitive function. Routine examination of the abdomen involves inspection, palpation, and auscultation to rule out the presence of masses, organomegaly, and areas of peritoneal irritation. This examination should be followed by a detailed evaluation of the vagina, perineum, and anorectum. The goals of the pelvic examination are to define objectively the degree of prolapse and determine the integrity of the connective tissue, neurologic function, and muscular support of the pelvic organs.
# Chunk 1267
Sitzmark Study Colonic transit studies are performed using ingested radiopaque markers followed by serial abdominal radiography. Patients are asked to follow a high-fiber diet over the test period and avoid the use of laxatives, suppositories, or enemas. A capsule containing 20 to 24 markers is ingested initially, and abdominal radiography is performed either daily or on the fourth day, the seventh day, and every 3 days thereafter until all the markers are gone. Segmental transit times are then calculated using a mathematical formula. Colonic transit study results are used to classify patients with constipation into delayed transit, normal transit, and outlet obstruction. After day 6, there should be fewer than five markers remaining in the colon. With slow transit, more than five markers are scattered throughout the colon. With outlet obstruction, more than five markers are in the rectosigmoid region, and transit is normal throughout the rest of the colon.
# Chunk 1268
Constipating agents have the most value in patients with chronic loose stools or diarrhea.

They can also help improve symptoms in patients with fecal frequency and urgency. Loperamide (Imodium) and diphenoxylate hydrochloride with atropine (Lomotil) are the most commonly used agents. Loperamide has been shown to prolong transit time and stimulate anal sphincter function. With either of these agents, careful titration is recommended to prevent the primary side effect of constipation. It is generally preferable to begin using 2 to 4 mg of loperamide daily and then titrate up to 4 mg three to four times per day. A 4-mg dose before meals has been shown to increase anal tone and improve continence (93). Lomotil is started at a dose of one to two tablets every day or every other day and titrated up to one to two tablets three to four times a day as needed. Caution should be exercised for patients taking other anticholinergic medications. Anticholinergic side effects include dry mouth, drowsiness, lightheadedness, and tachycardia. Codeine can also be used as a constipating agent. It should be used judiciously in those with chronic disorders and in
# Chunk 1269
Dietary treatment of IBS consists of avoiding foods that are associated with symptoms, including alcohol, caffeine, sorbitol, and foods that increase gas production. Although increased dietary fiber or fiber supplementation has been shown to improve the constipation-predominant form of this illness, fiber supplementation has little effect on the diarrhea variant associated with fecal incontinence. Pharmacologic therapy is directed toward the predominant symptom. Loperamide and Lomotil tend to be useful first-line agents for treating diarrhea. Tricyclic antidepressants improve abdominal discomfort and are also valuable in diarrhea-predominant patients because of their constipating effect. The serotonin type 3 (5HT3) antagonist alosetron (Lotronex) has been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of severe diarrhea-predominant IBS refractory to treatment. It has shown improvement in global assessment measures, but its use is limited because of multiple isolated case reports of ischemic colitis. The recommended dose is 1 mg once or twice daily. It does not appear to be effective for the spastic-pain variant of IBS. Anticholinergics (dicyclomine, hyoscyamine) and antispasmodics (mebeverine, pinaverine) are targeted at the pain and bloating symptoms but may also be useful for the diarrhea variant because of their constipating side effects. Studies comparing anticholinergic medications to placebo show inconclusive results with only modest benefits. Antispasmodic agents may also be of value and are available in many countries but are not approved for use in the United States. Currently, additional 5HT3 antagonists and 5HT4 antagonists are under development and are approved for use in Europe but not in the United States. Most studies are poorly designed and difficult to interpret because of a high placebo response rate that often exceeds 30% (95,96).
# Chunk 1270
The goal of bowel regimens is to achieve predictable elimination of feces. This can be accomplished by using the gastrocolic reﬂex as well as by dietary and pharmacologic means. Defecation immediately following meals involves the physiologic response of the gastrocolic reﬂex to facilitate predictable emptying. The strength of the gastrocolic reﬂex varies among individuals and may be hypoactive or hyperactive with certain systemic disorders, such as diabetes and multiple sclerosis. This technique can be especially useful in the morning to give the individual freedom from fecal incontinence throughout the day. The use of suppositories or enemas in the morning or at night in conjunction with the gastrocolic reﬂex may provide further relief of daytime symptoms. The goal is to leave the rectum empty between evacuations. Enema use, typically once or twice daily, should be titrated to the patient’s baseline colonic activity. Regular toileting in elderly patients in nursing homes can improve fecal incontinence caused by overﬂow incontinence from fecal impaction. The use of cone-tip colostomy-irrigation catheters is reserved for patients in whom other therapeutic modalities have failed. These catheters avoid the risk of rectal perforation and provide a dam to prevent efﬂux of the irrigating solutions (108).
# Chunk 1271
More recent studies suggest poor long-term outcomes for the overlapping sphincteroplasty.

In a series of 55 women who underwent overlapping sphincteroplasty for fecal incontinence secondary to obstetric trauma, researchers contacted 47 (86%) patients by postal questionnaire and telephone interview with a median time since surgery of 77 months (range 60–96 months) (116). The investigators observed less symptomatic improvement when compared with the results at 15 months postoperative evaluation. After excluding one patient because of Crohn disease, eight (17%) failed because they required additional surgery, such as colostomy, postanal repair, and artificial bowel sphincter. Among the remaining 38 patients, 27 (71%) reported improved bowel control, 5 (13%) were unimproved, and 6 (16%) were worse. No patient was fully continent to solid and liquid stool and ﬂatus. Only 23 (50%) patients had “good” outcomes defined as not requiring further continence surgery and fecal incontinence less than once per month.
# Chunk 1272
In another study, investigators contacted 49 (69%) of 71 patients by telephone interview (117). All underwent overlapping sphincteroplasty with a median follow-up of 62.5 months (range 47–141 months). Only 6 (12%) patients were totally continent, and another 18 (37%) were continent to liquid and solid stool. More than half of the patients had incontinence to liquid or solid stool. The largest series with long-term follow-up involved contact of 130 (71%) of 191 patients using a postal or telephone questionnaire (118). The median time from surgery for respondents was 10 years (range 7–16 years). Of those who responded, 6% had no incontinence, 16% were incontinent of ﬂatus only, 19% had soiling only, and 57% were incontinent of solid stool. These outcomes were significantly worse than the previously reported 3-year assessment (119). Despite the fact that 61% had a poor outcome defined as having fecal incontinence or requiring additional surgery for incontinence, 62% still considered their bowel control to be better than before surgery, and 74% were satisfied with the results of their surgery. Although control may be improved when compared with preoperative status, continence outcomes do not seem to be maintained at long-term follow-up.
# Chunk 1273
An extensive review of the literature summarized 13 case series and one case report from 1996 to 2003. There were no randomized trials or cohort studies (140). The largest series consisted of 112 patients (141). There was one series with 53 patients, and all others had fewer than 28 patients each (142). Explantation was required in 17% to 41% of patients. Reasons for explantation included infection, erosion, device malfunction, pain, incontinence, and dissatisfaction, with infection being the most common. Surgical revision was necessary in 13% to 50% of the reports. Almost everyone had at least one adverse event, and more than one-third of these events required surgical intervention. Reasons for surgical revision were similar to those for explantation. Rates of fecal impaction ranged from 6% to 83%. All studies recorded statistically and clinically significant improvement in continence scores for patients with a functional artificial sphincter; however, most did not report the continence status for those in whom the device was explanted. The proportion of patients with a functional device ranged from 49% to 85%. The authors concluded that there is insufficient evidence on the safety and effectiveness of the artificial sphincter for fecal incontinence.
# Chunk 1274
The device is instilled exactly the same way as for treatment of urinary incontinence. Current application is performed as a two-stage outpatient surgical procedure. The first stage involves instillation of the electrodes. The electrode is placed through the S2-4 foramen using minimally invasive surgical technique. During the test phase, multiple electrodes can be employed either bilaterally or at different levels to determine the site with the best response. Proper location is confirmed intraoperatively using ﬂuoroscopy as well as visualization of an appropriate pelvic ﬂoor muscle response (bellows) with minimal plantar ﬂexion of the first and second toes, which usually corresponds to S3 stimulation. An interval testing phase utilizes an external pulse generator that typically lasts 1 to 2 weeks. Those with a good response (decrease in fecal incontinence episodes of at least 50% documented by bowel-habit diary) will proceed to the second stage, implantation of the permanent pulse generator (IPG). Typically only one electrode is left in place at the end of the second stage. Once the permanent pulse generator is implanted, all adjustments are made using telemetry. The patient has a basic remote control that enables her to turn the device on or off and adjust the amplitude of the stimulation.
# Chunk 1275
By the end of 2003, sacral nerve stimulation had been used to treat more than 1,300 patients with fecal incontinence (145). Despite this large number, the analysis of the results was limited to several small case series. In all studies, significant improvements in continence scores lasting up to 99 months occurred. Most patients experienced at least a 75% improvement in continence scores, and improvement also occurred in the frequency of incontinence episodes, the ability to postpone defecation, and bowel emptying. Intent-to-treat analysis revealed 80% to 100% therapeutic success. There also were significant improvements in quality-of-life measures using validated measurement scales. Complications occurred in 0% to 50% of patients, with the most common complications consisting of pain at the electrode or IPG site, electrode migration, infection, or worsening of bowel symptoms. No permanent sequelae occurred, however. Effects of anorectal physiology varied among the published studies, highlighting the fact that the precise mechanism of action remains unclear.
# Chunk 1276
A Cochrane review of three crossover trials concluded that the limited data suggest improvement in both fecal incontinence and constipation with sacral nerve stimulation (146). Large multi-center trials have been conducted to evaluate the efficacy of sacral nerve stimulation for fecal incontinence. Wexner et al. prospectively followed 120 patients (110 female, 10 male) for a mean of 28 (2-70) months (147,148). Participants completed validated quality-of-life measures and bowel diaries. Success, defined as a 50% or greater improvement and reduction in fecal incontinence episodes per week, was achieved in 83% at 1 year and 85% at 2 years. Forty-one percent achieved total continence at 1 year, and mean incontinent episodes decreased from 9.4 to 1.9 per week. The same group reported an overall 10.8% infection rate (13/120), with nine occurring within the first month and four occurring after 1 year. Among the early infections, five responded to antibiotics, one resolved spontaneously, and three were treated surgically. For the late infections, all four had to be removed. Another large multicenter study of 200 patients revealed decreased severity scores and improved quality of life with sacral nerve stimulation (149). Loose stool consistency and low stimulation intensity were predictive of successful outcomes on multivariate analysis. Ultrasound findings, manometry, age and gender did not impact outcomes. Tjandra et al. performed a randomized controlled trial of 120 participants with 1-year follow-up comparing sacral nerve stimulation to best supportive therapy consisting of pelvic ﬂoor exercises, bulking agent, and dietary manipulation (150). Fecal incontinence outcomes improved dramatically in the stimulation group, with 47% achieving complete continence. In contrast, there were no significant improvements observed in the supportive therapy group. Thus, sacral nerve stimulation appears to be a promising new treatment for fecal incontinence with relatively limited complications. FDA approval for fecal incontinence seems likely in the near future, and the minimally invasive nature of this procedure makes it a desirable first-line surgical option.
# Chunk 1277
Hyperosmolar Laxatives These consist of poorly absorbed substances that increase intraluminal osmolarity and water absorption. This action results in greater stool volume with decreased consistency. Examples include nonabsorbable sugars (lactulose and sorbitol), glycerin, and polyethylene glycol (GoLytely, MiraLAX). Polyethylene glycol is a common preoperative bowel preparation. Side effects are diarrhea, increased ﬂatus, and abdominal cramping (162).
# Chunk 1278
Emollient Laxatives These agents are divided into two subsets: docusate salts and mineral oil. The docusate salts have hydrophilic and hydrophobic properties similar to detergents. They soften stool and decrease surface tension by increasing stool water and lipid content. Examples include docusate calcium (Surfak), docusate potassium (Dialose, Kasof), and docusate sodium (Colace, Comfolax). They also improve the absorption of other laxatives and are combined in preparations with stimulant laxatives such as Correctol, Peri-Colace, and Feen-a-Mint. The limited absorption of mineral oil allows it to penetrate and soften the stool. It can be used orally or rectally. Prolonged daily use can lead to decreased absorption of the fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E, and K. Use of mineral oil should be avoided in elderly and debilitated patients, as well as in those with esophageal motility disorders because of the potential for aspiration pneumonia. Side effects include diarrhea, anal leakage, and pruritus ani (162–164).
# Chunk 1279
Saline Laxatives These usually contain magnesium cations and phosphate anions that are relatively nonabsorbable and produce an osmotic gradient with increased water absorption. They also stimulate intestinal motility by increasing cholecystokinin release. Fast-acting effects can be seen with both oral (2–6 hours) and rectal (15 minutes) preparations. Examples include magnesium citrate, magnesium hydroxide (Milk of Magnesia), magnesium sulfate, sodium phosphate, and biphosphate (Phospho-soda, Fleet enema). Although generally well tolerated, electrolyte abnormalities can occur. These side effects should be avoided in patients with renal insufficiency because of the potential for magnesium toxicity (162–164).
# Chunk 1280
Efficacy of Nonsurgical Treatment Irritable Bowel Syndrome

The most commonly used first-line treatment for the constipation variant of IBS is fiber supplementation and osmotic laxatives. The efficacy of bulking agents for this condition is controversial, and many studies, including meta-analyses, exhibit an effect similar to placebo. There may be benefit to the use of fiber because of the high placebo effect with IBS treatment and lack of serious adverse events associated with its use. However, patients may experience exacerbation of bloating and abdominal discomfort with fiber therapy. Randomized trials and meta-analysis revealed a beneficial effect of polyethylene glycol (MiraLAX) over placebo for the treatment of chronic constipation. In addition, polyethylene glycol was better than tegaserod and lactulose for chronic constipation (165–167). They can be useful as adjunctive treatment options, but can also exacerbate abdominal pain and discomfort. A newer class of drugs, serotonin 5HT4 agonist tegaserod (Zelnorm), stimulates peristalsis, increases colonic motility, decreases intestinal transit times, and reduces visceral hypersensitivity. The recommended dose is 6 mg twice daily. Randomized trials have consistently shown an approximately 10% greater improvement in global IBS symptoms when compared with placebo. Improvement in the bloating and pain symptoms also occurred. No episodes of ischemic colitis or cardiac toxicity have been reported with the use of this medication, and the most common side effects are diarrhea and headache. Cisapride, a 5HT4 agonist with partial 5HT3 antagonist actions, has been withdrawn from use secondary to rare cardiac toxicity. Additional 5HT4 agonists, 5HT3 agonists, and cholecystokinin antagonists are in development (95,96).
# Chunk 1281
As with slow-transit constipation, initial management using bowel regimens, laxatives, enemas, suppositories, and fiber supplementation is appropriate for patients with dyssynergic defecation, yet many will have already tried conservative management before undergoing testing to confirm the diagnosis. These treatments are relatively well tolerated with few serious side effects. They have not been shown to have greater efficacy when compared with placebo, and their role in the treatment of dyssynergic defecation remains uncertain. Specific treatment for this condition tends to focus on biofeedback because of studies indicating that this is an acquired behavioral disorder of defecation. Modalities such as diaphragmatic muscle training, simulated defecation, and manometric or electromyography-guided anal sphincter and pelvic muscle relaxation have been employed independently or combined with other techniques. These techniques have yielded symptomatic improvement in approximately 60% to 80% of patients. Many patients with dyssynergic defecation also have abnormal rectal sensation, so rectal sensory conditioning may provide additional benefit (33,49,169,170). Others have tried botulinum toxin injections to paralyze the puborectalis and anal sphincter muscle. Small case series have shown modest early improvement, but the results do not appear to be long lasting (171,172). A recent randomized trial of 48 participants comparing botulinum toxin to biofeedback retraining found better initial improvement with the botulinum toxin (70% vs. 50%) but no difference at 1 year (33% vs. 25%) (173).
# Chunk 1282
Subtotal colectomy with ileosigmoid or ileorectal anastomosis is considered by many to be the surgical treatment of choice for slow-transit constipation refractory to medical management. Most surgeons restrict the use of this surgical procedure to the most extreme cases and typically operate on fewer than 10% of patients. Strict criteria for surgery include the following: chronic, severe, disabling symptoms unresponsive to medical therapy; slow transit in the proximal colon; no evidence of pseudo-obstruction; and normal anorectal function (162). Success rates are variable and depend on several factors. An extensive review of colectomy for slow-transit constipation analyzed 32 studies from 1981 to 1988 and found satisfaction rates ranged from 39% to 100% (180). Higher success rates occurred in studies in the United States (n = 11, median 94%, range 75%–100%) and prospective studies (n = 16, median 90%, range 50%–100%). Superior outcomes occurred in those who had a complete physiologic evaluation and proven slow-transit constipation. Patients with anismus had higher rates of recurrent symptoms and lower satisfaction levels (181). Poorer outcomes occurred with ileosigmoid and cecorectal anastomosis than with ileorectal anastomosis. Those with segmental resection (hemicolectomy) had the worst outcome. None of the studies had a comparison group, and outcomes were variable and lacking validated measures. Morbidity associated with the operation included small bowel obstruction (median 18%, range 2%–71%), need for reoperation (median 14%, range 0%–50%), diarrhea (median 14%, range 0%–46%), fecal incontinence (median 14%, range 0%–52%), recurrent constipation (median 9%, range 0%–33%), persistent abdominal pain (median 41%, range 0%–90%), and permanent ileostomy (median 5%, range 0%–28%). Mortality ranged from 0%–6% (182). A quality-of-life study revealed that the score correlated poorly with frequency of bowel movements. However, a lower score was seen in those patients who had persistent abdominal pain, diarrhea, fecal incontinence, and permanent ileostomies. Overall satisfaction with the procedure was very high and correlated with the quality-of-life score (183).
# Chunk 1283
Pelvic Organ Prolapse The variety of surgical treatment techniques for the repair of rectocele include posterior colporrhaphy, defect-directed repair, posterior fascial replacement, transanal repair, and abdominal repair with sacral colpopexy. When an enterocele is present, a culdoplasty is usually performed. In cases of perineal descent, abdominal sacral colpoperineopexy is the procedure of choice. Suture rectopexy can be performed in conjunction with sacral colpoperineopexy if rectal prolapse is present. Despite the routine use of these procedures, data are limited regarding symptomatic improvement of disordered defecation. Greater detail regarding the specific techniques for many of these procedures is provided in Chapter 27 This section will focus on surgical outcomes, including anatomic cure of prolapse, improvement of defecatory dysfunction symptoms, and morbidity associated with the procedure.
# Chunk 1284
A randomized clinical trial of 106 women with stage II or greater posterior vaginal wall prolapse compared posterior colporrhaphy, defect-directed rectocele repair, and defect-directed repair augmented with a porcine small intestinal submucosal (210). Participants completed validated pelvic ﬂoor instruments at baseline and 6 months, 1 year, and 2 years after surgery. Anatomic failure was defined as POP-Q system point Bp greater than or equal to −2 at 1 year. There was a significant improvement in prolapse and colorectal scales in all groups with no differences between groups. The proportion of subjects with functional failures was 15% overall and not significantly different between groups. Posterior colporrhaphy and defect-directed repairs resulted in similar anatomic and functional outcomes, although the addition of a porcine-derived graft did not improve anatomic outcomes. On average, all bowel symptoms evaluated were significantly improved 1 year after surgery, with no differences between treatment groups. The development of new “bothersome” bowel symptoms after surgery was uncommon (11%). After controlling for age, treatment group, comorbidities, and preoperative bowel symptoms, corrected postoperative vaginal support (stage 0 or I) was associated with a reduced risk of postoperative straining (adjusted OR 0.17; 95% CI, 0.03–0.9) and feeling of incomplete emptying (adjusted OR 0.1; 95% CI, 0.01–0.52). This led the authors to conclude that resolution or improvement in bowel symptoms can be expected in the majority of women after rectocele repair (211).
# Chunk 1285
Transanal repair involves repair of the rectocele through a transanal incision with excision of redundant rectal mucosa and plication of the rectovaginal septum and rectal wall. The procedure was developed and is primarily used by colorectal surgeons to treat constipation or obstructed defecation associated with “low” or distal rectoceles. The advantages of this approach include excision of redundant rectal mucosa and the ability to treat other anorectal pathology, such as hemorrhoids or anterior rectal wall prolapse (212). Disadvantages include the inability to repair higher rectoceles, enteroceles, cystoceles, uterine prolapse, and defects in the perineal body or anal sphincter (213). Major complications of infection (6%) and rectovaginal fistula (3%) are relatively rare (203). Most studies did not require vaginal bulging or protrusion symptoms as a prerequisite for surgery. The results of several studies are summarized in Table 28.11. The anatomic cure rate was 70% to 98%, and symptoms of constipation, difficult evacuation, and vaginal digitations appear to improve (202–207).
# Chunk 1286
Rectocele repair with graft augmentation is becoming more common, despite a paucity of supporting evidence indicating its benefits over standard procedures. The reason for its emergence is the theory that vaginal hernia repairs behave similar to abdominal hernia repairs, which have a documented decrease in recurrence when augmented with grafts. A variety of graft materials have been employed with posterior colporrhaphy and defect-directed repairs including autograft, allograft, xenograft, and synthetic mesh. There are no comparison data to aid in selecting the optimal graft. The purpose of the graft is debatable. It can either be intended to replace existing fascia as a permanent barrier or to provide an absorbable scaffold for collagen deposition, scar formation, and remodeling. The ideal material should have a low erosion rate, be relatively inexpensive, and decrease recurrence rates without causing bowel or sexual dysfunction. The outcomes for rectocele repair using graft materials placed either vaginally or abdominally appear in Table 28.11. High anatomic cure rates of 89% to 100% occurred, and symptoms of constipation, difficult evacuation, and vaginal bulge also appeared to improve.
# Chunk 1287
The abdominal approach to rectocele repair may be of value when a superior defect in the rectovaginal fascia occurs in a patient with accompanying enterocele, uterine prolapse, or vault prolapse. If a patient is undergoing an abdominal or laparoscopic procedure such as a sacral colpopexy, the graft can be extended along the posterior vaginal wall to correct proximal defects in the rectovaginal septum (220). There are limited data regarding the efficacy of abdominal rectocele repair. The indication for this procedure, as well as the need for additional vaginal repair of distal defects, is often determined intraoperatively. An ancillary study from the Pelvic Floor Disorders Network evaluating bowel symptoms 1 year after sacrocolpopexy found that the majority of bothersome bowel symptoms resolve after this procedure. There was no difference in postoperative bowel symptoms among those who underwent a concomitant rectocele repair and those who did not. It is important to note that the study was not developed to evaluate the impact of concomitant rectocele repair on bowel symptom resolution, and those who underwent a rectocele repair had more severe baseline bowel symptoms including worse obstructive symptom (221).
# Chunk 1288
Short-term outcomes for 19 patients who underwent sacral colpoperineopexy indicated good anatomic results for apical and posterior support as well as for perineal descent (39). Complete cessation of defecatory dysfunction symptoms was accomplished in 66% of patients. In a report of outcomes for a slightly different variation of the sacral colpoperineopexy, the authors’ technique involved attachment of Marlex mesh to the perineal body using a needle carrier (222). The failure rate was 25% and mesh erosion rate was 5% for 205 patients with up to 10-year follow-up. A study of Mersilene mesh erosion rates related to sacral colpopexy and sacral colpoperineopexy noted similar erosion rates between sacral colpopexy and colpoperineopexy when the vagina was not opened (3.2% vs. 4.5%, respectively) (223). However, the erosion rate was 16% with vaginal suture placement and 40% when the mesh was placed vaginally. The use of nonsynthetic grafts such as dermal allograft and xenograft may help prevent high erosion rates. In a case series of 11 patients, researchers performed sigmoid resection (if indicated) and suture rectopexy in conjunction with sacral colpoperineopexy using AlloDerm for women with coexistent rectal prolapse, perineal descent, and defecatory dysfunction. Early follow-up (12.5 ± 7.7 months) revealed excellent improvement of defecatory dysfunction symptoms and quality-of-life considerations, with an 82% cure of perineal descent (224). A recently published retrospective cohort of 38 women revealed high satisfaction following abdominal sacral colpoperineopexy, despite the persistence of obstructed defecation symptoms 5 years after surgery (225). Sacral colpoperineopexy may have value for a select group of patients, but larger prospective series with long-term anatomic and symptomatic outcomes are necessary to evaluate the durability of this procedure.
# Chunk 1289
Abdominal procedures vary with respect to the extent of rectal mobilization, method of rectal fixation, and inclusion or exclusion of bowel resection. During abdominal rectopexy, the mesorectal plane is developed and the rectum mobilized down to the pelvic ﬂoor posteriorly, with care taken to identify and preserve the hypogastric nerves. Division of the lateral ligaments may or may not be performed. The concern is that division of the lateral ligaments will lead to rectal denervation and increased postoperative constipation. If performing a suture rectopexy, the fascia propria of the rectum is secured to the sacral periosteum from S-1 to S-3 (226). If performing a sigmoid resection with the rectopexy (Frykman-Goldberg resection rectopexy), the bowel resection is performed after mobilization and before suturing (227). The theoretical advantages of a rectosigmoid resection are creation of a dense area of fibrosis between the anastomotic suture line and the sacrum; removal of abundant rectosigmoid, avoiding torsion or volvulus; additional fixation through straightening of the left colon and decreased mobility from the phrenocolic ligament; and relief of constipation in select patients. It is typically reserved for patients with a long redundant sigmoid colon, although specific criteria have not been proposed. Mesh rectopexies are usually avoided because of concern for increased complications and infections associated with placement of a foreign body at the time of bowel resection. There are two basic types of mesh rectopexy: posterior mesh rectopexy and anterior sling rectopexy (Rip-stein procedure) (228,229). A variety of materials have been used for this procedure, including absorbable and permanent mesh. The assumption is that placement of this material will provide increased support through increased fibrous tissue formation. During the Ripstein procedure, an anterior sling of fascia lata or synthetic mesh is placed in front of the rectum and sutured to the sacrum. Most surgeons avoid this procedure because of fear of obstructed defecation. Modifications using a posterolateral wrap have been developed to resolve this problem.
# Chunk 1290
46.

Thompson WG, Longstreth GF, Drossman DA, et al. Functional bowel disorders and functional abdominal pain. In: Drossman DA, Corazziari E, Talley NJ, et al., eds. Rome II: the functional gastrointestinal disorders. 2nd ed. McLean, VA: Degnon Associates, 2000:351–432.
# Chunk 1291
75.

Smith ARB, Hosker GL, Warrell DW. The role of partial denervation of the pelvic ﬂoor in the aetiology of genitourinary prolapse and stress incontinence of urine: a neurophysiologic study. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1989;96:24–28.
# Chunk 1292
221.

Gutman RE, Bradley CS, Ye W, et al. Pelvic Floor Disorders Network. Effects of colpocleisis on bowel symptoms among women with severe pelvic organ prolapse. Int Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct 2010;21:461–466.
# Chunk 1293
225.

Grimes CL, Quiroz LH, Gutman RE, et al. Long-term impact of abdominal sacral colpoperineopexy on symptoms of obstructed defecation. Female Pelvic Med Reconstr Surg 2010;16:234–237.
# Chunk 1294
239.

Deen KI, Grant E, Billingham C, et al. Abdominal resection rectopexy with pelvic ﬂoor repair versus perineal rectosigmoidectomy and pelvic ﬂoor repair for full-thickness rectal prolapse. Br J Surg 1994;81:302–304.
# Chunk 1295
Figure 29.1 Normal twins at 12 years of age. The heavier twin (weighing 143 lb) is clearly more advanced in puberty than the lighter twin (weighing 87 lb). Anecdotal photographs and data such as these served to provide the basis for the theory that body fat, body mass, and menarche are linked. (From Wilkins L. The diagnosis and treatment of endocrine disorders in childhood and adolescence. 3rd ed. Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas, 1965, with permission.) development, and Montgomery’s glands are visible around the circumference of the areola. The nipple is generally below the midplane of breast tissue when the woman is seated and viewed from the side. Full breast development usually occurs over 3 to 3.5 years, but it may occur in as little as 2 years or not progress beyond stage 4 until the first pregnancy. Breast size is no indication of breast maturity.
# Chunk 1296
Hormonal Changes By 10 weeks of gestation, gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) is present in the hypothalamus, and luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) are present in the pituitary gland (14). Gonadotropin levels are elevated in both female and male fetuses before birth; the levels of FSH are higher in females. At birth, gonadotropin and sex steroid concentrations are still high, but the levels decline during the first several weeks of life and remain low during the prepubertal years. The hypothalamic–pituitary unit appears to be suppressed by the extremely low levels of gonadal steroids present in childhood. Gonadal suppression of gonadotropin secretion is demonstrated by higher gonadotropin levels in children with gonadal dysgenesis and those who undergo gonadectomy before puberty (15).
# Chunk 1297
Several of the hormonal changes associated with pubertal development begin before any of the physical changes are obvious. Early in puberty, there is increased sensitivity of LH to GnRH. Sleep-entrained increases in both LH and FSH can be documented early in puberty (16). In boys, the nocturnal increases in gonadotropin levels are accompanied by simultaneous increases in circulating testosterone levels (17). In contrast, in girls, the nighttime increases in circulating gonadotropin levels are followed by increased secretion of estradiol the next day (18) (Fig. 29.5). This delay in estradiol secretion is believed to result from the additional synthetic
# Chunk 1298
Increased adrenal androgen secretion is important in stimulating adrenarche, the appearance of pubic and axillary hair, in both boys and girls. Pubarche specifically refers to the appearance of pubic hair. Progressive increases in circulating levels of the major adrenal androgens, dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) and its sulfate (DHEAS), begin as early as 2 years of age, accelerate at 7 to 8 years of age, and continue until 13 to 15 years of age (21–23). The accelerated increases in adrenal androgens begin about 2 years before the increases in gonadotropin and gonadal sex steroid secretion when the hypothalamic–pituitary–gonadal unit is still functioning at a low prepubertal level.
# Chunk 1299
In girls, mean levels of estradiol, secreted predominantly by the ovaries, increases steadily during puberty (19). Although, as noted, increases in estradiol first appear during the daytime hours, basal levels eventually increase during both the day and night. Estrone, which is secreted in part by the ovaries and arises in part from extraglandular conversion of estradiol and androstenedione, increases early in puberty but plateaus by midpuberty. Thus, the ratio of estrone to estradiol decreases throughout puberty, indicating that ovarian production of estradiol becomes increasingly important and peripheral conversion of androgens to estrone becomes less important during maturation.
# Chunk 1300
Figure 29.10 Typical appearance of two individuals with 45,X gonadal dysgenesis. A: This 16-year-old individual has obvious short stature, a webbed neck, shortened fourth metatarsals, and a thoracotomy scar from the repair of the coarctation of the aorta that was performed at 13 years of age. B: This 11-year-old individual also has obvious short stature and stigmata of Turner syndrome. Note that these two individuals look more like each other than they might look like any genetic siblings.
# Chunk 1301
Treatment of Turner Syndrome To increase final adult height, commonly accepted treatment strategies include use of exogenous GH (42–44). With recombinant human GH use, the average height gain varied from 4 to 16 cm. It appears that early initiation of therapy (between 2–8 years of age), gradually increasing the dose, and continuing treatment for a mean of 7 years can lead to achievement of a final height greater than 150 cm in most patients (43). Weekly doses of GH of 0.375 mg/kg divided into seven daily doses are typical. Therapy may be continued until a satisfactory height is attained or until little growth potential remains (bone age ≥14 years and growth velocity <2 cm per year). It is not clear if a nonaromatizable anabolic steroid such as oxandrolone will provide additional growth. In girls older than 8 years of age or those with extreme short stature, consideration can be given to using higher doses of GH and adding oxandrolone (45). The dose of oxandrolone should be 0.05 mg/kg per day or less, as higher doses will result in virilization and more rapid skeletal maturation. In addition, liver enzymes should be monitored.
# Chunk 1302
Figure 29.13 Right A: A 16-year-old girl with delayed puberty. Breast budding began at 11 years of age, but there was no further development. During the year before presentation, her scholastic performance in school deteriorated, she gained 25 lb, she became increasingly lethargic, and nocturia and polydypsia were noted. Initial evaluation documented low follicle-stimulating hormone, elevated prolactin, and a bone age of 10.5 years. Computed tomography scanning documented a large hypothalamic neoplasm that proved to be an ectopic germinoma. The patient was also documented to be hypothyroid and hypoadrenal and to have diabetes insipidus. Despite the elevated prolactin, she had no galactorrhea because of the minimal breast development. (From Rebar RW. Normal and abnormal sexual differentiation and pubertal development. In: Moore TR, Reiter RC, Rebar RW, et al., eds. Gynecology and obstetrics: a longitudinal approach. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1993:97–133, with permission.)
# Chunk 1303
Figure 29.13 B: A 16-year-old girl (frontal view) with primary amenorrhea who progressed in puberty until about 12 years of age. Breast budding occurred at about 10 years of age. The patient’s short stature is obvious. She proved to have hypopituitarism. Classic radiographic findings established the diagnosis of Langerhans cell–type histiocytosis (Hand-Sch¨ uller-Christian disease). C: Side view of girl shown in Figure 29.13B.
# Chunk 1304
Because normal body weight is commonly maintained in bulimia, it is unusual for bulimic patients to experience either delayed development or amenorrhea. Girls with anorexia nervosa may have, in addition to hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, partial diabetes insipidus, abnormal temperature regulation, hypotension, chemical hypothyroidism with low serum triiodothyronine (T3) and high reverse T3 levels, and elevated circulating cortisol levels in the absence of evidence of hypercortisolism (62). Other common features include hypokalemia, anemia, hypoalbuminemia, high β-carotene levels, and high cholesterol levels. All features of anorexia nervosa are reversible with weight gain, except for amenorrhea (which persists in 30% to 47%) and osteopenia (i.e., it now seems that any bone lost cannot be fully recovered). Management of patients with anorexia nervosa is notoriously difficult. A team approach involving the primary clinician, psychiatrist, and nutritionist is most effective. In fact, anorexia nervosa has the highest mortality of any psychiatric disorder. Deaths are often sudden and unexpected. Cause of death (often unknown) can include hypoglycemia and electrolyte imbalance.
# Chunk 1305
Figure 29.14 A: A 20-year-old college woman with anorexia nervosa. B: A 16-year-old student with anorexia nervosa. In both cases, as is true of most such patients, pubertal development had been completed and menses initiated before anorexia led to marked weight loss.
# Chunk 1306
Figure 29.15 A: This 17-year-old individual presented with primary amenorrhea and was found to have a blind-ending vagina and bilateral inguinal masses. Circulating levels of testosterone were at the upper limits of the normal range for men and the karyotype was 46,XY, confirming androgen insensitivity. B: Two inguinal testes were found at surgery. (From Simpson JL, Rebar RW. Normal and abnormal sexual differentiation and development. In: Becker KL, ed. Principles and practice of endocrinology and metabolism. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: JB Lippincott, 1995:788–822, with permission.)
# Chunk 1307
Figure 29.18 Left: A71/2-year-old girl with Tanner stage 4 pubertal development who began menstruating 1 month earlier. She was 57 inches tall (above the 95th percentile). Luteinizing hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone levels were consistent with her development. A large neoplasm that proved to be a hypothalamic hamartoma was present on computed tomography scan. Pubertal development began at about 5 years of age.
# Chunk 1308
The efficacy of gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogues (GnRHa) in increasing adult height is undisputed only in early-onset (girls less than 6 years old) central precocious puberty (76). Concerns of weight gain and long-term decrease in bone mineral density with the use of GnRHa do not seem to be warranted. The most important clinical criterion for initiating GnRHa treatment is documented progression of pubertal development over a 3-to 6-month period. This observational period may not be necessary if the child is at or past Tanner stage 3, particularly with advanced skeletal maturation. It appears that discontinuation of GnRHa at a chronological age of about 11 years and a bone age of about 12 years is associated with maximum adult height (77–79). There are a variety of GnRHa formulations, and the choice of a particular agent depends on patient and physician preference.
# Chunk 1309
The McCune-Albright syndrome is characterized by the classic triad of polyostotic fibrous dysplasia of bone, irregular caf´e-au-lait spots on the skin, and GnRH-independent sexual precocity. The caf´e-au-lait spots are usually large, do not cross the midline, and have irregular “coast of Maine” margins. They are often located on the same side as the bony lesions. Sexual precocity often begins in the first 2 years and usually presents with menstrual bleeding. Girls develop sexual precocity as a result of functioning ovarian cysts. Serum estradiol is elevated. Other endocrinopathies may include hyperthyroidism, hypercortisolism, hyperprolactinemia, acromegaly, and hyperparathyroidism. Osteomalacia, hepatic abnormalities, and cardiac arrhythmia may occur. Mutations of the Gsα subunit of the G protein, which couples extracellular hormonal signals to the activation of adenylate cyclase, are responsible for the autonomous hyperfunction of the endocrine glands and, presumably, for the other defects present in this disorder (82). Treatment with a GnRH agonist is not effective because the precocious pubertal development is GnRH independent. Treatment with aromatase inhibitors, such as testolactone and fadrozole, has mixed results. A multicenter trial showed that tamoxifen decreases vaginal bleeding, growth rate, and the rate of bone age advancement (83).
# Chunk 1310
Figure 29.21 Typical facial hirsutism in three women with polycystic ovarian syndrome. A: 25-year-old.
# Chunk 1311
Figure 29.21 (Continued ) B: 21-year-old C: 17-year-old.

Measurements of 17α-hydroxyprogesterone appear to be of value in populations at high risk for nonclassic late-onset 21-hydroxylase deficiency. In the white population, the gene occurs in only about 1 in 1,000 individuals, but it occurs in 1 in 27 Ashkenazi Jews, 1 in 40 Hispanics, 1 in 50 Yugoslavs, and 1 in 300 Italians (84). The incidence is increased among Eskimos and French Canadians. Alternatively, screening might be restricted to hirsute teenagers presenting with the more “typical” features of nonclassic 21-hydroxylase deficiency, including severe hirsutism beginning at puberty, “ﬂattening” of the breasts (i.e., defeminization), shorter
# Chunk 1312
Valerie L. Baker Wendy J. Schillings Howard D. McClamrock

Girls experienced menarche at increasingly younger ages during the past century. Primary amenorrhea is defined as absence of menses at age 13 years when there is no visible development of secondary sexual characteristics or age 15 years in the presence of normal secondary sexual characteristics.
# Chunk 1313
The mean age of menarche became younger during this century. Therefore, the definition of primary amenorrhea changed: Primary amenorrhea is defined as the absence of menses by 13 years of age when there is no visible development of secondary sexual characteristics or by 15 years of age in the presence of normal secondary sexual characteristics. The ages defining primary amenorrhea were decreased by 1 year to continue to represent two standard deviations above the mean age of developing secondary sexual characteristics and menses (1). Failure to begin breast development by age 13 warrants investigation. A woman who previously menstruated can develop secondary amenorrhea, which is defined as absence of menstruation for three normal menstrual cycles (2). A woman with regular cycles and a delay of menses of even a week may warrant assessment with a pregnancy test. It is reasonable to evaluate a woman who has fewer than nine cycles per year. With a few exceptions, the causes of primary amenorrhea are similar to the causes of secondary amenorrhea.
# Chunk 1314
2.

Because of the association with coarctation of the aorta (up to 30%) and thyroid dysfunction, patients with Turner syndrome should undergo echocardiography every 3 to 5 years and thyroid function studies yearly. Cardiac MRI is considered an important component of the cardiac evaluation (6). Patients with Turner syndrome should be evaluated for hearing loss, renal malformations, diabetes, and hypertension.
# Chunk 1315
3.

Estrogen can be given daily in combination with progestogen (medroxyprogesterone acetate or progesterone) to prevent hyperplasia that could result from unopposed estrogen stimulation of the endometrium in patients with a uterus. Medroxyprogesterone acetate may be administered at a dose of 2.5 mg daily every day of the month or 5 to 10 mg for 12 to 14 days per month. Oral micronized progesterone may be administered at a daily dose 100 mg every day of the month or 200 mg daily for 12 to 14 days per month. Cyclic hormone therapy (with 12 to 14 days of progestogen per month) more closely mimics the natural menstrual cycle. Progesterone suppositories may be administered at a dose of 50 mg daily or 100 mg for 12 to 14 days monthly.
# Chunk 1316
Mayer-Rokitansky-K¨uster-Hauser syndrome includes vaginal agenesis with variable m¨ullerian duct abnormalities accompanied in some cases by renal, skeletal, and auditory abnormalities (60). M¨ullerian agenesis accounts for approximately 10% of cases of primary amenorrhea (2). Of the patients with this syndrome, 15% have an absent, pelvic, or horseshoe kidney, 40% have a double urinary collecting system, and 5% to 12% have skeletal abnormalities(61–63).Mayer-Rokitansky-K¨uster-Hausersyndrome isassociated with abnormal galactose metabolism (64).
# Chunk 1317
Asherman syndrome, which is more common with secondary amenorrhea or hypomenorrhea, may occur in patients with risk factors for endometrial or cervical scarring (Fig. 30.3). Such risk factors include a history of uterine or cervical surgery, infections related to use of an intrauterine device, and severe pelvic inﬂammatory disease. Asherman syndrome is found in 39% of patients undergoing hysterosalpingography who previously underwent postpartum curettage (65). Infections such as tuberculosis and schistosomiasis may cause Asherman syndrome but are not common for women who have lived their whole lives in the United States. Cervical stenosis resulting from surgical removal of dysplasia (cone biopsy, loop electroexcision procedure) may lead to amenorrhea.
# Chunk 1318
Figure 30.2 A: A well-developed patient with complete androgen insensitivity. Note the characteristic paucity of pubic hair and well-developed breasts. (From Yen SSC, Jaffe RB. Reproductive endocrinology. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, 1991:497, with permission.) B: Another patient with androgen insensitivity syndrome with a contrasting thin body hiatus. This is a 17-year-old twin 46,XY. (From Jones HW Jr, Scott WW. Hermaphrodism, genital anomalies, and related endocrine disorders. 2nd ed. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins, 1971, with permission.)
# Chunk 1319
Primary ovarian insufficiency is suggested as the preferred term for the condition that otherwise was referred to as premature ovarian failure or premature menopause (82,83). Overt primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) is defined as the presence of amenorrhea for 4 months or more accompanied by two serum FSH levels in the menopausal range for a woman who is less than 40 years of age. Ovarian “insufficiency” is suggested to be more appropriate than “failure” in part because ovarian function can wax and wane, and function can resume even after it appears that a woman transitioned into menopause. Ovarian insufficiency may be caused by decreased follicular endowment or accelerated follicular atresia (82). Over 75% of women with POI will have at least intermittent symptoms including hot ﬂushes, night sweats, and emotional lability (84). Symptoms are uncommon among women with primary amenorrhea who never received estrogen.
# Chunk 1320
Autoimmune Disorders In one series, 4% of women with POI were noted to have steroidogenic cell immunity with lymphocytic oophoritis as the mechanism for follicle dysfunction (105). Autoimmune lymphocytic oophoritis is associated with a theca cell infiltrate that spares granulosa cells (106). Ultrasound examination reveals the presence of numerous ovarian follicles, despite elevated serum FSH levels and hypoestrogenism (82). Ovarian antibody testing is not clinically reliable for diagnosing the disorder, as women with biopsy-proven autoimmune oophoritis may have a negative test for ovarian antibody. However, women with autoimmune lymphocytic oophoritis appear to reliably test positive for adrenal antibodies. The most readily available antibody is the 21-hydroxylase antibody (by immunoprecipitation). Ideally, antibody to the adrenal gland itself, as assessed by indirect immunoﬂuorescence, is reasonable to test if available. Testing for 21-hydroxylase antibody is strongly recommended for women who are determined to have POI because women who test positive for this antibody are at risk for potentially fatal hypoadrenalism. Signs that suggest a risk for potentially fatal adrenal insufficiency include hyperpigmentation, weakness, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and weight loss.
# Chunk 1321
A pregnancy test (urine or serum human chorionic gonadotropin [hCG]) should be performed in a reproductive-age woman who has amenorrhea with normal secondary sexual characteristics and a normal pelvic examination. If the results of the pregnancy test are negative, the evaluation of amenorrhea is as follows: 1.
# Chunk 1322
Assessment of Estrogen Status

The presence of vaginal dryness or hot ﬂashes increases the likelihood of a diagnosis of hypoestrogenism. A sample of vaginal secretions can be obtained during the physical examination, and mucosal estrogen response can be demonstrated by the presence of superficial cells. A serum estradiol level higher than 40 pg/mL is considered indicative of significant estrogen production, but interassay discrepancies often exist and serum estrogen levels can vary greatly on a day-today basis for a given woman. Vaginal ultrasound demonstrating a thin endometrium suggests that a patient is hypoestrogenic, unless there is reason to suspect that the patient lacks functional endometrium. A DEXA (dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry) scan to determine bone mineral density should be considered for a patient in whom long-term hypoestrogenism is suspected.
# Chunk 1323
Eﬂornithine Hydrochloride Eﬂornithine hydrochloride is a topical cream that is approved by the FDA for use on the face and chin. Improvements in facial hirsutism may be seen in 4 to 8 weeks of twice-daily applications.
# Chunk 1324
The most commonly recommended treatment regimen for clomiphene citrate is 50 mg daily for 5 days, beginning on the third to fifth day of menstrual or withdrawal bleeding. Cycles may be monitored by measuring midluteal progesterone levels to assess ovulation. Ovulation may be confirmed by an appropriate rise of basal body temperature and menses occurring at the expected time after the temperature rise. Ultrasonographic monitoring to assess folliculogenesis may be helpful, especially when hCG is used to induce ovulation. Endometrial thinning caused by the antiestrogenic effects of clomiphene citrate may be detected with midcycle ultrasound. With these data, it is possible to immediately adjust the dose in the subsequent cycle if a given regimen is ineffective. Dosage increases of 50 mg per day are usually used, and more than 70% of conceptions occur at doses no higher than 100 mg per day for 5 days (144). Dosages higher than 150 mg per day for 5 days are usually ineffective, and patients who remain anovulatory with this dosage should undergo further evaluation accompanied by changes in the therapeutic plan. Longer courses of clomiphene citrate therapy, and adjunctive therapy with glucocorticoids, are suggested if a patient does not ovulate with standard therapy (145).
# Chunk 1325
Women with PCOS who do not ovulate or become pregnant with clomiphene citrate, and women with hypogonadotropic hypoestrogenic anovulation, may be candidates for therapy with injectable gonadotropins. Available preparations include recombinant FSH and LH and products purified from the urine of menopausal women (FSH or FSH-LH combinations). Administration protocols and dosages vary widely and should be adjusted to individual needs. Safe administration requires careful monitoring of ovarian response with ultrasonography and, in some cases, serial estradiol measurements. In general, gonadotropins are administered at a dose of 50 to 150 IU per day by subcutaneous injection for 3 to 5 days, after which time estradiol and follicular monitoring commence. In most cycles, gonadotropin is administered for 7 to 12 days. Ovulation is triggered by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection of 5,000 to 10,000 IU hCG or subcutaneous injection of 250 μgof recombinant hCG once the lead follicle reaches 16 to 20 mm in diameter based on ultrasonographic assessments. Ovulation generally occurs approximately 38 to 40 hours after hCG administration. Luteal phase support is sometimes provided with the administration of progesterone supplementation or with additional injections of hCG.
# Chunk 1326
Figure 31.2 Major steroid biosynthesis pathway.

Laboratory Assessment of Hyperandrogenemia

Approximately 66% to 78% of circulatory testosterone is bound to sex hormone–binding globulin (SHBG) and is considered biologically inactive. Most of the proportion of serum testosterone that is not bound to SHBG is weakly associated with albumin (20% to 32%). A small percentage (1% to 2%) of testosterone is entirely unbound or free. The fraction of circulating testosterone that is unbound by SHBG has an inverse relationship with the SHBG concentration.
# Chunk 1327
In the past, testing for androgen conjugates (e.g., 3α-androstenediol G [3α-diol G] and androsterone G [AOG] as markers for 5α-reductase activity in the skin) was advocated. Routine ≥9 Adult onset adrenal hyperplasia >1000 <10,000 ng/dL Hirsutism Ferriman – Gallwey score ≤8 24-hour urinary cortisol Trial of OCPs, cosmetic, and dermatologic treatments >45 g/day ACTH stimulation test >300 ng/dL Cushing evaluation Plus: Moon facies, plethora, striae, dorsoclavicular or supraclavicular fat pads, proximal muscular weakness Assess for PCOS, AOAH, HAIR-AN, ovarian or adrenocortical tumor or other* 17-OH progesterone bioavailable testosterone (total and free included) No response 48-hour low-dose dexamethasone suppression: 40% suppression of T  11-desoxycortisol >7 ng/mL,  24-hour urinary cortisol >45 g/day,  DHEAS >360 g/dL Total T >200 ng/dL Elevated values consistent with Ovarian Tumor or Adrenocortical Tumor Total T >80 <150 ng/dL, bioavailable or free T mildly elevated, endocrine consultation PCOS, hyperthecosis, HAIR-AN Radiologic consultation on current imaging techniques Total T >200 ng/dL  bioavailable or free T >6.85 pg/mL  Or free endocrine consultation Total T normal or mildly elevated, bioavailable T normal or mildly elevated PCOS, idiopathic hirsutism Adrenal androgen secreting tumor  usually >1.5 cm and detectable by CT (sensitivity 70%–90%).  Ovarian androgen-secreting tumors usually <2 cm.  Selective venous sampling may be required.
# Chunk 1328
and all three androgens were simultaneously elevated in 56% of the cases. Serum androgen levels became subnormal in all ACT-AS patients after the tumor was removed. In nontumor androgen excess alone, the most commonly elevated androgen was androstenedione (93%), while all three androgens (T, A, and DHEAS) were elevated in only 22% of the cases. Free testosterone values above 6.85 pg/mL (23.6 pmol/L) had the best diagnostic value for ACT-AS (sensitivity 82%; CI, 57%–96%; specificity 97%, CI, 91%–100%) (Table 31.3). The large overlap of androstenedione, testosterone, and DHEAS levels between ACT-AS and androgen excess groups suggests that thoughtful consideration should be employed when choosing hormone studies for this evaluation (11).
# Chunk 1329
The heterogeneity of hormone secretion patterns in the adrenocortical tumor group reveals the complexities of hormone level screening for adrenocortical tumors: 7 of 44 patients (15.9%) had tumors secreting androgens alone, 2 of 44 (4.5%) had tumors secreting androgens and estrogens, 28 of 44 (63.6%) had tumors secreting both androgens and cortisol, and 7 of 44 (15.9%) had tumors secreting androgens, cortisol, and estrogens. Compound S or 11-desoxycortisol was increased (≥10 ng/mL or 28.9 nmol/L) in 23 of 27 ACT-AS patients (85%); 20 of 21 patients with malignant tumors, and 3 of 6 patients with apparently benign tumors, although 11-desoxycortisol was normal and inferior to 6 ng/mL (17.3 nmol/L) in 35 of 35 nontumor androgen excess patients (100%). Youden’s index displayed that a 11-desoxycortisol level above 7 ng/mL (20.2 nmol/L) has a sensitivity of 89% (95% CI, 71%–98%) and a specificity of 100% (95% CI, 90%–100%) for the detection of ACT-AS (11,12).
# Chunk 1330
The increased testosterone levels in patients with PCOS are considered ovarian in origin. The serum total testosterone levels are usually no more than twice the upper normal range (20 to 80 ng/dL). However, in ovarian hyperthecosis, values may reach 200 ng/dL or more (48). The adrenal compartment plays a role in the development of PCOS. Although the hyperfunctioning CYP17 androgen-forming enzyme coexists in both the ovaries and the adrenal glands, DHEAS is increased in only about 50% of patients with PCOS (49,50). The hyperresponsiveness of DHEAS to stimulation with ACTH, the onset of symptoms around puberty, and the observation of 17,20-lyase activation (one of the two CYP17 enzymes) are key events in adrenarche that led to the hypothesis that PCOS arises as an exaggeration of adrenarche (48).
# Chunk 1331
Acanthosis nigricans is a reliable marker of insulin resistance in hirsute women. This thickened, pigmented, velvety skin lesion is most often found in the vulva and may be present on the axilla, over the nape of the neck, below the breast, and on the inner thigh (72). The HAIR-AN syndrome consists of hyperandrogenism (HA), insulin resistance (IR), and acanthosis nigricans (AN) (68,73). These patients often have high testosterone levels (>150 ng/dL), fasting insulin levels of greater than 25 μIU/mL (normal <20 to 24 μIU/mL), and maximal serum insulin responses to glucose load (75 gm) exceeding 300 μIU/mL (normal is <160 μIU/m: at 2 hours postglucose load).
# Chunk 1332
2.

A complete lipid profile based using the American Heart Association guidelines (Fig. 31.6). If the fasting serum lipid profile is normal, it should be reassessed every 2 years or sooner if weight gain occurs.
# Chunk 1333
5.

D3 is more potent and appropriate dosing to correct levels is still under investigation.

In chronic anovulatory patients with PCOS, persistently elevated estrogen levels, which are uninterrupted by progesterone, increase the risk of endometrial carcinoma (81,82). These endometrial cancers are usually well differentiated, stage I lesions with a cure rate of more than 90% (see Chapter 35). Endometrial biopsy should be considered in PCOS patients, because they may occasionally harbor these cancers as early as the third decade of life. Abnormal bleeding, increasing weight, and age are factors that should lower the threshold for endometrial sampling. Prevention of endometrial cancer is a core management goal for patients with
# Chunk 1334
than 0.5 mg every evening should be avoided to prevent the risk of adrenal suppression and severe side effects that resemble Cushing syndrome. To avoid oversuppression of the pituitary– adrenal axis, morning serum cortisol levels should be monitored intermittently (maintain at >2 μg/dL). Reduction in hair growth rate was reported, and significant improvement in acne associated with adrenal hyperandrogenism (108).
# Chunk 1335
At least a modest improvement in hirsutism can be anticipated in 70% to 80% of women using at least 100 mg of spironolactone per day for 6 months (112). Spironolactone reduces the daily linear growth rate of sexual hair, hair shaft diameters, and daily hair volume production (113). Combination therapy with spironolactone and oral contraceptives seems effective via their differing but synergistic activities (15,114).
# Chunk 1336
The most common dose is 50 to 100 mg twice daily. Women treated with 200 mg per day show a greater reduction in hair shaft diameter than women receiving 100 mg per day (115). Maximal inhibition of hirsutism is noted between 3 and 6 months but continues for 12 months. Electrolysis can be recommended 9 to 12 months after the initiation of spironolactone for permanent hair removal.
# Chunk 1337
The most common side effect of spironolactone is menstrual irregularity (usually metrorrhagia), which may occur in over 50% of patients with a dosage of 200 mg per day (115). Normal menses may resume with reduction of the dosage. Infrequently, other side effects such as mastodynia, urticaria, or scalp hair loss may occur. Nausea and fatigue can occur with high doses (112). Because spironolactone can increase serum potassium levels, its use is not recommended in patients with renal insufficiency or hyperkalemia. Periodic monitoring of potassium and creatinine levels is suggested.
# Chunk 1338
In hyperinsulinemic hyperandrogenemic nonobese PCOS adolescents on a combination of metformin (850 mg per day) and ﬂutamide (62.5 mg per day), the low-dose OC containing drospirenone resulted in a more effective and more efficient reduction in total and abdominal fat excess than was demonstrated by those utilizing an OC with gestodene as the progestin (124). The combination of ethinyl-drospirenone, metformin, and ﬂutamide is effective in reducing excess total and abdominal fat and attenuating dysadipocytokinemia in young women with hyperinsulinemic PCOS. The use of the antiandrogen ﬂutamide appeared to emphasize effects (125). Many patients taking ﬂutamide (50% to 75%) report dry skin, blue-green discoloration of urine, and liver enzyme elevation. Liver toxicity or failure and death are rare but severe side effects of ﬂutamide appear to be dose related (126). The 2008 Endocrine Society clinical practice guidelines do not recommend using ﬂutamide as first-line therapy for treating hirsutism. If it is used, the lowest effective dose should be given, and the patient’s liver function should be monitored closely (4). Flutamide should not be used in women desiring pregnancy.
# Chunk 1339
Finasteride Finasteride is a specific inhibitor of type 2 5α-reductase enzyme activity, approved in the United States at a 5-mg dose for the treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia, and at a 1-mg dose to treat male-pattern baldness. In a study in which finasteride (5 mg daily) was compared with spironolactone (100 mg daily), both drugs resulted in similar significant improvement in hirsutism, despite differing effects on androgen levels (127). Most of the improvement in hirsutism with finasteride occurred after 6 months of therapy with 7.5 mg of finasteride daily (128). The improvement in hirsutism in the presence of rising testosterone levels is convincing evidence that it is the binding of DHT, and not testosterone, to the androgen receptor that is responsible for hair growth. Finasteride does not prevent ovulation or cause menstrual irregularity. The increase in SHBG caused by OCs further decreases free testosterone levels; OCs in combination with finasteride are more effective in reducing hirsutism than finasteride alone. As with spironolactone and ﬂutamide, finasteride could theoretically feminize a male fetus; therefore, both of these agents are used only with additional contraception.
# Chunk 1340
Laparoscopic ovarian electrocautery is used as an alternative to wedge resection in patients with severe PCOS whose condition is resistant to clomiphene citrate. In a recent series, ovarian drilling was achieved laparoscopically with an insulated electrocautery needle, using 100-W cutting current to assist entry and 40-W coagulating current to treat each microcyst over 2 seconds (8-mm needle in ovary) (134). In each ovary, 10 to 15 punctures were created. This led to spontaneous ovulation in 73% of patients, with 72% conceiving within 2 years. Of those who underwent a follow-up laparoscopy, 11 of 15 were adhesion free. To reduce adhesion formation, a technique that cauterized the ovary in only four points led to a similar pregnancy rate, with a miscarriage rate of 14% (135). Other laparoscopic techniques using laser instead of electrocautery for laparoscopic ovarian drilling were described (136). Most series report a decrease in both androgen and LH concentrations and an increase in FSH concentrations (137,138). The beneficial endocrinological effects of laparoscopic ovarian drilling and the improvement in hirsutism were sustained for up to 9 years in patients with PCOS (139). Unilateral diathermy results in bilateral ovarian activity (140). Further studies are anticipated to define candidates who may benefit most from such a procedure. The risk of adhesion formation should be discussed with the patient.
# Chunk 1341
The most common cause of ACTH-independent Cushing syndrome is exogenous or iatrogenic (i.e., superphysiologic therapy with corticosteroids) or factitious (self-induced). Corticosteroids are used in pharmacologic quantities to treat a variety of diseases with an inﬂammatory component. Over time, such therapy will result in Cushing syndrome. When corticosteroids are taken by the patient but not prescribed by a physician, the diagnosis may be especially challenging. The diagnostic workup for Cushing syndrome focuses on the ability to suppress autonomous cortisol secretion and whether ACTH is elevated or suppressed. According to the 2008 Endocrine Society’s clinical practice guidelines for the diagnosis of Cushing syndrome, the initial use of one test with high diagnostic accuracy (24-hour urine free cortisol, late night salivary cortisol, 1 mg overnight or 2 mg 48-hour dexamethasone suppression test) is recommended. The 24-hour urine-free cortisol (UFC) should be used to diagnose Cushing syndrome in pregnant women and in patients with epilepsy, whereas the 1-mg overnight dexamethasone suppression test, rather than UFC, should be used for initial testing for Cushing syndrome in patients with severe renal failure and adrenal incidentaloma. The 2-mg 48-hour dexamethasone suppression test is the optimal test in conditions that are associated with overactivation of the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis: depression, morbid obesity, alcoholism, and diabetes mellitus.
# Chunk 1342
Figure 31.7 Algorithm for testing patients suspected of having Cushing syndrome (CS). Diagnostic criteria that suggest Cushing syndrome are a urinary-free cortisol (UFC) greater than the normal range for the assay, serum cortisol greater than 1.8 μg/dL (50 nmol/L) after 1 mg dexamethasone (1 mg DST), and a late night salivary cortisol greater than 145 ng/dL (4 nmol/L). (Based on recommendations from Nieman LK, Biller BM, Findling JW, et al. The diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome: an Endocrine Society Clinical Practice Guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2008;93:1526–1540.)
# Chunk 1343
The treatment of choice for Cushing disease is transsphenoidal resection. The remission rate is approximately 70% to 90% and the recurrence rate is 5% to 10% at 5 years and 10% to 20% at 10 years in patients with microadenomas who undergo surgery by an experienced surgeon (160– 164). Patients with macroadenoma have lower remission rates (<60%) and higher recurrence rates (12% to 45%) (165–167). Following surgery, transient diabetes insipidus and enduring compromise of anterior pituitary secretion of growth hormone, gonadotropins, and TSH are common (167,168).
# Chunk 1344
Fractionated external beam radiotherapy or stereotactic radiosurgery is used to treat patients with Cushing disease in whom transsphenoidal microsurgery was not successful or in patients who are poor surgical candidates. This therapy can achieve control of hypercortisolemia in approximately 50% to 60% of patients within 3 to 5 years (155,169,170). Hypopituitarism is the most common side effect of pituitary irradiation, and long-term follow-up is essential to detect relapse, which can occur after an initial response to radiotherapy.
# Chunk 1345
Nelson syndrome results from adenomatous progression of ACTH-secreting cells in patients with Cushing syndrome treated by bilateral adrenalectomy. The macroadenoma that causes this syndrome produces sellar pressure symptoms of headaches, visual field disturbances, and ophthalmoplegia. Extremely high ACTH levels in Nelson syndrome are associated with severe hyper-pigmentation (melanocyte-stimulating hormone activity). The treatment is surgical removal or radiation. The offending adenomatous tissue is often resistant to complete surgical removal (173). This syndrome reportedly complicates 10% to 50% of bilateral adrenalectomy cases. Measuring pituitary MRI and ACTH plasma levels at regular intervals after bilateral adrenalectomy will allow detection of the early progression of corticotroph tumors and the possibility of cure by surgery, particularly with microadenomas (155). Nelson syndrome is less common today because bilateral adrenalectomy is less frequently used as initial treatment.
# Chunk 1346
4.

An accumulation of the precursors of the affected enzyme in the bloodstream.

21-Hydroxylase Deficiency Deficiency of 21-hydroxylase is responsible for over 90% of all cases of adrenal hyperplasia due to adrenal synthetic enzyme deficiency. The disorder produces a spectrum of conditions; CAH, with or without salt wasting, and milder forms that are expressed as hyperandrogenism of pubertal onset (adult onset adrenal hyperplasia, AOAH). Salt-wasting CAH, the most severe form, affects 75% of patients with congenital manifestations during the first 2 weeks of life and results in a life-threatening hypovolemic salt-wasting crisis, accompanied by hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, and acidosis. The salt-wasting form results from a severity of enzyme deficiency sufficient to result in ineffective aldosterone synthesis. With or without salt-wasting and newborn adrenal crisis, the condition is usually diagnosed earlier in affected female newborns than in males as genital virilization (e.g., clitoromegaly, labioscrotal fusion, and abnormal urethral course) is apparent at birth.
# Chunk 1347
Patients with severe hirsutism, virilization, or recent and rapidly progressing signs of androgen excess require careful investigation for the presence of an androgen-secreting neoplasm. The two most common sources of androgen-secreting tumors are the adrenal glands and the ovaries. To assess the symptoms, serum and urine tests for androgens and their metabolites should be obtained along with modern abdominal imaging techniques such as CT, MRI, and ultrasound scans (194). In prepubertal girls, virilizing tumors may cause signs of heterosexual precocious puberty in addition to hirsutism, acne, and virilization. In patients suspected of harboring an adrenal or ovarian tumor because of rapidly progressing or severe hyperandrogenism, the bioavailable testosterone level (free testosterone level above 6.85 pg/mL; 23.6 pmol/L), followed by an11-desoxycortisol (above 7 ng/mL; 20.2 nmol/L), DHEAS (>3.6 μg/mL) and a 24-hour urinary cortisol (>45 μg per day) are the most sensitive and specific for the detection of an androgen-secreting adrenocortical tumor (Table 31.3). A markedly elevated free testosterone level (2.5 times the upper normal range) is considered typical of an adrenal androgen-secreting tumor, while moderately elevated free testosterone levels are often ovarian in origin. A DHEAS level greater than 800 μg/dL is typical of an adrenal tumor. An adrenal tumor is unlikely when serum DHEAS and urinary 17-ketosteroid excretion measurements are in the normal basal range and the serum cortisol concentration is less than 3.3 μg/dL after dexamethasone administration (195). The results of other dynamic tests, especially testosterone suppression and stimulation, are unreliable (196).
# Chunk 1348
Ovarian neoplasms are the most frequent androgen-producing tumors. Granulosa cell tumors constitute 1% to 2% of all ovarian tumors and occur mostly in adult women (in postmenopausal more frequently than in premenopausal women) (see Chapter 37). Usually associated with estrogen production, they are the most common functioning tumors in children and can lead to isosexual precocious puberty (202). Patients can present with vaginal bleeding caused by endometrial hyperplasia or endometrial cancer resulting from prolonged exposure to tumor-derived estrogen (203). Total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy are the treatments of choice. If fertility is desired, a more conservative approach involving unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy with careful staging can be performed in women with stage IA (the cancer does not extend outside the involved ovary and a concomitant uterine cancer is excluded) (203). The malignant potential of these lesions is variable. The 10year survival rates vary from 60% to 90%, depending on the stage, tumor size, and histologic atypia (202).
# Chunk 1349
Thecomas are rare and occur in older patients. In one study only 11% were androgenic, even in the presence of steroid-type cells (luteinized thecomas) (202). They are unilateral in more than 90% of the cases and rarely malignant. A unilateral oophorectomy is adequate treatment (204).
# Chunk 1350
Sertoli-Leydig cell tumors, previously classified as androblastoma or arrhenoblastoma, account for 11% of solid ovarian tumors. They contain various proportions of Sertoli cells, Leydig cells, and fibroblasts (202). Sertoli-Leydig cell tumors are the most common virilizing tumors in women of reproductive age; however, masculinization occurs in only one-third of patients. The tumor is bilateral in 1.5%. In 80% of cases, it is diagnosed at stage IA (202). Sertoli-Leydig cell tumors are frequently low-grade malignancies, and their prognosis is related to their degree of differentiation and stage of disease (205). Treatment with unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy is justified in patients with stage IA disease who desire fertility. Total abdominal hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, and adjuvant therapy are recommended for postmenopausal women who have advanced-stage disease.
# Chunk 1351
Luteomas of pregnancy are frequently associated with maternal and fetal masculinization.

This is not a true neoplasm but rather a reversible hyperplasia, which usually regresses postpartum. A review of the literature reveals a 30% incidence of maternal virilization and a 65% incidence of virilized female newborns in the presence of a pregnancy luteoma and maternal masculinization (219–221).
# Chunk 1352
Figure 31.8 Amino acid sequence of prolactin. Three cysteine disulfide bands are located within the molecule. (From Bondy PK. Rosenberg leukocyte esterase: metabolic control and disease, 8th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1980, with permission.) prolactin (MW 23,000 D) constitutes more than 50% of all combined prolactin production and is most responsive to extrapituitary stimulation or suppression (233,235,236). Clinical assays for prolactin measure the little prolactin, and in all but extremely rare circumstances, these measures are sufficient to assess diseases of abnormal pituitary production of the hormone.
# Chunk 1353
Medical Treatment Ergot alkaloids are the mainstay of therapy. In 1985, bromocriptine was approved for use in the United States to treat hyperprolactinemia caused by a pituitary adenoma. These agents act as strong dopamine agonists, thus decreasing prolactin levels. Effects on prolactin levels occur within hours, and lesion size may decrease within 1 or 2 weeks. Bromocriptine decreases prolactin synthesis, DNA synthesis, cell multiplication, and overall size of prolactinomas. Bromocriptine treatment results in normal prolactin blood levels or return of ovulatory menses in 80% to 90% of patients.
# Chunk 1354
Because ergot alkaloids, like bromocriptine, are excreted via the biliary tree, caution is required when using it in the presence of liver disease. The major adverse effects include nausea, headaches, hypotension, dizziness, fatigue and drowsiness, vomiting, headaches, nasal congestion, and constipation. Many patients tolerate bromocriptine when the dose is increased gradually, by 1.25 mg (one-half tablet) daily each week until prolactin levels are normal or a dose of 2.5 mg twice daily is reached. A proposed regimen is as follows: one-half tablet every evening (1.25 mg) for 1 week, one-half tablet morning and evening (1.25 mg) during the second week, one-half tablet in the morning (1.25 mg) and a full tablet every evening (2.5 mg) during the third week, and one tablet every morning and every evening during the fourth week and thereafter (2.5 mg twice a day). The lowest dose that maintains the prolactin level in the normal range is continued (1.25 mg twice daily often is sufficient to normalize prolactin levels in individuals with levels less than 100 ng/mL). Pharmacokinetic studies show peak serum levels occur 3 hours after an oral dose, with a nadir at 7 hours. Because little detectable bromocriptine is in the serum by 11 to 14 hours, twice-a-day administration is required. Prolactin levels can be checked soon (6 to 24 hours) after the last dose.
# Chunk 1355
Cabergoline, which appears to be as effective as bromocriptine in lowering prolactin levels and in reducing tumor size, has substantially fewer adverse effects than bromocriptine. Very rarely, patients experience nausea and vomiting or dizziness with cabergoline; they may be treated with intravaginal cabergoline as with bromocriptine. A gradually increasing dosage helps avoid the side effects of nausea, vomiting, and dizziness. Cabergoline at 0.25 mg twice per week is usually adequate for hyperprolactinemia with values less than 100 ng/mL. If required to normalize prolactin levels, the dosage can be increase by 0.25 mg per dose on a weekly basis to a maximum of 1 mg twice weekly.
# Chunk 1356
Discontinuation of bromocriptine therapy after 2 to 3 years may be attempted in a select group of patients who have maintained normoprolactinemia while on therapy (302,303). In a retrospective series of 131 patients treated with bromocriptine for a median of 47 months, normoprolactinemia was sustained in 21% at a median follow-up of 44 months after treatment discontinuation (303). Discontinuation of cabergoline therapy was successful in patients treated for 3 to 4 years who maintained normoprolactinemia (304). In cabergoline discontinuers who met stringent inclusion criteria, a recurrence rate of 64% was noted (305). A recent meta-analysis involving 743 patients noted sustained normoprolactinemia in only a minority of patients (21%) after discontinuation. Patients with 2 years or more of therapy before discontinuation and no demonstrable tumor visible on MRI had the highest chance of persistent normoprolactinemia (306). Recurrence rates are higher for macroadenomas (as compared to microadenomas or hyperprolactinemia without adenoma) after cessation of bromocriptine or cabergoline, warranting close follow-up with serum prolactin and MRI after cessation of therapy. In patients with macroadenomas, withdrawal of therapy should proceed with caution, as rapid tumor reexpansion may occur.
# Chunk 1357
Medical Treatment Treatment with bromocriptine decreases prolactin levels and the size of macroadenomas; nearly one-half show a 50% reduction in size, and another one-fourth show a 33% reduction after 6 months of therapy. Because tumor regrowth occurs in more than 60% of cases after discontinuation of bromocriptine therapy, long-term therapy is usually required.
# Chunk 1358
After stabilization of tumor size is documented, the MRI scan is repeated 6 months later and, if stable, yearly for several years. This examination may be performed earlier if new symptoms develop or if there is no improvement in symptoms. Serum prolactin levels are measured every 6 months.
# Chunk 1359
TSH regulates thyroidal iodine metabolism by activation of adenylate cyclase. This facilitates endocytosis as a component of iodide uptake, digestion of thyroglobulin-containing colloid, and the release of thyroid hormones T4,T3, and reverse T3.T4 is released from the thyroid at 40 to 100 times the concentration of T3. The concentration of reverse T3, which has no intrinsic thyroid activity, is 30% to 50% of T3, and 1% of T4 concentration. Of thyroid hormones released, 70% are bound by circulating thyroid-binding globulin (TBG). T4 is present in higher concentrations in the circulating storage pool and has a slower turnover rate than T3. Approximately 30% of T4 is converted to T3 in the periphery. Reverse T3 participates in regulation of the conversion of T4 to T3.T3 is the primary physiologically functional thyroid hormone at the cellular level. T3 binds the nuclear receptor with 10 times the affinity of T4. Thyroid hormone effects on cells include increased oxygen consumption, heat production, and metabolism of fats, proteins, and carbohydrates. Systemically, thyroid hormone activity is responsible for the basal metabolic rate. It balances fuel efficiency with performance. Hyperthyroid states result in excessive fuel consumption with marginal performance.
# Chunk 1360
Optimal iodine intake to prevent disease lies within a relatively narrow range around the recommended daily consumption. Extreme iodine deficiency states are associated with cretinism, goiter, and hypothyroidism, while iodine sufficiency is associated with autoimmune thyroid disease and reduced remission rates in Graves disease (334).
# Chunk 1361
Thyroid Function Measurements of free serum T4 and T3 are complicated by the low levels of free hormone in systemic circulation, with only 0.02% to 0.03% of T4 and 0.2% to 0.3% of T3 circulating in the unbound state (340). Of the T4 and T3 in circulation, approximately 70% to 75% is bound to TBG, 10% to 15% attached to prealbumin, 10% to 15% bound to albumin, and a minor fraction (<5%) is bound to lipoprotein (340,341). Total thyroid measurements are dependent on levels of TBG, which are variable and affected by many conditions such as pregnancy, oral contraceptive pill use, estrogen therapy, hepatitis, and genetic abnormalities of TBG. Thus, assays for the measurement of free T4 and T3 are more clinically relevant than measuring total thyroid hormone levels.
# Chunk 1362
Antithyroglobulin antibodies are predominantly in the noncomplement fixing, polycolonal, immunoglobulin-G (IgG) class. Antithyroglobulin antibodies are found in 35% to 60% of patients with hypothyroid autoimmune thyroiditis, 12% to 30% of patients with Graves disease, and 3% of the general population (351–353). Antithyroglobulin antibodies are associated with acute thyroiditis, nontoxic goiter, and thyroid cancer (348).
# Chunk 1363
Previously referred to as antimicrosomal antibodies, TPO antibodies are directed against thyroid peroxidase and are found in Hashimoto thyroiditis, Graves disease, and postpartum thyroiditis. The antibodies produced are characteristically cytotoxic, complement-fixing IgG antibodies. In patients with thyroid autoantibodies, 99% will have positive anti-TPO antibodies, whereas only 36% will have positive antithyroglobulin antibodies, making anti-TPO a more sensitive test for autoimmune thyroid disease (353). Anti-TPO antibodies are present in 80% to 99% of patients with hypothyroid autoimmune thyroiditis, 45% to 80% of patients with Graves disease, and 10% to 15% of the general population (352–354). These antibodies can cause artifact in the measurement of thyroid hormone levels. Antithyroid peroxidase antibodies are used clinically in
# Chunk 1364
Another group of antibodies important in autoimmune thyroid disease bind the TSH receptor (TSHR). The TSHR belongs to the family of G-protein coupled receptors. TSHRAb are pathogenic and capable of activating (TSI) or blocking (TBI) TSH receptor functions. TBIs are detectable in two varieties: those that block TSH binding and those that block both pre-and postreceptor processes. Several investigators detected such blocking antibodies in patients with primary hypothyroidism and atrophic thyroid glands (355,356). The nomenclature and detection assay of TSH receptor antibodies are listed in Table 31.12. Anti-TSH receptor antibodies were reported in 6% to 60% of patients with hypothyroid autoimmune thyroiditis, 70% to 100% of patients with Graves disease, and 1% to 2% of the general population (357–361). Untreated Graves disease patients tested with third-generation immunometric assays are uniformly positive (362). TSHRAb are classified as binding inhibitory immunoglobulins by competitive binding assays (TBII); and in functional assays: stimulating (TSI)—according to their capacity to increase cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) production; blocking (TBI)—which possesses the capacity to reduce TSH effects; and, neutral (TNI)—with no effect on TSH binding or alteration of cAMP levels. A number of competitive and functional assays are available to determine the levels of each antibody type, which, in toto, correlate with severity of disease, extraglandular signs, risk of fetal effects, and chances for remission and recurrence. TSHRAb are used clinically to distinguish postpartum thyroiditis from Graves disease, to predict the risk of fetal and neonatal thyrotoxicosis in women with prior ablative treatment or current thionamide therapy in the setting of Graves disease, and in the diagnosis of euthyroid Graves ophthalmopathy (348). These assays will increasingly optimize individual patient testing and treatment (363).
# Chunk 1365
Overt and subclinical hypothyroidism are defined as an elevated TSH with a low T4 and an elevated TSH and normal T4, respectively, using appropriate patient ranges (nonpregnant and pregnant). A number of professional organizations published various recommendations for thyroid function assessment via a TSH in women. Because of the long interval from development of disease to diagnosis, the nonspecific nature of symptoms, and the potential adverse neonatal and maternal outcomes associated with untreated hypothyroidism in pregnancy, the American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists (AACE) recommended screening women prior to conceiving or at the first prenatal appointment (367,368). The AACE also recommended screening for the presence of hypothyroidism in patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus (threefold increased risk of postpartum thyroid dysfunction and 33% prevalence overall), patients taking lithium therapy (35% prevalence), and consideration of testing in patients presenting with infertility (>12% prevalence) or depression (10% to 12% prevalence), as these populations are at an increased risk of hypothyroidism (368). A screening TSH was recommended in women starting at the age of 50 because of the increased prevalence of hypothyroidism in this population (369). Thyroid function testing at 6-month intervals was recommended for patients taking amiodarone, as hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism occurs in 14% to 18% of these patients (368). Any woman with a history of postpartum thyroiditis should be offered annual surveillance of thyroid function, as 50% of these patients will develop hypothyroidism within 7 years of diagnosis (370). Because there is a high prevalence of hypothyroidism in women with Turner and Down syndromes, an annual check of thyroid function is recommended for these patients (371,372).
# Chunk 1366
Alternatively, the Endocrine Society’s clinical practice guidelines regarding the management of thyroid dysfunction during pregnancy and postpartum recommends targeted screening for the following individuals: history of thyroid disorder, family history of thyroid disease, goiter, thyroid autoantibodies, clinical signs or symptoms of thyroid disease, autoimmune disorders, infertility, head and/or neck radiation, and preterm delivery (373). The American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists accepted these recommendations for TSH testing (374). Because of the (i) potentially significant neurologic affects on the fetus and other adverse pregnancy events; (ii) physiologic rise in TBG and the TSH-like activity of hCG in pregnancy, and (iii) potential for the targeted screening groups to have overt or subclinical hypothyroidism defined by the reference ranges for pregnancy (TSH <2.5, 3.1, and 3.5 μIU/mL for the first, second, and third trimesters, respectively), targeted maternal testing for hypothyroidism is encouraged. The targeted screening protocol allows that 30% of subclinical hypothyroidism cases may be missed. According to these recommendations, preconceptionally diagnosed hypothyroid women (overt or subclinical) should have their T4 dosage adjusted such that the TSH value is less than 2.5 μIU/mL before pregnancy. The T4 dosage in women already on replacement will routinely require a dose escalation (30% to 50%) at 4 to 6 weeks gestation in order to maintain a TSH value less than 2.5 μIU/mL. Pregnant women with overt hypothyroidism should be normalized as rapidly as possible to maintain TSH at less than 2.5 and 3 μIU/mL in the first, second, and third trimesters, respectively. Euthyroid women with thyroid autoantibodies are at risk of hypothyroidism and should have TSH screening in each trimester. After delivery, hypothyroid women need a reduction in T4 dosage used during pregnancy. Because subclinical hypothyroidism is associated with adverse outcomes for mother and the fetus, T4 replacement is recommended.
# Chunk 1367
Thyroxine replacement is initiated in patients with clinically overt hypothyroidism or sub-clinical hypothyroidism with a goiter. Regression of gland size usually does not occur, but treatment often prevents further growth of the thyroid gland. Treatment is recommended for patients with subclinical hypothyroidism in the setting of a TSH greater than 10 mIU/L on repeat measurements, pregnant patients, a strong habit of tobacco use, signs or symptoms associated with thyroid failure, or patients with severe hyperlipidemia (380). All pregnant patients with an elevated TSH level should be treated with levothyroxine. Treatment does not slow progression of the disease. The initial dosage of levothyroxine may be as little as 12.5 μg per day up to a full replacement dose. The mean replacement dosage of levothyroxine is 1.6 μg/kg of body weight per day, although the dosage varies greatly between patients (368). Aluminum hydroxide (antacids), cholestyramine, iron, calcium, and sucralfate may interfere with absorption. Rifampin and sertraline hydrochloride may accelerate the metabolism of levothyroxine. The half-life of levothyroxine is nearly 7 days; therefore, nearly 6 weeks of treatment are necessary before the effects of a dosage change can be evaluated.
# Chunk 1368
Graves disease is a complex autoimmune disorder in which several genetic susceptibility loci and environmental factors are likely to play a role in the development of the disease. Human leukocyte antigen and polymorphisms in the cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen 4 (CTLA-4) gene were established as susceptibility loci; however, the magnitude of their contributions seems to vary among patient populations and study groups. Additional loci are likely to be identified by a combination of genome-wide linkage analyses and allelic association analyses of candidate genes. The rate of concordance for Graves disease is only 20% in monozygotic twins and even lower in dizygotic twins, consistent with a multifactorial inheritance pattern highly inﬂuenced by environmental factors. Linkage analysis identified loci on chromosomes 14q31, 20q11.2, and Xq21 that are associated with susceptibility to Graves disease (393).
# Chunk 1369
The classic triad in Graves disease consists of exophthalmos, goiter, and hyperthyroidism. The symptoms associated with Graves disease include frequent bowel movements, heat intolerance, irritability, nervousness, heart palpitations, impaired fertility, vision changes, sleep disturbances, tremor, weight loss, and lower extremity swelling. Physical findings may include lid lag, nontender thyroid enlargement (two to four times normal), onycholysis, dependent lower extremity edema, palmar erythema, proptosis, staring gaze, and thick skin. A cervical venous bruit and tachycardia may be noted. The tachycardia does not respond to increased vagal tone produced with a Valsalva maneuver. Severe cases may demonstrate acropachy, chemosis, clubbing, dermopathy, exophthalmos with ophthalmoplegia, follicular conjunctivitis, pretibial myxedema, and vision loss.
# Chunk 1370
Table 31.14 Potential Causes of Hyperthyroidism

Tumors secreting human chorionic gonadotropin (molar pregnancy, choriocarcinoma) a similar clinical picture include toxic adenomas and toxic multinodular goiter. A radioactive iodine uptake thyroid scan may help differentiate these two conditions from Graves disease. Rare conditions resulting in thyrotoxicosis include metastatic thyroid carcinoma causing thyrotoxicosis, amiodarone induced thyrotoxicosis, iodine induced thyrotoxicosis, postpartum thyroiditis, a TSH-secreting pituitary adenoma, an hCG-secreting choriocarcinoma, struma ovarii, and “de Quervan’s” or subacute thyroiditis (394). Factitious ingestion of thyroxine or desiccated thyroid should be considered in patients with eating disorders. Patients with thyrotoxicosis factitia demonstrate elevated T3 and T4, suppressed TSH, and a low serum thyroglobulin level, whereas other causes of thyroiditis and thyrotoxicosis demonstrate high levels of thyroglobulin. Potential causes of hyperthyroidism are listed in Table 31.14.
# Chunk 1371
A single dose of radioactive iodine-131 is an effective cure in about 80% of cases and is the definitive treatment in nonpregnant women. Any woman of childbearing age should be tested for pregnancy before undergoing diagnostic or therapeutic administration of iodine. Ablation of a second-trimester fetal thyroid gland and congenital hypothyroidism (cretinism) from treatment during the first trimester were reported (395). Nuclear medicine professionals provide expertise in the administration of the radioactive isotope, and because the effect of the radioactive iodine is not immediate, the endocrinologist continues to provide suppressive medical treatment for 6 to 12 weeks after administration of iodine while the patient remains hyperthyroid. As early as 2 to 3 months after treatment, patients may become hypothyroid and should be supplemented with thyroxine as indicated by serum levels of free thyroid hormone levels (368). TSH testing is not sensitive for predicting thyroid function during this time as changes in TSH lag 2 weeks to several months behind thyroid function changes (368). Failure to respond to iodine 6 months after treatment may require a repeat treatment with radioactive iodine (394). Postablative hypothyroidism develops in 50% of patients within the first year after iodine therapy and in more than 2% of patients per year thereafter.
# Chunk 1372
Thyroid-Stimulating Receptor Antibody in Graves Disease The level of TSHRAb of the TBII class grossly parallels the degree of hyperthyroidism as assessed by the serum levels of thyroid hormones and total thyroid volume. Studies suggest that the combination of a small goiter volume (<40 mL) and a low TBII level (<30 U/L) results in a 45% chance of remission during the 5 years after completion of a 12-to 24-month course of antithyroid drug therapy (397). In contrast, the overall rate of relapse exceeded 70% in patients with a large goiter volume (>70 mL) and a higher TBII level (>30 U/L). The subgroup of patients with larger goiters and higher TBII levels had less than a 10% chance to remain in remission in the 5 years after treatment. Although it is not necessary for the diagnosis of Graves disease, except in some cases of multinodular goiter, a TSHRAb measurement may be a useful marker of disease severity. Used in combination with other clinical factors, it may contribute to initial decisions regarding treatment. See Table 31.12 for a review of the nomenclature and assay methods for TSHRAb.
# Chunk 1373
In 2009, the FDA published a warning on the use of propylthiouracil because of 32 reported cases of serious liver injury associated with its use (400,401). The average daily dose associated with liver failure was 300 mg, and liver failure was reported to occur anywhere from 6 days to 450 days after initiation of therapy (402). Traditionally PTU was the drug of choice to treat hyperthyroidism for the duration of pregnancy because it less readily crosses the placenta, and methimazole was associated with an increased risk of choanal atresia and aplasia cutis (403– 406). Because of the case reports of PTU-related liver failure and the increased risk of birth defects associated with methimazole use during embryogenesis, the FDA and the Endocrine Society recommend PTU never be used as first-line medical treatment of hyperthyroidism for nonpregnant patients. It is recommended that its use be limited to pregnant women during the first trimester; situations where surgery or radioactive iodine treatment are contraindicated, and individuals who have developed a toxic reaction to methimazole (400,402). The FDA recommends monitoring patients closely for signs and symptoms of liver injury while taking PTU.If liver injury is suspected, PTU should be promptly discontinued (400). The American Thyroid Association recommends an initial dose of 100 to 600 mg per day in three divided doses with a goal to maintain T4 in the upper limit of normal using the lowest possible dose. Minor reactions such as pruritus affect 3% to 5% of patients treated with thionamide therapy, and antihistamines may eliminate symptoms and allow continued use. Agranulocytosis is a rare and potentially fatal complication of PTU and methimazole therapy, and developing in 0.2% of women treated, and it mandates immediate discontinuation of the drug (403). Agranulocytosis most commonly presents with fever and a sore throat followed by sepsis; the occurrence of fever, sore throat, or a viral-like syndrome should prompt an urgent evaluation.
# Chunk 1374
Studies suggest a potential role for an intrathyroid dexamethasone injection to prevent relapse (410). Other medical therapies include iodide and lithium, both of which reduce thyroid hormone release and inhibit the organification of iodine. Iodide leads to the secondary coupling of T3 and T4. Iodide inhibition of thyroid metabolism is only transient, and complete escape from inhibition occurs within 1 to 2 weeks of iodide therapy, making this useful only for acute management of severe thyrotoxicosis (394). Lithium may be used when thionamide therapy is contraindicated or in combination with PTU or methimazole (394). To avoid toxicity during treatment, serum lithium levels should be monitored. Lithium has been associated with fetal Ebstein anomaly, and iodide has been associated with congenital goiter; these medications should not be used in pregnant women and should be used with caution in women of reproductive age. Because of the complications related to medical therapy of hyperthyroidism, women desiring pregnancy should be counseled to strongly consider surgical treatment or radioactive iodine treatment prior to pregnancy (402).
# Chunk 1375
2. In the woman with antecedent Graves disease previously treated with radioiodine or thyroidectomy and regardless of the current thyroid status (euthyroidism with or without thyroxine substitution), TSHRAb should be measured early in pregnancy to evaluate the risk for fetal hyperthyroidism. If the TSHRAb level is high, careful monitoring of the fetus is mandatory for the early detection of signs of thyroid overstimulation (tachycardia, impaired growth rate, oligohydramnios, goiter). Cardiac echography and measurement of circulatory velocity may be confirmatory. Ultrasonographic measurements of the fetal thyroid have been defined from 20 weeks gestational age but require a well-trained operator, and thyroid visibility may be hindered because of fetal head position. Color Doppler ultrasonography is helpful in evaluating thyroid hypervascularization. Because of the potential risks of fetal-neonatal hyperthyroid cardiac insufficiency and the inability to measure the degree of hyperthyroidism in the mother because of previous thyroid ablation, it may be appropriate to consider direct diagnosis in the fetus. Fetal blood sampling through cordocentesis is feasible as early as 25 to 27 weeks gestation with less than 1% adverse effects (fetal bleeding, bradycardia, infection, spontaneous abortion, in utero death) when performed by experienced clinicians. ATD administration to the mother may be considered to treat the fetal hyperthyroidism.
# Chunk 1376
3. In the woman with concurrent hyperthyroid Graves disease, regardless of whether it has preceded the onset of pregnancy, ATD treatment should be monitored and adjusted to keep free T4 in the high-normal range to prevent fetal hypothyroidism and minimize toxicity associated with higher doses of these medications. TSHR-Ab should be measured at the beginning of the last trimester, especially if the required ATD dosage is high. If the TSHRAb assay is negative or the level low, fetal–neonatal hyperthyroidism is rare. If antibody levels are high (TBII ≥40 U/L or TSAb ≥300%), evaluation of the fetus for hyperthyroidism is required. In this condition, there is usually a fair correlation between maternal and fetal thyroid function such that monitoring the ATD dosage according to the mother’s thyroid status is appropriate for the fetus. In some cases in which a high dose of ATD >20 mg/d of methimazole or >300 mg/d of propylthiouracil [PTU]) is necessary, there is a risk of goitrous hypothyroidism in the fetus, which might be indistinguishable from goitrous Graves disease. The correct diagnosis relies on the assay of fetal thyroid hormones and TSH, which allows for optimal treatment.
# Chunk 1377
Postpartum thyroiditis usually begins with a transient hyperthyroid phase between 6 weeks and 6 months postpartum followed by a hypothyroid phase. Only one-fourth of the cases follow this classic clinical picture, and more than one-third have either hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism alone. Individuals with type 1 diabetes have a threefold increased risk of developing postpartum thyroiditis. Women with a history of postpartum thyroiditis in a previous pregnancy have nearly a 70% chance of recurrence in a subsequent pregnancy. Although psychotic episodes are rare, postpartum thyroid dysfunction should be considered in all women with postpartum psychosis. The thyrotoxic phase may be subclinical and overlooked, particularly in areas where iodine intake is low (423). Unlike patients with Graves disease, those with the hyperthyroidism caused by postpartum thyroiditis have a low level of radioactive isotope uptake. Women with a history of postpartum thyroiditis should be followed closely as they have a 20% risk of permanent hypothyroidism immediately following the onset of thyroiditis, up to a 60% risk of permanent
# Chunk 1378
Patients with Turner syndrome (and other forms of hypergonadotropic hypogonadism associated with abnormalities of the second sex chromosome) exhibit a high prevalence of autoimmune thyroid disorders. Approximately 50% of adult patients with Turner syndrome have antithyroid peroxidase (anti-TPO) and antithyroglobulin (anti-TG) autoantibodies. Of these patients, approximately 30% will develop subclinical or clinical hypothyroidism. The disorder is indistinguishable from Hashimoto thyroiditis. A susceptibility locus for Graves disease is noted on chromosome X (435). Because of the increased risk of autoimmune thyroid disease, it is recommended that women with Turner syndrome be screened with yearly TSH testing starting at the age of 4 (436).
# Chunk 1379
Down syndrome, caused by an extra chromosome 21, is characterized by an atypical body habitus, mental retardation, cardiac malformations, an increased risk of leukemia, and a reduced life expectancy. The extra chromosome is almost always of maternal origin. Autoimmune thyroid disorders are more common in patients with Down syndrome than in the general population. The gene for autoimmune polyglandular syndrome I (APECED) was mapped to chromosome 21 and is thought to be a transcription factor involved in immune regulation (AIRE). This gene may play a role in the development of autoimmune thyroid disease in these patients (437). Hashimoto thyroiditis is the most common type of thyroid disease in individuals with Down syndrome. Hypothyroidism develops in as many as 50% of patients older than age 40 with Down syndrome. These clinical syndromes and other evidence suggest part of the genetic susceptibility to Hashimoto thyroiditis may reside on chromosomes X and 21. Because of the increased frequency of hypothyroidism associated with Down syndrome, it is recommended to screen individuals at 6 months, 12 months, and then annually thereafter (372).
# Chunk 1380
401.

Rivkees SA. 63 years and 715 days to the “boxed warning”: unmasking of the propylthiouracil problem. Int J Pediatr Endocrinol 2010 (in press).
# Chunk 1381
Tubal and peritoneal factors account for 30% to 40% of cases of female infertility. Cervical factor is estimated to be a cause of infertility in no more than 5% of infertile couples. Uterine pathologies constitute the etiologic factor in infertility in as many as 15% of couples seeking treatment and are diagnosed in as many as 50% of infertile patients. Leiomyomas have not been shown to be a direct cause of infertility.
# Chunk 1382
Infertility is defined as 1 year of unprotected intercourse without pregnancy (1). This condition may be further classified as primary infertility, in which no previous pregnancies have occurred, and secondary infertility, in which a prior pregnancy, although not necessarily a live birth, has occurred. About 90% of couples should conceive within 12 months of unprotected intercourse (2). Subfertility refers to couples who conceive after 12 months of attempted impregnation (2). Fecundability refers to the probability of pregnancy per cycle, which is considered to be at 20% in fertile couples (1). Fecundity refers to the probability of achieving a live birth in a single cycle and, by definition, has a value lower than fecundability. The diagnosis of impaired fecundity has been proposed to include couples with 36 months or more without conception or physical inability or difficulty in having a child; however, there is currently no clear consensus on any of these terms (3–5).
# Chunk 1383
Twenty-one percent of couples in the United States are expected to experience infertility in their lifetimes, with a current prevalence of 7.4% (6). In 2002, over 7 million US women age 22 to 44 reported using infertility services in their lifetimes (7). Once diagnosed, 13% of couples will not pursue treatment (8). The diagnosis of impaired fecundity has been rising, reaching 15% in 2002 and largely resulting from the trend toward delayed childbearing in developed countries (3). Worldwide, male factor accounts for 51.2% and tubal blockage for 25% to 35% of infertility and subfertility (conception after attempting for 1 year) (9,10). In Europe, ovulatory dysfunction accounts for 21% to 32%, male factor 19% to 57%, tubal factor 14% to 26%, unexplained 8% to 30%, endometriosis 4% to 6%, and combined male and female factors 34.4% of infertility (11–13). The odds of infertility increase with female age and in general among patients who have not graduated from college (14). The high cost of infertility treatment is a barrier for many in the United States where insurance typically does not cover these services (15). Language and other cultural barriers affect access for many minority groups (15,16). The women most likely to obtain specialized treatment are 30 years of age or older, white, married, and of relatively high socioeconomic status (7).
# Chunk 1384
Brain imaging (MRI is the gold standard) to exclude  Pituitary microadenoma  Pituitary macroadenoma  Other abnormal brain mass Hypothyroidism  Exclude secondary causes  Treat condition  Supplement with thyroid hormone if indicated  Spontaneous ovulation will occur when thyroid function normalizes  Treat underlying condition  When prolactin normalizes, spontaneous ovulation should occur Anovulation Normal or high day 3 FSH and LH Ovarian disorders (see Figure 30.3) Low LH, FSH, TSH, GH, ACTH High serum prolactin levels Abnormal TSH or T4Low FSH, LH, E2 Hypothalmic disorders Thyroid disease Hyperprolactinemia Panhypopituitarism Assess and treat condition Repeat test to exclude false positive Elevated prolactin If a pituatary microadenoma is diagnosed  Bromocriptine or cabergoline to normalize prolactin level  Spontaneous ovulation should occur when prolactin is normal Anorexia  Medical and psychiatric assessment  Treat condition  Aim to increase BMI to allow spontaneous ovulation  If female athlete triad, assess bone density, diet, caloric in take Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism  Congenital or acquired  Brain imaging Hyperthyroidism  Evaluate cause  Treat condition Ovulation induction  Pulsalite GnRH-agonist  Induce FSH and LH release Ovulation induction  FSH intrauterine insemination  FSH timed intercourse If no spontaneous ovulation, exclude irreversible damage to pituitary
# Chunk 1385
Sperm Transport During ejaculation, mature spermatozoa are released from the vas deferens along with ﬂuid from the prostate, seminal vesicles, and bulbourethral glands. The released semen is a gelatinous mixture of spermatozoa and seminal plasma; however, this thins out 20 to 30 minutes after ejaculation. This process, called liquefaction, is the direct result of proteolytic enzymes within the prostatic ﬂuid (30). Following ejaculation, the released spermatozoa must undergo capacitation to become competent to fertilize the oocyte. Capacitation occurs within the cervical mucus and involves removal of inhibitory mediators such as cholesterol from the sperm surface, tyrosine phosphorylation, and calcium ion inﬂux, all of which allow the sperm to recognize additional fertilization cues during travel through the female reproductive tract. When the sperm reach the tubal isthmus they are slowly released into the ampulla, further reducing the number of sperm that reach the oocyte (31). Sperm transport from the posterior vaginal fornix to the fallopian tubes occurs within 2 minutes during the follicular phase of the menstrual cycle (32).
# Chunk 1386
Abstinence Abstinence of a minimum of 2 to a maximum of 7 days usually is recommended prior to the semen analysis, but the optimal duration is unknown (30). The epididymis stores the equivalent of three ejaculations (29). With prolonged abstinence, sperm overﬂow into the urethra and are ﬂushed out into the urine (30). A study of men attending an infertility clinic found that the total motile sperm count and normal morphology decreased after 10 days’ abstinence in normozoospermic men but after 5 days’ abstinence in oligozoospermic men (45). There are conﬂicting reports regarding the impact of shorter abstinence of 1 or 2 days on semen parameters (45,46), but one study suggested intrauterine insemination success rates might be improved by shortening abstinence times prior to specimen collection (46).
# Chunk 1387
Sperm Motility and Viability Sperm motility is the percentage of progressively motile sperm in the ejaculate. The normal lower limit is 32% or more, recently revised from 50% or more (30,43). Viability should be at least 58%. Progressive motility refers to movement either linearly or in a large circle regardless of speed. Nonprogressive motility describes sperm that display only small movements or twitching or no movement at all (immotile). Assessments of speed of progression, either rapid or slow, have been removed from the revised guidelines because of difficulty in unbiased measurement of this parameter. A reduction in sperm motility is referred to as asthenozoospermia. Leukocytes can impair sperm motility through oxidative stress. When a large number of immotile sperm are present or when progressive motility is less than 40%,
# Chunk 1388
Nonsperm Cells These include epithelial cells, round cells, and isolated sperm heads or tails. Round cells include immature germ cells and leukocytes. Immature germ cell elevation suggests testicular damage, while leukocytes (predominantly neutrophils) are associated with inﬂammation. Leukocytes can be distinguished by peroxidase positive staining, and normal leukocyte concentrations should be less than 1 million/mL. However, the prognostic significance of leukocytes in the semen is controversial (30,50). When bacterial colonization is found, the most common pathogens are Chlamydia trachomatis (41.4%), Ureaplasma urealyticum (15.5%), and Mycoplasma hominis (10.3%) (51).
# Chunk 1389
Insemination Processing During and after intercourse, seminal ﬂuid usually is prevented from reaching the intrauterine cavity and intra-abdominal space by the cervical barrier. The introduction of seminal ﬂuid past this barrier may be associated with pelvic infection and severe uterine cramping or anaphylactoid reactions, possibly mediated by seminal factors such as prostaglandins. Thus, protocols for processing whole semen include the washing of specimens to remove seminal factors and to isolate pure sperm. Additional processing may include centrifugation through density gradients, sperm migration protocols, and differential adherence procedures (66). Finally, phosphodiesterase inhibitors, such as pentoxiphylline, have been used during semen processing in an attempt to enhance sperm motility, fertilization capacity, and acrosome reactivity for IVF procedures (60,69).
# Chunk 1390
Risks of Intracytoplasmic Sperm Injection In skilled hands, oocyte damage with ICSI is reportedly 10% (81). However, oocyte degeneration can follow even an uncomplicated ICSI procedure, with rates as high as 30% to 50%. This is most likely a function of oocyte quality and/or patient factors rather than the ICSI process itself (82). Based on data from 5-year-old children, ICSI is associated with a higher congenital anomaly risk (4.2%) when compared with conventional IVF (typically 2% to 3%) (80). There may be an increased risk of imprinting disorders and hypospadias with ICSI (47). Reports indicate a slightly higher risk of sex chromosome abnormalities (0.8% to 1% ICSI vs. 0.2% IVF) and translocations (0.36% ICSI vs. 0.07% general population). It is unclear whether these relate to the ICSI procedure or inherent gamete defects; men with abnormal semen parameters have higher rates of sperm aneuploidy. Recent studies have not found an association with impaired intellectual or motor development among ICSI children. In the setting of specific genetic abnormalities such as Y chromosome microdeletions, abnormal karyotypes, cystic fibrosis mutations, or congenital absence of the vas deferens, genetic counseling should be offered to address the possible risk of infertility or other abnormality in the offspring (80).
# Chunk 1391
Gonadal failure is the hallmark of testicular azoospermia. Causes of this condition may be genetic, acquired (e.g., radiation therapy, chemotherapy, testicular torsion, varicocele, or mumps orchitis), or developmental (e.g., testicular maldescent). Testicular atrophy is often present. Because of the low chance of obtaining sperm, testicular biopsy is generally not recommended with hypergonadotropic hypogonadism (elevated levels of LH and FSH with low serum levels of testosterone) and consideration should be given to using donor sperm. Diagnostic testicular biopsies may be indicated in the setting of normal hormonal testing. If sperm are present on diagnostic testing, consideration can be given to using surgically retrieved spermatozoa for ICSI (44,47,86). If no sperm are present, consideration can be given to correcting acquired conditions such as varicocele, which may restore sperm to the ejaculate to permit ICSI or spontaneous pregnancy (87,88). Chromosomal abnormalities by peripheral karyotype testing are present in about 7% of infertile, 5% of oligospermic, and 10% to 15% in azoospermic men. Sex chromosome aneuploidies such as Klinefelter syndrome (47,XXY) encompass two-thirds of these infertility-associated chromosome abnormalities. Microdeletions in the Y chromosome have been identified in 10% to 20% of men with idiopathic azoospermia or severe oligospermia with concentration less than 5 million/mL (44,47,86) (Table 32.6). These microdeletions can be transmitted to the male offspring, who may then suffer from infertility. Therefore, screening for genetic causes is indicated in nonacquired cases of testicular azoospermia so that genetic counseling can be provided before treatment (80). The two most commonly implicated candidate gene families are the RNA-binding motif (RBM) and the “deleted in azoospermia” (DAZ) families, but microdeletions at various loci on the Y chromosome have been described (44,47,86,89–91). For example, microdeletions in Yq11.23 can occur in one or more of three regions: AZFa (proximal), AZFb (central), and AZFc (distal) (44,47,86).
# Chunk 1392
Vasectomy Reversal and Treatment of Obstructive Azoospermia Vasectomy can be reversed effectively using microsurgical vasovasostomy or vasoepididymostomy. These techniques can be used for epidymal obstructions (93). Patency and subsequent pregnancy rates approach 100% and 80%, respectively. Pregnancy typically occurs within 24 months of reversal (94). Rates of patency and pregnancy vary inversely with the length of time from vasectomy, particularly for reversal procedure performed after 15 years or more (93,94). Although 60% of reversal patients develop antisperm antibodies, these do not appear to affect fecundability. Following surgery, periodic semen analyses can identify reobstruction, which can range from 3% to 21% depending on which segments were anastamosed. For those patients with azoospermia 6 months after reversal, the procedure is considered a failure and testicular sperm aspiration with ICSI could be considered. However, repeat vasovasostomy is associated with patency rates of 75% and pregnancy rates of 43% (94).
# Chunk 1393
Reproductive aging is associated with abnormalities in the oocyte meiotic spindles that lead to chromosome alignment errors and increase rates of conceptus aneuploidies, particularly trisomies. This serves to increase the risk for spontaneous pregnancy loss and thereby decrease live birth rates in older women (100,105). A large study based on the Danish national registry estimated the rates of clinically recognized spontaneous pregnancy loss for various age groups to be 13.3% (12 to 19 years), 11.1% (20 to 24 years), 11.9% (25 to 29 years), 15.0% (30 to 34 years), 24.6% (35 to 39 years), 51.0% (40 to 44 years), and 93.4% (older than 45 years) (106). In addition, using sensitive hCG assays in women during their reproductive years, 22% of all pregnancies were found to be lost before they could be clinically diagnosed (107).
# Chunk 1394
Serum Day 3 Follicule Stimulating Hormone As women age, FSH physiologically rises in the early follicular phase (cycle day 3), with levels of 5.74 IU/L at age 35 to 39 and 14.34 IU/L at age 45 to 59. Higher levels are seen after unilateral oophorectomy. In women in their 40s, levels greater than 20 IU/L are predictive of menopause. Because the incidence of abnormal values is lower in younger women, testing is typically performed for women aged 35 or older (108). In subfertile women with an FSH 8 IU/L or more, spontaneous pregnancy rates decrease by 7% per unit of FSH increase, with a 40% reduction at 15 IU/L and 58% at 20 IU/L (112). FSH levels vary widely by assay, laboratory, and population (109). Because of the poor sensitivity of high basal FSH values in determining fecundability, they should not be used as the sole basis for excluding women from consideration for ART (113). Likewise, the poor specificity of low basal FSH values in determining fecundability makes them unreliable when used to reassure patients, particularly those of increased reproductive age (109).
# Chunk 1395
Ovulatory Factor Ovulatory factor accounts for 30% to 40% of all cases of female infertility. Initial diagnoses among women with ovulatory factor infertility may include anovulation (complete absence of ovulation) or oligo-ovulation (infrequent ovulation). Menstrual history may be suggestive if oligomenorrhea, amenorrhea, polymenorrhea, or dysfunctional uterine bleeding is present (124). Menstrual dysfunction is present in 18% to 20% of the general population (125). Figure 32.5 shows the ﬂuctuations of E2, progesterone, FSH, and LH in a normal, 28-day ovulatory cycle. The normal length of the menstrual cycle in reproductive-age women varies from 21 to 35 days, with a mean of 27 to 29 days (126). Most of the variability in cycle length occurs during the follicular phase (127), but the luteal phase, often considered to be fixed at 14 days, can range from 7 to 19 days (128). Even women with regular monthly menses may have anovulation, although the presence of moliminal symptoms such as premenstrual breast swelling, bloating, and mood changes are much more suggestive of ovulatory cycles (125).
# Chunk 1396
Methods to Document Ovulation

The “Fertile Window” The fertile window is the 6 day interval ending on the day of ovulation, but not after ovulation. Sperm can survive for up to 6 days in well-estrogenized cervical mucus, but the egg may be fertilizable for less than a day. Daily intercourse during this window may increase the probability of conception (32,127). The average woman is fertile between days 10 and 17 of the menstrual cycle, but many women can conceive outside of this range (128). Therefore, if timed intercourse is too cumbersome, intercourse two to three times weekly throughout the menstrual cycle will likely result in at least some of those occasions falling within the fertile window (129). Duration of abstinence prior to the fertile window has not been established, although one author suggests 5 days (127).
# Chunk 1397
Luteinizing Hormone Monitoring At a mean time of 2 hours following the peak of the serum LH surge, urinary LH can be detected. Commercially available kits for documenting the LH surge are generally accurate, quick, convenient, and relatively inexpensive enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) that use 35 to 50 mIU/mL as their threshold for detection (132,133). Once the LH surge is detected, ovulation may occur within the next 48 hours (32,132,133). The positive-predictive and negative-predictive values for these kits have been described to be 92% and 95%, respectively (132,134). Because the duration of the surge may be less than 12 hours, twice daily testing may increase detection rates (133). However, the 2 days of highest probability of conception are the day of and the day prior to the LH surge, so this may actually lead to abstaining from intercourse during a potentially fertile time (127). False-positive rates occur in 7% of cycles, which may reﬂect urinary clearance of unsustained premature LH surges (32,131,135). The tests cannot be used in patients with irregular cycles (127).
# Chunk 1398
Midluteal Serum Progesterone When used to document ovulation, serum progesterone measurement should coincide with peak progesterone secretion in the midluteal phase (typically on days 21 to 23 of an ideal 28-day cycle or 7 days following the LH surge). The lower limit of progesterone levels in the luteal phase varies among laboratories, but a level above 3 ng/mL (10 nmol/L) typically confirms ovulation. However, interpretation of isolated luteal-phase measurements of serum progesterone is complicated by the frequent pulses that characterize the secretion of this hormone. Although ovulatory levels are often considerably higher than 3 ng/mL, low midluteal serum levels of progesterone are not necessarily diagnostic of anovulation (124).
# Chunk 1399
Clomiphene Citrate Dosing The drug is supplied in 50 mg tablets; the usual starting dose is 50 mg per day, but patients who are very sensitive may respond to 12.5 to 25 mg per day. Therapy is typically begun within the first 5 days after the onset of a spontaneous or progesterone-induced menses and is continued for 5 days (i.e., treatment on days 2 to 6, 3 to 7, or 5 to 9 of the menstrual cycle) (136). It has been reported to be effective when started the day following progesterone withdrawal therapy, without waiting for menses (152). If ovulation does not occur at the initial dosage of clomiphene citrate, the dosage is increased in each subsequent cycle by 50 mg per day. Seventy-four percent of women will ovulate with 100 mg per day, the maximum dose approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (153). However, some patients need higher doses, which have been safely given up to 250 mg per day (136). A novel stair-step method has been proposed, which increases the dose within a single cycle without intervening menses if there was no follicular response documented by ultrasound 4 to 5 days after the last pill (154). However, this particular protocol raises concern for unknown endometrial and embryonic effects (155).
# Chunk 1400
Ovulation Monitoring during Clomiphene Citrate Therapy If preovulation monitoring is not performed, patients should be instructed to have intercourse every 2 to 3 days following the last day of therapy and check a serum progesterone weekly for 5 weeks before inducing a withdrawal bleed or increasing the clomiphene citrate dose (142). Although no clear advantage has been demonstrated for any ovulation monitoring technique, regular contact should be maintained with patients to review response to therapy. The urinary LH surge may be detected 5 to 12 days after treatment is completed. When clomiphene is given cycle days 5 to 9, the surge typically occurs on cycle day 16 or 17 and can be confirmed by midluteal serum progesterone testing 7 days later. With ultrasound monitoring, treatment should be withheld if large cysts are seen on baseline testing. Following clomiphene, follicles typically reach a preovulatory diameter of 19 to 25 mm by ultrasound, but may be as large as 30 mm (136,137). A combination of LH testing and ultrasound can be used, with LH kits starting when the largest ultrasound-measured follicle reaches 14 mm in diameter (131).
# Chunk 1401
although it appears to be safe when used during pregnancy (142,162). Risks of metformin include gastrointestinal upset and rare lactic acidosis, so it should be avoided in settings of hepatic and renal dysfunction and prior to surgery or use of contrast radiologic dye. Reported effective doses include 500 mg three times daily, 850 mg twice daily, or 1,000 mg twice daily (142,162). The medication is best tolerated when started at the lowest dose and increased gradually. Extended release formulations are associated with less gastrointestinal upset (142). Because regular ovulation may be delayed for 3 to 6 months or may not occur with metformin alone, patients may need medications to induce withdrawal bleeding to mitigate the risk of continued anovulation and endometrial hyperplasia (141). Thiazolidinediones, which include rosiglitazone and pioglitazone, have been used for ovulation induction in PCOS patients (165–168). They have less associated gastrointestinal upset than metformin. All carry the risk of liver toxicity and, in the case of rosiglitazone, cardiovascular harm, and they are typically avoided during pregnancy (141).
# Chunk 1402
Aromatase Inhibitors These drugs include letrozole and anastrazole. Through their inhibition of aromatase-mediated conversion of androgens to estrogens and subsequent decreases in circulating estradiol, aromatase inhibitors have been approved for treatment of breast cancer. The off-label use of letrozole for ovulation induction in clomiphene-resistant patients was first reported in 2001 (176). Typical doses are 2.5 to 5 mg of letrozole or 1 mg of anastrazole daily for 5 days. Timing of administration is similar to that of clomiphene, although longer durations of 10 days have been reported (177,178). Letrozole appears to have less negative effects on endometrial development when compared to clomiphene (176). Although concerns have been raised regarding possible associations between fetal congenital anomalies and the use of aromatase inhibitors, no such increase was observed when letrozole was compared to clomiphene (179). Patients should be counseled regarding the absence of prospective, sufficiently powered studies to assess safety of off-label use of aromatase inhibitors for ovulation induction (141).
# Chunk 1403
Gonadotropin Therapy Anovulatory PCOS patients who fail to ovulate or conceive with oral agents should be considered for ovulation induction with exogenous gonadotropin injections. Evening medication administration allows for morning monitoring and midday decision making. Monitoring involves serum estradiol levels and transvaginal ultrasound measurements of follicle development. Typical protocols monitor at baseline, 4 to 5 days after treatment initiation, then every 1 to 3 days until follicular maturation (expected follicle growth is 1 to 2 mm daily after achieving 10 mm diameter) (180). Given the goal of promoting growth of a single mature follicle, low initial gonadotropin doses of 37.5 to 75 IU per day are generally recommended, with increases in doses by 50% of the previous dose after 7 days if no follicle greater than 10 mm is observed (141,180). Typical treatment duration is 7 to 12 days, but some patients require longer medications regimens for adequate stimulation. The maximum required gonadotropin dose seldom exceeds 225 units per day. Ovulation triggering with hCG is recommended for gonadotropin cycles and is used when one or two follicles are 16 to 18 mm in diameter and the E2 level per dominant follicle is 150 to 300 pg/mL. Ovulation can be expected 24 to 48 hours after the hCG trigger. GnRH agonists such as leuprolide (500 μg subcutaneously) can be used to trigger ovulation, but they require progesterone supplementation following administration. Intercourse should be recommended within 24 to 48 hours of ovulation triggering or IUI 24 to 36 hours after triggering (180). Testing for pregnancy should be performed 15 to 16 days after ovulation triggering and the cycle reviewed if pregnancy testing is negative. Gonadotropin dosage in future cycles should be altered if the prior response was inadequate or excessive.
# Chunk 1404
Surgical Treatment For clomiphene-resistant patients, surgical ovarian drilling has been performed as an alternative to the outdated ovarian wedge resection in an effort to decrease ovarian androgen-producing tissue and to promote ovulation without the risk of multiple pregnancy seen with gonadotropin administration (141,185). Drilling 3 to 15 puncture sites per ovary is typically performed via laparoscopy using electrocautery and diathermy or laser, although transvaginal ultrasound-guided and vaginal hydro-laparoscopy procedures have been reported (186–195). Successful drilling has been performed with the harmonic scalpel (190). Within 12 months after ovarian drilling, cumulative ovulation, clinical pregnancy, and live birth rates are 52%, 26% to 48%, and 13% to 32%, respectively. These outcomes are similar to those using gonadotropins, but ovarian drilling carries a lower multiple gestation rate. Outcomes are not significantly different when diathermy or laser are used for drilling, but they are compromised with patient age greater than 35 years or basal FSH greater than 10 mIU/mL (185,187). The risks of ovarian drilling include surgical complications, adhesions, recurrence of anovulation, and a theoretical risk of ovarian failure (185,196).
# Chunk 1405
Hyperprolactinemia Hyperprolactinemia can be associated with oligomenorrhea or amenorrhea and should be evaluated with pituitary magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to exclude macroadenoma or other intracranial pathology (197). Dopamine agonists are first-line agents in otherwise asymptomatic oligoovulatiory or anovulatory patients to restore ovulation (197). Bromocriptine normalizes prolactin levels and induces ovulation in 80% to 90% of patients. It is taken two to three times daily, and most patients will respond to a total dose less than 7.5 mg daily. Side effects can be bothersome and include nausea, vomiting, postural hypotension, and headache. Cabergoline has similarly high efficacy and the advantage of a 0.25 mg twice-weekly dosing schedule and fewer side effects (198).
# Chunk 1406
Hysterosalpingography Risks Although use of oil-based contrast has been associated with higher pregnancy rates following HSG when compared to water-based contrast (213,214), water-based contrast is generally preferred to avoid oil embolism or granuloma formation. Furthermore, patients should be screened for and pretreated with glucocorticoids if iodine allergy is found (210). The risk of PID after HSG is 0.3% to 3.1% overall but is greater than 10% in the setting of hydrosalpinges (215,216). Therefore, HSG should be avoided in the setting of known hydrosalpinges and/or current or suspected PID (208,216). The role of routine antibiotic prophylaxis for HSG is controversial, but in high-risk patients doxycycline could be considered (217). Recommended dosing is 100 mg twice daily, beginning the day before HSG and continuing for 3 to 5 days. If prophylaxis is not used and hydrosalpinges are noted on examination, postprocedure doxycycline treatment is recommended. Other rare complications of HSG include vascular intravasation, cervical laceration, uterine perforation, hemorrhage, vasovagal reactions, severe pain, and allergic response to the contrast dye (208).
# Chunk 1407
Laparoscopy Laparoscopy is considered the gold standard for diagnosing tubal and peritoneal disease. It allows visualization of all pelvic organs and permits detection and potential concurrent treatment of intramural and subserosal uterine fibroids, peritubal and periovarian adhesions, and endometriosis. Abnormal findings on HSG can be validated by direct visualization on laparoscopy using chromopertubation, which involves the transcervical installation of a dye such as indigo carmine to directly visualize tubal patency and fimbrial architecture (212). However, even laparoscopy has been reported to have a false-positive rate of 11%
# Chunk 1408
Proximal Tubal Occlusion Proximal tubal catheterization and cannulation performed either via HSG or hysteroscopy can restore tubal patency in up to 85% of obstructions, although the reocclusion rate approaches 30%. The best candidates for proximal tubal catheterization or cannulation have muscle spasm, stromal edema, amorphous debris, mucosal agglutination, or viscous secretions, while nonresponders include those with luminal fibrosis, failed tubal reanastamosis, fibroids, congenital atresia, or tuberculosis. Occlusion from salpingitis isthmica nodosa, endometriosis, synechiae, salpingitis, and cornual polyps only occasionally will respond to catheterization or cannulation (10). Catheterization involves passage of a soft catheter into the tubal ostia, while cannulation passes a guidewire thru the ostia and injects contrast media or colored dye. Tubal perforation, typically minor, occurs in 1.9% to 11% of cases (10,211,218). Catheterization under ﬂuoroscopy during HSG is referred to as selective salpingography (222). Visualization of patency with the hysteroscopic approach can be accomplished using laparoscopy or ultrasound (10,218). Ongoing pregnancy rates following proximal tubal catheterization or cannulation are 12% to 44% regardless of hysteroscopic or HSG approach. If occlusion persists or recurs, IVF is usually recommended. Microsurgical tubocornual anastomosis is an option with small studies reporting pregnancy rates of up to 68% (10). This procedure typically is performed via laparotomy and involves excision of the tubal isthmus, followed by reimplantation of the residual tube into a new opening made through the uterine cornua (211).
# Chunk 1409
Distal Tubal Occlusion (Excluding Sterilization or Hydrosalpinx) Distal tubal disease and occlusion are causal in 85% of all tubal infertility and can be secondary to a variety of inﬂammatory conditions including infection, endometriosis, or prior abdominal or pelvic surgery (211,223). Patients younger than 35 years of age with mild distal tubal disease, normal tubal mucosa, and absent or minimal pelvic adhesions are the best candidates for corrective microsurgery (223). In vitro fertilization should be considered for older patients or those with diminished ovarian reserve, combined proximal and distal tubal disease, severe pelvic adhesions, tubal damage that is not amenable to reconstruction, or additional infertility factors (223,224). Fimbrioplasty involves lysis of fimbrial adhesions or dilation of fimbrial phimosis, whereas salpingostomy (also known as salpingoneostomy) involves the creation of a new tubal opening in an occluded fallopian tube (223). In well-selected patients, pregnancy rates are reported to be 32% to 42.2%, 54.6% to 60%, 30% to 34.6%, and 55.9% for adhesiolysis, fimbrioplasty, salpingostomy, and nonsterilization-related anastamosis, respectively (211,223). As a group, these procedures are associated with a 7.9% rate of subsequent ectopic pregnancy (223).
# Chunk 1410
Sterilization Reversal Twenty percent of women express regret following sterilization, and 1% to 5% of those will request reversal, often after a change in marital status. The technique for sterilization reversal involves microsurgical dissection of the occluded ends of the fallopian tube followed by a layered reapposition of the proximal and distal tubal segments. Surgical approaches include minilaparotomy, laparoscopy, and robotic-assisted laparoscopy (224,225). Pregnancy rates following microsurgical tubal reanastamosis for sterilization reversal are 55% to 81%, with most pregnancies occurring within 18 months of surgery (224). Ectopic pregnancy rates following the procedure are generally less than 10% but may approach 18% (223,226). The main predictors of success are age younger than 35 years, isthmic-isthmic or ampulo-ampullar anastamosis, final anastamosed tubal length greater than 4 cm, and less-destructive sterilization methods such as use of rings or clips (224,226). Unlike vasectomy reversal, the length of time between fallopian tubal sterilization and reversal does not seem to affect outcome. IVF should be considered in lieu of sterilization reversal for older patients or those with diminished ovarian reserve, severe pelvic adhesions, additional infertility factors, or prior unsuccessful reanastamosis (223,224).
# Chunk 1411
Congenital Anomalies of the Uterus positive and negative predictive values for uterine polyps (233). Because of a smaller volume of distension media used, SIS is generally better tolerated than HSG or hysteroscopy (231,234). Another advantage of SIS is the ability to evaluate the myometrium and the adnexa for fibroids or adenomyosis. When combined with three-dimensional technology, SIS is particularly good at assessing the overall uterine contour and delineating congenital anomalies such as septate uteri (234). Standard SIS has somewhat lower sensitivity of 77.8% in detecting uterine congenital anomalies when compared to hysteroscopy, but this is higher than both two-dimensional transvaginal ultrasound and HSG. Hysterosalpingogram and SIS perform similarly for intrauterine adhesions, each having approximately 50% positive predictive value and greater than 90% negative predictive value (233).
# Chunk 1412
Intrauterine Synechiae or Asherman’s Syndrome Severe trauma to the basalis layer of the endometrium with subsequent tissue bridge formation leads to intrauterine synechiae or Asherman’s syndrome. Symptoms of severe disease include amenorrhea, menstrual irregularities, spontaneous abortion, and recurrent pregnancy loss. The causes of intrauterine adhesions are often iatrogenic, with patients typically reporting intraoperative or postoperative complications of uterine evacuations for incomplete pregnancy loss, pregnancy termination, or postpartum hemorrhage. Myomectomy, hysterotomy, diagnostic curettage, cesarean section, tuberculosis, caustic abortifacients, and uterine packing are less-common causes in Western countries (255). In developing countries, Asherman’s syndrome resulting from genital tuberculosis is quite common (256). Hysteroscopic resection of synechiae is the preferred treatment to restore fertility in women with Asherman’s syndrome, and success rates are generally very high. Patients with genital tuberculosis have a very poor prognosis. Postoperative prevention of adhesion reformation disease may involve estrogen therapy alone for 1 month or in combination with intraoperative placement of an intrauterine device (such as a small Malecot catheter or pediatric Foley catheter) for 1 to 2 weeks. There is no standard regimen for estrogen therapy, but oral conjugated estrogens 2.5 mg daily overlapping with progestin or estradiol valerate 2 mg injections daily have been suggested (255,257).
# Chunk 1413
Diagnosis Diagnostic criteria for LPD have been varyingly defined, but have included a low mid-luteal phase serum progesterone levels of less than 5 to 10 ng/mL, a delay of 2 days or more in endometrial histology when compared to chronologic cycle day in two or more cycles, a BBT rise lasting less than 11 days, and a shortened luteal phase of less than 14 days (259–261). Unfortunately, the characteristic pulsatile secretion of progesterone during the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle combines with wide temporal variations (even within a 60-to 90-minute time span) to make interpretation of midlueal progesterone levels difficult (258). Similar rates of shortened luteal phase are found in fertile and infertile women, and there is significant variability of luteal phase length from cycle to cycle in an individual woman (261). Finally, there is significant interobserver variability in pathologic interpretation of endometrial biopsies from infertile women, and out-of-phase biopsy results poorly discriminate between fertile and infertile women (263,264).
# Chunk 1414
Treatment Progesterone therapy is considered standard practice during ART cycles, but is more controversial during non-ART fertility treatments (258,259,262). When used, progesterone supplementation can be administered via oral, vaginal, or intramuscular routes. Intramuscular progesterone is dosed at 25 to 50 mg daily. Most products are delivered in oil, and caution should be used to ascertain the presence of sesame or peanut allergies. Oral micronized progesterone is associated with erratic absorption and decreased bioavailability, so it is typically administered via an off-label delivery route—vaginally 200 to 600 mg daily, and often in divided doses. The side effects of this delivery route, however, can include vaginal discharge and irritation. Other vaginal preparations include a once-daily gel and a 100 mg insert that is given two to three times daily. There remains no consensus regarding the superiority of vaginal versus intramuscular administration. Progesterone therapy typically begins 3 to 4 days following the hCG trigger or LH surge and, if pregnancy occurs, continues for at least 8 to 9 weeks of gestation (258,259,262). Although some progestins can stimulate the androgen receptor, there is no evidence of teratogenicity with the progesterone supplementation described herein (258).
# Chunk 1415
Pelvic Factor Endometriosis Endometriosis affects 6% to 10% of all women during their reproductive years but is present in 25% to 50% of infertile women (212,265). It is characterized by the presence of endometrial tissue growing outside the uterine cavity and is found primarily on the peritoneum, ovaries, and rectovaginal septum (265). Fecundability rates in affected patients are estimated at 2% to 10% per month (266). Possible mechanisms for infertility among women with endometriosis include anatomic distortion from adhesions or fibrosis and the known presence of inﬂammatory mediators that exert toxic effects on gametes, embryos, tubal fimbria, and eutopic endometrium (265,266). Laparoscopy for direct visualization remains the mainstay in the diagnosis of endometriosis. The disease is staged laparoscopically according to the Revised American Society for Reproductive Medicine’s classification, with stages III and IV (moderate to severe) including ovarian endometriomas, dense tubal or ovarian adhesions, and/or cul-de-sac obliteration (265). However, laparoscopy can miss deep disease that may better be detected by ultrasound (i.e., endometriomas) and rectovaginal examination (267). It is unclear whether the presence of endometriosis negatively affects IVF outcomes, although some reports indicate a worse prognosis for more severe disease (stages III and IV) (221,268).
# Chunk 1416
Endometriosis Infertility Managment Hormonal suppression of endometriosis typically has a minimal benefit for endometriosis-related infertility (265). In minimal to mild disease, laparoscopic ablation appears to significantly improve pregnancy rates when compared to diagnostic laparoscopy alone, although there remains some dissent (267,269). One major randomized trial reported 31% versus 17% pregnancy rates over 3 years with a subsequent meta-analysis supporting these findings (265,266,270,271). Although authors have estimated that eight laparoscopies involving treatment of mild or minimal endometriosis would need to be performed for each pregnancy gained, that number is likely to be much higher given that not everyone who undergoes laparoscopy will have endometriosis (267,270). The benefit of surgical management of endometriosis is even less clear for moderate to severe disease, although removal of endometriomas may be indicated prior to IVF when they would interfere with oocyte retrieval (265–267). Endometrioma resection during IVF or ICSI treatment is associated with decreased ovarian function in up to 13% of cases (272,273). Furthermore, 40% of endometriomas recur postoperatively, and conﬂicting reports exist that show increases and decreases in pregnancy and live birth rates after surgery (267,272,273). Therefore, IVF is considered a reasonable first-line therapy for endometriosis-associated infertility because of the short time to pregnancy and avoidance of surgery (221).
# Chunk 1417
Adhesions Adhesions may result from sharp, mechanical, or thermal injury, infection, radiation, ischemia, dessication, abrasion, or foreign body reaction. Adhesiolysis improves pregnancy rates by 12% at 1 year and by 29% at 2 years in infertile women with adnexal adhesions. Use of adhesion barriers reduces adhesion formation following laparoscopy and laparotomy, but there is no evidence to date for improvement in pregnancy rates (274,275).
# Chunk 1418
Unexplained Infertility Thirty percent of couples are diagnosed with unexplained infertility, in which the basic infertility evaluation reveals normal semen parameters, evidence of ovulation, patent fallopian tubes, and no other obvious cause of infertility. Patients with unexplained infertility may be reassured that even after 12 months of failed attempts, 20% will conceive in the following 12 months and over 50% in the following 36 months. This suggests that in couples with the good prognostic factors of female age less than 30, less than 24 months of infertility, and a previous pregnancy in the same partnership, unexplained infertility may merely reﬂect the lower extreme of normal fertility. It is likely that current technology is limited in terms of diagnosing all causes for infertility, and the utility of evaluations other than basic testing in an infertile couple has yet to be proven (2,150,276).
# Chunk 1419
Superovulation (Controlled Ovarian Hyperstimulation) Unlike ovulation induction, in which the goal is to stimulate the release of a single oocyte in a women who was not previously ovulating, the explicit goal of superovulation (for non-ART or ART purposes) is to cause more than one egg to be ovulated, thereby increasing the probability of conception in women with unexplained infertility (136). In most superovulation protocols, a baseline scan is performed on day 2 of the menstrual cycle to assess antral follicle count and the presence or absence of ovarian cysts. Baseline estrogen and progesterone levels are typically obtained on this day (301). Starting daily doses in superovulation cycles are higher for both clomiphene (100 mg for 5 days) and gonadotropins (150 to 300 IU daily) than those used for ovulation induction (111,301,302). Superovulation with clomiphene is otherwise conducted as described above for ovulation induction. When gonadotropins are used for normal responders with unexplained infertility, FSH doses of 225 IU and 300 IU lead to similar outcomes with IVF (111). The maximal gonadotropin dosage is typically 450 IU per day because higher dosages do not increase ovarian response (301). In most superovulation protocols, gonadotropins are started on day 2 or 3 of menses (301–303). The starting dose of gonadotropins is maintained each day until cycle day 6 or 7 (stimulation day 4 or 5), when the serum estradiol level and transvaginal ultrasound are first measured to document ovarian response (111,302,303). Gonadotropin dosage is increased by 50 to 100 IU per day every 2 to 4 days until a response is evident (304). Estradiol levels typically double every 48 hours, with follicle growth of 1 to 2 mm daily after a 10 mm diameter is reached (305). Triggering of ovulation typically occurs when at least two follicles have reached an average diameter 17 to 18 mm and the endometrial thickness is 8 mm or more (111,302,303,306–308). For non-ART cycles, cancellation should be strongly considered for E2 levels 1,000 to 2,500 pg/mL, for three or more follicles 16 mm or more, or for two or more follicles 16 mm or more plus two or more follicles 14 mm or more (141). Ultrasound monitoring of IVF cycles without estradiol levels can be considered (309).
# Chunk 1420
Process of Assisted Reproductive Technologies (9% per cycle) than either superovulation (4%) or IUI (5%) alone (302). Laparoscopy to treat minimal or mild endometriosis is associated with live birth rates similar to those in patients with unexplained infertility who receive COH/IUI (70% over four cycles) (311). In women over the age of 40, non-ART therapies are much less effective and IVF should be offered as an initial or early treatment option (312). Pregnancy rates per cycle for unexplained infertility in women who are less than 40 years old have been grouped by treatment modality and reported as follows: (i) clomiphene/IUI 7.8%, (ii) gonadotropin/IUI 9.8%, and (iii) IVF 30.7% (313). The use of ICSI or splitting sibling oocytes between IVF and ICSI has been proposed as an approach to unexplained infertility patients to diagnose and treat underlying occult male or oocyte factors (293,314). Although ICSI does improve fertilization rates and reduce fertilization failure, no differences have been noted in pregnancy or live birth rates when comparing IVF to ICSI for unexplained infertility (314,315).
# Chunk 1421
Luteinizing Hormone surge and Premature Luteinization Without GnRH agonist or antagonist suppression, LH surges occur in IVF cycles resulting from high estradiol levels in the early follicular phase. This, in turn, results in a lower oocyte yield and reduced pregnancy rates (317). Spontaneous ovulation prior to oocyte retrieval is reported to occur in 16% of nonsuppressed IVF cycles (318). The premature LH rise typically occurs after 5 to 7 days of stimulation (317). In contrast, premature luteinization is a somewhat misleading term that refers to a rise in serum progesterone (cutoffs vary from 0.8 to 2 ng/mL) observed on the day of hCG administration and occurs in the setting of low LH levels secondary to gonadotropin-suppressive medications (319). The incidence of premature luteinization has been estimated at 6% to 7% when the progesterone cutoff level is set at greater than 1.5 ng/mL, but it may be as high as 35%. Mechanisms underlying premature luteinization may include incomplete pituitary desensitization, increased granulosa cell receptor sensitivity to LH secondary to aggressive COH or innately poor responders, and/or the presence of multiple follicles each producing a normal amount of progesterone consistent with the late follicular phase (319,320). Although the literature on this subject remains inconsistent, the negative effects of premature luteinization have been attributed to endometrial advancement rather than oocyte or embryonic dysfunction (319–321). Methods proposed to address premature luteinization have included earlier triggering with hCG, less aggressive stimulation protocols, cryopreservation of embryos (freeze-all), and administration of the antiprogestin mifepristone at the time of hCG (320,322).
# Chunk 1422
Over the course of 10 to 14 days, agonists initially bind to and upregulate pituitary GnRH receptor activity, leading to a ﬂare response of increased gonadotropin secretion. This is followed by receptor desensitization (depleted gonadotropin pools along with rapid uncoupling of the GnRH receptor from its regulatory protein and loss of signal transduction) that suppresses circulating levels of pituitary gonadotropins and, with high doses and prolonged use, eventually decreases GnRH receptor numbers (301,317,323–325). Therefore, prolonged use of GnRH agonists induces a menopause-like state characterized by low estradiol levels and accompanied by common side effects such as hot ﬂashes and moodiness. The ﬂare effect may cause ovarian cyst formation as described in the “Unexplained Infertility” section of this chapter (301). GnRH agonists are commercially available for either depot or daily use and can be administered intranasally (buserelin and nafarelin) or by intramuscular or subcutaneous injection (leuprolide, triptorelin, or buserelin). Intranasal preparations have lower absorption rates when compared to injectable agonists and are associated with milder suppression (326). Typical starting daily doses of leuprolide are 1 mg, 0.5 mg, or 25 μg (microdose) (324).
# Chunk 1423
Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone Agonist Protocols Some of the more commonly used ART medications and protocols are summarized in Fig. 32.6 and Table 32.8. In the long protocol, a GnRH agonist is started in the luteal phase (day 21) of the previous cycle. This diminishes the GnRH agonists ﬂare effect and suppresses endogenous FSH and dominant follicle selection to promote synchronous follicular growth (317). After 10 to 14 days of GnRH agonist administration, a pelvic ultrasound and estradiol level are used to confirm suppression and gonadotropin stimulation begins. The GnRH agonist is continued (the dose may be halved or unchanged) throughout the cycle until the hCG trigger (317,324). Mean serum progesterone levels on the day of hCG administration using the long protocol are reportedly 0.84 ng/mL (320). The long protocol provides for better oocyte yields and pregnancy rates in normal responders when compared with shorter protocols that use later administration or early cessation of agonists (317). Shorter protocols using lower GnRH agonist doses have been advocated for poor responders in whom excessive suppression may be undesirable, perhaps from direct negative effects of the agonist on the ovary (324). However, long protocols, particularly those using single-dose depot rather than daily GnRH agonist formulations, are associated with higher gonadotropin dose and duration, which themselves have been associated with lower pregnancy rates (327–329). Alternatively, GnRH microdose ﬂare protocols have been developed that may improve oocyte yield in poor responders. Microdose ﬂare regimens involve pretreatment with 14 to 21 days of combination oral contraceptives. Four days following the
# Chunk 1424
lix) were developed by modifying the GnRH decapeptide at six positions. They compete with endogenous GnRH for binding to pituitary GnRH receptors. Because they have no agonistic activity, GnRH antagonists lead to almost immediate suppression of FSH and LH and do not require the additional time for pituitary down-regulation that characterizes the GnRH agonists. With prolonged use, GnRH antagonists down-regulate GnRH receptors (323). At this time, the only delivery method available for GnRH antagonist is subcutaneous injection, although orally active agents are in development. GnRH antagonists can be given as 0.25 mg daily doses or as a single 3 mg dose with no difference in outcome (325). The time between daily injections should not exceed 30 hours (301). With single dose regimens, avoidance of multiple injections is attractive, but additional small doses starting 4 days after initial dose are required in 10% of cycles (325). Use of GnRH antagonists in ART protocols is typically begun on day 4 to 7 of stimulation. This timing balances the risk for premature LH surges with the need for initiation of endogenous FSH-mediated follicular recruitment and endogenous estradiol production prior to administration (301,317,325).
# Chunk 1425
Follicular Recruitment Although the inciting stimulus is unclear, cohorts of small antral follicles (<2 mm) become responsive to FSH stimulation only after 45 days of initial growth. They are then considered recruitable and begin to slowly enlarge in the late luteal phase of the cycle preceding ovulation. Once the antral follicle grows beyond 10 mm, FSH induces the appearance of LH receptors on the granulosa cells. At that point, somewhat contrary to the 2-cell2-gonadotropin model, LH can exert FSH-like actions on the granulosa cell, including stimulation of aromatase. With complete absence of endogenous LH, such as that seen with hypothalamic hypogonadism, exogenous FSH produces fewer preovulatory follicles, inadequate estradiol, lower ovulation rates, and thinner endometrium when compared to ovaries stimulated with exogenous HMG (FSH and LH). Therefore, in the setting of normal hypothalamic function, it seems likely that even with suppressive therapy, enough endogenous LH is present to synergize with exogenous FSH to provide adequate stimulation for recruitment (326).
# Chunk 1426
Follicular Waves Seventy-five percent of unstimulated human menstrual cycles have two waves of follicular development: one major wave in which a dominant follicle is selected to the detriment of other follicles and one minor wave during which all follicles undergo atresia. When progesterone is available to block LH, the first wave is typically minor and occurs one day after ovulation in the previous cycle. The subsequent major wave occurs around the time of menses, with the dominant follicle being selected by its ability to reach a diameter of 10 mm by cycle day 6 or 7, which coincides with an estradiol rise that inhibits FSH. One-quarter of cycles will exhibit an additional wave that occurs 2 days prior to menses and may be minor or major. If the dominant follicle regresses or is removed, a new follicular wave begins 2 days later. In light of this, future efforts toward greater synchrony during stimulation might include ablation of the early dominant follicle using aspiration or administration of exogenous estrogen and progesterone during the follicular phase (333).
# Chunk 1427
Controlled Ovarian Hyperstimulation The goal of gonadotropin stimulation for ART is the synchronous growth of dominant follicles in quantities greater than that associated with non-ART therapy. FSH is the key hormone in this regard (111). Gonadotropin preparations are described in the “Ovulatory Factor” section, while dosing and the relevance of baseline ovarian cysts are described in the “Unexplained Infertility” section. ART pregnancy outcomes are not affected by the source of FSH, the delivery system, or the route of administration (156). In one recent report, women who were predicted to be normal responders using 225 to 300 IU of FSH required 11 days of stimulation, had 11 to 13 follicles 15 mm or larger on the day of hCG trigger, had a peak E2 level of approximately 2,100 pg/mL, and had 10 to 11 oocytes retrieved, of which 82% to 83% were mature (111). Most investigators suggest that the optimal number of retrieved oocytes in a given cycle is between 5 and 15, and the optimal level of estradiol at the time of hCG administration is between 70 and 140 pg/mL per oocyte or follicle (306,329). It should be noted that the utility of estradiol monitoring during ART is controversial, and that ultrasound monitoring alone may be adequate to maximize pregnancy and live birth rates (309). Cycle cancellation in normal responders occurs in up to 6% of the cycles because of inadequate response and 1.5% of cycles for excessive response (111). Cycle cancellation increases with older age and decreased ovarian reserve, but is reportedly decreased by 2% for every additional 100 IU gonadotropins used (328). There appears to be no benefit of exceeding a total daily gonadotropin dose of 450 IU in any patient (301).
# Chunk 1428
Combined oral contraceptives (OCs) are commonly taken for 14 to 28 days prior to GnRH analogues to ease cycle scheduling, synchronize follicular development, further prevent LH surges, reduce the incidence of ovarian cysts, and reduce cancellation rates resulting from hyperstimulation (331,337,338). Patients can begin OCs anytime between days 1 and 5 of menses (337). For antagonist cycles, COH begins 2 to 5 days after stopping OCs (irrespective of menses) (331). During long GnRH agonist protocols, the agonist overlaps the final 5 days of OC use, followed by initiation of COH on the second or third day of withdrawal bleeding (300,338). As previously discussed, microdose ﬂare protocols involve pretreatment with 14 to 21 days of OC, followed 4 days later by a microdose of agonist. COH typically starts 1 to 2 days later (324).
# Chunk 1429
The progestins norethindrone acetate 10 mg orally daily, medroxyprogesterone acetate 10 mg orally daily, or a single intramuscular dose of progesterone (not specified) can be used in place of an OC in ART cycles, but recommendations on the duration of treatment and the timing of initiation vary widely: a duration of 5 to 20 days and initiation anytime between days 1 and 19 of menses have been reported. A dose of 4 mg of daily micronized 17β estradiol or estradiol valerate has been used in lieu of OCs in ART cycles, with initiation between cycle days 15 and 21 and a duration of 10 to 15 days. Although OC pretreatment for antagonist cycles has been shown to increase both the duration of stimulation and the amount of medication used, its effect on pregnancy rates is controversial (331,337). OC pretreatment during GnRH agonist cycles is associated with higher pregnancy rates than those in cycles without pretreatment (300). Progestin and estradiol pretreatment do not affect live birth rates in either agonist or antagonist cycles (337).
# Chunk 1430
Oocyte Maturation during Assisted Reproductive Technology Cycles Because spontaneous LH surges occur inconsistently during non-ART gonadotropin cycles and are suppressed in ART cycles, hCG has been used to trigger ovulation. In combination with its long half-life, homology between hCG and LH (identical α subunits) allows for cross-reactivity with the LH receptor and induction of final ococyte maturation and ovulation (347). hCG is derived from urine (5,000 to 10,000 IU intramuscularly) or through recombinant technology (250 μg subcutaneously, equivalent to 5,000 to 6,000 IU of intramuscular urinary product) (156). The half-life of hCG is 2.32 days, compared to 1 to 5 hours for LH (347). Ovulation is typically triggered when at least two follicles are 17 to 18 mm or larger in average diameter (but <24 mm) and the endometrial thickness is 8 mm or more (111,302,303,306–308,348). Similar clinical outcomes have been noted when 5,000 IU or 10,000 IU of hCG (349) and urinary or recombinant preparations are used for triggering (348,350). If there is concern for ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS, see below), GnRH agonists can be substituted for hCG to trigger ovulation in antagonist protocols or recombinant LH can be substituted for hCG in agonist protocols; however, both protocols are associated with decreased pregnancy rates in nondonor ART cycles (347,351).
# Chunk 1431
Endometrial Preparation for Frozen Embryo Transfer When FET is combined with a recipient’s natural cycle, no exogenous treatment is given, and transfer is timed to spontaneous ovulation. In medicated FET cycles, estradiol supplementation begins in the early follicular phase and is continued for 13 to 15 days (373). Multiple estradiol preparations have been described for use in FET cycles, but none has been proven superior (377). Transvaginal ultrasound is used to assess endometrial thickness during estrogen therapy, and estrogen administration continues until an optimal thickness of greater than 8 mm is reached (373). Progesterone supplementation begins 48 to 72 hours prior to transfer when cleavage-stage embryos are used and 6 to 7 days prior to transfer when blastocysts will be thawed (373,377). Again, several progesterone preparations have been described for use in FET cycles, but none has been proven superior (discussed in the “Uterine Factors” section). GnRH agonists are commonly used during medicated cycles to prevent premature LH surges that might adversely affect endometrial maturation (377) (Fig. 32.7).
# Chunk 1432
The production of hCG by the blastocyst can be detected as early as 7 days posttransfer, and serum quantitative hCG levels may be obtained 11 to 14 days following embryo transfer (373,378). A serum threshold of 200 mIU/mL of hCG measured 12 days after transfer is 92% and 80% predictive of ongoing pregnancies for day 3 and day 5 embryos, respectively, with levels normally rising approximately 40% per day. If normally rising hCG levels are detected, transvaginal ultrasound is planned at 6 to 7 weeks of gestation to determine the location of the pregnancy, the number of gestational sacs, and pregnancy viability (378).
# Chunk 1433
Donor Oocyte Patients with ovarian failure, poor oocyte quality, poor ovarian response to stimulation, or failed fertilization or implantation after multiple ART cycles may be candidates to receive donated oocytes. A female same-sex couple may choose to have one partner undergo IVF and place the resulting oocytes fertilized with donor sperm into the other partner (383). At present, donor oocytes must be used to create embryos during the retrieval cycle, because oocyte freezing is considered experimental (384). With carefully selected donors, live birth rates per cycle of donor oocyte IVF are 50% to 60% regardless of the recipient’s age (Table 32.10). However, recipients must be aware that advanced recipient age is associated with higher risk for preeclampsia, diabetes, and cesarean section (385–387). Oocyte donors must endure all the interventions and risks of the ART process described herein except for embryo transfer and luteal support. Because of the intensity of therapy and the potential infectious disease and genetic risks for donor, recipient, and the resulting offspring, oocyte donors must be screened for infectious and heritable disorders similar to those performed for sperm donors (see “Male Factor”) and undergo meticulous informed consent and a comprehensive psychosocial evaluation. Oocyte donors may be anonymous or known to the recipient (96). Oocyte recipients undergo endometrial preparation (as described in the “Process of Assisted Reproductive Technologies” section), but GnRH analogues are not required if there is no endogenous ovarian function. Recipients may initiate progesterone one day prior, on the same day, or one day after the donor’s oocyte retrieval, but a randomized trial found lower pregnancy rates when progesterone was initiated prior to the retrieval (377). Other topics, such as methods for donor recruitment and financial compensation for the donor, are much more challenging issues (388).
# Chunk 1434
Pregnancy treatment with either surgery or methotrexate. The absence of an intrauterine pregnancy on transvaginal ultrasound evaluation in conjunction with a maternal serum hCG level above a threshold of 1,500 mIU/mL suggests the diagnosis (394,395). Heterotopic pregnancy involves concurrent intrauterine and ectopic pregnancy, usually within the fallopian tube, but ovarian implantations have been reported (395,396). The incidence of heterotopic pregnancy, which is normally rare, is particularly high (1%) after IVF treatment. Multiple gestation, smoking, previous tubal surgery, and prior PID are potential risk factors in addition to ART. As with standard ectopic pregnancies, pain and bleeding are the most common presenting findings with heterotopic pregnancies. Heterotopic pregnancies are most often diagnosed in the first 5 to 8 weeks of gestation using laparoscopy or laparotomy. Only 26% of heterotopic cases can be diagnosed with transvaginal ultrasound, possibly as a result of difficulties in sonographic interpretation in the presence of concomitant ovarian hyperstimulation. After treatment of a heterotopic gestation with laparoscopy, laparotomy, or ultrasound-guided injection of potassium chloride into the extrauterine pregnancy, the overall delivery rate for the intrauterine pregnancy is nearly 70% (395).
# Chunk 1435
OHSS is a medical complication that is both completely iatrogenic and unique to stimulatory infertility treatment (397). Its symptoms are the result of ovarian enlargement and fragility, extravascular ﬂuid accumulation, and intravascular volume depletion. Proposed mechanisms for the characteristic ﬂuid shifts that accompany OHSS include increased protein-rich ﬂuid secretion from the stimulated ovaries, increased renin and prorenin within follicular ﬂuid, and increased capillary permeability mediated by angiotensin. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), whose expression in granulosa cells and serum is augmented by hCG, and a variety of other inﬂammatory cytokines have been implicated in the pathogenesis of this disease (398). Two distinct patterns of OHSS onset have been described. Early OHSS occurs 3 to 7 days following the hCG trigger and is associated with the administration of exogenous hCG. Late onset disease occurs 12 to 17 days after the hCG trigger; it is the result of endogenous hCG secretion from the pregnancy and tends to be more severe with multiple gestation. Pregnancy outcomes are inconsistently affected by the presence of OHSS, with higher rates of biochemical losses but similar rates of clinical losses when compared to patients without OHSS (399).
# Chunk 1436
Severity Classification Mild OHSS (grades 1 and 2) is associated with high serum estradiol levels and ovarian enlargement to less than 5 cm and has minimal clinical significance. Grade 3 moderate OHSS is accompanied by mild abdominal distention and has minimal clinical significance (397). Grade 3 OHSS occurs in one-third of all COH cycles (398). Grade 4 moderate OHSS is accompanied by gastrointestinal upset and ovarian enlargement to 5 to 12 cm (397). The presence of ﬂuid shifts from intra-to extravascular spaces are the hallmark of severe disease, and grade 5 OHSS includes tense ascites or hydrothorax. Grade 6 OHSS is accompanied by hemoconcentration, coagulation abnormalities, respiratory failure, and renal dysfunction (397). Other markers of severe OHSS include hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, elevated liver function tests, and an elevated white blood cell count (397,398). Concerning symptoms for severe disease include rapid weight gain (≥2 lb per day), increased measurable abdominal girth, hypotension, tachypnea, tachycardia, oliguria, and severe abdominal pain. The latter symptom is suggestive of ovarian cyst rupture or hemorrhage (398).
# Chunk 1437
Management If outpatient management is appropriate, the patient should be instructed to limit her activity, to weigh herself daily, and to monitor her ﬂuid intake (at least 1 L per day of mostly electrolyte-balanced ﬂuid) and output. Daily follow-up by telephone or visit is important and the patient should be reassessed if she notes worsening of the symptoms or if her weight gain increases to more than 2 lb per day. Indications for hospitalization include an inability to tolerate oral hydration, hemodynamic instability, respiratory compromise, tense ascites, hemoconcentration, leukocytosis, hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, abnormal renal or liver function, and decreased oxygen saturation. Fluid intake and urine output need to be carefully measured, and admission to an intensive care setting can be considered if the patient has hyperkalemia, renal failure, respiratory failure, or thromboembolic disease. Although intravenous ﬂuids may worsen ascities, they are essential to correct hypovolemia, hypotension, electrolyte abnormalities, and oliguria. Albumin 25% can be dosed 50 to 100 mg intravenously every 4 to 12 hours if further intravascular volume expansion is needed. Diuretics can be considered to improve weight gain and oliguria only after hypovolemia has been corrected. Thromboembolic prophylaxis should be given. Single or repeated transvaginal or transabdominal ultrasound-guided paracentesis may relieve pain, hydrothorax, or persistent oliguria. Rapid large-volume ﬂuid removal can be considered, as compensatory ﬂuid shifts are unlikely to occur in this typically young healthy population as long as the patient is carefully monitored (398).
# Chunk 1438
Coasting may be considered when estradiol levels are less than 4,500 pg/mL and/or there are 15 to 30 mature follicles present. During coasting, gonadotropin stimulation is withheld and estradiol levels are checked daily (351). An initial rise of estradiol is typically observed within the first 48 hours of the coast, but the levels should subsequently plateau or decrease (402). The patient may then be triggered when serum estradiol levels fall to less than 3,500 pg/mL. If GnRH agonists are used for initial LH surge suppression, switching to an antagonist during the coast has been associated with improved outcomes (351).
# Chunk 1439
The primary indication for preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) is to improve the chances of having healthy infants in families at high risk for a specific genetic disease (409). Following embryo biopsy, genetic testing can be performed on a blastomere (cell from day 3 embryo), polar body, or on blastocyst trophectoderm prior to transferring the embryo. Aneuploidy in embryos most commonly affects chromosomes X, Y, 13, 14, 15, 16, 18, 21, and 22. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) is a technique that assesses aneuploidy, translocation, other structural chromosomal defects and sex chromosome content (410). FISH is technically limited by the number of distinct chromosomes that can be evaluated, which results in an inherently high false-negative rate. Newer methods are being developed that assess the entire genome using comparative genomic hybridization or DNA microarrays (411). One-quarter of the cases of PGD are performed for single gene disorders, most commonly myotonic dystrophy, Huntington disease, cystic fibrosis, fragile X syndrome, spinal muscular atrophy, tuberous sclerosis, Marfan syndrome, thalassemia, and sickle cell anemia. Because polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is required for single gene disorder diagnosis, ICSI is performed during ART to avoid contamination from sperm bound to the zona pellucida. PGD can be used for HLA antigen tissue matching in an effort to produce a child whose cord blood or stem cells could potentially help an existing affected child. Disadvantages to PGD include decreased postbiopsy embryo survival, requirements for extended culture with an associated possibility that no embryos will be available for transfer or cryopreservation, false-positive and false-negative testing results, and controversies regarding disposition of nontransferred embryos (409,410). PGD is not synonymous with preimplantation genetic screening (PGS), which is performed in couples without known chromosomal anomaly, mutation, or other genetic abnormality. Although it seems intuitive that replacing only euploid embryos should improve pregnancy and live birth rates in patients with advanced age, recurrent pregnancy loss, or implantation failure, study outcomes have not been consistent (409,410,412–415).
# Chunk 1440
Advances in the ability to document and diagnose early pregnancy reveal that spontaneous pregnancy loss is a common event. Spontaneous pregnancy loss is, in fact, the most common complication of pregnancy. Approximately 70% of human conceptions fail to achieve viability, and an estimated 50% are lost before the first missed menstrual period (1). Most of these pregnancy losses are unrecognized. Studies using sensitive assays for human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) indicate that the actual rate of pregnancy loss after implantation is 31% (2). Loss occurs in 15% of pregnancies that are clinically recognized before 20 weeks of gestation from last menstrual period (3,4).
# Chunk 1441
Traditionally, recurrent abortion has been defined as the occurrence of three or more clinically recognized pregnancy losses before 20 weeks from the last menstrual period. Using this definition, recurrent pregnancy loss occurs in approximately 1 in 300 pregnancies (2). Clinical investigation of pregnancy loss, however, may be initiated after two consecutive spontaneous abortions, especially when fetal heart activity is identified before any of the pregnancy losses, when the women is older than 35 years of age, or when the couple has had difficulty conceiving (5). A study of over 1,000 patients with recurrent pregnancy loss reported no difference in the prevalence of abnormal results for evidence-based and investigative diagnostic tests when the diagnostic workup was initiated after two versus three or more losses (6). If clinical intervention is undertaken in the form of investigation after two spontaneous abortions, approximately 1% of pregnant women will require evaluation (3). Even with a history of recurrent pregnancy loss, a patient is more likely to carry her next pregnancy successfully to term than to miscarry. For patients with a history of recurrent pregnancy loss, the risk of subsequent pregnancy loss is estimated to be 24% after two clinically recognized losses, 30% after three losses, and 40% to 50% after four losses (7). These data make clinical study of recurrent pregnancy loss and its treatment difficult because very large groups of patients must be studied to demonstrate the effects of any proposed therapeutic intervention.
# Chunk 1442
Parental chromosomal abnormalities and thrombotic complications of the antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (APS) are the only undisputed causes of recurrent abortion. However, collectively these abnormalities account for less than 10% to 15% of recurrent pregnancy losses. Although the exact proportion of patients diagnosed with a particular abnormality may vary among the populations studied, other associations have been made with anatomic abnormalities (12%–16%), endocrine problems (17%–20%), infections (0.5%–5%), and immunologic factors, including those associated with the APS (20%–50%). Other miscellaneous factors have been implicated and account for approximately 10% of cases. Among women aged 35 or greater who experience recurrent pregnancy loss, spontaneous fetal chromosomal abnormalities are likely to be responsible for the vast majority of losses (8). Even after a thorough evaluation, the potential cause remains unexplained in about one-third to one-half of all cases of recurrent loss (Table 33.1) (3,6,9).
# Chunk 1443
Like spontaneous pregnancy loss, inherited and combined inherited or acquired thrombophilias are also surprisingly common. Greater than 15% of whites carry an inherited thrombophilic mutation (21). The most common of these are the factor V Leiden mutation, a mutation in the promoter region of the prothrombin gene and mutations in the gene encoding methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR). These disorders are present in their heterozygous state in approximately 5%, 2% to 3%, and 11% to 15% of healthy white populations, respectively (22,29–31). These common mutations are associated with mild thrombotic risks. It remains controversial whether homozygous MTHFR mutations are associated with vascular disease at all (32). In contrast, more severe thrombophilic deficiencies, such as those of antithrombin and of protein S, are much less common in the general population. These epidemiologic data support the hypothesis that a selective genetic advantage may accompany carriage of common heritable thrombophilias. To this point, women with activated protein C resistance because of the factor V Leiden mutation have reduced blood loss at delivery and factor V Leiden carriage is reported to improve pregnancy rates in intracytoplasmic sperm injection or IVF, suggesting a positive role in implantation (33,34). It is important to note that the above epidemiology of factor V Leiden mutations is specific to white populations. Factor V Leiden and prothrombin gene mutations are rare in African and Asian populations, despite similar incidence of venous thromboembolic events (35–38). Protein C, protein S, and antithrombin mutations are the most important risk factors for venous thromboembolic events among many Chinese and other Asian populations (39). These ethnographic differences are important considerations when faced with decisions concerning diagnostic testing in patients with a history of recurrent fetal loss.
# Chunk 1444
Although each hypothesis has minimal relevance to recurrent pregnancy loss, their discussion is warranted because therapies aimed at these disorders persist. Historically, the blocking antibody deficiency hypothesis has received the most attention (112,181). This hypothesis is based on a supposition that blocking factors (presumably antibodies) were required to prevent a maternal, cell-mediated, antifetal immune response that was believed to occur in all pregnancies. It was therefore proposed that, in the absence of these blocking antibodies, abortion occurred (273). This supposition was not consistently substantiated (274,275). For instance, maternal hyporesponsiveness in mixed lymphocyte culture with paternal stimulator cells was originally proposed to identify women with deficient blocking activity (273). Investigations based on this type of testing were continued by those who proposed that parental HLA sharing resulted in a predisposition to blocking antibody deficiency (276,277). These reports were of limited sample size, were retrospective in nature, and lacked population-based controls. One prospective, population-based control study conclusively demonstrated that HLA heterogeneity was not essential for successful pregnancy (278). However, follow-up studies showed that, in the exceedingly rare case of complete sharing of the entire HLA region, spontaneous pregnancy losses do increase (279). This particular 10-year prospective trial concluded that HLA typing is of no use in outbred populations, because only isolated and significantly inbred populations have such HLA homogeneity. Further evidence refuting the blocking antibody hypothesis for recurrent abortion comes from reports of successful pregnancies among women who do not produce serum factors capable of mixed lymphocyte culture inhibition and also among women who do not produce antipaternal cytotoxic antibodies (273,274). Those mixed lymphocyte culture results that demonstrate hyporesponsiveness in some recurrent pregnancy loss patients are now believed to represent the effect of the pregnancy loss rather than the cause of recurrent abortion (217,273–275).
# Chunk 1445
The best method for monitoring in early pregnancy is ultrasonography. If used, serum βhCG levels should be serially monitored from the time of a missed menstrual period until the level is approximately 1,200 to 1,500 mIU/mL, at which time an ultrasonographic scan is performed and blood sampling is discontinued. Ultrasonographic assessment may then be performed every 2 weeks until the gestational age at which previous pregnancies were aborted. The prognostic value of serial ultrasonography and a variety of hormonal and biochemical measurements during early pregnancy in women with histories of recurrent losses has been reported (341).
# Chunk 1446
TNF-α Inhibition Interest in the potent proinﬂammatory cytokine, TNF-α, as a mediator of pregnancy loss came out of the description of the TH1 and TH2 paradigm (209). Over the past 10 years, there have been several publications that link maternal serum TNF-α levels and activating TNF-α gene promoter polymorphisms to recurrent pregnancy loss (413–415). The development of antagonists of TNF-α in the form of blocking antibodies (adalimumab, inﬂiximab) and inhibitory recombinant proteins (etanercept) has allowed for successful treatment of several autoimmune disorders, including rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis, and Crohn’s disease. Their use, however, has not been associated with universally positive outcomes and may worsen some disorders, including multiple sclerosis (416). These products are associated with rare but worrisome side effects, including liver failure, aplastic anemia, interstitial lung disease, and anaphylaxis (417). Although there exists only a single, small, retrospective, observational, nonrandomly assigned case series that involved treatment of recurrent pregnancy loss patients with inhibitors of TNF-α, these positive preliminary results have led a growing number of clinics to offer this therapy to patients, often at a significant cost (418). The safety of these compounds in pregnancy has not been appropriately studied, and preliminary reports associating exposure to TNF-α inhibitors during early pregnancy to fetal VACTERL syndrome is concerning (419). As with Intralipid therapy, use of TNF-α inhibition for the treatment of recurrent pregnancy loss should only be administered under an institutional review board–approved protocol in a study setting and should not generate clinical income.
# Chunk 1447
Antithrombotic Therapy Therapy for patients with recurrent pregnancy losses associated with either APS or other thrombophilic disorders has now shifted toward the use of antithrombotic medications. Unlike immunosuppressive treatments, this approach appears to address the effect (hypercoagulability), but not the underlying cause (e.g., genetic, APS) of recurrent pregnancy loss. However, there are reports that heparin, one typical anticoagulant, may exert direct immunomodulatory effects by binding to antiphospholipid antibodies and may decrease movement of inﬂammatory cells to sites of alloantigen exposure (427,428). The combined use of low-dose aspirin (75 to 80 mg per day) and subcutaneous unfractionated heparin (5,000 to 10,000 units twice daily) during pregnancy has been best studied among women with APS and appears to be efficacious (429–433). A typical regimen for women with antiphospholipid antibody syndrome would include use of aspirin (80 mg every day) beginning with any attempts to conceive. After pregnancy has been confirmed, 10,000 IU unfractionated sodium heparin is administered subcutaneously twice daily, throughout gestation. An aPTT should be obtained weekly and dosages of heparin should be adjusted until anticoagulation is achieved. Patients using this therapy should be treated in conjunction with a perinatologist because of their increased risks for preterm labor, premature rupture of the membranes, intrauterine growth restriction, intrauterine fetal demise, and pre-eclampsia. Other potential risks include gastric bleeding, osteopenia, and abruptio placenta.
# Chunk 1448
The prognosis for successful pregnancy depends both on the potential underlying cause of pregnancy loss and (epidemiologically) on the number of prior losses (Table 33.4). As previously discussed, epidemiologic surveys indicate that the chance of a viable birth even after four prior losses may be as high as 60%. Depending on the study, the prognosis for successful pregnancy in couples with a cytogenetic etiology for reproductive loss varies from 20% to 80% (453– 455). Women with corrected anatomical anomalies may expect a successful pregnancy in 60% to 90% of cases (74,453,456–459). A success rate higher than 90% has been reported for women with corrected endocrinologic abnormalities (454). Between 70% to 90% of pregnancies reported among women receiving therapy for antiphospholipid antibodies have been viable (460,461).
# Chunk 1449
111.

Trout SW, Seifer DB. Do women with unexplained recurrent pregnancy loss have higher day 3 serum FSH and estradiol values? Fertil Steril 2000;74:335–337.
# Chunk 1450
Menopause, the permanent cessation of menstruation, occurs at a mean age of 51 years. Despite a great increase in the life expectancy of women, the age at menopause remains remarkably constant. A woman in the United States today will live approximately 30 years, or greater than a third of her life, beyond the menopause. The age at menopause appears to be genetically determined and is unaffected by race, socioeconomic status, age at menarche, or number of prior ovulations. Factors that are toxic to the ovary often result in an earlier age of menopause; women who smoke experience an earlier menopause, as do many women exposed to chemotherapy or pelvic radiation (1). Women who had surgery on their ovaries or had a hysterectomy, despite retention of their ovaries, may experience early menopause (2). Premature ovarian insufficiency, defined as menopause before the age of 40 years, occurs in approximately 1% of women. It may be idiopathic or associated with a toxic exposure, chromosomal abnormality, or an autoimmune disorder.
# Chunk 1451
Vasomotor symptoms affect up to 75% of perimenopausal women. Symptoms last for 1 to 2 years after menopause in most women, but may continue for up to 10 years or longer in others. Hot ﬂashes are the primary reason women seek care at menopause. Hot ﬂashes disturb women at work, interrupt daily activities and disrupt sleep (5). Many women report difficulty concentrating and emotional lability during the menopausal transition. Treatment of vasomotor symptoms should improve these cognitive and mood symptoms if they are secondary to sleep disruption and its resulting daytime fatigue. The incidence of thyroid disease increases as women age; therefore, thyroid function tests should be performed if vasomotor symptoms are atypical or resistant to therapy.
# Chunk 1452
also effectively treats hot ﬂashes for many women. Low-dose oral esterified and conjugated estrogens (CE) (0.3 mg daily), oral estradiol (0.5 mg daily), and transdermal estradiol (0.025 and 0.014 mg weekly) often are effective and associated with minimal side effects and endometrial stimulation (15–17). Progestin therapy must be given concurrently if a woman has not had a hysterectomy, although with low-dose estrogen therapy, intermittent progestin treatment may be an option.
# Chunk 1453
Gabapentin (Neurontin)isa γ-aminobutyric acid analogue approved for the treatment of seizures that reduced hot ﬂash frequency and severity significantly more than placebo in several randomized, double-blind trials (24). Hot ﬂash scores decreased 54% in the women treated with gabapentin (900 mg per day) compared with a 31% reduction in placebo-treated women. Side effects include disorientation, dizziness, and drowsiness. Women who are principally bothered by night sweats and disrupted sleep may benefit from sleeping medication. In a double-blind, placebo-controlled study of peri-and postmenopausal women, the prescription insomnia treatment, eszopiclone, significantly improved sleep and menopause-related symptoms, with a positive impact on next-day functioning, mood, and quality of life (25). The antihistamine diphenhydramine hydrochloride is an inexpensive, over-the-counter sleep aid.
# Chunk 1454
Urogenital Atrophy Urogenital atrophy results in vaginal dryness and pruritus, dyspareunia, dysuria, and urinary urgency. These common problems in menopausal women respond well to therapy (26). Systemic estrogen therapy is a very effective treatment for vaginal dryness, dyspareunia, and associated symptoms. Low doses of estrogen applied vaginally are preferred to systemic estrogen therapy when vasomotor symptoms are not present, given minimal systemic absorption and increased safety. Low doses of estrogen cream (Premarin, Estrace) (0.5 g) are effective when used only once or twice a week (27). An estradiol vaginal tablet (Vagifem) (10 μg) inserted twice weekly may be less messy and easier to use than estrogen cream. An estrogen-containing vaginal ring (Estring) (7.5 μg per day) is another convenient formulation, which is placed in the vagina every 3 months and slowly releases a low dose of estradiol (28). Studies of the low-dose estrogen vaginal ring and tablet confirm a small increase in serum estradiol and estrone levels, but these levels remain within the normal range for postmenopausal women (29).
# Chunk 1455
Bisphosphonates, including alendronate (Fosamax, 35 or 70 mg orally weekly), risedronate (Actonel, 35 mg weekly or 150 mg orally monthly), ibandronate (Boniva, 150 mg orally monthly or 3 mg every 3 months intravenous), and zoledronic acid (Zometa, 5 mg intravenous yearly) specifically inhibit bone resorption and are very effective for both the prevention and treatment of osteoporosis (42–44). Patients should take oral bisphosphonates on an empty stomach with a large glass of water and remain upright for at least 30 minutes. The major side effect is gastrointestinal distress; esophageal ulceration, osteonecrosis of the jaw, and atypical femoral fractures are very rare occurrences.
# Chunk 1456
The WHI randomized controlled trial of combination hormone therapy versus placebo showed that hormone therapy did not prevent heart disease in healthy women, but instead, it increased the risk of cardiovascular events in older women (51). The WHI was a 15-year study sponsored by the National Institutes of Health that examined ways to prevent heart disease, osteoporosis, and breast and colorectal cancer in women. There were several different studies in WHI, involving more than 160,000 healthy postmenopausal women. The WHI randomized controlled trial enrolled approximately 16,000 women nationwide between the ages of 50 and 79 years. The average age of women in the study was 63 years. The major goal of the WHI clinical trial was to determine whether combined estrogen and progestin hormone therapy prevented heart disease and to evaluate associated benefits and risks. After an average of 5 years of follow-up, risks (hazard ratio) were increased for CHD (1.3), breast cancer (1.3), stroke (1.4), and pulmonary embolism (PE) (2.1), and decreased for hip fracture (0.7) and colorectal cancer (0.6) (51). The absolute excess risk per 10,000 woman-years attributable to hormone therapy was small, with seven more CHD events, eight breast cancers, eight strokes, and eight pulmonary embolisms, with six fewer colorectal cancers and five fewer hip fractures.
# Chunk 1457
The use of unopposed estrogen is associated with an increased risk of endometrial hyperplasia and cancer. Therefore, combination estrogen-progestin therapy is recommended for all women with a uterus. Treatment may be provided in a sequential manner, with estrogen daily and progestin for 12 to 14 days of each month, or in a continuous-combined fashion with estrogen and a lower dose of progestin daily. Sequential regimens result in regular, predictable vaginal bleeding. The majority of women using continuous-combined regimens will experience amenorrhea by the end of 1 year of therapy, but the bleeding that does occur is irregular and unpredictable. Low-dose combination hormone therapy products (e.g., Prempro 0.45/1.5 and 0.3/1.5 mg per day) generally result in a lower incidence of breakthrough bleeding and breast tenderness (67).
# Chunk 1458
Sexual problems are highly prevalent, reported in approximately 40% of US women, with 12% reporting a sexual problem associated with personal distress (71). Although sexual problems generally increase with aging, distressing sexual problems peak in midlife women (aged 45 to 64) and are lowest in women 65 years or older. The etiology of female sexual dysfunction is often multifactorial, including depression or anxiety, relationship conﬂict, stress, fatigue, prior abuse, medications, or physical problems that make sexual activity uncomfortable, such as endometriosis or atrophic vaginitis. The impact of the menopausal transition on sexual function was examined in a prospective, longitudinal cohort study of approximately 3,000 women who were pre-or perimenopausal at baseline and followed for 6 years. Pain during sexual intercourse increased and sexual desire decreased over the menopausal transition, but other factors were unaffected, including sexual arousal, frequency, and pleasure (72). In contrast to menopausal factors, which were unrelated to most aspects of sexual functioning, age, social, health, and psychological factors were strongly linked.
# Chunk 1459
Most endometrial carcinomas are sporadic, but about 10% of cases have a hereditary basis (37– 41). Two genetic models were described in the development of familial endometrial cancer: HNPCC or Lynch II syndrome and a predisposition for endometrial cancer alone; both are inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion (42). The majority of studies focused on the increased incidence of endometrial cancer associated with Lynch II syndrome, a highly penetrant disorder (80% to 85%) (43). HNPCC or Lynch II syndrome is caused by an inherited mutation in one of the following mismatch repair genes: hMSH2, hMLH1, PMS1, PMS2, or hMSH6 (44–47). The disorder is characterized by early age (average age younger than 45 years) at onset of neoplastic lesions in a variety of tissues, including the colon, uterus, stomach, ureters, ovaries, and skin (43,48,49). The lifetime risk of endometrial cancer in women with Lynch II syndrome is 32% to 60% and the lifetime risk of ovarian cancer is 10% to 12% (50,51). Interestingly, colorectal cancer is less prevalent in women with HNPCC or Lynch II syndrome than in men, whose risk approaches 100%. In a study of 1,763 patients from 50 HNPCC or Lynch II syndrome families in the Finnish Cancer Registry, the cumulative incidence of colorectal cancer in women was 54% by age 70, while the cumulative incidence of endometrial cancer was 60% (11). Although these data appear to support the use of endometrial cancer surveillance strategies for women with Lynch syndrome, a specific algorithm is not defined (50,52). No effective screening method exists for patients at increased risk for ovarian cancer.
# Chunk 1460
In 2006, a European workshop of 21 experts in the treatment of hereditary gastrointestinal cancers from ninecountries (the Mallorca group) recommended the following endometrial cancer surveillance strategy for patients with HNPCC or Lynch II syndrome: annual pelvic examination, transvaginal ultrasound, and endometrial biopsy beginning at 30 to 35 years of age (53). These recommendations are by expert opinion only, and it is unknown whether these interventions are cost-effective or will impact mortality from endometrial or ovarian cancer in patients with Lynch II syndrome. An attractive alternative to early detection is prophylactic surgery after completion of childbearing (54,55). In 2006 a multi-institutional, matched case-control study found that prophylactic hysterectomy withbilateral salpingo-oophorectomy is an effective primary prevention strategy in women with Lynch II syndrome (51). No woman with hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy developed endometrial, ovarian, or primary peritoneal carcinoma during the period of follow-up. In contrast, endometrial cancer developed in 33% and ovarian cancer in 5% of women who did not undergo prophylactic surgery (51).
# Chunk 1461
Symptoms Endometrial carcinoma most often occurs in women in the sixth and seventh decades of life, at an average age of 60 years; 75% of cases occur in women older than 50 years of age. About 90% of women with endometrial carcinoma have vaginal bleeding or discharge as their only presenting symptom. Most women recognize the importance of this symptom and seek medical consultation within 3 months. Some women experience pelvic pressure or discomfort indicative of uterine enlargement or extrauterine disease spread. Bleeding may not have occurred because of cervical stenosis, especially in older patients, and may be associated with hematometra or pyometra, causing a purulent vaginal discharge. This finding is often associated with a poor prognosis (69). Less than 5% of women diagnosed with endometrial cancer are asymptomatic. In the absence of symptoms, endometrial cancer usually is detected as the result of investigation of abnormal Pap test results, discovery of cancer in a uterus removed for some other reason, or evaluation of an abnormal finding on a pelvic ultrasonography examination or computed tomography (CT) scan obtained for an unrelated reason. Women who are found to have malignant cells on Pap test are more likely to have a more advanced stage of disease (70).
# Chunk 1462
Possible uterine causes of perimenopausal or postmenopausal bleeding include endometrial atrophy, endometrial polyps, estrogen therapy, hyperplasia, and cancer or sarcoma (72–75) (Table 35.3). Uterine leiomyomas should never be accepted as a cause of postmenopausal bleeding. Endometrial atrophy is the most common endometrial finding in women with post-menopausal bleeding, accounting for 60% to 80% of such bleeding. Women with endometrial atrophy usually were menopausal for about 10 years. Endometrial biopsy often yields insufficient tissue or only blood and mucus, and usually bleeding ceases after biopsy. Endometrial polyps account for 2% to 12% of postmenopausal bleeding. Polyps are often difficult to identify with office endometrial biopsy or curettage. Hysteroscopy, transvaginal ultrasonography, or both may be useful adjuncts in identifying endometrial polyps. Unrecognized and untreated polyps may be a source of continued or recurrent bleeding, leading eventually to unnecessary hysterectomy.
# Chunk 1463
Diagnosis Office endometrial aspiration biopsy is the accepted first step in evaluating a patient with abnormal uterine bleeding or suspected endometrial pathology (76). The diagnostic accuracy of office-based endometrial biopsy is 90% to 98% when compared with subsequent findings at dilation and curettage (D&C) or hysterectomy (77–79).
# Chunk 1464
The narrow plastic cannulas are relatively inexpensive, often can be used without a tenaculum, cause less uterine cramping (resulting in increased patient acceptance), and are successful in obtaining adequate tissue samples in more than 95% of cases. If cervical stenosis is encountered, a paracervical block can be performed, and the cervix can be dilated. Premedication with an antiprostaglandin agent can reduce uterine cramping. Complications following endometrial biopsy are exceedingly rare; uterine perforation occurs in only 1 to 2 cases per 1,000. Endocervical curettage may be performed at the time of endometrial biopsy if cervical pathology is suspected. A Pap test is an unreliable diagnostic test because only 30% to 50% of patients with endometrial cancer have abnormal Pap test results (80).
# Chunk 1465
An observational study reported a significant survival benefit of para-aortic lymphadenectomy in patients at intermediate or high risk of recurrence (based on presence of histologic grade 3 or deep myometrial invasion, or lymphovascular invasion, or evidence of spread outside of the uterine corpus), compared to patients who had hysterectomy with pelvic lymphadenectomy but without para-aortic dissection. This benefit was not observed in patients with low-risk endometrial cancer (143). In addition, the Postoperative Radiation Therapy in Endometrial Carcinoma (PORTEC) studies identified patients with stage IC, grade 3 endometrial carcinoma as being at high risk of early distant spread and death when treated with hysterectomy only (no staging), followed by pelvic external-beam radiation therapy. These patients had a 31% risk of distant recurrence (136). From the literature, it seems that the patients who have the potential to benefit from surgical staging are those with risk factors such as histologic grade 3, deep myometrial invasion, or lymphovascular invasion.
# Chunk 1466
Stage IV∗ Tumor invades bladder and/or bowel mucosa, and/or distant metastases IVA∗ Tumor invasion of bladder and/or bowel mucosa IVB∗ Distant metastases, including intra-abdominal metastases and/or inguinal
# Chunk 1467
Age In general, younger women with endometrial cancer have a better prognosis than older women. Two reports observed no deaths related to disease in patients with endometrial cancer diagnosed before 50 years of age (145,146). Another series demonstrated a 60.9% 5-year survival rate for patients older than 70 years of age, compared with 92.1% survival rate for patients younger than 50 years of age (147). Decreased survival was associated with an increased risk for extrauterine spread (38% vs. 21%) and deep myometrial invasion (57% vs. 24%) for these two groups. The GOG reported 5-year survival rates of 96.3% for patients 50 years of age or younger, 87.3% for patients 51 to 60 years, 78% for patients 61 to 70 years, 70.7% for patients 71 to 80 years, and 53.6% for patients older than 80 years (148).
# Chunk 1468
Table 35.8 Prognostic Variables in Endometrial Carcinoma prognostic variable. Increasing patient age appears to be independently associated with disease recurrence in endometrial cancer. In one study, the mean age at diagnosis of patients who had recurrence or died of disease was 68.6 years, compared with 60.3 years for patients without recurrence. For every 1year increase in age, the estimated rate of recurrence increased 7%. None of the patients younger than 50 years of age developed recurrent cancer, compared with 12% of patients aged 50 to 75 years and 33% of patients older than 75 years (149).
# Chunk 1469
Histologic Grade Histologic grade of the endometrial tumor is strongly associated with prognosis (132,141,149,152–156). In one study, recurrences developed in 7.7% of grade 1 tumors, 10.5% of grade 2 tumors, and 36.1% of grade 3 tumors. Patients with grade 3 tumors were in excess of fivetimes more likely to have a recurrence than were patients with grades 1 and 2 tumors. The 5-year disease-free survival rates for patients with grades 1 and 2 tumors were 92% and 86%, respectively, compared with 64% for patients with grade 3 tumors (149). Another study reported similar results, noting recurrences in 9% of patients with grades 1 and 2 tumors compared with 39% of patients with grade 3 lesions (153). Increasing tumor anaplasia is associated with deep myometrial invasion, cervical extension, lymph node metastasis, and both local recurrence and distant metastasis.
# Chunk 1470
Tumor Size Tumor size is a significant prognostic factor for lymph node metastasis and survival in patients with endometrial cancer (142,157). One report determined tumor size in 142 patients with clinical stage I endometrial cancer and found lymph node metastasis in 4% of patients with tumors 2 cm or smaller, in 15% of patients with tumors larger than 2 cm, and in 35% of patients with tumors involving the entire uterine cavity (156). Tumor size better defined an intermediate-risk group for lymph nodes metastasis (i.e., patients with grade 2 tumors with less than 50% myometrial invasion). Overall, these patients had a 10% risk for lymph node metastasis, but there was no nodal metastasis associated with tumors 2 cm or smaller, compared with 18% when tumors were larger than 2 cm. Five-year survival rates were 98% for patients with tumors 2 cm or smaller, 84% for patients with tumors larger than 2 cm, and 64% for patients with tumors involving the whole uterine cavity (137,157).
# Chunk 1471
Myometrial Invasion Because access to the lymphatic system increases as cancer invades into the outer one-half of the myometrium, increasing depth of invasion is associated with increasing likelihood of extrauterine spread and recurrence (153,155,175). The association of depth of myometrial invasion with extrauterine disease and lymph node metastases was reported (175). Of patients without demonstrable myometrial invasion, only 1% had pelvic lymph node metastasis, compared with patients with outer one-third myometrial invasion who had 25% pelvic and 17% aortic lymph node metastases. Deep myometrial invasion (>50% for all stages; ≥66% for stage I) is the strongest predictor of hematogenous recurrence (176). Survival decreases with increasing depth of myometrial invasion. In general, patients with noninvasive or superficially invasive tumors have an 80% to 90% 5-year survival rate, whereas those with deeply invasive tumors have a 60% survival rate. The most sensitive indicator of the effect of myometrial invasion on survival is distance from the tumor–myometrial junction to the uterine serosa. Patients with tumors that are less than 5 mm from the serosal surface are at much higher risk for recurrence and death than those with tumors greater than 5 mm from the serosal surface (177,178).
# Chunk 1472
In contrast to these reports, an equal number of studies found no significant relationship between malignant peritoneal cytology and an increased incidence of disease recurrence in the absence of other risk factors such as extrauterine disease (186–189). Patients with positive peritoneal cytology as the only site of extrauterine disease (i.e., no adnexal or uterine serosal invasion) and without poor prognosticators (i.e., myometrial invasion more than50%, nonendometrioid histologic subtype, grade 3, lymphovascular space invasion, cervical invasion) have a very favorable outcome with an absence of extra-abdominal recurrences (190). These patients have an associated 5-year survival of 98% to 100% even when not treated with adjuvant therapy (148,191,192). On the other hand, patients with positive cytology in addition to poor prognostic factors demonstrate a high rate (47%) of distant extra-abdominal failure and may potentially benefit from systemic chemotherapy. Positive peritoneal cytology seems to have an adverse effect on survival only if the endometrial cancer has spread to the adnexa, peritoneum, or lymph nodes, not if the disease is otherwise confined to the uterus (188,189,191). These considerations led to the omission of cytology as a factor impacting stage in the FIGO 2009 staging criteria.
# Chunk 1473
Lymph Node Metastasis Lymph node metastasis is the most important prognostic factor in clinical early-stage endometrial cancer. Of patients with clinical stage I disease, about 10% will have pelvic and 6% will have para-aortic lymph node metastases. Patients with lymph node metastases have almost a sixfold higher likelihood of developing recurrent cancer than patients without lymph node metastases. One study reported a recurrence rate of 48% with positive lymph nodes, including 45% with positive pelvic nodes and 64% with positive aortic nodes, compared with 8% with negative nodes. The 5-year disease-free survival rate for patients with lymph node metastases was 54%, compared with 90% for patients without lymph node metastases (148). The GOG found that the presence or absence of para-aortic lymph node metastases was of paramount importance in determining prognosis. Of 48 para-aortic node–positive patients, 28 (58%) developed progressive or recurrent cancer, and only 36% of these patients were alive at 5 years, compared with 85% of patients without para-aortic node involvement (194). One series examined patients with lymph nodes metastases in addition to other extrauterine sites of disease (vagina, uterine serosa, positive peritoneal cytology, adnexal invasion). The recurrence rateswere67% (41% extranodal) for those with lymphatic dissemination versus. 32% (5% extranodal) for those with other sites of extrauterine disease spread (190).
# Chunk 1474
Intraperitoneal Metastases Extrauterine metastasis, excluding peritoneal cytology and lymph node metastasis, occurs in about 4% to 6% of patients with clinical stage I endometrial cancer. Gross intraperitoneal spread is highly correlated with lymph node metastases; one study noted that 51% of patients with intraperitoneal tumor had positive lymph nodes, whereas only 7% of patients without gross peritoneal spread had positive nodes (141). Extrauterine spread other than lymph node metastasis issignificantly associated with tumor recurrence. Another study found that 50% of patients with extrauterine disease developed recurrence, compared with 11% of patients without extrauterine disease, making recurrence almost fivetimes more likely in patients with extrauterine disease spread. The 5-year disease-free survival rate for patients with nonlymphatic extrauterine disease was 50%, compared with 88% in other patients (148). Predictors of peritoneal relapse include stage IV disease or stage II or III disease with two or more of the following risk factors: cervical invasion, positive peritoneal cytology, positive lymph nodes, and nonendometrioid histology (195).
# Chunk 1475
Types I and II Endometrial Carcinoma: Molecular Aberrations

Based on their etiological and pathological features, sporadic endometrial cancer is classified into two subtypes (2,134). Type I (endometrioid histology) represents the majority of lesions (approximately 80%), whichare mostly low grade, estrogen receptor positive, associated with hyperestrogenism, and arise from atypical complex hyperplasia (196,197). Hyperestrogenism may be attributed to obesity with peripheral conversion of androgens to estrogens, anovulation, or exposure to excessive exogenous estrogen (134,198–202). Obesity, polycystic ovarian syndrome, tamoxifen use, and unopposed estrogen use are all associated with increased risk of endometrial cancer. Other associated findings include late onset of menopause, nulliparity, diabetes mellitus, and hypertension. The molecular basis for the progression from hyperplasia to invasive endometrial carcinoma as a result of hyperestrogenism remains unknown because the involvement of only a minority of factors is reproducible (203). In contrast, type II endometrial cancer (serous, clear cell carcinoma) appears to be unrelated to high estrogen levels and often develops in nonobese women. Type II cancers arise from its precursor, endometrial intraepithelial carcinoma (EIC) adjacent to an atrophic endometrium background in relatively older women (204). Distinct molecular changes are associated with these two subtypes. Common genetic changes in endometrioid endometrial cancer include mutations in PTEN (205–212), or β-catenin genes (213–215). In contrast, type II cancers frequently demonstrate alterations in HER2/neu, p53, p16, e-cadherin, and loss of heterozygosity (LOH) (216–218). These distinct molecular alterations underscore prognostic differences. Type I endometrial cancer is limited to the uterus in 70% of cases with a 5-year survival greater than 85%. Type II endometrial cancer displays a more aggressive clinical course and a poor prognosis; even in tumors with little or no myometrial invasion, more than one in three patients will have extensive extrauterine spread with complete surgical staging, resulting in an overall survival of 20% (106,110,114,219).
# Chunk 1476
Chromosomal instability with extensive genomic derangements is commonly found in type II endometrial cancers (231). The most frequent genetic alteration is TP53 mutation, present in about 90% of serous carcinomas (205,227,232,233). In contrast to endometrioid carcinoma, MSI is rare (<5%), as are K-ras and PTEN mutations (210,234,235). Other genetic alterations that occur more frequently in serous compared to endometrioid carcinomas are inactivation of  Exploratory Iaparotomy  Biopsy of any suspicious Iesions  TAH-BSO  Peritoneal cytology  Resect any enlarged Iymph nodes  Selective pelvic and para-aortic Iymphadenectomy (see Table 30.8)  Grade 1,2  No or minimal myometrial invasion Pelvic RT & vaginal boost (extended field if positive para-aortic nodes) Whole abdominal radiation or chemotherapy  G2, superficial myometrial invasion  G3, no myometrial   invasion  G3, any myometrial invasion  Deep myometrial invasion  Cervix spread  Positive Iymph nodes  Adnexal spread  Intraperitoneal disease completely resected Positive peritoneal cytology
# Chunk 1477
Surgical Treatment An algorithm for the management of patients with clinical stage I and II endometrial cancer is presented in Figure 35.6. The most common current protocol for surgical management of endometrial cancer includes peritoneal cytology, hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, and surgical staging.In patients with nonendometrioid cancer, omentectomy along with appendectomy and peritoneal biopsies may be performed. The need to perform lymphadenectomy is based on the type of endometrial cancer, the grade of the tumor, the tumor size and extent of myometrial invasion determined during the surgery, and the presence of extrauterine disease. Bilateral pelvic and para-aortic lymphadenectomy is performed if the patient has any of the following factors:evidence of extrauterine disease, tumor that is FIGO grade 3, nonendometrioidtype endometrial cancer, or evidence of tumor invasion more than 50% of the thickness of the myometrium.In the absence of these risk factors only bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy is performed, if the tumor size is greater than 2cm; para-aortic lymphadenectomy would be performed only if pelvic lymph nodes were positive (Fig. 35.7). Lymphadenectomy is omitted altogether for patients without the above risk factors, absence of cervical involvement, and tumor size less than2cm. The decision to administer postoperative radiation, chemotherapy, or both is predicated on the final results of pathological examination of the surgical specimen and cytology, according to previously described criteria (243).
# Chunk 1478
A large prospective study by GOG randomized patients to laparoscopy versus laparotomy for the primary treatment of patients with endometrial cancer (258). Over 2,500 patients were enrolled, 1,696 to laparoscopy and 920 to laparotomy. Consistent with early reports, patients randomized to laparoscopy had shorter hospital stay (52% more than 2 days vs. 94% in the laparotomy group), less blood loss, and fewer postoperative complications (14% vs. 21%). The rate of intra-operative complications was similar, and the operative time was longer in the laparoscopy cohort. There was no difference in lymph node counts, and stage distribution was identical between groups. A follow-up quality-of-life investigation of the same cohorts revealed improved Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy–General (FACT-G) scores, better physical functioning, better body image, less pain and its interference with quality of life, and an earlier resumption of normal activities and return to work over the 6-week recovery period in the laparoscopic group (259). Although the differences were modest and negligible by 6 months, the analysis was performed as per intention to treat. Of concern is the 24% rate of conversions in the laparoscopic cohort; only 4% were converted because of advanced disease. Furthermore, the conversion rate increased dramatically with body mass index (BMI). This is problematic recognizing that the vast majority of patients with endometrial cancer are obese. The conversion rate for patients with a BMI of 40 was 57%. This implies a limitation of the surgical technique in obese patients.
# Chunk 1479
The use of extraperitoneal laparoscopic staging for para-aortic lymphadenectomy was reported in a prospective investigation of 293 patients with endometrial cancer (260). The extraperitoneal approach greatly improved exposure by circumventing handling of the small bowel and was successful in over 90% of unselected patients up to a BMI of 51. There was no difference in lymph node counts, all dissections were performed to the level of the renal veins, and significant improvements in blood loss, postoperative complications, and length of stay were noted compared to the laparotomy group. The ability to gain access to the renal veins is important, given that 60% of patients with nodal involvement above the inferior mesenteric artery have negative ipsilateral inframesenteric para-aortic nodes (140). Thus, 38% to 46% of patients with para-aortic metastases will be missed if the dissection is limited to the region below the inframesenteric artery. Althoughinfrarenal lymphadenectomy has yet to be proven necessary, the extraperitoneal approach offers the most reliable method to consistently perform a thorough dissection.
# Chunk 1480
Several series show that radiotherapy is effective treatment for patients with inoperable endometrial cancer (268–277) (Table 35.9). One reported on the treatment of 120 patients with clinical stage I and 17 patients with clinical stage II endometrial cancer with radiation alone, 85% of whom received only intracavitary radiation. Because of the high incidence of death caused by intercurrent illness in this group of patients, the 5-and 10-year overall survival rates were only 55% and 28%, respectively, compared with disease-specific survival rates of 87% and 85%, respectively. There was no difference in disease-specific survival rates between patients with stage I and II disease. Intrauterine cancer recurred in 14% of patients, and extrauterine pelvic disease recurred in 3%. The authors treated 15 patients with stage III and IV disease, usually with a combination of external-beam and intracavitary radiation therapy, yielding a 5year disease-specific survival rate of 49%. Five patients (3%) had serious late complications of radiation therapy (277).
# Chunk 1481
Although it is generally agreed that intracavitary radiation is necessary to achieve adequate local control, the indications for external-beam radiation therapy in the primary treatment of endometrial cancer are less well defined. Patients with cervical involvement and known or suspected extrauterine pelvic spread undoubtedly would benefit from external-beam radiation therapy. Theoretically, external-beam radiation could sterilize microscopic nodal disease and possibly increase the radiation dose to deep myometrial or subserosal uterine disease, which may receive an insufficient dose from intracavitary radiation alone. A correlation between tumor grade and recurrence was noted in several reports. One found that the 5-year progression-free survival rate for medically inoperable patients with clinical stage I disease treated with radiotherapy alone
# Chunk 1482
Vaginal control rates with the more convenient, better-tolerated HDR brachytherapy are comparable to control rates with the lengthier low-dose rate (LDR) brachytherapy. Pearcey and Petereit established the HDR dosing of 21 Gy to 5-mm depth in threefractions as the standard brachytherapy dose, providing local control rates of 98% to 100% (284). Additional retrospective data demonstrate 98% to 100% vaginal control rates with HDR in high risk early-stage endometrial cancer (285,286). Retrospective data suggestthat the vaginal relapse rate after brachytherapy averages 4% to 5% (Table 35.11) and this is similar to the 5-year vaginal failure rate of 3.5% reported among the highest-risk patients who received ERT in PORTEC-1 (135,282,285,287– 291).
# Chunk 1483
PORTEC-2 randomized patients with apparent uterine-confined endometrial cancer at high risk for recurrence (>60 years of age with grade 1 or 2, stage IB and grade 3, stage IA; or any age, any grade IIA with <50% myometrial invasion), to pelvic ERT (46 Gy, in 23 fractions) versus vaginal brachytherapy (21 Gy in three HDR fractions or 30 Gy LDR, to a depth of 0.5 cm). At 3 years, there was no difference in vaginal failure rates (0.9% for vaginal brachytherapy, 2% for pelvic ERT; p = .97).There was a higher rate of nonvaginal pelvic relapse in the brachytherapy group (3.6 %) compared to the ERT group (0.7%; p = .03), however, the absolute difference was small and there was no difference in overall survival (292). The difference between nonvaginal pelvic recurrences may be a reﬂection of unrecognized lymph node metastases at the time of initial surgery treated with ERT. One concern regarding PORTEC-2 is that there was not a surgery-only control in the study. However, the highest risk endometrial cancer subgroup in PORTEC-1 (patients >60 years of age with grade 3 or deeply invasive grade 1 or 2, all stage I) was similar to the cohort included in PORTEC-2 and the locoregional recurrence rate in patients who did not receive adjuvant ERT in PORTEC-1 was 18% (135).
# Chunk 1484
The PORTEC trial tested the role of postoperative pelvic radiation therapy for presumed stage I endometrial cancer in 714 patients. Eligibility criteria were stage IB, grades 1 to 2, and stage IA, grades 2 to 3; patients with stage IA, grade 3, were only 10% of the study population, and lymph node biopsies and peritoneal cytology were not required. Local-regional recurrences developed in 14% of the surgery group, compared with 4% of the postoperative pelvic radiation group. Overall, the 5-year survival rate was no different between the two groups (85% vs. 81%, respectively) (135). These results were confirmed by GOG99, a prospective, randomized investigation of surgery alone (including lymphadenectomy to the level of the inferior mesentery artery in some patients) versus surgery plus adjuvant pelvic radiation in intermediate-risk endometrial cancer (stages IA to IIb occult). Of 392 patients accrued to the study, more than 80% were actually low-risk patients (90.6% stage I, 81.6% grades 1 to 2, 82% <50% myometrial invasion). Disease recurrence was reduced by 58% (p = 0.007) with the use of postoperative pelvic radiation. After 2 years, the cumulative recurrence rate was 12% in the group with no postoperative treatment compared with 3% in the group that received pelvic radiation. The pelvic failure rate was 8.9% in the surgery-alone group compared with 1.6% in the postoperative pelvic radiation group. Overall survival rates were not significantly improved in patients receiving postoperative pelvic radiation compared with those treated only with surgery (92% vs. 86%, respectively) (279). Recently, the intergroup ASTEC/EN.5 trial provided further confirmation that external-beam radiation therapy in patients at intermediate to high risk of recurrence has no significant effect on overall survival (294).
# Chunk 1485
Postoperative whole-pelvis external-beam radiation usually involves the delivery of 4,500 to 5,040 cGy in 180 cGy daily fractions over 5 to 6 weeks to a field encompassing the upper one-half of the vagina inferiorly, the lower border of the L4 vertebral body superiorly, and 1 cm lateral to the margins of the bony pelvis. The dose of radiation at the surface of the vaginal apex usually is boosted to 6,000 to 7,000 cGy by a variety of techniques. The most frequently reported side effects are gastrointestinal, usually abdominal cramps and diarrhea, although more serious complications such as bleeding, proctitis, bowel obstruction, and fistula can occur and may require surgical correction. The urinary system may be affected in the form of hematuria, cystitis, or fistula. The overall complication rate ranges from 25% to 40%; and the rate of serious complications requiring surgical intervention is about 1.5% to 3%.
# Chunk 1486
In one report, only one case of severe enteric morbidity occurred in 48 patients, a complication rate of 2% (295). In a GOG study, 37 of 48 patients with positive para-aortic nodes received postoperative para-aortic radiation, 36% of whom remained tumor free at 5 years (132). A comparison of patients with positive para-aortic nodes treated with megestrol acetate alone versus megestrol acetate and extended-field radiation showed that the survival rate in the patients receiving extended-field radiation was significantly better: 53% versus 12.5%, respectively (296). In another study of 18 patients with positive para-aortic nodes, 5-year survival rates were 67% for microscopic nodal disease and 17% for gross nodal disease (297).
# Chunk 1487
Whole-abdomen radiation therapy is usually reserved for patients with stages III and IV endometrial cancer. It may be considered for patients who have serous or carcinosarcomas, which have a propensity for upper-abdominal recurrence (299–304). The recommended dose to the whole abdomen is 3,000 cGy in 20 daily fractions of 150 cGy, with kidney shielding at 1,500 to 2,000 cGy, along with an additional 1,500 cGy to the para-aortic lymph nodes and 2,000 cGy to the pelvis. Gastrointestinal side effects, including nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea, sometimes make it necessary to interrupt therapy, but it is rare for patients to discontinue treatment because of these symptoms. Hematologic toxicity can be expected to occur during whole-abdomen radiation, but it is usually mild. The incidence of late complications, mainly chronic diarrhea and small bowel obstruction, is low (5% to 10%).
# Chunk 1488
In a series of 27 patients treated with surgical stage III endometrial cancer with whole-abdomen radiation, patients with spread to the adnexa, positive peritoneal cytology, or both had a 5year, relapse-free survival of 90%, whereas all patients with macroscopic disease beyond the adnexa had recurrence (298). Similar results were reported by others (300,301). Some advocated the use of adjuvant whole-abdomen radiotherapy for patients with high-risk stagesI and II endometrial carcinoma, including those with deep myometrial invasion, high-grade tumors, and serous histology, because of the high proportion of recurrences in the upper abdomen. A 5-year recurrence-free survival rate of 85% was reported (302,303). With whole-abdomen radiation in patients at increased risk for intra-abdominal metastatic disease, such as those with nonnodal extrauterine disease and serous histology, an actuarial 5-year relapse-free survival rate of 70% was reported, with no significant toxicity (304). Similarly, others noted a 3-year disease-free survival rate of 79% in patients with stages III and IV endometrial adenocarcinoma treated with whole-abdomen radiation (305). Other reports of using adjuvant postoperative whole-abdomen radiation in early-stage uterine serous carcinoma suggest a reduction in recurrence rates (304– 306). Most recurrences are in the upper abdomen in all of these patients, despite use of this type of radiotherapy. After the publication of GOG122, demonstrating the superiority of chemotherapy over whole-abdominal radiotherapy in advanced endometrial cancer, the utilization of whole-abdominal radiotherapy is not common (see section on “Chemotherapy”) (307).
# Chunk 1489
In cases of advanced disease, chemotherapy is now standard treatment. The GOG122 trial compared whole-abdominal radiotherapy versus systemic chemotherapy (eightcycles of doxorubicin and cisplatin) in 388 patients with stage III or IV disease who underwent maximal surgical resection of disease to less than 2 cm. Its results showed a significant advantage of chemotherapy on 5-year survival (307). Patients who received chemotherapy had a 13% improvement in 2-year progression-free survival (50% vs. 46%) and an 11% improvement in overall 2-year survival (70% vs. 59%) compared with patients treated with whole-abdomen radiation. Although this study was the first to suggest an improvement in outcome for use of adjuvant chemotherapy compared with radiation, toxicity was more prevalent with chemotherapy; patients with gross residual disease were assigned to the radiation arm, almost guaranteeing failure; and overall, 55% of patients experienced a recurrence or progression during the study period (315). GOG184 randomized 552 patients with advanced disease to sixcycles of cisplatin and doxorubicin with or without paclitaxel following surgical debulking and radiotherapy. Side effects were more pronounced with the three-drug regimen, and recurrence-free survival at 36 months was no different between arms (62% vs. 64% for the three-drug regimen). The investigation was closed to patients with stage IV disease during the trial, but subgroup analysis suggested a 50% reduction in recurrence or death in the 57 patients with gross residual disease who received cisplatin, doxorubicin, and paclitaxel (111).
# Chunk 1490
Regarding the use of chemotherapy in high-risk populations with early stage endometrial cancer, the European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer, along with the Nordic Society of Gynecologic Oncology, presented the results of a collaborative trial comparing external radiotherapy versus chemoradiotherapy in patients with stages I or II or IIIC1 (positive pelvic nodes only) and one of the following characteristics: grade 3 or myometrial invasion greater than 50%, DNA aneuploidy, or clearcell or serous histologic type. Performance of a systematic lymphadenectomy was optional. A total of 375 patients were enrolled over a 10-year period and the study was closed early because of slow recruitment. The hazard ratio for progression-free survival was 0.58 (95% CI, 0.34–0.99) in favor of chemoradiation after a median follow-up of 3.5 years (316).
# Chunk 1491
The Japanese GOG randomized patients to pelvic radiotherapy versus platinum-based chemotherapy in patients with stage IB to IIIC endometrial cancer and myometrial invasion greater than 50%. Assessment of para-aortic nodal status was performed in only 29% of cases. The investigators found no differences between the twoexperimental arms in terms of progression-free survival and overall survival. A subgroup analysis of 120 patients with either (i) stage IB tumor and age greater than 70 years or grade 3 endometrioid adenocarcinoma or (ii) stage II or IIIA tumor (positive cytologic findings) showed that chemotherapy was associated with significantly improved disease-free and overall survival rates (317). The benefits achieved with combined chemoradiation, identification of the best chemotherapeutic regimen, and the identification of subgroups of patients who may benefit from these treatments deserves further investigation.
# Chunk 1492
This combined approach resulted in 5-year survival rates of 60% to 80%, with severe gastrointestinal or urologic complications occurring in about 10% of patients (319–327). Patients who have medically inoperable disease are usually treated with external-beam radiation and one or two intracavitary insertions. Compared with combined radiation and surgery, the results with radiation alone are diminished, but about 50% of patients are long-term survivors (279) (Table 35.9).
# Chunk 1493
Clinical Stages III and IV Clinical stage III disease accounts for about 7% to 10% of all endometrial carcinomas (335–340). Patients usually have clinical evidence of disease spread to the parametria, pelvic sidewall, or adnexal structures; less frequently, there is spread to the vagina or pelvic peritoneum. Treatment for stage III endometrial carcinoma must be individualized, but initial operative evaluation and treatment should be considered because of the high risk for occult lymph node metastases and intraperitoneal spread when disease is known to extend outside of the uterus into the pelvis. In the presence of an adnexal mass, the initial impetus for surgery is to determine the nature of the mass. Surgery is performed to determine the extent of disease and to remove the bulk of the disease if possible. This procedure should include peritoneal washings for cytologic examination, para-aortic and pelvic lymphadenectomy, biopsy or excision of any suspicious areas within the peritoneal cavity, and omentectomy and peritoneal biopsies. Except in patients with bulky parametrial disease, total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy should be performed. The goal of surgery is eradication of all macroscopic disease because this finding is of major prognostic importance in the management of patients with clinical stage III disease. Postoperative therapy can be tailored to the extent of disease.
# Chunk 1494
Results of therapy depend on the extent and nature of disease. A 5-year survival rate of 54% was reported for all patients with stage III disease; however, the survival was 80% when only adnexal metastases were present, compared with 15% when other extrauterine pelvic structures were involved (335). Patients with surgical–pathologic stage III disease have a much better survival rate (40%) than those with clinical stage III disease (16%) (326). Patients who are treated with combined surgery and radiation fare better than patients who receive radiation therapy alone (340).
# Chunk 1495
Stage IV endometrial adenocarcinoma, in which tumor invades the bladder or rectum or extends outside the pelvis, makes up about 3% of cases (340–344). Treatment of stage IV disease is patient dependent but usually involves a combination of surgery, radiation therapy, and systemic hormonal therapy or chemotherapy. One objective of surgery and radiation therapy is to achieve local disease control in the pelvis to provide palliative relief of bleeding, discharge, and complications involving the bladder and rectum. In one report, control of pelvic disease was achieved in 28% of 72 patients with stage IV disease treated with radiation alone or in combination with surgery, progestins, or both (342). Several reports noted a positive impact of cytoreductive surgery on survival, the median survival being about threetimes greater with optimal cytoreduction (18 to 34 months vs. 8 to 11 months, respectively) (342–344). Pelvic exenteration may be considered in the very rare patient in whom disease is limited to the bladder, rectum, or both (345,346).
# Chunk 1496
Recurrent Disease About one-fourth of patients treated for early endometrial cancer develop recurrent disease. More than one-half of the recurrences develop within 2 years, and about three-fourths occurs within 3 years of initial treatment. The distribution of recurrences is dependent in large part on the type of primary therapy: surgery alone versus surgery plus local or regional radiotherapy. In a GOG study of 390 patients with surgical stage I disease, vaginal and pelvic recurrences were noted to comprise 53% of all recurrences in the group treated with surgery alone, whereas only 30% of recurrences were vaginal or pelvic in the group treated with combined surgery and radiotherapy (132). Therefore, after combined surgery and radiotherapy (vaginal or external beam), 70% or more of patients with treatment failures have distant metastases, and most of these patients do not have evidence of local or pelvic recurrence. The most common sites of extrapelvic metastases are the lung, abdomen, lymph nodes (aortic, supraclavicular, inguinal), liver, brain, and bone. Patients with isolated vaginal recurrences fare better than those with pelvic recurrences, who in turn have a better chance of cure than those with distant metastases. Patients who initially have well-differentiated tumors or who develop recurrent cancer more than 3 years after the primary therapy also tend to have an improved prognosis.
# Chunk 1497
In a 1984 report on 379 patients with recurrent endometrial cancer seen at the Norwegian Radium Hospital from 1960 to 1976, site of recurrence was local or regional in 190 patients (50%), distant in 108 patients (28%), and local and distant in 81 patients (21%) (347). The median time of recurrence was 14 months for patients with local recurrences and 19 months for patients with distant metastases. Of all recurrences, 34% were detected within 1 year, and 76% were detected within 3 years of primary treatment. At the time of diagnosis of recurrence, 32% of patients had no symptoms. Vaginal bleeding was the most common symptom associated with local recurrence, and pelvic pain was most often present with pelvic recurrence. Hemoptysis was the initial symptom in 32% of patients with lung metastases, but 45% of cases of lung metastases were asymptomatic and picked up on routine chest x-ray. Only 9% of patients with metastases at other sites did not have symptoms; most had pain (37%) or other symptoms such as anorexia, nausea and vomiting, or ascites related to intra-abdominal carcinomatosis, neurologic symptoms such as seizures from brain metastases, or jaundice caused by liver metastases. Overall, only 29 (7.7%) of the 379 patients were alive without evidence of disease from 3 to 19 years. This included 22 patients (12%) with local or pelvic recurrence, 5 patients (5%) with distant metastases, and 2 patients (2%) with both local and distant recurrences. The best results were obtained in the 42 patients with vaginal vault recurrences who were treated with radiotherapy, resulting in a 24% survival rate. None of the 78 patients with pelvic soft tissue recurrence survived. Three patients (7%) with only lung metastases treated with progestins, two patients with lymph node metastases treated with combined radiotherapy and progestins, and two patients with local recurrence and lung metastases treated with radiotherapy, surgery, and progestins survived.
# Chunk 1498
Surgery A small subset of patients with isolated recurrent endometrial cancer may benefit from surgical intervention. A search for distant recurrences prior to treatment is obligatory as such patients are best treated with chemotherapy. In one small series, upper-abdominal disease was found at laparotomy in three(37.5%) of eightpatients with presumed localized pelvic recurrence. Presence of subclinical extrapelvic metastases was associated with larger pelvic tumor size (>2 cm) and elevated serum CA125 levels (348). As discussed in the next section, isolated vaginal recurrence in patients who have not received prior pelvic radiation is best treated with external radiation plus some type of brachytherapy.
# Chunk 1499
Treatment of patients with pelvic recurrence (generally located on the pelvic sidewall secondary to lymphatic failure) is more complex. Althoughthe study by Aalders et al. reviewed above showed no survivors in patients with pelvic recurrences, there is evidence that a multimodality approach consisting of radiotherapy followed by radical surgical resection and intraoperative radiotherapy (IORT) will cure some patients (347). A retrospective investigation at Mayo Clinic of 25 heavily pretreated patients with recurrent endometrial cancer demonstrated a survival of 71% in patients with complete surgical resection (349). Over 50% of these patients underwent radiation as primary therapy and one-half of those treated with radiationalso received chemotherapy or an attempt at surgical resection at the time of recurrence. Radical procedures performed at the time of IORT included resection of the pelvic sidewall en bloc with the obturator nerve, external iliac vein, psoas, iliacus, or obturator internus muscles, ureter, or boney ileum (Fig. 35.7). Seven patients required exenteration in combination with resection of the pelvic sidewall. Two patients with isolated para-aortic recurrences were alive and diseasefree at 54 and 71 months. Althoughsurvival in this cohort was impressive, the complication rate was similarly impressive at 64%. The most common complication was neuropathy; other complications included functional ureteral obstruction and fourpatients developed fistulas. Until more active agents are developed, radical multimodality treatment remains the only viable alternative for patients with pelvic recurrences. Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center reported on 36 patients with isolated central pelvic recurrence who underwent pelvic exenteration for recurrent endometrial carcinoma. Seventy-five percent died of their cancer within 1 year of operation, and 14% were alive after 5 years (349).
# Chunk 1500
Radiation Therapy Radiotherapy is the best treatment option for patients with isolated local or regional recurrences who are unable or unwilling to undergo radical pelvic resection (350–356). The best local control and subsequent cure are usually achieved by a combination of ERT followed by a brachytherapy boost to deliver a total tumor dose of at least 6,000 cGy. Women with low-volume disease limited to the pelvis have the best outcome. For patients with isolated vaginal recurrence treated with radiation, reported 5-year survival rates range from 24% to 45%. The reclamation rate was 81% in one multi-institutional series that was limited to stage I patients with isolated vaginal failures (357). Conversely, for those patients who undergo radiation for the pelvic extension of their disease, lower survival rates (0% to 26%) are reported. Factors associated with improved survival and control of pelvic disease in patients with locally recurrent endometrial cancer include initial endometrial cancer grade 1, younger age at recurrence, recurrent tumor size 2 cm or less, time from initial treatment to recurrence of more than 1 year, vaginal versus pelvic disease, and use of vaginal brachytherapy.
# Chunk 1501
Hormonal Therapy The use of progestational agents for treatment of metastatic endometrial cancer was first described in 1961 when researchers observed an objective response rate of 29% in 21 patients (358). In a report from 1974, a beneficial response was observed in 35% of 308 patients (359). Subsequent reports noted somewhat less optimistic response rates, probably as a result of more strictly applied criteria for objective responses (359–362) (Table 35.12). Reports from Roswell Park Cancer Center and the Mayo Clinic observed objective response rates of 16% and 11%, respectively, with an additional 15% to 40% of patients exhibiting stable disease for at least 3 months (358,363). In 1986, the GOG reported on the use of oral medroxyprogesterone acetate for treatment of patients with advanced or recurrent endometrial cancer (361). Of 219 patients with measurable disease, 8% had a complete response, 6% had a partial response, 52% had stable disease, and 34% developed progressive disease within 1 month. The mean survival time for the entire group was 10.4 months. In a follow-up study comparing
# Chunk 1502
The response of metastatic endometrial carcinoma to progestin therapy is related to several clinical and pathologic factors. Higher response rates are observed in well-differentiated tumors. A 20.5% response in low-grade tumors and only 1.4% response in high-grade tumors are noted (360). Likewise, the probability of an objective response to progestin therapy is about 70% for tumors that are estrogen-and progesterone-receptor positive, compared with about 5% to 15% for tumors that are negative for both receptors. A longer disease-free interval is associated with higher response rates to progestins. The response rate to progestinsranged from 6% in patients with an interval from primary treatment to recurrence of less than 6 months to 65% in patients in whom disease recurred more than 5 years after initial treatment (359). Other observed but less well-documented factors that may have an adverse effect on response to progestins are disease recurrence within a prior radiation field, large tumor burden, and advanced primary versus recurrent disease (360, 363).
# Chunk 1503
Progestins are recommended as initial treatment for all patients with recurrent endometrioid tumors with hormone receptor–positive tumors. Radiation therapy, surgery, or both should be used whenever feasible for treatment of localized recurrent cancer such as vaginal, pelvic, bone, and peripheral lymph node disease; however, these patients should also be given longterm progestin therapy unless they are known to have a progesterone-receptor–negative tumor. Patients with nonlocalized recurrent tumors, especially if progesterone receptors are known to be positive, are candidates for progestin therapy, either megestrol acetate, 80 mg twice daily, or medroxyprogesterone acetate, 50 to 100 mg three times daily. Progestin therapy should be continued for at least 2 to 3 months before assessing response. If a response is obtained, the progestin should be continued for as long as the disease is static or in remission. In the presence of a relative contraindication to high-dose progestin therapy (e.g., prior or current thromboembolic disease, severe heart disease, or inability of the patient to tolerate progestin therapy), tamoxifen, 20 mg twice daily, is recommended. Failure to respond to hormonal therapy is an indication for initiating chemotherapy.
# Chunk 1504
Treatment Results Comprehensive survival data for endometrial cancer are provided by the FIGO (391). Survival in relation to the old clinical and surgical stage is shown in Table 35.13 and in relation to surgical stage and grade in Table 35.14. The overall 5-year survival rate was 76%. Patients who underwent surgical staging had much better 5-year survival rates than those staged clinically across all stages (respectively): stage I, 87% versus 54%; stage II, 76% versus 41%; stage III, 57% versus 23%; stage IV, 18% versus 12%. Survival in surgical stage I disease ranged from more than 90% for patients with grade 1 and 2 tumors without myometrial invasion to 63% for stage IB grade 3.
# Chunk 1505
History and physical examination remain the most effective methods of follow-up in patients treated for endometrial cancer (392–394). Patients should be examined every 3 to 4 months during the first 2 years and every 6 months thereafter. About one-half of patients discovered to have recurrent cancer have symptoms, and 75% to 80% of recurrences are detected initially on physical examination. Particular attention should be given to peripheral lymph nodes, the abdomen, and the pelvis. Very few asymptomatic recurrences are detected by vaginal cytology.
# Chunk 1506
Uterine sarcomas are relatively rare tumors of mesodermal origin. They constitute 2% to 6% of uterine malignancies (403–405). There is an increased incidence of uterine sarcomas after radiation therapy to the pelvis for either carcinoma of the cervix or a benign condition. The relative risk of uterine sarcoma after pelvic radiotherapy is estimated to be 5.38, with an interval of 10 to 20 years (405). Uterine sarcomas are, in general, the most malignant group of uterine tumors and differ from endometrial cancers with regard to diagnosis, clinical behavior, pattern of spread, and management.
# Chunk 1507
Staging Staging of uterine sarcomas is based on the FIGO system (Table 35.16).

Stromal tumors occur primarily in perimenopausal women between ages 45 and 50 years; about one-third occurs in postmenopausal women. There is no relationship to parity, associated diseases, or prior pelvic radiotherapy. These tumors are rare in African-American women. The most frequent symptom is abnormal uterine bleeding; abdominal pain and pressure caused by an enlarging pelvic mass occur less often, and some patients do not have symptoms. Pelvic examination usually reveals regular or irregular uterine enlargement, sometimes associated with rubbery parametrial induration. The diagnosis may be determined by endometrial biopsy, but the usual preoperative diagnosis is uterine leiomyoma. At surgery, the diagnosis is suggested by the presence of an enlarged uterus filled with soft, gray-white to yellow necrotic and hemorrhagic tumors with bulging surfaces associated with wormlike elastic extensions into the pelvic veins.
# Chunk 1508
Endometrial stromal sarcoma extends beyond the uterus in 40% of cases at the time of diagnosis, but the extrauterine spread is confined to the pelvis in two-thirds of the cases. Upper-abdominal, pulmonary, and lymph node metastases are uncommon. Recurrence occurs in almost one-half of cases at an average interval of 5 years after initial therapy. Prolonged survival and cure are common even after the development of recurrent or metastatic disease.
# Chunk 1509
Optimum initial therapy for patients with endometrial stromal sarcoma consists of surgical excision of all grossly detectable tumor. Total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy should be performed. The adnexa should always be removed because of the propensity for tumor extension into the parametria, broad ligaments, and adnexal structures, and the possible estrogen-stimulating effect on the tumor cells if ovaries are retained. A beneficial effect of radiation therapy is reported, and pelvic radiation is recommended for
# Chunk 1510
Stage III Tumor invades abdominal tissues (not just protruding into the abdomen). IIIA One site IIIB > one site IIIC Metastasis to pelvic and/or para-aortic lymph nodes
# Chunk 1511
Stage II Tumor extends to the pelvis

IIB Tumor extends to extrauterine pelvic tissue

Stage III Tumor invades abdominal tissues (not just protruding into the abdomen). IIIA One site IIIB > one site IIIC Metastasis to pelvic and/or para-aortic lymph nodes
# Chunk 1512
High-grade ESS or undifferentiated endometrial sarcoma is a highly malignant neoplasm. Histologically, it exhibits greater than 10 MF/10 HPF and often completely lacks recognizable stromal differentiation. This tumor has a much more aggressive clinical course and poorer prognosis than endometrial stromal sarcoma (406,408,413–416). The 5-year disease-free survival is about 25%. Treatment of undifferentiated endometrial sarcoma should consist of total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy. The poor therapeutic results suggest that radiation therapy, chemotherapy, or both should be used in combination with surgery. These tumors, unlike endometrial stromal sarcoma, are not responsive to progestin therapy.
# Chunk 1513
Leiomyosarcoma The median age for women with leiomyosarcoma (43 to 53 years) is somewhat lower than for other uterine sarcomas, and premenopausal patients have a better chance of survival. This malignancy has no relationship with parity, and the incidence of associated diseases is not as high as in carcinosarcoma or endometrial adenocarcinoma. AfricanAmerican women have a higher incidence and a poorer prognosis than women of other races. A history of prior pelvic radiation therapy can be elicited in about 4% of patients with leiomyosarcoma. The incidence of sarcomatous change in benign uterine leiomyomas is reported to be between 0.13% and 0.81% (419–429).
# Chunk 1514
Presenting symptoms, which are of short duration (mean, 6 months) and not specific to the disease, include vaginal bleeding, pelvic pain or pressure, and awareness of an abdominopelvic mass. The principal physical finding is the presence of a pelvic mass. The diagnosis should be suspected if severe pelvic pain accompanies a pelvic tumor, especially in a postmenopausal woman. Endometrial biopsy, although not as useful as in other sarcomas, may establish the diagnosis in as many as one-third of cases when the lesion is submucosal.
# Chunk 1515
Gordana Stevanovic, MD, and Jianyu Rao, MD, Department of Pathology, UCLA.) out from a myomatous uterus into the parametria toward the pelvic sidewalls. It may be confused with low-grade stromal sarcoma. Symptoms are related to the associated uterine myomas. Most patients are in the late fifth and early sixth decades of life. The prognosis is excellent, even when tumor is left in pelvic vessels. Late local recurrences can occur, and deaths from extension into the inferior vena cava or metastases to the heart were reported. Estrogen may stimulate the proliferation of these intravascular tumors. Treatment should be total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy with removal of as much of the tumor as possible.
# Chunk 1516
Disseminated peritoneal leiomyomatosis is a rare clinical entity characterized by benign smooth muscle nodules scattered throughout the peritoneal cavity (440). This condition probably arises as a result of metaplasia of subperitoneal mesenchymal stem cells to smooth muscle, fibroblasts, myofibroblasts, and decidual cells under the inﬂuence of estrogen and progesterone. Most reported cases occurred in 30-to 40-year-old women who are or who recently were pregnant or who have a long history of oral contraceptive use. Intriguing features of this disease are its grossly malignant appearance, benign histology, and favorable clinical outcome. Intraoperative diagnosis requires frozen-section examination. Extirpative surgery, including total abdominal hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, omentectomy, and excision of as much gross disease as possible, may be indicated in menopausal women. Removal of the source of excess estrogen, treatment with progestins, or both resulted in regression of unresected tumor masses. Almost all patients have a good prognosis.
# Chunk 1517
Almost all of these tumors occur after menopause, at a median age of 62 years. The incidence is higher in AfricanAmerican women. These tumors are often found in association with other medical conditions, such as obesity, diabetes mellitus, and hypertension. A history of previous pelvic radiation can be obtained in 7% to 37% of patients.
# Chunk 1518
The most frequent presenting symptom is postmenopausal bleeding, which occurs in 80% to 90% of cases. Other less common symptoms are vaginal discharge, abdominal or pelvic pain, weight loss, and passage of tissue from the vagina. The duration of symptoms usually is only a few months. On physical examination, uterine enlargement is present in 50% to 95% of patients, and a polypoid mass may be seen within or protruding from the endocervical canal in up to 50% of patients. Diagnosis can usually be determined by biopsy of an endocervical mass or endometrial curettage.
# Chunk 1519
Disease extends outside the uterus in 40% to 60% of cases at the time of diagnosis, indicating the highly malignant nature of this lesion. Even when disease is believed to be confined to the uterus preoperatively, surgical and pathologic staging identifies extrauterine spread of disease in a significant number of cases. In one study, 55% of women with clinical stage I carcinosarcoma had a higher surgical–pathologic stage. Only 28% of tumors were actually confined to the uterine corpus, 16% had extension to the cervix, and 56% showed extrauterine spread (447). In a significant number of patients, lymph node metastases and positive peritoneal cytology werefound with early-stage carcinosarcoma (446,448,449). Deep myometrial invasion, which is present in about one-half of stage I cases, is associated with poor prognosis. Almost all patients in whom tumor involves the outer one-half of the myometrium die from the disease. Patients who die from carcinosarcoma tend to have larger tumors and a higher incidence of LVSI. Patients with a history of prior pelvic radiation have a poorer prognosis. Overall, the 5-year survival rate for patients with carcinosarcoma is about 20% to 30%.
# Chunk 1520
Adenosarcoma is an uncommon variant of carcinosarcoma (450,451). It consists of an admixture of benign-appearing neoplastic glands and a sarcomatous stroma. Most patients present with postmenopausal vaginal bleeding, and the disease is diagnosed or suspected based on endometrial curettage. Most adenosarcomas are well circumscribed and limited to the endometrium or superficial myometrium. The treatment is hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, with or without adjuvant radiotherapy. Because recurrences, mostly in the form of local pelvic or vaginal disease, are reported in 40% to 50% of cases, adjuvant postoperative intravaginal or pelvic radiation is recommended.
# Chunk 1521
Surgery The first step in the treatment of early uterine sarcoma should be exploration. Because extirpative survey is the most important aspect of treatment, and knowledge of the extent and spread of the disease is important for further management, one should not forgo or delay surgery by using radiation therapy or chemotherapy first. At the time of surgery, the peritoneal cavity should be carefully explored and peritoneal washings obtained. Special attention should be given to the pelvic and para-aortic lymph nodes; lymphadenectomy should be performed with ESS and carcinosarcoma, but may be omitted in leiomyosarcoma, in which the risk of lymph node metastases is low and the therapeutic and diagnostic value is questionable (428). Total abdominal hysterectomy is the standard procedure, and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy should be performed in all patients except premenopausal women with leiomyosarcoma. Based on the surgical and pathologic findings, additional therapy with radiation therapy or chemotherapy can be planned. Rarely, a patient may be cured by excision of an isolated pulmonary metastasis (455,456).
# Chunk 1522
The initiating event in cervical dysplasia and carcinogenesis is infection with HPV. HPV infection was detected in up to 99% of women with squamous cervical carcinoma. HPV is the causative agent in both squamous and adenocarcinoma of the cervix, but the respective tumors may have different carcinogenic pathways (7). There are more than 100 different types of HPV, more than 30 of which can affect the lower genital tract. There are 14 high-risk HPV subtypes; two of the high-risk subtypes, 16 and 18, are found in up to 62% of cervical carcinomas. The mechanism by which HPV affects cellular growth and differentiation is through the interaction of viral E6 and E7 proteins with tumor suppressor genes p53 and Rb, respectively. Inhibition of p53 prevents cell cycle arrest and cellular apoptosis, which normally occurs when damaged DNA is present, whereas inhibition of Rb disrupts transcription factor E2F, resulting in unregulated cellular proliferation (8). Both steps are essential for the malignant transformation of cervical epithelial cells. Two HPV vaccines, the quadrivalent Gardasil and the bivalent Cervarix, are approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and protect against subtypes 16 and 18. After 3 years, the efficacy of Gardasil was 99% for preventing cervical intraepithelial neoplasia grades 2 and 3 caused by HPV 16 or 18 in females who were not previously infected with either HPV 16 or 18 before vaccination; however, efficacy was only 44% in those who were infected prior to vaccination (9). Because the quadrivalent and bivalent HPV vaccines both protect only against certain types of HPV, vaccinated women need to continue to receive Pap test screening according to guidelines.
# Chunk 1523
Various investigators used lymphangiography, computed tomography (CT), ultrasonography, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and positron emission tomography (PET) in an attempt to improve the accuracy of clinical staging (15–25). These modalities suffer from poor sensitivity and high false-negative rates. Evaluation of the para-aortic lymph nodes with lymphangiography is associated with a false-positive rate of 20% to 40% and a false-negative rate of 10% to 20% (15–17). Overall, lymphangiography has a sensitivity of 79% and specificity of 73% (20). CT has poor sensitivity (34%) but excellent specificity (97%) (21). The accuracy of CT scanning is 80% to 85%; the false-negative rate is 10% to 15%, and the false-positive rate is 20% to 25% (16–18). Ultrasound has a high false-negative rate (30%), low sensitivity (19%), but high specificity (99%) (19). Early data showed that MRI results were comparable to those of CT scanning, a finding confirmed on meta-analysis (21,22). However, a systematic review comparing CT scan with MRI showed that MRI is significantly more sensitive with
# Chunk 1524
PET scans are increasingly being utilized either alone or in conjunction with CT or MRI to detect metastatic disease; however, large prospective data series are limited. Early studies suggest that PET may be more useful than other techniques for the detection of abdominal and extrapelvic disease, with comparable or better sensitivity (76% to 100%) and specificity (94%) (24,25). In addition, PET scans may be better predictors of treatment outcome. Although early studies show promise for the use of PET scans in evaluating cervical cancer, the sensitivity for detecting metastatic disease less than 1 cm in size appears to be limited (26).
# Chunk 1525
carcinoma should be reserved for lesions resembling oat cell carcinoma of the lung. Small cell anaplastic carcinoma infiltrates diffusely and consists of tumor cells that have scanty cytoplasm, round to oval small nuclei, coarsely granular chromatin, and high mitotic activity. The nucleoli are absent or small. Immunohistochemistry or electron microscopy can differentiate the small cell neuroendocrine tumors. Patients with the large cell type of carcinoma, with or without keratinization, have a better prognosis than those with the small cell variant. Small cell anaplastic carcinomas behave more aggressively than poorly differentiated squamous carcinomas that contain small cells. Infiltration of parametrial tissue and pelvic lymph node metastasis affect the prognosis.
# Chunk 1526
Adenocarcinoma in situ (AIS) is believed to be the precursor of invasive adenocarcinoma, and it is not surprising that the two often coexist (32). In addition to AIS, intraepithelial or invasive squamous neoplasia occurs in 30% to 50% of cervical adenocarcinomas (33). A squamous intraepithelial lesion may be observed colposcopically on the ectocervix, and the coexistent adenocarcinoma often is higher in the cervical canal.
# Chunk 1527
Patients with AIS who are treated with conization should undergo close clinical follow-up.

Endocervical curettage, often used in surveillance, may miss residual or invasive disease, and false-negative rates as high as 50% were reported (34). In addition, skip lesions not resected at the time of conization may be present. For these reasons, hysterectomy should be considered the standard therapy for patients who have completed their childbearing. In two reports, patients with negative cone biopsy margins were followed conservatively, with few requiring repeat surgical procedures (35,36). Because cervical AIS tends to affect women during their reproductive years, a thorough discussion of risks and benefits should take place, and treatment should be individualized.
# Chunk 1528
Adenocarcinoma of the cervix is managed in the same manner used for squamous cell carcinoma. Adenocarcinoma was believed to be associated with a worse prognosis and outcome when compared with squamous cell carcinoma. A study of 203 women with adenocarcinoma and 756 women with squamous carcinoma supported this assertion (30). This study showed 5-year survival rates of 90% versus 60%, 62% versus 47%, and 36% versus 8% for stages I, II, and III, respectively. Although some attributed these rates to a relative resistance to radiation, they are more likely a reﬂection of the tendency of adenocarcinomas to grow endophytically and to be undetected until a large volume of tumor is present. When adjusted for tumor size, it appears that there is no difference in prognosis between the two histologic subtypes. Adenocarcinoma may be detected by cervical sampling, but less reliably so than squamous carcinomas. A definitive diagnosis may require cervical conization.
# Chunk 1529
In mature adenosquamous carcinomas, the glandular and squamous carcinomas are readily identified on routine histologic evaluation and do not cause diagnostic problems. In poorly differentiated or immature adenosquamous carcinomas, however, glandular differentiation can be appreciated only with special stains, such as mucicarmine and PAS. In one study, 30% of squamous cell carcinomas demonstrated mucin secretion when stained with mucicarmine (47). These squamous cell carcinomas with mucin secretion have a higher incidence of pelvic lymph node metastases than do squamous cell carcinomas without mucin secretion, and they are similar to the signet-ring variant of adenosquamous carcinoma (47,50).
# Chunk 1530
If radiation therapy is needed, transposing the ovaries out of the planned radiation field may preserve ovarian function. Although transposition provides some protection, studies suggest that normal ovarian function is preserved in fewer than 50% of patients (63,64). Metastasis to the ovaries occurs in 0.9% of cases of early stage cervical cancer, so preservation of the ovaries, particularly with adenocarcinoma, may confer a small recurrence risk (65).
# Chunk 1531
Figure 36.6 Abdominal radical trachelectomy.

lymphadenectomy is not recommended. If lymph–vascular space invasion is found, a modified radical hysterectomy with pelvic lymphadenectomy is appropriate and effective therapy.
# Chunk 1532
Radical Trachelectomy Radical trachelectomy is a procedure that is gaining popularity as a surgical management option for women with stage 1A2 and IB1 disease who desire uterine preservation and fertility. This procedure may be performed vaginally, abdominally, laparoscopically, or robotically (Fig. 36.6), and it usually is accompanied by pelvic lymphadenectomy and cervical cerclage placement. The risk of positive pelvic lymph nodes with stage Ia2 cancer may be as high as 8%, indicating the need for lymphadenectomy. Lymphadenectomy may be performed laparoscopically, robotically, or by the open laparotomy technique. Experience with this therapeutic modality is limited, although early results are promising, and it is uncertain whether the long-term outcome is similar to that of traditional therapy. Patients who are ideal candidates for this procedure have tumors less than 2 cm in diameter and have negative lymph nodes. Lymphadenectomy can be performed at the beginning of the procedure, and depending on those results, the procedure can be continued or abandoned. A retrospective trial comparing patients who had tumors with these attributes and were treated with either laparoscopic radical hysterectomy or laparoscopic radical trachelectomy showed similar outcomes and recurrence (69). There are limited data on subsequent pregnancy outcomes after radical trachelectomy; however, successful outcomes were reported. A study found that for women attempting to conceive after radical trachelectomy, the 5-year cumulative pregnancy rate was 52.8%, with an increased risk of miscarriage (70). Although radical trachelectomy and lymphadenectomy are performed with curative intent, it should be remembered that if a recurrence develops, definitive therapy with surgery or radiation is necessary.
# Chunk 1533
Pelvic Lymphadenectomy The pelvic lymphadenectomy is begun by opening the round ligaments at the pelvic sidewall and developing the paravesical and pararectal spaces. The ureter is elevated on the medial ﬂap by a Deaver retractor to expose the common iliac artery. The common iliac and external iliac nodes are dissected, with care taken to avoid injuring the genitofemoral nerve, which lies laterally on the psoas muscle. At the bifurcation of the common iliac artery, the external iliac node chain is divided into lateral and medial portions.
# Chunk 1534
Para-aortic Lymph Node Evaluation The bowel is packed to expose the peritoneum overlying the bifurcation of the aorta. The peritoneum is incised medial to the ureter and over the right common iliac artery. A retractor is placed retroperitoneally to expose the aorta and the vena cava. Any enlarged para-aortic lymph nodes are removed, hemoclips are applied for hemostasis, and specimens are sent for analysis by frozen section. If the lymph nodes are positive for metastatic cancer, an option is to discontinue the operation and treat the patient with radiation therapy (71). If the lymph nodes are negative for disease, the left side of the aorta is palpated through the peritoneal incision with a finger passed under the inferior mesenteric artery. The lymph nodes on this side of the aorta are more lateral and nearly behind the aorta and the common iliac artery. If the left para-aortic lymph nodes appear healthy and the cervical tumor is small with no suspicious pelvic lymph nodes, these additional lymph nodes are not submitted for frozen-section analysis. If they are removed, they may be dissected through the incision made for the right para-aortic nodes, or they may be dissected after reﬂection of the sigmoid colon medially.
# Chunk 1535
Chronic Complications The most common chronic effect of radical hysterectomy is bladder hypotonia or, in extreme instances, atony. This condition occurs in about 3% of patients, regardless of the method of bladder drainage used (76,77). It may be a result of bladder denervation and not simply a problem associated with bladder overdistention (78). Voiding every 4 to 6 hours, increasing intra-abdominal pressure with Cred´e’s maneuver, and intermittent selfcatheterization may be used to manage bladder hypotonia.
# Chunk 1536
Laparoscopic-assisted radical vaginal hysterectomy is being performed with increasing frequency in highly selected patients. In one large series of 200 women with stages IA1 to IIB cervical cancer treated with laparoscopic lymphadenectomy followed by radical vaginal hysterectomy, the authors found a 5-year survival rate comparable to patients treated with a similar abdominal approach and a comparable rate of intraoperative complications (81).
# Chunk 1537
Although data utilizing sentinel lymph node detection techniques in cervical cancer are limited, several interesting conclusions can be drawn from completed studies. Sentinel nodes can be detected in 80% to 100% of cervical cancer patients, and these rates were confirmed by both laparotomy and laparoscopy. A combination of dye and radiolabeled techniques appears to be superior for the detection of sentinel lymph nodes over either technique used alone. Test sensitivity of 65% to 87% can be expected with a 90% to 97% negative predictive value. The likelihood of detecting sentinel nodes may depend on the tumor volume, the time from injection to retrieval of the sentinel nodes, and the volume of dye or radiolabeled tracer injected. Sentinel node detection rates do not appear to be inﬂuenced by prior cold knife cone biopsy. False-negative results were reported. The role of sentinel node detection in cervix cancer is investigational; although the technique is promising, complete lymphadenectomy, when indicated, remains the standard of care (84).
# Chunk 1538
Patients treated with radical hysterectomy who have intermediate or high risk factors have a 30% and 40% risk, respectively, of recurrence within 3 years (100–102).
# Chunk 1539
Depth of Invasion Patients in whom depth of invasion is less than 1 cm have a 5-year survival rate of approximately 90%, but the survival rate falls to 63% to 78% if the depth of invasion is more than 1 cm (76,98,102–105).
# Chunk 1540
Parametrial Spread Patients with spread to the parametrium have a 5-year survival rate of 69%, compared with 95% when the parametrium is negative. When the parametrium is involved and pelvic lymph nodes are positive, the 5-year survival rate falls to 39% to 42% (90,106).
# Chunk 1541
Lymph–Vascular Space Involvement The significance of finding lymph–vascular space involvement is somewhat controversial. Several reports show a 50% to 70% 5-year survival rate when lymph–vascular space invasion is present and a 90% 5-year survival rate when invasion is absent (76,89,93,107,108). Others found no significant difference in survival if the study is controlled for other risk factors (98,99,109–112). Lymph–vascular space involvement may be a predictor of lymph node metastasis and not an independent predictor of survival.
# Chunk 1542
Lymph Nodes The variable that is most independently predictive of survival is the status of the lymph nodes. Patients with negative nodes have an 85% to 90% 5-year survival rate, whereas the survival rate for those with positive nodes ranges from 20% to 74%, depending on the number of nodes involved and the location and size of the metastases (94–96,99,102,105,111–113).
# Chunk 1543
Data on lymph node status is summarized as follows: 1.

When the common iliac lymph nodes are positive, the 5-year survival rate is about 25%, compared with about 65% when only the pelvic lymph nodes are involved (106,114,115).
# Chunk 1544
2.

Bilateral positive pelvic lymph nodes portend a less favorable prognosis (22% to 40% survival rate) than unilateral positive pelvic nodes (59% to 70%) (114,115).
# Chunk 1545
3.

The presence of more than three positive pelvic lymph nodes is accompanied by a 68% recurrence rate, compared with 30% to 50% when three or fewer lymph nodes are positive (94,112).
# Chunk 1546
4.

Patients in whom tumor emboli are the only findings in the pelvic lymph node have an 82.5% 5-year survival rate, whereas the survival rate is 62.1% and 54% with microscopic invasion and macroscopic disease, respectively (84).
# Chunk 1547
Table 36.5 Comparison of Surgery versus Radiation for Stage IB/IIA Cancer of the Cervix to treat the pelvic lymph nodes. Larger lesions require external radiotherapy first to shrink the tumor and to reduce the anatomic distortion caused by the cancer. Such a treatment strategy enables the therapist to achieve intracavitary dosimetry. The usual doses delivered are 7,000 to 8,000 cGy to point A (defined as 2 cm superior to the external cervical os and 2 cm lateral to the internal uterine canal) and 6,000 cGy to point B (defined as 3 cm lateral to point A), limiting the bladder and rectal dosage to less than 6,000 cGy. To achieve this level, it is necessary to adequately pack the bladder and bowel away from the intracavitary source. Localization films and careful calculation of dosimetry are mandatory to optimize the dose of radiation and to reduce the incidence of bowel and bladder complications. Local control depends on delivering an adequate dose to the tumor from the intracavitary source.
# Chunk 1548
As noted, clinical staging is imprecise and fails to accurately predict disease extension to the para-aortic nodes in 7% of patients with stage IB, 18% with stage IIB, and 28% with stage III disease (119). Such patients will have “geographic” treatment failures if standard pelvic radiotherapy ports are used. As a result, treatment plans for these patients are individualized based on CT scans, PET scans, and biopsies of the para-aortic lymph nodes for consideration of extended-field radiotherapy. The routine use of extended-field radiation for prophylactic para-aortic radiation without documentation of distant metastasis to the para-aortic nodes was evaluated and is not practiced because of the increased enteric morbidity associated with this treatment modality.
# Chunk 1549
A method of providing external beam therapy, known as intensity modulated radiation therapy (IMRT), may be a significant therapeutic development. This technique uses computer-generated algorithms that accurately distinguish between target treatment volumes and normal tissue. The radiation beam intensity is modulated to optimize the delivery of radiation to the specified treatment volume while sparing adjacent normal tissue. The result appears to be much more accurate treatment of the tumor with minimal toxicity. Emphasizing this point is a study in 40 gynecologic cancer patients in which IMRT was used. Excellent coverage of the planned treatment volume was obtained, with no patient suffering grade 3 toxicity, and only 60% of patients suffering grade 2 toxicity, compared with a historical rate of 90% toxicity with conventional techniques (120). This technique is especially promising for treating cervical cancer because it allows higher doses to be delivered much more precisely, allowing patients who are unable to undergo brachytherapy because of pelvic anatomy and tumor geometry a chance for curative therapy. Studies utilizing IMRT in treating patients with cervical cancer are limited, but experience with this technique is increasing. Initial papers comparing the two techniques report decreased toxicity with comparable locoregional control, but they do not have long-term data on 5-year survival rates, so this technique is yet to be validated (121).
# Chunk 1550
Adjuvant Radiation In an effort to improve survival rates, postoperative radiotherapy was recommended for patients with high and intermediate risk factors such as metastasis to pelvic lymph nodes, invasion of paracervical tissue, deep cervical invasion, or positive surgical margins (76,86,89,90,106,111,112,122). Although most authors agree that postoperative radiotherapy is necessary in the presence of positive surgical margins, the use of radiation in patients with other high risk factors is controversial. Increasing evidence supports the use of adjuvant radiation. Particularly controversial, but best studied, is the use of radiation in the presence of positive pelvic lymph nodes. The rationale for treatment is the knowledge that pelvic lymphadenectomy does not remove all of the nodal and lymphatic tissue and subsequent radiotherapy can eradicate microscopic disease. The hesitancy to recommend postoperative radiotherapy derives from the significant rate of postradiation bowel and urinary tract complications (123). Most of the available data are retrospective. However, a randomized study by the GOG comparing radiation with no further treatment for patients at high risk for recurrence with negative pelvic nodes revealed a 30% serious complication rate, 16% reoperation rate, and a 2% mortality rate as a result of treatment-related complications (124).
# Chunk 1551
Based on retrospective studies, it appears that postoperative radiation therapy for positive pelvic nodes can decrease pelvic recurrence but does not improve 5-year actuarial survival rates. One multi-institutional study showed no difference in survival in patients with three or fewer positive pelvic nodes (59% versus 60%) (112). However, there seemed to be a benefit when radiotherapy was given to those with more than three positive nodes.
# Chunk 1552
In a study of 60 pairs of irradiated and nonirradiated women matched for age, lesion size, number, and location of positive nodes after radical hysterectomy, no significant difference was found in projected 5-year survival rates (72% for surgery alone, 64% for surgery plus radiation) (125). The proportion of recurrences confined to the pelvis was 67% in patients treated with surgery only and 27% in patients treated with postoperative radiation (p = 0.03). In a Cox regression analysis of 320 women who underwent radical hysterectomy, for the 72 who received postoperative radiation, there was a significant decrease in pelvic recurrence but no survival benefit (95). A multi-institutional retrospective study was performed on 185 women with positive pelvic nodes after radical hysterectomy, including 103 who received postoperative radiotherapy (97). Multivariate analysis disclosed that radiotherapy was not an independent predictor of survival, whereas age, lesion diameter, and number of positive nodes did inﬂuence survival. These authors concluded that additional treatment is needed to improve survival rates. Because survival is limited by distant recurrence, the addition of chemotherapy to postoperative radiotherapy was proposed. A 75% disease-free survival rate was reported at 3 years in 40 high-risk patients given cisplatin, vinblastine, and bleomycin after radical hysterectomy, and a 46% disease-free survival rate was found in 79 comparable patients who refused treatment (126). Only 4 (11.8%) of 34 patients with positive pelvic nodes had recurrences, whereas disease recurred in 8 (33%) of 24 untreated patients with positive nodes. An 82% rate of disease-free survival was reported at 2 years among 32 patients who were treated postoperatively with radiation therapy plus cisplatin and bleomycin (127).
# Chunk 1553
The location of lymph node metastases apparently is relevant to postirradiation recurrence rates. When common iliac lymph nodes are involved, the survival rate drops to 20%. As the number of positive pelvic nodes increases, the percentage of positive common iliac and low paraaortic nodes increases (i.e., 0.6% when pelvic lymph nodes are negative, 6.3% with one positive pelvic node, 21.4% with two or three positive nodes, and 73.3% with four or more positive nodes). This information was used to recommend extended-field radiotherapy to patients with positive pelvic lymph nodes in an attempt to treat undetected extrapelvic nodal disease (107). A 3-year disease-free survival rate of 85% occurred in patients with positive pelvic nodes, and a survival rate of 51% occurred in patients with positive common iliac nodes; these rates are better than the survival rates of 50% and 23%, respectively, for historical control groups receiving radiotherapy to the pelvis alone.
# Chunk 1554
A third GOG trial evaluated patients with stage IB to IVA cervical cancer. Of the patients enrolled in this study, 70% had stage IB or IIA disease (131). A total of 403 patients were enrolled and evaluated. The 5-year survival rates were 73% in patients treated with chemoradiation and 58% in patients treated with radiation therapy alone. The cumulative rates of disease-free survival at 5 years were 67% in patients treated with concurrent chemoradiation and 40% in patients treated with radiation therapy alone. Survival and progression-free intervals for patients receiving concurrent chemoradiation were significantly improved (131). The results of this study suggested that chemoradiation is the treatment of choice for stage IIB to IVA disease and that those patients with stage IB2 and IIA disease may benefit from chemoradiation.
# Chunk 1555
A GOG study of chemoradiation comparing concurrent cisplatin and radiation with radiation alone in patients with bulky IB cervical cancer included adjuvant hysterectomy after completion of the radiation (132). There were 183 patients assigned to the concurrent chemotherapy and radiation arm and 186 patients treated with radiation alone. The median duration of follow-up was 36 months, with disease recurrence detected in 37% of the patients treated with radiation alone, compared with 21% who were treated with concurrent chemoradiation (132). The 3-year survival rates were 83% in the group who received concurrent chemoradiation and 74% in the group who received radiation alone (132). The study also included adjuvant hysterectomy after completion of radiation treatment. Because the results did not show an improvement in survival by using adjuvant hysterectomy, the authors concluded that adjuvant hysterectomy would not be part of their recommendations. This study supports the results of previous studies and shows that patients with bulky stage IB and IIA cervical cancer treated with concurrent chemoradiation have survival rates superior to those treated with radiation alone. These two studies indicate that patients with bulky stage IB and IIA disease should have primary treatment consisting of chemoradiation, with the chemotherapy agent being weekly cisplatin.
# Chunk 1556
Surgical staging procedures designed to discover positive lymph nodes may be forgone with use of PET/CT imaging studies. The use of transperitoneal exploration was associated with a 16% to 33% mortality rate from radiotherapy-induced bowel complications and a 5-year survival rate of only 9% to 12% (133,134). To avoid these complications, extraperitoneal dissection of the para-aortic nodes is recommended, and the radiation dose should be reduced to 5,000 cGy or less (135,136). When this approach is used, postradiotherapy bowel complications occur in fewer than 5% of patients, and the 5-year survival rate is 15% to 26% in patients with positive para-aortic nodes (19,137,138). Survival appears to be related to the amount of disease in the para-aortic nodes and to the size of the primary tumor. In patients whose metastases to the para-aortic lymph nodes are microscopic and whose central tumor has not extended to the pelvic sidewall, the 5-year survival rate improves to 20% to 50% (139,140). Surgical staging techniques have improved to include laparoscopic assessment of the para-aortic and pelvic lymph nodes. Studies demonstrated benefit from surgical staging with improved survival and changes in treatment plans in 40% of patients (136,137). When PET/CT is compared with surgicopathological staging of para-aortic lymph nodes, some patients with histologically positive para-aortic lymph nodes are missed with surgicopathological staging (141).
# Chunk 1557
Management of Grossly Positive Para-aortic Lymph Nodes

The management of patients with macroscopic or grossly positive para-aortic lymph nodes discovered at the time of surgery or by imaging studies is controversial. It is likely that grossly positive nodes are beyond the ability of radiation therapy alone to sterilize. Therefore, to improve survival, additional therapy is required. In a representative study of the multiple reports in the literature, lymph node metastases were noted in 133 of 266 patients. Pelvic and para-aortic nodes were positive in 44 patients and positive para-aortic nodes were noted in only 2 patients. Five-and 10-year survival rates were similar for patients with macroscopically positive resectable nodes and microscopically positive nodes. Patients with unresectable nodal disease had a worse survival rate than those with resectable disease. All patients underwent extraperitoneal lymph node resections and subsequent radiotherapy. There was a 10% incidence of severe morbidity related to radiation use. Consistent with other reports in the literature, this study showed that extraperitoneal debulking lymphadenectomy confers a survival advantage similar to that enjoyed by patients with micrometastatic disease without additional morbidity (27).
# Chunk 1558
Although not standard practice, the performance of a supraclavicular lymph node biopsy was advocated in patients with positive para-aortic lymph nodes before the initiation of extended-field irradiation and in patients with a central recurrence before exploration for possible exenteration. The incidence of metastatic disease in the supraclavicular lymph nodes in patients with positive para-aortic lymph nodes is 5% to 30% (144). Node enlargement and increased metabolic activity can be assessed with chest PET/CT scanning. Cytologic assessment by FNA can obviate the need for an excisional biopsy and should be performed if any enlarged nodes are present. If the scalene lymph nodes are positive, chemotherapy should be considered.
# Chunk 1559
Complications of Radiation Therapy

Perforation of the uterus may occur with the insertion of the uterine tandem. This is particularly a problem for elderly patients and those who had a previous diagnostic conization procedure. When perforation is recognized, the tandem should be removed, and the patient should be observed for bleeding or signs of peritonitis. Survival may be decreased in patients who have uterine perforation, possibly because these patients have more extensive uterine disease (145). Fever may occur after insertion of the uterine tandem and ovoids. Fever most often results from infection of the necrotic tumor and occurs 2 to 6 hours after insertion of the intracavitary system. If uterine perforation was excluded by ultrasonography, intravenous broad-spectrum antibiotic coverage, usually with a cephalosporin, should be administered. If the fever does not decrease promptly or if the temperature is higher than 38.5◦C, an aminoglycoside and a bacteroides species–specific antibiotic should administered. If fever persists or if the patient shows signs of septic shock or peritonitis, the intracavitary system must be removed. Antibiotics are continued until the patient recovers, and the intracavitary application is delayed for 1 to 2 weeks.
# Chunk 1560
Acute Morbidity The acute effects of radiotherapy are caused by ionizing radiation on the epithelium of the intestine and bladder and occur after administration of 2,000 to 3,000 cGy. Symptoms include diarrhea, abdominal cramps, nausea, frequent urination, and occasionally bleeding from the bladder or bowel mucosa. Bowel symptoms can be treated with a low-gluten, low-lactose, and low-protein diet. Antidiarrheal and antispasmodic agents may help. Bladder symptoms may be treated with antispasmodic medication. Severe symptoms may require a week of rest from radiotherapy.
# Chunk 1561
Chronic Morbidity The chronic effects of radiotherapy result from radiation-induced vasculitis and fibrosis and are more serious than the acute effects. These complications occur several months to years after radiotherapy is completed. The bowel and bladder fistula rate after pelvic radiation therapy for cervical cancer is 1.4% to 5.3%, respectively (59,61). Other serious toxicity (e.g., bowel bleeding, stricture, stenosis, or obstruction) occurs in 6.4% to 8.1% of patients (59,61).
# Chunk 1562
Small Bowel Complications Patients with previous abdominal surgery are more likely to have pelvic adhesions and thus sustain more radiotherapy complications in the small bowel. The terminal ileum may be particularly susceptible to chronic damage because of its relatively fixed position at the cecum. Patients with small bowel complications have a long history of crampy abdominal pain, intestinal rushes, and distention characteristic of partial small bowel obstruction. Often, low-grade fever and anemia accompany the symptoms. Patients who have no evidence of disease should be treated aggressively with total parenteral nutrition, nasogastric suction, and early surgical intervention after the anemia resolves and good nutritional status is attained. The type of procedure performed depends on individual circumstances (148). Small bowel fistulas that occur after radiotherapy rarely close spontaneously while total parenteral nutrition is maintained. Recurrent cancer should be excluded; aggressive ﬂuid replacement, nasogastric suction, and wound care should be instituted. Fistulography and a barium enema should be performed to exclude a combined large and small bowel fistula. The fistula-containing loop of bowel may be either resected or isolated and left in situ. In the latter case, the fistula will act as its own mucous fistula.
# Chunk 1563
Chemotherapy for Advanced Disease Chemotherapy was studied in advanced cervical cancer with mixed results. Single-agent chemotherapy was the standard for advanced or recurrent disease. Active agents include cisplatin, carboplatin, paclitaxel, and ifosfamide, but response rates are only 10% to 20% with a median duration of only 4 to 6 months. A number of trials were performed to determine whether multiagent chemotherapy is superior. The GOG Protocol 149 studied patients with histologically confirmed, advanced stage (IVb), recurrent or persistent squamous cell cancer of the cervix and randomized these patients to one of two combination chemotherapy treatment arms. Of the 287 patients, 146 patients were randomized to the cisplatin and ifosfamide arm, and 141 patients received cisplatin, ifosfamide, and bleomycin. There were no differences in overall survival, progression-free survival, response rates, or overall toxicity between the two combination chemotherapy regimens (149). In another trial sponsored by the GOG, single-agent cisplatin was compared to cisplatin plus either dibromodulcitol or ifosfamide plus mesna. In this trial, the combination of cisplatin plus ifosfamide had a better response rate (31% vs. 18%) and median time to progression (4.6 months vs. 3.2 months) compared with single agent cisplatin. Toxicity was notably higher in the combination regimen, and there was no overall survival advantage demonstrated (150). The GOG published the results of a study comparing single-agent cisplatin to cisplatin plus paclitaxel in women with stage IVb squamous cell cancer of the cervix. Although the response rate (36% vs. 19%) and progression-free survival (4.8 months vs. 2.8 months) were greater for the combination regimen, there was only a 1-month increase in overall survival (151). Finally, the regimen of methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin, and cisplatin (MVAC), which received considerable attention because of preliminary studies suggesting high response rates, was evaluated in POG Protocol 179. In this study,
# Chunk 1564
Stages IIB to IIIB Invasive Cancer Therapy for patients with stage IIB or greater cervical cancer traditionally was radiation therapy. Primary pelvic radiotherapy fails to control disease progression in 30% to 82% of patients with advanced cervical carcinoma (3). Two-thirds of these failures occur in the pelvis (158). A variety of agents were used in an attempt to increase the effectiveness of radiation therapy in patients with large primary tumors. Because chemoradiation was superior to radiation therapy alone, chemoradiation is the preferred treatment strategy for these patients, with cisplatin the chemotherapy agent of choice. Nodal involvement, particularly the para-aortic lymph nodes, is the most important factor related to survival (see section above on Concurrent Chemoradiation).
# Chunk 1565
Patients who receive radiotherapy should be monitored closely to assess treatment response. Tumors may be expected to regress for up to 3 months after radiotherapy. During the pelvic examination, progressive shrinkage of the cervix and possible stenosis of the cervical os and surrounding upper vagina is expected and should be noted. During rectovaginal examination, careful palpation of the uterosacral and cardinal ligaments for nodularity is important. Cytologic assessment by FNA of suspicious areas should be performed to allow early diagnosis of persistent disease. In addition to the pelvic examination, the supraclavicular and inguinal lymph nodes should be carefully examined, and cervical or vaginal assessment should be performed every 3 months for 2 years and then every 6 months for the next 3 years. Endocervical curettage may be performed in patients with large central tumors.
# Chunk 1566
Patients with 3 to 5 mm of invasion and those with lymph–vascular space invasion may be followed to term or delivered early after establishment of fetal pulmonary maturity (165,168). They may have cesarean delivery, immediately followed by modified radical hysterectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy. Patients with more than 5 mm invasion should be treated as having frankly invasive carcinoma of the cervix. Treatment depends on the gestational age of the pregnancy and the wishes of the patient. Modern neonatal care affords a 75% survival rate for infants delivered at 28 weeks of gestation and 90% for those delivered at 32 weeks of gestation. Fetal pulmonary maturity can be determined by amniocentesis, and prompt treatment can be instituted when pulmonary maturity is documented. Although timing is controversial, it is probably unwise to delay therapy for longer than 4 weeks (167,168). The recommended treatment is classic cesarean delivery followed by radical hysterectomy with pelvic lymphadenectomy. There should be a thorough discussion of the risks and options with both parents before any treatment is undertaken.
# Chunk 1567
Cancer of the cervical stump was more common many decades ago when supracervical hysterectomy was popular; because this operation is being performed more frequently, this situation may become increasingly familiar. Early-stage disease is treated surgically, with very little change in technique from that used when the uterus is intact (172). Radical parametrectomy with upper vaginectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy is the standard procedure. Advanced-stage disease may present a therapeutic problem for the radiotherapist if the length of the cervical canal is less than 2 cm. This length is necessary to allow satisfactory placement of the uterine tandem. If the uterine tandem cannot be placed, radiation therapy can be completed with vaginal ovoids or with an external treatment plan in which lateral ports are used to augment the standard anterior and posterior ports. Such a technique will reduce the dosage to the bowel and bladder and thus reduce the incidence of complications.
# Chunk 1568
Pelvic Mass The origin of a pelvic mass must be clarified before treatment is initiated. A CT urogram can exclude a pelvic kidney, and a barium enema helps to identify diverticular disease or carcinoma of the colon. An abdominal x-ray film may show calcifications typically associated with benign ovarian teratomas or uterine leiomyomas. Pelvic ultrasonography differentiates between solid and cystic masses and indicates uterine or adnexal origin. Solid masses of uterine origin are most often leiomyomas and do not need further investigation.
# Chunk 1569
Radiation Therapy Survival after radiotherapy depends on the volume of disease, the status of the surgical margins, and the length of delay from surgery to radiotherapy. Patients with microscopic disease have a 95% to 100% 5-year survival rate; the 5-year survival rate is 82% to 84% in those with macroscopic disease and free margins, 38% to 87% in those with microscopically positive margins, and 20% to 47% in those with obvious residual cancer (175–177). A delay in treatment of more than 6 months is associated with a 20% survival rate (177).
# Chunk 1570
Acute Hemorrhage Occasionally, a large lesion can produce life-threatening hemorrhage. A biopsy of the lesion should be performed to verify neoplasia, and a vaginal pack soaked in Monsel’s solution (ferric subsulfate) should be packed tightly against the cervix. After proper evaluation, external radiation therapy can be started with the expectation that control of bleeding may require 8 to 10 daily treatments at 180 to 200 cGy per day. Broad-spectrum antibiotics should be used to reduce the incidence of infection. If the patient becomes febrile, the pack should be removed. Rapid replacement of the pack may be necessary, and a fresh pack should be immediately available. This approach to management of hemorrhage in patients previously untreated is preferable to exploration and vascular ligation. Vascular embolization under ﬂuoroscopic control may be required in severe cases, and this procedure may obviate a laparotomy. However, vascular occlusion ultimately may lead to decreased blood ﬂow and oxygenation of the tumor, compromising the effectiveness of subsequent radiotherapy.
# Chunk 1571
The narrow upper vagina of older patients may preclude the use of an intracavitary source of radiation. These patients must receive their entire course of therapy from external sources, leading to a higher central failure rate and more significant bowel and bladder morbidity. If stage I disease is present in such a patient, a radical hysterectomy with pelvic lymphadenectomy is preferable, if the patient’s medical condition allows this approach. There may be a role for IMRT in the management of such tumors.
# Chunk 1572
Surgical Therapy Surgical therapy for postirradiation recurrence is limited to patients with central pelvic disease. A few carefully selected patients with small-volume disease limited to the cervix may be treated with an extrafascial or radical hysterectomy. However, the difficulty of assessing tumor volume and the 30% to 50% rate of serious urinary complications in these previously irradiated patients have led most gynecologic oncologists to recommend pelvic exenteration as a last chance for cure (184,185).
# Chunk 1573
Preoperative Evaluation and Patient Selection It is imperative to search for metastatic disease before undergoing an exenteration. The presence of metastatic disease in this setting is considered a contraindication to exenterative procedures. Physical examination includes careful palpation of the peripheral lymph nodes with FNA cytologic sampling of any nodes that appear suspicious. A random biopsy of nonsuspicious supraclavicular lymph nodes is advocated by some clinicians but is not routinely practiced (145,186). A PET/CT scan of the chest and abdomen and pelvis CT helps in the detection of liver metastases and enlarged nodes. Cytologic study of any abnormality should be undertaken with CT-guided FNA. If a positive cytologic diagnosis is obtained, it will obviate the need for exploratory laparotomy.
# Chunk 1574
Extension of the tumor to the pelvic sidewall is a contraindication to exenteration; however, this may be difficult for even the most experienced examiner to determine because of radiation fibrosis. If any question of resectability arises, exploratory laparotomy and parametrial biopsies should be offered (187–190). The clinical triad of unilateral leg edema, sciatic pain, and ureteral obstruction is nearly always pathognomonic of unresectable disease on the pelvic sidewall. Preoperatively, the patient should be prepared for a major operation. Total parenteral nutrition may be necessary to place the patient in an anabolic state for optimal healing. A bowel preparation, preoperative antibiotic administration, and prophylaxis for deep venous thrombosis with low-dose heparin or pneumatic calf compression should be undertaken (191).
# Chunk 1575
Fistulas of the gastrointestinal and genitourinary tract are serious surgical complications, with a 30% to 40% mortality rate despite attempts at surgical repair. The risk for fistula formation is decreased if nonirradiated segments of bowel are used for formation of the urinary conduit (191). The 5-year survival rate is 33% to 60% for patients undergoing anterior exenteration and 20% to 46% for those undergoing total exenteration (187–197). Survival rates are worse for patients with recurrent disease (larger than 3 cm), invasion into the bladder, positive pelvic lymph nodes, and recurrence diagnosed within 1 year after radiotherapy (190). The 5-year survival rate of patients with positive pelvic lymph nodes is less than 5%; thus, the performance of an extensive lymphadenectomy in the irradiated field is not warranted. Discontinuation of the procedure is advisable if any nodes are positive for metastatic cancer. Patients who have any disease in the peritoneal cavity have no chance of survival.
# Chunk 1576
Locally recurrent cervical cancer in a previously irradiated field is associated with a dismal prognosis. Exenterative therapy traditionally was reserved for the highly select patient with centrally recurrent disease, a selection criteria that excludes most patients with recurrence. A technique called the laterally extended endopelvic resection (LEER) procedure was described, which offers a surgical treatment option for patients with recurrent disease involving the pelvic sidewall. The LEER procedure involves extending the lateral resection plane of the traditional pelvic exenteration to include resection of the internal iliac vessels; the endopelvic portion of the obturator internus muscle; and the coccygeus, iliococcygeus, and pubococcygeus muscles. Extension of the surgical plane allows for resection of lateral tumors with a negative margin. Experience with it is limited to one center, which reports as high as a 62% recurrence-free survival, but as high as 70% moderate to severe morbidity (198).
# Chunk 1577
The FIGO staging for vaginal carcinoma is shown in Table 36.6. Staging is performed by clinical examination and, if indicated, cystoscopy, proctoscopy, and chest and skeletal radiography. Information derived from lymphangiography, CT, MRI, or PET cannot be used to change the FIGO stage; however, it can be used for planning treatment. Less than 30% of vaginal cancers present at stage I (204–206).
# Chunk 1578
Etiology The association of cervical cancer with HPV suggests that vaginal cancer may have a similar association (207). A study of 341 cases revealed that in younger patients the disease seemed to be related to HPV infection, while in older patients there was no association (206). In addition, as many as 30% of women with vaginal cancer have a history of cervical cancer treated within the previous 5 years (208–210). As with cervical cancer, there appears to be a premalignant phase called vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia (VAIN) (see Chapter 19). The exact incidence of progression to invasive vaginal cancer from VAIN is not known; however, there are documented cases of invasive disease occurring despite adequate treatment of VAIN (211,212).
# Chunk 1579
Malignant melanoma of the vagina is rare and lethal, occurring most often in white women. The average age of these patients is 58 years (226). Most lesions are deeply invasive, corresponding to a Clark level IV when compared with the staging for vulvar melanomas. The most common location of these tumors is in the lower one-third of the vagina (227). Melanomas have a wide variety of size, color, and growth patterns (225,228). Radical excision (vaginectomy, hysterectomy, and pelvic lymphadenectomy) is the mainstay of treatment. The goal of treatment is to avoid local (vaginal) recurrence, which is the most common site of recurrence (226,227). The need to dissect regional lymph nodes is uncertain. Because the disease is deeply invasive, hematogenous spread is the most common lethal recurrence. There is no difference in overall survival of patients with local as opposed to radical excision (226). The survival rate is approximately 10% at 5 years.
# Chunk 1580
Survival The overall 5-year survival rate for patients with vaginal cancer is 52% (Table 36.7). This reﬂects the difficulties of treatment and the fact the disease presents at late stage. For patients with stage I disease, the 5-year survival rate is 74%. Most recurrences are in the pelvis, either from enlarged regional nodes or from large central tumors. Radiation techniques, including interstitial implants with Syed applicator and combination chemoradiation, are the mainstay of therapy. Careful evaluation of patients who receive radiation therapy to detect central recurrence may allow some patients to be saved by pelvic exenteration. Because of the rarity of vaginal cancer, these patients should be treated in a center that is familiar with the complexity of treatment and modalities of therapy.
# Chunk 1581
26.

Park SY, Roh JW, Park YJ, et al. Positron emission tomography (PET) for evaluating para-aortic and pelvic lymph node metastasis in cervical cancer before surgical staging: a surgico-pathologic study. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 2003;22:456.
# Chunk 1582
It should be emphasized that up to 40% of serous borderline tumors are associated with spread beyond the ovary, but high-stage disease does not necessarily warrant a diagnosis of carcinoma. The diagnosis of a serous borderline tumor versus serous carcinoma is based on the histologic features of the primary tumor (11). Up to 10% of women with ovarian serous borderline tumors and extraovarian implants may have invasive implants, and these can behave more aggressively (13). The 5-year overall survival for women with invasive implants is about 50% if stringent criteria are applied (10,13–15). Most implants are noninvasive (10,16). In the noninvasive implants, papillary proliferations of atypical cells involve the peritoneal surface and form smooth invaginations (10). In contrast, the invasive implants resemble well-differentiated serous carcinoma and are characterized by atypical cells forming irregular glands with sharp borders. Implants are usually confined to the abdominal cavity and may be seen in the pelvis, omentum, and adjacent tissues, including lymph nodes, but spread outside the abdominal cavity is rare. Death can occur as the result of intestinal obstruction (16–19).
# Chunk 1583
cases with carcinoma of the endometrium. Identification of multifocal disease is important because patients with disease metastatic from the uterus to the ovaries have a 30% to 40% 5-year survival, whereas those with synchronous multifocal disease have a 75% to 80% 5-year survival (20). When the histologic appearance of endometrial and ovarian tumors is different, the two tumors most likely represent two separate primary lesions. When they appear similar, the endometrial tumor can be considered a separate primary tumor if it is well differentiated and only superficially invasive.
# Chunk 1584
The average age of patients with borderline tumors is approximately 46 years (2,3,9). Eighty percent to 90% of ovarian cancers, including borderline forms, occur after the age of 40 years, whereas 30% to 40% of malignancies occur after the age of 65 years. The chance that a primary epithelial tumor will be of borderline or invasive malignancy in a patient younger than 40 years is approximately 1 in 10, but after that age it rises to 1 in 3 (2,3). Less than 1% of epithelial ovarian cancers occur before the age of 20 years, with two-thirds of ovarian malignancies in such patients being germ cell tumors (31).
# Chunk 1585
Prevention Because parity is inversely related to the risk of ovarian cancer, having at least one child is protective for the disease, with a risk reduction of 0.3 to 0.4. Oral contraceptive use reduces the risk of epithelial ovarian cancer (32). Women who use oral contraceptives for 5 or more years reduce their relative risk to 0.5 (i.e., there is a 50% reduction in the likelihood of development of ovarian cancer). Women who had two children and used oral contraceptives for 5 or more years have a relative risk of ovarian cancer as low as 0.3, or a 70% reduction (34). The oral contraceptive pill is the only documented method of chemoprevention for ovarian cancer, and it should be recommended to women for this purpose. When counseling patients regarding birth control options, this important benefit of oral contraceptive use should be emphasized. This is important for women with a strong family history of ovarian cancer.
# Chunk 1586
CA125 is useful for monitoring epithelial ovarian cancer patients during their chemotherapy, but the role of CA125 is still being defined in a screening setting (43–49). Regarding the sensitivity of the test, elevated CA125 levels are seen in 50% of patients with stage I disease (43,48). Data suggest that the specificity of CA125 is improved when the test is combined with transvaginal ultrasonography or when the CA125 levels are followed over time (49,50). These data encouraged the development of prospective screening studies in Sweden and the United Kingdom (45,47). In these studies, patients with elevated CA125 levels (>30 U/mL) underwent abdominal ultrasonography, and 14 ovarian cancers were discovered among 27,000 women screened. About four laparotomies were performed for each case of cancer detected (47).
# Chunk 1587
A randomized trial of nearly 22,000 women aged 45 years or older was performed in the United Kingdom (50). The patients were assigned to either a control group of routine pelvic examination (n = 0,977) or to a screening group (n = 10,958). The screening consisted of three annual screens that involved measurement of serum CA125 levels, pelvic ultrasonography if the CA125 was 30 U/mL or higher, and referral for gynecologic examination if the ovarian volume was 8.8 mL or greater on the ultrasonography. Of the 468 women in the screened group with an elevated CA125, 29 were referred for surgery, 6 cancers were discovered, and 23 had false-positive screening results, yielding a positive predictive value of 20.7%. During a 7-year follow-up period, cancer developed in 10 additional women in the screened group, as it did in 20 women in the control group. Although the median survival of women in whom cancer developed in the screened group was 72.9 months, compared with 41.8 months in the control group (p = .0112), the number of deaths did not differ significantly between the control and screened groups (18/10,977 vs. 9/10,958; relative risk 2.0 [0.78 to 5.13]). These data show that a multimodal approach to ovarian cancer screening is feasible, but a larger trial is necessary to determine whether this approach affects mortality. Such a three-arm randomized trial is ongoing in the United Kingdom, and the anticipated accrual is approximately 50,000 women per study arm and 100,000 women in the control arm. Based on the risk of ovarian cancer (ROC) algorithm for CA125 levels, patients in the third group will be referred for transvaginal ultrasonography and/or surgery (51). Women will be screened for 3 years and studied for 7 years. The aims of this trial are to determine the feasibility of screening for ovarian cancer and whether ovarian cancers can be diagnosed at an earlier stage and the impact of early detection on survival.
# Chunk 1588
Symptoms The majority of women with epithelial ovarian cancer have vague and nonspecific symptoms (3,85–87). In early-stage disease, if the patient is premenopausal, she may experience irregular menses. If a pelvic mass is compressing the bladder or rectum, she may report urinary frequency or constipation (85–87). Occasionally, she may perceive lower abdominal distention, pressure, or pain, such as dyspareunia. Acute symptoms, such as pain secondary to rupture or torsion, are unusual.
# Chunk 1589
In advanced-stage disease, patients have symptoms related to the presence of ascites, omental metastases, or bowel metastases. The symptoms include abdominal distention, bloating, constipation, nausea, anorexia, or early satiety. Premenopausal women may report irregular or heavy menses, whereas vaginal bleeding may occur in postmenopausal women (86).
# Chunk 1590
Traditionally, ovarian cancer was considered a “silent killer” that did not produce symptoms until far advanced. Some patients with ovarian cancers confined to the ovary are asymptomatic, but the majority will have nonspecific symptoms that do not necessarily suggest an origin in the ovary (86,88–90). In one survey of 1,725 with ovarian cancer, 95% recalled symptoms before diagnosis, including 89% with stage I and II disease and 97% with stages III and IV disease (86). Some 70% had abdominal or gastrointestinal symptoms, 58% pain, 34% urinary symptoms, and 26% pelvic discomfort. At least some of these symptoms could have reﬂected pressure on the pelvic viscera from the enlarging ovary. Goff et al. developed an ovarian cancer symptom index and reported that symptoms associated with ovarian cancer, when present for less than 1 year and occurring longer than 12 days a month, were pelvic/abdominal pain, urinary frequency/urgency, increased abdominal size or bloating, and difficulty eating or feeing full (88). The index had a sensitivity of 56.7% for early ovarian cancer and 79.5% for advanced stage disease. A population-based study from Australia found that there did not appear to be a significant difference in the duration of symptoms or the nature of symptoms in patients with early as opposed to advanced stage ovarian cancer, reinforcing the concept that they are biologically different entities and arguing against the widely held misconception that early stage ovarian cancers are at an early stage because they were diagnosed earlier than patients with more advanced stage cancers (89).
# Chunk 1591
Signs The most important sign of epithelial ovarian cancer is the presence of a pelvic mass on physical examination. A solid, irregular, fixed pelvic mass is highly suggestive of an ovarian malignancy. If an upper abdominal mass or ascites is present, the diagnosis of ovarian cancer is almost certain. Because the patient usually reports abdominal symptoms, she may not have a pelvic examination, and a tumor may be missed.
# Chunk 1592
Serum CA125 levels are useful in distinguishing malignant from benign pelvic masses (92). For a postmenopausal patient with an adnexal mass and a very high serum CA125 level (>200 U/mL), there is a 96% positive predictive value for malignancy. For premenopausal patients, the specificity of the test is low because the CA125 level tends to be elevated in common benign conditions.
# Chunk 1593
Before the planned exploration, the patient should undergo routine hematologic and biochemical assessments. A preoperative evaluation in a patient undergoing laparotomy should include a radiograph of the chest. Abdominal and pelvic computed tomography (CT) or MRI are of limited value for a patient with a definite pelvic mass (103–105). A CT or MRI should be performed for patients with ascites and no pelvic mass to look for liver or pancreatic tumors. The findings only rarely preclude laparotomy (103). The value of PET scanning is still being evaluated (105–107). If the hepatic enzyme values are normal, the likelihood of liver disease is low. Liver-spleen scans, bone scans, and brain scans are unnecessary unless symptoms or signs suggest metastases to these sites.
# Chunk 1594
The importance of thorough surgical staging cannot be overemphasized, because subsequent treatment will be determined by the stage of disease. For patients in whom exploratory laparotomy does not reveal any macroscopic evidence of disease on inspection and palpation of the entire intra-abdominal space, a careful search for microscopic spread must be undertaken. In earlier series in which patients did not undergo careful surgical staging, the overall 5-year survival for patients with apparent stage I epithelial ovarian cancer was only about 60% (132). Since then, survival rates of 90% to 100% are reported for patients who were properly staged and were found to have stage IA or IB disease (133,134).
# Chunk 1595
4.

Any suspicious areas or adhesions on the peritoneal surfaces should be biopsied. If there is no evidence of disease, multiple intraperitoneal biopsies should be performed. Tissue from the peritoneum of the pelvic cul-de-sac, both paracolic gutters, the peritoneum over the bladder, and the intestinal mesenteries should be taken for biopsy.
# Chunk 1596
Metastases in apparent stage I and II epithelial ovarian cancer occur in as many as 3 in 10 patients whose tumors appear to be confined to the pelvis but who have occult metastatic disease in the upper abdomen or the retroperitoneal lymph nodes (110,133–140). In a literature review, occult metastases in such patients were found in biopsies of the diaphragm in 7.3%, biopsies of the omentum in 8.6%, the pelvic lymph nodes in 5.9%, the aortic lymph nodes in 18.1%, and in 26.4% of peritoneal washings (132).
# Chunk 1597
Fertility Preservation in Early-Stage Ovarian Cancer For patients who underwent a thorough staging laparotomy and who have no evidence of spread beyond the ovary, abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy are appropriate therapy. The uterus and the contralateral ovary can be preserved in women with stage IA, grade 1 to 2 disease who desire to preserve fertility. The conditions of the women should be monitored carefully with routine periodic pelvic examinations and determinations of serum CA125 levels. Generally, the other ovary and the uterus are removed at the completion of childbearing.
# Chunk 1598
If the patient is medically stable, she should undergo cytoreductive surgery to remove as much of the tumor and its metastases as possible (144–171). The operation to remove the primary tumor and the associated metastatic disease is referred to as debulking or cytoreductive surgery. The operation typically includes the performance of a total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, along with a complete omentectomy and resection of any metastatic lesions from the peritoneal surfaces or from the intestines. The pelvic tumor often directly involves the rectosigmoid colon, the terminal ileum, and the cecum
# Chunk 1599
Hacker and Berek demonstrated that patients whose largest residual lesions were less than 5 mm had a superior survival rate, which was substantiated by Van Lindert et al. (145–148). The median survival of patients in this category was 40 months, compared with 18 months for patients whose lesions were less than 1.5 cm and 6 months for patients with nodules greater than 1.5 cm. Patients whose disease is completely resected to no macroscopic (microscopic only) residual disease have the best overall survival (149) (Fig. 37.12). Approximately 30% to 40% of patients in this category will be free of disease at 5 years.
# Chunk 1600
The peritoneal cavity and retroperitoneum are thoroughly inspected and palpated to assess the extent of the primary tumor and the metastatic disease. All abdominal viscera must be palpated to exclude the possibility that the ovarian disease is metastatic, particularly from the stomach, colon, or pancreas. If optimal status is not considered achievable, extensive bowel and urologic resections are not indicated, except to overcome a bowel obstruction. Removal of the primary tumor and omental cake is usually both feasible and desirable.
# Chunk 1601
Pelvic Tumor Resection The essential principle of pelvic tumor removal is the retroperitoneal approach. To accomplish this, the retroperitoneum is entered laterally, along the surface of the psoas muscles, which avoids the iliac vessels and the ureters. If the uterus is present, the procedure is initiated by bilateral division of the round ligaments. The peritoneal incision is extended cephalad, lateral to the ovarian vessels within the infundibulopelvic ligament, and caudally toward the bladder. With careful dissection, the retroperitoneal space is explored, and the ureter and pelvic vessels are identified. The pararectal and paravesicular spaces are identified and developed, as described in Chapter 36.
# Chunk 1602
Intestinal Resection Resection of focal areas of disease involving the small or large intestine should be performed if that would permit the removal of all or most of the abdominal metastases and leave the patient with optimal disease at the end of the cytoreduction. Apart from the rectosigmoid colon, the most frequent sites of intestinal metastasis are the terminal ileum, the cecum, and the transverse colon. Resection of one or more of these segments of bowel may be necessary (154,156).
# Chunk 1603
An analysis of the retrospective data indicates that, when performed by gynecologic oncologists, successful operations are feasible in 70% to 90% of patients (152,153). Major morbidity is approximately 5% and operative mortality is 1% (156,161,162). Intestinal resection in these patients does not appear to increase the overall morbidity caused by the operation (156).
# Chunk 1604
Carboplatin is widely used instead of cisplatin, as it is equivalent in efficacy and much better tolerated with significantly fewer side effects (191). A randomized phase III trial of three versus six cycles of adjuvant carboplatin and paclitaxel in 457 patients with early stage epithelial ovarian carcinoma was conducted by the GOG (192). An unexpectedly large number of patients (126 patients, 29%) had incomplete or inadequately documented surgical staging in this study. The recurrence rate for six cycles was 24% lower (HR = 0.76; confidence interval [CI], 0.5– 1.13; p = 0.18) versus three cycles, but this was not statistically significant. The estimates of probability of recurrence at 5 years were 20.1% for six cycles and 25.4% for three cycles. The authors concluded that three cycles of adjuvant carboplatin and paclitaxel was a reasonable option for women with high-risk early stage ovarian cancer. The current GOG trial includes patients with high-risk stage I and stage II disease, and offers three cycles of carboplatin and paclitaxel followed by a randomization to either observation versus 26 weeks of weekly low-dose (40 mg/m2) paclitaxel. High-risk stage I is defined as stage IA or IB, grade 3, stage IC, or clear cell carcinomas.
# Chunk 1605
The ICON3 trial was a study of 2,074 women with all stages of ovarian cancer, including 20% who had stage I or II disease (208). Carboplatin plus paclitaxel was compared with two non-paclitaxel regimens, carboplatin (70%), or cyclophosphamide, Adriamycin, and cisplatin (CAP) (30%). The regimens were chosen before randomization and based on the clinical preference of the treating physician. One-third of patients who received carboplatin or CAP subsequently received second-line paclitaxel, and this additional chemotherapy was often given before clinical progression. With a median follow-up of 51 months, the carboplatin plus paclitaxel and the control groups had a similar progression-free survival (0.93) and overall survival (0.98). The median survival for the paclitaxel plus carboplatin and control groups was 36.1 and 35.4 months, respectively. The median duration of progression-free survival was 17.3 and 16.1 months, respectively. The researchers concluded that single agent carboplatin and CAP were as effective as paclitaxel and carboplatin for first-line chemotherapy. Because carboplatin as a single agent had a lower toxicity than the other regimens and the median survival (33 months) was similar in the prior trial (ICON2) that compared carboplatin and CAP as first-line treatment, the researchers suggested that carboplatin alone was the preferred therapy (209).
# Chunk 1606
A randomized, prospective GOG study (Protocol 104) of intraperitoneal cisplatin versus intravenous cisplatin (100 mg/m2), each given with 750 mg/m2 cyclophosphamide, was performed jointly by the SWOG and the GOG in patients with minimal residual disease (212). The intraperitoneal cisplatin arm had a somewhat longer overall median survival than the intravenous arm, 49 versus 41 months (p = 0.03). In the patients with minimal residual disease (<0.5 cm maximal residual), paradoxically, there was no difference between the two treatments, 51 versus 46 months (p = 0.08).
# Chunk 1607
Topotecan 1.0–1.25 IV 1 4.0 IV 3 (daily × 3–5 days)

Etoposide 50 PO 3, days 14–21 ∗Bevacizumab 7.5–15 mg/kg can be added to any of these regimens. aExcept for carboplatin dosing, where AUC—area under the curve—dose calculated by using Calvert formula (Calvert AH, Newell DR, Gumbrell LA, et al. Carboplatin dosage: prospective evaluation of a simple formula based on renal function. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:1748–1756).bDrugs that can be substituted for paclitaxel if hypersensitivity to that drug occurs; the number of treatments administered as tolerated.
# Chunk 1608
Women who relapse later than 6 months after primary chemotherapy are classified as platinum-sensitive and usually receive further platinum-based chemotherapy with response rates ranging from 27% to 65% and a median survival of 12 to 24 months (259–263). Patients who relapse within 6 months of completing first-line chemotherapy are classified as platinum-resistant and have a median survival of 6 to 9 months and a 10% to 30% likelihood of responding to chemotherapy. Patients who progress while on treatment are classified as having platinum-refractory disease. Objective response rates to chemotherapy in patients with platinum-refractory ovarian cancer are low—less than 20% (264).
# Chunk 1609
Platinum-Sensitive Disease The use of combination platinum plus paclitaxel chemotherapy versus a single-agent platinum was tested in two multinational randomized phase III trials and a randomized phase II study (292,293). In a report of the ICON4 and AGO-OVAR-2.2 (AGO Studiengruppe Ovarialkarzinom) trials, 802 women with platinum-sensitive ovarian cancer, who relapsed after being treatment free for at least 6 to 12 months were randomized to platinum-based chemotherapy (72% carboplatin or cisplatin alone; 17% CAP; 4% carboplatin plus cisplatin; and 3% cisplatin plus doxorubicin)or paclitaxel plus platinum-based chemotherapy (80% paclitaxel plus carboplatin; 10% paclitaxel plus cisplatin; 5% paclitaxel plus both carboplatin and cisplatin; and 4% paclitaxel alone) (292). The AGO-OVAR-2.2 trial did not accrue its planned number of patients. In both trials, a significant proportion of the patients did not receive paclitaxel as part of their initial chemotherapeutic regimen. Combining the trials for analysis, there was a significant survival advantage for the paclitaxel-containing therapy (HR = 0.82) with a median follow-up of 42 months. The absolute 2-year survival advantage was 7% (57% versus 50%), and there was a 5-month improvement in median survival (29 versus 24 months). Progression-free survival was better with the paclitaxel regimen (HR = 0.76); there was a 10% difference in 1-year progression-free survival (50% versus 40%) and a 3-month prolongation in median progression-free survival (13 versus 10 months). The toxicities were comparable, except for a significantly higher incidence of neurologic toxicity and alopecia in the paclitaxel group, while myelosuppression was significantly greater with the non-paclitaxel-containing regimens. These data support the slight advantage of a second-line regimen containing both paclitaxel and a platinum agent compared with platinum-based therapy alone in patients who have not received paclitaxel in their primary chemotherapeutic regimen.
# Chunk 1610
There were two randomized trials comparing carboplatin alone to carboplatin and gemcitabine or liposomal doxorubicin (294,295). There was a higher response rate with the combination therapy and a longer progression-free survival, but the studies were not powered to look at overall survival. In the Gynecologic Oncology Intergroup (GCIG) study comparing carboplatin and gemcitabine with carboplatin alone, the response rate was 47.2% for the combination and 30.9% for carboplatin, with the progression-free survival being 8.6 months and 5.8 months, respectively (294). A large GCIG study (CALYPSO) compared carboplatin and liposomal doxorubicin (CD) with carboplatin and paclitaxel (CP) in 976 patients (296). The progression-free survival for the CD arm was statistically superior to CP arm with a median progression-free survival of 11.3 months versus 9.4 months, respectively. Overall survival data are not yet available. The CD arm was better tolerated with less severe toxicities, and this combination is now widely used (296).
# Chunk 1611
Platinum-Resistant and Refractory Disease Patients with platinum-refractory and resistant ovarian cancer are treated with chemotherapy and may have a number of lines of therapy depending on response and performance status. In platinum-refractory patients (i.e., those progressing on treatment), response rates to second-line chemotherapy are less than 10% and the median survival is short, around 3 to 5 months (260–264). The management of women who are platinum-resistant (i.e., progressing within 6 months of completion of chemotherapy) is difficult and “non-cross-resistant agents” are selected, but there does not appear to be one best treatment. Single-agent therapy is typically used because combination regimens are associated with more toxicity without any apparent additional benefit. High response rates of 48% to 64% were reported with dose-dense weekly carboplatin (AUC4) plus paclitaxel (90 mg/m2), and this deserves more study (297). There are a variety of potentially active drugs: paclitaxel, docetaxel, topotecan, liposomal doxorubicin, gemcitabine, oral etoposide, tamoxifen, and bevacizumab are the most frequently used. Other agents include vinorelbine and newer drugs such as trabectedin.
# Chunk 1612
The results of a study comparing topotecan with liposomal doxorubicin demonstrate the low response rates and poor prognosis among women with platinum-resistant ovarian cancer (265). There were two randomized trials comparing liposomal doxorubicin with either topotecan or paclitaxel. In a study of 237 women who relapsed after receiving one platinum-containing regimen, 117 of whom (49.4%) had platinum-refractory disease, liposomal doxorubicin 50 mg/m2 over 1 hour every 4 weeks was compared with topotecan 1.5 mg/m2/day for 5 days every 3 weeks (265). The two treatments had a similar overall response rate (20% versus 17%), time to progression (22 versus 20 weeks), and median overall survival (66 versus 56 weeks). The myelotoxicity was significantly lower in the liposomal doxorubicin-treated patients than with those receiving topotecan. In a second study comparing liposomal doxorubicin with single-agent paclitaxel in 214 platinum-treated patients who had not received prior taxanes, the overall response rates for liposomal doxorubicin and paclitaxel were 18% versus 22%, respectively, and median survival durations were 46 and 56 weeks, respectively, and these were not significantly different (266). In practice, most patients are treated with a starting dose of 40 mg/m2 of liposomal doxorubicin every 4 weeks, because of the toxicity associated with the higher dose and the need to dose reduce when 50 mg/m2 is used. In a subset analysis of platinum-resistant patients, the median time to progression ranged from 9.1 to 13.6 weeks for topotecan and liposomal doxorubicin, respectively. The median survival (p = 0.455) was 35.6 weeks for pegylated liposomal doxorubicin and 41.3 weeks for topotecan. Objective response rates were recorded in 6.5% of patients who received topotecan and in 12.3% of those who received pegylated liposomal doxorubicin (p = 0.118). It is not known whether the treatment improved symptoms control or quality of life because this was not specifically addressed.
# Chunk 1613
Single-agent paclitaxel shows objective responses in 20% to 30% in phase II trials of women with platinum-resistant ovarian cancer (269–274). The main toxicities are fatigue and peripheral neuropathy. Weekly paclitaxel is active, and the toxicity, especially myelosuppression, is less than with the every 3-week regimens. In a study of 53 women with platinum-resistant ovarian cancer, weekly paclitaxel (80 mg/m2 over 1 hour) had an objective response of 25% in patients with measurable disease, and 27% of patients without measurable disease had a 75% decline in serum CA125 levels (269).
# Chunk 1614
Topotecan Topotecan is an active second-line treatment for patients with platinum-sensitive and platinum-resistant disease (277–291). In a study of 139 women receiving topotecan 1.5 mg/m2 daily for 5 days, response rates were 19% and 13% in patients with platinum-sensitive and platinum-resistant disease, respectively (287). The predominant toxicity of topotecan is hematologic, especially neutropenia. With the 5-day dosing schedule, approximately 70% to 80% of patients have severe neutropenia, and 25% have febrile neutropenia with or without infection. In some studies, regimens of 5 days produce better response rates than regimens of shorter duration, but in others, reducing the dose to 1.0 mg/m2 per day for 3 days is associated with similar response rates but lower toxicity (280,290). In a study of 31 patients, one-half of whom were platinum refractory, topotecan 2 mg/m2 per day for 3 days every 21 days had a 32% response rate (285). Continuous infusion topotecan (0.4 mg/m2 per day for 14 to 21 days) had a 27% to 35% objective response rate in platinum-refractory patients (284). Weekly topotecan administered at a dose of 4 mg/m2 per week for 3 weeks with a week off every month produced a response rate similar to the 5-day regimen with considerably less toxicity, and this is the preferred dose schedule in the recurrent setting (290).
# Chunk 1615
Oral topotecan, not available in the United States, results in similar response rates with less hematologic toxicity (286). The intravenous and oral formulations of topotecan were compared in a randomized trial of 266 women as a third-line regimen after an initial platinum-based regimen (291). Compared with intravenous topotecan (1.5 mg/m2 daily for 5 days every 3 weeks), oral topotecan (2.3 mg/m2 per day for 5 days every 3 weeks) produced a similar response rate (13% versus 20%), less severe myelosuppression, and only a slightly shorter median survival (51 versus 58 weeks).
# Chunk 1616
Gemcitabine Gemcitabine is associated with response rates of 20% to 50%, with 15% to 30% in patients who are platinum-resistant (302–306). The principal toxicities are myelosuppression and gastrointestinal. The drug is used in doublet combinations with cisplatin or carboplatin with acceptable responses and toxicities, and in the triplet combination with carboplatin and paclitaxel (304).
# Chunk 1617
Oral Etoposide The most common toxicities with oral etoposide are myelosuppression and gastrointestinal: grade 4 neutropenia is observed in about one-fourth of patients, and 10% to 15% have severe nausea and vomiting (307,308). A study of oral etoposide given for a prolonged treatment (50 mg/m2 daily for 21 days every 4 weeks) had a 27% response rate in 41 women with platinum-resistant disease, 3 of whom had durable complete responses (308). In 25 patients with platinum and taxane-resistant disease, 8 objective responses (32%) were reported.
# Chunk 1618
Bevacizumab is the first targeted agent to show significant single agent activity in ovarian cancer. It is a humanized monoclonal antibody that targets angiogenesis by binding to VEGF-A, thereby blocking the interaction of VEGF with its receptor. There are a number of phase II studies reported using bevacizumab in patients with platinum-sensitive and platinum-resistant ovarian cancer with response rates ranging from 16% to 22% in both platinum-sensitive and -refractory patients (319). Up to 40% of patients had stabilization of disease for at least 6 months. A study of low-dose metronomic chemotherapy with 50 mg of cyclophosphamide daily and bevacizumab 10 mg/kg intravenously every 2 weeks showed significant activity in a study of 70 patients with recurrent ovarian cancer (320). The primary end point was progression-free survival at 6 months. The probability of being alive and progression free at 6 months was 56%. A partial response was achieved in 17 patients (24%). Median time to progression and survival were 7.2 and 16.9 months, respectively. This comes with toxicity. The side effects of bevacizumab are well recognized and include hypertension, fatigue, proteinuria, gastrointestinal perforation or fistula, and uncommonly, vascular thrombosis and central nervous system ischemia, pulmonary hypertension, and bleeding and wound healing complications. The most common side effects are hypertension that is grade 3 in 7% of patients and is usually treatable. The most concerning side effect is bowel perforation and the study by Cannistra et al. was stopped after recruiting 44 patients because of an 11% incidence of perforation of the bowel (321).
# Chunk 1619
It was suggested that the bowel perforation complication could be avoided by carefully screening patients. Simpkins et al. limited bevacizumab treatment to patients without clinical symptoms of bowel obstruction or evidence of rectosigmoid involvement on pelvic examination or bowel involvement on CT scan (322). Their study included 25 patients with platinum-resistant ovarian cancer who were heavily pretreated, and they observed a response rate of 28% and no bowel perforations or any other grade 3 or 4 toxicities were reported. This highlights the importance of patient selection and suggests that increased experience with these agents will result in less toxicity.
# Chunk 1620
Radiation Therapy Whole-abdominal radiation therapy given as a treatment for recurrent or persistent disease is associated with a high morbidity and is not used. The principal problem associated with this approach is the development of acute and chronic intestinal morbidity. As many as 30% of patients treated with this approach develop intestinal obstruction, which necessitated exploratory surgery with potential morbidity (324).
# Chunk 1621
Surgery for bowel obstruction in patients with ovarian cancer carries an operative mortality of about 10% and a major complications rate of about 30% (325–337). The need for multiple reanastomoses and prior radiation therapy increase the morbidity, which consists primarily of sepsis and enterocutaneous fistulae. The median survival ranges from 3 to 12 months, although about 20% of such patients survive longer than 12 months (337–340).
# Chunk 1622
The 5-year survival rate for carefully and properly staged patients with stage I disease is as high as 94%, for stage II is 73%, for stage III or IV 28% (1). The 5-year survival rate for stage IIIA is 41%, for stage IIIB about 25%, for stage IIIC 23%, and for stage IV disease 11% (Fig. 37.16). An analysis of the National Cancer Institute’s Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) database reveals a trend toward improved survival for ovarian cancer in the United States. In this cohort, the survival for stage I was 93%, for stage II 70%, for stage III 37%, and for stage IV 25% (341).
# Chunk 1623
Survival of patients with borderline tumors is excellent, with stage I lesions having a 98% 15year survival (30). When all stages of borderline tumors are included, the 5-year survival rate is about 86% to 90%.
# Chunk 1624
Patients with stage III disease with microscopic residual disease at the start of treatment have a 5-year survival rate of about 40% to 75%, compared with about 30% to 40% for those with optimal disease and only 5% for those with suboptimal disease (126,127,149). Patients whose Karnofsky index (KI) is low (<70) have a significantly shorter survival than those with a KI greater than 70 (30).
# Chunk 1625
In contrast to the slower-growing epithelial ovarian tumors, germ cell malignancies grow rapidly and are characterized by subacute pelvic pain related to capsular distention, hemorrhage, or necrosis. The rapidly enlarging pelvic mass may produce pressure symptoms on the bladder or rectum, and menstrual irregularities may occur in menarcheal patients. Some young patients misinterpret the early symptoms of a neoplasm as those of pregnancy, which can lead to a delay in the diagnosis. Acute symptoms associated with torsion or rupture of the adnexa can develop. These symptoms may be confused with acute appendicitis. In more advanced cases, ascites may develop, and the patient can have abdominal distention (336).
# Chunk 1626
Adnexal masses measuring 2 cm or larger in premenarcheal girls or 8 cm or larger in other premenopausal patients will usually require surgical exploration. For young patients, blood tests should include serum hCG and AFP and LDH. A CT scan of the chest is important because germ cell tumors can metastasize to the lungs or mediastinum. A karyotype should be obtained preoperatively for all premenarcheal girls, particularly those with dysgerminomas, because of the propensity of these tumors to arise in dysgenetic gonads (343,349). A preoperative CT scan or MRI may document the presence and extent of retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy or liver metastases; however, because these patients require surgical exploration, preoperative imaging is not usually required. If postmenarcheal patients have predominantly cystic lesions up to 8 cm in diameter, they may be observed or given oral contraceptives for two menstrual cycles (350).
# Chunk 1627
to 3% of all ovarian cancers, but they represent as many as 5% to 10% of ovarian cancers in patients younger than 20 years. Seventy-five percent of dysgerminomas occur between the ages of 10 and 30 years, 5% occur before the age of 10 years, and they rarely occur after 50 years of age (2,3,336). Because these malignancies occur in young women, 20% to 30% of ovarian malignancies associated with pregnancy are dysgerminomas.
# Chunk 1628
About 65% of dysgerminomas are stage I (i.e., confined to one or both ovaries) at diagnosis (2,3,352–356). About 85% to 90% of stage I tumors are confined to one ovary; 10% to 15% are bilateral. Dysgerminoma is the only germ cell malignancy that has this significant rate of bilaterality. Other germ cell tumors are rarely bilateral.
# Chunk 1629
In patients in whom the neoplasm appears on inspection to be confined to the ovary, a careful staging operation should be undertaken to determine the presence of any occult metastatic disease. All peritoneal surfaces should be inspected and palpated, and any suspicious lesions should be sampled for biopsy. Unilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy and careful palpation and biopsy of enlarged para-aortic nodes are particularly important parts of the staging. These tumors often metastasize to the para-aortic nodes around the renal vessels. Dysgerminoma is the only germ cell tumor that tends to be bilateral, excisional biopsy of any suspicious masses is desirable (354–356). If a small contralateral tumor is found, it may be possible to resect it and preserve some normal ovary.
# Chunk 1630
Many patients with a dysgerminoma will have a tumor that is apparently confined to one ovary and will be referred after unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy without surgical staging. The options for such patients are (i) repeat laparotomy for surgical staging, (ii) regular pelvic and abdominal CT scans, or (iii) adjuvant chemotherapy. Because these are rapidly growing tumors, the preference is to perform regular surveillance. Tumor markers (LDH, AFP, and β-hCG) should be monitored in case occult mixed germ cell elements are present.
# Chunk 1631
For patients with advanced, incompletely resected germ cell tumors, the GOG studied cisplatinbased chemotherapy in two consecutive protocols (357,358). In the first study, patients received four cycles of vinblastine (12 mg/m2 every 3 weeks), bleomycin (20 units/m2 intravenously every week for 12 weeks), and cisplatin (20 mg/m2 per day intravenously for 5 days every 3 weeks). Patients with persistent or progressive disease at second-look laparotomy were treated
# Chunk 1632
About 75% of recurrences occur within the first year after initial treatment, the most common sites being the peritoneal cavity and the retroperitoneal lymph nodes (2,335,336). These patients should be treated with chemotherapy, although radiation may be appropriate in selected patients. Patients with recurrent disease who had no therapy other than surgery should be treated with chemotherapy. If prior chemotherapy with BEP was given, there are a number of second-line options including TIP (paclitaxel, iphosphamide, cisplatin) or VIP (vinblastine, iphosphamide, cisplatin) (Table 35.7), and consideration should be given to the use of high-dose chemotherapy in selected patients. Patients with recurrent disease should be managed in specialized centers. Radiation therapy is effective for this disease, with the major disadvantage being loss of fertility if pelvic and abdominal irradiation is required.
# Chunk 1633
Table 37.7 POMB-ACE Chemotherapy for Germ Cell Tumors of the Ovary

IV, intravenous. The sequence of treatment schedules is two courses of POMB followed by ACE. POMB is then alternated with ACE until patients are in biochemical remission as measured by human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) and α-fetoprotein (AFP), placental alkaline phosphatase (PLAP), and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH). The usual number of courses of POMB is three to five. Following biochemical remission, patients alternate ACE with OMB until remission has been maintained for approximately 12 weeks. The interval between courses of treatment is kept to the minimum (usually 9 to 11 days). If delays are caused by myelosuppression after courses of ACE, the first 2 days of etoposide are omitted from subsequent courses of ACE. From Newlands ES, Southall PJ, Paradinas FJ, et al. Management of ovarian germ cell tumours. In: Williams CJ, Kaikorian JG, Green MR, et al., eds. Textbook of uncommon cancer. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1988:47, with permission.
# Chunk 1634
Surgery for advanced disease followed by pelvic and abdominal radiation resulted in a 5-year survival rate of 63% to 83%, for this same group of patients cure rates of 85% to 90% are reported with the use of VBP (vinblastine, bleomycin, cisplatin), BEP,or EC combination chemotherapy and radiation is infrequently indicated (356–376).
# Chunk 1635
Immature Teratomas Immature teratomas contain elements that resemble tissues derived from the embryo. Immature teratomatous elements may occur in combination with other germ cell tumors as mixed germ cell tumors. The pure immature teratoma accounts for fewer than 1% of all ovarian cancers, but it is the second most common germ cell malignancy and accounts for 10% to 20% of all ovarian malignancies seen in women younger than 20 years (2). About 50% of pure immature teratomas of the ovary occur in women between the ages of 10 and 20 years, and they rarely occur in postmenopausal women.
# Chunk 1636
Surgery In a premenopausal patient whose lesion appears to be confined to a single ovary, unilateral oophorectomy and surgical staging should be performed. For a postmenopausal patient, a total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy may be performed. Contralateral involvement is rare, and routine resection or wedge biopsy of the contralateral ovary is unnecessary (3,378,379). Any lesions on the peritoneal surfaces should be sampled and submitted for histologic evaluation. The most frequent site of dissemination is the peritoneum and, much less commonly, the retroperitoneal lymph nodes. Blood-borne metastases to organ parenchyma, such as the lungs, liver, or brain, are uncommon. When present, they are usually seen in patients with late or recurrent disease and most often in tumors that are poorly differentiated (i.e., grade 3).
# Chunk 1637
The most important prognostic feature of the immature teratoma is the grade of the lesion (2,370). The stage of disease and the extent of tumor at the initiation of treatment have an impact on the curability of the lesion. Overall, the 5-year survival rate for patients with all stages of pure immature teratomas is 70% to 80%, and it is 90% to 95% for patients with surgically staged, stage I lesions (374,377,386).
# Chunk 1638
Endodermal Sinus Tumors Endodermal sinus tumors (EST) are referred to as yolk sac carcinomas because they are derived from the primitive yolk sac (2, 3). These lesions are the third most frequent malignant germ cell tumors of the ovary. ESTs occur in patients with a median age of 16 to 18 years (2,3,405). About one-third of the patients are premenarcheal at the time of diagnosis. Abdominal or pelvic pain is the most frequent initial symptom, occurring in about 75% of patients, whereas an asymptomatic pelvic mass is documented in 10% of patients (343).
# Chunk 1639
Most EST lesions secrete AFP and, rarely, they may elaborate detectable alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT). AFP can be demonstrated in the tumor by means of the immunoperoxidase technique. There is a good correlation between the extent of disease and the level of AFP, although discordance is observed. The serum level of these markers, particularly AFP, is useful in monitoring the patient’s response to treatment (405–409).
# Chunk 1640
Choriocarcinoma of the Ovary

Pure nongestational choriocarcinoma of the ovary is an extremely rare tumor. Histologically, it has the same appearance as gestational choriocarcinoma metastatic to the ovaries (413). Most patients with this cancer are younger than 20 years. The presence of hCG can be useful in monitoring the patient’s response to treatment. In the presence of high hCG levels, isosexual precocity occurs in about 50% of patients whose lesions appear before menarche (413,414).
# Chunk 1641
Mixed Germ Cell Tumors Mixed germ cell malignancies of the ovary contain two or more elements of the lesions described above. In one series, the most common component of a mixed malignancy was dysgerminoma, which occurred in 80%, followed by EST in 70%, immature teratoma in 53%, choriocarcinoma in 20%, and embryonal carcinoma in 16% (415). The most frequent combination was a dysgerminoma and an EST. The mixed lesions may secrete either AFP, hCG, or both or neither of these markers, depending on the components.
# Chunk 1642
Adult granulosa cell tumors are usually stage I at diagnosis, but may recur 5 to 30 years after initial diagnosis (421). Most juvenile granulosa cell tumors are clinically benign; only about 10% recur and when they do so, it is generally within 5 years of the initial diagnosis. The tumors may spread hematogenously, and metastases can develop in the lungs, liver, and brain years after initial diagnosis. When adult granulosa cell tumors do recur, they can progress rapidly. Malignant thecomas are extremely rare, and their signs and symptoms, management, and outcome are similar to those of the granulosa cell tumors (419). Inhibin is secreted by some granulosa cell tumors and is a useful marker for the disease (427–431). An elevated serum inhibin level in a premenopausal woman presenting with amenorrhea and infertility is suggestive of a granulosa cell tumor (432).
# Chunk 1643
Chemotherapy There is no evidence that adjuvant chemotherapy will prevent recurrence of disease (436–439). Metastatic lesions and recurrences were treated with a variety of antineoplastic drugs. Although the data are inconclusive, BEP or carboplatin and paclitaxel are used in selected patients with stage III or IV tumors or recurrent disease (433). In a GOG study, 37% (14 of 30) patients treated with BEP had a negative second-look laparotomy, and these patients had a median time to progression of 24.4 months (440). Granulosa cell tumors are potentially hormonally responsive, with about 30% of granulosa tumors expressing estrogen receptors and almost 100% expressing progesterone receptors. Hormonal agents such as progestins or luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone agonists are used to treat these patients because they are often elderly (441–445). There are case reports of durable response to aromatase inhibitors in patients with metastatic granulosa cell tumors who received multiple prior treatment (443). Small clinical series and case reports indicated that luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone agonists had a 50% response rate in 13 patients, while 4 of 5 patients in the literature responded to a progestational agent. Two case series reported durable responses in a total of six patients receiving aromatase inhibitors among those who progressed on or were intolerant of chemotherapy (442–445).
# Chunk 1644
The 5-year survival rate is 70% to 90%, and recurrences thereafter are uncommon (3,450– 455). Most fatalities occur in the presence of poorly differentiated tumors.
# Chunk 1645
advanced breast cancer, about 20% to 30% of the cases reveal ovarian involvement, 60% of those bilaterally. The involvement of ovaries in early-stage breast cancer seems to be considerably lower, but precise figures are not available. In almost all cases, either ovarian involvement is occult or a pelvic mass is discovered after other metastatic disease becomes apparent.
# Chunk 1646
Lymphoma and Leukemia Lymphomas and leukemia can involve the ovary. When they do, the involvement is usually bilateral (477–479). About 5% of patients with Hodgkin’s lymphoma will have lymphomatous involvement of the ovaries, but this involvement occurs typically with advanced-stage disease. With Burkitt’s lymphoma, ovarian involvement is very common. Other types of lymphoma involve the ovaries less frequently, and leukemic infiltration of the ovaries is uncommon (479). Sometimes the ovaries can be the only apparent sites of involvement of the abdominal or pelvic viscera with a lymphoma; if this circumstance is found, a careful surgical exploration may be necessary. Intraoperatively, a hematologist-oncologist should be consulted to determine the need for these procedures if frozen section of a solid ovarian mass reveals a lymphoma. Most lymphomas no longer require extensive surgical staging; biopsy of enlarged lymph nodes should be performed. In some cases of Hodgkin’s lymphoma, a more extensive evaluation may be necessary. Treatment involves that of the lymphoma or leukemia. Removal of a large ovarian mass may improve patient comfort and facilitate a response to subsequent radiation or chemotherapy.
# Chunk 1647
Vaginal discharge or bleeding is the most common symptom reported by patients with tubal carcinoma and is documented in more than 50% of patients (3,481). Lower abdominal or pelvic pressure and pain are noted in many patients. The symptoms may be rather vague and nonspecific. For perimenopausal and postmenopausal women with unusual, unexplained, or persistent vaginal discharge, in the absence of bleeding, the clinician should be concerned about the possibility of occult tubal cancer. Fallopian tube cancer may be found incidentally in asymptomatic women at the time of abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy.
# Chunk 1648
Prognosis The overall 5-year survival for patients with epithelial tubal carcinomas is about 40%. This number is higher than for patients with ovarian cancer and reﬂects the somewhat higher proportion of patients diagnosed with early-stage disease. These data may reﬂect the fact that some advanced stage tubal cancers were classified as ovarian cancers. The reported 5-year survival rate for patients with stage I disease is only about 65%. The 5-year survival rate for patients with stage II disease is 50% to 60%, but it is only 10% to 20% for patients with stages III and IV disease (480,485).
# Chunk 1649
92.

Malkasian GD, Knapp RC, Lavin PT, et al. Preoperative evaluation of serum CA 125 levels in premenopausal and postmenopausal patients with pelvic masses: discrimination of benign from malignant disease. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1988;159:341–346.
# Chunk 1650
412.

Kammerer-Doak D, Baurick K, Black W, et al. Endodermal sinus tumor and embryonal carcinoma of the ovary in a 53-year-old woman. Gynecol Oncol 1996;63:133–137.
# Chunk 1651
The single most important prognostic factor is lymph node status: 5-year survival without groin node metastases is greater than 90%; with groin node metastases 5-year survival is 50%.
# Chunk 1652
Following the reports of Taussig in the United States and Way in Great Britain, radical vulvectomy and en bloc groin dissection, with or without pelvic lymphadenectomy, was standard treatment for all patients with operable disease (6,7). Postoperative morbidity was high and prolonged hospitalization common. During the past 25 years, there were significant advances in the management of vulvar cancer, reﬂecting a paradigm shift toward a more conservative surgical approach without compromised survival and with markedly decreased physical and psychological morbidity: 1.
# Chunk 1653
Approximately 90% to 92% of all invasive vulvar cancers are of the squamous cell type.

Squamous carcinomas of the vulva can be divided into distinct histologic subtypes designated as basaloid carcinoma, warty carcinoma, and keratinizing squamous carcinoma (16). Mitoses are noted in these malignancies, but atypical keratinization is the histologic hallmark of invasive vulvar cancer (26). Most vulvar squamous carcinomas reveal keratinization (Fig. 38.1). Histologic features that correlate with the occurrence of inguinal lymph node metastasis are lymph–vascular space invasion, tumor thickness, depth of stromal invasion, histologic pattern of invasion (spray and stellate versus broad and pushing), and increased amount of keratin (27–30).
# Chunk 1654
The overall incidence of inguinal-femoral lymph node metastases is reported to be about 32% (41,43,46–56) (Table 38.2). Metastases to pelvic nodes occur in about 12% of cases. Pelvic nodal metastases are rare (0.6%) in the absence of groin node involvement, but they occur in about 16% of cases with positive groin nodes (Table 38.2). The risk increases to 33% in the presence of clinically suspicious groin nodes and to 40% to 50% if there are three or more pathologically positive inguinal-femoral nodes (33,48,57–60). The incidence of lymph node
# Chunk 1655
Prognosis and Survival Survival of patients with vulvar cancer correlates with FIGO stage (69). The prognosis for patients with early-stage disease is generally good (Table 38.5). The single most important prognostic factor is lymph node status (54–56,59,70,71). A report from the Mayo Clinic on 330 patients with primary squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva demonstrated a significant correlation between lymph node status and risk of treatment failure, especially in the first 2 years following initial therapy: 44.2% overall recurrence rate with positive versus 17.5% with negative lymph nodes. More than one-third of relapses presented 5 years or more after initial therapy (72). There is a strong negative correlation between the number of positive lymph nodes and survival (Table 38.6). Patients with negative lymph nodes have a 5-year survival rate of over 80%; for patients with positive nodes 5-year survival falls below 50%. The number of positive nodes is of critical importance: Patients with one microscopically positive lymph node have a prognosis similar to those with all negative lymph nodes, whereas patients with three or more positive nodes have a poor prognosis and a 2-year survival rate of 20% (73). The survival rate for patients with positive pelvic nodes is about 11% (74). In addition
# Chunk 1656
During the past 20 years, several investigators advocated a radical local excision rather than a radical vulvectomy for the primary lesion for patients with T1b tumors (37,49,79,80). Regardless of whether a radical vulvectomy or a radical local excision is performed, the surgical margins adjacent to the tumor are the same. An analysis of the literature indicates that the incidence of local invasive recurrence after radical local excision or radical hemivulvectomy is not higher than that after radical vulvectomy (36,49,74,81–83). This finding suggests that in the presence of an otherwise normal-appearing vulva, radical local excision is a safe surgical option, regardless of the size of the tumor or the depth of invasion. Based on cumulative data of 413 patients reported in four studies, an 8 mm or greater histopathological resection margin results in a high rate of local disease control (81,84–86). Of the 252 patients whose tumors were resected with margins of 8 mm or greater, 2.4% experienced a local recurrence, compared to 30.3% of the 161 patients whose margins were less than 8 mm. Neither clinical tumor size nor the presence of coexisting benign vulvar pathology correlated with local recurrence. It is important to bear in mind that paraffin-embedded tissue shrinks by about 25%. At the time of radical local excision, at least a 1-cm grossly negative margin, without putting the skin under tension, should be obtained and extended down to the level of the inferior fascia of the urogenital diaphragm.
# Chunk 1657
To achieve primary surgical clearance for tumors involving the upper urethra, anus, rectum, or rectovaginal septum, pelvic exenteration is needed in addition to radical vulvectomy and inguinal-femoral lymphadenectomy, which carries an extremely high physical and psychological morbidity (95,96). Reported 5-year survival rates with this approach are about 50% (97– 100). For many of these patients, a combined approach of surgery and radiation therapy offers improved survival and reduced morbidity and is the preferred treatment approach. Numerous small prospective and retrospective series report on the use of external beam radiation, often with concomitant chemotherapy to shrink the primary tumor. Reported initial response rates to chemoradiation are 80% to 90%, and operability is achieved in 63% to 92% of cases (101–108).
# Chunk 1658
As experience with this combination therapy evolved, it appeared that external beam therapy is appropriate for most cases, with more selective use of brachytherapy. The extensiveness of the surgery is significantly modified. A limited vulvar resection is advocated, and bulky N2 and N3 nodes are resected without full groin lymphadenectomy to avoid the leg edema associated with groin lymphadenectomy and radiation. With this combined radiation-surgical approach, 5-year survival rates as high as 76% are reported (110). With the experience accrued, preoperative radiation, with or without concurrent chemotherapy, is regarded as the first treatment of choice for patients with advanced vulvar cancer who would otherwise require some type of pelvic exenteration or stoma. Neoadjuvant therapy is not justified in patients with tumors that can be adequately treated with primary radical vulvectomy and bilateral groin node dissection.
# Chunk 1659
If clinically evident groin metastases, any extracapsular spread or two or more microscopically positive groin nodes are found, the patient is at increased risk of groin and pelvic recurrence and should receive postoperative groin and pelvic irradiation. In 1977, the GOG initiated a prospective trial in which patients with positive groin nodes were randomized to either ipsilateral pelvic node dissection or bilateral pelvic plus groin irradiation (60). The survival rate for the radiation group (68% at 2 years) was significantly better than the survival rate for the pelvic lymphadenectomy group (54% at 2 years) (p = 0.03). The survival advantage was limited to patients with clinically evident groin nodes or more than one microscopically positive groin node. Groin recurrence occurred in 3 of 59 patients (5%) treated with radiation, compared with 13 of 55 (23.6%) patients treated with lymphadenectomy (p = 0.02). Four patients who received radiation had a pelvic recurrence, compared with one who had lymphadenectomy. These data indicate no benefit from pelvic irradiation compared with pelvic lymphadenectomy for the prevention of pelvic recurrence, but they do highlight the value of groin irradiation in preventing groin recurrence in patients with multiple positive groin nodes.
# Chunk 1660
Most recurrences of vulvar cancer occur within the first 2 years from initial therapy, with groin recurrences occurring sooner (median time to recurrence 6 to 7 months) than vulvar recurrences (median time to recurrence 3 years) (72,145–147). About one-third of vulvar cancer relapses present 5 or more years after initial therapy (72). In a long-term follow-up study at the Mayo Clinic, nearly 1 in 10 patients with vulvar cancer had a late (longer than 5 years) reoccurrence of disease (72). Over 95% of those late relapses had local reoccurrences (same site recurrence or second primary vulvar site). Because of this propensity for late local reoccurrence, regular and long-term careful examinations of the vulva and groin constitute the cornerstone of posttreatment surveillance for these patients.
# Chunk 1661
The published literature on the management and outcome of recurrent disease is limited. The timing and primary site of recurrence is critical to the prognosis postrecurrence. Although groin recurrences tend to occur early and are nearly always fatal, 5-year overall survival rates of 50% to 70% are reported for patients with surgically treated isolated vulvar recurrences and more than 60% of patients with local recurrence or reoccurrence were alive at 20 years in the Mayo Clinic long-term follow-up study (72,147,148).
# Chunk 1662
It is accepted that lesions with less than 1 mm of invasion may be treated with radical local excision alone (165,172). With more invasive lesions, en bloc resection of the primary tumor and regional groin nodes was traditionally recommended. In the past 15 years, radical vulvectomy was performed less frequently and survival did not seem to be compromised (173). One study reported on 32 patients with vulvar melanoma who underwent local excision (n = 14), simple vulvectomy (n = 7), or radical resection (n = 11) (174). No group had a superior survival rate, although the overall survival rate at 5 years was only 25%. Another study reported on 59 patients who underwent radical vulvectomy and 19 who underwent more conservative resections (163). Survival was not improved by the more radical approach, and they recommended radical local excision for the primary tumor, with groin dissection for tumors with a thickness of more than 1 mm. A recent SEER data analysis of 644 patients with vulvar melanoma did not find a survival difference in patients with localized disease treated with more conservative versus radical surgery. Five-year disease specific survival rates for patients undergoing conservative surgery for localized disease were 75% versus 79% for those undergoing radical surgery (174). Literature on cutaneous melanoma suggests that a 1-cm margin of skin and subcutaneous tissue is sufficient for the treatment of superficial localized melanoma (Breslow tumor thickness <0.76 mm), whereas a 2-cm margin suffices for intermediate-thickness lesions (1 to 4 mm) (175,176). At least a 1-cm tumor-free deep surgical margin is recommended, irrespective of tumor thickness. Because melanomas commonly involve the clitoris and labia minora, the vaginourethral margin of resection is a common site of failure, and care should be taken to obtain an adequate “inner” resection margin (177). A 10-year survival rate of 61% was shown for lateral lesions, compared with 37% for medial lesions (p = 0.027) (149).
# Chunk 1663
Controversy exists as to which patients may benefit from inguinal-femoral lymphadenectomy. A prospective study by the GOG demonstrated that the risk of inguinal-femoral lymph node metastasis correlated with the Breslow microstage (165). As with cutaneous melanoma, it appears that for superficial lesions (Breslow tumor thickness <0.76 mm), the risk for nodal spread is so low that routine lymphadenectomy is not indicated as long as the nodes appear clinically free of disease. For intermediate-thickness (1 to 4 mm) cutaneous melanoma, a randomized controlled trial of elective lymph node dissection versus observation showed a 5-year survival advantage for patients who underwent elective lymph node dissection, who were younger than 60 years, and whose tumors were characterized by 1-to 2-mm thickness and no ulcerations (178). Patients with deeply invasive cutaneous melanomas (>4-mm tumor thickness) have a high risk of regional and systemic metastases and are unlikely to benefit from regional lymphadenectomy (179). Given some of the epidemiologic, histologic, and prognostic differences between vulvar and cutaneous melanoma, extrapolation of these data to the vulva should be done with caution (180). Specific to patients with vulvar melanoma, there is a small body of literature to suggest that there may be a clinical benefit in elective groin lymphadenectomy and the resection of clinically positive nodes (162,163). The role of the sentinel lymph node procedure in vulvar melanoma is under investigation. In cutaneous melanoma, sentinel lymph node biopsy replaced elective lymph node dissection in patients with clinically negative nodes, as it provides the same prognostic information with reduced morbidity. Only patients with metastatic disease undergo completion lymphadenectomy. Results from an interim analysis of the Multicenter Selective Lymphadenectomy Trial confirmed the prognostic value of the sentinel node procedure. These data suggest that an immediate completion lymphadenectomy following detection of a positive sentinel lymph node improves survival in patients with regional nodal metastases (181). Studies on the sentinel lymph node procedure for vulvar melanoma are limited. A review of the literature estimates a false-negative rate of about 15% (182). Although the sentinel node procedure appears appropriate for select patients with vulvar melanoma, the importance of an expert team familiar with the procedure and consisting of a gynecologic oncologist, a nuclear medicine specialist, and a pathologist with expertise in microstaging cannot be overemphasized.
# Chunk 1664
Prognosis The behavior of melanomas can be unpredictable, but the prognosis is poor. The reported 5year overall survival rate for vulvar melanoma is in the range of 50% to 60% (158,159,171). A SEER database analysis showed disease-specific survival rates for patients with localized, regional, and distant disease of 76%, 39%, and 22%, respectively (171). Localized disease, negative lymph nodes, and younger age were significant independent prognostic factors for improved survival. Because vulvar melanoma has a propensity for late recurrences, 5-year survival may not reﬂect cure. Prognosis is best predicted by microstaging. Patients with lesions invading to 1 mm or less have a good prognosis, but as depth of invasion increases, the prognosis worsens (Table 38.8). Tumor volume is reported to correlate with prognosis; patients whose lesions have a volume less than 100 mm3 have an excellent prognosis (184). Additional prognostic factors are the patient’s age, AJCC stage, presence of multifocal or satellite lesions, tumor ulceration, central tumor location, histologic growth pattern, lymph–vascular space involvement, and aneuploidy (158,162–164,194–197).
# Chunk 1665
Treatment Traditionally, treatment was radical vulvectomy with bilateral groin and pelvic node dissection (201). There seems to be no indication for dissection of the pelvic nodes in the absence of positive groin nodes, and good results were reported with hemivulvectomy or radical local excision for the primary tumor (199). Because these lesions are deep in the vulva, extensive dissection is required in the ischiorectal fossa; surgical margins are often close. Postoperative radiation to the vulva decreased the likelihood of local recurrence from 27% (6 of 22 patients) to 7% (1 of 14 patients) (199). If the ipsilateral groin nodes are positive, bilateral groin and pelvic irradiation may decrease regional recurrence. If the tumor is fixed to the inferior pubic ramus or involves adjacent structures, such as the anal sphincter or rectum, preoperative radiation and chemotherapy is preferable to avoid ultraradical surgery. A recent report of 10 consecutive patients with primary Bartholin gland carcinoma suggests that treatment with radiation or chemoradiation using teletherapy combined with a boost to the primary site or regional nodes and/or interstitial brachytherapy may offer an effective alternative to surgery with 3-and 5-year survival rates of 72% and 66%, respectively (202).
# Chunk 1666
Rhabdomyosarcomas are the most common soft tissue sarcomas in childhood, and 20% involve the pelvis or genitourinary tract (227). Dramatic gains were made in the treatment of these tumors during the past 20 years. Previously, radical pelvic surgery was the standard approach, but results were poor. A multimodal approach evolved, and survival rates improved significantly, with a corresponding decrease in morbidity. In a report of the experience of the Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study I and II (1972 to 1984) with primary tumors of the female genital tract, nine patients aged 1 to 19 years had primary vulvar tumors, and these tumors were often regarded as a form of Bartholin gland infection before biopsy (228). They were all managed with chemotherapy (vincristine,or actinomycin D and cyclophosphamide and doxorubicin), with or without radiotherapy. Wide local excision of the tumor, with or without inguinal-femoral lymphadenectomy, was carried out before or after the chemotherapy. Seven of the nine patients were free of disease 4 or more years from diagnosis, one patient was free of disease when lost to follow-up at 5 years, and one patient was alive with disease.
# Chunk 1667
Lymphomas The genital tract may be involved primarily by malignant lymphomas but, more commonly, involvement is a manifestation of systemic disease. In the lower genital tract, the cervix is most often involved, followed by the vulva and the vagina (229). Most patients are in their third to sixth decades of life, and about three-fourths of the cases involve diffuse large cell or histiocytic non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas. The remainder are nodular or Burkitt’s lymphomas. Treatment is by surgical excision followed by chemotherapy and radiation or both, and the overall 5-year survival rate is about 70% (229).
# Chunk 1668
Hyperthyroidism Clinically evident hyperthyroidism was observed in 7% of patients with a complete molar gestation. These women may have tachycardia, warm skin, and tremor, and the diagnosis can be confirmed by detection of elevated serum levels of free thyroxine (T4) and tri-iodothyronine (T3). Clinical evidence of hyperthyroidism with complete mole is rare.
# Chunk 1669
Trophoblastic Embolization Respiratory distress rarely occurs in patients with a complete mole. It is usually diagnosed in patients with excessive uterine size and markedly elevated hCG levels. These patients may have chest pain, dyspnea, tachypnea, and tachycardia and may experience severe respiratory distress during and after molar evacuation. Auscultation of the chest usually reveals diffuse rales, and chest radiographic evaluation may show bilateral pulmonary infiltrates. Respiratory distress usually resolves within 72 hours with cardiopulmonary support. In some circumstances, patients may require mechanical ventilation. Respiratory insufficiency may result from trophoblastic embolization and the cardiopulmonary complications of thyroid storm, preeclampsia, and massive ﬂuid replacement.
# Chunk 1670
After molar evacuation, patients should be monitored with weekly determinations of β-subunit hCG levels until these levels are normal for 3 consecutive weeks, followed by monthly determinations until the levels are normal for 6 consecutive months (39). The average time to achieve the first normal hCG level after evacuation is about 9 weeks (40). After achieving nondetectable serum hCG levels, the risk of developing GTN approaches zero (41–43). If these findings are confirmed, it is possible that postmolar hCG surveillance could be safely abbreviated.
# Chunk 1671
All patients with high-risk GTN (stages II–IV) should be treated with primary intensive combination chemotherapy and the selective use of radiation therapy and surgery. Between July 1965 and June 2008, of the 103 patients with high-risk GTN stages II–IV treated at the NETDC, 83 (80.5%) achieved complete remission. Before 1975, when single agent therapy was used primarily to treat patients with stage IV GTN, only 6 of 20 patients (30%) attained complete remission. Since 1975, 17 of 21 patients (80.9%) achieved remission. This improvement in survival resulted from the use of multimodal therapy, including primary combination chemotherapy in conjunction with radiation and surgical treatment. Patients with stage IV disease are at the greatest risk of developing rapidly progressive and unresponsive tumors despite intensive multimodal therapy. They should be referred to centers with special expertise in the management of trophoblastic disease.
# Chunk 1672
An algorithm for the management of persistent GTN is presented in Figure 39.7.

GTN Choriocarcinoma Mole Evacuation and  weekly hCG levels ↓ hCG levels ↑ or plateau of hCG levels Careful follow-up and contraception Distant metastasis Uterine disease Pelvic metastasis Lung metastasis Stage IVStage I Stage II Stage III Combination chemotherapy ± surgery ± RT Single drug chemotherapy or hysterectomy Calculate risk Low High ResistantFollow-up Metastatic work-up Figure 39.7 Management of gestational trophoblastic tumor. GTN, gestational trophoblastic neoplasia; hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; RT, radiotherapy. (From Berkowitz RS, Goldstein DP. Gestational trophoblastic neoplasia. In: Berek JS, Hacker NF. Berek and Hacker’s Gynecologic Oncology, 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2010;607, with permission.) 1473
# Chunk 1673
Technique of Single-Agent Treatment patients were randomized to receive either biweekly ActD 1.25mg/m2 intravenous (IV) bolus or weekly MTX 30 mg/m2 intramuscular (IM). The remission rate was 58% in the MTX arm and 73% in the ActD arm. These results suggest that ActD is superior to the weekly MTX regimen in treating low-risk GTN. Before recommending pulse ActD as the primary modality in the treatment of patients with low-risk GTN, it is important to be aware of the potential for significant toxicity of this regimen compared to those receiving MTX. All patients with low-risk disease in this study ultimately achieved remission, regardless of their initial response. Regarding the true comparative effectiveness of these agents, it would be prudent to compare the biweekly ActD regimen to the more commonly used 5-day or 8-day MTX regimens, which offer a high initial remission rate with minimal toxicity.
# Chunk 1674
An evaluation of 185 patients treated with MTX-FA revealed that complete remission was achieved in 162 patients (87.6%); of these patients, 132 (81.5%) required only one course of MTX-FA to attain remission (72). MTX-FA induced remission in 147 of 163 patients (90.2%) with stage I GTN and in 15 of 22 patients (68.2%) with low-risk stages II and III GTN. Resistance to therapy was more common in patients with choriocarcinoma, metastasis, and pretreatment serum hCG levels higher than 50,000 mIU/mL. After treatment with MTX-FA, thrombocytopenia, granulocytopenia, and hepatotoxicity developed in 3 (1.6%), 11 (5.9%), and 26 (14.1%) patients, respectively. Thus, MTX-FA achieved an excellent therapeutic outcome with minimal toxicity and attained this goal with limited exposure to chemotherapy.
# Chunk 1675
The serum hCG level is measured weekly after each course of chemotherapy. The hCG regression curve serves as the primary basis for determining the need for additional treatment.
# Chunk 1676
False-Positive hCG Tests The concept of false-positive hCG tests caused by heterophile antibodies is critical to remember when following patients with molar gestation or GTN. Some assay systems used by commercial laboratories are particularly vulnerable to false-positive tests resulting from the presence of heterophilic antibodies in the test kits they were using (89). For the most part this problem was corrected by adding blocking antibodies to the test systems. Since the hCG molecules in GTN are significantly more degraded or heterogeneous than in normal pregnancy, with higher proportions of free B-hCG, nicked hCG, and B-core fragments, it is important to use an assay that detects both intact hCG and its metabolites and fragments in order to accurately assess the tumor burden (90–92). Additionally, cross-reactivity with luteinizing hormone (LH) can cause confusion when dealing with women in the perimenopausal age group whose hCG level may plateau above assay even when there is no longer active tumor. The use of hormone suppression will suppress LH and prevent unnecessary treatment. False-positive hCG tests caused by heterophile agglutinins or LH release may cause confusion in the diagnosis of early pregnancy, ectopic pregnancy, and so-called phantom choriocarcinoma. When there is concern about the possibility of a false-positive serum hCG test, a urine sample should be tested, because patients with phantom hCG generally have no measurable hCG in a parallel urine sample.
# Chunk 1677
Family History Of women who develop breast cancer, 20% to 30% have a family history of the disease. Although any family history of breast cancer increases the overall relative risk, this risk is not significantly increased if the disease was diagnosed postmenopausally in a first-degree or more distant relative (3). If a woman’s mother or sister had unilateral breast cancer premenopausally, her lifetime risk of developing the disease approaches 30%, whereas a woman whose mother or sister had bilateral breast cancers premenopausally has at least a 40% to 50% lifetime risk. The increased incidence in these women is probably the result of inherited oncogenes.
# Chunk 1678
Approximately 5% to 10% of breast cancers have an inherited basis. All inherited genes are autosomal dominant but have variable penetrance. Men carry the gene 50% of the time. The most common mutations are the BRCA1 (chromosome 17q21) and BRCA2 (chromosome 13q12-13) gene deletions. Carriers of these germline mutations have up to a 4% per year risk of developing breast cancer and a lifetime risk that ranges from 35% to 85% (4). These individuals have up to a 65% risk of developing a contralateral breast cancer. The BRCA1 mutation is associated with an increased risk of ovarian and prostate cancer, whereas BRCA2 carriers, although less common, demonstrate increased risks of male breast and prostate cancers. Both mutations are rare in the general public (0.1%) but are more commonly identified in Jews of Ashkenazi descent (1% to 2.3%) (5). Genetic testing is available and should be considered if there is a high likelihood that results will be positive and will be used to inﬂuence decisions regarding the clinical management of the care of the patient and her family. Patients with three of more relatives with breast or ovarian cancer with one of the relatives being diagnosed before the age of 50, two first-or second-degree relatives with breast or ovarian cancer, any relative with male breast cancer, patients whose cancer has been diagnosed before the age of 50, and any patients with both breast and ovarian cancer in their family should undergo genetic counseling for BRCA testing. Ashkenazi Jewish patients should undergo genetic counseling if any first-degree relative, or two second-degree relatives on the same side have breast or ovarian cancer (6). Genetic testing is increasingly important given the evidence that prophylactic surgery may prevent new cancers from occurring, as well as prolong survival, in some cases. A prospective multicenter cohort study of 2,482 women with BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations between 1974 and 2008 showed risk-reducing mastectomy was associated with a decreased risk of breast cancer. Risk-reducing salpingooophorectomy was associated with decreased risk of ovarian cancer, first diagnosis of breast cancer, all-cause mortality, breast cancer–specific mortality, and ovarian cancer–specific mortality (7).
# Chunk 1679
The standard screening modalities of mammography and physical examination are complementary. Approximately 10% to 50% of cancers detected mammographically are not palpable, whereas physical examination detects 10% to 20% of cancers not seen radiographically (17). The purpose of screening is to detect tumors when they are small (<1 cm) and have the highest potential for surgical cure. Most trials show a 20% to 30% reduction in breast cancer mortality for women age 50 and older who undergo annual screening mammography. Data on screening women younger than 40 years are more controversial. Results from the Gothenburg screening trial showed a 45% reduction in mortality for women screened between the ages of 40 and 49 (18). Because of these findings, it is recommended that all women undergo yearly screening mammography starting at age 40, along with clinical breast examination at least every 3 years (19). Monthly breast self-examination (BSE) is no longer recommended because there is little evidence to show that BSE is superior to heightened breast awareness such that any new symptoms related to the breast in daily activities would be reported promptly when noticed. BSE was not shown to improve survival. Women should be informed about the benefits and limitations of monthly BSE, mainly the risk of a false-positive result. Women who would still prefer to perform BSE should be instructed in the technique and occasionally have their technique reviewed. No other tests, including ultrasonography, computed tomography (CT) scans, sestamibi scans, positron emission tomography (PET) scans, or serum blood markers, have been shown to be effective screening modalities. Screening guidelines recommended by the American College of Radiology and the American Cancer Society are presented in Table 40.1. In 2010, the ACS recommended annual screening mammography and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) starting at age 30 for women with a known BRCA mutation and other high-risk genetic syndromes, women who are untested with a first-degree relative with the BRCA mutation and women with an approximately 20% to 25% or greater lifetime risk of breast cancer, or women who have been treated with radiation for Hodgkin’s lymphoma (19). Although breast MRI may prove to be advantageous for other women with an elevated risk of breast cancer, there
# Chunk 1680
When a dominant breast mass is identified, the presence of a carcinoma must be considered, and biopsy should be performed to establish a tissue diagnosis. About 30% to 40% of lesions clinically believed to be malignant will be benign on histologic examination (20). Conversely, 25% of clinically benign-appearing lesions will be malignant when biopsied (21).
# Chunk 1681
Table 40.2 Continued pNX Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed (e.g., previously removed or not removed for pathologic study) pN0 No regional lymph node metastasis identified histologically pN0(i−) No regional lymph node metastases histologically, negative IHC pN0(i+) Malignant cells in regional lymph node(s) no greater than 0.2 mm (detected by H&E or IHC including ITC) pN0(mol−) No regional lymph node metastases histologically, negative molecular findings (RT-PCR) pN0(mol+) Positive molecular findings (RT-PCR), but no regional lymph node metastases detected by histology or IHC pN1 Micrometastases; or metastases in 1 to 3 axillary lymph nodes; and/or in internal mammary nodes with metastases detected by sentinel lymph node biopsy but not clinically detected pN1mi Micrometastasis (>0.2 mm and/or more than 200 cells, but none >2.0 mm) pN1a Metastases in 1 to 3 axillary lymph nodes, at least one metastasis >2.0 mm pN1b Metastases in internal mammary nodes with micrometastases or macrometastases detected by sentinel lymph node biopsy but not clinically apparent pN1c Metastases in 1 to 3 axillary lymph nodes, and in internal mammary lymph nodes with micrometastases or macrometastases detected by sentinel lymph node biopsy but not clinically detected pN2 Metastases in 4 to 9 axillary lymph nodes; or in clinically detected internal mammary lymph nodes in the absence of axillary lymph node metastases pN2a Metastases in 4 to 9 axillary lymph nodes (at least one tumor deposit >2.0 mm) pN2b Metastases in clinically detected internal mammary lymph nodes in the absence of axillary lymph node metastases pN3 Metastases in ten or more axillary lymph nodes; or in infraclavicular (level III axillary) lymph nodes; or in clinically detected ipsilateral internal mammary lymph nodes in the presence of one or more positive level I, II axillary lymph nodes; or in more than three axillary lymph nodes and in internal mammary lymph nodes with micrometastases or macrometastases detected by sentinel lymph node biopsy but not clinically detected; or in ipsilateral supraclavicular lymph nodes pN3a Metastases in ten or more axillary lymph nodes (at least one tumor deposit greater than 2.0 mm); or metastasis to the infraclavicular (level III axillary lymph) nodes pN3b Metastases in clinically detected ipsilateral internal mammary nodes in the presence of one or more positive axillary lymph nodes; or in more than three axillary lymph nodes and in internal mammary lymph nodes with micrometastases or macrometastases detected by sentinel lymph node biopsy but not clinically detected
# Chunk 1682
Preoperative Evaluation The extent of the preoperative workup varies with the initial stage of the disease (30). For most patients with small tumors, clinically negative lymph nodes, and no evidence of metastasis (TNM stage I), the preoperative evaluation should consist of bilateral mammography, chest radiography, complete blood count, and screening blood chemistry tests. Bone, CT, and MRI scanning are unnecessary unless there are symptoms or abnormal blood chemistry levels to suggest the existence of bone or intra-abdominal involvement. For patients with clinical stage II, node-positive disease, a bone scan is recommended, but CT scan of the abdomen is not necessary unless symptoms or laboratory results suggest liver disease. Patients with clinical stage III or stage IV disease should undergo both bone and liver scanning. PET scanning is becoming a popular means of total body scanning for breast cancer, but there have been concerns that this modality may miss some bony metastasis. A study found that PET scan is highly concordant (81%) with bone scan in a study of 132 paired studies of breast cancer patients (31). Of 31 (19%) discordant pairs, 12 patients had pathology proven metastatic disease. Nine of these 12 patients had a positive PET scan but negative bone scan, supporting the use of PET scan in detecting osseous metastasis in breast cancer, although further studies are needed to ascertain whether this modality should supplant the use of bone scan in this setting.
# Chunk 1683
Radiation therapy alone, without excision of the tumor, is associated with a high local failure rate, as is local excision without radiation (57–60). Throughout the last quarter of the 20th century, a paradigm shift occurred in the surgical management of breast cancer. Data from the NSABP B-04 trial, for which 25-year follow-up exists, established the equivalency of radical versus total mastectomy with regard to overall survival. Shortly after initiation of the B-04 trial, a number of studies were designed to evaluate the efficacy of breast preservation among women with early-stage breast cancers. The Milan trial, a major prospective randomized trial that began accruing patients in 1973, compared treatment with either radical mastectomy or a combination of quadrantectomy, axillary lymph node dissection, and postoperative radiation therapy. In total, 701 clinically node-negative patients with noncentrally located, small tumors (<2 cm) (T1 N0 M0) were enrolled. After 25 years of follow-up, there continues to be no statistically significant difference between the two groups in either local control or overall survival rates (61).
# Chunk 1684
In 1991 intraoperative lymphatic mapping and sentinel lymph node dissection were introduced to address these problems (72). The concept behind sentinel lymph node dissection is best described by the definition of a sentinel node. The sentinel node is the lymph node that has the greatest potential to harbor metastasis if axillary disease is present. Examination of the sentinel lymph node dissection can accurately predict the status of the entire nodal basin. Removing only one or two lymph nodes can accurately stage the axilla with minimal morbidity. Numerous investigators have demonstrated that, with proper training, sentinel lymph node dissection identification rates range from 90% to 99%, with false-negative rates of less than 5% found in most large studies (73). In one study of 107 patients with T1 and T2 breast cancer who underwent sentinel lymph node dissection followed by axillary lymph node dissection, the sentinel node was successfully identified in 100 patients (93.5%) (73). There were no false-negative results, and the sentinel node accurately predicted axillary status in all 100 patients.
# Chunk 1685
Patients with lymph node metastasis have a higher risk of recurrence than patients with node-negative disease. The 10-year survival rate for women with palpable metastatic axillary lymph nodes who fail to receive systemic therapy is about 50% to 60%. The number of lymph nodes involved and the presence of extracapsular invasion are important indicators of poor prognosis.
# Chunk 1686
Historically, the most frequently used adjuvant combination chemotherapy was CMF: cyclophosphamide (C), methotrexate (M), and 5-ﬂuorouracil (5-FU). In the original study by Bonadonna et al., patients with positive axillary lymph nodes were randomized to receive either 12 monthly cycles of CMF or no therapy after radical mastectomy (96). A statistically significant benefit was found with CMF treatment for premenopausal patients, especially those with one to three positive nodes. A subsequent study showed six cycles of CMF to be as effective as 12 cycles (97). No significant effect was seen for postmenopausal women, which may result from the fact that these women were less likely to tolerate the full course of therapy (98). After 20 years of follow-up, this trial demonstrated a persistent survival advantage for premenopausal women receiving CMF adjuvant therapy (99). In a later study involving node-negative, estrogen receptor–negative breast cancer patients, after 12 years of follow-up, 71% of patients treated with adjuvant CMF remained disease free compared with 48% in the control group, regardless of menopausal status (100).
# Chunk 1687
Several landmark trials showed that taxanes such as paclitaxel and docetaxel in combination with anthracyclines have significant efficacy and are the new standard adjuvant therapy for node-positive breast cancer. The Cancer and Leukemia Group B was the first to show a 17% improvement in the rate of recurrence and 18% reduction in the rate of death with the addition of paclitaxel to cyclophosphamide (102). Given concerns over the cardiotoxicity of anthracyclines as well as the 0.21% risk of leukemia after the AC regimen at 5 years, a US oncology trial randomized stage I, II, and III patients to AC or docetaxel and cyclophosphamide (TC) every 3 weeks for four cycles and found that after 7 years’ follow-up disease-free survival and overall survival statistically favored the TC group (103). This was the first trial to compare a taxane-based regimen to an anthracycline-based regimen. Concerns remain because multiple trials demonstrate that the duration of therapy is significant and the TC regimen used was a short-duration treatment of four cycles (104). Until results of an ongoing US oncology trial designed to assess whether an incremental benefit exists for adding an anthracycline to TC-based therapy for six cycles on a 3-week dosing schedule for Her-2/neu negative patients, oncologists will need to decide whether to add anthracycline to taxane-based chemotherapy guided by their clinical judgment.
# Chunk 1688
Hormonal Therapy Hormonal manipulation with tamoxifen or an aromatase inhibitor, used alone or in combination with a cytotoxic regimen, is beneficial in select groups of women. Tamoxifen,an estrogen analogue, offers substantial benefits in both premenopausal and postmenopausal women. Taken at a dose of 20 mg per day for 5 years, tamoxifen reduces the annual risk of recurrence by about 50% and the annual risk of death by about 25%. These benefits occur in women with estrogen receptor–positive disease regardless of chemotherapy treatment (107).
# Chunk 1689
Tamoxifen, when used in combination with cytotoxic chemotherapy, improves survival in women with positive axillary lymph nodes and tumor estrogen receptor expression (108). In patients with node-negative, estrogen receptor–positive disease, the addition of tamoxifen to chemotherapy improved disease-free survival rates after 5 years of follow-up (109). In NSABP study B-14, 2,644 patients with estrogen receptor–positive tumors and no axillary metastases were randomized to either tamoxifen (10 mg orally twice daily for 5 years) or a placebo control. After a 4-year median follow-up, the disease-free survival rate for the 1,318 patients treated with tamoxifen was 82% compared with 77% for the 1,326 patients treated with placebo (p = .00001), again regardless of menopausal status.
# Chunk 1690
The Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group (EBCTCG) performed a meta-analysis of adjuvant systemic therapy for breast cancer. They analyzed randomized trials involving adjuvant systemic hormonal, cytotoxic, or immune therapy administered to more than 75,000 women with stage I or II carcinoma. The investigators concluded that for post-menopausal women with estrogen receptor–positive tumors, tamoxifen daily for at least 2 years had a significant beneficial effect on disease-free survival rates, with these effects lasting up to 10 years. The incidence of both carcinoma in the contralateral breast and death rate from heart disease decreased.
# Chunk 1691
In addition to tamoxifen, aromatase inhibitors have been approved for use in the adjuvant treatment of patients with estrogen receptor–positive cancers. Aromatase inhibitors act by inhibiting the aromatase enzyme, thus blocking the conversion of androgens into estrogens. These drugs should be used only in postmenopausal patients or premenopausal women who have undergone chemical ovarian suppression or oophorectomy. Although aromatase inhibitors cause fewer episodes of thrombotic events, hot ﬂashes, and endometrial cancers, musculoskeletal symptoms and osteoporosis are more commonly encountered among aromatase inhibitor users than those taking tamoxifen. Results from the anastrozole (Arimidex), tamoxifen, Alone or in Combination (ATAC) trial showed overall lower recurrence rates, as well as fewer contralateral tumors, among women treated with anastrozole alone after 68 months of follow-up (110). A meta-analysis confirmed that aromatase inhibitor therapy alone conferred a 2.9% absolute decrease in recurrence; aromatase inhibitor therapy after 2 to 3 years of tamoxifen conferred a 3.1% reduction in recurrence, as well as a 0.7% decrease in mortality at 5-year follow-up, although additional long-term follow-up is needed (111). Based on these results, aromatase inhibitors are now often offered as a first-line treatment option for adjuvant therapy. Research suggests that conversion of patients from tamoxifen to an aromatase inhibitor, such as letrozole (Femara), after 2.5 or 5 years may improve survival, although concurrent use of the two agents offers no benefit (110,112).
# Chunk 1692
Adjuvant systemic therapy lowers the incidence of recurrence by 25% to 30%. It is important to understand that the proportional reduction in risk of relapse is relatively constant regardless of absolute risk (113). The EBCTCG meta-analysis showed that the risk reduction of recurrence and breast cancer–specific mortality from polychemotherapy occurs in all women, but the most benefit occurs in women under the age of 50 (Table 40.6). A meta-analysis from the EBCTCG assessing the effect of polychemotherapy and tamoxifen on estrogen receptor–poor breast cancer found that women under the age of 50 or between the ages of 50 and 69 had statistically significant decreases in 10-year risks of recurrence and mortality, with more benefit in women under the age of 50, confirming the results of the earlier study in patients with estrogen receptor–poor breast cancer (114). Tamoxifen did not add any benefit in patients with estrogen receptor–poor tumors. Adjuvant cytotoxic chemotherapy appears to affect the natural history of patients with either axillary node–negative or node–positive breast cancer. All high-risk patients with node-negative disease are considered candidates for adjuvant cytotoxic therapy.
# Chunk 1693
Paget’s Disease In the 1870s, Sir James Paget described a nipple lesion similar to eczema and recognized that this nipple change was associated with an underlying breast malignancy (121). The erosion results from invasion of the nipple and surrounding areola by characteristic large cells with irregular nuclei, now called Paget cells. Although the origin of these cells is much debated by pathologists, they are probably extensions of an underlying carcinoma into the major ducts of the nipple–areolar complex. There may be no visible changes associated with the initial invasion of the nipple. Often, the patient’s presenting symptom will be nipple discharge, which is actually a combination of serum and blood from the involved ducts. The patient may have a delay in the diagnosis because the presenting symptoms are overlooked. The diagnosis is established by incisional or punch biopsy of the area of the skin changes.
# Chunk 1694
Except for biopsy of the lesion to establish the diagnosis, surgery is not part of the initial management of inﬂammatory carcinoma. Mastectomy usually fails locally within 2 years of the initial diagnosis and does not improve overall or disease-free survival rates. Better results are achieved with a combination of chemotherapy and radiation therapy. Mastectomy may be indicated for patients who remain free of distant metastatic disease after initial chemotherapy and radiation (123).
# Chunk 1695
Lobular carcinoma in situ should not be considered a true malignancy but rather a risk factor for the subsequent development of invasive ductal or lobular carcinoma in either breast (124). A more appropriate nomenclature for lobular carcinoma in situ may be lobular neoplasia. Most women with lobular carcinoma in situ are premenopausal and have neither clinical nor mammographic signs of an abnormality. The lesion typically is not a discrete mass, but rather a multifocal entity within one or both breasts incidentally discovered by the pathologist during the evaluation of a completely unrelated issue. Lobular carcinoma in situ usually is managed with an excisional biopsy followed by careful surveillance with clinical breast examinations and mammography. Occasionally, a patient may request either bilateral prophylactic mastectomy or tamoxifen for chemoprevention. Women with lobular carcinoma in situ have a 1% per year and up to a 30% lifetime risk of developing an invasive cancer.
# Chunk 1696
Unlike patients with LCIS, 30% to 50% of patients with DCIS will develop an invasive ductal cancer within the same breast if treated by excisional biopsy alone (126).
# Chunk 1697
Although modified radical mastectomy was previously the standard treatment for intraductal carcinoma, more conservative surgery, with or without radiation therapy, yielded good results. In NSABP trial B17, 818 patients were randomly assigned to excision alone or excision followed by radiation therapy. The mean extent of DCIS lesions was 13 mm, and 88% were larger than 20 mm. All lesions were completely resected with negative margins. After a median follow-up of 43 months, the actuarial 5-year local recurrence rate was 10.4% without radiation versus 7.5% with radiation (p = .055) for noninvasive cancers, and 10.5% without radiation versus 2.9% with radiation (p > .001) for invasive cancers. Of 83 recurrences, only 9 (11%) were not in the index quadrant. A reanalysis with a mean follow-up of 90 months confirmed these results (127). These data suggest that segmental mastectomy offers excellent local control.
# Chunk 1698
Breast cancer complicates 1 in 3,000 pregnancies (129,130). It is the second most common malignancy seen in association with pregnancy, surpassed only by cervical cancer. Initial studies suggested a significantly worse prognosis for patients first diagnosed during pregnancy, but data indicate that the hormonal changes associated with pregnancy seem to have little, if any, inﬂuence on prognosis. When pregnant patients are matched stage for stage with nonpregnant patients, survival rates seem equivalent (131). Patients typically present with a painless mass. Up to 60% will have concurrent lymph node involvement. The evaluation includes imaging with ultrasonography and mammography, which, although controversial, expose the fetus to less than 0.02 cGy of radiation when used with proper abdominal shielding (132). If biopsy is warranted, the procedure can be performed safely and should not be delayed until after delivery. Needle biopsy is safe and easily accomplished in the office setting.
# Chunk 1699
Counseling regarding future childbearing is important for women who have had carcinoma of the breast. It was assumed that subsequent pregnancies would be detrimental because of the high levels of circulating estrogens, but there is no clear difference in survival for women who become pregnant after the diagnosis of breast cancer. One study evaluated the effect of subsequent pregnancy on overall survival after the diagnosis of early-stage breast cancer. Approximately 40% of the women in the study had node-positive disease. The 5-and 10-year survival rates were better in women who became pregnant than in matched pair controls who did not. This study suggests that subsequent pregnancy does not adversely affect the prognosis of early-stage breast cancer (135). A subsequent investigation demonstrated no increase in the relative risk of death for patients who gave birth more than 10 months after their initial diagnosis of cancer (136). Theoretically, it may be that only women with estrogen receptor–positive or progesterone-positive tumors would be affected deleteriously by subsequent pregnancy, but this possibility has not been studied. Because recurrences are most frequent within the first 2 to 3 years after diagnosis, patients with receptor-positive tumors and advanced-stage disease probably should wait until after that time before becoming pregnant again.
# Chunk 1700
101.

Fisher B, Brown AM, Dimitrov NV, et al. Two months of doxorubicin-cyclophosphamide with and without interval reinduction therapy compared with 6 months of cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and ﬂuorouracil in positive-node breast cancer patients with tamoxifen-nonresponsive tumors: results from the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project B-15. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1483–1496.
# Chunk 1701
Clinical Correlation: Frozen Sections

Sometimes, the pathologist may be asked to immediately evaluate tissue obtained during surgery, especially when in-stant pathologic diagnosis may determine how the surgery will proceed. There are several indications to perform such an evaluation, routinely known as a frozen section. Most commonly, a surgeon in the operating room requests a frozen section when no preoperative diagnosis was available or when unexpected intraoperative findings must be identi-fied. In addition, the surgeon may want to know whether all of a pathologic mass within the healthy tissue limit has been re-moved and whether the margin of the surgical resection is free of diseased tissue. Frozen sections are also done in combination with other procedures such as endoscopy or thin-needle biopsy to confirm whether the obtained biopsy material will be usable in further pathologic examinations. Three main steps are involved in frozen section prepa-ration:  Freezing the tissue sample. Small tissue samples are frozen either by using compressed carbon dioxide or by immersion in a cold fluid (isopentane) at a temperature of 50 C. Freezing can be achieved in a special high-efficiency refrigerator. Freezing makes the tissue solid and allows sectioning with a microtome.  Sectioning the frozen tissue. Sectioning is usually per-formed inside a cryostat, a refrigerated compartment containing a microtome. Because the tissue is frozen solid, it can be cut into extremely thin (5 to 10 m) sec-tions. The sections are then mounted on glass slides.  Staining the cut sections. Staining is done to differen-tiate cell nuclei from the rest of the tissue. The most common stains used for frozen sections are H&E, methylene blue (Fig. F1.1.1), and PAS stains. The entire process of preparation and evaluation of frozen sections may take as little as 10 minutes to complete. The total time to obtain results largely depends on the transport time of the tissue from the operating room to the pathology laboratory, on the pathologic technique used, and the expe-rience of the pathologist. The findings are then directly com-municated to the surgeon waiting in the operating room. aba b FIGURE F1.1.1 • Evaluation of a specimen obtained during surgery by frozen-section technique. a. This photomicrograph shows a specimen obtained from the large intestine that was prepared by frozen-section technique and stained with methylene blue. 160 b. Part of the specimen was fixed in formalin and processed as a routine H&E preparation. Examination of the frozen section revealed it to be normal. This diagnosis was later confirmed by examining the routinely prepared H&E specimen. 180. (Courtesy of Dr. Daniel W. Visscher.)  membrane phospholipid–protein (or carbohydrate) complexes.
# Chunk 1702
Similar light and electron microscopy histochemical procedures have been developed to demonstrate alkaline phosphatase, adenosine triphosphatases (ATPases) of many varieties (including the Na /K -ATPase that is the enzymatic basis of the sodium pump in cells and tissues), various esterases, and many respiratory enzymes (Fig. 1.3).
# Chunk 1703
Many genetic disorders have been identifed in individuals who have mutations in a gene that encodes lysosomal pro-teins. These diseases are termed lysosomal storage diseases (LSDs) and are characterized by dysfunctional lysosomes. The defective protein in most cases is a hy-drolytic enzyme or its cofactor; less commonly, lysosomal membrane proteins or proteins that are involved in sorting, targeting, and transporting lysosomal proteins are defec-tive. The result is an accumulation in cells of the specifc products that lysosomal enzymes normally use as sub-strates in their reactions. These undigested, accumulated products disrupt the normal function of the cell and lead to its death. Currently, 49 disorders are known LSDs with a collec-tive incidence of about 1 in 7,000 live births. The life ex-pectancy across the entire group of people with these disorders is 15 years. The frst LSD was described in 1881 by British ophthalmologist Warren Tay, who reported symp-toms of retinal abnormalities in a 12-month-old infant with severe neuromuscular symptoms. In 1896, U.S. neurologist Bernard Sachs described a patient with similar eye symp-toms found earlier by Tay. This disease is now known as Tay-Sachs disease. It is caused by the absence of one enzyme, a lysosomal galactosidase ( -hexosaminidase) that catalyzes a step in lysosomal breakdown of ganglio-sides in neurons. The resulting accumulation of the GM2 ganglioside that is found within concentric lamellated struc-tures in residual bodies of neurons interferes with normal cell function. Children born with LSDs usually appear normal at birth; however, they soon show clinical signs of the disease. They often experience slower growth, show changes in fa-cial features, and develop bone and joint deformities that lead to signifcant restrictions of limb movement. They may lose already attained skills such as speech and learning ability. Behavioral problems may occur, as well as mental retardation. They are prone to frequent lung infections and heart disease. Some children have enlarged internal or-gans such as the liver and spleen (hepatosplenomegaly). The most common LSDs in children are Gaucher disease, Hurler syndrome (MPS I), Hunter syndrome (MPS II), and Pompe disease. Not long ago, LSDs were seen as neurodegenerative disorders without any potential treatment. In the last two decades, there has been limited success in treating the symptoms of LSDs. Considerable effort has been devoted to genetic research and fnding methods to replace the missing enzymes that cause various forms of LSD. Enzyme-replacement therapy, which requires the cellu-lar delivery of a manufactured recombinant enzyme, is avail-able for some LSDs such as cystinosis and Gaucher disease. Enzymes have also been supplied by transplanta-tion of bone marrow containing normal genes from an un-affected person. Success of the enzyme-replacement therapy is often limited by insuffcient biodistribution of re-combinant enzymes and high costs. Recently emerging strategies for the treatment of LSDs include pharmaco-logical chaperone therapy in which chaperone molecules are delivered to affected cells. In some cases, synthetic chaparones can assist in folding of mutated en-zymes to improve their stability and advance their lysoso-mal delivery. In the future, the combination of different therapies such as enzyme replacement, pharmacological chaperone, and gene-transfer therapies with the devel-opment of newborn screening tests will enable early detec-tion and improve clinical outcome of patients with LSDs. 
# Chunk 1704
The restriction point (or “point of no return”) is the most important checkpoint in the cell cycle. At this checkpoint, the cell self-evaluates its own replicative potential before deciding to either enter the S phase and the next round of cell division or to retire and leave the cell cycle. A cell that leaves the cycle in the G1 phase usually begins terminal differentiation by entering the GO phase (“O” stands for “outside” the cycle). Thus, the G1 phase may last for only a few hours (average 9 to 12 hours) in a rapidly dividing cell, or it may last a lifetime in a nondividing cell. This checkpoint is mediated by interactions between the retinoblastoma susceptibility protein (pRb) and a family of essential transcription factors (E2F) with target promoters. In normal cells, proper interaction between pRb and E2F turns off many genes and blocks cell-cycle progression.
# Chunk 1705
 FOLDER 5.3 Clinical Correlation: Junctional Complexes as a Target of Pathogenic Agents

Epithelia form a physical barrier that allows the body to main-tain internal homeostasis while protecting the  organism from harmful pathogenic agents from the external environment. The easiest way for many viruses, bacteria, and parasites to suc-cessfully compromise the protective functions of the epithelial layer is to destroy the junctional complexes between epithelial cells. Several proteins found in junctional specializations of the cell membrane are affected by molecules produced or ex-pressed by these pathogenic agents. Bacteria. A common bacterium that causes food poi-soning, Clostridium perfringens, attacks the zonula occlu-dens junction. This microorganism is widely distributed in the external environment and is found within the intestinal flora of humans and many domestic animals. Food poison-ing symptoms are characterized by intense abdominal pain and diarrhea that begins 8 to 22 hours after eating foods contaminated by these bacteria. Symptoms usually abate within 24 hours. The enterotoxin produced by C. perfrin-gens is a small 35-kilodalton protein whose carboxy termi-nus binds specifically to the claudin molecules of the zonula occludens. Its amino terminus forms pores within the apical domain of the plasma membrane. Binding to claudins prevents their incorporation into the zonula occlu-dens strands and leads to malfunction and breakdown of the junction. Dehydration that occurs with this type of food poisoning is a result of a massive movement of fluids via paracellular pathways into the lumen of the intestines. Helicobacter pylori, another bacterium, resides within the stomach and binds to the extracellular  domains of zonula occludens proteins. During this process, the CagA surface-exposed 128-kilodalton protein produced by the bacteria is translocated from the microorganism into the cy-toplasm, where it targets both ZO-1 and JAM proteins. As a result, the zonula occludens barrier becomes disrupted, and its capacity for tyrosine kinase signaling diminishes, causing cytoskeletal rearrangements. H. pylori cause injury to the protective barrier of the stomach that may lead to the development of gastric ulcers and gastric carcinomas. Viruses. The one specific group of RNA viruses responsible for infant enteritis (inflammation of the intestines) uses the intracellular JAM signaling pathway. The attachment and endocytosis of the reovirus is initiated by the interaction of its viral attachment protein with a JAM molecule. This interaction activates nuclear  factor-B pro-tein (NF B), which migrates into the nucleus and triggers a cascade of cellular events leading to apoptosis. This is ev-idence that JAMs are being used as signal transduction molecules to convey impulses from the external environ-ment to the cell nucleus. Zonula occludens–associated proteins that contain the PDZ-expressed sequence are targets of oncogenic aden-ovirus and papillomavirus. The viral oncoproteins produced by these viruses bind via their PDZ binding domains to ZO-2 and multi-PDZ–containing protein-1 (MUPP-1). The oncogenic effect of these interactions is attributed, in part, to the sequestration and degradation of the zonula occludens and the tumor-suppressor proteins associated with the viruses. Parasites. The common house dust mite, Der-matophagoides pteronyssinus, also destroys zonula occludens junctions. It belongs to the arachnid family, which includes spiders, scorpions, and ticks. When its fecal pellets are inhaled with dust particles, serine and cysteine peptidases present in the pellets cleave occluding and ZO-1 protein, resulting in the breakdown of zonula occludens junctions in the respiratory epithelium. The loss of the pro-tective epithelial barrier in the lung exposes the lung to in-haled allergens and initiates an immune response that can lead to severe asthma attacks.
# Chunk 1706
TABLE Comparison of Features Characteristic of Mast Cells and Basophils 6.6 Characteristic Features Mast Cells Basophils Origin Hemopoietic stem cell Hemopoietic stem cell Site of differentiation Connective tissue Bone marrow Cell divisions Yes (occasionally) No Cells in circulation No Yes Life span Weeks to months Days Size 20–30 m 7–10 m Shape of nucleus Round Segmented (usually bilobar) Granules Many, large, metachromatic Few, small, basophilic High-affinity surface receptors Present Present for IgE antibodies (Fc RI) Marker of cellular activity Tryptase Not yet established however, cannot be reversed by treatment with antihistaminic agents.
# Chunk 1707
FOLDER 6.5 Clinical Correlation: The Role of Mast Cells and Basophils in Allergic Reactions

When an individual is exposed to a specific antigen (aller-gen) that reacts with IgE antibodies bound to the surface of mast cells or basophils via their high-affinity receptors (FcεRI), it initiates mast cell activation. This type of IgE-dependent activation initiates a cascade of events, result-ing in allergic reactions. These reactions can occur as immediate hypersensitiviy reactions, (usually within sec-onds to minutes after exposure to an allegen), late-phase reactions, or chronic allergic inflammations. The immediate hypersensitivity reaction involves IgE-mediated release of histamine and other mediators from mast cells and also from basophils. The clinical symp-toms caused by the above mediators vary, depending on which organ system is affected. The release of mediators in the superficial layers of the skin can manifest as erythema (redness), swelling and itch-ing, or pain sensations. Respiratory system symptoms in-clude sneezing, rhinorrhea (runny nose), increased production of mucus, coughing, bronchospasm (constric-tion of bronchi), and pulmonary edema. Individuals with these symptoms often complain of tightness in the chest, shortness of breath, and wheezing. The gastrointestinal tract can also be affected with symptoms of nausea, vomit-ing, diarrhea, and abdominal cramping. In highly sensitive individuals, the antigen injected by an insect can trigger a massive discharge of mast cells and ba-sophil granules that affect more than one system. This con-dition is known as anaphylaxis. Dilation and increased permeability of systemic blood vessels can cause anaphy-lactic shock. This often-explosive, life-threatening reaction is characterized by significant hypotension (decreased blood pressure), decreased circulating blood volume (leaky vessels), and smooth muscle cells constriction in the bronchial tree. The individual has difficulty breathing and may exhibit a rash, as well as have nausea and vomiting. Symptoms of anaphylactic shock usually develop within 1 to 3 minutes, and immediate treatment with vasoconstric-tors such as epinephrine is required. The assessment of the activation of basophils in systemic anaphylactic reac-tions is still problematic because an assay for a specific cellular marker released by basophils (and not by other cells such as mast cells) has not yet been developed. After the signs or symptoms of the immediate hyper-sensitiviy reaction have been resolved, an affected indi-vidual may develop late-phase allergic reactions 6 to 24 hours later. The symptoms of these reactions may in-clude redness, persistent swelling of the skin, nasal dis-charge, sneezing, and coughing, usually accompanied by an elevated white blood cell count. These symptoms usu-ally last a few hours and then disappear within 1 to 2 days of the initial allergen exposure. In the respiratory system, the late-phase reaction is believed to be responsible for the development of persistent asthma. If the exposure to an allergen is persistent (for instance by a dog-owning patient who is allergic to dogs), it can result in chronic allergic infammation. Tissues in such individuals accumulate variety of immune cells, such as eosinophils and T lymphocytes that cause more tissue dam-age and prolong inflammation. This can lead to permanent structural and functional changes in the affected tissue.
# Chunk 1708
When hyaline cartilage calcifies, it is replaced by bone.

Hyaline cartilage is prone to calcification, a process in which calcium phosphate crystals become embedded in the tumors characterized by secretion of cartilage matrix. Ap-proximately 3.6% of primary bone tumors that are diagnosed in the United States each year are chondrosarcomas. These tumors are the second most common matrix-producing tu-mors of bone after osteosarcomas (malignant bone-forming tumors). They occur more commonly in men than women and affect individuals that are usually age 45 and older. Chondrosarcomas originate predominantly in the axial skele-ton (and most commonly involve vertebrae, pelvic bones, ribs, scapulae, and the sternum), and in metaphyses of prox-imal ends of long bones (most often the femur and humerus). The most common symptom reported by patients is a deep pain, often present for months and typically dull in character. Since cartilaginous tissue is compressed inside the bone, in most cases initial growth of a tumor cannot be palpated. Radiographs, CT, and MRI scans are essential for the initial diagnosis and later for the evaluation of the extent of deep intramedullary tumors. Chondrosarcomas are classified by grades that strongly correlate with a patient’s prognosis. Micro-scopically, grade 1 represents the least aggressive and grade 3 represents the most aggressive tumor. Most chondrosarcomas (90%) are pathologically classified as conventional (grades 1 and 2); they rarely metastasize and are composed of hyaline cartilage that infiltrates bone marrow cavity and surrounds existing bony trabe-culae (Fig. F7.2.1). Multiple chondroblasts that are often binucleated with pleomorphic and hyperchromatic nu-clear patterns are frequently seen in a single lacuna. Cartilaginous matrix may also undergo mineralization and subsequent endochondral ossification. Metastatic spread to lungs and lymph nodes is more frequently asso-ciated with grade 3 lesions. Recently, immunohistochemical localization of collagen types has been used to determine stage of tissue differenti-ation, which in fact correlates with a patient’s prognosis. The presence of collagen types II and X and the proteogly-can aggrecan in biopsies indicates mature tumors associ-ated with good prognosis. On the other hand, the presence of collagen type I indicates changes in the extracellular ma-trix toward dedifferentiated (fibrous) types of tumor with poorer prognosis. In addition, transcription factor SOX9, which is essential for differentiation of mesenchymal cells into chondroblasts during normal fetal development, is expressed in chondrosarcomas. Treatment of chondrosarcoma is primary surgical: The tumor is widely excised. Chemotherapy and radiation play limited roles in treatment. Patients with adequately re-sected low-grade tumors have an excellent survival rate. FIGURE F7.2.1 • Photomicrograph of a chondrosarcoma (grade 1) from the epiphysis of the long bone, stained with H&E. This photomicrograph shows a tissue mass of chondrosarcoma infiltrating intertrabecular spaces of the bone marrow. Note the presence of malignant chondrocytes in various stages of maturity. Small area of active bone marrow is visible in the upper left corner of the image. 240. (Courtesy of Dr. Fabiola Medeiros.) marrowmarrowmarrowbonebonebonechondrosarcomachondrosarcomachondrosarcoma  FOLDER 7.2 Clinical Correlation: Malignant Tumors of the Cartilage; Chondrosarcomas
# Chunk 1709
The osteoblast is the differentiated bone-forming cell that secretes bone matrix.

Like its close relatives, the fibroblast and the chondroblast, the osteoblast is a versatile secretory cell that retains the ability to divide. It secretes both type I collagen (which constitutes 90% of the protein in bone) and bone matrix proteins (BMPs), which constitute the initial unmineralized bone, or osteoid. The bone matrix proteins produced by the osteoblast include calcium-binding proteins such as osteocalcin and osteonectin; multiadhesive glycoproteins such as bone sialoproteins I and II, osteopontin, and thrombospondin, various proteoglycans and their aggregates, and alkaline phosphatase (ALP). Circulating levels of ALP and osteocalcin are used clinically as markers of osteoblast activity.
# Chunk 1710
FIGURE 8.23 • Photomicrograph of fractured long bone undergoing repair. a. This low-magnification photomicrograph of a 3-week-old bone fracture, stained with H&E, shows parts of the bone separated from each other by the fibrocartilaginous callus. At this stage, the cartilage undergoes endochondral ossification. In addition, the osteoblasts of the periosteum are involved in secretion of new bony matrix on the outer surface of the callus. On the right of the microphotograph, the fibrocartilaginous callus is covered by periosteum, which also serves as the attachment site for the skeletal muscle. 35. b. Higher magnification of the callus from the area indicated by the upper rectangle in panel a shows osteoblasts lining bone trabeculae. Most of the original fibrous and cartilaginous matrix at this site has been replaced by bone. The early bone is deposited as an immature bone, which is later replaced by mature compact bone. 300. c. Higher magnification of the callus from the area indicated by the lower rectangle in panel a. A fragment of old bone pulled away from the fracture site by the periosteum is now adjacent to the cartilage. It will be removed by osteoclast activity. The cartilage will calcify and be replaced by new bone spicules as seen in panel b. 300.
# Chunk 1711
Two hormones, leptin and insulin, are responsible for long-term regulation of body weight.

The discovery of the leptin (ob) gene, which encodes a fat-specific messenger RNA (mRNA) for leptin, has given some insight into the mechanism of energy homeostasis. In experimental animal models, the addition of recombinant leptin to obese, leptin-deficient ob/ob mice causes them to reduce their food intake and lose about 30% of their total body weight after 2 weeks of treatment. Unlike mutant mice, in most obese humans, levels of leptin mRNA in adipose tissue as well as serum levels of leptin are elevated. This was observed in all types of obesity, regardless of whether it is caused by genetic factors, hypothalamic lesions, or increased efficiency of food utilization. For unknown reasons, adipocytes in these obese individuals are resistant to leptin’s action, and administration of leptin does not reduce the amount of adipose tissue. Conversely, studies of individuals who have lost weight and those with anorexia nervosa show that leptin mRNA levels in their adipose tissue and serum levels of leptin are significantly reduced. Recent clinical findings indicate that leptin most likely protects the body against weight loss in times of food deprivation.
# Chunk 1712
Clinical Correlation: Obesity

Obesity is epidemic in the United States. According to current estimates by the National Institutes of Health (NIH), about two-thirds of Americans are considered to be obese, and 300,000 die annually from obesity-related metabolic diseases (i.e., diabetes, hypertension, cardiovascular dis-eases, and cancer). An individual is considered obese when the percentage of body fat exceeds the average per-centage for the individual’s age and sex. The prevalence of obesity has increased in the last decade from 12% to 18%. The increases are seen in both sexes and at all so-cioeconomic levels, with the greatest increase reported in the 18to 29-year-old age group. The body mass index (BMI), expressed as weight/ height2, is closely correlated with the total amount of body fat and is commonly used to classify overweight and obe-sity among adults. A BMI of approximately 25 kg/m2 is considered normal. A BMI greater than 27 kg/m2, which correlates to an excess body weight of approximately 20%, is considered a health risk. Obesity is associated with an increased risk of mortality as well as with many diseases such as hypertension, car-diovascular diseases, diabetes, and cancer. It is a chronic condition that develops as a result of an interaction be-tween a person’s genetic makeup and his or her environ-ment. Obesity genes encode the molecular components of the short-term and long-term weight regulation systems, which include leptin, ghrelin, and other factors that regulate energy balance. In addition, several of these factors modu-late glucose metabolism by adipose tissue and contribute to the development of insulin resistance, which is associ-ated with type 2 diabetes. Intensive research directed to-ward adipocyte-derived proteins may in the future provide potential drugs for reducing obesity and overcoming insulin resistance. blood vesselblood vessel connectiveconnective tissue septatissue septa
# Chunk 1713
The metabolic activity of brown adipose tissue is largely regulated by norepinephrine released from the sympathetic nerve terminals, which stimulates lipolysis and hydrolysis of triglycerydes as well as increases mitochondrial expression and activity of UCP-1 molecules. In experimental animals, chapter 9 Adipose Tissue B ROWN AD I POSE TISS U E TABLE Summary of Adipose Tissue Features 9.2 Features White Adipose Tissue Brown Adipose Tissue Location Subcutaneous layer, mammary gland, Large amounts in newborn greater omentum, mesenteries, Remnants in adults at the retroperitoneal retroperitoneal space, visceral space, deep cervical and supraclavicular pericardium, orbits (eye sockets), regions of the neck, interscapular, bone marrow cavity paravertebral regions of the back, mediastinum Function Metabolic energy storage, insulation, Heat production (thermogenesis) cushioning, hormone production, source of metabolic water Adipocyte morphology Unilocular, spherical, flatten nucleus, Multilocular, spherical, round rim of cytoplasm eccentric nucleus Large diameter (15–150 m) Smaller diameter (10–25 m) Transcription factors “master PPAR-/RXR PRDM16/PGC-1 switch” in differentiation UCP-1 genes expression No Yes (unique to brown fat) Mitochondria Few, poorly developed Many, well developed Innervation Few sympathetic nerve fibers High density of sympathetic nerve fibers Vascularization Few blood vessels Highly vascularized tissue Response to environmental Decreased lipogenesis Increased lipogenesis stress (cold exposure) Increased lipoprotein lipase activity Decreased lipoprotein lipase activity Growth and differentiation Throughout entire life from Only during fetal period stromal-vascular cells Decreases in adult life (exception: individuals with pheochromocytoma and hibernoma)  FOLDER 9.3 Clinical Correlation: PET Scanning and Brown Adipose Tissue Interference
# Chunk 1714
Positron emission tomography, also called a “PET scan,” is a diagnostic tool that can locate malignant cells in the body. PET is based on the detection of high-energy gamma rays created when positrons (subatomic particles of antimatter), produced during decay of radioactive mate-rials, are encountered by electrons. The procedure re-quires the injection of a radioactive tracer, most commonly 18-fuorine-2-fuoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose (18F-FDG). This radioactive glucose isotope is used in PET imaging because malignant cells metabolize glucose at a greater rate than normal cells. After injection of the isotope, a de-tector scans the entire body and records radiation emitted by the 18F-FDG tracer as it becomes incorporated within the body’s cells. A computer reassembles the signals into images, which are, in effect, biological maps of 18F-FDG distribution in the body. Recently, due to greater diagnostic accuracy and improved biopsy methods, combined positron emission tomography and computed tomography (PET/CT) scanners are utilized more frequently. One drawback to PET imaging is that many normal tissues and benign lesions also show increased glucose metabolism and can thus be misinterpreted as malignant. For example, brown adipose tissue, with its increased glucose uptake me-diated by increased activity of glucose transporters, can be a potential source of false-positive interpretation of PET scans. Since brown adipose tissue is present in the neck, supraclavicular regions, and mediastinum (see page 260) it is commonly observed on PET scans, especially in underweight patients and during winter months, when brown adipose tis-sue is more predominant. This 18F-FDG uptake most likely represents activated brown adipose tissue during increased sympathetic nerve activity related to cold stress. A typical PET image of brown fat is usually bilateral and symmetric; however, in the mediastinum, the image may be asymmetric or focal and can mimic malignancy. False-positive results from brown fat 18F-FDG uptake in these areas have been reported in young women undergoing scans for diagnosis and staging of breast cancer. Therefore, under-standing that brown fat can show that increased radioac-tive tracer uptake is crucial for establishing an accurate diagnosis and avoiding false-positive results (Fig. F9.3.1). FIGURE F9.3.1 • Coronal positron emission tomography/ computed tomography (PET/CT) image of a healthy young woman. This upper part of the coronal section of this whole-body PET/CT scan shows extensive bilateral increased 18F-FDG uptake (red color) in the neck, supraclavicular, and upper axillary regions. Note that moderate increased radioactive tracer uptake is also detectable in the myocardium (yellow color). Regions of extensive metabolic activity correlate with the distribution pattern of low-density brown adipose tissue. PET/CT imaging allows for precise localization of increased 18F-FDG uptake areas and differentiation between brown adipose tissue tracer uptake and malignant tumor findings. (Courtesy of Dr. Jolanta Durski.)
# Chunk 1715
7.8 m 0.8 m 2.6 m

The life span of erythrocytes is approximately 120 days, after which most (90%) of them are phagocytosed by macrophages in the spleen, bone marrow, and liver. The remaining aged erythrocytes (10%) break down intravascularly, releasing insignificant amounts of hemoglobin into the blood.
# Chunk 1716
glycophorin C adductin spectrin ankyrin actin tropomyosin band 3 protein 4.2

FIGURE 10.2  Erythrocyte morphology. a. Photomicrograph of three capillaries (Cap) joining to form a venule (V ), as observed in adipose tissue within a full-thickness mesentery spread. The erythrocytes appear in single file in one of the capillaries (the other two are empty). The light center area of some of the erythrocytes results from their biconcave shape. Erythrocytes are highly plastic and can fold on themselves when passing through very narrow capillaries. The large round structures are adipose cells (A). 470.
# Chunk 1717
Erythrocytes transport oxygen and carbon dioxide bound to the protein hemoglobin (68 kilodaltons). A monomer of hemoglobin is similar in composition and structure to myoglobin, the oxygen-binding protein found in striated muscle. A high concentration of hemoglobin is present within erythrocytes and is responsible for their uniform staining with eosin and the cytoplasmic granularity seen with the TEM. The disc shape of the erythrocyte facilitates gas exchange because more hemoglobin molecules are closer to the plasma membrane than they would be in a spherical cell. Thus, gases have less distance to diffuse within the cell to reach a binding site on the hemoglobin.
# Chunk 1718
Blood Type Erythrocyte Surface Antigen Serum Antibody Can Give Blood to Can Receive Blood From A A antigen Anti-B A and AB A and O B B antigen Anti-A B and AB B and O AB A and B antigens No antibodies Only AB A, B, AB, and O (universal blood recipient) O O antigen (no A or B antigens) Anti-A and anti-B A, B, AB, and O (universal blood donor) Only O TABLE ABO Blood Group System F10.1.1
# Chunk 1719
 FOLDER 10.2 Clinical Correlation: Hemoglobin in Patients with Diabetes

As mentioned in the text, about 96% of total hemoglobin in adults is represented by hemoglobin type HbA. Approx-imately 8% of HbA consists of several subtypes that dis-play slight chemical differences. These subtypes are hemoglobins HbA1a1, HbA1a2, HbA1b, and HbA1c. Of these subtypes, hemoglobin type A1c is of clinical sig-nificance because it binds irreversibly to glucose. It is re-ferred to as glycated or glycosylated hemoglobin. Levels of this hemoglobin subtype are used to monitor an individual’s blood glucose levels over the previous 2 to 3 months (clinically referred to as an A1c test). Individuals with diabetes have increased levels of glycated hemoglobin HbA1c in the blood because of their elevated blood glu-cose. Since the normal life span of erythrocytes is about 120 days (see page 295), glycated hemoglobin can only be eliminated when the RBCs containing it are de-stroyed. Thus, HbA1c values are directly proportional to the concentration of glucose in the blood over the entire life span of the erythrocyte. In healthy individuals and in those with diabetes that is being effectively controlled, HbA1c levels should not be higher than 7% of the total hemoglobin. Since HbA1c values are not subject to the short-term fluctuations in blood glucose levels that are seen, for example, after meals or during fasting, blood for HbA1c testing can be obtained without regard to when food is consumed.
# Chunk 1720
A primary example of genetic immunodeficiency that af-fects oxygen-dependent killing mechanisms is chronic granulomatous disease (CGD). In this inherited disor-der of neutrophils and other phagocytic cells, one of the components of the NADPH oxidase complex (phox system) has mutated or is absent. As a result, neutrophils cannot produce reactive oxygen intermediates (ROIs). The NADPH oxidase complex consists of five molecules. Two of them, glycoprotein 91 (gp91) and protein 22 (p22), are part of a membrane-bound cytochrome called cy-tochrom B558 (see Fig. 10.8). Three other cytosolic com-ponents—protein 47 (p47), protein 67 (p67), and protein 40 (p40)—are components of Rac-2 GTPase, which is required for oxidase activity. Neutrophil activation and stimulation from phagocytosis cause cytosolic pro-teins to translocate to the plasma membrane of the phagolysosome to assemble the active NADPH oxidase complex. The assembled enzyme transports electrons from cytosolic NADPH across the membrane to molecular O2 residing inside the phagolysosome, generating bactericidal superoxide anions (O2 –) and other ROIs. Approximately 50% to 70% of all CGD cases are caused by a mutation in the CYBB (cytochrome B, b subunit) gene located on the X chromosome. This gene encodes glycoprotein 91 (gp91), which is necessary for proper function of the NADPH oxidase complex. Since gp91 deficiency is an X-linked disease, CGD caused by this mutation is often re-ferred as X91 disease. Another 20% to 40% of those with CGD have mutations in the NCF1 gene on chromo-some 7 that codes for protein 47. Mutations in gene NCF2 (which encodes protein 67) and CYBA (which encodes protein 22) are rare, accounting for fewer than 10% of all cases of CGD. Mutations in the NCF1, NCF2, and CYBA genes produce autosomal recessive forms of CGD. CGD decreases the ability of neutrophils to kill certain types of bacteria and fungi. Individuals with this disease are frequently affected by recurrent life-threatening bacte-rial and fungal infections and chronic inflammatory condi-tions. The most common pathologic changes occur in tissues and organs that form barriers against the entry of microorganisms from the external environment. They in-clude skin (skin infections), gingiva (swollen inflamed gums), lungs (pneumonia), lymph nodes (lymphoadenitis), gastrointestinal tract (enteritis, diarrhea), liver, and spleen. Another characteristic feature of CGD is the development of enlarged, tumorlike masses called granulomas. The presence of granulomas may cause serious problems in the gastrointestinal tract by obstructing the passage of food and in the genitourinary tract by blocking the flow of urine from the kidneys and bladder.
# Chunk 1721
Lymphocytes are the main functional cells of the lymphatic or immune system.

Lymphocytes are the most common agranulocytes and account for about 30% of the total blood leukocytes. In understanding the function of the lymphocytes, one must realize that most lymphocytes found in blood or lymph represent recirculating immunocompetent cells (i.e., cells that have developed the capacity to recognize and respond to antigens and are in transit from one lymphatic tissue to another). In the tissues associated with the immune system (see Chapter 14, Lymphatic System), three groups of lymphocytes can be identified according to size: small, medium, and large lymphocytes, ranging in diameter from 6 to 30 m. The large lymphocytes are either activated lymphocytes, which possess surface receptors that interact with a specific antigen, or natural killer (NK) lymphocytes. In the bloodstream, most lymphocytes are small or medium sized, 6 to 15 m in diameter. The majority—more than 90%—are small lymphocytes.
# Chunk 1722
The next named stage in erythropoiesis is the orthochromatophilic erythroblast (normoblast). This cell has a small, compact, densely stained nucleus. The cytoplasm is eosinophilic because of the large amount of hemoglobin (Fig. 10.20). It is only slightly larger than a mature erythrocyte. At this stage, the orthochromatophilic erythroblast is no longer capable of division.
# Chunk 1723
The polychromatophilic erythrocyte has extruded its nucleus.

The orthochromatic erythroblast loses its nucleus by extruding it from the cell; it is then ready to pass into the blood  sinusoids of the red bone marrow. Some polyribosomes that can still synthesize hemoglobin are retained in the cell. These polyribosomes impart a slight basophilia to the otherwise eosinophilic cells; for this reason, these new cells are called polychromatophilic erythrocytes (Fig. 10.21). The polyribosomes of
# Chunk 1724
FIGURE 10.21 • Electron micrograph of a polychromatophilic erythrocyte (reticulocyte). The nucleus is no longer present, and the cytoplasm shows the characteristic fimbriated processes that occur just after nuclear extrusion. Mitochondria are still present, as are early and late endosomes and ribosomes. 16,500. (Courtesy of Dr. Dorothea Zucker-Franklin.) the new erythrocytes can also be demonstrated with special stains that cause the polyribosomes to clump and form a reticular network. Consequently, polychromatophilic erythrocytes are also (and more commonly) called reticulocytes. In normal blood, reticulocytes constitute about 1% to 2% of the total erythrocyte count. However, if increased numbers of erythrocytes enter the bloodstream (as during increased erythropoiesis to compensate for blood loss), the number of reticulocytes  increases.
# Chunk 1725
At each of these stages of development, the erythroblast divides several times. It takes about a week for the progeny of a newly formed basophilic erythroblast to reach the circulation. Nearly all erythrocytes are released into the circulation as soon as they are formed; bone marrow is not a storage site for erythrocytes. Erythrocyte formation and release are regulated by erythropoietin, a 34-kilodalton glycoprotein hormone synthesized and secreted by the kidney in response to decreased blood oxygen concentration. Erythropoietin acts on the specific receptors expressed on the surface of ErP.
# Chunk 1726
Kinetics of Granulopoiesis

Granulopoesis in the bone marrow takes about two weeks.

The mitotic (proliferative) phase in granulopoiesis lasts about a week and stops at the late myelocyte stage. The post-mitotic phase, characterized by cell differentiation—from metamyelocyte to mature granulocyte—also lasts about a week. The time it takes for half of the circulating segmented neutrophils to leave the peripheral blood is about 6 to 8 hours. Neutrophils leave the blood randomly—that is, a given neutrophil may circulate for only a few minutes or as long as 16 hours before entering the perivascular connective tissue (a measured half-life of circulating human neutrophils is only 8 to 12 hours).
# Chunk 1727
 FOLDER 10.6 Clinical Correlation: Cellularity of the Bone Marrow

Bone marrow cellularity is one of the most important factors in evaluating the function of the bone marrow. The assessment of bone marrow cellularity is semiquantita-tive and represents the ratio of hemopoietic cells to adipocytes. The most reliable evaluation of cellularity is ob-tained from the microscopic examination of a bone marrow biopsy that preserves the organization of the marrow. Smear preparations are not accurate preparations with which to assess bone marrow cellularity. Bone cellularity changes with age. Normal bone marrow cellularity for a specifc age can be calculated by subtract-ing an individual’s age from 100 and adding 10%. Thus, a 30-year-old individual’s bone marrow contains between 60% and 80% of active bone-producing cells (100 – 30 70 10%); in contrast, a 70-year-old individual’s marrow is in the range of 20% to 40% (100 70 30 10%).
# Chunk 1728
In hypocellular bone marrow, which occurs in aplastic anemia or after chemotherapy, only a small number of blood-forming cells can be found in a marrow biopsy (Fig. F10.6.1a). Thus, a 50-year-old individual with this condition might have a bone cellularity index of 10% to 20%. In the same-aged individual with acute myelogenous leukemia, the bone cellularity index might be 80% to 90%. Hypercellular bone marrow is characteristic of bone marrow affected by tumors originating from hemopoietic cells (Fig. F10.6.1b).
# Chunk 1729
Bone marrow smear, human, Giemsa, ×180.

This low magnification photomicrograph shows a bone marrow smear. This type of preparation allows for the examination of developing red and white cells. A marrow smear is made in a manner similar to that of a peripheral blood smear. A sample of bone marrow is aspirated from a bone and simply placed on a slide and spread into a thin monolayer of cells. A wide variety of cell types are present in the marrow smear. Most of the cells are developing granulocytes and developing erythrocytes. Mature erythrocytes (Ey) are also present in large numbers. They are readily identified by their lack of a nucleus and eosinophilic staining. Often intermixed with these red cells are small groups of reticulocytes. These are very young erythrocytes that  contain residual ribosomes in their cytoplasm. The presence of the ribosomes slightly alters the color of the reticulocyte giving it a just perceptible blue coloration in comparison to the mature eosinophilic erythrocyte. The reticulocytes are best distinguished at higher magnifications. In addition, adipocytes (A) are found in variable numbers. In preparations such as this, the lipid content is lost during preparation and recognition of the cell is based on a clear or unstained round space. Another large cell that is typically present is the megakaryocyte (M). The megakaryocyte is a polyploid cell that exhibits a large and irregular nuclear profile. It is the platelet-producing cell.
# Chunk 1730
AG RAN U LOCYTE S AN D R E D MAR ROW KEY A, adipocytes BN, band neutrophil E, eosinophils Ey, erythrocytes M, megakaryocyte 306 Erythropoiesis is a process by which the concentration of erythrocytes in the peripheral blood stream is maintained under normal condi-tions in a steady state. Stimulation of erythroid stem cells (ErP or CFU-E) by hormonal action results in a proliferation of precursor cells that undergo differentiation and maturation in the bone marrow. The earliest recognizable precursor of the red blood cell is the proerythroblast. These cells lack hemoglobin. Their cytoplasm is basophilic and the nucleus exhibits a dense chromatin structure and several nucleoli. The Golgi apparatus, when evident, appears as a light staining area. The basophilic erythroblast is smaller than the proerythroblast, from which it arises by mitotic division. Its nucleus is smaller. The cytoplasm shows strong basophilia due to the increasing number of ribosomes involved in hemoglobin synthesis. The accumulation of hemoglobin in the cell gradually changes the staining reaction of the cytoplasm so that it begins to stain with eosin. The recognizable presence of hemoglobin in the cell by virtue of its staining signifies its transition to the polychro-matophilic erythroblast. The cytoplasm in the earlier part of this stage may exhibit a blue-grey color. With time, increasing amounts of hemoglobin are synthesized and concomitantly, decreasing numbers of ribosomes are present. The nucleus of the cell is smaller than that of the basophilic erythroblast and the heterochromatin is much coarser. At the end of this stage, the nucleus has become much smaller and the cytoplasm more eosinophilic. This is the last stage in which mitosis occurs. The next definable stage is the orthochromatophilic erythrob-last, also called normoblast. Its nucleus is smaller than earlier stages and is extremely condensed. The cytoplasm is considerably less blue leaning more to a pink or eosinophilic coloration. It is slightly larger than a mature erythrocyte. At this stage, it is no longer capable of division. In the next stage, the polychromatophilic erythrocyte, also more commonly called a reticulocyte, has lost its nucleus and is ready to pass into the blood sinusoids of the red bone marrow. Some ribosomes that can still synthesize hemoglobin are present in the cell. These ribosomes create a very slight basophilia to the cell. Comparison of this cell to typical mature erythrocytes in the marrow smear reveals a slight difference in coloration.
# Chunk 1731
Polychromatophilic erythrocyte, bone marrow smear, human, Giemsa, ×2,200.

A polychromatophilic erythrocyte (PE) is seen in this micro-graph. Its nucleus has been extruded and the cytoplasm exhibits a slight basophilia. In proximity are a number of mature erythrocytes (E). Compare the coloration of the polychromatophilic erythrocyte with that of the mature red blood cells. Polychromatophilic erythrocytes can also be readily demonstrated with special stains that cause the remaining ribosomes in the cytoplasm to clump and form a visible reticular network, hence the polychromatophilic erythrocyte is also commonly called a reticulocyte.
# Chunk 1732
A localized injury to cardiac muscle tissue that results in the death of cells is repaired by replacement with fibrous connective tissue. Consequently, cardiac function is lost at the site of injury. This pattern of injury and repair is seen in nonfatal myocardial infarction (MI). Confirmation of suspected MI in the individual can be made through the detection of specific markers in the blood. These markers are the structural  subunits TnI and TnT of the cardiac troponin complex. They are usually released into the bloodstream within 3 to 12 hours after an MI. TnI levels remain elevated for up to 2 weeks from the time of the initial injury; thus, it is regarded as an excellent marker for diagnosing MI that has recently occurred.
# Chunk 1733
TABLE Peripheral Gangliaa12.1 aPractical note: Neuron cell bodies seen in tissue sections such as tongue, pancreas, urinary bladder, and heart are invariably terminal ganglia or “ganglion cells” of the parasympathetic nervous system. Ganglia that contain cell bodies of sensory neurons; these are not synaptic stations  Dorsal root ganglia of all spinal nerves  Sensory ganglia of cranial nerves  Trigeminal (semilunar, Gasserian) ganglion of the trigeminal (V) nerve  Geniculate ganglion of the facial (VII) nerve  Spiral ganglion (contains bipolar neurons) of the cochlear division of the vestibulocochlear (VIII) nerve  Vestibular ganglion (contains bipolar neurons) of the vestibular division of the vestibulocochlear (VIII) nerve  Superior and inferior ganglia of the glossopharyngeal (IX) nerve  Superior and inferior ganglia of the vagus (X) nerve Ganglia that contain cell bodies of autonomic (postsynaptic) neurons; these are synaptic stations  Sympathetic ganglia  Sympathetic trunk (paravertebral) ganglia (the highest of these is the superior cervical ganglion)  Prevertebral ganglia (adjacent to origins of large unpaired branches of abdominal aorta), including celiac, superior mesenteric, inferior mesenteric, and aorticorenal ganglia  Adrenal medulla, which may be considered a modified sympathetic ganglion (each of the secretory cells of the medulla, as well as the recognizable ganglion cells, is innervated by cholinergic presynaptic sympathetic nerve fibers)  Parasympathetic ganglia  Head ganglia  Ciliary ganglion associated with the oculomotor (III) nerve  Submandibular ganglion associated with the facial (VII) nerve  Pterygopalatine (sphenopalatine) ganglion of the facial (VII) nerve  Otic ganglion associated with the glossopharyngeal (IX) nerve  Terminal ganglia (near or in wall of organs), including ganglia of the submucosal (Meissner’s) and myenteric (Auerbach’s) plexuses of the gastrointestinal tract (these are also ganglia of the enteric division of the ANS) and isolated ganglion cells in a variety of organs pair. Following nerve injury, they proliferate and actively phagocytose myelin debris. In general, most of the nuclei (90%) found in cross-sections of peripheral nerves belong to Schwann cells; the remaining 10% is equally  distributed between the occasional fibroblasts and other cells such as endothelial cells of capillaries, macrophages, and mast cells.
# Chunk 1734
The presynaptic parasympathetic neurons send axons from the brain stem—that is, the midbrain, pons, and medulla, and the sacral segments of the spinal cord (S2 through S4)— to visceral ganglia. The ganglia in or near the wall of abdominal and pelvic organs and the visceral motor ganglia of cranial nerves III, VII, IX, and X contain cell bodies of the postsynaptic effector neurons of the parasympathetic division (Figs. 12.24c and 12.25).
# Chunk 1735
FIGURE 12.25 • Schematic diagram showing the general arrangement of sympathetic and parasympathetic neurons of the ANS. The sympathetic outflow is shown on the right; the parasympathetic, on the left. The sympathetic (thoracolumbar) outflow leaves the CNS from the thoracic and upper lumbar segments (T1–L2 or L3) of the spinal cord. These presynaptic fibers communicate with postsynaptic neurons in two locations, the paravertebral and prevertebral ganglia. Paravertebral ganglia are linked together and form two sympathetic trunks (yellow columns on each side of the spinal cord). Prevertebral ganglia are associated with the main branches of the abdominal aorta (yellow circles). Note the distribution of postsynaptic sympathetic nerve fibers to the viscera. The parasympathetic (craniosacral) outflow leaves the CNS from the gray matter of the brain stem within cranial nerves III, VII, IX, and X and the gray matter of sacral segments (S2–S4) of the spinal cord and is distributed to the viscera. The presynaptic fibers traveling with cranial nerves III, VII, and IX communicate with postsynaptic neurons in various ganglia located in the head and neck region (yellow circles). The presynaptic fibers traveling with cranial nerve X and with pelvic splanchnic nerves have their synapses with postsynaptic neurons in the wall of visceral organs (terminal ganglia). The viscera thus contain both sympathetic and parasympathetic innervation. Note that a two-neuron chain carries impulses to all viscera except the adrenal medulla. (Modified from Moore KL, Dalley AF. Clinically Oriented Anatomy. Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999:48–50.) the intestine will continue peristaltic movements even by the same pathologic changes that can occur in neuafter the vagus nerve or pelvic splanchnic nerves are rons of the brain. Lewy bodies associated with Parkin severed. son’s disease (see Folder 12.1) as well as amyloid plaques
# Chunk 1736
 Parasympathetic presynaptic outfow to the abdominal viscera is via the vagus (X) and pelvic splanchnic nerves. Postsynaptic neurons of the parasympathetic system to abdominopelvic organs are in terminal ganglia that generally are in the walls of the organs, such as the ganglia of the submucosal (Meissner’s) plexus and the myenteric (Auerbach’s) plexus in the alimentary canal. These ganglia are part of the enteric division of the ANS.
# Chunk 1737
Axonal injury also initiates retrograde signaling to the nerve cell body leading to the upregulation of a gene called c-jun. C-jun transcription factor is involved in early as well as later stages of nerve regeneration. Reorganization of the perinuclear cytoplasm and organelles starts within a few days. The cell body of the injured nerve swells, and its nucleus moves peripherally. Initially, Nissl bodies disappear from the center of the neuron and move to the periphery of the neuron in a process called chromatolysis. Chromatolysis is first observed within 1 to 2 days after injury and reaches a peak at about 2 weeks (see Fig. 12.33b). The changes in the cell body are proportional to the amount of axoplasm destroyed by the injury; extensive loss of axoplasm can lead to death of the cell.
# Chunk 1738
Several diseases affect the valves of the heart, causing their degeneration (e.g., calcification, fibrosis) and resulting in heart malfunction because of insufficiency or stenosis of valvular orifices. These conditions, known collectively as valvular heart disease, include rheumatic heart disease, vegetative endocarditis, degenerative calcific aortic valve stenosis, and mitral annular calcification. For example, rheumatic fever causes inﬂammation of the heart valves (valvulitis). Inﬂammation induces angiogenesis in the valve and vascularization in the normally avascular layers of the valve. These changes most commonly affect the mitral valve (65% to 70%) and aortic valve (20% to 25%). This inﬂammation can lead to progressive replacement of elastic tissue by irregular masses of collagen fibers, causing the valve to thicken. The valves become rigid and inﬂexible, which affects their ability to open and close.
# Chunk 1739
Hemopoietic functions of the spleen include:  removal and destruction of senescent, damaged, and abnormal erythrocytes and platelets;  retrieval of iron from erythrocyte hemoglobin;  formation of erythrocytes during early fetal life; and  storage of blood, especially red blood cells, in some species.
# Chunk 1740
Three major types of skin cancer originate from cells in the epidermis. In general, skin cancer is caused by unpro-tected, long-term exposure to the sun’s ultraviolet radiation. The most common type is the basal cell carcinoma, which microscopically, as its name implies, resembles cells from the stratum basale of the epidermis. Basal cell carcinoma is a slow-growing tumor that usually does not metastasize. Typically, the cancer cells arise from the follicular bulge of the outer root sheath of the hair follicle. Almost in all cases of basal cell carcinoma, the recommended treatment is surgical removal of the tumor. The second most common skin cancer is the squa-mous cell carcinoma with more than 200,000 cases each year. Individuals with this form of cancer usually develop a small painless nodule or patch that is surrounded by an area of inflammation. Squamous cell carcinoma is charac-terized by highly atypical cells at all levels of the epidermis (carcinoma in situ). Disruption of the basement membrane results in spread (metastasis) of tumor cells to the lymph nodes. Squamous cell carcinoma is known for variable dif-ferentiation patterns ranging from polygonal squamous cells arranged in orderly lobules and zones of keratinization to rounded cells with foci of necrosis and occasional single keratinized cells. Treatment for squamous cell carcinoma depends on histological type, size, and location. It may in-clude surgical excision, curettage and electrodesiccation, cryotherapy (freezing with liquid nitrogen), or chemoor ra-diotherapy. Moh’s micrographic surgical procedure is being used for locally recurrent skin cancers. This proce-dure involves shaving away one-by-one thin layers of epi-dermis and examining them under a microscope for the presence of malignant cells. When the shaving is cancer free, the surgery is complete. This method preserves as many unaffected skin layers as possible while making cer-tain that all cancer cells are removed. Malignant melanoma is the most serious form of skin cancer if not recognized at an early stage and surgically removed. Individual melanoma cells, which originate from melanocytes, contain large nuclei with irregular contours and prominent eosinophilic nucleoli. These cells either aggregate in nests or are scattered through the entire thick-ness of the epidermis (Fig F15.1.1). They may reside only in the epidermis (melanoma in situ) or extend into the underly-ing papillary layer of the dermis. With time, the melanoma undergoes a radial growth phase. The melanocytes grow in all directions, upward in the epidermis, downward into the dermis, and peripherally in the epidermis. At this early stage, the melanoma tends not to metastasize. On the skin surface, it presents itself as an irregularly pigmented multicolor lesion, appearing black with parts brown to light brown, and a mixture of pink to red or shades of blue (Fig. F15.1.2). In time (approximately 1 to 2 years), melanocytes exhibit mitotic activity and form round nodules growing perpendicularly to the surface of the skin. In this vertical growth phase, the melanocytes display little or no pigment and usually metastasize into regional lymph nodes.
# Chunk 1741
Although many neural and emotional factors can alter the composition of sweat, altered sweat composition can also be a sign of disease. For example, elevated sodium and chlo-ride levels in sweat can serve as an indicator of cystic fbro-sis. Individuals with cystic fibrosis have two to five times higher than normal amounts of sodium and chloride in their sweat. In pronounced uremia, when the kidneys are unable to rid the body of urea, the concentration of urea in sweat increases. In this condition, after the water evaporates, crystals may be discerned on the skin, especially on the upper lip. These include urea crystals and are called urea frost.
# Chunk 1742
release of a hypotonic sweat at the skin surface. This hypo-tonic watery solution is low in protein and contains varying amounts of sodium chloride, urea, uric acid, and ammonia. Thus, the eccrine sweat gland also serves, in part, as an excretory organ.
# Chunk 1743
Teeth are a major component of the oral cavity and are essential for the beginning of the digestive process. Teeth are embedded in and attached to the alveolar processes of the maxilla and mandible. Children have 10 deciduous (primary, milk) teeth in each jaw, on each side:  A medial (central) incisor, the first tooth to erupt (usually in the mandible) at approximately 6 months of age (in some infants, the first teeth may not erupt until 12 to 13 months of age)  A lateral incisor, which erupts at approximately 8 months  A canine tooth, which erupts at approximately 15 months  Two molar teeth, the first of which erupts at 10 to 19 months and the second of which erupts at 20 to 31 months
# Chunk 1744
Maturation-stage ameloblasts transport substances needed for enamel maturation.

The histologic feature that marks the cycles of maturation-stage ameloblasts is a striated or ruffled border (Fig. 16.14) Maturation-stage ameloblasts with a striated border occupy approximately 70% of a specific cycle, and those that are smooth-ended, approximately 30% of a specific cycle. There is no stratum intermedium in the enamel organ during enamel maturation; stellate papillary cells are adjacent to the maturation-stage ameloblasts.
# Chunk 1745
TABLE Composition of Unstimulated Saliva16.1 Organic constituents Mean (mg/mL) Protein 220.0 Amylase 38.0 Mucin 2.7 Muramidase (lysozyme) 22.0 Lactoferrin 0.03 ABO group markers 0.005 EGF 3.4 sIgA 19.0 IgG 1.4 IgM 0.2 Glucose 1.0 Urea 20.0 Uric acid 1.5 Creatinine 0.1 Cholesterol 8.0 cAMP 7.0 Inorganic constituents Sodium 15.0 Potassium 80.0 Thiocyanate Smokers 9.0 Nonsmokers 2.0 Calcium 5.8 Phosphate 16.8 Chloride 50.0 Fluoride Traces (according to intake) Modified from Jenkins GN. The Physiology and Biochemistry of the Mouth, 4th ed. Oxford: Blackwell Scientific Publications, 1978. sIgA, secretory IgA; EGF, epithelial growth factor.
# Chunk 1746
Saliva contains water, various proteins, and electrolytes.

Saliva contains chiefly water, proteins and glycoproteins (enzymes and antibodies), and electrolytes. It has a high potassium concentration that is approximately seven times that of blood, a sodium concentration approximately one tenth that of blood, a bicarbonate concentration approximately three times that of blood, and significant amounts of calcium, phosphorus, chloride, thiocyanate, and urea. Lysozyme and -amylase are the principal enzymes present (see Table 16.1).
# Chunk 1747
 Inferior (lower) esophageal sphincter. As the name implies, this sphincter is located at the lower end of the esophagus; its action is reinforced by the diaphragm that surrounds this part of the esophagus as it passes into the abdominal cavity. It creates a pressure difference between the esophagus and stomach that prevents reflux of gastric contents into the esophagus. Abnormal relaxation of this sphincter allows acidic content of the stomach to return (reﬂux) into the esophagus. If not treated, this condition may progress into gastroesophageal refux disease (GERD), characterized by  inﬂammation of the esophageal mucosa (reﬂux esophagitis), strictures, and difficulty in swallowing (dysphagia) with accompanying chest pain.
# Chunk 1748
Parts of the digestive tract do not possess a serosa. These include the thoracic part of the esophagus and portions of structures in the abdominal and pelvic cavities that are fixed to the cavity wall—the duodenum, ascending and descending colon, rectum, and anal canal. These structures are attached to the abdominal and pelvic wall by connective tissue, the adventitia, which blends with the connective tissue of the wall.
# Chunk 1749
 FOLDER 18.2 Clinical Correlation: Congestive Heart Failure and Liver Necrosis

Liver injury may be triggered by hemodynamic changes in the circulatory system. In congestive heart failure, the heart is unable to provide sufficient oxygenated blood to meet the metabolic requirements of many tissues and organs, including the liver, which is readily affected by hypoperfusion and hypoxia (low blood oxygen content). Zone 3 of the liver acinus is the first to be affected by this condition. The hepatocytes in this zone are the last to receive blood as it passes along the sinusoids; as a result, these cells receive a blood supply already depleted in oxygen. Examination of a liver biopsy specimen from an individual with congestive heart failure shows a distinct pattern of liver necrosis. Hepatocytes in zone 3, which is located around the central vein, undergo ischemic necrosis. Typically, no noticeable changes are seen in zones 1 and 2, representing the periphery of a classic lobule. Necrosis of this type is referred to as centrilobular necrosis. Figure F18.2.1 shows the centrilobular portion of a classic lobule. The multiple round vacuoles indicate lipid accumulation, and the atrophic changes are the result of dying hepatocytes undergoing autophagocytosis. Centrilobular necrosis as a result of hypoxia is referred to as cardiac cirrhosis; however, unlike true cirrhosis, nodular regeneration of hepatocytes is minimal.
# Chunk 1750
FIGURE F18.2.1 • Photomicrograph of centrilobular necrosis in human liver. This photomicrograph shows a routine H&E liver biopsy specimen from an individual with congestive heart failure. Pathologic changes (referred to as ischemic necrosis) are most severe in hepatocytes in zone 3. This zone surrounds the terminal hepatic venule (central vein). This type of necrosis is referred to as centrilobular necrosis. Note the presence of multiple round vacuoles, which indicates extensive lipid accumulation. No noticeable changes are seen in the periphery of the lobule, that is zone 1 and much of zone 2. 320.
# Chunk 1751
Despite its name, vitamin D is actually an inactive precursor that undergoes a series of transformations to become the fully active hormone that regulates plasma calcium levels. In the human body vitamin D is derived from two sources:  Skin, in which vitamin D3 (cholecalciferol) is rapidly produced by the action of ultraviolet light on the precur-sor 7-dehydrocholesterol. The skin is the major source of vitamin D3, especially in regions where food is not supple-mented with vitamin D. Typically, 30 minutes to 2 hours of sunlight exposure per day can provide enough vitamin D to fulfill daily body requirements for this vitamin.  Diet, from which vitamin D3 is absorbed by the small intestine in association with chylomicrons. In the blood vitamin D3 is bound to vitamin D–binding protein and transported to the liver. The first transforma-tion occurs in the liver and involves hydroxylation of vitamin D3 to form 25-OH vitamin D3. This compound is released into the bloodstream and undergoes a second hydroxyla-tion in the proximal tubules of the kidney to produce the highly active 1,25-(OH)2 vitamin D3 (calcitriol). The pro-cess is regulated indirectly by an increase in plasma Ca2concentration, which triggers secretion of PTH, or directly by a decrease in circulating phosphates, which in turn stim-ulates activity of 1 -hydroxylase responsible for conver-sion of 25-OH vitamin D3 into active 1,25-(OH)2 vitamin D3. Active 1,25-(OH)2 vitamin D3 stimulates intestinal absorption of Ca2and phosphate and mobilization of Ca2from bones. It is therefore necessary for normal development and growth of bones and teeth. The related compound vitamin D2 (ergocalciferol) undergoes the same conversion steps as vitamin D3 and produces the same biologic effects. Patients with end-stage chronic kidney diseases have inadequate conversion of vitamin D into active metabolites resulting in vitamin D3 deficiency. In adults,  vitamin D3 defi-ciency is manifested by impaired bone mineralization and reduced bone density. Therefore, patients with chronic kidney diseases, especially those on prolonged renal hemodialysis are often supplemented with vitamin D3 and calcium to avoid severe disturbance of calcium homeostasis because of sec-ondary hyperparathyroidism, a condition prevalent in these patients. Vitamin D3 deficiency in childhood results in rickets, a disease that causes abnormal bone ossification.
# Chunk 1752
and specific secretion by the cells of the kidney. The final urine is conveyed by the ureters to the urinary bladder, where it is stored until discharged via the urethra. The final urine contains water and electrolytes as well as waste products, such as urea, uric acid, and creatinine, and breakdown products of various substances.
# Chunk 1753
The GBM restricts the movement of particles, usually proteins, larger than approximately 70,000 daltons or 3.6 nm radius (e.g., albumin or hemoglobin). Although albumin is not a usual constituent, it may sometimes be found in urine, indicating that the size of albumin is close to the effective pore size of the filtration barrier. The polyanionic glycosaminoglycans of the laminae rarae have strong negative charges and restrict the movement of anionic particles and molecules across the GBM, even those smaller than 70,000 daltons. Despite the ability of the filtration barrier to restrict protein, several grams of protein do pass through the barrier each day. This
# Chunk 1754
with suspected renal disease. It typically includes several measurement of physical, biochemical, and microscopic urine characteristics such as pH, specific gravity (indirect measurement of ion concentration), bilirubin, concentration of intermediate compounds derived from the fatty acid metabolism known as ketone bodies, hemoglobin, and con-centration of the proteins. Important part of this analysis in-cludes the determination of the amount of protein excreted in the urine. The excretion of excessive amounts of protein (i.e., proteinuria [albuminuria]) is an important  diagnostic sign of renal disease. Normally, less than 150 mg of protein is of protein almost always indicates renal disease, extreme exercise, such as jogging, or severe dehydration may pro-duce increased proteinuria in individuals without renal dis-ease. Microscopic examination of the urine may reveal presence of red and white blood cells, mineral crystals, and pathogenic agents such as bacteria or fungi. Often these elements are enclosed within the cylindrical structures called urinary casts. The matrix of urinary cast is formed by an 85kilodalton protein, uromodulin (Tamm-Horsfall protein) that precipitate in the lumen of distal convoluted tubes and collecting ducts during a disease process.
# Chunk 1755
This page intentionally left blank.

The urinary system consists of the paired kidneys, the paired ureters, which lead from the kidneys to the urinary bladder, and the urethra, which leads from the bladder to the exterior of the body. The kidneys conserve body fluid and electrolytes and remove metabolic wastes such as urea, uric acid, creatinine, and breakdown products of various substances. They produce urine, initially an ultrafiltrate of blood that is modi-fied by selective resorption and specific secretion by kidney tubule cells. The kidneys also function as endocrine organs, producing erythropoi-etin, a growth factor that regulates red blood cell formation, and renin, a hormone involved in blood pressure and blood volume control. They also hydroxylate vitamin D, a steroid prohormone, to produce its active form. Each kidney is a flattened, bean-shaped structure approximately 10 cm long, 6.5 cm wide (from convex to concave border), and 3 cm thick. The concave medial border of each kidney contains a hilum, an indented region through which blood vessels, nerves, and lymphatic vessels enter and leave the kidney. The funnel-shaped origin of the ureter, the renal pelvis, also leaves the kidney at the hilum. A cut, hemi-sected fresh kidney reveals two distinct regions: a cortex, the reddish-brown outer region, and a medulla, a much lighter inner part continu-ous with the renal pelvis. The cortex is characterized by renal corpuscles and their tubules, including the convoluted and straight tubules of the nephron, the collecting tubules, and an extensive vascular supply.
# Chunk 1756
PLATE 78 • URETER The ureters are paired tubular structures that convey urine from the kid-neys to the urinary bladder. They are lined with transitional epithelium (urothelium), an impervious layer that lines the urinary excretory passa-ges from the renal calyces through the urethra. The ability of this epithe-lium to become thinner and flatter allows all of these passages to accommodate to distension by the urine. The epithelium rests on a dense collagenous lamina propria, which in turn, rests on an inner longitudinal and an outer circular layer of smooth muscle. Regular peristaltic contractions of this muscle contribute to the flow of urine from the kidney to the urinary bladder. ORIENTATION MICROGRAPH: As shown in this low-power orienta-tion micrograph, the wall of the ureter consists of a mucosa (Muc), a muscularis (Mus), and an adventitia (Adv). Note that the ureters are lo-cated behind the peritoneum of the abdominal cavity in their course to the bladder. Thus, a serosa (Ser) may be found covering a portion of the circumference of the tube. Also, because of contraction of the smooth muscle of the muscularis, the luminal surface is characteristically folded, thus creating a star-shaped lumen. ATATAT BVBVBV AdvAdvAdv MucMucMuc MusMusMus Ser
# Chunk 1757
All known hormones of the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland are small proteins or glycoproteins. This important fact has led to definitive identification of specific cell types by immunocytochemistry (Table 21.2). These studies have classified cells of the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland into five cell types:  Somatotropes (GH cells) are most commonly found within the pars distalis and constitute approximately 50% of the parenchymal cells in the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland. These medium-sized, oval cells exhibit round, centrally located nuclei and produce growth hormone (GH; somatotropin). The presence of eosinophilic vesicles in their cytoplasm classifies them as acidophils. Three hormones regulate the release of GH from somatotropes. Two of these hormones are opposing hypothalamic-releasing hormones: growth hormone–releasing hormone (GHRH), which stimulates GH release from the somatotropes, and somatostatin, which inhibits GH release from the somatotropes. Recently, a third hormone, a 28-amino acid peptide ghrelin, was isolated from the stomach. It is a potent stimulator of GH secretion and appears to coordinate food intake with GH secretion. Hormonally active tumors that originate from somatotropes are associated with hypersecretion of GH and cause gigantism in children and acromegaly in adults.
# Chunk 1758
Abnormalities in the signaling mechanisms that coordinate and control the function of multiple organs and biological processes are the bases of many endocrine diseases. Classical biochemistry, physiology, and advances in cell and molecular biology and genetics combined with clinical observations are able to explain the mechanisms of hor-monal action and endocrine diseases. Endocrine diseases can be classified into four major categories:  Hormone overproduction. The most common cause of hormone overproduction is an increase in the total num-ber of cells producing a specific hormone. An example of this mechanism is hyperthyroidism (Graves’ disease; see Folder 21.4). Briefly, the presence of abnormal antibodies that mimic the action of TSH stimulates a dramatic in-crease in the number of thyroid cells. In some instances, increased hormone secretion is related to genetic abnor-mality that affects regulation of hormone synthesis and re-lease. In addition, mutation in tumor suppressor genes and protooncogenes may lead to proliferation of mutant cells that produce the specific hormone. This commonly occurs in cells of the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland.  Hormone underproduction. Underproduction of hor-mones may result from destruction of an endocrine organ by a disease process (e.g., tuberculosis of the adrenal glands) or autoimmunity (e.g., Hashimoto’s disease in which abnormal antibodies target and destroy thyroid hormone–producing cells). Also, genetic abnormalities that lead to abnormal development of endocrine glands (e.g., hypogonadotropic hypogonadism), abnormal hormone synthesis (e.g., deletion of the GH gene), or abnormal reg-ulation of hormone secretion (e.g., hypoparathyroidism associated with mutation of the calcium-sensing receptor expressed on parathyroid cells) can cause decreased serum levels or lack of active hormones. Iatrogenic injury to endocrine glands such as occurs when the parathyroid gland is removed during thyroidectomy (thyroid gland removal) may also be responsible.  Altered tissue responses to hormones. This cate-gory of endocrine disease is often cause by a variety of genetic mutation in hormone receptors (e.g., TSH, LH, and PTH). In diabetic patients, the resistance to insulin in muscles and the liver is mainly caused by signals origi-nating from adipose tissue (see Chapter 9).  Tumors of endocrine glands. Most of the tumors of endocrine gland are hormonally active and are responsi-ble for hormone overproduction. However, some tumors of endocrine glands do not produce hormones, but com-press neighboring organs or cause destructions of other organs due to metastasis. An example of such a tumor is thyroid cancer that can metastasize throughout the body without presenting signs of thyroid hormone overpro-duction (hyperthyroidism). Hormones are used to treat endocrine diseases. A com-mon use is as hormone replacement therapies when a specific endocrine gland is not developed or ceases to produce the required hormone. Hormones and their syn-thetic analogs can be used to suppress the effects of other hormones. In general, thyroid and steroid hormones can be administered orally, whereas protein hormones (e.g., insulin, GH) need to be injected. Recent technological innovations including computerized mini-pumps and depot intramuscular injections have made therapy more manage-able for patients.
# Chunk 1759
 FOLDER 21.3 Clinical Correlation: Pathologies Associated with ADH Secretion chapter 21 Endocrine Organs PI N EAL G LAN D 753 The absence or reduced production of ADH leads to a condition known as diabetes insipidus, which is char-acterized by polyuria (production of large volumes of di-luted urine—up to 20 L per day) with hypotonic and tasteless (insipid) urine. Individuals with this condition have extreme thirst, which allows them to counteract the loss of water by drinking large amounts of fluids. This dis-ease commonly results from head injuries, tumors, or other lesions that can damage the hypothalamus or pos-terior lobe of the pituitary gland. This form of the disease is classified as hypothalamic diabetes insipidus in contrast to nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, in which secretion of the ADH is normal or elevated, but there is a lack of renal response to circulating levels of ADH. Nephrogenic diabetes is usually a congenital disorder re-lated to the mutation of the aquaporins-2 (AQP-2) water channels gene or different ADH V2 receptor mutations in kidney tubules. Hypothalamic diabetes insipidus is usu-ally treated by administration of synthetic analogs of ADH (desmopressin), whereas the treatment of the nephro-genic type of this disease is aimed at reducing the volume of urine output. Abnormally high levels of ADH are found in the syn-drome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secre-tion (SIADH), which is characterized by hyponatremia (low serum levels of sodium), decreased serum osmolality asso-ciated with excessive urine sodium excretion, and elevated urine osmolality. In SIADH, the elevated level of ADH in-creases the absorption of water, thereby leading to produc-tion of concentrated urine, inability to excrete water, and hyponatremia that results from excess water rather than sodium deficiency. The increase in ADH secretion may be related to CNS disorders (tumors, injuries, infections, or cerebrovascular accidents); pulmonary diseases (pneumo-nia, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, a lung abscess, or tuberculosis); tumors that secrete ADH (small-cell carci-noma of the lung, tumors of the pancreas, thymoma, or lym-phomas); and certain drugs (anti-inflammatories, nicotine, diuretics, and many others). Treatment of SIADH depends on the underlying etiology and includes fluid restrictions as well as pharmacological treatment. An ADH V2–receptor antagonist (Conivaptan) is now available to improve hy-ponatremia and to increase the free water diuresis without loss of other ions in the urine of patients with SIADH. TABLE Hypothalamic Regulating Hormones21.5 Hormone Composition Source Major Functions Growth hormone– releasing hormone (GHRH) Two forms in human: polypeptides containing 40 and 44 amino acids Cell bodies of neurons located in the arcuate nucleus of hypothalamus Stimulates secretion and gene expression of GH by somatotropes Somatostatin Two forms in human: polypeptides containing 14 and 28 amino acids Cell bodies of neurons located in the periventricular, paraven-tricular, and  arcuate nuclei of the hypothalamus Inhibits secretion of GH by somatotropes, inhibits insulin secretion by B cells of pancreatic islets Dopamine Catecholamine (amino acid derivative) Cell bodies of neurons located in the arcuate nucleus of hypothalamus Inhibits secretion of PRL by lactotropes Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) Polypeptide containing 41 amino acids Cell bodies of neurons located in the arcuate, periventricular, and medial paraventricular nuclei of hypothalamus Stimulates secretion of ACTH by corticotropes; stimulates gene expression for POMC in corticotropes Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) Polypeptide containing 10 amino acids Cell bodies of neurons located in the arcuate, ventromedial, dorsal, and  paraventricular nuclei of hypothalamus Stimulates secretion of LH and FSH by gonadotropes Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) Polypeptide containing 3 amino acids Cell bodies of neurons located by the ventromedial, dorsal, and paraventricular nuclei of hypothalamus Stimulates secretion and gene expression of TSH by thyrotropes; stimulates synthesis and secretion of PRL
# Chunk 1760
The human pineal gland relates light intensity and duration to endocrine activity.

The pineal gland is a photosensitive organ and an important timekeeper and regulator of the day/night cycle (circadian rhythm). It obtains information about light and dark cycles from the retina via the retinohypothalamic tract, which connects in the suprachiasmatic nucleus with sympathetic neural tracts traveling into the pineal gland. During the day, light impulses inhibit the production of the major pineal gland hormone, melatonin. Therefore, pineal activity, as measured by changes in the plasma level of melatonin, increases during darkness and decreases during light. In humans, these circadian changes of melatonin secretion play an important role in regulating daily body rhythms.
# Chunk 1761
TABLE Hormones of the Pineal Gland21.6 Hormone Composition Source Major Functions Melatonin Indolamine (N-acetyl-5-methoxytryptamine) Pinealocytes Regulates daily body rhythms and day/night cycle (circadian rhythms); inhibits secretion of GnRH and regulates steroidogenic activity of the gonads particularly as related to the menstrual cycle; in animals, influences seasonal sexual activity
# Chunk 1762
2.

Resorption, diffusion, and oxidation of iodide. Follicular epithelial cells actively transport iodide from the 758 The most common symptom of thyroid disease is a goiter, the enlargement of the thyroid gland. It may indicate either hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism. Hypothyroidism can be caused by insufficient dietary iodine (iodine-defciency goiter, endemic goiter) or by one of several inherited autoimmune diseases, such as autoimmune thyroiditis (Hashimoto’s thyroiditis). Autoimmune thyroiditis is characterized by the presence of abnormal autoimmunoglobulins directed against thyroglobu-lin (TgAb), thyroid peroxidase (TPOAb), and the TSH recep-tor (TSHAb). The results are thyroid cell apoptosis and follicular destruction. The low levels of circulating thyroid hormone stimulate release of excessive amounts of TSH, which cause hypertrophy of the thyroid through synthesis of more thyroglobulin. Adult hypothyroidism, formerly called myxedema (due to the puffy appearance of the skin) is char-acterized by mental and physical sluggishness. The edema that occurs in the severe stages of hypothyroidism is caused by the accumulation of large amounts of hyaluronan in the extracellular matrix of the connective tissue of the dermis. In hyperthyroidism (toxic goiter or Graves’ dis-ease), excessive amounts of thyroid hormones are re-leased into the circulation. Individuals with Graves’ disease have detectable levels of autoantibodies. These abnormal immunoglobulins (IgG) bind to the TSH receptors on the follicular cells and stimulate adenylate cyclase activity. As a result, increased levels of cAMP in follicular cells lead to continuous stimulation of the cells and increased thyroid hormone secretion. Because of negative feedback, the lev-els of TSH in the circulation are usually normal. However, under such stimulation the thyroid gland undergoes hyper-trophy, and the thyroid hormone is secreted at abnormally high rates, causing increased metabolism. Most of the clin-ical futures are associated with increased metabolic rate and increased sympathetic nerve activities. These include weight loss, excessive sweating, tachycardia, and nervous-ness. Noticeable features include protrusion of the eyeballs and retraction of the eyelids, resulting from increased sym-pathetic activity and increased deposition of extracellular matrix in the adipose tissue located behind the eyeball (Fig. F21.4.1a). The thyroid gland is enlarged. Microscopic features include the presence of columnar follicular cells lin-ing the thyroid follicles. Because of the high utilization of col-loid, the follicle tends to be depleted in the areas of contact with the apical surface of follicular cells (Fig. F21.4.1b). The treatment for Graves’ disease is either surgical to remove the thyroid gland or radiotherapy by ingestion of radioactive iodine (131I), which destroys most active follicular cells.
# Chunk 1763
blood into their cytoplasm using ATPase-dependent lishing an intracellular concentration of iodide that is 30 sodium/iodide symporters (NIS). The NIS is the to 40 times greater than that of the serum. Iodide ions 87-kilodalton transmembrane protein that mediates ac-then diffuse rapidly toward the apical cell membrane. tive iodide uptake in the basolateral membrane of the From here iodide ions are transported to the lumen of follicular epithelial cells. These cells are capable of estab-the follicle by the 86 kilodalton iodide/chloride receptor FIGURE 21.16 • Diagram of steps in thyroid hormone synthesis. This diagram 5L depicts two follicular cells: one in the process of thyroglobulin synthesis (on the left with red pathways) and the other in the process of thyroglobulin resorption (on the right with blue pathways). The numbers, which are described more fully in the text, indicate the sequential steps that occur: 1, synthesis and secretion of thyroglobulin; 2, uptake and concentration of iodide from the blood by sodum/iodide symporters (NIS), release of iodide into the colloid via iodide/chloride (pendrin) 6 transporters, and oxidation of iodide to iodine by thyroid peroxidase; 3, iodination of thyroglobulin in the colloid; 4, formation of T3 and T4 hormones in the colloid by oxidative coupling reactions; 5L, resorption pathway); 5TE, resorption of colloid via pathway; and 6, release of T4 and T3 from synthesis resorption the cell into the circulation.
# Chunk 1764
6. Release of T4 and T3 into the circulation and recycling processes. Majority of T4 and T3 are liberated from thyroglobulin in the lysosomal pathway in a T4 to T3 ratio of 20:1. They cross the basal membrane and enter the blood and lymphatic capillaries. Most of the released hormones are immediately bound to either a specific plasma protein (54 kilodalton), thyroxinbinding protein (70%), or a nonspecific prealbumin fraction of serum protein (25%), leaving only small amounts (~5%) of free circulating hormones that are metabolically active. Very small amounts of T4 to T3 are released bound to thyroglobulin. Only the follicular cells are capable of producing T4, whereas most T3, which is five times more active than T4, is produced through conversion from T4 by organs such as the kidney, liver, and heart. The free circulating hormones also function in the feedback system that regulates the secretory activity of the thyroid. Once uncoupled from thyroglobulin, DIT and MIT molecules are further deiodinated within the cytoplasm of the follicular cells to release the amino acid tyrosine and iodide, which are then available for recycling.
# Chunk 1765
TABLE Hormones of the Adrenal Glands 21.9 Hormone Composition Source Major Functions Adrenal cortex Mineralocorticoids (95% of mineralocorticoid activity in aldosterone) Steriod hormones (cholesterol derivatives) Parenchymal cells of the zona glomerulosa Aid in controlling electrolyte homeostasis (act on distal tubule of kidney to increase sodium reabsorption and decrease potassium reabsorp-tion); function in maintaining the osmotic  balance in the urine and in preventing serum acidosis Glucocorticoids (cortico -sterone, and cortisol; 95% of glucocorticoid activity in cortisol) Steriod hormones (cholesterol derivatives) Parenchymal cells of the zona fasciculata (and to a lesser extent of the zona reticularis) Promote normal metabolism, particularly carbohy-drate metabolism (increase rate of amino acid transport to live, promote removal of protein from skeletal muscle and its transport to liver, reduce rate of glucose metabolism by cells and stimulate glycogen synthesis by liver, stimulate mobilization of fats from storage deposits for energy use); provide resistance to stress; suppress inflammatory response and some allergic reactions Gonadocorticoids (dehydroepiandrosterone [DHEA] is a major sex steroid produced in both men and women) Steriod hormones (cholesterol derivatives) Parenchymal cells of the zona reticularis (and to a lesser extent of the zona fasciculata) Induce weak masculinizing effect; at normal serum levels usually their function is insignificant Adrenal medulla Norepinephrine and epinephrine (in human, 80% epinephrine) Catecholamines (amino acid derivatives) Chromaffin cells Sympathomimetic (produce effects similar to those induced by the sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system)a; increase heart rate, increase blood pressure, reduce blood flow to viscera and skin; stimulate conversion of glycogen to glucose; increase sweating; induce dilation of bronchioles; increase rate of respiration; decrease digestion; decrease enzyme production by digestive system glands; decrease urine production a The catecholamines influence the activity of glandular epithelium, cardiac muscle, and smooth muscle located in the walls of blood vessels and viscera.
# Chunk 1766
At approximately the 26th week of gestation, the testes descend from the abdomen into the scrotum. This migration of testes is caused by differential growth of the abdominal cavity combined with the action of testosterone that causes shortening of the gubernaculum, the testosterone-sensitive ligament connecting the inferior pole of each testis with the developing scrotum. The testes descend into the scrotum by passing through the inguinal canal, the narrow passage  between the abdominal cavity and the scrotum. During  descent, the testes carry their blood vessels, lymphatic vessels, and nerves as well as their principal ex-current duct system, the ductus deferens with them. Descent of the testis is sometimes obstructed, resulting in cryptorchidism, or undescended testes. This condition is common (30%) in premature newborns and about 1% of fullterm newborns. Cryptorchidism can lead to irreversible histologic changes in the testis and increases the risk of testicular cancer. Therefore, an undescended testis requires surgical correction. Orchiopexy (placement in the scrotal sac) should be performed, preferably before histologic changes become irreversible at approximately 2 years of age.
# Chunk 1767
Duration of spermatogenesis in humans is approximately 74 days.

After injecting a pulse of tritiated thymidine, a specific generation of cells can be followed by sequential biopsies of the seminiferous tubules. In this way, the time required for the labeled cells to go through the various stages can be determined. Several generations of developing cells may be  present in the thickness of the seminiferous epithelium at any given site and at any given time, which produces the characteristic cell associations. Autoradiographic studies have  revealed that the duration of the cycle of the seminiferous epithelium is constant, lasting about 16 days in humans. In humans it would require about 4.6 cycles (each 16 days long), or approximately 74 days, for a spermatogonium produced by a stem cell to complete the process of spermatogenesis. It would then require approximately 12 days for the spermatozoon to pass through the epididymis. Approximately 300 million sperm cells are produced daily in the human testis. The length of the cycle and the time required for spermatogenesis are constant and specific in each species. Therefore, in any pharmacologic intervention (e.g., therapy for male  infertility), if a drug is given that affects the initial phases of spermatogenesis, approximately 86 days are required to see the effect of that compound on sperm production.
# Chunk 1768
The corpus luteum of menstruation is formed in the absence of fertilization.

If fertilization and implantation do not occur, the corpus luteum remains active only for 14 days; in this case it is called the corpus luteum of menstruation. In the absence of formation of centrosome of spermatozoon unpacked nucleus of spermatozoon formation of second polar body human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) and other luteotropins, the rate of secretion of progestogens and estrogens declines, and the corpus luteum begins to degenerate about 10 to 12 days after ovulation.
# Chunk 1769
High levels of progesterone, produced from cholesterol by the corpus luteum, block the cyclic development of ovarian follicles. In early pregnancy, the corpus luteum measures 2 cm to 3 cm, thus filling most of the ovary. Its function begins to decline gradually after 8 weeks of pregnancy, although it persists throughout pregnancy. Although the corpus luteum remains active, the placenta produces sufficient amounts of estrogens and progestogens from maternal and fetal precursors to take over the function of the corpus luteum after 6 weeks of pregnancy. Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) can be detected in the serum as early as 6 days after conception and in the urine as early as 10 to 14 days of pregnancy. Detection of hCG in the urine by specific antibodies forms the basis of most over-the-counter pregnancy tests. In addition, the rapid increase in circulating level of hGC in early pregnancy is responsible for “morning sickness,” a condition characterized by nausea and vomiting. These symptoms usually occur in the early hours of the morning are often among the first signs of pregnancy.
# Chunk 1770
There are several indications for in vitro fertilization (IVF), but the primary one is infertility as a result of surgically un-correctable damage to, or absence of, the uterine tubes. To induce multiple follicle development and maturation, women selected for an IVF procedure undergo controlled hyper-stimulation of the ovaries. Hyperstimulation is achieved by different hormonal therapies using human menopausal go-nadotropins and clomiphene citrate (Serophene), with or without FSH. Mature preovulatory oocytes are collected from the Graafian follicles by either laparoscopic or ultrasound-guided percutaneous aspiration or transvaginal aspiration. Before insemination, the oocytes are preincubated in a specialized medium with serum complements for a time determined by their stage of maturity. The collected semen is placed in a special medium. The oocytes are then added to the medium containing the col-lected semen for fertilization. Twelve to 16 hours later, the oocytes are examined with the differential interference con-trast microscope to determine the presence of female and male pronuclei, the indication of successful fertilization (Fig. F23.2.1a). At this stage, the fertilized oocyte may be frozen for future IVF transfers. Generally, 80% of mature oocytes cultured in vitro are fertilized. At this point, the embryo is transferred to a special growth medium for 24 to 48 hours, where it is allowed to grow to the stage of four to six cells (Fig. F23.2.1b). Several embryos are then trans-ferred into the uterus via the vagina and cervical canal on the third or fourth day after the initial aspiration of the oocyte. Before embryo transfer, the uterus has been pre-pared to receive the embryo by administration of appropri-ate hormones. Embryos are therefore placed into a hormonally prepared uterus under conditions equivalent to those in normal implantation (see page 852). Intensive pro-gesterone treatment is usually begun just after the transfer to mimic the function of the corpus luteum of pregnancy. In recent years, existing treatment protocols have been optimized to such an extent that success rates of pregnancy and delivery with IVF programs have reached greater than 30% per embryo transfer. Further improvements in preg-nancy rates may be achieved by the introduction of new drugs, such as recombinant FSH or gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) antagonists that provide individualized hormonal treatment. Additionally, the occurrence of multiple pregnancies, which is the main complication of IVF, may be limited by reducing the number of transferred embryos.
# Chunk 1771
At ovulation, about 45% of women experience midcycle pain (“mittelschmerz”). It is usually described as a sharp, lower abdominal pain that lasts from a few minutes to as long as 24 hours and is frequently accompanied by a small amount of bleeding from the uterus. It is believed that this pain is related to smooth muscle cell contraction in the ovary as well as in its ligaments. These contractions are in response to an increased level of prostaglandin F2 mediated by the surge of LH.
# Chunk 1772
The uterine tubes are paired tubes that extend bilaterally from the uterus toward the ovaries (see Fig. 23.1). Also commonly referred to as the Fallopian tubes, the uterine tubes transport the ovum from the ovary to the uterus and provide the necessary environment for fertilization and initial development of the zygote to the morula stage. One end of 846 changes that involve two phases:  Follicular phase  Luteal phase Ovulation occurs between the two phases (Fig. F23.3.1). The follicular phase begins with the development of a small number of primary follicles (10 to 20) under the influ-ence of FSH and LH. Selection of dominant follicles occurs by days 5 to 7 of the menstrual cycle. During the first 8 to 10 days of the cycle, FSH is the principal hormone influenc-ing the growth of the follicles. It stimulates the granulosa and thecal cells, which begin to secrete steroid hormones, principally estrogens, into the follicular lumen. As estrogen production from the dominant follicle increases, FSH is in-hibited by a negative feedback loop from the pituitary gland. Estrogens continue to accumulate in the follicular lumen, fi-nally reaching a level that makes the follicle independent of FSH for its continued growth and development. Late in the follicular phase, before ovulation, progesterone levels begin to rise under the influence of LH. The amount of estrogens in the circulating blood inhibits further production of FSH by the adenohypophysis. Ovulation is induced by a surge in the in the FSH level. It occurs approximately 34 to 36 hours after the start of the LH surge or about 10 to 12 hours after the peak of the LH surge. The luteal phase begins immediately after ovulation as the granulosa and thecal cells of the ruptured follicle undergo rapid morphologic transformation to form the cor-pus luteum. Estrogens and large amounts of progesterone are secreted by the corpus luteum. Under the influence of both hormones, but primarily progesterone, the en-dometrium begins its secretory phase, which is essential for the preparation of the uterus for implantation in the event that the egg is fertilized. LH appears to be responsi-ble for the development and maintenance of the corpus lu-teum during the menstrual cycle. If fertilization does not occur, the corpus luteum degenerates within a few days as the hormonal levels drop. If fertilization does occur, the corpus luteum is maintained and continues to secrete pro-gesterone and estrogens. hCG, which is initially produced by the embryo and later by the placenta, stimulates the corpus luteum and is responsible for its maintenance dur-ing pregnancy. menstrual phase proliferative phase secretory phase 0 5 10 14 20 25 28 0 5 10 15 20 0 10 20 30 40 50 menstrual cycle ovarian hormones (in blood) estrogen progesterone ovarian cycle pituitary hormones (in blood) LH FSH FIGURE F23.3.1 • Relationship of morphologic and physiologic events that occur in the men -strual cycle. This diagram illustrates the relation of the morphologic changes in the endo metrium and ovary to the pituitary and ovarian blood hormone levels that occur during the menstrual cycle. The pituitary and ovarian hormones and their plasma con centrations are indicated in arbitrary units. LH, luteinizing hormone; FSH, follicle-stimulating hormone.
# Chunk 1773
 The perimetrium, the outer serous layer or visceral peritoneal covering of the uterus, is continuous with the pelvic and abdominal peritoneum and consists of a mesothelium and a thin layer of loose connective tissue. Beneath the mesothelium, a layer of elastic tissue is usually prominent.
# Chunk 1774
 The smooth muscle bundles in the inner and outer layers are predominantly oriented parallel to the long axis of activity of the endometrium during the cycle are correlated with the maturation of the ovarian follicles (see Folder 23.3). The end of each cycle is characterized by the partial destruction and sloughing of the endometrium, accompanied by bleeding from the mucosal vessels. The discharge of tissue and blood from the vagina, which usually continues for 3 to 5 days, is referred to as menstruation or menstrual fow. The menstrual cycle is defined as beginning on the day when menstrual flow begins.
# Chunk 1775
specialized layer that facilitates the separation of the placenta The corpus luteum actively produces hormones for about from the uterine wall at the termination of pregnancy. 10 days if fertilization does not occur. As hormone levels rapidly decline, changes occur in the blood supply to the stra-The menstrual phase results from a decline in the ovarian tum functionale. Initially, periodic contractions of the walls of secretion of progesterone and estrogen. the spiral arteries, lasting for several hours, cause the stratum functionale to become ischemic. The glands stop secreting, and the endometrium shrinks in height as the stroma becomes less edematous. After about 2 days, extended periods of arterial contraction, with only brief periods of blood flow, cause disruption of the surface epithelium and rupture of the blood vessels. When the spiral arteries close off, blood flows into the stratum basale but not into the stratum functionale. Blood, uterine fluid, and sloughing stromal and epithelial cells from the stratum functionale constitute the vaginal discharge. As patches of tissue separate from the endometrium, the torn ends of veins, arteries, and glands are exposed (Fig. 23.16c). The desquamation continues until only the stratum basale remains. Clotting of blood is inhibited during this period of menstrual flow. Arterial blood flow is restricted except for the brief periods of relaxation of the walls of the spiral arteries. Blood continually seeps from the open ends of the veins. The period of menstrual fow normally lasts about 5 days. The average blood loss in the menstrual phase is 35 ml to 50 ml. Blood flow through the straight arteries maintains the stratum basale.
# Chunk 1776
FIGURE 23.17 • Schematic diagrams of sectioned blastocysts. a. A human blastocyst at about 4.5 days of development showing formation of the inner cell mass. b. A monkey blastocyst at about 9 days of development. The trophoblastic cells of the monkey blastocyst have begun to invade the epithelial cells of the endometrium. In humans, the blastocyst begins to invade the endometrium at about the fifth or sixth day of development. c. A human blastocyst at 14 days after implantation. At this stage, the trophoblast cells have differentiated into syncytiotrophoblasts and cytotrophoblasts.
# Chunk 1777
The mature placenta measures about 15 to 20 cm in when the placenta attaches too deeply into the uterine wall diameter and 2 to 3 cm in thickness, covers 25% to 30% but does not penetrate the myometrium. Placenta increta of the uterine surface, and weighs 500 g to 600 g at term. (about 15% of all cases) occurs when the placental villi The surface area of the villi of human placenta is estimated penetrate deep into the muscular layer of the myometrum. to be about 10 m2. The microvilli on the syncytiotrophoblast In the remaining 10% of all cases, placenta percreta pen-increase the effective area for metabolic exchange to more etrates through the entire uterine wall and attaches to an-than 90 m2. After birth, the uterus continues to contract, other organ such as the bladder, rectum, intestines, or reducing the luminal surface and inducing placental separa-large blood vessels. It is the most serious complication of tion from the uterine wall. The entire fetal portion of the pla-placentation and may cause rupture of the uterus and other centa, fetal membranes, and the intervening projections of complications related to its attachment. A retained abnordecidual tissue are released. During uncomplicated labor, mal placenta or placental fragments may cause massive the placenta separates from the uterine wall and is delivered postpartum bleeding and need to be manually removed. approximately 30 minutes after birth. Placenta increta and percreta are often treated by perform-
# Chunk 1778
The examination of Pap smears is a valuable diagnostic tool in evaluating the vaginal and cervical mucosae (Fig. F23.5.1). The superficial epithelial cells are scraped from the mucosa, spread on a glass slide, fixed, and then stained with the Papanicolaou stain (a combination of hematoxylin, orange G, and eosin azure). Examination of the Pap smear provides valuable diagnostic information about the epithelium regard-ing pathologic changes, response to hormonal changes dur-ing the menstrual cycle, and the microbial environment of the vagina. The synthesis and release of glycogen by the epithelial cells of the uterus and vagina are directly related to changes in the pH of vaginal fluid. The pH of the fluid, which is normally low, around pH 4, becomes more acid near midcycle as Lactobacillus acidophilus, a lactic acid–forming bacterium in the vagina, metabolizes the se-creted glycogen. An alkaline environment can favor the growth of infectious agents such as Staphylococci, Corynebacterium vaginale, Trichomonas vaginalis, and Candida albicans, causing an abnormal increase in vaginal transexudates and inflammation of the vaginal mucosa and vulvar skin known as vulvovaginitis. These pathologic con-ditions are readily diagnosed with Pap smears. Specific antimicrobial agents (antibiotics, sulfonamides) are used to-gether with nonspecific therapy (acidified 0.1% hexetidine gel) to restore the normal low pH in the vagina and thus pre-vent the growth of these agents. In addition, cervicovaginal Pap smears are widely used for diagnosis of early cervical cancer as well as endome-trial carcinoma. Because cervical lesions may exist in a noninvasive stage for as long as 20 years, the abnormal cells shed from the epithelium are easily detected with a Pap smear examination. Microscopic examination of these cells permits differentiation between normal and abnormal cells, determines their site of origin, and allows classifying cellular changes related to the spread of the disease. The Pap smear is an extremely effective and in-expensive screening method in preventing cervical can-cer. Most of the cell abnormalities detected by Pap smears are in the precancerous stage, which allows the clinician to implement appropriate therapy.
# Chunk 1779
The secretion released in the first few days after childbirth is known as colostrum. This premilk is an alkaline, yellowish secretion with a higher protein, vitamin A, sodium, and chloride content and a lower lipid, carbohydrate, and potassium content than milk. It contains considerable amounts of antibodies (mainly secretory IgA) that provide the newborn with some degree of passive immunity. The antibodies in the colostrum are believed to be produced by the lymphocytes and plasma cells that infiltrate the loose connective tissue of the breast during its proliferation and development and are secreted across the glandular cells as in salivary glands and intestine. As these wandering cells decrease in number after parturition, the production of colostrum stops, and lipid-rich milk is produced.
# Chunk 1780
 FOLDER 23.6

Clinical Correlation: Cervix and Human Papillomavirus (HPV) Infections

Human papillomavirus (HPV) is the most common and cancer of the penis in men. Most HPV-associated sexually transmitted virus in the United States. More than lesions can be diagnosed by microscopic examination of 40 HPV types are known to infect the urogenital and anal smears or biopsies. In difficult cases, ancillary techniques regions of men and women, targeting the stratified squa-such as in situ hybridization can help to confirm the diagnosis mous epithelium of the perineal skin or mucous mem-(Fig. F23.6.1). Recently, two vaccines (Cervarix and Garbranes. Most women will be infected by HPV in their dasil) have become available to protect women against the lifetime, but only a small percentage (5%–10%) will de-types of HPV that cause most cervical cancers. Cervarix is velop a persistent infection and the associated risk of cer-designed to prevent infections from HPV types 16 and 18 vical cancer. Of the approximately 40 sexually transmitted and contains recombinant noninfectious viruslike particles HPV types, most (90%) cause genital warts rather than (VLPs) from both virus types. Gardasil contains a mixture of cervical cancer and so are called low-risk HPV types (e.g., recombinant VLPs from HPV types 6, 11, 16, and 18. Nei-HPV types 6 and 11). Low-risk HPV types tend to infect ther vaccine is therapeutic (i.e., they do not clear prior in-mature epithelial cells and lead to genital warts or mild fection), but both lead to the development of specific cervical dysplasia. HPV types 16 and 18 are the most immunity against HPV infections. The vaccines are most efcommon high-risk HPV types and are associated with 70% fective for girls and young women between ages 9 and 26 of cervical cancers. High-risk HPV types usually infect di-who have had no prior HPV exposure and who complete viding cells, cause moderate to severe cervical dysplasia or the three-injection immunization protocol before initiation carcinomas, and are linked to anal cancer, vulvar cancer, of sexual activity.
# Chunk 1781
FIGURE 23.36 • Photomicrographs and diagram of a lactating mammary gland. a. Low-magnification micrograph of a fast greenosmium–stained section of a lactating mammary gland. Portions of several large lobules and an excretory duct are seen. Many of the alveoli exhibit a prominent lumen, even at this magnification. 60. b. A higher magnification of an area in a shows lipid droplets (black circular profiles) within the secretory cells of the alveoli as well as in the alveolar lumina. The arrows indicate plasma cells within the interstitial spaces. 480. c. Diagram of a lactating mammary gland epithelial cell. (Redrawn after Bloom W, Fawcett DW. A Textbook of Histology, 10th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1975.) and infertility. This effect is caused by high levels of serum prolactin, which suppress secretion of LH. Ovulation usually for 2 to 3 years, lactational amenorrhea is the principal means of birth control.
# Chunk 1782
 FOLDER 23.7 Functional Considerations: Lactation and Infertility

Almost 50% of fully breast-feeding women exhibit lacta-resumes after 6 months or earlier with a decrease in suckling tional amenorrhea (lack of menstruation during lactation) frequency. In cultures in which breast-feeding may continue
# Chunk 1783
BV, blood vessels CT, connective tissue FC, former follicular cavity GLC, granulosa lutein cells TC, granulosa cells transforming into corpus luteum cells TLC, theca lutein cells KEY 878 The uterine tubes (oviducts, Fallopian tubes) are joined to the uterus and extend to the ovaries, where they present an open flared end (abdominal ostium) for entry of the ovum at ovulation. The oviduct undergoes cyclical changes along with those of the uterus, but these are not nearly as pronounced. The epithelial cells increase in height during the middle of the cycle, just about the time the ovum will be passing through the tube, and become reduced during the premenstrual period. Some of the epithelial cells are ciliated. The epithelial cells depend on the ovaries for their viability. Not only does the number of ciliated cells increase during the follicular phase of the ovarian cycle, but also removal of the ovaries leads to atrophy of the epithelium and loss of ciliated cells. The uterine tube varies in size and degree of mucosal folding along its length. The mucosal folds are evident in its distal portion, the infundibulum, as it nears the open end. Near the opening, the tube flares outward and is called the infundibulum. It has fringed folded edges called fimbria. The infundibulum leads proximally to the ampulla, which constitutes about two thirds of the length of the oviduct, has the most numerous and complex mucosal folds, and is the site of fertilization. Mucosal folds are least numerous at the proximal end of the oviduct, near the uterus, where the tube is narrow and referred to as the isthmus. A uterine or intramural portion measures about 1 cm in length and passes through the uterine wall to empty into the uterine cavity. Fertilization of the ovum usually occurs in the distal portion of the ampulla. For the first several days of development, as it navigates the complex pathway created by the mucosal folds, the embryo is transported proximally by the beating of the cilia of the ciliated epithelial cells and by peristaltic contractions of the well-developed muscularis layer that underlies the mucosa.
# Chunk 1784
PLATE 103 Mammary Gland, Late Proliferative and Lactating  Stages

Mammary glands exhibit a number of changes during pregnancy in preparation for lactation. Lymphocytes and plasma cells infiltrate the loose connective tissue as the glandular tissue develops. As the cells of the glandular portion proliferate by mitotic division, the ducts branch and alveoli begin to develop at their growing ends. Alveolar development becomes most prominent in the later stages of pregnancy, and accumulation of secretory product takes place in the alveoli. At the same time, lymphocytes and plasma cells become prominent in the loose connective tissue of the developing lobules. Myoepithelial cells proliferate between the base of the epithelial cells and the basal lamina in both the alveolar and the ductal portion of the glands. They are most prominent in the larger ducts. Both merocrine and apocrine secretion are involved in the production of milk. The protein component is synthesized, concentrated, and secreted by exocytosis in a manner typical for protein secretion. The lipid component begins as droplets in the cytoplasm that coalesce into large droplets in the apical cytoplasm of the alveolar cells and cause the apical plasma membrane to bulge into the alveolar lumen. The droplets are surrounded by a thin layer of cytoplasm and are enveloped in plasma membrane as they are released. The initial secretion in the first days after birth is called colostrum. This premilk is an alkaline secretion with a higher protein, vitamin A, sodium, and chloride content than milk and a lower lipid, carbohydrate, and potassium content. Considerable amounts of antibodies are contained in colostrum, and these provide the newborn with passive immunity to many antigens. The antibodies are produced by the plasma cells in the stroma of the breast and are carried across the glandular cells in a manner similar to that for secretory IgA in the salivary glands and intestine. A few days after parturition, the secretion of colostrum stops and lipid-rich milk is produced.
# Chunk 1785
The corneal epithelium is a nonkeratinized stratified squamous epithelium.

The corneal epithelium (Fig. 24.4) consists of approximately five layers of nonkeratinized cells and measures about 50 m in average thickness. It is continuous with the conjunctival epithelium that overlies the adjacent sclera. The epithelial cells adhere to neighboring cells via desmosomes that are present on short interdigitating processes. Like other stratified epithelium, such as that of the skin, the cells proliferate from a basal layer and become squamous at the surface. The basal cells are low columnar with round, ovoid nuclei; the surface cells acquire a squamous or discoid shape, and their nuclei are flattened and pyknotic (see Fig. 24.4b). As the cells migrate to the surface, the cytoplasmic organelles gradually disappear, indicating a progressive decline in metabolic activity. The corneal epithelium has a remarkable regenerative capacity with a turnover time of approximately 7 days.
# Chunk 1786
Log scale of size in meters 10–7 10–6 10–5 10–4 10–3 10–2 (1 cm) Fig. 1.4 Pathogens vary greatly in size and lifestyle. Intracellular pathogens include viruses, such as herpes simplex (first panel), and various bacteria, such as Listeria monocytogenes (second panel). many bacteria, such as Staphylococcus aureus (third panel), or fungi, such as Aspergillus fumigates (fourth panel), tissues, as do some archaea and protozoa (third panel). many parasites, such as the nematode Strongyloides stercoralis (fifth panel), are large multicellular organisms that can move throughout the body in a complex life cycle. Second panel courtesy of dan Portnoy. Fifth panel courtesy of James lok.
# Chunk 1787
The great diversity of lymphocyte receptor repertoire means that there will usually be some lymphocytes bearing a receptor for any given foreign antigen. Recent experiments suggest this number to be perhaps a few hundred per mouse, certainly not enough to mount a response against a pathogen. To generate sufficient antigen-specific effector lymphocytes to fight an infection, a lymphocyte with an appropriate receptor specificity is activated first to proliferate. Only when a large clone of identical cells has been produced do these finally differentiate into effector cells, a process that requires 4 to 5 days. This means that the adaptive immune response to a pathogen occurs several days after the initial infection has occurred and been detected by the innate immune system.
# Chunk 1788
Anatomic barriers and initial chemical defenses.

Direct mechanisms of tissue damage by pathogens Direct cytopathic effect Variola Varicella-zoster Hepatitis B virus Polio virus Measles virus Infuenza virus Herpes simplex virus Human herpes virus 8 (HHV8) Smallpox Chickenpox, shingles Hepatitis Poliomyelitis Measles, subacute sclerosing panencephalitis Infuenza Cold Kaposi's sarcoma sores Exotoxin production Streptococcus pyogenes Staphylococcus aureus Corynebacterium diphtheriae Clostridium tetani Vibrio cholerae Tonsillitis, scarlet fever Boils, toxic shock syndrome, food poisoning Diphtheria Tetanus Cholera Endotoxin Escherichia coli Haemophilus infuenzae Salmonella typhi Shigella Pseudomonas aeruginosa Yersinia pestis Gram-negative sepsis Meningitis, pneumonia Typhoid fever Bacillarydysentery Wound infection Plague
# Chunk 1789
Endothelial activation is driven by macrophage-produced cytokines, particularly TNF-α, which induce the rapid externalization of granules called Weibel–Palade bodies in the endothelial cells. These granules contain preformed P-selectin, which appears on the surfaces of local endothelial cells just minutes after macrophages have responded to the presence of microbes by producing TNF-α. Shortly after P-selectin gets to the cell surface, mRNA encoding E-selectin is synthesized, and within 2 hours the endothelial cells are expressing mainly E-selectin. Both P-selectin and E-selectin interact with sulfated sialyl-LewisX, a sulfated form of a carbohydrate structure that is also an important blood group antigen. Sulfated sialyl-LewisX is present on the surface of neutrophils, and its interactions with P-selectin and E-selectin are important for neutrophil rolling on the endothelium. Mutations in enzymes involved in its synthesis, such as fucosyltransferase, cause defective sialyl-LewisX expression that results in an immunodeficiency, leukocyte adhesion deficiency type 2.
# Chunk 1790
Extravasation proceeds in four stages. In the first, induction of selectins induces leukocyte rolling along the endothelium. P-selectin appears on endothelial cell surfaces within a few minutes of exposure to leukotriene B4, C5a, or histamine, which is released from mast cells in response to C5a. P-selectin can also be induced by TNF-α or LPS, and both of these induce synthesis of E-selectin, which appears on the endothelial cell surface a few hours later. When the sulfated sialyl-LewisX on monocytes and neutrophils contacts these exposed P-and E-selectins, these cells adhere reversibly to the vessel wall and begin to ‘roll’ along endothelium (see Fig. 3.31, top panel), permitting stronger interactions of the next step in leukocyte migration. Neutrophils are particularly efficient at rolling along endothelium even under flow rates that prevent rolling by other cells. Such ‘shear-resistant rolling’ by neutrophils uses long extensions of plasma membrane, termed slings, that bind the endothelium and wrap around the cell as it rolls, serving to tether the cell firmly to the endothelium and to promote rapid entry to sites of infection.
# Chunk 1791
CXCL8 and CCL2 (see Section 3-17) are produced at the site of infection and bind to proteoglycans in the extracellular matrix and on endothelial cell surfaces. In this way, a matrix-associated concentration gradient of chemokines is formed on a solid surface along which the leukocyte can migrate to the focus of infection (see Fig. 3.31). CXCL8 is released by the macrophages that first encounter pathogens; it recruits neutrophils, which enter the infected tissue in large numbers in the early part of the induced response. Their influx usually peaks within the first 6 hours of an inflammatory response. Monocytes are recruited through the action of CCL2, and accumulate more slowly than neutrophils. Once in the inflamed tissue, neutrophils are able to eliminate many pathogens by phagocytosis. In an innate immune response, neutrophils use their complement receptors and the direct pattern recognition receptors discussed earlier in this chapter (see Section 3-1) to recognize and phagocytose pathogens or pathogen components directly or after opsonization with complement (see Section 2-13). In addition, as we will see in Chapter 10, neutrophils act as phagocytic effectors in humoral adaptive immunity, taking up antibody-coated microbes by means of specific receptors.
# Chunk 1792
somatic gene rearrangement to diversify receptors built from LRR domains.

Since the early 1960s it has been known that certain jawless fishes, the hagfish and the lamprey, could mount a form of accelerated rejection of transplanted skin grafts and exhibit a kind of immunological delayed-type hypersensitivity. Their serum also seemed to contain an activity that behaved as a specific agglutinin, increasing in titer after secondary immunizations, in a similar way to an antibody response in higher vertebrates. Although these phenomena seemed reminiscent of adaptive immunity, there was no evidence of a thymus or of immunoglobulins, but these animals did have cells that could be considered to be genuine lymphocytes on the basis of morphological and molecular analysis. Analysis of the genes expressed by lymphocytes of the sea lamprey Petromyzon marinus revealed none related to T-cell receptor or immunoglobulin genes. However, these cells expressed large amounts of mRNAs from genes encoding proteins with multiple LRR domains, the same protein domain from which the pathogen-recognizing Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are built (see Section 3-5).
# Chunk 1793
Newly synthesized MHC class I αchains that enter the endoplasmic reticulum membranes bind to calnexin, a general-purpose chaperone protein that retains the MHC class I molecule in a partly folded state (Fig. 6.8). Calnexin also associates with partly folded T-cell receptors, immunoglobulins, and MHC class II molecules, and so has a central role in the assembly of many immunological as well as non-immunological proteins. When β2-microglobulin binds to the α chain, the partly folded MHC class I α:β2-microglobulin heterodimer dissociates from calnexin and binds to an assembly of proteins called the MHC class I peptide-loading complex (PLC). One component of ubiquitinated protein normal proteins (>70%) ribosome DRiPs (<30%) TAP tapasin ERp57calreticulin MHC class I ˜:˛2m complex is released from calnexin, binds a complex of chaperone proteins (calreticulin, ERp57) and binds to TAP via tapasin peptide fragments proteasome ERAAP˜2m MHC class I nucleus ER cytosol calnexin Partly folded MHC class I ˜ chains bind to calnexin until ˛2-microglobulin binds Cytosolic proteins and defective ribosomal products (DRiPs) are degraded to peptide fragments by the proteasome. TAP delivers peptides to the ER
# Chunk 1794
Most immature B cells leaving the bone marrow will not survive to become fully mature B cells. Figure 8.12 shows the possible fates of newly produced B cells that enter the periphery. The daily output of new B cells from the bone marrow is roughly 5–10% of the total B-lymphocyte population in the steady-state peripheral pool. In unimmunized animals, the size of this pool seems to remain constant, due to homeostasis, which means that the stream of new B cells needs to be balanced by the removal of an equal number of peripheral B cells. However, the majority of peripheral mature B cells are long-lived, and only 1–2% of these die each day. Thus, most of the B cells that die are in the rapidly turning-over immature peripheral B-cell population, of which more than 50% die every 3 days. The failure of most newly formed B cells to survive for more than a few days in the periphery seems to be due to competition between peripheral B cells for access to the follicles in the spleen. If newly produced immature B cells do not enter a follicle, their passage through the periphery is halted and they eventually die. The limited number of lymphoid follicles cannot accommodate all of the B cells generated each day, and so there is continual competition for entry.
# Chunk 1795
8-12 T-cell precursors proliferate extensively in the thymus, but most die there.

T-cell precursors arriving in the thymus from the bone marrow spend up to a week differentiating there before they enter a phase of intense proliferation. In a young adult mouse the thymus contains about 108 to 2 × 108 thymocytes. About 5 × 107 new cells are generated each day; however, only about 106 to 2 × 106 (roughly 2–4%) of these leave the thymus each day as mature T cells. Despite the disparity between the number of T cells generated in the thymus and the number leaving, the thymus does not continue to grow in size or cell number. This is because about 98% of the thymocytes that develop in the thymus also die in the thymus by apoptosis (see Section 1-14). Cells undergoing apoptosis are recognized and ingested by macrophages, and apoptotic bodies, which are the residual condensed chromatin of apoptotic cells, are seen inside macrophages throughout the thymic cortex (Fig. 8.19). This apparently
# Chunk 1796
T-cell precursors committed to the α:β lineage at the DN3 stage undergo vigorous proliferation in the subcapsular region and progress to the DN4 stage. These cells then rapidly transit through an immature CD8 single-positive stage and become double-positive cells that express low levels of the T-cell receptor and both the CD4 and CD8 co-receptors as they move deeper into the thymic cortex. These double-positive cells have a life-span of only about 3–4 days unless they are rescued by engagement of their T-cell receptor. The rescue of double-positive cells from programmed cell death and their maturation into CD4 or CD8 single-positive cells is the process known as positive selection. Only about 10–30% of the T-cell receptors generated by gene rearrangement will be able to recognize self peptide:self MHC complexes and thus function in self MHC-restricted responses to foreign antigens (see Chapter 4); those that have this capability are selected for survival in the thymus. Double-positive cells also undergo negative selection: T cells whose receptors recognize self peptide:self MHC complexes too strongly undergo apoptosis, thus eliminating potentially self-reactive cells. In this section, we examine the interactions between developing double-positive thymocytes and different thymic components and discuss the mechanisms by which these interactions shape the mature T-cell repertoire.
# Chunk 1797
Fig. 9.5 Trapping and activation of antigen-specific naive T cells in lymphoid tissue. naive T cells entering the lymph node from the blood encounter antigen-presenting dendritic cells in T-cell zones. T cells that recognize their specific antigen bind stably to the dendritic cells and are activated through their T-cell receptors, resulting in their retention within the lymph node as they develop into effector T cells. By 5 days after the arrival of antigen, activated effector T cells are leaving the lymph node in large numbers via the efferent lymphatics. Lymphocyte recirculation and recognition are so effective that all the naive T cells in the peripheral circulation specific for a particular antigen can be trapped by that antigen in one node within 2 days.
# Chunk 1798
The major effector functions of each class (+++) are shaded in dark red, whereas lesser functions (++) are shown in dark pink, and very minor functions (+) in pale pink. The distributions are marked similarly, with actual average levels in serum being shown in the bottom row. IgA has two subclasses, IgA1 and IgA2. The IgA column refers to both. *IgG2 can act as an opsonin in the presence of an Fc receptor of the appropriate allotype, found in about 50% of people of Caucasian descent.
# Chunk 1799
The establishment of a focus of infection in tissues and the response of the innate immune system produce changes in the immediate environment. Many microorganisms are repelled or kept in check at this stage by innate defenses, which are triggered by stimulation of the various germlineencoded pattern recognition receptors expressed by innate sensor cells—such as epithelial cells, tissue-resident mast cells, macrophages, and dendritic cells (see Chapters 2 and 3). Cytokines and chemokines produced by pathogen-activated innate sensor cells initiate local inflammation, and also activate ILCs. These responses are activated within minutes to hours, and are sustained for at least several days. The inflammatory response is induced through activation of the endothelium of local post-capillary venules (see Fig. 3.31). This leads to the recruitment of circulating innate effector cells, particularly neutrophils and monocytes, thereby increasing the numbers of phagocytes available for microbe clearance. As monocytes enter tissue and become activated, additional inflammatory cells are attracted into the infected tissue so that the inflammatory response is maintained and reinforced. Leakiness of the inflamed endothelium also leads to the influx of serum proteins, including complement, activation of which in a primary infection occurs mainly via the alternative and lectin pathways (see Fig. 2.15). This results in the production of the anaphylatoxins C3a and C5a, which further activate the vascular endothelium; and C3b, which opsonizes microbes for more effective clearance by recruited phagocytes. This early phase of the inflammatory response is largely nonspecific for the type of pathogen.
# Chunk 1800
The duration of immunological memory has been estimated by examining responses in people who received vaccinia, the virus used to immunize against smallpox (Fig. 11.23). Because smallpox was eradicated in 1978, it is presumed that their responses represent true immunological memory and are not due to restimulation from time to time by the smallpox virus. One study found strong vaccinia-specific CD4 and CD8 T-cell memory responses as long as 75 years after the original immunization, and from the strength of these responses it was estimated that the memory response had an approximate half-life of between 8 and 15 years. Half-life represents the time required for a response to diminish to 50% of its original strength. By contrast with T-cell memory, titers of antivirus antibody remained stable, almost without measurable decline.
# Chunk 1801
Experiments like these have shown that when an animal is first immunized with a protein antigen, functional helper T-cell memory against that antigen appears abruptly and reaches a maximum after 5 days or so. Functional antigen-specific B-cell memory appears some days later, then enters a phase of cell proliferation and selection in lymphoid tissues. By 1 month after immunization, memory B cells are present at their maximum level. These levels of memory cells are then maintained, with little alteration, for the lifetime of the animal. It is important to recognize that the functional memory elicited in these experiments can be due to the precursors of memory cells as well as the memory cells themselves. These precursors are probably activated T cells and B cells, some of whose progeny will later differentiate into memory cells. Thus, precursors to memory cells can appear very shortly after immunization, even though resting memory-type lymphocytes may not yet have developed.
# Chunk 1802
A similar suppression of naive T-cell responses by antigen-specific memory T cells can occur in the setting of infection by lymphocytic choriomeningitis 1000 100 10 A B C D E F G Response to epitope Response to epitope Response to epitope A B C D E F A B C D Percentagenormal response 1000 100 10 Percentagenormal response 1000 100 10 Percentagenormal response Same individual at 20 years infected with a new variant in˜uenza virus makes antibody only against epitopes shared with original virus, not against epitopes shared with the variant encountered at age 5 years Same individual at 5 years infected with a variant in˜uenza virus makes antibody only against the epitopes shared with the original virus Individual at 2 years infected with in˜uenza virus makes antibody against all epitopes present on the virus
# Chunk 1803
Fig. 11.34 When individuals who have been infected with one influenza virus responds preferentially to those epitopes shared variant of influenza virus are infected with a second or third with the original virus, and makes a smaller than normal response variant, they make antibodies only against epitopes that were to new epitopes on the virus (center panel). Even at age 20 years, present on the initial virus. A child infected for the first time with this commitment to respond to epitopes shared with the original an influenza virus at 2 years of age makes a response to all epitopes virus, and the subnormal response to new epitopes, is retained (right (left panel). At age 5 years, the same child exposed to a different panel). This phenomenon is called ‘original antigenic sin.’ virus (LCMV) in the mouse or dengue virus in humans. Mice that were primed with one strain of LCMV responded to a subsequent infection with a second strain of LCMV by expanding CD8 T cells that reacted to antigens specific for the first strain. However, this type of effect was not observed when responses to variable ovalbumin antigenic epitopes were examined in the setting of recurrent infections using the bacterial pathogen Listeria monocytogenes, suggesting that the suppression caused by ‘original antigenic sin’ does not occur in all immune responses.
# Chunk 1804
Fig. 12.19 Tolerance to antigens can be experimentally generated by oral administration. Mice are fed for 2 weeks with 25 mg of either ovalbumin, the experimental protein, or a second protein as a control. Seven days later, the mice are immunized subcutaneously with ovalbumin plus an adjuvant, and after 2 weeks, the serum antibodies and T‑cell function are measured. Mice that were fed ovalbumin have a lower ovalbumin‑specific systemic immune response than those fed the control protein.
# Chunk 1805
Fig 12.23 The microbiota tune local and systemic immune responses. The microbiota has local and distant effects on immune function, although only a few individual organisms and mechanisms have been identified. Segmented filamentous bacteria (SFB) potently induce SFB‑specific TH17 cells, perhaps by inducing epithelial cells to produce serum amyloid A (SAA) protein that may act on dendritic cells. Bacterial flagellin favors TH17 and IgA responses by stimulating TLR‑5 on mucosal CD11b‑expressing dendritic cells. The microbiota is also needed for the presence of isolated lymphoid follicles and ILCs, especially ILC3 cells, but inhibits the accumulation of invariant NKT cells (iNKTs). Besides providing energy to colonic enterocytes, butyrate and other SCFAs may also act to drive the generation of FoxP3+ Tregs, although the molecular mechanism is still unclear. Clostridia also induce production of TGF‑β by epithelial cells. The polysaccharide antigen (PSA) from Bacteroides fragilis stimulates the preferential generation of regulatory T cells, possibly by binding to TLR‑2 on CD4+ T cells. Unidentified members of the microbiota are needed to maintain the production of TSLP, IL‑25, IL‑33, and RA.
# Chunk 1806
The first description of an immunodeficiency disease was Ogden C. Bruton’s account, in 1952, of the failure of a male child to produce antibody. Because inheritance of this condition is Xlinked and is characterized by the absence of immunoglobulin in the serum (agammaglobulinemia), it was called Bruton’s Xlinked agammaglobulinemia (XLA) (see Fig. 13.2). Since then, autosomal recessive variants of agammaglobulinemia have been described. Infants with these diseases are usually identified as a result of recurrent infections with pyogenic bacteria, such as Streptococcus pneumoniae, and enteroviruses. In this regard, it should be noted that normal infants have a transient deficiency in immunoglobulin production in the first 3–12 months of life. The newborn infant has antibody levels comparable to those of the mother because of the transplacental transport of maternal IgG (see Section 1017). As this IgG is catabolized, antibody levels gradually decrease until the infant begins to produce significant amounts of its own IgG at about 6 months (Fig. 13.3). Thus, IgG levels are quite low between the ages of 3 months and 1 year. This can lead to a period of heightened susceptibility to infection, especially in premature babies, who begin with lower levels of maternal IgG and also reach immune competence later after birth. Because of the transient protection afforded
# Chunk 1807
Worldwide totals 35.3 million/2.3 million/1.6 million total cases in 2012 new cases in 2012 deaths in 2012 Sub-Saharan Africa 25 million/1.6 million/1.2 million Caribbean 250,000/12,000/11,000 South and South-east Asia 3.9 million/270,000/220,000 Latin America 1.5 million/86,000/52,000 Eastern Europe and Central Asia 1.3 million/130,000/91,000 East Asia 800,000/270,000/220,000 North America 1.3 million/48,000/20,000 Western Europe 860,000/29,000/17,000 North Africa and Middle East 260,000/32,000/17,000 Oceania 51,000/2100/1200 Fig. 13.28 The incidence of new HIV infection is increasing more slowly in many regions of the world, but AIDS is still a major disease burden. the number of individuals living with HiV/aiDS is large and continues to grow, but the number of new infections in 2012 decreased by over one-third since the peak of the epidemic. Worldwide, in 2012, it is estimated that there were around 35.3 million individuals infected with HiV, including some 2.4 million new cases, and approximately 1.6 million deaths from aiDS, a decrease of 30% since the peak in 2005. new infections in children have declined approximately 50% since 2001, with 260,000 new cases in 2012. (AIDS Epidemic Update, unaiDS/World Health Organization, 2013.)
# Chunk 1808
Fig. 13.38 The time-course of reduction of HIV circulating in the blood during drug treatment. the production of new HiV particles can be arrested for prolonged periods by treatment using combinations of protease inhibitors and viral reversetranscriptase inhibitors. after the initiation of such treatment, virus production is curtailed as the infected cells die and no new cells are infected. the half-life of virus decay occurs in three phases. in the first phase the half-life (t1/2) is about 2 days, reflecting the half-life of productively infected CD4 t cells; this phase lasts about 2 weeks, during which time viral production declines cells; cells that are already infected can continue to produce virions because, once the provirus is established, reverse transcriptase and integrase are not needed to make new virus particles, and while the viral protease acts at a very late maturation step of the virus, inhibition of the protease does not prevent virus from being released. However, in all cases, further cycles of infection by released virions are blocked, and replication is therefore prevented.
# Chunk 1809
HAART is also accompanied by a slow but steady increase in CD4 T cells, despite the fact that many other compartments of the immune system remain compromised. Three complementary mechanisms have been established for the recovery in CD4 Tcell numbers. The first is a redistribution of CD4 T memory cells from lymphoid tissues into the circulation as viral replication as the lymphocytes that were productively infected at the onset of treatment die. Released virus is rapidly cleared from the circulation, where it has a half-life of 6 hours, and there is a decrease in virus levels in plasma of more than 95% during this first phase. the second phase lasts for about 6 months; the virus now has a half-life of about 2 weeks. During this phase, virus is released from infected macrophages and from resting, latently infected CD4 t cells stimulated to divide and develop productive infection. it is thought that there is then a third phase of unknown length that results from the reactivation of integrated provirus in memory t cells and other long-lived reservoirs of infection. this reservoir of latently infected cells might remain present for many years. Measurement of this phase of viral decay is impossible at present because viral levels in plasma are below detectable levels (dotted line). Data Months on treatment courtesy of G.M. Shaw.
# Chunk 1810
Precautions that can be taken by uninfected individuals are relatively inexpensive and involve measures to protect against contact with body fluids, such as semen, blood, blood products, or milk, from people who are infected. It has been repeatedly demonstrated that this is sufficient to prevent infection, as exemplified by healthcare workers who care for AIDS patients for long periods without seroconversion or signs of infection. The routine use of condoms greatly reduces the risk of HIV transmission, as does restraint from breastfeeding by infected mothers of newborns. Male circumcision also reduces transmission rates, as the foreskin is a major site of viral entry in uncircumcised males. Additional measures that have been considered include the use of microbicidal gels or suppositories, improvements in which have led to products that show promise in recent trials. Some of these agents can also reduce the transmission of other sexually transmitted diseases (for example, genital herpes) that increase the risk of HIV transmission. Finally, there is increasing interest in the prophylactic use of antiretroviral drugs (referred to as preexposure prophylaxis, or PrEP), which are administered either topically or orally to individuals at high risk for contracting HIV. To date, two reverse transcriptase inhibitors have shown efficacy in trials, and combined daily use of both drugs taken orally has demonstrated over 90% reduction in the risk of HIV infection. Moreover, use of antiretroviral therapy immediately postexposure—for example, in hospital workers exposed to contaminated blood by accidental needlestick—substantially reduces the risk of acquiring HIV. One concern with this approach is the risk of developing drug resistance in those who do contract HIV while on PrEP, particularly in individuals with poor adherence to the dosing regimen. Although the significance of this risk has yet to be established, it remains an issue. Nevertheless, testing of new PrEP strategies based on additional antiretrovirals or of longacting formulations that reduce the risk of poor compliance represents areas of considerable promise.
# Chunk 1811
IgE is prominent in the defense against extracellular parasitic organisms, especially helminths and protozoa (see Section 11-9). These parasitic organisms are prevalent in developing nations, but most serum IgE in developed nations is directed against innocuous antigens, sometimes causing allergic symptoms (Fig. 14.1). Almost half the population of North America and Europe is sensitized to one or more common environmental antigens, and, although rarely life-threatening, allergic diseases initiated by contact with a specific allergen can cause much distress and lost time from school and work. The burden of allergic diseases in the Western world is considerable, with their prevalence having more than doubled in the past 20 years. Consequently, most clinical and scientific attention paid to IgE has been directed toward its pathologic roles in allergic disease rather than its protective capacity. Until the last decade, developing countries in Africa and the Middle East reported a relatively low prevalence of allergy; however, this situation is rapidly changing, probably as a result of Western-style modernization.
# Chunk 1812
Fig. 14.5 Netherton’s syndrome illustrates the association of proteases with the development of high levels of IgE and allergy. This 26-year-old man with Netherton’s syndrome, caused by a deficiency in the protease inhibitor SPINK5, had persistent erythroderma (redness of the skin), recurrent infections of the skin and other tissues, and multiple food allergies associated with high serum IgE levels. In the top photograph, large erythematous plaques covered with scales and erosions are visible over the upper trunk. The lower panel shows a section through the skin of the same patient. Note the psoriasis-like hyperplasia of the epidermis. Neutrophils are also present in the epidermis. In the dermis, a perivascular infiltrate is evident. Although not discernible at this magnification, the infiltrate contains both mononuclear cells and neutrophils. Source: Sprecher, E., et al.: Clin. Exp. Dermatol. 2004, 29:513–517.
# Chunk 1813
14-4 Environmental factors may interact with genetic susceptibility to cause allergic disease.

Studies of susceptibility suggest that environmental factors and genetic variation each account for about 50% of the risk of developing atopy. The prevalence of atopic allergic diseases, and of asthma in particular, is increasing in economically advanced regions of the world, and this is likely due to the impact of changes in certain environmental factors on individuals with genetic backgrounds that predispose them toward atopy. Interestingly, although the incidence of asthma is lower in economically underdeveloped regions of Africa, Americans of African ancestry show increased asthma frequency and severity compared with Americans not of African ancestry. This shows a clear impact of environment on the expressivity of genetic influences.
# Chunk 1814
In support of a role for disturbed immunoregulatory pathways in susceptibility to asthma is evidence that exposure to certain types of childhood infection, with the important exception of some respiratory infections that we consider below, helps to protect against the development of allergic disease. Younger children from families with three or more older siblings and children aged less than 6 months who are exposed to other children in daycare facilities— situations linked to a greater exposure to infections—appear to be partially protected against atopy and asthma. Additionally, children with early-life exposure to a farm or ones having a dog are also somewhat protected against development of atopy and asthma, presumably because of their exposure to farmor pet-associated microbes. Furthermore, early colonization of the gut by commensal bacteria such as lactobacilli and bifidobacteria, or infection by gut pathogens such as Toxoplasma gondii or Helicobacter pylori, is associated with a reduced prevalence of allergic disease. There is also emerging evidence that, conversely, repeated exposure to antibiotics in early life increases the risk of developing asthma.
# Chunk 1815
In contrast to these negative associations between childhood infection and the development of atopy and asthma is evidence that children who have had attacks of bronchiolitis associated with respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infection are more prone to developing asthma later on. Children hospitalized with RSV infection have a skewed ratio of cytokine production away from IFN-γ toward IL-4, presumably increasing their likelihood of developing TH2 responses and increased production of IgE. This effect of RSV appears to depend on age at first infection. Experimental infection of neonatal mice with RSV was followed by lower increases in the production of IFN-γcompared with mice that received experimental RSV infection at 4 or 8 weeks of age. When the mice were rechallenged at 12 weeks of age with RSV infection, animals that had been primarily infected as neonates had more severe lung inflammation than animals first infected at 4 or 8 weeks of age.
# Chunk 1816
Left panel: the response to an inhaled antigen can be divided into early and late responses. An asthmatic response in the lungs with narrowing of the airways caused by the constriction of bronchial smooth muscle and development of edema can be measured as a fall in the peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR). The immediate response peaks within minutes after antigen inhalation and then subsides, returning to near baseline PEFR. Six to eight hours after antigen challenge, there can be a late-phase response that also results in a fall in the PEFR. The immediate response is caused by the direct effects on blood vessels, nerves, and smooth muscle of rapidly metabolized mediators such as histamine and lipid mediators released by mast cells. The late-phase response is caused by the continued production of these mediators, by the production of vasoactive compounds that dilate blood vessels, and by recruitment of lymphocytes and myeloid cells, which together lead to the production of edema. Right panel: a wheal-and-flare allergic reaction develops within a minute or two of intradermal injection of antigen and lasts for up to 30–60 minutes. The more widespread edematous response characteristic of the late phase develops approximately 6 hours later and can persist for up to 2 or 3 days. The photograph shows an intradermal skin challenge with allergen resulting in a wheal-and-flare (early-phase) reaction observed 15 minutes after allergen challenge (left) and a late-phase reaction occurring 6 hours after challenge (right). The allergen was grass pollen extract. Photograph courtesy of S.R. Durham.
# Chunk 1817
clinically as seasonal allergic rhinoconjunctivitis) is caused by a variety of allergens, including certain grass and tree pollens. Symptoms in the late summer or autumn are commonly caused by weed pollen, such as that of ragweed, or the spores of fungi such as Alternaria. Ubiquitous allergens such as Fel d 1 in cat dander, Der p 1 in the feces of house dust mites, and Bla g 1 in cockroach can be a cause of year-round, or perennial, allergic rhinoconjunctivitis.
# Chunk 1818
A more serious IgE-mediated respiratory disease is allergic asthma, which is triggered by allergen-induced activation of submucosal mast cells in the lower airways. This can lead within seconds to bronchial constriction and an increased secretion into the airways of fluid and mucus, making breathing more difficult by trapping inhaled air in the lungs. Patients with allergic asthma usually need treatment, and severe asthmatic attacks can be life threatening. The same allergens that cause allergic rhinitis and conjunctivitis commonly cause asthma attacks. For example, respiratory arrest caused by severe attacks of asthma in the summer or autumn has been associated with the inhalation of Alternaria spores.
# Chunk 1819
IgE-mediated food allergies affect about 1–4% of American and European adults and are slightly more frequent in children (around 5%). About 25% of food allergy in children is due to peanuts, and peanut allergy is increasing in incidence. Figure 14.15 lists risk factors for developing IgE-mediated food allergy. IgE-mediated food allergy can manifest itself in a variety of ways, ranging from a swelling of the lips and oral tissue on contact with the allergen, to gastrointestinal cramping, diarrhea, or vomiting. Local gastrointestinal symptoms are due to activation of mucosal mast cells, leading to transepithelial fluid loss and smooth muscle contractions. Food allergens that subsequently reach the bloodstream can lead to urticaria, asthma, and, in the most severe cases, systemic anaphylaxis that can lead to cardiovascular collapse (see Section 14-10). Certain foods, most importantly peanuts, tree nuts, and shellfish, are particularly associated with severe anaphylaxis. Around 150 deaths occur each year in the United States as a result of a severe allergic reaction to food, with peanut and tree nut allergies accounting for most of the deaths. Peanut allergy is a significant public health problem, especially in schools, where children may be unwittingly exposed to peanuts, which are present in many foods. Recent studies offer hope for reducing the incidence of severe food allergy. In one study, infants with severe eczema who were at high risk for developing peanut allergy were randomly assigned either to be fed peanuts regularly, starting between ages 4 and 11 months, or to be on a peanut-avoidance diet for 5 years. At the age of 5, the children who had consumed peanuts showed more than a threefold reduction in the frequency of peanut allergy; the reduction was associated with decreased production of peanut-specific IgE. This suggests that deliberate introduction into the diet of allergen at the appropriate time to at-risk individuals may suppress the development of food allergy.
# Chunk 1820
Another, more routinely used approach that aims to permanently eliminate the allergic response is allergen desensitization. This form of immunotherapy aims to restore the patient’s ability to tolerate exposure to the allergen. Patients are desensitized by injection with escalating doses of allergen, starting with tiny amounts. The mechanism by which desensitization occurs is not definitively established, but for most successfully desensitized patients, the procedure results in a change in the antibody response from one that is IgE predominant to one dominated by an IgG subclass. Successful desensitization appears to depend on the induction of Treg cells secreting IL-10 and/or TGF-β, which skew the response away from IgE production (see Section 14-4). For example, beekeepers exposed to repeated stings (paralleling the therapeutic desensitization process) are often naturally protected from severe allergic reactions such as anaphylaxis through a mechanism that involves IL-10-secreting T cells. Similarly, specific allergen immunotherapy for sensitivity to insect venom and airborne allergens induces the increased production of IL-10 and in some cases TGF-β, as well as the production of IgG isotypes, particularly IgG4, an isotype selectively promoted by IL-10. Recent evidence shows that desensitization is also associated with a reduction in the numbers of inflammatory cells at the site of the allergic reaction. A potential complication of the desensitization approach is that in spite of starting with extremely small doses of allergen, some patients can experience an IgE-mediated allergic response, sometimes including bronchospasms. Thus, many physicians feel that allergen immunotherapy is contraindicated in patients with severe asthma. For patients who experience resolution of their allergy symptoms during allergen immunotherapy, weekly or every other week injections are continued for 3 years, and then the therapy is discontinued. In approximately half of patients treated in this fashion, symptoms do not recur following cessation of the injections. These patients experience durable ability to tolerate the allergen without symptoms. Recent studies suggest that administration of immunotherapy via the sublingual route is equally or more effective than administration by subcutaneous injection, offering the possibility of less expensive and perhaps more effective immunotherapy in the future.
# Chunk 1821
A systemic reaction known as serum sickness can result from the injection of large quantities of a poorly catabolized foreign antigen. This illness was so named because it frequently followed the administration of therapeutic horse antiserum. In the pre-antibiotic era, antiserum made by immunizing horses with Streptococcus pneumoniae was often used to treat pneumococcal pneumonia; the specific anti-pneumococcal antibodies in the horse serum would help the patient to clear the infection. In much the same way, antivenin (serum from horses immunized with snake venoms) is still used today as a source of neutralizing antibodies to treat people suffering from the bites of poisonous snakes.
# Chunk 1822
Fig. 15.55 The mixed lymphocyte reaction (MLR) can be used to detect histoincompatibility. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells, which include lymphocytes and monocytes, are isolated from the two individuals to be tested. The cells from the person who serves as the stimulator (yellow) are first irradiated to prevent their proliferation. Then they are mixed with the cells from the other person, who serves as the responder (blue), and cultured for 5 days (top panel). In the culture, responder lymphocytes are stimulated by allogeneic HLA class I and II molecules expressed by the stimulator’s monocytes and the dendritic cells that differentiate from the monocytes. The stimulated lymphocytes proliferate and differentiate into effector cells. Five days after mixing, the culture is assessed for T‑cell proliferation (bottom left panel), which is due to CD4 T cells recognizing HLA class II differences, and for cytotoxic T cells (bottom right panel) produced in response to HLA class I differences. The mixed lymphocyte reaction is instrumental in distinguishing MHC class II from MHC class I.
# Chunk 1823
Another checkpoint involves the inhibitory receptor PD-1 and its ligands PD-L1 and PD-L2. PD-L1 is expressed on a wide variety of human tumors; in renal cell carcinoma, PD-L1 expression is associated with a poor prognosis. In mice, transfection of the gene encoding PD-L1 into tumor cells increased their growth in vivo and reduced their susceptibility to lysis by cytotoxic T cells. These effects were reversed by an antibody against PD-L1. In humans, the anti-PD-1 antibody pembrolizumab has been shown to be effective in previously treated melanoma patients, giving a nearly 30% response rate. It is FDA-approved for use following treatment with ipilimumab, or in patients with a BRAF mutation after treatment with ipilimumab and a B-raf inhibitor. Another anti-PD-1 antibody, nivolumab, is also approved for treatment of metastatic melanoma and is being considered for use in treatment of Hodgkin’s lymphoma. Ongoing clinical trials are evaluating checkpoint blockade using antibodies to PD-L1 and PD-L2.
# Chunk 1824
Chapter 16: Manipulation of the Immune Response

Fig. 16.28 The effect of vaccination against group C Neisseria meningitidis (meningococcus) on the number of cases of group B and group C meningococcal disease in England and Wales. Meningococcal infection affects roughly 5 in 100,000 people a year in the UK, with groups B and C meningococci accounting for almost all the cases. Before the introduction of the meningitis C vaccine, group C disease was the second most common cause of meningococcal disease, accounting for about 40% of cases. Group C disease now accounts for less than 10% of cases, with group B disease accounting for more than 80% of cases. After the introduction of the vaccine, there was a significant decrease in the number of laboratory-confirmed cases of group C disease in all age groups. The impact was greatest in the immunized groups, with reductions of more than 90% in these groups. An impact has also been seen in the unimmunized age groups, with a reduction of about 70%, suggesting that this vaccine has had a herd immunity effect.
# Chunk 1825
Fig. A.13 Cellular proteins reacting with an antibody can be dissociates it from the antibody and also coats the protein with a characterized by immunoprecipitation of labeled cell lysates. strong negative charge, allowing it to migrate according to its size All actively synthesized cellular proteins can be labeled metabolically in polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE). The positions of the by incubating cells with radioactive amino acids (shown here for labeled proteins are determined by autoradiography using X-ray methionine; 35S-Met), or one can label just the cell-surface proteins film. This technique of SDS-PAGE can be used to determine the by using radioactive iodine in a form that cannot cross the cell molecular weight and subunit composition of a protein. Patterns of membrane or by a reaction with the small molecule biotin, detected protein bands observed with metabolic labeling are usually more by its reaction with labeled avidin (not shown). Cells are lysed with complex than those revealed by radioiodination, owing to the detergent and individual labeled cell-associated proteins can be presence of precursor forms of the protein (right panel). The mature precipitated with a monoclonal antibody attached to beads. After form of a surface protein can be identified as being the same size as unbound proteins have been washed away, the bound protein that detected by surface iodination or biotinylation (not shown). is eluted in the detergent sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), which generally abbreviated as SDSPAGE. SDS binds relatively homogeneously to proteins, conferring a charge that allows the electrophoretic field to drive protein migration through the gel. The rate of migration is controlled mainly by protein size (see Fig. A.13). Proteins of differing charges can be separated using isoelectric focusing (see Section A-7). This technique can be combined with SDS-PAGE in a procedure known as twodimensional gel electrophoresis. For this, the immunoprecipitated protein is eluted in urea, a nonionic solubilizing agent, and run on an isoelectric focusing gel in a narrow tube of polyacrylamide. This first-dimensional isoelectric focusing gel is then placed across the top of an SDS-PAGE slab gel, which is then run vertically to separate the proteins by molecular weight (Fig. A.14). Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis is a powerful technique that allows many hundreds of proteins in a complex mixture to be distinguished from one another.
# Chunk 1826
The GBD 2010 found that the worldwide mortality figure among children <5 years of age dropped from 16.39 million in 1970 to 11.9 million in 1990 and to 6.8 million in 2010—a decrease that surpassed predictions. Of childhood deaths in 2010, 3.1 million (40%) occurred in the neonatal period. About one-third of deaths among children <5 years old occurred in southern Asia and almost one-half in sub-Saharan Africa; <1% occurred in high-income countries.
# Chunk 1827
Worldwide, although both life expectancy and years of life lived in good health have risen, years of life lived with disability have also increased. Despite the higher prevalence of diseases common in older populations (e.g., dementia and musculoskeletal disease) in developed and high-income countries, best estimates from 2010 reveal that disability resulting from cardiovascular diseases, chronic respiratory diseases, and the long-term impact of communicable diseases was greater in lowand middle-income countries. In most developing countries, people lived shorter lives and experienced disability and poor health for a greater proportion of their lives. Indeed, 50% of the global burden of disease occurred in southern Asia and sub-Saharan Africa, which together account for only 35% of the world’s population.
# Chunk 1828
The GBD 2010 study found that the three leading risk factors for global disease burden in 2010 were (in order of frequency) high blood pressure, tobacco smoking (including secondhand smoke), and alcohol use—a substantial change from 1990, when childhood undernutrition was ranked first. Though ranking eighth in 2010, childhood undernutrition remains the leading risk factor for death worldwide among children <5 years of age. In an era that has seen obesity become a major health concern in many developed countries—and the sixth leading risk factor worldwide—the persistence of undernutrition is surely cause for great consternation. Low body weight is still the dominant risk factor for disease burden in sub-Saharan Africa. Inability to feed the hungry reflects many years of failed development projects and must be addressed as a problem of the highest priority. Indeed, no health care initiative, however generously funded, will be effective without adequate nutrition.
# Chunk 1829
Fourth, the lack of trained health care personnel, most notably doctors and nurses, in resource-poor settings must be addressed. This personnel deficiency is invoked as a reason for the failure to treat AIDS in poor countries. In what is termed the brain drain, many physicians and nurses emigrate from their home countries to pursue opportunities abroad, leaving behind health systems that are understaffed and ill equipped to deal with the epidemic diseases that ravage local populations. The WHO recommends a minimum of 20 physicians and 100 nurses per 100,000 persons, but recent reports from that organization and others confirm that many countries, especially in sub-Saharan Africa, fall far short of those target numbers. Specifically, more than one-half of those countries register fewer than 10 physicians per 100,000 population. In contrast, the United States and Cuba register 279 and 596 doctors per 100,000 population, respectively. Similarly, the majority of sub-Saharan African countries do not have even half of the WHO-recommended minimum number of nurses. Further inequalities in health care staffing exist within countries. Rural–urban disparities in health care personnel mirror disparities of both wealth and health. For instance, nearly 90% of Malawi’s population lives in rural areas, but more than 95% of clinical officers work at urban facilities, and 47% of nurses work at tertiary care facilities. Even community health workers trained to provide first-line services to rural populations often transfer to urban districts.
# Chunk 1830
Chapter 248 reviews the etiology, pathogenesis, and clinical treatment of malaria, the world’s third-ranking infectious killer. Malaria’s human cost is enormous, with the highest toll among children—especially African children—living in poverty. In 2010, there were ~219 million cases of malaria, and the disease is thought to have killed 660,000 people; 86% of these deaths (~568,000) occurred among children <5 years old. The poor disproportionately experience the burden of malaria: more than 80% of estimated malaria deaths occur in just 14 countries, and mortality rates are highest in sub-Saharan Africa. The Democratic Republic of the Congo and Nigeria account for more than 40% of total estimated malaria deaths globally.
# Chunk 1831
The WHO recommends that all individuals living in malaria-endemic areas sleep under protective ITNs. About 140 million long-lasting ITNs were distributed in high-burden African countries in 2006–2008, and rates of household ownership of ITNs in high-burden countries increased to 31%. Although the RBM partnership has seen modest success, the WHO’s 2009 World Malaria Report states that the percentage of children <5 years of age using an ITN (24%) remains well below the World Health Assembly’s target of 80%. Limited success in scaling up ITN coverage reflects the inadequately acknowledged economic barriers that prevent the destitute sick from gaining access to critical preventive technologies and the challenges faced in designing and implementing effective delivery platforms for these products. In other words, this is a delivery failure rather than a lack of knowledge of how best to reduce malaria deaths.
# Chunk 1832
artemIsInIn-based combInatIon therapy The emergence and spread of chloroquine resistance have increased the need for antimalarial combination therapy. To limit the spread of resistance, the WHO now recommends that only ACT (as opposed to artemisinin monotherapy) be used for uncomplicated falciparum malaria. Like that of other antimalarial interventions, the use of ACT has increased in the last few years, but coverage rates remain very low in several countries in sub-Saharan Africa. The RBM partnership has invested significantly in measures to enhance access to ACT by facilitating its delivery through the public health sector and developing innovative funding mechanisms (e.g., the Affordable Medicines Facility—malaria) that reduce its cost significantly so that ineffective monotherapies can be eliminated from the market.
# Chunk 1833
Although the burden of communicable diseases—especially HIV infection, TB, and malaria—still accounts for the majority of deaths in resource-poor regions such as sub-Saharan Africa, 63% of all deaths worldwide in 2008 were held to be due to NCDs. Although we will use this term to describe cardiovascular diseases, cancers, diabetes, and chronic lung diseases, this usage masks important distinctions. For instance, two significant NCDs in low-income countries, rheumatic heart disease (RHD) and cervical cancer, represent the chronic sequelae of infections with group A Streptococcus and human papillomavirus, respectively. It is in these countries that the burden of disease due to NCDs is rising most rapidly. Close to 80% of deaths attributable to NCDs occur in lowand middle-income countries, where 86% of the global population lives. The WHO reports that ~25% of global NCD-related deaths take place before the age of 60—a figure representing ~5.7 million people and exceeding the total number of deaths due to AIDS, TB, and malaria combined. In almost all high-income countries, the WHO reported that NCD deaths accounted for ~70% of total deaths in 2008. By 2020, NCDs will account for 80% of the global burden of disease and for 7 of every 10 deaths in developing countries. The recent increase in resources for and attention to communicable diseases is both welcome and long overdue, but developing countries are already carrying a “double burden” of communicable and noncommunicable diseases.
# Chunk 1834
cardIovascular dIsease Because systemic investigation of the causes of stroke and heart failure in sub-Saharan Africa has begun only recently, little is known about the impact of elevated blood pressure in this portion of the continent. Modestly elevated blood pressure in the absence of tobacco use in populations with low rates of obesity may confer little risk of adverse events in the short run. In contrast, persistently elevated blood pressure above 180/110 goes largely undetected, untreated, and uncontrolled in this part of the world. In the cohort of men assessed in the Framingham Heart Study, the prevalence of blood pressures above 210/120—severe hypertension—declined from 1.8% in the 1950s to 0.1% by the 1960s with the introduction of effective antihypertensive agents. Although debate continues about appropriate screening strategies and treatment thresholds, rural health centers staffed largely by nurses must quickly gain access to essential antihypertensive medications.
# Chunk 1835
In stark contrast to the extraordinary lengths to which clinicians in wealthy countries will go to treat ischemic cardiomyopathy, little attention has been paid to young patients with nonischemic cardiomyopathies in resource-poor settings. Nonischemic cardiomyopathies, such as those due to hypertension, RHD, and chronic lung disease, account for >90% of cases of cardiac failure in sub-Saharan Africa and include poorly understood entities such as peripartum cardiomyopathy (which has an incidence in rural Haiti of 1 per 300 live births) and HIV-associated cardiomyopathy. Multidrug regimens that include beta blockers, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, and other agents can dramatically reduce mortality risk and improve quality of life for these patients. Lessons learned in the scale-up of chronic care for HIV infection and TB may be illustrative as progress is made in establishing the means to deliver heart-failure therapies.
# Chunk 1836
A 46-year-old man presents to his internist with a chief complaint of hemoptysis. An otherwise healthy nonsmoker, he is recovering from an apparent viral bronchitis. This presentation pattern suggests that the small amount of blood-streaked sputum is due to acute bronchitis, so that a chest x-ray provides sufficient reassurance that a more serious disorder is absent.
# Chunk 1837
In the second scenario, a 46-year-old patient who has the same chief complaint but with a 100-pack-year smoking history, a productive morning cough, and episodes of blood-streaked sputum fits the pattern of carcinoma of the lung. Consequently, along with the chest x-ray, the physician obtains a sputum cytology examination and refers this patient for a chest computed tomography (CT) scan.
# Chunk 1838
In the third scenario, a 46-year-old patient with hemoptysis who immigrated from a developing country has an echocardiogram as well, because the physician hears a soft diastolic rumbling murmur at the apex on cardiac auscultation, suggesting rheumatic mitral stenosis and possibly pulmonary hypertension.
# Chunk 1839
Although rapid, pattern recognition used without sufficient reflection can result in premature closure: mistakenly concluding that one already knows the correct diagnosis and therefore failing to complete the data collection that would demonstrate the lack of fit of the initial pattern selected. For example, a 45-year-old man presents with a 3-week history of a “flulike” upper respiratory infection (URI) including symptoms of dyspnea and a productive cough. On the basis of the presenting complaints, the clinician uses a “URI assessment form” to improve the quality and efficiency of care by standardizing the information gathered. After quickly acquiring the requisite structured examination components and noting in particular the absence of fever and a clear chest examination, the physician prescribes medication for acute bronchitis and sends the patient home with the reassurance that his illness was not serious. Following a sleepless night with significant dyspnea, the patient develops nausea and vomiting and collapses. He presents to the emergency department in cardiac arrest and is unable to be resuscitated. His autopsy shows a posterior wall myocardial infarction and a fresh thrombus in an atherosclerotic right coronary artery. What went wrong? The clinician had decided, based on the patient’s appearance, even before starting the history, that the patient’s complaints were not serious. Therefore, he felt confident that he could perform an abbreviated and focused examination by using the URI assessment protocol rather than considering the broader range of possibilities and performing appropriate tests to confirm or refute his initial hypotheses. In particular, by concentrating on the URI, the clinician failed to elicit the full dyspnea history, which would have suggested a far more serious disorder, and he neglected to search for other symptoms that could have directed him to the correct diagnosis.
# Chunk 1840
A second commonly used cognitive shortcut, the availability heuristic, involves judgments based of how easily prior similar cases or outcomes can be brought to mind. For example, an experienced clinician may recall 20 elderly patients seen over the last few years who presented with painless dyspnea of acute onset and were found to have acute myocardial infarction (MI). A novice clinician may spend valuable time seeking a pulmonary cause for the symptoms before considering and then confirming the cardiac diagnosis. In this situation, the patient’s clinical pattern does not fit the most common pattern of acute MI, but experience with this atypical presentation, along with the ability to recall it, directs the physician to the diagnosis.
# Chunk 1841
In contrast, exercise SPECT myocardial perfusion test is more accurate for CAD. For simplicity, assume that the finding of a reversible exercise-induced perfusion defect has both a sensitivity and a specificity of 90%, yielding a likelihood ratio for a positive test of 9.0 (0.90/ [1 – 0.90]) (consistent with moderate discriminatory ability because it falls between 5 and 10). For the same 10% pretest probability patient, a positive test raises the probability of CAD to 50% (Fig. 3-2). However, despite the differences in posttest probabilities between these two tests (30% versus 50%), the more accurate test may not improve diagnostic likelihood enough to change patient management (e.g., decision to refer to cardiac catheterization) because the more accurate test has only moved the physician from being fairly certain that the patient did not have CAD to a 50:50 chance of disease. In a patient with a pretest probability of 80%, exercise SPECT test raises the posttest probability to 97% (compared with 95% for the exercise treadmill). Again, the more accurate test does not provide enough improvement in posttest confidence to alter management, and neither test has improved much on what was known from clinical data alone.
# Chunk 1842
FIgURE 3-2 Nomogram version of Bayes’ rule used to predict the posttest probability of disease (right-hand scale) using the pretest probability of disease (left-hand scale) and the likelihood ratio for a positive test (middle scale). See text for information on calculation of likelihood ratios. To use, place a straight edge connecting the pretest probability and the likelihood ratio and read off the posttest probability. The right-hand part of the figure illustrates the value of a positive exercise treadmill test (likelihood ratio 4, green line) and a positive exercise thallium single-photon emission computed tomography perfusion study (likelihood ratio 9, broken yellow line) in a patient with a pretest probability of coronary artery disease of 50%. (Adapted from Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine: Likelihood ratios. Available at http://www.cebm.net/ index.aspx?o=1043.) probability, a negative test may not rule out disease adequately if it is not sufficiently sensitive. Thus, the largest change in diagnostic likelihood following a test result occurs when the clinician is most uncertain (i.e., pretest probability between 30% and 70%). For example, if a patient has a pretest probability for CAD of 50%, a positive exercise treadmill test will move the posttest probability to 80% and a positive exercise SPECT perfusion test will move it to 90% (Fig. 3-2).
# Chunk 1843
In 2003, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) proposed that routine universal HIV testing should be incorporated into standard adult medical care and, in part, cited a decision analysis model comparing HIV screening with usual care. Assuming a 1% prevalence of unidentified HIV infection in the population, routine screening of a cohort of 43-year-old men and women increased life expectancy by 5.5 days and lifetime costs by $194 per person screened, yielding an incremental cost-effectiveness ratio for screening versus usual care of $15,078 per quality-adjusted life-year (the additional cost to society to increase population health by 1 year of perfect health). Factors that influenced the results included assumptions about the effectiveness of behavior modification on subsequent sexual behavior, the benefits of early therapy for HIV infection, and the prevalence and incidence of HIV infection in the population targeted. This model, which required over 75 separate data points, provided novel insights into a public health problem in the absence of a randomized clinical trial and helped weigh the pros and cons of such a health policy recommendation. Although such models have been developed for selected clinical problems, their benefit and application to individual real-time clinical management have yet to be demonstrated.
# Chunk 1844
Meta-analyses typically focus on summary measures of relative treatment benefit, such as odds ratios or relative risks. Clinicians also should examine what absolute risk reduction (ARR) can be expected from the therapy. A useful summary metric of absolute treatment benefit is the number needed to treat (NNT) to prevent one adverse outcome event (e.g., death, stroke). NNT is simply 1/ARR. For example, if a hypothetical therapy reduced mortality rates over a 5-year follow-up by 33% (the relative treatment benefit) from 12% (control arm) to 8% (treatment arm), the ARR would be 12% – 8% = 4%, and the NNT would be 1/0.04, or 25. Thus, it would be necessary to treat 25 patients for 5 years to prevent 1 death. If the hypothetical treatment was applied to a lower-risk population, say, with a 6% 5-year mortality, the 33% relative treatment benefit would reduce absolute mortality by 2% (from 6% to 4%), and the NNT for the same therapy in this lower-risk group of patients would be 50. Although not always made explicit, comparisons of NNT estimates from different studies should account for the duration of follow-up used to create each estimate.
# Chunk 1845
1.

The absolute and relative impact of screening on disease incidence or mortality. The absolute difference in disease incidence or mortality between a screened and nonscreened group allows the comparison of size of the benefit across preventive services. A meta-analysis of Swedish mammography trials (ages 40–70) found that ~1.2 fewer women per 1000 would die from breast cancer if they were screened over a 12-year period. By comparison, ~3 lives per 1000 would be saved from colon cancer in a population (ages 50–75) screened with annual fecal occult blood testing (FOBT) over a 13-year period. Based on this analysis, colon cancer screening may actually save more women’s lives than does mammography. However, the relative impact of FOBT (30% reduction in colon cancer death) is similar to the relative impact of mammography (14–32% reduction in breast cancer death), emphasizing the importance of both relative and absolute comparisons.
# Chunk 1846
3.

Increase in average life expectancy for a population. Predicted increases in life expectancy for various screening and preventive interventions are listed in Table 4-3. It should be noted, however, that the increase in life expectancy is an average that applies to a population, not to an individual. In reality, the vast majority of the population does not derive any benefit from a screening test or preventive intervention. A small subset of patients, however, will benefit greatly. For example, Pap smears do not benefit the 98% of women who never develop cancer of the cervix. However, for the 2% who would have developed cervical cancer, Pap smears may add as much as 25 years to their lives. Some studies suggest that a 1-month gain of life expectancy is a reasonable goal for a population-based screening or prevention strategy.
# Chunk 1847
Mammography:

Women, 40–50 years 0–5 days

Women, 50–70 years 1 month

Pap smears, age 18–65 2–3 months
# Chunk 1848
Getting a 35-year-old smoker to quit 3–5 years

Beginning regular exercise for a 40-year-old 9 months–2 years man (30 min, 3 times a week) result often varies across settings. For some tests such as screening mammography and screening chest CT, a false-positive result occurs when an abnormality is identified that is not malignant, requiring either a biopsy diagnosis or short-term follow-up. For other tests such as Pap smears, a false-positive result occurs because the test identifies a wide range of potentially premalignant states, only a small percentage of which would ever progress to an invasive cancer. This risk is closely tied to the risk of overdiagnosis in which the screening test identifies disease that would not have presented clinically in the patient’s lifetime. Assessing the degree of overdiagnosis from a screening test is very difficult given the need for long-term follow-up of an unscreened population to determine the true incidence of disease over time. Recent estimates suggest that as much as 15–25% of breast cancers identified by mammography screening and 15–37% of prostate cancers identified by prostate-specific antigen testing may never have presented clinically. Screening tests also have the potential to create unwarranted anxiety, particularly in conjunction with false-positive findings. Although multiple studies have documented increased anxiety through the screening process, there are few data suggesting this anxiety has long-term adverse consequences, including subsequent screening behavior. Screening tests that involve radiation (e.g., mammography, chest CT) add to the cumulative radiation exposure for the screened individual. The absolute amount of radiation is very small from any of these tests, but the overall impact of repeated exposure from multiple sources is still being determined. Some preventive interventions (e.g., vaccinations) and screening tests (e.g., mammography) may lead to discomfort at the time of administration, but again, there is little evidence of long-term adverse consequences.
# Chunk 1849
Clinical Implications of Altered Protein Binding Many drugs circulate in the plasma partly bound to plasma proteins. Since only unbound (free) drug can distribute to sites of pharmacologic action, drug response is related to the free rather than the total circulating plasma drug concentration. In chronic kidney or liver disease, protein binding may be decreased and thus drug actions increased. In some situations (myocardial infarction, infection, surgery), acute phase reactants transiently increase drug binding and thus decrease efficacy. These changes assume the greatest clinical importance for drugs that are highly protein-bound since even a small change in protein binding can result in large changes in free drug; for example, a decrease in binding from 99% to 98% doubles the free drug concentration from 1% to 2%. For some drugs (e.g., phenytoin), monitoring free rather than total drug concentrations can be useful.
# Chunk 1850
Prescribers should use only a limited number of drugs, with which they are thoroughly familiar.

of death in women. In 1997, the majority of U.S. women surveyed 6e-1 thought that cancer (35%) rather than heart disease (30%) was the leading cause of death in women (Fig. 6e-2). In 2012, these percep- tions were reversed, with 56% of U.S. women surveyed recognizing
# Chunk 1851
Women’s risk for many diseases increases at menopause, which occurs at a median age of 51.4 years. In the industrialized world, women spend one-third of their lives in the postmenopausal period. Estrogen levels fall abruptly at menopause, inducing a variety of physiologic and metabolic responses. Rates of cardiovascular disease (CVD) increase and bone density begins to decrease rapidly after menopause. In the United States, women live on average about 5 years longer than men, with a life expectancy at birth in 2011 of 81.1 years compared with 76.3 years in men. Elderly women outnumber elderly men, so that age-related conditions such as hypertension have a female preponderance. However, the difference in life expectancy between men and women has decreased an average of 0.1 year every year since its peak of 7.8 years in 1979. If this convergence in mortality figures continues, it is projected that mortality rates will be similar by 2054.
# Chunk 1852
Ca lung, trachea, bronhus

FIgURE 6e-1 Death rates per 100,000 population for 2007 by 5-year age groups in U.S. women. Note that the scale of the y axis is increased in the graph on the right compared with that on the left. Accidents and HIV/AIDS are the leading causes of death in young women 20–34 years of age. Accidents, breast cancer, and ischemic heart disease (IHD) are the leading causes of death in women 35–49 years of age. IHD becomes the leading cause of death in women beginning at age 50 years. In older women, IHD remains the leading cause of death, cerebrovascular disease becomes the second leading cause of death, and lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related deaths. At age 85 years and beyond, Alzheimer’s disease (AD) becomes the third leading cause of death. Ca, cancer; CLRD, chronic lower respiratory disease; DM, diabetes mellitus. (Data adapted from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/dvs/MortFinal2007_WorkTable210R.pdf.)
# Chunk 1853
Some studies have suggested that estrogen administration improves cognitive function in nondemented postmenopausal women as well as in women with AD, and several observational studies have suggested that postmenopausal hormone therapy (HT) may decrease the risk of AD. However, HT placebo-controlled trials have found no improvement in disease progression or cognitive function in women with AD. Further, the Women’s Health Initiative Memory Study (WHIMS), an ancillary study in the Women’s Health Initiative (WHI), found no benefit compared with placebo of estrogen alone [combined continuous equine estrogen (CEE), 0.625 mg daily] or estrogen with progestin [CEE, 0.625 mg daily, and medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA), 2.5 mg daily] on cognitive function or the development of dementia in women ≥65 years. Indeed, there was a significantly increased risk for both dementia and mild cognitive impairment in women receiving HT. However, preliminary findings from the Kronos Early Estrogen Prevention Study (KEEPS), a randomized clinical trial of early initiation of HT after menopause that compared CEE 0.45 mg daily, 50 μg of weekly transdermal estradiol (both estrogen arms included cyclic oral micronized progesterone 200 mg daily for 12 days each month), or placebo, found no adverse effects on cognitive function.
# Chunk 1854
In 1997, cancer was cited as the leading cause of death in women, not heart disease. In 2012, this trend had reversed. The rate of awareness that heart disease is the leading cause of death in women was significantly higher in 2012 (56% vs 30%, p <.001) than in 1997. (Data adapted from L Mosca et al: Circulation 127:1254, 2013.) and lowers low-density lipoprotein (LDL), whereas androgens have the opposite effect. Estrogen has direct vasodilatory effects on the vascular endothelium, enhances insulin sensitivity, and has antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties. There is a striking increase in CHD after both natural and surgical menopause, suggesting that endogenous estrogens are cardioprotective. Women also have longer QT intervals on electrocardiograms, and this increases their susceptibility to certain arrhythmias.
# Chunk 1855
Sex differences in disease prevalence, susceptibility, and clinical manifestations of disease were discussed in Chap. 6e (“Women’s Health”). It is notable that the two leading causes of death in both men and women—heart disease and cancer—are the same. However, men have a higher prevalence of neurodevelopmental and degenerative disorders; substance abuse disorders, including the use of performance-enhancing drugs and alcohol dependence; diabetes; and cardiovascular disease; and women have a higher prevalence of autoimmune disorders, depression, rheumatologic disorders, and osteoporosis. Men are substantially more likely to die from accidents, suicides, and homicides than women. Among men 15–34 years of age, unintentional injuries, homicides, and suicides account for over three-fourths of all deaths. Among men 35–64 years of age, heart disease, cancer, and unintentional injuries are the leading causes of death. Among men 65 years of age or older, heart disease, cancer, lower respiratory tract infections, and stroke are the major causes of death.
# Chunk 1856
LUTS is highly prevalent in older men, affecting nearly 50% of men over the age of 65 and 70% of men over the age of 80. LUTS adversely affects quality of life because of its impact on sleep, ability to perform activities of daily living, and depressive symptoms. LUTS is often associated with erectile dysfunction.
# Chunk 1857
After radical prostatectomy, in the absence of residual cancer, PSA becomes undetectable within a month. An undetectable PSA after radical prostatectomy is a good indicator of biochemical recurrence-free survival at 5 years. Therefore, men with organ-confined prostate cancer (pT2), Gleason score ≤6, and a preoperative PSA of <10 ng/mL, who have had undetectable PSA levels (<0.1 ng/mL) for >2 years after radical prostatectomy, have very low risk of disease recurrence (<0.5% at 10 years) and may be considered for testosterone therapy on an individualized basis. If testosterone therapy is instituted, it should be associated with careful monitoring of PSA levels and done in consultation with a urologist.
# Chunk 1858
Approximately 5–7% of all pregnant women develop preeclampsia, the new onset of hypertension (blood pressure >140/90 mmHg) and proteinuria (either a 24 hour urinary protein >300 mg/24 h, or a protein-creatinine ratio ≥0.3) after 20 weeks of gestation. Although the precise pathophysiology of preeclampsia remains unknown, recent studies show excessive placental production of antagonists to both vascular epithelial growth factor (VEGF) and transforming growth factor β (TGF-β). These antagonists to VEGF and TGF-β disrupt endothelial and renal glomerular function resulting in edema, hypertension, and proteinuria. The renal histological feature of preeclampsia is glomerular endotheliosis. Glomerular endothelial cells are swollen and encroach on the vascular lumen. Preeclampsia is associated with abnormalities of cerebral circulatory autoregulation, which increase the risk of stroke at mildly and moderately elevated blood pressures. Risk factors for the development of preeclampsia include nulliparity, diabetes mellitus, a history of renal disease or chronic hypertension, a prior history of preeclampsia, extremes of maternal age (>35 years or <15 years), obesity, antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, and multiple gestation. Low-dose aspirin (81 mg daily, initiated at the end of the first trimester) may reduce the risk of preeclampsia in pregnant women at high risk of developing the disease.
# Chunk 1859
Gestational diabetes occurs in approximately 4% of pregnancies. All pregnant women should be screened for gestational diabetes unless they are in a low-risk group. Women at low risk for gestational diabetes are those <25 years of age; those with a body mass index <25 kg/m2, no maternal history of macrosomia or gestational diabetes, and no diabetes in a first-degree relative; and those who are not members of a high-risk ethnic group (African American, Hispanic, Native American). A typical two-step strategy for establishing the diagnosis of gestational diabetes involves administration of a 50-g oral glucose challenge with a single serum glucose measurement at 60 min. If the plasma glucose is <7.8 mmol/L (<130 mg/dL), the test is considered normal. Plasma glucose >7.8 mmol/L (>130 mg/dL) warrants administration of a 100-g oral glucose challenge with plasma glucose measurements obtained in the fasting state and at 1, 2, and 3 h. Normal plasma glucose concentrations at these time points are <5.8 mmol/L (<105 mg/dL), 10.5 mmol/L (190 mg/dL), 9.1 mmol/L (165 mg/dL), and 8.0 mmol/L (145 mg/dL), respectively. Some centers have adopted more sensitive criteria, using values of <5.3 mmol/L (<95 mg/dL), <10 mmol/L (<180 mg/dL), <8.6 mmol/L (<155 mg/dL), and <7.8 mmol/L (<140 mg/dL) as the upper norms for a 3-h glucose tolerance test. Two elevated glucose values indicate a positive test. Adverse pregnancy outcomes for mother and fetus appear to increase with glucose as a continuous variable; thus it is challenging to define the optimal threshold for establishing the diagnosis of gestational diabetes.
# Chunk 1860
Testing for hypothyroidism using TSH measurements before or early in pregnancy may be warranted in symptomatic women and in women with a personal or family history of thyroid disease. With use of this case-finding approach, about 30% of pregnant women with mild hypothyroidism remain undiagnosed, leading some to recommend universal screening. Children born to women with an elevated serum TSH (and a normal total thyroxine) during pregnancy may have impaired performance on neuropsychologic tests.
# Chunk 1861
The goal of therapy for hypothyroidism is to maintain the serum TSH in the normal range, and thyroxine is the drug of choice. During pregnancy, the dose of thyroxine required to keep the TSH in the normal range rises. In one study, the mean replacement dose of thyroxine required to maintain the TSH in the normal range was 0.1 mg daily before pregnancy and increased to 0.15 mg daily during pregnancy. Since the increased thyroxine requirement occurs as early as the fifth week of pregnancy, one approach is to increase the thyroxine dose by 30% (two additional pills weekly) as soon as pregnancy is diagnosed and then adjust the dose by serial measurements of TSH.
# Chunk 1862
Other than bacterial vaginosis, the most common bacterial infections during pregnancy involve the urinary tract (Chap. 162). Many pregnant women have asymptomatic bacteriuria, most likely due to stasis caused by progestational effects on ureteral and bladder smooth muscle and later in pregnancy due to compression effects of the enlarging uterus. In itself, this condition is not associated with an adverse outcome of pregnancy. However, if asymptomatic bacteriuria is left untreated, symptomatic pyelonephritis may occur. Indeed, ~75% of pregnancy-associated pyelonephritis cases are the result of untreated asymptomatic bacteriuria. All pregnant women should be screened with a urine culture for asymptomatic bacteriuria at the first prenatal visit. Subsequent screening with nitrite/leukocyte esterase strips is indicated for high-risk women, such as those with sickle cell trait or a history of urinary tract infections. All women with positive screens should be treated. Pregnant women who develop pyelonephritis need careful monitoring, including inpatient IV antibiotic administration due to the elevated risk of urosepsis and acute respiratory distress syndrome in pregnancy.
# Chunk 1863
Postpartum infection is a significant cause of maternal morbidity and mortality. Postpartum endomyometritis is more common after cesarean delivery than vaginal delivery and develops in 2% of women after elective repeat cesarean section and in up to 10% after emergency cesarean section following prolonged labor. To reduce the risk of endomyometritis, prophylactic antibiotics should be given to all patients undergoing cesarean section, and administration 30–60 min prior to skin incision is preferable to administration at the time of umbilical cord clamping. As most cases of postpartum endomyometritis are polymicrobial, broad-spectrum antibiotic coverage with a penicillin, an aminoglycoside, and metronidazole is recommended (Chap. 201). Most cases resolve within 72 h. Women who do not respond to antibiotic treatment for postpartum endomyometritis should be evaluated for septic pelvic thrombophlebitis. Imaging studies may be helpful in establishing the diagnosis, which is primarily a clinical diagnosis of exclusion. Patients with septic pelvic thrombophlebitis generally have tachycardia out of proportion to their fever and respond rapidly to IV administration of heparin.
# Chunk 1864
Cytomegalovirus Infection The most common cause of congenital viral infection in the United States is cytomegalovirus (CMV) (Chap. 219). As many as 50–90% of women of childbearing age have antibodies to CMV, but only rarely does CMV reactivation result in neonatal infection. More commonly, primary CMV infection during pregnancy creates a risk of congenital CMV. No currently accepted treatment of CMV infection during pregnancy has been demonstrated to protect the fetus effectively. Moreover, it is difficult to predict which fetus will sustain a life-threatening CMV infection. Severe CMV disease in the newborn is characterized most often by petechiae, hepatosplenomegaly, and jaundice. Chorioretinitis, microcephaly, intracranial calcifications, hepatitis, hemolytic anemia, and purpura may also develop. CNS involvement, resulting in the development of psychomotor, ocular, auditory, and dental abnormalities over time, has been described.
# Chunk 1865
HIV Infection (See also Chap. 226) The predominant cause of HIV infection in children is transmission of the virus from mother to newborn during the perinatal period. All pregnant women should be screened for HIV infection. Factors that increase the risk of mother-to-newborn transmission include high maternal viral load, low maternal CD4+ T cell count, prolonged labor, prolonged duration of membrane rupture, and the presence of other genital tract infections, such as syphilis or herpes. Prior to the widespread use of antiretroviral treatment, the perinatal transmission rate was in the range of 20%. In women with a good response to antiretroviral treatment, the transmission rate is about 1%. Measurement of maternal plasma HIV RNA copy number guides the decision for vaginal versus cesarean delivery. For women with <1000 copies of plasma HIV RNA/ml who are receiving combination antiretroviral therapy, the risk of transmission to the newborn is approximately 1% regardless of mode of delivery or duration of membrane rupture. These women may elect to attempt a vaginal birth following the spontaneous onset of labor. For women with a viral load of ≥1000 copies/ml prior to 38 weeks of gestation, a scheduled prelabor cesarean at 38 weeks is recommended to reduce the risk of HIV transmission to the newborn. To reduce the risk of mother-to-newborn transmission, women with >400 copies of HIV RNA/ml should be treated during the intrapartum interval with zidovudine. All newborns of HIV-infected mothers should be treated with zidovudine for 6 months after birth. Women who are HIV-positive may transmit the virus through their breast milk. In developed countries, HIV-infected mothers are advised not to breast-feed.
# Chunk 1866
Maternal death is defined as death occurring during pregnancy or within 42 days of completion of pregnancy from a cause related to or aggravated by pregnancy, but not due to accident or incidental causes. From 1935 to 2007, the U.S. maternal death rate decreased from nearly 600/100,000 births to 12.7/100,000 births. There are significant health disparities in the maternal mortality rate, with the highest rates among non-Hispanic black women. In 2007, maternal mortality rates (per 100,000) by race were 10.5 among non-Hispanic white women, 8.9 among Hispanic women, and 28.4 among non-Hispanic black women. The most common causes of maternal death in the United States today are pulmonary embolism, obstetric hemorrhage, hypertension, sepsis, cardiovascular conditions (including peripartum cardiomyopathy), and ectopic pregnancy.
# Chunk 1867
RCRI 0 1 2 ˜3 Event Rate 0.50% 1.30% 6.00% 11%

An RCRI score ≥3 in patients with severe myocardial ischemia on stress testing should lead to consideration of coronary revascularization prior to noncardiac surgery. Noninvasive cardiac testing is most appropriate if it is anticipated that, in the event of a strongly positive test, a patient will meet guidelines for coronary angiography and coronary revascularization. Pharmacologic stress tests are more useful than exercise testing in patients with functional limitations. Dobutamine echocardiography and persantine, adenosine, or dobutamine nuclear perfusion testing (Chap. 270e) have excellent negative predictive values (near 100%) but poor positive predictive values (<20%) in the identification of patients at risk for perioperative MI or death. Thus, a negative study is reassuring, but a positive study is a relatively weak predictor of a “hard” perioperative cardiac event.
# Chunk 1868
RISK ModIFICATIoN: PREVENTIVE STRATEgIES To REdUCE CARdIAC RISK Perioperative Coronary Revascularization Currently, potential options for reducing perioperative cardiovascular risk include coronary artery revascularization and/or perioperative preventive medical therapies (Chap. 293). Prophylactic coronary revascularization with either coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) or percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) provides no shortor midterm survival benefit for patients without left main CAD or three-vessel CAD in the presence of poor left ventricular systolic function and is not recommended for patients with stable CAD before noncardiac surgery. Although PCI is associated with lower procedural risk than is CABG in the perioperative setting, the placement of a coronary artery stent soon before noncardiac surgery may increase the risk of bleeding during surgery if dual antiplatelet therapy (aspirin and thienopyridine) is administered; moreover, stent placement shortly before noncardiac surgery increases the perioperative risk of MI and cardiac death due to stent thrombosis if such therapy is withdrawn prematurely (Chap. 296e). It is recommended that, if possible, noncardiac surgery be delayed 30–45 days after placement of a bare metal coronary stent and for 365 days after a drug-eluting stent. For patients who must undergo noncardiac surgery early (>14 days) after PCI, balloon angioplasty without stent placement appears to be a reasonable alternative because dual antiplatelet therapy is not necessary in such patients. One recent clinical trial further suggests that after 6 months, bare metal and drug eluting stents may not pose a threat.
# Chunk 1869
Continuous goal Assessment Major barriers to ensuring quality palliative and end-of-life care include difficulty providing an accurate prognosis and emotional resistance of patients and their families to accepting the implications of a poor prognosis. There are two practical solutions to these barriers. One is to integrate palliative care with curative care regardless of prognosis. With this approach, palliative care no longer conveys the message of failure, having no more treatments, or “giving up hope.” Fundamental to integrating palliative care with curative therapy is to include continuous goal assessment as part of the routine patient reassessment that occurs at most patient-physician encounters. Alternatively, some practices may find it useful to implement a standard point in the clinical course to address goals of care and advance care planning. For example, some oncology practices ask all patients whose Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status is 3 or less—meaning they spend 50% or more of the day in bed—or those who develop metastatic disease about their goals of care and advance care preferences.
# Chunk 1870
Pain • Frequency The frequency of pain among terminally ill patients varies widely. Substantial pain occurs in 36–90% of patients with advanced cancer. In the SUPPORT study of hospitalized patients with diverse conditions and an estimated survival ≤6 months, 22% reported moderate to severe pain, and caregivers of those patients noted that 50% had similar levels of pain during the last few days of life. A meta-analysis found pain prevalence of 58–69% in studies that included patients characterized as having advanced, metastatic, or terminal cancer; 44–73% in studies that included patients characterized as undergoing cancer treatment; and 21–46% in studies that included posttreatment individuals.
# Chunk 1871
For continuous pain, opioids should be administered on a regular, around-the-clock basis consistent with their duration of analgesia. They should not be provided only when the patient experiences pain; the goal is to prevent patients from experiencing pain. Patients also should be provided rescue medication, such as liquid morphine, for breakthrough pain, generally at 20% of the baseline dose. Patients should be informed that using the rescue medication does not obviate the need to take the next standard dose of pain medication. If after 24 h the patient’s pain remains uncontrolled and recurs before the next dose, requiring the patient to use the rescue medication, the daily opioid dose can be increased by the total dose of rescue medications used by the patient, or by 50% for moderate pain and 100% for severe pain of the standing opioid daily dose.
# Chunk 1872
assessment The physician should establish the patient’s previous bowel habits, including the frequency, consistency, and volume. Abdominal and rectal examinations should be performed to exclude impaction or acute abdomen. A number of constipation assessment scales are available, although guidelines issued in the Journal of Palliative Medicine did not recommend them for routine practice. Radiographic assessments beyond a simple flat plate of the abdomen in cases in which obstruction is suspected are rarely necessary.
# Chunk 1873
InterventIon Intervention to reestablish comfortable bowel habits and relieve pain and discomfort should be the goals of any measures to address constipation during end-of-life care. Although physical activity, adequate hydration, and dietary treatments with fiber can be helpful, each is limited in its effectiveness for most seriously ill patients, and fiber may exacerbate problems in the setting of dehydration and if impaired motility is the etiology. Fiber is contraindicated in the presence of opioid use. Stimulant and osmotic laxatives, stool softeners, fluids, and enemas are the mainstays of therapy (Table 10-5). In preventing constipation from opioids and other medications, a combination of a laxative and a stool softener (such as senna and docusate) should be used. If after several days of treatment, a bowel movement has not occurred, a rectal examination to remove impacted stool and place a suppository is necessary. For patients with impending bowel obstruction or gastric stasis, octreotide to reduce secretions can be helpful. For patients in whom the suspected mechanism is dysmotility, metoclopramide can be helpful.
# Chunk 1874
dyspnea • Frequency Dyspnea is a subjective experience of being short of breath. Frequencies vary among causes of death, but it can affect 80–90% of dying patients with lung cancer, COPD, and heart disease. Dyspnea is among the most distressing physical symptoms and can be even more distressing than pain.
# Chunk 1875
assessment Like pain and dyspnea, fatigue is subjective. Objective changes, even in body mass, may be absent. Consequently, assessment must rely on patient self-reporting. Scales used to measure fatigue, such as the Edmonton Functional Assessment Tool, the Fatigue Self-Report Scales, and the Rhoten Fatigue Scale, are usually appropriate for research rather than clinical purposes. In clinical practice, a simple performance assessment such as the Karnofsky Performance Status or the ECOG’s question “How much of the day does the patient spend in bed?” may be the best measure. In this 0–4 performance status assessment, 0 = normal activity; 1 = symptomatic without being bedridden; 2 = requiring some, but <50%, bed time; 3 = bedbound more than half the day; and 4 = bedbound all the time. Such a scale allows for assessment over time and correlates with overall disease severity and prognosis. A 2008 review by the European Association of Palliative Care also described several longer assessment tools with 9–20 items, including the Piper Fatigue Inventory, the Multidimensional Fatigue Inventory, and the Brief Fatigue Inventory (BFI).
# Chunk 1876
practIces Withholding and withdrawing acutely life-sustaining medical interventions from terminally ill patients are now standard practice. More than 90% of American patients die without cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), and just as many forgo other potentially life-sustaining interventions. For instance, in ICUs in the period 1987–1988, CPR was performed 49% of the time, but it was performed only 10% of the time in 1992–1993. On average, 3.8 interventions, such as vasopressors and transfusions, were stopped for each dying ICU patient. However, up to 19% of decedents in hospitals received interventions such as extubation, ventilation, and surgery in the 48 h preceding death. However, practices vary widely among hospitals and ICUs, suggesting an important element of physician preferences rather than objective data.
# Chunk 1877
Mechanical ventilation may be the most challenging intervention to withdraw. The two approaches are terminal extubation, which is the removal of the endotracheal tube, and terminal weaning, which is the gradual reduction of the or ventilator rate. One-third of ICU physicians prefer to use the terminal weaning technique, and 13% extubate; the majority of physicians use both techniques. The American Thoracic Society’s 2008 clinical policy guidelines note that there is no single correct process of ventilator withdrawal and that physicians use and should be proficient in both methods but that the chosen approach should carefully balance benefits and burdens as well as patient and caregiver preferences. Physicians’ assessment of patients’ likelihood of survival, their prediction of possible cognitive damage, and patients’ preferences about the use of life support are primary factors in determining the likelihood of withdrawal of mechanical ventilation. Some recommend terminal weaning because patients do not develop upper airway obstruction and the distress caused by secretions or stridor; however, terminal weaning can prolong the dying process and not allow a patient’s family to be with him or her unencumbered by an endotracheal tube. To ensure comfort for conscious or semiconscious patients before withdrawal of the ventilator, neuromuscular blocking agents should be terminated and sedatives and analgesics administered. Removing the neuromuscular blocking agents permits patients to show discomfort, facilitating the titration of sedatives and analgesics; it also permits interactions between patients and their families. A common practice is to inject a bolus of midazolam (2–4 mg) or lorazepam (2–4 mg) before withdrawal, followed by 5–10 mg of morphine and continuous infusion of morphine (50% of the bolus dose per hour) during weaning. In patients who have significant upper airway secretions, IV scopolamine at a rate of 100 μg/h can be administered. Additional boluses of morphine or increases in the infusion rate should be administered for respiratory distress or signs of pain. Higher doses will be needed for patients already receiving sedatives and opioids. Families need to be reassured about treatments for common symptoms after withdrawal of ventilatory support, such as dyspnea and agitation, and warned about the uncertainty of length of survival after withdrawal of ventilatory support: up to 10% of patients unexpectedly survive for 1 day or more after mechanical ventilation is stopped.
# Chunk 1878
practIces Fewer than 10–20% of terminally ill patients actually consider euthanasia and/or physician-assisted suicide for themselves. In the Netherlands and Oregon, >70% of patients using these interventions are dying of cancer; in Oregon, in 2013, just 1.2% of physician-assisted suicide cases involved patients with HIV/AIDS and 7.2% involved patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. In the Netherlands, the share of deaths attributable to euthanasia or physician-assisted suicide declined from around 2.8% of all deaths in 2001 to around 1.8% in 2005. In 2013, the last year with complete data, around 71 patients in Oregon (just 0.2% of all deaths) died by physician-assisted suicide, although this may be an underestimate. In Washington State, between March 2009 (when the law allowing physician-assisted suicide went into force) and December 2009, 36 individuals died from prescribed lethal doses.
# Chunk 1879
Patients in the last days of life typically experience extreme weakness and fatigue and become bedbound; this can lead to pressure sores. The issue of turning patients who are near the end of life, however, must be balanced against the potential discomfort that movement may cause. Patients stop eating and drinking with drying of mucosal membranes and dysphagia. Careful attention to oral swabbing, lubricants for lips, and use of artificial tears can provide a form of care to substitute for attempts at feeding the patient. With loss of the gag reflex and dysphagia, patients may also experience accumulation of oral secretions, producing noises during respiration sometimes called “the death rattle.” Scopolamine can reduce the secretions. Patients also experience changes in respiration with periods of apnea or Cheyne-Stokes breathing. Decreased intravascular volume and cardiac output cause tachycardia, hypotension, peripheral coolness, and livedo reticularis (skin mottling). Patients can have urinary and, less frequently, fecal incontinence. Changes in consciousness and neurologic function generally lead to two different paths to death (Fig. 10-2).
# Chunk 1880
Dysphagia Inability to swallow oral medications needed for palliative care

Apnea, Cheyne-Stokes respirations, dyspnea
# Chunk 1881
PALLIATIVE CARE SERVICES: HoW ANd WHERE

Determining the best approach to providing palliative care to patients will depend on patient preferences, the availability of caregivers and specialized services in close proximity, institutional resources, and reimbursement. Hospice is a leading, but not the only, model of palliative care services. In the United States, a plurality—41.5%—of hospice care is provided in residential homes. In 2012, just over 17% of hospice care was provided in nursing homes. In the United States, Medicare pays for hospice services under Part A, the hospital insurance part of reimbursement. Two physicians must certify that the patient has a prognosis of ≤6 months if the disease runs its usual course. Prognoses are probabilistic by their nature; patients are not required to die within 6 months but rather to have a condition from which half the individuals with it would not be alive within 6 months. Patients sign a hospice enrollment form that states their intent to forgo curative services related to their terminal illness, but they can still receive medical services for other comorbid conditions. Patients also can withdraw enrollment and reenroll later; the hospice Medicare benefit can be revoked later to secure traditional Medicare benefits. Payments to the hospice are per diem (or capitated), not fee-for-service. Payments are intended to cover physician services for the medical direction of the care team; regular home care visits by registered nurses and licensed practical nurses; home health aid and homemaker services; chaplain services; social work services; bereavement counseling; and medical equipment, supplies, and medications. No specific therapy is excluded, and the goal is for each therapy to be considered for its symptomatic (as opposed to disease-modifying) effect. Additional clinical care, including services of the primary physician, is covered by Medicare Part B even while the hospice Medicare benefit is in place. The health reform legislation signed into law in March 2010—the Affordable Care Act—directs the Secretary of Health and Human Services to gather data on Medicare hospice reimbursement with the goal of reforming payment rates to account for resource use over an entire episode of care. The legislation also requires additional evaluations and reviews of eligibility for hospice care by hospice physicians or nurses. Finally, the legislation establishes a demonstration project for concurrent hospice care in Medicare, which would test and evaluate allowing patients to remain eligible for regular Medicare during hospice care.
# Chunk 1882
Abbreviations: BMI, body mass index; CRP, C-reactive protein; DEXA, dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry; ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; fMRI, functional MRI; IL-6, interleukin 6; PET, positron emission tomography; TNFα, tumor necrosis factor α.
# Chunk 1883
Chapter 11 Clinical Problems of Aging

FIgURE 11-12 Longitudinal trajectory of bioavailable testosterone plasma concentration in the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging (BLSA). The plot is based on 584 men who were 50 years or older with a total of 1455 data points. The average follow up for each subject was 3.2 years. (Figure created using unpublished data from the BLSA.) energy for compensatory mechanisms. Indeed, observational studies have demonstrated (1) that older persons with poor health status and substantial morbidity have a higher RMR than healthier individuals of the same age and sex and (2) that a high RMR is an independent risk factor for mortality and may contribute to the weight loss that often accompanies severe illness. Finally, for reasons that are not yet completely clear but certainly involve changes in the biomechanical characteristics of movement, older age, pathology, and physical impairment increase the energy cost of motor activities such as walking. Overall, older individuals with multiple chronic conditions have low available energy levels and require more energy both at rest and during physical activity. Thus, sick older people may consume all their available energy performing the most basic ADLs, and consequent fatigue and restriction may lead to a sedentary existence. Energy status can be assessed clinically by simply asking patients about their perceived level of fatigue during daily activities such as walking or dressing. Energy capacity can be assessed more precisely by exercise tolerance during a walking test or a treadmill test coupled with spirometry.
# Chunk 1884
Neurodegeneration It was long generally believed that neurons stop reproducing shortly after birth and that their number declines throughout life. However, results from animal models and even some studies in humans suggest that neurogenesis in the hippocampus continues at low levels throughout life. Brain atrophy occurs with aging after the age of 60 years. Atrophy proceeds at varying rates in different parts of the brain (Fig. 11-14) and is often accompanied by an inflammatory response and microglial activation. Age-associated brain atrophy may contribute to age-related declines in cognitive and motor function. Atrophy may also be a factor in some brain diseases that can occur with aging, such as mild cognitive impairment, in which persons have mild but detectable impairments on tests of cognition but no severe disability in daily activities. In mild cognitive impairment, atrophy has been found mostly in the prefrontal cortex and hippocampus, develop a mild proinflammatory state characterized by high levels of proinflammatory markers, including interleukin 6 (IL-6) and C-reactive protein (CRP) (Fig. 11-13). Aging is also thought to be associated with increased oxidative stress damage, either because the production of reactive oxygen species increases or because antioxidant buffers are less effective. Since hormones, inflammatory markers, and antioxidants are integrated into complex signaling networks, levels
# Chunk 1885
Ask all patients about falls in the past year No falls One fall past 6 months Gait or balance problem Report >1 fall, or difficulty with gait or balance, or seeking medical attention because of fall Multifactorial fall risk assessment Check for gait or balance problems
# Chunk 1886
Urinary Incontinence Urinary incontinence—the involuntary leakage of urine—is highly prevalent among older persons (especially women) and has a profound negative impact on quality of life. Approximately 50% of American women will experience some form of urinary incontinence over a lifetime. Increasing age, white race, childbirth, obesity, and medical comorbidity are all risk factors for urinary incontinence. The three main clinical forms of urinary incontinence are as follows: (1) Stress incontinence is the failure of the sphincteric mechanism to remain closed when there is a sudden increase in intraabdominal pressure, such as a cough or sneeze. In women this condition is due to insufficient strength of the pelvic floor muscles, while in men it is almost exclusively secondary to prostate surgery. (2) Urge incontinence is the loss of urine accompanied by a sudden sensation of need to urinate and inability to control it and is due to detrusor muscle overactivity (lack of inhibition) caused by loss of neurologic control or local irritation. (3) Overflow incontinence is characterized by urinary dribbling, either constantly or for some period after urination. This condition is due to impaired detrusor contractility (due usually to denervation, for example, in
# Chunk 1887
Prevalence of urinary incontinence*

FIgURE 11-18 Rates of urge, stress, and mixed incontinence, by age group, in a sample of 3552 women. *Based on a sample of 3553 participants. (From JL Melville et al: Arch Intern Med 165:537, 2005.) diabetes) or bladder outlet obstruction (prostate hypertrophy in men and cystocele in women). Thus, it is not surprising that the pathogenesis of urinary incontinence is connected to the disrupted aging systems that contribute to frailty, body composition changes (atrophy of the bladder and pelvic floor muscle), and neurodegeneration (both central and peripheral nervous systems). Frailty is a strong risk factor for urinary incontinence. Indeed, older women are more likely to have mixed (urge + stress) incontinence than any pure form (Fig. 11-18). In analogy with the other geriatric syndromes, urinary incontinence derives from a predisposing condition superimposed on a stressful precipitating factor. Accordingly, treatment of urinary incontinence should address both. The first line of treatment is bladder training associated with pelvic muscle exercise (Kegel exercises) that sometimes should be associated with electrical stimulation. Women with possible vaginal or uterine prolapse should be referred to a specialist. Urinary tract infections should be investigated and eventually treated. A long list of medications can precipitate urinary incontinence, including diuretics, antidepressants, sedative hypnotics, adrenergic agonists or blockers, anticholinergics, and calcium channel blockers. Whenever possible, these medications should be discontinued. Until recently, it was believed that oral or local estrogen treatment alleviated the symptoms of urinary incontinence in postmenopausal women, but this notion is now controversial. Antimuscarinic drugs such as tolterodine, darifenacin, and fesoterodine are modestly effective for mixed-etiology incontinence, but all of these drugs can affect cognition and so must be used with caution and with monitoring of cognitive status. In some cases, surgical treatment should be considered. Chronic catheterization has many adverse effects and should be limited to chronic urinary retention that cannot be managed in any other way. Bacteriuria always occurs and should be treated only if it is symptomatic. Bacterial communities isolated from the urine of women with urinary incontinence appear to differ with the type of incontinence; this observation suggests that the bladder microbiota may play a role in urinary incontinence. If so, this microbial population would be a potential target for treatment.
# Chunk 1888
diabetes (See also Chaps. 417–419) Both the incidence and the prevalence of diabetes mellitus increase with aging. Among persons ≥65 years old, the prevalence is ∼12% (with higher figures among African Americans and Hispanics), reflecting the effects of population aging and the obesity epidemic. Diabetes affects all four main aging systems that contribute to frailty. Obesity, especially visceral obesity, is a strong risk factor for insulin resistance, the metabolic syndrome, and diabetes. Diabetes is associated with both reduced muscle mass and accelerated rates of muscle wasting. Diabetic patients have an elevated RMR and a poor degree of fitness. Diabetes is associated with multiple hormone dysregulation, a proinflammatory state, and excess oxidative stress. Finally, diabetes-induced neurodegeneration involves both the central and peripheral nervous systems. Given these characteristics, it is not surprising that patients with diabetes mellitus are more likely to be frail and at high risk of developing physical disability, depression, delirium, cognitive impairment, urinary incontinence, injurious falls, and persistent pain. Thus, the assessment of older diabetic patients should always include screening and risk factor evaluation for these conditions.
# Chunk 1889
In young and adult patients, the main treatment goal has been strict glycemic control aimed at bringing the hemoglobin A1c level to within normal values (i.e., ≤6%). However, the risk/benefit ratio is optimized by the use of less aggressive glycemic targets. In fact, in the context of a randomized clinical trial, strict glycemic control was associated with a higher mortality rate. Thus, a more reasonable goal for hemoglobin A1c is 7% or slightly below. Treatment goals are altered further in frail older adults who have a high risk of complications of hypoglycemia and a life expectancy of <5 years. In these cases, an even less stringent target (e.g., 7–8%) should be considered, with A1c monitored every 6 or 12 months. Hypoglycemia is particularly difficult to identify in older diabetic patients because autonomic and nervous system symptoms occur at a lower blood sugar level than in younger diabetics, although the metabolic reactions and neurologic injury effects are similar in the two age groups. The autonomic symptoms of hypoglycemia are often masked by beta blockers. Frail older adults are at even higher risk for serious hypoglycemia than are healthier, higher-functioning older adults. In older patients with type 2 diabetes, a history of severe hypoglycemic episodes is associated with higher mortality risk, more severe microvascular complications, and greater risk of dementia. Thus, patients with suspected or documented episodes of hypoglycemia, especially those who are frail or disabled, need more liberal glucose-control goals, careful education about hypoglycemia, and close follow-up by the health care provider, possibly in the presence of a caregiver. Chlorpropamide has a prolonged half-life, particularly in older adults, and should be avoided because it is associated with a high risk of hypoglycemia. Metformin should be used with caution and only in patients free of severe renal insufficiency. Renal insufficiency should be assessed by a calculated glomerular filtration rate or, in very old patients who have reduced muscle mass, by a direct measure of creatinine clearance from a 24-h urine collection. Lifestyle changes in diet and exercise and a little weight loss can prevent or delay diabetes in high-risk individuals and are substantially more effective than metformin treatment. The risk of type 2 diabetes decreased by 58% in a study of diet and exercise, and this effect was similar at all ages and in all ethnic groups. The risk reduction with standard care plus metformin was 31%.
# Chunk 1890
Osteoporosis: Bone mineral density (BMD) should be measured at least once after the age of 65 years. There is little evidence that regular monitoring of BMD improves the prediction of fractures. Because of limitations in the precision of dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry, the minimal interval between evaluations should be 2–3 years.
# Chunk 1891
Diabetes: Serum glucose and hemoglobin A1c should be checked every 3 years or more often in patients who are obese or hypertensive.
# Chunk 1892
Breast cancer: Mammography should be done every 2 years between the ages of 50 and 74 years. No consensus guidelines exist for mammography after the age of 75 years.
# Chunk 1893
Cervical cancer: A Pap smear should be done every 3 years up to the age of 65 years.

Influenza: Immunize annually.
# Chunk 1894
Osteoporosis: Prescribe calcium at 1200 mg daily and vitamin D at ≥800 IU daily.

Exercise Rates of regular physical activity decrease with age and are lowest in older persons. This situation is unfortunate because increased physical activity has clear benefits in older adults, improving physical function, muscle strength, mood, sleep, and metabolic risk profile. Some studies suggest that exercise can improve cognition and prevent dementia, but this association is still controversial. Exercise programs, both aerobic and strength training, are feasible and beneficial even in very old and frail individuals. Regular, moderate-intensity exercise can reduce the rate of age-associated decline in physical function. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends that older persons should spend at least 150 min per week in moderate-intensity aerobic activity (e.g., brisk walking) and should engage in muscle-strengthening activities that work all major muscle groups (legs, hips, back, abdomen, chest, shoulders, and arms) at least 2 days a week. In the absence of contraindications, more intense and prolonged physical activity provides greater benefits. Frail and sedentary persons may need supervision, at least at the start of the exercise program, to avoid falls and exercise-related injuries.
# Chunk 1895
Emphasize that good hydration is essential. Fluid intake should be at least 1000 mL daily.

Encourage the use of fat-free and low-fat dairy products, legumes, poultry, and lean meats. Encourage consumption of fish at least once a week, since there is strong epidemiologic evidence that fish consumption is associated with a lowered risk of Alzheimer’s disease.
# Chunk 1896
Novel Interventions to Modify Aging Processes Aging is a complex process with multiple manifestations at the molecular, cellular, organ, and whole-organism level. The nature of the aging process is still not fully understood, but aging and its effects may be modulated by appropriate interventions. Dietary and genetic alterations can increase healthy life span and prevent the development of dysregulated systems and the aging phenotype in laboratory model organisms. The mechanisms responsible for life span expansion are “food” sensors typically activated in situations of food shortage, such as IGF/insulin and the TOR (target of rapamycin) pathways. Accordingly, a reduction in food intake without malnutrition extends the life span by 10–50% in diverse organisms, from yeasts to rhesus monkeys. Mechanisms that mediate the effects of caloric restriction are under intensive study because they are potential targets for interventions aimed at counteracting the emergence of the aging phenotype and its deleterious effects in humans. For example, resveratrol, a natural compound found in grape skin that mimics some of the effects of dietary restriction, increases longevity and improves health in mice fed a high-fat diet but has little effect on mice fed a standard diet. Other compounds that potentially mimic caloric restriction are being developed and tested. A high prevalence of IGF-1 receptor gene mutation has been found in Ashkenazi Jewish centenarians and in other long-lived individuals, suggesting that the downregulation of IGF-1 signaling may promote human longevity. A 20-year period of 30% dietary restriction applied to adult rhesus monkeys was associated with reduced cardiovascular and cancer morbidity, reduced signs of aging, and greater longevity, although a second such study did not find increased longevity. In humans, dietary restriction is effective against obesity and reduces insulin resistance, inflammation, blood pressure, CRP level, and intima-media thickness of the carotid arteries. However, the beneficial effects of dietary restriction in humans are still controversial, and some potential negative effects have not been sufficiently studied. An interesting effect of caloric restriction in humans is mitochondrial biogenesis. Mitochondrial dysfunction has emerged as a potentially important underlying contributor to aging. Reduced expression of mitochondrial genes is a strongly conserved feature of aging across different species. Mitochondria are the machinery for chemical energy production, and brain and muscle are particularly susceptible to defective mitochondrial function. Thus, declining mitochondrial function may be a direct cause of at least three of the main dysregulated systems contributing to the phenotype of aging.
# Chunk 1897
Successive layers of defenses, barriers and safeguards

FIguRE 12e-1 “Swiss cheese” diagram. Reason argues that most accidents occur when a series of “latent failures” are present in a system and happen to line up in a given instance, resulting in an accident. Examples of latent failures in the case of a fall might be that the unit is unusually busy and the floor happens to be wet. (Adapted from J Reason: BMJ 320:768, 2000; with permission.) been more controversial until recently. For example, the accident rate among truck drivers increases dramatically if they work over a certain number of hours in a week, especially with prolonged shifts. A recent study of house officers in the intensive care unit demonstrated that they were about one-third more likely to make errors when they were on a 24-h shift than when they were on a schedule that allowed them to sleep 8 h the previous night. The American College of Graduate Medical Education has moved to address this issue by putting in place the 80-h workweek. Although this stipulation is a step forward, it does not address the most important cause of fatigue-related errors: extended-duty shifts. High levels of stress and heavy workloads also can increase error rates. Thus, in extremely high-pressure situations, such as cardiac arrests, errors are more likely to occur. Strategies such as using protocols in these settings can be helpful, as can simple recognition that the situation is stressful.
# Chunk 1898
The Frequency of Adverse Events in Health Care Most large studies focusing on the frequency and consequences of adverse events have been performed in the inpatient setting; some data are available for nursing homes, but much less information is available about the outpatient setting. The Harvard Medical Practice Study, one of the largest studies to address this issue, was performed with hospitalized patients in New York. The primary outcome was the adverse event: an injury caused by medical management rather than by the patient’s underlying disease. In this study, an event either resulted in death or disability at discharge or prolonged the length of hospital stay by at least 2 days. Key findings were that the adverse event rate was 3.7% and that 58% of the adverse events were considered preventable. Although New York is not representative of the United States as a whole, the study was replicated later in Colorado and Utah, where the rates were essentially similar. Since then, other studies using analogous methodologies have been performed in various developed nations, and the rates of adverse events in these countries appear to be ~10%. Rates of safety issues appear to be even higher in developing and transitional countries; thus, this is clearly an issue of global proportions. The World Health Organization has focused on this area, forming the World Alliance for Patient Safety.
# Chunk 1899
Addressing these challenges, however, does 85 2005 not mean simply waiting for economic growth. Analysis of the association between wealth and health across countries reveals that, for any given level of wealth, there is a substantial variation in life expectancy at birth that has persisted despite overall global progress in life expectancy during the past 30 years (Fig. 13e-2). Health status in low-and middle-income countries varies enormously. Nations such as Cuba and Costa Rica have life expectancies and childhood mortality rates similar to or even better than those in high-income countries; in contrast, countries in sub-Saharan Africa and the former Soviet bloc have experienced significant reverses in these health markers in the past 20 years.
# Chunk 1900
In the large majority of lowand middle-income countries, the level of public financing for health is woefully insufficient: whereas high-income countries spend, on average, 7% of the gross domestic product on health, middle-income countries spend <4% and low-income countries <3%. External financing for health through various donor channels has grown significantly over time. While these funds for health are significant (~$20 billion [U.S.] in 2008 for lowand middle-income countries), they represent <2% of total health expenditures in low-and middle-income countries and hence are neither a sufficient nor a long-term solution to chronic underfinancing. In Africa, 70% of health expenditures come from domestic sources. The predominant form of health care financing—charging patients at the point of service—is the least efficient and the most inequitable, tipping millions of households into poverty annually.
# Chunk 1901
These encouraging trends are illustrative of new opportunities to implement a primary health care approach and strengthen primary care services in lowand middle-income countries. Brazil, India, China, and Chile are being joined by many other lowand middle-income countries, including Indonesia, Mexico, the Philippines, Turkey, Rwanda, Ethiopia, South Africa, and Ghana, in ambitious initiatives mobilizing new resources to move toward universal coverage of health services at affordable cost.
# Chunk 1902
The first large survey of use of these practices was performed by David Eisenberg and associates in 1993. It surprised the medical community by showing that more than 30% of Americans use complementary or alternative health approaches. Many studies since that time have extended those conclusions. Subsequently, the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS), a large, national survey conducted by the National Center for Health Statistics, a component of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, has addressed the use of complementary health practices and largely confirmed those results. The NHIS is a household survey of many kinds of health practices in the civilian population; it uses methods that create a nationally representative sample and has a sample size large enough to permit valid estimates about some subgroups. In 2002, 2007, and 2012, the survey included a set of questions that addressed complementary and alternative health approaches. Information was obtained from 31,000 adults in 2002 and 23,300 adults and 9400 children in 2007. Only preliminary data are available from the 2012 survey. In all three surveys, approximately 40% of adults report using some form of complementary therapy or health practice. In the 2007 study, 38% of adults and 12% of children had used one or more modalities. These surveys yield the estimate that nonvitamin, nonmineral dietary supplements are used by approximately 18% of the population. The most prevalent mind-body practices are relaxation techniques and meditation, chiropractic, and therapeutic massage. Americans are willing to pay for these services; the estimated out-of-pocket expenditure for complementary health practices in 2007 was $34 billion, representing 1.5% of total health expenditures and 11% of out-of-pocket costs.
# Chunk 1903
Osteopathic Manipulative Therapy Founded in 1892 by the physician Andrew Taylor Still, osteopathic medicine was originally based on the belief that manipulation of soft tissue and bone can correct a wide range of diseases of the musculoskeletal and other organ systems. Over the ensuing century, the osteopathic profession has welcomed increasing integration with conventional medicine. Today, the postgraduate training, practice, credentialing, and licensure of osteopathic physicians are virtually indistinguishable from those of allopathic physicians. Osteopathic medical schools, however, include training in manual therapies, particularly spinal manipulation. Approximately 70% of family practice osteopathic physicians perform manipulative therapies on some of their patients.
# Chunk 1904
Recently, another randomized experiment was conducted in Oregon among low-income, childless adults who were uninsured. Many people who gained insurance coverage in 2014 when the United States implemented the Affordable Care Act are from this group. Some of the uninsured childless adults won a lottery that made them eligible for Medicaid; those who did not win became the comparison group. After ~2 years, the results suggested that the use of services by persons on Medicaid had increased by ~25–35%. Medicaid served its purpose of providing protection against large medical bills; there was an 81% reduction in the proportion of families who spent >30% of their income on medical care, and there were large reductions in both medical debt and borrowing to pay for medical care. Turning to health outcomes, there was a 30% reduction in depression among the uninsured who received Medicaid relative to the comparison group as well as an increase in the numbers of diagnosed diabetics and of diabetics taking medication. Although there were no statistically significant changes in measures of blood pressure, lipids, or glycosylated hemoglobin, confidence intervals were sufficiently large that clinically meaningful effects could not be ruled out.
# Chunk 1905
Percentage of patients increased 58%, with similar increases among whites (61%) and blacks (56%). However, the TKR rate for blacks was 37% lower than the rate for whites in 2000 and 39% lower in 2006; i.e., the disparity not only did not improve but even worsened slightly (Fig. 16e-5). More recent data (up to 2010) show no apparent change in these figures. Data for enrollees in Medicare managed-care plans provides evidence for a narrowing in racial disparities between 1997 and 2003 in several “report card” preventive care measures, such as mammography and glucose and cholesterol testing. However, racial disparities in more complex measures, such as glucose control in diabetic patients and cholesterol levels in patients after a heart attack, actually worsened during that interval.
# Chunk 1906
FIgURE 16e-5 Racial trends in age-adjusted total knee replacement in Medicaid enrollees from 2000 to 2006. The reference population consisted of Medicaid part A enrollees ≥65 years of age who were not members of a managed-care plan. (From the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2009.) from whom minorities receive their care; i.e., certain specific providers, geographic regions, or hospitals are lower-performing on certain aspects of quality. For example, one study showed that 25% of hospitals cared for 90% of black Medicare patients in the United States and that these hospitals tended to have lower performance scores on certain quality measures than other hospitals. That said, health systems generally are not well prepared to measure, report, and intervene to reduce disparities in care. Few hospitals or health plans stratify their quality data by race/ethnicity or language to measure disparities, and even fewer use data of this type to develop disparity-targeted interventions. Similarly, despite regulations concerning the need for professional interpreters, research demonstrates that many health care organizations and providers fail to routinely provide this service for patients with limited English proficiency. Despite the link between limited English proficiency and health-care quality and safety, few providers or institutions monitor performance for patients in these areas.
# Chunk 1907
A survey of 6722 Americans ≥18 years of age is particularly relevant to this important link between provider–patient communication and health outcomes. Whites, blacks, Hispanics/Latinos, and Asian Americans who had made a medical visit in the past 2 years were asked whether they had trouble understanding their doctors; whether they felt the doctors did not listen; and whether they had medical questions they were afraid to ask. The survey found that 19% of all patients experienced one or more of these problems, yet whites experienced them 16% of the time as opposed to 23% of the time for blacks, 33% for Hispanics/Latinos, and 27% for Asian Americans (Fig. 16e-7).
# Chunk 1908
On the basis of historic factors such as discrimination, segregation, and medical experimentation, blacks may be especially mistrustful of providers. The exploitation of blacks by the U.S. Public Health Service during the Tuskegee syphilis study from 1932 to 1972 left a legacy of mistrust that persists even today among this population. Other populations, including Native Americans/Alaskan Natives, Hispanics/ Latinos, and Asian Americans, also harbor significant mistrust of the health care system. A national Kaiser Family Foundation survey of 3884 individuals found that 36% of Hispanics and 35% of blacks (compared with 15% of whites) felt they had been treated unfairly in the health care system in the past because of their race/ethnicity. Perhaps even more alarming, 65% of blacks and 58% of Hispanics (compared with 22% of whites) were afraid of being treated unfairly in the future on that basis (Fig. 16e-8).
# Chunk 1909
Pattern Myocardial ischemic discomfort usually builds over minutes and is exacerbated by activity and mitigated by rest. In contrast, pain that reaches its peak intensity immediately is more suggestive of aortic dissection, pulmonary embolism, or spontaneous pneumothorax. Pain that is fleeting (lasting only a few seconds) is rarely ischemic in origin. Similarly, pain that is constant in intensity for a prolonged period (many hours to days) is unlikely to represent myocardial ischemia if it occurs in the absence of other clinical consequences, such as abnormalities of the ECG, elevation of cardiac biomarkers, or clinical sequelae (e.g., heart failure or hypotension). Both myocardial ischemia and acid reflux may have their onset in the morning, the latter because of the absence of food to absorb gastric acid.
# Chunk 1910
Abnormalities of the ST segment and T wave may occur in a variety of conditions, including pulmonary embolism, ventricular hypertrophy, acute and chronic pericarditis, myocarditis, electrolyte imbalance, and metabolic disorders. Notably, hyperventilation associated with panic disorder can also lead to nonspecific ST and T-wave abnormalities. Pulmonary embolism is most often associated with sinus tachycardia but can also lead to rightward shift of the ECG axis, manifesting as an S-wave in lead I, with a Q-wave and T-wave in lead III (Chaps. 268 and 300). In patients with ST-segment elevation, the presence of diffuse lead involvement not corresponding to a specific coronary anatomic distribution and PR-segment depression can aid in distinguishing pericarditis from acute MI.
# Chunk 1911
SoME KEy CoMPonEnTS of THE PATiEnT’S HiSToRy

Age Time and mode of onset of the pain Pain characteristics Duration of symptoms Location of pain and sites of radiation Associated symptoms and their relationship to the pain Nausea, emesis, and anorexia Diarrhea, constipation, or other changes in bowel habits Menstrual history not require operative intervention, and the mildest of abdominal pains 103 may herald an urgently correctable lesion. Any patient with abdominal pain of recent onset requires early and thorough evaluation and accurate diagnosis.
# Chunk 1912
SOME MECHANISMS OF PAIN ORIgINATINg IN THE ABDOMEN Inflammation of the Parietal Peritoneum The pain of parietal peritoneal inflammation is steady and aching in character and is located directly over the inflamed area, its exact reference being possible because it is transmitted by somatic nerves supplying the parietal peritoneum. The intensity of the pain is dependent on the type and amount of material to which the peritoneal surfaces are exposed in a given time period. For example , the sudden release into the peritoneal cavity of a small quantity of sterile acid gastric juice causes much more pain than the same amount of grossly contaminated neutral feces. Enzymatically active pancreatic juice incites more pain and inflammation than does the same amount of sterile bile containing no potent enzymes. Blood is normally only a mild irritant and the response to urine can be bland, so exposure of blood and urine to the peritoneal cavity may go unnoticed unless it is sudden and massive. Bacterial contamination, such as may occur with pelvic inflammatory disease or perforated distal intestine, causes low-intensity pain until multiplication causes a significant amount of inflammatory mediators to be released. Patients with perforated upper gastrointestinal ulcers may present entirely differently depending on how quickly gastric juices enter the peritoneal cavity. Thus, the rate at which any inflammatory material irritates the peritoneum is important.
# Chunk 1913
Vascular Disturbances A frequent misconception is that pain due to intraabdominal vascular disturbances is sudden and catastrophic in nature. Certain disease processes, such as embolism or thrombosis of the superior mesenteric artery or impending rupture of an abdominal aortic aneurysm, can certainly be associated with diffuse, severe pain. Yet, just as frequently, the patient with occlusion of the superior mesenteric artery only has mild continuous or cramping diffuse pain for 2 or 3 days before vascular collapse or findings of peritoneal inflammation appear. The early, seemingly insignificant discomfort is caused by hyperperistalsis rather than peritoneal inflammation. Indeed, absence of tenderness and rigidity in the presence of continuous, diffuse pain (e.g., “pain out of proportion to physical findings”) in a patient likely to have vascular disease is quite characteristic of occlusion of the superior mesenteric artery. Abdominal pain with radiation to the sacral region, flank, or genitalia should always signal the possible presence of a rupturing abdominal aortic aneurysm. This pain may persist over a period of several days before rupture and collapse occur.
# Chunk 1914
Pain due to functional causes conforms to none of the aforementioned patterns. Mechanisms of disease are not clearly established. Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a functional gastrointestinal disorder characterized by abdominal pain and altered bowel habits. The diagnosis is made on the basis of clinical criteria (Chap. 352) and after exclusion of demonstrable structural abnormalities. The episodes of abdominal pain are often brought on by stress, and the pain varies considerably in type and location. Nausea and vomiting are rare. Localized tenderness and muscle spasm are inconsistent or absent. The causes of IBS or related functional disorders are not known.
# Chunk 1915
APPROACH TO THE PATIENT:

Few abdominal conditions require such urgent operative intervention that an orderly approach need be abandoned, no matter how ill the patient. Only patients with exsanguinating intraabdominal hemorrhage (e.g., ruptured aneurysm) must be rushed to the operating room immediately, but in such instances, only a few minutes are required to assess the critical nature of the problem. Under these circumstances, all obstacles must be swept aside, adequate venous access for fluid replacement obtained, and the operation begun. Many of these patients have died in the radiology department or the emergency room while awaiting unnecessary examinations such as electrocardiograms or computed tomography (CT) scans. There are no contraindications to operation when massive intraabdominal hemorrhage is present. Fortunately, this situation is relatively rare. This statement does not necessarily apply to patients with intraluminal gastrointestinal hemorrhage, who can often be managed by other means (Chap. 57). Nothing will supplant an orderly, painstakingly detailed history, which is far more valuable than any laboratory or radiographic examination. This kind of history is laborious and time-consuming, making it not especially popular, even though a reasonably accurate diagnosis can be made on the basis of the history alone in the majority of cases.
# Chunk 1916
An accurate menstrual history in a female patient is essential. It is important to remember that normal anatomic relationships can be significantly altered by the gravid uterus. Abdominal and pelvic pain may occur during pregnancy due to conditions that do
# Chunk 1917
In the examination, simple critical inspection of the patient, e.g., of facies, position in bed, and respiratory activity, provides valuable clues. The amount of information to be gleaned is directly proportional to the gentleness and thoroughness of the examiner. Once a patient with peritoneal inflammation has been examined brusquely, accurate assessment by the next examiner becomes almost impossible. Eliciting rebound tenderness by sudden release of a deeply palpating hand in a patient with suspected peritonitis is cruel and unnecessary. The same information can be obtained by gentle percussion of the abdomen (rebound tenderness on a miniature scale), a maneuver that can be far more precise and localizing. Asking the patient to cough will elicit true rebound tenderness without the need for placing a hand on the abdomen. Furthermore, the forceful demonstration of rebound tenderness will startle and induce protective spasm in a nervous or worried patient in whom true rebound tenderness is not present. A palpable gallbladder will be missed if palpation is so aggressive that voluntary muscle spasm becomes superimposed on involuntary muscular rigidity. As with history taking, sufficient time should be spent in the examination. Abdominal signs may be minimal but nevertheless, if accompanied by consistent symptoms, may be exceptionally meaningful. Abdominal signs may be virtually or totally absent in cases of pelvic peritonitis, so careful pelvic and rectal examinations are mandatory in every patient with abdominal pain. Tenderness on pelvic or rectal examination in the absence of other abdominal signs can be caused by operative indications such as perforated appendicitis, diverticulitis, twisted ovarian cyst, and many others. Much attention has been paid to the presence or absence of peristaltic sounds, their quality, and their frequency. Auscultation of the abdomen is one of the least revealing aspects of the physical examination of a patient with abdominal pain. Catastrophes such as a strangulating small intestinal obstruction or perforated appendicitis may occur in the presence of normal peristaltic sounds. Conversely, when the proximal part of the intestine above obstruction becomes markedly distended and edematous, peristaltic sounds may lose the characteristics of borborygmi and become weak or absent, even when peritonitis is not present. It is usually the severe chemical peritonitis of sudden onset that is associated with the truly silent abdomen.
# Chunk 1918
Laboratory examinations may be valuable in assessing the patient with abdominal pain, yet, with few exceptions, they rarely establish a diagnosis. Leukocytosis should never be the single deciding factor as to whether or not operation is indicated. A white blood cell count >20,000/μL may be observed with perforation of a viscus, but pancreatitis, acute cholecystitis, pelvic inflammatory disease, and intestinal infarction may also be associated with marked leukocytosis. A normal white blood cell count is not rare in cases of perforation of abdominal viscera. The diagnosis of anemia may be more helpful than the white blood cell count, especially when combined with the history.
# Chunk 1919
The urinalysis may reveal the state of hydration or rule out severe renal disease, diabetes, or urinary infection. Blood urea nitrogen, glucose, and serum bilirubin levels may be helpful. Serum amylase levels may be increased by many diseases other than pancreatitis, e.g., perforated ulcer, strangulating intestinal obstruction, and acute cholecystitis; thus, elevations of serum amylase do not rule out the need for an operation.
# Chunk 1920
Typical presenting symptoms include headache, polymyalgia rheumatica (Chap. 385), jaw claudication, fever, and weight loss. Headache is the dominant symptom and often appears in association with malaise and muscle aches. Head pain may be unilateral or bilateral and is located temporally in 50% of patients but may involve any and all aspects of the cranium. Pain usually appears gradually over a few hours before peak intensity is reached; occasionally, it is explosive in onset. The quality of pain is only seldom throbbing; it is almost invariably described as dull and boring, with superimposed episodic stabbing pains similar to the sharp pains that appear in migraine. Most patients can recognize that the origin of their head pain is superficial, external to the skull, rather than originating deep within the cranium (the pain site for migraineurs). Scalp tenderness is present, often to a marked degree; brushing the hair or resting the head on a pillow may be impossible because of pain. Headache is usually worse at night and often aggravated by exposure to cold. Additional findings may include reddened, tender nodules or red streaking of the skin overlying the temporal arteries, and tenderness of the temporal or, less commonly, the occipital arteries.
# Chunk 1921
The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) is often, although not always, elevated; a normal ESR does not exclude giant cell arteritis. A temporal artery biopsy followed by immediate treatment with prednisone 80 mg daily for the first 4–6 weeks should be initiated when clinical suspicion is high. The prevalence of migraine among the elderly is substantial, considerably higher than that of giant cell arteritis. Migraineurs often report amelioration of their headaches with prednisone; thus, caution must be used when interpreting the therapeutic response.
# Chunk 1922
The broad diagnosis of chronic daily headache (CDH) can be applied when a patient experiences headache on 15 days or more per month. CDH is not a single entity; it encompasses a number of different headache syndromes, both primary and secondary (Table 21-3). In aggregate, this group presents considerable disability and is thus specially dealt with here. Population-based estimates suggest that about 4% of adults have daily or near-daily headache.
# Chunk 1923
Management of Medication Overuse: Outpatients For patients who overuse medications, it is essential that analgesic use be reduced and eliminated. One approach is to reduce the medication dose by 10% every 1–2 weeks. Immediate cessation of analgesic use is possible for some patients, provided there is no contraindication. Both approaches are facilitated by the use of a medication diary maintained during the month or two before cessation; this helps to identify the scope of the problem. A small dose of a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) such as naproxen, 500 mg bid, if tolerated, will help relieve residual pain as analgesic use is reduced. NSAID overuse is not usually a problem for patients with daily headache when a NSAID with a longer half-life is taken once or twice daily; however, overuse problems may develop with more frequent dosing schedules or shorter acting NSAIDS. Once the patient has substantially reduced analgesic use, a preventive medication should be introduced. It must be emphasized that preventives generally do not work in the presence of analgesic overuse. The most common cause of unresponsiveness to treatment is the use of a preventive when analgesics continue to be used regularly. For some patients, discontinuing analgesics is very difficult; often the best approach is to directly inform the patient that some degree of pain is inevitable during this initial period.
# Chunk 1924
Management of Medication Overuse: Inpatients Some patients will require hospitalization for detoxification. Such patients have typically failed efforts at outpatient withdrawal or have a significant medical condition, such as diabetes mellitus, which would complicate withdrawal as an outpatient. Following admission to the hospital, acute medications are withdrawn completely on the first day, in the absence of a contraindication. Antiemetics and fluids are administered as required; clonidine is used for opioid withdrawal symptoms. For acute intolerable pain during the waking hours, aspirin, 1 g IV (not approved in United States), is useful. IM chlorpromazine can be helpful at night; patients must be adequately hydrated. Three to 5 days into the admission, as the effect of the withdrawn substance wears off, a course of IV dihydroergotamine (DHE) can be used. DHE, administered every 8 h for 5 consecutive days, can induce a significant remission that allows a preventive treatment to be established. 5-HT3 antagonists, such as ondansetron or granisetron, or the neurokinin receptor antagonist, aprepitant, may be required with DHE to prevent significant nausea, and domperidone (not approved in the United States) orally or by suppository can be very helpful. Avoiding sedating or otherwise side effect prone antiemetics is helpful.
# Chunk 1925
Secondary NDPH • LOw CSF VOLUME HEAdACHE In these syndromes, head pain is positional: it begins when the patient sits or stands upright and resolves upon reclining. The pain, which is occipitofrontal, is usually a dull ache but may be throbbing. Patients with chronic low CSF volume headache typically present with a history of headache from one day to the next that is generally not present on waking but worsens during the day. Recumbency usually improves the headache within minutes, and it can take only minutes to an hour for the pain to return when the patient resumes an upright position.
# Chunk 1926
The most common cause of headache due to persistent low CSF volume is CSF leak following LP. Post-LP headache usually begins within 48 h but may be delayed for up to 12 days. Its incidence is between 10 and 30%. Beverages with caffeine may provide temporary relief. Besides LP, index events may include epidural injection or a vigorous Valsalva maneuver, such as from lifting, straining, coughing, clearing the eustachian tubes in an airplane, or multiple orgasms. Spontaneous CSF leaks are well recognized, and the diagnosis should be considered whenever the headache history is typical, even when there is no obvious index event. As time passes from the index event, the postural nature may become less apparent; cases in which the index event occurred several years before the eventual diagnosis have been recognized. Symptoms appear to result from low volume rather than low pressure: although low CSF pressures, typically 0–50 mmH2O, are usually identified, a pressure as high as 140 mmH2O has been noted with a documented leak.
# Chunk 1927
Initial treatment for low CSF volume headache is bed rest. For patients with persistent pain, IV caffeine (500 mg in 500 mL of saline administered over 2 h) can be very effective. An electrocardiogram (ECG) to screen for arrhythmia should be performed before administration. It is reasonable to administer at least two infusions of caffeine before embarking on additional tests to identify the source of the CSF leak. Because IV caffeine is safe and can be curative, it spares many patients the need for further investigations. If unsuccessful, an abdominal binder may be helpful. If a leak can be identified, an autologous blood patch is usually curative. A blood patch is also effective for post-LP headache; in this setting, the location is empirically determined to be the site of the LP. In patients with intractable pain, oral theophylline is a useful alternative; however, its effect is less rapid than caffeine.
# Chunk 1928
John W. Engstrom, Richard A. Deyo

The importance of back and neck pain in our society is underscored by the following: (1) the cost of back pain in the United States exceeds $100 billion annually; approximately one-third of these costs are direct health care expenses, and two-thirds are indirect costs resulting from loss of wages and productivity; (2) back symptoms are the most common cause of disability in those <45 years; (3) low back pain is the second most common reason for visiting a physician in the United States; and (4) 70% of persons will have back pain at some point in their lives.
# Chunk 1929
Pain referred to the back may arise from abdominal or pelvic viscera. The pain is usually described as primarily abdominal or pelvic, accompanied by back pain and usually unaffected by posture. The patient may occasionally complain of back pain only.
# Chunk 1930
Unexplained fever Unexplained weight loss Percussion tenderness over the spine Abdominal, rectal, or pelvic mass Internal/external rotation of the leg at the hip; heel percussion sign Straight leg– or reverse straight leg–raising signs Progressive focal neurologic deficit
# Chunk 1931
Lumbar spinal stenosis (LSS) describes a narrowed lumbar spinal canal and is frequently asymptomatic. Typical is neurogenic claudication, consisting of back and buttock or leg pain induced by walking or standing and relieved by sitting. Symptoms in the legs are usually bilateral. Unlike vascular claudication, symptoms are often provoked by standing without walking. Unlike lumbar disk disease, symptoms are usually relieved by sitting. Patients with neurogenic claudication can often walk much farther when leaning over a shopping cart and can pedal a stationary bike with ease while sitting. These flexed positions increase the anteroposterior spinal canal diameter and reduce intraspinal venous hypertension, resulting in pain relief. Focal weakness, sensory loss, or insufficient evidence to support the routine use of epidural glucocorticoid injections. Surgical therapy is considered when medical therapy does not relieve symptoms sufficiently to allow for resumption of activities of daily living or when focal neurologic signs are present. Most patients with neurogenic claudication who are treated medically do not improve over time. Surgical management can produce significant relief of back and leg pain within 6 weeks, and pain relief persists for at least 2 years. However, up to one-quarter develop recurrent stenosis at the same spinal level or an adjacent level 7–10 years after the initial surgery; recurrent symptoms usually respond to a second surgical decompression.
# Chunk 1932
Diseases of the thorax, abdomen, or pelvis may refer pain to the posterior portion of the spinal segment that innervates the diseased organ. Occasionally, back pain may be the first and only manifestation. Upper abdominal diseases generally refer pain to the lower thoracic or upper lumbar region (eighth thoracic to the first and second lumbar vertebrae), lower abdominal diseases to the midlumbar region (second to fourth lumbar vertebrae), and pelvic diseases to the sacral region. Local signs (pain with spine palpation, paraspinal muscle spasm) are absent, and little or no pain accompanies routine movements of the spine.
# Chunk 1933
Menstrual pain may be felt in the sacral region sometimes with poorly localized, cramping pain radiating down the legs. Pain due to neoplastic infiltration of nerves is typically continuous, progressive in severity, and unrelieved by rest at night. Less commonly, radiation therapy of pelvic tumors may produce sacral pain from late radiation necrosis of tissue. Low back pain that radiates into one or both thighs is common in the last weeks of pregnancy.
# Chunk 1934
CLBP is defined as pain lasting >12 weeks; it accounts for 50% of total back pain costs. Risk factors include obesity, female gender, older age, prior history of back pain, restricted spinal mobility, pain radiating into a leg, high levels of psychological distress, poor self-rated health, minimal physical activity, smoking, job dissatisfaction, and widespread pain. In general, the same treatments that are 120 recommended for ALBP can be useful for patients with CLBP. In this setting, however, the long-term benefit of opioid therapy or muscle relaxants is less clear. Evidence supports the use of exercise therapy, and this can be one of the mainstays of treatment for CLBP. Effective regimens have generally included a combination of gradually increasing aerobic exercise, strengthening exercises, and stretching exercises. Motivating patients is sometimes challenging, and in this setting, a program of supervised exercise can improve compliance. In general, activity tolerance is the primary goal, while pain relief is secondary. Supervised intensive physical exercise or “work hardening” regimens have been effective in returning some patients to work, improving walking distance, and reducing pain. In addition, some forms of yoga have been evaluated in randomized trials and may be helpful for patients who are interested. A long-term benefit of spinal manipulation or massage for CLBP is unproven. Medications for CLBP may include acetaminophen, NSAIDs, and tricyclic antidepressants. Trials of tricyclics suggest benefit even for patients without evidence of depression. Trials do not support the efficacy of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) for CLBP. However, depression is common among patients with chronic pain and should be appropriately treated. Cognitive-behavioral therapy is based on evidence that psychological and social factors, as well as somatic pathology, are important in the genesis of chronic pain and disability. Cognitive-behavioral therapy includes efforts to identify and modify patients’ thinking about their pain and disability. A systematic review concluded that such treatments are more effective than a waiting list control group for short-term pain relief; however, long-term results remain unclear. Behavioral treatments may have effects similar in magnitude to exercise therapy. Back pain is the most frequent reason for seeking complementary and alternative treatments. The most common of these for back pain are spinal manipulation, acupuncture, and massage. The role of most complementary and alternative medicine approaches remains unclear. Biofeedback has not been studied rigorously. There is no convincing evidence that either spinal manipulation or transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) is effective in treating CLBP. Rigorous recent trials of acupuncture suggest that true acupuncture is not superior to sham acupuncture, but that both may offer an advantage over routine care. Whether this is due entirely to placebo effects provided even by sham acupuncture is uncertain. Some trials of massage therapy have been encouraging, but this has been less well studied than spinal manipulation or acupuncture. Various injections, including epidural glucocorticoid injections, facet joint injections, and trigger point injections, have been used for treating CLBP. However, in the absence of radiculopathy, there is no evidence that these approaches are effective. Injection studies are sometimes used diagnostically to help determine the anatomic source of back pain. The use of discography to provide evidence that a specific disk is the pain generator is not recommended. Pain relief following a glucocorticoid injection into a facet is commonly used as evidence that the facet joint is the pain source; however, the possibility that the response was a placebo effect or due to systemic absorption of the glucocorticoids is difficult to exclude. Another category of intervention for chronic back pain is electrothermal and radiofrequency therapy. Intradiskal therapy has been proposed using both types of energy to thermocoagulate and destroy nerves in the intervertebral disk, using specially designed catheters or electrodes. Current evidence does not support the use of these intradiskal therapies. Radiofrequency denervation is sometimes used to destroy nerves that are thought to mediate pain, and this technique has been used for facet joint pain (with the target nerve being the medial branch of the primary dorsal ramus), for back pain thought to arise from the intervertebral disk (ramus communicans), and radicular back pain (dorsal root ganglia). A few small trials have produced conflicting results for facet joint and diskogenic pain. A trial in patients with chronic radicular pain found no difference between radiofrequency
# Chunk 1935
A normal body temperature is ordinarily maintained despite environmental variations because the hypothalamic thermoregulatory center balances the excess heat production derived from metabolic activity in muscle and the liver with heat dissipation from the skin and lungs. According to studies of healthy individuals 18–40 years of age, the mean oral temperature is 36.8° ± 0.4°C (98.2° ± 0.7°F), with low levels at 6 a.m. and higher levels at 4–6 p.m. The maximal normal oral temperature is 37.2°C (98.9°F) at 6 a.m. and 37.7°C (99.9°F) at 4 p.m.; these values define the 99th percentile for healthy individuals. In light of these studies, an a.m. temperature of >37.2°C (>98.9°F) or a p.m. temperature of >37.7°C (>99.9°F) would define a fever. The normal daily temperature variation is typically 0.5°C (0.9°F). However, in some individuals recovering from a febrile illness, this daily variation can be as great as 1.0°C. During a febrile illness, the diurnal variation is usually maintained, but at higher, febrile levels. The daily temperature 124 variation appears to be fixed in early childhood; in contrast, elderly individuals can exhibit a reduced ability to develop fever, with only a modest fever even in severe infections. Rectal temperatures are generally 0.4°C (0.7°F) higher than oral readings. The lower oral readings are probably attributable to mouth breathing, which is a factor in patients with respiratory infections and rapid breathing. Lower-esophageal temperatures closely reflect core temperature. Tympanic membrane thermometers measure radiant heat from the tympanic membrane and nearby ear canal and display that absolute value (unadjusted mode) or a value automatically calculated from the absolute reading on the basis of nomograms relating the radiant temperature measured to actual core temperatures obtained in clinical studies (adjusted mode). These measurements, although convenient, may be more variable than directly determined oral or rectal values. Studies in adults show that readings are lower with unadjusted-mode than with adjusted-mode tympanic membrane thermometers and that unadjusted-mode tympanic membrane values are 0.8°C (1.6°F) lower than rectal temperatures. In women who menstruate, the a.m. temperature is generally lower in the 2 weeks before ovulation; it then rises by ∼0.6°C (1°F) with ovulation and remains at that level until menses occur. Body temperature can be elevated in the postprandial state. Pregnancy and endocrinologic dysfunction also affect body temperature.
# Chunk 1936
226) may exhibit pharyngitis, lymphadenopathy, and a nonspecific maculopapular exanthem.

The rash of erythema infectiosum (fifth disease), which is caused by human parvovirus B19, primarily affects children 3–12 years old; it develops after fever has resolved as a bright blanchable erythema on the cheeks (“slapped cheeks”) with perioral pallor (Chap. 221). A more diffuse rash (often pruritic) appears the next day on the trunk and extremities and then rapidly develops into a lacy reticular eruption that may wax and wane (especially with temperature change) over 3 weeks. Adults with fifth disease often have arthritis, and fetal hydrops can develop in association with this condition in pregnant women.
# Chunk 1937
Exanthem subitum (roseola) is caused by human herpesvirus 6 and is most common among children <3 years of age (Chap. 219). As in erythema infectiosum, the rash usually appears after fever has subsided. It consists of 2to 3-mm rose-pink macules and papules that coalesce only rarely, occur initially on the trunk and sometimes on the extremities (sparing the face), and fade within 2 days.
# Chunk 1938
Although drug reactions have many manifestations, including urticaria, exanthematous drug-induced eruptions (Chap. 74) are most common and are often difficult to distinguish from viral exanthems. Eruptions elicited by drugs are usually more intensely erythematous and pruritic than viral exanthems, but this distinction is not reliable. A history of new medications and an absence of prostration may help to distinguish a drug-related rash from an eruption of another etiology. Rashes may persist for up to two weeks after administration of the offending agent is discontinued. Certain populations are more prone than others to drug rashes. Of HIV-infected patients, 50–60% develop a rash in response to sulfa drugs; 90% of patients with mononucleosis due to Epstein-Barr virus develop a rash when given ampicillin.
# Chunk 1939
Severe polyarticular, migratory arthralgias, especially involving small joints (e.g., hands, wrists, ankles) 50% of patients <20 years old; fever more common in most severe form, EM major, which can be confused with Stevens-Johnson syndrome (but EM major lacks prominent skin sloughing) 180, 181, 221
# Chunk 1940
Urticarial vasculitis Serum sickness, Erythematous, edematous “urticaria-like” Patients with serum sick-Fever variable; arthralgias/ 385f often due to infec-plaques, pruritic or burning; unlike urticaria: ness (including hepatitis arthritis tion (including typical lesion duration >24 h (up to 5 days) B), connective tissue hepatitis B viral, and lack of complete lesion blanching with disease enteroviral, parasitic), compression due to hemorrhage drugs; connective tissue disease
# Chunk 1941
Erythema nodosum Infections (e.g., (septal panniculitis) streptococcal, fungal, mycobacterial, yersinial); drugs (e.g., sulfas, penicillins, oral contraceptives); sarcoidosis; idiopathic causes dermatosis) inflammatory bowel disease; pregnancy; malignancy (usually hematologic); drugs (G-CSF) Subcutaneous nodules (up to 3 cm); fluctuance, draining common with mycobacteria; necrotic nodules (extremities, periorbital or nasal regions) common with Aspergillus, Mucor
# Chunk 1942
Individuals with classic urticaria (“hives”) usually have a hypersensitivity reaction without associated fever. In the presence of fever, urticaria-like eruptions are most often due to urticarial vasculitis (Chap. 385). Unlike individual lesions of classic urticaria, which last up to 24 h, these lesions may last 3–5 days. Etiologies include serum sickness (often induced by drugs such as penicillins, sulfas, salicylates, or barbiturates), connective-tissue disease (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus or Sjren’s syndrome), and infection (e.g., with hepatitis B virus, enteroviruses, or parasites). Malignancy, especially lymphoma, may be associated with fever and chronic urticaria (Chap. 72).
# Chunk 1943
(Reprinted from A Krusell et al: Emerg Infect Dis 8:727, 2002.)

Figure 25e-37 Disseminated cryptococcal infection. A liver transplant recipient developed six cutaneous lesions similar to the one shown. Biopsy and serum antigen testing demonstrated Cryptococcus. Important features of the lesion include a benign-appearing fleshy papule with central umbilication resembling molluscum contagiosum. (Courtesy of Lindsey Baden, MD; with permission.)
# Chunk 1944
PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases

Figure 25e-39 Disseminated Aspergillus infection. Multiple necrotic lesions developed in this neutropenic patient undergoing hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. The lesion in the photograph is on the inner thigh and is several centimeters in diameter. Biopsy demonstrated infarction caused by Aspergillus fumigatus. (Courtesy of Lindsey Baden, MD; with permission.)
# Chunk 1945
Fever >38.3°C (101°F) on at least two occasions 2.

Illness duration of ≥3 weeks 3.

4.

Diagnosis that remains uncertain after a thorough history-taking, physical examination, and the following obligatory investigations: determination of erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) level; platelet count; leukocyte count and differential; measurement of levels of hemoglobin, electrolytes, creatinine, total protein, alkaline phosphatase, alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, lactate dehydrogenase, creatine kinase, ferritin, antinuclear antibodies, and rheumatoid factor; protein electrophoresis; urinalysis; blood cultures (n = 3); urine culture; chest x-ray; abdominal ultrasonography; and tuberculin skin test (TST).
# Chunk 1946
Table 26-1 summarizes the findings of several large studies on

FUO conducted over the past 20 years. In general, infection accounts for about 20–25% of cases of FUO in Western countries; next in frequency are neoplasms and noninfectious inflammatory diseases (NIIDs), the latter including “collagen or rheumatic diseases,” vasculitis syndromes, and granulomatous disorders. In geographic areas outside the West, infections are a much more common cause of FUO (43% vs 22%), while the proportions of cases due to NIIDs and neoplasms are similar. Up to 50% of cases caused by infections in patients with FUO outside Western nations are due to tuberculosis, which is a less common cause in the United States and Western Europe. The number of FUO patients diagnosed with NIIDs probably will not decrease in the near future, as fever may precede more typical manifestations or serologic evidence by months in these diseases. Moreover, many NIIDs can be diagnosed only after prolonged observation and exclusion of other diseases.
# Chunk 1947
In the West, the percentage of undiagnosed cases of FUO has increased in more recent studies. An important factor contributing to the seemingly high diagnostic failure rate is that a diagnosis is more often being established before 3 weeks have elapsed, given that patients with fever tend to seek medical advice earlier and better diagnostic techniques, such as CT and MRI, are widely available; therefore, only the cases that are more difficult to diagnose continue to meet the criteria for FUO. Furthermore, most patients who have FUO without a diagnosis currently do well, and thus a less aggressive diagnostic approach may be used in clinically stable patients once diseases with immediate therapeutic or prognostic consequences have been ruled out to a reasonable extent. This factor may be especially relevant to patients with recurrent fever who are asymptomatic in between febrile episodes. In patients with recurrent fever (defined as repeated episodes of fever interspersed with fever-free intervals of at least 2 weeks and apparent remission of the underlying disease), the chance of attaining an etiologic diagnosis is <50%.
# Chunk 1948
Bacterial, nonspecific Abdominal abscess, adnexitis, apical granuloma, appendicitis, cholangitis, cholecystitis, diverticulitis, endocarditis, endometritis, epidural abscess, infected vascular catheter, infected joint prosthesis, infected vascular prosthesis, infectious arthritis, infective myonecrosis, intracranial abscess, liver abscess, lung abscess, malakoplakia, mastoiditis, mediastinitis, mycotic aneurysm, osteomyelitis, pelvic inflammatory disease, prostatitis, pyelonephritis, pylephlebitis, renal abscess, septic phlebitis, sinusitis, spondylodiscitis, xanthogranulomatous urinary tract infection
# Chunk 1949
Microbiologic serology should not be included in the diagnostic workup in patients without PDCs for specific infections. A TST is included in the obligatory investigations, but it may yield false-negative results in patients with miliary tuberculosis, malnutrition, or immunosuppression. Although the interferon γ release assay is less influenced by prior vaccination with bacille Calmette-Guérin or by infection with nontuberculous mycobacteria, its sensitivity is similar to that of the TST; a negative TST or interferon γ release assay therefore does not exclude a diagnosis of tuberculosis. Miliary tuberculosis is especially difficult to diagnose. Granulomatous disease in liver or bone marrow biopsy samples, for example, should always lead to a (re)consideration of this diagnosis. If miliary tuberculosis is suspected, liver biopsy for acid-fast smear, culture, and PCR probably still has the highest diagnostic yield; however, biopsies of bone marrow, lymph nodes, or other involved organs also can be considered.
# Chunk 1950
Obligatory investigations:

ESR and CRP, hemoglobin, platelet count, leukocyte count and differential, electrolytes, creatinine, total protein, protein electrophoresis, alkaline phosphatase, AST, ALT, LDH, creatine kinase, antinuclear antibodies, rheumatoid factor, urinalysis, blood cultures (n=3), urine culture, chest x-ray, abdominal ultrasonography, and tuberculin skin test
# Chunk 1951
Stable condition: Follow-up for new PDCs Consider NSAID Deterioration: Further diagnostic tests Consider therapeutic trial PDCs present PDCs absent or misleading Exclude manipulation with thermometer Stop or replace medication to exclude drug fever Guided diagnostic tests DIAGNOSIS Cryoglobulin and funduscopy NO DIAGNOSIS FDG-PET/CT (or labeled leukocyte scintigraphy or gallium scan) Scintigraphy abnormal Scintigraphy normal Confirmation of abnormality (e.g., biopsy, culture) Repeat history and physical examination Perform PDC-driven invasive testing DIAGNOSIS NO DIAGNOSIS DIAGNOSIS NO DIAGNOSIS Chest and abdominal CT Temporal artery biopsy (˜55 years) DIAGNOSIS NO DIAGNOSIS
# Chunk 1952
CHAPTER 26 Fever of Unknown Origin

FIguRE 26-1 Structured approach to patients with FUO. ALT, alanine aminotransferase; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; CRP, C-reactive protein; ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; FDG-PET/CT, 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography combined with low-dose computed tomography; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; PDCs, potentially diagnostic clues (all localizing signs, symptoms, and abnormalities potentially pointing toward a diagnosis); NSAID, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug.
# Chunk 1953
Fluorodeoxyglucose Positron Emission Tomography 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) has become an established imaging procedure in FUO. FDG accumulates in tissues with a high rate of glycolysis, which occurs not only in malignant cells but also in activated leukocytes, and thus permits the imaging of acute and chronic inflammatory processes. Normal uptake may obscure pathologic foci in the brain, heart, bowel, kidneys, and bladder. In patients with fever, bone marrow uptake is frequently increased in a nonspecific way due to cytokine activation, which upregulates glucose transporters in bone marrow cells. Compared with conventional scintigraphy, FDG-PET offers the advantages of higher resolution, greater sensitivity in chronic low-grade infections, and a high degree of accuracy in the central skeleton. Furthermore, vascular uptake of FDG is increased in patients with vasculitis. The mechanisms responsible for FDG uptake do not allow differentiation among infection, sterile inflammation, and malignancy. However, in patients with FUO, since all of these disorders are causes of FUO, FDG-PET can be used to guide additional diagnostic tests (e.g., targeted biopsies) that may yield the final diagnosis. Improved anatomic resolution by direct integration with CT (FDG-PET/CT) has further improved the accuracy of this modality.
# Chunk 1954
Although scintigraphic techniques do not directly provide a definitive diagnosis, they often identify the anatomic location of a particular ongoing metabolic process and, with the help of other techniques such as biopsy and culture, facilitate timely diagnosis and treatment. Pathologic FDG uptake is quickly eradicated by treatment with glucocorticoids in many diseases, including vasculitis and lymphoma; therefore, glucocorticoid use should be stopped or postponed until after FDG-PET is performed. Results reported in the literature and the advantages offered by FDG-PET indicate that conventional scintigraphic techniques should be replaced by FDG-PET/CT in the investigation of patients with FUO at institutions where this technique is available. FDG-PET/CT is a relatively expensive procedure whose availability is still limited compared with that of CT and conventional scintigraphy. Nevertheless, FDGPET/CT can be cost-effective in the FUO diagnostic workup if used at an early stage, helping to establish an early diagnosis, reducing days of hospitalization for diagnostic purposes, and obviating unnecessary and unhelpful tests.
# Chunk 1955
If no diagnosis is reached despite scintigraphic and PDC-driven histologic investigations or culture, second-stage screening diagnostic tests should be considered (Fig. 26-1). In three studies, the diagnostic yield of screening chest and abdominal CT in patients with FUO was ~20%. The specificity of chest CT was ~80%, but that of abdominal CT varied between 63% and 80%. Despite the relatively limited specificity of abdominal CT and the probably limited additional value of chest CT after normal FDG-PET, chest and abdominal CT may be used as screening procedures at a later stage of the diagnostic protocol because of their noninvasive nature and high sensitivity. Bone marrow aspiration is seldom useful in the absence of PDCs for bone marrow disorders. With addition of FDG-PET, which is very sensitive in detecting lymphoma, carcinoma, and osteomyelitis, the value of bone marrow biopsy as a screening procedure is probably further reduced. Several studies have shown a high prevalence of giant cell arteritis among patients with FUO, with rates up to 17% among elderly patients. Giant cell arteritis often involves large arteries and in most cases can be diagnosed by FDG-PET. However, temporal artery biopsy is still recommended for patients ≥55 years of age in a later stage of the diagnostic protocol: FDG-PET will not be useful in vasculitis limited to the temporal arteries because of the small diameter of these vessels and the high levels of FDG uptake in the brain that overlies them. In the past, liver biopsies have often been performed as a screening procedure in patients with FUO. In each of two recent studies, liver biopsy as part of the later stage of a screening diagnostic protocol was helpful in only one patient. Moreover, abnormal liver tests are not predictive of a diagnostic liver biopsy in FUO. Liver biopsy is an invasive procedure that carries the possibility of complications and even death. Therefore, it should not be used for screening purposes in patients with FUO except in those with PDCs for liver disease.
# Chunk 1956
HigH-RiSK fEATuRES inDiCATing HoSPiTALizATion oR inTEnSivE EvALuATion of SynCoPE

Chest pain suggesting coronary ischemia Features of congestive heart failure Moderate or severe valvular disease Moderate or severe structural cardiac disease Electrocardiographic features of ischemia History of ventricular arrhythmias Prolonged QT interval (>500 ms) Repetitive sinoatrial block or sinus pauses Persistent sinus bradycardia Bior trifascicular block or intraventricular conduction delay with QRS duration≥120 ms Atrial fibrillation Nonsustained ventricular tachycardia Family history of sudden death Preexcitation syndromes Brugada pattern on ECG Palpitations at time of syncope Syncope at rest or during exercise predisposing neurologic disorders, physiologic impairment, and vasoactive medication use among institutionalized patients.
# Chunk 1957
Several disorders associated with cardiac electrophysiologic instability and arrhythmogenesis are due to mutations in ion channel subunit genes. These include the long QT syndrome, Brugada syndrome, and catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. The long QT syndrome is a genetically heterogeneous disorder associated with prolonged cardiac repolarization and a predisposition to ventricular arrhythmias. Syncope and sudden death in patients with long QT syndrome result from a unique polymorphic ventricular tachycardia called torsades des pointes that degenerates into ventricular fibrillation. The long QT syndrome has been linked to genes encoding K+ channel α-subunits, K+ channel β-subunits, voltage-gated Na+ channel, and a scaffolding protein, ankyrin B (ANK2). Brugada syndrome is characterized by idiopathic ventricular fibrillation in association with right ventricular electrocardiogram (ECG) abnormalities without structural heart disease. This disorder is also genetically heterogeneous, although it is most frequently linked to mutations in the Na+ channel α-subunit, SCN5A. Catecholaminergic polymorphic tachycardia is an inherited, genetically heterogeneous disorder associated with exerciseor stress-induced ventricular arrhythmias, syncope, or sudden death. Acquired QT interval prolongation, most commonly due to drugs, may also result in ventricular arrhythmias and syncope. These disorders are discussed in detail in Chap. 277.
# Chunk 1958
Generalized and partial seizures may be confused with syncope; however, there are a number of differentiating features. Whereas tonic-clonic movements are the hallmark of a generalized seizure, myoclonic and other movements also may occur in up to 90% of syncopal episodes. Myoclonic jerks associated with syncope may be multifocal or generalized. They are typically arrhythmic and of short duration (<30 s). Mild flexor and extensor posturing also may occur. Partial or partial-complex seizures with secondary generalization are usually preceded by an aura, commonly an unpleasant smell; fear; anxiety; abdominal discomfort; or other visceral sensations. These phenomena should be differentiated from the premonitory features of syncope.
# Chunk 1959
The goals of the initial evaluation are to determine whether the transient loss of consciousness was due to syncope; to identify the cause; and to assess risk for future episodes and serious harm (Table 27-1). The initial evaluation should include a detailed history, thorough questioning of eyewitnesses, and a complete physical and neurologic examination. Blood pressure and heart rate should be measured in the supine position and after 3 min of standing to determine whether orthostatic hypotension is present. An ECG should be performed if there is suspicion of syncope due to an arrhythmia or underlying cardiac disease. Relevant electrocardiographic abnormalities include bradyarrhythmias or tachyarrhythmias, AV block, ischemia, old myocardial infarction, long QT syndrome, and bundle branch block. This initial assessment will lead to the identification of a cause of syncope in approximately 50% of patients and also allows stratification of patients at risk for cardiac mortality.
# Chunk 1960
Cardiac Evaluation ECG monitoring is indicated for patients with a high pretest probability of arrhythmia causing syncope. Patients should be monitored in hospital if the likelihood of a life-threatening arrhythmia is high, e.g., patients with severe structural or coronary artery disease, nonsustained ventricular tachycardia, trifascicular heart block, prolonged QT interval, Brugada syndrome ECG pattern, or family history of sudden cardiac death (Table 27-1). Outpatient Holter monitoring is recommended for patients who experience frequent syncopal episodes (one or more per week), whereas loop recorders, which continually record and erase cardiac rhythm, are indicated for patients with suspected arrhythmias with low risk of sudden cardiac death. Loop recorders may be external (recommended for evaluation of episodes that occur at a frequency of greater than one per month) or implantable (if syncope occurs less frequently).
# Chunk 1961
Treadmill exercise testing with ECG and blood pressure monitoring should be performed in patients who have experienced syncope during or shortly after exercise. Treadmill testing may help identify exercise-induced arrhythmias (e.g., tachycardia-related AV block) and exercise-induced exaggerated vasodilation.
# Chunk 1962
Variability in the definitions of fatigue and the survey instruments used in different studies makes it difficult to arrive at precise figures about the global burden of fatigue. The point prevalence of fatigue was 6.7% and the lifetime prevalence was 25% in a large National Institute of Mental Health survey of the U.S. general population. In primary care clinics in Europe and the United States, between 10 and 25% of patients surveyed endorsed symptoms of prolonged (present for >1 month) or chronic (present for >6 months) fatigue, but fatigue was the primary reason for seeking medical attention in only a minority of patients. In a community survey of women in India, 12% reported chronic fatigue. By contrast, the prevalence of chronic fatigue syndrome, as defined by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, is low (Chap. 464e).
# Chunk 1963
Hematologic Chronic or progressive anemia may present with fatigue, sometimes in association with exertional tachycardia and breathlessness. Anemia may also contribute to fatigue in chronic illness. Low serum ferritin in the absence of anemia may also cause fatigue that is reversible with iron replacement.
# Chunk 1964
APPROACH TO THE PATIENT:

A detailed history focusing on the quality, pattern, time-course, associated symptoms, and alleviating factors of fatigue is critical in defining the syndrome, determining whether fatigue is the appropriate designation, determining whether the symptoms are acute or chronic, and determining whether fatigue is primarily mental, physical, or both in order to direct further evaluation and treatment. The review of systems should attempt to distinguish fatigue from excessive daytime sleepiness, dyspnea on exertion, exercise intolerance, and muscle weakness. The presence of fever, chills, night sweats, or weight loss should raise suspicion for an occult infection or malignancy. A careful review of prescription, over-the-counter, herbal, and recreational drug and alcohol use is mandatory. Circumstances surrounding the onset of symptoms and potential triggers should be investigated. The social history is important, with attention paid to job stress and work hours, the social support network, and domestic affairs including a screen for intimate partner violence. Sleep habits and sleep hygiene should be questioned. The impact of fatigue on daily functioning is important to understand the patient’s experience and gauge recovery and the success of treatment.
# Chunk 1965
Laboratory testing is likely to identify the cause of chronic fatigue in only about 5% of cases. Beyond a few standard screening tests, laboratory evaluation should be guided by the history and physical examination; extensive testing is more likely to lead to false-positive results that require explanation and unnecessary investigation and should be avoided in lieu of frequent clinical follow-up. A reasonable approach to screening includes a complete blood count with differential (to screen for anemia, infection, and malignancy), electrolytes (including sodium, potassium, and calcium), glucose, renal function, liver function, and thyroid function. Testing for HIV and adrenal function can also be considered. Published guidelines defining chronic fatigue syndrome also recommend an erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) as part of the evaluation for mimics, but unless the value is very high, such nonspecific testing in the absence of other features is unlikely to clarify the situation. Routine screening with an antinuclear antibody (ANA) test is also unlikely to be informative in isolation and is frequently positive at low titers in otherwise healthy adults. Additional unfocused studies, such as whole-body imaging scans, are usually not indicated; in addition to their inconvenience, potential risk, and cost, they often reveal unrelated incidental findings that can prolong the workup unnecessarily.
# Chunk 1966
Muscle stretch (tendon) reflexes are usually increased with upper motor neuron lesions, but may be decreased or absent for a variable period immediately after onset of an acute lesion. Hyperreflexia is usually—but not invariably—accompanied by loss of cutaneous reflexes (such as superficial abdominals; Chap. 437) and, in particular, by an extensor plantar (Babinski) response. The muscle stretch reflexes are depressed with lower motor neuron lesions directly involving specific reflex arcs. They generally are preserved in patients with myopathic weakness except in advanced stages, when they sometimes are attenuated. In disorders of the neuromuscular junction, reflex responses may be affected by preceding voluntary activity of affected muscles; such activity may lead to enhancement of initially depressed reflexes in Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome and, conversely, to depression of initially normal reflexes in myasthenia gravis (Chap. 461).
# Chunk 1967
Proximal Weakness Myopathy often produces symmetric weakness of the pelvic or shoulder girdle muscles (Chap. 462e). Diseases of the neuromuscular junction, such as myasthenia gravis (Chap. 461), may present with symmetric proximal weakness often associated with ptosis, diplopia, or bulbar weakness and fluctuating in severity during the day. In anterior horn cell disease, proximal weakness is usually asymmetric, but it may be symmetric if familial. Numbness does not occur with any of these diseases. The evaluation usually begins with determination of the serum creatine kinase level and electrophysiologic studies.
# Chunk 1968
APPROACH TO THE PATIENT:

Because the diagnosis of delirium is clinical and is made at the bedside, a careful history and physical examination are necessary in evaluating patients with possible confusional states. Screening tools can aid physicians and nurses in identifying patients with delirium, including the Confusion Assessment Method (CAM) (Table 34-1); the Organic Brain Syndrome Scale; the Delirium Rating Scale; and, in the ICU, the ICU version of the CAM and the Delirium Detection Score. Using the well-validated CAM, a diagnosis of delirium is made if there is (1) an acute onset and fluctuating course and (2) inattention accompanied by either (3) disorganized thinking or (4) an altered level of consciousness. These scales may not identify the full spectrum of patients with delirium, and all patients who are acutely confused should be presumed delirious regardless of their presentation due to the wide variety of possible clinical features. A course that fluctuates over hours or days and may worsen at night (termed sundowning) is typical but not essential for the diagnosis. Observation of the patient usually will reveal an altered level of consciousness or a deficit of attention. Other features that are sometimes present include alteration of sleep-wake cycles, thought disturbances such as hallucinations or delusions, autonomic instability, and changes in affect.
# Chunk 1969
Electrocardiogram Arterial blood gas Serum and/or urine toxicology screen (perform earlier in young persons) Brain imaging with MRI with diffusion and gadolinium (preferred) or CT Suspected CNS infection: lumbar puncture after brain imaging Suspected seizure-related etiology: electroencephalogram (EEG) (if high suspicion, should be performed immediately)
# Chunk 1970
Basic screening labs, including a complete blood count, electrolyte panel, and tests of liver and renal function, should be obtained in all patients with delirium. In elderly patients, screening for systemic infection, including chest radiography, urinalysis and culture, and possibly blood cultures, is important. In younger individuals, serum and urine drug and toxicology screening may be appropriate early in the workup. Additional laboratory tests addressing other autoimmune, endocrinologic, metabolic, and infectious etiologies should be reserved for patients in whom the diagnosis remains unclear after initial testing.
# Chunk 1971
Relatively simple methods of supportive care can be highly effective in treating patients with delirium. Reorientation by the nursing staff and family combined with visible clocks, calendars, and outside-facing windows can reduce confusion. Sensory isolation should be prevented by providing glasses and hearing aids to patients who need them. Sundowning can be addressed to a large extent through vigilance to appropriate sleep-wake cycles. During the day, a well-lit room should be accompanied by activities or exercises to prevent napping. At night, a quiet, dark environment with limited interruptions by staff can assure proper rest. These sleep-wake cycle interventions are especially important in the ICU setting as the usual constant 24-h activity commonly provokes delirium. Attempting to mimic the home environment as much as possible also has been shown to help treat and even prevent delirium. Visits from friends and family throughout the day minimize the anxiety associated with the constant flow of new faces of staff and physicians. Allowing hospitalized patients to have access to home bedding, clothing, and nightstand objects makes the hospital environment less foreign and therefore less confusing. Simple standard nursing practices such as maintaining proper nutrition and volume status as well as managing incontinence and skin breakdown also help alleviate discomfort and resulting confusion.
# Chunk 1972
In light of the high morbidity associated with delirium and the tremendously increased health care costs that accompany it, development of an effective strategy to prevent delirium in hospitalized patients is extremely important. Successful identification of high-risk patients is the first step, followed by initiation of appropriate interventions. Simple standardized protocols used to manage risk factors for delirium, including sleep-wake cycle reversal, immobility, visual impairment, hearing impairment, sleep deprivation, and dehydration, have been shown to be effective. Recent trials in the ICU have focused both on identifying sedatives, such as dexmedetomidine, that are less likely to lead to delirium in critically ill patients and on developing protocols for daily awakenings in which infusions of sedative medications are interrupted and the patient is reorientated by the staff. All hospitals and health care systems should work toward decreasing the incidence of delirium.
# Chunk 1973
William W. Seeley, Bruce L. Miller

Dementia, a syndrome with many causes, affects >5 million people in the United States and results in a total annual health care cost between $157 and $215 billion. Dementia is defined as an acquired deterioration in cognitive abilities that impairs the successful performance of activities of daily living. Episodic memory, the ability to recall events specific in time and place, is the cognitive function most commonly lost; 10% of persons age >70 years and 20–40% of individuals age >85 years have clinically identifiable memory loss. In addition to memory, dementia may erode other mental faculties, including language, visuospatial, praxis, calculation, judgment, and problem-solving abilities. Neuropsychiatric and social deficits also arise in many dementia syndromes, manifesting as depression, apathy, anxiety, hallucinations, delusions, agitation, insomnia, sleep disturbances, compulsions, or disinhibition. The clinical course may be slowly progressive, as in Alzheimer’s disease (AD); static, as in anoxic encephalopathy; or may fluctuate from day to day or minute to minute, as in dementia with Lewy bodies. Most patients with AD, the most prevalent form of dementia, begin with episodic memory impairment, although in other dementias, such as frontotemporal dementia, memory loss is not typically a presenting feature. Focal cerebral disorders are discussed in Chap. 36 and illustrated in a video library in Chap. 37e; the pathogenesis of AD and related disorders is discussed in Chap. 448.
# Chunk 1974
Subtle cumulative decline in episodic memory is a common part of aging. This frustrating experience, often the source of jokes and humor, is referred to as benign forgetfulness of the elderly. Benign means that it is not so progressive or serious that it impairs reasonably successful and productive daily functioning, although the distinction between benign and more significant memory loss can be difficult to make. At age 85, the average person is able to learn and recall approximately one-half of the items (e.g., words on a list) that he or she could at age 18. A measurable cognitive problem that does not seriously disrupt daily activities is often referred to as mild cognitive impairment (MCI). Factors that predict progression from MCI to an AD dementia include a prominent memory deficit, family history of dementia, presence of an apolipoprotein ε4 (Apo ε4) allele, small hippocampal volumes, an AD-like signature of cortical atrophy, low cerebrospinal fluid Aβ, and elevated tau or evidence of brain amyloid deposition on positron emission tomography (PET) imaging.
# Chunk 1975
Abbreviations: CT, computed tomography; EEG, electroencephalogram; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; PET, positron emission tomography; RBC, red blood cell; RPR, rapid plasma reagin (test); SPECT, single-photon emission computed tomography; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone; VDRL, Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (test for syphilis).
# Chunk 1976
FIguRE 35-4 Positron emission tomography (PET) images obtained with the amyloid-imaging agent Pittsburgh Compound-B ([11C]PIB) in a normal control (left); three different patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI; center); and a patient with mild Alzheimer’s disease (AD; right). Some MCI patients have control-like levels of amyloid, some have AD-like levels of amyloid, and some have intermediate levels. (Images courtesy of William Klunk and Chester Mathis, University of Pittsburgh.) 176 psychosis, although the risk profile for these compounds is significant. When patients do not respond to treatment, it is usually a mistake to advance to higher doses or to use anticholinergic drugs or sedatives (such as barbiturates or benzodiazepines). It is important to recognize and treat depression; treatment can begin with a low dose of an SSRI (e.g., escitalopram, starting dose 5 mg daily, target dose 5–10 mg daily) while monitoring for efficacy and toxicity. Sometimes apathy, visual hallucinations, depression, and other psychiatric symptoms respond to the cholinesterase inhibitors, especially in DLB, obviating the need for other more toxic therapies. Cholinesterase inhibitors are being used to treat AD (donepezil, rivastigmine, galantamine) and PDD (rivastigmine). Recent work has focused on developing antibodies against Aβ42 as a treatment for AD. Although the initial randomized controlled trials failed, there was some evidence for efficacy in the mildest patient groups. Therefore, researchers have begun to focus on patients with very mild disease and asymptomatic individuals at risk for AD, such as those who carry autosomal dominantly inherited genetic mutations or healthy elders with CSF or amyloid imaging biomarker evidence supporting presymptomatic AD. Memantine proves useful when treating some patients with moderate to severe AD; its major benefit relates to decreasing caregiver burden, most likely by decreasing resistance to dressing and grooming support. In moderate to severe AD, the combination of memantine and a cholinesterase inhibitor delayed nursing home placement in several studies, although other studies have not supported the efficacy of adding memantine to the regimen. A proactive strategy has been shown to reduce the occurrence of delirium in hospitalized patients. This strategy includes frequent orientation, cognitive activities, sleep-enhancement measures, vision and hearing aids, and correction of dehydration. Nondrug behavior therapy has an important place in dementia management. The primary goals are to make the patient’s life comfortable, uncomplicated, and safe. Preparing lists, schedules, calendars, and labels can be helpful in the early stages. It is also useful to stress familiar routines, walks, and simple physical exercises. For many demented patients, memory for events is worse than their ability to carry out routine activities, and they may still be able to take part in activities such as walking, bowling, dancing, singing, bingo, and golf. Demented patients often object to losing control over familiar tasks such as driving, cooking, and handling finances. Attempts to help or take over may be greeted with complaints, depression, or anger. Hostile responses on the part of the caregiver are counterproductive and sometimes even harmful. Reassurance, distraction, and calm positive statements are more productive in this setting. Eventually, tasks such as finances and driving must be assumed by others, and the patient will conform and adjust. Safety is an important issue that includes not only driving but controlling the kitchen, bathroom, and sleeping area environments, as well as stairways. These areas need to be monitored, supervised, and made as safe as possible. A move to a retirement complex, assisted-living center, or nursing home can initially increase confusion and agitation. Repeated reassurance, reorientation, and careful introduction to the new personnel will help to smooth the process. Providing activities that are known to be enjoyable to the patient can be of considerable benefit. The clinician must pay special attention to frustration and depression among family members and caregivers. Caregiver guilt and burnout are common. Family members often feel overwhelmed and helpless and may vent their frustrations on the patient, each other, and health care providers. Caregivers should be encouraged to take advantage of day-care facilities and respite services. Education and counseling about dementia are important. Local and national support groups, such as the Alzheimer’s Association (www.alz.org), can provide considerable help.
# Chunk 1977
181 CHAPTER 36 Aphasia, Memory Loss, and Other Focal Cerebral Disorders

FIguRE 36-3 A. A 47-year-old man with a large frontoparietal lesion in the right hemisphere was asked to circle all the A’s. Only targets on the right are circled. This is a manifestation of left hemispatial neglect. B. A 70-year-old woman with a 2-year history of degenerative dementia was able to circle most of the small targets but ignored the larger ones. This is a manifestation of simultanagnosia.
# Chunk 1978
Sleep Disorders Charles A. Czeisler, Thomas E. Scammell, Clifford B. Saper Disturbed sleep is among the most frequent health complaints that physicians encounter. More than one-half of adults in the United States experience at least intermittent sleep disturbance, and only 30% 38 of adult Americans report consistently obtaining a sufficient amount of sleep. The Institute of Medicine has estimated that 50–70 million Americans suffer from a chronic disorder of sleep and wakefulness, which can adversely affect daytime functioning as well as physical and mental health. Over the last 20 years, the field of sleep medicine has emerged as a distinct specialty in response to the impact of sleep disorders and sleep deficiency on overall health.
# Chunk 1979
Given the opportunity, most healthy young adults will sleep 7–8 h per night, although the timing, duration, and internal structure of sleep vary among individuals. In the United States, adults tend to have one consolidated sleep episode each night, although in some cultures sleep may be divided into a mid-afternoon nap and a shortened night sleep. This pattern changes considerably over the life span, as infants and young children sleep considerably more than older people.
# Chunk 1980
Normal nocturnal sleep in adults displays a consistent organization from night to night (Fig. 38-1). After sleep onset, sleep usually progresses through NREM stages N1–N3 sleep within 45–60 min. NREM stage N3 sleep (also known as slow-wave sleep) predominates in the first third of the night and comprises 15–25% of total nocturnal sleep time in young adults. Sleep deprivation increases the rapidity of sleep onset and both the intensity and amount of slow-wave sleep.
# Chunk 1981
The first REM sleep episode usually occurs in the second hour of sleep. NREM and REM sleep alternate through the night with an average period of 90–110 min (the “ultradian” sleep cycle). Overall, in a healthy young adult, REM sleep constitutes 20–25% of total sleep, and NREM stages N1 and N2 constitute 50–60%.
# Chunk 1982
Sleep deprivation degrades cognitive performance, particularly on tests that require continual vigilance. Paradoxically, older people are less vulnerable to the neurobehavioral performance impairment induced by acute sleep deprivation than young adults, maintaining their reaction time and sustaining vigilance with fewer lapses of attention. However, it is more difficult for older adults to obtain recovery sleep after staying awake all night, as the ability to sleep during the daytime declines with age.
# Chunk 1983
After sleep deprivation, NREM sleep is generally recovered first, followed by REM sleep. However, because REM sleep tends to be most prominent in the second half of the night, sleep truncation (e.g., by an alarm clock) results in selective REM sleep deprivation. This may 06.00 08.00 increase REM sleep pressure to the point where the first REM sleep 185 may occur much earlier in the nightly sleep episode. Because several disorders (see below) also cause sleep fragmentation, it is important that the patient have sufficient sleep opportunity (at least 8 h per night) for several nights prior to a diagnostic polysomnogram.
# Chunk 1984
Awakenings from REM sleep are associated with recall of vivid dream imagery over 80% of the time, especially later in the night. Imagery may also be reported after NREM sleep interruptions. Certain disorders may occur during specific sleep stages and are described below under “Parasomnias.” These include sleepwalking, night terrors, and enuresis (bed wetting), which occur most commonly in children during deep (N3) NREM sleep, and REM sleep behavior disorder, which occurs mainly among older men who fail to maintain full atonia during REM sleep, and often call out, thrash around, or even act out entire dreams.
# Chunk 1985
The pineal hormone melatonin is secreted predominantly at night in both dayand night-active species, reflecting the direct modulation of pineal activity by a circuitous neural pathway that links the SCN to the sympathetic nervous system, which innervates the pineal gland. Melatonin secretion does not require sleep, but melatonin secretion is inhibited by ambient light, an effect mediated by the neural connection from the retina to the pineal gland via the SCN. Sleep efficiency is highest when the sleep episode coincides with endogenous melatonin secretion. Administration of exogenous melatonin can hasten sleep onset and increase sleep efficiency when administered at a time when endogenous melatonin levels are low, such as in the afternoon or evening or at the desired bedtime in patients with delayed sleep-wake phase disorder, but it does not increase sleep efficiency if administered when endogenous melatonin levels are elevated. This may explain why melatonin is often ineffective in the treatment of patients with primary insomnia.
# Chunk 1986
APPROACH TO THE PATIENT:

Patients may seek help from a physician because of: (1) sleepiness or tiredness during the day; (2) difficulty initiating or maintaining sleep at night (insomnia); or (3) unusual behaviors during sleep itself (parasomnias).
# Chunk 1987
It is often helpful for the patient to complete a daily sleep log for 1–2 weeks to define the timing and amounts of sleep. When relevant, the log can also include information on levels of alertness, work times, and drug and alcohol use, including caffeine and hypnotics.
# Chunk 1988
Eliciting a history of daytime sleepiness is usually adequate, but objective quantification is sometimes necessary. The MSLT measures a patient’s propensity to sleep under quiet conditions. The test is performed after an overnight polysomnogram to establish that the patient has had an adequate amount of good-quality nighttime sleep. The MSLT consists of five 20-min nap opportunities every 2 h across the day. The patient is instructed to try to fall asleep, and the major endpoints are the average latency to sleep and the occurrence of REM sleep during the naps. An average sleep latency across the naps of less than 8 min is considered objective evidence of excessive daytime sleepiness. REM sleep normally occurs only during the nighttime sleep episode, and the occurrence of REM sleep in two or more of the MSLT naps provides support for the diagnosis of narcolepsy.
# Chunk 1989
Sedating medications, stimulant withdrawal, head trauma, systemic inflammation, Parkinson’s disease and other neurodegenerative disorders, hypothyroidism, encephalopathy weeknights, the average U.S. adult gets only 6.75 h of sleep. Only 30% of the U.S. adult population reports consistently obtaining sufficient sleep. Insufficient sleep is especially common among shift workers, individuals working multiple jobs, and people in lower socioeconomic groups. Most teenagers need ≥9 h of sleep, but many fail to get enough sleep because of circadian phase delay, or social pressures to stay up late coupled with early school start times. Late evening light exposure, television viewing, video-gaming, social media, texting, and smart-phone use often delay bedtimes despite the fixed, early wake times required for work or school. As is typical with any disorder that causes sleepiness, individuals with chronically insufficient sleep may feel inattentive, irritable, unmotivated, and depressed, and have difficulty with school, work, and driving. Individuals differ in their optimal amount of sleep, and it can be helpful to ask how much sleep the patient obtains on a quiet vacation when he or she can sleep without restrictions. Some patients may think that a short amount of sleep is normal or advantageous, and they may not appreciate their biological need for more sleep, especially if coffee and other stimulants mask the sleepiness. A 2-week sleep log documenting the timing of sleep and daily level of alertness is diagnostically useful and provides helpful feedback for the patient. Extending sleep to the optimal amount on a regular basis can resolve the sleepiness and other symptoms. As with any lifestyle change, extending sleep requires commitment and adjustments, but the improvements in daytime alertness make this change worthwhile.
# Chunk 1990
Respiratory dysfunction during sleep is a common, serious cause of excessive daytime sleepiness as well as of disturbed nocturnal sleep. At least 24% of middle-aged men and 9% of middle-aged women in the United States have a reduction or cessation of breathing dozens or more times each night during sleep, with 9% of men and 4% of women doing so more than a hundred times per night. These episodes may be due to an occlusion of the airway (obstructive sleep apnea), absence of respiratory effort (central sleep apnea), or a combination of these factors (mixed sleep apnea). Failure to recognize and treat these conditions appropriately may lead to impairment of daytime alertness, increased risk of sleep-related motor vehicle crashes, depression, hypertension, myocardial infarction, diabetes, stroke, and increased mortality. Sleep apnea is particularly prevalent in overweight men and in the elderly, yet it is estimated to go undiagnosed in most affected individuals. This is unfortunate because several effective treatments are available. Readers are referred to Chap. 319 for a comprehensive review of the diagnosis and treatment of patients with sleep apnea.
# Chunk 1991
Extensive evidence suggests that an autoimmune process likely causes this selective loss of the orexin-producing neurons. Certain human leukocyte antigens (HLAs) can increase the risk of autoimmune disorders (Chap. 373e), and narcolepsy has the strongest known HLA association. HLA DQB1*06:02 is found in about 90% of people with narcolepsy, whereas it occurs in only 12–25% of the general population. Researchers now hypothesize that in people with DQB1*06:02, an immune response against influenza, Streptococcus, or other infections may also damage the orexin-producing neurons through a process of molecular mimicry. This mechanism may account for the 8to 12-fold increase in new cases of narcolepsy among children in Europe who received a particular brand of H1N1 influenza A vaccine (Pandemrix).
# Chunk 1992
When narcolepsy is suspected, the diagnosis should be firmly established with a polysomnogram followed by an MSLT. The 00:00 04:00 08:00 12:00 16:00 00:00 04:00 08:00 12:00 16:00 Clock time paralysis). With severe cataplexy, an indi-FIguRE 38-3 Polysomnographic recordings of a healthy individual and a patient with vidual may be laughing at a joke and then narcolepsy. The individual with narcolepsy enters rapid eye movement (REM) sleep quickly at suddenly collapse to the ground, immobile night and has moderately fragmented sleep. During the day, the healthy subject stays awake but awake for 1–2 min. With milder epi-from 8:00 AM until midnight, but the patient with narcolepsy dozes off frequently, with many sodes, patients may have mild weakness daytime naps that include REM sleep.
# Chunk 1993
190 polysomnogram helps rule out other possible causes of sleepiness such as sleep apnea, and the MSLT provides essential, objective evidence of sleepiness plus REM sleep dysregulation. Across the five naps of the MSLT, most patients with narcolepsy will fall asleep in less than 8 min on average, and they will have episodes of REM sleep in at least two of the naps. Abnormal regulation of REM sleep is also manifested by the appearance of REM sleep within 15 min of sleep onset at night, which is rare in healthy individuals sleeping at their habitual bedtime. Stimulants should be stopped 1 week before the MSLT and antidepressants should be stopped 3 weeks prior, because these medications can affect the MSLT. In addition, patients should be encouraged to obtain a fully adequate amount of sleep each night for the week prior to the test to eliminate any effects of insufficient sleep.
# Chunk 1994
The treatment of narcolepsy is symptomatic. Most patients with narcolepsy feel more alert after sleep, and they should be encouraged to get adequate sleep each night and to take a 15to 20-min nap in the afternoon. This nap may be sufficient for some patients with mild narcolepsy, but most also require treatment with wake-promoting medications. Modafinil is used quite often because it has fewer side effects than amphetamines and a relatively long half-life; for most patients, 200–400 mg each morning is very effective. Methylphenidate (10–20 mg bid) or dextroamphetamine (10 mg bid) are often effective, but sympathomimetic side effects, anxiety, and the potential for abuse can be concerns. These medications are available in slow-release formulations, extending their duration of action and allowing easier dosing. Sodium oxybate (gamma hydroxybutyrate) is given twice each night and is often very valuable in improving alertness, but it can produce excessive sedation, nausea, and confusion.
# Chunk 1995
during sleep of brain areas normally active only during wakefulness. The polysomnogram is rarely used in the evaluation of insomnia, as it typically confirms the patient’s subjective report of long latency to sleep and numerous awakenings but usually adds little new information. Many patients with insomnia have increased fast (beta) activity in the EEG during sleep; this fast activity is normally present only during wakefulness, which may explain why some patients report feeling awake for much of the night. The MSLT is rarely used in the evaluation of insomnia because, despite their feelings of low energy, most people with insomnia do not easily fall asleep during the day, and on the MSLT, their average sleep latencies are usually longer than normal.
# Chunk 1996
Psychophysiologic Factors Many patients with insomnia have negative expectations and conditioned arousal that interfere with sleep. These individuals may worry about their insomnia during the day and have increasing anxiety as bedtime approaches if they anticipate a poor night of sleep. While attempting to sleep, they may frequently check the clock, which only heightens anxiety and frustration. They may find it easier to sleep in a new environment rather than their bedroom, as it lacks the negative associations.
# Chunk 1997
Psychiatric Conditions About 80% of patients with psychiatric disorders have sleep complaints, and about half of all chronic insomnia occurs in association with a psychiatric disorder. Depression is classically associated with early morning awakening, but it can also interfere with the onset and maintenance of sleep. Mania and hypomania can disrupt sleep and often are associated with substantial reductions in the total amount of sleep. Anxiety disorders can lead to racing thoughts and rumination that interfere with sleep and can be very problematic if the patient’s mind becomes active midway through the night. Panic attacks can occur during sleep and need to be distinguished from other parasomnias. Insomnia is common in schizophrenia and other psychoses, often resulting in fragmented sleep, less deep NREM sleep, and sometimes reversal of the day-night sleep pattern.
# Chunk 1998
Medical Conditions A large number of medical conditions disrupt sleep. Pain from rheumatologic disorders or a painful neuropathy commonly disrupts sleep. Some patients may sleep poorly because of respiratory conditions such as asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, cystic fibrosis, congestive heart failure, or restrictive lung disease, and some of these disorders are worse at night in bed due to circadian variations in airway resistance and postural changes that can result in paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea. Many women experience poor sleep with the hormonal changes of menopause. Gastroesophageal reflux is also a common cause of difficulty sleeping.
# Chunk 1999
PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases

Patients with restless legs syndrome (RLS) report an irresistible urge to move the legs. Many patients report a creepy-crawly or unpleasant deep ache within the thighs or calves, and those with more severe RLS may have discomfort in the arms as well. For most patients with RLS, these dysesthesias and restlessness are much worse in the evening and first half of the night. The symptoms appear with inactivity and can make sitting still in an airplane or when watching a movie a miserable experience. The sensations are temporarily relieved by movement, stretching, or massage. This nocturnal discomfort usually interferes with sleep, and patients may report daytime sleepiness as a consequence. RLS is very common, affecting 5–10% of adults and is more common in women and older adults.
# Chunk 2000
Sleepwalking (Somnambulism) Patients affected by this disorder carry out automatic motor activities that range from simple to complex. Individuals may walk, urinate inappropriately, eat, exit the house, or drive a car with minimal awareness. Full arousal may be difficult, and occasional individuals may respond to attempted awakening with agitation or violence. Sleepwalking arises from NREM stage N3 sleep, usually in the first few hours of the night, and the EEG usually shows the slow cortical activity of deep NREM sleep even when the patient is moving about. Sleepwalking is most common in children and adolescents, when these sleep stages are most robust. About 15% of children have occasional sleepwalking, and it persists in about 1% of adults. Episodes are usually isolated but may be recurrent in 1–6% of patients. The cause is unknown, although it has a familial basis in roughly one-third of cases. Sleepwalking can be worsened by insufficient sleep, which subsequently causes an increase in deep NREM sleep; alcohol; and stress. These should be addressed if present. Small studies have shown some efficacy of antidepressants and benzodiazepines; relaxation techniques and hypnosis can also be helpful. Patients and their families should improve home safety (e.g., replace glass doors, remove low tables to avoid tripping) to minimize the chance of injury if sleepwalking occurs.
# Chunk 2001
RBD primarily afflicts older men, and most either have or will develop a neurodegenerative disorder. In longitudinal studies of RBD, half of the patients developed a synucleinopathy such as Parkinson’s disease (Chap. 449) or dementia with Lewy bodies (Chap. 448), or occasionally multiple system atrophy (Chap. 454), within 12 years, and over 80% developed a synucleinopathy by 20 years. RBD can occur in patients taking antidepressants, and in some, these medications may unmask this early indicator of neurodegeneration. Synucleinopathies probably cause neuronal loss in brainstem regions that regulate muscle atonia during REM sleep, and loss of these neurons permits movements to break through during REM sleep. RBD also occurs in about 30% of patients with narcolepsy, but the underlying cause is probably different, as they seem to be at no increased risk of a neurodegenerative disorder.
# Chunk 2002
Delayed Sleep-Wake Phase Disorder Delayed sleep-wake phase disorder (DSWPD) is characterized by: (1) reported sleep onset and wake times intractably later than desired; (2) actual sleep times at nearly the same clock hours daily; and (3) if conducted at the habitual delayed sleep time, essentially normal sleep on polysomnography (except for delayed sleep onset). Patients with DSWPD exhibit an abnormally delayed endogenous circadian phase, which can be assessed by measuring, in a dimly lit environment, the onset of secretion of the endogenous circadian rhythm of pineal melatonin in either the blood or saliva, as light suppresses melatonin secretion. Dim-light melatonin onset (DLMO) in DSWPD patients typically occurs later in the evening than normal, which is about 8:00–9:00 pm (i.e., about 1–2 h before habitual bedtime). Patients tend to be young adults. The delayed circadian phase could be due to: (1) an abnormally long, genetically determined intrinsic period of the endogenous circadian pacemaker; (2) reduced phase-advancing capacity of the pacemaker; (3) slower rate of buildup of homeostatic sleep drive during wakefulness; or (4) an irregular prior sleep-wake schedule, characterized by frequent nights when the patient chooses to remain awake while exposed to artificial light well past midnight (for personal, social, school, or work reasons). In most cases, it is difficult to distinguish among these factors, as patients with either a behaviorally induced or biologically driven circadian phase delay may both exhibit a similar circadian phase delay in DLMO, making it difficult for both to fall asleep at the desired hour. DSWPD is a self-perpetuating condition that can persist for years and may not respond to attempts to reestablish normal bedtime hours. Treatment methods involving phototherapy with blue-enriched light during the morning hours and/or melatonin administration in the evening hours show promise in these patients, although the relapse rate is high. Patients with this circadian rhythm sleep disorder can be distinguished from those who have sleep-onset insomnia because DSWPD patients show late onset of dim-light melatonin secretion.
# Chunk 2003
Non-24-h Sleep-Wake Rhythm Disorder Non-24-h sleep-wake rhythm disorder (N24SWRD) can occur when the primary synchronizing input (i.e., the light-dark cycle) from the environment to the circadian pacemaker is compromised (as occurs in many blind people with no light perception) or when the maximal phase-advancing capacity of the circadian pacemaker cannot accommodate the difference between the 24-h geophysical day and the intrinsic period of the patient’s circadian pacemaker, resulting in loss of entrainment to the 24-h day. Rarely, self-selected exposure to artificial light may, in some sighted patients, inadvertently entrain the circadian pacemaker to a >24-h schedule. Affected patients with N24SWRD have difficulty maintaining a stable phase relationship between the output of the pacemaker and the 24-h day. Such patients typically present with an incremental pattern of successive delays in sleep propensity, progressing in and out of phase with local time. When the N24SWRD patient’s endogenous circadian rhythms are out of phase with the local environment, nighttime insomnia coexists with excessive daytime sleepiness. Conversely, when the endogenous circadian rhythms are in phase with the local environment, symptoms remit. The interval between symptomatic phases may last several weeks to several months in N24SWRD, depending on the period of the underlying nonentrained rhythm and the 24-h day. Nightly low-dose (0.5 mg) melatonin administration may improve sleep and, in some cases, induce synchronization of the circadian pacemaker.
# Chunk 2004
194 There is a significant increase in the risk of sleep-related, fatal-to-thedriver highway crashes in the early morning and late afternoon hours, coincident with bimodal peaks in the daily rhythm of sleep tendency. Resident physicians constitute another group of workers at greater risk for accidents and other adverse consequences of lack of sleep and misalignment of the circadian rhythm. Recurrent scheduling of resident physicians to work shifts of ≥24 consecutive hours impairs psychomotor performance to a degree that is comparable to alcohol intoxication, doubles the risk of attentional failures among intensive care unit resident physicians working at night, and significantly increases the risk of serious medical errors in intensive care units, including a fivefold increase in the risk of serious diagnostic mistakes. Some 20% of hospital resident physicians report making a fatigue-related mistake that injured a patient, and 5% admit making a fatigue-related mistake that resulted in the death of a patient. Moreover, working for >24 consecutive hours increases the risk of percutaneous injuries and more than doubles the risk of motor vehicle crashes on the commute home. For these reasons, in 2008, the Institute of Medicine concluded that the practice of scheduling resident physicians to work for more than 16 consecutive hours without sleep is hazardous for both resident physicians and their patients. From 5 to 15% of individuals scheduled to work at night or in the early morning hours have much greater-than-average difficulties remaining awake during night work and sleeping during the day; these individuals are diagnosed with chronic and severe shift-work disorder (SWD). Patients with this disorder have a level of excessive sleepiness during work at night or in the early morning and insomnia during day sleep that the physician judges to be clinically significant; the condition is associated with an increased risk of sleep-related accidents and with some of the illnesses associated with night-shift work. Patients with chronic and severe SWD are profoundly sleepy at work. In fact, their sleep latencies during night work average just 2 min, comparable to mean daytime sleep latency durations of patients with narcolepsy or severe sleep apnea.
# Chunk 2005
Modafinil (200 mg) or armodafinil (150 mg) 30–60 min before the start of each night shift is an effective treatment for the excessive sleepiness during night work in patients with SWD. Although treatment with modafinil or armodafinil significantly improves performance and reduces sleep propensity and the risk of lapses of attention during night work, affected patients remain excessively sleepy.
# Chunk 2006
PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases

Jet Lag Disorder Each year, more than 60 million people fly from one time zone to another, often resulting in excessive daytime sleepiness, sleep-onset insomnia, and frequent arousals from sleep, particularly in the latter half of the night. The syndrome is transient, typically lasting 2–14 d depending on the number of time zones crossed, the direction of travel, and the traveler’s age and phase-shifting capacity. Travelers who spend more time outdoors at their destination reportedly adapt more quickly than those who remain in hotel rooms, presumably due to brighter (outdoor) light exposure. Avoidance of antecedent sleep loss and obtaining naps on the afternoon prior to overnight travel can reduce the difficulties associated with extended wakefulness. Laboratory studies suggest that low doses of melatonin can enhance sleep efficiency, but only if taken when endogenous melatonin concentrations are low (i.e., during the biologic daytime).
# Chunk 2007
Posterior uveitis This is diagnosed by observing inflammation of the vitreous, retina, or choroid on fundus examination. It is more likely than anterior uveitis to be associated with an identifiable systemic disease. Some patients have panuveitis, or inflammation of both the anterior and posterior segments of the eye. Posterior uveitis is a manifestation of autoimmune diseases such as sarcoidosis, Behçet’s disease, Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome, and inflammatory bowel disease. It also accompanies diseases such as toxoplasmosis, onchocerciasis, cysticercosis, coccidioidomycosis, toxocariasis, and histoplasmosis; infections caused by organisms such as Candida, Pneumocystis carinii, Cryptococcus, Aspergillus, herpes, and cytomegalovirus (see Fig. 219-1); and other diseases, such as syphilis, Lyme disease, tuberculosis, cat-scratch disease, Whipple’s disease, and brucellosis. In multiple sclerosis, chronic inflammatory changes can develop in the extreme periphery of the retina (pars planitis or intermediate uveitis).
# Chunk 2008
FIguRE 39-7 Hypertensive retinopathy with blurred optic disc, scattered hemorrhages, cotton-wool spots (nerve fiber layer infarcts), and foveal exudate in a 62-year-old man with chronic renal failure and a systolic blood pressure of 220.
# Chunk 2009
Optic Neuritis This is a common inflammatory disease of the optic nerve. In the Optic Neuritis Treatment Trial (ONTT), the mean age of patients was 32 years, 77% were female, 92% had ocular pain (especially with eye movements), and 35% had optic disc swelling. In most patients, the demyelinating event was retrobulbar and the ocular fundus appeared normal on initial examination (Fig. 39-10), although optic disc pallor slowly developed over subsequent months.
# Chunk 2010
For some patients, optic neuritis remains an isolated event. However, the ONTT showed that the 15-year cumulative probability of developing clinically definite multiple sclerosis after optic neuritis is 50%. A brain magnetic resonance (MR) scan is advisable in every patient with a first attack of optic neuritis. If two or more plaques are present on initial imaging, treatment should be considered to prevent the development of additional demyelinating lesions (Chap. 458).
# Chunk 2011
FIguRE 39-9 Anterior ischemic optic neuropathy from temporal arteritis in a 67-year-old woman with acute disc swelling, splinter hemorrhages, visual loss, and an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 70 mm/h.
# Chunk 2012
PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases

FIguRE 39-17 Proliferative diabetic retinopathy in a 25-year-old man with an 18-year history of diabetes, showing neovascular vessels emanating from the optic disc, retinal and vitreous hemorrhage, cot-ton-wool spots, and macular exudate. Round spots in the periphery represent recently applied panretinal photocoagulation.
# Chunk 2013
graves’ Ophthalmopathy This is the leading cause of proptosis in adults (Chap. 405). The proptosis is often asymmetric and can even appear to be unilateral. Orbital inflammation and engorgement of the extra-ocular muscles, particularly the medial rectus and the inferior rectus, account for the protrusion of the globe. Corneal exposure, lid retraction, conjunctival injection, restriction of gaze, diplopia, and visual loss from optic nerve compression are cardinal symptoms. Graves’ eye disease is a clinical diagnosis, but laboratory testing can be useful. The serum level of thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulins is often elevated. Orbital imaging usually reveals enlarged extraocular eye muscles, but not always. Graves’ ophthalmopathy can be treated with oral prednisone (60 mg/d) for 1 month, followed by a taper over several months. Worsening of symptoms upon glucocorticoid withdrawal is common. Topical lubricants, taping the eyelids closed at night, moisture chambers, and eyelid surgery are helpful to limit exposure of ocular tissues. Radiation therapy is not effective. Orbital decompression should be performed for severe, symptomatic exophthalmos or if visual function is reduced by optic nerve compression. In patients with diplopia, prisms or eye muscle surgery can be used to restore ocular alignment in primary gaze.
# Chunk 2014
Orbital Pseudotumor This is an idiopathic, inflammatory orbital syndrome that is distinguished from Graves’ ophthalmopathy by the prominent complaint of pain. Other symptoms include diplopia, ptosis, proptosis, and orbital congestion. Evaluation for sarcoidosis, granulomatosis with polyangiitis, and other types of orbital vasculitis or collagen-vascular disease is negative. Imaging often shows swollen eye muscles (orbital myositis) with enlarged tendons. By contrast, in Graves’ ophthalmopathy, the tendons of the eye muscles usually are spared. The Tolosa-Hunt syndrome (Chap. 455) may be regarded as an extension of orbital pseudotumor through the superior orbital fissure into the cavernous sinus. The diagnosis of orbital pseudotumor is difficult. Biopsy of the orbit frequently yields nonspecific evidence of fat infiltration by lymphocytes, plasma cells, and eosinophils. A dramatic response to a therapeutic trial of systemic glucocorticoids indirectly provides the best confirmation of the diagnosis.
# Chunk 2015
PTOSIS Blepharoptosis This is an abnormal drooping of the eyelid. Unilateral or bilateral ptosis can be congenital, from dysgenesis of the levator palpebrae superioris, or from abnormal insertion of its aponeurosis into the eyelid. Acquired ptosis can develop so gradually that the patient is unaware of the problem. Inspection of old photographs is helpful in dating the onset. A history of prior trauma, eye surgery, contact lens use, diplopia, systemic symptoms (e.g., dysphagia or peripheral muscle weakness), or a family history of ptosis should be sought. Fluctuating ptosis that worsens late in the day is typical of myasthenia gravis. Examination should focus on evidence for proptosis, eyelid masses or deformities, inflammation, pupil inequality, or limitation of motility. The width of the palpebral fissures is measured in primary gaze to determine the degree of ptosis. The ptosis will be underestimated if the patient compensates by lifting the brow with the frontalis muscle.
# Chunk 2016
Multiple Ocular Motor Nerve Palsies These should not be attributed to spontaneous microvascular events affecting more than one cranial nerve at a time. This remarkable coincidence does occur, especially in diabetic patients, but the diagnosis is made only in retrospect after all other diagnostic alternatives have been exhausted. Neuroimaging should focus on the cavernous sinus, superior orbital fissure, and orbital apex, where all three ocular motor nerves are in close proximity. In a diabetic or immunocompromised host, fungal infection (Aspergillus, Mucorales, Cryptococcus) is a common cause of multiple nerve palsies. In a patient with systemic malignancy, carcinomatous meningitis is a likely diagnosis. Cytologic examination may be negative despite repeated sampling of the cerebrospinal fluid. The cancer-associated Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome also can produce ophthalmoplegia. Giant cell (temporal) arteritis occasionally manifests as diplopia from ischemic palsies of extraocular muscles. Fisher’s syndrome, an ocular variant of Guillain-Barré, produces ophthalmoplegia with areflexia and ataxia. Often the ataxia is mild, and the reflexes are normal. Antiganglioside antibodies (GQ1b) can be detected in about 50% of cases.
# Chunk 2017
alimentary and respiratory tracts. This important discovery generalizes the concept of taste-related chemoreception to areas of the body beyond the mouth and throat, with α-gustducin, the taste-specific G-protein α-subunit, expressed in so-called brush cells found specifically within the human trachea, lung, pancreas, and gallbladder. These brush cells are rich in nitric oxide (NO) synthase, known to defend against xenobiotic organisms, protect the mucosa from acid-induced lesions, and, in the case of the gastrointestinal tract, stimulate vagal and splanchnic afferent neurons. NO further acts on nearby cells, including enteroendocrine cells, absorptive or secretory epithelial cells, mucosal blood vessels, and cells of the immune system. Members of the T2R family of bitter receptors and the sweet receptors of the T1R family have been identified within the gastrointestinal tract and in enteroendocrine cell lines. In some cases, these receptors are important for metabolism, with the T1R3 receptors and gustducin playing decisive roles in the sensing and transport of dietary sugars from the intestinal lumen into absorptive enterocytes via a sodium-dependent glucose transporter and in regulation of hormone release from gut enteroendocrine cells. In other cases, these receptors may be important for airway protection, with a number of T2R bitter receptors in the motile cilia of the human airway that responded to bitter compounds by increasing their beat frequency. One specific T2R38 taste receptor is expressed in human upper respiratory epithelia and responds to acyl-monoserine lactone quorum-sensing molecules secreted by Pseudomonas aeruginosa and other gram-negative bacteria. Differences in T2R38 functionality, as related to TAS2R38 genotype, correlate with susceptibility to upper respiratory infections in humans.
# Chunk 2018
In the event that the hearing aid provides inadequate rehabilitation, cochlear implants may be appropriate (Fig. 43-4). Criteria for implantation include severe to profound hearing loss with open-set sentence cognition of ≤40% under best aided conditions. Worldwide, more than 300,000 hearing-impaired individuals have received cochlear implants. Cochlear implants are neural prostheses that convert sound energy to electrical energy and can be used to stimulate the auditory division of the eighth nerve directly. In most cases of profound hearing impairment, the auditory hair cells are lost but the ganglionic cells of the auditory division of the eighth nerve are preserved. Cochlear implants consist of electrodes that are inserted into the cochlea through the round window, speech processors that extract acoustical elements of speech for conversion to electrical currents, and a means of transmitting the electrical energy through the skin. Patients with implants experience sound that helps with speech reading, allows open-set word recognition, and helps in modulating the person’s own voice. Usually, within the first 3–6 months after implantation, adult patients can understand speech without visual cues. With the current generation of multichannel cochlear implants, nearly 75% of patients are able to converse on the telephone.
# Chunk 2019
Conductive hearing losses may be prevented by prompt antibiotic therapy of adequate duration for AOM and by ventilation of the middle ear with tympanostomy tubes in middle ear effusions lasting ≥12 weeks. Loss of vestibular function and deafness due to aminoglycoside antibiotics can largely be prevented by careful monitoring of serum peak and trough levels.
# Chunk 2020
The large assortment of URI classifications reflects the wide variety of causative infectious agents and the varied manifestations of common pathogens. Nearly all nonspecific URIs are caused by viruses spanning multiple virus families and many antigenic types. For instance, there are at least 100 immunotypes of rhinovirus (Chap. 223), the most common cause of URI (~30–40% of cases); other causes include influenza virus (three immunotypes; Chap. 224) as well as parainfluenza virus (four immunotypes), coronavirus (at least three immunotypes), and adenovirus (47 immunotypes) (Chap. 223). Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), a well-established pathogen in pediatric populations, is also a recognized cause of significant disease in elderly and immunocompromised individuals. A host of additional viruses, including some viruses not typically associated with URIs (e.g., enteroviruses, rubella virus, and varicella-zoster virus), account for a small percentage of cases in adults each year. Although new diagnostic modalities (e.g., nasopharyngeal swab for polymerase chain reaction [PCR]) can assign a viral etiology, there are few specific treatment options, and no pathogen is identified in a substantial proportion of cases. A specific diagnostic workup beyond a clinical diagnosis is generally unnecessary in an otherwise healthy adult.
# Chunk 2021
S. aureus (MRSA) as an emerging cause. It is difficult to assess whether a cultured bacterium represents a true infecting organism, an insufficiently deep sample (which would not be expected to be sterile), or—especially in the case of previous sinus surgeries—a colonizing organism. Anaerobes occasionally are found in association with infections of the roots of premolar teeth that spread to the adjacent maxillary sinuses. The role of atypical organisms like Chlamydia pneumoniae and Mycoplasma pneumoniae in the pathogenesis of acute sinusitis is unclear. Nosocomial cases commonly are associated with bacteria prevalent in the hospital environment, including S. aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Serratia marcescens, Klebsiella pneumoniae, and Enterobacter species. Often, these infections are polymicrobial and can involve organisms that are highly resistant to numerous antibiotics. Fungi also are established causes of sinusitis, although most acute cases are in immunocompromised patients and represent invasive, life-threatening infections. The best-known example is rhinocerebral mucormycosis caused by fungi of the order Mucorales, which includes Rhizopus, Rhizomucor, Mucor, Lichtheimia (formerly Mycocladus, formerly Absidia), and Cunninghamella (Chap. 242). These infections classically occur in diabetic patients with ketoacidosis but can also develop in transplant recipients, patients with hematologic malignancies, and patients receiving chronic glucocorticoid or deferoxamine therapy. Other hyaline molds, such as Aspergillus and Fusarium species, also are occasional causes of this disease.
# Chunk 2022
Diagnosis Distinguishing viral from bacterial rhinosinusitis in the ambulatory setting is usually difficult because of the relatively low sensitivity and specificity of the common clinical features. One clinical feature that has been used to help guide diagnostic and therapeutic decision-making is illness duration. Because acute bacterial sinusitis is uncommon in patients whose symptoms have lasted <10 days, expert panels now recommend reserving this diagnosis for patients with “persistent” symptoms (i.e., symptoms lasting >10 days in adults or >10–14 days in children) accompanied by the three cardinal signs of purulent nasal discharge, nasal obstruction, and facial pain (Table 44-1). Even among patients who meet these criteria, only 40–50% have true bacterial sinusitis. The use of CT or sinus radiography is not recommended for acute disease, particularly early in the course of illness (i.e., at <10 days) in light of the high prevalence of similar findings among patients with acute viral rhinosinusitis. In the evaluation of persistent, recurrent, or chronic sinusitis, CT of the sinuses becomes the radiographic study of choice.
# Chunk 2023
Invasive otitis externa, also known as malignant or necrotizing otitis externa, is an aggressive and potentially life-threatening disease that occurs predominantly in elderly diabetic patients and other immunocompromised persons. The disease begins in the external canal as a soft tissue infection that progresses slowly over weeks to months and often is difficult to distinguish from a severe case of chronic otitis externa because of the presence of purulent otorrhea and an erythematous swollen ear and external canal. Severe, deep-seated otalgia, frequently out of proportion to findings on examination, is often noted and can help differentiate invasive from chronic otitis externa. The characteristic finding on examination is granulation tissue in the posteroinferior wall of the external canal, near the junction of bone and cartilage. If left unchecked, the infection can migrate to the base of the skull (resulting in skull-base osteomyelitis) and onward to the meninges and brain, with a high mortality rate. Cranial nerve involvement is seen occasionally, with the facial nerve usually affected first and most often. Thrombosis of the sigmoid sinus can occur if the infection extends to the area. CT, which can reveal osseous erosion of the temporal bone and skull base, can be used to help determine the extent of disease, as can gallium and technetium-99 scintigraphy studies. P. aeruginosa is by far the most common offender, although S. aureus, Staphylococcus epidermidis, Aspergillus, Actinomyces, and some gram-negative bacteria also have been associated with this disease. In all cases, the external ear canal should be cleansed and a biopsy specimen of the granulation tissue within the canal (or of deeper tissues) obtained for culture of the offending organism. IV antibiotic therapy should be given for a prolonged course (6–8 weeks) and directed specifically toward the recovered pathogen. For P. aeruginosa, the regimen typically includes an antipseudomonal penicillin or cephalosporin (e.g., piperacillin or cefepime), often with an aminoglycoside or a fluoroquinolone, the latter of which can even be administered orally given its excellent bioavailability. In addition, antibiotic drops containing an agent active 229 against Pseudomonas (e.g., ciprofloxacin) are usually prescribed and are combined with glucocorticoids to reduce inflammation. Cases of invasive Pseudomonas otitis externa recognized in the early stages can sometimes be treated with oral and otic fluoroquinolones alone, albeit with close follow-up. Extensive surgical debridement, once an important component of the treatment approach, is now rarely indicated.
# Chunk 2024
PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases

There has been considerable debate on the usefulness of antibiotics for the treatment of acute otitis media. A higher proportion of treated than untreated patients are free of illness 3–5 days after diagnosis. The difficulty of predicting which patients will benefit from antibiotic therapy has led to different approaches. In the Netherlands, for instance, physicians typically manage acute otitis media with initial observation, administering anti-inflammatory agents for aggressive pain management and reserving antibiotics for high-risk patients, patients with complicated disease, or patients whose condition does not improve after 48–72 h. In contrast, many experts in the United States continue to recommend antibiotic therapy for children <6 months old in light of the higher frequency of secondary complications in this young and functionally immunocompromised population. However, observation without antimicrobial therapy is now the recommended option in the United States for acute otitis media in children >2 years of age and for mild to moderate disease without middle-ear effusion in children 6 months to 2 years of age. Treatment is typically indicated for patients <6 months old; for children 6 months to 2 years old who have mid-dle-ear effusion and signs/symptoms of middle-ear inflammation; for all patients >2 years old who have bilateral disease, TM perforation, immunocompromise, or emesis; and for any patient who has severe symptoms, including a fever ≥39°C or moderate to severe otalgia (Table 44-2).
# Chunk 2025
Acute bacterial pharyngitis is typically caused by S. pyogenes, which accounts for ~5–15% of all cases of acute pharyngitis in adults; rates vary with the season and with utilization of the health care system. Group A streptococcal pharyngitis is primarily a disease of children 5–15 years of age; it is uncommon among children <3 years old, as is rheumatic fever. Streptococci of groups C and G account for a minority of cases, although these serogroups are nonrheumatogenic. Fusobacterium necrophorum has been increasingly recognized as a cause of pharyngitis in adolescents and young adults and is isolated nearly as often as group A streptococci. This organism is important because of the rare but life-threatening Lemierre’s disease, which is generally associated with F. necrophorum and is usually preceded by pharyngitis (see “Oral Infections,” below). The remaining bacterial causes of acute pharyngitis are seen infrequently (<1% of cases each) but should be considered in appropriate exposure groups because of the severity of illness if left untreated; these etiologic agents include Neisseria gonorrhoeae, Corynebacterium diphtheriae, Corynebacterium ulcerans, Yersinia enterocolitica, and Treponema pallidum (in secondary syphilis). Anaerobic bacteria also can cause acute pharyngitis (Vincent’s angina) and can contribute to more serious polymicrobial infections, such as peritonsillar or retropharyngeal abscesses (see below). Atypical organisms such as M. pneumoniae and C. pneumoniae have been recovered from patients with acute pharyngitis; whether these agents are commensals or causes of acute infection is debatable.
# Chunk 2026
CHAPTER 44 Sore Throat, Earache, and Upper Respiratory Symptoms 234 organisms to drain into the lateral pharyngeal space, which contains the carotid artery and internal jugular vein. Septic thrombophlebitis of the internal jugular vein can result, with associated pain, dysphagia, and neck swelling and stiffness. Sepsis usually occurs 3–10 days after the onset of sore throat and is often coupled with metastatic infection to the lung and other distant sites. Occasionally, the infection can extend along the carotid sheath and into the posterior mediastinum, resulting in mediastinitis, or it can erode into the carotid artery, with the early sign of repeated small bleeds into the mouth. The mortality rate from these invasive infections can be as high as 50%. Treatment consists of IV antibiotics (clindamycin or ampicillin/sulbactam) and surgical drainage of any purulent collections. The concomitant use of anticoagulants to prevent embolization remains controversial and is sometimes advised, with careful consideration of both the risks and the benefits.
# Chunk 2027
Acute epiglottitis (supraglottitis) is an acute, rapidly progressive form of cellulitis of the epiglottis and adjacent structures that can result in complete—and potentially fatal—airway obstruction in both children and adults. Before the widespread use of H. influenzae type b (Hib) vaccine, this entity was much more common among children, with a peak incidence at ~3.5 years of age. In some countries, mass vaccination against Hib has reduced the annual incidence of acute epiglottitis in children by >90%; in contrast, the annual incidence in adults has changed little since the introduction of Hib vaccine. Because of the danger of airway obstruction, acute epiglottitis constitutes a medical emergency, particularly in children, and prompt diagnosis and airway protection are of the utmost importance.
# Chunk 2028
Clinical Manifestations and Diagnosis Epiglottitis typically presents more acutely in young children than in adolescents or adults. On presentation, most children have had symptoms for <24 h, including high fever, severe sore throat, tachycardia, systemic toxicity, and (in many cases) drooling while sitting forward. Symptoms and signs of respiratory obstruction also may be present and may progress rapidly. The somewhat milder illness in adolescents and adults often follows 1–2 days of severe sore throat and is commonly accompanied by dyspnea, drooling, and stridor. Physical examination of patients with acute epiglottitis may reveal moderate or severe respiratory distress, with inspiratory stridor and retractions of the chest wall. These findings diminish as the disease progresses and the patient tires. Conversely, oropharyngeal examination reveals infection that is much less severe than would be predicted from the symptoms—a finding that should alert the clinician to a cause of symptoms and obstruction that lies beyond the tonsils. The diagnosis often is made on clinical grounds, although direct fiberoptic laryngoscopy is frequently performed in a controlled environment (e.g., an operating room) to visualize and culture the typical edematous “cherry-red” epiglottis and facilitate placement of an endotracheal tube. Direct visualization in an examination room (i.e., with a tongue blade and indirect laryngoscopy) is not recommended because of the risk of immediate laryngospasm and complete airway obstruction. Lateral neck radiographs and laboratory tests can assist in the diagnosis but may delay the critical securing of the airway and cause the patient to be moved or repositioned more than is necessary, thereby increasing the risk of further airway compromise. Neck radiographs typically reveal an enlarged edematous epiglottis (the “thumbprint sign,” Fig. 44-3), usually with a dilated hypopharynx and normal subglottic structures. Laboratory tests characteristically document mild to moderate leukocytosis with a predominance of neutrophils. Blood cultures are positive in a significant proportion of cases.
# Chunk 2029
Security of the airway is always of primary concern in acute epiglottitis, even if the diagnosis is only suspected. Mere observation for signs of impending airway obstruction is not routinely recommended, particularly in children. Many adults have been managed with observation only since the illness is perceived to be milder in this age group, but some data suggest that this approach may be risky and probably should be reserved only for adult patients who have yet to develop dyspnea or stridor. Once the airway has been secured and specimens of blood and epiglottis tissue have been obtained for culture, treatment with IV antibiotics should be given to cover the most likely organisms, particularly H. influenzae. Because rates of ampicillin resistance in this organism have risen significantly in recent years, therapy with a β-lactam/β-lactamase inhibitor combination or a secondor third-generation cephalosporin is recommended. Typically, ampicillin/sulbactam, cefuroxime, cefotaxime, or ceftriaxone is given, with clindamycin and TMP-SMX reserved for patients allergic to β-lactams. Antibiotic therapy should be continued for 7–10 days and should be tailored to the organism recovered in culture. If the household contacts of a patient with H. influenzae epiglottitis include an unvaccinated child under age 4, all members of the household (including the patient) should receive prophylactic rifampin for 4 days to eradicate carriage of H. influenzae.
# Chunk 2030
Of major concern are chronic, relatively painless ulcers and mixed red/white patches (erythroplakia and leukoplakia) of >2 weeks’ duration. Squamous cell carcinoma and premalignant dysplasia should be considered early and a diagnostic biopsy performed. This awareness and this procedure are critically important because early-stage malignancy is vastly more treatable than late-stage disease. High-risk sites include the lower lip, floor of the mouth, ventral and lateral tongue, and soft palate–tonsillar pillar complex. Significant risk factors for oral cancer in Western countries include sun exposure (lower lip), tobacco and alcohol use, and human papillomavirus infection. In India and some other Asian countries, smokeless tobacco mixed with betel nut, slaked lime, and spices is a common cause of oral cancer. Rarer causes of chronic oral ulcer, such as tuberculosis, fungal infection, granulomatosis with polyangiitis, and midline granuloma may look identical to carcinoma. Making the correct diagnosis depends on recognizing other clinical features and performing a biopsy of the lesion. The syphilitic chancre is typically painless and therefore easily missed. Regional lymphadenopathy is invariably present. The syphilitic etiology is confirmed with appropriate bacterial and serologic tests.
# Chunk 2031
Disorders of mucosal fragility often produce painful oral ulcers that fail to heal within 2 weeks. Mucous membrane pemphigoid and pemphigus vulgaris are the major acquired disorders. While their clinical features are often distinctive, a biopsy or immunohistochemical examination should be performed to diagnose these entities and to 237 distinguish them from lichen planus and drug reactions.
# Chunk 2032
Addison’s disease Miscellaneous Linear gingival erythemaa aStrongly associated with HIV infection.

major salivary glands secrete intermittently in response to autonomic 241 stimulation, which is high during a meal but low otherwise. Hundreds of minor glands in the lips and cheeks secrete mucus continuously throughout the day and night. Consequently, oral function becomes impaired when salivary function is reduced. The sensation of a dry mouth (xerostomia) is perceived when salivary flow is reduced by 50%. The most common etiology is medication, especially drugs with anticholinergic properties but also alpha and beta blockers, calcium channel blockers, and diuretics. Other causes include Sjögren’s syndrome, chronic parotitis, salivary duct obstruction, diabetes mellitus, HIV/AIDS, and radiation therapy that includes the salivary glands in the field (e.g., for Hodgkin’s disease and for head and neck cancer). Management involves the elimination or limitation of drying medications, preventive dental care, and supplementation with oral liquid or salivary substitutes. Sugarless mints or chewing gum may stimulate salivary secretion if dysfunction is mild. When sufficient exocrine tissue remains, pilocarpine or cevimeline has been shown to increase secretions. Commercial saliva substitutes or gels relieve dryness. Fluoride supplementation is critical to prevent caries.
# Chunk 2033
Elective dental treatments should be postponed for at least 1 month and preferably for 6 months after myocardial infarction, after which the risk of reinfarction is low provided the patient is medically stable (e.g., stable rhythm, stable angina, and no heart failure). Patients who have suffered a stroke should have elective dental care deferred for 6 months. In both situations, effective stress reduction requires good pain control, including the use of the minimal amount of vasoconstrictor necessary to provide good hemostasis and local anesthesia.
# Chunk 2034
Complete edentulousness with advanced age, though less common than in previous decades, still affects <50% of the U.S. population ffi85 years of age. Speech, mastication, and facial contours are dramatically affected. Edentulousness may also exacerbate obstructive sleep apnea, particularly in asymptomatic individuals who wear dentures. Dentures can improve verbal articulation and restore diminished facial contours. Mastication can also be restored; however, patients expecting dentures to facilitate oral intake are often disappointed. Accommodation to dentures requires a period of adjustment. Pain can result from friction or traumatic lesions produced by loose dentures. Poor fit and poor oral hygiene may permit the development of candidiasis. This fungal infection may be either asymptomatic or painful and is suggested by erythematous smooth or granular tissue conforming to an area covered by the appliance. Individuals with dentures and no natural teeth need regular (annual) professional oral examinations.
# Chunk 2035
Respiratory System Dyspnea • DISEASES OF THE AIRWAYS Asthma and COPD, the most common obstructive lung diseases, are characterized by expiratory airflow obstruction, which typically leads to dynamic hyperinflation of the lungs and chest wall. Patients with moderate to severe disease have both increased resistive and elastic loads (a term that relates to the stiffness of the system) on the ventilatory muscles and experience increased work of breathing. Patients with acute bronchoconstriction also report a sense of tightness, which can exist even when lung function is still within the normal range. These patients are commonly tachypneic; this condition leads to hyperinflation and reduced respiratory system compliance and also limits tidal volume. Both the chest tightness and the tachypnea are probably due to stimulation of pulmonary receptors. Both asthma and COPD may lead to hypoxemia and hypercapnia from ventilation-perfusion (V/Q) mismatch (and diffusion limitation during exercise with emphysema); hypoxemia is much more common than hypercapnia as a consequence of the different ways in which oxygen and carbon dioxide bind to hemoglobin.
# Chunk 2036
If diagnosis still uncertain, obtain cardiopulmonary exercise test

FIGuRE 47e-2 Algorithm for the evaluation of the patient with dyspnea. JVP, jugular venous pulse; CHF, congestive heart failure; ECG, electrocardiogram; CT, computed tomography. (Adapted from RM Schwartzstein, D Feller-Kopman, in E Braunwald, L Goldman [eds]. Primary Cardiology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2003.)
# Chunk 2037
Laboratory studies should include electrocardiography to seek evidence of ventricular hypertrophy and prior myocardial infarction. Echocardiography is indicated when systolic dysfunction, pulmonary hypertension, or valvular heart disease is suspected. Bronchoprovocation testing is useful in patients with intermittent symptoms suggestive of asthma but normal physical examination and lung function; up to one-third of patients with the clinical diagnosis of asthma do not have reactive airways disease when formally tested. Measurement of brain natriuretic peptide levels in serum is increasingly used to assess for CHF in patients presenting with acute dyspnea but may be elevated in the presence of right ventricular strain as well.
# Chunk 2038
Details as to the sound, the time of occurrence during the day, and the pattern of coughing infrequently provide useful etiologic clues. Regardless of cause, cough often worsens upon first lying down at night, with talking, or with the hyperpnea of exercise; it frequently improves with sleep. An exception may involve the cough that occurs only with certain allergic exposures or exercise in cold air, as in asthma. Useful historical questions include what circumstances surround the onset of cough, what makes the cough better or worse, and whether or not the cough produces sputum.
# Chunk 2039
It is commonly held that (alone or in combination) the use of an ACE inhibitor; postnasal drainage; gastroesophageal reflux; and asthma account for more than 90% of cases of chronic cough with a normal or noncontributory chest radiograph. However, clinical experience does not support this contention, and strict adherence to this concept discourages the search for alternative explanations by both clinicians and researchers. ACE inhibitor–induced cough occurs in 5–30% of patients taking these agents and is not dose dependent. ACE metabolizes bradykinin and other tachykinins, such as substance P. The mechanism of ACE inhibitor–associated cough may involve sensitization of sensory nerve endings due to accumulation of bradykinin. In support of this hypothesis, polymorphisms in the neurokinin-2 receptor gene are associated with ACE inhibitor–induced cough. Any patient with
# Chunk 2040
Edema is recognized by the persistence of an indentation of the skin after pressure; this is known as “pitting” edema. In its more subtle form, edema may be detected by noting that after the stethoscope is removed from the chest wall, the rim of the bell leaves an indentation on the skin of the chest for a few minutes. Edema may be present when the ring on a finger fits more snugly than in the past or when a patient complains of difficulty putting on shoes, particularly in the evening. Edema may also be recognized by puffiness of the face, which is most readily apparent in the periorbital areas.
# Chunk 2041
The presence of heart disease, as manifested by cardiac enlargement and/or ventricular hypertrophy, together with evidence of cardiac failure, such as dyspnea, basilar rales, venous distention, and hepatomegaly, usually indicates that edema results from heart failure. Noninvasive tests such as echocardiography may be helpful in establishing the diagnosis of heart disease. The edema of heart failure typically occurs in the dependent portions of the body.
# Chunk 2042
Nephrotic Syndrome and other Hypoalbuminemic States The primary alteration in the nephrotic syndrome is a diminished colloid oncotic pressure due to losses of large quantities (≥3.5 g/d) of protein into the urine. With severe hypoalbuminemia (<35 g/L) and the consequent reduced colloid osmotic pressure, the sodium and water that are retained cannot be restrained within the vascular compartment, and total and effective arterial blood volumes decline. This process initiates the edema-forming sequence of events described above, including activation of the RAAS. The nephrotic syndrome may occur during the course of a variety of kidney diseases, which include glomerulonephritis, diabetic glomerulosclerosis, and hypersensitivity reactions. The edema is diffuse, symmetric, and most prominent in the dependent areas; as a consequence, periorbital edema is most prominent in the morning.
# Chunk 2043
Edema resulting from hypoproteinemia, as occurs in the nephrotic syndrome, characteristically is generalized, but it is especially evident in the very soft tissues of the eyelids and face and tends to be most pronounced in the morning owing to the recumbent posture assumed during the night. Less common causes of facial edema include trichinosis, allergic reactions, and myxedema. Edema limited to one leg or to one or both arms is usually the result of venous and/or lymphatic obstruction. Unilateral paralysis reduces lymphatic and venous drainage on the affected side and may also be responsible for unilateral edema. In patients with obstruction of the superior vena cava, edema is confined to the face, neck, and upper extremities in which the venous pressure is elevated compared with that in the lower extremities.
# Chunk 2044
APPROACH TO THE PATIENT:

CHAPTER 51e Approach to the Patient with a Heart Murmur

An important first question is whether the edema is localized or generalized. If it is localized, the local phenomena that may be responsible should be considered. If the edema is generalized, one should first determine if there is serious hypoalbuminemia, e.g., serum albumin <25 g/L. If so, the history, physical examination, urinalysis, and other laboratory data will help evaluate the question of cirrhosis, severe malnutrition, or the nephrotic syndrome as the underlying disorder. If hypoalbuminemia is not present, it should be determined if there is evidence of heart failure severe enough to promote generalized edema. Finally, it should be ascertained as to whether or not the patient has an adequate urine output or if there is significant oliguria or anuria. These abnormalities are discussed in Chaps. 61, 334, and 335.
# Chunk 2045
Acute, severe MR from papillary muscle rupture usually accompanies an inferior, posterior, or lateral MI and occurs 2–7 days after presentation. It often is signaled by chest pain, hypotension, and pulmonary edema, but a murmur may be absent in up to 50% of cases. The posteromedial papillary muscle is involved 6 to 10 times more frequently than the anterolateral papillary muscle. The murmur is to be distinguished from that associated with post-MI ventricular septal rupture, which is accompanied by a systolic thrill at the left sternal border in nearly all patients and is holosystolic in duration. A new heart murmur after an MI is an indication for transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) (Chap. 270e), which allows bedside delineation of its etiology and pathophysiologic significance. The distinction between acute MR and ventricular septal rupture also can be achieved with right heart catheterization, sequential determination of oxygen saturations, and analysis of the pressure waveforms (tall v wave in the pulmonary artery wedge pressure in MR). Post-MI mechanical complications of this nature mandate aggressive medical stabilization and prompt referral for surgical repair.
# Chunk 2046
Additional clues to the etiology and importance of a heart murmur can be gleaned from the history and other physical examination findings. Symptoms suggestive of cardiovascular, neurologic, or pulmonary disease help focus the differential diagnosis, as do findings relevant to the jugular venous pressure and waveforms, the arterial pulses, other heart sounds, the lungs, the abdomen, the skin, and the extremities. In many instances, laboratory studies, an ECG, and/or a chest x-ray may have been obtained earlier and may contain valuable information. A patient with suspected infective endocarditis, for example, may have a murmur in the setting of fever, chills, anorexia, fatigue, dyspnea, splenomegaly, petechiae, and positive blood cultures. A new systolic murmur in a patient with a marked fall in blood pressure after a recent MI suggests myocardial rupture. By contrast, an isolated grade 1 or 2 mid-systolic murmur at the left sternal border in a healthy, active, and asymptomatic young adult is most likely a benign finding for which no further evaluation is indicated. The context in which the murmur is appreciated often dictates the need for further testing.
# Chunk 2047
The patient history is extremely valuable in making a presumptive diagnosis or at least substantially restricting the differential diagnoses in most patients. Key elements of the history are the localization of dysphagia, the circumstances in which dysphagia is experienced, other symptoms associated with dysphagia, and progression. Dysphagia that localizes to the suprasternal notch may indicate either an oropharyngeal or an esophageal etiology as distal dysphagia is referred proximally about 30% of the time. Dysphagia that localizes to the chest is esophageal in origin. Nasal regurgitation and tracheobronchial aspiration manifest by coughing with swallowing are hallmarks of oropharyngeal dysphagia. Severe cough with swallowing may also be a sign of a tracheoesophageal fistula. The presence of hoarseness may be another important diagnostic clue. When hoarseness precedes dysphagia, the primary lesion is usually laryngeal; hoarseness that occurs after the development of dysphagia may result from compromise of the recurrent laryngeal nerve by a malignancy. The type of food causing dysphagia is a crucial detail. Intermittent dysphagia that occurs only with solid food implies structural dysphagia, whereas constant dysphagia with both liquids and solids strongly suggests a motor abnormality. Two caveats to this pattern are that despite having a motor abnormality, patients with scleroderma generally develop mild dysphagia for solids only and, somewhat paradoxically, that patients with oropharyngeal dysphagia often have greater difficulty managing liquids than solids. Dysphagia that is progressive over the course of weeks to months raises concern for neoplasia. Episodic dysphagia to solids that is unchanged over years indicates a benign disease process such as a Schatzki’s ring or eosinophilic esophagitis. Food impaction with a prolonged inability to pass an ingested bolus even with ingestion of liquid is typical of a structural dysphagia. Chest pain frequently accompanies dysphagia whether it is related to motor disorders, structural disorders, or reflux disease. A prolonged history of heartburn preceding the onset of dysphagia is suggestive of peptic stricture and, infrequently, esophageal adenocarcinoma. A history of prolonged nasogastric intubation, esophageal or head and neck surgery, ingestion of caustic to neck, nasal regurgitation, aspiration, neck, food impaction
# Chunk 2048
Intraperitoneal Disorders Visceral obstruction and inflammation of hollow and solid viscera may elicit vomiting. Gastric obstruction results from ulcers and malignancy, whereas small-bowel and colon blockage occur because of adhesions, benign or malignant tumors, volvulus, intussusception, or inflammatory diseases like Crohn’s disease. The superior mesenteric artery syndrome, occurring after weight loss or prolonged bed rest, results when the duodenum is compressed by the overlying superior mesenteric artery. Abdominal irradiation impairs intestinal motor function and induces strictures. Biliary colic causes nausea by acting on local afferent nerves. Vomiting with pancreatitis, cholecystitis, and appendicitis is due to visceral irritation and induction of ileus. Enteric infections with viruses like norovirus or rotavirus or bacteria such as Staphylococcus aureus and Bacillus cereus often cause vomiting, especially in children. Opportunistic infections like cytomegalovirus or herpes simplex virus induce emesis in immunocompromised individuals.
# Chunk 2049
Other functional gastroduodenal disorders without organic abnormalities have been characterized in adults. Chronic idiopathic nausea is defined as nausea without vomiting occurring several times a week. Functional vomiting is defined as one or more vomiting episodes weekly in the absence of an eating disorder or psychiatric disease. Cyclic vomiting syndrome presents with periodic discrete episodes of relentless nausea and vomiting in children and adults and shows an association with migraine headaches, suggesting that some cases may be migraine variants. Some adult cases have been described in association with rapid gastric emptying. A related condition, cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome, presents with cyclical vomiting with intervening well periods in individuals (mostly men) who use large quantities of cannabis over many years and resolves with its discontinuation. Pathologic behaviors such as taking prolonged hot baths or showers are associated with the syndrome. Rumination syndrome, characterized by repetitive regurgitation of recently ingested food, is often misdiagnosed as refractory vomiting.
# Chunk 2050
APPROACH TO THE PATIENT:

The history helps define the etiology of nausea and vomiting. Drugs, toxins, and infections often cause acute symptoms, whereas established illnesses evoke chronic complaints. Gastroparesis and pyloric obstruction elicit vomiting within an hour of eating. Emesis from intestinal blockage occurs later. Vomiting occurring within minutes of meal consumption prompts consideration of rumination syndrome. With severe gastric emptying delays, the vomitus may contain food residue ingested hours or days before. Hematemesis raises suspicion of an ulcer, malignancy, or Mallory-Weiss tear. Feculent emesis is noted with distal intestinal or colonic obstruction. Bilious vomiting excludes gastric obstruction, whereas emesis of undigested food is consistent with a Zenker’s diverticulum or achalasia. Vomiting can relieve abdominal pain from a bowel obstruction, but has no effect in pancreatitis or cholecystitis. Profound weight loss raises concern about malignancy or obstruction. Fevers suggest inflammation. An intracranial source is considered if there are headaches or visual field changes. Vertigo or tinnitus indicates labyrinthine disease.
# Chunk 2051
The physical examination complements the history. Orthostatic hypotension and reduced skin turgor indicate intravascular fluid loss. Pulmonary abnormalities raise concern for aspiration of vomitus. Abdominal auscultation may reveal absent bowel sounds with ileus. High-pitched rushes suggest bowel obstruction, whereas a succussion splash upon abrupt lateral movement of the patient is found with gastroparesis or pyloric obstruction. Tenderness or involuntary guarding raises suspicion of inflammation, whereas fecal blood suggests mucosal injury from ulcer, ischemia, or tumor. Neurologic disease presents with papilledema, visual field loss, or focal neural abnormalities. Neoplasm is suggested by palpation of masses or adenopathy.
# Chunk 2052
For intractable symptoms or an elusive diagnosis, selected screening tests can direct clinical care. Electrolyte replacement is indicated for hypokalemia or metabolic alkalosis. Iron-deficiency anemia mandates a search for mucosal injury. Pancreaticobiliary disease is indicated by abnormal pancreatic or liver biochemistries, whereas endocrinologic, rheumatologic, or paraneoplastic etiologies are suggested by hormone or serologic abnormalities. If bowel obstruction is suspected, supine and upright abdominal radiographs may show intestinal air-fluid levels with reduced colonic air. Ileus is characterized by diffusely dilated air-filled bowel loops.
# Chunk 2053
Gastrointestinal motility testing may detect an underlying motor disorder when anatomic abnormalities are absent. Gastroparesis commonly is diagnosed by gastric scintigraphy, by which emptying of a radiolabeled meal is measured. Isotopic breath tests and wireless motility capsule methods are alternatives tests to define gastroparesis in different regions of the world. Intestinal pseudoobstruction often is suggested by abnormal barium transit and luminal dilation on small-bowel contrast radiography. Delayed small-bowel transit also may be detected by wireless capsule techniques. Small-intestinal manometry can confirm the diagnosis and further characterize the motor abnormality as neuropathic or myopathic based on contractile patterns. Such investigation can obviate the need for surgical intestinal biopsy to evaluate for smooth muscle or neuronal degeneration. Combined ambulatory esophageal pH/impedance testing and high-resolution manometry can facilitate diagnosis of rumination syndrome.
# Chunk 2054
DIFFERENTIAL DIAgNOSIS gastroesophageal Reflux Disease Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is prevalent. Heartburn is reported once monthly by 40% of Americans and daily by 7–10%. Most cases of heartburn occur because of excess acid reflux, but reflux of nonacidic fluid produces similar symptoms. Alkaline reflux esophagitis produces GERD-like symptoms most often in patients who have had surgery for peptic ulcer disease. Ten percent of patients with heartburn exhibit normal esophageal acid exposure and no increase in nonacidic reflux (functional heartburn).
# Chunk 2055
Other Causes Opportunistic fungal or viral esophageal infections may produce heartburn but more often cause odynophagia. Other causes of esophageal inflammation include eosinophilic esophagitis and pill esophagitis. Biliary colic is in the differential diagnosis of unexplained upper abdominal pain, but most patients with biliary colic report discrete acute episodes of right upper quadrant or epigastric pain rather than the chronic burning, discomfort, and fullness of dyspepsia. Twenty percent of patients with gastroparesis report a predominance of pain or discomfort rather than nausea and vomiting. Intestinal lactase deficiency as a cause of gas, bloating, and discomfort occurs in 15–25% of whites of northern European descent but is more common in blacks and Asians. Intolerance of other carbohydrates (e.g., fructose, sorbitol) produces similar symptoms. Small-intestinal bacterial overgrowth may cause dyspepsia, often associated with bowel dysfunction, distention, and malabsorption. Eosinophilic infiltration of the duodenal mucosa is described in some dyspeptics, particularly with postprandial distress syndrome. Celiac disease, pancreatic disease (chronic pancreatitis, malignancy), hepatocellular carcinoma, Ménétrier’s disease, infiltrative diseases (sarcoidosis, eosinophilic gastroenteritis), mesenteric ischemia, thyroid and parathyroid disease, and abdominal wall strain cause dyspepsia. Gluten sensitivity in the absence of celiac disease is reported to evoke unexplained upper abdominal symptoms. Extraperitoneal etiologies of indigestion include congestive heart failure and tuberculosis.
# Chunk 2056
Once alarm factors are excluded (Table 54-3), patients with typi cal GERD do not need further evaluation and are treated empiri cally. Upper endoscopy is indicated to exclude mucosal injury in cases with atypical symptoms, symptoms unresponsive to acid sup pression, or alarm factors. For heartburn >5 years in duration, espe cially in patients >50 years old, endoscopy is advocated to screen for Barrett’s metaplasia. The benefits and cost-effectiveness of this approach have not been validated in controlled studies. Ambulatory endoscopically attached to the esophageal wall is considered for chest pain. High-resolution esophageal manometry is ordered when surgical treatment of GERD is considered. A low LES pressure predicts failure of drug therapy and provides a rationale to proceed to surgery. Poor esophageal body peristalsis raises concern about postoperative dysphagia and directs the choice of surgical tech nique. Nonacidic reflux may be detected by combined esophageal impedance-pH testing in medication-unresponsive patients.
# Chunk 2057
Upper endoscopy is recommended as the initial test in patients with unexplained dyspepsia who are >55 years old or who have alarm factors because of the purported elevated risks of malig nancy and ulcer in these groups. However, endoscopic findings in unexplained dyspepsia include erosive esophagitis in 13%, peptic ulcer in 8%, and gastric or esophageal malignancy in only 0.3%. Management of patients <55 years old without alarm factors depends on the local prevalence of H. pylori infection. In regions with low H. pylori prevalence (<10%), a 4-week trial of an acid- suppressing medication such as a proton pump inhibitor (PPI) is recommended. If this fails, a “test and treat” approach is most commonly applied. H. pylori status is determined with urea breath testing, stool antigen measurement, or blood serology testing.
# Chunk 2058
The distal ileum acts as a reservoir, emptying intermittently by bolus movements. This action allows time for salvage of fluids, electrolytes, and nutrients. Segmentation by haustra compartmentalizes the colon and facilitates mixing, retention of residue, and formation of solid stools. There is increased appreciation of the intimate interaction between the colonic function and the luminal ecology. The resident microorganisms, predominantly anaerobic bacteria, in the colon are necessary for the digestion of unabsorbed carbohydrates that reach the colon even in health, thereby providing a vital source of nutrients to the mucosa. Normal colonic flora also keeps pathogens at bay by a variety of mechanisms. In health, the ascending and transverse regions of colon function as reservoirs (average transit time, 15 h), and the descending colon acts as a conduit (average transit time, 3 h). The colon is efficient at conserving sodium and water, a function that is particularly important in sodium-depleted patients in whom the small intestine alone is unable to maintain sodium balance. Diarrhea or constipation may result from alteration in the reservoir function of the proximal colon or the propulsive function of the left colon. Constipation may also result from disturbances of the rectal or sigmoid reservoir, typically as a result of dysfunction of the pelvic floor, the anal sphincters, the coordination of defecation, or dehydration.
# Chunk 2059
More than 90% of cases of acute diarrhea are caused by infectious agents; these cases are often accompanied by vomiting, fever, and abdominal pain. The remaining 10% or so are caused by medications, toxic ingestions, ischemia, food indiscretions, and other conditions.
# Chunk 2060
The pathophysiology underlying acute diarrhea by infectious agents produces specific clinical features that may also be helpful in diagnosis (Table 55-2). Profuse, watery diarrhea secondary to small-bowel hypersecretion occurs with ingestion of preformed bacterial toxins, enterotoxin-producing bacteria, and enteroadherent pathogens. Diarrhea associated with marked vomiting and minimal or no fever may occur abruptly within a few hours after ingestion of the former two types; vomiting is usually less, abdominal cramping or bloating is greater, and fever is higher with the latter. Cytotoxin-producing and invasive microorganisms all cause high fever and abdominal pain. Invasive bacteria and Entamoeba histolytica often cause bloody diarrhea (referred to as dysentery). Yersinia invades the terminal ileal and proximal colon mucosa and may cause especially severe abdominal pain with tenderness mimicking acute appendicitis.
# Chunk 2061
Other Causes Side effects from medications are probably the most common noninfectious causes of acute diarrhea, and etiology may be suggested by a temporal association between use and symptom onset. Although innumerable medications may produce diarrhea, some of the more frequently incriminated include antibiotics, cardiac antidysrhythmics, antihypertensives, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), certain antidepressants, chemotherapeutic agents, bronchodilators, antacids, and laxatives. Occlusive or nonocclusive ischemic colitis typically occurs in persons >50 years; often presents as acute lower abdominal pain preceding watery, then bloody diarrhea; and generally results in acute inflammatory changes in the sigmoid or left colon while sparing the rectum. Acute diarrhea may accompany colonic diverticulitis and graft-versus-host disease. Acute diarrhea, often associated with systemic compromise, can follow ingestion of toxins including organophosphate insecticides; amanita and other mushrooms; arsenic; and preformed environmental toxins in seafood, such as ciguatera and scombroid. Acute anaphylaxis to food ingestion can have a similar presentation. Conditions causing chronic diarrhea can also be confused with acute diarrhea early in their course. This confusion may occur with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and some of the other inflammatory chronic diarrheas that may have an abrupt rather than insidious onset and exhibit features that mimic infection.
# Chunk 2062
APPROACH TO THE PATIENT:

The decision to evaluate acute diarrhea depends on its severity and duration and on various host factors (Fig. 55-2). Most episodes of acute diarrhea are mild and self-limited and do not justify the cost and potential morbidity rate of diagnostic or pharmacologic interventions. Indications for evaluation include profuse diarrhea with dehydration, grossly bloody stools, fever ≥38.5°C (≥101°F), duration >48 h without improvement, recent antibiotic use, new community outbreaks, associated severe abdominal pain in patients >50 years, and elderly (≥70 years) or immunocompromised patients. In some cases of moderately severe febrile diarrhea associated with fecal leukocytes (or increased fecal levels of the leukocyte proteins, such as calprotectin) or with gross blood, a diagnostic evaluation might be avoided in favor of an empirical antibiotic trial (see below).
# Chunk 2063
Structural examination by sigmoidoscopy, colonoscopy, or abdominal computed tomography (CT) scanning (or other imaging approaches) may be appropriate in patients with uncharacterized persistent diarrhea to exclude IBD or as an initial approach in patients with suspected noninfectious acute diarrhea such as might be caused by ischemic colitis, diverticulitis, or partial bowel obstruction.
# Chunk 2064
HORMONES Although uncommon, the classic examples of secretory diarrhea are those mediated by hormones. Metastatic gastrointestinal carcinoid tumors or, rarely, primary bronchial carcinoids may produce watery diarrhea alone or as part of the carcinoid syndrome that comprises episodic flushing, wheezing, dyspnea, and right-sided valvular heart disease. Diarrhea is due to the release into the circulation of potent intestinal secretagogues including serotonin, histamine, prostaglandins, and various kinins. Pellagra-like skin lesions may rarely occur as the result of serotonin overproduction with niacin depletion. Gastrinoma, one of the most common neuroendocrine tumors, most typically presents with refractory peptic ulcers, but diarrhea occurs in up to one-third of cases and may be the only clinical manifestation in 10%. While other secretagogues released with gastrin may play a role, the diarrhea most often results from fat maldigestion owing to pancreatic enzyme inactivation by low intraduodenal pH. The watery diarrhea hypokalemia achlorhydria syndrome, also called pancreatic cholera, is due to a non-β cell pancreatic adenoma, referred to as a VIPoma, that secretes VIP and a host of other peptide hormones including pancreatic polypeptide, secretin, gastrin, gastrin-inhibitory polypeptide (also called glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptide), neurotensin, calcitonin, and prostaglandins. The secretory diarrhea is often massive with stool volumes >3 L/d; daily volumes as high as 20 L have been reported. Life-threatening dehydration; neuromuscular dysfunction from associated hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, or hypercalcemia; flushing; and hyperglycemia may accompany a VIPoma. Medullary carcinoma of the thyroid may present with watery diarrhea caused by calcitonin, other secretory peptides, or prostaglandins. Prominent diarrhea is often associated with metastatic disease and poor prognosis. Systemic mastocytosis, which may be associated with the skin lesion urticaria pigmentosa, may cause diarrhea that is either secretory and mediated by histamine or inflammatory due to intestinal infiltration by mast cells. Large colorectal villous adenomas may rarely be associated with a secretory diarrhea that may cause hypokalemia, can be inhibited by NSAIDs, and are apparently mediated by prostaglandins.
# Chunk 2065
OSMOTIC LAXATIVES Ingestion of magnesium-containing antacids, health supplements, or laxatives may induce osmotic diarrhea typified by a stool osmotic gap (>50 mosmol/L): serum osmolarity (typically 290 mosmol/kg) – (2 × [fecal sodium + potassium concentration]). Measurement of fecal osmolarity is no longer recommended because, even when measured immediately after evacuation, it may be erroneous because carbohydrates are metabolized by colonic bacteria, causing an increase in osmolarity.
# Chunk 2066
INTRALUMINAL MALdIgESTION This condition most commonly results from pancreatic exocrine insufficiency, which occurs when >90% of pancreatic secretory function is lost. Chronic pancreatitis, usually a sequel of ethanol abuse, most frequently causes pancreatic insufficiency. Other causes include cystic fibrosis; pancreatic duct obstruction; and, rarely, somatostatinoma. Bacterial overgrowth in the small intestine may deconjugate bile acids and alter micelle formation, impairing fat digestion; it occurs with stasis from a blind-loop, small-bowel diverticulum or dysmotility and is especially likely in the elderly. Finally, cirrhosis or biliary obstruction may lead to mild steatorrhea due to deficient intraluminal bile acid concentration.
# Chunk 2067
IdIOPATHIC INFLAMMATORY BOwEL dISEASE The illnesses in this category, which include Crohn’s disease and chronic ulcerative colitis, are among the most common organic causes of chronic diarrhea in adults and range in severity from mild to fulminant and life-threatening. They may be associated with uveitis, polyarthralgias, cholestatic liver disease (primary sclerosing cholangitis), and skin lesions (erythema nodosum, pyoderma gangrenosum). Microscopic colitis, including both lymphocytic and collagenous colitis, is an increasingly recognized cause of chronic watery diarrhea, especially in middle-aged women and those on NSAIDs, statins, proton pump inhibitors (PPIs), and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs); biopsy of a normal-appearing colon is required for histologic diagnosis. It may coexist with symptoms suggesting IBS or with celiac sprue or drug-induced enteropathy. It typically responds well to anti-inflammatory drugs (e.g., bismuth), to the opioid agonist loperamide, or to budesonide.
# Chunk 2068
The exceedingly common IBS (10% point prevalence, 1–2% per year incidence) is characterized by disturbed intestinal and colonic motor and sensory responses to various stimuli. Symptoms of stool frequency typically cease at night, alternate with periods of constipation, are accompanied by abdominal pain relieved with defecation, and rarely result in weight loss.
# Chunk 2069
APPROACH TO THE PATIENT:

The laboratory tools available to evaluate the very common problem of chronic diarrhea are extensive, and many are costly and invasive. As such, the diagnostic evaluation must be rationally directed by a careful history, including medications, and physical examination (Fig. 55-3A). When this strategy is unrevealing, simple triage tests are often warranted to direct the choice of more complex investigations (Fig. 55-3B). The history, physical examination (Table 55-4), and routine blood studies should attempt to characterize the mechanism of diarrhea, identify diagnostically helpful associations, and assess the patient’s fluid/electrolyte and nutritional status. Patients should be questioned about the onset, duration, pattern, aggravating (especially diet) and relieving factors, and stool characteristics of their diarrhea. The presence or absence of fecal incontinence, fever, weight loss, pain, certain exposures (travel, medications, contacts with diarrhea), and common extraintestinal manifestations (skin changes, arthralgias, oral aphthous ulcers) should be noted. A family history of IBD or sprue may indicate those possibilities. Physical findings may offer clues such as a thyroid mass, wheezing, heart murmurs, edema, hepatomegaly, abdominal masses, lymphadenopathy, mucocutaneous abnormalities, perianal fistulas, or anal sphincter laxity. Peripheral blood leukocytosis, elevated sedimentation rate, or C-reactive protein suggests inflammation; anemia reflects blood loss or nutritional deficiencies; or eosinophilia may occur with parasitoses, neoplasia, collagen-vascular disease, allergy, or eosinophilic gastroenteritis. Blood chemistries may demonstrate electrolyte, hepatic, or other metabolic disturbances. Measuring IgA tissue transglutaminase antibodies may help detect celiac disease. Bile acid diarrhea is confirmed by a scintigraphic radiolabeled bile acid retention test; however, this is not available in many countries. Alternative approaches are a screening blood test (serum C4 or FGF-19), measurement of fecal bile acids, or a therapeutic trial with a bile acid sequestrant (e.g., cholestyramine or colesevelam).
# Chunk 2070
Exclude iatrogenic problem: medication, surgery Blood pr Colonoscopy + biopsy Features, e.g., stool, suggest malabsorption Small bowel: Imaging, biopsy, aspirate Pain aggravated before bm, relieved with bm, sense incomplete evacuation Suspect IBS Limited screen for organic disease No blood, features of malabsorption Consider functional diarrhea Dietary exclusion, e.g., lactose, sorbitol Chronic diarrhea
# Chunk 2071
Limited screen for organic disease Chronic diarrhea Stool vol, OSM, pH; Laxative screen; Hormonal screen Persistent chronic diarrhea Stool fat >20 g/day Pancreatic function Titrate Rx to speed of transit Opioid Rx + follow-up Low K+ Screening tests all normal Colonoscopy + biopsy Normal and stool fat <14 g/day Small bowel: X-ray, biopsy, aspirate; stool 48-h fat Full gut transit Low Hb, Alb; abnormal MCV, MCH; excess fat in stool
# Chunk 2072
FIguRE 55-3 Chronic diarrhea. A. Initial management based on accompanying symptoms or features. B. Evaluation based on findings from a limited age-appropriate screen for organic disease. Alb, albumin; bm, bowel movement; Hb, hemoglobin; IBS, irritable bowel syndrome; MCH, mean corpuscular hemoglobin; MCV, mean corpuscular volume; OSM, osmolality; pr, per rectum. (Reprinted from M Camilleri: Clin Gastroenterol
# Chunk 2073
For secretory diarrheas (watery, normal osmotic gap), possible medication-related side effects or surreptitious laxative use should be reconsidered. Microbiologic studies should be done including fecal bacterial cultures (including media for Aeromonas and Plesiomonas), inspection for ova and parasites, and Giardia antigen assay (the most sensitive test for giardiasis). Small-bowel bacterial overgrowth can be excluded by intestinal aspirates with quantitative cultures or with glucose or lactulose breath tests involving measurement of breath hydrogen, methane, or other metabolite. However, interpretation of these breath tests may be confounded by disturbances of intestinal transit. Upper endoscopy and colonoscopy with biopsies and small-bowel x-rays (formerly barium, but increasingly CT with enterography or magnetic resonance with enteroclysis) are helpful to rule out structural or occult inflammatory disease. When suggested by history or other findings, screens for peptide hormones should be pursued (e.g., serum gastrin, VIP, calcitonin, and thyroid hormone/thyroid-stimulating hormone, urinary 5-hydroxyindolacetic acid, histamine).
# Chunk 2074
Further evaluation of osmotic diarrhea should include tests for lactose intolerance and magnesium ingestion, the two most common causes. Low fecal pH suggests carbohydrate malabsorption; lactose malabsorption can be confirmed by lactose breath testing or by a therapeutic trial with lactose exclusion and observation of the effect of lactose challenge (e.g., a liter of milk). Lactase determination on small-bowel biopsy is not generally available. If fecal magnesium or laxative levels are elevated, inadvertent or surreptitious ingestion should be considered and psychiatric help should be sought.
# Chunk 2075
For those with proven fatty diarrhea, endoscopy with small-bowel biopsy (including aspiration for Giardia and quantitative cultures) should be performed; if this procedure is unrevealing, a small-bowel radiograph is often an appropriate next step. If small-bowel studies are negative or if pancreatic disease is suspected, pancreatic exocrine insufficiency should be excluded with direct tests, such as the secretin-cholecystokinin stimulation test or a variation that could be performed endoscopically. In general, indirect tests such as assay of fecal elastase or chymotrypsin activity or a bentiromide test have fallen out of favor because of low sensitivity and specificity.
# Chunk 2076
PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases

Constipation is a common complaint in clinical practice and usually refers to persistent, difficult, infrequent, or seemingly incomplete defecation. Because of the wide range of normal bowel habits, constipation is difficult to define precisely. Most persons have at least three bowel movements per week; however, low stool frequency alone is not the sole criterion for the diagnosis of constipation. Many constipated patients have a normal frequency of defecation but complain of excessive straining, hard stools, lower abdominal fullness, or a sense of incomplete evacuation. The individual patient’s symptoms must be analyzed in detail to ascertain what is meant by “constipation” or “difficulty” with defecation.
# Chunk 2077
Psychosocial or cultural factors may also be important. A person whose parents attached great importance to daily defecation will become greatly concerned when he or she misses a daily bowel movement; some children withhold stool to gain attention or because of fear of pain from anal irritation; and some adults habitually ignore or delay the call to have a bowel movement.
# Chunk 2078
APPROACH TO THE PATIENT:

A careful history should explore the patient’s symptoms and confirm whether he or she is indeed constipated based on frequency (e.g., fewer than three bowel movements per week), consistency (lumpy/hard), excessive straining, prolonged defecation time, or need to support the perineum or digitate the anorectum to facilitate stool evacuation. In the vast majority of cases (probably >90%), there is no underlying cause (e.g., cancer, depression, or hypothyroidism), and constipation responds to ample hydration, exercise, and supplementation of dietary fiber (15–25 g/d). A good diet and medication history and attention to psychosocial issues are key. Physical examination and, particularly, a rectal examination should exclude fecal impaction and most of the important diseases that present with constipation and possibly indicate features suggesting an evacuation disorder (e.g., high anal sphincter tone, failure of perineal descent, or paradoxical puborectalis contraction during straining to simulate stool evacuation).
# Chunk 2079
The presence of weight loss, rectal bleeding, or anemia with constipation mandates either flexible sigmoidoscopy plus barium enema or colonoscopy alone, particularly in patients >40 years, to exclude structural diseases such as cancer or strictures. Colonoscopy alone is most cost-effective in this setting because it provides an opportunity to biopsy mucosal lesions, perform polypectomy, or dilate strictures. Barium enema has advantages over colonoscopy in the patient with isolated constipation because it is less costly and identifies colonic dilation and all significant mucosal lesions or strictures that are likely to present with constipation. Melanosis coli, or pigmentation of the colon mucosa, indicates the use of anthraquinone laxatives such as cascara or senna; however, this is usually apparent from a careful history. An unexpected disorder such as megacolon or cathartic colon may also be detected by colonic radiographs. Measurement of serum calcium, potassium, and thyroid-stimulating hormone levels will identify rare patients with metabolic disorders.
# Chunk 2080
Patients with more troublesome constipation may not respond to fiber alone and may be helped by a bowel-training regimen, which involves taking an osmotic laxative (e.g., magnesium salts, lactulose, sorbitol, polyethylene glycol) and evacuating with enema or suppository (e.g., glycerine or bisacodyl) as needed. After breakfast, a distraction-free 15–20 min on the toilet without straining is encouraged. Excessive straining may lead to development of hemorrhoids, and, if there is weakness of the pelvic floor or injury to the pudendal nerve, may result in obstructed defecation from descending perineum syndrome several years later. Those few who do not benefit from the simple measures delineated above or require long-term treatment or fail to respond to potent laxatives should undergo further investigation (Fig. 55-4). Novel agents that induce secretion (e.g., lubiprostone, a chloride channel activator, or linaclotide, a guanylate cyclase C agonist that activates chloride secretion) are also available.
# Chunk 2081
FIguRE 55-4 Algorithm for the management of constipation. abd, abdominal.

Measurement of Colonic Transit Radiopaque marker transit tests are easy, repeatable, generally safe, inexpensive, reliable, and highly applicable in evaluating constipated patients in clinical practice. Several validated methods are very simple. For example, radiopaque markers are ingested; an abdominal flat film taken 5 days later should indicate passage of 80% of the markers out of the colon without the use of laxatives or enemas. This test does not provide useful information about the transit profile of the stomach and small bowel.
# Chunk 2082
After the cause of constipation is characterized, a treatment decision can be made. Slow-transit constipation requires aggressive medical or surgical treatment; anismus or pelvic floor dysfunction usually responds to biofeedback management (Fig. 40-4). The remaining ∼60% of patients with constipation has normal colonic transit and can be treated symptomatically. Patients with spinal cord injuries or other neurologic disorders require a dedicated bowel regimen that often includes rectal stimulation, enema therapy, and carefully timed laxative therapy.
# Chunk 2083
PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases solution), lubiprostone, linaclotide, and bisacodyl, or, in some countries, prucalopride, a 5-HT4 agonist. If a 3-to 6-month trial of medical therapy fails, unassociated with obstructed defecation, the patients should be considered for laparoscopic colectomy with ileorectostomy; however, this should not be undertaken if there is continued evidence of an evacuation disorder or a generalized GI dysmotility. Referral to a specialized center for further tests of colonic motor function is warranted. The decision to resort to surgery is facilitated in the presence of megacolon and megarectum. The complications after surgery include small-bowel obstruction (11%) and fecal soiling, particularly at night during the first postoperative year. Frequency of defecation is 3–8 per day during the first year, dropping to 1–3 per day from the second year after surgery.
# Chunk 2084
Neurologic injuries such as stroke, quadriplegia, and multiple sclerosis may lead to visceral and autonomic dysfunction that can impair caloric intake. Dysphagia from these neurologic insults is a common mechanism. Functional disability that compromises activities of daily living (ADLs) is a common cause of undernutrition in the elderly. Visual impairment from ophthalmic or central nervous system disorders such as a tremor can limit the ability of people to prepare and eat meals. IWL may be one of the earliest manifestations of Alzheimer’s dementia.
# Chunk 2085
Initial assessment includes a comprehensive history and physical, a complete blood count, tests of liver enzyme levels, C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, renal function studies, thyroid function tests, chest radiography, and an abdominal ultrasound (Table 56-2). Age, sex, and risk factor–specific cancer screening tests, such as mammography and colonoscopy, should be performed (Chap. 100). Patients at risk should have HIV testing. All elderly patients with weight loss should undergo screening for dementia and depression by using instruments such as the
# Chunk 2086
Body mass index <21 Thyroid function tests 25% of food left uneaten after 7 d Erythrocyte sedimentation rate Change in fit of clothing C-reactive protein Change in appetite, smell, or taste Ferritin Abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, HIV testing, if indicated diarrhea, constipation, dysphagia aMay be more specific to assess weight loss in the elderly.
# Chunk 2087
therapy and receive standard doses of oral PPI. Approximately one-third of patients with bleeding ulcers will rebleed within the next 1–2 years if no preventive strategies are employed. Prevention of recurrent bleeding focuses on the three main factors in ulcer pathogenesis, Helicobacter pylori, NSAIDs, and acid. Eradication of H. pylori in patients with bleeding ulcers decreases rates of rebleeding to <5%. If a bleeding ulcer develops in a patient taking NSAIDs, the NSAIDs should be discontinued. If NSAIDs must be given, a cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) selective inhibitor (coxib) plus a PPI should be used. PPI co-therapy alone or a coxib alone is associated with an annual rebleeding rate of ~10% in patients with a recent bleeding ulcer, whereas the combination of a coxib and PPI provides a further significant decrease in recurrent ulcer bleeding. Patients with established cardiovascular disease who develop bleeding ulcers while taking low-dose aspirin should restart aspirin as soon as possible after their bleeding episode (1–7 days). A randomized trial showed that failure to restart aspirin was associated with no significant difference in rebleeding (5% vs. 10% at 30 days) but a significant increase in mortality at 30 days (9% vs. 1%) and 8 weeks (13% vs. 1%) compared with immediate reinstitution of aspirin. Patients with bleeding ulcers unrelated to H. pylori or NSAIDs should remain on PPI therapy indefinitely. Peptic ulcers are discussed in Chap. 348.
# Chunk 2088
ESOPHAgEAL VARICES Patients with variceal hemorrhage have poorer outcomes than patients with other sources of UGIB. Urgent endoscopy within 12 h is recommended in cirrhotics with UGIB, and if esophageal varices are present, endoscopic ligation is performed and an IV vasoactive medication (e.g., octreotide 50 μg bolus and 50 μg/h infusion) is given for 2–5 days. Combination endoscopic and medical therapy appears to be superior to either therapy alone in decreasing rebleeding. In patients with advanced liver disease (e.g., Child-Pugh class C with score 10–13), a transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) should be strongly considered within the first 1–2 days of hospitalization because randomized trials show significant decreases in rebleeding and mortality compared with standard endoscopic and medical therapy. Over the long term, treatment with nonselective beta blockers plus endoscopic ligation is recommended because the combination of endoscopic and medical therapy is more effective than either alone in reduction of recurrent esophageal variceal bleeding.
# Chunk 2089
APPROACH TO THE PATIENT:

Measurement of the heart rate and blood pressure is the best way to initially assess a patient with GIB. Clinically significant bleeding leads to postural changes in heart rate or blood pressure, tachycardia, and, finally, recumbent hypotension. In contrast, the hemoglobin does not fall immediately with acute GIB, due to proportionate reductions in plasma and red cell volumes (i.e., “people bleed whole blood”). Thus, hemoglobin may be normal or only minimally decreased at the initial presentation of a severe bleeding episode. As extravascular fluid enters the vascular space to restore volume, the hemoglobin falls, but this process may take up to 72 h. Transfusion is recommended when the hemoglobin drops below 7 g/dL, based on a large randomized trial showing this restrictive transfusion strategy decreases rebleeding and death in acute UGIB compared with a transfusion threshold of 9 g/dL. Patients with slow, chronic GIB may have very low hemoglobin values despite normal blood pressure and heart rate. With the development of iron-deficiency anemia, the mean corpuscular volume will be low and red blood cell distribution width will increase.
# Chunk 2090
Hematemesis indicates an upper GI source of bleeding (above the ligament of Treitz). Melena indicates blood has been present in the GI tract for at least 14 h, and as long as 3–5 days. The more proximal the bleeding site, the more likely melena will occur. Hematochezia usually represents a lower GI source of bleeding, although an upper GI lesion may bleed so briskly that blood transits the bowel before melena develops. When hematochezia is the presenting symptom of UGIB, it is associated with hemodynamic instability and dropping hemoglobin. Bleeding lesions of the small bowel may present as melena or hematochezia. Other clues to UGIB include hyperactive bowel sounds and an elevated blood urea nitrogen (due to volume depletion and blood proteins absorbed in the small intestine).
# Chunk 2091
Acute upper GI bleeding ICU for 1–2 days; ward for 2–3 days Ligation + IV vasoactive drug (e.g., octreotide) Esophageal varicesUlcer Mallory-Weiss tear Clean base Discharge No IV PPI or endoscopic therapy Active bleeding or visible vessel ICU for 1 day; ward for 2 days IV PPI therapy + endoscopic therapy Adherent clot Ward for 2–3 days IV PPI therapy +/– endoscopic therapy Flat, pigmented spot No IV PPI or endoscopic therapy Ward for 3 days Active bleeding No active bleeding No endoscopic therapy Discharge Endoscopic therapy Ward for 1–2 days FIguRE 57-1 Suggested algorithm for patients with acute upper gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding. Recommendations on level of care and time of discharge assume patient is stabilized without further bleeding or other concomitant medical problems. ICU, intensive care unit; PPI, proton pump inhibitor.
# Chunk 2092
Another sensitive indicator of increased serum bilirubin is darkening of the urine, which is due to the renal excretion of conjugated bilirubin. Patients often describe their urine as teaor cola-colored. Bilirubinuria indicates an elevation of the direct serum bilirubin fraction and, therefore, the presence of liver disease.
# Chunk 2093
The conjugated bilirubin excreted into bile drains into the duodenum and passes unchanged through the proximal small bowel. Conjugated bilirubin is not taken up by the intestinal mucosa. When the conjugated bilirubin reaches the distal ileum and colon, it is hydrolyzed to unconjugated bilirubin by bacterial β-glucuronidases. The unconjugated bilirubin is reduced by normal gut bacteria to form a group of colorless tetrapyrroles called urobilinogens. About 80–90% of these products are excreted in feces, either unchanged or oxidized to orange derivatives called urobilins. The remaining 10–20% of the urobilinogens are passively absorbed, enter the portal venous blood, and are re-excreted by the liver. A small fraction (usually <3 mg/dL) escapes hepatic uptake, filters across the renal glomerulus, and is excreted in urine.
# Chunk 2094
With the van den Bergh method, the normal serum bilirubin concentration usually is 17 μmol/L (<1 mg/dL). Up to 30%, or 5.1 μmol/L (0.3 mg/dL), of the total may be direct-reacting (conjugated) bilirubin. Total serum bilirubin concentrations are between 3.4 and 15.4 μmol/L (0.2 and 0.9 mg/dL) in 95% of a normal population.
# Chunk 2095
Several new techniques, although less convenient to perform, have added considerably to our understanding of bilirubin metabolism. First, studies using these methods demonstrate that, in normal persons or those with Gilbert’s syndrome, almost 100% of the serum bilirubin is unconjugated; <3% is monoconjugated bilirubin. Second, in jaundiced patients with hepatobiliary disease, the total serum bilirubin concentration measured by these new, more accurate methods is lower than the values found with diazo methods. This finding suggests that there are diazo-positive compounds distinct from bilirubin in the serum of patients with hepatobiliary disease. Third, these studies indicate that, in jaundiced patients with hepatobiliary disease, monoglucuronides of bilirubin predominate over diglucuronides. Fourth, part of the direct-reacting bilirubin fraction includes conjugated bilirubin that is covalently linked to albumin. This albumin-linked bilirubin fraction (delta fraction, or biliprotein) represents an important fraction of total serum bilirubin in patients with cholestasis and hepatobiliary disorders. The delta fraction (delta bilirubin) is formed in serum when hepatic excretion of bilirubin glucuronides is impaired and the glucuronides accumulate in serum. By virtue of its tight binding to albumin, the clearance rate of delta bilirubin from serum approximates the half-life of albumin (12–14 days) rather than the short half-life of bilirubin (about 4 h).
# Chunk 2096
Unconjugated bilirubin is always bound to albumin in the serum, is not filtered by the kidney, and is not found in the urine. Conjugated bilirubin is filtered at the glomerulus, and the majority is reabsorbed by the proximal tubules; a small fraction is excreted in the urine. Any bilirubin found in the urine is conjugated bilirubin. The presence of bilirubinuria implies the presence of liver disease. A urine dipstick test (Ictotest) gives the same information as fractionation of the serum bilirubin and is very accurate. A false-negative result is possible in patients with prolonged cholestasis due to the predominance of delta bilirubin, which is covalently bound to albumin and therefore not filtered by the renal glomeruli.
# Chunk 2097
History (focus on medication/drug exposure) Physical examination Lab tests: Bilirubin with fractionation, ALT, AST, alkaline phosphatase, prothrombin time, and albumin
# Chunk 2098
Isolated elevation of the bilirubin Indirect hyperbilirubinemia (direct < 15%) See Table 58-1 Direct hyperbilirubinemia (direct > 15%) See Table 58-1 Drugs Rifampicin Probenecid Inherited disorders Dubin-Johnson syndrome Rotor syndrome 1. Viral serologies Hepatitis A IgM Hepatitis B surface antigen and core antibody (IgM) Hepatitis C RNA 2. Toxicology screen Acetaminophen level 3. Ceruloplasmin (if patient < 40 years of age) 4. ANA, SMA, SPEP Inherited disorders Gilbert's syndrome Crigler-Najjar syndromes Hemolytic disorders Ineffective erythropoiesis Bilirubin and other liver tests elevated Hepatocellular pattern: ALT/AST elevated out of proportion to alkaline phosphatase See Table 58-2 Cholestatic pattern: Alkaline phosphatase out of proportion ALT/AST See Table 58-3 Dilated ducts Extrahepatic cholestasis CT/MRCP/ERCP Liver biopsy Liver biopsy MRCP/Liver biopsy Results negativeResults negative Additional virologic testing CMV DNA, EBV capsid antigen Hepatitis D antibody (if indicated) Hepatitis E IgM (if indicated) Results negative AMA positive Serologic testing AMA Hepatitis serologies Hepatitis A, CMV, EBV Review drugs (see Table 58-3) Ultrasound Ducts not dilated Intrahepatic cholestasis
# Chunk 2099
FIguRE 58-1 Evaluation of the patient with jaundice. ALT, alanine aminotransferase; AMA, antimitochondrial antibody; ANA, antinuclear antibody; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; CMV, cytomegalovirus; EBV, Epstein-Barr virus; LKM, liver-kidney microsomal antibody; MRCP, magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography; SMA, smooth-muscle antibody; SPEP, serum protein electrophoresis.
# Chunk 2100
History A complete medical history is perhaps the single most important part of the evaluation of the patient with unexplained jaundice. Important considerations include the use of or exposure to any chemical or medication, whether physician-prescribed, overthe-counter, complementary, or alternative medicines (e.g., herbal and vitamin preparations) or other drugs such as anabolic steroids. The patient should be carefully questioned about possible parenteral exposures, including transfusions, intravenous and intranasal drug use, tattooing, and sexual activity. Other important points include recent travel history; exposure to people with jaundice; exposure to possibly contaminated foods; occupational exposure to hepatotoxins; alcohol consumption; the duration of jaundice; and the presence of any accompanying signs and symptoms, such as arthralgias, myalgias, rash, anorexia, weight loss, abdominal pain, fever, pruritus, and changes in the urine and stool. While none of the latter manifestations is specific for any one condition, any of them can suggest a particular diagnosis. A history of arthralgias and myalgias predating jaundice suggests hepatitis, either viral or drug-related. Jaundice associated with the sudden onset of severe right-upper-quadrant pain and shaking chills suggests choledocholithiasis and ascending cholangitis.
# Chunk 2101
Laboratory Tests A battery of tests are helpful in the initial evaluation of a patient with unexplained jaundice. These include total and direct serum bilirubin measurement with fractionation; determination of serum aminotransferase, alkaline phosphatase, and albumin concentrations; and prothrombin time tests. Enzyme tests (alanine aminotransferase [ALT], aspartate aminotransferase [AST], and alkaline phosphatase [ALP]) are helpful in differentiating between a hepatocellular process and a cholestatic process (Table 358-1; Fig. 58-1)—a critical step in determining what additional workup is indicated. Patients with a hepatocellular process generally have a rise in the aminotransferases that is disproportionate to that in ALP, whereas patients with a cholestatic process have a rise in ALP that is disproportionate to that of the aminotransferases. The serum bilirubin can be prominently elevated in both hepatocellular and cholestatic conditions and therefore is not necessarily helpful in differentiating between the two.
# Chunk 2102
Hepatocellular Conditions Hepatocellular diseases that can cause jaundice include viral hepatitis, drug or environmental toxicity, alcohol, and end-stage cirrhosis from any cause (Table 58-2). Wilson’s disease occurs primarily in young adults. Autoimmune hepatitis is typically seen in young to middle-aged women but may affect men and women of any age. Alcoholic hepatitis can be differentiated from viral and toxin-related hepatitis by the pattern of the aminotransferases: patients with alcoholic hepatitis typically have an AST-to-ALT ratio of at least 2:1, and the AST level rarely exceeds 300 U/L. Patients with acute viral hepatitis and toxin-related injury severe enough to produce jaundice typically have aminotransferase levels >500 U/L, with the ALT greater than or equal to the AST. While ALT and AST values <8 times normal may be seen in either hepatocellular or cholestatic liver disease, values 25 times normal or higher are seen primarily in acute hepatocellular diseases. Patients with jaundice from cirrhosis can have normal or only slightly elevated aminotransferase levels.
# Chunk 2103
Choledocholithiasis is the most common cause of extrahepatic cholestasis. The clinical presentation can range from mild right-upper-quadrant discomfort with only minimal elevations of enzyme test values to ascending cholangitis with jaundice, sepsis, and circulatory collapse. PSC may occur with clinically important strictures limited to the extrahepatic biliary tree. IgG4-associated cholangitis is marked by stricturing of the biliary tree. It is critical that the clinician differentiate this condition from PSC as it is responsive to glucocorticoid therapy. In rare instances, chronic pancreatitis causes strictures of the distal common bile duct, where it passes through the head of the pancreas. AIDS cholangiopathy is a condition that is usually due to infection of the bile duct epithelium with CMV or cryptosporidia and has a cholangiographic appearance similar to that of PSC. The affected patients usually present with greatly elevated serum alkaline phosphatase levels (mean, 800 IU/L), but the bilirubin level is often near normal. These patients do not typically present with jaundice.
# Chunk 2104
Kathleen E. Corey, Lawrence S. Friedman

Abdominal swelling is a manifestation of numerous diseases. Patients may complain of bloating or abdominal fullness and may note increasing abdominal girth on the basis of increased clothing or belt size. Abdominal discomfort is often reported, but pain is less frequent. When abdominal pain does accompany swelling, it is frequently the result of an intraabdominal infection, peritonitis, or pancreatitis. Patients with abdominal distention from ascites (fluid in the abdomen) may report the new onset of an inguinal or umbilical hernia. Dyspnea may result from pressure against the diaphragm and the inability to expand the lungs fully.
# Chunk 2105
Flatus Abdominal swelling may be the result of increased intestinal gas. The normal small intestine contains approximately 200 mL of gas made up of nitrogen, oxygen, carbon dioxide, hydrogen, and methane. Nitrogen and oxygen are consumed (swallowed), whereas carbon dioxide, hydrogen, and methane are produced intraluminally by bacterial fermentation. Increased intestinal gas can occur in a number of conditions. Aerophagia, the swallowing of air, can result in increased amounts of oxygen and nitrogen in the small intestine and lead to abdominal swelling. Aerophagia typically results from gulping food; chewing gum; smoking; or as a response to anxiety, which can lead to repetitive belching. In some cases, increased intestinal gas is the consequence of bacterial metabolism of excess fermentable substances such as lactose and other oligosaccharides, which can lead to production of hydrogen, carbon dioxide, or methane. In many cases, the precise cause of abdominal distention cannot be determined. In some persons, particularly those with irritable bowel syndrome and bloating, the subjective sense of abdominal pressure is attributable to impaired intestinal transit of gas rather than increased gas volume. Abdominal distention—an objective increase in girth—is the result of a lack of coordination between diaphragmatic contraction and anterior abdominal wall relaxation, a response in some cases to an increase in intraabdominal volume loads. Occasionally, increased lumbar lordosis accounts for apparent abdominal distention.
# Chunk 2106
Fatal growth An abdominal mass can result in abdominal swelling. Enlargement of the intraabdominal organs, specifically the liver (hepatomegaly) or spleen (splenomegaly), or an abdominal aortic aneurysm 286 can result in abdominal distention. Bladder distention also may result in abdominal swelling. In addition, malignancies, abscesses, or cysts can grow to sizes that lead to increased abdominal girth.
# Chunk 2107
APPROACH TO THE PATIENT:

PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases

Determining the etiology of abdominal swelling begins with history-taking and a physical examination. Patients should be questioned regarding symptoms suggestive of malignancy, including weight loss, night sweats, and anorexia. Inability to pass stool or flatus together with nausea or vomiting suggests bowel obstruction, severe constipation, or an ileus (lack of peristalsis). Increased eructation and flatus may point toward aerophagia or increased intestinal production of gas. Patients should be questioned about risk factors for or symptoms of chronic liver disease, including excessive alcohol use and jaundice, which suggest ascites. Patients should also be asked about other symptoms of medical conditions, including heart failure and tuberculosis, which may cause ascites.
# Chunk 2108
The abdominal examination should begin with inspection for the presence of uneven distention or an obvious mass. Auscultation should follow. The absence of bowel sounds or the presence of high-pitched localized bowel sounds points toward an ileus or intestinal obstruction. An umbilical venous hum may suggest the presence of portal hypertension, and a harsh bruit over the liver is heard rarely in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma or alcoholic hepatitis. Abdominal swelling caused by intestinal gas can be differentiated from swelling caused by fluid or a solid mass by percussion; an abdomen filled with gas is tympanic, whereas an abdomen containing a mass or fluid is dull to percussion. The absence of abdominal dullness, however, does not exclude ascites, because a minimum of 1500 mL of ascitic fluid is required for detection on physical examination. Finally, the abdomen should be palpated to assess for tenderness, a mass, enlargement of the spleen or liver, or presence of a nodular liver suggesting cirrhosis or tumor. Light palpation of the liver may detect pulsations suggesting retrograde vascular flow from the heart in patients with right-sided heart failure, particularly tricuspid regurgitation.
# Chunk 2109
Abdominal x-rays can be used to detect dilated loops of bowel sug gesting intestinal obstruction or ileus. Abdominal ultrasonography can detect as little as 100 mL of ascitic fluid, hepatosplenomegaly, a nodular liver, or a mass. Ultrasonography is often inadequate to detect retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy or a pancreatic lesion because of overlying bowel gas. If malignancy or pancreatic disease is suspected,
# Chunk 2110
CT can be performed. CT may also detect changes associated with advanced cirrhosis and portal hypertension (Fig. 59-1). Laboratory evaluation should include liver biochemical testing, serum albumin level measurement, and prothrombin time determina tion (international normalized ratio) to assess hepatic function as well as a complete blood count to evaluate for the presence of cytopenias that may result from portal hypertension or of leukocytosis, anemia, and thrombocytosis that may result from systemic infection. Serum amylase and lipase levels should be checked to evaluate the patient for acute pancreatitis. Urinary protein quantitation is indicated when nephrotic syndrome, which may cause ascites, is suspected.
# Chunk 2111
288 be measured. In contrast to “spontaneous” bacterial peritonitis, which may complicate cirrhotic ascites (see “Complications,” below), secondary peritonitis is suggested by an ascitic glucose level <50 mg/dL, an ascitic LDH level higher than the serum LDH level, and the detection of multiple pathogens on ascitic fluid culture. When pancreatic ascites is suspected, the ascitic amylase level should be measured and is typically >1000 mg/dL. Cytology can be useful in the diagnosis of peritoneal carcinomatosis. At least 50 mL of fluid should be obtained and sent for immediate processing. Tuberculous peritonitis is typically associated with ascitic fluid lymphocytosis but can be difficult to diagnose by paracentesis. A smear for acid-fast bacilli has a diagnostic sensitivity of only 0 to 3%; a culture increases the sensitivity to 35–50%. In patients without cirrhosis, an elevated ascitic adenosine deaminase level has a sensitivity of >90% when a cut-off value of 30–45 U/L is used. When the cause of ascites remains uncertain, laparotomy or laparoscopy with peritoneal biopsies for histology and culture remains the gold standard.
# Chunk 2112
The initial treatment for cirrhotic ascites is restriction of sodium intake to 2 g/d. When sodium restriction alone is inadequate to control ascites, oral diuretics—typically the combination of spironolactone and furosemide—are used. Spironolactone is an aldosterone antagonist that inhibits sodium resorption in the distal convoluted tubule of the kidney. Use of spironolactone may be limited by hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, and painful gynecomastia. If the gynecomastia is distressing, amiloride (5–40 mg/d) may be substituted for spironolactone. Furosemide is a loop diuretic that is generally combined with spironolactone in a ratio of 40:100; maximal daily doses of spironolactone and furosemide are 400 mg and 160 mg, respectively.
# Chunk 2113
Malignant ascites does not respond to sodium restriction or diuretics. Patients must undergo serial LVPs, transcutaneous drainage catheter placement, or, rarely, creation of a peritoneovenous shunt (a shunt from the abdominal cavity to the vena cava).
# Chunk 2114
Approximately 50% of women experience dysuria at some time in their lives; ∼20% report having had dysuria within the past year. Most dysuria syndromes in women can be categorized into two broad groups: bacterial cystitis and lower genital tract infections.
# Chunk 2115
Among women presenting with dysuria, the probability of bacterial cystitis is ∼50%. This figure rises to >90% if four criteria are fulfilled: dysuria and frequency without vaginal discharge or irritation. Present standards suggest that women meeting these four criteria, if they are otherwise healthy, are not pregnant, and have an apparently normal urinary tract, can be diagnosed with uncomplicated bacterial cystitis and treated empirically with appropriate antibiotics. Other women with dysuria should be further evaluated by urine dipstick, urine culture, and a pelvic examination.
# Chunk 2116
Numerous hypotheses about the pathogenesis of IC/BPS have been put forward. It is not surprising that most early theories focused on the bladder. For instance, IC/BPS has been investigated as a chronic bladder infection. Sophisticated technologies have not identified a causative organism in urine or in bladder tissue; however, the patients studied by these methods had IC/BPS of long duration, and the results do not preclude the possibility that infection may trigger the syndrome or may be a feature of early IC/BPS. Other inflammatory factors, including a role for mast cells, have been postulated, but (as noted above) the 90% of patients without a Hunner’s ulcer have little bladder inflammation and do not have a prominence of mast cells in bladder tissue. Autoimmunity has been considered, but autoantibodies are low in titer, nonspecific, and thought to be a result rather than a cause of IC/BPS. Increased permeability of the bladder mucosa due to defective epithelium or glycosaminoglycan (the bladder’s mucous coating) has been studied frequently, but the findings have been inconclusive.
# Chunk 2117
The pain of IC/BPS includes suprapubic prominence and changes with the voiding cycle. Two-thirds of women with IC/BPS report two or more sites of pain. The most common site (involved in 80% of women) and generally the one with the most severe pain is the supra-pubic area. About 35% of female patients have pain in the urethra, 25% in other parts of the vulva, and 30% in nonurogenital areas, mostly the low back and also the anterior or posterior thighs or the buttocks. The pain of IC/BPS is most commonly described as aching, pressing, throbbing, tender, and/or piercing. What may distinguish IC/BPS from other pelvic pain is that, in 95% of patients, bladder filling exacerbates the pain and/or bladder emptying relieves it. Almost as many patients report a puzzling pattern in which certain dietary substances worsen the pain of IC/BPS. Smaller proportions—but still the majority—of patients report that their IC/BPS pain is worsened by menstruation, stress, tight clothing, exercise, and riding in a car as well as during or after vaginal intercourse.
# Chunk 2118
In many patients with IC/BPS, there is a link between pain and urinary urgency; that is, two-thirds of patients describe the urge to urinate as a desire to relieve their bladder pain. Only 20% report that the urge stems from a desire to prevent incontinence; indeed, very few patients with IC/BPS are incontinent. As mentioned above, urinary frequency can be severe, with ∼85% of patients voiding more than 10 times per 24 h and some as often as 60 times. Voiding continues through the night, and nocturia is common, frequent, and often associated with sleep deprivation.
# Chunk 2119
The second category of disorders encompasses the FSSs that can accompany IC/BPS. IC/BPS can be misdiagnosed as gynecologic chronic pelvic pain, irritable bowel syndrome, or fibromyalgia. The correct diagnosis may be entertained only when either changes of pain with altered bladder volume or urinary symptoms become more prominent.
# Chunk 2120
The third category involves syndromes that IC/BPS mimics by way of its referred pain, such as vulvodynia and chronic urethral syndrome. Therefore, IC/BPS should be considered in the differential diagnosis of persistent or recurrent “urinary tract infection” (UTI) with sterile urine cultures; overactive bladder with pain; chronic pelvic pain, endometriosis, vulvodynia, or FSSs with urinary symptoms; and “chronic prostatitis.” As mentioned above, important clues to the diagnosis of IC/BPS are pain that changes with bladder volume or with certain foods or drinks. Common among these are chilies, chocolate, citrus fruits, tomatoes, alcohol, caffeinated drinks, and carbonated beverages; full lists of common trigger foods are available at the websites cited in the treatment section below.
# Chunk 2121
A typical patient presents to the primary clinician after days, weeks, or months of pain, urgency, frequency, and/or nocturia. The presence of urinary nitrites, leukocytes, or uropathogenic bacteria should prompt treatment for UTI in women and chronic bacterial prostatitis in men. Persistence or recurrence of symptoms in the absence of bacteriuria should prompt a pelvic examination for women, an assay for serum prostate-specific antigen for men, and urine cytology and inclusion of IC/BPS in the differential diagnosis for both sexes.
# Chunk 2122
The pelvic floor is often tender in IC/BPS patients. Two randomized controlled trials showed that weekly physical therapy directed at relaxation of the pelvic muscles yielded significantly more relief than a similar schedule of general body massage. This intervention can be initiated under the direction of a knowledgeable physical therapist who recognizes that the objective is to relax the pelvic floor, not to strengthen it.
# Chunk 2123
Among oral medications, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are commonly used but are controversial and often unsuccessful. Two randomized controlled trials showed that amitriptyline can diminish IC/BPS symptoms if an adequate dose (≥50 mg per night) can be given. This drug is used not for its antidepressant activity but because of its proven effects on neuropathic pain; however, it is not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for treatment of IC/BPS. An initial dose of 10 mg at bedtime is increased weekly up to 75 mg (or less if a lower dose adequately relieves symptoms). Side effects can be expected and include dry mouth, weight gain, sedation, and constipation. If this regimen does not control symptoms adequately, pentosan polysulfate, a semisynthetic polysaccharide, can be added at a dose of 100 mg three times a day. Its theoretical effect is to replenish a possibly defective glycosaminoglycan layer over the bladder mucosa; randomized controlled trials suggest only
# Chunk 2124
PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases

Azotemia and urinary Abnormalities Julie Lin, Bradley M. Denker Normal kidney functions occur through numerous cellular pro-cesses to maintain body homeostasis. Disturbances in any of these 61 functions can lead to abnormalities that may be detrimental to survival. Clinical manifestations of these disorders depend on the pathophysiology of renal injury and often are identified as a complex of symptoms, abnormal physical findings, and laboratory changes that constitute specific syndromes. These renal syndromes (Table 61-1) may arise from systemic illness or as primary renal disease. Nephrologic syndromes usually consist of several elements that reflect the underlying pathologic processes, typically including one or more of the following: (1) reduction in glomerular filtration 289 rate (GFR) (azotemia), (2) abnormalities of urine sediment (red blood cells [RBCs], white blood cells [WBCs], casts, and crystals), abnormal excretion of serum proteins (proteinuria), (4) disturbances in urine volume (oliguria, anuria, polyuria), (5) presence of hypertension and/or expanded total body fluid volume (edema), (6) electrolyte abnormalities, and (7) in some syndromes, fever/pain. The specific combination of these findings should permit identification of one of the major nephrologic syndromes (Table 61-1) and allow differential diagnoses to be narrowed so that the appropriate diagnostic and therapeutic course can be determined. All these syndromes and their associated diseases are discussed in more detail in subsequent chapters. This chapter focuses on several aspects of renal abnormalities that are critically important for distinguishing among those processes: (1) reduction in GFR leading to azotemia, alterations of the urinary sediment and/or protein excretion, and abnormalities of urinary volume.
# Chunk 2125
Monitoring the GFR is important in both hospital and outpatient settings, and several different methodologies are available. GFR is the primary metric for kidney “function,” and its direct measurement involves administration of a radioactive isotope (such as inulin or iothalamate) that is filtered at the glomerulus into the urinary space but is neither reabsorbed nor secreted throughout the tubule. GFR—i.e., the clearance of inulin or iothalamate in milliliters per minute—is calculated from the rate of appearance of the isotope in the urine over several hours. In most clinical circumstances, direct GFR measurement is not feasible, and the plasma creatinine level is used as a surrogate to estimate GFR. Plasma creatinine (PCr) is the most widely used marker for GFR, which is related directly to urine creatinine (UCr) excretion and inversely to PCr. On the basis of this relationship (with some important caveats, as discussed below), GFR will fall in roughly inverse proportion to the rise in PCr. Failure to account for GFR reductions in drug dosing can lead to significant morbidity and death from drug toxicities (e.g., digoxin, aminoglycosides). In the outpatient setting, PCr serves as an estimate for GFR (although much less accurate; see below). In patients with chronic progressive renal disease, there is an approximately linear relationship between 1/PCr (y axis) and time (x axis). The slope of that line will remain constant for an individual;
# Chunk 2126
A significantly reduced GFR (either acute or chronic) is usually reflected in a rise in PCr, leading to retention of nitrogenous waste products (defined as azotemia) such as urea. Azotemia may result from reduced renal perfusion, intrinsic renal disease, or postrenal processes (ureteral obstruction; see below and Fig. 61-1). Precise determination of GFR is problematic, as both commonly measured indices (urea and creatinine) have characteristics that affect their accuracy as markers of clearance. Urea clearance may underestimate GFR significantly because of urea reabsorption by the tubule. In contrast, creatinine is derived from muscle metabolism of creatine, and its generation varies little from day to day.
# Chunk 2127
AZOTEMIA Urinalysis and Renal ultrasound HydronephrosisRenal size parenchyma Urinalysis Urologic evaluation Relieve obstruction Small kidneys, thin cortex, bland sediment, isosthenuria <3.5 g protein/24 h Normal size kidneys Intact parenchyma Bacteria Pyelonephritis Chronic Renal Failure Symptomatic treatment delay progression If end-stage, prepare for dialysis Normal urinalysis with oliguria Abnormal urinalysis WBC, casts eosinophils Interstitial nephritis Red blood cells Renal artery or vein occlusion Urine electrolytes Muddy brown casts, amorphous sediment + protein RBC casts Proteinuria Angiogram FeNa <1% U osmolality > 500 mosmol FeNa >1% U osmolality < 350 mosmol Renal biopsy Prerenal Azotemia Volume contraction, cardiac failure, vasodilatation, drugs, sepsis, renal vasoconstriction, impaired autoregulation Acute Tubular Necrosis Glomerulonephritis or vasculitis Immune complex, anti-GBM disease Acute Renal Failure
# Chunk 2128
FIguRE 61-1 Approach to the patient with azotemia. FeNa, fractional excretion of sodium; GBM, glomerular basement membrane; RBC, red blood cell; WBC, white blood cell.
# Chunk 2129
There are limitations to all creatinine-based estimates of GFR. Each equation, along with 24-h urine collection for measurement of creatinine clearance, is based on the assumption that the patient is in steady state, without daily increases or decreases in PCr as a result of rapidly changing GFR. The MDRD equation is better correlated with true GFR when the GFR is <60 mL/min per 1.73 m2. The gradual loss of muscle from chronic illness, chronic use of glucocorticoids, or malnutrition can mask significant changes in GFR with small or imperceptible changes in PCr. Cystatin C, a member of the cystatin superfamily of cysteine protease inhibitors, is produced at a relatively constant rate from all nucleated cells. Serum cystatin C has been proposed to be a more sensitive marker of early GFR decline than is PCr; however, like serum creatinine, cystatin C is influenced by the patient’s age, race, and sex and also is associated with diabetes, smoking, and markers of inflammation.
# Chunk 2130
Prolonged renal hypoperfusion may lead to acute tubular necrosis (ATN), an intrinsic renal disease that is discussed below. The urinalysis and urinary electrolyte measurements can be useful in distinguishing prerenal azotemia from ATN (Table 61-2). The urine Na and osmolality of patients with prerenal azotemia can be predicted from the stimulatory actions of norepinephrine, angiotensin II, ADH, and low tubule fluid flow rate. In prerenal conditions, the tubules are intact, leading to a concentrated urine (>500 mosmol), avid Na retention (urine Na concentration, <20 mmol/L; fractional excretion of Na, <1%), and UCr/PCr >40 (Table 61-2). The prerenal urine sediment is usually normal or has hyaline and granular casts, whereas the sediment of ATN usually is filled with cellular debris, tubular epithelial casts, and dark (muddy brown) granular casts.
# Chunk 2131
BUN/PCr ratio Urine sodium UNa, meq/L Urine osmolality, mosmol/L H2O Fractional excretion of sodiuma Urine/plasma creatinine UCr/PCr Urinalysis (casts)
# Chunk 2132
FENa = . PNa × >20:1 granular 10–15:1 >40 <350 >2% <20 Muddy brown

Abbreviations: BUN, blood urea nitrogen; PCr, plasma creatinine concentration; PNa, plasma sodium concentration; UCr, urine creatinine concentration; UNa, urine sodium concentration.
# Chunk 2133
When prerenal and postrenal azotemia have been excluded as etiologies of renal failure, an intrinsic parenchymal renal disease is present. Intrinsic renal disease can arise from processes involving large renal vessels, intrarenal microvasculature and glomeruli, or the tubulointerstitium. Ischemic and toxic ATN account for ~90% of cases of acute intrinsic renal failure. As outlined in Fig. 61-1, the clinical setting and urinalysis are helpful in separating the possible etiologies. Prerenal azotemia and ATN are part of a spectrum of renal hypoperfusion; evidence of structural tubule injury is present in ATN, whereas prompt reversibility occurs with prerenal azotemia upon restoration of adequate renal perfusion. Thus, ATN often can be distinguished from prerenal azotemia by urinalysis and urine electrolyte composition (Table 61-2 and Fig. 61-1). Ischemic ATN is observed most frequently in patients who have undergone major surgery, trauma, severe hypovolemia, overwhelming sepsis, or extensive burns. Nephrotoxic ATN complicates the administration of many common medications, usually by inducing a combination of intrarenal vasoconstriction, direct tubule toxicity, and/ or tubule obstruction. The kidney is vulnerable to toxic injury by virtue of its rich blood supply (25% of cardiac output) and its ability to concentrate and metabolize toxins. A diligent search for hypo-tension and nephrotoxins usually uncovers the specific etiology of ATN. Discontinuation of nephrotoxins and stabilization of blood pressure often suffice without the need for dialysis while the tubules recover. An extensive list of potential drugs and toxins implicated in ATN is found in Chap. 334.
# Chunk 2134
Processes involving the tubules and interstitium can lead to acute kidney injury (AKI), a subtype of acute renal failure. These processes include drug-induced interstitial nephritis (especially by antibiotics, NSAIDs, and diuretics), severe infections (both bacterial and viral), systemic diseases (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus), and infiltrative disorders (e.g., sarcoidosis, lymphoma, or leukemia). A list of drugs associated with allergic interstitial nephritis is found in Chap. 340. Urinalysis usually shows mild to moderate proteinuria, hematuria, and pyuria (~75% of cases) and occasionally WBC casts. The finding of RBC casts in interstitial nephritis has been reported but should prompt a search for glomerular diseases (Fig. 61-1). Occasionally, renal biopsy will be needed to distinguish among these possibilities. The finding of eosinophils in the urine is suggestive of allergic interstitial nephritis or atheroembolic renal disease and is optimally observed with Hansel staining. The absence of eosinophiluria, however, does not exclude these etiologies.
# Chunk 2135
Occlusion of large renal vessels, including arteries and veins, is an uncommon cause of acute renal failure. A significant reduction in GFR by this mechanism suggests bilateral processes or, in a patient with a single functioning kidney, a unilateral process. Renal arteries can be occluded with atheroemboli, thromboemboli, in situ thrombosis, aortic dissection, or vasculitis. Atheroembolic renal failure can occur spontaneously but most often is associated with recent aortic instrumentation. The emboli are cholesterol-rich and lodge in medium and small renal arteries, with a consequent eosinophil-rich inflammatory reaction. Patients with atheroembolic acute renal failure often have a normal urinalysis, but the urine may contain eosinophils and casts. The diagnosis can be confirmed by renal biopsy, but this procedure is often unnecessary when other stigmata of atheroemboli are present (livedo reticularis, distal peripheral infarcts, eosinophilia). Renal artery thrombosis may lead
# Chunk 2136
PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases

HEMATURIA Proteinuria (>500 mg/24 h), Dysmorphic RBCs or RBC casts Pyuria, WBC casts Urine culture Urine eosinophils Hemoglobin electrophoresis Urine cytology UA of family members 24 h urinary calcium/uric acid IVP +/Renal ultrasound As indicated: retrograde pyelography or arteriogram, or cyst aspiration Cystoscopy Urogenital biopsy and evaluation Renal CT scan Renal biopsy of mass/lesion Follow periodic urinalysis Renal biopsy FIguRE 61-2 Approach to the patient with hematuria. ANCA, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody; ASLO, antistreptolysin O; CT, computed tomography; GBM, glomerular basement membrane; IVP, intravenous pyelography; RBC, red blood cell; UA, urinalysis; VDRL, Venereal Disease Research Laboratory; WBC, white blood cell.
# Chunk 2137
Diseases of the glomeruli (glomerulonephritis and vasculitis) and the renal microvasculature (hemolytic-uremic syndromes, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, and malignant hypertension) usually present with various combinations of glomerular injury: proteinuria, hematuria, reduced GFR, and alterations of sodium excretion that lead to hypertension, edema, and circulatory congestion (acute nephritic syndrome). These findings may occur as primary renal diseases or as renal manifestations of systemic diseases. The clinical setting and other laboratory data help distinguish primary renal diseases from systemic diseases. The finding of RBC casts in the urine is an indication for early renal biopsy (Fig. 61-1), as the pathologic pattern has important implications for diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment. Hematuria without RBC casts can also be an indication of glomerular disease; this evaluation is summarized in Fig. 61-2. A detailed discussion of glomerulonephritis and diseases of the microvasculature is found in Chap. 340.
# Chunk 2138
When the total daily urinary excretion of protein is >3.5 g, hypoalbuminemia, hyperlipidemia, and edema (nephrotic syndrome; Fig. 61-3) are often present as well. However, total daily urinary protein excretion >3.5 g can occur without the other features of the nephrotic syndrome in a variety of other renal diseases, including diabetes (Fig. 61-3). Plasma cell dyscrasias (multiple myeloma) can be associated with large amounts of excreted light chains in the urine, which may not be detected by dipstick. The light chains are filtered by the glomerulus and overwhelm the reabsorptive capacity of the proximal tubule. Renal failure from these disorders occurs through a variety of mechanisms, including proximal tubule injury, tubule obstruction (cast nephropathy), and light chain deposition (Chap. 340). However, not all excreted light chains are nephrotoxic.
# Chunk 2139
PROTEINURIA ON URINE DIPSTICK Quantify by 24-h urinary excretion of protein and albumin or first morning spot albumin-to-creatinine ratio RBCs or RBC casts on urinalysis In addition to disorders listed under microalbuminuria consider Myeloma-associated kidney disease (check UPEP) Intermittent proteinuria Postural proteinuria Congestive heart failure Fever Exercise Go to Fig. 61-2 Macroalbuminuria 300-3500 mg/d or 300-3500 mg/g Microalbuminuria 30-300 mg/d or 30-300 mg/g Nephrotic range > 3500 mg/d or > 3500 mg/g + Consider Early diabetes Essential hypertension Early stages of glomerulonephritis (especially with RBCs, RBC casts)Consider Early diabetes Essential hypertension Early stages of glomerulonephritis (especially with RBCs, RBC casts) Nephrotic syndrome Diabetes Amyloidosis Minimal change disease FSGS Membranous glomerulopathy IgA nephropathy
# Chunk 2140
FIguRE 61-3 Approach to the patient with proteinuria. Investigation of proteinuria is often initiated by a positive dipstick on routine urinalysis. Conventional dipsticks detect predominantly albumin and provide a semiquantitative assessment (trace, 1+, 2+, or 3+), which is influenced by urinary concentration as reflected by urine specific gravity (minimum, <1.005; maximum, 1.030). However, more exact determination of proteinuria should employ a spot morning protein/creatinine ratio (mg/g) or a 24-h urine collection (mg/24 h). FSGS, focal segmental glomerulosclerosis; RBC, red blood cell; UPEP, urine protein electrophoresis.
# Chunk 2141
Hypoalbuminemia in nephrotic syndrome occurs through excessive urinary losses and increased proximal tubule catabolism of filtered albumin. Edema forms from renal sodium retention and reduced plasma oncotic pressure, which favors fluid movement from capillaries to interstitium. To compensate for the perceived decrease in effective intravascular volume, activation of the renin-angiotensin system, stimulation of ADH, and activation of the sympathetic nervous system take place, promoting continued renal salt and water reabsorption and progressive edema. Despite these changes, hypertension is uncommon in primary kidney diseases resulting in the nephrotic syndrome (Fig. 61-3 and Chap. 338). The urinary loss of regulatory proteins and changes in hepatic synthesis contribute to the other manifestations of the nephrotic syndrome. A hypercoagulable state may arise from urinary losses of antithrombin III, reduced serum levels of proteins S and C, hyperfibrinogenemia, and enhanced platelet aggregation. Hypercholesterolemia may be severe and results from increased hepatic lipoprotein synthesis. Loss of immunoglobulins contributes to an increased risk of infection. Many diseases (some listed in Fig. 61-3) and drugs can cause the nephrotic syndrome; a complete list is found in Chap. 338.
# Chunk 2142
Isolated microscopic hematuria can be a manifestation of glomerular diseases. The RBCs of glomerular origin are often dysmorphic when examined by phase-contrast microscopy. Irregular shapes of RBCs may also result from pH and osmolarity changes produced along the distal nephron. Observer variability in detecting dysmorphic RBCs is common. The most common etiologies of isolated glomerular hematuria are IgA nephropathy, hereditary nephritis, and thin basement membrane disease. IgA nephropathy and hereditary nephritis can lead to episodic gross hematuria. A family history of renal failure is often present in hereditary nephritis, and patients with thin basement membrane disease often have family members with microscopic hematuria. A renal biopsy is needed for the definitive diagnosis of these disorders, which are discussed in more detail in Chap. 338. Hematuria with dysmorphic RBCs, RBC casts, and protein excretion >500 mg/d is virtually diagnostic of glomerulonephritis. RBC casts form as RBCs that enter the tubule fluid and become trapped in a cylindrical mold of gelled Tamm-Horsfall protein. Even in the absence of azotemia, these patients should undergo serologic evaluation and renal biopsy as outlined in Fig. 61-2.
# Chunk 2143
By history, it is often difficult for patients to distinguish urinary frequency (often of small volumes) from true polyuria (>3 L/d), and a quantification of volume by 24-h urine collection may be needed (Fig. 61-4). Polyuria results from two potential mechanisms: excretion of nonabsorbable solutes (such as glucose) or excretion of water (usually from a defect in ADH production or renal responsiveness). To distinguish a solute diuresis from a water diuresis and to determine whether the diuresis is appropriate for the clinical circumstances, urine osmolality is measured. The average person excretes between 600 and 800 mosmol of solutes per day, primarily as urea and electrolytes. If the urine output is >3 L/d and the urine is dilute (<250 mosmol/L), total mosmol excretion is normal and a water diuresis is present. This circumstance could arise from polydipsia, inadequate secretion of vasopressin (central diabetes insipidus), or failure of renal tubules to respond to vasopressin (nephrogenic diabetes insipidus). If the urine volume is >3 L/d and urine
# Chunk 2144
POLYURIA (>3 L/24 h) Urine osmolality < 250 mosmol History, low serum sodium Water deprivation test or ADH level Primary polydipsia Psychogenic Hypothalamic disease Drugs (thioridazine, chlorpromazine, anticholinergic agents) > 300 mosmol Diabetes insipidus (DI)
# Chunk 2145
Excessive filtration of a poorly reabsorbed solute such as glucose or mannitol can depress reabsorption of NaCl and water in the proximal tubule and lead to enhanced excretion in the urine. Poorly controlled diabetes mellitus with glucosuria is the most common cause of a solute diuresis, leading to volume depletion and serum hypertonicity. Since the urine sodium concentration is less than that of blood, more water than sodium is lost, causing hypernatremia and hypertonicity. Common iatrogenic solute diuresis occurs in association with mannitol administration, radiocontrast media, and high-protein feedings (enteral or parenteral), leading to increased urea production and excretion. Less commonly, excessive sodium loss may result from cystic renal diseases or Bartter’s syndrome or may develop during a tubulointerstitial process (such as resolving ATN). In these so-called salt-wasting disorders, the tubule damage results in direct impairment of sodium reabsorption and indirectly reduces the responsiveness of the tubule to aldosterone. Usually, the sodium losses are mild, and the obligatory urine output is <2 L/d; resolving ATN and postobstructive diuresis are exceptions and may be associated with significant natriuresis and polyuria.
# Chunk 2146
Formation of large volumes of dilute urine is usually due to polydipsic states or diabetes insipidus. Primary polydipsia can result from habit, psychiatric disorders, neurologic lesions, or medications. During deliberate polydipsia, extracellular fluid volume is normal or expanded and plasma vasopressin levels are reduced because serum osmolality tends to be near the lower limits of normal. Urine osmolality is also maximally dilute at 50 mosmol/L.
# Chunk 2147
Figure 62e-39 Triple phosphate crystals. (ABF/Vanderbilt Collection.) Figure 62e-41 Uric acid crystals. (ABF/Vanderbilt Collection.) 295 fluid and Electrolyte Disturbances David B. Mount SODIuM AND WATER COMPOSITION OF BODY FLuIDS Water is the most abundant constituent in the body, comprising approximately 50% of body weight in women and 60% in men. Total-63 body water is distributed in two major compartments: 55–75% is intracellular (intracellular fluid [ICF]), and 25–45% is extracellular (extracellular fluid [ECF]). The ECF is further subdivided into intravascular (plasma water) and extravascular (interstitial) spaces in a ratio of 1:3. Fluid movement between the intravascular and interstitial spaces occurs across the capillary wall and is determined by Starling forces, i.e., capillary hydraulic pressure and colloid osmotic pressure. The transcapillary hydraulic pressure gradient exceeds the corresponding oncotic pressure gradient, thereby favoring the movement of plasma ultrafiltrate into the extravascular space. The return of fluid into the intravascular compartment occurs via lymphatic flow.
# Chunk 2148
Maintenance of Arterial Circulatory Integrity Sodium is actively pumped out of cells by the Na+/K+-ATPase membrane pump. In consequence, 85–90% of body Na+ is extracellular, and the ECF volume (ECFV) is a function of total-body Na+ content. Arterial perfusion and circulatory integrity are, in turn, determined by renal Na+ retention or excretion, in addition to the modulation of systemic arterial resistance. Within the kidney, Na+ is filtered by the glomeruli and then sequentially reabsorbed by the renal tubules. The Na+ cation is typically reabsorbed with the chloride anion (Cl–), and, thus, chloride homeostasis also affects the ECFV. On a quantitative level, at a glomerular filtration rate (GFR) of 180 L/d and serum Na+ of ~140 mM, the kidney filters some 25,200 mmol/d of Na+. This is equivalent to ~1.5 kg of salt, which would occupy roughly 10 times the extracellular space; 99.6% of filtered Na+-Cl– must be reabsorbed to excrete 100 mM per day. Minute changes in renal Na+-Cl– excretion will thus have significant effects on the ECFV, leading to edema syndromes or hypovolemia.
# Chunk 2149
Approximately 9 L of fluid enter the gastrointestinal tract daily, 2 L by ingestion and 7 L by secretion; almost 98% of this volume is absorbed, such that daily fecal fluid loss is only 100–200 mL. Impaired gastrointestinal reabsorption or enhanced secretion of fluid can cause hypovolemia. Because gastric secretions have a low pH (high H+ 298 concentration), whereas biliary, pancreatic, and intestinal secretions of hypovolemia, such as acute tubular necrosis; similarly, patients with are alkaline (high HCO3 concentration), vomiting and diarrhea are diabetes insipidus will have an inappropriately dilute urine. often accompanied by metabolic alkalosis and acidosis, respectively. Evaporation of water from the skin and respiratory tract (so-called “insensible losses”) constitutes the major route for loss of solute-free
# Chunk 2150
Diagnostic Evaluation A careful history will usually determine the etiologic cause of hypovolemia. Symptoms of hypovolemia are nonspecific and include fatigue, weakness, thirst, and postural dizziness; more severe symptoms and signs include oliguria, cyanosis, abdominal and chest pain, and confusion or obtundation. Associated electrolyte disorders may cause additional symptoms, for example, muscle weakness in patients with hypokalemia. On examination, diminished skin turgor and dry oral mucous membranes are less than ideal markers of a decreased ECFV in adult patients; more reliable signs of hypovolemia include a decreased jugular venous pressure (JVP), orthostatic tachycardia (an increase of >15–20 beats/min upon standing), and orthostatic hypotension (a >10–20 mmHg drop in blood pressure on standing). More severe fluid loss leads to hypovolemic shock, with hypotension, tachycardia, peripheral vasoconstriction, and peripheral hypoperfusion; these patients may exhibit peripheral cyanosis, cold extremities, oliguria, and altered mental status.
# Chunk 2151
Disorders of serum Na+ concentration are caused by abnormalities in water homeostasis, leading to changes in the relative ratio of Na+ to body water. Water intake and circulating AVP constitute the two key effectors in the defense of serum osmolality; defects in one or both of these two defense mechanisms cause most cases of hyponatremia and hypernatremia. In contrast, abnormalities in sodium homeostasis per se lead to a deficit or surplus of whole-body Na+-Cl– content, a key determinant of the ECFV and circulatory integrity. Notably, volume status also modulates the release of AVP by the posterior pituitary, such that hypovolemia is associated with higher circulating levels of the hormone at each level of serum osmolality. Similarly, in “hypervolemic” causes of arterial underfilling, e.g., heart failure and cirrhosis, the associated neurohumoral activation is associated with an increase in circulating AVP, leading to water retention and hyponatremia. Therefore, a key concept in sodium disorders is that the absolute plasma Na+ concentration tells one nothing about the volume status of a given patient, which furthermore must be taken into account in the diagnostic and therapeutic approach.
# Chunk 2152
The renal causes of hypovolemic hyponatremia share an inappropriate loss of Na+-Cl– in the urine, leading to volume depletion and an increase in circulating AVP; urine Na+ concentration is typically >20 mM (Fig. 63-5). A deficiency in circulating aldosterone and/or its renal effects can lead to hyponatremia in primary adrenal insufficiency and other causes of hypoaldosteronism; hyperkalemia and hyponatremia in a hypotensive and/or hypovolemic patient with high urine Na+ concentration (much greater than 20 mM) should strongly suggest this diagnosis. Salt-losing nephropathies may lead to hyponatremia when sodium intake is reduced, due to impaired renal tubular function; typical causes include reflux nephropathy, interstitial nephropathies, postobstructive uropathy, medullary cystic disease, and the recovery phase of acute tubular necrosis. Thiazide diuretics cause hyponatremia via a number of mechanisms, including polydipsia and diuretic-induced volume depletion. Notably, thiazides do not inhibit the renal concentrating mechanism, such that circulating AVP retains a full effect on renal water retention. In contrast, loop diuretics, which are less frequently associated with hyponatremia, inhibit Na+-Cl– and K+ absorption by the TALH, blunting the countercurrent mechanism and reducing the ability to concentrate the urine. Increased excretion of an osmotically active nonreabsorbable or poorly reabsorbable solute can also lead to volume depletion and hyponatremia; important causes include glycosuria, ketonuria (e.g., in starvation or in diabetic or alcoholic ketoacidosis), and bicarbonaturia (e.g., in renal tubular acidosis or metabolic alkalosis, where the associated bicarbonaturia leads to loss of Na+).
# Chunk 2153
Hypervolemic Hyponatremia Patients with hypervolemic hyponatremia develop an increase in total-body Na+-Cl– that is accompanied by a proportionately greater increase in total-body water, leading to a reduced plasma Na+ concentration. As in hypovolemic hyponatremia, the causative disorders can be separated by the effect on urine Na+ concentration, with acute or chronic renal failure uniquely associated with an increase in urine Na+ concentration (Fig. 63-5). The pathophysiology of hyponatremia in the sodium-avid edematous disorders (congestive heart failure [CHF], cirrhosis, and nephrotic syndrome) is similar to that in hypovolemic hyponatremia, except that arterial filling and circulatory integrity is decreased due to the specific etiologic factors (e.g., cardiac dysfunction in CHF, peripheral vasodilation in cirrhosis). Urine Na+ concentration is typically very low, i.e., <10 mM, even after hydration with normal saline; this Na+-avid state may be obscured by diuretic therapy. The degree of hyponatremia provides an indirect index of the associated neurohumoral activation and is an important prognostic indicator in hypervolemic hyponatremia.
# Chunk 2154
Laboratory investigation should include a measurement of serum osmolality to exclude pseudohyponatremia, which is defined as the coexistence of hyponatremia with a normal or increased plasma tonicity. Most clinical laboratories measure plasma Na+ concentration by testing diluted samples with automated ion-sensitive electrodes, correcting for this dilution by assuming that plasma is 93% water. This correction factor can be inaccurate in patients with pseudohyponatremia due to extreme hyperlipidemia and/or hyperproteinemia, in whom serum lipid or protein makes up a greater percentage of plasma volume. The measured osmolality should also be converted to the effective osmolality (tonicity) by subtracting the measured concentration of urea (divided by 2.8, if in mg/dL); patients with hyponatremia have an effective osmolality of <275 mOsm/kg.
# Chunk 2155
Urine electrolytes and osmolality are crucial tests in the initial evaluation of hyponatremia. A urine Na+ concentration <20–30 mM is consistent with hypovolemic hyponatremia, in the clinical absence of a hypervolemic, Na+-avid syndrome such as CHF (Fig. 63-5). In contrast, patients with SIAD will typically excrete urine with an Na+ concentration that is >30 mM. However, there can be substantial overlap in urine Na+ concentration values in patients with SIAD and hypovolemic hyponatremia, particularly in the elderly; the ultimate “gold standard” for the diagnosis of hypovolemic hyponatremia is the demonstration that plasma Na+ concentration corrects after hydration with normal saline. Patients with thiazide-associated hyponatremia may also present with higher than expected urine Na+ concentration and other findings suggestive of SIAD; one should defer making a diagnosis of SIAD in these patients until 1–2 weeks after discontinuing the thiazide. A urine osmolality <100 mOsm/kg is suggestive of polydipsia; urine osmolality >400 mOsm/kg indicates that AVP excess is playing a more dominant role, whereas intermediate values are more consistent with multifactorial pathophysiology (e.g., AVP excess with a significant component of polydipsia). Patients with hyponatremia due to decreased solute intake (beer potomania) typically have urine Na+ concentration <20 mM and urine osmolality in the range of <100 to the low 200s. Finally, the measurement of urine K+ concentration is required to calculate the urine-to-plasma electrolyte ratio, which is useful to predict the response to fluid restriction (see the section on treatment of hyponatremia below).
# Chunk 2156
The rate of correction should be comparatively slow in chronic hyponatremia (<8–10 mM in the first 24 h and <18 mM in the first 48 h), so as to avoid ODS; lower target rates are appropriate in patients at particular risk for ODS, such as alcoholics or hypokalemic patients. Overcorrection of the plasma Na+ concentration can occur when AVP levels rapidly normalize, for example following the treatment of patients with chronic hypovolemic hyponatremia with intravenous saline or following glucocorticoid replacement of patients with hypopituitarism and secondary adrenal failure. Approximately 10% of patients treated with vaptans will overcorrect; the risk is increased if water intake is not liberalized. In the event that the plasma Na+ concentration overcorrects following therapy, be it with hypertonic saline, isotonic saline, or a vaptan, hyponatremia can be safely reinduced or stabilized by the administration of the AVP agonist desmopressin acetate (DDAVP) and/or the administration of free water, typically intravenous D5W; the goal is to prevent or reverse the development of ODS. Alternatively, the treatment of patients with marked hyponatremia can be initiated with the twice-daily administration of DDAVP to maintain constant AVP bioactivity, combined with the administration of hypertonic saline to slowly correct the serum sodium in a more controlled fashion, thus reducing upfront the risk of overcorrection.
# Chunk 2157
Diagnostic Approach The history should focus on the presence or absence of thirst, polyuria, and/or an extrarenal source for water loss, 304 such as diarrhea. The physical examination should include a detailed neurologic exam and an assessment of the ECFV; patients with a particularly large water deficit and/or a combined deficit in electrolytes and water may be hypovolemic, with reduced JVP and orthostasis. Accurate documentation of daily fluid intake and daily urine output is also critical for the diagnosis and management of hypernatremia. Laboratory investigation should include a measurement of serum and urine osmolality, in addition to urine electrolytes. The appropriate response to hypernatremia and a serum osmolality >295 mOsm/kg is an increase in circulating AVP and the excretion of low volumes (<500 mL/d) of maximally concentrated urine, i.e., urine with osmolality >800 mOsm/kg; should this be the case, then an extrarenal source of water loss is primarily responsible for the generation of hypernatremia. Many patients with hypernatremia are polyuric; should an osmotic diuresis be responsible, with excessive excretion of Na+-Cl–, glucose, and/or urea, then daily solute excretion will be >750–1000 mOsm/d (>15 mOsm/kg body water per day) (Fig. 63-6). More commonly, patients with hypernatremia and polyuria will have a predominant water diuresis, with excessive excretion of hypotonic, dilute urine. Adequate differentiation between nephrogenic and central causes of DI requires the measurement of the response in urinary osmolality to DDAVP, combined with measurement of circulating AVP in the setting of hypertonicity. By definition, patients with baseline hypernatremia are hypertonic, with an adequate stimulus for AVP by the posterior pituitary. Therefore, in contrast to polyuric patients with a normal or reduced baseline plasma Na+ concentration and osmolality, a water deprivation test (Chap. 61) is unnecessary in hypernatremia; indeed, water deprivation is absolutely contraindicated in this setting, given the risk for worsening the hypernatremia. Patients with NDI will fail to respond to DDAVP, with a urine osmolality that increases by <50% or <150 mOsm/kg from baseline, in combination with a normal or high circulating AVP level; patients with central DI will respond to DDAVP, with a reduced circulating AVP. Patients may exhibit a partial response to DDAVP, with a >50% rise in urine osmolality that nonetheless fails to reach 800 mOsm/kg; the level of circulating AVP will help differentiate the underlying cause, i.e., NDI versus central DI. In pregnant patients, AVP assays should be drawn in tubes containing the protease inhibitor 1,10-phenanthroline, to prevent in vitro degradation of AVP by placental vasopressinase. For patients with hypernatremia due to renal loss of water, it is critical to quantify ongoing daily losses using the calculated electrolyte-free water clearance, in addition to calculation of the baseline water deficit (the relevant formulas are discussed in Table 63-3). This requires daily measurement of urine electrolytes, combined with accurate measurement of daily urine volume.
# Chunk 2158
3.5 and 5.0 mM, despite marked variation in dietary K+ intake. In a healthy individual at steady state, the entire daily intake of potassium is excreted, approximately 90% in the urine and 10% in the stool; thus, the kidney plays a dominant role in potassium homeostasis. However, more than 98% of total-body potassium is intracellular, chiefly in muscle; buffering of extracellular K+ by this large intracellular pool plays a crucial role in the regulation of plasma K+ concentration. Changes in the exchange and distribution of intraand extracellular K+ can thus lead to marked hypoor hyperkalemia. A corollary is that massive necrosis and the attendant release of tissue K+ can cause severe hyperkalemia, particularly in the setting of acute kidney injury and reduced excretion of K+.
# Chunk 2159
Diagnostic Approach The cause of hypokalemia is usually evident from history, physical examination, and/or basic laboratory tests. The history should focus on medications (e.g., laxatives, diuretics, antibiotics), diet and dietary habits (e.g., licorice), and/or symptoms that suggest a particular cause (e.g., periodic weakness, diarrhea). The physical examination should pay particular attention to blood pressure, volume status, and signs suggestive of specific hypokalemic disorders, e.g., hyperthyroidism and Cushing’s syndrome. Initial laboratory evaluation should include electrolytes, BUN, creatinine, serum osmolality, Mg2+, Ca2+, a complete blood count, and urinary pH, osmolality, creatinine, and electrolytes (Fig. 63-7). The presence of a non–anion gap acidosis suggests a distal, hypokalemic renal tubular acidosis or diarrhea; calculation of the urinary anion gap can help differentiate these two diagnoses. Renal K+ excretion can be assessed with a 24-h urine collection; a 24-h K+ excretion of <15 mmol is indicative of an extrarenal cause of hypokalemia (Fig. 63-7). If only a random, spot urine sample is available, serum and urine osmolality can be used to calculate the transtubular K+ gradient (TTKG), which should be <3 in the presence of hypokalemia (see also “Hyperkalemia”). Alternatively, a urinary K+-to-creatinine ratio of >13 mmol/g creatinine (>1.5 mmol/ mmol creatinine) is compatible with excessive renal K+ excretion. Urine Cl– is usually decreased in patients with hypokalemia from a nonreabsorbable anion, such as antibiotics or HCO3–. The most common causes of chronic hypokalemic alkalosis are surreptitious vomiting, diuretic abuse, and GS; these can be distinguished by the pattern of urinary electrolytes. Hypokalemic patients with vomiting due to bulimia will thus have a urinary Cl– <10 mmol/L; urine Na+, K+, and 307 Cl– are persistently elevated in GS, due to loss of function in the thiazide-sensitive Na+-Cl– cotransporter, but less elevated in diuretic abuse and with greater variability. Urine diuretic screens for loop diuretics and thiazides may be necessary to further exclude diuretic abuse.
# Chunk 2160
PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases Hypokalemia (Serum K+<3.5 mmol/l) <15 mmol/day OR <15 mmol/g Cr >15 mmol/g Cr OR >15 mmol/day Renal loss TTKG ˜ Distal K+ secretion ˜ Tubular flow -Osmotic diuresis BP and/or Volume Extrarenal loss/remote renal loss Metabolic acidosis -GI K+ loss Normal -Profuse sweating Metabolic alkalosis -Remote diuretic use -Remote vomiting or stomach drainage -Profuse sweating Non-reabsorbable anions other than HCO3 – -Hippurate -Penicillins Metabolic acidosis -Proximal RTA -Distal RTA -DKA -Amphotericin B -Acetazolamide Acid-base status Low OR normal Acid-base status Variable Aldosterone High Low High High Low High Normal Cortisol Renin Urine K+ Emergency? Pseudohypokalemia? Move to therapy History, physical examination & basic laboratory tests Clear evidence of transcellular shift No further workup Treat accordingly Clear evidence of low intake Treat accordingly and re-evaluate Yes Yes Yes Yes No No No No -Insulin excess -˜2-adrenergic agonists -FHPP -Hyperthyroidism -Barium intoxication -Theophylline -Chloroquine >4 >20 >0.20 <0.15 <10 <2 Metabolic alkalosis Urine Ca/Cr (molar ratio) -Vomiting -Chloride diarrhea Urine Cl– (mmol/l) -Loop diuretic -Bartter’s syndrome -Thiazide diuretic -Gitelman’s syndrome -RAS -RST -Malignant HTN -PA -FH-I -Cushing’s syndrome -Liddle’s syndrome -Licorice -SAME
# Chunk 2161
Hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism is a very common predisposing factor in several overlapping subsets of hyperkalemic patients: diabetics, the elderly, and patients with renal insufficiency. Classically, patients should have suppressed PRA and aldosterone; approximately 50% have an associated acidosis, with a reduced renal excretion of NH4+, a positive urinary anion gap, and urine pH <5.5. Most patients are volume expanded, with secondary increases in circulating atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) that inhibit both renal renin release and adrenal aldosterone release.
# Chunk 2162
Clinical Features Hyperkalemia is a medical emergency due to its effects on the heart. Cardiac arrhythmias associated with hyperkalemia include sinus bradycardia, sinus arrest, slow idioventricular rhythms, ventricular tachycardia, ventricular fibrillation, and asystole. Mild increases in extracellular K+ affect the repolarization phase of the cardiac action potential, resulting in changes in T-wave morphology; further increase in plasma K+ concentration depresses intracardiac conduction, with progressive prolongation of the PR and QRS intervals. Severe hyperkalemia results in loss of the P wave and a progressive widening of the QRS complex; development of a sine-wave sinoventricular rhythm suggests impending ventricular fibrillation or asystole. Hyperkalemia can also cause a type I Brugada pattern in the electrocardiogram (ECG), with a pseudo–right bundle branch block and persistent coved ST segment elevation in at least two precordial leads. This hyperkalemic Brugada’s sign occurs in critically ill patients with severe hyperkalemia and can be differentiated from genetic Brugada’s syndrome by an absence of P waves, marked QRS widening, and an abnormal QRS axis. Classically, the electrocardiographic manifestations in hyperkalemia progress from tall peaked T waves (5.5–6.5 mM), to a loss of P waves (6.5–7.5 mM) to a widened QRS complex (7.0–8.0 mM), and, ultimately, a to a sine wave pattern (>8.0 mM). However, these changes are notoriously insensitive, particularly in patients with chronic kidney disease or end-stage renal disease.
# Chunk 2163
Diagnostic Approach The first priority in the management of hyperkalemia is to assess the need for emergency treatment, followed by a comprehensive workup to determine the cause (Fig. 63-8). History and physical examination should focus on medications, diet and dietary supplements, risk factors for kidney failure, reduction in urine output, blood pressure, and volume status. Initial laboratory 311 tests should include electrolytes, BUN, creatinine, serum osmolality, Mg2+ and Ca2+, a complete blood count, and urinary pH, osmolality, creatinine, and electrolytes. A urine Na+ concentration of <20 mM indicates that distal Na+ delivery is a limiting factor in K+ excretion; volume repletion with 0.9% saline or treatment with furosemide may be effective in reducing plasma K+ concentration. Serum and urine osmolality are required for calculation of the transtubular K+ gradient (TTKG) (Fig. 63-8). The expected values of the TTKG are largely based on historical data, and are <3 in the presence of hypokalemia and >7–8 in the presence of hyperkalemia.
# Chunk 2164
CHAPTER 63 Fluid and Electrolyte Disturbances Hyperkalemia(Serum K+ ˜5.5 mmol/l) History, physical examination & basic laboratory tests Decreased urinary K+ excretion (<40 mmol/day) Urine electrolytes TTKG Evidence of increased potassium load Urine Na+ <25 mmol/L Reduced tubular flow Reduced distal K+ secretion (GFR >20 ml/min) Advanced kidney failure (GFR ˜20 ml/min) Reduced ECV TTKG <8 (Tubular resistance) TTKG ˜8 Low aldosterone Renin 9°-Fludrocortisone Treat accordingly and re-evaluate Pseudohyperkalemia? Evidence of transcellular shift No further actionK+ ˜6.0 or ECG changes Emergency therapy Yes Yes Decreased distal Na+ delivery Yes Treat accordingly and re-evaluate -Hypertonicity (e.g., mannitol) -Hyperglycemia -Succinylcholine -˛-aminocaproic acid -Digoxin -˝-blockers -Metabolic acidosis (non-organic) -Arginine or lysine infusion -Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis -˙Insulin -Exercise Yes No No No No >8 <5 High Low Drugs -Amiloride -Spironolactone -Triamterene -Trimethoprim -Pentamidine -Eplerenone -Drospirenone -Calcineurin inhibitors Other causes -Tubulointerstitial diseases -Urinary tract obstruction -PHA type I -PHA type II -Sickle cell disease -Renal transplant -SLE -Primary adrenal insufficiency -Isolated aldosterone deficiency -Heparin/ LMW heparin -ACE-I / ARB -Ketoconazole -Diabetes mellitus -Acute GN -Tubulointerstitial diseases -PHA type II -NSAIDs -˝-Blockers FIguRE 63-8 The diagnostic approach to hyperkalemia. See text for details. ACE-I, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor; ARB, angioten-sin II receptor blocker; CCD, cortical collecting duct; ECG, electrocardiogram; ECV, effective circulatory volume; GFR, glomerular filtration rate; GN, glomerulonephritis; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; LMW heparin, low-molecular-weight heparin; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; PHA, pseudohypoaldosteronism; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus; TTKG, transtubular potassium gradient. (Used with permission from DB Mount, K Zandi-Nejad K: Disorders of potassium balance, in Brenner and Rector’s The Kidney, 8th ed, BM Brenner [ed]. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders & Company, 2008, pp 547-587.)
# Chunk 2165
A 23-year-old woman was admitted with a 3-day history of fever, cough productive of blood-tinged sputum, confusion, and orthostasis. Past medical history included type 1 diabetes mellitus. A physical examination in the emergency department indicated postural hypo-tension, tachycardia, and Kussmaul respiration. The breath was noted to smell of “acetone.” Examination of the thorax suggested consolidation in the right lower lobe.
# Chunk 2166
Sodium 130 meq/L Potassium 5.0 meq/L Chloride 96 meq/L CO2 14 meq/L Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) 20 mg/dL Creatinine 1.3 mg/dL Glucose 450 mg/dL
# Chunk 2167
The diagnosis of DKA is usually not challenging but should be considered in all patients with an elevated AG and metabolic acidosis. Hyperglycemia and ketonemia (positive acetoacetate at a dilution of 1:8 or greater) are sufficient criteria for diagnosis in patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus. The Δ[HCO3−] should approximate the increase in the plasma AG (ΔAG), but this equality can be modified by several factors. For example, the ΔAG will often decrease with IV hydration, as glomerular filtration increases and ketones are excreted into the urine. The decrement in plasma sodium is the result of hyperglycemia, which induces the movement of water into the extracellular compartment from the intracellular compartment of cells that require insulin for the transport of glucose. Additionally, a natriuresis occurs in response to an osmotic diuresis associated with hyperglycemia. Moreover, in patients with DKA, thirst is very common and water ingestion often continues. The plasma potassium concentration is usually mildly elevated, but in the face of acidosis, and as a result of the ongoing osmotic diuresis, a significant total-body deficit of potassium is almost always present. Recognition of the total-body deficit of potassium is critically important. The inclusion of potassium replacement in the therapeutic regimen at the appropriate time and with the appropriate indications (see below) is essential. Volume depletion is a very common finding in DKA and is a pivotal component in the pathogenesis of the disorder.
# Chunk 2168
A 25-year-old man with a 6-year history of HIV-AIDS complicated recently by Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia (PCP) was treated with intravenous trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (20 mg trimethoprim/kg per day). On day 4 of treatment, the following laboratory data were
# Chunk 2169
PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases

H2O AQP-2AQP-3, 4 H2O

FIGuRE 64e-1 Water, sodium, potassium, ammonia, and proton transport in principal cells (PC) and adjacent type A intercalated cells (A-IC). Water is absorbed down the osmotic gradient by principal cells, through the apical aquaporin-2 (AQP-2) and basolateral aquaporin-3 (AQP-3) and aquaporin-4 (AQP-4) channels. The absorption of Na+ via the amiloride-sensitive epithelial sodium channel (ENaC) generates a lumen-negative potential difference, which drives K+ excretion through the apical secretory K+ channel, ROMK (renal outer medullary K+ channel), and/or the flow-dependent maxi-K channel. Transepithelial ammonia (NH3) transport and proton transport occur in adjacent type A intercalated cells, via apical and basolateral ammonia channels and apical H+-ATPase pumps, respectively; NH4+ is ultimately excreted in the urine, in the defense of systemic pH. Electrogenic proton secretion by type A intercalated cells is also affected by the lumen-negative potential difference generated by the adjacent principal cells, such that reduction of this lumen-negative electrical gradient can reduce H+ excretion. Type A intercalated cells also reabsorb filtered  K+ in potassium-deficient states, via apical H+/K+-ATPase.
# Chunk 2170
Knowledge of the factors controlling potassium secretion by the cortical collecting tubule principal cell can be helpful in understanding the basis for treatment of the hyperkalemia, especially if discontinuing the offending agent is not a reasonable clinical option. Potassium secretion is encouraged by a higher urine flow rate, increased distal delivery of sodium, distal delivery of a poorly reabsorbed anion (such as bicarbonate), and/or administration of a loop diuretic. Therefore, the approach to treatment in this patient should include intravenous 0.9% NaCl to expand the ECF and deliver more Na+ and Cl− to the cortical collecting tubule. In addition, because the trimethoprim molecule must be protonated to inhibit ENaC, alkalinization of the renal tubule fluid enhances distal tubular K+ secretion. As an alternative to inducing bicarbonaturia to assist in potassium secretion, a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor may be administered to induce a kaliuresis. However, in the case presented here, for acetazolamide to be effective, the non-AG metabolic acidosis in this patient would first need to be corrected; Acetazolamide would, thus, require the coadministration of intravenous sodium bicarbonate for maximal benefit. Finally, systemic hyperkalemia directly suppresses renal ammoniagenesis, ammonium excretion, and, thus, acid excretion. Correcting the hyperkalemia with a potassium-binding resin (Kayexalate) is sometimes appropriate in these patients; the subsequent decline in the plasma K+ concentration will also increase urinary ammonium excretion, helping correct the acidosis.
# Chunk 2171
A 63-year-old man was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) with a severe aspiration pneumonia. Past medical history included schizophrenia, for which he required institutional care; treatment had included neuroleptics and intermittent lithium, the latter restarted 6 months before admission. The patient was treated with antibiotics and intubated for several days, with the development of polyuria (3–5 L/d), hypernatremia, and acute renal insufficiency; the peak plasma Na+ concentration was 156 meq/L, and peak creatinine was 2.6 mg/dL. Urine osmolality was measured once and reported as 157 mOsm/kg, with a coincident plasma osmolality of 318 mOsm/kg. Lithium was stopped on admission to the ICU.
# Chunk 2172
This patient became polyuric after admission to the ICU with severe pneumonia, developing significant hypernatremia and acute renal insufficiency. Polyuria can result from either an osmotic diuresis or a water diuresis. An osmotic diuresis can be caused by excessive excretion of Na+-Cl−, mannitol, glucose, and/or urea, with a daily solute excretion of >750–1000 mOsm/d (>15 mOsm/kg body water per day). In this case, however, the patient was excreting large volumes of very hypotonic urine, with a urine osmolality that was substantially lower than that of plasma; this, by definition, was a water diuresis, resulting in inappropriate excretion of free water and hypernatremia. The appropriate response to hypernatremia and a plasma osmolality >295 mOsm/kg is an increase in circulating vasopressin (AVP) and the excretion of low volumes (<500 mL/d) of maximally concentrated urine, i.e., urine with osmolality >800 mOsm/kg. This patient’s response to hypernatremia was clearly inappropriate, due to either a loss of circulating AVP (central diabetes insipidus [CDI]) or renal resistance to AVP (nephrogenic diabetes insipidus [NDI]). Ongoing loss of free water was sufficiently severe in this patient that absolute hypovolemia ensued, despite the fact that approximately two-thirds of the excreted water was derived from the intracellular fluid compartment rather than the ECF compartment. Hypovolemia led to an acute decrease in the glomerular filtration rate (GFR), i.e., acute renal insufficiency, with gradual improvement following hydration (see below).
# Chunk 2173
The patient’s water deprivation test was consistent with NDI, with an AVP level within the normal range in the setting of hypernatremia (i.e., no evidence of CDI) and an inappropriately low urine osmolality that failed to increase by >50% or >150 mOsm/kg after both water deprivation and the administration of DDAVP. This defect would be considered compatible with complete NDI; patients with partial NDI can achieve urine osmolalities of 500–600 mOsm/kg after DDAVP treatment but will not maximally concentrate their urine to 800 mOsm/kg or higher.
# Chunk 2174
How should this patient be treated? What are the major pitfalls of therapy?

This patient developed severe hypernatremia due to a water diuresis from lithium-associated NDI. Treatment of hypernatremia must include both replacement of the existing free water deficit and daily replacement of ongoing free water loss. The first step is to estimate total-body water (TBW), typically estimated as 50% of the body weight in women and 60% in men. The free water deficit is then calculated as ([Na+ − 140]/140) × TBW. In this patient, the free water deficit was 4.2 L at a weight of 97.5 kg and plasma Na+ concentration of 150 meq/L. This free water deficit should be replaced slowly over 48–72 h to avoid increasing the plasma Na+ concentration by >10 meq/L per 24 h. A common mistake is to replace this deficit while neglecting to replace ongoing losses of free water, such that plasma Na+ concentration either fails to correct or, in fact, increases.
# Chunk 2175
For this patient, the CeH2O was 2.5 L/d when initially evaluated, i.e., with urine Na+ and K+ concentrations of 34 and 5.2 meq/L, plasma Na+ concentration of 150 meq/L, and a urinary volume of 3.4 L. Therefore, the patient was given 2.5 L of D5W over the first 24 h to replace ongoing free water losses, along with 2.1 L of D5W to replace half his free water deficit. Daily random urine electrolytes and urinary volume measurement can be used to monitor CeH2O and adjust daily fluid administration in this manner, while following plasma Na+ concentration. Physicians often calculate the free water deficit to guide therapy of hypernatremia, providing half the deficit in the first 24 h. This approach can be adequate in patients who do not have significant ongoing losses of free water, e.g., with hypernatremia due to decreased free water intake. This case illustrates how free water requirements can be grossly underestimated in hypernatremic patients if ongoing, daily free water losses are not taken into account.
# Chunk 2176
A 78-year-old man was admitted with pneumonia and hyponatremia. Plasma Na+ concentration was initially 129 meq/L, decreasing within 3 days to 118–120 meq/L despite fluid restriction to 1 L/d. A chest computed tomography (CT) revealed a right 2.8 × 1.6 cm infrahilar mass and postobstructive pneumonia. The patient was an active smoker. Past medical history was notable for laryngeal carcinoma treated 15 years prior with radiation therapy, renal cell carcinoma, peripheral vascular disease, and hypothyroidism. On review of systems, he denied headache, nausea, and vomiting. He had chronic hip pain, managed with acetaminophen with codeine. Other medications included cilostazol, amoxicillin/clavulanate, digoxin, diltiazem, and thyroxine. He was euvolemic on examination, with no lymphadenopathy and a normal chest examination.
# Chunk 2177
Cortisol 25 μg/dL TSH 2.6 Uric acid 2.7 mg/dL

Urine: Na+ 97 K+ 22 Cl− 86 Osm 597

The patient was treated with furosemide, 20 mg PO bid, and salt tablets. The plasma Na+ concentration increased to 129 meq/L with this therapy; however, the patient developed orthostatic hypotension and dizziness. He was started on demeclocycline, 600 mg PO in the morning and 300 mg in the evening, just before discharge from hospital. Plasma Na+ concentration increased to 140 meq/L with a BUN of 23 and creatinine of 1.4, at which point demeclocycline was reduced to 300 mg PO bid. Bronchoscopic biopsy eventually showed small-cell lung cancer; the patient declined chemotherapy and was admitted to hospice.
# Chunk 2178
What factors contributed to this patient’s hyponatremia? What are the therapeutic options?

This patient developed hyponatremia in the context of a central lung mass and postobstructive pneumonia. He was clinically euvolemic, with a generous urine Na+ concentration and low plasma uric acid concentration. He was euthyroid, with no evidence of pituitary dysfunction or secondary adrenal insufficiency. The clinical presentation is consistent with the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis (SIAD). Although pneumonia was a potential contributor to the SIAD, it was notable that the plasma Na+ concentration decreased despite a clinical response to antibiotics. It was suspected that this patient had SIAD due to small-cell lung cancer, with a central lung mass on chest CT and a significant smoking history. There was a history of laryngeal cancer and renal cancer but with no evidence of recurrent disease; these malignancies were not considered contributory to his SIAD. Biopsy of the lung mass ultimately confirmed the diagnosis of small-cell lung cancer, which is responsible for ~75% of malignancy-associated SIAD; ~10% of patients with this neuroendocrine tumor will have a plasma Na+ concentration of <130 meq/L at presentation. The patient had no other “nonosmotic” stimuli for an increase in AVP, with no medications associated with SIAD and minimal pain or nausea.
# Chunk 2179
The patient received 1 L of saline over the first 5 h of her hospital admission. On examination at hour 6, the heart rate was 72 sitting and 90 standing, and blood pressure was 105/50 mmHg lying and standing. Her jugular venous pressure (JVP) was indistinct with no peripheral edema. On abdominal examination, the patient had a slight increase in bowel sounds but a nontender abdomen and no organomegaly.
# Chunk 2180
This patient presented with hypovolemic hyponatremia and a “prerenal” reduction in GFR, with an increase in serum creatinine. She had experienced diarrhea for some time and manifested an orthostatic tachycardia after a liter of normal saline. As expected for hypovolemic hyponatremia, the urine Na+ concentration was <20 meq/L in the absence of congestive heart failure or other causes of hypervolemic hyponatremia, and she responded to saline hydration with an increase in plasma Na+ concentration and a decrease in creatinine.
# Chunk 2181
A 44-year-old woman was referred from a local hospital after presenting with flaccid paralysis. Severe hypokalemia was documented (2.0 meq/L), and an infusion containing KCl was initiated.
# Chunk 2182
The diagnosis in this case is classic hypokalemic dRTA from Sjögren’s syndrome. This patient presented with a non-AG metabolic acidosis. The urine AG was positive, indicating an abnormally low excretion of ammonium in the face of systemic acidosis. The urine pH was inappropriately alkaline, yet there was no evidence of hypercalciuria, nephrocalcinosis, or bone disease. The patient was subsequently shown to exhibit hyperglobulinemia. These findings, taken together, indicate that the cause of this patient’s hypokalemia and non-AG metabolic acidosis was a renal tubular abnormality. The hypokalemia and abnormally low excretion of ammonium, as estimated by the urine AG, in the absence of glycosuria, phosphaturia, or aminoaciduria (Fanconi’s syndrome), defines the entity of classic distal renal tubular acidosis (dRTA), also known as type 1 RTA. Because of the hyperglobulinemia, additional serology was obtained, providing evidence for the diagnosis of primary Sjögren’s syndrome. Furthermore, additional history indicated a 5-year history of xerostomia and keratoconjunctivitis sicca but without synovitis, arthritis, or rash.
# Chunk 2183
A 32-year-old man was admitted to the hospital with weakness and hypokalemia. The patient had been very healthy until 2 months previously when he developed intermittent leg weakness. His review of systems was otherwise negative. He denied drug or laxative abuse and was on no medications. Past medical history was unremarkable, with no history of neuromuscular disease. Family history was notable for a sister with thyroid disease. Physical examination was notable only for reduced deep tendon reflexes.
# Chunk 2184
Sodium 139 143 meq/L Potassium 2.0 3.8 meq/L Chloride 105 107 meq/L Bicarbonate 26 29 meq/L BUN 11 16 mg/dL Creatinine 0.6 1.0 mg/dL Calcium 8.8 8.8 mg/dL Phosphate 1.2 mg/dL Albumin 3.8 meq/L TSH 0.08 μIU/L (normal 0.2–5.39) Free T4 41 pmol/L (normal 10–27)
# Chunk 2185
Ultimately, definitive therapy for TPP requires treatment of the associated hyperthyroidism. In the short term, however, potassium replacement is necessary to hasten muscle recovery and prevent cardiac arrhythmias. The average recovery time of an acute attack is reduced by ~50% in patients treated with intravenous K+-Cl− at a rate of 10 meq/h; however, this incurs a significant risk of rebound hyperkalemia, with up to 70% developing a plasma K+ concentration of >5.0 meq/L. This potential for rebound hyperkalemia is a general problem in the management of all causes of redistributive hypokalemia, resulting in the need to distinguish these patients accurately and rapidly from those with a large K+ deficit due to renal or extrarenal loss of K+. An attractive alternative to K+-Cl− replacement in TPP is treatment with high-dose propranolol (3 mg/kg), which rapidly reverses the associated hypokalemia, hypophosphatemia, and paralysis. Notably, rebound hyperkalemia is not associated with this treatment.
# Chunk 2186
A 66-year-old man was admitted to hospital with a plasma K+ concentration of 1.7 meq/L and profound weakness. The patient had noted progressive weakness over several days, to the point that he was unable to rise from bed. Past medical history was notable for small-cell lung cancer with metastases to brain, liver, and adrenals. The patient had been treated with one cycle of cisplatin/etoposide 1 year before this admission, which was complicated by acute kidney injury (peak creatinine of 5, with residual chronic kidney disease), and three subsequent cycles of cyclophosphamide/doxorubicin/vincristine, in addition to 15 treatments with whole-brain radiation.
# Chunk 2187
A stuporous 22-year-old man was admitted with a history of behaving strangely. His friends indicated he experienced recent emotional problems stemming from a failed relationship and had threatened suicide. There was a history of alcohol abuse, but his friends were unaware of recent alcohol consumption. The patient was obtunded on admission, with no evident focal neurologic deficits. The remainder of the physical examination was unremarkable.
# Chunk 2188
The first step in the diagnostic evaluation of hyperor hypocalcemia is to ensure that the alteration in serum calcium levels is not due to abnormal albumin concentrations. About 50% of total calcium is ionized, and the rest is bound principally to albumin. Although direct measurements of ionized calcium are possible, they are easily influenced by collection methods and other artifacts; thus, it is generally preferable to measure total calcium and albumin to “correct” the serum calcium. When serum albumin concentrations are reduced, a corrected calcium concentration is calculated by adding 0.2 mM (0.8 mg/dL) to the total calcium level for every decrement in serum albumin of 1.0 g/dL below the reference value of 4.1 g/dL for albumin, and, conversely, for elevations in serum albumin.
# Chunk 2189
Once true hypercalcemia is established, the second most important laboratory test in the diagnostic evaluation is a PTH level using a two-site assay for the intact hormone. Increases in PTH are often accompanied by hypophosphatemia. In addition, serum creatinine should be measured to assess renal function; hypercalcemia may impair renal function, and renal clearance of PTH may be altered depending on the fragments detected by the assay. If the PTH level is increased (or “inappropriately normal”) in the setting of elevated calcium and low phosphorus, the diagnosis is almost always primary hyperparathyroidism. Because individuals with FHH may also present with mildly elevated PTH levels and hypercalcemia, this diagnosis should be considered and excluded because parathyroid surgery is ineffective in this condition. A calcium/creatinine clearance ratio (calculated as urine calcium/ serum calcium divided by urine creatinine/serum creatinine) of <0.01 is suggestive of FHH, particularly when there is a family history of mild, asymptomatic hypercalcemia. In addition, sequence analysis of the CaSR gene is now commonly performed for the definitive diagnosis of FHH, although in some families, FHH may be caused by mutations in G proteins that mediate signaling by the CaSR. Ectopic PTH secretion is extremely rare.
# Chunk 2190
PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases

Mild, asymptomatic hypercalcemia does not require immediate therapy, and management should be dictated by the underlying diagnosis. By contrast, significant, symptomatic hypercalcemia usually requires therapeutic intervention independent of the etiology of hypercalcemia. Initial therapy of significant hypercalcemia begins with volume expansion because hypercalcemia invariably leads to dehydration; 4–6 L of intravenous saline may be required over the first 24 h, keeping in mind that underlying comorbidities (e.g., congestive heart failure) may require the use of loop diuretics to enhance sodium and calcium excretion. However, loop diuretics should not be initiated until the volume status has been restored to normal. If there is increased calcium mobilization from bone (as in malignancy or severe hyperparathyroidism), drugs that inhibit bone resorption should be considered. Zoledronic acid (e.g., 4 mg intravenously over ∼30 min), pamidronate (e.g., 60–90 mg intravenously over 2–4 h), and ibandronate (2 mg intravenously over 2 h) are bisphosphonates that are commonly used for the treatment of hypercalcemia of malignancy in adults. Onset of action is within 1–3 days, with normalization of serum calcium levels occurring in 60–90% of patients. Bisphosphonate infusions may need to be repeated if hypercalcemia relapses. An alternative to the bisphosphonates is gallium nitrate (200 mg/m2 intravenously daily for 5 days), which is also effective, but has potential nephrotoxicity. In rare instances, dialysis may be necessary. Finally, although intravenous phosphate chelates calcium and decreases serum calcium levels, this therapy can be toxic because calcium-phosphate complexes may deposit in tissues and cause extensive organ damage.
# Chunk 2191
In patients with 1,25(OH)2D-mediated hypercalcemia, glucocorticoids are the preferred therapy, as they decrease 1,25(OH)2D production. Intravenous hydrocortisone (100–300 mg daily) or oral prednisone (40–60 mg daily) for 3–7 days is used most often. Other drugs, such as ketoconazole, chloroquine, and hydroxychloroquine, may also decrease 1,25(OH)2D production and are used occasionally.
# Chunk 2192
The approach to treatment depends on the severity of the hypocalcemia, the rapidity with which it develops, and the accompanying complications (e.g., seizures, laryngospasm). Acute, symptomatic hypocalcemia is initially managed with calcium gluconate, 10 mL 10% wt/vol (90 mg or 2.2 mmol) intravenously, diluted in 50 mL of 5% dextrose or 0.9% sodium chloride, given intravenously over 5 min. Continuing hypocalcemia often requires a constant intravenous infusion (typically 10 ampules of calcium gluconate or 900 mg of calcium in 1 L of 5% dextrose or 0.9% sodium chloride administered over 24 h). Accompanying hypomagnesemia, if present, should be treated with appropriate magnesium supplementation.
# Chunk 2193
Chronic hypocalcemia due to hypoparathyroidism is treated with calcium supplements (1000–1500 mg/d elemental calcium in divided doses) and either vitamin D2 or D3 (25,000–100,000 U daily) or calcitriol [1,25(OH)2D, 0.25–2 μg/d]. Other vitamin D metabolites (dihydrotachysterol, alfacalcidiol) are now used less frequently. Vitamin D deficiency, however, is best treated using vitamin D supplementation, with the dose depending on the severity of the deficit and the underlying cause. Thus, nutritional vitamin D deficiency generally responds to relatively low doses of vitamin D (50,000 U, 2–3 times per week for several months), whereas vitamin D deficiency due to malabsorption may require much higher doses 315 (100,000 U/d or more). The treatment goal is to bring serum calcium into the low normal range and to avoid hypercalciuria, which may lead to nephrolithiasis.
# Chunk 2194
acidosis. An increase in the AG is most often due to an increase in unmeasured anions and, less commonly, is due to a decrease in unmeasured cations (calcium, magnesium, potassium). In addition, the AG may increase with an increase in anionic albumin, because of either increased albumin concentration or alkalosis, which alters albumin charge. A decrease in the AG can be due to (1) an increase in unmeasured cations; (2) the addition to the blood of abnormal cations, such as lithium (lithium intoxication) or cationic immunoglobulins (plasma cell dyscrasias); (3) a reduction in the major plasma anion albumin concentration (nephrotic syndrome); (4) a decrease in the effective anionic charge on albumin by acidosis; or (5) hyperviscosity and severe hyperlipidemia, which can lead to an underestimation of sodium and chloride concentrations. A fall in serum albumin by 1 g/dL from the normal value (4.5 g/dL) decreases the AG by 2.5 meq/L. Know the common causes of a high-AG acidosis (Table 66-3).
# Chunk 2195
PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases

APPROACH TO THE PATIENT:

There are four principal causes of a high-AG acidosis: (1) lactic acidosis, (2) ketoacidosis, (3) ingested toxins, and (4) acute and chronic renal failure (Table 66-4). Initial screening to differentiate the high-AG acidoses should include (1) a probe of the history for evidence of drug and toxin ingestion and measurement of arterial blood gas to detect coexistent respiratory alkalosis (salicylates); (2) determination of whether diabetes mellitus is present (diabetic ketoacidosis); (3) a search for evidence of alcoholism or increased levels of β-hydroxybutyrate (alcoholic ketoacidosis); (4) observation for clinical signs of uremia and determination of the blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine (uremic acidosis); (5) inspection of the urine for oxalate crystals (ethylene glycol); and (6) recognition of the numerous clinical settings in which lactate levels may be increased (hypotension, shock, cardiac failure, leukemia, cancer, and drug or toxin ingestion).
# Chunk 2196
ALCOHOLIC kETOACIdOSIS (AkA) Chronic alcoholics can develop ketoacidosis when alcohol consumption is abruptly curtailed and nutrition is poor. AKA is usually associated with binge drinking, vomiting, abdominal pain, starvation, and volume depletion. The glucose concentration is variable, and acidosis may be severe because of elevated ketones, predominantly β-hydroxybutyrate. Hypoperfusion may enhance lactic acid production, chronic respiratory alkalosis may accompany liver disease, and metabolic alkalosis can result from vomiting (refer to the relationship between ∆AG and ∆HCO3 -). Thus, mixed acid-base disorders are common in AKA. As the circulation is restored by administration of isotonic saline, the preferential accumulation of β-hydroxybutyrate is then shifted to acetoacetate. This explains the common clinical observation of an increasingly positive nitroprusside reaction as the patient improves. The nitroprusside ketone reaction (Acetest) can detect acetoacetic acid but not β-hydroxybutyrate, so that the degree of ketosis and ketonuria can not only change with therapy, but can be underestimated initially. Patients with AKA usually present with relatively normal renal function, as opposed to DKA, where renal function is often compromised because of volume depletion (osmotic diuresis) or diabetic nephropathy. The AKA patient with normal renal function may excrete relatively large quantities of ketoacids in the urine and, therefore, may have a relatively normal
# Chunk 2197
Vigorous gastric lavage with isotonic saline (not NaHCO3) should be initiated immediately, followed by administration of activated charcoal per nasogastric tube. In the acidotic patient, to facilitate removal of salicylate, IV NaHCO3 is administered in amounts adequate to alkalinize the urine and to maintain urine output (urine pH >7.5). While this form of therapy is straightforward in acidotic patients, a coexisting respiratory alkalosis may make this approach hazardous. Alkalemic patients should not receive NaHCO3. Acetazolamide may be administered in the face of alkalemia, when an alkaline diuresis cannot be achieved, or to ameliorate volume overload associated with NaHCO3 administration, but this drug can cause systemic metabolic acidosis if HCO3 is not replaced. Hypokalemia should be anticipated with an alkaline diuresis and should be treated promptly and aggressively. Glucose-containing fluids should be administered because of the danger of hypoglycemia. Excessive insensible fluid losses may cause severe volume depletion and hypernatremia. If renal failure prevents rapid clearance of salicylate, hemodialysis can be performed against a bicarbonate dialysate.
# Chunk 2198
ALCOHOLS Under most physiologic conditions, sodium, urea, and glucose generate the osmotic pressure of blood. Plasma osmolality is calculated according to the following expression: Posm = 2Na+ + Glu + BUN (all in mmol/L), or, using conventional laboratory values in which glucose and BUN are expressed in milligrams per deciliter: Posm = 2Na+ + Glu/18 + BUN/2.8. The calculated and determined osmolality should agree within 10–15 mmol/kg H2O. When the measured osmolality exceeds the calculated osmolality by >10–15 mmol/kg H2O, one of two circumstances prevails. Either the serum sodium is spuriously low, as with hyperlipidemia or hyperproteinemia (pseudohyponatremia), or osmolytes other than sodium salts, glucose, or urea have accumulated in plasma. Examples of such osmolytes include mannitol, radiocontrast media, ethanol, isopropyl alcohol, ethylene glycol, propylene glycol, methanol, and acetone. In this situation, the difference between the calculated osmolality and the measured osmolality (osmolar gap) is proportional to the concentration of the unmeasured solute. With an appropriate clinical history and index of suspicion, identification of an osmolar gap is helpful in identifying the presence of poison-associated AG acidosis. Three alcohols may cause fatal intoxications: ethylene glycol, methanol, and isopropyl alcohol. All cause an elevated osmolal gap, but only the first two cause a high-AG acidosis.
# Chunk 2199
ETHYLENE gLYCOL (See also Chap. 472e) Ingestion of ethylene glycol (commonly used in antifreeze) leads to a metabolic acidosis and severe damage to the CNS, heart, lungs, and kidneys. The increased AG and osmolar gap are attributable to ethylene glycol and its metabolites, oxalic acid, glycolic acid, and other organic acids. Lactic acid production increases secondary to inhibition of the tricarboxylic acid cycle and altered intracellular redox state. Diagnosis is facilitated by recognizing oxalate crystals in the urine, the presence of an osmolar gap in serum, and a high-AG acidosis. Although use of a Wood’s lamp to 319 visualize the fluorescent additive to commercial antifreeze in the urine of patients with ethylene glycol ingestion, this is rarely reproducible. The combination of a high AG and high osmolar gap in a patient suspected of ethylene glycol ingestion should be taken as evidence of ethylene glycol toxicity. Treatment should not be delayed while awaiting measurement of ethylene glycol levels in this setting.
# Chunk 2200
Renal Failure (See also Chap. 335) The hyperchloremic acidosis of moderate renal insufficiency is eventually converted to the high-AG acidosis of advanced renal failure. Poor filtration and reabsorption of organic anions contribute to the pathogenesis. As renal disease progresses, the number of functioning nephrons eventually becomes insufficient to keep pace with net acid production. Uremic acidosis is characterized, therefore, by a reduced rate of NH4+ production and excretion. The acid retained in chronic renal disease is buffered by alkaline salts from bone. Despite significant retention of acid (up to 20 mmol/d), the serum [HCO3 -] does not decrease further, indicating participation of buffers outside the extracellular compartment. Chronic metabolic acidosis results in significant loss of bone mass due to reduction in bone calcium carbonate. Chronic acidosis also increases urinary calcium excretion, proportional to cumulative acid retention.
# Chunk 2201
Proximal RTA (type 2 RTA) (Chap. 339) is most often due to generalized proximal tubular dysfunction manifested by glycosuria, generalized aminoaciduria, and phosphaturia (Fanconi syndrome). With a low plasma [HCO3 -], the urine pH is acid (pH <5.5). The fractional excretion of [HCO3 -] may exceed 10–15% when the serum HCO3 - >20 mmol/L. Because HCO3 is not reabsorbed normally in the proximal tubule, therapy with NaHCO3 will enhance renal potassium wasting and hypokalemia.
# Chunk 2202
To establish the cause of metabolic alkalosis (Table 66-6), it is necessary to assess the status of the extracellular fluid volume (ECFV), the recumbent and upright blood pressure, the serum [K+], and the renin-aldosterone system. For example, the presence of chronic hypertension and chronic hypokalemia in an alkalotic patient suggests either mineralocorticoid excess or that the hypertensive patient is receiving diuretics. Low plasma renin activity and normal urine [Na+] and [Cl-] in a patient who is not taking diuretics indicate a primary mineralocorticoid excess syndrome. The combination of hypokalemia and alkalosis in a normotensive, nonedematous patient can be due to Bartter’s or Gitelman’s syndrome, magnesium deficiency, vomiting, exogenous alkali, or diuretic ingestion. Determination of urine electrolytes (especially the urine [Cl-]) and screening of the urine for diuretics may be helpful. If the urine is alkaline, with an elevated [Na+] and [K+] but low [Cl-], the diagnosis is usually either vomiting (overt or surreptitious) or alkali ingestion. If the urine is relatively acid and has low concentrations of Na+, K+, and Cl-, the most likely possibilities are prior vomiting, the posthypercapnic state, or prior diuretic ingestion. If, on the other hand, neither the urine sodium, potassium, nor chloride concentrations are depressed, magnesium deficiency, Bartter’s or Gitelman’s syndrome, or current diuretic ingestion should be considered. Bartter’s syndrome is distinguished from Gitelman’s syndrome because of hypocalciuria and hypomagnesemia in the latter disorder.
# Chunk 2203
METABOLIC ALKALOSIS ASSOCIATED WITH ECFV CONTRACTION, K+ DEPLETION,

AND SECONDARY HYPERRENINEMIC HYPERALDOSTERONISM gastrointestinal Origin Gastrointestinal loss of H+ from vomiting or gastric aspiration results in retention of HCO3 -. During active vomiting, the filtered load of bicarbonate is acutely increased to exceed the reabsorptive capacity of the proximal tubule for HCO3 so that the urine becomes alkaline and high in potassium. When vomiting ceases, the persistence of volume, potassium, and chloride depletion causes 322 maintenance of the alkalosis because of an enhanced capacity of the nephron to reabsorb HCO3 -. Correction of the contracted ECFV with NaCl and repair of K+ deficits corrects the acid-base disorder by restoring the ability of the kidney to excrete the excess bicarbonate.
# Chunk 2204
The initial evaluation of ED begins with a review of the patient’s medical, surgical, sexual, and psychosocial histories. The history should note whether the patient has experienced pelvic trauma, surgery, or radiation. In light of the increasing recognition of the relationship between lower urinary tract symptoms and ED, it is advisable to evaluate for the presence of symptoms of bladder outlet obstruction. Questions should focus on the onset of symptoms, the presence and duration of partial erections, and the progression of ED. A history of nocturnal or early morning erections is useful for distinguishing physiologic ED from psychogenic ED. Nocturnal erections occur during rapid eye movement (REM) sleep and require intact neurologic and circulatory systems. Organic causes of ED generally are characterized by a gradual and persistent change in rigidity or the inability to sustain nocturnal, coital, or self-stimulated erections. The patient should be questioned about the presence of penile curvature or pain with coitus. It is also important to address libido, as decreased sexual drive and ED are sometimes the earliest signs of endocrine abnormalities (e.g., increased prolactin, decreased testosterone levels). It is useful to ask whether the problem is confined to coitus with one partner or also involves other partners; ED not uncommonly arises in association with new or extramarital sexual relationships. Situational ED, as opposed to consistent ED, suggests psychogenic causes. Ejaculation is much less commonly affected than erection, but questions should be asked about whether ejaculation is normal, premature, delayed, or absent. Relevant risk factors should be identified, such as diabetes mellitus, coronary artery disease (CAD), and neurologic disorders. The patient’s surgical history should be explored with an emphasis on bowel, bladder, prostate, and vascular procedures. A complete drug history is also important. Social changes that may precipitate ED are also crucial to the evaluation, including health worries, spousal death, divorce, relationship difficulties, and financial concerns.
# Chunk 2205
Same as sildenafil

Intraurethral prostaglandin E1 (alprostadil), in the form of a semisolid pellet (doses of 125–1000 μg), is delivered with an applicator. Approximately 65% of men receiving intraurethral alprostadil respond with an erection when tested in the office, but only 50% achieve successful coitus at home. Intraurethral insertion is associated with a markedly reduced incidence of priapism in comparison to intracavernosal injection.
# Chunk 2206
Although there are anatomic differences as well as variation in the density of vascular and neural beds in males and females, the primary effectors of sexual response are strikingly similar. Intact sensation is important for arousal. Thus, reduced levels of sexual functioning are more common in women with peripheral neuropathies (e.g., diabetes). Vaginal lubrication is a transudate of serum that results from the increased pelvic blood flow associated with arousal. Vascular insufficiency from a variety of causes may compromise adequate lubrication and result in dyspareunia. Cavernosal and arteriole smooth-muscle relaxation occurs via increased nitric oxide synthase (NOS) activity and produces engorgement in the clitoris and the surrounding vestibule. Orgasm requires an intact sympathetic outflow tract; hence, orgasmic disorders are common in female patients with spinal cord injuries.
# Chunk 2207
Because adrenal androgens are readily suppressed by low doses of glucocorticoids, the dexamethasone androgen-suppression test may broadly distinguish ovarian from adrenal androgen overproduction. A blood sample is obtained before and after the administration of dexamethasone (0.5 mg orally every 6 h for 4 days). An adrenal source is suggested by suppression of unbound testosterone into the normal range; incomplete suppression suggests ovarian androgen excess. An overnight 1-mg dexamethasone suppression test, with measurement of 8:00 a.m. serum cortisol, is useful when there is clinical suspicion of Cushing’s syndrome (Chap. 406).
# Chunk 2208
Oral contraceptives are contraindicated in women with a history of thromboembolic disease and women with increased risk of breast or other estrogen-dependent cancers (Chap. 413). There is a relative contraindication to the use of oral contraceptives in smokers and those with hypertension or a history of migraine headaches. In most trials, estrogen-progestin therapy alone improves the extent of acne by a maximum of 50–70%. The effect on hair growth may not be evident for 6 months, and the maximum effect may require 9–12 months owing to the length of the hair growth cycle. Improvements in hirsutism are typically in the range of 20%, but there may be an arrest of further progression of hair growth.
# Chunk 2209
Oligomenorrhea is defined as a cycle length >35 days or <10 menses per year. Both the frequency and the amount of vaginal bleeding are irregular in oligomenorrhea, and moliminal symptoms (premenstrual breast tenderness, food cravings, mood lability), suggestive of ovulation, are variably present. Anovulation can also present with intermenstrual 335 intervals <24 days or vaginal bleeding for >7 days. Frequent or heavy irregular bleeding is termed dysfunctional uterine bleeding if anatomic uterine and outflow tract lesions or a bleeding diathesis has been excluded.
# Chunk 2210
Primary Amenorrhea The absence of menses by age 16 has been used traditionally to define primary amenorrhea. However, other factors, such as growth, secondary sexual characteristics, the presence of cyclic pelvic pain, and the secular trend toward an earlier age of menarche, particularly in African-American girls, also influence the age at which primary amenorrhea should be investigated. Thus, an evaluation for amenorrhea should be initiated by age 15 or 16 in the presence of normal growth and secondary sexual characteristics; age 13 in the absence of secondary sexual characteristics or if height is less than the third percentile; age 12 or 13 in the presence of breast development and cyclic pelvic pain; or within 2 years of breast development if menarche, defined by the first menstrual period, has not occurred.
# Chunk 2211
Secondary Amenorrhea or Oligomenorrhea Anovulation and irregular cycles are relatively common for up to 2 years after menarche and for 1–2 years before the final menstrual period. In the intervening years, menstrual cycle length is ~28 days, with an intermenstrual interval normally ranging between 25 and 35 days. Cycle-to-cycle variability in an individual woman who is ovulating consistently is generally +/− 2 days. Pregnancy is the most common cause of amenorrhea and should be excluded early in any evaluation of menstrual irregularity. However, many women occasionally miss a single period. Three or more months of secondary amenorrhea should prompt an evaluation, as should a history of intermenstrual intervals >35 or <21 days or bleeding that persists for >7 days.
# Chunk 2212
A major abnormality in patients with PCOS is the failure of regular, predictable ovulation. Thus, these patients are at risk for the development of dysfunctional bleeding and endometrial hyperplasia associated with unopposed estrogen exposure. Endometrial protection can be achieved with the use of oral contraceptives or progestins (medroxyprogesterone acetate, 5–10 mg, or prometrium, 200 mg daily for 10–14 days of each month). Oral contraceptives are also useful for management of hyperandrogenic symptoms, as are spironolactone and cyproterone acetate (not available in the United States), which function as weak androgen receptor blockers. Management of the associated metabolic syndrome may be appropriate for some patients (Chap. 422). For patients interested in fertility, weight control is a critical first step. Clomiphene citrate is highly effective as a first-line treatment, and there is increasing evidence that the aromatase inhibitor letrozole may also be effective. Exogenous gonadotropins can be used by experienced practitioners; a diagnosis of polycystic ovaries in the presence or absence of cycle abnormalities increases the risk of hyperstimulation.
# Chunk 2213
The mechanisms that cause pelvic pain are similar to those that cause abdominal pain (Chap. 20) and include inflammation of the parietal peritoneum, obstruction of hollow viscera, vascular disturbances, and pain originating in the abdominal wall. Pelvic pain may reflect pelvic disease per se but also may reflect extrapelvic disorders that refer pain to the pelvis. In up to 60% of cases, pelvic pain can be attributed to 338 gastrointestinal problems, including appendicitis, cholecystitis, infections, intestinal obstruction, diverticulitis, and inflammatory bowel disease. Urinary tract and musculoskeletal disorders are also common causes of pelvic pain.
# Chunk 2214
APPROACH TO THE PATIENT:

PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases

As with all types of abdominal pain, the first priority is to identify life-threatening conditions (shock, peritoneal signs) that may require emergent surgical management. The possibility of pregnancy should be identified as soon as possible by menstrual history and/or testing. A thorough history that includes the type, location, radiation, and status with respect to increasing or decreasing severity can help identify the cause of acute pelvic pain. Specific associations with vaginal bleeding, sexual activity, defecation, urination, movement, or eating should be specifically sought. Determination of whether the pain is acute versus chronic and cyclic versus noncyclic will direct further investigation (Table 69-1). However, disorders that cause cyclic pain occasionally may cause noncyclic pain, and the converse is also true.
# Chunk 2215
Pelvic inflammatory disease most commonly presents with bilateral lower abdominal pain. It is generally of recent onset and is exacerbated by intercourse or jarring movements. Fever is present in about half of these patients; abnormal uterine bleeding occurs in about one-third. New vaginal discharge, urethritis, and chills may be present but are less specific signs. Adnexal pathology can present acutely and may be due to rupture, bleeding or torsion of cysts, or, much less commonly, neoplasms of the ovary, fallopian tubes, or paraovarian areas. Fever may be present with ovarian torsion. Ectopic pregnancy is associated with rightor left-sided lower abdominal pain, with clinical signs generally appearing 6–8 weeks after the last normal menstrual period. Amenorrhea is present in ~75% of cases and vaginal bleeding in ~50% of cases. Orthostatic signs and fever may be present. Risk factors include the presence of known tubal disease, previous ectopic pregnancies, a history of infertility, diethylstilbestrol (DES) exposure of the mother in utero, or a history of pelvic infections. Threatened abortion may also present with amenorrhea, abdominal pain, and vaginal bleeding. Although more common than ectopic pregnancy, it is rarely associated with systemic signs. Uterine pathology includes endometritis and, less frequently, degenerating leiomyomas (fibroids). Endometritis often is associated with vaginal bleeding and systemic signs of infection. It occurs in the setting of sexually transmitted infections, uterine instrumentation, or postpartum infection.
# Chunk 2216
Treatment of acute pelvic pain depends on the suspected etiology but may require surgical or gynecologic intervention. Conservative management is an important consideration for ovarian cysts, if torsion is not suspected, to avoid unnecessary pelvic surgery and the subsequent risk of infertility due to adhesions. Surgical treatment may be required for ectopic pregnancies; however, approximately 35% of ectopic pregnancies are unruptured and may be appropriate for treatment with methotrexate, which is effective in ~90% of cases.
# Chunk 2217
Secondary dysmenorrhea is caused by underlying pelvic pathology. Endometriosis results from the presence of endometrial glands and stroma outside the uterus. These deposits of ectopic endometrium respond to hormonal stimulation and cause dysmenorrhea, which begins several days before menses. Endometriosis also may be associated with painful intercourse, painful bowel movements, and tender nodules in the uterosacral ligament. Fibrosis and adhesions can produce lateral displacement of the cervix. Transvaginal pelvic ultrasound is part of the initial workup and may detect an endometrioma within the ovary, rectovaginal or bladder nodules, or ureteral involvement. The CA125 level may be increased, but it has low negative predictive value. Definitive diagnosis requires laparoscopy. Symptomatology does not always predict the extent of endometriosis. The prevalence is lower in black and Hispanic women than in Caucasians and Asians. Other secondary causes of dysmenorrhea include adenomyosis, a condition caused by the presence of ectopic endometrial glands and stroma within the myometrium. Cervical stenosis may result from trauma, infection, or surgery.
# Chunk 2218
The clinical presentation often varies with age. Half of patients with AD present within the first year of life, and 80% present by 5 years of age. About 80% ultimately coexpress allergic rhinitis or asthma. The infantile pattern is characterized by weeping inflammatory patches and crusted plaques on the face, neck, and extensor surfaces. The childhood and adolescent pattern is typified by dermatitis of flexural skin, particularly in the antecubital and popliteal fossae (Fig. 71-1). AD may resolve spontaneously, but approximately 40% of all individuals affected as children will have dermatitis in adult life. The distribution of lesions in adults may be similar to those seen in childhood; however, adults frequently have localized disease manifesting as lichen simplex chronicus or hand eczema (see below). In patients with localized disease, AD may be suspected because of a typical personal or family history or the presence of cutaneous stigmata of AD such as perioral pallor, an extra fold of skin beneath the lower eyelid (Dennie-Morgan folds), increased palmar skin markings, and an increased incidence of cutaneous infections, particularly with Staphylococcus aureus. Regardless of other manifestations, pruritus is a prominent characteristic of AD in all age groups and is exacerbated by dry skin. Many of the cutaneous findings in affected patients, such as lichenification, are secondary to rubbing and scratching.
# Chunk 2219
Secondary infection of eczematous skin may lead to exacerbation of AD. Crusted and weeping skin lesions may be infected with S. aureus. When secondary infection is suspected, eczematous lesions should be cultured and patients treated with systemic antibiotics active against S. aureus. The initial use of penicillinase-resistant penicillins or cephalosporins is preferable. Dicloxacillin or cephalexin (250 mg qid for 7–10 days) is generally adequate for adults; however, antibiotic selection must be directed by culture results and clinical response. More than 50% of S. aureus isolates are now methicillin resistant in some communities. Current recommendations for the treatment of infection with these community-acquired methicillinresistant S. aureus (CA-MRSA) strains in adults include trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole (1 double-strength tablet bid), minocycline (100 mg bid), doxycycline (100 mg bid), or clindamycin (300–450 mg qid). Duration of therapy should be 7–10 days. Inducible resistance may limit clindamycin’s usefulness. Such resistance can be detected by the double-disk diffusion test, which should be ordered if the isolate is erythromycin resistant and clindamycin sensitive. As an adjunct, antibacterial washes or dilute sodium hypochlorite baths (0.005% bleach) and intermittent nasal mupirocin may be useful.
# Chunk 2220
Lichen planus (LP) is a papulosquamous disorder that may affect the skin, scalp, nails, and mucous membranes. The primary cutaneous lesions are pruritic, polygonal, flat-topped, violaceous papules. Close examination of the surface of these papules often reveals a network of gray lines (Wickham’s striae). The skin lesions may occur anywhere but have a predilection for the wrists, shins, lower back, and genitalia (Fig. 71-5). Involvement of the scalp (lichen planopilaris) may lead to scarring alopecia, and nail involvement may lead to permanent deformity or loss of fingernails and toenails. LP commonly involves mucous membranes, particularly the buccal mucosa, where it can present on a spectrum ranging from a mild, white, reticulate eruption of the mucosa to a severe, erosive stomatitis. Erosive stomatitis may persist for years and may be linked to an increased risk of oral squamous cell carcinoma. Cutaneous eruptions clinically resembling LP have been observed after administration of numerous drugs, including thiazide diuretics, gold, antimalarial agents, penicillamine, and phenothiazines, and in patients with skin lesions of chronic graft-versus-host disease. In addition, LP may be associated with hepatitis C infection. The course of LP is variable, but most patients have spontaneous remissions 6 months to 2 years after the onset of disease. Topical glucocorticoids are the mainstay of therapy.
# Chunk 2221
Griseofulvin is approved in the United States for dermatophyte infections involving the skin, hair, or nails. When griseofulvin is used, a daily dose of 500 mg microsized or 375 mg ultramicrosized, administered with a fatty meal, is adequate for most dermatophyte infections. Higher doses are required for some cases of tinea pedis and tinea capitis. Markedly inflammatory tinea capitis may result in scarring and hair loss, and systemic or topical glucocorticoids may be helpful in preventing these sequelae. The duration of griseofulvin therapy may be 2 weeks for uncomplicated tinea corporis, 8–12 weeks for tinea capitis, or as long as 6–18 months for nail infections. Due to high relapse rates, griseofulvin is seldom used for nail infections. Common side effects of griseofulvin include gastrointestinal distress, headache, and urticaria.
# Chunk 2222
Oral itraconazole is approved for onychomycosis. Itraconazole is given with food as either continuous daily therapy (200 mg/d) or pulses (200 mg bid for 1 week per month). Fingernails require 2 months of continuous therapy or two pulses. Toenails require 3 months of continuous therapy or three pulses. Itraconazole has the potential for serious interactions with other drugs requiring the P450 enzyme system for metabolism. Itraconazole should not be administered to patients with evidence of ventricular dysfunction or patients with known CHF. Terbinafine (250 mg/d) is also effective for onychomycosis, and the granule version is approved for treatment of tinea capitis. Therapy with terbinafine is continued for 6 weeks for fingernail and scalp infections and 12 weeks for toenail infections. Terbinafine has fewer interactions with other drugs than itraconazole, but caution should be used with patients who are on multiple medications. The risk/benefit ratio should be considered when an asymptomatic toenail infection is treated with systemic agents.
# Chunk 2223
Tinea versicolor is caused by a nondermatophytic, dimorphic fungus, Malassezia furfur, a normal inhabitant of the skin. The expression of infection is promoted by heat and humidity. The typical lesions consist of oval scaly macules, papules, and patches concentrated on the chest, shoulders, and back but only rarely on the face or distal extremities. On dark skin the lesions often appear as hypopigmented areas, while on light skin they are slightly erythematous or hyperpigmented. A KOH preparation from scaling lesions will demonstrate a confluence of short hyphae and round spores (“spaghetti and meatballs”). Lotions or shampoos containing sulfur, salicylic acid, or selenium sulfide will clear the infection if used daily for 1–2 weeks and then weekly thereafter. These preparations are irritating if left on the skin for >10 min; thus, they should be washed off completely. Treatment with some oral antifungal agents is also effective, but they do not provide lasting results and are not FDA approved for this indication. A very short course of ketoconazole has been used, as have itraconazole and fluconazole. The patient must sweat after taking the medication if it is to be effective. Griseofulvin is not effective and terbinafine is not reliably effective for tinea versicolor.
# Chunk 2224
Treatment of warts, other than anogenital warts, should be tempered by the observation that a majority of warts in normal individuals resolve spontaneously within 1–2 years. There are many modalities available to treat warts, but no single therapy is universally effective. Factors that influence the choice of therapy include the location of the wart, the extent of disease, the age and immunologic status of the patient, and the patient’s desire for therapy. Perhaps the most useful and convenient method for treating warts in almost any location is cryotherapy with liquid nitrogen. Equally effective for nongenital warts, but requiring much more patient compliance, is the use of keratolytic agents such as salicylic acid plasters or solutions. For genital warts, in-office application of a podophyllin solution is moderately effective but may be associated with marked local reactions. Prescription preparations of dilute, purified podophyllin are available for home use. Topical imiquimod, a potent inducer of local cytokine release, has been approved for treatment of genital warts. A new topical compound composed of green tea extracts (sinecatechins) is also available. Conventional and laser surgical procedures may be required for recalcitrant warts. Recurrence of warts appears to be common to all these modalities. A highly effective vaccine for selected types of HPV has been approved by the FDA, and its use appears to reduce the incidence of anogenital and cervical carcinoma.
# Chunk 2225
PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases

Acneiform eruptions (see “Acne,” above) and folliculitis represent the most common pustular dermatoses. An important consideration in the evaluation of follicular pustules is a determination of the associated pathogen, e.g., normal flora, Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa (“hot tub” folliculitis), Malassezia, dermatophytes (Majocchi’s granuloma), and Demodex spp. Noninfectious forms of folliculitis include HIVor immunosuppression-associated eosinophilic folliculitis and folliculitis secondary to drugs such as glucocorticoids, lithium, and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitors. Administration of high-dose systemic glucocorticoids can result in a widespread eruption of follicular pustules on the trunk, characterized by lesions in the same stage of development. With regard to underlying systemic diseases, nonfollicular-based pustules are a characteristic component of pustular psoriasis (sterile) and can be seen in septic emboli of bacterial or fungal origin (see “Purpura,” below). In patients with acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP) due primarily to medications (e.g., cephalosporins), there are large areas of erythema studded with multiple sterile pustules in addition to neutrophilia.
# Chunk 2226
The differential diagnosis of localized hypomelanosis includes the following primary cutaneous disorders: idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis, postinflammatory hypopigmentation, tinea (pityriasis) versicolor, vitiligo, chemicalor drug-induced leukoderma, nevus depigmentosus (see below), and piebaldism (Table 72-10). In this group of diseases, the areas of involvement are macules or patches with a decrease or absence of pigmentation. Patients with vitiligo also have an increased incidence of several autoimmune disorders, including Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, Graves’ disease, pernicious anemia, Addison’s disease, uveitis, alopecia areata, chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, and the autoimmune polyendocrine syndromes (types I and II). Diseases of the thyroid gland are the most frequently associated disorders, occurring in up to 30% of patients with vitiligo. Circulating autoantibodies are often found, and the most common ones are antithyroglobulin, antimicrosomal, and antithyroid-stimulating hormone receptor antibodies.
# Chunk 2227
Urticarial vasculitis is an immune complex disease that may be confused with simple urticaria. In contrast to simple urticaria, individual lesions tend to last longer than 24 h and usually develop central petechiae that can be observed even after the urticarial phase has resolved. The patient may also complain of burning rather than pruritus. On biopsy, there is a leukocytoclastic vasculitis of the small dermal blood vessels. Although many cases of urticarial vasculitis are idiopathic in origin, it can be a reflection of an underlying systemic illness such as lupus erythematosus, Sjögren’s syndrome, or hereditary complement deficiency. There is a spectrum of urticarial vasculitis that ranges from purely cutaneous to multisystem involvement. The most common systemic signs and symptoms are arthralgias and/or arthritis, nephritis, and crampy abdominal pain, with asthma and chronic obstructive lung disease seen less often. Hypocomplementemia occurs in oneto two-thirds of patients, even in the idiopathic cases. Urticarial vasculitis can also be seen in patients with hepatitis B and hepatitis C infections, serum sickness, and serum sickness–like illnesses (e.g., due to cefaclor, minocycline).
# Chunk 2228
Even though specific mucocutaneous lesions are present in only ~30% of the patients with primary systemic (AL) amyloidosis, the diagnosis can be made via histologic examination of abdominal subcutaneous fat, in conjunction with a serum free light chain assay. By special staining, amyloid deposits are seen around blood vessels or individual fat cells in 40–50% of patients. There are also three forms of amyloidosis that are limited to the skin and that should not be construed as cutaneous lesions of systemic amyloidosis. They are macular amyloidosis (upper back), lichen amyloidosis (usually lower extremities), and nodular amyloidosis. In macular and lichen amyloidosis, the deposits are composed of altered epidermal keratin. Early-onset macular and lichen amyloidosis have been associated with MEN syndrome, type 2a.
# Chunk 2229
Patients with multicentric reticulohistiocytosis also have pink-colored papules and nodules on the face and mucous membranes as well as on the extensor surface of the hands and forearms. They have a polyarthritis that can mimic rheumatoid arthritis clinically. On histologic examination, the papules have characteristic giant cells that are not seen in biopsies of rheumatoid nodules. Pink to skin-colored papules that are firm, 2–5 mm in diameter, and often in a linear arrangement are seen in patients with papular mucinosis. This disease is also referred to as generalized lichen myxedematosus or scleromyxedema. The latter name comes from the induration of the face and extremities that may accompany the papular eruption. Biopsy specimens of the papules show localized mucin deposition, and serum protein electrophoresis plus immunofixation electrophoresis demonstrates a monoclonal spike of IgG, usually with a λ light chain.
# Chunk 2230
Several systemic disorders are characterized by yellow-colored cutaneous papules or plaques—hyperlipidemia (xanthomas), gout (tophi), diabetes (necrobiosis lipoidica), pseudoxanthoma elasticum, and Muir-Torre syndrome (sebaceous tumors). Eruptive xanthomas are the most common form of xanthomas and are associated with hypertriglyceridemia (primarily hyperlipoproteinemia types I, IV, and V). Crops of yellow papules with erythematous halos occur primarily on the extensor surfaces of the extremities and the buttocks, and they spontaneously involute with a fall in serum triglycerides. Types II and III result in one or more of the following types of xanthoma: xanthelasma, tendon xanthomas, and plane xanthomas. Xanthelasma are found on the eyelids, whereas tendon xanthomas are frequently associated with the Achilles and extensor finger tendons; plane xanthomas are flat and favor the palmar creases, neck, upper trunk, and flexural folds. Tuberous xanthomas are frequently associated with hypertriglyceridemia, but they are also seen in patients with hypercholesterolemia and are found most 365 frequently over the large joints or hand. Biopsy specimens of xanthomas show collections of lipid-containing macrophages (foam cells).
# Chunk 2231
In tophaceous gout, there are deposits of monosodium urate in the skin around the joints, particularly those of the hands and feet. Additional sites of tophi formation include the helix of the ear and the olecranon and prepatellar bursae. The lesions are firm, yellow in color, and occasionally discharge a chalky material. Their size varies from 1 mm to 7 cm, and the diagnosis can be established by polarized light microscopy of the aspirated contents of a lesion. Lesions of necrobiosis lipoidica are found primarily on the shins (90%), and patients can have diabetes mellitus or develop it subsequently. Characteristic findings include a central yellow color, atrophy (transparency), telangiectasias, and a red to red-brown border. Ulcerations can also develop within the plaques. Biopsy specimens show necrobiosis of collagen and granulomatous inflammation.
# Chunk 2232
Erythema induratum and nodular vasculitis have overlapping features clinically and histologically, and whether they represent two separate entities or the ends of a single disease spectrum is a point of debate; in general, the latter is usually idiopathic and the former is associated with the presence of Mycobacterium tuberculosis DNA by PCR within skin lesions. The lesions of lupus panniculitis are found primarily on the cheeks, upper arms, and buttocks (sites of abundant fat) and are seen in both the cutaneous and systemic forms of lupus. The overlying skin may be normal, erythematous, or have the changes of discoid lupus. The subcutaneous fat necrosis that is associated with pancreatic disease is presumably secondary to circulating lipases and is seen in patients with pancreatic carcinoma as well as in patients with acute and chronic pancreatitis. In this disorder, there may be an associated arthritis, fever, and inflammation of visceral fat. Histologic examination of deep incisional biopsy specimens will aid in the diagnosis of the particular type of panniculitis.
# Chunk 2233
Monoclonal cryoglobulinemia is associated with plasma cell dyscrasias, chronic lymphocytic leukemia, and lymphoma. Purpura, primarily of the lower extremities, and hemorrhagic infarcts of the fingers, toes, and ears are seen in these patients. Exacerbations of disease activity can follow cold exposure or an increase in serum viscosity. Biopsy specimens show precipitates of the cryoglobulin within dermal vessels. Similar deposits have been found in the lung, brain, and renal glomeruli. Patients with thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura can also have hemorrhagic infarcts as a result of intravascular thromboses. Additional signs include microangiopathic hemolytic anemia and fluctuating neurologic abnormalities, especially headaches and confusion.
# Chunk 2234
CAuSES of MuCoCuTAnEouS uLCERS this explains the irregular outline of the purpura (see below).

Several types of infectious emboli can give rise to palpable purpura. These embolic lesions are usually irregular in outline as opposed to the lesions of LCV, which are circular in outline. The irregular outline is indicative of a cutaneous infarct, and the size corresponds to the area of skin that received its blood supply from that particular arteriole or artery. The palpable purpura in LCV are circular because the erythrocytes simply diffuse out evenly from the postcapillary venules as a result of inflammation. Infectious emboli are most commonly due to gram-negative cocci (meningococcus, gonococcus), gram-negative rods (Enterobacteriaceae), and gram-positive cocci (Staphylococcus). Additional causes include Rickettsia and, in immunocompromised patients, Aspergillus and other opportunistic fungi.
# Chunk 2235
Lesions of ecthyma gangrenosum begin as edematous, erythematous papules or plaques and then develop central purpura and necrosis. Bullae formation also occurs in these lesions, and they are frequently found in the girdle region. The organism that is classically associated with ecthyma gangrenosum is Pseudomonas aeruginosa, but other gram-negative rods such as Klebsiella, Escherichia coli, and Serratia can produce similar lesions. In immunocompromised hosts, the list of potential pathogens is expanded to include Candida and other opportunistic fungi (e.g., Aspergillus, Fusarium).
# Chunk 2236
PV can be life-threatening. Prior to the availability of glucocorticoids, mortality rates ranged from 60% to 90%; the current figure is ~5%. Common causes of morbidity and death are infection and complications of treatment with glucocorticoids. Bad prognostic 371 factors include advanced age, widespread involvement, and the requirement for high doses of glucocorticoids (with or without other immunosuppressive agents) for control of disease. The course of PV in individual patients is variable and difficult to predict. Some patients experience remission, while others may require long-term treatment or succumb to complications of their disease or its treatment. The mainstay of treatment is systemic glucocorticoids. Patients with moderate to severe PV are usually started on prednisone at 1 mg/kg per day. If new lesions continue to appear after 1–2 weeks of treatment, the dose may need to be increased and/or prednisone may need to be combined with other immunosuppressive agents such as azathioprine (2–2.5 mg/kg per day), mycophenolate mofetil (20–35 mg/kg per day), or cyclophosphamide (1–2 mg/kg per day). Patients with severe, treatment-resistant disease may derive benefit from plasmapheresis (six high-volume exchanges [i.e., 2–3 L per exchange] over ~2 weeks), IV immunoglobulin (IVIg) (2 g/kg over 3–5 days every 6–8 weeks), or rituximab (375 mg/m2 per week × 4, or 1000 mg on days 1 and 15). It is important to bring severe or progressive disease under control quickly in order to lessen the severity and/or duration of this disorder. Accordingly, some have suggested that rituximab and daily glucocorticoids should be used early in PV patients to avert the development of treatment-resistant disease.
# Chunk 2237
Discoid lupus erythematosus (DLE, also called chronic cutaneous LE) is characterized by discrete lesions, most often found on the face, scalp, and/or external ears. The lesions are erythematous papules or plaques with a thick, adherent scale that occludes hair follicles (follicular plugging). When the scale is removed, its underside shows small excrescences that correlate with the openings of hair follicles (so-called “carpet tacking”), a finding relatively specific for DLE. Longstanding lesions develop central atrophy, scarring, and hypopigmentation but frequently have erythematous, sometimes raised borders (Fig. 73-6). These lesions persist for years and tend to expand slowly. Up to 15% of patients with DLE eventually meet the American College of Rheumatology criteria for SLE. However, typical discoid lesions are frequently seen in patients with SLE. Biopsy of DLE lesions shows hyperkeratosis, follicular plugging, atrophy of the epidermis, hydropic degeneration of basal keratinocytes, and a mononuclear cell infiltrate adjacent to epidermal, adnexal, and microvascular basement membranes. Direct immunofluorescence microscopy demonstrates immunoglobulin(s) and complement deposits at the basement membrane zone in ~90% of cases. Treatment is focused on control of local cutaneous disease and consists mainly of photoprotection and topical or intralesional glucocorticoids. If local therapy is ineffective, use of aminoquinoline antimalarial agents may be indicated.
# Chunk 2238
erythematous border. In most cases, patients have one or a few lesions, and the disease is termed localized morphea. In some patients, widespread cutaneous lesions may occur without systemic involvement (generalized morphea). Many adults with generalized morphea have concomitant rheumatic or other autoimmune disorders. Skin biopsy of morphea is indistinguishable from that of scleroderma. Scleroderma and morphea are usually quite resistant to therapy. For this reason, physical therapy to prevent joint contractures and to maintain function is employed and is often helpful. Treatment options for early, rapidly progressive disease include phototherapy (UVA1 or PUVA) or methotrexate (15–20 mg/week) alone or in combination with daily glucocorticoids.
# Chunk 2239
Diffuse fasciitis with eosinophilia is a clinical entity that can sometimes be confused with scleroderma. There is usually a sudden onset of swelling, induration, and erythema of the extremities, frequently following significant physical exertion. The proximal portions of the extremities (upper arms, forearms, thighs, calves) are more often involved than are the hands and feet. While the skin is indurated, it usually displays a woody, dimpled, or “pseudocellulite” appearance rather than being bound down as in scleroderma; contractures may occur early secondary to fascial involvement. The latter may also cause muscle groups to be separated and veins to appear depressed (i.e., the “groove sign”). These skin findings are accompanied by peripheral-blood eosinophilia, increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and sometimes hypergammaglobulinemia. Deep biopsy of affected areas of skin reveals inflammation and thickening of the deep fascia overlying muscle. An inflammatory infiltrate composed of eosinophils and mononuclear cells is usually found. Patients with eosinophilic fasciitis appear to be at increased risk for developing bone marrow failure or other hematologic abnormalities. While the ultimate course of eosinophilic fasciitis is uncertain, many patients respond favorably to treatment with prednisone in doses of 40–60 mg/d.
# Chunk 2240
FIguRE 74-5 Sorafenib-associated hand-foot syndrome.

Maculopapular reactions usually develop within 1 week of initiation of therapy and last less than 2 weeks. Occasionally, these eruptions resolve despite continued use of the responsible drug. Because the eruption may also worsen, the suspect drug should be discontinued unless it is essential; it is important to note that the rash may continue to progress for a few days to up to one week following medication discontinuation. Oral antihistamines and emollients may help relieve pruritus. Short courses of potent topical glucocorticoids can reduce inflammation and symptoms. Systemic glucocorticoid treatment is rarely indicated.
# Chunk 2241
Drug-induced urticaria may be caused by three mechanisms: an IgE-dependent mechanism, circulating immune complexes (serum sickness), and nonimmunologic activation of effector pathways. IgE-dependent urticarial reactions usually occur within 36 h of drug exposure but can occur within minutes. Immune complex–induced urticaria associated with serum sickness–like reactions usually occurs 6–12 days after first exposure. In this syndrome, the urticarial eruption (typically polycyclic plaques) may be accompanied by fever, hematuria, arthralgias, hepatic dysfunction, and neurologic symptoms. Certain drugs, such as NSAIDs, ACE inhibitors, angiotensin II antagonists, radiographic dye, and opiates, may induce urticarial reactions, angioedema, and anaphylaxis in the absence of drug-specific antibody through direct mast-cell degranulation.
# Chunk 2242
Pustular Eruptions AGEP is a rare reaction pattern (3–5 cases per million per year) that is often associated with exposure to drugs (Fig. 74-8). Usually beginning on the face or intertriginous areas, small nonfollicular pustules overlying erythematous and edematous skin may coalesce and lead to superficial erosion. Differentiating this eruption from TEN in its initial stages may be difficult. A skin biopsy is important and shows neutrophil collections and sparse necrotic keratinocytes in the upper part of the epidermis instead of the full-thickness epidermal necrosis that characterizes TEN. Fever and leukocytosis are common, and eosinophilia occurs in one-third of cases. Acute pustular psoriasis is the principal differential diagnostic consideration. DIHS with pustular features must also be clinically considered, although the timing for the onset of DIHS is distinct (much later onset). AGEP often begins within a few days of initiating drug treatment, most notably antibiotics, but may occur as late as 7–14 days after initiation of treatment. A broad range of drug classes (anticonvulsants, mercury, radiocontrast dye) and infections (viral, Mycoplasma) are also associated with AGEP. Patch testing with the responsible drug results in a localized pustular eruption.
# Chunk 2243
FIguRE 74-8 Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis.

Drug-induced Hypersensitivity Syndrome Drug-induced hypersensitivity syndrome (DIHS) is a multiorgan drug reaction previously known as DRESS (drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms); since eosinophilia is not always present, the term DIHS is now preferred. Allopurinol is the most common cause. Although less frequently prescribed, abacavir has been reported to cause DIHS with an incidence as high as 4–8%. It presents as a widespread erythematous eruption that may become purpuric, pustular, or lichenoid and is accompanied by many of the following features: fever, facial edema, lymphadenopathy, leukocytosis (often with atypical lymphocytes and eosinophilia), hepatitis, myositis (including myocarditis), and sometimes nephritis (with proteinuria) or pneumonitis. Distinct patterns of timing of onset and organ involvement may exist; e.g., allopurinol classically induces DIHS with renal involvement. Cardiac and lung involvement is more common with minocycline; gastrointestinal involvement is almost exclusively seen with abacavir, and some medications typically lack eosinophilia (abacavir, dapsone, lamotrigine). The cutaneous reaction usually begins 2–8 weeks after the drug is started and lasts longer than mild eruptions after drug cessation. Signs and symptoms may persist for several weeks, especially those associated with hepatitis. The eruption recurs with rechallenge, and cross-reactions among aromatic anticonvulsants, including phenytoin, carbamazepine, and barbiturates, are frequent. Other drugs causing this syndrome include sulfonamides and other antibiotics. Hypersensitivity to reactive drug metabolites, hydroxylamine for sulfamethoxazole, and arene oxide for aromatic anticonvulsants may be involved in the pathogenesis of DIHS. Reactivation of herpes viruses, especially herpesvirus 6 and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), has been frequently reported in this syndrome, although the causal role of viral infection has been debated. Recent research suggests that inciting drugs may reactivate quiescent herpes viruses, resulting in expansion of viral-specific CD8+ T lymphocytes with subsequent end-organ damage. Viral reactivation may be associated with a worse clinical prognosis. Mortality rates as high as 10% have been reported; mortality is highest in association with hepatitis. Systemic glucocorticoids (prednisone, 1–2 mg/kg daily) should be started with slow taper over 8–12 weeks. A steroid-sparing agent, such as mycophenolate mofetil, may be indicated in cases of rapid recurrence upon steroid taper. In all cases, rapid withdrawal of the suspected drug is required. Given the severe long-term complications of myocarditis, patients should undergo cardiac evaluation if heart involvement is suspected by hypotension or arrhythmia. Patients should be closely monitored for resolution of organ dysfunction and for development of late-onset autoimmune thyroiditis (up to 6 months).
# Chunk 2244
FIguRE 74-9 Toxic epidermal necrolysis. (Photo credit: Lindy Peta Fox, MD, and Jubin Ryu, MD, PhD.)

Patients with SJS, SJS/TEN, or TEN initially present with acute onset of painful skin lesions, fever >39°C (102.2°F), sore throat, and conjunctivitis resulting from mucosal lesions. Intestinal and pulmonary involvement is associated with a poor prognosis, as are a greater extent of epidermal detachment and older age. About 10% and 30% of SJSand TEN-affected persons die from their disease, respectively. Drugs that most commonly cause SJS or TEN are sulfonamides, nevirapine (1 in 1000 risk of SJS or TEN), allopurinol, lamotrigine, aromatic anticonvulsants, and NSAIDs, specifically oxicam. Frozen-section skin biopsy may aid in rapid diagnosis. At this time, SJS and TEN have no proven effective treatment. The best results come from early diagnosis, immediate discontinuation of any suspected drug, supportive therapy, and paying close attention to ocular complications and infection. Systemic glucocorticoid therapy (prednisone 1–2 mg/kg) may be useful early in the evolution of the disease, but long-term systemic glucocorticoid use has been associated with higher mortality. Cyclosporine may be a possible therapy for SJS/TEN. After initial enthusiasm for the use of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) in the treatment of SJS/TEN, some recent data questions whether IVIG benefits these patients. Randomized studies to more definitively assess the potential benefit of systemic glucocorticoids and IVIG are lacking and difficult to perform but are necessary.
# Chunk 2245
The probability of drug etiology varies with the pattern of the reaction. Only fixed drug eruptions are always drug-induced. Morbilliform eruptions are usually viral in children and drug-induced in adults. Among severe reactions, drugs account for 10–20% of anaphylaxis and vasculitis and between 70–90% of AGEP, DIHS, SJS, or TEN. Skin biopsy helps in characterizing the reaction but does not indicate drug causality. Blood counts and liver and renal function tests are important for evaluating organ involvement. The association of mild elevation of liver enzymes and high eosinophil count is frequent but not specific for a drug reaction. Blood tests that could identify an alternative cause, antihistone antibody tests (to rule out drug-induced lupus), and serology or polymerase chain reaction for infections may be of great importance to determine a cause.
# Chunk 2246
Most cases of drug eruptions occur during the first course of treatment with a new medication. A notable exception is IgE-mediated urticaria and anaphylaxis that need presensitization and develop a few minutes to a few hours after rechallenge. Characteristic times of onset to drug reaction are as follows: 4–14 days for morbilliform eruptions, 2–4 days for AGEP, 5–28 days for SJS/TEN, and 14–48 days for DIHS. A drug chart, compiling information of all current and past medications/ supplements and the timing of administration relative to the rash, is a key diagnostic tool to identifying the inciting drug. Medications introduced for the first time in the relevant time frame are prime suspects. Two other important elements to suspect causality at this stage are (1) previous experience with the drug in the population and (2) alternative etiologic candidates.
# Chunk 2247
External Drugs, plants, food important and include the use of high-SPF and high UVA-protection broad-spectrum sunscreens as well as the induction of “hardening” by the cautious administration of artificial UV-B (broad-band or narrow-band) and/or UV-A radiation or the use of psoralen plus UV-A (PUVA) photochemotherapy for 2–4 weeks before initial sun exposure. Such prophylactic phototherapy or photochemotherapy at the beginning of spring may prevent the occurrence of PMLE throughout the summer.
# Chunk 2248
In both types of PCT, the predominant feature is chronic photo-sensitivity characterized by increased fragility of sun-exposed skin, particularly areas subject to repeated trauma such as the dorsa of the hands, the forearms, the face, and the ears. The predominant skin lesions are vesicles and bullae that rupture, producing moist erosions (often with a hemorrhagic base) that heal slowly, with crusting and purplish discoloration of the affected skin. Hypertrichosis, mottled pigmentary change, and scleroderma-like induration are associated features. The diagnosis can be confirmed biochemically by measurement of urinary porphyrin excretion, plasma porphyrin assay, and assay of erythrocyte and/or hepatic uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase. Multiple mutations of the uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase gene have been identified in human populations. Some patients with PCT have associated mutations in the HFE gene, which is linked to hemochromatosis; these mutations could contribute to the iron overload seen in PCT, although iron status as measured by serum ferritin, iron levels, and transferrin saturation is no different from that in PCT patients without HFE mutations. Prior hepatitis C virus infection appears to be an independent risk factor for PCT.
# Chunk 2249
PART 2 Cardinal Manifestations and Presentation of Diseases

FIguRE 76e-55 Skin lesions of neutropenic patients. A. Hemorrhagic papules on the foot of a patient undergoing treatment for multiple myeloma. Biopsy and culture demonstrated Aspergillosis species. B. Eroded nodule on the hard palate of a patient undergoing chemotherapy. Biopsy and culture demonstrated Mucor species. C. Ecthyma gangrenosum in a neutropenic patient with Pseudomonas aeruginosa bacteremia.
# Chunk 2250
Impaired O2 delivery to the kidney can result from a decreased red cell mass (anemia), impaired O2 loading of the hemoglobin molecule or a high O2 affinity mutant hemoglobin (hypoxemia), or, rarely, impaired blood flow to the kidney (renal artery stenosis). EPO governs the day to-day production of red cells, and ambient levels of the hormone can be measured in the plasma by sensitive immunoassays—the normal level being 10–25 U/L. When the hemoglobin concentration falls below 100–120 g/L (10–12 g/dL), plasma EPO levels increase in proportion to the severity of the anemia (Fig. 77-2). In circulation, EPO has a half-clearance time of 6–9 h. EPO acts by binding to specific receptors on the surface of marrow erythroid precursors, inducing them to pro liferate and to mature. With EPO stimulation, red cell production can increase fourto fivefold within a 1to 2-week period, but only in the presence of adequate nutrients, especially iron. The functional capacity of the erythron, therefore, requires normal renal production of EPO, a functioning erythroid marrow, and an adequate supply of substrates for hemoglobin synthesis. A defect in any of these key components can lead to anemia. Generally, anemia is recognized in the laboratory when a patient’s hemoglobin level or hematocrit is reduced below an expected value (the normal range). The likelihood and severity of anemia are defined based on the deviation of the patient’s hemoglobin/hematocrit from values expected for ageand sex-matched normal subjects. The hemoglobin concentration in adults has a Gaussian distribution. The and FOG-1 (friend of GATA-1) transcription factors (Chap. 89e).
# Chunk 2251
In mammals, O2 is transported to tissues bound to the hemoglobin contained within circulating red cells. The mature red cell is 8 μm in diameter, anucleate, discoid in shape, and extremely pliable in order to traverse the microcirculation successfully; its membrane integrity is maintained by the intracellular generation of ATP. Normal red cell production results in the daily replacement of 0.8–1% of all circulating red cells in the body, since the average red cell lives 100–120 days. The organ responsible for red cell production is called the erythron. The erythron is a dynamic organ made up of a rapidly proliferating pool of marrow erythroid precursor cells and a large mass of mature circulating
# Chunk 2252
CLINICAL PRESENTATION OF ANEMIA Signs and Symptoms Anemia is most often recognized by abnormal screening laboratory tests. Patients less commonly present with advanced anemia and its attendant signs and symptoms. Acute anemia is due to blood loss or hemolysis. If blood loss is mild, enhanced O2 delivery is achieved through changes in the O2–hemoglobin dissociation curve mediated by a decreased pH or increased CO2 (Bohr effect). With acute blood loss, hypovolemia dominates the clinical picture, and the hematocrit and hemoglobin levels do not reflect the volume of blood lost. Signs of vascular instability appear with acute losses of 10–15% of the total blood volume. In such patients, the issue is not anemia but hypotension and decreased organ perfusion. When >30% of the blood volume is lost suddenly, patients are unable to compensate with the usual mechanisms of vascular contraction and changes in regional blood flow. The patient prefers to remain supine and will show postural hypotension and tachycardia. If the volume of blood lost is >40% (i.e., >2 L in the average-sized adult), signs of hypovolemic shock including confusion, dyspnea, diaphoresis, hypotension, and tachycardia appear (Chap. 129). Such patients have significant deficits in vital organ perfusion and require immediate volume replacement.
# Chunk 2253
With acute hemolysis, the signs and symptoms depend on the mechanism that leads to red cell destruction. Intravascular hemolysis with release of free hemoglobin may be associated with acute back pain, free hemoglobin in the plasma and urine, and renal failure. Symptoms associated with more chronic or progressive anemia depend on the age of the patient and the adequacy of blood supply to critical organs. Symptoms associated with moderate anemia include fatigue, loss of stamina, breathlessness, and tachycardia (particularly with physical exertion). However, because of the intrinsic compensatory mechanisms that govern the O2–hemoglobin dissociation curve, the gradual onset of anemia—particularly in young patients—may not be associated with signs or symptoms until the anemia is severe (hemoglobin <70–80 g/L [7–8 g/dL]). When anemia develops over a period of days or weeks, the total blood volume is normal to slightly increased, and changes in cardiac output and regional blood flow help compensate for the overall loss in O2-carrying capacity. Changes in the position of the O2–hemoglobin dissociation curve account for some of the compensatory response to anemia. With chronic anemia, intracellular levels of 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate rise, shifting the dissociation curve to the right and facilitating O2 unloading. This compensatory mechanism can only maintain normal tissue O2 delivery in the face of a 20–30 g/L (2–3 g/dL) deficit in hemoglobin concentration. Finally, further protection of O2 delivery to vital organs is achieved by the shunting of blood away from organs that are relatively rich in blood supply, particularly the kidney, gut, and skin.
# Chunk 2254
APPROACH TO THE PATIENT:

The evaluation of the patient with anemia requires a careful history and physical examination. Nutritional history related to drugs or alcohol intake and family history of anemia should always be assessed. Certain geographic backgrounds and ethnic origins are associated with an increased likelihood of an inherited disorder of the hemoglobin molecule or intermediary metabolism. Glucose-6phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency and certain hemoglobinopathies are seen more commonly in those of Middle Eastern or African origin, including African Americans who have a high frequency of G6PD deficiency. Other information that may be useful includes exposure to certain toxic agents or drugs and symptoms related to other disorders commonly associated with anemia. These include symptoms and signs such as bleeding, fatigue, malaise, fever, weight loss, night sweats, and other systemic symptoms. Clues to the mechanisms of anemia may be provided on physical examination by findings of infection, blood in the stool, lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, or petechiae. Splenomegaly and lymphadenopathy suggest an underlying lymphoproliferative disease, whereas petechiae suggest platelet dysfunction. Past laboratory measurements are helpful to determine a time of onset.
# Chunk 2255
Table 77-1 lists the tests used in the initial workup of anemia. A routine complete blood count (CBC) is required as part of the evaluation and includes the hemoglobin, hematocrit, and red cell indices: the mean cell volume (MCV) in femtoliters, mean cell hemoglobin (MCH) in picograms per cell, and mean concentration of hemoglobin per volume of red cells (MCHC) in grams per liter (non-SI: grams per deciliter). The red cell indices are calculated as shown in Table 77-2, and the normal variations in the hemoglobin and hematocrit with age are shown in Table 77-3. A number of physiologic factors affect the CBC, including age, sex, pregnancy, smoking, and altitude. High-normal hemoglobin values may be seen in men and women who live at altitude or smoke heavily. Hemoglobin elevations due to smoking reflect normal compensation due to the displacement of O2 by CO in hemoglobin binding. Other important information is provided by the reticulocyte count and measurements of iron supply including serum iron, total iron-binding capacity (TIBC; an indirect measure of serum transferrin), and serum ferritin. Marked alterations in the red cell indices usually reflect disorders of maturation or iron deficiency. A careful evaluation of the peripheral blood smear is important, and clinical laboratories often provide a description of both the red and white cells, a white cell differential count, and the platelet count. In patients with severe anemia and abnormalities in red blood cell morphology and/or low reticulocyte counts, a bone marrow aspirate or biopsy can assist in the diagnosis. Other tests of value in the diagnosis of specific anemias are discussed in chapters on specific disease states.
# Chunk 2256
(From RS Hillman et al: Hematology in Clinical Practice, 5th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2010.) have been recently released from the bone marrow. They are identified by staining with a supravital dye that precipitates the ribosomal RNA (Fig. 77-12). These precipitates appear as blue or black punctate spots and can be counted manually or, currently, by fluorescent emission of dyes that bind to RNA. This residual RNA is metabolized over the first 24–36 h of the reticulocyte’s life span in circulation. Normally, the reticulocyte count ranges from 1 to 2% and reflects the daily replacement of 0.8–1.0% of the circulating red cell population. A corrected reticulocyte count provides a reliable measure of effective red cell production.
# Chunk 2257
In the initial classification of anemia, the patient’s reticulocyte count is compared with the expected reticulocyte response. In general, if the EPO and erythroid marrow responses to moderate anemia [hemoglobin <100 g/L (10 g/dL)] are intact, the red cell production rate increases to two to three times normal within 10 days following the onset of anemia. In the face of established anemia, a reticulocyte response less than two to three times normal indicates an inadequate marrow response.
# Chunk 2258
To use the reticulocyte count to estimate marrow response, two corrections are necessary. The first correction adjusts the reticulocyte count based on the reduced number of circulating red cells. With anemia, the percentage of reticulocytes may be increased while the absolute number is unchanged. To correct for this effect, the reticulocyte percentage is multiplied by the ratio of the patient’s hemoglobin or hematocrit to the expected hemoglobin/hematocrit
# Chunk 2259
Correction #1 for Anemia:

This correction produces the corrected reticulocyte count.

In a person whose reticulocyte count is 9%, hemoglobin 7.5 g/dL, and hematocrit 23%, the absolute reticulocyte count = 9 × (7.5/15) [or × (23/45)] = 4.5%
# Chunk 2260
In a person whose reticulocyte count is 9%, hemoglobin 7.5 gm/dL, and hematocrit 23%, the reticulocyte production index (7.5/15)(hemoglobincorrection) =×9 =2.25 for the age and sex of the patient (Table 77-4). This provides an estimate of the reticulocyte count corrected for anemia. To convert the corrected reticulocyte count to an index of marrow production, a further correction is required, depending on whether some of the reticulocytes in circulation have been released from the marrow pre maturely. For this second correction, the peripheral blood smear is examined to see if there are polychromatophilic macrocytes present.
# Chunk 2261
Fig. 77-13. The correction is necessary because these prematurely released cells survive as reticulocytes in circulation for >1 day, thereby providing a falsely high estimate of daily red cell produc tion. If polychromasia is increased, the reticulocyte count, already corrected for anemia, should be divided again by 2 to account for the prolonged reticulocyte maturation time. The second correction fac tor varies from 1 to 3 depending on the severity of anemia. In gen eral, a correction of 2 is simply used. An appropriate correction is shown in Table 77-4. If polychromatophilic cells are not seen on the blood smear, the second correction is not required. The now doubly 1.5 2.5
# Chunk 2262
FIguRE 77-13 Correction of the reticulocyte count. To use the reticulocyte count as an indicator of effective red cell production, the reticulocyte percentage must be corrected based on the level of anemia and the circulating life span of the reticulocytes. Erythroid cells take ∼4.5 days to mature. At a normal hemoglobin, reticulocytes are released to the circulation with ∼1 day left as reticulocytes. However, with different levels of anemia, reticulocytes (and even earlier erythroid cells) may be released from the marrow prematurely. Most patients come to clinical attention with hematocrits in the mid20s, and thus a correction factor of 2 is commonly used because the observed reticulocytes will live for 2 days in the circulation before losing their RNA.
# Chunk 2263
Tests of Iron Supply and Storage The laboratory measurements that reflect the availability of iron for hemoglobin synthesis include the serum iron, the TIBC, and the percent transferrin saturation. The percent transferrin saturation is derived by dividing the serum iron level (× 100) by the TIBC. The normal serum iron ranges from 9 to 27 μmol/L (50–150 μg/dL), whereas the normal TIBC is 54–64 μmol/L (300–360 μg/dL); the normal transferrin saturation ranges from 25 to 50%. A diurnal variation in the serum iron leads to a variation in the percent transferrin saturation. The serum ferritin is used to evaluate total body iron stores. Adult males have serum ferritin levels that average ∼100 μg/L, corresponding to iron stores of ∼1 g. Adult females have lower serum ferritin levels averaging 30 μg/L, reflecting lower iron stores (∼300 mg). A serum ferritin level of 10–15 μg/L indicates depletion of body iron stores. However, ferritin is also an acute-phase reactant and, in the presence of acute or chronic inflammation, may rise several-fold above baseline levels. As a rule, a serum ferritin >200 μg/L means there is at least some iron in tissue stores.
# Chunk 2264
Bone Marrow Examination A bone marrow aspirate and smear or a needle biopsy can be useful in the evaluation of some patients with anemia. In patients with hypoproliferative anemia and normal iron status, a bone marrow is indicated. Marrow examination can diagnose primary marrow disorders such as myelofibrosis, a red cell maturation defect, or an infiltrative disease (Figs. 77-14 to 77-16). The increase or decrease of one cell lineage (myeloid vs erythroid) compared to another is obtained by a differential count of nucleated cells in a bone marrow smear (the myeloid/erythroid [M/E] ratio). A patient with a hypoproliferative anemia (see below) and a reticulocyte production index <2 will demonstrate an M/E ratio of 2 or 3:1. In contrast, patients with hemolytic disease and a production index >3 will have an M/E ratio of at least 1:1. Maturation disorders are identified from the discrepancy between the M/E ratio and the reticulocyte production index (see below). Either the marrow smear or biopsy can be stained for the presence of iron stores or iron in developing red cells. The storage iron is in the form of ferritin or hemosiderin. On carefully prepared bone marrow smears, small ferritin granules can normally be seen under oil immersion in 20–40% of developing erythroblasts. Such cells are called sideroblasts.
# Chunk 2265
FIguRE 77-14 Normal bone marrow. This is a low-power view of a section of a normal bone marrow biopsy stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). Note that the nucleated cellular elements account for ∼40–50% and the fat (clear areas) accounts for ∼50–60% of the area. (From RS Hillman et al: Hematology in Clinical Practice, 5th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2010.)
# Chunk 2266
Hypoproliferative Anemias At least 75% of all cases of anemia are hypoproliferative in nature. A hypoproliferative anemia reflects absolute or relative marrow failure in which the erythroid marrow has not proliferated appropriately for the degree of anemia. The majority of hypoproliferative anemias are due to mild to moderate iron deficiency or inflammation. A hypoproliferative anemia can result from marrow damage, iron deficiency, or inadequate EPO stimulation. The last may reflect impaired renal function, suppression of EPO production by inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin 1, or reduced tissue needs for O2 from metabolic disease such as hypothyroidism. Only occasionally is the marrow unable to produce red cells at a normal rate, and this is most prevalent in patients with renal failure. With diabetes mellitus or myeloma, the EPO deficiency may be more marked than would be predicted by the degree of renal insufficiency. In general, hypoproliferative anemias are characterized by normocytic, normochromic red cells, although microcytic, hypochromic cells may be observed with mild iron deficiency or long-standing chronic inflammatory disease. The key laboratory tests in distinguishing between the various forms of hypoproliferative anemia include the serum iron and iron-binding capacity, evaluation of renal and thyroid function, a marrow biopsy or aspirate to detect marrow damage or infiltrative disease, and serum ferritin to assess iron stores. An iron stain of the marrow will determine the pattern of iron distribution. Patients with the anemia of acute or chronic inflammation show a distinctive pattern of serum iron (low), TIBC (normal or low), percent transferrin saturation (low), and serum ferritin (normal or high). These changes in iron values are brought about by hepcidin, the iron regulatory hormone that is produced by the liver and is increased in inflammation (Chap. 126). A distinct pattern of results is noted in mild to moderate iron deficiency (low serum iron, high TIBC, low percent transferrin saturation, low serum ferritin) (Chap. 126). Marrow damage by drugs, infiltrative disease such as leukemia or lymphoma, or marrow aplasia is diagnosed from the peripheral blood and bone marrow morphology. With infiltrative disease or fibrosis, a marrow biopsy is required.
# Chunk 2267
Maturation Disorders The presence of anemia with an inappropriately low reticulocyte production index, macroor microcytosis on smear, and abnormal red cell indices suggests a maturation disorder. Maturation disorders are divided into two categories: nuclear maturation defects, associated with macrocytosis, and cytoplasmic maturation defects, associated with microcytosis and hypochromia usually from defects in hemoglobin synthesis. The inappropriately low reticulocyte production index is a reflection of the ineffective erythropoiesis that results from the destruction within the marrow of developing erythroblasts. Bone marrow examination shows erythroid hyperplasia.
# Chunk 2268
The evaluation of blood loss anemia is usually not difficult. Most problems arise when a patient presents with an increased red cell production index from an episode of acute blood loss that went unrecognized. The cause of the anemia and increased red cell production may not be obvious. The confirmation of a recovering state may require observations over a period of 2–3 weeks, during which the hemoglobin concentration will rise and the reticulocyte production index fall (Chap. 129).
# Chunk 2269
Polycythemia is defined as an increase in the hemoglobin above normal. This increase may be real or only apparent because of a decrease in plasma volume (spurious or relative polycythemia). The term erythrocytosis may be used interchangeably with polycythemia, but some draw a distinction between them: erythrocytosis implies documentation of increased red cell mass, whereas polycythemia refers to any increase in red cells. Often patients with polycythemia are detected through an incidental finding of elevated hemoglobin or hematocrit levels. Concern that the hemoglobin level may be abnormally high is usually triggered at 170 g/L (17 g/dL) for men and 150 g/L (15 g/dL) for women. Hematocrit levels >50% in men or >45% in women may be abnormal. Hematocrits >60% in men and >55% in women are almost invariably associated with an increased red cell mass. Given that the machine that quantitates red cell parameters actually measures hemoglobin concentrations and calculates hematocrits, hemoglobin levels may be a better index.
# Chunk 2270
Dx: Relative  erythrocytosis Measure RBC mass Measure serum  EPO levels Measure arterial O2 saturation elevated elevated Dx: O2 affinity  hemoglobinopathy increased elevated normal Dx: Polycythemia vera Confirm JAK2mutation smoker? normal normal Dx: Smoker’s  polycythemia normal Increased hct or hgb low low Diagnostic evaluation for  heart or lung disease, e.g., COPD, high altitude, AV or intracardiac shunt Measure hemoglobin O2 affinity Measure  carboxyhemoglobin  levels Search for tumor as source of EPO    IVP/renal ultrasound (renal Ca or cyst)    CT of head (cerebellar hemangioma)    CT of pelvis (uterine leiomyoma)    CT of abdomen (hepatoma) no yes
# Chunk 2271
AV, atrioventricular; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; CT, computed tomography; EPO, erythropoietin; hct, hematocrit; hgb, hemoglobin; IVP, intravenous pyelogram; RBC, red blood cell.
# Chunk 2272
If serum EPO levels are elevated, one needs to distinguish whether the elevation is a physiologic response to hypoxia or related to autonomous EPO production. Patients with low arterial O2 saturation (<92%) should be further evaluated for the presence of heart or lung disease, if they are not living at high altitude. Patients with normal O2 saturation who are smokers may have elevated EPO levels because of CO displacement of O2. If carboxyhemoglobin (COHb) levels are high, the diagnosis is “smoker’s polycythemia.” Such patients should be urged to stop smoking. Those who cannot stop smoking require phlebotomy to control their polycythemia. Patients with normal O2 saturation who do not smoke either have an abnormal hemoglobin that does not deliver O2 to the tissues (evaluated by finding elevated O2–hemoglobin affinity) or have a source of EPO production that is not responding to the normal feedback inhibition. Further workup is dictated by the differential diagnosis of EPO-producing neoplasms. Hepatoma, uterine leiomyoma, and renal cancer or cysts are all detectable with abdominopelvic computed tomography scans. Cerebellar hemangiomas may produce EPO, but they present with localizing neurologic signs and symptoms rather than polycythemia-related symptoms.
# Chunk 2273
Tonsillectomy is a major hemostatic challenge, because intact hemostatic mechanisms are essential to prevent excessive bleeding from the tonsillar bed. Bleeding may occur early after surgery or after approximately 7 days postoperatively, with loss of the eschar at the operative site. Similar delayed bleeding is seen after colonic polyp resection. Gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding and hematuria are usually due to underlying pathology, and procedures to identify and treat the bleeding site should be undertaken, even in patients with known bleeding disorders. VWD, particularly types 2 and 3, has been associated with angiodysplasia of the bowel and GI bleeding.
# Chunk 2274
Because of the nature of coagulation assays, proper sample acquisition and handling is critical to obtaining valid results. In patients with abnormal coagulation assays who have no bleeding history, repeat studies with attention to these factors frequently results in normal values. Most coagulation assays are performed in sodium citrate anticoagulated plasma that is recalcified for the assay. Because the anticoagulant is in liquid solution and needs to be added to blood in proportion to the plasma volume, incorrectly filled or inadequately mixed blood collection tubes will give erroneous results. Vacutainer tubes should be filled to >90% of the recommended fill, which is usually denoted by a line on the tube. An elevated hematocrit (>55%) can result in a false value due to a decreased plasma-to-anticoagulant ratio.
# Chunk 2275
The size and texture of the lymph node(s) and the presence of pain are useful parameters in evaluating a patient with lymphadenopathy. Nodes <1.0 cm2 in area (1.0 cm × 1.0 cm or less) are almost always secondary to benign, nonspecific reactive causes. In one retrospective analysis of younger patients (9–25 years) who had a lymph node biopsy, a maximum diameter of >2 cm served as one discriminant for predicting that the biopsy would reveal malignant or granulomatous disease. Another study showed that a lymph node size of 2.25 cm2 (1.5 cm × 1.5 cm) was the best size limit for distinguishing malignant or granulomatous lymphadenopathy from other causes of lymphadenopathy. Patients with node(s) ≤1.0 cm2 should be observed after excluding infectious mononucleosis and/or toxoplasmosis unless there are symptoms and signs of an underlying systemic illness.
# Chunk 2276
Nonsuperficial presentations (thoracic or abdominal) of adenopathy are usually detected as the result of a symptom-directed diagnostic workup. Thoracic adenopathy may be detected by routine chest radiography or during the workup for superficial adenopathy. It may also be found because the patient complains of a cough or wheezing from airway compression; hoarseness from recurrent laryngeal nerve involvement; dysphagia from esophageal compression; or swelling of the neck, face, or arms secondary to compression of the superior vena cava or subclavian vein. The differential diagnosis of mediastinal and hilar adenopathy includes primary lung disorders and systemic illnesses that characteristically involve mediastinal or hilar nodes. In the young, mediastinal adenopathy is associated with infectious mononucleosis and sarcoidosis. In endemic regions, histoplasmosis can cause unilateral paratracheal lymph node involvement that mimics lymphoma. Tuberculosis can also cause unilateral adenopathy. In older patients, the differential diagnosis includes primary lung cancer (especially among smokers), lymphomas, metastatic carcinoma (usually lung), tuberculosis, fungal infection, and sarcoidosis.
# Chunk 2277
The laboratory investigation of patients with lymphadenopathy must be tailored to elucidate the etiology suspected from the patient’s history and physical findings. One study from a family practice clinic evaluated 249 younger patients with “enlarged lymph nodes, not infected” or “lymphadenitis.” No laboratory studies were obtained in 51%. When studies were performed, the most common were a complete blood count (CBC) (33%), throat culture (16%), chest x-ray (12%), or monospot test (10%). Only eight patients (3%) had a node biopsy, and half of those were normal or reactive. The CBC can provide useful data for the diagnosis of acute or chronic leukemias, EBV or CMV mononucleosis, lymphoma with a leukemic component, pyogenic infections, or immune cytopenias in illnesses such as SLE. Serologic studies may demonstrate antibodies specific to components of EBV, CMV, HIV, and other viruses; Toxoplasma gondii; Brucella; and so on. If SLE is suspected, antinuclear and anti-DNA antibody studies are warranted.
# Chunk 2278
The indications for lymph node biopsy are imprecise, yet it is a valuable diagnostic tool. The decision to biopsy may be made early in a patient’s evaluation or delayed for up to 2 weeks. Prompt biopsy should occur if the patient’s history and physical findings suggest a malignancy; examples include a solitary, hard, nontender cervical node in an older patient who is a chronic user of tobacco; supraclavicular adenopathy; and solitary or generalized adenopathy that is firm, movable, and suggestive of lymphoma. If a primary head and neck cancer is suspected as the basis of a solitary, hard cervical node, then a careful ENT examination should be performed. Any mucosal lesion that is suspicious for a primary neoplastic process should be biopsied first. If no mucosal lesion is detected, an excisional biopsy of the largest node should be performed. Fine-needle aspiration should not be performed as the first diagnostic procedure. Most diagnoses require more tissue than such aspiration can provide, and it often delays a definitive diagnosis. Fine-needle aspiration should be reserved for thyroid nodules and for confirmation of relapse in patients whose primary diagnosis is known. If the primary physician is uncertain about whether to proceed to biopsy, consultation with a hematologist or medical oncologist should be helpful. In primary care practices, <5% of lymphadenopathy patients will require a biopsy. That percentage will be considerably larger in referral practices, i.e., hematology, oncology, or ENT.
# Chunk 2279
Two groups have reported algorithms that they claim will identify more precisely those lymphadenopathy patients who should have a biopsy. Both reports were retrospective analyses in referral practices. The first study involved patients 9–25 years of age who had a node biopsy performed. Three variables were identified that predicted those young patients with peripheral lymphadenopathy who should undergo biopsy; lymph node size >2 cm in diameter and abnormal chest x-ray had positive predictive values, whereas recent ENT symptoms had negative predictive values. The second study evaluated 220 lymphadenopathy patients in a hematology unit and identified five variables (lymph node size, location [supraclavicular or nonsupraclavicular], age [>40 years or <40 years], texture [nonhard or hard], and tenderness) that were used in a mathematical model to identify patients requiring a biopsy. Positive predictive value was found for age >40 years, supraclavicular location, node size >2.25 cm2, hard texture, and lack of pain or tenderness. Negative predictive value was evident for age <40 years, node size <1.0 cm2, nonhard texture, and tender or painful nodes. Ninety-one percent of those who required biopsy were correctly classified by this model. Because both of these studies were retrospective analyses and one was limited to young patients, it is not known how useful these models would be if applied prospectively in a primary care setting.
# Chunk 2280
A palpable spleen is the major physical sign produced by diseases affecting the spleen and suggests enlargement of the organ. The normal spleen weighs <250 g, decreases in size with age, normally lies entirely within the rib cage, has a maximum cephalocaudad diameter of 13 cm by ultrasonography or maximum length of 12 cm and/or width of 7 cm by radionuclide scan, and is usually not palpable. However, a palpable spleen was found in 3% of 2200 asymptomatic, male, freshman college students. Follow-up at 3 years revealed that 30% of those students still had a palpable spleen without any increase in disease prevalence. Ten-year follow-up found no evidence for lymphoid malignancies. Furthermore, in some tropical countries (e.g., New Guinea), the incidence of splenomegaly may reach 60%. Thus, the presence of a palpable spleen does not always equate with presence of disease. Even when disease is present, splenomegaly may not reflect the primary disease but rather a reaction to it. For example, in patients with Hodgkin’s disease, only two-thirds of the palpable spleens show involvement by the cancer.
# Chunk 2281
The absence of the spleen has minimal long-term effects on the hematologic profile. In the immediate postsplenectomy period, leukocytosis (up to 25,000/μL) and thrombocytosis (up to 1 × 106/μL) may develop, but within 2–3 weeks, blood cell counts and survival of each cell lineage are usually normal. The chronic manifestations of splenectomy are marked variation in size and shape of erythrocytes (anisocytosis, poikilocytosis) and the presence of Howell-Jolly bodies (nuclear remnants), Heinz bodies (denatured hemoglobin), basophilic stippling, and an occasional nucleated erythrocyte in the peripheral blood. When such erythrocyte abnormalities appear in a patient whose spleen has not been removed, one should suspect splenic infiltration by tumor that has interfered with its normal culling and pitting function.
# Chunk 2282
The most serious consequence of splenectomy is increased susceptibility to bacterial infections, particularly those with capsules such as Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and some gram-negative enteric organisms. Patients under age 20 years are particularly susceptible to overwhelming sepsis with S. pneumoniae, and the overall actuarial risk of sepsis in patients who have had their spleens removed is about 7% in 10 years. The case–fatality rate for pneumococcal sepsis in splenectomized patients is 50–80%. About 25% of patients without spleens will develop a serious infection at some time in their life. The frequency is highest within the first 3 years after splenectomy. About 15% of the infections are polymicrobial, and lung, skin, and blood are the most common sites. No increased risk of viral infection has been noted in patients who have no spleen. The susceptibility to bacterial infections relates to the inability to remove opsonized bacteria from the bloodstream and a defect in making antibodies to T cell–independent antigens such as the polysaccharide components of bacterial capsules. Pneumococcal vaccine should be administered to all patients 2 weeks before elective splenectomy. The Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices recommends that these patients receive repeat vaccination 5 years after splenectomy. Efficacy has not been proven for this group, and the recommendation discounts the possibility that administration of the vaccine may actually lower the titer of specific pneumococcal antibodies. A more effective pneumococcal conjugate vaccine that involves T cells in the response is now available (Prevenar, 7-valent). The vaccine to Neisseria meningitidis should also be given to patients in whom elective splenectomy is planned. Although efficacy data for H. influenzae type b vaccine are not available for older children or adults, it may be given to patients who have had a splenectomy.
# Chunk 2283
dISORdERS OF AdHESION Three main types of leukocyte adhesion deficiency (LAD) have been described. All are autosomal recessive and result in the inability of neutrophils to exit the circulation to sites of infection, leading to leukocytosis and increased susceptibility to infection (Fig. 80-8). Patients with LAD 1 have mutations in CD18, the common component of the integrins LFA-1, Mac-1, and p150,95, leading to a defect in tight adhesion between neutrophils and the endothelium. The heterodimer formed by CD18/CD11b (Mac-1) is also the receptor for the complement-derived opsonin C3bi (CR3). The CD18 gene is located on distal chromosome 21q. The severity of the defect determines the severity of clinical disease. Complete lack of expression of the leukocyte integrins results in a severe phenotype in which inflammatory stimuli do not increase the expression of leukocyte integrins on neutrophils or activated T and B cells. Neutrophils (and monocytes) from patients with LAD 1 adhere poorly to endothelial cells and protein-coated surfaces and exhibit defective spreading, aggregation, and chemotaxis. Patients with LAD 1 have recurrent bacterial infections involving the skin, oral and genital mucosa, and respiratory and intestinal tracts; persistent leukocytosis (resting neutrophil counts of 15,000–20,000/μL) because cells do not marginate; and, in severe cases, a history of delayed separation of the umbilical stump. Infections, especially of the skin, may become necrotic with progressively enlarging borders, slow healing, and development of dysplastic scars. The most common bacteria are Staphylococcus aureus and enteric gram-negative bacteria. LAD 2 is caused by an abnormality of fucosylation of SLex (CD15s), the ligand on neutrophils that interacts with selectins on endothelial cells and is responsible for neutrophil rolling along the endothelium. Infection susceptibility in LAD 2 appears to be less severe than in LAD 1. LAD 2 is also known as congenital disorder of glycosylation IIc (CDGIIc) due to mutation in a GDP-fucose transporter (SLC35C1). LAD 3 is characterized by infection susceptibility, leukocytosis, and petechial hemorrhage due to impaired integrin activation caused by mutations in the gene FERMT3.
# Chunk 2284
CHAPTER 80 Disorders of Granulocytes and Monocytes

Chronic Granulomatous Diseases (70% X-Linked, 30% Autosomal Recessive)
# Chunk 2285
Severe infections of skin, ears, lungs, liver, and bone with catalase-positive microorganisms such as Staphylococcus aureus, Burkholderia cepacia complex, Aspergillus spp., Chromobacterium violaceum; often hard to culture organism; excessive inflammation with granulomas, frequent lymph node suppuration; granulomas can obstruct GI or GU tracts; gingivitis, aphthous ulcers, seborrheic dermatitis
# Chunk 2286
Patients with leukopenias or leukocyte dysfunction often have delayed inflammatory responses. Therefore, clinical manifestations may be minimal despite overwhelming infection, and unusual infections must always be suspected. Early signs of infection demand prompt, aggressive culturing for microorganisms, use of antibiotics, and surgical drainage of abscesses. Prolonged courses of antibiotics are often required. In patients with CGD, prophylactic antibiotics (trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole) and antifungals (itraconazole) markedly diminish the frequency of life-threatening infections. Glucocorticoids may relieve gastrointestinal or genitourinary tract obstruction by granulomas in patients with CGD. Although TNF-α-blocking agents may markedly relieve inflammatory bowel symptoms, extreme caution must be exercised in their use in CGD inflammatory bowel disease, because it profoundly increases these patients’ already heightened susceptibility to infection. Recombinant human IFN-γ, which nonspecifically stimulates phagocytic cell function, reduces the frequency of infections in patients with CGD by 70% and reduces the severity of infection. This effect of IFN-γ in CGD is additive to the effect of prophylactic antibiotics. The recommended dose is 50 μg/m2 subcutaneously three times weekly. IFN-γ has also been used successfully in the treatment of leprosy, nontuberculous mycobacteria, and visceral leishmaniasis.
# Chunk 2287
Rigorous oral hygiene reduces but does not eliminate the discomfort of gingivitis, periodontal disease, and aphthous ulcers; chlorhexidine mouthwash and tooth brushing with a hydrogen peroxide–sodium bicarbonate paste help many patients. Oral antifungal agents (fluconazole, itraconazole, voriconazole, posaconazole) have reduced mucocutaneous candidiasis in patients with Job’s syndrome. Androgens, glucocorticoids, lithium, and immunosuppressive therapy have been used to restore myelopoiesis in patients with neutropenia due to impaired production. Recombinant G-CSF is useful in the management of certain forms of neutropenia due to depressed neutrophil production, including those related to cancer chemotherapy. Patients with chronic neutropenia with evidence of a good bone marrow reserve need not receive prophylactic antibiotics. Patients with chronic or cyclic neutrophil counts <500/μL may benefit from prophylactic antibiotics and G-CSF during periods of neutropenia. Oral trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (160/800 mg) twice daily can prevent infection. Increased numbers of fungal infections are not seen in patients with CGD on this regimen. Oral quinolones such as levofloxacin and ciprofloxacin are alternatives.
# Chunk 2288
Vital stains are necessary to see precipitated hemoglobin called Heinz bodies.

Red cells can take on a variety of different shapes. All abnormally shaped red cells are poikilocytes. Small red cells without the central pallor are spherocytes; they can be seen in hereditary spherocytosis, hemolytic anemias of other causes, and clostridial sepsis. Dacrocytes are teardrop-shaped cells that can be seen in hemolytic anemias, severe iron deficiency, thalassemias, myelofibrosis, and myelodysplastic syndromes. Schistocytes are helmet-shaped cells that reflect microangiopathic hemolytic anemia or fragmentation on an artificial heart valve. Echinocytes are spiculated red cells with the spikes evenly spaced; they can represent an artifact of abnormal drying of the blood smear or reflect changes in stored blood. They also can be seen in renal failure and malnutrition and are often reversible. Acanthocytes are spiculated red cells with the spikes irregularly distributed. This process tends to be irreversible and reflects underlying renal disease, abetalipoproteinemia, or splenectomy. Elliptocytes are elliptical-shaped red cells that can reflect an inherited defect in the red cell membrane, but they also are seen in iron deficiency, myelodysplastic syndromes, megaloblastic anemia, and thalassemias. Stomatocytes are red cells in which the area of central pallor takes on the morphology of a slit instead of the usual round shape. Stomatocytes can indicate an inherited red cell membrane defect and also can be seen in alcoholism. Target cells have an area of central pallor that contains a dense center, or bull’s-eye. These cells are seen classically in thalassemia, but they are also present in iron deficiency, cholestatic liver disease, and some hemoglobinopathies. They also can be generated artifactually by improper slide making.
# Chunk 2289
Polymorphisms are essential for linkage studies because they provide a means to distinguish the maternal and paternal chromosomes in an individual. On average, 1 out of every 1000 bp varies from one person to the next. Although this degree of variation seems low (99.9% identical), it means that >3 million sequence differences exist between any two unrelated individuals and the probability that the sequence at such loci will differ on the two homologous chromosomes is high (often >70–90%). These sequence variations include variable number of tandem repeats (VNTRs), short tandem repeats (STRs), and SNPs. Most STRs, also called polymorphic microsatellite markers, consist of di-, tri-, or tetranucleotide repeats that can be characterized readily using the polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Characterization of SNPs, using DNA chips or beads, permits comprehensive analyses of genetic variation, linkage, and association studies. Although these sequence variations often have no apparent functional consequences, they provide much of the basis for variation in genetic traits.
# Chunk 2290
Prenatal diagnosis of numerous genetic diseases in instances with a high risk for certain disorders is now possible by direct DNA analysis. Amniocentesis involves the removal of a small amount of amniotic fluid, usually at 16 weeks of gestation. Cells can be collected and submitted for karyotype analyses, FISH, and mutational analysis of selected genes. The main indications for amniocentesis include advanced maternal age (>35 years), an abnormal serum triple marker test (α-fetoprotein, β human chorionic gonadotropin, pregnancy-associated plasma protein A, or unconjugated estriol), a family history of chromosomal abnormalities, or a Mendelian disorder amenable to genetic testing. Prenatal diagnosis can also be performed by chorionic villus sampling (CVS), in which a small amount of the chorion is removed by a transcervical or transabdominal biopsy. Chromosomes and DNA obtained from these cells can be submitted for cytogenetic and mutational analyses. CVS can be performed earlier in gestation (weeks 9–12) than amniocentesis, an aspect that may be of relevance when termination of pregnancy is a consideration. Later in pregnancy, beginning at about 18 weeks of gestation, percutaneous umbilical blood sampling (PUBS) permits collection of fetal blood for lymphocyte culture and analysis. Recently, the entire fetal genome has been determined prenatally from cells taken from the mother’s plasma through deep sequencing and the counting of parental haplotypes, or by inferring it from DNA sequences obtained from blood samples from the mother, father, and umbilical cord. These approaches enable screening for clinically relevant and deleterious alleles inherited from the parents, as well as for de novo germline mutations, and they may have the potential to change the diagnosis of genetic disorders in the prenatal setting.
# Chunk 2291
Prenatal diagnosis is carried out by analysis of samples obtained by four techniques: amniocentesis, chorionic villous sampling, fetal blood sampling, and analysis of cell free DNA from maternal serum. Amniocentesis, which has been the most commonly used test to date, is usually performed between 15 and 17 weeks of gestational age and carries a small but significant risk for miscarriage. Amniocentesis can be performed as early as 12 weeks, but because there is a lower volume of fluid, the risks for fetal injury or miscarriage are greater. Chorionic villous sampling (CVS) or placental biopsy is routinely carried out earlier than amniocentesis, between 10 and 12 weeks, but a reported increase in limb defects when the procedure is carried out earlier than
# Chunk 2292
Timing of Testing Indications for Testing 10 weeks has resulted in reduced use of this test in some centers. Fetal blood sampling (percutaneous umbilical blood sampling [PUBS]) is a riskier procedure that is carried out in the second or third trimester of pregnancy, usually to follow up on an unclear finding from an amniocentesis (such as mosaicism) or an ultrasound abnormality that was detected later in pregnancy. One of the far-reaching recent advances in prenatal diagnosis of chromosome and other genetic disorders is the utilization of cell free fetal DNA that can be identified in maternal serum. The obvious advantages of using fetal DNA obtained from maternal serum is that the DNA can be obtained at minimal risk to the pregnancy, because it requires a maternal blood sample, rather than amniotic fluid which is obtained by puncturing the uterine membranes and carries a risk of miscarriage or infection. Although cell free fetal DNA screening, also called noninvasive prenatal screening, has started to be offered clinically, it requires further confirmation of fetal tissues when an abnormal result is identified. Furthermore, ethical concerns have been raised, because it is feared that the ease of doing this test may encourage testing for individuals who are not truly prepared to deal with the choices that accompany diagnosis of a genetic disease and this testing may change the ethical implications of prenatal testing. Nevertheless, this is an active of area of research, both in terms of the technology and the utilization and implications.
# Chunk 2293
Maternal age is well known to be an important risk factor for having a fetus with trisomy. At a maternal age less than 25 years, 2% of all clinically recognized pregnancies are trisomic, but by a maternal age of 36 years, this figure increases to 10%, and by the maternal age of 42 years, the figure increases to >33%. Based on the risk of having a chromosomally abnormal fetus in comparison to the risk for an adverse event from amniocentesis or CVS, the recommendation is that women over the age of 35 consider prenatal testing if they want to know the chromosomal status of their fetus. The precise mechanism for the maternal age effect is not known, but it is believed that it involves a breakdown in the process of chromosome segregation. A similar effect is not seen for trisomy and paternal age. This difference may reflect the fact that oocytes are generated early in ovary development in the female, whereas spermatogonia are generated continuously after puberty in the male.
# Chunk 2294
Maternal serum screening results are the third most frequent indication for prenatal chromosome analysis. There have been several versions of maternal serum screening offered over the past few decades. Currently, the “quad” screen analyzes levels of α fetoprotein (AFP), human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), estriol, and inhibin-A. The values of these analytes are used to adjust the maternal age–predicted risk of a trisomy 21 or trisomy 18 fetus.
# Chunk 2295
FIGURE 84-1 A 36-year-old woman (arrow) seeks consultation because of her family history of cancer. The patient expresses concern that the multiple cancers in her relatives imply an inherited predisposition to develop cancer. The family history is recorded, and records of the patient’s relatives confirm the reported diagnoses. Symbol key Breast cancer 52 Breast ca 44 46 Ovarian ca 43 Ovarian cancer 2 40 Ovarian ca 38 42 Breast ca 38 24 Pneumonia 56 36 62 69 Breast ca 44 55 Ovarian ca 54 6210 Accident 6 40 5 2 2 intensive and ideally involves interviews of additional family members or reviewing medical records, autopsy reports, and death certificates.
# Chunk 2296
Some of the aforementioned features of the family history are illustrated in Fig. 84-1. In this example, the proband, a 36-year-old woman (IV-1), has a strong history of breast and ovarian cancer on the paternal side of her family. The early age of onset and the co-occurrence of breast and ovarian cancer in this family suggest the possibility of an inherited mutation in BRCA1 or BRCA2. It is unclear however, without genetic testing, whether her father harbors such a mutation and transmitted it to her. After appropriate genetic counseling of the pro-band and her family, the most informative and cost-effective approach to DNA analysis in this family is to test the cancer-affected 42-year-old living cousin for the presence of a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation. If a mutation is found, then it is possible to test for this particular alteration in other family members, if they so desire. In the example shown, if the proband’s father has a BRCA1 mutation, there is a 50:50 probability that the mutation was transmitted to her, and genetic testing can be used to establish the absence or presence of this alteration. In this same example, if a mutation is not detected in the cancer-affected cousin, testing would not be indicated for cancer-unaffected relatives.
# Chunk 2297
Genetic testing is performed largely by DNA sequence analysis for mutations, although genotype can also be deduced through the study of RNA or protein (e.g., apolipoprotein E, hemoglobin S, and immunohistochemistry). For example, universal screening for Lynch syndrome via immunohistochemical analysis of colorectal cancers for absence of expression of mismatch repair proteins is under way at multiple hospitals throughout the United States. The determination of DNA sequence alterations relies heavily on the use of polymerase chain reaction (PCR), which allows rapid amplification and analysis of the gene of interest. In addition, PCR enables genetic testing on minimal amounts of DNA extracted from a wide range of tissue sources including leukocytes, mucosal epithelial cells (obtained via saliva or buccal swabs), and archival tissues. Amplified DNA can be analyzed directly by DNA sequencing, or it can be hybridized to DNA chips or blots to detect the presence of normal and altered DNA sequences. Direct DNA sequencing is frequently used for determination of hereditary disease susceptibility and prenatal diagnosis. Analyses of large alterations of the genome are possible using cytogenetics, fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH), Southern blotting, or multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) (Chap. 83e).
# Chunk 2298
Ophthalmologic: cataracts, pigment retinopathy, neurologic and myopathic (optic atrophy, ophthalmoplegia) ophthalmoplegia, diabetes mellitus, hir sutism, gastrointestinal dysmotility, and nephropathy. The typical age of death ranges from 10 to 35 years, but some individuals live into their sixth decade. Intercurrent infections or intestinal obstructions are often the terminal events. Laboratory investigation commonly demonstrates elevated lactate concentrations at rest with excessive increase after moderate exercise. Brain imaging during stroke-like episodes shows areas of increased T2 signal, typically involving the posterior cerebrum and not conforming to the distribution of major arteries. Electrocardiogram (ECG) may show evidence of cardiomyopathy, preexcitation, or incomplete heart block. Electromyography and nerve conduction studies are consistent with a myopathic process, but axonal and sensory neuropathy may coexist. Muscle biopsy typically shows ragged red fibers with the modified Gomori trichrome stain or “ragged blue fibers” resulting from the hyperintense reaction with the histochemical staining for succinate dehydrogenase. The diagnosis of MELAS is based on a combination of clinical findings and molecular genetic testing. Mutations in the mtDNA gene MT-TL1 encoding tRNAleu are causative. The most common mutation, present in approximately 80% of individuals with typical clinical findings, is an A-to-G transition at nucleotide 3243 (m.3243A>G). Mutations can usually be detected in mtDNA from leukocytes in individuals with typical MELAS; however, the occurrence of heteroplasmy can result in varying tissue distribution of mutated mtDNA. In the absence of specific treatment, various manifestations of MELAS are treated according to standard modalities for prevention, surveillance, and treatment.
# Chunk 2299
Blood: creatine kinase, liver functions, glucose, lactate Urine: organic and amino acids CSF: glucose, protein, lactate Cardiac x-ray, ECG, ECHO EEG, EMG, nerve conduction Brain CT/MRI
# Chunk 2300
FIGURE 85e-6 Clinical and laboratory investigation of a suspected mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) disorder. CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; CT, computed tomography; ECG, electrocardiogram; ECHO, echocardiography; EEG, electroencephalogram; EMG, electromyogram; LHON, Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy; MELAS, mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis, and stoke-like episodes; MERFF, myoclonic epilepsy with ragged red fibers; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; RFLP, restriction fragment length polymorphism.
# Chunk 2301
therefore, it is appropriate to send a blood sample for molecular genetic analysis by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) or restriction fragment length polymorphism. The same is true for most MERRF patients who harbor a point mutation in the lysine tRNA gene at position 8344. In contrast, patients with the m.3243A>G MELAS mutation often have low levels of mutated mtDNA in blood. If clinical suspicion is strong enough to warrant peripheral blood testing, then patients with a negative result should be investigated further by performing a skeletal muscle biopsy.
# Chunk 2302
At many levels, different people are very much alike: our genomes are >99% identical, and we have similar collections of human cells. However, our microbial communities differ drastically, both between people and between habitats within a single human body. The greatest variation (beta diversity, described below) is between body sites. For example, the difference between the microbial communities residing in a person’s mouth versus the same person’s gut is comparable to the difference in communities residing in soil versus seawater. Even within a body site, the differences among people are not subtle: gut, skin, and oral communities can all differ by 80–90%, even from the broad, bacterial species–level view. The English poet John Donne said that “no man is an island”; however, from a microbial perspective, each of us consists of not just one isolated island but rather a whole archipelago of distinct habitats that exchange microbes with one another and with the outside environment at some as yet undetermined level. Before we can discuss these differences and understand their relevance to human disease, it is important to understand some basic terms and ecologic principles.
# Chunk 2303
Studies of fecal samples obtained from twins over time have shown that the overall degree of phylogenetic similarity of bacterial communities does not differ significantly between monozygotic and dizygotic twin pairs, although monozygotic twin pairs may be more similar in some populations at earlier ages. These results, together with intervention studies in mice and epidemiologic observations in humans, emphasize that early environmental exposures are a very important determinant of adult-gut microbial ecology. In humans, the initial exposures depend on delivery mode: babies sampled within 20 min of birth have relatively undifferentiated microbial communities in the mouth, the skin, and the gut. For vaginally delivered babies, these communities resemble the specific microbial communities found in the mother’s vagina. For babies delivered by cesarean section, the communities resemble skin communities. Although studies of older children and of adults stratified by delivery mode are still rare in the literature, these differences have been shown to persist until at least 4 months of age and perhaps until age 7 years. The infant gut microbiota changes to resemble the adult gut community over the first 3 years of life; comparable studies have not been done in other body habitats to date.
# Chunk 2304
In a study of three healthy adult volunteers given a short course of ciprofloxacin (500 mg by mouth twice a day for 5 days—a regimen commonly used against uncomplicated urinary tract infections), overall gut-community configuration came to resemble baseline within 6 months after treatment cessation, although some taxa failed to recover. However, the effects of the antibiotic perturbation were highly individualized. Administration of a second course of treatment months later led to altered-community states, relative to baseline, in all three volunteers; again, the extent of the alteration differed with the individual. Crucially, as shown in this and other studies, a given bacterial taxon can respond differently to the same antibiotic in different individuals; this observation suggests that the rest of the microbial community plays an important role in determining the effects of antibiotics on a per-individual basis.
# Chunk 2305
The microbiota is a key trigger in the development of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) in mice that harbor mutations in genes associated with IBD risk in humans. Moreover, components of the gut microbiota can modify the activity of the immune system to ameliorate or prevent IBD. Mice containing a mutant ATG16L1 allele linked to Crohn’s disease are particularly susceptible to IBD. Upon infection with mouse norovirus and treatment with dextran sodium sulfate, expression of a hypomorphic ATG16L1 allele leads to defects in small-intestinal Paneth cells and renders mice significantly more susceptible to ileitis than are wild-type control animals. This process is dependent on the gut microbiota and highlights how the intersection of host genetics, infectious agents, and the microbiota can lead to severe immune pathology; i.e., the pathogenic potential of a microbiota may be context-dependent, requiring a confluence of factors. An important observation is that members of the gut microbiota, including B. fragilis or members of Clostridium, prevent the severe inflammation that develops in mouse models mimicking various aspects of human IBD.
# Chunk 2306
H. sapiens genome as well as that in our microbiomes. For example, digoxin is inactivated by the human gut bacterium Eggerthella lenta, but only by strains with a cytochrome-containing operon. Expression of this operon is induced by digoxin and inhibited by arginine. Studies in gnotobiotic mice established that dietary protein affects (reduces) microbial metabolism of digoxin, with corresponding alterations in levels of the drug in both serum and urine. These findings reinforce the need to consider strain-level diversity in the gut microbiota when examining interpersonal variations in the metabolism of orally administered drugs.
# Chunk 2307
The efficacy of FMT for the treatment of recurrent C. difficile infection has been assessed in a number of small trials. One unblinded, placebo-controlled trial assessed the use of FMT in 42 patients with recurrent C. difficile infection (defined as at least one relapse after treatment with vancomycin or metronidazole for ≥10 d). Patients were pretreated with oral vancomycin. The experimental group then received FMT via nasoduodenal tube from healthy volunteer donors (<60 years of age) selected from the community. Controls underwent sterile lavage or received oral vancomycin alone. In 10 weeks of follow-up, infection was cured (with cure defined as three negative fecal tests for C. difficile toxin) in 81% of patients in the FMT group (13 of 16) but in only 23% (3 of 13) in the bowel-lavage control arm and 31% (4 of 13) in the vancomycin-only group. Metagenomic analysis of microbiota samples collected before and after treatment revealed an increased representation of Bacteroidetes and Clostridium clusters IV and XIVa, along with a 100-fold decrease in the relative abundance of Proteobacteria, in the FMT group.
# Chunk 2308
A meta-analysis of FMT in C. difficile infection examined 20 case-series publications, 15 case reports, and the one unblinded study described above. All but one of these studies used fresh (not frozen) fecal samples. Donor selection varied, although most donors were family members or relatives and most studies excluded donors who had recently received antibiotics. It is noteworthy that the concentrations of infused donor feces varied widely (i.e., from 5 g to 200 g, resuspended in 10–500 mL); these fecal suspensions were introduced at different sites along the gastrointestinal tract, including the stomach and points throughout the small intestine and colon. Resolution of infection, which was frequently assessed on the basis of symptom resolution (with C. difficile toxin testing rarely performed), was documented in 87% (467) of 536 treated patients. The most common adverse events reported were diarrhea (94% of cases) and abdominal cramps (31%) on the day of infusion. The meta-analysis was limited to clinical outcomes and did not specifically address the role of the microbiota in disease resolution (e.g., the extent of invasion of donor taxa; their persistence; or the long-term effects of transplantation on various facets of host biology, which generally have not been evaluated).
# Chunk 2309
Hemophilia (Chap. 78) has long been considered a promising disease model for gene transfer, because the gene product does not require precise regulation of expression and biologically active clotting factors can be synthesized in a variety of tissue types, permitting latitude in the choice of target tissue. Moreover, raising circulating factor levels from <1% (levels seen in those severely affected) into the range of 5% greatly improves the phenotype of the disease. Preclinical studies with recombinant AAV vectors infused into skeletal muscle or liver have resulted in long-term (>5 years) expression of factor VIII or factor IX in the hemophilic dog model. Administration to skeletal muscle of an AAV vector expressing factor IX in patients with hemophilia B was safe and resulted in long-term expression as measured on muscle biopsy, but circulating levels never rose to >1% for sustained periods, and a large number of IM injections (>80–100) was required to access a large muscle mass. Intravascular vector delivery has been used to access large areas of skeletal muscle in animal models of hemophilia and will likely be tested for this and other disorders in upcoming trials.
# Chunk 2310
The initial decline in fertility resulted in older age groups becoming a larger fraction of the total population. Declines in adult and old age mortality contributed to population aging in the later stages of the process. Life expectancy at birth—the average age to which someone is expected to live, under prevailing mortality conditions—has been calculated at around 28 years in ancient Greece, perhaps 30 years in medieval Britain, and less than 25 years in the colony of Virginia in North America. In the United States, life expectancy climbed slowly during the nineteenth century, reaching 49 years for white women by 1900. White men had a life expectancy 2 years lower than that for white women, and black Americans had a life expectancy 14 years lower than did white Americans in 1900. By the early twenty-first century, life expectancy in the United States had improved dramatically for all, with the sex gap wider and the racial gaps narrower than at the beginning of the century: 76 years for white men in 2006; 81 years for white women; and 70 and 76 years for black men and women, respectively. However, although the United States had a relatively high life expectancy compared to other high-income countries around 1980, almost all such countries have in the interim exceeded the United States in life expectancy. Female life expectancy, especially for whites in the United States, has done particularly poorly, and this has been attributed to relatively high rates of lifetime smoking.
# Chunk 2311
Regions of the world are at very different stages of the demographic transition (Fig. 93e-1). Of a world population of 6.8 billion in 2012, approximately 11% were older than age 60 years, with Japan (32%) and Europe (22%) being the oldest regions (Germany and Italy 27% each) and the United States having 19%. The percentage of the population older than age 60 years in the United States has remained lower than in Europe, due both to modestly higher fertility rates and to higher rates of immigration. Asia has about 10% older than age 60 years, with the population giants close to the average—China (12%), Indonesia (9%), and India (7%). Middle Eastern and African countries have the lowest proportions of older people (5% or lower).
# Chunk 2312
The members of the population who could potentially become age 80 and older in 2050 are already alive today. The actual numbers of people who will be age 80 and older in 2050 will therefore depend almost solely on adult and old age mortality rates over the next 35 years. The history of the decline of mortality suggests that improvements in the standard of living, including increased and improved education and improved nutrition, coupled with improvements in public health stemming from an understanding of the germ theory of disease initially led to the decline in mortality, with medical achievements such as antibiotics and improved understanding of risk factors for cardiovascular and circulatory diseases becoming factors only in the post–World War II period; the largest strides in cardiovascular disease came only in more recent decades. The improvements in educational attainment of succeeding generations have been credited in large part for improvements changes in educational attainment of the elderly population will be less dramatic.
# Chunk 2313
CHAPTER 94e The Biology of Aging disease, and cancer. In humans, caloric restriction is associated with increased lifespan and healthspan. This is most convincingly demonstrated in Okinawa, Japan, where one of the most long-lived human populations resides. In comparison to the rest of the Japanese population, Okinawan people usually combine an above-average amount of daily exercise with a below-average food intake. However, when Okinawan families move to Brazil, they adopt a Western lifestyle that affects both exercise and nutrition, causing a rise in weight and a reduction in life expectancy by nearly two decades. In the Biosphere II project, where volunteers lived together for 24 months undergoing an unforeseen severe caloric restriction, there were improvements in insulin, blood sugar, glycated hemoglobin, cholesterol levels, and blood pressure—all outcomes that would be expected to benefit lifespan. Caloric restriction changes many aspects of human aging that might influence lifespan such as the transcriptome, hormonal status (especially IGF-I and thyroid hormones), oxidative stress, inflammation, mitochondrial function, glucose homeostasis, and cardiometabolic risk factors. Epigenetic modifications are an emerging target for caloric restriction.
# Chunk 2314
Note: This table (taken from the DRI reports; see www.nap.edu) presents recommended dietary allowances (RDAs) in bold type and adequate intakes (AIs) in ordinary type followed by an asterisk (*). An RDA is the average daily dietary intake level sufficient to meet the nutrient requirements of nearly all healthy individuals (97–98%) in a group. The RDA is calculated from an estimated average requirement (EAR). If sufficient scientific evidence is not available to establish an EAR and thus to calculate an RDA, an AI is usually developed. For healthy breast-fed infants, an AI is the mean intake. The AI for other life-stage and sex-specific groups is believed to cover the needs of all healthy individuals in those groups, but lack of data or uncertainty in the data makes it impossible to specify with confidence the percentage of individuals covered by this intake.
# Chunk 2315
aAs retinol activity equivalents (RAEs). 1 RAE = 1 μg retinol, 12 μg β-carotene, 24 μg α-carotene, or 24 μg β-cryptoxanthin. The RAE for dietary provitamin A carotenoids is twofold greater than the retinol equivalent (RE), whereas the RAE for preformed vitamin A is the same as the RE. bAs cholecalciferol. 1 μg cholecalciferol = 40 IU vitamin D. cUnder the assumption of minimal sunlight. dAs α-tocopherol. α-Tocopherol includes RRR-α-tocopherol, the only form of α-tocopherol that occurs naturally in foods, and the 2R-stereoisomeric forms of α-tocopherol (RRR-, RSR-, RRS-, and RSS-α-tocopherol) that occur in fortified foods and supplements. It does not include the 2S-stereoisomeric forms of α-tocopherol (SRR-, SSR-, SRS-, and SSS-α-tocopherol) also found in fortified foods and supplements. eAs niacin equivalents (NEs). 1 mg of niacin = 60 mg of tryptophan; 0–6 months = preformed niacin (not NE). fAs dietary folate equivalents (DFEs). 1 DFE = 1 μg food folate = 0.6 μg of folic acid from fortified food or as a supplement consumed with food = 0.5 μg of a supplement taken on an empty stomach. gAlthough AIs have been set for choline, there are few data to assess whether a dietary supply of choline is needed at all stages of the life cycle, and it may be that the choline requirement can be met by endogenous synthesis at some of these stages. hBecause 10–30% of older people may malabsorb food-bound B12, it is advisable for those >50 years of age to meet their RDA mainly by consuming foods fortified with B12 or a supplement containing B12. iIn view of evidence linking inadequate folate intake with neural tube defects in the fetus, it is recommended that all women capable of becoming pregnant consume 400 μg of folate from supplements or fortified foods in addition to intake of food folate from a varied diet. jIt is assumed that women will continue consuming 400 μg from supplements or fortified food until their pregnancy is confirmed and they enter prenatal care, which ordinarily occurs after the end of the periconceptional period—the critical time for formation of the neural tube.
# Chunk 2316
(e.g., pregnancy or lactation). The RDA, which is the nutrient-intake based on observed or experimentally determined approximations of goal for planning diets of individuals, is defined statistically as two nutrient intakes in healthy people. In the DRIs, AIs rather than RDAs standard deviations above the EAR to ensure that the needs of any are proposed for nutrients consumed by infants (up to age 1 year) as given individual are met. The online tool at http://fnic.nal.usda.gov/ well as for chromium, fluoride, manganese, sodium, potassium, pantointeractiveDRI/ allows health professionals to calculate individualized thenic acid, biotin, choline, and water consumed by persons of all ages. daily nutrient recommendations for dietary planning based on the Vitamin D and calcium recommendations were recently revised, and DRIs for persons of a given age, sex, and weight. The RDAs are used more precise estimates are now available. to formulate food guides such as the U.S. Department of Agriculture
# Chunk 2317
Note: This table (taken from the DRI reports; see www.nap.edu) presents recommended dietary allowances (RDAs) in bold type and adequate intakes (AIs) in ordinary type followed by an asterisk (*). An RDA is the average daily dietary intake level sufficient to meet the nutrient requirements of nearly all healthy individuals (97–98%) in a group. The RDA is calculated from an estimated average requirement (EAR). If sufficient scientific evidence is not available to establish an EAR and thus to calculate an RDA, an AI is usually developed. For healthy breast-fed infants, an AI is the mean intake. The AI for other life-stage and sex-specific groups is believed to cover the needs of all healthy individuals in those groups, but lack of data or uncertainty in the data make it impossible to specify with confidence the percentage of individuals covered by this intake.
# Chunk 2318
Route of Intake The RDAs apply only to oral intakes. When nutrients are administered parenterally, similar values can sometimes be used for amino acids, glucose (carbohydrate), fats, sodium, chloride, potassium, and most vitamins because their intestinal absorption rate is nearly 100%. However, the oral bioavailability of most mineral elements may be only half that obtained by parenteral administration. For some nutrients that are not readily stored in the body or that cannot be stored in large amounts, timing of administration may also be important. For example, amino acids cannot be used for protein synthesis if they are not supplied together; instead, they will be used for energy production, although in healthy individuals eating adequate diets, the distribution of protein intake over the course of the day has little effect on health.
# Chunk 2319
Most health care facilities have nutrition-screening processes in place for identifying possible malnutrition after hospital admission. Nutritional screening is required by the Joint Commission, which accredits and certifies health care organizations in the United States. However, there are no universally recognized or validated standards. The factors that are usually assessed include abnormal weight for height or body mass index (e.g., BMI <19 or >25); reported weight change (involuntary loss or gain of >5 kg in the past 6 months) (Chap. 56); diagnoses with known nutritional implications (e.g., metabolic disease, any disease affecting the gastrointestinal tract, alcoholism); present therapeutic dietary prescription; chronic poor appetite; presence of chewing and swallowing problems or major food intolerances; need for assistance with preparing or shopping for food, eating, or other aspects of self-care; and social isolation. The nutritional status of hospitalized patients should be reassessed periodically—at least once every week.
# Chunk 2320
In acute thiamine deficiency with either cardiovascular or neurologic signs, 200 mg of thiamine three times daily should be given intravenously until there is no further improvement in acute symptoms; oral thiamine (10 mg/d) should subsequently be given until recovery is complete. Cardiovascular and ophthalmoplegic improvement occurs within 24 h. Other manifestations gradually clear, although psychosis in Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome may be permanent or may persist for several months. Other nutrient deficiencies should be corrected concomitantly.
# Chunk 2321
Deficiency Niacin deficiency causes pellagra, which is found mostly among people eating corn-based diets in parts of China, Africa, and India. Pellagra in North America is found mainly among alcoholics; among patients with congenital defects of intestinal and kidney absorption of tryptophan (Hartnup disease; Chap. 434e); and among patients with carcinoid syndrome (Chap. 113), in which there is increased conversion of tryptophan to serotonin. The antituberculosis drug isoniazid is a structural analog of niacin and can precipitate pellagra. In the setting of famine or population displacement, pellagra results from the absolute lack of niacin but also from the deficiency of micronutrients required for the conversion of tryptophan to niacin (e.g., iron, riboflavin, and pyridoxine). The early symptoms of pellagra include loss of appetite, generalized weakness and irritability, abdominal pain, and vomiting. Bright red glossitis then ensues and is followed by a characteristic skin rash that is pigmented and scaling, particularly in skin areas exposed to sunlight. This rash is known as Casal’s necklace because it forms a ring around the neck; it is seen in advanced cases. Vaginitis and esophagitis also may occur. Diarrhea (due in part to proctitis and in part to malabsorption), depression, seizures, and dementia are also part of the pellagra syndrome. The primary manifestations of this syndrome are sometimes referred to as “the four D’s”: dermatitis, diarrhea, and dementia leading to death.
# Chunk 2322
Treatment of pellagra consists of oral supplementation with 100– 200 mg of nicotinamide or nicotinic acid three times daily for 5 days. High doses of nicotinic acid (2 g/d in a time-release form) are used for the treatment of elevated cholesterol and triglyceride levels and/ or low high-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels (Chap. 421).
# Chunk 2323
Toxicity Prostaglandin-mediated flushing due to binding of the vitamin to a G protein–coupled receptor has been observed at daily nicotinic acid doses as low as 30 mg taken as a supplement or as therapy for dyslipidemia. There is no evidence of toxicity from niacin that is derived from food sources. Flushing always starts in the face and may be accompanied by skin dryness, itching, paresthesia, and headache. Pharmaceutical preparations of nicotinic acid combined with laropiprant, a selective prostaglandin D2 receptor 1 antagonist, or premedication with aspirin may alleviate these symptoms. Flushing is subject to tachyphylaxis and often improves with time. Nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain also occur at similar doses of niacin. Hepatic toxicity is the most serious toxic reaction caused by sustained-release niacin and may present as jaundice with elevated aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels. A few cases of fulminant hepatitis requiring liver transplantation have been reported at doses of 3–9 g/d. Other toxic reactions include glucose intolerance, hyperuricemia, macular edema, and macular cysts. The combination of nicotinic acid preparations for dyslipidemia with 3-hydroxy3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitors may increase the risk of rhabdomyolysis. The upper limit for daily niacin intake has been set at 35 mg. However, this upper limit does not pertain to the therapeutic use of niacin.
# Chunk 2324
Administration of vitamin C (200 mg/d) improves the symptoms of scurvy within several days. High-dose vitamin C supplementation (e.g., 1–2 g/d) may slightly decrease the symptoms and duration of upper respiratory tract infections. Vitamin C supplementation has also been reported to be useful in Chédiak-Higashi syndrome (Chap. 80) and osteogenesis imperfecta (Chap. 427). Diets high in vitamin C have been claimed to lower the incidence of certain cancers, particularly esophageal and gastric cancers. If proved, this effect may be due to the fact that vitamin C can prevent the conversion of nitrites and secondary amines to carcinogenic nitrosamines. However, an intervention study from China did not show vitamin C to be protective. A potential role for parenteral ascorbic acid in the treatment of advanced cancers has been suggested.
# Chunk 2325
Saharan Africa, some parts of Latin America, and the western Pacific, including parts of China. Vitamin A status is usually assessed by measuring serum retinol (normal range, 1.05–3.50 μmol/L [30–100 μg/dL]) or blood-spot retinol or by tests of dark adaptation. Stable isotopic or invasive liver biopsy methods are available to estimate total body stores of vitamin A. As judged by deficient serum retinol (<0.70 μmol/L [20 μg/dL]), vitamin A deficiency worldwide is present in >90 million preschool-age children, among whom >4 million have an ocular manifestation of deficiency termed xerophthalmia. This condition includes milder stages of night blindness and conjunctival xerosis (dryness) with Bitot’s spots (white patches of keratinized epithelium appearing on the sclera) as well as rare, potentially blinding corneal ulceration and necrosis. Keratomalacia (softening of the cornea) leads to corneal scarring that blinds at least a quarter of a million children each year and is associated with fatality rates of 4–25%. However, vitamin A deficiency at any stage poses an increased risk of death from diarrhea, dysentery, measles, malaria, or respiratory disease. Vitamin A deficiency can compromise barrier, innate, and acquired immune defenses to infection. In areas where deficiency is widely prevalent, vitamin A supplementation can markedly reduce the risk of childhood mortality (by 23–34%, on average). About 10% of pregnant women in undernourished settings also develop night blindness (assessed by history) during the latter half of pregnancy, and this moderate vitamin A deficiency is associated with an increased risk of maternal infection and death.
# Chunk 2326
Any stage of xerophthalmia should be treated with 60 mg (or RAE) of vitamin A in oily solution, usually contained in a soft-gel capsule. The same dose is repeated 1 and 14 days later. Doses should be reduced by half for patients 6–11 months of age. Mothers with night blindness or Bitot’s spots should be given vitamin A orally–either 3 mg daily or 7.5 mg twice a week for 3 months. These regimens are efficacious, and they are less expensive and more widely available than injectable water-miscible vitamin A. A common approach to prevention is to provide vitamin A supplementation every 4–6 months to young children and infants (both HIV-positive and HIV-negative) in high-risk areas. Infants 6–11 months of age should receive 30 mg vitamin A; children 12–59 months of age, 60 mg. For reasons that are not clear, vitamin A supplementation has not proven useful in high-risk settings for preventing morbidity or death among infants 1–5 months of age.
# Chunk 2327
Uncomplicated vitamin A deficiency is rare in industrialized countries. One high-risk group—extremely low-birth-weight (<1000-g) infants—is likely to be vitamin A–deficient and should receive a supplement of 1500 μg (or RAE) three times a week for 4 weeks. Severe measles in any society can lead to secondary vitamin A deficiency. Children hospitalized with measles should receive two 60-mg doses of vitamin A on two consecutive days. Vitamin A deficiency most often occurs in patients with malabsorptive diseases (e.g., celiac sprue, short-bowel syndrome) who have abnormal dark adaptation or symptoms of night blindness without other ocular changes. Typically, such patients are treated for 1 month with 15 mg/d of a water-miscible preparation of vitamin A. This treatment is followed by a lower maintenance dose, with the exact amount determined by monitoring serum retinol.
# Chunk 2328
Toxicity The acute toxicity of vitamin A was first noted in Arctic explorers who ate polar bear liver and has also been seen after administration of 150 mg to adults or 100 mg to children. Acute toxicity is manifested by increased intracranial pressure, vertigo, diplopia, bulging fontanels (in children), seizures, and exfoliative dermatitis; it may result in death. Among children being treated for vitamin A deficiency according to the protocols outlined above, transient bulging of fontanels occurs in 2% of infants, and transient nausea, vomiting, and headache occur in 5% of preschoolers. Chronic vitamin A intoxication is largely a concern in industrialized countries and has been seen in otherwise healthy adults who ingest 15 mg/d and children who ingest 6 mg/d over a period of several months. Manifestations include dry skin, cheilosis, glossitis, vomiting, alopecia, bone demineralization and pain, hypercalcemia, lymph node enlargement, hyperlipidemia, amenorrhea, and features of pseudotumor cerebri with increased intracranial pressure and papilledema. Liver fibrosis with portal hypertension and 96e-7 bone demineralization may result from chronic vitamin A intoxication. Provision of vitamin A in excess to pregnant women has resulted in spontaneous abortion and in congenital malformations, including craniofacial abnormalities and valvular heart disease. In pregnancy, the daily dose of vitamin A should not exceed 3 mg. Commercially available retinoid derivatives are also toxic, including 13-cis-retinoic acid, which has been associated with birth defects. Thus contraception should be continued for at least 1 year and possibly longer in women who have taken 13-cis-retinoic acid.
# Chunk 2329
Vitamin K deficiency in adults may be seen in patients with chronic small-intestinal disease (e.g., celiac disease, Crohn’s disease), in those with obstructed biliary tracts, or after small-bowel resection. Broad-spectrum antibiotic treatment can precipitate vitamin K deficiency by reducing numbers of gut bacteria, which synthesize menaquinones, and by inhibiting the metabolism of vitamin K. In patients with warfarin therapy, the anti-obesity drug orlistat can lead to international normalized ratio changes due to vitamin K malabsorption. Vitamin K deficiency usually is diagnosed on the basis of an elevated prothrombin time or reduced clotting factors, although vitamin K may also be measured directly by high-pressure liquid chromatography. Vitamin K deficiency is treated with a parenteral dose of 10 mg. For patients with chronic malabsorption, 1–2 mg/d should be given orally or 1–2 mg per week can be taken parenterally. Patients with liver disease may have an elevated prothrombin time because of liver cell destruction as well as vitamin K deficiency. If an elevated prothrombin time does not improve during vitamin K therapy, it can be deduced that this abnormality is not the result of vitamin K deficiency.
# Chunk 2330
Deficiency Dietary copper deficiency is relatively rare, although it has been described in premature infants who are fed milk diets and in infants with malabsorption (Table 96e-2). Copper-deficiency anemia (refractory to therapeutic iron) has been reported in patients with malabsorptive diseases and nephrotic syndrome and in patients treated for Wilson’s disease with chronic high doses of oral zinc, which can interfere with copper absorption. Menkes kinky hair syndrome is an X-linked metabolic disturbance of copper metabolism characterized by mental retardation, hypocupremia, and decreased circulating ceruloplasmin (Chap. 427). This syndrome is caused by mutations in the copper-transporting ATP7A gene. Children with this disease often die within 5 years because of dissecting aneurysms or cardiac rupture. Aceruloplasminemia is a rare autosomal recessive disease characterized by tissue iron overload, mental deterioration, microcytic anemia, and low serum iron and copper concentrations.
# Chunk 2331
The diagnosis of copper deficiency is usually based on low serum levels of copper (<65 μg/dL) and low ceruloplasmin levels (<20 mg/ dL). Serum levels of copper may be elevated in pregnancy or stress conditions since ceruloplasmin is an acute-phase reactant and 90% of circulating copper is bound to ceruloplasmin.
# Chunk 2332
Assessment of circulAting (viscerAl) proteins The serum proteins most commonly used to assess nutritional status include albumin, total iron-binding capacity (or transferrin), thyroxine-binding prealbumin (or transthyretin), and retinol-binding protein. Because they have different synthesis rates and half-lives (the half-life of serum albumin is ~21 days, whereas those of prealbumin and retinol-binding protein are ~2 days and ~12 h, respectively), some of these proteins reflect changes in nutritional status more quickly than do others. However, rapid fluctuations can also make shorter-half-life proteins less reliable.
# Chunk 2333
Edema Heart failure Hepatomegaly Parotid enlargement Sudden heart failure, death offset it. Total protein loss and protein balance can be calculated from urinary urea nitrogen (UUN) as follows:
# Chunk 2334
Prothrombin time (2.0–15.5 s)

Serum creatinine (0.6–1.6 mg/dL) 24-h urinary creatinine (500–1200 mg/d, standardized for height and sex) 24-h urinary urea nitrogen (UUN; <5 g/d; depends on level of protein intake) 2.8–3.5 g/dL: Protein depletion or systemic inflammation <2.8 g/dL: Possible acute malnutrition or severe inflammation 10–15 mg/dL: Mild protein depletion or inflammation 5–10 mg/dL: Moderate protein depletion or inflammation <5 mg/dL: Severe protein depletion or inflammation Increasing value reflects positive protein balance <200 μg/dL: Protein depletion or inflammatory state;
# Chunk 2335
Low value: muscle wasting due to prolonged energy deficit

Determine level of catabolism (as long as protein intake is ≥10 g below calculated protein loss or <20 g total, and as long as carbohydrate intake has been at least 100 g) 5–10 g/d: Mild catabolism or normal fed state 10–15 g/d: Moderate catabolism >15 g/d: Severe catabolism loss (protein catabolic rate) = [24-h UUN (g) + 4] × 6.25. Adjustments required in burn patients and others with large nonurinary nitrogen losses and in patients with fluctuating levels of blood urea nitrogen (e.g., in renal failure) <8 mg/dL: Possibly inadequate protein intake 12–23 mg/dL: Possibly adequate protein intake >23 mg/dL: Possibly excessive protein intake If serum creatinine is normal, use BUN.
# Chunk 2336
Inanition Key issues include whether normal food intake is likely to be impossible for a prolonged period and whether the patient can tolerate prolonged starvation. A previously well-nourished person can tolerate ~7 days of starvation without harm, even in the presence of a moderate systemic response to inflammation (SRI), whereas the degree of tolerance to prolonged starvation is much less in patients whose skeletal muscle mass is already reduced, whether from PEM, from the muscle atrophy of old age (sarcopenia), or from muscle atrophy due to neuromuscular disease. Excess body fat does not exclude the possibility of coexisting muscle atrophy from any of these causes. In general, unintentional weight loss of >10% during the previous 6 months or a weight-to-height ratio that is <90% of standard, when associated with physiologic impairment, crudely predicts that the patient has moderate PEM. Weight loss >20% of usual or <80% of standard makes severe PEM more likely.
# Chunk 2337
Patients with a severe SRI require the initiation of SNS within the first several days of care, for they are highly unlikely to consume an adequate amount of food voluntarily over the next 7 days. On the other hand, a moderate SRI, as is common during the period following major uncomplicated surgery without oral intake, may be tolerated for 5–7 days as long as the patient is initially well nourished. Patients awaiting elective major surgery benefit from preoperative nutritional repletion for 5–10 days but only in the presence of significant PEM. When adequate preoperative nutrition or SNS is impractical, early postoperative SNS is usually indicated. Furthermore, patients with a combination of a moderate SRI and moderate PEM are likely to benefit from early postoperative SNS.
# Chunk 2338
Enteral SNS is often required in patients with anorexia, impaired swallowing, or small-intestinal disease. The bowel and its associated digestive organs derive 70% of their required nutrients directly from nutritional substrates absorbed from the intestinal lumen. Enteral feeding also supports gut function by stimulating splanchnic blood flow, neuronal activity, IgA antibody release, and secretion of gastrointestinal hormones that stimulate gut trophic activity. These factors support the gut as an immunologic barrier against enteric pathogens. For these reasons, current evidence indicates that some luminal nutrition should be provided, even when PN is required to provide most of the nutritional support. The nonessential amino acids arginine and glutamine, short-chain fatty acids, long-chain omega 3 fatty acids, and nucleotides are available in some specialty enteral formulas and appear to have an important role in maintaining immune function. The addition of supplemental PN to enteral feeding (either by mouth or as SNS by enteral tube) may hasten the transition to full enteral feeding, which is usually successful when >50% of requirements can be met enterally. As long as protein and other essential nutrient requirements are met, substantial nutritional benefit can be achieved by providing ~50% of energy needs for periods of up to 10 days. As a rule of thumb, dietary protein provision should be increased by ~25–50% when energy intake is reduced by this amount, since negative energy balance reduces the efficiency of dietary protein retention. For longer periods and in patients who have a normal or increased body fat content, it may be preferable to provide only 75–80% of energy needs (together with increased protein), as the mild energy deficit improves gastrointestinal tolerance, makes glycemic control far easier, and avoids excess fluid administration.
# Chunk 2339
In the past, bowel rest through PN was the cornerstone of treatment for many severe gastrointestinal disorders. However, the value of providing even minimal amounts of enteral nutrition (EN) is now widely accepted. Protocols to facilitate more widespread use of EN include initiation within 24 h of ICU admission; aggressive use of the head-upright position; use of postpyloric and nasojejunal feeding tubes; use of prokinetic agents; more rapid increases in feeding rates; tolerance of higher gastric residuals; and adherence to nurse-directed algorithms for feeding progression. Parenteral SNS alone is generally necessary only for severe gut dysfunction due to prolonged ileus, intestinal obstruction, or severe hemorrhagic pancreatitis.
# Chunk 2340
The purpose of SNS is to correct and prevent malnutrition. Certain conditions require special modification of the SNS regimen. Protein intake may need to be limited in many stable patients with renal insufficiency or borderline liver function. In renal disease, except for brief periods, protein intakes should approach the required level for normal adults of at least 0.8 g/kg and should aim for 1.2 g/kg as long as severe azotemia does not occur. Patients with severe renal failure who require SNS need concurrent renal replacement therapy. In hepatic failure, protein intakes of 1.2–1.4 g/kg (up to 1.5 g/kg) should be provided as long as encephalopathy due to protein intolerance does not occur. In the presence of protein intolerance, formulas containing 33–50% branched-chain amino acids are available and can be provided at the 1.2to 1.4-g/kg level. Cardiac patients and many other severely stressed patients often benefit from fluid and sodium restriction to 1000 mL of PN formula and 5–20 meq of sodium per day. In patients with severe chronic PEM characterized by severe weight loss, it is important to initiate PN gradually because of the profound antinatriuresis, antidiuresis, and intracellular accumulation of potassium, magnesium, and phosphorus that develop as a consequence of the resulting high insulin levels. This modification of parenteral SNS is usually accomplished by limiting daily fluid intake initially to ~1000 mL; limiting carbohydrate intake to 10–20% dextrose; limiting sodium intake; and providing ample potassium, magnesium, and phosphorus, with careful daily assessment of fluid and electrolyte status. Protein need not be restricted.
# Chunk 2341
Total energy expenditure comprises resting energy expenditure, activity energy expenditure, and the thermal effect of feeding (Chap. 97). Resting energy expenditure accounts for two-thirds of total energy expenditure, activity energy expenditure for one-fourth to one-third, and the thermal effect of feeding for ~10%. For normally nourished, healthy individuals, the total energy expenditure is ~30–35 kcal/kg. Critical illness increases resting energy expenditure, but this increase is significant only in initially well-nourished individuals with a robust SRI who experience, for example, severe multiple trauma, extensive burns, sepsis, sustained high fever, or closed head injury. In these situations, total energy expenditure can reach 40–45 kcal/kg. The chronically starved patient with adapted PEM has a reduced energy expenditure and is inactive, with a usual total energy expenditure of ~20–25 kcal/kg. Very few patients with adapted PEM require as much as 30 kcal/kg for energy balance. Because providing ~50% of measured energy expenditure as SNS is at least as effective as 100% for the first 10 days of critical illness, actual measurement of energy expenditure generally is not necessary in the early period of SNS. However, in patients who remain critically ill beyond several weeks, in patients with severe PEM for whom estimates of energy expenditure are unreliable, and in patients who are difficult to wean from ventilators, it is reasonable to measure energy expenditure directly when the technique is available, targeting an energy intake of 100–120% of the measured energy expenditure.
# Chunk 2342
As a rule, amino acids and glucose are provided in an increasing dose until energy provision matches estimated resting energy expenditure. At this point, it becomes beneficial to add fat. A surfeit of glucose merely stimulates de novo lipogenesis—an energy-inefficient process. Polyunsaturated long-chain triglycerides (e.g., in soybean oil) are the chief ingredient in most parenteral fat emulsions and provide the majority of the fat in enteral feeding formulas. These vegetable oil–based emulsions provide essential fatty acids. The fat content of enteral feeding formulas ranges from 3% to 50% of energy. Parenteral fat is provided in separate containers as 20% and 30% emulsions that can be infused separately or mixed in the sterile pharmacy as an all-in-one or total nutrient admixture of amino acids, glucose, lipid, electrolytes, vitamins, and minerals. Although parenteral fat needs to make up only ~3% of the energy requirement in order to meet essential fatty acid requirements, when provided daily as an all-in-one mixture of carbohydrate, fat, and protein, the complete admixture has a fat content of 2–3 g/dL and provides 20–30% of the total energy requirement—an acceptable level that offers the advantage of ensuring emulsion stability. When given as a separate infusion, parenteral fat should not be provided at rates exceeding 0.11 g/kg of body mass or 100 g over 12 h—equivalent to 500 mL of 20% parenteral fat.
# Chunk 2343
The daily protein recommendation for healthy adults is 0.8 g/kg, but body proteins are replenished faster with 1.5 g/kg in patients with PEM, and net protein catabolism is reduced in critically ill patients when 1.5–2.0 g/kg is provided. In patients who are not critically ill but who require SNS in the acute-care setting, at least 1 g of protein/ kg is recommended, and larger amounts up to 1.5 g/kg are appropriate when volume, renal, and hepatic tolerances allow. The standard parenteral and enteral formulas contain protein of high biologic value and meet the requirements for the eight essential amino acids when nitrogen needs are met. Parenteral amino acid mixtures and elemental enteral mixtures consist of hydrated individual amino acids. Because of their hydrated status, elemental amino acid solutions deliver 17% less protein substrate than intact proteins. In protein-intolerant conditions such as renal and hepatic failure, modified amino acid formulas may be considered. In hepatic failure, higher branched-chain, amino acid–enriched formulas appear to improve outcomes. Conditionally essential amino acids like arginine and glutamine may also have some benefit in supplemental amounts.
# Chunk 2344
Protein (nitrogen) balance provides a measure of the efficacy of parenteral or enteral SNS. This balance is calculated as protein intake/6.25 (because proteins are, on average, 16% nitrogen) minus the 24-h urine urea nitrogen plus 4 g of nitrogen (the latter reflecting other nitrogen losses). In critical illness, a mild negative nitrogen balance of 2–4 g/d is often achievable. A similarly mild positive nitrogen balance is observed in the nonstressed recuperating patient. Each gram of nitrogen lost or gained represents ~30 g of lean tissue.
# Chunk 2345
As needed for acid-base balance, but usually 2:1 to 1:1 with acetate As needed for acid-base balance 10–20 meq/d 8–16 meq/d 20–40 mmol parenteral zinc/d (equivalent to 30 mg of oral elemental zinc) to maintain zinc balance. Excessive urinary potassium losses with amphotericin or magnesium losses with cisplatin or in renal failure necessitate adjustments in sodium, potassium, magnesium, phosphorus, and acid-base balance. Vitamin and trace element requirements are met by the daily provision of a complete parenteral vitamin supplement and trace elements via PN and by the provision of adequate amounts of enteral feeding formulas that contain these micronutrients.
# Chunk 2346
General sense of well-being

Strength, as evidenced by getting out of bed, walking, and resistance exercise as appropriate Vital signs, including temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and respiratory rate Fluid balance: weight (recorded at least several times weekly); fluid intake (parenteral and enteral) vs. fluid output (urine, stool, gastric drainage, wound, ostomy) Parenteral nutrition delivery equipment: tubing, pump, filter, catheter, dressing
# Chunk 2347
Blood glucose, Na, K, Cl, HCO3, BUN Daily until stable and fully advanced; then twice weekly

Serum creatinine, albumin, PO4, Ca, Baseline; then twice weekly Mg, Hb/Hct, WBC count aParameters are assessed daily unless otherwise specified.
# Chunk 2348
Abbreviations: BUN, blood urea nitrogen; Hb, hemoglobin; Hct, hematocrit; INR, international normalized ratio; WBC, white blood cell.
# Chunk 2349
COMPLICATIONS Mechanical The insertion of a central venous catheter should be performed by trained and experienced personnel using aseptic techniques to limit the major common complications of pneumothorax and inadvertent arterial puncture or injury. The catheter’s position should be radiographically confirmed to be in the superior vena cava distal to the junction with the jugular or subclavian vein and not directly against the vessel wall. Thrombosis related to the catheter may occur at the site of entry into the vein and extend to encase the catheter. Catheter infection predisposes to thrombosis, as does the SRI. The addition of 6000 U of heparin to the daily parenteral formula for hospitalized patients with temporary catheters reduces the risk of fibrin sheath formation and catheter infection. Temporary catheters that develop a thrombus should be removed and, according to clinical findings, treated with anticoagulants. Thrombolytic therapy can be considered for patients with permanent catheters, depending on the ease of replacement and the presence of alternative, reasonably acceptable venous access sites. Low-dose warfarin therapy (1 mg/d) reduces the risk of thrombosis in permanent catheters used for at-home parenteral SNS, but full anticoagulation may be required for patients who have recurrent thrombosis related to permanent catheters. A recent U.S. Food and Drug Administration mandate to reformulate parenteral multivitamins to include vitamin K at a dose of 150 μg/d may affect the efficacy of low-dose warfarin therapy. A “no vitamin K” version is available for patients receiving this therapy. Catheters can become occluded due to mechanical factors; by fibrin at the tip; or by fat, minerals, or drugs intraluminally. These occlusions can be managed with low-dose alteplase for fibrin, with indwelling 70% alcohol for fat, with 0.1 N hydrochloric acid for mineral precipitates, and with either 0.1 N hydrochloric acid or 0.1 N sodium hydroxide for drugs, depending on the pH of the drug.
# Chunk 2350
hyperinsulinemia leads to sodium and fluid retention. Consequently, 98e-7 in the absence of gastrointestinal losses or renal dysfunction, net fluid retention is likely when total fluid intake exceeds 2000 mL/d. Close monitoring of body mass as well as of fluid intake and output is necessary to prevent this complication. In the absence of significant renal impairment, the sodium content of the urine is likely to be <10 meq/L. Provision of sodium in limited amounts (40 meq/d) and the use of both glucose and fat in the PN mixture will reduce serum glucose levels and help reduce fluid retention. The elevated insulin level also increases the intracellular transport of potassium, magnesium, and phosphorus, which can precipitate a dangerous re-feeding syndrome if the total glucose content of the PN solution is advanced too quickly in severely malnourished patients. To assess glucose tolerance, it is generally best to start PN with <200 g of glucose/d. Regular insulin can be added to the PN formula to establish glycemic control, and the insulin doses can be increased proportionately as the glucose content is advanced. As a general rule, patients with insulin-dependent diabetes require about twice their usual at-home insulin dose when receiving PN at 20–25 kcal/kg, largely as a consequence of parenteral glucose administration and some loss of insulin to the formula’s container. As a rough estimate, the amount of insulin provided can be proportionately similar to the number of calories provided as total parenteral nutrition (TPN) relative to full feeding, and the insulin can be placed in the TPN formula. Subcutaneous regular insulin can be provided to improve glucose control as assessed by measurements of blood glucose every 6 h. About two-thirds of the total 24-h amount can be added to the next day’s order, with SC insulin supplements as needed. Advances in the TPN glucose concentration should be made when reasonable glucose control is established, and the insulin dose can be adjusted proportionately to the calories added as glucose and amino acids. These are general rules, and they are conservative. Given the adverse clinical impact of hyperglycemia, it may be necessary to use intensive insulin therapy as a separate infusion with a standard protocol to initially establish control. Once control is established, this insulin dose can be added to the PN formula. Acid-base imbalance is also common during parenteral SNS. Amino acid formulas are buffered, but critically ill patients are prone to metabolic acidosis, often due to renal tubular impairment. The use of sodium and potassium acetate salts in the PN formula may address this problem. Bicarbonate salts should not be used because they are incompatible with TPN formulations. Nasogastric drainage produces hypochloremic alkalosis that can be managed by attention to chloride balance. Occasionally, hydrochloric acid may be required for a more rapid response or when diuretic therapy limits the ability to provide substantial sodium chloride. Up to 100 meq/L and up to 150 meq of hydrochloric acid per day may be placed in a fat-free TPN formula.
# Chunk 2351
Fat: ~30% cals (corn, soy, safflower oils) 5.

Recommended daily intake of all minerals and vitamins in >1500 kcal/d 6.
# Chunk 2352
COMPLICATIONS Aspiration The debilitated patient with poor gastric emptying and impairment of swallowing and cough is at risk for aspiration; this complication is particularly common among patients who are mechanically ventilated. Tracheal suctioning induces coughing and gastric regurgitation, and cuffs on endotracheal or tracheostomy tubes seldom protect against aspiration. Preventive measures include elevating the head of the bed to 30°, using nurse-directed algorithms for formula advancement, combining enteral with parenteral feeding, and using post–ligament of Treitz feeding. Tube feeding should not be discontinued for gastric residuals of <300 mL unless there are other signs of gastrointestinal intolerance, such as nausea, vomiting, or abdominal distention. Continuous feeding using pumps is better tolerated intragastrically than bolus feeding and is essential for feeding into the jejunum. For small-bowel feeding, residuals are not assessed, but abdominal pain and distention should be monitored.
# Chunk 2353
Source: From R Siegel et al: Cancer statistics, 2014. CA Cancer J Clin 64:9, 2014.

Cancer is the second leading cause of death behind heart disease. Deaths from heart disease have declined 45% in the United States since 1950 and continue to decline. Cancer has overtaken heart disease as the number one cause of death in persons younger than age 85 years. Incidence trends over time are shown in Fig. 99-1. After a 70-year period of increase, cancer deaths began to decline in 1990–1991 (Fig. 99-2). Between 1990 and 2010, cancer deaths decreased by 21% among men and 12.3% among women. The magnitude of the decline is illustrated in Fig. 99-3. The five leading causes of cancer deaths are shown for various populations in Table 99-2. The 5-year survival for white patients was 39% in 1960–1963 and 69% in 2003–2009. Cancers are more often deadly in blacks; the 5-year survival was 61% for the 2003–2009 interval; however, the racial differences are narrowing over time. Incidence and mortality vary among racial and ethnic groups (Table 99-3). The basis for these differences is unclear.
# Chunk 2354
FIGURE 99-1 Incidence rates for particular types of cancer over the last 35 years in men (A) and women (B). (From R Siegel et al: CA Cancer J Clin 64:9, 2014.) incidence is highly variable, affecting only 2 per 100,000 African women but as many as 61 per 100,000 North American men. Breast cancer is the second most common cancer worldwide; however, it ranks fifth as a cause of death behind lung, stomach, liver, and colorectal cancer. Among the eight most common forms of cancer, lung (2-fold), breast (3-fold), prostate (2.5-fold), and colorectal (3-fold) cancers are more common in more developed countries than in less developed countries. By contrast, liver (2-fold), cervical (2-fold), and esophageal (2to 3-fold) cancers are more common in less developed countries. Stomach cancer incidence is similar in more and less developed countries but is much more common in Asia than North America or Africa. The most common cancers in Africa are cervical, breast, and liver cancers. It has been estimated that nine modifiable risk factors are responsible for more than one-third of cancers worldwide. These include smoking, alcohol consumption, obesity, physical inactivity, low fruit and vegetable consumption, unsafe sex, air pollution, indoor smoke from household fuels, and contaminated injections.
# Chunk 2355
Incidence (n = 10,864,499) Mortality (n = 6,724,931) Prevalence (n = 24,576,453) at the time of staging. If imaging tests have become normal, repeat biopsy of previously involved tissue is performed to docu-FIGURE 99-4 Worldwide overall annual cancer incidence, mortality, and ment complete response by pathologic criteria. Biopsies are not5-year prevalence for the period of 1993–2001. (Adapted from A Jemal et al: usually required if there is macroscopic residual disease. A com-
# Chunk 2356
plete response is defined as disappearance of all evidence of disease, and a partial response as >50% reduction in the sum of the products of the perpendicular diameters of all measurable lesions. The determination of partial response may also be based on a 30% decrease in the sums of the longest diameters of lesions (Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors [RECIST]). Progressive disease is defined as the appearance of any new lesion or an increase of >25% in the sum of the products of the perpendicular diameters of all measurable lesions (or an increase of 20% in the sums of the longest diameters by RECIST). Tumor shrinkage or growth that does not meet any of these criteria is considered stable disease. Some sites of involvement (e.g., bone) or patterns of involvement (e.g., lymphangitic lung or diffuse pulmonary infiltrates) are considered unmeasurable. No response is complete without biopsy documentation of their resolution, but partial responses may exclude their assessment unless clear objective progression has occurred.
# Chunk 2357
Tumor markers may be useful in patient management in certain tumors. Response to therapy may be difficult to gauge with certainty. However, some tumors produce or elicit the production of markers that can be measured in the serum or urine, and in a particular patient, rising and falling levels of the marker are usually associated with increasing or decreasing tumor burden, respectively. Some clinically useful tumor markers are shown in Table 99-6. Tumor markers are not in themselves specific enough to permit a diagnosis of malignancy to be made, but once a malignancy has been diagnosed and shown to be associated with elevated levels of a tumor marker, the marker can be used to assess response to treatment.
# Chunk 2358
The recognition and treatment of depression are important components of management. The incidence of depression in cancer patients is ~25% overall and may be greater in patients with greater debility. This diagnosis is likely in a patient with a depressed mood (dysphoria) and/or a loss of interest in pleasure (anhedonia) for at least 2 weeks. In addition, three or more of the following symptoms are usually present: appetite change, sleep problems, psychomotor retardation or agitation, fatigue, feelings of guilt or worthlessness, inability to concentrate, and suicidal ideation. Patients with these symptoms should receive therapy. Medical therapy with a serotonin reuptake inhibitor such as fluoxetine (10–20 mg/d), sertraline (50–150 mg/d), or paroxetine (10–20 mg/d) or a tricyclic antidepressant such as amitriptyline (50–100 mg/d) or desipramine (75–150 mg/d) should be tried, allowing 4–6 weeks for response. Effective therapy should be continued at least 6 months after resolution of symptoms. If therapy is unsuccessful, other classes of antidepressants may be used. In addition to medication, psychosocial interventions such as support groups, psychotherapy, and guided 473 imagery may be of benefit.
# Chunk 2359
Pain Pain occurs with variable frequency in the cancer patient: 25–50% of patients present with pain at diagnosis, 33% have pain associated with treatment, and 75% have pain with progressive disease. The pain may have several causes. In ~70% of cases, pain is caused by the tumor itself—by invasion of bone, nerves, blood vessels, or mucous 2Information about unsound methods may be obtained from the National Council Against Health Fraud, Box 1276, Loma Linda, CA 92354, or from the Center for Medical Consumers and Health Care Information, 237 Thompson Street, New York, NY 10012.
# Chunk 2360
Delayed emesis may be related to bowel inflammation from the therapy and can be controlled with oral dexamethasone and oral metoclopramide, a dopamine receptor antagonist that also blocks serotonin receptors at high dosages. The best strategy for preventing anticipatory emesis is to control emesis in the early cycles of therapy to prevent the conditioning from taking place. If this is unsuccessful, prophylactic antiemetics the day before treatment may help. Experimental studies are evaluating behavior modification.
# Chunk 2361
Pleural effusions due to tumors may or may not contain malignant cells. Lung cancer, breast cancer, and lymphomas account for ~75% of malignant pleural effusions. Their exudative nature is usually gauged by an effusion/serum protein ratio of ≥0.5 or an effusion/serum lactate dehydrogenase ratio of ≥0.6. When the condition is symptomatic, thoracentesis is usually performed first. In most cases, symptomatic improvement occurs for <1 month. Chest tube drainage is required if symptoms recur within 2 weeks. Fluid is aspirated until the flow rate is <100 mL in 24 h. Then either 60 units of bleomycin or 1 g of doxycycline is infused into the chest tube in 50 mL of 5% dextrose in water; the tube is clamped; the patient is rotated on four sides, spending 15 min in each position; and, after 1–2 h, the tube is again attached to suction for another 24 h. The tube is then disconnected from suction and allowed to drain by gravity. If <100 mL drains over the next 24 h, the chest tube is pulled, and a radiograph is taken 24 h later. If the chest tube continues to drain fluid at an unacceptably high rate, sclerosis can be repeated. Bleomycin may be somewhat more effective than doxycycline but is very expensive. Doxycycline is usually the drug of first choice. If neither doxycycline nor bleomycin is effective, talc can be used.
# Chunk 2362
Patients in whom therapy has been unsuccessful have other problems related to the end of life.

Death and Dying The most common causes of death in patients with cancer are infection (leading to circulatory failure), respiratory failure, hepatic failure, and renal failure. Intestinal blockage may lead to inanition and starvation. Central nervous system disease may lead to seizures, coma, and central hypoventilation. About 70% of patients develop dyspnea preterminally. However, many months usually pass between the diagnosis of cancer and the occurrence of these complications, and during this period, the patient is severely affected by the possibility of death. The path of unsuccessful cancer treatment usually occurs in three phases. First, there is optimism at the hope of cure; when the tumor recurs, there is the acknowledgment of an incurable disease, and the goal of palliative therapy is embraced in the hope of being able to live with disease; finally, at the disclosure of imminent death, another adjustment in outlook takes place. The patient imagines the worst in preparation for the end of life and may go through stages of adjustment to the diagnosis. These stages include denial, isolation, anger, bargaining, depression, acceptance, and hope. Of course, patients do not all progress through all the stages or proceed through them in the same order or at the same rate. Nevertheless, developing an understanding of how the patient has been affected by the diagnosis and is coping with it is an important goal of patient management.
# Chunk 2363
Those who stop smoking have a 30–50% lower 10-year lung cancer mortality rate compared to those who continue smoking, despite the fact that some carcinogen-induced gene mutations persist for years after smoking cessation. Smoking cessation and avoidance would save more lives than any other public health activity.
# Chunk 2364
Prevention and Early Detection of Cancer 476 Current approaches to smoking cessation recognize smoking as an addiction (Chap. 470). The smoker who is quitting goes through identifiable stages that include contemplation of quitting, an action phase in which the smoker quits, and a maintenance phase. Smokers who quit completely are more likely to be successful than those who gradually reduce the number of cigarettes smoked or change to lower-tar or lower-nicotine cigarettes. More than 90% of the Americans who have successfully quit smoking did so on their own, without participation in an organized cessation program, but cessation programs are helpful for some smokers. The Community Intervention Trial for Smoking Cessation (COMMIT) was a 4-year program showing that light smokers (<25 cigarettes per day) were more likely to benefit from simple cessation messages and cessation programs than those who did not receive an intervention. Quit rates were 30.6% in the intervention group and 27.5% in the control group. The COMMIT interventions were unsuccessful in heavy smokers (<25 cigarettes per day). Heavy smokers may need an intensive broad-based cessation program that includes counseling, behavioral strategies, and pharmacologic adjuncts, such as nicotine replacement (gum, patches, sprays, lozenges, and inhalers), bupropion, and/or varenicline. The health risks of cigars are similar to those of cigarettes. Smoking one or two cigars daily doubles the risk for oral and esophageal cancers; smoking three or four cigars daily increases the risk of oral cancers more than eightfold and esophageal cancer fourfold. The risks of occasional use are unknown. Smokeless tobacco also represents a substantial health risk. Chewing tobacco is a carcinogen linked to dental caries, gingivitis, oral leukoplakia, and oral cancer. The systemic effects of smokeless tobacco (including snuff) may increase risks for other cancers. Esophageal cancer is linked to carcinogens in tobacco dissolved in saliva and swallowed. The net effects of e-cigarettes on health are poorly studied. Whether they aid in smoking cessation or serve as a “gateway” for nonsmoking children to acquire a smoking habit is debated.
# Chunk 2365
Prevention and Early Detection of Cancer 478 decreased the absolute risk of adenomatous polyp recurrence by 7% at 4 years; extended observational follow-up demonstrated a 12% absolute risk reduction 5 years after cessation of treatment. However, in the Women’s Health Initiative, combined use of calcium carbonate and vitamin D twice daily did not reduce the incidence of invasive colorectal cancer compared with placebo after 7 years. The Women’s Health Initiative demonstrated that postmenopausal women taking estrogen plus progestin have a 44% lower relative risk of colorectal cancer compared to women taking placebo. Of >16,600 women randomized and followed for a median of 5.6 years, 43 invasive colorectal cancers occurred in the hormone group and 72 in the placebo group. The positive effect on colon cancer is mitigated by the modest increase in cardiovascular and breast cancer risks associated with combined estrogen plus progestin therapy. A case-control study suggested that statins decrease the incidence of colorectal cancer; however, several subsequent case-control and cohort studies have not demonstrated an association between regular statin use and a reduced risk of colorectal cancer. No randomized controlled trials have addressed this hypothesis. A meta-analysis of statin use showed no protective effect of statins on overall cancer incidence or death.
# Chunk 2366
Tamoxifen is an antiestrogen with partial estrogen agonistic activity in some tissues, such as endometrium and bone. One of its actions is to upregulate transforming growth factor β, which decreases breast cell proliferation. In randomized placebo-controlled trials to assess tamoxifen as adjuvant therapy for breast cancer, tamoxifen reduced the number of new breast cancers in the opposite breast by more than a third. In a randomized placebo-controlled prevention trial involving >13,000 preand postmenopausal women at high risk, tamoxifen decreased the risk of developing breast cancer by 49% (from 43.4 to 22 per 1000 women) after a median follow-up of nearly 6 years. Tamoxifen also reduced bone fractures; a small increase in risk of endometrial cancer, stroke, pulmonary emboli, and deep vein thrombosis was noted. The International Breast Cancer Intervention Study (IBIS-I) and the Italian Randomized Tamoxifen Prevention Trial also demonstrated a reduction in breast cancer incidence with tamoxifen use. A trial comparing tamoxifen with another selective estrogen receptor modulator, raloxifene, in postmenopausal women showed that raloxifene is comparable to tamoxifen in cancer prevention. This trial only included postmenopausal women. Raloxifene was associated with more invasive breast cancers and a trend toward more noninvasive breast cancers, but fewer thromboembolic events than tamoxifen; the drugs are similar in risks of other cancers, fractures, ischemic heart disease, and stroke. Both tamoxifen and raloxifene (the latter for post-menopausal women only) have been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for reduction of breast cancer in women at high risk for the disease (1.66% risk at 5 years based on the Gail risk model: http://www.cancer.gov/bcrisktool/).
# Chunk 2367
Because the aromatase inhibitors are even more effective than tamoxifen in adjuvant breast cancer therapy, it has been hypothesized that they would be more effective in breast cancer prevention. A randomized, placebo-controlled trial of exemestane reported a 65% relative reduction (from 5.5 to 1.9 per 1000 women) in the incidence of invasive breast cancer in women at elevated risk after a median follow-up of about 3 years. Common adverse effects included arthralgias, hot flashes, fatigue, and insomnia. No trial has directly compared aromatase inhibitors with selective estrogen receptor modulators for breast cancer chemoprevention.
# Chunk 2368
Dutasteride has also been evaluated as a preventive agent for prostate cancer. The Reduction by Dutasteride of Prostate Cancer Events (REDUCE) trial was a randomized double-blind trial in which approximately 8200 men with an elevated PSA (2.5–10 ng/mL for men age 50–60 years and 3–10 ng/mL for men age 60 years or older) and negative prostate biopsy on enrollment received daily 0.5 mg of dutasteride or placebo. The trial found a statistically significant 23% relative risk reduction in the incidence of biopsy-detected prostate cancer in the dutasteride arm at 4 years of treatment (659 cases vs 858 cases, respectively). Overall, across years 1 through 4, there was no difference between the arms in the number of tumors with a Gleason score of 7 to 10; however, during years 3 and 4, there was a statistically significant difference in tumors with Gleason score of 8 to 10 in the dutasteride arm (12 tumors vs 1 tumor, respectively).
# Chunk 2369
A quadrivalent HPV vaccine (covering HPV strains 6, 11, 16, and 18) and a bivalent vaccine (covering HPV strains 16 and 18) are available for use in the United States. HPV types 16 and 18 cause cervical and anal cancer; reduction in these HPV types could prevent >70% of cervical cancers worldwide. HPV types 6 and 11 cause genital papillomas. For individuals not previously infected with these HPV strains, the vaccines demonstrate high efficacy in preventing persistent strain-specific HPV infections; however, the trials and substudies that evaluated the vaccines’ ability to prevent cervical and anal cancer relied on surrogate outcome measures (cervical or anal intraepithelial neoplasia [CIN/AIN] I, II, and III), and the degree of durability of the immune response beyond 5 years is not currently known. The vaccines do not appear to impact preexisting infections and the efficacy appears to
# Chunk 2370
A number of trials have suggested that annual or biennial screening with mammography or mammography plus clinical breast examination in normal-risk women older than age 50 years decreases breast cancer mortality. Each trial has been criticized for design flaws. In most trials, breast cancer mortality rate is decreased by 15–30%. Experts disagree on whether average-risk women age 40–49 years should receive regular screening (Table 100-3). The U.K. Age Trial, the only randomized trial of breast cancer screening to specifically evaluate the impact of mammography in women age 40–49 years, found no statistically significant difference in breast cancer mortality for screened women versus controls after about 11 years of follow-up (relative risk 0.83; 95% confidence interval 0.66–1.04); however, <70% of women received screening in the intervention arm, potentially diluting the observed effect. A meta-analysis of eight large randomized trials showed a 15% relative reduction in mortality (relative risk 0.85; 95% confidence interval 0.75–0.96) from mammography screening for women age 39–49 years after 11–20 years of follow-up. This is equivalent to a number needed to invite to screening of 1904 over 10 years to prevent one breast cancer death. At the same time, nearly half of women age 40–49 years screened annually will have false-positive mammograms necessitating further evaluation, often including biopsy. Estimates of overdiagnosis range from 10 to 40% of diagnosed invasive cancers. In the United States, widespread screening over the last several decades has not been accompanied by a reduction in incidence of metastatic breast cancer despite a large increase in early-stage disease, suggesting a substantial amount of overdiagnosis at the population level.
# Chunk 2371
cervical cancer Screening with Papanicolaou (Pap) smears decreases cervical cancer mortality. The cervical cancer mortality rate has fallen substantially since the widespread use of the Pap smear. With the onset of sexual activity comes the risk of sexual transmission of HPV, the fundamental etiologic factor for cervical cancer. Screening guidelines recommend regular Pap testing for all women who have reached the age of 21 (prior to this age, even in individuals that have begun sexual activity, screening may cause more harm than benefit). The recommended interval for Pap screening is 3 years. Screening more frequently adds little benefit but leads to important harms, including unnecessary procedures and overtreatment of transient lesions. Beginning at age 30, guidelines also offer the alternative of combined Pap smear and HPV testing for women. The screening interval for women who test normal using this approach may be lengthened to 5 years.
# Chunk 2372
Women 50–74 years: Every 2 years (“B”)

Women ≥75 years: “I”

Women 21–65 years: Screen every 3 years (“A”)
# Chunk 2373
Adults 50–75 years: every 5 years in combination with high-sensitivity FOBT every 3 years (“A”)b

Adults 76–85 years: “C”
# Chunk 2374
Adults 55–80 years, with a ≥30 pack-year smoking history, still smoking or have quit within past 15 years. Discontinue once a person has not smoked for 15 years or develops a health problem that substantially limits life expectancy or the ability to have curative lung surgery: “B” “D” Women ≥20 years: Breast self-exam is an option Women 20–39 years: Perform every 3 years Women ≥40 years: Perform annually Women ≥40 years: Screen annually for as long as the woman is in good health
# Chunk 2375
Women 30–65 years: Acceptable approach to screen with cytology every 3 years (see HPV test below)

Women <21 years: No screening
# Chunk 2376
Two meta-analyses of five randomized controlled trials of sigmoidoscopy (i.e., the NORCCAP, SCORE, PLCO, Telemark, and U.K. trials) found an 18% relative reduction in colorectal cancer incidence and a 28% relative reduction in colorectal cancer mortality. Participant ages ranged from 50 to 74 years, with follow-up ranging from 6 to 13 years. Diagnosis of adenomatous polyps by sigmoidoscopy should lead to evaluation of the entire colon with colonoscopy. The most efficient interval for screening sigmoidoscopy is unknown, but an interval of 5 years is often recommended. Case-control studies suggest that intervals of up to 15 years may confer benefit; the U.K. trial demonstrated benefit with one-time screening.
# Chunk 2377
lung cancer Chest x-ray and sputum cytology have been evaluated in several randomized lung cancer screening trials. The most recent and largest (n = 154,901) of these, one substudy of the Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian (PLCO) cancer screening trial, found that, compared with usual care, annual chest x-ray did not reduce the risk of dying from lung cancer (relative risk 0.99; 95% confidence interval 0.87–1.22) after 13 years. Low-dose CT has also been evaluated in several randomized trials. The largest and longest of these, the National Lung Screening Trial (NLST), was a randomized controlled trial of screening for lung cancer in approximately 53,000 persons age 55–74 years with a 30+ pack-year smoking history. It demonstrated a statistically significant relative reduction of about 15–20% in lung cancer mortality in the CT arm compared to the chest x-ray arm (or about 3 fewer deaths per 1000 people screened with CT). However, the harms include the potential radiation risks associated with multiple scans, the discovery of incidental findings of unclear significance, and a high rate of false-positive test results. Both incidental findings and false-positive tests can lead to invasive diagnostic procedures associated with anxiety, expense, and complications (e.g., pneumoor hemothorax after lung biopsy). The NLST was performed at experienced screening centers, and the balance of benefits and harms may differ in the community setting at less experienced centers.
# Chunk 2378
Prostate cancer The most common prostate cancer screening modalities are DRE and serum PSA assay. An emphasis on PSA screening has caused prostate cancer to become the most common nonskin cancer diagnosed in American males. This disease is prone to lead-time bias, length bias, and overdiagnosis, and substantial debate continues among experts as to whether screening should be offered unless the patient specifically asks to be screened. Virtually all organizations stress the importance of informing men about the uncertainty regarding screening efficacy and the harms associated with screening. Prostate cancer screening clearly detects many asymptomatic cancers, but the ability to distinguish tumors that are lethal but still curable from those that pose little or no threat to health is limited, and randomized trials indicate that the effect of PSA screening on prostate cancer mortality across a population is, at best, small. Men older than age 50 years have a high prevalence of indolent, clinically insignificant prostate cancers (about 30–50% of men, increasing further as men age).
# Chunk 2379
Two major randomized controlled trials of the impact of PSA screening on prostate cancer mortality have been published. The PLCO Cancer Screening Trial was a multicenter U.S. trial that randomized almost 77,000 men age 55–74 years to receive either annual PSA testing for 6 years or usual care. At 13 years of follow-up, no statistically significant difference in the number of prostate cancer deaths were noted between the arms (rate ratio 1.09; 95% confidence interval 0.87–1.36). Approximately 50% of men in the control arm received at least one PSA test during the trial, which may have potentially diluted a small effect.
# Chunk 2380
Work by Peyton Rous in the early 1900s revealed that a chicken sarcoma could be transmitted from animal to animal in cell-free extracts, suggesting that cancer could be induced by an agent acting positively to promote tumor formation. The agent responsible for the transmission of the cancer was a retrovirus (Rous sarcoma virus, RSV) and the oncogene responsible was identified 75 years later as v-src. Other oncogenes were also discovered through their presence in the genomes of retroviruses that are capable of causing cancers in chickens, mice, and rats. The cellular homologues of these viral genes are called protooncogenes and are often targets of mutation or aberrant regulation in human cancer. Whereas many oncogenes were discovered because of their presence in retroviruses, other oncogenes, particularly those involved in translocations characteristic of particular leukemias and lymphomas, were isolated through genomic approaches. Investigators cloned the sequences surrounding the chromosomal translocations observed cytogenetically and then deduced the nature of the genes that were the targets of these translocations (see below). Some of these were oncogenes known from retroviruses (like ABL, involved in chronic myeloid leukemia [CML]), whereas others were new (like BCL2, involved in B cell lymphoma). In the normal cellular environment, protooncogenes have crucial roles in cell proliferation and differentiation. Table 101e-1 is a partial list of oncogenes known to be involved in human cancer.
# Chunk 2381
Increasingly, laparoscopic approaches are being used to address primary abdominal and pelvic tumors. Lymph node spread may be assessed using the sentinel node approach, in which the first draining lymph node a spreading tumor would encounter is defined by injecting a dye or radioisotope into the tumor site at operation and then resecting the first node to turn blue or collect label. The sentinel node assessment is continuing to undergo clinical evaluation but appears to provide reliable information without the risks (lymphedema, lymphangiosarcoma) associated with resection of all the regional nodes. Advances in adjuvant chemotherapy (chemotherapy given systemically after removal of all disease by operation and without evidence of active metastatic disease) and radiation therapy following surgery have permitted a substantial decrease in the extent of primary surgery cer), surgery is not the first treatment modality used. After an initial diagnostic biopsy, chemotherapy and/or radiation therapy is delivered to reduce the size of the tumor and clinically control undetected metastatic disease. Such therapy is followed by a surgical procedure to remove residual masses; this is called neoadjuvant therapy. Because the sequence of treatment is critical to success and is different from the standard surgery-first approach, coordination among the surgical oncologist, radiation oncologist, and medical oncologist is crucial.
# Chunk 2382
Localized Radiation Therapy Radiation effect is influenced by three determinants: total absorbed dose, number of fractions, and time of treatment. A frequent error is to omit the number of fractions and the duration of treatment. This is analogous to saying that a runner completed a race in 20 s; without knowing how far he or she ran, the result is difficult to interpret. The time could be very good for a 200-m race or very poor for a 100-m race. Thus, a typical course of radiation therapy should be described as 4500 cGy delivered to a particular target (e.g., mediastinum) over 5 weeks in 180-cGy fractions. Most curative radiation treatment programs are delivered once a day, 5 days a week, in 150to 200-cGy fractions.
# Chunk 2383
Chronic toxicities are more serious. Radiation of the head and neck region often produces thyroid failure. Cataracts and retinal damage can lead to blindness. Salivary glands stop making saliva, which leads to dental caries and poor dentition. Taste and smell can be affected. Mediastinal irradiation leads to a threefold increased risk of fatal myocardial infarction. Other late vascular effects include chronic constrictive pericarditis, lung fibrosis, viscus stricture, spinal cord transection, and radiation enteritis. A serious late toxicity is the development of second solid tumors in or adjacent to the radiation fields. Such tumors can develop in any organ or tissue and occur at a rate of about 1% per year beginning in the second decade after treatment. Some organs vary in susceptibility to radiation carcinogenesis. A woman who receives mantle field radiation therapy for Hodgkin’s disease at age 25 years has a 30% risk of developing breast cancer by age 55 years. This is comparable in magnitude to genetic breast cancer syndromes. Women treated after age 30 years have little or no increased risk of breast cancer. No data suggest that a threshold dose of therapeutic radiation exists below which the incidence of second cancers is decreased. High rates of second tumors occur in people who receive as little as 1000 cGy.
# Chunk 2384
If cure is not possible, chemotherapyFIGuRE 103e-3 Integration of cell death responses. Cell death through an apoptotic mecha-may be undertaken with the goal of palliatnism requires active participation of the cell. In response to interruption of growth factor (GF) or ing some aspect of the tumor’s effect on thepropagation of certain cytokine death signals (e.g., tumor necrosis factor receptor [TNF-R]), there host. In this usage, value is perceived by the is activation of “upstream” cysteine aspartyl proteases (caspases), which then directly digest demonstration of improved symptom relief,cytoplasmic and nuclear proteins, resulting in activation of “downstream” caspases; these cause progression-free survival, or overall survivalactivation of nucleases, resulting in the characteristic DNA fragmentation that is a hallmark of at a certain time from the inception of treatapoptosis. Chemotherapy agents that create lesions in DNA or alter mitotic spindle function ment in the treated population, compared seem to activate aspects of this process by damage ultimately conveyed to the mitochondria, to a relevant control population established perhaps by activating the transcription of genes whose products can produce or modulate the as the result of clinical research protocol ortoxicity of free radicals. In addition, membrane damage with activation of sphingomyelinases other organized comparative study. Such results in the production of ceramides that can have a direct action at mitochondria. The anti-clinical research protocols are the basis forapoptotic protein bcl2 attenuates mitochondrial toxicity, while proapoptotic gene products such U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)as bax antagonize the action of bcl2. Damaged mitochondria release cytochrome C and approval of a particular cancer treatment as apoptosis-activating factor (APAF), which can directly activate caspase 9, resulting in propaga-safe and effective and are the benchmark for tion of a direct signal to other downstream caspases through protease activation. Apoptosis-an evidence-based approach to the use ofinducing factor (AIF) is also released from the mitochondrion and then can translocate to the chemotherapeutic agents. Common tumorsnucleus, bind to DNA, and generate free radicals to further damage DNA. An additional proapop-that may be meaningfully addressed by chetotic stimulus is the bad protein, which can heterodimerize with bcl2 gene family members to motherapy with palliative intent are listedantagonize apoptosis. Importantly, though, bad protein function can be retarded by its seques-in Table 103e-3, E. tration as phospho-bad through the 14-3-3 adapter proteins. The phosphorylation of bad is Usually, tumor-related symptoms manimediated by the action of the AKT kinase in a way that defines how growth factors that activate fest as pain, weight loss, or some localthis kinase can retard apoptosis and promote cell survival. symptom related to the tumor’s effect on normal structures. Patients treated with palliative intent should be aware of their when used to address disseminated or metastatic cancers. If a tumor diagnosis and the limitations of the proposed treatments, have accessis localized to a single site, serious consideration of surgery or primary to supportive care, and have suitable “performance status,” accordingradiation therapy should be given, because these treatment modalities to assessment algorithms such as the one developed by Karnofskymay be curative as local treatments. Chemotherapy may then be used (see Table 99-4) or by the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Groupafter the failure of these modalities to eradicate a local tumor or as part (ECOG) (see Table 99-5). ECOG performance status 0 (PS0) patientsof multimodality approaches to offer primary treatment to a clinically are without symptoms; PS1 patients are ambulatory but restricted inlocalized tumor. In this event, it can allow organ preservation when strenuous physical activity; PS2 patients are ambulatory but unablegiven with radiation, as in the larynx or other upper airway sites, or to work and are up and about 50% or more of the time; PS3 patientssensitize tumors to radiation when given, e.g., to patients concur-are capable of limited self-care and are up <50% of the time; and PS4rently receiving radiation for lung or cervix cancer (Table 103e-3, B). patients are totally confined to bed or chair and incapable of self-care.Chemotherapy can be administered as an adjuvant, i.e., in addition to Only PS0, PS1, and PS2 patients are generally considered suitable forsurgery or radiation (Table 103e-3, C), even after all clinically appar-palliative (noncurative) treatment. If there is curative potential, evenent disease has been removed. This use of chemotherapy has curative poor–performance status patients may be treated, but their prognosispotential in breast and colorectal neoplasms, as it attempts to eliminate is usually inferior to that of good–performance status patients treated clinically unapparent tumor that may have already disseminated. As with similar regimens.noted above, small tumors frequently have high growth fractions and An important perspective the primary care provider may bring totherefore may be intrinsically more susceptible to the action of antipro-patients and their families facing incurable cancer is that, given theliferative agents. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy refers to administration of limited value of chemotherapeutic approaches at some point in the
# Chunk 2385
Doxorubicin can intercalate into DNA, thereby altering DNA structure, replication, and topoisomerase II function. It can also undergo reduction reactions by accepting electrons into its quinone ring system, with the capacity to undergo reoxidation to form reactive oxygen radicals after reoxidation. It causes predictable myelosuppression, alopecia, nausea, and mucositis. In addition, it causes acute cardiotoxicity in the form of atrial and ventricular dysrhythmias, but these are rarely of clinical significance. In contrast, cumulative doses >550 mg/m2 are associated with a 10% incidence of chronic cardiomyopathy. The incidence of cardiomyopathy appears to be related to schedule (peak serum concentration), with low-dose, frequent treatment or continuous infusions better tolerated than intermittent higher-dose exposures. Cardiotoxicity has been related to iron-catalyzed oxidation and reduction of doxorubicin, and not to topoisomerase action. Cardiotoxicity is related to peak plasma dose; thus, lower doses and continuous infusions are less likely to cause heart damage. Doxorubicin’s cardiotoxicity is increased when given together with trastuzumab (Herceptin), the anti-HER2/neu antibody. Radiation recall or interaction with concomitantly administered radiation to cause local site complications is frequent. The drug is a powerful vesicant, with necrosis of tissue apparent 4–7 days after an extravasation; therefore, it should be administered into a rapidly flowing intravenous line. Dexrazoxane is an antidote to doxorubicin-induced extravasation. Doxorubicin is metabolized by the liver, so doses must be reduced by 50–75% in the presence of liver dysfunction. Daunorubicin is closely related to doxorubicin and was actually introduced first into leukemia treatment, where it remains part of curative regimens and has been shown preferable to doxorubicin owing to less mucositis and colonic damage. Idarubicin is also used in acute myeloid leukemia treatment and may be preferable to daunorubicin in activity. Encapsulation of daunorubicin into a liposomal formulation has attenuated cardiac toxicity and antitumor activity in Kaposi’s sarcoma, other sarcomas, multiple myeloma, and ovarian cancer.
# Chunk 2386
The common cytotoxic chemotherapeutic agents almost invariably affect bone marrow function. Titration of this effect determines the MTD of the agent on a given schedule. The normal kinetics of blood cell turnover influences the sequence and sensitivity of each of the formed elements. Polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs; t1/2 = 6–8 h), platelets (t = 5–7 days), and red blood cells (RBCs; t = 120 days) have most, less, and least susceptibility, respectively, to usually administered cytotoxic agents. The nadir count of each cell type in response to classes of agents is characteristic. Maximal neutropenia occurs 6–14 days after conventional doses of anthracyclines, antifolates, and antimetabolites. Alkylating agents differ from each other in the timing of cytopenias. Nitrosoureas, DTIC, and procarbazine can display delayed marrow toxicity, first appearing 6 weeks after dosing.
# Chunk 2387
Complications of myelosuppression result from the predictable sequelae of the missing cells’ function. Febrile neutropenia refers to the clinical presentation of fever (one temperature ≥38.5°C or three readings ≥38°C but ≤38.5°C per 24 h) in a neutropenic patient with an uncontrolled neoplasm involving the bone marrow or, more usually, in a patient undergoing treatment with cytotoxic agents. Mortality from uncontrolled infection varies inversely with the neutrophil count. If the nadir neutrophil count is >1000/μL, there is little risk; if <500/μL, risk of death is markedly increased. Management of febrile neutropenia has conventionally included empirical coverage with antibiotics for the duration of neutropenia (Chap. 104). Selection of antibiotics is governed by the expected association of infections with certain underlying neoplasms; careful physical examination (with scrutiny of catheter sites, dentition, mucosal surfaces, and perirectal and genital orifices by gentle palpation); chest x-ray; and Gram stain and culture of blood, urine, and sputum (if any) to define a putative site of infection. In the absence of any originating site, a broadly acting β-lactam with anti-Pseudomonas activity, such as ceftazidime, is begun empirically. The addition of vancomycin to cover potential cutaneous sites of origin (until these are ruled out or shown to originate from methicillin-sensitive organisms) or metronidazole or imipenem for abdominal or other sites favoring anaerobes reflects modifications tailored to individual patient presentations. The coexistence of pulmonary compromise raises a distinct set of potential pathogens, including Legionella, Pneumocystis, and fungal agents that may require further diagnostic evaluations, such as bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage. Febrile neutropenic patients can be stratified broadly into two prognostic groups. The first, with expected short duration of neutropenia and no evidence of hypotension or abdominal or other localizing symptoms, may be expected to do well even with oral regimens, e.g., ciprofloxacin or moxifloxacin, or amoxicillin plus clavulanic acid. A less favorable prognostic group is patients with expected prolonged neutropenia, evidence of sepsis, and end organ compromise, particularly pneumonia. These patients require tailoring of their antibiotic regimen to their underlying presentation, with frequent empirical addition of antifungal agents if fever and neutropenia persists for 7 days without identification of an adequately treated organism or site.
# Chunk 2388
Source: From the American Society of Clinical Oncology: J Clin Oncol 24:3187, 2006.

regimens associated with a 20% incidence of febrile neutropenia. “Dose-dense” regimens, where cycling of chemotherapy is intended to be completed without delay of administered doses, may also benefit, but such patients should be on a clinical trial. Administration of G-CSF in these circumstances has reduced the incidence of febrile neutropenia in several studies by about 50%. Most patients, however, receive regimens that do not have such a high risk of expected febrile neutropenia, and therefore most patients initially should not receive G-CSF or GM-CSF. Special circumstances—such as a documented history of febrile neutropenia with the regimen in a particular patient or categories of patients at increased risk, such as patients older than age 65 years with aggressive lymphoma treated with curative chemotherapy regimens; extensive compromise of marrow by prior radiation or chemotherapy; or active, open wounds or deep-seated infection—may support primary treatment with G-CSF or GM-CSF. Administration of G-CSF or GM-CSF to afebrile neutropenic patients or to patients with low-risk febrile neutropenia is not recommended, and patients receiving concomitant chemoradiation treatment, particularly those with thoracic neoplasms, likewise are not generally recommended for treatment. In contrast, administration of G-CSF to high-risk patients with febrile neutropenia and evidence of organ compromise including sepsis syndrome, invasive fungal infection, concurrent hospitalization at the time fever develops, pneumonia, profound neutropenia (<0.1 × 109/L), or age >65 years is reasonable.
# Chunk 2389
Anemia associated with chemotherapy can be managed by transfusion of packed RBCs. Transfusion is not undertaken until the hemoglobin falls to <80 g/L (8 g/dL), compromise of end organ function occurs, or an underlying condition (e.g., coronary artery disease) calls for maintenance of hemoglobin >90 g/L (9 g/dL). Patients who are to receive therapy for >2 months on a “stable” regimen and who are likely to require continuing transfusions are also candidates for erythropoietin (EPO). Randomized trials in certain tumors have raised the possibility that EPO use may promote tumor-related adverse events. This information should be considered in the care of individual patients. In the event EPO treatment is undertaken, maintenance of hemoglobin of 90–100 g/L (9–10 g/dL) should be the target. In the setting of adequate iron stores and serum EPO levels <100 ng/mL, EPO, 150 U three times a week, can produce a slow increase in hemoglobin over about 2 months of administration. Depot formulations can be administered less frequently. It is unclear whether higher hemoglobin levels, up to 110–120 g/L (11–12 g/dL), are associated with improved quality of life to a degree that justifies the more intensive EPO use. Efforts to achieve levels at or above 120 g/L (12 g/dL) have been associated with increased thromboses and mortality rates. EPO may rescue hypoxemic cells from death and contribute to tumor radioresistance.
# Chunk 2390
The most common side effect of chemotherapy administration is nausea, with or without vomiting. Nausea may be acute (within 24 h of chemotherapy), delayed (>24 h), or anticipatory of the receipt of chemotherapy. Patients may be likewise stratified for their risk of susceptibility to nausea and vomiting, with increased risk in young, female, heavily pretreated patients without a history of alcohol or drug use but with a history of motion or morning sickness. Antineoplastic agents vary in their capacity to cause nausea and vomiting. Highly emetogenic drugs (>90%) include mechlorethamine, streptozotocin, DTIC, cyclophosphamide at >1500 mg/m2, and cisplatin; moderately emetogenic drugs (30–90% risk) include carboplatin, cytosine arabinoside (>1 mg/m2), ifosfamide, conventional-dose cyclophosphamide, and anthracyclines; low-risk (10–30%) agents include 5FU, taxanes, etoposide, and bortezomib, with minimal risk (<10%) afforded by treatment with antibodies, bleomycin, busulfan, fludarabine, and vinca alkaloids. Emesis is a reflex caused by stimulation of the vomiting center in the medulla. Input to the vomiting center comes from the chemoreceptor trigger zone (CTZ) and afferents from the peripheral gastrointestinal tract, cerebral cortex, and heart. The different emesis “syndromes” require distinct management approaches. In addition, a conditioned reflex may contribute to anticipatory nausea arising after repeated cycles of chemotherapy. Accordingly, antiemetic agents differ in their locus and timing of action. Combining agents from different classes or the sequential use of different classes of agent is the cornerstone of successful management of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting. Of great importance are the prophylactic administration of agents and such psychological techniques as the maintenance of a supportive milieu, counseling, and relaxation to augment the action of antiemetic agents.
# Chunk 2391
Streptococcus or Staphylococcus is common, neutropenic patients—i.e., those with <500 functional polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs)/ μL—and patients with impaired blood or lymphatic drainage may develop infections with unusual organisms. Innocent-looking macules or papules may be the first sign of bacterial or fungal sepsis in immunocompromised patients (Fig. 104-1). In the neutropenic host, a macule progresses rapidly to ecthyma gangrenosum (see Fig. 25e-35), a usually painless, round, necrotic lesion consisting of a central black or gray-black eschar with surrounding erythema. Ecthyma gangrenosum, which is located in nonpressure areas (as distinguished from necrotic lesions associated with lack of circulation), is often associated with Pseudomonas aeruginosa bacteremia (Chap. 189) but may be caused by other bacteria.
# Chunk 2392
Candida spp. Mucor/Rhizopus

Aspergillus spp.

aOften associated with intravenous catheters.

Cellulitis, an acute spreading inflammation of the skin, is most often caused by infection with group A Streptococcus or Staphylococcus aureus, virulent organisms normally found on the skin (Chap. 156). Although cellulitis tends to be circumscribed in normal hosts, it may spread rapidly in neutropenic patients. A tiny break in the skin may lead to spreading cellulitis, which is characterized by pain and erythema; in the affected patients, signs of infection (e.g., purulence) are often lacking. What might be a furuncle in a normal host may require amputation because of uncontrolled infection in a patient presenting with leukemia. A dramatic response to an infection that might be trivial in a normal host can mark the first sign of leukemia. Fortunately, granulocytopenic patients are likely to be infected with certain types of organisms (Table 104-4); thus the selection of an antibiotic regimen is somewhat easier than it might otherwise be (see “Antibacterial Therapy,” below). It is essential to recognize cellulitis early and to treat it aggressively. Patients who are neutropenic or who have previously received antibiotics for other reasons may develop cellulitis with unusual organisms (e.g., Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas, or fungi). Early treatment, even of innocent-looking lesions, is essential to prevent necrosis and loss of tissue. Debridement to prevent spread may sometimes be necessary early in the course of disease, but it can often be performed after chemotherapy, when the PMN count increases.
# Chunk 2393
More common than tunnel infections are exit-site infections, often with erythema around the area where the line penetrates the skin. Most authorities (Chap. 172) recommend treatment (usually with vancomycin) for an exit-site infection caused by coagulase-negative Staphylococcus. Treatment of coagulase-positive staphylococcal infection is associated with a poorer outcome, and it is advisable to remove the catheter if possible. Similarly, most clinicians remove catheters associated with infections due to P. aeruginosa and Candida species, because such infections are difficult to treat and bloodstream infections with these organisms are likely to be deadly. Catheter infections caused by Burkholderia cepacia, Stenotrophomonas species, Agrobacterium species, Acinetobacter baumannii, Pseudomonas species other than aeruginosa, and carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae are likely to be very difficult to eradicate with antibiotics alone. Similarly, isolation of Bacillus, Corynebacterium, and Mycobacterium species should prompt removal of the catheter.
# Chunk 2394
Lower Gastrointestinal Tract Disease Hepatic candidiasis (Chap. 240) results from seeding of the liver (usually from a gastrointestinal source) in neutropenic patients. It is most common among patients being treated for AML and usually presents symptomatically around the time the neutropenia resolves. The characteristic picture is that of persistent fever unresponsive to antibiotics, abdominal pain and tenderness or nausea, and elevated serum levels of alkaline phosphatase in a patient with hematologic malignancy who has recently recovered from neutropenia. The diagnosis of this disease (which may present in an indolent manner and persist for several months) is based on the finding of yeasts or pseudohyphae in granulomatous lesions. Hepatic ultrasound or CT may reveal bull’s-eye lesions. MRI scans reveal small lesions not visible by other imaging modalities. The pathology (a granulomatous response) and the timing (with resolution of neutropenia and an elevation in granulocyte count) suggest that the host response to Candida is an important component of the manifestations of disease. In many cases, although organisms are visible, cultures of biopsied material may be negative. The designation hepatosplenic candidiasis or hepatic candidiasis is a misnomer because the disease often involves the kidneys and other tissues; the term chronic disseminated candidiasis may be more appropriate. Because of the risk of bleeding with liver biopsy, diagnosis is often based on imaging studies (MRI, CT). Treatment should be directed to the causative agent (usually C. albicans but sometimes Candida tropicalis or other less common Candida species).
# Chunk 2395
Typhlitis Typhlitis (also referred to as necrotizing colitis, neutropenic colitis, necrotizing enteropathy, ileocecal syndrome, and cecitis) is a clinical syndrome of fever and right-lower-quadrant (or generalized abdominal) tenderness in an immunosuppressed host. This syndrome is classically seen in neutropenic patients after chemotherapy with cytotoxic drugs. It may be more common among children than among adults and appears to be much more common among patients with AML or ALL than among those with other types of cancer. Physical examination reveals right-lower-quadrant tenderness, with or without rebound tenderness. Associated diarrhea (often bloody) is common, and the diagnosis can be confirmed by the finding of a thickened cecal wall on CT, MRI, or ultrasonography. Plain films may reveal a right-lower-quadrant mass, but CT with contrast or MRI is a much more sensitive means of diagnosis. Although surgery is sometimes attempted to avoid perforation from ischemia, most cases resolve with medical therapy alone. The disease is sometimes associated with positive blood cultures (which usually yield aerobic gram-negative bacilli), and therapy is recommended for a broad spectrum of bacteria (particularly gram-negative bacilli, which are likely to be found in the bowel flora). Surgery is indicated in the case of perforation.
# Chunk 2396
Brain Masses Mass lesions of the brain most often present as headache with or without fever or neurologic abnormalities. Infections associated with mass lesions may be caused by bacteria (particularly Nocardia), fungi (particularly Cryptococcus or Aspergillus), or parasites (Toxoplasma). Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)–associated lymphoma may also present as single—or sometimes multiple—mass lesions of the brain. A biopsy may be required for a definitive diagnosis.
# Chunk 2397
Cause of Pneumonia microscopic and microbiologic evaluation of the fluid obtained by endoscopic bronchial lavage is often diagnostic. Lavage fluid should be cultured for Mycoplasma, Chlamydia, Legionella, Nocardia, more common bacterial pathogens, fungi, and viruses. In addition, the possibility of Pneumocystis pneumonia should be considered, especially in patients with ALL or lymphoma who have not received prophylactic trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX). The characteristics of the infiltrate may be helpful in decisions about further diagnostic and therapeutic maneuvers. Nodular infiltrates suggest fungal pneumonia (e.g., that caused by Aspergillus or Mucor). Such lesions may best be approached by visualized biopsy procedures. It is worth noting that while bacterial pneumonias classically present as lobar infiltrates in normal hosts, bacterial pneumonias in granulocytopenic hosts present with a paucity of signs, symptoms, or radiographic abnormalities; thus, the diagnosis is difficult.
# Chunk 2398
Diffuse interstitial infiltrates suggest viral, parasitic, or Pneumocystis pneumonia. If the patient has a diffuse interstitial pattern on chest x-ray, it may be reasonable, while considering invasive diagnostic procedures, to institute empirical treatment for Pneumocystis with TMP-SMX and for Chlamydia, Mycoplasma, and Legionella with a quinolone or azithromycin. Noninvasive procedures, such as staining of induced sputum smears for Pneumocystis, serum cryptococcal antigen tests, and urine testing for Legionella antigen, may be helpful. Serum galactomannan and β-d-glucan tests may be of value in diagnosing Aspergillus infection, but their utility is limited by their lack of sensitivity and specificity. The presence of an elevated level of β-d-glucan in the serum of a patient being treated for cancer who is not receiving prophylaxis against Pneumocystis suggests the diagnosis of Pneumocystis pneumonia. Infections with viruses that cause only 489 upper respiratory symptoms in immunocompetent hosts, such as respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), influenza viruses, and parainfluenza viruses, may be associated with fatal pneumonitis in immunocompromised hosts. CMV reactivation occurs in cancer patients receiving chemotherapy, but CMV pneumonia is most common among HSCT recipients (Chap. 169). Polymerase chain reaction testing now allows rapid diagnosis of viral pneumonia, which can lead to treatment in some cases (e.g., influenza). Multiplex studies that can detect a wide array of viruses in the lung and upper respiratory tract are now available and will lead to specific diagnoses of viral pneumonias.
# Chunk 2399
Bleomycin is the most common cause of chemotherapy-induced lung disease. Other causes include alkylating agents (such as cyclophosphamide, chlorambucil, and melphalan), nitrosoureas (carmustine [BCNU], lomustine [CCNU], and methyl-CCNU), busulfan, procarbazine, methotrexate, and hydroxyurea. Both infectious and noninfectious (drugand/or radiation-induced) pneumonitis can cause fever and abnormalities on chest x-ray; thus, the differential diagnosis of an infiltrate in a patient receiving chemotherapy encompasses a broad range of conditions (Table 104-7). The treatment of radiation pneumonitis (which may respond dramatically to glucocorticoids) or drug-induced pneumonitis is different from that of infectious pneumonia, and a biopsy may be important in the diagnosis. Unfortunately, no definitive diagnosis can be made in ∼30% of cases, even after bronchoscopy.
# Chunk 2400
Physical examination: skin lesions, mucous  membranes, IV catheter sites, perirectal area Granulocyte count: absolute count < 500/˜L; expected  duration of neutropenia Blood cultures; chest radiogram; other appropriate  studies based on history (sputum, urine, skin biopsy)
# Chunk 2401
promptly to cover likely pathogens if infection is suspected. Indeed, early initiation of antibacterial agents is mandatory to prevent deaths. Like most immunocompromised patients, neutropenic patients are threatened by their own microbial flora, including gram-positive and gram-negative organisms found commonly on the skin and mucous membranes and in the bowel (Table 104-4). Because treatment with narrow-spectrum agents leads to infection with organisms not covered by the antibiotics used, the initial regimen should target all pathogens likely to be the initial causes of bacterial infection in neutropenic hosts. As noted in the algorithm shown in Fig. 104-2, administration of antimicrobial agents is routinely continued until neutropenia resolves—i.e., the granulocyte count is sustained above 500 μL for at least 2 days. In some cases, patients remain febrile after resolution of neutropenia. In these instances, the risk of sudden death from overwhelming bacteremia is greatly reduced, and the following diagnoses should be seriously considered: (1) fungal infection, (2) bacterial abscesses or undrained foci of infection, and (3) drug fever (including reactions to antimicrobial agents as well as to chemotherapy or cytokines). In the proper setting, viral infection or graft-versus-host disease should be considered. In clinical practice, antibacterial therapy is usually discontinued when the patient is no longer neutropenic and all evidence of bacterial disease has been eliminated. Antifungal agents are then discontinued if there is no evidence of fungal disease. If the patient remains febrile, a search for viral diseases or unusual pathogens is conducted while unnecessary cytokines and other drugs are systematically eliminated from the regimen.
# Chunk 2402
C. krusei, C. parapsilosis, and C. glabrata.

For decades, it has been common clinical practice to add amphotericin B to antibacterial regimens if a neutropenic patient remains febrile despite 4–7 days of treatment with antibacterial agents. The rationale for this empirical addition is that it is difficult to culture fungi before they cause disseminated disease and that mortality rates from disseminated fungal infections in granulocytopenic patients are high. Before the introduction of newer azoles into clinical practice, amphotericin B was the mainstay of antifungal therapy. The insolubility of amphotericin B has resulted in the marketing of several lipid formulations that are less toxic than the amphotericin B deoxycholate complex. Echinocandins (e.g., caspofungin) are useful in the treatment of infections caused by azole-resistant Candida strains as well as in therapy for aspergillosis and have been shown to be equivalent to liposomal amphotericin B for the empirical treatment of patients with prolonged fever and neutropenia. Newer azoles have also been demonstrated to be effective in this setting. Although fluconazole is efficacious in the treatment of infections due to many Candida species, its use against serious fungal infections in immunocompromised patients is limited by its narrow spectrum: it has no activity against Aspergillus or against several non-albicans Candida species. The broad-spectrum azoles (e.g., voriconazole and posaconazole) provide another option for the treatment of Aspergillus infections (Chap. 241), including CNS infection. Clinicians should be aware that the spectrum of each azole is somewhat different and that no drug can be assumed to be efficacious against all fungi. Aspergillus terreus is resistant to amphotericin B. Although voriconazole is active against Pseudallescheria boydii, amphotericin B is not; however, voriconazole has no activity against Mucor. Posaconazole, which is administered orally, is useful as a prophylactic agent in patients with prolonged neutropenia. Studies in progress are assessing the use of these agents in combinations. For a full discussion of antifungal therapy, see Chap. 235.
# Chunk 2403
Outbreaks of fatal Aspergillus infection have been associated with construction projects and materials in several hospitals. The association between spore counts and risk of infection suggests the need for a high-efficiency air-handling system in hospitals that care for large numbers of neutropenic patients. The use of laminar-flow rooms and prophylactic antibiotics has decreased the number of infectious episodes in severely neutropenic patients. However, because of the expense of such a program and the failure to show that it dramatically affects mortality rates, most centers do not routinely use laminar flow to care for neutropenic patients. Some centers use “reverse isolation,” in which health care providers and visitors to a patient who is neutropenic wear gowns and gloves. Since most of the infections these patients develop are due to organisms that colonize the patients’ own skin and bowel, the validity of such schemes is dubious, and limited clinical data do not support their use. Hand washing by all staff caring for neutropenic patients should be required to prevent the spread of resistant organisms.
# Chunk 2404
the skin, meninges, mucous membranes, upper esophagus, and eyes. 493 Melanocytes in each of these locations have the potential for malignant transformation. Cutaneous melanoma is predominantly a malignancy of white-skinned people (98% of cases), and the incidence correlates with latitude of residence, providing strong evidence for the role of sun exposure. Men are affected slightly more than women (1.3:1), and the median age at diagnosis is the late fifties. Dark-skinned populations (such as those of India and Puerto Rico), blacks, and East Asians also develop melanoma, albeit at rates 10–20 times lower than those in whites. Cutaneous melanomas in these populations are diagnosed more often at a higher stage, and patients tend to have worse outcomes. Furthermore, in nonwhite populations, there is a much higher frequency of acral (subungual, plantar, palmar) and mucosal melanomas. In 2014, more than 76,000 individuals in the United States were expected to develop melanoma, and approximately 9700 were expected to die. There will be nearly 50,000 annual deaths worldwide as a result of melanoma. Data from the Connecticut Tumor Registry support an unremitting increase in the incidence and mortality of melanoma. In the past 60 years, there have been 17-fold and 9-fold increases in incidence for men and women, respectively. In the same six decades, there has been a tripling of mortality rates for men and doubling for women. Mortality rates begin to rise at age 55, with the greatest increase in men age >65 years. Of particular concern is the increase in rates among women <40 years of age. Much of this increase is believed to be associated with a greater emphasis on tanned skin as a marker of beauty, the increased availability and use of indoor tanning beds, and exposure to intense ultraviolet (UV) light in childhood. These statistics highlight the need to promote prevention and early detection.
# Chunk 2405
RISK FACTORS Presence of Nevi The risk of developing melanoma is related to genetic, environmental, and host factors (Table 105-1). The strongest risk factors for melanoma are the presence of multiple benign or atypical nevi and a family or personal history of melanoma. The presence of melanocytic nevi, common or dysplastic, is a marker for increased risk of melanoma. Nevi have been referred to as precursor lesions because they can transform into melanomas; however, the actual risk for any specific nevus is exceedingly low. About one-quarter of melanomas are histologically associated with nevi, but the majority arise de novo. The number of clinically atypical moles may vary from one to several hundred, and they usually differ from one another in appearance. The borders are often hazy and indistinct, and the pigment pattern is more highly varied than that in benign acquired nevi. Individuals with clinically atypical moles and a strong family history of melanoma have been reported to have a >50% lifetime risk for developing melanoma and warrant close follow-up with a dermatologist. Of the 90% of patients whose disease is sporadic (i.e., who lack a family history of melanoma), ∼40% have clinically atypical moles, compared with an estimated 5–10% of the population at large.
# Chunk 2406
Four major types of cutaneous melanoma have been recognized (Table 105-2). In three of these types—superficial spreading melanoma, lentigo maligna melanoma, and acral lentiginous melanoma— the lesion has a period of superficial (so-called radial) growth during which it increases in size but does not penetrate deeply. It is during this period that the melanoma is most capable of being cured by surgical excision. The fourth type—nodular melanoma —does not have a recognizable radial growth phase and usually presents as a deeply invasive lesion that is capable of early metastasis. When tumors begin to penetrate deeply into the skin, they are in the so-called vertical growth phase. Melanomas with a radial growth phase are characterized by irregular and sometimes notched borders, variation in pigment pattern, and variation in color. An increase in size or change in color is noted by the patient in 70% of early lesions. Bleeding, ulceration, and pain are late signs and are of little help in early recognition. Superficial spreading melanoma is the most common variant observed in the white population. The back is the most common site for melanoma in men. In women, the back and the lower leg (from knee to ankle) are common sites. Nodular melanomas are dark brown-black to blue-black nodules. Lentigo maligna melanoma usually is confined to chronically sun-damaged sites in older individuals. Acral lentiginous melanoma occurs on the palms, soles, nail beds, and mucous membranes. Although this type occurs in whites, it occurs most frequently (along with nodular melanoma) in blacks and East Asians. A fifth type of melanoma, desmoplastic melanoma, is associated with a fibrotic response, neural invasion, and a greater tendency for local recurrence. Occasionally, melanomas appear clinically to be amelanotic, in which case the diagnosis is established microscopically after biopsy of a new or a changing skin nodule. Melanomas can also arise in the mucosa of the head and neck (nasal cavity, paranasal sinuses and oral cavity), the gastrointestinal tract, the CNS, the female genital tract (vulva, vagina), and the uveal tract of the eye.
# Chunk 2407
Once the diagnosis of melanoma has been made, the tumor must be staged to determine the prognosis and treatment. Staging helps determine prognosis and aids in treatment selection. The current melanoma staging criteria and estimated 15-year survival by stage are depicted in Table 105-3. The clinical stage of the patient is determined after the pathologic evaluation of the melanoma skin lesion and clinical/radiologic assessment for metastatic disease. Pathologic staging also includes the microscopic evaluation of the regional lymph nodes obtained at sentinel lymph node biopsy or completion lymphadenectomy as indicated. All patients should have a complete history, with attention to symptoms that may represent metastatic disease such as malaise, weight loss, headaches, visual changes, and pain, and physical examination directed to the site of the primary melanoma, looking for persistent disease or for dermal or subcutaneous nodules that could represent satellite or in-transit metastases, and to the regional draining lymph nodes, CNS, liver, and lungs. A complete blood count (CBC), complete metabolic panel, and LDH should be performed. Although these are low-yield tests for uncovering occult metastatic disease, a microcytic anemia would raise the possibility of bowel metastases, particularly in the small bowel, and an unexplained elevated LDH should prompt a more extensive evaluation, including computed tomography (CT) scan or possibly a positron emission tomography (PET) (or CT/ PET combined) scan. If signs or symptoms of metastatic disease are present, appropriate diagnostic imaging should be performed. At initial presentation, more than 80% of patients will have disease confined to the skin and a negative history and physical exam, in which case imaging is not indicated.
# Chunk 2408
Melanomas may recur at the edge of the scar or graft, as satellite metastases, which are separate from but within 2 cm of the scar; as in-transit metastases, which are recurrences >2 cm from the primary lesion but not beyond the regional nodal basin; or, most commonly, as metastasis to a draining lymph node basin. Each of these presentations is managed surgically, following which there 498 is the possibility of long-term disease-free survival. Isolated limb perfusion or infusion with melphalan and hyperthermia are options for patients with extensive cutaneous regional recurrences in an extremity. High complete response rates have been reported and significant palliation of symptoms can be achieved, but there is no change in overall survival. Patients rendered free of disease after surgery may be at high risk for a local or distant recurrence and should be considered for adjuvant therapy. Radiotherapy can reduce the risk of local recurrence after lymphadenectomy, but does not affect overall survival. Patients with large nodes (>3–4 cm), four or more involved lymph nodes, or extranodal spread on microscopic examination should be considered for radiation. Systemic adjuvant therapy is indicated primarily for patients with stage III disease, but high-risk, node-negative patients (>4 mm thick or ulcerated lesions) and patients with completely resected stage IV disease also may benefit. Either interferon α2b (IFN-α2b), which is given at 20 million units/m2 IV 5 days a week for 4 weeks followed by 10 million units/m2 SC three times a week for 11 months (1 year total), or subcutaneous peginterferon α2b (6 μg/kg per week for 8 weeks followed by 3 μg/kg per week for a total of 5 years) is acceptable adjuvant therapy. Treatment is accompanied by significant toxicity, including a flu-like illness, decline in performance status, and the development of depression. Side effects can be managed in most patients by appropriate treatment of symptoms, dose reduction, and treatment interruption. Sometimes IFN must be permanently discontinued before all of the planned doses are administered because of unacceptable toxicity. The high-dose regimen is significantly more toxic than peginterferon, but the latter requires 4 additional years of therapy. Adjuvant treatment with IFN improves disease-free survival, but its impact on overall survival remains controversial. Enrollment in a clinical trial is appropriate for these patients, many of whom will otherwise be observed without treatment either because they are poor candidates for IFN or because the patient (or their oncologist) does not believe the beneficial effects of IFN outweigh the toxicity. The recently approved immunotherapy and targeted agents are being evaluated in the adjuvant setting.
# Chunk 2409
At diagnosis, most patients with melanoma will have early-stage disease; however, some will present with metastases, and others will develop metastases after initial therapy. Patients with a history of melanoma who develop signs or symptoms suggesting recurrent disease should undergo restaging that includes physical examination, CBC, complete metabolic panel, LDH, and appropriate diagnostic imaging that may include a magnetic resonance image (MRI) of the brain and total-body PET/CT or CT scans of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis. Distant metastases (stage IV), which may involve any organ, commonly involve the skin and lymph nodes as well as viscera, bone, or the brain. Historically, metastatic melanoma was considered incurable; median survival ranges from 6 to 15 months, depending on the organs involved. The prognosis is better for patients with skin and subcutaneous metastases (M1a) than for lung (M1b) and worst for those with metastases to liver, bone, and brain (M1c). An elevated serum LDH is a poor prognostic factor and places the patient in stage M1c regardless of the site of the metastases (Table 105-3). Although historical data suggest that the 15-year survival of patients with M1a, M1b, and M1c disease is less than 10%, there is optimism that newer therapies will increase the number of melanoma patients with long-term survival, especially patients with M1a and M1b disease.
# Chunk 2410
The treatment for patients with stage IV melanoma has changed dramatically in the past 2 years. Two new classes of therapeutic agents for melanoma have been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). The immune T cell checkpoint inhibitor, ipilimumab, and three new oral agents that target the MAP kinase pathway: the BRAF inhibitors, vemurafenib and dabrafenib, and the
# Chunk 2411
RAF and MEK inhibitors of the MAP kinase pathway are a new and exciting approach for patients whose melanomas harbor a BRAF mutation. The high frequency of oncogenic mutations in the RASRAF-MEK-ERK pathway, which delivers proliferation and survival signals from the cell surface to the cytoplasm and nucleus, has led to the development of inhibitors to BRAF and MEK. Two BRAF inhibitors, vemurafenib and dabrafenib, have been approved for the treatment of stage IV patients whose melanomas harbor a mutation at position 600 in the gene for BRAF. The oral BRAF inhibitors cause 499 tumor regression in approximately 50% of patients, and overall survival is improved compared to treatment with chemotherapy. Treatment is accompanied by manageable side effects that differ from those following immunotherapy or chemotherapy. A class-specific complication of BRAF inhibition is the development of numerous skin lesions, some of which are well-differentiated squamous cell skin cancers (seen in up to a quarter of patients). Patients should be co-managed with a dermatologist as these skin cancers will need excision. Metastases have not been reported, and treatment can be continued safely following simple excision. Long-term results following treatment with BRAF inhibitors are not yet available, but the current concern is that over time the vast majority of patients will relapse and eventually die from drug-resistant disease. There are a number of mechanisms by which resistance develops, usually via maintenance of MAP kinase signaling; however, mutations in the BRAF gene that affect binding of the inhibitor are not among them. The MEK inhibitor trametinib has activity as a single agent, but appears to be less effective than either of the BRAF inhibitors. Combined therapy with the BRAF inhibitor and MEK inhibitor showed improved progression-free survival compared to BRAF inhibitor therapy alone; and, interestingly, the neoplastic skin lesions that were so troubling with BRAF inhibition alone did not occur. Although the durability of responses following combined therapy remains to be determined, its use in metastatic melanoma is FDA approved. Activating mutations in the c-kit receptor tyrosine kinase are found in a minority of cutaneous melanomas with chronic sun damage, but more commonly in mucosal and acral lentiginous subtypes. Overall, the number of patients with c-kit mutations is exceedingly small, but when present, they are largely identical to mutations found in gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs); melanomas with activating c-kit mutations can have clinically meaningful responses to imatinib.
# Chunk 2412
Cancer of the Skin 500 melanoma recommend a comprehensive history and physical examination every 6–12 months for 5 years, and then annually as clinically indicated. Particular attention should be paid to the draining lymph nodes in stage I–III patients as resection of lymph node recurrences may still be curative. A CBC, LDH, and chest x-ray are recommended at the physician’s discretion, but are ineffective tools for the detection of occult metastases. Routine imaging for metastatic disease is not recommended at this time. For patients with higher stage disease (IIB–IV), imaging (chest x-ray, CT, and/or PET/CT scans) every 4–12 months can be considered. Because no discernible survival benefit has been demonstrated for routine surveillance, it is reasonable to perform scans only if clinically indicated.
# Chunk 2413
Squamous Cell Carcinoma The natural history of SCC depends on tumor and host characteristics. Tumors arising on sun-damaged skin have a lower metastatic potential than do those on non-sunexposed areas. Cutaneous SCC metastasizes in 0.3–5.2% of individuals, most frequently to regional lymph nodes. Tumors occurring on the lower lip and ear develop regional metastases in 13 and 11% of patients, respectively, whereas the metastatic potential of SCC arising in scars, chronic ulcerations, and genital or mucosal surfaces is higher. Recurrent SCC has a much higher potential for metastatic disease, approaching 30%. Large, poorly differentiated, deep tumors with perineural or lymphatic invasion, multifocal tumors, and those arising in immunosuppressed patients often behave aggressively.
# Chunk 2414
Treatments used for BCC include electrodesiccation and curettage (ED&C), excision, cryosurgery, radiation therapy (RT), laser therapy, Mohs micrographic surgery (MMS), topical 5-fluorouracil, photo-dynamic therapy (PDT), and topical immunomodulators such as imiquimod. The therapy chosen depends on tumor characteristics including depth and location, patient age, medical status, and patient preference. ED&C remains the most commonly employed method for superficial, minimally invasive nodular BCCs and low-risk tumors (e.g., a small tumor of a less aggressive subtype in a favorable location). Wide local excision with standard margins is usually selected for invasive, ill-defined, and more aggressive subtypes of tumors, or for cosmetic reasons. MMS, a specialized type of surgical excision that provides the best method for tumor removal while preserving uninvolved tissue, is associated with cure rates >98%. It is the preferred modality for lesions that are recurrent, in high-risk or cosmetically sensitive locations (including recurrent tumors in these locations), and in which maximal tissue conservation is critical (e.g., the eyelids, lips, ears, nose, and digits). RT can cure patients not considered surgical candidates and can be used as a surgical adjunct in high-risk tumors. Younger patients may not be good candidates 502 for RT because of the risks of long-term carcinogenesis and radio-dermatitis. Imiquimod can be used to treat superficial and smaller nodular BCCs, although it is not FDA-approved for nodular BCC. Topical 5-fluorouracil therapy should be limited to superficial BCC. PDT, which uses selective activation of a photoactive drug by visible light, has been used in patients with numerous tumors. Intralesional chemotherapy (5-fluorouracil and IFN) for NMSC has existed since the mid-twentieth century, but is used so infrequently that recent consensus guidelines for the treatment of BCC and SCC do not include it. Like RT, it remains an option for well-selected patients who cannot or will not undergo surgery.
# Chunk 2415
Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) is a neural crest–derived highly aggressive malignancy with mortality rates approaching 33% at 3 years. An oncogenic Merkel cell polyomavirus is present in 80% of tumors. Many patients have detectable cellular or humoral immune responses to polyoma viral proteins, although this immune response is insufficient to eradicate the malignancy. Survival depends on extent of disease: 90% survive with local disease, 52% with nodal involvement, and only 10% with distant disease at 3 years. MCC incidence tripled over the last 20 years with an estimated 1600 cases per year in the United States. Immunosuppression can increase incidence and diminish prognosis. MCC lesions typically present as an asymptomatic rapidly expanding bluish-red/violaceous tumor on sun-exposed skin of older white patients. Treatment is surgical excision with sentinel lymph node biopsy for accurate staging in patients with localized disease, often followed by adjuvant RT. Patients with extensive disease can be offered systemic chemotherapy; however, there is no convincing survival benefit. Whenever possible a clinical trial should be considered for this rare but aggressive NMSC, especially in light of the potential for new treatments directed at the oncogenic virus that causes this malignancy.
# Chunk 2416
Advanced head and neck cancers in any location can cause severe pain, otalgia, airway obstruction, cranial neuropathies, trismus, odynophagia, dysphagia, decreased tongue mobility, fistulas, skin involve ment, and massive cervical lymphadenopathy, which may be unilateral or bilateral. Some patients have enlarged lymph nodes even though no primary lesion can be detected by endoscopy or biopsy; these patients are considered to have carcinoma of unknown primary (Fig. 106-1). If the enlarged nodes are located in the upper neck and the tumor cells are of squamous cell histology, the malignancy probably arose from a mucosal surface in the head or neck. Tumor cells in supraclavicular lymph nodes may also arise from a primary site in the chest or abdomen.
# Chunk 2417
The physical examination should include inspection of all visible mucosal surfaces and palpation of the floor of the mouth and of the tongue and neck. In addition to tumors themselves, leukoplakia (a white mucosal patch) or erythroplakia (a red mucosal patch) may be observed; these “premalignant” lesions can represent hyperplasia, dysplasia, or carcinoma in situ and require biopsy. Further examination should be performed by a specialist. Additional staging procedures include CT of the head and neck to identify the extent of the disease. Patients with lymph node involvement should have CT scan of the chest and upper abdomen to screen for distant metastases. In heavy smokers, the CT scan of the chest can also serve as a screening tool to rule out a second lung primary tumor. A positron emission tomography (PET) scan may also be administered and can help to identify or exclude distant metastases. The definitive staging procedure is an
# Chunk 2418
Nearly one-third of patients have localized disease, that is, T1 or T2 (stage I or stage II) lesions without detectable lymph node involvement or distant metastases. These patients are treated with curative intent by either surgery or radiation therapy. The choice of modality differs according to anatomic location and institutional expertise. Radiation therapy is often preferred for laryngeal cancer to preserve voice function, and surgery is preferred for small lesions in the oral cavity to avoid the long-term complications of radiation, such as xerostomia and dental decay. Overall 5-year survival is 60–90%. Most recurrences occur within the first 2 years following diagnosis and are usually local.
# Chunk 2419
Neoplasms of the Lung 508 chemotherapy agents performed quite differently in squamous carcinomas versus adenocarcinomas, firmly established the need for modifications in the then-existing 2004 WHO lung cancer classification system. The revised 2011 classification system, developed jointly by the International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer, the American Thoracic Society, and the European Respiratory Society, provides an integrated approach to the classification of lung adenocarcinomas that includes clinical, molecular, radiographic, and pathologic information. It also recognizes that most lung cancers present in an advanced stage and are often diagnosed based on small biopsies or cytologic specimens, rendering clear histologic distinctions difficult if not impossible. Previously, in the 2004 classification system, tumors failing to show definite glandular or squamous morphology in a small biopsy or cytologic specimen were simply classified as non-small-cell carcinoma, not otherwise specified. However, because the distinction between adenocarcinoma and squamous carcinoma is now viewed as critical to optimal therapeutic decision making, the modified classification approach recommends these lesions be further characterized using a limited special stain workup. This distinction can be achieved using a single marker for adenocarcinoma (thyroid transcription factor-1 or napsin-A) plus a squamous marker (p40 or p63) and/or mucin stains. The modified classification system also recommends preservation of sufficient specimen material for appropriate molecular testing necessary to help guide therapeutic decision making (see below). Another significant modification to the WHO classification system is the discontinuation of the terms bronchioloalveolar carcinoma and mixed-subtype adenocarcinoma. The term bronchioloalveolar carcinoma was dropped due to its inconsistent use and because it caused confusion in routine clinical care and research. As formerly used, the term encompassed at least five different entities with diverse clinical and molecular properties. The terms adenocarcinoma in situ and minimally invasive adenocarcinoma are now recommended for small solitary adenocarcinomas (≤3 cm) with either pure lepidic growth (term used to describe single-layered growth of atypical cuboidal cells coating the alveolar walls) or predominant lepidic growth with ≤5 mm invasion. Individuals with these entities experience 100% or near 100% 5-year disease-free survival with complete tumor resection. Invasive adenocarcinomas, representing more than 70–90% of surgically resected lung adenocarcinomas, are now classified by their predominant pattern: lepidic, acinar, papillary, and solid patterns. Lepidic-predominant subtype has a favorable prognosis, acinar and papillary have an intermediate prognosis, and solid-predominant has a poor prognosis. The terms signet ring and clear cell adenocarcinoma have been eliminated from the variants of invasive lung adenocarcinoma, whereas the term micropapillary, a subtype with a particularly poor prognosis, has been added. Although EGFR mutations are encountered most frequently in nonmucinous adenocarcinomas with a lepidicor papillary-predominant pattern, most adenocarcinoma subtypes can harbor EGFR or KRAS mutations. The same is true of ALK, RET, and ROS1 rearrangements. What was previously termed mucinous bronchioloalveolar carcinoma is now called invasive mucinous adenocarcinoma. These tumors generally lack EGFR mutations and show a strong correlation with KRAS mutations. Overall, the revised WHO reclassification of lung cancer addresses important advances in diagnosis and treatment, most importantly, the critical advances in understanding the specific genes and molecular pathways that initiate and sustain lung tumorigenesis resulting in new “targeted” therapies with improved specificity and better antitumor efficacy.
# Chunk 2420
The diagnosis of lung cancer most often rests on the morphologic or cytologic features correlated with clinical and radiographic findings. Immunohistochemistry may be used to verify neuroendocrine differentiation within a tumor, with markers such as neuron-specific enolase (NSE), CD56 or NCAM, synaptophysin, chromogranin, and Leu7. Immunohistochemistry is also helpful in differentiating primary from metastatic adenocarcinomas; thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), identified in tumors of thyroid and pulmonary origin, is positive in over 70% of pulmonary adenocarcinomas and is a reliable indicator of primary lung cancer, provided a thyroid primary has been excluded. A negative TTF-1, however, does not exclude the possibility of a lung primary. TTF-1 is also positive in neuroendocrine tumors of pulmonary and extrapulmonary origin. Napsin-A (Nap-A) is an aspartic protease that plays an important role in maturation of surfactant B7 and is expressed in cytoplasm of type II pneumocytes. In several studies, Nap-A has been reported in >90% of primary lung adenocarcinomas. Notably, a combination of Nap-A and TTF-1 is useful in distinguishing primary lung adenocarcinoma (Nap-A positive, TTF-1 positive) from primary lung squamous cell carcinoma (Nap-A negative, TTF-1 negative) and primary SCLC (Nap-A negative, TTF-1 positive). Cytokeratins 7 and 20 used in combination can help narrow the differential diagnosis; nonsquamous NSCLC, SCLC, and mesothelioma may stain positive for CK7 and negative for CK20, whereas squamous cell lung cancer often will be both CK7 and CK20 negative. p63 is a useful marker for the detection of NSCLCs with squamous differentiation when used in cytologic pulmonary samples. Mesothelioma can be easily identified ultrastructurally, but it has historically been difficult to differentiate from adenocarcinoma through morphology and immunohistochemical staining. Several markers in the last few years have proven to be more helpful including CK5/6, calretinin, and Wilms tumor gene-1 (WT-1), all of which show positivity in mesothelioma.
# Chunk 2421
Because a majority of lung cancer patients present with advanced 509 disease beyond the scope of surgical resection, there is understandable skepticism about the value of screening in this condition. Indeed, randomized controlled trials conducted in the 1960s to 1980s using screening chest x-rays (CXR), with or without sputum cytology, reported no impact on lung cancer–specific mortality in patients characterized as high risk (males age ≥45 years with a smoking history). These studies have been criticized for their design, statistical analyses, and outdated imaging modalities. The results of the more recently conducted Prostate, Lung, Colorectal and Ovarian Cancer Screening Trial (PLCO) are consistent with these earlier reports. Initiated in 1993, participants in the PLCO lung cancer screening trial received annual CXR screening for 4 years, whereas participants in the usual care group received no interventions other than their customary medical care. The diagnostic follow-up of positive screening results was determined by participants and their physicians. The PLCO trial differed from previous lung cancer screening studies in that women and never smokers were eligible. The study was designed to detect a 10% reduction in lung cancer mortality in the interventional group. A total of 154,901 individuals between 55 and 74 years of age were enrolled (77,445 assigned to annual CXR screenings; 77,456 assigned to usual care). Participant demographics and tumor characteristics were well balanced between the two groups. Through 13 years of follow-up, cumulative lung cancer incidence rates (20.1 vs 19.2 per 10,000 person-years; rate ratio [RR], 1.05; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.98–1.12) and lung cancer mortality (n = 1213 vs n = 1230) were identical between the two groups. The stage and histology of detected cancers in the two groups also were similar. These data corroborate previous recommendations against CXR screening for lung cancer.
# Chunk 2422
Patients with central or endobronchial growth of the primary tumor may present with cough, hemoptysis, wheeze, stridor, dyspnea, or postobstructive pneumonitis. Peripheral growth of the primary tumor may cause pain from pleural or chest wall involvement, dyspnea on a restrictive basis, and symptoms of a lung abscess resulting from tumor cavitation. Regional spread of tumor in the thorax (by contiguous growth or by metastasis to regional lymph nodes) may cause tracheal obstruction, esophageal compression with dysphagia, recurrent laryngeal paralysis with hoarseness, phrenic nerve palsy with elevation of the hemidiaphragm and dyspnea, and sympathetic nerve paralysis with Horner’s syndrome (enophthalmos, ptosis, miosis, and anhydrosis). Malignant pleural effusions can cause pain, dyspnea, or cough. Pancoast (or superior sulcus tumor) syndromes result from local extension of a tumor growing in the apex of the lung with involvement of the eighth cervical and first and second thoracic nerves, and present with shoulder pain that characteristically radiates in the ulnar
# Chunk 2423
distribution of the arm, often with radiologic destruction of the first and second ribs. Often Horner’s syndrome and Pancoast syndrome coexist. Other problems of regional spread include superior vena cava syndrome from vascular obstruction; pericardial and cardiac extension with resultant tamponade, arrhythmia, or cardiac failure; lymphatic obstruction with resultant pleural effusion; and lymphangitic spread through the lungs with hypoxemia and dyspnea. In addition, lung cancer can spread transbronchially, producing tumor growth along multiple alveolar surfaces with impairment of gas exchange, respiratory insufficiency, dyspnea, hypoxemia, and sputum production. Constitutional symptoms may include anorexia, weight loss, weakness, fever, and night sweats. Apart from the brevity of symptom duration, these parameters fail to clearly distinguish SCLC from NSCLC or even from neoplasms metastatic to lungs.
# Chunk 2424
Extrathoracic metastatic disease is found at autopsy in more than 50% of patients with squamous carcinoma, 80% of patients with adenocarcinoma and large-cell carcinoma, and greater than 95% of patients with SCLC. Approximately one-third of patients present with symptoms as a result of distant metastases. Lung cancer metastases may occur in virtually every organ system, and the site of metastatic involvement largely determines other symptoms. Patients with brain metastases may present with headache, nausea and vomiting, seizures, or neurologic deficits. Patients with bone metastases may present with pain, pathologic fractures, or cord compression. The latter may also occur with epidural metastases. Individuals with bone marrow invasion may present with cytopenias or leukoerythroblastosis. Those with liver metastases may present with hepatomegaly, right upper quadrant pain, fever, anorexia, and weight loss. Liver dysfunction and biliary obstructions are rare. Adrenal metastases are common but rarely cause pain or adrenal insufficiency unless they are large.
# Chunk 2425
Paraneoplastic syndromes are common in patients with lung cancer, especially those with SCLC, and may be the presenting finding or the first sign of recurrence. In addition, paraneoplastic syndromes may mimic metastatic disease and, unless detected, lead to inappropriate palliative rather than curative treatment. Often the paraneoplastic syndrome may be relieved with successful treatment of the tumor. In some cases, the pathophysiology of the paraneoplastic syndrome is known, particularly when a hormone with biological activity is secreted by a tumor. However, in many cases, the pathophysiology is unknown. Systemic symptoms of anorexia, cachexia, weight loss (seen in 30% of patients), fever, and suppressed immunity are paraneoplastic syndromes of unknown etiology or at least not well defined. Weight loss greater than 10% of total body weight is considered a bad prognostic sign. Endocrine syndromes are seen in 12% of patients; hypercalcemia resulting from ectopic production of parathyroid hormone (PTH), or more commonly, PTH-related peptide, is the most common life-threatening metabolic complication of malignancy, primarily occurring with squamous cell carcinomas of the lung. Clinical symptoms include nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, constipation, polyuria, 511 thirst, and altered mental status.
# Chunk 2426
Hyponatremia may be caused by the syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone (SIADH) or possibly atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP). SIADH resolves within 1-4 weeks of initiating chemotherapy in the vast majority of cases. During this period, serum sodium can usually be managed and maintained above 128 mEq/L via fluid restriction. Demeclocycline can be a useful adjunctive measure when fluid restriction alone is insufficient. Vasopressin receptor antagonists like tolvaptan also have been used in the management of SIADH. However, there are significant limitations to the use of tolvaptan including liver injury and overly rapid correction of the hyponatremia, which can lead to irreversible neurologic injury. Likewise, the cost of tolvaptan may be prohibitive (as high as $300 per tablet in some areas). Of note, patients with ectopic ANP may have worsening hyponatremia if sodium intake is not concomitantly increased. Accordingly, if hyponatremia fails to improve or worsens after 3–4 days of adequate fluid restriction, plasma levels of ANP should be measured to determine the causative syndrome.
# Chunk 2427
Neoplasms of the Lung 512 tissue for analysis. Tumor tissue may be obtained via minimally invasive techniques such as bronchial or transbronchial biopsy during fiberoptic bronchoscopy, by fine-needle aspiration or percutaneous biopsy using image guidance, or via endobronchial ultrasound (EBUS) guided biopsy. Depending on the location, lymph node sampling may occur via transesophageal endoscopic ultrasound-guided biopsy (EUS), EBUS, or blind biopsy. In patients with clinically palpable disease such as a lymph node or skin metastasis, a biopsy may be obtained. In patients with suspected metastatic disease, a diagnosis may be confirmed by percutaneous biopsy of a soft tissue mass, lytic bone lesion, bone marrow, pleural or liver lesion, or an adequate cell block obtained from a malignant pleural effusion. In patients with a suspected malignant pleural effusion, if the initial thoracentesis is negative, a repeat thoracentesis is warranted. Although the majority of pleural effusions are due to malignant disease, particularly if they are exudative or bloody, some may be parapneumonic. In the absence of distant disease, such patients should be considered for possible curative treatment. The diagnostic yield of any biopsy depends on several factors including location (accessibility) of the tumor, tumor size, tumor type, and technical aspects of the diagnostic procedure including the experience level of the bronchoscopist and pathologist. In general, central lesions such as squamous cell carcinomas, small-cell carcinomas, or endobronchial lesions such as carcinoid tumors are more readily diagnosed by bronchoscopic examination, whereas peripheral lesions such as adenocarcinomas and large-cell carcinomas are more amenable to transthoracic biopsy. Diagnostic accuracy for SCLC versus NSCLC for most specimens is excellent, with lesser accuracy for subtypes of NSCLC. Bronchoscopic specimens include bronchial brush, bronchial wash, bronchioloalveolar lavage, transbronchial fine-needle aspiration (FNA), and core biopsy. For more accurate histologic classification, mutation analysis, or investigational purposes, reasonable efforts (e.g., a core needle biopsy) should be made to obtain more tissue than what is contained in a routine cytology specimen obtained by FNA. Overall sensitivity for combined use of bronchoscopic methods is approximately 80%, and together with tissue biopsy, the yield increases to 85–90%. Like transbronchial core biopsy specimens, transthoracic core biopsy specimens are also preferred. Sensitivity is highest for larger lesions and peripheral tumors. In general, core biopsy specimens, whether transbronchial, transthoracic, or EUS-guided, are superior to other specimen types. This is primarily due to the higher percentage of tumor cells with fewer confounding factors such as obscuring inflammation and reactive nonneoplastic cells.
# Chunk 2428
Complete history and physical examination Determination of performance status and weight loss Complete blood count with platelet determination Measurement of serum electrolytes, glucose, and calcium; renal and liver function tests PET scan to evaluate mediastinum and detect metastatic disease MRI brain if clinically indicated
# Chunk 2429
radiographic imaging with CT scan, positron emission tomography (PET), or preferably CT-PET. PET scanning attempts to identify sites of malignancy based on glucose metabolism by measuring the uptake of 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). Rapidly dividing cells, presumably in the lung tumors, will preferentially take up 18F-FDG and appear as a “hot spot.” To date, PET has been mostly used for staging and detection of metastases in lung cancer and in the detection of nodules >15 mm in diameter. Combined 18F-FDG PET-CT imaging has been shown to improve the accuracy of staging in NSCLC compared to visual correlation of PET and CT or either study alone. CT-PET has been found to be superior in identifying pathologically enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes and extrathoracic metastases. A standardized uptake value (SUV) of >2.5 on PET is highly suspicious for malignancy. False negatives can be seen in diabetes, in lesions <8 mm, and in slow-growing tumors (e.g., carcinoid tumors or well-differentiated adenocarcinoma). False positives can be seen in certain infections and granulomatous disease (e.g., tuberculosis). Thus, PET should never be used alone to diagnose lung cancer, mediastinal involvement, or metastases. Confirmation with tissue biopsy is required. For brain metastases, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the most effective method. MRI can also be useful in selected circumstances, such as superior sulcus tumors to rule out brachial plexus involvement, but in general, MRI does not play a major role in NSCLC staging.
# Chunk 2430
In SCLC patients, current staging recommendations include a CT scan of the chest and abdomen (because of the high frequency of hepatic and adrenal involvement), MRI of the brain (positive in 10% of asymptomatic patients), and radionuclide bone scan if symptoms or signs suggest disease involvement in these areas (Fig. 107-5). Although there are less data on the use of CT-PET in SCLC, the most recent American College of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines recommend PET scans in patients with clinical stage I SCLC who are being considered for curative intent surgical 513 resection. In addition, invasive mediastinal staging and extrathoracic imaging (head MRI/CT and PET or abdominal CT plus bone scan) is also recommended for patients with clinical stage I SCLC if curative intent surgical resection is contemplated. Some practice guidelines also recommend the use of PET scanning in the staging of SCLC patients who are potential candidates for the addition of thoracic radiotherapy to chemotherapy. Bone marrow biopsies and aspirations are rarely performed now given the low incidence of isolated bone marrow metastases. Confirmation of metastatic disease, ipsilateral or contra-lateral lung nodules, or metastases beyond the mediastinum may be achieved by the same modalities recommended earlier for patients with NSCLC.
# Chunk 2431
Neoplasms of the Lung recurrence and a trend toward decreased overall survival. All patients should be assessed for cardiovascular risk using American College of Cardiology and American Heart Association guidelines. A myocardial infarction within the past 3 months is a contraindication to thoracic surgery because 20% of patients will die of reinfarction. An infarction in the past 6 months is a relative contraindication. Other major contraindications include uncontrolled arrhythmias, an FEV1 of less than 1 L, CO2 retention (resting Pco2 >45 mmHg), DLco <40%, and severe pulmonary hypertension.
# Chunk 2432
A solitary pulmonary nodule is defined as an x-ray density completely surrounded by normal aerated lung with circumscribed margins, of any shape, usually 1–6 cm in greatest diameter. The approach to a patient with a solitary pulmonary nodule is based on an estimate of the probability of cancer, determined according to the patient’s smoking history, age, and characteristics on imaging (Table 107-9). Prior CXRs and CT scans should be obtained if available for comparison. A PET scan may be useful if the lesion is greater than 7–8 mm in diameter. If no diagnosis is apparent, Mayo investigators reported that clinical characteristics (age, cigarette smoking status, and prior cancer diagnosis) and three radiologic characteristics (nodule diameter, spiculation, and upper lobe location) were independent predictors of malignancy. At present, only two radiographic criteria are thought to predict the benign nature of a solitary pulmonary nodule: lack of growth over a period >2 years and certain characteristic patterns of calcification. Calcification alone, however, does not exclude malignancy; a dense central nidus, multiple punctuate foci, and “bulls eye” (granuloma) and “popcorn ball” (hamartoma) calcifications are highly suggestive of a benign lesion. In contrast, a relatively large lesion, lack of or asymmetric calcification, chest symptoms, associated atelectasis, pneumonitis, or growth of the lesion revealed by comparison with an old x-ray or CT scan or a positive PET scan may be suggestive of a malignant process and warrant further attempts to establish a histologic diagnosis. An algorithm for assessing these lesions is shown in Fig. 107-6.
# Chunk 2433
Neoplasms of the Lung

FIGURE 107-6 A. Algorithm for evaluation of solitary pulmonary nodule (SPN). B. Algorithm for evaluation of solid SPN. C. Algorithm for evaluation of semisolid SPN. CT, computed tomography; CXR, chest radiograph; GGN, ground-glass nodule; PET, positron emission tomography; TTBx, transbronchial biopsy; TTNA, transthoracic needle biopsy. (Adapted from VK Patel et al: Chest 143:840, 2013.)
# Chunk 2434
patients with excellent pulmonary reserve. The 5-year survival rates are 60–80% for patients with stage I NSCLC and 40–50% for patients with stage II NSCLC.
# Chunk 2435
Follow-up thin-section CT in months. If nodule unchanged and solid component is >8 mm, consider PET-CT. Further recommendations may include surgical resection, nodule biopsy, or serial CT scans. If there is a change in size or nodule characteristics, surgical resection should be strongly considered *Fleischner society guidelines; modified from: H. MacMahon, et al: Radiology 2005; 237;395–400 **ACCP guidelines (see MK Gould et al: Chest 2007;132(suppl 3):108s-130S. ***Consider patient preference, severity of medical comorbidities, center specific expertise prior to tissue diagnosis.
# Chunk 2436
who either refuse or are not suitable candidates for surgery should be considered for radiation therapy with curative intent. Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) is a relatively new technique used to treat patients with isolated pulmonary nodules (≤5 cm) who are not candidates for or refuse surgical resection. Treatment is typically administered in three to five fractions delivered over 1–2 weeks. In uncontrolled studies, disease control rates are >90%, and 5-year survival rates of up to 60% have been reported with SBRT. By comparison, survival rates typically range from 13 to 39% in patients with stage I or II NSCLC treated with standard external-beam radiotherapy. Cryoablation is another technique occasionally used to treat small, isolated tumors (i.e., ≤3 cm). However, very little data exist on long-term outcomes with this technique.
# Chunk 2437
In should be noted that all patients with resected NSCLC are at high risk of recurrence, most of which occurs within 18–24 months of surgery, or developing a second primary lung cancer. Thus, it is reasonable to follow these patients with periodic imaging studies. Given the results of the NLST, periodic CT scans appear to be the most appropriate screening modality. Based on the timing of most recurrences, some guidelines recommend a contrasted chest CT scan every 6 months for the first 3 years after surgery, followed by yearly CT scans of the chest without contrast thereafter.
# Chunk 2438
Superior Sulcus Tumors (Pancoast Tumors) Superior sulcus tumors represent a distinctive subset of stage III disease. These tumors arise in the apex of the lung and may invade the second and third ribs, the brachial plexus, the subclavian vessels, the stellate ganglion, and adjacent vertebral bodies. They also may be associated with Pancoast syndrome, characterized by pain that may arise in the shoulder or chest wall or radiate to the neck. Pain characteristically radiates to the ulnar surface of the hand. Horner’s syndrome (enophthalmos, ptosis, miosis, and anhydrosis) due to invasion of the paravertebral sympathetic chain may be present as well. Patients with these tumors should undergo the same staging procedures as all patients with stage II and III NSCLC. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy or 519 combined chemoradiotherapy followed by surgery is reserved for those without N2 involvement. This approach yields excellent survival outcomes (>50% 5-year survival in patients with an R0 resection). Patients with N2 disease are less likely to benefit from surgery and can be managed with chemoradiotherapy alone. Patients presenting with metastatic disease can be treated with radiation therapy (with or without chemotherapy) for symptom palliation.
# Chunk 2439
Targeted Therapies for Select Molecular Cohorts of NSCLC As the efficacy of traditional cytotoxic chemotherapeutic agents plateaued in NSCLC, there was a critical need to define novel therapeutic treatment strategies. These novel strategies have largely been based on the identification of somatic driver mutations within the tumor. These driver mutations occur in genes encoding signaling proteins that, when aberrant, drive initiation and maintenance of tumor cells. Importantly, driver mutations can serve as Achilles’ heels for tumors, if their gene products can be targeted therapeutically with small-molecule inhibitors. For example, EGFR mutations have been detected in 10–15% of North American patients diagnosed with NSCLC. EGFR mutations are associated with younger age, light (<10 pack-year) and nonsmokers, and adenocarcinoma histology. Approximately 90% of these mutations are exon 19 deletions or exon 21 L858R point mutations within the EGFR TK domain, resulting in hyperactivation of both EGFR kinase activity and downstream signaling. Lung tumors that harbor activating mutations within the EGFR kinase domain display high sensitivity to small-molecule EGFR TKIs. Erlotinib and afatinib are FDA-approved oral small-molecule TKIs that inhibit EGFR. Outside the United States, gefitinib also is available. Several large, international, phase III studies have demonstrated improved response rates, progression-free survival, and overall survival in patients with EGFR mutation–positive NSCLC patients treated with an EGFR TKI as compared with standard first-line chemotherapy regimens (Table 107-13).
# Chunk 2440
Chemotherapy significantly prolongs survival in patients with SCLC. Four to six cycles of platinum-based chemotherapy with either cisplatin or carboplatin plus either etoposide or irinotecan has been the mainstay of treatment for nearly three decades and is recommended over other chemotherapy regimens irrespective of initial stage. Cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin (Adriamycin), and vincristine (CAV) may be an alternative for patients who are unable to tolerate a platinum-based regimen. Despite response rates to first-line therapy as high as 80%, the median survival ranges from 12 to 20 months for patients with LD and from 7 to 11 months for patients with ED. Regardless of disease extent, the majority of patients relapse and develop chemotherapy-resistant disease. Only 6–12% of patients with LD-SCLC and 2% of patients with ED-SCLC live beyond 5 years. The prognosis is especially poor for patients who relapse within the first 3 months of therapy; these patients are said to have chemotherapy-resistant disease. Patients are said to have sensitive disease if they relapse more than 3 months after their initial therapy and are thought to have a somewhat better overall survival. These patients also are thought to have the greatest potential benefit from second-line chemotherapy (Fig. 107-7). Topotecan is the
# Chunk 2441
Thoracic radiation therapy (TRT) is a standard component of induction therapy for good performance status and limited-stage SCLC patients. Meta-analyses indicate that chemotherapy combined with chest irradiation improves 3-year survival by approximately 5% as compared with chemotherapy alone. The 5-year survival rate, however, remains disappointingly low at ∼10–15%. Most commonly, TRT is combined with cisplatin and etoposide chemotherapy due to a superior toxicity profile as compared to anthracycline-containing chemotherapy regimens. As observed in locally advanced NSCLC, concurrent chemoradiotherapy is more effective than sequential chemoradiation but is associated with significantly more esophagitis and hematologic toxicity. Ideally TRT should be administered with the first two cycles of chemotherapy because later application appears slightly less effective. If for reasons of fitness or availability, this regimen cannot be offered, TRT should follow induction chemotherapy. With respect to fractionation of TRT, twice-daily 1.5-Gy fractioned radiation therapy has been shown to improve survival in LD-SCLC patients but is associated with higher rates of grade 3 esophagitis and pulmonary toxicity. Although it is feasible to deliver once-daily radiation therapy doses up to 70 Gy concurrently with cisplatin-based chemotherapy, there are no data to support equivalency of this approach compared with the 45-Gy twice-daily radiotherapy dose. Therefore, the current standard regimen of a 45-Gy dose administered in 1.5-Gy fractions twice daily for 30 days is being compared with higher-dose regimens in two phase III trials, one in the United States and one in Europe. Patients should be carefully selected for concurrent chemoradiation therapy based on good performance status and adequate pulmonary reserve. The role of radiotherapy in ED-SCLC is largely restricted to palliation of tumor-related symptoms such as bone pain and bronchial obstruction.
# Chunk 2442
Core biopsy of most distant site of disease Squamous carcinoma Adenocartcinoma Obtain tissue Determine histology Determine molecular status Treatment options EGFRmut Erlotinib or afatinib Crizotinib No mutation or mutation for which there is no FDA approved therapy Platinum-based chemothearpy ± bevacizumab Cisplatin or carboplatin + gemcitabine, doc-etaxel, paclitaxel, or nab-paclitaxel Platinum-based chemotherapy ALK (+) Large-cell neuroendocrine carcinoma FIGURE 107-8 Approach to first-line therapy in a patient with stage IV non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). EGFRmut, EGFR mutation; FDA, Food and Drug Administration.
# Chunk 2443
If a nonpalpable mammographic lesion has a low index of suspicion, mammographic follow-up in 3–6 months is reasonable. Workup of indeterminate and suspicious lesions has been rendered more complex by the advent of stereotactic biopsies. Morrow and colleagues have suggested that these procedures are indicated for lesions that require biopsy but are likely to be benign—that is, for cases in which the procedure probably will eliminate additional surgery. When a lesion is more probably malignant, open biopsy should be performed with a needle localization technique. Others have proposed more widespread use of stereotactic core biopsies for nonpalpable lesions on economic grounds and because diagnosis leads to earlier treatment planning. However, stereotactic diagnosis of a malignant lesion does not eliminate the need for definitive surgical procedures, particularly if breast conservation is attempted. For example, after a breast biopsy with needle localization (i.e., local excision) of a stereotactically diagnosed malignancy, reexcision may still be necessary to achieve negative margins. To some extent, these issues are decided on the basis of referral pattern and the availability of the resources for stereotactic core biopsies. A reasonable approach is shown in Fig. 108-4.
# Chunk 2444
Only about 1 in every 5–10 breast biopsies leads to a diagnosis of cancer, although the rate of positive biopsies varies in different countries and clinical settings. (These differences may be related to interpretation, medico-legal considerations, and availability of mammograms.) The vast majority of benign breast masses are due to “fibrocystic” disease, a descriptive term for small fluid-filled cysts and modest epithelial cell and fibrous tissue hyperplasia. However, fibrocystic disease is a histologic, not a clinical, diagnosis, and women who have had a biopsy with benign findings are at greater risk of developing breast cancer than those who have not had a biopsy. The subset of women with ductal or lobular cell proliferation (about 30% of patients), particularly the small fraction (3%) with atypical hyperplasia, have a fourfold greater risk of developing breast cancer than those women who have not had a biopsy, and the increase in the risk is about ninefold for women in this category who also have an affected first-degree relative. Thus, careful follow-up of these patients is required. By contrast, patients with a benign biopsy without atypical hyperplasia are at little risk and may be followed routinely.
# Chunk 2445
Correct staging of breast cancer patients is of extraordinary importance. Not only does it permit an accurate prognosis, but in many cases, therapeutic decision-making is based largely on the TNM (primary tumor, regional nodes, metastasis) classification (Table 108-1). Comparison with historic series should be undertaken with caution, as the staging has changed several times in the past 20 years. The current staging is complex and results in significant changes in outcome by stage as compared with prior staging systems.
# Chunk 2446
diating the breast, result in a survival that is as good as (or slightly tumors (i.e., T2 in size, positive margins, positive nodes). At pres-superior to) that after extensive surgical procedures, such as mas-ent, nearly one-third of women in the United States are managed tectomy or modified radical mastectomy, with or without further by lumpectomy. Breast-conserving surgery is not suitable for all irradiation. Postlumpectomy breast irradiation greatly reduces the patients: it is not generally suitable for tumors >5 cm (or for smaller risk of recurrence in the breast. While breast conservation is associ-tumors if the breast is small), for tumors involving the nipple-areola ated with a possibility of recurrence in the breast, 10-year survival is complex, for tumors with extensive intraductal disease involvat least as good as that after more extensive surgery. Postoperative ing multiple quadrants of the breast, for women with a history of radiation to regional nodes following mastectomy is also associated collagen-vascular disease, and for women who either do not have with an improvement in survival. Because radiation therapy can also the motivation for breast conservation or do not have convenient reduce the rate of local or regional recurrence, it should be strongly access to radiation therapy. However, these groups probably do not considered following mastectomy for women with high-risk primary account for more than one-third of patients who are treated with 528 mastectomy. Thus, a great many women still undergo mastectomy who could safely avoid this procedure and probably would if appropriately counseled. Sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB) is generally the standard of care for women with localized breast cancer and clinically negative axilla. If SLNB is negative, more extensive axillary surgery is not required, avoiding much of the risk of lymphedema following more extensive axillary dissections. In the presence of minimal involvement of a sentinel lymph node, further axillary surgery is not required. An extensive intraductal component is a predictor of recurrence in the breast, and so are several clinical variables. Both axillary lymph node involvement and involvement of vascular or lymphatic channels by metastatic tumor in the breast are associated with a higher risk of relapse in the breast but are not contraindications to breast-conserving treatment. When these patients are excluded, and when lumpectomy with negative tumor margins is achieved, breast conservation is associated with a recurrence rate in the breast of 5% or less. The survival of patients who have recurrence in the breast is somewhat worse than that of women who do not. Thus, recurrence in the breast is a negative prognostic variable for longterm survival. However, recurrence in the breast is not the cause of distant metastasis. If recurrence in the breast caused metastatic disease, then women treated with lumpectomy, who have a higher rate of recurrence in the breast, should have poorer survival than women treated with mastectomy, and they do not. Most patients should consult with a radiation oncologist before making a final decision concerning local therapy. However, a multimodality clinic in which the surgeon, radiation oncologist, medical oncologist, and other caregivers cooperate to evaluate the patient and develop a treatment plan is usually considered a major advantage by patients.
# Chunk 2447
shown superiority for aromatase inhibitors over tamoxifen alone in the adjuvant setting, although tamoxifen appears essentially equivalent in women who are obese and therefore presumably have higher endogenous concentrations of estrogen. Unfortunately the optimal plan is unclear. Tamoxifen for 5 years followed by an aromatase inhibitor, the reverse strategy, or even switching to an aromatase inhibitor after 2–3 years of tamoxifen has been shown to be better than tamoxifen alone. Continuation of tamoxifen for 10 years yields further benefit and is a reasonable decision for women with less favorable prognoses. Unfortunately, multiple studies have revealed very suboptimal adherence to long-term adjuvant endocrine regimens, and every effort should be made to encourage their continuous use. No valid information currently permits selection among the three clinically approved aromatase inhibitors. Concomitant use of bisphosphonates is almost always warranted; however, it is not finally settled as to whether their prophylactic use increases survival in addition to just decreasing recurrences in bone.
# Chunk 2448
About one-third of patients treated for apparently localized breast cancer develop metastatic disease. Although a small number of these patients enjoy long remissions when treated with combinations of systemic and local therapy, most eventually succumb to metastatic disease. The median survival for all patients diagnosed with metastatic breast cancer is less than 3 years. Soft tissue, bony, and visceral (lung and liver) metastases each account for approximately one-third of sites of initial relapses. However, by the time of death, most patients will have bony involvement. Recurrences can appear at any time after primary therapy. A very cruel fact about breast cancer recurrences is that at least half of all breast cancer recurrences occur >5 years after initial therapy. It is now clear that a variety of host factors can influence recurrence rates, including depression and central obesity, and these diseases should be managed as aggressively as possible.
# Chunk 2449
Endocrine Therapy Normal breast tissue is estrogen dependent. Both primary and metastatic breast cancer may retain this phenotype. The best means of ascertaining whether a breast cancer is hormone dependent is through analysis of estrogen and progesterone receptor levels on the tumor. Tumors that are positive for the estrogen receptor and negative for the progesterone receptor have a response rate of ∼30%. Tumors that are positive for both receptors have a response rate approaching 70%. If neither receptor is present, the objective response rates are <5%. Receptor analyses provide information as to the correct ordering of endocrine therapies as opposed to chemotherapy. Because of their lack of toxicity and because some patients whose receptor analyses are reported as negative respond to endocrine therapy, an endocrine treatment should be attempted in virtually every patient with metastatic breast cancer. Potential endocrine therapies are summarized in Table 108-4. The choice of endocrine therapy is usually determined by toxicity profile and availability. In most postmenopausal patients, the initial endocrine therapy should be an aromatase inhibitor rather than tamoxifen. For the subset of postmenopausal women who are estrogen receptor–positive but also HER2/neu-positive, response rates to aromatase inhibitors are substantially higher than to tamoxifen. Aromatase inhibitors are not used in premenopausal women because their hypothalamus can respond to estrogen deprivation by producing gonadotropins that promote estrogen synthesis. Newer “pure” antiestrogens that are free of agonistic effects are also effective. Cases in which tumors shrink in response to tamoxifen withdrawal (as well as withdrawal of pharmacologic doses of estrogens) have been reported. A series of studies with aromatase inhibitors, tamoxifen, and fulvestrant have all shown that the addition of everolimus to the hormonal treatment can lead to significant benefit after progression on the endocrine agent alone. Everolimus (an mTOR inhibitor) in coordination with endocrine agents is now being explored as front-line therapy and in the adjuvant setting. Endogenous estrogen formation may be blocked by analogues of aromatase inhibitors, tamoxifen, and aConsider retreatment with Everolimus in combination for disease progression
# Chunk 2450
Abbreviation: LHRH, luteinizing hormone–releasing hormone.

luteinizing hormone–releasing hormone in premenopausal women. Additive endocrine therapies, including treatment with progestogens, estrogens, and androgens, may also be tried in patients who respond to initial endocrine therapy; the mechanism of action of these latter therapies is unknown. Patients who respond to one endocrine therapy have at least a 50% chance of responding to a second endocrine therapy. It is not uncommon for patients to respond to two or three sequential endocrine therapies; however, combination endocrine therapies do not appear to be superior to individual agents, and combinations of chemotherapy with endocrine therapy are not useful. The median survival of patients with metastatic disease is approximately 2 years, although many patients, particularly older persons and those with hormone-dependent disease, may respond to endocrine therapy for 3–5 years or longer.
# Chunk 2451
Between 10 and 25% of patients present with so-called locally advanced, or stage III, breast cancer at diagnosis. Many of these cancers are technically operable, whereas others, particularly cancers with chest wall involvement, inflammatory breast cancers, or cancers with large matted axillary lymph nodes, cannot be managed with surgery initially. Although no randomized trials have shown any survival benefit for neoadjuvant regimens as compared to adjuvant therapy, this approach has gained widespread use. More than 90% of patients with locally advanced breast cancer show a partial or better response to multidrug chemotherapy regimens that include an anthracycline. Early administration of this treatment reduces the bulk of the disease and frequently makes the patient a suitable candidate for salvage surgery and/or radiation therapy. These patients should be managed in multimodality clinics to coordinate surgery, radiation therapy, and systemic chemotherapy. Such approaches produce long-term disease-free survival in about 30–50% of patients. The neoadjuvant setting is also an ideal time to evaluate the efficacy of novel treatments because the effect on the tumor can be directly assessed.
# Chunk 2452
Women who have one breast cancer are at risk of developing a contralateral breast cancer at a rate of approximately 0.5% per year. When adjuvant tamoxifen or an aromatase inhibitor is administered to these patients, the rate of development of contralateral breast cancers is reduced. In other tissues of the body, tamoxifen has estrogen-like effects that are beneficial, including preservation of bone mineral density and long-term lowering of cholesterol. However, tamoxifen has estrogen-like effects on the uterus, leading to an increased risk of uterine cancer (0.75% incidence after 5 years on tamoxifen). Tamoxifen also increases the risk of cataract formation. The Breast Cancer Prevention Trial (BCPT) revealed a >49% reduction in breast cancer among women with a risk of at least 1.66% taking the drug for 5 years. Raloxifene has shown similar breast cancer prevention potency but may have different effects on bone and heart. The two agents have been compared in a prospective randomized prevention trial (the Study of Tamoxifen and Raloxifene [STAR] trial). The agents are approximately equivalent in preventing breast cancer with fewer thromboembolic events and endometrial cancers with raloxifene; however, raloxifene did not reduce noninvasive cancers as effectively as tamoxifen, so no clear winner has emerged. A newer selective estrogen receptor modulator (SERM), lasofoxifene, has been shown to reduce cardiovascular events in addition to breast cancer and fractures, and further studies of this agent should be watched with interest. It should be recalled that prevention of contralateral breast cancers in women diagnosed with one cancer is a reasonable surrogate for breast cancer prevention because these are second primaries not recurrences. In this regard, the aromatase inhibitors are all considerably more effective than tamoxifen; however, they are not approved for primary breast cancer prevention. It remains puzzling that agents with the safety 531 profile of raloxifene, which can reduce breast cancer risk by 50% with additional benefits in preventing osteoporotic fracture, are still so infrequently prescribed. They should be far more commonly offered to women than they are.
# Chunk 2453
Lobular Neoplasia Proliferation of cytologically malignant cells within the lobules is termed lobular neoplasia. Nearly 30% of patients who have had adequate local excision of the lesion develop breast cancer (usually infiltrating ductal carcinoma) over the next 15–20 years. Ipsilateral and contralateral cancers are equally common. Therefore, lobular neoplasia may be a premalignant lesion that suggests an elevated risk of subsequent breast cancer, rather than a form of malignancy itself, and aggressive local management seems unreasonable. Most patients should be treated with an SERM or an aromatase inhibitor (for postmenopausal women) for 5 years and 532 followed with careful annual mammography and semiannual physical examinations. Additional molecular analysis of these lesions may make it possible to discriminate between patients who are at risk of further progression and require additional therapy and those in whom simple follow-up is adequate.
# Chunk 2454
Breast cancer is about 1/150th as frequent in men as in women; 1720 men developed breast cancer in 2006. It usually presents as a unilateral lump in the breast and is frequently not diagnosed promptly. Given the small amount of soft tissue and the unexpected nature of the problem, locally advanced presentations are somewhat more common. When male breast cancer is matched to female breast cancer by age and stage, its overall prognosis is identical. Although gynecomastia may initially be unilateral or asymmetric, any unilateral mass in a man older than age 40 years should receive a careful workup including biopsy. On the other hand, bilateral symmetric breast development rarely represents breast cancer and is almost invariably due to endocrine disease or a drug effect. It should be kept in mind, nevertheless, that the risk of cancer is much greater in men with gynecomastia; in such men, gross asymmetry of the breasts should arouse suspicion of cancer. Male breast cancer is best managed by mastectomy and axillary lymph node dissection or SLNB. Patients with locally advanced disease or positive nodes should also be treated with irradiation. Approximately 90% of male breast cancers contain estrogen receptors, and approximately 60% of cases with metastatic disease respond to endocrine therapy. No randomized studies have evaluated adjuvant therapy for male breast cancer. Two historic experiences suggest that the disease responds well to adjuvant systemic therapy, and, if not medically contraindicated, the same criteria for the use of adjuvant therapy in women should be applied to men.
# Chunk 2455
Clinical Features Gastric cancers, when superficial and surgically curable, usually produce no symptoms. As the tumor becomes more extensive, patients may complain of an insidious upper abdominal discomfort varying in intensity from a vague, postprandial fullness to a severe, steady pain. Anorexia, often with slight nausea, is very common but is not the usual presenting complaint. Weight loss may eventually be observed, and nausea and vomiting are particularly prominent in patients whose tumors involve the pylorus; dysphagia and early satiety may be the major symptoms caused by diffuse lesions originating in the cardia. There may be no early physical signs. A palpable abdominal mass indicates long-standing growth and predicts regional extension.
# Chunk 2456
Complete surgical removal of the tumor with resection of adjacent lymph nodes offers the only chance for cure. However, this is possible in less than a third of patients. A subtotal gastrectomy is the treatment of choice for patients with distal carcinomas, whereas total or near-total gastrectomies are required for more proximal tumors. The inclusion of extended lymph node dissection in these procedures appears to confer an added risk for complications without providing a meaningful enhancement in survival. The prognosis following complete surgical resection depends on the degree of tumor penetration into the stomach wall and is adversely influenced by regional lymph node involvement and vascular invasion, characteristics found in the vast majority of American patients. As a result, the probability of survival after 5 years for the 25–30% of patients able to undergo complete resection is ∼20% for distal tumors and <10% for proximal tumors, with recurrences continuing for at least 8 years after surgery. In the absence of ascites or extensive hepatic or peritoneal metastases, even patients whose disease is believed to be incurable by surgery should be offered resection of the primary lesion. Reduction of tumor bulk is the best form of palliation and may enhance the probability of benefit from subsequent therapy. In high-incidence regions such as Japan and Korea, where the use of endoscopic screening programs has identified patients with superficial tumors, the use of laparoscopic gastrectomy has gained popularity. In the United States and western Europe, the use of this less invasive surgical approach remains investigational.
# Chunk 2457
Gastric adenocarcinoma is a relatively radioresistant tumor, and the adequate control of the primary tumor requires doses of external-beam irradiation that exceed the tolerance of surrounding structures, such as bowel mucosa and spinal cord. As a result, the major role of radiation therapy in patients has been palliation of pain. Radiation therapy alone after a complete resection does not prolong survival. In the setting of surgically unresectable disease limited to the epigastrium, patients treated with 3500–4000 cGy did not live longer than similar patients not receiving radiotherapy; however, survival was prolonged slightly when 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) plus leucovorin was given in combination with radiation therapy (3-year survival 50% vs 41% for radiation therapy alone). In this clinical setting, the 5-FU likely functions as a radiosensitizer.
# Chunk 2458
Primary lymphoma of the stomach is relatively uncommon, accounting for <15% of gastric malignancies and ∼2% of all lymphomas. The stomach is, however, the most frequent extranodal site for lymphoma, and gastric lymphoma has increased in frequency during the past 536 35 years. The disease is difficult to distinguish clinically from gastric adenocarcinoma; both tumors are most often detected during the sixth decade of life; present with epigastric pain, early satiety, and generalized fatigue; and are usually characterized by ulcerations with a ragged, thickened mucosal pattern demonstrated by contrast radiographs or endoscopic appearance. The diagnosis of lymphoma of the stomach may occasionally be made through cytologic brushings of the gastric mucosa but usually requires a biopsy at gastroscopy or laparotomy. Failure of gastroscopic biopsies to detect lymphoma in a given case should not be interpreted as being conclusive, because superficial biopsies may miss the deeper lymphoid infiltrate. The macroscopic pathology of gastric lymphoma may also mimic adenocarcinoma, consisting of either a bulky ulcerated lesion localized in the corpus or antrum or a diffuse process spreading throughout the entire gastric submucosa and even extending into the duodenum. Microscopically, the vast majority of gastric lymphoid tumors are lymphomas of B-cell origin. Histologically, these tumors may range from well-differentiated, superficial processes (mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue [MALT]) to high-grade, large-cell lymphomas. Like gastric adenocarcinoma, infection with H. pylori increases the risk for gastric lymphoma in general and MALT lymphomas in particular. Large-cell lymphomas of the stomach spread initially to regional lymph nodes (often to Waldeyer’s ring) and may then disseminate.
# Chunk 2459
Leiomyosarcomas and GISTs make up 1–3% of gastric neoplasms. They most frequently involve the anterior and posterior walls of the gastric fundus and often ulcerate and bleed. Even those lesions that appear benign on histologic examination may behave in a malignant fashion. These tumors rarely invade adjacent viscera and characteristically do not metastasize to lymph nodes, but they may spread to the liver and lungs. The treatment of choice is surgical resection. Combination chemotherapy should be reserved for patients with metastatic disease. All such tumors should be analyzed for a mutation in the c-kit receptor. GISTs are unresponsive to conventional chemotherapy; yet ∼50% of patients experience objective response and prolonged survival when treated with imatinib mesylate (Gleevec) (400–800 mg PO daily), a selective inhibitor of the c-kit tyrosine kinase. Many patients with GIST whose tumors have become refractory to imatinib subsequently benefit from sunitinib (Sutent) or regorafenib (Stivarga), other inhibitors of the c-kit tyrosine kinase.
# Chunk 2460
Small-bowel tumors comprise <3% of gastrointestinal neoplasms. Because of their rarity and inaccessibility, a correct diagnosis is often delayed. Abdominal symptoms are usually vague and poorly defined, and conventional radiographic studies of the upper and lower intestinal tract often appear normal. Small-bowel tumors should be considered in the differential diagnosis in the following situations: (1) recurrent, unexplained episodes of crampy abdominal pain; (2) intermittent bouts of intestinal obstruction, especially in the absence of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) or prior abdominal surgery; (3) intussusception in the adult; and (4) evidence of chronic intestinal bleeding in the presence of negative conventional and endoscopic examination. A careful small-bowel barium study should be considered in such a circumstance; the diagnostic accuracy may be improved by infusing barium through a nasogastric tube placed into the duodenum (enteroclysis). Alternatively, capsule endoscopic procedures have been used.
# Chunk 2461
While rare, small-bowel malignancies occur in patients with longstanding regional enteritis and celiac sprue as well as in individuals with AIDS. Malignant tumors of the small bowel are frequently associated with fever, weight loss, anorexia, bleeding, and a palpable abdominal mass. After ampullary carcinomas (many of which arise from biliary or pancreatic ducts), the most frequently occurring small-bowel malignancies are adenocarcinomas, lymphomas, carcinoid tumors, and leiomyosarcomas.
# Chunk 2462
The most common primary cancers of the small bowel are adenocarcinomas, accounting for ∼50% of malignant tumors. These cancers occur most often in the distal duodenum and proximal jejunum, where they tend to ulcerate and cause hemorrhage or obstruction. Radiologically, they may be confused with chronic duodenal ulcer disease or with Crohn’s disease if the patient has long-standing regional enteritis. The diagnosis is best made by endoscopy and biopsy under direct vision. Surgical resection is the treatment of choice with suggested postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy options generally following treatment patterns used in the management of colon cancer.
# Chunk 2463
Lymphoma in the small bowel may be primary or secondary. A diagnosis of a primary intestinal lymphoma requires histologic confirmation in a clinical setting in which palpable adenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly are absent and no evidence of lymphoma is seen on chest radiograph, CT scan, or peripheral blood smear or on bone marrow aspiration and biopsy. Symptoms referable to the small bowel are present, usually accompanied by an anatomically discernible lesion. Secondary lymphoma of the small bowel consists of involvement of the intestine by a lymphoid malignancy extending from involved retroperitoneal or mesenteric lymph nodes (Chap. 134).
# Chunk 2464
Primary intestinal lymphoma accounts for ∼20% of malignancies of the small bowel. These neoplasms are non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas; they usually have a diffuse, large-cell histology and are of T cell origin. Intestinal lymphoma involves the ileum, jejunum, and duodenum, in decreasing frequency—a pattern that mirrors the relative amount of normal lymphoid cells in these anatomic areas. The risk of small-bowel lymphoma is increased in patients with a prior history of malabsorptive conditions (e.g., celiac sprue), regional enteritis, and depressed immune function due to congenital immunodeficiency syndromes, prior organ transplantation, autoimmune disorders, or AIDS.
# Chunk 2465
The development of localized or nodular masses that narrow the lumen results in periumbilical pain (made worse by eating) as well as weight loss, vomiting, and occasional intestinal obstruction. The diagnosis of small-bowel lymphoma may be suspected from the appearance on contrast radiographs of patterns such as infiltration and thickening of mucosal folds, mucosal nodules, areas of irregular ulceration, or stasis of contrast material. The diagnosis can be confirmed by surgical exploration and resection of involved segments. Intestinal lymphoma can occasionally be diagnosed by peroral intestinal mucosal biopsy, but because the disease mainly involves the lamina propria, full-thickness surgical biopsies are usually required.
# Chunk 2466
A unique form of small-bowel lymphoma, diffusely involving the entire intestine, was first described in oriental Jews and Arabs and is referred to as immunoproliferative small intestinal disease (IPSID), Mediterranean lymphoma, or α heavy chain disease. This is a B cell tumor. The typical presentation includes chronic diarrhea and steatorrhea associated with vomiting and abdominal cramps; clubbing of the digits may be observed. A curious feature in many patients with IPSID is the presence in the blood and intestinal secretions of an abnormal IgA that contains a shortened α heavy chain and is devoid of light chains. It is suspected that the abnormal α chains are produced by plasma cells infiltrating the small bowel. The clinical course of 537 patients with IPSID is generally one of exacerbations and remissions, with death frequently resulting from either progressive malnutrition and wasting or the development of an aggressive lymphoma. The use of oral antibiotics such as tetracycline appears to be beneficial in the early phases of the disorder, suggesting a possible infectious etiology. Combination chemotherapy has been administered during later stages of the disease, with variable results. Results are better when antibiotics and chemotherapy are combined.
# Chunk 2467
Cancer of the large bowel is second only to lung cancer as a cause of cancer death in the United States: 136,830 new cases occurred in 2014, and 50,310 deaths were due to colorectal cancer. The incidence rate has decreased significantly during the past 25 years, likely due to enhanced and more compliantly followed screening practices. Similarly, mortality rates in the United States have decreased by approximately 25%, resulting largely from earlier detection and improved treatment.
# Chunk 2468
Most colorectal cancers, regardless of etiology, arise from adenomatous polyps. A polyp is a grossly visible protrusion from the mucosal surface and may be classified pathologically as a nonneoplastic hamartoma (e.g., juvenile polyp), a hyperplastic mucosal proliferation (hyperplastic polyp), or an adenomatous polyp. Only adenomas are clearly premalignant, and only a minority of adenomatous polyps evolve into cancer. Adenomatous polyps may be found in the colons of ∼30% of middle-aged and ∼50% of elderly people; however, <1% of polyps ever become malignant. Most polyps produce no symptoms and remain clinically undetected. Occult blood in the stool is found in <5% of patients with polyps.
# Chunk 2469
A number of molecular changes are noted in adenomatous polyps and colorectal cancers that are thought to reflect a multistep process in the evolution of normal colonic mucosa to life-threatening invasive carcinoma. These developmental steps toward carcinogenesis include, but are not restricted to, point mutations in the K-ras protooncogene; hypomethylation of DNA, leading to gene activation; loss of DNA 538 (allelic loss) at the site of a tumor-suppressor gene (the adenomatous polyposis coli [APC] gene) on the long arm of chromosome 5 (5q21); allelic loss at the site of a tumor-suppressor gene located on chromosome 18q (the deleted in colorectal cancer [DCC] gene); and allelic loss at chromosome 17p, associated with mutations in the p53 tumor-suppressor gene (see Fig. 101e-2). Thus, the altered proliferative pattern of the colonic mucosa, which results in progression to a polyp and then to carcinoma, may involve the mutational activation of an oncogene followed by and coupled with the loss of genes that normally suppress tumorigenesis. It remains uncertain whether the genetic aberrations always occur in a defined order. Based on this model, however, cancer is believed to develop only in those polyps in which most (if not all) of these mutational events take place. Clinically, the probability of an adenomatous polyp becoming a cancer depends on the gross appearance of the lesion, its histologic features, and its size. Adenomatous polyps may be pedunculated (stalked) or sessile (flat-based). Invasive cancers develop more frequently in sessile polyps. Histologically, adenomatous polyps may be tubular, villous (i.e., papillary), or tubulovillous. Villous adenomas, most of which are sessile, become malignant more than three times as often as tubular adenomas. The likelihood that any polypoid lesion in the large bowel contains invasive cancer is related to the size of the polyp, being negligible (<2%) in lesions <1.5 cm, intermediate (2–10%) in lesions 1.5–2.5 cm, and substantial (10%) in lesions >2.5 cm in size. Following the detection of an adenomatous polyp, the entire large bowel should be visualized endoscopically because synchronous lesions are noted in about one-third of cases. Colonoscopy should then be repeated periodically, even in the absence of a previously documented malignancy, because such patients have a 30–50% probability of developing another adenoma and are at a higher-than-average risk for developing a colorectal carcinoma. Adenomatous polyps are thought to require >5 years of growth before becoming clinically significant; colonoscopy need not be carried out more frequently than every 3 years for the vast majority of patients.
# Chunk 2470
Risk factors for the development of colorectal cancer are listed in Table 110-1.

Diet The etiology for most cases of large-bowel cancer appears to be related to environmental factors. The disease occurs more often in upper socioeconomic populations who live in urban areas. Mortality from colorectal cancer is directly correlated with per capita consumption of calories, meat protein, and dietary fat and oil as well as elevations in the serum cholesterol concentration and mortality from coronary artery disease. Geographic variations in incidence largely are unrelated to genetic differences, since migrant groups tend to assume the large-bowel cancer incidence rates of their adopted countries. Furthermore, population groups such as Mormons and Seventh Day Adventists, whose lifestyle and dietary habits differ somewhat risK faCtors for the DeveLopment of CoLoreCtaL CanCer
# Chunk 2471
Polyposis Coli Polyposis coli (familial polyposis of the colon) is a rare condition characterized by the appearance of thousands of adenomatous polyps throughout the large bowel. It is transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait; the occasional patient with no family history probably developed the condition due to a spontaneous mutation. Polyposis coli is associated with a deletion in the long arm of chromosome 5 (including the APC gene) in both neoplastic (somatic mutation) and normal (germline mutation) cells. The loss of this genetic material (i.e., allelic loss) results in the absence of tumor-suppressor genes whose protein products would normally inhibit neoplastic growth. The presence of soft tissue and bony tumors, congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium, mesenteric desmoid tumors, and ampullary cancers in addition to the colonic polyps characterizes a subset of polyposis coli known as Gardner’s syndrome. The appearance of malignant tumors of the central nervous system accompanying polyposis coli defines Turcot’s syndrome. The colonic polyps in all these conditions are rarely present before puberty but are generally evident in affected individuals by age 25. If the polyposis is not treated surgically, colorectal cancer will develop in almost all patients before age 40. Polyposis coli results from a defect in the colonic mucosa, leading to an abnormal proliferative pattern and impaired DNA repair mechanisms. Once the multiple polyps are detected, patients should undergo a total colectomy. Medical therapy with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as sulindac and selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors such as celecoxib can decrease the number and size of polyps in patients with polyposis coli; however, this effect on polyps is only temporary, and the use of NSAIDs has not been shown to reduce the risk of cancer. Colectomy remains the primary therapy/prevention. The offspring of patients with polyposis coli, who often are prepubertal when the diagnosis is made in the parent, have a 50% risk for developing this premalignant disorder and should be carefully screened by annual flexible sigmoidoscopy until age 35. Proctosigmoidoscopy is a sufficient screening procedure because polyps tend to be evenly distributed from cecum to anus, making more invasive and expensive techniques such as colonoscopy or barium enema unnecessary. Testing for occult blood in the stool is an inadequate screening maneuver. If a causative germ-line AP C mutation has been identified in an affected family member, an alternative method for identifying carriers is testing DNA from peripheral blood mononuclear cells for the presence of the specific APC mutation. The detection of such a germline mutation can lead to a definitive diagnosis before the development of polyps.
# Chunk 2472
Hereditary Nonpolyposis Colon Cancer Hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer (HNPCC), also known as Lynch’s syndrome, is another autosomal dominant trait. It is characterized by the presence of three or more relatives with histologically documented colorectal cancer, one of whom is a first-degree relative of the other two; one or more cases of colorectal cancer diagnosed before age 50 in the family; and colorectal cancer involving at least two generations. In contrast to polyposis coli, HNPCC is associated with an unusually high frequency of cancer arising in the proximal large bowel. The median age for the appearance of an adenocarcinoma is <50 years, 10–15 years younger than the median age for the general population. Despite having a poorly differentiated, mucinous histologic appearance, the proximal colon tumors that characterize HNPCC have a better prognosis than sporadic tumors from patients of similar age. Families with HNPCC often include individuals with multiple primary cancers; the association of colorectal cancer with either ovarian or endometrial carcinomas is especially strong in women, and an increased appearance of gastric, small-bowel, genitourinary, pancreaticobiliary, and sebaceous skin tumors has been reported as well. It has been recommended that members of such families undergo annual or biennial colonoscopy beginning at age 25 years, with intermittent pelvic ultrasonography and endometrial biopsy for afflicted women; such a screening strategy has not yet been validated. HNPCC is associated with germline muta-539 tions of several genes, particularly hMSH2 on chromosome 2 and hMLH1 on chromosome 3. These mutations lead to errors in DNA replication and are thought to result in DNA instability because of defective repair of DNA mismatches resulting in abnormal cell growth and tumor development. Testing tumor cells through molecular analysis of DNA or immunohistochemical staining of paraffin-fixed tissue for “microsatellite instability” (sequence changes reflecting defective mismatch repair) in patients with colorectal cancer and a positive family history for colorectal or endometrial cancer may identify probands with HNPCC.
# Chunk 2473
(Chap. 351) Large-bowel cancer is increased in incidence in patients with long-standing inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Cancers develop more commonly in patients with ulcerative colitis than in those with granulomatous (i.e., Crohn’s) colitis, but this impression may result in part from the occasional difficulty of differentiating these two conditions. The risk of colorectal cancer in a patient with IBD is relatively small during the initial 10 years of the disease, but then appears to increase at a rate of ∼0.5–1% per year. Cancer may develop in 8–30% of patients after 25 years. The risk is higher in younger patients with pancolitis.
# Chunk 2474
540 SCREENING The rationale for colorectal cancer screening programs is that the removal of adenomatous polyps will prevent colorectal cancer, and that earlier detection of localized, superficial cancers in asymptomatic individuals will increase the surgical cure rate. Such screening programs are particularly important for individuals with a family history of the disease in first-degree relatives. The relative risk for developing colorectal cancer increases to 1.75 in such individuals and may be even higher if the relative was afflicted before age 60. The prior use of proctosigmoidoscopy as a screening tool was based on the observation that 60% of early lesions are located in the rectosigmoid. For unexplained reasons, however, the proportion of large-bowel cancers arising in the rectum has been decreasing during the past several decades, with a corresponding increase in the proportion of cancers in the more proximal descending colon. As such, the potential for proctosigmoidoscopy to detect a sufficient number of occult neoplasms to make the procedure cost-effective has been questioned. Screening strategies for colorectal cancer that have been examined during the past several decades are listed in Table 110-3. Many programs directed at the early detection of colorectal cancers have focused on digital rectal examinations and fecal occult blood (i.e., stool guaiac) testing. The digital examination should be part of any routine physical evaluation in adults older than age 40 years, serving as a screening test for prostate cancer in men, a component of the pelvic examination in women, and an inexpensive maneuver for the detection of masses in the rectum. However, because of the proximal migration of colorectal tumors, its value as an overall screening modality for colorectal cancer has become limited. The development of the fecal occult blood test has greatly facilitated the detection of occult fecal blood. Unfortunately, even when performed optimally, the fecal occult blood test has major limitations as a screening technique. About 50% of patients with documented colorectal cancers have a negative fecal occult blood test, consistent with the intermittent bleeding pattern of these tumors. When random cohorts of asymptomatic persons have been tested, 2–4% have fecal occult blood-positive stools. Colorectal cancers have been found in <10% of these “test-positive” cases, with benign polyps being detected in an additional 20–30%. Thus, a colorectal neoplasm will not be found in most asymptomatic individuals with occult blood in their stool. Nonetheless, persons found to have fecal occult blood-positive stool routinely undergo further medical evaluation, including sigmoidoscopy and/or colonoscopy—procedures that are not only uncomfortable and expensive but also associated with a small risk for significant complications. The added cost of these studies would appear justifiable if the small number of patients found to have occult neoplasms because of fecal occult blood screening could be shown to have an improved prognosis and prolonged survival. Prospectively controlled trials have shown a statistically significant reduction in mortality rate from colorectal cancer for individuals undergoing annual stool guaiac screening. However, this benefit only emerged after >13 years of follow-up and was extremely expensive to achieve, because all positive tests (most of which were falsely positive) were followed by colonoscopy. Moreover, these colonoscopic examinations quite likely provided the opportunity for cancer prevention through the removal of potentially premalignant adenomatous polyps (i.e., computed tomography colonography) because the eventual development of cancer was reduced by 20% in the cohort undergoing annual screening.
# Chunk 2475
With the appreciation that the carcinogenic process leading to the progression of the normal bowel mucosa to an adenomatous polyp and then to a cancer is the result of a series of molecular changes, investigators have examined fecal DNA for evidence of mutations associated with such molecular changes as evidence of the occult presence of precancerous lesions or actual malignancies. Such a strategy has been tested in more than 4000 asymptomatic individuals whose stool was assessed for occult blood and for 21 possible mutations in fecal DNA; these study subjects also underwent colonoscopy. Although the fecal DNA strategy suggested the presence of more advanced adenomas and cancers than did the fecal occult blood testing approach, the overall sensitivity, using colonoscopic findings as the standard, was less than 50%, diminishing enthusiasm for further pursuit of the fecal DNA screening strategy.
# Chunk 2476
With the appreciation of the inadequacy of fecal occult blood testing alone, concerns about the practicality of imaging approaches, and the wider adoption of endoscopic examinations by the primary care community, screening strategies in asymptomatic persons have changed. At present, both the American Cancer Society and the National Comprehensive Cancer Network suggest either fecal occult blood testing annually coupled with flexible sigmoidoscopy every 5 years or colonoscopy every 10 years beginning at age 50 in asymptomatic individuals with no personal or family history of polyps or colorectal cancer. The recommendation for the inclusion of flexible sigmoidoscopy is strongly supported by the recently published results of three randomized trials performed in the United States, the United Kingdom, and Italy, involving more than 350,000 individuals, which consistently showed that periodic (even single) sigmoidoscopic examinations, after more than a decade of median follow-up, lead to an approximate 21% reduction in the development of colorectal cancer and a more than 25% reduction in mortality from the malignant disease. Less than 20% of participants in these studies underwent a subsequent colonoscopy. In contrast to the cathartic preparation required before colonoscopic procedures, which is only performed by highly trained specialists, flexible sigmoidoscopy requires only an enema as preparation and can be accurately performed by nonspecialty physicians or physician-extenders. The randomized screening studies using flexible sigmoidoscopy led to the estimate that approximately 650 individuals needed to be screened to prevent one colorectal cancer death; this contrasts with the data for mammography where the number of women needing to be screened to prevent one breast cancer death is 2500, reinforcing the efficacy of endoscopic surveillance for colorectal cancer screening. Presumably the benefit from the sigmoidoscopic screening is the result of the identification and removal of adenomatous polyps; it is intriguing that this benefit has been achieved using a technique that leaves the proximal half of the large bowel unvisualized.
# Chunk 2477
It remains to be seen whether surveillance colonoscopy, which has gained increasing popularity in the United States for colorectal cancer screening, will prove to be more effective than flexible sigmoidoscopy. Ongoing randomized trials being conducted in Europe are addressing this issue. Although flexible sigmoidoscopy only visualizes the distal half of the large bowel, leading to the assumption that colonoscopy represents a more informative approach, colonoscopy has been reported as being less accurate for screening the proximal rather than the distal colon, perhaps due to technical considerations but also possibly because of a greater frequency of serrated (i.e., “flat”) polyps in the right colon, which are more difficult to identify. At present, colonoscopy performed every 10 years has been offered as an alternative to annual fecal occult blood testing with periodic (every 5 years) flexible sigmoidoscopy. Colonoscopy has been shown to be superior to double-contract barium enema and also to have a higher sensitivity for detecting villous or dysplastic adenomas or cancers than the strategy using occult fecal blood testing and flexible sigmoidoscopy. Whether colonoscopy performed every 10 years beginning at age 50 is medically superior and economically equivalent to flexible sigmoidoscopy remains to be determined.
# Chunk 2478
Most recurrences after a surgical resection of a large-bowel cancer occur within the first 4 years, making 5-year survival a fairly reliable indicator of cure. The likelihood for 5-year survival in patients with colorectal cancer is stage-related (Fig. 110-3). That likelihood has improved during the past several decades when similar surgical stages have been compared. The most plausible explanation for this improvement is more thorough intraoperative and pathologic staging. In particular, more exacting attention to pathologic detail has revealed that the prognosis following the resection of a colorectal cancer is not related merely to the presence or absence of regional lymph node involvement; rather, prognosis may be more precisely gauged by the number of involved lymph nodes (one to three lymph nodes [“N1”] vs four or more lymph nodes [“N2”]) and the number of nodes examined. A minimum of 12 sampled lymph nodes is thought necessary to
# Chunk 2479
Total resection of tumor is the optimal treatment when a malignant lesion is detected in the large bowel. An evaluation for the presence of metastatic disease, including a thorough physical examination, biochemical assessment of liver function, measurement of the plasma CEA level, and a CT scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis, should be performed before surgery. When possible, a colonoscopy of the entire large bowel should be performed to identify synchronous neoplasms and/or polyps. The detection of metastases should not preclude surgery in patients with tumor-related symptoms such as gastrointestinal bleeding or obstruction, but it often prompts the use of a less radical operative procedure. The necessity for a primary tumor resection in asymptomatic individuals with metastatic disease is an area of controversy. At the time of laparotomy, the entire peritoneal cavity should be examined, with thorough inspection of the liver, pelvis, and hemidiaphragm and careful palpation of the full length of the large bowel. Following recovery from a complete resection, patients should be observed carefully for 5 years by semiannual physical examinations and blood chemistry measurements. If a complete colonoscopy was not performed preoperatively, it should be carried out within the first several postoperative months. Some authorities favor measuring plasma CEA levels at 3-month intervals because of the sensitivity of this test as a marker for otherwise undetectable tumor recurrence. Subsequent endoscopic surveillance of the large bowel, probably at triennial intervals, is indicated, because patients who have been cured of one colorectal cancer have a 3–5% probability of developing an additional bowel cancer during their lifetime and a >15% risk for the development of adenomatous polyps. Anastomotic (“suture-line”) recurrences are infrequent in colorectal cancer patients, provided the surgical resection margins are adequate and free of tumor. The value of periodic CT scans of the abdomen, assessing for an early, asymptomatic indication of tumor recurrence, is an area of uncertainty, with some experts recommending the test be performed annually for the first 3 postoperative years.
# Chunk 2480
Irinotecan (CPT-11), a topoisomerase 1 inhibitor, prolongs survival when compared to supportive care in patients whose disease has progressed on 5-FU. Furthermore, the addition of irinotecan to 5-FU and leucovorin (LV) (e.g., FOLFIRI) improves response rates and survival of patients with metastatic disease. The FOLFIRI regimen is as follows: irinotecan, 180 mg/m2 as a 90-min infusion on day 1; LV, 400 mg/m2 as a 2-h infusion during irinotecan administration; immediately followed by 5-FU bolus, 400 mg/m2, and 46-h continuous infusion of 2.4–3 g/m2 every 2 weeks. Diarrhea is the major side effect from irinotecan. Oxaliplatin, a platinum analogue, also improves the response rate when added to 5-FU and LV (FOLFOX) as initial treatment of patients with metastatic disease. The FOLFOX regimen is as follows: 2-h infusion of LV (400 mg/m2 per day) followed by a 5-FU bolus (400 mg/m2 per day) and 22-h infusion (1200 mg/m2) every 2 weeks, together with oxaliplatin, 85 mg/m2 as a 2-h infusion on day 1. Oxaliplatin frequently causes a dose-dependent sensory neuropathy that often but not always resolves following the cessation of therapy. FOLFIRI and FOLFOX are equal in efficacy. In metastatic disease, these regimens may produce median survivals of 2 years.
# Chunk 2481
Patients with solitary hepatic metastases without clinical or radiographic evidence of additional tumor involvement should be considered for partial liver resection, because such procedures are associated with 5-year survival rates of 25–30% when performed on selected individuals by experienced surgeons.
# Chunk 2482
The administration of 5-FU and LV for 6 months after resection of tumor in patients with stage III disease leads to a 40% decrease in recurrence rates and 30% improvement in survival. The likelihood of recurrence has been further reduced when oxaliplatin has been combined with 5-FU and LV (e.g., FOLFOX); unexpectedly, the addition of irinotecan to 5-FU and LV as well as the addition of either bevacizumab or cetuximab to FOLFOX did not significantly enhance outcome. Patients with stage II tumors do not appear to benefit appreciably from adjuvant therapy, with the use of such treatment generally restricted to those patients having biologic characteristics (e.g., perforated tumors, T4 lesions, lymphovascular invasion) that place them at higher likelihood for recurrence. The addition of oxaliplatin to adjuvant treatment for patients older than age 70 and those with stage II disease does not appear to provide any therapeutic benefit.
# Chunk 2483
Cancers of the anus account for 1–2% of the malignant tumors of the large bowel. Most such lesions arise in the anal canal, the anatomic area extending from the anorectal ring to a zone approximately halfway between the pectinate (or dentate) line and the anal verge. Carcinomas arising proximal to the pectinate line (i.e., in the transitional zone between the glandular mucosa of the rectum and the squamous epithelium of the distal anus) are known as basaloid, cuboidal, or cloacogenic tumors; about one-third of anal cancers have this histologic pattern. Malignancies arising distal to the pectinate line have squamous histology, ulcerate more frequently, and constitute ∼55% of anal cancers. The prognosis for patients with basaloid and squamous cell cancers of 544 the anus is identical when corrected for tumor size and the presence or absence of nodal spread. The development of anal cancer is associated with infection by human papillomavirus, the same organism etiologically linked to cervical cancer. The virus is sexually transmitted. The infection may lead to anal warts (condyloma acuminata), which may progress to anal intraepithelial neoplasia and on to squamous cell carcinoma. The risk for anal cancer is increased among homosexual males, presumably related to anal intercourse. Anal cancer risk is increased in both men and women with AIDS, possibly because their immunosuppressed state permits more severe papillomavirus infection. Vaccination against human papilloma viruses may reduce the eventual risk for anal cancer. Anal cancers occur most commonly in middle-aged persons and are more frequent in women than men. At diagnosis, patients may experience bleeding, pain, sensation of a perianal mass, and pruritus. Radical surgery (abdominal-perineal resection with lymph node sampling and a permanent colostomy) was once the treatment of choice for this tumor type. The 5-year survival rate after such a procedure was 55–70% in the absence of spread to regional lymph nodes and <20% if nodal involvement was present. An alternative therapeutic approach combining external beam radiation therapy with concomitant chemotherapy (5-FU and mitomycin C) has resulted in biopsy-proven disappearance of all tumor in >80% of patients whose initial lesion was <3 cm in size. Tumor recurrences develop in <10% of these patients, meaning that ∼70% of patients with anal cancers can be cured with nonoperative treatment and without the need for a colostomy. Surgery should be reserved for the minority of individuals who are found to have residual tumor after being managed initially with radia tion therapy combined with chemotherapy. tumors of the Liver and Biliary tree Brian I. Carr HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMA INCIDENCE 111
# Chunk 2484
studied along two general lines. First are agents identified as carcinogenic in experimental animals (particularly rodents) that are thought to be present in the human environment (Table 111-2). Second is the association of HCC with various other clinical conditions. Probably the best-studied and most potent ubiquitous natural chemical carcinogen is a product of the Aspergillus fungus, called aflatoxin B1. This mold and aflatoxin product can be found in a variety of stored grains in hot, humid places, where peanuts and rice are stored in unrefrigerated conditions. Aflatoxin contamination of foodstuffs correlates well with incidence rates in Africa and to some extent in China. In endemic areas of China, even farm animals such as ducks have HCC. The most potent carcinogens appear to be natural products of plants, fungi, and bacteria, such as bush trees containing pyrrolizidine alkaloids as well as tannic acid and safrole. Pollutants such as pesticides and insecticides are known rodent carcinogens.
# Chunk 2485
Symptoms These include abdominal pain, weight loss, weak ness, abdominal fullness and swelling, jaundice, and nausea (Table 111-3). Presenting signs and symptoms differ somewhat between highand low-incidence areas. In high-risk areas, especially in South African blacks, the most common symptom is abdominal pain; by contrast, only 40–50% of Chinese and Japanese patients present with abdominal pain. Abdominal swelling may occur as a consequence of ascites due to the underlying chronic liver disease or may be due to a rapidly expanding tumor. Occasionally, central necrosis or acute hemorrhage into the peritoneal cavity leads to death. In countries with an active surveillance program, HCC tends to be identified at an earlier stage, when symptoms may be due only to the underlying disease. Jaundice is usually due to obstruction of the intrahepatic ducts from underlying liver disease. Hematemesis may occur due to
# Chunk 2486
Physical Signs Hepatomegaly is the most common physical sign, occurring in 50–90% of the patients. Abdominal bruits are noted in 6–25%, and ascites occurs in 30–60% of patients. Ascites should be examined by cytology. Splenomegaly is mainly due to portal hypertension. Weight loss and muscle wasting are common, particularly with rapidly growing or large tumors. Fever is found in 10–50% of patients, from unclear cause. The signs of chronic liver disease may often be present, including jaundice, dilated abdominal veins, palmar erythema, gynecomastia, testicular atrophy, and peripheral edema. Budd-Chiari syndrome can occur due to HCC invasion of the hepatic veins, with tense ascites and a large tender liver (Chap. 365).
# Chunk 2487
Resection Liver transplantation (CLT/LDLT) Curative treatments (30%) 5-yr survival: 40–70% Randomized controlled trials (50%) Median survival 11–20 months Symptomatic treatment (20%) Survival <3 months PEI/RF TACE Sorafenib Advanced stage (C) Portal invasion, N1, M1, PST 1-2 Intermediate stage (B) Multinodular, PST 0 Very early stage (0) Single <2 cm carcinoma in situ Single Portal pressure/ bilirubin Normal Increased Associated diseases No Yes 3 nodules ˜3 cm Stage 0 PST 0, Child-Pugh A Early stage (A) Single or 3 nodules <3 cm, PST 0 PST End stage (D) Stage D PST >2, Child-Pugh C Stage A-C PST 0–2, Child-Pugh A–B HCC
# Chunk 2488
AFP is a serum tumor marker for HCC; however, it is only increased in approximately one-half of U.S. patients. The lens culinaris agglutinin-reactive fraction of AFP (AFP-L3) assay is thought to be more specific. The other widely used assay is that for des-γ-carboxy prothrombin (DCP), a protein induced by vitamin K absence (PIVKA-2). This protein is increased in as many as 80% of HCC patients but may also be elevated in patients with vitamin K deficiency; it is always elevated after warfarin use. It may also predict for portal vein invasion. Both AFP-L3 and DCP are U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved. Many other assays have been developed, such as glypican-3, but none have greater aggregate sensitivity and specificity. In a patient presenting with either a new hepatic mass or other indications of recent hepatic decompensation, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), vitamin B12, AFP, ferritin, PIVKA2, and antimitochondrial antibody should be measured, and standard liver function tests should be performed, including prothrombin time (PT), partial thromboplastin time (PTT), albumin, transaminases, γ-glutamyl transpeptidase, and alkaline phosphatase. γ-Glutamyl transpeptidase and alkaline phosphatase may be particularly important in the 50% of HCC patients who have low AFP levels. Decreases in platelet count and white blood cell count may reflect portal hypertension and associated hypersplenism. Hepatitis A, B, and C serology should be measured. If HBV or HCV serology is positive, quantitative measurements of HBV DNA or HCV RNA are needed.
# Chunk 2489
New Directions Newer biomarkers are being evaluated, especially tissueand serum-based genomics profiling. Newer plasma biomarkers include glypican-3, osteopontin, insulin-like growth factor I, and vascular endothelial growth factor. However, they are still in process of validation. Furthermore, the commercial availability of kits for isolating circulating tumor cells is permitting the molecular profiling of HCCs without the need for further tissue biopsy.
# Chunk 2490
An ultrasound examination of the liver is an excellent screening tool. The two characteristic vascular abnormalities are hypervascularity of the tumor mass (neovascularization or abnormal tumor-feeding arterial vessels) and thrombosis by tumor invasion of otherwise normal portal veins. To determine tumor size and extent and the presence of portal vein invasion accurately, a helical/ triphasic CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis, with fast-contrast bolus technique, should be performed to detect the vascular lesions typical of HCC. Portal vein invasion is normally detected as an obstruction and expansion of the vessel. A chest CT is used to exclude metastases. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can also provide detailed information, especially with the newer contrast agents. Ethiodol (Lipiodol) is an ethiodized oil emulsion retained by liver tumors that can be delivered by hepatic artery injection (5–15 mL) for CT imaging 1 week later. For small tumors, Ethiodol injection is very helpful before biopsy because the histologic presence of the dye constitutes proof that the needle biopsied the mass under suspicion. A prospective comparison of triphasic CT, gadolinium-enhanced MRI, ultrasound, and fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) showed similar results for CT, MRI, and ultrasound; PET imaging appears to be positive in only a subset of HCC patients. Abdominal CT versus MRI/CT uses a faster single breath-hold, is less complex, and is less dependent on patient cooperation. MRI requires a longer examination, and ascites can cause artifacts, but MRI is better able to distinguish dysplastic or regenerative nodules from HCC. Imaging criteria have been developed for HCC that do not require biopsy proof, as they have >90% specificity. The criteria include nodules >1 cm with arterial enhancement and portal venous washout and, for small tumors, specified growth rates on two scans performed less than 6 months apart (Organ Procurement and Transplant Network). Nevertheless, explant pathology after liver transplant for HCC has shown that ∼20% of patients diagnosed without biopsy did not actually have a tumor.
# Chunk 2491
Tumors of the Liver and Biliary Tree 548 high-risk populations showed that ultrasound was more sensitive than AFP elevations alone, although most practitioners request both tests at 6-month intervals for HBV and HCV carriers, especially in the presence of cirrhosis or worsening of liver function tests. However, an Italian study in patients with cirrhosis identified a yearly HCC incidence of 3% but showed no increase in the rate of detection of potentially curable tumors with aggressive screening. Prevention strategies including universal vaccination against hepatitis are more likely to be effective than screening efforts. Despite absence of formal guidelines, most practitioners obtain 6-month AFP and ultrasound (cheap and ubiquitous, even in poor countries) or CT (more sensitive, especially in overweight patients, but more costly) studies when following high-risk patients (HBV carriers, HCV cirrhosis, family history of HCC).
# Chunk 2492
Prevention strategies can only be planned when the causes of a cancer are known or strongly suspected. This is true of few human cancers, with significant exceptions being smoking and lung cancer, papilloma virus and cancer of the cervix uteri, and cirrhosis of any cause or dietary contamination by aflatoxin B1 for HCC. Aflatoxin B1is one of the most potent known chemical carcinogens and is a product of the Aspergillus mold that grows on peanuts and rice when stored in hot and humid climates. The obvious strategy is to refrigerate these foodstuffs when stored and to conduct surveillance programs for elevated aflatoxin B1 levels, as happens in the United States, but not usually in Asia. HBV is commonly transmitted from mother to fetus in Asia (except Japan), and neonatal HBV vaccination programs have resulted in a big decrease in adolescent HBV and, thus, in predicted HCC rates. There are millions of HBV and HCV carriers (4 million with HCV in the United States) who are already infected. Nucleoside analogue–based chemoprevention (entecavir) of HBV-mediated HCC in Japan resulted in a fivefold decrease in HCC incidence over 5 years in cirrhotic but not in non-cirrhotic HBV patients. More powerful and effective HCV therapies promise the possibility of prevention of HCV-based HCC in the future.
# Chunk 2493
current directions Expanded criteria for larger HCCs beyond the Milan criteria (one lesion <5 cm or three lesions, each <3 cm), such as the University of California, San Francisco (UCSF) criteria (single lesion ≤6.5 cm or two lesions ≤4.5 cm with a total diameter ≤8 cm; 1and 5-year survival rates of 90 and 75%, respectively), are being increasingly accepted by various UNOS areas for OLTX with satisfactory longer-term survival comparable to Milan criteria results. Furthermore, downstaging of HCCs that are too large for the Milan criteria by medical therapy (TACE) is increasingly recognized as acceptable treatment before OLTX with equivalent outcomes to patients who originally were within Milan criteria. Within-criteria patients with AFP levels >1000 ng/mL have exceptionally high post-OLTX recurrence rates. Also, the use of “salvage” OLTX after recurrent HCC after resection has produced conflicting outcomes. Shortages of organs combined with advances in resection safety have led to increasing use of resection for patients with good liver function.
# Chunk 2494
Tumors of the Liver and Biliary Tree 552 tumor regrowth. Second, the Sorafenib HCC Assessment Randomized Protocol (SHARP) phase III trial of sorafenib versus placebo for unresectable HCC showed that survival could be significantly enhanced in the treatment arm with only 2% of the patients having tumor response but 70% of patients having disease stabilization. This observation has led to a reconsideration of the usefulness of response and the significance of disease stability. Third, HCC is a typically highly vascular tumor, and the vascularity is considered to be a measure of tumor viability. As a result, the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) have been modified to mRECIST, which requires measurement of vascular/ viable tumor on the CT or MRI scan. A partial response is defined as a 30% decrease in the sum of diameters of viable (arterially enhancing) target tumors. The need for semiquantitation of tumor vascularity on scans has led to the introduction of diffusion-weighted MRI imaging. Tissue-specific imaging agents such as gadoxetic acid (Primovist or Eovist) and the move to functional and genetic imaging mark a shift in approaches. Furthermore, plasma AFP response may be a biologic marker of radiologic response.
# Chunk 2495
Long-term survival is associated with resection or ablation or transplantation, all of which can yield >70% 5-year survival. Liver transplant is the only therapy that can treat the tumor and the underlying liver disease simultaneously and may be the most important advance in HCC therapy in 50 years. Unfortunately, it benefits only patients with limited size tumors without macrovascular portal vein invasion. Untreated patients with multinodular asymptomatic tumors without vascular invasion or extrahepatic spread have a median survival of approximately 16 months. Chemoembolization (TACE) improves their median survival to 19–20 months and is considered standard therapy for these patients, who represent the majority of HCC patients, although 90Yttrium therapy may provide similar results with less toxicity. Patients with advanced-stage disease, vascular invasion, or metastases have a median survival of around 6 months. Among this group, outcomes may vary according to their underlying liver disease. It is this group at which kinase inhibitors are directed.
# Chunk 2496
This rarer variant of HCC has a quite different biology than adult-type HCC. None of the known HCC causative factors seem important here. It is typically a disease of younger adults, often teenagers and predominantly females. It is AFP-negative, but patients typically have elevated blood neurotensin levels, normal liver function tests, and no cirrhosis. Radiology is similar for HCC, except that characteristic adult-type portal vein invasion is less common. Although it is often multifocal in the liver, and therefore not resectable, metastases are common, especially to lungs and locoregional lymph nodes, but survival is often much better than with adult-type HCC. Resectable tumors are associated with 5-year survival ≥50%. Patients often present with a huge liver or unexplained weight loss, fever, or elevated liver function tests on routine evaluations. These huge masses suggest quite slow growth for many tumors. Surgical resection is the best management option, even for metastases, as these tumors respond much less well to chemotherapy than adult-type HCC. Although several series of OLTX for FL-HCC have been reported, the patients seem to die from tumor recurrences, with a 2-to 5-year lag compared with OLTX for adult-type HCC. Anecdotal responses to gemcitabine plus cisplatin-TACE are reported.
# Chunk 2497
Cholangiocarcinoma (CCC) CCC typically refers to mucin-producing adenocarcinomas (different from HCC) that arise from the biliary tract and have features of cholangiocyte differentiation. They are grouped by their anatomic site of origin, as intrahepatic (IHC), perihilar (central, ∼65% of CCCs), and peripheral (or distal, ∼30% of CCCs). IHC is the second most common primary liver tumor. Depending on the site of origin, they have different features and require different treatments. They arise on the basis of cirrhosis less frequently than HCC, but may complicate primary biliary cirrhosis. However, cirrhosis and both primary biliary cirrhosis and HCV predispose to IHC. Nodular tumors arising at the bifurcation of the common bile duct are called Klatskin tumors and are often associated with a collapsed gallbladder, a finding that mandates visualization of the entire biliary tree. The approach to management of central and peripheral CCC is quite different. Incidence is increasing. Although most CCCs have no obvious cause (etiology unknown), a number of predisposing factors have been identified. Predisposing diseases include primary sclerosing cholangitis (10–20% of primary sclerosing cholangitis [PSC] patients), an autoimmune disease, and liver fluke in Asians, especially Opisthorchis viverrini and Clonorchis sinensis. CCC seems also to be associated with any cause of chronic biliary inflammation and injury, with alcoholic liver disease, choledocholithiasis, choledochal cysts (10%), and Caroli’s disease (a rare inherited form of bile duct ectasia). CCC most typically presents as painless jaundice, often with pruritus or weight loss. Diagnosis is made by biopsy, percutaneously for peripheral liver lesions, or more commonly via endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) under direct vision for central lesions. The tumors often stain positively for cytokeratins 7, 8, and 19 and negatively for cytokeratin 20. However, histology alone cannot usually distinguish CCC from metastases from colon or pancreas primary tumors. Serologic tumor markers appear to be nonspecific, but CEA, CA 19-9, and CA-125 are often elevated in CCC patients and are useful for following response to therapy. Radiologic evaluation typically starts with ultrasound, which is very useful in visualizing dilated bile ducts, and then proceeds with either MRI or magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) or helical CT scans. Invasive cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) is then needed to define the biliary tree and obtain a biopsy or is needed therapeutically to decompress an obstructed biliary tree with internal stent placement. If that fails, then percutaneous biliary drainage will be needed, with the biliary drainage flowing into an external bag. Central tumors often invade the porta hepatis, and locoregional lymph node involvement by tumor is frequent. Incidence has been increasing in recent decades; few patients survive 5 years. The usual treatment is surgical, but combination systemic chemotherapy may be effective. After complete surgical resection for IHC, 5-year survival is 25–30%. Combination radiation therapy with liver transplant has produced a 5-year recurrence-free survival rate of 65%.
# Chunk 2498
Hilar CCC is resectable in ∼30% of patients and usually involves bile duct resection and lymphadenectomy for prognostication. Typical survival is approximately 24 months, with recurrences being mainly in the operative bed but with ∼30% in the lungs and liver. Distal CCC, which involves the main ducts, is normally treated by resection of the extrahepatic bile ducts, often with pancreaticoduodenectomy. Survival is similar. Due to the high rates of locoregional recurrences or positive surgical margins, many patients receive postoperative adjuvant radiotherapy. Its effect on survival has not been assessed. Intraluminal brachyradiotherapy has also shown some promise. However, photodynamic therapy enhanced survival in one study. In this technique, sodium porfimer is injected intravenously and then subjected to intraluminal red light laser photoactivation. OLTX has been assessed for treatment of unresectable CCC. Five-year survival was ∼20%, so enthusiasm waned. However, neoadjuvant radiotherapy with sensitizing chemotherapy has shown better survival rates for CCC treated by OLTX and is currently used by UNOS for perihilar CCC <3 cm with neither intrahepatic or extrahepatic metastases. A 12-center data collection study of 287 patients with perihilar CCC confirmed the benefit of this approach in a subset of patients, with a 53% 5-year survival rate but with 10% patient dropout before transplantation. The patients had neoadjuvant external radiation with radiosensitizing therapy. Patients with tumors >3 cm had significantly shorter survival. Multiple chemotherapeutic agents have been assessed for activity and survival in unresectable CCC. Most have been inactive. However, both systemic and hepatic arterial gemcitabine have shown promising results. The combination of cisplatin plus gemcitabine has produced a survival advantage compared with gemcitabine alone in a 410-patient randomized controlled phase III trial for patients with locally advanced or metastatic CCC and is now considered standard therapy for unresectable CCC. Median overall survival in the combination arm was 11.7 months versus 8.1 months for gemcitabine alone. Significant responses were seen mainly in patients with IHC and gallbladder cancer. However, neither surgery for lymph node–positive disease nor regional chemotherapy in nonsurgical patients has shown any survival advantage thus far. Several case series have shown safety and some responses for hepatic arterial chemotherapy with gemcitabine, drug-eluting beads, and 90Yttrium microspheres, but no convincing clinical trials are available. Clinical trials are under way with targeted therapies. Bevacizumab plus erlotinib gave a 10% partial response rate with median overall survival of 9.9 months. A sorafenib trial yielded an overall survival of 4.4 months, but 50% of the patients had received previous chemotherapy. Patients with unresectable tumors should be treated in clinical trials.
# Chunk 2499
Gallbladder (GB) cancer has an even worse prognosis than CCC, with a typical survival of ∼6 months or less. Women are affected much more commonly than men (4:1), unlike HCC or CCC, and GB cancer occurs more frequently than CCC. Most patients have a history of antecedent 553 gallstones, but very few patients with gallstones develop GB cancer (∼0.2%). GB cancer presents similarly to CCC and is often diagnosed unexpectedly during gallstone or cholecystitis surgery. Presentation is typically that of chronic cholecystitis, chronic right upper quadrant pain, and weight loss. Useful but nonspecific serum markers include CEA and CA 19-9. CT scans or MRCP typically reveal a GB mass. The mainstay of treatment is surgical, either simple or radical cholecystectomy for stage I or II disease, respectively. Survival rates are near 100% at 5 years for stage I, and range from 60–90% at 5 years for stage II. More advanced GB cancer has worse survival, and many patients are unresectable. Adjuvant radiotherapy, used in the presence of local lymph node disease, has not been shown to enhance survival. Chemotherapy is not useful in advanced or metastatic GB cancer.
# Chunk 2500
This tumor arises within 2 cm of the distal end of the common bile duct and is mainly (90%) an adenocarcinoma. Locoregional lymph nodes are commonly involved (50%), and the liver is the most frequent site for metastases. The most common clinical presentation is jaundice, and many patients also have pruritus, weight loss, and epigastric pain. Initial evaluation is performed with an abdominal ultrasound to assess vascular involvement, biliary dilation, and liver lesions. This is followed by a CT scan or MRI and especially MRCP. The most effective therapy is resection by pylorus-sparing pancreaticoduodenectomy, an aggressive procedure resulting in better survival rates than with local resection. Survival rates are ∼25% at 5 years in operable patients with involved lymph nodes and ∼50% in patients without involved nodes. Unlike CCC, approximately 80% of patients are thought to be resectable at diagnosis. Adjuvant chemotherapy or radiotherapy has not been shown to enhance survival. For metastatic tumors, chemotherapy is currently experimental.
# Chunk 2501
Elizabeth Smyth, David Cunningham

Pancreatic cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer death in the United States and is associated with a poor prognosis. Endocrine tumors affecting the pancreas are discussed in Chap. 113. Infiltrating ductal adenocarcinomas, the subject of this Chapter, account for the vast majority of cases and arise most frequently in the head of pancreas. At the time of diagnosis, 85–90% of patients have inoperable or metastatic disease, which is reflected in the 5-year survival rate of only 6% for all stages combined. An improved 5-year survival of up to 24% may be achieved when the tumor is detected at an early stage and when complete surgical resection is accomplished.
# Chunk 2502
showing contrast in dilated pancreatic duct (arrows).

Percutaneous biopsy of the pancreatic primary or liver metastases is only acceptable in patients with inoperable or metastatic disease. ERCP is a useful method for obtaining ductal brushings, but the sensitivity of ERCP for diagnosis ranges from 35 to 70%.
# Chunk 2503
Approximately 10% of patients present with localized nonmetastatic disease that is potentially suitable for surgical resection. Approximately 30% of patients have R1 resection (microscopic residual disease) following surgery. Those who undergo R0 resection (no microscopic or macroscopic residual tumor) and who receive adjuvant treatment have the best chance of cure, with an estimated median survival of 20–23 months and a 5-year survival of approximately 20%. Outcomes are more favorable in patients with small (<3 cm), well-differentiated tumors and lymph node–negative disease.
# Chunk 2504
Approximately 30% of patients present with locally advanced, unresectable, but nonmetastatic pancreatic carcinoma. The median survival with gemcitabine is 9 months. Patients who respond to chemotherapy or who achieve stable disease after 3–6 months of gemcitabine have frequently been offered consolidation radiotherapy. However, a large, phase III, randomized controlled trial, LAP-07, did not demonstrate any improvement in survival for patients treated with CRT after 4 months of disease control on either gemcitabine or a gemcitabine/erlotinib combination.
# Chunk 2505
GI-NETs (carcinoids) can occur in almost any GI tissue (Table 113-3); however, at present, most (70%) have their origin in one of three sites: bronchus, jejunoileum, or colon/rectum. In the past, GI-NET (carcinoids) most frequently were reported in the appendix (i.e., 40%); however, the bronchus/lung, rectum, and small intestine are now the most common sites. Overall, the GI tract is the most common site for these tumors, accounting for 64%, with the respiratory tract a distant second at 28%. Both race and sex can affect the frequency as well as the distribution of GI-NETs (carcinoids). African Americans have a higher incidence of carcinoids. Race is particularly important for rectal carcinoids, which are found in 41% of Asians/Pacific Islanders with NETs compared to 32% of American Indians/Alaskan natives, 26% of African Americans, and 12% of white Americans. Females have a lower incidence of small intestinal and pancreatic carcinoids.
# Chunk 2506
I. Both GI-NETs (carcinoids) and pNETs

Symptomatic presentation (p <.05) Presence of liver metastases (p <.001) Extent of liver metastases (p <.001) Presence of lymph node metastases (p <.001) Development of bone or extrahepatic metastases (p <.01) Depth of invasion (p <.001) Rapid rate of tumor growth Elevated serum alkaline phosphatase levels (p = .003) Primary tumor site (p <.001) Primary tumor size (p <.005) High serum chromogranin A level (p <.01) Presence of one or more circulating tumor cells (p <.001) Various histologic features
# Chunk 2507
Endocrine Tumors of the Gastrointestinal Tract and Pancreas 562 The presence of lymph node metastases or extrahepatic metastases; the depth of invasion; the rapid rate of growth; various histologic features (differentiation, mitotic rates, growth indices, vessel density, vascular endothelial growth factor [VEGF], and CD10 metalloproteinase expression); necrosis; presence of cytokeratin; elevated serum alkaline phosphatase levels; older age; presence of circulating tumor cells; and flow cytometric results, such as the presence of aneuploidy, are all important prognostic factors for the development of metastatic disease (Table 113-5). For patients with GI-NETs (carcinoids), additional associations with a worse prognosis include the development of the carcinoid syndrome (especially the development of carcinoid heart disease), male sex, the presence of a symptomatic tumor or greater increases in a number of tumor markers (5-hydroxyindolacetic acid [5-HIAA], neuropeptide K, chromogranin A), and the presence of various molecular features. With pNETs or gastrinomas, a worse prognosis is associated with female sex, overexpression of the Ha-ras oncogene or p53, the absence of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN 1), higher levels of various tumor markers (i.e., chromogranin A, gastrin), and presence of various histologic features (immunohistochemistry for c-KIT, low cyclin B1, loss of PTEN/TSC-2, expression of fibroblast growth factor-13) and various molecular features (Table 113-5). The TNM classification systems and the grading systems (G1–G3) have important prognostic value. A number of diseases due to various genetic disorders are associated with an increased incidence of NETs (Table 113-6). Each one is caused by a loss of a possible tumor-suppressor gene. The most important is MEN 1, which is an autosomal dominant disorder due to a defect in a 10-exon gene on 11q13, which encodes for a 610-amino-acid nuclear protein, menin (Chap. 408). Patients with MEN 1 develop hyperparathyroidism due to parathyroid hyperplasia in 95–100% of cases, pNETs in 80–100%, pituitary adenomas in 54–80%, adrenal adenomas in 27–36%, bronchial carcinoids in 8%, thymic carcinoids in 8%, gastric carcinoids in 13–30% of patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, skin tumors (angiofibromas [88%], collagenomas [72%]), central nervous system (CNS) tumors (meningiomas [<8%]), and smooth-muscle tumors (leiomyomas, leiomyosarcomas [1–7%]). Among patients with MEN 1, 80–100% develop nonfunctional pNETs (most are microscopic with 0–13% large/symptomatic), and functional pNETs occur in 20–80% in different series, with a mean of 54% developing Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, 18% insulinomas, 3% glucagonomas, 3%
# Chunk 2508
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE MOST COMMON GI-NETs (CARCINOIDS) Appendiceal NETs (Carcinoids) Appendiceal NETs (carcinoids) occur in 1 in every 200–300 appendectomies, usually in the appendiceal tip, have an incidence of 0.15/100,000 per year, comprise 2–5% of all GI-NETs (carcinoids), and comprise 32–80% of all appendiceal tumors. Most (i.e., >90%) are <1 cm in diameter without metastases in older studies, but more recently, 2–35% have had metastases (Table 113-3). In the SEER data of 1570 appendiceal carcinoids, 62% were localized, 27% had regional metastases, and 8% had distant metastases. The risk of metastases increases with size, with those <1 cm having a 0 to <10% risk of metastases and those >2 cm having a 25–44% risk. Besides tumor size, other important prognostic factors for metastases include basal location, invasion of mesoappendix, poor differentiation, advanced stage or WHO/ENETS classification, older age, and positive resection margins. The 5-year survival is 88–100% for patients with localized disease, 78–100% for patients with regional involvement, and 12–28% for patients with distal metastases. In patients with tumors <1 cm in diameter, the 5-year survival is 95–100%, whereas it is 29% if tumors are >2 cm in diameter. Most tumors are well-differentiated G1 tumors (87%) (Table 113-4), with the remainder primarily well-differentiated G2 tumors (13%); poorly differentiated G3 tumors are uncommon (<1%). Their percentage of the total number of carcinoids decreased from 43.9% (1950–1969) to 2.4% (1992–1999). Appendiceal goblet cell (GC) NETs (carcinoids)/ carcinomas are a rare subtype (<5%) that are mixed adeno-neuroendocrine carcinomas. They are malignant and are thought to comprise a distinct entity; they frequently present with advanced disease and are recommended to be treated as adenocarcinomas, not carcinoid tumors.
# Chunk 2509
Small intestinal (SI) NETs (carcinoids) have a reported incidence of 0.67/100,000 in the United States, 0.32/100,000 in England, and 1.12/100,000 in Sweden and comprise >50% of all SI tumors. There is a male predominance (1.5:1), and race affects frequency, with a lower frequency in Asians and greater frequency in African Americans. The mean age of presentation is 52–63 years, with a wide range (1–93 years). Familial SI carcinoid families exist but are very uncommon. These are frequently multiple; 9–18% occur in the jeunum, 70–80% are present in the ileum, and 70% occur within 6 cm (2.4 in.) of the ileocecal valve. Forty percent are <1 cm in diameter, 32% are 1–2 cm, and 29% are >2 cm. They are characteristically well differentiated; however, they are generally invasive, with 1.2% being intramucosal in location, 27% penetrating the submucosa, and 20% invading the muscularis propria. Metastases occur in a mean of 47–58% (range 20–100%). Liver metastases occur in 38%, to lymph nodes in 37% and more distant in 20–25%. They characteristically cause a marked fibrotic reaction, which can lead to intestinal obstruction. Tumor size is an important variable in the frequency of metastases. However, even small NETs (carcinoids) of the small intestine (<1 cm) have metastases in 15–25% of cases, whereas the proportion increases to 58–100% for tumors 1–2 cm in diameter. Carcinoids also occur in the duodenum, with 31% having metastases. Duodenal tumors <1 cm virtually never metastasize, whereas 33% of those >2 cm had metastases. SI NETs (carcinoids) are the most common cause (60–87%) of the carcinoid syndrome and are discussed in a later section (Table 113-7). Important prognostic factors are listed in (Table 113-5), and particularly important are the
# Chunk 2510
During Course At Presentation of Disease

Mean 57 yrs 59.2 yrs tumor extent, proliferative index by grading, and stage (Table 113-4). The overall survival at 5 years is 55–75%; however, it varies markedly with disease extent, being 65–90% with localized disease, 66–72% with regional involvement, and 36–43% with distant disease.
# Chunk 2511
Rectal NETs (Carcinoids) Rectal NETs (carcinoids) comprise 27% of all GI-NETs (carcinoids) and 16% of all NETs and are increasing in frequency. In the U.S. SEER data, they currently have an incidence of 0.86/100,000 per year (up from 0.2/100,000 per year in 1973) and represent 1–2% of all rectal tumors. They are found in approximately 1 in every 1500/2500 proctoscopies/colonoscopies or 0.05–0.07% of individuals undergoing these procedures. Nearly all occur between 4 and 13 cm above the dentate line. Most are small, with 66–80% being <1 cm in diameter, and rarely metastasize (5%). Tumors between 1 and 2 cm can metastasize in 5–30%, and those >2 cm, which are uncommon, in >70%. Most invade only to the submucosa (75%), with 2.1% confined to the mucosa, 10% to the muscular layer, and 5% to adjacent structures. Histologically, most are well differentiated (98%) with 72% ENETS/WHO grade G1 and 28% grade G2 (Table 113-4). Overall survival is 88%; however, it is very much dependent of the stage, with 5-year survival of 91% for localized disease, 36–49% for regional disease, and 20–32% for distant disease. Risk factors are listed in Table 113-5 and particularly include tumor size, depth of invasion, presence of metastases, differentiation, and recent TNM classification and grade.
# Chunk 2512
Bronchial NETs (Carcinoids) Bronchial NETs (carcinoids) comprise 25–33% of all well-differentiated NETs and 90% of all the poorly differentiated NETs found, likely due to a strong association with smoking. Their incidence ranges from 0.2 to 2/100,000 per year in the United States and European countries and is increasing at a rate of 6% per year. They are slightly more frequent in females and in whites compared with those of Hispanic/Asian/African descent, and are most commonly seen in the sixth decade of life, with a younger age of presentation for typical carcinoids (45 years) compared to atypical carcinoids (55 years).
# Chunk 2513
Endocrine Tumors of the Gastrointestinal Tract and Pancreas 564 (KC-III). Another proposed classification includes three categories of lung NETs: benign or low-grade malignant (typical carcinoid), low-grade malignant (atypical carcinoid), and high-grade malignant (poorly differentiated carcinoma of the large-cell or small-cell type). The WHO classification includes four general categories: typical carcinoid, atypical carcinoid, large-cell neuroendocrine carcinoma, and small-cell carcinoma. The ratio of typical to atypical carcinoids is 8–10:1, with the typical carcinoids comprising 1–2% of lung tumors, atypical 0.1–0.2%, large-cell neuroendocrine tumors 0.3%, and small-cell lung cancer 9.8% of all lung tumors. These different categories of lung NETs have different prognoses, varying from excellent for typical carcinoid to poor for small-cell neuroendocrine carcinomas. The occurrence of large-cell and small-cell lung carcinoids, but not typical or atypical lung carcinoids, is related to tobacco use. The 5-year survival is very much influenced by the classification of the tumor, with survival of 92–100% for patients with a typical carcinoid, 61–88% with an atypical carcinoid, 13–57% with a large-cell neuroendocrine tumor, and 5% with a small-cell lung cancer.
# Chunk 2514
II) (6% of all cases). These tumors generally pursue a benign course, with type I uncommonly (<10%) associated with metastases, whereas type II tumors are slightly more aggressive, with 10–30% associated with metastases. They are usually multiple, small, and infiltrate only to the submucosa. The third subtype of gastric NETs (carcinoids) (type III) (sporadic) occurs without hypergastrinemia (14–25% of all gastric carcinoids) and has an aggressive course, with 54–66% developing metastases. Sporadic carcinoids are usually single, large tumors; 50% have atypical histology, and they can be a cause of the carcinoid syndrome. Five-year survival is 99–100% in patients with type I, 60–90% in patients with type II, and 50% in patients with type III gastric NETs (carcinoids).
# Chunk 2515
CLINICAL PRESENTATION OF NETs (CARCINOIDS) GI/Lung NET (Carcinoid) Without the Carcinoid Syndrome The age of patients at diagnosis ranges from 10 to 93 years, with a mean age of 63 years for the small intestine and 66 years for the rectum. The presentation is diverse and is related to the site of origin and the extent of malignant spread. In the appendix, NETs (carcinoids) usually are found incidentally during surgery for suspected appendicitis. SI NETs (carcinoids) in the jejunoileum present with periodic abdominal pain (51%), intestinal obstruction with ileus/invagination (31%), an abdominal tumor (17%), or GI bleeding (11%). Because of the vagueness of the symptoms, the diagnosis usually is delayed approximately 2 years from onset of the symptoms, with a range up to 20 years. Duodenal, gastric, and rectal NETs (carcinoids) are most frequently found by chance at endoscopy. The most common symptoms of rectal carcinoids are melena/bleeding (39%), constipation (17%), and diarrhea (12%). Bronchial NETs (carcinoids) frequently are discovered as a lesion on a chest radiograph, and 31% of the patients are asymptomatic. Thymic NETs (carcinoids) present as anterior mediastinal masses, usually on chest radiograph or computed tomography (CT) scan. Ovarian and testicular NETs (carcinoids) usually present as masses discovered on physical examination or ultrasound. Metastatic NETs (carcinoids) in the liver frequently presents as hepatomegaly in a patient who may have minimal symptoms and nearly normal liver function test results.
# Chunk 2516
Cardiac manifestations occur initially in 11–40% (mean 26%) of patients with carcinoid syndrome and in 14–41% (mean 30%) at some time in the disease course. The cardiac disease is due to the formation of fibrotic plaques (composed of smooth-muscle cells, myofibroblasts, and elastic tissue) involving the endocardium, primarily on the right side, although lesions on the left side also occur occasionally, especially if a patent foramen ovale exists. The dense fibrous deposits are most commonly on the ventricular aspect of the tricuspid valve and less commonly on the pulmonary valve cusps. They can result in constriction of the valves, and pulmonic stenosis is usually predominant, whereas the tricuspid valve is often fixed open, resulting in regurgitation predominating. Overall, in patients with carcinoid heart disease, 90–100% have tricuspid insufficiency, 43–59% have tricuspid stenosis, 50–81% have pulmonary insufficiency, 25–59% have pulmonary stenosis, and 11% (0–25%) left-side lesions. Up to 80% of patients with cardiac lesions develop heart failure. Lesions on the left side are much less extensive, occur in 30% at autopsy, and most frequently affect the mitral valve. Up to 80% of patients with cardiac lesions have evidence of heart failure. At diagnosis in various series, 27–43% of patients are in New York Heart Association class I, 30–40% are in class II, 13–31% are in class III, and 3–12% are in class IV. At present, carcinoid heart disease is reported to be decreasing in frequency and severity, with mean occurrence in 20% of patients and occurrence in as few as 3–4% in some reports. Whether this decrease is due to the widespread use of somatostatin analogues, which control the release of bioactive agents thought involved in mediating the heart disease, is unclear.
# Chunk 2517
One of the main secretory products of GI-NETs (carcinoids) involved in the carcinoid syndrome is serotonin (5-HT) (Fig. 113-1), which is synthesized from tryptophan. Up to 50% of dietary tryptophan can be used in this synthetic pathway by tumor cells, and this can result in inadequate supplies for conversion to niacin; hence, some patients (2.5%) develop pellagra-like lesions. Serotonin has numerous biologic effects, including stimulating intestinal secretion with inhibition of absorption, stimulating increases in intestinal motility, and stimulating fibrogenesis. In various studies, 56–88% of all GI-NETs (carcinoids) were associated with serotonin overproduction; however, 12–26% of the patients did not have the carcinoid syndrome. In one study, platelet serotonin was elevated in 96% of patients with midgut NETs (carcinoids), 43% with foregut tumors, and 0% with hindgut tumors. In 90–100% of patients with the carcinoid syndrome, there is evidence of serotonin overproduction. Serotonin is thought to be predominantly responsible for the diarrhea. Patients with the carcinoid syndrome have increased colonic motility with a shortened transit time and possibly a secretory/absorptive alteration that is compatible with the known actions of serotonin in the gut mediated primarily through 5-HT3 and, to a lesser degree, 5-HT4 receptors. Serotonin receptor antagonists (especially 5-HT3 antagonists) relieve the diarrhea in many, but not all, patients. A tryptophan 5-hydroxylase inhibitor, LX-1031, which inhibits serotonin synthesis in peripheral tissues, is reported to cause a 44% decrease in bowel movement frequency and a 20% improvement in stool form in patients with the carcinoid syndrome. Additional studies suggest that tachykinins may be important mediators of diarrhea in some patients. In one study, plasma tachykinin levels correlated with symptoms of diarrhea. Serotonin does not appear to be involved in the flushing because serotonin receptor antagonists do not relieve flushing. In patients with gastric carcinoids, the characteristic red, patchy pruritic flush is thought due to histamine release because H1 and H2 receptor antagonists can prevent it. Numerous studies have shown that tachykinins (substance P, neuropeptide K) are stored in GI-NETs (carcinoids) and released during flushing. However, some studies have demonstrated that octreotide can relieve the flushing induced by pentagastrin in these patients without altering the stimulated increase in plasma substance P, suggesting that other mediators must be involved in the flushing. A correlation between plasma tachykinin levels (but not substance P levels) and flushing has been reported. Prostaglandin release could be involved in mediating either the diarrhea or flush, but conflicting data exist.
# Chunk 2518
One of the most immediate life-threatening complications of the carcinoid syndrome is the development of a carcinoid crisis. This is more common in patients who have intense symptoms or have greatly increased urinary 5-HIAA levels (i.e., >200 mg/d). The crisis may occur spontaneously; however, it is usually provoked by procedures such as anesthesia, chemotherapy, surgery, biopsy, endoscopy, or radiologic examinations such as during biopsies, hepatic artery embolization, and vessel catheterization. It can be provoked by stress or procedures as mild as repeated palpation of the tumor during physical examination. Patients develop intense flushing, diarrhea, abdominal pain, cardiac abnormalities including tachycardia, hypertension, or hypotension, and confusion or stupor. If not adequately treated, this can be a terminal event.
# Chunk 2519
Endocrine Tumors of the Gastrointestinal Tract and Pancreas 566 DIAGNOSIS OF THE CARCINOID SYNDROME AND GI-NETs (CARCINOIDS) The diagnosis of carcinoid syndrome relies on measurement of urinary or plasma serotonin or its metabolites in the urine. The measurement of 5-HIAA is used most frequently. False-positive elevations may occur if the patient is eating serotonin-rich foods such as bananas, pineapples, walnuts, pecans, avocados, or hickory nuts or is taking certain medications (cough syrup containing guaifenesin, acetaminophen, salicylates, serotonin reuptake inhibitors, or l-dopa). The normal range for daily urinary 5-HIAA excretion is 2–8 mg/d. Serotonin overproduction was noted in 92% of patients with carcinoid syndrome in one study, and in another study, 5-HIAA had 73% sensitivity and 100% specificity for carcinoid syndrome. Serotonin overproduction is not synonymous with the presence of clinical carcinoid syndrome because 12–26% of patients with serotonin overproduction do not have clinical evidence of the carcinoid syndrome. Most physicians use only the urinary 5-HIAA excretion rate; however, plasma and platelet serotonin levels, if available, may provide additional information. Platelet serotonin levels are more sensitive than urinary 5-HIAA but are not generally available. A single plasma 5-HIAA determination was found to correlate with the 24-h urinary values, raising the possibility that this could replace the standard urinary collection because of its greater convenience and avoidance of incomplete or improper collections. Because patients with foregut NETs (carcinoids) may produce an atypical carcinoid syndrome, if this syndrome is suspected and the urinary 5-HIAA is minimally elevated or normal, other urinary metabolites of tryptophan, such as 5-HTP and 5-HT, should be measured (Fig. 113-1). Flushing occurs in a number of other diseases, including systemic mastocytosis, chronic myeloid leukemia with increased histamine release, menopause, reactions to alcohol or glutamate, and side effects of chlorpropamide, calcium channel blockers, and nicotinic acid. None of these conditions cause increased urinary 5-HIAA. The diagnosis of carcinoid tumor can be suggested by the carcinoid syndrome, recurrent abdominal symptoms in a healthy-appearing individual, or the discovery of hepatomegaly or hepatic metastases associated with minimal symptoms. Ileal NETs (carcinoids), which make up 25% of all clinically detected carcinoids, should be suspected in patients with bowel obstruction, abdominal pain, flushing, or diarrhea. Serum chromogranin A levels are elevated in 56–100% of patients with GI-NETs (carcinoids), and the level correlates with tumor bulk. Serum chromogranin A levels are not specific for GI-NETs (carcinoids) because they are also elevated in patients with pNETs and other NETs. Furthermore, a major problem is caused by potent acid antisecretory drugs such as proton pump inhibitors (omeprazole and related drugs) because they almost invariably cause elevation of plasma chromogranin A levels; the elevation occurs rapidly (3–5 days) with continued use, and the elevated levels overlap with the levels seen in many patients with NETs. Plasma neuron-specific enolase levels are also used as a marker of GI-NETs (carcinoids) but are less sensitive than chromogranin A, being increased in only 17–47% of patients. Newer markers have been proposed including pancreastatin (a chromogranin A breakdown product) and activin A. The former is not affected by proton pump inhibitors; however, its sensitivity and specificity are not established. Plasma activin elevations are reported to correlate with the presence of cardiac disease with a sensitivity of 87% and specificity of 57%.
# Chunk 2520
A gastrinoma is an NET that secretes gastrin; the resultant hypergastrinemia causes gastric acid hypersecretion (Zollinger-Ellison syndrome [ZES]). The chronic hypergastrinemia results in marked gastric acid hypersecretion and growth of the gastric mucosa with increased numbers of parietal cells and proliferation of gastric ECL cells. The gastric acid hypersecretion characteristically causes peptic ulcer disease (PUD), often refractory and severe, as well as diarrhea. The most common presenting symptoms are abdominal pain (70–100%), diarrhea (37–73%), and gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) (30–35%); 10–20% of patients have diarrhea only. Although peptic ulcers may occur in unusual locations, most patients have a typical duodenal ulcer. Important observations that should suggest this diagnosis include PUD with diarrhea; PUD in an unusual location or with multiple ulcers; PUD refractory to treatment or persistent; PUD associated with prominent gastric folds; PUD associated with findings suggestive of MEN 1 (endocrinopathy, family history of ulcer or endocrinopathy, nephrolithiases); and PUD without Helicobacter pylori present. H. pylori is present in >90% of idiopathic peptic ulcers but is present in <50% of patients with gastrinomas. Chronic unexplained diarrhea also should suggest ZES.
# Chunk 2521
Most gastrinomas (50–90%) in sporadic ZES are present in the duodenum, followed by the pancreas (10–40%) and other intraabdominal sites (mesentery, lymph nodes, biliary tract, liver, stomach, ovary). Rarely, the tumor may involve extraabdominal sites (heart, lung cancer). In MEN 1/ZES the gastrinomas are also usually in the duodenum (70–90%), followed by the pancreas (10–30%), and are almost always multiple. About 60–90% of gastrinomas are malignant (Table 113-2) with metastatic spread to lymph nodes and liver. Distant metastases to bone occur in 12–30% of patients with liver metastases.
# Chunk 2522
Diagnosis The diagnosis of ZES requires the demonstration of inappropriate fasting hypergastrinemia, usually by demonstrating hypergastrinemia occurring with an increased basal gastric acid output (BAO) (hyperchlorhydria). More than 98% of patients with ZES have fasting hypergastrinemia, although in 40–60% the level may be elevated less than tenfold. Therefore, when the diagnosis is suspected, a fasting gastrin is usually the initial test performed. It is important to remember that potent gastric acid suppressant drugs such as proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) (omeprazole, esomeprazole, pantoprazole, lansoprazole, rabeprazole) can suppress acid secretion sufficiently to cause hypergastrinemia; because of their prolonged duration of action, these drugs have to be tapered or frequently discontinued for a week before the gastrin determination. Withdrawal of PPIs should be performed carefully because PUD complications can rapidly develop in some patients and is best done in consultation with GI units with experience in this area. The widespread use of PPIs can confound the diagnosis of ZES by raising a false-positive diagnosis by causing hypergastrinemia in a patient being treated with idiopathic PUD (without ZES) and lead to a false-negative diagnosis because at routine doses used to treat patients with idiopathic PUD, PPIs control symptoms in most ZES patients and thus mask the diagnosis. If ZES is suspected and the gastrin level is elevated, it is important to show that it is increased when gastric pH is ≤2.0 because physiologically hypergastrinemia secondary to achlorhydria (atrophic gastritis, pernicious anemia) is one of the most common causes of hypergastrinemia. Nearly all ZES patients have a fasting pH ≤2 when off antisecretory drugs. If the fasting gastrin is >1000 pg/mL (increased tenfold) and the pH is ≤2.0, which occurs in 40–60% of patients with ZES, the diagnosis of ZES is established after the possibility of retained antrum syndrome has been ruled out by history. In patients with hypergastrinemia with fasting gastrins <1000 pg/mL (<10-fold increased) and gastric pH ≤2.0, other conditions, such as H. pylori infections, antral G-cell hyperplasia/hyperfunction, gastric outlet obstruction, and, rarely, renal failure, can masquerade as ZES. To establish the diagnosis in this group, a determination of BAO and a secretin provocative test should be done. In patients with ZES without previous gastric acid–reducing surgery, the BAO is usually (>90%) elevated (i.e., >15 mEq/h). The secretin provocative test is usually positive, with the criterion of a >120-pg/mL increase over the basal level having the highest sensitivity (94%) and specificity (100%). Unfortunately the diagnosis of ZES is becoming increasing more difficult. This is due not only to the widespread use of PPIs (leading to false-positive results as well as masking ZES presentation), but also recent studies demonstrate than many of the commercial gastrin kits that are used by most laboratories to measure fasting serum gastrin levels are not reliable. In one study, 7 of the 12 tested commercial gastrin kits inaccurately assessed the true serum concentration of gastrin primarily because the antibodies used had inappropriate specificity for the different circulating forms of gastrin and were not adequately validated. Both underestimation and overestimation of fasting serum gastrin levels occurred using these commercial kits. To circumvent this problem, it is either necessary to use one of the five reliable kits identified or, alternatively, to refer the patient to a center with expertise in making the diagnosis in your area, or if this is not possible, to contact such a center and use the gastrin assay they recommend. An accurate gastrin assay is essential for accurate measurement of fasting serum gastrin level as well as for assessing gastrin levels during the secretin provocative test, and thus, the diagnosis of ZES cannot reliably be made without one.
# Chunk 2523
With the increased ability to control acid hypersecretion, more than 50% of patients who are not cured (>60% of patients) will die from tumor-related causes. At presentation, careful imaging studies are essential to localize the extent of the tumor to determine the appropriate treatment. A third of patients present with hepatic metastases, and in <15% of those patients, the disease is limited, so that surgical resection may be possible. Surgical short-term cure is possible in 60% of all patients without MEN 1/ZES or liver metastases (40% of all patients) and in 30% of patients long term. In patients with MEN 1/ZES, long-term surgical cure is rare because the tumors are multiple, frequently with lymph node metastases. Surgical studies demonstrate that successful resection of the gastrinoma not only decreases the chances of developing liver metastases but also increases the disease-related survival rate. Therefore, all patients with gastrinomas without MEN 1/ZES or a medical condition that limits life expectancy should undergo surgery by a surgeon experienced in the treatment of these disorders.
# Chunk 2524
Diagnosis The diagnosis of insulinoma requires the demonstration of an elevated plasma insulin level at the time of hypoglycemia. A number of other conditions may cause fasting hypoglycemia, such as the inadvertent or surreptitious use of insulin or oral hypoglycemic agents, severe liver disease, alcoholism, poor nutrition, and other extrapancreatic tumors. Furthermore, postprandial hypoglycemia can be caused by a number of conditions that confuse the diagnosis of insulinoma. Particularly important here is the increased occurrence of hypoglycemia after gastric bypass surgery for obesity, which is now widely performed. A new entity, insulinomatosis, was described that can cause hypoglycemia and mimic insulinomas. It occurs in 10% of patients with persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia and is characterized by the occurrence of multiple macro-/microadenomas expressing insulin, and it is not clear how to distinguish this entity from insulinoma preoperatively. The most reliable test to diagnose insulinoma is a fast up to 72 h with serum glucose, C-peptide, proinsulin, and insulin measurements every 4–8 h. If at any point the patient becomes symptomatic or glucose levels are persistently below <2.2 mmol/L (40 mg/dL), the test should be terminated, and repeat samples for the above studies should be obtained before glucose is given. Some 70–80% of patients will develop hypoglycemia during the first 24 h, and 98% by 48 h. In nonobese normal subjects, serum insulin levels should decrease to <43 pmol/L (<6 µU/mL) when blood glucose decreases to <2.2 mmol/L (<40 mg/ dL) and the ratio of insulin to glucose is <0.3 (in mg/dL). In addition to having an insulin level >6 µU/mL when blood glucose is <40 mg/ dL, some investigators also require an elevated C-peptide and serum proinsulin level, an insulin/glucose ratio >0.3, and a decreased plasma β-hydroxybutyrate level for the diagnosis of insulinomas. Surreptitious use of insulin or hypoglycemic agents may be difficult to distinguish from insulinomas. The combination of proinsulin levels (normal in exogenous insulin/hypoglycemic agent users), C-peptide levels (low in exogenous insulin users), antibodies to insulin (positive in exogenous insulin users), and measurement of sulfonylurea levels in serum or plasma will allow the correct diagnosis to be made. The diagnosis of insulinoma has been complicated by the introduction of specific insulin 569 assays that do not also interact with proinsulin, as do many of the older radioimmunoassays (RIAs), and therefore give lower plasma insulin levels. The increased use of these specific insulin assays has resulted in increased numbers of patients with insulinomas having lower plasma insulin values (<6 µU/mL) than levels proposed to be characteristic of insulinomas by RIA. In these patients, the assessment of proinsulin and C-peptide levels at the time of hypoglycemia is particularly helpful for establishing the correct diagnosis. An elevated proinsulin level when the fasting glucose level is <45 mg/dL is sensitive and specific.
# Chunk 2525
Endocrine Tumors of the Gastrointestinal Tract and Pancreas 570 Diagnosis The diagnosis is confirmed by demonstrating an increased plasma glucagon level. Characteristically, plasma glucagon levels exceed 1000 pg/mL (normal is <150 pg/mL) in 90%; 7% are between 500 and 1000 pg/mL, and 3% are <500 pg/mL. A trend toward lower levels at diagnosis has been noted in the last decade. A plasma glucagon level >1000 pg/mL is considered diagnostic of glucagonoma. Other diseases causing increased plasma glucagon levels include cirrhosis, diabetic ketoacidosis, celiac disease, renal insufficiency, acute pancreatitis, hypercorticism, hepatic insufficiency, severe stress, and prolonged fasting or familial hyperglucagonemia, as well as danazol treatment. With the exception of cirrhosis, these disorders do not increase plasma glucagon >500 pg/mL. Necrolytic migratory erythema is not pathognomonic for glucagonoma and occurs in myeloproliferative disorders, hepatitis B infection, malnutrition, short-bowel syndrome, inflammatory bowel disease, zinc deficiency, and malabsorption disorders.
# Chunk 2526
The somatostatinoma syndrome is due to an NET that secretes excessive amounts of somatostatin, which causes a distinct syndrome characterized by diabetes mellitus, gallbladder disease, diarrhea, and steatorrhea. There is no general distinction in the literature between a tumor that contains somatostatin-like immunoreactivity (somatostatinoma) and does (11–45%) or does not (55–90%) produce a clinical syndrome (somatostatinoma syndrome) by secreting somatostatin. In a review of 173 cases of somatostatinomas, only 11% were associated with the somatostatinoma syndrome. The mean age is 51 years. Somatostatinomas occur primarily in the pancreas and small intestine, and the frequency of the symptoms and occurrence of the somatostatinoma syndrome differ in each. Each of the usual symptoms is more common in pancreatic than in intestinal somatostatinomas: diabetes mellitus (95% vs 21%), gallbladder disease (94% vs 43%), diarrhea (92% vs 38%), steatorrhea (83% vs 12%), hypochlorhydria (86% vs 12%), and weight loss (90% vs 69%). The somatostatinoma syndrome occurs in 30–90% of pancreatic and 0–5% of SI somatostatinomas. In various series, 43% of all duodenal NETs contain somatostatin; however, the somatostatinoma syndrome is rarely present (<2%). Somatostatinomas occur in the pancreas in 56–74% of cases, with the primary location being the pancreatic head. The tumors are usually solitary (90%) and large (mean size 4.5 cm). Liver metastases are common, being present in 69–84% of patients. Somatostatinomas are rare in patients with MEN 1, occurring in only 0.65%.
# Chunk 2527
The principal symptoms are large-volume diarrhea (100%) severe enough to cause hypokalemia (80–100%), dehydration (83%), hypochlorhydria (54–76%), and flushing (20%). The diarrhea is secretory in nature, persisting during fasting, and is almost always >1 L/d and in 70% is >3 L/d. In a number of studies, the diarrhea was intermittent initially in up to half the patients. Most patients do not have accompanying steatorrhea (16%), and the increased stool volume is due to increased excretion of sodium and potassium, which, with the anions, accounts for the osmolality of the stool. Patients frequently have hyperglycemia (25–50%) and hypercalcemia (25–50%).
# Chunk 2528
NF-pNETs are NETs that originate in the pancreas and either secrete no products or their products do not cause a specific clinical syndrome. Their symptoms are due entirely to the tumor per se. NF-pNETs secrete chromogranin A (90–100%), chromogranin B (90–100%), α-HCG (human chorionic gonadotropin) (40%), neuron-specific enolase (31%), and β-HCG (20%), and because 40–90% secrete PP, they are also often called PPomas. Because the symptoms are due to the tumor mass, patients with NF-pNETs usually present late in the disease course with invasive tumors and hepatic metastases (64–92%), and the tumors are usually large (72% >5 cm). NF-pNETs are usually solitary except in patients with MEN 1, in which case they are multiple. They occur primarily in the pancreatic head. Even though these tumors do not cause a functional syndrome, immunocytochemical studies show that they synthesize numerous peptides and cannot be distinguished from functional pNETs by immunocytochemistry. In MEN 1, 80–100% of patients have microscopic NF-pNETs, but they become large or symptomatic in a minority (0–13%) of cases. In VHL, 12–17% develop NF-pNETs, and in 4%, they are ≥3 cm in diameter.
# Chunk 2529
The most common symptoms are abdominal pain (30–80%), jaundice (20–35%), and weight loss, fatigue, or bleeding; 10–35% are found incidentally. The average time from the beginning of symptoms to diagnosis is 5 years.
# Chunk 2530
Overall survival in patients with sporadic NF-pNET is 30–63% at 5 years, with a median survival of 6 years. Unfortunately, surgical curative resection can be considered only in a minority of these patients because 64–92% present with diffuse metastatic disease. Treatment needs to be directed against the tumor per se using the various modalities discussed below for advanced disease. The treatment of NF-pNETs in either MEN 1 patients or patients with VHL is controversial. Most recommend surgical resection for any tumor >2–3 cm in diameter; however, there is no consensus on smaller 571 NF-pNETs in these inherited disorders, with most recommending careful surveillance of these patients. The treatment of small sporadic, asymptomatic NF-pNETs (≤2 cm) is also controversial. Most of these are low-or intermediate-grade lesions, and <7% are malignant. Some advocate a nonoperative approach with careful, regular follow-up, whereas other recommend an operative approach with specially consideration for a laparoscopic surgical approach.
# Chunk 2531
GRFomas are NETs that secrete excessive amounts of growth hormone– releasing factor (GRF) that cause acromegaly. GRF is a 44-amino-acid peptide, and 25–44% of pNETs have GRF immunoreactivity, although it is uncommonly secreted. GRFomas are lung tumors in 47–54% of cases, pNETs in 29–30%, and SI carcinoids in 8–10%; up to 12% occur at other sites. Patients have a mean age of 38 years, and the symptoms usually are due to either acromegaly or the tumor per se. The acromegaly caused by GRFomas is indistinguishable from classic acromegaly. The pancreatic tumors are usually large (>6 cm), and liver metastases are present in 39%. They should be suspected in any patient with acromegaly and an abdominal tumor, a patient with MEN 1 with acromegaly, or a patient without a pituitary adenoma with acromegaly or associated with hyperprolactinemia, which occurs in 70% of GRFomas. GRFomas are an uncommon cause of acromegaly. GRFomas occur in <1% of MEN 1 patients. The diagnosis is established by performing plasma assays for GRF and growth hormone. Most GRFomas have a plasma GRF level >300 pg/mL (normal <5 pg/mL men, <10 pg/mL women). Patients with GRFomas also have increased plasma levels of insulin-like growth factor type I (IGF-I) similar to those in classic acromegaly. Surgery is the treatment of choice if diffuse metastases are not present. Long-acting somatostatin analogues such as octreotide and lanreotide are the agents of choice, with 75–100% of patients responding.
# Chunk 2532
Endocrine Tumors of the Gastrointestinal Tract and Pancreas 572 tomography. In pNETs, endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) and functional localization by measuring venous hormonal gradients are also reported to be useful. Bronchial carcinoids are usually detected by standard chest radiography and assessed by CT. Rectal, duodenal, colonic, and gastric carcinoids are usually detected by GI endoscopy. Because of their wide availability, CT and MRI are generally initially used to determine the location of the primary NETs and the extent of disease. NETs are hyper-vascular tumors, and with both MRI and CT, contrast enhancement is essential for maximal sensitivity, and it is recommended that generally triple-phase scanning be used. The ability of cross-sectional imaging and, to a lesser extent, SRS to detect NETs is a function of NET size. With CT and MRI, <10% of tumors <1 cm in diameter are detected, 30–40% of tumors 1–3 cm are detected, and >50% of tumors >3 cm are detected. Many primary GI-NETs (carcinoids) are small, as are insulinomas and duodenal gastrinomas, and are frequently not detected by cross-sectional imaging, whereas most other pNETs present late in the course of their disease and are large (>4 cm). Selective angiography is more sensitive, localizing 60–90% of all NETs; however, it is now used infrequently. For detecting liver metastases, CT and MRI are more sensitive than ultrasound, and with recent improvements, 5–25% of patients with liver metastases will be missed by CT and/or MRI. pNETs, as well as GI-NETs (carcinoids), frequently (>80%) overexpress high-affinity somatostatin receptors in both the primary tumors and the metastases. Of the five types of somatostatin receptors (sst1–5), radiolabeled octreotide binds with high affinity to sst2 and sst5, has a lower affinity for sst3, and has a very low affinity for sst1 and sst4. Between 80 and 100% of GI-NETs (carcinoids) and pNETs possess sst2, and many also have the other four sst subtypes. Interaction with these receptors can be used to treat these tumors as well as to localize NETs by using radiolabeled somatostatin analogues (SRS). In the United States, [111In-DTPA-d-Phe1]octreotide (octreoscan) is generally used with gamma camera detection using single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) imaging. Numerous studies, primarily in Europe, using gallium-68-labeled somatostatin analogues and positron emission tomography (PET) detection, demonstrate even greater sensitivity than with SRS with 111In-labeled somatostatin analogues. Although not yet approved in the United States, there are a number of centers starting to use this approach. Because of its sensitivity and ability to localize tumor throughout the body, SRS is the initial imaging modality of choice for localizing both the primary tumor and metastatic NETs. SRS localizes tumor in 73–95% of patients with GI-NETs (carcinoids) and in 56–100% of patients with pNETs, except insulinomas. Insulinomas are usually small and have low densities of sst receptors, resulting in SRS being positive in only 12–50% of patients with insulinomas. SRS identifies >90–95% of patients with liver metastases due to NETs. Figure 113-3 shows an example of the increased sensitivity of SRS in a patient with a GI-NET (carcinoid) tumor. The CT scan showed a single liver metastasis, whereas the SRS demonstrated three metastases in the liver in multiple locations. Occasional false-positive responses with SRS can occur (12% in one study) because numerous other normal tissues as well as diseases can have high densities of sst receptors, including granulomas (sarcoid, tuberculosis, etc.), thyroid diseases (goiter, thyroiditis), and activated lymphocytes (lymphomas, wound infections). If liver metastases are identified by SRS, to plan the proper treatment, either a CT or an MRI (with contrast enhancement) is recommended to assess the size and exact location of the metastases because SRS does not provide information on tumor size. For pNETs in the pancreas, EUS is highly sensitive, localizing 77–100% of insulinomas, which occur almost exclusively within the pancreas. Endoscopic ultrasound is less sensitive for extrapancreatic tumors. It is increasingly used in patients with MEN 1, and to a lesser extent VHL, to detect small pNETs not seen with other modalities or for serial pNET assessments to determine size changes or rapid growth in patients in whom surgery is deferred. EUS with cytologic evaluation also is used frequently to distinguish an NF-pNET from a pancreatic adenocarcinoma or another nonendocrine pancreatic tumor. Not infrequently patients present with liver metastases due to an NET and the primary site is unclear. Occult small intestinal NETs (carcinoids) are increasingly detected by double-balloon enteroscopy or capsule endoscopy.
# Chunk 2533
FIGURE 113-4 Survival (Kaplan-Meier plots) of patients with pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (pNETs; n = 1072) (A–C) or gastrointestinal neuroendocrine tumors (GI-NETs; carcinoids) (appendix, n = 138; midgut, n = 238) (D–F) stratified according to recent proposed classification and grading systems. (Panels A–C are drawn from data in G Rindi et al: J Natl Cancer Inst 104:764, 2012; panels D and E are drawn from data in M Volante et al: Am J Surg Pathol 37:606, 2013; and panel F is drawn from data in MS Khan: Br J Cancer 108:1838, 2013.) study was 95%, and with distant metastases, it was 20% (Fig. 113-4). With gastrinomas, the 5-year survival without liver metastases is 98%; with limited metastases in one hepatic lobe, it is 78%; and with diffuse metastases, 16% (Fig. 113-4). In a large study of 156 patients (67 pNETs, rest carcinoids), the overall 5-year survival rate was 77%; it was 96% without liver metastases, 73% with liver metastases, and 50% with distant disease. Another very important prognostic factor is whether the NET is well-differentiated (G1/G2) or poorly differentiated (<1% of all NETs) (G3). Well-differentiated NETs have a 5-year survival of 50–80%, whereas poorly differentiated NETs have a 5-year survival of only 0–15%.
# Chunk 2534
Cytoreductive surgery is considered if either all of the visible metastatic disease or at last 90% is thought resectable; however, unfortunately, this is possible in only the 9–22% of patients who present with limited hepatic metastases. Although no randomized studies have proven that it extends life, results from a number of studies suggest that it may increase survival; therefore, it is recommended, if possible. RFA can be applied to NET liver metastases if they are 574 limited in number (usually less than five) and size (usually <3.5 cm in diameter). It can be used at the time of surgery (either general or laparoscopic) or using radiologic guidance. Response rates are >80%, the responses can last up to 3 years, the morbidity rate is low, and this procedure may be particularly helpful in patients with functional pNETs that are difficult to control medically. Although RFA has not been established in a controlled trial, both the European and North American Neuroendocrine Tumor Society guidelines (ENETS, NANETS) state it can be an effective antitumor treatment for both refractory functional syndromes and for palliative treatment. Chemotherapy plays a different role in the treatment of patients with pNETs and GI-NETs (carcinoids). Chemotherapy continues to be widely used in the treatment of patients with advanced pNETs with moderate success (response rates 20–70%); however, in general, its results in patients with metastatic GI-NETs (carcinoids) has been disappointing, with response rates of 0–30% with various twoand three-drug combinations, and thus, it is infrequently used in these patients. An important distinction in patients with pNETs is whether the tumor is well differentiated (G1/G2) or poorly differentiated (G3). The chemotherapeutic approach is different for these two groups. The current regimen of choice for patients with well-differentiated pNETs is the combination of streptozotocin and doxorubicin with or without 5-fluorouracil. Streptozotocin is a glucosamine nitrourea compound originally found to have cytotoxic effects on pancreatic islets, and later in studies with doxorubicin with or without 5-fluorouracil, it produced response rates of 20–45% in advanced pNETs. Streptozotocin causes considerable morbidity, with 70–100% of patients developing side effects (most prominent being nausea/vomiting in 60–100% or leukopenia/thrombocytopenia) and 15–40% of patients developing some degree of renal dysfunction (proteinuria in 40–50%, decreased creatine clearance). The combination of temozolomide (TMZ) with capecitabine produces partial response rates as high as 70% in patients with advance pNETs and a 2-year survival of 92%. The use of TMZ or another alkylating agent in advanced pNETs is supported by studies that show low levels of the DNA repair enzyme O6-methylguanine DNA methyltransferase in pNETs, but not in GI-NETs (carcinoids), which increases the sensitivity of pNETs to TMZ. In poorly differentiated NETs (G3), chemotherapy with a cisplatin-based regimen with etoposide or other agents (vincristine, paclitaxel) is the recommended treatment, with response rates of 40–70%; however, responses are generally short-lived (<12 months). This chemotherapy regimen can be associated with significant toxicity including GI toxicities (nausea, vomiting), myelosuppression, and renal toxicity. In addition to the effectiveness in controlling the functional hormonal state, long-acting somatostatin analogues such as octreotide and lanreotide are increasingly used for their antiproliferative effects. Whereas somatostatin analogues rarely decrease tumor size (i.e., 0–17%), these drugs have tumoristatic effects, stopping additional growth in 26–95% of patients with NETs. In a randomized, double-blind study in patients with metastatic midgut carcinoids (PROMID study) octreotide-LAR demonstrated a marked lengthening of time to progression (14.3 vs 6 months, p = .000072). This improvement was seen in patients with limited liver involvement. This study did not assess whether such treatment will extend survival. A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled, phase III study in patients with well-differentiated, metastatic, inoperable pNETs (45%) or GI-NETs (carcinoids) (55%) (CLARINET study) showed that monthly treatment with lanreotide-autogel reduced tumor progression or death by 53%. Somatostatin analogues can induce apoptosis in GI-NETs (carcinoids), which probably contributes to their tumoristatic effects. Treatment with somatostatin analogues is generally well-tolerated, with most side effects being mild and uncommonly leading to stopping the drug. Potential longterm side effects include diabetes/glucose intolerance, steatorrhea, and the development of gallbladder sludge/gallstones (10–80%), although only 1% of patients develop symptomatic gallbladder disease. Because of these phase III studies, somatostatin analogues are generally recommended as first-line treatment for patients with well-differentiated metastatic NETs.
# Chunk 2535
Molecular targeted medical treatment with either an mTOR inhibitor (everolimus) or a tyrosine kinase inhibitor (sunitinib) is now approved treatment in the United States and Europe for patients with metastatic unresectable pNET, each supported by a phase III, double-blind, prospective, placebo-controlled trial. mTOR is a serine-threonine kinase that plays an important role in proliferation, cell growth, and apoptosis in both normal and neoplastic cells. Activation of the mTOR cascade is important in mediating NET cell growth, especially in pNETs. A number of mTOR inhibitors have shown promising antitumor activity in NETs including everolimus and temsirolimus, with the former undergoing a phase III trial (RADIANT-3) involving 410 patients with advance progressive pNETs. Everolimus caused significant improvement in progression-free survival (11 vs 4.6 months, p <.001) and increased by a factor of 3.7 the proportion of patients progression-free at 18 months (37% vs 9%). Everolimus treatment was associated with frequent side effects, causing a twofold increase in adverse events, with the most frequent being grade 1 or 2. Grade 3 or 4 side effects included hematologic, GI (diarrhea), stomatitis, or hypoglycemia occurring in 3–7% of patients. Most grade 3 or 4 side effects were controlled by dose reduction or drug interruption. The ENETS 2012 guidelines conclude that everolimus, similar to sunitinib (below), should be considered as a first-line treatment in selected cases of well-differentiated pNETs that are unresectable. NETs, like other normal and neoplastic cells, frequently possess multiple types of the 20 different tyrosine kinase (TK) receptors that are known and mediate the action of different growth factors. Numerous studies demonstrate that TK receptors in normal and neoplastic tissues as well as NETs are especially important in mediating cell growth, angiogenesis, differentiation, and apoptosis. Whereas a number of TK inhibitors show antiproliferative activity in NETs only sunitinib has undergone a phase III controlled trial. Sunitinib is an orally active small-molecule inhibitor of TK receptors (PDGFRs, VEGFR-1, VEGFR-2, c-KIT, FLT-3). In a phase III study in which 171 patients with progressive, metastatic, nonresectable pNETs were treated with sunitinib (37.5 mg/d) or placebo, sunitinib treatment caused a doubling of progression-free survival (11.4 vs 4.5 months, p <.001), an increase in objective tumor response rate (9% vs 0%, p = .007), and an increase in overall survival. Sunitinib treatment was associated with an overall threefold increase in side effects, although most were grade 1 or 2. The most frequent grade 3 or 4 side effects were neutropenia (12%) and hypertension (9.6%), which were controlled by dose reduction or temporary interruption. There is no consensus regarding the order of sunitinib or everolimus use in patients with advanced, well-differentiated, progressive pNETs.
# Chunk 2536
Three different radionuclides are being used. High doses of [111In-DTPA-D-Phe1]octreotide, which emits γ-rays, internal conversion, and Auger electrons; 90yttrium, which emits high-energy β-particles coupled by a DOTA chelating group to octreotide or octreotate; and 177lutetium-coupled analogues, which emit both, are all in clinical studies. At present, the 177lutetium-coupled analogues are the most widely used. 111Indium-, 90yttrium-, and 177lutetiumlabeled compounds caused tumor stabilization in 41–81%, 44–88%, and 23–40%, respectively, and a decrease in tumor size in 8–30%, 6–37%, and 38%, respectively, of patients with advanced metastatic NETs. In one large study involving 504 patients with malignant NETs, 177lutetium-labeled analogues produced a reduction of tumor size of >50% in 30% of patients (2% complete) and tumor stabilization in 51% of patients. An effect on survival has not been established. At present, PRRT is not approved for use in either the United States or Europe, but because of the above promising results, a large phase III study is now being conducted in both the United States and Europe. The ENETS 2012, NANETS 2010, Nordic 2010, and European Society for Medical Oncology (ESMO) guidelines list PRRT as an experimental or investigational treatment at present.
# Chunk 2537
The use of liver transplantation has been abandoned for treatment of most metastatic tumors to the liver. However, for metastatic NETs, it is still a consideration. Among 213 European patients with NETs (50% functional NETs) who had liver transplantation from 1982 to 2009, the overall 5-year survival was 52% and disease free-survival was 30%. In various studies, the postoperative mortality rate is 10–14%. These results are similar to the United Network for Organ Sharing data in the United States in which 150 NET patients had liver transplants and the 5-year survival was 49%. In various studies, important prognostic factors for a poor outcome include a major resection performed in addition at the time of the liver transplant; poor tumor differentiation; hepatomegaly; age >45 years; a primary NET in the duodenum or pancreas; the presence of extrahepatic metastatic disease or extensive liver involvement (>50%); Ki-67 proliferative index >10%; and abnormal E-cadherin staining. The ENETS 2012 guidelines conclude that liver transplantation should be viewed as providing palliative care, with cure an exception, and recommend it be reserved for patients with life-threatening hormonal disturbances refractory to other treatments or for selected patients with a nonfunctional tumor with diffuse liver metastatic disease refractory to all other treatments.
# Chunk 2538
Howard I. Scher, Jonathan E. Rosenberg, Robert J. Motzer

Transitional cell epithelium lines the urinary tract from the renal pelvis to the ureter, urinary bladder, and the proximal two-thirds of the urethra. Cancers can occur at any point: 90% of malignancies develop in the bladder, 8% in the renal pelvis, and 2% in the ureter or urethra. Bladder cancer is the fourth most common cancer in men and the thirteenth in women, with an estimated 72,570 new cases and 15,210 deaths in the United States predicted for the year 2013. The almost 5:1 ratio of incidence to mortality reflects the higher frequency of the less lethal superficial variants compared to the more lethal invasive and metastatic variants. The incidence is roughly four times higher in men than in women and twofold higher in white men than in black men, with a median age of 65 years.
# Chunk 2539
Stage TNM 5-Year Survival Superficial Superficial Infiltrating Invasion of adjacent structures Lymph node invasion Distant extension IV IV IV I III III T1 Ta Tis T3a T4a T4b L. Nodes% 26 7–30 10–20% T3b 50 35–50% 90% 70 100 100 60 Ois Oa T2 70%II FIGURE 114-1 Bladder staging. TNM, tumor, node, metastasis.
# Chunk 2540
Several options are frequently used for urinary diversion. Ileal conduits bring urine directly from the ureter to the abdominal wall. Some patients receive either a continent cutaneous reservoir constructed from detubularized bowel or an orthotopic neobladder. Approximately 25% of men receive a neobladder, leading to 85–90% continence during the day. Cutaneous reservoirs are drained by intermittent catheterization. Contraindications to a neobladder include renal insufficiency, an inability to self-catheterize, or CIS or an exophytic tumor in the urethra. Diffuse CIS in the bladder is a relative contraindication based on the risk of a urethral recurrence. Concurrent ulcerative colitis or Crohn’s disease may hinder the use of bowel.
# Chunk 2541
Chemotherapy has also been tested in the neoadjuvant and adjuvant settings. In a randomized trial, patients receiving three cycles of neoadjuvant MVAC followed by cystectomy had a significantly better median (6.2 years) and 5-year survival (57%) compared to cystectomy alone (median survival 3.8 years; 5-year survival 42%). Similar results were obtained in an international study of three cycles of cisplatin, methotrexate, and vinblastine (CMV) followed by either radical cystectomy or radiation therapy. The decision to administer adjuvant therapy is based on recurrence risk after cystectomy. Studies of adjuvant chemotherapy have been underpowered, and most closed for lack of accrual. One underpowered study using the GPC regimen suggested that adjuvant treatment improved survival, although many patients never received chemotherapy for metastases. Another underpowered study did not show a benefit for GC chemotherapy. Therefore, preoperative chemotherapy is preferred when medically appropriate. Indications for adjuvant chemotherapy in patients who did not receive neoadjuvant treatment include nodal disease, extravesical tumor extension, or vascular invasion in the resected specimen.
# Chunk 2542
The management of bladder cancer is summarized in Table 114-2.

About 5000 cases of renal pelvis and ureter cancer occur each year; nearly all are transitional cell carcinomas similar to bladder cancer in biology and appearance. This tumor is associated with chronic phenacetin abuse and aristolochic acid consumption in Chinese herbal preparations; aristolochic acid also seems to be associated with Balkan nephropathy, a chronic interstitial nephritis endemic in Bulgaria, Greece, Bosnia-Herzegovina, taBLe 114-1 survivaL foLLoWing surgery for BLaDDer CanCer Pathologic Stage 5-Year Survival, % 10-Year Survival, % taBLe 114-2 management of BLaDDer CanCer Nature of Lesion Management Approach 578 and Romania. In addition, upper tract urothelial carcinoma is linked to hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. The most common symptom is painless gross hematuria, and the disease is usually detected on imaging during the workup for hematuria. Patterns of spread are like bladder cancer. For low-grade disease localized to the renal pelvis and ureter, nephroureterectomy (including excision of the distal ureter with a portion of the bladder) is associated with 5-year survival of 80–90%. More invasive or poorly differentiated tumors are more likely to recur locally and to metastasize. Metastatic disease is treated with the chemotherapy used in bladder cancer, and the outcome is similar to that of metastatic bladder cancer.
# Chunk 2543
The presenting signs and symptoms include hematuria, abdominal pain, and a flank or abdominal mass. Other symptoms are fever, weight loss, anemia, and a varicocele. The tumor is most commonly detected as an incidental finding on a radiograph. Widespread use of radiologic cross-sectional imaging procedures (CT, ultrasound, MRI) contributes to earlier detection, including incidental renal masses detected during evaluation for other medical conditions. The increasing number of incidentally discovered low-stage tumors has contributed to an improved 5-year survival for patients with renal cell carcinoma and increased use of nephron-sparing surgery (partial nephrectomy). A spectrum of paraneoplastic syndromes has been associated with these malignancies, including erythrocytosis, hypercalcemia, nonmetastatic hepatic dysfunction (Stauffer’s syndrome), and acquired dysfibrinogenemia. Erythrocytosis is noted at presentation in only about 3% of patients. Anemia, a sign of advanced disease, is more common.
# Chunk 2544
Staging is based on the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) staging system (Fig. 114-2). Stage I tumors are <7 cm in greatest diameter and confined to the kidney, stage II tumors are ≥7 cm and confined to the kidney, stage III tumors extend through the renal capsule but are confined to Gerota’s fascia (IIIa) or involve a single hilar lymph node (N1), and stage IV disease includes tumors that have invaded adjacent organs (excluding the adrenal gland) or involve multiple lymph nodes or distant metastases. The 5-year survival rate varies by stage: >90% for stage I, 85% for stage II, 60% for stage III, and 10% for stage IV.
# Chunk 2545
115 of the prostate

Howard I. Scher, James A. Eastham

Benign and malignant changes in the prostate increase with age. Autopsies of men in the eighth decade of life show hyperplastic changes in >90% and malignant changes in >70% of individuals. The high prevalence of these diseases among the elderly, who often have competing causes of morbidity and mortality, mandates a risk-adapted approach to diagnosis and treatment. This can be achieved by considering these diseases as a series of states. Each state represents a distinct clinical milestone for which therapy(ies) may be recommended based on current symptoms, the risk of developing symptoms, or death from disease in relation to death from other causes within a given time frame. For benign proliferative disorders, symptoms of urinary frequency, infection, and potential for obstruction are weighed against the side effects and complications of medical or surgical intervention. For prostate malignancies, the risks of developing the disease, symptoms, or death from cancer are balanced against the morbidities of the recommended treatments and preexisting comorbidities.
# Chunk 2546
In 2013, approximately 238,590 prostate cancer cases were diagnosed, and 29,720 men died from prostate cancer in the United States. The absolute number of prostate cancer deaths has decreased in the past 5 years, which has been attributed by some to the widespread use of PSA-based detection strategies. However, the benefit of screening on survival is unclear. The paradox of management is that although 1 in 6 men will eventually be diagnosed with the disease, and the disease remains the second leading cause of cancer deaths in men, only 1 man in 30 with prostate cancer will die of his disease.
# Chunk 2547
Currently no drugs or dietary supplements are approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for prevention of prostate cancer, nor are any recommended by the major clinical guidelines. Although statins may have some protective effect, the potential risks outweigh the benefits given the small number of men who die of prostate cancer. The results from several large, double-blind, randomized chemoprevention trials established 5α-reductase inhibitors (5ARI) as the most likely therapy to reduce the future risk of a prostate cancer diagnosis. The Prostate Cancer Prevention Trial (PCPT), in which men older than age 55 years received placebo or the 5ARI finasteride, which inhibits the type 1 isoform, showed a 25% (95% confidence interval 19–31%) reduction in the period prevalence of prostate cancer across all age groups in favor of finasteride (18.4%) over placebo (24.4%). In the Reduction by Dutasteride of Prostate Cancer Events (REDUCE) trial, a similar 23% reduction in the 4-year period prevalence was observed in favor of dutasteride (p = .001). Dutasteride inhibits both the type 1 and type 2 5ARI isoforms. While both studies met their endpoint, there was concern that most of the cancers that were prevented were low risk and that there was a slightly higher rate of clinically significant cancers (those with higher Gleason score) in the treatment arm. Neither drug was FDA-approved for prostate cancer prevention. In comparison, the Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial (SELECT), which enrolled African-American men age ≥50 years and others age ≥55 years, showed no difference in cancer incidence in patients receiving vitamin E (4.6%) or selenium (4.9%) alone or in combination (4.6%) relative to placebo (4.4%). A similar lack of benefit for vitamin E, vitamin C, and selenium was seen in the Physicians Health Study II.
# Chunk 2548
Prostate-Specific Antigen PSA (kallikrein-related peptidase 3; KLK3) is a kallikrein-related serine protease that causes liquefaction of seminal coagulum. It is produced by both nonmalignant and malignant epithelial cells and, as such, is prostate-specific, not prostate cancer–specific. Serum levels may also increase from prostatitis and BPH. Serum levels are not significantly affected by DRE, but the performance of a prostate biopsy can increase PSA levels up to tenfold for 8–10 weeks. PSA circulating in the blood is inactive and mainly occurs as a complex with the protease inhibitor α1-antichymotrypsin and as free (unbound) PSA forms. The formation of complexes between PSA, α2-macroglobulin, or other protease inhibitors is less significant. Free PSA is rapidly eliminated from the blood by glomerular filtration with an estimated half-life of 12–18 h. Elimination of PSA bound to α1-antichymotrypsin is slow (estimated half-life of 1–2 weeks) because it too is largely cleared by the kidneys. Levels should be undetectable after about 6 weeks if the prostate has been removed. Immunohistochemical staining for PSA can be used to establish a prostate cancer diagnosis.
# Chunk 2549
Psa-Based screening and early detection PSA testing was approved by the U.S. FDA in 1994 for early detection of prostate cancer, and the widespread use of the test has played a significant role in the proportion of men diagnosed with early-stage cancers: more than 70–80% of newly diagnosed cancers are clinically organ-confined. The level of PSA in blood is strongly associated with the risk and outcome of prostate cancer. A single PSA measured at age 60 is associated (area under the curve [AUC] of 0.90) with lifetime risk of death from prostate cancer. Most prostate cancer deaths (90%) occur among men with PSA levels in the top quartile (>2 ng/mL), although only a minority of men with PSA >2 ng/mL will develop lethal prostate cancer. Despite this and mortality rate reductions reported from large randomized prostate cancer screening trials, routine use of the test remains controversial.
# Chunk 2550
FIGURE 115-2 T stages of prostate cancer. (A) T1—Clinically inapparent tumor, neither palpable nor visible by imaging; (B) T2—Tumor confined within prostate; (C ) T3—Tumor extends through prostate capsule and may invade the seminal vesicles; (D) T4—Tumor is fixed or invades adjacent structures. Eighty-one percent of patients present with local disease (T1 and T2), which is associated with a 5-year survival rate of 100%. An additional 12% of patients present with regional disease (T3 and T4 without metastases), which is also associated with a 100% survival rate after 5 years. Four percent of patients present with distant disease (T4 with metastases), which is associated with a 28% 5-year survival rate. (Three percent of patients are ungraded, and this group is associated with a 73% 5-year survival rate.) (Data from AJCC, http://seer .cancer.gov/statfacts/html/prost.html. Figure © 2014 Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center; used with permission.) or survival may not be apparent for years. After radical surgery to remove all prostate tissue, PSA should become undetectable in the blood within 6 weeks. If PSA remains or becomes detectable after radical prostatectomy, the patient is considered to have persistent disease. After radiation therapy, in contrast, PSA does not become undetectable because the remaining nonmalignant elements of the gland continue to produce PSA even if all cancer cells have been eliminated. Similarly, cancer control is not well defined for a patient managed by active surveillance because PSA levels will continue to rise in the absence of therapy. Other outcomes are time to objective progression (local or systemic), cancer-specific survival, and overall survival; however, these outcomes may take years to assess.
# Chunk 2551
Neoadjuvant hormonal therapy has also been explored in an attempt to improve the outcomes of surgery for high-risk patients, using a variety of definitions. The results of several large trials testing 3 or 8 months of androgen depletion before surgery showed that serum PSA levels decreased by 96%, prostate volumes decreased by 34%, and margin positivity rates decreased from 41% to 17%. Unfortunately, hormones did not produce an improvement in PSA relapse–free survival. Thus, neoadjuvant hormonal therapy is not recommended.
# Chunk 2552
Cancer control after radiation therapy has been defined by various criteria, including a decline in PSA to <0.5 or 1 ng/mL, “nonrising” PSA values, and a negative biopsy of the prostate 2 years after completion of treatment. The current standard definition of biochemical failure (the Phoenix definition) is a rise in PSA by ≥2 ng/mL higher than the lowest PSA achieved. The date of failure is “at call” and not backdated.
# Chunk 2553
Radiation dose is critical to the eradication of prostate cancer. In a representative study, a PSA nadir of <1.0 ng/mL was achieved in 90% of patients receiving 75.6 or 81.0 Gy versus 76% and 56% of those receiving 70.2 and 64.8 Gy, respectively. Positive biopsy rates at 2.5 years were 4% for those treated with 81 Gy versus 27% and 36% for those receiving 75.6 and 70.2 Gy, respectively.
# Chunk 2554
Improvements in brachytherapy techniques have resulted in fewer complications and a marked reduction in local failure rates. In a series of 197 patients followed for a median of 3 years, 5-year actuarial PSA relapse–free survival for patients with pretherapy PSA levels of 0–4, 4–10, and >10 ng/mL were 98%, 90%, and 89%, respectively. In a separate report of 201 patients who underwent posttreatment biopsies, 80% were negative, 17% were indeterminate, and 3% were positive. The results did not change with longer follow-up. Nevertheless, many physicians feel that implantation is best reserved for patients with good or intermediate prognostic features.
# Chunk 2555
Arguing against active surveillance are the results of a Swedish randomized trial of radical prostatectomy versus active surveillance. With a median follow-up of 6.2 years, men treated by radical surgery had a lower risk of prostate cancer death relative to active surveillance patients (4.6% vs 8.9%) and a lower risk of metastatic progression (hazard ratio 0.63). Case selection is critical, and determining clinical parameters predictive of cancer aggressiveness that can be used to reliably select men most likely to benefit from active surveillance is an area of intense study. In one prostatectomy series, it was estimated that 10–15% of those treated had “insignificant” disease. One set of criteria includes men with clinical T1c tumors that are biopsy Gleason grade 6 or less involving three or fewer cores, each of them having less than 50% involvement by tumor and a PSA density of less than 0.15.
# Chunk 2556
The decision to recommend radiation therapy after prostatectomy is guided by the pathologic findings at surgery, because imaging studies such as CT and bone scan are typically uninformative. Some recommend a choline-11 positron emission tomography (PET) scan, but availability in the United States is limited. Others recommend that a biopsy of the urethrovesical anastomosis be obtained before considering radiation, whereas others treat empirically based on risk. Factors that predict for response to salvage radiation therapy are a positive surgical margin, lower Gleason score in the radical prostatectomy specimen, long interval from surgery to PSA failure, slow PSA doubling time, absence of disease in the lymph nodes, and a low (<0.5–1 ng/mL) PSA value at the time of radiation treatment. Radiation therapy is generally not recommended if the PSA was persistently elevated after surgery, which usually indicates that the disease has spread outside of the area of the prostate bed and is unlikely to be controlled with radiation therapy. As is the case for other disease states, nomograms to predict the likelihood of success are available.
# Chunk 2557
The rise in PSA after surgery or radiation therapy may indicate subclinical or micrometastatic disease with or without local recurrence. In these cases, the need for treatment depends, in part, on the estimated probability that the patient will develop clinically detectable metastatic disease on a scan and in what time frame. That immediate therapy is not always required was shown in a series where patients who developed a biochemical recurrence after radical prostatectomy received no systemic therapy until metastatic disease was documented. Overall, the median time to metastatic progression by imaging was 8 years, and 63% of the patients with rising PSA values remained free of metastases at 5 years. Factors associated with progression included the Gleason score of the radical prostatectomy specimen, time to recurrence, and PSA doubling time. For those with Gleason grade ≥8, the probability of metastatic progression was 37%, 51%, and 71% at 3, 5, and 7 years, respectively. If the time to recurrence was <2 years and PSA doubling time was long (>10 months), the proportions with metastatic disease at the same time intervals were 23%, 32%, and 53%, versus 47%, 69%, and 79% if the doubling time was short (<10 months). PSA doubling times are also prognostic for survival. In one series, all patients who succumbed to disease had PSA doubling times of 3 months or less.
# Chunk 2558
Outcomes of Androgen Depletion The anti–prostate cancer effects of the various androgen depletion/blockade strategies are similar, and the outcomes predictable: an initial response, then a period of stability in which tumor cells are dormant and nonproliferative, followed after a variable period of time by a rise in PSA and tumor regrowth as a castration-resistant lesion that for most men is invariably lethal. Androgen depletion is not curative because cells that survive castration are present when the disease is first diagnosed. Considered by disease manifestation, PSA levels return to normal in 60–70% of cases, and measurable lesions regress in about 50%; improvements in bone scan occur in 25% of cases, but the majority of cases remain stable. The duration of response and survival is inversely proportional to disease extent at the time androgen depletion is first started, whereas the degree of PSA decline at 6 months has been shown to be prognostic. In a large-scale trial, PSA nadir proved prognostic.
# Chunk 2559
An active question is whether hormones should be given in the adjuvant setting after surgery or radiation treatment of the primary tumor or whether to wait until PSA recurrence, metastatic disease, or symptoms are documented. Trials in support of early therapy have often been underpowered relative to the reported benefit or have been criticized on methodologic grounds. One trial showing a survival benefit for patients treated with radiation therapy and 3 years of androgen depletion, relative to radiation alone, was criticized for the poor outcomes of the control group. Another showing a survival benefit for patients with positive lymph nodes who were randomized to immediate medical or surgical castration compared to observation (p = .02) was criticized because the confidence intervals around the 5and 8-year survival distributions for the two groups overlapped. A large randomized study comparing early to late hormone treatment (orchiectomy or GnRH analogue) in patients with locally advanced or asymptomatic metastatic disease showed that patients treated early were less likely to progress from M0 to M1 disease, to develop pain, and to die of prostate cancer. This trial was criticized because therapy was delayed “too long” in the late-treatment group. Noteworthy is that the American Society of Clinical Oncology Guidelines recommend deferring treatment until the disease has recurred and the prognosis has been reassessed. These guidelines do not support immediate therapy.
# Chunk 2560
Chemotherapy and New Agents Through 2009, docetaxel was the only systemic therapy proven to prolong life. As a single agent, the drug produced PSA declines in 50% of patients, measurable disease regression in 25%, and improvement in both preexisting pain and prevention of future cancer-related pain. Since then, six agents with diverse mechanisms of action that target the tumor itself or other aspects of the metastatic process have been proven to prolong life and were FDA approved. The first was sipuleucel-T, the first biologic approach shown to prolong life in which antigen-presenting cells are activated ex vivo, pulsed with antigen, and reinfused. The second, cabazitaxel, a non–cross-resistant taxane, was shown to be superior to mitoxantrone in the post-docetaxel setting. This was followed by the CYP17 inhibitor abiraterone acetate, which lowers androgen levels in the tumor, adrenal glands, and testis, and the next-generation antiandrogen enzalutamide, which not only has a higher binding affinity to the AR relative to first-generation compounds, but uniquely inhibits nuclear location and DNA binding of the receptor complex. Both abiraterone acetate and enzalutamide were first approved for postchemotherapy treated patients on the basis of placebo-controlled phase III trials—a further indication that these tumors are not uniformly hormone-refractory. The indication for abiraterone acetate was later expanded to the prechemotherapy setting, based on a second trial using a co-primary endpoint of radiographic progression–free survival and overall survival. Similar results were seen with enzalutamide, for which an expanded indication is also anticipated. Alpharadin (radium-223 chloride), an alpha-emitting bone-seeking radioisotope, has been shown to prolong life in patients with symptoms related to osseous disease. The alpharadin result validated the bone microenvironment as a therapeutic target independent of direct effects on the tumor itself, as no declines in PSA were observed in the trial. Notable is that in addition to a survival benefit, the drug also reduced the development of significant skeletal events.
# Chunk 2561
Over the past month, how often have you had a weak urinary stream?

Over the past month, how often have you had to push or strain to begin urination? Over the past month, how many times did you most typically get up to urinate from the time you went to bed at night until the time you got up in the morning? Sum of 7 circled numbers (AUA Symptom Score): ____ Abbreviation: AUA, American Urological Association.
# Chunk 2562
Back pain from retroperitoneal metastases is common and must be distinguished from musculoskeletal pain. Dyspnea from pulmonary metastases occurs infrequently. Patients with increased serum levels of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) may present with gynecomastia. A delay in diagnosis is associated with a more advanced stage and possibly worse survival.
# Chunk 2563
The staging evaluation for GCT includes a determination of serum levels of α fetoprotein (AFP), hCG, and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH). After orchiectomy, a computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis is generally performed. Stage I disease is limited to the testis, epididymis, or spermatic cord. Stage II disease is limited to retroperitoneal (regional) lymph nodes. Stage III disease is disease outside the retroperitoneum, involving supradiaphragmatic nodal sites or viscera. The staging may be “clinical”—defined solely by physical examination, blood marker evaluation, and radiographs—or “pathologic”—defined by an operative procedure.
# Chunk 2564
Careful monitoring of the serum tumor markers AFP and hCG is essential in the management of patients with GCT, because these markers are important for diagnosis, as prognostic indicators, in monitoring treatment response, and in the early detection of relapse. Approximately 70% of patients presenting with disseminated nonseminomatous GCT have increased serum concentrations of AFP and/or hCG. Although hCG concentrations may be increased in patients with either nonseminoma or seminoma histology, the AFP concentration is increased only in patients with nonseminoma. The presence of an increased AFP level in a patient whose tumor shows only seminoma indicates that an occult nonseminomatous component exists, and the patient should be treated for nonseminomatous GCT. LDH levels are less specific than AFP or hCG but are increased in 50–60% patients with metastatic nonseminoma and in up to 80% of patients with advanced seminoma.
# Chunk 2565
AFP, hCG, and LDH levels should be determined before and after orchiectomy. Increased serum AFP and hCG concentrations decay according to first-order kinetics; the half-life is 24–36 h for hCG and 5–7 days for AFP. AFP and hCG should be assayed serially during and after treatment. The reappearance of hCG and/or AFP or the failure of these markers to decline according to the predicted half-life is an indicator of persistent or recurrent tumor.
# Chunk 2566
Patients with radiographs and physical examination showing no evidence of disease and serum AFP and hCG concentrations that are either normal or declining to normal according to the known half-life have clinical stage I disease. Approximately 20–50% of such patients will have retroperitoneal lymph node metastases (pathologic stage II) but will still be cured in over 95% of cases. Depending on risk of relapse, which is determined by the pathology (see below), surveillance, a nerve-sparing retroperitoneal lymph node dissection (RPLND), or adjuvant chemotherapy (one to two cycles of bleomycin, etoposide, and cisplatin [BEP]) may be appropriate choices depending on the availability of surgical expertise and patient and physician preference. If the primary tumor shows no evidence for lymphatic or vascular invasion and is limited to the testis (T1, clinical stage IA), then the risk of relapse is only 10–20%. Because over 80% of patients with clinical stage IA nonseminoma are cured with orchiectomy alone and there is no survival advantage to RPLND (or adjuvant chemotherapy), surveillance is the preferred treatment option. This avoids overtreatment with the potential for both acute and long-term toxicities (see below). Surveillance requires patients to be carefully followed with periodic chest radiography, physical examination, CT scan of the abdomen, and serum tumor marker determinations. The median time to relapse is approximately 7 months, and late relapses (>2 years) are rare. Noncompliant patients can be considered for RPLND or adjuvant BEP.
# Chunk 2567
Patients with limited, ipsilateral retroperitoneal adenopathy ≤2 cm in largest diameter and normal levels of AFP and hCG can be treated with either a modified bilateral nerve-sparing RPLND or chemotherapy. The local recurrence rate after a properly performed RPLND is very low. Depending on the extent of disease, the postoperative management options include either surveillance or two cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy. Surveillance is the preferred approach for patients with resected “low-volume” metastases (tumor nodes ≤2 cm in diameter and <6 nodes involved) because the probability of relapse is one-third or less. For those who relapse, risk-directed chemotherapy is indicated (see section on advanced GCT below). Because relapse occurs in ≥50% of patients with “highvolume” metastases (>6 nodes involved, or any involved node >2 cm in largest diameter, or extranodal tumor extension), two cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy should be considered, as it results in a cure in ≥98% of patients. Regimens consisting of etoposide plus cisplatin (EP) with or without bleomycin every 3 weeks are effective and well tolerated.
# Chunk 2568
Inguinal orchiectomy followed by immediate retroperitoneal radiation therapy or surveillance with treatment at relapse both result in cure in nearly 100% of patients with stage I seminoma. Historically, radiation was the mainstay of treatment, but the reported association between radiation and secondary malignancies and the absence of a survival advantage of radiation over surveillance has led many to favor surveillance for compliant patients. Approximately 15% of patients relapse, which is usually treated with chemotherapy. Longterm follow-up is essential, because approximately 30% of relapses occur after 2 years and 5% occur after 5 years. A single dose of carboplatin has also been investigated as an alternative to radiation therapy; the outcome was similar, but long-term safety data are lacking, and the retroperitoneum remained the most frequent site of relapse.
# Chunk 2569
Regardless of histology, all patients with stage IIC and stage III and most with stage IIB GCT are treated with chemotherapy. Combination chemotherapy programs based on cisplatin at doses of 100 mg/m2 plus etoposide at doses of 500 mg/m2 per cycle cure 70–80% of such patients, with or without bleomycin, depending on risk stratification (see below). A complete response (the complete disappearance of all clinical evidence of tumor on physical examination and radiography plus normal serum levels of AFP and hCG for ≥1 month) occurs after chemotherapy alone in ~60% of patients, and another 10–20% become disease free with surgical resection of residual masses containing viable GCT. Lower doses of cisplatin result in inferior survival rates.
# Chunk 2570
For ~90% of patients with good-risk GCTs, four cycles of EP or three cycles of BEP produce durable complete responses, with minimal acute and chronic toxicity, and a low relapse rate. Pulmonary toxicity is absent when bleomycin is not used and is rare when therapy is limited to 9 weeks; myelosuppression with neutropenic fever is less frequent; and the treatment mortality rate is negligible. Approximately 75% of intermediate-risk patients and 50% of poor-risk patients achieve durable complete remission with four cycles of BEP, and no regimen has proved superior.
# Chunk 2571
POSTCHEMOTHERAPY SURGERY Resection of residual metastases after the completion of chemotherapy is an integral part of therapy. If the initial histology is nonseminoma and the marker values have normalized, all sites of residual disease should be resected. In general, residual retroperitoneal disease requires a modified bilateral RPLND. Thoracotomy (unilateral or bilateral) and neck dissection are less frequently required to remove residual mediastinal, pulmonary parenchymal, or cervical nodal disease. Viable tumor (seminoma, embryonal carcinoma, yolk sac tumor, or choriocarcinoma) will be present in 15%, mature teratoma in 40%, and necrotic debris and fibrosis in 45% of resected specimens. The frequency of teratoma or viable disease is highest in residual mediastinal tumors. If necrotic debris or mature teratoma is present, no further chemotherapy is rarely present, and the most frequent finding is necrotic debris. For residual retroperitoneal disease, a complete RPLND is technically difficult due to extensive postchemotherapy fibrosis. Observation is recommended when no radiographic abnormality exists on CT scan. Positive findings on a positron emission tomography (PET) scan correlate with viable seminoma in residua and mandate surgical excision or biopsy.
# Chunk 2572
Presentation Neoplasms of the ovary tend to be painless unless they undergo torsion. Symptoms are therefore typically related to compression of local organs or due to symptoms from metastatic disease. Women with tumors localized to the ovary do have an increased incidence of symptoms including pelvic discomfort, bloating, and perhaps changes in a woman’s typical urinary or bowel pattern. Unfortunately, these symptoms are frequently dismissed by either the woman or her health care team. It is believed that high-grade tumors metastasize early in the neoplastic process. Unlike other epithelial malignancies, these tumors tend to exfoliate throughout the peritoneal cavity and thus present with symptoms associated with disseminated intraperitoneal tumors. The most common symptoms at presentation include a multimonth period of progressive complaints that typically include some combination of heartburn, nausea, early satiety, indigestion, constipation, and abdominal pain. Signs include the rapid increase in abdominal girth due to the accumulation of ascites that typically alerts the patient and her physician that the concurrent gastrointestinal symptoms are likely associated with serious pathology. Radiologic evaluation typically demonstrates a complex adnexal mass and ascites. Laboratory evaluation usually demonstrates a markedly elevated CA-125, a shed mucin (Muc 16) associated with, but not specific for, ovarian cancer. Hematogenous and lymphatic spread are seen but are not the typical presentation. Ovarian cancers are divided into four stages, with stage I tumors confined to the ovary, stage II malignancies confined to the pelvis, and stage III tumors confined to the peritoneal cavity (Table 117-1). These three stages are subdivided, with the most common presentation, stage IIIC, defined as tumors with bulky intraperitoneal disease. About 60% of women present with stage IIIC disease. Stage IV disease includes women with parenchymal metastases (liver, lung, spleen) or, alternatively, abdominal wall or pleural disease. The 40% not presenting with stage IIIC disease are roughly evenly distributed among the other stages, although mucinous and clear cell tumors are overrepresented in stage I tumors.
# Chunk 2573
Screening Ovarian cancer is the fifth most lethal malignancy in women in the United States. It is curable in early stages, but seldom curable in advanced stages; hence, the development of effective screening strategies is of considerable interest. Furthermore, the ovary is well visualized with a variety of imaging techniques, most notably trans-vaginal ultrasound. Early-stage tumors often produce proteins that can be measured in the blood such as CA-125 and HE-4. Nevertheless, the incidence of ovarian cancer in the middle-aged female population is low, with only approximately 1 in 2000 women between the ages of 50 and 60 carrying an asymptomatic and undetected tumor. Thus effective screening techniques must be sensitive but, more importantly, highly specific to minimize the number of false-positive results. Even a screening test with 98% specificity and 50% sensitivity would have a positive predictive value of only about 1%. A large randomized study of active screening versus usual standard care demonstrated that a screening program consisting of six annual CA-125 measurements and four annual transvaginal ultrasounds in a population of women age 55–74 was not effective at reducing death from ovarian cancer and was associated with significant morbidity in the screened arm due to complications associated with diagnostic testing in the screened group. Although ongoing studies are evaluating the utility of alternative screening strategies, currently screening of normal-risk women is not recommended outside of a clinical trial.
# Chunk 2574
In women presenting with a localized ovarian mass, the principal diagnostic and therapeutic maneuver is to determine if the tumor is benign or malignant and, in the event that the tumor is malignant, whether the tumor arises in the ovary or is a site of metastatic disease. Metastatic disease to the ovary can be seen from primary tumors of the colon, appendix, stomach (Krukenberg tumors), and breast. Typically women undergo a unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, and if pathology reveals a primary ovarian malignancy, then the procedure is followed by a hysterectomy, removal of the remaining tube and ovary, omentectomy, and pelvic node sampling along with some random biopsies of the peritoneal cavity. This extensive surgical procedure is performed because approximately 30% of tumors that by visual inspection appear to be confined to the ovary have already disseminated to the peritoneal cavity and/or surrounding lymph nodes.
# Chunk 2575
If there is evidence of bulky intraabdominal disease, a comprehensive attempt at maximal tumor cytoreduction is attempted even if it involves partial bowel resection, splenectomy, and in certain cases more extensive upper abdominal surgery. The ability to debulk metastatic ovarian cancer to minimal visible disease is associated with an improved prognosis compared with women left with visible disease. Patients without gross residual disease after resection have a median survival of 39 months, compared with 17 months for those left with macroscopic tumor. Once tumors have been surgically debulked, women receive therapy with a platinum agent, typically a taxane. Debate continues as to whether this therapy should be delivered intravenously or, alternatively, whether some of the therapy should be delivered directly into the peritoneal cavity via a catheter. Three randomized studies have demonstrated improved survival with intraperitoneal therapy, but this approach is still not widely accepted due to technical challenges associated with this delivery route and increased toxicity. In women who present with bulky intraabdominal disease, an alternative approach is to treat with platinum plus a taxane for several cycles before attempting a surgical debulking procedure (neoadjuvant therapy). Subsequent surgical procedures are more effective at leaving the patient without gross residual tumor and appear to be less morbid. Two studies have demonstrated that the neoadjuvant approach is associated with an overall survival that is comparable to the traditional approach of primary surgery followed by chemotherapy.
# Chunk 2576
With optimal debulking surgery and platinum-based chemotherapy (usually carboplatin dosed to an area under the curve [AUC] of 6 plus paclitaxel 175 mg/m2 by 3-h infusion in 21-day cycles), 70% of women who present with advanced-stage tumors respond, and 40–50% experience a complete remission with normalization of their CA-125, computed tomography (CT) scans, and physical examination. Unfortunately, a small proportion of women who obtain a complete response to therapy will remain in remission. Disease recurs within 1–4 years from the completion of their primary therapy in 75% of the complete responders. CA-125 levels often increase as a first sign of relapse; however, data are not clear that early intervention in relapsing patients influences survival. Recurrent disease is effectively managed, but not cured, with a variety of chemotherapeutic agents. Eventually all women with recurrent disease develop chemotherapy-refractory disease at which point refractory ascites, poor bowel motility, and obstruction or pseudoobstruction due to a 594 tumor-infiltrated aperistaltic bowel are common. Limited surgery to relieve intestinal obstruction, localized radiation therapy to relieve pressure or pain from masses, or palliative chemotherapy may be helpful. Agents with >15% response rates include gemcitabine, topotecan, liposomal doxorubicin, pemetrexed, and bevacizumab. Approximately 10% of ovarian cancers are HER2/neu positive, and trastuzumab may induce responses in this subset. Five-year survival correlates with the stage of disease: stage I, 85–90%; stage II, 70–80%; stage III, 20–50%; and stage IV, 1–5% (Table 117-1). Low-grade serous tumors are molecularly distinct from high-grade serous tumors and are, in general, poorly responsive to chemotherapy. Targeted therapies focused on inhibiting kinases downstream of RAS and BRAF are being tested. Patients with tumors of low malignant potential are managed by surgery; chemotherapy and radiation therapy do not improve survival.
# Chunk 2577
The mainstay of treatment for sex cord tumors is surgical resection. Most women present with tumors confined to the ovary. For the small subset of women who present with metastatic disease or develop evidence of tumor recurrence after primary resection, survival is still typically long, often in excess of a decade. Because these tumors are slow growing and relatively refractory to chemotherapy, women with metastatic disease are often debulked because disease is usually peritoneal-based (as with epithelial ovarian cancer). Definitive data that surgical debulking of metastatic or recurrent disease prolongs survival are lacking, but ample data document women who have survived years or, in some cases, decades after resection of recurrent disease. In addition, large peritoneal-based metastases also have a proclivity for hemorrhage, sometimes with catastrophic complications. Chemotherapy is occasionally effective, and women tend to receive regimens designed to treat epithelial or germ cell tumors. Bevacizumab has some activity in clinical trials but is not approved for this specific indication. These tumors often produce high levels of müllerian inhibiting substance (MIS), inhibin, and, in the case of Sertoli-Leydig tumors, α fetoprotein (AFP). These proteins are detectable in serum and can be used as tumor markers to monitor women for recurrent disease because the increase or decrease of these proteins in the serum tends to reflect the changing bulk of systemic tumor.
# Chunk 2578
Presentation Germ cell tumors can present at all ages, but the peak age of presentation tends to be in females in their late teens or early twenties. Typically these tumors will become large ovarian masses, which eventually present as palpable low abdominal or pelvic masses. Like sex cord tumors, torsion or hemorrhage may present urgently or emergently as acute abdominal pain. Some of these tumors produce elevated levels of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), which can lead to isosexual precocious puberty when tumors present in younger girls. Unlike epithelial ovarian cancer, these tumors have a higher proclivity for nodal or hematogenous metastases. As with testicular tumors, some of these tumors tend to produce AFP (yolk sac tumors) or hCG (embryonal carcinoma, choriocarcinomas, and some dysgerminomas) that are reliable tumor markers.
# Chunk 2579
Scans are not part of the formal clinical staging of cervical cancer yet are very useful in planning appropriate therapy. CT can detect hydronephrosis indicative of pelvic sidewall disease but is not accurate at evaluating other pelvic structures. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is more accurate at estimating uterine extension and paracervical extension of disease into soft tissues typically bordered by broad and cardinal ligaments that support the uterus in the central pelvis. Positron emission tomography (PET) scan is the most accurate technique for evaluating the pelvis and more importantly nodal (pelvic, para-aortic, and scalene) sites for disease.
# Chunk 2580
The majority of women with tumors of the uterine corpus present with postmenopausal vaginal bleeding due to shedding of the malignant endometrial lining. Premenopausal women often will present with atypical bleeding between typical menstrual cycles. These signs typically bring a woman to the attention of a health care professional, and hence the majority of women present with early-stage disease with the tumor confined to the uterine corpus. Diagnosis is typically established by endometrial biopsy. Epithelial tumors may spread to pelvic or para-aortic lymph nodes. Pulmonary metastases can appear later in the natural history of this disease but are very uncommon at initial presentation. Serous tumors tend to have patterns of spread much more reminiscent of ovarian cancer with many patients presenting with disseminated peritoneal disease and sometimes ascites. Some women presenting with uterine sarcomas will present with pelvic pain. Nodal metastases are uncommon with sarcomas, which are more likely to present with either intraabdominal disease or pulmonary metastases.
# Chunk 2581
APPROACH TO THE PATIENT: primary and metastatic tumors of the nervous system

Brain tumors of any type can present with a variety of symptoms and signs that fall into two categories: general and focal; patients often have a combination of the two (Table 118-1). General or nonspecific symptoms include headache, with or without nausea or vomiting, cognitive difficulties, personality change, and gait disorder. Generalized symptoms arise when the enlarging tumor and its surrounding edema cause an increase in intracranial pressure or direct compression of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) circulation leading to hydrocephalus. The classic headache associated with a brain tumor is most evident in the morning and improves during the day, but this particular pattern is actually seen in a minority of patients. Headaches are often holocephalic but can be ipsilateral to the side of a tumor. Occasionally, headaches have features of a typical migraine with unilateral throbbing pain associated with visual scotoma. Personality changes may include apathy and withdrawal from social circumstances, mimicking depression. Focal or lateralizing findings include hemiparesis, aphasia, or visual field defect. Lateralizing symptoms are typically subacute and progressive. A visual field defect is often unnoticed by the patient; its presence may only be revealed after it leads to an injury such as an automobile accident occurring in the blind visual field. Language difficulties may be mistaken for confusion. Seizures are a common presentation of brain tumors, occurring in about 25% of patients with brain metastases or malignant gliomas but can be the presenting symptom in up to 90% of patients with a low-grade glioma. All seizures that arise from a brain tumor will have a focal onset whether or not it is apparent clinically.
# Chunk 2582
On contrast-enhanced MRI, PCNSL usually appears as a densely enhancing tumor (Fig. 118-4). Immunocompetent patients have solitary lesions more often than immunosuppressed patients. Frequently there is involvement of the basal ganglia, corpus callosum, or periventricular region. Although the imaging features are often characteristic, PCNSL can sometimes be difficult to differentiate from high-grade gliomas, infections, or demyelination. Stereotactic biopsy is necessary to obtain a histologic diagnosis. Whenever possible, glucocorticoids should be withheld until after the biopsy has been obtained because they have a cytolytic effect on lymphoma cells and may lead to nondiagnostic tissue. In addition, patients should be tested for HIV and the extent of disease should be assessed by performing PET or CT of the body, MRI of the spine, CSF analysis, and slit-lamp examination of the eye. Bone marrow biopsy and testicular ultrasound are occasionally performed.
# Chunk 2583
The periventricular location and diffuse enhancement pattern are characteristic of lymphoma.

survival of up to 50 months. The combination of methotrexate with other chemotherapeutic agents such as cytarabine increases the response rate to 70–100%. The addition of whole-brain RT to methotrexate-based chemotherapy prolongs progression-free survival but not overall survival. Furthermore, RT is associated with delayed neurotoxicity, especially in patients over the age of 60 years. As a result, full-dose RT is frequently omitted, but there may be a role for reduced-dose RT. The anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody rituximab has activity in PCNSL and is often incorporated into the chemotherapy regimen. For some patients, high-dose chemotherapy with autologous stem cell rescue may offer the best chance of preventing relapse. At least 50% of patients will eventually develop recurrent disease. Treatment options include RT for patients who have not had prior irradiation, re-treatment with methotrexate, as well as other agents such as temozolomide, rituximab, procarbazine, topotecan, and pemetrexed. High-dose chemotherapy with autologous stem cell rescue may have a role in selected patients with relapsed disease.
# Chunk 2584
PCNSL in immunocompromised patients often produces multiple ring-enhancing lesions that can be difficult to differentiate from metastases and infections such as toxoplasmosis. The diagnosis is usually established by examination of the CSF for cytology and EBV DNA, toxoplasmosis serologic testing, brain PET imaging for hypermetabolism of the lesions consistent with tumor instead of infection, and, if necessary, brain biopsy. Since the advent of highly active antiretroviral drugs, the incidence of HIV-related PCNSL has declined. These patients may be treated with whole-brain RT, high-dose methotrexate, and initiation of highly active antiretroviral therapy. In organ transplant recipients, reduction of immunosuppression may improve outcome.
# Chunk 2585
Medulloblastomas are the most common malignant brain tumor of childhood, accounting for approximately 20% of all primary CNS tumors among children. They arise from granule cell progenitors or from multipotent progenitors from the ventricular zone. Approximately 5% of children have inherited disorders with germline mutations of genes that predispose to the development of medulloblastoma. Gorlin syndrome, the most common of these inherited disorders, is due to mutations in the patched-1 (PTCH-1) gene, a key component in the sonic hedgehog pathway. Turcot syndrome, caused by mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene and familial adenomatous polyposis, has also been associated with an increased incidence of medulloblastoma. Histologically, medulloblastomas are highly cellular tumors with abundant dark staining, round nuclei, and rosette formation (Homer-Wright rosettes). They present with headache, ataxia, and signs of brainstem involvement. On MRI they appear as densely enhancing tumors in the posterior fossa, sometimes associated with hydrocephalus. Seeding of the CSF is common. Treatment involves maximal surgical resection, craniospinal irradiation, and chemotherapy with agents such as cisplatin, lomustine, cyclophosphamide, and vincristine. Approximately 70% of patients have long-term survival but usually at the cost of significant neurocognitive impairment. A major goal of current research is to improve survival while minimizing long-term complications.
# Chunk 2586
The standard treatment for brain metastases has been whole-brain radiotherapy (WBRT) usually administered to a total dose of 3000 cGy in 10 fractions. This affords rapid palliation, and approximately 80% of patients improve with glucocorticoids and RT. However, it is not curative. Median survival is only 4–6 months. More recently, SRS delivered through a variety of techniques including the gamma knife, linear accelerator, proton beam, and CyberKnife all can deliver highly focused doses of RT, usually in a single fraction. SRS can effectively sterilize the visible lesions and afford local disease control in 80–90% of patients. In addition, there are some patients who have clearly been cured of their brain metastases using SRS, whereas this is distinctly rare with WBRT. However, SRS can be used only for lesions 3 cm or less in diameter and should be confined to patients with only one to three metastases. The addition of WBRT to SRS improves disease control in the nervous system but does not prolong survival.
# Chunk 2587
Disease Stage 5-Year Survival, % subsequent excision without compromising a definitive resection. Lymph node metastases occur in 5%, except in synovial and epithelioid sarcomas, clear-cell sarcoma (melanoma of the soft parts), angiosarcoma, and rhabdomyosarcoma, where nodal spread may be seen in 17%. The pulmonary parenchyma is the most common site of metastases. Exceptions are GISTs, which metastasize to the liver; myxoid liposarcomas, which seek fatty tissue; and clear-cell sarcomas, which may metastasize to bones. Central nervous system metastases are rare, except in alveolar soft part sarcoma.
# Chunk 2588
Soft tissue sarcomas tend to grow along fascial planes, with the surrounding soft tissues compressed to form a pseudocapsule that gives the sarcoma the appearance of a well-encapsulated lesion. This is invariably deceptive because “shelling out,” or marginal excision, of such lesions results in a 50–90% probability of local recurrence. Wide excision with a negative margin, incorporating the biopsy site, is the standard surgical procedure for local disease. The adjuvant use of radiation therapy and/or chemotherapy vascular structures are involved so that resection will result in serious functional consequences to the limb.
# Chunk 2589
Ewing’s sarcoma, which constitutes ~10–15% of all bone sarcomas, is common in adolescence and has a peak incidence in the second decade of life. It typically involves the diaphyseal region of long bones and also has an affinity for flat bones. The plain radiograph may show a characteristic “onion peel” periosteal reaction with a generous soft tissue mass, which is better demonstrated by CT or MRI. This mass is composed of sheets of monotonous, small, round, blue cells and can be confused with lymphoma, embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma, and small-cell carcinoma. The presence of p30/32, the product of the mic-2 gene (which maps to the pseudoautosomal region of the X and Y chromosomes), is a cell-surface marker for Ewing’s sarcoma (and other members of the Ewing’s family of tumors, sometimes called PNETs). Most PNETs arise in soft tissues; they include peripheral neuroepithelioma, Askin’s tumor (chest wall), and esthesioneuroblastoma. Glycogen-filled cytoplasm detected by staining with periodic acid–Schiff is also characteristic of Ewing’s sarcoma cells. The classic cytogenetic abnormality associated with this disease (and other PNETs) is a reciprocal translocation of the long arms of chromosomes 11 and 22, t(11;22), which creates a chimeric gene product of unknown function with components from the fli-1 gene on chromosome 11 and ews on 22. This disease is very aggressive, and it is therefore considered a systemic disease. Common sites of metastases are lung, bones, and bone marrow. Systemic chemotherapy is the mainstay of therapy, often being used before surgery. Doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide or ifosfamide, etoposide, vincristine, and dactinomycin are active drugs. Topotecan or irinotecan in combination with an alkylating agent is often used in relapsed patients. Targeted therapy with an anti-IGF-I receptor antibody in combination with an inhibitor of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) appears to have promising activity in refractory cases. Local treatment for the primary tumor includes surgical resection, usually with limb salvage or radiation therapy. Patients with lesions below the elbow and below the mid-calf have a 5-year survival rate of 80% with effective treatment. Ewing’s sarcoma at first presentation is a curable tumor, even in the presence of obvious metastatic disease, especially in children <11 years old.
# Chunk 2590
Cancer in the bone may produce osteolysis, osteogenesis, or both. Osteolytic lesions result when the tumor produces substances that can directly elicit bone resorption (vitamin D–like steroids, prostaglandins, or parathyroid hormone–related peptide) or cytokines that can induce the formation of osteoclasts (interleukin 1 and tumor necrosis factor). Osteoblastic lesions result when the tumor produces cytokines that activate osteoblasts. In general, purely osteolytic lesions are best detected by plain radiography, but they may not be apparent until they are >1 cm. These lesions are more commonly associated with hypercalcemia and with the excretion of hydroxyproline-containing peptides indicative of matrix destruction. When osteoblastic activity is prominent, the lesions may be readily detected using radionuclide bone scanning (which is sensitive to new bone formation), and the radiographic appearance may show increased bone density or sclerosis. Osteoblastic lesions are associated with higher serum levels of alkaline phosphatase and, if extensive, may produce hypocalcemia. Although some tumors may produce mainly osteolytic lesions (e.g., kidney cancer) and others mainly osteoblastic lesions (e.g., prostate cancer), most metastatic lesions produce both types of lesion and may go through stages where one or the other predominates.
# Chunk 2591
Studies looking for unique signature abnormalities in CUP tumors have not been positive. Abnormalities in chromosomes 1 and 12 and other complex cytogenetic abnormalities have been reported. Aneuploidy has been described in 70% of CUP patients with metastatic adenocarcinoma or undifferentiated carcinoma. The overexpression of various genes, including Ras, bcl-2 (40%), her-2 (11%), and p53 (26–53%), has been studied in CUP samples, but they have no effect on response to therapy or survival. The extent of angiogenesis in CUP relative to that in metastases from known primaries has also been evaluated, but no consistent findings have emerged. Using the Sequenom (SQM) Massarray platform, a study in consecutive CUP patients showed that the overall mutational rate was surprisingly low (18%). No “new” low-frequency mutations were found using a panel of mutations involving the P13K/AKT pathway, MEK pathway, receptors, and downstream effectors. Nevertheless, it is possible that newer “deep sequencing” techniques in select patients may yield consistent abnormalities.
# Chunk 2592
Role of Serum Tumor Markers and Cytogenetics Most tumor markers, including CEA, CA-125, CA 19-9, and CA 15-3, when elevated, are nonspecific and not helpful in determining the primary tumor site. Men who present with adenocarcinoma and osteoblastic metastasis should undergo a prostate-specific antigen (PSA) test. In patients with undifferentiated or poorly differentiated carcinoma (especially with a midline tumor), elevated β-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG) and α fetoprotein (AFP) levels suggest the possibility of an extragonadal germ cell (testicular) tumor. With the availability of IHC, cytogenetic studies are rarely needed.
# Chunk 2593
Role of Imaging Studies In the absence of contraindications, a baseline 120e-1 IV contrast computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis is the standard of care. This helps to search for the primary tumor, evaluate the extent of disease, and select the most accessible biopsy site. Older studies suggested that the primary tumor site is detected in 20–35% of patients who undergo a CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis, although by current definition, these patients do not have CUP. These studies also suggest a latent primary tumor prevalence of 20%; with more sophisticated imaging, this has decreased to ≤5% today.
# Chunk 2594
A conventional workup for a squamous cell carcinoma and cervical CUP (neck lymphadenopathy with no known primary tumor) includes a CT scan or MRI and invasive studies, including indirect and direct laryngoscopy, bronchoscopy, and upper endoscopy. Ipsilateral (or bilateral) staging tonsillectomy has been recommended for these patients. 18-Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (18-FDG-PET) scans are useful in this patient population and may help guide the biopsy; determine the extent of disease; facilitate the appropriate treatment, including planning radiation fields; and help with disease surveillance. A smaller radiation field encompassing the primary (when found) and metastatic adenopathy decreases the risk of chronic xerostomia. Several studies have evaluated the utility of PET in patients with squamous cervical CUP, and head and neck primary tumors were identified in ~21–30%.
# Chunk 2595
LIGHT MICROSCOPY EVALUATION Adequate tissue obtained preferably by excisional biopsy or core-needle biopsy (instead of only a fine-needle aspiration) is stained with hematoxylin and eosin and subjected to light microscopic examination. On light microscopy, 60–65% of CUP is adenocarcinoma, and 5% is squamous cell carcinoma. The remaining 30–35% is poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, poorly differentiated carcinoma, or poorly differentiated neoplasm. A small percentage of lesions are diagnosed as neuroendocrine cancers (2%), mixed tumors (adenosquamous or sarcomatoid carcinomas), or undifferentiated neoplasms (Table 120e-1).
# Chunk 2596
Squamous cell CUP Disseminated, visceral metastases Metastatic inguinal adenopathy Metastatic cervical adenopathy Directed invasive tests as needed Perineal exam, anoscopy if needed. Pelvic examination in women. PET is optional. Triple endoscopy, consider tonsillectomy. CT neck and chest. PET is optional. C in good performance status patients. RT as indicated. If localized, lymph node dissection, followed by local RT in select patients If no extra-cervical disease—neck dissection followed by adjuvant RT vs. RT alone. C for bulky disease.
# Chunk 2597
Low-grade neuroendocrine carcinoma often has an indolent course, and treatment decisions are based on symptoms and tumor bulk. Urine 5-HIAA and serum chromogranin may be elevated and can be followed as markers. Often the patient is treated with somatostatin analogues alone for hormone-related symptoms (diarrhea, flushing, nausea). Specific local therapies or systemic therapy would only be indicated if the patient is symptomatic with local pain secondary to significant growth of the metastasis or the hormone-related symptoms are not controlled with endocrine therapy. Patients with high-grade neuroendocrine carcinoma are treated as having small-cell lung cancer and are responsive to chemotherapy; 20–25% show a complete response, and up to 10% patients survive more than 5 years.
# Chunk 2598
The management of HHM begins with removal of excess calcium in the diet, medications, or IV solutions. Saline rehydration (typically 200–500 mL/h) is used to dilute serum calcium and promote calciuresis; exercise caution in patients with cardiac, hepatic, or renal insufficiency. Forced diuresis with furosemide (20–80 mg IV in escalating doses) or other loop diuretics can enhance calcium excretion but provides relatively little value except in life-threatening hypercalcemia. When used, loop diuretics should be administered only after complete rehydration and with careful monitoring of fluid balance. Oral phosphorus (e.g., 250 mg Neutra-Phos 3–4 times daily) should be given until serum phosphorus is >1 mmol/L (>3 mg/dL). Bisphosphonates such as pamidronate (60–90 mg IV), zoledronate (4–8 mg IV), and etidronate (7.5 mg/kg per day PO for 3–7 consecutive days) can reduce serum calcium within 1–2 days and suppress calcium release for several weeks. Bisphosphonate infusions can be repeated, or oral bisphosphonates can be used for chronic treatment. Dialysis should be considered in severe hypercalcemia when saline hydration and bisphosphonate treatments are not possible or are too slow in onset. Previously used agents such as calcitonin and mithramycin have little utility now that bisphosphonates are available. Calcitonin (2–8 U/kg SC every 6–12 h) should be considered when rapid correction of severe hypercalcemia is needed. Hypercalcemia associated with lymphomas, multiple myeloma, or leukemia may respond to glucocorticoid treatment (e.g., prednisone 40–100 mg PO in four divided doses).
# Chunk 2599
Diagnosis The diagnostic features of ectopic vasopressin production are the same as those of other causes of SIADH (Chaps. 63 and 404). Hyponatremia and reduced serum osmolality occur in the setting of an inappropriately normal or increased urine osmolality. Urine sodium excretion is normal or increased unless volume depletion is present. Other causes of hyponatremia should be excluded, including renal, adrenal, or thyroid insufficiency. Physiologic sources of vasopressin stimulation (CNS lesions, pulmonary disease, nausea), adaptive circulatory mechanisms (hypotension, heart failure, hepatic cirrhosis), and medications, including many chemotherapeutic agents, also should be considered as possible causes of hyponatremia. Vasopressin measurements are not usually necessary to make the diagnosis.
# Chunk 2600
Most patients with ectopic vasopressin production develop hyponatremia over several weeks or months. The disorder should be corrected gradually unless mental status is altered or there is risk of seizures. Treatment of the underlying malignancy may reduce ectopic vasopressin production, but this response is slow if it occurs at all. Fluid restriction to less than urine output, plus insensible losses, is often sufficient to correct hyponatremia partially. However, strict monitoring of the amount and types of liquids consumed or administered intravenously is required for fluid restriction to be effective. Salt tablets and saline are not helpful unless volume depletion is also present. Demeclocycline (150–300 mg orally three to four times daily) can be used to inhibit vasopressin action on the renal distal tubule, but its onset of action is relatively slow (1–2 weeks). Conivaptan, a nonpeptide V2-receptor antagonist, can be administered either PO (20–120 mg bid) or IV (10–40 mg) and is particularly effective when used in combination with fluid restriction in euvolemic hyponatremia. Tolvaptan (15 mg PO daily) is another vasopressin antagonist. The dose can be increased to 30–60 mg/d based on response. Severe hyponatremia (Na <115 meq/L) or mental status changes may require treatment with hypertonic (3%) or normal saline infusion together with furosemide to enhance free water clearance. The rate of sodium correction should be slow (0.5–1 meq/L per hour) to prevent rapid fluid shifts and the possible development of central pontine myelinolysis.
# Chunk 2601
Diagnosis The diagnosis of ectopic ACTH syndrome is usually not difficult in the setting of a known malignancy. Urine free cortisol levels fluctuate but are typically greater than two to four times normal, and the plasma ACTH level is usually >22 pmol/L (>100 pg/mL). A suppressed ACTH level excludes this diagnosis and indicates an ACTH-independent cause of Cushing’s syndrome (e.g., adrenal or exogenous glucocorticoid). In contrast to pituitary sources of ACTH, most ectopic sources of ACTH do not respond to glucocorticoid suppression. Therefore, high-dose dexamethasone (8 mg PO) suppresses 8:00 a.m. serum cortisol (50% decrease from baseline) in ~80% of pituitary ACTH-producing adenomas but fails to suppress ectopic ACTH in ~90% of cases. Bronchial and other carcinoids are well-documented exceptions to these general guidelines, as these ectopic sources of ACTH may exhibit feedback regulation indistinguishable from pituitary adenomas, including suppression by high-dose dexamethasone, and ACTH responsiveness to adrenal blockade with metyrapone. If necessary, petrosal sinus catheterization can be used to evaluate a patient with ACTH-dependent Cushing’s syndrome when the source of ACTH is unclear. After CRH stimulation, a 3:1 petrosal sinus:peripheral ACTH ratio strongly suggests a pituitary ACTH source. Imaging studies (computed tomography or magnetic reso-611 nance imaging) are also useful in the evaluation of suspected carcinoid lesions, allowing biopsy and characterization of hormone production using special stains. If available, positron emission tomography or octreotide scanning may identify some sources of ACTH production.
# Chunk 2602
Approximately 30% of patients with solid tumors have granulocytosis (granulocyte count >8000/μL). In about half of patients with granulocytosis and cancer, the granulocytosis has an identifiable nonparaneoplastic etiology (infection, tumor necrosis, glucocorticoid administration, etc.). The other patients have proteins in urine and serum that stimulate the growth of bone marrow cells. Tumors and tumor cell lines from patients with lung, ovarian, and bladder cancers have been documented to produce granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF), granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), and/or interleukin 6 (IL-6). However, the etiology of granulocytosis has not been characterized in most patients.
# Chunk 2603
Clinical Manifestations Patients with cancer who develop deep venous thrombosis usually develop swelling or pain in the leg, and physical examination reveals tenderness, warmth, and redness. Patients who present with pulmonary embolism develop dyspnea, chest pain, and syncope, and physical examination shows tachycardia, cyanosis, and 613 hypotension. Some 5% of patients with no history of cancer who have a diagnosis of deep venous thrombosis or pulmonary embolism will have a diagnosis of cancer within 1 year. The most common cancers associated with thromboembolic episodes include lung, pancreatic, gastrointestinal, breast, ovarian, and genitourinary cancers; lymphomas; and brain tumors. Patients with cancer who undergo surgical procedures requiring general anesthesia have a 20–30% risk of deep venous thrombosis.
# Chunk 2604
Patients with cancer and a diagnosis of deep venous thrombosis or pulmonary embolism should be treated initially with IV unfractionated heparin or low-molecular-weight heparin for at least 5 days, and warfarin should be started within 1 or 2 days. The warfarin dose should be adjusted so that the international normalized ratio (INR) is 2–3. Patients with proximal deep venous thrombosis and a relative contraindication to heparin anticoagulation (hemorrhagic brain metastases or pericardial effusion) should be considered for placement of a filter in the inferior vena cava (Greenfield filter) to prevent pulmonary embolism. Warfarin should be administered for 3–6 months. An alternative approach is to use low-molecularweight heparin for 6 months. Patients with cancer who undergo a major surgical procedure should be considered for heparin prophylaxis or pneumatic boots. Breast cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy and patients with implanted catheters should be considered for prophylaxis. Guidelines recommend that hospitalized patients with cancer and patients receiving a thalidomide analogue receive prophylaxis with low-molecular-weight heparin or low-dose aspirin. Use of prophylaxis routinely during chemotherapy is controversial and not recommended by the American Society of Clinical Oncology.
# Chunk 2605
history, accompanying symptoms (e.g., anorexia, weight loss), and type of syndrome dictate the studies and degree of effort needed to demonstrate a neoplasm. For example, the frequent association of Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS) with SCLC should lead to a chest and abdomen computed tomography (CT) or body positron emission tomography (PET) scan and, if negative, periodic tumor screening for at least 3 years after the neurologic diagnosis. In contrast, the weak association of polymyositis with cancer calls into question the need for repeated cancer screenings in this situation. Serum and urine immunofixation studies should be considered in patients with peripheral neuropathy of unknown cause; detection of a monoclonal gammopathy suggests the need for additional studies to uncover a B cell or plasma cell malignancy. In paraneoplastic neuropathies, diagnostically useful antineuronal antibodies are limited to anti-CV2/CRMP5 and anti-Hu.
# Chunk 2606
no response within several days, one can advance to intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) or plasma exchange, and then to immunosuppression with either rituximab or cyclophosphamide. Approximately 30% of patients with anti-Ma2-associated encephalitis respond to treatment of the tumor (usually a germ cell neoplasm of the testis) and immunotherapy.
# Chunk 2607
Encephalitis with N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antibodies (Fig. 122-1) usually occurs in young women and children, but men and older patients of both sexes can be affected. The disorder has a characteristic pattern of symptom progression that includes a prodrome resembling a viral process, followed in a few days by the onset of severe psychiatric symptoms, memory loss, seizures, decreased level of consciousness, abnormal movements (orofacial, limb, and trunk dyskinesias, dystonic postures), autonomic instability, and frequent hypoventilation. Monosymptomatic episodes, such as pure psychosis, occur in 4% of the patients. Clinical relapses occur in 12–24% of patients (12% during the first 2 years after initial presentation). Most patients have intrathecal synthesis of antibodies, likely by infiltrating plasma cells in brain and meninges (Fig. 122-4A). The syndrome is often misdiagnosed as a viral or idiopathic encephalitis, neuroleptic malignant syndrome, or encephalitis lethargica, and many patients are initially evaluated by psychiatrists with the suspicion of acute psychosis. The detection of an associated teratoma is dependent on age and gender: 46% of female patients 12 years or older have unior bilateral ovarian teratomas, whereas less than 7% of girls younger than 12 have a teratoma (Fig. 122-4B). In male patients, the detection of a tumor is rare. Patients older than 45 years are more frequently male; about 20% of these patients have tumors (e.g., cancer of the breast, ovary, or lung).
# Chunk 2608
Patients with this syndrome develop myalgias and rapid progression of weakness involving the extremities and the pharyngeal and respiratory muscles, often resulting in death. Serum muscle enzymes are elevated, and muscle biopsy shows extensive necrosis with minimal or absent inflammation and sometimes deposits of complement. The disorder occurs as a paraneoplastic manifestation of a variety of cancers including SCLC and cancer of the gastrointestinal tract, breast, kidney, and prostate, among others. Glucocorticoids and treatment of the underly-619 ing tumor rarely control the disorder.
# Chunk 2609
About 40–50% of patients are asymptomatic; masses are detected incidentally on routine chest radiographs. When symptomatic, patients may have cough, chest pain, dyspnea, fever, wheezing, fatigue, weight loss, night sweats, or anorexia. Occasionally, thymomas may obstruct the superior vena cava. Pericardial effusion may be present. About 40% of patients with thymoma have another systemic autoimmune illness related to the thymoma. About 30% of patients with thymoma have myasthenia gravis, 5–8% have pure red cell aplasia, and ~5% have hypogammaglobulinemia. Thymoma with hypogammaglobulinemia also is called Good’s syndrome. Among patients with myasthenia gravis, ~10–15% have a thymoma. Thymoma more rarely may be associated with polymyositis, systemic lupus erythematosus, thyroiditis, Sjren’s syndrome, ulcerative colitis, pernicious anemia, Addison’s disease, stiff person syndrome, scleroderma, and panhypopituitarism. In one series, 70% of patients with thymoma were found to have another systemic illness.
# Chunk 2610
The staging system for thymoma was developed by Masaoka and colleagues (Table 123e-1). It is an anatomic system in which the stage is increased on the basis of the degree of invasiveness. The 5-year survival of patients in the various stages is as follows: stage I, 96%; stage II, 86%; stage III, 69%; and stage IV, 50%. The French Study Group on Thymic Tumors (GETT) has proposed modifications to the Masaoka scheme based on the degree of surgical removal because the extent of surgery has been noted to be a prognostic indicator. In their system, stage I tumors are divided into A and B on the basis of whether the surgeon suspects adhesions to adjacent structures; stage III tumors are divided into A and B based on whether disease was subtotally resected or only biopsied. The concurrence between the two systems is high.
# Chunk 2611
and noninvasive, and about 35% are invasive. They may have a variable percentage of lymphocytes within the tumor, but genetic studies suggest that the lymphocytes are benign polyclonal cells. The epithelial component of the tumor may consist primarily of round or oval cells derived mainly from the cortex or spindle-shaped cells derived mainly from the medulla or combinations of the two types (World Health Organization classification; Table 123e-2). Cytologic features are not reliable predictors of biologic behavior. In part, this unreliability may be related to the moderate reproducibility of the system. About 90% of A, AB, and B1 tumors are localized. A very small number of patients have aggressive histology features characteristic of carcinomas. Thymic carcinomas are invasive and have a poor prognosis.
# Chunk 2612
About 30–50% of patients with pure red cell aplasia have a thymoma. Thymectomy results in the resolution of pure red cell aplasia in ~30% of patients. About 10% of patients with hypogammaglobulinemia have a thymoma, but hypogammaglobulinemia rarely responds to thymectomy.
# Chunk 2613
This multimodality approach appears to be superior to the use of surgery followed by radiation therapy alone, which produces a 5-year survival of ≤50% in patients with advanced-stage disease.
# Chunk 2614
Pregnancy is associated with a number of physiologic changes that frequently result in symptoms that may make it difficult to recognize symptoms or physical findings suggestive of a neoplasm. Increased sensitivity of central chemoreceptors to Pco2 drives an increase in minute ventilation that many women perceive as dyspnea at rest or with minimal exertion. The combination of increased total body water, decreased colloid oncotic pressure, and some obstruction of venous return from the lower extremities causes demonstrable dependent edema in more than 50% of pregnant women. Decreased gastrointestinal motility due to high serum progesterone levels and mechanical compression from an enlarging uterus cause early satiety, gastroesophageal reflux, nausea, vomiting, and constipation. Hemorrhoids develop and often bleed. Breasts enlarge and increase in density and “lumpiness.” These changes may result in delayed recognition and more advanced disease at diagnosis.
# Chunk 2615
In 2012, several sets of recommendations were published for screening for cervical cancer: one by the American Cancer Society (ACS), the American Society for Colposcopy and Cervical Pathology (ASCCP), and the American Society for Clinical Pathology (ASCP); a second by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF); and a third by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG). Although the details of the recommendations for screening and management of abnormal results differ slightly among the three sets of guidelines, there is general consensus that cytology screening should start at age 21 and continue every 3 years through age 29. After age 30, cytology screening frequency may be reduced to every 5 years if accompanied by co-testing for HPV. Recommendations for management of abnormal cytology findings are complex and determined by the degree of abnormality of the cytology finding (e.g., atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance; atypical squamous cells, cannot exclude high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion; low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion; or high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion), the HPV status of the patient, the age of the patient, and whether this is the first abnormal finding or a persistent abnormality. A full discussion of all the treatment recommendations based on these factors is beyond the scope of this chapter. Some of the diagnostic procedures recommended for evaluation of nonpregnant women are contraindicated in pregnancy, and the indications for some procedures are modified in the setting of pregnancy. Suffice it to say that the evaluation of women with abnormal cervical cytology in pregnancy should be referred to knowledgeable and experienced gynecologists or gynecologic oncologists.
# Chunk 2616
Cervical intraepithelial neoplasia is a slowly progressive lesion and has a low risk of progression to invasive cancer during pregnancy (~0.4%), and many low-grade lesions (36–70%) regress spontaneously. Accordingly, some physicians defer definitive diagnostic procedures in pregnant women until 6 weeks postpartum unless they are at high risk for invasive disease. If invasive disease is suspected and the pregnancy is between 16 and 20 weeks, a cone biopsy may be performed to make the diagnosis and may be curative for some lesions; however, the procedure may cause heavy bleeding due to the increased vasculature in the gravid cervix and increases the risk of premature rupture of membranes and preterm labor twoto threefold. Cone biopsy should not be done within 4 weeks of delivery. The only indication for therapy of cervical neoplasia in pregnant women is the documentation of invasive cancer.
# Chunk 2617
Breast cancer complicates approximately 1 in 3000 to 10,000 live births. About 5% of all breast cancers occur in women age 40 years or younger. Among all premenopausal women with breast cancer, 25–30% were pregnant at the time of diagnosis. It has been recognized for some time that breast cancer associated with pregnancy generally seems to have a poorer prognosis for both overall survival and progression-free survival. The definition of pregnancy-associated breast cancer (PABC) has differed in various publications, but a generally accepted definition is breast cancer diagnosed during pregnancy or within 1 year of delivery. There are likely several reasons for the observation of the poorer prognosis. Breast cancers diagnosed during pregnancy are often diagnosed at a later stage of disease and so have a poorer outcome. The late diagnosis is often due to the fact that early physical signs of the disease are missed or attributed to the changes that occur in the breast normally as a function of pregnancy. However, a discreet breast mass in a pregnant woman should never be assumed to be normal. Another reason is the more aggressive behavior of the cancer possibly related to the hormonal milieu (estrogen increases 100-fold; progesterone increases 1000-fold) of the pregnancy. However, about 70% of the breast cancers found in pregnancy are estrogen receptor– negative. About 28–58% of the tumors express HER2, a biologically more aggressive breast cancer subset. Another factor is that aggressive, definitive chemotherapy and radiation therapy are often delayed due aLower measured levels could be in part artifactual due to the increased levels of estrogen in the milieu.
# Chunk 2618
(See Chap. 134) Hodgkin’s disease occurs mainly in the age range that coincides with child-bearing. However, Hodgkin’s disease is not more common in pregnant than nonpregnant women. Hodgkin’s disease is diagnosed in approximately 1 in 6000 pregnancies. It generally presents as a nontender lymph node swelling, most often in the left supraclavicular region. It may be accompanied by B symptoms (fever, night sweats, unexplained weight loss). Excisional biopsy is the preferred diagnostic procedure because fine-needle aspiration cannot reveal the architectural framework that is an essential component of Hodgkin’s disease diagnosis. The stage at presentation appears to be unaffected by pregnancy. Women diagnosed in the second and third trimester can be treated safely with combination chemotherapy, usually doxorubicin, bleomycin, vinblastine, and dacarbazine (ABVD). In general, the patient in the first trimester is asymptomatic, and a woman with a desired pregnancy can be followed until the second or third trimester when definitive multiagent chemotherapy can be safely given. Radiation therapy is not given during pregnancy and is not necessary for optimal management of the pregnant patient. If symptoms requiring treatment appear during the first trimester, anecdotal evidence suggests that Hodgkin’s disease symptoms can be controlled with weekly low-dose vinblastine. Such an approach has been safely used to avoid termination of pregnancy. Pregnancy does not have an adverse effect on treatment outcome.
# Chunk 2619
Non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas are more unusual in pregnancy (approximately 0.8 per 100,000 pregnancies), but are usually tumors with an aggressive natural history, such as diffuse large B cell lymphoma, Burkitt’s lymphoma, or peripheral T cell lymphoma. Diagnosis relies on an excisional biopsy of a tumor mass, not fine-needle aspiration. Staging evaluation is generally limited to ultrasound or MRI examinations. Diagnosis in the first trimester should prompt termination of the pregnancy followed by definitive treatment with combination chemotherapy, because aggressive lymphomas are not likely to be held at bay with single-agent chemotherapy. Women diagnosed in the second or third trimesters can be treated with standard chemotherapy, such as with cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone (CHOP). The experience with rituximab in this setting is anecdotal. However, infants born of mothers who have received rituximab may have transient delay in B cell development that typically normalizes by 6 months. The treatment outcome is similar in lymphomas diagnosed in pregnant and nonpregnant women of the same clinical stage.
# Chunk 2620
The assessment of thyroid function during pregnancy is challenging because of the physiologic changes that occur during pregnancy. Women who have previously been treated for thyroid cancer are at risk of hypothyroidism. The demand for thyroid hormone increases during pregnancy, and doses to maintain normal function may increase by 30–50%. Total T4 levels are higher during pregnancy, but target therapeutic levels also increase (Table 124e-4). It is recommended that the upper and lower limits of the laboratory range be multiplied by 1.5 in the second and third trimester to establish a pregnancy-specific normal range. The target thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level is <2.5 mIU/L.
# Chunk 2621
(See Chap. 117) Gestational trophoblastic disease encompasses hydatidiform mole, choriocarcinoma, placental site trophoblastic tumor, and assorted miscellaneous and unclassifiable trophoblastic tumors. Moles are the most common, occurring in 1 in 1500 pregnancies in the United States. The incidence is higher in Asia. In general, if the serum level of β-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG) returns to normal after surgical removal (evacuation) of the mole, the illness is considered gestational trophoblastic disease. By contrast, if the β-hCG level remains elevated after mole evacuation, the patient is considered to have gestational trophoblastic neoplasia. Choriocarcinoma occurs in 1 in 25,000 pregnancies. Maternal age >45 years and prior history of molar pregnancy are risk factors. A previous molar pregnancy makes choriocarcinoma about 1000 times more likely to occur (incidence 1–2%).
# Chunk 2622
Women with molar gestations often present with first-trimester bleeding, disproportionately high serum β-hCG levels for menstrual age, unusually large uterine size for menstrual age, hyperemesis gravidarum, theca lutein cysts in the ovaries (due to β-hCG stimulation), and hyperthyroidism (due to cross-reactivity of β-hCG and TSH) and may develop preeclampsia before 20 weeks of menstrual age. Pelvic ultrasound imaging of complete moles shows absence of fetal parts, an enlarged echo-bright, hydropic placenta in an enlarged uterus, and enlarged multicystic ovaries. If the diagnosis is uncertain at the initial examination and the pregnancy is desired, then a serum β-hCG level should be obtained and the examination repeated in a week. If no embryo is seen within 7–10 days and the serum β-hCG is elevated, 124e-5 then this is a nonviable pregnancy that should be evacuated. Diagnosis of partial molar pregnancies can be more difficult because an embryo or fetus with visible heart motion is usually present, and the hydropic changes in the placenta, uterine enlargement, and elevations of β-hCG are not usually as dramatic. Although an embryo or fetus is present, it rarely grows normally with normal anatomy, and repeated ultrasound examinations usually make the diagnosis. Amniocentesis will also make the diagnosis by demonstration of triploidy.
# Chunk 2623
Patients with molar pregnancies require prompt uterine evacuation with suction curettage, which may be complicated by very heavy bleeding. Following evacuation of complete moles, approximately 20% will result in persistent, invasive, or metastatic disease. Partial moles are considerably less likely (<5%) to result in persistent disease. Patients should be monitored with serial determinations of serum β-hCG until the values fall below the lower limit of the assay and remain low for at least 6 months. Patients should be advised not to become pregnant for at least 12 months.
# Chunk 2624
Persistence of detectable β-hCG for more than 6 months after molar evacuation

About half of choriocarcinomas develop after a molar pregnancy, and half develop after ectopic pregnancy or, rarely, after a normal full-term pregnancy. Disease is classified as stage I if it is confined to the uterus, stage II if disease is limited to genital structures (~30% have vaginal involvement), stage III if disease has spread to the lungs but no other organs, and stage IV if disease has spread to liver, brain, or other organs.
# Chunk 2625
Patients without widely metastatic disease are generally managed with single-agent methotrexate (either 30 mg/m2 IM weekly until β-hCG normalizes or 1 mg/kg IM every other day for four doses followed by leucovorin 0.1 mg/kg IV 24 h after methotrexate), which cures >90% of patients. Patients with very high β-hCG levels, presenting >4 months after a pregnancy, with brain or liver metastases, or failing to be cured by single-agent methotrexate are treated with combination chemotherapy. Etoposide, methotrexate, and dactinomycin alternating with cyclophosphamide and vincristine (EMA-CO) is the most commonly used regimen, producing long-term survival in >80% of patients. Brain metastases can usually be controlled with brain radiation therapy. The vast majority of choriocarcinomas can be cured with chemotherapy alone. Hysterectomy is reserved for women who have completed their child-bearing, women with chemotherapy-resistant disease in the uterus, and women with rare placental site trophoblastic tumors confined to the uterus because these tumors are less reliably sensitive to chemotherapy. Women cured of trophoblastic disease who have not undergone hysterectomy do not appear to have increased risk of fetal abnormalities or maternal complications with subsequent pregnancies.
# Chunk 2626
Cardiovascular toxicity of cancer chemotherapeutic agents includes dysrhythmias, cardiac ischemia, cardiomyopathic congestive heart failure (CHF), pericardial disease, and peripheral vascular disease. Because these cardiac toxicities are difficult to distinguish from disease that is not associated with cancer treatment, clear etiologic implication of cancer chemotherapeutic agents may be difficult. Cardiovascular complications occurring in an unexpected clinical setting in patients who have undergone cancer therapy are often important in raising suspicion. Dose-dependent myocardial toxicity of anthracyclines with characteristic myofibrillar dropout is pathologically pathognomonic on endomyocardial biopsy. Anthracycline cardiotoxicity occurs through a root mechanism of chemical free radical damage. Fe3+doxorubicin complexes damage DNA, nuclear and cytoplasmic membranes, and mitochondria. About 5% of patients receiving >450–550 mg/m2 of doxorubicin will develop CHF. Cardiotoxicity in relation to the dose of anthracycline is clearly not a step function, but rather a continuous function, and occasional patients are seen with CHF at substantially lower doses. Advanced age, other concomitant cardiac disease, hypertension, diabetes, and thoracic radiation therapy are all important cofactors in promoting anthracycline-associated CHF. The risk of cardiac failure appears to be substantially lower when doxorubicin is administered by continuous infusion. Anthracycline-related CHF is difficult to reverse and has a mortality rate as high as 50%, making prevention crucial. Some anthracyclines such as mitoxantrone are associated with less cardiotoxicity, and continuous-infusion regimens and liposomally encapsulated doxorubicin are associated with less cardiotoxicity. Dexrazoxane, an intracellular iron chelator, may limit anthracycline toxicity, but the concern of limiting chemotherapeutic efficacy has somewhat limited its use. Monitoring patients for cardiac toxicity typically involves periodic gated nuclear cardiac blood pool ejection fraction testing (multigated acquisition scan [MUGA]) or cardiac ultrasonography. More recently, cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has been used, but MRI is not standard or widespread. Testing is performed more frequently at higher cumulative doses, with additional risk factors, and certainly for any newly developing CHF or other symptoms of cardiac dysfunction.
# Chunk 2627
Patients receiving radiation have an increasing and lifelong risk of second malignancies that is 1–2% in the second decade following treatment but increases to >25% after 25 years. These malignancies include cancers of the thyroid and breast, sarcomas, and CNS cancers, which often tend to be aggressive and have a poor prognosis. An example of organ-, age-, and sex-dependent radiation-induced secondary malignancy is breast cancer, in which the risk is small with radiation in women under age 30 but increases about 20-fold over baseline in women over 30. A 25-year-old woman treated with mantle radiation for Hodgkin’s lymphoma has a 29% actuarial risk of developing breast cancer by age 55.
# Chunk 2628
626 In a normal individual, the average red cell life span is 120 days. Thus, 0.8–1% of red cells are replaced each day. At the end of its life span, the red cell is recognized as senescent by the cells of the reticuloendothelial (RE) system, and the red cell undergoes phagocytosis. Once within the RE cell, the ingested hemoglobin is broken down, the globin and other proteins are returned to the amino acid pool, and the iron is shuttled back to the surface of the RE cell, where it is presented to circulating transferrin. It is the efficient and highly conserved recycling of iron from senescent red cells that supports steady-state (and even mildly accelerated) erythropoiesis. Because each milliliter of red cells contains 1 mg of elemental iron, the amount of iron needed to replace those red cells lost through senescence amounts to 20 mg/d (assuming an adult with a red cell mass of 2 L). Any additional iron required for daily red cell production comes from the diet. Normally, an adult male will need to absorb at least 1 mg of elemental iron daily to meet needs, while females in the childbearing years will need to absorb an average of 1.4 mg/d. However, to achieve a maximum proliferative erythroid marrow response to anemia, additional iron must be available. With markedly stimulated erythropoiesis, demands for iron are increased by as much as sixto eightfold. With extravascular hemolytic anemia, the rate of red cell destruction is increased, but the iron recovered from the red cells is efficiently reutilized for hemoglobin synthesis. In contrast, with intra-vascular hemolysis or blood loss anemia, the rate of red cell production is limited by the amount of iron that can be mobilized from stores. Typically, the rate of mobilization under these circumstances will not support red cell production more than 2.5 times normal. If the delivery of iron to the stimulated marrow is suboptimal, the marrow’s proliferative response is blunted, and hemoglobin synthesis is impaired. The result is a hypoproliferative marrow accompanied by microcytic, hypochromic anemia. Whereas blood loss or hemolysis places a demand on the iron supply, inflammatory conditions interfere with iron release from stores and can result in a rapid decrease in the serum iron (see below).
# Chunk 2629
The amount of iron required from the diet to replace losses averages approximately 10% of body iron content a year in men and 15% in women of childbearing age. Dietary iron content is closely related to total caloric intake (approximately 6 mg of elemental iron per 1000 calories). Iron bioavailability is affected by the nature of the foodstuff, with heme iron (e.g., red meat) being most readily absorbed. In the United States, the average iron intake in an adult male is 15 mg/d with 6% absorption; for the average female, the daily intake is 11 mg/d with 12% absorption. An individual with iron deficiency can increase iron absorption to approximately 20% of the iron present in a meat-containing diet but only 5–10% of the iron in a vegetarian diet. As a result, one-third of the female population in the United States has virtually no iron stores. Vegetarians are at an additional disadvantage because certain foodstuffs that include phytates and phosphates reduce iron absorption by approximately 50%. When ionizable iron salts are given together with food, the amount of iron absorbed is reduced. When the percentage of iron absorbed from individual food items is compared with the percentage for an equivalent amount of ferrous salt, iron in vegetables is only about one-twentieth as available, egg iron one-eighth, liver iron one-half, and heme iron one-half to two-thirds.
# Chunk 2630
Iron deficiency is one of the most prevalent forms of malnutri tion. Globally, 50% of anemia is attributable to iron deficiency and accounts for approximately 841,000 deaths annually worldwide. Africa and parts of Asia bear 71% of the global mortality burden; North America represents only 1.4% of the total morbidity and mortality associated with iron deficiency.
# Chunk 2631
FIGURE 126-2 Laboratory studies in the evolution of iron deficiency. Measurements of marrow iron stores, serum ferritin, and total iron-binding capacity (TIBC) are sensitive to early iron-store depletion. Iron-deficient erythropoiesis is recognized from additional abnormalities in the serum iron (SI), percent transferrin saturation, the pattern of marrow sideroblasts, and the red blood cell (RBC) protoporphyrin level. Patients with iron-deficiency anemia demonstrate all the same abnormalities plus hypochromic microcytic anemia. (From RS Hillman, CA Finch: The Red Cell Manual, 7th ed. Philadelphia, F.A.Davis and Co., 1996, with permission.) range, hemoglobin synthesis is unaffected despite the dwindling iron stores. Once the transferrin saturation falls to 15–20%, hemoglobin synthesis becomes impaired. This is a period of iron-deficient erythropoiesis. Careful evaluation of the peripheral blood smear reveals the first appearance of microcytic cells, and if the laboratory technology is available, one finds hypochromic reticulocytes in circulation. Gradually, the hemoglobin and hematocrit begin to fall, reflecting iron-deficiency anemia. The transferrin saturation at this point is 10–15%.
# Chunk 2632
LABORATORY IRON STUDIES Serum Iron and Total Iron-Binding Capacity The serum iron level represents the amount of circulating iron bound to transferrin. The TIBC is an indirect measure of the circulating transferrin. The normal range for the serum iron is 50–150 μg/dL; the normal range for TIBC is 300–360 μg/dL. Transferrin saturation, which is normally 25–50%, is obtained by the following formula: serum iron × 100 ÷ TIBC. Iron-deficiency states are associated with saturation levels below 20%. There is a diurnal variation in the serum iron. A transferrin saturation % >50% indicates that a disproportionate amount of the iron bound to transferrin is being delivered to nonerythroid tissues. If this persists for an extended time, tissue iron overload may occur.
# Chunk 2633
Evaluation of Bone Marrow Iron Stores Although RE iron stores can be estimated from the iron stain of a bone marrow aspirate or biopsy, the measurement of serum ferritin has largely supplanted these procedures for determination of storage iron (Table 126-3). The serum ferritin level is a better indicator of iron overload than the marrow iron stain. However, in addition to storage iron, the marrow iron stain provides information about the effective delivery of iron to developing erythroblasts. Normally, when the marrow smear is stained for iron, 20–40% of developing erythroblasts—called sideroblasts—will have visible ferritin granules in their cytoplasm. This represents iron in excess of that needed for hemoglobin synthesis. In states in which release of iron from storage sites is blocked, RE iron will be detectable, and there will be few or no sideroblasts. In the myelodysplastic syndromes, mitochondrial dysfunction can occur, and accumulation of iron in mitochondria appears in a necklace fashion around the nucleus of the erythroblast. Such cells are referred to as ringed sideroblasts.
# Chunk 2634
Tablet (Iron Elixir (Iron Content), Generic Name Content), mg mg in 5 mL contain different amounts of iron, they are generally all absorbed well and are effective in treatment. Some come with other compounds designed to enhance iron absorption, such as ascorbic acid. It is not clear whether the benefits of such compounds justify their costs. Typically, for iron replacement therapy, up to 200 mg of elemental iron per day is given, usually as three or four iron tablets (each containing 50–65 mg elemental iron) given over the course of the day. Ideally, oral iron preparations should be taken on an empty stomach, since food may inhibit iron absorption. Some patients with gastric disease or prior gastric surgery require special treatment with iron solutions, because the retention capacity of the stomach may be reduced. The retention capacity is necessary for dissolving the shell of the iron tablet before the release of iron. A dose of 200 mg of elemental iron per day should result in the absorption of iron up to 50 mg/d. This supports a red cell production level of two to three times normal in an individual with a normally functioning marrow and appropriate erythropoietin stimulus. However, as the hemoglobin level rises, erythropoietin stimulation decreases, and the amount of iron absorbed is reduced. The goal of therapy in individuals with iron-deficiency anemia is not only to repair the anemia, but also to provide stores of at least 0.5–1 g of iron. Sustained treatment for a period of 6–12 months after correction of the anemia will be necessary to achieve this.
# Chunk 2635
The response to iron therapy varies, depending on the erythropoietin stimulus and the rate of absorption. Typically, the reticulocyte count should begin to increase within 4–7 days after initiation of therapy and peak at 1–1½ weeks. The absence of a response may be due to poor absorption, noncompliance (which is common), or a confounding diagnosis. A useful test in the clinic to determine the patient’s ability to absorb iron is the iron tolerance test. Two iron tablets are given to the patient on an empty stomach, and the serum iron is measured serially over the subsequent 2 h. Normal absorption will result in an increase in the serum iron of at least 100 μg/ dL. If iron deficiency persists despite adequate treatment, it may be necessary to switch to parenteral iron therapy.
# Chunk 2636
Parenteral iron is used in two ways: one is to administer the total dose of iron required to correct the hemoglobin deficit and provide the patient with at least 500 mg of iron stores; the second is to give repeated small doses of parenteral iron over a protracted period. The latter approach is common in dialysis centers, where it is not unusual for 100 mg of elemental iron to be given weekly for 10 weeks to augment the response to recombinant EPO therapy. The amount of iron needed by an individual patient is calculated by the following formula:
# Chunk 2637
Body weight (kg) × 2.3 × (15 – patient’s hemoglobin, g/dL) + 500 or 1000 mg (for stores).

In administering intravenous iron dextran, anaphylaxis is a con cern. Anaphylaxis is much rarer with the newer preparations. The factors that have correlated with an anaphylactic-like reaction include a history of multiple allergies or a prior allergic reaction to dextran (in the case of iron dextran). Generalized symptoms appearing several days after the infusion of a large dose of iron can include arthralgias, skin rash, and low-grade fever. These may be dose-related, but they do not preclude the further use of parenteral iron in the patient. To date, patients with sensitivity to iron dextran have been safely treated with other parenteral iron preparations.
# Chunk 2638
Progressive CKD is usually associated with a moderate to severe hypoproliferative anemia; the level of the anemia corre-EPO Marrow lates with the stage of CKD. Red cells are typically normocytic and normochromic, and reticulocytes are decreased. The anemiaIron is primarily due to a failure of EPO production by the diseased kidney and a reduction in red cell survival. In certain forms of acuteInterferon ° renal failure, the correlation between the anemia and renal function is weaker. Patients with the hemolytic-uremic syndrome increase erythropoiesis in response to the hemolysis, despite renal failure requiring Rheumatoid arthritis dialysis. Polycystic kidney disease also shows a smaller degree of EPO FIGURE 126-4 Suppression of erythropoiesis by inflammatory deficiency for a given level of renal failure. By contrast, patients with cytokines. Through the release of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and diabetes or myeloma have more severe EPO deficiency for a given level interferon γ (IFN-γ), neoplasms and bacterial infections suppress of renal failure. erythropoietin (EPO) production and the proliferation of erythroid Assessment of iron status provides information to distinguish the progenitors (erythroid burst-forming units and erythroid colony-anemia of CKD from the other forms of hypoproliferative anemia forming units [BFU/CFU-E]). The mediators in patients with vasculitis (Table 126-6) and to guide management. Patients with the anemia of and rheumatoid arthritis include interleukin 1 (IL-1) and IFN-γ. The red CKD usually present with normal serum iron, TIBC, and ferritin levarrows indicate sites of inflammatory cytokine inhibitory effects. RBC, els. However, those maintained on chronic hemodialysis may develop red blood cell. iron deficiency from blood loss through the dialysis procedure. Iron must be replenished in these patients to ensure an adequate response to EPO therapy (see below).
# Chunk 2639
EPO is particularly useful in anemias in which endogenous EPO levels are inappropriately low, such as CKD or AI. Iron status must be evaluated and iron replaced to obtain optimal effects from EPO. In patients with CKD, the usual dose of EPO is 50–150 U/kg three times a week intravenously. Hemoglobin levels of 10–12 g/dL are usually reached within 4–6 weeks if iron levels are adequate; 90% of these patients respond. Once a target hemoglobin level is achieved, the EPO dose can be decreased. A decrease in hemoglobin level occurring in the face of EPO therapy usually signifies the development of an infection or iron depletion. Aluminum toxicity and hyperparathyroidism can also compromise the response to EPO. When an infection intervenes, it is best to interrupt the EPO therapy and rely on transfusions to correct the anemia until the infection is adequately treated. The dose of EPO needed to correct chemotherapy-induced anemia in patients with cancer is higher, up to 300 U/kg three times a week, and only approximately 60% of patients respond. Because of evidence that there is an increased risk of thromboembolic complications and tumor progression with EPO administration, the risks and benefits of using EPO in such patients must be weighed carefully, and the target hemoglobin should be that necessary to avoid transfusions.
# Chunk 2640
Red cells first appearing at about 6 weeks after conception contain the embryonic hemoglobins Hb Portland (ζ2γ2), Hb Gower I (ζ2ε2), and Hb Gower II (α2ε2). At 10–11 weeks, fetal hemoglobin (HbF; α2γ2) becomes predominant. The switch to nearly exclusive synthesis of adult hemoglobin (HbA; α2β2) occurs at about 38 weeks (Fig. 127-1).
# Chunk 2641
as those that encode the enzymes for heme biosynthesis. Normal red blood cell (RBC) differentiation requires the coordinated expression of the globin genes with the genes responsible for heme and iron metabolism. RBC precursors contain a protein, α-hemoglobinstabilizing protein (AHSP), that enhances the folding and solubility of α globin, which is otherwise easily denatured, leading to insoluble precipitates. These precipitates play an important role in the thalassemia syndromes and certain unstable hemoglobin disorders. Polymorphic variation in the amounts and/or functional capacity of AHSP might explain some of the clinical variability seen in patients inheriting identical thalassemia mutations.
# Chunk 2642
There are five major classes of hemoglobinopathies (Table 127-1). Structural hemoglobinopathies occur when mutations alter the amino acid sequence of a globin chain, altering the physiologic properties of the variant hemoglobins and producing the characteristic clinical abnormalities. The most clinically relevant variant hemoglobins polymerize abnormally, as in sickle cell anemia, or exhibit altered solubility or oxygen-binding affinity. Thalassemia syndromes arise from mutations that impair production or translation of globin mRNA, leading to deficient globin chain biosynthesis. Clinical abnormalities are attributable to the inadequate supply of hemoglobin and the imbalances in the production of individual globin chains, leading to premature destruction of erythroblasts and RBC. Thalassemic hemoglobin variants combine features of thalassemia (e.g., abnormal globin biosynthesis) and of structural hemoglobinopathies (e.g., an abnormal amino acid sequence). Hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin (HPFH) is characterized by synthesis of high levels of fetal hemoglobin in adult life. Acquired hemoglobinopathies include modifications of the hemoglobin molecule by toxins (e.g., acquired methemoglobinemia) and clonal abnormalities of hemoglobin synthesis (e.g., high levels of HbF production in preleukemia and α thalassemia in myeloproliferative disorders).
# Chunk 2643
Vasoocclusion causes protean manifestations. Intermittent episodes of vasoocclusion in connective and musculoskeletal structures produce ischemia manifested by acute pain and tenderness, fever, tachycardia, and anxiety. These recurrent episodes, called painful crises, are the most common clinical manifestation. Their frequency and severity vary greatly. Pain can develop almost anywhere in the body and may last from a few hours to 2 weeks. Repeated crises requiring hospitalization (>3 episodes per year) correlate with reduced survival in adult life, suggesting that these episodes are associated with accumulation of chronic end-organ damage. Provocative factors include infection, fever, excessive exercise, anxiety, abrupt changes in temperature, hypoxia, or hypertonic dyes.
# Chunk 2644
FIGURE 127-3 Pathophysiology of sickle cell crisis.

Repeated microinfarction can destroy tissues having microvascular beds prone to sickling. Thus, splenic function is frequently lost within the first 18–36 months of life, causing susceptibility to infection,by quantitating the P50, the partial pressure of oxygen at which the particularly by pneumococci. Acute venous obstruction of the spleenhemoglobin sample becomes 50% saturated with oxygen. Direct tests (splenic sequestration crisis), a rare occurrence in early childhood, mayfor the percent carboxyhemoglobin and methemoglobin, using spec-require emergency transfusion and/or splenectomy to prevent traptrophotometric techniques, can readily be obtained from most clinical ping of the entire arterial output in the obstructed spleen. Occlusionlaboratories on an urgent basis.
# Chunk 2645
Sickle cell syndromes are remarkable for their clinical heterogeneity. Some patients remain virtually asymptomatic into or even through adult life, while others suffer repeated crises requiring hospitalization from early childhood. Patients with sickle thalassemia and sickle-HbE tend to have similar, slightly milder symptoms, perhaps because of the ameliorating effects of production of other hemoglobins within the RBC. Hemoglobin SC disease, one of the more common variants of sickle cell anemia, is frequently marked by lesser degrees of hemolytic anemia and a greater propensity for the development of retinopathy and aseptic necrosis of bones. In most respects, however, the clinical manifestations resemble sickle cell anemia. Some rare hemoglobin variants actually aggravate the sickling phenomenon.
# Chunk 2646
Diagnosis Sickle cell syndromes are suspected on the basis of hemolytic anemia, RBC morphology (Fig. 127-4), and intermittent episodes of ischemic pain. Diagnosis is confirmed by hemoglobin electrophoresis, mass spectroscopy, and the sickling tests already discussed. Thorough characterization of the exact hemoglobin profile of the patient is important, because sickle thalassemia and hemoglobin SC disease have distinct prognoses or clinical features. Diagnosis is usually established in childhood, but occasional patients, often with compound heterozygous states, do not develop symptoms until the onset of puberty, pregnancy, or early adult life. Genotyping of family members and potential parental partners is critical for genetic counseling. Details of the childhood history establish prognosis and need for aggressive or experimental therapies. Factors associated with increased morbidity and reduced survival include more than three crises requiring hospitalization per year, chronic neutrophilia, a history of splenic sequestration or hand-foot syndrome, and second episodes of acute chest syndrome. Patients with a history of cerebrovascular accidents are at higher risk for repeated episodes and require partial exchange transfusion and especially close monitoring using Doppler carotid flow measurements. Patients with severe or repeated episodes of acute chest syndrome may need lifelong transfusion support, using partial exchange transfusion, if possible.
# Chunk 2647
Disorders of Hemoglobin 636 arterial saturation. Diagnostic evaluation for pneumonia and pulmonary embolism should be especially thorough, since these may occur with atypical symptoms. Critical interventions are transfusion to maintain a hematocrit >30, and emergency exchange transfusion if arterial saturation drops to <90%. As patients with sickle cell syndrome increasingly survive into their fifth and sixth decades, end-stage renal failure and pulmonary hypertension are becoming increasingly prominent causes of end-stage morbidity. A sickle cell cardiomyopathy and/or premature coronary artery disease may compromise cardiac function in later years. Sickle cell patients have received kidney transplants, but they often experience an increase in the frequency and severity of crises, possibly due to increased infection as a consequence of immunosuppression. The most significant advance in the therapy of sickle cell anemia has been the introduction of hydroxyurea as a mainstay of therapy for patients with severe symptoms. Hydroxyurea (10–30 mg/kg per day) increases fetal hemoglobin and may also exert beneficial effects on RBC hydration, vascular wall adherence, and suppression of the granulocyte and reticulocyte counts; dosage is titrated to maintain a white cell count between 5000 and 8000/μL. White cells and reticulocytes may play a major role in the pathogenesis of sickle cell crisis, and their suppression may be an important side benefit of hydroxyurea therapy. Hydroxyurea should be considered in patients experiencing repeated episodes of acute chest syndrome or with more than three crises per year requiring hospitalization. The utility of this agent for reducing the incidence of other complications (priapism, retinopathy) is under evaluation, as are the long-term side effects. To date, however, minimal risk of bone marrow dyscrasias or other neoplasms has been documented. Hydroxyurea offers broad benefits to most patients whose disease is severe enough to impair their functional status, and it may improve survival. HbF levels increase in most patients within a few months. The antitumor drug 5-azacytidine was the first agent found to elevate HbF. It never achieved widespread use because of concerns about acute toxicity and carcinogenesis. However, low doses of the related agent 5-deoxyazacytidine (decitabine) can elevate HbF with more acceptable toxicity. Bone marrow transplantation can provide definitive cures but is known to be effective and safe only in children. Clinical trials studying partially myeloablative conditioning regimens (“mini” transplants) are likely to support more widespread use of this modality in older patients. Prognostic features justifying bone marrow transplant are the presence of repeated crises early in life, a high neutrophil count, or the development of hand-foot syndrome. Children at risk for stroke can now be identified through the use of Doppler ultrasound techniques. Prophylactic exchange transfusion appears to substantially reduce the risk of stroke in this population. Children who do suffer a cerebrovascular accident should be maintained for at least 3–5 years on a program of vigorous exchange transfusion, as the risk of second strokes is extremely high. Gene therapy for sickle cell anemia is being intensively pursued, but no safe measures are currently available. The development of newer methods of direct gene correction in situ (e.g., zinc finger nucleases, or “CRISPR” [clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats] technology) could well find clinical use in these patients. Experimental methods of derepressing HbF by interfering with Bcl11a are also being explored.
# Chunk 2648
Unstable hemoglobins occur sporadically, often by spontaneous new mutations. Heterozygotes are often symptomatic because a significant Heinz body burden can develop even when the unstable variant accounts for only a portion of the total hemoglobin. Symptomatic unstable hemoglobins tend to be β-globin variants, because sporadic mutations affecting only one of the four α globins alleles would generate only 20–30% abnormal hemoglobin.
# Chunk 2649
High-affinity hemoglobins (e.g., Hb Yakima [β99Asp→His]) bind oxygen more readily but deliver less O2 to tissues at normal capillary Po2 levels (Fig. 127-2). Mild tissue hypoxia ensues, stimulating RBC production and erythrocytosis (Table 127-3). In extreme cases, the hematocrits can rise to 60–65%, increasing blood viscosity and producing typical symptoms (headache, somnolence, or dizziness). Phlebotomy may be required. Typical mutations alter interactions within the heme pocket or disrupt the Bohr effect or salt-bond site. Mutations that impair the interaction of HbA with 2,3-BPG can increase O2 affinity because 2,3-BPG binding lowers O2 affinity.
# Chunk 2650
Hypochromia and microcytosis characterize all forms of β thalassemia because of the reduced amounts of hemoglobin tetramers (Fig. 127-5). In heterozygotes (β thalassemia trait), this is the only abnormality seen. Anemia is minimal. In more severe homozygous states, unbalanced αand β-globin accumulation causes accumulation of highly insoluble unpaired α chains. They form toxic inclusion bodies that kill developing erythroblasts in the marrow. Few of the proerythroblasts beginning erythroid maturation survive. The surviving RBCs bear a burden of inclusion bodies that are detected in the spleen, shortening the RBC life span and producing severe hemolytic anemia. The resulting profound anemia stimulates erythropoietin release and compensatory erythroid hyperplasia, but the marrow response is sabotaged by the ineffective erythropoiesis. Anemia persists. Erythroid hyperplasia can become exuberant and produce masses of extramedullary erythropoietic tissue in the liver and spleen.
# Chunk 2651
In HbH disease, HbA production is only 25–30% normal. Fetuses accumulate some unpaired γ chains (Hb Barts; γ-chain tetramers). In adults, unpaired β chains accumulate and are soluble enough to form β4 tetramers called HbH. HbH forms few inclusions in erythroblasts and precipitates in circulating RBC. Patients with HbH disease have thalassemia intermedia characterized by moderately severe hemolytic anemia but milder ineffective erythropoiesis. Survival into midadult life without transfusions is common.
# Chunk 2652
The diagnosis of β-thalassemia major is readily made during childhood on the basis of severe anemia accompanied by the characteristic signs of massive ineffective erythropoiesis: hepatosplenomegaly, profound microcytosis, a characteristic blood smear (Fig. 127-5), and elevated levels of HbF, HbA2, or both. Many patients require chronic hypertransfusion therapy designed to maintain a hematocrit of at least 27–30% so that erythropoiesis is suppressed. Splenectomy is required if the annual transfusion requirement (volume of RBCs per kilogram of body weight per year) increases by >50%. Folic acid supplements may be useful. Vaccination with Pneumovax in anticipation of eventual splenectomy is advised, as is close monitoring for infection, leg ulcers, and biliary tract disease. Many patients develop endocrine deficiencies as a result of iron overload. Early endocrine evaluation is required for glucose intolerance, thyroid dysfunction, and delayed onset of puberty or secondary sexual characteristics.
# Chunk 2653
Antenatal diagnosis of thalassemia syndromes is now widely available. DNA diagnosis is based on polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification of fetal DNA, obtained by amniocentesis or chorionic villus biopsy followed by hybridization to allele-specific oligonucleotide probes or direct DNA sequencing.
# Chunk 2654
Deferasirox is an oral iron-chelating agent. Single daily doses of 20–30 mg/kg deferasirox produced reductions in liver iron concentration comparable to deferoxamine in long-term transfused adult and pediatric patients. Deferasirox produces some elevations in liver enzymes and slight but persistent increases in serum creatinine, without apparent clinical consequence. Other toxicities are similar to those of deferoxamine. Its toxicity profile is acceptable, although long-term effects are still being evaluated.
# Chunk 2655
BONE MARROW TRANSPLANTATION, GENE THERAPY, AND MANIPULATION OF HbF

Bone marrow transplantation provides stem cells able to express normal hemoglobin; it has been used in a large number of patients with β thalassemia and a smaller number of patients with sickle cell anemia. Early in the course of disease, before end-organ damage occurs, transplantation is curative in 80–90% of patients. In highly experienced centers, the treatment-related mortality is <10%. Because survival into adult life is possible with conventional therapy, the decision to transplant is best made in consultation with specialized centers.
# Chunk 2656
Aplastic crisis refers to a profound cessation of erythroid activity in patients with chronic hemolytic anemias. It is associated with a rapidly falling hematocrit. Episodes are usually self-limited. Aplastic crises are caused by infection with a particular strain of parvovirus, B19A. Children infected with this virus usually develop permanent immunity. Aplastic crises do not often recur and are rarely seen in adults. Management requires close monitoring of the hematocrit and reticulocyte count. If anemia becomes symptomatic, transfusion support is indicated. Most crises resolve spontaneously within 1–2 weeks.
# Chunk 2657
Cobalamin is synthesized solely by microorganisms. Ruminants obtain cobalamin from the foregut, but the only source for humans is food of animal origin, e.g., meat, fish, and dairy products. Vegetables, fruits, and other foods of nonanimal origin are free from cobalamin unless they are contaminated by bacteria. A normal Western diet contains 5–30 μg of cobalamin daily. Adult daily losses (mainly in the urine and feces) are 1–3 μg (~0.1% of body stores), and because the body does not have the ability to degrade cobalamin, daily requirements are also about 1–3 μg. Body stores are of the order of 2–3 mg, sufficient for 3–4 years if supplies are completely cut off.
# Chunk 2658
Neural Tube Defects Folic acid supplements at the time of conception and in the first 12 weeks of pregnancy reduce by ~70% the incidence of neural tube defects (NTDs) (anencephaly, meningomyelocele, encephalocele, and spina bifida) in the fetus. Most of this protective effect can be achieved by taking folic acid, 0.4 mg daily, at the time of conception.
# Chunk 2659
Cardiovascular Disease Children with severe homocystinuria (blood levels ≥100 μmol/L) due to deficiency of one of three enzymes, methionine synthase, MTHFR, or cystathionine synthase (Fig. 128-1), have vascular disease, e.g., ischemic heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, or pulmonary embolus, as teenagers or in young adulthood. Lesser degrees of raised serum homocysteine and low levels of serum folate and homozygous inherited mutations of MTHFR have been found to be associated with cerebrovascular, peripheral vascular, and coronary heart disease and with deep vein thrombosis. Prospective randomized trials of lowering homocysteine levels with supplements of folic acid, vitamin B12, and vitamin B6 against placebo over a 5-year period in patients with vascular disease or diabetes have not, however, shown a reduction of first event fatal or nonfatal myocardial infarction, nor have these supplements reduced the risk of recurrent cardiovascular disease after an acute myocardial infarct. Meta-analysis showed an 18% reduction in strokes but no significant prevention of death from any cause. Venous thrombosis has been reported to be more frequent in vitamin B12–deficient subjects than in controls. This was ascribed to raised plasma homocysteine levels in vitamin B12 deficiency.
# Chunk 2660
INADEQUATE DIETARY INTAKE Adults Dietary cobalamin deficiency arises in vegans who omit meat, fish, eggs, cheese, and other animal products from their diet. The largest group in the world consists of Hindus, and it is likely that many millions of Indians are at risk of deficiency of cobalamin on a nutritional basis. Subnormal serum cobalamin levels are found in up to 50% of randomly selected, young, adult Indian vegans, but the deficiency usually does not progress to megaloblastic anemia since the diet of most vegans is not totally lacking in cobalamin and the enterohepatic circulation of cobalamin is intact. Dietary cobalamin deficiency may also arise rarely in nonvegetarian individuals who exist on grossly inadequate diets because of poverty or psychiatric disturbance.
# Chunk 2661
Deficiencies of cobalamin, folate, protein, ?riboflavin, ?nicotinic acid

Therapy with colchicine, para-aminosalicylate, neomycin, slow-release potassium chloride, anticonvulsant drugs, metformin, phenformin, cytotoxic drugs Alcohol in close relatives and in persons with other organ-specific autoimmune diseases, e.g., thyroid diseases, vitiligo, hypoparathyroidism, and Addison’s disease. It is also associated with hypogammaglobulinemia, with premature graying or blue eyes, and persons of blood group A. An association with human leukocyte antigen (HLA) 3 has been reported in some but not all series and, in those with endocrine disease, with HLA-B8, -B12, and -BW15. Life expectancy is normal in women once regular treatment has begun. Men have a slightly subnormal life expectancy as a result of a higher incidence of carcinoma of the stomach than in control subjects. Gastric output of hydrochloric acid, pepsin, and IF is severely reduced. The serum gastrin level is raised, and serum pepsinogen I levels are low.
# Chunk 2662
Selective Malabsorption of Cobalamin with Proteinuria (Imerslund’s

Syndrome; Imerslund-Gräsbeck Syndrome; Congenital Cobalamin Malabsorption; Autosomal Recessive Megaloblastic Anemia; MGA1) This autosomally recessive disease is the most common cause of megaloblastic anemia due to cobalamin deficiency in infancy in Western countries. More than 200 cases have been reported, with familial clusters in Finland, Norway, the Middle East, and North Africa. The patients secrete normal amounts of IF and gastric acid but are unable to absorb cobalamin. In Finland, impaired synthesis, processing, or ligand binding of cubilin due to inherited mutations is found. In Norway, mutation of the gene for AMN has been reported. Other tests of intestinal absorption are normal. Over 90% of these patients show nonspecific proteinuria, but renal function is otherwise normal and renal biopsy has not shown any consistent renal defect. A few have shown aminoaciduria and congenital renal abnormalities, such as duplication of the renal pelvis.
# Chunk 2663
ABNORMALITIES OF COBALAMIN METABOLISM Congenital Transcobalamin II Deficiency or Abnormality Infants with TC II deficiency usually present with megaloblastic anemia within a few weeks of birth. Serum cobalamin and folate levels are normal, but the anemia responds to massive (e.g., 1 mg three times weekly) injections of cobalamin. Some cases show neurologic complications. The protein may be present but functionally inert. Genetic abnormalities found include mutations of an intra-exonic cryptic splice site, extensive deletion, single nucleotide deletion, nonsense mutation, and an RNA editing defect. Malabsorption of cobalamin occurs in all cases, and serum immunoglobulins are usually reduced. Failure to institute adequate cobalamin therapy or treatment with folic acid may lead to neurologic damage.
# Chunk 2664
CBLA assays involving intrinsic factor in PA patients with intrinsic antibodies in serum. These antibodies may cause false normal serum vitamin B12 levels in up to 50% of cases tested. Where clinical indications of PA are strong, a normal serum vitamin B12 does not rule out the diagnosis. Serum MMA levels will be elevated in PA (see below).
# Chunk 2665
Serum Methylmalonate and Homocysteine In patients with cobalamin deficiency sufficient to cause anemia or neuropathy, the serum MMA level is raised. Sensitive methods for measuring MMA and homocysteine in serum have been introduced and recommended for the early diagnosis of cobalamin deficiency, even in the absence of hematologic abnormalities or subnormal levels of serum cobalamin. Serum MMA levels fluctuate, however, in patients with renal failure. Mildly elevated serum MMA and/or homocysteine levels occur in up to 30% of apparently healthy volunteers, with serum cobalamin levels up to 258 pmol/L (350 ng/L) and normal serum folate levels; 15% of elderly subjects, even with cobalamin levels >258 pmol/L (>350 ng/L), have this pattern of raised metabolite levels. These findings bring into question the exact cutoff points for normal MMA and homocysteine levels. It is also unclear at present whether these mildly raised metabolite levels have clinical consequences.
# Chunk 2666
Tests for the Cause of Cobalamin Deficiency Only vegans, strict vegetarians, or people living on a totally inadequate diet will become vitamin  deficient because of inadequate intake. Studies of cobalamin absorption once were widely used, but difficulty in obtaining radioactive cobalamin and ensuring that IF preparations are free of viruses has made these tests obsolete. Tests to diagnose PA include serum gastrin, which is raised; serum pepsinogen I, which is low in PA (90–92%) but also in other conditions; and gastric endoscopy. Tests for IF and parietal cell antibodies are also used, as well as tests for individual intestinal diseases.
# Chunk 2667
Red Cell Folate The red cell folate assay is a valuable test of body folate stores. It is less affected than the serum assay by recent diet and traces of hemolysis. In normal adults, concentrations range from 880–3520 μmol/L (160–640 μg/L) of packed red cells. Subnormal levels occur in patients with megaloblastic anemia due to folate deficiency but also in nearly two-thirds of patients with severe cobalamin deficiency. False-normal results may occur if a folate-deficient patient has received a recent blood transfusion or if a patient has a raised reticulocyte count. Serum homocysteine assay is discussed earlier.
# Chunk 2668
It is usually possible to establish which of the two deficiencies, folate or cobalamin, is the cause of the anemia and to treat only with the appropriate vitamin. In patients who enter the hospital severely ill, however, it may be necessary to treat with both vitamins in large doses once blood samples have been taken for cobalamin and folate assays and a bone marrow biopsy has been performed (if deemed necessary). Transfusion is usually unnecessary and inadvisable. If it is essential, packed red cells should be given slowly, one or two units only, with the usual treatment for heart failure if present. Potassium supplements have been recommended to obviate the danger of the hypokalemia but are not necessary. Occasionally, an excessive rise in platelets occurs after 1–2 weeks of therapy. Antiplatelet therapy, e.g., aspirin, should be considered if the platelet count rises to >800 × 109/L.
# Chunk 2669
Hemolytic Anemias and Anemia Due to Acute Blood Loss 650 The laboratory features of HA are related to hemolysis per se and the erythropoietic response of the bone marrow. Hemolysis regularly produces an increase in unconjugated bilirubin and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) in the serum; urobilinogen will be increased in both urine and stool. If hemolysis is mainly intravascular, the telltale sign is hemoglobinuria (often associated with hemosiderinuria); in the serum, there is hemoglobin, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) is increased, and haptoglobin is reduced. In contrast, the bilirubin level may be normal or only mildly elevated. The main sign of the erythropoietic response by the bone marrow is an increase in reticulocytes (a test all too often neglected in the initial workup of a patient with anemia). Usually the increase will be reflected in both the percentage of reticulocytes (the more commonly quoted figure) and the absolute reticulocyte count (the more definitive parameter). The increased number of reticulocytes is associated with an increased mean corpuscular volume (MCV) in the blood count. On the blood smear, this is reflected in the presence of macrocytes; there is also polychromasia, and sometimes one sees nucleated red cells. In most cases, a bone marrow aspirate is not necessary in the diagnostic workup; if it is done, it will show erythroid hyperplasia. In practice, once an HA is suspected, specific tests will usually be required for a definitive diagnosis of a specific type of HA.
# Chunk 2670
FIGURE 129-1 Red blood cell (RBC) metabolism. The Embden-Meyerhof pathway (glycolysis) generates ATP for energy and membrane maintenance. The generation of NADPH maintains hemoglobin in a reduced state. The hexose monophosphate shunt generates NADPH that is used to reduce glutathione, which protects the red cell against oxidant stress. Regulation of 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate levels is a critical determinant of oxygen affinity of hemoglobin. Enzyme deficiency states in order of prevalence: glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) > pyruvate kinase > glucose-6-phosphate isomerase > rare deficiencies of other enzymes in the pathway. The more common enzyme deficiencies are encircled.
# Chunk 2671
The membrane-cytoskeleton complex is so integrated that, not surprisingly, an abnormality of almost any of its components will be disturbing or disruptive, causing structural failure, which results ultimately in hemolysis. These abnormalities are almost invariably inherited mutations; thus, diseases of the membrane-cytoskeleton complex belong to the category of inherited HAs. Before the red cells lyse, they often exhibit more or less specific morphologic changes that alter the normal biconcave disk shape. Thus, the majority of the dis eases in this group have been known for over a century as hereditary spherocytosis and hereditary elliptocytosis. Over the past 20 years, their tions can arise from mutations in several genes with considerable overlap (Fig. 129-3).
# Chunk 2672
Disorders of Cation Transport These rare conditions with autosomal dominant inheritance are characterized by increased intracellular sodium in red cells, with concomitant loss of potassium; indeed, they are sometimes discovered through the incidental finding, in a blood test, of a high serum K+ (pseudohyperkalemia). In patients from some families, the cation transport disturbance is associated with gain of water; as a result, the red cells are overhydrated (low MCHC), and on a blood smear, the normally round-shaped central pallor is replaced by a linear-shaped central pallor, which has earned this disorder the name stomatocytosis (Fig. 129-3). In patients from other families, instead, the red cells are dehydrated (high MCHC), and their consequent rigidity has earned this disorder the name xerocytosis. One would surmise that in these disorders the primary defect may be in a cation transporter; indeed, xerocytosis results from mutations in PIEZO1. In other patients with stomatocytosis, mutations are found in other genes also related to solute transport (Table 129-3), including SLC4A1 (encoding band 3), the Rhesus gene RHAG, and the glucose transporter gene SLC2A1 responsible for a special form called cryohydrocytosis. Hemolysis can vary from relatively mild to quite severe. From the practical point of view, it is important to know that in stomatocytosis, splenectomy is strongly contraindicated because it has been followed in a significant proportion of cases by severe thromboembolic complications.
# Chunk 2673
AHA can develop as a result of three types of triggers: (1) fava beans, (2) infections, and (3) drugs (Table 129-5). Typically, a hemolytic attack starts with malaise, weakness, and abdominal or lumbar pain. After an interval of several hours to 2–3 days, the patient develops jaundice and often dark urine. The onset can be extremely abrupt, especially with favism in children. The anemia is moderate to extremely severe, usually normocytic and normochromic, and due partly to intravascular hemolysis; hence, it is associated with hemoglobinemia, hemoglobinuria, high LDH, and low or absent plasma haptoglobin. The blood film shows anisocytosis, polychromasia, and spherocytes typical of hemolytic anemias. The most typical feature of G6PD deficiency is the presence of bizarre poikilocytes, with red cells that appear to have unevenly distributed hemoglobin (“hemighosts”) and red cells that appear to have had parts of them bitten away (“bite cells” or “blister cells”) (Fig. 129-7). A classical test, now rarely carried out, is supravital staining with methyl violet, which, if done promptly, reveals the presence of Heinz bodies (consisting of precipitates of denatured hemoglobin and hemichromes), which are regarded as a signature of oxidative damage to red cells (they are also seen with unstable hemoglobins). LDH is high, and so is the unconjugated
# Chunk 2674
clinical features The patient may seek medical attention because, one morning, she or he passed blood instead of urine (Fig. 129-9). This distressing or frightening event may be regarded as the classical presentation; however, more frequently, this symptom is not noticed or is suppressed. Indeed, the patient often presents simply as a problem in the differential diagnosis of anemia, whether symptomatic or discovered incidentally. Sometimes, the anemia is associated from the outset with neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, or both, thus signaling an element of bone marrow failure (see below). Some patients may present with recurrent attacks of severe abdominal pain defying a specific diagnosis and eventually found to be related to thrombosis. When thrombosis affects the hepatic veins, it may produce acute hepatomegaly and ascites, i.e., a full-fledged Budd-Chiari syndrome, which, in the absence of liver disease, ought to raise the suspicion of PNH.
# Chunk 2675
The definitive diagnosis of PNH must be based on the demonstration that a substantial proportion of the patient’s red cells have an increased susceptibility to complement (C), due to the deficiency on their surface of proteins (particularly CD59 and CD55) that normally protect the red cells from activated C. The sucrose hemolysis test is unreliable; in contrast, the acidified serum (Ham) test is highly reliable but is carried out only in a few labs. The gold standard today is flow cytometry, which can be carried out on granulocytes as well as on red cells. A bimodal distribution of cells, with a discrete population that is CD59 and CD55 negative, is diagnostic of PNH. In PNH patients, this population is at least 5% of the total red cells and at least 20% of the total granulocytes.
# Chunk 2676
Unlike other acquired hemolytic anemias, PNH may be a lifelong condition, and most patients receive supportive treatment only, including transfusion of filtered red cells1 whenever necessary, 1Now that filters with excellent retention of white cells are routinely used, the traditional cated because there is no evidence that they have any effect on chronic hemolysis; in fact, they are contraindicated because their side effects are considerable and potentially dangerous. A major advance in the management of PNH has been the development of a humanized monoclonal antibody, eculizumab, which binds to washing of red cells, aiming to avoid white cell reactions triggering hemolysis, is no the complement component C5 near the site that, when cleaved, longer necessary and is wasteful. will trigger the distal part of the complement cascade leading to 662 the formation of membrane attack complex (MAC). In an international, placebo-controlled, randomized trial of 87 patients (so far the only controlled therapeutic trial in PNH) who had been selected on grounds of having severe hemolysis making them transfusion-dependent, eculizumab proved effective and was licensed in 2007. Eculizumab, by abrogating complement-dependent intravascular hemolysis, significantly improves the quality of life of PNH patients. One would expect that the need for blood transfusion would also be abrogated; indeed, this is the case in about one-half of patients, in many of whom there is also a rise in hemoglobin levels. In the remaining patients, however, the anemia remains sufficiently severe to require blood transfusion. One reason for this is that, once the distal complement pathway is blocked, red cells no longer destroyed by the MAC become opsonized by complement (C3) fragments and undergo extravascular hemolysis (Fig. 129-10). The extent to which this happens depends in part on a genetic polymorphism of the complement receptor CR1. Based on its half-life, eculizumab must be administered intravenously every 14 days. The only form of treatment that currently can provide a definitive cure for PNH is allogeneic BMT. When an HLA-identical sibling is available, BMT should be offered to any young patient with severe PNH; the availability of eculizumab has decreased significantly the proportion of patients receiving BMT. For patients with the PNH-AA syndrome, immunosuppressive treatment with antithymocyte globulin and cyclosporine A may be indicated, especially in order to relieve severe thrombocytopenia and/or neutropenia in patients in whom these were the main problem(s); of course, this treatment will have little or no effect on hemolysis. Any patient who has had venous thrombosis or who has a genetically determined thrombophilic state in addition to PNH complications that do not resolve otherwise, ment with tissue plasminogen activator may be indicated.
# Chunk 2677
Bone marrow failure results from severe damage to the hematopoietic cell compartment. In aplastic anemia, replacement of the bone marrow by fat is apparent in the morphology of the biopsy specimen (Fig. 130-1) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the spine. Cells bearing the CD34 antigen, a marker of early hematopoietic cells, are greatly diminished, and in functional studies, committed and primitive progenitor cells are virtually absent; in vitro assays BD have suggested that the stem cell pool FIGURE 130-1 Normal and aplastic bone marrow. A. Normal bone marrow biopsy. B. Normal is reduced to ≤1% of normal in severe bone marrow aspirate smear. The marrow is normally 30–70% cellular, and there is a heterogeneous disease at the time of presentation. mix of myeloid, erythroid, and lymphoid cells. C. Aplastic anemia biopsy. D. Marrow smear in aplas-
# Chunk 2678
The natural history of severe aplastic anemia is rapid deterioration and death. Historically, provision first of RBC and later of platelet transfusions and effective antibiotics were of some benefit, but few patients show spontaneous recovery. The major prognostic determinant is the blood count. Severe disease has been defined by the presence of two of three parameters: absolute neutrophil count <500/μL, platelet count <20,000/μL, and corrected reticulocyte count <1% (or absolute reticulocyte count <60,000/μL). In the era of effective immunosuppressive therapies, absolute numbers of reticulocytes (>25,000/μL) and lymphocytes (>1000/μL) may be better predictors of response to treatment and long-term outcome.
# Chunk 2679
This is the best therapy for the younger patient with a fully histocompatible sibling donor (Chap. 139e). Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) typing should be ordered as soon as the diagnosis of aplastic anemia is established in a child or younger adult. In transplant candidates, transfusion of blood from family members should be avoided so as to prevent sensitization to histocompatibility antigens, but limited numbers of blood products probably do not greatly affect outcome. For allogeneic transplant from fully matched siblings, long-term survival rates for children are approximately 90%. Transplant morbidity and mortality are increased among adults, due to the higher risk of chronic GVHD and serious infections.
# Chunk 2680
The standard regimen of antithymocyte globulin (ATG) in combination with cyclosporine induces hematologic recovery (independence from transfusion and a leukocyte count adequate to prevent infection) in 60–70% of patients. Children do especially well, whereas older adult patients often suffer complications due to the presence of comorbidities. An early robust hematologic response correlates with long-term survival. Improvement in granulocyte number is generally apparent within 2 months of treatment. Most recovered patients continue to have some degree of blood count depression, the MCV remains elevated, and bone marrow cellularity returns toward normal very slowly if at all. Relapse (recurrent pancytopenia) is frequent, often occurring as cyclosporine is discontinued; most, but not all, patients respond to reinstitution of immunosuppression, but some responders become dependent on continued cyclosporine administration. Development of MDS, with typical marrow morphologic or cytogenetic abnormalities, occurs in approximately 15% of treated patients, usually but not invariably associated with a return of pancytopenia, and some patients develop leukemia. A laboratory diagnosis of PNH can generally be made at the time of presentation of aplastic anemia by flow cytometry; recovered patients may have frank hemolysis if the PNH clone expands. Bone marrow examinations should be performed if there is an unfavorable change in blood counts.
# Chunk 2681
Horse ATG is administered as intravenous infusions over 4 days. ATG binds to peripheral blood cells; therefore, platelet and granulocyte numbers may decrease further during active treatment. Serum sickness, a flulike illness with a characteristic cutaneous eruption and arthralgia, often develops approximately 10 days after initiating treatment. Methylprednisolone is administered with ATG to ameliorate the immune consequences of heterologous protein infusion. Excessive or extended glucocorticoid therapy is associated with avascular joint necrosis. Cyclosporine is administered orally at an initial high dose, with subsequent adjustment according to blood levels obtained every 2 weeks; rough levels should be between 150 and 200 ng/mL. The most important side effects are nephrotoxicity, hypertension, seizures, and opportunistic infections, especially Pneumocystis jiroveci (prophylactic treatment with monthly inhaled pentamidine is recommended).
# Chunk 2682
Both platelet and erythrocyte numbers can be maintained by transfusion. Alloimmunization historically limited the usefulness of platelet transfusions and is now minimized by several strategies, including use of single donors to reduce exposure and physical or chemical methods to diminish leukocytes in the product; HLA-matched platelets are often effective in patients refractory to random donor products. Inhibitors of fibrinolysis such as aminocaproic acid have not been shown to relieve mucosal oozing; the use of low-dose glucocorticoids to induce “vascular stability” is unproven and not recommended. Whether platelet transfusions are better used prophylactically or only as needed remains unclear. Any rational regimen of prophylaxis requires transfusions once or twice weekly to maintain the platelet count >10,000/μL (oozing from the gut increases precipitously at counts <5000/μL). Menstruation should be suppressed either by oral estrogens or nasal follicle-stimulating hormone/luteinizing hormone (FSH/LH) antagonists. Aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents inhibit platelet function and must be avoided.
# Chunk 2683
RBCs should be transfused to maintain a normal level of activity, usually at a hemoglobin value of 70 g/L (90 g/L if there is underlying cardiac or pulmonary disease); a regimen of 2 units every 2 weeks will replace normal losses in a patient without a functioning bone marrow. In chronic anemia, the iron chelators, deferoxamine and deferasirox, should be added at approximately the fiftieth transfusion to avoid secondary hemochromatosis.
# Chunk 2684
Like aplastic anemia, PRCA results cytopathic effect of B19 parvovirus infection of the erythroid progenitor cell. B. Uninuclear mega-from diverse mechanisms. Antibodies karyocyte and microblastic erythroid precursors typical of the 5q–myelodysplasia syndrome. to RBC precursors are frequently pres-C. Ringed sideroblast showing perinuclear iron granules. D. Tumor cells present on a touch preparaent in the blood, but T cell inhibition tion made from the marrow biopsy of a patient with metastatic carcinoma.
# Chunk 2685
Red cell aplasia is compatible with long-term survival with supportive care alone: a combination of erythrocyte transfusions and iron chelation. For persistent B19 parvovirus infection, almost all patients respond to intravenous immunoglobulin therapy (e.g., 0.4 g/kg daily for 5 days), although relapse and retreatment may be expected, especially in patients with AIDS. The majority of patients with idiopathic PRCA respond favorably to immunosuppression. Most first receive a course of glucocorticoids. Also effective are cyclosporine, ATG, azathioprine, and cyclophosphamide.
# Chunk 2686
Only hematopoietic stem cell transplantation offers cure of MDS. The current survival rate in selected patient cohorts is ~50% at 3 years and is improving. Results using unrelated matched donors are now similar to those obtained using siblings, and patients in their 50s and 60s have been successfully transplanted. Nevertheless, treatment-related mortality and morbidity increase with recipient age. Complicating the decision to undertake transplant is that the high-risk patient, for whom the procedure is most obviously indicated, has a high probability of a poor outcome from transplant-related mortality or disease relapse, whereas the low-risk patient, who is more likely to tolerate transplant, also may do well for years 671 with less aggressive therapies.
# Chunk 2687
MDS has been regarded as particularly refractory to cytotoxic chemotherapy regimens, and as in AML in the older adult, drug toxicity is frequent and often fatal, and remissions if achieved are brief. Low doses of cytotoxic drugs have been administered for their “differentiation” potential, and from this experience, drug therapies have emerged based on pyrimidine analogues. These new drugs are classified as epigenetic modulators, believed to act through a demethylating mechanism to alter gene regulation and allow differentiation to mature blood cells from the abnormal MDS stem cell (although global methylation status has not correlated with clinical efficacy). Azacitidine and decitabine are two epigenetic modifiers frequently used in bone marrow failure clinics. Azacitidine improves blood counts and survival in MDS, compared to best supportive care. Azacitidine is usually administered subcutaneously, daily for 7 days, at 4-week intervals, for at least four cycles before assessing for response. Overall, generally improved blood counts with a decrease in transfusion requirements occurred in ~50% of patients in published trials. Response is dependent on continued drug administration, and most patients eventually will no longer respond and experience recurrent cytopenias or progression to AML. Decitabine is closely related to azacitidine and more potent; 30–50% of patients show responses in blood counts, with a duration of response of almost a year. Decitabine is usually administered by continuous intravenous infusion in regimens of varying doses and durations of 3 to 10 days in repeating cycles. The major toxicity of azacitidine and decitabine is myelosuppression, leading to worsened blood counts. Other symptoms associated with cancer chemotherapy frequently occur. Demethylating agents are frequently used in the high-risk patient who is not a candidate for stem cell transplant. In the lower risk patient, they are also effective, but alternative therapies should be considered.
# Chunk 2688
HGFs can improve blood counts but, as in most other marrow failure states, have been most beneficial to patients with the least severe pancytopenia. EPO alone or in combination with G-CSF can improve hemoglobin levels, but mainly in those with low serum EPO levels who have no or only a modest need for transfusions. Survival does not appear to be improved by G-CSF treatment alone but may be enhanced by erythropoietin and amelioration of anemia. G-CSF treatment alone failed to improve survival in a controlled trial.
# Chunk 2689
Fibrosis of the bone marrow (see Fig. 129-2), usually accompanied by a characteristic blood smear picture called leukoerythroblastosis, can occur as a primary hematologic disease, called myelofibrosis or myeloid metaplasia (Chap. 131), and as a secondary process, called 672 myelophthisis. Myelophthisis, or secondary myelofibrosis, is reactive. Fibrosis can be a response to invading tumor cells, usually an epithelial cancer of breast, lung, or prostate origin or neuroblastoma. Marrow fibrosis may occur with infection of mycobacteria (both Mycobacterium tuberculosis and Mycobacterium avium), fungi, or HIV and in sarcoidosis. Intracellular lipid deposition in Gaucher’s disease and obliteration of the marrow space related to absence of osteoclast remodeling in congenital osteopetrosis also can produce fibrosis. Secondary myelofibrosis is a late consequence of radiation therapy or treatment with radiomimetic drugs. Usually the infectious or malignant underlying processes are obvious. Marrow fibrosis can also be a feature of a variety of hematologic syndromes, especially chronic myeloid leukemia, multiple myeloma, lymphomas, myeloma, and hairy cell leukemia. The pathophysiology has three distinct features: proliferation of fibroblasts in the marrow space (myelofibrosis); the extension of hematopoiesis into the long bones and into extramedullary sites, usually the spleen, liver, and lymph nodes (myeloid metaplasia); and ineffective erythropoiesis. The etiology of the fibrosis is unknown but most likely involves dysregulated production of growth factors: platelet-derived growth factor and transforming growth factor β have been implicated. Abnormal regulation of other hematopoietins would lead to localization of blood-producing cells in nonhematopoietic tissues and uncoupling of the usually balanced processes of stem cell proliferation and differentiation. Myelofibrosis is remarkable for pancytopenia despite very large numbers of circulating hematopoietic progenitor cells. Anemia is dominant in secondary myelofibrosis, usually normocytic and normochromic. The diagnosis is suggested by the characteristic leukoerythroblastic smear (see Fig. 129-1). Erythrocyte morphology is highly abnormal, with circulating nucleated RBCs, teardrops, and shape distortions. WBC numbers are often elevated, sometimes mimicking a leukemoid reaction, with circulating myelocytes, promyelocytes, and myeloblasts. Platelets may be abundant and are often of giant size. Inability to aspirate the bone marrow, the characteristic “dry tap,” can allow a presumptive diagnosis in the appropriate setting before the biopsy is decalcified. The course of secondary myelofibrosis is determined by its etiology, usually a metastatic tumor or an advanced hematologic malignancy. Treatable causes must be excluded, especially tuberculosis and fungus. Transfusion support can relieve symptoms.
# Chunk 2690
Importantly, the JAK2 gene is located on the short arm of chromo some 9, and loss of heterozygosity on chromosome 9p due to mitotic recombination is the most common cytogenetic abnormality in PV. The segment of 9p involved contains the JAK2 locus, and loss of heterozygosity in this region leads to homozygosity for JAK2 V617F. More than 95% of PV patients express this mutation, as do approximately 50% of PMF and ET patients. Homozygosity for the mutation occurs in approximately 30% of PV patients and 60% of PMF patients but is rare in ET. Over time, a portion of PV JAK2 V617F heterozygotes become homozygotes due to mitotic recombination, but usually not after 10 years of the disease. Most PV patients who do not express JAK2 V617F express a mutation in exon 12 of the kinase and are not clinically different from those who do, nor do JAK2 V617F heterozygotes differ clinically from homozygotes. Interestingly, the predisposition to acquire mutations in JAK2 appears to be associated with a specific JAK2 gene haplotype, GGCC. JAK2 V617F is the basis for many of the phenotypic and biochemical characteristics of PV such as elevation of the leukocyte alkaline phosphatase (LAP) score; however, it cannot solely account for the entire PV phenotype and is probably not the initiating lesion in the three MPNs. First, PV patients with the same phenotype and documented clonal disease lack any mutation of JAK2. Second, ET and PMF patients have the same mutation but different clinical phenotypes. Third, familial PV can occur without the mutation, even when other members of the same family express it. Fourth, not all the cells of the malignant clone express JAK2 V617F. Fifth, JAK2 V617F has been observed in patients with long-standing idiopathic erythrocytosis. Sixth, in some patients, JAK2 V617F appears to be acquired after another mutation. Finally, in some JAK2 V617F–positive PV or ET patients, acute leukemia can occur in a JAK2 V617F–negative progenitor cell. However, although JAK2 V617F alone may not be sufficient to cause PV, it appears essential for the transformation of ET to PV, although not for its transformation to PMF.
# Chunk 2691
Other laboratory studies that may aid in diagnosis include the red cell count, mean corpuscular volume, and red cell distribution width (RDW), particularly when the hematocrit or hemoglobin levels are less than 60% or 20 g/dL, respectively. Only three situations cause microcytic erythrocytosis: β thalassemia trait, hypoxic erythrocytosis, and PV. With β thalassemia trait, the RDW is normal, whereas with hypoxic erythrocytosis and PV, the RDW may be elevated due to associated iron deficiency. Today, however, the assay for JAK2 V617F has superseded other tests for establishing the diagnosis of PV. Of course, in patients with associated acid-peptic disease, occult gastrointestinal bleeding may lead to a presentation with hypochromic, microcytic anemia, masking the presence of PV.
# Chunk 2692
PV is generally an indolent disorder, the clinical course of which is measured in decades, and its management should reflect its tempo. Thrombosis due to erythrocytosis is the most significant complication and often the presenting manifestation, and maintenance of the hemoglobin level at ≤140 g/L (14 g/dL; hematocrit <45%) in men and ≤120 g/L (12 g/dL; hematocrit <42%) in women is mandatory to avoid thrombotic complications. Phlebotomy serves initially to reduce hyperviscosity by bringing the red cell mass into the normal range while further expanding the plasma volume. Periodic phlebotomies thereafter serve to maintain the red cell mass within the normal range and to induce a state of iron deficiency that prevents an accelerated reexpansion of the red cell mass. In most PV patients, once an iron-deficient state is achieved, phlebotomy is usually only required at 3-month intervals. Neither phlebotomy nor iron deficiency increases the platelet count relative to the effect of the disease itself, and thrombocytosis is not correlated with thrombosis in PV, in contrast to the strong correlation between erythrocytosis and thrombosis in this disease. The use of salicylates as a tonic against thrombosis in PV patients is not only potentially harmful if the red cell mass is not controlled by phlebotomy, but is also an unproven remedy. Anticoagulants are only indicated when a thrombosis has occurred and can be difficult to monitor if the red cell mass is substantially elevated owing to the artifactual imbalance between the test tube anticoagulant and plasma that occurs when blood from these patients is assayed for prothrombin or partial thromboplastin activity. Asymptomatic hyperuricemia (<10 mg/dL) requires no therapy, but allopurinol should be administered to avoid further elevation of the uric acid when chemotherapy is used to reduce splenomegaly or leukocytosis or to treat pruritus. Generalized pruritus intractable to antihistamines or antidepressants such as doxepin can be a major problem in PV; interferon α (IFN-α), psoralens with ultraviolet light in the A range (PUVA) therapy, and hydroxyurea are other methods of palliation. Asymptomatic thrombocytosis requires no therapy unless the platelet count is sufficiently high to cause bleeding due an acquired form of von Willebrand’s disease in which there is adsorption and proteolysis of high-molecular-weight von Willebrand factor (VWF) multimers by the expanded platelet mass. Symptomatic splenomegaly can be treated with pegylated IFN-α. Pegylated IFN-α can also produce complete hematologic and molecular remissions in PV, and its role in this disorder is currently under investigation. Anagrelide, a phosphodiesterase inhibitor, can reduce the platelet count and, if tolerated, is preferable to hydroxyurea because it lacks marrow toxicity and is protective against venous thrombosis. A reduction in platelet number may be necessary for the treatment of erythromelalgia or ocular migraine if salicylates are not effective or if the platelet count is sufficiently high to increase the risk of hemorrhage but only to the degree that symptoms are alleviated. Alkylating agents and radioactive sodium phosphate (32P) are leukemogenic in PV, and their use should be avoided. If a cytotoxic agent must be used, hydroxyurea is preferred, but this drug does not prevent either thrombosis or myelofibrosis in PV, is itself leukemogenic, and should be used for as short a time as possible. Previously, PV patients with massive splenomegaly unresponsive to reduction by chemotherapy or interferon required splenectomy. However, with the introduction of the nonspecific JAK2 inhibitor ruxolitinib, it has been possible in the majority of patients with PV complicated by myelofibrosis and myeloid metaplasia to reduce spleen size while at the same time alleviating constitutional symptoms to due to cytokine release. This drug is currently undergoing clinical trials in PV patients intolerant of hydroxyurea. In some patients with end-stage disease, pulmonary hypertension may develop due to fibrosis or extramedullary hematopoiesis. A role for allogeneic bone marrow transplantation in PV has not been defined.
# Chunk 2693
No signs or symptoms are specific for PMF. Many patients are asymptomatic at presentation, and the disease is usually detected by the discovery of splenic enlargement and/or abnormal blood counts during a routine examination. However, in contrast to its companion MPN, night sweats, fatigue, and weight loss are common presenting complaints. A blood smear will show the characteristic features of extramedullary hematopoiesis: teardrop-shaped red cells, nucleated red cells, myelocytes, and promyelocytes; myeloblasts may also be present (Fig. 131-1). Anemia, usually mild initially, is the rule, whereas the leukocyte and platelet counts are either normal or increased, but either can be depressed. Mild hepatomegaly may accompany the splenomegaly but is unusual in the absence of splenic enlargement; isolated lymphadenopathy should suggest another diagnosis. Both serum lactate dehydrogenase and alkaline phosphatase levels can be elevated. The LAP score can be low, normal, or high. Marrow is usually inaspirable due to the myelofibrosis (Fig. 131-2), and bone x-rays may reveal osteosclerosis. Exuberant extramedullary hematopoiesis can cause ascites; portal, pulmonary, or intracranial hypertension; intestinal or ureteral obstruction; pericardial tamponade; spinal cord compression; or skin nodules. Splenic enlargement can be sufficiently rapid to cause splenic infarction with fever and pleuritic chest pain. Hyperuricemia and secondary gout may ensue.
# Chunk 2694
Importantly, approximately 50% of PMF patients, like patients with its companion myeloproliferative disorders PV and ET, express the JAK2 V617F mutation, often as homozygotes. Such patients are usually older and have higher hematocrits than the patients who are JAK2 V617F–negative, whereas PMF patients expressing an MPL mutation tend to be more anemic and have lower leukocyte counts. Somatic mutations in exon 9 of the calreticulin gene (CALR) have been found in a majority of patients with PMF and ET who lack mutations in either JAK2 or MPL, and their clinical course appears to be more indolent than patients expressing either a JAK2 or an MPL mutation.
# Chunk 2695
No specific therapy exists for PMF. The causes for anemia are multifarious and include ineffective erythropoiesis uncompensated by splenic extramedullary hematopoiesis, hemodilution due to splenomegaly, splenic sequestration, blood loss secondary to thrombocytopenia or portal hypertension, folic acid deficiency, systemic inflammation, and autoimmune hemolysis. Neither recombinant erythropoietin nor androgens such as danazol have proven to be consistently effective as therapy for anemia. Erythropoietin may worsen splenomegaly and will be ineffective if the serum erythropoietin level is >125 mU/L. Given the inflammatory milieu that characterizes PMF, corticosteroids can ameliorate anemia as well as constitutional symptoms such as fever, chills, night sweats, anorexia, and weight loss, and low-dose thalidomide together with prednisone has proved effective as well. Thrombocytopenia can be due to impaired marrow function, splenic sequestration, or autoimmune destruction
# Chunk 2696
Anemia is unusual, but a mild neutrophilic leukocytosis is not. The blood smear is most remarkable for the number of platelets present, some of which may be very large. The large mass of circulating platelets may prevent the accurate measurement of serum potassium due to release of platelet potassium upon blood clotting. This type of hyperkalemia is a laboratory artifact and not associated with electrocardiographic abnormalities. Similarly, arterial oxygen measurements can be inaccurate unless thrombocythemic blood is collected on ice. The prothrombin and partial thromboplastin times are normal, whereas abnormalities of platelet function such as a prolonged bleeding time and impaired platelet aggregation can be present. However, despite much study, no platelet function abnormality is characteristic of ET, and no platelet function test predicts the risk of clinically significant bleeding or thrombosis.
# Chunk 2697
Hematologic Findings Anemia is usually present at diagnosis and can be severe. The degree varies considerably, irrespective of other hematologic findings, splenomegaly, or duration of symptoms. The anemia is usually normocytic normochromic. Decreased erythropoiesis often results in a reduced reticulocyte count, and red blood cell (RBC) sur vival is decreased by accelerated destruction. Active blood loss also contributes to the anemia.
# Chunk 2698
About 50% of patients have a mild to moderate elevation of serum uric acid at presentation. Only 10% have marked elevations, but renal precipitation of uric acid and the nephropathy that may result is a serious but uncommon complication. The initiation of chemotherapy may aggravate hyperuricemia, and patients are usually started immediately on allopurinol and hydration at diagnosis. Rasburicase (recombinant
# Chunk 2699
Performance status (prognostic factor) Ecchymosis and oozing from IV sites (DIC, possible acute promyelocytic leukemia) Fever and tachycardia (signs of infection) Papilledema, retinal infiltrates, cranial nerve abnormalities (CNS leukemia) Poor dentition, dental abscesses Gum hypertrophy (leukemic infiltration, most common in monocytic leukemia) Skin infiltration or nodules (leukemia infiltration, most common in monocytic leukemia) Lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, hepatomegaly Back pain, lower extremity weakness [spinal granulocytic sarcoma, most likely in t(8;21) patients]
# Chunk 2700
CBC with manual differential cell count Chemistry tests (electrolytes, creatinine, BUN, calcium, phosphorus, uric acid, hepatic enzymes, bilirubin, LDH, amylase, lipase) Clotting studies (prothrombin time, partial thromboplastin time, fibrinogen, D-dimer) Viral serologies (CMV, HSV-1, varicella-zoster) RBC type and screen HLA typing for potential allogeneic HSCT Bone marrow aspirate and biopsy (morphology, cytogenetics, flow cytometry, molecular studies for NPM1 and CEBPA mutations and FLT3-ITD) Cryopreservation of viable leukemia cells Myocardial function (echocardiogram or MUGA scan) PA and lateral chest radiograph Placement of central venous access device
# Chunk 2701
Abbreviations: AML, acute myeloid leukemia; BUN, blood urea nitrogen; CBC, complete blood count; CMV, cytomegalovirus; CNS, central nervous system; DIC, disseminated intravascular coagulation; HLA, human leukocyte antigen; HSCT, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation; HSV, herpes simplex virus; IV, intravenous; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; MRI, magnetic reso nance imaging; MUGA, multigated acquisition; PA, posteroanterior; RBC, red blood (cell) count.
# Chunk 2702
Allogeneic HSCT is used in patients age <70–75 years with a human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-compatible donor who have high-risk cytogenetics. Selected high-risk patients are also considered for alternative donor transplants (e.g., mismatched unrelated, haploidentical related, and unrelated umbilical cord donors). In patients with CN-AML and high-risk molecular features such as FLT3-ITD, allogeneic HSCT is best applied in the context of clinical trials because the impact of aggressive therapy on outcome is unknown. For older patients, exploration of reduced-intensity allogeneic HSCT has been pursued.
# Chunk 2703
Adequate and prompt blood bank support is critical to therapy of AML. Platelet transfusions should be given as needed to maintain a platelet count ≥10,000/μL. The platelet count should be kept at higher levels in febrile patients and during episodes of active bleeding or DIC. Patients with poor posttransfusion platelet count increments may benefit from administration of platelets from HLA-matched donors. RBC transfusions should be administered to keep the hemoglobin level >80 g/L (8 g/dL) in the absence of active bleed ing, DIC, or congestive heart failure, which require higher hemoglobin levels. Blood products leukodepleted by filtration should be used to avert or delay alloimmunization as well as febrile reactions. Blood products should also be irradiated to prevent transfusion-associated GVHD. Cytomegalovirus (CMV)-negative blood products should be used for CMV-seronegative patients who are potential candidates for allogeneic HSCT. Leukodepleted products are also effective for these patients if CMV-negative products are not available.
# Chunk 2704
Fever develops in most patients with AML, but infections are documented in only half of febrile patients. Early initiation of empirical broad-spectrum antibacterial and antifungal antibiotics has significantly reduced the number of patients dying of infectious complications (Chap. 104). An antibiotic regimen adequate to treat gram-negative organisms should be instituted at the onset of fever in a neutropenic patient after clinical evaluation, including a detailed physical examination with inspection of the indwelling catheter exit site and a perirectal examination, as well as procurement of cultures and radiographs aimed at documenting the source of fever. Specific antibiotic regimens should be based on antibiotic sensitivity data obtained from the institution at which the patient is being treated. Acceptable regimens for empiric antibiotic therapy include monotherapy with imipenem-cilastatin, meropenem, piperacillin/ tazobactam, or an extended-spectrum antipseudomonal cephalosporin (cefepime or ceftazidime). The combination of an aminoglycoside with an antipseudomonal penicillin (e.g., piperacillin) or an aminoglycoside in combination with an extended-spectrum antipseudomonal cephalosporin should be considered in complicated or resistant cases. Aminoglycosides should be avoided if possible in patients with renal insufficiency. Empirical vancomycin should be added in neutropenic patients with catheter-related infections, blood cultures positive for gram-positive bacteria before final identification and susceptibility testing, hypotension or shock, 686 or known colonization with penicillin/cephalosporin-resistant pneumococci or methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. In special situations where decreased susceptibility to vancomycin, vancomycin-resistant organisms, or vancomycin toxicity is documented, other options including linezolid, daptomycin, and quinupristin/ dalfopristin need to be considered. Caspofungin (or a similar echinocandin), voriconazole, or liposomal amphotericin B should be considered for antifungal treatment if fever persists for 4–7 days following initiation of empiric antibiotic therapy. Amphotericin B has long been used for antifungal therapy. Although liposomal formulations have improved the toxicity profile of this agent, its use has been limited to situations with high risk of or documented mold infections. Caspofungin has been approved for empiric antifungal treatment. Voriconazole has also been shown to be equivalent in efficacy and less toxic than amphotericin B. Antibacterial and antifungal antibiotics should be continued until patients are no longer neutropenic, regardless of whether a specific source has been found for the fever. Recombinant hematopoietic growth factors have been incorporated into clinical trials in AML. These trials have been designed to lower the infection rate after chemotherapy. Both G-CSF and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) have reduced the median time to neutrophil recovery. This accelerated rate of neutrophil recovery, however, has not generally translated into significant reductions in infection rates or shortened hospitalizations. In most randomized studies, both G-CSF and GM-CSF have failed to improve the CR rate, disease-free survival, or overall survival. Although receptors for both G-CSF and GM-CSF are present on AML blasts, therapeutic efficacy is neither enhanced nor inhibited by these agents. The use of growth factors as supportive care for AML patients is controversial. We favor their use in elderly patients with complicated courses, those receiving intensive postremission regimens, patients with uncontrolled infections, or those participating in clinical trials.
# Chunk 2705
Assessment of residual disease by RT-PCR amplification of the t(15;17) chimeric gene product PML-RARA following the final cycle of chemotherapy is an important step in the management of APL patients. Disappearance of the signal is associated with long-term disease-free survival; its persistence documented by two consecutive tests performed 2 weeks apart invariably predicts relapse. Sequential monitoring of RT-PCR for PML-RARA is now considered standard for postremission monitoring of APL, especially in high-risk patients.
# Chunk 2706
Chronic Myeloid Leukemia Hagop Kantarjian, Jorge Cortes Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a clonal hematopoietic stem cell disorder. The disease is driven by the BCR-ABL1 chimeric gene prod-uct, a constitutively active tyrosine kinase, resulting from a reciprocal balanced translocation between the long arms of chromosomes 9 and 133 22, t(9;22) (q34;q11.2), cytogenetically detected as the Philadelphia chromosome (Ph) (Fig. 133-1). Untreated, the course of CML may be biphasic or triphasic, with an early indolent or chronic phase, followed often by an accelerated phase and a terminal blastic phase. Before the era of selective BCR-ABL1 tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), the median survival in CML was 3–7 years, and the 10-year survival rate was 30% or less. Introduced into CML therapy in 2000, TKIs have revolutionized the treatment, natural history, and prognosis of CML. Today, the estimated 10-year survival rate with imatinib mesylate, the first BCR-ABL1 TKI approved, is 85%. Allogeneic stem cell transplantation (SCT), a curative but risky treatment approach, is now offered as secondor third-line therapy after failure of TKIs.
# Chunk 2707
CML accounts for 15% of all cases of leukemia. There is a slight male preponderance (male:female ratio 1.6:1). The median age at diagnosis is 55–65 years. It is uncommon in children; only 3% of patients with CML are younger than 20 years. CML incidence increases slowly with age, with a steeper increase after the age of 40–50 years. The annual incidence of CML is 1.5 cases per 100,000 individuals. In the United States, this translates into 4500–5000 new cases per year. The incidence of CML has not changed over several decades. By extrapolation, the worldwide annual incidence of CML is about 100,000 cases. With a median survival of 6 years before 2000, the disease prevalence in the United States was 20,000–30,000 cases. With TKI therapy, the annual mortality has been reduced from 10–20% to about 2%. Therefore, the prevalence of CML in the United States is expected to continue to increase (about 80,000 in 2013) and reach a plateau of approximately 180,000 cases around 2030. The worldwide prevalence will depend on the treatment penetration of TKIs and their effect on reduction of worldwide annual mortality. Ideally, with full TKI treatment penetration, the worldwide prevalence should plateau at 35 times the incidence, or around 3 million patients.
# Chunk 2708
CML is defined by the presence of BCR-ABL1 abnormality in a patient with a myeloproliferative neoplasm. In some patients with a typical morphologic picture of CML, the Ph abnormality is not detectable by standard cytogenetic analysis, but fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and molecular studies (polymerase chain reaction [PCR]) detect BCR-ABL1. These patients have a course similar to Ph-positive CML and respond to TKI therapy. Many of the remaining patients have atypical morphologic or clinical features and belong to other diagnostic groups, such as atypical CML or chronic myelomonocytic leukemia. These individuals do not respond to TKI therapy and have a poor prognosis with a median survival of about 2–3 years. Detection of mutations in the granulocyte colony-stimulating factor receptor (CSF3R) in chronic neutrophilic leukemia and in some cases of atypical CML and of mutations in SETBP1 in atypical CML confirmed that they are distinct entities.
# Chunk 2709
Symptoms Most patients with CML (90%) present in the indolent or chronic phase. Depending on the timing of diagnosis, patients are often asymptomatic (if the diagnosis is discovered during health care screening tests). Common symptoms, when present, are manifestations of anemia and splenomegaly. These may include fatigue, malaise, weight loss (if high leukemia burden), or early satiety and left upper quadrant pain or masses (from splenomegaly). Less common presenting findings include thrombotic or vasoocclusive events (from severe leukocytosis or thrombocytosis). These include priapism, cardiovascular complications, myocardial infarction, venous thrombosis, visual disturbances, dyspnea and pulmonary insufficiency, drowsiness, loss of coordination, confusion, or cerebrovascular accidents. Bleeding diatheses findings include retinal hemorrhages, gastrointestinal bleeding,
# Chunk 2710
Physical Findings Splenomegaly is the most common physical finding, occurring in 20–70% of patients depending on health care screening frequency. Other less common findings include hepatomegaly (10–20%), lymphadenopathy (5–10%), and extramedullary disease (skin or subcutaneous lesions). The latter indicates CML transformation if a biopsy confirms the presence of sheets of blasts. Other physical findings are manifestations of complications of high tumor burden described earlier (e.g., cardiovascular, cerebrovascular, bleeding). High basophil counts may be associated with histamine overproduction causing pruritus, diarrhea, flushing, and even gastrointestinal ulcers.
# Chunk 2711
Hematologic and Marrow Findings In untreated CML, leukocytosis ranging from 10–500 × 109/L is common. The peripheral blood differential shows left-shifted hematopoiesis with predominance of neutrophils and the presence of bands, myelocytes, metamyelocytes, promyelocytes, and blasts (usually ≤5%). Basophils and/or eosinophils are frequently increased. Thrombocytosis is common, but thrombocytopenia is rare and, when present, suggests a worse prognosis, disease acceleration, or an unrelated etiology. Anemia is present in one-third of patients. Cyclic oscillations of counts are noted in 25% of patients without treatment. Biochemical abnormalities include a low leukocyte alkaline phosphatase score and high levels of vitamin B12, uric acid, lactic dehydrogenase, and lysozyme. The presence of unexplained and sustained leukocytosis, with or without splenomegaly, should lead to a marrow examination and cytogenetic analysis.
# Chunk 2712
Techniques such as FISH and PCR are now used to aid in the diagnosis of CML. They are more sensitive approaches to estimate the CML burden in patients on TKI therapy. They can be done on peripheral samples, and thus are less painful and more convenient. Patients with CML at diagnosis should have a FISH analysis to quantify the percentage of Ph-positive cells, if FISH is used to replace marrow cytogenetic analysis in monitoring response to therapy. FISH may not detect additional chromosomal abnormalities (clonal evolution); thus, a cytogenetic analysis is usually recommended at the time of diagnosis. The BCR-ABL1 RNA message is usually one of two variants: e13a2 (formerly b2a2) and e14a2 (formerly b3a2). About 2–5% of patients 690 may have other RNA fusion types (e.g., e1a2, e13a3, or e14a3). In these patients, the routine PCR primers may not amplify the BCR-ABL1 transcripts, thus leading to false-negative results. Therefore, molecular studies at diagnosis are important to document the type and presence of BCR-ABL1 transcripts to avoid erroneously “undetectable” BCRABL1 transcripts on follow-up studies, with the misconception of a complete molecular response. Both FISH and PCR studies can be falsely positive at low levels or falsely negative because of technical issues. Therefore, a diagnosis of CML must always rely on a marrow analysis with routine cytogenetics. The diagnostic bone marrow confirms the presence of the Ph chromosome, detects clonal evolution, i.e., chromosomal abnormalities in the Ph-positive cells (which may be prognostic), and also quantifies the percentage of marrow blasts and basophils. In 10% of patients, the percentage of marrow blasts and basophils can be significantly higher than in the peripheral blood, suggesting poorer prognosis or even disease transformation. Monitoring patients on TKI therapy by cytogenetics, FISH, and molecular studies has become an important standard practice to assess response to therapy, emphasize compliance, evaluate possible treatment resistance, change TKI therapy, and order mutational analysis studies. It is thus important to recognize the comparability of these measures in monitoring response. A partial cytogenetic response is defined as the presence of 35% less Ph-positive metaphases by routine cytogenetic analysis. This is roughly equivalent to BCR-ABL1 transcripts by the International Scale (IS) of 10% or less. A complete cytogenetic response refers to the absence of Ph-positive metaphases (0% Ph positivity). This is approximately equivalent to BCR-ABL1 transcripts (IS) of 1% or less. A major molecular response refers to BCR-ABL1 transcripts (IS) ≤0.1%, or roughly a 3-log or greater reduction of CML burden from baseline. A complete molecular response usually refers to BCR-ABL1 transcripts (IS) <0.0032% (undetectable by current techniques), roughly equivalent to a more than 4.5-log reduction of CML burden from baseline.
# Chunk 2713
Findings in CML Transformation Progression of CML is usually associated with leukocytosis resistant to therapy, increasing anemia, fever and constitutional symptoms, and increased blasts and basophils in the peripheral blood or marrow. Criteria of accelerated-phase CML, historically associated with median survival of less than 1.5 years, include the presence of 15% or more peripheral blasts, 30% or more peripheral blasts plus promyelocytes, 20% or more peripheral basophils, cytogenetic clonal evolution (presence of chromosomal abnormalities in addition to Ph), and thrombocytopenia <100 × 109/L (unrelated to 1.0 therapy). About 5–10% of patients present with de novo accelerated phase or blastic phase. The prognosis of de novo accelerated phase with TKI therapy has improved significantly, with an estimated 8-year survival rate of 75%. The median survival of accelerated phase evolving from chronic phase has also improved from a historical median survival of 18 months to an estimated 4-year survival rate of 70% on TKI therapy. Therefore, the criteria for accelerated-phase CML should be revisited because most have lost much of their prognostic significance. Blastic-phase CML is defined by the presence of 30% or more peripheral or marrow blasts or the presence of sheets of blasts in extramedullary disease (usually skin, soft tissues, or lytic bone lesions). Blasticphase CML is commonly myeloid (60%) but can present uncommonly as erythroid, promyelocytic, monocytic, or megakaryocytic. Lymphoid blastic phase occurs in about 25% of patients. Lymphoblasts are terminal deoxynucleotide transferase positive and peroxidase negative (although occasionally with low positivity up to 3–5%) and express lymphoid markers (CD10, CD19, CD20, CD22). However, they also often express myeloid markers (50–80%), resulting in diagnostic confusion. This is important because, unlike other morphologic blastic phases, lymphoid blastic-phase CML is quite responsive to antiALL-type chemotherapy (e.g., hyper-CVAD [cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin, and dexamethasone]) in combination with TKIs.
# Chunk 2714
Before the imatinib era, the annual mortality in CML was 10% in the first 2 years and 15–20% thereafter. The median survival time in CML was 3–7 years (with hydroxyurea-busulfan and interferon α). Without a curative option of allogeneic SCT, the course of CML was inexorable toward transformation to, and death from, accelerated or blastic phases. The disease stability was unpredictable, with some patients demonstrating sudden transformation to a blastic phase. With imatinib therapy, the annual mortality in CML has decreased to 2% in the first 12 years of observation. Half of the deaths are from factors other than CML, such as old age, accidents, suicides, other cancers, and other medical conditions (e.g., infections, surgical procedures). The estimated 8to 10-year survival rate is now 85%, or 93% if only CML-related deaths are considered (Fig. 133-2). The course of CML has also become quite predictable. In the first 2 years of TKI therapy, rare sudden transformations are still noted (1–2%), usually lymphoid blastic transformations that respond to combinations of chemotherapy and TKIs followed by allogeneic SCT. These may be explained by the intrinsic mechanisms of sudden transformation already existing in the CML clones before the start of therapy that were not amenable to TKI inhibition, in particular imatinib. Second-generation TKIs (nilotinib, 1.0 0.0 0.0 100 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Years 41% 19% 5% 2% Accelerated 1980–2000 398 325 28 p = 0.015 Accelerated 2001–2013 258 86 88 Blastic 1980–2000 196 189 5 Blastic 2001–2013 175 133 7 p < 0.001 p < 0.001
# Chunk 2715
The introduction of TKI therapy, first in the form of imatinib mesylate in 2001, has revolutionized the treatment and prognosis in CML. Before 2000, allogeneic SCT was frontline therapy, when available, because of its potentially curative capacity. Otherwise, patients 691 were offered interferon α therapy (approved for the treatment of CML in 1986), which had modest benefits (improving survival from a median of 3–4 years with hydroxyurea-busulfan to a median of 6–7 years), but also significant side effects. Other alternatives included hydroxyurea, busulfan, and other nonspecific chemotherapies. With TKI therapy, the estimated 10-year survival in CML is 85%. Since 2001, six agents have been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of CML. These include five oral BCR-ABL1-selective TKIs: imatinib (Gleevec), nilotinib (Tasigna), dasatinib (Sprycel), bosutinib (Bosulif), and ponatinib (Iclusig). Imatinib 400 mg orally daily, nilotinib 300 mg orally twice a day (on an empty stomach), and dasatinib 100 mg orally daily are approved for frontline therapy of CML. All three are also approved for salvage therapy (nilotinib 400 mg twice daily), in addition to bosutinib (500 mg daily) and ponatinib (45 mg daily). Imatinib, dasatinib (140 mg daily), bosutinib, and ponatinib are also approved for the treatment of CML transformation (accelerated and blastic phase), whereas nilotinib is only approved for chronic and accelerated phase. Dasatinib, nilotinib, and bosutinib are referred to as sec-ond-generation TKIs; ponatinib is referred to as a third-generation TKI. The sixth approved agent is omacetaxine (Synribo), a protein synthesis inhibitor with presumed more selective inhibition of the synthesis of the BCR-ABL1 oncoprotein. It is approved for the treatment of chronicand accelerated-phase CML after failure of two or more TKIs, at 1.25 mg/m2 subcutaneously twice a day for 14 days for induction and for 7 days for consolidation-maintenance. Nilotinib is similar in structure to imatinib but 30 times more potent. Dasatinib and bosutinib are dual SRC-ABL1 TKIs (dasatinib is reported to be 300 times more potent and bosutinib 30–50 times more potent than imatinib). Ponatinib is effective against wild-type and mutant BCRABL1 clones. It is unique in being the only currently available BCRABL1 TKI that is active against T315I, a gatekeeper mutant resistant to the other four TKIs (Table 133-2).
# Chunk 2716
Imatinib, nilotinib, and dasatinib are all acceptable frontline therapies in CML. The long-term results of imatinib are very favorable. The 8-year follow-up results show a cumulative complete cytogenetic response rate (occurring at least once) of 83%, with 60–65% of patients being in complete cytogenetic response at 5-year follow-up. The estimated 8-year event-free survival rate is 81%, and the overall survival rate is 85%. Among patients continuing on imatinib, the annual rate of transformation to accelerated-blastic phase in years 4–8 is <1%. In two randomized studies, one comparing nilotinib 300 mg twice daily or 400 mg twice daily with imatinib (ENEST-nd) and the other comparing dasatinib 100 mg daily with imatinib (DASISION), the second-generation TKIs were associated with better outcomes in early surrogate endpoints, including higher rates of complete cytogenetic responses (85–87% vs 77–82%), major molecular responses (65–76% vs 46–63%), and undetectable BCR-ABL1 transcripts (IS) (32–37% vs 15–30%), and lower rates of transformation to accelerated-blastic phase (2–4% vs 6%). However, neither study showed a survival benefit with second-generation TKIs (median follow-up times of 4–5 years). This may be because salvage 692 therapy with other TKIs (following close observation and treatment change at progression) provides highly effective salvage therapy that rebalances the negative effect of the relapse. Salvage therapy in chronic phase with dasatinib, nilotinib, bosutinib, or ponatinib is associated with complete cytogenetic response rates of 30–60% of patients, depending on the salvage status (cytogenetic vs hematologic relapse), prior response to other TKIs, and the mutations at the time of relapse. Complete cytogenetic responses are generally durable, particularly in the absence of clonal evolution and mutations. Ponatinib is the only TKI active in the setting of T315I mutation, with complete cytogenetic response rates of 50–70%. The estimated 3to 5-year survival rates with new TKIs as salvage are 70–80% (compared with <50% before their availability). For example, with dasatinib salvage after imatinib failure in chronic-phase CML, the major molecular response rates were 40–43%, the estimated 6-year survival rates were 74–83%, and progression-free survival rates were 40–51%. Thus, TKIs in the salvage setting have already reduced the annual mortality from the historical rate of 10–15% to ≤5%. The goal of CML therapy is viewed differently in the context of research versus standard practice. In current practice, functional cure, defined as survival with CML similar to survival among normal individuals, is the current goal of therapy. CML is now considered an indolent disease, which, with appropriate TKI therapy, treatment compliance, careful monitoring, and early change to other TKIs as indicated, can be associated with close to normal survival. Therefore, in standard practice, achievement and maintenance of a complete cytogenetic response are the aims of therapy, because complete cytogenetic response is the only treatment-related factor associated with survival prolongation. Lack of achievement of a major molecular response (protects against events; associated with longer event-free survival) or of negative BCR-ABL1 transcripts (offers the potential of TKI interruption on investigational studies) should not be considered indications to change TKI therapy or to consider allogeneic SCT. A general practice rule is to continue the particular TKI chosen at the most tolerable dose schedule not associated with grade 3–4 side effects or with bothersome chronic side effects, for as long as possible, until either cytogenetic relapse or the persistence of unacceptable side effects. These two factors (i.e., cytogenetic relapse and intolerable side effects as judged by the patient and treating physician) are the indicators of “failure” of a particular TKI therapy. Because of the increasing prevalence of CML (cost of TKI therapy) and the emerging long-term low rates of significant organ toxicities, the ultimate goal of CML therapy in the research setting is to achieve eradication of the disease (molecular cure) that is prolonged and durable, with recovery of nonneoplastic, nonclonal hematopoiesis off TKI therapy. The first step toward this aim is to obtain the highest rates of undetectable BCR-ABL1 transcripts lasting for at least 2 or more years. Recommendations provided by the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) and by the European LeukemiaNet (ELN) discuss optimal/expected, suboptimal/warning, and failure response scenarios at different time points of TKI treatment duration. Unfortunately, they may have been misinterpreted in current practice, because oncologists often report that their aim of treatment is the achievement of major molecular response and disease eradication. Significantly, a substantial proportion of oncologists consider a change of TKI therapy in a patient in complete cytogenetic response if they note “loss of major molecular response” (increase of BCR-ABL1 transcripts ([IS] from <0.1% to >0.1%). This perception may be the result of confusion regarding the NCCN and ELN guidelines, which have been updated often as a result of maturing data and have multiple treatment endpoint considerations. Although such endpoints have been suggested by these recommendations as possible criteria for failure, it is important to emphasize that no randomized study has yet shown that a change of TKI treatment in patients with complete cytogenetic response because of a loss of major molecular response, versus changing at the time of cytogenetic relapse, has been shown to improve survival. This is likely because of the high efficacy of salvage TKI therapy at the time of cytogenetic relapse.
# Chunk 2717
Side effects of TKIs are generally mild to moderate, although with long-term TKI therapy, they could affect the patient’s quality of life. Serious side effects occur in less than 5–10% of patients. With imatinib therapy, common mild to moderate side effects include fluid retention, weight gain, nausea, diarrhea, skin rashes, periorbital edema, bone or muscle aches, fatigue, and others (rates of 10–20%). In general, second-generation TKIs are associated with lower rates of these bothersome adverse events. However, dasatinib is associated with higher rates of myelosuppression (20–30%), particularly thrombocytopenia, and with pleural (10–25%) or pericardial effusions (≤5%). Nilotinib is associated with higher rates of hyperglycemia (10–20%), pruritus and skin rashes, and headaches. Nilotinib is also associated with rare events of pancreatitis (<5%). Bosutinib is associated with higher rates of early and self-limited gastrointestinal complications like diarrhea (50–70%). Ponatinib is associated with higher rates of skin rashes (10–15%), pancreatitis (5%), elevations of amylase/lipase (10%), and vasospastic/vasoocclusive events (10–20%). Nilotinib and dasatinib may cause prolongation of the QTc interval; therefore, they should be evaluated cautiously in patients with prolonged QTc interval on electrocardiogram (>470–480 ms), and drugs given for other medical conditions should have relatively smaller or no effects on QTc. These side effects can often be dose-dependent and are generally reversible with treatment interruptions and dose reductions. Dose reductions can be individualized. However, the lowest estimated effective doses of TKIs (from different studies and treatment practices) are imatinib 300 mg daily; nilotinib 200 mg twice daily; dasatinib 20 mg daily; bosutinib 300 mg daily; and ponatinib 15 mg daily.
# Chunk 2718
Allogeneic SCT, a curative modality in CML, is associated with longterm survival rates of 40–60% when implemented in the chronic phase. It is associated with early (1-year) mortality rates of 5–30%. Although the 5to 10-year survival rates were reported to be around 50–60% (and considered as cure rates), about 10–15% of patients die in the subsequent 1–2 decades from subtle long-term complications of the transplant (rather than from CML relapse). These are related to chronic graft-versus-host disease (GVHD), organ dysfunction, development of second cancers, and hazard ratios for mortality higher than in the normal population. Other significant morbidities include infertility, chronic immune-mediated complications, cataracts, hip necrosis, and other morbidities affecting quality of life. The cure and early mortality rates in chronic-phase CML are also associated with several factors: patient age, duration of chronic phase, whether the donor is related or unrelated, degree of matching, preparative regimen, and others. In accelerated-phase CML, the cure rates with allogeneic SCT are 20–40%, depending on the definition of acceleration. Patients with clonal evolution as the only criterion have cure rates of up to 40–50%. Patients undergoing allogeneic SCT in second chronic phase have cure rates of 40–50%. The cure rates with allogeneic SCT in blastic phase CML are ≤15%. Post–allogeneic SCT strategies are now implemented in the setting of molecular or cytogenetic relapse or in hematologic relapse/transformation. These include the use of TKIs for prevention or treatment of relapse, donor lymphocyte infusions, and second allogeneic SCTs, among others. TKIs appear to be highly successful at reinducing cytogenetic/molecular remissions in the setting of cytogenetic or molecular relapse after allogeneic SCT.
# Chunk 2719
response within 1 year of salvage TKI therapy have short remission 693 durations and should consider allogeneic SCT as more urgent in the setting of salvage. Patients without clonal evolution or mutations at relapse and who achieve a complete cytogenetic response with TKI salvage, have long-lasting complete remissions and may delay the option of allogeneic SCT to third-line therapy. Finally, older patients (age 65–70 years or older) and those with high risk of mortality with allogeneic SCT may forgo this curative option for several years of disease control in chronic phase with or without cytogenetic response (Table 133-3). Historically, before the availability of TKIs, patients without cytogenetic response on interferon α or hydroxy-urea had expected short median survival times (2–3 years) with expected rapid disease transformation. The maturing experience with TKIs suggests a different course, whereby patients may remain in chronic phase on TKI-based therapies (combinations including hydroxyurea, cytarabine, decitabine, and others), with or without cytogenetic response, for many years. Table 133-3 summarizes a general guidance to the choice of TKIs versus allogeneic SCT.
# Chunk 2720
Achievement of complete cytogenetic response by 12 months of imatinib therapy and its persistence later, the only consistent prognostic factor associated with survival, is now the main therapeutic endpoint in CML. Failure to achieve a complete cytogenetic response by 12 months or occurrence of later cytogenetic or hematologic relapse is considered as treatment failure and an indication to change therapy. Because salvage therapy with other TKIs reestab lishes good outcome, it is important to ensure patient compliance to continued TKI therapy and change therapy at the first sign of cytogenetic relapse. Patients on frontline imatinib therapy should be closely monitored until documentation of complete cytogenetic response, at which time they can be monitored every 6 months with peripheral blood FISH and PCR studies (to check for concordance of results), or more frequently if there are concerns about changes in BCR-ABL1 transcripts (e.g., every 3 months). Monitoring by molecular studies only is reasonable in patients who are in major molecular response. Cytogenetic relapse on imatinib is an indication of treatment failure and need to change TKI therapy. Mutational analysis in this instance helps in the selection of the next TKI and identifies mutations in 30–50% of patients. Mutational studies in patients in complete cytogenetic response (in whom there may be concerns of increasing BCR-ABL1 transcripts) identify mutations in ≤5% and are therefore not indicated. Earlier response has been identified as a prognostic factor for long-term outcome, including achievement of partial cytogenetic response (BCR-ABL1 transcripts ≤10%) by 3–6 months of therapy. Failure to achieve such a response on imatinib therapy has been associated with significantly worse survival in some studies (particularly when second-generation TKIs were not readily available as salvage therapy), but not in others (when they were).
# Chunk 2721
The use of second-generation TKIs (nilotinib, dasatinib) as front-line therapy changed the monitoring approach slightly. Patients are expected to achieve complete cytogenetic response by 3–6 months of therapy. Failure to do so is associated with worse event-free survival, transformation rates, and survival. However, the 3to 5-year estimated survival among such patients is still high, around 80–90%, which is better than what would be anticipated if such patients were offered allogeneic SCT at that time. Thus, this adverse response to therapy is considered a warning signal, but it is not known whether changing therapy to other TKIs at that time would improve longer term outcome.
# Chunk 2722
Patients in accelerated or blastic phase may receive therapy with TKIs, preferably secondor third-generation TKIs (dasatinib, nilotinib, bosutinib, ponatinib), alone or in combination with chemotherapy, to reduce the CML burden, before undergoing allogeneic SCT. Response rates with single-agent TKIs range from 30 to 50% in accelerated phase and from 20 to 30% in blastic phase. Cytogenetic 694 responses, particularly complete cytogenetic responses, are uncommon (10–30%) and transient in blastic phase. Studies of TKIs in combination with chemotherapy are ongoing; the general experience suggests that combined TKI-chemotherapy strategies increase the response rates and their durability and improve survival. In CML lymphoid blastic phase, the combination of anti-ALL chemotherapy with TKIs results in complete response rates of 60–70% and median survival times of 2–3 years (compared with historical response rates of 40–50% and median survival times of 12–18 months). This allows many patients to undergo allogeneic SCT in a state of minimal CML burden or secondary chronic phase, which are associated with higher cure rates. In CML nonlymphoid blastic phase, anti-AML chemotherapy combined with TKIs results in CR rates of 30–50% and median survival times of 9–12 months (compared with historical response rates of 20–30% and median survival times of 3–5 months). In accelerated phase, response to single TKIs is significant in conditions where “softer” accelerated phase criteria are considered (e.g., clonal evolution alone, thrombocytosis alone, significant splenomegaly or resistance to hydroxyurea, but without evidence of high blast and basophil percentages). In accelerated phase, combinations usually include TKIs with low-intensity chemotherapy such as low-dose cytarabine, low-dose idarubicin, decitabine, interferon α, hydroxyurea, or others.
# Chunk 2723
Routine physical exams and blood tests in the United States and advanced countries result in early detection of CML in most patients. About 50–70% of patients with CML are diagnosed accidentally, and high-risk CML as defined by prognostic models (e.g., Sokal risk groups) is found in only 10–20% of patients. This is not the same situation in emerging nations (e.g., India, China, African countries, the Middle East), where most patients are diagnosed following evaluation for symptoms and many present with high tumor burdens, such as massive splenomegaly, and advanced phases of CML (high-risk CML documented in 30–50%). Therefore, the prognosis of such patients on TKI therapy may be worse than the published experience.
# Chunk 2724
The high cost of TKI therapies (annual costs of $90,000–$140,000 in the United States; lower but variable in the rest of the world) makes the general affordability of such treatments difficult. Although TKI treatment penetration is high in nations where cost of therapy is not an issue (e.g., Sweden, European Union), it may be less so in other nations, even in advanced ones like the United States, where out-ofpocket expenses may be prohibitive to a subset of patients (perhaps 10–20%). Based on the sales of imatinib worldwide and charity free drug supplies, it is estimated that less than 30% of patients are treated with imatinib (or other TKIs) consistently. Although the estimated 10-year survival in CML is 85% in single-institution studies (e.g.,
# Chunk 2725
M.D. Anderson Cancer Center), in national studies in countries with TKI affordability (Sweden) (Figs. 133-2 and 133-3) or in company-sponsored studies (where all patients have access to TKIs throughout their care), the estimated 10-year survival worldwide, even 12 years after the introduction of TKI therapies, is likely to be less than 50%. The Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) data from 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4
# Chunk 2726
EBV is associated with the development of Burkitt’s lymphoma in Central Africa and the occurrence of aggressive non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas in immunosuppressed patients in Western countries. The majority of primary central nervous system (CNS) lymphomas
# Chunk 2727
In CLL, the patient evaluation should include a complete blood count, chemistry tests to measure major organ function, serum protein electrophoresis, and a bone marrow biopsy. However, some physicians believe that the diagnosis would not always require a bone marrow biopsy. Patients often have imaging studies of the chest and abdomen looking for pathologic lymphadenopathy. Patients with typical B-cell CLL can be subdivided into three major prognostic groups. Those patients with only blood and bone marrow involvement by leukemia but no lymphadenopathy, organomegaly, or signs of bone marrow failure have the best prognosis. Those with lymphadenopathy and organomegaly have an intermediate prognosis, and patients with bone marrow failure, defined as hemoglobin <100 g/L (10 g/dL) or platelet count <100,000/μL, have the worst prognosis. The pathogenesis of the anemia or thrombocytopenia is important to discern. The prognosis is adversely affected when either or both of these abnormalities are due to progressive marrow infiltration and loss of productive marrow. However, either or both may be due to autoimmune phenomena or to hypersplenism that can develop during the course of the disease. These destructive mechanisms are usually completely reversible (glucocorticoids for autoimmune disease; splenectomy for hypersplenism) and do not influence disease prognosis.
# Chunk 2728
Evaluation of patients with Hodgkin’s lymphoma will typically include a complete blood count; erythrocyte sedimentation rate; chemistry studies reflecting major organ function; computed tomography (CT) scans of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis; and a bone marrow biopsy. Neither a positron emission tomography (PET) scan nor a gallium scan is absolutely necessary for primary staging, but one performed at the completion of therapy allows evaluation of persisting radiographic abnormalities, particularly the mediastinum. Knowing that the PET scan or gallium scan is abnormal before treatment can help in this assessment. In most cases, these studies will allow assignment of anatomic stage and the development of a therapeutic plan.
# Chunk 2729
In patients with non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, the same evaluation described for patients with Hodgkin’s lymphoma is usually carried out. In addition, serum levels of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and β2-microglobulin and serum protein electrophoresis are often included in the evaluation. Anatomic stage is assigned in the same manner as used for Hodgkin’s lymphoma. However, the prognosis of patients with non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma is best assigned using the International Prognostic Index (IPI) (Table 134-9). This is a powerful predictor of outcome in all subtypes of non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. Patients are assigned an IPI score based on the presence or absence of five adverse prognostic factors and may have none or all five of these adverse prognostic factors. Figure 134-4 shows the prognostic significance of this score in 1300 patients with all types of non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. With the addition of rituximab to CHOP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone), treatment outcomes have improved and the original IPI has lost some of its discrimination power. A revised IPI has been proposed that better predicts outcome of rituximab plus chemotherapy-based programs (Table 134-9). CT scans are routinely used in the evaluation of patients with all subtypes of non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, but PET and
# Chunk 2730
The treatment of patients with precursor B-cell ALL involves remission induction with combination chemotherapy, a consolidation phase that includes administration of high-dose systemic therapy and treatment to eliminate disease in the CNS, and a period of continuing therapy to prevent relapse and effect cure. The overall cure rate in children is 90%, whereas ~50% of adults are long-term disease-free survivors. This reflects the high proportion of adverse cytogenetic abnormalities seen in adults with precursor B-cell ALL.
# Chunk 2731
Physical examination Documentation of B symptoms Laboratory evaluation

Serum β2-microglobulin Chest radiograph CT scan of abdomen, pelvis, and usually chest Bone marrow biopsy Lumbar puncture in lymphoblastic, Burkitt’s, and diffuse large B-cell lym phoma with positive marrow biopsy
# Chunk 2732
MALT lymphoma may occur in the stomach, orbit, intestine, lung, thyroid, salivary gland, skin, soft tissues, bladder, kidney, and CNS. It may present as a new mass, be found on routine imaging studies, or be associated with local symptoms such as upper abdominal discomfort in gastric lymphoma. Most MALT lymphomas are gastric in origin. At least two genetic forms of gastric MALT exist: one (accounting for ~50% of cases) characterized by t(11;18)(q21;q21) that juxtaposes the amino terminal of the API2 gene with the carboxy terminal of the MALT1 gene creating an API2/MALT1 fusion product, and the other characterized by multiple sites of genetic instability including trisomies of chromosomes 3, 7, 12, and 18. About 95% of gastric MALT lymphomas are associated with H. pylori infection, and those that are do not usually express t(11;18). The t(11;18) usually results in activation of nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB), which acts as a survival factor for the cells. Lymphomas with t(11;18) translocations are genetically stable and do not evolve to diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. By contrast, t(11;18)-negative MALT lymphomas often acquire BCL6 mutations and progress to aggressive histology lymphoma. MALT lymphomas are localized to the organ of origin in ~40% of cases and to the organ and regional lymph nodes in ~30% of patients. However, distant metastasis can occur—particularly with transformation to diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Many patients who develop this lymphoma will have an autoimmune or inflammatory process such as Sjögren’s syndrome (salivary gland MALT), Hashimoto’s thyroiditis (thyroid MALT), Helicobacter gastritis (gastric MALT), C. psittaci conjunctivitis (ocular MALT), or Borrelia skin infections (cutaneous MALT).
# Chunk 2733
Evaluation of patients with MALT lymphoma follows the pattern (Table 134-11) for staging a patient with non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. In particular, patients with gastric lymphoma need to have studies performed to document the presence or absence of H. pylori infection. Endoscopic studies including ultrasound can help define the extent of gastric involvement. Most patients with MALT lymphoma have a good prognosis, with a 5-year survival of ~75%. In patients with a low IPI score, the 5-year survival is ~90%, whereas it drops to ~40% in patients with a high IPI score.
# Chunk 2734
The most common presentation of mantle cell lymphoma is with palpable lymphadenopathy, frequently accompanied by systemic symptoms. The median age is 63 years, and men are affected four times as commonly as women. Approximately 70% of patients will be stage IV at the time of diagnosis, with frequent bone marrow and peripheral blood involvement. Of the extranodal organs that can be involved, gastrointestinal involvement is particularly important to recognize. Patients who present with lymphomatosis polyposis in the large intestine usually have mantle cell lymphoma. Table 134-11 outlines the evaluation of patients with mantle cell lymphoma. Patients who present with gastrointestinal tract involvement often have Waldeyer’s ring involvement, and vice versa. The 5-year survival for all patients with mantle cell lymphoma is ~25%, with only occasional patients who present with a high IPI score surviving 5 years and ~50% of patients with a low IPI score surviving 5 years.
# Chunk 2735
Current therapies for mantle cell lymphoma are evolving. Patients with localized disease might be treated with combination chemotherapy followed by radiotherapy; however, these patients are exceedingly rare. For the usual presentation with disseminated disease, standard lymphoma treatments have been unsatisfactory, with the minority of patients achieving complete remission. Aggressive combination chemotherapy regimens followed by autologous or allogeneic bone marrow transplantation are frequently offered to younger patients. For the occasional elderly, asymptomatic patient, observation followed by single-agent chemotherapy might be the most practical approach. An intensive combination chemotherapy regimen originally used in the treatment of acute leukemia, HyperC-VAD (cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin, dexamethasone, cytarabine, and methotrexate), in combination with rituximab, seems to be associated with better response rates, particularly in younger patients. Alternating two regimens, HyperC-VAD with rituximab added (R-HyperC-VAD) and rituximab plus high-dose methotrexate and cytarabine, can achieve complete responses in >80% of patients and an 8-year survival of 56%, comparable to regimens using high-dose therapy and autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Bendamustine plus rituximab has been found to induce complete responses in about 31% of patients, but the responses are generally not long lasting. Bortezomib and temsirolimus are single agents that induce transient partial responses in a minority of patients and are being added to primary combinations.
# Chunk 2736
Follicular Lymphoma Follicular lymphomas make up 22% of nonHodgkin’s lymphomas worldwide and at least 30% of non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas diagnosed in the United States. This type of lymphoma can be diagnosed accurately on morphologic findings alone and has been the diagnosis in the majority of patients in therapeutic trials for “low-grade” lymphoma in the past. The clinical characteristics of follicular lymphoma are presented in Table 134-10.
# Chunk 2737
Patients with follicular lymphoma have a high rate of histologic transformation to diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (5–7% per year). This is recognized ~40% of the time during the course of the illness by repeat biopsy and is present in almost all patients at autopsy. This transformation is usually heralded by rapid growth of lymph nodes—often localized—and the development of systemic symptoms such as fevers, sweats, and weight loss. Although these patients have a poor prognosis, aggressive combination chemotherapy regimens can sometimes cause a complete remission in the diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, at times leaving the patient with persisting follicular lymphoma. With more frequent use of R-CHOP to treat follicular lymphoma at diagnosis, it appears that the rate of histologic progression is decreasing. R-CHOP or bendamustine plus rituximab with intermittent rituximab maintenance for 2 years are the most commonly used treatment approaches.
# Chunk 2738
Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma can present as either primary lymph node disease or at extranodal sites. More than 50% of patients will have some site of extranodal involvement at diagnosis, with the most common sites being the gastrointestinal tract and bone marrow, each being involved in 15–20% of patients. Essentially any organ can be involved, making a diagnostic biopsy imperative. For example, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma of the pancreas has a much better prognosis than pancreatic carcinoma but would be missed without biopsy. Primary diffuse large B-cell lymphoma of the brain is being diagnosed with increasing frequency. Other unusual subtypes of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma such as pleural effusion lymphoma and intravascular lymphoma have been difficult to diagnose and associated with a very poor prognosis.
# Chunk 2739
Table 134-11 shows the initial evaluation of patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. After a careful staging evaluation, ~50% of patients will be found to have stage I or II disease, and ~50% will have widely disseminated lymphoma. Bone marrow biopsy shows involvement by lymphoma in ~15% of cases, with marrow involvement by small cells more frequent than by large cells.
# Chunk 2740
Malignancies of Lymphoid Cells 706 be expected to achieve a complete remission, and 50–70% of complete responders will be cured. The chances for a favorable response to treatment are predicted by the IPI. In fact, the IPI was developed based on the outcome of patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma treated with CHOP-like regimens. For the 35% of patients with a low IPI score of 0–1, the 5-year survival is >70%, whereas for the 20% of patients with a high IPI score of 4–5, the 5-year survival is ~20%. The addition of rituximab to CHOP has improved each of those numbers by ~15%. A number of other factors, including molecular features of the tumor, levels of circulating cytokines and soluble receptors, and other surrogate markers, have been shown to influence prognosis. However, they have not been validated as rigorously as the IPI and have not been uniformly applied clinically. Because a number of patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma are either initially refractory to therapy or relapse after apparently effective chemotherapy, 30–40% of patients will be candidates for salvage treatment at some point. Alternative combination chemotherapy regimens can induce complete remission in as many as 50% of these patients, but long-term disease-free survival is seen in ≤10%. Autologous bone marrow transplantation is superior to salvage chemotherapy at usual doses and leads to longterm disease-free survival in ~40% of patients whose lymphomas remain chemotherapy-sensitive after relapse.
# Chunk 2741
Burkitt’s Lymphoma/Leukemia Burkitt’s lymphoma/leukemia is a rare disease in adults in the United States, making up <1% of non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas, but it makes up ~30% of childhood non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. Burkitt’s leukemia, or L3 ALL, makes up a small proportion of childhood and adult acute leukemias. Table 134-10 shows the clinical features of Burkitt’s lymphoma.
# Chunk 2742
Nodal marginal zone lymphoma, also known as monocytoid cell lymphoma, represents ~1% of non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas. This lymphoma has a slight female predominance and presents with disseminated disease (i.e., stage III or IV) in 75% of patients. Approximately one-third of patients have bone marrow involvement, and a leukemic presentation occasionally occurs. The staging evaluation and therapy should use the same approach as used for patients with follicular lymphoma. Approximately 60% of the patients with nodal marginal zone lymphoma will survive 5 years after diagnosis.
# Chunk 2743
Adult T-Cell Lymphoma/Leukemia Adult T-cell lymphoma/leukemia is one manifestation of infection by the HTLV-1 retrovirus. Patients can be infected through transplacental transmission, mother’s milk, blood transfusion, and by sexual transmission of the virus. Patients who acquire the virus from their mother through breast milk are most likely to develop lymphoma, but the risk is still only 2.5% and the latency averages 55 years. Nationwide testing for HTLV-1 antibodies and the aggressive implementation of public health measures could theoretically lead to the disappearance of adult T-cell lymphoma/leukemia. Tropical spastic paraparesis, another manifestation of HTLV-1 infection (Chap. 225e), occurs after a shorter latency (1–3 years) and is most common in individuals who acquire the virus during adulthood from transfusion or sex.
# Chunk 2744
Malignancies of Lymphoid Cells 708 The diagnosis of anaplastic large T/null-cell lymphoma is made when an expert hematopathologist recognizes the typical morphologic picture and a T-cell or null-cell immunophenotype with CD30 positivity. Documentation of the t(2;5) and/or overexpression of ALK protein confirm the diagnosis. Some diffuse large B-cell lymphomas can also have an anaplastic appearance but have the same clinical course or response to therapy as other diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. A small percentage of anaplastic lymphomas are ALK negative. Patients with anaplastic large T/null-cell lymphoma are typically young (median age, 33 years) and male (~70%). Some 50% of patients present in stage I/II, and the remainder present with more extensive disease. Systemic symptoms and elevated LDH levels are seen in about one-half of patients. Bone marrow and the gastrointestinal tract are rarely involved, but skin involvement is frequent. Some patients with disease confined to the skin have a different and more indolent disorder that has been termed cutaneous anaplastic large T/null-cell lymphoma and might be related to lymphomatoid papulosis.
# Chunk 2745
The initial evaluation of a patient with a peripheral T-cell lymphoma should include the studies in Table 134-11 for staging patients with non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. Unfortunately, patients with peripheral T-cell lymphoma usually present with adverse prognostic factors, with >80% of patients having an IPI score ≥2 and >30% having an IPI score ≥4. As this would predict, peripheral T-cell lymphomas are associated with a poor outcome, and only 25% of the patients survive 5 years after diagnosis. Treatment regimens are the same as those used for diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (omitting rituximab), but patients with peripheral T-cell lymphoma have a poorer response to treatment. Because of this poor treatment outcome, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation is often considered early in the care of young patients.
# Chunk 2746
HODGKIN’S LYMPHOMA Classical Hodgkin’s Lymphoma Hodgkin’s lymphoma occurs in 9000 patients in the United States each year, and the disease does not appear to be increasing in frequency. Most patients present with palpable lymphadenopathy that is nontender; in most patients, these lymph nodes are in the neck, supraclavicular area, and axilla. More than half the patients will have mediastinal adenopathy at diagnosis, and this is sometimes the initial manifestation. Subdiaphragmatic presentation of Hodgkin’s lymphoma is unusual and more common in older males. One-third of patients present with fevers, night sweats, and/or weight loss—B symptoms in the Ann Arbor staging classification (Table 134-8). Occasionally, Hodgkin’s lymphoma can present as a fever of unknown origin. This is more common in older patients who are found to have mixed-cellularity Hodgkin’s lymphoma in an abdominal site. Rarely, the fevers persist for days to weeks, followed by afebrile intervals and then recurrence of the fever. This pattern is known as Pel-Ebstein fever. Hodgkin’s lymphoma can occasionally present with unusual manifestations. These include severe and unexplained itching, cutaneous disorders such as erythema nodosum and ichthyosiform atrophy, paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration and other distant effects on the CNS, nephrotic syndrome, immune hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia, hypercalcemia, and pain in lymph nodes on alcohol ingestion.
# Chunk 2747
The diagnosis of Hodgkin’s lymphoma is established by review of an adequate biopsy specimen by an expert hematopathologist. In the United States, most patients have nodular sclerosing Hodgkin’s lymphoma, with a minority of patients having mixed-cellularity Hodgkin’s lymphoma. Lymphocyte-predominant and lymphocyte-depleted Hodgkin’s lymphoma are rare. Mixed-cellularity Hodgkin’s lymphoma or lymphocyte-depletion Hodgkin’s lymphoma are seen more frequently in patients infected by HIV (Fig. 134-11). Hodgkin’s lymphoma is a tumor characterized by rare neoplastic cells of B-cell origin (immunoglobulin genes are rearranged but not expressed) in a tumor mass that is largely polyclonal inflammatory infiltrate, probably a reaction to cytokines produced by the tumor cells. The differential diagnosis of a lymph node biopsy suspicious for Hodgkin’s lymphoma includes inflammatory processes, mononucleosis, non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, phenytoin-induced adenopathy, and nonlymphomatous malignancies.
# Chunk 2748
The staging evaluation for a patient with Hodgkin’s lymphoma would typically include a careful history and physical examination; complete blood count; erythrocyte sedimentation rate; serum chemistry studies including LDH; chest radiograph; CT scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis; and bone marrow biopsy. Many patients would also have a PET scan or a gallium scan. Although rarely used, a bipedal lymphangiogram can be helpful. PET and gallium scans are most useful to document remission. Staging laparotomies were once popular for most patients with Hodgkin’s lymphoma but are now done rarely because of an increased reliance on systemic rather than local therapy.
# Chunk 2749
Patients with localized Hodgkin’s lymphoma are cured >90% of the time. In patients with good prognostic factors, extended-field radiotherapy has a high cure rate. Increasingly, patients with all stages of Hodgkin’s lymphoma are treated initially with chemotherapy. Patients with localized or good-prognosis disease receive a brief course of chemotherapy followed by radiotherapy to sites of node involvement. Patients with more extensive disease or those with B symptoms receive a complete course of chemotherapy. The most popular chemotherapy regimen used in Hodgkin’s lymphoma is a combination of doxorubicin, bleomycin, vinblastine, and dacarbazine (ABVD). Today, most patients in the United States receive ABVD, but a weekly chemotherapy regimen administered for 12 weeks called Stanford V is becoming increasingly popular, but it includes radiation therapy, which has been associated with life-threatening late toxicities such as premature coronary artery disease and second solid tumors. In Europe, a high-dose regimen called BEACOPP incorporating alkylating agents has become popular and might have a better response rate in very-high-risk patients. Long-term disease-free survival in patients with advanced disease can be achieved in >75% of patients who lack systemic symptoms and in 60–70% of patients with systemic symptoms.
# Chunk 2750
Many patients with extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type have excellent antitumor responses with combination chemotherapy regimens, particularly those with localized disease. Radiation therapy is often used after completion of chemotherapy. Four risk factors have been defined, including B symptoms, advanced stage, elevated LDH, and regional lymph node involvement. Patient survival is linked to the number of risk factors: 5-year survival is 81% for zero risk factors, 64% for one risk factor, 32% for two risk factors, and 7% for three or four risk factors. Combination regimens without anthracyclines have been touted as superior to CHOP, but data are sparse. High-dose therapy with stem cell transplantation has been used, but its role is unclear.
# Chunk 2751
Primary Cutaneous CD30+ T-Cell Lymphoma This tumor involves the skin and is composed of cells that appear similar to the cells of anaplastic T-cell lymphoma. Among cutaneous T-cell tumors, about 25% are CD30+ anaplastic lymphomas. If dissemination to lymph nodes occurs, it is difficult to distinguish between the cutaneous and systemic forms of the disease. The tumor cells are often CD4+, and the cells contain granules that are positive for granzyme B and perforin in 70% of cases. The typical t(2;5) of anaplastic T-cell lymphoma is absent; indeed, its presence should prompt a closer look for systemic involvement and a switch to a diagnosis of anaplastic T-cell lymphoma. This form of lymphoma has sporadically been noted as a rare complication of silicone on saline breast implants. Cutaneous CD30+ T-cell lymphoma often responds to therapy. Radiation therapy can be effective, and surgery can also produce long-term disease control. Five-year survival exceeds 90%.
# Chunk 2752
In a series of 55 patients with WHO-defined aCML, median age at diagnosis was 62 years with female preponderance (57%); splenomegaly was reported in 54% of the patients, red cell transfusion requirement in 65%, abnormal karyotype in 20% (20q– and trisomy 8 being the most frequent), and leukemic transformation in 40%. Median survival was 25 months. Outcome was worse in patients with marked worLd heaLth organization diagnostiC Criteria for ChroniC neUtrophiLiC LeUkeMia (CnL); atypiCaL ChroniC MyeLoid LeUkeMia, BCRABL1negative (aCML); and ChroniC MyeLoMonoCytiC LeUkeMia (CMML) <10% Bone marrow ↑Neutrophils, number and % ↑Granulocyte proliferation Dysplasia in ≥1 myeloid lineages <5% blasts Granulocytic dysplasia ± erythroid/ or megakaryocyte dysplasia
# Chunk 2753
Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML) is classified under the WHO category of MDS/MPN and is defined by an absolute monocyte count (AMC) of >1 × 109/L in the peripheral blood. Median age at diagnosis ranges between 65 and 75 years, and there is a 2:1 male predominance. Clinical presentation is variable and depends on whether the disease presents with MDS-like or MPN-like phenotype; the former is associated with cytopenias and the latter with splenomegaly and features of myeloproliferation such as fatigue, night sweats, weight loss, and cachexia. About 20% of patients with CMML experience serositis involving the joints (arthritis), pericardium (pericarditis and pericardial effusion), pleura (pleural effusion), or peritoneum (ascites).
# Chunk 2754
Prognosis A meta-analysis showed median survival of 1.5 years in CMML. Numerous prognostic systems have attempted to better define and stratify the natural history of CMML. One of these, the Mayo prognostic model, assigns one point each to the following four independent prognostic variables: AMC >10 × 109/L, presence of circulating immature cells, hemoglobin <10 g/dL, and platelet count <100,000/mL. This model stratified patients into three risk groups: low (0 points), intermediate (1 point), and high (≥2 points), translating to median survival times of 32, 18, and 10 months, respectively.
# Chunk 2755
A French study incorporated ASXL1 mutational status in 312 CMML patients. In a multivariable model, independent predictors of poor survival were WBC >15 × 109/L (3 points), ASXL1 mutations (2 points), age >65 years (2 points), platelet count <100,000/mL (2 points), and hemoglobin <10 g/dL in females and <11 g/dL in males (2 points). This model stratified patients into three groups: low (0–4 points), intermediate (5–7 points), and high risk (8–12 points), with median survival times of not reached, 38.5 months, and 14.4 months, respectively.
# Chunk 2756
Juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML) is primarily a disease of early childhood and is included, along with CMML, in the MDS/ MPN WHO category. Both CMML and JMML feature leukocytosis, monocytosis, and hepatosplenomegaly. Additional characteristic features in JMML include thrombocytopenia and elevated fetal hemoglobin. Myeloid progenitors in JMML display granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) hypersensitivity that has been attributed to dysregulated RAS/MAPK signaling. The latter is believed to result from mutually exclusive mutations involving RAS, PTPN11, and NF1. A third of patients with JMML that is not associated with Noonan’s syndrome carry PTPN11 mutations, whereas the incidence of NF1 in patients without neurofibromatosis type 1 and RAS mutations is approximately 15% each. Drug therapy is relatively ineffective in JMML, and the treatment of choice is ASCT, which results in a 5-year survival of approximately 50%.
# Chunk 2757
RARS-T is classified in the MDS/MPN category because it shares dysplastic features with RARS and myeloproliferative features with essential thrombocythemia (ET). In one study, 111 patients with RARS-T were compared with 33 patients with RARS. The frequency of SF3B1 mutations in RARS-T (87%) was similar to that in RARS (85%). JAK2 V617F mutation was detected in 49% of RARS-T patients (including 48% of those mutated for SF3B1) but none of those with RARS. In RARS-T, SF3B1 mutations were more frequent in females (95%) than in males (77%), and mean ring sideroblast counts were higher in SF3B1-mutated patients. Median overall survival was 6.9 years in SF3B1-mutated patients versus 3.3 years in unmutated patients. Six-year survival was 67% in JAK2-mutated patients versus 32% in unmutated patients. Multivariable analysis identified younger age and JAK2 and SF3B1 mutations as favorable factors.
# Chunk 2758
In one series, 85 patients with non-RARS-T MDS/MPN, median age was 70 years, and 72% were males. Splenomegaly at presentation was present in 33%, thrombocytosis in 13%, leukocytosis in 18%, JAK2 mutations in 30%, and abnormal karyotype in 51%; the most frequent cytogenetic abnormality was trisomy 8. Median survival was 12.4 months and favorably affected by thrombocytosis. Treatment with hypomethylating agents, immunomodulators, or ASCT did not appear to favorably affect survival.
# Chunk 2759
Diagnosis of SM is based on bone marrow examination that shows clusters of morphologically abnormal, spindle-shaped mast cells that are best evaluated by the use of immunohistochemical stains that are specific to mast cells (tryptase, CD117). In addition, mast cell immunophenotyping reveals aberrant CD25 expression by neoplastic mast cells. Other laboratory findings in SM include increased levels of serum tryptase, histamine and urine histamine metabolites, and prostaglandins. SM is associated with KIT mutations, usually KIT D816V, in the majority of patients. Accordingly, mutation screening for KIT D816V is diagnostically useful. However, the ability to detect KIT D816V depends on assay sensitivity and mast cell content of the test sample.
# Chunk 2760
The nature of the M component is variable in plasma cell disorders. It may be an intact antibody molecule of any heavy chain subclass, or it may be an altered antibody or fragment. Isolated light or heavy chains may be produced. In some plasma cell tumors such as extramedullary or solitary bone plasmacytomas, less than one-third of patients will have an M component. In ~20% of myelomas, only light chains are produced and, in most cases, are secreted in the urine as Bence Jones proteins. The frequency of myelomas of a particular heavy chain class is roughly proportional to the serum concentration, and therefore, IgG myelomas are more common than IgA and IgD myelomas. In approximately 1% of patients with myeloma, biclonal or triclonal gammopathy is observed.
# Chunk 2761
Bone pain is the most common symptom in myeloma, affecting nearly 70% of patients. Unlike the pain of metastatic carcinoma, which often is worse at night, the pain of myeloma is precipitated by movement. Persistent localized pain in a patient with myeloma usually signifies a pathologic fracture. The bone lesions of myeloma are caused by the proliferation of tumor cells, activation of osteoclasts that destroy bone, and suppression of osteoblasts that form new bone. The increased osteoclast activity is mediated by osteoclast activat ing factors (OAFs) made by the myeloma cells (OAF activity can be mediated by several cytokines, including IL-1, lymphotoxin, VEGF, receptor activator of NF-κB [RANK] ligand, macrophage inhibitory factor [MIP]-1α, and tumor necrosis factor [TNF]). The bone lesions are lytic in nature and are rarely associated with osteoblastic new bone formation due to their suppression by dickhoff-1 (DKK-1) produced by myeloma cells. Therefore, radioisotopic bone scanning is less useful in diagnosis than is plain radiography. The bony lysis results in substantial mobilization of calcium from bone, and serious acute and chronic complications of hypercalcemia may dominate the clinical picture (see below). Localized bone lesions may expand to the point that mass lesions may be palpated, especially on the skull (Fig. 136-5), clavicles, and sternum; and the collapse of vertebrae may lead to spinal cord compression. The next most common clinical problem in patients with myeloma is susceptibility to bacterial infections. The most common infections are pneumonias and pyelonephritis, and the most frequent pathogens are Streptococcus pneumoniae, Staphylococcus aureus, and Klebsiella pneumoniae in the lungs and Escherichia coli and other gram-negative organisms in the urinary tract. In ~25% of patients, recurrent infections are the presenting features, and >75%
# Chunk 2762
Renal failure occurs in nearly 25% of myeloma patients, and some renal pathology is noted in more than 50%. Many factors contribute to this. Hypercalcemia is the most common cause of renal failure. Glomerular deposits of amyloid, hyperuricemia, recurrent infections, frequent use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents for pain control, use of iodinated contrast dye for imaging, bisphosphonate use, and occasional infiltration of the kidney by myeloma cells all may contribute to renal dysfunction. However, tubular damage associated with the excretion of light chains is almost always present. Normally, light chains are filtered, reabsorbed in the tubules, and catabolized. With the increase in the amount of light chains presented to the tubule, the tubular cells become overloaded with these proteins, and tubular damage results either directly from light chain toxic effects or indirectly from the release of intracellular lysosomal enzymes. The earliest manifestation of this tubular damage is the adult Fanconi’s syndrome (a type 2 proximal renal tubular acidosis), with loss of glucose and amino acids, as well as defects in the ability of the kidney to acidify and concentrate the urine. The proteinuria is not accompanied by hypertension, and the protein is nearly all light chains. Generally, very little albumin is in the urine because glomerular function is usually normal. When the glomeruli are involved, nonselective proteinuria is also observed. Patients with myeloma also have a decreased anion gap [i.e., Na+ – (Cl− + HCO3−)] because the M component is cationic, resulting in retention of chloride. This is often accompanied by hyponatremia that is felt to be artificial (pseudohyponatremia) because each volume of serum has less water as a result of the increased protein. Renal dysfunction due to light chain deposition disease, light chain cast nephropathy, and amyloidosis is partially reversible with effective therapy. Myeloma patients are susceptible to developing acute renal failure if they become dehydrated.
# Chunk 2763
Although neurologic symptoms occur in a minority of patients, they may have many causes. Hypercalcemia may produce lethargy, weakness, depression, and confusion. Hyperviscosity may lead to headache, fatigue, shortness of breath, exacerbation or precipitation of heart failure, visual disturbances, ataxia, vertigo, retinopathy, somnolence, and coma. Bony damage and collapse may lead to cord compression, radicular pain, and loss of bowel and bladder control. Infiltration of peripheral nerves by amyloid can be a cause of carpal tunnel syndrome and other sensorimotor monoand polyneuropathies. Neuropathy associated with monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) and myeloma is more frequently sensory than motor neuropathy and is associated with IgM more than other isotypes. In >50% of patients with neuropathy, the IgM monoclonal protein is directed against myelin-associated globulin (MAG). Sensory neuropathy is also a side effect of thalidomide and bortezomib therapy.
# Chunk 2764
The diagnosis of myeloma requires marrow plasmacytosis (>10%), a serum and/or urine M component, and end organ damage detailed in Table 136-1. Bone marrow plasma cells are CD138 and either monoclonal kappa or lambda light chain positive. The most important differential diagnosis in patients with myeloma involves their separation from individuals with MGUS or smoldering multiple myeloma (SMM). MGUS is vastly more common than myeloma, occurring in 1% of the population older than age 50 years and in up to 10% of individuals older than age 75 years. The diagnostic criteria for MGUS, SMM, and myeloma are described in Table 136-1. Although ~1% of patients per year with MGUS go on to develop myeloma, all
# Chunk 2765
M protein in serum and/or urine Bone marrow (clonal) plasma cellsb or plasmacytoma Myeloma-related organ or tissue impairment (end organ damage, including
# Chunk 2766
No M protein in serum and/or urine with immunofixation Bone marrow clonal plasmacytosis ≥10% or plasmacytoma Myeloma-related organ or tissue impairment (end organ damage, including
# Chunk 2767
Any one of the following: (a) organomegaly (splenomegaly, hepatomegaly, or lymphadenopathy); (b) extravascular volume overload (edema, pleural effusion, or ascites); (c) endocrinopathy (adrenal, thyroid, pituitary, gonadal, parathyroid, and pancreatic); (d) skin changes (hyperpigmentation, hypertrichosis, glomeruloid hemangiomata, plethora, acrocyanosis, flushing, and white nails); (e) papilledema; (f ) thrombocytosis/polycythemiad aMyeloma-related organ or tissue impairment (end organ damage): calcium levels increased: serum calcium >0.25 mmol/L above the upper limit of normal or >2.75 mmol/L; renal insufficiency: creatinine >173 mmol/L; anemia: hemoglobin 2 g/dL below the lower limit of normal or hemoglobin <10 g/dL; bone lesions: lytic lesions or osteoporosis with compression fractures (magnetic resonance imaging or computed tomography may clarify); other: symptomatic hyperviscosity, amyloidosis, recurrent bacterial infections (>2 episodes in 12 months). bIf flow cytometry is performed, most plasma cells (>90%) will show a “neoplastic” phenotype. cA small M component may sometimes be present. dThese features should have no attributable other causes and have temporal relation with each other.
# Chunk 2768
Abbreviation: POEMS, polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, M-protein, and skin changes.

myeloma is preceded by MGUS. Non-IgG subtype, abnormal kappa/ lambda free light chain ratio, and serum M protein >15 g/L (1.5 g/ dL) are associated with higher incidence of progression of MGUS to myeloma. Absence of all three features predicts a 5% chance of progression, whereas higher risk MGUS with the presence of all three features predicts a 60% chance of progression over 20 years. The features responsible for higher risk of progression from SMM to MM are bone marrow plasmacytosis >10%, abnormal kappa/lambda free light chain ratio, and serum M protein >30 g/L (3 g/dL). Patients with only one of these three features have a 25% chance of progression to MM in 5 years, whereas patients with high-risk SMM with all three features have a 76% chance of progression. There are two important variants 715 of myeloma—solitary bone plasmacytoma and solitary extramedullary plasmacytoma. These lesions are associated with an M component in <30% of the cases, they may affect younger individuals, and both are associated with median survivals of ≥10 years. Solitary bone plasmacytoma is a single lytic bone lesion without marrow plasmacytosis. Extramedullary plasmacytomas usually involve the submucosal lymphoid tissue of the nasopharynx or paranasal sinuses without marrow plasmacytosis. Both tumors are highly responsive to local radiation therapy. If an M component is present, it should disappear after treatment. Solitary bone plasmacytomas may recur in other bony sites or evolve into myeloma. Extramedullary plasmacytomas rarely recur or progress.
# Chunk 2769
The clinical evaluation of patients with myeloma includes a careful physical examination searching for tender bones and masses. Chest and bone radiographs may reveal lytic lesions or diffuse osteopenia. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) offers a sensitive means to document extent of bone marrow infiltration and cord or root compression in patients with pain syndromes. A complete blood count with differential may reveal anemia. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate is elevated. Rare patients (~1%) may have plasma cell leukemia with >2000 plasma cells/μL. This may be seen in disproportionate frequency in IgD (12%) and IgE (25%) myelomas. Serum calcium, urea nitrogen, creatinine, and uric acid levels may be elevated. Protein electrophoresis and measurement of serum immunoglobulins and free light chains are useful for detecting and characterizing M spikes, supplemented by immunoelectrophoresis, which is especially sensitive for identifying low concentrations of M components not detectable by protein electrophoresis. A 24-h urine specimen is necessary to quantitate Bence Jones protein excretion. Serum alkaline phosphatase is usually normal even with extensive bone involvement because of the absence of osteoblastic activity. It is also important to quantitate serum β2-microglobulin and albumin (see below).
# Chunk 2770
The serum M component will be IgG in 53% of patients, IgA in 25%, and IgD in 1%; 20% of patients will have only light chains in serum and urine. Dipsticks for detecting proteinuria are not reliable at identifying light chains, and the heat test for detecting Bence Jones protein is falsely negative in ~50% of patients with light chain myeloma. Fewer than 1% of patients have no identifiable M component; these patients usually have light chain myeloma in which renal catabolism has made the light chains undetectable in the urine. In most of these patients, light chains can now be detected by serum free light chain assay. IgD myeloma may also present with light chain disease. About two-thirds of patients with serum M components also have urinary light chains. The light chain isotype may have an impact on survival. Patients secreting lambda light chains have a significantly shorter overall survival than those secreting kappa light chains. Whether this is due to some genetically important determinant of cell proliferation or because lambda light chains are more likely to cause renal damage and form amyloid than are kappa light chains is unclear. The heavy chain isotype may have an impact on patient management as well. About half of patients with IgM paraproteins develop hyperviscosity compared with only 2–4% of patients with IgA and IgG M components. Among IgG myelomas, it is the IgG3 subclass that has the highest tendency to form both concentrationand temperature-dependent aggregates, leading to hyperviscosity and cold agglutination at lower serum concentrations.
# Chunk 2771
No specific intervention is indicated for patients with MGUS. Follow-up once a year or less frequently is adequate except in higher risk MGUS, where serum protein electrophoresis, complete blood count, creatinine, and calcium should be repeated every 6 months. A patient with MGUS and severe polyneuropathy is considered for therapeutic intervention if a causal relationship can be assumed, especially in absence of any other potential causes for neuropathy. Therapy can include plasmapheresis and occasionally rituximab in patients with IgM MGUS or myeloma-like therapy in those with IgG or IgA disease. About 10% of patients with myeloma are asymptomatic (SMM) and will have an indolent course demonstrating only very slow progression of disease over many years. For these patients, no specific therapeutic intervention is indicated, although early intervention with lenalidomide and dexamethasone may prevent progression from high-risk SMM to active MM. At present, patients with SMM only require antitumor therapy when the disease becomes symptomatic with development of anemia, hypercalcemia, progressive lytic bone lesions, renal dysfunction, or recurrent infections. Patients with solitary bone plasmacytomas and extramedullary plasmacytomas may be expected to enjoy prolonged disease-free survival after local radiation therapy at a dose of around 40 Gy. There is a low incidence of occult marrow involvement in patients with solitary bone plasmacytoma. Such patients are usually identified because their serum M component falls slowly or disappears initially, only to return after a few months. These patients respond well to systemic therapy.
# Chunk 2772
Thalidomide (200 mg daily), when combined with dexamethasone, achieved responses in two-thirds of newly diagnosed MM patients. Subsequently, lenalidomide (25 mg/d on days 1–21 every 4 weeks), an immunomodulatory derivative of thalidomide, and bortezomib (1.3 mg/m2 on days 1, 4, 8, and 11 every 3 weeks), a proteasome inhibitor, have each been combined with dexamethasone (40 mg once every week) and obtained high response rates (>80%) in newly diagnosed patients with MM. Importantly, their superior toxicity profile with improved efficacy has made them the preferred agents for induction therapy. Efforts to improve the fraction of patients responding and the degree of response have involved adding agents to the treatment regimen. The combination of lenalidomide, bortezomib, and dexamethasone achieves close to a 100% response rate and 30% complete response rate, making it one of the preferred induction regimens in transplant-eligible patients. Other similar three-drug combinations (bortezomib, thalidomide, and dexamethasone or bortezomib, cyclophosphamide, and dexamethasone) also achieve >90% response rate. Herpes zoster prophylaxis is indicated if bortezomib is used, and neuropathy attendant to bortezomib can be decreased both by its subcutaneous administration and administration on a weekly schedule. Lenalidomide use requires prophylaxis for deep vein thrombosis (DVT) with either aspirin or warfarin or low-molecular-weight heparin if patients are at a greater risk of DVT. In patients receiving lenalidomide, stem cells should be collected within 6 months, because the continued use of lenalidomide may compromise the ability to collect adequate numbers of stem cells. Initial therapy is continued until maximal cytoreduction. In patients who are transplant candidates, alkylating agents such as melphalan should be avoided because they damage stem cells, leading to decreased ability to collect stem cells for autologous transplant.
# Chunk 2773
In patients who are not transplant candidates due to physiologic age >70 years, significant cardiopulmonary problems, or other comorbid illnesses, the same twoor three-drug combinations described above are considered standard of care as induction therapy. Previously, therapy consisting of intermittent pulses of melphalan, an alkylating agent, with prednisone (MP; melphalan, 0.25 mg/kg per day, and prednisone, 1 mg/kg per day for 4 days) every 4–6 weeks was used. However, a number of studies have combined novel agents with MP and reported superior response and survival outcomes. In patients >65 years old, combining thalidomide with MP (MPT) obtains higher response rates and overall survival compared with MP alone. Similarly, significantly improved response (71 vs 35%) and overall survival (3-year survival 72 vs 59%) were observed with the combination of bortezomib and MP compared with MP alone. Lenalidomide added to MP followed by lenalidomide maintenance also prolonged progression-free survival compared with MP alone. These combinations of novel agents with MP also achieve high complete response rates (MPT, ~15%; MP plus bortezomib, ~30%; MP plus lenalidomide, ~20%; and MP, ~2–4%). Although combinations of MP with newer agents are an alternative in these patients, most studies favor continuous therapy with nonMP-containing regimens (e.g., lenalidomide plus dexamethasone) due to longer term safety profile and efficacy.
# Chunk 2774
Improvement in the serum M component may lag behind the symptomatic improvement. The fall in M component depends on the rate of tumor kill and the fractional catabolic rate of immunoglobulin, which in turn depends on the serum concentration (for IgG). Light chain excretion, with a functional half-life of ~6 h, may fall within the first week of treatment. Because urine light chain levels may relate to renal tubular function, they are not a reliable measure of tumor cell kill, especially in patients with renal dysfunction; however, improvements in serum free light chain measurement are often seen sooner. Although patients may not achieve complete remission, clinical responses may last for long periods of time.
# Chunk 2775
A familial occurrence is common in WM, but its molecular bases are yet unclear. A distinct MYD88 L265P somatic mutation has been reported in over 90% of patients with WM and the majority of IgM MGUS. Presence of this mutation is now used as a diagnostic test to discriminate WM from marginal zone lymphomas (MZLs), IgM-secreting myeloma, and chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) with plasmacytic differentiation. This mutation also explains the molecular pathogenesis of the disease, with involvement of Toll-like receptor (TLR) and interleukin 1 receptor (IL-1R) signaling leading to 718 activation of IL-1R–associated kinase (IRAK) 4 and IRAK1 followed by nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) activation. The disease is similar to myeloma in being slightly more common in men and occurring with increased incidence with increasing age (median 64 years). There have been reports that the IgM in some patients with macroglobulinemia may have specificity for myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG), a protein that has been associated with demyelinating disease of the peripheral nervous system and may be lost earlier and to a greater extent than the better known myelin basic protein in patients with multiple sclerosis. Sometimes patients with macroglobulinemia develop a peripheral neuropathy, and half of these patients are positive for anti-MAG antibody. The neuropathy may precede the appearance of the neoplasm. There is speculation that the whole process begins with a viral infection that may elicit an antibody response that cross-reacts with a normal tissue component. Like myeloma, the disease involves the bone marrow, but unlike myeloma, it does not cause bone lesions or hypercalcemia. Bone marrow shows >10% infiltration with lymphoplasmacytic cells (surface IgM+, CD19+, CD20+, and CD22+, rarely CD5+, but CD10− and CD23−) with an increase in number of mast cells. Like myeloma, an M component is present in the serum in excess of 30 g/L (3 g/dL), but unlike myeloma, the size of the IgM paraprotein results in little renal excretion, and only ~20% of patients excrete light chains. Therefore, renal disease is not common. The light chain isotype is kappa in 80% of the cases. Patients present with weakness, fatigue, and recurrent infections similar to myeloma patients, but epistaxis, visual disturbances, and neurologic symptoms such as peripheral neuropathy, dizziness, headache, and transient paresis are much more common in macroglobulinemia. Physical examination reveals adenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly, and ophthalmoscopic examination may reveal vascular segmentation and dilation of the retinal veins characteristic of hyperviscosity states. Patients may have a normocytic, normochromic anemia, but rouleaux formation and a positive Coombs’ test are much more common than in myeloma. Malignant lymphocytes are usually present in the peripheral blood. About 10% of macroglobulins are cryoglobulins. These are pure M components and are not the mixed cryoglobulins seen in rheumatoid arthritis and other autoimmune diseases. Mixed cryoglobulins are composed of IgM or IgA complexed with IgG, for which they are specific. In both cases, Raynaud’s phenomenon and serious vascular symptoms precipitated by the cold may occur, but mixed cryoglobulins are not commonly associated with malignancy. Patients suspected of having a cryoglobulin based on history and physical examination should have their blood drawn into a warm syringe and delivered to the laboratory in a container of warm water to avoid errors in quantitating the cryoglobulin.
# Chunk 2776
Control of serious hyperviscosity symptoms such as an altered state of consciousness or paresis can be achieved acutely by plasmapheresis because 80% of the IgM paraprotein is intravascular. The median survival of affected individuals is ~50 months, similar to that of MM. However, many patients with WM have indolent disease that does not require therapy. Pretreatment parameters including older age, male sex, general symptoms, and cytopenias define a high-risk population. Treatment is usually not initiated unless the disease is symptomatic or increasing anemia, hyperviscosity, lymphadenopathy, or hepatosplenomegaly is present. Bortezomib and bendamustine are two agents with significant efficacy in WM. Rituximab (anti-CD20) can produce responses, alone or combined with either of these two agents. Rituximab can produce IgM flare, so its use is initially withheld in patients with high IgM levels. Fludarabine (25 mg/m2 per day for 5 days every 4 weeks) and cladribine (0.1 mg/kg per day for 7 days every 4 weeks) are also highly effective single agents. With identification of the MYD88 mutation, BTK and IRAK1/4 inhibitors are being evaluated and show significant responses. Although high-dose therapy plus autologous transplantation is an option, its use has declined due to the availability of other effective agents.
# Chunk 2777
This disease affects individuals of widely different age groups and countries of origin. It is characterized by lymphadenopathy, fever, anemia, malaise, hepatosplenomegaly, and weakness. It is frequently associated with autoimmune diseases, especially rheumatoid arthritis. Its most distinctive symptom is palatal edema, resulting from involvement of nodes in Waldeyer’s ring, and this may progress to produce respiratory compromise. The diagnosis depends on the demonstration of an anomalous serum M component (often <20 g/L [<2 g/dL]) that reacts with anti-IgG but not anti–light chain reagents. The M component is typically present in both serum and urine. Most of the paraproteins have been of the γ1 subclass, but other subclasses have been seen. The patients may have thrombocytopenia, eosinophilia, and nondiagnostic bone marrow that may show increased numbers of lymphocytes or plasma cells that do not stain for light chain. Patients usually have a rapid downhill course and die of infection; however, some patients have survived 5 years with chemotherapy. Therapy is indicated when symptomatic and involves chemotherapeutic combinations used in low-grade lymphoma. Rituximab has also been reported to show efficacy.
# Chunk 2778
This is the most common of the heavy chain diseases. It is closely related to a malignancy known as Mediterranean lymphoma, a disease that affects young persons in parts of the world where intestinal parasites are common, such as the Mediterranean, Asia, and South America. The disease is characterized by an infiltration of the lamina propria of the small intestine with lymphoplasmacytoid cells that secrete truncated alpha chains. Demonstrating alpha heavy chains is difficult because the alpha chains tend to polymerize and appear as a smear instead of a sharp peak on electrophoretic profiles. Despite the polymerization, hyperviscosity is not a common problem in alpha heavy chain disease. Without J chain–facilitated dimerization, viscosity does not increase dramatically. Light chains are absent from serum and urine. The patients present with chronic diarrhea, weight loss, and malabsorption and have extensive mesenteric and paraaortic adenopathy. Respiratory tract involvement occurs rarely. Patients may vary widely in their clinical course. Some may develop diffuse aggressive histologies of malignant lymphoma. Chemotherapy may produce long-term remissions. Rare patients appear to have responded to antibiotic therapy, raising the question of the etiologic role of antigenic stimulation, perhaps by some chronic intestinal infection. Chemotherapy plus antibiotics may be more effective than chemotherapy alone. Immunoproliferative small-intestinal disease (IPSID) is recognized as an infectious pathogen–associated human lymphoma that has association with Campylobacter jejuni. It involves mainly the proximal small intestine resulting in malabsorption, diarrhea, and abdominal pain. IPSID is associated with excessive plasma cell differentiation and produces truncated alpha heavy chain proteins lacking the light chains as well as the first constant domain. Early-stage IPSID responds to antibiotics (30–70% complete remission). Most untreated IPSID patients progress to lymphoplasmacytic and immunoblastic lymphoma. Patients not responding to antibiotic therapy are considered for treatment with combination chemotherapy used to treat low-grade lymphoma.
# Chunk 2779
The secretion of isolated mu heavy chains into the serum appears to occur in a very rare subset of patients with CLL. The only features that may distinguish patients with mu heavy chain disease are the presence of vacuoles in the malignant lymphocytes and the excretion of kappa light chains in the urine. The diagnosis requires ultracentrifugation or gel filtration to confirm the nonreactivity of the paraprotein with the light chain reagents, because some intact macroglobulins fail to interact with these serums. The tumor cells seem to have a defect in the assembly of light and heavy chains, because they appear to contain both in their cytoplasm. There is no evidence that such patients should be treated differently from other patients with CLL (Chap. 134).
# Chunk 2780
hypoalbuminemia that may be severe; patients with serum albumin levels below 2 g/dL generally have pedal edema or anasarca. Amyloid cardiomyopathy is characterized by concentric ventricular hypertrophy and diastolic dysfunction associated with elevation of brain natriuretic peptide or N-terminal pro–brain natriuretic peptide as well as troponin. These cardiac biomarkers can be used for disease staging, prognostication, and disease activity monitoring in patients with AL amyloidosis. Notably, renal insufficiency can falsely elevate levels of these biomarkers. Recently, biomarkers of cardiac remodeling— i.e., matrix metalloproteinases and tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases—have been found to be altered in the serum of patients with amyloid cardiomyopathy. Electrocardiographic and echocardiographic features of amyloid cardiomyopathy are described below. Patients with liver involvement, even when advanced, usually develop cholestasis with an elevated alkaline phosphatase concentration but minimal alteration of the aminotransferases and preservation of synthetic function. In AL amyloidosis, endocrine organs may be infiltrated with fibrils, and hypothyroidism, hypoadrenalism, or even hypopituitarism can occur. Although none of these findings is specific for amyloidosis, the presence of abnormalities in multiple organ systems should raise suspicion regarding this diagnosis.
# Chunk 2781
Diagnosis Identification of an underlying clonal plasma cell or B lymphoproliferative process and a clonal LC are key to the diagnosis of AL amyloidosis. Serum protein electrophoresis and urine protein electrophoresis, although of value in multiple myeloma, are not useful screening tests if AL amyloidosis is suspected because the clonal LC or whole immunoglobulin often is not present in sufficient amounts to produce a monoclonal “M-spike” in the serum or LC (Bence Jones) protein in the urine. However, more than 90% of patients with AL amyloidosis have serum or urine monoclonal LC or whole immunoglobulin detectable by immunofixation electrophoresis of serum (SIFE) or urine (UIFE) (Fig. 137-3A) or by nephelometric measurement of “free” LCs (i.e., LCs circulating in monomeric form rather than in an immunoglobulin tetramer with heavy chain). Examining the ratio as well as the absolute amount of free LCs is essential, as renal insufficiency reduces LC clearance, elevating both isotypes. In addition, an increased percentage of plasma cells in the bone marrow—typically 5–30% of nucleated cells—is found in ~90% of patients. Kappa or lambda clonality should be demonstrated by flow cytometry, immunohistochemistry, or in situ hybridization for LC mRNA (Fig. 137-3B).
# Chunk 2782
A monoclonal serum protein by itself is not diagnostic of amyloidosis, since monoclonal gammopathy of uncertain significance is common in older patients (Chap. 136). However, when monoclonal gammopathy of uncertain significance is found in patients with biopsy-proven amyloidosis, the AL type should be strongly suspected. Similarly, patients thought to have “smoldering myeloma” because of a modest elevation of bone-marrow plasma cells should be screened for AL amyloidosis if they have signs or symptoms of renal, cardiac, or neurologic disease. Accurate tissue amyloid typing is essential for appropriate treatment. Immunohistochemical staining of the amyloid deposits is useful if they bind one LC antibody in preference to the other; some AL deposits bind antibodies nonspecifically. Immunoelectron microscopy is more reliable, and mass spectrometry–based microsequencing of small amounts of protein extracted from fibril deposits can also be undertaken. In ambiguous cases, other forms of amyloidosis should be thoroughly excluded with appropriate genetic and other testing.
# Chunk 2783
FIGURE 137-3 Laboratory features of AL amyloidosis. A. Serum immunofixation electrophoresis reveals an IgGκ monoclonal protein in this example; serum protein electrophoresis is often normal. B. Bone-marrow biopsy sections stained by immunohistochemistry with antibody to CD138 (syndecan, highly expressed on plasma cells) (left) or by in situ hybridization with fluorescein-tagged probes (Ventana Medical Systems) binding to κ mRNA (center) and λ mRNA (right) in plasma cells. (Photomicrograph courtesy of C. O’Hara; with permission.) clonal bone-marrow plasma cells, using approaches employed for multiple myeloma. Treatment with oral melphalan and prednisone can decrease the plasma cell burden but rarely leads to complete hematologic remission, meaningful organ responses, or improved survival and is no longer widely used. The substitution of dexamethasone for prednisone produces a higher response rate and more durable remissions, although dexamethasone is not always well tolerated by patients with significant edema or cardiac disease. High-dose IV melphalan followed by autologous stem cell transplantation (HDM/SCT) produces complete hematologic responses in ~40% of treated patients, as determined by loss of clonal plasma cells in the bone marrow and disappearance of the monoclonal LC, as determined by SIFE/UIFE and free LC quantitation. Hematologic responses can be followed in the subsequent 6–12 months as improvements in organ function and quality of life. Hematologic responses appear to be more durable after HDM/SCT than in multiple myeloma, with remissions continuing in some patients beyond 15 years without additional treatment. Unfortunately, only about half of AL amyloidosis patients are suitable for aggressive treatment, and, even at specialized treatment centers, transplantation-related mortality rates are higher than those for other hematologic diseases because of impaired organ function. Amyloid cardiomyopathy, poor nutritional and performance status, and multiorgan disease contribute to excess morbidity and mortality. A bleeding diathesis resulting from adsorption of clotting factor X to amyloid fibrils also increases mortality rates; however, this syndrome occurs in only 5–10% of patients. A randomized multicenter trial conducted in France compared oral melphalan and dexamethasone with HDM/ SCT and failed to show a benefit of dose-intensive treatment, although the transplantation-related mortality rate in this study was very high. It has become clear that careful selection of patients and expert peritransplantation management are essential in reducing transplantation-related mortality.
# Chunk 2784
The familial amyloidoses are autosomal dominant diseases in which, beginning in midlife, a variant (FINE) plasma protein forms amyloid deposits. These diseases are rare, with an estimated incidence of <1 case/100,000 population in the United States, although founder effects in isolated areas of Portugal, Sweden, and Japan have led to a much higher incidence. The most common form of AF amyloidosis is ATTRm in the updated nomenclature, caused by mutation of the abundant plasma protein transthyretin (TTR, also known as prealbumin). More than 100 TTR mutations are known, and most are associated with ATTR amyloidosis. One variant, V122I, has a carrier frequency that may be as high as 4% in the African-American population and is associated with late-onset cardiac amyloidosis. The actual incidence and penetrance of disease in the African-American population is the subject of ongoing research, but ATTR amyloidosis warrants consideration in the differential diagnosis of African-American patients who present with concentric cardiac hypertrophy and evidence of diastolic dysfunction, particularly in the absence of a history of hypertension. Other familial amyloidoses, caused by variant apolipoproteins AI or AII, gelsolin, fibrinogen Aα, or lysozyme, are reported in only a few families worldwide. New amyloidogenic serum proteins continue to be identified periodically, including recently the leukocyte chemotactic factor LECT2, a cause of renal amyloidosis in Hispanic and Pakistani populations. To date, no mutation in the coding sequence for the LECT2 gene has been identified, so the heritability of ALECT2 is uncertain.
# Chunk 2785
Aβ2M amyloid is composed of β2-microglobulin, the invariant chain of class I human leukocyte antigens, and produces rheumatologic manifestations in patients undergoing long-term hemodialysis. β2Microglobulin is excreted by the kidney, and levels become elevated in end-stage renal disease. The molecular mass of β2M is 11.8 kDa— above the cutoff of some dialysis membranes. The incidence of this disease appears to be declining with the use of newer membranes in high-flow dialysis techniques. Aβ2M amyloidosis usually presents as carpal tunnel syndrome, persistent joint effusions, spondyloarthropathy, or cystic bone lesions. Carpal tunnel syndrome is often the first symptom. In the past, persistent joint effusions accompanied by mild discomfort were found in up to 50% of patients who had undergone dialysis for >12 years. Involvement is bilateral, and large joints (shoulders, knees, wrists, and hips) are most frequently affected. The synovial fluid is noninflammatory, and β2M amyloid can be found if the sediment is stained with Congo red. Although less common, visceral β2M amyloid deposits do occasionally occur in the gastrointestinal tract, heart, tendons, and subcutaneous tissues of the buttocks. There is no specific therapy for Aβ2M amyloidosis, but cessation of dialysis after renal allografting may lead to symptomatic improvement.
# Chunk 2786
A diagnosis of amyloidosis should be considered in patients with unexplained nephropathy, cardiomyopathy (particularly with diastolic dysfunction), neuropathy (either peripheral or autonomic), enteropathy, or the pathognomonic soft tissue findings of macroglossia or periorbital ecchymoses. Pathologic identification of amyloid fibrils can be made with Congo red staining of aspirated abdominal fat or of an involved-organ biopsy specimen. Accurate typing by a combination of immunologic, biochemical, and genetic testing is essential in selecting appropriate therapy (Fig. 137-1). Systemic amyloidosis should not be considered an untreatable condition, as anti–plasma cell chemotherapy is highly effective in AL disease and targeted therapies are being developed for AA and ATTR disease. Tertiary referral centers can provide specialized diagnostic techniques and access to clinical trials for patients with these rare diseases.
# Chunk 2787
I system antigens are also oligosaccharides related to H, A, B, and Le. I and i are not allelic pairs but are carbohydrate antigens that differ only in the extent of branching. The i antigen is an unbranched chain that is converted by the I gene product, a glycosyltransferase, into a branched chain. The branching process affects all the ABH antigens, which become progressively more branched in the first 2 years of life. Some patients with cold agglutinin disease or lymphomas can produce anti-I autoantibodies that cause RBC destruction. Occasional patients with mononucleosis or Mycoplasma pneumonia may develop cold agglutinins of either anti-I or anti-i specificity. Most adults lack i
# Chunk 2788
Pretransfusion testing of a potential recipient consists of the “type and screen.” The “forward type” determines the ABO and Rh phenotype of the recipient’s RBC by using antisera directed against the A, B, and D antigens. The “reverse type” detects isoagglutinins in the patient’s serum and should correlate with the ABO phenotype, or forward type.
# Chunk 2789
The alloantibody screen identifies antibodies directed against other RBC antigens. The alloantibody screen is performed by mixing patient serum with type O RBCs that contain the major antigens of most blood group systems and whose extended phenotype is known. The specificity of the alloantibody is identified by correlating the presence or absence of antigen with the results of the agglutination.
# Chunk 2790
Whole blood provides both oxygen-carrying capacity and volume expansion. It is the ideal component for patients who have sustained acute hemorrhage of ≥25% total blood volume loss. Whole blood is stored at 4°C to maintain erythrocyte viability, but platelet dysfunction and degradation of some coagulation factors occurs. In addition, 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate levels fall over time, leading to an increase in the oxygen affinity of the hemoglobin and a decreased capacity to deliver oxygen to the tissues, a problem with all red cell storage. Fresh whole blood avoids these problems, but it is typically used only in emergency settings (i.e., military). Whole blood is not readily available, because it is routinely processed into components.
# Chunk 2791
The immune complexes that result in RBC lysis can cause renal dysfunction and failure. Diuresis should be induced with intravenous fluids and furosemide or mannitol. Tissue factor released from the lysed erythrocytes may initiate DIC. Coagulation studies including prothrombin time (PT), activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), fibrinogen, and platelet count should be monitored in patients with hemolytic reactions.
# Chunk 2792
These reactions occur in patients previously sensitized to RBC alloantigens who have a negative alloantibody screen due to low antibody levels. When the patient is transfused with antigen-positive blood, an anamnestic response results in the early production of alloantibody that binds donor RBCs. The alloantibody is detectable 1–2 weeks following the transfusion, and the posttransfusion DAT may become positive due to circulating donor RBCs coated with antibody or complement. The transfused, alloantibody-coated erythrocytes are cleared by the reticuloendothelial system. These reactions are detected most commonly in the blood bank when a subsequent patient sample reveals a positive alloantibody screen or a new alloantibody in a recently transfused recipient.
# Chunk 2793
Febrile Nonhemolytic Transfusion Reaction The most frequent reaction associated with the transfusion of cellular blood components is a febrile nonhemolytic transfusion reaction (FNHTR). These reactions are characterized by chills and rigors and a ≥1°C rise in temperature. FNHTR is diagnosed when other causes of fever in the transfused patient are ruled out. Antibodies directed against donor leukocyte and HLA antigens may mediate these reactions; thus, multiply transfused patients and multiparous women are felt to be at increased risk. Although anti-HLA antibodies may be demonstrated in the recipient’s serum, investigation is not routinely done because of the mild nature test result Positive test result Indirect Coombs test/ indirect antiglobulin test (Coombs reagent) the reb blood cell surface anti-RBC antibodies Blood sample from a patient with immune mediated haemolytic anaemia: antibodies are shown attached to antigens on the RBC surface. Recipient’s serum is obtained, containing anitbodies (Ig’s). Donor’s blood sample is added to the tube with serum. Recipient’s Ig’s that target the donor’s red blood cells form antibody-antigen complexes. Anti-human Ig’s (Coombs antibodies) are added to the solution. Agglutination of red blood cells occurs, because human Ig’s are attached to red blood cells. The patient’s washed RBCs are incubated with antihuman antibodies (Coombs reagent). RBCs agglutinate: antihuman antibodies form links between RBCs by binding to the human antibodies on the RBCs. FIGURE 138E-1 Direct and indirect Coombs test. The direct Coombs (antiglobulin) test detects the presence of antibodies (or complement) on the surface of erythrocytes. The indirect Coombs (antiglobulin) test detects antibodies in the serum that may bind to donor erythrocytes. RBC, red blood cell. (Adapted from http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/1/1c/coombs_test_schematic.png.) of most FNHTR. The use of leukocyte-reduced blood products may prevent or delay sensitization to leukocyte antigens and thereby reduce the incidence of these febrile episodes. Cytokines released from cells within stored blood components may mediate FNHTR; thus, leukoreduction before storage may prevent these reactions.
# Chunk 2794
NONIMMUNOLOGIC REACTIONS Fluid Overload Blood components are excellent volume expanders, and transfusion may quickly lead to transfusion-associated circulatory overload (TACO). Dyspnea with PaO2 <90% on room air, bilateral infiltrates on chest x-ray, and systolic hypertension are found with TACO. Brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) is often elevated (>1.5) compared with pretransfusion levels. Monitoring the rate and volume of the transfusion and using a diuretic can minimize this problem.
# Chunk 2795
Cytomegalovirus This ubiquitous virus infects ≥50% of the general population and is transmitted by the infected “passenger” WBCs found in transfused PRBCs or platelet components. Cellular components that are leukocyte-reduced have a decreased risk of transmitting CMV, regardless of the serologic status of the donor. Groups at risk for CMV infections include immunosuppressed patients, CMV-seronegative transplant recipients, and neonates; these patients should receive leukocyte-depleted components or CMV seronegative products.
# Chunk 2796
parvovirus B19 Blood components and pooled plasma products can transmit this virus, the etiologic agent of erythema infectiosum, or fifth disease, in children. Parvovirus B19 shows tropism for erythroid precursors and inhibits both erythrocyte production and maturation. Pure red cell aplasia, presenting either as acute aplastic crisis or chronic anemia with shortened RBC survival, may occur in individuals with an underlying hematologic disease, such as sickle cell disease or thalassemia (Chap. 130). The fetus of a seronegative woman is at risk for developing hydrops from this virus.
# Chunk 2797
Granulocyte and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factors are clinically useful to hasten leukocyte recovery in patients with leukopenia related to high-dose chemotherapy. Erythropoietin stimulates erythrocyte production in patients with anemia of chronic renal failure and other conditions, thus avoiding or reducing the need for transfusion. This hormone can also stimulate erythropoiesis in the autologous donor to enable additional donation.
# Chunk 2798
Peripheral blood counts usually reach their nadir several days to a week after transplant as a consequence of the preparative regimen; then cells produced by the transplanted stem cells begin to appear in the peripheral blood. The rate of recovery depends on the source of stem cells, the use of posttransplant growth factors, and the form of GVHD prophylaxis used. If marrow is the source of stem cells, recovery to 100 granulocytes/μL occurs on average by day 16 and to 500/μL by day 22. Use of G-CSF–mobilized peripheral blood stem cells speeds the rate of recovery by ~1 week when compared to marrow, whereas engraftment following cord blood transplantation is typically delayed by ~1 week compared to marrow. Use of a myeloid growth factor (G-CSF or GM-CSF) after transplant can accelerate recovery by 3–5 days, whereas use of methotrexate to prevent GVHD delays engraftment by a similar
# Chunk 2799
COMPLICATIONS FOLLOWING HEMATOPOIETIC CELL TRANSPLANT Early Direct Chemoradiotoxicities The transplant preparative regimen may cause a spectrum of acute toxicities that vary according to intensity of the regimen and the specific agents used, but frequently results in nausea, vomiting, and mild skin erythema (Fig. 139e-1). Regimens that include high-dose cyclophosphamide can result in hemorrhagic cystitis, which can usually be prevented by bladder irrigation or with the sulfhydryl compound mercaptoethanesulfonate (MESNA); rarely, acute hemorrhagic carditis is seen. Most high-dose preparative regimens will result in oral mucositis, which typically develops 5–7 days after transplant and often requires narcotic analgesia. Use of a patient-controlled analgesic pump provides the greatest patient satisfaction and results in a lower cumulative dose of narcotic. Keratinocyte growth factor (palifermin) can shorten the duration of mucositis by several days following autologous transplantation. Patients begin losing their hair 5–6 days after transplant and by 1 week are usually profoundly pancytopenic.
# Chunk 2800
Depending on the intensity of the conditioning regimen, 3–10% of patients will develop sinusoidal obstruction syndrome (SOS) of the liver (formerly called venoocclusive disease), a syndrome that results from direct cytotoxic injury to hepatic-venular and sinusoidal endothelium, with subsequent deposition of fibrin and the development of a local hypercoagulable state. This chain of events leads to the clinical symptoms of tender hepatomegaly, ascites, jaundice, and fluid retention. These symptoms can develop any time during the first month after transplant, with the peak incidence at day 16. Predisposing factors include prior exposure to intensive chemotherapy, pretransplant hepatitis of any cause, and use of more intense conditioning regimens. The mortality rate of sinusoidal obstruction syndrome is ~30%, with progressive hepatic failure culminating in a terminal hepatorenal syndrome. Both thrombolytic and antithrombotic agents, such as tissue plasminogen activator, heparin, and prostaglandin E, have been studied as therapy, but none has proven of consistent major benefit in controlled trials, and all have significant toxicity. Studies with defibrotide, a polydeoxyribonucleotide, seem encouraging.
# Chunk 2801
Graft-Versus-Host Disease GVHD is the result of allogeneic T cells that are transferred with the donor’s stem cell inoculum reacting with antigenic targets on host cells. Acute GVHD usually occurs within the first 3 months after transplant with a peak onset around 4 weeks and is characterized by an erythematous maculopapular rash; by persistent anorexia or diarrhea, or both; and by liver disease with increased serum levels of bilirubin, alanine and aspartate aminotransferase, and alkaline phosphatase. Because many conditions can mimic acute GVHD, the diagnosis usually requires skin, liver, or endoscopic biopsy for confirmation. In all these organs, endothelial damage and lymphocytic infiltrates are seen. In skin, the epidermis and hair follicles are damaged; in liver, the small bile ducts show segmental disruption; and in intestines, destruction of the crypts and mucosal ulceration may be noted. A commonly used rating system for acute GVHD is shown in Table 139e-1. Grade I acute GVHD is of little clinical significance, does not affect the likelihood of survival, and does not require treatment. In contrast, grades II to IV GVHD are associated with significant symptoms and a poorer probability of survival, and they require aggressive therapy.
# Chunk 2802
Chronic GVHD occurs most commonly between 3 months and 2 years after allogeneic transplant, developing in 20–50% of recipients. The disease is more common in older patients, in recipients of mismatched or unrelated stem cells, and in those with a preceding episode of acute GVHD. The disease resembles an autoimmune disorder with malar rash, sicca syndrome, arthritis, obliterative bronchiolitis, and bile duct degeneration and cholestasis. Single-agent prednisone or cyclosporine is standard treatment at present, although trials of other agents are under way. Mortality rates from chronic GVHD average around 15%, but range from 5–50% depending on severity. In most patients, chronic GVHD resolves, but it may require 1–3 years of immunosuppressive treatment before these agents can be withdrawn without the disease recurring. Because patients with chronic GVHD are susceptible to significant infection, they should receive prophylactic trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and all suspected infections should be investigated and treated aggressively.
# Chunk 2803
400 mg PO qd to day 75 posttransplant 800 mg PO bid to day 30 800 mg PO bid to day 365 5 mg/kg IV bid for 7 days, then 5 (mg/kg)/d 5 days/week to day 100
# Chunk 2804
TRANSPLANTATION tomegaly or portal fibrosis and if they have been given adequate iron chelation therapy. Among such patients, the probabilities of 5-year survival and disease-free survival are 95 and 90%, respectively. Although prolonged survival can be achieved with aggressive
# Chunk 2805
By replacing abnormal stem cells with cells from a normal donor, hematopoietic cell transplantation can cure patients of a variety of immunodeficiency disorders including severe combined immunodeficiency, Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, and Chédiak-Higashi syndrome. The widest experience has been with severe combined immunodeficiency disease, where cure rates of 90% can be expected with HLA-identical donors and success rates of 50–70% have been reported using haplotype-mismatched parents as donors (Table 139e-3).
# Chunk 2806
Allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation is the only therapy shown to cure a substantial portion of patients with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). Five-year disease-free survival rates are 15–20% for patients transplanted for blast crisis, 25–50% for accelerated-phase patients, and 60–70% for chronic-phase patients, with cure rates as high as 80% at selected centers. However, with the availability of imatinib mesylate and other highly active tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), transplantation is generally reserved for those who fail to achieve a complete cytogenetic response with a TKI, relapse after an initial response, or are intolerant of the drugs (Chap. 133).
# Chunk 2807
Allogeneic transplantation using a high-dose preparative regimen has rarely been used for chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), in large part because of the chronic nature of the disease and because of the age profile of patients. In those cases where it was studied, complete remissions were achieved in the majority of patients, with disease-free survival rates of ~50% at 3 years, despite the advanced stage of the disease at the time of transplant. The marked antitumor effects have resulted in the increased use and study of allogeneic transplantation using reduced-intensity conditioning for the treatment of CLL.
# Chunk 2808
Patients with disseminated intermediateor high-grade non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma who have not been cured by first-line chemotherapy and are transplanted in first relapse or second remission can still be cured in 40–50% of cases. This represents a clear advantage over results obtained with conventional-dose salvage chemotherapy. It is unsettled whether patients with high-risk disease benefit from transplantation in first remission. Most experts favor the use of autologous rather than allogeneic transplantation for patients with intermediateor high-grade non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, because fewer complications occur with this approach and survival appears equivalent. For patients with recurrent disseminated indolent nonHodgkin’s lymphoma, autologous transplantation results in high response rates and improved progression-free survival compared to salvage chemotherapy. However, late relapses are seen after transplantation. The role of autologous transplantation in the initial treatment of patients is debated. It may be indicated in the small subset of patients presenting with high-risk prognostic factors but is not clearly more effective in those in lower risk groups. Reduced-intensity conditioning regimens followed by allogeneic transplantation result in high response rates in patients with indolent lymphomas, but the exact role of this approach remains to be defined.
# Chunk 2809
The role of transplantation in Hodgkin’s disease is similar to that in intermediateand high-grade non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. With transplantation, 5-year disease-free survival is 20–30% in patients who never achieve a first remission with standard chemotherapy and up to 70% for those transplanted in second remission. Transplantation has no defined role in first remission in Hodgkin’s disease.
# Chunk 2810
Platelet count < 150,000/˜L Hemoglobin and white blood count Normal Abnormal Bone marrow examination Peripheral blood smear Platelets clumped: Redraw in sodium citrate or heparin Fragmented red blood cells Normal RBC morphology; platelets normal or increased in size Microangiopathic hemolytic anemias (e.g., DIC, TTP) Consider: Drug-induced thrombocytopenia Infection-induced thrombocytopenia Idiopathic immune thrombocytopenia Congenital thrombocytopenia first appear in areas of increased venous pressure, the ankles and feet in an ambulatory patient. Petechiae are pinpoint, nonblanching hemorrhages and are usually a sign of a decreased platelet number and not platelet dysfunction. Wet purpura, blood blisters that form on the oral mucosa, are thought to denote an increased risk of life-threatening hemorrhage in the thrombocytopenic patient. Excessive bruising is seen in disorders of both platelet number and function.
# Chunk 2811
HIT can occur after exposure to low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) as well as unfractionated heparin (UFH), although it is more common with the latter. Most patients develop HIT after exposure to heparin for 5–14 days (Fig. 140-3). It occurs before 5 days in those who were exposed to heparin in the prior few weeks or months (<~100 days) and have circulating anti-heparin/PF4 antibodies. Rarely, thrombocytopenia and thrombosis begin several days after all heparin has been stopped (termed delayed-onset HIT). The “4T’s” have been recommended to be used in a diagnostic algorithm for HIT: thrombocytopenia, timing of platelet count drop, thrombosis and other sequelae such as localized skin reactions, and other causes of thrombocytopenia not evident. Application of the 4T scoring system is very useful in excluding a diagnosis of HIT but will result in overdiagnosis of HIT in situations where thrombocytopenia and thrombosis due to other etiologies are common, such as in the intensive care unit. A scoring model based on broad expert opinion (the HIT Expert Probability [HEP] Score) has improved operating characteristics and may provide better utility as a scoring system.
# Chunk 2812
Disorders of Platelets and Vessel Wall 728 of HIT. This is especially true in patients who have undergone cardiopulmonary bypass surgery, where approximately 50% of patients develop these antibodies postoperatively. IgG-specific ELISAs increase specificity but may decrease sensitivity. The other assay is a platelet activation assay, most commonly the serotonin release assay, which measures the ability of the patient’s serum to activate platelets in the presence of heparin in a concentration-dependent manner. This test has lower sensitivity but higher specificity than the ELISA. However, HIT remains a clinical diagnosis.
# Chunk 2813
Because of the high rate of thrombosis in patients with HIT, anticoagulation should be considered, even in the absence of thrombosis. In patients with thrombosis, patients can be transitioned to warfarin, with treatment usually for 3–6 months. In patients without thrombosis, the duration of anticoagulation needed is undefined. An increased risk of thrombosis is present for at least 1 month after diagnosis; however, most thromboses occur early, and whether thrombosis occurs later if the patient is initially anticoagulated is unknown. Options include continuing anticoagulation until a few days after platelet recovery or for 1 month. Introduction of warfarin alone in the setting of HIT or HITT may precipitate thrombosis, particularly venous gangrene, presumably due to clotting activation and severely reduced levels of proteins C and S. Warfarin therapy, if started, should be overlapped with a DTI or fondaparinux and started after resolution of the thrombocytopenia and lessening of the prothrombotic state.
# Chunk 2814
Initial treatment in patients without significant bleeding symptoms, severe thrombocytopenia (<5000/μL), or signs of impending bleeding (such as retinal hemorrhage or large oral mucosal hemorrhages) can be instituted as an outpatient using single agents. Traditionally, this has been prednisone at 1 mg/kg, although Rh0(D) immune globulin therapy (WinRho SDF), at 50–75 μg/kg, is also being used in this setting. Rh0(D) immune globulin must be used only in Rh-positive patients because the mechanism of action is production of limited hemolysis, with antibody-coated cells “saturating” the Fc receptors, inhibiting Fc receptor function. Monitoring patients for 8 h after infusion is now advised by the FDA because of the rare complication of severe intravascular hemolysis. Intravenous gamma globulin (IVIgG), which is pooled, primarily IgG antibodies, also blocks the Fc receptor system, but appears to work primarily through different mechanism(s). IVIgG has more efficacy than anti-Rh0(D) in postsplenectomized patients. IVIgG is dosed at 1–2 g/kg total, given over 1–5 days. Side effects are usually related to the volume of infusion and infrequently include aseptic meningitis and renal failure. All immunoglobulin preparations are derived from human plasma and undergo treatment for viral inactivation.
# Chunk 2815
Prothrombin AR 1 in 2,000,000 + + − 20–30% Factor V AR 1 in 1,000,000 +/− +/− − 15–20% Factor VII AR 1 in 500,000 − + − 15–20% Factor VIII X-linked 1 in 5,000 + − − 30% Factor IX X-linked 1 in 30,000 + − − 30% Factor X AR 1 in 1,000,000 +/− +/− − 15–20% Factor XI AR 1 in 1,000,000 + − − 15–20% Factor XII AR ND + − − b HK ARND +−− b Prekallikrein AR ND + − − b Factor XIII AR 1 in 2,000,000 − − +/− 2–5% aValues within normal range (−) or prolonged (+). bNo risk for bleeding; treatment is not indicated.
# Chunk 2816
The FVIII half-life of 8–12 h requires injections twice a day to main-

Without treatment, severe hemophilia has a limited life expectancy. Advances in the blood fractionation industry during World War II resulted in the realization that plasma could be used to treat hemophilia, but the volumes required to achieve even modest elevation of circulating factor levels limit the utility of plasma infusion as an approach to disease management. The discovery in the 1960s that the cryoprecipitate fraction of plasma was enriched for FVIII, and the eventual purification of FVIII and FIX from plasma, led to the introduction of home infusion therapy with factor concentrates in the 1970s. The availability of factor concentrates resulted in a dramatic improvement in life expectancy and in quality of life for people with severe hemophilia. However, the contamination of the blood supply with hepatitis viruses and, subsequently, HIV resulted in widespread transmission of these bloodborne infections within the hemophilia population; complications of HIV and of hepatitis C are now the leading causes of death among U.S. adults with severe hemophilia. The introduction of viral inactivation steps in the preparation of plasma-derived products in the mid-1980s greatly reduced the risk of HIV and hepatitis, and the risks were further reduced by the successful production of recombinant FVIII and FIX proteins, both licensed in the 1990s. It is uncommon for hemophilic patients born after 1985 to have contracted either hepatitis or HIV, and for these individuals, life expectancy is approximately 65 years. In fact, since 1998, no evidence of new infections with viral hepatitis or HIV has been reported in patients using blood products. Factor replacement therapy for hemophilia can be provided either in response to a bleeding episode or as a prophylactic treatment. Primary prophylaxis is defined as a strategy for maintaining the missing clotting factor at levels ~1% or higher on a regular basis in order to prevent bleeds, especially the onset of hemarthroses. Hemophilic boys receiving regular infusions of FVIII (3 days/week) or FIX (2 days/week) can reach puberty without detectable joint abnormalities. Prophylaxis has become gradually more common in young patients. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported that 51% of children with severe hemophilia who are younger than age 6 years receive prophylaxis, increasing considerably from 33% in 1995. Although highly recommended, the high cost and difficulties in accessing peripheral veins in young patients and the potential infectious and thrombotic risks of long-term central vein catheters are important limiting factors for many young patients. Emerging data show that prophylaxis is also increasing among adults with severe hemophilia.
# Chunk 2817
The clinical diagnosis of an inhibitor is suspected when patients do not respond to factor replacement at therapeutic doses. Inhibitors increase both morbidity and mortality in hemophilia. Because early detection of an inhibitor is critical to a successful correction of the bleeding or to eradication of the antibody, most hemophilia centers perform annual screening for inhibitors. The laboratory test required to confirm the presence of an inhibitor is an aPTT with a mix (with normal plasma). In most hemophilia patients, a 1:1 mix with normal plasma completely corrects the aPTT. In inhibitor patients, the aPTT on a 1:1 mix is abnormally prolonged, because the inhibitor neutralizes the FVIII clotting activity of the normal plasma. The Bethesda assay uses a similar principle and defines the specificity of the inhibitor and its titer. The results are expressed in Bethesda units (BU), in which 1 BU is the amount of antibody that neutralizes 50% of the FVIII or FIX present in normal plasma after 2 h of incubation at 37°C. Clinically, inhibitor patients are classified as low responders or high responders, which provides guidelines for optimal therapy. Therapy for inhibitor patients has two goals: the control of acute bleeding episodes and the eradication of the inhibitor. For the control of bleeding episodes, low responders, those with titer <5 BU, respond well to high doses of human or porcine FVIII (50–100 U/kg), with minimal or no increase in the inhibitor titers. However, high-responder patients, those with initial inhibitor titer >10 BU or an anamnestic response in the antibody titer to >10 BU even if low titer initially, do not respond to FVIII or FIX concentrates. The control of bleeding episodes in high-responder patients can be achieved by using concentrates enriched for prothrombin, FVII, FIX, FX (prothrombin complex concentrates [PCCs] or activated PCCs [aPCCs]), and more recently recombinant activated factor VII (FVIIa) known as “bypass agents” (Fig. 141-1). The rates of therapeutic success have been higher for FVIIa than for PCC or aPCC. For eradication of the inhibitory antibody, immunosuppression alone is not effective. The most effective strategy is the immune tolerance induction (ITI) based on daily infusion of missing protein until the inhibitor disappears, typically requiring periods longer than 1 year, with success rates of approximately 60%. The management of patients with severe hemophilia and inhibitors resistant to ITI is challenging. The use of anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody (rituximab) combined with ITI was thought to be effective. Although this therapy may reduce the inhibitor titers in some cases, sustained eradication is uncommon and may require two to three infusions weekly of clotting factor concentrates.
# Chunk 2818
Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is the major cause of morbidity and the second leading cause of death in hemophilia patients exposed to older clotting factor concentrates. The vast majority of young patients treated with plasma-derived products from 1970 to 1985 became infected with HCV. It has been estimated that >80% of patients older than 20 years of age are HCV antibody positive as of 2006. The comorbidity of the underlying liver disease in hemophilia patients is clear when these individuals require invasive procedures; correction of both genetic and acquired (secondary to liver disease) deficiencies may be needed. Infection with HIV also swept the population of patients using plasma-derived concentrates two decades ago. Co-infection of HCV and HIV, present in almost 50% of hemo-735 philia patients, is an aggravating factor for the evolution of liver disease. The response to HCV antiviral therapy in hemophilia is restricted to <30% of patients and even poorer among those with both HCV and HIV infection. End-stage liver disease requiring organ transplantation may be curative for both the liver disease and for hemophilia.
# Chunk 2819
Usually hemophilia carriers, with factor levels of ~50% of normal, have not been considered to be at risk for bleeding. However, a wide range of values (22–116%) have been reported due to random inactivation of the X chromosomes (lyonization). Therefore, it is important to measure the factor level of carriers to recognize those at risk of bleeding and to optimize preoperative and postoperative management. During pregnancy, both FVIII and FIX levels increase gradually until delivery. FVIII levels increase approximately twoto threefold compared to nonpregnant women, whereas an FIX increase is less pronounced. After delivery, there is a rapid fall in the pregnancy-induced rise of maternal clotting factor levels. This represents an imminent risk of bleeding that can be prevented by infusion of factor concentrate to levels of 50–70% for 3 days in the setting of vaginal delivery and up to 5 days for cesarean section. In mild cases, the use of DDAVP and/or antifibrinolytic drugs is recommended.
# Chunk 2820
Multiple Deficiencies of Vitamin K–Dependent Coagulation Factors Two enzymes involved in vitamin K metabolism have been associated with combined deficiency of all vitamin K–dependent proteins, including the procoagulant proteins prothrombin, VII, IX, and X and the anticoagulant proteins C and S. Vitamin K is a fat-soluble vitamin that is a cofactor for carboxylation of the gamma carbon of the glutamic acid residues in the vitamin K–dependent factors, a critical step for calcium and phospholipid binding of these proteins (Fig. 141-2). The enzymes γ-glutamylcarboxylase and epoxide reductase are critical for the metabolism and regeneration of vitamin K. Mutations in the genes encoding the γ-carboxylase (GGCX) or vitamin K epoxide reductase complex 1 (VKORC1) result in defective enzymes and thus in vitamin K–dependent factors with reduced activity, varying from 1 to 30% of normal. The disease phenotype is characterized by mild to severe bleeding episodes present from birth. Some patients respond to high doses of vitamin K. For severe bleeding, replacement therapy with FFP or PCC may be necessary to achieve full hemostatic control.
# Chunk 2821
VITAMIN K DEFICIENCY Vitamin K–dependent proteins are a heterogenous group, including clotting factor proteins and also proteins found in bone, lung, kidney, and placenta. Vitamin K mediates posttranslational modification of glutamate residues to γ-carboxylglutamate, a critical step for the activity of vitamin K–dependent proteins for calcium binding and proper assembly to phospholipid membranes (Fig. 141-2). Inherited deficiency of the functional activity of the enzymes involved in vitamin K metabolism, notably the GGCX or VKORC1 (see above), results in bleeding disorders. The amount of vitamin K in the diet is often limiting for the carboxylation reaction; thus recycling of the vitamin K is essential to maintain normal levels of vitamin K–dependent proteins. In adults, low dietary intake alone is seldom reason for severe vitamin K deficiency but may become common in association with the use of broad-spectrum antibiotics. Disease or surgical interventions that affect the ability of the intestinal tract to absorb vitamin K, either through anatomic alterations or by changing the fat content of bile salts and pancreatic juices in the proximal small bowel, can result in significant reduction of vitamin K levels. Chronic liver diseases such as primary biliary cirrhosis also deplete vitamin K stores. Neonatal vitamin K deficiency and the resulting hemorrhagic disease of the newborn have been almost entirely eliminated by routine administration of vitamin K to all neonates. Prolongation of PT values is the most common and earliest finding in vitamin K–deficient patients due to reduction in prothrombin, FVII, FIX, and FX levels. FVII has the shortest half-life among these factors that can prolong the PT before changes in the aPTT. Parenteral administration of vitamin K at a total dose of 10 mg is sufficient to restore normal levels of clotting factor within 8–10 h. In the presence of ongoing bleeding or a need for immediate correction before an invasive procedure, replacement with FFP or PCC is required. The latter should be avoided in patients with severe underlying liver disorders due to high risk of thrombosis. The reversal of excessive anticoagulant therapy with warfarin or warfarinlike drugs can be achieved by minimal doses of vitamin K (1 mg orally or by intravenous injection) for asymptomatic patients. This strategy can diminish the risk of bleeding while maintaining therapeutic anticoagulation for an underlying prothrombotic state.
# Chunk 2822
Treatment with FFP is the most effective to correct hemostasis in patients with liver failure. Infusion of FFP (5–10 mL/kg; each bag contains ~200 mL) is sufficient to ensure 10–20% of normal levels of clotting factors but not correction of PT or aPTT. Even high doses of FFP (20 mL/kg) do not correct the clotting times in all patients. Monitoring for clinical symptoms and clotting times will determine if repeated doses are required 8–12 h after the first infusion. Platelet concentrates are indicated when platelet counts are <10,000–20,000/μL to control an ongoing bleed or immediately before an invasive procedure if counts are <50,000/μL. Cryoprecipitate is indicated only when fibrinogen levels are less than 100 mg/mL; dosing is six bags for a 70-kg patient daily. Prothrombin complex concentrate infusion in patients with liver failure should be avoided due to the high risk of thrombotic complications. The safety of the use of antifibrinolytic drugs to control bleeding in patients with liver failure is not yet well defined and should be avoided.
# Chunk 2823
ACQUIRED INHIBITORS OF COAGULATION FACTORS An acquired inhibitor is an immune-mediated disease characterized by the presence of an auto-antibody against a specific clotting factor. FVIII is the most common target of antibody formation, and is sometimes referred to as acquired hemophilia A, but inhibitors to prothrombin, FV, FIX, FX, and FXI are also reported. Acquired inhibitor to FVIII occurs predominantly in older adults (median age of 60 years), but occasionally in pregnant or postpartum women with no previous history of bleeding. In 50% of patients with inhibitors, no underlying disease is identified at the time of diagnosis. In the remaining patients, the causes are autoimmune diseases, malignancies (lymphomas, prostate cancer), dermatologic diseases, and pregnancy. Bleeding episodes occur commonly in soft tissues, the gastrointestinal or urinary tracts, and skin. In contrast to hemophilia, hemarthrosis is rare in these patients. Retroperitoneal hemorrhages and other life-threatening bleeding may appear suddenly. The overall mortality in untreated patients ranges from 8 to 22%, and most deaths occur within the first few weeks after presentation. The diagnosis is based on the prolonged aPTT with normal PT and TT. The aPTT remains prolonged after mixture of the test plasma with equal amounts of pooled normal plasma for 2 h at 37°C. The Bethesda assay using FVIII-deficient plasma as performed for inhibitor detection in hemophilia will confirm the diagnosis. Major bleeding is treated with bypass products such as PCC/aPCC or recombinant FVIIa. In contrast to hemophilia, inhibitors in nonhemophilic patients are typically responsive to immune suppression, and therapy should be initiated early for most cases. The first choice includes steroid or a combination of steroid with cytotoxic therapy (e.g., cyclophosphamide), with complete eradication of the inhibitors in more than 70% of patients. High-dose intravenous γ-globulin and anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody have been reported to be effective in patients with autoantibodies to FVIII; however, there is no firm evidence that these alternatives are superior to the first line of immunosuppressive drugs. Notably, relapse of the inhibitor to FVIII is relatively common (up to 20%) within the first 6 months following withdrawal of immunosuppression. Thus, after eradication, patients should be followed up regularly for early therapeutic intervention when indicated or prior to invasive procedure.
# Chunk 2824
More than 200,000 new cases of venous thromboembolism occur each year. Of these cases, up to 30% of patients die within 30 days and one-fifth suffer sudden death due to pulmonary embolism; 30% go on to develop recurrent venous thromboembolism within 10 years. Data from the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) study reported a 9% 28-day fatality rate from DVT and a 15% fatality rate from pulmonary embolism. Pulmonary embolism in the setting of cancer has a 25% fatality rate. The mean incidence of first DVT in the general population is 5 per 10,000 person-years; the incidence is similar in males and females when adjusting for factors related to reproduction and birth control and increases dramatically with age from 2 to 3 per 10,000 person-years at 30–49 years of age to 20 at 70–79 years of age.
# Chunk 2825
Prasugrel was compared with clopidogrel in 13,608 patients with acute coronary syndromes who were scheduled to undergo percutaneous coronary intervention. The incidence of the primary efficacy endpoint, a composite of cardiovascular death, MI, or stroke, was significantly lower with prasugrel than with clopidogrel (9.9% and 12.1%, respectively), mainly reflecting a reduction in the incidence of nonfatal MI. The incidence of stent thrombosis also was significantly lower with prasugrel (1.1% and 2.4%, respectively). However, these advantages were at the expense of significantly higher rates of fatal bleeding (0.4% and 0.1%, respectively) and life-threatening bleeding (1.4% and 0.9%, respectively) with prasugrel. Because patients older than age 75 years and those with a history of prior stroke or transient ischemic attack have a particularly high risk of bleeding, prasugrel should generally be avoided in older patients, and the drug is contraindicated in those with a history of cerebrovascular disease. Caution is required if prasugrel is used in patients weighing less than 60 kg or in those with renal impairment.
# Chunk 2826
dosing Clopidogrel is given once daily at a dose of 75 mg. Loading 747 doses of clopidogrel are given when rapid ADP receptor blockade is desired. For example, patients undergoing coronary stenting are often given a loading dose of 300 mg, which produces inhibition of ADP-induced platelet aggregation in about 6 h; loading doses of 600 or 900 mg produce an even more rapid effect. After a loading dose of 60 mg, prasugrel is given once daily at a dose of 10 mg. Patients older than age 75 years or weighing less than 60 kg should receive a lower daily prasugrel dose of 5 mg.
# Chunk 2827
tHienopyridine resistance The capacity of clopidogrel to inhibit ADP-induced platelet aggregation varies among subjects. This variability reflects, at least in part, genetic polymorphisms in the CYP isoenzymes involved in the metabolic activation of clopidogrel. Most important of these is CYP2C19. Clopidogrel-treated patients with the loss-offunction CYP2C19*2 allele exhibit reduced platelet inhibition compared with those with the wild-type CYP2C19*1 allele and experience a higher rate of cardiovascular events. This is important because estimates suggest that up to 25% of whites, 30% of African Americans, and 50% of Asians carry the loss-of-function allele, which would render them resistant to clopidogrel. Even patients with the reduced function CYP2C19*3, *4, or *5 alleles may derive less benefit from clopidogrel than those with the full-function CYP2C19*1 allele. Concomitant administration of clopidogrel with proton pump inhibitors, which are inhibitors of CYP2C19, produces a small reduction in the inhibitory effects of clopidogrel on ADP-induced platelet aggregation. The extent to which this interaction increases the risk of cardiovascular events remains controversial.
# Chunk 2828
Antiplatelet, Anticoagulant, and Fibrinolytic Drugs 748 clopidogrel. Rates of stroke were similar with ticagrelor and clopido-Indications Dipyridamole plus aspirin was compared with aspirin grel (1.5% and 1.3%, respectively), and no difference in rates of major or dipyridamole alone, or with placebo, in patients with an ischemic bleeding was noted. When minor bleeding was added to the major stroke or transient ischemic attack. The combination reduced the risk bleeding results, however, ticagrelor showed an increase relative to of stroke by 22.1% compared with aspirin and by 24.4% compared clopidogrel (16.1% and 14.6%, respectively; p = .008). Ticagrelor also with dipyridamole. A second trial compared dipyridamole plus aspirin was superior to clopidogrel in patients with acute coronary syndrome with aspirin alone for secondary prevention in patients with ischemic who underwent percutaneous coronary intervention or cardiac sur-stroke. Vascular death, stroke, or MI occurred in 13% of patients gery. Based on these observations, some guidelines give ticagrelor given combination therapy and in 16% of those treated with aspirin preference over clopidogrel, particularly in higher risk patients. alone. Another trial randomized 20,332 patients with noncardioembolic ischemic stroke to either Aggrenox or clopidogrel. The primarydosing Ticagrelor is initiated with an oral loading dose of 180 mg efficacy endpoint of recurrent stroke occurred in 9.0% of those given followed by 90 mg twice daily. The dose does not require adjustment Aggrenox and in 8.8% of patients treated with clopidogrel. Althoughin patients with renal impairment, but the drug should be used with this difference was not statistically significant, the study failed to meet caution in patients with hepatic disease and in those receiving potent the prespecified margin to claim noninferiority of Aggrenox relativeinhibitors or inducers of CYP3A4 because ticagrelor is metabolized in to clopidogrel. These results have dampened enthusiasm for the usethe liver via CYP3A4. Ticagrelor is usually administered in conjunc-of Aggrenox.tion with aspirin; the daily aspirin dose should not exceed 100 mg. Because of its vasodilatory effects and the paucity of data supporting the use of dipyridamole in patients with symptomatic coronary artery side effects In addition to bleeding, the most common side effects of disease, Aggrenox should not be used for stroke prevention in such ticagrelor are dyspnea, which can occur in up to 15% of patients, and patients. Clopidogrel is a better choice in this setting.
# Chunk 2829
asymptomatic ventricular pauses. The dyspnea, which tends to occur soon after initiating ticagrelor, is usually self-limiting and mild in Dosing Aggrenox is given twice daily. Each capsule contains 200 mg intensity. The mechanism responsible for this side effect is unknown. of extended-release dipyridamole and 25 mg of aspirin.
# Chunk 2830
In a second trial, vorapaxar was compared with placebo for secondary prevention in 26,449 patients with prior MI, ischemic stroke, or peripheral arterial disease. Overall, vorapaxar reduced the risk for cardiovascular death, MI, or stroke by 13%, but doubled the risk of intracranial bleeding. In the prespecified subgroup of 17,779 patients with prior MI, however, vorapaxar reduced the risk for cardiovascular death, MI, or stroke by 20% compared with placebo (from 9.7% to 8.1%, respectively). The rate of intracranial hemorrhage was higher with vorapaxar than with placebo (0.6% and 0.4%, respectively; p = .076) as was the rate of moderate or severe bleeding (3.4% and 2.1%, respectively; P <0.0001). Based on these data, the drug is under consideration for regulatory approval in MI patients under the age of 75 years who have no history of stroke or transient ischemic attack and have a weight over 60 kg.
# Chunk 2831
The clinical features of HIT are illustrated in Table 143-3. Typically, HIT occurs 5–14 days after initiation of heparin therapy, but it can manifest earlier if the patient has received heparin within the past 3 months. A platelet count below 100,000/μL or a 50% decrease in the platelet count from the pretreatment value should raise the suspicion of HIT in those receiving heparin. HIT is more common in surgical patients than in medical patients and, like many autoimmune disorders, occurs more frequently in females than in males.
# Chunk 2832
osteoporosis Treatment with therapeutic doses of heparin for >1 month can cause a reduction in bone density. This complication has been reported in up to 30% of patients given long-term heparin therapy, and symptomatic vertebral fractures occur in 2–3% of these individuals.
# Chunk 2833
LMWH exhibits about 90% bioavailability after SC injection. Because LMWH binds less avidly to heparin-binding proteins in plasma than heparin, LMWH produces a more predictable dose response, and resistance to LMWH is rare. With a longer half-life and more predictable anticoagulant response, LMWH can be given SC once or twice daily without coagulation monitoring, even when the drug is given in treatment doses. These properties render LMWH more convenient than unfractionated heparin. Capitalizing on this feature, studies in patients with venous thromboembolism have shown that home treatment with LMWH is as effective and safe as in-hospital treatment with continuous IV infusions of heparin. Outpatient treatment with LMWH streamlines care, reduces health care costs, and increases patient satisfaction.
# Chunk 2834
Fondaparinux is used at a dose of 2.5 mg once daily in patients with acute coronary syndromes. When this prophylactic dose of fondaparinux was compared with treatment doses of enoxaparin in patients with non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndrome, there was no difference in the rate of cardiovascular death, MI, or stroke at 9 days. However, the rate of major bleeding was 50% lower with fondaparinux than with enoxaparin, a difference that likely reflects the fact that the dose of fondaparinux was lower than that of enoxaparin. In acute coronary syndrome patients who require percutaneous coronary intervention, there is a risk of catheter thrombosis with fondaparinux unless adjunctive heparin is given.
# Chunk 2835
TABLE 143-7 COMPArIsON Of THE PrOPErTIEs Of LEPIruDIN, BIVALIruDIN, AND ArgATrOBAN

Antiplatelet, Anticoagulant, and Fibrinolytic Drugs 754 lepirudin accumulates in patients with renal insufficiency. For thromboprophylaxis, desirudin is given SC twice daily in fixed doses; the half-life of desirudin is 2–3 h after SC injection. A high proportion of lepirudin-treated patients develop antibodies against the drug; antibody formation is rare with SC desirudin. Although lepirudin-directed antibodies rarely cause problems, in a small subset of patients, they can delay lepirudin clearance and enhance its anticoagulant activity. Serious bleeding has been reported in some of these patients. Lepirudin is usually monitored using the aPTT, and the dose is adjusted to maintain an aPTT that is 1.5–2.5 times the control. The aPTT is not an ideal test for monitoring lepirudin therapy because the clotting time plateaus with higher drug concentrations. Although the clotting time with ecarin, a snake venom that converts prothrombin to meizothrombin, provides a better index of lepirudin dose than the aPTT, the ecarin clotting time has yet to be standardized. When used for thromboprophylaxis, desirudin does not require monitoring.
# Chunk 2836
The antithrombotic effect of warfarin depends on a reduction in the functional levels of factor X and prothrombin, clotting factors that have half-lives of 24 and 72 h, respectively. Because the antithrombotic effect of warfarin is delayed, patients with established thrombosis or at high risk for thrombosis require concomitant treatment with a rapidly acting parenteral anticoagulant, such as heparin, LMWH, or fondaparinux, for at least 5 days.
# Chunk 2837
Warfarin accumulates in the liver where the two isomers are metabolized via distinct pathways. CYP2C9 mediates oxidative metabolism of the more active S isomer (Fig. 143-6). Two relatively common variants, CYP2C9*2 and CYP2C9*3, encode an enzyme with reduced activity. Patients with these variants require lower maintenance doses of warfarin. Approximately 25% of Caucasians have at least one variant allele of CYP2C9*2 or CYP2C9*3, whereas those variant alleles are less common in African Americans and Asians (Table 143-8). Heterozygosity for CYP2C9*2 or CYP2C9*3 decreases the warfarin dose requirement by 20–30% relative to that required in subjects with the wild-type CYP2C9*1/*1 alleles, whereas homozygosity for the CYP2C9*2 or CYP2C9*3 alleles reduces the warfarin dose requirement by 50–70%.
# Chunk 2838
Polymorphisms in VKORC1 also can influence the anticoagulant response to warfarin. Several genetic variations of VKORC1 are in strong linkage disequilibrium and have been designated as non-A haplotypes. VKORC1 variants are more prevalent than variants of CYP2C9. Asians have the highest prevalence of VKORC1 variants, followed by Caucasians and African Americans (Table 143-8). Polymorphisms in VKORC1 likely explain 30% of the variability in warfarin dose requirements. Compared with VKORC1 non-A/non-A homozygotes, the warfarin dose requirement decreases by 25 and 50% in A haplotype heterozygotes and homozygotes, respectively. These findings prompted the Food and Drug Administration to amend the prescribing information for warfarin to indicate that lower initiation doses should be considered for patients with CYP2C9 and VKORC1 genetic variants. In addition to genotype data, other pertinent patient information has been incorporated into warfarin dosing algorithms. Although such algorithms help predict suitable warfarin doses, it remains unclear whether better dose identification improves patient outcome in terms of reducing hemorrhagic complications or recurrent thrombotic events.
# Chunk 2839
fresh-frozen plasma as a source of the vitamin K–dependent clotting There is no need to stop warfarin before procedures associated withproteins. Four factor prothrombin complex concentrates, which con-a low risk of bleeding; these include dental cleaning, simple dentaltain all four vitamin K–dependent clotting proteins, are the treatment extraction, cataract surgery, or skin biopsy. For procedures associatedof choice for (1) life-threatening bleeds, (2) rapid restoration of the with a moderate or high risk of bleeding, warfarin should be stoppedINR into the normal range in patients requiring urgent surgery or 5 days before the procedure to allow the INR to return to normal levels.
# Chunk 2840
warfarin can be restarted. skin necrosis A rare complication of warfarin, skin necrosis usually is

New Oral Anticoagulants New oral anticoagulants are now availableseen 2–5 days after initiation of therapy. Well-demarcated erythemaas alternatives to warfarin. These include dabigatran, which targetstous lesions form on the thighs, buttocks, breasts, or toes. Typically, thrombin, and rivaroxaban, apixaban, and edoxaban, which targetthe center of the lesion becomes progressively necrotic. Examination factor Xa. All of these drugs have a rapid onset and offset of action of skin biopsies taken from the border of these lesions reveals thrombi and have half-lives that permit onceor twice-daily administration.
# Chunk 2841
Approach to the Patient with an Infectious Disease Neeraj K. Surana, Dennis L. Kasper HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE The origins of the field of infectious diseases are humble. The notion that communicable diseases were due to a miasma (“bad air”) can be traced back to at least the mid-sixteenth century. Not until the work of Louis Pasteur and Robert Koch in the late nineteenth century was there credible evidence supporting the germ theory of disease—i.e., that microorganisms are the direct cause of infections. In contrast to this relatively slow start, the twentieth century saw remarkable advances in the field of infectious diseases, and the etiologic agents of numerous infectious diseases were soon identified. Furthermore, the discovery of antibiotics and the advent of vaccines against some of the most deadly and debilitating infections greatly altered the landscape of human health. Indeed, the twentieth century saw the elimination of smallpox, one of the great scourges in the history of humanity. These remarkable successes prompted noted scholar Aidan Cockburn to write in a 1963 publication entitled The Evolution and Eradication of Infectious Diseases: “It seems reasonable to anticipate that within some measurable time . . . all the major infections will have disappeared.” Professor Cockburn was not alone in this view. Robert Petersdorf, a renowned infectious disease expert and former editor of this textbook, wrote in 1978 that “even with my great personal loyalties to infectious diseases, I cannot conceive a need for 309 more [graduating trainees in infectious diseases] unless they spend their time culturing each other.” Given the enormous growth of interest in the microbiome in the past 5 years, Dr. Petersdorf’s statement might have been ironically clairvoyant, although he could have had no idea what was in store for humanity, with an onslaught of new, emerging, and re-emerging infectious diseases. Clearly, even with all the advances of the twentieth century, infec-tious diseases continue to represent a formidable challenge for patients and physicians alike. Furthermore, during the latter half of the century, several chronic diseases were demonstrated to be directly or indirectly caused by infectious microbes; perhaps the most notable examples are the associations of Helicobacter pylori with peptic ulcer disease and gastric carcinoma, human papillomavirus with cervical cancer, and hepatitis B and C viruses with liver cancer. In fact, ~16% of all malignancies are now known to be associated with an infectious cause. In addition, numerous emerging and re-emerging infectious diseases continue to have a dire impact on global health: HIV/AIDS, pandemic influenza, and severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) are but a few examples. The fear of weaponizing pathogens for bioterrorism is ever present and poses a potentially enormous threat to public health. Moreover, escalating antimicrobial resistance in clinically relevant microbes (e.g., Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Plasmodium species, and HIV) signifies that the administration of antimicrobial agents—once thought to be a panacea—requires appropriate stewardship. For all these reasons, infectious diseases continue to exert grim effects on individual patients as well as on international public health. Even with all the successes of the past century, physicians must be as thoughtful about infectious diseases now as they were at the beginning of the twentieth century. 144 SEC TIon 1 BASIC ConSIDERATIonS In InfEC TIouS DISEASES PART 8: Infectious Diseases
# Chunk 2842
Infectious diseases remain the second leading cause of death worldwide. Although the rate of infectious disease–related deaths has decreased dramatically over the past 20 years, the absolute numbers of such deaths have remained relatively constant, totaling just over 12 million in 2010 (Fig. 144-1A). As shown in Fig. 144-1B, these deaths disproportionately affect lowand middle-income countries (Chap. 13e); in 2010, 23% of all deaths worldwide were related to infectious diseases, with rates >60% in most sub-Saharan African countries.
# Chunk 2843
Inflammatory Markers The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and the C-reactive protein (CRP) level are indirect and direct measures of the acute-phase response, respectively, that can be used to assess a patient’s general level of inflammation. Moreover, these markers can be followed serially over time to monitor disease progress/resolution. It is noteworthy that the ESR changes relatively slowly, and its measurement more often than weekly usually is not useful; in contrast, CRP concentrations change rapidly, and daily measurements can be useful in the appropriate context. Although these markers are sensitive indicators of inflammation, neither is very specific. An extremely elevated ESR (>100 mm/h) has a 90% predictive value for a serious underlying disease (Table 144-3). Work is ongoing to identify other potentially useful inflammatory markers (e.g., procalcitonin, serum amyloid A protein); however, their clinical utility requires further validation.
# Chunk 2844
At times, primary physicians need assistance with patient management, from a diagnostic and/or therapeutic perspective. Multiple studies have demonstrated that an infectious disease consult is associated with positive outcomes for patients with various diseases. For example, in a prospective cohort study of patients with S. aureus bacteremia, infectious disease consultation was independently associated with a 56% reduction in 28-day mortality. In addition, infectious disease specialists provide other services (e.g., infection control, antimicrobial stewardship, management of outpatient antibiotic therapy, occupational exposure programs) that have been shown to benefit patients. Whenever such assistance would be advantageous to a patient with a possible infection, the primary physician should opt for an infectious disease consult. Specific situations that might prompt a consult include (1) difficult-todiagnose patients with presumed infections, (2) patients who are not responding to treatment as expected, (3) patients with a complicated medical history (e.g., organ transplant recipients, patients immunosuppressed due to autoimmune or inflammatory conditions), and (4) patients with “exotic” diseases (i.e., diseases that are not typically seen within the region).
# Chunk 2845
Inpatient, non-ICU Above plus Legionella spp.

Inpatient, ICU Above plus S. aureus

Hospital-acquired S. pneumoniae, pneumoniad H. influenzae, S. aureus, gram-negative bacilli (e.g., Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Acinetobacter spp.)
# Chunk 2846
FIguRE 145e-1 Bacterial surface structures. A and B. Traditional electron micrographic images of fixed cells of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Flagella (A) and pili (B) project out from the bacterial poles. C and D. Atomic force microscopic image of live P. aeruginosa freshly planted onto a smooth mica surface. This technology reveals the fine, three-dimensional detail of the bacterial surface structures. (Images courtesy of Drs. Martin Lee and Milan Bajmoczi, Harvard Medical School.) (molecular weight, 17,000–30,000) that polymerizes to form the pilus. Many strains of Escherichia coli isolated from urinary tract infections express mannose-binding type 1 pili, whose binding to integral membrane glycoproteins called uroplakins that coat the cells in the bladder epithelium is inhibited by d-mannose. Other strains produce the Pap (pyelonephritis-associated) or P pilus adhesin that mediates binding to digalactose (gal-gal) residues on globosides of the human P blood groups. Both of these types of pili have proteins located at the tips of the main pilus unit that are critical to the binding specificity of the whole pilus unit. Although immunization with the mannose-binding tip protein (FimH) of type 1 pili prevents experimental E. coli bladder infections in mice and monkeys, a human trial of this vaccine was not successful. E. coli cells causing diarrheal disease express pilus-like receptors for enterocytes on the small bowel, along with other receptors termed colonization factors.
# Chunk 2847
Other bacterial structures involved in adherence to host tissues include specific staphylococcal and streptococcal proteins that bind to human extracellular matrix proteins such as fibrin, fibronectin, fibrinogen, laminin, and collagen. Fibronectin appears to be a commonly used receptor for various pathogens; a particular amino acid sequence in fibronectin, Arg-Gly-Asp or RGD, is a critical target used by bacteria to bind to host tissues. Binding of a highly conserved Staphylococcus aureus surface protein, clumping factor A (ClfA), to fibrinogen has been implicated in many aspects of pathogenesis. Attempts to interrupt this interaction and prevent S. aureus sepsis in low-birth-weight infants by administering an intravenous IgG preparation derived from the plasma of individuals with high titers of antibody to ClfA failed to show efficacy in a clinical trial; however, this approach is being pursued in some vaccine formulations targeting this organism. The conserved outer-core portion of the lipopolysaccharide (LPS) of P. aeruginosa mediates binding to the cystic fibrosis trans-membrane conductance regulator (CFTR) on airway epithelial cells— an event that appears to play a critical role in normal host resistance to infection by initiating recruitment of polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMNs) to the lung mucosa to kill the cells via opsonophagocytosis. A large number of microbial pathogens encompassing major gram-positive bacteria (staphylococci and streptococci), gram-negative bacteria (major enteric species and coccobacilli), fungi (Candida, Fusobacterium, Aspergillus), and even eukaryotes (Trichomonas vaginalis and Plasmodium falciparum) express a surface polysaccharide composed of β-1-6-linked-poly-N-acetyl-d-glucosamine (PNAG). One of the functions of PNAG for some of these organisms is to promote binding to materials used in catheters and other types of implanted devices. This polysaccharide may be a critical factor in the establishment of device-related infections by pathogens such as staphylococci and E. coli. High-powered imaging techniques (e.g., atomic force microscopy) have revealed that bacterial cells have a nonhomogeneous surface that is probably attributable to different concentrations of cell surface molecules, including microbial adhesins, at specific places on the cell surface (Figs. 120-1C and 120-1D).
# Chunk 2848
Host Receptors Host receptors are found both on target cells (such as epithelial cells lining mucosal surfaces) and within the mucus layer covering these cells. Microbial pathogens bind to a wide range of host receptors to establish infection (Table 145e-1). Selective loss of host receptors for a pathogen may confer natural resistance to an otherwise susceptible population. For example, 70% of individuals in West Africa lack Fy antigens and are resistant to P. vivax infection.
# Chunk 2849
Abbreviations: CDC, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; HBV, hepatitis B virus; HCV, hepatitis C virus; MDR, multidrug-resistant; MERS, Middle East respiratory syndrome; MRSA, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus; NAAT, nucleic acid amplification test; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; SARS, severe acute respiratory syndrome; TB, tuberculosis; VRE, vancomycin-resistant enterococci.
# Chunk 2850
Unlike direct pathogen detection, serologic diagnosis—measurement of the host’s response to pathogen exposure—can typically be made only in retrospect, requiring both acuteand convalescent-phase sera. For chronic infections, distinguishing active from latent infection or identifying repeat exposure by serology alone can be difficult or impossible, depending on the syndrome. In addition, the sensitivity of serologic diagnosis varies with the organism and the patient’s immune status. For instance, tuberculosis is notoriously difficult to identify by serologic methods; tuberculin skin testing using purified protein derivative (PPD) is especially insensitive in active disease and may be cross-reactive with vaccines or other mycobacteria. Even the newer interferon γ release assays (IGRAs), which measure cytokine release from T lymphocytes in response to Mycobacterium tuberculosis– specific antigens in vitro, have limited sensitivity in immunodeficient hosts. Neither PPD testing nor IGRAs can distinguish latent from active infection. Serologic Lyme disease diagnostics suffer similar limitations: in patients from endemic regions, the presence of IgG antibodies to Borrelia burgdorferi may reflect prior exposure rather than active disease, while IgM antibodies are imperfectly sensitive and specific (50% and 80%, respectively, in early disease). The complex nature of these tests, particularly in view of the nonspecific symptoms that may accompany Lyme disease, has had substantial implications on public perceptions of Lyme disease and antibiotic misuse in endemic areas. Similarly, syphilis, a chronic infection caused by Treponema pallidum, is notoriously difficult to stage by serology alone, requiring the use of multiple different nontreponemal (e.g., rapid protein reagin) and treponemal (e.g., fluorescent treponemal antibody) tests in conjunction with clinical suspicion. Complementing serology, antigen detection can improve sensitivity and specificity in select cases but has been validated only for a limited set of infections. Typically, structural elements of pathogens are detected, including components of viral envelopes (e.g., hepatitis B surface antigen, HIV p24 antigen), cell surface markers in certain bacteria (e.g., Streptococcus pneumoniae, Legionella pneumophila serotype 1) or fungi (e.g., Cryptococcus, Histoplasma), and less specific fungal cell-wall components such as galactomannan and β-glucan (e.g., Aspergillus and other dimorphic fungi).
# Chunk 2851
More recently, metagenomic assembly has been successfully extended to bacterial pathogen discovery. Investigators identified a new bacterial species associated with “cord colitis”—a rare antibiotic-responsive, culture-negative colitis in recipients of umbilical cord-blood stem cells—by sequencing colon biopsy samples from affected patients and matched controls. A single dominant species emerged from metagenomic assembly in samples from patients that was absent from control samples. The presence of this species was confirmed by PCR and fluorescence in situ hybridization on primary tissue samples. On the basis of its similarity to other known species, the organism was named Bradyrhizobium enterica, a novel species from a genus that has proved difficult to culture and thus would have been hard to identify by other means. Correlation versus causation remains an open question; therefore, further efforts will be required to make such links.
# Chunk 2852
(Figure prepared with valuable input from Dr. Ami S. Bhatt, personal communication.) from viruses to bacteria to parasites. As sequencing-based discovery expands, microbes may be found to be associated with conditions not classically thought of as infectious. Studies of bowel flora in laboratory animals and even humans are already beginning to suggest correlations between microbe composition and various aspects of metabolic and cardiovascular health. Improved methods for pathogen detection will continue to uncover unexpected correlations between microbes and disease states, but the mere presence of a microbe does not establish causality. Fortunately, once the relatively laborious and computationally intensive metagenomic sequencing and assembly efforts have identified a pathogen, further detection can easily be undertaken with targeted methods such as PCR or hybridization, which are much more straightforward and scalable. This capacity should facilitate the additional careful investigation that will be required to progress beyond correlation and to draw causal inference.
# Chunk 2853
For several reasons, the challenge of predicting antibiotic susceptibility from genotype has not yet been met in bacteria to the same degree as in HIV. In general, bacteria have evolved diverse resistance mechanisms to most antibiotics; thus, the task cannot be reduced to probing for a single genetic lesion, target, or mechanism. For instance, at least five distinct modes of resistance to fluoroquinolones are known: reduced import, increased efflux, mutated target sites, drug modification, and shielding of the target sites by expression of another protein. Further, we lack a comprehensive compendium of genetic elements conferring resistance, and new mechanisms and genes emerge regularly in the face of antibiotic deployment. As bacteria have far more complex genomes than viruses, with thousands of genes on their chromosomes and the capacity for acquiring many more through 774 horizontal gene transfer of plasmids and mobile genetic elements within and even between species, the task of not only defining all current but also predicting all future mechanisms at a genetic level is daunting or perhaps impossible. Despite these challenges, in a few select cases where the genotypic basis for resistance has been well defined, genotypic assays for antibiotic resistance are already being introduced into clinical practice. One important example is the detection of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). S. aureus is one of the most common and serious bacterial pathogens of humans, particularly in health care settings. Resistance to methicillin, the most effective antistaphylococcal antibiotic, has become very common even in community-acquired strains. The alternative to methicillin, vancomycin, is effective against MRSA but measurably inferior to methicillin against methicillinsusceptible S. aureus (MSSA). Analysis of clinical MRSA isolates has demonstrated that the molecular basis for resistance to methicillin in essentially all cases stems from the expression of an alternative penicillin-binding protein (PBP2A) encoded by the gene mecA, which is found within a transferable genetic element called mec. This mobile cassette has spread rapidly through the S. aureus population via horizontal gene transfer and selection from widespread antibiotic use. Because resistance is essentially always due to the presence of the mec cassette, MRSA is amenable to molecular detection. In recent years, a PCR test for the presence of the mec cassette, which saves hours to days compared with standard culture-based methods, has been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Additional molecular diagnostics are being implemented in the evaluation of bacterial antibiotic resistance. Vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE) harbor one of a limited number of van genes responsible for resistance to this important antibiotic by altering the mechanism for cell wall cross-linking that vancomycin inhibits. Detection of one of these genes by PCR indicates resistance. Identification of two carbapenemase-encoding plasmids—NDM-1 and KPC—responsible for a significant fraction of carbapenem resistance (though not for all such resistance) has led to the development of a multiplexed PCR assay to detect these important resistance elements. Because carbapenems are broad-spectrum antibiotics frequently reserved for multidrugresistant bacteria (particularly enteric gram-negative bacilli) and are often used as antibiotics of last resort, the initial appearance of resistance and the subsequent increase in its prevalence have caused considerable concern. Therefore, even though other mechanisms for carbapenem resistance exist, a rapid PCR test for the two plasmids encoding these two carbapenemases has been developed to aid in both diagnostic and infection control efforts. Efforts are under way to extend this multiplexed PCR assay to other plasmid-borne carbapenemases and thus to make it more comprehensive. The power and application of molecular genetic tests are not limited to high-income settings. With the increasing burden of drug-resistant tuberculosis in the developing world, a molecular diagnostic test has now been developed to detect rifampin-resistant tuberculosis. The genetic basis for rifampin resistance has been well defined by targeted sequencing: characteristic mutations in the molecular target of rifampin, RNA polymerase, account for the vast majority of rifampinresistant strains of M. tuberculosis. A PCR assay that can detect both the M. tuberculosis organism and a rifampin-resistant allele of RNA polymerase from clinical samples has recently been approved. Since rifampin resistance frequently accompanies resistance to other antibiotics, this test can suggest the possible presence of multidrug-resistant
# Chunk 2854
While pathogen-based diagnostics continue to be the mainstay for diagnosing infection, serologic testing has long been the basis of a strategy to diagnose infection by measuring host responses. Here, too, the application of genomics is now being explored to improve upon this approach, given the previously described limitations of serologic testing. Rather than using antibody responses as a retrospective biomarker for infection, recent efforts have focused on transcriptomic analysis of the host response as a new direction with diagnostic implications for human disease. For instance, while pathogen-based diagnostic tests to distinguish active from latent tuberculosis infection have proved elusive, recent work shows that the transcriptional profile of circulating white blood cells exhibits a differential pattern of expression of nearly 400 transcripts that distinguish active from latent tuberculosis; this expression pattern is driven in part by changes in interferon-inducible genes in the myeloid lineage. In a validation cohort, this transcriptional signature was able to distinguish patients with active versus latent disease, to distinguish tuberculosis infection from other pulmonary inflammatory states or infections, and to track responses to treatment in as little as 2 weeks, with normalization of expression toward that of patients without active disease over 6 months of effective therapy. Such a test could play an important role not only in the management of patients but also as a marker of efficacy in clinical trials of new therapeutic agents. Similarly, other investigators have been trying to identify host transcriptional signatures in circulating blood cells that are distinct in influenza A infection from those in upper respiratory infections caused by certain other viruses or bacteria. These signatures also varied with phase of infection and showed promise in distinguishing exposed subjects who will become symptomatic from those who will not. These results suggest that profiling of host transcriptional dynamics could augment the information obtained from studies of pathogens, both enhancing diagnosis and monitoring the progression of illness and the response to therapy.
# Chunk 2855
DIAGNOSTIC WORKUP After a quick clinical assessment, diagnostic material should be obtained rapidly and antibiotic and supportive treatment begun. Blood (for cultures; baseline complete blood count with differential; measurement of serum electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, serum creatinine, and serum glucose; and liver function tests) can be obtained at the time an IV line is placed and before antibiotics are administered. The blood lactate concentration also should be measured. Three sets of blood cultures should be performed for patients with possible acute endocarditis. Asplenic patients should have a buffy coat examined for bacteria; these patients can have >106 organisms per milliliter of blood (compared with 104/mL in patients with an intact spleen). Blood smears from patients at risk for severe parasitic disease, such as malaria or babesiosis (Chap. 250e), must be examined for the diagnosis and quantitation of parasitemia. Blood smears may also be diagnostic in ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis.
# Chunk 2856
Spinal epidural abscess Staphylococcus spp., gram-negative bacilli

Artesunate (2.4 mg/kg IV at 0, 12, and 24 h; then once daily)f or quinine (IV loading dose of 20 mg salt/kg; then 10 mg/kg q8h)
# Chunk 2857
Vancomycin (15 mg/kg q12h)b plus ceftriaxone (2 g q24h) If a β-lactam-sensitive strain is identified, vancomycin can be discontinued. If the patient is >50 years old or has comorbid disease, add ampicillin (2 g q4h) for Listeria coverage. Dexamethasone (10 mg q6h × 4 days) improves outcome in adults with meningitis (especially pneumococcal) and cloudy CSF, positive CSF Gram’s stain, or a CSF leukocyte count >1000/mL.
# Chunk 2858
Septic Shock (See also Chap. 325) Patients with bacteremia leading to septic shock may have a primary site of infection (e.g., pneumonia, pyelonephritis, or cholangitis) that is not evident initially. Elderly patients with comorbid conditions, hosts compromised by malignancy and neutropenia, and patients who have recently undergone a surgical procedure or hospitalization are at increased risk for an adverse outcome. Gram-negative bacteremia with organisms such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa or Escherichia coli and gram-positive infection with organisms such as Staphylococcus aureus (including methicillin-resistant S. aureus [MRSA]) or group A streptococci can present as intractable hypotension and multiorgan failure. Treatment can usually be initiated empirically on the basis of the presentation, host factors (Chap. 325), and local patterns of bacterial resistance. Outcomes are worse when antimicrobial treatment is delayed or when the responsible pathogen ultimately proves not to be susceptible to the initial regimen. Broad-spectrum antimicrobial agents are therefore recommended and should be instituted rapidly, preferably within the first hour after presentation. Risk factors for fungal infection should be assessed, as the incidence of fungal septic shock is increasing. Biomarkers such as C-reactive protein and procalcitonin have not proved reliable diagnostically but, when measured over time, can facilitate appropriate de-escalation of therapy. Glucocorticoids should be considered only for patients with severe sepsis who do not respond to fluid resuscitation and vasopressor therapy.
# Chunk 2859
Overwhelming Infection in Asplenic Patients (See also Chap. 325)

Patients without splenic function are at risk for overwhelming bacterial sepsis. Asplenic adult patients succumb to sepsis at 58 times the rate of the general population. Most infections are thought to occur within the first 2 years after splenectomy, with a mortality rate of ~50%, but the increased risk persists throughout life. In asplenia, encapsulated bacteria cause the majority of infections. Adults, who are more likely to have antibody to these organisms, are at lower risk than children. Streptococcus pneumoniae is the most common isolate, causing 50–70% of cases, but the risk of infection with Haemophilus influenzae or Neisseria meningitidis is also high. Severe clinical manifestations of infections due to E. coli, S. aureus, group B streptococci,
# Chunk 2860
Other Sepsis Syndromes Tularemia (Chap. 195) is seen throughout the United States but occurs primarily in Arkansas, Missouri, South Dakota, and Oklahoma. This disease is associated with wild rabbit, tick, and tabanid fly contact. It can be transmitted by arthropod bite, handling of infected animal carcasses, consumption of contaminated food and water, or inhalation. The typhoidal form can be associated with gram-negative septic shock and a mortality rate of >30%, especially in patients with underlying comorbid or immunosuppressive conditions. Plague occurs infrequently in the United States (Chap. 196), primarily after contact with ground squirrels, prairie dogs, or chipmunks, but is endemic in other parts of the world, with >90% of all cases occurring in Africa. The septic form is particularly rare and is associated with shock, multiorgan failure, and a 30% mortality rate. These infections should be considered in the appropriate epidemiologic setting. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention lists Francisella tularensis and Yersinia pestis (the agents of tularemia and plague, respectively) along with Bacillus anthracis (the agent of anthrax) as important organisms that might be used for bioterrorism (Chap. 261e).
# Chunk 2861
Meningococcemia most often affects young children (i.e., those 6 months to 5 years old). In sub-Saharan Africa, the high prevalence of serogroup A meningococcal disease has been a threat to public health for more than a century. Thousands of deaths occur annually in this area, which is known as the “meningitis belt,” and large epidemic waves occur approximately every 8–12 years. Serogroups W135 and X are also important emerging pathogens in Africa. In the United States, sporadic cases and outbreaks occur in day-care centers, schools (grade school through college, particularly among college freshmen living in residential halls), and army barracks. Household contacts of index cases are at 400–800 times greater risk of disease than the general population. Patients may exhibit fever, headache, nausea, vomiting, myalgias, changes in mental status, and meningismus. However, the rapidly progressive form of disease is not usually associated with meningitis. The rash is initially pink, blanching, and maculopapular, appearing on the trunk and extremities, but then becomes hemorrhagic, forming petechiae. Petechiae are first seen at the ankles, wrists, axillae, mucosal surfaces, and palpebral and bulbar conjunctiva, with subsequent spread on the lower extremities and to the trunk. A cluster of petechiae may be seen at pressure points—e.g., where a blood pressure cuff has been inflated. In rapidly progressive meningococcemia (10–20% of cases), the petechial rash quickly becomes purpuric (see Fig. 70-5), and patients develop DIC, multiorgan failure, and shock; 50–60% of these patients die, and survivors often require extensive debridement or amputation of gangrenous extremities.
# Chunk 2862
Other rickettsial diseases cause significant morbidity and mortality worldwide. Mediterranean spotted fever caused by Rickettsia conorii is found in Africa, southwestern and south-central Asia, and southern Europe. Patients have fever, flu-like symptoms, and an inoculation eschar at the site of the tick bite. A maculopapular rash develops within 1–7 days, involving the palms and soles but sparing the face. Elderly patients or those with diabetes, alcoholism, uremia, or congestive heart failure are at risk for severe disease characterized by neurologic involvement, respiratory distress, and gangrene of the digits. Mortality rates associated with this severe form of disease approach 50%. Epidemic typhus, caused by Rickettsia prowazekii, is transmitted in louse-infested environments and emerges in conditions of extreme poverty, war, and natural disaster. Patients experience a sudden onset of high fevers, severe headache, cough, myalgias, and abdominal pain. A maculopapular rash develops (primarily on the trunk) in more than half of patients and can progress to petechiae and purpura. Serious signs include delirium, coma, seizures, noncardiogenic pulmonary edema, skin necrosis, and peripheral gangrene. Mortality rates approached 60% in the preantibiotic era and continue to exceed 10–15% in contemporary outbreaks. Scrub typhus, caused by Orientia tsutsugamushi (a separate genus in the family Rickettsiaceae), is transmitted by larval mites or chiggers and is one of the most common infections in southeastern Asia and the western Pacific. The organism is found in areas of heavy scrub vegetation (e.g., along riverbanks). Patients may have an inoculation eschar and may develop a maculopapular rash. Severe cases progress to pneumonia, meningoencephalitis, DIC, and renal failure. Mortality rates range from 1% to 35%.
# Chunk 2863
If recognized in a timely fashion, rickettsial disease is very responsive to treatment. Doxycycline (100 mg twice daily for 3–14 days) is the treatment of choice for both adults and children. The newer macrolides and chloramphenicol may be suitable alternatives, but mortality rates are higher when a tetracycline-based treatment is not given.
# Chunk 2864
Other Emergent Infections Associated with Rash Vibrio vulnificus and other noncholera Vibrio bacteremic infections (Chap. 193) can cause focal skin lesions and overwhelming sepsis in hosts with chronic liver disease, iron storage disorders, diabetes, renal insufficiency, or other immunocompromising conditions. After ingestion of contaminated raw shellfish, typically oysters from the Gulf Coast, there is a sudden onset of malaise, chills, fever, and hypotension. The patient develops bullous or hemorrhagic skin lesions, usually on the lower extremities, and 75% of patients have leg pain. The mortality rate can be as high as 50–60%, particularly when the patient presents with hypotension. Outcomes are improved when patients are treated with tetracycline-containing regimens. Other infections, caused by agents such as Aeromonas, Klebsiella, and E. coli, can cause hemorrhagic bullae and death due to overwhelming sepsis in cirrhotic patients. Capnocytophaga canimorsus can cause septic shock in asplenic patients. Infection typically follows a dog bite. Patients present with fever, chills, myalgia, vomiting, diarrhea, dyspnea, confusion, and headache. Findings can include an exanthem or erythema multiforme (see Figs. 70-9 and 25e-25), cyanotic mottling or peripheral cyanosis, petechiae, and ecchymosis. About 30% of patients with this fulminant form die of overwhelming sepsis and DIC, and survivors may require amputation because of gangrene.
# Chunk 2865
Erythroderma TSS (Chaps. 172 and 173) is usually associated with erythroderma. The patient presents with fever, malaise, myalgias, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and confusion. There is a sunburn-type rash that may be subtle and patchy but is usually diffuse and is found on the face, trunk, and extremities. Erythroderma, which desquamates after 1–2 weeks, is more common in Staphylococcus-associated than in Streptococcus-associated TSS. Hypotension develops rapidly—often within hours—after the onset of symptoms. Multiorgan failure occurs. Early renal failure may precede hypotension and distinguishes this syndrome from other septic shock syndromes. There may be no indication of a primary focal infection, although possible cutaneous or mucosal portals of entry for the organism can be ascertained when a careful history is taken. Colonization rather than overt infection of the vagina or a postoperative wound, for example, is typical with staphylococcal TSS, and the mucosal areas appear hyperemic but not infected. Streptococcal TSS is more often associated with skin or soft tissue infection (including necrotizing fasciitis), and patients are more likely to be bacteremic. TSS caused by Clostridium sordellii is associated with childbirth or with skin injection of black-tar heroin. The diagnosis of TSS is defined by the clinical criteria of fever, rash, hypotension, and multiorgan involvement. The mortality rate is 5% for menstruation-associated TSS, 10–15% for nonmenstrual TSS, 30–70% for streptococcal TSS, and up to 90% for obstetric C. sordellii TSS.
# Chunk 2866
See also Chap. 156.

Necrotizing Fasciitis This infection is characterized by extensive necrosis of the subcutaneous tissue and fascia. It may arise at a site of minimal trauma or postoperative incision and may also be associated with recent varicella, childbirth, or muscle strain. The most common causes of necrotizing fasciitis are group A streptococci alone (Chap. 173), the incidence of which has been increasing for the past two decades, and a mixed facultative and anaerobic flora (Chap. 156). Diabetes mellitus, IV drug use, chronic liver or renal disease, and malignancy are associated risk factors. Physical findings are initially minimal compared with the severity of pain and the degree of fever. The examination is often unremarkable except for soft tissue edema and erythema. The infected area is red, hot, shiny, swollen, and exquisitely tender. In untreated infection, the overlying skin develops blue-gray patches after 36 h, and cutaneous bullae and necrosis develop after 3–5 days. Necrotizing fasciitis due to a mixed flora, but not that due to group A streptococci, can be associated with gas production. Without treatment, pain decreases because of thrombosis of the small blood vessels and destruction of the peripheral nerves—an ominous sign. The mortality rate is 15–34% overall, >70% in association with TSS, and nearly 100% without surgical intervention. Necrotizing fasciitis may also be due to Clostridium perfringens (Chap. 179); in this condition, the patient is extremely toxic and the mortality rate is high. Within 48 h, rapid tissue invasion and systemic toxicity associated with hemolysis and death ensue. The distinction between this entity and clostridial myonecrosis is made by muscle biopsy. Necrotizing fasciitis caused by community-acquired MRSA also has been reported.
# Chunk 2867
Clostridial Myonecrosis (See also Chap. 179) Myonecrosis is often associated with trauma or surgery but can develop spontaneously. The incubation period is usually 12–24 h long, and massive necrotizing gangrene develops within hours of onset. Systemic toxicity, shock, and death can occur within 12 h. The patient’s pain and toxic appearance are out of proportion to physical findings. On examination, the patient is febrile, apathetic, tachycardic, and tachypneic and may express a feeling of impending doom. Hypotension and renal failure develop later, and hyperalertness is evident preterminally. The skin over the affected area is bronze-brown, mottled, and edematous. Bullous lesions with serosanguineous drainage and a mousy or sweet odor can develop. Crepitus can occur secondary to gas production in muscle tissue. The mortality rate is >65% for spontaneous myonecrosis, which is often associated with Clostridium septicum or C. tertium and underlying malignancy. The mortality rates associated with trunk and limb infection are 63% and 12%, respectively, and any delay in surgical treatment increases the risk of death.
# Chunk 2868
NEUROLOGIC INFECTIONS WITH OR WITHOUT SEPTIC SHOCK Bacterial Meningitis (See also Chap. 164) Bacterial meningitis is one of the most common infectious disease emergencies involving the central nervous system. Although hosts with cell-mediated immune deficiency (including transplant recipients, diabetic patients, elderly patients, and cancer patients receiving certain chemotherapeutic agents) are at particular risk for Listeria monocytogenes meningitis, 783 most cases in adults are due to S. pneumoniae (30–60%) and N. meningitidis (10–35%). The classic presentation of fever, meningismus, and altered mental status is seen in only one-half to two-thirds of patients. The elderly can present without fever or meningeal signs. Cerebral dysfunction is evidenced by confusion, delirium, and lethargy that can progress to coma. In some cases, the presentation is fulminant, with sepsis and brain edema; papilledema at presentation is unusual and suggests another diagnosis (e.g., an intracranial lesion). Focal signs, including cranial nerve palsies (IV, VI, VII), can be seen in 10–20% of cases; 50–70% of patients have bacteremia. A poor outcome is associated with coma, hypotension, a pneumococcal etiology, respiratory distress, a CSF glucose level of <0.6 mmol/L (<<0 mg/dL), a CSF protein level of >2.5 g/L, a peripheral white blood cell count of <5000/μL, and a serum sodium level of <135 mmol/L. Rapid initiation of treatment is essential; the odds of an unfavorable outcome may increase by 30% for each hour that treatment is delayed. Mortality also increases linearly with age of the patient.
# Chunk 2869
Suppurative Intracranial Infections (See also Chap. 164) In suppurative intracranial infections, rare intracranial lesions present along with sepsis and hemodynamic instability. Rapid recognition of the toxic patient with central neurologic signs is crucial to improvement of the dismal prognosis of these entities. Subdural empyema arises from the paranasal sinus in 60–70% of cases. Microaerophilic streptococci and staphylococci are the predominant etiologic organisms. The patient is toxic, with fever, headache, and nuchal rigidity. Of all patients, 75% have focal signs and 6–20% die. Despite improved survival rates, 15–44% of patients are left with permanent neurologic deficits. Septic cavernous sinus thrombosis follows a facial or sphenoid sinus infection; 70% of cases are due to staphylococci (including MRSA), and the remainder are due primarily to aerobic or anaerobic streptococci. A unilateral or retroorbital headache progresses to a toxic appearance and fever within days. Three-quarters of patients have unilateral periorbital edema that becomes bilateral and then progresses to ptosis, proptosis, ophthalmoplegia, and papilledema. The mortality rate is as high as 30%. Septic thrombosis of the superior sagittal sinus spreads from the ethmoid or maxillary sinuses and is caused by S. pneumoniae, other streptococci, and staphylococci. The fulminant course is characterized by headache, nausea, vomiting, rapid progression to confusion and coma, nuchal rigidity, and brainstem signs. If the sinus is totally thrombosed, the mortality rate exceeds 80%.
# Chunk 2870
Brain Abscess (See also Chap. 164) Brain abscess often occurs without systemic signs. Almost half of patients are afebrile, and presentations are more consistent with a space-occupying lesion in the brain; 70% of patients have headache and/or altered mental status, 50% have focal neurologic signs, and 25% have papilledema. Abscesses can present as single or multiple lesions resulting from contiguous foci or hematogenous infection, such as endocarditis. The infection progresses over several days from cerebritis to an abscess with a mature capsule. More than half of infections are polymicrobial, with an etiology consisting of aerobic bacteria (primarily streptococcal species) and anaerobes. Abscesses arising hematogenously are especially apt to rupture into the ventricular space, causing a sudden and severe deterioration in clinical status and a high mortality rate. Otherwise, mortality is low but morbidity is high (30–55%). Patients presenting with stroke and a parameningeal infectious focus, such as sinusitis or otitis, may have a brain abscess, and physicians must maintain a high level of suspicion. Prognosis worsens in patients with a fulminant course, delayed diagnosis, abscess rupture into the ventricles, multiple abscesses, or abnormal neurologic status at presentation.
# Chunk 2871
Approach to the Acutely Ill Infected Febrile Patient 784 seizure in the setting of fulminant malaria has cerebral malaria. In adults, this nonspecific febrile illness progresses to coma over several days; occasionally, coma occurs within hours and death within 24 h. Nuchal rigidity and photophobia are rare. On physical examination, symmetric encephalopathy is typical, and upper motor neuron dysfunction with decorticate and decerebrate posturing can be seen in advanced disease. Unrecognized infection results in a 20–30% mortality rate.
# Chunk 2872
Avian and Swine Influenza (See also Chap. 224) Human cases of avian influenza have occurred primarily in Southeast Asia, particularly Vietnam (H5N1) and China (H7N9). Avian influenza should be considered in patients with severe respiratory tract illness, particularly if they have been exposed to poultry. Patients present with high fever, an influenza-like illness, and lower respiratory tract symptoms; this illness can progress rapidly to bilateral pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome, multiorgan failure, and death. Early antiviral treatment with neuraminidase inhibitors should be initiated along with aggressive supportive measures. Unlike avian influenza, for which human-to-human transmission has been rare so far and has not been sustained, a novel swine-associated influenza A/H1N1 virus has spread rapidly throughout the world. Patients most at risk of severe disease are children <5 years of age, elderly persons, patients with underlying chronic conditions, and pregnant women. Obesity also has been identified as a risk factor for severe illness.
# Chunk 2873
Since childhood vaccines have become widely available in the United States, major declines in rates of vaccine-preventable diseases among both children and adults have become evident (Table 148-2). For example, vaccination of children <5 years of age against seven types of Streptococcus pneumoniae led to a >90% overall reduction in invasive disease caused by those types. A series of childhood vaccines targeting 13 vaccine-preventable diseases in a single birth cohort leads to prevention of 42,000 premature deaths and 20 million illnesses and saves nearly $70 billion (U.S.).
# Chunk 2874
By removing barriers to the consumer or patient, providers and health care institutions can improve vaccine use. Financial barriers have traditionally been important constraints, particularly among uninsured adults. Even for insured adults, out-of-pocket costs associated with newer, more expensive adult vaccines (e.g., zoster vaccine) are an obstacle to be overcome. After influenza vaccine was included by Medicare for all beneficiaries in 1993, coverage among persons ≥65 years of age doubled (from ~30% in 1989 to >60% in 1997). Other strategies that enhance patients’ access to vaccination include extended office hours (e.g., evening and weekend hours) and scheduled vaccination-only clinics where waiting times are reduced. Provision of vaccines outside the “medical home” (e.g., through occupational clinics, universities, pharmacies, and retail settings) can expand access for adults who do not make medical visits frequently. Increasing proportions of adults are being vaccinated in these settings.
# Chunk 2875
Tracking of immunization coverage at national, state, institution, and practice levels can yield feedback to practitioners and programs and facilitate quality improvement. Healthcare Effectiveness Data 793 and Information Set (HEDIS) measures related to adult immunization facilitate comparison of health plans. The CDC’s National Immunization Survey and National Health Interview Survey provide selected information on immunization coverage among adults and track progress toward achievement of Healthy People 2020 targets for immunization coverage. Influenza and pneumococcal vaccine coverage rates have been higher among persons ≥65 years of age (60–70%) than among high-risk 18to 64-year-olds. Figures on state-specific immunization coverage with pneumococcal polysaccharide and influenza vaccines (as measured through the CDC’s Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System) reveal substantial geographic variation in coverage. There are persistent disparities in adult immunization coverage rates between whites and racial and ethnic minorities. In contrast, racial and economic disparities in immunization of young children have been dramatically reduced during the past 20 years. Much of this progress is attributed to the Vaccines for Children Program, which since 1994 has entitled uninsured children to receive free vaccines.
# Chunk 2876
by such variables as health status, specific itinerary, purpose of travel, season, and lifestyle during travel. Detailed information regarding influenza Influenza (Chap. 224)—possibly the most common vaccinecountry-specific risks and recommendations may be obtained from the preventable infection in travelers—occurs year-round in the tropicsCenters for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) publication Health and during the summer months in the Southern Hemisphere (coin-Information for International Travel (available at www.cdc.gov/travel).
# Chunk 2877
Required Immunizations • yellow fever Documentation of vaccina-IMMUNIZATIONS FOR TRAVEL tion against yellow fever (Chap. 233) may be required or recom-Immunizations for travel fall into three broad categories: mended as a condition for entry into or passage through countries of routine (childhood/adult boosters that are necessary regardless of sub-Saharan Africa and equatorial South America, where the disease travel), required (immunizations that are mandated by international is endemic or epidemic, or (by the International Health Regulations) regulations for entry into certain areas or for border crossings), and for entry into countries at risk of having the infection introduced. This aCross-protects against enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli and provides 30–50% protection against travelers’ diarrhea.
# Chunk 2878
vaccine is given only by state-authorized yellow fever centers, and its administration must be documented on an official International Certificate of Vaccination. A registry of U.S. clinics that provide the vaccine is available from the CDC (www.cdc.gov/travel). Recent data suggest that fewer than 50% of travelers entering areas endemic for yellow fever are immunized; this lack of coverage is a serious problem, as 13 countries in Central and South America and 30 countries in Africa harbor the illness. Severe adverse events associated with this vaccine have recently increased in incidence. First-time vaccine recipients may present with a syndrome characterized as either neurotropic (1 case per 125,000 doses) or viscerotropic (overall, 1 case per 250,000 doses; among persons 60–69 years of age, 1 case per 100,000 doses; and among persons ≥ 70 years of age, 1 case per 40,000 doses). Immunosuppression and thymic disease increase the risk of these adverse events (www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/vis/vis-statements/yf.pdf).
# Chunk 2879
Long-stay overseas workers appear to be at considerable risk for hepatitis B infection (Chap. 360). The recommendation that all travelers be immunized against hepatitis B before departure is supported by two studies showing that 17% of the assessed travelers who received health care abroad had some type of injection; according to the World Health Organization, nonsterile equipment is used for up to 75% of all injections given in parts of the developing world. A 3-week accelerated schedule of the combined hepatitis A and B vaccine has been approved in the United States. Although no data are available on the specific risk of infection with hepatitis B virus among U.S. travelers, ~240 million people in the world have chronic infection. All children and adolescents in the United States are immunized against this illness. Hepatitis B vaccination should be considered for all travelers.
# Chunk 2880
typHoid fever Most cases of typhoid fever in North America are due to travel, with ~300 cases seen per year in the United States. The attack rate for typhoid fever (Chap. 190) is 1 case per 30,000 travelers per month of travel to the developing world. However, attack rates in India, Senegal, and North Africa are tenfold higher; rates are especially high among travelers to relatively remote destinations and among immigrants and their families who have returned to their homelands to visit friends or relatives (VFRs). Between 1999 and 2006 in the United States, 66% of imported cases involved the latter group. Unfortunately, data show that the causative organism has become increasingly resistant to fluoroquinolone antibiotics (especially in those cases acquired on the Indian subcontinent). Both of the available vaccines—one oral (live) and the other injectable (polysaccharide)— have efficacy rates of ~70%. In some countries, a combined hepatitis A/typhoid vaccine is available.
# Chunk 2881
meningococcal meningitis Although the risk of meningococcal disease among travelers has not been quantified, it is likely to be higher among travelers who live with poor indigenous populations in overcrowded conditions (Chap. 180). Because of its enhanced ability to prevent nasal carriage (compared with the older polysaccharide vaccine), a quadrivalent conjugate vaccine is the product of choice (regardless of age) for immunization of persons traveling to sub-Saharan Africa during the dry season or to areas of the world where there are epidemics. The vaccine, which protects against serogroups A, C, Y, and W-135, has an efficacy rate of >90%.
# Chunk 2882
Japanese encepHalitis The risk of Japanese encephalitis (Chap. 233), an infection transmitted by mosquitoes in rural Asia and Southeast Asia, can be as high as ~1 case per 5000 travelers per month of stay in an endemic area. Most infections are asymptomatic, with a very small proportion of infected persons becoming ill. However, among those who do become ill, severe neurologic sequelae are common. Most symptomatic infections among U.S. residents have involved military personnel or their families. The vaccine efficacy rate is >90%. The vaccine is recommended for persons staying >1 month in rural endemic areas or for shorter periods if their activities (e.g., camping, bicycling, hiking) in these areas will increase exposure risk.
# Chunk 2883
796 rabies Domestic animals, primarily dogs, are the major transmitters of rabies in developing countries (Chap. 232). Several studies have shown that the risk of rabies posed by a dog bite in an endemic area translates into 1–3.6 cases per 1000 travelers per month of stay. Countries where canine rabies is highly endemic include Mexico, the Philippines, Sri Lanka, India, Thailand, China, and Vietnam. The two vaccines available in the United States provide >90% protection. Rabies vaccine is recommended for long-stay travelers, particularly children (who tend to play with animals and may not report bites), and for persons who may be occupationally exposed to rabies in endemic areas; however, in a large-scale study, almost 50% of potential exposures occurred within the first month of travel. Even after receipt of a preexposure rabies vaccine series, two postexposure doses are required. Travelers who have had the preexposure series do not require rabies immune globulin (which is often unavailable in developing countries) if they are exposed to the disease.
# Chunk 2884
It is estimated that more than 30,000 American and European travelers develop malaria each year (Chap. 248). The risk to travelers is highest in Oceania and sub-Saharan Africa (estimated at 1:5 and 1:50 per month of stay, respectively, among persons not using chemoprophylaxis); intermediate in malarious areas on the Indian subcontinent and in Southeast Asia (1:250–1:1000 per month); and low in South and Central America (1:2500–1:10,000 per month). Of the 1925 cases of malaria reported in 2011 in the United States (the highest figure in 40 years), 90% of those due to Plasmodium falciparum occurred in travelers returning or emigrating from Africa and Oceania. VFRs are at the highest risk of acquiring malaria and may die of the disease if their immunity has waned after living outside an endemic area for a number of years. According to data from the CDC, VFRs accounted for 59% of severe malaria cases in the United States in 2011. With the worldwide increase in chloroquineand multidrug-resistant falciparum malaria, decisions about chemoprophylaxis have become more difficult. The case-fatality rate for falciparum malaria in the United States is 4%; however, in only one-third of patients who die is the diagnosis of malaria considered before death.
# Chunk 2885
Several studies indicate that fewer than 50% of travelers adhere to basic recommendations for malaria prevention. Keys to the prevention of malaria include both personal protection measures against mosquito bites (especially between dusk and dawn) and malaria chemoprophylaxis. The former measures entail the use of DEET-containing insect repellents, permethrin-impregnated bed nets and clothing, screened sleeping accommodations, and protective clothing. Thus, in regions where infections such as malaria are transmitted, DEET products (25–50%) are recommended, even for children and infants at birth. Studies suggest that concentrations of DEET above ~50% do not offer a marked increase in protection time against mosquitoes. The CDC also recommends picaridin, oil of lemon eucalyptus (PMD, paramenthane-3,8-diol), and IR3535 (3-[N-butyl-N-acetyl]-aminopropionic acid, ethyl ester). In general, higher concentrations of any active ingredient provide a longer duration of protection. Personal protection measures also help prevent other insect-transmitted illnesses, such as dengue fever (Chap. 233). Over the past decade, the incidence of dengue has markedly increased, particularly in the Caribbean region, Latin America, Southeast Asia, and (more recently) Africa. Chikungunya, another mosquito-borne infection that clinically resembles dengue fever but with arthralgia and arthritis instead of myalgia, has recently crossed to the Western Hemisphere; many thousands of cases are now occurring in the Caribbean. Both dengue and chikungunya viruses are transmitted by an urban-dwelling mosquito that bites primarily at dawn and dusk.
# Chunk 2886
Note: See also Chap. 248.

as low as 8% in industrialized countries and as high as 55% in parts of Africa, Central and South America, and Southeast Asia. Infants and young adults are at particularly high risk for gastrointestinal illness and for complications such as dehydration. Recent reviews suggest that there is little correlation between dietary indiscretions and the occurrence of travelers’ diarrhea. Earlier studies of U.S. students in Mexico showed that eating meals in restaurants and cafeterias or consuming food from street vendors was associated with increased risk. For further discussion, see “Precautions,” below.
# Chunk 2887
Self-Treatment (See also Table 160-5) As travelers’ diarrhea often occurs despite rigorous food and water precautions, travelers should carry medications for self-treatment. An antibiotic is useful in reducing the frequency of bowel movements and the duration of illness in moderate to severe diarrhea. The standard regimen is a 3-day course of a quinolone taken twice daily (or, in the case of some newer formulations, once daily). However, studies have shown that one double dose of a quinolone may be equally effective. For diarrhea acquired in areas such as Thailand, where >90% of Campylobacter infections are quinolone resistant, azithromycin may be a better alternative. Rifaximin, a poorly absorbed rifampin derivative, is highly effective against noninvasive bacterial pathogens such as enterotoxigenic and enteroaggregative E. coli. The current approach to self-treatment of travelers’ diarrhea for the typical short-term traveler is to carry three once-daily doses of an antibiotic and to use as many doses as necessary to resolve the illness. If neither high fever nor blood in the stool accompanies the diarrhea, loperamide should be taken in combination with the antibiotic; studies have shown that this combination is more effective than an antibiotic alone and does not prolong illness.
# Chunk 2888
Prophylaxis Prophylaxis of travelers’ diarrhea with bismuth subsalicylate is widely used but only ~60% effective. For certain individuals (e.g., athletes, persons with a repeated history of travelers’ diarrhea, and persons with chronic diseases), a single daily dose of a quinolone, azithromycin, or rifaximin during travel of <1 month’s duration is 75–90% efficacious in preventing travelers’ diarrhea. Probiotics have been only ~20% effective as prophylaxis. In Europe and Canada, an oral subunit cholera vaccine that cross-protects against enterotoxigenic E. coli (Dukoral) has been shown to provide 30–50% protection against travelers’ diarrhea.
# Chunk 2889
A traveler’s medical kit is strongly advisable. The contents may vary widely, depending on the itinerary, duration of stay, style of travel, and local medical facilities. While many medications are available abroad (often over the counter), directions for their use may be nonexistent or in a foreign language, or a product may be outdated or counterfeit. For example, a multicountry study in Southeast Asia 797 showed that a mean of 53% (range, 21–92%) of antimalarial products were counterfeit or contained inadequate amounts of active drug. The sale and marketing of such medications constitute a growing industry. In the medical kit, the short-term traveler should consider carrying an analgesic; an antidiarrheal agent and an antibiotic for self-treatment of travelers’ diarrhea; antihistamines; a laxative; oral rehydration salts; a sunscreen with broad-spectrum protection (UVA and UVB, with the latter at a level of at least 30 SPF); a DEET-containing or equivalent insect repellent for the skin; an insecticide for clothing (permethrin); and, if necessary, an antimalarial drug. To these medications, the long-stay traveler might add a broad-spectrum general-purpose antibiotic (levofloxacin or azithromycin), an antibacterial eye and skin ointment, and a topical antifungal cream. Regardless of the duration of travel, a first-aid kit containing such items as scissors, tweezers, and bandages should be considered. A practical approach to self-treatment of infections in the long-stay traveler who carries a once-daily dose of antibiotics (e.g., levofloxacin) is to use 3 tablets “below the waist” (bowel and bladder infections) and 6 tablets “above the waist” (skin and respiratory infections).
# Chunk 2890
See “Prevention of Gastrointestinal Illness,” above.

Fever in a traveler who has returned from a malarious area should be considered a medical emergency because death from P. falciparum malaria can follow an illness of only several days’ duration. Although “fever from the tropics” does not always have a tropical cause, malaria should be the first diagnosis considered. The risk of P. falciparum malaria is highest among travelers returning from Africa or Oceania
# Chunk 2891
When no specific diagnosis is forthcoming, the following investigations, where applicable, are suggested: complete blood count, liver function tests, thick/thin blood films or rapid diagnostic testing for malaria (repeated several times if necessary), urinalysis, urine and blood cultures (repeated once), chest x-ray, and collection of an acute-phase serum sample to be held for subsequent examination along with a paired convalescent-phase serum sample.
# Chunk 2892
As Nobel Laureate Dr. Joshua Lederberg pointed out, “The microbe that felled one child in a distant continent yesterday can reach yours today and seed a global pandemic tomorrow.” The vigilant clinician understands that the importance of a thorough travel history cannot be overemphasized.
# Chunk 2893
Measurement of serum antibody provides an indirect marker for past or current infection with a specific viral agent or other pathogens, including Brucella, Legionella, Rickettsia, and Helicobacter pylori. Serologic methods can be used to determine whether an individual has protective antibody levels or is infected by a specific pathogen. Determination of an antibody level as a measure of current immunity is important in the case of viral agents for which there are vaccines, such as rubella virus and varicella-zoster virus; assays for this purpose normally use one or two dilutions of serum for a qualitative determination of protective antibody levels. Quantitative serologic assays to detect increases in antibody titers most often employ paired serum samples obtained at the onset of illness and 10–14 days later (i.e., acuteand convalescent-phase samples). Since the incubation period before symptoms are noted may be long enough for an antibody response to occur, the demonstration of acute-phase antibody alone is often insufficient to establish the diagnosis of active infection as opposed to past exposure. A fourfold increase in total antibody titer between the acuteand convalescent-phase samples is regarded as evidence for active infection. In addition, IgM may be useful as a measure of an early, acute-phase antibody response. For certain viral agents, such as Epstein-Barr virus, the antibodies produced may be directed at different antigens during different phases of the infection. For this reason, most laboratories test for antibody directed at both viral capsid antigens and antigens associated with recently infected host cells to determine the stage of infection.
# Chunk 2894
Sputum, tissue, urine, body fluids

Pleural fluid, lung biopsy, bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, bronchial/ transbronchial biopsy
# Chunk 2895
Sample preparation: Culture to Sabouraud’s and other media; stain with lactophenol cotton blue or other stain; examine wet mount Virology specimen: Use cell culture or serologic methods; samples include buffy coat, serum, blood, bronchial wash, stool, urine
# Chunk 2896
Branched-chain DNA (bDNA) testing is an alternative to NAATs for quantitative nucleic acid testing. In such testing, bDNA attaches to a site different from the target-binding sequence of the original probe. Chemiluminescence-labeled oligonucleotides can then bind to multiple repeating sequences on the bDNA. The amplified bDNA signal is detected by chemiluminescence. bDNA assays for viral load of HIV, hepatitis B virus, and hepatitis C virus have been approved by the FDA. The advantage of bDNA assays over PCR is that only a single heating/ annealing step is required to hybridize the target-binding probe to the target sequence for amplification.
# Chunk 2897
The world’s oceans have absorbed 90% of the excess heat that greenhouse gases have kept in Earth’s atmosphere since the 1960s. Ocean heat provides energy for hurricanes, and warmer years tend to have greater hurricane activity. Atlantic hurricanes are the best studied and have the most data available. An analysis of satellite observations from 1983 to 2005 has shown a trend toward increasing severity—albeit decreasing frequency—of Atlantic hurricanes. Modeling of future tropical cyclones suggests that their intensity may increase 2–11% by 2100 and that the average storm will bring 20% more rainfall.
# Chunk 2898
Dengue Like malaria epidemics, dengue fever epidemics depend on temperature (Fig. 151e-5). Higher temperatures increase the rate of larval development and accelerate the emergence of adult Aedes mosquitoes. The daily temperature range may also influence dengue virus transmission, with a smaller range corresponding to a higher transmission potential. Temperatures <15°C or >36°C also substantially reduce mosquito feeding. In a Rhesus model of dengue, viral replication can occur in as little as 7 days with temperatures of >32–35°C; at 30°C, replication takes ≥12 days; and replication does not reliably occur at 26°C. Research on dengue in New Caledonia has shown peak transmission at ~32°C, reflecting combined effects of a shorter extrinsic incubation period, a higher feeding frequency, and more rapid development of mosquitoes. Along with temperature, peak relative humidity is a strong predictor of dengue outbreaks.
# Chunk 2899
Outbreaks of waterborne disease are associated with heavy rainfall events. A review of 548 waterborne disease outbreaks in the United States found that 51% were preceded by precipitation levels above the 90th percentile. Since 1900, most regions of the United States except the Southwest and Hawaii have experienced an increase in heavy downpours (Fig. 151e-9), with the greatest intensification of the water cycle in New England and Alaska. Climate models suggest that by 2100 daily heavy-precipitation events, which are defined as a cumulative daily amount that now occurs once every 20 years, will increase nationwide (Fig. 151e-10). This scenario may be from two to as much as five times more likely, depending on the extent of greenhouse gas emission reductions achieved early in the twenty-first century.
# Chunk 2900
FIGURE 151e-10 Increased frequency of extreme daily precipitation events (defined as a daily amount that now occurs once in 20 years) by the latter part of the twenty-first century (2081–2100) compared to the frequency in the latter part of the twentieth century (1981–2000). A representative concentration pathway (RCP) describes a plausible climate future based on a net radiative forcing (e.g., 2.6 or 8.5) in 2100. (From U.S. National Climate Assessment 2014, NOAA National Climate Data Center/Cooperative Institute for Climate and Satellites, North Carolina.) 151e-8 Most disease outbreaks after heavy precipitation occur through contamination of drinking-water supplies. While outbreaks related to surface-water contamination generally occur within a month of the precipitation event, disease outbreaks from groundwater contamination tend to occur ≥2 months later. According to a review of published reports of waterborne disease outbreaks, Vibrio and Leptospira species are the pathogens most commonly involved in the wake of heavy precipitation.
# Chunk 2901
chronic watery diarrhea, intestinal biopsy; stool parasitic therapy for with or without fever, antigen assay postinfectious syn-abdominal pain, nausea
# Chunk 2902
Chronic wound Acinetobacter Worldwide Inoculation via Weeks to Chronic pain, swelling, ± Culture of tissue Guided by results of Adequate initial wound Miscellaneous infection spp., other gram- and penetrating gression of lent drainage of infected antibiotic susceptibil-treatment of acute soft- injury acute infection site with or without consti ity testing; carbape-tissue infection; removal aureus, including nem ± amikacin as of foreign bodies; strict MRSA; invasive empirical therapy for adherence to infection molds (Aspergillus, multidrug-resistant control precautions to Fusarium, Mucor,
# Chunk 2903
FIGURE 152e-1 Syndromic approach to the differential diagnosis of suspected infection in a veteran who has returned from a foreign war in southwest Asia, central Asia, or Africa at least 2 weeks prior to clinical presentation. HBV, hepatitis B virus.
# Chunk 2904
malaria acquired during the U.S.S.R.’s war in Afghanistan in the 1980s, 76% developed clinical manifestations >1 month after their return to the U.S.S.R., with some cases developing as long as 3 years later.
# Chunk 2905
Chronic osteomyelitis related to either extension of a contiguous soft tissue infection or an infected prosthesis also represents a burgeoning problem for wounded veterans of recent wars. Limited micro-biologic data have shown a predominance of gram-negative etiologic agents—most often Acinetobacter and Pseudomonas aeruginosa—in the initial episodes of osteomyelitis but a shift to staphylococcal isolates in the majority of recurrent cases—a change that may perhaps be related to nosocomial acquisition. Relapses have been noted to occur 1 month to 1 year after treatment of the initial infection.
# Chunk 2906
Pseudomonas Acinetobacter MDR Condition MRSA aeruginosa spp. Enterobacteriaceae √ Chronic dialysis √ Home infusion therapy √ Home wound care √ Family member with MDR infection √ √ Abbreviations: MDR, multidrug-resistant; MRSA, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus.
# Chunk 2907
When these barriers are overcome or when microorganisms are small enough to be inhaled to the alveolar level, resident alveolar macrophages are extremely efficient at clearing and killing pathogens. Macrophages are assisted by proteins that are produced by the alveolar epithelial cells (e.g., surfactant proteins A and D) and that have intrinsic opsonizing properties or antibacterial or antiviral activity. Once engulfed by the macrophage, the pathogens—even if they are not killed—are eliminated via either the mucociliary elevator or the lymphatics and no longer represent an infectious challenge. Only when the capacity of the alveolar macrophages to ingest or kill the microorganisms is exceeded does clinical pneumonia become manifest. In that situation, the alveolar macrophages initiate the inflammatory response to bolster lower respiratory tract defenses. The host inflammatory response, rather than proliferation of microorganisms, triggers the clinical syndrome of pneumonia. The release of inflammatory mediators, such as interleukin 1 and tumor necrosis factor, results in fever. Chemokines, such as interleukin 8 and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor, stimulate the release of neutrophils and their attraction to the lung, producing both peripheral leukocytosis and increased purulent secretions. Inflammatory mediators released by macrophages and the newly recruited neutrophils create an alveolar capillary leak equivalent to that seen in the acute respiratory distress syndrome, although in pneumonia this leak is localized (at least initially). Even erythrocytes can cross the alveolar-capillary membrane, with consequent hemoptysis. The capillary leak results in a radiographic infiltrate and rales detectable on auscultation, and hypoxemia results from alveolar filling. Moreover, some bacterial pathogens appear to interfere with the hypoxemic vasoconstriction that would normally occur with fluid-filled alveoli, and this interference can result in severe hypoxemia. Increased respiratory drive in the systemic inflammatory response syndrome (Chap. 325) leads to respiratory alkalosis. Decreased compliance due to capillary leak, hypoxemia, increased respiratory drive, increased secretions, and occasionally infection-related bronchospasm all lead to dyspnea. If severe enough, the changes in lung mechanics secondary to reductions in lung volume and compliance and the intrapulmonary shunting of blood may cause respiratory failure and the patient’s death.
# Chunk 2908
The extensive list of potential etiologic agents in CAP includes bacteria, fungi, viruses, and protozoa. Newly identified pathogens include metapneumoviruses, the coronaviruses responsible for severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and Middle East respiratory syndrome, and community-acquired strains of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). Most cases of CAP, however, are caused by relatively few pathogens (Table 153-2). Although Streptococcus pneumoniae is most common, other organisms also must be considered in light of the patient’s risk factors and severity of illness. Separation of potential agents into either “typical” bacterial pathogens or “atypical” organisms may be helpful. The former category includes S. pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and (in selected patients) S. aureus and gram-negative bacilli such as Klebsiella pneumoniae and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The “atypical” organisms include Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydia pneumoniae, and Legionella species (in inpatients) as well as respiratory viruses such as influenza viruses, adenoviruses, human metapneumovirus, and respiratory syncytial viruses. Viruses may be responsible for a large proportion of CAP cases that require hospital admission, even in adults. Atypical organisms cannot be cultured on standard media or seen on Gram’s stain. The frequency and importance of atypical pathogens have significant implications for therapy. These organisms are intrinsically resistant to all β-lactam agents and must be treated with a macrolide, a fluoroquinolone, or a tetracycline. In the ∼10–15% of CAP cases that are polymicrobial, the etiology usually includes a combination of typical and atypical pathogens.
# Chunk 2909
More than 5 million CAP cases occur annually in the United States; usually, 80% of the affected patients are treated as outpatients and 20% as inpatients. The mortality rate among outpatients is usually ≤1%, whereas among hospitalized patients the rate can range from ∼12% to 40%, depending on whether treatment is provided in or outside of the intensive care unit (ICU). CAP results in more than 1.2 million hospitalizations and more than 55,000 deaths annually. The overall yearly cost associated with CAP is estimated at $12 billion. The incidence rates are highest at the extremes of age. The overall annual rate in the United States is 12 cases/1000 persons, but the figure increases to 12–18/1000 among children <4 years of age and to 20/1000 among persons >60 years of age.
# Chunk 2910
URINARY ANTIGEN TESTS Two commercially available tests detect pneumococcal and Legionella antigen in urine. The test for Legionella pneumophila detects only serogroup 1, but this serogroup accounts for most community-acquired cases of Legionnaires’ disease in the United States. The sensitivity and specificity of the Legionella urine antigen test are as high as 90% and 99%, respectively. The pneumococcal urine antigen test also is quite sensitive and specific (80% and >90%, respectively). Although false-positive results can be obtained with samples from pneumococcus-colonized children, the test is generally reliable. Both tests can detect antigen even after the initiation of appropriate antibiotic therapy.
# Chunk 2911
C. pneumoniae, and mycobacteria. In patients with pneumococcal pneumonia, an increased bacterial load in whole blood documented by PCR is associated with an increased risk of septic shock, the need for mechanical ventilation, and death. Clinical availability of such a test could conceivably help identify patients suitable for ICU admission.
# Chunk 2912
The CURB-65 criteria include five variables: confusion (C); urea >7 mmol/L (U); respiratory rate ≥30/min (R); blood pressure, systolic ≤90 mmHg or diastolic ≤60 mmHg (B); and age ≥65 years. Patients with a score of 0, among whom the 30-day mortality rate is 1.5%, can be treated outside the hospital. With a score of 2, the 30-day mortality rate is 9.2%, and patients should be admitted to the hospital.
# Chunk 2913
The minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) cutoffs for penicillin in pneumonia are ≤2 μg/mL for susceptibility, >2–4 μg/mL for intermediate, and ≥8 μg/mL for resistant. A change in susceptibility thresholds resulted in a dramatic decrease in the proportion of pneumococcal isolates considered nonsusceptible. For meningitis, MIC thresholds remain at the former higher levels. Fortunately, resistance to penicillin appeared to plateau even before the change in MIC thresholds. Pneumococcal resistance to β-lactam drugs is due solely to low-affinity penicillin-binding proteins. Risk factors for penicillin-resistant pneumococcal infection include recent antimicrobial therapy, an age of <2 years or >65 years, attendance at day-care centers, recent hospitalization, and HIV infection.
# Chunk 2914
Abbreviations: CA-MRSA, community-acquired methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus; ICU, intensive care unit.
# Chunk 2915
Follow-Up Fever and leukocytosis usually resolve within 2–4 days in otherwise healthy patients with CAP, but physical findings may persist longer. Chest radiographic abnormalities are slowest to resolve (4–12 weeks), with the speed of clearance depending on the patient’s age and underlying lung disease. Patients may be discharged from the hospital once their clinical conditions, including comorbidities, are stable. The site of residence after discharge (nursing home, home with family, home alone) is an important discharge timing consideration, particularly for elderly patients. For a hospitalized patient, a follow-up radiograph ∼4–6 weeks later is recommended. If relapse or recurrence is documented, particularly in the same lung segment, the possibility of an underlying neoplasm must be considered.
# Chunk 2916
The prognosis of CAP depends on the patient’s age, comorbidities, and site of treatment (inpatient or outpatient). Young patients without comorbidity do well and usually recover fully after ~2 weeks. Older patients and those with comorbid conditions can take several weeks longer to recover fully. The overall mortality rate for the outpatient group is <1%. For patients requiring hospitalization, the overall mortality rate is estimated at 10%, with ~50% of deaths directly attributable to pneumonia.
# Chunk 2917
The patients at greatest risk for HCAP are not well defined. Patients from nursing homes are not always at elevated risk for infection with MDR pathogens. Careful evaluation of nursing home residents with pneumonia suggests that their risk of MDR infection is low if they have not recently received antibiotics and are independent in most activities of daily living. Recent hospitalization (i.e., in the preceding 90 days) is also a major risk factor for infection with MDR pathogens. Conversely, nursing home patients are at increased risk of infection with influenza virus and other atypical pneumonia pathogens. Undue concern about MDR pathogens occasionally results in failure to cover atypical pathogens when treating nursing home patients. In addition, patients receiving home infusion therapy or undergoing chronic dialysis are probably at particular risk for MRSA pneumonia but may not be at greater risk for infection with Pseudomonas or Acinetobacter than are other patients who develop CAP.
# Chunk 2918
810 Epidemiology Pneumonia is a common complication among patients requiring mechanical ventilation. Prevalence estimates vary between 6 and 52 cases per 100 patients, depending on the population studied. On any given day in the ICU, an average of 10% of patients will have pneumonia—VAP in the overwhelming majority of cases. The frequency of diagnosis is not static but changes with the duration of mechanical ventilation, with the highest hazard ratio in the first 5 days and a plateau in additional cases (1% per day) after ~2 weeks. However, the cumulative rate among patients who remain ventilated for as long as 30 days is as high as 70%. These rates often do not reflect the recurrence of VAP in the same patient. Once a ventilated patient is transferred to a chronic-care facility or to home, the incidence of pneumonia drops significantly, especially in the absence of other risk factors for pneumonia. However, in chronic ventilator units, purulent tracheobronchitis becomes a significant issue, often interfering with efforts to wean patients off mechanical ventilation (Chap. 323). Three factors are critical in the pathogenesis of VAP: colonization of the oropharynx with pathogenic microorganisms, aspiration of these organisms from the oropharynx into the lower respiratory tract, and compromise of the normal host defense mechanisms. Most risk factors and their corresponding prevention strategies pertain to one of these three factors (Table 153-7). The most obvious risk factor is the endotracheal tube, which bypasses the normal mechanical factors preventing aspiration. While the presence of an endotracheal tube may prevent large-volume aspiration, microaspiration is actually exacerbated by secretions pooling above the cuff. The endotracheal tube and the concomitant need
# Chunk 2919
How the lower respiratory tract defenses become overwhelmed remains poorly understood. Almost all intubated patients experience microaspiration and are at least transiently colonized with pathogenic bacteria. However, only around one-third of colonized patients develop VAP. Colony counts increase to high levels, sometimes days before the development of clinical pneumonia; these increases suggest that the final step in VAP development, independent of aspiration and oropharyngeal colonization, is the overwhelming of host defenses. Severely ill patients with sepsis and trauma appear to enter a state of immunoparalysis several days after admission to the ICU—a time that corresponds to the greatest risk of developing VAP. The mechanism of this immunosuppression is not clear, although several factors have been suggested. Hyperglycemia affects neutrophil function, and trials suggest that keeping the blood sugar level close to normal with exogenous insulin may have beneficial effects, including a decreased risk of infection. More frequent transfusions also adversely affect the immune response.
# Chunk 2920
Treatment failure is not uncommon in VAP, especially that caused by MDR pathogens. In addition to the 40% failure rate for MRSA infection treated with vancomycin, VAP due to Pseudomonas has a 50% failure rate, no matter what the regimen. Causes of clinical failure vary with the pathogen(s) and the antibiotic(s). Inappropriate therapy can usually be minimized by use of the recommended triple-drug regimen (Table 153-9). However, the emergence of β-lactam resistance during therapy is an important problem, especially in infection with Pseudomonas and Enterobacter species. Recurrent VAP caused by the same pathogen is possible because the biofilm on endotracheal tubes allows reintroduction of the microorganism. However, studies of VAP caused by Pseudomonas show that approximately half of recurrent cases are caused by a new strain. Inadequate local levels of vancomycin are the likely cause of treatment failure in VAP due to MRSA.
# Chunk 2921
Prognosis VAP is associated with significant mortality. Crude mortality rates of 50–70% have been reported, but the real issue is attributable mortality. Many patients with VAP have underlying diseases that would result in death even if VAP did not occur. Attributable mortality exceeded 25% in one matched-cohort study, while more recent studies have suggested much lower rates. Patients who develop VAP are at least twice as likely to die as those who do not. Some of the variability in VAP mortality rates is clearly related to the type of patient and ICU studied. VAP in trauma patients is not associated with attributable mortality, possibly because many of the patients were otherwise healthy before being injured. However, the causative pathogen also plays a major role. Generally, MDR pathogens are associated with significantly greater attributable mortality than non-MDR pathogens. Pneumonia caused by some pathogens (e.g., S. maltophilia) is simply a marker for a patient whose immune system is so compromised that death is almost inevitable.
# Chunk 2922
FIGURE 154-1 Representative chest CT scans demonstrating development of lung abscesses. This patient was immunocompromised due to underlying lymphoma and developed severe Pseudomonas aeruginosa pneumonia, as represented by a left lung infiltrate with concern for central regions of necrosis ( panel A, black arrow). Two weeks later, areas of cavitation with air fluid levels were visible in this region and were consistent with the development of lung abscesses ( panel B, white arrow). (Images provided by Dr. Ritu Gill, Division of Chest Radiology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston.) obstruction from malignancy or a foreign body, the obstructing lesion prevents clearance of oropharyngeal secretions, leading to abscess development. With underlying systemic conditions (e.g., immunosuppression after bone marrow or solid organ transplantation), impaired host defense mechanisms lead to increased susceptibility to development of lung abscesses caused by a broad range of pathogens, including opportunistic organisms (Table 154-1).
# Chunk 2923
APPROACH TO THE PATIENT:

For patients with a lung abscess and a low likelihood of malignancy (e.g., smokers <45 years old) and with risk factors for aspiration, it is reasonable to administer empirical treatment and then to pursue further evaluation if therapy does not elicit a response. However, some clinicians may opt for up-front cultures, even in primary lung abscesses. In patients with risk factors for malignancy or other underlying conditions (especially immunocompromised hosts) or with an atypical presentation, earlier diagnostics should be considered, such as bronchoscopy with biopsy or CT-guided needle aspiration. Bronchoscopy should be performed early in patients whose history, symptoms, or imaging findings are consistent with possible bronchial obstruction. In patients from areas endemic for tuberculosis or patients with other risk factors for tuberculosis (e.g., underlying HIV infection), induced sputum samples should be examined early in the workup to rule out this disease.
# Chunk 2924
Noncardiac Manifestations The classic nonsuppurative peripheral manifestations of subacute endocarditis (e.g., Janeway lesions; Fig. 155-2A) are related to prolonged infection; with early diagnosis and treatment, these have become infrequent. In contrast, septic embolization mimicking some of these lesions (subungual hemorrhage, Osler’s nodes) is common in patients with acute S. aureus endocarditis (Fig. 155-2B). Musculoskeletal pain usually remits promptly with treatment but must be distinguished from focal metastatic infections (e.g., spondylodiscitis), which may complicate 10–15% of cases. Hematogenously seeded focal infection occurs most often in the skin, spleen, kidneys, skeletal system, and meninges. Arterial emboli, one-half of which precede the diagnosis, are clinically apparent in up to 50% of patients. Endocarditis caused by S. aureus, vegetations >10 mm in diameter (as measured by echocardiography), and infection involving the mitral valve, especially the anterior leaflet, are independently associated with an increased risk of embolization. Symptoms, pain, or ischemia-induced dysfunction relate to the organ or area suffering embolic arterial occlusion (e.g., kidney, spleen, bowel, extremity). Cerebrovascular emboli presenting as strokes or occasionally as encephalopathy complicate 15–35% of cases of endocarditis. Again, one-half of these events precede the diagnosis of endocarditis. The frequency of stroke is 8 per 1000 patient-days during the week prior to diagnosis; the figure falls to 4.8 and 1.7 per 1000 patient-days during the first and second weeks of effective antimicrobial therapy, respectively. This decline exceeds that which can be attributed to change in vegetation size. Only 3% of strokes occur after 1 week of effective therapy. Emboli occurring late during or after effective therapy do not in themselves constitute evidence of failed antimicrobial treatment.
# Chunk 2925
• Ceftriaxone (2 g IV q24h) or ampicillin (2 g IV q4h) or If patient is highly allergic to β-lactams, use doxycycline. doxycycline (100 mg q12h PO) for 6 weeks aDoses are for adults with normal renal function. Doses of gentamicin, streptomycin, and vancomycin must be adjusted for reduced renal function. Ideal body weight is used to calculate doses of gentamicin and streptomycin per kilogram (men = 50 kg + 2.3 kg per inch over 5 feet; women = 45.5 kg + 2.3 kg per inch over 5 feet). bMIC, ≤0.1 μg/mL. cVancomycin dose is based on actual body weight. Adjust for trough level of 10–15 μg/mL for streptococcal and enterococcal infections and 15–20 μg/mL for staphylococcal infections. dAminoglycosides should not be administered as single daily doses for enterococcal endocarditis and should be introduced as part of the initial treatment. Target peak and trough serum concentrations of divided-dose gentamicin 1 h after a 20to 30-min infusion or IM injection are ~3.5 μg/mL and ≤1 μg/mL, respectively; target peak and trough serum concentrations of streptomycin (timing as with gentamicin) are 20–35 μg/mL and <10 μg/mL, respectively. eNetilmicin (4 mg/kg qd, as a single dose) can be used in lieu of gentamicin. fMIC, >0.1 μg/mL and <0.5 μg/mL. gMIC, ≥0.5 μg/mL and <8 μg/mL. hAntimicrobial susceptibility must be evaluated; see text. iRifampin increases warfarin and dicumarol requirements for anticoagulation.
# Chunk 2926
Methicillin-susceptible S. aureus endocarditis that is uncomplicated and limited to the tricuspid or pulmonic valve can often be treated with a 2-week course that combines oxacillin or nafcillin (but not vancomycin) with gentamicin. However, patients with prolonged fever (≥5 days) during therapy or multiple septic pulmonary emboli should receive standard-duration therapy. Vancomycin plus gentamicin for 2 weeks as treatment for right-sided endocarditis caused by MRSA yields suboptimal results; thus this entity is treated for 4 weeks with vancomycin or daptomycin (6 mg/kg as a single daily dose).
# Chunk 2927
Blood cultures should be repeated daily until sterile in patients with endocarditis due to S. aureus or difficult-to-treat organisms, rechecked if there is recrudescent fever, and performed again 4–6 weeks after therapy to document cure. Blood cultures become sterile within 2 days after the start of appropriate therapy when infection is caused by viridans streptococci, enterococci, or HACEK organisms. In S. aureus endocarditis, β-lactam therapy results in sterile cultures in 3–5 days, whereas in MRSA endocarditis, positive cultures may persist for 7–9 days with vancomycin or daptomycin treatment. MRSA bacteremia persisting despite an adequate dosage of vancomycin may indicate infection due to a strain with reduced vancomycin susceptibility and therefore may point to a need for alternative therapy. When fever persists for 7 days despite appropriate antibiotic therapy, patients should be evaluated for paravalvular abscess, extracardiac abscesses (spleen, kidney), or complications (embolic events). Recrudescent fever raises the possibility of these complications but also of drug reactions or complications of hospitalization. Vegetations become smaller with effective therapy; however, 3 months after cure, 50% are unchanged and 25% are slightly larger.
# Chunk 2928
Indications • congestive Heart failure Moderate to severe refractory CHF caused by new or worsening valve dysfunction is the major indication for cardiac surgery. At 6 months of follow-up, patients with left-sided endocarditis and moderate to severe heart failure due to valve dysfunction who are treated medically have a 50% mortality rate, while among matched patients who undergo surgery the mortality rate is 15%. The survival benefit with surgery, which is most predictable among patients with the most weighty indications (propensity), is seen in both NVE and PVE. Surgery can relieve functional stenosis due to large vegetations or restore competence to damaged regurgitant valves by repair or replacement.
# Chunk 2929
Timing of Cardiac Surgery With the more life-threatening indications for surgery (valve dysfunction and severe CHF, paravalvular abscess, major prosthesis dehiscence), early surgery—i.e., during the initial week of therapy—is associated with a greater chance of survival than later surgery. With less compelling indications, surgery may reasonably be delayed to allow further treatment as well as improvement in overall health (Table 155-6). After 14 days of recommended antibiotic therapy, excised valves are culture-negative in 99% and 50% of patients with streptococcal and S. aureus endocarditis, 826 respectively. Recrudescent endocarditis on a new implanted prosthetic valve follows surgery for active NVE and PVE in 2% and 6–15% of patients, respectively. These frequencies do not justify the risk of an adverse outcome due to a delay in surgery, particularly in patients with severe heart failure, valve dysfunction, and uncontrolled staphylococcal infections. Delay is justified when infection is controlled and CHF is resolved with medical therapy. Neurologic complications of endocarditis may be exacerbated as a consequence of cardiac surgery. The risk of neurologic deterioration is related to the type of neurologic complication and the interval between the complication and surgery. Whenever feasible, cardiac surgery should be delayed for 2–3 weeks after a nonhemorrhagic embolic infarction and for 4 weeks after a cerebral hemorrhage. A ruptured mycotic aneurysm should be treated before cardiac surgery.
# Chunk 2930
Factors that can adversely affect outcome include older age, severe comorbid conditions and diabetes, delayed diagnosis, involvement of prosthetic valves or the aortic valve, an invasive (S. aureus) or antibiotic-resistant (P. aeruginosa, yeast) pathogen, intracardiac and major neurologic complications, and an association with health care. Death and poor outcome often are related not to failure of antibiotic therapy but rather to the interactions of comorbidities and endocarditis-related end-organ complications. In developed countries, overall survival rates are 80–85%; however, rates vary considerably among subpopulations of endocarditis patients. Survival rates for patients with NVE caused by viridans streptococci, HACEK organisms, or enterococci (susceptible to synergistic therapy) are 85–90%. For S. aureus NVE in patients who do not inject drugs, survival rates are 55–70%, whereas 85–90% of injection drug users survive this infection. PVE beginning within 2 months of valve replacement results in mortality rates of 40–50%, whereas rates are only 10–20% in later-onset cases.
# Chunk 2931
Protection against infection of the epidermis depends on the mechanical barrier afforded by the stratum corneum, since the epidermis itself is devoid of blood vessels (Fig. 156-1). Disruption of this layer by burns or bites, abrasions, foreign bodies, primary dermatologic disorders (e.g., herpes simplex, varicella, ecthyma gangrenosum), surgery, or vascular or pressure ulcer allows penetration of bacteria to the deeper structures. Similarly, the hair follicle can serve as a portal either for components of the normal flora (e.g., Staphylococcus) or for extrinsic bacteria (e.g., Pseudomonas in hot-tub folliculitis). Intracellular infection of the squamous epithelium with vesicle formation may arise from cutaneous inoculation, as in infection with herpes simplex virus (HSV) type 1; from the dermal capillary plexus, as in varicella and infections due to other viruses associated with viremia; or from cutaneous nerve roots, as in herpes zoster. Bacteria infecting the epidermis, such as Streptococcus pyogenes, may be translocated laterally to deeper structures via lymphatics, an event that results in the rapid superficial spread of erysipelas. Later, engorgement or obstruction of
# Chunk 2932
lymphatics causes flaccid edema of the epidermis, another characteristic of erysipelas.

The rich plexus of capillaries beneath the dermal papillae provides nutrition to the stratum germinativum, and physiologic responses of this plexus produce important clinical signs and symptoms. For example, infective vasculitis of the plexus results in petechiae, Osler’s nodes, Janeway lesions, and palpable purpura, which, if present, are important clues to the existence of endocarditis (Chap. 155). In addition, metastatic infection within this plexus can result in cutaneous manifestations of disseminated fungal infection (Chap. 240), gonococcal infection (Chap. 181), Salmonella infection (Chap. 190), Pseudomonas infection (i.e., ecthyma gangrenosum; Chap. 189), meningococcemia (Chap. 180), and staphylococcal infection (Chap. 172). The plexus also provides bacteria with access to the circulation, thereby facilitating local spread or bacteremia. The postcapillary venules of this plexus are a prominent site of polymorphonuclear leukocyte sequestration, diapedesis, and chemotaxis to the site of cutaneous infection.
# Chunk 2933
(Table 156-1) Vesicle formation due to infection is caused by viral proliferation within the epidermis. In varicella and variola, viremia precedes the onset of a diffuse centripetal rash that progresses from macules to vesicles, then to pustules, and finally to scabs over the course of 1–2 weeks. Vesicles of varicella have a “dewdrop” appearance and develop in crops randomly about the trunk, extremities, and face over 3–4 days. Herpes zoster occurs in a single dermatome; the appearance of vesicles is preceded by pain for several days. Zoster may occur in persons of any age but is most common among immunosuppressed individuals and elderly patients, whereas most cases of varicella occur in young children. Vesicles due to HSV are found on or around the
# Chunk 2934
(Table 156-1) Staphylococcal scalded-skin syndrome (SSSS) in neonates is caused by a toxin (exfoliatin) from phage group II S. aureus. SSSS must be distinguished from toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN), which occurs primarily in adults, is drug-induced, and is associated with a higher mortality rate. Punch biopsy with frozen section is useful in making this distinction since the cleavage plane is the stratum corneum in SSSS and the stratum germinativum in TEN (Fig. 156-1). Intravenous γ-globulin is a promising treatment for TEN. Necrotizing fasciitis and gas gangrene also induce bulla formation (see “Necrotizing Fasciitis,” below). Halophilic vibrio infection can be as aggressive and fulminant as necrotizing fasciitis; a helpful clue in its diagnosis is a history of exposure to waters of the Gulf of Mexico or the Atlantic seaboard or (in a patient with cirrhosis) the ingestion of raw seafood. The etiologic organism (Vibrio vulnificus) is highly susceptible to tetracycline.
# Chunk 2935
(Table 156-1) Impetigo contagiosa is caused by S. pyogenes, and bullous impetigo is due to S. aureus. Both skin lesions may have an early bullous stage but then appear as thick crusts with a golden-brown color. Epidemics of impetigo caused by MRSA have been reported. Streptococcal lesions are most common among children 2–5 years of age, and epidemics may occur in settings of poor hygiene, particularly among children in lower socioeconomic settings in tropical climates. It is important to recognize impetigo contagiosa because of its relationship to poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis. Rheumatic fever is not a complication of skin infection caused by S. pyogenes. Superficial dermatophyte infection (ringworm) can occur on any skin surface, and skin scrapings with KOH staining are diagnostic. Primary infections with dimorphic fungi such as Blastomyces dermatitidis and Sporothrix schenckii can initially present as crusted skin lesions resembling ringworm. Disseminated infection with Coccidioides immitis can also involve the skin, and biopsy and culture should be performed on crusted lesions in patients from endemic areas. Crusted nodular lesions caused by Mycobacterium chelonei have been described in HIVseropositive patients. Treatment with clarithromycin looks promising.
# Chunk 2936
Diffuse folliculitis occurs in two settings. Hot-tub folliculitis is caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa in waters that are insufficiently chlorinated and maintained at temperatures of 37–40°C. Infection is usually self-limited, although bacteremia and shock have been reported. Swimmer’s itch occurs when a skin surface is exposed to water infested with freshwater avian schistosomes. Warm water temperatures and alkaline pH are suitable for mollusks that serve as intermediate hosts between birds and humans. Free-swimming schistosomal cercariae readily penetrate human hair follicles or pores but quickly die and elicit a brisk allergic reaction, causing intense itching and erythema.
# Chunk 2937
P. aeruginosa causes three types of soft tissue infection: ecthyma gangrenosum in neutropenic patients, hot-tub folliculitis, and cellulitis following penetrating injury. Most commonly, P. aeruginosa is introduced into the deep tissues when a person steps on a nail. Treatment includes surgical inspection and drainage, particularly if the injury also involves bone or joint capsule. Choices for empirical treatment while antimicrobial susceptibility data are awaited include an aminoglycoside, a third-generation cephalosporin (ceftazidime, cefoperazone, or cefotaxime), a semisynthetic penicillin (ticarcillin, mezlocillin, or piperacillin), or a fluoroquinolone (although drugs of the last class are not indicated for the treatment of children <13 years old).
# Chunk 2938
See Also Diagnosis/Condition Primary Treatment Alternative Treatment Chap(s).

aPasteurella multocida, a species commonly associated with both dog and cat bites, is resistant to cephalexin, dicloxacillin, clindamycin, and erythromycin. Eikenella corrodens, a bacterium commonly associated with human bites, is resistant to clindamycin, penicillinase-resistant penicillins, and metronidazole but is sensitive to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and fluoroquinolones. bThe frequency of erythromycin resistance in group A Streptococcus is currently ~5% in the United States but has reached 70–100% in some other countries. Most, but not all, erythromycin-resistant group A streptococci are susceptible to clindamycin. Approximately 90% of Staphylococcus aureus strains are sensitive to clindamycin, but resistance—both intrinsic and inducible—is increasing. cSevere hospital-acquired S. aureus infections or community-acquired S. aureus infections that are not responding to the β-lactam antibiotics recommended in this table may be caused by methicillin-resistant strains, requiring a switch to vancomycin, daptomycin, or linezolid. dSome strains of methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) remain sensitive to tetracycline and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. Daptomycin (4 mg/kg IV q24h) or tigecycline (100-mg loading dose followed by 50 mg IV q12h) is an alternative treatment for MRSA.
# Chunk 2939
APPROACH TO THE PATIENT:

Aspiration of synovial fluid—an essential element in the evaluation of potentially infected joints—can be performed without difficulty in most cases by the insertion of a large-bore needle into the site of maximal fluctuance or tenderness or by the route of easiest access. Ultrasonography or fluoroscopy may be used to guide aspiration of difficult-to-localize effusions of the hip and, occasionally, the shoulder and other joints. Normal synovial fluid contains <180 cells (predominantly mononuclear cells) per microliter. Synovial cell counts averaging 100,000/μL (range, 25,000–250,000/μL), with >90% neutrophils, are characteristic of acute bacterial infections. Crystal-induced, rheumatoid, and other noninfectious inflammatory arthritides usually are associated with <30,000–50,000 cells/μL; cell counts of 10,000–30,000/μL, with 50–70% neutrophils and the remainder lymphocytes, are common in mycobacterial and fungal infections. Definitive diagnosis of an infectious process relies on identification of the pathogen in stained smears of synovial fluid, isolation of the pathogen from cultures of synovial fluid and blood, or detection of microbial nucleic acids and proteins by nucleic acid amplification (NAA)–based assays and immunologic techniques.
# Chunk 2940
Laboratory Findings Specimens of peripheral blood and synovial fluid should be obtained before antibiotics are administered. Blood cultures are positive in up to 50–70% of S. aureus infections but are less frequently positive in infections due to other organisms. The synovial fluid is turbid, serosanguineous, or frankly purulent. Gram-stained smears confirm the presence of large numbers of neutrophils. Levels of total protein and lactate dehydrogenase in synovial fluid are elevated, and the glucose level is depressed; however, these findings are not specific for infection, and measurement of these levels is not necessary for diagnosis. The synovial fluid should be examined for crystals, because gout and pseudogout can resemble septic arthritis clinically, and infection and crystal-induced disease occasionally occur together. Organisms are seen on synovial fluid smears in nearly three-quarters of infections with S. aureus and streptococci and in 30–50% of infections due to gram-negative and other bacteria. Cultures of synovial fluid are positive in >90% of cases. Inoculation of synovial fluid into bottles containing liquid media for blood cultures increases the yield of a culture, especially if the pathogen is a fastidious organism or the patient is taking an antibiotic. NAA-based assays for bacterial DNA, when available, can be useful for the diagnosis of partially treated or culture-negative bacterial arthritis.
# Chunk 2941
H. influenzae and by strains of Streptococcus pneumoniae that are resistant to penicillin are treated with cefotaxime or ceftriaxone for 2 weeks. Most enteric gram-negative infections can be cured in 3–4 weeks by a secondor third-generation cephalosporin given IV or by a fluoroquinolone such as levofloxacin (500 mg IV or PO every 24 h). P. aeruginosa infection should be treated for at least 2 weeks with a combination regimen composed of an aminoglycoside plus either an extended-spectrum penicillin such as mezlocillin (3 g IV every 4 h) or an antipseudomonal cephalosporin such as ceftazidime (1 g IV every 8 h). If tolerated, this regimen is continued for an additional 2 weeks; alternatively, a fluoroquinolone such as ciprofloxacin (750 mg PO twice daily) is given by itself or with the penicillin or cephalosporin in place of the aminoglycoside.
# Chunk 2942
Because it is difficult to isolate gonococci from synovial fluid and blood, specimens for culture should be obtained from potentially infected mucosal sites. NAA-based urine tests also may be positive. Cultures and Gram-stained smears of skin lesions are occasionally positive. All specimens for culture should be plated onto Thayer-Martin agar directly or in special transport media at the bedside and transferred promptly to the microbiology laboratory in an atmosphere of 5% CO2, as generated in a candle jar. NAA-based assays are extremely sensitive in detecting gonococcal DNA in synovial fluid. A dramatic alleviation of symptoms within 12–24 h after the initiation of appropriate antibiotic therapy supports a clinical diagnosis of the DGI syndrome if cultures are negative.
# Chunk 2943
Initial treatment consists of ceftriaxone (1 g IV or IM every 24 h) to cover possible penicillin-resistant organisms. Once local and systemic signs are clearly resolving, the 7-day course of therapy can be completed with an oral fluoroquinolone such as ciprofloxacin (500 mg twice daily) if the organism is known to be susceptible. If penicillin-susceptible organisms are isolated, amoxicillin (500 mg three times daily) may be used. Suppurative arthritis usually responds to needle aspiration of involved joints and 7–14 days of antibiotic treatment. Arthroscopic lavage or arthrotomy is rarely required. Patients with DGI should be treated for Chlamydia trachomatis infection unless this infection is ruled out by appropriate testing.
# Chunk 2944
Lyme arthritis generally responds well to therapy. A regimen of oral doxycycline (100 mg twice daily for 30 days), oral amoxicillin (500 mg four times daily for 30 days), or parenteral ceftriaxone (2 g/d for 2–4 weeks) is recommended. Patients who do not respond to a total of 2 months of oral therapy or 1 month of parenteral therapy are unlikely to benefit from additional antibiotic therapy and are treated with anti-inflammatory agents or synovectomy. Failure of therapy is associated with host features such as the human leukocyte antigen DR4 (HLA-DR4) genotype, persistent reactivity to OspA (outer-surface protein A), and the presence of hLFA-1 (human leukocyte function–associated antigen 1), which cross-reacts with OspA.
# Chunk 2945
Aspiration of the involved joint yields fluid with an average cell count of 20,000/μL, with ~50% neutrophils. Acid-fast staining of the fluid yields positive results in fewer than one-third of cases, and cultures are positive in 80%. Culture of synovial tissue taken at biopsy is positive in ~90% of cases and shows granulomatous inflammation in most. NAA methods can shorten the time to diagnosis to 1 or 2 days. Radiographs reveal peripheral erosions at the points of synovial attachment, periarticular osteopenia, and eventually joint-space narrowing. Therapy for tuberculous arthritis is the same as that for tuberculous pulmonary disease, requiring the administration of multiple agents for 6–9 months. Therapy is more prolonged in immunosuppressed individuals such as those infected with HIV.
# Chunk 2946
Viruses produce arthritis by infecting synovial tissue during systemic infection or by provoking an immunologic reaction that involves joints. As many as 50% of women report persistent arthralgias, and 10% report frank arthritis within 3 days of the rash that follows natural infection with rubella virus and within 2–6 weeks after receipt of live-virus vaccine. Episodes of symmetric inflammation of fingers, wrists, and knees uncommonly recur for >1 year, but a syndrome of chronic fatigue, low-grade fever, headaches, and myalgias can persist for months or years. IV immunoglobulin has been helpful in selected cases. Self-limited monarticular or migratory polyarthritis may develop within 2 weeks of the parotitis of mumps; this sequela is more common among men than among women. Approximately
# Chunk 2947
About 2 weeks before the onset of jaundice, up to 10% of persons with acute hepatitis B develop an immune complex–mediated, serum sickness–like reaction with maculopapular rash, urticaria, fever, and arthralgias. Less common developments include symmetric arthritis involving the hands, wrists, elbows, or ankles and morning stiffness that resembles a flare of rheumatoid arthritis. Symptoms resolve at the time jaundice develops. Many persons with chronic hepatitis C infection report persistent arthralgia or arthritis, both in the presence and in the absence of cryoglobulinemia.
# Chunk 2948
Treatment includes surgery and high doses of parenteral antibiotics, which are given for 4–6 weeks because bone is usually involved. In most cases, the prosthesis must be replaced to cure the infection. Implantation of a new prosthesis is best delayed for several weeks or months because relapses of infection occur most commonly within this time frame. In some cases, reimplantation is not possible, and the patient must manage without a joint, with a fused joint, or even with amputation. Cure of infection without removal of the prosthesis is occasionally possible in cases that are due to streptococci or pneumococci and that lack radiologic evidence of loosening of the prosthesis. In these cases, antibiotic therapy must be initiated within several days of the onset of infection, and the joint should be drained vigorously by open arthrotomy or arthroscopically. In selected patients who prefer to avoid the high morbidity rate associated with joint removal and reimplantation, suppression of the infection with antibiotics may be a reasonable goal. A high cure rate with retention of the prosthesis has been reported when the combination of oral rifampin and ciprofloxacin is given for 3–6 months to persons with staphylococcal prosthetic joint infection of short duration. This approach, which is based on the ability of rifampin to kill organisms adherent to foreign material and in the stationary growth phase, requires confirmation in prospective trials.
# Chunk 2949
Vertebral osteomyelitis is typically classified as pyogenic or nonpyogenic. However, this distinction is arbitrary because, in “nonpyogenic” cases (tuberculous, brucellar), macroscopic pus formation (caseous necrosis, abscess) is quite common. A more accurate scheme is to classify cases as acute or subacute/chronic. Whereas the micro-839 biologic spectrum of acute cases is similar in different parts of the world, the spectrum of subacute/chronic cases varies according to the geographic region. The great majority of cases are monomicrobial in etiology. Of episodes of acute vertebral osteomyelitis, 40–50% are caused by Staphylococcus aureus, 12% by streptococci, and 20% by gram-negative bacilli—mainly Escherichia coli (9%) and Pseudomonas aeruginosa (6%). Subacute vertebral osteomyelitis is typically caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis or Brucella species in regions where these microorganisms are endemic. Osteomyelitis due to viridans streptococci also has a subacute presentation; these infections most often occur as secondary foci in patients with endocarditis. In vertebral osteomyelitis due to Candida species, the diagnosis is often delayed by several weeks; this etiology should be suspected in IV drug users who do not use sterile paraphernalia. In implant-associated spinal osteomyelitis, coagulase-negative staphylococci and P. acnes—which, in the absence of an implant, are generally considered contaminants—typically cause low-grade (chronic) infections. As an exception, coagulasenegative staphylococci can cause native spinal osteomyelitis in cases of prolonged bacteremia (e.g., in patients with infected pacemaker electrodes or implanted vascular catheters that are not promptly removed).
# Chunk 2950
Leukocytosis and neutrophilia have low levels of diagnostic sensitivity (only 65% and 40%, respectively). In contrast, an increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate or C-reactive protein (CRP) level has been reported in 98% and 100% of cases, respectively; thus, these tests are helpful in excluding vertebral osteomyelitis. The fraction of blood cultures that yield positive results depends heavily on whether the patient has been pretreated with antibiotics; across studies, the range is from 30% to 78%. In view of this low rate of positive blood culture after antibiotic treatment, such therapy should be withheld until microbial growth is proven unless the patient has sepsis syndrome. In patients with negative blood cultures, CT-guided or open biopsy is needed. Whether a CT-guided biopsy with a negative result is repeated or followed by 840 open biopsy depends on the experience of personnel at the specific center. Bone samples should be cultured for aerobic, anaerobic, and fungal agents, with a portion of the sample sent for histopathologic study. In cases with a subacute/chronic presentation, a suggestive history, or a granuloma detected during histopathologic analysis, mycobacteria and brucellae also should be sought. When blood and tissue cultures are negative despite suggestive histopathology, broad-range polymerase chain reaction analysis of biopsy specimens or aspirated pus should be considered. This technique allows detection of unusual pathogens such as Tropheryma whipplei. Given that signs and symptoms of osteomyelitis are nonspecific, the clinical differential diagnosis of febrile back pain is broad, including pyelonephritis, pancreatitis, and viral syndromes. In addition, multiple noninfectious pathologies of the vertebral column, such as osteoporotic fracture, seronegative spondylitis (ankylosing spondylitis, psoriasis, reactive arthritis, enteropathic arthritis), and spinal stenosis must be considered. Imaging procedures are the most important tools not only for the diagnosis of vertebral osteomyelitis but also for the detection of pyogenic complications and alternative conditions (e.g., bone metastases or osteoporotic fractures). Plain radiography is a reasonable first step in evaluating patients without neurologic symptoms and may reveal an alternative diagnosis. Because of its low sensitivity, plain radiography generally is not helpful in acute osteomyelitis, but it can be useful in subacute or chronic cases. The gold standard is MRI, which should be performed expeditiously in patients with neurologic impairment in order to rule out a herniated disk or to detect pyogenic complications in a timely manner. Even if the pathologic findings on MRI suggest vertebral osteomyelitis, alternative diagnoses should be considered, especially when blood cultures are negative. The most common alternative diagnosis is erosive osteochondrosis. Septic bone necrosis, gouty spondylodiskitis, and erosive diskovertebral lesions (Andersson lesions) in ankylosing spondylitis may likewise mimic vertebral osteomyelitis. CT is less sensitive than MRI but may be helpful in guiding a percutaneous biopsy. In the future, positron-emission tomography (PET) with 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose, which has a high degree of diagnostic accuracy, may be an alternative imaging procedure when MRI is contraindicated. 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose PET should be considered for patients with implants and patients in whom several foci are suspected.
# Chunk 2951
Microorganism Antimicrobial Agenta (Dose, Route)

Staphylococcus spp. Recommendation for initial treatment phase (2 weeks with implant) Methicillin-susceptible Rifampin (450 mg PO/IV q12hb)
# Chunk 2952
FIGURE 158-1 CT scan of acute vertebral osteomyelitis (L1/L2) due to Staphylococcus aureus in a 64-year-old man. Low-grade fever persisted despite appropriate IV antibiotic therapy. The scan revealed a psoas abscess on the right side.
# Chunk 2953
FIGURE 158-2 A 42-year-old man who had had a malleolar frac-ture 6 weeks previously had persistent pain and slight inflam-mation after orthopedic repair. His infection was treated with oral antibiotics without debridement surgery. This insufficient manage-ment of an implant-associated Staphylococcus aureus infection was complicated by a sinus tract.
# Chunk 2954
P. acnes causes up to one-third of episodes of periprosthetic shoulder infection.

PJI is traditionally classified as early (<3 months after implantation), delayed (3–24 months after surgery), or late (>2 years after implantation). For therapeutic decision-making (see below), it is more useful to classify PJI as (1) acute hematogenous PJI with <3 weeks of symptoms, (2) early postinterventional PJI manifesting within 1 month after surgery, and (3) chronic PJI with symptom duration of >3 weeks.
# Chunk 2955
FIGURE 158-3 Early periprosthetic joint infection of the left hip caused by group B streptococci in a 68-year-old woman.
# Chunk 2956
Blood tests such as the measurement of CRP (elevated levels, ≥10 mg/L) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (elevated rates, ≥30 mm/h) are sensitive (91–97%) but not specific (70–78%). Synovial fluid cell counts are ~90% sensitive and specific, with threshold values of 1700 leukocytes/μL in periprosthetic knee infection and 4200 leukocytes/μL in periprosthetic hip infection. During debridement surgery, at least three but optimally six tissue samples should be obtained for culture and histopathology. If implant material (modular parts, screws, or the prosthesis) is removed, sonication of this material followed by culture and/or use of molecular methods to examine the sonicate fluid allows the detection of microorganisms in biofilms.
# Chunk 2957
Poststernotomy osteomyelitis is generally caused by S. aureus (40–50% of cases), coagulase-negative staphylococci (15–30%), enterococci (5–12%), or gram-negative bacilli (15–25%). Fungal infections caused by Candida species also play a role. The fact that ~20% of cases are polymicrobial is indicative of exogenous superinfection during therapy. Hematogenous sternal osteomyelitis is caused most commonly by
# Chunk 2958
FIGURE 158-4 Sternal osteomyelitis caused by Staphylococcus epi-dermidis 5 weeks after sternotomy for aortocoronary bypass in a 72-year-old man.
# Chunk 2959
The correlation between cultures from bone biopsy and those from wound swabs or even deep soft tissue punctures is poor. Consistent results have been found in only 13–43% of cases in various studies. The 845 correlation is better when S. aureus is isolated (40–50%) than when anaerobes (20–35%), gram-negative bacilli (20–30%), or coagulasenegative staphylococci (0–20%) are identified. When only bone biopsy samples are considered, the leading pathogens are S. aureus (30–40%), anaerobes (10–20%), and various gram-negative bacilli (30–40%). The precise distribution depends on whether the patient already has been treated with antibiotics. Anaerobes are especially prevalent in chronic wounds. Pretreatment typically selects for P. aeruginosa or enterococci.
# Chunk 2960
As mentioned above, correlation between cultures of bone and those of wound swabs or wound punctures is poor. Antibiotic treatment should be based on bone culture. If no bone biopsy is performed, empirical therapy chosen in light of the most common infecting agents and the type of clinical syndrome should be given. Wound debridement combined with a 4to 6-week course of antibiotics has been shown to render amputation unnecessary in about two-thirds of patients. According to the 2012 Infectious Diseases Society of America Clinical Practice Guideline for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Diabetic Foot Infections, the following management strategies should be considered. If a foot ulcer is clinically infected, prompt empirical antimicrobial therapy may prevent progression to osteomyelitis. When the risk of methicillin-resistant S. aureus is considered high, an agent active against these strains (e.g., vancomycin) should be chosen. If the patient has not recently received antibiotics, the spectrum of the selected antibiotic must include gram-positive cocci (e.g., clindamycin, ampicillin-sulbactam). If the patient has received antibiotics within the past month, the spectrum of empirical antibiotics should include gram-negative bacilli (e.g., clindamycin plus a fluoroquinolone). If the patient has risk factors for Pseudomonas infection (previous colonization, residence in a warm climate, frequent exposure of the foot to water), an empirical antipseudomonal agent (e.g., piperacillin-tazobactam, cefepime) is indicated. If osteomyelitis is suspected either on clinical grounds (probe to bone) or on the basis of imaging procedures (MRI), bone biopsy should be performed. If not all infected bone is surgically removed, the patient should be treated for 4–6 weeks in line with the identified pathogen(s) and their susceptibility. Treatment should initially be given by the IV route. Whether therapy can later be administered by the oral route depends on the bioavailability of oral drugs that cover the infecting agents. If dead bone cannot be removed, longterm therapy (at least 3 months) should be considered. In such cases, cure of osteomyelitis is usually the exception, and repetitive suppressive treatment may be needed.
# Chunk 2961
846 Intraabdominal Infections and Abscesses Miriam Baron Barshak, Dennis L. Kasper Intraperitoneal infections generally arise because a normal anatomic barrier is disrupted. This disruption may occur when the appendix, a 159 diverticulum, or an ulcer ruptures; when the bowel wall is weakened by ischemia, tumor, or inflammation (e.g., in inflammatory bowel disease); or with adjacent inflammatory processes, such as pancreatitis or pelvic inflammatory disease, in which enzymes (in the former case) or organisms (in the latter) may leak into the peritoneal cavity. Whatever the inciting event, once inflammation develops and organisms usually contained within the bowel or another organ enter the normally sterile peritoneal space, a predictable series of events takes place. Intraabdominal infections occur in two stages: peritonitis and—if the patient survives this stage and goes untreated—abscess formation. The types of microorganisms predominating in each stage of infection are responsible for the pathogenesis of disease.
# Chunk 2962
Treatment for PBP is directed at the isolate from blood or peritoneal fluid. Gram’s staining of peritoneal fluid often gives negative results in PBP. Therefore, until culture results become available, therapy should cover gram-negative aerobic bacilli and gram-positive cocci. Third-generation cephalosporins such as cefotaxime (2 g q8h, administered IV) provide reasonable initial coverage in moderately ill patients. Broad-spectrum antibiotics, such as penicillin/ β-lactamase inhibitor combinations (e.g., piperacillin/tazobactam, 3.375 g q6h IV for adults with normal renal function) or ceftriaxone (2 g q24h IV), are also options. Broader empirical coverage aimed at resistant hospital-acquired gram-negative bacteria (e.g., treatment with carbapenem) may be appropriate for nosocomially acquired PBP until culture results become available. Empirical coverage for anaerobes is not necessary. A mortality benefit from albumin (1.5 g/ kg of body weight within 6 h of detection and 1.0 g/kg on day 3) has been demonstrated for patients who present with serum creatinine levels ≥1 mg/dL, blood urea nitrogen levels ≥30 mg/dL, or total bilirubin levels ≥4 mg/dL but not for patients who do not meet these criteria. After the infecting organism is identified, therapy should be narrowed to target the specific pathogen. Patients with PBP usually respond within 72 h to appropriate antibiotic therapy. Antimicrobial treatment can be administered for as little as 5 days if rapid improve-847 ment occurs and blood cultures are negative, but a course of up to 2 weeks may be required for patients with bacteremia and for those whose improvement is slow. Persistence of WBCs in the ascitic fluid after therapy should prompt a search for additional diagnoses.
# Chunk 2963
Prevention • primary prevention Several observational studies and a meta-analysis raise the concern that proton pump inhibitor therapy may increase the risk of PBP. No prospective studies have yet addressed whether avoidance of such therapy may prevent PBP. Nonselective beta blockers may prevent secondary bacterial peritonitis. A 2012 guideline from the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases recommends chronic antibiotic prophylaxis with a regimen described in the next section for patients who are at highest risk for PBP—that is, those with an ascitic-fluid total protein level <1.5 g/ dL along with impaired renal function (creatinine, ≥1.2 mg/dL; blood urea nitrogen, ≥25 mg/dL; or serum sodium, ≤130 mg/dL) and/or liver failure (Child-Pugh score, ≥9; and bilirubin, ≥3 mg/dL). A 7-day course of antibiotic prophylaxis is recommended for patients with cirrhosis and gastrointestinal bleeding.
# Chunk 2964
secondary prevention PBP has a high rate of recurrence. Up to 70% of patients experience a recurrence within 1 year. Antibiotic prophylaxis is recommended for patients with a history of PBP to reduce this rate to <20% and improve short-term survival rates. Prophylactic regimens for adults with normal renal function include fluoroquinolones (ciprofloxacin, 750 mg weekly; norfloxacin, 400 mg/d) or trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole (one double-strength tablet daily). However, longterm administration of broad-spectrum antibiotics in this setting has been shown to increase the risk of severe staphylococcal infections.
# Chunk 2965
The clinical presentation of CAPD peritonitis resembles that of secondary peritonitis in that diffuse pain and peritoneal signs are common. The dialysate is usually cloudy and contains >100 WBCs/μL, >50% of which are neutrophils. However, the number of cells depends in part on dwell time. According to a guideline from the International Society for Peritoneal Dialysis (2010), for patients undergoing automated peritoneal dialysis who present during their nighttime treatment and whose dwell time is much shorter than with CAPD, the clinician should use the percentage of PMNs rather than the absolute number of WBCs to diagnose peritonitis. As the normal peritoneum has very few PMNs, a proportion above 50% is strong evidence of peritonitis even if the absolute WBC count does not reach 100/μL. Meanwhile, patients undergoing automated peritoneal dialysis without a daytime exchange who present with abdominal pain may have no fluid to withdraw, in which case 1 L of dialysate should be infused and permitted to dwell a minimum of 1–2 h, then drained, examined for turbidity, and sent for cell count with differential and culture. The differential (with a shortened dwell time) may be more useful than the absolute WBC count. In equivocal cases or in patients with systemic or abdominal symptoms in whom the effluent appears clear, a second exchange is performed, with a dwell time of at least 2 h. Clinical judgment should guide initiation of therapy.
# Chunk 2966
S. aureus, coagulase-negative Staphylococcus, and gram-negative bacilli until the results of cultures become available. Guidelines suggest that agents should be chosen on the basis of local experience with resistant organisms. In some centers, a first-generation cephalosporin such as cefazolin (for gram-positive bacteria) and a fluoroquinolone or a third-generation cephalosporin such as ceftazidime (for gram-negative bacteria) may be reasonable; in areas with high rates of infection with methicillin-resistant S. aureus, vancomycin should be used instead of cefazolin, and gram-negative coverage may need to be broadened—e.g., with an aminoglycoside, ceftazidime, cefepime, or carbapenem. Broad coverage including vancomycin should be particularly considered for toxic patients and for those with exit-site infections. Vancomycin should also be included in the regimen if the patient has a history of colonization or infection with methicillin-resistant S. aureus or has a history of severe allergy to penicillins and cephalosporins. Loading doses are administered intraperitoneally; doses depend on the dialysis method and the patient’s renal function. Antibiotics are given either continuously (i.e., with each exchange) or intermittently (i.e., once daily, with the dose allowed to remain in the peritoneal cavity for at least 6 h). If the patient is severely ill, IV antibiotics should be added at doses appropriate for the patient’s degree of renal failure. The clinical response to an empirical treatment regimen should be rapid; if the patient has not responded after 48–96 h of treatment, new samples should be collected for cell counts and cultures, and catheter removal should be considered. For patients who lack exit-site or tunnel infection, the typical duration of antibiotic treatment is 14 days. For patients with exit-site or tunnel infection, catheter removal should be considered, and a longer duration of antibiotic therapy (up to 21 days) may be appropriate. In fungal infections, the catheter should be removed immediately.
# Chunk 2967
Clinical Presentation Of all intraabdominal abscesses, 74% are intra-peritoneal or retroperitoneal and are not visceral. Most intraperitoneal abscesses result from fecal spillage from a colonic source, such as an inflamed appendix. Abscesses can also arise from other processes. They usually form within weeks of the development of peritonitis and may be found in a variety of locations from omentum to mesentery, pelvis to psoas muscles, and subphrenic space to a visceral organ such as the liver, where they may develop either on the surface of the organ or within it. Periappendiceal and diverticular abscesses occur commonly. Diverticular abscesses are least likely to rupture. Infections of the female genital tract and pancreatitis are also among the more 849 common causative events. When abscesses occur in the female genital tract—either as a primary infection (e.g., tuboovarian abscess) or as an infection extending into the pelvic cavity or peritoneum—B. fragilis figures prominently among the organisms isolated. B. fragilis is not found in large numbers in the normal vaginal flora. For example, it is encountered less commonly in pelvic inflammatory disease and endometritis without an associated abscess. In pancreatitis with leakage of damaging pancreatic enzymes, inflammation is prominent. Therefore, clinical findings such as fever, leukocytosis, and even abdominal pain do not distinguish pancreatitis itself from complications such as pancreatic pseudocyst, pancreatic abscess (Chap. 371), or intraabdominal collections of pus. Especially in cases of necrotizing pancreatitis, in which the incidence of local pancreatic infection may be as high as 30%, needle aspiration under CT guidance is performed to sample fluid for culture. Many centers prescribe preemptive antibiotics for patients with necrotizing pancreatitis. Imipenem is frequently used for this purpose because it reaches high tissue levels in the pancreas (although it is not unique in this regard). Recent randomized controlled studies have not demonstrated a benefit from this practice, and some guidelines no longer recommend preemptive antibiotics for patients with acute pancreatitis. If needle aspiration yields infected fluid in the setting of acute necrotizing pancreatitis, antibiotic treatment is appropriate in conjunction with surgical and/or percutaneous drainage of infected material. Infected pseudocysts that occur remotely from acute pancreatitis are unlikely to be associated with significant amounts of necrotic tissue and may be treated with either surgical or percutaneous catheter drainage in conjunction with appropriate antibiotic therapy. Diagnosis Scanning procedures have considerably facilitated the diagnosis of intraabdominal abscesses. Abdominal CT probably has the highest yield, although ultrasonography is particularly useful for the right upper quadrant, kidneys, and pelvis. Both indium-labeled WBCs and gallium tend to localize in abscesses and may be useful in finding a collection. Because gallium is taken up in the bowel, indium-labeled WBCs may have a slightly greater yield for abscesses near the bowel. Neither indium-labeled WBC nor gallium scans serve as a basis for a definitive diagnosis, however; both need to be followed by other, more specific studies, such as CT, if an area of possible abnormality is identified. Abscesses contiguous with or contained within diverticula are particularly difficult to diagnose with scanning procedures. Although barium should not be injected if a perforation is suspected, a barium enema occasionally may detect a diverticular abscess not diagnosed by other procedures. If one study is negative, a second study sometimes reveals a collection. Although exploratory laparotomy has been less commonly used since the advent of CT, this procedure still must be undertaken on occasion if an abscess is strongly suspected on clinical grounds.
# Chunk 2968
Fever is the most common presenting sign of liver abscess. Some patients, particularly those with associated disease of the biliary tract, have symptoms and signs localized to the right upper quadrant, including pain, guarding, punch tenderness, and even rebound tenderness. Nonspecific symptoms, such as chills, anorexia, weight loss, nausea, and vomiting, may also develop. Only 50% of patients with liver abscesses, however, have hepatomegaly, right-upper-quadrant tenderness, or jaundice; thus, one-half of patients have no symptoms or signs to direct attention to the liver. Fever of unknown origin may be the only manifestation of liver abscess, especially in the elderly. Diagnostic studies of the abdomen, especially the right upper quadrant, should be a part of any workup for fever of unknown origin. The single most reliable laboratory finding is an elevated serum concentration of alkaline phosphatase, which is documented in 70% of patients with liver abscesses. Other tests of liver function may yield normal results, but 50% of patients have elevated serum levels of bilirubin, and 48% have elevated concentrations of aspartate aminotransferase. Other laboratory findings include leukocytosis in 77% of patients, anemia (usually normochromic, normocytic) in 50%, and hypoalbuminemia in 33%. Concomitant bacteremia is found in one-third to one-half of patients. A liver abscess is sometimes suggested by chest radiography, especially if a new elevation of the right hemidiaphragm is seen; other suggestive findings include a right basilar infiltrate and a right pleural effusion.
# Chunk 2969
Organisms recovered from liver abscesses vary with the source. In liver infection arising from the biliary tree, enteric gram-negative aerobic bacilli and enterococci are common isolates. Klebsiella pneumoniae liver abscess has been well described in Southeast Asia for more than 20 years and has become an emerging syndrome in North America and elsewhere. These community-acquired infections have been linked to a virulent hypermucoviscous K. pneumoniae phenotype and to a specific genotype. The typical syndrome includes liver abscess, bacteremia, and metastatic infection. Ampicillin/amoxicillin therapy started within the previous 30 days has been associated with increased risk for this syndrome, presumably because of selection for the causative strain. Unless previous surgery has been performed, anaerobes are not generally involved in liver abscesses arising from biliary infections. In contrast, in liver abscesses arising from pelvic and other intraperitoneal sources, a mixed flora including both aerobic and anaerobic species is common; B. fragilis is the species most frequently isolated. With hematogenous spread of infection, usually only a single organism is encountered; this species may be S. aureus or a streptococcal species such as one in the Streptococcus milleri group. Results of cultures obtained from drain sites are not reliable for defining the etiology of infections. Liver abscesses may also be caused by Candida species; such abscesses usually follow fungemia in patients receiving chemotherapy for cancer and often present when PMNs return after a period of neutropenia. Amebic liver abscesses are not an uncommon problem (Chap. 247). Amebic serologic testing gives positive results in >95% of cases. In addition, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing has been used in recent years. Negative results from these studies help to exclude this diagnosis.
# Chunk 2970
Although ~50% of patients with splenic abscesses have abdominal pain, the pain is localized to the left upper quadrant in only one-half of these cases. Splenomegaly is found in ~50% of cases. Fever and leukocytosis are generally present; the development of fever preceded diagnosis by an average of 20 days in one series. Left-sided chest findings may include abnormalities to auscultation, and chest radiographic findings may include an infiltrate or a left-sided pleural effusion. CT scan of the abdomen has been the most sensitive diagnostic tool. Ultrasonography can yield the diagnosis but is less sensitive. Liver-spleen scan or gallium scan may also be useful. Streptococcal species are the most common bacterial isolates from splenic abscesses, followed by S. aureus—presumably reflecting the associated endocarditis. An increase in the prevalence of gram-negative aerobic isolates from splenic abscesses has been reported; these organisms often derive from a urinary tract focus, with associated bacteremia, or from another intraabdominal source. Salmonella species are seen fairly commonly, especially in patients with sickle cell hemoglobinopathy. Anaerobic species accounted for only 5% of isolates in the largest collected series, but the reporting of a number of “sterile abscesses” may indicate that optimal techniques for the isolation of anaerobes were not used.
# Chunk 2971
Perinephric and Renal Abscesses Perinephric and renal abscesses are 851 not common. The former accounted for only ~0.02% of hospital admissions and the latter for ~0.2% in Altemeier’s series of 540 intraabdominal abscesses. Before antibiotics became available, most renal and perinephric abscesses were hematogenous in origin, usually complicating prolonged bacteremia, with S. aureus most commonly recovered. Now, in contrast, >75% of perinephric and renal abscesses arise from a urinary tract infection. Infection ascends from the bladder to the kidney, with pyelonephritis preceding abscess development. Bacteria may directly invade the renal parenchyma from medulla to cortex. Local vascular channels within the kidney may also facilitate the transport of organisms. Areas of abscess developing within the parenchyma may rupture into the perinephric space. The kidneys and adrenal glands are surrounded by a layer of perirenal fat that, in turn, is surrounded by Gerota’s fascia, which extends superiorly to the diaphragm and inferiorly to the pelvic fat. Abscesses extending into the perinephric space may track through Gerota’s fascia into the psoas or transversalis muscles, into the anterior peritoneal cavity, superiorly to the subdiaphragmatic space, or inferiorly to the pelvis. Of the risk factors that have been associated with the development of perinephric abscesses, the most important is concomitant nephrolithiasis obstructing urinary flow. Of patients with perinephric abscess, 20–60% have renal stones. Other structural abnormalities of the urinary tract, prior urologic surgery, trauma, and diabetes mellitus have also been identified as risk factors.
# Chunk 2972
The organisms most frequently encountered in perinephric and renal abscesses are E. coli, Proteus species, and Klebsiella species. E. coli, the aerobic species most commonly found in the colonic flora, seems to have unique virulence properties in the urinary tract, including factors promoting adherence to uroepithelial cells. The urease of Proteus species splits urea, thereby creating a more alkaline and more hospitable environment for bacterial proliferation. Proteus species are frequently found in association with large struvite stones caused by the precipitation of magnesium ammonium sulfate in an alkaline environment. These stones serve as a nidus for recurrent urinary tract infection. Although a single bacterial species is usually recovered from a perinephric or renal abscess, multiple species may also be found. If a urine culture is not contaminated with periurethral flora and is found to contain more than one organism, a perinephric abscess or renal abscess should be considered in the differential diagnosis. Urine cultures may also be polymicrobial in cases of bladder diverticulum.
# Chunk 2973
The presentation of perinephric and renal abscesses is quite nonspecific. Flank pain and abdominal pain are common. At least 50% of patients are febrile. Pain may be referred to the groin or leg, particularly with extension of infection. The diagnosis of perinephric abscess, like that of splenic abscess, is frequently delayed, and the mortality rate in some series is appreciable, although lower than in the past. Perinephric or renal abscess should be most seriously considered when a patient presents with symptoms and signs of pyelonephritis and remains febrile after 4 or 5 days of treatment. Moreover, when a urine culture yields a polymicrobial flora, when a patient is known to have renal stones, or when fever and pyuria coexist with a sterile urine culture, these diagnoses should be entertained.
# Chunk 2974
Renal ultrasonography and abdominal CT are the most useful diagnostic modalities. If a renal or perinephric abscess is diagnosed, nephrolithiasis should be excluded, especially when a high urinary pH suggests the presence of a urea-splitting organism.
# Chunk 2975
S. aureus is most likely to be isolated when a psoas abscess arises from hematogenous spread or a contiguous focus of osteomyelitis; a mixed enteric flora is the most likely etiology when the abscess has an intra-abdominal or pelvic source. Patients with psoas abscesses frequently present with fever, lower abdominal or back pain, or pain referred to the hip or knee. CT is the most useful diagnostic technique.
# Chunk 2976
Dysentery may result not only from the production of cytotoxins but also from bacterial invasion and destruction of intestinal mucosal cells. Infections due to Shigella and enteroinvasive E. coli are characterized by the organisms’ invasion of mucosal epithelial cells, intraepithelial multiplication, and subsequent spread to adjacent cells. Salmonella causes inflammatory diarrhea by invasion of the bowel mucosa but generally is not associated with the destruction of enterocytes or the full clinical syndrome of dysentery. Salmonella typhi and Yersinia enterocolitica can penetrate intact intestinal mucosa, multiply intracellularly in Peyer’s patches and intestinal lymph nodes, and then disseminate through the bloodstream to cause enteric fever, a syndrome characterized by fever, headache, relative bradycardia, abdominal pain, splenomegaly, and leukopenia.
# Chunk 2977
Key to superscripts: 1. Diarrhea lasting >2 weeks is generally defined as chronic; in such cases, many of the causes of acute diarrhea are much less likely, and a new spectrum of causes needs to be considered. 2. Fever often implies invasive disease, although fever and diarrhea may also result from infection outside the gastrointestinal tract, as in malaria. 3. Stools that contain blood or mucus indicate ulceration of the large bowel. Bloody stools without fecal leukocytes should alert the laboratory to the possibility of infection with Shiga toxin–producing enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli. Bulky white stools suggest a small-intestinal process that is causing malabsorption. Profuse “rice-water” stools suggest cholera or a similar toxigenic process. 4. Frequent stools over a given period can provide the first warning of impending dehydration. 5. Abdominal pain may be most severe in inflammatory processes like those due to Shigella, Campylobacter, and necrotizing toxins. Painful abdominal muscle cramps, caused by electrolyte loss, can develop in severe cases of cholera. Bloating is common in giardiasis. An appendicitis-like syndrome should prompt a culture for Yersinia enterocolitica with cold enrichment. 6. Tenesmus (painful rectal spasms with a strong urge to defecate but little passage of stool) may be a feature of cases with proctitis, as in shigellosis or amebiasis. 7. Vomiting implies an acute infection (e.g., a toxin-mediated illness or food poisoning) but can also be prominent in a variety of systemic illnesses (e.g., malaria) and in intestinal obstruction. 8. Asking patients whether anyone else they know is sick is a more efficient means of identifying a common source than is constructing a list of recently eaten foods. If a common source seems likely, specific foods can be investigated. See text for a discussion of bacterial food poisoning. 9. Current antibiotic therapy or a recent history of treatment suggests Clostridium difficile diarrhea (Chap. 161). Stop antibiotic treatment if possible and consider tests for C. difficile toxins. Antibiotic use may increase the risk of chronic intestinal carriage following salmonellosis. 10. See text (and Chap. 149) for a discussion of traveler’s diarrhea.
# Chunk 2978
Central and South America each year, 20–50% experience a sudden onset of abdominal cramps, anorexia, and watery diarrhea; thus traveler’s diarrhea is the most common travel-related infectious illness (Chap. 149). The time of onset is usually 3 days to 2 weeks after the traveler’s arrival in a resource-poor area; most cases begin within the first 3–5 days. The illness is generally self-limited, lasting 1–5 days. The high rate of diarrhea among travelers to underdeveloped areas is related to the ingestion of contaminated food or water.
# Chunk 2979
Bacterial disease caused by an enterotoxin elaborated outside the host, such as that due to Staphylococcus aureus or B. cereus, has the shortest incubation period (1–6 h) and generally lasts <12 h. Most cases of staphylococcal food poisoning are caused by contamination from infected human carriers. Staphylococci can multiply at a wide range of temperatures; thus, if food is left to cool slowly and remains at room temperature after cooking, the organisms will have the opportunity to form enterotoxin. Outbreaks following picnics where potato salad, mayonnaise, and cream pastries have been served offer classic examples of staphylococcal food poisoning. Diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, and abdominal cramping are common, while fever is less so.
# Chunk 2980
The mainstay of treatment is adequate rehydration. The treatment of cholera and other dehydrating diarrheal diseases was revolutionized by the promotion of oral rehydration solution (ORS), the efficacy of which depends on the fact that glucose-facilitated absorption of sodium and water in the small intestine remains intact in the presence of cholera toxin. The use of ORS has reduced mortality rates for cholera from >50% (in untreated cases) to <1%. A number of ORS formulas have been used. Initial preparations were based on the treatment of patients with cholera and included a solution containing 3.5 g of sodium chloride, 2.5 g of sodium bicarbonate (or 2.9 g of sodium citrate), 1.5 g of potassium chloride, and 20 g of glucose (or 40 g of sucrose) per liter of water. Such a preparation can still be used for the treatment of severe cholera. Many causes of secretory diarrhea, however, are associated with less electrolyte loss than occurs in cholera. Beginning in 2002, the World Health Organization recommended a “reduced-osmolarity/reduced-salt” ORS that is better tolerated and more effective than classic ORS. This preparation contains 2.6 g of sodium chloride, 2.9 g of trisodium citrate, 1.5 g of potassium chloride, and 13.5 g of glucose (or 27 g of sucrose) per liter of water. ORS formulations containing rice or cereal as the carbohydrate source may be even more effective than glucose-based solutions. Patients who are severely dehydrated or in whom vomiting precludes the use of oral therapy should receive IV solutions such as Ringer’s lactate.
# Chunk 2981
hospitals tripled between 2000 and 2005. In 2005, hospitals in Montreal, Quebec, reported rates four times higher than the 1997 baseline, with directly attributable mortality of 6.9% (increased from 1.5%). An epidemic strain, variously known as toxinotype III, REA type BI, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) ribotype 027, and pulsed-field type NAP1 and thus collectively designated NAP1/BI/027, is thought to account for much of the increase in incidence and has been found in North America, Europe, and Asia. It is now recognized that two clones of NAP1/BI/027 originated in the United States and Canada and spread to the United Kingdom, Europe, and Asia. The epidemic organism is characterized by (1) an ability to produce 16–23 times as much toxin A and toxin B as control strains in vitro; (2) the presence of a third toxin (binary toxin CDT); and (3) high-level resistance to all fluoroquinolones. New strains have been and probably will continue to be implicated in outbreaks, including a strain (toxinotype V, ribotype 078) commonly found in food animals that also carries binary toxin and has been associated with high mortality risk in human infections. In the past 5 years, rates of CDI in the United Kingdom have markedly decreased, and the frequency of the NAP1/BI/027 strain in the countries of the European Union has likewise decreased. However, there has been no evidence of decreased rates of CDI or a decreased incidence of NAP1/BI/027 in North America; the latter strain still causes 25–35% of all CDIs in most regions of the United States.
# Chunk 2982
The diagnosis of CDI is based on a combination of clinical criteria: (1) diarrhea (≥3 unformed stools per 24 h for ≥2 days) with no other recognized cause plus (2) toxin A or B detected in the stool, toxin-producing C. difficile detected in the stool by PCR or culture, or pseudomembranes seen in the colon. PMC is a more advanced form of CDI and is visualized at endoscopy in only ~50% of patients with diarrhea who have a positive stool culture and toxin assay for C. difficile. Endoscopy is a rapid diagnostic tool in seriously ill patients with suspected PMC and an acute abdomen, but a negative result in this examination does not rule out CDI.
# Chunk 2983
Despite the array of tests available for C. difficile and its toxins (Table 161-1), no single traditional test has high sensitivity, high specificity, and rapid turnaround. Most laboratory tests for toxins, including enzyme immunoassays, lack sensitivity. However, testing of multiple additional stool specimens is not recommended. Nucleic acid amplification tests, including PCR assays, have now been approved for diagnostic purposes and appear to be both rapid and sensitive while retaining high specificity. Testing of asymptomatic patients is not recommended except for epidemiologic study purposes. In particular, so-called tests of cure following treatment are not recommended because >50% of patients continue to harbor the organism and toxin after diarrhea has ceased and test results do not always predict recurrence of CDI. Thus these results should not be used to restrict placement of patients in long-term-care or nursing home facilities.
# Chunk 2984
Colonoscopy or sigmoidoscopy + ++++ Highly specific if pseudomembranes are seen; insensitive compared with other tests aAccording to both clinical and test-based criteria. ++++, >90%; +++, 71–90%; ++, 51–70%; +, ~50%.
# Chunk 2985
860 prompt initiation of specific CDI treatment has become the standard. Empirical treatment is appropriate if CDI is strongly suspected on clinical grounds. General treatment guidelines include hydration and the avoidance of antiperistaltic agents and opiates, which may mask symptoms and possibly worsen disease. Nevertheless, antiperistaltic agents have been used safely with vancomycin or metronidazole for mild to moderate CDI. Oral administration of vancomycin, fidaxomicin, or metronidazole is recommended for CDI treatment. IV vancomycin is ineffective for CDI, and fidaxomicin is available only for oral administration; when IV metronidazole is administered, fecal bactericidal drug concentrations are achieved during acute diarrhea; however, in the presence of adynamic ileus, IV metronidazole treatment of CDI has failed. Two large clinical trials comparing vancomycin and fidaxomicin indicated comparable resolution of diarrhea (~90% of patients) as well as significantly reduced rates of recurrent CDI with fidaxomicin from rates with vancomycin. In previous randomized trials, diarrhea response rates to oral therapy with vancomycin or metronidazole were ≥94%, but four observational studies found that response rates for metronidazole had declined to 62–78%. Although the mean time to resolution of diarrhea is 2–4 days, the response to metronidazole may be much slower. Treatment should not be deemed a failure until a drug has been given for at least 6 days. On the basis of data for shorter courses of vancomycin and the results of two large-scale clinical trials, it is recommended that vancomycin, fidaxomicin, and metronidazole be given for at least 10 days. Metronidazole is not approved for CDI by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), but most patients with mild to moderate illness respond to 500 mg given by mouth three times a day for 10 days; extension of the treatment period may be needed for slow responders. In addition to the reports of increases in metronidazole failures, a prospective, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study has demonstrated the superiority of vancomycin over metronidazole for treatment of severe CDI. The severity assessment score in that study included age as well as laboratory parameters (elevated temperature, low albumin level, or elevated WBC count), documentation of PMC by endoscopy, and treatment of CDI in the intensive care unit. Although a validated severity score is not available, it is important to initiate treatment with oral vancomycin for patients who appear seriously ill, particularly if they have a high WBC count (>15,000/μL) or a creatinine level that is ≥1.5 times higher than the premorbid value (Table 161-2). In addition, a randomized blinded trial compared a toxin-binding polymer, tolevamer, with two antibiotic regimens for treatment of CDI and showed that vancomycin was superior to metronidazole for all patients regardless of severity. Small randomized trials of nitazoxanide, bacitracin, rifaximin, and fusidic acid for treatment of CDI have been conducted. These drugs have not been extensively studied, shown to be superior, or approved by the FDA for CDI, but they provide potential alternatives to vancomycin, fidaxomicin, and metronidazole.
# Chunk 2986
Overall, ~15–30% of successfully treated patients experience recurrences of CDI, either as relapses caused by the original organism or as reinfections following treatment. Rates of CDI recurrence are significantly lower among patients treated with fidaxomicin rather than vancomycin. Rates of recurrence are comparable with vancomycin and metronidazole. Recurrence rates are higher among patients ≥65 years old, those who continue to take antibiotics while being treated for CDI, and those who remain in the hospital after the initial episode of CDI. Patients who have a first recurrence of CDI have a high rate of second recurrence (33–65%). In the first recurrence, re-treatment with metronidazole is comparable to treatment with vancomycin (Table 161-2), and fidaxomicin is superior to vancomycin in reducing the risk of further recurrences in patients who have had one recurrence. Recurrent CDI, once thought to be relatively mild, has now been documented to pose a significant (11%) risk of serious complications (shock, megacolon, perforation, colectomy, or death within 30 days). There is no standard treatment for multiple recurrences, but long or repeated metronidazole courses should be avoided because of potential neurotoxicity. The use of vancomycin in tapering doses or with pulse dosing every other day for 2–8 weeks may be the most practical approach to treatment of patients with multiple recurrences. Other approaches include the administration of vancomycin followed by the yeast Saccharomyces boulardii; the administration of vancomycin followed by a fecal microbiota transplant given via nasoduodenal tube, colonoscope, or enema; and the intentional colonization of the patient with a nontoxigenic
# Chunk 2987
strain of C. difficile. None of these biotherapeutic approaches has been approved by the FDA for use in the United States. Other nonFDA-approved antibiotic strategies include (1) sequential treatment with vancomycin (125 mg four times daily for 10–14 days) followed by rifaximin (400 mg twice daily for 14 days) and (2) treatment with nitazoxanide (500 mg twice daily for 7 days). IV immunoglobulin, which has also been used with variable success, presumably provides antibodies to C. difficile toxins.
# Chunk 2988
Fulminant (rapidly progressive and severe) CDI presents the most difficult treatment challenge. Patients with fulminant disease often do not have diarrhea, and their illness mimics an acute surgical abdomen. Sepsis (hypotension, fever, tachycardia, leukocytosis) may result from severe CDI. An acute abdomen (with or without toxic megacolon) may include signs of obstruction, ileus, colon-wall thickening and ascites on abdominal CT, and peripheral-blood leukocytosis (≥20,000 WBCs/μL). With or without diarrhea, the differential diagnosis of an acute abdomen, sepsis, or toxic megacolon should include CDI if the patient has received antibiotics in the past 2 months. Cautious sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy to visualize PMC and abdominal CT are the best diagnostic tests in patients without diarrhea.
# Chunk 2989
Urinary Tract Infections, Pyelonephritis, and Prostatitis 862 Many factors predisposing women to cystitis also increase the risk of pyelonephritis. Factors independently associated with pyelonephritis in young healthy women include frequent sexual intercourse, a new sexual partner, a UTI in the previous 12 months, a maternal history of UTI, diabetes, and incontinence. The common risk factors for cystitis and pyelonephritis are not surprising given that pyelonephritis typically arises through the ascent of bacteria from the bladder to the upper urinary tract. However, pyelonephritis can occur without clear antecedent cystitis. About 20–30% of women who have had one episode of UTI will have recurrent episodes. Early recurrence (within 2 weeks) is usually regarded as relapse rather than reinfection and may indicate the need to evaluate the patient for a sequestered focus. Intracellular pods of infecting organisms within the bladder epithelium have been demonstrated in animal models of UTI, but the importance of this phenomenon in humans is not yet clear. The rate of recurrence ranges from 0.3 to 7.6 infections per patient per year, with an average of 2.6 infections per year. It is not uncommon for multiple recurrences to follow an initial infection, resulting in clustering of episodes. Clustering may be related temporally to the presence of a new risk factor or to the sloughing of the protective outer bladder epithelial layer in response to bacterial attachment during acute cystitis. The likelihood of a recurrence decreases with increasing time since the last infection. A case-control study of predominantly white premenopausal women with recurrent UTI identified frequent sexual intercourse, use of spermicide, a new sexual partner, a first UTI before 15 years of age, and a maternal history of UTI as independent risk factors for recurrent UTI. The only consistently documented behavioral risk factors for recurrent UTI include frequent sexual intercourse and spermicide use. In postmenopausal women, major risk factors for recurrent UTI include a history of premenopausal UTI and anatomic factors affecting bladder emptying, such as cystoceles, urinary incontinence, and residual urine. In pregnant women, ASB has clinical consequences, and both screening for and treatment of this condition are indicated. Specifically, ASB during pregnancy is associated with preterm birth and perinatal death of the fetus and with pyelonephritis in the mother. A Cochrane meta-analysis found that treatment of ASB in pregnant women decreased the risk of pyelonephritis by 75%. The majority of men with UTI have a functional or anatomic abnormality of the urinary tract, most commonly urinary obstruction secondary to prostatic hypertrophy. That said, not all men with UTI have detectable urinary abnormalities; this point is particularly relevant for men ≤45 years of age. Lack of circumcision is also associated with an increased risk of UTI because Escherichia coli is more likely to colonize the glans and prepuce and subsequently migrate into the urinary tract. Women with diabetes have been found to have a twoto threefold higher rate of ASB and UTI than women without diabetes; there is insufficient evidence to make a corresponding statement about men. Increased duration of diabetes and the use of insulin rather than oral medication are also associated with a higher risk of UTI among women with diabetes. Poor bladder function, obstruction in urinary flow, and incomplete voiding are additional factors commonly found in patients with diabetes that increase the risk of UTI. Impaired cytokine secretion may contribute to ASB in diabetic women.
# Chunk 2990
The uropathogens causing UTI vary by clinical syndrome but are usually enteric gram-negative rods that have migrated to the urinary tract. The susceptibility patterns of these organisms vary by clinical syndrome and by geography. In acute uncomplicated cystitis in the United States, the etiologic agents are highly predictable: E. coli accounts for 75–90% of isolates; Staphylococcus saprophyticus for 5–15% (with particularly frequent isolation from younger women); and Klebsiella, Proteus, Enterococcus, and Citrobacter species, along with other organisms, for 5–10%. Similar etiologic agents are found in Europe and Brazil. The spectrum of agents causing uncomplicated pyelonephritis is similar, with E. coli predominating. In complicated UTI (e.g., CAUTI), E. coli remains the predominant organism, but other aerobic gram-negative rods, such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Klebsiella, Proteus, Citrobacter, Acinetobacter, and Morganella species, also are frequently isolated. Gram-positive bacteria (e.g., enterococci and Staphylococcus aureus) and yeasts are also important pathogens in complicated UTI. Data on etiology and resistance are generally obtained from laboratory surveys and should be understood in the context that organism identification is performed only in cases in which urine is sent for culture—i.e., typically, when complicated UTI or pyelonephritis is suspected. The available data demonstrate a worldwide increase in the resistance of E. coli to antibiotics commonly used to treat UTI. North American and European surveys from women with acute cystitis have documented resistance rates of >20% to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) and to ciprofloxacin in some regions. In community-acquired infections, the increased prevalence of uropathogens producing extended-spectrum β-lactamases has left few oral options for therapy. Since resistance rates vary by local geographic region, with individual patient characteristics, and over time, it is important to use current and local data when choosing a treatment regimen.
# Chunk 2991
Mild pyelonephritis can present as low-grade fever with or without lower-back or costovertebral-angle pain, whereas severe pyelonephritis can manifest as high fever, rigors, nausea, vomiting, and flank and/or loin pain. Symptoms are generally acute in onset, and symptoms of cystitis may not be present. Fever is the main feature distinguishing cystitis and pyelonephritis. The fever of pyelonephritis typically exhibits a high spiking “picket-fence” pattern and resolves over 72 h of therapy. Bacteremia develops in 20–30% of cases of pyelonephritis. Patients with diabetes may present with obstructive uropathy associated with acute papillary necrosis when the sloughed papillae obstruct the ureter. Papillary necrosis may also be evident in some cases of pyelonephritis complicated by obstruction, sickle cell disease, analgesic nephropathy, or combinations of these conditions. In the rare cases of bilateral papillary necrosis, a rapid rise in the serum creatinine level may be the first indication of the condition. Emphysematous pyelonephritis is a particularly severe form of the disease that is associated with the production of gas in renal and perinephric tissues and occurs almost exclusively in diabetic patients (Fig. 162-2). Xanthogranulomatous pyelonephritis occurs when chronic urinary obstruction (often by stag-horn calculi), together with chronic infection, leads to suppurative destruction of renal tissue (Fig. 162-3). On pathologic examination, the residual renal tissue frequently has a yellow coloration, with infiltration by lipid-laden macrophages. Pyelonephritis can also be complicated by intraparenchymal abscess formation; this situation should be suspected when a patient has continued fever and/or bacteremia despite antibacterial therapy.
# Chunk 2992
DIAGNOSTIC TOOLS History The diagnosis of any of the UTI syndromes or ASB begins with a detailed history (Fig. 162-4). The history given by the patient has a high predictive value in uncomplicated cystitis. A meta-analysis evaluating the probability of acute UTI on the basis of history and physical findings concluded that, in women presenting with at least one symptom of UTI (dysuria, frequency, hematuria, or back pain) and without complicating factors, the probability of acute cystitis or pyelonephritis is 50%. The even higher rates of accuracy of self-diagnosis among women with recurrent UTI probably account for the success of patient-initiated treatment of recurrent cystitis. If vaginal discharge and complicating factors are absent and risk factors for UTI are present, then the probability of UTI is close to 90%, and no laboratory evaluation is needed. Similarly, a combination of dysuria and urinary frequency in the absence of vaginal discharge increases the probability of UTI to 96%. Further laboratory evaluation with dipstick testing or urine culture is not necessary in such patients before the initiation of definitive therapy.
# Chunk 2993
The Urine Dipstick Test, Urinalysis, and Urine Culture Useful diagnostic tools include the urine dipstick test and urinalysis, both of which provide point-of-care information, and the urine culture, which can retrospectively confirm a prior diagnosis. Understanding the parameters of the dipstick test is important in interpreting its results. Only members of the family Enterobacteriaceae convert nitrate to nitrite, and enough nitrite must accumulate in the urine to reach the threshold of detection. If a woman with acute cystitis is forcing fluids and voiding frequently, the dipstick test for nitrite is less likely to be positive, even when E. coli is present. The leukocyte esterase test detects this enzyme in the host’s polymorphonuclear leukocytes in the urine, whether the cells are intact or lysed. Many reviews have attempted to describe the diagnostic accuracy of dipstick testing. The bottom line for clinicians is that a urine dipstick test can confirm the diagnosis of uncomplicated cystitis in a patient with a reasonably high pretest probability of this
# Chunk 2994
Acute onset of Back pain Nausea/vomiting Fever Cystitis symptoms Acute onset of urinary symptoms Dysuria Frequency Urgency Non-localizing systemic symptoms of infection Fever Altered mental status Leukocytosis Positive urine culture in the absence of Urinary symptoms Systemic symptoms related to the urinary tract Recurrent acute urinary symptoms Male with perineal, pelvic, or prostatic pain All other patients Woman with unclear history or risk factors for STD Otherwise healthy woman who is not pregnant, clear history Patient who is pregnant, is a renal transplant recipient, or will undergo an invasive urologic procedure Otherwise healthy woman who is not pregnant Patient with urinary catheter All other patients All other patients Otherwise healthy woman who is not pregnant Male No obvious non-urinary cause Consider acute prostatitis Urinalysis and culture Consider urology evaluation Consider uncomplicated cystitis or STD Dipstick, urinalysis, and culture STD evaluation, pelvic exam Consider uncomplicated cystitis No urine culture needed Consider telephone management Consider complicated UTI, CAUTI, or pyelonephritis Urine culture Blood cultures Exchange or remove catheter if present Consider complicated UTI Urinalysis and culture Address any modifiable anatomic or functional abnormalities Consider uncomplicated pyelonephritis Urine culture Consider outpatient management Consider ASB Screening and treatment warranted Consider pyelonephritis Urine culture Blood cultures Consider ASB No additional workup or treatment needed Consider CA-ASB No additional workup or treatment needed Remove unnecessary catheters Consider recurrent cystitis Urine culture to establish diagnosis Consider prophylaxis or patient-initiated management Consider chronic bacterial prostatitis Meares-Stamey 4-glass test Consider urology consult
# Chunk 2995
disease. Either nitrite or leukocyte esterase positivity can be interpreted differ in men (highly specific) and in noncatheterized nursing home as a positive result. Blood in the urine also may suggest a diagnosis of residents (highly sensitive). UTI. A dipstick test negative for both nitrite and leukocyte esterase Urine microscopy reveals pyuria in nearly all cases of cystitis and in the same type of patient should prompt consideration of other hematuria in ~30% of cases. In current practice, most hospital laboratoexplanations for the patient’s symptoms and collection of urine for ries use an automated system rather than manual examination for urine culture. A negative dipstick test is not sufficiently sensitive to rule out microscopy. A machine aspirates a sample of the urine and then classifies bacteriuria in pregnant women, in whom it is important to detect all the particles in the urine by size, shape, contrast, light scatter, volume, and episodes of bacteriuria. Performance characteristics of the dipstick test other properties. These automated systems can be overwhelmed by high 866 numbers of dysmorphic red blood cells, white blood cells, or crystals; in general, counts of bacteria are less accurate than are counts of red and white blood cells. The authors’ clinical recommendation is that the patient’s symptoms and presentation should outweigh an incongruent result on automated urinalysis. The detection of bacteria in a urine culture is the diagnostic “gold standard” for UTI; unfortunately, however, culture results do not become available until 24 h after the patient’s presentation. Identifying specific organism(s) can require an additional 24 h. Studies of women with symptoms of cystitis have found that a colony count threshold of >102 bacteria/mL is more sensitive (95%) and specific (85%) than a threshold of 105/mL for the diagnosis of acute cystitis in women. In men, the minimal level indicating infection appears to be 103/mL. Urine specimens frequently become contaminated with the normal microbial flora of the distal urethra, vagina, or skin. These contaminants can grow to high numbers if the collected urine is allowed to stand at room temperature. In most instances, a culture that yields mixed bacterial species is contaminated except in settings of long-term catheterization, chronic urinary retention, or the presence of a fistula between the urinary tract and the gastrointestinal or genital tract.
# Chunk 2996
Uncomplicated Cystitis in Women Uncomplicated cystitis in women can be treated on the basis of history alone. However, if the symptoms are not specific or if a reliable history cannot be obtained, then a urine dipstick test should be performed. A positive nitrite or leukocyte esterase result in a woman with one symptom of UTI increases the probability of UTI from 50% to ~80%, and empirical treatment can be considered without further testing. In this setting, a negative dipstick result does not rule out UTI, and a urine culture, close clinical follow-up, and possibly a pelvic examination are recommended. These recommendations are made with the caveat that no factors associated with complicated UTI, such as pregnancy, are known to be present.
# Chunk 2997
Cystitis in Men The signs and symptoms of cystitis in men are similar to those in women, but this disease differs in several important ways in the male population. Collection of urine for culture is strongly recommended when a man has symptoms of UTI, as the documentation of bacteriuria can differentiate the less common syndromes of acute and chronic bacterial prostatitis from the very common entity of chronic pelvic pain syndrome, which is not associated with bacteriuria and thus is not usually responsive to antibacterial therapy. If the diagnosis is unclear, localization cultures using the twoor four-glass Meares-Stamey test (urine collection after prostate massage) should be undertaken to differentiate between bacterial and nonbacterial prostatic syndromes, and the patient should be referred to a urologist. Men with febrile UTI often have an elevated serum level of prostate-specific antigen as well as an enlarged prostate and enlarged seminal vesicles on ultrasound—findings indicative of prostate involvement. In 85 men with febrile UTI, symptoms of urinary retention, early recurrence of UTI, hematuria at follow-up, and voiding difficulties were predictive of surgically correctable disorders. Men with none of these symptoms had normal upper and lower urinary tracts on urologic workup.
# Chunk 2998
Urinary analgesics are appropriate in certain situations to speed resolution of bladder discomfort. The urinary tract analgesic phenazopyridine is widely used but can cause significant nausea. Combination analgesics containing urinary antiseptics (methenamine, methylene blue), a urine-acidifying agent (sodium phosphate), and an antispasmodic agent (hyoscyamine) also are available.
# Chunk 2999
Since patients with pyelonephritis have tissue-invasive disease, the treatment regimen chosen should have a very high likelihood of eradicating the causative organism and should reach therapeutic blood levels quickly. High rates of TMP-SMX-resistant E. coli in patients with pyelonephritis have made fluoroquinolones the first-line therapy for acute uncomplicated pyelonephritis. Whether the fluoroquinolones are given orally or parenterally depends on the patient’s tolerance for oral intake. A randomized clinical trial demonstrated that a 7-day course of therapy with oral ciprofloxacin (500 mg twice daily, with or without an initial IV 400-mg dose) was highly effective for the initial management of pyelonephritis in the outpatient setting. Oral TMP-SMX (one double-strength tablet twice daily for 14 days) also is effective for treatment of acute uncomplicated pyelonephritis if the uropathogen is known to be susceptible. If the pathogen’s susceptibility is not known and TMPSMX is used, an initial IV 1-g dose of ceftriaxone is recommended. Oral β-lactam agents are less effective than the fluoroquinolones and should be used with caution and close follow-up. Options for parenteral therapy for uncomplicated pyelonephritis include fluoroquinolones, an extended-spectrum cephalosporin with or without an aminoglycoside, or a carbapenem. Combinations of a β-lactam and a β-lactamase inhibitor (e.g., ampicillin-sulbactam, ticarcillinclavulanate, piperacillin-tazobactam) or imipenem-cilastatin can be used in patients with more complicated histories, previous episodes of pyelonephritis, or recent urinary tract manipulations; in general, the treatment of such patients should be guided by urine culture results. Once the patient has responded clinically, oral therapy should be substituted for parenteral therapy.
# Chunk 3000
Since the prostate is involved in the majority of cases of febrile UTI in men, the goal in these patients is to eradicate the prostatic infection as well as the bladder infection. A 7to 14-day course of a fluoroquinolone or TMP-SMX is recommended if the uropathogen is susceptible. If acute bacterial prostatitis is suspected, antimicrobial therapy should be initiated after urine and blood are obtained for cultures. Therapy can be tailored to urine culture results and should be continued for 2–4 weeks. For documented chronic bacterial prostatitis, a 4to 6-week course of antibiotics is often necessary. Recurrences, which are not uncommon in chronic prostatitis, often warrant a 12-week course of treatment.
# Chunk 3001
The etiology of CAUTI is diverse, and urine culture results are essential to guide treatment. Fairly good evidence supports the practice of catheter change during treatment for CAUTI. The goal is to remove biofilm-associated organisms that could serve as a nidus for reinfection. Pathology studies reveal that many patients with long-term catheters have occult pyelonephritis. A randomized trial in persons with spinal cord injury who were undergoing intermittent catheterization found that relapse was more common after 3 days of therapy than after 14 days. In general, a 7to 14-day course of antibiotics is recommended, but further studies on the optimal duration of therapy are needed.
# Chunk 3002
The appearance of Candida in the urine is an increasingly common complication of indwelling catheterization, particularly for patients in the intensive care unit, those taking broad-spectrum antimicrobial drugs, and those with underlying diabetes mellitus. In many studies, >50% of urinary Candida isolates have been found to be non-albicans species. The clinical presentation varies from an asymptomatic laboratory finding to pyelonephritis and even sepsis. Removal of the urethral catheter results in resolution of candiduria in more than one-third of asymptomatic cases. Treatment of asymptomatic patients does not appear to decrease the frequency of recurrence of candiduria. Treatment is recommended for patients who have symptomatic cystitis or pyelonephritis and for those who are at high risk for disseminated disease. High-risk patients include those with neutropenia, those who are undergoing urologic manipulation, those who are clinically unstable, and low-birth-weight infants. Fluconazole (200–400 mg/d for 14 days) reaches high levels in urine and is the first-line regimen for Candida infections of the urinary tract. Although instances of successful eradication of candiduria by some of the newer azoles and echinocandins have been reported, these agents are characterized by only low-level urinary excretion and thus are not recommended. For Candida isolates with high levels of resistance to fluconazole, oral flucytosine and/ or parenteral amphotericin B are options. Bladder irrigation with amphotericin B generally is not recommended.
# Chunk 3003
In all societies, STIs rank among the most common of all infectious diseases, with >30 infections now classified as pre dominantly sexually transmitted or as frequently sexually transmissible (Table 163-1). In developing countries, with three-quarters of the world’s population and 90% of the world’s STIs, factors such as population growth (especially in adolescent and young-adult age groups), rural-to-urban migration, wars, limited or no provision of reproductive health services for women, and poverty create exceptional vulnerability to disease resulting from unprotected sex. During the 1990s in China, Russia, the other states of the former Soviet Union, and South Africa, internal social structures changed rapidly as borders opened to the West, unleashing enormous new epidemics of HIV infection and other STIs. Despite advances in the provision of highly effective antiretroviral therapy worldwide, HIV remains the leading cause of death in some developing countries, and HPV and hepatitis B virus (HBV) remain important causes of cervical and hepatocellular carcinoma, respectively—two of the most common malignancies in the developing world. Sexually transmitted herpes simplex virus (HSV) infections now cause most genital ulcer disease throughout the world and an increasing proportion of cases of genital herpes in developing countries with generalized HIV epidemics, where the positive-feedback loop between HSV and HIV transmission is a growing, intractable problem. Despite this consistent link, randomized trials evaluating the efficacy of antiviral therapy in suppressing HSV in both HIV-uninfected and HIV-infected persons have not demonstrated a protective effect against acquisition or transmission of HIV. The World Health Organization estimated that 448 million new cases of four curable STIs—gonorrhea, chlamydial infection, syphilis, and trichomoniasis—occurred in 2005. Up to 50% of women of reproductive age in developing countries have bacterial vaginosis (arguably acquired sexually). All of these curable infections have been associated with increased risk of HIV transmission or acquisition.
# Chunk 3004
U. urealyticum and Ureaplasma parvum, and a few studies suggest that

U. urealyticum—but not U. parvum—is associated with NGU. Coliform bacteria can cause urethritis in men who practice insertive anal intercourse. The initial diagnosis of urethritis in men currently includes specific tests only for N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis; it does not yet include testing for Mycoplasma or Ureaplasma species. The following summarizes the approach to the patient with suspected urethritis: 1. Establish the presence of urethritis. If proximal-to-distal “milking” of the urethra does not express a purulent or mucopurulent discharge, even after the patient has not voided for several hours (or preferably overnight), a Gram’s-stained smear of an anterior urethral specimen obtained by passage of a small urethrogenital swab 2–3 cm into the urethra usually reveals ≥5 neutrophils per 1000× field in areas containing cells; in gonococcal infection, such a smear usually reveals gram-negative intracellular diplococci as well. Alternatively, the centrifuged sediment of the first 20–30 mL of voided urine—ideally collected as the first morning specimen— can be examined for inflammatory cells, either by microscopy showing ≥10 leukocytes per high-power field or by the leukocyte esterase test. Patients with symptoms who lack objective evidence of urethritis may have functional rather than organic problems and generally do not benefit from repeated courses of antibiotics.
# Chunk 3005
3.

Evaluate for gonococcal and chlamydial infection. An absence of typical gram-negative diplococci on Gram’s-stained smear of urethral exudate containing inflammatory cells warrants a preliminary diagnosis of NGU, as this test is 98% sensitive for the diagnosis of gonococcal urethral infection. However, an increasing proportion of men with symptoms and/or signs of urethritis are simultaneously assessed for infection with N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis by “multiplex” NAATs of first-voided urine. The urine specimen tested should consist of the first 10–15 mL of the stream, and, if possible, patients should not have voided for the prior 2 h. Culture or NAAT for N. gonorrhoeae may yield positive results when Gram’s staining is negative; certain strains of N. gonorrhoeae can result in negative urethral Gram’s stains in up to 30% of cases of urethral infection. Results of tests for gonococcal and chlamydial infection predict the patient’s prognosis (with greater risk for recurrent NGU if neither chlamydiae nor gonococci are found than if either is detected) and can guide both the counseling given to the patient and the management of the patient’s sexual partner(s).
# Chunk 3006
E. coli or Staphylococcus saprophyticus, at a concentration of ≥102/mL in a properly collected specimen of midstream urine from a dysuric woman with pyuria indicates probable bacterial UTI, whereas pyuria with <102 conventional uropathogens per milliliter of urine (“sterile” pyuria) suggests acute urethral syndrome due to C. trachomatis or
# Chunk 3007
The standard dosage of oral metronidazole for the treatment of bacterial vaginosis is 500 mg twice daily for 7 days. The single 2-g oral dose of metronidazole recommended for trichomoniasis produces significantly lower short-term cure rates and should not be used. Intravaginal treatment with 2% clindamycin cream (one full applicator [5 g containing 100 mg of clindamycin phosphate] each night for 7 nights) or with 0.75% metronidazole gel (one full applicator [5 g containing 37.5 mg of metronidazole] twice daily for 5 days) is also approved for use in the United States and does not elicit systemic adverse reactions; the response to both of these treatments is similar to the response to oral metronidazole. Other alternatives include oral clindamycin (300 mg twice daily for 7 days), clindamycin ovules (100 g intravaginally once at bedtime for 3 days), and oral tinidazole (1 g daily for 5 days or 2 g daily for 3 days). Unfortunately, recurrence over the long term (i.e., several months later) is distressingly common after either oral or intravaginal treatment. A randomized trial comparing intravaginal gel containing 37.5 mg of metronidazole with a suppository containing 500 mg of metronidazole plus nystatin (the latter not marketed in the United States) showed significantly higher rates of recurrence with the 37.5-mg regimen; this result suggests that higher metronidazole dosages may be important in topical intravaginal therapy. Recurrences can be significantly lessened with the twice-weekly use of suppressive intravaginal metronidazole gel. As stated above, treatment of male partners with metronidazole does not prevent recurrence of bacterial vaginosis.
# Chunk 3008
TREATMEnT VulVoVAgInAl PrurITus, burnIng, or IrrITATIon

Symptoms and signs of vulvovaginal candidiasis warrant treatment, usually intravaginal administration of any of several imidazole antibiotics (e.g., miconazole or clotrimazole) for 3–7 days or of a single dose of oral fluconazole (Table 163-5). Over-the-counter marketing of such preparations has reduced the cost of care and made treatment more convenient for many women with recurrent yeast vulvovaginitis. However, most women who purchase these preparations do not have vulvovaginal candidiasis, whereas many do have other vaginal infections that require different treatment. Therefore, only women with classic symptoms of vulvar pruritus and a history of previous episodes of yeast vulvovaginitis documented by an experienced clinician should self-treat. Short-course topical intravaginal azole drugs are effective for the treatment of uncomplicated vulvovaginal candidiasis (e.g., clotrimazole, two 100-mg vaginal tablets daily for 3 days; or miconazole, a 1200-mg vaginal suppository as a single dose). Single-dose oral treatment with fluconazole (150 mg) is also effective and is preferred by many patients. Management of complicated cases (see above) and those that do not respond to the usual intravaginal or single-dose oral therapy often involves prolonged or periodic oral therapy; this situation is discussed extensively in the 2010 CDC STD treatment guidelines (http://www.cdc.gov/std/treatment). Treatment of sexual partners is not routinely indicated.
# Chunk 3009
Other Causes of Vaginal Discharge or Vaginitis In the ulcerative vaginitis associated with staphylococcal toxic shock syndrome, Staphylococcus aureus should be promptly identified in vaginal fluid by Gram’s stain and by culture. In desquamative inflammatory vaginitis, smears of vaginal fluid reveal neutrophils, massive vaginal epithelial-cell exfoliation with increased numbers of parabasal cells, and gram-positive cocci; this syndrome may respond to treatment with 2% clindamycin cream, often given in combination with topical steroid preparations for several weeks. Additional causes
# Chunk 3010
No organism 35% CT 17% GC 13% TV 10% MG 8% HSV 5% MG/CT 2% MG/GC/CT 1% GC/CT 7% FIGURE 163-4 Organisms detected among female sexually transmitted disease clinic patients with mucopurulent cervicitis (n = 167). CT, Chlamydia trachomatis; GC, gonococcus; MG, Mycoplasma genitalium; TV, Trichomonas vaginalis; HSV, herpes simplex virus. (Courtesy of Dr. Lisa Manhart; with permission.) presence, although it adds relatively little to the diagnostic value of assessment for cervical signs. The presence of ≥20 PMNs/1000× microscopic field within strands of cervical mucus not contaminated by vaginal squamous epithelial cells or vaginal bacteria indicates endocervicitis. Detection of intracellular gram-negative diplococci in carefully collected endocervical mucus is quite specific but ≤50% sensitive for gonorrhea. Therefore, specific and sensitive tests for
# Chunk 3011
Clinical Manifestations • endometritis: a clinical patHologic syndrome

A study of women with clinically suspected PID who were undergoing both endometrial biopsy and laparoscopy showed that those with endometritis alone differed from those who also had salpingitis in significantly less often having lower-quadrant, adnexal, or cervical motion or abdominal rebound tenderness; fever; or elevated C-reactive protein levels. In addition, women with endometritis alone differed from those with neither endometritis nor salpingitis in more often having gonorrhea, chlamydial infection, and risk factors such as douching or IUD use. Thus, women with endometritis alone were intermediate between those with neither endometritis nor salpingitis and those with salpingitis with respect to risk factors, clinical manifestations, cervical infection prevalence, and elevated C-reactive protein level. Women with endometritis alone are at lower risk of subsequent tubal occlusion and resulting infertility than are those with salpingitis.
# Chunk 3012
salpingitis Symptoms of nontuberculous salpingitis classically evolve from a yellow or malodorous vaginal discharge caused by MPC and/ or bacterial vaginosis to midline abdominal pain and abnormal vaginal bleeding caused by endometritis and then to bilateral lower abdominal and pelvic pain caused by salpingitis, with nausea, vomiting, and increased abdominal tenderness if peritonitis develops.
# Chunk 3013
periHepatitis and periappendicitis Pleuritic upper-abdominal pain and tenderness, usually localized to the right upper quadrant (RUQ), develop in 3–10% of women with acute PID. Symptoms of perihepatitis arise during or after the onset of symptoms of PID and may overshadow lower abdominal symptoms, thereby leading to a mistaken diagnosis of cholecystitis. In perhaps 5% of cases of acute salpingitis, early laparoscopy reveals perihepatic inflammation ranging from edema and erythema of the liver capsule to exudate with fibrinous adhesions between the visceral and parietal peritoneum. When treatment is delayed and laparoscopy is performed late, dense “violin-string” adhesions can be seen over the liver; chronic exertional or positional RUQ pain ensues when traction is placed on the adhesions. Although perihepatitis, also known as the Fitz-Hugh–Curtis syndrome, was for many years specifically attributed to gonococcal salpingitis, most cases are now attributed to chlamydial salpingitis. In patients with chlamydial salpingitis, serum titers of microimmunofluorescent antibody to C. trachomatis are typically much higher when perihepatitis is present than when it is absent.
# Chunk 3014
Sexually Transmitted Infections: Overview and Clinical Approach 878 impractical. Most patients with acute PID have lower abdominal pain of <3 weeks’ duration, pelvic tenderness on bimanual pelvic examination, and evidence of lower genital tract infection (e.g., MPC). Approximately 60% of such patients have salpingitis at laparoscopy, and perhaps 10–20% have endometritis alone. Among the patients with these findings, a rectal temperature >38°C, a palpable adnexal mass, and elevation of the ESR to >15 mm/h also raise the probability of salpingitis, which has been found at laparoscopy in 68% of patients with one of these additional findings, 90% of patients with two, and 96% of patients with three. However, only 17% of all patients with laparoscopy-confirmed salpingitis have had all three additional findings. In a woman with pelvic pain and tenderness, increased numbers of PMNs (30 per 1000× microscopic field in strands of cervical mucus) or leukocytes outnumbering epithelial cells in vaginal fluid (in the absence of trichomonal vaginitis, which also produces PMNs in vaginal discharge) increase the predictive value of a clinical diagnosis of acute PID, as do onset with menses, history of recent abnormal menstrual bleeding, presence of an IUD, history of salpingitis, and sexual exposure to a male with urethritis. Appendicitis or another disorder of the gut is favored by the early onset of anorexia, nausea, or vomiting; the onset of pain later than day 14 of the menstrual cycle; or unilateral pain limited to the right or left lower quadrant. Whenever the diagnosis of PID is being considered, serum assays for human β-chorionic gonadotropin should be performed; these tests are usually positive with ectopic pregnancy. Ultrasonography and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can be useful for the identification of tuboovarian or pelvic abscess. MRI of the tubes can also show increased tubal diameter, intratubal fluid, or tubal wall thickening in cases of salpingitis. The primary and uncontested value of laparoscopy in women with lower abdominal pain is for the exclusion of other surgical problems. Some of the most common or serious problems that may be confused with salpingitis (e.g., acute appendicitis, ectopic pregnancy, corpus luteum bleeding, ovarian tumor) are unilateral. Unilateral pain or pelvic mass, although not incompatible with PID, is a strong indication for laparoscopy unless the clinical picture warrants laparotomy instead. Atypical clinical findings such as the absence of lower genital tract infection, a missed menstrual period, a positive pregnancy test, or failure to respond to appropriate therapy are other common indications for laparoscopy. Endometrial biopsy is relatively sensitive and specific for the diagnosis of endometritis, which correlates well with the presence of salpingitis. Vaginal or endocervical swab specimens should be examined by NAATs for N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis. At a minimum, vaginal fluid should be evaluated for the presence of PMNs, and endocervical secretions ideally should be assessed by Gram’s staining for PMNs and gram-negative diplococci, which indicate gonococcal infection. The clinical diagnosis of PID made by expert gynecologists is confirmed by laparoscopy or endometrial biopsy in ~90% of women who also have cultures positive for N. gonorrhoeae or
# Chunk 3015
The CDC STD treatment guidelines recommend initiation of empirical treatment for PID in sexually active young women and other women at risk for PID if they are experiencing pelvic or lower abdominal pain, if no other cause for the pain can be identified, and if pelvic examination reveals one or more of the following criteria for PID: cervical motion tenderness, uterine tenderness, or adnexal tenderness. Women with suspected PID can be treated as either outpatients or inpatients. In the multicenter Pelvic Inflammatory Disease Evaluation and Clinical Health (PEACH) trial, 831 women with mild to moderately severe symptoms and signs of PID were randomized to receive either inpatient treatment with IV cefoxitin and doxycycline or outpatient treatment with a single IM dose of cefoxitin plus oral doxycycline. Short-term clinical and microbiologic outcomes and long-term outcomes were equivalent in the two groups. Nonetheless, hospitalization should be considered when (1) the diagnosis is uncertain and surgical emergencies such as appendicitis and ectopic pregnancy cannot be excluded, (2) the patient is pregnant, (3) pelvic abscess is suspected, (4) severe illness or nausea and vomiting preclude outpatient management, (5) the patient has HIV infection, (6) the patient is assessed as unable to follow or tolerate an outpatient regimen, or (7) the patient has failed to respond to outpatient therapy. Some experts also prefer to hospitalize adolescents with PID for initial therapy, although younger women do as well as older women on outpatient therapy.
# Chunk 3016
Currently, oral cephalosporins, doxycycline, and the fluoroquinolones do not provide reliable coverage for gonococcal infection. Thus, adequate oral treatment of women with serious intolerance to cephalosporins is a challenge. If penicillins are an option, amoxicillin/ clavulanic acid combined with doxycycline has elicited a short-term clinical response in one trial. If fluoroquinolones are the only option and if the community prevalence and individual risk of gonorrhea are known to be low, oral levofloxacin (500 mg once daily) or ofloxacin (400 mg twice daily) for 14 days, with or without metronidazole, may be considered; moreover, clinical trials performed outside the United States support the effectiveness of oral moxifloxacin. In this case, it is imperative to perform a sensitive diagnostic test for gonorrhea (ideally, culture to test for antimicrobial susceptibility) before initiation of therapy. For women whose PID involves quinolone-resistant
# Chunk 3017
Doxycycline plus either cefotetan or cefoxitin: Administration of these drugs should be continued by the IV route for at least 48 h after the patient’s condition improves and then followed with oral doxycycline (100 mg twice daily) to complete 14 days of therapy.
# Chunk 3018
2.

Clindamycin plus gentamicin in patients with normal renal function: Once-daily administration of gentamicin (with combination of the total daily dose into a single daily dose) has not been evaluated in PID but has been efficacious in other serious infections and could be substituted. Treatment with these drugs should be continued for at least 48 h after the patient’s condition improves and then followed with oral doxycycline (100 mg twice daily) or clindamycin (450 mg four times daily) to complete 14 days of therapy. In cases with tuboovarian abscess, clindamycin rather than doxycycline for continued therapy provides better coverage for anaerobic infection.
# Chunk 3019
Prognosis Late sequelae include infertility due to bilateral tubal occlusion, ectopic pregnancy due to tubal scarring without occlusion, chronic pelvic pain, and recurrent salpingitis. The overall post-salpingitis risk of infertility due to tubal occlusion in a large study in Sweden was 11% after one episode of salpingitis, 23% after two episodes, and 54% after three or more episodes. A University of Washington study found a sevenfold increase in the risk of ectopic pregnancy and an eightfold increase in the rate of hysterectomy after PID.
# Chunk 3020
Genital ulceration reflects a set of important STIs, most of which sharply increase the risk of sexual acquisition and shedding of HIV. In a 1996 study of genital ulcers in 10 of the U.S. cities with the highest rates of primary syphilis, PCR testing of ulcer specimens demonstrated HSV in 62% of patients, Treponema pallidum (the cause of syphilis) in 13%, and Haemophilus ducreyi (the cause of chancroid) in 12–20%. Today, genital herpes represents an even higher proportion of genital ulcers in the United States and other industrialized countries.
# Chunk 3021
In Asia and Africa, chancroid (Fig. 163-5) was once considered the most common type of genital ulcer, followed in frequency by primary syphilis and then genital herpes (Fig. 163-6). With increased efforts to control chancroid and syphilis and widespread use of broad-spectrum antibiotics to treat STI-related syndromes, together with more frequent recurrences or persistence of genital herpes attributable to HIV infection, PCR testing of genital ulcers now clearly implicates genital herpes as by far the most common cause of genital ulceration in most developing countries. LGV due to C. trachomatis (Fig. 163-7) and donovanosis (granuloma inguinale, due to Klebsiella granulomatis; see Fig. 198e-1) continue to cause genital ulceration in some developing countries. LGV virtually disappeared in industrialized countries during the first 20 years of the HIV pandemic, but outbreaks are again occurring in Europe (including the United Kingdom), in North America, and in Australia. In these outbreaks, LGV typically presents as proctitis, with or without anal lesions, in men who report unprotected receptive anal intercourse, very often in association with HIV and/or hepatitis C virus infection; the latter may be an acute infection acquired through the same exposure. Other causes of genital ulcers include (1) candidiasis and traumatized genital warts—both readily recognized; (2) lesions due to genital involvement by more widespread dermatoses; (3) cutaneous manifestations of systemic diseases such as genital mucosal ulceration in Stevens-Johnson syndrome or Behçet’s disease; (4) superinfections of lesions that may originally have been sexually acquired (for example, methicillin-resistant S. aureus complicating a genital ulcer due to HSV-2); and (5) localized drug reactions, such as the ulcers occasionally seen with topical paromomycin cream or boric acid preparations.
# Chunk 3022
and epidemiologic considerations can usually guide initial management (Table 163-8) pending results of specific tests. Clinicians should order a rapid serologic test for syphilis in all cases of genital ulcer. To evaluate lesions except those highly characteristic of infection with HSV (i.e., those with herpetic vesicles), dark-field microscopy, direct immunofluorescence, and PCR for T. pallidum can be useful but are rarely available today in most countries. It is important to note that 30% of syphilitic chancres—the primary ulcer of syphilis—are associated with an initially nonreactive syphilis serology. All patients presenting with genital ulceration should be counseled and tested for HIV infection.
# Chunk 3023
“Atypical” or clinically trivial ulcers may be more common manifestations of genital herpes than classic vesiculopustular lesions. Specific tests for HSV in such lesions are therefore indicated (Chap. 216). Commercially available type-specific serologic tests for serum antibody to HSV-2 may give negative results, especially when patients present early with the initial episode of genital herpes or when HSV-1 is the cause of genital herpes (as is often the case today). Furthermore, a positive test for antibody to HSV-2 does not prove that the current lesions are herpetic, because nearly one-fifth of the general population of the United States (and no doubt a higher proportion of those at risk for other STIs) becomes seropositive for HSV-2 during early adulthood. Although even “type-specific” tests for HSV-2 that are commercially available in the United States are not 100% specific, a positive HSV-2 serology does enable the clinician to tell the patient that he or she has probably had genital herpes, should learn to recognize symptoms, and should avoid sex during recurrences. In addition, because genital shedding and sexual transmission of HSV-2 often occur in the absence of symptoms and signs of recurrent herpetic lesions, persons who have a history of genital herpes or who are seropositive for HSV-2 should consider the use of condoms or suppressive antiviral therapy, both of which can reduce the risk of HSV-2 transmission to a sexual partner.
# Chunk 3024
Acute proctitis in persons who have practiced receptive anorectal intercourse is usually sexually acquired. Such patients should undergo anoscopy to detect rectal ulcers or vesicles and petechiae after swabbing of the rectal mucosa; to examine rectal exudates for PMNs and gram-negative diplococci; and to obtain rectal swab specimens for testing for rectal gonorrhea, chlamydial infection, herpes, and syphilis. Pending test results, patients with proctitis should receive empirical syndromic treatment—e.g., with ceftriaxone (a single IM dose of 250 mg for gonorrhea) plus doxycycline (100 mg by mouth twice daily for 7 days) for possible chlamydial infection plus treatment for herpes or syphilis if indicated. If LGV proctitis is proven or suspected, the recommended treatment is doxycycline (100 mg by mouth twice daily for 21 days); alternatively, 1 g of azithromycin once a week for 3 weeks is likely to be effective but is little studied.
# Chunk 3025
Because many infected individuals develop no symptoms or fail to recognize and report symptoms, clinicians should routinely perform an STI risk assessment for teenagers and young adults as a guide to selective screening. As stated earlier, U.S. Preventive Services Task Force Guidelines recommend screening sexually active female patients ≤25 years of age for C. trachomatis whenever they present for health care (at least once a year); older women should be tested if they have more than one sexual partner, have begun a new sexual relationship since the previous test, or have another STI diagnosed. In women 25–29 years of age, chlamydial infection is uncommon but still may reach a prevalence of 3–5% in some settings; information provided by women in this age group on a sex partner’s concurrency (whether a male partner has had another sex partner during the time they have been together) is helpful in identifying women at increased risk. In some regions of the United States, widespread selective screening and treatment of young women for cervical C. trachomatis infection have been associated with a 50–60% drop in prevalence. Such screening and treatment also protect the individual woman from PID. Sensitive urine-based genetic amplification tests permit expansion of screening to men, teenage boys, and girls in settings where examination is not planned or is impractical (e.g., during preparticipation sports examinations or during initial medical evaluation of adolescent girls). Vaginal swabs—collected either by the health care provider at a pelvic examination or by the woman herself—are highly sensitive and specific for the diagnosis of chlamydial and gonococcal infection; they are now the preferred type of specimen for screening and diagnosis of these infections.
# Chunk 3026
In 2007, the ACIP recommended routine immunization of 9to 26-year-old girls and women with the quadrivalent HPV vaccine (against HPV types 6, 11, 16, and 18) approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration; the optimal age for recommended vaccination is 11–12 years because of the very high risk of HPV infection after sexual debut. In 2009, the ACIP added bivalent HPV vaccine (against types 6 and 11) as an option and expanded the groups in which immunization (with either quadrivalent or bivalent vaccine) is safe and effective to include boys and men 9–26 years old. HPV vaccines offering broader protection against additional oncogenic HPV types are anticipated. Since 2011, the ACIP has recommended routine administration of quadrivalent HPV vaccine to boys at 11 or 12 years of age and to males 13–21 years of age who have not yet been vaccinated or who have not completed the three-dose vaccine series; men 22–26 years of age may also be vaccinated.
# Chunk 3027
Tier 2 Evaluation (if above negative): EBV: Serum serology, CSF PCR Mycoplasma: Serum serology, CSF PCR Influenza A, B: Serology, respiratory culture, CSF PCR Adenovirus: Serology, throat swab. CSF PCR Fungal: CSF & serum coccidioidal antibody, Histoplasma antigen & antibody
# Chunk 3028
N. meningitidis is the causative organism of recurring epidemics of meningitis every 8 to 12 years.

S. pneumoniae (Chap. 173) is the most common cause of meningitis in adults >20 years of age, accounting for nearly half the reported cases (1.1 per 100,000 persons per year). There are a number of predisposing conditions that increase the risk of pneumococcal meningitis, the most important of which is pneumococcal pneumonia. Additional risk factors include coexisting acute or chronic pneumococcal sinusitis or otitis media, alcoholism, diabetes, splenectomy, hypogammaglobulinemia, complement deficiency, and head trauma with basilar skull fracture and CSF rhinorrhea. The mortality rate remains ~20% despite antibiotic therapy.
# Chunk 3029
The classic CSF abnormalities in bacterial meningitis (Table 164-2) are (1) polymorphonuclear (PMN) leukocytosis (>100 cells/μL in 90%), (2) decreased glucose concentration (<2.2 mmol/L [<40 mg/dL] and/ or CSF/serum glucose ratio of <0.4 in ~60%), (3) increased protein concentration (>0.45 g/L [>45 mg/dL] in 90%), and (4) increased opening pressure (>180 mmH2O in 90%). CSF bacterial cultures are positive in >80% of patients, and CSF Gram’s stain demonstrates organisms in >60%.
# Chunk 3030
Limulus lysate Positive in cases of gram-negative meningitis

Abbreviation: PCR, polymerase chain reaction that may mask a relative decrease in the CSF glucose concentration. The CSF glucose concentration is low when the CSF/serum glucose ratio is <0.6. A CSF/serum glucose ratio <0.4 is highly suggestive of bacterial meningitis but may also be seen in other conditions, including fungal, tuberculous, and carcinomatous meningitis. It takes from 30 min to several hours for the concentration of CSF glucose to reach equilibrium with blood glucose levels; therefore, administration of 50 mL of 50% glucose (D50) prior to LP, as commonly occurs in emergency room settings, is unlikely to alter CSF glucose concentration significantly unless more than a few hours have elapsed between glucose administration and LP.
# Chunk 3031
A 16S rRNA conserved sequence broad-based bacterial PCR can detect small numbers of viable and nonviable organisms in CSF and is expected to be useful for making a diagnosis of bacterial meningitis in patients who have been pretreated with oral or parenteral antibiotics and in whom Gram’s stain and CSF culture are negative. When the broad-range PCR is positive, a PCR that uses specific bacterial primers to detect the nucleic acid of S. pneumoniae, N. meningitidis, Escherichia coli, L. monocytogenes, H. influenzae, and S. agalactiae can be obtained based on the clinical suspicion of the meningeal pathogen. The latex agglutination (LA) test for the detection of bacterial antigens of S. pneumoniae, N. meningitidis, H. influenzae type b, group B Streptococcus, and E. coli K1 strains in the CSF has been useful for making a diagnosis of bacterial meningitis but is being replaced by the CSF bacterial PCR assay. The CSF LA test has a specificity of 95–100% for S. pneumoniae and N. meningitidis, so a positive test is virtually diagnostic of bacterial meningitis caused by these organisms. However, the sensitivity of the CSF LA test is only 70–100% for detection of S. pneumoniae and 33–70% for detection of N. meningitidis antigens, so a negative test does not exclude infection by these organisms. The Limulus amebocyte lysate assay is a rapid diagnostic test for the detection of gram-negative endotoxin in CSF and thus for making a diagnosis of gram-negative bacterial meningitis. The test has a specificity of 85–100% and a sensitivity approaching 100%. Thus, a positive Limulus amebocyte lysate assay occurs in virtually all patients with gram-negative bacterial meningitis, but false positives may occur.
# Chunk 3032
Rickettsial disease can resemble bacterial meningitis (Chap. 211). Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF) is transmitted by a tick bite and caused by the bacteria Rickettsia rickettsii. The disease may present acutely with high fever, prostration, myalgia, headache, nausea, and vomiting. Most patients develop a characteristic rash within 96 h of the onset of symptoms. The rash is initially a diffuse erythematous maculopapular rash that may be difficult to distinguish from that of meningococcemia. It progresses to a petechial rash, then to a purpuric rash, and if untreated, to skin necrosis or gangrene. The color of the lesions changes from bright red to very dark red, then yellowish-green to black. The rash typically begins in the wrist and ankles and then spreads distally and proximally within a matter of a few hours, involving the palms and soles. Diagnosis is made by immunofluorescent staining of skin biopsy specimens. Ehrlichioses are also transmitted by a tick bite. These are small gram-negative coccobacilli of which two species cause human disease. Anaplasma phagocytophilum causes human granulocytic ehrlichiosis (anaplasmosis), and Ehrlichia chaffeensis causes human monocytic ehrlichiosis. The clinical and laboratory manifestations of the infections are similar. Patients present with fever, headache, confusion, nausea, and vomiting. Twenty percent of patients have a maculopapular or petechial rash. There is laboratory evidence of leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, and anemia, and mild to moderate elevations in alanine aminotransferases, alkaline phosphatase, and lactate dehydrogenase. Patients with RMSF and those with ehrlichial infections may have an altered level of consciousness ranging from mild lethargy to coma, confusion, focal neurologic signs, cranial nerve palsies, hyperreflexia, and seizures.
# Chunk 3033
SPECIFIC ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY Meningococcal Meningitis (Table 164-3) Although ceftriaxone and cefotaxime provide adequate empirical coverage for N. meningitidis, penicillin G remains the antibiotic of choice for meningococcal meningitis caused by susceptible strains. Isolates of N. meningitidis with moderate resistance to penicillin have been identified and are increasing in incidence worldwide. CSF isolates of N. meningitidis should be tested for penicillin and ampicillin susceptibility, and if resistance is found, cefotaxime or ceftriaxone should be substituted for penicillin. A 7-day course of intravenous antibiotic therapy is adequate for uncomplicated meningococcal meningitis. The index case and all close contacts should receive chemoprophylaxis with a 2-day regimen of rifampin (600 mg every 12 h for 2 days in adults and 10 mg/kg every 12 h for 2 days in children >1 year). Rifampin is not recommended in pregnant women. Alternatively, adults can be
# Chunk 3034
Using a variety of diagnostic techniques, including CSF PCR, culture, and serology, a specific viral cause can be found in 60–90% of cases of viral meningitis. The most important agents are enteroviruses (including echoviruses and coxsackieviruses in addition to numbered enteroviruses), varicella-zoster virus (VZV), HSV (HSV-2 > HSV-1), HIV, and arboviruses (Table 164-4). CSF cultures are positive in 30–70% of patients, with the frequency of isolation depending on the specific viral agent. Approximately two-thirds of culture-negative cases of “aseptic” meningitis have a specific viral etiology identified by CSF PCR testing (see below).
# Chunk 3035
Viral meningitis is not a nationally reportable disease; however, it has been estimated that the incidence is ~60,000–75,000 cases per year. In temperate climates, there is a substantial increase in cases during the nonwinter months, reflecting the seasonal predominance of enterovirus and arthropod-borne virus (arbovirus) infections in the summer and fall, with a peak monthly incidence of about 1 reported case per 100,000 population.
# Chunk 3036
LABORATORY DIAGNOSIS CSF Examination The most important laboratory test in the diagnosis of viral meningitis is examination of the CSF. The typical profile is a pleocytosis, a normal or slightly elevated protein concentration (0.2–0.8 g/L [20–80 mg/dL]), a normal glucose concentration, and a normal or mildly elevated opening pressure (100–350 mmH2O). Organisms are not seen on Gram’s stain of CSF. The total CSF cell count in viral meningitis is typically 25–500/μL, although cell counts of several thousand/μL are occasionally seen, especially with infections due to lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) and mumps virus. Lymphocytes are typically the predominant cell. Rarely, PMNs may predominate in the first 48 h of illness, especially with infections due to echovirus 9, West Nile virus, eastern equine encephalitis (EEE) virus, or mumps. A PMN pleocytosis occurs in 45% of patients with West Nile virus (WNV) meningitis and can persist for a week or longer before shifting to a lymphocytic pleocytosis. PMN pleocytosis with low glucose may also be a feature of cytomegalovirus (CMV) infections in immunocompromised hosts. Despite these exceptions, the presence of a CSF PMN pleocytosis in a patient with suspected viral meningitis in whom a specific diagnosis has not been established should prompt consideration of alternative diagnoses, including bacterial meningitis or parameningeal infections. The CSF glucose concentration is typically normal in viral infections, although it may be decreased in 10–30% of cases due to mumps or LCMV. Rare instances of decreased CSF glucose concentration occur in cases of meningitis due to echo-viruses and other enteroviruses, HSV-2, and VZV. As a rule, a lymphocytic pleocytosis with a low glucose concentration should suggest fungal or tuberculous meningitis, Listeria meningoencephalitis, or noninfectious disorders (e.g., sarcoid, neoplastic meningitis).
# Chunk 3037
Viral Culture The sensitivity of CSF cultures for the diagnosis of viral meningitis and encephalitis, in contrast to its utility in bacterial infections, is generally poor. In addition to CSF, specific viruses may also be isolated from throat swabs, stool, blood, and urine. Enteroviruses and adenoviruses may be found in feces; arboviruses, some enteroviruses, and LCMV in blood; mumps and CMV in urine; and enteroviruses, mumps, and adenoviruses in throat washings. During enteroviral infections, viral shedding in stool may persist for several weeks. The presence of enterovirus in stool is not diagnostic and may result from residual shedding from a previous enteroviral infection; it also occurs in some asymptomatic individuals during enteroviral epidemics.
# Chunk 3038
Enteroviruses (EV) (Chap. 228) are the most common cause of viral meningitis, accounting for >85% of cases in which a specific etiology can be identified. Cases may either be sporadic or occur in clusters. EV71 has produced large epidemics of neurologic disease outside the United States, especially in Southeast Asia, but most recently reported cases in the United States have been sporadic. Enteroviruses are the most likely cause of viral meningitis in the summer and fall months, especially in children (<15 years), although cases occur at reduced frequency year round. Although the incidence of enteroviral meningitis declines with increasing age, some outbreaks have preferentially affected older children and adults. Meningitis outside the neonatal period is usually benign. Patients present with sudden onset of fever; headache; nuchal rigidity; and often constitutional signs, including vomiting, anorexia, diarrhea, cough, pharyngitis, and myalgias. The physical examination should include a careful search for stigmata of enterovirus infection, including exanthems, hand-foot-mouth disease, herpangina, pleurodynia, myopericarditis, and hemorrhagic conjunctivitis. The CSF profile is typically a lymphocytic pleocytosis (100–1000 cells/μL) with normal glucose and normal or mildly elevated protein concentration. However, up to 15% of patients, most commonly young infants rather than older children or adults, have a normal CSF leukocyte count. In rare cases, PMNs may predominate during the first 48 h of illness. CSF reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR) is the diagnostic procedure of choice and is both sensitive (>95%) and specific (>100%). CSF PCR has the highest sensitivity if performed within 48 h of symptom onset, with sensitivity declining rapidly after day 5 of symptoms. PCR of throat washings or stool specimens may be positive for several weeks, and positive results can help support the diagnosis of an acute enteroviral infection. The sensitivity of routine enteroviral PCRs for detecting EV71 is low, and specific testing may be required. Treatment is supportive, and patients usually recover without sequelae. Chronic and severe infections can occur in neonates and in individuals with hypoor agammaglobulinemia.
# Chunk 3039
Arbovirus infections (Chap. 233) occur predominantly in the summer and early fall. Arboviral meningitis should be considered when clusters of meningitis and encephalitis cases occur in a restricted geographic region during the summer or early fall. In the United States, the most important causes of arboviral meningitis and encephalitis are WNV, St. Louis encephalitis virus, and the California encephalitis group of viruses. In WNV epidemics, avian deaths may serve as sentinel infections for subsequent human disease. A history of tick exposure or travel or residence in the appropriate geographic area should suggest the possibility of Colorado tick fever virus or Powassan virus infection, although nonviral tick-borne diseases, including RMSF and Lyme neuroborreliosis, may present similarly. Arbovirus meningoencephalitis is typically associated with a CSF lymphocytic pleocytosis, normal glucose concentration, and normal or mildly elevated protein concentration. However, ~45% of patients with WNV meningoencephalitis have CSF neutrophilia, which can persist for a week or more. The rarity of hypoglycorrhachia in WNV infection, the absence of positive Gram’s stains, and the negative cultures help distinguish these patients from those with bacterial meningitis. Definitive diagnosis of arboviral meningoencephalitis is based on demonstration of viral-specific IgM in CSF or seroconversion. The prevalence of CSF IgM increases progressively during the first week after infection, peaking at >80% in patients with neuroinvasive disease; as a result, repeat studies may be needed when disease suspicion is high and an early study is negative. CSF PCR tests are available for some viruses in selected diagnostic laboratories and at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), but in the case of WNV, sensitivity (~70%) of CSF PCR is less than that of CSF serology. WNV CSF PCR may be useful in immunocompromised patients who may have absent or reduced antibody responses.
# Chunk 3040
HSV meningitis (Chap. 216) has been increasingly recognized as a major cause of viral meningitis in adults, and overall, it is probably second in importance to enteroviruses as a cause of viral meningitis, accounting for 5% of total cases overall and undoubtedly a higher frequency of those cases occurring in adults and/or outside of the summer-fall period when enterovirus infections are increasingly common. In adults, the majority of cases of uncomplicated meningitis are due to HSV-2, whereas HSV-1 is responsible for 90% of cases of HSV encephalitis. HSV meningitis occurs in ~25–35% of women and ~10–15% of men at the time of an initial (primary) episode of genital herpes. Of these patients, 20% go on to have recurrent attacks of meningitis. Diagnosis of HSV meningitis is usually by HSV CSF PCR because cultures may be negative, especially in patients with recurrent meningitis. Demonstration of intrathecal synthesis of HSV-specific antibody may also be useful in diagnosis, although antibody tests are less sensitive and less specific than PCR and may not become positive until after the first week of infection. Although a history of or the presence of HSV genital lesions is an important diagnostic clue, many patients with HSV meningitis give no history and have no evidence of active genital herpes at the time of presentation. Most cases of recurrent viral or “aseptic” meningitis, including cases previously diagnosed as Mollaret’s meningitis, are due to HSV.
# Chunk 3041
EBV infections may also produce aseptic meningitis, with or without associated infectious mononucleosis. The presence of atypical lymphocytes in the CSF or peripheral blood is suggestive of EBV infection but may occasionally be seen with other viral infections. EBV is almost never cultured from CSF. Serum and CSF serology can help establish the presence of acute infection, which is characterized by IgM viral capsid antibodies (VCAs), antibodies to early antigens (EAs), and the absence of antibodies to EBV-associated nuclear antigen (EBNA). CSF PCR is another important diagnostic test, although false-positive results may reflect viral reactivation associated with other infectious or inflammatory processes or the presence of latent viral DNA in lymphocytes recruited due to other inflammatory conditions.
# Chunk 3042
Mumps (Chap. 231e) should be considered when meningitis occurs in the late winter or early spring, especially in males (male-to-female ratio 3:1). With the widespread use of the live attenuated mumps vaccine in the United States since 1967, the incidence of mumps meningitis has fallen by >95%; however, mumps remains a potential source of infection in nonimmunized individuals and populations. Rare cases (10–100:100,000 vaccinated individuals) of vaccine-associated mumps meningitis have been described, with onset typically 2–4 weeks after vaccination. The presence of parotitis, orchitis, oophoritis, pancreatitis, or elevations in serum lipase and amylase is suggestive of mumps meningitis; however, their absence does not exclude the diagnosis. Clinical meningitis was previously estimated to occur in 10–30% of patients with mumps parotitis; however, in a recent U.S. outbreak of nearly 2600 cases of mumps, only 11 cases of meningitis were identified, suggesting the incidence may be lower than previously suspected. Mumps infection confers lifelong immunity, so a documented history of previous infection excludes this diagnosis. Patients with meningitis have a CSF pleocytosis that can exceed 1000 cells/μL in 25%. Lymphocytes predominate in 75%, although CSF neutrophilia occurs in 25%. Hypoglycorrhachia, occurs in 10–30% of patients and may be a clue to the diagnosis when present. Diagnosis is typically made by culture of virus from CSF or by detecting IgM antibodies or seroconversion. CSF PCR is available in some diagnostic and research laboratories.
# Chunk 3043
LCMV infection (Chap. 233) should be considered when aseptic meningitis occurs in the late fall or winter and in individuals with a history of exposure to house mice (Mus musculus), pet or laboratory rodents (e.g., hamsters, rats, mice), or their excreta. Some patients have an associated rash, pulmonary infiltrates, alopecia, parotitis, orchitis, or myopericarditis. Laboratory clues to the diagnosis of LCMV, in addition to the clinical findings noted above, may include the presence of leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, or abnormal liver function tests. Some cases present with a marked CSF pleocytosis (>1000 cells/μL) and hypoglycorrhachia (<30%). Diagnosis is based on serology and/or culture of virus from CSF.
# Chunk 3044
Treatment of almost all cases of viral meningitis is primarily symptomatic and includes use of analgesics, antipyretics, and antiemetics. Fluid and electrolyte status should be monitored. Patients with suspected bacterial meningitis should receive appropriate empirical therapy pending culture results (see above). Hospitalization may not be required in immunocompetent patients with presumed viral meningitis and no focal signs or symptoms, no significant alteration in consciousness, and a classic CSF profile (lymphocytic pleocytosis, normal glucose, negative Gram’s stain) if adequate provision for monitoring at home and medical follow-up can be ensured. Immunocompromised patients; patients with significant alteration in consciousness, seizures, or the presence of focal signs and symptoms suggesting the possibility of encephalitis or parenchymal brain involvement; and patients who have an atypical CSF profile should be hospitalized. Oral or intravenous acyclovir may be of benefit in patients with meningitis caused by HSV-1 or -2 and in cases of severe EBV or VZV infection. Data concerning treatment of HSV, EBV, and VZV meningitis are extremely limited. Seriously ill patients should probably receive intravenous acyclovir (15–30 mg/kg per day in three divided doses), which can be followed by an oral drug such as acyclovir (800 mg five times daily), famciclovir (500 mg tid), or valacyclovir (1000 mg tid) for a total course of 7–14 days. Patients who are less ill can be treated with oral drugs alone. Patients with 893 HIV meningitis should receive highly active antiretroviral therapy (Chap. 226). There is no specific therapy of proven benefit for patients with arboviral encephalitis, including that caused by WNV.
# Chunk 3045
Vaccination is an effective method of preventing the development of meningitis and other neurologic complications associated with poliovirus, mumps, measles, rubella, and varicella infection. A live attenuated VZV vaccine (Varivax) is available in the United States. Clinical studies indicate an effectiveness rate of 70–90% for this vaccine, but a booster may be required after ~10 years to maintain immunity. A related vaccine (Zostavax) is recommended for prevention of herpes zoster (shingles) in adults over the age of 60. An inactivated varicella vaccine is available for transplant recipients and others for whom live viral vaccines are contraindicated
# Chunk 3046
Meningitis, Encephalitis, Brain Abscess, and Empyema 894 majority of cases of acute encephalitis of suspected viral etiology remain of unknown cause. Hundreds of viruses are capable of causing encephalitis, although only a limited subset is responsible for most cases in which a specific cause is identified (Table 164-4). The most commonly identified viruses causing sporadic cases of acute encephalitis in immunocompetent adults are herpesviruses (HSV, VZV, EBV). Epidemics of encephalitis are caused by arboviruses, which belong to several different viral taxonomic groups including Alphaviruses (e.g., EEE virus, western equine encephalitis virus), Flaviviruses (e.g., WNV, St. Louis encephalitis virus, Japanese encephalitis virus, Powassan virus), and Bunyaviruses (e.g., California encephalitis virus serogroup, La Crosse virus). Historically, the largest number of cases of arbovirus encephalitis in the United States has been due to St. Louis encephalitis virus and the California encephalitis virus serogroup. However, since 2002, WNV has been responsible for the majority of arbovirus meningitis and encephalitis cases in the United States. WNV caused 2873 confirmed cases of neuroinvasive disease (encephalitis, meningitis, or myelitis) in 2012 with 286 deaths. States reporting >200 cases included Texas (1868 cases), California (479), Louisiana (335), Illinois (290), Mississippi (249), South Dakota (203), and Michigan (202). In 2013, there were 1140 neuroinvasive cases with 100 deaths. States reporting >100 cases included California (357 cases), Colorado (315), Nebraska (213), Texas (157), South Dakota (148), North Dakota (123), and Illinois (106). It is important to recognize that WNV epidemics are unpredictable and that cases have occurred in every state in the continental United States. New causes of viral CNS infections are constantly appearing, as evidenced by the outbreak of cases of encephalitis in Southeast Asia caused by Nipah virus, a newly identified member of the Paramyxoviridae family; of meningitis in Europe caused by Toscana virus, an arbovirus belonging to the Bunyavirus family; and of neurologic disorders associated with major epidemics of Chikungunya virus, a togavirus, in Africa, India, and Southeast Asia. Parechoviruses including human parechovirus 3 (HPeV3), members of the Picornavirus family, have recently been reported as causes of fever, sepsis, and meningitis in infants (age <3 months) in the United States and abroad.
# Chunk 3047
CSF PCR has become the primary diagnostic test for CNS infections caused by CMV, EBV, HHV-6, and enteroviruses (see “Viral Meningitis,” above). In the case of VZV CNS infection, CSF PCR and detection of virus-specific IgM or intrathecal antibody synthesis both provide important aids to diagnosis. The sensitivity and specificity of CSF PCRs vary with the virus being tested. The sensitivity (~96%) and specificity (~99%) of HSV CSF PCR are equivalent to or exceed those of brain biopsy. It is important to recognize that HSV CSF PCR results need to be interpreted after considering the likelihood of disease in the patient being tested, the timing of the test in relationship to onset of symptoms, and the prior use of antiviral therapy. A negative HSV CSF PCR test performed by a qualified laboratory at the appropriate time during illness in a patient with a high likelihood of HSV encephalitis based on clinical and laboratory abnormalities significantly reduces the likelihood of HSV encephalitis but does not exclude it. For example, in a patient with a pretest probability of 35% of having HSV encephalitis, a negative HSV CSF PCR reduces the posttest probability to ~2%, and for a patient with a pretest probability of 60%, a negative test reduces the posttest probability to ~6%. In both situations, a positive test makes the diagnosis almost certain (98–99%). There have been several recent reports of initially negative HSV CSF PCR tests that were obtained early (≤72 h) following symptom onset and that became positive when repeated 1–3 days later. The frequency of positive HSV CSF PCRs in patients with herpes encephalitis also decreases as a function of the duration of illness, with only ~20% of cases remaining positive after ≥14 days. PCR results are generally not affected by ≤1 week of antiviral therapy. In one study, 98% of CSF specimens remained PCR-positive during the first week of initiation of antiviral therapy, but the numbers fell to ~50% by 8–14 days and to ~21% by >15 days after initiation of antiviral therapy.
# Chunk 3048
The sensitivity and specificity of CSF PCR tests for viruses other than HSV have not been definitively characterized. Enteroviral (EV) CSF PCR appears to have a sensitivity and specificity of >95%. EV PCR sensitivity for EV71 may be considerably lower (~30% in some reports). Parechoviruses are also not detected by standard EV RT-PCRs. The specificity of EBV CSF PCR has not been established. Positive EBV CSF PCRs associated with positive tests for other pathogens have been reported and may reflect reactivation of EBV latent in lymphocytes that enter the CNS as a result of an unrelated infectious or inflammatory process. In patients with CNS infection due to VZV, CSF antibody and PCR studies should be considered complementary, because patients may have evidence of intrathecal synthesis of VZV-specific antibodies and negative CSF PCRs. In the case of WNV infection, CSF PCR appears to be less sensitive (~70% sensitivity) than detection of WNV-specific CSF IgM, although PCR testing remains useful in immunocompromised patients who may not mount an effective anti-WNV antibody response.
# Chunk 3049
Brain Biopsy Brain biopsy is now generally reserved for patients in whom CSF PCR studies fail to lead to a specific diagnosis, who have focal abnormalities on MRI, and who continue to show progressive clinical deterioration despite treatment with acyclovir and supportive therapy.
# Chunk 3050
Detection of intrathecal synthesis (increased CSF/serum HSV antibody ratio corrected for breakdown of the blood-brain barrier) of HSV-specific antibody may be useful in diagnosis of HSV encephalitis in patients in whom only late (>1 week after onset) CSF specimens are available and PCR studies are negative. Serum serology alone is of no value in diagnosis of HSV encephalitis due to the high seroprevalence rate in the general population.
# Chunk 3051
Meningitis, Encephalitis, Brain Abscess, and Empyema 896 mimics of focal viral encephalitis included mycobacteria, fungi, rickettsiae, Listeria, Mycoplasma, and other bacteria (including Bartonella sp.). Autoimmune causes of encephalitis, including those associated with antibodies against N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor, voltage-gated potassium channels (VGKC), α-amino-3-hydroxy-5methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA), and γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors, and GAD-65, have been increasingly recognized as causes of encephalitis that can mimic that caused by viral infection. In most cases, diagnosis is made by detection of the specific autoantibodies in serum and/or CSF. NMDA receptor antibodies have recently been reported in some patients with HSE encephalitis, and their presence should not exclude appropriate testing and treatment for HSV encephalitis. Autoimmune encephalitis may also be associated with specific cancers (paraneoplastic) and onconeuronal antibodies (e.g., anti-Hu, Yo, Ma2, amphiphysin, CRMP5, CV2) (Chap. 122). Subacute or chronic forms of encephalitis may occur in association with auto-antibodies against thyroglobulin and thyroperoxidase (Hashimoto’s encephalopathy) and with prion diseases. Infection caused by the ameba Naegleria fowleri can also cause acute meningoencephalitis (primary amebic meningoencephalitis), whereas that caused by Acanthamoeba and Balamuthia more typically produces subacute or chronic granulomatous amebic meningoencephalitis. Naegleria thrive in warm, iron-rich pools of water, including those found in drains, canals, and both natural and human-made outdoor pools. Infection has typically occurred in immunocompetent children with a history of swimming in potentially infected water. The CSF, in contrast to the typical profile seen in viral encephalitis, often resembles that of bacterial meningitis with a neutrophilic pleocytosis and hypoglycorrhachia. Motile trophozoites can be seen in a wet mount of warm, fresh CSF. There have been an increasing number of cases of Balamuthia mandrillaris amebic encephalitis mimicking acute viral encephalitis in children and immunocompetent adults. This organism has also been associated with encephalitis in recipients of transplanted organs from a donor with unrecognized infection. No effective treatment has been identified, and mortality approaches 100%. Encephalitis can be caused by the raccoon pinworm Baylisascaris procyonis. Clues to the diagnosis include a history of raccoon exposure, especially of playing in or eating dirt potentially contaminated with raccoon feces. Most patients are children, and many have an associated eosinophilia. Once nonviral causes of encephalitis have been excluded, the major diagnostic challenge is to distinguish HSV from other viruses that cause encephalitis. This distinction is particularly important because in virtually every other instance the therapy is supportive, whereas specific and effective antiviral therapy is available for HSV, and its efficacy is enhanced when it is instituted early in the course of infection. HSV encephalitis should be considered when clinical features suggesting involvement of the inferomedial frontotemporal regions of the brain are present, including prominent olfactory or gustatory hallucinations, anosmia, unusual or bizarre behavior or personality alterations, or memory disturbance. HSV encephalitis should always be suspected in patients with signs and symptoms consistent with acute encephalitis with focal findings on clinical examination, neuroimaging studies, or EEG. The diagnostic procedure of choice in these patients is CSF PCR analysis for HSV. A positive CSF PCR establishes the diagnosis, and a negative test dramatically reduces the likelihood of HSV encephalitis (see above). The anatomic distribution of lesions may provide an additional clue to diagnosis. Patients with rapidly progressive encephalitis and prominent brainstem signs, symptoms, or neuroimaging abnormalities may be infected by flaviviruses (WNV, St. Louis encephalitis virus, Japanese encephalitis virus), HSV, rabies, or
# Chunk 3052
Epidemiologic factors may provide important clues to the diagnosis of viral meningitis or encephalitis. Particular attention should be paid to the season of the year; the geographic location and travel history; and possible exposure to animal bites or scratches, rodents, and ticks. Although transmission from the bite of an infected dog remains the most common cause of rabies worldwide, in the United States very few cases of dog rabies occur, and the most common risk factor is exposure to bats—although a clear history of a bite or scratch is often lacking. The classic clinical presentation of encephalitic (furious) rabies is fever, fluctuating consciousness, and autonomic hyperactivity. Phobic spasms of the larynx, pharynx, neck muscles, and diaphragm can be triggered by attempts to swallow water (hydrophobia) or by inspiration (aerophobia). Patients may also present with paralytic (dumb) rabies characterized by acute ascending paralysis. Rabies due to the bite of a bat has a different clinical presentation than classic rabies due to a dog or wolf bite. Patients present with focal neurologic deficits, myoclonus, seizures, and hallucinations; phobic spasms are not a typical feature. Patients with rabies have a CSF lymphocytic pleocytosis and may show areas of increased T2 signal abnormality in the brainstem, hippocampus, and hypothalamus. Diagnosis can be made by finding rabies virus antigen in brain tissue or in the neural innervation of hair follicles at the nape of the neck. PCR amplification of viral nucleic acid from CSF and saliva or tears may also enable diagnosis. Serology is frequently negative in both serum and CSF in the first week after onset of infection, which limits its acute diagnostic utility. No specific therapy is available, and cases are almost invariably fatal, with isolated survivors having devastating neurologic sequelae.
# Chunk 3053
Prior to intravenous administration, acyclovir should be diluted to a concentration ≤7 mg/mL. (A 70-kg person would receive a dose of 700 mg, which would be diluted in a volume of 100 mL.) Each dose should be infused slowly over 1 h, rather than by rapid or bolus infusion, to minimize the risk of renal dysfunction. Care should be taken to avoid extravasation or intramuscular or subcutaneous administration. The alkaline pH of acyclovir can cause local inflammation and phlebitis (9%). Dose adjustment is required in patients with impaired renal glomerular filtration. Penetration into CSF is excellent, with average drug levels ~50% of serum levels. Complications of therapy include elevations in blood urea nitrogen and creatinine levels (5%), thrombocytopenia (6%), gastrointestinal toxicity (nausea, vomiting, diarrhea) (7%), and neurotoxicity (lethargy or obtundation, disorientation, confusion, agitation, hallucinations, tremors, seizures) (1%). Acyclovir resistance may be mediated by changes in either the viral deoxypyrimidine kinase or DNA polymerase. To date, acyclovir-resistant isolates have not been a significant clinical problem in immunocompetent individuals. However, there have been reports of clinically virulent acyclovir-resistant HSV isolates from sites outside the CNS in immunocompromised individuals, including those with AIDS.
# Chunk 3054
Ganciclovir is a synthetic nucleoside analogue of 2’-deoxyguanosine. The drug is preferentially phosphorylated by virus-induced cellular kinases. Ganciclovir triphosphate acts as a competitive inhibitor of the CMV DNA polymerase, and its incorporation into nascent viral DNA results in premature chain termination. Following intravenous administration, CSF concentrations of ganciclovir are 25–70% of coincident plasma levels. The usual dose for treatment of severe 897 neurologic illnesses is 5 mg/kg every 12 h given intravenously at a constant rate over 1 h. Induction therapy is followed by maintenance therapy of 5 mg/kg every day for an indefinite period. Induction therapy should be continued until patients show a decline in CSF pleocytosis and a reduction in CSF CMV DNA copy number on quantitative PCR testing (where available). Doses should be adjusted in patients with renal insufficiency. Treatment is often limited by the development of granulocytopenia and thrombocytopenia (20–25%), which may require reduction in or discontinuation of therapy. Gastrointestinal side effects, including nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal pain, occur in ~20% of patients. Some patients treated with ganciclovir for CMV retinitis have developed retinal detachment, but the causal relationship to ganciclovir treatment is unclear. Valganciclovir is an orally bioavailable prodrug that can generate high serum levels of ganciclovir, although studies of its efficacy in treating CMV CNS infections are limited.
# Chunk 3055
Foscarnet is a pyrophosphate analogue that inhibits viral DNA polymerases by binding to the pyrophosphate-binding site. Following intravenous infusion, CSF concentrations range from 15 to 100% of coincident plasma levels. The usual dose for serious CMV-related neurologic illness is 60 mg/kg every 8 h administered by constant infusion over 1 h. Induction therapy for 14–21 days is followed by maintenance therapy (60–120 mg/kg per day). Induction therapy may need to be extended in patients who fail to show a decline in CSF pleocytosis and a reduction in CSF CMV DNA copy number on quantitative PCR tests (where available). Approximately one-third of patients develop renal impairment during treatment, which is reversible following discontinuation of therapy in most, but not all, cases. This is often associated with elevations in serum creatinine and proteinuria and is less frequent in patients who are adequately hydrated. Many patients experience fatigue and nausea. Reductions in serum calcium, magnesium, and potassium occur in ~15% of patients and may be associated with tetany, cardiac rhythm disturbances, or seizures.
# Chunk 3056
Cidofovir is a nucleotide analogue that is effective in treating

CMV retinitis and equivalent to or better than ganciclovir in some experimental models of murine CMV encephalitis, although data concerning its efficacy in human CMV CNS disease are limited. The usual dose is 5 mg/kg intravenously once weekly for 2 weeks, then biweekly for two or more additional doses, depending on clinical response. Patients must be prehydrated with normal saline (e.g., 1 L over 1–2 h) prior to each dose and treated with probenecid (e.g., 1 g 3 h before cidofovir and 1 g 2 and 8 h after cidofovir). Nephrotoxicity is common; the dose should be reduced if renal function deteriorates.
# Chunk 3057
There is considerable variation in the incidence and severity of sequelae in patients surviving viral encephalitis. In the case of EEE virus infection, nearly 80% of survivors have severe neurologic sequelae. At the other extreme are infections due to EBV, California encephalitis virus, and Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus, where severe sequelae are unusual. For example, approximately 5–15% of children infected with La Crosse virus have a residual seizure disorder, and 1% have persistent hemiparesis. Detailed information about sequelae in patients with HSV encephalitis treated with acyclovir is available from the NIAID-Collaborative Antiviral Study Group (CASG) trials. Of 32 acyclovir-treated patients, 26 survived (81%). Of the 26 survivors, 12 (46%) had no or only minor sequelae, 3 (12%) were moderately impaired (gainfully employed but not functioning at their previous level), and 11 (42%) were severely impaired (requiring continuous supportive care). The incidence and severity of sequelae were directly related to the age of the patient and the level of consciousness at the time of initiation of therapy. Patients with severe neurologic impairment (Glasgow coma score 6) at initiation of therapy either died or survived with severe sequelae. Young patients (<30 years) with good neurologic function at initiation of therapy did substantially better (100% survival, 62% with no or mild sequelae) compared with their older counterparts (>30 years; 64% survival, 57% no or mild sequelae). Some recent studies using quantitative HSV CSF PCR tests indicate that clinical outcome following treatment also correlates with the amount of HSV DNA present in CSF at the time of presentation. Many patients with WNV infection have sequelae, including cognitive impairment; weakness; and hyperor hypokinetic movement disorders, including tremor, myoclonus, and parkinsonism. In a large longitudinal study of prognosis in 156 patients with WNV infection, the mean time to achieve recovery (defined as 95% of maximal predicted score on specific validated tests) was 112–148 days for fatigue, 121–175 days for physical function, 131–139 days for mood, and 302–455 days for mental function (the longer interval in each case representing patients with neuroinvasive disease).
# Chunk 3058
Patients with subacute meningitis typically have an unrelenting headache, stiff neck, low-grade fever, and lethargy for days to several weeks before they present for evaluation. Cranial nerve abnormalities and night sweats may be present. This syndrome overlaps that of chronic meningitis, discussed in detail in Chap. 165.
# Chunk 3059
Fungal infections are typically acquired by the inhalation of airborne fungal spores. The initial pulmonary infection may be asymptomatic or present with fever, cough, sputum production, and chest pain. The pulmonary infection is often self-limited. A localized pulmonary fungal infection can then remain dormant in the lungs until there is an abnormality in cell-mediated immunity that allows the fungus to reactivate and disseminate to the CNS. The most common pathogen causing fungal meningitis is C. neoformans. This fungus is found worldwide in soil and bird excreta. H. capsulatum is endemic to the Ohio and Mississippi River valleys of the central United States and to parts of Central and South America. C. immitis is endemic to the desert areas of the southwest United States, northern Mexico, and Argentina.
# Chunk 3060
The classic CSF abnormalities in tuberculous meningitis are as follows: (1) elevated opening pressure, (2) lymphocytic pleocytosis (10–500 cells/μL), (3) elevated protein concentration in the range of 1–5 g/L, and (4) decreased glucose concentration in the range of 1.1–2.2 mmol/L (20–40 mg/dL). The combination of unrelenting headache, stiff neck, fatigue, night sweats, and fever with a CSF lymphocytic pleocytosis and a mildly decreased glucose concentration is highly suspicious for tuberculous meningitis. The last tube of fluid collected at LP is the best tube to send for a smear for acid-fast bacilli (AFB). If there is a pellicle in the CSF or a cobweb-like clot on the surface of the fluid, AFB can best be demonstrated in a smear of the clot or pellicle. Positive smears are typically reported in only 10–40% of cases of tuberculous meningitis in adults. Cultures of CSF take 4–8 weeks to identify the organism and are positive in ~50% of adults. Culture remains the gold standard to make the diagnosis of tuberculous meningitis. PCR for the detection of M. tuberculosis DNA should be sent on CSF if available, but the sensitivity and specificity on CSF have not been defined. The CDC recommends the use of nucleic acid amplification tests for the diagnosis of pulmonary tuberculosis.
# Chunk 3061
Meningitis due to C. neoformans in non-HIV, nontransplant patients is treated with induction therapy with amphotericin B (AmB) (0.7 mg/kg IV per day) plus flucytosine (100 mg/kg per day in four divided doses) for at least 4 weeks if CSF culture results are negative after 2 weeks of treatment. Therapy should be extended for a total of 6 weeks in the patient with neurologic complications. Induction therapy is followed by consolidation therapy with fluconazole 400 mg/d for 8 weeks. Organ transplant recipients are treated with liposomal AmB (3–4 mg/kg per day) or AmB lipid complex (ABLC) 5 mg/kg per day plus flucytosine (100 mg/kg per day in four divided doses) for at least 2 weeks or until CSF culture is sterile. Follow CSF yeast cultures for sterilization rather than the cryptococcal antigen titer. This treatment is followed by an 8to 10-week course of fluconazole (400–800 mg/d [6–12 mg/kg] PO). If the CSF culture is sterile after 10 weeks of acute therapy, the dose of fluconazole is decreased to 200 mg/d for 6 months to a year. Patients with HIV infection are treated with AmB or a lipid formulation plus flucytosine for at least 2 weeks, followed by fluconazole for a minimum of 8 weeks. HIV-infected patients may require indefinite maintenance therapy with fluconazole 200 mg/d. Meningitis due to H. capsulatum is treated with AmB (0.7–1.0 mg/kg per day) for 4–12 weeks. A total dose of 30 mg/kg is recommended. Therapy with AmB is not discontinued until fungal cultures are sterile. After completing a course of AmB, maintenance therapy with itraconazole 200 mg two or three times daily is initiated and continued for at least 9 months to a year. C. immitis meningitis is treated with either high-dose fluconazole (1000 mg daily) as monotherapy or intravenous AmB (0.5–0.7 mg/kg per day) for >4 weeks. Intrathecal AmB (0.25–0.75 mg/d three times weekly) may be required to eradicate the infection. Lifelong therapy with fluconazole (200–400 mg daily) is recommended to prevent relapse. AmBisome (5 mg/kg per day) or AmB lipid complex (5 mg/kg per day) can be substituted for AmB in patients who have or who develop significant renal dysfunction. The most common complication of fungal meningitis is hydrocephalus. Patients who develop hydrocephalus should receive a CSF diversion device. A ventriculostomy can be used until CSF fungal cultures are sterile, at which time the ventriculostomy is replaced by a ventriculoperitoneal shunt.
# Chunk 3062
Syphilitic meningitis is treated with aqueous penicillin G in a dose of 3–4 million units intravenously every 4 h for 10–14 days. An alternative regimen is 2.4 million units of procaine penicillin G intramuscularly daily with 500 mg of oral probenecid four times daily for 10–14 days. Either regimen is followed with 2.4 million units of benzathine penicillin G intramuscularly once a week for 3 weeks. The standard criterion for treatment success is reexamination of the CSF. The CSF should be reexamined at 6-month intervals for 2 years. The cell count is expected to normalize within 12 months, and the VDRL titer to decrease by two dilutions or revert to nonreactive within 2 years of completion of therapy. Failure of the CSF pleocytosis to resolve or an increase in the CSF VDRL titer by two or more dilutions requires retreatment.
# Chunk 3063
The CSF is typically normal, although mild elevation in protein and/ or IgG may be found. Pleocytosis occurs in <25% of cases, is predominantly mononuclear, and rarely exceeds 25 cells/μL. PCR amplification of JCV DNA from CSF has become an important diagnostic tool. The presence of a positive CSF PCR for JCV DNA in association with typical MRI lesions in the appropriate clinical setting is diagnostic of PML, reflecting the assay’s relatively high specificity (92–100%); however, sensitivity is variable, and a negative CSF PCR does not exclude the diagnosis. In HIV-negative patients and HIV-positive patients not receiving highly active antiviral therapy (HAART), sensitivity is likely 70–90%. In HAART-treated patients, sensitivity may be closer to 60%, reflecting the lower JCV CSF viral load in this relatively more immunocompetent group. Studies with quantitative JCV CSF PCR indicate that patients with low JCV loads (<100 copies/μL) have a generally better prognosis than those with higher viral loads. Patients with negative CSF PCR studies may require brain biopsy for definitive diagnosis. In biopsy or necropsy specimens of brain, JCV antigen and nucleic acid can be detected by immunocytochemistry, in situ hybridization, or PCR amplification.
# Chunk 3064
SSPE is a rare chronic, progressive demyelinating disease of the CNS associated with a chronic nonpermissive infection of brain tissue with measles virus. The frequency has been estimated at 1 in 100,000– 500,000 measles cases. An average of five cases per year are reported in the United States. The incidence has declined dramatically since the introduction of a measles vaccine. Most patients give a history of primary measles infection at an early age (2 years), which is followed after a latent interval of 6–8 years by the development of a progressive neurologic disorder. Some 85% of patients are between 5 and 15 years old at diagnosis. Initial manifestations include poor school performance and mood and personality changes. Typical signs of a CNS viral infection, including fever and headache, do not occur. As the disease progresses, patients develop progressive intellectual deterioration, focal and/or generalized seizures, myoclonus, ataxia, and visual disturbances. In the late stage of the illness, patients are unresponsive, quadriparetic, and spastic, with hyperactive tendon reflexes and extensor plantar responses.
# Chunk 3065
A bacterial brain abscess is a relatively uncommon intracranial infection, with an incidence of ~0.3–1.3:100,000 persons per year. Predisposing conditions include otitis media and mastoiditis, paranasal sinusitis, pyogenic infections in the chest or other body sites, penetrating head trauma or neurosurgical procedures, and dental infections. In immunocompetent individuals the most important pathogens are Streptococcus spp. (anaerobic, aerobic, and viridans [40%]), Enterobacteriaceae (Proteus spp., E. coli sp., Klebsiella spp. [25%]), anaerobes (e.g., Bacteroides spp., Fusobacterium spp. [30%]), and staphylococci (10%). In immunocompromised hosts with underlying HIV infection, organ transplantation, cancer, or immunosuppressive therapy, most brain abscesses are caused by Nocardia spp., Toxoplasma gondii, Aspergillus spp., Candida spp., and C. neoformans. In Latin America and in immigrants from Latin America, the most common cause of brain abscess is Taenia solium (neurocysticercosis). In India and East Asia, mycobacterial infection (tuberculoma) remains a major cause of focal CNS mass lesions.
# Chunk 3066
Otogenic abscesses occur predominantly in the temporal lobe (55– 75%) and cerebellum (20–30%). In some series, up to 90% of cerebellar abscesses are otogenic. Common organisms include streptococci, Bacteroides spp., Pseudomonas spp., Haemophilus spp., and Enterobacteriaceae. Abscesses that develop as a result of direct spread of infection from the frontal, ethmoidal, or sphenoidal sinuses and those that occur due to dental infections are usually located in the frontal lobes. Approximately 10% of brain abscesses are associated with paranasal sinusitis, and this association is particularly strong in young males in their second and third decades of life. The most common pathogens in brain abscesses associated with paranasal sinusitis are streptococci (especially Streptococcus milleri), Haemophilus spp., Bacteroides spp., Pseudomonas spp., and S. aureus. Dental infections are associated with ~2% of brain abscesses, although it is often suggested that many “cryptogenic” abscesses are in fact due to dental infections. The most common pathogens in this setting are streptococci, staphylococci, Bacteroides spp., and Fusobacterium spp.
# Chunk 3067
Hematogenous abscesses account for ~25% of brain abscesses. Hematogenous abscesses are often multiple, and multiple abscesses often (50%) have a hematogenous origin. These abscesses show a predilection for the territory of the middle cerebral artery (i.e., posterior frontal or parietal lobes). Hematogenous abscesses are often located at the junction of the gray and white matter and are often poorly encapsulated. The microbiology of hematogenous abscesses is dependent on the primary source of infection. For example, brain abscesses that develop as a complication of infective endocarditis are often due to viridans streptococci or S. aureus. Abscesses associated with pyogenic lung infections such as lung abscess or bronchiectasis are often due to streptococci, staphylococci, Bacteroides spp., Fusobacterium spp., or Enterobacteriaceae. Abscesses that follow penetrating head trauma or neurosurgical procedures are frequently due to methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA), S. epidermidis, Enterobacteriaceae, Pseudomonas spp., and Clostridium spp. Enterobacteriaceae and P. aeruginosa are important causes of abscesses associated with urinary sepsis. Congenital cardiac malformations that produce a right-to-left shunt, such as tetralogy of Fallot, patent ductus arteriosus, and atrial and ventricular septal defects, allow bloodborne bacteria to bypass the pulmonary capillary bed and reach the brain. Similar phenomena can occur with pulmonary arteriovenous malformations. The decreased arterial oxygenation and saturation from the right-to-left shunt and polycythemia may cause focal areas of cerebral ischemia, thus providing a nidus for microorganisms that bypassed the pulmonary circulation to multiply and form an abscess. Streptococci are the most common pathogens in this setting.
# Chunk 3068
A brain abscess typically presents as an expanding intracranial mass lesion rather than as an infectious process. Although the evolution of signs and symptoms is extremely variable, ranging from hours to weeks or even months, most patients present to the hospital 11–12 days following onset of symptoms. The classic clinical triad of headache, fever, and a focal neurologic deficit is present in <50% of cases. The most common symptom in patients with a brain abscess is headache, occurring in >75% of patients. The headache is often characterized as a constant, dull, aching sensation, either hemicranial or generalized, and it becomes progressively more severe and refractory to therapy. Fever is present in only 50% of patients at the time of diagnosis, and its absence should not exclude the diagnosis. The new onset of focal or generalized seizure activity is a presenting sign in 15–35% of patients. Focal neurologic deficits including hemiparesis, aphasia, or visual field defects are part of the initial presentation in >60% of patients.
# Chunk 3069
Contrast-enhanced CT or MRI to detect parenchymal, subdural, epidural, or sinus infection

Tuberculin skin test may be negative; AFB culture of CSF (sputum, urine, gastric contents if indicated); tuberculostearic acid detection in CSF; identify tubercle bacillus on acid-fast stain of CSF or protein pellicle; PCR
# Chunk 3070
Exposure history; previous tuberculous illness; immunosuppressed, anti-TNF therapy or AIDS; young children; fever, meningismus, night sweats, miliary TB on x-ray or liver biopsy; stroke due to arteritis
# Chunk 3071
Chemical Mononuclear or PMNs, low Contrast-enhanced CT scan or MRI; History of recent injection into the subarachnoid space; his-compounds (may glucose, elevated protein; xan-cerebral angiogram to detect tory of sudden onset of headache; recent resection of acouscause recurrent thochromia from subarachnoid aneurysm tic neuroma or craniopharyngioma; epidermoid tumor of meningitis) hemorrhage in week prior to brain or spine, sometimes with dermoid sinus tract; pituitary presentation with “meningitis” apoplexy Primary inflammation CNS sarcoidosis Mononuclear cells; elevated Serum and CSF angiotensin-CN palsy, especially of CN VII; hypothalamic dysfunction, protein; often low glucose converting enzyme levels; biopsy of especially diabetes insipidus; abnormal chest radiograph; extraneural affected tissues or brain peripheral neuropathy or myopathy lesion/meningeal biopsy
# Chunk 3072
Recovery in 2–6 months, diagnosis by exclusion phocytic meningitis Mollaret’s meningitis Large endothelial cells and PCR for herpes; MRI/CT to rule out Recurrent meningitis; exclude HSV-2; rare cases due to HSV-1; (recurrent meningitis) PMNs in first hours, followed by epidermoid tumor or dural cyst occasional case associated with dural cyst mononuclear cells Drug hypersensitivity PMNs; occasionally mononu-Complete blood count (eosinophilia) Exposure to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents, sulfonclear cells or eosinophils amides, isoniazid, tolmetin, ciprofloxacin, penicillin, carbamazepine, lamotrigine, IV immunoglobulin, OKT3 antibodies, phenazopyridine; improvement after discontinuation of drug; recurrence with repeat exposure
# Chunk 3073
parameningeal infection; identification of a potential source of outflow (obstructive hydrocephalus), then lumbar puncture carries infection (chronic draining ear, sinusitis, right-to-left cardiac or the potential risk of brain herniation. Obstructive hydrocephalus pulmonary shunt, chronic pleuropulmonary infection) supports this usually requires direct ventricular drainage. In patients with open diagnosis. In some cases, diagnosis may be established by recogni-CSF flow pathways, elevated ICP can still occur due to impaired tion and biopsy of unusual skin lesions (Behçet’s syndrome, SLE, resorption of CSF by arachnoid villi. In such patients, lumbar punccryptococcosis, blastomycosis, Lyme disease, sporotrichosis, trypano-ture is usually safe, but repetitive or continuous lumbar drainage may somiasis, IV drug use) or enlarged lymph nodes (lymphoma, sarcoid, be necessary to prevent abrupt deterioration and death from raised tuberculosis, HIV, secondary syphilis, or Whipple’s disease). A careful ICP. In some patients, especially those with cryptococcal meningiophthalmologic examination may reveal uveitis (Vogt-Koyanagi-tis, fatal levels of raised ICP can occur without enlarged ventricles. Harada syndrome, sarcoid, or central nervous system [CNS] lym-Contrast-enhanced MRI or CT studies of the brain and spinal phoma), keratoconjunctivitis sicca (Sjögren’s syndrome), or iridocy-cord can identify meningeal enhancement, parameningeal infecclitis (Behçet’s syndrome) and is essential to assess visual loss from tions (including brain abscess), encasement of the spinal cord papilledema. Aphthous oral lesions, genital ulcers, and hypopyon (malignancy, inflammation or infection), or nodular deposits on the suggest Behçet’s syndrome. Hepatosplenomegaly suggests lymphoma, meninges or nerve roots (malignancy or sarcoidosis) (Fig. 165-1). sarcoid, tuberculosis, or brucellosis. Herpetic lesions in the genital Imaging studies are also useful to localize areas of meningeal dis-area or on the thighs suggest HSV-2 infection. A breast nodule, a sus-ease prior to meningeal biopsy. picious pigmented skin lesion, focal bone pain, or an abdominal mass Angiographic studies can identify evidence of cerebral arteritis directs attention to possible carcinomatous meningitis. in patients with chronic meningitis and stroke.
# Chunk 3074
FIGURE 165-1 Primary central nervous system lymphoma. A 24-year-old man, immunosuppressed due to intestinal lymphangiectasia, developed multiple cranial neuropathies. CSF findings consisted of 100 lymphocytes/μL and a protein of 2.5 g/L (250 mg/dL); cytology and cultures were negative. Gadolinium-enhanced T1 MRI revealed diffuse, multifocal meningeal enhancement surrounding the brain-stem (A), spinal cord, and cauda equina (B).
# Chunk 3075
In addition to the CSF examination, an attempt should be made to uncover pertinent underlying illnesses. Tuberculin skin test, chest radiograph, urine analysis and culture, blood count and differential, renal and liver function tests, alkaline phosphatase, sedimentation rate, antinuclear antibody, anti-Ro antibody, anti-La antibody, and serum angiotensin-converting enzyme level are often indicated. In some cases, a thorough search for a systemic site of infection is indicated. Pulmonary foci of infection may be present, particularly with fungal or tuberculous disease. Hence a CT or MRI of the chest and a sputum examination may be helpful. Abnormalities can be pursued by bronchoscopy or transthoracic needle biopsy. A tuberculin skin test is often placed, although the test has limited specificity and sensitivity for diagnosis of active disease. Liver or bone marrow biopsy may be diagnostic in some cases of miliary tuberculosis, disseminated fungal infection, sarcoidosis, or metastatic malignancy. Positron emission tomography with fluorodeoxyglucose may be useful in identifying a systemic site for biopsy in patients with suspected carcinomatous meningitis or sarcoidosis when other tests are unrevealing. Genetic testing can identify mutations that cause rare monogenic autoinflammatory disorders.
# Chunk 3076
If CSF is not diagnostic then a meningeal biopsy should be strongly considered in patients who are severely disabled, who need chronic ventricular decompression, or whose illness is progressing rapidly. The activities of the surgeon, pathologist, microbiologist, and cytologist should be coordinated so that a large enough sample is obtained and the appropriate cultures and histologic and molecular studies, including electron-microscopic and PCR studies, are performed. The diagnostic yield of meningeal biopsy can be increased by targeting regions that enhance with contrast on MRI or CT. With current microsurgical techniques, most areas of the basal meninges can be accessed for biopsy via a limited craniotomy. In a series from the Mayo Clinic reported by TM Cheng et al. (Neurosurgery 34:590, 1994), MRI demonstrated meningeal enhancement in 47% of patients undergoing meningeal biopsy. Biopsy of an enhancing region was diagnostic in 80% of cases; biopsy of nonenhancing regions was diagnostic in only 9%; sarcoid (31%) and metastatic adenocarcinoma (25%) were the most common conditions identified. Tuberculosis is the most common condition identified in many reports from outside the United States.
# Chunk 3077
Over the past decade, the estimated incidence of burn injuries in the United States has steadily declined; still, however, >1 million burn injuries are brought to medical attention each year. While many burn injuries are minor and require little or no intervention, 183,000 cases were reported between 2002 and 2011 to the National Burn Repository from specialized burn care facilities; of the 45,000 persons hospitalized for these injuries, 60% required intensive care and 20,000 had major burns involving at least 25% of the total body surface area. The majority of burn patients are men. Children under the age of 5 account for ~20% of all reported cases. Scalds, structural fires, and flammable liquids and gases are the major causes of burns, but electrical, chemical, and smoking-related sources also are important. Burns predispose to infection by damaging the protective barrier function of the skin, thus facilitating the entry of pathogenic microorganisms, and by inducing systemic immunosuppression. It is therefore not surprising that multiorgan failure and infectious complications are the major causes of morbidity and death in serious burn injury. More than 3000 patients in the United States die of burn-related infections each year, and 6 of the top 10 complications recently identified by the American Burn Association’s 10-year review are infectious: pneumonia (4.6%), septicemia (2.7%), cellulitis/traumatic injury (2.6%), respiratory failure (2.5%), wound infection (2.2%), another infection (2.0%), renal failure (1.5%), line infection (1.4%), acute respiratory distress syndrome (1.2%), and arrhythmia (1.0%).
# Chunk 3078
Streptococci and staphylococci were the predominant causes of burn-wound infection in the preantibiotic era and remain important pathogens at present. With the advent of antimicrobial agents, Pseudomonas aeruginosa became a major problem in burn-wound management. In animal models of cutaneous thermal injury and wound infection with Pseudomonas, there is an early, steady increase of neutrophils in the skin and bacterial dissemination to lungs and spleen within 72 h. Less common anaerobic bacteria are typically found in infections of electrical burns or when open wound dressings are used. The widespread use of topical and more effective antimicrobial agents has resulted in a decline in bacterial wound infections and the emergence of fungi (particularly Candida albicans, Aspergillus 166e-1 species, and the agents of mucormycosis) as increasingly important pathogens in burn-wound patients. Herpes simplex virus also has been found in burn wounds, especially those on the neck and face and those associated with inhalation injury. Cytomegalovirus viremia has been described in up to 71% of seropositive burn patients in prospective studies, and high levels (>1000 copies/mL) have been associated with increased duration of mechanical ventilation and longer stay in the intensive care unit (ICU).
# Chunk 3079
(Courtesy of Dr. Robert L. Sheridan, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston; with permission.)

FIGurE 166e-3 A burn wound infected with Pseudomonas aeruginosa, with liquefaction of tissue. Note the green discoloration at the wound margins, which is suggestive of Pseudomonas infection. (Courtesy of Dr. Robert L. Sheridan, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston; with permission.) for definitive diagnosis of infection. The timing of these biopsies can be guided by clinical changes, but in some centers burn wounds are routinely biopsied at regular intervals. The biopsy specimen is examined for histologic evidence of bacterial invasion, and quantitative microbiologic cultures are performed. The presence of >105 viable bacteria per gram of tissue is highly suggestive of invasive infection and of a dramatically increased risk of sepsis. Histopathologic evidence of the invasion of viable tissue and the presence of microorganisms in unburned blood vessels and lymphatics is a more definitive indicator of infection. A blood culture positive for the same organism seen in large quantities in biopsied tissue is a reliable indicator of burn sepsis. Surface cultures may provide some indication of the microorganisms present in the hospital environment but are not indicative of the etiology of infection. This noninvasive technique may be of use in determining the flora present in excised burn areas or in areas where the skin is too thin for biopsy (e.g., over the ears, eyes, or digits). Rapid identification of organisms and institution of appropriate therapy are critical to the survival of patients with severe burn injury; polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is now being used for rapid identification of specific pathogens, sometimes in <6 h, to allow earlier treatment interventions.
# Chunk 3080
The use of oral antibiotics for selective digestive decontamination (SDD) to decrease bacterial colonization and the risk of burn-wound infection is controversial and has not been widely adopted. In a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial in patients with burns involving >20% of the total body surface area, SDD was associated with reduced mortality rates in the burn ICU and in the hospital and also with a reduced incidence of pneumonia. The effects of SDD on the normal anaerobic bowel flora must be taken into consideration before this approach is used.
# Chunk 3081
All burn-injury patients should undergo tetanus booster immunization if they have completed primary immunization but have not received a booster dose in the past 5 years. Patients without prior immunization should receive tetanus immune globulin and undergo primary immunization.
# Chunk 3082
In the United States, dogs bite >4.7 million people each year and are responsible for 80% of all animal-bite wounds, an estimated 15–20% of which become infected. Each year, 800,000 Americans seek medical attention for dog bites; of those injured, 386,000 require treatment in an emergency department, with >1000 emergency department visits each day and about a dozen deaths per year. Most dog bites are provoked and are inflicted by the victim’s pet or by a dog known to the victim. These bites are frequently sustained during efforts to break up a dogfight. Children are more likely than adults to sustain canine bites, with the highest incidence of 6 bites/1000 population among boys 5–9 years old. Victims are more often male than female, and bites most often involve an upper extremity. Among children <4 years old, two-thirds of all these injuries involve the head or neck. Infection typically manifests 8–24 h after the bite as pain at the site of injury with cellulitis accompanied by purulent, sometimes foul-smelling discharge. Septic arthritis and osteomyelitis may develop if a canine tooth penetrates synovium or bone. Systemic manifestations (e.g., fever, lymphadenopathy, and lymphangitis) also may occur. The microbiology of dog-bite wound infections is usually mixed and includes β-hemolytic streptococci, Pasteurella species, Staphylococcus species (including methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus [MRSA]), Eikenella corrodens, and Capnocytophaga canimorsus. Many wounds also include anaerobic bacteria such as Actinomyces, Fusobacterium, Prevotella, and Porphyromonas species.
# Chunk 3083
Infections have been attributed to bites from many animal species. Often these bites are sustained as a consequence of occupational exposure (farmers, laboratory workers, veterinarians) or recreational exposure (hunters and trappers, wilderness campers, owners of exotic pets). Generally, the microflora of bite wounds reflects the oral flora of the biting animal. Most members of the cat family, including feral cats, harbor P. multocida. Bite wounds from aquatic animals such as alligators or piranhas may contain Aeromonas hydrophila. Venomous snakebites (Chap. 474) result in severe inflammatory responses and tissue necrosis—conditions that render these injuries prone to infection. The snake’s oral flora includes many species of aerobes and anaerobes, such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Serratia marcescens, Proteus species, Staphylococcus epidermidis, Bacteroides fragilis, and Clostridium species. Bites from nonhuman primates are highly susceptible to infection with pathogens similar to those isolated from human bites (see below). Bites from Old World monkeys (Macaca) may also result in the transmission of B virus (Herpesvirus simiae, cercopithecine herpesvirus), a cause of serious infection of the human central nervous system. Bites of seals, walruses, and polar bears may cause a chronic suppurative infection known as seal finger, which is probably due to one or more species of Mycoplasma colonizing these animals.
# Chunk 3084
Presumptive or Prophylactic Therapy The use of antibiotics for patients presenting early (within 8 h) after bite injury is controversial. Although symptomatic infection frequently will not yet have manifested at this point, many early wounds will harbor pathogens, and many will become infected. Studies of antibiotic prophylaxis for wound infections are limited and have often included only small numbers of cases in which various types of wounds have been managed according to various protocols. A meta-analysis of eight randomized trials of prophylactic antibiotics in patients with dog-bite wounds demonstrated a reduction in the rate of infection by 50% with prophylaxis. However, in the absence of sound clinical trials, many clinicians base the decision to treat bite wounds with empirical antibiotics on the species of the biting animal; the location, severity, and extent of the bite wound; and the existence of comorbid conditions in the host. All humanand monkey-bite wounds should be treated presumptively because of the high rate of infection. Most cat-bite wounds, particularly those involving the hand, should be treated. Other factors favoring treatment for bite wounds include severe injury, as in crush wounds; potential bone or joint involvement; involvement of the hands or genital region; host immunocompromise, including that due to liver disease or splenectomy; and prior mastectomy on the side of an involved upper extremity. When prophylactic antibiotics are administered, they are usually given for 3–5 days.
# Chunk 3085
Rabies and Tetanus Prophylaxis Rabies prophylaxis, consisting of both passive administration of rabies immune globulin (with as much of the dose as possible infiltrated into and around the wound) and active immunization with rabies vaccine, should be given in consultation with local and regional public health authorities for some animal bites and scratches as well as for certain nonbite exposures (Chap. 232). Rabies is endemic in a variety of animals, including dogs and cats in many areas of the world. Many local health authorities require the reporting of all animal bites. A tetanus booster immunization should be given if the patient has undergone primary immunization but has not received a booster dose in the past 5 years. Patients who have not previously completed primary immunization should be immunized and should also receive tetanus immune globulin. Elevation of the site of injury is an important adjunct to antimicrobial therapy. Immobilization of the infected area, especially the hand, also is beneficial.
# Chunk 3086
Treatment of UTIs is based on the results of quantitative urine cultures (Chap. 162). The most common pathogens are Escherichia coli, nosocomial gram-negative bacilli, enterococci, and Candida. Several caveats apply in the treatment of institutionally acquired infection. First, in patients with chronic indwelling bladder catheters, especially those in long-term-care facilities, “catheter flora”—microorganisms living on encrustations within the catheter lumen—may differ from actual urinary tract pathogens. Therefore, for suspected UTI in the setting of chronic catheterization (especially in women), it is useful to replace the bladder catheter and to obtain a freshly voided urine specimen. Second, as in all nosocomial infections, at the time treatment is initiated on the basis of a positive culture, it is useful to repeat the culture to verify the persistence of infection. Third, the frequency with which UTIs occur may lead to the erroneous assumption that the urinary tract alone is the source of infection in a febrile hospitalized patient. Fourth, recovery of Staphylococcus aureus from urine cultures may result from hematogenous seeding and may indicate an occult systemic infection. Finally, although Candida is now the most common pathogen in nosocomial UTIs among patients on intensive care units (ICUs), treatment of candiduria is often unsuccessful and is recommended only when there is upper-pole or bladder-wall invasion, obstruction, neutropenia, or immunosuppression.
# Chunk 3087
Historically, pneumonia has accounted for ~10–15% of nosocomial infections; ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP) occurred in 1 to >4 patients per 1000 ventilator-days, and these infections were reported as responsible for a mean of 10 extra hospital days and $23,000 in extra costs per episode. Most cases of bacterial nosocomial pneumonia are caused by aspiration of endogenous or hospital-acquired oropharyngeal (and occasionally gastric) flora. Nosocomial pneumonias are associated with more deaths than are infections at any other body site. However, attributable mortality rates suggest that the risk of dying from nosocomial pneumonia is affected greatly by other factors, including comorbidities, inadequate antibiotic treatment, and the involvement of specific pathogens (particularly Pseudomonas aeruginosa or Acinetobacter). Surveillance and accurate diagnosis of pneumonia have been problematic in hospitals because many patients, especially those in the ICU, have abnormal chest roentgenographs, fever, and leukocytosis potentially attributable to multiple causes. This diagnostic uncertainty has led to a refocus from VAP to “ventilatorassociated events” (VAEs), conditions, and complications, for which worsening physiologic parameters, such as oxygenation, are key metrics. Early data suggest that ~5–10% of patients using mechanical ventilators develop VAEs. Viral pneumonias, which are particularly important in pediatric and immunocompromised patients, are discussed in the virology section and in Chap. 153.
# Chunk 3088
S. aureus, P. aeruginosa, Enterobacter species, Klebsiella pneumoniae, or Acinetobacter. When invasive techniques are used to diagnose VAP, the proportion of isolates accounted for by gram-negative bacilli decreases from 50–70% to 35–45%. Infection is polymicrobial in as many as 20–40% of cases. The role of anaerobic bacteria in VAP is not well defined. Third, one multicenter study suggested that 8 days is an appropriate duration of therapy for nosocomial pneumonia, with a longer duration (15 days in that study) when the pathogen is Acinetobacter or P. aeruginosa. Finally, in febrile patients (particularly those who have endotracheal or gastric tubes inserted through the nares), occult respiratory tract infections, especially bacterial sinusitis and otitis media, should be considered.
# Chunk 3089
Wound infections occur in ~500,000 patients each year, account for ~15–20% of nosocomial infections, contribute up to 7–10 extra postoperative hospital days, and result in $3000 to $29,000 in extra costs, depending on the operative procedure and pathogen(s). The average wound infection has an incubation period of 5–7 days—longer than many postoperative stays. For this reason and because many procedures are now performed on an outpatient basis, the incidence of wound infections has become more difficult to assess. These infections usually are caused by the patient’s endogenous or hospital-acquired skin and mucosal flora and occasionally are due to airborne spread of skin squames that may be shed into the wound from members of the operating-room team. True airborne spread of infection through droplet nuclei is rare in operating rooms unless there is a “disseminator” (e.g., of group A streptococci or staphylococci) among the staff. In general, the common risks for postoperative wound infection are related to the surgeon’s technical skill, the patient’s underlying conditions (e.g., diabetes mellitus, obesity) or advanced age, and inappropriate timing of antibiotic prophylaxis. Additional risks include the presence of drains, prolonged preoperative hospital stays, shaving of operative sites by razor the day before surgery, long duration of surgery, and infection at remote sites (e.g., untreated UTI).
# Chunk 3090
Evidence-based bundles of control measures (Table 168-4) have been strikingly effective, eliminating almost all CVC-associated infections in one ICU study. Additional control measures for infections associated with vascular access include use of a chlorhexidine-impregnated 916 patch at the skin-catheter junction; daily bathing of ICU patients with chlorhexidine; application of semitransparent access-site dressings (for ease of bathing and site inspection and protection of the site from secretions); avoidance of the femoral site for catheterization because of a higher risk of infection (most likely related to the density of the skin flora); rotation of peripheral catheters to a new site at specified intervals (e.g., every 72–96 h), which may be facilitated by use of an IV therapy team; and application of aseptic technique when accessing pressure transducers or other vascular ports. Unresolved issues include the role of gut translocation rather than vascular access sites as a cause of primary bacteremia in immunocompromised patients and the implications for surveillance definitions; the best frequency for rotation of CVC sites (given that guidewire-assisted catheter changes at the same site do not lessen and can even increase infection risk); the appropriate role of mupirocin ointment, a topical antibiotic with excellent antistaphylococcal activity, in site care; the relative degrees of risk posed by peripherally inserted central catheters (PICC lines); and the risk-benefit of prophylactic use of heparin (to avoid catheter thrombi, which may be associated with increased risk of infection) or of vancomycin or alcohol (as catheter flushes or “locks”— i.e., concentrated anti-infective solutions instilled into the catheter lumen) for high-risk patients. Vascular device–related infection is suspected on the basis of the appearance of the catheter site or the presence of fever or bacteremia without another source in patients with vascular catheters. The diagnosis is confirmed by the recovery of the same species of microorganism from peripheral-blood cultures (preferably two samples drawn from peripheral veins by separate venipunctures) and from semiquantitative or quantitative cultures of the vascular catheter tip. Less commonly used diagnostic measures include (1) differential (faster) time to positivity (>2 h) for blood drawn through the vascular access device than for a sample from a peripheral vein and (2) differences in quantitative cultures (a threefold or greater “step-up”) for blood samples drawn simultaneously from a peripheral vein and from a CVC, which should show the step-up if infected. When infusion-related sepsis is considered (e.g., because of the abrupt onset of fever or shock temporally related to infusion therapy), a sample of the infusate or blood product should be retained for culture. Therapy for vascular access–related infection is directed at the pathogen recovered from the blood and/or infected site. Important considerations in treatment are the need for an echocardiogram (to evaluate the patient for endocarditis), the duration of therapy, and the need to remove potentially infected catheters. In one report, approximately one-fourth of patients with intravascular catheter– associated S. aureus bacteremia who were studied by transesophageal echocardiography had evidence of endocarditis; this test may be useful in determining the appropriate duration of treatment. Detailed consensus guidelines for the management of intravascular catheter–related infections have been published and recommend catheter removal in most cases of bacteremia or fungemia due to nontunneled CVCs. When attempting to salvage a potentially infected catheter, some clinicians use the “antibiotic lock” technique, which may facilitate penetration of infected biofilms, in addition to systemic antimicrobial therapy (see www.idsociety.org/Other_Guidelines/). The authors of the consensus treatment guidelines advise that the decision to remove a tunneled catheter or implanted device suspected of being the source of bacteremia or fungemia should be based on the severity of the patient’s illness, the strength of evidence that the device is infected, the presence of local or systemic complications, an assessment of the specific pathogens, and the patient’s response to antimicrobial therapy if the catheter or device is initially retained. For patients with track-site infection, successful therapy without catheter removal is unusual. For patients with suppurative venous thrombophlebitis, excision of affected veins is usually required.
# Chunk 3091
In several trials over the past 10 years, source control—i.e., removal of patients’ fecal patina—by daily bathing with chlorhexidine has reduced the risk of bacteremia in ICU patients. “Search-and-destroy” methods—i.e., active surveillance cultures to detect and isolate the “resistance iceberg” of patients colonized with MRSA—in nonoutbreak settings are credited with elimination of nosocomial MRSA in the Netherlands and Denmark. In a recent multicenter trial in the United States, universal source control with chlorhexidine and nasal mupirocin was significantly more effective for controlling MRSA than was a search-and-destroy approach and led to control of other pathogens as well, providing a broad (“horizontal”) rather than a narrower (“vertical”) intervention (see www.ahrq.gov/ professionals/systems/hospital/universal_icu_decolonization/). For some pathogens, such as VRE, enforcement of environmental cleaning also reduces cross-transmission risk.
# Chunk 3092
In the first month after HSC transplantation, infectious complications are similar to those in granulocytopenic patients receiving chemotherapy for acute leukemia (Chap. 104). Because of the anticipated 1to 4-week duration of neutropenia and the high rate of bacterial infection in this population, many centers give prophylactic antibiotics to patients upon initiation of myeloablative therapy. Quinolones decrease the incidence of gram-negative bacteremia among these patients. Bacterial infections are common in the first few days after HSC transplantation. The organisms involved are predominantly those found on skin, mucosa, or IV catheters (Staphylococcus aureus, coagulase-negative staphylococci, streptococci) or aerobic bacteria that colonize the bowel (Escherichia coli, Klebsiella, Pseudomonas). Bacillus cereus, although rare, has emerged as a pathogen early after transplantation and can cause meningitis, which is unusual in these patients. Chemotherapy, use of broad-spectrum antibiotics, and delayed reconstitution of humoral immunity place HSC transplant patients at risk for diarrhea and colitis caused by Clostridium difficile overgrowth and toxin production.
# Chunk 3093
Abbreviation: GVHD, graft-versus-host disease.

Beyond the first few days of neutropenia, infections with nosocomial pathogens (e.g., vancomycin-resistant enterococci, Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, Acinetobacter species, and extended-spectrum β-lactamase–producing gram-negative bacteria) as well as with filamentous bacteria (e.g., Nocardia species) become more common. Vigilance is indicated, particularly for patients with a history of active or known latent tuberculosis, even when they have been appropriately pretreated. A form of bacterial colitis among cord-blood recipients has occurred 90–300 days after transplantation, responds to antimicrobial agents such as metronidazole, and—as determined by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of biopsy specimens—may be attributed to the bacterium Bradyrhizobium enterica (related to B. japonicum). Episodes of bacteremia due to encapsulated organisms mark the late posttransplantation period (>6 months after HSC reconstitution); patients who have undergone splenectomy and those with persistent hypogammaglobulinemia are at particular risk.
# Chunk 3094
Varicella-Zoster Virus Reactivation of VZV manifests as herpes zoster and may occur within the first month but more commonly occurs several months after transplantation. Reactivation rates are ∼40% for allogeneic HSC transplant recipients and 25% for autologous recipients. Localized zoster can spread rapidly in an immunosuppressed patient. Fortunately, disseminated disease can usually be controlled with high doses of acyclovir. Because of frequent dissemination among patients with skin lesions, acyclovir is given prophylactically in some centers to prevent severe disease. Low doses of acyclovir appear to be effective in preventing reactivation of VZV. However, acyclovir can also suppress the development of VZV-specific immunity. Thus, its administration for only 6 months after transplantation does not prevent zoster from occurring when treatment is stopped. Administration of low doses of acyclovir for an entire year after transplantation is effective and may eliminate most cases of posttransplantation zoster, even among cord-blood recipients. For further discussion, see Chap. 217.
# Chunk 3095
Human Herpesviruses 6 and 7 Human herpesvirus type 6 (HHV-6), the cause of roseola in children, is a ubiquitous herpesvirus that is reactivated (as determined by quantitative plasma PCR) in ∼50% of HSC transplant recipients 2–4 weeks after transplantation. Reactivation is more common among patients requiring glucocorticoids for GVHD and among those receiving second transplants. Reactivation of HHV6, primarily type B, may be associated with delayed monocyte and platelet engraftment. Limbic encephalitis developing after transplantation has been associated with HHV-6 in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). The causality of the association is not well defined; in several cases, plasma viremia was detected long before the onset of encephalitis. Nevertheless, most patients with encephalitis had very high viral loads in plasma at the time of CNS illness, and viral antigen has been detected in hippocampal astrocytes. HHV-6 DNA is sometimes found in lung samples after transplantation. However, its role in pneumonitis is unclear, as co-pathogens are frequently present. While HHV-6 is susceptible to foscarnet or cidofovir (and possibly to ganciclovir) in vitro, the efficacy of antiviral treatment has not been well studied. Little is known about the related herpesvirus HHV-7 or its role in posttransplantation infection. For further discussion, see Chap. 219.
# Chunk 3096
Other (Non-Herpes) Viruses The diagnosis of pneumonia in HSC transplant recipients poses special problems. Because patients have undergone treatment with multiple chemotherapeutic agents and sometimes irradiation, their differential diagnosis should include—in addition to bacterial and fungal pneumonia—CMV pneumonitis, pneumonia of other viral etiologies, parasitic pneumonia, diffuse alveolar hemorrhage, and chemicalor radiation-associated pneumonitis. Since fungi and viruses (e.g., influenza A and B viruses, respiratory syncytial virus [RSV], parainfluenza virus [types 1–4], adenovirus, enterovirus, bocavirus, human metapneumovirus, coronavirus, and rhinovirus [increasingly detected by multiplex PCR]) also can cause pneumonia in this setting, it is important to obtain a specific diagnosis. Diagnostic modalities include Gram’s stain, microbiologic culture, antigen testing, and—increasingly—multipathogen PCR and mass spectrometry assays. M. tuberculosis has been an uncommon cause of pneumonia among HSC transplant recipients in Western countries (accounting for <0.1–0.2% of cases) but is common in Hong Kong (5.5%) and in countries where the prevalence of tuberculosis is high. The recipient’s exposure history is clearly critical in an assessment of posttransplantation infections.
# Chunk 3097
During the early period (<1 month after transplantation; Table 169-4), infections are most commonly caused by extracellular bacteria (staphylococci, streptococci, enterococci, and E. coli and other gram-negative organisms, including nosocomial organisms with broad antibiotic resistance), which often originate in surgical wound or anastomotic sites. The type of transplant largely determines the spectrum of infection. In subsequent weeks, the consequences of the administration of agents that suppress cell-mediated immunity become apparent, and acquisition—or, more commonly, reactivation—of viruses, mycobacteria, endemic fungi, and parasites (from the recipient or from the transplanted organ) can occur. CMV infection is often a problem, particularly in the first 6 months after transplantation, and may present as severe systemic disease or as infection of the transplanted organ. HHV-6 reactivation (assessed by plasma PCR) occurs within the first 2–4 weeks after transplantation and may be associated with fever, leukopenia, and very rare cases of encephalitis. Data suggest that replication of HHV-6 and HHV-7 may exacerbate CMV-induced disease. CMV is associated not only with generalized immunosuppression but also with organ-specific, rejection-related syndromes: glomerulopathy in kidney transplant recipients, bronchiolitis obliterans in lung transplant recipients, vasculopathy in heart transplant recipients, and the vanishing bile duct syndrome in liver transplant recipients. A complex interplay between increased CMV 924 TABLE 169-4 CoMMon InfECTIonS AfTER SoLID oRgAn TRAnSPLAnTATIon, By SITE of InfECTIon
# Chunk 3098
Beyond 6 months after transplantation, infections characteristic of occur in the allograft. However, because the seroprevalence of KSHV patients with defects in cell-mediated immunity—e.g., infections with is very low in Western countries, Kaposi’s sarcoma is not common. Listeria, Nocardia, Rhodococcus, mycobacteria, various fungi, and other Recipients (or donors) from Iceland, the Middle East, Mediterranean intracellular pathogens—may be a problem. International patients and countries, and Africa are at highest risk of disease. Data suggest that global travelers may experience reactivation of dormant infections a switch of immunosuppressive agents—from calcineurin inhibitors with trypanosomes, Leishmania, Plasmodium, Strongyloides, and other (cyclosporine, tacrolimus) to mTor pathway–active agents (sirolimus, parasites. Reactivation of latent M. tuberculosis infection, while rare in everolimus)—after adequate wound healing may significantly reduce Western nations, is far more common among persons from developing the likelihood of development of Kaposi’s sarcoma and perhaps of countries. The recipient is typically the source, although reactivation EBV-LPD and certain other posttransplantation malignancies. and spread from the donor organ can occur. While pulmonary disease remains most common, atypical sites can be involved and mortality KIDNEY TRANSPLANTATION rates can be high (up to 30%). Vigilance, prophylaxis/preemptive ther-See Table 169-4. apy (when indicated), and rapid diagnosis and treatment of infections can be lifesaving in SOT recipients, who, unlike most HSC transplant Early Infections Bacteria often cause infections that develop in the recipients, continue to be immunosuppressed. period immediately after kidney transplantation. There is a role for
# Chunk 3099
EBV disease is more serious; it may present as an extranodal proliferation of B cells that invade the CNS, nasopharynx, liver, small bowel, heart, and other organs, including the transplanted kidney. The disease is diagnosed by the finding of a mass of proliferating EBV-positive B cells. The incidence of EBV-LPD is elevated among patients who acquire EBV infection from the donor and among patients given high doses of cyclosporine, tacrolimus, glucocorticoids, and anti–T cell antibodies. Disease may regress once immunocompetence is restored. KSHV infection can be transmitted with the donor kidney and result in development of Kaposi’s sarcoma, although it more often represents reactivation of latent infection of the recipient. Kaposi’s sarcoma often appears within 1 year after transplantation, although the time of onset ranges widely (1 month to ∼20 years). Avoidance of immunosuppressive agents that inhibit calcineurin has been associated with less Kaposi’s sarcoma, less EBV disease, and even less CMV replication. The use of rapamycin (sirolimus) has independently led to regression of Kaposi’s sarcoma.
# Chunk 3100
The papovaviruses BK virus and JC virus (polyomavirus hominis types 1 and 2) have been cultured from the urine of kidney transplant recipients (as they have from that of HSC transplant recipients) in the setting of profound immunosuppression. High levels of BK virus replication detected by PCR in urine and blood are predictive of pathology, especially in the setting of renal transplantation. JC virus may rarely cause similar disease in kidney transplantation. Urinary excretion of BK virus and BK viremia are associated with the development of ureteral strictures, polyomavirus-associated nephropathy (1–10% of renal transplant recipients), and (less commonly) generalized vasculopathy. Timely detection and early reduction of immunosuppression are critical and can reduce rates of graft loss related to polyomavirusassociated nephropathy from 90% to 10–30%. Therapeutic responses to IVIg, quinolones, leflunomide, and cidofovir have been reported, but the efficacy of these agents has not been substantiated through adequate clinical study. Most centers approach the problem by reducing immunosuppression in an effort to enhance host immunity and decrease viral titers. JC virus is associated with rare cases of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy. Adenoviruses may persist and cause hemorrhagic nephritis/cystitis with continued immunosuppression in these patients, but disseminated disease like that seen in HSC transplant recipients is much less common.
# Chunk 3101
Kidney transplant recipients are also subject to infections with other intracellular organisms. These patients may develop pulmonary infections with Mycobacterium, Aspergillus, and Mucor species as well as infections with other pathogens in which the T cell/macrophage axis plays an important role. L. monocytogenes is a common cause of bacteremia ≥1 month after renal transplantation and should be seriously considered in renal transplant recipients presenting with fever and headache. Kidney transplant recipients may develop Salmonella bacteremia, which can lead to endovascular infections and require prolonged therapy. Pulmonary infections with Pneumocystis are common unless the patient is maintained on TMP-SMX prophylaxis.
# Chunk 3102
Kidney transplant recipients are susceptible to invasive fungal infections, including those due to Aspergillus and Rhizopus, which may present as superficial lesions before dissemination. Mycobacterial infection (particularly that with Mycobacterium marinum) can be diagnosed by skin examination. Infection with Prototheca wickerhamii (an achlorophyllic alga) has been diagnosed by skin biopsy. Warts caused by human papillomaviruses (HPVs) are a late consequence of persistent immunosuppression; imiquimod or other forms of local therapy are usually satisfactory. Merkel cell carcinoma, a rare and aggressive neuroendocrine skin tumor whose frequency is increased fivefold in elderly SOT (especially kidney) recipients, is causally linked to a novel polyomavirus, Merkel cell polyomavirus.
# Chunk 3103
Notably, although BK virus replication and virus-associated disease can be detected far earlier, polyomavirus-associated nephropathy is clinically diagnosed in a median of ∼300 days and thus qualifies as a late-onset disease. With the establishment of better screening procedures (e.g., urine cytology, urine nucleic acid load, plasma PCR), disease onset is being detected earlier (see “Middle-Period Infections,” above) and preemptive strategies (decrease or modification of immunosuppression) are being instituted more promptly, as the efficacy of antiviral therapy is not well established.
# Chunk 3104
HEART TRANSPLANTATION Early Infections Sternal wound infection and mediastinitis are early complications of heart transplantation. An indolent course is common, with fever or a mildly elevated white blood cell count preceding the development of site tenderness or drainage. Clinical suspicion based on evidence of sternal instability and failure to heal may lead to the diagnosis. Common microbial residents of the skin (e.g., S. aureus, including methicillin-resistant strains, and Staphylococcus epidermidis) as well as gram-negative organisms (e.g., Pseudomonas aeruginosa) and fungi (e.g., Candida) are often involved. In rare cases, mediastinitis in heart transplant recipients can also be due to Mycoplasma hominis (Chap. 212); since this organism requires an anaerobic environment for growth and may be difficult to see on conventional medium, the laboratory should be alerted that its involvement is suspected. M. hominis mediastinitis has been cured with a combination of surgical debridement (sometimes requiring muscle-flap placement) and the administration of clindamycin and tetracycline. Organisms associated with mediastinitis may sometimes be cultured from pericardial fluid.
# Chunk 3105
CMV infection is associated with poor outcomes after heart transplantation. The virus is usually detected 1–2 months after transplantation, causes early signs and laboratory abnormalities (usually fever and atypical lymphocytosis or leukopenia and thrombocytopenia) at 2–3 months, and can produce severe disease (e.g., pneumonia) at 3–4 months. An interesting observation is that seropositive recipients usually develop viremia faster than patients whose primary CMV infection is a consequence of transplantation. Between 40% and 70% of patients develop symptomatic CMV disease in the form of (1) CMV pneumonia, the form most likely to be fatal; (2) CMV esophagitis and gastritis, sometimes accompanied by abdominal pain with or without ulcerations and bleeding; and (3) the CMV syndrome, consisting of CMV in the bloodstream along with fever, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, and hepatic enzyme abnormalities. Ganciclovir is efficacious in the treatment of CMV infection; prophylaxis with ganciclovir or possibly with other antiviral agents, as described for renal transplantation, may reduce the overall incidence of CMV-related disease.
# Chunk 3106
LUNG TRANSPLANTATION Early Infections It is not surprising that lung transplant recipients are predisposed to the development of pneumonia. The combination of ischemia and the resulting mucosal damage, together with accompanying denervation and lack of lymphatic drainage, probably contributes to the high rate of pneumonia (66% in one series). The prophylactic use of high doses of broad-spectrum antibiotics for the first 3–4 days after surgery may decrease the incidence of pneumonia. Gram-negative pathogens (Enterobacteriaceae and Pseudomonas species) are troublesome in the first 2 weeks after surgery (the period of maximal vulnerability). Pneumonia can also be caused by Candida (possibly as a result of colonization of the donor lung), Aspergillus, and Cryptococcus. Many centers use antifungal prophylaxis (typically fluconazole or liposomal amphotericin B) for the first 1–2 weeks.
# Chunk 3107
LIVER TRANSPLANTATION Early Infections As in other transplantation settings, early bacterial infections are a major problem after liver transplantation. Many centers administer systemic broad-spectrum antibiotics for the first 24 h or sometimes longer after surgery, even in the absence of documented infection. However, despite prophylaxis, infectious complications are common and correlate with the duration of the surgical procedure and the type of biliary drainage. An operation lasting >12 h is associated with an increased likelihood of infection. Patients who have a choledochojejunostomy with drainage of the biliary duct to a Roux-en-Y jejunal bowel loop have more fungal infections than those whose bile is drained 927 via anastomosis of the donor common bile duct to the recipient common bile duct. Overall, liver transplant patients have a high incidence of fungal infections, and the occurrence of fungal (often candidal) infection in the setting of choledochojejunostomy correlates with retransplantation, elevated creatinine levels, long procedures, transfusion of >40 units of blood, reoperation, preoperative use of glucocorticoids, prolonged treatment with antibacterial agents, and fungal colonization 2 days before and 3 days after surgery. Many centers give antifungal agents prophylactically in this setting.
# Chunk 3108
Middle-Period Infections The development of postsurgical biliary stricture predisposes patients to cholangitis. The incidence of strictures is increased in live-donor liver transplantation. Transplant recipients who develop cholangitis may have high spiking fevers and rigors but often lack the characteristic signs and symptoms of classic cholangitis, including abdominal pain and jaundice. Although these findings may suggest graft rejection, rejection is typically accompanied by marked elevation of liver function enzymes. In contrast, in cholangitis in transplant recipients, results of liver function tests (with the possible exception of alkaline phosphatase levels) are often within the normal range. Definitive diagnosis of cholangitis in liver transplant recipients requires demonstration of aggregated neutrophils in bile duct biopsy specimens. Unfortunately, invasive studies of the biliary tract (either T-tube cholangiography or endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography) may themselves lead to cholangitis. For this reason, many clinicians recommend an empirical trial of therapy with antibiotics covering gram-negative organisms and anaerobes before these procedures are undertaken as well as antibiotic coverage if procedures are eventually performed.
# Chunk 3109
Composite tissue allotransplantation (CTA) is a new field in which, rather than a single organ, multiple tissue types composing a major body part are transplanted. The sites involved have included an upper extremity, the face, the trachea, the knee, and the abdominal wall. The numbers of recipients are limited. The different procedures and the associated infectious complications vary. Nevertheless, some early trends related to infectious complications have become apparent, as very intense and prolonged immunosuppression is typically required to prevent rejection. For example, in the early postoperative period, bacterial infections are especially frequent in facial transplant recipients. Perioperative prophylaxis is tailored to the organisms likely to complicate the different procedures. As in SOT recipients, complicated CMV infections have been observed in several CTA settings, particularly when the recipient is seronegative and the donor is seropositive. In some patients, anti-CMV immune globulin in addition to ganciclovir (as used in HSC transplant recipients with CMV pneumonia) was needed to control disease, and ganciclovir resistance requiring alternative therapies developed in several patients. Infectious complications from reactivation of other members of the human herpesvirus family and other latent viruses also caused significant morbidity, as discussed for SOT recipients. Prophylaxis for CMV infection, P. jirovecii infection, toxoplasmosis, and fungal infection is administered for several months on the basis of the limited studies available.
# Chunk 3110
K. pneumoniae, K. oxytoca, Bacteroides spp., Clostridium perfringens, and Peptostreptococcus spp.

Escherichia coli (52%); H. influenzae (70%); Salmonella spp. (91%)
# Chunk 3111
The aminoglycosides are a class of antibacterial agents with concentration-dependent activity against most gram-negative organisms. The most commonly used aminoglycosides are gentamicin, tobramycin, and amikacin, although others, such as streptomycin, kanamycin, neomycin, and paromomycin, may be used in special circumstances. Aminoglycosides have a significant dose-dependent post-antibiotic effect, meaning that they have an antibacterial effect even after serum drug levels are undetectable. The postantibiotic effect and concentration-dependent killing form the rationale behind extended-interval aminoglycoside dosing, in which a larger dose is given once daily rather than smaller doses multiple times daily. Aminoglycosides are active against gram-negative bacilli, such as Enterobacteriaceae,
# Chunk 3112
M. chelonae) as well as in the prophylaxis and treatment of M. avium-intracellulare infection in patients with HIV/AIDS and in combination therapy for H. pylori infection and bartonellosis. Enterobacteriaceae, Pseudomonas species, and Acinetobacter species are intrinsically resistant to macrolides as a result of decreased membrane permeability, although azithromycin is active against gram-negative diarrheal pathogens. The major adverse effects of this drug class include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea and abdominal pain, prolongation of QTc interval, exacerbation of myasthenia gravis, and tinnitus. Azithromycin specifically has been associated with an increased risk of death, especially among patients with underlying heart disease, because of the risk of QTc interval prolongation and torsades de pointes. Erythromycin, clarithromycin, and telithromycin inhibit the CYP3A4 hepatic drug-metabolizing enzyme and can result in increased levels of coadministered drugs, including benzodiazepines, statins, warfarin, cyclosporine, and tacrolimus. Azithromycin does not inhibit CYP3A4 and lacks these drug–drug interactions.
# Chunk 3113
Metronidazole is used in the treatment of anaerobic bacterial infections as well as infections caused by protozoa (e.g., amebiasis, giardiasis, trichomoniasis). It is the agent of choice as a component of combination therapy for polymicrobial abscesses in the lung, brain, or abdomen, the etiology of which often includes anaerobic bacteria, and for bacterial vaginosis, pelvic inflammatory disease, mild to moderate C. difficile–associated diarrhea, and anaerobic infections, such as those due to Bacteroides, Fusobacterium, and Prevotella species. Metronidazole is bactericidal against anaerobic bacteria and exhibits concentration-dependent killing. It has high oral bioavailability and tissue penetration, including penetration of the blood–brain barrier. The majority of Actinomyces, Propionibacterium, and Lactobacillus species are intrinsically resistant to metronidazole. The major adverse effects include nausea, diarrhea, and a metallic taste. Concomitant ingestion of alcohol may result in a disulfiram-like reaction, and patients are usually instructed to avoid alcohol during treatment. Long-term treatment carries the risk of leukopenia, neutropenia, peripheral neuropathy, and central nervous system toxicity manifesting as confusion, dysarthria, ataxia, nystagmus, and ophthalmoparesis. Through metronidazole’s effect on the CYP2C9 drug-metabolizing enzyme, its coadministration with warfarin can result in decreased metabolism and enhanced anticoagulant effects that require close monitoring. Concomitant administration of metronidazole with lithium can result in increased serum levels of lithium and associated toxicity; coadministration with phenytoin can result in phenytoin toxicity and possibly decreased levels of metronidazole.
# Chunk 3114
After sexual intercourse or 3 times weekly for up to 1 year 3–5 days Undefined 2 days (rifampin), single dose (ciprofloxacin)
# Chunk 3115
Serotype Distribution Not all pneumococcal serotypes are equally likely to cause disease; serotype distribution varies by age, disease syndrome, and geography. Geographic differences may be driven by variation in the burden of disease rather than by true serotype distribution differences. Most data on serotype distribution are related to pediatric invasive pneumococcal disease (IPD, defined as infection of a normally sterile site); much less information on global distribution is available for disease in adults. Among children <5 years of age, five to seven serotypes cause >60% of IPD cases in most parts of the world, seven serotypes (1, 5, 6A, 6B, 14, 19F, and 23F) account for ~60% of cases in all areas of the world, but in any given region these 100% <2 years of age and among adults ≥65 years of age (188 and 60 cases/100,000, respectively;
# Chunk 3116
Fig. 171-5). Since the introduction of PCV, 80% IPD rates among infants and children in the

United States have fallen by >75%, a decrease driven by the near elimination of vaccine serotype IPD. A similar impact of PCV on 948 18% 16% 14% 12% 10% 8% 6% 4% 2% 0% % of serotyped isolates 14 16B5 23F 19F6A19A 9V 18C Serotypes 2 4 37F12F 812A 15A9N29 FIGURE 171-3 Meta-analysis of available global pneumococcal serotype data, adjusted for regional disease incidence. The red line shows cumulative incidence, as indicated on the been introduced into the routine pediatric vaccination schedule. However, changes in the tries have been heterogeneous; the interpreta tion of this heterogeneity is a complex issue. In the United States, Canada, and Australia, rates of non-vaccine-serotype IPD have increased but the magnitude of the increase is generally small relative to the substantial reductions in vaccine-serotype IPD. In contrast, in other settings (e.g., Alaska Native communiright-hand Y axis. (Source: Global Serotype Project Report for the Pneumococcal Advance Market ties and the United Kingdom), the reduction Commitment Target Product Profile; available at http://www.gavi.org/library/gavi-documents/amc/ in vaccine-serotype IPD has been offset by tpp-codebook/.) seven serotypes may not all rank as the most common disease strains (Fig. 171-3). Some serotypes (e.g., types 1 and 5) not only tend to cause disease in areas with a high disease burden but also cause waves of disease in lower-burden areas (e.g., Europe) or outbreaks (e.g., in military barracks; meningitis in sub-Saharan Africa). The broader range of serotypes causing disease among adults than among children is apparent from a comparison of the coverage of existing multiserotype vaccines in different age groups. For example, data from the United States for 2006–2007 on the serotypes causing IPD indicated that a polysaccharide vaccine containing 23 serotypes (PPSV23) would cover 84% of cases among children <5 years of age and 76% of those among persons 18–64 years of age but only 65% of those among persons ≥65 years of age.
# Chunk 3117
Nasopharyngeal Carriage Pneumococci are intermittent inhabitants of the healthy human nasopharynx and are transmitted by respiratory droplets. In children, pneumococcal nasopharyngeal ecology varies by geographic region, socioeconomic status, climate, degree of crowding, and particularly intensity of exposure to other children, with children in day-care settings having higher rates of colonization. In developed-world settings, children serve as the major vectors of pneumococcal transmission. By 1 year of age, ~50% of children have had at least one episode of pneumococcal colonization. Cross-sectional prevalence data show rates of pneumococcal carriage ranging from 20% to 50% among children <5 years of age and from 5% to 15% among young notable increases in rates of disease caused by non-vaccine serotypes. Explanations for the heterogeneity of findings include replacement disease resulting from vaccine pressure, changes in clinical case investigation, secular trends unrelated to PCV use, antibiotic pressure selecting for resistant organisms, changes in surveillance or reporting systems, rapidity of introduction, and inclusion of a catch-up campaign. A recent systematic review concludes that serotype replacement in IPD follows the use of PCV7 but that the magnitude of this phenomenon is small relative to the reduction in disease from vaccine serotypes. The net effect of PCV is to reduce the rate of pneumococcal disease both in the age group targeted for vaccination and in unvaccinated age groups.
# Chunk 3118
United Kingdom. Data on colonization rates among healthy elderly individuals are limited. In developing-world settings, pneumococ cal acquisition occurs much earlier, sometimes within the first few days after birth, and nearly all infants have had at least one episode of colonization by 2 months of age. Cross-sectional studies show that up to the age of 5 years, 70–90% of children carry S. pneumoniae in the nasopharynx, and a significant proportion of adults (sometimes >40%) also are colonized. Their high rates of colonization make adults an important source of transmission and may affect community trans-10% mission dynamics. 0%
# Chunk 3119
FIGURE 171-5 Rates of invasive pneumococcal disease before the introduction of pneumococcal conjugate vaccine, by age group: United States, 1998. (Source: CDC, Active Bacterial Core Surveillance/ Emerging Infectious Program Network, 2000. Data adapted from MMWR 49[RR-9], 2000.) severity of disease at presentation (rather than according to whether the pneumonia episode is associated with bacteremia) and with the patient’s age (from <5% among hospitalized patients 18–44 years old to >12% among those >65 years old, even when appropriate and timely management is available). Notably, the likelihood of death in the first 24 h of hospitalization did not change substantially with the introduction of antibiotics; this surprising observation highlights the fact that the pathophysiology of severe pneumococcal pneumonia among adults reflects a rapidly progressive cascade of events that often unfolds irrespective of antibiotic administration. Management in an intensive care unit can provide critical support for the patient through the acute period, with lower CFRs.
# Chunk 3120
Acquired Immunity Acquired immunity induced via contact following colonization or through cross-reactive antigens rests largely on the development of serum IgG antibody specific for the pneumococcal capsular polysaccharide. Nearly all polysaccharides are T cell– independent antigens; B cells can make antibodies to such antigens without T cell help. However, in children <1–2 years old, such B cell responses are poorly developed. This delayed ontogeny of capsule-specific IgG in young children is associated with susceptibility to pneumococcal infection (Fig. 171-5). The extremely high risk of pneumococcal infection in the absence of serum immunoglobulin (i.e., in conditions such as agammaglobulinemia) highlights the important role of capsular antibody in protection against disease. Each serotype’s capsule is chemically distinct; thus immunity tends to be serotype specific, although some cross-immunity exists. For example, conjugate vaccine–induced antibodies to serotype 6B prevent infection due to serotype 6A. However, cross-protection against serotypes within serogroups is not universal; for instance, antibodies to serotype 19F do not appear to confer protection against disease caused by serotype 19A. Antibodies to surface-exposed or secreted pneumococcal proteins (such as pneumolysin, PsaA, and PspA) also appear in the circulation with increasing age of the host, but their functional significance remains unclear. Data from murine models suggest that CD4+ T cells may play a role in preventing pneumococcal colonization and disease, and recent experimental data derived from humans suggest that IL-17-secreting CD4+ T cells may be relevant.
# Chunk 3121
findings on pHysical examination The clinical signs associated with pneumococcal pneumonia among adults include tachypnea (>30 breaths/min) and tachycardia, hypotension in severe cases, and fever in most cases (although not in all elderly patients). Respiratory signs are varied, including dullness to percussion in areas of the chest with significant consolidation, crackles on auscultation, reduced expansion of the chest in some cases as a result of splinting to reduce pain, bronchial breathing in a minority of cases, pleural rub in occasional cases, and cyanosis in cases with significant hypoxemia. Among infants with severe pneumonia, chest wall indrawing and nasal flaring are common. Nonrespiratory findings can include upper abdominal pain if the diaphragmatic pleura is involved as well as mental status changes, particularly confusion in elderly patients.
# Chunk 3122
differential diagnosis The differential diagnosis of pneumococcal pneumonia includes cardiac conditions such as myocardial infarction and heart failure with atypical pulmonary edema; pulmonary conditions such as atelectasis; and pneumonia caused by viral pathogens, mycoplasmas, Haemophilus influenzae, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Staphylococcus aureus, Legionella, or (in HIV-infected and otherwise immunocompromised hosts) Pneumocystis. In cases with abdominal symptoms, the differential diagnosis includes cholecystitis, appendicitis, perforated peptic ulcer disease, and subphrenic abscesses. The challenge in cases with abdominal symptoms is to remember to include pneumococcal pneumonia—a nonabdominal process—in the differential diagnosis.
# Chunk 3123
Blood drawn from patients with suspected pneumococcal pneumonia can be used for supportive or definitive diagnostic tests. Blood cultures are positive for pneumococci in a minority (<30%) of cases of pneumococcal pneumonia. Nonspecific findings include an elevated polymorphonuclear leukocyte count (>15,000/μL in most cases and upward of 40,000/μL in some), leukopenia in <10% of cases (a poor prognostic sign associated with a fatal outcome), and elevated values in liver function tests (e.g., both conjugated and unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia). Anemia, low serum albumin levels, hyponatremia, and elevated serum creatinine levels are all found in ~20–30% of patients.
# Chunk 3124
A definitive diagnosis of pneumococcal meningitis rests on the examination of CSF for (1) evidence of turbidity (visual inspection); (2) elevated protein level, elevated white blood cell count, and reduced glucose concentration (quantitative measurement); and (3) specific identification of the etiologic agent (culture, Gram’s staining, antigen testing, or polymerase chain reaction [PCR]). A blood culture positive for S. pneumoniae in conjunction with clinical manifestations of meningitis also is considered confirmatory. Among adults, detection of pneumococcal antigen in urine is considered highly specific because of the low prevalence of nasopharyngeal colonization in this age group.
# Chunk 3125
MENINGITIS LIKELY OR PROVEN TO BE DUE TO S. PNEUMONIAE

As a result of the increased prevalence of resistant pneumococci, first-line therapy for persons ≥1 month of age is a combination of vancomycin (adults, 30–60 mg/kg per day; infants and children, 60 mg/kg per day) and cefotaxime (adults, 8–12 g/d in 4–6 divided doses; children, 225–300 mg/kg per day in 1 dose or 2 divided doses) or ceftriaxone (adults, 4 g/d in 1 dose or 2 divided doses; children, 100 mg/kg per day in 1 dose or 2 divided doses). If children are hypersensitive to β-lactam agents (penicillins and cephalosporins), rifampin (adults, 600 mg/d; children, 20 mg/d in 1 dose or 2 divided doses) can be substituted for cefotaxime or ceftriaxone. A repeat lumbar puncture should be considered after 48 h if the organism is not susceptible to penicillin and information on cephalosporin sensitivity is not yet available, if the patient’s clinical condition does not improve or deteriorates, or if dexamethasone has been administered and may be compromising clinical evaluation. When antibiotic sensitivity data become available, treatment should be modified accordingly. If the isolate is sensitive to penicillin, vancomycin can be discontinued and penicillin can replace the cephalosporin, or cefotaxime or ceftriaxone can be continued alone. If the isolate displays any resistance to penicillin but is susceptible to the cephalosporins, vancomycin can be discontinued and cefotaxime or ceftriaxone continued. If the isolate exhibits any resistance to penicillin and is not susceptible to cefotaxime and ceftriaxone, vancomycin and high-dose cefotaxime or ceftriaxone can be continued; rifampin may be added as well if the isolate is susceptible and the patient’s clinical condition is worsening, if the CSF remains positive for bacteria, or if the MIC of the cephalosporin in question against the infecting strain is high. Some physicians advocate the use of glucocorticoids in children >6 months old, but this recommendation remains controversial and is not universally considered the standard of care. Glucocorticoids significantly reduce rates of mortality, severe hearing loss, and neurologic sequelae in adults and should be administered to those with community-acquired bacterial meningitis. If dexamethasone is given to either adults or children, it should be administered before or in conjunction with the first antibiotic dose.
# Chunk 3126
Amoxicillin (80–90 mg/kg per day) is recommended for children with acute otitis media except in situations where observation and symptom-based treatment without antibiotics are advocated. These situations include nonsevere illness and an uncertain diagnosis in children 6 months to 2 years of age and nonsevere illness (even if the diagnosis seems certain) in children >2 years of age. Although the optimal duration of therapy has not been conclusively established, a 10-day course is recommended for younger children and for children with severe disease at any age. For children >6 years old who have mild or moderate disease, a course of 5–7 days is considered adequate. Patients whose illness fails to respond should be reassessed at 48–72 h. If acute otitis media is confirmed and antibiotic treatment has not been started, administration of amoxicillin should be commenced. If antibiotic therapy fails, a change is indicated. Failure to respond to second-line antibiotics as well indicates that myringotomy or tympanocentesis may need to be undertaken in order to obtain samples for culture.
# Chunk 3127
Capsular Polysaccharide Vaccines The 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPSV23), containing 25 μg of each capsular polysaccharide, has been licensed for use since 1983. Recommendations for its use vary by country. The U.S. Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices recommends PPSV23 for all persons ≥65 years of age and for those 2–64 years of age who have underlying medical conditions that put them at increased risk for pneumococcal disease or, if infected, disease of increased severity (Table 171-1; see also www.cdc .gov/vaccines/schedules/). The committee recently updated their recommendations to include the combined use of PPSV23 and a conjugate vaccine in at-risk individuals (see “Polysaccharide–Protein Conjugate Vaccines,” below). Revaccination 5 years after the first dose is recommended for persons >2 years of age who have underlying medical conditions but not routinely for those whose only indication is an age of ≥65 years. PPSV23 does not induce an anamnestic response, and antibody concentrations wane over time; thus revaccination is particularly important for individuals with conditions resulting in loss of antibody. Concerns about repeated revaccination have focused on safety (i.e., local reactions) and the induction of immune hyporesponsiveness.
# Chunk 3128
Musculoskeletal Infections S. aureus is among the most common 957 causes of bone infections—both those resulting from hematogenous dissemination and those arising from contiguous spread from a soft tissue site. Hematogenous osteomyelitis in children most often involves the long bones. Infections present as fever and bone pain or with a child’s reluctance to bear weight. The white blood cell count and erythrocyte sedimentation rate are often elevated. Blood cultures are positive in ~50% of cases. When necessary, bone biopsies for culture and histopathologic examination are usually diagnostic. Routine x-rays may be normal for up to 14 days after the onset of symptoms. 99mTc-phosphonate scanning often detects early evidence of infection. MRI is more sensitive than other techniques in establishing a radiologic diagnosis.
# Chunk 3129
The overall incidence of S. aureus endocarditis has increased over the past 20 years. S. aureus is now the leading cause of endocarditis worldwide, accounting for 25–35% of cases. This increase is due, at least in part, to the increased use of intravascular devices. Studies of patients with S. aureus bacteremia and intravascular catheters that used transesophageal echocardiography found an infective endocarditis incidence of ~25%. Other factors associated with an increased risk of endocarditis are injection drug use, hemodialysis, the presence of intravascular prosthetic devices at the time of bacteremia, and immunosuppression. Patients with implantable cardiac devices (e.g., permanent pacemakers) are at increased risk of endocarditis or device-related infections. Despite the availability of effective antibiotics, mortality rates from these infections continue to range from 20% to 40%, depending on both the host and the nature of the infection. Complications of
# Chunk 3130
Renal: blood urea nitrogen or serum creatinine level ≥2 times the normal upper limit d.

Mucous membranes: vaginal, oropharyngeal, or conjunctival hyperemia e.
# Chunk 3131
TSS results from the elaboration of an enterotoxin or the structurally related enterotoxin-like TSST-1. More than 90% of menstrual cases are caused by TSST-1, whereas a high percentage of nonmenstrual cases are caused by enterotoxins. TSS begins with relatively nonspecific flu-like symptoms. In menstrual cases, the onset usually comes 2 or 3 days after the start of menstruation. Patients present with fever, hypotension, and erythroderma of variable intensity. Mucosal involvement is common (e.g., conjunctival hyperemia). The illness can rapidly progress to symptoms that include vomiting, diarrhea, confusion, myalgias, and abdominal pain. These symptoms reflect the multisystemic nature of the disease, with involvement of the liver, kidneys, gastrointestinal tract, and/or CNS. Desquamation of the skin occurs during convalescence, usually 1–2 weeks after the onset of illness. Laboratory findings may include azotemia, leukocytosis, hypoalbuminemia, thrombocytopenia, and liver function abnormalities.
# Chunk 3132
The isolation of MRSA was reported within 1 year of the introduction of methicillin. Since then, the prevalence of MRSA has steadily increased. In many hospitals, 40–50% of S. aureus isolates are now resistant to methicillin. Resistance to methicillin indicates resistance to all SPRPs as well as to all cephalosporins (except ceftaroline). Production of a novel penicillin-binding protein (PBP2a) is responsible for methicillin resistance. This protein is synthesized by the mecA gene, which (as stated above) is part of a large mobile genetic element—a pathogenicity or genomic island—called SCCmec. It is hypothesized that this genetic material was acquired via horizontal transfer from a related staphylococcal species, such as Staphylococcus sciuri. Phenotypic expression of methicillin resistance may be constitutive (i.e., expressed in all organisms in a population) or heterogeneous (i.e., displayed by only a proportion of the total organism population). Detection of methicillin resistance in the clinical microbiology laboratory can be difficult if the strain expresses heterogeneous resistance. Therefore, susceptibility studies are routinely performed at reduced temperatures (≤35°C for 24 h), with increased concentrations of salt in the medium to enhance the expression of resistance. In addition to PCR-based techniques, a number of rapid methods for the detection of methicillin resistance have been developed.
# Chunk 3133
Dalbavancin is a long-acting, parenterally administered lipoglycopeptide that has been used to treat skin and soft tissue infections. Because of its long half-life, it can be administered on a weekly basis. There are limited data on its use in the treatment of invasive staphylococcal infections.
# Chunk 3134
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS Pharyngitis Although seen in patients of all ages, GAS pharyngitis is one of the most common bacterial infections of childhood, accounting for 20–40% of all cases of exudative pharyngitis in children; it is rare among those under the age of 3. Younger children may manifest streptococcal infection with a syndrome of fever, malaise, and lymphadenopathy without exudative pharyngitis. Infection is acquired through contact with another individual carrying the organism. Respiratory droplets are the usual mechanism of spread, although other routes, including food-borne outbreaks, have been well described. The incubation period is 1–4 days. Symptoms include sore throat, fever and chills, malaise, and sometimes abdominal complaints and vomiting, particularly in children. Both symptoms and signs are quite variable, ranging from mild throat discomfort with minimal physical findings to high fever and severe sore throat associated with intense erythema and swelling of the pharyngeal mucosa and the presence of purulent exudate over the posterior pharyngeal wall and tonsillar pillars. Enlarged, tender anterior cervical lymph nodes commonly accompany exudative pharyngitis.
# Chunk 3135
When a carrier is transmitting infection to others, attempts to eradicate carriage are warranted. Data are limited on the best regimen to clear GAS after penicillin alone has failed. Regimens reported to have efficacy superior to that of penicillin alone for eradication of carriage include (1) oral clindamycin (7 mg/kg; 300 mg maximum) three times daily for 10 days or (2) penicillin (as recommended for treatment of pharyngitis in Table 173-3) plus oral rifampin (10 mg/kg; 300 mg maximum) twice daily for the first 4 days of treatment. A 10-day course of oral vancomycin (250 mg four times daily) and rifampin (600 mg twice daily) has eradicated rectal colonization.
# Chunk 3136
See Table 173-3 and Chap. 156.

deep soft-tissue infections Necrotizing fasciitis (hemolytic streptococcal gangrene) involves the superficial and/or deep fascia investing the muscles of an extremity or the trunk. The source of the infection is either the skin, with organisms introduced into tissue through trauma (sometimes trivial), or the bowel flora, with organisms released during abdominal surgery or from an occult enteric source, such as a diverticular or appendiceal abscess. The inoculation site may be inapparent and is often some distance from the site of clinical involvement; e.g., the introduction of organisms via minor trauma to the hand may be associated with clinical infection of the tissues overlying the shoulder or chest. Cases associated with the bowel flora are usually polymicrobial, involving a mixture of anaerobic bacteria (such as Bacteroides fragilis or anaerobic streptococci) and facultative organisms (usually gram-negative bacilli). Cases unrelated to contamination from bowel organisms are most commonly caused by GAS alone or in combination with other organisms (most often S. aureus). Overall, GAS is implicated in ~60% of cases of necrotizing fasciitis. The onset of symptoms is usually quite acute and is marked by severe pain at the site of involvement, malaise, fever, chills, and a toxic appearance. The physical findings, particularly early on, may not be striking, with only minimal erythema of the overlying skin. Pain and tenderness are usually severe. In contrast, in more superficial cellulitis, the skin appearance is more abnormal, but pain and tenderness are only mild or moderate. As the infection progresses (often over several hours), the severity and extent of symptoms worsen, and skin changes become more evident, with the appearance of dusky or mottled erythema and edema. The marked tenderness of the involved area may evolve into anesthesia as the spreading inflammatory process produces infarction of cutaneous nerves.
# Chunk 3137
Identified first as a cause of mastitis in cows, streptococci belonging to Lancefield’s group B have since been recognized as a major cause of sepsis and meningitis in human neonates. GBS is also a frequent cause of peripartum fever in women and an occasional cause of serious infection in nonpregnant adults. Since the widespread institution of prenatal screening for GBS in the 1990s, the incidence of neonatal infection per 1000 live births has fallen from ~2–3 cases to ~0.6 case. During the same period, GBS infection in adults with underlying chronic illnesses has become more common; adults now account for a larger proportion of invasive GBS infections than do newborns. Lancefield group B consists of a single species, S. agalactiae, which is definitively identified with specific antiserum to the group B cell wall–associated carbohydrate antigen. A streptococcal isolate can be classified presumptively as GBS on the basis of biochemical tests, including hydrolysis of sodium hippurate (in which 99% of isolates are positive), hydrolysis of bile esculin (in which 99–100% are negative), bacitracin susceptibility (in which 92% are resistant), and production of CAMP factor (in which 98–100% are positive). CAMP factor is a phospholipase produced by GBS that causes synergistic hemolysis with β lysin produced by certain strains of S. aureus. Its presence can be demonstrated by cross-streaking of the test isolate and an appropriate staphylococcal strain on a blood agar plate. GBS organisms causing human infections are encapsulated by one of ten antigenically distinct polysaccharides. The capsular polysaccharide is an important virulence factor. Antibodies to the capsular polysaccharide afford protection against GBS of the same (but not of a different) capsular type.
# Chunk 3138
Penicillin is the agent of choice for all GBS infections. Empirical broad-spectrum therapy for suspected bacterial sepsis, consisting of ampicillin and gentamicin, is generally administered until culture results become available. If cultures yield GBS, many pediatricians continue to administer gentamicin, along with ampicillin or penicillin, for a few days until clinical improvement becomes evident. Infants with bacteremia or soft tissue infection should receive penicillin at a dosage of 200,000 units/kg per day in divided doses. For meningitis, infants ≤7 days of age should receive 250,000–450,000 units/kg per day in three divided doses; infants >7 days of age should receive 450,000–500,000 units/kg per day in four divided doses. Meningitis should be treated for at least 14 days because of the risk of relapse with shorter courses.
# Chunk 3139
The majority of GBS infections in otherwise healthy adults are related to pregnancy and parturition. Peripartum fever, the most common manifestation, is sometimes accompanied by symptoms and signs of endometritis or chorioamnionitis (abdominal distention and uterine or adnexal tenderness). Blood and vaginal swab cultures are often positive. Bacteremia is usually transitory but occasionally results in meningitis or endocarditis. Infections in adults that are not associated with the peripartum period generally involve individuals who are elderly or have an underlying chronic illness, such as diabetes mellitus or a malignancy. Among the infections that develop with some frequency in adults are cellulitis and soft tissue infection (including infected diabetic skin ulcers), urinary tract infection, pneumonia, endocarditis, and septic arthritis. Other reported infections include meningitis, osteomyelitis, and intraabdominal or pelvic abscesses. Relapse or recurrence of invasive infection weeks to months after a first episode is documented in ~4% of cases.
# Chunk 3140
Streptococcus suis is an important pathogen in swine and has been reported to cause meningitis in humans, usually in individuals with occupational exposure to pigs. Strains of S. suis associated with human infections have generally reacted with Lancefield group R typing serum and sometimes with group D typing serum as well. Isolates may be α-or β-hemolytic and are sensitive to penicillin. Streptococcus iniae, a pathogen of fish, has been associated with infections in humans who have handled live or freshly killed fish. Cellulitis of the hand is the most common form of human infection, although bacteremia and endocarditis have been reported. Anaerobic streptococci, or peptostreptococci, are part of the normal flora of the oral cavity, bowel, and vagina. Infections caused by the anaerobic streptococci are discussed in Chap. 201.
# Chunk 3141
According to the National Healthcare Safety Network of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, enterococci are the second most common organisms (after staphylococci) isolated from hospital-associated infections in the United States. Although E. faecalis remains the predominant species recovered from nosocomial infections, the isolation of E. faecium has increased substantially in the past 20 years. In fact, E. faecium is now almost as common as E. faecalis as an etiologic agent of hospital-associated infections. This point is important, because E. faecium is by far the most resistant and challenging enterococcal species to treat; indeed, more than 80% of
# Chunk 3142
The epidemiology of enterococcal disease and the emergence of VRE have followed slightly different trends in other parts of the world than in the United States. In Europe, the emergence of VRE in the mid-1980s was seen primarily in isolates recovered from animals and healthy humans rather than from hospitalized patients. The presence of VRE was associated with the use of the glycopeptide avoparcin as a growth promoter in animal feeds; this association prompted the European Union to ban the use of this compound in animal husbandry in 1996. However, after an initial decrease in the isolation of VRE from animals and humans, the prevalence of hospital-associated VRE infections has slowly increased in certain European countries, with important regional differences. For example, rates of vancomycin resistance among E. faecium clinical isolates in Europe are highest in Greece, the United Kingdom, and Portugal (10–30%), whereas rates in the Scandinavian countries and the Netherlands are <1%. These regional differences have been attributed in part to the implementation of aggressive “search-and-destroy” policies of infection control in countries such as the Netherlands; these policies have kept the frequency of nosocomial methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and VRE very low. Despite regional differences, rates 973 of VRE continue to be much lower in Europe than in the United States. The reasons are not totally understood, although it has been postulated that this difference is related to the higher levels of human antibiotic use in the United States. Rates of enterococcal resistance to vancomycin in some Latin American countries are also lower (~4%) than those in the United States. Conversely, in Asia, rates of vancomycin resistance among enterococci appear to be similar to those in U.S. hospitals.
# Chunk 3143
INTRAABDOMINAL, PELVIC, AND SOFT TISSUE INFECTIONS

As mentioned earlier, enterococci are part of the commensal flora of the gastrointestinal tract and can produce spontaneous peritonitis in cirrhotic individuals and in patients undergoing chronic ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (Chap. 159). These organisms are commonly found (usually along with other bacteria, including enteric gram-negative species and anaerobes) in clinical samples from intraabdominal and pelvic collections. The presence of enterococci in intraabdominal infections is sometimes considered to be of little clinical relevance. Several studies have shown that the role of enterococci in intraabdominal infections originating in the community and involving previously healthy patients is minor, because surgery and broad-spectrum antimicrobial drugs that do not target enterococci are often sufficient to treat these infections successfully. In the last few decades, however, these organisms have become prominent as a cause of intraabdominal infections in hospitalized patients because of the emergence and spread of vancomycin resistance among enterococci and the increase in rates of nosocomial infections due to multidrug-resistant E. faecium isolates. In fact, several studies have now documented treatment failures due to enterococci, with consequently increased rates of postoperative complications and death among patients with intraabdominal infections. Thus, anti-enterococcal therapy is recommended for nosocomial peritonitis in immunocompromised and severely ill patients who have had a prolonged hospital stay, have undergone multiple procedures, have persistent abdominal sepsis and collections, or have risk factors for the development of endocarditis (e.g., prosthetic or damaged heart valves). Conversely, specific treatment for enterococci in the first episode of intraabdominal infections originating in the community and affecting previously healthy patients with no important cardiac risk factors for endocarditis does not appear to be beneficial.
# Chunk 3144
Urinary tract infections • Fosfomycin (3 g PO, one dose)k aAuthors’ preferences are underlined for each category; many of these regimens are off-label. bConsider doses of 8–10 mg/kg per day if used in combination and 10–12 mg/kg per day if used alone (off-label). Close monitoring of creatine phosphokinase levels is recommended throughout therapy because of possible rhabdomyolysis. cPotentially active agents may include ampicillin or ceftaroline (even if the infecting strain is resistant in vitro) or tigecycline. In vitro synergism of daptomycin with some β-lactam agents is observed against some isolates that subsequently become nonsusceptible to daptomycin during therapy. Consider combination therapy if the daptomycin minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) is ≥3 μg/ mL. dOnly if the organism does not exhibit high-level resistance to aminoglycosides (see Table 174–1, footnote c). eQuinupristin-dalfopristin (Q/D) and linezolid are listed in the American Heart Association’s recommendations for the treatment of endocarditis caused by vancomycinand ampicillin-resistant E. faecium. fAgents that may be useful in combination with Q/D (if the isolate is susceptible to each agent) include doxycycline with rifampin (one reported case) and fluoroquinolones (one reported case). gIn selected cases of catheter-associated bacteremia, removal of the catheter and a short course of therapy (~5–7 days) may be sufficient. A single positive blood culture that is likely to be associated with a catheter in a patient who is otherwise doing well may not require therapy after removal of the catheter. hFluoroquinolone antibiotics (e.g., moxifloxacin) and rifampin (if the isolate is susceptible to each agent) reach therapeutic levels in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). iIntrathecal Q/D (1–5 mg/d) has been used in combination with Q/D systemic therapy in meningitis. If Q/D is chosen, simultaneous use of both systemic and intrathecal therapy is suggested. jIntrathecal gentamicin (2–10 mg/d) if high-level resistance is not detected. Intraventricular daptomycin has been used in two cases of meningitis. kApproved by the Food and Drug Administration only for uncomplicated urinary tract infections caused by vancomycin-susceptible E. faecalis. lConcentrations of amoxicillin and ampicillin in urine far exceed those in serum and may be potentially effective even against isolates with high MICs. Doses up to 12 g/d are suggested for isolates with MICs of ≥64 μg/mL.
# Chunk 3145
Linezolid and quinupristin/dalfopristin (Q/D) are two agents approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of some VRE infections (Table 174–2). Linezolid is not bactericidal, and its use in severe endovascular infections has produced mixed results; therefore, it is recommended only as an alternative to other agents. In addition, linezolid may cause significant toxicities (thrombocytopenia, peripheral neuropathy, and optic neuritis) when used in regimens given for >2 weeks. Nonetheless, linezolid may play a role in the treatment of enterococcal meningitis and other CNS infections, although clinical data are limited. Q/D is not active against most E. faecalis isolates, and its in vivo efficacy against
# Chunk 3146
C. diphtheriae is transmitted via the aerosol route, usually during close contact with an infected person. There are no significant reservoirs other than humans. The incubation period for respiratory diphtheria is 2–5 days, but disease onset has occurred as late as 10 days after exposure. Prior to the vaccination era, most individuals over the age of 10 were immune to C. diphtheriae; infants were protected by maternal IgG antibodies but became susceptible after ~6 months of age. Thus, the disease primarily affected children and nonimmune young adults. In temperate regions, respiratory diphtheria occurs year-round but is most common during winter months.
# Chunk 3147
FIGURE 175-1 Respiratory diphtheria due to toxigenic C. diphtheriae producing exudative pharyngitis in a 47-year-old female patient displaying neck edema and a pseudomembrane extending from the uvula to the pharyngeal wall. The characteristic white pseudomembrane is caused by diphtheria toxin–mediated necrosis of the respiratory epithelial layer, producing a fibrinous coagulative exudate. Submucosal edema adds to airway narrowing. The pharyngitis is acute in onset, and respiratory obstruction from the pseudomembrane may occur in severe cases. Inoculation of pseudomembrane fragments or submembranous swabs onto Löffler’s or tellurite selective medium reveals C. diphtheriae. (Photograph by P. Strebel, MD, used by permission. From R. Kadirova et al: J Infect Dis 181:S110, 2000. With permission of Oxford University Press.)
# Chunk 3148
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS Respiratory Diphtheria The clinical diagnosis of diphtheria is based on the constellation of sore throat; adherent tonsillar, pharyngeal, or nasal pseudomembranous lesions; and low-grade fever. In addition, diagnosis requires the isolation of C. diphtheriae or histopathologic isolation of compatible gram-positive organisms. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recognizes confirmed respiratory diphtheria (laboratory proven or epidemiologically linked to a culture-confirmed case) and probable respiratory diphtheria (clinically compatible but not laboratory proven or epidemiologically linked). Carriers are defined as individuals who have positive cultures for C. diphtheriae and who either are asymptomatic or have symptoms but lack pseudomembranes. Most patients seek medical care for sore throat and fever several days into the illness. Occasionally, weakness, dysphagia, headache, and voice change are the initial manifestations. Neck edema and difficulty breathing are evident in more advanced cases and carry a poor prognosis.
# Chunk 3149
Polyneuropathy is seen 3–5 weeks after the onset of diphtheria and has a slow indolent course. However, patients may develop severe and prolonged neurologic abnormalities. The disorders typically occur in the mouth and neck, with lingual or facial numbness as well as dysphonia, dysphagia, and cranial nerve paresthesias. More ominous signs include weakness of respiratory and abdominal muscles and paresis of the extremities. Sensory manifestations and sensory ataxia also are observed. Cranial nerve dysfunction typically precedes disturbances of the trunk and extremities because of proximity to the site of infection. Autonomic dysfunction also is associated with polyneuropathy and can lead to hypotension. Polyneuropathy is typically reversible in patients who survive the acute phase.
# Chunk 3150
Fatal pseudomembranous diphtheria typically occurs in patients with nonprotective antibody titers and in unimmunized patients. The pseudomembrane may actually increase in size from the time it is first noted. Risk factors for death include bullneck diphtheria; myocarditis with ventricular tachycardia; atrial fibrillation; complete heart block; an age of >60 years or <6 months; alcoholism; extensive pseudo-membrane elongation; and laryngeal, tracheal, or bronchial involvement. Another important predictor of fatal outcome is the interval between the onset of local disease and the administration of antitoxin. Cutaneous diphtheria has a low mortality rate and is rarely associated with myocarditis or peripheral neuropathy.
# Chunk 3151
Bacteremia L. monocytogenes septicemia presents with fever, chills, and myalgias/arthralgias and cannot be differentiated from septicemia involving other organisms. Meningeal symptoms, focal neurologic findings, or mental status changes may suggest the diagnosis. Bacteremia is documented in 70–90% of cancer patients with listeriosis. A nonspecific flulike illness with fever is a common presentation in pregnant women. Endocarditis of prosthetic and native valves is an uncommon complication, with reported fatality rates of 35–50% in case series. A lumbar puncture is often prudent, although not necessary, in pregnant women without central nervous system (CNS) symptoms.
# Chunk 3152
Infection in Pregnant Women and Neonates Listeriosis in pregnancy is a severe and important infection. The usual presentation is a nonspecific acute or subacute febrile illness with myalgias, arthralgias, backache, and headache. Pregnant women with listeriosis are usually bacteremic. This syndrome should prompt blood cultures, especially if there is no other reasonable explanation. Involvement of the CNS is rare in the absence of other risk factors. Preterm delivery is a common complication, and the diagnosis may be made only post-partum. As many as 70–90% of fetuses from infected women can become infected. Prepartum treatment of bacteremic women enhances the chances of delivery of a healthy infant. Women usually do well after delivery: maternal deaths are very rare, even when the diagnosis is made late in pregnancy or post-partum. Overall mortality rates for fetuses infected in utero approach 50% in some series; among live-born neonates treated with antibiotics, mortality rates are much lower (~20%). Granulomatosis infantiseptica is an overwhelming listerial fetal infection with miliary microabscesses and granulomas, most often in the skin, liver, and spleen. Less severe neonatal infection acquired in utero presents at birth. “Late-onset” neonatal illness typically develops ~10–30 days post-partum. Mothers of infants with late-onset disease are not ill.
# Chunk 3153
986 bioassay for serum tetanus toxin may be helpful, but a negative result does not exclude the diagnosis. Polymerase chain reaction also has been used for detection of tetanus toxin, but its sensitivity is unknown. The few conditions that mimic generalized tetanus include strychnine poisoning and dystonic reactions to antidopaminergic drugs. Abdominal muscle rigidity is characteristically continuous in tetanus but is episodic in the latter two conditions. Cephalic tetanus can be confused with other causes of trismus, such as oropharyngeal infection. Hypocalcemia and meningoencephalitis are included in the differential diagnosis of neonatal tetanus.
# Chunk 3154
It is important to establish a secure airway early in severe tetanus. Ideally, patients should be nursed in calm, quiet environments because light and noise can trigger spasms. Tracheal secretions are increased in tetanus, and dysphagia due to pharyngeal involvement combined with hyperactivity of laryngeal muscles makes endotracheal intubation difficult. Patients may need ventilator support for several weeks. Thus tracheostomy is the usual method of securing the airway in severe tetanus.
# Chunk 3155
Tetanus is prevented by good wound care and immunization (Chap. 148). In neonates, use of safe, clean delivery and cord-care practices as well as maternal vaccination are essential. The WHO guidelines for tetanus vaccination consist of a primary course of three doses in infancy, boosters at 4–7 and 12–15 years of age, and one booster in adulthood. In the United States, the CDC suggests an additional dose at 14–16 months and boosters every 10 years. “Catch-up” schedules recommend a three-dose primary course for unimmunized adolescents followed by two further doses. For persons who have received a complete primary course in childhood but no further boosters, two doses at least 4 weeks apart are recommended.
# Chunk 3156
The distinctive clinical syndrome of botulism consists of symmetric cranial-nerve palsies followed by bilateral descending flaccid paralysis that may progress to respiratory failure and death. The incubation period from ingestion of contaminated food to onset of symptoms in food-borne botulism is usually 8–36 h but can be as long as 10 days and is dose dependent. Incubation periods of 4–17 days have been documented in wound botulism associated with accidental injury. However, estimation is difficult in cases involving injection drug users because most of these patients inject drugs several times daily. Similarly, the incubation period for infant botulism has not been established, but the fact that the illness has affected infants <3 days old suggests that this interval may be very short.
# Chunk 3157
Botulism-Specific Laboratory Tests Botulism is confirmed in the laboratory by demonstration of toxin in clinical specimens (e.g., serum, stool, gastric aspirate, and sterile-water enema samples) or in samples of ingested foods. Isolation of toxigenic clostridia from stool also provides evidence of botulism. Wound cultures yielding the organism are highly suggestive in symptomatic cases. The universally accepted method for confirmation of botulism is the mouse bioassay, which is available only in specialized laboratories. Specific guidance about what specimens to collect should be obtained from the testing laboratory because the requirements vary with the form of botulism suspected. Clinical specimens collected early in the hospital admission process should be submitted for testing; toxin results may be negative if specimens are collected >7 days after symptom onset. Because of the extreme potency of botulinum toxin, a test may yield a negative result even when a patient has botulism; thus, a negative result does not exclude this diagnosis. In suspected wound botulism, material from abscesses should be collected in anaerobic culture tubes. New laboratory tests for botulism are being developed but remain experimental. Nerve conduction studies showing reduced amplitude of motor potentials—with or without potentiation by rapid repetitive stimulation in weak muscles—and needle electromyography showing small-motor-unit action potentials are consistent with botulism; these results and those that make alternative diagnoses more likely may be useful. Standard blood work and radiologic studies are not useful in diagnosing botulism.
# Chunk 3158
Clostridial species may be found in polymicrobial infections also involving microbial components of the indigenous flora. In these infections, clostridia often appear in association with non-spore-forming anaerobes and facultative or aerobic organisms. Head and neck infections, conjunctivitis, brain abscess, sinusitis, otitis, aspiration pneumonia, lung abscess, pleural empyema, cholecystitis, septic arthritis, and bone infections all may involve clostridia. These conditions are often associated with severe local inflammation but may lack the characteristic systemic signs of toxicity and rapid progression seen in other clostridial infections. In addition, clostridia are isolated from ~66% of intraabdominal infections in which the mucosal integrity of the bowel or respiratory system has been compromised. In this setting, C. ramosum, C. perfringens, and C. bifermentans are the most commonly isolated species. Their presence does not invariably lead to a poor outcome. Clostridia have been isolated from suppurative infections of the female genital tract (e.g., ovarian or pelvic abscess) and from diseased gallbladders. Although the most frequently isolated species is C. perfringens, gangrene is not typically observed; however, gas formation in the biliary system can lead to emphysematous cholecystitis, especially in diabetic patients. C. perfringens in association with mixed aerobic and anaerobic microbes can cause aggressive life-threatening type I necrotizing fasciitis or Fournier’s gangrene.
# Chunk 3159
Enteritis necroticans (gas gangrene of the bowel) is a fulminating clinical illness characterized by extensive necrosis of the intestinal mucosa and wall. Cases can occur sporadically in adults or as epidemics in people of all ages. Enteritis necroticans is 991 caused by α toxin– and β toxin–producing strains of C. perfringens type C; β toxin is located on a plasmid and is mainly responsible for pathogenesis. This life-threatening infection causes ischemic necrosis of the jejunum. In Papua New Guinea during the 1960s, enteritis necroticans (known in that locale as pigbel) was found to be the most common cause of death in childhood; it was associated with pig feasts and occurred both sporadically and in outbreaks. Intramuscular immunization against the β toxin resulted in a decreased incidence of the disease in Papua New Guinea, although the condition remains common. Enteritis necroticans has also been recognized in the United States, the United Kingdom, Germany (where it is known as darmbrand), and other developed nations; especially affected are adults who are malnourished or who have diabetes, alcoholic liver disease, or neutropenia.
# Chunk 3160
Patients with suspected clostridial enteric infection should undergo nasogastric suction and receive IV fluids. Pyrantel is given by mouth, and the bowel is rested by fasting. Benzylpenicillin (1 mU) is given IV every 4 h, and the patient is observed for complications requiring surgery. Patients with mild cases recover without surgical intervention. If surgical indications are present (gas in the peritoneal cavity, absent bowel sounds, rebound tenderness, abdominal rigidity), however, the mortality rate ranges from 35% to 100%; a fatal outcome is due in part to perforation of the intestine.
# Chunk 3161
The development of gas gangrene requires an anaerobic environment and contamination of a wound with spores or vegetative organisms. Devitalized tissue, foreign bodies, and ischemia reduce locally available oxygen levels and favor outgrowth of vegetative cells and spores. Thus conditions predisposing to traumatic gas gangrene include crush-type injury, laceration of large or medium-sized arteries, and open fractures of long bones that are contaminated with soil or bits of clothing containing the bacterial spores. Gas gangrene of the abdominal wall and flanks follows penetrating injuries such as knife or gunshot wounds that are sufficient to compromise intestinal integrity, with resultant leakage of the bowel contents into the soft tissues. Proximity to fecal sources of bacteria is a risk factor for cases following hip surgery, adrenaline injections into the buttocks, or amputation of the leg for ischemic vascular disease. In the last decade, cutaneous gas gangrene caused by C. perfringens, C. novyi, and C. sordellii has been described in the United States and northern Europe among persons injecting black-tar heroin subcutaneously.
# Chunk 3162
The incubation period for traumatic gas gangrene can be as short as 6 h and is usually <4 days. The infection is characterized by the sudden onset of excruciating pain at the affected site and the rapid development of a foul-smelling wound containing a thin serosanguineous discharge and gas bubbles. Brawny edema and induration develop and give way to cutaneous blisters containing bluish to maroon-colored fluid. Such tissue later may become liquefied and slough. The margin between healthy and necrotic tissue often advances several inches per hour despite appropriate antibiotic therapy, and radical amputation remains the single best life-saving intervention. Shock and organ failure frequently accompany gas gangrene; when patients become bacteremic, the mortality rate exceeds 50%.
# Chunk 3163
Toxic Shock Syndrome Clostridial infection of the endometrium, particularly that due to C. sordellii, can develop after gynecologic procedures, childbirth, or abortion (spontaneous or elective, surgical or medical) and, once established, proceeds rapidly to TSS and death. Systemic manifestations, including edema, effusions, profound leukocytosis, and hemoconcentration, are followed by the rapid onset of hypotension and multiple-organ failure. Elevation of the hematocrit to 75–80% and leukocytosis of 50,000–200,000 cells/ μL, with a left shift, are characteristic of C. sordellii infection. Pain may not be a prominent feature, and fever is typically absent. In one series, 18% of 45 cases of C. sordellii infection were associated with normal childbirth, 11% with medically induced abortion, and 0.4% with spontaneous abortion; the case-fatality rate was 100% in these groups. Of the infections in this series that were not related to gynecologic procedures or childbirth, 22% occurred in injection drug users, and 50% of these patients died. Other infections followed trauma or surgery (42%), mostly in healthy persons, and 53% of these patients died. Overall, the mortality rate was 69% (31 of 45 cases). Of patients who succumbed, 85% died within 2–6 days after infection onset or following procedures.
# Chunk 3164
After early childhood, a second peak of disease occurs among adolescents and young adults (15–25 years of age) in Europe and North America. It is thought that this peak relates to social behaviors and environmental exposures in this age group, as discussed below. Most cases of infection with N. meningitidis in developed countries today are sporadic, and the rarity of the disease suggests that individual susceptibility may be important. A number of factors probably contribute to individual susceptibility, including the host’s genetic constitution, environment, and contact with a carrier or a case.
# Chunk 3165
Septicemia Meningococcal septicemia alone accounts for up to 20% of cases of meningococcal disease. The condition may progress from early nonspecific symptoms to death within hours. Mortality rates among children with this syndrome have been high (25–40%), but early aggressive management (as discussed below) may reduce the figure to <10%. Early symptoms are nonspecific and suggest an influenza-like illness with fever, headache, and myalgia accompanied by vomiting and abdominal pain. As discussed above, the rash, if present, may appear to be viral early in the course until petechiae or purpuric lesions develop. Purpura fulminans occurs in severe cases, with multiple large purpuric lesions and signs of peripheral ischemia. Surveys of patients have indicated that limb pain, pallor (including a mottled appearance and cyanosis), and cold hands and feet may be prominent. Shock is manifested by tachycardia, poor peripheral perfusion, tachypnea, and oliguria. Decreased cerebral perfusion leads to confusion, agitation, or decreased level of consciousness. With progressive shock, multiorgan failure ensues; hypotension is a late sign in children, who more commonly present with compensated shock (tachycardia, poor peripheral perfusion, and normal blood pressure). Poor outcome is associated with an absence of meningism, hypotension, young age, coma, relatively low temperature (<38°C), leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia. Spontaneous hemorrhage (pulmonary, gastric, or cerebral) may result from consumption of coagulation factors and thrombocytopenia.
# Chunk 3166
Although meningococcal disease is often diagnosed on clinical grounds, in suspected meningococcal meningitis or meningococcemia, blood should routinely be sent for culture to confirm the diagnosis and to facilitate public health investigations; blood cultures are positive in up to 75% of cases. Culture media containing sodium polyanethol sulfonate, which may inhibit meningococcal growth, should be avoided. Meningococcal viability is reduced if there is a delay in transport of the specimen to the microbiology laboratory for culture or in plating of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples. In countries where treatment with antibiotics before hospitalization is recommended for meningococcal disease, the majority of clinically suspected cases are culture negative. Real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis of whole-blood samples increases the diagnostic yield by >40%, and results obtained with this method may remain positive for several days after administration of antibiotics. Indeed, in the United Kingdom, more than half of clinically suspected cases are currently identified by PCR.
# Chunk 3167
Unless contraindications exist (raised intracranial pressure, uncorrected shock, disordered coagulation, thrombocytopenia, respiratory insufficiency, local infection, ongoing convulsions), lumbar puncture should be undertaken to identify and confirm the etiology of suspected meningococcal meningitis, whose presentation cannot be distinguished from that of meningitis of other bacterial causes. Some authorities have recommended a CT brain scan prior to lumbar puncture because of the risk of cerebral herniation in patients with raised intracranial pressure. However, a normal CT scan is not uncommon in the presence of raised intracranial pressure in meningococcal meningitis, and the decision to perform a lumbar puncture should be made on clinical grounds. CSF features of meningococcal meningitis (elevated protein level and WBC count, decreased glucose level) are indistinguishable from those of other types of bacterial meningitis unless a gram-negative diplococcus is identified. (Gram’s staining is up to 80% sensitive for meningococcal meningitis.) CSF should be submitted for culture (sensitivity, 90%) and (where available) PCR analysis. CSF antigen testing with latex agglutination is insensitive and should be replaced by molecular diagnosis when possible.
# Chunk 3168
Both meningococcal meningitis and meningococcal septicemia are conventionally treated for 7 days, although courses of 3–5 days may be equally effective. Furthermore, a single dose of ceftriaxone or an oily suspension of chloramphenicol has been used successfully in resource-poor settings. No data are available to guide the duration of treatment for meningococcal infection at other foci (e.g., pneumonia, arthritis); antimicrobial therapy is usually continued until clinical and laboratory evidence of infection has resolved. Cultures usually become sterile within 24 h of initiation of appropriate antibiotic chemotherapy.
# Chunk 3169
Polysaccharide Vaccines Purified meningococcal capsular polysaccharide has been used for immunization since the 1960s. Meningococcal polysaccharide vaccines are currently formulated as either bivalent (serogroups A and C) or quadrivalent (serogroups A, C, Y, and W), with 50 μg of each polysaccharide per dose. Local reactions (erythema, induration, and tenderness) may occur in up to 40% of vaccinees, but serious adverse events (including febrile convulsions in young children) are very rarely reported. In adults, the vaccines are immunogenic, but immunity appears to be relatively short-lived (with antibody levels above baseline for only 2–10 years), and booster doses do not induce a further rise in antibody concentration. Indeed, a state of immunologic hyporesponsiveness has been widely reported to follow booster doses of plain polysaccharide vaccines. The repeating units of these vaccines cross-link B cell receptors to drive specific memory B cells to become plasma cells and produce antibody. Because meningococcal polysaccharides are T cell–independent antigens, no memory B cells are produced after immunization, and the memory B-cell pool is depleted such that fewer polysaccharide-specific cells are available to respond to a subsequent dose of vaccine (Fig. 180-6). The clinical relevance of hyporesponsiveness is unknown. Plain polysaccharide vaccines generally are not immunogenic in early childhood, pos-1001 sibly because marginal-zone B cells are involved in polysaccharide responses and maturation of the splenic marginal zone is not complete until 18 months to 2 years of age. The efficacy of the meningococcal serogroup C component is >90% in young adults; no efficacy data are available for the serogroup Y and W polysaccharides in this age group.
# Chunk 3170
Vaccines Based on Subcapsular Antigens The lack of immunogenicity of the serogroup B capsule has led to the development of vaccines based on subcapsular antigens. Various surface components have been studied in early-phase clinical trials. Outer-membrane vesicles (OMVs) containing outer-membrane proteins, phospholipid, and LPS can be extracted from cultures of N. meningitidis by detergent treatment (Fig. 180-7). OMVs prepared in this way were used in efficacy trials with a Norwegian outbreak strain and reduced the incidence of group B disease among 14to 16-year-old schoolchildren by 53%. Similarly, OMV vaccines constructed from local outbreak strains in Cuba and New Zealand have had reported efficacy rates of >70%. These OMV vaccines appear to produce strain-specific immune responses, with only limited cross-protection, and are therefore best suited to clonal outbreaks (e.g., those in Cuba and New Zealand as well as others in Norway and the province of Normandy in France).
# Chunk 3171
Gonorrhea predominantly affects young, nonwhite, unmarried, less educated members of urban populations. The number of reported cases probably represents half of the true number of cases—a discrepancy resulting from underreporting, self-treatment, and nonspecific treatment without a laboratory-proven diagnosis. The number of reported new cases of gonorrhea in the United States rose from ~250,000 in the early 1960s to a high of 1.01 million in 1978. The recorded incidence of gonorrhea in modern times peaked in 1975, with 468 reported new cases per 100,000 population in the United States. This peak was attributable to the interaction of several variables, including improved accuracy of diagnosis, changes in patterns of contraceptive use, and changes in sexual behavior. The incidence of the disease has since declined gradually and is currently estimated at 120 cases per 100,000, a figure that is still the highest among industrialized countries. A fur-1003 ther decline in the overall incidence of gonorrhea in the United States over the past quarter-century may reflect increased condom use resulting from public health efforts to curtail HIV transmission. At present, the attack rate in the United States is highest among 15to 19-year-old women and 20to 24-year-old men; 60% of all reported cases occur in the preceding two groups together. From the standpoint of ethnicity, rates are highest among African Americans and lowest among persons of Asian or Pacific Island descent.
# Chunk 3172
1004 porin Porin (previously designated protein I) is the most abundant gonococcal surface protein, accounting for >50% of the organism’s total outer-membrane protein. Porin molecules exist as trimers that provide anion-transporting aqueous channels through the otherwise hydrophobic outer membrane. Porin exhibits stable interstrain antigenic variation and forms the basis for gonococcal serotyping. Two main serotypes have been identified: PorB.1A strains are often associated with disseminated gonococcal infection (DGI), whereas PorB.1B strains usually cause local genital infections only. DGI strains are generally resistant to the killing action of normal human serum and do not incite a significant local inflammatory response; therefore, they may not cause symptoms at genital sites. These characteristics may be related to the ability of PorB.1A strains to bind to complement-inhibitory molecules, resulting in a diminished inflammatory response. Porin can translocate to the cytoplasmic membrane of host cells—a process that could initiate gonococcal endocytosis and invasion.
# Chunk 3173
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS Gonococcal Infections in Men Acute urethritis is the most common clinical manifestation of gonorrhea in male patients. The usual incubation period after exposure is 2–7 days, although the interval can be longer and some men remain asymptomatic. Strains of the PorB.1A serotype tend to cause a greater proportion of cases of mild and asymptomatic urethritis than do PorB.1B strains. Urethral discharge and dysuria, usually without urinary frequency or urgency, are the major symptoms. The discharge initially is scant and mucoid but becomes profuse and purulent within a day or two. Gram’s staining of the urethral discharge may reveal PMNs and gram-negative intracellular monococci and diplococci (Fig. 181-1). The clinical manifestations of gonococcal urethritis are usually more severe and overt than those of nongonococcal urethritis, including urethritis caused by Chlamydia trachomatis (Chap. 213); however, exceptions are common, and it is often impossible to differentiate the causes of urethritis on clinical grounds alone. The majority of cases of urethritis seen in the United States today are not caused by N. gonorrhoeae and/or C. trachomatis. Although a number of other organisms may be responsible, many cases do not have a specific etiologic agent identified.
# Chunk 3174
The physical examination may reveal a mucopurulent discharge (mucopus) issuing from the cervical os. Because Gram’s stain is not sensitive for the diagnosis of gonorrhea in women, specimens should be submitted for culture or a nonculture assay (see “Laboratory Diagnosis,” below). Edematous and friable cervical ectopy and endocervical bleeding induced by gentle swabbing are more often seen in chlamydial infection. Gonococcal infection may extend deep enough to produce dyspareunia and lower abdominal or back pain. In such cases, it is imperative to consider a diagnosis of pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) and to administer treatment for that disease (Chaps. 163 and 213).
# Chunk 3175
from women with nonulcerative STIs than in those from women with ulcerative STIs.

A rapid diagnosis of gonococcal infection in men may be obtained by Gram’s staining of urethral exudates (Fig. 181-1). The detection of gram-negative intracellular monococci and diplococci is usually highly specific and sensitive in diagnosing gonococcal urethritis in symptomatic males but is only ~50% sensitive in diagnosing gonococcal cervicitis. Samples should be collected with Dacron or rayon swabs. Part of the sample should be inoculated onto a plate of modified Thayer-Martin or other gonococcal selective medium for culture. It is important to process all samples immediately because gonococci do not tolerate drying. If plates cannot be incubated immediately, they can be held safely for several hours at room temperature in candle extinction jars prior to incubation. If processing is to occur within 6 h, transport of specimens may be facilitated by the use of nonnutritive swab transport systems such as Stuart or Amies medium. For longer holding periods (e.g., when specimens for culture are to be mailed), culture media with self-contained CO2-generating systems (such as the JEMBEC or Gono-Pak systems) may be used. Specimens should also be obtained for the diagnosis of chlamydial infection (Chap. 213).
# Chunk 3176
Antibody to the capsule is important in protection from infection by Hib strains. The level of (maternally acquired) serum antibody to the capsular polysaccharide, which is a polymer of polyribitol ribose phosphate (PRP), declines from birth to 6 months of age and, in the absence of vaccination, remains low until ~2 or 3 years of age. The age at the antibody nadir correlates with that of the peak incidence of type b disease. Antibody to PRP then appears partly as a result of exposure to Hib or cross-reacting antigens. Systemic Hib disease is unusual after the age of 6 years because of the presence of protective antibody. Vaccines in which PRP is conjugated to protein carrier molecules have been developed and are now used widely. These vaccines generate an antibody response to PRP in infants and effectively prevent invasive infections in infants and children.
# Chunk 3177
Initial therapy for meningitis due to Hib should consist of a cephalosporin such as ceftriaxone or cefotaxime. For children, the dosage of ceftriaxone is 75–100 mg/kg daily given in two doses 12 h apart. The pediatric dosage of cefotaxime is 200 mg/kg daily given in four doses 6 h apart. Adult dosages are 2 g every 12 h for ceftriaxone and 2 g every 4–6 h for cefotaxime. An alternative regimen for initial therapy is ampicillin (200–300 mg/kg daily in four divided doses) plus chloramphenicol (75–100 mg/kg daily in four divided doses). Therapy should continue for a total of 1–2 weeks.
# Chunk 3178
Invasive infections other than meningitis are treated with the same antimicrobial agents. For epiglottitis, the dosage of ceftriaxone is 50 mg/kg daily, and the dosage of cefotaxime is 150 mg/kg daily, given in three divided doses 8 h apart. Epiglottitis constitutes a medical emergency, and maintenance of an airway is critical. The duration of therapy is determined by the clinical response. A course of 1–2 weeks is usually appropriate.
# Chunk 3179
H. influenzae), as shown in a 10-year prospective study; the distribution of exacerbations associated with new-strain acquisitions is shown in Fig. 182-3. Not included are culture-negative cases or cases from which a pathogen had been previously isolated. With the application of rigorous clinical criteria for defining the etiology of exacerbations (both culture-positive and culture-negative), ~10% of all exacerbations in the same study were caused by M. catarrhalis. The clinical features of an exacerbation due to M. catarrhalis are similar to those of exacerbations due to other bacterial pathogens, including H. influenzae and S. pneumoniae. The cardinal symptoms are cough with increased sputum production, sputum purulence, and dyspnea in comparison with baseline symptoms.
# Chunk 3180
Haemophilus Species Haemophilus parainfluenzae is the most common species isolated from cases of HACEK endocarditis. Of patients with HACEK endocarditis due to Haemophilus species, 60% have been ill for <2 months before presentation, and 19–50% develop congestive heart failure. Mortality rates as high as 30–50% were reported in older series; however, more recent studies have documented mortality rates of <5%. H. parainfluenzae has been isolated from other infections, such as meningitis; brain, dental, pelvic, and liver abscess; pneumonia; urinary tract infection; and septicemia.
# Chunk 3181
Aeromonas causes sepsis and bacteremia in infants with multiple medical problems and in immunocompromised hosts, particularly those with cancer or hepatobiliary disease. A. caviae is associated with health care–related bacteremia. Aeromonas infection and sepsis can occur in patients with trauma (including severe trauma with myonecrosis) and in burn patients exposed to Aeromonas by environmental (freshwater or soil) contamination of their wounds. Reported mortality rates range from 25% among immunocompromised adults with sepsis to >90% among patients with myonecrosis. Aeromonas can produce ecthyma gangrenosum (hemorrhagic vesicles surrounded by a rim of erythema with central necrosis and ulceration; see Fig. 25e-35) resembling the lesions seen in Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection. This organism causes nosocomial infections related to catheters, surgical incisions, or use of leeches. Other manifestations include necrotizing fasciitis, meningitis, peritonitis, pneumonia, and ocular infections.
# Chunk 3182
Pasteurella multocida P. multocida is a bipolar-staining, gram-negative coccobacillus that colonizes the respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts of domestic animals; oropharyngeal colonization rates are 70–90% in cats and 50–65% in dogs. P. multocida can be transmitted to humans 183e-3 through bites or scratches, via the respiratory tract from contact with contaminated dust or infectious droplets, or via deposition of the organism on injured skin or mucosal surfaces during licking. Most human infections affect skin and soft tissue; almost two-thirds of these infections are caused by cats. Patients at the extremes of age or with serious underlying disorders (e.g., cirrhosis, diabetes) are at increased risk for systemic manifestations, including meningitis, peritonitis, osteomyelitis and septic arthritis, endocarditis, and septic shock, but cases have also occurred in healthy individuals of all ages. If inhaled,
# Chunk 3183
CLINICAL AND LABORATORY FEATURES Pontiac Fever Pontiac fever is an acute, self-limiting, flu-like illness with an incubation period of 24–48 h. Pneumonia does not develop. Malaise, fatigue, and myalgias are the most common symptoms, occurring in 97% of cases. Fever (usually with chills) develops in 80–90% of cases and headache in 80%. Other symptoms (seen in fewer than 50% of cases) include arthralgias, nausea, cough, abdominal pain, and diarrhea. Modest leukocytosis with a neutrophilic predominance is sometimes detected. Complete recovery occurs within a few days; antibiotic therapy is unnecessary. A few patients may experience lassitude for some weeks after recovery. The diagnosis is established by antibody seroconversion. Pontiac fever due to L. longbeachae has been reported in individuals exposed to potting soil.
# Chunk 3184
The incubation period for Legionnaires’ disease is usually 2–10 days, although slightly longer incubation periods have been documented. Fever is almost universal. In one observational study, 20% of patients had temperatures in excess of 40°C (104°F). The symptoms and signs may range from a mild cough and a slight fever to stupor with widespread pulmonary infiltrates and multisystem failure. The mild cough of Legionnaires’ disease is only slightly productive. Sometimes the sputum is streaked with blood. Chest pain—either pleuritic or nonpleuritic—can be a prominent feature and, when coupled with hemoptysis, can lead to an incorrect diagnosis of pulmonary embolism. Shortness of breath is reported by one-third to one-half of patients. Gastrointestinal difficulties are often pronounced; abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting affect 10–20% of patients. Diarrhea (watery rather than bloody) is reported in 25–50% of cases. The most common neurologic abnormalities are confusion or changes in mental status; however, the multitudinous neurologic symptoms reported range from headache and lethargy to encephalopathy. Nonspecific symptoms—malaise, fatigue, anorexia, and headache—are reported early in the illness. Myalgias and arthralgias are uncommon but are prominent in a few patients. Upper respiratory symptoms, including coryza, are rare.
# Chunk 3185
IV route. A clinical response usually occurs within 3–5 days, after which oral therapy can be substituted. The total duration of therapy in the immunocompetent host is 10–14 days.
# Chunk 3186
Mortality rates are highest (80%) among immunosuppressed patients who do not receive appropriate antimicrobial therapy early in the course of illness. With timely antibiotic treatment, mortality rates from community-acquired Legionnaires’ disease among immunocompetent patients range from 0 to 11%; without treatment, the figure may be as high as 31%. In a study of survivors of an outbreak of community-acquired Legionnaires’ disease, sequelae of fatigue, neurologic symptoms, and weakness were found in 63–75% of patients 17 months after receipt of antibiotics.
# Chunk 3187
Pertussis is a highly communicable disease, with attack rates of within households in well-immunized populations. The infection has a worldwide distribution, with cyclical outbreaks every 3–5 years (a pattern that has persisted despite widespread immunization). Pertussis occurs in all months; however, in North America, its activity peaks in summer and autumn.
# Chunk 3188
In developing countries, pertussis remains an important cause of infant morbidity and death. The reported incidence of pertussis worldwide has decreased as a result of improved vaccine coverage (Fig. 185-1). However, coverage rates are still <50% in many developing nations; the World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that 90% of the burden of pertussis is in developing regions. In addition, overreporting of immunization coverage and underreporting of disease result in substantial underestimation of the global burden of pertussis. The WHO estimates that there were 195,000 deaths from pertussis among children in 2008.
# Chunk 3189
Although thought of as a disease of childhood, pertussis can affect people of all ages and is increasingly being identified as a cause of prolonged coughing illness in adolescents and adults. In unimmunized populations, pertussis incidence peaks during the preschool years, and well over half of children have the disease before reaching adulthood. In highly immunized populations such as those in North America, the peak incidence is among infants <1 year of age who have not completed the three-dose primary immunization series. An increase in pertussis incidence among adolescents and adults began in the late 1990s and led to the introduction of an adolescent booster across North America by 2006. While the disease burden among adolescents has started to decrease, children 7–10 years of age have recently emerged as a high-risk group. In major outbreaks in 2010 and 2012, the incidence of pertussis among children 10 years of age, most of whom were fully immunized, was as high as that among infants <6 months of age. Although adults contribute a smaller proportion of reported cases of pertussis than do children and adolescents, this difference may be related to a greater degree of underrecognition and underreporting. A number of studies of prolonged coughing illness suggest that B. pertussis may be the etiologic agent in 12–30% of adults with cough that does not improve within 2 weeks. In one study of the efficacy of an acellular pertussis vaccine in adolescents and adults, the incidence of pertussis in the placebo group was 3.7–4.5 cases per 1000 person-years. Although this prospective cohort study yielded a lower estimate than the studies of cough illness, its results still translate to 600,000–800,000 cases of pertussis annually among adults in the United States.
# Chunk 3190
Complications are frequently associated with pertussis and are more common among infants than among older children or adults. Subconjunctival hemorrhages, abdominal and inguinal hernias, pneumothoraces, and facial and truncal petechiae can result from increased intrathoracic pressure generated by severe fits of coughing. Weight loss can follow decreased caloric intake. In a series of more than 1100 children <2 years of age who were hospitalized with pertussis, 27.1% had apnea, 9.4% had pneumonia, 2.6% had seizures, and 0.4% had encephalopathy; 10 children (0.9%) died. Pneumonia is reported in <5% of adolescents and adults and increases in frequency after 50 years of age. In contrast to the primary B. pertussis pneumonia that develops in infants, pneumonia in adolescents and adults with pertussis is usually caused by a secondary infection with encapsulated organisms such as Streptococcus pneumoniae or Haemophilus influenzae. Pneumothorax, severe weight loss, inguinal hernia, rib fracture, carotid artery aneurysm, and cough syncope have all been reported in adolescents and adults with pertussis.
# Chunk 3191
Nasopharyngeal cultures in untreated pertussis remain positive for a mean of 3 weeks after the onset of illness; these cultures become negative within 5 days of the institution of appropriate antimicrobial therapy. The duration of a positive PCR in untreated pertussis or after therapy is not known but exceeds that of positive cultures. Since much of the period during which the organism can be recovered from the nasopharynx falls into the catarrhal phase, when the etiology of the infection is not suspected, there is only a small window of opportunity for culture-proven diagnosis. Cultures from infants and young children are more frequently positive than those from older children and adults; this difference may reflect earlier presentation of the former age group for medical care. Direct fluorescent antibody tests of nasopharyngeal secretions for direct diagnosis may still be available in some laboratories but should not be used because of poor sensitivity and specificity. Pseudo-outbreaks of pertussis have been reported as a result of false-positive PCR results. Greater standardization of PCR methodology can alleviate this problem.
# Chunk 3192
The carbapenems are the most reliably active β-lactam agents against ESBL-expressing strains. Clinical experience with alternatives is more limited, but, for organisms susceptible to piperacillintazobactam (minimal inhibitory concentration [MIC], ≤4 μg/mL), this agent—at a dosage of 4.5 g q6h—may offer a carbapenemsparing alternative, at least for E. coli. The role of tigecycline is unclear despite its excellent in vitro activity; Proteus, Morganella, and Providencia are inherently resistant, and attainable serum and urine levels are low. Therefore, caution appears to be prudent, especially with serious infections, until more clinical data become available. Oral options for the treatment of strains expressing CTX-M ESBLs are limited, with fosfomycin being the most reliably active agent (see section below on the treatment of extraintestinal E. coli infections).
# Chunk 3193
For treatment of carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae, tigecycline and colistin are the parenteral agents with the most reliable in vitro activity. However, because tigecycline reaches only low serum and urine concentrations, caution is warranted in using it to treat bacteremia and perhaps urinary tract infection (UTI), although a few case reports describe some success with tigecycline therapy for UTI. Colistin has nephrotoxic and neurotoxic potential. Furthermore, increasing resistance has been described to both of these agents. Thus the clinician is left with few or no therapeutic options. Aminoglycosides may have some utility if active. Fosfomycin is often active in vitro, but clinical data are limited, concerns exist about the development of resistance with monotherapy, and no parenteral formulation is available in the United States. Although control data are lacking, combination therapy is being used in this setting with the goals of increasing efficacy and decreasing the emergence of resistance.
# Chunk 3194
(See also Chap. 168) Avoidance of inappropriate antimicrobial use is a key measure in preventing infections due to antimicrobial-resistant strains and the further development of antimicrobial resistance. Antimicrobial stewardship programs should be adopted to facilitate achievement of this goal. Diligent adherence to hand-hygiene protocols by health care personnel, cleaning/disinfection of objects that come into contact with patients (e.g., stethoscopes and blood pressure cuffs), and contact precautions should be implemented for patients colonized or infected with carbapenem-resistant (and perhaps other XDR) GNB. Avoidance of the use of indwelling devices (e.g., urinary and intravascular catheters, endotracheal tubes) and, when such devices are necessary, placement according to an appropriate protocol decrease infection risk. Likewise, protocols for daily use evaluation and removal as soon as possible should be implemented. Patient positioning (e.g., head of bed at ≥30°) and good oral hygiene decrease the incidence of pneumonia among ventilated patients. Increasing data support the implementation of universal decolonization to prevent infection in ICU patients.
# Chunk 3195
abdominal and pelvic infection The abdomen/pelvis is the second most common site of extraintestinal infection due to E. coli. A wide variety of clinical syndromes occur in this location, including acute peritonitis secondary to fecal contamination, spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, dialysis-associated peritonitis, diverticulitis, appendicitis, intraperitoneal or visceral abscesses (hepatic, pancreatic, splenic), infected pancreatic pseudocysts, and septic cholangitis and/or cholecystitis. In intraabdominal infections, E. coli can be isolated either alone or (as often occurs) in combination with other facultative and/ or anaerobic members of the intestinal flora (Chap. 159).
# Chunk 3196
pneUmonia E. coli is not usually considered a cause of pneumonia (Chap. 153). Indeed, enteric GNB account for only 1–3% of cases of community-acquired pneumonia, in part because these organisms only transiently colonize the oropharynx in a minority of healthy individuals. However, rates of oral colonization with E. coli and other GNB increase with severity of illness and antibiotic use. Consequently, GNB are a more common cause of pneumonia among residents of LTCFs and are the most common cause (60–70% of cases) of hospital-acquired pneumonia (Chap. 168), particularly among postoperative and ICU patients (e.g., ventilator-associated pneumonia). Pulmonary infection is usually acquired by small-volume aspiration but occasionally occurs via hematogenous spread, in which case multifocal nodular infiltrates can be seen. Tissue necrosis, probably due to bacterial cytotoxins, is common. Despite significant institutional variation, E. coli is generally the third or fourth most commonly isolated GNB in hospital-acquired pneumonia, accounting for 5–8% of episodes in both U.S.-based and Europe-based studies. Regardless of the host, pneumonia due to ExPEC is a serious disease, with high crude and attributable mortality rates (20–60% and 10–20%, respectively).
# Chunk 3197
bacteremia E. coli bacteremia can arise from primary infection at any extraintestinal site. In addition, primary E. coli bacteremia can arise from percutaneous intravascular devices or transrectal prostate biopsy or from the increased intestinal mucosal permeability seen in neonates and in the settings of neutropenia and chemotherapy-induced mucositis, trauma, and burns. Roughly equal proportions of E. coli bacteremia cases originate in the community and in health care settings. In most studies, E. coli and Staphylococcus aureus are the two most common blood isolates of clinical significance. Isolation of E. coli from the blood is almost always clinically significant and is typically accompanied by the sepsis syndrome, severe sepsis (sepsis-induced dysfunction of at least one organ or system), or septic shock (Chap. 325).
# Chunk 3198
The urinary tract is the most common source of E. coli bacteremia, accounting for one-half to two-thirds of episodes. Bacteremia from a urinary tract source is particularly common among patients with pyelonephritis, urinary tract obstruction, or urinary instrumentation in the presence of infected urine. The abdomen is the second most common source, accounting for 25% of episodes. Although biliary obstruction (stones, tumor) and overt bowel disruption, which typically are readily apparent, are responsible for many of these cases, some abdominal sources (e.g., abscesses) are remarkably silent clinically and require identification via imaging studies (e.g., CT). Therefore, the physician should be cautious in designating the urinary tract as the source of E. coli bacteremia in the absence of characteristic signs and symptoms of UTI. Soft tissue, bone, pulmonary, and intravascular catheter infections are other sources of E. coli bacteremia.
# Chunk 3199
Domesticated ruminant animals, particularly cattle and young calves, serve as the major reservoir for STEC/EHEC. Ground beef—the most common food source of STEC/EHEC strains—is often contaminated during processing. Furthermore, manure from cattle or other animals (including that in the form of fertilizer) can contaminate produce (potatoes, lettuce, spinach, sprouts, fallen fruits, nuts, strawberries), and fecal runoff from this source can contaminate water systems. Dairy products and petting zoos are additional sources of infection. By contrast, humans appear to be the reservoir for STEAEC. It is estimated that <102 colony-forming units (CFU) of STEC/EHEC/STEAEC can cause disease. Therefore, not only can low levels of food or environmental contamination (e.g., in water swallowed while swimming) result in disease, but person-to-person transmission (e.g., at day-care centers and in institutions) is an important route for secondary spread. Laboratory-associated infections also occur. Illness due to this group of pathogens occurs both as outbreaks and as sporadic cases, with a peak incidence in the summer months.
# Chunk 3200
In contrast to other intestinal pathotypes, STEC/EHEC/ STEAEC causes infections more frequently in industrialized countries than in developing regions. O157:H7 strains are the fourth most commonly reported cause of bacterial diarrhea in the United States (after Campylobacter, Salmonella, and Shigella). Colonization of the colon and perhaps the ileum results in symptoms after an incubation period of 3 or 4 days. Colonic edema and an initial nonbloody secretory diarrhea may develop into the STEC/EHEC/ STEAEC hallmark syndrome of grossly bloody diarrhea (identified by history or examination) in >90% of cases. Significant abdominal pain and fecal leukocytes are common (70% of cases), whereas fever is not; absence of fever can incorrectly lead to consideration of noninfectious conditions (e.g., intussusception and inflammatory or ischemic bowel disease). Occasionally, infections caused by C. difficile, K. oxytoca (see “Klebsiella Infections,” below), Campylobacter, and Salmonella present in a similar fashion. STEC/EHEC disease is usually self-limited, lasting 5–10 days. An uncommon but feared complication of this infection is HUS, which occurs 2–14 days after diarrhea in 2–8% of cases, most often affecting very young or elderly patients. Distinctive features of STEAEC infection, as compared with classical STEC/EHEC disease, include a higher incidence among adults, especially young women, and a higher rate of HUS (~20%). It is estimated that >50% of all cases of HUS in the United States and 90% of HUS cases in children are caused by STEC/EHEC. This complication is mediated by the systemic translocation of Shiga toxins. Erythrocytes may serve as carriers of Stx to endothelial cells located in the small vessels of the kidney and brain. The subsequent development of thrombotic microangiopathy (perhaps with direct toxin-mediated effects on various nonendothelial cells) commonly produces some combination of fever, thrombocytopenia, renal failure, and encephalopathy. Although the mortality rate with dialysis support is <10%, residual renal and neurologic dysfunction may persist.
# Chunk 3201
enteropatHogenic e. coli EPEC causes disease primarily in young children, including neonates. The first E. coli pathotype recognized as an agent of diarrheal disease, EPEC was responsible for outbreaks of infantile diarrhea (including some outbreaks in hospital nurseries) in industrialized countries in the 1940s and 1950s. At present, EPEC infection is an uncommon cause of diarrhea in developed countries but is an important cause of diarrhea (both sporadic and epidemic) among infants in developing countries. Breast-feeding diminishes the incidence of EPEC infection. Rapid person-to-person spread may occur. Upon colonization of the small bowel, symptoms develop after a brief incubation period (1 or 2 days). Initial localized adherence via bundle-forming pili leads to a characteristic effacement of microvilli, with the formation of cuplike, actin-rich pedestals mediated by factors in the LEE. Diarrhea production is a complex and regulated process in which host cell modulation by a type III secretion system plays an important role. Strains lacking bundle-forming pili have been categorized as atypical EPEC (aEPEC); increasing data support a role for these strains as intestinal pathogens. Diarrheal stool often contains mucus but not blood. Although EPEC diarrhea is usually self-limited (lasting 5–15 days), it may persist for weeks.
# Chunk 3202
enteroinvasive e. coli EIEC, a relatively uncommon cause of diarrhea, is rarely identified in the United States, although a few food-related outbreaks have been described. In developing countries, sporadic disease is infrequently recognized in children and travelers. EIEC shares many genetic and clinical features with Shigella, both of which evolved from a common ancestor. However, unlike Shigella, EIEC produces disease only with a large inoculum (108–1010 CFU), with onset generally following an incubation period of 1–3 days. Initially, enterotoxins are believed to induce secretory small-bowel diarrhea. Subsequently, colonization and invasion of the colonic mucosa, followed by replication therein and cell-to-cell spread, result in the development of inflammatory colitis characterized by fever, abdominal pain, tenesmus, and scant stool containing mucus, blood, and inflammatory cells. Symptoms are usually self-limited (7–10 days).
# Chunk 3203
FIGuRE 186-1 New hypervirulent variant of K. pneumoniae (hvKP). Top: Abdominal CT scan of a previously healthy 24-year-old Vietnamese man shows a primary liver abscess (red arrow) with metastatic spread to the spleen (black arrow). (Courtesy of Drs. Chiu-Bin Hsaio and Diana Pomakova.) Middle: A previously healthy 33-year-old Chinese man presented with endophthalmitis. (From Virulence 4:2, 1-12 Feb. 15, 2013.) Bottom: A hypermucoviscous phenotype (which does not necessarily equate with a mucoid phenotype) has been associated with hvKP strains. This phenotype has been semiquantitatively defined by a positive “string test” (formation of a viscous string >5 mm long when bacterial colonies on an agar plate are stretched by an inoculation loop). (Courtesy of Dr. Russo.) monomicrobial necrotizing fasciitis; meningitis; brain, subdural, and epidural abscess; and endophthalmitis (Fig. 186-1, middle), particularly in the Asian Pacific Rim but also globally. Cytotoxin-producing strains of K. oxytoca have been implicated as a cause of hemorrhagic antibiotic-associated non–C. difficile colitis.
# Chunk 3204
cKP and K. oxytoca have similar antibiotic resistance profiles. These species are intrinsically resistant to ampicillin and ticarcillin, and nitrofurantoin is inconsistently active against them. NHSN data for 2009–2010 documented resistance to thirdand fourth-generation cephalosporins in 28.9% of CLABSI isolates of cKP and K. oxytoca, and INICC data for 2004–2009 identified resistance to third-generation cephalosporins in 76.3% of ICU isolates of K. pneumoniae. This increasing resistance is mediated primarily by plasmid-encoded ESBLs. In addition, such plasmids usually encode resistance to aminoglycosides, tetracyclines, and TMP-SMX. Furthermore, isolates of cKP that produce CTX-M ESBLs have been obtained from ambulatory patients with no recent health care contact (see the section on the treatment of extraintestinal E. coli infections for treatment considerations). Resistance to β-lactam/β-lactamase inhibitor combinations and cephamycins independent of ESBL-encoding plasmids has also been described with increasing frequency, particularly in Latin America. The prevalence of fluoroquinolone resistance is 15–20% overall and is 50% among ESBL-containing strains. Given both the undesirability of treating the latter strains with penicillins or cephalosporins and the fluoroquinolone resistance often associated with ESBLs, empirical treatment of serious or health care–associated cKP and K. oxytoca infections with amikacin or carbapenems is prudent, as dictated by local susceptibilities. Predictably, however, the ESBL-driven use of carbapenems has selected for strains of cKP and
# Chunk 3205
Proteus mirabilis causes 90% of Proteus infections, which occur in the community, LTCFs, and hospitals. Proteus vulgaris and Proteus penneri are associated primarily with infections acquired in LTCFs or hospitals. Proteus species are part of the colonic flora of a wide variety of mammals, birds, fish, and reptiles. The ability of these GNB to generate histamine from contaminated fish has implicated them in the pathogenesis of 1033 scombroid (fish) poisoning (Chap. 474). P. mirabilis colonizes healthy humans (prevalence, 50%), whereas P. vulgaris and P. penneri are isolated primarily from individuals with underlying disease. The urinary tract is by far the most common site of Proteus infection, with adhesins, flagella, IgA-IgG protease, iron acquisition systems, and urease representing the principal known urovirulence factors. Proteus less commonly causes infection at a variety of other extraintestinal sites.
# Chunk 3206
INFECTIOuS SYNDROMES uTI Most Proteus infections arise from the urinary tract. P. mirabilis causes only 1–2% of UTIs in healthy women, and Proteus species collectively cause only 5% of hospital-acquired UTIs. However, Proteus is responsible for 10–15% of cases of complicated UTI, primarily those associated with catheterization; indeed, among UTI isolates from chronically catheterized patients, the prevalence of Proteus is 20–45%. This high prevalence is due in part to bacterial production of urease, which hydrolyzes urea to ammonia and results in alkalization of the urine. Alkalization of urine, in turn, leads to precipitation of organic and inorganic compounds, which contributes to formation of struvite and carbonate-apatite crystals, formation of biofilms on catheters, and/or development of frank calculi. Proteus becomes associated with the stones and biofilms; thereafter, it usually can be eradicated only by removal of the stones or the catheter. Over time, staghorn calculi may form within the renal pelvis and lead to obstruction and renal failure. Thus, urine samples with unexplained alkalinity should be cultured for Proteus, and identification of a Proteus species in urine should prompt consideration of an evaluation for urolithiasis.
# Chunk 3207
Enterobacter strains. Ampicillin and firstand second-gener ation cephalosporins have little or no activity. Extensive use of third-generation cephalosporins can induce or select for variants with stable derepression of AmpC β-lactamase, which confers resistance to these agents as well as monobactams (e.g., aztreonam) and—in many cases—β-lactam/β-lactamase inhibitor combinations. Resistance may emerge during therapy; in one study, this phenomenon was documented in 20% of clinical isolates. De novo resistance should be considered when clinical deterioration follows initial improvement, and third-generation cephalosporins should be avoided in the treatment of serious Enterobacter infections. Cefepime is stable in the presence of AmpC β-lactamases; thus, it is a suitable option for treatment of Enterobacter infections so long as no coexistent ESBL is present. Detection of ESBLs in Enterobacter is difficult because of the presence of AmpC β-lactamase; nonetheless, their prevalence (particularly in E. cloacae) is known to be variable worldwide but is generally increasing and is now 5–50% overall. This increase is evidenced by NHSN data, which documented resistance to thirdand fourth-generation cephalosporins in 37.4% of CLABSI Enterobacter isolates in the United States; fortunately, carbapenems, amikacin, and tigecycline have generally retained excellent activity (90–99% susceptibility) and fluoroquinolones have good activity (85–95% susceptibility). Once susceptibility data become available, it is critical to de-escalate the antimicrobial regimen whenever possible.
# Chunk 3208
S. rubidaea are red pigmented.

Most Serratia strains (>80%) are resistant to ampicillin, amoxi cillin-clavulanate, ampicillin-sulbactam, first-generation cepha losporins, cephamycins, nitrofurantoin, and colistin. In general, >90% of Serratia isolates are susceptible to other antibiotics appropriate for use against GNB. Induction or selection of variants with stable derepression of chromosomal AmpC β-lactamases may develop during therapy. Both in the United States and globally, the prevalence of ESBL-producing isolates is generally low (<5%), but rates of 20–30% have been reported in Asia and Latin America. Acquisition of carbapenemase-encoding genes is uncommon but increasing.
# Chunk 3209
C. freundii is more extensively resistant to antibiotics than is C. koseri. More than 90% of isolates are resistant to ampicillin and firstand sec-ond-generation cephalosporins. Citrobacter species (except C. koseri) possess AmpC β-lactamases; induction or selection of variants with stable derepression may develop during therapy. Resistance to antipseudomonal penicillins, aztreonam, fluoroquinolones, gentamicin, and third-generation cephalosporins is variable but increasing. The prevalence of ESBL-producing isolates is <5%. Carbapenems, amikacin, cefepime, tigecycline (with which clinical experience is limited), fosfomycin (which is available in the United States only as an oral formulation), and colistin (which is an agent of last resort because of potential toxicities) are most active, with >90% of strains susceptible.
# Chunk 3210
Asia, Australia, the Middle East, and Africa Although surveillance data are sparse from many countries in these regions, problems with carbapenem-resistant A. baumannii abound. Community-acquired infections are well described in northern Australia and some parts of Asia. These infections may be more likely in men >45 years of age who have histories of cigarette smoking, alcoholism, diabetes mellitus, or chronic obstructive airway disease. Community-acquired strains are more susceptible to antimicrobial agents than are hospital-acquired strains, but the clinical presentation of community-acquired disease is quite distinct and is characterized by overwhelming infection with severe pneumonia, septic shock, and multiorgan failure.
# Chunk 3211
Community-acquired pneumonia due to A. baumannii has been described in tropical regions of Australia and Asia. The disease typically occurs during the “wet” season among people with a history of alcohol abuse. Infection may result in fulminant pneumonia requiring admission to an ICU, with a mortality rate of ~50%.
# Chunk 3212
Prevalence and Risk Factors The prevalence of H. pylori among adults is <30% in most parts of the United States and in other developed countries as opposed to >80% in most developing countries. In the United States, prevalence varies with age: up to 50% of 60-year-old persons, ~20% of 30-year-old persons, and fewer than 10% of children are colonized. H. pylori is usually acquired in childhood. The age association is due mostly to a birth-cohort effect whereby current 60-year-olds were more commonly colonized as children than are current children. Spontaneous acquisition or loss of
# Chunk 3213
Endoscopy-Based Tests Endoscopy is usually unnecessary in the initial management of young patients with simple dyspepsia but is commonly used to exclude malignancy and make a positive diagnosis in older patients or those with “alarm” symptoms. If endoscopy is performed, the most convenient biopsy-based test is the biopsy urease test, in which one large or two small gastric biopsy specimens are placed into a gel containing urea and an indicator. The presence of H. pylori urease leads to a pH alteration and therefore to a color change, which often occurs within minutes but can require up to 24 h. Histologic examination of biopsy specimens for H. pylori also is accurate, provided that a special stain (e.g., a modified Giemsa or silver stain) permitting optimal visualization of the organism is used. If biopsy specimens are obtained from both antrum and corpus, histologic study yields additional information, including the degree and pattern of inflammation and the presence of any atrophy, metaplasia, or dysplasia. Microbiologic culture is most specific but may be insensitive because of difficulty with H. pylori isolation. Once the organism is cultured, its identity as H. pylori can be confirmed by its typical appearance on Gram’s stain and its positive reactions in oxidase, catalase, and urease tests. Moreover, the organism’s susceptibility to antibiotics can be determined, and this information can be clinically useful in difficult cases. The occasional biopsy specimens containing the less common non-pylori gastric helicobacters give only weakly positive results in the biopsy urease test. Positive identification of these bacteria requires visualization of the characteristic long, tight spirals in histologic sections; they cannot easily be cultured.
# Chunk 3214
Noninvasive Tests Noninvasive H. pylori testing is the norm if gastric cancer does not need to be excluded by endoscopy. The best-established test (and a very accurate one) is the urea breath test. In this simple test, the patient drinks a solution of urea labeled with the nonradioactive isotope 13C and then blows into a tube. If H. pylori urease is present, the urea is hydrolyzed, and labeled carbon dioxide is detected in breath samples. The stool antigen test, a simple and accurate test using monoclonal antibodies specific for H. pylori antigens, is more convenient and potentially less expensive than the urea breath test, but some patients dislike sampling stool. The simplest tests for ascertaining H. pylori status are serologic assays measuring specific IgG levels in serum by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay or immunoblot. The best of these tests are as accurate as other diagnostic methods, but many commercial tests—especially rapid office tests—do not perform well.
# Chunk 3215
use of Tests to Assess Treatment Success The urea breath test, the stool antigen test, and biopsy-based tests can all be used to assess the success of treatment (Fig. 188-2). However, because these tests are dependent on H. pylori load, their use <4 weeks after treatment may yield false-negative results. Furthermore, these tests are unreliable if performed within 4 weeks of intercurrent treatment with antibiotics or bismuth compounds or within 2 weeks of the discontinuation of proton pump inhibitor (PPI) treatment. In the assessment of treatment success, noninvasive tests are normally preferred; however, after gastric ulceration, endoscopy should be repeated to ensure healing and to exclude gastric carcinoma by further histologic sampling. Serologic tests are not used to monitor treatment success, as the gradual drop in titer of H. pylori– specific antibodies is too slow to be of practical use.
# Chunk 3216
Any remaining symptoms are not due to H. pylori

FIGuRE 188-2 Algorithm for the management of Helicobacter pylori infection. *Note that either the urea breath test or the stool antigen test can be used in this algorithm. Occasionally, endoscopy and a biopsy-based test are used instead of either of these tests in follow-up after treatment. The main indication for these invasive tests is gastric ulceration; in this condition, as opposed to duodenal ulceration, it is important to check healing and to exclude underlying gastric adenocarcinoma. However, even in this situation, patients undergoing endoscopy may still be receiving proton pump inhibitor therapy, which precludes H. pylori testing. Thus a urea breath test or a stool antigen test is still required at a suitable interval after the end of therapy to determine whether treatment has been successful (see text). †Some authorities use empirical third-line regimens, of which several have been described.
# Chunk 3217
In the past, burned patients appeared to be unusually susceptible to

P. aeruginosa. For example, in 1959–1963, Pseudomonas burn-wound sepsis was the principal cause of death in 60% of burned patients dying at the U.S. Army Institute of Surgical Research. For reasons that are unclear, P. aeruginosa infection in burns is no longer the major problem that it was during the 1950s and 1960s. Similarly, in the 1960s,
# Chunk 3218
Bacteremia Crude mortality rates exceeding 50% have been reported among patients with P. aeruginosa bacteremia. Consequently, this clinical entity has been much feared, and its management has been attempted with the use of multiple antibiotics. Recent publications report attributable mortality rates of 28–44%, with the precise figure depending on the adequacy of treatment and the seriousness of the underlying disease. In the past, the patient with P. aeruginosa bacteremia classically was neutropenic or had a burn injury. Today, however, a minority of such patients have bacteremic P. aeruginosa infections. Rather, P. aeruginosa bacteremia is seen most often in patients in ICUs.
# Chunk 3219
Older reports of P. aeruginosa pneumonia described patients with an acute clinical syndrome of fever, chills, cough, and necrotizing pneumonia indistinguishable from other gram-negative bacterial pneumonias. The traditional accounts described a fulminant infection. Chest radiographs demonstrated bilateral pneumonia, often with nodular densities with or without cavities. This picture is now remarkably rare. Today, the typical patient is on a ventilator, has a slowly progressive infiltrate, and has been colonized with P. aeruginosa for days. While some cases may progress rapidly over 48–72 h, they are the exceptions. Nodular densities are not commonly seen. However, infiltrates may go on to necrosis. Necrotizing pneumonia has also been seen in the community (e.g., after inhalation of hot-tub water contaminated with P. aeruginosa). The typical patient has fever, leukocytosis, and purulent sputum, and the chest radiograph shows a new infiltrate or the expansion of a preexisting infiltrate. Chest examination generally detects rales or dullness. Of course, such findings are quite common among ventilated patients in the ICU. A sputum Gram’s stain showing mainly polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs) in conjunction with a culture positive for P. aeruginosa in this setting suggests a diagnosis of acute P. aeruginosa pneumonia. There is no consensus about whether
# Chunk 3220
Bone and Joint Infections P. aeruginosa is an infrequent cause of bone and joint infections. However, Pseudomonas bacteremia or infective endocarditis caused by the injection of contaminated illicit drugs has been documented to result in vertebral osteomyelitis and sternoclavicular joint arthritis. The clinical presentation of vertebral P. aeruginosa osteomyelitis is more indolent than that of staphylococcal osteomyelitis. The duration of symptoms in IV drug users with vertebral osteomyelitis due to P. aeruginosa varies from weeks to months. Fever is not uniformly present; when present, it tends to be low grade. There may be mild tenderness at the site of involvement. Blood cultures are usually negative unless there is concomitant endocarditis. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) is generally elevated. Vertebral osteomyelitis due to P. aeruginosa has also been reported in the elderly, in whom it originates from urinary tract infections (UTIs). The infection generally involves the lumbosacral area because of a shared venous drainage (Batson’s plexus) between the lumbosacral spine and the pelvis. Sternoclavicular septic arthritis due to P. aeruginosa is seen almost exclusively in IV drug users. This disease may occur with or without endocarditis, and a primary site of infection often is not found. Plain radiographs show joint or bone involvement. Treatment of these forms of disease is generally successful.
# Chunk 3221
Ear Infections P. aeruginosa infections of the ears vary from mild swimmer’s ear to serious life-threatening infections with neurologic sequelae. Swimmer’s ear is common among children and results from infection of moist macerated skin of the external ear canal. Most cases resolve with treatment, but some patients develop chronic drainage. Swimmer’s ear is managed with topical antibiotic agents (otic solutions). The most serious form of Pseudomonas infection involving the ear has been given various names: two of these designations, malignant otitis externa and necrotizing otitis externa, are now used for the same entity. This disease was originally described in elderly diabetic patients, in whom the majority of cases still occur. However, it has also been described in patients with AIDS and in elderly patients without underlying diabetes or immunocompromise. The usual presenting symptoms are decreased hearing and ear pain, which may be severe and lancinating. The pinna is usually painful, and the external canal may be tender. The ear canal almost always shows signs of inflammation, with granulation tissue and exudate. Tenderness anterior to the tragus may extend as far as the temporomandibular joint and mastoid process. A small minority of patients have systemic symptoms. Patients in whom the diagnosis is made late may present with cranial nerve palsies or even with cavernous venous sinus thrombosis. The ESR is invariably elevated (≥100 mm/h). The diagnosis is made on clinical grounds in severe cases; however, the “gold standard” is a positive technetium-99 bone scan in a patient with otitis externa due to P. aeruginosa. In diabetic patients, a positive bone scan constitutes presumptive evidence for this diagnosis and should prompt biopsy or empirical therapy.
# Chunk 3222
Once phagocytosed, typhoidal salmonellae disseminate throughout the body in macrophages via the lymphatics and colonize reticuloendothelial tissues (liver, spleen, lymph nodes, and bone marrow). Patients have relatively few or no signs and symptoms during this initial incubation stage. Signs and symptoms, including fever and abdominal pain, probably result from secretion of cytokines by macrophages and epithelial cells in response to bacterial products that are recognized by innate immune receptors when a critical number of organisms have replicated. Over time, the development of hepatosplenomegaly is likely to be related to the recruitment of mononuclear cells and the development of a specific acquired cell-mediated immune response to S. typhi colonization. The recruitment of additional mononuclear cells and lymphocytes to Peyer’s patches during the several weeks after initial colonization/infection can result in marked enlargement and necrosis 1050 of the Peyer’s patches, which may be mediated by bacterial products that promote cell death as well as the inflammatory response. In contrast to enteric fever, which is characterized by an infiltration of mononuclear cells into the small-bowel mucosa, NTS gastroenteritis is characterized by massive polymorphonuclear leukocyte infiltration into both the largeand small-bowel mucosa. This response appears to depend on the induction of interleukin 8, a strong neutrophil chemotactic factor, which is secreted by intestinal cells as a result of Salmonella colonization and translocation of bacterial proteins into host cell cytoplasm. The degranulation and release of toxic substances by neutrophils may result in damage to the intestinal mucosa, causing the inflammatory diarrhea observed with nontyphoidal gastroenteritis. An additional important factor in the persistence of nontyphoidal salmonellae in the intestinal tract and the organisms’ capacity to compete with endogenous flora is the ability to utilize the sulfur-containing compound tetrathionate for metabolism in a microaerophilic environment. In the presence of intestinal inflammation, tetrathionate is generated from thiosulfate produced by epithelial cells through inflammatory cell production of reactive oxygen species.
# Chunk 3223
The incubation period for S. typhi averages 10–14 days but ranges from 5 to 21 days, depending on the inoculum size and the host’s health and immune status. The most prominent symptom is prolonged fever (38.8°–40.5°C; 101.8°–104.9°F), which can continue for up to 4 weeks if untreated. S. paratyphi A is thought to cause milder disease than S. typhi, with predominantly gastrointestinal symptoms. However, a prospective study of 669 consecutive cases of enteric fever in Kathmandu, Nepal, found that the infections caused by these organisms were clinically indistinguishable. In this series, symptoms reported on initial medical evaluation included headache (80%), chills (35–45%), cough (30%), sweating (20–25%), myalgias (20%), malaise (10%), and arthralgia (2–4%). Gastrointestinal manifestations included anorexia (55%), abdominal pain (30–40%), nausea (18–24%), vomiting (18%), and diarrhea (22–28%) more commonly than constipation (13–16%). Physical findings included coated tongue (51–56%), splenomegaly (5–6%), and abdominal tenderness (4–5%).
# Chunk 3224
Early physical findings of enteric fever include rash (“rose spots”; 30%), hepatosplenomegaly (3–6%), epistaxis, and relative bradycardia at the peak of high fever (<50%). Rose spots (Fig. 190-2; see also Fig. 25e-9) make up a faint, salmon-colored, blanching, maculopapular rash located primarily on the trunk and chest. The rash is evident in ~30% of patients at the end of the first week and resolves without a trace after 2–5 days. Patients can have two or three crops of lesions, and Salmonella can be cultured from punch biopsies of these lesions. The faintness of the rash makes it difficult to detect in highly pigmented patients.
# Chunk 3225
Bone marrow culture is 55–90% sensitive, and, unlike that of blood culture, its yield is not reduced by up to 5 days of prior antibiotic therapy. Culture of intestinal secretions (best obtained by a noninvasive duodenal string test) can be positive despite a negative bone marrow culture. If blood, bone marrow, and intestinal secretions are all cultured, the yield is >90%. Stool cultures, although negative in 60–70% of cases during the first week, can become positive during the third week of infection in untreated patients.
# Chunk 3226
Most patients with uncomplicated enteric fever can be managed at home with oral antibiotics and antipyretics. Patients with persistent vomiting, diarrhea, and/or abdominal distension should be hospitalized and given supportive therapy as well as a parenteral third-generation cephalosporin or fluoroquinolone, depending on the susceptibility profile. Therapy should be administered for at least 10 days or for 5 days after fever resolution.
# Chunk 3227
Two typhoid vaccines are commercially available: (1) Ty21a, an oral live attenuated S. typhi vaccine (given on days 1, 3, 5, and 7, with a booster every 5 years); and (2) Vi CPS, a parenteral vaccine consisting of purified Vi polysaccharide from the bacterial capsule (given in a single dose, with a booster every 2 years). The old parenteral whole-cell typhoid/paratyphoid A and B vaccine is no longer licensed, largely because of significant side effects, especially fever. An acetone-killed whole-cell vaccine is available only for use by the U.S. military. The minimal age for vaccination is 6 years for Ty21a and 2 years for Vi CPS. In a recent meta-analysis of vaccines for preventing typhoid fever in populations in endemic areas, the cumulative efficacy was 48% for Ty21a at 2.5–3.5 years and 55% for Vi CPS at 3 years. Although data on typhoid vaccines in travelers are limited, some evidence suggests that efficacy rates may be substantially lower than those for local populations in endemic areas. Currently, there is no licensed vaccine for paratyphoid fever.
# Chunk 3228
Vi CPS typhoid vaccine is poorly immunogenic in children <5 years of age because of T cell–independent properties. In the more recently developed Vi-rEPA vaccine, Vi is bound to a nontoxic recombinant protein that is identical to Pseudomonas aeruginosa exotoxin A. In 2to 4-year-olds, two injections of Vi-rEPA induced higher T cell responses and higher levels of serum IgG antibody to Vi than did Vi CPS in 5to 14-year-olds. In a two-dose trial in 2to 5-year-old children in Vietnam, Vi-rEPA provided 91% efficacy at 27 months and 89% efficacy at 46 months and was very well tolerated. This vaccine is not yet commercially available in the United States. Efforts to improve the immunogenicity and reduce the number of doses of live attenuated oral vaccines are ongoing.
# Chunk 3229
Typhoid vaccine is not required for international travel, but it is recommended for travelers to areas where there is a moderate to high risk of exposure to S. typhi, especially those who are traveling to southern Asia and other developing regions of Asia, Africa, the Caribbean, and Central and South America and who will be exposed to potentially contaminated food and drink. Typhoid vaccine should be considered even for persons planning <2 weeks of travel to high-risk areas. In addition, laboratory workers who deal with S. typhi and household contacts of known S. typhi carriers should be vaccinated. Because the protective efficacy of vaccine can be overcome by the high inocula that are commonly encountered in food-borne exposures, immunization is an adjunct and not a substitute for the avoidance of high-risk foods and beverages. Immunization is not recommended for adults residing in typhoid-endemic areas or for the management of persons who may have been exposed in a common-source outbreak.
# Chunk 3230
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS Gastroenteritis Infection with NTS most often results in gastroenteritis indistinguishable from that caused by other enteric pathogens. Nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea occur 6–48 h after the ingestion of contaminated food or water. Patients often experience abdominal cramping and fever (38–39°C; 100.5–102.2°F). Diarrheal stools are usually loose, nonbloody, and of moderate volume. However, large-volume watery stools, bloody stools, or symptoms of dysentery may occur. Rarely, NTS causes pseudoappendicitis or an illness that mimics inflammatory bowel disease.
# Chunk 3231
Gastroenteritis caused by NTS is usually self-limited. Diarrhea resolves within 3–7 days and fever within 72 h. Stool cultures remain positive for 4–5 weeks after infection and—in rare cases of chronic carriage (<1%)—for >1 year. Antibiotic treatment usually is not recommended and may prolong fecal carriage. Neonates, the elderly, and immunosuppressed patients (e.g., transplant recipients, HIV-infected persons) with NTS gastroenteritis are especially susceptible to dehydration and dissemination and may require hospitalization and antibiotic therapy. Acute NTS gastroenteritis was associated with a threefold increased risk of dyspepsia and irritable bowel syndrome at 1 year in a study from Spain.
# Chunk 3232
1054 Bacteremia and Endovascular Infections Up to 8% of patients with NTS gastroenteritis develop bacteremia; of these, 5–10% develop localized infections. Bacteremia and metastatic infection are most common with Salmonella choleraesuis and Salmonella dublin and among infants, the elderly, and immunocompromised patients, especially those with HIV infection. NTS endovascular infection should be suspected in high-grade or persistent bacteremia, especially with preexisting valvular heart disease, atherosclerotic vascular disease, prosthetic vascular graft, or aortic aneurysm. Arteritis should be suspected in elderly patients with prolonged fever and back, chest, or abdominal pain developing after an episode of gastroenteritis. Endocarditis and arteritis are rare (<1% of cases) but are associated with potentially fatal complications, including valve perforation, endomyocardial abscess, infected mural thrombus, pericarditis, mycotic aneurysms, aneurysm rupture, aortoenteric fistula, and vertebral osteomyelitis. In some areas of sub-Saharan Africa, NTS may be among the most common causes—or even the most common cause—of bacteremia in children. NTS bacteremia among these children is not associated with diarrhea and has been associated with nutritional status and HIV infection.
# Chunk 3233
Because of the increasing prevalence of antibiotic resistance, empirical therapy for life-threatening NTS bacteremia or focal NTS infection should include a third-generation cephalosporin or a fluoroquinolone (Table 190-2). If the bacteremia is low-grade (<50% of positive blood cultures), the patient should be treated for 7–14 days. Patients with HIV/AIDS and NTS bacteremia should receive 1–2 weeks of IV antibiotic therapy followed by 4 weeks of oral therapy with a aConsider for neonates; persons >50 years of age with possible atherosclerotic vascular disease; and patients with immunosuppression, endovascular graft, or joint prosthesis. bOr ofloxacin, 400 mg bid (PO). cConsider on an individualized basis for patients with severe diarrhea and high fever who require hospitalization. dOr cefotaxime, 2 g q8h (IV).
# Chunk 3234
1056 PATHOGENESIS AND PATHOLOGY 28S ribosomal RNA. This process leads to inhibition of binding of the Shigella infection occurs essentially through oral contamination via amino-acyl-tRNA to the 60S ribosomal subunit and thus to a general direct fecal-oral transmission, the organism being poorly adapted to shutoff of cell protein biosynthesis. Shiga toxins are translocated from survive in the environment. Resistance to low-pH conditions allows the bowel into the circulation. After binding of the toxins to target cells shigellae to survive passage through the gastric barrier, an ability that in the kidney, pathophysiologic alterations may result in hemolytic-may explain in part why a small inoculum (as few as 100 CFU) is suf-uremic syndrome (HUS; see below). ficient to cause infection. The watery diarrhea that usually precedes the dysenteric syndrome CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS is attributable to active secretion and abnormal water reabsorption—a The presentation and severity of shigellosis depend to some extent secretory effect at the jejunal level described in experimentally infected on the infecting serotype but even more on the age and the immuno rhesus monkeys. This initial purge is probably due to the combined logic and nutritional status of the host. Poverty and poor standards of action of an enterotoxin (ShET-1) and mucosal inflammation. The hygiene are strongly related to the number and severity of diarrheal dysenteric syndrome, manifested by bloody and mucopurulent stools, episodes, especially in children <5 years old who have been weaned. reflects invasion of the mucosa. Shigellosis typically evolves through four phases: incubation, watery
# Chunk 3235
The pathogenesis of Shigella is essentially determined by a large diarrhea, dysentery, and the postinfectious phase. The incubation virulence plasmid of 214 kb comprising ~100 genes, of which 25 period usually lasts 1–4 days but may be as long as 8 days. Typical iniencode a type III secretion system that inserts into the mem-tial manifestations are transient fever, limited watery diarrhea, malaise, brane of the host cell to allow effectors to transit from the bacterial and anorexia. Signs and symptoms may range from mild abdominal cytoplasm to the host cell cytoplasm (Fig. 191-1). Bacteria are thereby discomfort to severe cramps, diarrhea, fever, vomiting, and tenesmus. able to invade intestinal epithelial cells by inducing their own uptake The manifestations are usually exacerbated in children, with tempera-after the initial crossing of the epithelial barrier through M cells (the tures up to 40°–41°C (104.0°–105.8°F) and more severe anorexia and specialized translocating epithelial cells in the follicle-associated epi-watery diarrhea. This initial phase may represent the only clinical manithelium that covers mucosal lymphoid nodules). The organisms festation of shigellosis, especially in developed countries. Otherwise, induce apoptosis of subepithelial resident macrophages. Once inside dysentery follows within hours or days and is characterized by uninthe cytoplasm of intestinal epithelial cells, Shigella effectors trigger the terrupted excretion of small volumes of bloody mucopurulent stools cytoskeletal rearrangements necessary to direct uptake of the organism with increased tenesmus and abdominal cramps. At this stage, Shigella into the epithelial cell. The Shigella-containing vacuole is then quickly produces acute colitis involving mainly the distal colon and the rectum. lysed, releasing bacteria into the cytosol. Unlike most diarrheal syndromes, dysenteric syndromes rarely present Intracellular shigellae next use cytoskeletal components to propel with dehydration as a major feature. Endoscopy shows an edematous themselves inside the infected cell; when the moving organism and the and hemorrhagic mucosa, with ulcerations and possibly overlying host cell membrane come into contact, cellular protrusions form and exudates resembling pseudomembranes. The extent of the lesions corare engulfed by neighboring cells. This series of events permits bacte-relates with the number and frequency of stools and with the degree of rial cell-to-cell spread. protein loss by exudative mechanisms. Most episodes are self-limited Cytokines released by a growing number of infected intestinal epi-and resolve without treatment in 1 week. With appropriate treatment, thelial cells attract increased numbers of immune cells (particularly recovery takes place within a few days to a week, with no sequelae. polymorphonuclear leukocytes [PMNs]) to the infected site, thus Acute life-threatening complications are seen most often in chilfurther destabilizing the epithelial barrier, exacerbating inflammation, dren <5 years of age (particularly those who are malnourished) and leading to the acute colitis that characterizes shigellosis. Evidence and in elderly patients. Risk factors for death in a clinically severe indicates that some type III secretion system–injected effectors can case include nonbloody diarrhea, moderate to severe dehydration, control the extent of inflammation, thus facilitating bacterial survival. bacteremia, absence of fever, abdominal tenderness, and rectal pro-Shiga toxin produced by S. dysenteriae type 1 increases disease lapse. Major complications are predominantly intestinal (e.g., toxic severity. This toxin belongs to a group of A1-B5 protein toxins whose megacolon, intestinal perforations, rectal prolapse) or metabolic B subunit binds to the receptor globotriaosylceramide on the target (e.g., hypoglycemia, hyponatremia, dehydration). Bacteremia is rare cell surface and whose catalytic A subunit is internalized by receptor-and is reported most frequently in severely malnourished and HIV-mediated endocytosis and interacts with the subcellular machinery to infected patients. Alterations of consciousness, including seizures, inhibit protein synthesis by expressing RNA N-glycosidase activity on delirium, and coma, may occur, especially in children <5 years old, and are associated with a poor prognosis; fever and severe metabolic alterations are more often the major causes of altered consciousness than is meningitis or the Ekiri syndrome (toxic encepha- lopathy associated with bizarre posturing, cerebral edema, and fatty degeneration of viscera), which Activation of has been reported mostly in Japanese children.NF-°B caused by IcsA Pneumonia, vaginitis, and keratoconjunctivitis due to Shigella are rarely reported. In the absence of serious malnutrition, severe and very unusual clinical manifestations, such as meningitis, may be IpaB type III linked to genetic defects in innate immune func secretion tions (i.e., deficiency in interleukin 1 receptor–IL-1˜ IpaA associated kinase 4 [IRAK-4]) and may require
# Chunk 3236
Initiation of inflammation to the colonic smooth-muscle layer and causing paralysis and dilation. The patient presents with abdominal distention and tenderness, with or FIGuRE 191-1 Invasive strategy of Shigella flexneri. IL, interleukin; NF-κB, nuclear factor without signs of localized or generalized peritoniκB; NLR, NOD-like receptor; PMN, polymorphonuclear leukocyte. tis. The abdominal x-ray characteristically shows marked dilation of the transverse colon (with the greatest distention in the ascending and descending segments); thumbprinting caused by mucosal inflammatory edema; and loss of the normal haustral pattern associated with pseudopolyps, often extending into the lumen. Pneumatosis coli is an occasional finding. If perforation occurs, radiographic signs of pneumoperitoneum may be apparent. Predisposing factors (e.g., hypokalemia and use of opioids, anticholinergics, loper-amide, psyllium seeds, and antidepressants) should be investigated.
# Chunk 3237
Shiga toxin produced by S. dysenteriae type 1 has been linked countries, where enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC) predominates as the etiologic agent of this syndrome. HUS is an early complication that most often develops after several days of diarrhea. Clinical examination shows pallor, asthenia, and irritability and, in some cases, bleeding of the nose and gums, oliguria, and increasing edema. HUS is a nonimmune (Coombs test–negative) hemolytic anemia defined by a diagnostic triad: microangiopathic hemolytic anemia (hemoglobin level typically <80 g/L [<8 g/dL]), thrombocytopenia (mild to moderate in severity; typically <60,000 platelets/μL), and acute renal failure due to thrombosis of the glomerular capillaries (with markedly elevated creatinine levels). Anemia is severe, with fragmented red blood cells (schizocytes) in the peripheral smear, high serum concentrations of lactate dehydrogenase and free circulating hemoglobin, and elevated reticulocyte counts. Acute renal failure occurs in 55–70% of cases; however, renal function recovers in most of these cases (up to 70% in various series). Leukemoid reactions, with leukocyte counts of 50,000/ μL, are sometimes noted in association with HUS.
# Chunk 3238
C. jejuni infections may be subclinical, especially in hosts in developing countries who have had multiple prior infections and thus are partially immune. Symptomatic infections mostly occur within 2–4 days (range, 1–7 days) of exposure to the organism in food or water. The sites of tissue injury include the jejunum, ileum, and colon. Biopsies show an acute nonspecific inflammatory reaction, with neutrophils, monocytes, and eosinophils in the lamina propria, as well as damage to the epithelium, including loss of mucus, glandular degeneration, and crypt abscesses. Biopsy findings may be consistent with Crohn’s disease or ulcerative colitis, but these “idiopathic”
# Chunk 3239
The clinical features of infections due to Campylobacter and the related Arcobacter and intestinal Helicobacter species causing enteric disease appear to be highly similar. C. jejuni can be considered the prototype, in part because it is by far the most common enteric pathogen in the group. A prodrome of fever, headache, myalgia, and/or malaise often occurs 12–48 h before the onset of diarrheal symptoms. The most common signs and symptoms of the intestinal phase are diarrhea, abdominal pain, and fever. The degree of diarrhea varies from several loose stools to grossly bloody stools; most patients presenting for medical attention have ≥10 bowel movements on the worst day of illness. Abdominal pain usually consists of cramping and may be the most prominent symptom. Pain is usually generalized but may become localized; C. jejuni infection may cause pseudoappendicitis. Fever may be the only initial manifestation of C. jejuni infection, a situation mimicking the early stages of typhoid fever. Febrile young children may develop convulsions. Campylobacter enteritis is generally self-limited; however, symptoms persist for >1 week in 10–20% of patients seeking medical attention, and clinical relapses occur in 5–10% of such untreated patients. Studies of common-source epidemics indicate that milder illnesses or asymptomatic infections may commonly occur.
# Chunk 3240
The symptoms of Campylobacter enteritis are not sufficiently unusual to distinguish this illness from that due to Salmonella, Shigella, Yersinia, and other pathogens. The combination of fever and fecal leukocytes or erythrocytes is indicative of inflammatory diarrhea, and definitive diagnosis is based on culture or demonstration of the characteristic organisms on stained fecal smears. Similarly, extraintestinal Campylobacter illness is diagnosed by culture. Infection due to Campylobacter should be suspected in the setting of septic abortion, and that due to C. fetus should be suspected specifically in the setting of septic thrombophlebitis. It is important to reiterate that (1) the presentation of Campylobacter enteritis may mimic that of ulcerative colitis or Crohn’s disease, (2) Campylobacter enteritis is much more common than either of the latter (especially among young adults), and (3) biopsy may not distinguish among these entities. Thus a diagnosis of inflammatory bowel disease should not be made until Campylobacter infection has been ruled out, especially in persons with a history of foreign travel, significant animal contact, immunodeficiency, or exposure incurring a high risk of transmission.
# Chunk 3241
Fluid and electrolyte replacement is central to the treatment of diarrheal illnesses (Chap. 160). Even among patients presenting for medical attention with Campylobacter enteritis, not all clearly benefit from specific antimicrobial therapy. Indications for therapy include high fever, bloody diarrhea, severe diarrhea, persistence for >1 week, and worsening of symptoms. A 5to 7-day course of erythromycin (250 mg orally four times daily or—for children—30–50 mg/kg per day, in divided doses) is the regimen of choice. Both clinical trials and in vitro susceptibility testing indicate that other macrolides, including azithromycin (a 1or 3-day regimen), also are useful therapeutic agents. An alternative regimen for adults is ciprofloxacin (500 mg orally twice daily) or another fluoroquinolone for 5–7 days, but resistance to this class of agents as well as to tetracyclines is substantial; ~22% of U.S. isolates in 2010 were resistant to ciprofloxacin. Because macrolide resistance usually is much less common (<10%), these drugs are the empirical agents of choice. Patients infected with antibiotic-resistant strains are at increased risk of adverse outcomes. Use of antimotility agents, which may prolong the duration of symptoms and have been associated with toxic megacolon and with death, is not recommended.
# Chunk 3242
Matthew K. Waldor, Edward T. Ryan

Members of the genus Vibrio cause a number of important infectious syndromes. Classic among them is cholera, a devastating diarrheal disease caused by Vibrio cholerae that has been responsible for seven global pandemics and much suffering over the past two centuries. Epidemic cholera remains a significant public health concern in the developing world today. Other vibrioses caused by other Vibrio species include syndromes of diarrhea, soft tissue infection, or primary sepsis. All Vibrio species are highly motile, facultatively anaerobic, curved gram-negative rods with one or more flagella. In nature, vibrios most commonly reside in tidal rivers and bays under conditions of moderate salinity. They proliferate in the summer months when water temperatures exceed 20°C. As might be expected, the illnesses they cause also increase in frequency during the warm months.
# Chunk 3243
V. cholerae. Consumption of contaminated food also can contribute to spread. There is no known animal reservoir. Although the infectious dose is relatively high, it is markedly reduced in hypochlorhydric persons, in those using antacids, and when gastric acidity is buffered by a meal. Cholera is predominantly a pediatric disease in endemic areas, but it affects adults and children equally when newly introduced into a population. In endemic areas, the burden of disease is often greatest during “cholera seasons” associated with high temperatures, heavy rainfall, and flooding, but cholera can occur year-round. For unexplained reasons, susceptibility to cholera is significantly influenced by ABO blood group status; persons with type O blood are at greatest risk of severe disease if infected, whereas those with type AB are at least risk. Cholera is native to the Ganges delta in the Indian subcontinent. Since 1817, seven global pandemics have occurred. The current (seventh) pandemic—the first due to the El Tor bio type—began in Indonesia in 1961 and spread in serial waves throughout Asia as V. cholerae El Tor displaced the endemic classical biotype, which is thought to have caused the previous six pandemics. In the early 1970s, El Tor cholera erupted in Africa, causing major epidemics
# Chunk 3244
Méditerranée, France; with permission.) before becoming a persistent endemic problem. Currently, >90% of cholera cases reported annually to the World Health Organization (WHO) are from Africa (Fig. 193-1), but the true burden in Africa as well as in Asia is unknown because diagnosis is often syndromic and because many countries with endemic cholera do not report cholera to the WHO. It is possible that >3 million cases of cholera occur yearly (of which only ~200,000 are reported to the WHO), resulting in >100,000 deaths annually (of which <5000 are reported to the WHO).
# Chunk 3245
V. cholerae.

Once established in the human small bowel, the organism produces cholera toxin, which consists of a monomeric enzymatic moiety (the A subunit) and a pentameric binding moiety (the B subunit). The B pen-tamer binds to GM1 ganglioside, a glycolipid on the surface of epithelial cells that serves as the toxin receptor and makes possible the delivery of the A subunit to its cytosolic target. The activated A subunit (A1) irreversibly transfers ADP-ribose from nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide to its specific target protein, the GTP-binding regulatory component of adenylate cyclase. The ADP-ribosylated G protein upregulates the activity of adenylate cyclase; the result is the intracellular accumulation of high levels of cyclic AMP. In intestinal epithelial cells, cyclic AMP inhibits the absorptive sodium transport system in villus cells and activates the secretory chloride transport system in crypt cells, and these events lead to the accumulation of sodium chloride in the intestinal lumen. Because water moves passively to maintain osmolality, isotonic fluid accumulates in the lumen. When the volume of that fluid exceeds the capacity of the rest of the gut to resorb it, watery diarrhea results. Unless the wasted fluid and electrolytes are adequately replaced, shock (due to profound dehydration) and acidosis (due to loss of bicarbonate) follow. Although perturbation of the adenylate cyclase pathway is the primary mechanism by which cholera toxin causes excess fluid secretion, cholera toxin also enhances intestinal secretion via prostaglandins and/or neural histamine receptors.
# Chunk 3246
Laboratory data usually reveal an elevated hematocrit (due to hemoconcentration) in nonanemic patients; mild neutrophilic leukocytosis; elevated levels of blood urea nitrogen and creatinine consistent with prerenal azotemia; normal sodium, potassium, and chloride levels; a markedly reduced bicarbonate level (<15 mmol/L); and an elevated anion gap (due to increases in serum lactate, protein, and phosphate). Arterial pH is usually low (~7.2).
# Chunk 3247
Cholera should be suspected when a patient ≥2 years of age develops acute watery diarrhea in an area known to have cholera or when a patient ≥5 years of age develops severe dehydration or dies from acute watery diarrhea, even in an area where cholera is not known to be present. The clinical suspicion of cholera can be confirmed by the identification of V. cholerae in stool; however, the organism must be specifically sought. With experience, it can be detected directly by dark-field microscopy on a wet mount of fresh stool, and its serotype can be discerned by immobilization with specific antiserum. Laboratory isolation of the organism requires the use of a selective medium such as taurocholate-tellurite-gelatin (TTG) agar or thiosulfate–citrate–bile salts–sucrose (TCBS) agar. If a delay in sample processing is expected, Carey-Blair transport medium and/or alkaline-peptone water-enrichment medium may be used as well. In endemic areas, there is little need for biochemical confirmation and characterization, although these tasks may be worthwhile in places where V. cholerae is an uncommon isolate. Standard microbiologic biochemical testing for Enterobacteriaceae will suffice for identification of V. cholerae. All vibrios are oxidase-positive. A point-of-care antigen-detection cholera dipstick assay is now commercially available for use in the field or where laboratory facilities are lacking.
# Chunk 3248
Moderatec,d <4 months (<5 kg) 200–400 mL of ORS 4–11 months (5–<8 kg) 400–600 mL of ORS 12–23 months (8–<11 kg) 600–800 mL of ORS 2–4 years (11–<16 kg) 800–1200 mL of ORS 5–14 years (16–<30 kg) 1200–2200 mL of ORS ≥15 years (≥30 kg) 2200–4000 mL of ORS
# Chunk 3249
V. cholerae O139 without supplemental cholera toxin B subunit. The vaccines are administered as a twoor three-dose regimen, with doses usually separated by 14 days. They provide ~60–85% protection for the first few months. Booster immunizations of WC-rBS are recommended after 2 years for individuals ≥6 years of age and after 6 months for children 2–5 years of age. For BivWC, which was developed more recently, no formal recommendation regarding booster immunizations exists. However, BivWC was associated with ~60% protection over 5 years among recipients of all ages in a study in Kolkata, India; the rate of protection among children ≤5 years of age approximated 40%. Models predict significant herd immunity when vaccination coverage rates exceed 50%. The killed vaccines have been safely administered among populations with high rates of HIV.
# Chunk 3250
Infections with V. parahaemolyticus can result in two distinct gastrointestinal presentations. The more common of the two presentations (including nearly all cases in North America) is characterized by watery diarrhea, usually occurring in conjunction with abdominal cramps, nausea, and vomiting and accompanied in ~25% of cases by fever and chills. After an incubation period of 4 h to 4 days, symptoms develop and persist for a median of 3 days. Dysentery, the less common presentation, is characterized by severe abdominal cramps, nausea, vomiting, and bloody or mucoid stools. V. parahaemolyticus also causes rare cases of wound infection and otitis and very rare cases of sepsis.
# Chunk 3251
1066 organisms is probably due to the group’s heterogeneous virulence attributes. In the United States, about half of all non-O1/O139 V. cholerae isolates are from stool samples. The typical incubation period for gastroenteritis due to these organisms is <2 days, and the illness lasts for ~2–7 days. Patients’ stools may be copious and watery or may be partly formed, less voluminous, and bloody or mucoid. Diarrhea can result in severe dehydration. Many cases include abdominal cramps, nausea, vomiting, and fever. Like those with cholera, patients who are seriously dehydrated should receive oral or IV fluids; the value of antibiotics is not clear. Extraintestinal infections due to non-O1/O139 V. cholerae commonly follow occupational or recreational exposure to seawater. Around 10% of non-O1/O139 V. cholerae isolates come from cases of wound infection, 10% from cases of otitis media, and 20% from cases of bacteremia (which is particularly likely to develop in patients with liver disease). Extraintestinal infections should be treated with antibiotics. Information to guide antibiotic selection and dosing is limited, but most strains are sensitive in vitro to tetracycline, ciprofloxacin, and third-generation cephalosporins.
# Chunk 3252
(See also Chap. 156)

V. vulnificus Infection with V. vulnificus is rare, but this organism is the most common cause of severe Vibrio infections in the United States. Like most vibrios, V. vulnificus proliferates in the warm summer months and requires a saline environment for growth. In the United States, infections in humans typically occur in coastal states between May and October and most commonly affect men >40 years of age. V. vulnificus has been linked to two distinct syndromes: primary sepsis, which usually occurs in patients with underlying liver disease, and primary wound infection, which generally affects people without underlying disease. (Vulnificus is Latin for “wound maker.”) Some authors have suggested that V. vulnificus also causes gastroenteritis independent of other clinical manifestations. V. vulnificus is endowed with a number of virulence attributes, including a capsule that confers resistance to phagocytosis and to the bactericidal activity of human serum as well as a cytolysin. Measured as the 50% lethal dose in mice, the organism’s virulence is considerably increased under conditions of iron overload; this observation is consistent with the propensity of
# Chunk 3253
All brucellae are small, gram-negative, unencapsulated, nonsporulating, nonmotile rods or coccobacilli. They grow aerobically on peptonebased medium incubated at 37°C; the growth of some types is improved by supplementary CO2. In vivo, brucellae behave as facultative intracellular parasites. The organisms are sensitive to sunlight, ionizing radiation, and moderate heat; they are killed by boiling and pasteurization but are resistant to freezing and drying. Their resistance to drying renders brucellae stable in aerosol form, facilitating airborne transmission. The organisms can survive for up to 2 months in soft cheeses made from goat’s or sheep’s milk; for at least 6 weeks in dry soil contaminated with infected urine, vaginal discharge, or placental or fetal tissues; and for at least 6 months in damp soil or liquid manure kept under cool dark conditions. Brucellae are easily killed by a wide range of common disinfectants used under optimal conditions but are likely to be much more resistant at low temperatures or in the presence of heavy organic contamination.
# Chunk 3254
Because the clinical picture of brucellosis is not distinctive, the diagnosis must be based on a history of potential exposure, a presentation consistent with the disease, and supporting laboratory findings. Results of routine biochemical assays are usually within normal limits, although serum levels of hepatic enzymes and bilirubin may be elevated. Peripheral leukocyte counts are usually normal or low, with relative lymphocytosis. Mild anemia may be documented. Thrombocytopenia and disseminated intravascular coagulation with raised levels of fibrinogen degradation products can develop. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein levels are often normal but may be raised.
# Chunk 3255
Isolation of brucellae from blood, CSF, bone marrow, or joint fluid or from a tissue aspirate or biopsy sample is definitive, and attempts at isolation are usually successful in 50–70% of cases. Duplicate cultures should be incubated for up to 6 weeks (in air and 10% CO2, respectively). Concentration and lysis of buffy coat cells before culture may increase the isolation rate. Cultures in modern nonradiometric or similar signaling systems (e.g., Bactec) usually become positive within 7–10 days but should be maintained for at least 3 weeks before the results are declared negative. All cultures should be handled under containment conditions appropriate for dangerous pathogens. Brucella species may be misidentified as Agrobacterium, Ochrobactrum, or Psychrobacter (Moraxella) phenylpyruvicus by the gallery identification strips commonly used in the diagnostic laboratory. In recent years, matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) has emerged as a powerful tool in bacterial identification. The relative homogeneity of classical Brucella species makes identification beyond the genus level by routine approaches challenging, although further improvements may facilitate discrimination at the species level. The place of this technique in routine diagnostic practice will depend on such refinements. Meanwhile, the authors are aware of cases in which blood culture isolates have been identified incorrectly using MALDI-TOF MS.
# Chunk 3256
In most centers, the standard agglutination test is still the mainstay of serologic diagnosis, although some investigators rely on the rose bengal test, which has not been fully validated for human diagnostic use. Dipstick assays for anti-Brucella IgM are useful for the diagnosis of acute infection but are less sensitive for infection with symptoms of several months’ duration. In an endemic setting, more than 90% of patients with acute bacteremia have standard agglutination titers of at least 1:320. Other screening tests are used in some centers.
# Chunk 3257
For adults with acute nonfocal brucellosis (duration, <1 month), a 6-week course of therapy incorporating at least two antimicrobial agents is required. Complex or focal disease necessitates ≥3 months of therapy. Adherence to the therapeutic regimen is very important, and poor adherence underlies almost all cases of apparent treatment failure; such failure is rarely due to the emergence of drug resistance, although increasing resistance to trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) has been reported at one center. There is good retrospective evidence that a 3-week course of two agents is as effective as a 6-week course for treatment and prevention of relapse in children, but this point has not yet been proven in prospective studies.
# Chunk 3258
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Shorter courses have been associated with high failure rates in adults. A 5to 7-day course of therapy with gentamicin and a 3-week course of TMP-SMX may be adequate for children with uncomplicated disease, but prospective trials are still needed to support this recommendation. Early experience with fluoroquinolone monotherapy was disappointing, although it was suggested that ofloxacin or ciprofloxacin, given together with rifampin for 6 weeks, might be an acceptable alternative to the other 6-week regimens for adults. A substantial meta-analysis did not support the use of fluoroquinolones in first-line treatment regimens, and these drugs are not recommended by an expert consensus group (Ioannina) except in the context of well-designed clinical trials. However, a more recent meta-analysis is more supportive of the efficacy of these drugs, and an adequately powered prospective study will be needed to resolve their role in standard combination therapy. A triple-drug regimen—doxycycline and rifampin combined with an initial course of an aminoglycoside—was superior to double-drug regimens in a meta-analysis. The triple-drug regimen should be considered for all patients with complicated disease and for those for whom treatment adherence is likely to be a problem.
# Chunk 3259
Relapse occurs in up to 30% of poorly compliant patients. Thus patients should ideally be followed clinically for up to 2 years to detect relapse, which responds to a prolonged course of the same therapy used originally. The general well-being and the body weight of the patient are more useful guides than serology to lack of relapse. IgG antibody levels detected by the standard agglutination test and its variants can remain in the diagnostic range for >2 years after successful treatment. Complement fixation titers usually fall to normal within 1 year of cure. Immunity is not solid; patients can be reinfected after repeated exposures. Fewer than 1% of patients die of brucellosis. When the outcome is fatal, death is usually a consequence of cardiac involvement; more rarely, it results from severe neurologic disease. Despite the low mortality rate, recovery from brucellosis is slow, and the illness can cause prolonged inactivity, with domestic and economic consequences.
# Chunk 3260
The diagnosis of tularemia is most frequently confirmed by agglutination testing. Microagglutination and tube agglutination are the techniques most commonly used to detect antibody to F. tularensis. In the standard tube agglutination test, a single titer of ≥1:160 is interpreted as a presumptive positive result. A fourfold increase in titer between paired serum samples collected 2–3 weeks apart is considered diagnostic. False-negative serologic responses are obtained early in infection; up to 30% of patients infected for 3 weeks have sera that test negative. Late in infection, titers into the thousands are common, and titers of 1:20–1:80 may persist for years. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays have proved useful for the detection of both antibodies and antigens.
# Chunk 3261
Culture and isolation of F. tularensis are difficult. In one study, the organism was isolated in only 10% of more than 1000 human cases, 84% of which were confirmed by serology. The medium of choice is cysteine-glucose-blood agar. F. tularensis can be isolated directly from infected ulcer scrapings, lymph node biopsy specimens, gastric washings, sputum, and blood cultures. Colonies are blue-gray, round, smooth, and slightly mucoid. On media containing blood, a small zone of α hemolysis usually surrounds the colony. Slide agglutination tests or direct fluorescent antibody tests with commercially available antisera can be applied directly to culture suspensions for identification. Most clinical laboratories will not attempt to culture F. tularensis because of the infectivity of the organism from the culture media and the consequent risk of a laboratory-acquired infection. Although tularemia is not spread from person to person, the organism can be inhaled from culture plates and infect unsuspecting laboratory workers. In most clinical laboratories, biosafety level 2 practices are recommended to handle clinical specimens thought to contain F. tularensis; however, biosafety level 3 conditions are required for procedures that produce aerosols or droplets during manipulation of cultures containing or possibly containing this organism.
# Chunk 3262
1070 cases of tularemia in which the patient becomes afebrile within the first 48–72 h of gentamicin treatment, a 5to 7-day course has been successful. If available, streptomycin given intramuscularly is also effective. The dosage for adults is 2 g/d in two divided doses. For children, the dosage is 30 mg/kg daily in two divided doses (maximal daily dose, 2 g). After a clinical response is demonstrated at 3–5 days, the dosage for children can be reduced to 10–15 mg/kg daily in two divided doses. The total duration of streptomycin therapy in both adults and children is usually 10 days. Unlike streptomycin and gentamicin, tobramycin is ineffective in the treatment of tularemia and should not be used. Because doxycycline is bacteriostatic against F. tularensis, there is a risk of relapse if the patient is not treated for a long enough period. Therefore, if doxycycline is used, it should be given for at least 14 days. The lack of availability of chloramphenicol limits the utility of this agent as a viable treatment option. Fluoroquinolones— specifically, ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin—have been used with good outcomes to treat infections caused by subspecies holarctica, which is most often found in Europe. The lack of data on the efficacy of these agents against subspecies tularensis limits their use in North America at this time.
# Chunk 3263
Virtually all strains of F. tularensis are susceptible to streptomycin and gentamicin. Hearing screening should be considered before initiation of streptomycin or gentamicin therapy. In successfully treated patients, defervescence usually occurs within 2 days, but skin lesions and lymph nodes may take 1–2 weeks to heal. When therapy is not initiated within the first several days of illness, defervescence may be delayed. Relapses are uncommon with streptomycin or gentamicin therapy. Late lymph-node suppuration, however, occurs in ~40% of children, regardless of the treatment received. These nodes have typically been found to contain sterile necrotic tissue without evidence of active infection. Patients with fluctuant nodes should receive several days of antibiotic therapy before drainage to minimize the risk to hospital personnel.
# Chunk 3264
Between 2004 and 2009, 12,503 cases of plague, with a global case-fatality rate of 6.7%, were recorded by the World Health Organization (WHO); these figures were obtained by combining cases notified under the International Health Regulations with data from national surveillance programs and publications. More than 97% of these cases were in Africa; the majority of cases were reported from the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the island of Madagascar. The period covered spans a change in the International Health Regulations from a requirement for nations to notify the WHO of all cases of plague to a requirement to report pneumonic plague or any suspected case of plague in an area not known to be endemic for plague. In the past decade, outbreaks of pneumonic plague have been recorded in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda, Algeria, Madagascar, China, and Peru.
# Chunk 3265
Pneumonic Plague Primary pneumonic plague results from inhalation of infectious bacteria in droplets expelled from another person or an animal with primary or secondary plague pneumonia. This syndrome has a short incubation period, averaging from a few hours to 2–3 days (range, 1–7 days), and is characterized by a sudden onset of fever, headache, myalgia, weakness, nausea, vomiting, and dizziness. Respiratory signs—cough, dyspnea, chest pain, and sputum production with hemoptysis—typically arise after 24 h. Progression of initial segmental pneumonitis to lobar pneumonia and then to bilateral lung involvement may occur (Fig. 196-3). The possible release of aerosolized Y. pestis bacteria in a bioterrorist attack, manifesting as an outbreak of primary pneumonic plague in nonendemic regions or in an urban setting where plague is rarely seen, has been a source of public health concern. Secondary pneumonic plague is a consequence of bacteremia occurring in ~10–15% of patients with bubonic plague. Bilateral alveolar infiltrates are seen on chest x-ray, and diffuse interstitial pneumonitis with scanty sputum production is typical.
# Chunk 3266
Reference laboratory tests for definitive identification of isolates include direct immunofluorescence for F1 antigen; specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for targets such as F1 antigen, the pesticin gene, and the plasminogen activator gene; and specific bacteriophage lysis. PCR can also be applied to diagnostic specimens, as can direct immunofluorescence for F1 antigen (produced in large amounts by Y. pestis) by slide microscopy. An immunochromatographic test strip for F1 antigen detection by monoclonal antibodies in clinical specimens has been devised in Madagascar. This method is effective for both laboratory and near-patient use and is now widely used in endemic countries. A similar test strip for Pla antigen has recently been developed and could be used to detect wild-type or engineered F1-negative virulent strains. Many other rapid diagnostic kits for possible bioterrorism pathogens, including Y. pestis, have been described in recent years, but none is widely used for primary or reference laboratory identification, and only one (a field real-time PCR for a range of potential bioterrorism agents) is approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Detailed phylogeographic DNA sequence data based on culture collections have been accumulated to trace plague evolution, and this system could be adapted in the future to determine real-time clinical plague epidemiology.
# Chunk 3267
Drug Daily Dose Interval, h Route

Source: Dennis DT, Campbell GL: Plague and other Yersinia infections, in AS Fauci et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine. 2008, p. 980; Inglesby TV et al: Plague as a biological weapon: medical and public health management. Working Group on Civilian Biodefense. JAMA 283:2281, 2000; and FDA Drug Product Label Reference ID 3123374 (www .accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2012/020634s061,020635s067,021721s028lbl.pdf ).
# Chunk 3268
Yersiniosis is a zoonotic infection with an enteropathogenic Yersinia species, usually Yersinia enterocolitica or Y. pseudotuberculosis. The usual hosts for these organisms are pigs and other wild and domestic animals; humans are usually infected by the oral route, and outbreaks from contaminated food occur. Yersiniosis is most common in childhood and in colder climates. Patients present with abdominal pain and sometimes with diarrhea (which may not occur in up to 50% of cases).
# Chunk 3269
Self-limiting diarrhea is the most common reported presentation in infection with pathogenic Y. enterocolitica, especially in children under the age of 4, who form the single largest group in most case series. Blood may be detected in diarrheal stool. Older children and adults are more likely than younger children to present with abdominal pain, which can be localized to the right iliac fossa—a situation that often leads to laparotomy for presumed appendicitis (pseudoappendicitis). Appendectomy is not indicated for Yersinia infection causing pseudoappendicitis. Thickening of the terminal ileum and cecum is seen on endoscopy and ultrasound, with elevated round or oval lesions that may overlie Peyer’s patches. Mesenteric lymph nodes are enlarged. Ulcerations of the mucosa are noted on endoscopy. Gastrointestinal complications include granulomatous appendicitis, a chronic inflammatory condition affecting the appendix that is responsible for ≤2% of cases of appendicitis; Yersinia is involved in a minority of cases.
# Chunk 3270
Y. pseudotuberculosis are more common than in other countries. Of infected individuals identified in a recent Y. pseudotuberculosis serotype O:3 outbreak in Finland, 12% developed reactive arthritis affecting the small joints of the hands and feet, knees, ankles, and shoulders and lasting >6 months in most cases. Erythema nodosum (see Fig. 25e-40) occurs after Yersinia infection (more commonly in women) with no evidence of HLA-B27 linkage.
# Chunk 3271
Most cases of diarrhea caused by enteropathogenic Yersinia are self-limiting. Data from clinical trials do not support antimicrobial treatment for adults or children with Y. enterocolitica diarrhea. Systemic infections with bacteremia or focal infections outside the gastrointestinal tract generally require antimicrobial therapy. Infants <3 months of age with documented Y. enterocolitica infection may require antimicrobial treatment because of the increased likelihood of bacteremia in this age group. Y. enterocolitica strains nearly always express β-lactamases. Because of the relative rarity of systemic Y. enterocolitica infection, there are no clinical trial data to guide antimicrobial choice or to suggest the optimal dose and duration of therapy. On the basis of retrospective case series and in vitro sensitivity data, fluoroquinolone therapy is effective for bacteremia in adults; for example, ciprofloxacin is given at a typical dose of 500 mg twice daily by mouth or 400 mg twice daily IV for at least 2 weeks (longer if positive blood cultures persist). A third-generation cephalosporin is an alternative—e.g., cefotaxime (typical dose, 6–8 g/d in three or four divided doses). In children, third-generation cephalosporins are effective; for example, cefotaxime is given to children ≥1 month of age at a typical dose of 75–100 mg/kg per day in three or four divided doses, with an increase to 150–200 mg/ kg per day in severe cases (maximal daily dose, 8–10 g). Amoxicillin and amoxicillin/clavulanate have shown poor efficacy in case series. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, gentamicin, and imipenem are all active in vitro. Y. pseudotuberculosis strains do not express β-lactamase but are intrinsically resistant to polymyxin. Because human infection with Y. pseudotuberculosis is less common than that with Y. enterocolitica, less case information is available; however, studies in mice suggest that ampicillin is ineffective. Drugs similar to those used against Y. enterocolitica should be used. The best results have been obtained with a quinolone.
# Chunk 3272
Of patients with CSD, 85–90% have typical disease. The primary lesion, a small (0.3to 1-cm) painless erythematous papule or pustule, develops at the inoculation site (usually the site of a scratch or a bite) within days to 2 weeks in about one-third to two-thirds of patients (Fig. 197–1A, B). Lymphadenopathy develops 1–3 weeks or longer after cat contact. The affected lymph node(s) are enlarged and usually painful, sometimes have overlying erythema, and suppurate in 10–15% of cases (Fig. 197–1C, D, and E). Axillary/epitrochlear nodes are most commonly involved; next in frequency are head/neck nodes and then inguinal/femoral nodes. Approximately 50% of patients have fever, malaise, and anorexia. A smaller proportion experience weight loss and night sweats mimicking the presentation of lymphoma. Fever is usually low-grade but infrequently rises to ≥39°C. Resolution is slow, requiring weeks (for fever, pain, and accompanying signs and symptoms) to months (for node shrinkage).
# Chunk 3273
The typical incubation period is 15–25 days (range, 3–38 days). “Classical” trench fever, as described in 1919, ranges from a mild febrile illness to a recurrent or protracted and debilitating disease. Onset may be abrupt or preceded by a prodrome of several days. Fever is often periodic, lasting 4–5 days with 5-day (range, 3to 8-day) intervals between episodes. Other symptoms and signs include headache, back and limb pain, profuse sweating, shivering, myalgia, arthralgia, splenomegaly, a maculopapular rash in occasional cases, and nuchal rigidity in some cases. Untreated, the disease usually lasts
# Chunk 3274
Ciprofloxacin (500 mg PO bid for 10 days) Verruga peruana Rifampin (10 mg/kg PO qd, to a maximum of 600 mg, for 14 days) aData on treatment efficacy for encephalitis and hepatosplenic CSD are lacking. Therapy similar to that given for retinitis is reasonable. bSome experts recommend gentamicin at 3 mg/ kg IV qd. If gentamicin is contraindicated, rifampin (300 mg PO bid) can be added to doxycycline for documented Bartonella endocarditis. cSome experts recommend extending oral doxycycline therapy for 3–6 months. dOther macrolides are probably effective and may be substituted for erythromycin or doxycycline.
# Chunk 3275
Azithromycin 1 g on day 1, then 500 mg daily for 7 days or 1 g weekly for 4 weeks

The recommended drug regimens for donovanosis are shown in Table 198e-1. Gentamicin can be added if the response is slow. Ceftriaxone, chloramphenicol, and norfloxacin are also effective. Patients treated for 14 days should be monitored until lesions have healed completely. Those treated with azithromycin probably do not need such rigorous follow-up.
# Chunk 3276
The incubation period is 3 weeks (range, 2–14 weeks). Oroya fever may present as a nonspecific bacteremic febrile illness without anemia or as an acute, severe hemolytic anemia with hepatomegaly and jaundice of rapid onset leading to vascular collapse and clouded sensorium. Myalgia, arthralgia, lymphadenopathy, and abdominal pain may develop. Temperature is elevated but not extremely so; high fever may suggest intercurrent infection. Subclinical asymptomatic infection also occurs. In verruga peruana, red, hemangioma-like, cutaneous vascular lesions of various sizes appear either weeks to months after systemic illness or with no previous suggestive history. These lesions persist for months up to 1 year. Mucosal and internal lesions may also develop.
# Chunk 3277
Cases of actinomycetoma occur mainly in tropical and subtropical regions, especially those of Mexico, Central and South America, Africa, and India. The most important risk factor is frequent contact with soil or vegetable matter, especially in laborers.
# Chunk 3278
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS Respiratory Tract Disease Pneumonia, the most common form of nocardial disease in the respiratory tract, is typically subacute; symptoms have usually been present for days or weeks at presentation. The onset is occasionally more acute in immunosuppressed patients. Cough is prominent and produces small amounts of thick, purulent sputum that is not malodorous. Fever, anorexia, weight loss, and malaise are common; dyspnea, pleuritic pain, and hemoptysis are less common. Remissions and exacerbations over several weeks are frequent. Roentgenographic patterns vary, but some are highly suggestive of nocardial pneumonia. Infiltrates vary in size and are typically dense. Single or multiple nodules are common (Figs. 199-1 and 199-2), sometimes suggesting tumors or metastases. Infiltrates and nodules tend to cavitate (Fig. 199-2). Empyema is present in one-quarter of cases. Co-infection with Nocardia and Mycobacterium tuberculosis has been reported from regions where tuberculosis is common.
# Chunk 3279
The first step in diagnosis is examination of sputum or pus for crooked, branching, beaded, gram-positive filaments 1 μm wide and up to 50 μm long (Fig. 199-5). Most nocardiae are acid-fast in direct smears if a weak acid is used for decolorization (e.g., in the modified Kinyoun, Ziehl-Neelsen, and Fite-Faraco methods). The organisms often take up silver stains. Recovery from specimens containing a mixed flora can be improved with selective media (colistin–nalidixic acid agar, modified Thayer-Martin agar, or buffered charcoal–yeast extract agar). Nocardiae grow well on most fungal and mycobacterial media, but procedures used for decontamination of specimens for mycobacterial culture can kill nocardiae and thus should not be used when nocardiae are suspected. Nocardiae grow relatively slowly; colonies may take up to 2 weeks to appear and may not develop their characteristic appearance—white, yellow, or orange, with aerial mycelia and delicate, dichotomously branched substrate mycelia—for up to 4 weeks. Several blood culture systems support nocardial growth, although nocardiae may not be detected for up to 2 weeks. The growth of nocardiae is so different from that of more common pathogens that the laboratory should be alerted when nocardiosis is suspected in order to maximize the likelihood of isolation.
# Chunk 3280
In nocardial pneumonia, sputum smears are often negative. Unless the diagnosis can be made in smear-negative cases by sampling lesions in more accessible sites, bronchoscopy or lung aspiration is usually necessary. To evaluate the possibility of dissemination in patients with nocardial pneumonia, a careful history should be obtained and a thorough physical examination performed. Suggestive symptoms or signs should be pursued with further diagnostic tests. Computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head, with and without contrast material, should be undertaken if signs or symptoms suggest brain involvement. Some authorities recommend brain imaging in all cases of pulmonary or disseminated disease. When clinically indicated, CSF or urine should be concentrated and then cultured. Actinomycetoma, eumycetoma (cases involving fungi; Chap. 243), and botryomycosis (cases involving cocci or bacilli, often Staphylococcus aureus) are difficult to distinguish clinically but are readily distinguished with microbiologic testing or biopsy. Granules should be sought in any discharge. Suspect particles should be washed in saline, examined microscopically, and cultured. Granules in actinomycetoma cases are usually white, pale yellow, pink, or red. Viewed microscopically, they consist of tight masses of fine filaments (0.5–1 μm wide) radiating outward from a central core (Fig. 199-5). Granules from eumycetoma cases are white, yellow, brown, black, or green. Under the microscope, they appear as masses of broader filaments (2–5 μm wide) encased in a matrix. Granules of botryomycosis consist of loose masses of cocci or bacilli. Organisms can also be seen in wound discharge or histologic specimens. The most reliable way to differentiate among the various organisms associated with mycetoma is by culture.
# Chunk 3281
Abdominal Disease Abdominal actinomycosis poses a great diagnostic challenge. Months or years usually pass from the inciting event (e.g., appendicitis, diverticulitis, peptic ulcer disease, spillage of gall stones or bile during laparoscopic cholecystectomy, foreign-body perforation, bowel surgery, or ascension from IUCD-associated pelvic disease) to clinical recognition. Because of the flow of peritoneal fluid and/ or the direct extension of primary disease, virtually any abdominal organ, region, or space can be involved. The disease usually presents as an abscess, a mass, or a mixed lesion that is often fixed to underlying tissue and mistaken for a tumor. On CT, enhancement is most often heterogeneous and adjacent bowel is thickened. Sinus tracts to the abdominal wall, to the perianal region, or between the bowel and other organs may develop and mimic inflammatory bowel disease (Chap. 351). Recurrent disease or a wound or fistula that fails to heal suggests actinomycosis.
# Chunk 3282
All levels of the urogenital tract can be infected. Renal disease usually presents as pyelonephritis and/or renal and perinephric abscess. Bladder involvement, usually due to extension of pelvic disease, may result in ureteral obstruction or fistulas to bowel, skin, or uterus. Actinomyces can be detected in urine with appropriate stains and cultures.
# Chunk 3283
Pelvic Disease Actinomycotic involvement of the pelvis occurs most commonly in association with an IUCD. When an IUCD is in place or has recently been removed, pelvic symptoms should prompt consideration of actinomycosis. The risk, although not quantified, appears small. The disease rarely develops when the IUCD has been in place for <1 year, but the risk increases with time. Actinomycosis can also present months after IUCD removal. Symptoms are typically indolent; fever, weight loss, abdominal pain, and abnormal vaginal bleeding or discharge are the most common. The earliest stage of disease—often endometritis—commonly progresses to pelvic masses or a tuboovarian abscess (Fig. 200-4). Unfortunately, because the diagnosis is often delayed, a “frozen pelvis” mimicking malignancy or endometriosis can develop by the time of recognition. Ca125 levels may be elevated, further contributing to misdiagnosis.
# Chunk 3284
The diagnosis of actinomycosis is rarely considered. All too often, actinomycosis is first mentioned by the pathologist after extensive surgery. Since medical therapy alone is frequently sufficient for cure, the challenge for the clinician is to consider the possibility of actinomycosis, to diagnose it in the least invasive fashion, and to avoid unnecessary surgery. The clinical and radiographic presentations that suggest actinomycosis are discussed above. Of note, hypermetabolism has been demonstrated by 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) in actinomycotic disease. Aspirations and biopsies (with or without CT or ultrasound guidance) are being used successfully to obtain clinical material for diagnosis, although surgery may be required. The diagnosis is most commonly made by microscopic identification of sulfur granules (an in vivo matrix of bacteria, calcium phosphate, and host material) in pus or tissues. Occasionally, these granules are identified grossly from draining sinus tracts or pus. Although sulfur granules are a defining characteristic of actinomycosis, granules also are found in mycetoma (Chaps. 199 and 243) and botryomycosis (a chronic suppurative bacterial infection of soft tissue or, in rare cases, visceral tissue that produces clumps of bacteria resembling granules). These entities can easily be differentiated from actinomycosis with appropriate histopathologic and microbiologic studies. Microbiologic identification of actinomycetes is often precluded by prior antimicrobial therapy or failure to perform appropriate micro-biologic cultures. For optimal yield, the avoidance of even a single dose of antibiotics is mandatory. Primary isolation usually requires 5–7 days under anaerobic conditions but may take as long as 2–4 weeks. Although not routinely used, 16S rRNA gene amplification and sequencing have been successfully applied to increase diagnostic sensitivity and specificity. Because actinomycetes are components of the normal oral and genital-tract flora, their identification in the absence of sulfur granules in sputum, bronchial washings, and cervicovaginal secretions is of little significance.
# Chunk 3285
Decisions about treatment are based on the collective clinical experience of the past 65 years. Actinomycosis requires prolonged treatment with high doses of antimicrobial agents; suitable antimicrobial agents and those deemed unreliable are listed in Table 200-1. The need for intensive treatment is presumably due to the drugs’ poor penetration of the thick-walled masses common in this infection and/or the sulfur granules themselves, which may represent a biofilm. Although therapy must be individualized, the IV administration of 18–24 million units of penicillin daily for 2–6 weeks, followed by oral therapy with penicillin or amoxicillin (total duration, 6–12 months), is a reasonable guideline for serious infections and bulky disease. Less extensive disease, particularly that involving the oralcervicofacial region, may be cured with a shorter course. If therapy is extended beyond the resolution of measurable disease, the risk of relapse—a clinical hallmark of this infection—will be minimized; CT and MRI are generally the most sensitive and objective techniques
# Chunk 3286
Whipple’s disease, a chronic multiorgan infection caused by Tropheryma whipplei, was first described in 1907. The long-held belief that Whipple’s disease is an infection was supported by observations on its responsiveness to antimicrobial therapy in the 1950s and the identification of bacilli via electron microscopy in small-bowel biopsy 1091 specimens in the 1960s. This hypothesis was finally confirmed by amplification and sequencing of a partial 16S rRNA polymerase chain reaction (PCR)–generated amplicon from duodenal tissue in 1991. The subsequent successful cultivation of T. whipplei enabled whole-genome sequencing and the development of additional diagnostic tests. The development of PCR-based diagnostics has broadened our understanding of both the epidemiology and the clinical syndromes attributable to T. whipplei. Exposure to T. whipplei, which appears to be much more common than has been appreciated, can be followed by asymptomatic carriage, acute disease, or chronic infection. Chronic infection (Whipple’s disease) is a rare development after exposure. “Classic” Whipple’s disease is manifested variably by a combination of arthralgias/arthritis, weight loss, chronic diarrhea, abdominal pain, and fever; less commonly, involvement at sites other than the gastrointestinal tract is documented. Acute infection and chronic organ disease in the absence of intestinal involvement (see “Isolated Infection,” below) are described with increasing frequency. Since untreated Whipple’s disease is often fatal and delayed diagnosis may lead to irreparable organ damage (e.g., in the CNS), knowledge of the clinical scenarios in which Whipple’s should be considered and of an appropriate diagnostic strategy is mandatory.
# Chunk 3287
Whipple’s disease is rare but has been increasingly recognized since the advent of PCR-based diagnostic tools. It occurs in all parts of the globe, with an incidence presently estimated at 1 case per 1 million patient-years. Seroprevalence studies indicate that ~50% of Western Europeans and ~75% of Africans from rural Senegal have been exposed to T. whipplei. A predilection for chronic disease has been observed in middle-aged Caucasian men. Males are infected five to eight times more frequently than females. To date, no clear animal or environmental reservoir has been demonstrated. However, the organism has been identified by PCR in sewage water and human feces. Workers with direct exposure to sewage are more likely to be asymptomatically colonized than controls, a pattern suggesting fecal-oral spread. Recent data support oral-oral or fecal-oral spread among family members. Further, the development of acute T. whipplei pneumonia in children raises the possibility of droplet or airborne transmission.
# Chunk 3288
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS Asymptomatic Colonization/Carriage Studies using primarily PCR have detected T. whipplei sequence in stool, saliva, duodenal tissue, and (rarely) blood in the absence of symptoms. Although prevalence rates are still being defined, in Western European countries, detection in saliva (0.2%) is less common than that in stool (1–11%) and appears to occur only with concomitant fecal carriage. The prevalence of fecal carriage is elevated in individuals with exposure to waste water or sewage (12–26%). However, in rural Senegal, 44% of children age 2–10 had
# Chunk 3289
isolated infection This entity has been defined as infection in the absence of intestinal symptoms, although an occasional small-bowel biopsy may be PCR-positive in this setting. “Isolated infection” is something of a misnomer since multiple nonintestinal sites of T. whipplei infection are not uncommon. Infection at the same nonintestinal sites (single or multiple) that are variably involved in classic Whipple’s disease may also present as “isolated infection.” Endocarditis, neurologic disease, uveitis, rheumatologic manifestations, and pulmonary involvement are most commonly described. Signs and symptoms are similar to those described for T. whipplei infection of these sites in classic Whipple’s disease. With enhanced PCR-based diagnostic capabilities, T. whipplei infection without concomitant intestinal involvement (of which endocarditis is the best example) will probably be diagnosed increasingly often.
# Chunk 3290
Infections due to Mixed Anaerobic Organisms Ronit Cohen-Poradosu, Dennis L. Kasper Anaerobes comprise the predominant class of bacteria of the normal human microbiota (formerly termed “the normal human flora”) that 201 1094 not eradicated by either regimen—was subsequently cured with oral minocycline and chloroquine (250 mg/d after a loading dose). A follow-up trial reported similar efficacy with a regimen of ceftriaxone (2 g IV q24h) for 2 weeks followed by oral TMP-SMX for 3 months. One issue in these trials was that the CNS doses—and perhaps the duration of ceftriaxone and meropenem treatment as well—were not optimal. Further, investigators have speculated that oral regimens with greater CNS penetrance, such as sulfadiazine (2–4 g/d in 3 or 4 divided doses) and/or doxycycline or minocycline (200 mg/d in 2 divided doses) plus hydroxychloroquine (200 mg three times a day, to raise phagosome pH and increase drug activity in vitro), might render the parenteral phase of treatment unnecessary, given that the one failure of therapy for CNS disease was cured with a similar regimen. Another issue is concern about the potential development of resistance to sulfa drugs. Lastly, it is unclear whether oral sulfaor tetracycline-based regimens will suffice in endocarditis. Until more data become available, it seems prudent—at least in asymptomatic/symptomatic CNS disease or cardiac infection—to administer CNS-optimized doses of IV ceftriaxone (2 g q12h) or meropenem (2 g q8h) for at least 2 weeks followed by oral doxycycline or minocycline plus hydroxychloroquine or chloroquine for at least 1 year, if tolerated. Although data on the use of PCR to guide therapy do not exist, it seems reasonable that continued T. whipplei detection by PCR, especially in the CSF, should dictate at least continuation of therapy and perhaps consideration of an alternative regimen. The occurrence of a Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction within 24 h of treatment initiation has been described, with rapid resolution. The addition of glucocorticoids may be beneficial in the management of clearly documented IRIS. Data on certain site-specific treatment issues are even more limited. Anecdotal reports describe successful treatment of uveitis with oral TMP-SMX with or without rifampin, whereas treatment with tetracycline alone has resulted in relapse. Although a role for adjunctive intraocular therapy has been reported, the data are unclear on this point. Surgery may be needed in the setting of endocarditis with significant valve dysfunction; however, timely recognition can result in cure with medical management alone. Although data on the treatment of foreign body–associated infection are virtually nonexistent, medical treatment for a prosthetic hip infection was apparently successful; however, follow-up was limited. Regardless of the therapeutic regimen chosen, an effort to ensure compliance and close follow-up for potential relapse (or perhaps reinfection), which can occur many years after an apparent cure, will maximize the chances for a good outcome.
# Chunk 3291
In contrast to these syndromes, bacterial aspiration pneumonitis develops over a period of several days or weeks rather than hours. Patients who enter the hospital with this syndrome typically have been ill for several days and generally report low-grade fever, malaise, and sputum production. In some patients, weight loss and anemia reflect a more chronic process. Usually the history reveals factors predisposing to aspiration, such as alcohol overdose or residence in a nursing home. Examination sometimes yields evidence of periodontal disease. Sputum characteristically is not malodorous unless the process has been under way for at least a week. A mixed bacterial flora with many PMNs is evident on Gram’s staining of sputum. Expectorated sputum is unreliable for anaerobic cultures because of inevitable contamination by the normal oral microbiota. Reliable specimens for culture can be obtained by transtracheal or transthoracic aspiration—techniques that are rarely used at present. Culture of protected-brush specimens or bronchoalveolar lavage fluid obtained by bronchoscopy is controversial.
# Chunk 3292
Extension from a subdiaphragmatic infection may also result in anaerobic empyema.

Intraabdominal Infections Intraabdominal infections—mainly peritonitis and abscesses—are usually polymicrobial and represent the normal intestinal (especially colonic) microbiota. These infections most often follow a breach in the mucosal barrier resulting from appendicitis, diverticulitis, neoplasm, inflammatory bowel disease, surgery, or trauma. On average, four to six bacterial species are isolated per specimen submitted to the microbiology laboratory, with a predominance of enteric aerobic/facultative gram-negative bacilli, anaerobes, and streptococci/enterococci. The most common isolates are Escherichia coli (found in ≥50% of patients) and B. fragilis (30– 50%). Other anaerobes commonly isolated from this type of infection include Peptostreptococcus, Prevotella, and Fusobacterium species. The involvement of clostridia can lead to severe infections. The dominance of four to six bacterial species out of the more than 500 colonic mucosal species is related both to the virulence factors of these species and to the inability of clinical laboratories to culture many other species residing in the colonic mucosa.
# Chunk 3293
Neutropenic enterocolitis (typhlitis) has been associated with anaerobic infection of the cecum but—in the setting of neutropenia (Chap. 104)—may involve the entire bowel. Patients usually present with fever; abdominal pain, tenderness, and distention; and watery diarrhea. The bowel wall is edematous with hemorrhage and necrosis. The primary pathogen is thought by some authorities to be Clostridium septicum, but other clostridia and mixed anaerobes have also been implicated. More than 50% of patients developing early clinical signs can benefit from antibiotic therapy and bowel rest. Surgery is sometimes required to remove gangrenous bowel. See Chap. 159 for a complete discussion of intraabdominal infections.
# Chunk 3294
Once the organism in the blood has been identified, both the portal of bloodstream entry and the underlying problem that probably led to seeding of the bloodstream can often be deduced from an understanding of the organism’s normal site of residence. For example, mixed anaerobic bacteremia including B. fragilis usually implies a colonic pathology with mucosal disruption from neoplasia, diverticulitis, or some other inflammatory lesion. Debilitating diseases such as malignancies, diabetes, organ transplantation, and abdominal and pelvic surgeries are among the predisposing factors for anaerobic bacteremia. In a retrospective nested case–control study, diabetes was identified as a risk factor for anaerobic bacteremia when the source of bacteremia was unknown. The initial manifestations are determined by the portal of entry and reflect the localized condition. When bloodstream invasion occurs, patients can become extremely ill, with rigors and hectic fevers. The clinical picture may be quite similar to that seen in sepsis involving aerobic gram-negative bacilli. Although complications of anaerobic bacteremia (e.g., septic thrombophlebitis and septic shock) have been reported, their incidence in association with anaerobic bacteremia is low. Anaerobic bacteremia is potentially fatal and requires rapid diagnosis and appropriate therapy. Reported case–fatality rates are high, ranging from 25% to 44%, and appear to increase with the age of the patient (with reported rates of >66% among patients >60 years old), with the isolation of multiple species from the bloodstream, and with the failure to surgically remove a focus of infection. The attributable mortality rate for bacteremia associated with the B. fragilis group was examined in a matched case–control study. Patients with B. fragilis–group bacteremia had a significantly higher mortality rate (28% vs 8%), with an attributable mortality rate of 19.3% and a mortality risk ratio of 3.2.
# Chunk 3295
There are three critical steps in the diagnosis of anaerobic infection: (1) proper collection of specimens; (2) rapid transport of the specimens to the microbiology laboratory, preferably in anaerobic transport media; and (3) proper handling of the specimens by the laboratory. Specimens must be collected by meticulous sampling of infected sites, with avoidance of contamination by the normal microbiota. When such contamination is likely, the specimen is unacceptable. Examples of specimens unacceptable for anaerobic culture include sputum collected by expectoration or nasal tracheal suction, bronchoscopy specimens, samples collected directly through the vaginal vault, urine collected by voiding, and feces. Specimens appropriate for anaerobic culture include sterile body fluids such as blood, pleural fluid, peritoneal fluid, cerebrospinal fluid, and aspirates or biopsy samples from normally sterile sites. As a general rule, liquid or tissue specimens are preferred; swab specimens should be avoided.
# Chunk 3296
TB caused by drug-susceptible strains is curable in the vast majority of

Mario C. Raviglione cases. If untreated, the disease may be fatal within 5 years in 50–65% of cases. Transmission usually takes place through the airborne spread of droplet nuclei produced by patients with infectious pulmonary TB.
# Chunk 3297
M. tuberculosis infection (LTBI) is relatively high among elderly whites. In general, adults ≥65 years of age have the highest incidence rate per capita (4.9 cases/100,000 population in 2013) and children <14 years of age the lowest (0.8 case/100,000 population). Blacks account for the highest proportion of cases (37%; 1257 cases in 2013) among U.S.-born persons. TB in the United States is also a disease of adult members of the HIV-infected population, the foreign-born population (64.6% of all cases in 2013), and disadvantaged/marginalized populations. Of the 6193 cases reported among foreign-born persons in 2013, 37% occurred in persons from the Americas and 32% occurred in persons born in the Western Pacific region. Overall, the highest rates per capita were among Asian Americans (18.7 cases/100,000 population). A total of 536 deaths were caused by TB in the United States in 2011. In Canada in 2013, 1638 TB cases were reported (4.7 cases/100,000 population); 70% (1145) of these cases occurred in foreign-born persons and 19% (309 cases) occurred in members of the Canadian aboriginal peoples, whose per capita rate is disproportionately high (23.4 cases/100,000 population) with a peak in the Nunavut territory of 143 cases/100,000 population—a rate similar to that in many highly endemic countries. Similarly, in Europe, TB has reemerged as an important public health problem, mainly as a result of cases among immigrants from high-incidence countries and among marginalized populations, often in large urban settings like London; in 2013, 41% of all cases reported from the United Kingdom occurred in London, and the rate per capita (36 cases/100,000 population) was similar to that in some middle-income countries. In most Western European countries, there are more cases annually among foreign-born than native populations.
# Chunk 3298
Studies conducted in various countries before the advent of chemotherapy showed that untreated TB is often fatal. About one-third of patients died within 1 year after diagnosis, and more than 50% died within 5 years. The 5-year mortality rate among sputum smear–positive cases was 65%. Of the survivors at 5 years, ~60% had undergone spontaneous remission, while the remainder were still excreting tubercle bacilli. With effective, timely, and proper chemotherapy, patients have a very high chance of being cured. However, improper use of anti-TB drugs, while reducing mortality rates, may also result in large numbers of chronic infectious cases, often with drug-resistant bacilli.
# Chunk 3299
Early in the course of disease, symptoms and signs are often nonspecific and insidious, consisting mainly of diurnal fever and night sweats due to defervescence, weight loss, anorexia, general malaise, and weakness. However, in up to 90% of cases, cough eventually develops—often initially nonproductive and limited to the morning and subsequently accompanied by the production of purulent sputum, sometimes with blood streaking. Hemoptysis develops in 20–30% of cases, and massive hemoptysis may ensue as a consequence of the erosion of a blood vessel in the wall of a cavity. Hemoptysis, however, may also result from rupture of a dilated vessel in a cavity (Rasmussen’s aneurysm) or from aspergilloma formation in an old cavity. Pleuritic chest pain sometimes develops in patients with subpleural parenchymal lesions or pleural disease. Extensive disease may produce dyspnea and, in rare instances, adult respiratory distress syndrome. Physical findings are of limited use in pulmonary TB. Many patients have no abnormalities detectable by chest examination, whereas others have detectable rales in the involved areas during inspiration, especially after coughing. Occasionally, rhonchi due to partial bronchial obstruction and classic amphoric breath sounds in areas with large cavities may be heard. Systemic features include fever (often low-grade and intermittent) in up to 80% of cases and wasting. Absence of fever, however, does not exclude TB. In some cases, pallor and finger clubbing develop. The most common hematologic findings are mild anemia, leukocytosis, and thrombocytosis with a slightly elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate and/or C-reactive protein level. None of these findings is consistent or sufficiently accurate for diagnostic purposes.
# Chunk 3300
Lymph Node TB (Tuberculous Lymphadenitis) The most common presentation of extrapulmonary TB in both HIV-seronegative and HIV-infected patients (35% of cases worldwide and more than 40% of cases in the United States in recent series), lymph node disease is particularly frequent among HIV-infected patients and among children (Fig. 202-8). In the United States, besides children, women (particularly non-Caucasians) seem to be especially susceptible. Once caused mainly by M. bovis, tuberculous lymphadenitis today is due largely to M. tuberculosis. Lymph node TB presents as painless swelling of the lymph nodes, most commonly at posterior cervical and supraclavicular sites (a condition historically referred to as scrofula). Lymph nodes are usually discrete in early disease but develop into a matted nontender mass over time and may result in a fistulous tract draining caseous material. Associated pulmonary disease is present in fewer than 50% of cases, and systemic symptoms are uncommon except in HIV-infected patients. The diagnosis is established by fine-needle aspiration biopsy (with a yield of up to 80%) or surgical excision biopsy. Bacteriologic confirmation is achieved in the vast majority of cases, granulomatous lesions with or without visible AFBs are typically seen, and cultures are positive in 70–80% of cases. Among HIV-infected patients, granulomas are less well organized and are frequently absent entirely, but bacterial loads are heavier than in HIVseronegative patients, with higher yields from microscopy and culture. Differential diagnosis includes a variety of infectious conditions, neoplastic diseases such as lymphomas or metastatic carcinomas, and rare disorders like Kikuchi’s disease (necrotizing histiocytic lymphadenitis), Kimura’s disease, and Castleman’s disease.
# Chunk 3301
FIGuRE 202-8 Tuberculous lymphadenitis affecting the cervical lymph nodes in a 2-year-old child from Malawi. (Courtesy of Prof. S. Graham, Centre for International Child Health, University of Melbourne, Australia; with permission.) 1110 postprimary disease. Depending on the extent of reactivity, the effusion may be small, remain unnoticed, and resolve spontaneously or may be sufficiently large to cause symptoms such as fever, pleuritic chest pain, and dyspnea. Physical findings are those of pleural effusion: dullness to percussion and absence of breath sounds. A chest radiograph reveals the effusion and, in up to one-third of cases, also shows a parenchymal lesion. Thoracentesis is required to ascertain the nature of the effusion and to differentiate it from manifestations of other etiologies. The fluid is straw colored and at times hemorrhagic; it is an exudate with a protein concentration >50% of that in serum (usually ~4–6 g/dL), a normal to low glucose concentration, a pH of ~7.3 (occasionally <7.2), and detectable white blood cells (usually 500–6000/μL). Neutrophils may predominate in the early stage, but lymphocyte predominance is the typical finding later. Mesothelial cells are generally rare or absent. AFB are rarely seen on direct smear, and cultures often may be falsely negative for M. tuberculosis; positive cultures are more common among postprimary cases. Determination of the pleural concentration of adenosine deaminase (ADA) may be a useful screening test, and TB may be excluded if the value is very low. Lysozyme is also present in the pleural effusion. Measurement of IFN-γ, either directly or through stimulation of sensitized T cells with mycobacterial antigens, can be helpful. Needle biopsy of the pleura is often required for diagnosis and is recommended over pleural fluid; it reveals granulomas and/or yields a positive culture in up to 80% of cases. Pleural biopsy can yield a positive result in ~75% of cases when real-time automated nucleic acid amplification is used (the Xpert® MTB/RIF assay [Cepheid, Sunnyvale, CA]; see “Nucleic Acid Amplification Technology,” below), although pleural fluid testing with this assay is not recommended because of low sensitivity. This form of pleural TB responds rapidly to chemotherapy and may resolve spontaneously. Concurrent glucocorticoid administration may reduce the duration of fever and/or chest pain but is not of proven benefit. Tuberculous empyema is a less common complication of pulmonary TB. It is usually the result of the rupture of a cavity, with spillage of a large number of organisms into the pleural space. This process may create a bronchopleural fistula with evident air in the pleural space. A chest radiograph shows hydropneumothorax with an air-fluid level. The pleural fluid is purulent and thick and contains large numbers of lymphocytes. Acid-fast smears and mycobacterial cultures are often positive. Surgical drainage is usually required as an adjunct to chemotherapy. Tuberculous empyema may result in severe pleural fibrosis and restrictive lung disease. Removal of the thickened visceral pleura (decortication) is occasionally necessary to improve lung function.
# Chunk 3302
TB of the upper Airways Nearly always a complication of advanced cavitary pulmonary TB, TB of the upper airways may involve the larynx, pharynx, and epiglottis. Symptoms include hoarseness, dysphonia, and dysphagia in addition to chronic productive cough. Findings depend on the site of involvement, and ulcerations may be seen on laryngoscopy. Acid-fast smear of the sputum is often positive, but biopsy may be necessary in some cases to establish the diagnosis. Carcinoma of the larynx may have similar features but is usually painless.
# Chunk 3303
Genitourinary TB Genitourinary TB, which accounts for ~10–15% of all extrapulmonary cases in the United States and elsewhere, may involve any portion of the genitourinary tract. Local symptoms predominate, and up to 75% of patients have chest radiographic abnormalities suggesting previous or concomitant pulmonary disease. Urinary frequency, dysuria, nocturia, hematuria, and flank or abdominal pain are common presentations. However, patients may be asymptomatic and their disease discovered only after severe destructive lesions of the kidneys have developed. Urinalysis gives abnormal results in 90% of cases, revealing pyuria and hematuria. The documentation of culture-negative pyuria in acidic urine should raise the suspicion of TB. IV pyelography, abdominal computed tomography (CT), or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (Fig. 202-9) may show deformities and obstructions; calcifications and ureteral strictures are suggestive findings. Culture of three morning urine specimens yields a definitive diagnosis in nearly 90% of cases. Severe ureteral strictures may lead to hydronephrosis and renal damage. Genital TB is diagnosed more commonly in female than in male patients. In female patients, it affects the fallopian tubes and the endometrium and may cause infertility, pelvic pain, and menstrual abnormalities. Diagnosis requires biopsy or culture of specimens obtained by dilation and curettage. In male patients, genital TB preferentially affects the epididymis, producing a slightly tender mass that may drain externally through a fistulous tract; orchitis and prostatitis may also develop. In almost half of cases of genitourinary TB, urinary tract disease is also present. Genitourinary TB responds well to chemotherapy.
# Chunk 3304
Gastrointestinal TB Gastrointestinal TB is uncommon, making up 3.5% of extrapulmonary cases in the United States. Various pathogenetic mechanisms are involved: swallowing of sputum with direct seeding, hematogenous spread, or (largely in developing areas) ingestion of milk from cows affected by bovine TB. Although any portion of the gastrointestinal tract may be affected, the terminal ileum and the cecum are the sites most commonly involved. Abdominal pain (at times similar to that associated with appendicitis) and swelling, obstruction, hematochezia, and a palpable mass in the abdomen are common findings at presentation. Fever, weight loss, anorexia, and night sweats are also common. With intestinal-wall involvement, ulcerations and fistulae may simulate Crohn’s disease; the differential diagnosis of this entity is always difficult. Anal fistulae should prompt an evaluation for rectal TB. Because surgery is required in most cases, the diagnosis can be established by histologic examination and culture of specimens obtained intraoperatively.
# Chunk 3305
Tuberculous peritonitis follows either the direct spread of tubercle bacilli from ruptured lymph nodes and intraabdominal organs (e.g., genital TB in women) or hematogenous seeding. Nonspecific abdominal pain, fever, and ascites should raise the suspicion of tuberculous peritonitis. The coexistence of cirrhosis (Chap. 363) in patients with tuberculous peritonitis complicates the diagnosis. In tuberculous peritonitis, paracentesis reveals an exudative fluid with a high protein content and leukocytosis that is usually lymphocytic (although neutrophils occasionally predominate). The yield of direct smear and culture is relatively low; culture of a large volume of ascitic fluid can increase the yield, but peritoneal biopsy (with a specimen best obtained by laparoscopy) is often needed to establish the diagnosis.
# Chunk 3306
Pericardial TB (Tuberculous Pericarditis) Due either to direct extension from adjacent mediastinal or hilar lymph nodes or to hematogenous spread, pericardial TB has often been a disease of the elderly in countries with low TB prevalence. However, it also develops frequently in HIV-infected patients. Case–fatality rates are as high as 40% in some series. The onset may be subacute, although an acute presentation, with dyspnea, fever, dull retrosternal pain, and a pericardial friction rub, is possible. An effusion eventually develops in many cases; cardiovascular symptoms and signs of cardiac tamponade may ultimately appear (Chap. 288). In the presence of effusion, TB must be suspected if the patient belongs to a high-risk population (HIV-infected, originating in a high-prevalence country); if there is evidence of previous TB in other organs; or if echocardiography, CT, or MRI shows effusion and thickness across the pericardial space. A definitive diagnosis can be obtained by pericardiocentesis under echocardiographic guidance. The pericardial fluid must be submitted for biochemical, cytologic, and microbiologic evaluation. The effusion is exudative in nature, with a high count of lymphocytes and monocytes. Hemorrhagic effusion is common. Direct smear examination is very rarely positive. Culture of pericardial fluid reveals M. tuberculosis in up to two-thirds of cases, whereas pericardial biopsy has a higher yield. High levels of ADA, lysozyme, and IFN-γ may suggest a tuberculous etiology.
# Chunk 3307
Miliary or Disseminated TB Miliary TB is due to hematogenous spread of tubercle bacilli. Although in children it is often the consequence of primary infection, in adults it may be due to either recent infection or reactivation of old disseminated foci. The lesions are usually yellowish granulomas 1–2 mm in diameter that resemble millet seeds (thus the term miliary, coined by nineteenth-century pathologists). Clinical manifestations are nonspecific and protean, depending on the predominant site of involvement. Fever, night sweats, anorexia, weakness, and weight loss are presenting symptoms in the majority of cases. At times, patients have a cough and other respiratory symptoms due to pulmonary involvement as well as abdominal symptoms. Physical findings include hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, and lymphadenopathy. Eye examination may reveal choroidal tubercles, which are pathognomonic of miliary TB, in up to 30% of cases. Meningismus occurs in fewer than 10% of cases.
# Chunk 3308
A high index of suspicion is required for the diagnosis of miliary TB. Frequently, chest radiography (Fig. 202-5) reveals a miliary reticulonodular pattern (more easily seen on underpenetrated film), although no radiographic abnormality may be evident early in the course and among HIV-infected patients. Other radiologic findings include large infiltrates, interstitial infiltrates (especially in HIV-infected patients), and pleural effusion. Sputum-smear microscopy is negative in most cases. Various hematologic abnormalities may be seen, including anemia with leukopenia, lymphopenia, neutrophilic leukocytosis and leukemoid reactions, and polycythemia. Disseminated intravascular coagulation has been reported. Elevation of alkaline phosphatase levels and other abnormal values in liver function tests are detected in patients with severe hepatic involvement. The TST may be negative in up to half of cases, but reactivity may be restored during chemotherapy. Bronchoalveolar lavage and transbronchial biopsy are more likely to provide bacteriologic confirmation, and granulomas are evident in liver or bone-marrow biopsy specimens from many patients. If it goes unrecognized, miliary TB is lethal; with proper early treatment, however, it is amenable to cure. Glucocorticoid therapy has not proved beneficial.
# Chunk 3309
Post-TB Complications TB may cause persisting pulmonary damage in patients whose infection has been considered cured on clinical grounds. Chronic impairment of lung functions, bronchiectasis, aspergillomas, and chronic pulmonary aspergillosis (CPA) have been associated with TB. CPA may manifest as simple aspergilloma (fungal ball) or chronic cavitary aspergillosis. Early studies revealed that, especially in the presence of large residual cavities, Aspergillus fumigatus may colonize the lesion and produce symptoms such as respiratory impairment, hemoptysis, persistent fatigue, and weight loss, often resulting in the erroneous diagnosis of TB recurrence. The detection of Aspergillus precipitins (IgG) in the blood suggests CPA, as do radiographic abnormalities such as thickening of the cavitary walls or the presence of a fungal ball inside the cavity. Treatment is difficult. Recent preliminary studies on the use of itraconazole for 6 months suggest that treatment with this agent may be superior to conservative treatment in improving radiologic and clinical manifestations of CPA. Surgical removal of lesions is risky.
# Chunk 3310
Exacerbations in systemic (lymphadenopathy) or respiratory symptoms, signs, and laboratory or radiographic manifestations of TB—termed the immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS) or TB immune reconstitution disease (TB-IRD)—have been associated with the administration of ART and occur in ~10% of HIV-infected TB patients. Usually developing 1–3 months after initiation of ART, IRIS is more common among patients with advanced immunosuppression and extrapulmonary TB. “Unmasking IRIS” may also develop after the initiation of ART in patients with undiagnosed subclinical TB. The earlier ART is started and the lower the baseline CD4+ T cell count, the greater the risk of IRIS. Death due to IRIS is relatively infrequent and occurs mainly among patients who have a high preexisting mortality risk. The presumed pathogenesis of IRIS consists of an immune response that is elicited by antigens released as bacilli are killed during effective chemotherapy and that is temporally associated with improving immune function. There is no diagnostic test for IRIS, and its confirmation relies heavily upon case definitions incorporating clinical and laboratory data; a variety of case definitions have been suggested. The first priority in the management of a possible case of IRIS is to ensure that the clinical syndrome does not represent a failure of TB treatment or the development of another infection. Mild paradoxical reactions can be managed with symptom-based treatment. Glucocorticoids have been used for more severe reactions, and prednisolone given for 4 weeks at a low dosage (1.5 mg/kg per day for 2 weeks and half that dose for the remaining 2 weeks) has reduced the need for hospitalization and therapeutic procedures and hastened alleviation of symptoms, as reflected by Karnofsky performance scores, quality-of-life assessments, radiographic response, and C-reactive protein levels. The effectiveness of glucocorticoids in alleviating the symptoms of IRIS is probably linked to suppression of proinflammatory cytokine concentrations, as these medications reduce serum concentrations of IL-6, IL-10, IL-12p40, TNF-α, IFN-γ, and IFN-γ-inducible protein 10 (IP-10). Recommendations for the prevention and treatment of TB in HIV-infected individuals are provided below.
# Chunk 3311
A presumptive diagnosis is commonly based on the finding of AFB on microscopic examination of a diagnostic specimen, such as a smear of expectorated sputum or of tissue (e.g., a lymph node biopsy). Although inexpensive, AFB microscopy has relatively low sensitivity (40–60%) in culture-confirmed cases of pulmonary TB. The traditional method— light microscopy of specimens stained with Ziehl-Neelsen basic fuchsin dyes—is nevertheless satisfactory, although time-consuming. Most modern laboratories processing large numbers of diagnostic specimens use auramine–rhodamine staining and fluorescence microscopy; this approach is more sensitive than the Ziehl-Neelsen method. However, it is expensive because it requires high-cost mercury vapor light sources and a dark room. Less expensive light-emitting diode (LED) fluorescence microscopes are now available. They are as sensitive as—or more sensitive than—traditional fluorescence microscopes. As a result, conventional light and fluorescence microscopes are being replaced with this more recent technology, especially in developing countries. For patients with suspected pulmonary TB, it has been recommended that two or three sputum specimens, preferably collected early in the morning, should be submitted to the laboratory for AFB smear and mycobacterial culture. Two specimens collected on the same visit may be as effective as three. If tissue is obtained, it is criti-1113 cal that the portion of the specimen intended for culture not be put in formaldehyde. The use of AFB microscopy in examining urine or gastric lavage fluid is limited by the presence of commensal mycobacteria that can cause false-positive results.
# Chunk 3312
Several test systems based on amplification of mycobacterial nucleic acid have become available in the past few years. These tests are most useful for the rapid confirmation of TB in persons with AFB-positive specimens, but some also have utility for the diagnosis of AFB-negative pulmonary and extrapulmonary TB. One system that permits rapid diagnosis of TB with high specificity and sensitivity (approaching that of culture) is the fully automated, real-time nucleic acid amplification technology known as the Xpert MTB/RIF assay. Xpert MTB/RIF can simultaneously detect TB and rifampin resistance in <2 h and has minimal biosafety and training requirements. Therefore, it can be housed in nonconventional laboratory settings. The WHO recommends its use worldwide as the initial diagnostic test in adults and children presumed to have MDR-TB or HIV-associated TB. Taking into account the availability of resources, the test may also be used in any adult or child presumed to have TB or as a follow-up test after microscopy in adults presumed to have TB but not at risk of MDR-TB or HIV-associated TB. Xpert MTB/RIF should be the initial test applied to CSF from patients in whom TB meningitis is suspected as well as a replacement test (over conventional microscopy, culture, and histopathology) for selected nonrespiratory specimens—obtained by gastric lavage, fine-needle aspiration, or pleural or other biopsies—from patients in whom extrapulmonary TB is suspected. This test has a sensitivity of 98% among AFB-positive cases and ~70% among AFB-negative specimens. Other tests, such as those based on manual amplification platforms, have not yet been deemed satisfactory for introduction into clinical practice as replacements for existing tests.
# Chunk 3313
Pyrazinamide 25 mg/kg, max 2 g 35 mg/kg, max 3 g aThe duration of treatment with individual drugs varies by regimen, as detailed in Table 202-3. bThe World Health Organization recommends the following dosages for children: isoniazid,10–15 mg/kg daily, max 300 mg/d; rifampin, 15 (range, 10–20) mg/kg daily, max 600 mg/d; pyrazinamide, 35 (range, 30–40) mg/kg daily; ethambutol, 20 (range, 15–25) mg/kg daily. cIn certain settings, streptomycin (15 mg/kg daily, with a maximum dose of 1 g; or 25–30 mg/kg thrice weekly, with a maximum dose of 1.5 g) can replace ethambutol in the initial phase of treatment. However, streptomycin generally is no longer considered a first-line drug.
# Chunk 3314
Standard short-course regimens are divided into an initial, or bactericidal, phase and a continuation, or sterilizing, phase. During the initial phase, the majority of the tubercle bacilli are killed, symptoms resolve, and usually the patient becomes noninfectious. The continuation phase is required to eliminate persisting mycobacteria and prevent relapse. The treatment regimen of choice for virtually all forms of drug-susceptible TB in adults consists of a 2-month initial (or intensive) phase of isoniazid, rifampin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol followed by a 4-month continuation phase of isoniazid and rifampin (Table 202-3). This regimen can cure TB in more than 90% of patients. In children, most forms of TB in the absence of HIV infection or suspected isoniazid resistance can be safely treated without ethambutol in the intensive phase. Treatment should be given daily throughout the course. However, daily treatment during the intensive phase and intermittently (three times weekly) during the continuation phase is an alternative for patients who can be directly supervised and properly supported. A fully supervised, three-timesweekly regimen throughout the course also can be offered in the absence of HIV infection, although the risk of acquired drug resistance is higher than that among patients treated daily for the full course. In addition, if the infecting strain is resistant to isoniazid, the risks of both acquired resistance and treatment failure are higher with three-times-weekly intensive therapy than with daily treatment in the intensive phase. HIV-infected patients should always receive their initial-phase regimen daily (see below). A continuation phase of once-weekly rifapentine and isoniazid has been shown to be equally effective for HIV-seronegative patients with noncavitary pulmonary TB who have negative sputum cultures at 2 months. Patients with cavitary pulmonary TB and delayed sputum-culture conversion (i.e., those who remain culture-positive at 2 months) should be tested immediately for drug-resistant TB, and a change of regimen should be considered. To prevent isoniazid-related neuropathy, pyridoxine (10–25 mg/d) should be added to the regimen given to persons at high risk of vitamin B6 deficiency (e.g., alcoholics; malnourished persons; pregnant and lactating women; and patients with conditions such as chronic renal failure, diabetes, and HIV infection, which are also associated with neuropathy). A full course of therapy (completion of treatment) is defined more accurately by the total number of doses taken than by the duration of treatment, although the course should not include interruptions of longer than 4 weeks. Specific recommendations on the required number of doses for each of the various treatment regimens have been published jointly by the American Thoracic Society, the Infectious Diseases Society of America, and the CDC. In some developing countries where the ability to ensure adherence to treatment is limited, a continuation-phase regimen of daily isoniazid and ethambutol for 6 months was used in the past. However, this regimen is associated with a higher rate of relapse, failure, and death, especially among HIV-infected patients, and is no longer recommended by the WHO.
# Chunk 3315
Intolerance to Z 2 HRE 7 HR aAll drugs can be given daily or intermittently (three times weekly throughout). A twice-weekly regimen after 2–8 weeks of daily therapy during the initial phase is sometimes used, although it is not recommended by the WHO. bStreptomycin can be used in place of ethambutol but is no longer considered a first-line drug. cSome experts suggest extending the continuation phase to 7 months for patients with cavitary pulmonary tuberculosis who remain sputum culture–positive after the initial phase of treatment. However, treatment in such patients must be guided by drug susceptibility testing to rule out drug-resistant TB. dA clinical trial showed that HIV-negative patients with noncavitary pulmonary tuberculosis who have negative sputum AFB smears after the initial phase of treatment can be given once-weekly rifapentine/isoniazid in the continuation phase. eThe 6-month regimen with pyrazinamide can probably be used safely during pregnancy and is recommended by the WHO and the International Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease. If pyrazinamide is not included in the initial treatment regimen, the minimal duration of therapy is 9 months. fStreptomycin should be discontinued after 2 months. Drug susceptibility results will determine the best regimen option. gThe availability of rapid molecular methods to identify drug resistance allows initiation of a proper regimen at the start of treatment. hAlthough normally not recommended, a fluoroquinolone may strengthen the regimen for patients with extensive disease. A later-generation agent (such as levofloxacin, moxifloxacin, or possibly gatifloxacin; see text) is preferred. iIsoniazid is added if susceptibility to this agent is confirmed or presumed. jAmikacin and kanamycin (aminoglycosides) or capreomycin (polypeptide). Any of these injectable agents is recommended for the first 8 months in most patients, but the duration may be modified according to the clinical response to therapy. Continuation of treatment with the injectable drug for at least 4 months after culture conversion is advised.
# Chunk 3316
During treatment, patients should be monitored for drug toxicity. The most common adverse reaction of significance is hepatitis. Patients should be carefully educated about the signs and symptoms of drug-induced hepatitis (e.g., dark urine, loss of appetite) and should be instructed to discontinue treatment promptly and see their health care provider should these symptoms occur. Although biochemical monitoring is not routinely recommended, all adult patients should undergo baseline assessment of liver function (e.g., measurement of serum levels of hepatic aminotransferases and bilirubin). Older patients, those with concomitant diseases, those with a history of hepatic disease (especially hepatitis C), and those using alcohol daily should be monitored especially closely (i.e., monthly), with repeated measurements of aminotransferases, during the initial phase of treatment. Up to 20% of patients have small increases in aspartate aminotransferase (up to three times the upper limit of normal) that are not accompanied by symptoms and are of no consequence. For patients with symptomatic hepatitis and those with marked (fiveto sixfold) elevations in serum levels of aspartate aminotransferase, treatment should be stopped and drugs reintroduced one at a time after liver function has returned to normal. Hypersensitivity reactions usually require the discontinuation of all drugs and rechallenge to determine which agent is the culprit. Because of the variety of regimens available, it usually is not necessary—although it is possible—to desensitize patients. Hyperuricemia and arthralgia caused by pyrazinamide can usually be managed by the administration of acetylsalicylic acid; however, pyrazinamide treatment should be stopped if the patient develops gouty arthritis. Individuals who develop autoimmune thrombocytopenia secondary to rifampin therapy should not receive the drug thereafter. Similarly, the occurrence of optic neuritis with ethambutol is an indication for permanent discontinuation of this drug. Other common manifestations of drug intolerance, such as pruritus and gastrointestinal upset, can generally be managed without the interruption of therapy.
# Chunk 3317
Strains of M. tuberculosis resistant to individual drugs arise by spontaneous point mutations in the mycobacterial genome that occur at low but predictable rates (10–7–10–10 for the key drugs). Resistance to rifampin is associated with mutations in the rpoB gene in 95% of cases; that to isoniazid with mutations mainly in the katG (50–95% of cases) and inhA (up to 45%) genes; that to pyrazinamide in the pncA gene (up to 98%); that to ethambutol in the embB gene (50–65%); that to the fluoroquinolones in the gyrA–gyrB genes (75–95%); and that to the aminoglycosides mainly in the rrs gene (up to 80%). Because there is no cross-resistance among the commonly used drugs, the probability that a strain will be resistant to two drugs is the product of the probabilities of resistance to each drug and thus is low. The development of drug-resistant TB is almost invariably the result of monotherapy—i.e., the failure of the health care provider to prescribe at least two drugs to which tubercle bacilli are susceptible or of the patient to take properly prescribed therapy. In addition, the use of drugs of substandard quality may cause the emergence of drug resistance. Drug-resistant TB may be either primary or acquired. Primary drug resistance is that which develops in a patient infected from the start by a drug-resistant strain. Acquired resistance is that which develops during treatment with an inappropriate regimen. In North America, Western Europe, most of Latin America, and the Persian Gulf States, rates of primary resistance are generally low and isoniazid resistance is most common. In the United States, although rates of primary isoniazid resistance have been stable at ~7–8%, the rate of primary MDR-TB has declined from 2.5% in 1993 to 1% since 2000. As described above, MDR-TB is an increasingly serious problem in some regions, especially in the states of the former Soviet Union and some countries of Asia (Fig. 202-11). Even more serious is the recently described occurrence of XDR-TB due to MDR strains that are also resistant to any fluoroquinolones and to any of three second-line injectable agents (amikacin, kanamycin, and capreomycin). Creation of drug-resistant TB can be prevented by adherence to the principles of sound treatment: inclusion of at least two quality-assured, bactericidal drugs to which the organism is susceptible; use of fixed-drug-combination products; supervision of treatment with patient support; and verification that patients complete the prescribed course. Transmission of drug-resistant strains can be prevented by implementation of respiratory infection-control measures (see below).
# Chunk 3318
Although the 6-month regimen described in Table 202-3 is generally effective for patients with initial isoniazid-resistant disease, it is prudent to include at least ethambutol and possibly pyrazinamide for the full 6 months and to consider extending the treatment course to 9 months. In such cases, isoniazid probably does not contribute to a successful outcome and could be omitted. In case of documented resistance to both isoniazid and ethambutol, a 9to 12-month regimen of rifampin, pyrazinamide, and a fluoroquinolone can be used. Any patients whose isolates exhibit resistance to rifampin should be managed as if they had MDR-TB (see below), with the addition of isoniazid if susceptibility to this agent is confirmed via rapid testing or is presumed. MDR-TB, in which bacilli are resistant to (at least) isoniazid and rifampin, is more difficult to manage than is disease caused by drug-susceptible organisms because these two bactericidal drugs are the most potent agents available and because associated resistance to other first-line drugs as well (e.g., ethambutol) is not uncommon. For treatment of MDR-TB, the WHO recommends that in most patients five drugs be used in the initial phase of at least 8 months: a later-generation fluoroquinolone, an injectable agent (the aminoglycosides amikacin or kanamycin or the polypeptide capreomycin), ethionamide (or prothionamide), either cycloserine or PAS, and pyrazinamide. Ethambutol can be added (Table 202-3). Although the optimal duration of treatment is not known, a course of at least 20 months is recommended for previously untreated patients, including the initial phase with an injectable agent, which is usually discontinued at 4 months after culture conversion.
# Chunk 3319
In late 2012, the FDA granted accelerated approval of bedaquiline, a diarylquinoline antibiotic. This new drug, when given for the first 24 weeks (400 mg daily for 2 weeks followed by 200 mg thrice weekly for 22 weeks), has been shown to increase the efficacy of the WHO standard regimen for MDR-TB with faster sputum conversion.
# Chunk 3320
Several observational studies and randomized controlled trials have shown that treatment of HIV-associated TB with anti-TB drugs and simultaneous use of ART are associated with significant reductions in mortality risk and AIDS-related events. Evidence from randomized controlled trials shows that early initiation of ART during anti-TB treatment is associated with a 34–68% reduction in mortality rates, with especially good results in patients with CD4+ T cell counts of <50/μL. Therefore, the main aim in the management of HIV-associated TB is to initiate anti-TB treatment and to immediately consider initiating or continuing ART. All HIV-infected TB patients, regardless of CD4+ T cell count, are candidates for ART, which optimally is initiated as soon as possible after the diagnosis of TB and within the first 8 weeks of anti-TB therapy. However, ART should be started within the first 2 weeks of TB treatment for patients with CD4+ T cell counts of <50/μL. In general, the standard 6-month daily regimen is equally efficacious in HIV-negative and HIV-positive patients for treatment of drug-susceptible TB. As for any other adult living with HIV (Chap. 226), first-line ART for TB patients should consist of two nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) plus a nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NNRTI). Although TB treatment modalities are similar to those in HIV-negative patients, adverse drug effects may be more pronounced in HIV-infected patients. In this 1.
# Chunk 3321
regard, three important considerations are relevant: an increased frequency of paradoxical reactions, interactions between ART components and rifamycins, and development of rifampin monoresistance with intermittent treatment. IRIS—i.e., the exacerbation of symptoms and signs of TB—has been described above. Rifampin, a potent inducer of enzymes of the cytochrome P450 system, lowers serum levels of many HIV protease inhibitors and some NNRTIs— essential drugs used in ART. In such cases, rifabutin, which has much less enzyme-inducing activity, has been used in place of rifampin. However, dosage adjustments for rifabutin and protease inhibitors are still being assessed. Several clinical trials have found that patients with HIV-associated TB whose degree of immunosuppression is advanced (e.g., CD4+ T cell counts of <100/μL) are prone to treatment failure and relapse with rifampin-resistant organisms when treated with “highly intermittent” (i.e., onceor twice-weekly) rifamycincontaining regimens. Consequently, it is recommended that all TB patients who are infected with HIV receive a rifampin-containing regimen on a daily basis. Because recommendations are frequently updated, consultation of the following websites is advised: www.who .int/hiv, www.who.int/tb, www.cdc.gov/hiv, and www.cdc.gov/tb.
# Chunk 3322
Although comparative clinical trials of treatment for extrapulmonary TB are limited, the available evidence indicates that most forms of disease can be treated with the 6-month regimen recommended for patients with pulmonary disease. The WHO and the American Academy of Pediatrics recommend that children with bone and joint TB, tuberculous meningitis, or miliary TB receive up to 12 months of treatment. Treatment for TB may be complicated by underlying medical problems that require special consideration. As a rule, patients with chronic renal failure should not receive aminoglycosides and should receive ethambutol only if serum drug levels 1120 can be monitored. Isoniazid, rifampin, and pyrazinamide may be given in the usual doses in cases of mild to moderate renal failure, but the dosages of isoniazid and pyrazinamide should be reduced for all patients with severe renal failure except those undergoing hemodialysis. Patients with hepatic disease pose a special problem because of the hepatotoxicity of isoniazid, rifampin, and pyrazinamide. Patients with severe hepatic disease may be treated with ethambutol, streptomycin, and possibly another drug (e.g., a fluoroquinolone); if required, isoniazid and rifampin may be administered under close supervision. The use of pyrazinamide by patients with liver failure should be avoided. Silicotuberculosis necessitates the extension of therapy by at least 2 months. The regimen of choice for pregnant women (Table 202-3) is 9 months of treatment with isoniazid and rifampin supplemented by ethambutol for the first 2 months. Although the WHO has recommended routine use of pyrazinamide for pregnant women, this drug has not been recommended in the United States because of insufficient data documenting its safety in pregnancy. Streptomycin is contraindicated because it is known to cause eighth-cranial-nerve damage in the fetus. Treatment for TB is not a contraindication to breast-feeding; most of the drugs administered will be present in small quantities in breast milk, albeit at concentrations far too low to provide any therapeutic or prophylactic benefit to the child. Medical consultation on difficult-to-manage cases is provided by the U.S. CDC Regional Training and Medical Consultation Centers (www.cdc.gov/tb/education/rtmc/).
# Chunk 3323
Before treatment of LTBI begins, it is mandatory to carefully exclude active TB. Several regimens can be used to treat LTBI. The most widely used is that based on isoniazid alone at a daily dose of 5 mg/kg (up to 300 mg/d) for 9 months. On the basis of cost-benefit analyses and concerns about feasibility, a 6-month period of treatment is currently recommended by the WHO, especially in highly TB-endemic countries. Isoniazid can be administered intermittently (twice weekly) at a dose of 15 mg/kg (up to 900 mg) but only as directly observed therapy. An alternative regimen for adults is 4 months of daily rifampin. A 3-month regimen of daily isoniazid and rifampin is used in some countries (e.g., the United Kingdom) for both adults and children who are known not to have HIV infection. A previously recommended regimen of 2 months of rifampin and pyrazinamide has been associated with serious or even fatal hepatotoxicity and now is generally not recommended. The rifampin-containing regimens should be considered for persons who are likely to have been infected with an isoniazid-resistant strain. A recent clinical trial showed that a regimen of isoniazid (900 mg) and rifapentine (900 mg) given once weekly for 12 weeks is as effective as the standard 9-month isoniazid regimen. This regimen was associated with higher treatment completion (82% vs 69%) and less hepatotoxicity (0.4% vs 2.7%) than isoniazid alone, although the rate of permanent discontinuation due to an adverse event was higher (4.9% vs 3.7%).
# Chunk 3324
Currently, the isoniazid–rifapentine regimen is not recommended for children <2 years of age, people living with HIV infection who are receiving ART, or pregnant women. Rifampin and rifapentine are contraindicated in HIV-infected individuals receiv-1121 ing protease inhibitors and most NNRTIs. (Efavirenz is the safest agent in this class of antiretrovirals for simultaneous administration with a rifamycin.) Clinical trials to assess the efficacy of long-term isoniazid administration (i.e., for at least 3 years) among people living with HIV in high-TB-transmission settings have shown that this regimen can be more effective than 9 months of isoniazid and is therefore recommended under those circumstances. Isoniazid should not be given to persons with active liver disease. All persons at increased risk of hepatotoxicity (e.g., those abusing alcohol daily and those with a history of liver disease) should undergo baseline and then monthly assessment of liver function. All patients should be carefully educated about hepatitis and instructed to discontinue use of the drug immediately should any symptoms develop. Moreover, patients should be seen and questioned monthly during therapy about adverse reactions and should be given no more than a 1-month supply of drug at each visit. Treatment of LTBI among persons likely to have been infected by a multidrug-resistant strain is a challenge because no regimens have yet been tested in clinical trials. Close observation for early signs of disease is one option; consultation with a TB expert is advised.
# Chunk 3325
America, and the Pacific. While Africa has the highest disease prevalence, Asia has the most cases. More than 80% of the world’s cases occur in a few countries: India, China, Myanmar, Indonesia, Brazil, Nigeria, Madagascar, and Nepal. Within endemic locales, the distribution of leprosy is quite uneven, with areas of high prevalence bordering on areas with little or no disease. In Brazil the majority of cases occur in the Amazon basin and two western states, while in Mexico leprosy is mostly confined to the Pacific coast. Except as imported cases, leprosy is largely absent from the United States, Canada, and northwestern Europe. In the United States, ~4000 persons have leprosy and 100–200 new cases are reported annually, most of them in California, Texas, New York, and Hawaii among immigrants from Mexico, Southeast Asia, the Philippines, and the Caribbean.
# Chunk 3326
The most severe lepromatous form of leprosy is twice as com mon among men as among women and is rarely encountered in children. The frequency of the polar forms of leprosy in different countries varies widely and may in part be genetically determined; certain human leukocyte antigen (HLA) associations are known for both polar forms of leprosy (see below). Furthermore, variations in 1123 immunoregulatory genes are associated with an increased susceptibility to leprosy, particularly the multibacillary form. In India and Africa, 90% of cases are tuberculoid; in Southeast Asia, 50% are tuberculoid and 50% lepromatous; and in Mexico, 90% are lepromatous. (For definitions of disease types, see Table 203-1 and “Clinical, Histologic, and Immunologic Spectrum,” below.)
# Chunk 3327
type 2 lepra reactions: erytHema nodosUm leprosUm Erythema nodosum leprosum (ENL) (Fig. 203-3) occurs exclusively in patients near the lepromatous end of the leprosy spectrum (BL/LL), affecting nearly 50% of this group. Although ENL may precede leprosy diagnosis and the initiation of therapy (sometimes, in fact, prompting the diagnosis), in 90% of cases it follows the institution of chemotherapy, generally within 2 years. The most common features of ENL are crops of painful erythematous papules that resolve spontaneously in a few days to a week but may recur; malaise; and fever that can be profound. However, patients may also experience symptoms of neuritis, lymphadenitis, uveitis, orchitis, and glomerulonephritis and may develop anemia, leukocytosis, and abnormal liver function tests (particularly increased aminotransferase levels). Individual patients may have either a single bout of ENL or chronic recurrent manifestations. Bouts may be either mild or severe and generalized; in rare instances, ENL results in death. Skin biopsy of ENL papules reveals vasculitis or panniculitis, sometimes with many lymphocytes but characteristically with polymorphonuclear leukocytes as well.
# Chunk 3328
tHe eye Owing to cranial nerve palsies, lagophthalmos and corneal insensitivity may complicate leprosy, resulting in trauma, secondary infection, and (without treatment) corneal ulcerations and opacities. For patients with these conditions, eyedrops during the day and ointments at night provide some protection from such consequences. Furthermore, in LL leprosy, the anterior chamber of the eye is invaded by bacilli, and ENL may result in uveitis, with consequent cataracts and glaucoma. Thus leprosy is a major cause of blindness in the developing world. Slit-lamp evaluation of LL patients often reveals “corneal beading,” representing globi of M. leprae.
# Chunk 3329
ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY Active Agents Established agents used to treat leprosy include dapsone (50–100 mg/d), clofazimine (50–100 mg/d, 100 mg three times weekly, or 300 mg monthly), and rifampin (600 mg daily or monthly; see “Choice of Regimens,” below). Of these drugs, only rifampin is bactericidal. The sulfones (folate antagonists), the foremost of which is dapsone, were the first antimicrobial agents found to be effective for the treatment of leprosy and are still the mainstays of therapy. With sulfone treatment, skin lesions resolve and numbers of viable bacilli in the skin are reduced. Although primarily bacteriostatic, dapsone monotherapy results in a resistance-related relapse rate of only 2.5%; after ≥18 years of therapy and subsequent discontinuation, only another 10% of patients relapse, developing new, usually asymptomatic, shiny, “histoid” nodules. Dapsone is generally safe and inexpensive. Individuals with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency who are treated with dapsone may develop severe hemolysis; those without this deficiency also have reduced red cell survival and a hemoglobin decrease averaging 1 g/dL. Dapsone’s usefulness is limited occasionally by allergic dermatitis and rarely by the sulfone syndrome (including high fever, anemia, exfoliative dermatitis, and a mononucleosis-type blood picture). It must be remembered that rifampin induces microsomal enzymes, necessitating increased doses of medications such as glucocorticoids and oral birth control regimens. Clofazimine is often cosmetically unacceptable to light-skinned leprosy patients because it causes a red-black skin discoloration that accumulates, particularly in lesional areas, and makes the patient’s diagnosis obvious to members of the community.
# Chunk 3330
In 1982, the WHO made recommendations for leprosy chemotherapy administered in control programs. These recommendations came on the heels of the demonstration of the relative success of long-term dapsone monotherapy and in the context of concerns about dapsone resistance. Other complicating considerations included the limited resources available for leprosy care in the very areas where it is most prevalent and the frustration and discouragement of patients and program managers with the previous requirement for lifelong therapy for many leprosy patients. Thus, for the first time, the WHO advocated a finite duration of therapy for all forms of leprosy and—given the prohibitive cost of daily rifampin treatment in developing countries—encouraged the monthly administration of this agent as part of a multidrug regimen. Over the ensuing years, the WHO recommendations have been broadly implemented, and the duration of therapy required, particularly for lepromatous leprosy, has been progressively shortened. For treatment purposes, the WHO classifies patients as paucibacillary or multibacillary. Previously, patients without demonstrable AFB in the dermis were classified as paucibacillary and those with AFB as multibacillary. Currently, in light of the perceived unreliability of skin smears in the field, patients are classified as multibacillary if they have six or more skin lesions and as paucibacillary if they have fewer. (Unfortunately, this classification method has been found wanting, as some patients near the lepromatous pole have only one or a few skin lesions.) The WHO recommends that paucibacillary adults be treated with 100 mg of dapsone daily and 600 mg of rifampin monthly (supervised) for 6 months (Table 203-2). For patients with single-lesion paucibacillary leprosy, the WHO recommends as an alternative a single dose of rifampin (600 mg), ofloxacin (400 mg), and minocycline (100 mg). Multibacillary adults should be treated with 100 mg of dapsone plus 50 mg of clofazimine daily (unsupervised)
# Chunk 3331
Form of More Intensive WHO-Recommended Regimen Leprosy Regimen (1982)

Tuberculoid Dapsone (100 mg/d) for Dapsone (100 mg/d, unsuper month, supervised) for 6 months (multibacillary) for 3 years plus dapsone mine (50 mg/d), unsupervised;
# Chunk 3332
and with 600 mg of rifampin plus 300 mg of clofazimine monthly (supervised). Originally, the WHO recommended that lepromatous patients be treated for 2 years or until smears became negative (generally in ~5 years); subsequently, the acceptable course was reduced to 1 year—a change that remains especially controversial in the absence of supporting clinical trials.
# Chunk 3333
Several factors have caused many authorities to question the WHO recommendations and to favor a more intensive approach. Among these factors are—for multibacillary patients—a high (double-digit) relapse rate in several locales (reaching 20–40% in one locale, with the rate directly related to the initial bacterial burden) and—for paucibacillary patients—demonstrable lesional activity for years in fully half of patients after the completion of therapy. The more intensive approach (Table 203-2) calls for tuberculoid leprosy to be treated with dapsone (100 mg/d) for 5 years and for lepromatous leprosy to be treated with rifampin (600 mg/d) for 3 years and with dapsone (100 mg/d) throughout life.
# Chunk 3334
Type 2 Treatment of ENL must be individualized. If ENL is mild (i.e., if it occurs without fever or other organ involvement and with occasional crops of only a few skin papules), it may be treated with antipyretics alone. However, in cases with many skin lesions, fever, malaise, and other tissue involvement, brief courses (1–2 weeks) of glucocorticoid treatment (initially 40–60 mg/d) are often effective. With or without therapy, individual inflamed papules last for <1 week. Successful therapy is defined by the cessation of skin lesion development and the disappearance of other systemic signs and symptoms. If, despite two courses of glucocorticoid therapy, ENL appears to be recurring and persisting, treatment with thalidomide (100–300 mg nightly) should be initiated, with the dose depending on the initial severity of the reaction. Because even a single dose of thalidomide administered early in pregnancy may result in severe birth defects, including phocomelia, the use of this drug in the United States for the treatment of fertile female patients is tightly regulated and requires informed consent, prior pregnancy testing, and maintenance of birth control measures. Although the mechanism of thalidomide’s dramatic action against ENL is not entirely clear, the drug’s efficacy is probably attributable to its reduction of TNF levels and IgM synthesis and its slowing of polymorphonuclear leukocyte migration. After the reaction is controlled, lower doses of thalidomide (50–200 mg nightly) are effective in preventing relapses of ENL. Clofazimine in high doses (300 mg nightly) has some efficacy against ENL, but its use permits only a modest reduction of the glucocorticoid dose necessary for ENL control.
# Chunk 3335
NTM can be detected on acid-fast or fluorochrome smears of sputum or other body fluids. When the organism burden is high, the organisms may appear as gram-positive beaded rods, but this finding is unreliable. (In contrast, nocardiae may appear as gram-positive and beaded but filamentous bacteria.) Again, the requisite and most sensitive step in the diagnosis of any mycobacterial disease is to think of including it in the differential. In almost all laboratories, mycobacterial sample processing, staining, and culture are conducted separately from routine bacteriologic tests; thus many infections go undiagnosed because of the physician’s failure to request the appropriate test. In addition, mycobacteria usually require separate blood culture media. NTM are broadly differentiated into rapidly growing (<7 days) and slowly growing (≥7 days) forms. Because M. tuberculosis typically takes ≥2 weeks to grow, many laboratories refuse to consider culture results final until 6 weeks have elapsed. Newer techniques using liquid culture media permit more rapid isolation of mycobacteria from specimens than is possible with traditional media. Species more readily detected with incubation at 30°C include M. marinum, M. haemophilum, and M. ulcerans. M. haemophilum prefers iron supplementation or blood, whereas M. genavense requires supplemented medium with the additive mycobactin J. Bacterial formation of pigment in light conditions (photochromogenicity) or dark conditions (scotochromogenicity) or a lack of bacterial pigment formation (nonchromogenicity) has been used to help categorize NTM. In contrast to NTM colonies, M. tuberculosis colonies are beige, rough, dry, and flat. Current identification schemes can reliably use biochemical, nucleic acid, or cell wall composition, as assessed by high-performance liquid chromatography or mass spectrometry, for speciation. With the remarkable decline in U.S. cases of tuberculosis over recent decades, NTM have become the mycobacteria most commonly isolated from humans in North America. However, not all isolations of NTM, especially from the lung, reflect pathology and require treatment. Whereas identification of an organism in a blood or organ biopsy specimen in a compatible clinical setting is diagnostic, the American Thoracic Society recommends that pulmonary infection due to NTM be diagnosed only when disease is clearly demonstrable—i.e., in an appropriate clinical and radiographic setting (nodules, bronchiectasis, cavities) and with repeated isolation of NTM from expectorated sputum or recovery of NTM from bronchoscopy or biopsy specimens. Given the large number of species of NTM and the importance of accurate diagnosis for the implementation of proper therapy, identification of these organisms is ideally taken to the species level.
# Chunk 3336
Prophylaxis of MAC disease in patients infected with HIV is started when the CD4+ T lymphocyte count falls to <50/μL. Azithromycin (1200 mg weekly), clarithromycin (1000 mg daily), or rifabutin (300 mg daily) is effective. Macrolide prophylaxis in immunodeficient patients who are susceptible to NTM (e.g., those with defects in the IFN-γ/IL-12 axis) has not been prospectively validated but seems prudent.
# Chunk 3337
Isoniazid 300 mg/d (5 mg/kg) 9 months Supplement with pyridoxine (25–50 mg daily). (6 months acceptable)
# Chunk 3338
The earliest recorded human case of TB dates back 9000 years. Early treatment modalities, such as bloodletting, were replaced by sanatorium regimens in the late nineteenth century. The discovery of streptomycin in 1943 launched the era of antibiotic treatment for TB. Over subsequent decades, the discovery of additional agents and the use of multiple-drug regimens allowed progressive shortening of the treatment course from years to as little as 6 months with the regimen for drug-susceptible TB. Latent TB infection (LTBI) and active TB disease are diagnosed by history, physical examination, radiographic imaging, tuberculin skin test, interferon γ release assays, acid-fast staining, mycobacterial cultures, and/or new molecular diagnostics. LTBI is treated with isoniazid (optimally given daily or twice weekly for 9 months), rifampin (daily for 4 months), or isoniazid plus rifapentine (weekly for 3 months) (Table 205e-1).
# Chunk 3339
For active or suspected TB disease, clinical factors, including HIV co-infection, symptom duration, radiographic appearance, and public health concerns about TB transmission, drive diagnostic testing and treatment initiation. Multiple-drug regimens are used for the treatment of TB disease (Table 205e-2). Initially, an intensive phase consisting of four drugs—isoniazid, rifampin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol—given for 2 months is followed by a continuation phase of isoniazid and rifampin for 4 months, for a total treatment duration of 6 months. The continuation phase is extended to 7 months (for a total treatment duration of 9 months) if the 2-month course of pyrazinamide is not completed or, for patients with cavitary pulmonary TB, if sputum cultures remain positive beyond 2 months of treatment (delayed culture conversion).
# Chunk 3340
Adherence to medications is critical in achieving a cure with antimycobacterial therapy. Consequently, directly observed therapy (DOT) by trained staff, either in the clinic or at home, is recommended to ensure adherence. In addition, monthly dispensing of TB medicines is recommended because monthly clinical monitoring for hepatotoxicity due to these medications is essential for all patients. Discontinuation of suspected offending agents at the onset of hepatitis symptoms reduces the risk of progression to fatal hepatitis. Clinical monitoring includes at least monthly assessment for symptoms (nausea, vomiting, abdominal discomfort, and unexplained fatigue) and signs (jaundice, dark urine, light stools, diffuse pruritus) of hepatotoxicity, although the latter represent comparatively late manifestations (Table 205e-3). The presence of such symptoms and signs mandates provisional discontinuation of potentially hepatotoxic agents. Biochemical testing of at least serum alanine aminotransferase and total bilirubin levels and exclusion of other causes of these abnormalities are also indicated during treatment for those at risk for hepatotoxicity (Table 205e-3). For patients with active TB, monthly mycobacterial cultures of sputum are recommended until it is certain that the organisms have been cleared and the patient has responded to therapy or until no sputum is available for culture.
# Chunk 3341
Abbreviations: ALT, alanine aminotransferase; BUN, blood urea nitrogen; ECG, electrocardiogram; ENT, ear, nose, and throat; LTBI, latent tuberculosis infection; MDR-TB, multidrug-resistant tuberculosis; ULN, upper limit of normal.
# Chunk 3342
is inexpensive. In this setting, the drug is taken daily or intermittently (i.e., twice weekly) as DOT for 9 months. The 9-month course is more efficacious than the 6-month course (75–90% vs ≤65%), but extension of treatment to 12 months is not likely to provide further protection. A 6-month course of daily or intermittent isoniazid is considered second-line, but acceptable, therapy. A recent large open-label, multicenter, randomized, controlled trial showed that weekly DOT with isoniazid and rifapentine, administered over 3 months, was not inferior to daily isoniazid given for 9 months and had a higher treatment completion rate than the single-drug regimen.
# Chunk 3343
PharMacology Isoniazid is the hydrazide of isonicotinic acid, a small, water-soluble molecule. The usual adult oral daily dose of 300 mg results in peak serum levels of 3–5 μg/mL within 30 min to 2 h after ingestion—well in excess of the MICs for most susceptible strains of M. tuberculosis. Both oral and IM preparations of isoniazid reach effective levels in the body, although antacids and high-carbohydrate meals may interfere with oral absorption. Isoniazid diffuses well throughout the body, reaching therapeutic concentrations in body cavities and fluids, with concentrations in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) comparable to those in serum.
# Chunk 3344
Dosing The recommended daily dose for the treatment of TB in the United States is 5 mg/kg for adults and 10–20 mg/kg for children, with a maximal daily dose of 300 mg for both. For intermittent therapy in adults (usually twice per week), the dose is 15 mg/kg, with a maximal daily dose of 900 mg. Isoniazid does not require dosage adjustment in patients with renal disease. When the 12-dose, 3-month weekly LTBI regimen is used, the dose of isoniazid is 15 mg/kg, with a maximal dose of 900 mg, and the drug is coadministered with rifapentine.
# Chunk 3345
In patients who have liver disorders or HIV infection, who are pregnant or in the 3-month postpartum period, who have a history of liver disease (e.g., hepatitis B or C, alcoholic hepatitis, or cirrhosis), who use alcohol regularly, who have multiple medical problems, or who have other risk factors for chronic liver disease, the risks and benefits of treatment for LTBI should be weighed. If treatment is undertaken, these patients should have serum concentrations of alanine aminotransferase (ALT) determined at baseline. Routine baseline hepatic ALT testing based solely on an age of >35 years is optional and depends on individual concerns. Monthly biochemical monitoring during isoniazid treatment is indicated for patients whose baseline liver function tests yield abnormal results and for persons at risk for hepatic disease, including the groups just mentioned. Guidelines recommend that isoniazid be discontinued in the presence of hepatitis symptoms or jaundice and an ALT level three times the upper limit of normal or in the absence of symptoms with an ALT level five times the upper limit of normal (Table 205e-3).
# Chunk 3346
PharMacology Rifampin is a fat-soluble, complex macrocyclic molecule readily absorbed after oral administration. Serum levels of 10–20 μg/mL are achieved 2.5 h after the usual adult oral dose of 10 mg/kg (given without food). Rifampin has a half-life of 1.5–5 h. The drug distributes well throughout most body tissues, including CSF. Rifampin turns body fluids such as urine, saliva, sputum, and tears a reddish-orange color—an effect that offers a simple means of assessing patients’ adherence to this medication. Rifampin is excreted primarily through the bile and enters the enterohepatic circulation; <30% of a dose is renally excreted.
# Chunk 3347
Dosing The daily dosage of rifampin is 10 mg/kg for adults and 10–20 mg/kg for children, with a maximum of 600 mg/d for both. The drug is given once daily, twice weekly, or three times weekly. No adjustments of dose or frequency are necessary in patients with renal insufficiency.
# Chunk 3348
PharMacology anD Dosing From a single dose of ethambutol, 75–80% is absorbed within 2–4 h of administration. Serum levels peak at 2–4 μg/mL after the standard adult daily dose of 15 mg/kg. Ethambutol is well distributed throughout the body except in the CSF; a dosage of 25 mg/kg is necessary for attainment of a CSF level half of that in serum. For intermittent therapy, the dosage is 50 mg/kg twice weekly. To prevent toxicity, the dosage must be lowered and the frequency of administration reduced for patients with renal insufficiency.
# Chunk 3349
PharMacology anD Dosing Pyrazinamide is well absorbed after oral administration, with peak serum concentrations of 20–60 μg/mL at 1–2 h after ingestion of the recommended adult daily dose of 15–30 mg/kg (maximum, 2 g/d). It distributes well to various body compartments, including CSF, and is an important component of treatment for tuberculous meningitis. The serum half-life of the drug is 9–11 h with normal renal and hepatic function. Pyrazinamide is metabolized in the liver to POA, 5-hydroxypyrazinamide, and 5-hydroxy-POA. A high proportion of pyrazinamide and its metabolites (~70%) is excreted in the urine. The dosage must be adjusted according to the level of renal function in patients with reduced creatinine clearance.
# Chunk 3350
Rifapentine Rifapentine is a semisynthetic cyclopentyl rifamycin, sharing a mechanism of action with rifampin. Rifapentine is lipophilic and has a prolonged half-life that permits weekly or twice-weekly dosing. Therefore, this drug is the subject of intensive clinical investigation aimed at determining optimal dosing and frequency of administration. Currently, rifapentine is an alternative to rifampin in the continuation phase of treatment for noncavitary drug-susceptible pulmonary TB in HIV-seronegative patients who have negative sputum smears at completion of the initial phase of treatment. When administered in these specific circumstances, rifapentine (10 mg/kg, up to 600 mg) is given once weekly with isoniazid. Because of higher rates of relapse, this regimen is not recommended for patients with TB disease and HIV co-infection. A large randomized controlled trial recently demonstrated that, for latent TB, a 12-dose (3-month) regimen of weekly DOT with a weight-based dose of isoniazid and rifapentine was noninferior to daily isoniazid for 9 months. Although the rate of permanent drug discontinuation due to adverse events was higher with rifapentine/ isoniazid, this regimen had a higher treatment completion rate than daily isoniazid in this study. The efficacy of this combination regimen in HIV-infected individuals not receiving ART and in children <12 years of age is under study. The regimen is not recommended for pregnant women, for persons with hypersensitivity reactions to isoniazid or rifampin, or for HIV-infected individuals taking ART.
# Chunk 3351
PharMacology Rifapentine’s absorption is improved when the drug is taken with food. After oral administration, rifapentine reaches peak serum concentrations in 5–6 h and achieves a steady state in 10 days. The half-life of rifapentine and its active metabolite, 25-desacetyl rifapentine, is ~13 h. The administered dose is excreted via the liver (70%).
# Chunk 3352
PharMacology anD Dosing Serum levels of streptomycin peak at 25–45 μg/mL after a 1-g dose. This agent penetrates poorly into the CSF, reaching levels that are only 20% of serum levels. The usual daily dose of streptomycin (given IM either daily or 5 days per week) is 15 mg/kg for adults and 20–40 mg/kg for children, with a maximum of 1 g/d for both. For patients ≥60 years of age, 10 mg/kg is the recommended daily dose, with a maximum of 750 mg/d. Because streptomycin is eliminated almost exclusively by the kidneys, its use in patients with renal impairment should be avoided or implemented with caution, with lower doses and less frequent administration.
# Chunk 3353
Diarylquinolines Bedaquiline (TMC207 or R207910) is a new diarylquinoline with a novel mechanism of action: inhibition of the mycobacterial ATP synthetase proton pump. TMC207 is bactericidal for drug-susceptible and MDR strains of M. tuberculosis. Resistance has been reported and is due to point mutations in the atpE gene encoding for subunit c of ATP synthetase. A phase 2 randomized controlled clinical trial in MDR-TB patients demonstrated substantial improvement in 2-month culture-conversion rates as well as a reduction in acquired resistance to companion drugs. This drug is metabolized by the hepatic cytochrome CYP3A4. Rifampin lowers TMC207 levels by 50%, and protease inhibitors also interact significantly with this drug. The oral bioavailability of TMC207 appears to be excellent. The dosage is 400 mg/d for the first 2 weeks and then 200 mg thrice weekly. The elimination half-life is long (>14 days). A single dose of this drug can inhibit the growth of M. tuberculosis for up to 1 week through a combination of long plasma half-life, high-level tissue penetration, and long tissue half-life. Bedaquiline added to a background regimen improved the 2-month sputum culture conversion rate in multicenter, randomized placebo-controlled trials, and these results led to approval by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). However, a higher death rate in one trial was observed in the bedaquiline arm than in the control arm (11.4% vs 2.5%); the result was a “black box” warning from the FDA, which also included QT prolongation. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has made a provisional recommendation for the use of bedaquiline for 24 weeks in adults with laboratory-confirmed pulmonary MDR-TB when no other effective treatment regimen can be provided.
# Chunk 3354
For patients with nodular/bronchiectatic MAC infection, the dosage of clarithromycin is 500 mg, given morning and evening three times a week. For the treatment of fibrocavitary or severe nodular/ bronchiectatic MAC infection, a dose of 500–1000 mg is given daily. Disseminated MAC infection is treated with 1000 mg daily. Clarithromycin is used in combination regimens that typically include ethambutol and a rifamycin in order to avoid the development of macrolide resistance. Adverse effects include frequent gastrointestinal intolerance, hepatotoxicity, headache, rash, and rare instances of hypoglycemia. Clarithromycin is contraindicated during pregnancy because of its teratogenicity in animal models.
# Chunk 3355
The Spirochaetales include four genera that are pathogenic for humans and for a variety of other animals: Leptospira species, which cause leptospirosis (Chap. 208); Borrelia species, which cause relapsing fever and Lyme disease (Chaps. 209 and 210); Brachyspira species, which cause intestinal infections; and Treponema species, which cause the diseases known collectively as treponematoses (see also Chap. 207e). The Treponema species include T. pallidum subspecies pallidum, which causes venereal syphilis; T. pallidum subspecies pertenue, which causes yaws; T. pallidum subspecies endemicum, which causes endemic syphilis or bejel; and T. carateum, which causes pinta. Until recently, the subspecies were distinguished primarily by the clinical syndromes they produce. Researchers have now identified molecular signatures sex with men (MSM), 20–70% of whom are co-infected with HIV 1133 (depending on geographic location). The number of primary and secondary cases among women in the United States increased from 2004 to 2008 but has since been declining in conjunction with a decline in congenital syphilis. Surveillance of the number of new cases of primary and secondary syphilis has revealed multiple 7to 10-year cycles, which may be attributed to herd immunity in at-risk populations, changing sexual behaviors, and changes in control efforts.
# Chunk 3356
With the advent of penicillin therapy, the total number of cases of syphilis reported annually in the United States declined significantly to a low of 31,575 cases in 2000—a 95% decrease from 1943—with <6000 reported cases of infectious primary and secondary syphilis (the latter being a better indicator of disease activity than total syphilis cases). Since 2000, the number of cases of primary and secondary syphilis has more than doubled, with more than 14,000 cases reported in 2012 (Fig. 206-1). Approximately 70% of these cases were in men who have persons with infectious syphilis become infected. Many have already developed manifestations of syphilis when they are first seen, and ∼30% of asymptomatic contacts examined within 30 days of exposure actually have incubating infection and will later develop infectious syphilis if not treated. Thus, identification and treatment of all recently exposed sexual contacts continue to be important aspects of syphilis control.
# Chunk 3357
The Tuskegee Study showed that the death rate among untreated African-American men with syphilis (25–50 years old) was 17% higher than the rate among uninfected subjects and that 30% of all deaths were attributable to cardiovascular or, to a lesser extent, CNS syphilis. Anatomic evidence of aortitis was found in 40–60% of autopsied subjects with syphilis (vs 15% of control subjects), whereas CNS syphilis was found in only 4%. Rates of hypertension were also higher among the infected subjects. The ethical issues eventually raised by this study, begun in the preantibiotic era but continuing into the early 1970s, had a major influence on the development of current guidelines for human medical experimentation, and the history of the study may still contribute to a reluctance of some African Americans to participate as subjects in clinical research.
# Chunk 3358
cardiovascUlar sypHilis Cardiovascular manifestations, usually appearing 10–40 years after infection, are attributable to endarteritis obliterans of the vasa vasorum, which provide the blood supply to large vessels; T. pallidum DNA has been detected by PCR in aortic tissue. Cardiovascular involvement results in uncomplicated aortitis, aortic regurgitation, saccular aneurysm (usually of the ascending aorta), or coronary ostial stenosis. In the preantibiotic era, symptomatic cardiovascular complications developed in ∼10% of persons with late untreated syphilis. Today, this form of late syphilis is rarely seen in the developed world. Linear calcification of the ascending aorta on chest x-ray films suggests asymptomatic syphilitic aortitis, as arteriosclerosis seldom produces this sign. Only 1 in 10 aortic aneurysms of syphilitic origin involves the abdominal aorta.
# Chunk 3359
The manifestations of congenital syphilis include (1) early manifestations, which appear within the first 2 years of life (often at 2–10 weeks of age), are infectious, and resemble the manifestations of secondary syphilis in the adult; (2) late manifestations, which appear after 2 years and are noninfectious; and (3) residual stigmata. The earliest manifestations of congenital syphilis include rhinitis, or “snuffles” (23%); mucocutaneous lesions (35–41%); bone changes (61%), including osteochondritis, osteitis, and periostitis detectable by x-ray examination of long bones; hepatosplenomegaly (50%); lymphadenopathy (32%); anemia (34%); jaundice (30%); thrombocytopenia; and leukocytosis. CNS invasion by T. pallidum is detectable in 22% of infected neonates. Neonatal death is usually due to pulmonary hemorrhage, secondary bacterial infection, or severe hepatitis.
# Chunk 3360
Late congenital syphilis (untreated after 2 years of age) is subclinical in 60% of cases; the clinical spectrum in the remainder of cases may include interstitial keratitis (which occurs at 5–25 years of age), eighth-nerve deafness, and recurrent arthropathy. Bilateral knee effusions are known as Clutton’s joints. Neurosyphilis was present in about one-quarter of untreated patients with late congenital syphilis in the preantibiotic era. Gummatous periostitis occurs at 5–20 years of age and, as in nonvenereal endemic syphilis, tends to cause destructive lesions of the palate and nasal septum.
# Chunk 3361
Both nontreponemal and treponemal tests may be nonreactive in early primary syphilis, although treponemal tests are slightly more sensitive (85–90%) during this stage than nontreponemal tests (∼80%). All tests are reactive during secondary syphilis. (Fewer than 1% of patients with high titers have a nontreponemal test that is nonreactive or weakly reactive with undiluted serum but is reactive with diluted serum—the prozone phenomenon.) VDRL and RPR sensitivity and titers may decline in untreated persons with late latent syphilis, but treponemal tests remain sensitive in these stages. After treatment for early syphilis, nontreponemal test titers will generally decline or the tests will become nonreactive, whereas treponemal tests often remain reactive after therapy and are not helpful in determining the infection status of persons with past syphilis.
# Chunk 3362
Aqueous procaine penicillin G (2.4 mU/d IM) plus oral probenecid (500 mg qid), both for 10–14 days

According to stage CSF normal or not examined: Tetracycline HCl (500 mg PO qid) or doxycycline (100 mg PO bid) for 2 weeks
# Chunk 3363
eradication campaign from 1952 to 1969, more than 160 mil lion people in Africa, Asia, and South America were examined for treponemal infections, and more than 50 million cases, contacts, and persons with latent infections were treated. This campaign reduced the prevalence of active yaws from >20% to <1% in many areas. In recent decades, lack of focused surveillance and diversion of resources have resulted in documented resurgence of these infections in some regions. The most recent WHO global estimate (1995) suggested that there are 460,000 new cases per year (mostly yaws) and a prevalence of 2.5 million infected persons; during subsequent years, an increased incidence was documented in some countries. Recent areas of resurgent yaws morbidity include West Africa (Ivory Coast, Ghana, Togo, Benin), the Central African Republic, Nigeria, and rural Democratic Republic of the Congo. The prevalence of endemic syphilis is estimated to be >10% in some regions of northern Ghana, Mali, Niger, Burkina Faso, and Senegal. In Asia and the Pacific Islands, reports suggest active outbreaks of yaws in Indonesia, Papua New Guinea, the Solomon Islands, East Timor, Vanuatu, Laos, and Kampuchea. India actively renewed its focus on yaws control in 1996, achieved zero-case status in 2003, and declared elimination in 2006. In the Americas, foci of yaws
# Chunk 3364
commonly in the tropics and subtropics because the climate and occasionally poor hygienic conditions favor the pathogen’s survival and distribution. In most countries, leptospirosis is an underappreciated problem. Most cases occur in men, with a peak incidence during the summer and fall in both the Northern and Southern Hemispheres and during the rainy season in the tropics.
# Chunk 3365
Transmission occurs through cuts, abraded skin, or mucous membranes, especially the conjunctival and oral mucosa. After entry, the organisms proliferate, cross tissue barriers, and disseminate hematogenously to all organs (leptospiremic phase). During this initial incubation period, leptospires can be isolated from the bloodstream (Fig. 208-3). The organisms are able to survive in the nonimmune host: they evade complement-mediated killing by binding factor H, a strong inhibitor of the complement system, on their surface. Moreover, pathogenic leptospires resist ingestion and killing by neutrophils, monocytes, and macrophages. During the immune phase, the appearance of antibodies coincides with the disappearance of leptospires from the blood. However, the bacteria persist in various organs, including liver, lung, kidney, heart, and brain. Autopsy findings illustrate the involvement of multiple organ systems in severe disease. Renal pathology shows both acute tubular damage and interstitial nephritis. Acute tubular lesions progress in time to interstitial edema and acute tubular necrosis. Severe nephritis is observed in patients who survive long enough to develop it and seems to be a secondary response to acute epithelial damage. The reported deregulation of the expression of several transporters along the nephron, including the proximal sodium-hydrogen exchanger 3 (NHE3), aquaporins 1 and 2 (AQP1 and AQP2), Na+-K+ ATPase, and the Na-K-2Cl cotransporter NKCC2, contributes to tubular potassium wasting, hypokalemia, and polyuria. Histopathology of the liver shows focal necrosis, foci of inflammation, and plugging of bile canaliculi. Widespread hepatocellular necrosis is not found. Petechiae and hemorrhages are observed in the heart, lungs (Fig. 208-4), kidneys (and adrenals), pancreas, liver, gastrointestinal tract (including retro-peritoneal fat, mesentery, and omentum), muscles, prostate, testis, and brain (subarachnoid bleeding). Several studies show an association between hemorrhage and thrombocytopenia. Although the underlying mechanisms of thrombocytopenia have not been elucidated, it seems likely that platelet consumption plays an important role. A consumptive coagulopathy may occur, with elevated markers of coagulation activation (thrombin–antithrombin complexes, prothrombin fragments 1 and 2, d-dimer), diminished anticoagulant markers (antithrombin, protein C), and deregulated fibrinolytic activity. Overt disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) has been documented in patients from Thailand and Indonesia. Elevated plasma levels of soluble E-selectin and von Willebrand factor in patients with leptospirosis reflect endothelial cell activation. Experimental models show that pathogenic leptospires or leptospiral proteins are able to activate endothelial cells in vitro and to disrupt endothelial-cell barrier function, promoting dissemination. Platelets have been shown to aggregate on activated endothelium in the human lung, whereas histology reveals swelling of activated endothelial cells but no evident vasculitis or necrosis. Immunoglobulin and complement deposition have been demonstrated in lung tissue involved in pulmonary hemorrhage.
# Chunk 3366
Approximate time scale Week 1 Acute stage Convalescent stage Convalescent shedder Normal response fever Titers decline at varying rates Early treatment Leptospiremia Leptospiruria and immunity Anamnestic Delayed Reservoir host Uveitis ? Interstitial nephritis 2 3 4 months-years years Incubation period Inoculation Leptospires present in Blood CSF CSF 1 2 3 4 5 Urine Blood Urine Antibody titers High Low “Negative” Laboratory investigations Culture Serology Phases 2–20 days FIGuRE 208-3 Biphasic nature of leptospirosis and relevant investigations at different stages of disease. Note that an incubation period of up to 1 month has now been documented. Specimens 1 and 2 for serology are acute-phase serum samples; specimen 3 is a convalescent-phase serum sample that may facilitate detection of a delayed immune response; and specimens 4 and 5 are follow-up serum samples that can pro-vide epidemiologic information, such as the presumptive infecting serogroup. CSF, cerebrospinal fluid. (Reprinted as adapted by PN Levett: Clin Microbiol Rev 14:296, 2001 [from LH Turner: Leptospirosis. BMJ 1:231, 1969] with permission from the American Society for Microbiology and the BMJ Publishing Group.)
# Chunk 3367
FIGuRE 208-4 Severe pulmonary hemorrhage in leptospirosis. Left panel: Chest x-ray. Right panel: Gross appearance of right lower lobes of lung at autopsy. This patient, a 15-year-old from the Peruvian Amazonian city of Iqitos, died several days after presentation with acute illness, jaundice, and hemoptysis. Blood culture yielded Leptospira interrogans serovar Copenhageni/Icterohaemorrhagiae. (Adapted with permission from E Segura et al: Clin Infect Dis 40:343, 2005. © 2005 by the Infectious Diseases Society of America.) 1144 CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS Although leptospirosis is a potentially fatal disease with bleeding and multiorgan failure as its clinical hallmarks, the majority of cases are thought to be relatively mild, presenting as the sudden onset of a febrile illness. The incubation period is usually 1–2 weeks but ranges from 1 to 30 days. (Figure 208-3 indicates a slightly different range, but an incubation period of up to 1 month has now been documented.) Leptospirosis is classically described as biphasic. The acute leptospiremic phase is characterized by fever of 3–10 days’ duration, during which time the organism can be cultured from blood. During the immune phase, resolution of symptoms may coincide with the appearance of antibodies, and leptospires can be cultured from the urine. The distinction between the first and second phases is not always clear: milder cases do not always include the second phase, and severe disease may be monophasic and fulminant. The idea that distinct clinical syndromes are associated with specific serogroups has been refuted, although some serovars tend to cause more severe disease than others.
# Chunk 3368
Acute kidney injury is common in severe disease, presenting after several days of illness, and can be either nonoliguric or oliguric. Typical electrolyte abnormalities include hypokalemia and hyponatremia. Loss of magnesium in the urine is uniquely associated with leptospiral nephropathy. Hypotension is associated with acute tubular necrosis, oliguria, or anuria, requiring fluid resuscitation and sometimes vasopressor therapy. Hemodialysis can be life-saving, with renal function typically returning to normal in survivors.
# Chunk 3369
Although biochemical, hematologic, and urinalysis findings in acute leptospirosis are nonspecific, certain patterns may suggest the diagnosis. Laboratory results usually show signs of a bacterial infection, including leukocytosis with a left shift and elevated markers of inflammation (C-reactive protein level and erythrocyte sedimentation rate). Thrombocytopenia (platelet count ≤100 × 109/L) is common and is associated with bleeding and renal failure. In severe disease, signs of coagulation activation may be present, varying from borderline abnormalities to a serious derangement compatible with DIC as defined by international criteria. The kidneys are invariably involved in leptospirosis. Related findings range from urinary sediment changes (leukocytes, erythrocytes, and hyaline or granular casts) and mild proteinuria in mild disease to renal failure and azotemia in severe leptospirosis. Nonoliguric hypokalemic renal insufficiency (see “Clinical Manifestations,” above) is characteristic of early leptospirosis. Serum bilirubin levels may be high, whereas rises in aminotransferase and alkaline phosphatase levels are usually moderate. Although clinical symptoms of pancreatitis are not a common finding, amylase levels are often elevated. When symptoms of aseptic meningitis develop, examination of the CSF shows pleocytosis that can range from a few cells to >1000 cells/μL, with a polymorphonuclear cell predominance. The protein concentration in the CSF may be elevated; CSF glucose levels are normal.
# Chunk 3370
A definitive diagnosis of leptospirosis is based on isolation of the organism from the patient, on a positive result in the polymerase chain reaction (PCR), or on seroconversion or a rise in antibody titer. In cases with strong clinical evidence of infection, a single antibody titer of 1:200–1:800 (depending on whether the case occurs in a low-or high-endemic area) in the microscopic agglutination test (MAT) is required. Preferably, a fourfold or greater rise in titer is detected between acuteand convalescent-phase serum specimens. Antibodies generally do not reach detectable levels until the second week of illness. The antibody response can be affected by early treatment with antibiotics.
# Chunk 3371
In addition to the MAT and the ELISA, various rapid tests with diagnostic value have been developed, and some of these are commercially available. These rapid tests mainly apply lateral flow, (latex) agglutination, or ELISA methodology and are reasonably sensitive and specific, although results reported in the literature vary, probably as a consequence of differences in test interpretation, (re)exposure risks, serovar distribution, and the use of biased serum panels. These methods do not require culture or MAT facilities and are useful in settings that lack a strong medical infrastructure. PCR methodologies, notably real-time PCR, have become increasingly widely implemented. Compared with serology, PCR offers a great advantage: the capacity to confirm the diagnosis of leptospirosis with a high degree of accuracy during the first 5 days of illness.
# Chunk 3372
Vaccines for agricultural and companion animals are gener ally available, and their use should be encouraged. The veteri nary vaccine used in a given area should contain the serovars known to be present in that area. Unfortunately, some vaccinated animals still excrete leptospires in their urine. Vaccination of humans against a specific serovar prevalent in an area has been undertaken in some European and Asian countries and has proved effective. Although a large-scale trial of vaccine in humans has been reported from Cuba, no conclusions can be drawn about efficacy and adverse reactions because of insufficient details on study design. The efficacy of chemoprophylaxis with doxycycline (200 mg once a week) or azithromycin (in pregnant women and children) is being disputed, but focused pre-and postexposure administration is indicated in instances of well-defined short-term exposure (Table 208-1).
# Chunk 3373
Coiled, thin microscopic filaments that swim in one direction and then coil up before heading in another were first observed in the blood of patients with relapsing fever in the 1880s (www.youtube .com/watch?v=VxDPV2lBd9U). These microbes were categorized as spirochetes and grouped as several species in the genus Borrelia. It was not until the 1960s that the organisms were isolated in pure culture. The breakthrough cultivation medium and its derivatives are rich in their ingredients, ranging from simple (e.g., amino acids and N-acetylglucosamine) to more complex (e.g., serum and protein hydrolysates). The limited biosynthetic capacity of Borrelia cells is accounted for by a genome content one-quarter that of Escherichia coli.
# Chunk 3374
The symptoms that accompany the fevers are usually nonspecific. Headache, neck stiffness, arthralgia, myalgia, and nausea may accompany the first and subsequent febrile episodes. An enlarging spleen and liver cause abdominal pain. A nonproductive cough is common during LBRF and—in combination with fever and myalgias—may suggest influenza. Acute respiratory distress syndrome may occur during TBRF.
# Chunk 3375
General laboratory studies are not specific. Mild to moderate normocytic anemia is common, but frank hemolysis and hemoglobinuria do not develop. Leukocyte counts are usually in the normal range or only slightly elevated, and leukopenia can occur during the crisis. Platelet counts can fall below 50,000/µL. Laboratory evidence of hepatitis can be found, with elevated serum concentrations of unconjugated bilirubin and aminotransferases; the prothrombin and partial thromboplastin times may be moderately prolonged.
# Chunk 3376
The accumulated anecdotal reports on TBRF therapy indicate a recurrence rate of ≥20% after single-dose treatment. This high rate of recurrence plausibly is due to the greater propensity of tick-borne species than of B. recurrentis to invade the CNS, from which they can reinvade the bloodstream after antibiotic levels decline. Accordingly, multiple antibiotic doses are recommended. The preferred treatment for adults is a 10-day course of tetracycline (500 mg or 12.5 mg/kg orally every 6 h) or doxycycline (100 mg twice daily). When tetracyclines are contraindicated, the alternative is erythromycin (500 mg or 12.5 mg/kg orally every 6 h) for 10 days. If a β-lactam antibiotic is given, it should be administered intravenously rather than orally, especially if CNS involvement is confirmed or suspected. For adults, the regimen is penicillin G (5 million units IV every 6 h) or ceftriaxone (2 g IV daily) for 10–14 days.
# Chunk 3377
Lyme Borreliosis Allen C. Steere DEFINITION Lyme borreliosis is caused by a spirochete, Borrelia burgdorferi sensu lato, that is transmitted by ticks of the Ixodes ricinus complex. The infec-tion usually begins with a characteristic expanding skin lesion, erythema 210 migrans (EM; stage 1, localized infection). After several days or weeks, the spirochete may spread to many different sites (stage 2, disseminated infection). Possible manifestations of disseminated infection include secondary annular skin lesions, meningitis, cranial neuritis, radiculoneuritis, peripheral neuritis, carditis, atrioventricular nodal block, or migratory musculoskeletal pain. Months or years later (usually after periods of latent infection), intermittent or persistent arthritis, chronic encephalopathy or polyneuropathy, or acrodermatitis may develop (stage 3, persistent infection). Most patients experience early symptoms of the illness during the summer, but the infection may not become symptomatic until it progresses to stage 2 or 3.
# Chunk 3378
1150 PATHOGENESIS AND IMMuNITY To maintain its complex enzootic cycle, B. burgdorferi must adapt to two markedly different environments: the tick and the mammalian host. The spirochete expresses outer-surface protein A (OspA) in the midgut of the tick, whereas OspC is upregulated as the organism travels to the tick’s salivary gland. There, OspC binds a tick salivary-gland protein (Salp15), which is required for infection of the mammalian host. The tick usually must be attached for at least 24 h for transmission of B. burgdorferi. After injection into the human skin, the spirochete downregulates OspC and upregulates the VlsE lipoprotein. This protein undergoes extensive antigenic variation, which is necessary for spirochetal survival. After several days to weeks, B. burgdorferi may migrate outward in the skin, producing EM, and may spread hematogenously or in the lymph to other organs. The only known virulence factors of B. burgdorferi are surface proteins that allow the spirochete to attach to mammalian proteins, integrins, glycosaminoglycans, or glycoproteins. For example, spread through the skin and other tissue matrices may be facilitated by the binding of human plasminogen and its activators to the surface of the spirochete. Some Borrelia strains bind complement regulator–acquiring surface proteins (FHL-1/reconectin, or factor H), which help to protect spirochetes from complement-mediated lysis. Dissemination of the organism in the blood is facilitated by binding to the fibrinogen receptor on activated platelets (αIIbβ3) and the vitronectin receptor (αvβ3) on endothelial cells. As the name indicates, spirochetal decorin-binding proteins A and B bind decorin, a glycosaminoglycan on collagen fibrils; this binding may explain why the organism is commonly aligned with collagen fibrils in the extracellular matrix in the heart, nervous system, or joints. To control and eradicate B. burgdorferi, the host mounts both innate and adaptive immune responses, resulting in macrophageand antibody-mediated killing of the spirochete. As part of the innate immune response, complement may lyse the spirochete in the skin. Cells at affected sites release potent proinflammatory cytokines, including interleukin 6, tumor necrosis factor α, interleukin 1β, and interferon γ. Patients who are homozygous for a Toll-like receptor 1 polymorphism (1805GG), particularly when infected with highly inflammatory B. burgdorferi RST1 strains, have exceptionally high levels of proinflammatory cytokines. The purpose of the adaptive immune response appears to be the production of specific antibodies, which opsonize the organism—a step necessary for optimal spirochetal killing. Studies with protein arrays expressing ~1200 B. burgdorferi proteins detected antibody responses to a total of 120 spirochetal proteins (particularly outer-surface lipoproteins) in a population of patients with Lyme arthritis. Histologic examination of all affected tissues reveals an infiltration of lymphocytes, macrophages, and plasma cells with some degree of vascular damage, including mild vasculitis or hypervascular occlusion. These findings suggest that the spirochete may have been present in or around blood vessels. In enzootic infection, B. burgdorferi spirochetes must survive this immune assault only during the summer months before returning to larval ticks to begin the cycle again the following year. In contrast, infection of humans is a dead-end event for the spirochete. Within several weeks or months, innate and adaptive immune mechanisms— even without antibiotic treatment—control widely disseminated infection, and generalized systemic symptoms wane. However, without antibiotic therapy, spirochetes may survive in localized niches for several more years. For example, B. burgdorferi infection in the United States may cause persistent arthritis or, in rare cases, subtle encephalopathy or polyneuropathy. Thus, immune mechanisms seem to succeed eventually in the near or total eradication of B. burgdorferi from selected niches, including the joints or nervous system, and symptoms resolve in most patients.
# Chunk 3379
The culture of B. burgdorferi in Barbour-Stoenner-Kelly (BSK) medium permits definitive diagnosis, but this method has been used primarily in research studies. Moreover, with a few exceptions, positive cultures have been obtained only early in the illness—particularly from biopsy samples of EM skin lesions, less often from plasma samples, and occasionally from CSF samples. Later in the infection, PCR is greatly superior to culture for the detection of B. burgdorferi DNA in joint fluid; this is the major use for PCR testing in Lyme disease. However, because B. burgdorferi DNA may persist for at least weeks after spirochetal killing with antibiotics, detection of spirochetal DNA in joint fluid is not an accurate test of active joint infection in Lyme disease and cannot be used reliably to determine the adequacy of antibiotic therapy. The sensitivity of PCR determinations in CSF from patients with neuroborreliosis has been much lower than that in joint fluid. There seems to be little if any role for PCR in the detection of B. burgdorferi DNA in blood or urine samples. Moreover, this procedure must be carefully controlled to prevent contamination.
# Chunk 3380
For serologic analysis of Lyme disease in the United States, the CDC recommends a two-step approach in which samples are first tested by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and equivocal or positive results are then tested by western blotting. During the first weeks of infection, both IgM and IgG responses to the spirochete should be determined, preferably in both acuteand convalescent-phase serum samples. Approximately 20–30% of patients have a positive response detectable in acute-phase samples, whereas ~70–80% have a positive response during convalescence (2–4 weeks later). After 4–8 weeks of infection (by which time most patients with active Lyme disease have disseminated infection), the sensitivity and specificity of the IgG response to the spirochete are both very high—in the range of 99%—as determined by the two-test approach of ELISA and western blot. At this point and thereafter, a single test (that for IgG) is usually sufficient. In persons with illness of >2 months’ duration, a positive IgM test result alone is likely to be false-positive and therefore should not be used to support the diagnosis.
# Chunk 3381
Hypovolemia leads to prerenal azotemia and (in 17% of cases) hypotension. Infection of the pulmonary microcirculation leads to noncardiogenic pulmonary edema; 12% of patients have severe respiratory disease, and 8% require mechanical ventilation. Cardiac involvement manifests as dysrhythmia in 7–16% of cases.
# Chunk 3382
Renal failure, often reversible with rehydration, is caused by acute tubular necrosis in severe cases with shock. Hepatic injury with increased serum aminotransferase concentrations (38% of cases) is due to focal death of individual hepatocytes without hepatic failure. Jaundice is recognized in 9% of cases and an elevated serum bilirubin concentration in 18–30%.
# Chunk 3383
Life-threatening bleeding is rare. Anemia develops in 30% of cases and is severe enough to require transfusions in 11%. Blood is detected in the stool or vomitus of 10% of patients, and death has followed massive upper-gastrointestinal hemorrhage.
# Chunk 3384
Other characteristic clinical laboratory findings include increased plasma levels of proteins of the acute-phase response (C-reactive protein, fibrinogen, ferritin, and others), hypoalbuminemia, and hyponatremia (in 56% of cases) due to the appropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone in response to the hypovolemic state. Myositis occurs occasionally, with marked elevations in serum creatine kinase levels and multifocal rhabdomyonecrosis. Ocular involvement includes conjunctivitis in 30% of cases and retinal vein engorgement, flame hemorrhages, arterial occlusion, and papilledema with normal CSF pressure in some instances.
# Chunk 3385
The only diagnostic test that has proven useful during the acute illness is immunohistologic examination of a cutaneous biopsy sample from a rash lesion for R. rickettsii. Examination of a 3-mm punch biopsy from such a lesion is 70% sensitive and 100% specific. The sensitivity of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification and detection of R. rickettsii DNA in peripheral blood is improving. However, although rickettsiae are present in large quantities in heavily infected foci of endothelial cells, there are relatively low quantities in the circulation. Cultivation of rickettsiae in cell culture is feasible but is seldom undertaken because of biohazard concerns. The recent dramatic increase in the reported incidence of RMSF correlates with the use of single-titer spotted fever–group cross-reactive enzyme immunoassay serology. Few cases are specifically determined to be caused by R. rickettsii. Currently, many febrile persons who do not have RMSF present with cross-reactive antibodies, possibly because of previous exposure to the highly prevalent spotted fever–group rickettsia R. amblyommii.
# Chunk 3386
Epidemiology R. conorii is prevalent in southern Europe,

Africa, and southwestern and south-central Asia. Regional names for the disease caused by this organism include Mediterranean spotted fever, Kenya tick typhus, Indian tick typhus, Israeli spotted fever, and Astrakhan spotted fever. The disease is characterized by high fever, rash, and—in most geographic locales—an inoculation eschar (tâche noire) at the site of the tick bite. A severe form of the disease (mortality rate, 50%) occurs in patients with diabetes, alcoholism, or heart failure.
# Chunk 3387
Diagnosis Diagnosis of these tick-borne spotted fevers is based on clinical and epidemiologic findings and is confirmed by serology, immunohistochemical demonstration of rickettsiae in skin biopsy specimens, cell-culture isolation of rickettsiae, or PCR of skin biopsy, eschar, or blood samples. Serologic diagnosis detects antibodies to antigens shared among spotted fever–group rickettsiae, hindering identification of the etiologic species. In an endemic area, a possible diagnosis of rickettsial spotted fevers should be considered when patients present with fever, rash, and/or a skin lesion consisting of a black necrotic area or a crust surrounded by erythema.
# Chunk 3388
FIGuRE 211-3 Top: Papulovesicular lesions on the trunk of the patient with rickettsialpox shown in Fig. 211-2. Bottom: Close-up of lesions from the same patient. (Reprinted from A Krusell et al: Emerg Infect Dis 8:727, 2002. Photos obtained by Dr. Kenneth Kaye.) 10–17 days, during which the eschar and regional lymphadenopathy frequently go unnoticed, disease onset is marked by malaise, chills, fever, headache, and myalgia. A macular rash appears 2–6 days after onset and usually evolves sequentially into papules, vesicles, and crusts that heal without scarring (Fig. 211-3); in some cases, the rash remains macular or maculopapular. Some patients develop nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, cough, conjunctivitis, or photophobia. Without treatment, fever lasts 6–10 days.
# Chunk 3389
Clinical Manifestations After an incubation period of ~1–2 weeks, the onset of illness is abrupt, with prostration, severe headache, and fever rising rapidly to 38.8°–40.0°C (102°–104°F). Cough is prominent, developing in 70% of patients. Myalgias are usually severe. A rash begins on the upper trunk, usually on the fifth day, and then becomes generalized, involving the entire body except the face, palms, and soles. Initially, this rash is macular; without treatment, it becomes maculopapular, petechial, and confluent. The rash often goes undetected in black skin; 60% of African patients have spotless epidemic typhus. Photophobia, with considerable conjunctival injection and eye pain, is common. The tongue may be dry, brown, and furred. Confusion and coma are common. Skin necrosis and gangrene of the digits as well as interstitial pneumonia may occur in severe cases. Untreated disease is fatal in 7–40% of cases, with outcome depending primarily on the condition of the host. Patients with untreated infections develop renal insufficiency and multiorgan involvement in which neurologic manifestations are frequently prominent. Overall, 12% of patients with epidemic typhus have neurologic involvement. Infection associated with North American flying squirrels is a milder illness; whether this milder disease is due to host factors (e.g., better health status) or attenuated virulence is unknown.
# Chunk 3390
The duration of untreated illness averages 12 days (range, 9–18 days). Rash is present in only 13% of patients at presentation for medical care (usually ~4 days after onset of fever), appearing an average of 2 days later in half of the remaining patients and never appearing in the others. The initial macular rash is often detected by careful inspection of the axilla or the inner surface of the arm. Subsequently, the rash becomes maculopapular, involving the trunk more often than the extremities; it is seldom petechial and rarely involves the face, palms, or soles. A rash is detected in only 20% of patients with darkly pigmented skin.
# Chunk 3391
Pulmonary involvement is frequently prominent; 35% of patients have a hacking, nonproductive cough, and 23% of patients who undergo chest radiography have pulmonary densities due to interstitial pneumonia, pulmonary edema, and pleural effusions. Bibasilar rales are the most common pulmonary sign. Less common clinical manifestations include abdominal pain, confusion, stupor, seizures, ataxia, coma, and jaundice. Clinical laboratory studies frequently reveal anemia and leukopenia early in the course, leukocytosis late in the course, thrombocytopenia, hyponatremia, hypoalbuminemia, mildly increased serum hepatic aminotransferases, and prerenal azotemia. Complications can include respiratory failure, hematemesis, cerebral hemorrhage, and hemolysis. Severe illness necessitates the admission of 10% of hospitalized patients to an intensive care unit. Greater severity is generally associated with old age, underlying disease, and treatment with a sulfonamide; the case-fatality rate is 1%. In a study of children with murine typhus, 50% suffered only nocturnal fevers, feeling well enough for active daytime play.
# Chunk 3392
Diagnosis and Treatment Serologic studies of acuteand convalescent-phase sera can provide a diagnosis, and an immunohistochemical method for identification of typhus group-specific antigens in biopsy samples has been developed. Cultivation and PCR are used only infrequently and are not widely available. Nevertheless, most patients are treated empirically with doxycycline (100 mg bid orally for 7–15 days) on the basis of clinical suspicion. Ciprofloxacin provides an alternative if doxycycline is contraindicated.
# Chunk 3393
Diagnosis and Treatment Serologic assays (indirect fluorescent antibody, indirect immunoperoxidase, and enzyme immunoassays) are the mainstays of laboratory diagnosis. PCR amplification of Orientia genes from eschars and blood also is effective. Patients are treated with doxycycline (100 mg bid orally for 7–15 days), azithromycin (500 mg orally for 3 days), or chloramphenicol (500 mg qid orally for 7–15 days). Some cases of scrub typhus in Thailand are caused by strains that have high doxycycline or chloramphenicol minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs) but that are susceptible to azithromycin and rifampin.
# Chunk 3394
E. chaffeensis has been detected in South America, Africa, and Asia.

Clinical Manifestations E. chaffeensis disseminates hematogenously from the dermal blood pool created by the feeding tick. After a median incubation period of 8 days, illness develops. Clinical manifestations are undifferentiated and include fever (96% of cases), headache (72%), myalgia (68%), and malaise (77%). Less frequently observed are nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea (25–57%); cough (28%); rash (26% overall, 6% at presentation); and confusion (20%). HME can be severe: 49% of patients with documented cases are hospitalized, and ~2% die. Severe manifestations include a toxic shock–like or septic shock–like syndrome, adult respiratory distress syndrome, cardiac failure, hepatitis, meningoencephalitis, hemorrhage, and—in immunocompromised patients—overwhelming ehrlichial infection. Laboratory findings are valuable in the differential diagnosis of HME; 61% of patients have leukopenia (initially lymphopenia, later neutropenia), 73% have thrombocytopenia, and 84% have elevated serum levels of hepatic aminotransferases. Despite low blood cell counts, the bone marrow is hypercellular, and noncaseating granulomas can be present. Vasculitis is not a component of HME.
# Chunk 3395
Diagnosis HME can be fatal. Early empirical antibiotic therapy based on clinical diagnosis diminishes adverse outcomes. This diagnosis is suggested by fever with a known tick exposure during the preceding 3 weeks, thrombocytopenia and/or leukopenia, and increased serum aminotransferase levels. Morulae are demonstrated in <10% of peripheral-blood smears. HME can be confirmed during active infection by PCR amplification of E. chaffeensis nucleic acids in blood obtained before the start of doxycycline therapy. Retrospective serodiagnosis requires a consistent clinical picture and a fourfold increase in E. chaffeensis antibody titer to ≥64 in paired sera obtained ~3 weeks apart. Separate specific diagnostic tests are necessary for HME and HGA.
# Chunk 3396
Doxycycline is effective for HME as well as for ewingii and EMLA ehrlichioses; the use of this drug in Candidatus N. mikurensis infection is associated with disease resolution. Therapy with doxycycline (100 mg given PO or IV twice daily) or tetracycline (250–500 mg given PO every 6 h) lowers hospitalization rates and shortens fever duration. E. chaffeensis is not susceptible to chloramphenicol in vitro, and the use of this drug is controversial. While a few reports document E. chaffeensis persistence in humans, this finding is rare; most infections are cured by short courses of doxycycline (continuing for 3–5 days after defervescence). Although poorly studied, rifampin may be suitable when doxycycline is contraindicated.
# Chunk 3397
Clinical Manifestations Seroprevalence rates are high in endemic regions; thus it seems likely that most individuals develop subclinical infections. The incubation period for HGA is 4–8 days, after which the disease manifests as fever (75–100% of cases), myalgia (77%), headache (82%), and malaise (97%). A minority of patients develop nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea (22–39%); cough (27%); or confusion (17%). Rash (6%) is almost invariably concurrent erythema migrans attributable to Lyme disease. Most patients develop thrombocytopenia (75%) and/or leukopenia (55%) with increased serum hepatic aminotransferase levels (83%).
# Chunk 3398
Diagnosis HGA should be included in the differential diagnosis of influenza-like illnesses during seasons with Ixodes tick activity (May through December), especially with known tick bite or exposure. Concurrent thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, or elevated serum levels of alanine or aspartate aminotransferase further increase the likelihood of HGA. Many HGA patients develop Lyme disease antibodies in the absence of clinical findings consistent with that diagnosis. Thus, HGA should be considered in the differential diagnosis of atypical severe Lyme disease presentations. Peripheral-blood film examination for neutrophil morulae can yield a diagnosis in 20–75% of infections. PCR testing of blood from patients with active disease before doxycycline therapy is sensitive and specific. Serodiagnosis is retrospective, requiring a fourfold increase in A. phagocytophilum antibody titer (to ≥160) in paired serum samples obtained 1 month apart. Since seroprevalence is high in some regions, a single acute-phase titer should not be used for diagnosis.
# Chunk 3399
1162 cHronic Q fever Chronic Q fever almost always implies endocarditis and usually occurs in patients with previous valvular heart disease, immunosuppression, or chronic renal insufficiency. Fever is usually absent or low grade. Valvular vegetations are detected in only 12% of patients by transthoracic echocardiography, but the rate of detection is higher (21–50%) with transesophageal echocardiography. The vegetations in chronic Q fever endocarditis differ from those in bacterial endocarditis, manifesting as endothelium-covered nodules on the valves. A high index of suspicion is necessary for timely diagnosis. Patients with chronic Q fever are often ill for >1 year before the diagnosis is made. The disease should be suspected in all patients with culture-negative endocarditis. In addition, all patients with valvular heart disease and an unexplained purpuric eruption, renal insufficiency, stroke, and/ or progressive heart failure should be tested for C. burnetii infection. Patients with chronic Q fever have hepatomegaly and/or splenomegaly, which—in combination with rheumatoid factor, elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate, high C-reactive protein level, and/or increased γ-globulin concentrations (up to 60–70 g/L)—suggests this diagnosis. Other manifestations of chronic Q fever include infection of vascular prostheses, aneurysms, and bone as well as chronic sternal wound infection. Unusual manifestations include chronic thrombocytopenia, mixed cryoglobulinemia, and livedo reticularis.
# Chunk 3400
Diagnosis Isolation of C. burnetii from buffy-coat blood samples or tissue specimens by a shell-vial technique is easy but requires a biosafety level 3 laboratory. PCR detects C. burnetii DNA in tissue specimens, including paraffin-embedded samples. Serology is the most commonly used diagnostic tool. Indirect immunofluorescence is sensitive and specific and is the method of choice. Rheumatoid factor should be adsorbed from the specimen before testing. With chronic infection, the titer to phase I antigen is usually much higher than that to phase II antigen (i.e., C. burnetii that has truncated lipopolysaccharide associated with gene deletions during laboratory passages), and the diagnosis should not be based on serology alone. Rather, the entire clinical setting must be taken into consideration. An anti–phase I IgG titer of ≥6400 would be considered a major criterion for the diagnosis of chronic Q fever, while a titer of ≥800 but ≤6400 would be a minor criterion. In acute Q fever, a fourfold rise in titer can be demonstrated between acuteand convalescent-phase serum samples.
# Chunk 3401
Treatment of acute Q fever with doxycycline (100 mg twice daily for 14 days) is usually successful. Quinolones also are effective. When Q fever is diagnosed during pregnancy, treatment with trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) is recommended for the duration of the pregnancy. One study showed no intrauterine fetal deaths and substantial reduction of obstetric complications in a group of Q fever patients treated with TMP-SMX.
# Chunk 3402
The treatment of chronic Q fever is difficult and requires careful follow-up. Addition of hydroxychloroquine (to alkalinize the phagolysosome) renders doxycycline bactericidal against C. burnetii, and this combination is currently the favored regimen. Treatment with doxycycline (100 mg bid) and hydroxychloroquine (200 mg tid; plasma concentration maintained at 0.8–1.2 μg/mL) for 18 months is superior to a regimen of doxycycline and ofloxacin. Among 21 patients who received doxycycline and hydroxychloroquine, 1 died of a surgical complication, 2 were still being treated at the end of the study, 1 was still being evaluated, and 17 were cured. The mean duration of treatment was 31 months. In the ofloxacin and doxycycline group of 14 patients, 1 had died, 1 was still being treated, 7 had relapsed, and 5 had been cured by the end of the study. Optimal management of Q fever endocarditis entails determining the MIC of doxycycline for the patient’s isolate and measuring serum doxycycline levels. A serum level–to–doxycycline MIC ratio of ≥1 is associated with a rapid decline in phase I antibodies with the doxycycline-hydroxychloroquine regimen. Patients treated with this regimen must be advised about photosensitivity and retinal toxicity risks. The doxycycline-hydroxychloroquine regimen was successful in one patient with HIV infection and Q fever endocarditis. The Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction occasionally complicates the treatment of chronic Q fever. Treatment of C. burnetii–infected aortic aneurysms is the same as that for Q fever endocarditis. Surgical intervention is often required.
# Chunk 3403
C. burnetii. Rifampin (300 mg once daily) combined with doxycycline (100 mg twice daily) or ciprofloxacin (750 mg twice daily) has been used successfully. The management of patients with Q fever endocarditis is complex and should preferably be undertaken by individuals with experience in managing this illness. Monitoring of antibody titers on a quarterly basis is an essential part of the management of these patients. Thus the laboratory should be contacted and asked to save all serum samples from such patients so that the current sample can be run with the previous one. There is incomplete agreement on the antibody titer at which therapy can be stopped. However, it is reasonable to discontinue treatment if IgG antibody levels have decreased by fourfold at 1 year, if IgM antibody to phase II has disappeared, and if the patient is clinically stable.
# Chunk 3404
Interferon γ was successful in the treatment of a 3-year-old boy with prolonged fever, abdominal pain, and thrombocytopenia due to
# Chunk 3405
M. pneumoniae infection occurs worldwide. It is likely that the incidence of upper respiratory illness due to M. pneumoniae is up to 20 times that of pneumonia caused by this organism. Infection is spread from one person to another by respiratory droplets expectorated during coughing and results in clinically apparent disease in an estimated 80% of cases. The incubation period for M. pneumoniae is 2–4 weeks; therefore, the time-course of infection in a specific population may be several weeks long. Intrafamilial attack rates are as high as 84% among children and 41% among adults. Outbreaks of M. pneumoniae illness often occur in institutional settings such as military bases, boarding schools, and summer camps. Infections tend to be endemic, with sporadic epidemics every 4–7 years. There is no seasonal pattern.
# Chunk 3406
Test Sensitivity, % Specificity, % aA combination of PCR and serology is suggested for routine diagnosis. If macrolide resistance is suspected, M. pneumoniae culture may prove useful, providing an isolate for susceptibility testing. bAcuteand convalescent-phase serum samples are recommended.
# Chunk 3407
Abbreviation: PCR, polymerase chain reaction.

the recommended serologic method. An acute-phase sample alone is not adequate for diagnosis, as antibodies to M. pneumoniae may not develop until 2 weeks into the illness; therefore, it is important to test paired samples. In addition, IgM antibody to M. pneumoniae can persist for up to 1 year after acute infection. Thus its presence may indicate recent rather than acute infection.
# Chunk 3408
Although in the majority of untreated cases symptoms resolve within 2–3 weeks without significant associated morbidity, M. pneumoniae pneumonia can be a serious illness that responds to appropriate antimicrobial therapy (Table 212-2). Randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials in adults have demonstrated that antimicrobial treatment significantly decreases the duration of fever, cough, malaise, hospitalization, and radiologic abnormalities in M. pneumoniae pneumonia. Treatment options for acute M. pneumoniae infection include macrolides (e.g., oral azithromycin, 500 mg on day 1, then 250 mg/d on days 2–5), tetracyclines (e.g., oral doxycycline, 100 mg twice daily for 10–14 days), and respiratory fluoroquinolones. However, ciprofloxacin and ofloxacin are not recommended because of their high minimal inhibitory concentrations against M. pneumoniae isolates and their poor performance in experimental studies. A 10to 14-day course of quinolone therapy appears adequate.
# Chunk 3409
While urogenital mycoplasmas may be transmitted to a fetus during passage through a colonized birth canal, sexual contact is the major mode of transmission, and the risk of colonization increases dramatically with increasing numbers of sexual partners. In asymptomatic women, these mycoplasmas may be found throughout the lower urogenital tract. The vagina yields the largest number of organisms; next most densely colonized are the periurethral area and the cervix. Ureaplasmas are isolated less often from urine than from the cervix, but M. hominis is found with approximately the same frequency at these two sites. Ureaplasmas are isolated from the vagina of 40–80% of sexually active, asymptomatic women and M. hominis from 21–70%. The two microorganisms are found concurrently in 31–60% of women. In men, colonization with each organism is less prevalent. Mycoplasmas have been isolated from urine, semen, and the distal urethra of asymptomatic men.
# Chunk 3410
C. trachomatis serovars D–K are transmitted during sexual contact or from mother to baby during childbirth and are associated with many syndromes, including cervicitis, salpingitis, acute urethral syndrome, endometritis, ectopic pregnancy, infertility, and PID in female patients; urethritis, proctitis, and epididymitis in male patients; and conjunctivitis and pneumonia in infants. Women bear the greatest burden of morbidity because of the serious sequelae of these infections. Untreated infections lead to PID, and multiple episodes of PID can lead to tubal factor infertility and chronic pelvic pain. Studies estimate that up to 80–90% of women and >50% of men with C. trachomatis genital infections lack symptoms; other patients have very mild symptoms. Thus a large reservoir of infected persons continues to transmit infection to sexual partners.
# Chunk 3411
In the United States, chlamydial infections are the most commonly reported of all infectious diseases. In 2012, 1.3 million cases were reported to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC); however, the CDC estimates that 2–3 million new cases occur per year, with substantial underreporting due to lack of screening in some populations. Rates of infection have increased every year; higher rates among women than among men reflect the focus on expansion of screening programs for women during the past 20 years, the use of increasingly sensitive diagnostic tests, an increased emphasis on case reporting, and improvements in the information systems used for reporting. The CDC and other professional organizations recommend annual screening of all sexually active women ≤25 years of age as well as rescreening of previously infected individuals at 3 months. Young women have the highest infection rates; in 2012, the figures were 3416.5 and 3722.5 cases per 100,000 population at 15–19 and 20–24 years of age, respectively. Age-specific rates among men, while much lower than those among women, were highest in the 20-to 24-year-old age group, at 1343.3 cases per 100,000. In 2012, rates 1167 increased for all racial and ethnic groups, with the highest rates among African Americans. For example, the rate of chlamydial infection among African-American girls 15–19 years of age was 7507.1 cases per 100,000—almost six times the rate among Caucasian girls in the same age group (1301.5/100,000). The rate among African-American women 20–24 years old was 4.8 times the rate among Caucasian women in the same age group. Similar racial disparities in reported rates of chlamydial infection exist among men. For boys 15–19 years of age, the rate among African Americans was 11.1 times the rate among Caucasians. The rate among Native Americans/Alaska Natives was more than four times the rate among Caucasians (648.3), and the rate among Latinos (383.6) was two times higher than that among Caucasians. These disparities are important reflections of health inequities in the United States.
# Chunk 3412
C. trachomatis in this syndrome have declined.

In the United States, most of the estimated 2 million cases of acute urethritis are NGU, and C. trachomatis is implicated in 30–50% of these cases. The cause of most of the remaining cases of NGU is uncertain, but recent evidence suggests that Ureaplasma urealyticum, Mycoplasma genitalium, Trichomonas vaginalis, and herpes simplex virus (HSV) cause some cases. The rate of involvement of C. trachomatis in urethral infection ranges from 3–7% among asymptomatic men to 15–20% among symptomatic men attending STD clinics. A multisite study of men in Baltimore, Seattle, Denver, and San Francisco reported an overall chlamydial prevalence of 7% in urine samples assessed by nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs). As in women, infection in men is age related, with young age as the greatest risk factor for chlamydial urethritis. The prevalence among men is highest at 20–24 years of age. In STD clinics, urethritis is usually less prevalent among men who have sex with men (MSM) than among heterosexual men and is almost always much more common among African-American men than among Caucasian men. One study reported prevalences of 19% and 9% among nonwhite and white heterosexual men, respectively.
# Chunk 3413
At least one-third of male patients with C. trachomatis urethral infection have no evident signs or symptoms of urethritis. The availability of NAATs for first-void urine specimens has facilitated broader-based testing for asymptomatic infection in male patients. As a result, asymptomatic chlamydial urethritis has been demonstrated in 5–10% of sexually active male adolescents screened at school-based clinics or community centers. Such patients generally have pyuria (≥15 leukocytes per 400× microscopic field in the sediment of first-void urine), a positive leukocyte esterase test, or an increased number of leukocytes on a Gram-stained smear prepared from a urogenital swab inserted 1–2 cm into the anterior urethra. To differentiate between true urethritis and functional symptoms in symptomatic patients or to make a presumptive diagnosis of C. trachomatis infection in high-risk but asymptomatic men (e.g., male patients in STD clinics, sex partners of women with nongonococcal salpingitis or mucopurulent cervicitis, fathers of children with inclusion conjunctivitis), the examination of an endourethral specimen for increased leukocytes is useful if specific diagnostic tests for chlamydiae are not available. Alternatively, urethritis can be assayed noninvasively by examination of a first-void urine sample for pyuria, either by microscopy or by the leukocyte esterase test. Urine (or a urethral swab) can also be tested directly for chlamydiae by DNA amplification methods, as described below (see “Detection Methods”).
# Chunk 3414
epididymitis Chlamydial urethritis may be followed by acute epididymitis, but this condition is rare, generally occurring in sexually active patients <35 years of age; in older men, epididymitis is usually associated with gram-negative bacterial infection and/or instrumentation procedures. It is estimated that 50–70% of cases of acute epididymitis are caused by C. trachomatis. The condition usually presents as unilateral scrotal pain with tenderness, swelling, and fever in a young man, often occurring in association with chlamydial urethritis. The illness may be mild enough to treat with oral antibiotics on an outpatient basis or severe enough to require hospitalization and parenteral therapy. Testicular torsion should be excluded promptly by radionuclide scan, Doppler flow study, or surgical exploration in a teenager or young adult who presents with acute unilateral testicular pain without urethritis. The possibility of testicular tumor or chronic infection (e.g., tuberculosis) should be excluded when a patient with unilateral intrascrotal pain and swelling does not respond to appropriate antimicrobial therapy.
# Chunk 3415
NGU is the initial manifestation of reactive arthritis in 80% of patients, typically occurring within 14 days after sexual exposure. The urethritis may be mild and may even go unnoticed by the patient. Similarly, gonococcal urethritis may precede reactive arthritis, but co-infection with an agent of NGU is difficult to rule out. The urethral discharge may be purulent or mucopurulent, and patients may or may not report dysuria. Accompanying prostatitis, usually asymptomatic, has been described. Arthritis usually begins ~4 weeks after the onset of urethritis but may develop sooner or, in a small percentage of cases, may actually precede urethritis. The knees are most frequently involved; next most commonly affected are the ankles and small joints of the feet. Sacroiliitis, either symmetrical or asymmetrical, is documented in two-thirds of patients. Mild bilateral conjunctivitis, iritis, keratitis, or uveitis is sometimes present but lasts for only a few days. Finally, dermatologic manifestations occur in up to 50% of patients. The initial lesions— usually papules with a central yellow spot—most often involve the soles and palms and, in ~25% of patients, eventually epithelialize and thicken to produce keratoderma blenorrhagicum. Circinate balanitis is usually painless and occurs in fewer than half of patients. The initial episode of reactive arthritis usually lasts 2–6 months.
# Chunk 3416
pelvic inflammatory disease Inflammation of sections of the fallopian tube is often referred to as salpingitis or PID. The proportion of acute salpingitis cases caused by C. trachomatis varies geographically and with the population studied. It has been estimated that C. trachomatis causes up to 50% of PID cases in the United States. PID occurs via ascending intraluminal spread of C. trachomatis or N. gonorrhoeae from the lower genital tract. Mucopurulent cervicitis is often followed by endometritis, endosalpingitis, and finally pelvic peritonitis. Evidence of mucopurulent cervicitis is often found in women with laparoscopically verified salpingitis. Similarly, endometritis, demonstrated by an endometrial biopsy showing plasma cell infiltration of the endometrial epithelium, is documented in most women with lap-aroscopy-verified chlamydial (or gonococcal) salpingitis. Chlamydial endometritis can also occur in the absence of clinical evidence of salpingitis. Histologic evidence of endometritis has been correlated with a syndrome consisting of vaginal bleeding, lower abdominal pain, and uterine tenderness in the absence of adnexal tenderness. Chlamydial salpingitis produces milder symptoms than gonococcal salpingitis and may be associated with less marked adnexal tenderness. Thus, mild adnexal or uterine tenderness in a sexually active woman with cervicitis suggests chlamydial PID.
# Chunk 3417
C. trachomatis has also been isolated frequently and persistently from the nasopharynx, rectum, and vagina of infected infants—occasionally for >1 year in the absence of treatment. In some cases, otitis media results from perinatally acquired chlamydial infection. Pneumonia may develop in infants from 2 weeks to 4 months of age. C. trachomatis is estimated to cause 20–30% of pneumonia cases in infants <6 months of age. Epidemiologic studies have linked chlamydial pulmonary infection in infants with increased occurrence of subacute lung disease (bronchitis, asthma, wheezing) in later childhood.
# Chunk 3418
lympHogranUloma venereUm C. trachomatis serovars L1, L2, and L3 cause LGV, an invasive systemic STD. The peak inci dence of LGV corresponds with the age of greatest sexual activity: the second and third decades of life. The worldwide incidence of LGV is falling, but the disease is still endemic and a major cause of morbidity in parts of Asia, Africa, South America, and the Caribbean. LGV is rare in industrialized countries; for more than a decade, the reported incidence in the United States has been only 0.1 case per 100,000 population. In the Bahamas, an apparent outbreak of LGV was described in association with a concurrent increase in heterosexual infection with HIV. Reports of outbreaks with the newly identified variant L2b in Europe, Australia, and the United States indicate that LGV is becoming more prevalent among MSM. These cases have usually presented as hemorrhagic proctocolitis in HIV-positive men. More widespread use of NAATs for identification of rectal infections may have enhanced case recognition.
# Chunk 3419
1170 As NAATs for C. trachomatis are being used more often, increasing numbers of cases of LGV proctitis are being recognized in MSM. Such patients present with anorectal pain and mucopurulent, bloody rectal discharge. Sigmoidoscopy reveals ulcerative proctitis or proctocolitis, with purulent exudate and mucosal bleeding. Histopathologic findings in the rectal mucosa include granulomas with giant cells, crypt abscesses, and extensive inflammation. These clinical, sigmoidoscopic, and histopathologic findings may closely resemble those of Crohn’s disease of the rectum. The most common presenting picture in heterosexual men and women is the inguinal syndrome, which is characterized by painful inguinal lymphadenopathy beginning 2–6 weeks after presumed exposure; in rare instances, the onset comes after a few months. The inguinal adenopathy is unilateral in two-thirds of cases, and palpable enlargement of the iliac and femoral nodes is often evident on the same side as the enlarged inguinal nodes. The nodes are initially discrete, but progressive periadenitis results in a matted mass of nodes that becomes fluctuant and suppurative. The overlying skin becomes fixed, inflamed, and thin, and multiple draining fistulas finally develop. Extensive enlargement of chains of inguinal nodes above and below the inguinal ligament (“the sign of the groove”) is not specific and, although not uncommon, is documented in only a minority of cases. Spontaneous healing usually takes place after several months; inguinal scars or granulomatous masses of various sizes persist for life. Massive pelvic lymphadenopathy may lead to exploratory laparotomy.
# Chunk 3420
cHoice of specimen Cervical and urethral swabs have traditionally been used for the diagnosis of STDs in female and male patients, respectively. However, given the greatly increased sensitivity and specificity of NAATs, less invasive samples (e.g., urine for both sexes and vaginal swabs for women) can be used. For screening of asymptomatic women, the CDC now recommends that self-collected or clinician-collected vaginal swabs, which are slightly more sensitive than urine, be used. Urine screening tests are often used in outreach screening programs, however. For symptomatic women undergoing a pelvic examination, cervical swab samples are desirable because they have slightly higher chlamydial counts. For male patients, a urine specimen is the sample of choice, but self-collected penile-meatal swabs have been explored.
# Chunk 3421
C. trachomatis infections in adults. Azithromycin causes fewer adverse gastrointestinal reactions than do older macrolides such as erythromycin. The single-dose regimen of azithromycin has great appeal for the treatment of patients with uncomplicated chlamydial infection (especially those without symptoms and those with a likelihood of poor compliance) and of the sexual partners of infected patients. These advantages must be weighed against the considerably greater cost of azithromycin. Whenever possible, the single 1-g dose should be given as directly observed therapy. Although not approved by the FDA for use in pregnancy, this regimen appears to be safe and effective for this purpose. However, amoxicillin (500 mg three times daily for 7 days) also can be given to pregnant women. The fluoroquinolones are contraindicated in pregnancy. A 2-week course of treatment is recommended for complicated chlamydial infections (e.g., PID, epididymitis) and at least a 3-week course of doxycycline (100 mg orally twice daily) or erythromycin base (500 mg orally four times daily) for LGV. Failure of treatment with a tetracycline in genital infections usually indicates poor compliance or reinfection rather than involvement of a drug-resistant strain. To date, clinically significant drug resistance has not been observed in C. trachomatis.
# Chunk 3422
Prevention Since many chlamydial infections are asymptomatic, effective control and prevention must involve periodic screening of individuals at risk. Selective cost-effective screening criteria have been developed. Among women, young age (generally <25 years) is a critical risk factor for chlamydial infections in nearly all studies. Other risk factors include mucopurulent cervicitis; multiple, new, or symptomatic male sex partners; and lack of barrier contraceptive use. In some settings, screening based on young age may be as sensitive 1172 as criteria that incorporate behavioral and clinical measures. Another strategy is universal testing of all patients in high-prevalence clinic populations (e.g., STD clinics, juvenile detention facilities, and family planning clinics). The effectiveness of selective screening in reducing the prevalence of chlamydial infection among women has been demonstrated in several studies. In the Pacific Northwest, where extensive screening began in family planning clinics in 1998 and in STD clinics in 1993, the prevalence declined from 10% in the 1980s to <5% in 2000. Similar trends have occurred in association with screening programs elsewhere. In addition, screening can effect a reduction in upper genital tract disease. In Seattle, women at a large health maintenance organization who were screened for chlamydial infection on a routine basis had a lower incidence of symptomatic PID than did women who received standard care and underwent more selective screening. In settings with low to moderate prevalence, the prevalence at which selective screening becomes more cost-effective than universal screening must be defined. Most studies have concluded that universal screening is preferable in settings with a chlamydial prevalence of >3–7%. Depending on the criteria used, selective screening is likely to be more cost-effective when prevalence falls below 3%. Nearly all regions of the United States have now initiated screening programs, particularly in family planning and STD clinics. Along with single-dose therapy, the availability of highly sensitive and specific diagnostic NAATs using urine specimens and self-obtained vaginal swabs makes it feasible to mount an effective nationwide Chlamydia control program, with screening of high-risk individuals in traditional health-care settings and in novel outreach and community-based settings. The
# Chunk 3423
Clinical Manifestations Both endemic trachoma and adult inclusion conjunctivitis present initially as conjunctivitis characterized by small lymphoid follicles in the conjunctiva. In regions with hyperendemic classic blinding trachoma, the disease usually starts insidiously before the age of 2 years. Reinfection is common and probably contributes to the pathogenesis of trachoma. Studies using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) or other NAATs indicate that chlamydial DNA is often present in the ocular secretions of patients with trachoma, even in the absence of positive cultures. Thus persistent infection may be more common than was previously thought.
# Chunk 3424
Adult inclusion conjunctivitis responds well to treatment with the same regimens used in uncomplicated genital infections—namely, azithromycin (a 1-g single oral dose) or doxycycline (100 mg twice daily for 7 days). Simultaneous treatment of all sexual partners is necessary to prevent ocular reinfection and chlamydial genital disease. Topical antibiotic treatment is not required for patients who receive systemic antibiotics.
# Chunk 3425
Psittacine birds and many other avian species act as natural reservoirs for C. psittaci–type organisms, which are common pathogens in domestic mammals and birds. The species C. psittaci, which now includes only avian strains, affects humans only as a zoonosis. (The other strains previously included in this species have been placed into different species that generally reflect the animals they infect: C. abortus, C. muridarum, C. suis, C. felis, and C. caviae.) Although all birds are susceptible, pet birds (parrots, parakeets, macaws, and cockatiels) and poultry (turkeys and ducks) are most frequently involved in transmission of C. psittaci to humans. Exposure is greatest among poultry-processing workers and owners of pet birds. Infectious forms of the organisms are shed from both symptomatic and apparently healthy birds and may remain viable for several months. C. psittaci can be transmitted to humans by direct contact with infected birds or by inhalation of aerosols from avian nasal discharges and from infectious avian fecal or feather dust. Transmission from person to person has never been demonstrated.
# Chunk 3426
and reinfection in adults. Seroprevalence rates of 40–70% show that C. pneumoniae is widespread in both industrialized and developing countries. Seropositivity usually is first detected at school age, and rates generally increase by ~10% per decade. About 50% of individuals have detectable antibody at 30 years of age, and most have detectable antibody by the eighth decade of life. Although serologic evidence suggests that C. pneumoniae may be associated with up to 10% of cases of community-acquired pneumonia, most of this evidence is based not on paired serum samples but rather on a single high IgG titer. Some doubt exists about the true prevalence and etiologic role of C. pneumoniae in atypical pneumonia, especially since reports of cross-reactivity have raised questions about the specificity of serology when only a single serum sample is used for diagnosis.
# Chunk 3427
Serology, PCR amplification, and culture can be used to diagnose

C. pneumoniae infection. Serology has been the traditional method of diagnosing infection by C. pneumoniae. The gold standard serologic test is the MIF test (see section on diagnosis of C. trachomatis genital infection, above). Any antibody titer above 1:16 is considered significant evidence of exposure to chlamydiae. According to a CDC-sponsored expert working group, the diagnosis of acute C. pneumoniae infection requires demonstration of a fourfold rise in titer in paired serum samples. There are no official recommendations for diagnosis of chronic infections, although many research studies have used high titers of IgA as an indicator. The older CF tests and EIAs for LPS are not recommended, as they are not specific for C. pneumoniae but identify the chlamydiae only to the genus level. The organism is very difficult to grow in tissue culture but has been cultivated in HeLa cells, HEp-2 cells, and HL cells. Although NAATs are commercially available for
# Chunk 3428
Initial viral infections usually last for several days or weeks. During this period, the concentration of virus at sites of infection rises and then falls, usually to unmeasurable levels. The rise and fall of viral replication at a given site depend on local innate immune responses and the access of systemic antibody and cell immune effectors to the virus. Typically, primary infections with enteroviruses, mumps virus, measles virus, rubella virus, rotavirus, influenza virus, AAV, adenovirus, HSV, and VZV are cleared from almost all sites within 3–4 weeks. Some viruses are especially proficient in altering or evading innate and acquired immune responses. Primary infection with AAV, EBV, or CMV can last for several months. Characteristically, primary infections due to HBV, HCV, hepatitis D virus (HDV), HIV, HPV, and molluscum contagiosum virus (MCV) extend beyond several weeks. For some of these viruses (e.g., HPV, HBV, HCV, HDV, and MCV), the manifestations of primary infection are almost indistinguishable from the persistent phase.
# Chunk 3429
EBV infection also has a role in the long-term development of B lymphocyte and epithelial cell malignancies. Persistent EBV infection with expression of an EBV latency-associated integral membrane protein (LMP1) in latently infected epithelial cells appears to be a critical early step in the evolution of anaplastic nasopharyngeal carcinoma, a common malignancy in populations in southern China and northern Africa. Genomic instability and chromosomal abnormalities also contribute to the development of EBV-associated nasopharyngeal carcinoma. EBV is an important cause of Hodgkin’s lymphoma. High-level expression of LMP1 or LMP2 in Reed-Sternberg cells is a hallmark in up to 50% of Hodgkin’s lymphoma cases. LMP1-induced nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) activity may prolong the survival of defective B cells that are normally eliminated by apoptosis, thereby allowing other genetic changes leading to the development of malignant Reed-Sternberg cells.
# Chunk 3430
Isolation of virus in tissue culture also depends on the collection of specimens from appropriate sites and the rapid transport of these specimens in appropriate medium to the virology laboratory (Chap. 150e). Rapid transport maintains viral viability and limits bacterial and fungal overgrowth. Enveloped viruses are generally more sensitive to freezing and thawing than nonenveloped viruses. The most appropriate site for culture depends on the pathogenesis of the virus in question. Nasopharyngeal, tracheal, or endobronchial aspirates are most appropriate for the identification of respiratory viruses. Sputum cultures generally are less appropriate because bacterial contamination and viscosity threaten tissue-culture cell viability. Aspirates of vesicular fluid are useful for isolation of HSV and VZV. Nasopharyngeal aspirates and stool specimens may be useful when the patient has fever and a rash and an enteroviral infection is suspected. Adenoviruses can be cultured from the urine of patients with hemorrhagic cystitis. CMV can frequently be isolated from cultures of urine or buffy coat. Biopsy material can be effectively cultured when viruses infect major organs, as in HSV encephalitis or adenovirus pneumonia.
# Chunk 3431
Inhaled zanamivir and orally administered oseltamivir have been effective in the treatment of naturally occurring, uncomplicated influenza A or B in otherwise healthy adults. In placebo-controlled studies, illness has been shortened by 1.0–1.5 days of therapy with either of these drugs when treatment is administered within 2 days of onset of symptoms. Pooled analyses of clinical studies of oseltamivir suggest that treatment may reduce the likelihood of hospitalizations and of certain respiratory tract complications associated with influenza, and observational studies suggest that oseltamivir may reduce mortality rates associated with influenza A outbreaks (Chap. 224). Once-daily inhaled zanamivir or once-daily orally administered oseltamivir can provide prophylaxis against laboratory-documented influenza A– and influenza B–associated illness.
# Chunk 3432
Children 1–9 years: 5 mg/kg per day (maximum, 150 mg/d) 5 mg/kg bid × 14–21 d; then 5 mg/kg per day as maintenance dose 900 mg bid × 21 d; then 900 mg/d as maintenance dose 60 mg/kg q8h × 14–21 d; then 90–120 mg/kg per day as maintenance dose 5 mg/kg once weekly × 2 weeks, then once every other week; given with probenecid and hydration 330 mg on days 1 and 15 followed by 330 mg monthly as maintenance 20 mg/kg (maximum, 800 mg) 4 or 5 times daily × 5 d
# Chunk 3433
Antiviral Chemotherapy, Excluding Antiretroviral Drugs

Herpes zoster: immunocompromised host 1 million units per wart (maximum of 5) thrice weekly × 3 weeks 250,000 units per wart (maximum of 10) twice weekly × up to 8 weeks 100 mg/d × 12–18 months; 150 mg bid as part of therapy for HIV infection 0.5 mg/d × 48 weeks (1 mg/d if HBV is resistant to lamivudine) 1.5 μg weekly × 48 weeks 1.5 μg/kg weekly (IFN)/ 800–1400 mg daily (ribavirin) × 24–48 weeks 9–15 μg thrice weekly × 6–12 months Effectiveness in localized zoster is most marked when treatment is given early. Foscarnet may be used for acyclovir-resistant VZV infections.
# Chunk 3434
A return of ALT levels to normal is documented in 48–72% of recipients and improved liver histopathology in 53–64%. Adefovir is effective in lamivudine-resistant hepatitis B. Renal function should be monitored.
# Chunk 3435
HBV DNA is reduced by >5 log10 copies/mL along with normalization of ALT levels in 74–77% of patients and improved histopathology in 65–67%. Resistance develops in 9–22% of patients after 2 years of therapy. Elevated CPK levels and myopathy may occur.
# Chunk 3436
ALT levels return to normal in 68–76% of patients, and liver histopathology improves in 72–74%. Resistance is uncommon with up to 2 years of therapy.
# Chunk 3437
SVRs are noted in 20–30% of patients. Normalization of ALT levels and improvements in liver histopathology are also seen.
# Chunk 3438
Combination therapy results in SVR in up to 40–50% of recipients.

The slower clearance of pegylated IFNs than of standard IFNs permits once-weekly administration. Pegylated formulations appear to be superior to standard IFNs in efficacy, both as monotherapy and in combination with ribavirin, and have largely supplanted standard IFNs in treatment of hepatitis C. SVRs were seen in 42–51% of patients infected with HCV genotype 1 and in 76–82% of those infected with genotype 2 or 3.
# Chunk 3439
HCV genotypes 1, 4, 5, and 6: 400 mg qd with daily weight-based ribavirin (1000 mg [<75 kg] to 1200 mg [>75 kg]) and weekly pegylated IFN for 12 weeks. Genotypes 2 and 3: 400 mg qd with daily weight-based ribavirin for 12 and 24 weeks, respectively
# Chunk 3440
Alternative regimen for genotypes 1 and 4: 150 mg qd for 12 weeks plus daily ribavirin and weekly pegylated IFN for 24 weeks and for 24–48 weeks, respectively Sofosbuvir is generally well tolerated, and most common side effects have been attributable to concomitantly administered IFN and ribavirin. Sofosbuvir is recommended in triple combination with pegylated IFN and ribavirin as first-line therapy for genotypes 1, 4, 5, and 6, with SVRs in 89–97% of treatment-naïve patients, and in double combination with ribavirin for genotypes 2 and 3.
# Chunk 3441
Pegylated IFN-α2b SC Sustained SVRs have been seen in 25–30% of 1.5 μg weekly × 48 weeks

IFN-α.

aFor detailed weight recommendations and for children <1 year of age, see www.cdc.gov/flu/professionals/antivirals/summary-clinicians.htm. bAmantadine and rimantadine are not recommended for routine use because of widespread resistance in currently circulating A/H3N2 and pandemic A/H1N1 viruses. Their use may be considered if sensitivities become reestablished. cNot approved for this indication by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). dApproved by the FDA for treatment of HIV-infected individuals. eAcyclovir suspension (15 mg/kg PO, to a maximum of 200 mg per dose) given for 7 d has been reported to be effective in treatment of primary herpetic gingivostomatitis in children. fActive ingredient: benzyl alcohol. Available without prescription. gConsult www.hcvguidelines.org for recommendations regarding treatment of null or partial responders to IFN regimens or of patients ineligible to receive IFN.
# Chunk 3442
Abbreviations: ALT, alanine aminotransferase; CMV, cytomegalovirus; CPK, creatine phosphokinase; HBeAg, hepatitis B e antigen; HBV, hepatitis B virus; HCV, hepatitis C virus; HSV, herpes simplex virus; IFN, interferon; RGT, response-guided therapy; RSV, respiratory syncytial virus; SVR, sustained virologic response; VZV, varicella-zoster virus.
# Chunk 3443
Zanamivir and oseltamivir have been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for treatment of influenza in adults and in children (those ≥7 years old for zanamivir and those ≥1 year old for oseltamivir) who have been symptomatic for ≤2 days. Oseltamivir is approved for prophylaxis of influenza in individuals ≥1 year of age and zanamivir for those ≥5 years of age (Table 215e-1). Guidelines for the use of oseltamivir in children <1 year of age can be accessed through the CDC website, as noted in the footnote to Table 215e-1.
# Chunk 3444
Amantadine and rimantadine are available only in oral formulations and are ordinarily administered to adults once or twice daily, with a dosage of 100–200 mg/d. Despite their structural similarities, the two compounds have different pharmacokinetics. Amantadine is not metabolized and is excreted almost entirely by the kidneys, with a half-life of 12–17 h and peak plasma concentrations of 0.4 μg/mL. In contrast, rimantadine is extensively metabolized to hydroxylated derivatives and has a half-life of 30 h. Only 30–40% of an orally administered dose of rimantadine is recovered in the urine. The peak plasma levels of rimantadine are approximately half those of amantadine,
# Chunk 3445
Antiviral Chemotherapy, Excluding Antiretroviral Drugs but rimantadine is concentrated in respiratory secretions to a greater extent than amantadine. For prophylaxis, the compounds must be administered daily for the period at risk (i.e., duration of the exposure). For therapy, amantadine or rimantadine is generally administered for 5–7 days.
# Chunk 3446
The most widespread use of acyclovir is in the treatment of genital HSV infections. IV or oral acyclovir or oral valacyclovir has shortened the duration of symptoms, reduced virus shedding, and accelerated healing when used for the treatment of primary genital HSV infections. Oral acyclovir and valacyclovir have also had a modest effect in treatment of recurrent genital HSV infections. However, the failure of treatment of either primary or recurrent disease to reduce the frequency of subsequent recurrences has indicated that acyclovir is ineffective in eliminating latent infection. Documented chronic oral administration of acyclovir for up to 6 years or of valacyclovir for up to 1 year has reduced the frequency of recurrences markedly during therapy; once the drug is discontinued, lesions recur. In one study, suppressive therapy with valacyclovir (500 mg once daily for 8 months) reduced transmission of HSV-2 genital infections among discordant couples by 50%. A modest effect on herpes labialis (i.e., a reduction of disease duration by 1 day) was seen when valacyclovir was administered upon detection of the first symptom of a lesion at a dose of 2 g every 12 h for 1 day. In AIDS patients, chronic or intermittent administration of acyclovir has been associated with the development of HSV and VZV strains resistant to the action of the drug and with clinical failures. The most common mechanism of resistance is a deficiency of the virus-induced thymidine kinase. Patients with HSV or VZV infections resistant to acyclovir have frequently responded to foscarnet.
# Chunk 3447
Cidofovir has poor oral availability and is administered intravenously. It is excreted primarily by the kidney and has a plasma half-life of 2.6 h. Cidofovir diphosphate’s intracellular half-life of >48 h is the basis for the recommended dosing regimen of 5 mg/kg once a week for the initial 2 weeks and then 5 mg/kg every other week. The major toxic effect of cidofovir is proximal renal tubular injury, as manifested by elevated serum creatinine levels and proteinuria. The risk of nephrotoxicity can be reduced by vigorous saline hydration and by concomitant oral administration of probenecid. Neutropenia, rashes, and gastrointestinal tolerance may also occur.
# Chunk 3448
Ganciclovir is available for IV or oral administration. Because its oral bioavailability is low (5–9%), relatively large doses (1 g three times daily) must be administered by this route. Oral ganciclovir has largely been supplanted by valganciclovir, which is the l-valyl ester of ganciclovir. Valganciclovir is well absorbed orally, with a bioavailability of 60%, and is rapidly hydrolyzed to ganciclovir in the intestine and liver. The area under the curve for a 900-mg dose of valganciclovir is equivalent to that for 5 mg/kg of IV ganciclovir, although peak serum concentrations are ~40% lower for valganciclovir. The serum half-life is 3.5 h after IV administration of ganciclovir and 4.0 h after PO administration of valganciclovir. Ganciclovir is excreted primarily by the kidneys in an unmetabolized form, and its dosage should be reduced in cases of renal failure. Ganciclovir therapy at the most commonly used initial IV dosage—i.e., 5 mg/kg every 12 h for 14–21 days—can be changed to valganciclovir (900 mg PO twice daily) when the patient can tolerate oral therapy. The maintenance dose is 5 mg/kg IV daily or five times per week for ganciclovir and 900 mg by mouth once a day for valganciclovir. Dose adjustment in patients with renal dysfunction is required. Intraocular ganciclovir, given by either intravitreal injection or intraocular implantation, has also been used to treat CMV retinitis.
# Chunk 3449
Famciclovir is the diacetyl 6-deoxyester of the guanosine analogue penciclovir. This agent is well absorbed orally, has a bioavailability of 77%, and is rapidly converted to penciclovir by deacetylation and oxidation in the intestine and liver. Penciclovir’s spectrum of activity and mechanism of action are similar to those of acyclovir. Thus, penciclovir usually is not active against acyclovir-resistant viruses. However, some acyclovir-resistant viruses with altered thymidine kinase or DNA polymerase substrate specificity may be sensitive to penciclovir. This drug is phosphorylated initially by a virus-encoded thymidine kinase and subsequently by cellular kinases to penciclovir triphosphate, which inhibits HSV-1, HSV-2, VZV, and EBV as well as hepatitis B virus (HBV). The serum half-life of penciclovir is 2 h, but the intracellular half-life of penciclovir triphosphate is 7–20 h—markedly longer than that of acyclovir triphosphate. The latter is the basis for the less frequent (twice-daily) dosing schedule for famciclovir than for acyclovir. Penciclovir is eliminated primarily in the urine by both glomerular filtration and tubular secretion. The usually recommended dosage interval should be adjusted for renal insufficiency.
# Chunk 3450
Clinical trials involving immunocompetent adults with herpes zoster showed that famciclovir was superior to placebo in eliciting the resolution of skin lesions and virus shedding and in shortening the duration of postherpetic neuralgia; moreover, administered at 500 mg every 8 h, famciclovir was at least as effective as acyclovir administered at an oral dose of 800 mg five times daily. Famciclovir was also effective in the treatment of herpes zoster in immunosuppressed patients. Clinical trials have demonstrated its effectiveness in the suppression of genital HSV infections for up to 1 year and in the treatment of initial and recurrent episodes of genital herpes. Famciclovir is effective as therapy for mucocutaneous HSV infections in HIV-infected patients. Application of a 1% penciclovir cream reduces the duration of signs and symptoms of herpes labialis in immunocompetent patients (by 0.5–1 day) and has been approved for that purpose by the FDA. Famciclovir is generally well tolerated, with occasional headache, nausea, and diarrhea reported in frequencies similar to those among placebo recipients. The administration of high doses of famciclovir for 2 years was associated with an increased incidence of mammary adenocarcinomas in female rats, but the clinical significance of this effect is unknown.
# Chunk 3451
Inhibition of the helicase-primase heterotrimeric complex of HSV-1 and HSV-2 represents a novel mechanism of action of amenamevir and pritelivir. These drugs are being assessed for prevention and treatment of HSV genital infection. The efficacy of amenamevir, administered as a single oral dose of 1200 mg for recurrent genital herpes, was comparable to that of valacyclovir given for 3 days. Pritelivir has a long half-life (up to 80 h) and was studied in a placebo-controlled trial of suppression of genital HSV infections. Compared with placebo, pritelivir—a loading dose followed by either a daily oral dose of 75 mg for 4 weeks or a weekly dose of 400 mg for 4 weeks—reduced HSV shedding and days of genital lesions. Additional clinical studies of the helicase-primase inhibitors of HSV are planned.
# Chunk 3452
Lamivudine is a pyrimidine nucleoside analogue that is used primarily in combination therapy against HIV infection (Chap. 226). Its activity against HBV is attributable to inhibition of the viral DNA polymerase. This drug has also been approved for the treatment of chronic HBV infection. At doses of 100 mg/d given for 1 year to patients positive for hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg), lamivudine is well tolerated and results in suppression of HBV DNA levels, normalization of serum aminotransferase levels in 40–75% of patients, and reduction of hepatic inflammation and fibrosis in 50–60% of patients. Loss of HBeAg occurs in 30% of patients. Lamivudine also appears to be useful in the prevention or suppression of HBV infection associated with liver transplantation. Resistance to lamivudine develops in 24% of patients treated for 1 year and is associated with changes in the YMDD motif of HBV DNA polymerase. Because of the frequency of development of resistance, lamivudine has been largely supplanted by less-resistanceprone drugs for the treatment of HBV infection.
# Chunk 3453
Adefovir dipivoxil is the oral prodrug of adefovir, an acyclic nucleotide analogue of adenosine monophosphate that is active against HBV, HIV, HSV, CMV, and poxviruses. It is phosphorylated by cellular kinases to the active triphosphate moiety, which is a competitive inhibitor of HBV DNA polymerase and results in chain termination after incorporation into nascent viral DNA. Adefovir is administered orally and is eliminated primarily by the kidneys, with a plasma half-life of 5–7.5 h. In clinical studies, therapy with adefovir at a dose of 10 mg/d for 48 weeks resulted in normalization of serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels in 48–72% of patients and improved liver histology in 53–64%; it also resulted in a 3.5to 3.9-log10 reduction in the number of HBV DNA copies per milliliter of plasma. Adefovir was effective in treatment-naïve patients as well as in those infected with lamivudineresistant HBV. Resistance to adefovir appears to develop less readily than that to lamivudine, but adefovir resistance rates of 15–18% have been reported after 192 weeks of treatment and may reach 30% after 5 years. This agent is generally well tolerated. Significant nephrotoxicity attributable to adefovir is uncommon at the dose used in the treatment of HBV infections (10 mg/d) but is a treatment-limiting adverse effect at the higher doses used in therapy for HIV infections (30–120 mg/d). In any case, renal function should be monitored in patients taking adefovir, even at the lower dose. Adefovir is approved only for treatment of chronic HBV infection.
# Chunk 3454
Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate is a prodrug of tenofovir, a nucleotide analogue of adenosine monophosphate with activity against both retroviruses and hepadnaviruses. In both immunocompetent and immunocompromised patients (including those co-infected with HIV and HBV), tenofovir given at a dose of 300 mg/d for 48 weeks reduced HBV replication by 4.6–6 log10, normalized ALT levels in 68–76% of patients, and improved liver histopathology in 72–74% of patients. Resistance develops uncommonly during ≥2 years of therapy, and tenofovir is active against lamivudine-resistant HBV. The safety profile of tenofovir is similar to that of adefovir, but nephrotoxicity has not been encountered at the dose used for HBV therapy. Tenofovir is approved for the treatment of HIV and chronic HBV infections. For a more detailed discussion of tenofovir, see Chap. 226.
# Chunk 3455
Entecavir is a cyclopentyl 2′-deoxyguanosine analogue that inhibits HBV through interaction of entecavir triphosphate with several HBV DNA polymerase functions. At a dose of 0.5 mg/d given for 48 weeks, entecavir reduced HBV DNA copies by 5.0–6.9 log10, normalized serum aminotransferase levels in 68–78% of patients, and improved histopathology in 70–72% of patients. Entecavir inhibits lamivudineresistant viruses that have M550I or M550V/L526M mutations but only at serum concentrations 20or 30-fold higher than those obtained with the 0.5-mg/d dose. Thus, higher doses of entecavir (1 mg/d) are recommended for the treatment of patients infected with lamivudineresistant HBV. Development of resistance to entecavir is uncommon in treatment-naïve patients but does occur at unacceptably high rates
# Chunk 3456
Telbivudine is a β-l enantiomer of thymidine and is a potent, selective inhibitor of HBV. Its active form is telbivudine triphosphate, which inhibits HBV DNA polymerase and causes chain termination but has little or no activity against human DNA polymerase. Administration of telbivudine at an oral dose of 600 mg/d for 52 weeks to patients with chronic hepatitis B resulted in reduction of HBV DNA by 5.2–6.4 log10 copies/mL along with normalization of ALT levels in 74–77% of recipients and improved histopathology in 65–67% of patients. Telbivudineresistant HBV is generally cross-resistant with lamivudine-resistant virus but is usually susceptible to adefovir. After 2 years of therapy, resistance to telbivudine was noted in isolates from 22% of HBeAgpositive patients and in those from 9% of HBeAg-negative patients.
# Chunk 3457
IFNs have undergone extensive study in the treatment of chronic HBV infection. The administration of standard IFN-α2b (5 million units daily or 10 million units three times a week for 16–24 weeks) to patients with stable chronic HBV infection resulted in loss of markers of HBV replication, such as HBeAg and HBV DNA, in 33–37% of cases; 8% of patients also became negative for hepatitis B surface antigen. In most patients who lose HBeAg and HBV DNA markers, serum aminotransferases return to normal levels, and both shortand long-term improvements in liver histopathology have been described.
# Chunk 3458
Predictors of a favorable response to standard IFN therapy include low pretherapy levels of HBV DNA, high pretherapy serum levels of ALT, a short duration of chronic HBV infection, and active inflammation in liver histopathology. Poor responses are seen in immunosuppressed patients, including those with HIV infection.
# Chunk 3459
In pegylated IFNs, IFN alphas are linked to polyethylene glycol. This linkage results in slower absorption, decreased clearance, and more sustained serum concentrations, thereby permitting a more convenient, once-weekly dosing schedule; in many instances, pegylated IFN has supplanted standard IFN. After 48 weeks of treatment with 180 μg of pegylated IFN-α2a, HBV DNA was reduced by 4.1–4.5 log10 copies/mL, with normalization of serum ALT levels in 39% of patients and improved histology in 38%. Response rates were somewhat higher when lamivudine was administered with pegylated IFN-α2a. Adverse effects of IFN are common and include fever, chills, myalgia, fatigue, neurotoxicity (manifested primarily as somnolence, depression, anxiety, and confusion), and leukopenia. Autoantibodies (e.g., antithyroid antibodies) can also develop. IFN-α2b and pegylated IFN-α2a are approved for the treatment of patients with chronic hepatitis B. Data supporting the therapeutic efficacy of pegylated interferon-α2b in HBV infection have been published; the drug has not been approved for this indication in the United States but has been approved for treatment of chronic HBV infection in other countries.
# Chunk 3460
Several IFN preparations, including IFN-α2a, IFN-α2b, IFNalfacon-1, and IFN-αm1 (lymphoblastoid), have been studied as therapy for chronic HCV infections. A variety of monotherapy regimens have been studied, of which the most common for standard IFN is IFN-α2b or -α2a at 3 million units three times per week for 12–18 months. The addition of oral ribavirin to IFN-α2b—either as initial therapy or after failure of IFN therapy alone—results in significantly higher rates of sustained virologic and/or serum ALT responses (40–50%) than are obtained with monotherapy. Comparative studies indicate that pegylated IFN-α2b or -α2a therapy is more effective than standard IFN treatment against chronic HCV infection. The combination of SC pegylated IFN and oral ribavirin results in sustained virologic responses (SVRs) in 42–51% of patients with HCV genotype 1 infection and in 76–82% of patients with genotype 2 or 3 infection. Ribavirin appears to have a small antiviral effect in HCV infection but may also be working through an immunomodulatory effect in combination with IFN. Optimal results with ribavirin appear to be associated with weight-based dosing. Prognostic factors for a favorable response include an age of <40 years, a short duration of infection, low levels of HCV RNA, a lesser degree of liver histopathology, and infection with HCV genotypes other than 1. IFN-alfacon, a synthetic “consensus” α interferon, appears to produce response rates similar to those elicited by standard IFN-α2a or -α2b alone. In 2014, the approval of a polymerase inhibitor, sofosbuvir, and a second-generation protease inhibitor, simeprevir, led to revised recommendations for treatment of hepatitis C with triple combinations of pegylated IFN, ribavirin, and one of these two drugs, depending on the viral genotype (see below and Table 215e-1).
# Chunk 3461
Simeprevir has been recommended as a component of alternative treatment—in combination with pegylated IFN and ribavirin—of chronic infection with HCV genotypes 1 and 4. Daily simeprevir, daily ribavirin, and weekly pegylated IFN for 12 weeks followed by another 12 weeks of pegylated IFN and ribavirin resulted in an SVR of 80% in the absence of the Q80K variant. In general, simeprevir‐based triple therapy appeared to be 10% less likely to yield an SVR than sofosbuvirbased therapy and more likely to cause adverse effects. However, for prior nonresponders or partial responders to pegylated IFN, the IFN‐free regimen of simeprevir, sofosbuvir, and ribavirin shows promise.
# Chunk 3462
worldwide. The past 15 years have shown that the prevalence of

HSV-2 is even higher in the developing than in the developed world. In sub-Saharan Africa, HSV-2 seroprevalence among pregnant women may approach 60%, and annual acquisition rates among teenage girls may verge on 20%. The global incidence has been estimated at ~23.6 million infections per year. As in the developed world, the rate of HSV-2 coital acquisition as well as the serologic prevalence is higher among women than among men. Most of this HSV-2 acquisition is preceded by acquisition of HSV-1; the frequency of genital HSV-1 in the developing world is low at present.
# Chunk 3463
In addition, HSV-2 facilitates the spread of HIV into low-risk populations on a per-coital basis, and prevalent HSV-2 appears to increase the risk of HIV infection by sevento ninefold. Mathematical models suggest that ~33–50% of HIV-1 infections may be attributable to HSV-2 both in men who have sex with men (MSM) and in sub-Saharan Africa. In addition, HSV-2 is more frequently reactivated in and transmitted by persons co-infected with HIV-1 as opposed to persons not co-infected. Thus, most areas of the world with a high HIV-1 prevalence also have a high HSV-2 prevalence. A wide variety of serologic surveys have indicated a similar or even higher seroprevalence of HSV-2 in most parts of Central America, South America, and Africa. In Africa, HSV-2 seroprevalence has ranged from 40% to 70% in obstetric and other sexually experienced populations. Antibody prevalence rates average ~5–10% higher among women than among men.
# Chunk 3464
HSV infections occur throughout the year. Transmission can result from contact with persons who have active ulcerative lesions or with persons who have no clinical manifestations of infection but who are shedding HSV from mucocutaneous surfaces. HSV reactivation on genital skin and mucosal surfaces is common. The frequency of sampling influences the frequency of detection. Recent studies indicate that most HSV-1 and HSV-2 episodes last <4–6 h; thus, replication of virus and clearance by the host are rapid. Even with once-daily sampling, HSV DNA can be detected on 20–30% of days by PCR. Corresponding figures for HSV-1 in oral secretions are similar. Rates of shedding are highest during the initial years after acquisition, with viral shedding occurring on as many as 30–50% of days during this period. Immunosuppressed patients shed HSV from mucosal sites at an even higher frequency (20–80% of days). These high rates of mucocutane-1177 ous reactivation suggest that exposure to HSV from sexual or other close contact (kissing, sharing of glasses or silverware) is common and help explain the continuing spread and high seroprevalence of HSV infections worldwide. Reactivation rates vary widely among individuals. Among HIV-positive patients, a low CD4+ T cell count and a high HIV-1 load are associated with increased rates of HSV reactivation. Daily antiviral chemotherapy for HSV-2 infection can reduce shedding rates but does not eliminate shedding, as measured by PCR or culture.
# Chunk 3465
Oral-Facial Infections Gingivostomatitis and pharyngitis are the most common clinical manifestations of first-episode HSV-1 infection, whereas recurrent herpes labialis is the most common clinical manifestation of reactivation HSV-1 infection. HSV pharyngitis and gingivostomatitis usually result from primary infection and are most common among children and young adults. Clinical symptoms and signs, which include fever, malaise, myalgias, inability to eat, irritabil ity, and cervical adenopathy, may last 3–14 days. Lesions may involve the hard and soft palate, gingiva, tongue, lip, and facial area. HSV-1 or HSV-2 infection of the pharynx usually results in exudative or ulcerative lesions of the posterior pharynx and/or tonsillar pillars. Lesions of the tongue, buccal mucosa, or gingiva may occur later in the course in one-third of cases. Fever lasting 2–7 days and cervical adenopathy are common. It can be difficult to differentiate HSV pharyngitis clinically from bacterial pharyngitis, Mycoplasma pneumoniae infections, and pharyngeal ulcerations of noninfectious etiologies (e.g., Stevens-Johnson syndrome). No substantial evidence suggests that reactivation of oral-labial HSV infection is associated with symptomatic recurrent pharyngitis.
# Chunk 3466
In immunosuppressed patients, HSV infection may extend into mucosal and deep cutaneous layers. Friability, necrosis, bleeding, severe pain, and inability to eat or drink may result. The lesions of HSV mucositis are clinically similar to mucosal lesions caused by cytotoxic drug therapy, trauma, or fungal or bacterial infections. Persistent ulcerative HSV infections are among the most common infections in patients with AIDS. HSV and Candida infections often occur concurrently. Systemic antiviral therapy speeds the rate of healing and relieves the pain of mucosal HSV infections in immunosuppressed patients. The frequency of HSV reactivation during the early phases of transplantation or induction chemotherapy is high (50–90%), and prophylactic systemic antiviral agents such as IV acyclovir and penciclovir or 1178 the oral congeners of these drugs are used to reduce reactivation rates. Patients with atopic eczema may also develop severe oral-facial HSV infections (eczema herpeticum), which may rapidly involve extensive areas of skin and occasionally disseminate to visceral organs. Extensive eczema herpeticum has resolved promptly with the administration of IV acyclovir. Erythema multiforme may also be associated with HSV infections (see Figs. 70-9 and 25e-25); some evidence suggests that HSV infection is the precipitating event in ~75% of cases of cutaneous erythema multiforme. HSV antigen has been demonstrated both in circulatory immune complexes and in skin lesion biopsy samples from these cases. Patients with severe HSV-associated erythema multiforme are candidates for chronic suppressive oral antiviral therapy. HSV-1 and varicella-zoster virus (VZV) have been implicated in the etiology of Bell’s palsy (flaccid paralysis of the mandibular portion of the facial nerve). Some but not all trials have documented quicker resolution of facial paralysis with the prompt initiation of antiviral therapy, with or without glucocorticoids. However, other trials have shown little benefit. Thus there is no consensus on the relative value of antiviral drugs alone, glucocorticoids alone, and the two modalities combined for the treatment of Bell’s palsy.
# Chunk 3467
Genital Infections First-episode primary genital herpes is characterized by fever, headache, malaise, and myalgias. Pain, itching, dysuria, vaginal and urethral discharge, and tender inguinal lymphadenopathy are the predominant local symptoms. Widely spaced bilateral lesions of the external genitalia are characteristic (Fig. 216-1). Lesions may be present in varying stages, including vesicles, pustules, or painful erythematous ulcers. The cervix and urethra are involved in >80% of women with first-episode infections. First episodes of genital herpes in patients who have had prior HSV-1 infection are associated with systemic symptoms in a few patients and with faster healing than primary genital herpes. Subclinical DNAemia has been found in ~30% of cases of true primary genital herpes. The clinical courses of acute first-episode genital herpes are similar for HSV-1 and HSV-2 infection. However, the recurrence rates of genital disease differ with the viral subtype: the 12-month recurrence rates among patients with first-episode HSV-2 and HSV-1 infections are ~90% and ~55%, respectively (median number of recurrences, 4 and <1, respectively). Recurrence rates for genital HSV-2 infections vary greatly among individuals and over time within the same individual. HSV has been isolated from the urethra and urine of men and women without external genital lesions. A clear mucoid discharge and dysuria are characteristics of symptomatic HSV urethritis. HSV has been isolated from the urethra of 5% of women with the dysuria-frequency syndrome. Occasionally, HSV genital tract disease is manifested by endometritis and salpingitis in women and by prostatitis in men. About 15% of cases of HSV-2 acquisition are associated with nonlesional clinical syndromes, such as aseptic meningitis, cervicitis, or urethritis. A more complete discussion of the differential diagnosis of genital herpes is presented in Chap. 163.
# Chunk 3468
Recent studies have identified genetic polymorphisms in two separate genes among families with a high frequency of HSV encephalitis. Peripheral-blood mononuclear cells from these patients (predominantly children) appear to secrete reduced levels of IFN in response to HSV. These observations suggest that some cases of sporadic HSV encephalitis may be related to host genetic determinants. The clinical hallmark of HSV encephalitis has been the acute onset of fever and focal neurologic symptoms and signs, especially in the temporal lobe (Fig. 216-2). Clinical differentiation of HSV encephalitis from other viral encephalitides, focal infections, or noninfectious processes is difficult. Elevated cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) protein levels, leukocytosis (predominantly lymphocytes), and red blood cell counts due to hemorrhagic necrosis are common. While brain biopsy has been the gold standard for defining HSV encephalitis, a highly sensitive and specific PCR for detection of HSV DNA in CSF has largely replaced biopsy for defining CNS infection. Although titers of antibody to HSV in CSF and serum increase in most cases of HSV encephalitis, they rarely do so earlier than 10 days into the illness and therefore, although useful in retrospect, generally are not helpful in establishing an early clinical diagnosis. In rare cases, demonstration of HSV antigen, HSV DNA, or HSV replication in brain tissue obtained by biopsy is highly sensitive; examination of such tissue also provides the opportunity to identify alternative, potentially treatable causes of encephalitis. Antiviral chemotherapy with acyclovir reduces the rate of death from HSV encephalitis. Most authorities recommend the administration of IV acyclovir to patients with presumed HSV encephalitis until the diagnosis is confirmed or an alternative diagnosis is made. All con-1179 firmed cases should be treated with IV acyclovir (30 mg/kg per day in three divided doses for 14–21 days). After the completion of therapy, the clinical recurrence of encephalitis requiring more treatment has been reported. For this reason, some authorities prefer to treat initially for 21 days, and many continue therapy until HSV DNA has been eliminated from the CSF. Even with therapy, neurologic sequelae are common, especially among persons >50 years of age.
# Chunk 3469
HSV DNA has been detected in CSF from 3–15% of persons presenting to the hospital with aseptic meningitis. HSV meningitis, which is usually seen in association with primary genital HSV infection, is an acute, self-limited disease manifested by headache, fever, and mild photophobia and lasting 2–7 days. Lymphocytic pleocytosis in the CSF is characteristic. Neurologic sequelae of HSV meningitis are rare. HSV is the most commonly identified cause of recurrent lymphocytic meningitis (Mollaret’s meningitis). Demonstration of HSV antibodies in CSF or persistence of HSV DNA in CSF can establish the diagnosis. For persons with frequent recurrences of HSV meningitis, daily antiviral therapy has reduced the occurrence of such episodes.
# Chunk 3470
Visceral Infections HSV infection of visceral organs usually results from viremia, and multiple-organ involvement is common. Occasionally, however, the clinical manifestations of HSV infection involve only the esophagus, lung, or liver. HSV esophagitis may result from direct extension of oral-pharyngeal HSV infection into the esophagus or may occur de novo by reactivation and spread of HSV to the esophageal mucosa via the vagus nerve. The predominant symptoms of HSV esophagitis are odynophagia, dysphagia, substernal pain, and weight loss. Multiple oval ulcerations appear on an erythematous base with or without a patchy white pseudomembrane. The distal esophagus is most commonly involved. With extensive disease, diffuse friability may spread to the entire esophagus. Neither endoscopic nor barium examination can reliably differentiate HSV esophagitis from Candida esophagitis or from esophageal ulcerations due to thermal injury, radiation, or corrosives. Endoscopically obtained secretions for cytologic examination and culture or DNA detection by PCR provide the most useful material for diagnosis. Systemic antiviral chemotherapy usually reduces the severity and duration of symptoms and heals esophageal ulcerations. HSV pneumonitis is uncommon except in severely immunosuppressed patients and may result from extension of herpetic tracheobronchitis into lung parenchyma. Focal necrotizing pneumonitis usually ensues. Hematogenous dissemination of virus from sites of oral or genital mucocutaneous
# Chunk 3471
1180 disease may also occur, producing bilateral interstitial pneumonitis. Bacterial, fungal, and parasitic pathogens are commonly present in HSV pneumonitis. The mortality rate from untreated HSV pneumonia in immunosuppressed patients is high (>80%). HSV has also been isolated from the lower respiratory tract of persons with acute respiratory distress syndrome and prolonged intubation. Most authorities believe that the presence of HSV in tracheal aspirates in such settings is due to reactivation of HSV in the tracheal region and localized tracheitis in persons with long-term intubation. Such patients should be evaluated for extension of HSV infection into the lung parenchyma. Controlled trials assessing the role of antiviral agents used against HSV in morbidity and mortality associated with acute respiratory distress syndrome have not been conducted. The role of lower respiratory tract HSV infection in overall rates of morbidity and mortality associated with these conditions is unclear. HSV is an uncommon cause of hepatitis in immunocompetent patients. HSV infection of the liver is associated with fever, abrupt elevations of bilirubin and serum aminotransferase levels, and leukopenia (<4000 white blood cells/μL). Disseminated intravascular coagulation may also develop. Other reported complications of HSV infection include monarticular arthritis, adrenal necrosis, idiopathic thrombocytopenia, and glomerulonephritis. Disseminated HSV infection in immunocompetent patients is rare. In immunocompromised patients, burn patients, or malnourished individuals, HSV occasionally disseminates to other visceral organs, such as the adrenal glands, pancreas, small and large intestines, and bone marrow. Rarely, primary HSV infection in pregnancy disseminates and may be associated with the death of both mother and fetus. This uncommon event is usually related to the acquisition of primary infection in the third trimester. Disseminated HSV infection is best detected by the presence of HSV DNA in plasma or blood.
# Chunk 3472
Neonatal HSV Infections Of all HSV-infected populations, neonates (infants younger than 6 weeks) have the highest frequency of visceral and/or CNS infection. Without therapy, the overall rate of death from neonatal herpes is 65%; <10% of neonates with CNS infection develop normally. Although skin lesions are the most commonly recognized features of disease, many infants do not develop lesions at all or do so only well into the course of disease. Neonatal infection is usually acquired perinatally from contact with infected genital secretions at delivery. Congenitally infected infants have been reported. Of neonatal HSV infections, 30–50% are due to HSV-1 and 50–70% to HSV-2. The risk of developing neonatal HSV infection is 10 times higher for an infant born to a mother who has recently acquired HSV than for other infants. Neonatal HSV-1 infections may also be acquired through postnatal contact with immediate family members who have symptomatic or asymptomatic oral-labial HSV-1 infection or through nosocomial transmission within the hospital. All neonates with presumed herpes should be treated with IV acyclovir and then placed on maintenance oral antiviral therapy for the first 6–12 months of life. Antiviral chemotherapy with high-dose IV acyclovir (60 mg/kg per day) has reduced the mortality rate from neonatal herpes to ~15%. However, rates of morbidity, especially among infants with HSV-2 infection involving the CNS, are still very high.
# Chunk 3473
The acquisition of primary disease in pregnancy, whether related to HSV-1 or HSV-2, carries the risk of transplacental transmission of virus to the neonate and can result in spontaneous abortion, although this outcome is relatively uncommon. For newly acquired genital HSV infection during pregnancy, most authorities recommend treatment with acyclovir (400 mg three times daily) or valacyclovir (500–1000 mg twice daily) for 7–10 days. However, the impact of this intervention on transmission is unknown. The high HSV-2 prevalence rate in pregnancy and the low incidence of neonatal disease (1 case per 6000–20,000 live births) indicate that only a few infants are at risk of acquiring HSV. Therefore, cesarean section is not warranted for all women with recurrent genital disease. Because intrapartum transmission of infection accounts for the majority of cases, abdominal delivery need be considered only for women who are shedding HSV at delivery. Several studies have shown no correlation between recurrence of viral shedding before delivery and viral shedding at term. Hence, weekly virologic monitoring and amniocentesis are not recommended.
# Chunk 3474
Isolation of HSV by cervicovaginal swab at the time of delivery is the greatest risk factor for intrapartum HSV transmission (relative risk = 346); however, culture-negative, PCR-positive cases of intrapartum transmission are well described. New acquisition of HSV (odds ratio [OR] = 49), isolation of HSV-1 versus HSV-2 (OR = 35), cervical versus vulvar HSV detection (OR = 15), use of fetal scalp electrodes (OR = 3.5), and young age confer further risk of transmission, whereas abdominal delivery is protective (OR = 0.14). Physical examination poorly predicts the absence of shedding, and PCR far exceeds culture in terms of sensitivity and speed. Therefore, PCR detection at the onset of labor should be used to aid clinical decision-making for women with HSV-2 antibody. Because cesarean section appears to be an effective means of reducing maternal-fetal transmission, patients with recurrent genital herpes should be encouraged to come to the hospital early at the time of delivery for careful examination of the external genitalia and cervix as well as collection of a swab sample for viral isolation. Women who have no evidence of lesions can have a vaginal delivery. The presence of active lesions on the cervix or external genitalia is an indication for cesarean delivery.
# Chunk 3475
Acyclovir, ganciclovir, famciclovir, and valacyclovir are all selectively 1181 phosphorylated to the monophosphate form in virus-infected cells. Cellular enzymes convert the monophosphate form of the drug to the triphosphate, which is then incorporated into the viral DNA chain. Acyclovir is the agent most frequently used for the treatment of HSV infections and is available in IV, oral, and topical formulations. Valacyclovir, the valyl ester of acyclovir, offers greater bioavailability than acyclovir and thus can be administered less frequently. Famciclovir, the oral formulation of penciclovir, is clinically effective in the treatment of a variety of HSV-1 and HSV-2 infections. Ganciclovir is active against both HSV-1 and HSV-2; however, it is more toxic than acyclovir, valacyclovir, and famciclovir and generally is not recommended for the treatment of HSV infections. Anecdotal case reports suggest that ganciclovir may also be less effective than acyclovir for treatment of HSV infections. All three recommended compounds—acyclovir, valacyclovir, and famciclovir—have proved effective in shortening the duration of symptoms and lesions of mucocutaneous HSV infections in both immunocompromised and immunocompetent patients (Table 216-1). IV and oral formulations prevent reactivation of HSV in seropositive immunocompromised patients during induction chemotherapy or in the period immediately after bone marrow or solid organ transplantation. Chronic daily suppressive therapy reduces the frequency of reactivation disease among patients with frequent genital or oral-labial herpes. Only valacyclovir has been subjected to clinical trials that demonstrated reduced transmission of HSV-2 infection between sexual partners. IV acyclovir (30 mg/kg per day, given as a 10-mg/kg infu sion over 1 h at 8-h intervals) is effective in reducing rates of death and morbidity from HSV encephalitis. Early initiation of therapy is a critical factor in outcome. The major side effect associated with IV acyclovir is transient renal insufficiency, usually due to crystallization of the compound in the renal parenchyma. This adverse reaction can be avoided if the medication is given slowly over 1 h and the patient is well hydrated. Because CSF levels of acyclovir average only 30–50% of plasma levels, the dosage of acyclovir used for treatment of CNS infection (30 mg/kg per day) is double that used for treatment of mucocutaneous or visceral disease (15 mg/kg per day). Even higher doses of IV acyclovir are used for neonatal HSV infection (60 mg/kg per day in three divided doses).
# Chunk 3476
B. Infections in immunocompetent patients 1. Genital herpes a.

First episodes: Oral acyclovir (200 mg 5 times per day or 400 mg tid), valacyclovir (1 g bid), or famciclovir (250 mg bid) for 7–14 days is effective. IV acyclovir (5 mg/kg q8h for 5 days) is given for severe disease or neurologic complications such as aseptic meningitis.
# Chunk 3477
b.

Symptomatic recurrent genital herpes: Short-course (1to 3-day) regimens are preferred because of low cost, likelihood of adherence, and convenience. Oral acyclovir (800 mg tid for 2 days), valacyclovir (500 mg bid for 3 days), or famciclovir (750 or 1000 mg bid for 1 day, a 1500-mg single dose, or 500 mg stat followed by 250 mg q12h for 3 days) effectively shortens lesion duration. Other options include oral acyclovir (200 mg 5 times per day), valacyclovir (500 mg bid), and famciclovir (125 mg bid for 5 days).
# Chunk 3478
Acyclovir-resistant strains of HSV have been identified. Most of these strains have an altered substrate specificity for phosphorylating acyclovir. Thus, cross-resistance to famciclovir and valacyclovir is usually found. Occasionally, an isolate with altered TK specificity arises and is sensitive to famciclovir but not to acyclovir. In some patients infected with TK-deficient virus, higher doses of acyclovir are associated with clearing of lesions. In others, clinical disease progresses despite high-dose therapy. Almost all clinically significant acyclovir resistance has been seen in immunocompromised patients, and HSV-2 isolates are more often resistant than HSV-1 strains. A study by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention indicated that ~5% of HSV-2 isolates from HIV-positive persons exhibit some degree of in vitro resistance to acyclovir. Of HSV-2 isolates from immunocompetent patients attending sexually transmitted disease clinics, <0.5% show reduced in vitro sensitivity to acyclovir. The lack of appreciable change in the frequency of detection of such isolates in the past 20 years probably reflects the reduced transmission of TK-deficient mutants. Isolation of HSV from lesions persisting despite adequate dosages and blood levels of acyclovir should raise the suspicion of acyclovir resistance. Therapy with the antiviral drug foscarnet is useful in acyclovir-resistant cases (Chap. 215e). Because of its toxicity and cost, this drug is usually reserved for patients with extensive mucocutaneous infections. Cidofovir is a nucleotide analogue and exists as a phosphonate or monophosphate form. Most TK-deficient strains of HSV are sensitive to cidofovir. Cidofovir ointment speeds healing of acyclovir-resistant lesions. No well-controlled trials of systemic cidofovir have been reported. True TK-negative variants of HSV appear to have a reduced capacity to spread because of altered neurovirulence—a feature important in the relatively infrequent presence of such strains in immunocompetent populations, even with increasing use of antiviral drugs.
# Chunk 3479
EPIDEMIOLOGY AND CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS Chickenpox Humans are the only known reservoir for VZV. Chickenpox is highly contagious, with an attack rate of at least 90% among susceptible (seronegative) individuals. Persons of both sexes and all races are infected equally. The virus is endemic in the population at large; however, it becomes epidemic among susceptible individuals during seasonal peaks—namely, late winter and early spring in the temperate zone. Much of our knowledge of the disease’s natural history and incidence predates the licensure of the chickenpox vaccine in 1995. Historically, children 5–9 years old are most commonly affected and account for 50% of all cases. Most other cases involve children 1–4 and 10–14 years old. Approximately 10% of the population of the United States over the age of 15 is susceptible to infection. VZV vaccination during the second year of life has dramatically changed the epidemiology of infection, causing a significant decrease in the annualized incidence of chickenpox.
# Chunk 3480
within a household are 70–90%. Patients are infectious ~48 h before onset of the vesicular rash, during the period of vesicle formation (which generally lasts 4–5 days), and until all vesicles are crusted.
# Chunk 3481
Clinically, chickenpox presents as a rash, low-grade fever, and malaise, although a few patients develop a prodrome 1–2 days before onset of the exanthem. In the immunocompetent patient, chickenpox is usually a benign illness associated with lassitude and with body temperatures of 37.8°–39.4°C (100°–103°F) of 3–5 days’ duration. The skin lesions—the hallmark of the infection—include maculopapules, vesicles, and scabs in various stages of evolution (Fig. 217-1). These lesions, which evolve from maculopapules to vesicles over hours to days, appear on the trunk and face and rapidly spread to involve other areas of the body. Most are small and have an erythematous base with a diameter of 5–10 mm. Successive crops appear over a 2to 4-day period. Lesions can also be found on the mucosa of the pharynx and/or the vagina. Their severity varies from one person to another. Some individuals have very few lesions, while others have as many as 2000. Younger children tend to have fewer vesicles than older individuals. Secondary and tertiary cases within families are associated with a relatively large number of vesicles. Immunocompromised patients— both children and adults, particularly those with leukemia—have lesions (often with a hemorrhagic base) that are more numerous and take longer to heal than those of immunocompetent patients. Immunocompromised individuals are also at greater risk for visceral complications, which occur in 30–50% of cases and are fatal 15% of the time in the absence of antiviral therapy.
# Chunk 3482
Varicella pneumonia, the most serious complication following chickenpox, develops more often in adults (up to 20% of cases) than in children and is particularly severe in pregnant women. Pneumonia due to VZV usually has its onset 3–5 days into the illness and is associated with tachypnea, cough, dyspnea, and fever. Cyanosis, pleuritic chest pain, and hemoptysis are frequently noted. Roentgenographic evidence of disease consists of nodular infiltrates and interstitial pneumonitis. Resolution of pneumonitis parallels improvement of the skin rash; however, patients may have persistent fever and compromised pulmonary function for weeks.
# Chunk 3483
Perinatal varicella is associated with mortality rates as high as 30% when maternal disease develops within 5 days before delivery or within 48 h thereafter. Illness in this setting is unusually severe because the newborn does not receive protective transplacental antibodies and has an immature immune system. Congenital varicella, with clinical manifestations of limb hypoplasia, cicatricial skin lesions, and microcephaly at birth, is extremely uncommon.
# Chunk 3484
Recipients of hematopoietic stem cell transplants are at particularly high risk of VZV infection. Of all cases of posttransplantation VZV infection, 30% occur within 1 year (50% of these within 9 months); 45% of the patients involved have cutaneous or visceral dissemination. The mortality rate in this situation is 10%. Postherpetic neuralgia,
# Chunk 3485
Unequivocal confirmation of the diagnosis is possible only through the isolation of VZV in susceptible tissue-culture cell lines, the demonstration of either seroconversion or a fourfold or greater rise in antibody titer between acute-phase and convalescent-phase serum specimens, or the detection of VZV DNA by PCR. A rapid impression can be obtained by a Tzanck smear, with scraping of the base of the lesions in an attempt to demonstrate multinucleated giant cells; however, the sensitivity of this method is low (~60%). PCR technology for the detection of viral DNA in vesicular fluid is available in a limited number of diagnostic laboratories. Direct immunofluorescent staining of cells from the lesion base or detection of viral antigens by other assays (such as the immunoperoxidase assay) is also useful, although these tests are not commercially available. The most frequently employed serologic tools for assessing host response are the immunofluorescent detection of antibodies to VZV membrane antigens, the fluorescent antibody to membrane antigen (FAMA) test, immune adherence hemagglutination, and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The FAMA test and the ELISA appear to be most sensitive.
# Chunk 3486
Medical management of chickenpox in the immunologically normal host is directed toward the prevention of avoidable complications. Obviously, good hygiene includes daily bathing and soaks. Secondary bacterial infection of the skin can be avoided by meticulous skin care, particularly with close cropping of fingernails. Pruritus can be decreased with topical dressings or the administration of antipruritic drugs. Tepid water baths and wet compresses are better than drying lotions for the relief of itching. Administration of aspirin to children with chickenpox should be avoided because of the association of aspirin derivatives with the development of Reye’s syndrome. Acyclovir (800 mg by mouth five times daily), valacyclovir (1 g three times daily), or famciclovir (250 mg three times daily) for 5–7 days is recommended for adolescents and adults with chickenpox of 1186 ≤24 h duration. (Valacyclovir is licensed for use in children and adolescents. Famciclovir is recommended but not licensed for varicella.) Likewise, acyclovir therapy may be of benefit to children <12 years of age if initiated early in the disease (<24 h) at a dose of 20 mg/kg every 6 h. The advantages (i.e., pharmacokinetics) of the second-generation agents valacyclovir and famciclovir are described in Chap. 215e. Aluminum acetate soaks for the management of herpes zoster can be both soothing and cleansing. Patients with herpes zoster benefit from oral antiviral therapy, as evidenced by accelerated healing of lesions and resolution of zoster-associated pain with acyclovir, valacyclovir, or famciclovir. Acyclovir is administered at a dosage of 800 mg five times daily for 7–10 days. However, valacyclovir and famciclovir are superior in terms of pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics and should be used preferentially. Famciclovir, the prodrug of penciclovir, is at least as effective as acyclovir and perhaps more so; the dose is 500 mg by mouth three times daily for 7 days. Valacyclovir, the prodrug of acyclovir, accelerates healing and resolution of zosterassociated pain more promptly than acyclovir. The dose is 1 g by mouth three times daily for 5–7 days. Compared with acyclovir, both famciclovir and valacyclovir offer the advantage of less frequent administration. All three of these drugs are now off patent. In severely immunocompromised hosts (e.g., transplant recipients, patients with lymphoproliferative malignancies), both chickenpox and herpes zoster (including disseminated disease) should be treated, at least at the outset, with IV acyclovir, which reduces the occurrence of visceral complications but has no effect on healing of skin lesions or pain. The dose is 10 mg/kg every 8 h for 7 days. For low-risk immunocompromised hosts, oral therapy with valacyclovir or famciclovir appears beneficial. If medically feasible, it is desirable to decrease immunosuppressive treatment concomitant with the administration of IV acyclovir. Patients with varicella pneumonia often require ventilatory support. Persons with zoster ophthalmicus should be referred immediately to an ophthalmologist. Therapy for this condition consists of the administration of analgesics for severe pain and the use of atropine. Acyclovir, valacyclovir, and famciclovir all accelerate healing. Decisions about the use of glucocorticoids should be made by the ophthalmologist. The management of acute neuritis and/or postherpetic neuralgia can be particularly difficult. In addition to the judicious use of analgesics ranging from nonnarcotics to narcotic derivatives, drugs such as gabapentin, pregabalin, amitriptyline hydrochloride, lidocaine (patches), and fluphenazine hydrochloride are reportedly beneficial for pain relief. In one study, glucocorticoid therapy administered early in the course of localized herpes zoster significantly accelerated such quality-of-life improvements as a return to usual activity and termination of analgesic medications. The dose of prednisone administered orally was 60 mg/d on days 1–7, 30 mg/d on days 8–14, and 15 mg/d on days 15–21. This regimen is appropriate only for relatively healthy elderly persons with moderate or severe pain at presentation. Patients with osteoporosis, diabetes mellitus, glycosuria, or hypertension may not be appropriate candidates. Glucocorticoids should not be used without concomitant antiviral therapy.
# Chunk 3487
Three methods are used for the prevention of VZV infections. First, a live attenuated varicella vaccine (Oka) is recommended for all children >1 year of age (up to 12 years of age) who have not had chickenpox and for adults known to be seronegative for VZV. Two doses are recommended for all children: the first at 12–15 months of age and the second at ~4–6 years of age. VZV-seronegative persons >13 years of age should receive two doses of vaccine at least 1 month apart. The vaccine is both safe and efficacious. Breakthrough cases are mild and may result in spread of the vaccine virus to susceptible contacts. The universal vaccination of children is resulting in a decreased incidence of chickenpox in sentinel communities. Furthermore, inactivation of the vaccine virus significantly decreases the occurrence of herpes zoster after hematopoietic stem-cell transplantation.
# Chunk 3488
Cellular immunity is more important than humoral immunity in controlling EBV infection. In the initial phase of infection, suppressor T cells, natural killer cells, and nonspecific cytotoxic T cells are important in controlling the proliferation of EBV-infected B cells. Levels of markers of T cell activation and serum interferon γ are elevated. Later in infection, human leukocyte antigen–restricted cytotoxic T cells that recognize EBNAs and LMPs and destroy EBV-infected cells are generated.
# Chunk 3489
The incubation period for IM in young adults is ~4–6 weeks. A prodrome of fatigue, malaise, and myalgia may last for 1–2 weeks before the onset of fever, sore throat, and lymphadenopathy. Fever is usually low-grade and is most common in the first 2 weeks of the illness; however, it may persist for >1 month. Common signs and symptoms are listed along with their frequencies in Table 218-1. Lymphadenopathy and pharyngitis are most prominent during the first 2 weeks of the illness, while splenomegaly is more prominent during the second and third weeks. Lymphadenopathy most often affects the posterior cervical nodes but may be generalized. Enlarged lymph nodes are frequently tender and symmetric but are not fixed in place. Pharyngitis, often the most prominent sign, can be accompanied by enlargement of the tonsils with an exudate resembling that of streptococcal pharyngitis. A morbilliform or papular rash, usually on the arms or trunk, develops in ~5% of cases (Fig. 218-1). Many patients treated with ampicillin develop a macular rash; this rash is not predictive of future adverse reactions to penicillins. Erythema nodosum and erythema multiforme also have been described (Chap. 72). The severity of the disease correlates with the levels of CD8+ T cells and EBV DNA in the blood. Most patients have symptoms for 2–4 weeks, but nearly 10% have fatigue that persists for ≥6 months.
# Chunk 3490
Laboratory Findings The white blood cell count is usually elevated and peaks at 10,000–20,000/μL during the second or third week of illness. Lymphocytosis is usually demonstrable, with >10% atypical lymphocytes. The latter cells are enlarged lymphocytes that have abundant cytoplasm, vacuoles, and indentations of the cell membrane (Fig. 218-2). CD8+ cells predominate among the atypical lymphocytes. Low-grade neutropenia and thrombocytopenia are common during the first month of illness. Liver function is abnormal in >90% of cases. Serum levels of aminotransferases and alkaline phosphatase are usually mildly elevated. The serum concentration of bilirubin is elevated in ~40% of cases.
# Chunk 3491
Autoimmune hemolytic anemia occurs in ~2% of cases during the first 2 weeks. In most cases, the anemia is Coombs-positive, with cold agglutinins directed against the red blood cell antigen. Most patients with hemolysis have mild anemia that lasts for 1–2 months, but some patients have severe disease with hemoglobinuria and jaundice. Nonspecific antibody responses may also include rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibodies, anti–smooth muscle antibodies, antiplatelet antibodies, and cryoglobulins. IM has been associated with red-cell aplasia, severe granulocytopenia, thrombocytopenia, pancytopenia, and hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. The spleen ruptures in <0.5% of cases. Splenic rupture is more common among male than female patients and may manifest as abdominal pain, referred shoulder pain, or hemodynamic compromise.
# Chunk 3492
EBV is associated with several malignancies. About 15% of cases of Burkitt’s lymphoma in the United States and ~90% of those in Africa are associated with EBV (Chap. 134). African patients with Burkitt’s lymphoma have high levels of antibody to EBV, and their tumor tissue usually contains viral DNA. Malaria in African patients may impair cellular immunity to EBV and induce polyclonal B cell activation with an expansion of EBV-infected B cells. These changes may enhance the proliferation of B cells with elevated EBV DNA in the bloodstream, thereby increasing the likelihood of a c-myc translocation—the hallmark of Burkitt’s lymphoma. EBV-containing Burkitt’s lymphoma also occurs in patients with AIDS.
# Chunk 3493
EBV has been associated with Hodgkin’s disease, especially the mixed-cellularity type (Chap. 134). Patients with Hodgkin’s disease often have elevated titers of antibody to EBV. In about half of cases in the United States, viral DNA and antigens are found in Reed-Sternberg cells. The risk of EBV-positive Hodgkin’s disease is significantly increased in young adults for several years after EBV-seropositive IM. About 50% of non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas in patients with AIDS are EBV-positive.
# Chunk 3494
DIAGNOSIS Serologic Testing (Fig. 218-4) The heterophile test is used for the diagnosis of IM in children and adults. In the test for this antibody, human serum is absorbed with guinea pig kidney, and the heterophile titer is defined as the greatest serum dilution that agglutinates sheep, horse, or cow erythrocytes. The heterophile antibody does not interact with EBV proteins. A titer of ≥40 is diagnostic of acute EBV infection in a patient who has symptoms compatible with IM and atypical lymphocytes. Tests for heterophile antibodies are positive in 40% of patients with IM during the first week of illness and in 80–90% during the third week. Therefore, repeated testing may be necessary, especially if the initial test is performed early. Tests usually remain positive for 3 months after the onset of illness, but heterophile antibodies can persist for up to 1 year. These antibodies usually are not detectable in children <5 years of age, in the elderly, or in patients presenting with symptoms not typical of IM. The commercially available monospot test for heterophile antibodies is somewhat more sensitive than the classic heterophile test. The monospot test is ~75% sensitive and ~90% specific compared with EBV-specific serologies (see below). False-positive monospot results are more common among persons with connective tissue disease, lymphoma, viral hepatitis, and malaria.
# Chunk 3495
EBV-specific antibody testing is used for patients with suspected acute EBV infection who lack heterophile antibodies and for patients with atypical infections. Titers of IgM and IgG antibodies to viral capsid antigen (VCA) are elevated in the serum of more than 90% of patients at the onset of disease. IgM antibody to VCA is most useful for the diagnosis of acute IM because it is present at elevated titers only 1189 during the first 2–3 months of the disease; in contrast, IgG antibody to VCA is usually not useful for diagnosis of IM but is often used to assess past exposure to EBV because it persists for life. Seroconversion to EBNA positivity also is useful for the diagnosis of acute infection with EBV. Antibodies to EBNA become detectable relatively late (3–6 weeks after the onset of symptoms) in nearly all cases of acute EBV infection and persist for the lifetime of the patient. These antibodies may be lacking in immunodeficient patients and in those with chronic active EBV infection.
# Chunk 3496
Titers of other antibodies also may be elevated in IM; however, these elevations are less useful for diagnosis. Antibodies to early antigens are detectable 3–4 weeks after the onset of symptoms in patients with IM. About 70% of individuals with IM have early antigen diffuse (EA-D) antibodies during the illness; the presence of EA-D antibodies is especially likely in patients with relatively severe disease. These antibodies usually persist for only 3–6 months. Levels of EA-D antibodies are also elevated in patients with nasopharyngeal carcinoma or chronic active EBV infection. Early antigen restricted (EA-R) antibodies are only occasionally detected in patients with IM but are often found at elevated titers in patients with African Burkitt’s lymphoma or chronic active EBV infection. IgA antibodies to EBV antigens have proved useful for the identification of patients with nasopharyngeal carcinoma and of persons at high risk for the disease.
# Chunk 3497
Of newborns in the United States, ∼1% are infected with CMV; the percentages are higher in many less-developed countries. Communal living and poor personal hygiene facilitate spread. Perinatal and early childhood infections are common. CMV may be present in breast milk, saliva, feces, and urine. Transmission has occurred among young children in day-care centers and has been traced from infected toddler to pregnant mother to developing fetus. When an infected child introduces CMV into a household, 50% of susceptible family members seroconvert within 6 months.
# Chunk 3498
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS Congenital CMV Infection Fetal infections range from subclinical to severe and disseminated. Cytomegalic inclusion disease develops in ∼5% of infected fetuses and is seen almost exclusively in infants born to mothers who develop primary infections during pregnancy. Petechiae, hepatosplenomegaly, and jaundice are the most common presenting features (60–80% of cases). Microcephaly with or without cerebral calcifications, intrauterine growth retardation, and prematurity are reported in 30–50% of cases. Inguinal hernias and chorioretinitis are less common. Laboratory abnormalities include elevated alanine aminotransferase levels in serum, thrombocytopenia, conjugated hyperbilirubinemia, hemolysis, and elevated protein levels in cerebrospinal fluid. The prognosis for severely infected infants is poor; the mortality rate is 20–30%, and few survivors escape intellectual or hearing difficulties later in childhood. The differential diagnosis of cytomegalic inclusion disease in infants includes syphilis, rubella, toxoplasmosis, infection with herpes simplex virus or enterovirus, and bacterial sepsis.
# Chunk 3499
Perinatal CMV Infection The newborn may acquire CMV at delivery by passage through an infected birth canal or by postnatal contact with infected breast milk or other maternal secretions. Of infants who are breast-fed for >1 month by seropositive mothers, 40–60% become infected. Iatrogenic transmission can result from blood transfusion; use of leukocyte-reduced or CMV-seronegative blood products for transfusion into low-birth-weight seronegative infants or seronegative pregnant women decreases risk.
# Chunk 3500
Cytomegalovirus and Human Herpesvirus Types 6, 7, and 8

Person with AIDS <100 CD4+ T cells/μL; CMV seropositivity Retinitis; gastrointestinal Ganciclovir, valganciclovir, Oral valganciclovir disease; neurologic disease foscarnet, or cidofovir 1192 often involves sexually active young adults. With incubation periods of 20–60 days, the illness generally lasts for 2–6 weeks. Prolonged high fevers, sometimes with chills, profound fatigue, and malaise, characterize this disorder. Myalgias, headache, and splenomegaly are common, but in CMV (as opposed to Epstein-Barr virus) mononucleosis, exudative pharyngitis and cervical lymphadenopathy are rare. Occasional patients develop rubelliform rashes, often after exposure to ampicillin or certain other antibiotics. Less common are interstitial or segmental pneumonia, myocarditis, pleuritis, arthritis, and encephalitis. In rare cases, Guillain-Barré syndrome complicates CMV mononucleosis. The characteristic laboratory abnormality is relative lymphocytosis in peripheral blood, with >10% atypical lymphocytes. Total leukocyte counts may be low, normal, or markedly elevated. Although significant jaundice is uncommon, serum aminotransferase and alkaline phosphatase levels are often moderately elevated. Heterophile antibodies are absent; however, transient immunologic abnormalities are common and may include the presence of cryoglobulins, rheumatoid factors, cold agglutinins, and antinuclear antibodies. Hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and granulocytopenia complicate recovery in rare instances. Most patients recover without sequelae, although postviral asthenia may persist for months. The excretion of CMV in urine, genital secretions, and/or saliva often continues for months or years. Rarely, CMV infection is fatal in immunocompetent hosts; survivors can have recurrent episodes of fever and malaise, sometimes associated with autonomic nervous system dysfunction (e.g., attacks of sweating or flushing).
# Chunk 3501
CMV infection usually cannot be diagnosed reliably on clinical grounds alone. Isolation of CMV or detection of its antigens or DNA in appropriate clinical specimens is the preferred approach. The most common method of detection is quantitative nucleic acid testing (QNAT) for CMV by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technology, for which blood or other specimens can be used; some centers use a CMV antigenemia test, an immunofluorescence assay that detects CMV antigens (pp65) in peripheral-blood leukocytes. Such assays may yield a positive result several days earlier than culture methods. QNAT may predict the risk for disease progression, particularly in immunocompromised hosts. CMV DNA in cerebrospinal fluid is useful in the diagnosis of CMV encephalitis or polyradiculopathy. Considerable variation exists among assays and laboratories; a recently introduced international testing standard should help reduce variation in PCR test results.
# Chunk 3502
Virus excretion or viremia is readily detected by culture of appropriate specimens on human fibroblast monolayers. If CMV titers are high, as is common in congenital disseminated infection and in AIDS, characteristic cytopathic effects may be detected within a few days. However, in some situations (e.g., CMV mononucleosis), viral titers are low, and cytopathic effects may take several weeks to appear. Many laboratories expedite diagnosis with an overnight tissue-culture method (shell vial assay) involving centrifugation and an immunocytochemical detection technique employing monoclonal antibodies to an immediate-early CMV antigen. Isolation of virus from urine or saliva does not, by itself, constitute proof of acute infection, since excretion from these sites may continue for months or years after illness. Detection of viremia is a better predictor of acute infection.
# Chunk 3503
Prevention of CMV in organ and hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients is usually based on one of two methods: universal prophylaxis or preemptive therapy. With universal prophylaxis, antiviral drugs are used for a defined period, often 3 or 6 months. One clinical trial demonstrated that, in CMV-seronegative recipients with seropositive donors, prophylaxis was more effective at prevention when given for 200 days rather than 100 days. With preemptive therapy, patients are monitored weekly for CMV viremia, and antiviral treatment is initiated once viremia is detected. Because of the bone marrow–suppressive effects of universal prophylaxis, preemptive therapy is more commonly employed in hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. For patients with advanced HIV infection (CD4+ T cell counts of <50/μL), some experts have advocated prophylaxis with valganciclovir (see below). However, side effects, lack of proven benefit, possible induction of viral resistance, and high cost have precluded the wide acceptance of this practice. Preemptive therapy is under study in HIV-infected patients.
# Chunk 3504
Ganciclovir or valganciclovir therapy for CMV disease consists of a 14-to 21-day induction course (5 mg/kg IV twice daily for ganciclovir or 900 mg PO twice daily for valganciclovir), sometimes followed by maintenance therapy (e.g., valganciclovir, 900 mg/d). Peripheral-blood neutropenia develops in roughly one-quarter of treated patients but may be ameliorated by granulocyte colony-stimulating factor or granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor. Whether to use maintenance therapy should depend on the overall level of immunocompromise and the risk of recurrent disease. Discontinuation of maintenance therapy should be considered in patients with AIDS who, while receiving antiretroviral therapy, have a sustained (3to 6-month) increase in CD4+ T cell counts to >100/μL.
# Chunk 3505
Foscarnet (sodium phosphonoformate) inhibits CMV DNA polymerase. Because this agent does not require phosphorylation to be active, it is also effective against most ganciclovir-resistant isolates. Foscarnet is less well tolerated than ganciclovir and causes considerable toxicity, including renal dysfunction, hypomagnesemia, hypokalemia, hypocalcemia, genital ulcers, dysuria, nausea, and paresthesia. Moreover, foscarnet administration requires the use of an infusion pump and close clinical monitoring. With aggressive hydration and dose adjustments for renal dysfunction, the toxicity of foscarnet can be reduced. The use of foscarnet should be avoided when a saline load cannot be tolerated (e.g., in cardiomyopathy). The approved induction regimen is 60 mg/kg every 8 h for 2 weeks, although 90 mg/kg every 12 h is equally effective and no more toxic. Maintenance infusions should deliver 90–120 mg/ kg once daily. No oral preparation is available. Foscarnet-resistant virus may emerge during extended therapy. This drug is used more frequently after hematopoietic stem cell transplantation than in other situations to avoid the myelosuppressive effects of ganciclovir; in
# Chunk 3506
Cytomegalovirus and Human Herpesvirus Types 6, 7, and 8 11 general, foscarnet is also the first choice for infections with ganciclovir-resistant CM Cidofovir is a nucleotide analogue with a long intracellular half-life that allows intermittent Iadministration. Induction regimens of 5 mgkg weekly for 2 weeks are followed by maintenance regimens of –5 mgkg every 2 weeks. Cidofovir can cause severe nephrotoxicity through dose-dependent proximal tubular cell injuryhowever, this adverse effect can be tempered somewhat by saline hydration and probenecid. Cidofovir is used primarily for ganciclovir-resistant virus.
# Chunk 3507
HHV-7 was isolated in 1990 from T lymphocytes from the peripheral blood of a healthy 26-year-old man. The virus is frequently acquired during childhood, albeit at a later age than HHV-6. HHV-7 is commonly present in saliva, which is presumed to be the principal source of infection; breast milk also can carry the virus. Viremia can be associated with either primary or reactivation infection. The most common clinical manifestations of childhood HHV-7 infections are fever and seizures. Some children present with respiratory or gastrointestinal signs and symptoms. An association has been made between HHV-7 and pityriasis rosea, but evidence is insufficient to indicate a causal relationship.
# Chunk 3508
Molluscum contagiosum is highly prevalent among children and is the most common human disease resulting from poxvirus infection. Swimming pools are a common vector for transmission. Atopy and compromise of skin integrity increase the risk of infection. Genital lesions are more common in adults, to whom the virus may be transmitted by sexual contact. The incubation period ranges from 2 weeks to 6 months, with an average of 2–7 weeks. In most cases, the disease is self-limited and regresses spontaneously after 3–4 months in immunocompetent hosts. There are no systemic complications, but skin lesions may persist for 3–5 years. Molluscum contagiosum can be associated with immunosuppression and is frequently seen among HIV-infected patients (Chap. 226). The disease can be more generalized, severe, and persistent in AIDS patients than in other groups. Moreover, molluscum contagiosum can be exacerbated in the immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS) associated with the initiation of antiretroviral therapy.
# Chunk 3509
B19V exclusively infects humans, and infection is endemic in virtually all parts of the world. Transmission occurs predominantly via the respiratory route and is followed by the onset of rash and arthralgia. By the age of 15 years, ~ 50% of children have detectable IgG; this figure rises to >90% among the elderly. In pregnant
# Chunk 3510
Polyarthropathy Syndrome Although uncommon among children, arthropathy occurs in ~50% of adults and is more common among women than among men. The distribution of the affected joints is often symmetrical, with arthralgia affecting the small joints of the hands and occasionally the ankles, knees, and wrists. Resolution usually occurs within a few weeks, but recurring symptoms can continue for months. The illness may mimic rheumatoid arthritis, and rheumatoid factor can often be detected in serum. B19V infection may trigger rheumatoid disease in some patients and has been associated with juvenile idiopathic arthritis.
# Chunk 3511
by the third day of TAC in patients with hematologic disorders; these antibodies remain detectable for ~3 months. B19V IgG is detectable by the seventh day of illness and persists throughout life. Quantitative detection of B19V DNA should be used for the diagnosis of early TAC or chronic anemia. Although B19V levels fall rapidly with the development of the immune response, DNA can be detectable by PCR for months or even years after infection, even in healthy individuals; therefore, quantitative PCR should be used. In acute infection at the height of viremia, >1012 B19V DNA IU/mL of serum can be detected; however, titers fall rapidly within 2 days. Patients with aplastic crisis or B19V-induced chronic anemia generally have >105 B19V DNA IU/mL.
# Chunk 3512
1198 Immune Response to HPV Infection A cell-mediated immune response plays an important role in controlling the progression of natural HPV infection. Histologic examination of lesions in individuals who experience regression of genital warts demonstrates infiltration of T cells and macrophages. CD4+ T cell regulation is particularly important in controlling HPV infections, as evidenced by the higher rates of infection and disease among immunosuppressed individuals, particularly those who are infected with HIV. Specific T-cell responses may be measured against HPV proteins, the most important of which appear to be the E2 and E6 proteins. In women with HPV-16 cervical infection, a strong T-cell response to HPV-16-derived E2 protein is associated with a lack of progression of cervical disease. Natural HPV infection of the genital tract gives rise to a serum antibody response in only 60–70% of individuals because there is no viremic phase during infection. Significant, although incomplete, protection against type-specific reinfection is associated with the presence of neutralizing antibodies. Serum antibodies likely reach the cervical epithelium and secretions by transudation and exudation. Therefore, protection against infection is related to the amount of neutralizing antibody at the site of infection and lasts as long as levels of neutralizing antibodies are sufficient.
# Chunk 3513
Although HPV is the causative agent of several cancers, most attention has focused on cervical cancer—the second most common cancer among women worldwide, which affects more than 500,000 women and kills more than 275,000 women annually. More than 85% of all cervical cancer cases and deaths occur in women living in low-income countries, especially in sub-Saharan Africa, Asia, and South and Central America. A quarter-century of evidence shows that HPV causes nearly 100% of cervical cancers. HPV infection is the most significant risk factor for cervical cancer; relative risks range from 10 to 20 and exceed 100 in prospective and case-control studies, respectively. The time from HPV infection to cervical cancer diagnosis may exceed 20 years. Cervical cancer peaks in the fifth and sixth decades of life among women living in developed countries but as much as a decade earlier among women living in resource-poor countries. Persistent carriers of oncogenic HPV types are at greatest risk for high-grade cervical dysplasia and cancer. Why only certain HPV infections eventually lead to malignancy is not clear. Biomarkers that can predict which women will develop cervical cancer are not available. Immunosuppression in general plays a significant role in re-detection/reactivation of HPV infections, while other factors such as smoking, hormonal changes, Chlamydia infection, and nutritional deficits promote viral persistence and cancer.
# Chunk 3514
The International Agency for Research on Cancer concludes that HPV types 16, 18, 31, 33, 35, 39, 45, 51, 52, 56, 58, and 59 are carcinogenic in the uterine cervix. HPV-16 is particularly virulent and causes 50% of cervical cancers. Worldwide, HPV-16 and HPV-18 cause 70% of cervical squamous cell carcinomas and 85% of cervical adenocarcinomas. Oncogenic types other than HPV-16 and HPV-18 cause the remaining 30% of cervical cancers. HPV-16 and HPV-18 also cause nearly 90% of anal cancers worldwide. Although oncogenic HPV infection is necessary for the development of cervical malignancy, only ~3–5% of infected women will ever develop this cancer, even in the absence of cytologic screening.
# Chunk 3515
In addition to cervical and anal cancer, other HPV-associated cancers include vulvar and vaginal cancer, which are associated with HPV in 50–70% of cases; penile cancer, which is caused by HPV in 50% of cases; and oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC). Over the past two decades, an epidemic of OPSCC related to oncogenic infection with HPV (primarily HPV-16) has developed. Annual rates of OPSCC among men in the United States have been increasing from a low of 0.27 case/100,000 in 1973 to 0.57 case/100,000 as of 2004; rates in women have remained relatively stable at ~0.17 case/100,000 per year. The increase in the incidence of OPSCC is greatest among white men 40–50 years of age. Nearly 14,000 new cases were diagnosed in the United States in 2013. Annual rates of OPSCCs of the base of the tongue and the tonsil have increased dramatically—i.e., by 1.3% and 0.6%, respectively. Fewer data are available from developing countries about OPSCCs.
# Chunk 3516
After HPV infection occurs, prevention of HPV-associated disease relies on screening. Women residing in developing countries who lack access to cervical screening programs have a higher rate of cervical cancer and a lower rate of cancer-specific survival. Approximately 75% of women living in developed countries have been screened in the past 5 years, whereas the figure is only ~5% among women living in developing countries. Economic and logistic obstacles likely impede routine screening of these populations for cervical cancer.
# Chunk 3517
The primary method used for cancer screening is cervical cytology via Pap smear. The guidelines of the American Society of Colposcopy and Cervical Pathology recommend initiation of cervical cancer screening at age 21, regardless of the age of sexual debut. Women 21–29 years old with a normal Pap smear should have the test repeated every 3 years. Although adolescent and young women often test positive for HPV DNA, they are at very low risk of cervical cancer. Co-testing, or testing for HPV DNA at the time of the Pap smear, is not recommended for women in this age group because the presence of HPV DNA does not correlate with the presence of high-grade squamous intraepithelial neoplasia. Women 30–65 years of age should have a Pap smear every 3 years if testing for HPV DNA is not performed. The screening interval for women in this age group can be extended to every 5 years if co-testing results are negative. HPV testing is not recommended for partners of women with HPV or for screening for conditions other than cervical cancer.
# Chunk 3518
Imiquimod Imiquimod (5% or 3.75% cream) is a patient-applied topical immunomodulatory agent thought to activate immune cells by binding to a Toll-like receptor—an event that leads to an inflammatory response. Imiquimod 5% cream is applied to genital warts at bedtime three times per week for up to 16 weeks. Warts are cleared in ~56% of patients, more often in women than in men; recurrence rates approach 13%. Local inflammatory side effects are common. Rates of clearance of genital warts with the 3.75% formulation are not as high, but the duration of treatment is shorter (i.e., daily application for a maximum of 8 weeks), and fewer local and systemic adverse reactions occur. Imiquimod should not be used to treat vaginal, cervical, or anal lesions. The safety of imiquimod during pregnancy has not been established.
# Chunk 3519
This chapter reviews viral infections caused by six of the major groups of respiratory viruses: rhinoviruses, coronaviruses, respiratory syncytial viruses, metapneumoviruses, parainfluenza viruses, and adenoviruses. The extraordinary outbreaks of lower respiratory tract disease associated with coronaviruses (severe acute respiratory syndrome [SARS] in 2002– 2003 and Middle East respiratory syndrome [MERS] in 2012–2013) are also discussed. Influenza viruses, which are a major cause of death as well as morbidity, are reviewed in Chap. 224. Herpesviruses, which occasionally cause pharyngitis and which also cause lower respiratory tract disease in immunosuppressed patients, are reviewed in Chap. 216. Enteroviruses, which account for occasional respiratory illnesses during the summer months, are reviewed in Chap. 228.
# Chunk 3520
Rhinovirus infections are worldwide in distribution. They are a prominent cause of the common cold and have been detected in up to 50% of common cold–like illnesses by tissue culture and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) techniques. Overall rates of rhinovirus infection are higher among infants and young children and decrease with increasing age. Rhinovirus infections occur throughout the year, with seasonal peaks in early fall and spring in temperate climates. These infections are most often introduced into families by preschool or grade-school children <6 years old. Of initial illnesses in family settings, 25–70% are followed by secondary cases, with the highest attack rates among the youngest siblings at home. Attack rates also increase with family size.
# Chunk 3521
Rhinoviruses appear to spread through direct contact with infected secretions, usually respiratory droplets. In some studies of volunteers, transmission was most efficient by hand-to-hand contact, with subsequent self-inoculation of the conjunctival or nasal mucosa. Other studies demonstrated transmission by largeor small-particle aerosol. Virus can be recovered from plastic surfaces inoculated 1–3 h previously; this observation suggests that environmental surfaces contribute to transmission. In studies of married couples in which neither partner had detectable serum antibody, transmission was associated with prolonged contact (≥122 h) during a 7-day period. Transmission was infrequent unless (1) virus was recoverable from the donor’s hands and nasal mucosa, (2) at least 1000 TCID50 (50% tissue culture infectious dose) of virus was present in nasal washes from the donor, and (3) the donor was at least moderately symptomatic with the “cold.” Despite anecdotal observations, exposure to cold temperatures, fatigue, and sleep deprivation have not been associated with increased rates of rhinovirus-induced illness in volunteers, although some studies have suggested that psychologically defined “stress” may contribute to development of symptoms.
# Chunk 3522
The incubation period for rhinovirus illness is short, generally 1–2 days. Virus shedding coincides with the onset of illness or may begin shortly before symptoms develop. The mechanisms of immunity to rhinovirus infection are not well worked out. In some studies, the presence of homotypic antibody has been associated with significantly reduced rates of subsequent infection and illness, but data conflict regarding the relative importance of serum and local antibody in protection from rhinovirus infection.
# Chunk 3523
Although rhinoviruses are the most frequently recognized cause of the common cold, similar illnesses are caused by a variety of other viruses, and a specific viral etiologic diagnosis cannot be made on clinical grounds alone. Rather, rhinovirus infection is diagnosed by isolation of the virus from nasal washes or nasal secretions in tissue culture. In practice, this procedure is rarely undertaken because of the benign, self-limited nature of the illness. In most settings, detection of rhino-virus RNA is more sensitive and easier by PCR than by tissue culture. Accordingly, PCR has generally become the standard for detection of rhinoviruses in clinical specimens. Given the many serotypes of rhinovirus, diagnosis by serum antibody tests is currently impractical. Likewise, common laboratory tests, such as white blood cell count and erythrocyte sedimentation rate, are not helpful.
# Chunk 3524
After an incubation period that generally lasts 2–7 days (range, 1–14 days), SARS usually begins as a systemic illness marked by the onset of fever, which is often accompanied by malaise, headache, and myalgias and is followed in 1–2 days by a nonproductive cough and dyspnea. Approximately 25% of patients have diarrhea. Chest x-rays can show a variety of infiltrates, including patchy areas of consolidation—most frequently in peripheral and lower lung fields—or interstitial infiltrates, which can progress to diffuse involvement. In severe cases, respiratory function may worsen during the second week of illness and progress to frank adult respiratory distress syndrome accompanied by multiorgan dysfunction. Risk factors for severe disease include an age of >50 years and comorbidities such as cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and hepatitis. Illness in pregnant women may be particularly severe, but SARS-CoV infection appears to be milder in children than in adults.
# Chunk 3525
Information regarding the clinical manifestations of MERS-CoV is limited. The case–fatality rate has been high in the initial cases, but this may represent an ascertainment bias, and it is clear that mild cases occur as well. The median incubation period has been estimated to be 5.2 days, and a secondary case was estimated to have an incubation period of 9–12 days. Cases have been reported that begin with cough and fever and progress to acute respiratory distress and respiratory failure within a week. Other cases have manifested as mild upper respiratory symptoms only. Renal failure has been noted, and DPP-4, the host cell receptor for MERS-CoV, is expressed at high levels in the kidney; these findings suggest that direct viral infection of the kidney may lead to renal dysfunction. Diarrhea and vomiting are also common in MERS, and pericarditis has been reported.
# Chunk 3526
Laboratory abnormalities in SARS include lymphopenia, which is documented in ~50% of cases and which mostly affects CD4+ T cells but also involves CD8+ T cells and natural killer cells. Total white blood cell counts are normal or slightly low, and thrombocytopenia may develop as the illness progresses. Elevated serum levels of aminotransferases, creatine kinase, and lactate dehydrogenase have been reported.
# Chunk 3527
A rapid diagnosis of SARS-CoV infection can be made by reverse-transcription PCR (RT-PCR) of respiratory tract samples and plasma early in the illness and of urine and stool later on. SARS-CoV can also be grown from respiratory tract samples by inoculation into Vero E6 tissue culture cells, in which a cytopathic effect is seen within days. RT-PCR appears to be more sensitive than tissue culture, but only around one-third of cases are positive by PCR at initial presentation. Serum antibodies can be detected by ELISA or immunofluorescence, and nearly all patients develop detectable serum antibodies within 28 days after the onset of illness.
# Chunk 3528
Infection with HRSV is seen throughout the world in annual epidemics that occur in late fall, winter, or spring and last up to 5 months. The virus is rarely encountered during the summer. Rates of illness are highest among infants 1–6 months of age, peaking at 2–3 months of age. The attack rates among susceptible infants and children are extraordinarily high, approaching 100% in settings such as daycare centers where large numbers of susceptible infants are present. By age 2, virtually all children will have been infected with HRSV. HRSV accounts for 20–25% of hospital admissions of young infants and children for pneumonia and for up to 75% of cases of bronchiolitis in this age group. It has been estimated that more than half of infants who are at risk will become infected during an HRSV epidemic.
# Chunk 3529
HRSV is transmitted primarily by close contact with contaminated fingers or fomites and by self-inoculation of the conjunctiva or anterior nares. Virus may also be spread by coarse aerosols produced by coughing or sneezing, but it is inefficiently spread by fine-particle aerosols. The incubation period is ~4–6 days, and virus shedding may last for ≥2 weeks in children and for shorter periods in adults. In immunosuppressed patients, shedding can continue for weeks.
# Chunk 3530
HRSV infection leads to a wide spectrum of respiratory illnesses. In infants, 25–40% of infections result in lower respiratory tract involvement, including pneumonia, bronchiolitis, and tracheobronchitis. In this age group, illness begins most frequently with rhinorrhea, low-grade fever, and mild systemic symptoms, often accompanied by cough and wheezing. Most patients recover gradually over 1–2 weeks. In more severe illness, tachypnea and dyspnea develop, and eventually frank hypoxia, cyanosis, and apnea can ensue. Physical examination may reveal diffuse wheezing, rhonchi, and rales. Chest radiography shows hyperexpansion, peribronchial thickening, and variable infiltrates ranging from diffuse interstitial infiltrates to segmental or lobar consolidation. Illness may be particularly severe in children born prematurely and in those with congenital cardiac disease, bronchopulmonary dysplasia, nephrotic syndrome, or immunosuppression. One study documented a 37% mortality rate among infants with HRSV pneumonia and congenital cardiac disease.
# Chunk 3531
The diagnosis of HRSV infection can be suspected on the basis of a suggestive epidemiologic setting—that is, severe illness among infants during an outbreak of HRSV in the community. Infections in older children and adults cannot be differentiated with certainty from those caused by other respiratory viruses. The specific diagnosis is established by detection of HRSV in respiratory secretions, such as sputum, throat swabs, or nasopharyngeal washes. Virus can be isolated in tissue culture, but this method has been largely supplanted by rapid viral diagnostic techniques consisting of immunofluorescence or ELISA of nasopharyngeal washes, aspirates, and (less satisfactorily) nasopharyngeal swabs. With specimens from children, these techniques have sensitivities and specificities of 80–95%; they are somewhat less sensitive with specimens from adults. RT-PCR detection techniques have shown even higher rates of sensitivity and specificity, particularly in adults. Serologic diagnosis may be made by comparison of acuteand convalescent-phase serum specimens by ELISA or by neutralization or complement-fixation tests. These tests may be useful in older children and adults but are less sensitive in children <4 months of age.
# Chunk 3532
HMPV infections are worldwide in distribution, are most frequent during the winter in temperate climates, and occur early in life, so that serum antibodies to the virus are present in 50% of children by age 2 and in nearly all children by age 5. HMPV infections have been detected in older age groups, including elderly adults, and in both immunocompetent and immunosuppressed hosts. This virus accounts for 1–5% of childhood upper respiratory tract infections and for 10–15% of respiratory tract illnesses requiring hospitalization of children. In addition, HMPV causes 2–4% of acute respiratory illnesses in ambulatory adults and elderly patients. HMPV has been detected in a few cases of SARS, but its role (if any) in these illnesses has not been established.
# Chunk 3533
In children, adenoviruses cause a variety of clinical syndromes. The most common is an acute upper respiratory tract infection, with prominent rhinitis. On occasion, lower respiratory tract disease, including bronchiolitis and pneumonia, also develops. Adenoviruses, particularly types 3 and 7, cause pharyngoconjunctival fever, a characteristic acute febrile illness of children that occurs in outbreaks, most often in summer camps. The syndrome is marked by bilateral conjunctivitis in which the bulbar and palpebral conjunctivae have a granular appearance. Low-grade fever is frequently present for the first 3–5 days, and rhinitis, sore throat, and cervical adenopathy develop. The illness generally lasts for 1–2 weeks and resolves spontaneously. Febrile pharyngitis without conjunctivitis has also been associated with adenovirus infection. Adenoviruses have been isolated from cases of whooping cough with or without Bordetella pertussis; the significance of adenovirus in that disease is unknown.
# Chunk 3534
Adenovirus infection should be suspected in the epidemiologic setting of acute respiratory disease in military recruits and in certain clinical syndromes (such as pharyngoconjunctival fever or epidemic keratoconjunctivitis) in which outbreaks of characteristic illnesses occur. In most cases, however, illnesses caused by adenovirus infection cannot be differentiated from those caused by a number of other viral respiratory agents and Mycoplasma pneumoniae. A definitive diagnosis of adenovirus infection is established by detection of the virus in tissue culture (as evidenced by cytopathic changes) and by specific identification with immunofluorescence or other immunologic techniques. Rapid viral diagnosis can be established by immunofluorescence or ELISA of nasopharyngeal aspirates, conjunctival or respiratory secretions, urine, or stool. Highly sensitive and specific PCR assays and nucleic acid hybridization are available and have become the standard for diagnosis based on clinical specimens. Adenovirus types 40 and 41, which have been associated with diarrheal disease in children, require special tissue-culture cells for isolation, and these serotypes are most commonly detected by direct ELISA of stool or by PCR. Serum antibody rises can be demonstrated by complement-fixation or neutralization tests, ELISA, radioimmunoassay, or (for those adenoviruses that hemagglutinate red cells) hemagglutination-inhibition tests.
# Chunk 3535
Influenza outbreaks occur virtually every year, although their extent and severity vary widely. Localized outbreaks take place at variable intervals, usually every 1–3 years. Global pandemics have occurred at variable intervals, but much less frequently than interpandemic outbreaks (Table 224-1). The most recent pandemic emerged in March of 2009 and was caused by an influenza A/H1N1 virus that rapidly spread worldwide over the next several months.
# Chunk 3536
All children from birth to <5 years, especially <2 years All persons ≥50 years old Pregnant women Adults and children who have chronic pulmonary (including asthma) or car diovascular (except isolated hypertension), renal, hepatic, neurologic, hema tologic, or metabolic disorders (including diabetes mellitus) Persons who have immunosuppression (including that caused by medications or by HIV infection)
# Chunk 3537
The host defense factors responsible for cessation of virus shedding and resolution of illness have not been defined specifically. Virus shedding generally stops within 2–5 days after symptoms first appear, at a time when serum and local antibody responses often are not detectable by conventional techniques, although antibody rises may be detected earlier by use of highly sensitive techniques, particularly in individuals with previous immunity to the virus. It has been suggested that interferon, cell-mediated immune responses, and/or nonspecific inflammatory responses all contribute to the resolution of illness. CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocyte responses may be particularly important in this regard.
# Chunk 3538
1212 Patients report a feverish feeling and chilliness, but true rigors are rare. Headache, either generalized or frontal, is often particularly troublesome. Myalgias may involve any part of the body but are most common in the legs and lumbosacral area. Arthralgias may also develop. Respiratory symptoms often become more prominent as systemic symptoms subside. Many patients have a sore throat or persistent cough, which may last for ≥1 week and which is often accompanied by substernal discomfort. Ocular signs and symptoms include pain on motion of the eyes, photophobia, and burning of the eyes. In the elderly, influenza may have a relatively subtle presentation. Typical features such as sore throat, myalgia, and even fever may be absent, and general symptoms such as anorexia, malaise, weakness, and dizziness may predominate. Physical findings are usually minimal in uncomplicated influenza. Early in the illness, the patient appears flushed, and the skin is hot and dry, although diaphoresis and mottled extremities are sometimes evident, particularly in older patients. Examination of the pharynx may yield surprisingly unremarkable results despite a severe sore throat, but injection of the mucous membranes and postnasal discharge are apparent in some cases. Mild cervical lymphadenopathy may be noted, especially in younger individuals. The results of chest examination are largely negative in uncomplicated influenza, although rhonchi, wheezes, and scattered rales have been reported with variable frequency in different outbreaks. Frank dyspnea, hyperpnea, cyanosis, diffuse rales, and signs of consolidation are indicative of pulmonary complications. Patients with apparently uncomplicated influenza have been reported to have a variety of mild ventilatory defects and increased alveolar-capillary diffusion gradients; thus, subclinical pulmonary involvement may be more common than is appreciated. In uncomplicated influenza, the acute illness generally resolves over 2–5 days, and most patients have largely recovered in 1 week, although cough may persist 1–2 weeks longer. In a significant minority (particularly the elderly), however, symptoms of weakness or lassitude (postinfluenza asthenia) may persist for several weeks and may prove troublesome for persons who wish to resume their full level of activity promptly. The pathogenetic basis for this asthenia is unknown, although pulmonary function abnormalities may persist for several weeks after uncomplicated influenza.
# Chunk 3539
primary influenza viral pneumonia Primary influenza viral pneumonia is the least common but most severe of the pneumonic complications. It presents as acute influenza that does not resolve but instead progresses relentlessly, with persistent fever, dyspnea, and eventual cyanosis. Sputum production is generally scanty, but the sputum can contain blood. Few physical signs may be evident early in the illness. In more advanced cases, diffuse rales may be noted, and imaging findings consistent with diffuse interstitial infiltrates and/or acute respiratory distress syndrome may be present. In such cases, arterial blood-gas determinations show marked hypoxia. Viral cultures of respiratory secretions and lung parenchyma, especially if samples are taken early in illness, yield high titers of virus. In fatal cases of primary viral pneumonia, histopathologic examination reveals a marked inflammatory reaction in the alveolar septa, with edema and infiltration by lymphocytes, macrophages, occasional plasma cells, and variable numbers of neutrophils. Fibrin thrombi in alveolar capillaries, along with necrosis and hemorrhage, have also been noted. Eosinophilic hyaline membranes can be found lining alveoli and alveolar ducts.
# Chunk 3540
A 5-day course of oseltamivir or zanamivir reduces the duration of signs and symptoms of uncomplicated influenza by 1–1.5 days if treatment is started within 2 days of the onset of illness and may be effective if started up to 5 days after onset of symptoms. Zanamivir is administered via an oral inhalation device and may exacerbate bronchospasm in asthmatic patients. Oseltamivir has been associated with nausea and vomiting, whose frequency can be reduced by administration of the drug with food. Oseltamivir has also been associated with neuropsychiatric side effects in children. Peramivir, an investigational neuraminidase inhibitor that can be administered intravenously, is being evaluated in clinical trials, as is an intravenous form of zanamivir.
# Chunk 3541
Chemoprophylaxis for healthy persons after community exposure generally is not recommended but may be considered for individuals at high risk of complications who have had close contact with an acutely ill person with influenza. During an outbreak, antiviral chemoprophylaxis can be administered simultaneously with inactivated vaccine because the drugs do not interfere with an immune response to the vaccine. However, concurrent administration of chemoprophylaxis and live attenuated vaccine may interfere with the immune response to the latter. Antiviral drugs should not be administered until at least 2 weeks after administration of live vaccine, and administration of live vaccine should not begin until at least 48 h after antiviral drug administration has been stopped. Chemoprophylaxis may also be considered to control nosocomial outbreaks of influenza. For that purpose, prophylaxis should be instituted promptly when influenza activity is detected and must be continued daily for the duration of the outbreak.
# Chunk 3542
HTLV-1 is endemic in southwestern Japan and Okinawa, where >1 million persons are infected. Antibodies to HTLV-1 are present in the serum of up to 35% of Okinawans, 10% of residents of the Japanese island of Kyushu, and <1% of persons in nonendemic regions of Japan. Despite this high prevalence of infection, only ~500 cases of ATL are diagnosed in this area each year. Clusters of infection have been noted in other areas of the Orient, such as Taiwan; in the Caribbean basin, including northeastern South America; in northwestern South America; in central and southern Africa; in Italy, Israel, Iran, and Papua New Guinea; in the Arctic; and in the southeastern part of the United States (Fig. 225e-4). An estimated 5–10 million persons have HTLV-1 infection worldwide.
# Chunk 3543
AcuTe ATL About 60% of patients who develop malignancy have classic acute ATL, which is characterized by a short clinical prodrome  (~2 weeks between the first symptoms and the diagnosis) and an aggressive natural history (median survival period, 6 months). The clinical picture is dominated by rapidly progressive skin lesions, pulmonary involvement, hypercalcemia, and lymphocytosis with cells containing lobulated or “flower-shaped” nuclei (see Fig. 134-10). The malignant cells have monoclonal proviral integrations and express CD4, CD3, and CD25 (low-affinity IL-2 receptors) on their surface. Serum levels of CD25 can be used as a tumor marker. Anemia and thrombocytopenia are rare. The skin lesions may be difficult to distinguish from those in mycosis fungoides. Lytic bone lesions, which are common, do not contain tumor cells but rather are composed of osteolytic cells, usually without osteoblastic activity. Despite the leukemic picture, bone marrow involvement is patchy in most cases.
# Chunk 3544
The hypercalcemia of ATL is multifactorial; the tumor cells produce osteoclast-activating factors (tumor necrosis factor α, IL-1, lymphotoxin) and can also produce a parathyroid hormone–like molecule. Affected patients have an underlying immunodeficiency that makes them susceptible to opportunistic infections similar to those seen in patients with AIDS (Chap. 226). The pathogenesis of the immunodeficiency is unclear. Pulmonary infiltrates in ATL patients reflect leukemic infiltration half the time and opportunistic infections with organisms such as Pneumocystis and other fungi the other half. Gastrointestinal symptoms are nearly always related to opportunistic infection. Strongyloides stercoralis is a gastrointestinal parasite that has a pattern of endemic distribution similar to that of HTLV-1. HTLV-1-infected persons also infected with this parasite may develop ATL more often or more rapidly than those without Strongyloides infections. Serum concentrations of lactate dehydrogenase and alkaline
# Chunk 3545
chronic ATL Patients with the chronic form of ATL generally have normal serum levels of calcium and lactate dehydrogenase and no involvement of the CNS, bone, or gastrointestinal tract. The median duration of survival for these patients is 2 years. In some cases, chronic ATL progresses to the acute form of the disease.
# Chunk 3546
HTLV-1 is not usually found in cells of the CNS but may be detected in a small population of lymphocytes present in the CSF. In general, HTLV-1 replication is greater in HAM than in ATL, and patients with HAM have a stronger immune response to the virus. Antibodies to HTLV-1 are present in the serum and appear to be produced in the CSF of HAM patients, where titers are often higher than in the serum. The pathophysiology of HAM may involve the induction of autoimmune destruction of neural cells by T cells with specificity for viral components such as Tax or Env proteins. One theory is that susceptibility to HAM may be related to the presence of human leukocyte antigen (HLA) alleles capable of presenting viral antigens in a fashion that leads to autoimmunity. Insufficient data are available to confirm an HLA association. However, antibodies in the sera of HAM patients have been shown to bind a neuron-specific antigen (heteronuclear ribonuclear protein A1 [hnRNP A1]) and to interfere with neurotransmission in vitro.
# Chunk 3547
For a detailed discussion of HIV, see Chap. 226.

Human Immunodeficiency virus disease: AIds and Related disorders Anthony S. Fauci, H. Clifford Lane AIDS was first recognized in the United States in the summer of 1981, 226 when the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) reported the unexplained occurrence of Pneumocystis jiroveci (formerly P. carinii) pneumonia in five previously healthy homosexual men in Los Angeles and of Kaposi’s sarcoma (KS) with or without
# Chunk 3548
Figure 226-6 schematically diagrams the worldwide distribution of HIV-1 subtypes by region. Seven strains account for the vast majority of HIV infections globally: HIV-1 subtypes A, B, C, D, G and two of the CRFs, CRF01_AE and CRF02_AG. Subtype C viruses (of the M group) are by far the most common form worldwide, likely accounting for ~50% of prevalent infections worldwide. In sub-Saharan Africa, home to approximately two-thirds of all individuals living with HIV/AIDS, the majority of infections are caused by
# Chunk 3549
The quantity of HIV-1 in plasma is a primary determinant of the risk of HIV-1 transmission. In a cohort of heterosexual couples in Uganda discordant for HIV infection and not receiving antiretroviral therapy, the mean serum HIV RNA level was significantly higher among HIV-infected subjects whose partners seroconverted than among those whose partners did not seroconvert. In fact, transmission was rare when the infected partner had a plasma level of <1700 copies of HIV RNA per milliliter, even when genital ulcer disease was present (Fig. 226-7). The rate of HIV transmission per coital act was highest during the early stage of HIV infection when plasma HIV RNA levels were high and in advanced disease as the viral set point increased.
# Chunk 3550
Exposures that place a health care worker at potential risk of HIV infection are percutaneous injuries (e.g., a needle stick or cut with a sharp object) or contact of mucous membrane or nonintact skin (e.g., exposed skin that is chapped, abraded, or afflicted with dermatitis) with blood, tissue, or other potentially infectious body fluids. Large, multi-institutional studies have indicated that the risk of HIV transmission following skin puncture from a needle or a sharp object that was contaminated with blood from a person with documented HIV infection is ~0.3% and after a mucous membrane exposure it is 0.09% (see “HIV and the Health Care Worker,” below) if the injured and/or exposed person is not treated within 24 h with antiretroviral drugs. The risk of hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection following a similar type of exposure is ~6–30% in nonimmune individuals; if a susceptible worker is exposed to HBV, postexposure prophylaxis with hepatitis B immune globulin and initiation of HBV vaccine is >90% effective in preventing HBV infection. The risk of HCV infection following percutaneous injury is ~1.8% (Chap. 360).
# Chunk 3551
HIV infection can be transmitted from an infected mother to her fetus during pregnancy, during delivery, or by breast-feeding. This remains an important form of transmission of HIV infection in certain developing countries, where the proportion of infected women to infected men is ~1:1. Virologic analyses of aborted fetuses indicate that HIV can be transmitted to the fetus during the first or second trimesters of pregnancy. However, maternal transmission to the fetus occurs most commonly in the perinatal period. Two studies performed in Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of Congo (then called Zaire) indicated that among all mother-to-child transmissions of HIV, the relative proportions were 23–30% before birth, 50–65% during birth, and 12–20% via breast-feeding.
# Chunk 3552
In the absence of prophylactic antiretroviral therapy to the mother during pregnancy, labor, and delivery, and to the fetus following birth, the probability of transmission of HIV from mother to infant/ fetus ranges from 15% to 25% in industrialized countries and from 25% to 35% in developing countries. These differences may relate to the adequacy of prenatal care as well as to the stage of HIV disease and the general health of the mother during pregnancy. Higher rates of transmission have been reported to be associated with many factors—the best documented of which is the presence of high maternal levels of plasma viremia, with the risk increasing linearly with the level of maternal plasma viremia. It is very unlikely that mother-tochild transmission will occur if the mother’s level of plasma viremia is <1000 copies of HIV RNA/mL of blood and extremely unlikely if the level is undetectable (i.e., <50 copies/mL). However, there may not be a lower “threshold” below which transmission never occurs, since certain studies have reported rare transmission by women with viral RNA levels <50 copies/mL. Increased mother-to-child transmission is also correlated with closer human leukocyte antigen (HLA) match between mother and child. A prolonged interval between membrane rupture and delivery is another well-documented risk factor for transmission. Other conditions that are potential risk factors, but that have not been consistently demonstrated, are the presence of chorioamnionitis at delivery; STIs during pregnancy; illicit drug use during pregnancy; cigarette smoking; preterm delivery; and obstetric procedures such as amniocentesis, amnioscopy, fetal scalp electrodes, and episiotomy. In a seminal study conducted in the United States and France in the 1990s, zidovudine treatment of HIV-infected pregnant women from the beginning of the second trimester through delivery and of the infant for 6 weeks following birth dramatically decreased the rate of intrapartum and perinatal transmission of HIV infection from 22.6% in the untreated group to <5%. Today, the rate of motherto-child transmission has fallen to 1% or less in pregnant women who are receiving combination antiretroviral therapy (cART) for their HIV infection. Such treatment, combined with cesarean section delivery, has rendered mother-to-child transmission of HIV an unusual event in the United States and other developed nations. In this regard, both the United States Public Health Service and the World Health Organization guidelines recommend that all pregnant HIV-infected 1223 women should receive cART for the health of the mother and to prevent perinatal transmission regardless of plasma HIV RNA copy number or CD4+ T cell counts.
# Chunk 3553
Although HIV can be isolated typically in low titers from saliva of a small proportion of infected individuals, there is no convincing evidence that saliva can transmit HIV infection, either through kiss ing or through other exposures, such as occupationally to health care workers. Saliva contains endogenous antiviral factors; among these factors, HIV-specific immunoglobulins of IgA, IgG, and IgM isotypes are detected readily in salivary secretions of infected individuals. It has been suggested that large glycoproteins such as mucins and thrombospondin 1 sequester HIV into aggregates for clearance by the host. In addition, a number of soluble salivary factors inhibit HIV to various degrees in vitro, probably by targeting host cell receptors rather than the virus itself. Perhaps the best studied of these, secretory leukocyte protease inhibitor (SLPI), blocks HIV infection in several cell culture systems, and it is found in saliva at levels that approximate those required for inhibition of HIV in vitro. In this regard, higher salivary levels of SLPI in breast-fed infants were associated with a decreased risk of HIV transmission through breast milk. It has also been suggested that submandibular saliva reduces HIV infectivity by stripping gp120 from the surface of virions, and that saliva-mediated disruption and lysis of HIV-infected cells occurs because of the hypotonicity of oral secretions. There have been outlier cases of suspected transmission by saliva, but these have probably been blood-to-blood transmissions. Transmission of HIV by a human bite can occur but is a rare event. Although virus can be identified, if not isolated, from virtually any body fluid, there is no evidence that HIV transmission can occur as a result of exposure to tears, sweat, or urine. However, there have been isolated cases of transmission of HIV infection by body fluids that may or may not have been contaminated with blood. Most of these situations occurred in the setting of a close relative providing intensive nursing care for an HIV-infected person without observing universal precautions, underscoring the importance of adhering to such precautions in the handling of body fluids and wastes from HIV-infected individuals.
# Chunk 3554
HIV INFECTION AND AIDS WORLDWIDE HIV infection/AIDS is a global pandemic, with cases reported from virtually every country. At the end of 2013, an estimated 35.0 million individuals were living with HIV infection, according to the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS). An estimated 95% of people living with HIV/AIDS reside in lowand middle-income countries; ~50% are female, and 3.2 million are children <15 years. The distribution of these cases is illustrated in Fig. 226-8. The estimated number of people living with HIV—i.e.,
# Chunk 3555
The HIV epidemic has occurred in “waves” in different regions of the world, each wave having somewhat different characteristics depending on the demographics of the country and region in question and the timing of the introduction of HIV into the population. Although the AIDS epidemic was first recognized in the United States and shortly thereafter in Western Europe, it very likely began in sub-Saharan Africa (see above), which has been particularly devastated by the epidemic. More than 70% of all people with HIV infection (~25 million), and nearly 90% of all HIV-infected children live in that region, even though sub-Saharan Africa is home to just 12% of the world’s population (Fig. 226-8). Within the region, southern Africa is worst-affected. In nine southern African countries, seroprevalence data indicate that >10% of the adult population age 15–49 is HIV-infected (Fig. 226-10). In addition, among high-risk individuals (e.g., commercial sex workers, patients attending STI clinics) who live in urban areas of sub-Saharan Africa, seroprevalence is now >50% in some places. Recent data offer promising signs of declining HIV incidence and prevalence in many countries in the region, although frequently at levels that remain high. Heterosexual exposure is
# Chunk 3556
The acute burst of viremia and wide dissemination of virus in primary HIV infection may be associated with an acute HIV syndrome, which occurs to varying degrees in ~50% of individuals with primary infection (see below). This syndrome is usually associated with high levels of viremia measured in millions of copies of HIV RNA per milliliter of plasma that last for several weeks. Acute mononucleosis-like symptoms are well correlated with the presence of viremia. Virtually all patients develop some degree of viremia during primary infection, which contributes to virus dissemination throughout the lymphoid tissue, even though they may remain asymptomatic or not recall experiencing symptoms. It appears that the initial level of plasma viremia in primary HIV infection does not necessarily determine the rate of disease progression; however, the set point of the level of steady-state plasma viremia after ~1 year does seem to correlate with the slope of disease progression in the untreated patient. The strikingly high levels of viremia observed in many patients with acute HIV infection is felt to be associated with a higher likelihood of transmission of the virus
# Chunk 3557
CHAPTER 226 Human Immunodeficiency Virus Disease: AIDS and Related Disorders 1230 as programmed death (PD) 1 molecule (of the B7-CD28 family of molecules), as well as loss of polyreactivity and proliferative capacity. Another mechanism contributing to the evasion by HIV of immune system control is the downregulation of HLA class I molecules on the surface of HIV-infected cells by the viral proteins Nef, Tat, and Vpu, resulting in the lack of ability of the CD8+ CTL to recognize and kill the infected target cell. Although this downregulation of HLA class I molecules would favor elimination of HIV-infected cells by natural killer (NK) cells, this latter mechanism does not seem to remove HIV-infected cells effectively (see below). The principal targets of neutralizing antibodies against HIV are the envelope proteins gp120 and gp41. HIV employs at least three mechanisms to evade neutralizing responses: hypervariability in the primary sequence of the envelope, extensive glycosylation of the envelope, and conformational masking of neutralizing epitopes. Several studies that have followed the humoral immune response to HIV from the earliest points after primary infection indicate that the virus continually mutates to escape the emerging antibody response such that the sequential antibodies that are induced do not neutralize the autologous virus. Broadly neutralizing antibodies capable of neutralizing a wide range of primary HIV isolates in vitro occur in only about 20% of HIV-infected individuals, and, when they do occur, it generally requires 2 to 3 years of infection with continual virus replication to drive the affinity maturation of the antibodies. Unfortunately, by the time these broadly neutralizing antibodies are formed, they are ineffective in containing the virus replication in the patient. Persistent viremia also results in exhaustion of B cells similar to the exhaustion reported for CD4+ T cells, adding to the defects in the humoral response to HIV. CD4+ T cell help is essential for the integrity of antigen-specific immune responses, both humoral and cell-mediated. HIV preferentially infects activated CD4+ T cells including HIV-specific CD4+ T cells, and so this loss of viral-specific helper T cell responses has profound negative consequences for the immunologic control of HIV replication. Furthermore, this loss occurs early in the course of infection, and animal studies indicate that 40–70% of all memory CD4+ T cells in the GALT are eliminated during acute infection. Another potential means of escape of HIV-infected cells from elimination by CD8+ CTLs is the sequestration of infected cells in immunologically privileged sites such as the central nervous system (CNS). Finally, the escape of HIV from immune-mediated elimination during primary infection allows the formation of a pool of latently infected cells that may not be recognized or completely eliminated by virus-specific CTLs or by ART (see below). Thus, despite a potent immune response and the marked downregulation of virus replication following primary HIV infection, HIV succeeds in establishing a state of chronic infection with a variable degree of persistent virus replication. During this period most patients make the clinical transition from acute primary infection to variable periods of clinical latency or smoldering disease activity (see below).
# Chunk 3558
Viral Dynamics The dynamics of viral production and turnover have been quantified using mathematical modeling in the setting of the administration of reverse transcriptase and protease inhibitors to HIV-infected individuals in clinical studies. Treatment with these drugs resulted in a precipitous decline in the level of plasma viremia, which typically fell by well over 90% within 2 weeks. The number of CD4+ T cells in the blood increased concurrently, which suggested that the Productively infected Latently infected per milliliter in the absence of therapy, there is virtually 1231 CD4+ lymphocytes CD4+ lymphocytes always some degree of ongoing virus replication.
# Chunk 3559
CD4+ lymphocytes infected with defective viruses

FIGuRE 226-21 Dynamics of HIV infection in vivo. See text for detailed description. (From AS Perelson et al: Science 271:1582, 1996.) killing of CD4+ T cells was linked directly to the levels of replicating virus. However, a significant component of the early rise in CD4+ T cell numbers following the initiation of therapy may be due to the redistribution of cells into the peripheral blood from other tissue compartments throughout the body as a consequence of therapy-related diminution in viremia-associated immune system activation. It was determined on the basis of modeling the kinetics of viral decline and the emergence of resistant mutants during therapy that 93–99% of the circulating virus originated from recently infected, rapidly turning over CD4+ T cells and that ~1–7% of circulating virus originated from longer-lived cells, likely monocytes/macrophages. A negligible amount of circulating virus originated from the pool of latently infected cells (Fig. 226-21). It was also determined that the half-life of a circulating virion was ~30–60 min and that of productively infected cells was 1 day. Given the relatively steady level of plasma viremia and of infected cells, it appears that extremely large amounts of virus (~1010–1011 virions) are produced and cleared from the circulation each day. In addition, data suggest that the minimal duration of the HIV-1 replication cycle in vivo is ~2 days. Other studies have demonstrated that the decrease in plasma viremia that results from cART correlates closely with a decrease in virus replication in lymph nodes, further confirming that lymphoid tissue is the main site of HIV replication and the main source of plasma viremia.
# Chunk 3560
It is important to distinguish between the terms long-term survivor and long-term nonprogressor. Long-term nonprogressors are by definition long-term survivors; however, the reverse is not always true. Predictions from one study that antedated the availability of effective cART estimated that ~13% of homosexual/bisexual men who were infected at an early age may remain free of clinical AIDS for >20 years. Many of these individuals may have progressed in their degree of immune deficiency; however, they certainly survived for a considerable period of time. With the advent of effective cART, the survival of HIV-infected individuals has dramatically increased. Early in the AIDS epidemic, prior to the availability of therapy, if a patient presented with a life-threatening opportunistic infection, the median survival was 26 weeks from the time of presentation. Currently, an HIV-infected 20-year-old individual in a high-income country who is appropriately treated with cART can expect to live at least 50 years according to mathematical model projections. In the face of cART, long-term survival is becoming commonplace. Definitions of
# Chunk 3561
The most commonly used confirmatory test is the Western blot (Fig. 226-29). This assay takes advantage of the fact that multiple HIV antigens of different, well-characterized molecular weights elicit the production of specific antibodies. These antigens can be separated on the basis of molecular weight, and antibodies to each component can be detected as discrete bands on the Western blot. A negative Western blot is one in which no bands are present at molecular weights corresponding to HIV gene products. In a patient with a positive or indeterminate EIA and a negative Western blot, one can conclude with certainty that the EIA reactivity was a false positive. On the other hand, a Western blot demonstrating antibodies to products of all three of the major genes of HIV (gag, pol, and env) is conclusive evidence of infection with HIV. Criteria established by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 1993 for a positive Western blot state that a result is considered positive if antibodies exist to two of the three HIV proteins: p24, gp41, and gp120/160. Using these criteria, ~10% of all blood donors deemed positive for HIV-1 infection lacked an antibody band to the pol gene product p31. Some 50% of these blood donors were subsequently found to be false positives. Thus, the absence of the p31 band should increase the suspicion that one may be dealing with a false-positive test result. In this setting it is prudent to obtain additional confirmation with an RNA-based test for HIV-1 and/ or a follow-up Western blot. By definition, Western blot patterns of reactivity that do not fall into the positive or negative categories are considered “indeterminate.” There are two possible explanations for an indeterminate Western blot result. The most likely explanation in a low-risk individual is that the patient being tested has antibodies that cross-react with one of the proteins of HIV. The most common patterns of cross-reactivity are antibodies that react with p24 and/or p55. The least likely explanation in this setting is that the individual is infected with HIV and is in the process of mounting a classic antibody response. In either instance, the Western blot should be repeated in 1 month to determine whether the indeterminate pattern is a pattern in evolution. In addition, one may attempt to confirm a diagnosis of HIV infection with the p24 antigen capture assay or one of the tests for HIV RNA (discussed below). While the Western blot is an excellent confirmatory test for HIV infection in patients with a positive or indeterminate EIA, it is a poor screening test. Among individuals with a negative EIA and PCR for HIV, 20–30% may show one or more bands on Western blot. While these bands are usually faint and represent cross-reactivity, their presence creates a situation in which other diagnostic modalities (such as DNA PCR, RT-PCR, or p24 antigen capture) must be employed to ensure that the bands do not indicate early HIV infection.
# Chunk 3562
infection. If the Western blot is negative, the EIA can be assumed to there is no progression in the Western blot, a diagnosis of HIV-1 is have been a false positive for HIV-1 and the diagnosis of HIV-1 infec-ruled out. If either the p24 or HIV-1 RNA assay is positive and/or the tion is ruled out. It would also be prudent at this point to perform spe-HIV-1 Western blot shows progression, a tentative diagnosis of HIV-1 cific serologic testing for HIV-2 following the same type of algorithm. infection can be made and later confirmed with a follow-up Western If the Western blot for HIV-1 is indeterminate, it should be repeated blot demonstrating a positive pattern. In addition to these standard in 4–6 weeks; in addition, one may proceed to a p24 antigen capture laboratory-based assays for detecting antibodies to HIV, an series of assay, HIV-1 RNA assay, or HIV-1 DNA PCR and specific serologic point-of-care tests can provide results in 1–60 min. Among the most testing for HIV-2. If the p24 and HIV RNA assays are negative and popular of these is the OraQuick Rapid HIV-1 antibody test that can be run on blood, plasma, or saliva. The sensitivity and specificity of this test is ~99% when run on whole blood. Specificity remains the SEROLOGIC TESTS IN THE DIAGNOSIS OF HIV-1 OR same but sensitivity drops to 98% when the test is run on saliva. While
# Chunk 3563
A variety of laboratory tests are available for the direct detection of HIV or its components (Table 226-8). These tests may be of considerable help in making a diagnosis of HIV infection when the Western blot results are indeterminate. In addition, the tests detecting levels of HIV RNA can be used to determine prognosis and to assess the response to antiretroviral therapies. The simplest of the direct detection tests is the p24 antigen capture assay. This is an EIA-type assay in which the solid phase consists of antibodies to the p24 antigen of HIV. It detects the viral protein p24 in the blood of HIV-infected individuals where it exists either as free antigen or complexed to anti-p24 antibodies. Overall, ~30% of individuals with untreated HIV infection have detectable levels of free p24 antigen. This increases to ~50% when samples are treated with a weak acid to dissociate antigen-antibody FIGuRE 226-30 Algorithm for the use of serologic tests in the complexes. Throughout the course of HIV infection, an equilibrium diagnosis of HIV-1 or HIV-2 infection. *Stable indeterminate exists between p24 antigen and anti-p24 antibodies. During the first Western blot 4–6 weeks later makes HIV infection unlikely. However, few weeks of infection, before an immune response develops, there it should be repeated twice at 3-month intervals to rule out HIV infec-is a brisk rise in p24 antigen levels (Fig. 226-27). After the develoption. Alternatively, one may test for HIV-1 p24 antigen or HIV RNA. EIA, ment of anti-p24 antibodies, these levels decline. Late in the course of enzyme immunoassay. infection, when circulating levels of virus are high, p24 antigen levels aSensitivity figures refer to those approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. bPrices may be lower in large-volume settings. Abbreviations: bDNA, branched DNA; cDNA, complementary DNA; EIA, enzyme immunoassay; TMA, transcription-mediated amplification; NASBA, nucleic acid sequence–based amplifi cation; PCR, polymerase chain reaction.
# Chunk 3564
CD4+ T Cell Counts The CD4+ T cell count is the laboratory test generally accepted as the best indicator of the immediate state of immunologic competence of the patient with HIV infection. This measurement, which can be made directly or calculated as the product of the percentage of CD4+ T cells (determined by flow cytometry) and the total lymphocyte count (determined by the white blood cell count [WBC] multiplied by the lymphocyte differential percentage), has been shown to correlate very well with the level of immunologic competence. Patients with CD4+ T cell counts <200/μL are at high risk of disease from P. jiroveci, while patients with CD4+ T cell counts <50/ μL are at high risk of disease from CMV, mycobacteria of the M. avium complex (MAC), and/or T. gondii (Fig. 226-31). Once the CD4+ T cell count is <200/μL, patients should be placed on a regimen for P. jiroveci prophylaxis, and once the count is <50/μL, primary prophylaxis for MAC infection is indicated. As with any laboratory measurement, one may wish to obtain two determinations prior to any significant changes in patient management based on CD4+ T cell count alone. Patients with HIV infection should have CD4+ T cell measurements performed at the time of diagnosis and every 3–6 months thereafter. More frequent measurements should be made if a declining trend is noted. For patients who have been on cART for at least 2 years
# Chunk 3565
Human Immunodeficiency Virus Disease: AIDS and Related Disorders

FIGuRE 226-31 Relationship between CD4+ T cell counts and the development of opportunistic diseases. Boxplot of the median (line inside the box), first quartile (bottom of the box), third quartile (top of the box), and mean (asterisk) CD4+ lymphocyte count at the time of the development of opportunistic disease. Can, candidal esophagitis; CMV, cytomegalovirus infection; Crp, cryptosporidiosis; Cry, cryptococcal meningitis; DEM, AIDS dementia complex; HSV, herpes simplex virus infection; HZos, herpes zoster; KS, Kaposi’s sarcoma; MAC, Mycobacterium avium complex bacteremia; NHL, non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma; PCP, primary Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia; PCP2, secondary P. jiroveci untreated patient. Following the initiation of therapy or any change in therapy, plasma HIV RNA levels should be monitored approximately every 4 weeks until the effectiveness of the therapeutic regimen is determined by the development of a new steady-state level of HIV RNA. In most instances of effective antiretroviral therapy the plasma level of HIV RNA will drop to <50 copies/mL within 6 months of the initiation of treatment. During therapy, levels of HIV RNA should be monitored every 3–6 months to evaluate the continuing effectiveness of therapy.
# Chunk 3566
HIV RNA Determinations Facilitated by highly sensitive techniques for the precise quantitation of small amounts of nucleic acids, the measurement of serum or plasma levels of HIV RNA has become an essential component in the monitoring of patients with HIV infection. As discussed in “Diagnosis of HIV Infection,” above, the most commonly used technique is the RT-PCR assay. This assay generates data in the form of number of copies of HIV RNA per milliliter of serum or plasma and can reliably detect as few as 40 copies of HIV RNA per milliliter of plasma. Research-based assays can detect down to one copy per milliliter. While it is common practice to describe levels of HIV RNA below these cut-offs as “undetectable,” this is a term that should be avoided as it is imprecise and leaves the false impression that the level of virus is 0. By utilizing more sensitive, nested PCR techniques and by studying tissue levels of virus as well as plasma levels, HIV RNA can be detected in virtually every patient with HIV infection. The one notable exception to this is a patient who underwent cytoreductive therapy followed by a bone marrow transplant from a CCR5Δ32 homozygous donor.
# Chunk 3567
It is estimated that 50–70% of individuals with HIV infection experience an acute clinical syndrome ~3–6 weeks after primary infection (Fig. 226-32). Varying degrees of clinical severity have been reported, and although it has been suggested that symptomatic seroconversion leading to the seeking of medical attention indicates an increased risk for an accelerated course of disease, there does not appear to be a correlation between the level of the initial burst of viremia in acute HIV infection and the subsequent course of disease. The typical clinical findings in the acute HIV syndrome are listed in Table 226-10; they occur along with a burst of plasma viremia. It has been reported that several symptoms of the acute HIV syndrome (fever, skin rash, pharyngitis, and myalgia) occur less frequently in those infected by injection drug use compared with those infected by sexual contact. The syndrome is typical of an acute viral syndrome and has been likened to acute infectious mononucleosis. Symptoms usually persist for one to several weeks and gradually subside as an immune response to HIV develops and the levels of plasma viremia decrease. Opportunistic infections have been reported during this stage of infection, reflecting the immunodeficiency that results from reduced numbers of CD4+
# Chunk 3568
S. pneumoniae (pneumococcal) infection may be the earliest serious infection to occur in patients with HIV disease. This can present as pneumonia, sinusitis, and/or bacteremia. Patients with untreated HIV infection have a sixfold increase in the incidence of pneumococcal pneumonia and a 100-fold increase in the incidence of pneumococcal bacteremia. Pneumococcal disease may be seen in patients with relatively intact immune systems. In one study, the baseline CD4+ T cell count at the time of a first episode of pneumococcal pneumonia was ~300/μL. Of interest is the fact that the inflammatory response to pneumococcal infection appears proportional to the CD4+ T cell count. Due to this high risk of pneumococcal disease, immunization with the conjugated pneumococcal vaccine followed by booster immunization with the 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine is one of the generally recommended prophylactic measures for patients with HIV infection. This is likely most effective if given while the CD4+ T cell count is >200/μL and, if given to patients with lower CD4+ T cell counts, should be repeated once the count has been above 200 for 6 months. Although clear guidelines do not exist, it also makes sense to repeat immunization every 5 years. The incidence of bacterial pneumonia is cut in half when patients quit smoking.
# Chunk 3569
Pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP), once the hallmark of AIDS, has dramatically declined in incidence following the development of effective prophylactic regimens and the widespread use of cART. It is, however, still the single most common cause of pneumonia in patients with HIV infection in the United States and can be identified as a likely etiologic agent in 25% of cases of pneumonia in patients with HIV infection, with an incidence in the range of 2–3 cases per 100 person-years. Approximately 50% of cases of HIV-associated PCP occur in patients who are unaware of their HIV status. The risk of PCP is greatest among those who have experienced a previous bout of PCP and those who have CD4+ T cell counts of <200/μL. Overall, 79% of patients with PCP have CD4+ T cell counts <100/μL and 95% of patients have CD4+ T cell counts <200/μL. Recurrent fever, night sweats, thrush, and unexplained weight loss also are associated with an increased incidence of PCP. For these reasons, it is strongly recommended that all patients with CD4+ T cell counts <200/μL (or a CD4 percentage <15) receive some form of PCP prophylaxis. The incidence of PCP is approaching zero in patients with known HIV infection receiving appropriate cART and prophylaxis. In the United States, primary PCP is now occurring at a median CD4+ T cell count of 36/ μL, while secondary PCP is occurring at a median CD4+ T cell count of 10/μL. Patients with PCP generally present with fever and a cough that is usually nonproductive or productive of only scant amounts of white sputum. They may complain of a characteristic retrosternal chest pain that is worse on inspiration and is described as sharp or burning. HIV-associated PCP may have an indolent course characterized by weeks of vague symptoms and should be included in the differential diagnosis of fever, pulmonary complaints, or unexplained weight loss in any patient with HIV infection and <200 CD4+ T cells/μL. The most
# Chunk 3570
common finding on chest x-ray is either a normal film, if the disease may demonstrate a patchy ground-glass appearance. Routine laborais suspected early, or a faint bilateral interstitial infiltrate. The classic tory evaluation is usually of little help in the differential diagnosis finding of a dense perihilar infiltrate is unusual in patients with AIDS. of PCP. A mild leukocytosis is common, although this may not be In patients with PCP who have been receiving aerosolized pentamidine obvious in patients with prior neutropenia. Elevation of lactate dehyfor prophylaxis, one may see an x-ray picture of upper lobe cavitary drogenase is common. Arterial blood-gases may indicate hypoxemia disease, reminiscent of TB. Other less common findings on chest with a decline in Pao and an increase in the arterial-alveolar (a–a) x-ray include lobar infiltrates and pleural effusions. Thin-section CT gradient. Arterial blood-gas measurements not only aid in making the diagnosis of PCP but also provide important information for staging the severity of the disease and directing treatment (see below). A definitive diagnosis of PCP requires demonstration of the organism in samples obtained from induced sputum, bronchoalveolar lavage, transbronchial biopsy, or open-lung biopsy. PCR has been used to10 detect specific DNA sequences for P. jiroveci in clinical specimens where histologic examinations have failed to make a diagnosis.
# Chunk 3571
FIGuRE 226-33 A. Decrease in the incidence of opportunistic infections and Kaposi’s sarcoma in HIV-infected individuals with CD4+ T cell counts <100/μL from 1992 through 1998. (Adapted and updated from FJ Palella et al: N Engl J Med 338:853, 1998, and JE Kaplan et al: Clin Infect Dis 30[S1]:S5, 2000, with permission.) B. Quarterly incidence rates of cytomegalovirus (CMV), Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia (PCP), and Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC) from 1995 to 2001. (From FJ Palella et al: AIDS 16:1617, 2002.) plained fever for >2 weeks, and any patient with a recent history of oropharyngeal candidiasis. The preferred regimen for prophylaxis is TMP/SMX, one double-strength tablet daily. This regimen also provides protection against toxoplasmosis and some bacterial respiratory pathogens. For patients who cannot tolerate TMP/SMX, alternatives for prophylaxis include dapsone plus pyrimethamine plus leucovorin, aerosolized pentamidine administered by the Respirgard II nebulizer, and atovaquone. Primary or secondary prophylaxis for PCP can be 1254 discontinued in those patients treated with cART who maintain good suppression of HIV (<50 copies/mL) and CD4+ T cell counts >200/μL for at least 3 months.
# Chunk 3572
M. tuberculosis, once thought to be on its way to extinction in the United States, experienced a resurgence associated with the HIV epidemic (Chap. 202). Worldwide, approximately one-third of all AIDS-related deaths are associated with TB, and TB is the primary cause of death for 10–15% of patients with HIV infection. In the United States ~5% of AIDS patients have active TB. Patients with HIV infection are more likely to have active TB by a factor of 100 when compared with an HIV-negative population. For an asymptomatic HIV-negative person with a positive purified protein derivative (PPD) skin test, the risk of reactivation TB is around 1% per year. For the patient with untreated HIV infection, a positive PPD skin test, and no signs or symptoms of TB, the rate of reactivation TB is 7–10% per year. Untreated TB can accelerate the course of HIV infection. Levels of plasma HIV RNA increase in the setting of active TB and decline in the setting of successful TB treatment. Active TB is most common in patients 25–44 years of age, in African Americans and Hispanics, in patients in New York City and Miami, and in patients in developing countries. In these demographic groups, 20–70% of the new cases of active TB are in patients with HIV infection. The epidemic of TB embedded in the epidemic of HIV infection probably represents the greatest health risk to the general public and the health care profession associated with the HIV epidemic. In contrast to infection with atypical mycobacteria such as MAC, active TB often develops relatively early in the course of HIV infection and may be an early clinical sign of HIV disease. In one study, the median CD4+ T cell count at presentation of TB was 326/μL. The clinical manifestations of TB in HIV-infected patients are quite varied and generally show different patterns as a function of the CD4+ T cell count. In patients with relatively high CD4+ T cell counts, the typical pattern of pulmonary reactivation occurs: patients present with fever, cough, dyspnea on exertion, weight loss, night sweats, and a chest x-ray revealing cavitary apical disease of the upper lobes. In patients with lower CD4+ T cell counts, disseminated disease is more common. In these patients the chest x-ray may reveal diffuse or lower-lobe bilateral reticulonodular infiltrates consistent with miliary spread, pleural effusions, and hilar and/or mediastinal adenopathy. Infection may be present in bone, brain, meninges, GI tract, lymph nodes (particularly cervical lymph nodes), and viscera. Some patients with advanced HIV infection and active TB may have no symptoms of illness, and thus screening for TB should be part of the initial evaluation of every patient with HIV infection. Approximately 60–80% of HIV-infected patients with TB have pulmonary disease, and 30–40% have extrapulmonary disease. Respiratory isolation and a negative-pressure room should be used for patients in whom a diagnosis of pulmonary TB is being considered. This approach is critical to limit nosocomial and community spread of infection. Culture of the organism from an involved site provides a definitive diagnosis. Blood cultures are positive in 15% of patients. This figure is higher in patients with lower CD4 +T cell counts. In the setting of fulminant disease one cannot rely on the accuracy of a negative PPD skin test to rule out a diagnosis of TB. In addition, IFN-γ release assays may be difficult to interpret due to high backgrounds as a consequence of HIV-associated immune activation. TB is one of the conditions associated with HIV infection for which cure is possible with appropriate therapy. Therapy for TB is generally the same in the HIV-infected patient as in the HIV-negative patient (Chap. 202). Due to the possibility of multidrug-resistant or extensively drug-resistant TB, drug susceptibility testing should be performed to guide therapy. Due to pharmacokinetic interactions, adjusted doses of rifabutin should be substituted for rifampin in patients receiving the HIV protease inhibitors or nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors. Treatment is most effective in programs that involve directly observed therapy. Initiation of cART and/or anti-TB therapy may be associated with clinical deterioration due to immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS) reactions. These are most common in patients initiating both treatments at the same time, may occur as early as 1 week after initiation of cART therapy, and are seen more frequently in patients with advanced HIV disease. For these reasons it is recommended that initiation of cART be delayed in antiretroviral-naïve patients with CD4 counts >50 cells/μL until 2–4 weeks following the initiation of treatment for TB. For patients with lower CD4 counts the benefits of more immediate cART outweigh the risks of IRIS, and cART should be started as soon as possible in those patients. Effective prevention of active TB can be a reality if the health care professional is aggressive in looking for evidence of latent or active TB by making sure that all patients with HIV infection receive a PPD skin test or evaluation with an IFN-γ release assay. Anergy testing is not of value in this setting. Since these tests rely on the host mounting an immune response to
# Chunk 3573
Atypical mycobacterial infections are also seen with an increased frequency in patients with HIV infection. Infections with at least 12 different mycobacteria have been reported, including M. bovis and representatives of all four Runyon groups. The most common atypical mycobacterial infection is with M. avium or M. intracellulare species— the Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC). Infections with MAC are seen mainly in patients in the United States and are rare in Africa. It has been suggested that prior infection with M. tuberculosis decreases the risk of MAC infection. MAC infections probably arise from organisms that are ubiquitous in the environment, including both soil and water. There is little evidence for person-to-person transmission of MAC infection. The presumed portals of entry are the respiratory and GI tracts. MAC infection is a late complication of HIV infection, occurring predominantly in patients with CD4+ T cell counts of <50/μL. The average CD4+ T cell count at the time of diagnosis is 10/μL. The most common presentation is disseminated disease with fever, weight loss, and night sweats. At least 85% of patients with MAC infection are mycobacteremic, and large numbers of organisms can often be demonstrated on bone marrow biopsy. The chest x-ray is abnormal in ~25% of patients, with the most common pattern being that of a bilateral, lower-lobe infiltrate suggestive of miliary spread. Alveolar or nodular infiltrates and hilar and/or mediastinal adenopathy can also occur. Other clinical findings include endobronchial lesions, abdominal pain, diarrhea, and lymphadenopathy. Anemia and elevated liver alkaline phosphatase are common. The diagnosis is made by the culture of blood or involved tissue. The finding of two consecutive sputum samples positive for MAC is highly suggestive of pulmonary infection. Cultures may take 2 weeks to turn positive. Therapy consists of a macrolide, usually clarithromycin, with ethambutol. Some physicians elect to add a third drug from among rifabutin, ciprofloxacin, or amikacin in patients with extensive disease. Therapy was generally for life; however, with the use of cART it is possible to discontinue therapy in patients with sustained suppression of HIV replication and CD4+ T cell counts >100/μL for 3–6 months. Primary prophylaxis for MAC is indicated in patients with HIV infection and CD4+ T cell counts <50/μL (Table 226-11). This may be discontinued in patients in whom cART induces a sustained suppression of viral replication and an increase in CD4+ T cell count to >100/μL for ≥6 months.
# Chunk 3574
Fungal infections of the lung, in addition to PCP, can be seen in patients with AIDS. Patients with pulmonary cryptococcal disease present with fever, cough, dyspnea, and, in some cases, hemoptysis. A focal or diffuse interstitial infiltrate is seen on chest x-ray in >90% of patients. In addition, one may see lobar disease, cavitary disease, pleural effusions, and hilar or mediastinal adenopathy. More than half of patients are fungemic, and 90% of patients have concomitant CNS infection. Coccidioides immitis is a mold that is endemic in the southwest United States. It can cause a reactivation pulmonary syndrome in patients with HIV infection. Most patients with this condition will have CD4+ T cell counts <250/μL. Patients present with fever, weight loss, cough, and extensive, diffuse reticulonodular infiltrates on chest x-ray. One may also see nodules, cavities, pleural effusions, and hilar adenopathy. While serologic testing is of value in the immunocompetent host, serologies are negative in 25% of HIV-infected patients with coccidioidal infection. Invasive aspergillosis is not an AIDS-defining illness and is generally not seen in patients with AIDS in the absence of neutropenia or administration of glucocorticoids. When it does occur, Aspergillus infection may have an unusual presentation in the respiratory tract of patients with AIDS, where it gives the appearance of a pseudomembranous tracheobronchitis. Primary pulmonary infection of the lung may be seen with histoplasmosis. The most common pulmonary manifestation of histoplasmosis, however, is in the setting of disseminated disease, presumably due to reactivation. In this setting respiratory symptoms are usually minimal, with cough and dyspnea occurring in 10–30% of patients. The chest x-ray is abnormal in ~50% of patients, showing either a diffuse interstitial infiltrate or diffuse small nodules, and the urine will often be positive for Histoplasma antigen.
# Chunk 3575
Two forms of idiopathic interstitial pneumonia have been identified in patients with HIV infection: lymphoid interstitial pneumonitis (LIP) and nonspecific interstitial pneumonitis (NIP). LIP, a common finding in children, is seen in about 1% of adult patients with untreated HIV infection. This disorder is characterized by a benign infiltrate of the lung and is thought to be part of the polyclonal activation of lymphocytes seen in the context of HIV and EBV infections. Transbronchial biopsy is diagnostic in 50% of the cases, with an open-lung biopsy required for diagnosis in the remainder of cases. This condition is generally self-limited and no specific treatment is necessary. Severe cases have been managed with brief courses of glucocorticoids. Although rarely a clinical problem since the use of cART, evidence of NIP may be seen in up to half of all patients with untreated HIV infection. Histologically, interstitial infiltrates of lymphocytes and plasma cells in a perivascular and peribronchial distribution are present. When symptomatic, patients present with fever and nonproductive cough occasionally accompanied by mild chest discomfort. Chest x-ray is usually normal or may reveal a faint interstitial pattern. Similar to LIP, NIP is a self-limited process for which no therapy is indicated other than appropriate management of the underlying HIV infection. HIV-related pulmonary arterial hypertension (HIV-PAH) is seen in ~0.5% of HIV-infected individuals. Patients may present with an array of symptoms including shortness of breath, fatigue, syncope, chest pain, and signs of right-sided heart failure. Chest x-ray reveals dilated pulmonary vessels and right-sided cardiomegaly with right ventricular hypertrophy seen on electrocardiogram. cART does not appear to be of clear benefit, and the prognosis is quite poor with a median survival in the range of 2 years.
# Chunk 3576
They may present with a variety of nonspecific symptoms including fever, anorexia, fatigue, and malaise of several weeks’ duration. Diarrhea is common but may be absent. Diagnosis is made by culture of blood and stool. Long-term therapy with ciprofloxacin is the recommended treatment. HIV-infected patients also have an increased incidence of S. typhi infection in areas of the world where typhoid is a problem. Shigella spp., particularly S. flexneri, can cause severe intestinal disease in HIV-infected individuals. Up to 50% of patients will develop bacteremia. Campylobacter infections occur with an increased frequency in patients with HIV infection. While
# Chunk 3577
Cryptosporidia, microsporidia, and Isospora belli (Chap. 254) are the most common opportunistic protozoa that infect the GI tract and cause diarrhea in HIV-infected patients. Cryptosporidial infection may present in a variety of ways, ranging from a self-limited or intermittent diarrheal illness in patients in the early stages of HIV infection to a severe, life-threatening diarrhea in severely immunodeficient individuals. In patients with untreated HIV infection and CD4+ T cell counts of <300/μL, the incidence of cryptosporidiosis is ~1% per year. In 75% of cases the diarrhea is accompanied by crampy abdominal pain, and 25% of patients have nausea and/or vomiting. Cryptosporidia may also cause biliary tract disease in the HIV-infected patient, leading to cholecystitis with or without accompanying cholangitis and pancreatitis secondary to papillary stenosis. The diagnosis of cryptosporidial diarrhea is made by stool examination or biopsy of the small intestine. The diarrhea is noninflammatory, and the characteristic finding is the presence of oocysts that stain with acid-fast dyes. Therapy is predominantly supportive, and marked improvements have been reported in the setting of effective cART. Treatment with up to 2000 mg/d of nitazoxanide (NTZ) is associated with improvement in symptoms or a decrease in shedding of organisms in about half of patients. Its overall role in the management of this condition remains unclear. Patients can minimize their risk of developing cryptosporidiosis by avoiding contact with human and animal feces, by not drinking untreated water from lakes or rivers, and by not eating raw shellfish.
# Chunk 3578
Microsporidia are small, unicellular, obligate intracellular parasites that reside in the cytoplasm of enteric cells (Chap. 254). The main species causing disease in humans is Enterocytozoon bieneusi. The clinical manifestations are similar to those described for cryptosporidia and include abdominal pain, malabsorption, diarrhea, and cholangitis. The small size of the organism may make it difficult to detect; however, with the use of chromotrope-based stains, organisms can be identified in stool samples by light microscopy. Definitive diagnosis generally depends on electron-microscopic examination of a stool specimen, intestinal aspirate, or intestinal biopsy specimen. In contrast to cryptosporidia, microsporidia have been noted in a variety of extraintestinal locations, including the eye, brain, sinuses, muscle, and liver, and they have been associated with conjunctivitis and hepatitis. The most effective way to deal with microsporidia in a patient with HIV infection is to restore the immune system by treating the HIV infection with cART. Albendazole, 400 mg bid, has been reported to be of benefit in some patients.
# Chunk 3579
CMV colitis was once seen as a consequence of advanced immunodeficiency in 5–10% of patients with AIDS. It is much less common with the advent of cART. CMV colitis presents as diarrhea, abdominal pain, weight loss, and anorexia. The diarrhea is usually nonbloody, and the diagnosis is achieved through endoscopy and biopsy. Multiple mucosal ulcerations are seen at endoscopy, and biopsies reveal characteristic intranuclear and cytoplasmic inclusion bodies. Secondary bacteremias may result as a consequence of thinning of the bowel wall. Treatment is with either ganciclovir or foscarnet for 3–6 weeks. Relapses are common, and maintenance therapy is typically necessary in patients whose HIV infection is poorly controlled. Patients with CMV disease of the GI tract should be carefully monitored for evidence of CMV retinitis.
# Chunk 3580
The initial evaluation of a patient with HIV infection and diarrhea should include a set of stool examinations, including culture, exami nation for ova and parasites, and examination for Clostridium difficile toxin. Approximately 50% of the time this workup will demonstrate infection with pathogenic bacteria, mycobacteria, or protozoa. If the initial stool examinations are negative, additional evaluation, including upper and/or lower endoscopy with biopsy, will yield a diagnosis of microsporidial or mycobacterial infection of the small intestine ~30% of the time. In patients for whom this diagnostic evaluation is nonrevealing, a presumptive diagnosis of HIV enteropathy can be made if the diarrhea has persisted for >1 month. An algorithm for the evalua tion of diarrhea in patients with HIV infection is given in Fig. 226-36. Rectal lesions are common in HIV-infected patients, particularly the perirectal ulcers and erosions due to the reactivation of HSV
# Chunk 3581
The prevalence of co-infection with HIV and hepatitis viruses varies by geographic region. In the United States, ~90% of HIV-infected individuals have evidence of infection with HBV; 6–14% have chronic HBV infection; 5–50% of patients are co-infected with HCV; and co-infections with hepatitis D, E, and/or G viruses are common. Among IV drug users with HIV infection, rates of HCV infection range from 70% to 95%. HIV infection has a significant impact on the course of hepatitis virus infection. It is associated with approximately a threefold increase in the development of persistent hepatitis B surface antigenemia. Patients infected with both HBV and HIV have decreased evidence of inflammatory liver disease. The presumption that this is due to the immunosuppressive effects of HIV infection is supported by the observations that this situation can be reversed, and one may see the development of more severe hepatitis following the initiation of effective cART. In studies of the impact of HIV on HBV infection, fourto tenfold increases in liver-related mortality rates have been noted in patients with HIV and active HBV infection compared to rates in patients with either infection alone. There is, however, only a slight increase in overall mortality rate in HIV-infected individuals who are also hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg)–positive. IFN-α is less successful as treatment for HBV in patients with HIV co-infection. Lamivudine, emtricitabine, adefovir/tenofovir/ entecavir, and telbivudine alone or in combination are useful in the treatment of hepatitis B in patients with HIV infection. It is important to remember that all the above-mentioned drugs also have activity against HIV and should not be used alone in patients with HIV infection, in order to avoid the emergence of quasispecies of HIV resistant to these drugs. For this reason, the need to treat hepatitis B infection in a patient with HIV infection is an indication to treat HIV infection in that same patient, regardless of CD4+ T cell count. HCV infection is more severe in the patient with HIV infection; it does not appear to affect overall mortality rates in HIV-infected individuals when other variables such as age, baseline CD4+ T cell count, and use of cART are taken into account. In the setting of HIV and HCV co-infection, levels of HCV are approximately tenfold higher than in the HIV-negative patient with HCV infection. There is a 50% higher overall mortality rate with a five-fold increased risk of death due to liver disease in patients chronically infected with both HCV and HIV. Use of directly acting agents for the treatment for HCV leads to cure rates approaching 100%, even in patients with HIV co-infection. Successful treatment of HCV in HIV-infected patients decreases mortality. Hepatitis A virus infection is not seen with an increased frequency in patients with HIV infection. It is recommended that all patients with HIV infection who have not experienced natural infection be immunized with hepatitis A and/or hepatitis B vaccines. Infection with hepatitis G virus, also known as GB virus C, is seen in ~50% of patients with HIV infection. For reasons that are currently unclear, there are data to suggest that patients with HIV infection co-infected with this virus have a decreased rate of progression to AIDS.
# Chunk 3582
Diseases of the Kidney and Genitourinary Tract Diseases of the kidney or genitourinary tract may be a direct consequence of HIV infection, due to an opportunistic infection or neoplasm, or related to drug toxicity. Overall, microalbuminuria is seen in ~20% of untreated HIV-infected patients; significant proteinuria is seen in closer to 2%. The presence of microalbuminuria has been associated with an increase in all-cause mortality rate. HIV-associated nephropathy (HIVAN) was first described in IDUs and was initially thought to be IDU nephropathy in patients with HIV infection; it is now recognized as a true direct complication of HIV infection. Although the majority of patients with this condition have CD4+ T cell counts <200/μL, HIV-associated nephropathy can be an early manifestation of HIV infection and is also seen in children. Over 90% of reported cases have been in African-American or Hispanic individuals; the disease is not only more prevalent in these populations but also more severe and is the third leading cause of end-stage renal failure among African Americans age 20–64 in the United States. Proteinuria is the hallmark of this disorder. Edema and hypertension are rare. Ultrasound examination reveals enlarged, hyperechogenic kidneys. A definitive diagnosis is obtained through renal biopsy. Histologically, focal segmental glomerulosclerosis is present in 80%, and mesangial proliferation in 10–15% of cases. Prior to effective antiretroviral therapy, this disease was characterized by relatively rapid progression to end-stage renal disease. Patients with HIV-associated nephropathy should be treated for their HIV infection regardless of CD4+ T cell count. Treatment with angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and/or prednisone, 60 mg/d, also has been reported to be of benefit in some cases. The incidence of this disease in patients receiving adequate cART has not been well defined; however, the impression is that it has decreased in frequency and severity. It is the leading cause of end-stage renal disease in patients with HIV infection.
# Chunk 3583
Patients with advanced HIV disease may develop hyponatremia due to the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (vasopressin) secretion (SIADH) as a consequence of increased free-water intake and decreased free-water excretion. SIADH is usually seen in conjunction with pulmonary or CNS disease. Low serum sodium may also be due to adrenal insufficiency; a concomitant high serum potassium should alert one to this possibility. Hyperkalemia may be secondary to adrenal insufficiency; HIV nephropathy; or medications, particularly trimethoprim and pentamidine. Hypokalemia may be seen in the setting of tenofovir or amphotericin therapy. Adrenal gland disease may be due to mycobacterial infections, CMV disease, cryptococcal disease, histoplasmosis, or ketoconazole toxicity. Iatrogenic Cushing’s syndrome with suppression of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis may be seen with the use of local glucocorticoids (injected or inhaled) in patients receiving ritonavir. This is due to inhibition of the hepatic enzyme CYP3A4 by ritonavir leading to prolongation of the glucocorticoid half-life.
# Chunk 3584
increased incidence of antinuclear antibodies. Despite these serologic findings, there is no evidence that HIV-infected individuals have an a manifestation of immune reconstitution. Immune-reconstitution increase in two of the more common autoimmune diseases, i.e., Graves’ disease may occur as a late (9–48 months) complication of systemic lupus erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis. In fact, itcART. In advanced HIV disease, infection of the thyroid gland may has been observed that these diseases may be somewhat ameliorated occur with opportunistic pathogens, including P. jiroveci, CMV, by the concomitant presence of HIV infection, suggesting that an mycobacteria, Toxoplasma gondii, and Cryptococcus neoformans. intact CD4+ T cell limb of the immune response plays an integralThese infections are generally associated with a nontender, diffuse role in the pathogenesis of these conditions. Similarly, there are anecenlargement of the thyroid gland. Thyroid function is usually normal. dotal reports of patients with common variable immunodeficiencyDiagnosis is made by fine-needle aspirate or open biopsy. (Chap. 374), characterized by hypogammaglobulinemia, who haveDepending on the severity of disease, HIV infection is associated had a normalization of Ig levels following the development of HIVwith hypogonadism in 20–50% of men. While this is generally a com-infection, suggesting a possible role for overactive CD4+ T cell plication of underlying illness, testicular dysfunction may also be a immunity in certain forms of that syndrome. The one autoimmuneside effect of ganciclovir therapy. In some surveys, up to two-thirds disease that may occur with an increased frequency in patientsof patients report decreased libido and one-third complain of erectile with HIV infection is a variant of primary Sjögren’s syndromedysfunction. Androgen-replacement therapy should be considered in (Chap. 383). Patients with HIV infection may develop a syndromepatients with symptomatic hypogonadism. HIV infection does not consisting of parotid gland enlargement, dry eyes, and dry mouthseem to have a significant effect on the menstrual cycle outside the that is associated with lymphocytic infiltrates of the salivary glandsetting of advanced disease. and lung. One also can see peripheral neuropathy, polymyositis, renal tubular acidosis, and hepatitis. In contrast to Sjögren’s syndrome, Immunologic and Rheumatologic Diseases Immunologic and rheumato-in which the lymphocytic infiltrates are composed predominantly logic disorders are common in patients with HIV infection and range of CD4+ T cells, in patients with HIV infection the infiltrates are from excessive immediate-type hypersensitivity reactions (Chap. 376) composed predominantly of CD8+ T cells. In addition, while patients to an increase in the incidence of reactive arthritis (Chap. 384) to with Sjögren’s syndrome are mainly women who have autoantibodconditions characterized by a diffuse infiltrative lymphocytosis. The ies to Ro and La and who frequently have HLA-DR3 or -B8 MHC occurrence of these phenomena is an apparent paradox in the setting haplotypes, HIV-infected individuals with this syndrome are usually of the profound immunodeficiency and immunosuppression that African-American men who do not have anti-Ro or anti-La and who most often are HLA-DR5. This syndrome appears to be less common with the increased use of effective cART. The term diffuse infiltrative lymphocytosis syndrome (DILS) is used to describe this entity and to distinguish it from Sjögren’s syndrome.
# Chunk 3585
A variety of other immunologic or rheumatologic diseases have been reported in HIV-infected individuals, either de novo or in association with opportunistic infections or drugs. Using the criteria of widespread musculoskeletal pain of at least 3 months’ duration and the presence of at least 11 of 18 possible tender points by digital palpation, 11% of an HIV-infected cohort containing 55% IDUs were diagnosed as having fibromyalgia (Chap. 396). While the incidence of frank arthritis was less in this population than in other studied populations that consisted predominantly of men who have sex with men, these data support the concept that there are musculoskeletal problems that occur as a direct result of HIV infection. In addition there have been reports of leukocytoclastic vasculitis in the setting of zidovudine therapy. CNS angiitis and polymyositis also have been reported in HIV-infected individuals. Septic arthritis is surprisingly rare, especially given the increased incidence of staphylococcal bacteremias seen in this population. When septic arthritis has been reported, it has usually been due to Staphylococcus aureus, systemic fungal infection with
# Chunk 3586
Following the initiation of effective cART, a paradoxical worsening of preexisting, untreated, or partially treated opportunistic infections may be noted. One may also see exacerbations of pre-existing or the development of new autoimmune conditions following the initiation of antiretrovirals (Table 226-12). IRIS related to a known pre-existing infection or neoplasm is referred to as paradoxical IRIS, while IRIS associated with a previously undiagnosed condition is referred to as unmasking IRIS. The term immune reconstitution disease (IRD) is sometimes used to distinguish IRIS manifestations related to opportunistic diseases from IRIS manifestations related to autoimmune diseases. IRD is particularly common in patients with underlying untreated mycobacterial or fungal infections. IRIS is seen in 10–30% of patients, depending on the clinical setting, and is most common in patients starting therapy with CD4+ T cell counts <50 cells/μL who have a precipitous drop in HIV RNA levels following the initiation of cART. Signs and symptoms may appear anywhere from 2 weeks to 2 years after the initiation of cART and can include localized lymphadenitis, prolonged fever, pulmonary infiltrates, hepatitis, increased intracranial pressure, uveitis, sarcoidosis, and Graves’ disease. The clinical course can be protracted, and severe cases can be fatal. The underlying mechanism appears to be related to a phenomenon similar to type IV hypersensitivity reactions and reflects the immediate improvements in immune function that occur as levels of HIV RNA drop and the immunosuppressive effects of HIV infection are controlled. In severe cases, the use of immunosuppressive drugs such as glucocorticoids may be required to blunt the inflammatory component of these reactions while specific antimicrobial therapy takes effect.
# Chunk 3587
Human Immunodeficiency Virus Disease: AIDS and Related Disorders 1262 Some patients, otherwise asymptomatic, may develop persistent generalized lymphadenopathy as an early clinical manifestation of HIV infection. This condition is defined as the presence of enlarged lymph nodes (>1 cm) in two or more extrainguinal sites for >3 months without an obvious cause. The lymphadenopathy is due to marked follicular hyperplasia in the node in response to HIV infection. The nodes are generally discrete and freely movable. This feature of HIV disease may be seen at any point in the spectrum of immune dysfunction and is not associated with an increased likelihood of developing AIDS. Paradoxically, a loss in lymphadenopathy or a decrease in lymph node size outside the setting of cART may be a prognostic marker of disease progression. In patients with CD4+ T cell counts >200/ μL, the differential diagnosis of lymphadenopathy includes KS, TB, Castleman’s disease, and lymphoma. In patients with more advanced disease, lymphadenopathy may also be due to atypical mycobacterial infection, toxoplasmosis, systemic fungal infection, or bacillary angiomatosis. While indicated in patients with CD4+ T cell counts <200/μL, lymph node biopsy is not indicated in patients with early-stage disease unless there are signs and symptoms of systemic illness, such as fever and weight loss, or unless the nodes begin to enlarge, become fixed, or coalesce. Monoclonal gammopathy of unknown significance (MGUS) (Chap. 136), defined as the presence of a serum monoclonal IgG, IgA, or IgM in the absence of a clear cause, has been reported in 3% of patients with HIV infection. The overall clinical significance of this finding in patients with HIV infection is unclear, although it has been associated with other viral infections, non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, and plasma cell malignancy. Anemia is the most common hematologic abnormality in HIV-infected patients and, in the absence of a specific treatable cause, is independently associated with a poor prognosis. While generally mild, anemia can be quite severe and require chronic blood transfusions. Among the specific reversible causes of anemia in the setting of HIV infection are drug toxicity, systemic fungal and mycobacterial infections, nutritional deficiencies, and parvovirus B19 infections. Zidovudine may block erythroid maturation prior to its effects on other marrow elements. A characteristic feature of zidovudine therapy is an elevated mean corpuscular volume (MCV). Another drug used in patients with HIV infection that has a selective effect on the erythroid series is dapsone. This drug can cause a serious hemolytic anemia in patients who are deficient in glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase and can create a functional anemia in others through induction of methemoglobinemia. Folate levels are usually normal in HIV-infected individuals; however, vitamin B12 levels may be depressed as a consequence of achlorhydria or malabsorption. True autoimmune hemolytic anemia is rare, although ~20% of patients with HIV infection may have a positive direct antiglobulin test as a consequence of polyclonal B cell activation. Infection with parvovirus B19 may also cause anemia. It is important to recognize this possibility given the fact that it responds well to treatment with IVIg. Erythropoietin levels in patients with HIV infection and anemia are generally lower than expected given the degree of anemia. Treatment with erythropoietin may result in an increase in hemoglobin levels. An exception to this is a subset of patients with zidovudine-associated anemia in whom erythropoietin levels may be quite high. During the course of HIV infection, neutropenia may be seen in approximately half of patients. In most instances it is mild; however, it can be severe and can put patients at risk of spontaneous bacterial infections. This is most frequently seen in patients with severely advanced HIV disease and in patients receiving any of a number of potentially myelosuppressive therapies. In the setting of neutropenia, diseases that are not commonly seen in HIV-infected patients, such as aspergillosis or mucormycosis, may occur. Both granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) and GM-CSF increase neutrophil counts in patients with HIV infection regardless of the cause of the neutropenia. Earlier concerns about the potential of these agents to also increase levels of HIV were not confirmed in controlled clinical trials. Thrombocytopenia may be an early consequence of HIV infection. Approximately 3% of patients with untreated HIV infection and CD4+ T cell counts ≥400/μL have platelet counts <150,000/μL. For untreated patients with CD4+ T cell counts <400/μL, this incidence increases to 10%. In patients receiving antiretrovirals, thrombocytopenia is associated with hepatitis C, cirrhosis, and ongoing high-level HIV replication. Thrombocytopenia is rarely a serious clinical problem in patients with HIV infection and generally responds well to successful cART. Clinically, it resembles the thrombocytopenia seen in patients with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (Chap. 140). Immune complexes containing anti-gp120 antibodies and anti-anti-gp120 antibodies have been noted in the circulation and on the surface of platelets in patients with HIV infection. Patients with HIV infection have also been noted to have a platelet-specific antibody directed toward a 25-kDa component of the surface of the platelet. Other data suggest that the thrombocytopenia in patients with HIV infection may be due to a direct effect of HIV on megakaryocytes. Whatever the cause, it is very clear that the most effective medical approach to this problem has been the use of cART. For patients with platelet counts <20,000/μL, a more aggressive approach combining IVIg or anti-Rh Ig for an immediate response and cART for a more lasting response is appropriate. Rituximab has been used with some success in otherwise refractory cases. Splenectomy is a rarely needed option and is reserved for patients refractory to medical management. Because of the risk of serious infection with encapsulated organisms, all patients with HIV infection about to undergo splenectomy should be immunized with pneumococcal polysaccharide. It should be noted that, in addition to causing an increase in the platelet count, removal of the spleen will result in an increase in the peripheral blood lymphocyte count, making CD4+ T cell counts unreliable markers of immunocompetence. In this setting, the clinician should rely on the CD4+ T cell percentage for making diagnostic decisions with respect to the likelihood of opportunistic infections. A CD4+ T cell percentage of 15 is approximately equivalent to a CD4+ T cell count of 200/μL. In patients with early HIV infection, thrombocytopenia has also been reported as a consequence of classic thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (Chap. 140). This clinical syndrome, consisting of fever, thrombocytopenia, hemolytic anemia, and neurologic and renal dysfunction, is a rare complication of early HIV infection. As in other settings, the appropriate management is the use of salicylates and plasma exchange. Other causes of thrombocytopenia include lymphoma, mycobacterial infections, and fungal infections.
# Chunk 3588
Folliculitis is among the most prevalent dermatologic disorders in patients with HIV infection and is seen in ~20% of patients. It is more common in patients with CD4+ T cell counts <200 cells/μL. Pruritic papular eruption is one of the most common pruritic rashes in patients with HIV infection. It appears as multiple papules on the face, trunk, and extensor surfaces and may improve with cART. Eosinophilic pustular folliculitis is a rare form of folliculitis that is seen with increased frequency in patients with HIV infection. It presents as multiple, urticarial perifollicular papules that may coalesce into plaquelike lesions. Skin biopsy reveals an eosinophilic infiltrate of the hair follicle, which in certain cases has been associated with the presence of a mite. Patients typically have an elevated serum IgE level and may respond to treatment with topical anthelmintics. Pruritus is a common symptom in patients with HIV infection and can lead to prurigo nodularis. Patients with HIV infection have also been reported to develop a severe form of Norwegian scabies with hyperkeratotic psoriasiform lesions.
# Chunk 3589
Cryptococcosis HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders (HAND), including HIV encepha-

Human Immunodeficiency Virus Disease: AIDS and Related Disorders 1264 pathogenesis, damage to the CNS may be a direct result of viral infection of the CNS macrophages or glial cells or may be secondary to the release of neurotoxins and potentially toxic cytokines such as IL-1β, TNF-α, IL-6, and TGF-β. It has been reported that HIV-infected individuals with the E4 allele for apoE are at increased risk for AIDS encephalopathy and peripheral neuropathy. Virtually all patients with HIV infection have some degree of nervous system involvement with the virus. This is evidenced by the fact that CSF findings are abnormal in ~90% of patients, even during the asymptomatic phase of HIV infection. CSF abnormalities include pleocytosis (50–65% of patients), detection of viral RNA (~75%), elevated CSF protein (35%), and evidence of intrathecal synthesis of anti-HIV antibodies (90%). It is important to point out that evidence of infection of the CNS with HIV does not imply impairment of cognitive function. The neurologic function of an HIV-infected individual should be considered normal unless clinical signs and symptoms suggest otherwise. Aseptic meningitis may be seen in any but the very late stages of HIV infection. In the setting of acute primary infection, patients may experience a syndrome of headache, photophobia, and meningismus. Rarely, an acute encephalopathy due to encephalitis may occur. Cranial nerve involvement may be seen, predominantly cranial nerve VII but occasionally V and/or VIII. CSF findings include a lymphocytic pleocytosis, elevated protein level, and normal glucose level. This syndrome, which cannot be clinically differentiated from other viral meningitides (Chap. 165), usually resolves spontaneously within 2–4 weeks; however, in some patients, signs and symptoms may become chronic. Aseptic meningitis may occur any time in the course of HIV infection; however, it is rare following the development of AIDS. This suggests that clinical aseptic meningitis in the context of HIV infection is an immune-mediated disease. Cryptococcus is the leading infectious cause of meningitis in patients with AIDS (Chap. 239). While the vast majority of these are due to C. neoformans, up to 12% may be due to C. gattii. Cryptococcal meningitis is the initial AIDS-defining illness in ~2% of patients and generally occurs in patients with CD4+ T cell counts <100/μL. Cryptococcal meningitis is particularly common in untreated patients with AIDS in Africa, occurring in ~5% of patients. Most patients present with a picture of subacute meningoencephalitis with fever, nausea, vomiting, altered mental status, headache, and meningeal signs. The incidence of seizures and focal neurologic deficits is low. The CSF profile may be normal or may show only modest elevations in WBC or protein levels and decreases in glucose. The opening pressure in the CSF is usually elevated. In addition to meningitis, patients may develop cryptococcomas and cranial nerve involvement. Approximately one-third of patients also have pulmonary disease. Uncommon manifestations of cryptococcal infection include skin lesions that resemble molluscum contagiosum, lymphadenopathy, palatal and glossal ulcers, arthritis, gastroenteritis, myocarditis, and prostatitis. The prostate gland may serve as a reservoir for smoldering cryptococcal infection. The diagnosis of cryptococcal meningitis is made by identification of organisms in spinal fluid with india ink examination or by the detection of cryptococcal antigen. Blood cultures for fungus are often positive. A biopsy may be needed to make a diagnosis of CNS cryptococcoma. Treatment is with IV amphotericin B 0.7 mg/kg daily, or liposomal amphotericin 4–6 mg/kg daily, with flucytosine 25 mg/kg qid for at least 2 weeks if possible, continuing with amphotericin alone ideally until the CSF culture turns negative. Decreases in renal function in association with amphotericin can lead to increases in flucytosine levels and subsequent bone marrow suppression. Amphotericin is followed by fluconazole 400 mg/d PO for 8 weeks, and then fluconazole 200 mg/d until the CD4+ T cell count has increased to >200 cells/μL for 6 months in response to cART. Repeated lumbar puncture may be required to manage increased intracranial pressure. Symptoms may recur with initiation of cART as an immune reconstitution syndrome (see above). Other fungi that may cause meningitis in patients with HIV infection are C. immitis and H. capsulatum. Meningoencephalitis has also been reported due to Acanthamoeba or Naegleria. HIV-associated dementia consists of a constellation of signs and symptoms of CNS disease. While this is generally a late complication of HIV infection that progresses slowly over months, it can be seen in patients with CD4+ T cell counts >350 cells/μL. A major feature of this entity is the development of dementia, defined as a decline in cognitive ability from a previous level. It may present as impaired ability to concentrate, increased forgetfulness, difficulty reading, or increased difficulty performing complex tasks. Initially these symptoms may be indistinguishable from findings of situational depression or fatigue. In contrast to “cortical” dementia (such as Alzheimer’s disease), aphasia, apraxia, and agnosia are uncommon, leading some investigators to classify HIV encephalopathy as a “subcortical dementia” characterized by defects in short-term memory and executive function (see below). In addition to dementia, patients with HIV encephalopathy may also have motor and behavioral abnormalities. Among the motor problems are unsteady gait, poor balance, tremor, and difficulty with rapid alternating movements. Increased tone and deep tendon reflexes may be found in patients with spinal cord involvement. Late stages may be complicated by bowel and/or bladder incontinence. Behavioral problems include apathy, irritability, and lack of initiative, with progression to a vegetative state in some instances. Some patients develop a state of agitation or mild mania. These changes usually occur without significant changes in level of alertness. This is in contrast to the finding of somnolence in patients with dementia due to toxic/metabolic encephalopathies.
# Chunk 3590
Source: Adapted from A Antinori et al: Neurology 69:1789, 2007.

FIGuRE 226-39 AIDS dementia complex. Postcontrast CT scan through the lateral ventricles of a 47-year-old man with AIDS, altered mental status, and dementia. The lateral and third ventricles and the cerebral sulci are abnormally prominent. Mild white matter hypodensity is seen adjacent to the frontal horns of the lateral ventricles.
# Chunk 3591
Overall Contribution Fraction of Patients Disease to First Seizure, % Who Have Seizures, % 15–35% of patients with primary CNS lymphoma, 8% of patients with cryptococcal meningitis, and 7–50% of patients with HIV encephalopathy. Seizures may also be seen in patients with CNS tuberculosis, aseptic meningitis, and progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy. Seizures may be the presenting clinical symptom of HIV disease. In one study of 100 patients with HIV infection presenting with a first seizure, cerebral mass lesions were the most common cause, responsible for 32 of the 100 new-onset seizures. Of these 32 cases, 28 were due to toxoplasmosis and 4 to lymphoma. HIV encephalopathy accounted for an additional 24 new-onset seizures. Cryptococcal meningitis was the third most common diagnosis, responsible for 13 of the 100 seizures. In 23 cases, no cause could be found, and it is possible that these cases represent a subcategory of HIV encephalopathy. Of these 23 cases, 16 (70%) had 2 or more seizures, suggesting that anticonvulsant therapy is indicated in all patients with HIV infection and seizures unless a rapidly correctable cause is found. While phenytoin remains the initial treatment of choice, hypersensitivity reactions to this drug have been reported in >10% of patients with AIDS, and therefore the use of phenobarbital or valproic acid should be considered as alternatives. Due to a variety of drug-drug interactions between antiseizure medications and antiretrovirals, drug levels need to be monitored carefully.
# Chunk 3592
the HIV-infected patient includes primary CNS lymphoma and, less commonly, TB or fungal or bacterial abscesses. The definitive diagnostic procedure is brain biopsy. However, given the morbidity rate that can accompany this procedure, it is usually reserved for the patient who has failed 2–4 weeks of empiric therapy for toxoplasmosis. If the patient is seronegative for T. gondii, the likelihood that a mass lesion is due to toxoplasmosis is <10%. In that setting, one may choose to be more aggressive and perform a brain biopsy sooner. Standard treatment is sulfadiazine and pyrimethamine with leucovorin as needed for a minimum of 4–6 weeks. Alternative therapeutic regimens include clindamycin in combination with pyrimethamine; atovaquone plus pyrimethamine; and azithromycin plus pyrimethamine plus rifabutin. Relapses are common, and it is recommended that patients with a history of prior toxoplasmic encephalitis receive maintenance therapy with sulfadiazine, pyrimethamine, and leucovorin as long as their CD4+ T cell counts remain <200 cells/μL. Patients with CD4+ T cell counts <100/μL and IgG antibody to Toxoplasma should receive primary prophylaxis for toxoplasmosis. Fortunately, the same daily regimen of a single double-strength tablet of TMP/SMX used for P. jiroveci prophylaxis provides adequate primary protection against toxoplasmosis. Secondary prophylaxis/maintenance therapy for toxoplasmosis may be discontinued in the setting of effective cART and increases in CD4+ T cell counts to >200/μL for 6 months.
# Chunk 3593
JC virus, a human polyomavirus that is the etiologic agent of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML), is an important opportunistic pathogen in patients with AIDS (Chap. 164). While ~80% of the general adult population has antibodies to JC virus, indicative of prior infection, <10% of healthy adults show any evidence of ongoing viral replication. PML is the only known clinical manifestation of JC virus infection. It is a late manifestation of AIDS and is seen in ~1–4% of patients with AIDS. The lesions of PML begin as small foci of demyelination in subcortical white matter that eventually coalesce. The cerebral hemispheres, cerebellum, and brainstem may all be involved. Patients typically have a protracted course with multifocal neurologic deficits, with or without changes in mental status. Approximately 20% of patients experience seizures. Ataxia, hemiparesis, visual field defects, aphasia, and sensory defects may occur. Headache, fever, nausea, and vomiting are rarely seen. Their presence should suggest another diagnosis. MRI typically reveals multiple, nonenhancing white matter lesions that may coalesce and have a predilection for the occipital and parietal lobes. The lesions show signal hyperintensity on T2-weighted images and diminished signal on T1-weighted images. The measurement of JC virus DNA levels in CSF has a diagnostic sensitivity of 76% and a specificity of close to 100%. Prior to the availability of cART, the majority of patients with PML died within 3–6 months of the onset of symptoms. Paradoxical worsening of PML has been seen with initiation of cART as an immune reconstitution syndrome. There is no specific treatment for PML; however, a median survival of 2 years and survival of >15 years have been reported in patients with PML treated with cART for their HIV disease. Despite having a significant impact on survival, only ~50% of patients with HIV infection and PML show neurologic improvement with cART. Studies with other antiviral agents such as cidofovir have failed to show clear benefit. Factors influencing a favorable prognosis for PML in the setting of HIV infection include a CD4+ T cell count >100/μL at baseline and the ability to maintain an HIV viral load of <500 copies/mL. Baseline HIV-1 viral load does not have independent predictive value of survival. PML is one of the few opportunistic infections that continues to occur with some frequency despite the widespread use of cART.
# Chunk 3594
Reactivation American trypanosomiasis may present as acute meningoencephalitis with focal neurologic signs, fever, headache, vomiting, and seizures. Accompanying cardiac disease in the form of arrhythmias or heart failure should increase the index of suspicion. The presence of antibodies to T. cruzi supports the diagnosis. In South America, reactivation of Chagas’ disease is considered to be an AIDS-defining condition and may be the initial AIDS-defining condition. The majority of cases occur in patients with CD4+ T cell counts <200 cells/μL. Lesions appear radiographically as single or multiple hypodense areas, typically with ring enhancement and edema. They are found predominantly in the subcortical areas, a feature that differentiates them from the deeper lesions of toxoplasmosis. T. cruzi amastigotes, or trypanosomes, can be identified from biopsy specimens or CSF. Other CSF findings include elevated protein and a mild (<100 cells/μL) lymphocytic pleocytosis. Organisms can also be identified by direct examination of the blood. Treatment consists of benzimidazole (2.5 mg/kg bid) or nifurtimox (2 mg/kg qid) for at least 60 days, followed by maintenance therapy for the duration of immunodeficiency with either drug at a dose of 5 mg/kg three times a week. As is the case with cerebral toxoplasmosis, successful therapy with antiretrovirals may allow discontinuation of therapy for Chagas’ disease.
# Chunk 3595
Primary CNS lymphoma is discussed below in the section on neoplastic diseases.

Spinal cord disease, or myelopathy, is present in ~20% of patients with AIDS, often as part of HIV-associated neurocognitive disorder. In fact, 90% of the patients with HIV-associated myelopathy have some evidence of dementia, suggesting that similar pathologic processes may be responsible for both conditions. Three main types of spinal cord disease are seen in patients with AIDS. The first of these is a vacuolar myelopathy, as mentioned above. This condition is pathologically similar to subacute combined degeneration of the cord, such as that occurring with pernicious anemia. Although vitamin B12 deficiency can be seen in patients with AIDS as a primary complication of HIV infection, it does not appear to be responsible for the myelopathy seen in the majority of patients. Vacuolar myelopathy is characterized by a subacute onset and often presents with gait disturbances, predominantly ataxia and spasticity; it may progress to include bladder and bowel dysfunction. Physical findings include evidence of increased deep tendon reflexes and extensor plantar responses. The second form of spinal cord disease involves the dorsal columns and presents as a pure sensory ataxia. The third form is also sensory in nature and presents with paresthesias and dysesthesias of the lower extremities. In contrast to the cognitive problems seen in patients with HIV encephalopathy, these spinal cord syndromes do not respond well to antiretroviral drugs, and therapy is mainly supportive.
# Chunk 3596
One of the most devastating consequences of HIV infection is CMV retinitis. Patients at high risk of CMV retinitis (CD4+ T cell count <100/μL) should undergo an ophthalmologic examination every 3–6 months. The majority of cases of CMV retinitis occur in patients with a CD4+ T cell count <50/μL. Prior to the availability of cART, this CMV reactivation syndrome was seen in 25–30% of patients with
# Chunk 3597
AIDS. In the cART era this has dropped to close to 2%. CMV retinitis usually presents as a painless, progressive loss of vision. Patients may also complain of blurred vision, “floaters,” and scintillations. The disease is usually bilateral, although typically it affects one eye more than the other. The diagnosis is made on clinical grounds by an experienced ophthalmologist. The characteristic retinal appearance is that of perivascular hemorrhage and exudate. In situations where the diagnosis is in doubt due to an atypical presentation or an unexpected lack of response to therapy, vitreous or aqueous humor sampling with molecular diagnostic techniques may be of value. CMV infection of the retina results in a necrotic inflammatory process, and the visual loss that develops is irreversible. CMV retinitis may be complicated by rhegmatogenous retinal detachment as a consequence of retinal atrophy in areas of prior inflammation. Therapy for CMV retinitis consists of oral valganciclovir, IV ganciclovir, or IV foscarnet, with cidofovir as an alternative. Combination therapy with ganciclovir and foscarnet has been shown to be slightly more effective than either ganciclovir or foscarnet alone in the patient with relapsed CMV retinitis. A 3-week induction course is followed by maintenance therapy with oral valganciclovir. If CMV disease is limited to the eye, intravitreal injections of ganciclovir or foscarnet may be considered. Intravitreal injections of cidofovir are generally avoided due to the increased risk of uveitis and hypotony. Maintenance therapy is continued until the CD4+ T cell count remains >100 μL for >6 months. The majority of patients with HIV infection and CMV disease develop some degree of uveitis with the initiation of cART. The etiology of this is unknown; however, it has been suggested that this may be due to the generation of an enhanced immune response to CMV as an IRIS (see above). In some instances this has required the use of topical glucocorticoids.
# Chunk 3598
Additional Disseminated Infections and Wasting Syndrome Infections with species of the small, gram-negative, Rickettsia-like organism Bartonella (Chap. 197) are seen with increased frequency in patients with HIV infection. While it is not considered an AIDS-defining illness by the CDC, many experts view infection with Bartonella as indicative of a severe defect in cell-mediated immunity. It is usually seen in patients with CD4+ T cell counts <100/μL and is a significant cause of unexplained fever in patients with advanced HIV infection. Among the clinical manifestations of Bartonella infection are bacillary angiomatosis, cat-scratch disease, and trench fever. Bacillary angiomatosis is usually due to infection with B. henselae and is linked to exposure to flea-infested cats. It is characterized by a vascular proliferation that leads to a variety of skin lesions that have been confused with the skin lesions of KS. In contrast to the lesions of KS, the lesions of bacillary angiomatosis generally blanch, are painful, and typically occur in the setting of systemic symptoms. Infection can extend to the lymph nodes, liver (peliosis hepatis), spleen, bone, heart, CNS, respiratory tract, and GI tract. Cat-scratch disease also is due to B. henselae and generally begins with a papule at the site of inoculation. This is followed several weeks later by the development of regional adenopathy and malaise. Infection with B. quintana is transmitted by lice and has been associated with case reports of trench fever, endocarditis, adenopathy, and bacillary angiomatosis. The organism is quite difficult to culture, and diagnosis often relies on identifying the organism in biopsy specimens using the Warthin-Starry or similar stains. Treatment is with either doxycycline or erythromycin for at least 3 months.
# Chunk 3599
Histoplasmosis is an opportunistic infection that is seen most frequently in patients in the Mississippi and Ohio River valleys, Puerto Rico, the Dominican Republic, and South America. These are all areas in which infection with H. capsulatum is endemic (Chap. 236). Because of this limited geographic distribution, the percentage of AIDS cases in the United States with histoplasmosis is only ~0.5. Histoplasmosis is generally a late manifestation of HIV infection; however, it may be the initial AIDS-defining condition. In one study, the median CD4+ T cell count for patients with histoplasmosis and AIDS was 33/μL. While disease due to H. capsulatum may present as a primary infection of the lung, disseminated disease, presumably due to reactivation, is the most common presentation in HIV-infected patients. Patients usually present with a 4to 8-week history of fever and weight loss. Hepatosplenomegaly and lymphadenopathy are each seen in about 25% of patients. CNS disease, either meningitis or a mass lesion, is seen in 15% of patients. Bone marrow involvement is common, with thrombocytopenia, neutropenia, and anemia occurring in 33% of patients. Approximately 7% of patients have mucocutaneous lesions consisting of a maculopapular rash and skin or oral ulcers. Respiratory symptoms are usually mild, with chest x-ray showing a diffuse infiltrate or diffuse small nodules in ~50% of cases. The gastrointestinal tract may be involved. Diagnosis is made by silver staining of tissue, by culturing the organisms from blood, bone marrow, or tissue, or by detecting antigen in blood or urine. Treatment is typically with liposomal amphotericin B followed by maintenance therapy with oral itraconazole until the serum histoplasma antigen is <2 units, the patient has been on antiretrovirals for at least 6 months, and the CD4 count is >150 cells/μL. In the setting of mild infection, it may be appropriate to initiate therapy with itraconazole alone.
# Chunk 3600
count. The initial lesion may be a small, raised reddish-purple nodule on the skin (Fig. 226-41), a discoloration on the oral mucosa (Fig. 226-34D), or a swollen lymph node. Lesions often appear in sun-exposed areas, particularly the tip of the nose, and have a propensity to occur in areas of trauma (Koebner phenomenon). Because of the vascular nature of the tumors and the presence of extravasated red blood cells in the lesions, their colors range from reddish to purple to brown and often take the appearance of a bruise, with yellowish discoloration and tattooing. Lesions range in size from a few millimeters to several centimeters in diameter and may be either discrete or confluent. KS lesions most commonly appear as raised macules; however, they can also be papular, particularly in patients with higher CD4+ T cell counts. Confluent lesions may give rise to surrounding lymphedema and may be disfiguring when they involve the face and disabling when they involve the lower extremities or the surfaces of joints. Apart from skin, the lymph nodes, GI tract, and lung are the organ systems most commonly affected by KS. Lesions have been reported in virtually every organ, including the heart and the CNS. In contrast to most malignancies, in which lymph node involvement implies metastatic spread and a poor prognosis, lymph node involvement may be seen very early in KS and is of no special clinical significance. In fact, some patients may present with disease limited to the lymph nodes. These are generally patients with relatively intact immune function and thus the patients with the best prognosis. Pulmonary involvement with KS generally presents with shortness of breath. Some 80% of patients with pulmonary KS also have cutaneous lesions. The chest x-ray characteristically shows bilateral lower lobe infiltrates that obscure the margins of the mediastinum and diaphragm (Fig. 226-42). Pleural effusions are seen in 70% of cases of pulmonary KS, a fact that is often helpful in the differential diagnosis. GI involvement is seen in 50% of patients with KS and usually takes one of two forms: (1) mucosal involvement, which may lead to bleeding that can be severe; these patients sometimes also develop symptoms of GI obstruction if lesions become large; and (2) biliary tract involvement. KS lesions may infiltrate the gallbladder and biliary tree, leading to a clinical picture of obstructive jaundice similar to that seen with sclerosing cholangitis. Several staging systems have been proposed for KS. One in common use was developed by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases AIDS Clinical Trials Group; it distinguishes patients on the basis of tumor extent, immunologic function, and presence or absence of systemic disease (Table 226-17).
# Chunk 3601
Good Risk (Stage 0): Poor Risk (Stage 1): Parameter All of the Following Any of the Following

Human Immunodeficiency Virus Disease: AIDS and Related Disorders aDefined as unexplained fever, night sweats, >10% involuntary weight loss, or diarrhea persisting for more than 2 weeks.
# Chunk 3602
Observation and optimization of antiretroviral therapy

Single or limited number of lesions

Combination chemotherapy with low-dose doxorubicin, bleomycin, and vinblastine (ABV) and death from secondary infections is considerably more common. Thus, whenever possible one should avoid treatment regimens that may further suppress the immune system and increase susceptibility to opportunistic infections. Treatment is indicated under two main circumstances. The first is when a single lesion or a limited number of lesions are causing significant discomfort or cosmetic problems, such as with prominent facial lesions, lesions overlying a joint, or lesions in the oropharynx that interfere with swallowing or breathing. Under these circumstances, treatment with localized radiation, intralesional vinblastine, topical 9-cis-retinoic acid, or cryotherapy may be helpful. It should be noted that patients with HIV infection are particularly sensitive to the side effects of radiation therapy. This is especially true with respect to the development of radiation-induced mucositis; doses of radiation directed at mucosal surfaces, particularly in the head and neck region, should be adjusted accordingly. The use of systemic therapy, either IFN-α or chemotherapy, should be considered in patients with a large number of lesions or in patients with visceral involvement. The single most important determinant of response appears to be the CD4+ T cell count. This relationship between response rate and baseline CD4+ T cell count is particularly true for IFN-α. The response rate to IFN-α for patients with CD4+ T cell counts >600/μL is ~80%, while the response rate for patients with counts <150/μL is <10%. In contrast to the other systemic therapies, IFN-α provides an added advantage of having antiretroviral activity; thus, it may be the appropriate first choice for single-agent systemic therapy for early patients with disseminated disease. A variety of chemotherapeutic agents also have been shown to have activity against KS. Four of them—liposomal daunorubicin, liposomal doxorubicin, vinblastine, and paclitaxel—have been approved by the FDA for this indication. Liposomal daunorubicin is approved as first-line therapy for patients with advanced KS. It has fewer side effects than conventional chemotherapy. In contrast, liposomal doxorubicin and paclitaxel are approved only for KS patients who have failed standard chemotherapy. Response rates vary from 23 to 88%, appear to be comparable to what had been achieved earlier with combination chemotherapy regimens, and are greatly influenced by CD4+ T cell count.
# Chunk 3603
Lymphomas occur with an increased frequency in patients with congenital or acquired T cell immunodeficiencies (Chap. 374). AIDS is no exception; at least 6% of all patients with AIDS develop lymphoma at some time during the course of their illness. This is a 120-fold increase in incidence compared with the general population. In contrast to the situation with KS, primary CNS lymphoma, and most opportunistic infections, the incidence of AIDS-associated systemic lymphomas has not experienced a dramatic decrease as a consequence of the widespread use of effective cART. Lymphoma occurs in all risk groups, with the highest incidence in patients with hemophilia and the lowest incidence in patients from the Caribbean or Africa with heterosexually acquired infection. Lymphoma is a late manifestation of HIV infection, generally occurring in patients with CD4+ T cell counts <200/μL. As HIV disease progresses, the risk of lymphoma increases. The attack rate for lymphoma increases exponentially with increasing duration of HIV infection and decreasing level of immunologic function. At 3 years following a diagnosis of HIV infection, the risk of lymphoma is 0.8% per year; by 8 years after infection, it is 2.6% per year. As individuals with HIV infection live longer as a consequence of improved cART and better treatment and prophylaxis of opportunistic infections, it is anticipated that the incidence of lymphomas may increase.
# Chunk 3604
Multicentric Castleman’s disease is a KSHV-associated lymphoproliferative disorder that is seen with an increased frequency in patients with HIV infection. While not a true malignancy, it shares many features with lymphoma including generalized lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, and systemic symptoms of fever, fatigue, and weight loss. Pulmonary symptoms may be seen in ~50% of patients. KS is present in 75–82% of cases. Lymph node biopsies reveal a predomi nance of interfollicular plasma cells and/or germinal centers with vascularization and an “onionskin” (hyaline vascular) appearance. Prior to the availability of cART, HIV-infected patients with multicentric Castleman’s disease had a 15-fold increased risk of developing nonHodgkin’s lymphoma compared with HIV-infected patients in general. Treatment typically involves chemotherapy. Anecdotal reports of success with rituximab suggest that more specific treatment may be successful, although, in one series treatment with rituximab was associated with worsening of coexisting KS. The median survival of patients with treated multicentric Castleman’s disease pre-cART was initially reported as 14 months. This has increased to a 2-year survival of more than 90% in the era of cART.
# Chunk 3605
Ritonavir was the first protease inhibitor for which clinical efficacy was demonstrated. In a study of 1090 patients with CD4+ T cell counts <100/μL who were randomized to receive either placebo or ritonavir in addition to any other licensed medications, patients receiving ritonavir had a reduction in the cumulative incidence of clinical progression or death from 34% to 17%. Mortality decreased from 10.1% to 5.8%. At full doses, ritonavir is poorly tolerated. Among the main side effects are nausea, diarrhea, abdominal pain, hyperlipidemia, and circumoral paresthesia. Ritonavir has a high affinity for several isoforms of cytochrome P450 (3A4, 2D6), and its use can result in large increases in the plasma concentrations of drugs metabolized by these pathways. Among the agents affected in this manner are most other protease inhibitors, macrolide antibiotics, R-warfarin, ondansetron, rifabutin, most calcium channel blockers, glucocorticoids, and some of the chemotherapeutic agents used to treat KS and/or lymphomas. In addition, ritonavir may increase the activity of glucuronyltransferases, thus decreasing the levels of drugs metabolized by this pathway. Overall, great care must be taken when prescribing additional drugs to patients taking protease inhibitors in general and ritonavir in particular. As mentioned above, the pharmacodynamic boosting property of ritonavir, seen with doses as low as 100–200 mg once or twice a day, is often used in the setting of cART for HIV infection to derive more convenient regimens. For example, when given with low-dose ritonavir, saquinavir and indinavir can be given on twice-a-day schedules and taken with food.
# Chunk 3606
Atazanavir is an azapeptide inhibitor of the HIV-1 protease that was licensed in 2003. An advantage of atazanavir is that total cholesterol and triglyceride levels do not increase as much with atazanavir as with other protease inhibitors. This coupled with the fact that it can be given on a once-daily schedule made atazanavir a popular component of initial treatment regimens following its licensure. Atazanavir is associated with increases in serum bilirubin, renal stones, and prolongations of the ECG PR interval. Atazanavirresistant isolates emerging in previously treatment-naïve individuals frequently harbor an I50L substitution. This mutation in some instances is associated with increased sensitivity to other protease inhibitors. Atazanavir requires an acidic gastric pH for absorption, and its use in combination with a proton pump inhibitor is contraindicated due to concerns about absorption. Atazanavir is an inhibitor of cytochrome P3A, and its use may be associated with
# Chunk 3607
<50 copies/mL of HIV RNA benefit from cART. Following the initiation of therapy one should expect a rapid, at least 1-log (tenfold) reduction in plasma HIV RNA levels within 1–2 months and then a slower decline in plasma HIV RNA levels to <50 copies/mL within 6 months. During this same time there should be a rise in the CD4+ T cell count of 100–150/μL that is also particularly brisk during the first month of therapy. Subsequently, one should anticipate a CD4+ T cell count increase of 50–100 cells/year until numbers approach normal. Many clinicians feel that failure to achieve these endpoints is an indication for a change in therapy. Other reasons for a change in therapy include a persistently declining CD4+ T cell count, a consistent increase in HIV RNA levels to >200 copies/mL, clinical deterioration, or drug toxicity (Table 226-25). As in the case of initiating therapy, changing therapy may have a lasting impact on future therapeutic options. When changing therapy because of treatment failure (clinical progression or worsening laboratory parameters), it is important to attempt to provide a regimen with at least two new active drugs. This decision can be guided by resistance testing (see below). In the patient in whom a change is made for reasons of drug toxicity, a simple replacement of one drug is reasonable. It should be stressed that in attempting to sort out a drug toxicity it may be advisable to hold all therapy for a period of time to distinguish between drug toxicity and disease progression. Drug toxicity will usually begin to show signs of reversal within 1–2 weeks. Prior to changing a treatment regimen because of drug failure, it is important to ensure that the patient has been adherent to the prescribed regimen. As in the case of initial therapy, the simpler the new therapeutic regimen, the easier it is for the patient to be compliant. Plasma HIV RNA levels should be monitored every 3–6 months during therapy and more frequently if one is contemplating a change in regimen due to an increase in viral load or immediately following a change in regimen.
# Chunk 3608
Human Immunodeficiency Virus Disease: AIDS and Related Disorders 1284 The premise of universal precautions is that every specimen should be handled as if it came from someone infected with a bloodborne pathogen. All samples should be double-bagged, gloves should be worn when drawing blood, and spills should be immediately disinfected with bleach. In attempting to put this small but definite risk to the health care worker in perspective, it is important to point out that ~200 health care workers die each year as a result of occupationally acquired hepatitis B infection. The tragedy in this instance is that these infections and deaths due to HBV could be greatly decreased by more extended use of the HBV vaccine. The risk of HBV infection following a needle-stick injury from a hepatitis antigen–positive patient is much higher than the risk of HIV infection (see “Transmission,” above). There are multiple examples of needle-stick injuries where the patient was positive for both HBV and HIV and the health care worker became infected only with HBV. For these reasons, it is advisable, given the high prevalence of HBV infection in HIV-infected individuals, that all health care workers dealing with HIV-infected patients be immunized with the HBV vaccine. TB is another infection common to HIV-infected patients that can be transmitted to the health care worker. For this reason, all health care workers should know their PPD status, have it checked yearly, and receive 6 months of isoniazid treatment if their skin test converts to positive. In addition, all patients in whom a diagnosis of TB is being entertained should be placed immediately in respiratory isolation, pending results of the diagnostic evaluation. The emergence of drug-resistant organisms, including the extensively drug-resistant TB strains that have been identified in Africa, has made TB an increasing problem for health care workers. This is particularly true for the health care worker with preexisting HIV infection. One of the most charged issues ever to come between health care workers and patients is that of transmission of infection from HIV-infected health care workers to their patients. This is discussed in “Occupational Transmission of HIV: Health Care Workers, Laboratory Workers, and the Health Care Setting,” above. Theoretically, the same universal precautions that are used to protect the health care worker from the HIV-infected patient will also protect the patient from the HIV-infected health care worker.
# Chunk 3609
Education, counseling, and behavior modification are the cornerstones of any HIV prevention strategy. A major problem in the United States and elsewhere is that many infections are passed on by those who do not know that they are infected. Of the ~1.1 million persons in the United States who are HIV-infected, it is estimated that ~16–18% do not know their HIV status and approximately 49% of all new infections are transmitted by those people who are not aware that they are infected. In this regard, the CDC has recommended that HIV testing become part of routine medical care and that all individuals between the ages of 13 and 64 years be tested at least one time. These individuals should be informed of the testing and be tested without the need for written informed consent. Each individual could “opt out” of testing, but testing would otherwise be routinely administered. Individuals who are practicing high-risk behavior should be tested more often. In addition to identifying individuals who might benefit from cART, information gathered from such an approach should serve as the basis for behavior-modification programs, both for infected individuals who may be unaware of their HIV status and who could infect others and for uninfected individuals practicing high-risk behavior. The practice of “safer sex” is the most effective way for sexually active uninfected individuals to avoid contracting HIV infection and for infected individuals to avoid spreading infection. Abstinence from sexual relations is the only absolute way to prevent sexual transmission of HIV infection. However, for many individuals this may not be feasible, and there are a number of relatively safe practices that can markedly decrease the chances of transmission of HIV infection. Partners engaged in monogamous sexual relationships who wish to be assured of safety should both be tested for HIV antibody. If both are negative, it must be understood that any divergence from monogamy puts both partners at risk; open discussion of the importance of honesty in such relationships should be encouraged. When the HIV status of either partner is not known, or when one partner is positive, there are a number of options. Use of condoms can markedly decrease the chance of HIV transmission. It should be remembered that condoms are not 100% effective in preventing transmission of HIV infection, and there is a ~10% failure rate of condoms used for contraceptive purposes. Most condom failures result from breakage or improper usage, such as not wearing the condom for the entire period of intercourse. Latex condoms are preferable, since virus has been shown to leak through natural skin condoms. Petroleum-based gels should never be used for lubrication of the condom, since they increase the likelihood of condom rupture. Some men who have sex with men practice fellatio as a “minimal risk” activity compared with anal intercourse. It should be emphasized that receptive fellatio is definitely not safe sex, and although the incidence of transmission via fellatio is considerably less than that of rectal or vaginal intercourse, there has been documentation of transmission of HIV where receptive fellatio was the only sexual act performed (see “Transmission,” above). Topical microbicides composed of gels containing antiretroviral drugs have been shown to be efficacious in preventing acquisition of HIV infection in women engaging in vaginal intercourse. However, there has been a considerable degree of variability in efficacy related to the variable adherence of participants to the use of the intervention. In general, it is felt that microbicides can be quite efficacious; however, adherence is a major stumbling block to 1285 their broad effectiveness. Pre-exposure prophylaxis (PreP) using oral antiretroviral drugs on a daily basis in uninfected men who have sex with men and transgender women has been shown to be efficacious in preventing acquisition of HIV infection. The degree of efficacy can be very high (>90%) if subjects adhere strictly to the regimen. However, adherence has proven to be a problem in maximizing the overall effectiveness of this approach.
# Chunk 3610
Adult male circumcision has been shown to result in a 50% to 65% reduction in HIV acquisition in the circumcised subject. Clearly, this approach has considerable potential as a preventive strategy for HIV infection and is currently being pursued, particularly in developing nations, as a component of HIV prevention. The most effective way to prevent transmission of HIV infection among IDUs is to stop the use of injectable drugs. Unfortunately, that is extremely difficult to accomplish unless the individual enters a treatment program. For those who will not or cannot participate in a drug treatment program and who will continue to inject drugs, the avoidance of sharing of needles and other paraphernalia (“works”) is the next best way to avoid transmission of infection. However, the cultural and social factors that contribute to the sharing of paraphernalia are complex and difficult to overcome. In addition, needles and syringes may be in short supply. Under these circumstances, paraphernalia should be cleaned after each usage with a virucidal solution, such as undiluted sodium hypochlorite (household bleach). Programs that provide sterile needles to addicts in exchange for used needles have resulted in a marked decrease in HIV transmission without increasing the use of injection drugs. It is important for IDUs to be tested for HIV infection and counseled to avoid transmission to their sexual partners. Oral PreP also is effective in preventing acquisition of HIV infections among IDUs. Prevention of transmission through blood or blood products and prevention of mother-to-child transmission are discussed in “Transmission,” above.
# Chunk 3611
Norovirus Caliciviridae Positive-sense All ages + + EM, RT-PCR single-strand RNA

Sapovirus Caliciviridae Positive-sense Children <5 years + EM, RT-PCR single-strand RNA
# Chunk 3612
Astrovirus Astroviridae Positive-sense Children <5 years + EM, EIA, RT-PCR single-strand RNA

Adenovirus (mainly types Adenoviridae Double-strand DNA Children <5 years +/+ + EM, EIA (commercial), PCR 40 and 41)
# Chunk 3613
Epidemiology Worldwide, nearly all children are infected with rotavirus by 3–5 years of age. Neonatal infections are common but are often asymptomatic or mild, presumably because of protection by maternal antibody or breast milk. Compared with rotavirus disease in industrialized countries, disease in developing countries occurs at a younger age, is less seasonal, and is more frequently caused by uncommon rotavirus strains. Moreover, because of suboptimal access to hydration therapy, rotavirus is a leading cause of diarrheal death among children in the developing world, with the highest mortality rates among children in sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia (Fig. 227-2).
# Chunk 3614
In tropical settings, rotavirus disease occurs year-round, with less pronounced seasonal peaks than in temperate settings, where rota-virus disease occurs predominantly during the cooler fall and winter months. Before the introduction of rotavirus vaccine in the United States, the rotavirus season each year began in the Southwest during the autumn and early winter (October through December) and migrated across the continent, peaking in the Northeast during late winter and spring (March through May). The reasons for this characteristic pattern are not clear but may be correlated with state-specific differences in birth rates, which could influence the rate of accumulation of susceptible infants after each rotavirus season. After the implementation of routine vaccination of U.S. infants against rotavirus in 2006, the characteristic prevaccine geotemporal pattern of U.S. rota-virus was dramatically altered, and these changes were accompanied by substantial declines in rotavirus detections by a national network of sentinel laboratories (Fig. 227-3). During the latest two seasons with available data (spanning 2010–2012), the number of rotavirus detections declined by 74–90% from the prevaccine baseline, and the common. While human rotavirus strains that possess a high degree of genetic homology with animal strains have been identified, animal-to-human transmission appears to be uncommon. Group B rotaviruses have been associated with several large epidemics of severe gastroenteritis among adults in China since 1982 and have also been identified in India. Group C rotaviruses have been associated with a small proportion of pediatric gastroenteritis cases in several countries worldwide.
# Chunk 3615
During episodes of rotavirus-associated diarrhea, virus is shed in thelial cell function and permeability. In addition, rotavirus may large quantities in stool (107–1012/g). Viral shedding detectable by EIA evoke fluid secretion through activation of the enteric nervous usually subsides within 1 week but may persist for >30 days in immu-system in the intestinal wall. Data indicate that rotavirus antigennocompromised individuals; it may be detected for longer periods by emia and viremia are common among children with acute rotavirus sensitive molecular assays, such as PCR. The virus is transmitted pre-infection, although the antigen and RNA levels in serum are substandominantly through the fecal-oral route. Spread through respiratory tially lower than those in stool. secretions, person-to-person contact, or contaminated environmental surfaces has been postulated to explain the rapid acquisition of anti-Clinical Manifestations The clinical spectrum of rotavirus infection body in the first 3 years of life, regardless of sanitary conditions. ranges from subclinical infection to severe gastroenteritis leading to
# Chunk 3616
In 2006, promising safety and efficacy results for two new rotavirus vaccines were reported from large clinical trials conducted in North America, Europe, and Latin America. Both vaccines are now recommended for routine immunization of all U.S. infants, and their use has rapidly led to a >70–80% decline in rotavirus hospitalizations and emergency department visits at hospitals across the United States. Indirect benefits from vaccination (i.e., herd immunity) have also been documented in many settings. In April 2009, the World Health Organization recommended the use of rotavirus vaccines in all countries worldwide. As of May 2013, a total of 42 countries, including 5 low-income countries in Africa and Asia, have incorporated rota-virus vaccine into their national childhood immunization programs. In Mexico and in Brazil, a decline in deaths from childhood diarrhea following introduction of rotavirus vaccines has been documented. Postmarketing surveillance has identified a low risk of intussusception in some countries; however, the benefits of vaccination exceed the risks, and no changes in vaccine administration policy have been implemented. The different epidemiology of rotavirus disease and the greater prevalence of co-infection with other enteric pathogens, of comorbidities, and of malnutrition in developing countries may adversely affect the performance of oral rotavirus vaccines, as is the case with oral vaccines against poliomyelitis, cholera, and typhoid in these regions. Therefore, evaluation of the efficacy of rotavirus vaccines in resource-poor settings of Africa and Asia was specifically recommended, and these trials have now been completed. As anticipated, the efficacy of rotavirus vaccines was moderate (50– 65%) in these settings when compared with that in industrialized countries. Nevertheless, even a moderately efficacious rotavirus vaccine would be likely to have substantial public health benefits in these areas with a high disease burden.
# Chunk 3617
Poliovirus can usually be cultured from the blood 3–5 days after infection, before the development of neutralizing antibodies. While viral replication at secondary sites begins to slow 1 week after infection, it continues in the gastrointestinal tract. Poliovirus is shed from the oropharynx for up to 3 weeks after infection and from the gastrointestinal tract for as long as 12 weeks; hypogammaglobulinemic patients can shed poliovirus for >20 years. During replication in the gastrointestinal tract, attenuated oral poliovirus can mutate, reverting to a more neurovirulent phenotype within a few days; however, additional mutations are probably required for full neurovirulence. One patient with hypogammaglobulinemia who had been infected 12 years earlier and was receiving IV immune globulin suddenly developed quadriplegia and respiratory muscle paralysis and died; analysis showed that the virus had reverted to a more wild-type sequence.
# Chunk 3618
Enteroviruses have a worldwide distribution. More than 50% of nonpoliovirus enterovirus infections and more than 90% of poliovirus infections are subclinical. When symptoms do develop, they are usually nonspecific and occur in conjunction with fever; only a minority of infections are associated with specific clinical syndromes. The incubation period for most enterovirus infections ranges from 2 to 14 days but usually is <1 week.
# Chunk 3619
Enterovirus infection is more common in socioeconomically disadvantaged areas, especially in those where conditions are crowded and in tropical areas where hygiene is poor. Infection is most common among infants and young children; serious illness develops most often during the first few days of life and in older children and adults. In developing countries, where children are infected at an early age, poliovirus infection has less often been associated with paralysis; in countries with better hygiene, older children and adults are more likely to be seronegative, become infected, and develop paralysis. Passively acquired maternal antibody reduces the risk of symptomatic infection in neonates. Young children are the most frequent shedders of enteroviruses and are usually the index cases in family outbreaks. In temperate climates, enterovirus infections occur most often in the summer and fall; no seasonal pattern is apparent in the tropics.
# Chunk 3620
paralytic poliomyelitis The least common presentation is that of paralytic disease. After one or several days, signs of aseptic meningitis are followed by severe back, neck, and muscle pain and by the rapid or gradual development of motor weakness. In some cases the disease appears to be biphasic, with aseptic meningitis followed first by apparent recovery but then (1–2 days later) by the return of fever and the development of paralysis; this form is more common among children than among adults. Weakness is generally asymmetric, is proximal more than distal, and may involve the legs (most commonly); the arms; or the abdominal, thoracic, or bulbar muscles. Paralysis develops during the febrile phase of the illness and usually does not progress after defervescence. Urinary retention may also occur. Examination reveals weakness, fasciculations, decreased muscle tone, and reduced or absent reflexes in affected areas. Transient hyperreflexia sometimes precedes the loss of reflexes. Patients frequently report sensory symptoms, but objective sensory testing usually yields normal results. Bulbar paralysis may lead to dysphagia, difficulty in handling secretions, or dysphonia. Respiratory insufficiency due to aspiration, involvement of the respiratory center in the medulla, or paralysis of the phrenic or intercostal nerves may develop, and severe medullary involvement may lead to circulatory collapse. Most patients with paralysis recover some function weeks to months after infection. About two-thirds of patients have residual neurologic sequelae.
# Chunk 3621
nonspecific febrile illness (sUmmer grippe) The most common clinical manifestation of enterovirus infection is a nonspecific febrile illness. After an incubation period of 3–6 days, patients present with an acute onset of fever, malaise, and headache. Occasional cases are associated with upper respiratory symptoms, and some cases include nausea and vomiting. Symptoms often last for 3–4 days, and most cases resolve in a week. While infections with other respiratory viruses occur more often from late fall to early spring, febrile illness due to enteroviruses frequently occurs in the summer and early fall.
# Chunk 3622
aseptic meningitis and encepHalitis In children and young adults, enteroviruses are the cause of up to 90% of cases of aseptic meningitis in which an etiologic agent can be identified. Patients with aseptic meningitis typically present with an acute onset of fever, chills, headache, photophobia, and pain on eye movement. Nausea and vomiting also are common. Examination reveals meningismus without localizing neurologic signs; drowsiness or irritability may also be apparent. In some cases, a febrile illness may be reported that remits but returns several days later in conjunction with signs of meningitis. Other systemic manifestations may provide clues to an enteroviral cause, including diarrhea, myalgias, rash, pleurodynia, myocarditis, and herpangina. Examination of the CSF invariably reveals pleocytosis; the CSF cell count shows a shift from neutrophil to lymphocyte predominance within 1 day of presentation, and the total cell count does not exceed 1000/μL. The CSF glucose level is usually normal (in contrast to the low CSF glucose level in mumps), with a normal or slightly elevated protein concentration. Partially treated bacterial meningitis may be particularly difficult to exclude in some instances. Enteroviral meningitis is more common in summer and fall in temperate climates, while viral meningitis of other etiologies is more common in winter and spring. Symptoms ordinarily resolve within a week, although CSF abnormalities can persist for several weeks. Enteroviral meningitis is often more severe in adults than in children. Neurologic sequelae are rare, and most patients have an excellent prognosis.
# Chunk 3623
Enterovirus, Parechovirus, and Reovirus Infections 1292 myocarditis and pericarditis Enteroviruses are estimated to cause up to one-third of cases of acute myocarditis. Coxsackievirus B and its RNA have been detected in pericardial fluid and myocardial tissue in some cases of acute myocarditis and pericarditis. Most cases of enteroviral myocarditis or pericarditis occur in newborns, adolescents, or young adults. More than two-thirds of patients are male. Patients often present with an upper respiratory tract infection that is followed by fever, chest pain, dyspnea, arrhythmias, and occasionally heart failure. A pericardial friction rub is documented in half of cases, and the electrocardiogram shows ST-segment elevations or STand T-wave abnormalities. Serum levels of myocardial enzymes are often elevated. Neonates commonly have severe disease, while most older children and adults recover completely. Up to 10% of cases progress to chronic dilated cardiomyopathy. Chronic constrictive pericarditis may also be a sequela.
# Chunk 3624
eXantHems Enterovirus infection is the leading cause of exanthems in children in the summer and fall. While exanthems are associated with many enteroviruses, certain types have been linked to specific syndromes. Echoviruses 9 and 16 have frequently been associated with exanthem and fever. Rashes may be discrete or confluent, beginning on the face and spreading to the trunk and extremities. Echovirus 9 is the most common cause of a rubelliform (discrete) rash. Unlike the rash of rubella, the enteroviral rash occurs in the summer and is not associated with lymphadenopathy. Roseola-like rashes develop after defervescence, with macules and papules on the face and trunk. The Boston exanthem, caused by echovirus 16, is a roseola-like rash. A variety of other rashes have been associated with enteroviruses, including erythema multiforme (see Fig. 25e-25) and vesicular, urticarial, petechial, or purpuric lesions. Enanthems also occur, including lesions that resemble the Koplik’s spots seen with measles (see Fig. 25e-2).
# Chunk 3625
An epidemic of enterovirus 71 infection in Taiwan in 1998 resulted in thousands of cases of hand-foot-and-mouth dis ease or herpangina (see below). Severe complications included CNS disease, myocarditis, and pulmonary hemorrhage. About 90% of those who died were children ≤5 years old, and death was associated with pulmonary edema or pulmonary hemorrhage. CNS disease included aseptic meningitis, flaccid paralysis (similar to that seen in poliomyelitis), and rhombencephalitis with myoclonus and tremor or ataxia. The mean age of patients with CNS complications was 2.5 years, and MRI in cases with encephalitis usually showed brain-stem lesions. Follow-up of children at 6 months showed persistent dysphagia, cranial nerve palsies, hypoventilation, limb weakness, and atrophy; at 3 years, persistent neurologic sequelae were documented, with delayed development and impaired cognitive function.
# Chunk 3626
Cyclic epidemics occur every 2–3 years in other Asian countries. However, the virus circulates at lower rates in the United States, Europe, and Africa. In the United States, hand-foot-and-mouth disease is most commonly associated with coxsackievirus A16. Between November 2011 and February 2012, outbreaks of hand-foot-and-mouth disease
# Chunk 3627
FIGuRE 228-2 Acute hemorrhagic conjunctivitis due to enterovirus 70. (Image reprinted with permission from Red Book 2012: Committee on Infectious Diseases, 29th ed. Used with permission of the American Academy of Pediatrics.) patients with subclinical infections. Isolation of virus from the throat is 1293 more likely to be associated with disease than is isolation from the stool since virus is shed for shorter periods from the throat. Cultures of CSF, serum, fluid from body cavities, or tissues are positive less frequently, but a positive result is indicative of disease caused by enterovirus. In some cases, the virus is isolated only from the blood or only from the CSF; therefore, it is important to culture multiple sites. Cultures are more likely to be positive earlier than later in the course of infection. Most human enteroviruses can be detected within a week after inoculation of cell cultures. Cultures may be negative because of the presence of neutralizing antibody, lack of susceptibility of the cells used, or inappropriate handling of the specimen. Coxsackievirus A may require inoculation into special cell-culture lines or into suckling mice.
# Chunk 3628
Identification of the enterovirus serotype is useful primarily for epidemiologic studies and, with a few exceptions, has little clinical utility. It is important to identify serious infections with enterovirus during epidemics and to distinguish the vaccine strain of poliovirus from the other enteroviruses in the throat or in the feces. Stool and throat samples for culture as well as acute-and convalescent-phase serum specimens should be obtained from all patients with suspected poliomyelitis. In the absence of a positive CSF culture, a positive culture of stool obtained within the first 2 weeks after the onset of symptoms is most often used to confirm the diagnosis of poliomyelitis. If polio-virus infection is suspected, two or more fecal and throat swab samples should be obtained at least 1 day apart and cultured for enterovirus as soon as possible. If poliovirus is isolated, it should be sent to the CDC for identification as either wild-type or vaccine virus.
# Chunk 3629
Reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (PCR) has been used to amplify viral nucleic acid from CSF, serum, urine, stool, conjunctiva, throat swabs, and tissues. A pan-enterovirus PCR assay can detect all human enteroviruses. With the proper controls, PCR of the CSF is highly sensitive (70–100%) and specific (>80%) and is more rapid than culture. PCR of the CSF is less likely to be positive when patients present ≥3 days after the onset of meningitis or with enterovirus 71 infection; in these cases, PCR of throat or rectal swabs— although less specific than PCR of CSF—should be considered.
# Chunk 3630
PCR of serum is also highly sensitive and specific in the diagnosis of disseminated disease. PCR may be particularly helpful for the diagnosis and follow-up of enterovirus disease in immunodeficient patients receiving immunoglobulin therapy, whose viral cultures may be negative. Antigen detection is less sensitive than PCR.
# Chunk 3631
In 1988, the World Health Organization adopted a resolution to eradicate poliomyelitis by the year 2000. From 1988 to 2001, the number of cases worldwide decreased by >99%, with only 496 confirmed cases reported in 2001. Wild-type poliovirus type 2 has not been detected in the world since 1999. The Americas were certified free of indigenous wild-type poliovirus transmission in 1994, the Western Pacific Region in 2000, and the European Region in 2002. However, in 2002, there were 1922 cases of polio, with 1600 cases reported in India. In fact, after the nadir of 496 cases in 2001, 21 countries that had previously been free of polio reported cases imported from 6 polio-endemic countries in 2002–2005. By 2006, polio transmission had been reduced in most of these 21 countries. In 2012, 293 cases of polio were reported (the lowest number ever in a 1-year period); 85% were from Nigeria, Pakistan, and Afghanistan, the only countries where polio remains endemic (Table 228-2). As of November 2013, there had been 390 cases of polio in 2013 compared with 293 cases in 2012. The increase was associated with a marked rise in imported cases, including more than 180 cases in Somalia, more than 10 cases each in Kenya and Syria, and cases in Cameroon and Ethiopia. Also in 2013, wild-type poliovirus was detected in sewage in Israel, prompting a massive vaccination campaign with OPV. As of November 2013, India had not reported a case of polio since January 2011. Polio is a source of concern for unimmunized or partially immunized travelers. Importation of polio-virus accounted for ~50% of cases in 2013. Clearly, global eradication of polio is necessary to eliminate the risk of importation of wild-type virus. Outbreaks are thought to have been facilitated by suboptimal rates of vaccination, isolated pockets of unvaccinated children, poor sanitation and crowding, improper vaccine-storage conditions, and a reduced level of response to one of the serotypes in the vaccine.
# Chunk 3632
The occurrence of outbreaks of poliomyelitis due to circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus of all three types has been increasing, especially in areas with low vaccination rates. In Egypt, 32 cases of vaccine-derived polio occurred in 1983–1993; in the Dominican Republic and Haiti, 21 cases occurred in 2000–2001; in Indonesia, 46 cases were reported in 2005; in Nigeria, 385 cases occurred in 2005–2012; in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, 64 cases were reported in 2008–2012; in Pakistan, 16 cases occurred in 2012, and at least 30 cases occurred in 2013. These OPV-derived viruses reverted to a more neurovirulent phenotype after undetected circulation (probably for >2 years). The epidemic in Hispaniola was rapidly terminated after intensive vaccination with OPV. In 2005, a case of vaccine-derived polio occurred in an unvaccinated U.S. woman returning from a visit to Central and South America. In the same year, an unvaccinated immunocompromised infant in Minnesota was found to be shedding vaccine-derived poliovirus; further investigation identified 4 of 22 infants in the same community who were shedding the virus. All 5 infants were asymptomatic. These outbreaks emphasize the need for maintaining high levels of vaccine coverage and continued surveillance for circulating virus.
# Chunk 3633
infections in early childhood. HPeV-1 infections occur throughout the year, while other parechovirus infections occur more commonly in summer and fall. Infections with HPeVs present similarly to those due to enteroviruses and may cause generalized disease of the newborn, aseptic meningitis, encephalitis, transient paralysis, exanthems, respiratory tract disease, and gastroenteritis. While HPeV-1 is the most common serotype and generally causes mild disease, deaths of infants in the United States have been associated with HPeV-1, HPeV-3, and HPeV-6. HPeVs can be isolated from the same sites as enteroviruses, including the nasopharynx, stool, and respiratory tract secretions. PCR using pan-enterovirus primers does not detect HPeVs, and while PCR assays are performed by the CDC and research laboratories, many commercial laboratories do not perform the test.
# Chunk 3634
In 2003, the World Health Assembly endorsed a resolution urging member countries to reduce the number of deaths attributed to measles by 50% (compared with 1999 estimates) by the end of 2005. This target was met. Global measles mortality rates were further reduced in 2008; during that year, there were an estimated 164,000 deaths due to measles (uncertainty bounds: 115,000 and 222,000 deaths). These achievements attest to the enormous public-health significance of measles vaccination. However, recent large outbreaks of measles in Europe and Africa illustrate the challenges faced in sustaining measles control: in these outbreaks, measles was imported into countries that had eliminated indigenous transmission of measles virus.
# Chunk 3635
Measles virus is one of the most highly contagious directly transmitted pathogens. Outbreaks can occur in populations in which <10% of persons are susceptible. Chains of transmission are common among household contacts, school-age children, and health care workers. There are no latent or persistent measles virus infections that result in prolonged contagiousness, nor are there animal reservoirs for the virus. Thus, measles virus can be maintained in human populations only by an unbroken chain of acute infections, which requires 1296 a continuous supply of susceptible individuals. Newborns become susceptible to measles virus infection when passively acquired maternal antibody is lost; when not vaccinated, these infants account for the bulk of new susceptible individuals. Endemic measles has a typical temporal pattern characterized by yearly seasonal epidemics superimposed on longer epidemic cycles of 2–5 years or more. In temperate climates, annual measles outbreaks typically occur in the late winter and early spring. These annual outbreaks are probably attributable to social networks facilitating transmission (e.g., congregation of children at school) and environmental factors favoring the viability and transmission of measles virus. Measles cases continue to occur during interepidemic periods in large populations, but at low incidence. The longer epidemic cycles occurring every several years result from the accumulation of susceptible persons over successive birth cohorts and the subsequent decline in the number of susceptibles following an outbreak. Secondary attack rates among susceptible household and institutional contacts generally exceed 90%. The average age at which measles occurs depends on rates of contact with infected persons, protective maternal antibody decline, and vaccine coverage. In densely populated urban settings with low-level vaccination coverage, measles is a disease of infants and young children. The cumulative distribution can reach 50% by 1 year of age, with a significant proportion of chil dren acquiring measles before 9 months—the age of routine vaccina tion in many countries, in line with the schedule recommended by the
# Chunk 3636
The incubation period for measles is ~10 days to fever onset and 14 days to rash onset. This period may be shorter in infants and longer (up to 3 weeks) in adults. Infection is initiated when measles virus is deposited on epithelial cells in the respiratory tract, oropharynx, or conjunctivae (Fig. 229-1A). During the first 2–4 days after infection, measles virus proliferates locally in the respiratory mucosa and spreads to draining lymph nodes. Virus then enters the bloodstream in infected leukocytes (primarily monocytes), producing the primary viremia that disseminates infection throughout the reticuloendothelial system. Further replication results in secondary viremia that begins 5–7 days after infection and disseminates measles virus throughout the body. Replication of measles virus in these target organs, together with the host’s immune response, is responsible for the signs and symptoms of measles that occur 8–12 days after infection and mark the end of the incubation period (Fig. 229-1B).
# Chunk 3637
In most persons, the signs and symptoms of measles are highly characteristic (Fig. 229-1B). Fever and malaise beginning ~10 days after exposure are followed by cough, coryza, and conjunctivitis. These signs and symptoms increase in severity over 4 days. Koplik’s spots (see Fig. 25e-2) develop on the buccal mucosa ~2 days before the rash appears. The characteristic rash of measles (see Fig. 25e-3) begins 2 weeks after infection, when the clinical manifestations are most severe, and signal the host’s immune response to the replicating virus. 1297 Headache, abdominal pain, vomiting, diarrhea, and myalgia may be present.
# Chunk 3638
Serology is the most common method of laboratory diagnosis. The detection of measles virus–specific IgM in a single specimen of serum or oral fluid is considered diagnostic of acute infection, as is a fourfold or greater increase in measles virus–specific IgG antibody levels between acuteand convalescent-phase serum specimens. Primary infection in the immunocompetent host results in antibodies that are detectable within 1–3 days of rash onset and reach peak levels in 2–4 weeks. Measles virus–specific IgM antibodies may not be detectable until 4–5 days or more after rash onset and usually fall to undetectable levels within 4–8 weeks of rash onset.
# Chunk 3639
Several methods for measurement of antibodies to measles virus are available. Neutralization tests are sensitive and specific, and the results are highly correlated with protective immunity; however, these tests 1298 require propagation of measles virus in cell culture and thus are expensive and laborious. Commercially available enzyme immunoassays are most frequently used. Measles can also be diagnosed by isolation of the virus in cell culture from respiratory secretions, nasopharyngeal or conjunctival swabs, blood, or urine. Direct detection of giant cells in respiratory secretions, urine, or tissue obtained by biopsy provides another method of diagnosis. For detection of measles virus RNA by reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction amplification of RNA extracted from clinical specimens, primers targeted to highly conserved regions of measles virus genes are used. Extremely sensitive and specific, this assay may also permit identification and characterization of measles virus genotypes for molecular epidemiologic studies and can distinguish wild-type from vaccine virus strains.
# Chunk 3640
Vitamin A is effective for the treatment of measles and can markedly reduce rates of morbidity and mortality. The WHO recommends administration of once-daily doses of 200,000 IU of vitamin A for 2 consecutive days to all children with measles who are ≥12 months of age. Lower doses are recommended for younger children: 100,000 IU per day for children 6–12 months of age and 50,000 IU per day for children <6 months old. A third dose is recommended 2–4 weeks later for children with evidence of vitamin A deficiency. While such deficiency is not a widely recognized problem in the United States, many American children with measles do, in fact, have low serum levels of vitamin A, and these children experience increased measles-associated morbidity. The Committee on Infectious Diseases of the American Academy of Pediatrics recommends that the administration of two consecutive daily doses of vitamin A be considered for children who are hospitalized with measles and its complications as well as for children with measles who are immunodeficient; who have ophthalmologic evidence of vitamin A deficiency, impaired intestinal absorption, or moderate to severe malnutrition; or who have recently immigrated from areas with high measles mortality rates. Parenteral and oral formulations of vitamin A are available.
# Chunk 3641
Rare but serious complications of measles involve the central nervous system (CNS). Postmeasles encephalomyelitis complicates ~1 in 1000 cases, affecting mainly older children and adults. Encephalomyelitis occurs within 2 weeks of rash onset and is characterized by fever, seizures, and a variety of neurologic abnormalities. The finding of periventricular demyelination, the induction of immune responses to myelin basic protein, and the absence of measles virus in the brain suggest that postmeasles encephalomyelitis is an autoimmune disorder triggered by measles virus infection. Other CNS complications that occur months to years after acute infection are measles inclusion body encephalitis (MIBE) and subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE). In contrast to postmeasles encephalomyelitis, MIBE and SSPE are caused by persistent measles virus infection. MIBE is a rare but fatal complication that affects individuals with defective cellular immunity and typically occurs months after infection. SSPE is a slowly progressive disease characterized by seizures and progressive deterioration of cognitive and motor functions, with death occurring 5–15 years after measles virus infection. SSPE most often develops in persons infected with measles virus at <2 years of age.
# Chunk 3642
Most persons with measles recover and develop long-term protective immunity to reinfection. Measles case-fatality proportions vary with the average age of infection, the nutritional and immunologic status of the population, measles vaccine coverage, and access to health care. Among previously vaccinated persons who do become infected, disease is less severe and mortality rates are significantly lower. In developed countries, <1 in 1000 children with measles die. In endemic areas of sub-Saharan Africa, the measles case-fatality proportion may be 5–10% or even higher. Measles is a major cause of childhood deaths in refugee camps and in internally displaced populations, where case-fatality proportions have been as high as 20–30%.
# Chunk 3643
Individuals with acquired rubella may shed virus from 7 days before rash onset to ~5–7 days thereafter. Both clinical and subclinical infections are considered contagious. Infants with CRS may shed large quantities of virus from bodily secretions, particularly from the throat and in the urine, up to 1 year of age. Outbreaks of rubella, including some in nosocomial settings, have originated with index cases of CRS. Thus only individuals immune to rubella should have contact with infants who have CRS or who are congenitally infected with rubella virus but are not showing signs of CRS.
# Chunk 3644
The largest recent rubella epidemic in the United States took place in 1964–1965, when an estimated 12.5 million cases occurred, resulting in ~20,000 cases of CRS. Since the introduction of the routine rubella vaccination program in the United States in 1969, the number of rubella cases reported each year has dropped by >99%; the rate of vaccination coverage with rubella-containing vaccine has been >90% among children 19–35 months old since 1995 and >95% for kindergarten and first-grade entrants since 1980. In 1989 a goal for the elimination of rubella and CRS in the United States was set, and in 2004 a panel of experts agreed unanimously that rubella was no longer an endemic disease in this country. The criteria used to document lack of endemic transmission included low disease incidence, high nationwide rubella antibody seroprevalence, outbreaks that were few and contained (i.e., small numbers of cases), and lack of endemic virus transmission (as assessed by genetic sequencing). In the United States, interruption of endemic transmission of rubella virus has been sustained since 2001; in 2012, however, three cases of CRS were reported in infants whose mothers had acquired rubella infection abroad. Thus health care providers should remain vigilant, considering the possibility of rubella infection in patients emigrating or returning from countries without rubella control programs and the accompanying potential for CRS among their infants.
# Chunk 3645
CLINICAL FEATURES Acquired Rubella Acquired rubella commonly presents with a generalized maculopapular rash that usually lasts for up to 3 days (Fig. 230e-1), although as many as 50% of cases may be subclinical or without rash. When it occurs, the rash is usually mild and may be difficult to detect in persons with darker skin. In children, rash is usually the first sign of illness. However, in older children and adults, a 1to 5-day prodrome often precedes the rash and may include low-grade fever, malaise, and upper respiratory symptoms. The incubation period is 14 days (range, 12–23 days).
# Chunk 3646
Rubella virus can be isolated from the blood and nasopharynx during the prodromal period and for as long as 2 weeks after rash onset. However, as the secretion of virus in individuals with acquired rubella is maximal just before or up to 4 days after rash onset, this is the optimal time frame for collecting specimens for viral cultures. Rubella can also be diagnosed by viral RNA detection in a reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay.
# Chunk 3647
Diagnostic tests used to confirm CRS include serologic assays and virus detection. In an infant with congenital infection, serum IgM antibodies are normally present for up to 6 months but may be detectable for up to 1 year after birth. In some instances, IgM may not be detectable until 1 month of age; thus infants who have symptoms consistent with CRS but who test negative shortly after birth should be retested at 1 month. A rubella serum IgG titer persisting beyond the time expected after passive transfer of maternal IgG antibody (i.e., a rubella titer that does not decline at the expected rate of a twofold dilution per month) is another serologic criterion used to confirm CRS.
# Chunk 3648
In congenital infection, rubella virus is isolated most commonly from throat swabs and less commonly from urine and cerebrospinal fluid. Infants with congenital rubella may excrete virus for up to 1 year, but specimens for virus isolation are most likely to be positive if obtained within the first 6 months after birth. Rubella virus in infants with CRS can also be detected by RT-PCR.
# Chunk 3649
A susceptible pregnant woman exposed to rubella virus should be tested for IgM antibodies and/or a fourfold rise in IgG antibody titer between acuteand convalescent-phase serum specimens to determine whether she was infected during pregnancy. Pregnant women with evidence of acute infection must be clinically monitored, and gestational age at the time of maternal infection must be determined to assess the possibility of risk to the fetus. Of women infected with rubella virus during the first 11 weeks of gestation, up to 90% deliver an infant with CRS; for maternal infection during the first 20 weeks of pregnancy, the CRS rate is 20%.
# Chunk 3650
Mumps is endemic worldwide, with epidemics every 3–5 years in unvaccinated populations. These epidemics typically occur in locations where children and young adults congregate, such as schools, military barracks, and other institutions. In countries without national mumps vaccination programs, the estimated annual global incidence is 100–1000 cases per 100,000 population. After the introduction of mumps vaccine in the United States in 1967, the number of reported cases declined dramatically. By 2001, fewer than 300 cases were reported, representing a 99.8% reduction from prevaccineera levels. Mumps incidence remained at historic lows in the United States until 2006, when 6584 cases were reported—the largest outbreak since 1987. At the time of the 2006 outbreak, the disease was resurging globally, even in populations with high-level vaccination coverage. The number of reported U.S. cases declined precipitously in the 2 years that followed but then spiked in 2009–2010, with focal outbreaks in New York and New Jersey, and again in 2011, with a focal outbreak in California. A recent study by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) showed that two-dose coverage with measles– mumps–rubella (MMR) vaccine in major U.S. cities (94.8%) remains at or very near the level needed to contain these childhood infections; however, focal areas with inadequate vaccination coverage still leave some children at risk. Sporadic, large-scale mumps outbreaks continue to be reported worldwide, sometimes in countries where the disease was once under control.
# Chunk 3651
Up to half of mumps virus infections are asymptomatic or lead to nonspecific respiratory symptoms. Inapparent infections are more common in adults than in children. The prodrome of mumps consists of low-grade fever, malaise, myalgia, headache, and anorexia. Mumps parotitis—acute-onset unilateral or bilateral swelling of the parotid or other salivary glands that lasts >2 days and has no other apparent cause—develops in 70–90% of symptomatic infections, usually within 24 h of prodromal symptoms but sometimes as long as 1 week thereafter. Parotitis is generally bilateral, although the two sides may not be involved synchronously. Unilateral involvement is documented in about one-third of cases. Swelling of the parotid is accompanied by tenderness and obliteration of the space between the earlobe and the angle of the mandible (Figs. 231e-2 and 231e-3). The patient frequently reports an earache and finds it difficult to eat, swallow, or talk. The orifice of the parotid duct is commonly red and swollen. The submaxillary and sublingual glands are involved less often than the parotid gland and are almost never involved alone. Glandular swelling increases for a few days and then gradually subsides, disappearing within 1 week. Recurrent sialadenitis is a rare sequela of mumps parotitis. In ~6% of mumps cases, obstruction of lymphatic drainage secondary to bilateral salivary gland swelling may lead to presternal pitting edema, associated often with submandibular adenitis and rarely with the more life-threatening supraglottic edema.
# Chunk 3652
Epididymo-orchitis is the next most common manifestation of mumps, developing in 15–30% of cases in postpubertal males, with bilateral involvement in 10–30% of those cases. Orchitis, accompanied by fever, typically occurs during the first week of parotitis but can develop up to 6 weeks after parotitis or in its absence. The testis is painful and tender and can be enlarged to several times its normal size; this condition usually resolves within 1 week. Testicular atrophy develops in one-half of affected men. Sterility after mumps is rare, although subfertility is estimated to occur in 13% of cases of unilateral orchitis and in 30–87% of cases of bilateral orchitis. Oophoritis occurs in ~5% of women with mumps and may be associated with lower abdominal pain and vomiting but has only rarely been associated with sterility or premature menopause. Mumps infection in postpubertal women may also present with mastitis.
# Chunk 3653
Documented CSF pleocytosis indicates that mumps virus invades the CNS in ~50% of cases; however, symptomatic CNS disease, typically in the form of aseptic meningitis, occurs in <10% of cases, with a male predominance. CNS symptoms of aseptic meningitis (e.g., stiff neck, headache, and drowsiness) appear ~5 days after parotitis and also occur often in the absence of parotid involvement. Within the first 24 h polymorphonuclear leukocytes may predominate in CSF (1000–2000 cells/μL), but by the second day nearly all the cells are lymphocytes. The glucose level in CSF may be low and the protein concentration high, a pattern reminiscent of bacterial meningitis. Mumps meningitis is a self-limited manifestation without significant risk of death or long-term sequelae. Cranial nerve palsies have occasionally led to permanent sequelae, particularly deafness. The reported incidence of mumps-associated hearing loss varies between 1 in 1000 and 1 in 100,000. In ~0.1% of infections, mumps virus may cause encephalitis, which presents as high fever with marked changes in the level of consciousness, seizures, and focal neurologic symptoms. Electroencephalographic abnormalities may be seen. Permanent sequelae are sometimes identified in survivors, and adult infections more commonly have poor outcomes than do pediatric infections. The mortality rate associated with mumps encephalitis is ~1.5%. Other CNS problems occasionally associated with mumps include cerebellar ataxia, facial palsy, transverse myelitis, hydrocephalus, Guillain-Barré syndrome, flaccid paralysis, and behavioral changes.
# Chunk 3654
Mumps pancreatitis, which may present as abdominal pain, occurs in ~4% of infections but is difficult to diagnose because an elevated serum amylase level can be associated with either parotitis or pancreatitis. An etiologic association of mumps virus and juvenile diabetes mellitus remains controversial. Myocarditis and endocardial fibroelastosis are rare and self-limited but may represent severe complications of mumps infection; however, mumps-associated electrocardiographic abnormalities have been reported in up to 15% of cases. Other unusual complications include thyroiditis, nephritis, arthritis, hepatic disease, keratouveitis, and thrombocytopenic purpura. Abnormal renal function is common, but severe, life-threatening nephritis is rare. It remains at issue whether an excessive number of spontaneous abortions are associated with gestational mumps. Mumps in pregnancy does not appear to lead to premature birth, low birth weight, or fetal malformations.
# Chunk 3655
For RT-PCR-based testing, viral RNA can be extracted either directly from clinical samples or from cell cultures incubated with clinical samples. Buccal swabs appear to be the best specimens for virus detection, particularly when obtained within 2 days of clinical onset; however, mumps virus can also be detected readily in throat swabs and saliva and, in cases of meningitis, in CSF. Despite the apparent high frequency of viremia during mumps, mumps virus has rarely been detected in blood. The ability to detect viral RNA in clinical samples rapidly diminishes beyond the first week after symptom onset, and 231e-3 in several studies rates of virus detection were substantially lower in recipients of two vaccine doses than in unvaccinated persons or recipients of one dose. The rate of false-negative RT-PCR findings can be quite high, approaching 70% in some studies.
# Chunk 3656
1300 EPIDEMIOLOGY Rabies is a zoonotic infection that occurs in a variety of mammals throughout the world except in Antarctica and on some islands. Rabies virus is usually transmitted to humans by the bite of an infected animal. Worldwide, endemic canine rabies is estimated to cause 55,000 human deaths annually. Most of these deaths occur in Asia and Africa, with rural populations and children most frequently affected. Thus, in many resource-poor and resource-limited countries, canine rabies continues to be a threat to humans. However, in Latin America, rabies control efforts in dogs have been quite successful in recent years. Endemic canine rabies has been eliminated from the United States and most other resource-rich countries. Rabies is endemic in wildlife species, and a variety of animal reservoirs have been identified in different countries. Surveillance data from 2012 identified 6162 confirmed animal cases of rabies in the United States (including Puerto Rico). Only 8% of these cases were in domestic animals, including 257 cases in cats, 84 in dogs, and 115 in cattle. In North American wildlife reservoirs, including bats, raccoons, skunks, and foxes, the infection is endemic, with involvement of one or more rabies virus variants in each reservoir species (Fig. 232-1). “Spillover” of rabies to other wildlife species and to domestic animals occurs. Bat rabies virus variants are present in every state except Hawaii and are responsible for most indigenously acquired human rabies cases in the United States. Raccoon rabies is endemic along the entire eastern coast of the United States. Skunk rabies is present in the midwestern states, with another focus in California. Rabies in foxes occurs in Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, and Alaska. In Canada and Europe, epizootics of rabies in red foxes have been well controlled with the use of baits containing rabies vaccine. A similar approach is used in Canada to control raccoon rabies. Rabies virus variants isolated from humans or other mammalian species can be identified by reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) amplification and sequencing or by characterization with monoclonal antibodies. These techniques are helpful in human cases with no known history of exposure. Worldwide, most human rabies is transmitted from dogs in countries with endemic canine rabies and dog-to-dog transmission, and human cases can be imported by travelers returning from these regions. In North America, human disease is usually associated with transmission from bats; there may be no known history of bat bite or other bat exposure in these cases. Most human cases are due to a bat rabies virus variant associated with silver-haired and tricolored bats. These are small bats whose bite may not be recognized, and the virus has adapted for replication at skin temperature and in cell types that are present in the skin.
# Chunk 3657
FIGuRE 232-3 Three large Negri bodies in the cytoplasm of a cerebellar Purkinje cell from an 8-year-old boy who died of rabies after being bitten by a rabid dog in Mexico. (From AC Jackson, E Lopez-Corella: N Engl J Med 335:568, 1996. © Massachusetts Medical Society.) weakness. Sphincter involvement is common, sensory involvement is usually mild, and these cases are commonly misdiagnosed as Guillain-Barré syndrome. Patients with paralytic rabies generally survive a few days longer than those with encephalitic rabies, but multiple-organ failure nevertheless ensues.
# Chunk 3658
In North America, a diagnosis of rabies often is not considered until relatively late in the clinical course, even with a typical clinical presentation. This diagnosis should be considered in patients presenting with acute atypical encephalitis or acute flaccid paralysis, including those in whom Guillain-Barré syndrome is suspected. The absence of an animal-bite history is common in North America. The lack of hydrophobia is not unusual in rabies. Once rabies is suspected, rabies-specific laboratory tests should be performed to confirm the diagnosis. Diagnostically useful specimens include serum, CSF, fresh saliva, skin biopsy samples from the neck, and brain tissue (rarely obtained before death). Because skin biopsy relies on the demonstration of rabies virus antigen in cutaneous nerves at the base of hair follicles, samples are usually taken from hairy skin at the nape of the neck. Corneal impression smears are of low diagnostic yield and are generally not performed. Negative antemortem rabies-specific laboratory tests never exclude a diagnosis of rabies, and tests may need to be repeated after an interval for diagnostic confirmation.
# Chunk 3659
Rabies is an almost uniformly fatal disease but is nearly always preventable with appropriate postexposure therapy during the early incubation period (see below). There are seven well-documented cases of survival from rabies. All but one of these patients had received rabies vaccine before disease onset. The single survivor who had not received vaccine had neutralizing antibodies to rabies virus in serum and CSF at clinical presentation. Most patients with rabies die within several days of the onset of illness, despite aggressive care in a critical care unit.
# Chunk 3660
All previously unvaccinated persons (but not those who have previously been immunized) should be passively immunized with rabies immune globulin (RIG). If RIG is not immediately available, it should be administered no later than 7 days after the first vaccine dose. After day 7, endogenous antibodies are being produced, and passive immunization may actually be counterproductive. If anatomically feasible, the entire dose of RIG (20 IU/kg) should be infiltrated at the site of the bite; otherwise, any RIG remaining after infiltration of the bite site should be administered IM at a distant site. With multiple or large wounds, the RIG preparation may need to be diluted in order to obtain a sufficient volume for adequate infiltration of all wound sites. If the exposure involves a mucous membrane, the entire dose should be administered IM. Rabies vaccine and RIG should never be administered at the same site or with the same syringe. Commercially available RIG in the United States is purified from the serum of hyper-immunized human donors. These human RIG preparations are much better tolerated than are the equine-derived preparations still in use in 1304 some countries (see below). Serious adverse effects of human RIG are uncommon. Local pain and low-grade fever may occur. Two purified inactivated rabies vaccines are available for rabies PEP in the United States. They are highly immunogenic and remarkably safe compared with earlier vaccines. Four 1-mL doses of rabies vaccine should be given IM in the deltoid area. (The anterolateral aspect of the thigh also is acceptable in children.) Gluteal injections, which may not always reach muscle, should not be given and have been associated with rare vaccine failures. Ideally, the first dose should be given as soon as possible after exposure; failing that, it should be given without further delay. The three additional doses should be given on days 3, 7, and 14; a fifth dose on day 28 is no longer recommended. Pregnancy is not a contraindication for immunization. Glucocorticoids and other immunosuppressive medications may interfere with the development of active immunity and should not be administered during PEP unless they are essential. Routine measurement of serum neutralizing antibody titers is not required, but titers should be measured 2–4 weeks after immunization in immunocompromised persons. Local reactions (pain, erythema, edema, and pruritus) and mild systemic reactions (fever, myalgias, headache, and nausea) are common; anti-inflammatory and antipyretic medications may be used, but immunization should not be discontinued. Systemic allergic reactions are uncommon, but anaphylaxis does occur rarely and can be treated with epinephrine and antihistamines. The risk of rabies development should be carefully considered before the decision is made to discontinue vaccination because of an adverse reaction. Most of the burden of rabies PEP is borne by persons with the fewest resources. In addition to the rabies vaccines discussed above, vaccines grown in either primary cell lines (hamster or dog kidney) or continuous cell lines (Vero cells) are satisfactory and are available in many countries outside the United States. Less expensive vaccines derived from neural tissues are still used in a diminishing number of developing countries; however, these vaccines are associated with serious neuroparalytic complications, including postinfectious encephalomyelitis and Guillain-Barré syndrome. The use of these vaccines should be discontinued as soon as possible, and progress has been made in this regard. Worldwide, >10 million individuals receive postexposure rabies vaccine each year. If human RIG is unavailable, purified equine RIG can be used in the same manner at a dose of 40 IU/kg. Before the administration of equine RIG, hypersensitivity should be assessed by intradermal testing with a 1:10 dilution. The incidence of anaphylactic reactions and serum sickness has been low with recent equine RIG products.
# Chunk 3661
In patients with suspected viral infection, a recognized history of mosquito bite has little diagnostic significance, but a history of tick bite is more diagnostically useful. Exposure to rodents is sometimes reported by persons infected with arenaviruses or hantaviruses. Laboratory diagnosis is required in all cases, although epidemics occasionally provide enough clinical and epidemiologic clues for a presumptive etiologic diagnosis. For most arthropod-borne and rodent-borne viruses, acute-phase serum samples (collected within 3 or 4 days of onset) have yielded isolates. Paired serum samples have been used to demonstrate rising antibody titers. Intensive efforts to develop rapid tests for viral hemorrhagic fevers have resulted in reliable antigen-detection enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs), IgM-capture ELISAs, and multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays. These tests can provide a diagnosis based on a single serum sample within a few hours and are particularly useful in patients with severe disease. More sensitive reverse-transcription PCR (RT-PCR) assays may yield diagnoses based on samples without detectable antigen and may also provide useful genetic information about the etiologic agent.
# Chunk 3662
Hantavirus infections differ from other viral infections discussed here in that severe acute disease is immunopathologic; patients present with serum IgM that serves as the basis for a sensitive and specific test. At diagnosis, patients with encephalitides generally are no longer viremic or antigenemic and usually do not have virions in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). In this situation, the value of serologic methods for IgM determination and RT-PCR is high. IgM-capture ELISA is increasingly being used for the simultaneous testing of serum and CSF. IgG ELISA or classic serology is useful in the evaluation of past exposure to viruses, many of which circulate in areas with minimal medical infrastructures and sometimes cause only mild or subclinical infection.
# Chunk 3663
Chikungunya Virus Disease Disease caused by chikungunya virus is endemic in rural areas of Africa. Intermittent epidemics take place in towns and cities of both Africa and Asia. Aedes aegypti mosquitoes are the usual vectors for the disease in urban areas. In 2004, a massive epidemic began in the Indian Ocean region (in particular on the islands of Réunion and Mauritius) and was most likely spread by travelers; Aedes albopictus was identified as the major vector of chikungunya virus during that epidemic. Between 2013 and 2014, several thousand chikungunya virus infections were reported (and several tens of thousands of cases were suspected) from Caribbean islands. The virus was imported to Italy, France, and the United States by travelers from the Caribbean. Chikungunya virus poses a threat to the continental United States as suitable vector mosquitoes are present in the southern states. The disease is most common among adults, in whom the clinical presentation may be dramatic. The abrupt onset of chikungunya virus disease follows an incubation period of 2–10 days. Fever (often severe) with a saddleback pattern and severe arthralgia are accompanied by chills and constitutional symptoms and signs, such as abdominal pain, anorexia, conjunctival injection, headache, nausea, and photophobia. Migratory polyarthritis mainly affects the small 1313 joints of the ankles, feet, hands, and wrists, but the larger joints are not necessarily spared. Rash may appear at the outset or several days into the illness; its development often coincides with defervescence, which occurs around day 2 or 3 of the disease. The rash is most intense on the trunk and limbs and may desquamate. Young children develop less prominent signs and are therefore less frequently hospitalized. Children also often develop a bullous rather than a maculopapular/ petechial rash. Maternal–fetal transmission has been reported and in some cases has led to fetal death. Recovery may require weeks, and some elderly patients may continue to experience joint pain, recurrent effusions, or stiffness for several years. This persistence of signs and symptoms may be especially common in HLA-B27-positive patients. In addition to arthritis, petechiae are occasionally seen and epistaxis is not uncommon, but chikungunya virus should not be considered a VHF agent. A few patients develop leukopenia. Elevated concentrations of aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and C-reactive protein have been described, as have mildly decreased platelet counts. Treatment of chikungunya virus disease relies on nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and sometimes chloroquine for refractory arthritis.
# Chunk 3664
Of the human Barmah Forest and Ross River virus infections surveyed, 55–75% were asymptomatic; however, these viral diseases can be debilitating. The incubation period is 7–9 days; the onset of illness is sudden, and disease is usually ushered in by disabling symmetrical joint pain. A nonitchy, diffuse, maculopapular rash (more common in Barmah Forest virus infection) generally develops coincidentally or follows shortly, but in some patients it can precede joint pains by several days. Constitutional symptoms such as low-grade fever, asthenia, headache, myalgia, and nausea are not prominent or are absent in many patients. Most patients are incapacitated for considerable periods (≥6 months) by joint involvement, which interferes with grasping, sleeping, and walking. Ankle, interphalangeal, knee, metacarpophalangeal, and wrist joints are most often involved, although elbows, shoulders, and toes may also be affected. Periarticular swelling and tenosynovitis are common, and one-third of patients have true arthritis (more common in Ross River disease). Myalgia and nuchal stiffness may accompany joint pains. Only half of all patients with arthritis can resume normal activities within 4 weeks, and 10% still must limit their activity after 3 months. Occasional patients are symptomatic for 1–3 years but without progressive arthropathy.
# Chunk 3665
The diagnosis of arboviral encephalitides depends on the careful evaluation of a febrile patient with CNS disease and the performance of laboratory studies to determine etiology. Clinicians should (1) consider empirical acyclovir treatment for herpesvirus meningoencephalitis and antibiotic treatment for bacterial meningitis until test results are received; (2) exclude intoxination and metabolic or oncologic causes, including paraneoplastic syndromes, hyperammonemia, liver failure, and anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis; and (3) rule out a brain abscess or a stroke. Leptospirosis, neurosyphilis, Lyme disease, cat-scratch disease, and more recently described viral encephalitides (e.g., Nipah virus infection) should be considered if epidemiologically relevant. CSF examination usually shows a modest increase in leukocyte counts—in the tens or hundreds or perhaps a few thousand. Early in the process, a significant proportion of these leukocytes may be polymorphonuclear, but mononuclear cells are usually predominant later. CSF glucose concentrations are generally normal. There are exceptions to this pattern of findings: in eastern equine encephalitis, for example, polymorphonuclear leukocytes may predominate during the first 72 h of disease and hypoglycorrhachia may be detected. In lymphocytic choriomeningitis/meningoencephalitis, lymphocyte counts may be in the thousands, and the glucose concentration may be diminished. A humoral immune response is usually detectable at or near the onset of disease. Both serum (acuteor convalescent-phase) and CSF should be examined for IgM antibodies and viruses by plaque-reduction neutralization assay and/or (RT)-PCR. Virus generally cannot be isolated from blood or CSF, although Japanese encephalitis virus has been recovered from CSF of patients with severe disease. RT-PCR analysis of CSF may yield positive results. Viral antigen is present in brain tissue, although its distribution may be focal. Electroencephalography usually shows diffuse abnormalities and is not directly helpful.
# Chunk 3666
The illness from La Crosse virus varies from aseptic meningitis accompanied by confusion to severe and occasionally fatal encephalitis (lethality rate, <0.5%). The incubation period is ~3–7 days. Although there may be prodromal symptoms/signs, the onset of CNS disease is sudden, with fever, headache, and lethargy often joined by nausea and vomiting, convulsions (in one-half of patients), and coma (in one-third of patients). Focal seizures, hemiparesis, tremor, aphasia, chorea, Babinski signs, and other evidence of significant neurologic dysfunction are common, but residual disease is not. Approximately 10% of patients have recurrent seizures in the succeeding months. Other serious sequelae of La Crosse virus infection are rare, although a decrease in scholastic standing in children has been reported and mild personality change has occasionally been suggested.
# Chunk 3667
The blood leukocyte count is commonly elevated in patients with La Crosse virus infection, sometimes reaching 20,000/μL, and is usually accompanied by a left shift. CSF leukocyte counts are typically 30–500/μL with a mononuclear cell predominance (although 25–90% of cells are polymorphonuclear in some patients). The blood protein concentration is normal or slightly increased, and the glucose concentration is normal. Specific virologic diagnosis based on IgM-capture assays of serum and CSF is efficient. The only human anatomic site from which virus has been isolated is the brain.
# Chunk 3668
Clinical signs of Japanese encephalitis emerge after an incubation period of 5–15 days and range from an unspecific febrile presentation (nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, cough) to aseptic meningitis, meningoencephalitis, acute flaccid paralysis, and severe encephalitis. Common findings are cerebellar signs, cranial nerve palsies, and cognitive and speech impairments. A Parkinsonian presentation and seizures are typical in severe cases. Effective vaccines are available. Vaccination is indicated for summer travelers to rural Asia, where the risk of acquiring Japanese encephalitis is considered to be about 1 per 5000 to 1 per 20,000 travelers per week if travel duration exceeds 3 weeks. Usually two intramuscular doses of the vaccine are given 28 days apart, with the second dose administered at least 1 week prior to travel.
# Chunk 3669
Disease severity increases with age. St. Louis encephalitis virus infections that result in aseptic meningitis or mild encephalitis are concentrated among children and young adults, while severe and fatal cases primarily affect the elderly. Infection rates are similar in all age groups; thus the greater susceptibility of older persons to disease is a biologic consequence of aging. St. Louis encephalitis has an abrupt onset after an incubation period of 4–21 days, sometimes following a prodrome, and begins with fever, lethargy, confusion, and headache. In addition, nuchal rigidity, hypotonia, hyperreflexia, myoclonus, and tremors are common. Severe cases can include cranial nerve palsies, hemiparesis, and seizures. Patients often report dysuria and may have viral antigen in urine as well as pyuria. The overall rate of lethality is generally ~7% but may reach 20% among patients >60 years of age. Recovery is slow. Emotional lability, difficulties with concentration and memory, asthenia, and tremors are commonly prolonged in older convalescent patients. The CSF of patients with St. Louis encephalitis usually contains tens to hundreds of leukocytes, with a lymphocytic predominance and a left shift. The CSF glucose concentration is normal in these patients.
# Chunk 3670
tick-borne viral encepHalitis Tick-borne encephalitis viruses are currently subdivided into four groups: the western/European subtype (previously called central European encephalitis virus), the (Ural-) Siberian subtype (previously called Russian spring-summer encephalitis virus), the Far Eastern subtype, and the louping ill subtype (previously called louping ill virus or, in Japan, Negishi virus). Small mammals and grouse, deer, and sheep are the vertebrate amplifiers for these viruses, which are transmitted by ticks. The risk of infection varies by geographic area and can be highly localized within a given area; human 1316 infections usually follow either outdoor activities resulting in tick bites or consumption of raw (unpasteurized) milk from infected goats or, less commonly, from other infected animals (cows, sheep). Milk seems to represent the main transmission route for louping ill viruses, which cause disease only very rarely. The western/European subtype viruses are transmitted mainly by Ixodes ricinus from Scandinavia to the Ural Mountains. (Ural-)Siberian viruses are transmitted predominantly by Ixodes persulcatus from Europe across the Ural Mountains to the Pacific Ocean; louping ill viruses seem to be confined primarily to Great Britain. Several thousand infections with tick-borne encephalitis virus are recorded each year among people of all ages. Human tick-borne viral encephalitis occurs between April and October, with a peak in June and July. Western/European viruses classically caused bimodal disease. After an incubation period of 7–14 days, the illness begins with a fever– myalgia phase (arthralgia, fever, headaches, myalgia, nausea) that lasts for 2–4 days and is thought to correlate with viremia. A subsequent remission for several days is followed by the recurrence of fever and the onset of meningeal signs. The CNS phase (7–10 days before onset of improvement) varies from mild aseptic meningitis, which is more common among younger patients, to severe (meningo-)encephalitis with coma, seizures, tremors, and motor signs. Spinal and medullary involvement can lead to typical limb-girdle paralysis and respiratory paralysis. Most patients with western/European virus infections recover (lethality rate, 1%), and only a minority of patients have significant deficits. However, the lethality rate from (Ural-)Siberian virus infections reaches 7–8%. Infections with Far Eastern viruses generally run a more abrupt course. The encephalitic syndrome caused by these viruses sometimes begins without a remission from the fever–myalgia phase and has more severe manifestations than the western/European syndrome. The lethality rate is high (20–40%), and major sequelae—most notably, lower motor neuron paralyses of the proximal muscles of the extremities, trunk, and neck—are common, developing in approximately one-half of patients. Thrombocytopenia sometimes develops during the initial febrile illness, resembling the early hemorrhagic phase of some other tick-borne flavivirus infections, such as Kyasanur Forest disease. In the early stage of the illness, virus may be isolated from the blood. In the CNS phase, IgM antibodies are detectable in serum and/or CSF. Diagnosis of tick-borne viral encephalitis primarily relies on serology and detection of viral genomes by RT-PCR. There is no specific therapy for infection. However, effective alum-adjuvanted, formalin-inactivated virus vaccines are produced in Austria, Germany, and Russia in chicken embryo cells (FSME-Immun® and Encepur®). Two doses of the Austrian vaccine separated by an interval of 1–3 months appear to be effective in the field, and antibody responses are similar when vaccine is given on days 0 and 14. Because rare cases of postvaccination Guillain-Barré syndrome have been reported, vaccination should be reserved for persons likely to experience rural exposure in an endemic area during the season of transmission. Cross-neutralization for the western/European and Far Eastern variants has been established, but there are no published field studies on cross-protection among formalin-inactivated vaccines. Because 0.2–4% of ticks in endemic areas may be infected, the use of immunoglobulin prophylaxis of tick-borne viral encephalitis has been raised. Prompt administration of high-titered specific antibody preparations should probably be undertaken, although no controlled data are available to prove the efficacy of this measure. Immunoglobulins should be considered because of the risk of antibody-mediated enhancement of infection or antigen–antibody complex deposition in tissues.
# Chunk 3671
west nile virUs infection West Nile virus is now the primary cause of arboviral encephalitis in the United States. In 2012, 2873 cases of neuroinvasive disease (e.g., meningitis, encephalitis, acute flaccid paralysis), with 270 deaths, and 2801 cases of non-neuroinvasive infection were reported. West Nile virus was initially described as being transmitted among wild birds by Culex mosquitoes in Africa, Asia, and southern Europe. In addition, the virus has been implicated in severe and fatal hepatic necrosis in Africa. West Nile virus was introduced into New York City in 1999 and subsequently spread to other areas of the northeastern United States, causing die-offs among crows, exotic zoo birds, and other birds. The virus has continued to spread and is now found in almost all states as well as in Canada, Mexico, South America, and the Caribbean islands. C. pipiens remains the major vector in the northeastern United States, but several other Culex species and A. albopictus are also involved. Jays compete with crows and other corvids as amplifiers and lethal targets in other areas of the country.
# Chunk 3672
West Nile virus is a common cause of febrile disease without CNS involvement (incubation period, 3–14 days), but it occasionally causes aseptic meningitis and severe encephalitis, particularly among the elderly. The fever–myalgia syndrome caused by West Nile virus differs from that caused by other viruses in terms of the frequent—rather than occasional—appearance of a maculopapular rash concentrated on the trunk (especially in children) and the development of lymphadenopathy. Back pain, fatigue, headache, myalgia, retroorbital pain, sore throat, nausea and vomiting, and arthralgia (but not arthritis) are common accompaniments that may persist for several weeks. Encephalitis, sequelae, and death are all more common among elderly, diabetic, and hypertensive patients and among patients with previous CNS insults. In addition to the more severe motor and cognitive sequelae, milder findings may include tremor, slight abnormalities in motor skills, and loss of executive functions. Intense clinical interest and the availability of laboratory diagnostic methods have made it possible to define a number of unusual clinical features. Such features include chorioretinitis, flaccid paralysis with histologic lesions resembling poliomyelitis, and initial presentation with fever and focal neurologic deficits in the absence of diffuse encephalitis. Immunosuppressed patients may have fulminant courses or develop persistent CNS infection. Virus transmission through both transplantation and blood transfusion has necessitated screening of blood and organ donors by nucleic acid–based tests. Occasionally, pregnant women infect their fetuses with West Nile virus.
# Chunk 3673
Arenaviruses Lymphocytic choriomeningitis/meningoencephalitis is the only human arenavirus infection resulting predominantly in fever 1318 and myalgia. Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus is transmitted to humans from the common house mouse (Mus musculus) by aerosols of excreta and secreta. The virus is maintained in the mouse mainly by vertical transmission from infected dams. The vertically infected mouse remains viremic and sheds virus for life, with high concentrations of virus in all tissues. Infected colonies of pet hamsters also can serve as a link to humans. Infections among scientists and animal caretakers can occur because the virus is widely used in immunology laboratories as a model of T cell function and can silently infect cell cultures and passaged tumor lines. In addition, patients may have a history of residence in rodent-infested housing or other exposure to rodents. An antibody prevalence of ~5–10% has been reported among adults from Argentina, Germany, and the United States. Lymphocytic choriomeningitis/meningoencephalitis differs from the general syndrome of fever and myalgia in that the onset is gradual. Conditions occasionally associated with the disease are orchitis, transient alopecia, arthritis, pharyngitis, cough, and maculopapular rash. An estimated one-fourth of patients (or fewer) experience a febrile phase of 3–6 days. After a brief remission, many develop renewed fever accompanied by severe headache, nausea and vomiting, and meningeal signs lasting for ~1 week (the CNS phase). These patients virtually always recover fully, as do the rare patients with clear-cut signs of encephalitis. Recovery may be delayed by transient hydrocephalus. During the initial febrile phase, leukopenia and thrombocytopenia are common, and virus can usually be isolated from blood. During the CNS phase, the virus may be found in the CSF, and antibodies are present in the blood. The pathogenesis of lymphocytic choriomeningitis/meningoencephalitis is thought to resemble that following direct intracranial inoculation of the virus into adult mice. The onset of the immune response leads to T cell–mediated immunopathologic meningitis. During the meningeal phase, CSF mononuclear-cell counts range from the hundreds to the low thousands per microliter, and hypoglycorrhachia is found in one-third of patients. IgM-capture ELISA, immunochemistry, and RT-PCR are used in the diagnosis of lymphocytic choriomeningitis/meningoencephalitis. IgM-capture ELISA of serum and CSF usually yields positive results; RT-PCR assays have been developed for probing CSF. Because patients who have fulminant infections transmitted by recent organ transplantation do not mount an immune response, immunohistochemistry or RT-PCR is required for diagnosis. Infection should be suspected in acutely ill febrile patients with marked leukopenia and thrombocytopenia. In patients with aseptic meningitis, any of the following suggests lymphocytic choriomeningitis/meningoencephalitis: a well-marked febrile prodrome, adult age, occurrence in the autumn, low CSF glucose levels, or CSF mononuclear-cell counts of >1000/μL. In pregnant women, infection may lead to fetal invasion with consequent congenital hydrocephalus and chorioretinitis. Because the maternal infection may be mild, causing only a short febrile illness, antibodies to the virus should be sought in both the mother and the fetus under suspicious circumstances, particularly in TORCH (toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex, and HIV)–negative neonatal hydrocephalus.
# Chunk 3674
A common pattern of disease in endemic areas consists of high attack rates among travelers and military personnel and little or no disease in the local population, who are protected after childhood infection. Toscana virus infection is common during the summer among rural residents and vacationers, particularly in Italy, Spain, and Portugal; a number of cases have been identified in travelers returning to Germany and Scandinavia. The disease may manifest as an uncomplicated febrile illness but is often associated with aseptic meningitis, with virus isolated from the CSF.
# Chunk 3675
Dengue begins after an incubation period averaging 4–7 days, when the typical patient experiences the sudden onset of fever, frontal headache, retroorbital pain, and back pain along with severe myalgias. These symptoms gave rise to the colloquial designation of dengue as “break-bone fever.” Often a transient macular rash appears on the first day, as do adenopathy, palatal vesicles, and scleral injection. The illness may last a week, with additional symptoms and clinical signs usually including anorexia, nausea or vomiting, and marked cutaneous hypersensitivity. Near the time of defervescence on days 3–5, a maculopapular rash begins on the trunk and spreads to the extremities and the face. Epistaxis and scattered petechiae are often noted in uncomplicated dengue, and preexisting gastrointestinal lesions may bleed during the acute illness.
# Chunk 3676
Laboratory findings of dengue include leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, and, in many cases, elevations of serum aminotransferase concentrations. The diagnosis is made by IgM ELISA or paired serology during recovery or by antigen-detection ELISA or RT-PCR during the acute phase. Virus is readily isolated from blood in the acute phase if mosquito inoculation or mosquito cell culture is used.
# Chunk 3677
HPS begins with a prodrome of ~3–4 days (range, 1–11 days) comprising fever, malaise, myalgia, and—in many cases—gastrointestinal disturbances such as abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. Dizziness is common and vertigo occasional. Severe prodromal symptoms/ signs may bring some patients to medical attention, but most cases are recognized as the pulmonary phase begins. Typical signs are slightly lowered blood pressure, tachycardia, tachypnea, mild hypoxemia, thrombocytopenia, and early radiographic signs of pulmonary edema. Physical findings in the chest are often surprisingly scant. The conjunctival and cutaneous signs of vascular involvement seen in hantavirus VHFs (see below) are uncommon. During the next few hours, decompensation may progress rapidly to severe hypoxemia and respiratory failure.
# Chunk 3678
The HPS differential diagnosis includes abdominal surgical conditions and pyelonephritis as well as rickettsial disease, sepsis, meningococcemia, plague, tularemia, influenza, and relapsing fever. A specific diagnosis is best made by IgM antibody testing of acute-phase serum, which has yielded positive results even in the prodrome. Tests using a Sin Nombre virus antigen detect antibodies to the related HPS-causing hantaviruses. Occasionally, heterotypic viruses will react only in the
# Chunk 3679
The acute phase in most cases of VHF is associated with ongoing virus replication and viremia. VHFs begin with fever and myalgia, usually of abrupt onset. (Arenavirus infections are the exceptions as they often develop gradually.) Within a few days, the patient presents for medical attention because of increasing prostration that is often accompanied by abdominal or chest pain, anorexia, dizziness, severe headache, hyperesthesia, photophobia, and nausea or vomiting and other gastrointestinal disturbances. Initial examination often reveals only an acutely ill patient with conjunctival suffusion, tenderness to palpation of muscles or abdomen, and borderline hypotension or postural hypotension, perhaps with tachycardia. Petechiae (often best visualized in the axillae), flushing of the head and thorax, periorbital edema, and proteinuria are common. AST concentrations are usually elevated at presentation or within a day or two thereafter. Hemoconcentration from vascular leakage, which is usually evident, is most marked in HFRS and in severe dengue. The seriously ill patient progresses to more severe clinical signs and develops shock and other findings typical of the causative virus. Shock, multifocal bleeding, and CNS involvement (encephalopathy, coma, seizures) are all poor prognostic signs.
# Chunk 3680
jUnín/argentinian and macHUpo/bolivian HemorrHagic fevers These severe diseases (with fetal lethality rates reaching 15–30%) are caused by Junín virus and Machupo virus, respectively. Their clinical presentations are similar, but their epidemiology differs because of the distribution and behavior of the viruses’ rodent reservoirs. Junín/ Argentinian hemorrhagic fever has thus far been recorded only in rural areas of Argentina, whereas Machupo/Bolivian hemorrhagic fever seems to be confined to rural Bolivia. Infection with the causative agents almost always results in disease, and all ages and both sexes are affected. Person-to-person or nosocomial transmission is rare but has occurred. The transmission of Junín/Argentinian hemorrhagic fever from convalescing men to their wives suggests the need for counseling of patients with arenavirus hemorrhagic fever concerning the avoidance of intimate contacts for several weeks after recovery. Compared with the pattern in Lassa fever (see below), thrombocytopenia—often marked—is the rule, hemorrhage is common, and CNS dysfunction (e.g., marked confusion, tremors of the upper extremities and tongue, and cerebellar signs) is much more common in disease caused by Junín virus and Machupo virus. Some cases follow a predominantly neurologic course, with a poor prognosis.
# Chunk 3681
lassa fever Lassa virus is known to cause endemic and epidemic disease in Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Guinea, and Liberia, although it is probably more widely distributed in western Africa. In countries where Lassa virus is endemic, Lassa fever can be a prominent cause of febrile disease. For example, in one hospital in Sierra Leone, laboratory-confirmed Lassa fever is consistently responsible for one-fifth of admissions to the medical wards. In western Africa alone, probably tens of thousands of Lassa virus infections occur annually. Lassa virus can be transmitted by close person-to-person contact. The virus is often present in urine during convalescence and is suspected to be present in seminal fluid early in recovery. Nosocomial spread has occurred but is uncommon if proper sterile parenteral techniques are used. All ages and both sexes are affected; the incidence of disease is highest in the dry season, but transmission takes place year-round.
# Chunk 3682
Among the VHF agents, only arenaviruses are typically associated with a gradual onset of illness, which begins after an incubation period of 5–16 days. Hemorrhage is seen in only ~15–30% of Lassa fever patients; a maculopapular rash is often noted in light-skinned patients. Effusions are common, and male-dominant pericarditis may develop late. Maternal lethality is higher than the usual 15–30% and is especially increased during the last trimester. The fetal death rate reaches 90%. Excavation of the uterus may increase survival rates of pregnant women, but data on Lassa fever and pregnancy are still sparse. These figures suggest that interruption of the pregnancy of Lassa virus–infected women should be considered. White blood cell counts are normal or slightly elevated, and platelet counts are normal or somewhat low. Deafness coincides with clinical improvement in ~20% of patients and is permanent and bilateral in some patients. Reinfection may occur but has not been associated with severe disease.
# Chunk 3683
High-level viremia or a high serum AST concentration statistically predicts a fatal outcome. Thus, patients with an AST concentration of >150 IU/mL should be treated with IV ribavirin. This antiviral nucleoside analogue appears to be effective in reducing case–fatality rates from those documented among retrospective controls. However, possible side effects, such as reversible anemia (which usually does not require transfusion), dependent hemolytic anemia, and bone marrow suppression, need to be kept in mind. Ribavirin should be given by slow IV infusion in a dose of 32 mg/kg; this dose should be followed by 16 mg/kg every 6 h for 4 days and then by 8 mg/kg every 8 h for 6 days. Inactivated Lassa virus vaccines failed in preclinical studies.
# Chunk 3684
HemorrHagic fever witH renal syndrome HFRS is the most important VHF today, with more than 100,000 cases of severe disease in Asia annually and milder infections numbering in the thousands in Europe. The disease is widely distributed in Eurasia. The major causative viruses are Puumala virus (Europe), Dobrava-Belgrade virus (the Balkans), and Hantaan virus (eastern Asia). Amur/Soochong, Gou, Kurkino, Muju, Saaremaa, Sochi, and Tula viruses also cause HFRS but much less frequently and in more geographically confined areas determined by the distribution of reservoir hosts. Seoul virus is exceptional in that it is associated with brown rats (Rattus norvegicus); therefore, the virus has a worldwide distribution because of the migration of these rodents on ships. Despite the wide distribution of Seoul virus, only mild or moderate HFRS occurs in Asia, and human disease has been difficult to identify in many areas of the world. Most cases of HFRS occur in rural residents or vacationers; the exception is Seoul virus infection, which may be acquired in an urban or rural setting or from contaminated laboratory-rat colonies. Classic Hantaan virus infection in Korea and in rural China is most common in the spring and fall and 1321 is related to rodent density and agricultural practices. Human infection is acquired primarily through aerosols of rodent urine, although virus is also present in rodent saliva and feces. Patients with HFRS are not infectious.
# Chunk 3685
Severe cases of HFRS evolve in four identifiable stages. The febrile stage lasts 3 or 4 days and is identified by the abrupt onset of fever, headache, severe myalgia, thirst, anorexia, and often nausea and vomiting. Photophobia, retroorbital pain, and pain on ocular movement are common, and the vision may become blurred with ciliary body inflammation. Flushing over the face, the V area of the neck, and the back is characteristic, as are pharyngeal injection, periorbital edema, and conjunctival suffusion. Petechiae often develop in areas of pressure, the conjunctivae, and the axillae. Back pain and tenderness to percussion at the costovertebral angle reflect massive retroperitoneal edema. Laboratory evidence of mild to moderate DIC is present. Other laboratory findings of HFRS include proteinuria and active urinary sediment. The hypotensive stage lasts from a few hours to 48 h and begins with falling blood pressure and sometimes shock. The relative bradycardia typical of the febrile phase is replaced by tachycardia. Kinin activation is marked. The rising hematocrit reflects increasing vascular leakage. Leukocytosis with a left shift develops, and thrombocytopenia continues. Atypical lymphocytes—which in fact are activated CD8+ and, to a lesser extent, CD4+ T cells—circulate. Proteinuria is marked, and the urine’s specific gravity falls to 1.010. Renal circulation is congested and compromised from local and systemic circulatory changes resulting in necrosis of tubules, particularly at the corticomedullary junction, and oliguria. During the oliguric stage, hemorrhagic tendencies continue, probably in large part because of uremic bleeding defects. Oliguria persists for 3–10 days before the return of renal function marks the onset of the polyuric stage (diuresis and hyposthenuria), which carries the danger of dehydration and electrolyte abnormalities.
# Chunk 3686
Mainstays of therapy are management of shock, reliance on vasopressors, modest crystalloid infusion, IV human serum albumin administration, and treatment of renal failure with prompt dialysis to prevent overhydration that may result in pulmonary edema and to control hypertension that increases the possibility of intracranial hemorrhage. Use of IV ribavirin has reduced lethality and morbidity in severe cases, provided treatment is begun within the first 4 days of illness. Lethality may be as high as 15% but with proper therapy should be <5%. Sequelae have not been definitively established.
# Chunk 3687
rift valley fever The natural range of Rift Valley fever virus was previously confined to sub-Saharan Africa, with circulation of the virus markedly enhanced by substantial rainfall. The El Niño Southern Oscillation phenomenon of 1997 facilitated subsequent spread of Rift 1322 Valley fever to the Arabian Peninsula, with epidemic disease in 2000. The virus has also been found in Madagascar and has been introduced into Egypt, where it caused major epidemics in 1977–1979, 1993, and thereafter. Rift Valley fever virus is maintained in nature by transovarial transmission in floodwater Aedes mosquitoes and presumably also has a vertebrate amplifier. Increased transmission during particularly heavy rains leads to epizootics characterized by high-level viremia in cattle, goats, or sheep. Numerous types of mosquitoes then feed on these animals and become infected, thereby increasing the possibility of human infections. Remote sensing via satellite can detect the ecologic changes associated with high rainfall that predict the likelihood of Rift Valley fever virus transmission. High-resolution satellites can also detect the special depressions in floodwaters from which the mosquitoes emerge. In addition, the virus can be transmitted by contact with blood or aerosols from domestic animals. Transmission risk is therefore high during birthing, and both abortuses and placentas need to be handled with caution. Slaughtered animals are not infectious because anaerobic glycolysis in postmortem tissues results in an acidic environment that rapidly inactivates bunyaviruses. Neither person-to-person nor nosocomial transmission of Rift Valley fever has been documented. Rift Valley fever virus is unusual in that it causes several clinical syndromes. Most infections are manifested as the fever–myalgia syndrome. A small proportion of infections result in VHF with especially prominent liver involvement. Renal failure and DIC are also common features. Perhaps 10% of otherwise mild infections lead to retinal vasculitis, and some patients have permanently impaired vision. Funduscopic examination reveals edema, hemorrhages, and infarction of the retina as well as optic nerve degeneration. In a small proportion of patients (<1 in 200), retinal vasculitis is followed by viral encephalitis. No proven therapy exists for Rift Valley fever. Both retinal disease and encephalitis occur after the acute febrile syndrome has resolved and serum neutralizing antibody has developed—events suggesting that only supportive care need be given. Epidemic disease is best prevented by vaccination of livestock. The ability of this virus to propagate after introduction into Egypt suggests that other potentially receptive areas, including the United States, should develop response plans. Rift Valley fever, like Venezuelan equine encephalitis, is likely to be controlled only with adequate stocks of an effective live attenuated vaccine, but such global stocks are unavailable. A formalin-inactivated vaccine confers immunity in humans, but quantities are limited and three injections are required; this vaccine is recommended for potentially exposed laboratory workers and for veterinarians working in sub-Saharan Africa. A new live attenuated vaccine, MP-12, is being tested in humans and may soon become available for general use. The vaccine is safe and licensed for use in sheep and cattle.
# Chunk 3688
severe dengUe Several weeks after convalescence from infection with dengue virus 1, 2, 3, or 4, the transient protection conferred by that infection against reinfection with a heterotypic dengue virus usually wanes. Heterotypic reinfection may result in classic dengue or, less commonly, in severe dengue. In the past 20 years, A. aegypti has progressively reinvaded Latin America and other areas, and frequent travel by infected individuals has introduced multiple variants of dengue viruses 1–4 from many geographic areas. Thus the pattern of hyperendemic transmission of multiple dengue virus serotypes established in the Americas and the Caribbean has led to the emergence of severe dengue as a major problem. Among the millions of dengue virus 1–4 infections, ~500,000 cases of severe dengue occur annually, with a lethality rate of ~2.5%. The induction of vascular permeability and shock depends on multiple factors, such as the presence or absence of enhancing and nonneutralizing antibodies, age (susceptibility to severe dengue drops considerably after 12 years of age), sex (females are more often affected than males), race (whites are more often affected than blacks), nutritional status (malnutrition is protective), or sequence of infections (e.g., dengue virus 1 infection followed by dengue virus 2 infection seems to be more dangerous than dengue virus 4 infection followed by dengue virus 2 infection). In addition, considerable heterogeneity exists among each dengue virus population. For instance, Southeast Asian dengue virus 2 variants have more potential to cause severe dengue than do other variants.
# Chunk 3689
Severe dengue is identified by the detection of bleeding tendencies (tourniquet test, petechiae) or overt bleeding in the absence of underlying causes, such as preexisting gastrointestinal lesions. Shock may result from increased vascular permeability. In milder cases of severe dengue, restlessness, lethargy, thrombocytopenia (<100,000/μL), and hemoconcentration are detected 2–5 days after the onset of typical dengue, usually at the time of defervescence. The maculopapular rash that often develops in dengue may also appear in severe dengue. In more severe cases, frank shock is apparent, with low pulse pressure, cyanosis, hepatomegaly, pleural effusions, and ascites; in some patients, severe ecchymoses and gastrointestinal bleeding develop. The period of shock lasts only 1 or 2 days.
# Chunk 3690
Ebolavirus and Marburgvirus Infections Jens H. Kuhn Several viruses of the family Filoviridae cause severe and frequently fatal viral hemorrhagic fevers in humans. Introduction of filoviruses 234 is incidental, occurring via bites from mosquitoes that have fed on viremic monkeys. After the identification of A. aegypti mosquitoes as vectors of yellow fever, containment strategies were aimed at increased mosquito control. Today, urban yellow fever transmission occurs only in some African cities, but the threat exists in the great cities of South America, where reinfestation by A. aegypti has taken place and dengue virus 1–4 transmission by the same mosquito is common. Despite the existence of a highly effective and safe vaccine, several hundred jungle yellow fever cases occur annually in South America, and thousands of jungle and urban cases occur each year in Africa (29,000–60,000 estimated for 2013).
# Chunk 3691
Yellow fever is a typical VHF accompanied by prominent hepatic necrosis. A period of viremia, typically lasting 3 or 4 days, is followed by a period of “intoxication.” During the latter phase in severe cases, characteristic jaundice, hemorrhages, black vomit, anuria, and terminal delirium occur, perhaps related in part to extensive hepatic involvement. Blood leukocyte counts may be normal or reduced and are often high in terminal stages. Albuminuria is usually noted and may be marked. As renal function fails in terminal or severe cases, the concentration of blood urea nitrogen rises proportionately. Abnormalities detected in liver function tests range from modest elevations of AST concentrations in mild cases to severe derangement.
# Chunk 3692
Urban yellow fever can be prevented by the control of A. aegypti. The continuing sylvatic cycles require vaccination of all visitors to areas of potential transmission with live attenuated variant 17D vaccine virus, which cannot be transmitted by mosquitoes. With few exceptions, reactions to the vaccine are minimal; immunity is provided within 10 days and lasts for at least 25–35 years. An egg allergy mandates caution in vaccine administration. Although there are no documented harmful effects of the vaccine on fetuses, pregnant women should be immunized only if they are definitely at risk of exposure to yellow fever virus. Because vaccination has been associated with several cases of encephalitis in children <6 months of age, it is contraindicated in this age group, nor is it recommended for infants 6–8 months of age unless the risk of exposure is very high. Rare, serious, multisystemic adverse reactions (occasionally fatal) have been reported, particularly affecting the elderly, and risk-to-benefit should be weighed prior to vaccine administration to individuals ≥60 years of age. Nevertheless, the number of deaths of unvaccinated travelers with yellow fever exceeds the number of deaths from vaccination, and a liberal vaccination policy for travelers to involved areas should be pursued. Timely information on changes in yellow fever distribution and yellow fever vaccine requirements can be obtained from the
# Chunk 3693
FIGuRE 234-3 Characteristics of outbreaks of human filovirus disease. Six of eight known filoviruses have caused disease in humans in the past. Outbreaks are listed by virus in chronological order. Laboratory infections are shaded gray and italicized. Arrows indicate international case exportation. Total number of cases and total number of lethal cases are summarized in the middle column (2014 EBOV infections as of December 3). The lethality/case–fatality rate (black dots) for each outbreak is plotted on a 0–100% scale along with 99% confidence intervals (black horizontal lines). The overall case–fatality rate for disease caused by a particular virus is delineated by vertical bold-colored lines, with vertical bold-colored dashed lines indicating the corresponding 99% confidence intervals; the overall case–fatality rate for all ebolavirus infections, all marburgvirus infections, and all filovirus infections are shown by vertical gray bars. BDBV, Bundibugyo virus; COD, Democratic Republic of the Congo (formerly Zaire); COG, Republic of the Congo; EBOV, Ebola virus; MARV, Marburg virus; RAVV, Ravn virus; SUDV, Sudan virus; TAFV, Taï Forest virus; UK, United Kingdom; USSR, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (today Russia).
# Chunk 3694
MVD and EVD cannot be differentiated by mere observation of clinical manifestations. The incidence of clinical signs does not differ significantly among infections caused by disparate filoviruses (Table 234-2). The incubation period ranges from 3 to 25 days, after which infected people develop a biphasic syndrome with a 1to 2-day
# Chunk 3695
Abbreviations: BDBV, Bundibugyo virus; EBOV, Ebola virus; MARV, Marburg virus; NR, not reported.

1328 relative remission separating the two phases. The first phase (disease onset until around day 5–7) resembles influenza and is characterized by sudden onset of fever and chills, severe headaches, cough, myalgia, pharyngitis, arthralgia of the larger joints, development of a maculopapular rash, and other signs/symptoms (Table 234-2). The second phase (approximately 5–7 days after disease onset and thereafter) involves the gastrointestinal tract (abdominal pain with vomiting and/ or diarrhea), respiratory tract (chest pain, cough), vascular system (postural hypotension, edema), and central nervous system (confusion, coma, headache). Hemorrhagic manifestations such as subconjunctival injection, nosebleeds, hematemesis, hematuria, and melena are typical (Table 234-2). Typical laboratory findings are leukopenia (with cell counts as low as 1000/μL) with a left shift prior to leukocytosis, thrombocytopenia (with counts as low as 50,000/μL), increased concentrations of liver and pancreatic enzymes (aspartate aminotransferase > alanine aminotransferase, γ-glutamyltransferase, serum amylase), hypokalemia, hypoproteinemia, increased creatinine and urea concentrations with proteinuria, and prolonged prothrombin and partial thromboplastin times. Patients usually succumb to disease 4–14 days after infection. Patients who survive experience prolonged and sometimes incapacitating sequelae such as arthralgia, asthenia, iridocyclitis, hearing loss, myalgia, orchitis, parotitis, psychosis, recurrent hepatitis, transverse myelitis, or uveitis. Temporary hair loss and desquamation of skin areas previously affected by a typical maculopapular rash are visible consequences of the disease. Rarely, filoviruses can persist in the liver, eyes, or testicles of survivors and may cause recurrent disease months after convalescence.
# Chunk 3696
1330 DIAGNOSIS The definitive diagnosis of any fungal infection requires histopathologic identification of the fungus invading tissue and accompanying evidence of an inflammatory response. The identification of an inflammatory response has been especially important with regard to Aspergillus infection. Aspergillus is ubiquitous and can float in the air onto biopsy material. Therefore, in rare but important instances, this fungus is an ex vivo contaminant during processing of a specimen for microscopy, with a consequent incorrect diagnosis. The stains most commonly used to identify fungi are periodic acid–Schiff and Gomori methenamine silver. Candida, unlike other fungi, is visible on gram-stained tissue smears. Hematoxylin and eosin stain is not sufficient to identify Candida in tissue specimens. When positive, an india ink preparation of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is diagnostic for cryptococcosis. Most laboratories now use calcofluor white staining coupled with fluorescent microscopy to identify fungi in fluid specimens. Extensive investigations of the diagnosis of deep organ fungal infections have yielded a variety of tests with different degrees of specificity and sensitivity. The most reliable tests are the detection of antibody to Coccidioides immitis in serum and CSF; of Histoplasma capsulatum antigen in urine, serum, and CSF; and of cryptococcal polysaccharide antigen in serum and CSF. These tests have a general sensitivity and specificity of 90%; however, because of variability among laboratories, testing on multiple occasions is advisable. The test for galactomannan has been used extensively in Europe and is now approved in the United States for diagnosis of aspergillosis. Sources of concern regarding galactomannan are the incidence of false-negative results and the need for multiple serial tests to reduce this incidence. The β-glucan test for Candida is also under evaluation but, like the galactomannan test, still requires additional validation; this test has a negative predictive value of ~90%. Both of these tests are being used with increasing frequency, especially for guiding the timing of initiation and duration of therapy. The galactomannan test is being evaluated in both serum and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. Numerous polymerase chain reaction assays to detect antigens are in the developmental stages, as are nucleic acid hybridization techniques; currently, these tests are not widely available. Of the fungal organisms, Candida is by far the most frequently recovered from blood. Although Candida species can be detected with any of the automated blood culture systems widely used at present, the lysis-centrifugation technique increases the sensitivity of blood cultures for Candida and for less common organisms (e.g., H. capsulatum). Lysis-centrifugation should be used when disseminated fungal infection is suspected. Except in the cases of coccidioidomycosis, cryptococcosis, and histoplasmosis, there are no fully validated and widely used tests for serodiagnosis of disseminated fungal infection. Skin tests for the endemic mycoses are no longer available.
# Chunk 3697
The echinocandins, including the FDA-approved drugs caspofungin, anidulafungin, and micafungin, have added considerably to the antifungal armamentarium. All three of these agents inhibit β-1,3-glucan synthase, which is necessary for cell wall synthesis in 1331 fungi and is not a component of human cells. None of these agents is currently available in an oral formulation. The echinocandins are considered fungicidal for Candida and fungistatic for Aspergillus. Their greatest use to date is against candidal infections. They offer two advantages: broad-spectrum activity against all Candida species and relatively low toxicity. The minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of all the echinocandins are highest against Candida parapsilosis; it is not clear whether these higher MIC values represent less clinical effectiveness against this species. The echinocandins are among the safest antifungal agents.
# Chunk 3698
In controlled trials, caspofungin has been at least as efficacious as AmB for the treatment of candidemia and invasive candidiasis and as efficacious as fluconazole for the treatment of candidal esophagi-tis. In addition, caspofungin has been efficacious as salvage therapy for aspergillosis. Anidulafungin has been approved by the FDA as therapy for candidemia in nonneutropenic patients and for Candida esophagitis, intraabdominal infection, and peritonitis. In controlled trials, anidulafungin has been shown to be noninferior and possibly superior to fluconazole against candidemia and invasive candidiasis. It is as efficacious as fluconazole against candidal esophagitis. When anidulafungin is used with cyclosporine, tacrolimus, or voriconazole, no dosage adjustment is required for either drug in the combination. Micafungin has been approved for the treatment of esophageal candidiasis and candidemia and for prophylaxis in patients receiving stem cell transplants. In a head-to-head trial, micafungin was noninferior to caspofungin for the treatment of candidemia. Studies thus far have shown that coadministration of micafungin and cyclosporine does not require dose adjustments for either drug. When micafungin is given with sirolimus, the area under the plasma drug concentration–time curve rises for sirolimus, usually necessitating a reduction in its dose. In open-label trials, favorable results have been obtained with micafungin for the treatment of deep-seated Aspergillus and Candida infections.
# Chunk 3699
Histoplasmosis is the most prevalent endemic mycosis in

North America. Although this fungal disease has been reported throughout the world, its endemicity is particularly notable in certain parts of North, Central, and South America; Africa; and Asia. In Europe, histoplasmosis is diagnosed fairly often, mostly in emigrants from or travelers to endemic areas on other continents. In the United States, the endemic areas spread over the Ohio and Mississippi river valleys. This pattern is related to the humid and acidic nature of the soil in these areas. Soil enriched with bird or bat droppings promotes the growth and sporulation of Histoplasma. Disruption of soil containing the organism leads to aerosolization of the microconidia and exposure of humans nearby. Activities associated with high-level exposure include spelunking, excavation, cleaning of chicken coops, demolition and remodeling of old buildings, and cutting of dead trees. Most cases seen outside of highly endemic areas represent imported disease—e.g., cases reported in Europe after travel to the Americas, Africa, or Asia.
# Chunk 3700
Chronic cavitary histoplasmosis is seen in smokers who have structural lung disease (e.g., bullous emphysema). This chronic illness is characterized by productive cough, dyspnea, low-grade fever, night sweats, and weight loss. Chest radiographs usually show upper-lobe infiltrates, cavitation, and pleural thickening—findings resembling those of tuber-1333 culosis. Without treatment, the course is slowly progressive.
# Chunk 3701
The detection of Histoplasma antigen in body fluids is extremely useful in the diagnosis of PDH and acute diffuse pulmonary histoplasmosis. The sensitivity of this technique is >95% in patients with PDH and >80% in patients with acute pulmonary histoplasmosis if both urine and serum are tested. Antigen level correlates with severity of illness in PDH and can be used to follow disease progression as levels predictably decrease with effective therapy. An increase in antigen levels also predicts relapse. Antigen can be detected in cerebrospinal fluid from patients with meningitis and in BAL fluid from those with pneumonia. Cross-reactivity occurs with African histoplasmosis, blastomycosis, coccidioidomycosis, paracoccidioidomycosis, and Penicillium marneffei infection.
# Chunk 3702
Serologic tests, including immunodiffusion and complement fixation, are useful for the diagnosis of histoplasmosis in immunocompetent patients. Serum antibody titers may rise fourfold in patients with acute histoplasmosis. Serologic tests are especially useful for the diagnosis of chronic pulmonary histoplasmosis. The limitations of serology, however, include insensitivity early in the course of infection (at least 1 month is required for the production of antibodies), insensitivity in immunosuppressed patients, and persistence of detectable antibody for several years after infection. Positive results from past infection may lead to a misdiagnosis of active histoplasmosis in a patient with another disease process.
# Chunk 3703
The duration of treatment for acute pulmonary histoplasmosis is 6–12 weeks, while that for PDH and chronic pulmonary histoplasmosis is ≥1 year. Antigen levels in urine and serum should be monitored during and for at least 1 year after therapy for PDH. Stable or rising antigen levels suggest treatment failure or relapse.
# Chunk 3704
Coccidioides grows within 3–7 days at 37°C on a variety of artificial media, including blood agar. Therefore, it is always useful to obtain samples of sputum or other respiratory fluids and tissues for culture in suspected cases of coccidioidomycosis. The clinical laboratory should be alerted to the possibility of this diagnosis, since Coccidioides poses a significant laboratory hazard if it is inadvertently inhaled. The organism can also be identified directly. While treatment of samples with potassium hydroxide is rarely fruitful in establishing the diagnosis, examination of sputum or other respiratory fluids after Papanicolaou or Gomori methenamine silver staining reveals spherules in a significant proportion of patients with pulmonary coccidioidomycosis. For fixed tissues (e.g., those obtained from biopsy specimens), spherules with surrounding inflammation can be demonstrated with hematoxylineosin or Gomori methenamine silver staining.
# Chunk 3705
Most patients with focal primary pulmonary coccidioidomycosis require no therapy. Patients for whom antifungal therapy should be considered include those with underlying cellular immunodeficiencies and those with prolonged symptoms and signs of extensive disease. Specific criteria include symptoms persisting for ≥2 months, night sweats occurring for >3 weeks, weight loss of >10%, a serum CF antibody titer of >1:16, and extensive pulmonary involvement apparent on chest radiography.
# Chunk 3706
The nodules that may follow primary pulmonary coccidioidomycosis do not require treatment. As noted above, these nodules are not easily distinguished from pulmonary malignancies by means of radiographic imaging. Close clinical follow-up and biopsy may be required to distinguish between these two entities. Most pulmonary cavities do not require therapy. Antifungal treatment should be considered in patients with persistent cough, pleuritic chest pain, and hemoptysis. Occasionally, pulmonary coccidioidal cavities become secondarily infected. This development is usually manifested by an air-fluid level within the cavity. Bacterial flora or Aspergillus species are commonly involved, and therapy directed at these organisms should be considered. Surgery is rarely required except in cases of persistent hemoptysis or pyopneumothorax. For chronic pulmonary coccidioidomycosis, prolonged antifungal therapy—lasting for at least 1 year—is usually required, with monitoring of symptoms, radiographic changes, sputum cultures, and serologic titers.
# Chunk 3707
Most cases of disseminated coccidioidomycosis require prolonged antifungal therapy. Duration of treatment is based on resolution of the signs and symptoms of the lesions in conjunction with a significant decline in serum CF antibody titer. Such therapy routinely is continued for at least several years. Relapse occurs in 15–30% of individuals once therapy is discontinued.
# Chunk 3708
A Blastomyces antigen assay that detects antigen in urine and serum is commercially available and is reasonably sensitive and specific (MiraVista Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN). Antigen detection appears to be more sensitive in urine than in serum. This antigen test may be useful for monitoring of patients during therapy or for early detection of relapse. Chemiluminescent DNA probes (AccuProbe; GenProbe Inc., San Diego, CA) are commonly used to confirm identification of
# Chunk 3709
FIGuRE 239-2 Disseminated fungal infection. A liver transplant recipient developed six cutaneous lesions similar to the one shown. Biopsy and serum antigen testing demonstrated Cryptococcus. Important features of the lesion include a benign-appearing fleshy papule with central umbilication resembling molluscum contagio-sum. (Photo courtesy of Dr. Lindsey Baden; with permission.)
# Chunk 3710
Both the site of infection and the immune status of the host must be considered in the selection of therapy for cryptococcosis. The disease has two general patterns of manifestation: (1) pulmonary cryptococcosis, with no evidence of extrapulmonary dissemination; and (2) extrapulmonary (systemic) cryptococcosis, with or without meningoencephalitis. Pulmonary cryptococcosis in an immunocompetent host sometimes resolves without therapy. However, given the propensity of Cryptococcus species to disseminate from the lung, the inability to gauge the host’s immune status precisely, and the availability of low-toxicity therapy in the form of fluconazole, the current recommendation is for pulmonary cryptococcosis in an immunocompetent individual to be treated with fluconazole (200– 400 mg/d for 3–6 months). Extrapulmonary cryptococcosis without CNS involvement in an immunocompetent host can be treated with the same regimen, although amphotericin B (AmB; 0.5–1 mg/ kg daily for 4–6 weeks) may be required for more severe cases. In general, extrapulmonary cryptococcosis without CNS involvement requires less intensive therapy, with the caveat that morbidity and death in cryptococcosis are associated with meningeal involvement. Thus the decision to categorize cryptococcosis as “extrapulmonary without CNS involvement” should be made only after careful evaluation of the CSF reveals no evidence of cryptococcal infection. For CNS involvement in a host without AIDS or obvious immune impairment, most authorities recommend initial therapy with AmB (0.5–1 mg/kg daily) during an induction phase, which is followed by prolonged therapy with fluconazole (400 mg/d) during a consolidation phase. For cryptococcal meningoencephalitis without a concomitant immunosuppressive condition, the recommended regimen is AmB (0.5–1 mg/kg) plus flucytosine (100 mg/kg) daily for 6–10 weeks. Alternatively, patients can be treated with AmB (0.5–1 1341 mg/kg) plus flucytosine (100 mg/kg) daily for 2 weeks and then with fluconazole (400 mg/d) for at least 10 weeks. Patients with immunosuppression are treated with the same initial regimens except that consolidation therapy with fluconazole is given for a prolonged period to prevent relapse.
# Chunk 3711
Cryptococcosis in patients with HIV infection always requires aggressive therapy and is considered incurable unless immune function improves. Consequently, therapy for cryptococcosis in the setting of AIDS has two phases: induction therapy (intended to reduce the fungal burden and alleviate symptoms) and lifelong maintenance therapy (to prevent a symptomatic clinical relapse). Pulmonary and extrapulmonary cryptococcosis without evidence of CNS involvement can be treated with fluconazole (200–400 mg/d). In patients who have more extensive disease, flucytosine (100 mg/kg per day) may be added to the fluconazole regimen for 10 weeks, with lifelong fluconazole maintenance therapy thereafter. For HIV-infected patients with evidence of CNS involvement, most authorities recommend induction therapy with AmB. An acceptable regimen is AmB (0.7–1 mg/kg) plus flucytosine (100 mg/kg) daily for 2 weeks followed by fluconazole (400 mg/d) for at least 10 weeks and then by lifelong maintenance therapy with fluconazole (200 mg/d). Fluconazole (400–800 mg/d) plus flucytosine (100 mg/kg per day) for 6–10 weeks followed by fluconazole (200 mg/d) as maintenance therapy is an alternative. Newer triazoles like voriconazole and posaconazole are highly active against cryptococcal strains and appear effective clinically, but clinical experience with these agents in the treatment of cryptococcosis is limited. Lipid formulations of AmB can be substituted for AmB deoxycholate in patients with renal impairment. Neither caspofungin nor micafungin is effective against Cryptococcus species; consequently, neither drug has a role in the treatment of cryptococcosis. Cryptococcal meningoencephalitis is often associated with increased intracranial pressure, which is believed to be responsible for damage to the brain and cranial nerves. Appropriate management of CNS cryptococcosis requires careful attention to the management of intracranial pressure, including the reduction of pressure by repeated therapeutic lumbar puncture and the placement of shunts. Recent studies suggest that the addition of a short course of interferon γ to antifungal therapy in patients with HIV infection increases clearance of cryptococci from the CSF.
# Chunk 3712
FIGuRE 240-2 Hematogenous Candida endophthalmitis. A classic off-white lesion projecting from the chorioretina into the vitreous causes the surrounding haze. The lesion is composed primarily of inflammatory cells rather than organisms. Lesions of this type may progress to cause extensive vitreal inflammation and eventual loss of the eye. Partial vitrectomy, combined with IV and possibly intravitreal antifungal therapy, may be helpful in controlling the lesions. (Image courtesy of Dr. Gary Holland; with permission.) challenging aspect of diagnosis is determining which patients with Candida isolates have hematogenously disseminated candidiasis. For instance, recovery of Candida from sputum, urine, or peritoneal catheters may indicate mere colonization rather than deep-seated infection, and Candida isolation from the blood of patients with indwelling intravascular catheters may reflect inconsequential seeding of the blood from or growth of the organisms on the catheter. Despite extensive research into both antigen and antibody detection systems, there is currently no widely available and validated diagnostic test to distinguish patients with inconsequential seeding of the blood from those whose positive blood cultures represent hematogenous dissemination to multiple organs. Many studies are under way to establish the utility of the β-glucan test; at present, its greatest utility is its negative predictive value (∼90%). Meanwhile, the presence of ocular or macronodular skin lesions is highly suggestive of widespread infection of multiple deep organs. Although extensive research is being conducted on other tests for infection, such as PCR, none of these tests is fully validated or widely available at present.
# Chunk 3713
Agent Route of Administration Dosea Comment aFor loading doses and adjustments in renal failure, see Pappas PG et al: Clinical practice guidelines for the management of candidiasis: 2009 update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis 48:503, 2009. The recommended duration of therapy is 2 weeks beyond the last positive blood culture and the resolution of signs and symptoms of infection. bAlthough ketoconazole is approved for the treatment of disseminated candidiasis, it has been replaced by the newer agents listed in this table. Posaconazole has been approved for prophylaxis in neutropenic patients and for oropharyngeal candidiasis. FDA, U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
# Chunk 3714
Caspofungin has been used with success; although echinocandins are poorly excreted into the urine, they may be an option, especially for non-albicans isolates. The doses and duration are the same as for disseminated candidiasis. The significance of the recovery of Candida from abdominal drains in postoperative patients is unclear, but again the threshold for treatment is generally low because most of the affected patients have been subjected to factors predisposing to disseminated candidiasis.
# Chunk 3715
Hematogenous Candida endophthalmitis is a special problem requiring ophthalmologic consultation. When lesions are expanding or are threatening the macula, an IV polyene combined with flucytosine (25 mg/kg four times daily) has been the regimen of choice, although comparative studies with other regimens have not yet been reported. As more data on the azoles and echinocandins become available, new strategies involving these agents are developing. Of paramount importance is the decision to perform a partial vitrectomy. This procedure debulks the infection and can preserve sight, which may otherwise be lost as a result of vitreal scarring. All patients with candidemia should undergo ophthalmologic examination because of the relatively high frequency of this ocular complication. Not only can this examination detect a developing eye lesion early in its course; in addition, identification of a lesion signifies a probability of ~90% of deep-organ abscesses and may prompt prolongation of therapy for candidemia beyond the recommended 2 weeks after the last positive blood culture. Although the basis for the consensus is a very small data set, the recommended treatment for Candida meningitis is a polyene (Table 240-3) plus flucytosine (25 mg/kg four times daily). Successful treatment of Candida-infected prosthetic material (e.g., an artificial joint) nearly always requires removal of the infected material followed by long-term administration of an antifungal agent selected on the basis of the isolate’s sensitivity and the logistics of administration.
# Chunk 3716
The use of antifungal agents to prevent Candida infections has been controversial, but some general principles have emerged. Most centers administer prophylactic fluconazole (400 mg/d) to recipients of allogeneic stem cell transplants. High-risk liver transplant recipients also are given fluconazole prophylaxis in most centers. The use of prophylaxis for neutropenic patients has varied considerably from center to center; many centers that elect to give prophylaxis to this population use either fluconazole (200–400 mg/d) or a lipid formulation of amphotericin B (AmBiSome, 1–2 mg/d). Caspofungin (50 mg/d) also has been recommended. Some centers have used itraconazole suspension (200 mg/d). Posaconazole (200 mg three times daily) also has been approved by the FDA for prophylaxis in neutropenic patients and is gaining in popularity.
# Chunk 3717
Aspergillus has a worldwide distribution, most commonly growing in decomposing plant materials (i.e., compost) and in bedding. This hyaline (nonpigmented), septate, branching mold produces vast numbers of conidia (spores) on stalks above the surface of mycelial growth. Aspergilli are found in indoor and outdoor air, on surfaces, and in water from surface reservoirs. Daily exposures vary from a few to many millions of conidia; the latter high numbers of conidia are encountered in hay barns and other very dusty environments. The required size of the infecting inoculum is uncertain; however, only intense exposures (e.g., during construction work, handling of moldy bark or hay, or composting) are sufficient to cause disease in healthy immunocompetent individuals. Allergic syndromes may be exacerbated by continuous antigenic exposure arising from sinus or airway colonization or from nail infection. High-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filtration is often protective against infection; thus HEPA filters should be installed and monitored for efficiency in operating rooms and in areas of the hospital that house high-risk patients.
# Chunk 3718
Real-time PCR ✓✓ ??

aIncidence and prevalence figures are for Europe. From www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/publications/ publications/risk-assessment-impact-environmental-usage-of-triazoles-on-aspergillus-sppresistance-to-medical-triazoles.pdf. bPeople are not born with allergic fungal disease; the annual frequency with which it occurs is not known. cAllergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis and severe asthma with fungal sensitization. dGD Brown et al: Human fungal infections: the hidden killers. Sci Transl Med 2012:4:165rv13. eKey for sensitivity: 1 check = limited (as the text indicates, 10–30% for culture); 2 checks = higher; 3 checks = >80%; and 4 checks = ~95%.
# Chunk 3719
FIGuRE 241-1 CT scan image of the chest in a patient with longstanding bilateral chronic cavitary pulmonary aspergillosis. This patient had a history of several bilateral pneumothoraces and had required bilateral pleurodesis in 1990. CT scan then demonstrated multiple bullae, and sputum cultures grew A. fumigatus. The patient had initially weakly and later strongly positive serum Aspergillus antibody tests (precipitins). This scan (2003) shows a mixture of thickand thin-walled cavities in both lungs (each marked with C), with a probable fungal ball (black arrow) protruding into the large cavity on the patient's right side (R). There is also considerable pleural thickening bilaterally.
# Chunk 3720
Chronic Aspergillus Sinusitis Three entities are subsumed under this broad designation: fungal ball of the sinus, chronic invasive sinusitis, and chronic granulomatous sinusitis. Fungal ball of the sinus is limited to the maxillary sinus (except in rare cases involving the sphenoid sinus) and consists of a chronic saprophytic entity in which the sinus cavity is filled with a fungal ball. Maxillary disease is associated with prior upper-jaw root canal work and chronic (bacterial) sinusitis. About 90% of CT scans show focal hyperattenuation related to concretions; on MRI scans, the T2-weighted signal is decreased, whereas it is increased in bacterial sinusitis. Removal of the fungal ball is curative. No tissue invasion is demonstrable histologically or radiologically.
# Chunk 3721
Allergic Bronchopulmonary Aspergillosis In almost all cases, ABPA represents a hypersensitivity reaction to A. fumigatus; rare cases are due to other aspergilli and other fungi. ABPA occurs in ~2.5% of patients with asthma who are referred to secondary care and in up to 15% of adults with cystic fibrosis. Episodes of bronchial obstruction with mucous plugs leading to coughing fits, “pneumonia,” consolidation, and breathlessness are typical. Many patients report coughing up thick sputum casts. Eosinophilia commonly develops before systemic glucocorticoids are given. The cardinal diagnostic tests include an elevated serum level of total IgE (usually >1000 IU/mL), a positive skin-prick test in response to A. fumigatus extract, or detection of Aspergillus-specific IgE and IgG antibodies. The presence of hyperattenuated mucus in airways is highly specific. Central bronchiectasis is characteristic, and some patients develop chronic cavitary pulmonary aspergillosis.
# Chunk 3722
Culture is important in confirming the diagnosis, given that multiple other (rarer) fungi can mimic Aspergillus species histologically. Bacterial agar is less sensitive than fungal media for culture. Thus, if physicians do not request fungal culture, the diagnosis may be missed. Culture may be falsely positive (e.g., in patients whose airways are colonized by Aspergillus) or falsely negative. Only 10–30% of patients with invasive aspergillosis have a positive culture at any time. Both antigen detection and real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) are faster and much more sensitive than culture of respiratory samples and blood.
# Chunk 3723
The Aspergillus antigen test relies on detection of galactomannan release from Aspergillus organisms during growth. Positive serum antigen results usually precede clinical or radiologic features by several days. The sensitivity of antigen detection is reduced by antifungal prophylaxis and empirical therapy.
# Chunk 3724
Definitive confirmation of the diagnosis requires (1) a positive culture of a sample taken directly from an ordinarily sterile site (e.g., a brain abscess) or (2) positive results of both histologic testing and culture of a sample taken from an affected organ (e.g., sinuses or skin). Most diagnoses of invasive aspergillosis are inferred from fewer data, including the presence of the halo sign on a high-resolution thoracic CT scan, in which a localized ground-glass appearance representing hemorrhagic infarction surrounds a nodule. While a halo sign may be produced by other fungi, Aspergillus species are by far the most common cause. Halo signs are present for ~7 days early in the course of infection in neutropenic patients and are a good prognostic feature, reflecting an early diagnosis. Thick CT sections can give the false appearance of a halo sign, as can other technical factors. Other common radiologic features of invasive pulmonary aspergillosis include nodules and pleural-based infarction or cavitation, with pleural fluid apparent in 10% of patients.
# Chunk 3725
For chronic invasive aspergillosis, Aspergillus antibody testing is invaluable although relatively imprecise. Biopsy of new nodules reveals hyphae surrounded by cells of chronic inflammation and sometimes granulomas. Antibody titers fall with successful therapy. Cultures are infrequently positive but are important in checking for azole resistance. Real-time PCR of sputum is often strongly positive. Some patients with chronic pulmonary aspergillosis also have elevated titers of total serum IgE and Aspergillus-specific IgE.
# Chunk 3726
ABPA and severe asthma with fungal sensitization are diagnosed serologically with elevated total and specific serum IgE levels and with skin-prick tests. Allergic Aspergillus sinusitis is usually diagnosed histologically, although precipitating antibodies in blood also may be useful.
# Chunk 3727
Note: The oral dose is usually 200 mg bid for voriconazole and itraconazole and 400 mg bid for posaconazole suspension. The IV dose of voriconazole for adults is 6 mg/kg twice at 12-h intervals (loading doses) followed by 4 mg/kg q12h; a larger dose is required for children and teenagers. Plasma monitoring is helpful in optimizing the dosage. Caspofungin is given as a single loading dose of 70 mg and then at 50 mg/d; some authorities use 70 mg/d for patients weighing >80 kg, and lower doses are required with hepatic dysfunction. Micafungin is given as 50 mg/d for prophylaxis and as at least 150 mg/d for treatment; this drug has not yet been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for this indication. AmB deoxycholate is given at a daily dose of 1 mg/kg if tolerated. Several strategies are available for minimizing renal dysfunction. Lipid-associated AmB is given at 3 mg/kg (AmBisome) or 5 mg/kg (Abelcet). Different regimens are available for aerosolized AmB, but none is FDA approved. Other considerations that may alter dose selection or route include age; concomitant medications; renal, hepatic, or intestinal dysfunction; and drug tolerability.
# Chunk 3728
Invasive aspergillosis is curable if immune reconstitution occurs, whereas allergic and chronic forms are not. The mortality rate for invasive aspergillosis is ~50% if the infection is treated but is 100% if the diagnosis is missed. Infection with a voriconazole-resistant strain carries a mortality rate of 88%. Cerebral aspergillosis, Aspergillus endocarditis, and bilateral extensive invasive pulmonary aspergillosis have very poor outcomes, as does invasive infection in persons with late-stage AIDS or relapsed uncontrolled leukemia and in recipients of allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplants.
# Chunk 3729
The mortality rate for chronic cavitary pulmonary aspergillosis is ~30% 6 months after presentation, falling to ~15% annually thereafter. After 12 months with no antifungal therapy, 70% of patients have deteriorated and 30% are stable (Fig. 241-2). Therapy fails in ~30% of recipients of antifungal therapy and still more often if azole resistance is present.
# Chunk 3730
Biopsy with histopathologic examination remains the most sensitive and specific modality for definitive diagnosis (Fig. 242-1). Biopsy reveals characteristic wide (≥6to 30-μm), thick-walled, ribbon-like, aseptate hyphal elements that branch at right angles. Other fungi, including Aspergillus, Fusarium, and Scedosporium species, have septa, are thinner, and branch at acute angles. Because artificial septa may result from folding of tissue during processing (which may also alter the appearance of the angle of branching), the width and the ribbon-like form of the fungus are the most reliable features distinguishing mucormycosis. The Mucorales are visualized most effectively with periodic acid–Schiff or methenamine silver stain or, if the organism burden is high, with hematoxylin and eosin. While histopathology can identify the Mucorales, specific species can be identified only by culture. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is being investigated as a diagnostic tool for mucormycosis but is not yet approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for this purpose and is not generally available.
# Chunk 3731
aThe starting dosage is 5–10 drops tid in water or juice. The dosage is increased weekly by 10 drops per dose, as tolerated, up to 40–50 drops tid. bThe dosage of lipid AmB is 3–5 mg/kg daily; the higher dosage should be used when the central nervous system is involved. cThe dosage of AmB deoxycholate is 0.6–1.0 mg/kg daily.
# Chunk 3732
Diagnosis The specific diagnosis of infection with a pigmented mold is established by growth of the organism in culture. However, in eumycetoma, a tentative clinical diagnosis can be made when a patient presents with a lesion characterized by swelling, sinus tracts, and grains. Histopathologic examination and culture are necessary to confirm that the etiologic agent is a mold and not an actinomycete. In chromoblastomycosis, the diagnosis rests on the histologic demonstration of sclerotic bodies (dark brown, thick-walled, septate fungal forms that resemble large yeasts) in the tissues; culture establishes which pigmented mold is causing the infection. For other infections, growth of the organism is essential to differentiate infection with a hyaline mold (e.g., Aspergillus or Fusarium) from that due to a pigmented mold. No serologic assays for pigmented molds are available. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays are increasingly used in the diagnosis of infection due to pigmented molds but are available only through fungal reference laboratories.
# Chunk 3733
Diagnosis The diagnostic approach usually includes both documentation of the growth of Fusarium species from involved tissue and demonstration of invasion by histopathologic techniques that show septate hyphae in tissues. The organism is difficult to differentiate from Aspergillus species in tissues; thus, identification with culture is imperative. An extremely helpful diagnostic clue is growth in blood cultures, which are positive in as many as 50% of patients with disseminated fusariosis. There are no serologic assays for Fusarium. PCR techniques have proved useful but are available only through fungal reference laboratories.
# Chunk 3734
Treatment and Prognosis Fusarium species are resistant to many anti-fungal agents. A lipid formulation of AmB (at least 5 mg/kg daily), voriconazole (200–400 mg twice daily), or posaconazole (300 mg daily) is recommended. Many physicians use both a lipid formulation of AmB and either voriconazole or posaconazole because susceptibility information is not available when therapy must be initiated. Serum drug levels should be monitored with either azole to ensure that absorption is adequate and with voriconazole to avoid toxicity. Mortality rates for disseminated fusariosis have been as high as 85%. With the improved antifungal therapy now available, mortality rates have fallen to ∼50%. However, if neutropenia persists, the mortality rate approaches 100%.
# Chunk 3735
FIGuRE 243-2 Painful necrotic foot lesion that developed over a week in a woman who had acute leukemia and who had been neu-tropenic for 2 months. Fusarium species were grown from a punch biopsy. (Courtesy of Dr. Nessrine Ktaich.)
# Chunk 3736
Diagnosis Diagnosis depends on the growth of Scedosporium species from involved tissue and the demonstration of invasion by histopathologic techniques that show septate hyphae in tissues. Culture evidence is essential because Scedosporium species are difficult to differentiate from Aspergillus in tissues. Demonstration of tissue invasion is essential because these ubiquitous environmental molds can be mere contaminants or colonizers. S. prolificans can grow in blood cultures, but S. apiospermum usually does not. There are no serologic assays for Scedosporium. PCR techniques have proved useful but are available only through fungal reference laboratories.
# Chunk 3737
Treatment and Prognosis Rates of response to AmB have been disappointing, and many Trichosporon isolates are resistant in vitro. Voriconazole appears to be the antifungal agent of choice and is used at a dosage of 200–400 mg twice daily. The mortality rates for disseminated Trichosporon infection have been as high as 70% but are decreasing with the use of newer azoles, such as voriconazole; however, patients who remain neutropenic are likely to succumb to this infection.
# Chunk 3738
Treatment and Prognosis Topical creams and lotions, including selenium sulfide shampoo, ketoconazole shampoo or cream, terbinafine cream, and ciclopirox cream, are effective in treating Malassezia infections and are usually given for 2 weeks. Mild topical steroid creams are sometimes used to treat seborrheic dermatitis. For extensive disease, itraconazole (200 mg/d) or fluconazole (200 mg/d) can be used for 5–7 days. The rare cases of fungemia caused by Malassezia species are treated with AmB or fluconazole, prompt removal of the catheter, and discontinuance of parenteral lipid infusions. Malassezia skin infections are benign and self-limited, although recurrences are the rule. The outcome of systemic infection depends on the host’s underlying conditions, but most infected infants do well.
# Chunk 3739
area should be kept as dry as possible. When patients have extensive skin lesions, oral itraconazole or terbinafine can hasten resolution (Table 243-2). Terbinafine interacts with fewer drugs than itraconazole and is generally the first-line agent. Onychomycosis does not respond to topical therapy, although ciclopirox nail lacquer applied daily for a year is occasionally beneficial. Itraconazole and terbinafine both accumulate in the nail plate and can be used to treat onychomycosis (Table 243-2). These agents are more effective and better tolerated than griseofulvin and ketoconazole. The major decision to be made with regard to therapy is whether the extent of nail involvement justifies the use of systemic antifungal agents that have adverse effects, may interact with other drugs, and are costly. Treating for cosmetic reasons alone is discouraged. Relapses of tinea cruris and tinea pedis are common and should be treated early with topical creams to avoid development of more extensive disease. Relapses of onychomycosis follow treatment in 25–30% of cases.
# Chunk 3740
The demonstration of organisms in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid is almost 100% sensitive and specific for PCP in patients with either HIV infection or immunosuppression of other etiologies. The organisms are identified with the specific stains indicated above for lung biopsy. While expectorated sputum or throat swabs have very low sensitivity, an induced sputum sample obtained and interpreted by an experienced provider can be highly sensitive and specific. The reported sensitivity of induced sputum for PCP is widely variable (55–90%), however, and is dependent on both the characteristics of the patient and the experience of the center conducting the test.
# Chunk 3741
Factors that influence mortality risk include the patient’s age and degree of immunosuppression as well as the presence of preexisting lung disease, a low serum albumin level, the need for mechanical ventilation, and the development of pneumothorax. With advances in supportive critical care, the prognosis for patients with PCP who require intubation and respiratory support has improved and now depends to a large extent on comorbidities and the prognosis of the underlying disease. Since patients typically do not respond to therapy for 4–8 days, supportive care for a minimum of 10 days is a reasonable consideration if such support is compatible with the patient’s wishes and the prognosis of comorbidities. Patients whose condition continues to deteriorate after 3 or 4 days or has not improved after 7–10 days should be reevaluated to determine whether other infectious processes are present (either having been missed on initial evaluation or having developed during treatment) or whether noninfectious processes (e.g., congestive heart failure, pulmonary emboli, pulmonary hypertension, drug toxicity, or a neoplastic process) are causing pulmonary dysfunction.
# Chunk 3742
TMP-SMX is the most effective prophylactic drug: few patients experience a PCP breakthrough when they are reliably taking a recommended TMP-SMX chemoprophylactic regimen. Several TMPSMX regimens have been used successfully. One double-strength tablet daily is the regimen with which there is the most experience, but either one single-strength tablet daily or one double-strength tablet two or three times weekly also has been recommended for various populations of patients.
# Chunk 3743
For patients who cannot tolerate TMP-SMX (usually because of hypersensitivity or bone marrow suppression), alternative drugs include daily dapsone, weekly dapsone-pyrimethamine, and monthly aerosol pentamidine. Patients who develop hypersensitivity to TMP-SMX can sometimes tolerate the drug if a gradual dose-escalation protocol is used. Dapsone cross-reacts with sulfonamides in a substantial fraction of patients and therefore is rarely useful in patients with a history of life-threatening reactions to TMP-SMX. Aerosolized pentamidine is highly effective, but it is not as effective as TMP-SMX and may not provide protection in areas of the lung that are not well ventilated. Atovaquone is also effective and well tolerated; however, this drug is available only as an oral preparation, and gastrointestinal absorption is unpredictable in patients with abnormal gastrointestinal motility or function.
# Chunk 3744
Most helminths and protozoa exit the body in the fecal stream. Many laboratories now use a stool collection kit with instructions for patients to transfer portions of the sample directly into bacterial carrier medium and fixative, which increases yield. If kits are not available, the patient should be instructed to collect feces in a clean waxed or cardboard container and to record the time of collection on the container. Refrigeration will preserve trophozoites for a few hours and protozoal cysts and helminthic ova for several days. Contamination with water (which could contain free-living protozoa) or with urine (which can damage trophozoites) should be avoided. Fecal samples should be collected before ingestion of barium or other contrast agents for radiologic procedures and before treatment with antidiarrheal agents and antacids; these substances change the consistency of the feces and interfere with microscopic detection of parasites. Because of the cyclic shedding of most parasites in the feces, a minimum of three samples collected on alternate days should be examined. Examination of a single sample can be up to 50% less sensitive.
# Chunk 3745
E. histolytica because the trophozoites are located primarily in the abscess wall. They must remember that the urine sediment offers the best opportunity to detect Schistosoma haematobium in the young Ethiopian immigrant or the American traveler who returns from Africa with hematuria. Tables 245e-1, 245e-2, and 245e-3, which offer a quick guide to the geographic distribution and anatomic locations of the major tissue parasites, should help the physician to select the appropriate body fluid or biopsy site for microscopic examination. Tables 245e-5 and 245e-6 provide additional information about the identification of parasites in samples from specific anatomic locations. The laboratory procedures for detection of parasites in other body fluids are similar to those used in the examination of feces. The physician should insist on wet mounts, concentration techniques, and permanent stains for all body fluids. The trichrome or iron-hematoxylin stain is satisfactory for all tissue helminths in body fluids other than blood,
# Chunk 3746
Schistosoma ova Serology for all; rectal snips (especially for S. mansoni), urine (S. haematobium), liver biopsy and liver ultrasound
# Chunk 3747
Leishmania spp. Buffy coat/Giemsa Media available from CDC

African trypanosomesa Buffy coat, anion Mouse or rat column/wet mount and inoculationb Giemsa aTrypanosoma rhodesiense and T. gambiense. bInject mice intraperitoneally with 0.2 mL of whole heparinized blood (0.5 mL for rats). After 5 days, check tail blood daily for trypanosomes as described above. Call the CDC (770-488-7775) for information on diagnosis and treatment. cDetectable in blood by conventional techniques only during acute disease. Xenodiagnosis is successful in ∼50% of patients with chronic Chagas’ disease. dDaytime (1000–1400 h) and nighttime (2200–0200 h) blood samples should be drawn to maximize the chance of detecting Wuchereria (nocturnal except for Pacific strains), Brugia (nocturnal), and Loa loa (diurnal).
# Chunk 3748
DNA hybridization with probes that are repeated many times in the genome of a specific parasite and amplification of a specific DNA fragment by PCR have now been established as useful techniques for the diagnosis of several protozoan infections (Table 245e-8). Although PCR is very sensitive, it is an adjunct to conventional techniques for parasite detection and should be requested only when microscopic and immunodiagnostic procedures fail to establish the probable diagnosis. For example, only multiple negative blood smears or the failure to identify the infecting species justifies PCR for the diagnosis or proper management of malaria. In addition to PCR of anticoagulated blood, the CDC (www.cdc.gov/dpdx/) and several commercial laboratories now perform PCRs for detection of certain specific parasites in stool samples, biopsy specimens, and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (Table 245e-8). Although PCRs are now used primarily for the detection of protozoans, active research efforts are likely to establish their feasibility for the detection of several helminths.
# Chunk 3749
Amphotericin B, liposomal (AmBisome)

Atovaquone Malaria,b babesiosis

Frequent: abdominal pain, diarrhea. Occasional: ECG disturbances (dose-related prolongation of QTc and PR interval), nausea, pruritus. Contraindicated in persons who have cardiac disease or who have taken mefloquine in the preceding 3 weeks
# Chunk 3750
Cimetidine: inhibited mebendazole metabolism

Theophylline: serum levels increased by thiabendazole

CHAPTER 246e Agents Used to Treat Parasitic Infections diarrhea, abdominal pain. Rare: angioedema, cholestatic jaundice levels increased by azithromycin
# Chunk 3751
Frequent: mild and transient (1–2 days) GI disturbances within first 2 weeks of therapy (resolve after treatment completion); motion sickness. Occasional: reversible elevations of creatinine and aminotransferases
# Chunk 3752
Azithromycin See Table 246e-1 and Chap. 170.

Azoles See Table 246e-1 and Chap. 235.

Benznidazole* This oral nitroimidazole derivative is used to treat Chagas’ disease, with cure rates of 80–90% recorded in acute infections. Benznidazole is believed to exert its trypanocidal effects by generating oxygen radicals to which the parasites are more sensitive than mammalian cells because of a relative deficiency in antioxidant enzymes. Benznidazole also appears to alter the balance between proand anti-inflammatory mediators by downregulating the synthesis of nitrite, interleukin (IL) 6, and IL-10 in macrophages. Benznidazole is highly lipophilic and readily absorbed. The drug is extensively metabolized; only 5% of the dose is excreted unchanged in the urine. Benznidazole is well tolerated; adverse effects are rare and usually manifest as GI upset or pruritic rash.
# Chunk 3753
Chloroquine is well absorbed. However, because it exhibits extensive tissue binding, a loading dose is required to yield effective plasma concentrations. A therapeutic drug level in plasma is reached 2–3 h after oral administration (the preferred route). Chloroquine can be administered IV, but excessively rapid parenteral administration can result in seizures and death from cardiovascular collapse. The mean half-life of chloroquine is 4 days, but the rate of excretion decreases as plasma levels decline, making once-weekly administration possible for prophylaxis in areas with sensitive strains. About one-half of the parent drug is excreted in urine, but the dose should not be reduced for persons with acute malaria and renal insufficiency.
# Chunk 3754
Diloxanide furoate is given alone to asymptomatic cyst passers. For patients with active amebic infections, diloxanide is generally administered in combination with a 5-nitroimidazole such as metronidazole or tinidazole. Diloxanide furoate is rapidly absorbed after oral administration. When coadministered with a 5-nitroimidazole, only diloxanide appears in the systemic circulation; levels peak within 1 h and disappear within 6 h. About 90% of an oral dose is excreted in the urine within 48 h, chiefly as the glucuronide metabolite. Diloxanide furoate is contraindicated in pregnant and breast-feeding women and in children <2 years of age.
# Chunk 3755
Furazolidone This nitrofuran derivative is an effective alternative agent for the treatment of giardiasis and also exhibits activity against Isospora belli. Because it is the only agent active against Giardia that is available in liquid form, it is most often used to treat young children. Furazolidone undergoes reductive activation in Giardia lamblia trophozoites—an event that, unlike the reductive activation of metronidazole, involves an NADH oxidase. The killing effect correlates with the toxicity of reduced products, which damage important cellular components, including DNA. Although furazolidone had been thought to be largely unabsorbed when administered orally, the occurrence of systemic adverse reactions indicates that this is not the case. More than 65% of the drug dose can be recovered from the urine as colored metabolites. Omeprazole reduces the oral bioavailability of furazolidone.
# Chunk 3756
Iodoquinol Iodoquinol (diiodohydroxyquin), a hydroxyquinoline, is an effective luminal agent for the treatment of amebiasis, balantidiasis, and infection with Dientamoeba fragilis. Its mechanism of action is unknown. It is poorly absorbed. Because the drug contains 64% organically bound iodine, it should be used with caution in patients with thyroid disease. Iodine dermatitis occurs occasionally during 246e-9 iodoquinol treatment. Protein-bound serum iodine levels may be increased during treatment and can interfere with certain tests of thyroid function. These effects may persist for as long as 6 months after discontinuation of therapy. Iodoquinol is contraindicated in patients with liver disease. Most serious are the reactions related to prolonged high-dose therapy (optic neuritis, peripheral neuropathy), which should not occur if the recommended dosage regimens are followed.
# Chunk 3757
Lumefantrine Lumefantrine (benflumetol), a fluorene arylaminoalcohol derivative synthesized in the 1970s by the Chinese Academy of Military Medical Sciences (Beijing), has marked blood schizonticidal activity against a wide range of plasmodia. This agent conforms structurally and in mode of action to other arylaminoalcohols (quinine, mefloquine, and halofantrine). Lumefantrine exerts its antimalarial effect as a consequence of its interaction with heme, a degradation product of hemoglobin metabolism. Although its antimalarial activity is slower than that of the artemisinin-based drugs, the recrudescence rate with the recommended lumefantrine regimen is lower. The pharmacokinetic properties of lumefantrine are reminiscent of those of halofantrine, with variable oral bioavailability, considerable augmentation of oral bioavailability by concomitant fat intake, and a terminal elimination half-life of ~4–5 days in patients with malaria.
# Chunk 3758
Mebendazole is available only in oral form but is poorly absorbed from the GI tract; only 5–10% of a standard dose is measurable in plasma. The proportion absorbed from the GI tract is extensively metabolized in the liver. Metabolites appear in the urine and bile; impaired liver or biliary function results in higher plasma mebendazole levels in treated patients. No dose reduction is warranted in patients with renal function impairment. Because mebendazole is poorly absorbed, its incidence of side effects is low. Transient abdominal pain and diarrhea sometimes occur, usually in persons with massive parasite burdens.
# Chunk 3759
Melarsoprol is highly toxic. The most serious adverse reaction is reactive encephalopathy, which affects 6% of treated individuals and usually develops within 4 days of the start of therapy, with an average case-fatality rate of 50%. Glucocorticoids are administered with melarsoprol to prevent this development. Because melarsoprol is intensely irritating, care must be taken to avoid infiltration of the drug.
# Chunk 3760
Niclosamide is poorly absorbed. Tablets are given on an empty stomach in the morning after a liquid meal the night before, and this dose is followed by another 1 h later. For treatment of hymenolepiasis, the drug is administered for 7 days. A second course is often prescribed. The scolex and proximal segments of the tapeworms are killed on contact with niclosamide and may be digested in the gut. However, disintegration of the adult tapeworm results in the release of viable ova, which theoretically can result in autoinfection. Although fears of the development of cysticercosis in patients with Taenia solium infections have proved unfounded, it is still recommended that a brisk purgative be given 2 h after the first dose.
# Chunk 3761
Nifurtimox* This nitrofuran compound is an inexpensive and effective oral agent for the treatment of acute Chagas’ disease. Trypanosomes lack catalase and have very low levels of peroxidase; as a result, they are very vulnerable to by-products of oxygen reduction. When nifurtimox is reduced in the trypanosome, a nitro anion radical is formed and undergoes autooxidation, resulting in the generation of the superoxide anion O2–, hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), hydroperoxyl radical (HO2), and other highly reactive and cytotoxic molecules. Despite the abundance of catalases, peroxidases, and superoxide dismutases that neutralize these destructive radicals in mammalian cells, nifurtimox has a poor therapeutic index. Prolonged use is required, but the course may have to be interrupted because of drug toxicity, which develops in 40–70% of recipients. Nifurtimox is well absorbed and undergoes rapid and extensive biotransformation; <0.5% of the original drug is excreted in urine.
# Chunk 3762
Oxamniquine is administered orally as a single dose and is well absorbed. Food retards absorption and reduces bioavailability. About 70% of an administered dose is excreted in urine as a mixture of pharmacologically inactive metabolites. Patients should be warned that their urine might have an intense orange-red color. Side effects are uncommon and usually mild, although hallucinations and seizures have been reported.
# Chunk 3763
Pentamidine isethionate is well absorbed, is highly tissue bound, and is excreted slowly over several weeks, with an elimination half-life of 12 days. No steady-state plasma concentration is attained in persons given daily injections; the result is extensive accumulation of pentamidine in tissues, primarily the liver, kidney, adrenal, and spleen. Pentamidine does not penetrate well into the CNS. Pulmonary concentrations of pentamidine are increased when the drug is delivered in aerosolized form.
# Chunk 3764
Praziquantel exerts its parasitic effects directly and does not need to be metabolized to be effective. It is well absorbed but undergoes extensive first-pass hepatic clearance. Levels of the drug are increased when it is taken with food, particularly carbohydrates, or with cimetidine. Serum levels are reduced by glucocorticoids, chloroquine, carbamazepine, and phenytoin. Praziquantel is completely metabolized in humans, with 80% of the dose recovered as metabolites in urine within 4 days. It is not known to what extent praziquantel crosses the placenta, but retrospective studies suggest that it is safe in pregnancy.
# Chunk 3765
Coadministration of thiabendazole to patients taking theophylline can result in an increase in theophylline levels by >50%. Therefore, serum levels of theophylline should be monitored closely in this situation.
# Chunk 3766
E. histolytica is acquired by ingestion of viable cysts from fecally contaminated water, food, or hands. Food-borne exposure is most prevalent and is particularly likely when food handlers are shedding cysts or food is being grown with feces-contaminated soil, fertilizer, or water. Besides the drinking of contaminated water, less common means of transmission include oral and anal sexual practices and—in rare instances—direct rectal inoculation through colonic irrigation devices. Motile trophozoites are released from cysts in the small intestine and, in most patients, remain as harmless commensals in the large bowel. After encystation, infectious cysts are shed in the stool and can survive for several weeks in a moist environment. In some patients, the trophozoites invade either the bowel mucosa, causing symptomatic colitis, or the bloodstream, causing distant abscesses of the liver, lungs, or brain. The trophozoites may not encyst in patients with active dysentery, and motile hematophagous trophozoites are frequently present in fresh stools. Trophozoites are rapidly killed by exposure to air or stomach acid, however, and therefore cannot transmit infection.
# Chunk 3767
Areas of highest incidence of Entamoeba infection (due to inadequate sanitation and crowding) include most developing countries in the tropics, particularly Mexico, India, and nations of Central and South America, tropical Asia, and Africa. In a 4-year follow-up study of preschool children in a highly endemic area of Bangladesh, 80% of children had at least one episode of E. histolytica infection and 53% had more than one episode. Naturally acquired immunity did develop but was usually short-lived and correlated with the presence in the stool of secretory IgA antibody to the major adherence lectin galactose N-acetylgalactosamine (Gal/GalNAc). The main groups at risk for amebiasis in developed countries are returned travelers, recent immigrants, MSM, military personnel, and inmates of institutions. Data from the GeoSentinel Surveillance Network, which come from tropical medicine clinics on six continents, showed that, among long-term travelers (trip duration, >6 months), diarrhea due to E. histolytica was among the most common diagnoses.
# Chunk 3768
More fulminant intestinal infection, with severe abdominal pain, high fever, and profuse diarrhea, is rare and occurs predominantly in children. Patients may develop toxic megacolon, in which there is severe bowel dilation with intramural air. Patients receiving glucocorticoids are at risk for severe amebiasis. Uncommonly, patients develop a chronic form of amebic colitis, which can be confused with inflammatory bowel disease. The association between severe amebiasis complications and glucocorticoid therapy emphasizes the importance of excluding amebiasis when inflammatory bowel disease is suspected. An occasional patient presents with only an asymptomatic or tender abdominal mass caused by an ameboma, which is easily confused with cancer on barium studies. A positive serologic test or biopsy can prevent unnecessary surgery in this setting. The syndrome of post–amebic colitis—i.e., persistent diarrhea following documented cure of amebic colitis—is controversial; no evidence of recurrent amebic infection can be found, and re-treatment usually has no effect.
# Chunk 3769
Amebic Liver Abscess Extraintestinal infection by E. histolytica most often involves the liver. Of travelers who develop an amebic liver abscess after leaving an endemic area, 95% do so within 5 months. Young patients with an amebic liver abscess are more likely than older patients to present in the acute phase with prominent symptoms of <10 days’ duration. Most patients are febrile and have right-upperquadrant pain, which may be dull or pleuritic in nature and may radiate to the shoulder. Point tenderness over the liver and right-sided pleural effusion are common. Jaundice is rare. Although the initial site of infection is the colon, fewer than one-third of patients with an amebic abscess have active diarrhea. Older patients from endemic areas are more likely to have a subacute course lasting 6 months, with weight loss and hepatomegaly. About one-third of patients with chronic pre sentations are febrile. Thus, the clinical diagnosis of an amebic liver abscess may be difficult to establish because the symptoms and signs are often nonspecific. Since 10–15% of patients present only with fever, amebic liver abscess must be considered in the differential diagnosis of fever of unknown origin (Chap. 26).
# Chunk 3770
Serology is an important addition to the methods used for parasitologic diagnosis of invasive amebiasis. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays and agar gel diffusion assays are positive in more than 90% of patients with colitis, amebomas, or liver abscess. Positive results in conjunction with the appropriate clinical syndrome suggest active disease because serologic findings usually revert to negative within 6–12 months. Even in highly endemic areas such as South Africa, fewer than 10% of asymptomatic individuals have a positive amebic serology. The interpretation of the indirect hemagglutination test is more difficult because titers may remain positive for as long as 10 years.
# Chunk 3771
Radiographic techniques such as ultrasonography, CT, and MRI are all useful for detection of the round or oval hypoechoic cyst of an amebic liver abscess. More than 80% of patients who have had symptoms for >10 days have a single abscess of the right lobe of the liver (Fig. 247-4). Approximately 50% of patients who have had symptoms for <10 days have multiple abscesses. Findings associated with complications include large abscesses (>10 cm) in the superior part of the right lobe, which may rupture into the pleural space; multiple lesions, which must be differentiated from pyogenic abscesses; and lesions of the left lobe, which may rupture into the pericardium. Because abscesses resolve slowly and may increase in size in patients who are responding clinically to therapy, frequent follow-up ultrasonography may prove confusing. Complete resolution of a liver abscess within 6 months can be anticipated in two-thirds of patients, but 10% may have persistent abnormalities for a year.
# Chunk 3772
Tissue amebicides reach high concentrations in the blood and tissue after oral or parenteral administration. The development of nitroimidazole compounds, especially metronidazole, was a major advance in the treatment of invasive amebiasis. Patients with amebic colitis should be treated with IV or oral metronidazole. Side effects include nausea, vomiting, abdominal discomfort, and a disulfiram-like reaction. Another longer-acting imidazole compound, tinidazole, is also effective and available in the United States. All patients should also receive a full course of therapy with a luminal agent, since metronidazole does not eradicate cysts. Resistance to metronidazole has been selected in the laboratory but has not been found in clinical isolates. Relapses are not uncommon and probably represent reinfection or failure to eradicate amebas from the bowel because of an inadequate dosage or duration of therapy.
# Chunk 3773
Metronidazole is the drug of choice for amebic liver abscess. Longer-acting nitroimidazoles (tinidazole and ornidazole) have been effective as single-dose therapy in developing countries. With early diagnosis and therapy, mortality rates from uncomplicated amebic liver abscess are <1%. There is no evidence that combined therapy with two drugs is more effective than the single-drug regimen. Studies of South Africans with liver abscesses demonstrated that 72% of patients without intestinal symptoms had bowel infection with
# Chunk 3774
More than 90% of patients respond dramatically to metronidazole therapy with decreases in both pain and fever within 72 h. Indications for aspiration of liver abscesses are (1) the need to rule out a pyogenic abscess, particularly in patients with multiple lesions; (2) the lack of a clinical response in 3–5 days; (3) the threat of imminent rupture; and (4) the need to prevent rupture of left-lobe abscesses into the pericardium. There is no evidence that aspiration, even of large abscesses (up to 10 cm), accelerates healing. Percutaneous drainage may be successful even if the liver abscess has already ruptured. Surgery should be reserved for instances of bowel perforation and rupture into the pericardium.
# Chunk 3775
Primary amebic meningoencephalitis caused by Naegleria fowleri follows the aspiration of water contaminated with trophozoites or cysts or the inhalation of contaminated dust, leading to invasion of the olfactory neuroepithelium. Infection is most common among otherwise healthy children or young adults, who often report recent swimming in lakes or heated swimming pools. Rarely, some cases occur when contaminated water is used for nasal irrigation. After an incubation period of 2–15 days, severe headache, high fever, nausea, vomiting, and meningismus develop. Photophobia and palsies of the third, fourth, and sixth cranial nerves are common. Rapid progression to seizures and coma may follow. The prognosis is uniformly poor: most patients die within a week. Recently, two surviving children were treated with miltefosine, an investigational drug that is available through the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) for the treatment of Naegleria infections.
# Chunk 3776
Balamuthia mandrillaris, a free-living ameba previously referred to as a leptomyxid ameba, is an important etiologic agent of amebic meningoencephalitis in immunocompetent hosts. The course is typically sub-acute, with focal neurologic signs, fever, seizures, and headaches leading to death within 1 week to several months after onset. Examination of CSF reveals mononuclear or neutrophilic pleocytosis, elevated protein levels, and normal to low glucose concentrations. Multiple hypodense lesions are usually detected with imaging studies (Fig. 247-6). This mixed picture of space-occupying lesions with CSF pleocytosis is suggestive of Balamuthia. Fluorescent antibody is available from the CDC for brain biopsy specimens. The variety of drugs used to treat the few surviving patients (i.e., fewer than five reported in the United States) includes pentamidine, flucytosine, sulfadiazine, and macrolides. The CDC recommends that miltefosine now be included, as for the other free-living amebas. The differential diagnosis includes tuberculomas (Chap. 202) and neurocysticercosis (Chap. 260).
# Chunk 3777
After entry into the bloodstream, merozoites rapidly invade erythrocytes and become trophozoites. Attachment is mediated via a specific erythrocyte surface receptor. For P. falciparum, the reticulocyte-binding protein homologue 5 (PfRh5) is indispensable for erythrocyte invasion. Basigin (CD147, EMMPRIN) is the erythrocyte receptor of PfRh5. In the case of P. vivax, this receptor is related to the Duffy blood-group antigen Fya or Fyb. Most West Africans and people with origins in that region carry the Duffy-negative FyFy phenotype and are therefore resistant to P. vivax malaria. During the early stage of intraerythrocytic development, the small “ring forms” of the different parasitic species appear similar under light microscopy. As the trophozoites enlarge, species-specific characteristics become evident, pigment becomes visible, and the parasite assumes an irregular or ameboid shape. By the end of the intraerythrocytic life cycle, the parasite has consumed two-thirds of the RBC’s hemoglobin and has grown to occupy most of the cell. It is now called a schizont. Multiple nuclear divisions have taken place (schizogony or merogony). The RBC then ruptures to release 6–30 daughter merozoites, each potentially capable of invading a new RBC and repeating the cycle. The disease in human beings is caused by the direct effects of the asexual parasite—RBC invasion and destruction—and by the host’s reaction. After release from the liver (P. vivax, P. ovale, P. malariae, P. knowlesi), some of the blood-stage parasites develop into morphologically distinct,
# Chunk 3778
MexicoArgentinaBoliviaColombiaVenezuelaPeruBrazilFrenchGuianaSurinameGuyanaChileEcuadorGalapagosIslandsParaguayUruguayFalklandIslandsDominican Republic HaitiBelize Guatemala El Salvador Nicaragua Costa Rica Panama Honduras Mongolia China Japan North Korea South Korea Philippines Taiwan Australia New Zealand New Caledonia Vanuatu Solomon Islands Papua New Guinea Pacific Islands (Palau) Fiji India IranIraq Jordan ThailandBangladesh Laos Bhutan Nepal Sri Lanka Madagascar Pakistan Afghanistan Turkmenistan Uzbekistan Kyrgyzstan Azerbaijan Armenia Georgia Saudi Arabia South Africa Egypt Turkey Malaysia Vietnam Macau Indonesia Algeria Libya Morocco Namibia Nigeria Cameroon Togo Benin Ghana Niger Chad CAR Sudan Mali Burkina Faso Western Sahara Ethiopia Botswana Angola Zambia DROC Rwanda Uganda Tanzania Kenya Burundi Somalia Syria CyprusIsrael Tunisia Greece Yemen Eritrea Oman Singapore Portugal Spain France Myanmar Gabon Congo Equatorial Guinea Guinea Sierra Leone Liberia Cote d'IvoireLesotho Swaziland Mozambique Zimbabwe Malawi UAE Kuwait Qatar Chloroquine-resistant Chloroquine-sensitive None Malaria-Endemic Areas Djibouti FIGuRE 248-2 Malaria-endemic countries in the Americas (bottom) and in Africa, the Middle East, Asia, and the South Pacific (top), 2007. CAR, Central African Republic; DROC, Democratic Republic of the Congo; UAE, United Arab Emirates. Several countries in the Americas, the Middle East, and North Africa are close to eliminating malaria.
# Chunk 3779
The epidemiology of malaria is complex and may vary considerably even within relatively small geographic areas. Endemicity traditionally has been defined in terms of parasitemia rates or palpable-spleen rates in children 2–9 years of age and classified as hypoendemic (<10%), mesoendemic (11–50%), hyperendemic (51–75%), and holoendemic (>75%). Until recently, it was uncommon to use these indices for planning control programs; however, many countries are now conducting national surveys to assess program progress. In holoand hyperendemic areas (e.g., certain regions of tropical Africa or coastal New Guinea) where there is intense P. falciparum transmission, people may sustain more than one infectious mosquito bite per day and are infected repeatedly throughout their lives. In such settings, rates of morbidity and mortality due to malaria are considerable during early childhood. Immunity against disease is hard won in these areas, and the burden of disease in young children is high; by adulthood, however, most malarial infections are asymptomatic. As control measures progress and urbanization expands, environmental conditions become less conducive to transmission, and all age groups may lose protective immunity and become susceptible to illness. Constant, frequent, year-round infection is termed stable transmission. In areas where transmission is low, erratic, or focal, full protective immunity is not acquired, and symptomatic disease may occur at all ages. This situation usually exists in hypoendemic areas and is termed unstable transmission. Even in stable-transmission areas, there is often an increased incidence of symptomatic malaria coinciding with increased mosquito breeding and transmission during the rainy season. Malaria can behave like an epidemic disease in some areas, particularly those with unstable malaria, such as northern India (the Punjab region), the horn of Africa, Rwanda, Burundi, southern Africa, and Madagascar. An epidemic can develop when there are changes in environmental, economic, or social conditions, such as heavy rains following drought or migrations (usually of refugees or workers) from a nonmalarious region to an area of high transmission, along with failure to invest in national programs; a breakdown in malaria control and prevention services caused by war or civil disorder can intensify epidemic conditions. This situation usually results in considerable mortality among all age groups.
# Chunk 3780
The principal determinants of the epidemiology of malaria are the number (density), the human-biting habits, and the longevity of the anopheline mosquito vectors. More than 100 of the >400 anopheline species can transmit malaria, but the ~40 species that do so commonly vary considerably in their efficiency as malaria vectors. More specifically, the transmission of malaria is directly proportional to the density of the vector, the square of the number of human bites per day per mosquito, and the tenth power of the probability of the mosquito’s surviving for 1 day. Mosquito longevity is particularly important because the portion of the parasite’s life cycle that takes place within the mosquito—from gametocyte ingestion to subsequent inoculation (sporogony)—lasts 8–30 days, depending on ambient temperature; thus, to transmit malaria, the mosquito must survive for >7 days. Sporogony is not completed at cooler temperatures—i.e., <16°C (60.8°F) for P. vivax and <21°C (69.8°F) for P. falciparum; thus transmission does not occur below these temperatures or at high altitudes, although malaria outbreaks and transmission have occurred in the highlands (>1500 m) of eastern Africa, which were previously free of vectors. The most effective mosquito vectors of malaria are those, such as Anopheles gambiae in Africa, that are long-lived, occur in high densities in tropical climates, breed readily, and bite humans in preference to other animals. The entomologic inoculation rate (i.e., the number of sporozoitepositive mosquito bites per person per year) is the most common measure of malaria transmission and varies from <1 in some parts of Latin America and Southeast Asia to >300 in parts of tropical Africa.
# Chunk 3781
After invading an erythrocyte, the growing malarial parasite progressively consumes and degrades intracellular proteins, principally hemoglobin. The potentially toxic heme is detoxified by lipid-mediated 1371 crystallization to biologically inert hemozoin (malaria pigment). The parasite also alters the RBC membrane by changing its transport properties, exposing cryptic surface antigens, and inserting new parasite-derived proteins. The RBC becomes more irregular in shape, more antigenic, and less deformable.
# Chunk 3782
Initially, the host responds to plasmodial infection by activating nonspecific defense mechanisms. Splenic immunologic and filtrative clearance functions are augmented in malaria, and the removal of both parasitized and uninfected erythrocytes is accelerated. The spleen is able to remove damaged ring-form parasites and return the once-infected erythrocytes to the circulation, where their survival period is shortened. The parasitized cells escaping splenic removal are destroyed when the schizont ruptures. The material released induces the activation of macrophages and the release of proinflammatory cytokines, which cause fever and exert other pathologic effects. Temperatures of ≥40°C (104°F) damage mature parasites; in untreated infections, the effect of such temperatures is to further synchronize the parasitic cycle, with eventual production of the regular fever spikes and rigors that originally served to characterize the different malarias. These regular fever patterns (quotidian, daily; tertian, every 2 days; quartan, every 3 days) are seldom seen today in patients who receive prompt and effective antimalarial treatment.
# Chunk 3783
The geographic distributions of sickle cell disease, hemoglobins C and E, hereditary ovalocytosis, the thalassemias, and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency closely resemble that of falciparum malaria before the introduction of control measures. This similarity suggests that these genetic disorders confer protection against death from falciparum malaria. For example, HbA/S heterozygotes (sickle cell trait) have a sixfold reduction in the risk of dying from severe falciparum malaria. Hemoglobin S–containing RBCs impair parasite growth at low oxygen tensions, and P. falciparum–infected RBCs containing hemoglobins S and C exhibit reduced cytoadherence because of reduced surface presentation of the adhesin PfEMP1. Parasite multiplication in HbA/E heterozygotes is reduced at high 1372 parasite densities. In Melanesia, children with α-thalassemia appear to have more frequent malaria (both vivax and falciparum) in the early years of life, and this pattern of infection appears to protect them against severe disease. In Melanesian ovalocytosis, rigid erythrocytes resist merozoite invasion, and the intraerythrocytic milieu is hostile. Nonspecific host defense mechanisms stop the infection’s expansion, and the subsequent strain-specific immune response then controls the infection. Eventually, exposure to sufficient strains confers protection from high-level parasitemia and disease but not from infection. As a result of this state of infection without illness (premunition), asymptomatic parasitemia is common among adults and older children living in regions with stable and intense transmission (i.e., holoor hyperendemic areas) and also in parts of low-transmission areas. Immunity is mainly specific for both the species and the strain of infecting malarial parasite. Both humoral immunity and cellular immunity are necessary for protection, but the mechanisms of each are incompletely understood (Fig. 248-1). Immune individuals have a polyclonal increase in serum levels of IgM, IgG, and IgA, although much of this antibody is unrelated to protection. Antibodies to a variety of parasitic antigens presumably act in concert to limit in vivo replication of the parasite. In the case of falciparum malaria, the most important of these antigens is the surface adhesin— the variant protein PfEMP1. Passively transferred IgG from immune adults has been shown to reduce levels of parasitemia in children. Passive transfer of maternal antibody contributes to the relative (but not complete) protection of infants from severe malaria in the first months of life. This complex immunity to disease declines when a person lives outside an endemic area for several months or longer. Several factors retard the development of cellular immunity to malaria. These factors include the absence of major histocompatibility antigens on the surface of infected RBCs, which precludes direct T cell recognition; malaria antigen–specific immune unresponsiveness; and the enormous strain diversity of malarial parasites, along with the ability of the parasites to express variant immunodominant antigens on the erythrocyte surface that change during the course of infection. Parasites may persist in the blood for months or years (or, in the case of P. malariae, for decades) if treatment is not given. The complexity of the immune response in malaria, the sophistication of the parasites’ evasion mechanisms, and the lack of a good in vitro correlate with clinical immunity have all slowed progress toward an effective vaccine.
# Chunk 3784
Malaria is a very common cause of fever in tropical countries. The first symptoms of malaria are nonspecific; the lack of a sense of wellbeing, headache, fatigue, abdominal discomfort, and muscle aches followed by fever are all similar to the symptoms of a minor viral illness. In some instances, a prominence of headache, chest pain, abdominal pain, cough, arthralgia, myalgia, or diarrhea may suggest another diagnosis. Although headache may be severe in malaria, the neck stiffness and photophobia seen in meningitis do not occur. While myalgia may be prominent, it is not usually as severe as in dengue fever, and the muscles are not tender as in leptospirosis or typhus. Nausea, vomiting, and orthostatic hypotension are common. The classic malarial paroxysms, in which fever spikes, chills, and rigors occur at regular intervals, are relatively unusual and suggest infection with P. vivax or P. ovale. The fever is usually irregular at first (that of falciparum malaria may never become regular); the temperature of nonimmune individuals and children often rises above 40°C (104°F) in conjunction with tachycardia and sometimes delirium. Although childhood febrile convulsions may occur with any of the malarias, generalized seizures are specifically associated with falciparum malaria and may herald the development of encephalopathy (cerebral malaria). Many clinical abnormalities have been described in acute malaria, but most patients with uncomplicated infections have few abnormal physical findings other than fever, malaise, mild anemia, and (in some cases) a palpable spleen. Anemia is common among young children living in areas with stable transmission, particularly where resistance has compromised the efficacy of antimalarial drugs. In nonimmune individuals with acute malaria, the spleen takes several days to become palpable, but splenic enlargement is found in a high proportion of otherwise healthy individuals in malaria-endemic areas and reflects repeated infections. Slight enlargement of the liver is also common, particularly among young children. Mild jaundice is common among adults; it may develop in patients with otherwise uncomplicated malaria and usually resolves over 1–3 weeks. Malaria is not associated with a rash like those seen in meningococcal septicemia, typhus, enteric fever, viral exanthems, and drug reactions. Petechial hemorrhages in the skin or mucous membranes—features of viral hemorrhagic fevers and leptospirosis— develop only very rarely in severe falciparum malaria.
# Chunk 3785
Renal failure Serum or plasma creatinine level of >265 μmol/L (>3 mg/dL); urine output (24 h) of <400 mL in adults or <12 mL/kg in children; no improvement with rehydration
# Chunk 3786
Hypoglycemia (<2.2 mmol/L)

Acidosis (arterial pH <7.3, serum HCO3 <15 mmol/L)

Elevated liver enzymes (AST/ALT 3 times upper limit of normal)
# Chunk 3787
Cerebral malaria manifests as diffuse symmetric encephalopathy; focal neurologic signs are unusual. Although some passive resistance to head flexion may be detected, signs of meningeal irritation are absent. The eyes may be divergent and a pout reflex is common, but other primitive reflexes are usually absent. The corneal reflexes are preserved, except in deep coma. Muscle tone may be either increased or decreased. The tendon reflexes are variable, and the plantar reflexes may be flexor or extensor; the abdominal and cremasteric reflexes are absent. Flexor or extensor posturing may be seen. On routine funduscopy, ~15% of patients have retinal hemorrhages; with pupillary dilation and indirect ophthalmoscopy, this figure increases to 30–40%. Other funduscopic abnormalities (Fig. 248-3) include discrete spots of retinal opacification (30–60%), papilledema (8% among children, rare among adults), cotton wool spots (<5%), and decolorization of a retinal vessel or segment of vessel (occasional cases). Convulsions, usually generalized and often repeated, occur in ~10% of adults and up to 50% of children with cerebral malaria. More covert seizure activity also is common, particularly among children, and may manifest as repetitive tonic-clonic eye movements or even hypersalivation. Whereas adults rarely (i.e., in <3% of cases) suffer neurologic sequelae, ~10% of children surviving cerebral malaria—especially those with hypoglycemia, severe anemia, repeated seizures, and deep coma—have residual neurologic deficits when they regain consciousness; hemiplegia, cerebral palsy, cortical blindness, deafness, and impaired cognition have been reported. The majority of these deficits improve markedly or resolve completely within 6 months. However, the prevalence of some other deficits increases over time; ~10% of children surviving cerebral malaria have a persistent language deficit. There may also be deficits in learning, planning and executive functions, attention, memory, and nonverbal functioning. The incidence of epilepsy is increased and life expectancy decreased among these children.
# Chunk 3788
Renal Impairment Acute kidney injury is common in severe falciparum malaria, but oliguric renal failure is rare among children. The pathogenesis of renal failure is unclear but may be related to erythrocyte sequestration and agglutination interfering with renal micro-circulatory flow and metabolism. Clinically and pathologically, this syndrome manifests as acute tubular necrosis. Renal cortical necrosis never develops. Acute renal failure may occur simultaneously with other vital-organ dysfunction (in which case the mortality risk is high) or may progress as other disease manifestations resolve. In survivors, urine flow resumes in a median of 4 days, and serum creatinine levels return to normal in a mean of 17 days (Chap. 334). Early dialysis or hemofiltration considerably enhances the likelihood of a patient’s survival, particularly in acute hypercatabolic renal failure.
# Chunk 3789
Hematologic Abnormalities Anemia results from accelerated RBC removal by the spleen, obligatory RBC destruction at parasite schizogony, and ineffective erythropoiesis. In severe malaria, both infected and uninfected RBCs show reduced deformability, which correlates with prognosis and development of anemia. Splenic clearance of all RBCs is increased. In nonimmune individuals and in areas with unstable transmission, anemia can develop rapidly and transfusion is often required. As a consequence of repeated malarial infections, children in many areas of Africa and on the island of New Guinea may develop severe anemia resulting from both shortened survival of uninfected RBCs and marked dyserythropoiesis. Anemia is a common consequence of antimalarial drug resistance, which results in repeated or continued infection.
# Chunk 3790
Chronic or repeated malarial infections produce hypergammaglobulinemia; normochromic, normocytic anemia; and, in certain situations, splenomegaly. Some residents of malaria-endemic areas in tropical Africa and Asia exhibit an abnormal immunologic response to repeated infections that is characterized by massive splenomegaly, hepatomegaly, marked elevations in serum titers of IgM and malarial antibody, hepatic sinusoidal lymphocytosis, and (in Africa) peripheral B cell lymphocytosis. This syndrome has been associated with the production of cytotoxic IgM antibodies to CD8+ T lymphocytes, antibodies to CD5+ T lymphocytes, and an increase in the ratio of CD4+ to CD8+ T cells. These events may lead to uninhibited B cell production of IgM and the formation of cryoglobulins (IgM aggregates and immune complexes). This immunologic process stimulates reticuloendothelial hyperplasia and clearance activity and eventually produces splenomegaly. Patients with hyperreactive malarial splenomegaly present with an abdominal mass or a dragging sensation in the abdomen and occasional sharp abdominal pains suggesting perisplenitis. Anemia and some degree of pancytopenia are usually evident, and in some cases malarial parasites cannot be found in peripheral-blood smears. Vulnerability to respiratory and skin infections is increased; many patients die of overwhelming sepsis. Persons with hyperreactive malarial splenomegaly who are living in endemic areas should receive antimalarial chemoprophylaxis; the results are usually good. In nonendemic areas, antimalarial treatment is advised. In some cases refractory to therapy, clonal lymphoproliferation may develop and can then evolve into a malignant lymphoproliferative disorder.
# Chunk 3791
P. falciparum parasitemia aMalaria cannot be diagnosed clinically with accuracy, but treatment should be started on clinical grounds if laboratory confirmation is likely to be delayed. In areas of the world where malaria is endemic and transmission is high, low-level asymptomatic parasitemia is common in otherwise healthy people. Thus malaria may not be the cause of a fever, although in this context the presence of >10,000 parasites/μL (~0.2% parasitemia) does indicate that malaria is the cause. Antibody and polymerase chain reaction tests have no role in the diagnosis of malaria except that PCR is increasingly used for genotyping and speciation in mixed infections and for detection of low-level parasitemias in asymptomatic residents of endemic areas. bAsexual parasites/200 WBCs × 40 = parasite count/μL (assumes a WBC count of 8000/μL). See Figs. 248-6 through 248-9. cP. falciparum gametocytemia may persist for days or weeks after clearance of asexual parasites. Gametocytemia without asexual parasitemia does not indicate active infection. dParasitized RBCs (%) × hematocrit × 1256 = parasite count/μL. See Figs. 248-4 and 248-5. eThe presence of >100,000 parasites/μL (~2% parasitemia) is associated with an increased risk of severe malaria, but some patients have severe malaria with lower counts. At any level of parasitemia, the finding that >50% of parasites are tiny rings (cytoplasm thickness less than half of nucleus width) carries a relatively good prognosis. The presence of visible pigment in >20% of parasites or of phagocytosed pigment in >5% of polymorphonuclear leukocytes (indicating massive recent schizogony) carries a worse prognosis. fPersistence of PfHRP2 is a disadvantage in high-transmission settings, where many asymptomatic people have positive tests, but can be used to diagnostic advantage in low-transmission settings when a sick patient has previously received unknown treatment (which, in endemic areas, often consists of antimalarial drugs). A positive PfHRP2 test indicates that the illness is falciparum malaria, even if the blood smear is negative.
# Chunk 3792
1378 parasites (i.e., >20% of parasites with visible pigment) in the peripheral-blood film or by the presence of phagocytosed malarial pigment in >5% of neutrophils. In P. falciparum infections, gametocytemia peaks 1 week after the peak of asexual parasites. Because the mature gametocytes of P. falciparum (unlike those of other plasmodia) are not affected by most antimalarial drugs, their persistence does not constitute evidence of drug resistance. Phagocytosed malarial pigment is sometimes seen inside peripheral-blood monocytes or polymorphonuclear leukocytes and may provide a clue to recent infection if malaria parasites are not detectable. After the clearance of the parasites, this intraphagocytic malarial pigment is often evident for several days in the peripheral blood films or for longer in bone marrow aspirates or smears of fluid expressed after intradermal puncture. Staining of parasites with the fluorescent dye acridine orange allows more rapid diagnosis of malaria (but not speciation of the infection) in patients with low-level parasitemia. Molecular diagnosis by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification of parasite nucleic acid is more sensitive than microscopy or rapid diagnostic tests for detecting malaria parasites and defining malarial species. While currently impractical in the standard clinical setting, PCR is used in reference centers in endemic areas. In epidemiologic surveys, sensitive PCR detection may prove very useful in identifying asymptomatic infections as control and eradication programs drive parasite prevalence down to very low levels. Serologic diagnosis with either indirect fluorescent antibody or enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays may prove useful as measures of transmission intensity in future epidemiologic studies. Serology has no place in the diagnosis of acute illness.
# Chunk 3793
Normochromic, normocytic anemia is usual. The leukocyte count is generally normal, although it may be raised in very severe infections. There is slight monocytosis, lymphopenia, and eosinopenia, with reactive lymphocytosis and eosinophilia in the weeks after the acute infection. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate, plasma viscosity, and levels of C-reactive protein and other acute-phase proteins are high. The platelet count is usually reduced to ~105/μL. Severe infections may be accompanied by prolonged prothrombin and partial thromboplastin times and by more severe thrombocytopenia. Levels of antithrombin III are reduced even in mild infection. In uncomplicated malaria, plasma concentrations of electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), and creatinine are usually normal. Findings in severe malaria may include metabolic acidosis, with low plasma concentrations of glucose, sodium, bicarbonate, calcium, phosphate, and albumin together with elevations in lactate, BUN, creatinine, urate, muscle and liver enzymes, and conjugated and unconjugated bilirubin. Hypergammaglobulinemia is usual in immune and semi-immune subjects. Urinalysis generally gives normal results. In adults and children with cerebral malaria, the mean cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) opening pressure at lumbar puncture is ~160 mm; usually the CSF content is normal or there is a slight elevation of total protein level (<1.0 g/L [<100 mg/dL]) and cell count (<20/μL).
# Chunk 3794
Radical treatment In addition to chloroquine or amodiaquine as detailed for P. vivax or P. ovale above, primaquine (0.5 mg of base/kg qd in tropical infection regions and 0.25 mg/kg for temperate-origin P. vivax) should be given for 14 days to prevent relapse. In mild G6PD deficiency, 0.75 mg of base/kg should be given once weekly for 8 weeks. Primaquine should not be given in severe G6PD deficiency.
# Chunk 3795
Quinidine (10 mg of base/kgi infused over 1–2 h, followed by 1.2 mg of base/kg per hourj with electrocardiographic monitoring) aIn endemic areas, except in pregnant women and infants, a single dose of primaquine (0.25 mg of base/kg) should be added as a gametocytocide to all falciparum malaria treatments to prevent transmission. This addition is considered safe even in G6PD deficiency. bVery few areas now have chloroquine-sensitive P. falciparum malaria (Fig. 248-2). cIn areas where the partner drug to artesunate is known to be effective. dArtemisinin derivatives are not readily available in some temperate countries. eFixed-dose coformulated combinations are available. The World Health Organization now recommends artemisinin combination regimens as first-line therapy for falciparum malaria in all tropical countries and advocates use of fixed-dose combinations. fTetracycline and doxycycline should not be given to pregnant women or to children <8 years of age. gOral treatment should be substituted as soon as the patient recovers sufficiently to take fluids by mouth. hArtesunate is the drug of choice when available. The doses in children weighing <20 kg should be 3 mg/kg. The data from large studies in Southeast Asia showed a 35% lower mortality rate than with quinine, and very large studies in Africa showed a 22.5% reduction in mortality rate compared with quinine. iA loading dose should not be given if therapeutic doses of quinine or quinidine have definitely been administered in the previous 24 h. Some authorities recommend a lower dose of quinidine. jInfusions can be given in 0.9% saline and 5–10% dextrose in water. Infusion rates for quinine and quinidine should be carefully controlled.
# Chunk 3796
In severe malaria, parenteral antimalarial treatment should be started immediately. Artesunate, given by either IV or IM injection, is the agent of choice; it is simple to administer, safe, and rapidly effective. It does not require dose adjustments in liver dysfunction or renal failure, and it should be used in pregnant women with severe malaria. If artesunate is unavailable and artemether, quinine, or quinidine is used, an initial loading dose must be given so that 1379 therapeutic concentrations are reached as soon as possible. Both quinine and quinidine will cause dangerous hypotension if injected rapidly; when given IV, they must be administered carefully by rate-controlled infusion only. If this approach is not possible, quinine may be given by deep IM injections into the anterior thigh. The optimal therapeutic range for quinine and quinidine in severe malaria is not known with certainty, but total plasma concentrations of 8–15 mg/L for quinine and 3.5–8.0 mg/L for quinidine are effective and do not cause serious toxicity. The systemic clearance and apparent volume of distribution of these alkaloids are markedly reduced and plasma protein binding is increased in severe malaria, so that the blood concentrations attained with a given dose are higher. If the patient remains seriously ill or in acute renal failure for >2 days, maintenance doses of quinine or quinidine should be reduced by 30–50% to prevent toxic accumulation of the drug. The initial doses should never be reduced. If safe and feasible, exchange transfusion may be considered for patients with severe malaria, although the precise indications for this procedure have not been agreed upon and there is no clear evidence that this measure is beneficial, particularly with artesunate treatment. Convulsions should be treated promptly with IV (or rectal) benzodiazepines. The role of prophylactic anticonvulsants in children is uncertain. If respiratory support is not available, then a full loading dose of phenobarbital (20 mg/kg) to prevent convulsions should not be given as it may cause respiratory arrest.
# Chunk 3797
P. falciparum is sensitive. Five ACT regimens are currently recommended by the WHO. In areas with multidrug-resistant falciparum malaria (parts of Asia and South America, including those with mefloquine-resistant parasites; Fig. 248-10), artemether-lumefantrine, artesunate-mefloquine, or dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine should be used; these regimens provide cure rates of >90%. In areas with sensitive parasites, the aforementioned combinations, artesunatesulfadoxine-pyrimethamine, or artesunate-amodiaquine also may be aHalofantrine should not be used by patients with long ECG QTc intervals or known conduction disturbances or by those taking drugs that may affect ventricular repolarization—e.g., quinidine, quinine, mefloquine, chloroquine, neuroleptics, antiarrhythmics, tricyclic antidepressants, and some antihistamines. bTetracycline and doxycycline should not be given to pregnant women or to children <8 years of age.
# Chunk 3798
Patients should be monitored for vomiting for 1 h after the administration of any oral antimalarial drug. If there is vomiting, the dose should be repeated. Symptom-based treatment, with tepid sponging and acetaminophen administration, lowers fever and thereby reduces the patient’s propensity to vomit these drugs. Minor central nervous system reactions (nausea, dizziness, sleep disturbances) are common. The incidence of serious adverse neuropsychiatric reactions to mefloquine treatment is ~1 in 1000 in Asia but may be as high as 1 in 200 among Africans and Caucasians. All the antimalarial quinolines (chloroquine, mefloquine, and quinine) exacerbate the orthostatic hypotension associated with malaria, and all are tolerated better by children than by adults. Pregnant women, young children, patients unable to tolerate oral therapy, and nonimmune individuals (e.g., travelers) with suspected malaria should be evaluated carefully and hospitalization considered. If there is any doubt as to the identity of the infecting malarial species, treatment for falciparum malaria should be given. A negative blood smear makes malaria unlikely but does not rule it out completely; thick blood films should be checked again 1 and 2 1381 days later to exclude the diagnosis. Nonimmune patients receiving treatment for malaria should have daily parasite counts performed until the thick films are negative. If the level of parasitemia does not fall below 25% of the admission value in 48 h or if parasitemia has not cleared by 7 days (and adherence is assured), drug resistance is likely and the regimen should be changed.
# Chunk 3799
To eradicate persistent liver stages and prevent relapse (radical treatment), primaquine (0.5 mg of base/kg or, in infections acquired in temperate areas, 0.25 mg/kg) should be given daily for 14 days to patients with P. vivax or P. ovale infections after laboratory tests for G6PD deficiency have proved negative. If the patient has a mild variant of G6PD deficiency, primaquine can be given in a dose of 0.75 mg of base/kg (45 mg maximum) once weekly for 8 weeks. Pregnant women with vivax or ovale malaria should not be given primaquine but should receive suppressive prophylaxis with chloroquine (5 mg of base/kg per week) until delivery, after which radical treatment can be given.
# Chunk 3800
Travelers should start taking antimalarial drugs 2 days to 2 weeks before departure so that any untoward reactions can be detected and so that therapeutic antimalarial blood concentrations will be present when needed (Table 248-8). Antimalarial prophylaxis should continue for 4 weeks after the traveler has left the endemic area, except if atovaquone-proguanil or primaquine has been taken; these drugs have significant activities against the liver stage of the infection (causal prophylaxis) and can be discontinued 1 week after departure from the endemic area. If suspected malaria develops while a traveler is abroad, obtaining a reliable diagnosis and antimalarial treatment locally is a top priority. Presumptive self-treatment for malaria with atovaquoneproguanil (for 3 consecutive days) or another drug can be considered under special circumstances; medical advice on self-treatment should be sought before departure for malarious areas and as soon as possible after illness begins. Every effort should be made to confirm the diagnosis by parasitologic studies.
# Chunk 3801
Mefloquine (250 mg of salt weekly, adult dose) has been widely used for malarial prophylaxis because it is usually effective against multidrug-resistant falciparum malaria and is reasonably well tolerated. The drug has been associated with rare episodes of psychosis and seizures at prophylactic doses; these reactions are more frequent at the higher doses used for treatment. More common side effects with prophylactic doses of mefloquine include mild nausea, dizziness, fuzzy thinking, disturbed sleep patterns, vivid dreams, and malaise. The drug is contraindicated for use by travelers with known hypersensitivity to mefloquine or related compounds (e.g., quinine, quinidine) and by persons with active or recent depression, anxiety disorder, psychosis, schizophrenia, another major psychiatric disorder, or seizures; mefloquine is not recommended for persons with cardiac conduction abnormalities although the evidence that it is cardiotoxic is very weak. Confidence is increasing with regard to the safety of mefloquine prophylaxis during pregnancy; in studies in Africa, mefloquine prophylaxis was found to be effective and safe during pregnancy. However, in one study from Thailand, treatment of malaria with mefloquine was associated with an increased risk of stillbirth; this effect was not seen subsequently.
# Chunk 3802
Primaquine For prevention of malaria 30 mg of base 0.5 mg of base/kg (0.8 mg of Begin 1–2 days before travel to malarious areas. in areas with mainly (52.6 mg of salt) salt/kg) PO qd, up to adult dose; Take daily at the same time each day while in
# Chunk 3803
Source: CDC: www.cdc.gov/malaria/travelers/drugs.html.

Canal, Caribbean countries, and some countries in the Middle East. potential problem with protracted prophylactic use; such myopathy is Chloroquine-resistant P. vivax has been reported from parts of eastern more likely to occur at the high doses used in the treatment of rheuma-Asia, Oceania, and Central and South America. This drug is gener-toid arthritis. Neuropsychiatric reactions and skin rashes are unusual. ally well tolerated, although some patients cannot take it because of When used continuously, amodiaquine, a related aminoquinoline, is malaise, headache, visual symptoms (due to reversible keratopathy), associated with a high risk of agranulocytosis (~1 person in 2000) and gastrointestinal intolerance, or pruritus. Chloroquine is considered hepatotoxicity (~1 person in 16,000); thus this agent should not be safe in pregnancy. With chronic administration for >5 years, a char-used for prophylaxis. acteristic dose-related retinopathy may develop, but this condition is Primaquine (daily adult dose, 0.5 mg of base/kg or 30 mg taken rare at the doses used for antimalarial prophylaxis. Idiosyncratic or with food), an 8-aminoquinoline compound, has proved safe and allergic reactions are also rare. Skeletal and/or cardiac myopathy is a effective in the prevention of drug-resistant falciparum and vivax 1384 malaria in adults. This drug can be considered for persons who are traveling to areas with or without drug-resistant P. falciparum and who are intolerant to other recommended drugs. Abdominal pain and oxidant hemolysis—the principal adverse effects—are not common as long as the drug is taken with food and is not given to G6PDdeficient persons, in whom it can cause serious hemolysis. Travelers must be tested for G6PD deficiency and be shown to have a level in the normal range before receiving primaquine. Primaquine should not be given to pregnant women or neonates. Primaquine, given in a single dose of 0.25 mg/kg as a gametocytocide, together with an ACT is recommended in falciparum malaria treatment regimens in malaria elimination programs. In the past, the dihydrofolate reductase inhibitors pyrimethamine and proguanil (chloroguanide) were administered widely, but the rapid selection of resistance in both P. falciparum and P. vivax has limited their use. Whereas antimalarial quinolines such as chloroquine (a 4-aminoquinoline) act on the erythrocyte stage of parasitic development, the dihydrofolate reductase inhibitors also inhibit preerythrocytic growth in the liver (causal prophylaxis) and development in the mosquito (sporontocidal activity). Proguanil is safe and well tolerated, although mouth ulceration occurs in ~8% of persons using this drug; it is considered safe for antimalarial prophylaxis in pregnancy. The prophylactic use of the combination of pyrimethamine and sulfadoxine is not recommended because of an unacceptable incidence of severe toxicity, principally exfoliative dermatitis and other skin rashes, agranulocytosis, hepatitis, and pulmonary eosinophilia (incidence, 1:7000; fatal reactions, 1:18,000). The combination of pyrimethamine with dapsone (0.2/1.5 mg/kg weekly; 12.5/100 mg, adult dose) has been used in some countries. Dapsone may cause methemoglobinemia and allergic reactions and (at higher doses) may pose a significant risk of agranulocytosis. Proguanil and the pyrimethamine-dapsone combination are not available in the United States. Because of the increasing spread and intensity of antimalarial drug resistance (Figs. 248-2 and 248-10), the CDC recommends that travelers and their providers consider their destination, type of travel, and current medications and health risks when choosing antimalarial chemoprophylaxis. There is an increasingly appreciated problem of counterfeit and substandard antimalarial drugs (and other medicines) on the shelves of pharmacies in Southeast Asia and sub-Saharan Africa; hence, travelers should purchase their preventive drugs from a reputable source before going to a malarious country. Consultation for the evaluation of prophylaxis failures or treatment of malaria can be obtained from state and local health departments and the CDC Malaria Hotline (770-488-7788) or the CDC Emergency Operations Center (770-488-7100).
# Chunk 3804
I. persulcatus B. duncani I. scapularis B. microti B. divergens I. ricinus I. ovatus

FIGuRE 249-1 Worldwide distribution of human babesiosis. Dark colors designate areas where human babesiosis is either endemic or sporadic (as defined by more than three tick-borne cases reported in a country or state). Isolated cases of babesiosis are denoted by circles. Colors designate causative Babesia species: Babesia microti and B. microti–like organisms in red, Babesia duncani and B. duncani–type organisms in orange, Babesia divergens and B. divergens–like organisms in blue, Babesia venatorum in purple, KO1 in black, and unspeciated Babesia organisms in white. Due to space constraints, the 10 cases reported from Montenegro are denoted by a single white circle, and those from Australia, Mozambique, and South Africa are not shown. Light colors denote areas that are enzootic for Ixodes tick species known to transmit one or several Babesia species but where human babesiosis has yet to be documented. (Adapted from E Vannier, PJ Krause: N Engl J Med 366:2397, 2012.) can reach 40.9°C (105.6°F) and is accompanied by one or more of the following: chills, sweats, headache, myalgia, arthralgia, nausea, anorexia, and dry cough. Less common symptoms include sore throat, photo-phobia, abdominal pain, vomiting, weight loss, shortness of breath, and depression. On physical examination, fever is the salient feature. Ecchymoses and petechiae have been reported. An erythema migrans rash signifies concurrent Lyme disease (Chap. 210). Splenomegaly and hepatomegaly occasionally are noted. Lymphadenopathy is absent. Jaundice, slight pharyngeal erythema, and retinopathy with splinter hemorrhages and retinal infarcts rarely occur. Symptoms typically last 1–2 weeks, but fatigue may persist for several months.
# Chunk 3805
Severe B. microti Illness Severe babesiosis requires hospital admission and typically occurs in patients with one or more of the following: age of >50 years, neonatal prematurity, male gender, asplenia, HIV/AIDS, malignancy, hemoglobinopathy, and immunosuppressive therapy. More than one-third of hospitalized patients develop complications, including acute respiratory distress syndrome, disseminated intra-vascular coagulation, congestive heart failure, renal failure, splenic infarcts, and splenic rupture. Patients who develop complications tend to have severe anemia (hemoglobin, ≤10 g/L). Laboratory prognostic factors for severe outcome—defined by hospitalization for >14 days, an intensive care unit stay of >2 days, or death—include an elevated alkaline phosphatase level (>125 U/L) and parasitemia of >4%. The fatality rate is 5–9% among hospitalized patients but is ~20% among immunocompromised patients and patients with transfusion-transmitted babesiosis.
# Chunk 3806
Other Babesia Infections Cases of B. duncani infection range in severity from asymptomatic to fatal. Clinical manifestations are similar to those reported for B. microti infection. All three patients infected with B. divergens–like organisms in the United States required hospitalization; one died. Most cases of B. divergens infection in Europe have occurred in people lacking a spleen. The incubation period is 1–3 weeks. Symptoms appear suddenly and consist of fever (>41°C or 105.8°F), shaking chills, drenching sweats, headache, myalgia, and lumbar and abdominal pain. Hemoglobinuria and jaundice are commonly noted, and mild hepatomegaly may occur. If the infection is not treated, patients often develop pulmonary edema and renal failure. All four patients infected with B. venatorum in Europe had been splenectomized; their illness ranged from mild to severe, and none died. A child in China who developed B. venatorum illness had an intact spleen and survived the infection.
# Chunk 3807
A diagnosis of babesiosis should be considered for any patient who lives or travels in a Babesia-endemic area and presents with a febrile illness in the late spring, summer, or early autumn or within 6 months after a blood transfusion. Co-infection with Babesia should be considered in cases of Lyme disease or human granulocytotropic anaplasmosis when symptoms are more severe or prolonged than usual.
# Chunk 3808
Screening laboratory tests can help support the diagnosis of babesiosis. A complete blood count often shows anemia and thrombocytopenia. Low hematocrit, hemoglobin, and haptoglobin levels and elevated reticulocyte counts and lactate dehydrogenase levels are consistent with hemolytic anemia. Liver enzyme tests often reveal elevated levels of alkaline phosphatase, aspartate and alanine aminotransferases, and bilirubin. Urinalysis may show hemoglobinuria, excess urobilinogen, and proteinuria. Elevated levels of blood urea nitrogen and serum creatinine indicate renal compromise.
# Chunk 3809
Tetrads are characteristic of B. microti, B. duncani, and B. divergens–like organisms in human erythrocytes. Because the number of parasitized RBCs may be low, particularly at the onset of symptoms, identification of the parasite may require multiple blood smears over several days. Parasitemia levels can range from 1% to 20% in immunocompetent hosts and can be as high as 85% in immunocompromised patients. If parasites cannot be identified by microscopy and the disease is still suspected, amplification of the babesial 18S rRNA gene by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is recommended. Quantitative PCR has greatly lowered the threshold for detection of B. microti DNA.
# Chunk 3810
Partial or complete C exchange transfusion is recommended in patients with high-grade parasitemia (0, severe anemia (hemoglobin, 0 gdL), or pulmonary, hepatic, or renal compromise. Parasitemia and hematocrit should be monitored daily until symptoms recede and the parasitemia level is
# Chunk 3811
L. donovani and Leishmania infantum (the latter designated Leishmania chagasi in the New World); these species are responsible for anthroponotic and zoonotic transmission, respectively. India and neighboring Bangladesh, Sudan, South Sudan, Ethiopia, and Brazil are the four largest foci of VL and account for 90% of the world’s VL burden, with India being the worst affected. Zoonotic VL is reported from all countries in the Middle East, Pakistan, and other countries from western Asia to China. Endemic foci also exist in the independent states of the former Soviet Union, mainly Georgia and Azerbaijan. In the Horn of Africa, Sudan, South Sudan, Ethiopia, Kenya, Uganda, and Somalia report VL. In Sudan and South Sudan, large outbreaks are thought to be anthroponotic, although zoonotic transmission also occurs. VL is rare in West and sub-Saharan Africa.
# Chunk 3812
L. infantum, has a large canine reservoir and was seen primarily in forms of immunosuppression (e.g., that associated with organ trans-infants before the advent of HIV infection. In Mediterranean Europe, plantation) also predispose to VL. In the Americas, disease caused by 70% of adult VL cases are associated with HIV co-infection. The com-L. infantum is endemic from Mexico to Argentina, but 90% of cases in bination is deadly because of the impact of the two infections together the New World are reported from northeastern Brazil.
# Chunk 3813
Clinical Features On the Indian subcontinent and in the Horn of Africa, persons of all ages are affected by VL. In endemic areas of the Americas and the Mediterranean basin, immunocompetent infants and small children as well as immunodeficient adults are affected especially often. The most common presentation of VL is an abrupt onset of moderateto high-grade fever associated with rigor and chills. Fever may continue for several weeks with decreasing intensity, and the patient may become afebrile for a short period before experiencing another bout of fever. The spleen may be palpable by the second week of illness and, depending on the duration of illness, may become hugely enlarged (Fig. 251-3). Hepatomegaly (usually moderate in degree) soon follows. Lymphadenopathy is common in most endemic regions of the world except the Indian subcontinent, where it is rare. Patients lose weight and feel weak, and the skin gradually develops dark discoloration due to hyperpigmentation that is most easily seen in brown-skinned individuals. In advanced illness, hypoalbuminemia may manifest as pedal edema and ascites. Anemia appears early and may become severe enough to cause congestive heart failure. Epistaxis, retinal hemorrhages, and gastrointestinal bleeding are associated with thrombocytopenia. Secondary infections such as measles, pneumonia, tuberculosis, bacillary or amebic dysentery, and gastroenteritis are common. Herpes zoster, chickenpox, boils in the skin, and scabies may also occur. Untreated, the disease is fatal in most patients, including 100% of those with HIV co-infection.
# Chunk 3814
In the field, however, a rapid immunochromatographic test based on the detection of antibodies to a recombinant antigen (rK39) consisting of 39 amino acids conserved in the kinesin region of L. infantum is used worldwide. The test requires only a drop of fingerprick blood or serum, and the result can be read within 15 min. Except in East Africa (where both its sensitivity and its specificity are lower), the sensitivity of the rK39 rapid diagnostic test (RDT) in immunocompetent individuals is ~98% and its specificity is 90%. In Sudan, an RDT based on a new synthetic polyprotein, rK28, was more sensitive (96.8%) and specific (96.2%) than rK39-based RDTs. Qualitative detection of leishmanial nucleic acid by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and quantitative detection by real-time PCR are confined to specialized laboratories and have yet to be used for routine diagnosis of VL in endemic areas. PCR can distinguish among the major species of Leishmania infecting humans.
# Chunk 3815
Severe anemia should be corrected by blood transfusion, and other comorbid conditions should be managed promptly. Treatment of VL is complex because the optimal drug, dosage, and duration vary with the endemic region. Despite completing recommended treatment, some patients experience relapse (most often within 6 months), and prolonged follow-up is recommended. A pentavalent antimonial is the drug of choice in most endemic regions of the world, but there is widespread resistance to antimony in the Indian state of Bihar, where either amphotericin B (AmB) deoxycholate or miltefosine is preferred. Dose requirements for AmB are lower in India than in the Americas, Africa, or the Mediterranean region. In Mediterranean countries, where cost is seldom an issue, liposomal AmB is the drug of choice. In immunocompetent patients, relapses are uncommon with AmB in its deoxycholate and lipid formulations. Antileishmanial therapy has recently evolved as new drugs and delivery systems have become available and resistance to antimonial compounds has emerged.
# Chunk 3816
Two pentavalent antimonial (SbV) preparations are available: sodium stibogluconate (100 mg of SbV/mL) and meglumine antimoniate (85 mg of SbV/mL). The daily dose is 20 mg/kg by IV infusion or IM injection, and therapy continues for 28–30 days. Cure rates exceed 90% in Africa, the Americas, and most of the Old World but are <50% in Bihar, India, as a result of resistance. Adverse reactions to SbV treatment are common and include arthralgia, myalgia, and elevated serum levels of aminotransferases. Electrocardiographic changes are common. Concave ST-segment elevation is not significant, but prolongation of QTc to >0.5 s may herald ventricular arrhythmia and sudden death. Chemical pancreatitis is common but usually does not require discontinuation of treatment; severe clinical pancreatitis occurs in immunosuppressed patients.
# Chunk 3817
The several lipid formulations of AmB developed to replace the deoxycholate formulation are preferentially taken up by reticuloendothelial tissues. Because very little free drug is available to cause toxicity, a large amount of drug can be delivered over a short period. Liposomal AmB has been used extensively to treat VL in all parts of the world. With a terminal half-life of ~150 h, liposomal AmB can be detected in the liver and spleen of animals for several weeks after a single dose. This is the only drug approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of VL; the regimen is 3 mg/kg daily on days 1–5, 14, and 21 (total dose, 21 mg/kg). However, the total-dose requirement for different regions of the world varies widely. In Asia, it is 10–15 mg/kg; in Africa, ~18 mg/kg; and in Mediterranean/American regions, ≥20 mg/kg. The daily dose is flexible (1–10 mg/kg). In a study in India, a single dose of 10 mg/kg cured infection in 96% of patients. Adverse effects of liposomal AmB are usually mild and include infusion reactions, backache, and occasional reversible nephrotoxicity.
# Chunk 3818
Multidrug therapy for leishmaniasis is likely to be preferred in the future. Its potential advantages in VL include (1) better compliance and lower costs associated with shorter treatment courses and decreased hospitalization, (2) less toxicity due to lower drug doses and/or shorter duration of treatment, and (3) a reduced likelihood that resistance to either agent will develop. In a study from India, one dose of liposomal AmB (5 mg/kg) followed by miltefosine for 7 days, paromomycin for 10 days, or both miltefosine and paromomycin simultaneously for 10 days (in their usual daily doses) produced a cure rate of >97% (all three combinations). In Africa, a combination of SbV and paromomycin given for 17 days was as effective and safe as SbV given for 30 days.
# Chunk 3819
HIV/VL co-infection has been reported from 35 countries. Where both infections are endemic, VL behaves as an opportunistic infection in HIV-1-infected patients. HIV infection can increase the risk of developing VL by severalfold in endemic areas. Co-infected patients usually show the classic signs of VL, but they may present with atypical features due to loss of immunity and involvement of unusual anatomic locations, with, for example, infiltration of the skin, oral mucosa, gastrointestinal tract, lungs, and other organs. Serodiagnostic tests are commonly negative. Parasites can be recovered from unusual sites such as bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and buffy coat. Liposomal AmB is the drug of choice for HIV/VL co-infection—both for primary treatment and for treatment of relapses. A total dose of 40 mg/kg, administered as 4 mg/kg on days 1–5, 10, 17, 24, 31, and 38, is considered optimal and is approved by the FDA, but most patients experience a relapse within 1 year. Pentavalent antimonials and AmB deoxycholate can also be used where liposomal AmB is not accessible. Reconstitution of patients’ immunity by antiretroviral therapy has led to a dramatic decline in the incidence of co-infection in the Mediterranean basin. In contrast, HIV/VL co-infection is on the rise in African and Asian countries. Ethiopia is worst affected: up to 30% of VL patients are also infected with HIV. Because restoration of the CD4+ T cell count to >200/μL does decrease the frequency of relapse, antiretroviral therapy (in addition to antileishmanial therapy) is a cornerstone for the management of HIV/VL co-infection. Secondary prophylaxis with lipo somal AmB has been shown to delay relapses, but no regimen has been established as optimal.
# Chunk 3820
cells. In about half of cases, epithelioid cells—scattered individually or forming compact granulomas—are seen. The diagnosis is based on history and clinical findings, but rK39 and other serologic tests are positive in most cases. Indian PKDL is treated with pentavalent antimonials for 60–120 days. This prolonged course frequently leads to noncompliance. The alternative—several courses of AmB spread over several months—is expensive and unacceptable for most patients. Oral miltefosine for 12 weeks, in the usual daily doses, cures most patients with Indian PKDL. In East Africa, a majority of patients experience spontaneous healing. In those with persistent lesions, the response to 60 days of treatment with a pentavalent antimonial is good.
# Chunk 3821
CL can be broadly divided into Old World and New World forms. Old World CL caused by Leishmania tropica is anthroponotic and is confined to urban or suburban areas throughout its range. Zoonotic CL is most commonly due to Leishmania major, which naturally parasitizes several species of desert rodents that act as reservoirs over wide areas of the Middle East, Africa, and central Asia. Local outbreaks of human disease are common. Major outbreaks currently affect Afghanistan and Pakistan in association with refugees and population movement. CL is increasingly seen in tourists and military personnel on mission in CL-endemic regions of countries like Afghanistan and as a co-infection in HIV-infected patients. Leishmania aethiopica is restricted to the highlands of Ethiopia, Kenya, and Uganda, where it is a natural parasite of hyraxes. New World CL is mainly zoonotic and is most often caused by Leishmania mexicana, Leishmania (Viannia) panamensis, and Leishmania amazonensis. A wide range of forest animals act as reservoirs, and human infections with these species are predominantly rural. As a result of extensive urbanization and deforestation, Leishmania (Viannia) braziliensis has adapted to peridomestic and urban animals, and CL due to this organism is increasingly becoming an urban disease. In the United States, a few cases of CL have been acquired indigenously in Texas.
# Chunk 3822
Laboratory Diagnosis Demonstration of amastigotes in material obtained from a lesion remains the diagnostic gold standard. Microscopic examination of slit skin smears, aspirates, or biopsies of the lesion is used for detection of parasites. Culture of smear or biopsy material may yield Leishmania. PCR is more sensitive than microscopy and culture and allows identification of Leishmania to the species level. This information is important in decisions about therapy because responses to treatment can vary with the species. Isoenzyme profiling is used to determine species for research purposes.
# Chunk 3823
L. aethiopica, which responds to paromomycin (16 mg/kg daily) but not to antimonials. Relapses usually respond to a second course of treatment. In Peru, topical imiquimod (5–7.5%) plus parenteral antimonials have been shown to cure CL more rapidly than antimonials alone. Azoles and triazoles have been used with mixed responses in both Old and New World CL but have not been adequately assessed for this indication in clinical trials. In L. major infection, oral fluconazole (200 mg/d for 6 weeks) resulted in a higher rate of cure than placebo (79% vs 34%) and also cured infection faster. Adverse effects include gastrointestinal symptoms and hepatotoxicity. Ketoconazole (600 mg/d for 28 days) is 76–90% effective in CL due to L. (V.) panamensis and L. mexicana in Panama and Guatemala. Miltefosine has been used in CL in doses of 2.5 mg/kg for 28 days. This agent is effective against L. major infections. In Colombia, where CL is due to L. (V.) panamensis, miltefosine was also effective, with a cure rate of 91%. For L. (V.) braziliensis infections, however, the results with miltefosine are less consistent. In Brazil, miltefosine cured 71% of patients with L. (V.) guyanensis infection. Other drugs, such as dapsone, allopurinol, rifampin, azithromycin, and pentoxifylline, have been used either alone or in combinations, but most of the relevant studies have had design limitations that preclude meaningful conclusions.
# Chunk 3824
Small lesions (≤3 cm in diameter) may conveniently be treated weekly until cure with an intralesional injection of a pentavalent antimonial at a dose adequate to blanch the lesion (0.2–2.0 mL). An ointment containing 15% paromomycin sulfate, either alone or with 0.5% gentamicin or 12% methylbenzonium chloride, cured 70–82% of lesions due to L. major in 20 days and may be suitable for lesions caused by other species. Heat therapy with an FDA-approved radio-frequency generator and cryotherapy with liquid nitrogen have also been used successfully.
# Chunk 3825
Diffuse Cutaneous Leishmaniasis (DCL) DCL is a rare form of leishmaniasis caused by L. amazonensis and L. mexicana in South and Central America and by L. aethiopica in Ethiopia and Kenya. DCL is characterized by the lack of a cell-mediated immune response to the parasite, the uncontrolled multiplication of which thus continues unabated. The DTH response does not develop, and lymphocytes do not respond to leishmanial antigens in vitro. DCL patients have a polarized immune response with high levels of immunosuppressive cytokines, including IL-10, transforming growth factor (TGF) β, and IL-4, and low concentrations of IFN-γ. Profound immunosuppression leads to widespread cutaneous disease. Lesions may initially be confined to the face or a limb but spread over months or years to other areas of the skin. They may be symmetrically or asymmetrically distributed and include papules, nodules, plaques, and areas of diffuse infiltration. These lesions do not ulcerate. The overlying skin is usually erythematous in pale-skinned patients. The lesions are teeming with parasites, which are therefore easy to recover. DCL does not heal spontaneously and is difficult to treat. If relapse and drug resistance are to be prevented, treatment should be continued for some time after lesions have healed and parasites can no longer be isolated. In the New World, repeated 20-day courses of pentavalent antimonials are given, with an intervening drug-free period of 10 days. Miltefosine has been used for several months with a good initial response. Combinations should be tried. 1393 In Ethiopia, a combination of paromomycin (14 mg/kg per day) and sodium stibogluconate (10 mg/kg per day) is effective.
# Chunk 3826
Laboratory Diagnosis Tissue biopsy is essential for identification of parasites, but the rate of detection is poor unless PCR techniques are used. The strongly positive DTH response fails to distinguish between past and present infection.
# Chunk 3827
Symptomatic chronic Chagas disease becomes apparent years 1395 or even decades after the initial infection. The heart is commonly involved, and symptoms are caused by rhythm disturbances, segmental or dilated cardiomyopathy, and thromboembolism. Right bundle branch block is a common electrocardiographic abnormality, but other types of intraventricular and atrioventricular blocks, premature ventricular contractions, and tachyand bradyarrhythmias occur frequently. Cardiomyopathy often results in biventricular heart failure, with a predominance of right-sided failure at advanced stages. Embolization of mural thrombi to the brain or other areas may take place. Sudden death is the main cause of death in Chagas heart disease; congestive heart failure and stroke are next most common. Patients with megaesophagus suffer from dysphagia, odynophagia, chest pain, and regurgitation. Aspiration can occur (especially during sleep) in patients with severe esophageal dysfunction, and repeated episodes of aspiration pneumonitis are common. Weight loss, cachexia, and pulmonary infection can result in death. Patients with megacolon are plagued by abdominal pain and chronic constipation, which predisposes to fecaloma formation. Advanced megacolon can cause obstruction, volvulus, septicemia, and death.
# Chunk 3828
Chronic Chagas disease is diagnosed by the detection of specific IgG antibodies that bind to T. cruzi antigens. Demonstration of the parasite is not of primary importance. In Latin America, ~30 assays are commercially available, including several based on recombinant antigens. Although these tests usually show good sensitivity and reasonable specificity, false-positive reactions may occur—typically with samples from patients who have other infectious and parasitic diseases or autoimmune disorders. In addition, confirmatory testing has presented a persistent challenge. For these reasons, the World Health Organization recommends that specimens be tested in at least two assays and that well-characterized positive and negative comparison samples be included in each run. The Chagas radioimmune precipitation assay (RIPA), a highly sensitive and specific confirmatory method for detecting antibodies to T. cruzi, is approved under the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendment and available in the laboratory of one of the authors (L.V.K.). In 2006, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved a test to screen blood and organ donors for T. cruzi infection (Ortho T. cruzi ELISA Test System; Ortho-Clinical Diagnostics, Raritan, NJ). Since January 2007, the vast majority of U.S. blood donors have been screened, and positive units have undergone confirmatory testing with the Chagas RIPA. A second test for donor screening was approved by the FDA in 2010 (Abbott PRISM® Chagas Assay; Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL), as was an enzyme strip assay (Abbott ESA Chagas) in 2011. The use of PCR assays to detect T. cruzi DNA in chronically infected persons has been studied extensively; unfortunately, the sensitivity of this approach has not been shown to be reliably greater than that of serology.
# Chunk 3829
1396 Nevertheless, limited studies have shown that only ~70% of acute infections are cured by a full course of treatment. Common adverse effects of nifurtimox include anorexia, nausea, vomiting, weight loss, and abdominal pain. Neurologic reactions to the drug may include restlessness, disorientation, insomnia, twitching, paresthesia, polyneuritis, and seizures. These symptoms usually disappear when the dosage is reduced or treatment is discontinued. The recommended daily dosage is 8–10 mg/kg for adults, 12.5–15 mg/kg for adolescents, and 15–20 mg/kg for children 1–10 years of age. The drug should be given orally in four divided doses each day, and therapy should be continued for 90–120 days. Nifurtimox is available from the Drug Service of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in Atlanta (telephone number, 404-639-3670). The efficacy of benznidazole is similar or even superior to that of nifurtimox. A cure rate of >90% among congenitally infected infants treated before their first birthday has been reported. Adverse effects include rash, peripheral neuropathy, and rare instances of granulocytopenia. The recommended oral dosage is 5 mg/kg per day for 60 days for adults and 5–10 mg/kg per day for 60 days for children, with administration of two or three divided doses. Benznidazole is generally considered the drug of choice in Latin America. The question of whether adults in the indeterminate or chronic symptomatic phase of Chagas disease should be treated with nifurtimox or benznidazole has been debated for years. The fact that cure rates in persons with long-established chronic infection are notably inferior to those in patients with acute or recent chronic infection is central to this controversy. No convincing evidence from randomized controlled trials indicates that nifurtimox or benznidazole treatment of adults in the indeterminate or chronic symptomatic phase reduces either the appearance or progression of symptoms or mortality rates. On the basis of results of some observational studies, a panel of experts convened by the CDC in 2006 recommended that adults <50 years old with presumably long-standing indeterminate T. cruzi infections— or even with mild to moderate disease—be offered treatment. A large randomized clinical trial (the BENEFIT multicenter trial) designed to assess the parasitologic and clinical efficacy of benznidazole in 2856 adults (18–75 years old) with chronic Chagas heart disease (without advanced lesions) is being performed in Brazil, Argentina, Colombia, Bolivia, and El Salvador, but results will not be available until 2015. In contrast, randomized studies have shown that treatment of children is useful, and the current consensus of Latin American authorities and the CDC panel of experts is that all
# Chunk 3830
The trypanosomes that cause sleeping sickness are found only in sub-Saharan Africa. After its near-eradication in the mid 1960s, sleeping sickness underwent a resurgence in the 1990s, primarily in Uganda, Sudan, the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and Angola. A subsequent increase in control activities reduced the incidence in many endemic areas, however, and in 2009 fewer than 10,000 cases were reported to the World Health Organization. Although underreporting is a persistent problem, the level of control achieved to date was the basis for convening a panel of experts in 2009 to develop a vision for eradication of HAT.
# Chunk 3831
A painful trypanosomal chancre appears in some patients at the site of inoculation of the parasite. Hematogenous and lymphatic dissemination (stage 1 disease) is marked by the onset of fever. Typically, bouts of high temperatures lasting several days are separated by afebrile periods. Lymphadenopathy is prominent in T. b. gambiense trypanosomiasis. The nodes are discrete, movable, rubbery, and nontender. Cervical nodes are often visible, and enlargement of the nodes of the posterior cervical triangle, or Winterbottom’s sign, is a classic finding. Pruritus and maculopapular rashes are common. Inconstant findings include malaise, headache, arthralgias, weight loss, edema, hepatosplenomegaly, and tachycardia. The differential diagnosis of stage 1 HAT includes many diseases that are common in the tropics and are associated with fevers. HIV infection, malaria, and typhoid fever are common in populations at risk for HAT and need to be considered.
# Chunk 3832
Eflornithine is highly effective for treatment of both stages of gambiense sleeping sickness. In the trials on which the FDA based its approval, this agent cured >90% of 600 patients with stage 2 disease. The recommended treatment schedule is 400 mg/kg per day, given IV in four divided doses, for 2 weeks. Adverse reactions include diarrhea, anemia, thrombocytopenia, seizures, and hearing loss. The high dosage and duration of therapy required are disadvantages that make widespread use of eflornithine difficult. A randomized trial
# Chunk 3833
Abbreviations: CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; NECT, nifurtimox-eflornithine combination therapy.

comparing the standard eflornithine regimen (400 mg/kg per day infused over 6 h for 14 days) with nifurtimox-eflornithine combination therapy (NECT; oral nifurtimox, 15 mg/kg per day in three divided doses, plus IV eflornithine, 200 mg/kg per day in two divided doses, both for 7 days) in adults with stage 2 gambiense HAT showed improved efficacy and reduced adverse effects with combination therapy, making this drug suitable for first-line use.
# Chunk 3834
The arsenical melarsoprol is the drug of choice for the treatment of rhodesiense HAT with CNS involvement and is an alternative agent for stage 2 gambiense disease. The “short course” of melarsoprol that is currently recommended has been shown to be noninferior to the decades-old treatment course for T. b. rhodesiense, which was administered over several weeks and was much more toxic. The short-course regimen consists of 10 daily doses of 2.2 mg/kg IV, each given with prednisolone (1 mg/kg).
# Chunk 3835
1400 The following general guidelines can be used to evaluate congenital infection. There is essentially no risk if the mother becomes infected ≥6 months before conception. If infection is acquired <6 months before conception, the likelihood of transplacental infection increases as the interval between infection and conception decreases. Women with documented acute toxoplasmosis should be counseled to use appropriate measures to prevent pregnancy for 6 months after infection. In pregnancy, if the mother becomes infected during the first trimester, the incidence of transplacental infection is lowest (~15%), but the disease in the neonate is most severe. If maternal infection occurs during the third trimester, the incidence of transplacental infection is greatest (65%), but the infant is usually asymptomatic at birth. Infected infants who are normal at birth may have a higher incidence of learning disabilities and chronic neurologic sequelae than uninfected children. Only a small proportion (20%) of women infected with T. gondii develop clinical signs of infection. Often the diagnosis is first appreciated when routine postconception serologic tests show evidence of specific antibody.
# Chunk 3836
Lymph Nodes During acute infection, lymph node biopsy demonstrates characteristic findings, including follicular hyperplasia and irregular clusters of tissue macrophages with eosinophilic cytoplasm. Granulomas rarely are evident in these specimens. Although tachyzoites are not usually visible, they can be sought either by subinoculation of infected tissue into mice, with resultant disease, or by PCR. PCR amplification of DNA fragments of Toxoplasma genes is effective and sensitive in establishing lymph node infection by tachyzoites.
# Chunk 3837
In persons whose immune systems are intact, acute toxoplasmosis is usually asymptomatic and self-limited. This condition can go unrecognized in 80–90% of adults and children with acquired infection. The asymptomatic nature of this infection makes diagnosis difficult in mothers infected during pregnancy. In contrast, the wide range of clinical manifestations in congenitally infected children includes severe neurologic complications such as hydrocephalus, microcephaly, mental retardation, and chorioretinitis. If prenatal infection is severe, multiorgan failure and subsequent intrauterine fetal death can occur.
# Chunk 3838
Toxoplasmosis in Immunocompetent Patients The most common manifestation of acute toxoplasmosis is cervical lymphadenopathy. The nodes may be single or multiple, are usually nontender, are discrete, and vary in firmness. Lymphadenopathy also may be found in suboccipital, supraclavicular, inguinal, and mediastinal areas. Generalized lymphadenopathy occurs in 20–30% of symptomatic patients. Between 20% and 40% of patients with lymphadenopathy also have headache, malaise, fatigue, and fever (usually with a temperature of <40°C [<104°F]). A smaller proportion of symptomatic individuals have myalgia, sore throat, abdominal pain, maculopapular rash, meningoencephalitis, and confusion. Rare complications associated with infection in the normal immune host include pneumonia, myocarditis, encephalopathy, pericarditis, and polymyositis. Signs and symptoms associated with acute infection usually resolve within several weeks, although the lymphadenopathy may persist for some months. In one epidemic, toxoplasmosis was diagnosed correctly in only 3 of the 25 patients who consulted physicians. If toxoplasmosis is considered in the differential diagnosis, routine laboratory and serologic screening should precede node biopsy.
# Chunk 3839
The results of routine laboratory studies are usually unremarkable except for minimal lymphocytosis, an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and a nominal increase in serum aminotransferase levels. Evaluation of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in cases with evidence of encephalopathy or meningoencephalitis shows an elevation of intra-cranial pressure, mononuclear pleocytosis (10–50 cells/mL), a slight increase in protein concentration, and (occasionally) an increase in the gamma globulin level. PCR amplification of the Toxoplasma DNA target sequence in CSF may be beneficial. The CSF of chronically infected individuals is normal.
# Chunk 3840
The signs and symptoms of acute toxoplasmosis in immunocompromised patients principally involve the CNS (Fig. 253-2). More than 50% of patients with clinical manifestations have intracerebral involvement. Clinical findings at presentation range from nonfocal to focal dysfunction. CNS findings include encephalopathy, meningoencephalitis, and mass lesions. Patients may present with altered mental status (75%), fever (10–72%), seizures (33%), headaches (56%), and focal neurologic findings (60%), including motor deficits, cranial nerve
# Chunk 3841
FIGuRE 253-2 Toxoplasmic encephalitis in a 36-year-old patient with AIDS. The mul-tiple lesions are demonstrated by MRI scanning (T1-weighted with gadolinium enhance-ment). (Courtesy of Clifford Eskey, Dartmouth Hitchcock Medical Center, Hanover, NH; with permission.) palsies, movement disorders, dysmetria, visual-field loss, and aphasia. Patients who present with evidence of diffuse cortical dysfunction develop evidence of focal neurologic disease as infection progresses. This altered condition is due not only to the necrotizing encephalitis caused by direct invasion by the parasite but also to secondary effects, including vasculitis, edema, and hemorrhage. The onset of infection can range from an insidious process over several weeks to an acute presentation with fulminant focal deficits, including hemiparesis, hemiplegia, visual-field defects, localized headache, and focal seizures.
# Chunk 3842
DIAGNOSIS Tissue and Body Fluids The differential diagnosis of acute toxoplasmosis can be made by appropriate culture, serologic testing, and PCR (Table 253-1). Although available only at specialized laboratories, the isolation of T. gondii from blood or other body fluids can be accomplished after subinoculation of the sample into the peritoneal cavity of mice. If no parasites are found in the mouse’s peritoneal fluid 6–10 days after inoculation, its anti-Toxoplasma serum titer can be evaluated 4–6 weeks after inoculation. Isolation of T. gondii from the patient’s body fluids reflects acute infection, whereas isolation from biopsied tissue is an indication only of the presence of tissue cysts and should not be misinterpreted as evidence of acute toxoplasmosis. Persistent parasitemia in patients with latent, asymptomatic infection is rare. Histologic examination of lymph nodes may suggest the characteristic changes described above. Demonstration of tachyzoites in lymph nodes establishes the diagnosis of acute toxoplasmosis. Like subinoculation into mice, histologic demonstration of cysts containing bradyzoites confirms prior infection with T. gondii but is nondiagnostic for acute infection.
# Chunk 3843
Patients with TE have focal or multifocal abnormalities demonstrable by CT or MRI. Neuroradiologic evaluation should include double-dose contrast CT of the head. By this test, single and frequently multiple contrast-enhancing lesions (<2 cm) may be identified. MRI usually demonstrates multiple lesions located in both hemispheres, with the basal ganglia and corticomedullary junction most commonly involved; MRI provides a more sensitive evaluation of the efficacy of therapy than does CT (Fig. 253-2). These findings are not pathognomonic of Toxoplasma infection, because 40% of CNS lymphomas are multifocal and 50% are ring-enhancing. For both MRI and CT scans, the rate of false-negative results is ~10%. The finding of a single lesion on an MRI scan increases the likelihood of primary CNS lymphoma (in which solitary lesions are four times more likely than in TE) and strengthens the argument for the performance of a brain biopsy. A therapeutic trial of anti-Toxoplasma medications is frequently used to assess the diagnosis. Treatment of presumptive TE with pyrimethamine plus sulfadiazine or clindamycin results in quantifiable clinical improvement in >50% of patients by day 3. Leucovorin is administered to prevent bone marrow toxicity. By day 7, >90% of treated patients show evidence of improvement. In contrast, if patients fail to respond or have lymphoma, clinical signs and symptoms worsen by day 7. Patients in this category require brain biopsy with or without a change in therapy. This procedure can now be performed by a stereotactic CT-guided method that reduces the potential for complications. Brain biopsy for T. gondii identifies organisms in 50–75% of cases. PCR amplification of CSF may also confirm toxoplasmosis or suggest alternative diagnoses (Table 253-1), such as progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (JC virus positive) or primary CNS lymphoma (Epstein-Barr virus positive).
# Chunk 3844
Ocular Toxoplasmosis The serum antibody titer may not correlate with the presence of active lesions in the fundus, particularly in cases of congenital toxoplasmosis. In general, a positive IgG titer (measured in undiluted serum if necessary) in conjunction with typical lesions establishes the diagnosis. Antibody production in ocular fluids, expressed in terms of the Goldmann-Witmer coefficient, has been described for diagnosis of ocular disease but does not always correlate with PCR results. If lesions are atypical and the serum antibody titer is in the low-positive range, the diagnosis is presumptive. The parasitic antigen–specific polyclonal IgG assay as well as parasite-specific PCR may facilitate the diagnosis. Accordingly, the clinical diagnosis of ocular toxoplasmosis can be supported in 60–90% of cases by laboratory tests, depending on the time of anterior chamber puncture and the panel of antibody analyses used. In the remaining cases, the possibility of a falsely negative laboratory diagnosis or of an incorrect clinical diagnosis cannot be clarified further.
# Chunk 3845
Cysts and trophozoites are passed in the stool into the environment. Cysts are ingested (10-25 cysts) in contaminated water or food or by direct fecal-oral transmission (as in day-care centers). Encystation occurs under conditions of bile salt concentration changes and alkaline pH. Smooth-walled cysts can contain two trophozoites. Cysts can survive in the environment (up to several weeks in cold water). They may also infect nonhuman mammalian species. FIGuRE 254-1 Life cycle of Giardia. (Reprinted with permission from RL Guerrant et al [eds]: Tropical Infectious Diseases: Principles, Pathogens and Practice, 2nd ed, p 987. © 2006, with permission from Elsevier Science.)
# Chunk 3846
Cure rates with metronidazole (250 mg thrice daily for 5 days) are ceptibilities of the young than of the old and of newly exposed persons than of chronically exposed populations suggest that at least partial usually >90%. Tinidazole (2 g once by mouth) may be more effective than metronidazole. Albendazole (400 mg daily for 5–10 days) is as protective immunity may develop.
# Chunk 3847
Pathophysiology Although intestinal epithelial cells harbor cryptosporidia in an intracellular vacuole, the means by which secretory diarrhea is elicited remain uncertain. No characteristic pathologic changes are found by biopsy. The distribution of infection can be spotty within the principal site of infection, the small bowel. Cryptosporidia are found in the pharynx, stomach, and large bowel of some patients and at times in the respiratory tract. Especially in patients with AIDS, involvement of the biliary tract can cause papillary stenosis, sclerosing cholangitis, or cholecystitis.
# Chunk 3848
Clinical Manifestations Asymptomatic infections can occur in both immunocompetent and immunocompromised hosts. In immunocompetent persons, symptoms develop after an incubation period of ~1 week and consist principally of watery nonbloody diarrhea, sometimes in conjunction with abdominal pain, nausea, anorexia, fever, and/or weight loss. In these hosts, the illness usually subsides after 1–2 weeks. In contrast, in immunocompromised hosts (especially those with AIDS and CD4+ T cell counts <100/μL), diarrhea can be chronic, persistent, and remarkably profuse, causing clinically significant fluid and electrolyte depletion. Stool volumes may range from 1 to 25 L/d. Weight loss, wasting, and abdominal pain may be severe. Biliary tract involvement can manifest as mid-epigastric or right-upper-quadrant pain.
# Chunk 3849
Diagnosis (Table 254-1) Evaluation starts with fecal examination for small oocysts, which are smaller (4–5 μm in diameter) than the fecal stages of most other parasites. Because conventional stool examination for ova and parasites (O+P) does not detect Cryptosporidium, specific testing must be requested. Detection is enhanced by evaluation of stools (obtained on multiple days) by several techniques, including modified acid-fast and direct immunofluorescent stains and enzyme immunoassays. Newer NAATs are being employed. Cryptosporidia can also be identified by light and electron microscopy at the apical surfaces of intestinal epithelium from biopsy specimens of the small bowel and, less frequently, the large bowel.
# Chunk 3850
Nitazoxanide, approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of cryptosporidiosis, is available in tablet form for adults (500 mg twice daily for 3 days) and as an elixir for children. To date, however, this agent has not been effective for 1407 the treatment of HIV-infected patients, in whom improved immune status due to antiretroviral therapy can lead to amelioration of cryptosporidiosis. Otherwise, treatment includes supportive care with replacement of fluids and electrolytes and administration of antidiarrheal agents. Biliary tract obstruction may require papillotomy or T-tube placement. Prevention requires minimizing exposure to infectious oocysts in human or animal feces. Use of submicron water filters may minimize acquisition of infection from drinking water.
# Chunk 3851
Although C. belli infects many animals, little is known about the epidemiology or prevalence of this parasite in humans. It is most common in tropical and subtropical countries. Acute infections can begin abruptly with fever, abdominal pain, and watery nonbloody diarrhea and can last for weeks or months. In patients who have AIDS or are immunocompromised for other reasons, infections often are not self-limited but rather resemble cryptosporidiosis, with chronic, profuse watery diarrhea. Eosinophilia, which is not found in other enteric protozoan infections, may be detectable. The diagnosis (Table 254-1) is usually made by detection of the large (~25-μm) oocysts in stool by modified acid-fast staining. Oocyst excretion may be low-level and intermittent; if repeated stool examinations are unrevealing, sampling of duodenal contents by aspiration or small-bowel biopsy (often with electron microscopic examination) may be necessary. NAATs are promising newer diagnostic tools.
# Chunk 3852
Cyclospora cayetanensis, a cause of diarrheal illness, is globally distributed: illness due to C. cayetanensis has been reported in the United States, Asia, Africa, Latin America, and Europe. The epidemiology of this parasite has not yet been fully defined, but waterborne transmission and food-borne transmission (e.g., by basil, sweet peas, and imported raspberries) have been recognized. The full spectrum of illness attributable to Cyclospora has not been delineated. Some infected patients may be without symptoms, but many have diarrhea, flulike symptoms, and flatulence and belching. The illness can be self-limited, can wax and wane, or, in many cases, can involve prolonged diarrhea, anorexia, and upper gastrointestinal symptoms, with sustained fatigue and weight loss in some instances. Diarrheal illness may persist for >1 month. Cyclospora can cause enteric illness in patients infected with HIV.
# Chunk 3853
The parasite is detectable in epithelial cells of small-bowel biopsy samples and elicits secretory diarrhea by unknown means. The absence of fecal blood and leukocytes indicates that disease due to Cyclospora is not caused by destruction of the small-bowel mucosa. The diagnosis (Table 254-1) can be made by detection of spherical 8to 10-μm oocysts in the stool, although routine stool O+P examinations are not sufficient. Specific fecal examinations must be requested to detect the oocysts, which are variably acid-fast and are fluorescent when viewed with ultraviolet light microscopy. Newer NAATs are proving to be sensitive. Cyclosporiasis should be considered in the differential diagnosis of prolonged diarrhea, with or without a history of travel by the patient to other countries.
# Chunk 3854
Ingested cysts liberate trophozoites, which reside and replicate in the large bowel. Many patients remain asymptomatic, but some have persisting intermittent diarrhea, and a few develop more fulminant dysentery. In symptomatic individuals, the pathology in the bowel— both gross and microscopic—is similar to that seen in amebiasis, with varying degrees of mucosal invasion, focal necrosis, and ulceration. Balantidiasis, unlike amebiasis, only rarely spreads hematogenously to other organs. The diagnosis is made by detection of the trophozoite stage in stool or sampled colonic tissue. Tetracycline (500 mg four times daily for 10 days) is an effective therapeutic agent.
# Chunk 3855
Blastocystosis Blastocystis hominis remains an organism of uncertain pathogenicity. Some patients who pass B. hominis in their stools are asymptomatic, whereas others have diarrhea and associated intestinal symptoms. Diligent evaluation reveals other potential bacterial, viral, or protozoal causes of diarrhea in some but not all patients with symptoms. Because the pathogenicity of B. hominis is uncertain and because therapy for Blastocystis infection is neither specific nor uniformly effective, patients with prominent intestinal symptoms should be fully evaluated for other infectious causes of diarrhea. If diarrheal symptoms associated with Blastocystis are prominent, either metronidazole (750 mg thrice daily for 10 days) or TMP-SMX (160 mg/800 mg twice daily for 7 days) can be used.
# Chunk 3856
dientamoebiasis Dientamoeba fragilis is unique among intestinal protozoa in that it has a trophozoite stage but not a cyst stage. How trophozoites survive to transmit infection is not known. When symptoms develop in patients with D. fragilis infection, they are generally mild and include intermittent diarrhea, abdominal pain, and anorexia. The diagnosis is made by the detection of trophozoites in stool; the lability of these forms accounts for the greater yield when fecal samples are preserved immediately after collection. Since fecal excretion rates vary, examination of several samples obtained on alternate days increases the rate of detection. Iodoquinol (650 mg three times daily for 20 days) or paromomycin (25–35 mg/kg per day in three doses for 7 days) is appropriate for treatment.
# Chunk 3857
diagnosis Detection of motile trichomonads by microscopic examination of wet mounts of vaginal or prostatic secretions has been the conventional means of diagnosis. Although this approach provides an immediate diagnosis, its sensitivity for the detection of T. vaginalis is only ~50–60% in routine evaluations of vaginal secretions. Direct immunofluorescent antibody staining is more sensitive (70–90%) than wet-mount examinations. T. vaginalis can be recovered from the urethra of both males and females and is detectable in males after prostatic massage. A new NAAT, APTIMA, is FDA approved and is highly sensitive and specific for urine and for endocervical and vaginal swabs from women.
# Chunk 3858
Metronidazole (either a single 2-g dose or 500-mg doses twice daily for 7 days) or tinidazole (a single 2-g dose) is effective. All sexual partners must be treated concurrently to prevent reinfection, especially from asymptomatic males. In males with persistent symptomatic urethritis after therapy for nongonococcal urethritis, metronidazole therapy should be considered for possible trichomoniasis. Alternatives to metronidazole for treatment during pregnancy are not readily available. einfection often accounts for apparent treatment failures, but strains of T. vaginalis exhibiting high-level resistance to metronidazole have been encountered. Treatment of these resistant infections with higher oral doses, parenteral doses, or concurrent oral and vaginal doses of metronidazole or with tinidazole has been successful.
# Chunk 3859
Symptoms due to larval migration and muscle invasion begin to appear in the second week after infection. The migrating Trichinella larvae provoke a marked local and systemic hypersensitivity reaction, with fever and hypereosinophilia. Periorbital and facial edema is common, as are hemorrhages in the subconjunctivae, retina, and nail beds (“splinter” hemorrhages). A maculopapular rash, headache, cough, dyspnea, or dysphagia sometimes develops. Myocarditis with tachyarrhythmias or heart failure—and, less commonly, encephalitis or pneumonitis—may develop and accounts for most deaths of patients with trichinellosis.
# Chunk 3860
Laboratory Findings and Diagnosis Blood eosinophilia develops in >90% of patients with symptomatic trichinellosis and may peak at a level of >50% 2–4 weeks after infection. Serum levels of muscle enzymes, including creatine phosphoki-
# Chunk 3861
and about illness in other individuals who ate FIGuRE 256-1 Life cycle ofTrichinella spiralis (cosmopolitan); nelsoni (equatorial Africa); the same meat. A presumptive clinical diagnosis britovi (Europe, western Africa, western Asia); nativa (Arctic); murrelli (North America); pap-can be based on fevers, eosinophilia, periorbital uae (Papua New Guinea); zimbabwensis (Tanzania); and pseudospiralis (cosmopolitan). CNS, edema, and myalgias after a suspect meal. A rise central nervous system. (Reprinted from RL Guerrant et al [eds]: Tropical Infectious Diseases: in the titer of parasite-specific antibody, which Principles, Pathogens and Practice, 2nd ed, p 1218. © 2006, with permission from Elsevier Science.) usually does not occur until after the third week of infection, confirms the diagnosis. Alternatively, a definitive diagnosis requires surgical biopsy of at least 1 g of involved muscle; the yields are highest near tendon insertions. The fresh muscle tissue should be compressed between glass slides and examined microscopically (Fig. 256-2), because larvae may be missed by examination of routine histopathologic sections alone.
# Chunk 3862
Trichinellosis Mild Supportive Moderate Albendazole (400 mg bid × 8–14 days) or Mebendazole (200–400 mg tid × 3 days, then 400 mg tid × 8–14 days) Severe Add glucocorticoids (e.g., prednisone, 1 mg/kg qd × 5 days) Visceral larva Mild to Supportive for adults, 400 mg bid for children) with glucocorticoids × 5–20 days has been effective
# Chunk 3863
Life Cycle Adult worms live in the lumen of the small intestine. Mature female Ascaris worms are extraordinarily fecund, each producing up to 240,000 eggs a day, which pass with the feces. Ascarid eggs, which are remarkably resistant to environmental stresses, become infective after several weeks of maturation in the soil and can remain infective for years. After infective eggs are swallowed, larvae hatched in the intestine invade the mucosa, migrate through the circulation to the lungs, break into the alveoli, ascend the bronchial tree, and return— through swallowing—to the small intestine, where they develop into adult worms. Between 2 and 3 months elapse between initial infection and egg production. Adult worms live for 1–2 years.
# Chunk 3864
Clinical Features During the lung phase of larval migration, ~9–12 days after egg ingestion, patients may develop an irritating nonproductive cough and burning substernal discomfort that is aggravated by coughing or deep inspiration. Dyspnea and blood-tinged sputum are less common. Fever is usually reported. Eosinophilia develops during this symptomatic phase and subsides slowly over weeks. Chest x-rays may reveal evidence of eosinophilic pneumonitis (Löffler’s syndrome), with rounded infiltrates a few millimeters to several centimeters in size. These infiltrates may be transient and intermittent, clearing after several weeks. Where there is seasonal transmission of the parasite, seasonal pneumonitis with eosinophilia may develop in previously infected and sensitized hosts.
# Chunk 3865
Laboratory Findings Most cases of ascariasis can be diagnosed by microscopic detection of characteristic Ascaris eggs (65 by 45 μm) in fecal samples. Occasionally, patients present after passing an adult worm— identifiable by its large size and smooth cream-colored surface—in the stool or, much less commonly, through the mouth or nose. During the early transpulmonary migratory phase, when eosinophilic pneumonitis occurs, larvae can be found in sputum or gastric aspirates before diagnostic eggs appear in the stool. The eosinophilia that is prominent during this early stage usually decreases to minimal levels in established infection. Adult worms may be visualized, occasionally serendipitously, on contrast studies of the gastrointestinal tract. A plain abdominal film may reveal masses of worms in gas-filled loops of bowel in patients with intestinal obstruction. Pancreaticobiliary worms can be detected by ultrasound and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography; the latter method also has been used to extract biliary Ascaris worms.
# Chunk 3866
Life Cycle Adult hookworms, which are ~1 cm long, use buccal teeth (Ancylostoma) or cutting plates (Necator) to attach to the small-bowel mucosa and suck blood (0.2 mL/d per Ancylostoma adult) and interstitial fluid. The adult hookworms produce thousands of eggs daily. The eggs are deposited with feces in soil, where rhabditiform larvae hatch and develop over a 1-week period into infectious filariform larvae. Infective larvae penetrate the skin and reach the lungs by way of the bloodstream. There they invade alveoli and ascend the airways before being swallowed and reaching the small intestine. The prepatent period from skin invasion to appearance of eggs in the feces is ~6–8 weeks, but it may be longer with A. duodenale. Larvae of A. duodenale, if swallowed, can survive and develop directly in the intestinal mucosa. Adult hookworms may survive over a decade but usually live ~6–8 years for A. duodenale and 2–5 years for N. americanus.
# Chunk 3867
Hot, humid regions Worldwide Worldwide

Small-bowel mucosa Cecum, colonic Cecum, appendix mucosa

Decades (owing to 5 years 2 months autoinfection) 5000–10,000 3000–7000 2000
# Chunk 3868
Ancylostoma caninum and Ancylostoma braziliense A. caninum, the canine hookworm, has been identified as a cause of human eosinophilic enteritis, especially in northeastern Australia. In this zoonotic infection, adult hookworms attach to the small intestine (where they may be visualized by endoscopy) and elicit abdominal pain and intense local eosinophilia. Treatment with mebendazole (100 mg twice daily for 3 days) or albendazole (400 mg once) or endoscopic removal is effective. Both of these animal hookworm species can cause cutaneous larva migrans (“creeping eruption”; Chap. 256).
# Chunk 3869
Epidemiology S. stercoralis is spottily dis tributed in tropical areas and other hot, cutaneous and/or abdominal symptoms. Recurrent urticaria, often 1415 involving the buttocks and wrists, is the most common cutaneous manifestation. Migrating larvae can elicit a pathognomonic serpiginous eruption, larva currens (“running larva”). This pruritic, raised, erythematous lesion advances as rapidly as 10 cm/h along the course of larval migration. Adult parasites burrow into the duodenojejunal mucosa and can cause abdominal (usually midepigastric) pain, which resembles peptic ulcer pain except that it is aggravated by food ingestion. Nausea, diarrhea, gastrointestinal bleeding, mild chronic colitis, and weight loss can occur. Small-bowel obstruction may develop with early, heavy infection. Pulmonary symptoms are rare in uncomplicated strongyloidiasis. Eosinophilia is common, with levels fluctuating over time.
# Chunk 3870
Free-living 1-mm adults in soil Eggs in soil Indirect development (heterogonic) (can multiply outside host for several generations) in soil Direct development Rhabditiform larvae in soil numbers of filariform larvae develop, penetrate bowel, and disseminate, causing: Colitis, polymicrobial sepsis, pneumonitis, or meningitis humid regions and is particularly common in Southeast Asia, sub-Saharan Africa, and Brazil. In the United States, the parasite is endemic in parts of the Southeast and is found in immigrants, refugees, travelers, and military personnel who have lived in endemic areas.
# Chunk 3871
FIGuRE 257-1 Life cycle of Strongyloides stercoralis. (Adapted from Guerrant RL et al Clinical Features In uncomplicated strongyloidia-[eds]: Tropical Infectious Diseases: Principles, Pathogens and Practice, 2nd ed, p 1276. © 2006, sis, many patients are asymptomatic or have mild with permission from Elsevier Science.) 1416 Diagnosis In uncomplicated strongyloidiasis, the finding of rhabditiform larvae in feces is diagnostic. Rhabditiform larvae are ~250 μm long, with a short buccal cavity that distinguishes them from hookworm larvae. In uncomplicated infections, few larvae are passed and single stool examinations detect only about one-third of cases. Serial examinations and the use of the agar plate detection method improve the sensitivity of stool diagnosis. In uncomplicated strongyloidiasis (but not in hyperinfection), stool examinations may be repeatedly negative. Strongyloides larvae may also be found by sampling of the duodenojejunal contents by aspiration or biopsy. An enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for serum antibodies to antigens of Strongyloides is a sensitive method for diagnosing uncomplicated infections. Such serologic testing should be performed for patients whose geographic histories indicate potential exposure, especially those who exhibit eosinophilia and/or are candidates for glucocorticoid treatment of other conditions. In disseminated strongyloidiasis, filariform larvae should be sought in stool as well as in samples obtained from sites of potential larval migration, including sputum, bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, or surgical drainage fluid.
# Chunk 3872
Even in the asymptomatic state, strongyloidiasis must be treated because of the potential for subsequent dissemination and fatal hyperinfection. Ivermectin (200 μg/kg daily for 2 days) is consistently more effective than albendazole (400 mg daily for 3 days). For disseminated strongyloidiasis, treatment with ivermectin should be extended for at least 5–7 days or until the parasites have been eradicated. In immunocompromised hosts, the course of ivermectin should be repeated 2 weeks after initial treatment.
# Chunk 3873
Life Cycle Adult Trichuris worms reside in the colon and cecum, the anterior portions threaded into the superficial mucosa. Thousands of eggs laid daily by adult female worms pass with the feces and mature in the soil. After ingestion, infective eggs hatch in the duodenum, releasing larvae that mature before migrating to the large bowel. The entire cycle takes ~3 months, and adult worms may live for several years.
# Chunk 3874
Clinical Features Tissue reactions to Trichuris are mild. Most infected individuals have no symptoms or eosinophilia. Heavy infections may result in anemia, abdominal pain, anorexia, and bloody or mucoid diarrhea resembling inflammatory bowel disease. Rectal prolapse can result from massive infections in children, who often suffer from malnourishment and other diarrheal illnesses. Moderately heavy Trichuris burdens also contribute to growth retardation.
# Chunk 3875
Diagnosis and Treatment The characteristic 50by 20-μm lemon-shaped Trichuris eggs are readily detected on stool examination. Adult worms, which are 3–5 cm long, are occasionally seen on proctoscopy. Mebendazole (500 mg once) or albendazole (400 mg daily for 3 doses) is safe and moderately effective for treatment, with cure rates of 70–90%. Ivermectin (200 μg/kg daily for 3 doses) is also safe but is not quite as efficacious as the benzimidazoles.
# Chunk 3876
Clinical Features Most pinworm infections are asymptomatic. Perianal pruritus is the cardinal symptom. The itching, which is often worse at night as a result of the nocturnal migration of the female worms, may lead to excoriation and bacterial superinfection. Heavy infections have been alleged to cause abdominal pain and weight loss. On rare occasions, pinworms invade the female genital tract, causing vulvovaginitis and pelvic or peritoneal granulomas. Eosinophilia is uncommon.
# Chunk 3877
Africa. Humans acquire the infection by accidentally ingesting Trichostrongylus larvae on contaminated leafy vegetables. The larvae do not migrate in humans but mature directly into adult worms in the small bowel. These worms ingest far less blood than hookworms; most infected persons are asymptomatic, but heavy infections may give rise to mild anemia and eosinophilia. In stool examinations, Trichostrongylus eggs resemble hookworm eggs but are larger (85 by 115 μm). Treatment consists of mebendazole or albendazole (Chap. 246e).
# Chunk 3878
Anisakiasis is a gastrointestinal infection caused by the accidental ingestion in uncooked saltwater fish of nematode larvae belonging to the family Anisakidae. The incidence of anisakiasis in the United States has increased as a result of the growing popularity of raw fish dishes. Most cases occur in Japan, the Netherlands, and Chile, where raw fish—sashimi, pickled green herring, and ceviche, respectively—are national culinary staples. Anisakid nematodes parasitize large sea mammals such as whales, dolphins, and seals. As part of a complex parasitic life cycle involving marine food chains, infectious larvae migrate to the musculature of a variety of fish. Both Anisakis simplex and Pseudoterranova decipiens have been implicated in human anisakiasis, but an identical gastric syndrome may be caused by the red larvae of eustrongylid parasites of fish-eating birds. When humans consume infected raw fish, live larvae may be coughed up within 48 h. Alternatively, larvae may immediately penetrate the mucosa of the stomach. Within hours, violent upper abdominal pain accompanied by nausea and occasionally vomiting ensues, mimicking an acute abdomen. The diagnosis can be established by direct visualization on upper endoscopy, outlining of the worm by contrast radiographic studies, or histopathologic examination of extracted tissue. Extraction of the burrowing larvae during endoscopy is curative. In addition, larvae may pass to the small bowel, where they penetrate the mucosa and provoke a vigorous eosinophilic granulomatous response. Symptoms may appear 1–2 weeks after the infective meal, with intermittent abdominal pain, diarrhea, nausea, and fever resembling the manifestations of Crohn’s disease. The diagnosis may be suggested by barium studies and confirmed by curative surgical resection of a granuloma in which the worm is embedded. Anisakid eggs are not found in the stool, since the larvae do not mature in humans. Serologic tests have been developed but are not widely available.
# Chunk 3879
Intestinal capillariasis is caused by ingestion of raw fish infected with Capillaria philippinensis. Subsequent autoinfec tion can lead to a severe wasting syndrome. The disease occurs in the Philippines and Thailand and, on occasion, elsewhere in Asia. The natural cycle of C. philippinensis involves fish from fresh and brackish water. When humans eat infected raw fish, the larvae mature in the intestine into adult worms, which produce invasive larvae that cause intestinal inflammation and villus loss. Capillariasis has an insidious onset with nonspecific abdominal pain and watery diarrhea. If untreated, progressive autoinfection can lead to protein-losing enteropathy, severe malabsorption, and ultimately death from cachexia, cardiac failure, or superinfection. The diagnosis is established by identification of the characteristic peanut-shaped (20by 40-μm) eggs on stool examination. Severely ill patients require hospitalization and supportive therapy in addition to prolonged anthelmintic treatment with albendazole (200 mg twice daily for 10 days; Chap. 246e).
# Chunk 3880
Abdominal angiostrongyliasis is found in Latin America and Africa. The zoonotic parasite Angiostrongylus costaricensis causes eosinophilic ileocolitis after the ingestion of contaminated vegetation. A. costaricensis normally parasitizes the cotton rat and other rodents, with slugs and snails serving as intermediate hosts. Humans become infected by accidentally ingesting infective larvae in mollusk slime deposited on fruits and vegetables; children are at highest risk. The larvae penetrate the gut wall and migrate to the mesenteric artery, where they develop into adult worms. Eggs deposited in the gut wall provoke an intense eosinophilic granulomatous reaction, and adult worms may cause mesenteric arteritis, thrombosis, or frank bowel infarction. Symptoms may mimic those of appendicitis, including abdominal pain and tenderness, fever, vomiting, and a palpable mass in the right iliac fossa. Leukocytosis and eosinophilia are prominent. CT with contrast medium typically shows inflamed bowel, often with concomitant obstruction, but a definitive diagnosis is usually made surgically with partial bowel resection. Pathologic study reveals a thickened bowel wall with eosinophilic granulomas surrounding the Angiostrongylus eggs. In nonsurgical cases, the diagnosis rests solely on clinical grounds because larvae and eggs cannot be detected in the stool. Medical therapy for abdominal angiostrongyliasis is of uncertain efficacy. Careful observation and surgical resection for severe symptoms are the mainstays of treatment.
# Chunk 3881
Thomas B. Nutman, Peter F. Weller

Filarial worms are nematodes that dwell in the subcutaneous tissues and the lymphatics. Eight filarial species infect humans (Table 258-1); of these, four—Wuchereria bancrofti, Brugia malayi, Onchocerca volvulus, and Loa loa—are responsible for most serious filarial infections. Filarial parasites, which infect an estimated 170 million persons worldwide, are transmitted by specific species of mosquitoes or other arthropods and have a complex life cycle, including infective larval stages carried by insects and adult worms that reside in either lymphatic or subcutaneous tissues of humans. The offspring of adults are microfi-1417 lariae, which, depending on their species, are 200–250 μm long and 5–7 μm wide, may or may not be enveloped in a loose sheath, and either circulate in the blood or migrate through the skin (Table 258-1). To complete the life cycle, microfilariae are ingested by the arthropod vector and develop over 1–2 weeks into new infective larvae. Adult worms live for many years, whereas microfilariae survive for 3–36 months. The bacterial endosymbiont Wolbachia has been found intracellularly in all stages of Brugia, Wuchereria, Mansonella, and Onchocerca species and has become a target for antifilarial chemotherapy.
# Chunk 3882
Orally administered diethylcarbamazine (DEC; 6 mg/kg daily for 12 days), which has both macroand microfilaricidal properties, remains the drug of choice for the treatment of active lymphatic filariasis (defined by microfilaremia, antigen positivity, or adult worms on ultrasound), although albendazole (400 mg twice daily by mouth for 21 days) has also demonstrated macrofilaricidal efficacy. A 4to 6-week course of oral doxycycline (targeting the intracellular Wolbachia) also has significant macrofilaricidal activity, as does DEC/ albendazole used daily for 7 days. The addition of DEC to a 3-week course of doxycycline is efficacious in lymphatic filariasis.
# Chunk 3883
DEC is used at a daily dosage of 4–6 mg/kg for 14 days. Symptoms usually resolve within 3–7 days after the initiation of therapy. Relapse, which occurs in ~12–25% of cases (sometimes after an interval of years), requires re-treatment.
# Chunk 3884
Onchocerciasis (“river blindness”) is caused by the filarial nematode O. volvulus, which infects an estimated 37 million individuals in 35 countries worldwide. The majority of individuals infected with O. volvulus live in the equatorial region of Africa extending from the Atlantic coast to the Red Sea. In the Americas, isolated foci were identified in Mexico, Guatemala, Colombia, Ecuador, Venezuela, and Brazil. The infection is also found in Yemen.
# Chunk 3885
Eosinophilia and elevated serum IgE levels are common but, because they occur in many parasitic infections, are not diagnostic in themselves. Assays to detect specific antibodies to Onchocerca and 1421 PCR to detect onchocercal DNA in skin snips are used in specialized laboratories and are highly sensitive and specific.
# Chunk 3886
FIGuRE 258-4 Adult Loa loa worm being surgically removed after its subconjunctival migration.

Definitive diagnosis of loiasis requires the detection of microfilariae in the peripheral blood or the isolation of the adult worm from the eye (Fig. 258-4) or from a subcutaneous biopsy specimen collected from a site of swelling developing after treatment. PCR-based assays for the detection of L. loa DNA in blood are available in specialized laboratories and are highly sensitive and specific, as are some newer recombinant antigen–based serologic techniques. In practice, the diagnosis must often be based on a characteristic history and clinical presentation, blood eosinophilia, and elevated levels of antifilarial antibodies, particularly in travelers to an endemic region, who are usually amicrofilaremic. Other clinical findings in travelers include hypergammaglobulinemia, elevated levels of serum IgE, and elevated leukocyte and eosinophil counts.
# Chunk 3887
Albendazole or ivermectin is effective in reducing microfilarial loads, although neither is approved for this purpose by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Moreover, ivermectin is contraindicated in patients with >8000 microfilariae/mL because this drug has been associated with severe adverse events (including encephalopathy and death) in heavily infected patients with loiasis in West and Central Africa. DEC (300 mg weekly) is an effective prophylactic regimen for loiasis.
# Chunk 3888
S. japonicum Skin penetration by China, Philippines, cercariae released from Indonesia snails

S. intercalatum Skin penetration by West Africa cercariae released from snails
# Chunk 3889
Human infection is initiated by penetration of intact skin with infective cercariae. These organisms, which are released from infected snails in freshwater bodies, measure ~2 mm in length and possess an anterior and a ventral sucker that attach to the skin and facilitate penetration. Once in subcutaneous tissue, cercariae transform into schistosomula, with morphologic, membrane, and immunologic changes. The cercarial outer membrane changes from a trilaminar to a heptalaminar structure that is then maintained throughout the organism’s life span in humans. This transformation is thought to be the schistosome’s main adaptive mechanism for survival in humans. Schistosomula begin their migration within 2–4 days via venous or lymphatic vessels, reaching the lungs and finally the liver parenchyma. Sexually mature worms descend into the venous system at specific anatomic locations: intestinal veins (S. mansoni, S. japonicum, S. mekongi, and S. intercalatum) and vesical and other pelvic veins (S. haematobium). After mating, adult gravid females travel against venous blood flow to small tributaries, where they deposit their ova intravascularly. Schistosome ova (Fig. 259-1) have specific morphologic features that vary with the species. Aided by enzymatic secretions through minipores in eggshells, ova move through the venous wall, traversing host tissues to reach the lumen of the intestinal or urinary tract, and are voided with stools or urine. Approximately 50% of ova are retained in host tissues locally (intestines or urinary tract) or are carried by venous blood flow to the liver and other organs. Schistosome ova that reach freshwater bodies hatch, releasing free-living miracidia that seek the snail intermediate host and undergo several cycles of asexual multiplication. Finally, infective cercariae are shed from snails to complete the transmission cycle.
# Chunk 3890
FIGuRE 259-2 Global distribution of schistosomiasis. A. Schistosoma mansoni infection (dark blue) is endemic in Africa, the Middle East, South America, and a few Caribbean countries. S. intercalatum infection (green) is endemic in sporadic foci in West and Central Africa. B. S. haematobium infection (purple) is endemic in Africa and the Middle East. The major endemic countries for S. japonicum infection (green) are China, the Philippines, and Indonesia. S. mekongi infection (red) is endemic in sporadic foci in Southeast Asia.
# Chunk 3891
S. mansoni), they lodge at presinusoidal sites, where granulomas are formed. These granulomas contribute to the hepatomegaly observed in infected individuals (Fig. 259-3). Schistosomal liver enlargement is also associated with certain class I and class II human leukocyte antigen (HLA) haplotypes and markers; its genetic basis appears to be polygenic. Presinusoidal portal blockage causes several hemodynamic changes, including portal hypertension and associated development of portosystemic collaterals at the esophagogastric junction and other sites. Esophageal varices are most likely to break and cause repeated episodes of hematemesis. Because changes in hepatic portal blood flow occur slowly, compensatory arterialization of the blood flow through the liver is established. Although this compensatory mechanism may be associated with certain metabolic side effects, retention of hepatocyte perfusion permits maintenance of normal liver function for several years.
# Chunk 3892
In general, disease manifestations of schistosomiasis occur in three stages, which vary not only by species but also by intensity of infection and other host factors, such as age and genetics of the human host. During the phase of cercarial invasion, a form of dermatitis may be observed. This so-called swimmers’ itch occurs most often with S. mansoni and S. japonicum infections, manifesting 2 or 3 days after invasion as an itchy maculopapular rash on the affected areas of the skin. The condition is particularly severe when humans are exposed to avian schistosomes. This form of cercarial dermatitis is also seen around freshwater lakes in the northern United States, particularly in the spring and summer months. Cercarial dermatitis is a self-limiting clinical entity. During worm maturation and at the beginning of oviposition (i.e., 4–8 weeks after skin invasion), acute schistosomiasis or Katayama syndrome—a serum sickness–like illness with fever, generalized lymphadenopathy, and hepatosplenomegaly—may develop. Individuals with acute schistosomiasis have a high degree of peripheral-blood eosinophilia. Parasite-specific antibodies may be detected before schistosome eggs are identified in excreta.
# Chunk 3893
S. mekongi, and S. intercalatum) cause intestinal and hepatosplenic disease as well as several manifestations associated with portal hypertension. During the intestinal phase, which may begin a few months after infection and may last for years, symptomatic patients characteristically have colicky abdominal pain, bloody diarrhea, and anemia. Patients may also report fatigue and an inability to perform daily routine functions and may show evidence of growth retardation and anemia. This more subtle form of schistosomiasis morbidity is generally underappreciated. The severity of intestinal schistosomiasis is often related to the intensity of the worm burden. The disease runs a chronic course and may result in colonic polyposis, which has been reported from some endemic areas, such as Egypt and Uganda.
# Chunk 3894
The clinical manifestations of S. haematobium infection occur relatively early and involve a high percentage of infected individuals. Up to 80% of children infected with S. haematobium have dysuria, frequency, and hematuria. Hematuria may sometimes occur only at the end of voiding. Urine examination reveals blood and albumin as well as an unusually high frequency of bacterial urinary tract infections and urinary sediment cellular metaplasia. These manifestations correlate with the intensity of infection, the presence of urinary bladder granulomas, and subsequent ulceration. Along with local effects of granuloma formation in the urinary bladder, obstruction of the lower end of the ureters results in hydroureter and hydronephrosis, which may be seen in 25–50% of infected children. As infection progresses, bladder granulomas undergo fibrosis, which results in typical sandy patches visible on cystoscopy. In many endemic areas, an association between squamous cell carcinoma of the bladder and S. haematobium infection has been observed. Such malignancy is detected in a younger age group than is transitional cell carcinoma. In fact, S. haematobium has now been classified as a human carcinogen. Genital schistosomiasis (described in the previous section) is a common presenting symptom among adults of both sexes.
# Chunk 3895
Individuals with established infection are diagnosed by a combination of geographic history, characteristic clinical presentation, and presence of schistosome ova in excreta. The diagnosis may also be established with the serologic assays mentioned above or with those that detect circulating schistosome antigens. These assays can be applied to blood, urine, or other body fluids (e.g., cerebrospinal fluid). For suspected schistosome infection, stool examination by the Kato thick smear or any other concentration method generally identifies most patients with heavy infection but does not identify all lightly infected individuals. For the latter patients, a point-of-care test to detect parasite circulating cathodic antigen in urine may prove very useful in establishing the presence of active S. mansoni infection and in monitoring the clearance of infection after treatment. For S. haematobium, urine may be examined by microscopy of sediment or by filtration of a known volume through Nuclepore filters. Sensitivity can be further improved by testing for parasite DNA in urine sediment. The Kato thick smear and Nuclepore filtration provide quantitative data on the intensity of infection, which is of value in assessing the degree of tissue damage and in monitoring the effect of chemotherapy. Schistosome infection may also be diagnosed by examination of tissue specimens, typically rectal biopsy samples; except in rare circumstances, other biopsy procedures (e.g., liver biopsy) are not needed.
# Chunk 3896
Treatment of schistosomiasis depends on the stage of infection and the clinical presentation. Other than topical dermatologic applications for relief of itching, no specific treatment is indicated for cercarial dermatitis caused by avian schistosomes. Therapy for acute schistosomiasis or Katayama syndrome needs to be adjusted appropriately for each case. Although antischistosomal chemotherapy may be used, it does not have a significant impact on maturing worms. In severe acute schistosomiasis, management in an acute-care setting is necessary, with supportive measures and consideration of glucocorticoid treatment to reduce inflammation. Once the acute critical phase is over, specific chemotherapy is indicated for parasite elimination. For all individuals with established infection, treatment to eradicate the parasite should be administered. The drug of choice is praziquantel, which—depending on the infecting species (Table 259-2)—is administered PO as a total of 40 or 60 mg/kg in two or three doses over a single day. Praziquantel treatment results in parasitologic cure in ~85% of cases and reduces egg counts by >90%. Efficacy rates among children <5 years old have been reported to be lower. These children are more likely to need re-treatment to effect a cure. Few side effects have been encountered, and those that do develop usually do not interfere with completion of treatment. Dependence on a single chemotherapeutic agent has raised the possibility of development of resistance in schistosomes; to date, such resistance does not seem to be clinically significant. The effect of antischistosomal treatment on disease manifestations varies by stage. Early hepatomegaly and bladder lesions are known to resolve after chemotherapy, but the late established manifestations, such as fibrosis, do not recede. Additional management modalities are needed for individuals with other manifestations, such as hepatocellular failure or recurrent hematemesis. The use of these interventions is guided by general medical and surgical principles.
# Chunk 3897
Clinical features of fascioliasis relate to the stage and intensity of infection. Acute disease develops during parasite migration (1–2 weeks after infection) and includes fever, right-upper-quadrant pain, hepatomegaly, and eosinophilia. Computed tomography (CT) of the liver may show multiple parenchymal holes/or migratory tracks. Symptoms and signs usually subside as the parasites reach their final habitat. In individuals with chronic infection, bile duct obstruction and biliary cirrhosis are infrequently demonstrated. No relation to hepatic malignancy has been ascribed to fascioliasis.
# Chunk 3898
Infection with the lung fluke Paragonimus westermani (Table 259-1) and related species (e.g., P. africanus) is endemic in many parts of the world, excluding North America and Europe. Endemicity is particularly noticeable in West Africa, Central and South America, and Asia. In nature, the reservoir hosts of P. westermani are wild and domestic felines. In Africa, P. africanus has been found in other species, such as dogs. Adult lung flukes, which are 7–12 mm in length, are found encapsulated in the lungs of infected persons. In rare circumstances, flukes are found encysted in the CNS (cerebral paragonimiasis) or the abdominal cavity. Humans acquire lung fluke infection by ingesting infective metacercariae encysted in the muscles and viscera of crayfish and freshwater crabs. In endemic areas, these 1429 crustaceans are consumed raw, marinated, or pickled. Once the organisms reach the duodenum, they excyst, penetrate the gut wall, and travel through the peritoneal cavity, diaphragm, and pleural space to reach the lungs. Mature flukes are found in the bronchioles surrounded by cystic lesions. Parasite eggs are either expectorated with sputum or swallowed and passed to the outside environment with feces. The life cycle is completed in snails and freshwater crustaceans.
# Chunk 3899
In cysticercosis, the clinical manifestations are variable. Cysticerci can be found anywhere in the body but are most commonly detected in the brain, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), skeletal muscle, subcutaneous tissue, or eye. The clinical presentation of cysticercosis depends on the number and location of cysticerci as well as on the extent of associated inflammatory responses or scarring. Neurologic manifestations are the most common (Fig. 260-1). Seizures are associated with inflammation surrounding cysticerci in the brain parenchyma. These seizures may be generalized, focal, or Jacksonian. Hydrocephalus results from CSF flow obstruction by cysticerci and accompanying inflammation or by CSF outflow obstruction from arachnoiditis. Symptoms of increased intra-cranial pressure, including headache, nausea, vomiting, changes in this problem can be overcome by using 1431 the more specific immunoblot assay. An immunoblot assay using lentil lectin purified glycoproteins is >99% specific and highly sensitive. However, patients with single intracranial lesions or with calcifications may be seronegative. With this assay, serum samples provide greater diagnostic sensitivity than CSF. All of the diagnostic antigens have been cloned, and assays using recombinant antigens are being developed. Antigen detection assays using monoclonal antibodies to detect parasite antigen in the blood or CSF may also facilitate diagnosis
# Chunk 3900
The initial management of neurocysticercosis should focus on symptom-based treatment of seizures or hydrocephalus. Seizures can usually be controlled with antiepileptic treatment. If parenchymal lesions resolve without development of calcifications and patients remain free of seizures, antiepileptic therapy can usually be discontinued after 1–2 years. Placebo-controlled trials are clarifying the clinical advantage of antiparasitic drugs for parenchymal neurocysticercosis. Trends toward faster resolution of neuroradiologic abnormalities have been observed in most studies. The clinical benefits are less dramatic and consist mainly of shortening the period during which recurrent seizures occur and decreasing the number of patients who have many recurrent seizures. For the treatment of patients with brain parenchymal cysticerci, most authorities favor antiparasitic drugs, including albendazole (15 mg/kg per day for 8–28 days) or praziquantel (50–100 mg/kg daily in three divided doses for 15–30 days). A combination of albendazole and praziquantel (50 mg/kg per day) may be more effective in patients with multiple lesions. A longer course or combination therapy is often needed in patients with multiple subarachnoid cysticerci. Both agents may exacerbate the inflammatory response around the dying parasite, thereby exacerbating seizures or hydrocephalus as well. Thus, patients receiving these drugs should be carefully monitored. High-dose glucocorticoids should be used during treatment. Because glucocorticoids induce first-pass metabolism of praziquantel and may decrease its antiparasitic effect, cimetidine should be co-administered to inhibit praziquantel metabolism.
# Chunk 3901
Patients with hepatic echinococcosis who are symptomatic most often present with abdominal pain or a palpable mass in the right upper quadrant. Compression of a bile duct or leakage of cyst fluid into the biliary tree may mimic recurrent cholelithiasis, and biliary obstruction can result in jaundice. Rupture of or episodic leakage from a hydatid cyst may produce fever, pruritus, urticaria, eosinophilia, or anaphylaxis. Pulmonary hydatid cysts may rupture into the bronchial tree or pleural cavity and produce cough, salty phlegm, dyspnea, chest pain, or hemoptysis. Rupture of hydatid cysts, which can occur spontaneously or at surgery, may lead to multifocal dissemination of protoscolices, which can form additional cysts. Other presentations are due to the involvement of bone (invasion of the medullary cavity with slow bone erosion producing pathologic fractures), the CNS (spaceoccupying lesions), the heart (conduction defects, pericarditis), and the pelvis (pelvic mass).
# Chunk 3902
A specific diagnosis of E. granulosus infection can be made by the examination of aspirated fluids for protoscolices or hooklets, but diagnostic aspiration is not usually recommended because of the risk of fluid leakage resulting in either dissemination of infection or anaphy-1433 lactic reactions. Serodiagnostic assays can be useful, although a negative test does not exclude the diagnosis of echinococcosis. Cysts in the liver elicit positive antibody responses in ~90% of cases, whereas up to 50% of individuals with cysts in the lungs are seronegative. Detection of antibody to specific echinococcal antigens by immunoblotting has the highest degree of specificity.
# Chunk 3903
Therapy for cystic echinococcosis is based on considerations of the size, location, and manifestations of cysts and the overall health of the patient. Surgery has traditionally been the principal definitive method of treatment. Currently, ultrasound staging is recommended for E. granulosus infections (Fig. 260-2). Small CL, CE1, and CE3 lesions may respond to chemotherapy with albendazole. For CE1 lesions and uncomplicated CE3 lesions, PAIR (percutaneous aspiration, infusion of scolicidal agents, and reaspiration) is now recommended instead of surgery. PAIR is contraindicated for superficially located cysts (because of the risk of rupture), for cysts with multiple thick internal septal divisions (honeycombing pattern), and for cysts communicating with the biliary tree. For prophylaxis of secondary peritoneal echinococcosis due to inadvertent spillage of fluid during PAIR, the administration of albendazole (15 mg/kg daily in two divided doses) should be initiated at least 2 days before the procedure and continued for at least 4 weeks afterward. Ultrasound-or CT-guided aspiration allows confirmation of the diagnosis by demonstration of protoscolices in the aspirate. After aspiration, contrast material should be injected to detect occult communications with the biliary tract. Alternatively, the fluid should be checked for bile staining visually and by dipstick. If no bile is found and no communication is visualized, the contrast material is reaspirated, with subsequent infusion of scolicidal agents (usually 95% ethanol; alternatively, hypertonic saline). This approach, when implemented by a skilled practitioner, yields rates of cure and relapse equivalent to those following surgery, with less perioperative morbidity and shorter hospitalization. In experienced hands, some CE2 lesions can be treated by aspiration with a trocar. Daughter cysts within the primary cyst may need to be punctured separately, and catheter drainage may be required.
# Chunk 3904
E. granulosus cysts (e.g., those communicating with the biliary tract), for most thoracic and intracranial cysts, and for areas where PAIR is not possible. For E. granulosus of the liver, the preferred surgical approach is pericystectomy, in which the entire cyst and the surrounding fibrous tissue are removed. The risks posed by leakage of fluid during surgery or PAIR include anaphylaxis and dissemination of infectious protoscolices. The latter complication has been minimized by careful attention to the prevention of spillage of the cyst and by soaking of the drapes with hypertonic saline. Infusion of scolicidal agents is no longer recommended because of problems with hypernatremia, intoxication, or sclerosing cholangitis. Albendazole, which is active against Echinococcus, should be administered adjunctively, beginning several days before resection of the liver and continuing for several weeks for E. granulosus. Praziquantel (50 mg/kg daily for 2 weeks) may hasten the death of the protoscolices. Medical therapy with albendazole alone for 12 weeks to 6 months results in cure in ~30% of cases and in improvement in another 50%. In many instances of treatment failure, E. granulosus infections are subsequently treated successfully with PAIR or additional courses of medical therapy. Response to treatment is best assessed by serial imaging studies, with attention to cyst size and consistency. Some cysts may not demonstrate complete radiologic resolution even though no viable protoscolices are present. Some of these cysts with partial radiologic resolution (e.g., CE4 or CE5) can be managed with observation only.
# Chunk 3905
Etiology and Pathogenesis H. nana is the only cestode of humans that does not require an intermediate host. Both the larval and adult phases of the life cycle take place in the human. The adult—the smallest tapeworm parasitizing humans—is ~2 cm long and dwells in the proximal ileum. Proglottids, which are small and rarely seen in the stool, release spherical eggs 30–44 μm in diameter, each of which contains an oncosphere with six hooklets. The eggs are immediately infective and are unable to survive for >10 days in the external environment. When the egg is ingested by a new host, the oncosphere is freed and penetrates the intestinal villi, becoming a cysticercoid larva. Larvae migrate back into the intestinal lumen, attach to the mucosa, and mature into adult worms over 10–12 days. Eggs may also hatch before passing into the stool, causing internal autoinfection with increasing numbers of intestinal worms. Although the life span of adult H. nana worms is only ~4–10 weeks, the autoinfection cycle perpetuates the infection.
# Chunk 3906
Diphyllobothrium latum and other Diphyllobothrium species are found in the lakes, rivers, and deltas of the Northern Hemisphere, central Africa, and South America. Etiology and Pathogenesis The adult worm—the longest tapeworm (up to 25 m)—attaches to the ileal and occasionally to the jejunal mucosa by its suckers, which are located on its elongated scolex. The adult worm has 3000–4000 proglottids, which release ~1 million eggs daily into the feces. If an egg reaches water, it hatches and releases a free-swimming embryo that can be eaten by small freshwater crustaceans (Cyclops or Diaptomus species). After an infected crustacean containing a developed procercoid is swallowed by a fish, the larva migrates into the fish’s flesh and grows into a plerocercoid, or sparganum larva. Humans acquire the infection by ingesting infected raw or smoked fish. Within 3–5 weeks, the tapeworm matures into an adult in the human intestine.
# Chunk 3907
Dipylidium caninum, a common tapeworm of dogs and cats, may accidentally infect humans. Dogs, cats, and occasionally humans become infected by ingesting fleas harboring cysticercoids. Children are more likely to become infected than adults. Most infections are asymptomatic, but abdominal pain, diarrhea, anal pruritus, urticaria, eosinophilia, or passage of segments in the stool may occur. The diagnosis is made by the detection of proglottids or ova in the stool. As in D. latum infection, therapy consists of praziquantel. Prevention requires anthelmintic treatment and flea control for pet dogs or cats.
# Chunk 3908
The potential impact of anthrax spores as a bioweapon was clearly demonstrated in 1979 following the accidental release of spores into the atmosphere from a Soviet Union bioweapons facility in Sverdlovsk, Russia. Although total figures are not known, at least 77 cases of anthrax were diagnosed with certainty, of which 66 were fatal. These victims were exposed in an area within 4 km downwind of the facility, and deaths due to anthrax were also noted in livestock up to 50 km further downwind. Based on recorded wind patterns, the interval between the time of exposure and development of clinical illness ranged from 2 to 43 days. The majority of cases were within the first 2 weeks. Death typically occurred within 1–4 days following the onset of symptoms. It is likely that the widespread use of postexposure penicillin prophylaxis limited the total number of cases. The extended period of time between exposure and disease in some individuals supports the data from nonhuman primate studies, suggesting that anthrax spores can lie dormant in the respiratory tract for at least 4–6 weeks without evoking an immune response. This extended period of microbiologic latency following exposure poses a significant challenge for management of victims in the postexposure period.
# Chunk 3909
(Photographs provided by Dr. Mary Wu Chang. Part A reproduced with permission from KJ Roche et al: N Engl J Med 345:1611, 2001 and Parts B and C reproduced with permission from A Freedman et al: JAMA 287:869, 2002.) form most likely to be responsible for death in the setting of a bioterrorist attack. It occurs following the inhalation of spores that become deposited in the alveolar spaces. These spores are phagocytized by macrophages and transported to the mediastinal and peribronchial lymph nodes where they germinate, leading to active bacterial growth and elaboration of the bacterial products edema toxin and lethal toxin. Subsequent hematogenous spread of bacteria is accompanied by cardiovascular collapse and death. The earliest symptoms are typically a viral-like prodrome with fever, malaise, and abdominal and/or chest symptoms that progress over the course of a few days to a moribund state. Characteristic findings on chest x-ray include mediastinal widening and pleural effusions (Fig. 261e-3). Although initially thought to be 100% fatal, the experiences at Sverdlovsk in 1979 and in the United States in 2001 (see below) indicate that with prompt initiation of antibiotic therapy, survival is possible. The characteristics of the 11 cases of inhalational anthrax diagnosed in the United States in 2001 following exposure to contaminated letters postmarked September 18 or October 9, 2001, followed the classic pattern established for this illness, with patients presenting with a rapidly progressive course characterized by fever, fatigue or malaise, nausea or vomiting, cough, and shortness of breath. At presentation, the total white blood cell counts were ~10,000 cells/μL; transaminases tended to be elevated, and all 11 had abnormal findings on chest x-ray and computed tomography (CT). Radiologic findings included infiltrates, mediastinal widening, and hemorrhagic pleural effusions. For cases in which the dates of exposure were known, symptoms appeared within 4–6 days. Death occurred within 7 days of diagnosis in the five fatal cases (overall mortality rate 55%). Rapid diagnosis and prompt initiation of antibiotic therapy were key to survival.
# Chunk 3910
Microbiology and Clinical Features Plague is caused by Y. pestis, a non-motile, gram-negative bacillus that exhibits bipolar, or “safety pin,” staining with Wright, Giemsa, or Wayson stains. It has had a major impact on the course of history, thus adding to the element of fear evoked by its mention. The earliest reported plague epidemic was in 224 b.c. in China. The most infamous pandemic began in Europe in the fourteenth century, during which time one-third to one-half of the entire population of Europe was killed. During a plague outbreak in India in 1994, even though the number of confirmed cases was relatively small, it is estimated that 500,000 individuals fled their homes in fear of this disease. In the first decade of the twenty-first century, 21,725 cases of plague were reported to the World Health Organization (WHO). Over 90% of these cases were from Africa, and the overall case fatality rate was 7.4%.
# Chunk 3911
Fever, myalgia, rash, encephalitis, prostration

Dry mouth, blurred vision, ptosis, weakness, dysarthria, dysphagia, dizziness, respiratory failure, progressive paralysis, dilated pupils 1–12 days Culture, Gram stain, PCR, Wright stain of peripheral smear 1–60 days Postexposure:
# Chunk 3912
Doxycycline, 100 mg PO bid or Levofloxacin, 500 mg PO daily

Doxycycline, 100 mg PO bid × 14 days or
# Chunk 3913
Ciprofloxacin, 500 mg PO bid × 14 days

Administration of antitoxin

Abbreviations: CDC, U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; FDA, U.S. Food and Drug Administration; HBAT, heptavalent botulinum antitoxin; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; RT-PCR, reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction.
# Chunk 3914
to disseminated intravascular coagulation, and gangrene of the digits infiltrates and consolidation on chest x-ray. In the absence of antibiotand/or nose may develop in patients with advanced septicemic plague. ics, the mortality rate of this form of plague is on the order of 85%, and It is thought that this appearance of some patients gave rise to the term death usually occurs within 2–6 days. Black Death in reference to the plague epidemic of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. Some patients may develop pneumonia (secondary pneumonic plague) as a complication of bubonic or septicemic plague. These patients may then transmit the agent to others via the respira-Streptomycin, tetracycline, doxycycline, and levofloxacin are tory route, causing cases of primary pneumonic plague. Primary pneu-licensed by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the monic plague is the manifestation most likely to occur as the result of a treatment of plague. Levofloxacin was approved for this indication bioterrorist attack, with an aerosol of bacteria spread over a wide area in 2012 via the animal rule (see below). Multiple additional antibiotor a particular environment that is densely populated. In this setting, ics licensed for other infections are commonly used and are likely patients would be expected to develop fever, cough with hemoptysis, effective. Among these are aminoglycosides such as gentamicin, dyspnea, and gastrointestinal symptoms 1–6 days following exposure. cephalosporins, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, chloramphenicol, Clinical features of pneumonia would be accompanied by pulmonary and ciprofloxacin (Table 261e-3). A multidrug-resistant strain of
# Chunk 3915
Vaccination and Prevention A formalin-fixed, whole-organism vaccine was licensed by the FDA for the prevention of plague. That vaccine is no longer being manufactured, but its potential value as a current countermeasure against bioterrorism would likely have been modest at best as it was ineffective against animal models of primary pneumonic plague. Efforts are under way to develop a second generation of vaccines that will protect against aerosol challenge. Among the candidates being tested are recombinant forms of the fraction 1 capsular (F1) antigen and the virulence component of the type III secretion apparatus (V) antigen of Y. pestis. It is likely that doxycycline or levofloxacin would provide coverage in a chemoprophylaxis setting. Unlike the case with anthrax, in which one has to be concerned about the persistence of ungerminated spores in the respiratory tract, the duration of prophylaxis against plague need only extend to 7 days following exposure.
# Chunk 3916
See also Chap. 220e.

Variola Virus as a Bioweapon Given that most of the world’s population was once vaccinated against smallpox, variola virus would not have been considered a good candidate as a bioweapon 30 years ago. However, with the cessation of immunization programs in the United States in 1972 and throughout the world in 1980 due to the successful global eradication of smallpox, close to 50% of the U.S. population is fully susceptible to smallpox today. Given its infectious nature and the 10–30% mortality rate in unimmunized individuals, the deliberate spread of this virus could have a devastating effect on our society and unleash a previously conquered deadly disease. It is estimated that an initial infection of 50–100 persons in a first generation of cases could expand by a factor of 10–20 with each succeeding generation in the absence of any effective containment measures. Although the likely implementation of an effective public health response makes this scenario unlikely, it does illustrate the potential damage and disruption that can result from a smallpox outbreak.
# Chunk 3917
Microbiology and Clinical Features Smallpox is caused by one of two variants of variola virus, V. major and V. minor. Variola is a double-strand DNA virus and member of the Orthopoxvirus genus of the Poxviridae family. Infections with V. minor are generally less severe than those of V. major, with milder constitutional symptoms and lower mortality rates; thus V. major is the only one considered to be a viable bioweapon. Infection with V. major typically occurs following contact with an infected person. Patients are infectious from the time that a maculopapular rash appears on the skin and oropharynx through the resolution and scabbing of the pustular lesions. Infection occurs principally during close contact, through the inhalation of saliva droplets containing virus from the oropharyngeal exanthem. Aerosolized material from contaminated clothing or linen can also spread infection. Several days after exposure, a primary viremia is believed to occur that results in dissemination of virus to lymphoid tissues. A secondary viremia occurs ~4 days later that leads to localization of infection in the dermis. Approximately 12–14 days following the initial exposure, the patient develops high fever, malaise, vomiting, headache, backache, and a maculopapular rash that begins on the face and extremities and spreads to the trunk (centripetal) with lesions in the same developmental stage in any given location. This is in contrast to the rash of varicella (chickenpox) that begins on the trunk and face and spreads to the extremities (centrifugal) with lesions at all stages of development. The lesions are initially maculopapular and evolve to vesicles that eventually become pustules and then scabs. The oral mucosa also develops maculopapular lesions that evolve to ulcers. The lesions appear over a period of 1–2 days and evolve at the same rate. Although virus can be isolated from the scabs on the skin, the conventional thinking is that once the scabs have formed the patient is no longer contagious. Smallpox is associated with 10–30% mortality rates, with patients typically dying of severe systemic illness during the second week of symptoms. Historically, ~5–10% of naturally occurring smallpox cases take either of two highly virulent atypical forms, classified as hemorrhagic and malignant. These are difficult to diagnose because of their atypical presentations. The hemorrhagic form is uniformly fatal and begins with the relatively abrupt onset of a severely prostrating illness characterized by high fevers and severe headache and back and abdominal pain. This form of the illness resembles a severe systemic inflammatory syndrome, in which patients have a high viremia but die without developing the characteristic rash. Cutaneous erythema develops accompanied by petechiae and hemorrhages into the skin and mucous membranes. Death usually occurs within 5–6 days. The malignant, or “flat,” form of smallpox is frequently fatal and has an onset similar to the hemorrhagic form, but with confluent skin lesions developing more slowly and never progressing to the pustular stage.
# Chunk 3918
Humans can become infected through a variety of environmental sources. Infection is most common in rural areas where a variety of small mammals may serve as reservoirs. Human infections in the summer are often the result of insect bites from ticks, flies, or mosquitoes that have bitten infected animals. In colder months, infections are most likely the result of direct contact with infected mammals and are most common in hunters. In these settings, infection typically presents as a systemic illness with an area of inflammation and necrosis at the site of tissue entry. Drinking of contaminated water may lead to an oropharyngeal form of tularemia characterized by pharyngitis with cervical and/or retropharyngeal lymphadenopathy (Chap. 195). The most likely mode of dissemination of tularemia as a biologic weapon would be as an aerosol, as has occurred in a number of natural outbreaks in rural areas, including Martha’s Vineyard in the United States. Approximately 1–14 days following exposure by this route, one would expect to see inflammation of the airways with pharyngitis, pleuritis, and bronchopneumonia. Typical symptoms would include the abrupt onset of fever, fatigue, chills, headache, and malaise (Table 261e-3). Some patients might experience conjunctivitis with ulceration, pharyngitis, and/or cutaneous exanthems. A pulse-temperature dissociation might be present. Approximately 50% of patients would show a pulmonary infiltrate on chest x-ray. Hilar adenopathy might also be present, and a small percentage of patients could have adenopathy without infiltrates. The highly variable presentation makes acute recognition of aerosol-disseminated tularemia very difficult. The diagnosis would likely be made by immunohistochemistry, molecular techniques, or culture of infected tissues or blood. Untreated, mortality rates range from 5 to 15% for cutaneous routes of infection and from 30 to 60% for infection by inhalation. Since the advent of antibiotic therapy, these rates have dropped to <2%.
# Chunk 3919
Microbiology and Clinical Features The viral hemorrhagic fevers are a group of illnesses caused by any one of a number of similar viruses (Table 261e-2). These viruses are all enveloped, single-strand RNA viruses that are thought to depend on a host reservoir for long-term survival. Although rodents or insects have been identified as the hosts for some of these viruses, for others the hosts are unknown. These viruses tend to be geographically restricted according to the migration patterns of their hosts. Great apes are not a natural reservoir for Ebola virus, but large numbers of these animals in sub-Saharan Africa have died from Ebola infection over the past decade. Humans can become infected with hemorrhagic fever viruses if they come into contact with an infected host or other infected animals. Person-to-person transmission, largely through direct contact with virus-containing body fluids, has been documented for Ebola, Marburg, and Lassa viruses and rarely for the New World arenaviruses. Although there is no clear evidence of respiratory spread among humans, these viruses have been shown in animal models to be highly infectious by the aerosol route. This, coupled with mortality rates as high as 90%, makes them excellent candidate agents of bioterrorism.
# Chunk 3920
Treatment for botulism is mainly supportive and may require intubation, mechanical ventilation, and parenteral nutrition (Table 261e-3). If diagnosed early enough, administration of equine antitoxin may reduce the extent of nerve injury and decrease the severity of disease. At present, a heptavalent botulinum antitoxin (HBAT) is available through the CDC as an investigational agent for treatment of naturally occurring noninfant botulism. HBAT contains horse serum–derived antibody fragments to all seven known botulinum toxins (A–G). It is composed of <2% intact immunoglobulin and ≥90% Fab and F(ab′)2 immunoglobulin fragments. A single dose of antitoxin is usually adequate to neutralize any circulating toxin. Repeat dosing may be needed in a setting of continued toxin exposure. Given that this product is derived from horse serum, one needs to be vigilant for hypersensitivity reactions, including serum sickness and anaphylaxis following its administration. Once the damage to the nerve axon has been done, however, there is little possible in the way of specific therapy. At this point, vigilance for secondary complications such as infections during the protracted recovery phase is of the utmost importance. Due to their ability to worsen neuromuscular blockade, aminoglycosides and clindamycin should be avoided in the treatment of these infections.
# Chunk 3921
The number of FDA-approved and licensed drugs and vaccines for category A and B agents is currently limited and not reflective of the pharmacy of today. In an effort to speed the licensure of additional drugs and vaccines for these diseases, the FDA has a rule for the licensure of such countermeasures against agents of bioterrorism when adequate and well-controlled clinical efficacy studies cannot be ethically conducted in humans. This is commonly referred to as the “Animal Rule.” Thus, for indications in which field trials of prophylaxis or therapy for a naturally occurring disease are not feasible, the FDA will rely on evidence solely from laboratory animal studies. For this rule to apply, it must be shown that (1) there are reasonably well-understood pathophysiologic mechanisms for the condition and its treatment; (2) the effect of the intervention is independently substantiated in at least two animal species, including species expected to react with a response predictive for humans; (3) the animal study endpoint is clearly related to the desired benefit in humans; and (4) the data in animals allow selection of an effective dose in humans. As noted above, levofloxacin for treatment of plague and raxibacumab for treatment of inhalational anthrax have been licensed via this mechanism.
# Chunk 3922
Source: State of New York, Department of Health.

appearing hours after exposure. The organs most commonly affected blister formation. Mustard also has mild cholinergic activity, which are the skin (with erythema and vesicles), the eyes (with manifestations may be responsible for effects such as early gastrointestinal and CNS ranging from mild conjunctivitis to severe eye damage), and the air-symptoms. Mustard reacts with tissue within minutes of entering the ways (with effects ranging from mild upper airway irritation to severe body. Its circulating half-life in unaltered form is extremely brief. bronchiolar damage). After exposure to large quantities of mustard, precursor cells of the bone marrow are damaged, with consequent pan-Clinical Features Topical effects of mustard occur in the skin, airways, cytopenia and secondary infection. The gastrointestinal mucosa may and eyes; the eyes are most sensitive and the airways next most sensibe damaged, and there are sometimes central nervous system (CNS) tive. Absorbed mustard may produce effects in the bone marrow, gas-signs of unknown mechanism. No specific antidotes exist; manage-trointestinal tract, and CNS. Direct injury to the gastrointestinal tract ment is entirely supportive. Immediate decontamination of the liquid also may occur after ingestion of the compound through contaminais the only way to reduce damage. Complete decontamination in 2 min tion of water or food. stops clinical injury; decontamination at 5 min reduces skin injury by Erythema is the mildest and earliest form of mustard skin injury. It ~50%. Table 262e-2 lists approaches to decontamination after expo-resembles sunburn and is associated with pruritus, burning, or sting-sure to mustard and other CWAs. ing pain. Erythema begins to appear within 2 h to 2 days after vapor
# Chunk 3923
(Fig. 262e-3). About 90% of eye injuries related to mustard heal in 2 weeks to 2 months without sequelae. Scarring between the iris and the lens may follow severe effects; this scarring may restrict pupillary movements and predispose victims to glaucoma. The most severe damage is caused by liquid mustard. Extensive eye exposure can be followed by severe corneal damage with possible perforation of the cornea and loss of the eye. In some individuals, latent chronic keratitis, sometimes associated with corneal ulcerations, has been described as early as 8 months and as late as 20 years after initial exposure.
# Chunk 3924
The management of a patient exposed to mustard may range from simple (as in the provision of symptom-based care for a sunburn-like erythema) to complex (as in total management of a severely ill patient with burns, immunosuppression, and multi-system involvement). Before raw denuded areas of skin develop, especially with less severe exposures, topical cortisone creams or lotions may be of benefit. Some very basic research data point to the early use of anti-inflammatory preparations. Small blisters (<1–2 cm) should be left intact. Because larger bullae eventually will break, they should be unroofed carefully. Denuded areas should be irrigated three or four times daily with saline, other sterile solutions, or soapy water and then liberally covered with the topical antibiotic of choice, such as silver sulfadiazine, mafenide acetate, or triple antibiotic ointment to a thickness of 1–2 mm. Some physicians advocate sterile needle drainage of large blisters, with collapsing of the blister roof to form a sterile dressing. Mustard blister fluid does not contain sulfur mustard but rather consists only of sterile tissue fluid. Health care staff should not fear possible contamination. If an antibiotic cream is not available, sterile petrolatum will be useful. Modified Dakin’s solution (sodium hypochlorite, 0.5%) was used for field-expedient irrigation and antisepsis both in WWI and for Iranian casualties in the Iran–Iraq war (1984–1987). Large areas of vesication require hospitalization, IV therapy, and whirlpool bath irrigation.
# Chunk 3925
Leukopenia begins around day 3 with major systemic absorption. Marrow suppression peaks at 7–14 days. In the Iran–Iraq war, a white blood cell count of ≤200/μL usually resulted in death of the patient. Sterilization of the gut by nonabsorbable antibiotics should be considered to reduce the possibility of sepsis from enteric organisms. Cellular replacement (bone marrow transplants or transfusions) may be successful. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor produced a 50% reduction in the time required for bone marrow recovery in nonhuman primates exposed to sulfur mustard. Medication for nausea and vomiting may be necessary for gastrointestinal side effects. Lymphopenia precedes general leukopenia by a day or more and may be a useful clinical tip-off to impending leukopenia.
# Chunk 3926
of a chemical agent is essential. Scrubbing of exposed skin with a stiff brush or bristles is discouraged, because skin damage may occur and may increase absorption of agent. “Gentle” liquid dish soap and copious amounts of water should be used, with mild to moderate friction applied with a single-use sponge or washcloth in the first and second washes. The third wash should be a rinse with copious amounts of warm or tepid water. Shampoo can be used to wash the hair. If only cold water is available, it should be used; decontamination should not be delayed while warm water is sought. Spot (local) decontamination with reactive skin decontamination lotion (RSDL), followed by a soap and water wash/shower, is the method preferred by the Department of Defense. RSDL is available for purchase by civilians and has been shown to be superior across a broad spectrum of nerve agents as well as sulfur mustard. RSDL is the only product approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for initial spot decontamination. An important caveat is that RSDL and 0.5% sodium hypochlorite (dilute bleach military field expedient) should not be used concurrently because of a potential exothermic reaction. In any event, decontamination must be accomplished before the patient enters the medical facility to avoid contaminating the facility and its staff. In patients with contaminated wounds, potentially contaminated clothing and other foreign material that may serve as a depot for the liquid agent should be extracted.
# Chunk 3927
Oximes Oximes are nucleophiles that reactivate the cholinesterase whose active site has been occupied and bound to nerve agent (Table 262e-3). Therapy with oximes therefore restores normal enzyme function. Oxime therapy is limited by a second side reaction, called “aging,” in which a side chain on nerve agents falls off the complex at a characteristic rate. “Aged” complexes are negatively charged, and oximes cannot reactivate negatively charged complexes. The practical effect of this limitation differs from one nerve agent to another since each ages at a characteristic rate. For example, sarin ages in 3–5 h, tabun ages over a longer period (12–13 h), and VX ages much less rapidly (>48 h). All these intervals are so much longer than the patient’s expected life span and expected treatment time after acute nerve-agent toxicity that they are irrelevant. Soman, in contrast, ages in 2 min; thus, only a few minutes after exposure, oximes are useless in treating soman poisoning. The oxime used varies by country; the United States has approved and fielded 2-PAM Cl. MARK 1 kits and Duodotes® (Fig. 262e-5A) both contain autoinjectors holding 600 mg of 2-PAM Cl. Initial field loading doses are 600, 1200, and 1800 mg. Since blood pressure may become elevated after administration of 45 mg/kg in adults, field use of 2-PAM Cl is restricted to 1800 mg/h IM. During the time when more oxime cannot be given, atropine alone is recommended. In the hospital setting, 2.5–25 mg/kg of 2-PAM Cl by the IV route has been found to reactivate 50% of inhibited cholinesterase. The usual recommendation is 1000 mg by slow IV drip over 20–30 min, with ≤2500 mg over a period of 1–1.5 h. Active research aims to field a more effective and broader-spectrum oxime than 2-PAM Cl.
# Chunk 3928
The classic two-step cyanide antidote kit includes two IV solutions: sodium nitrite and sodium thiosulfate. It may also include amyl nitrite perles for inhalation. Nitrites are methemoglobin formers; when administered to a patient, nitrite converts a fraction of the body’s hemoglobin into methemoglobin by converting heme iron from Fe++ to Fe+++. CN– has a greater affinity for methemoglobin Fe+++ than for cytochrome a3. As a result, administration of nitrite creates a “sink” of cyanmethemoglobin; formation of methemoglobin pulls CN– off mitochondrial cytochrome a3, allowing cellular respiration to resume. Recent work suggests that nitrites may also work via a second mechanism involving the neurotransmitter nitrous oxide; if so, this mechanism may explain why cyanide-poisoned patients improve after nitrite administration faster than is explained by the known rate of methemoglobin formation.
# Chunk 3929
Nitrite administration may save the patient acutely but creates an unstable pool of cyanmethemoglobin, the elimination of which requires a sulfur donor: sodium thiosulfate. Sodium thiosulfate donates sulfur to the reaction catalyzed by rhodanese; cyanide is converted to thiocyanate, a compound the body eliminates harmlessly in urine. Sodium thiosulfate alone may be administered to fire victims, whose oxygen-carrying capacity is already reduced and in whom the administration of nitrite may form so much methemoglobin as to render the blood unable to carry oxygen at all.
# Chunk 3930
Hydroxocobalamin, or vitamin B12a, has recently been approved for use as an alternative cyanide antidote. Unlike sodium nitrite and sodium thiosulfate, it must be reconstituted at the scene. Hydroxocobalamin lacks the propensity of nitrites for hypotension, but many cases in which it has been beneficial have also required the use of sodium thiosulfate. Hydroxocobalamin causes an orange discoloration of the skin that is of no functional significance.
# Chunk 3931
All of these antidotes require the placement of an IV line. Amyl nitrite is currently the only non-intravenous cyanide antidote available and has never been formally approved by the FDA. Amyl nitrite aVictims whose clothing or skin is contaminated with hydrogen cyanide liquid or solution can secondarily contaminate response personnel by direct contact or through off-gassing vapors. Dermal contact with cyanide-contaminated victims or with the gastric contents of victims who may have ingested cyanide-containing materials should be avoided. Victims exposed only to hydrogen cyanide gas do not pose contamination risks to rescuers. If the patient is a victim of recent smoke inhalation (and thus may have high carboxyhemoglobin levels), only sodium thiosulfate should be administered. bIf sodium nitrite is unavailable, administer amyl nitrite by inhalation from crushable ampoules. cAvailable in cyanide antidote kits, which can be purchased from various manufacturers.
# Chunk 3932
Blocking agents prevent the entrance of radioactive materials. The best-recognized effective blocking agent is potassium iodide (KI), which blocks the uptake of radioactive iodine (131I) by the thyroid. KI is most effective if taken within the first hour after exposure and is still effective 6 h after exposure. Its effectiveness subsequently declines until 24 h after exposure; however, it is recommended that KI be taken up to 48 h after exposure. The KI dose is based on age, predicted thyroid exposure, and pregnancy and lactation status. Adults between the ages of 18 and 40 should receive 130 mg/d for 7–14 days if exposed to ≥10 cGy of radioactive iodine. Other thyroid-blocking agents include propylthiouracil (100 mg tid for 8 days) and methimazole (10 mg tid for 2 days followed by 5 mg tid for 6 days). These agents are somewhat less effective than KI.
# Chunk 3933
Chelating agents can bind many radioactive materials, after which the complexes are excreted from the body. In this regard, diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA)—as either Ca-DTPA or Zn-DTPA—is superior to ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA); DTPA has been approved by the FDA to treat internal contamination with plutonium, americium, and curium, but it also chelates berkelium, californium, and any other material with an atomic number >92. Ca-DTPA is more effective than Zn-DTPA during the first 24 h after internal contamination, and the two drugs are equally effective after the initial 24 h. If both drugs are available, Ca-DTPA should be given as the first dose. If additional treatment is needed, treatment should be switched to Zn-DTPA. The dose is 1 g of Ca-DTPA or Zn-DTPA, dissolved in 250 mL of normal saline or 5% glucose and given intravenously over 1 h daily. The duration of chelation treatment depends on the amount of internal contamination and the individual response to treatment. DTPA also can be administrated by nebulized inhalation; 1 g is given in a 1:1 dilution with water or saline over 15–20 min. Nebulized Zn-DTPA is recommended if inhalation was the only route of internal contamination. The IV route is recommended and should be used if the route of internal contamination is not known or if multiple routes of internal contamination are likely. DTPA penta-ethyl ester is a prodrug that has a favorable oral-absorption profile and whose therapeutic effects have been demonstrated in initial efficacy studies. Because it can be given orally, this prodrug may ultimately prove more useful in the setting of mass casualties than IV or nebulized forms of the drug. Treating uranium contamination with DTPA is contraindicated due to synergistic damage to the kidneys.
# Chunk 3934
One of the major difficulties in treating victims exposed to radiation is determination of the amount of exposure. Immediately after a terrorist event, when victims are being triaged, information regarding source, dose, and exposure time is unlikely to be available. Clinical assessment of the patient is the best approach and includes history, physical examination, and observation for onset of the ARS prodrome. An early prodrome indicates high-level exposure to radiation. Victims who arrive at the hospital reporting severe weakness, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, or seizures probably will not survive despite supportive measures. A very limited number of tests can be performed to estimate 263e-7 radiation exposure and contamination. The Biodosimetry Assessment Tool (BAT) facilitates treatment decisions during radiation exposure incidents. Developed by the U.S. Armed Forces Radiobiology Research Institute (AFRRI), the BAT provides a method of estimating radiation exposure on the basis of a single lymphocyte count, the lymphocyte depletion rate, and the time from exposure to onset of emesis. The BAT algorithms are based on large datasets from human radiation exposure and are available at http://www.usuhs.mil/afrri/outreach/request.htm. The patient should be observed for clinical symptoms, and the severity and time of onset of nausea, vomiting, headache, anorexia, fever, hypotension, tachycardia, weakness, cognitive changes, skin desquamation, diarrhea, and bloody stools should be recorded. The AFRRI Biodosimetry Worksheet (http://www.usuhs.mil/afrri/outreach/pdf/ afrriform331.pdf ) is a useful resource for detailed recording. Baseline tests should include a complete blood count with differential and platelet count, renal evaluation, and determination of electrolytes, serum amylase, and serum C-reactive protein. Urine and stool samples should be obtained if internal contamination is suspected. Nasal swabs taken from each nostril within the first 1–2 h after the exposure may be useful for determination of radionuclide inhalation. After exhalation, each swab is labeled, sealed in a plastic bag, and sent for analysis to appropriate laboratories. Patients exposed to 0.7–4 Gy develop pancytopenia from as early as 10 days to as late as 8 weeks after exposure. Lymphocytes show the most rapid decline, whereas counts of other leukocytes and platelets decline less rapidly. Erythrocytes are the least vulnerable blood elements.
# Chunk 3935
Approach to the Patient with Possible Cardiovascular Disease Joseph Loscalzo THE MAGNITUDE OF THE PROBLEM Cardiovascular diseases comprise the most prevalent serious disorders in industrialized nations and are a rapidly growing problem in devel-oping nations (Chap. 266e). Age-adjusted death rates for coronary heart disease have declined by two-thirds in the last four decades in the United States, reflecting the identification and reduction of risk factors as well as improved treatments and interventions for the man-agement of coronary artery disease, arrhythmias, and heart failure. Nonetheless, cardiovascular diseases remain the most common causes of death, responsible for 35% of all deaths, almost 1 million deaths each year. Approximately one-fourth of these deaths are sudden. In addition, cardiovascular diseases are highly prevalent, diagnosed in 80 million adults, or ~35% of the adult population. The growing preva-lence of obesity (Chap. 416), type 2 diabetes mellitus (Chap. 417), and metabolic syndrome (Chap. 422), which are important risk factors for atherosclerosis, now threatens to reverse the progress that has been made in the age-adjusted reduction in the mortality rate of coronary heart disease. For many years cardiovascular disease was considered to be more common in men than in women. In fact, the percentage of all deaths secondary to cardiovascular disease is higher among women (43%) than among men (37%) (Chap. 6e). In addition, although the absolute number of deaths secondary to cardiovascular disease has declined over the past decades in men, this number has actually risen in women. Inflammation, obesity, type 2 diabetes mellitus, and the metabolic syndrome appear to play more prominent roles in the development of coronary atherosclerosis in women than in men. Coronary artery disease (CAD) is more frequently associated with dysfunction of the coronary microcirculation in women than in men. Exercise electro-cardiography has a lower diagnostic accuracy in the prediction of epicardial obstruction in women than in men. NATURAL HISTORY Cardiovascular disorders often present acutely, as in a previously asymptomatic person who develops an acute myocardial infarction (Chap. 295), or a previously asymptomatic patient with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (Chap. 287), or with a prolonged QT interval (Chap. 277) whose first clinical manifestation is syncope or even sudden death. However, the alert physician may recognize the patient at risk for these complications long before they occur and often can take measures to prevent their occurrence. For example, a patient with acute myocardial infarction will often have had risk factors for athero-sclerosis for many years. Had these risk factors been recognized, their elimination or reduction might have delayed or even prevented the infarction. Similarly, a patient with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy may have had a heart murmur for years and a family history of this disor-der. These findings could have led to an echocardiographic examina-tion, recognition of the condition, and appropriate therapy long before the occurrence of a serious acute manifestation. Patients with valvular heart disease or idiopathic dilated cardiomy-opathy, by contrast, may have a prolonged course of gradually increas-ing dyspnea and other manifestations of chronic heart failure that is punctuated by episodes of acute deterioration only late in the course of the disease. Understanding the natural history of various cardiac 264 SEC Tion 1 inTRoDuC Tion To CARDiovASCulAR DiSoRDERS PART 10: Disorders of the Cardiovascular System disorders is essential for applying appropriate diagnostic and therapeutic measures to each stage of the condition, as well as for providing the patient and family with the likely prognosis.
# Chunk 3936
When an attempt is made to determine the severity of functional impairment in a patient with heart disease, it is helpful to ascertain the level of activity and the rate at which it is performed before symptoms develop. Thus, it is not sufficient to state that the patient complains of dyspnea. The breathlessness that occurs after running up two long flights of stairs denotes far less functional impairment than do similar symptoms that occur after taking a few steps on level ground. Also, the degree of customary physical activity at work and during recreation should be considered. The development of two-flight dyspnea in a well-conditioned marathon runner may be far more significant than the development of one-flight dyspnea in a previously sedentary person. The history should include a detailed consideration of the patient’s therapeutic regimen. For example, the persistence or development of edema, breathlessness, and other manifestations of heart failure in a patient who is receiving optimal doses of diuretics and other therapies for heart failure (Chap. 279) is far graver than are similar manifestations in the absence of treatment. Similarly, the presence of angina pectoris despite treatment with optimal doses of multiple antianginal drugs (Chap. 293) is more serious than it is in a patient on no therapy. In an effort to determine the progression of symptoms, and thus the severity of the underlying illness, it may be useful to ascertain what, if any, specific tasks the patient could have carried out 6 months or 1 year earlier that he or she cannot carry out at present.
# Chunk 3937
(See also Chap. 268) Although an ECG usually should be recorded in patients with known or suspected heart disease, with the exception of the identification of arrhythmias, conduction abnormalities, ventricular hypertrophy, and acute myocardial infarction, it generally does not establish a specific diagnosis. The range of normal electrocardiographic findings is wide, and the tracing can be affected significantly by many noncardiac factors, such as age, body habitus, and serum electrolyte concentrations. In general, electrocardiographic changes should be interpreted in the context of other abnormal cardiovascular findings.
# Chunk 3938
Unique regional features have modified aspects of the transition in various parts of the world. High-income countries experienced declines in CVD death rates by as much as 50–60% over the last 60 years, whereas CVD death rates increased by 15% over the past 20 years in the lowand middle-income range. However, given the large amount of available data, the United States serves as a useful reference point for comparisons. The age of pestilence and famine occurred before 1900, with a largely agrarian economy and population. Infectious diseases accounted for more deaths than any other cause. By the 1930s, the country proceeded through the age of receding pandemics. The establishment of public health infrastructures resulted in dramatic declines in infectious disease mortality rates. Lifestyle changes due to rapid urbanization resulted in a simultaneous increase in CVD mortality rates, reaching approximately 390 per 100,000. Between 1930 and 1965, the country entered the age of degenerative
# Chunk 3939
DIET Total caloric intake per capita increases as countries develop. With regard to CVD, a key element of dietary change is an increase in intake of saturated animal fats and hydrogenated vegetable fats, which contain atherogenic trans fatty acids, along with a decrease in intake of plant-based foods and an increase in simple carbohydrates. Fat contributes less than 20% of calories in rural China and India, less than 30% in Japan, and well above 30% in the United States. Caloric contributions from fat appear to be falling in the HICs. In the United States, between 1971 and 2010, the percentage of calories derived from saturated fat decreased from 13% to 11%.
# Chunk 3940
Lipid Levels Worldwide, high cholesterol levels are estimated to play a role in 56% of ischemic heart disease events and 18% of strokes, amounting to 4.4 million deaths annually. Although mean population plasma cholesterol levels tend to rise as countries move through the epidemiologic transition, mean serum total cholesterol levels have decreased globally between 1980 and 2008 by 0.08 mmol/L per decade in men and 0.07 mmol/L per decade in women. In 2008, age-standardized mean total cholesterol was 4.64 mmol/L (179.4 mg/dL) in men and 4.76 mmol/L (184.2 mg/dL) in women. Large declines occurred in Australasia, North America, and Western Europe (0.19–0.21 mmol/L). Countries in the East Asia and Pacific region experienced increases of greater than 0.08 mmol/L in both men and women. Social and individual changes that accompany urbanization clearly play a role because plasma cholesterol levels tend to be higher among urban residents than among rural residents. This shift is largely driven by greater consumption of dietary fats—primarily from animal products and processed vegetable oils—and decreased physical activity. In HICs, in general, mean population cholesterol levels are falling, whereas wide variation is seen in the LMICs.
# Chunk 3941
Diabetes Mellitus As a consequence of, or in addition to, increasing body mass index and decreasing levels of physical activity, worldwide rates of diabetes—predominantly type 2 diabetes—are on the rise. According to the most recent data from the GBD project, mean fasting plasma glucose levels have increased globally between 1980 and 2008. An estimated 346 million people worldwide have diabetes. The International Diabetes Foundation predicts that this number will reach 522 million by 2030, a yearly rate of growth that is higher than that of the world’s adult population. Nearly 50% of people with diabetes are undiagnosed, and 80% live in LMICs. The highest regional prevalence for diabetes occurs in the Middle East and North Africa, where an estimated 12.5% of the adult population has diabetes. Future growth will also largely occur in this region, along with other LMICs in South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa. There appear to be clear genetic susceptibilities to diabetes mellitus of various racial and ethnic groups. For example, migration studies suggest that South Asians and Indians tend to be at higher risk than those of European extraction.
# Chunk 3942
CHAPTER 266e Epidemiology of Cardiovascular Disease

Disorders of the Cardiovascular SystemPhysical Examination of the Cardiovascular System Patrick T. O’Gara, Joseph Loscalzo The approach to a patient with known or suspected cardiovascular disease begins with the time-honored traditions of a directed history and a targeted physical examination. The scope of these activities depends on the clinical context at the time of presentation, rang-ing from an elective ambulatory follow-up visit to a more focused emergency department encounter. There has been a gradual decline in physical examination skills over the last two decades at every level, from student to faculty specialist, a development of great concern to both clinicians and medical educators. Classic cardiac findings are recognized by only a minority of internal medicine and family practice residents. Despite popular perceptions, clinical performance does not improve predictably as a function of experience; instead, the acquisi-tion of new examination skills may become more difficult for a busy individual practitioner. Less time is now devoted to mentored cardio-vascular examinations during the training of students and residents. One widely recognized outcome of these trends is the progressive overutilization of noninvasive imaging studies to establish the pres-ence and severity of cardiovascular disease even when the examina-tion findings imply a low pretest probability of significant pathology. Educational techniques to improve bedside skills include repetition, patient-centered teaching conferences, and visual display feedback of auscultatory events with Doppler echocardiographic imaging. The evidence base that links the findings from the history and physi-cal examination to the presence, severity, and prognosis of cardiovas-cular disease has been established most rigorously for coronary artery disease, heart failure, and valvular heart disease. For example, obser-vations regarding heart rate, blood pressure, signs of pulmonary congestion, and the presence of mitral regurgitation (MR) contribute importantly to bedside risk assessment in patients with acute coronary syndromes. Observations from the physical examination in this set-ting can inform clinical decision making before the results of cardiac biomarkers testing are known. The prognosis of patients with systolic heart failure can be predicted on the basis of the jugular venous pressure (JVP) and the presence or absence of a third heart sound (S3). Accurate characterization of cardiac murmurs provides important insight into the natural history of many valvular and congenital heart lesions. Finally, the important role played by the physical examination in enhancing the clinician-patient relationship cannot be overestimated. THE GENERAL PHYSICAL EXAMINATION Any examination begins with an assessment of the general appear-ance of the patient, with notation of age, posture, demeanor, and 267 SEC Tion 2 DiAgnoSiS oF CARDiovASCulAR DiSoRDERS overall health status. Is the patient in pain or resting quietly, dyspneic or diaphoretic? Does the patient choose to avoid certain body positions to reduce or eliminate pain, as might be the case with suspected acute pericarditis? Are there clues indicating that dyspnea may have a pulmonary cause, such as a barrel chest deformity with an increased anterior-posterior diameter, tachypnea, and pursed-lip breathing? Skin pallor, cyanosis, and jaundice can be appreciated readily and provide additional clues. A chronically ill-appearing emaciated patient may suggest the presence of long-standing heart failure or another systemic disorder, such as a malignancy. Various genetic syndromes, often with cardiovascular involvement, can also be recognized easily, such as trisomy 21, Marfan’s syndrome, and Holt-Oram syndrome. Height and weight should be measured routinely, and both body mass index and body surface area should be calculated. Knowledge of the waist circumference and the waist-to-hip ratio can be used to predict long-term cardiovascular risk. Mental status, level of alertness, and mood should be assessed continuously during the interview and examination.
# Chunk 3943
Skin Central cyanosis occurs with significant right-to-left shunting at the level of the heart or lungs, allowing deoxygenated blood to reach the systemic circulation. Peripheral cyanosis or acrocyanosis, in contrast, is usually related to reduced extremity blood flow due to small vessel constriction, as seen in patients with severe heart failure, shock, or peripheral vascular disease; it can be aggravated by the use of β-adrenergic blockers with unopposed α-mediated constriction. Differential cyanosis refers to isolated cyanosis affecting the lower but not the upper extremities in a patient with a large patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) and secondary pulmonary hypertension with right-to-left to shunting at the great vessel level. Hereditary telangiectasias on the lips, tongue, and mucous membranes, as part of the Osler-Weber-Rendu syndrome (hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia), resemble spider nevi and can be a source of right-to-left shunting when also present in the lung. Malar telangiectasias also are seen in patients with advanced mitral stenosis and scleroderma. An unusually tan or bronze discoloration of the skin may suggest hemochromatosis as the cause of the associated systolic heart failure. Jaundice, which may be visible first in the sclerae, has a broad differential diagnosis but, in the appropriate setting, can be consistent with advanced right heart failure and congestive hepatomegaly or late-term “cardiac cirrhosis.” Cutaneous ecchymoses are seen frequently among patients taking vitamin K antagonists or antiplatelet agents such as aspirin and thienopyridines. Various lipid disorders sometimes are associated with subcutaneous xanthomas, particularly along the tendon sheaths or over the extensor surfaces of the extremities. Severe hypertriglyceridemia can be associated with eruptive xanthomatosis and lipemia retinalis. Palmar crease xanthomas are specific for type III hyperlipoproteinemia. Pseudoxanthoma elasticum, a disease associated with premature atherosclerosis, is manifested by a leathery, cobblestoned appearance of the skin in the axilla and neck creases and by angioid streaks on funduscopic examination. Extensive lentiginoses have been described in a variety of development delay–cardiovascular syndromes, including Carney’s syndrome, which includes multiple atrial myxomas. Cutaneous manifestations of sarcoidosis such as lupus pernio and erythema nodosum may suggest this disease as a cause of an associated dilated cardiomyopathy, especially with heart block, intraventricular conduction delay, or ventricular tachycardia.
# Chunk 3944
Physical Examination of the Cardiovascular System 1444 The venous waveform sometimes can be difficult to distinguish from the carotid pulse, especially during casual inspection. Nevertheless, the venous waveform has several characteristic features, and its individual components can be appreciated in most patients (Fig. 267-1). The arterial pulsation is not easily obliterated with palpation; the venous waveform in patients with sinus rhythm is usually biphasic, while the carotid pulse is monophasic; and the jugular venous pulsation should change with changes in posture or inspiration (unless the venous pressure is quite elevated). The venous waveform is divided into several distinct peaks. The a wave reflects right atrial presystolic contraction and occurs just after the electrocardiographic P wave, preceding the first heart sound (S1). A prominent a wave is seen in patients with reduced right ventricular compliance; a cannon a wave occurs with atrioventricular (AV) dissociation and right atrial contraction against a closed tricuspid valve. In a patient with a wide complex tachycardia, the appreciation of cannon a waves in the jugular venous waveform identifies the rhythm as ventricular in origin. The a wave is not present with atrial fibrillation. The x descent defines the fall in right atrial pressure after inscription of the a wave. The c wave interrupts this x descent and is followed by a further descent. The v wave represents atrial filling (atrial diastole) and occurs during ventricular systole. The height of the v wave is determined by right atrial compliance as well as the volume of blood returning to the right atrium either antegrade from the cavae or retrograde through an incompetent tricuspid valve. In patients with TR, the v wave is accentuated and the subsequent fall in pressure (y descent) is rapid. With progressive degrees of TR, the v wave merges with the c wave, and the right atrial and jugular vein waveforms become “ventricularized.” The y descent, which follows the peak of the v wave, can become prolonged or blunted with obstruction to right ventricular inflow, as may occur with tricuspid stenosis or pericardial tamponade. Normally, the venous pressure should fall by at least 3 mmHg with inspiration. Kussmaul’s sign is defined by either a rise or a lack of fall of the JVP with inspiration and is classically associated with constrictive pericarditis, although it has been reported in patients with restrictive cardiomyopathy, massive pulmonary embolism, right ventricular infarction, and advanced left ventricular systolic heart failure. It is also a common, isolated finding in patients after cardiac surgery without other hemodynamic abnormalities. Venous hypertension sometimes can be elicited by performance of the abdominojugular reflex or with passive leg elevation. When these signs are positive, a volume-overloaded state with limited compliance of an overly distended or constricted venous system is present. The abdominojugular reflex is elicited with firm and consistent pressure over the upper portion of the abdomen, preferably over the right upper quadrant, for at least 10 s. A positive response is defined by a sustained rise of more than 3 cm in JVP for at least 15 s after release of the hand. Patients must be coached to refrain from breath holding or a Valsalva-like maneuver during the procedure. The abdominojugular reflex is useful in predicting a pulmonary artery wedge pressure in excess of 15 mmHg in patients with heart failure. Although the JVP estimates right ventricular filling pressure, it has a predictable relationship with the pulmonary artery wedge pressure. In a large study of patients with advanced heart failure, the presence of a right atrial pressure >10 mmHg (as predicted on bedside examination) had a positive value of 88% for the prediction of a pulmonary artery wedge pressure of >22 mmHg. In addition, an elevated JVP has prognostic significance in patients with both symptomatic heart failure and asymptomatic left ventricular systolic dysfunction. The presence of an elevated JVP is associated with a higher risk of subsequent hospitalization for heart failure, death from heart failure, or both.
# Chunk 3945
Physical Examination of the Cardiovascular System 1446 Pulsus paradoxus is measured by noting the difference between the patient with calf claudication, a decrease in pulse amplitude between systolic pressure at which the Korotkoff sounds are first heard (dur-the common femoral and popliteal arteries will localize the obstrucing expiration) and the systolic pressure at which the Korotkoff tion to the level of the superficial femoral artery, although inflow sounds are heard with each heartbeat, independent of the respiratory obstruction above the level of the common femoral artery may coexist. phase. Between these two pressures, the Korotkoff sounds are heard Auscultation for carotid, subclavian, abdominal aortic, and femoral only intermittently and during expiration. The cuff pressure must be artery bruits should be routine. However, the correlation between the decreased slowly to appreciate the finding. It can be difficult to mea-presence of a bruit and the degree of vascular obstruction is poor. A sure pulsus paradoxus in patients with tachycardia, atrial fibrillation, cervical bruit is a weak indicator of the degree of carotid artery steno-or tachypnea. A pulsus paradoxus may be palpable at the brachial sis; the absence of a bruit does not exclude the presence of significant artery or femoral artery level when the pressure difference exceeds luminal obstruction. If a bruit extends into diastole or if a thrill is pres15 mmHg. This inspiratory fall in systolic pressure is an exaggerated ent, the obstruction is usually severe. Another cause of an arterial bruit consequence of interventricular dependence. is an arteriovenous fistula with enhanced flow.
# Chunk 3946
Acute cor pulmonale due to pulmonary embolism (Chap. 300), for example, may be associated with a normal ECG or a variety of abnormalities. Sinus tachycardia is the most common arrhythmia, although other tachyarrhythmias, such as atrial fibrillation or flutter, may occur. The QRS axis may shift to the right, sometimes in concert with the so-called S1Q3T3 pattern (prominence of the S wave in lead I and the Q wave in lead III, with T-wave inversion in lead III). Acute right ventricular dilation also may be associated with slow R-wave progression and ST-T abnormalities in V1 to V4 simulating acute anterior infarction. A right ventricular conduction disturbance may appear.
# Chunk 3947
1456 From a clinical viewpoint, the division of V1 V2 V3 V4 V5 V6 acute myocardial infarction into ST-segment elevation and non-ST elevation types is useful since the efficacy of acute reperfusion therapy is limited to the former group. The ECG leads are usually more helpful in localizing regions of ST elevation than non-ST elevation ischemia. For example, acute transmural anterior (including apical and FIGURE 268-12 Severe anterior wall ischemia (with or without infarction) may cause promilateral) wall ischemia is reflected by ST eleva-nent T-wave inversions in the precordial leads. This pattern (sometimes referred to as Wellens tions or increased T-wave positivity in one T waves) is usually associated with a high-grade stenosis of the left anterior descending or more of the precordial leads (V1–V6) and coronary artery. leads I and aVL. Inferior wall ischemia produces changes in leads II, III, and aVF. “Posterior” wall ischemia (usu-tissue may lead to decreased R-wave amplitude or abnormal Q waves ally associated with lateral or inferior involvement) may be indirectly (even in the absence of transmurality) in the anterior or inferior leads recognized by reciprocal ST depressions in leads V1 to V3 (thus consti-(Fig. 268-13). Previously, abnormal Q waves were considered marktuting an ST elevation “equivalent” acute coronary syndrome). Right ers of transmural myocardial infarction, whereas subendocardial ventricular ischemia usually produces ST elevations in right-sided infarcts were thought not to produce Q waves. However, careful ECG-chest leads (Fig. 268-5). When ischemic ST elevations occur as the ear-pathology correlative studies have indicated that transmural infarcts liest sign of acute infarction, they typically are followed within a period may occur without Q waves and that subendocardial (nontransmural) ranging from hours to days by evolving T-wave inversions and often infarcts sometimes may be associated with Q waves. Therefore, infarcts by Q waves occurring in the same lead distribution. Reversible trans-are more appropriately classified as “Q-wave” or “non-Q-wave.” The mural ischemia, for example, due to coronary vasospasm (Prinzmetal’s major acute ECG changes in syndromes of ischemic heart disease variant angina and possibly the Tako-tsubo “stress” cardiomyopathy are summarized schematically in Fig. 268-14. Loss of depolarizasyndrome), may cause transient ST-segment elevations without devel-tion forces due to posterior or lateral infarction may cause reciprocal opment of Q waves, as may very early reperfusion in acute coronary increases in R-wave amplitude in leads V1 and V2 without diagnostic Q syndromes. Depending on the severity and duration of ischemia, the waves in any of the conventional leads. Atrial infarction may be asso-ST elevations may resolve completely in minutes or be followed by ciated with PR-segment deviations due to an atrial current of injury, T-wave inversions that persist for hours or even days. Patients with changes in P-wave morphology, or atrial arrhythmias. In the weeks ischemic chest pain who present with deep T-wave inversions in mul-and months after infarction, these ECG changes may persist or begin tiple precordial leads (e.g., V1–V4,, I, and aVL) with or without cardiac to resolve. Complete normalization of the ECG after Q-wave infarcenzyme elevations typically have severe obstruction in the left anterior tion is uncommon but may occur, particularly with smaller infarcts. In descending coronary artery system (Fig. 268-12). In contrast, patients contrast, ST-segment elevations that persist for several weeks or more whose baseline ECG already shows abnormal T-wave inversions may after a Q-wave infarct usually correlate with a severe underlying wall develop T-wave normalization (pseudonormalization) during episodes motion disorder (akinetic or dyskinetic zone), although not necessarof acute transmural ischemia. ily a frank ventricular aneurysm. ECG changes due to ischemia may
# Chunk 3948
FIGURE 268-15 The earliest ECG change with hyperkalemia is usually peaking (“tenting”) of the T waves. With further increases in the serum potassium concentration, the QRS complexes widen, the P waves decrease in amplitude and may disappear, and finally a sine-wave pattern leads to asystole unless emergency therapy is given. (After AL Goldberger et al: Goldberger’s Clinical Electrocardiography: A Simplified Approach,  8th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier/Saunders, 2013.) perturbations. Total electrical alternans (P-QRS-T) with sinus tachy-Hypocalcemia Normal Hypercalcemia cardia is a relatively specific sign of pericardial effusion, usually with cardiac tamponade (Fig. 268-18). The mechanism relates to a periodic II swinging motion of the heart in the effusion at a frequency exactly one-half the heart rate. In contrast, pure repolarization (ST-T or U wave) alternans is a sign of electrical instability and may precede ventricular tachyarrhythmias.
# Chunk 3949
FIgURE 268-18 Classic triad of findings for pericardial effusion with cardiac tamponade: (1) sinus tachycardia; (2) low QRS voltages; and (3) electrical alternans (best seen in leads V3 and V4 in this case; arrows). This triad is highly specific for pericardial effusion, usually with tamponade physiology, but of limited sensitivity. (Adapted from LA Nathanson et al: ECG Wave-Maven. http://ecg.bidmc.harvard.edu.) (11) abnormal Q waves, (12) ST segments, (13) T waves, and (14) U waves. Comparison with any previous ECGs is invaluable. The diagnosis and management of specific cardiac arrhythmias and conduction disturbances are discussed in Chaps. 274 and 276.
# Chunk 3950
PART 10 Disorders of the Cardiovascular System Normal diastolic function Mitral inflow Mitral inflow at peak valsalva maneuver Doppler tissue imaging of mitral annular motion Pulmonary venous flow Flow propagation velocity (Vp) on color M-mode Left ventricular relaxation Left ventricular compiance Atrial pressure Normal Normal Normal Impaired Normal to Normal Impaired Impaired Impaired Mild diastolic dysfunction Impaired relaxation Moderate diastolic dysfunction Pseudonormal Reversible restrictive Fixed restrictive Severe diastolic dysfunction 0.75< E/A<1.5 DT >140 ms Adur 0 Velocity, m/s 2.0 A E 0.75 <E/A<1.5 DT>140 ms E/A˜1.5 DT<140 ms E/A>1.5 DT<140 ms E/A°0.75 ˛E/A<0.5 0 Velocity, m/s 2.0 AE E/e’<10 Velocity, m/s0 0.15 e’ a’ ˛E/A˜0.5 ˛E/A˜0.5 ˛E/A˜0.5˛E/A<0.5 S˜D ARdur<Adur Vp >50 cm/s E/Vp <1.5 >45 cm/s E/Vp <1.5 >45 cm/s E/Vp >2.5 >45 cm/s E/Vp >2.5 >45 cm/s E/Vp <2.5 ARdur Time, ms Time, ms Time, ms Time, ms Time, ms 0 Velocity, m/s 2.0 S<D or ARdur>Adur+30 ms S<D or ARdur>Adur+30 ms S<D or ARdur>Adur+30 ms S>D ARdur<Adur E/e’<10 E/e’˜10 E/e’˜10 E/e’˜10 FIGURE 270e-8 Stages of diastolic function based on various parameters, including mitral inflow (with and without Valsalva maneuver), Doppler tissue imaging, pulmonary venous flow, and flow propagation. (Adapted with permission from MM Redfield et al: JAMA 289:194, 2003.) even among experts. The effective dose from a typical myocardial perfusion SPECT scan ranges between ~4 and 11 mSv, depending on the protocol and type of scanner used. The effective dose from a typical myocardial perfusion PET scan is lower, ~2.5–4 mSv. Radiation exposure associated with cardiac CT is variable and, as with radionuclide imaging, also depends on the imaging protocol and scanner used. Although historic radiation doses with cardiac CT have been quite high, the introduction of newer technologies described above (e.g., x-ray tube modulation, prospective ECG gating) has resulted in a significant dose reduction. The current average radiation dose for a coronary CTA ranges from 5–15 mSv and, in selected cases, can be as low as 1 mSv. Imaging laboratories follow the ALARA (as low as reasonably achievable) principle when balancing the clinical need and imaging approach. By comparison, the average dose for invasive coronary angiography is ~7 mSv, whereas exposure to radiation from natural sources in the United States amounts to ~3 mSv annually.
# Chunk 3951
SPECT MPI 113 studies (n = 11,212 patients) 88% 76%

Coronary CTA 18 studies (n = 1286 patients) 99% 89% Note: In these studies, the diagnosis of coronary artery disease was based on the presence of a >50% or >70% stenosis on invasive coronary angiography.
# Chunk 3952
FIGURE 270e-10 Coronary angiographic (left panel) and rubidium-82 myocardial perfusion positron emission tomograph images (right panel) in an 85-year-old female with diabetes presenting with chest pain. The coronary angiogram demonstrates significant stenoses of the left main and circumflex coronary arteries. However, the perfusion images demonstrate only a reversible lateral wall defect. Quantification of stress and rest myocardial blood flow demonstrated a significant, global reduction on coronary flow reserve (estimated at 1.2, normal value >2.0), reflecting extensive myocardium risk that was underestimated by the semiquantitative estimates of myocardial perfusion. LAD, left ante-rior descending artery; LCX, left circumflex artery; LM, left main artery; RCA, right coronary artery.
# Chunk 3953
PART 10 Disorders of the Cardiovascular System

FIGURE 270e-29 Representative cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR; top panel) and positron emission tomography (PET; lower panel) images from a 45-year-old male presenting with complete heart block. The CMR images demonstrate extensive late gadolinium enhance-ment in the subepicardial left ventricular (LV) anterior and anteroseptal walls and also in the right ventricular (RV) free wall (arrows). The PET images demonstrate extensive fluorodeoxyglucose uptake in the same areas, most consistent with active inflammation due to sarcoidosis.
# Chunk 3954
VIDEO 270e-5 A 60-year-old female presented with intermittent chest pain of 3 days in duration but was pain free at the time of assessment in the emergency room. Admission electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrated T-wave inversion in the anterior precordial lead, but cardiac enzymes were normal. A resting cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) study reviewed a large area of anteroseptal hypokinesia (left picture, region of hypokinesia shown by the red arrows), matching with a large resting perfusion defect (middle picture, perfusion defect shown by the blue arrows). Late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) imaging (right picture), however, did not show any enhancement to indicate any infarction in the anteroseptal wall, suggesting that the hypocontractile and hypoperfused anteroseptal wall was viable. Urgent coronary angiography demonstrated an acute thrombus in the mid left anterior descending coronary artery, which required coronary stenting. This case represents an example of acute coronary syndrome with hibernating but viable myocardium in the anteroseptal wall. The anteroseptal wall recovered contractile function when reassessed 6 months later.
# Chunk 3955
CHAPTER 271e Atlas of Noninvasive Imaging

Figure 271e-2 A 55-year-old man with exertional chest discomfort and dyspnea. He exercised for 12 min on a standard Bruce protocol, experiencing typical chest pain and ST-segment depression in V2–V5. End-systolic frame of a stress echocardiogram shows apical four-chamber view at rest (left) and after exercise (right). After exercise, there is a clear regional wall motion abnormality in the distal septum through the apex, consistent with a stenosis in the left anterior descending artery distribution (arrows). LV, left ventricle. (See Videos 271e-3 and 271e-4.)
# Chunk 3956
Figure 271e-3 Exercise single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) myocardial perfusion technetium-99m (99mTc) sestamibi scan in a 54-year-old male with a history of coronary artery disease and a prior coronary stent. The stress images (left and middle) show a large defect involving the apex, all apical segments, mid-inferior, mid-inferoseptum, and mid-anteroseptum (arrowheads), which is completely reversible at rest (right), reflecting a large area of exercise-induced myocardial ischemia throughout the left anterior descending coronary territory. The bull's eye displays on the right panel depict the semiquantitative extent of ischemia (light yellow and blue areas represent the extent
# Chunk 3957
PART 10 Disorders of the Cardiovascular System and severity of ischemia).

Figure 271e-4 Coronary computed tomography angiography (CTA). Curved multiplanar reformations demonstrating coronary artery disease severity, defined as normal (no plaque or stenosis), mild (<40%), moderate (40–69%), and severe (>70%) luminal narrowing. By guidelines for CTA reporting, alternative classification provides for stenosis grading as normal, minimal (1–24%), mild (25–49%), moderate (50–69%), severe (70–99%), and occluded (100%). (From GL Raff et al: SCCT guidelines for the interpretation and reporting of coronary computed tomographic angiography. J Cardiovasc Comput Tomogr 3:122, 2009; with permission.) -CAC score 271e = 96th percentile for age, race and ethnicity1 10-year hard CHD risk is 6% (observed age) vs 30% (arterial age)2#
# Chunk 3958
Figure 271e-7 Adenosine positron emission tomography (PET) myocardial perfusion 13N-ammonia scan in a 60-year-old female with atypical chest pain. The stress images (left) show a large defect involving the apex, all apical segments, mid-inferior, mid-inferoseptum, and midanteroseptum (arrowheads), which is completely reversible at rest (right). This is consistent with a medium-sized area of stress-induced ischemia in the mid portion of the left anterior descending (LAD) coronary artery. The right panel illustrates the time-activity curves used for quantification of myocardial blood flow (in mL/min per g of tissue) at peak stress (upper panel) and at rest (lower panel). Coronary flow reserve is then calculated as the ratio of stress/rest myocardial blood flow. The coronary flow reserve is abnormal in the LAD territory, and normal in the left circumflex (LCX) and right coronary artery (RCA) territories (i.e., >2.0). TOT, total left ventricle.
# Chunk 3959
Figure 271e-8 Coronary computed tomography angiography (CTA) obtained on a 35-year-old female presenting to an outpatient clinic with a history of unexplained syncope and a 6-month complaint of intermittent, atypical chest pain occurring primarily during rest. Physical examination is normal. An exercise treadmill test is performed demonstrating good exercise capacity with no exertional chest pain or ischemic ECG changes. For persistent, unexplained symptoms, coronary CTA is obtained. A. Three-dimensional cardiac CT image reconstruction demonstrating anomalous right coronary artery (RCA) origin from the left coronary cusp with an acute angle takeoff (arrow) and an intraarterial course between the aorta (Ao) and main pulmonary artery (PA). B, C. Contrast-enhanced CTA in two-dimensional axial (B) and coronal oblique views (C) demonstrating proximal RCA intraarterial course between the Ao and main PA.
# Chunk 3960
Figure 271e-11 Rest myocardial perfusion and metabolism positron emission tomography (PET) scan obtained with 13N-ammonia (perfusion) and 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG; glucose metabolism) in a 48-year-old male with a prior myocardial infarction. The rest perfusion
# Chunk 3961
Figure 271e-13 A 66-year-old patient with multiple myeloma and progressive shortness of breath. Echocardiography shows features typical of cardiac amyloidosis, including thickened myocardium with a “sparkly” appearance and left atrial enlargement. Systolic function is mildly reduced, and diastolic function is severely reduced. LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; RV, right ventricle. (See Videos 271e-11 and 271e-12.)
# Chunk 3962
Figure 271e-17 Late gadolinium enhancement cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (left panel) and rest myocardial perfusion and fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET)/computed tomography (CT) studies (middle and right panels) in a 48-year-old male with a complete heart block. The MRI images demonstrate a linear area of mid-wall late gadolinium enhancement involving the inferior and inferolateral walls (arrows). The myocardial perfusion images were normal. However, the FDG images demonstrated a focal area of intense glucose uptake in the inferolateral wall, corresponding to the area of late enhancement on MRI. This is consistent with focal active sarcoidosis. LV, left ventricle; RV, right ventricle.
# Chunk 3963
Figure 271e-18 A 46-year-old patient with malignant melanoma who presents with acute shortness of breath. Echocardiogram reveals a large pericardial effusion (arrow, upper left) with evidence of cardiac tamponade. M-mode echocardiography (upper right) shows evidence of collapse of the right ventricular free wall during diastole (arrow). Doppler echocardiography (lower panel) shows evidence of respiratory flow variation, consistent with a pulsus paradoxus. LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; RV, right ventricle. (See Video 271e-17.)
# Chunk 3964
PART 10 Disorders of the Cardiovascular System

Figure 271e-22 Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET)/computed tomography (CT) in a 52-year-old male with a prior aortic valve replacement who presented with fever and was found to have Haemophilus parainfluenzae bacteremia. The multiplanar reformatted fused PET/CT images demonstrate intense FDG uptake surrounding the aortic valve prosthesis (arrowheads), compatible with a paravalvular abscess. The patient was found to have purulent fluid around the valve during surgery, and he underwent an aortic valve replacement. Ao, aorta; AV, aortic valve; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle.
# Chunk 3965
Figure 271e-23 Cardiac computed tomography (CT) pulmonary vein mapping in a 62-year-old male with symptomatic, paroxysmal atrial fibrillation referred for cardiac CT for pulmonary vein mapping prior to planned pulmonary vein isolation. Three-dimensional image reconstruction, demonstrating (A) normal pulmonary vein anatomy and (B) common variant with presence of separate right middle pulmonary vein (RMPV) ostium. LLPV, left lower pulmonary vein; LUPV, left upper pulmonary vein; RLPV, right lower pulmonary vein; RUPV, right upper pulmonary vein.
# Chunk 3966
Contrast-induced acute kidney injury, defined as an increase in creatinine >0.5 mg/dL or 25% above baseline that occurs 48–72 hours after contrast administration, occurs in ~2–7% of patients with rates of 20–30% reported in high-risk patients, including those with diabetes mellitus, congestive heart failure, chronic kidney disease, anemia, and older age. Dialysis is required in 0.3–0.7% of patients and is associated with a fivefold increase in in-hospital mortality. For all patients, adequate intravascular volume expansion with intravenous 0.9% saline (1.0–1.5 mL/kg per hour) for 3–12 hours before and continued 6–24 hours after the procedure limits the risk of contrast-induced acute kidney injury. Pretreatment with N-acetylcysteine (Mucomyst) has not reduced the risk of contrast-induced acute kidney injury consistently and, therefore, is no longer recommended routinely. Diabetic patients treated with metformin should stop the drug 48 hours prior to the procedure to limit the associated risk of lactic acidosis. Other strategies to decrease risk include the administration of sodium bicarbonate (3 mL/kg per hour) 1 hour before and 6 hours after the procedure; use of lowor iso-osmolar contrast agents; and limiting the volume of contrast to <100 mL per procedure.
# Chunk 3967
Cardiac catheterization is performed after the patient has fasted for 6 hours and has received intravenous conscious sedation to remain awake but sedated during the procedure. All patients with suspected coronary artery disease are pretreated with 325 mg aspirin. In patients in whom the procedure is likely to progress to a percutaneous coronary intervention, an additional antiplatelet agent should be started: clopidogrel (600-mg loading dose and 75 mg daily) or prasugrel (60-mg loading dose and 10 mg daily), or ticagrelor (180-mg loading and 90 mg twice daily). Prasugrel should not be selected for individuals with prior stroke or transient ischemic attack. Warfarin is held starting 2–3 days prior to the catheterization to allow the international normalized ratio (INR) to fall to <1.7 and limit access-site bleeding complications. Cardiac catheterization is a sterile procedure, so antibiotic prophylaxis is not required.
# Chunk 3968
Once the procedure is completed, vascular access sheaths are removed. If the femoral approach is used, direct manual compression or vascular closure devices that immediately close the arteriotomy site with a staple/clip, collagen plug, or sutures are used to achieve hemostasis. These devices decrease the length of supine bed rest (from 6 hours to 2–4 hours) and improve patient satisfaction but have not been shown definitively to be superior to manual compression with respect to access-site complications. With radial-artery access, bed rest is needed for only 2 hours. When cardiac catheterization is performed as an elective outpatient procedure, the patient completes postprocedure bed rest in a monitored setting and is discharged home with instructions to liberalize fluids because contrast agents promote an osmotic diuresis, to avoid strenuous activity, and to observe the vascular access site for signs of complications. Overnight hospitalization may be required for high-risk patients with significant comorbidities, patients with complications occurring during the catheterization, or patients who have undergone a percutaneous coronary intervention. Hypotension early after the procedure may be due to inadequate fluid replacement or retroperitoneal bleeding from the access site. Patients who received >2 Gy of radiation during the procedure should be examined for signs of erythema. For patients who received higher doses (>5 Gy), clinical follow-up within 1 month to assess for skin injury is recommended.
# Chunk 3969
the twentieth century. Subsequent recording of cellular membrane currents demonstrated that the body surface ECG is the timed sum of the cellular action potentials in the atria and ventricles. In the late 1960s, the development of intracavitary recording, in particular, His bundle electrograms, marked the beginning of contemporary clinical electrophysiology. Adoption of radiofrequency technology to ablate cardiac tissue in the early 1990s heralded the birth of interventional cardiac electrophysiology.
# Chunk 3970
The judicious use of noninvasive diagnostic tests is an important element in the evaluation of patients with arrhythmias, and there is no test more important than the ECG, particularly if recorded at the time of symptoms. Uncommon but diagnostically important signatures of electrophysiologic disturbances may be unearthed on the resting ECG, such as delta waves in Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome, prolongation or shortening of the QT interval, right precordial ST-segment abnormalities in Brugada syndrome, and epsilon waves in arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia. Variants of body surface ECG recording can provide important information about arrhythmia substrates and triggers. Holter monitoring and event recording, either continuous or intermittent, record the body surface ECG over longer periods, enhancing the possibility of observing the cardiac rhythm during symptoms. Holter monitoring is particularly useful in assessing daily symptoms thought to be attributable to arrhythmia or for quantifying a particular arrhythmia phenomenon (e.g., premature ventricular complex burden). Ambulatory event monitors are indicated when symptoms thought to be due to arrhythmia occur less frequently (i.e., several episodes per month), and, because the monitors are typically patient-activated, they are optimal for correlating symptoms with rhythm disturbances. Implantable long-term monitors permit prolonged telemetric monitoring both for diagnosis and to assess the efficacy of therapy. Implantable monitors are typically used for the evaluation of malignant symptoms that occur quite infrequently and that cannot be provoked at diagnostic electro-physiology study.
# Chunk 3971
Permanent pacemaking is the only reliable therapy for symptomatic bradycardia in the absence of extrinsic and reversible etiologies such as increased vagal tone, hypoxia, hypothermia, and drugs (Table 274-1). Approximately 50% of the 150,000 permanent pacemakers implanted in the United States and 20–30% of the 150,000 of those in Europe were implanted for SA node disease.
# Chunk 3972
Rare heritable forms of sinus node disease have been described, and several have been characterized genetically. Autosomal dominant sinus node dysfunction in conjunction with supraventricular tachycardia (i.e., tachycardia-bradycardia variant of sick-sinus syndrome [SSS2]) has been linked to mutations in the pacemaker current (If) subunit gene HCN4 on chromosome 15. An autosomal recessive form of SSS1 with the prominent feature of atrial inexcitability and absence of P waves on the electrocardiogram (ECG) is caused by mutations in the cardiac sodium channel gene, SCN5A, on chromosome 3. Variants in myosin heavy chain 6 (MYH6) increase the susceptibility to SSS (SSS3). SA node dysfunction associated with myopia has been described but not genetically characterized. There are several neuromuscular diseases, including Kearns-Sayre syndrome (ophthalmoplegia, pigmentary degeneration of the retina, and cardiomyopathy) and myotonic dystrophy, that have a predilection for the conducting system and SA node.
# Chunk 3973
One-third to one-half of patients with SA node dysfunction develop supraventricular tachycardia, usually atrial fibrillation or atrial flutter. The incidence of persistent atrial fibrillation in patients with SA node dysfunction increases with advanced age, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, left ventricular dilation, valvular heart disease, and ventricular pacing. Remarkably, some symptomatic patients may experience an improvement in symptoms with the development of atrial fibrillation, presumably from an increase in their average heart rate. Patients with the tachycardia-bradycardia variant of SSS, similar to patients with atrial fibrillation, are at risk for thromboembolism, and those at greatest risk, including patients ≥65 years and patients with a prior history of stroke, valvular heart disease, left ventricular dysfunction, or atrial enlargement, should be treated with anticoagulants. Up to one-quarter of patients with SA node disease will have concurrent AV conduction disease, although only a minority will require specific therapy for high-grade AV block.
# Chunk 3974
The electrocardiographic manifestations of SA node dysfunction include sinus bradycardia, sinus pauses, sinus arrest, sinus exit block, tachycardia (in SSS), and chronotropic incompetence. It is often difficult to distinguish pathologic from physiologic sinus bradycardia. By definition, sinus bradycardia is a rhythm driven by the SA node with a rate of <60 beats/min; sinus bradycardia is very common and typically benign. Resting heart rates <60 beats/min are very common in young healthy individuals and physically conditioned subjects. A sinus rate of <40 beats/min in the awake state in the absence of physical conditioning generally is considered abnormal. Sinus pauses and sinus arrest result from failure of the SA node to discharge, producing a pause without P waves visible on the ECG (Fig. 274-3). Sinus pauses of up to 3 s are common in awake athletes, and pauses of this duration or longer may be observed in asymptomatic elderly subjects. Intermittent failure of conduction from the SA node produces sinus exit block. The severity of sinus exit block may vary in a manner similar to that of AV block (Chap. 275). Prolongation of conduction from the sinus node will not be apparent on the ECG; second-degree SA block will produce intermittent conduction from the SA node and a regularly irregular atrial rhythm.
# Chunk 3975
Type I second-degree SA block results from progressive prolongation of SA node conduction with intermittent failure of the impulses originating in the sinus node to conduct to the surrounding atrial tissue. Second-degree SA block appears on the ECG as an intermittent absence of P waves (Fig. 274-4). In type II second-degree SA block, there is no change in SA node conduction before the pause. Complete or third-degree SA block results in no P waves on the ECG. Tachycardia-bradycardia syndrome is manifest as alternating sinus bradycardia and atrial tachyarrhythmias. Although atrial tachycardia, atrial flutter, and atrial fibrillation may be observed, the latter is the most common tachycardia. Chronotropic incompetence is the inability to increase the heart rate in response to exercise or other stress appropriately and is defined in greater detail below.
# Chunk 3976
Sinus tachycardia is considered physiologic when it is an appropriate response to exercise, stress, or illness. Sinus tachycardia can be difficult to distinguish from focal atrial tachycardia (see below) that originates from a focus near the sinus node. A causative factor (such as exertion) and a gradual increase and decrease in rate favors sinus tachycardia, whereas an abrupt onset and offset favor atrial tachycardia. The distinction can be difficult and occasionally requires extended ECG monitoring or even invasive electrophysiology study. Treatment for physiologic sinus tachycardia is aimed at the underlying condition (Table 276-2).
# Chunk 3977
Focal Atrial Tachycardia Focal atrial tachycardia (AT) can be due to abnormal automaticity, triggered automaticity, or a small reentry circuit confined to the atrium or atrial tissue extending into a pulmonary vein, the coronary sinus, or vena cava. It can be sustained, nonsustained, paroxysmal, or incessant. Focal AT accounts for approximately 10% of PSVT referred for catheter ablation. Nonsustained AT is commonly observed on 24-h ambulatory ECG recordings, and the prevalence increases with age. Tachycardia can occur in the absence of structural heart disease or can be associated with any form of heart disease that affects the atrium. Sympathetic stimulation is a promoting factor such that AT can be a sign of underlying illness. AT with AV block can occur in digitalis toxicity. Symptoms are similar to other supraventricular tachycardias (SVTs). Incessant AT can cause tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy.
# Chunk 3978
FIGURE 276-3 Location of focal atrial tachycardia focus estimated by P-wave morphology. LAA, left atrial appendage; LIV, left inferior pulmonary vein; LSV, left superior pulmonary vein; RAA, right atrial appendage; RIV, right inferior pulmonary vein; RSV, right superior pulmonary vein; SVC, superior vena cava.
# Chunk 3979
AV, atrioventricular.

1484 establish the diagnosis. AV block with only transient slowing of tachycardia may expose ongoing p waves, indicating AT or atrial flutter as the mechanism. Carotid sinus massage is reasonable provided the risk of carotid vascular disease is low, as indicated by absence of carotid bruits and no prior history of stroke. A Valsalva maneuver should be attempted in cooperative individuals, and if effective, the patient can be taught to perform this maneuver as needed. If vagal maneuvers fail or cannot be performed, intravenous adenosine will terminate the vast majority of PSVT by transiently blocking conduction in the AV node. Adenosine may produce transient chest pain, dyspnea, and anxiety. It is contraindicated in patients with prior cardiac transplantation due to potential hypersensitivity. It can theoretically aggravate bronchospasm. Adenosine precipitates atrial fibrillation, which is usually brief, in up to 15% of patients, so it should be used cautiously in patients with WPW syndrome in whom AF may produce hemodynamic instability. Intravenous beta blockers and calcium channel blockers (verapamil or diltiazem) are also effective but may cause hypotension before and after arrhythmia termination and have a longer duration of action. These agents can also be given orally and can be taken by the patient on an as-needed basis to slow ventricular rate and facilitate termination by Valsalva maneuver. The differential diagnosis of wide-complex tachycardia includes ventricular tachycardia (Chap. 277), PSVT with bundle branch block aberrancy, and preexcited tachycardia (see above). In general, these should be managed as ventricular tachycardia until proven otherwise. If the tachycardia is regular and the patient is stable, a trial of intravenous adenosine is reasonable. Very irregular wide-complex tachycardia should be managed with cardioversion, intravenous procainamide, or ibutilide, which presumes preexcited atrial fibrillation or flutter (see above). If the diagnosis of PSVT with aberrancy is unequivocal, as may be the case in patients with prior episodes, treatment for PSVT is reasonable. In all cases, continuous ECG monitoring should be implemented, and emergency cardioversion and defibrillation should be available.
# Chunk 3980
For a first episode of atrial flutter, conversion to sinus rhythm with no antiarrhythmic drug therapy is reasonable. For recurrent episodes, antiarrhythmic drug therapy with sotalol, dofetilide, disopyramide, and amiodarone may be considered, but more than 70% of patients experience recurrences. For recurrent episodes of common atrial flutter, catheter ablation of the cavotricuspid isthmus abolishes the arrhythmia in over 90% of patients with a low risk of complications that are largely related to vascular access and infrequent heart block. Approximately 50% of patients presenting with atrial flutter develop atrial fibrillation within the next 5 years.
# Chunk 3981
The clinical type of AF suggests the underlying pathophysiology (Fig. 276-12). Paroxysmal AF is defined as episodes that start and stop spontaneously. It is often initiated by small reentrant or rapidly firing foci in sleeves of atrial muscle along the pulmonary veins. Catheter ablation that isolates these foci usually abolishes the AF. Persistent AF has a longer duration, exceeding 7 days, and, in many cases, will continue unless cardioversion is performed. Cardioversion can be followed by prolonged periods of sinus rhythm. Episodes may be initiated by rapidly firing foci, but persistence of the arrhythmia is likely due to single or multiple areas of reentry facilitated by structural and electrophysiologic atrial abnormalities. In patients with long-standing persistent AF (>1 year), significant structural changes are present in the atrium that support reentry and automaticity, making it difficult to restore and maintain sinus rhythm. Some patients progress over years from paroxysmal to persistent AF. Fibrosis that develops with aging and atrial hypertrophy in response to hypertension and other cardiac disease may be an important promoting factor, although electrophysiologic changes to conduction and refractoriness occur as well in response to chronic tachycardia in the atrium.
# Chunk 3982
Warfarin reduces the annual risk of stroke by 64% compared to placebo and by 37% compared to antiplatelet therapy. The newer anticoagulants, dabigatran, rivaroxaban, and apixaban, have been found to be noninferior to warfarin in individual trials, and analysis of pooled data suggests superiority to warfarin by small absolute margins of 0.4–0.7% in reduction of mortality, stroke, major bleeding, and intracranial hemorrhage. Warfarin is an inconvenient agent that requires several days to achieve a therapeutic effect (prothrombin time [PT]/international normalized ratio [INR] >2), requires monitoring of PT/INR to adjust dose, and has many drug and food interactions, thus limiting patient compliance. The newer agents are easier to use and achieve reliable anticoagulation promptly without requiring dosage adjustment based on blood tests. Dabigatran, rivaroxaban, and apixaban have renal excretion, cannot be used with severe renal insufficiency, and require dose adjustment for modest renal impairment, which is of particular concern in the elderly, who are at increased bleeding risk. Excretion can also be influenced by P-glycoprotein inducers and inhibitors. Warfarin anticoagulation can be reversed by administration of fresh frozen plasma and vitamin K. Reversing agents for the newer anticoagulants are lacking (but in development), and bleeding must be managed with supportive care, with the expectation that clotting will improve over 12 h as the anticoagulant is excreted.
# Chunk 3983
Roy M. John, William G. Stevenson and proarrhythmic effects that warrant avoidance in patients with coronary artery disease or heart failure. The class III agents sotalol and dofetilide can be administered to patients with coronary artery disease or structural heart disease but have approximately a 3% risk of inducing excessive QT prolongation and torsades des pointes. Dofetilide should be initiated only in a hospital with ECG monitoring, and many physicians take this approach with sotalol as well. Dronedarone increases mortality in patients with heart failure. All of these agents have modest efficacy in patients with paroxysmal AF, of whom approximately 30–50% will benefit. Amiodarone is more effective, maintaining sinus rhythm in approximately two-thirds of patients. It can be administered to patients with heart failure and coronary artery disease. Over 20% of patients experience toxicities during long-term therapy.
# Chunk 3984
diagnosis Sustained monomorphic VT has to be distinguished from other causes of uniform wide QRS tachycardia. These include supra-ventricular tachycardia with left or right bundle branch block aberrant conduction, supraventricular tachycardias conducted to the ventricles over an accessory pathway (Chap. 276), and rapid cardiac pacing in a patient with a pacemaker or defibrillator. In the presence of known heart disease, VT is the most likely diagnosis of a wide QRS tachycardia. Hemodynamic stability during the arrhythmia does not exclude VT. A number of ECG criteria have been evaluated. The presence of AV dissociation is usually a reliable marker for VT (Fig. 277-7), but P waves can be difficult to define. A P wave following each QRS does not
# Chunk 3985
Patients who present with sustained VT associated with coronary artery disease typically have a history of prior large MI and present years after the acute infarct with a remodeled ventricle and markedly depressed LV function. Even when there is biomarker evidence of acute MI, a preexisting scar from previous MI should be suspected as the cause of the VT. Infarct scars provide a durable substrate for sustained VT, and up to 70% of patients have a recurrence of the arrhythmia within 2 years. Scar-related reentry is not dependent on recurrent acute myocardial ischemia, so coronary revascularization cannot be anticipated to prevent recurrent VT, even when it may be appropriate for other indications. Depressed ventricular function, which is a risk factor for sudden death, is usually present. Implantation of an ICD is warranted for most patients provided that there is a reasonable expectation of survival with acceptable functional status for the next year after recovery from the VT episode. ICDs reduce annual mortality from 12.3% to 8.8% and lower arrhythmic deaths by 50% in patients with hemodynamically significant sustained VT or a history of cardiac arrest compared with pharmacologic therapy. Chronic amiodarone therapy may be considered for patients who are not candidates for or who decline ICD placement.
# Chunk 3986
Following ICD implantation, patients remain at risk for heart failure, recurrent ischemic events, and recurrent VT, with a 5-year mortality that exceeds 30%. Attention to therapies with survival benefit, including β-adrenergic blocking agents, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, and statins, is important. Patients with frequent symptomatic recurrences of VT require antiarrhythmic drug therapy or catheter ablation.
# Chunk 3987
monomorphic vt in arvc ARVC (Chap. 287) is a rare genetic disorder most commonly due to mutations in genes encoding for cardiac desmosomal proteins. Approximately 50% have a familial transmission with autosomal dominant inheritance. A less common, autosomal recessive form is associated with cardiocutaneous syndromes that include Naxos disease and Carvajal syndrome. Patients typically present between the second and fifth decade with palpitations, syncope, or cardiac arrest owing to sustained monomorphic VT, although polymorphic VT can also occur. Fibrosis and fibro-fatty replacement most commonly involve the right ventricular myocardium and provide the substrate for reentrant VT that usually has a left bundle branch block–like configuration, consistent with the right ventricular origin. The sinus rhythm ECG suggests the disease in more than 85% of patients, most often showing T-wave inversions in V1–V3 (Fig. 277-6). Delayed activation of the right ventricle may cause a widened QRS (≥110 ms) in the right precordial leads and a prolonged S-wave upstroke in those leads, and occasionally a deflection at the end of the QRS known as an epsilon wave (Fig. 277-6). Cardiac imaging may show right ventricular enlargement or areas of abnormal motion or reveal areas of scar on CMR imaging with gadolinium. The monomorphic VT of early ARVC can sometimes be difficult to differentiate from idiopathic right ventricular outflow tract VT.
# Chunk 3988
congenital long Qt syndrome The con-1497 genital long QT syndrome (LQTS) is caused by mutations in genes coding for cardiac ion channels responsible for ventricular repolarization. The corrected QT (QTc) is typically prolonged to greater than 440 ms in men and 460 ms in women. Symptoms are due to Torsade de Pointes VT (Fig. 277-8). Several forms of congenital LQTS have been identified, but three groups of mutations that lead to LQTS type 1 (LQTS-1), LQTS type 2 (LQTS-2), or LQTS type 3 (LQTS-3) account for A 90% of cases. The most frequently encountered mutations, LQTS1 and LQTS2, are due to abnormalities of potassium channels, but mutations affecting the sodium channel (LQTS3) and calcium channels have also been described (Table 277-3).
# Chunk 3989
FIGURE 277-8 Electrocardiogram (ECG) of a patient with prolonged QT and episodes of torsade de pointes ventricular tachycardia (VT). A. Twelve-lead ECG showing a heart rate of 54, anterior ered in the course of family screening wall T inversion, and QT interval of 600 ms. The corrected QT interval (QTc) is 585 ms. B. Telemetry or on a routine ECG. Genotyping can
# Chunk 3990
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (hcm) HCM is the most common genetic cardiovascular disorder, occurring in 1 in 500 individuals, and is a prominent cause of sudden death before the age of 35 years (Chap. 287). Sudden death can be due to polymorphic VT/VF. Rarely, sustained monomorphic VT occurs related to areas of ventricular scar. Risk factors include young age, nonsustained VT, failure of blood pressure to increase during exercise, recent (within 6 months) syncope, ventricular wall thickness >3 cm, and possibly the severity of LV outflow obstruction. An ICD is generally indicated for high-risk patients, but the specific risk profile warranting an ICD continues to be debated. Surgical myectomy, performed to relieve outflow obstruction, has been associated with a sudden death rate of less than 1% per year. The reported annual rate of sustained VT or sudden death after transcoronary ethanol septal ablation done to relieve outflow obstruction has been reported to range between 1 and 5%.
# Chunk 3991
Amiodarone and Dronedarone Amiodarone, which blocks multiple cardiac ionic currents and has sympatholytic activity, suppresses a variety of ventricular arrhythmias. It is administered intravenously for life-threatening arrhythmias. During chronic oral therapy, electrophysiologic effects develop over several days. It is more effective than sotalol in reducing ICD shocks and is the preferred drug for ventricular arrhythmias in patients with heart disease who are not candidates for an ICD. Bradyarrhythmias are the major cardiac adverse effect. Ventricular proarrhythmia can occur, but Torsade de Pointes VT is rare. Noncardiac toxicities are a major problem and contribute to drug discontinuation in approximately a third of patients during long-term therapy. Pneumonitis or pulmonary fibrosis occurs in approximately 1% of patients. Photosensitivity is common, and neuropathy and ocular toxicity can occur. Systematic monitoring is recommended during chronic therapy, including assessment for thyroid and liver toxicity every 6 months and lung toxicity with a chest radiograph and/or determination of lung diffusing capacity annually. Dronedarone has structural similarities to amiodarone but without the iodine moiety. Efficacy for ventricular arrhythmias is poor, and it increases mortality in patients with heart failure.
# Chunk 3992
HF is a burgeoning problem worldwide, with more than 20 million people affected. The overall prevalence of HF in the adult population in developed countries is 2%. HF prevalence follows an exponential pattern, rising with age, and affects 6–10% of people over age 65. Although the relative incidence of HF is lower in women than in men, women constitute at least one-half the cases of HF because of their longer life expectancy. In North America and Europe, the lifetime risk of developing HF is approximately one in five for a 40-year-old. The overall prevalence of HF is thought to be increasing, in part because current therapies for cardiac disorders, such as myocardial infarction (MI), valvular heart disease, and arrhythmias, are allowing patients to survive longer. Very little is known about the prevalence or risk of developing HF in emerging nations because of the lack of population-based studies in those countries. HF was once thought to arise primarily in the setting of a depressed left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction (EF); however, epidemiologic studies have shown that approximately one-half of patients who develop HF have a normal or preserved EF (EF ≥50%). Accordingly, the historical terms “systolic” and “diastolic” HF have been abandoned, and HF patients are now broadly categorized into HF with a reduced EF (HFrEF; formerly systolic failure) or HF with a preserved EF (HRpEF; formerly diastolic failure).
# Chunk 3993
Despite many recent advances in the evaluation and management of HF, the development of symptomatic HF still carries a poor prognosis. Community-based studies indicate that 30–40% of patients die within 1 year of diagnosis and 60–70% die within 5 years, mainly from worsening HF or as a sudden event (probably because of a ventricular arrhythmia). Although it is difficult to predict prognosis in an individual, patients with symptoms at rest (New York Heart Association [NYHA] class IV) have a 30–70% annual mortality rate, whereas patients with symptoms with moderate activity (NYHA class II) have an annual mortality rate of 5–10%. Thus, functional status is an important predictor of patient outcome (Table 279-2).
# Chunk 3994
orthopnEa Orthopnea, which is defined as dyspnea occurring in the recumbent position, is usually a later manifestation of HF than is exertional dyspnea. It results from redistribution of fluid from the splanchnic circulation and lower extremities into the central circulation during recumbency, with a resultant increase in pulmonary capillary pressure. Nocturnal cough is a common manifestation of this process and a frequently overlooked symptom of HF. Orthopnea generally is relieved by sitting upright or sleeping with additional pillows. Although orthopnea is a relatively specific symptom of HF, it may occur in patients with abdominal obesity or ascites and patients with pulmonary disease whose lung mechanics favor an upright posture.
# Chunk 3995
paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnEa (pnd) This term refers to acute episodes of severe shortness of breath and coughing that generally occur at night and awaken the patient from sleep, usually 1–3 h after the
# Chunk 3996
acutE pulmonary EdEma See Chap. 326

Other Symptoms Patients with HF also may present with gastrointestinal symptoms. Anorexia, nausea, and early satiety associated with abdominal pain and fullness are common complaints and may be related to edema of the bowel wall and/or a congested liver. Congestion of the liver and stretching of its capsule may lead to right upper-quadrant pain. Cerebral symptoms such as confusion, disorientation, and sleep and mood disturbances may be observed in patients with severe HF, particularly elderly patients with cerebral arteriosclerosis and reduced cerebral perfusion. Nocturia is common in HF and may contribute to insomnia.
# Chunk 3997
General Appearance and Vital Signs In mild or moderately severe HF, the patient appears to be in no distress at rest except for feeling uncomfortable when lying flat for more than a few minutes. In more severe HF, the patient must sit upright, may have labored breathing, and may not be able to finish a sentence because of shortness of breath. Systolic blood pressure may be normal or high in early HF, but it generally is reduced in advanced HF because of severe LV dysfunction. The pulse pressure may be diminished, reflecting a reduction in stroke volume. Sinus tachycardia is a nonspecific sign caused by increased adrenergic activity. Peripheral vasoconstriction leading to cool peripheral extremities and cyanosis of the lips and nail beds is also caused by excessive adrenergic activity.
# Chunk 3998
Cardiac Cachexia With severe chronic HF, there may be marked weight loss and cachexia. Although the mechanism of cachexia is not entirely understood, it is probably multifactorial and includes elevation of the resting metabolic rate; anorexia, nausea, and vomiting due to congestive hepatomegaly and abdominal fullness; elevation of circulating concentrations of cytokines such as TNF; and impairment of intestinal absorption due to congestion of the intestinal veins. When present, cachexia augurs a poor overall prognosis.
# Chunk 3999
Routine Laboratory Testing Patients with new-onset HF and those with chronic HF and acute decompensation should have a complete blood count, a panel of electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, serum creatinine, hepatic enzymes, and a urinalysis. Selected patients should have assessment for diabetes mellitus (fasting serum glucose or oral glucose tolerance test), dyslipidemia (fasting lipid panel), and thyroid abnormalities (thyroid-stimulating hormone level).
# Chunk 4000
HF resembles but should be distinguished from (1) conditions in which there is circulatory congestion secondary to abnormal salt and water retention but in which there is no disturbance of cardiac structure or function (e.g., renal failure), and (2) noncardiac causes of pulmonary edema (e.g., acute respiratory distress syndrome). In most patients who present with classic signs and symptoms of HF, the diagnosis is relatively straightforward. However, even experienced clinicians have difficulty differentiating the dyspnea that arises from cardiac and pulmonary causes (Chap. 47e). In this regard, noninvasive cardiac imaging, biomarkers, pulmonary function testing, and chest x-ray may be useful. A very low BNP or NT-proBNP may be helpful in excluding a cardiac cause of dyspnea in this setting. Ankle edema may arise secondary to varicose veins, obesity, renal disease, or gravitational effects. When HF develops in patients with a preserved EF, it may be difficult to determine the relative contribution of HF to the dyspnea that occurs in chronic lung disease and/or obesity.
# Chunk 4001
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS Symptoms The symptoms of chronic cor pulmonale generally are related to the underlying pulmonary disorder. Dyspnea, the most common symptom, is usually the result of the increased work of breathing secondary to changes in elastic recoil of the lung (fibrosing lung diseases), altered respiratory mechanics (e.g., overinflation with COPD), or inefficient ventilation (e.g., primary pulmonary vascular disease). Orthopnea and PND are rarely symptoms of isolated right HF and usually point toward concurrent left heart dysfunction. Rarely, these symptoms reflect increased work of breathing in the supine position resulting from compromised diaphragmatic excursion. Abdominal pain and ascites that occur with cor pulmonale are similar to the right HF that ensues in chronic HF. Lower-extremity edema may occur secondary to neurohormonal activation, elevated RV filling pressures, or increased levels of carbon dioxide and hypoxemia, which can lead to peripheral vasodilation and edema formation.
# Chunk 4002
ADHF is a heterogeneous clinical syndrome most often resulting in need for hospitalization due to confluence of interrelated abnormalities of decreased cardiac performance, renal dysfunction, and alterations in vascular compliance. Admission with a diagnosis of ADHF is associated with excessive morbidity and mortality, with nearly half of these patients readmitted for management within 6 months, and a high short-term (5–8% in-hospital) and long-term mortality (20% at 1 year). Importantly, long-term aggregate outcomes remain poor, with a combined incidence of cardiovascular deaths, heart failure hospitalizations, myocardial infarction, strokes, or sudden death reaching 50% at 12 months after hospitalization. The management of these patients has remained difficult and principally revolves around volume control and decrease of vascular impedance while maintaining attention to end-organ perfusion (coronary and renal).
# Chunk 4003
parameters associated with worse outcomes: a blood urea nitrogen level greater than 43 mg/dL (to convert to mmol/L, multiply by 0.357), systolic blood pressure less than 115 mmHg, a serum creatinine level greater than 2.75 mg/dL (to convert to μmol/L, multiply by 88.4), and an elevated troponin I level. A useful clinical schema to identify treatment targets for the various phenotypic presentations and management goals in ADHF is depicted in Fig. 280-2.
# Chunk 4004
The Cardiorenal Syndrome The cardiorenal syndrome is being recognized increasingly as a complication of ADHF. Multiple definitions have been proposed for the cardiorenal syndrome, but at its simplest, it can be thought to reflect the interplay between abnormalities of heart and kidney function, with deteriorating function of one organ while therapy is administered to preserve the other. Approximately 30% of patients hospitalized with ADHF exhibit abnormal renal function at baseline, and this is associated with longer hospitalizations and increased mortality. However, mechanistic studies have been largely unable to find correlation between deterioration in renal function, cardiac output, left-sided filling pressures, and reduced renal perfusion; most patients with cardiorenal syndrome demonstrate a preserved cardiac output. It is hypothesized that in patients with established heart failure, this syndrome represents a complex interplay of neurohormonal factors, potentially exacerbated by “backward failure” resulting from increased intra-abdominal pressure and impairment in return of renal venous blood flow. Continued use of diuretic therapy may be associated with a reduction in glomerular filtration rate and a worsening of the cardiorenal syndrome when right-sided filling pressures remain elevated. In patients in the late stages of disease characterized by profound low cardiac output state, inotropic therapy or mechanical circulatory support has been shown to preserve or improve renal function in selected individuals in the short term until more definitive therapy such as assisted circulation or cardiac transplantation is implemented.
# Chunk 4005
Ultrafiltration Ultrafiltration (UF) is an invasive fluid removal technique that may supplement the need for diuretic therapy. Proposed benefits of UF include controlled rates of fluid removal, neutral effects on serum electrolytes, and decreased neurohormonal activity. This technique has also been referred to as aquapheresis in recognition of its electrolyte depletion–sparing effects. Current UF systems function with two large-bore, peripherally inserted venous lines. In a pivotal study evaluating UF versus conventional therapy, fluid removal was improved and subsequent heart failure hospitalizations and urgent clinic visits were reduced with UF; however, no improvement in renal function and no subjective differences in dyspnea scores or adverse outcomes were noted. More recently, in the Cardiorenal Rescue Study in Acute Decompensated Heart Failure (CARRESS-HF) trial, 188 patients with ADHF and worsening renal failure were randomized to stepped pharmacologic care or UF. The primary endpoint was a change in serum creatinine and change in weight (reflecting fluid removal) at 96 hours. Although similar weight loss occurred in both groups (approximately 5.5 kg), there was worsening in creatinine in the UF group. Deaths and hospitalizations for heart failure were no different between groups, but there were more severe adverse events in the UF group, mainly due to kidney failure, bleeding complications, and intravenous catheter-related complications. This investigation argues against using UF as a primary strategy in patients with ADHF who are nonetheless responsive to diuretics. Whether UF is useful in states of diuretic unresponsiveness remains an open question, and this strategy continues to be employed judiciously in such situations.
# Chunk 4006
Vasodilators including intravenous nitrates, nitroprusside, and nesiritide (a recombinant brain-type natriuretic peptide) have been advocated for upstream therapy in an effort to stabilize ADHF. The latter agent was introduced in a fixed dose for therapy after a comparison with intravenous nitrates suggested more rapid and greater reduction in pulmonary capillary wedge pressure. Enthusiasm for nesiritide waned due to concerns within the pivotal trials for development of renal insufficiency and an increase in mortality. To address these concerns, a large-scale morbidity and mortality trial, the Acute Study of Clinical Effectiveness of Nesiritide in Decompensated Heart Failure (ASCEND-HF) study was completed in 2011 and randomly enrolled 7141 patients with ADHF to nesiritide or placebo for 24 to 168 hours in addition to standard care. Nesiritide was not associated with an increase or a decrease in the rates of death and rehospitalization and had a clinically insignificant benefit on dyspnea. Renal function did not worsen, but increased rates of hypotension were noted. Although this trial established the safety for this drug, the routine use cannot be advocated due to lack of significant efficacy. Recombinant human relaxin-2, or serelaxin, is a peptide upregulated in pregnancy and examined in ADHF patients with a normal or elevated blood pressure. In the Relaxin in Acute Heart Failure (RELAX-AHF) trial, serelaxin or placebo was added to a regimen of standard therapy in 1161 patients hospitalized with ADHF, evidence of congestion, and systolic pressure >125 mmHg. Serelaxin improved dyspnea, reduced signs and symptoms of congestion, and was associated with less early worsening of HF. Exploratory endpoints of hard outcomes at 6 months suggested positive signals in favor of mortality reduction. This agent is being tested in a large, more confirmatory trial setting.
# Chunk 4007
Aldosterone antagonism is associated with a reduction in mortality in all stages of symptomatic NYHA class II to IV HFrEF. Elevated aldosterone levels in HFrEF promote sodium retention, electrolyte imbalance, and endothelial dysfunction and may directly contribute to myocardial fibrosis. The selective agent eplerenone (tested in NYHA class II and post–myocardial infarction heart failure) and the nonselective antagonist spironolactone (tested in NYHA class III and IV heart failure) reduce mortality and hospitalizations, with significant reductions in sudden cardiac death (SCD). Hyperkalemia and worsening renal function are concerns, especially in patients with underlying chronic kidney disease, and renal function and serum potassium levels must be closely monitored.
# Chunk 4008
SCD due to ventricular arrhythmias is the mode of death in approximately half of patients with heart failure and is particularly proportionally prevalent in HFrEF patients with early stages of the disease. Patients who survive an episode of SCD are considered to be at very high risk and qualify for placement of an implantable cardioverterdefibrillator (ICD). Although primary prevention is challenging, the degree of residual left ventricular dysfunction despite optimal medical therapy (≤35%) to allow for adequate remodeling and the underlying etiology (post–myocardial infarction or ischemic cardiomyopathy) are the two single most important risk markers for stratification of need and benefit. Currently, patients with NYHA class II or III symptoms of heart failure and an LVEF <35%, irrespective of etiology of heart failure, are appropriate candidates for ICD prophylactic therapy. In patients with a myocardial infarction and optimal medical therapy with residual LVEF ≤30% (even when asymptomatic), placement of an ICD is appropriate. In patients with a terminal illness and a predicted life span of less than 6 months or in those with NYHA class IV symptoms who are refractory to medications and who are not candidates for transplant, the risks of multiple ICD shocks must be carefully weighed against the survival benefits. If a patient meets the QRS criteria for CRT, combined CRT with ICD is often employed (Table 280-3).
# Chunk 4009
Despite stellar outcomes with medical therapy, admission rates following heart failure hospitalization remain high, with nearly half of all patients readmitted to hospital within 6 months of discharge. Recurrent heart failure and related cardiovascular conditions account for only half of readmissions in patients with heart failure, whereas other comorbidity-related conditions account for the rest. The key to achieving enhanced outcomes must begin with the attention to transitional care at the index hospitalization with facilitated discharge through comprehensive discharge planning, patient and caregiver education, appropriate use of visiting nurses, and planned follow-up. Early postdischarge follow-up, whether by telephone or clinic-based, may be critical to ensuring stability because most heart failure–related readmissions tend to occur within the first 2 weeks after discharge. Although routinely advocated, intensive surveillance of weight and vital signs with use of telemonitoring has not decreased hospitalizations. Intrathoracic impedance measurements have been advocated for the identification of early rise in filling pressure and worsened hemodynamics so that preemptive management may be employed. However, this has not been successful and may worsen outcomes in the short term. Implantable pressure monitoring systems do tend to provide signals for early decompensation, and in patients with moderately advanced symptoms, such systems have been shown to provide information that can allow implementation of therapy to avoid hospitalizations by as much as 39% (in the CardioMEMS Heart Sensor Allows Monitoring of Pressure to Improve Outcomes in NYHA Class III Heart
# Chunk 4010
A registry organized by the ISHLT has tracked worldwide and

U.S. survival rates after heart transplantation since 1982. The most recent update reveals survival rates of 83% and 76% 1 and 3 years after transplantation, respectively, or a posttransplantation “half-life” of 10.00 years (Fig. 281-1). The quality of life of survivors is generally excellent, with well over 90% of patients in the registry returning to normal and unrestricted function after transplantation.
# Chunk 4011
Cardiac allograft rejection is usually diagnosed by endomyocardial biopsy conducted either on a surveillance basis or in response to clinical deterioration. Biopsy surveillance is performed on a regular basis in most programs for the first year postoperatively (or the first 5 years in many programs). Therapy consists of augmentation of immunosuppression, the intensity and duration of which are dictated by the severity of rejection.
# Chunk 4012
Publication of the REMATCH (Randomized Evaluation of Mechanical Assistance in the Treatment of Heart Failure) trial in 2001 documented a somewhat improved survival rate in patients who had end-stage heart disease, were not candidates for transplantation, and were randomized to a pulsatile LVAD (albeit with a high rate of complications, especially neurologic issues) as opposed to continued medical therapy. This result led to renewed interest in use of the devices for nonbiologic permanent replacement of heart function as well. Subsequently, this device was supplanted by the HeartMate II axial-flow device, which has dramatically improved the survival of patients with severe end-stage heart disease in whom medical therapy has failed. The patients who had this device implanted had a 2-year survival rate of 58%, whereas the survival rate for patients in the medically treated arm of the original REMATCH trial was only 8%. More recent experience has shown that the mean survival period of patients with a continuous-flow LVAD for destination therapy is approaching 5 years.
# Chunk 4013
In patients with Eisenmenger’s VSD, pulmonary arterial vasodilators and both singleor double-lung transplantation with intracardiac defect repair or heart/lung transplantation show promise for improvement in symptoms (Chaps. 281 and 320e). Chronic hypoxemia in cyanotic CHD results in secondary erythrocytosis due to increased erythropoietin production (Chap. 49). The term polycythemia is a misnomer; white cell counts are normal, and platelet counts are normal to decreased. Compensated erythrocytosis with iron-replete equilibrium hematocrits rarely results in symptoms of hyperviscosity at hematocrits <65% and occasionally not even with hematocrits ≥70%. For this reason, therapeutic phlebotomy is rarely required in compensated erythrocytosis. In contrast, patients with decompensated erythrocytosis fail to establish equilibrium with unstable, rising hematocrits and recurrent hyperviscosity symptoms. Therapeutic phlebotomy, a two-edged sword, allows temporary relief of symptoms but limits oxygen delivery, begets instability of the hematocrit, and compounds the problem by iron depletion. Iron-deficiency symptoms are usually indistinguishable from those of hyperviscosity; progressive symptoms after recurrent phlebotomy are usually due to iron depletion with hypochromic microcytosis. Iron depletion results in a larger number of smaller (microcytic) hypochromic red cells that are less capable of carrying oxygen and less deformable in the microcirculation; with more of them relative to plasma volume, viscosity is greater than for an equivalent hematocrit with fewer, larger, iron-replete, deformable cells. As such, iron-depleted erythrocytosis results in increasing symptoms due to decreased oxygen delivery to the tissues.
# Chunk 4014
This condition is commonly called dextro-or D-transposition of the great arteries. The aorta arises rightward anteriorly from the RV, and the pulmonary artery emerges leftward and posteriorly from the LV, which results in two separate parallel circulations; some communication between them must exist after birth to sustain life. Most patients have an interatrial communication, two-thirds have a patent ductus arteriosus, and about one-third have an associated VSD. Transposition is more common in males and accounts for ~10% of cyanotic heart disease. The course is determined by the degree of tissue hypoxemia, the ability of each ventricle to sustain an increased workload in the presence of reduced coronary arterial oxygenation, the nature of the associated cardiovascular anomalies, and the status of the pulmonary vascular bed. Patients who do not undergo surgical palliation generally do not survive to reach adulthood. The long-term outcomes in those that have undergone surgery are in large part determined by the type of surgery performed. By the third decade of life, ~30% of patients with “atrial switch” operations will have developed decreased RV function and progressive tricuspid regurgitation, which may lead to congestive heart failure. Pulmonary vascular obstruction develops by 1–2 years of age in patients with an associated large VSD or large patent ductus arteriosus in the absence of obstruction to LV outflow.
# Chunk 4015
Aortic stenosis Congenital (bicuspid, unicuspid)

AS, including low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, lipoprotein a (Lp[a]), diabetes mellitus, smoking, chronic kidney disease, and the metabolic syndrome. The presence of aortic valve sclerosis (focal thickening and calcification of the leaflets not severe enough to cause obstruction) is associated with an excess risk of cardiovascular death and myocardial infarction (MI) among persons older than age 65. Approximately 30% of persons older than 65 years exhibit aortic valve sclerosis, whereas 2% exhibit frank stenosis.
# Chunk 4016
Because the CO at rest is usually well maintained until late in the course, marked fatigability, weakness, peripheral cyanosis, cachexia, and other clinical manifestations of a low CO are usually not prominent until this stage is reached. Orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, and pulmonary edema, i.e., symptoms of LV failure, also occur only in the advanced stages of the disease. Severe pulmonary hypertension leading to RV failure and systemic venous hypertension, hepatomegaly, AF, and tricuspid regurgitation (TR) are usually late findings in patients with isolated severe AS.
# Chunk 4017
Death in patients with severe AS occurs most commonly in the seventh and eighth decades. Based on data obtained at postmortem examination in patients before surgical treatment became widely available, the average time to death after the onset of various symptoms was as follows: angina pectoris, 3 years; syncope, 3 years; dyspnea, 2 years; congestive heart failure, 1.5–2 years. Moreover, in >80% of patients who died with AS, symptoms had existed for <4 years. Among adults dying with valvular AS, sudden death, which presumably resulted from an arrhythmia, occurred in 10–20%; however, most sudden deaths occurred in patients who had previously been symptomatic. Sudden death as the first manifestation of severe AS is very uncommon (<1% per year) in asymptomatic adult patients. Calcific AS is a progressive disease, with an annual reduction in valve area averaging 0.1 cm2 and annual increases in the peak jet velocity and mean valve gradient averaging 0.3 meters/s and 7 mmHg, respectively (Table 283-2).
# Chunk 4018
area <1 cm2 or 0.6 cm2/m2 body surface area) who are symptomatic, those who exhibit LV systolic dysfunction (EF <50%), and those with BAV disease and an aneurysmal root or ascending aorta (maximal dimension >5.5 cm). Operation for aneurysm disease is recommended at smaller aortic diameters (4.5–5.0 cm) for patients with a family history of an aortic catastrophe and for patients who exhibit rapid aneurysm growth (>0.5 cm/year). Patients with asymptomatic moderate or severe AS who are referred for coronary artery bypass grafting surgery should also have AVR. In patients without heart failure, the operative risk of AVR (including patients with AS or AR) is approximately 2% (Table 283-2) but increases as a function of age and the need for concomitant aortic surgery or coronary revascularization with bypass grafting. The indications for AVR in the asymptomatic patient have been the subject of intense debate over the past 5 years, as surgical outcomes in selected patients have continued to improve. Relative indications for which surgery can be considered include an abnormal response to treadmill exercise; rapid progression of AS, especially when urgent access to medical care might be compromised; very severe AS, defined by an aortic valve jet velocity >5 meters/s or mean gradient >60 mmHg and low operative risk; and excessive LV hypertrophy in the absence of systemic hypertension. Exercise testing can be safely performed in the asymptomatic patient, as many as one-third of whom will show signs of functional impairment.
# Chunk 4019
Because many patients with calcific AS are elderly, particular attention must be directed to the adequacy of hepatic, renal, and pulmonary function before AVR is recommended. Age alone is not a contraindication to AVR for AS. The perioperative mortality rate depends to a substantial extent on the patient’s preoperative clinical and hemodynamic state. Treatment decisions for AS patients who are not at low operative risk should be made by a multidisciplinary heart team with representation from general cardiology, interventional cardiology, imaging, cardiac surgery, and other allied specialties as needed, including geriatrics. The 10-year survival rate of older adult patients with AVR is approximately 60%. Approximately 30% of bioprosthetic valves evidence primary valve failure in 10 years, requiring re-replacement, and an approximately equal percentage of patients with mechanical prostheses develop significant hemorrhagic complications as a consequence of treatment with vitamin K antagonists. Homograft AVR is usually reserved for patients with aortic valve endocarditis.
# Chunk 4020
TAVR is most frequently performed via the transfemoral route, although trans-LV apical, subclavian, carotid, and ascending aortic routes have been used. Aortic balloon valvuloplasty under rapid RV pacing is performed as a first step to create an orifice of sufficient size for the prosthesis. Procedural success rates exceed 90%. Among elderly patients with severe AS who are considered inoperable (i.e., prohibitive surgical risk), 1and 2-year survival rates are significantly higher with TAVR compared with medical therapy (including PABV) (Fig. 283-4). Oneand 2-year survival rates are essentially equal for high-surgical-risk patients treated with TAVR or surgical AVR (SAVR) (Fig. 283-5). TAVR is associated with an early hazard for stroke and a higher incidence of postprocedural, paravalvular AR, a risk factor for mortality over the next 2 years. Postprocedural heart block requiring permanent pacemaker therapy is observed significantly more frequently with the self-expanding valve. Valve performance characteristics are excellent. Overall outcomes with this transformative technology have been very favorable and have allowed the extension of AVR to groups of patients previously considered at high or prohibitive risk for conventional surgery. Nevertheless, some patients are not candidates for this procedure because their comorbidity profile, including an assessment of frailty, would make its undertaking inappropriate. The heart team is specifically charged with making challenging decisions of this nature. The use of these devices for the treatment of patients at intermediate operative risk and for those with structural deterioration of bioprosthetic aortic and mitral valves (“valve-in-valve”), as an alternative to reoperative valve replacement, is under active study.
# Chunk 4021
Chronic severe AR may have a long latent period, and patients may remain relatively asymptomatic for as long as 10–15 years. However, uncomfortable awareness of the heartbeat, especially on lying down, may be an early complaint. Sinus tachycardia, during exertion or with emotion, or premature ventricular contractions may produce particularly uncomfortable palpitations as well as head pounding. These complaints may persist for many years before the development of exertional dyspnea, usually the first symptom of diminished cardiac reserve. The dyspnea is followed by orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, and excessive diaphoresis. Anginal chest pain even in the absence of CAD may occur in patients with severe AR, even in younger patients. Anginal pain may develop at rest as well as during exertion. Nocturnal angina may be a particularly troublesome symptom, and it may be accompanied by marked diaphoresis. The anginal episodes can be prolonged and often do not respond satisfactorily to sublingual nitroglycerin. Systemic fluid accumulation, including congestive hepatomegaly and ankle edema, may develop late in the course of the disease.
# Chunk 4022
Echocardiogram LV size is increased in chronic AR and systolic function is normal or even supernormal until myocardial contractility declines, as signaled by a decrease in EF or increase in the end-systolic dimension. A rapid, high-frequency diastolic fluttering of the anterior mitral leaflet produced by the impact of the regurgitant jet is a characteristic finding. The echocardiogram is also useful in determining the cause of AR, by detecting dilation of the aortic annulus and root, aortic dissection (see Fig. 270e-5), or primary leaflet pathology. With severe AR, the central jet width assessed by color flow Doppler imaging exceeds 65% of the LV outflow tract, the regurgitant volume is ≥60 mL/beat, the regurgitant fraction is ≥50%, and there is diastolic flow reversal in the proximal descending thoracic aorta. The continuous-wave Doppler profile of the AR jet shows a rapid deceleration time in patients with acute severe AR, due to the rapid increase in LV diastolic pressure. Surveillance transthoracic echocardiography forms the cornerstone of longitudinal follow-up and allows for the early detection of changes in LV size and/or function. For patients in whom transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) is limited by poor acoustical windows or inadequate semiquantitative assessment of LV function or the severity of the regurgitation, cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can be performed. This modality also allows for accurate assessment of aortic size and contour. Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) can also provide detailed anatomic assessment of the valve, root, and portions of the aorta.
# Chunk 4023
In patients whose mitral orifices are large enough to accommodate a normal blood flow with only mild elevations of LA pressure, marked elevations of this pressure leading to dyspnea and cough may be precipitated by sudden changes in the heart rate, volume status, or CO, as, for example, with severe exertion, excitement, fever, severe anemia, paroxysmal AF 1540 and other tachycardias, sexual intercourse, pregnancy, and thyrotoxicosis. As MS progresses, lesser degrees of stress precipitate dyspnea, the patient becomes limited in daily activities, and orthopnea and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea develop. The development of persistent AF often marks a turning point in the patient’s course and is generally associated with acceleration of the rate at which symptoms progress. Hemoptysis (Chap. 48) results from rupture of pulmonary-bronchial venous connections secondary to pulmonary venous hypertension. It occurs most frequently in patients who have elevated LA pressures without markedly elevated pulmonary vascular resistances and is rarely fatal. Recurrent pulmonary emboli (Chap. 300), sometimes with infarction, are an important cause of morbidity and mortality late in the course of MS. Pulmonary infections, i.e., bronchitis, bronchopneumonia, and lobar pneumonia, commonly complicate untreated MS, especially during the winter months.
# Chunk 4024
Left atrial myxoma (Chap. 289e) may obstruct LA emptying, causing dyspnea, a diastolic murmur, and hemodynamic changes resembling those of MS. However, patients with an LA myxoma often have features suggestive of a systemic disease, such as weight loss, fever, anemia, systemic emboli, and elevated serum IgG and interleukin 6 (IL-6) concentrations. The auscultatory findings may change markedly with body position. The diagnosis can be established by the demonstration of a characteristic echo-producing mass in the LA with TTE.
# Chunk 4025
(Courtesy of Raymond G. McKay, MD; with permission.) survival in younger (<45 years) patients with pliable valves is excellent, with rates as high as 80–90% over 3–7 years. Therefore, PMBV has become the procedure of choice for such patients when it can be performed by a skilled operator in a high-volume center.
# Chunk 4026
manipulation, or those in whom the surgeon does not find it possible to improve valve function significantly with valvotomy. MVR is now routinely performed with preservation of the chordal attachments to optimize LV functional recovery. Perioperative mortality rates with MVR vary with age, LV function, the presence of CAD, and associated comorbidities. They average 5% overall but are lower in young patients and may be twice as high in patients >65 years of age with significant comorbidities (Table 284-2). Because there are also long-term complications of valve replacement, patients in whom preoperative evaluation suggests the possibility that MVR may be required should be operated on only if they have severe MS—i.e., an orifice area ≤1.5 cm2—and are in NYHA Class III, i.e., symptomatic with ordinary activity despite optimal medical therapy. The overall 10-year survival of surgical survivors is ~70%. Long-term prognosis is worse in patients >65 years of age and those with marked disability and marked depression of the CO preoperatively. Pulmonary hypertension and RV dysfunction are additional risk factors for poor outcome.
# Chunk 4027
A diastolic pressure gradient between the right atrium (RA) and right ventricle (RV) defines TS. It is augmented when the transvalvular blood flow increases during inspiration and declines during expiration. A mean diastolic pressure gradient of 4 mmHg is usually sufficient to elevate the mean RA pressure to levels that result in systemic venous congestion. Unless sodium intake has been restricted and diuretics administered, this venous congestion is associated with hepatomegaly, ascites, and edema, sometimes severe. In patients with sinus rhythm, the RA a wave may be extremely tall and may even approach the level of the RV systolic pressure. The y descent is prolonged. The cardiac output (CO) at rest is usually depressed, and it fails to rise during exercise. The low CO is responsible for the normal or only slightly elevated left atrial (LA), pulmonary artery (PA), and RV systolic pressures despite the presence of MS. Thus, the presence of TS can mask the hemodynamic and clinical features of any associated MS.
# Chunk 4028
Because the development of MS generally precedes that of TS, many patients initially have symptoms of pulmonary congestion and fatigue. Characteristically, patients with severe TS complain of relatively little dyspnea for the degree of hepatomegaly, ascites, and edema that they have. However, fatigue secondary to a low CO and discomfort due to refractory edema, ascites, and marked hepatomegaly are common in patients with advanced TS and/or TR. In some patients, TS may be
# Chunk 4029
Mild or moderate degrees of TR are usually well tolerated in the absence of other hemodynamic disturbances. Because TR most often coexists with left-sided valve lesions, LV dysfunction, and/or PA hypertension, symptoms related to these lesions may dominate the clinical picture. Fatigue and exertional dyspnea owing to reduced forward CO are early symptoms of isolated, severe TR. As the disease progresses and RV function declines, patients may report cervical pulsations, abdominal full-ness/bloating, diminished appetite, and muscle wasting, although with progressive weight gain and painful swelling of the lower extremities.
# Chunk 4030
Mild or moderate degrees of PR do not, by themselves, result in symptoms. Other problems, such as PA hypertension, may dominant the clinical picture. With progressively severe PR and RV dysfunction, fatigue, exertional dyspnea, abdominal fullness/bloating, and lower extremity swelling may be reported.
# Chunk 4031
Compared with patients with isolated, single-lesion valve disease, patients with multiple or mixed valve disease may develop symptoms at a relatively earlier stage in the natural history of their disease. Symptoms such as exertional dyspnea and fatigue are usually related to elevated filling pressures, reduced CO, or their combination. Palpitations may signify AF and identify mitral valve disease as an important component of the clinical presentation, even when not previously suspected. Chest pain compatible with angina could reflect left or right ventricular oxygen supply/demand mismatch on a substrate of hypertrophy and pressure/volume overload with or without superimposed coronary artery disease. Symptoms related to right heart failure (abdominal fullness/bloating, edema) are late manifestations of advanced disease.
# Chunk 4032
For all cardiomyopathies, the early symptoms often relate to exertional intolerance with breathlessness or fatigue, usually from inadequate cardiac reserve during exercise. These symptoms may initially go unnoticed or be attributed to other causes, commonly lung disease or age-dependent exercise limitation. As fluid retention leads to elevation of resting filling pressures, shortness of breath may occur during routine daily activity such as dressing and may manifest as dyspnea or cough when lying down at night. Although often considered the hallmark of congestion, peripheral edema may be absent despite severe fluid retention, particularly in younger patients in whom ascites and abdominal discomfort may dominate. The nonspecific term congestive heart failure describes only the resulting syndrome of fluid retention, which is common to all three types of cardiomyopathy and also to cardiac structural diseases associated 1From BJ Maron et al: Circulation 113:1807, 2006.
# Chunk 4033
aLeft-sided symptoms of pulmonary congestion: dyspnea on exertion, orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea. Right-sided symptoms of systemic venous congestion: hepatic and abdominal distention, discomfort on bending, peripheral edema.
# Chunk 4034
Chemistry: Serum sodium,a potassium,a calcium, a magnesiuma Fasting glucose (glycohemoglobin in diabetes mellitus) Creatinine,a blood urea nitrogena Albumin,a total protein,a liver function testsa Lipid profile Thyroid-stimulating hormonea Serum iron, transferrin saturation Urinalysis Creatine kinase isoforms Cardiac troponin levels
# Chunk 4035
Hematology: Hemoglobin/hematocrita White blood cell count with differential,a including eosinophils Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
# Chunk 4036
Laboratory evaluation for myocarditis The initial evaluation for suspected myocarditis includes an ECG, an echocardiogram, and serum levels of troponin and creatine phosphokinase fractions. Magnetic resonance imaging is increasingly used for the diagnosis of myocarditis, which is supported by evidence of increased tissue edema and gadolinium enhancement (Fig. 287-6), particularly in the mid-wall (as distinct from usual coronary artery territories).
# Chunk 4037
The Dallas Criteria for myocarditis on endomyocardial biopsy include lymphocytic infiltrate with evidence of myocyte necrosis (Fig. 287-7) and are negative in 80–90% of patients with clinical myocarditis. Negative Dallas Criteria can reflect sampling error or early resolution of lymphocytic infiltrates, but also the insensitivity of the test when inflammation results from cytokines and antibody-mediated injury. Routine histologic examination of endomyocardial biopsy rarely reveals a specific infective etiology, such as toxoplasmosis or Cytomegalovirus. Immunohistochemistry of myocardial biopsy samples is commonly used to identify active lymphocyte subtypes and may also detect upregulation of HLA antigens and the presence of complement components attributed to inflammation, but the specificity and significance of these findings are uncertain.
# Chunk 4038
Treatment of the advanced stages focuses on clinical manifestations of the disease and includes heart failure medications, pacemakerdefibrillators, and anticoagulation. Increasing attention is directed to antiparasitic therapy even in chronic disease without obvious active infection. The most common effective antiparasitic therapies are benznidazole and nifurtimox, both associated with multiple severe reactions, including dermatitis, gastrointestinal distress, and neuropathy. Survival is less than 30% at 5 years after the onset of overt clinical heart failure. Patients without major extracardiac disease have occasionally undergone transplantation, after which they may require lifelong therapy to suppress reactivation of infection.
# Chunk 4039
Depending on the time course, the ventricles may appear restrictive or dilated. There is often right ventricular predominance of both dilation and ventricular arrhythmias, sometimes initially attributed to arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia. Small ventricular aneurysms are common. Computed tomography of the chest often reveals pulmonary lymphadenopathy even in the absence of clinical lung disease. Metabolic imaging (positron emission tomography (PET]) of the whole chest can highlight active sarcoid lesions that are avid for glucose. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the heart can identify areas likely to be inflammatory. To rule out chronic infections, such as tuberculosis or histoplasmosis as the cause of adenopathy, the diagnosis usually requires pathologic confirmation. Biopsy of enlarged mediastinal nodes may provide the highest yield. The scattered granulomata of sarcoidosis can easily be missed on cardiac biopsy (Fig. 287-8).
# Chunk 4040
Peripartum cardiomyopathy (PPCM) develops during the last trimester or within the first 6 months after pregnancy, with a frequency between 1:2000 and 1:15,000 deliveries. Risk factors are increased maternal age, increased parity, twin pregnancy, malnutrition, use of tocolytic therapy for premature labor, and preeclampsia or toxemia of pregnancy. Heart failure early after delivery was previously common in Nigeria, when the custom for new mothers included salt ingestion while reclining on a warm bed, which likely impaired mobilization of the excess circulating volume after delivery. In the Western world, lymphocytic myocarditis has sometimes been found on myocardial biopsy. This inflammation has been hypothesized to reflect increased susceptibility to viral myocarditis or an autoimmune myocarditis due to cross-reactivity of anti-uterine antibodies against cardiac muscle. Another proposed mechanism invokes an abnormal prolactin cleavage fragment, which is induced by oxidative stress and may trigger myocardial apoptosis; this observation has led to preliminary investigation of bromocriptine as possible therapy.
# Chunk 4041
Alcohol is the most common toxin implicated in chronic dilated cardiomyopathy. Excess consumption may contribute to more than 10% of cases of heart failure, including exacerbation of cases with other primary etiologies such as valvular disease or previous infarction. Toxicity is attributed both to alcohol and to its primary metabolite, acetaldehyde. Polymorphisms of the genes encoding alcohol dehydrogenase and the angiotensin-converting enzyme increase the likelihood of alcoholic cardiomyopathy in an individual with excess consumption. Superimposed vitamin deficiencies and toxic alcohol additives are rarely implicated. The alcohol consumption necessary to produce cardiomyopathy in an otherwise normal heart has been estimated to be five to six drinks (about 4 ounces of pure ethanol) daily for 5–10 years, but frequent binge drinking may also be sufficient. Many patients with alcoholic cardiomyopathy are fully functional in their daily lives without apparent stigmata of alcoholism. The cardiac impairment in severe alcoholic cardiomyopathy is the sum of both permanent damage and a substantial component that is reversible after cessation of alcohol consumption. Atrial fibrillation occurs commonly both early in the disease (“holiday heart”) and in advanced stages. Medical therapy includes neurohormonal antagonists and diuretics as needed for fluid management. Withdrawal should be supervised to avoid exacerbations of heart failure or arrhythmias, and ongoing support arranged. Even with severe disease, marked improvement can occur within 3–6 months of abstinence. Implantable defibrillators are generally deferred until an adequate period of abstinence, after which they may not be necessary if the ejection fraction has improved. With continued consumption, the prognosis is grim.
# Chunk 4042
Calcium is essential for excitation-contraction coupling. Chronic deficiencies of calcium, such as can occur with hypoparathyroidism (particularly postsurgical) or intestinal dysfunction (from diarrheal syndromes and following extensive resection), can cause severe chronic heart failure that responds over days or weeks to vigorous calcium repletion. Phosphate is a component of high-energy compounds needed for efficient energy transfer and multiple signaling pathways. Hypophosphatemia can develop during starvation and early refeeding following a prolonged fast, and occasionally during hyperalimentation. Magnesium is a cofactor for thiamine-dependent reactions and for the sodium-potassium adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase), but 1564 The most recognizable familial cardiomyopathy syndromes with extra-cardiac manifestations are the muscular dystrophies. Both Duchenne’s and the milder Becker’s dystrophy result from abnormalities in the X-linked dystrophin gene of the sarcolemmal membrane. Skeletal myopathy is present in multiple other genetic cardiomyopathies (Table 287-3), some of which are associated with creatine kinase elevations. Families with a history of atrial arrhythmias, conduction system disease, and cardiomyopathy may have abnormalities of the nuclear membrane lamin proteins. While all dilated cardiomyopathies carry a risk of sudden death, a family history of cardiomyopathy with sudden death raises suspicion for a particularly arrhythmogenic mutation; affected family members may be considered for implantable defibrillators even before meeting the reduced ejection fraction threshold for primary prevention of sudden death. A prominent family history of sudden death or ventricular tachycardia before clinical cardiomyopathy suggests genetic defects in the desmosomal proteins (Fig. 287-10). Originally described as affecting the right ventricle (arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia [ARVD]), this disorder (arrhythmogenic ventricular dysplasia) can affect either or both ventricles. Patients often present first with ventricular tachycardia. Genetic defects in proteins of the desmosomal complex disrupt myocyte junctions and adhesions, leading to replacement of myocardium by deposits of fat. Thin ventricular walls may be recognized on echocardiography but are better visualized on MRI. Because desmosomes are also important for elasticity hypomagnesemia rarely becomes sufficiently profound to cause clini-of hair and skin, some of the defective desmosomal proteins are cal cardiomyopathy. associated with striking “woolly hair” and thickened skin on the Hemochromatosis is variably classified as a metabolic or storage palms and soles. Implantable defibrillators are usually indicated to disease (Chap. 428). It is included among the causes of restrictive prevent sudden death. There is variable progression to right, left, or cardiomyopathy, but the clinical presentation is often that of a dilated biventricular failure. cardiomyopathy. The autosomal recessive form is related to the HFE Left ventricular noncompaction is a condition of unknown prevagene. With up to 10% of the population heterozygous for one muta-lence that is increasingly revealed with the refinement of imaging tion, the clinical prevalence might be as high as 1 in 500. The lower techniques. The diagnostic criteria include the presence of multiple observed rates highlight the limited penetrance of the disease, suggest-trabeculations in the left ventricle distal to the papillary muscles, creing the role of additional genetic and environmental factors for clinical ating a “spongy” appearance of the apex. Noncompaction has been expression. Hemochromatosis can also be acquired from iron overload associated with multiple genetic variants in the sarcomeric and other due to hemolytic anemia and transfusions. Excess iron is deposited genes, such as TAZ (encoding tafazzin). The diagnosis may be made in the perinuclear compartment of cardiomyocytes, with resulting incidentally or in patients previously diagnosed with cardiomyopathy, disruption of intracellular architecture and mitochondrial function. in whom the criteria for noncompaction may appear and resolve with Diagnosis is easily made from measurement of serum iron and trans-changing left ventricular size and function. The three cardinal clinical ferrin saturation, with a threshold of >60% for men and >45–50% for features are ventricular arrhythmias, embolic events, and heart failure. women. MRI can help to quantitate iron stores in the liver and heart, Treatment generally includes anticoagulation and early consideration and endomyocardial biopsy tissue can be stained for iron (Fig. 287-9), for an implantable defibrillator, in addition to neurohormonal antagowhich is particularly important if the patient has another cause for nists as indicated by stage of disease. cardiomyopathy. If diagnosed early, hemochromatosis can often be Some families inherit a susceptibility to viral-induced myocarditis. managed by repeated phlebotomy to remove iron. For more severe This propensity may relate to abnormalities in cell surface receptors, iron overload, iron chelation therapy with desferrioxamine (deferox-such as the coxsackie-adenovirus receptor, that bind viral proteins. amine) or deferasirox can help to improve cardiac function if myocyte loss and replacement fibrosis are not too severe. Inborn disorders of metabolism occasionally present with dilated cardiomyopathy, although they are most often associated with restrictive cardiomyopathy (Table 287-4).
# Chunk 4043
The least common of the physiologic triad of cardiomyopathies is restrictive cardiomyopathy, which is dominated by abnormal diastolic function, often with mildly decreased contractility and ejection fraction (usually >30–50%). Both atria are enlarged, sometimes massively. Modest left ventricular dilation can be present, usually with an end-diastolic dimension <6 cm. End-diastolic pressures are elevated in both ventricles, with preservation of cardiac output until late in the disease. Subtle exercise intolerance is usually the first symptom but is often not recognized until after clinical presentation with congestive symptoms. The restrictive diseases often present with relatively more right-sided symptoms, such as edema, abdominal discomfort, and ascites, although filling pressures are elevated in both ventricles. The cardiac impulse is less displaced than in dilated cardiomyopathy and less dynamic than in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. A fourth heart sound is more common than a third heart sound in sinus rhythm, but atrial fibrillation is common. Jugular venous pressures often show rapid Y descents and may increase during inspiration (positive Kussmaul’s sign). Most restrictive cardiomyopathies are due to infiltration of abnormal substances between myocytes, storage of abnormal metabolic products within myocytes, or fibrotic injury (Table 287-5). The differential diagnosis should include constrictive pericardial disease, which may also be dominated by right-sided heart failure.
# Chunk 4044
The diagnosis of primary or familial amyloidosis can sometimes be made from biopsies of an abdominal fat pad or the rectum, but cardiac amyloidosis is most reliably identified from a biopsy of the heart, in which amyloid fibrils infiltrate the myocardium diffusely, particularly around the conduction system and coronary vessels (Fig. 287-14). Diagnosis of the type of amyloid protein requires immunohistochemistry of biopsied tissue rather than serum or urine electrophoresis, which can lead to incorrect classification.
# Chunk 4045
The substantial variability of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy pathology is reflected in the diversity of clinical presentations. Patients may be diagnosed after undergoing evaluations triggered by the abnormal physical findings (murmur) or symptoms of exertional dyspnea, angina, or syncope. Alternatively, diagnosis may follow evaluations prompted by the detection of disease in family members. Cardiac imaging (Fig. 287-16) is central to diagnosis due to the insensitivity of examination and ECG and the need to exclude other causes for hypertrophy. The identification of a disease-causing mutation in a proband can focus family evaluations on mutation carriers, but this strategy requires a high degree of certainty that the mutation is truly pathogenic and not a benign DNA variant. Biopsy is not needed to diagnose hypertrophic cardiomyopathy but can be used to exclude infiltrative and metabolic diseases. Rigorous athletic training (athlete’s heart) may cause intermediate degrees of physiologic hypertrophy difficult to differentiate from mild hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Unlike hyper-trophic cardiomyopathy, hypertrophy in the athlete’s heart regresses with cessation of training, and is accompanied by supernormal exercise capacity (VO2max >50 mL/kg/min), mild ventricular dilation, and normal diastolic function.
# Chunk 4046
3.

The electrocardiogram (ECG) in acute pericarditis without massive effusion usually displays changes secondary to acute subepicardial inflammation (Fig. 288-1). It typically evolves through four stages. In stage 1, there is widespread elevation of the ST segments, often with upward concavity, involving two or three standard limb leads and V2 to V6, with reciprocal depressions only in aVR and sometimes V1. Also, there is depression of the PR segment below the TP segment, reflecting atrial involvement. Usually there are no significant changes in QRS complexes. After several days, the ST segments return to normal (stage 2), and only then, or even later, do the T waves become inverted (stage 3). Weeks or months after the onset of acute pericarditis, the ECG returns to normal (stage 4). In contrast, in AMI, ST elevations are convex, and reciprocal depression is usually more prominent; these changes may return to normal within a
# Chunk 4047
There is no specific therapy for acute idiopathic pericarditis, but bed rest and anti-inflammatory treatment with aspirin (2–4 g/d), with gastric protection (e.g., omeprazole 20 mg/d), may be given. If this is ineffective, one of the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as ibuprofen (400–600 mg tid) or indomethacin (25–50 mg tid), should be tried. In responsive patients, these doses should be continued for 1–2 weeks and then tapered over several weeks. In patients who are unresponsive, colchicine (0.5 mg bid, given for 4–8 weeks) has been found to be effective, not only in acute pericarditis, but also in reducing the risk of recurrent pericarditis. Colchicine is concentrated in and interferes with the migration of neutrophils, is contraindicated in patients with hepatic or renal dysfunction, and may cause diarrhea and other gastrointestinal side effects. Glucocorticoids (e.g., prednisone 1 mg/kg per day) usually suppress the clinical manifestations of acute pericarditis in patients who have failed therapy with the anti-inflammatory therapies described above, but appear to increase the risk of subsequent recurrence. Therefore, full-dose corticosteroids should be given for only 2–4 days and then tapered. Anticoagulants should be avoided because their use could cause bleeding into the pericardial cavity and tamponade.
# Chunk 4048
Viral or idiopathic acute pericarditis occurs at all ages but is more common in young adults and is often associated with pleural effusions and pneumonitis. The almost simultaneous development of fever and precordial pain, often 10–12 days after a presumed viral illness, constitutes an important feature in the differentiation of acute pericarditis from AMI, in which chest pain precedes fever. The constitutional symptoms are usually mild to moderate, and a pericardial friction rub is often audible. The disease ordinarily runs its course in a few days to 4 weeks. The ST-segment alterations in the ECG usually disappear after 1 or more weeks, but the abnormal T waves may persist for several years and be a source of confusion in persons without a clear history of pericarditis. Pleuritis and pneumonitis frequently accompany viral or idiopathic acute pericarditis. Accumulation of some pericardial fluid is common, and both tamponade and constrictive pericarditis are possible, but infrequent, complications.
# Chunk 4049
The clinical picture mimics acute viral or idiopathic pericarditis. The principal symptom is the pain of acute pericarditis, which usually develops 1–4 weeks after the cardiac injury but earlier (1–3 days) after AMI. Recurrences are common and may occur up to 2 years or more following the injury. Fever, pleuritis, and pneumonitis are the outstanding features, and the bout of illness usually subsides in 1 or 2 weeks. The pericarditis may be of the fibrinous variety, or it may be a pericardial effusion, which is often serosanguineous but rarely causes tamponade. ECG changes typical of acute pericarditis may also occur. This syndrome is probably the result of a hypersensitivity reaction to antigen(s) that originate from injured myocardial tissue and/or pericardium.
# Chunk 4050
Because there is no specific test for acute idiopathic pericarditis, the diagnosis is one of exclusion. Consequently, all other disorders that may be associated with acute fibrinous pericarditis must be considered. A common diagnostic error is mistaking acute viral or idiopathic pericarditis for AMI and vice versa. When acute fibrinous pericarditis is associated with AMI (Chap. 295), it is characterized by fever, pain, and a friction rub in the first 4 days after the development of the infarct. ECG abnormalities (such as the appearance of Q waves, brief ST-segment elevations with reciprocal changes, and earlier T-wave changes in AMI) and the extent of the elevations of markers of myocardial necrosis (higher in AMI) are helpful in differentiating pericarditis from AMI.
# Chunk 4051
Weakness, fatigue, weight gain, increased abdominal girth, abdominal discomfort, and edema are common. The patient often appears chronically ill, and in advanced cases, anasarca, skeletal muscle wasting, and cachexia may be present. Exertional dyspnea is common, and orthopnea may occur, although it is usually not severe. Acute left ventricular failure (acute pulmonary edema) is very uncommon. The cervical veins are distended and may remain so even after intensive diuretic treatment, and venous pressure may fail to decline during inspiration (Kussmaul’s sign). The latter is common in chronic pericarditis but may also occur in tricuspid stenosis, right ventricular infarction, and restrictive cardiomyopathy.
# Chunk 4052
Myocardial contusions are the most common form of nonpenetrating cardiac injury and may initially be overlooked in trauma patients as the clinical focus is directed toward other, more obvious injuries. Myocardial necrosis may occur as a direct result of the blunt injury or as a result of traumatic coronary laceration or thrombosis. The contused myocardium is pathologically similar to infarcted myocardium and may be associated with atrial or ventricular arrhythmias; conduction disturbances, including bundle branch block; or ECG abnormalities resembling those of infarction or pericarditis. Thus, it is important to consider contusion as a cause of otherwise unexplained ECG changes in a trauma patient. Serum creatine kinase, myocardial band (CK-MB) isoenzyme levels are increased in ~20% of patients who experience blunt chest trauma but may be falsely elevated in the presence of massive skeletal muscle injury. Cardiac troponin levels are more specific for identifying cardiac injury in this setting. Echocardiography is useful in detecting structural and functional sequelae of contusion, including wall motion abnormalities (most commonly involving the right ventricle, interventricular septum, or left ventricular apex), pericardial effusion, valvular dysfunction, and ventricular rupture.
# Chunk 4053
Compared to their nondiabetic counterparts, diabetic patients are more likely to have a myocardial infarction, have a greater burden of CAD, have larger infarct size, and have more postinfarct complications, including heart failure, shock, and death. Importantly, diabetic patients are more likely to have atypical ischemic symptoms; nausea, dyspnea, pulmonary edema, arrhythmias, heart block, or syncope may be their anginal equivalent. Additionally, “silent ischemia,” resulting from autonomic nervous system dysfunction, is more common in diabetic patients, accounting for up to 90% of their ischemic episodes. Thus, one must have a low threshold for suspecting CAD in diabetic patients. The treatment of diabetic patients with CAD must include aggressive risk factor management (Chap. 418). Considerations regarding pharmacologic therapy and revascularization strategies are similar in diabetic and nondiabetic patients except that diabetic patients have higher morbidity and mortality rates associated with revascularization, have an increased risk of restenosis after percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI), and have improved survival when treated with surgical bypass compared with PCI for multivessel CAD.
# Chunk 4054
PART 10 Disorders of the Cardiovascular System 290e-2 deficient in thiamine may be a major dietary component. In Western nations where the use of thiamine-enriched flour is widespread, clinical thiamine deficiency is limited primarily to alcoholics, food faddists, and patients receiving chemotherapy. Nonetheless, when thiamine stores are measured using the thiamine-pyrophosphate effect (TPPE), thiamine deficiency has been found in 20–90% of patients with chronic heart failure. This deficiency appears to result from both reduced dietary intake and a diuretic-induced increase in the urinary excretion of thiamine. The acute administration of thiamine to these patients increases the left ventricular ejection fraction and the excretion of salt and water. Clinically, patients with thiamine deficiency usually have evidence of generalized malnutrition, peripheral neuropathy, glossitis, and anemia. The classic associated cardiovascular syndrome is characterized by high-output heart failure, tachycardia, and often elevated biventricular filling pressures. The major cause of the high-output state is vasomotor depression leading to reduced systemic vascular resistance, the precise mechanism of which is not understood. The cardiac examination may reveal a wide pulse pressure, tachycardia, a third heart sound, and an apical systolic murmur. The electrocardiogram (ECG) may reveal decreased voltage, a prolonged QT interval, and T-wave abnormalities. The chest x-ray generally reveals cardiomegaly and signs of congestive heart failure (CHF). The response to thiamine is often dramatic, with an increase in systemic vascular resistance, a decrease in cardiac output, clearing of pulmonary congestion, and a reduction in heart size often occurring in 12–48 h. Although the response to inotropes and diuretics may be poor before thiamine therapy, these agents may be important after thiamine repletion, since the left ventricle may not be able to handle the increased work load presented by the return of vascular tone.
# Chunk 4055
(See also Chap. 113) Carcinoid tumors most often originate in the small bowel and elaborate a variety of vasoactive amines (e.g., serotonin), kinins, indoles, and prostaglandins that are believed to be responsible for the diarrhea, flushing, and labile blood pressure that characterize the carcinoid syndrome. Some 50% of patients with carcinoid syndrome have cardiac involvement, usually manifesting as abnormalities of the tricuspid or pulmonic valves. These patients invariably have hepatic metastases that allow vasoactive substances to circumvent hepatic metabolism. Left-sided cardiac involvement is rare and indicates either pulmonary carcinoid or an intracardiac shunt. Pathologically, carcinoid lesions are fibrous plaques that consist of smooth-muscle cells embedded in a stroma of glycosaminoglycans and collagen. They occur on the cardiac valves, where they cause valvular dysfunction, as well as on the endothelium of the cardiac chambers and great vessels.
# Chunk 4056
Aspirin reduces CHD events in several contexts. Chapter 293 discusses aspirin therapy in stable ischemic heart disease, Chap. 294 reviews recommendations for aspirin treatment in acute coronary syndromes, and Chap. 446 describes aspirin’s role in preventing recurrent ischemic stroke. In primary prevention, pooled trial data show that low-dose aspirin treatment (81 mg/d to 325 mg on alternate days) can reduce the risk of a first MI in men. Although the Women’s Health Study (WHS) showed that aspirin (100 mg on alternate days) reduced strokes by 17%, it did not prevent MI in women. Current AHA guidelines recommend the use of low-dose aspirin (75–160 mg/d) for women with high cardiovascular risk (≥20% 10-year risk), for men with a ≥10% 10-year risk of CHD, and for all aspirin-tolerant patients with established cardiovascular disease who lack contraindications.
# Chunk 4057
Ischemia also causes characteristic changes in the electrocardiogram (ECG) such as repolarization abnormalities, as evidenced by inversion of T waves and, when more severe, displacement of ST segments (Chap. 268). Transient T-wave inversion probably reflects nontransmural, intramyocardial ischemia; transient ST-segment depression often reflects patchy subendocardial ischemia; and ST-segment elevation is thought to be caused by more severe transmural ischemia. Another important consequence of myocardial ischemia is electrical instability, which may lead to isolated ventricular premature beats or even ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation (Chap. 277). Most patients who die suddenly from IHD do so as a result of ischemia-induced ventricular tachyarrhythmias (Chap. 327).
# Chunk 4058
Although episodes of angina typically are caused by exertion (e.g., exercise, hurrying, or sexual activity) or emotion (e.g., stress, anger, fright, or frustration) and are relieved by rest, they also may occur at rest (Chap. 294) and while the patient is recumbent (angina decubitus). The patient may be awakened at night by typical chest discomfort and dyspnea. Nocturnal angina may be due to episodic tachycardia, diminished oxygenation as the respiratory pattern changes during sleep, or expansion of the intrathoracic blood volume that occurs with recumbency; the latter causes an increase in cardiac size (end-diastolic volume), wall tension, and myocardial oxygen demand that can lead to ischemia and transient left ventricular failure.
# Chunk 4059
Although the diagnosis of IHD can be made with a high degree of confidence from the history and physical examination, a number of simple laboratory tests can be helpful. The urine should be examined for evidence of diabetes mellitus and renal disease (including microalbuminuria) since these conditions accelerate atherosclerosis. Similarly, examination of the blood should include measurements of lipids (cholesterol—total, LDL, HDL—and triglycerides), glucose (hemoglobin ), creatinine, hematocrit, and, if indicated based on the physical examination, thyroid function. A chest x-ray is important as it may show the consequences of IHD, i.e., cardiac enlargement, ventricular aneurysm, or signs of heart failure. These signs can support the diagnosis of IHD and are important in assessing the degree of cardiac damage. Evidence exists that an elevated level of high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (CRP) (specifically, between 0 and 3 mg/dL) is an independent risk factor for IHD and may be useful in therapeutic decision making about the initiation of hypolipidemic treatment. The major benefit of high-sensitivity CRP is in reclassifying the risk of IHD in patients in the “intermediate” risk category on the basis of traditional risk factors.
# Chunk 4060
In interpreting ECG stress tests, the probability that coronary artery disease (CAD) exists in the patient or population under study (i.e., pretest probability) should be considered. Overall, false-positive or false-negative results occur in one-third of cases. However, a positive result on exercise indicates that the likelihood of CAD is 98% in males who are >50 years with a history of typical angina pectoris and who develop chest discomfort during the test. The likelihood decreases if the patient has atypical or no chest pain by history and/or during the test.
# Chunk 4061
The incidence of false-positive tests is significantly increased in patients with low probabilities of IHD, such as asymptomatic men age <40 or premenopausal women with no risk factors for premature atherosclerosis. It is also increased in patients taking cardioactive drugs, such as digitalis and antiarrhythmic agents, and in those with intraventricular conduction disturbances, resting ST-segment and T-wave abnormalities, ventricular hypertrophy, or abnormal serum potassium levels. Obstructive disease limited to the circumflex coronary artery may result in a false-negative stress test since the lateral portion of the heart that this vessel supplies is not well represented on the surface 12-lead ECG. Since the overall sensitivity of exercise stress electrocardiography is only ~75%, a negative result does not exclude CAD, although it makes the likelihood of three-vessel or left main CAD extremely unlikely.
# Chunk 4062
Cardiac Imaging (See also Chap. 270e) When the resting ECG is abnormal (e.g., preexcitation syndrome, >1 mm of resting ST-segment depression, left bundle branch block, paced ventricular rhythm), information gained from an exercise test can be enhanced by stress myocardial radionuclide perfusion imaging after the intravenous administration of thallium-201 or 99m-technetium sestamibi during exercise (or with pharmacologic) stress. Contemporary data also suggest positron emission tomography (PET) imaging (with exercise or pharmacologic stress) using N-13 ammonia or rubidium-82 nuclide as another technique for assessing perfusion. Images obtained immediately after cessation of exercise to detect regional ischemia are compared with those obtained at rest to confirm reversible ischemia and regions of persistently absent uptake that signify infarction.
# Chunk 4063
CHAPTER 293 Ischemic Heart DiseaseAEvaluation of the patient with known or suspected IHD Can patient exercise adequately? Are confounding features present on resting ECG? Perform treadmill exercise test An imaging study should be performed Yes No Possible indications for stress testing of patient: 1. Dx of IHD uncertain 2. Assess functional capacity of patient 3. Assess adequacy of treatment program for IHD 4. Markedly abnormal calcium score on EBCT 2-D Echo Nuclear perfusion scan Cardiac MR scan Cardiac PET scan ECHOECG MIBI CMR PET No Yes
# Chunk 4064
FIGURE 293-2 Evaluation of the patient with known or suspected ischemic heart disease. On the left of the figure is an algorithm for identifying patients who should be referred for stress testing and the decision pathway for determining whether a standard treadmill exercise with electrocardiogram (ECG) monitoring alone is adequate. A specialized imaging study is necessary if the patient cannot exercise adequately (pharmacologic challenge is given) or if there are confounding features on the resting ECG (symptom-limited treadmill exercise may be used to stress the coronary circulation). Panels B–E, continued on the next page, are examples of the data obtained with ECG monitoring and specialized imaging procedures. CMR, cardiac magnetic resonance; EBCT, electron beam computed tomography; ECHO, echocardiography; IHD, ischemic heart disease; MIBI, methoxyisobutyl isonitrite; MR, magnetic resonance; PET, positron emission tomography. A. Lead V4 at rest (top panel) and after 4.5 min of exercise (bottom panel). There is 3 mm (0.3 mV) of horizontal ST-segment depression, indicating a positive test for ischemia. (Modified from BR Chaitman, in E Braunwald et al [eds]: Heart Disease, 8th ed, Philadelphia, Saunders, 2008.) B. A 45-year-old avid jogger who began experiencing classic substernal chest pressure underwent an exercise echo study. With exercise the patient’s heart rate increased from 52 to 153 beats/min. The left ventricular chamber dilated with exercise, and the septal and apical portions became akinetic to dyskinetic (red arrow). These findings are strongly suggestive of a significant flow-limiting stenosis in the proximal left anterior descending artery, which was confirmed at coronary angiography. (Modified from SD Solomon, in E. Braunwald et al [eds]: Primary Cardiology, 2nd ed, Philadelphia, Saunders, 2003.) C. Stress and rest myocardial perfusion single-photon emission computed tomography images obtained with 99m-technetium sestamibi in a patient with chest pain and dyspnea on exertion. The images demonstrate a medium-size and severe stress perfusion defect involving the inferolateral and basal inferior walls, showing nearly complete reversibility, consistent with moderate ischemia in the right coronary artery territory (red arrows). (Images provided by Dr. Marcello Di Carli, Nuclear Medicine Division, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA.) D. A patient with a prior myocardial infarction presented with recurrent chest discomfort. On cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) cine imaging, a large area of anterior akinesia was noted (marked by the arrows in the top left and right images, systolic frame only). This area of akinesia was matched by a larger extent of late gadolinium-DTPA enhancements consistent with a large transmural myocardial infarction (marked by arrows in the middle left and right images). Resting (bottom left) and adenosine vasodilating stress (bottom right) first-pass perfusion images revealed reversible perfusion abnormality that extended to the inferior septum. This patient was found to have an occluded proximal left anterior descending coronary artery with extensive collateral formation. This case illustrates the utility of different modalities in a CMR examination in characterizing ischemic and infarcted myocardium. DTPA, diethylenetriamine penta-acetic acid. (Images provided by Dr. Raymond Kwong, Cardiovascular Division, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA.) E. Stress and rest myocardial perfusion PET images obtained with rubidium-82 in a patient with chest pain on exertion. The images demonstrate a large and severe stress perfusion defect involving the mid and apical anterior, anterolateral, and anteroseptal walls and the left ventricular apex, showing complete reversibility, consistent with extensive and severe ischemia in the mid-left anterior descending coronary artery territory (red arrows). (Images provided by Dr. Marcello Di Carli, Nuclear Medicine Division, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA.)
# Chunk 4065
1588 DYSLIPIDEMIA The treatment of dyslipidemia is central in aiming for long-term relief from angina, reduced need for revascularization, and reduction in myocardial infarction and death. The control of lipids can be achieved by the combination of a diet low in saturated and trans-unsaturated fatty acids, exercise, and weight loss. Nearly always, HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins) are required and can lower LDL cholesterol (25–50%), raise HDL cholesterol (5–9%), and lower triglycerides (5–30%). A powerful treatment effect of statins on atherosclerosis, IHD, and outcomes is seen regardless of the pretreatment LDL cholesterol level. Fibrates or niacin can be used to raise HDL cholesterol and lower triglycerides (Chaps. 291e and 421). Controlled trials with lipid-regulating regimens have shown equal proportional benefit for men, women, the elderly, diabetic patients, and smokers. Compliance with the health-promoting behaviors listed above is generally very poor, and a conscientious physician must not underestimate the major effort required to meet this challenge. Many patients who are discharged from the hospital with proven coronary disease do not receive adequate treatment for dyslipidemia. In light of the proof that treating dyslipidemia brings major benefits, physicians need to establish treatment pathways, monitor compliance, and follow up regularly.
# Chunk 4066
Despite treatment with nitrates, beta blockers, or calcium channel blockers, some patients with IHD continue to experience angina, and additional medical therapy is now available to alleviate their symptoms. Ranolazine, a piperazine derivative, may be useful for patients with chronic angina despite standard medical therapy. Its antianginal action is believed to occur via inhibition of the late inward sodium current (INa). The benefits of INa inhibition include limitation of the Na overload of ischemic myocytes and prevention of Ca2+ overload via the Na+–Ca2+ exchanger. A dose of 500–1000 mg orally twice daily is usually well tolerated. Ranolazine is contraindicated in patients with hepatic impairment or with conditions or drugs associated with QTc prolongation and when drugs that inhibit the CYP3A metabolic system (e.g., ketoconazole, diltiazem, verapamil, macrolide antibiotics, HIV protease inhibitors, and large quantities of grapefruit juice) are being used.
# Chunk 4067
Efficacy Primary success, i.e., adequate dilation (an increase in luminal diameter >20% to a residual diameter obstruction <50%) with relief of angina, is achieved in >95% of cases. Recurrent stenosis of the dilated vessels occurs in ~20% of cases within 6 months of PCI with bare metal stents, and angina will recur within 6 months in 10% of cases. Restenosis is more common in patients with diabetes mellitus, arteries with small caliber, incomplete dilation of the stenosis, long stents, occluded ves sels, obstructed vein grafts, dilation of the left anterior descending coronary artery, and stenoses containing thrombi. In diseased vein grafts, procedural success has been improved by the use of capture devices or filters that prevent embolization, ischemia, and infarction.
# Chunk 4068
4.

Angina is abolished or greatly reduced in ~90% of patients after complete revascularization. Although this usually is associated with graft patency and restoration of blood flow, the pain may also have been alleviated as a result of infarction of the ischemic segment or a placebo effect. Within 3 years, angina recurs in about one-fourth of patients but is rarely severe.
# Chunk 4069
5.

Survival may be improved by operation in patients with stenosis of the left main coronary artery as well as in patients with three-or two-vessel disease with significant obstruction of the proximal left anterior descending coronary artery. The survival benefit is greater in patients with abnormal LV function (ejection fraction <50%). Survival may also be improved in the following patients: (a) patients with obstructive CAD who have survived sudden cardiac death or sustained ventricular tachycardia; (b) patients who have undergone previous CABG and have multiple saphenous vein graft stenoses, especially of a graft supplying the left anterior descending coronary artery; and (c) patients with recurrent stenosis after PCI and high-risk criteria on noninvasive testing.
# Chunk 4070
Obstructive CAD, acute myocardial infarction, and transient myocardial ischemia are frequently asymptomatic. During continuous ambulatory ECG monitoring, the majority of ambulatory patients with typical chronic stable angina are found to have objective evidence of myocardial ischemia (ST-segment depression) during episodes of chest discomfort while they are active outside the hospital. In addition, many of these patients also have more frequent episodes of asymptomatic ischemia. Frequent episodes of ischemia (symptomatic and asymptomatic) during daily life appear to be associated with an increased likelihood of adverse coronary events (death and myocardial infarction). In addition, patients with asymptomatic ischemia after a myocardial infarction are at greater risk for a second coronary event. The widespread use of exercise ECG during routine examinations has also identified some of these previously unrecognized patients with asymptomatic CAD. Longitudinal studies have demonstrated an increased incidence of coronary events in asymptomatic patients with positive exercise tests.
# Chunk 4071
Most would agree that an asymptomatic 45-year-old commercial airline pilot with significant (0.4-mV) ST-segment depression in leads V1 to V4 during mild exercise should undergo coronary arteriography, whereas an asymptomatic, sedentary 85-year-old retiree with 0.1-mV ST-segment depression in leads II and III during maximal activity need not. However, there is no consensus about the most appropriate approach in the large majority of patients for whom the situation is less extreme. Asymptomatic patients with silent ischemia, three-vessel CAD, and impaired LV function may be considered appropriate candidates for CABG.
# Chunk 4072
History and Physical Examination The chest discomfort, often severe enough to be described as frank pain, is typically located in the sub-sternal region or sometimes in the epigastrium, and radiates to the left arm, left shoulder, and/or neck. Anginal “equivalents” such as dyspnea, epigastric discomfort, nausea, or weakness may occur instead of chest pain and appear to be more frequent in women, the elderly, and patients with diabetes mellitus. The physical examination resembles that in patients with stable angina (Chap. 293) and may be unremarkable. If the patient has a large area of myocardial ischemia or a large NSTEMI, the physical findings can include diaphoresis; pale, cool skin; sinus tachycardia; a third and/or fourth heart sound; basilar rales; and, sometimes, hypotension.
# Chunk 4073
Beta Adrenergic Blockers and Other Agents Beta blockers are the other mainstay of anti-ischemic treatment. They may be started by the intravenous route in patients with severe ischemia, but this is contraindicated in the presence of heart failure. Ordinarily, oral beta blockade targeted to a heart rate of 50–60 beats/min is recommended. Heart rate–slowing calcium channel blockers, e.g., verapamil or diltiazem, are recommended for patients who have persistent symptoms or ECG signs of ischemia after treatment with full-dose nitrates and beta blockers and in patients with contraindications to either class of these agents. Additional medical therapy includes angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or, if these are not tolerated, angiotensin receptor blockers. Early administration of intensive HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins), such as atorvastatin 80 mg/d, prior to percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI), and continued thereafter, has been shown to reduce complications of the procedure and recurrences of ACS.
# Chunk 4074
Prognosis Many patients with PVA pass through an acute, active phase, with frequent episodes of angina and cardiac events during the first 6 months after presentation. Survival at 5 years is excellent (~90–95%). Patients with no or mild fixed coronary obstruction tend to experience a more benign course than do patients with associated severe obstructive lesions. Nonfatal MI occurs in up to 20% of patients by 5 years. Patients with PVA who develop serious arrhythmias during spontaneous episodes of pain are at a higher risk for sudden cardiac death. In most patients who survive an infarction or the initial 3to 6-month period of frequent episodes, there is a tendency for symptoms and cardiac events to diminish over time.
# Chunk 4075
When patients with prolonged ischemic discomfort at rest are first seen, the working clinical diagnosis is that they are suffering from an acute coronary syndrome (Fig. 295-1). The 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) is a pivotal diagnostic and triage tool because it is at the center of the decision pathway for management; it permits distinction of those patients presenting with ST-segment elevation from those presenting without ST-segment elevation. Serum cardiac biomarkers are obtained to distinguish unstable angina (UA) from non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) and to assess the magnitude of an ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI). This chapter focuses on the evaluation and management of patients with STEMI, while Chap. 294 discusses UA/NSTEMI.
# Chunk 4076
FIGURE 295-1 Acute coronary syndromes. Following disruption of a vulnerable plaque, patients experience ischemic discomfort resulting from a reduction of flow through the affected epicardial coronary artery. The flow reduction may be caused by a completely occlusive thrombus (right) or subtotally occlusive thrombus (left). Patients with ischemic discomfort may present with or without ST-segment elevation. Of patients with ST-segment elevation, the majority (wide red arrow) ultimately develop a Q wave on the ECG (Qw MI), while a minority (thin red arrow) do not develop Q wave and, in older literature, were said to have sustained a non-Q-wave MI (NQMI). Patients who present without ST-segment elevation are suffering from either unstable angina or a non-ST-segment elevation MI (NSTEMI) (wide green arrows), a distinction that is ultimately made based on the presence or absence of a serum cardiac marker such as CK-MB or a cardiac troponin detected in the blood. The majority of patients presenting with NSTEMI do not develop a Q wave on the ECG; a minority develop a Qw MI (thin green arrow). Dx, diagnosis; ECG, electrocardiogram; MI, myocardial infarction. (Adapted from CW Hamm et al: Lancet 358:1533, 2001, and MJ Davies: Heart 83:361, 2000; with permission from the BMJ Publishing Group.)
# Chunk 4077
In up to one-half of cases, a precipitating factor appears to be present before STEMI, such as vigorous physical exercise, emotional stress, or a medical or surgical illness. Although STEMI may commence at any time of the day or night, circadian variations have been reported such that clusters are seen in the morning within a few hours of awakening.
# Chunk 4078
STEMI progresses through the following temporal stages: (1) acute (first few hours–7 days), (2) healing (7–28 days), and (3) healed (≥29 days). When evaluating the results of diagnostic tests for STEMI, the temporal phase of the infarction must be considered. The laboratory tests of value in confirming the diagnosis may be divided into four groups: (1) ECG, (2) serum cardiac biomarkers, (3) cardiac imaging, and (4) nonspecific indices of tissue necrosis and inflammation.
# Chunk 4079
The electrocardiographic manifestations of STEMI are described in Chap. 268. During the initial stage, total occlusion of an epicardial coronary artery produces ST-segment elevation. Most patients initially presenting with ST-segment elevation ultimately evolve Q waves on the ECG. However, Q waves in the leads overlying the infarct zone may vary in magnitude and even appear only transiently, depending on the reperfusion status of the ischemic myocardium and restoration of transmembrane potentials over time. A small proportion of patients initially presenting with ST-segment elevation will not develop Q waves when the obstructing thrombus is not totally occlusive, obstruction is transient, or if a rich collateral network is present. Among patients presenting with ischemic discomfort but without ST-segment elevation, if a serum cardiac biomarker of necrosis (see below) is detected, the diagnosis of NSTEMI is ultimately made (Fig. 295-1). A minority of patients who present initially without ST-segment elevation may develop a Q-wave MI. Previously, it was believed that transmural myocardial infarction (MI) is present if the ECG demonstrates Q waves or loss of R waves, and nontransmural MI may be present if the ECG shows only transient ST-segment and T-wave changes. However, electrocardiographic-pathologic correlations are far from perfect and terms such as Q-wave MI, non-Q-wave MI, transmural MI, and nontransmural MI, have been replaced by STEMI and NSTEMI (Fig. 295-1). Contemporary studies using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) suggest that the development of a Q wave on the ECG is more dependent on the volume of infarcted tissue rather than the transmurality of infarction.
# Chunk 4080
Cardiac-specific troponin T (cTnT) and cardiac-specific troponin I (cTnI) have amino-acid sequences different from those of the skeletal muscle forms of these proteins. These differences permitted the development of quantitative assays for cTnT and cTnI with highly specific monoclonal antibodies. Since cTnT and cTnI are not normally detectable in the blood of healthy individuals but may increase after STEMI to levels many times higher than the upper reference limit (the highest value seen in 99% of a reference population not suffering from MI), the measurement of cTnT or cTnI is of considerable diagnostic usefulness, and they are now the preferred biochemical markers for MI (Fig. 295-2). With improvements in the assays for the cardiac-specific troponins, it is now possible to detect concentrations <1 ng/L in patients without ischemic-type chest discomfort. The cardiac troponins are particularly valuable when there is clinical suspicion of either skeletal muscle injury or a small MI that may be below the detection limit for creatine phosphokinase (CK) and its MB isoenzyme (CK-MB) measurements, and they are, therefore, of particular value in distinguishing UA from NSTEMI. In practical terms, the high-sensitivity troponin assays are of less immediate value in patients with STEMI. Contemporary urgent reperfusion strategies necessitate making a decision (based largely on a combination of clinical and ECG findings) before the results of blood tests have returned from the laboratory. Levels of cTnI and cTnT may remain elevated for 7–10 days after STEMI.
# Chunk 4081
The nonspecific reaction to myocardial injury is associated with polymorphonuclear leukocytosis, which appears within a few hours after the onset of pain and persists for 3–7 days; the white blood cell count often reaches levels of 12,000–15,000/μL. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate rises more slowly than the white blood cell count, peaking during the first week and sometimes remaining elevated for 1 or 2 weeks.
# Chunk 4082
Relative contraindications to fibrinolytic therapy, which require assessment of the risk-to-benefit ratio, include current use of anticoagulants (international normalized ratio ≥2), a recent (<2 weeks) invasive or surgical procedure or prolonged (>10 min) cardiopulmonary resuscitation, known bleeding diathesis, pregnancy, a hemorrhagic ophthalmic condition (e.g., hemorrhagic diabetic retinopathy), active peptic ulcer disease, and a history of severe hypertension that is currently adequately controlled. Because of the risk of an allergic reaction, patients should not receive streptokinase if that agent had been received within the preceding 5 days to 2 years.
# Chunk 4083
Hemorrhage is the most frequent and potentially the most serious complication. Because bleeding episodes that require transfusion are more common when patients require invasive procedures, unnecessary venous or arterial interventions should be avoided in patients receiving fibrinolytic agents. Hemorrhagic stroke is the most serious complication and occurs in ~0.5–0.9% of patients being treated with these agents. This rate increases with advancing age, with patients >70 years experiencing roughly twice the rate of intracranial hemorrhage as those <65 years. Large-scale trials have suggested that the rate of intracranial hemorrhage with tPA or rPA is slightly higher than with streptokinase.
# Chunk 4084
Diet Because of the risk of emesis and aspiration soon after STEMI, patients should receive either nothing or only clear liquids by mouth for the first 4–12 h. The typical coronary care unit diet should provide ≤30% of total calories as fat and have a cholesterol content of ≤300 mg/d. Complex carbohydrates should make up 50–55% of total calories. Portions should not be unusually large, and the menu should be enriched with foods that are high in potassium, magnesium, and fiber, but low in sodium. Diabetes mellitus and hypertriglyceridemia are managed by restriction of concentrated sweets in the diet.
# Chunk 4085
Bowel Management Bed rest and the effect of the narcotics used for the relief of pain often lead to constipation. A bedside commode rather than a bedpan, a diet rich in bulk, and the routine use of a stool softener such as dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate (200 mg/d) are recommended. If the patient remains constipated despite these measures, a laxative can be prescribed. Contrary to prior belief, it is safe to perform a gentle rectal examination on patients with STEMI.
# Chunk 4086
Sedation Many patients require sedation during hospitalization to withstand the period of enforced inactivity with tranquility. Diazepam (5 mg), oxazepam (15–30 mg), or lorazepam (0.5–2 mg), given three to four times daily, is usually effective. An additional dose of any of the above medications may be given at night to ensure adequate sleep. Attention to this problem is especially important during the first few days in the coronary care unit, where the atmosphere of 24-h vigilance may interfere with the patient’s sleep. However, sedation is no substitute for reassuring, quiet surroundings. Many drugs used in the coronary care unit, such as atropine, H2 blockers, and narcotics, can produce delirium, particularly in the elderly. This effect should not be confused with agitation, and it is wise to conduct a thorough review of the patient’s medications before arbitrarily prescribing additional doses of anxiolytics.
# Chunk 4087
Approximately one-third of patients with inferior infarction demonstrate at least a minor degree of RV necrosis. An occasional patient with inferoposterior LV infarction also has extensive RV infarction, and rare patients present with infarction limited primarily to the RV. Clinically significant RV infarction causes signs of severe RV failure (jugular venous distention, Kussmaul’s sign, hepatomegaly [Chap. 267]) with or without hypotension. ST-segment elevations of right-sided precordial ECG leads, particularly lead V4R, are frequently present in the first 24 h in patients with RV infarction. Two-dimensional echocardiography is helpful in determining the degree of RV dysfunction. Catheterization of the right side of the heart often reveals a distinctive hemodynamic pattern resembling constrictive pericarditis (steep right atrial “y” descent and an early diastolic dip and plateau in RV waveforms) (Chap. 288). Therapy consists of volume expansion to maintain adequate RV preload and efforts to improve LV performance with attendant reduction in pulmonary capillary wedge and pulmonary arterial pressures.
# Chunk 4088
Ventricular Premature Beats Infrequent, sporadic ventricular premature depolarizations occur in almost all patients with STEMI and do not require therapy. Whereas in the past, frequent, multifocal, or early diastolic ventricular extrasystoles (so-called warning arrhythmias) were routinely treated with antiarrhythmic drugs to reduce the risk of development of ventricular tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation, pharmacologic therapy is now reserved for patients with sustained ventricular arrhythmias. Prophylactic antiarrhythmic therapy (either intravenous lidocaine early or oral agents later) is contraindicated for ventricular premature beats in the absence of clinically important ventricular tachyarrhythmias, because such therapy may actually increase the mortality rate. Beta-adrenoceptor blocking agents are effective in abolishing ventricular ectopic activity in patients with STEMI and in the prevention of ventricular fibrillation. As described earlier (see “Beta-Adrenoceptor Blockers”), they should be used routinely in patients without contraindications. In addition, hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia are risk factors for ventricular fibrillation in patients with STEMI; to reduce the risk, the serum potassium concentration should be adjusted to approximately 4.5 mmol/L and magnesium to about 2.0 mmol/L.
# Chunk 4089
Sustained ventricular tachycardia that is well tolerated hemodynamically should be treated with an intravenous regimen of amiodarone (bolus of 150 mg over 10 min, followed by infusion of 1.0 mg/min for 6 h and then 0.5 mg/min) or procainamide (bolus of 15 mg/kg over 20–30 min; infusion of 1–4 mg/min); if it does not stop promptly, electroversion should be used (Chap. 276). An unsynchronized discharge of 200–300 J (monophasic waveform; approximately 50% of these energies with biphasic waveforms) is used immediately in patients with ventricular fibrillation or when ventricular tachycardia causes hemodynamic deterioration. Ventricular tachycardia or fibrillation that is refractory to electroshock may be more responsive after the patient is treated with epinephrine (1 mg intravenously or 10 mL of a 1:10,000 solution via the intracardiac route) or amiodarone (a 75–150-mg bolus).
# Chunk 4090
FIGURE 295-5 Algorithm for assessment of need for implantation of a cardioverter-defibrillator. The appropriate management is selected based on measurement of left ventricular ejection fraction and assessment of the New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional class. Patients with depressed left ventricular function at least 40 days after ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) are referred for insertion of an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) if the left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) is <30–40% and they are in NYHA class II–III or if the LVEF is <30–35% and they are in NYHA class I functional status. Patients with preserved left ventricular function (LVEF >40%) do not receive an ICD regardless of NYHA functional class. All patients are treated with medical therapy after STEMI. VF, ventricular fibrillation; VT, ventricular tachycardia. (Adapted from data contained in DP Zipes et al: ACC/AHA/ESC 2006 guidelines for management of patients with ventricular arrhythmias and the prevention of sudden cardiac death; a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force and the European Society of Cardiology Committee for Practice Guidelines [Writing Committee to Develop Guidelines for Management of Patients with Ventricular Arrhythmias and the Prevention of Sudden Cardiac Death]. J Am Coll Cardiol 48:1064, 2006.) (such as anemia, fever, heart failure, or a metabolic derangement), the 1609 primary problem should be treated first. However, if it appears to be due to sympathetic overstimulation (e.g., as part of a hyperdynamic state), then treatment with a beta blocker is indicated. Other common arrhythmias in this group are atrial flutter and atrial fibrillation, which are often secondary to LV failure. Digoxin is usually the treatment of choice for supraventricular arrhythmias if heart failure is present. If heart failure is absent, beta blockers, verapamil, or diltiazem are suitable alternatives for controlling the ventricular rate, as they may also help to control ischemia. If the abnormal rhythm persists for >2 h with a ventricular rate >120 beats/min, or if tachycardia induces heart failure, shock, or ischemia (as manifested by recurrent pain or ECG changes), a synchronized electroshock (100–200 J monophasic waveform) should be used.
# Chunk 4091
Many clinical and laboratory factors have been identified that are associated with an increase in cardiovascular risk after initial recovery from STEMI. Some of the most important factors include persistent ischemia (spontaneous or provoked), depressed LV ejection fraction (<40%), rales above the lung bases on physical examination or congestion on chest radiograph, and symptomatic ventricular arrhythmias. Other features associated with increased risk include a history of previous MI, age >75, diabetes mellitus, prolonged sinus tachycardia, hypotension, ST-segment changes at rest without angina (“silent ischemia”), an abnormal signal-averaged ECG, nonpatency of the infarct-related coronary artery (if angiography is undertaken), and persistent advanced heart block or a new intraventricular conduction abnormality on the ECG. Therapy must be individualized on the basis of the relative importance of the risk(s) present.
# Chunk 4092
The usual duration of hospitalization for an uncomplicated STEMI is about 5 days. The remainder of the convalescent phase may be accomplished at home. During the first 1–2 weeks, the patient should be encouraged to increase activity by walking about the house and outdoors in good weather. Normal sexual activity may be resumed during this period. After 2 weeks, the physician must regulate the patient’s activity on the basis of exercise tolerance. Most patients will be able to return to work within 2–4 weeks.
# Chunk 4093
Evidence suggests that warfarin lowers the risk of late mortality and the incidence of reinfarction after STEMI. Most physicians prescribe aspirin routinely for all patients without contraindications and add warfarin for patients at increased risk of embolism (see “Thromboembolism” earlier). Several studies suggest that in patients <75 years old a low dose of aspirin (75–81 mg/d) in combination with 1611 warfarin administered to achieve an international normalized ratio >2.0 is more effective than aspirin alone for preventing recurrent MI and embolic cerebrovascular accident. However, there is an increased risk of bleeding and a high rate of discontinuation of warfarin that has limited clinical acceptance of combination antithrombotic therapy. There is increased risk of bleeding when warfarin is added to dual antiplatelet therapy (aspirin and clopidogrel). However, patients who have had a stent implanted and have an indication for anticoagulation should receive dual antiplatelet therapies in combination with warfarin. Such patients should also receive a proton pump inhibitor to minimize the risk of gastrointestinal bleeding and should have regular monitoring of their hemoglobin levels and stool hematest while on combination antithrombotic therapy.
# Chunk 4094
Drug-eluting stents further enhanced the efficacy of PCI. An antiproliferative agent is attached to the metal stent by use of a thin polymer coating. The antiproliferative drug elutes from the stent over a 1to 3-month period after implantation. Drug-eluting stents have been shown to reduce clinical restenosis by 50%, so that in uncomplicated lesions symptomatic restenosis occurs in 5–10% of patients. Not surprisingly, this led to the rapid acceptance of these devices; currently 80–90% of all stents implanted are drug-eluting. The first-generation devices were coated with either sirolimus or paclitaxel. Second-generation drug-eluting stents use newer agents such as everolimus, biolimus, and zotarolimus. These second-generation drug-eluting stents appear to be more effective with fewer complications, such as early or late stent thrombosis, than the first-generation devices and, therefore, have replaced the first-generation stents. Biodegradable polymers that are used to attach the drugs to the stents may be superior to permanent polymers in preventing late stent thrombosis and are under investigation. In addition, the everolimus-eluting biodegradable vascular scaffold (BVS) stent has been shown to be safe and effective with gradual degradation over several years with return of normal vessel function. It is currently approved in Europe. Additional stents are under investigation. Other interventional devices include atherectomy devices and thrombectomy catheters. These devices are designed to remove atherosclerotic plaque or thrombus and are used in conjunction with balloon dilatation and stent placement. Rotational atherectomy is the most commonly used adjunctive device and is modeled after a dentist’s drill, with small round burrs of 1.25–2.5 mm at the tip of a flexible wire shaft. They are passed over the guidewire up to the stenosis and drill away atherosclerotic material. Because the atherosclerotic particles are ≤25 μm, they pass through the coronary microcirculation and rarely cause problems. The device is particularly useful in heavily calcified plaques that are resistant to balloon dilatation. Given the current advances in stents, rotational atherectomy is infrequently used. Directional atherectomy catheters are not used in the coronaries any longer but are used in peripheral arterial disease.
# Chunk 4095
A successful procedure (angiographic success), defined as a reduction of the stenosis to less than a 20% diameter narrowing, occurs in 95–99% of patients. Lower success rates are seen in patients with tortuous, small, or calcified vessels or chronic total occlusions. Chronic total occlusions have the lowest success rates (60–70%), and their recanalization is usually not attempted unless the occlusion is recent (within 3 months) or there are favorable anatomic features. Improvements in equipment and technique have increased the success rates of recanalization of chronic total occlusions.
# Chunk 4096
Metallic stents are also prone to stent thrombosis (1–3%), either acute (<24 h) or subacute (1–30 days), which can be ameliorated by greater attention to full initial stent deployment and the use of dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) (aspirin, plus a platelet P2Y12 receptor blocker [clopidogrel, prasugrel, or ticagrelor]). Late (30 days–1 year) and very late stent thromboses (>1 year) occur very infrequently with stents but are slightly more common with first-generation drug-eluting stents, necessitating DAPT for up to 1 year or longer. Use of the second-generation stents is associated with lower rates of late and very late stent thromboses, and shorter durations of DAPT may be possible. Premature discontinuation of DAPT, particularly in the first month after implantation, is associated with a significantly increased risk for stent thrombosis (threeto ninefold greater). Stent thrombosis results in death in 10–20% and myocardial infarction in 30–70% of patients. Elective surgery that requires discontinuation of antiplatelet therapy after drug-eluting stent implantation should be postponed until after 6 months and preferably after 1 year, if at all possible.
# Chunk 4097
Restenosis, or renarrowing of the dilated coronary stenosis, is the most common complication of angioplasty and occurs in 20–50% of patients with balloon angioplasty alone, 10–30% of patients with bare metal stents, and 5–15% of patients with drug-eluting stents within the first year. The fact that stent placement provides a larger acute luminal area than balloon angioplasty alone reduces the incidence of subsequent restenosis. Drug-eluting stents further reduce restenosis through a reduction in excessive neointimal growth over the stent. If restenosis does not occur, the long-term outcome is excellent (Fig. 296e-3). Clinical restenosis is recognized by recurrence of angina or symptoms within 9 months of the procedure. Less frequently, patients with restenosis can present with non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) (10%) or STEMI (2%) as well. Clinical restenosis requires confirmation of a significant stenosis at the site of the prior PCI. Target lesion revascularization (TLR) or target vessel revascularization (TVR) is defined as angiographic restenosis with repeat PCI or coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG). By angiography, the incidence of restenosis is significantly higher than clinical restenosis (TLR or TVR) because many patients have mild restenosis that does not result in a recurrence of symptoms. The management of clinical restenosis is usually to repeat the PCI with balloon dilatation and placement of a drug-eluting stent. Once a patient has had restenosis, the risk of a second restenosis is further increased. The risk factors for restenosis are diabetes, myocardial infarction, long lesions, small-diameter vessels, and suboptimal initial PCI result.
# Chunk 4098
PART 10 Disorders of the Cardiovascular System 296e-4 lesion characteristics, including the degree of the stenosis, the presence of calcium, lesion length, and presence of thrombus, are assessed. The most common reason to decide not to do PCI is that the lesion felt to be responsible for the patient’s symptoms is not treatable. This is most commonly due to the presence of a chronic total occlusion (>3 months in duration). In this setting, the historical success rate has been low (30–70%) and complications are more common. A lesion classification to characterize the likelihood of success or failure of PCI has been developed by the ACC/AHA. Lesions with the highest success are called type A lesions (such as proximal noncalcified subtotal lesions), and those with the lowest success or highest complication rate are type C lesions (such as chronic total occlusions). Intermediate lesions are classified as type B1 or B2 depending on the number of unfavorable characteristics. Approximately 25–30% of patients will not be candidates for PCI due to unfavorable anatomy, whereas only 5% of CABG patients will not be candidates for surgery due to coronary anatomy. The primary reason for being considered inoperable with CABG is the presence of severe comorbidities such as advanced age, frailty, severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), or poor left ventricular function. Another consideration in choosing a revascularization strategy is the degree of revascularization. In patients with multivessel disease, bypass grafts can usually be placed to all vessels with significant steno-sis, whereas PCI may be able to treat only some of the lesions due to the presence of unfavorable anatomy. Assessment of the significance of intermediate lesions using fractional flow reserve (FFR) (Chap.
# Chunk 4099
The use of circulatory support techniques is occasionally needed in order to safely perform PCI on hemodynamically unstable patients. It also can be useful in helping to stabilize patients before surgical interventions. The most commonly used device is the percutaneous intraaortic balloon pump developed in the early 1960s. A 7to 10-French, 25to 50-mL balloon catheter is placed retrograde from the femoral artery into the descending aorta between the aortic arch and the abdominal aortic bifurcation. It is connected to a helium gas inflation system that synchronizes the inflation to coincide with early diastole with deflation by mid-diastole. As a result, it increases early diastolic pressure, lowers systolic pressure, and lowers late diastolic pressure through displacement of blood from the descending aorta (counterpulsation). This results in an increase in coronary blood flow and a decrease in afterload. It is contraindicated in patients with aortic regurgitation, aortic dissection, or severe peripheral artery disease. The major complications are vascular and thrombotic. Intravenous heparin is given in order to reduce thrombotic complications.
# Chunk 4100
A 62-year-old male with a history of chronic stable angina.

A four-vessel coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) surgery was performed 17 years earlier with a left internal mammary artery graft to the LAD, a right internal mammary artery graft to the right coronary artery (RCA), a saphenous vein graft to the first obtuse marginal branch, and a saphenous vein graft to the first diagonal branch.
# Chunk 4101
Saphenous vein grafts have a failure rate of up to 20% after 1 year and as high as 50% by 5 years.

Graft failure (after >1 month) results from intimal hyperplasia and atherosclerosis.
# Chunk 4102
A 62-year-old male had a drug-eluting stent placed in a proximal LAD lesion to treat severe angina. He received dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and clopidogrel for 1 year and then discontinued clopidogrel per protocol.
# Chunk 4103
A 75-year-old female with symptomatic aortic stenosis and a valve area of 0.58 cm2 by transthoracic echocardiogram.
# Chunk 4104
The prevalence of calcific aortic stenosis is 2–3% in individuals age ≥75 years.

Symptomatic aortic stenosis is associated with an average survival of 2–3 years and an increased risk of sudden death; aortic valve replacement improves both symptoms and survival.
# Chunk 4105
After the atrial septal occluder device is placed, patients are treated with antiplatelet agents and use antibiotic prophylaxis for certain procedures for 6 months. Follow-up echocardiograms to assess for device migration or erosion, residual shunting, thrombus, or pericardial effusion are recommended at 1 day, 1 month, 6 months, 1 year, and periodically thereafter.
# Chunk 4106
1612 In the United States, based on results of the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), approximately 30% (ageadjusted prevalence) of adults, or at least 65 million individuals, have hypertension (defined as any one of the following: systolic blood pressure ≥140 mmHg, diastolic blood pressure ≥90 mmHg, taking antihypertensive medications). Hypertension prevalence is 33.5% in non-Hispanic blacks, 28.9% in non-Hispanic whites, and 20.7% in Mexican Americans. The likelihood of hypertension increases with age, and among individuals age ≥60, the prevalence is 65.4%. Recent evidence suggests that the prevalence of hypertension in the United States may be increasing, possibly as a consequence of increasing obesity. The prevalence of hypertension and stroke mortality rates are higher in the southeastern United States than in other regions. In African Americans, hypertension appears earlier, is generally more severe, and results in higher rates of morbidity and mortality from stroke, left ventricular hypertrophy, CHF, and end-stage renal disease (ESRD) than in white Americans. Both environmental and genetic factors may contribute to regional and racial variations in hypertension prevalence. Studies of societies undergoing “acculturation” and studies of migrants from a less to a more urbanized setting indicate a profound environmental contribution to blood pressure. Obesity and weight gain are strong, independent risk factors for hypertension. It has been estimated that 60% of hypertensives are >20% overweight. Among populations, hypertension prevalence is related to dietary NaCl intake, and the age-related increase in blood pressure may be augmented by a high NaCl intake. Low dietary intakes of calcium and potassium also may contribute to the risk of hypertension. The urine sodium-to-potassium ratio (an index of both sodium and potassium intakes) is a stronger correlate of blood pressure than is either sodium or potassium alone. Alcohol consumption, psychosocial stress, and low levels of physical activity also may contribute to hypertension. Adoption, twin, and family studies document a significant heritable component to blood pressure levels and hypertension. Family studies controlling for a common environment indicate that blood pressure heritabilities are in the range 15–35%. In twin studies, heritability estimates of blood pressure are ~60% for males and 30–40% for females. High blood pressure before age 55 occurs 3.8 times more frequently among persons with a positive family history of hypertension. However, to date, only a fraction of high heritability estimates are accounted for by specific genetic determinants.
# Chunk 4107
Home blood pressure and average 24-h ambulatory blood pressure measurements are generally lower than clinic blood pressures. Because ambulatory blood pressure recordings yield multiple readings throughout the day and night, they provide a more comprehensive assessment of the vascular burden of hypertension than do a limited number of office readings. Increasing evidence suggests that home blood pressures, including 24-h blood pressure recordings, more reliably predict target organ damage than do office blood pressures. Blood pressure tends to be higher in the early morning hours, soon after waking, than at other times of day. Myocardial infarction and stroke are more common in the early morning hours. Nighttime blood pressures are generally 10–20% lower than daytime blood pressures, and an attenuated nighttime blood pressure “dip” may be associated with increased cardiovascular disease risk. Recommended criteria for a diagnosis of hypertension, based on 24-h blood pressure monitoring, are average awake blood pressure ≥135/85 mmHg and asleep blood pressure ≥120/75 mmHg. These levels approximate a clinic blood pressure of 140/90 mmHg.
# Chunk 4108
Depending on the populations studied and the methodologies for 1617 defining insulin resistance, ~25–50% of nonobese, nondiabetic hypertensive persons are insulin resistant. The constellation of insulin resistance, abdominal obesity, hypertension, and dyslipidemia has been designated as the metabolic syndrome. As a group, first-degree relatives of patients with primary hypertension are also insulin resistant, and hyperinsulinemia (a surrogate marker of insulin resistance) may predict the eventual development of hypertension and cardiovascular disease. Although the metabolic syndrome may in part be heritable as a polygenic condition, the expression of the syndrome is modified by environmental factors, such as degree of physical activity and diet. Insulin sensitivity increases and blood pressure decreases in response to weight loss. The recognition that cardiovascular disease risk factors tend to cluster within individuals has important implications for the evaluation and treatment of hypertension. Evaluation of both hypertensive patients and individuals at risk for developing hypertension should include assessment of overall cardiovascular disease risk. Similarly, introduction of lifestyle modification strategies and drug therapies should address overall risk and not focus exclusively on hypertension.
# Chunk 4109
Several clues from the history and physical examination may suggest renovascular hypertension. The diagnosis should be considered in patients with other evidence of atherosclerotic vascular disease. Although response to antihypertensive therapy does not exclude the diagnosis, severe or refractory hypertension, recent loss of hypertension control or recent onset of moderately severe hypertension, and unexplained deterioration of renal function or deterioration of renal function associated with an ACE inhibitor should raise the possibility of renovascular hypertension. Approximately 50% of patients with renovascular hypertension have an abdominal or flank bruit, and the bruit is more likely to be hemodynamically significant if it lateralizes or extends throughout systole into diastole.
# Chunk 4110
Some degree of renal artery obstruction may be observed in almost 50% of patients with atherosclerotic disease, and there are several approaches for evaluating the functional significance of such a lesion to predict the effect of vascular repair on blood pressure control and renal function. Each approach has varying degrees of sensitivity and specificity, and no single test is sufficiently reliable to determine a causal relationship between a renal artery lesion and hypertension. Functionally significant lesions generally occlude more than 70% of the lumen of the affected renal artery. On angiography, the presence of collateral vessels to the ischemic kidney suggests a functionally significant lesion. A lateralizing renal vein renin ratio (ratio >1.5 of affected side/contralateral side) has a 90% predictive value for a lesion that would respond to vascular repair; however, the false-negative rate for blood pressure control is 50–60%. Measurement of the pressure gradient across a renal artery lesion does not reliably predict the response to vascular repair.
# Chunk 4111
In a hypertensive patient with unprovoked hypokalemia (i.e., unrelated to diuretics, vomiting, or diarrhea), the prevalence of primary aldosteronism approaches 40–50%. In patients on diuretics, serum potassium <3.1 mmol/L (<3.1 meq/L) also raises the possibility of primary aldosteronism; however, serum potassium is an insensitive and nonspecific screening test. Serum potassium is normal in ~25% of patients subsequently found to have an aldosterone-producing adenoma, and higher percentages of patients with other etiologies of primary aldosteronism are not hypokalemic. Additionally, hypokalemic hypertension may be a consequence of secondary aldosteronism, other mineralocorticoidand glucocorticoid-induced hypertensive disorders, and pheochromocytoma.
# Chunk 4112
The ratio of plasma aldosterone to plasma renin activity (PA/ PRA) is a useful screening test. These measurements preferably are obtained in ambulatory patients in the morning. A ratio >30:1 in conjunction with a plasma aldosterone concentration >555 pmol/L (>20 ng/dL) reportedly has a sensitivity of 90% and a specificity of 91% for an aldosterone-producing adenoma. In a Mayo Clinic series, an aldosterone-producing adenoma subsequently was confirmed surgically in >90% of hypertensive patients with a PA/PRA ratio ≥20 and a plasma aldosterone concentration ≥415 pmol/L (≥15 ng/dL). There are, however, several caveats to interpreting the ratio. The cutoff for a “high” ratio is laboratoryand assay-dependent. Some anti-hypertensive agents may affect the ratio (e.g., aldosterone antagonists, angiotensin receptor antagonists, and ACE inhibitors may increase renin; aldosterone antagonists may increase aldosterone). Current recommendations are to withdraw aldosterone antagonists for at least 4–6 weeks before obtaining these measurements. Because aldosterone biosynthesis is potassium-dependent, hypokalemia should be corrected with oral potassium supplements prior to screening. With these caveats, the ratio has been reported to be useful as a screening test in measurements obtained with patients taking their usual antihypertensive medications. A high ratio in the absence of an elevated plasma aldosterone level is considerably less specific for primary aldosteronism since many patients with primary hypertension have low renin levels in this setting, particularly African Americans and elderly patients.
# Chunk 4113
Several sporadic and familial adrenal abnormalities may culminate in the syndrome of primary aldosteronism, and appropriate therapy depends on the specific etiology. The two most common causes of sporadic primary aldosteronism are an aldosterone-producing adenoma and bilateral adrenal hyperplasia. Together, they account for >90% of all patients with primary aldosteronism. The tumor is almost always unilateral, and most often measures <3 cm in diameter. Most of the remainder of these patients have bilateral adrenocortical hyperplasia (idiopathic hyperaldosteronism). Rarely, primary aldosteronism may be caused by an adrenal carcinoma or an ectopic malignancy, e.g., ovarian arrhenoblastoma. Most aldosterone-producing carcinomas, in contrast to adrenal adenomas and hyperplasia, produce excessive amounts of other adrenal steroids in addition to aldosterone. Functional differences in hormone secretion may assist in the diagnosis of adenoma vs. hyperplasia. Aldosterone biosynthesis is more responsive to ACTH in patients with adenoma and more responsive to angiotensin in patients with hyperplasia. Consequently, patients with adenoma tend to have higher plasma aldosterone in the early morning that decreases during the day, reflecting the diurnal rhythm of ACTH, whereas plasma aldosterone tends to increase with upright posture in patients with hyperplasia, reflecting the normal postural response of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis. However, there is overlap in the ability of these measurements to discriminate between adenoma and hyperplasia. Rare familial forms of primary aldosteronism include glucocorticoid-remediable primary aldosteronism and familial aldosteronism types II and III. Genetic testing may assist in the diagnosis of these familial disorders.
# Chunk 4114
Adrenal computed tomography (CT) should be carried out in all patients diagnosed with primary aldosteronism. High-resolution CT may identify tumors as small as 0.3 cm and is positive for an adrenal tumor 90% of the time. If the CT is not diagnostic, an adenoma may be detected by adrenal scintigraphy with 6 β-[I131] iodomethyl-19norcholesterol after dexamethasone suppression (0.5 mg every 6 h for 7 days); however, this technique has decreased sensitivity for adenomas <1.5 cm.
# Chunk 4115
(See also Chap. 406) Cushing’s syndrome is related to excess cortisol production due either to excess ACTH secretion (from a pituitary tumor or an ectopic tumor) or to ACTH-independent adrenal production of cortisol. Hypertension occurs in 75–80% of patients with Cushing’s syndrome. The mechanism of hypertension may be related to stimulation of mineralocorticoid receptors by cortisol and increased secretion of other adrenal steroids. If clinically suspected based on phenotypic characteristics, in patients not taking exogenous glucocorticoids, laboratory screening may be carried out with measurement of 24-h excretion rates of urine free cortisol or an overnight dexamethasone-suppression test. Late night salivary cortisol is also a sensitive and convenient screening test. Further evaluation is required to confirm the diagnosis and identify the specific etiology of Cushing’s syndrome. Appropriate therapy depends on the etiology.
# Chunk 4116
(See also Chap. 407) Catecholamine-secreting tumors are located in the adrenal medulla (pheochromocytoma) or in extra-adrenal paraganglion tissue (paraganglioma) and account for hypertension in ~0.05% of patients. If unrecognized, pheochromocytoma may result in lethal cardiovascular consequences. Clinical manifestations, including hypertension, are primarily related to increased circulating catecholamines, although some of these tumors may secrete a number of other vasoactive substances. In a small percentage of patients, epinephrine is the predominant catecholamine secreted by the tumor, and these patients may present with hypotension rather than hypertension. The initial suspicion of the diagnosis is based on symptoms and/or the association of pheochromocytoma with other disorders (Table 298-4). Approximately 20% of pheochromocytomas are familial with autosomal dominant inheritance. Inherited pheochromocytomas may be associated with multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) type 2A and type 2B, von Hippel-Lindau disease, and neurofibromatosis (Table 298-4). Each of these syndromes is related to specific, identifiable germ-line mutations. Additionally, mutations of succinate dehydrogenase genes are associated with paraganglioma syndromes, generally characterized by head and neck paragangliomas. Laboratory testing consists of measuring catecholamines in either urine or plasma, e.g., 24-h urine metanephrine excretion or fractionated plasma free metanephrines. The urine measurement is less sensitive but more specific. Genetic screening is available for evaluating patients and relatives suspected of harboring a pheochromocytoma associated with a familial syndrome. Surgical excision is the definitive treatment of pheochromocytoma and results in cure in ~90% of patients.
# Chunk 4117
Independent of obesity, hypertension occurs in >50% of individuals with obstructive sleep apnea. The severity of hypertension correlates with the severity of sleep apnea. Approximately 70% of patients with obstructive sleep apnea are obese. Hypertension related to obstructive sleep apnea also should be considered in patients with drug-resistant hypertension and patients with a history of snoring. The diagnosis can be confirmed by polysomnography. In obese patients, weight loss may alleviate or cure sleep apnea and related hypertension. Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) or bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP) administered during sleep is an effective therapy for obstructive sleep apnea. With CPAP or BiPAP, patients with apparently drug-resistant hypertension may be more responsive to antihypertensive agents.
# Chunk 4118
Prevention and treatment of obesity are important for reducing blood pressure and cardiovascular disease risk. In short-term trials, even modest weight loss can lead to a reduction of blood pressure and an increase in insulin sensitivity. Average blood pressure reductions of 6.3/3.1 mmHg have been observed with a reduction in mean body weight of 9.2 kg. Regular physical activity facilitates weight loss, decreases blood pressure, and reduces the overall risk of cardiovascular disease. Blood pressure may be lowered by 30 min of moderately intense physical activity, such as brisk walking, 6–7 days a week, or by more intense, less frequent workouts.
# Chunk 4119
Drug therapy is recommended for individuals with blood pressures ≥140/90 mmHg. The degree of benefit derived from antihypertensive agents is related to the magnitude of the blood pressure reduction. Lowering systolic blood pressure by 10–12 mmHg and diastolic blood pressure by 5–6 mmHg confers relative risk reductions of 35–40% for stroke and 12–16% for CHD within 5 years of the initiation of treatment. Risk of heart failure is reduced by >50%. Hypertension control is the single most effective intervention for slowing the rate of progression of hypertension-related kidney disease.
# Chunk 4120
Diuretics Low-dose thiazide diuretics may be used alone or in combination with other antihypertensive drugs. Thiazides inhibit the Na+/Cl− pump in the distal convoluted tubule and hence increase sodium excretion. In the long term, they also may act as vasodilators. Thiazides are safe, efficacious, inexpensive, and reduce clinical events. They provide additive blood pressure–lowering effects when combined with beta blockers, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs), or angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs). In contrast, addition of a diuretic to a calcium channel blocker is less effective. Usual doses of hydrochlorothiazide range from 6.25–50 mg/d. Owing to an increased incidence of metabolic side effects (hypokalemia, insulin resistance, increased cholesterol), higher doses generally are not recommended. Chlorthalidone is a diuretic structurally similar to hydrochlorothiazide, and like hydrochlorothiazide, it blocks sodium-chloride cotransport in the early distal tubule. However, chlorthalidone has a longer half-life (40–60 h vs. 9–15 h) and an antihypertensive potency ~1.5–2.0 times that of hydrochlorothiazide. Potassium loss is also greater with chlorthalidone. Two potassium-sparing diuretics, amiloride and triamterene, act by inhibiting epithelial sodium channels in the distal nephron. These agents are weak antihypertensive agents but may be used in combination with a thiazide to protect against hypokalemia. The main pharmacologic target for loop diuretics is the Na+-K+-2Cl− cotransporter in the thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle. Loop diuretics generally are reserved for hypertensive patients with reduced glomerular filtration rates (reflected in serum creatinine >220 μmol/L [>2.5 mg/ dL]), CHF, or sodium retention and edema for some other reason, such as treatment with a potent vasodilator, e.g., minoxidil.
# Chunk 4121
Renal artery stenosis is common and often has only minor hemodynamic effects. Fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD) is reported in 3–5% of normal subjects presenting as potential kidney donors without hypertension. It may present clinically with hypertension in younger individuals (between age 15 and 50), most often women. FMD does not often threaten kidney function, but sometimes produces total occlusion and can be associated with renal artery aneurysms. Atherosclerotic renal artery stenosis (ARAS) is common in the general population (6.8% of a community-based sample above age 65), and the prevalence increases with age and for patients with other vascular conditions such as coronary artery disease (18–23%) and/or peripheral aortic or lower extremity disease (>30%). If untreated, ARAS progresses in nearly 50% of cases over a 5-year period, sometimes to total occlusion. Intensive treatment of arterial blood pressure and statin therapy appear to slow these rates and improve clinical outcomes.
# Chunk 4122
endovascular procedures, and supportive care, particularly antihyper-injury including microangiopathic hemolysis and renal dysfunction tensive drug therapy. Application of these methods depends on the can improve over time. Whereas series reported before the era of drug patient’s overall condition, the precipitating factors (e.g., local trauma therapy suggested that 1-year mortality rates exceeded 90%, current or systemic illness), the magnitude of renal tissue and function at risk, survival over 5 years exceeds 50%. and the likelihood of recurrent events in the future. For unilateral Malignant hypertension is less common in Western countries, disease, e.g., arterial dissection with thrombosis, supportive care with although it persists in parts of the world where medical care and antihyanticoagulation may suffice. Acute, bilateral occlusion is potentially pertensive drug therapy are less available. It most commonly develops catastrophic, producing anuric renal failure. Depending on the pre-in patients with treated hypertension who neglect to take medications cipitating event, surgical or thrombolytic therapies can sometimes or who may use vasospastic drugs, such as cocaine. Renal abnormalities restore kidney viability. typically include rising serum creatinine and occasionally hematuria and proteinuria. Biochemical findings may include evidence of hemo-MICROVASCULAR INJURY ASSOCIATED WITH HYPERTENSION lysis (anemia, schistocytes, and reticulocytosis) and changes associated with kidney failure. African-American males are more likely to develop rapidly progressive hypertension and kidney failure than are whites in“Malignant” Hypertension Although BP rises with age, it has long been the United States. Genetic polymorphisms (first identified as MYH9,recognized that some individuals develop rapidly progressive BP elevabut now thought to be APOL1) that are common in the Africantions with target organ injury including retinal hemorrhages, encepha-American population predispose to subtle focal sclerosing glomerularlopathy, and declining kidney function. Placebo arms during the disease, with severe hypertension developing at younger ages second-controlled trials of hypertension therapy identified progression to ary to renal disease in this instance.
# Chunk 4123
severe levels in 20% of subjects over 5 years. If untreated, patients with target organ injury including papilledema and declining kidney “Hypertensive Nephrosclerosis” Based on experience with malignant function suffered mortality rates in excess of 50% over 6–12 months, hypertension and epidemiologic evidence linking BP with long-term hence the designation “malignant.” Postmortem studies of such risks of kidney failure, it has long been assumed that lesser degrees of patients identified vascular lesions, designated “fibrinoid necrosis,” hypertension induce less severe, but prevalent, changes in kidney veswith breakdown of the vessel wall, deposition of eosinophilic mate-sels and loss of kidney function. As a result, a large portion of patients rial including fibrin, and a perivascular cellular infiltrate. A separate reaching ESRD without a specific etiologic diagnosis are assigned the lesion was identified in the larger interlobular arteries in many patients designation “hypertensive nephrosclerosis.” Pathologic examination with hyperplastic proliferation of the vascular wall cellular elements, commonly identifies afferent arteriolar thickening with deposition of deposition of collagen, and separation of layers, designated the homogeneous eosinophilic material (hyaline arteriolosclerosis) associ“onionskin” lesion. For many of these patients, fibrinoid necrosis led ated with narrowing of vascular lumina. Clinical manifestations include to obliteration of glomeruli and loss of tubular structures. Progressive retinal vessel changes associated with hypertension (arteriolar narkidney failure ensued and, without dialysis support, led to early rowing, crossing changes), left ventricular hypertrophy, and elevated mortality in untreated malignant-phase hypertension. These vascular BP. The role of these vascular changes in kidney function is unclear. changes could develop with pressure-related injury from a variety Postmortem and biopsy samples from normotensive kidney donors of hypertensive pathways, including but not limited to activation of demonstrate similar vessel changes associated with aging, dyslipidemia, the renin-angiotensin system and severe vasospasm associated with and glucose intolerance. Although BP reduction does slow progression catecholamine release. Occasionally, endothelial injury is sufficient to of proteinuric kidney diseases and is warranted to reduce the excessive induce microangiopathic hemolysis, as discussed below. cardiovascular risks associated with CKD, antihypertensive therapy
# Chunk 4124
FIGURE 300-5 Large bilateral proximal PE on a coronal chest CT image in a 54-year-old man with lung cancer and brain metastases. He had developed sudden onset of chest heaviness and shortness of breath while at home. There are filling defects in the main and segmental pulmonary arteries bilaterally (white arrows). Only the left upper lobe segmental artery is free of thrombus.
# Chunk 4125
Warfarin This vitamin K antagonist prevents carboxylation activation of coagulation factors II, VII, IX, and X. The full effect of warfarin requires at least 5 days, even if the prothrombin time, used for monitoring, becomes elevated more rapidly. If warfarin 1635 is initiated as monotherapy during an acute thrombotic illness, a paradoxical exacerbation of hypercoagulability increases the likelihood of thrombosis. Overlapping UFH, LMWH, fondaparinux, or parenteral direct thrombin inhibitors with warfarin for at least 5 days will nullify the early procoagulant effect of warfarin.
# Chunk 4126
Among patients with idiopathic, unprovoked VTE, the recurrence rate is high after cessation of anticoagulation. VTE that occurs during long-haul air travel is considered unprovoked. Unprovoked VTE may be caused by an exacerbation of an underlying inflammatory state and can be conceptualized as a chronic illness, with latent periods between flares of recurrent episodes. American College of Chest Physicians (ACCP) guidelines recommend considering 1636 anticoagulation for an indefinite duration with a target INR between 2 and 3 for patients with idiopathic VTE. An alternative approach after the first 6 months of anticoagulation is to reduce the intensity of anticoagulation and to lower the target INR range to between 1.5 and 2. Counterintuitively, the presence of genetic mutations such as heterozygous factor V Leiden and prothrombin gene mutation does not appear to increase the risk of recurrent VTE. However, patients with antiphospholipid antibody syndrome may warrant indefinite-duration anticoagulation, even if the initial VTE was provoked by trauma or surgery.
# Chunk 4127
The only Food and Drug Administration–approved indication for PE fibrinolysis is massive PE. For patients with submassive PE, who have preserved systolic blood pressure but moderate or severe RV dysfunction, use of fibrinolysis remains controversial. Results of a 1006-patient European multicentered randomized trial of submassive PE, using the thrombolytic agent tenecteplase, were published in 2014. Death or hemodynamic collapse within 7 days of randomization was reduced by 56% in the tenecteplase group. However, hemorrhagic stroke occurred in 2% of tenecteplase patients versus 0.2% in patients who only received heparin.
# Chunk 4128
Dalteparin 2500 or 5000 units daily Cancer surgery, including gynecologic cancer surgery Enoxaparin 40 mg daily, consider 1 month of prophylaxis Major orthopedic surgery Warfarin (target INR 2.0–3.0)
# Chunk 4129
Abdominal aortic aneurysms occur more frequently in males than in females, and the incidence increases with age. Abdominal aortic aneurysms ≥4.0 cm may affect 1–2% of men older than 50 years. At least 90% of all abdominal aortic aneurysms >4.0 cm are related to atherosclerotic disease, and most of these aneurysms are below the level of the renal arteries. Prognosis is related to both the size of the aneurysm and the severity of coexisting coronary artery and cerebrovascular disease. The risk of rupture increases with the size of the aneurysm: the 5-year risk for aneurysms <5 cm is 1–2%, whereas it is 20–40% for aneurysms >5 cm in diameter. The formation of mural thrombi within aneurysms may predispose to peripheral embolization.
# Chunk 4130
Abdominal radiography may demonstrate the calcified outline of the aneurysm; however, about 25% of aneurysms are not calcified and cannot be visualized by x-ray imaging. An abdominal ultrasound can delineate the transverse and longitudinal dimensions of an abdominal aortic aneurysm and may detect mural thrombus. Abdominal ultrasound is useful for serial documentation of aneurysm size and can be used to screen patients at risk for developing an aortic aneurysm. In one large study, ultrasound screening of men age 65–74 years was associated with a risk reduction in aneurysm-related death of 42%. For this reason, screening by ultrasonography is recommended for men age 65–75 years who have ever smoked. In addition, siblings or offspring of persons with abdominal aortic aneurysms, as well as individuals with thoracic aortic or peripheral arterial aneurysms, should be considered for screening for abdominal aortic aneurysms. CT with contrast and MRI are accurate noninvasive tests to determine the location and size of abdominal aortic aneurysms and to plan endovascular or open surgical repair (Fig. 301-3). Contrast aortography may be used for the evaluation of patients with aneurysms, but the procedure carries a small risk of complications such as bleeding, allergic reactions, and atheroembolism. Since the presence of mural thrombi may reduce the luminal size, aortography may underestimate the diameter of an aneurysm.
# Chunk 4131
Operative repair of the aneurysm with insertion of a prosthetic graft or endovascular placement of an aortic stent graft (Fig. 301-3) is indicated for abdominal aortic aneurysms of any size that are expanding rapidly or are associated with symptoms. For asymptomatic aneurysms, abdominal aortic aneurysm repair is indicated if the diameter is >5.5 cm. In randomized trials of patients with abdominal aortic aneurysms <5.5 cm, there was no difference in the long-term (5to 8-year) mortality rate between those followed with ultrasound surveillance and those undergoing elective surgical repair. Thus, serial noninvasive follow-up of smaller aneurysms (<5 cm) is an alternative to immediate repair. The decision to perform an open surgical operation or endovascular repair is based in part on the vascular anatomy and comorbid conditions. Endovascular repair of abdominal aortic aneurysms has a lower short-term morbidity rate but a comparable long-term mortality rate with open surgical reconstruction. Long-term surveillance with CT or MR aortography is indicated after endovascular repair to detect leaks and possible aneurysm expansion.
# Chunk 4132
The peak incidence of aortic dissection is in the sixth and seventh decades. Men are more affected than women by a ratio of 2:1. The presentations of aortic dissection and its variants are the consequences of intimal tear, dissecting hematoma, occlusion of involved arteries, and compression of adjacent tissues. Acute aortic dissection presents with the sudden onset of pain (Chap. 19), which often is described as very severe and tearing and is associated with diaphoresis. The pain may be localized to the front or back of the chest, often the interscapular region, and typically migrates with propagation of the dissection. Other symptoms include syncope, dyspnea, and weakness. Physical findings may include hypertension or hypotension, loss of pulses, aortic regurgitation, pulmonary edema, and neurologic findings due to carotid artery obstruction (hemiplegia, hemianesthesia) or spinal cord ischemia (paraplegia). Bowel ischemia, hematuria, and myocardial ischemia have all been observed. These clinical manifestations reflect complications resulting from the dissection occluding the major arteries. Furthermore, clinical manifestations may result from the compression of adjacent structures (e.g., superior cervical ganglia, superior vena cava, bronchus, esophagus) by the expanding dissection, causing aneurysmal dilation, and include Horner’s syndrome, superior vena cava syndrome, hoarseness, dysphagia, and airway compromise. 1641 Hemopericardium and cardiac tamponade may complicate a type A lesion with retrograde dissection. Acute aortic regurgitation is an important and common (>50%) complication of proximal dissection. It is the outcome of either a circumferential tear that widens the aortic root or a disruption of the annulus by a dissecting hematoma that tears a leaflet(s) or displaces it, inferior to the line of closure. Signs of aortic regurgitation include bounding pulses, a wide pulse pressure, a diastolic murmur often radiating along the right sternal border, and evidence of congestive heart failure. The clinical manifestations depend on the severity of the regurgitation.
# Chunk 4133
The diagnosis of aortic dissection can be established by noninvasive techniques such as echocardiography, CT, and MRI. Aortography is used less commonly because of the accuracy of these noninvasive techniques. Transthoracic echocardiography can be performed simply and rapidly and has an overall sensitivity of 60–85% for aortic dissection. For diagnosing proximal ascending aortic dissections, its sensitivity exceeds 80%; it is less useful for detecting dissection of the arch and descending thoracic aorta. Transesophageal echocardiography requires greater skill and patient cooperation but is very accurate in identifying dissections of the ascending and descending thoracic aorta but not the arch, achieving 98% sensitivity and approximately 90% specificity. Echocardiography also provides important information regarding the presence and severity of aortic regurgitation and pericardial effusion. CT and MRI are both highly accurate in identifying the intimal flap and the extent of the dissection and involvement of major arteries; each has a sensitivity and specificity >90%. They are useful in recognizing intramural hemorrhage and penetrating ulcers. The relative utility of transesophageal echocardiography, CT, and MRI depends on the availability and expertise in individual institutions as well as on the hemodynamic stability of the patient, with CT and MRI obviously less suitable for unstable patients.
# Chunk 4134
This inflammatory disease often affects the ascending aorta and aortic arch, causing obstruction of the aorta and its major arteries. Takayasu’s arteritis is also termed pulseless disease because of the frequent occlusion of the large arteries originating from the aorta. It also may involve the descending thoracic and abdominal aorta and occlude large branches such as the renal arteries. Aortic aneurysms also may occur. The pathology is a panarteritis characterized by mononuclear cells and occasionally giant cells, with marked intimal hyperplasia, medial and adventitial thickening, and, in the chronic form, fibrotic occlusion. The disease is most prevalent in young females of Asian descent but does occur in women of other geographic and ethnic origins and also in young men. During the acute stage, fever, malaise, weight loss, and other systemic symptoms may be evident. Elevations of the erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein are common. The chronic stages of the disease, which is intermittently active, present with symptoms related to large artery occlusion, such as upper extremity claudication, cerebral ischemia, and syncope. The process is progressive, and there is no definitive therapy. Glucocorticoids and immunosuppressive agents are effective in some patients during the acute phase. Surgical bypass or endovascular intervention of a critically stenotic artery may be necessary.
# Chunk 4135
Pathology (See also Chap. 291e) Segmental lesions that cause steno-sis or occlusion are usually localized to large and medium-size vessels. The pathology of the lesions includes atherosclerotic plaques with calcium deposition, thinning of the media, patchy destruction of muscle and elastic fibers, fragmentation of the internal elastic lamina, and thrombi composed of platelets and fibrin. The primary sites of involvement are the abdominal aorta and iliac arteries (30% of symptomatic patients), the femoral and popliteal arteries (80–90% of patients), and the more distal vessels, including the tibial and peroneal arteries (40– 50% of patients). Atherosclerotic lesions occur preferentially at arterial branch points, which are sites of increased turbulence, altered shear stress, and intimal injury. Involvement of the distal vasculature is most common in elderly individuals and patients with diabetes mellitus.
# Chunk 4136
Clinical Evaluation Fewer than 50% of patients with PAD are symp-1643 tomatic, although many have a slow or impaired gait. The most common symptom is intermittent claudication, which is defined as a pain, ache, cramp, numbness, or a sense of fatigue in the muscles; it occurs during exercise and is relieved by rest. The site of claudication is distal to the location of the occlusive lesion. For example, buttock, hip, thigh, and calf discomfort occurs in patients with aortoiliac disease, whereas calf claudication develops in patients with femoral-popliteal disease. Symptoms are far more common in the lower than in the upper extremities because of the higher incidence of obstructive lesions in the former region. In patients with severe arterial occlusive disease in whom resting blood flow cannot accommodate basal nutritional needs of the tissues, critical limb ischemia may develop. Patients complain of rest pain or a feeling of cold or numbness in the foot and toes. Frequently, these symptoms occur at night when the legs are horizontal and improve when the legs are in a dependent position. With severe ischemia, rest pain may be persistent.
# Chunk 4137
Prognosis The natural history of patients with PAD is influenced primarily by the extent of coexisting coronary artery and cerebrovascular disease. Approximately one-third to one-half of patients with symptomatic PAD have evidence of coronary artery disease (CAD) based on clinical presentation and electrocardiogram, and over one-half have significant CAD by coronary angiography. Patients with PAD have a 15–30% 5-year mortality rate and a twoto sixfold increased risk of death from coronary heart disease. Mortality rates are highest in those with the most severe PAD. Measurement of ABI is useful for detecting PAD and identifying persons at risk for future atherothrombotic events. The likelihood of symptomatic progression of PAD is lower than the chance of succumbing to CAD. Approximately 75–80% of nondiabetic patients who present with mild to moderate claudication remain symptomatically stable. Deterioration is likely to occur in the remainder, with approximately 1–2% of the group ultimately developing critical limb ischemia each year. Approximately 25–30% of patients with critical limb ischemia undergo amputation within 1 year. The prognosis is worse in patients who continue to smoke cigarettes or have diabetes mellitus.
# Chunk 4138
Several operative procedures are available for treating patients with aortoiliac and femoral-popliteal artery disease. The preferred operative procedure depends on the location and extent of the obstruction(s) and the general medical condition of the patient. Operative procedures for aortoiliac disease include aortobifemoral bypass, axillofemoral bypass, femoro-femoral bypass, and aortoiliac endarterectomy. The most frequently used procedure is the aortobifemoral bypass using knitted Dacron grafts. Immediate graft patency approaches 99%, and 5and 10-year graft patency rates in survivors are >90% and 80%, respectively. Operative complications include myocardial infarction and stroke, infection of the graft, peripheral embolization, and sexual dysfunction from interruption of autonomic nerves in the pelvis. The operative mortality rate ranges from 1–3%, mostly due to ischemic heart disease.
# Chunk 4139
Operative therapy for femoral-popliteal artery disease includes in situ and reverse autogenous saphenous vein bypass grafts, placement of polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) or other synthetic grafts, and thromboendarterectomy. The operative mortality rate ranges from 1–3%. The long-term patency rate depends on the type of graft used, the location of the distal anastomosis, and the patency of runoff vessels beyond the anastomosis. Patency rates of femoral-popliteal saphenous vein bypass grafts approach 90% at 1 year and 70–80% at 5 years. Five-year patency rates of infrapopliteal saphenous vein bypass grafts are 60–70%. In contrast, 5-year patency rates of infrap-1645 opliteal PTFE grafts are <30%.
# Chunk 4140
Secondary Causes of Raynaud’s Phenomenon Raynaud’s phenomenon occurs in 80–90% of patients with systemic sclerosis (scleroderma) and is the presenting symptom in 30% (Chap. 382). It may be the only symptom of scleroderma for many years. Abnormalities of the digital vessels may contribute to the development of Raynaud’s phenomenon in this disorder. Ischemic fingertip ulcers may develop and progress to gangrene and autoamputation. About 20% of patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) have Raynaud’s phenomenon (Chap. 378). Occasionally, persistent digital ischemia develops and may result in ulcers or gangrene. In most severe cases, the small vessels are occluded by a proliferative endarteritis. Raynaud’s phenomenon occurs in about 30% of patients with dermatomyositis or polymyositis (Chap. 388). It frequently develops in patients with rheumatoid arthritis and may be related to the intimal proliferation that occurs in the digital arteries.
# Chunk 4141
Endovenous thermal ablation procedures of the saphenous veins include endovenous laser therapy and radiofrequency ablation. To ablate the great saphenous vein, a catheter is placed percutaneously and advanced from the level of the knee to just below the saphenofemoral junction via ultrasound guidance. Thermal energy is then delivered as the catheter is pulled back. The heat injures the endothelium and media and promotes thrombosis and fibrosis, resulting in venous occlusion. Average 1and 5-year occlusion rates exceed 90% following endovenous laser therapy and are slightly less after radiofrequency ablation. Deep vein thrombosis of the common femoral vein adjacent to the saphenofemoral junction is an uncommon but potential complication of endovenous thermal ablation. Other adverse effects of thermal ablation procedures include pain, paresthesias, bruising, hematoma, and hyperpigmentation.
# Chunk 4142
Sclerotherapy involves the injection of a chemical into a vein to cause fibrosis and obstruction. Sclerosing agents approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration include sodium tetradecyl sulfate, polidocanol, sodium morrhuate, and glycerin. The sclerosing agent is administered as a liquid or mixed with air or CO2/O2 to create a foam. It first is injected into the great saphenous vein or its affected tributaries, often with ultrasound guidance. Thereafter, smaller more distal veins and incompetent perforating veins are injected. Following completion of the procedure, elastic bandages are applied, or 30–40 mmHg compression stockings are worn for 1–2 weeks. Average 1and 5-year occlusion rates are 81% and 74%, respectively, following sclerotherapy. Complications are uncommon and include deep vein thrombosis, hematomas, damage to adjacent saphenous or sural nerves, and infection. Anaphylaxis is a very rare but severe complication.
# Chunk 4143
Surgical therapy usually involves ligation and stripping of the great and small saphenous veins. The procedure is performed under general anesthesia. Incisions are made at the groin and the upper calf. The great saphenous vein is ligated below the saphenofemoral junction, and a wire is inserted into the great saphenous vein and advanced distally. The proximal part of the great saphenous vein is secured to the wire and retrieved, i.e., stripped, via the calf incision. Stripping of the great saphenous vein below the knee and stripping of the small saphenous vein usually are not performed because of the respective risks of saphenous and sural nerve injury. Complications of great saphenous vein ligation and stripping include deep vein thrombosis, bleeding, hematoma, infection, and nerve injury. Recurrent varicose veins occur in up to 50% patients by 5 years, due to technical failures, deep venous insufficiency, and incompetent perforating veins.
# Chunk 4144
Diagnostic Testing The evaluation of patients with lymphedema should include diagnostic studies to clarify the cause. Abdominal and pelvic ultrasound and computed tomography (CT) can be used to detect obstructing lesions such as neoplasms. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the affected limb may reveal a honeycomb pattern
# Chunk 4145
PH and is characterized by symptoms of dyspnea, chest pain, and syncope. If left untreated, the disease carries a high mortality rate, with the most common cause of death being decompensated right heart failure. There have been significant advances in this field in regard to understanding the pathogenesis, diagnosis, and classification of PAH. Despite these significant advances, there is still a substantial delay in diagnosis of up to 2 years. In many cases, patients whose primary complaint is dyspnea on exertion are frequently misdiagnosed with more common diseases such as asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary 1655 disease. The availability of newer drugs has resulted in a radical change in the management of this disease with significant improvement in both quality of life and mortality. A delay in diagnosis results in an obvious delay in the initiation of appropriate treatment. Clinicians should be able to recognize the signs and symptoms of PH and to complete a systematic workup in patients suspected of having it. In this way, early diagnosis, prompt treatment, and improved outcomes for patients become achievable.
# Chunk 4146
Idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension (IPAH) is a progressive disease that leads to right heart failure and death. It is typically seen in young women. The National Institutes of Health registry, the first large registry of patients with PAH, reported that the average age at diagnosis was 36 years, with only 9% of patients with IPAH over the age of 60 at diagnosis. However, the more current clinical data suggest that the patient demographics are changing. The Pulmonary Hypertension Connection registry found that the average age of diagnosis for IPAH was 45 years, with 8.5% of patients older than 70 years at diagnosis. This finding is supported by data from the Registry to Evaluate Early and Long-Term PAH Disease Management (REVEAL), the largest cohort of PAH to date, which reported that the average age at diagnosis of IPAH was 44.9±0.6 years.
# Chunk 4147
Pulmonary Function Testing (See also Chap. 307) The initial pulmonary function test obtained is spirometry. This study is an effort-dependent test used to assess for obstructive pathophysiology as seen in asthma, COPD, and bronchiectasis. A diminished-forced expiratory volume in 1 sec (FEV1)/forced vital capacity (FVC) (often defined as <70% of the predicted value) is diagnostic of obstruction. In addition to measuring FEV1 and FVC, the clinician should examine the flow-volume loop (which is effort-independent). A plateau of the inspiratory and expiratory curves suggests large-airway obstruction in extrathoracic and intrathoracic locations, respectively.
# Chunk 4148
Depending on the clinician’s suspicion, a variety of other studies may be done. Concern about large-airway lesions may warrant bronchoscopy. This procedure may also be used to sample the alveolar space with bronchoalveolar lavage or to obtain nonsurgical lung biopsies. Blood testing may include assessment for hypercoagulable states in the setting of pulmonary vascular disease, serologic testing for infectious or rheumatologic disease, or assessment of inflammatory markers or leukocyte counts (e.g., eosinophils). Sputum evaluation for malignant cells or microorganisms may be appropriate. An echocardiogram to assess rightand left-sided heart function is often obtained. Finally, at times, a surgical lung biopsy is needed to diagnose certain diseases of the respiratory system. All of these studies will be guided by the preceding history, physical examination, pulmonary function testing, and chest imaging.
# Chunk 4149
Measurement of gas Exchange • DiFFusing cApAcity (DL co) This test uses a small (and safe) amount of carbon monoxide (CO) to measure gas exchange across the alveolar membrane during a 10-sec breath hold. CO in exhaled breath is analyzed to determine the quantity of CO crossing the alveolar membrane and combining with hemoglobin in red blood cells. This “single-breath diffusing capacity” (Dlco) value increases with the surface area available for diffusion and the amount of hemoglobin within the capillaries, and it varies inversely with alveolar membrane thickness. Thus, Dlco decreases in diseases that thicken or destroy alveolar membranes (e.g., pulmonary fibrosis, emphysema), curtail the pulmonary vasculature (e.g., pulmonary hypertension), or reduce alveolar capillary hemoglobin (e.g., anemia). Single-breath diffusing capacity may be elevated in acute congestive heart failure, asthma, polycythemia, and pulmonary hemorrhage.
# Chunk 4150
Proper staging of lung cancer is of paramount concern when determining a treatment regimen. Although CT and PET scanning are useful for determining the size and nature of mediastinal lymph nodes as part of the staging of lung cancer, tissue biopsy and histopathologic examination are often critical for the diagnosis of mediastinal masses or enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes. The two major surgical procedures used to obtain specimens from masses or nodes in the mediastinum are mediastinoscopy (via a suprasternal approach) and mediastinotomy (via a parasternal approach). Both procedures are performed under general anesthesia by a qualified surgeon. In the case of suprasternal mediastinoscopy, a rigid mediastinoscope is inserted at the suprasternal notch and passed into the mediastinum along a pathway just anterior to the trachea. Tissue can be obtained with biopsy forceps passed through the scope, sampling masses or nodes that are in a paratracheal or pretracheal position (levels 2R, 2L, 3, 4R, 4L). Aortopulmonary lymph nodes (levels 5, 6) are not accessible by this route and thus are commonly sampled by parasternal mediastinotomy (the Chamberlain procedure). This approach involves a parasternal incision and dissection directly down to a mass or node that requires biopsy.
# Chunk 4151
Lung Function Tests Simple spirometry confirms airflow limitation with a reduced FEV1, FEV1/FVC ratio, and PEF (Fig. 309-6). Reversibility is demonstrated by a >12% and 200-mL increase in FEV1 15 min after an inhaled short-acting β2-agonist or in some patients by a 2to 4-week trial of oral corticosteroids (OCS) (prednisone or prednisolone 30–40 mg daily). Measurements of PEF twice daily may confirm the diurnal variations in airflow obstruction. Flow-volume loops show reduced peak flow and reduced maximum expiratory flow. Further lung function tests are rarely necessary, but whole-body plethysmography shows increased airway resistance and may show increased total lung capacity and residual volume. Gas diffusion is usually normal, but there may be a small increase in gas transfer in some patients.
# Chunk 4152
The characteristic symptoms of asthma are wheez ing, dyspnea, and coughing, which are variable, both spontaneously and with therapy. Symptoms may be worse at night, and patients typically awake in the early morning hours. Patients may report difficulty in filling their lungs with air. There is increased mucus production in some patients, with typically tenacious mucus that is difficult to expectorate. There may be increased ventilation and use of accessory muscles of ventilation. Prodromal symptoms may precede
# Chunk 4153
CLINICAL USE ICSs are by far the most effective controllers in the management of asthma and are beneficial in treating asthma of any severity and age. ICSs are usually given twice daily, but some may be effective once daily in mildly symptomatic patients. ICSs rapidly improve the symptoms of asthma, and lung function improves over several days. They are effective in preventing asthma symptoms, such as EIA and nocturnal exacerbations, but also prevent severe exacerbations. ICSs reduce AHR, but maximal improvement may take several months of therapy. Early treatment with ICS appears to prevent irreversible changes in airway function that occur with chronic asthma. Withdrawal of ICS results in slow deterioration of asthma control, indicating that they suppress inflammation and symptoms, but do not cure the underlying condition. ICSs are now given as first-line therapy for patients with persistent asthma, but if they do not control symptoms at low doses, it is usual to add a LABA as the next step.
# Chunk 4154
Cromones Cromolyn sodium and nedocromil sodium are asthma controller drugs that appear to inhibit mast cell and sensory nerve activation and are, therefore, effective in blocking trigger-induced asthma such as EIA and allergenand sulfur dioxide–induced symptoms. Cromones have relatively little benefit in the long-term control of asthma due to their short duration of action (at least four times daily by inhalation). They are very safe and were popular in the treatment of childhood asthma, although now low doses of ICS are preferred because they are more effective and have a proven safety profile.
# Chunk 4155
Stepwise Therapy For patients with mild, intermittent asthma, a short-acting β2-agonist is all that is required (Fig. 309-8). However, use of a reliever medication more than twice a week indicates the need for regular controller therapy. The treatment of choice for all patients is an ICS given twice daily. It is usual to start with an intermediate dose (e.g., 200 μg bid of beclomethasone dipropionate [BDP]) or equivalent and to decrease the dose if symptoms are controlled after 3 months. If symptoms are not controlled, a LABA should be added, which is most conveniently given by switching to a combination inhaler. The dose of controller should be adjusted accordingly, as judged by the need for a rescue inhaler. Low doses of theophylline or an antileukotriene may also be considered as an add-on therapy, but these are less effective than LABA. In patients with severe asthma, low-dose oral theophylline is also helpful, and when there is irreversible airway narrowing, the long-acting anticholinergic tiotropium bromide may be tried. If asthma is not controlled despite the maximal recommended dose of inhaled therapy, it is important to check compliance and inhaler technique. In these patients, maintenance treatment with an OCS may be needed, and the lowest dose that maintains control should be used. Occasionally omalizumab may be tried in steroid-dependent asthmatics who are not well controlled. Once asthma is controlled, it is important to slowly decrease therapy in order to find the optimal dose to control symptoms.
# Chunk 4156
Clinical Features Patients are aware of increasing chest tightness, wheezing, and dyspnea that are often not or poorly relieved by their usual reliever inhaler. In severe exacerbations, patients may be so breathless that they are unable to complete sentences and may become cyanotic. Examination usually shows increased ventilation, hyperinflation, and tachycardia. Pulsus paradoxus may be present, but this is rarely a useful clinical sign. There is a marked fall in spirometric values and PEF. Arterial blood gases on air show hypoxemia, and PCO2 is usually low due to hyperventilation. A normal or rising PCO2 is an indication of impending respiratory failure and requires immediate monitoring and therapy. A chest roentgenogram is not usually informative but may show pneumonia or pneumothorax.
# Chunk 4157
Corticosteroid-Resistant Asthma A few patients with asthma show a poor response to corticosteroid therapy and may have various molecular abnormalities that impair the anti-inflammatory action of corticosteroids. Complete resistance to corticosteroids is extremely uncommon and affects less than 1 in 1000 patients. It is defined by a failure to respond to a high dose of oral prednisone/prednisolone (40 mg once daily over 2 weeks), ideally with a 2-week run-in with matched placebo. More common is reduced responsiveness to corticosteroids where control of asthma requires OCS (corticosteroiddependent asthma). In patients with poor responsiveness to corticosteroids, there is a reduction in the response of circulating monocytes and lymphocytes to the anti-inflammatory effects of corticosteroids in vitro and reduced skin blanching in response to topical corticosteroids. There are several mechanisms that have been described, including an increase in the alternatively spliced form of the glucocorticoid receptor (GR)-β, an abnormal pattern of histone acetylation in response to corticosteroids, a defect in IL-10 production, and a reduction in HDAC2 activity (as in COPD). These observations suggest that there are likely to be heterogeneous mechanisms for corticosteroid resistance; whether these mechanisms are genetically determined has yet to be decided.
# Chunk 4158
Bronchopulmonary Aspergillosis Bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (BPA) is uncommon and results from an allergic pulmonary reaction to inhaled spores of Aspergillus fumigatus and, occasionally, other Aspergillus species. A skin prick test to A. fumigatus is always positive, whereas serum Aspergillus precipitins are low or undetectable. Characteristically, there are fleeting eosinophilic infiltrates in the lungs, particularly in the upper lobes. Airways become blocked with mucoid plugs rich in eosinophils, and patients may cough up brown plugs and have hemoptysis. BPA may result in bronchiectasis, particularly affecting central airways, if not suppressed by corticosteroids. Asthma is controlled in the usual way by ICS, but it is necessary to give a course of OCS if any sign of worsening or pulmonary shadowing is found. Treatment with the oral antifungal itraconazole is beneficial in preventing exacerbations.
# Chunk 4159
Categories of individuals at particular risk in the United States include farmers, bird owners, industrial workers, and hot tub users. Farmer’s lung occurs as a result of exposure to one of several possible sources of bacterial or fungal antigens such as grain, moldy hay, or silage. Potential offending antigens include thermophilic actinomycetes or Aspergillus species. Bird fancier’s lung (also referred to by names corresponding to specific birds) must be considered in patients who give a history of keeping birds in their home and is precipitated by exposure to antigens derived from feathers, droppings, and serum proteins. Occupational exposure to birds may also cause HP, as is seen in poultry worker’s lung. Chemical worker’s lung is provoked by exposure to occupational chemical antigens such as diphenylmethane diisocyanate and toluene diisocyanate. Mycobacteria may cause HP rather than frank infection, a phenomenon observed in hot tub lung and in HP due to metalworking fluid.
# Chunk 4160
Duck fever Duck feathers, serum proteins Fish meal worker’s lung Fish meal dust Furrier’s lung Dust from animal furs Laboratory worker’s lung Rat urine, serum, fur Pituitary snuff taker’s lung Animal proteins
# Chunk 4161
Differentiating HP from other conditions that cause a similar constellation of respiratory and systemic symptoms requires an increased index of suspicion based on obtaining a history of possible exposure to an offending antigen. Presentations of acute or subacute HP can be mistaken for respiratory infection. In cases of chronic disease, HP must be differentiated from interstitial lung disease, such as IPF or 1683 nonspecific interstitial pneumonitis (NSIP); this can be a difficult task even with lung biopsy. Given the presence of pulmonary infiltrates and noncaseating granulomas on biopsy, sarcoidosis is also a consideration in the differential diagnosis of HP. Unlike in HP, however, hilar adenopathy may be prominent on chest x-ray, organs other than the lung may be involved, and noncaseating granulomas in pathologic specimens tend to be well formed. Other inhalational syndromes, such as organic toxic dust syndrome (OTDS), can be misdiagnosed as HP. OTDS occurs with exposure to organic dusts, including those produced by grains or mold silage, but neither requires prior antigen sensitization nor is characterized by positive serum precipitins.
# Chunk 4162
Clinical Features and Etiology At presentation, acute eosinophilic pneumonia is often mistaken for acute lung injury or acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), until a BAL is performed and reveals >25% eosinophils. Although the predominant symptoms of acute eosinophilic pneumonia are cough, dyspnea, malaise, myalgias, night sweats, and pleuritic chest pain, physical exam findings include high fevers, basilar rales, and rhonchi on forced expiration. Acute eosinophilic pneumonia most often affects males between age 20 and 40 with no history of asthma. Although no clear etiology has been identified, several case reports have linked acute eosinophilic pneumonia to recent initiation of tobacco smoking or exposure to other environmental stimuli including dust from indoor renovations.
# Chunk 4163
In addition to a suggestive history, the key to establishing a diagnosis of acute eosinophilic pneumonia is the presence of >25% eosinophilia on BAL fluid. While lung biopsies show eosinophilic infiltration with acute and organizing diffuse alveolar damage, it is generally not necessary to proceed to biopsy to establish a diagnosis. Although patients present with an elevated white blood cell count, in contrast to other pulmonary eosinophilic syndromes, acute eosinophilic pneumonia is often not associated with peripheral eosinophilia upon presentation. However, between 7 and 30 days of disease onset, peripheral eosinophilia often occurs with mean eosinophil counts of 1700. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein, and IgE levels are high but nonspecific, whereas HRCT is always abnormal with bilateral random patchy ground-glass or reticular opacities, and small pleural effusions in as many as two-thirds of patients. Pleural fluid is characterized by a high pH with marked eosinophilia.
# Chunk 4164
Patients present with a subacute illness over weeks to months, with cough, low-grade fevers, progressive dyspnea, weight loss, wheezing, malaise, and night sweats, and a chest x-ray with migratory bilateral peripheral or pleural-based opacities. Although this “photographic negative pulmonary edema” appearance on chest x-ray and chest CT is pathognomonic of chronic eosinophilic pneumonia, less than 25% of patients present with this finding. Other radiographic findings include atelectasis, pleural effusions, lymphadenopathy, and septal line thickening.
# Chunk 4165
Almost 90% of patients have peripheral eosinophilia, with mean eosinophil counts of over 30% of total white blood cell count. BAL eosinophilia is also an important distinguishing feature with mean BAL eosinophil counts of close to 60%. Both peripheral and BAL eosinophilia are very responsive to treatment with corticosteroids. Other laboratory features of chronic eosinophilic pneumonia include increased ESR, C-reactive protein, platelets, and IgE. Lung biopsy is also often not required to establish a diagnosis, but may show accumulation of eosinophils and histiocytes in the lung parenchyma and interstitium, as well as cryptogenic organizing pneumonia, but with minimal fibrosis. Nonrespiratory manifestations are uncommon, but arthralgias, neuropathy, and skin and GI symptoms have all been reported; their presence may suggest EGPA or hypereosinophilic syndrome. Another similarity is the rapid response to corticosteroids with quick resolution of peripheral and BAL eosinophilia and improvement in symptoms. In contrast to acute eosinophilic pneumonia, though, over 50% of patients relapse, and many require prolonged courses of corticosteroids for months to years.
# Chunk 4166
Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis and Pulmonary Infiltrates with Eosinophilia 1686 Because these agents are also the initial treatment of choice for EGPA patients, institution of these therapies in patients with EGPA who are perceived to have severe asthma may delay the diagnosis of EGPA because signs of vasculitis may be masked. Corticosteroids dramatically alter the course of EGPA: up to 50% of those who are untreated die within 3 months of diagnosis, whereas treated patients have a 6-year survival of over 70%. Common causes of death include heart failure, cerebral hemorrhage, renal failure, and GI bleeding. Recent data suggest that clinical remission may be obtained in over 90% of patients treated; approximately 25% of those patients may relapse, often due to corticosteroid tapering, with a rising eosinophil count heralding the relapse. Myocardial, GI, and renal involvement most often portend a poor prognosis. In such cases, treatment with higher doses of corticosteroids or the addition of cytotoxic agents such as cyclophosphamide is often warranted. Although survival does not differ between those treated or untreated with cyclophosphamide, cyclophosphamide is associated with a reduced incidence of relapse and an improved clinical response to treatment. Other therapies that have been used successfully in the management of EGPA include azathioprine, methotrexate, intravenous gamma globulin, and interferon α. Plasma exchange has not been shown to provide any additional benefit. Recent studies examining the efficacy of anti-IL-5 therapy have shown promise.
# Chunk 4167
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) is an eosinophilic pulmonary disorder that occurs in response to allergic sensitization to antigens from Aspergillus species fungi. The predominant clinical presentation of ABPA is an asthmatic phenotype, often accompanied by cough with production of brownish plugs of mucus. ABPA has also been well described as a complication of cystic fibrosis. A workup for ABPA may be beneficial in patients who carry a diagnosis of asthma but have proven refractory to usual therapy. ABPA is a distinct diagnosis from simple asthma, characterized by prominent peripheral eosinophilia and elevated circulating levels of IgE (>417 IU/mL). Establishing a diagnosis of ABPA also requires establishing sensitivity to Aspergillus antigens by skin test reactivity, positive serum precipitins for Aspergillus, and/or direct measurement of circulating specific IgG and IgE to Aspergillus. Central bronchiectasis is described as a classic finding on chest imaging in ABPA but is not necessary for making a diagnosis. Other possible findings on chest imaging include patchy infiltrates and evidence of mucus impaction.
# Chunk 4168
Occupational exposure to coal dust can lead to CWP, which has enormous social, economic, and medical significance in every nation in which coal mining is an important industry. Simple radiographically identified CWP is seen in ~10% of all coal miners and in as many as 50% of anthracite miners with more than 20 years of work on the coal face. The prevalence of disease is lower in workers in bituminous coal mines.
# Chunk 4169
Chest imaging findings are similar to those of sarcoidosis (nodules along septal lines) except that hilar adenopathy is somewhat less common. As with sarcoidosis, pulmonary function test results may show restrictive and/or obstructive ventilatory deficits and decreased diffusing capacity. With early disease, both chest imaging studies and pulmonary function tests may be normal. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy with transbronchial lung biopsy usually is required to make the diagnosis of CBD. In a beryllium-sensitized individual, the presence of noncaseating granulomas or monocytic infiltration in lung tissue establishes the diagnosis. Accumulation of beryllium-specific CD4+ T cells occurs in the granulomatous inflammation seen on lung biopsy. Susceptibility to CBD is highly associated with human leukocyte antigen DP (HLA-DP) alleles that have a glutamic acid in position 69 of the β chain.
# Chunk 4170
Test of swallowing function and general neuromuscular strength

Exclusion of other causes aSkin testing for Aspergillus reactivity; measurement of serum precipitins for Aspergillus, serum IgE levels, serum eosinophils, etc.
# Chunk 4171
Antibiotics targeting the causative or presumptive pathogen (with Haemophilus influenzae and P. aeruginosa isolated commonly) should be administered in acute exacerbations, usually for a minimum of 7–10 days and perhaps for as long as 14 days. Decisions about treatment of NTM infection can be difficult, given that these organisms can be colonizers as well as pathogens and the prolonged treatment course often is not well tolerated. Consensus guidelines have advised that diagnostic criteria for true clinical infection with NTM should be considered in patients with symptoms and radiographic findings of lung disease who have at least two sputum samples positive on culture; at least one bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid sample positive on culture; a biopsy sample displaying histopathologic features of NTM infection (e.g., granuloma or a positive stain for acid-fast bacilli) along with one positive sputum culture; or a pleural fluid sample (or a sample from another sterile extrapulmonary site) positive on culture. MAC strains are the most common NTM pathogens, and the recommended regimen for HIV-negative patients includes a macrolide combined with rifampin and ethambutol. Consensus guidelines also recommend macrolide susceptibility testing for clinically significant MAC isolates.
# Chunk 4172
After resolution of an acute infection in patients with recurrences (e.g., ≥3 episodes per year), the use of suppressive antibiotics to minimize the microbial load and reduce the frequency of exacerbations has been proposed, although there is less consensus with regard to this approach in non-CF-associated bronchiectasis than in patients with CF-related bronchiectasis. Possible suppressive treatments include (1) administration of an oral antibiotic (e.g., ciprofloxacin) daily for 1–2 weeks per month; (2) use of a rotating schedule of oral antibiotics (to minimize the risk of development of drug resistance); (3) administration of a macrolide antibiotic (see below) daily or three times per week (with mechanisms of possible benefit related to non-antimicrobial properties, such as anti-inflammatory effects and reduction of gram-negative bacillary biofilms); (4) inhalation of aerosolized antibiotics (e.g., tobramycin inhalation solution) by select patients on a rotating schedule (e.g., 30 days on, 30 days off ), with the goal of decreasing the microbial load without eliciting the side effects of systemic drug administration; and (5) intermittent administration of IV antibiotics (e.g., “clean-outs”) for patients with more severe bronchiectasis and/or resistant pathogens. In relation to macrolide therapy (point 3 above), a number of double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized trials have recently been published in non-CF bronchiectasis and support a benefit of long-term macrolides (6–12 months of azithromycin or erythromycin) in decreasing rates of bronchiectasis exacerbation, mucus production, and decline in lung function. However, two of these studies also reported increased macrolide resistance in commensal pathogens, dampening enthusiasm for universal use of macrolides in this setting and raising the question of whether there might be select non-CF bronchiectasis patients with higher morbidity for whom benefits of long-term macrolides might outweigh the risks of emergence of antibiotic resistance. In particular, development of macrolide-resistant NTM is a significant concern, making treatment of that pathogen much more difficult. Therefore, it is advised to rule out NTM infection before chronic macrolide therapy is considered.
# Chunk 4173
Respiratory Manifestations The major morbidity and mortality associated with CF is attributable to respiratory compromise, characterized by copious hyperviscous and adherent pulmonary secretions that obstruct small and medium-sized airways. CF airway secretions are exceedingly difficult to clear, and a complex bacterial flora that includes Staphylococcus aureus, Haemophilus influenzae, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa (among other pathogens) is routinely cultured from CF sputum. Robust pulmonary inflammation in the setting of inspissated mucus and chronic bacterial infection leads to collateral tissue injury and further aggravates respiratory decline. Organisms such as P. aeruginosa exhibit a stereotypic mode of pathogenesis; a sentinel and early colonization event often engenders lifelong pulmonary infection by the same genetic strain. Over the course of many years,
# Chunk 4174
Pancreatic Findings The complete name of the disease, cystic fibrosis of the pancreas, refers to profound tissue destruction of the exocrine pancreas, with fibrotic scarring and/or fatty replacement, cyst proliferation, loss of acinar tissue, and ablation of normal pancreatic architecture. As in the lung, tenacious exocrine secretions (sometimes termed concretions) obstruct pancreatic ducts and impair production and flow of digestive enzymes to the duodenum. The sequelae of exocrine pancreatic insufficiency include chronic malabsorption, poor growth, fat-soluble vitamin insufficiency, high levels of serum immunoreactive trypsinogen (a diagnostic test used in newborn screening), and loss of pancreatic islet cell mass. CF-related diabetes mellitus is a manifestation in over 30% of adults with the disease and is likely multifactorial in nature (attributable to progressive destruction of the endocrine pancreas, insulin resistance due to stress hormones, and other factors).
# Chunk 4175
CFTR defects known to elicit disease are often categorized based on molecular mechanism. For example, the common F508del mutation (nomenclature denotes omission of a single phenylalanine residue [F] at CFTR position 508) leads to a folding abnormality recognized by cellular quality control pathways. CFTR encoding F508del retains partial ion channel function, but protein maturation is arrested in the endoplasmic reticulum, and CFTR fails to arrive at the plasma membrane. Instead, F508del CFTR is misrouted and undergoes endoplasmic reticulum–associated degradation via the proteasome. CFTR mutations that disrupt protein maturation are termed class II defects and are by far the most common genetic abnormalities. F508del alone accounts for ~70% of defective CFTR alleles in the United States, where 1698 approximately 90% of individuals with CF carry at least one F508del mutation.
# Chunk 4176
S. aureus has also been observed, although the clinical significance of this finding has not been fully elucidated. Typical inpatient antibiotic coverage includes combination drug therapy with an aminoglycoside and β-lactam for up to 14 days. Maximal improvement in lung function is often achieved by 8–10 days in this setting. Many families elect parenteral antibiotic treatment at home, and additional studies are needed to evaluate specific drug combinations, duration of therapy, and home versus inpatient management. Other CF respiratory sequelae that may require hospitalization include hemoptysis and pneumothorax. Hypersensitivity to Aspergillus (allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis) occurs in approximately 5% of individuals with the disease and should be suspected in the absence of a response to conventional treatment.
# Chunk 4177
Lung transplantation remains a viable therapeutic option in the setting of end-stage CF pulmonary failure, with 5-year postoperative survival rates on the order of 50–60%. Determining the optimal tim ing for surgery presents a substantial challenge, particularly because overall prognosis for individuals with severe lung disease is sometimes difficult to predict, and mortality associated with transplantation is significant (1-year survival rates of approximately 80%). Forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) measurements less than 30% predicted, together with an assortment of other clinical features, are often used as thresholds for entry onto transplantation lists, although waiting periods for healthy donor lungs can be quite protracted. Based on clinical outcome and limited access to healthy donor lungs, many CF patients and their families do not pursue this option.
# Chunk 4178
Specific treatment in the form of α1AT augmentation therapy is available for severe α1AT deficiency as a weekly IV infusion (see “Treatment,” below).
# Chunk 4179
The three most common symptoms in COPD are cough, sputum production, and exertional dyspnea. Many patients have such symptoms for months or years before seeking medical attention. Although the development of airflow obstruction is a gradual process, many patients date the onset of their disease to an acute illness or exacerbation. A careful history, however, usually reveals the presence of symptoms prior to the acute exacerbation. The development of exertional dyspnea, often described as increased effort to breathe, heaviness, air hunger, or gasping, can be insidious. It is best elicited by a careful history focused on typical physical activities and how the patient’s ability to perform them has changed. Activities involving significant arm work, particularly at or above shoulder level, are particularly difficult for patients with COPD. Conversely, activities that allow the patient to brace the arms and use accessory muscles of respiration are better tolerated. Examples of such activities include pushing a shopping cart or walking on a treadmill. As COPD advances, the principal feature is worsening dyspnea on exertion with increasing intrusion on the ability to perform vocational or avocational activities. In the most advanced stages, patients are breathless doing simple activities of daily living.
# Chunk 4180
III Severe FEV1/FVC <0.7 and FEV1 ≥30% but <50% predicted

IV Very severe FEV1/FVC <0.7 and FEV1 <30% predicted
# Chunk 4181
Antibiotics As outlined below, there are strong data implicating bacterial infection as a precipitant of a substantial portion of exacerbations. Early trials of prophylactic or suppressive antibiotics, given either seasonally or year round, failed to show a positive impact on exacerbation occurrence. More recently, a randomized clinical trial of azithromycin, chosen for both its anti-inflammatory and antimicrobial properties, administered daily to subjects with a history of exacerbation in the past 6 months demonstrated a reduced exacerbation frequency and longer time to first exacerbation in the macrolide-treated cohort (hazard ratio, 0.73).
# Chunk 4182
Oxygen Supplemental O2 is the only pharmacologic therapy demonstrated to unequivocally decrease mortality rates in patients with COPD. For patients with resting hypoxemia (resting O2 saturation ≤88% or <90% with signs of pulmonary hypertension or right heart failure), the use of O2 has been demonstrated to have a significant impact on mortality rate. Patients meeting these criteria should be on continual oxygen supplementation because the mortality benefit is proportional to the number of hours per day oxygen is used. Various delivery systems are available, including portable systems that patients may carry to allow mobility outside the home.
# Chunk 4183
Pulmonary Rehabilitation This refers to a treatment program that incorporates education and cardiovascular conditioning. In COPD, pulmonary rehabilitation has been demonstrated to improve health-related quality of life, dyspnea, and exercise capacity. It has also been shown to reduce rates of hospitalization over a 6to 12-month period.
# Chunk 4184
Exacerbations are a prominent feature of the natural history of COPD. Exacerbations are episodes of increased dyspnea and cough and change in the amount and character of sputum. They may or may not be accompanied by other signs of illness, including fever, myalgias, and sore throat. Self-reported health-related quality of life correlates with frequency of exacerbations more closely than it does with the degree of airflow obstruction. Economic analyses have shown that >70% of COPD-related health care expenditures go to emergency department visits and hospital care; this translates to >$10 billion annually in the United States. The frequency of exacerbations increases as airflow obstruction increases; patients with moderate to severe airflow obstruction (GOLD stage III or IV; Table 314-1) on average have one to three episodes per year. However, some individuals with very severe airflow obstruction do not have frequent exacerbations; the history of prior exacerbations is a strong predictor of future exacerbations. Recently, an elevated ratio of the diameter of the pulmonary artery to aorta on chest CT has been associated with increased risk of COPD exacerbations.
# Chunk 4185
The role of pharmacotherapy in reducing exacerbation frequency is less well studied. Chronic oral glucocorticoids are not recommended for this purpose. Inhaled glucocorticoids reduce the frequency of exacerbations by 25–30% in most analyses. The use of inhaled glucocorticoids should be considered in patients with frequent exacerbations or those who have an asthmatic component, i.e., significant reversibility on pulmonary function testing or marked symptomatic improvement after inhaled bronchodilators. Similar magnitudes of reduction have been reported for anticholinergic and long-acting β-agonist therapy. The influenza vaccine has been shown to reduce exacerbation rates in patients with COPD. As outlined above, daily azithromycin administered to subjects with COPD and an exacerbation history reduces exacerbation frequency.
# Chunk 4186
Patient Assessment An attempt should be made to establish the severity of the exacerbation as well as the severity of preexisting COPD. The more severe either of these two components, the more likely that the patient will require hospital admission. The history should include quantification of the degree of dyspnea by asking about breathlessness during activities of daily living and typical activities for the patient. The patient should be asked about fever; change in character of sputum; any ill contacts; and associated symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, myalgias, and chills. Inquiring about the frequency and severity of prior exacerbations can provide important information.
# Chunk 4187
The physical examination should incorporate an assessment of the degree of distress of the patient. Specific attention should be focused on tachycardia, tachypnea, use of accessory muscles, signs of perioral or peripheral cyanosis, the ability to speak in complete sentences, and the patient’s mental status. The chest examination should establish the presence or absence of focal findings, degree of air movement, presence or absence of wheezing, asymmetry in the chest examination (suggesting large airway obstruction or pneumothorax mimicking an exacerbation), and the presence or absence of paradoxical motion of the abdominal wall.
# Chunk 4188
Glucocorticoids Among patients admitted to the hospital, the use of glucocorticoids has been demonstrated to reduce the length of stay, hasten recovery, and reduce the chance of subsequent exacerbation or relapse for a period of up to 6 months. One study demonstrated that 2 weeks of glucocorticoid therapy produced benefit indistinguishable from 8 weeks of therapy. The GOLD guidelines recommend 30–40 mg of oral prednisolone or its equivalent for a period of 10–14 days. Hyperglycemia, particularly in patients with preexisting diagnosis of diabetes, is the most frequently reported acute complication of glucocorticoid treatment.
# Chunk 4189
The optimal dose and proper length of therapy with glucocorticoids in the treatment of most ILDs are not known. A common starting dose is prednisone, 0.5–1 mg/kg in a once-daily oral dose 1711 (based on the patient’s lean body weight). This dose is continued for 4–12 weeks, at which time the patient is reevaluated. If the patient is stable or improved, the dose is tapered to 0.25–0.5 mg/kg and is maintained at this level for an additional 4–12 weeks, depending on the course. Rapid tapering or a shortened course of glucocorticoid treatment can result in recurrence. If the patient’s condition continues to decline on glucocorticoids, a second agent (see below) often is added and the prednisone dose is lowered to or maintained at 0.25 mg/kg per day.
# Chunk 4190
Clinical Manifestations Exertional dyspnea, a nonproductive cough, and inspiratory crackles with or without digital clubbing may be present on physical examination. HRCT lung scans typically show patchy, predominantly basilar, subpleural reticular opacities, often associated with traction bronchiectasis and honeycombing (Fig. 315-2). A definite UIP pattern on HRCT is highly accurate for the presence of a UIP pattern on surgical lung biopsy. Atypical findings that should suggest an alternative diagnosis include extensive ground-glass abnormality, nodular opacities, upper or midzone predominance, and prominent hilar or mediastinal lymphadenopathy. Pulmonary function tests often reveal a restrictive pattern, a reduced DlCO, and arterial hypoxemia that is exaggerated or elicited by exercise.
# Chunk 4191
ACUTE INTERSTITIAL PNEUMONIA (HAMMAN-RICH SYNDROME) Clinical Manifestations AIP is a rare, fulminant form of lung injury characterized histologically by diffuse alveolar damage on lung biopsy. Most patients are older than 40 years. AIP is similar in presentation to the acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) (Chap. 322) and probably corresponds to the subset of cases of idiopathic ARDS. The onset is usually abrupt in a previously healthy individual. A prodromal illness, usually lasting 7–14 days before presentation, is common. Fever, cough, and dyspnea are common manifestations at presentation. Diffuse, bilateral, air-space opacification is present on the chest radiograph. HRCT scans show bilateral, patchy, symmetric areas of ground-glass attenuation. Bilateral areas of air-space consolidation also may be present. A predominantly subpleural distribution may be seen.
# Chunk 4192
TREATMENT Clinical recognition of DIP is important because the process is associated with a better prognosis (10-year survival rate is ~70%) in response to smoking cessation. There are no clear data showing that systemic glucocorticoids are effective in DIP.
# Chunk 4193
The typical age of presentation is 30–50 years, and males predominate. The clinical presentation is usually insidious and is manifested by progressive exertional dyspnea, fatigue, weight loss, and low-grade fever. A nonproductive cough is common, but occasionally expectoration of “chunky” gelatinous material may occur. Polycythemia, hypergammaglobulinemia, and increased LDH levels are common. Markedly elevated serum levels of lung surfactant proteins A and D have been found in PAP. In the absence of any known secondary cause of PAP, an elevated serum anti-GM-CSF titer is highly sensitive and specific for the diagnosis of acquired PAP. BAL fluid levels of anti-GM-CSF antibodies correlate better with the severity of PAP than do serum titers. Radiographically, bilateral symmetric alveolar opacities located centrally in middle and lower lung zones result in a “bat-wing” distribution. HRCT shows a ground-glass opacification and thickened intralobular structures and interlobular septa.
# Chunk 4194
PULMONARY LYMPHANGIOLEIOMYOMATOSIS Clinical Manifestations Pulmonary LAM is a rare condition that afflicts premenopausal women and should be suspected in young women with “emphysema,” recurrent pneumothorax, or chylous pleural effusion. It is often misdiagnosed as asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Whites are affected much more commonly than are members of other racial groups. The disease accelerates during pregnancy and abates after oophorectomy. Common complaints at presentation are dyspnea, cough, and chest pain. Hemoptysis may be life threatening. Spontaneous pneumothorax occurs in 50% of patients; it may be bilateral and necessitate pleurodesis. Meningioma and renal angiomyolipomas (hamartomas), characteristic findings in the genetic disorder tuberous sclerosis, are also common in patients with LAM. Chylothorax, chyloperitoneum (chylous ascites), chyluria, and chylopericardium are other complications. Pulmonary function testing usually reveals an obstructive or mixed obstructive-restrictive pattern, and gas exchange is often abnormal. HRCT shows thin-walled cysts surrounded by normal lung without zonal predominance.
# Chunk 4195
SYNDROMES OF ILD WITH DIFFUSE ALVEOLAR HEMORRHAGE Clinical Manifestations The clinical onset is often abrupt, with cough, fever, and dyspnea. Severe respiratory distress requiring ventilatory support may be evident at initial presentation. Although hemoptysis is expected, it can be absent at the time of presentation in one-third of the cases. For patients without hemoptysis, new alveolar opacities, a falling hemoglobin level, and hemorrhagic BAL fluid point to the diagnosis. The chest radiograph is nonspecific and most commonly shows new patchy or diffuse alveolar opacities. Recurrent episodes of DAH may lead to pulmonary fibrosis, resulting in interstitial opacities on the chest radiograph. An elevated white blood cell count and falling hematocrit are common. Evidence for impaired renal function caused by focal segmental necrotizing glomerulonephritis, usually with crescent formation, also may be present. Varying degrees of hypoxemia may occur and are often severe enough to require ventilatory support. DlCO may be increased, resulting from the increased hemoglobin within the alveoli compartment.
# Chunk 4196
Treatment The mainstay of therapy for the DAH associated with sys-1715 temic vasculitis, CTD, Goodpasture syndrome, and isolated pulmonary capillaritis is IV methylprednisolone, 0.5–2 g daily in divided doses for up to 5 days, followed by a gradual tapering, and then maintenance on an oral preparation. Prompt initiation of therapy is important, particularly in the face of renal insufficiency, because early initiation of therapy has the best chance of preserving renal function. The decision to start other immunosuppressive therapy (cyclophosphamide or azathioprine) acutely depends on the severity of illness.
# Chunk 4197
Lymphomatoid Granulomatosis • CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS Pulmonary lymphomatoid granulomatosis generally presents predominantly in men between the ages of 30 and 50, although patients can be affected at any age. The effects of race and geography on disease incidence are not known, although a higher diagnosis rate is reported in Western countries. Although it may affect virtually any organ, it is most frequently characterized by pulmonary (>90%), skin, and central nervous system involvement. The most common presenting symptoms and signs include cough, fever, rash/nodules, malaise, weight loss, neurologic abnormalities, dyspnea, and chest pain.
# Chunk 4198
Perform diagnostic thoracentesis Measure pleural fluid protein and LDH Exudate Further diagnostic procedures Transudate Treat CHF, cirrhosis, nephrosis Measure PF glucose Obtain PF cytology Obtain differential cell count Culture, stain PF PF marker for TB Consider:Malignancy Bacterial infections Rheumatoid pleuritis Glucose < 60 mg/dL No diagnosis Consider pulmonary embolus (spiral CT or lung scan) Treat for PE Treat for TB PF marker for TB Observe Consider thoracoscopy or image-guided pleural biopsy Any of following met? PF/serum protein > 0.5 PF/serum LDH > 0.6 PF LDH > 2/3 upper normal serum limit Pleural effusion Yes No Yes Yes Yes No No No SYMPTOMS IMPROVING
# Chunk 4199
The diagnosis usually is made via cytology of the pleural fluid. If the initial cytologic examination is negative, thoracoscopy is the best next procedure if malignancy is strongly suspected. At the time of thoracoscopy, a procedure such as pleural abrasion should be performed to effect a pleurodesis. An alternative to thoracoscopy is CTor ultrasound-guided needle biopsy of pleural thickening or nodules. Patients with a malignant pleural effusion are treated symptomatically for the most part, since the presence of the effusion indicates disseminated disease and most malignancies associated with pleural effusion are not curable with chemotherapy. The only symptom that can be attributed to the effusion itself is dyspnea. If the patient’s lifestyle is compromised by dyspnea and if the dyspnea is relieved with a therapeutic thoracentesis, one of the following procedures should be considered: (1) insertion of a small indwelling catheter or (2) tube thoracostomy with the instillation of a sclerosing agent such as doxycycline (500 mg).
# Chunk 4200
Disorders of the Pleura 1718 Tuberculous Pleuritis (See also Chap. 202) In many parts of the world, the most common cause of an exudative pleural effusion is tuberculosis (TB), but tuberculous effusions are relatively uncommon in the United States. Tuberculous pleural effusions usually are associated with primary TB and are thought to be due primarily to a hypersensitivity reaction to tuberculous protein in the pleural space. Patients with tuberculous pleuritis present with fever, weight loss, dyspnea, and/or pleuritic chest pain. The pleural fluid is an exudate with predominantly small lymphocytes. The diagnosis is established by demonstrating high levels of TB markers in the pleural fluid (adenosine deaminase >40 IU/L or interferon γ >140 pg/mL). Alternatively, the diagnosis can be established by culture of the pleural fluid, needle biopsy of the pleura, or thoracoscopy. The recommended treatments of pleural and pulmonary TB are identical (Chap. 202).
# Chunk 4201
SignS anD SyMptoMS of hypoVentiLation

Dyspnea during activities of daily living neuromuscular disorders. As neuromuscular weakness progresses, the respiratory muscles, including the diaphragm, are placed at a mechanical disadvantage in the supine position due to the upward movement of the abdominal contents. New-onset orthopnea is frequently a sign of reduced respiratory muscle force generation. More commonly, however, extremity weakness or bulbar symptoms develop prior to sleep disturbance in neuromuscular diseases such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) or muscular dystrophy. Patients with respiratory drive disorders do not have symptoms distinguishable from other causes of chronic hypoventilation.
# Chunk 4202
Nocturnal noninvasive positive-pressure ventilation (NIPPV) has been used successfully in the treatment of hypoventilation and apneas, both central and obstructive, in patients with neuromuscular and chest wall disorders. Nocturnal NIPPV has been shown to improve daytime hypercapnia, prolong survival, and improve health-related quality of life when daytime hypercapnia is documented. ALS guidelines recommend consideration of nocturnal NIPPV if symptoms of hypoventilation exist and one of the following criteria is present: PaCO2 ≥45 mmHg; nocturnal oximetry demonstrates oxygen saturation ≤88% for 5 consecutive min; maximal inspiratory pressure <60 cmH2O; FVC <50% predicted; or sniff nasal pressure <40 cmH2O. However, at present, there is inconclusive evidence to support preemptive nocturnal NIPPV use in all patients with neuromuscular and chest wall disorders who demonstrate nocturnal but not daytime hypercapnia. Nevertheless, at some point, the institution of full-time ventilatory support with either pressure or volume-preset modes is required in progressive neuromuscular disorders. There is less evidence to direct the timing of this decision, but ventilatory failure requiring mechanical ventilation and chest infections related to ineffective cough are frequent triggers for the institution of full-time ventilatory support.
# Chunk 4203
The diagnosis of OHS requires body mass index (BMI) ≥30 kg/m2 and chronic daytime alveolar hypoventilation, defined as PaCO2 ≥45 mmHg at sea level in the absence of other known causes of hypercapnia. In almost 90% of cases, the sleep-disordered breathing is in the form of OSA. Several international studies in different populations confirm that the overall prevalence of OSA syndrome, defined by an apnea-hypopnea index (AHI) ≥5 and daytime sleepiness, is approximately 3–4% in middle-aged men and 2% in middle-aged women. Thus, the population at risk for the development of OHS continues to rise as the worldwide obesity epidemic persists. Although no population-based prevalence studies of OHS have been performed, some estimates suggest there may be as many as 500,000 individuals with OHS in the United States.
# Chunk 4204
Some, but not all, studies suggest that severe obesity (BMI >40 kg/ m2) and severe OSA (AHI >30 events per hour) are risk factors for the development of OHS. The pathogenesis of hypoventilation in these patients is the result of multiple physiologic variables and conditions including OSA, increased work of breathing, respiratory muscle impairment, ventilation-perfusion mismatching, and depressed central ventilatory responsiveness to hypoxemia and hypercapnia. These defects in central respiratory drive often improve with treatment, which suggests that decreased ventilatory responsiveness is a consequence rather than a primary cause of OHS. The treatment of OHS is similar to that for OSA: weight reduction and nocturnal NIPPV. There is evidence that weight loss alone lowers PaCO2 in patients with OHS. However, treatment with NIPPV should never be delayed while the patient attempts to lose weight. Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) improves daytime hypercapnia and hypoxemia in more than half of patients with OHS and concomitant OSA. Bilevel positive airway pressure should be reserved for patients not able to tolerate high levels of CPAP support or patients who remain hypoxemic despite resolution of obstructive respiratory events. NIPPV with bilevel positive airway pressure should be strongly considered if hypercapnia persists after several weeks of CPAP therapy with objectively proven adherence. Patients with OHS and no evidence of OSA are typically started on bilevel positive airway pressure, as are patients presenting with acute decompensated OHS. Finally, comorbid conditions that impair ventilation, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, should be aggressively treated in conjunction with coexisting OHS.
# Chunk 4205
AHI and the profile of oxygen saturation over the night (mean, nadir, time at low levels). Reports may also include the respira tory disturbance index, which includes the number of respiratory effort–related arousals in addition to the number of apneas plus hypopneas. In-laboratory PSG also quantifies sleep latency (time from “lights off ” to first sleep onset), sleep efficiency (percentage of • Apnea:
# Chunk 4206
A ≥30% reduction in airflow for at least 10 sec during sleep that is accompanied by either a ≥3% desaturation or an arousal (Fig. 319-2C) effort–related arousal (RERA): A partially obstructed breath that does not meet the criteria for hypopnea but provides evidence of increasing inspiratory effort (usually through pleural pressure monitoring) punctuated by an arousal (Fig. 319-2D) breath: A partially obstructed breath, typically within a hypopnea or RERA, identified by a flattened or “scooped-out” inspiratory flow shape (Fig. 319-3) oBStruCtiVe SLeep apnea/hypopnea SynDroMe (oSahS): QuantifiCation anD SeVerity SCaLe • Apnea-hypopnea index (AHI):a Number of apneas plus hypopneas per hour • Respiratory disturbance index (RDI): Number of apneas plus hypopneas plus
# Chunk 4207
t. flow snore flown. p. flow t. flowchest n. p. flow abdomen

FIGURE 319-2 A. Obstructive apnea. There are 30 sec of no airflow, as shown in the nasal pressure (n. p. flow) and thermistor-measured flow (t. flow). Note the presence of chest-abdomen motion, indicating respiratory effort against an occluded airway. B. Central apnea in a patient with Cheyne-Stokes respiration due to congestive heart failure. The flat chest-abdomen tracings indicate the absence of inspiratory effort during the central apneas. C. Hypopnea. Partial obstruction of the pharyngeal airway can limit ventilation, leading to desaturation (a mild decrease in this patient, from 93% to 90%) and arousal. D. Respiratory effort–related arousal (RERA). Minimal flow reduction terminated by an arousal (Ar) without desaturation constitutes a RERA. EEG, electroencephalogram; EOG, electro-oculogram; EKG, electrocardiogram.
# Chunk 4208
Oral appliances for OSAHS work by advancing the mandible, thus opening the airway by repositioning the lower jaw and pulling the tongue forward. These devices generally work better when customized for patient use; maximal adaptation can take several weeks. Efficacy studies show that these devices can reduce the AHI by γ50% in two-thirds of individuals, although these data are based largely on patients with mild OSAHS. Side effects of oral appliances include temporomandibular joint pain and tooth movement. Oral appliances are most often used for treating patients with mild OSAHS or patients who do not tolerate CPAP. However, since adherence to the use of oral appliances sometimes exceeds CPAP adherence, these devices are under investigation for treatment of more severe disease.
# Chunk 4209
Standard exclusions include HIV infection, chronic active hepatitis B or C infection, uncontrolled or untreatable pulmonary or extrapulmonary infection, uncured malignancy, active cigarette smoking, drug or alcohol dependency, irreversible physical deconditioning, chronic nonadherence with medical care, significant disease of another vital organ (e.g., heart, liver, or kidney), and psychiatric or psychosocial situations that could substantially interfere with post-transplantation management. Other problems that may compromise outcome constitute relative contraindications. Some typical issues are ventilator-dependent respiratory failure, previous thoracic surgical procedures, obesity, and coronary artery disease. Chronic infection with antibiotic-resistant Pseudomonas species, Burkholderia species, Aspergillus species, or nontuberculous mycobacteria is a unique concern in some patients with CF. The potential impact of these and other factors must be judged in the clinical context to determine an individual candidate’s suitability for transplantation.
# Chunk 4210
Referral FEV1 <30% or rapidly declining FEV1 Hospitalization in ICU for exacerbation Increasing frequency of exacerbations Refractory or recurrent pneumothorax Recurrent hemoptysis not controlled by bronchial artery embolization
# Chunk 4211
Any of the following criteria: DLCO <39% Decrement in FVC ≥10% during 6 months of follow-up Decrease in SpO2 to <88% during a 6-min walk test Honeycombing on HRCT (fibrosis score >2)
# Chunk 4212
Abbreviations: BODE, body mass index (B), airflow obstruction (O), dyspnea (D), exercise capacity (E); DLCO, diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide; FEV1, forced expiratory volume in 1 s; FVC, forced vital capacity; HRCT, high-resolution computed tomography; ICU, intensive care unit; NYHA, New York Heart Association; PaCO2, partial pressure of carbon dioxide in arterial blood; SpO2, arterial oxygen saturation by pulse oximetry; UIP, usual interstitial pneumonitis.
# Chunk 4213
Either bilateral or single-lung transplantation is an option for other diseases unless there is a special consideration, but bilateral transplantation has been utilized increasingly for most indications. Recently, ~65% of procedures in the United States have been bilateral, and ~70% of transplants for COPD, ~55% of those for IPF, and ~95% of those for IPAH in the international registry have been bilateral.
# Chunk 4214
OUTCOMES Survival Major registries publish survival rates (Table 320e-2) and other outcomes annually (www.ishlt.org; www.srtr.org). In the international registry, the survival half-life for recipients with IPF is 4.4 years; IPAH, 5 years; COPD, 5.3 years; and CF, 7.5 years. However, age and transplantation procedure have a significant impact on outcome. For recipients 18–59 years of age, the survival half-life is 5–6 years, but this figure decreases to 4.4 years among patients 60–65 years old and to 3.6 years for those >65 years old. Survival rates at >15 years have been significantly higher after bilateral transplantation than after unilateral transplantation for COPD, α1-antitrypsin deficiency emphysema, IPF, and IPAH.
# Chunk 4215
The severity is variable, and a standardized grading system has been established. Up to 50% of lung transplant recipients may have some degree of PGD, and ~10–20% have severe PGD. The treatment follows the conventional supportive paradigm for acute lung injury. Inhalation of nitric oxide and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation have been used in severe cases; retransplantation has also been performed, but when undertaken in the first 30 days this procedure is associated with a poor survival rate (~30% at 1 year). Most recipients with mild PGD recover, but the mortality rate for severe PGD has been ~40–60%. PGD is also associated with longer postoperative ventilator support, longer intensive care unit and hospital stays, higher costs, and excess morbidity, and severe PGD is a risk factor for the later development of chronic rejection (see below).
# Chunk 4216
The prevalence of BOS approaches 50% by 5 years after transplantation. Antecedent ACR is the main risk factor, but PGD, CMV pneumonitis, other community-acquired respiratory viral infections, and gastroesophageal reflux have been implicated as well. BOS can present acutely and imitate infectious bronchitis, or it can manifest as an insidious decline in lung function. The chest radiograph is typically unchanged; CT may reveal mosaic perfusion, air trapping, ground-glass opacities, or bronchiolectasis. Bronchoscopy is indicated to rule out other processes, but transbronchial biopsies identify bronchiolitis obliterans in a minority of cases.
# Chunk 4217
Bacterial bronchitis or pneumonia can occur at any time but is very common in the perioperative period. Later, bronchitis occurs frequently in recipients with BOS, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa or methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus is often the culprit.
# Chunk 4218
CMV is the most common cause of viral infection. Although gastroenteritis, colitis, and hepatitis can occur, CMV viremia and CMV pneumonia are the main illnesses. Most episodes occur in the first 6 months, and treatment with ganciclovir is effective unless resistance develops. Other community-acquired viruses, such as influenza, parainfluenza, and respiratory syncytial viruses, also contribute to respiratory complications. The most problematic fungal infections are caused by Aspergillus species. The spectrum encompasses simple pulmonary colonization, tracheobronchitis, invasive pulmonary aspergillosis, and disseminated aspergillosis, and the clinical scenario dictates treatment.
# Chunk 4219
Approach to the Patient with Critical Illness John P. Kress, Jesse B. Hall The care of critically ill patients requires a thorough understanding of pathophysiology and centers initially on the resuscitation of patients at the extremes of physiologic deterioration. This resuscitation is often fast-paced and occurs early, without a detailed awareness of the patient’s chronic medical problems. While physiologic stabilization is taking place, intensivists attempt to gather important background med-ical information to supplement the real-time assessment of the patient’s current physiologic conditions. Numerous tools are available to assist intensivists in the accurate assessment of pathophysiology and manage-ment of incipient organ failure, offering a window of opportunity for diagnosing and treating underlying disease(s) in a stabilized patient. Indeed, the use of invasive interventions such as mechanical ventilation and renal replacement therapy is commonplace in the intensive care unit (ICU). An appreciation of the risks and benefits of such aggressive and often invasive interventions is vital to ensure an optimal outcome. Nonetheless, intensivists must recognize when a patient’s chances for recovery are remote or nonexistent and must counsel and comfort dying patients and their significant others. Critical care physicians often must redirect the goals of care from resuscitation and cure to comfort when the resolution of an underlying illness is not possible. ASSESSMENT OF ILLNESS SEVERITY 321 SEC TIon 1 RESPIRAToRy CRITICAl CARE
# Chunk 4220
See also Chap. 324.

Shock, a common condition necessitating ICU admission or occurring in the course of critical care, is defined by the presence of multisystem end-organ hypoperfusion. Clinical indicators include reduced mean arterial pressure (MAP), tachycardia, tachypnea, cool skin and extremities, acute altered mental status, and oliguria. Hypotension is usually, though not always, present. The end result of multiorgan hypoperfusion is tissue hypoxia, often with accompanying lactic acidosis. Since the MAP is the product of cardiac output and systemic vascular resistance (SVR), reductions in blood pressure can be caused by decreases in cardiac output and/or SVR. Accordingly, once shock is contemplated, the initial evaluation of a hypotensive patient should include an early bedside assessment of the adequacy of cardiac output (Fig. 321-2). Clinical evidence of diminished cardiac output includes a narrow pulse pressure—a marker that correlates with stroke volume— and cool extremities with delayed capillary refill. Signs of increased cardiac output include a widened pulse pressure (particularly with a reduced diastolic pressure), warm extremities with bounding pulses, and rapid capillary refill. If a hypotensive patient has clinical signs of increased cardiac output, it can be inferred that the reduced blood pressure is from decreased SVR.
# Chunk 4221
TYPE I: ACUTE HYPOXEMIC RESPIRATORY FAILURE

This type of respiratory failure occurs with alveolar flooding and subsequent intrapulmonary shunt physiology. Alveolar flooding may be a consequence of pulmonary edema, pneumonia, or alveolar hemorrhage. Pulmonary edema can be further categorized as occurring due to elevated pulmonary microvascular pressures, as seen in heart failure and intravascular volume overload or ARDS (“low-pressure pulmonary edema,” Chap. 322). This syndrome is defined by acute onset (≤1 week) of bilateral opacities on chest imaging that are not fully explained by cardiac failure or fluid overload and of shunt physiology requiring positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP). Type I respiratory failure occurs in clinical settings such as sepsis, gastric aspiration, pneumonia, near-drowning, multiple blood transfusions, and pancreatitis. The mortality rate among patients with ARDS was traditionally very high (50–70%), although changes in patient care have led to mortality rates closer to 30% (see below).
# Chunk 4222
(See also Chap. 323) Whereas a thorough understanding of the pathophysiology of respiratory failure is essential for optimal patient care, recognition of a patient’s readiness to be liberated from mechanical ventilation is likewise important. Several studies have shown that daily spontaneous breathing trials can identify patients who are ready for extubation. Accordingly, all intubated, mechanically ventilated patients should undergo daily screening of respiratory function. If oxygenation is stable (i.e., PaO2/FIO2 [partial pressure of oxygen/fraction of inspired oxygen] >200 and PEEP ≤5 cmH2O), cough and airway reflexes are intact, and no vasopressor agents or sedatives are being administered, the patient has passed the screening test and should undergo a spontaneous breathing trial. This trial consists of a period of breathing through the endotracheal tube without ventilator support (both continuous positive airway pressure [CPAP] of 5 cmH2O and an open T-piece breathing system can be used) for 30–120 min. The spontaneous breathing trial is declared a failure and stopped if any of the following occur: (1) respiratory rate >35/min for >5 min, (2) O2 saturation <90%, (3) heart rate >140/min or a 20% increase or decrease from baseline, (4) systolic blood pressure <90 mmHg or >180 mmHg, or (5) increased anxiety or diaphoresis. If, at the end of the spontaneous breathing trial, none of the above events has occurred and the ratio of the respiratory rate and tidal volume in liters (f/VT) is <105, the patient can be extubated. Such protocol-driven approaches to patient care can have an important impact on the duration of mechanical ventilation and ICU stay. In spite of such a careful approach to liberation from mechanical ventilation, up to 10% of patients develop respiratory distress after extubation and may require resumption of mechanical ventilation. Many of these patients will require reintubation. The use
# Chunk 4223
Pressure, cmH2O ensured, additional indications for sedation include anxiolysis; treat-

FIGURE 321-5 Pressure-volume relationship in the lungs of a ment of subjective dyspnea; psychosis; facilitation of nursing care; patient with acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). At reduction of autonomic hyperactivity, which may precipitate myocarthe lower inflection point, collapsed alveoli begin to open and lung dial ischemia; and reduction of total O2 consumption (VO2). compliance changes. At the upper deflection point, alveoli become Neuromuscular blocking agents are occasionally needed to facilitate overdistended. The shape and size of alveoli are illustrated at the top mechanical ventilation in patients with profound ventilator dyssynof the figure. chrony despite optimal sedation, particularly in the setting of severe ARDS. Use of these agents may result in prolonged weakness—a myopathy known as the postparalytic syndrome. For this reason, neuromuscular blocking agents typically are used as a last resort when aggressive sedation fails to achieve patient-ventilator synchrony. Because neuromuscular blocking agents result in pharmacologic paralysis without altering mental status, sedative-induced amnesia is mandatory when these agents are administered.
# Chunk 4224
Amnesia can be achieved reliably with benzodiazepines such as lorazepam and midazolam as well as the the IV anesthetic agent propofol. Outside the setting of pharmacologic paralysis, few data support the idea that amnesia is mandatory in all patients who require intubation and mechanical ventilation. Since many of these critically patients have impaired hepatic and renal function, sedatives and opiates may accumulate when given for prolonged periods. A nursing protocol– driven approach to sedation of mechanically ventilated patients or daily interruption of sedative infusions paired with daily spontaneous breathing trials has been shown to prevent excessive drug accumulation and shorten the duration of both mechanical ventilation and ICU stay.
# Chunk 4225
Studies have shown that most ICU patients are anemic as a result of chronic inflammation. Phlebotomy also contributes to ICU anemia. A large multicenter study involving patients in many different ICU settings challenged the conventional notion that a hemoglobin level of 100 g/L (10 g/dL) is needed in critically ill patients, with similar outcomes noted in those whose transfusion trigger was 7 g/dL. Red blood cell transfusion is associated with impairment of immune function and increased risk of infections as well as of ARDS and volume overload, all of which may explain the findings in this study. Recently, a conservative transfusion strategy enhanced survival among patients with active upper gastrointestinal hemorrhage.
# Chunk 4226
(See also Chaps. 34 and 328) This state is defined by (1) an acute onset of changes or fluctuations in mental status, (2) inattention, (3) disorganized thinking, and (4) an altered level of consciousness (i.e., a state other than alertness). Delirium is reported to occur in a wide range of mechanically ventilated ICU patients and can be detected by the Confusion Assessment Method (CAM)-ICU or the Intensive Care Delirium Screening Checklist. These tools are used to ask patients to answer simple questions and perform simple tasks and can be used readily at the bedside. The differential diagnosis of delirium in ICU patients is broad and includes infectious etiologies (including sepsis), medications (particularly sedatives and analgesics), drug withdrawal, metabolic/electrolyte derangements, intracranial pathology (e.g., stroke, intracranial hemorrhage), seizures, hypoxia, hypertensive crisis, shock, and vitamin deficiencies (particularly thiamine). Patients with ICU delirium have increases in length of hospital stay, time on mechanical ventilation, cognitive impairment at hospital discharge, and 6-month mortality rate. Interventions to reduce ICU delirium are limited. The sedative dexmedetomidine has been less strongly associated with ICU delirium than midazolam. In addition, as mentioned above, very early physical and occupational therapy in mechanically ventilated patients has been demonstrated to reduce delirium.
# Chunk 4227
(See also Chap. 330) This condition is common after cardiac arrest and often results in severe and permanent brain injury in survivors. Active cooling of patients after cardiac arrest has been shown to improve neurologic outcomes. Therefore, patients who present to the ICU after circulatory arrest from ventricular fibrillation or pulseless ventricular tachycardia should be actively cooled to achieve a core body temperature of 32–34°C.
# Chunk 4228
Bruce D. Levy, Augustine M. K. Choi

Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) is a clinical syndrome of severe dyspnea of rapid onset, hypoxemia, and diffuse pulmonary infiltrates leading to respiratory failure. ARDS is caused by diffuse lung injury from many underlying medical and surgical disorders. The lung injury may be direct, as occurs in toxic inhalation, or indirect, as occurs in sepsis (Table 322-1). The clinical features of ARDS are listed in Table 322-2. By expert consensus, ARDS is defined by three categories based on the degrees of hypoxemia (Table 322-2). These stages of mild, moderate, and severe ARDS are associated with mortality risk and with the duration of mechanical ventilation in survivors.
# Chunk 4229
The exudative phase encompasses the first 7 days of illness after exposure to a precipitating ARDS risk factor, with the patient experiencing the onset of respiratory symptoms. Although usually presenting within 12–36 h after the initial insult, symptoms can be delayed by 5–7 days. Dyspnea develops, with a sensation of rapid shallow breathing
# Chunk 4230
Functional Recovery in ARDS Survivors While it is common for patients with ARDS to experience prolonged respiratory failure and remain dependent on mechanical ventilation for survival, it is a testament to the resolving powers of the lung that the majority of patients recover nearly normal lung function. Patients usually recover maximal lung function within 6 months. One year after endotracheal extubation, more than one-third of ARDS survivors have normal spirometry values and diffusion capacity. Most of the remaining patients have only mild abnormalities in pulmonary function. Unlike mortality risk, recovery of lung function is strongly associated with the extent of lung injury in early ARDS. Low static respiratory compliance, high levels of required PEEP, longer durations of mechanical ventilation, and high lung injury scores are all associated with less recovery of pulmonary function. Of note, when physical function is assessed 5 years after ARDS, exercise limitation and decreased physical quality of life are often documented despite normal or nearly normal pulmonary function. When caring for ARDS survivors, it is important to be aware of the potential for a substantial burden of psychological problems in patients and family caregivers, including significant rates of depression and posttraumatic stress disorder.
# Chunk 4231
The most common reasons for instituting mechanical ventilation are acute respiratory failure with hypoxemia (acute respiratory distress syndrome, heart failure with pulmonary edema, pneumonia, sepsis, complications of surgery and trauma), which accounts for ~65% of all ventilated cases, and hypercarbic ventilatory failure—e.g., due to coma (15%), exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD; 13%), and neuromuscular diseases (5%). The primary objectives of mechanical ventilation are to decrease the work of breathing, thus avoiding respiratory muscle fatigue, and to reverse life-threatening hypoxemia and progressive respiratory acidosis.
# Chunk 4232
Whichever mode of MV is used in acute respiratory failure, the evidence from several important controlled trials indicates that a protective ventilation approach guided by the following principles (and summarized in Fig. 323-1) is safe and offers the best chance of a good outcome: (1) Set a target tidal volume close to 6 mL/kg of ideal body weight. (2) Prevent plateau pressure (static pressure in the airway at the end of inspiration) exceeding 30 cm H2O. (3) Use the lowest possible fraction of inspired oxygen (Fio2) to keep the Sao2 at ≥90%. (4) Adjust the PEEP to maintain alveolar patency while preventing overdistention and closure/reopening. With the application of these techniques, the mortality rate among patients with acute hypoxemic respiratory failure has decreased to ~30% from close to 50% a decade ago.
# Chunk 4233
Patients for whom mechanical ventilation has been initiated usually require sedation and analgesia to maintain an acceptable level of comfort. Often, this treatment consists of a combination of a benzodiazepine and an opiate administered intravenously. Medications commonly used for this purpose include lorazepam, midazolam, diazepam, morphine, and fentanyl. Oversedation must be avoided in the ICU because most (but not all) studies show that daily interruption of sedation in patients with improved ventilatory status results in a shorter time on 1743 the ventilator and a shorter ICU stay.
# Chunk 4234
Endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation have direct and indirect effects on the lung and upper airways, the cardiovascular system, and the gastrointestinal system. Pulmonary complications include barotrauma, nosocomial pneumonia, oxygen toxicity, tracheal stenosis, and deconditioning of respiratory muscles. Barotrauma and volutrauma overdistend and disrupt lung tissue; may be clinically manifest by interstitial emphysema, pneumomediastinum, subcutaneous emphysema, or pneumothorax; and can result in the liberation of cytokines from overdistended tissues, further promoting tissue injury. Clinically significant pneumothorax requires tube thoracostomy. Intubated patients are at high risk for ventilator-associated pneumonia as a result of aspiration from the upper airways through small leaks around the endotracheal tube cuff; the most common organisms responsible for this condition are Pseudomonas aeruginosa, enteric gram-negative rods, and Staphylococcus aureus. Given the high associated mortality rates, early initiation of empirical antibiotics directed against likely pathogens is recommended. Hypotension resulting from elevated intrathoracic pressures with decreased venous return is almost always responsive to intravascular volume repletion. In patients who are judged to have respiratory failure on the basis of alveolar edema but in whom the cardiac or pulmonary origin of the edema is unclear, hemodynamic monitoring with a pulmonary arterial catheter may be of value in helping to clarify the cause of the edema. Gastrointestinal effects of positive-pressure ventilation include stress ulceration and mild to moderate cholestasis.
# Chunk 4235
Critical Care Medicine Approach to the Patient with Shock Ronald V. Maier Shock is the clinical syndrome that results from inadequate tissue perfusion. Irrespective of cause, the hypoperfusion-induced imbal-ance between the delivery of and requirements for oxygen and substrate leads to cellular dysfunction. The cellular injury created by the inadequate delivery of oxygen and substrates also induces the production and release of damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs or “danger signals”) and inflammatory mediators that further compromise perfusion through functional and structural changes within the microvasculature. This leads to a vicious cycle in which impaired perfusion is responsible for cellular injury that causes maldistribution of blood flow, further compromising cellular perfusion; the latter ultimately causes multiple organ failure (MOF) and, if the process is not interrupted, leads to death. The clinical manifestations of shock are also the result, in part, of autonomic neuroendocrine responses to hypoperfusion as well as the break-down in organ function induced by severe cellular dysfunction (Fig. 324-1). When very severe and/or persistent, inadequate oxygen delivery leads to irreversible cell injury, only rapid restoration of oxygen 324 SEC TIon 2 SHoCK And CARdIAC ARREST delivery can reverse the progression of the shock state. The funda- 1744 Daily wean screen (resolving disease, adequate gas exchange, stable hemodynamics, spontaneous breathing ability) Pass Assess for extubation Fail NoYes SBT Pass Fail Continue MV Treat reversible elements Repeat daily screen Extubate Consider tracheostomy secretions, and is alert enough to follow commands. In addition, other factors must be taken into account, such as the possible difficulty of replacing the tube if that maneuver is required. If upper airway difficulty is suspected, an evaluation using a “cuff-leak” test (assessing the presence of air movement around a deflated endotracheal tube cuff) is supported by some internists. Despite all precautions, ~10–15% of extubated patients require reintubation. Several studies suggest that NIV can be used to obviate reintubation, particularly in patients with ventilatory failure secondary to COPD exacerbation; in this setting, earlier extubation with the use of prophylactic NIV has yielded good results. The use of NIV to facilitate weaning in respiratory failure of other etiologies is not currently indicated.
# Chunk 4236
Prolonged Mechanical Ventilation and Tracheostomy From 5% to 13% of patients undergoing MV will go on to require prolonged MV (>21 days). In these instances, critical care personnel must decide whether and when to perform a tracheostomy. This decision is individualized and is based on the risk and benefits of tracheostomy and prolonged intubation as well as the patient’s preferences and expected outcomes. A tracheostomy is thought to be more comfortable, to require less sedation, and to provide a more secure airway and may also reduce weaning time. However, tracheostomy carries the risk of complications, which occur in 5–40% of these procedures and include bleeding, cardiopulmonary arrest, hypoxia, structural damage, pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum, and wound infection. In patients with long-term tracheostomy, complex complications include tracheal stenosis, granulation, and erosion of the innominate artery. In general, if a patient needs MV for more than 10–14 days, a tracheostomy, planned under optimal conditions, is indicated. Whether it is completed at the bedside or as an operative procedure depends on local resources and experience. Some 5–10% of patients are deemed unable to wean in the ICU. These patients may benefit from transfer to special units where a multidisciplinary approach, including nutrition optimization, physical therapy with rehabilitation, and slower weaning methods (including SIMV with PSV), results in successful weaning rates of up to 30%. Unfortunately, close to 2% of ventilated patients may ultimately become dependent on ventilatory support to maintain life. Most of these patients remain in chronic care institutions, although some with strong social, economic, and family support may live a relatively fulfilling life with at-home ventilation.
# Chunk 4237
Approach to the Patient with Shock 1746 volume by enhancing renal tubular reabsorption of sodium, resulting in the excretion of a low-volume, concentrated, sodium-free urine. Vasopressin has a direct action on vascular smooth muscle, contributing to vasoconstriction, and acts on the distal renal tubules to enhance water reabsorption.
# Chunk 4238
Patients in shock require care in an intensive care unit (ICU). Careful and continuous assessment of the physiologic status is necessary. Arterial pressure through an indwelling line, pulse, and respiratory rate should be monitored continuously; a Foley catheter should be inserted to follow urine flow; and mental status should be assessed frequently. Sedated patients should be allowed to awaken (“drug holiday”) daily to assess their neurologic status and to shorten duration of ventilator support.
# Chunk 4239
Volume resuscitation is initiated with the rapid infusion of either isotonic saline (although care must be taken to avoid hyperchloremic acidosis from loss of bicarbonate buffering capacity and replacement with excess chloride) or a balanced salt solution such as Ringer’s lactate (being cognizant of the presence of potassium and potential renal dysfunction) through large-bore intravenous lines. Data, particularly on severe traumatic brain injury (TBI), regarding benefits of small volumes of hypertonic saline that more rapidly restore blood pressure are variable but tend to show improved survival thought to be linked to immunomodulation. No distinct benefit from the use of colloid has been demonstrated, and in trauma patients, it is associated with a higher mortality particularly in patients with TBI. The infusion of 2–3 L of salt solution over 20–30 min should restore normal hemodynamic parameters. Continued hemodynamic instability implies that shock has not been reversed and/or there are significant ongoing blood or other volume losses. Continuing acute blood loss with hemoglobin concentrations declining to ≤100 g/L (10 g/dL) should initiate blood transfusion preferably as fully cross-matched, recently banked (<14 days old) blood. Resuscitated patients are often coagulopathic due
# Chunk 4240
Approach to the Patient with Shock

Same, plus: Tachycardia Tachypnea Oliguria Postural

Same, plus: 1750 to deficient clotting factors in crystalloids and banked packed red blood cells (PRBCs). Early administration of component therapy during massive transfusion (fresh-frozen plasma [FFP] and platelets) approaching a 1:1 ratio of PRBC/FFP appears to improve survival. In extreme emergencies, type-specific or O-negative packed red cells may be transfused. Following severe and/or prolonged hypovolemia, inotropic support with norepinephrine, vasopressin, or dopamine may be required to maintain adequate ventricular performance but only after blood volume has been restored. Increases in peripheral vasoconstriction with inadequate resuscitation lead to tissue loss and organ failure. Once hemorrhage is controlled and the patient has stabilized, blood transfusions should not be continued unless the hemoglobin is <~7 g/dL. Studies have demonstrated an increased survival in patients treated with this restrictive blood transfusion protocol. Successful resuscitation also requires support of respiratory function. Supplemental oxygen should always be provided, and endotracheal intubation may be necessary to maintain arterial oxygenation. Following resuscitation from isolated hemorrhagic shock, end-organ damage is frequently less than following septic or traumatic shock. This may be due to the absence of massive activation of the inflammatory innate immune response and consequent nonspecific organ injury and failure.
# Chunk 4241
The systemic response to any class of microorganism can be harmful. Microbial invasion of the bloodstream is not essential because local inflammation can also elicit distant organ dysfunction and hypotension. In fact, blood cultures yield bacteria or fungi in only ~20–40% of cases of severe sepsis and 40–70% of cases of septic shock. In a prevalence study of 14,414 patients in intensive care units (ICUs) from 75 countries in 2007, 51% of patients were considered infected. Respiratory infection was most common (64%). Microbiologic results were positive in 70% of individuals considered infected; of the isolates, 62% were gram-negative bacteria (Pseudomonas species and Escherichia coli were most common), 47% were gram-positive bacteria (Staphylococcus aureus was most common), and 19% were fungi (Candida species). This distribution is similar to that reported a decade earlier from eight academic centers in the United States (Table 325-2). In patients whose blood cultures are negative, the etiologic agent is often established by culture or microscopic examination of infected material from a local site; specific identification of microbial DNA or RNA in blood or tissue samples is also used. In some case series, a majority of patients with a clinical picture of severe sepsis or septic shock have had negative microbiologic data.
# Chunk 4242
Gastrointestinal manifestations such as nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and ileus may suggest acute gastroenteritis. Stress ulceration can lead to upper gastrointestinal bleeding. Cholestatic jaundice, with elevated levels of serum bilirubin (mostly conjugated) and alkaline phosphatase, may precede other signs of sepsis. Hepatocellular or canalicular dysfunction appears to underlie most cases, and the results of hepatic function tests return to normal with resolution of the infection. Prolonged or severe hypotension may induce acute hepatic injury or ischemic bowel necrosis.
# Chunk 4243
MAJOR COMPLICATIONS Cardiopulmonary Complications Ventilation-perfusion mismatching produces a fall in arterial Po2 early in the course. Increasing alveolar epithelial injury and capillary permeability result in increased pulmonary water content, which decreases pulmonary compliance and interferes with oxygen exchange. In the absence of pneumonia or heart failure, progressive diffuse pulmonary infiltrates and arterial hypoxemia occurring within 1 week of a known insult indicate the development of mild acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) (200 mmHg < Pao2/Fio2 ≤ 300 mmHg), moderate ARDS (100 mmHg < Pao2/Fio2 ≤ 200 mmHg), or severe ARDS (Pao2/Fio2 ≤100 mmHg). Acute lung injury or ARDS develops in ~50% of patients with severe sepsis or septic shock. Respiratory muscle fatigue can exacerbate hypoxemia and hypercapnia. An elevated pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (>18 mmHg) suggests fluid volume overload or cardiac failure rather than ARDS. Pneumonia caused by viruses or by Pneumocystis may be clinically indistinguishable from ARDS.
# Chunk 4244
Coagulopathy Although thrombocytopenia occurs in 10–30% of patients, the underlying mechanisms are not understood. Platelet counts are usually very low (<50,000/μL) in patients with DIC; these low counts may reflect diffuse endothelial injury or microvascular thrombosis, yet thrombi have only infrequently been found on biopsy of septic organs.
# Chunk 4245
Abnormalities that occur early in the septic response may include leukocytosis with a left shift, thrombocytopenia, hyperbilirubinemia, and 1756 proteinuria. Leukopenia may develop. The neutrophils may contain toxic granulations, Döhle bodies, or cytoplasmic vacuoles. As the septic response becomes more severe, thrombocytopenia worsens (often with prolonged thrombin time, decreased fibrinogen, and the presence of d-dimers, suggesting DIC), azotemia and hyperbilirubinemia become more prominent, and levels of aminotransferases rise. Active hemolysis suggests clostridial bacteremia, malaria, a drug reaction, or DIC; in the case of DIC, microangiopathic changes may be seen on a blood smear. During early sepsis, hyperventilation induces respiratory alkalosis. With respiratory muscle fatigue and the accumulation of lactate, metabolic acidosis (with increased anion gap) typically supervenes. Evaluation of arterial blood gases reveals hypoxemia that is initially correctable with supplemental oxygen but whose later refractoriness to 100% oxygen inhalation indicates right-to-left shunting. The chest radiograph may be normal or may show evidence of underlying pneumonia, volume overload, or the diffuse infiltrates of ARDS. The electrocardiogram may show only sinus tachycardia or nonspecific ST–T wave abnormalities. Most diabetic patients with sepsis develop hyperglycemia. Severe infection may precipitate diabetic ketoacidosis that may exacerbate hypotension (Chap. 417). Hypoglycemia occurs rarely and may indicate adrenal insufficiency. The serum albumin level declines as sepsis continues. Hypocalcemia is rare.
# Chunk 4246
It is therefore very important to promptly initiate empirical antimicrobial therapy that is effective against both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria (Table 325-3). Maximal recommended doses of antimicrobial drugs should be given intravenously, with adjustment for impaired renal function when necessary. Available information about patterns of antimicrobial susceptibility among bacterial isolates from the community, the hospital, and the patient should be taken into account. When culture results become available, the regimen can often be simplified because a single antimicrobial agent is usually adequate for the treatment of a known pathogen. Meta-analyses have concluded that, with one exception, combination antimicrobial therapy is not superior to monotherapy for treating gram-negative bacteremia; the exception is that aminoglycoside monotherapy for P. aeruginosa bacteremia is less effective than the combination of an aminoglycoside with an antipseudomonal β-lactam agent. Empirical antifungal therapy should be strongly considered if the septic patient is already receiving broad-spectrum antibiotics or parenteral nutrition, has been neutropenic for ≥5 days, has had a long-term central venous catheter in place, or has been hospitalized in an ICU for a prolonged period. The chosen antimicrobial regimen should be reconsidered daily in order to provide maximal efficacy with minimal resistance, toxicity, and cost.
# Chunk 4247
Removal or drainage of a focal source of infection is essential. In one series, a focus of ongoing infection was found in ~80% of surgical ICU patients who died of severe sepsis or septic shock. Sites of occult infection should be sought carefully, particularly in the lungs, abdomen, and urinary tract. Indwelling IV or arterial catheters should be removed and the tip rolled over a blood agar plate for quantitative culture; after antibiotic therapy has been initiated, a new catheter should be inserted at a different site. Foley and drainage catheters should be replaced. The possibility of paranasal sinusitis (often caused by gram-negative bacteria) should be considered if the patient has undergone nasal intubation or has an indwelling nasogastric or feeding tube. Even in patients without abnormalities on chest radiographs, computed tomography (CT) of the chest may identify unsuspected parenchymal, mediastinal, or pleural disease. In the neutropenic patient, cutaneous sites of tenderness and erythema, particularly in the perianal region, must be carefully sought. In patients with sacral or ischial decubitus ulcers, it is important to exclude pelvic or other soft tissue pus collections with CT or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). In patients with severe sepsis arising from the urinary tract, sonography or CT should be used to rule out ureteral obstruction, perinephric abscess, and renal abscess. Sonographic or CT imaging of the upper abdomen may disclose
# Chunk 4248
Neutropenia (<500 neutrophils/μL) Regimens include (1) imipenemcilastatin (0.5 g q6h) or meropenem (1 g q8h) or cefepime (2 g q8h) or (2) piperacillin-tazobactam (3.375 g q4h) plus tobramycin (5–7 mg/kg q24h). Vancomycin (15 mg/kg q12h) should be added if the patient has an indwelling vascular catheter, has received quinolone prophylaxis, or has received intensive chemotherapy that produces mucosal damage; if staphylococci are suspected; if the institution has a high incidence of MRSA infections; or if there is a high prevalence of MRSA isolates in the community. Empirical antifungal therapy with an echinocandin (for caspofungin: a 70-mg loading dose, then 50 mg daily), voriconazole (6 mg/kg q12h for 2 doses, then 3 mg/ kg q12h), or a lipid formulation of amphotericin B should be added if the patient is hypotensive, has been receiving broad-spectrum antibacterial drugs, or remains febrile 5 days after initiation of empirical antibacterial therapy.
# Chunk 4249
Erythrocyte transfusion is generally recommended when the blood hemoglobin level decreases to ≤7 g/dL, with a target level of 9 g/dL in adults. Erythropoietin is not used to treat sepsis-related anemia. Bicarbonate is sometimes administered for severe metabolic acidosis (arterial pH <7.2), but there is little evidence that it improves either hemodynamics or the response to vasopressor hormones. DIC, if complicated by major bleeding, should be treated with transfusion of fresh-frozen plasma and platelets. Successful treatment of the underlying infection is essential to reverse both acidosis and DIC. Patients who are hypercatabolic and have acute renal failure may benefit greatly from intermittent hemodialysis or continuous veno-venous hemofiltration.
# Chunk 4250
Recombinant activated protein C (aPC) was the first immunomodulatory drug to be approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of patients with severe sepsis or septic shock. Approval was based on the results of a single randomized controlled trial in which the drug was given within 24 h of the patient’s first sepsis-related organ dysfunction; the 28-day survival rate was significantly higher among aPC recipients
# Chunk 4251
A careful retrospective analysis found that the apparent efficacy of all sepsis therapeutics studied to date has been greatest among the patients at greatest risk of dying before treatment; conversely, use of many of these drugs has been associated with increased mortality rates among patients who are less ill. It is possible that neutralizing one of many different mediators may help patients who are very sick, whereas disrupting the mediator balance may of severe sepsis. With modern therapy, fewer than 10% of previously healthy young individuals (below 35 years of age) die with severe sepsis; the case–fatality rate then increases slowly through middle and old age. The most commonly identified etiologic agents in patients who die are Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus pyogenes, Streptococcus pneumoniae, and Neisseria meningitidis. Individuals with preexisting comorbidities are at greater risk of dying of severe sepsis at any age. The etiologic agents in these cases are likely to be S. aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, various Enterobacteriaceae, enterococci, or fungi. (Adapted from DC Angus et al: Crit Care Med 29:1303, 2001.) both short-and long-term mortality. Cognitive impairment may be significant in survivors, particularly those who are elderly.
# Chunk 4252
Incidence The rate of CS complicating acute MI was 20% in the 1960s, stayed at ~8% for >20 years, but decreased to 5–7% in the first decade of this millennium largely due to increasing use of early reperfusion therapy for acute MI. Shock is more common with ST elevation MI (STEMI) than with non-ST elevation MI (Chap. 295).
# Chunk 4253
(See also Chap. 287) Myocarditis can mimic acute MI with ST deviation or bundle branch block on the ECG and marked elevation of cardiac markers. Acute myocarditis causes CS in a small proportion of cases. These patients are typically younger than those with CS due to acute MI and often do not have typical ischemic chest pain. Echocardiography usually shows global LV dysfunction. Initial management is the same as for CS complicating acute MI (Fig. 326-2) but does not involve coronary revascularization. Endomyocardial biopsy is recommended to determine the diagnosis and need for immunosuppressives for entities such as giant cell myocarditis. Refractory CS can be managed with assist devices with or without ECMO.
# Chunk 4254
The etiologies and pathophysiology of pulmonary edema are discussed in Chap. 47e.

Diagnosis Acute pulmonary edema usually presents with the rapid onset of dyspnea at rest, tachypnea, tachycardia, and severe hypoxemia. Crackles and wheezing due to alveolar flooding and airway compression from peribronchial cuffing may be audible. Release of endogenous catecholamines often causes hypertension.
# Chunk 4255
Morphine Given in 2to 4-mg IV boluses, morphine is a transient venodilator that reduces preload while relieving dyspnea and anxiety. These effects can diminish stress, catecholamine levels, tachycardia, and ventricular afterload in patients with pulmonary edema and systemic hypertension.
# Chunk 4256
In the past, the most common electrical mechanism for cardiac arrest was ventricular fibrillation (VF) or pulseless sustained ventricular tachycardia (PVT). These were the initial rhythms recorded in 60–80% of cardiac arrests, with VF being the far more common of the two. Severe persistent bradyarrhythmias, asystole, and pulseless electrical activity (PEA; organized electrical activity, unusually slow, without mechanical response, formerly called electromechanical dissociation [EMD]) caused another 20–30%. Currently, asystole has emerged as the most common mechanism recorded at initial contact (45–50% of cases). PEA accounts for 20–25%, and VF is now present on initial contact in 25–35%. Undoubtedly, a significant proportion of the asystole cases began as VF and deteriorated to asystole because of long response times, but there are data suggesting an absolute reduction in VF as well. Acute low cardiac output states, having a precipitous onset, also may present clinically as a cardiac arrest. These hemodynamic causes include massive acute pulmonary emboli, internal blood loss from a ruptured aortic aneurysm, intense anaphylaxis, and cardiac rupture with tamponade after myocardial infarction (MI).
# Chunk 4257
Cardiac disorders constitute the most common causes of sudden natural death. After an initial peak incidence of sudden death between birth and 6 months of age (sudden infant death syndrome [SIDS]), the incidence of sudden death declines sharply and remains low through childhood and adolescence. Among adolescents and young adults, the incidence of SCD is approximately 1 per 100,000 population per year. The incidence begins to increase in adults over age 30 years, reaching a second peak in the age range of 45–75 years, when it approximates 1–2 per 1000 per year among the unselected adult population. Increasing 1765TABlE 327-1 dISTInCTIon BETwEEn CARdIovASCulAR CollAPSE, CARdIAC ARREST, And dEATH
# Chunk 4258
C.

age within this range is associated with increasing risk for sudden cardiac death (Fig. 327-1A). From 1 to 13 years of age, only one of five sudden natural deaths is due to cardiac causes. Between 14 and 21 years of age, the proportion increases to 30%, and it rises to 88% in the middle-aged and elderly.
# Chunk 4259
Adolescents/ young adults [1 per 100,000] General population >35 years of age [1 per 500–1000] arteries and unstable coronary artery lesions, which include various permutations of eroded, fissured, or ruptured plaques; platelet aggregates; hemorrhage; and/or thrombosis. As many as 70–75% of males who die suddenly have preexisting healed MIs, whereas only 20–30% have recent acute MIs, despite the prevalence of unstable plaques and thrombi. The latter suggests transient ischemia as the mechanism of 0.001%/Year
# Chunk 4260
SCD risk is 0.1–0.2% per year (1 per 500–1000 population). Among the population is limited to approximately 1 per 1000 population per year general population of adolescents and adults younger than age 30 (Fig. 327-1) and ~50% of all SCDs due to coronary artery disease occur years, the overall risk of SCD is 1 per 100,000 population, or 0.001% as the first clinical manifestation of the disease (Fig. 327-2A), the only per year. The risk of SCD increases dramatically beyond age 35 years.
# Chunk 4261
currently practical strategies are profiling for risk of developing CHD

The greatest rate of increase is between 40 and 65 years and risk factor control (Fig. 327-2B). The most powerful long-term (vertical axis is discontinuous). Among patients older than 30 years of risk factors include age, cigarette smoking, elevated serum cholesterol, age, with advanced structural heart disease and markers of high risk for diabetes mellitus, elevated blood pressure, LV hypertrophy, and non- cardiac arrest, the event rate may exceed 25% per year, and age-related specific electrocardiographic abnormalities. Markers of inflammation risk attenuates. (Modified from RJ Myerburg, A Castellanos: Cardiac (e.g., levels of C-reactive protein) that may predict plaque destabiliza arrest and sudden cardiac death, in P Libby et al [eds]: Braunwald’s Heart tion have been added to risk classifications. The presence of multiple
# Chunk 4262
1767 A100 40 50 30 20 10 0 5–10%Arrhythmic risk markers 7–15%Hemodynamic risk markers ˜20%Acute M.I.; unstable AP °30%Know disease; low power or non-specific markers ~50%First clinical event
# Chunk 4263
FIGURE 327-2 Population subsets, risk predictors, and distribution of sudden cardiac deaths (SCDs) according to clinical circumstances. A. The population subset with high-risk arrhythmia markers in conjunction with low ejection fraction is a group at high risk of SCD but accounts for <10% of the total SCD burden attributable to coronary artery disease. In contrast, 50% of all SCD victims present with SCD as the first and only manifestation of underlying disease, and up to 30% have known disease but are considered relatively low risk because of the absence of high-risk markers. B. Profiling for individual prediction and prevention of SCD is difficult. The highest absolute numbers of events occur among the general population who may have risk factors for coronary heart disease or expressions of disease that do not predict high risk. This results in a low sensitivity for predicting and preventing SCD. New approaches that include epidemiologic modeling of transient risk factors and genetic predictors of individual patient risk offer hope for greater sensitivity in the future. AM, ambulatory monitoring; AP, angina pectoris; ASHD, arteriosclerotic heart disease; CAD, coronary artery disease; CT, computed tomography; EF, ejection fraction; EP, electrophysiologic; EPS, electrophysiologic study; MI, myocardial infarction. (Modified from RJ Myerburg: J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 12:369–381, 2001.)
# Chunk 4264
In the setting of acute MI (Chap. 295), it is important to distinguish between primary and secondary cardiac arrests. Primary cardiac arrests are those that occur in the absence of hemodynamic instability, and secondary cardiac arrests are those that occur in patients in whom abnormal hemodynamics dominate the clinical picture before cardiac arrest. The success rate for immediate resuscitation in primary cardiac arrest during acute MI in a monitored setting should exceed 90%. In contrast, as many as 70% of patients with secondary cardiac arrest succumb immediately or during the same hospitalization.
# Chunk 4265
Post-MI patients with EFs <35% and other markers of risk such as ambient ventricular arrhythmias, inducible ventricular tachyarrhythmias in the electrophysiology laboratory, and a history of heart failure are considered candidates for ICDs 40 days or more after the MI. Total mortality benefits in the range of a 20–35% reduction over 2–5 years have been observed in a series of clinical trials. One study suggested that an EF <30% was a sufficient marker of risk to indicate ICD benefit, and another demonstrated benefit for patients with Functional Class 2 or 3 heart failure and EFs ≤35%, regardless of etiology (ischemic or nonischemic) or the presence of ambient or induced arrhythmias (Chaps. 277 and 279). For patients with newly diagnosed heart failure and an EF <35%, the required delay between diagnosis and institution of medical therapy, and subsequent implantation of an ICD, is 90 days. In general, there appears to be a gradient of increasing ICD benefit with EFs ranging lower than the threshold indications. However, patients with very low EFs (e.g., <20%) may receive less benefit.
# Chunk 4266
Coma and seizures are common accompaniments of large shifts in sodium and water balance in the brain. These changes in osmolarity arise from systemic medical disorders, including diabetic ketoacidosis, the nonketotic hyperosmolar state, and hyponatremia from any cause (e.g., water intoxication, excessive secretion of antidiuretic hormone, or atrial natriuretic peptides). Sodium levels <125 mmol/L induce confusion, and levels <115 mmol/L are typically associated with coma and convulsions. In hyperosmolar coma, the serum osmolarity is generally >350 mosmol/L. Hypercapnia depresses the level of consciousness in proportion to the rise in carbon dioxide (CO2) tension in the blood. In all of these metabolic encephalopathies, the degree of neurologic change depends to a large extent on the rapidity with which the serum changes occur. The pathophysiology of other metabolic encephalopathies such as those due to hypercalcemia, hypothyroidism, vitamin B12 deficiency, and hypothermia are incompletely understood but must reflect derangements of CNS biochemistry, membrane function, or neurotransmitters.
# Chunk 4267
The studies that are most useful in the diagnosis of coma are chemicaltoxicologic analysis of blood and urine, cranial CT or MRI, EEG, and CSF examination. Arterial blood gas analysis is helpful in patients with lung disease and acid-base disorders. The metabolic aberrations commonly encountered in clinical practice are usually exposed by measurement of electrolytes, glucose, calcium, osmolarity, and renal (blood urea nitrogen) and hepatic (NH3) function. Toxicologic analysis may be necessary in any case of acute coma where the diagnosis is not immediately clear. However, the presence of exogenous drugs or toxins, especially alcohol, does not exclude the possibility that other factors, particularly head trauma, are also contributing to the 1775 clinical state. An ethanol level of 43 mmol/L (0.2 g/dL) in nonhabituated patients generally causes impaired mental activity; a level of >65 mmol/L (0.3 g/dL) is associated with stupor. The development of tolerance may allow the chronic alcoholic to remain awake at levels >87 mmol/L (0.4 g/dL).
# Chunk 4268
Other diagnostic studies are best used in specific circumstances, usually when neuroimaging studies fail to reveal a structural lesion and the etiology of the altered mental state remains uncertain. Electroencephalography (EEG) can be important in the evaluation of critically ill patients with severe brain dysfunction. The EEG of metabolic encephalopathy typically reveals generalized slowing. One of the most important uses of EEG is to help exclude inapparent seizures, especially nonconvulsive status epilepticus. Untreated continuous or frequently recurrent seizures may cause neuronal injury, making the diagnosis and treatment of seizures crucial in this patient group. Lumbar puncture (LP) may be necessary to exclude infectious or inflammatory processes, and an elevated opening pressure may be an important clue to cerebral venous sinus thrombosis. In patients with coma or profound encephalopathy, it is preferable to perform a neuroimaging study prior to LP. If bacterial meningitis is suspected, an LP may be performed first or antibiotics may be empirically administered before the diagnostic studies are completed. Standard laboratory evaluation of critically ill patients should include assessment of serum electrolytes (especially sodium and calcium), glucose, renal and hepatic function, complete blood count, and coagulation. Serum or urine toxicology screens should be performed in patients with encephalopathy of unknown cause. EEG, LP, and other specific laboratory tests are most useful when the mechanism of the altered level of consciousness is uncertain; they are not routinely performed in clear-cut cases of stroke or traumatic brain injury.
# Chunk 4269
Secondary Brain Insults Patients with primary brain injuries, whether due to trauma or stroke, are at risk for ongoing secondary ischemic brain injury. Because secondary brain injury can be a major determinant of a poor outcome, strategies for minimizing secondary brain insults are an integral part of the critical care of all patients. Although elevated ICP may lead to secondary ischemia, most secondary brain injury is mediated through other clinical events that exacerbate the ischemic cascade already initiated by the primary brain injury. Episodes of secondary brain insults are usually not associated with apparent neurologic worsening. Rather, they lead to cumulative injury limiting eventual recovery, which manifests as a higher mortality rate or worsened long-term functional outcome. Thus, close monitoring of vital signs is important, as is early intervention to prevent secondary ischemia. Avoiding hypotension and hypoxia is critical, as significant hypotensive events (systolic blood pressure <90 mmHg) as short as 10 min in duration have been shown to adversely influence outcome after traumatic brain injury. Even in patients with stroke or head trauma who do not require ICP monitoring, close attention to adequate cerebral perfusion is warranted. Hypoxia (pulse oximetry saturation <90%), particularly in combination with hypotension, also leads to secondary brain injury. Likewise, fever and hyperglycemia both worsen experimental ischemia and have been associated with worsened clinical outcome after stroke and head trauma. Aggressive control of fever with a goal of normothermia is warranted but may be difficult to achieve with antipyretic medications and cooling blankets. The value of newer surface or intravascular temperature control devices for the management of refractory fever is under investigation. The use of IV insulin infusion is encouraged for control of hyperglycemia because this allows better regulation of serum glucose levels than SC insulin. A reasonable goal is to maintain the serum glucose level at <10.0 mmol/L (<180 mg/dL), although episodes of hypoglycemia appear equally detrimental and the optimal targets remain uncertain. New cerebral monitoring tools that allow continuous evaluation of brain tissue oxygen tension, CBF, and metabolism (via microdialysis) may further improve the management of secondary brain injury.
# Chunk 4270
Clinical examination at different time points after a hypoxicischemic insult (especially cardiac arrest) is useful in assessing prognosis for long-term neurologic outcome. The prognosis is better for patients with intact brainstem function, as indicated by normal pupillary light responses and intact oculocephalic (doll’s eyes), oculovestibular (caloric), and corneal reflexes. Absence of these reflexes and the presence of persistently dilated pupils that do not react to light are grave prognostic signs. A low likelihood of a favorable outcome from hypoxic-ischemic coma is strongly suggested by an absent pupillary light reflex or extensor or absent motor response to pain on day 3 following the injury, excluding patients with metabolic disturbances and those treated with high-dose barbiturates or hypothermia, which confound interpretation of these signs. Electrophysiologically, the bilateral absence of the N20 component of the somatosensory evoked potential (SSEP) in the first several days also conveys a poor prognosis. A very elevated serum level (>33 μg/L) of the biochemical marker neuron-specific enolase (NSE) is indicative of brain damage after resuscitation from cardiac arrest and predicts a poor outcome. However, at present, SSEPs and NSE levels may be difficult to obtain in a timely fashion, with SSEP testing requiring substantial expertise in interpretation and NSE measurements not yet standardized. Recent studies suggest that the administration of mild hypothermia after cardiac arrest (see “Treatment”) may affect the time points when these clinical and electrophysiologic predictors become reliable in identifying patients with a very low likelihood of clinically meaningful recovery. For example, the false-positive rate for incorrect prediction of poor neurologic outcome may be as high as 21% (95% confidence interval [CI] 8–43%) for patients treated with mild hypothermia who exhibit 3-day motor function no better than extensor posturing. Long-term consequences of hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy include persistent coma or a vegetative state (Chap. 328), dementia, visual agnosia (Chap. 36), parkinsonism, choreoathetosis, cerebellar ataxia, myoclonus, seizures, and an amnestic state, which may be a consequence of selective damage to the hippocampus.
# Chunk 4271
Diagnosis Sepsis-associated encephalopathy presents clinically as a diffuse dysfunction of the brain without prominent focal findings. Confusion, disorientation, agitation, and fluctuations in level of alertness are typical. In more profound cases, especially with hemodynamic compromise, the decrease in level of alertness can be more prominent, at times resulting in coma. Hyperreflexia and frontal release signs such as a grasp or snout reflex (Chap. 36) can be seen. Abnormal movements such as myoclonus, tremor, or asterixis can occur. Sepsis-associated encephalopathy is quite common, occurring in the majority of patients with sepsis and multisystem organ failure. Diagnosis is often difficult because of the multiple potential causes of neurologic dysfunction in critically ill patients and requires exclusion of structural, metabolic, toxic, and infectious (e.g., meningitis or encephalitis) causes. The mortality rate of patients with sepsis-associated encephalopathy severe enough to produce coma approaches 50%, although this principally reflects the severity of the underlying critical illness and is not a direct result of the encephalopathy. Patients dying from severe sepsis or septic shock may have elevated levels of the serum brain injury biomarker S-100β and neuropathologic findings of neuronal apoptosis and cerebral ischemic injury. Successful treatment of the underlying critical illness almost always results in substantial improvement of the encephalopathy. However, although severe disability to the level of chronic vegetative or minimally conscious states is uncommon, long-term cognitive dysfunction clinically similar to dementia is being increasingly recognized in some survivors.
# Chunk 4272
Although encephalopathy may be the most obvious neurologic dysfunction in critically ill patients, dysfunction of the PNS is also quite common. It is typically present in patients with prolonged critical illnesses lasting several weeks and involving sepsis; clinical suspicion is aroused when there is failure to wean from mechanical ventilation despite improvement of the underlying sepsis and critical illness. Critical illness polyneuropathy refers to the most common PNS complication related to critical illness; it is seen in the setting of prolonged critical illness, sepsis, and multisystem organ failure. Neurologic findings include diffuse weakness, decreased reflexes, and distal sensory loss. Electrophysiologic studies demonstrate a diffuse, symmetric, distal axonal sensorimotor neuropathy, and pathologic studies have confirmed axonal degeneration. The precise mechanism of critical illness polyneuropathy remains unclear, but circulating factors such as cytokines, which are associated with sepsis and SIRS, are thought to play a role. It has been reported that up to 70% of patients with the sepsis syndrome have some degree of neuropathy, although far fewer 1784 have a clinical syndrome profound enough to cause severe respiratory muscle weakness requiring prolonged mechanical ventilation or resulting in failure to wean. Aggressive glycemic control with insulin infusions appears to decrease the risk of critical illness polyneuropathy. Treatment is otherwise supportive, with specific intervention directed at treating the underlying illness. Although spontaneous recovery is usually seen, the time course may extend over weeks to months and necessitate long-term ventilatory support and care even after the underlying critical illness has resolved.
# Chunk 4273
A defect in neuromuscular transmission may be a source of weakness in critically ill patients. Botulism (Chap. 178) may be acquired by ingesting botulinum toxin from improperly stored food or may arise from an anaerobic abscess from Clostridium botulinum (wound botulism). Infants can present with generalized weakness from gut-derived Clostridium infection, especially if they are fed honey. Diplopia and dysphagia are early signs of foodborne botulism. Treatment is mostly supportive, although use of antitoxin early in the course may limit the duration of the neuromuscular blockade. General ICU care is similar to patients with Guillain-Barré syndrome or myasthenia gravis with focused care to avoid ulcer formation at pressure points, deep venous thromboprophylaxis, and infection prevention. Public health officers should be rapidly informed when the diagnosis is made to prevent further exposure to others from the tainted food or source of wound botulism (such as injection drug use).
# Chunk 4274
Critically ill patients, especially those with sepsis, frequently develop muscle weakness and wasting, often in the face of seemingly adequate nutritional support. Critical illness myopathy is an overall term that describes several different discrete muscle disorders that may occur in critically ill patients. The assumption has been that a catabolic myopathy may develop as a result of multiple factors, including elevated cortisol and catecholamine release and other circulating factors induced by the SIRS. In this syndrome, known as cachectic myopathy, serum creatine kinase levels and electromyography (EMG) are normal. Muscle biopsy shows type II fiber atrophy. Panfascicular muscle fiber necrosis may also occur in the setting of profound sepsis. This less common acute necrotizing intensive care myopathy is characterized clinically by weakness progressing to a profound level over just a few days. There may be associated elevations in serum creatine kinase and urine myoglobin. Both EMG and muscle biopsy may be normal initially but eventually show abnormal spontaneous activity and panfascicular necrosis with an accompanying inflammatory reaction. Acute rhabdomyolysis can occur from alcohol ingestion or from compartment syndromes.
# Chunk 4275
Autopsy and angiography studies have found that about 2% of adults harbor intracranial aneurysms, for a prevalence of 4 million persons in the United States; the aneurysm will rupture, producing SAH, in 25,000–30,000 cases per year. For patients who arrive alive at hospital, the mortality rate over the next month is about 45%. Of those who survive, more than half are left with major neurologic deficits as a result of the initial hemorrhage, cerebral vasospasm with infarction, or hydrocephalus. If the patient survives but the aneurysm is not obliterated, the rate of rebleeding is about 20% in the first 2 weeks, 30% in the first month, and about 3% per year afterward. Given these alarming figures, the major therapeutic emphasis is on preventing the predictable early complications of the SAH.
# Chunk 4276
1.

Rerupture. The incidence of rerupture of an untreated aneurysm in the first month following SAH is ~30%, with the peak in the first 7 days. Rerupture is associated with a 60% mortality rate and poor outcome. Early treatment eliminates this risk.
# Chunk 4277
3.

Vasospasm. Narrowing of the arteries at the base of the brain following SAH causes symptomatic ischemia and infarction in ~30% of patients and is the major cause of delayed morbidity and death. Signs of ischemia appear 4–14 days after the hemorrhage, most often at 7 days. The severity and distribution of vasospasm determine whether infarction will occur.
# Chunk 4278
Close monitoring (daily or twice daily) of electrolytes is important because hyponatremia can occur precipitously during the first 2 weeks following SAH (see above).
# Chunk 4279
Early aneurysm repair prevents rerupture and allows the safe application of techniques to improve blood flow (e.g., induced hypertension) should symptomatic vasospasm develop. An aneurysm can be “clipped” by a neurosurgeon or “coiled” by an endovascular surgeon. Surgical repair involves placing a metal clip across the aneurysm neck, thereby immediately eliminating the risk of rebleeding. This approach requires craniotomy and brain retraction, which is associated with neurologic morbidity. Endovascular techniques involve placing platinum coils, or other embolic material, within the aneurysm via a catheter that is passed from the femoral artery. The aneurysm is packed tightly to enhance thrombosis and over time is walled off from the circulation (Fig. 330-7D). There have been two prospective randomized trials of surgery versus endovascular treatment for ruptured aneurysms: the first was the International Subarachnoid Aneurysm Trial (ISAT), which was terminated early when 24% of patients treated with endovascular therapy were dead or dependent at 1 year compared to 31% treated with surgery, a significant 23% relative reduction. After 5 years, risk of death was lower in the coiling group, although the proportion of survivors who were independent was the same in both groups. Risk of rebleeding was low, but more common in the coiling group. These results favoring coiling at 1 year were confirmed in a second trial, although the differences in functional outcome were no longer significant at 3 years. Because some aneurysms have a morphology that is not amenable to endovascular treatment, surgery remains an important treatment option. Centers that combine both endovascular and neurosurgical expertise likely offer the best outcomes for patients, and there are reliable data showing that specialized aneurysm treatment centers can improve mortality rates.
# Chunk 4280
Free-water restriction is contraindicated in patients with SAH at risk for vasospasm because hypovolemia and hypotension may occur and precipitate cerebral ischemia. Many patients continue to experience a decline in serum sodium despite receiving parenteral fluids containing normal saline. Frequently, supplemental oral salt coupled with normal saline will mitigate hyponatremia, but often patients also require intravenous hypertonic saline. Care must be taken not to correct serum sodium too quickly in patients with marked hyponatremia of several days’ duration, as central pontine myelinolysis may occur.
# Chunk 4281
tumors, such as lung cancer, lymphoma, and metastatic tumors, are responsible for the majority of SVCS cases. With the expanding use of intravascular devices (e.g., permanent central venous access catheters, pacemaker/defibrillator leads), the prevalence of benign causes of SVCS is increasing now, accounting for at least 40% of cases. Lung cancer, particularly of small-cell and squamous cell histologies, accounts for approximately 85% of all cases of malignant origin. In young adults, malignant lymphoma is a leading cause of SVCS. Hodgkin’s lymphoma involves the mediastinum more commonly than other lymphomas but rarely causes SVCS. When SVCS is noted in a young man with a mediastinal mass, the differential diagnosis is lymphoma versus primary mediastinal germ cell tumor. Metastatic cancers to the mediastinal lymph nodes, such as testicular and breast carcinomas, account for a small proportion of cases. Other causes include benign tumors, aortic aneurysm, thyromegaly, thrombosis, and fibrosing mediastinitis from prior irradiation, histoplasmosis, or Behçet’s syndrome. SVCS as 1788 the initial manifestation of Behçet’s syndrome may be due to inflammation of the SVC associated with thrombosis. Patients with SVCS usually present with neck and facial swelling (especially around the eyes), dyspnea, and cough. Other symptoms include hoarseness, tongue swelling, headaches, nasal congestion, epistaxis, hemoptysis, dysphagia, pain, dizziness, syncope, and lethargy. Bending forward or lying down may aggravate the symptoms. The characteristic physical findings are dilated neck veins; an increased number of collateral veins covering the anterior chest wall; cyanosis; and edema of the face, arms, and chest. Facial swelling and plethora are typically exacerbated when the patient is supine. More severe cases include proptosis, glossal and laryngeal edema, and obtundation. The clinical picture is milder if the obstruction is located above the azygos vein. Symptoms are usually progressive, but in some cases, they may improve as collateral circulation develops. Signs and symptoms of cerebral and/or laryngeal edema, though rare, are associated with a poorer prognosis and require urgent evaluation. Seizures are more likely related to brain metastases than to cerebral edema from venous occlusion. Patients with small-cell lung cancer and SVCS have a higher incidence of brain metastases than those without SVCS. Cardiorespiratory symptoms at rest, particularly with positional changes, suggest significant airway and vascular obstruction and limited physiologic reserve. Cardiac arrest or respiratory failure can occur, particularly in patients receiving sedatives or undergoing general anesthesia. Rarely, esophageal varices may develop. These are “downhill” varices based on the direction of blood flow from cephalad to caudad (in contrast to “uphill” varices associated with caudad to cephalad flow from portal hypertension). If the obstruction to the SVC is proximal to the azygous vein, varices develop in the upper one-third of the esophagus. If the obstruction involves or is distal to the azygous vein, varices occur in the entire length of the esophagus. Variceal bleeding may be a late complication of chronic SVCS. Superior vena cava obstruction may lead to bilateral breast edema with bilateral enlarged breast. Unilateral breast dilatation may be seen as a consequence of axillary or subclavian vein blockage. The diagnosis of SVCS is a clinical one. The most significant chest radiographic finding is widening of the superior mediastinum, most commonly on the right side. Pleural effusion occurs in only 25% of patients, often on the right side. The majority of these effusions are exudative and occasionally chylous. However, a normal chest radio-graph is still compatible with the diagnosis if other characteristic findings are present. Computed tomography (CT) provides the most reliable view of the mediastinal anatomy. The diagnosis of SVCS requires diminished or absent opacification of central venous structures with prominent collateral venous circulation. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has no advantages over CT. Invasive procedures, including bronchoscopy, percutaneous needle biopsy, mediastinoscopy, and even thoracotomy, can be performed by a skilled clinician without any major risk of bleeding. Endobronchial or esophageal ultrasound-guided needle aspiration may establish the diagnosis safely. For patients with a known cancer, a detailed workup usually is not necessary, and appropriate treatment may be started after obtaining a CT scan of the thorax. For those with no history of malignancy, a detailed evaluation is essential to rule out benign causes and determine a specific diagnosis to direct the appropriate therapy.
# Chunk 4282
Malignant pericardial disease is found at autopsy in 5–10% of patients with cancer, most frequently with lung cancer, breast cancer, leukemias, and lymphomas. Cardiac tamponade as the initial presentation of extrathoracic malignancy is rare. The origin is not malignancy in about 50% of cancer patients with symptomatic pericardial disease, but it can be related to irradiation, drug-induced pericarditis, hypothyroidism, idiopathic pericarditis, infection, or autoimmune diseases. Two types of radiation pericarditis occur: an acute inflammatory, effusive pericarditis occurring within months of irradiation, which usually resolves spontaneously, and a chronic effusive pericarditis that may appear up to 20 years after radiation therapy and is accompanied by a thickened pericardium.
# Chunk 4283
Most patients with pericardial metastasis are asymptomatic. However, the common symptoms are dyspnea, cough, chest pain, orthopnea, and weakness. Pleural effusion, sinus tachycardia, jugular venous distention, hepatomegaly, peripheral edema, and cyanosis are the most frequent physical findings. Relatively specific diagnostic findings, such as paradoxical pulse, diminished heart sounds, pulsus alternans (pulse waves alternating between those of greater and lesser amplitude with successive beats), and friction rub are less common than with nonmalignant pericardial disease. Chest radiographs and electrocardiogram (ECG) reveal abnormalities in 90% of patients, but half of these abnormalities are nonspecific. Echocardiography is the most helpful diagnostic test. Pericardial fluid may be serous, serosanguineous, or hemorrhagic, and cytologic examination of pericardial fluid is diagnostic in most patients. Measurements of tumor markers in the pericardial fluid are not helpful in the diagnosis of malignant pericardial fluid. Pericardioscopy (not widely available) with targeted pericardial and epicardial biopsy may differentiate neoplastic and benign pericardial disease. A combination of cytology, pericardial and epicardial biopsy, and guided pericardioscopy gives the best diagnostic yield. CT scan findings of irregular pericardial thickening and mediastinal lymphadenopathy suggest this is a malignant pericardial effusion. Cancer patients with pericardial effusion containing malignant cells on cytology have a very poor survival, about 7 weeks.
# Chunk 4284
The onset of obstruction is usually insidious. Pain is the most common symptom and is usually colicky in nature. Pain can also be due to abdominal distention, tumor masses, or hepatomegaly. Vomiting can be intermittent or continuous. Patients with complete obstruction usually have constipation. Physical examination may reveal abdominal distention with tympany, ascites, visible peristalsis, high-pitched bowel sounds, and tumor masses. Erect plain abdominal films may reveal multiple air-fluid levels and dilation of the small or large bowel. Acute cecal dilation to >12–14 cm is considered a surgical emergency because of the high likelihood of rupture. CT scan is useful in defining the extent of disease and the exact nature of the obstruction and differentiating benign from malignant causes of obstruction in patients who have undergone surgery for malignancy. Malignant obstruction is suggested by a mass at the site of obstruction or prior surgery, adenopathy, or an abrupt transition zone and irregular bowel thickening at the obstruction site. Benign obstruction is more likely when CT shows mesenteric vascular changes, a large volume of ascites, or a smooth transition zone and smooth bowel thickening at the obstruction site. In challenging patients with obstructive symptoms, particularly low-grade small-bowel obstruction (SBO), CT enteroclysis often can help establish the diagnosis by providing distention of small-bowel loops. In this technique, water-soluble contrast is infused through a nasoenteric tube into the duodenum or proximal small bowel followed by CT images. The prognosis for the patient with cancer who develops intestinal obstruction is poor; median survival is 3–4 months. About 25–30% of patients are found to have intestinal obstruction due to causes other than cancer. Adhesions from previous operations are a common benign cause. Ileus induced by vinca alkaloids, narcotics, or other drugs is another reversible cause.
# Chunk 4285
FIGURE 331-2 Management of cancer patients with back pain.

1792 Radiation therapy plus glucocorticoids is generally the initial treatment of choice for most patients with spinal cord compression. Up to 75% of patients treated when still ambulatory remain ambulatory, but only 10% of patients with paraplegia recover walking capacity. Indications for surgical intervention include unknown etiology, failure of radiation therapy, a radioresistant tumor type (e.g., melanoma or renal cell cancer), pathologic fracture dislocation, and rapidly evolving neurologic symptoms. Laminectomy is done for tissue diagnosis and for the removal of posteriorly localized epidural deposits in the absence of vertebral body disease. Because most cases of epidural spinal cord compression are due to anterior or anterolateral extradural disease, resection of the anterior vertebral body along with the tumor, followed by spinal stabilization, has achieved good results. A randomized trial showed that patients who underwent an operation followed by radiotherapy (within 14 days) retained the ability to walk significantly longer than those treated with radiotherapy alone. Surgically treated patients also maintained continence and neurologic function significantly longer than patients in the radiation group. The length of survival was not significantly different in the two groups, although there was a trend toward longer survival in the surgery group. The study drew some criticism for the poorer than expected results in the patients who did not go to surgery. The benefit of surgery over radiotherapy decreased in patients over age 65 years. However, patients should be evaluated for surgery if they are expected to survive longer than 3 months. Conventional radiotherapy has a role after surgery. Chemotherapy may have a role in patients with chemosensitive tumors who have had prior radiotherapy to the same region and who are not candidates for surgery. Most patients with prostate cancer who develop cord compression have already had hormonal therapy; however, for those who have not, androgen deprivation is combined with surgery and radiotherapy. Patients who previously received radiotherapy for MSCC with an in-field tumor progression can be treated with reirradiation if they are not surgical candidates. Patients with metastatic vertebral tumors may benefit from percutaneous vertebroplasty or kyphoplasty, the injection of acrylic cement into a collapsed vertebra to stabilize the fracture. Pain palliation is common, and local antitumor effects have been noted. Cement leakage may cause symptoms in about 10% of patients. Bisphosphonates may be helpful in prevention of SCC in patients with bony involvement. The histology of the tumor is an important determinant of both recovery and survival. Rapid onset and progression of signs and symptoms are poor prognostic features.
# Chunk 4286
Hyperleukocytosis and the leukostasis syndrome associated with it is a potentially fatal complication of acute leukemia (particularly myeloid leukemia) that can occur when the peripheral blast cell count is >100,000/mL. The frequency of hyperleukocytosis is 5–13% in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and 10–30% in acute lymphoid leukemia; however, leukostasis is rare in lymphoid leukemia. At such high blast cell counts, blood viscosity is increased, blood flow is slowed by aggregates of tumor cells, and the primitive myeloid leukemic cells are capable of invading through the endothelium and causing hemorrhage. Brain and lung are most commonly affected. Patients with brain leukostasis may experience stupor, headache, dizziness, tinnitus, visual disturbances, ataxia, confusion, coma, or sudden death. On examination, papilledema, retinal vein distension, retinal hemorrhages, and focal deficit may be present. Administration of 600 cGy of whole-brain irradiation can protect against this complication and can be followed by rapid institution of antileukemic therapy. Hydroxyurea, 3–5 g, can rapidly reduce a high blast cell count while the accurate diagnostic workup is in progress. Pulmonary leukostasis may present as respiratory distress and hypoxemia, and progress to respiratory failure. Chest radiographs may be normal but usually show interstitial or alveolar infiltrates. Hyperleukocytosis rarely may cause acute leg ischemia, renal vein thrombosis, myocardial ischemia, bowel infraction, and priapism. Arterial blood gas results should be interpreted cautiously. Rapid consumption of plasma oxygen by the markedly increased number of white blood cells can cause spuriously low arterial oxygen tension. Pulse oximetry is the most accurate way of assessing oxygenation in patients with hyperleukocytosis. Leukapheresis may be helpful in decreasing circulating blast counts. Treatment of the leukemia can result in pulmonary hemorrhage from lysis of blasts in the lung, called leukemic cell lysis pneumopathy. Intravascular volume depletion and unnecessary blood transfusions may increase blood viscosity and worsen the leukostasis syndrome. Leukostasis is very rarely a feature of the high white cell counts associated with chronic lymphoid or chronic myeloid leukemia.
# Chunk 4287
Hemoptysis may be caused by nonmalignant conditions, but lung cancer accounts for a large proportion of cases. Up to 20% of patients with lung cancer have hemoptysis some time in their course. Endobronchial metastases from carcinoid tumors, breast cancer, colon cancer, kidney cancer, and melanoma may also cause hemoptysis. The volume of bleeding is often difficult to gauge. Massive hemoptysis is defined as >200–600 mL of blood produced in 24 h. However, any hemoptysis should be considered massive if it threatens life. When respiratory difficulty occurs, hemoptysis should be treated emergently. The first priorities are to maintain the airway, optimize oxygenation, and stabilize the hemodynamic status. If the bleeding side is known, the patient should be placed in a lateral decubitus position, with the bleeding side down to prevent aspiration into the unaffected lung, and given supplemental oxygen. If large-volume bleeding continues or the airway is compromised, the patient should be intubated and undergo emergency bronchoscopy. If the site of bleeding is detected, either the patient undergoes a definitive surgical procedure or the lesion is treated with a neodymium:yttrium-aluminum-garnet (Nd:YAG) laser, argon plasma coagulation, or electrocautery. In stable 1794 patients, multidetector CT angiography delineates bronchial and non-bronchial systemic arteries and identifies the source of bleeding and underlying pathology with high sensitivity. Massive hemoptysis usually originates from the high-pressure bronchial circulation. Bronchial artery embolization is considered a first-line definite procedure for managing hemoptysis. Bronchial artery embolization may control brisk bleeding in 75–90% of patients, permitting the definitive surgical procedure to be done more safely. Embolization without definitive surgery is associated with rebleeding in 20–50% of patients. Recurrent hemoptysis usually responds to a second embolization procedure. A postembolization syndrome characterized by pleuritic pain, fever, dysphagia, and leukocytosis may occur; it lasts 5–7 days and resolves with symptomatic treatment. Bronchial or esophageal wall necrosis, myocardial infarction, and spinal cord infarction are rare complications. Surgery, as a salvage strategy, is indicated after failure of embolization and is associated with better survival when performed in a nonurgent setting. Pulmonary hemorrhage with or without hemoptysis in hematologic malignancies is often associated with fungal infections, particularly Aspergillus sp. After granulocytopenia resolves, the lung infiltrates in aspergillosis may cavitate and cause massive hemoptysis. Thrombocytopenia and coagulation defects should be corrected, if possible. Surgical evaluation is recommended in patients with aspergillosis-related cavitary lesions. Bevacizumab, an antibody to vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) that inhibits angiogenesis, has been associated with life-threatening hemoptysis in patients with non-small-cell lung cancer, particularly of squamous cell histology. Non-small-cell lung cancer patients with cavitary lesions or previous hemoptysis (≥2.5 mL) within the past 3 months have higher risk for pulmonary hemorrhage.
# Chunk 4288
SIADH is discussed fully in Chaps. 121 and 401e.

FIGURE 331-3 Airway obstruction. A. Computed tomography scan of a 62-year-old man with tracheal obstruction caused by renal carci-noma showing paratracheal mass with tracheal invasion/obstruction (arrow). B. Chest x-ray of same patient after stent (arrows) placement.
# Chunk 4289
Lactic acidosis is a rare and potentially fatal metabolic complication of cancer. Lactic acidosis associated with sepsis and circulatory failure is a common preterminal event in many malignancies. Lactic acidosis in the absence of hypoxemia may occur in patients with leukemia, lymphoma, or solid tumors. In some cases, hypoglycemia also is present. Extensive involvement of the liver by tumor is often present. In most cases, decreased metabolism and increased production by the tumor both contribute to lactate accumulation. Tumor cell overexpression of certain glycolytic enzymes and mitochondrial dysfunction can contribute to its increased lactate production. HIV-infected patients have an increased risk of aggressive lymphoma; lactic acidosis that occurs in such patients may be related either to the rapid growth of the tumor or from toxicity of nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors. Symptoms of lactic acidosis include tachypnea, tachycardia, change of mental status, and hepatomegaly. The serum level of lactic acid may reach 10–20 mmol/L (90–180 mg/dL). Treatment is aimed at the underlying disease. The danger from lactic acidosis is from the acidosis, not the lactate. Sodium bicarbonate should be added if acidosis is very severe or if hydrogen ion production is very rapid and uncontrolled. Other treatment options include renal replacement therapy, such as hemodialysis, and thiamine replacement. The prognosis is poor regardless of the treatment offered.
# Chunk 4290
In patients with cancer, adrenal insufficiency may go unrecognized because the symptoms, such as nausea, vomiting, anorexia, and orthostatic hypotension, are nonspecific and may be mistakenly attributed to progressive cancer or to therapy. Primary adrenal insufficiency may develop owing to replacement of both glands by metastases (lung, breast, colon, or kidney cancer; lymphoma), to removal of both glands, or to hemorrhagic necrosis in association with sepsis or anticoagulation. Impaired adrenal steroid synthesis occurs in patients being treated for cancer with mitotane, ketoconazole, or aminoglutethimide or undergoing rapid reduction in glucocorticoid therapy. Rarely, metastatic replacement causes primary adrenal insufficiency as the first manifestation of an occult malignancy. Metastasis to the pituitary or hypothalamus is found at autopsy in up to 5% of patients with cancer, but associated secondary adrenal insufficiency is rare. On the other hand, ipilimumab, an anti-CTLA-4 antibody used for treatment of malignant melanoma, may cause autoimmunity including autoimmune-like enterocolitis, hypophysitis, and hepatitis. Autoimmune hypophysitis may present with headache, visual field defects, and pituitary hormone deficiencies manifesting as hypopituitarism, adrenal insufficiency (including adrenal crisis), or hypothyroidism. Anti-CTLA-4-associated hypophysitis symptoms occur at an average of 6–12 weeks after initiation of therapy. The treatment of severe autoimmune toxicity is glucocorticoids. Almost all patients with hypophysitis respond to withdrawal of ipilimumab and glucocorticoid therapy in several days. However, pituitary dysfunction may resolve or may be permanent, requiring longterm therapy and thyroid and testosterone replacement. Peripheral Addison’s disease can also be observed with anti-CTLA-4 antibodies. Megestrol acetate, used to manage cancer and HIV-related cachexia, may suppress plasma levels of cortisol and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). Patients taking megestrol may develop adrenal insufficiency, and even those whose adrenal dysfunction is not symptomatic may have inadequate adrenal reserve if they become seriously ill. Paradoxically, some patients may develop Cushing’s syndrome and/or hyperglycemia because of the glucocorticoid-like activity of megestrol acetate. Cranial irradiation for childhood brain tumors may affect the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis, resulting in secondary adrenal insufficiency.
# Chunk 4291
Hyperuricemia may be present at the time of chemotherapy. Effective treatment kills malignant cells and leads to increased serum uric acid levels from the turnover of nucleic acids. Owing to the acidic local environment, uric acid can precipitate in the tubules, medulla, and collecting ducts of the kidney, leading to renal failure. Lactic acidosis and dehydration may contribute to the precipitation of uric acid in the renal tubules. The finding of uric acid crystals in the urine is strong evidence for uric acid nephropathy. The ratio of urinary uric acid to urinary creatinine is >1 in patients with acute hyperuricemic nephropathy and <1 in patients with renal failure due to other causes.
# Chunk 4292
The likelihood that TLS will occur in patients with Burkitt’s lymphoma is related to the tumor burden and renal function. Hyperuricemia and high serum levels of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH >1500 U/L), both of which correlate with total tumor burden, also correlate with the risk of TLS. In patients at risk for TLS, pretreatment evaluations should include a complete blood count, serum chemistry evaluation, and urine analysis. High leukocyte and platelet counts may artificially elevate potassium levels (“pseudohyperkalemia”) due to lysis of these cells after the blood is drawn. In these cases, plasma potassium instead of serum potassium should be followed. In pseudohyperkalemia, no electrocardiographic abnormalities are present. In patients with abnormal baseline renal function, the kidneys and retroperitoneal area should be evaluated by sonography and/or CT to rule out obstructive uropathy. Urine output should be watched closely.
# Chunk 4293
Severe reactions from rituximab have occurred with

Maintain hydration by administration of normal or 1/2 normal saline at 3000 mL/m2 per day high numbers (>50 × 109 lymphocytes) of circulating –/+ Keep urine pH at 7.0 or greater by administration of sodium bicarbonate* cells bearing the target antigen (CD20) and have been Administer allopurinol at 300 mg/m2 per day associated with a rapid fall in circulating tumor cells, mild electrolyte evidence of TLS, and very rarely, death. In addition, increased liver enzymes, D-dimer, and LDH and prolongation of the prothrombin time may occur. Diphenhydramine, hydrocortisone, and acetaminophen can often prevent or suppress the infusion-related symptoms. If they occur, the infusion is stopped and restarted at half the initial infusion rate after the symptoms have abated. Severe CRS may require intensive support for acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and resistant hypotension.
# Chunk 4294
Serum uric acid >8 mg/dL Serum creatinine >1.6 mg/dL If, after 24–48 h Serum uric acid >8 mg/dL Serum creatinine >1.6 mg/dL Correct treatable renal failure (obstruction) Start rasburicase 0.2 mg/kg daily Serum uric acid ˜8.0 mg/dL Serum creatinine ˜1.6 mg/dL Urine pH °7.0 Delay chemotherapy if feasible or start hemodialysis Start chemotherapy ± chemotherapy Monitor serum chemistry every 6–12 h Discontinue bicarbonate administration* If serum potassium >6 meq/L Serum uric acid >10 mg/dL Serum creatinine >10 mg/dL Serum phosphate >10 mg/dL or increasing Symptomatic hypocalcemia present
# Chunk 4295
HUS usually has its onset 4–8 weeks after the last dose of chemotherapy, but it is not rare to detect it several months later. HUS is characterized by microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and renal failure. Dyspnea, weakness, fatigue, oliguria, and purpura are also common initial symptoms and findings. Systemic hypertension and pulmonary
# Chunk 4296
FIGURE 331-4 Management of patients at high risk for the tumor lysis syndrome. edema frequently occur. Severe hypertension, pul *See text. monary edema, and rapid worsening of hemolysis and renal function may occur after a blood or blood product transfusion. Cardiac findings include during laboratory monitoring of the patient with TLS. Samples atrial arrhythmias, pericardial friction rub, and pericardial effusion. must be cooled immediately to deactivate the urate oxidase. Despite Raynaud’s phenomenon is part of the syndrome in patients treated aggressive prophylaxis, TLS and/or oliguric or anuric renal failure with bleomycin. may occur. Care should be taken to prevent worsening of symptom-Laboratory findings include severe to moderate anemia associatic hypocalcemia by induction of alkalosis during bicarbonate infu-ated with red blood cell fragmentation and numerous schistocytes sion. Administration of sodium bicarbonate may also lead to urinary on peripheral smear. Reticulocytosis, decreased plasma haptoglobin, precipitation of calcium phosphate, which is less soluble at alkaline and an LDH level document hemolysis. The serum bilirubin level is pH. Dialysis is often necessary and should be considered early in the usually normal or slightly elevated. The Coombs’ test is negative. The course. Hemodialysis is preferred. Hemofiltration offers a gradual, white cell count is usually normal, and thrombocytopenia (<100,000/ continuous method of removing cellular by-products and fluid. The μL) is almost always present. Most patients have a normal coagulation prognosis is excellent, and renal function recovers after the uric acid profile, although some have mild elevations in thrombin time and in level is lowered to ≤10 mg/dL. levels of fibrin degradation products. The serum creatinine level is elevated at presentation and shows a pattern of subacute worsening within weeks of the initial azotemia. The urinalysis reveals hematuria,
# Chunk 4297
HUMAN ANTIBODY INFUSION REACTIONS proteinuria, and granular or hyaline casts; and circulating immune The initial infusion of human or humanized antibodies (e.g., ritux-complexes may be present. imab, gemtuzumab, trastuzumab, alemtuzumab, panitumumab, bren-The basic pathologic lesion appears to be deposition of fibrin in tuximab vedotin) is associated with fever, chills, nausea, asthenia, the walls of capillaries and arterioles, and these deposits are similar to and headache in up to half of treated patients. Bronchospasm and those seen in HUS due to other causes. These microvascular abnorhypotension occur in 1% of patients. Severe manifestations including malities involve mainly the kidneys and rarely occur in other organs. pulmonary infiltrates, acute respiratory distress syndrome, and cardio-The pathogenesis of cancer treatment–related HUS is not completely genic shock occur rarely. Laboratory manifestations include elevated understood, but probably the most important factor is endothelial hepatic aminotransferase levels, thrombocytopenia, and prolongation damage. Primary forms of HUS/TTP are related to a decrease in proof prothrombin time. The pathogenesis is thought to be activation cessing of von Willebrand factor by a protease called ADAMTS13. of immune effector processes (cells and complement) and release of The case fatality rate is high; most patients die within a few months. inflammatory cytokines, such as tumor necrosis factor α, interferon There is no consensus on the optimal treatment for chemotherapy-gamma, interleukin 6, and interleukin 10 (cytokine release syndrome induced HUS. Treatment modalities for HUS/TTP including immu[CRS]). Although its origins are not completely understood, CRS is nocomplex removal (plasmapheresis, immunoadsorption, or exchange believed to be due to activation of a variety of cell types including transfusion), antiplatelet/anticoagulant therapies, immunosuppressive therapies, and plasma exchange have varying degrees of success. The outcome with plasma exchange is generally poor, as in many other cases of secondary TTP. Rituximab is successfully used in patients with chemotherapy-induced HUS as well as in ADAMTS13deficient TTP.
# Chunk 4298
The onset of symptoms may be insidious, with symptoms including dyspnea, nonproductive cough, and tachycardia. Patients may have bibasilar crepitant rales, end-inspiratory crackles, fever, and cyanosis. The chest radiograph generally shows an interstitial and sometimes an intraalveolar pattern that is strongest at the lung bases and may be symmetric. A small effusion may occur. Hypoxemia with decreased carbon monoxide diffusing capacity is always present. Glucocorticoids may be helpful in patients in whom pulmonary toxicity is related to radiation therapy or to chemotherapy. Treatment is otherwise supportive.
# Chunk 4299
Radiation pneumonitis and/or fibrosis is a relatively frequent side effect of thoracic radiation therapy. It may be acute or chronic. Radiation-induced lung toxicity is a function of the irradiated lung volume, dose per fraction, and radiation dose. The larger the irradiated lung field, the higher is the risk for radiation pneumonitis. The use of concurrent chemoradiation, particularly regimens including paclitaxel, increases pulmonary toxicity. Radiation pneumonitis usually develops 2–6 months after completion of radiotherapy. The clinical syndrome, which varies in severity, consists of dyspnea, cough with scanty sputum, low-grade fever, and an initial hazy infiltrate on chest radiographs. The infiltrate and tissue damage usually are confined to the radiation field. The patients subsequently may develop a patchy alveolar infiltrate and air bronchograms, which may progress to acute respiratory failure that is sometimes fatal. A lung biopsy may be necessary to make the diagnosis. Asymptomatic infiltrates found incidentally after radiation therapy need not be treated. However, prednisone should be administered to patients with fever or other symptoms. The dosage should be tapered slowly after the resolution of radiation pneumonitis, because abrupt withdrawal of glucocorticoids may cause an exacerbation of pneumonia. Delayed radiation fibrosis may occur years after radiation therapy and is signaled by dyspnea on exertion. Often it is mild, but it can progress to chronic respiratory failure. Therapy is supportive.
# Chunk 4300
Pneumonia is a common problem in patients undergoing treatment for cancer. Bacterial pneumonia typically causes a localized infiltrate on chest radiographs. Therapy is tailored to the causative organism. When diffuse interstitial infiltrates appear in a febrile patient, the differential diagnosis is extensive and includes pneumonia due to infection with Pneumocystis carinii; viral infections including cytomegalovirus, adenovirus, herpes simplex virus, herpes zoster, respiratory syncytial virus, or intracellular pathogens such as Mycoplasma and Legionella; effects of drugs or radiation; tumor progression; nonspecific pneumonitis; and fungal disease. Detection of opportunistic pathogens in pulmonary infections is still a challenge. Diagnostic tools include chest radiographs, CT scans, bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage, brush cytology, transbronchial biopsy, fine-needle aspiration, and open lung biopsy. In addition to the culture, evaluation of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid for P. carinii by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and serum galactomannan test improve the diagnostic yield. Patients with cancer who are neutropenic and have fever and local infiltrates on chest radiograph should be treated initially with broad-spectrum antibiotics. A new or persistent focal infiltrate not responding to broad-spectrum antibiotics argues for initiation of empiric antifungal therapy. When diffuse bilateral infiltrates develop in patients with febrile neutropenia, broad-spectrum antibiotics plus trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, with or without erythromycin, should be initiated. Addition of an antiviral agent is necessary in some settings, such as patients undergoing allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. If the patient does not improve in 4 days, open lung biopsy is the procedure of choice. Bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage may be used in patients who are poor candidates for surgery.
# Chunk 4301
FIGURE 331-5 Abdominal computed tomography (CT) scans of a 72-year-old woman with neutropenic enterocolitis secondary to chemotherapy. A. Air in inferior mesenteric vein (arrow) and bowel wall with pneumatosis intestinalis. B. CT scan of upper abdomen demonstrating air in portal vein (arrows).
# Chunk 4302
of acute leukemia. Nevertheless, it may involve any segment of the gastrointestinal tract including small intestine, appendix, and colon. This complication has also been seen in patients with other forms of cancer treated with taxanes, 5-fluorouracil, irinotecan, vinorelbine, cisplatin, carboplatin, and high-dose chemotherapy (Fig. 331-5). It also has been reported in patients with AIDS, aplastic anemia, cyclic neutropenia, idiosyncratic drug reactions involving antibiotics, and immunosuppressive therapies. The patient develops right lower quadrant abdominal pain, often with rebound tenderness and a tense, distended abdomen, in a setting of fever and neutropenia. Watery diarrhea (often containing sloughed mucosa) and bacteremia are common, and bleeding may occur. Plain abdominal films are generally of little value in the diagnosis; CT scan may show marked bowel wall thickening, particularly in the cecum, with bowel wall edema, mesenteric stranding, and ascites, and may help to differentiate neutropenic colitis from other abdominal disorders such as appendicitis, diverticulitis, and Clostridium difficile–associated colitis in this high-risk population. Patients with bowel wall thickness >10 mm on ultrasonogram have higher mortality rates. However, bowel wall thickening is significantly more prominent in patients with C. difficile colitis. Pneumatosis intestinalis is a more specific finding, seen only in those with neutropenic enterocolitis and ischemia. The combined involvement of the small and large bowel suggests a diagnosis of neutropenic enterocolitis.
# Chunk 4303
Hemorrhagic cystitis can develop in patients receiving cyclophosphamide or ifosfamide. Both drugs are metabolized to acrolein, which is a strong chemical irritant that is excreted in the urine. Prolonged contact or high concentrations may lead to bladder irritation and hemorrhage. Symptoms include gross hematuria, frequency, dysuria, burning, urgency, incontinence, and nocturia. The best management is prevention. Maintaining a high rate of urine flow minimizes exposure. In addition, 2-mercaptoethanesulfonate (mesna) detoxifies the metabolites and can be coadministered with the instigating drugs. Mesna usually is given three times on the day of ifosfamide administration in doses that are each 20% of the total ifosfamide dose. If hemorrhagic cystitis develops, the maintenance of a high urine flow may be sufficient supportive care. If conservative management is not effective, irrigation of the bladder with a 0.37–0.74% formalin solution for 10 min stops the bleeding in most cases. N-Acetylcysteine may also be an effective irrigant. Prostaglandin (carboprost) can inhibit the process. In extreme cases, ligation of the hypogastric arteries, urinary diversion, or cystectomy may be necessary.
# Chunk 4304
Hemorrhagic cystitis also occurs in patients who undergo bone marrow transplantation (BMT). In the BMT setting, early-onset hemorrhagic cystitis is related to drugs in the treatment regimen (e.g., cyclophosphamide), and late-onset hemorrhagic cystitis is usually due to the polyoma virus BKV or adenovirus type 11. BKV load in urine alone or in combination with acute graft-versus-host disease correlates with development of hemorrhagic cystitis. Viral causes are usually detected by PCR-based diagnostic tests. Treatment of viral hemorrhagic cystitis is largely supportive, with reduction in doses of immunosuppressive agents, if possible. No antiviral therapy is approved, although cidofovir is reported to be effective in a small series. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy has been used successfully in patients with BKV-associated and cyclophosphamide-induced hemorrhagic cystitis during hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, as well as in hemorrhagic radiation cystitis.
# Chunk 4305
This process is saturable, resulting in urinary bicarbonate excretion Filtered hydrogen phosphate ion (HPO42-) is also titrated in the proxiwhen plasma levels exceed the physiologically normal range (24-26 mal tubule by secreted H+ to form H2PO4 -, and this reaction constitutes meq/L). Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors such as acetazolamide, a class a major component of the urinary buffer referred to as titratable acid. of weak diuretic agents, block proximal tubule reabsorption of bicar-Most filtered phosphate ion is reabsorbed by the proximal tubule bonate and are useful for alkalinizing the urine. through a sodium-coupled cotransport process that is regulated by
# Chunk 4306
The proximal tubule contributes to acid secretion by two mecha-parathyroid hormone. nisms involving the titration of the urinary buffers ammonia (NH3) Chloride is poorly reabsorbed throughout the first segment of the and phosphate. Renal NH3 is produced by glutamine metabolism in proximal tubule, and a rise in Cl− concentration counterbalances the the proximal tubule. Subsequent diffusion of NH3 out of the proxi-removal of bicarbonate anion from tubular fluid. In later proximal mal tubular cell enables trapping of H+ secreted by sodium-proton tubular segments, cellular Cl− reabsorption is initiated by apical exchange in the lumen as ammonium ion (NH4+). Cellular K+ levels exchange of cellular formate for higher luminal concentrations of inversely modulate proximal tubular ammoniagenesis, and in the Cl-. Once in the lumen, formate anions are titrated by H+ (provided setting of high serum K+ from hypoaldosteronism, reduced ammo-by Na+/H+ exchange) to generate neutral formic acid, which can difniagenesis facilitates the appearance of type IV renal tubular acidosis. fuse passively across the apical membrane back into the cell where it dissociates a proton and is recycled. Basolateral Cl− exit is mediated by a K+/Cl− cotransporter.
# Chunk 4307
The loop of Henle contributes to urine-concentrating ability by establishing a hypertonic medullary interstitium that promotes water reabsorption by the downstream inner medullary collecting duct. Countercurrent multiplication produces a hypertonic medullary interstitium using two countercurrent systems: the loop of Henle (opposing descending and ascending limbs) and the vasa recta (medullary peritubular capillaries enveloping the loop). The countercurrent flow in these two systems helps maintain the hypertonic environment of the inner medulla, but NaCl reabsorption by the thick ascending limb is the primary initiating event. Reabsorption of NaCl without water dilutes the tubular fluid and adds new osmoles to medullary interstitial fluid. Because the descending thin limb is highly water permeable, osmotic equilibrium occurs between the descending limb tubular fluid and the interstitial space, leading to progressive solute trapping in the inner medulla. Maximum medullary interstitial osmolality also requires partial recycling of urea from the collecting duct.
# Chunk 4308
The perception of extracellular blood volume is determined, in part, by the integration of arterial tone, cardiac stroke volume, heart rate, and the water and solute content of extracellular fluid. Na+ and accompanying anions are the most abundant extracellular effective osmoles and together support a blood volume around which pressure is generated. Under normal conditions, this volume is regulated by sodium balance (Fig. 332e-4B), and the balance between daily Na+ intake and excretion is under the influence of baroreceptors in regional blood vessels and vascular hormone sensors modulated by atrial natriuretic peptides, the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, Ca2+ signaling, adenosine, vasopressin, and the neural adrenergic axis. If Na+ intake exceeds Na+ excretion (positive Na+ balance), then an increase in blood volume will trigger a proportional increase in urinary Na+ excretion. Conversely, when Na+ intake is less than urinary excretion (negative Na+ balance), blood volume will decrease and trigger enhanced renal Na+ reabsorption, leading to decreased urinary Na+ excretion.
# Chunk 4309
Chapter 332e Cellular and Molecular Biology of the Kidney adaptation of the Kidney to Injury Joseph V. Bonventre Many years ago Claude Bernard (1878) introduced the concepts of milieu extérieur (the environment where an organism lives) and a 333e milieu intérieur (the environment in which the tissues of that organism live). He argued that the milieu intérieur varied very little and that there were vital mechanisms that functioned to maintain this internal environment constant. Walter B. Cannon later extended these concepts by recognizing that the constancy of the internal state, which he termed the homeostatic state, was evidence of physiologic mechanisms that act to maintain this minimal variability. In higher animals, the plasma is maintained remarkably constant in composition both within an individual and among individuals. The kidney plays a vital role in this constancy. The kidney changes the composition of the urine to maintain electrolyte and acid-base balance and can produce hormones that can maintain constancy of blood hemoglobin and mineral metabolism. When the kidney is injured, the remaining functional mass responds and attempts to continue to maintain the milieu intérieur. It is remarkable how well the residual nephrons can perform in this task so that in many cases homeostasis is maintained until the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) drops to very low levels. At this point, the functional tissue can no longer compensate. In this chapter, we will discuss a number of these compensatory adaptations that the kidney makes in response to injury in an attempt to protect itself and protect the milieu intérieur. A theme that permeates, however, is that these adaptive processes can often be maladaptive and contribute to enhanced renal dysfunction, facilitating a positive feedback process that is inherently unstable.
# Chunk 4310
The prevalence of CAKUT has been generally found to be between 0.003 and 0.2%, depending on the population studied. This excludes fetuses with transient upper renal tract dilatation likely related to the high rate of fetal urine flow rate. In the adult U.S. Renal Data System (USRDS) of patients with end-stage kidney disease, approximately 0.6% are listed as having dysplastic or hypoplastic kidneys as a primary cause of the disease. This is likely an underestimate, however, because many patients with “small kidneys” may be misdiagnosed with chronic glomerulonephritis or chronic pyelonephritis.
# Chunk 4311
Hypertrophy Because nephrons of mammals, in contrast to those of fish, cannot regenerate, the loss of functional units of the kidney, either due to disease or surgery, results in anatomic and functional changes in the remaining nephrons. As described above, there is increased blood flow to remaining glomeruli with potentially adverse effects over time of the resultant increased size of the remaining glomeruli and hyperfiltration (Fig. 333e-1). In addition, there is hypertrophy of the tubules. Some of the mediators of this hypertrophy of the remaining functional tubules are listed in Table 333e-2. In the adult, within a few weeks after unilateral nephrectomy for donation of a kidney, the GFR is approximately 70% of the prenephrectomy value. It then remains relatively stable for most patients over 15–20 years. The hyperfiltration is related to an increase in renal blood flow likely secondary to dilatation of the afferent arterioles potentially due to increases in nitric oxide (NO) production. The rate of increase in GFR is slower in the adult than it is in the young after nephrectomy. There are a number of factors that have been implicated at the cellular and nephron level to account for the compensatory hypertrophy that ensues after removal of functional nephrons (Table 333e-2).
# Chunk 4312
mineral metabolism In CKD, there is a decrease in the ability of the kidney to excrete phosphate and produce 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 [1,25(OH)2D3]. There is a resultant increase in serum phosphate and reduction in serum calcium (Fig. 333e-2). In response, the body adapts by increasing production of parathyroid hormone (PTH) and fibroblast growth factor-23 (FGF-23) in an attempt to increase phosphaturia. The elevated levels of PTH act on bone to increase bone resorption and on osteocytes to increase FGF-23 expression. Elevated levels of PTH increase FGF-23 expression by activating protein kinase A and wnt signaling in osteoblast-like cells. There are a number of other factors that increase bone FGF-23 production in CKD including systemic acidosis, altered hydroxyapatite metabolism, changes in bone matrix, and release of low-molecular-weight FGFs. Although the production of PTH and FGF-23 initially are adaptive attempts to maintain body phosphate levels by enhancing excretion by the kidney, they become maladaptive due to systemic effects on the cardiovascular system and bone, as renal function continues to deteriorate. PTH and FGF-23 decrease the kidney’s ability to reabsorb phosphate by decreasing the levels of the sodium-phosphate cotransporters NaPi2a and NaPi2c on the apical and basolateral membranes of the renal tubule. FGF-23 also reduces the ability of the kidney to generate 1,25(OH)2D3. In the parathyroid gland, the FGF-23 receptor, the klotho-fibroblast growth factor 1 complex, is downregulated with a consequent loss of the normal action of FGF-23 to downregulate PTH production. PTH and FGF-23 have been implicated in the cardiovascular disease that is so characteristic of patients with CKD. With CKD, there is less klotho expression in ˜Renal 1,25 (OH)2D3
# Chunk 4313
Maladaptive Response of the Kidney to Acute Injury By contrast to the above adaptive repair that occurs after a single insult, after three doses of DT administered at weekly intervals, there is maladaptive repair with development over time of a chronic interstitial infiltrate, increased myofibroblast proliferation, tubulointerstitial fibrosis, and tubular atrophy, as well as an increase in serum creatinine (0.6 ± 0.1 mg/dL vs 0.18 ± 0.02 mg/dL in control mice) by week 5, 2 weeks after the last dose in the thrice-treated animals. There is a dramatic increase in the number of interstitial cells that expressed the platelet-derived growth factor receptor β (pericytes/perivascular fibroblasts), αSMA (myofibroblasts), FSP-1/S100A4 (fibroblast specific protein-1), and F4/80 (macrophages). In addition, there is loss of endothelial cells, interstitial capillaries, and development of focal global and segmental glomerulosclerosis.
# Chunk 4314
Sushrut S. Waikar, Joseph V. Bonventre

Acute kidney injury (AKI), previously known as acute renal failure, is characterized by the sudden impairment of kidney function resulting in the retention of nitrogenous and other waste products normally cleared by the kidneys. AKI is not a single disease but, rather, a designation for a heterogeneous group of conditions that share common diagnostic features: specifically, an increase in the blood urea nitrogen (BUN) concentration and/or an increase in the plasma or serum creatinine (SCr) concentration, often associated with a reduction in urine volume. It is important to recognize that AKI is a clinical diagnosis and not a structural one. A patient may have AKI without injury to the kidney parenchyma. AKI can range in severity from asymptomatic and transient changes in laboratory parameters of glomerular filtration rate (GFR), to overwhelming and rapidly fatal derangements in effective circulating volume regulation and electrolyte and acid-base composition of the plasma.
# Chunk 4315
AKI complicates 5–7% of acute care hospital admissions and up to 30% of admissions to the intensive care unit, particularly in the setting of diarrheal illnesses, infectious diseases like malaria and leptospirosis, and natural disasters such as earthquakes. The incidence of AKI has grown by more than fourfold in the United States since 1988 and is estimated to have a yearly incidence of 500 per 100,000 population, higher than the yearly incidence of stroke. AKI is associated with a markedly increased risk of death in hospitalized individuals, particularly in those admitted to the ICU where in-hospital mortality rates may exceed 50%. AKI increases the risk for the development or worsening of chronic kidney disease. Patients who survive and recover from an episode of severe AKI requiring dialysis are at increased risk for the later development of dialysis-requiring end-stage kidney disease. AKI may be community-acquired or hospital-acquired. Common causes of community-acquired AKI include volume depletion, adverse effects of medications, and obstruction of the urinary tract. The most common clinical settings for hospital-acquired AKI are sepsis, major surgical procedures, critical illness involving heart or liver failure, intravenous iodinated contrast administration, and nephrotoxic medication administration.
# Chunk 4316
In the United States, more than 700,000 cases of sepsis occur each year. AKI complicates more than 50% of cases of severe sepsis and greatly increases the risk of death. Sepsis is also a very important cause of AKI in the developing world. Decreases in GFR with sepsis can occur even in the absence of overt hypotension, although most cases of severe AKI typically occur in the setting of hemodynamic collapse requiring vasopressor support. While there is clearly tubular injury associated with AKI in sepsis as manifest by the presence of tubular debris and casts in the urine, postmortem examinations of kidneys from individuals with severe sepsis suggest that other factors, perhaps related to inflammation, mitochondrial dysfunction, and interstitial edema, must be considered in the pathophysiology of sepsis-induced AKI.
# Chunk 4317
Contrast Agents Iodinated contrast agents used for cardiovascular and computed tomography (CT) imaging are a leading cause of AKI. The risk of AKI, or “contrast nephropathy,” is negligible in those with normal renal function but increases markedly in the setting of CKD, particularly diabetic nephropathy. The most common clinical course of contrast nephropathy is characterized by a rise in SCr beginning 24–48 h following exposure, peaking within 3–5 days, and resolving within 1 week. More severe, dialysis-requiring AKI is uncommon except in the setting of significant preexisting CKD, often in association with congestive heart failure or other coexisting causes for ischemia-associated AKI. Patients with multiple myeloma and renal disease are particularly susceptible. Low fractional excretion of sodium and relatively benign urinary sediment without features of tubular necrosis (see below) are common findings. Contrast nephropathy is thought to occur from a combination of factors, including (1) hypoxia in the renal outer medulla due to perturbations in renal microcirculation and occlusion of small vessels; (2) cytotoxic damage to the tubules directly or via the generation of oxygen free radicals, especially because the concentration of the agent within the tubule is markedly increased; and (3) transient tubule obstruction with precipitated contrast material. Other diagnostic agents implicated as a cause of AKI are high-dose gadolinium used for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and oral sodium phosphate solutions used as bowel purgatives.
# Chunk 4318
Antibiotics Several antimicrobial agents are commonly associated with AKI. Aminoglycosides and amphotericin B both cause tubular necrosis. Nonoliguric AKI (i.e., without a significant reduction in urine volume) accompanies 10–30% of courses of aminoglycoside antibiotics, even when plasma levels are in the therapeutic range. Aminoglycosides are freely filtered across the glomerulus and then accumulate within the renal cortex, where concentrations can greatly exceed those of the plasma. AKI typically manifests after 5–7 days of therapy and can present even after the drug has been discontinued. Hypomagnesemia is a common finding.
# Chunk 4319
FIGuRE 334-5 Anatomic sites and causes of obstruction leading to postrenal acute kidney injury.

during coma or immobilization, prolonged seizure activity, excessive exercise, heat stroke or malignant hyperthermia, infections, metabolic disorders (e.g., hypophosphatemia, severe hypothyroidism), and myopathies (drug-induced, metabolic, or inflammatory). Pathogenic factors for AKI include intrarenal vasoconstriction, direct proximal tubular toxicity, and mechanical obstruction of the distal nephron lumen when myoglobin or hemoglobin precipitates with Tamm-Horsfall protein (uromodulin, the most common protein in urine and produced in the thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle), a process favored by acidic urine. Tumor lysis syndrome may follow initiation of cytotoxic therapy in patients with high-grade lymphomas and acute lymphoblastic leukemia; massive release of uric acid (with serum levels often exceeding 15 mg/dL) leads to precipitation of uric acid in the renal tubules and AKI (Chap. 331). Other features of tumor lysis syndrome include hyperkalemia and hyperphosphatemia. The tumor lysis syndrome can also occasionally occur spontaneously or with treatment for solid tumors or multiple myeloma. Myeloma light chains can also cause AKI by direct tubular toxicity and by binding to Tamm-Horsfall protein to form obstructing intratubular casts. Hypercalcemia, which can also be seen in multiple myeloma, may cause AKI by intense renal vasoconstriction and volume depletion.
# Chunk 4320
The presence of AKI is usually inferred by an elevation in the SCr concentration. AKI is currently defined by a rise from baseline of at least 0.3 mg/dL within 48 h or at least 50% higher than baseline within 1 week, or a reduction in urine output to less than 0.5 mL/kg per hour for longer than 6 h. It is important to recognize that given this definition, some patients with AKI will not have tubular or glomerular damage (e.g., prerenal azotemia). The distinction between AKI and CKD is important for proper diagnosis and treatment. The distinction is straightforward when a recent baseline SCr concentration is available, but more difficult in the many instances in which the baseline is unknown. In such cases, clues suggestive of CKD can come from radiologic studies (e.g., small, shrunken kidneys with cortical thinning on renal ultrasound, or evidence of renal osteodystrophy) or laboratory tests such as normocytic anemia in the absence of blood loss or secondary hyperparathyroidism with hyperphosphatemia and hypocalcemia, consistent with CKD. No set of tests, however, can rule out AKI superimposed on CKD because AKI is a frequent complication in patients with CKD, further complicating the distinction. Serial blood tests showing continued substantial rise of SCr represents clear evidence of AKI. Once the diagnosis of AKI is established, its cause needs to be determined.
# Chunk 4321
The clinical context, careful history taking, and physical examination often narrow the differential diagnosis for the cause of AKI. Prerenal azotemia should be suspected in the setting of vomiting, diarrhea, glycosuria causing polyuria, and several medications including diuretics, NSAIDs, ACE inhibitors, and ARBs. Physical signs of orthostatic hypotension, tachycardia, reduced jugular venous pressure, decreased skin turgor, and dry mucous membranes are often present in prerenal azotemia. A history of prostatic disease, nephrolithiasis, or pelvic or paraaortic malignancy would suggest the possibility of postrenal AKI. Whether or not symptoms are present early during obstruction of the urinary tract depends on the location of obstruction. Colicky flank pain radiating to the groin suggests acute ureteric obstruction. Nocturia and urinary frequency or hesitancy can be seen in prostatic disease. Abdominal fullness and suprapubic pain can accompany massive bladder enlargement. Definitive diagnosis of obstruction requires radiologic investigations.
# Chunk 4322
The urinalysis and urine sediment examination are invaluable tools, but they require clinical correlation because of generally limited sensitivity and specificity (Fig. 334-6) (Chap. 62e). In the absence of preexisting proteinuria from CKD, AKI from ischemia or nephrotoxins leads to mild proteinuria (<1 g/d). Greater proteinuria in AKI suggests damage to the glomerular ultrafiltration barrier or excretion of myeloma light chains; the latter are not detected with conventional urine dipsticks (which detect albumin) and require the sulfosalicylic acid test or immunoelectrophoresis. Atheroemboli can cause a variable degree of proteinuria. Extremely heavy proteinuria (“nephrotic range,” >3.5 g/d) can occasionally be seen in glomerulonephritis, vasculitis, or interstitial nephritis (particularly from NSAIDs). AKI can also complicate cases of minimal change disease, a cause of the nephrotic syndrome (Chap. 332e). If the dipstick is positive for hemoglobin but few red blood cells are evident in the urine sediment, then rhabdomyolysis or hemolysis should be suspected.
# Chunk 4323
Certain forms of AKI are associated with characteristic patterns in the rise and fall of SCr. Prerenal azotemia typically leads to modest rises in SCr that return to baseline with improvement in hemodynamic status. Contrast nephropathy leads to a rise in SCr within 24–48 h, peak within 3–5 days, and resolution within 5–7 days. In comparison, atheroembolic disease usually manifests with more subacute rises in 1806 taBLe 334-1 MajOr Causes, CLInICaL Features, anD DIagnOstIC stuDIes FOr prerenaL anD IntrInsIC aCute KIDney Injury
# Chunk 4324
Eosinophilia, sterile pyuria; often nonoliguric FeNa may be low (<1%)

Urine eosinophils have limited diagnostic accuracy; systemic signs of drug reaction often absent; kidney biopsy may be helpful
# Chunk 4325
Imaging with computed tomography or ultrasound

Abbreviations: ACE-I, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor-I; AGBM, antiglomerular basement membrane; AKI, acute kidney injury; ANA, antinuclear antibody; ANCA, antineutrophilic cytoplasmic antibody; ARB, angiotensin receptor blocker; ASO, antistreptolysin O; BUN, blood urea nitrogen; CKD, chronic kidney disease; FeNa, fractional excretion of sodium; GI, gastrointestinal; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; NSAID, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug; TTP/HUS, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura/hemolytic-uremic syndrome.
# Chunk 4326
SCr, although severe AKI with rapid increases in SCr can occur in this setting. With many of the epithelial cell toxins such as aminoglycoside antibiotics and cisplatin, the rise in SCr is characteristically delayed for 3–5 days to 2 weeks after initial exposure.
# Chunk 4327
The fractional excretion of sodium (FeNa) is the fraction of the filtered sodium load that is reabsorbed by the tubules, and is a measure of both the kidney’s ability to reabsorb sodium as well as endogenously and exogenously administered factors that affect tubular reabsorption. As such, it depends on sodium intake, effective intravascular volume, GFR, diuretic intake, and intact tubular reabsorptive mechanisms. With prerenal azotemia, the FeNa may be below 1%, suggesting avid tubular sodium reabsorption. In patients with CKD, a FeNa significantly above 1% can be present despite a superimposed prerenal state. The FeNa may also be above 1% despite hypovolemia due to treatment with diuretics. Low FeNa is often seen early in glomerulonephritis and other disorders and, hence, should not be taken as prima facie evidence of prerenal azotemia. Low FeNa is therefore suggestive, but not synonymous, with effective intravascular volume depletion, and should not be used as the sole guide for volume management. The response of urine output to crystalloid or colloid fluid administration may be both diagnostic and therapeutic in prerenal azotemia. In ischemic AKI, the FeNa is frequently above 1% because of tubular injury and resultant inability to reabsorb sodium. Several causes of ischemia-associated and nephrotoxin-associated AKI can present with FeNa below 1%, however, including sepsis (often early in the course), rhabdomyolysis, and contrast nephropathy.
# Chunk 4328
The ability of the kidney to produce a concentrated urine is dependent upon many factors and reliant on good tubular function in multiple regions of the kidney. In the patient not taking diuretics and with good baseline kidney function, urine osmolality may be above 500 mOsm/kg in prerenal azotemia, consistent with an intact medullary gradient and elevated serum vasopressin levels causing water reabsorption resulting in concentrated urine. In elderly patients and those 1808 with CKD, however, baseline concentrating defects may exist, making urinary osmolality unreliable in many instances. Loss of concentrating ability is common in septic or ischemic AKI, resulting in urine osmolality below 350 mOsm/kg, but the finding is not specific.
# Chunk 4329
Prerenal Azotemia Prevention and treatment of prerenal azotemia require optimization of renal perfusion. The composition of replacement fluids should be targeted to the type of fluid lost. Severe acute blood loss should be treated with packed red blood cells. Isotonic crystalloid and/or colloid should be used for less severe acute hemorrhage or plasma loss in the case of burns and pancreatitis. Crystalloid solutions are less expensive and probably equally efficacious as colloid solutions. Hydroxyethyl starch solutions increase the risk of severe AKI and are contraindicated. Crystalloid has been reported to be preferable to albumin in the setting of traumatic brain injury. Isotonic crystalloid (e.g., 0.9% saline) or colloid should be used for volume resuscitation in severe hypovolemia, whereas hypotonic crystalloids (e.g., 0.45% saline) suffice for less severe hypovolemia. Excessive chloride administration from 0.9% saline may lead to hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis and may impair GFR. Bicarbonate-containing solutions (e.g., dextrose water with 150 mEq sodium bicarbonate) should be used if metabolic acidosis is a concern.
# Chunk 4330
Sodium bicarbonate (if pH <7.2 to keep serum bicarbonate >15 mmol/L) b.

Administration of other bases, e.g., THAM c.
# Chunk 4331
Early and aggressive volume repletion is mandatory in patients with rhabdomyolysis, who may initially require 10 L of fluid per day. Alkaline fluids (e.g., 75 mmol/L sodium bicarbonate added to 0.45% saline) may be beneficial in preventing tubular injury and cast formation, but carry the risk of worsening hypocalcemia. Diuretics may be used if fluid repletion is adequate but unsuccessful in achieving urinary flow rates of 200–300 mL/h. There is no specific therapy for established AKI in rhabdomyolysis, other than dialysis in severe cases or general supportive care to maintain fluid and electrolyte balance and tissue perfusion. Careful attention must be focused on calcium and phosphate status because of precipitation in damaged tissue and release when the tissue heals.
# Chunk 4332
SuPPORTIVE MEASuRES Volume Management Hypervolemia in oliguric or anuric AKI may be life threatening due to acute pulmonary edema, especially because many patients have coexisting pulmonary disease, and AKI likely increases pulmonary vascular permeability. Fluid and sodium should be restricted, and diuretics may be used to increase the urinary flow rate. There is no evidence that increasing urine output itself improves the natural history of AKI, but diuretics may help to avoid the need for dialysis in some cases. In severe cases of volume overload, furosemide may be given as a bolus (200 mg) followed by an intravenous drip (10–40 mg/h), with or without a thiazide diuretic. In decompensated heart failure, stepped diuretic therapy was found to be superior to ultrafiltration in preserving renal function. Diuretic therapy should be stopped if there is no response. Dopamine in low doses may transiently increase salt and water excretion by the kidney in prerenal states, but clinical trials have failed to show any benefit in patients with intrinsic AKI. Because of the risk of arrhythmias and potential bowel ischemia, it has been argued that the risks of dopamine outweigh the benefits in the treatment or prevention of AKI.
# Chunk 4333
Electrolyte and Acid-Base Abnormalities The treatment of dysnatremias and hyperkalemia is described in Chap. 63. Metabolic acidosis is generally not treated unless severe (pH <7.20 and serum bicarbonate <15 mmol/L). Acidosis can be treated with oral or intravenous sodium bicarbonate (Chap. 66), but overcorrection should be avoided because of the possibility of metabolic alkalosis, hypocalcemia, hypokalemia, and volume overload. Hyperphosphatemia is common in AKI and can usually be treated by limiting intestinal absorption of phosphate using phosphate binders (calcium carbonate, calcium acetate, lanthanum, sevelamer, or aluminum hydroxide). Hypocalcemia does not usually require therapy unless symptoms are present. Ionized calcium should be monitored rather than total calcium when hypoalbuminemia is present.
# Chunk 4334
more prominent. Virtually all organ systems are affected, but the most 1813 evident complications include anemia and associated easy fatigability; decreased appetite with progressive malnutrition; abnormalities in calcium, phosphorus, and mineral-regulating hormones, such as 1,25(OH)2D3 (calcitriol), parathyroid hormone (PTH), and fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF-23); and abnormalities in sodium, potassium, water, and acid-base homeostasis. Many patients, especially the elderly, will have eGFR values compatible with stage 2 or 3 CKD. However, the majority of these patients will show no further deterioration of renal function. The primary care physician is advised to recheck kidney function, and if it is stable and not associated with proteinuria, the patient can usually be managed in this setting. However, if there is evidence of decline of GFR, uncontrolled hypertension, or proteinuria, referral to a nephrologist is appropriate. If the patient progresses to stage 5 CKD, toxins accumulate such that patients usually experience a marked disturbance in their activities of daily living, well-being, nutritional status, and water and electrolyte homeostasis, eventuating in the uremic syndrome.
# Chunk 4335
Although serum urea and creatinine concentrations are used to measure the excretory capacity of the kidneys, accumulation of these two molecules themselves does not account for the many symptoms and signs that characterize the uremic syndrome in advanced renal failure.
# Chunk 4336
1814 Hundreds of toxins that accumulate in renal failure have been implicated in the uremic syndrome. These include water-soluble, hydrophobic, protein-bound, charged, and uncharged compounds. Additional categories of nitrogenous excretory products include guanidino compounds, urates and hippurates, products of nucleic acid metabolism, polyamines, myoinositol, phenols, benzoates, and indoles. It is thus evident that the serum concentrations of urea and creatinine should be viewed as being readily measured, but incomplete, surrogate markers for these compounds, and monitoring the levels of urea and creatinine in the patient with impaired kidney function represents a vast oversimplification of the uremic state. The uremic syndrome and the disease state associated with advanced renal impairment involve more than renal excretory failure. A host of metabolic and endocrine functions normally performed by the kidneys is also impaired or suppressed, and this results in anemia, malnutrition, and abnormal metabolism of carbohydrates, fats, and proteins. Furthermore, plasma levels of many hormones, including PTH, FGF23, insulin, glucagon, steroid hormones including vitamin D and sex hormones, and prolactin, change with CKD as a result of reduced excretion, decreased degradation, or abnormal regulation. Finally, CKD is associated with worsening systemic inflammation. Elevated levels of C-reactive protein are detected along with other acute-phase reactants, whereas levels of so-called negative acute-phase reactants, such as albumin and fetuin, decline with progressive reduction in GFR. Thus, the inflammation associated with CKD is important in the malnutrition-inflammation-atherosclerosis/calcification syndrome, which contributes in turn to the acceleration of vascular disease and comorbidity associated with advanced kidney disease. In summary, the pathophysiology of the uremic syndrome can be divided into manifestations in three spheres of dysfunction: (1) those consequent to the accumulation of toxins that normally undergo renal excretion, including products of protein metabolism; (2) those consequent to the loss of other kidney functions, such as fluid and electrolyte homeostasis and hormone regulation; and (3) progressive systemic inflammation and its vascular and nutritional consequences.
# Chunk 4337
With worsening renal function, the total urinary net daily acid excretion is usually limited to 30–40 mmol, and the anions of retained organic acids can then lead to an anion-gap metabolic acidosis. Thus, the non-anion-gap metabolic acidosis that can be seen in earlier stages of CKD may be complicated by the addition of an anion-gap metabolic acidosis as CKD progresses. In most patients, the metabolic acidosis is mild; the pH is rarely <7.35 and can usually be corrected with oral sodium bicarbonate supplementation. Animal and human studies have suggested that even modest degrees of metabolic acidosis may be associated with the development of protein catabolism. Alkali supplementation may attenuate the catabolic state and possibly slow CKD progression and accordingly is recommended when the serum bicarbonate concentration falls below 20–23 mmol/L. The concomitant sodium load mandates careful attention to volume status and the need for diuretic agents.
# Chunk 4338
treatMent Fluid, electrolyte, And Acid-BAse disorders

Dietary salt restriction and the use of loop diuretics, occasionally in combination with metolazone, may be needed to maintain euvolemia. In contrast, overzealous salt restriction or diuretic use can lead to ECFV depletion and precipitate a further decline in GFR. The rare patient with salt-losing nephropathy may require a sodium-rich diet or salt supplementation. Water restriction is indicated only if there is a problem with hyponatremia. Intractable ECFV expansion, despite dietary salt restriction and diuretic therapy, may be an indication to start renal replacement therapy. Hyperkalemia often responds to dietary restriction of potassium, the use of kaliuretic diuretics, and avoidance of both potassium supplements (including occult sources, such as dietary salt substitutes) and potassium-retaining medications (especially angiotensin-converting enzyme [ACE] inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers [ARBs]). Kaliuretic diuretics promote urinary potassium excretion, whereas potassium-binding resins, such as calcium resonium or sodium polystyrene, can promote potassium loss through the GI tract and may reduce the incidence of hyperkalemia. Intractable hyperkalemia is an indication (although uncommon) to consider institution of dialysis in a CKD patient. The renal tubular acidosis and subsequent anion-gap metabolic acidosis in progressive CKD will respond to alkali supplementation, typically with sodium bicarbonate. Recent studies suggest that this replacement should be considered when the serum bicarbonate concentration falls below 20–23 mmol/L to avoid the protein catabolic state seen with even mild degrees of metabolic acidosis and to slow the progression of CKD.
# Chunk 4339
Uremic fetor, a urine-like odor on the breath, derives from the breakdown of urea to ammonia in saliva and is often associated with an unpleasant metallic taste (dysgeusia). Gastritis, peptic disease, and mucosal ulcerations at any level of the GI tract occur in uremic patients and can lead to abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and GI bleeding. These patients are also prone to constipation, which can be worsened by the administration of calcium and iron supplements. The retention of uremic toxins also leads to anorexia, nausea, and vomiting.
# Chunk 4340
Laboratory Investigation Laboratory studies should focus on a search for clues to an underlying causative or aggravating disease process and on the degree of renal damage and its consequences. Serum and urine protein electrophoresis, looking for multiple myeloma, should be obtained in all patients >35 years with unexplained CKD, especially if there is associated anemia and elevated, or even inappropriately 1820 normal, serum calcium concentration in the face of renal insufficiency. In the presence of glomerulonephritis, autoimmune diseases such as lupus and underlying infectious etiologies such as hepatitis B and C and HIV should be tested. Serial measurements of renal function should be obtained to determine the pace of renal deterioration and ensure that the disease is truly chronic rather than acute or subacute and hence potentially reversible. Serum concentrations of calcium, phosphorus, vitamin D, and PTH should be measured to evaluate metabolic bone disease. Hemoglobin concentration, iron, vitamin B12, and folate should also be evaluated. A 24-h urine collection may be helpful, because protein excretion >300 mg may be an indication for therapy with ACE inhibitors or ARBs.
# Chunk 4341
Although renal biopsy can usually be performed in early CKD (stages 1–3), it is not always indicated. For example, in a patient with a history of type 1 diabetes mellitus for 15–20 years with retinopathy, nephrotic-range proteinuria, and absence of hematuria, the diagnosis of diabetic nephropathy is very likely and biopsy is usually not necessary. However, if there were some other finding not typical of diabetic nephropathy, such as hematuria or white blood cell casts, or absence of diabetic retinopathy, some other disease may be present and a biopsy may be indicated.
# Chunk 4342
The potassium concentration of dialysate may be varied from 0 to 4 mmol/L depending on the predialysis serum potassium concentration. The usual dialysate calcium concentration is 1.25 mmol/L (2.5 meq/L), although modification may be required in selected settings (e.g., higher dialysate calcium concentrations may be used in patients with hypocalcemia associated with secondary hyperparathyroidism or following parathyroidectomy). The usual dialysate sodium concentration is 136– 140 mmol/L. In patients who frequently develop hypotension during their dialysis run, “sodium modeling” to counterbalance urea-related osmolar gradients is often used. With sodium modeling, the dialysate sodium concentration is gradually lowered from the range of 145–155 mmol/L to isotonic concentrations (136–140 mmol/L) near the end of the dialysis treatment, typically declining either in steps or in a linear or exponential fashion. Higher dialysate sodium concentrations and sodium modeling may predispose patients to positive sodium balance and increased thirst; thus, these strategies to ameliorate intradialytic hypotension may be undesirable in hypertensive patients or in patients with large interdialytic weight gains. Because patients are exposed to approximately 120 L of water during each dialysis treatment, water used for the dialysate is subjected to filtration, softening, deionization, and, ultimately, reverse osmosis to remove microbiologic contaminants and dissolved ions.
# Chunk 4343
The hemodialysis procedure consists of pumping heparinized blood through the dialyzer at a flow rate of 300–500 mL/min, while dialysate flows in an opposite counter-current direction at 500–800 mL/ min. The efficiency of dialysis is determined by blood and dialysate flow through the dialyzer as well as dialyzer characteristics (i.e., its efficiency in removing solute). The dose of dialysis, which is currently defined as a derivation of the fractional urea clearance during a single 1824 treatment, is further governed by patient size, residual kidney function, dietary protein intake, the degree of anabolism or catabolism, and the presence of comorbid conditions. Since the landmark studies of Sargent and Gotch relating the measurement of the dose of dialysis using urea concentrations with morbidity in the National Cooperative Dialysis Study, the delivered dose of dialysis has been measured and considered as a quality assurance and improvement tool. Although the fractional removal of urea nitrogen and derivations thereof are considered to be the standard methods by which “adequacy of dialysis” is measured, a large multicenter randomized clinical trial (the HEMO Study) failed to show a difference in mortality associated with a large difference in urea clearance. Current targets include a urea reduction ratio (the fractional reduction in blood urea nitrogen per hemodialysis session) of >65–70% and a body water– indexed clearance × time product (KT/V) above 1.2 or 1.05, depending on whether urea concentrations are “equilibrated.” For the majority of patients with ESRD, between 9 and 12 h of dialysis are required each week, usually divided into three equal sessions. Several studies have suggested that longer hemodialysis session lengths may be beneficial (independent of urea clearance), although these studies are confounded by a variety of patient characteristics, including body size and nutritional status. Hemodialysis “dose” should be individualized, and factors other than the urea nitrogen should be considered, including the adequacy of ultrafiltration or fluid removal and control of hyperkalemia, hyperphosphatemia, and metabolic acidosis. A recent randomized clinical trial (the Frequent Hemodialysis Network Trial) demonstrated improved control of hypertension and hyperphosphatemia, reduced left ventricular mass, and improved self-reported physical health with six times per week hemodialysis compared to the usual three times per week therapy. A companion trial in which frequent nocturnal hemodialysis was compared to conventional hemodialysis at home showed no significant effect on left ventricular mass or self-reported physical health. Finally, an evaluation of the U.S. Renal Data System registry showed a significant increase in mortality and hospitalization for heart failure after the longer interdialytic interval that occurs over the dialysis “weekend.”
# Chunk 4344
Peritoneal dialysis may be carried out as CAPD, CCPD, or a combination of both. In CAPD, dialysate is manually infused into the peritoneal cavity and exchanged three to five times during the day. A nighttime dwell is frequently instilled at bedtime and remains in the peritoneal cavity through the night. In CCPD, exchanges are performed in an automated fashion, usually at night; the patient is connected to an automated cycler that performs a series of exchange cycles while the patient sleeps. The number of exchange cycles required to optimize peritoneal solute clearance varies by the peritoneal membrane characteristics; as with hemodialysis, solute clearance should be tracked to ensure dialysis “adequacy.”
# Chunk 4345
As with hemodialysis, the optimal dose of peritoneal dialysis is unknown. Several observational studies have suggested that higher rates of urea and creatinine clearance (the latter generally measured in liters per week) are associated with lower mortality rates and fewer uremic complications. However, a randomized clinical trial (Adequacy of Peritoneal Dialysis in Mexico [ADEMEX]) failed to show a significant reduction in mortality or complications with a relatively large increment in urea clearance. In general, patients on peritoneal dialysis do well when they retain residual kidney function. The rates of technique failure increase with years on dialysis and have been correlated with loss of residual function to a greater extent than loss of peritoneal membrane capacity. For some patients in whom CCPD does not provide sufficient solute clearance, a hybrid approach can be adopted where one or more daytime exchanges are added to the CCPD regimen. Although this approach can enhance solute clearance and prolong a patient’s capacity to remain on peritoneal dialysis, the burden of the hybrid approach can be overwhelming.
# Chunk 4346
Peritonitis typically develops when there has been a break in sterile technique during one or more of the exchange procedures. Peritonitis is usually defined by an elevated peritoneal fluid leukocyte count (100/μL, of which at least 50% are polymorphonuclear neutrophils); these cutoffs are lower than in spontaneous bacterial peritonitis because of the presence of dextrose in peritoneal dialysis solutions and rapid bacterial proliferation in this environment without antibiotic therapy. The clinical presentation typically consists of pain and cloudy dialysate, often with fever and other constitutional symptoms. The most common culprit organisms are gram-positive cocci, including Staphylococcus, reflecting the origin from the skin. Gram-negative rod infections are less common; fungal and mycobacterial infections can be seen in selected patients, particularly after antibacterial therapy. Most cases of peritonitis can be managed either with intraperitoneal or oral antibiotics, depending on the organism; many patients with peritonitis do not require hospitalization. In cases where peritonitis is due to hydrophilic gram-negative rods (e.g., Pseudomonas sp.) or yeast, antimicrobial therapy is usually not sufficient, and catheter removal is required to ensure complete eradication of infection. Nonperitonitis catheter-associated infections (often termed tunnel infections) vary widely in severity. Some cases can be managed with local antibiotic or silver nitrate administration, whereas others are severe enough to require parenteral antibiotic therapy and catheter removal.
# Chunk 4347
Transplantation of the human kidney is the treatment of choice for advanced chronic renal failure. Worldwide, tens of thousands of these procedures have been performed with more than 180,000 patients bearing functioning kidney transplants in the United States today. When azathioprine and prednisone initially were used as immunosuppressive drugs in the 1960s, the results with properly matched familial donors were superior to those with organs from deceased donors: 75–90% compared with 50–60% graft survival rates at 1 year. During the 1970s and 1980s, the success rate at the 1-year mark for deceased-donor
# Chunk 4348
transplants rose progressively. Currently, deceased-donor grafts have a 92% 1-year survival and living-donor grafts have a 96% 1-year survival. Although there has been improvement in long-term survival, it has not been as impressive as the short-term survival, and currently the “average” (t1/2) life expectancy of a living-donor graft is around 20 years and that of a deceased-donor graft is close to 14 years.
# Chunk 4349
Among the few absolute “immunologic” contraindications to transplantation is the presence of antibodies against the donor kidney at the time of the anticipated transplant that can cause hyperacute rejection. Those harmful antibodies include natural antibodies against the ABO blood group antigens and antibodies against human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I (A, B, C) or class II (DR) antigens. These antibodies are routinely excluded by proper screening of the candidate’s ABO compatibility and direct cytotoxic cross-matching of candidate serum with lymphocytes of the donor.
# Chunk 4350
Depleting Agents Peripheral human lymphocytes, thymocytes, or lymphocytes from spleens or thoracic duct fistulas are injected into horses, rabbits, or goats to produce antilymphocyte serum, from which the globulin fraction is then separated, resulting in antithymocyte globulin. Those polyclonal antibodies induce lymphocyte depletion, and the immune system may take several months to recover.
# Chunk 4351
Steroids Glucocorticoids are important adjuncts to immunosuppressive therapy. Among all the agents employed, prednisone has effects that are easiest to assess, and in large doses it is usually effective for the reversal of rejection. In general, 200–300 mg prednisone is given immediately before or at the time of transplantation, and the dose is reduced to 30 mg within a week. The side effects of the glucocorticoids, particularly impairment of wound healing and predisposition to infection, make it desirable to taper the dose as rapidly as possible in the immediate postoperative period. Many centers now have protocols for early discontinuance or avoidance of steroids because of long-term adverse effects on bone, skin, and glucose metabolism. For treatment of acute rejection, methylprednisolone, 0.5–1 g IV, is administered immediately upon diagnosis of beginning rejection and continued once daily for 3 days. Such “pulse” doses are not effective in chronic rejection. Most patients whose renal function is stable after 6 months or a year do not require large doses of prednisone; maintenance doses of 5–10 mg/d are the rule. A major effect of steroids is preventing the release of IL-6 and IL-1 by monocytes-macrophages.
# Chunk 4352
Adequate hemodialysis should be performed within 48 h of surgery, and care should be taken that the serum potassium level is not markedly elevated so that intraoperative cardiac arrhythmias can be averted. The diuresis that commonly occurs postoperatively must be carefully monitored. In some instances, it may be massive, reflecting the inability of ischemic tubules to regulate sodium and water excretion; with large diureses, massive potassium losses may occur. Most chronically uremic patients have some excess of extracellular fluid, and it is useful to maintain an expanded fluid volume in the immediate postoperative period. Acute tubular necrosis (ATN) due to ischemia may cause immediate oliguria or may follow an initial short period of graft function. Recovery usually occurs within 3 weeks, although periods as long as 6 weeks have been reported. Superimposition of rejection on ATN is common, and the differential diagnosis may be difficult without a graft biopsy. Cyclosporine therapy prolongs ATN, and some patients do not diurese until the dose is reduced drastically. Many centers avoid starting cyclosporine for the first several days, using antilymphocyte globulin (ALG) or a monoclonal antibody along with mycophenolic acid and prednisone until renal function is established. Figure 337-2 illustrates an algorithm followed by many transplant centers for early posttransplant management of recipients at high or low risk of early renal dysfunction.
# Chunk 4353
Early diagnosis of rejection allows prompt institution of therapy to preserve renal function and prevent irreversible damage. Clinical evidence of rejection is rarely characterized by fever, swelling, and tenderness over the allograft. Rejection may present only with a rise in serum creatinine, with or without a reduction in urine volume. The focus should be on ruling out other causes of functional deterioration.
# Chunk 4354
Doppler ultrasonography may be useful in ascertaining changes in the renal vasculature and in renal blood flow. Thrombosis of the renal vein occurs rarely; it may be reversible if it is caused by technical factors and intervention is prompt. Diagnostic ultrasound is the procedure of choice to rule out urinary obstruction or to confirm the presence of perirenal collections of urine, blood, or lymph. A rise in the serum creatinine level is a late marker of rejection, but it may be the only sign. Novel biomarkers are needed for early noninvasive detection of allograft rejection.
# Chunk 4355
Calcineurin inhibitors (cyclosporine and tacrolimus) have an afferent arteriolar constrictor effect on the kidney and may produce permanent vascular and interstitial injury after sustained high-dose therapy. This action will lead to a deterioration in renal function difficult to distinguish from rejection without a renal biopsy. Interstitial fibrosis, isometric tubular vacuolization, and thickening of arteriolar walls are suggestive of this side effect, but not diagnostic. Hence, if no rejection is detected on the biopsy, serum creatinine may respond to a reduction in dose. However, if rejection activity is present in the biopsy, appropriate therapy is indicated. The first rejection episode is usually treated with IV administration of methylprednisolone, 500–1000 mg daily for 3 days. Failure to respond is an indication for antibody therapy, usually with antithymocyte globulin.
# Chunk 4356
Aggressive diagnostic procedures, including transbronchial and open-lung biopsy, are frequently indicated. In the case of P. jiroveci (Chap. 244) infection, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) is the treatment of choice; amphotericin B has been used effectively in systemic fungal infections. Prophylaxis against P. jiroveci with daily or alternate-day low-dose TMP-SMX is very effective. Involvement of the oropharynx with Candida (Chap. 240) may be treated with local nystatin. Tissue-invasive fungal infections require treatment with systemic agents such as fluconazole. Small doses (a total of 300 mg) of amphotericin given over a period of 2 weeks may be effective in fungal infections refractory to fluconazole. Macrolide antibiotics, especially ketoconazole and erythromycin, and some calcium channel blockers (diltiazem, verapamil) compete with calcineurin inhibitors for P450 catabolism and cause elevated levels of these immunosuppressive drugs. Analeptics, such as phenytoin and carbamazepine, will increase catabolism to result in low levels. Aspergillus (Chap. 241), Nocardia (Chap. 199), and especially CMV (Chap. 219) infections also occur.
# Chunk 4357
The polyoma group (BK, JC, SV40) is another class of DNA viruses that can become dormant in kidneys and can be activated by immunosuppression. When reactivation occurs with BK, there is a 50% chance of progressive fibrosis and loss of the graft within 1 year by the activated virus. Risk of infection is associated with the overall degree of immunosuppression rather than the individual immunosuppressive drugs used. Renal biopsy is necessary for the diagnosis. There have been variable results with leflunomide, cidofovir, and quinolone antibiotics (which are effective against polyoma helicase), but it is most important to reduce the immunosuppressive load.
# Chunk 4358
(A–C: Courtesy of Dr. Vincent Gattone, Indiana University; with permission.) tubules. Most large proteins and all cells are excluded from filtration by a physicochemical barrier governed by pore size and negative electrostatic charge. The mechanics of filtration and reclamation are quite complicated for many solutes (Chap. 325). For example, in the case of serum albumin, the glomerulus is an imperfect barrier. Although albumin has a negative charge, which would tend to repel the negatively charged GBM, it only has a physical radius of 3.6 nm, while pores in the GBM and slit-pore membranes have a radius of 4 nm. Consequently, variable amounts of albumin inevitably cross the filtration barrier to be reclaimed by megalin and cubilin receptors along the proximal tubule. Remarkably, humans with normal nephrons excrete on average 8–10 mg of albumin in daily voided urine, approximately 20–60% of total excreted protein. This amount of albumin, and other proteins, can rise to gram quantities following glomerular injury.
# Chunk 4359
Sustained proteinuria >1–2 g/24 h is also commonly associated with glomerular disease. Patients often will not know they have proteinuria unless they become edematous or notice foaming urine on voiding. Sustained proteinuria has to be distinguished from lesser amounts of so-called benign proteinuria in the normal population (Table 338-1). This latter class of proteinuria is nonsustained, generally <1 g/24 h, and is sometimes called functional or transient proteinuria. Fever, exercise, obesity, sleep apnea, emotional stress, and congestive heart failure can explain transient proteinuria. Proteinuria only seen with upright posture is called orthostatic proteinuria and has a benign prognosis. Isolated proteinuria sustained over multiple clinic visits is found in many glomerular lesions. Proteinuria in most adults with glomerular disease is nonselective, containing albumin and a mixture of other serum proteins, whereas in children with minimal change disease, the proteinuria is selective and composed largely of albumin.
# Chunk 4360
When confronted with an abnormal urinalysis and elevated serum creatinine, with or without edema or congestive heart failure, one must consider whether the glomerulonephritis is acute or chronic. This assessment is best made by careful history (last known urinalysis or serum creatinine during pregnancy or insurance physical, evidence of infection, or use of medication or recreational drugs); the size of the kidneys on renal ultrasound examination; and how the patient feels at presentation. Chronic glomerular disease often presents with decreased kidney size. Patients who quickly develop renal failure are fatigued and weak and often have uremic symptoms associated with nausea, vomiting, fluid retention, and somnolence. Primary glomerulonephritis presenting with renal failure that has progressed slowly, however, can be remarkably asymptomatic, as are patients with acute glomerulonephritis without much loss in renal function. Once this initial information is collected, selected patients who are clinically stable, have adequate blood clotting parameters, and are willing and able to receive treatment are encouraged to have a renal biopsy.
# Chunk 4361
Each region of a renal biopsy is assessed separately. By light microscopy, glomeruli (at least 10 and ideally 20) are reviewed individually for discrete lesions; <50% involvement is considered focal, and >50% is diffuse. Injury in each glomerular tuft can be segmental, involving a portion of the tuft, or global, involving most of the glomerulus. Glomeruli having proliferative characteristics show increased cellularity. When cells in the capillary tuft proliferate, it is called endocapillary, and when cellular proliferation extends into Bowman’s space, it is called extracapillary. Synechiae are formed when epithelial podocytes attach to Bowman’s capsule in the setting of glomerular injury; crescents, which in some cases may be the extension of synechiae, develop when fibrocellular/fibrin collections fill all or part of Bowman’s space; and sclerotic glomeruli show acellular, amorphous accumulations of proteinaceous material throughout the tuft with loss of functional capillaries and normal mesangium. Since age-related glomerulosclerosis is common in adults, one can estimate the background percentage of sclerosis by dividing the patient’s age in half and subtracting 10. Immunofluorescent and electron microscopy can detect the presence and location of subepithelial, subendothelial, or mesangial immune deposits, or reduplication or splitting of the basement membrane. In the other regions of the biopsy, the vasculature surrounding glomeruli and tubules can show angiopathy, vasculitis, the presence of fibrils, or thrombi. The tubules can be assessed for adjacency to one another; separation can be the result of edema, tubular dropout, or collagen deposition resulting from interstitial fibrosis. Interstitial fibrosis is an ominous sign of irreversibility and progression to renal failure.
# Chunk 4362
The classic presentation is an acute nephritic picture with hematuria, pyuria, red blood cell casts, edema, hypertension, and oliguric renal failure, which may be severe enough to appear as RPGN. Systemic symptoms of headache, malaise, anorexia, and flank pain (due to swelling of the renal capsule) are reported in as many as 50% of cases. Five percent of children and 20% of adults have proteinuria in the nephrotic range. In the first week of symptoms, 90% of patients will have a depressed CH50 and decreased levels of C3 with normal levels of C4. Positive rheumatoid factor (30–40%), cryoglobulins and circulating immune complexes (60–70%), and ANCA against myeloperoxidase (10%) are also reported. Positive cultures for streptococcal infection are inconsistently present (10–70%), but increased titers of ASO (30%), anti-DNAse, (70%), or antihyaluronidase antibodies (40%) can help confirm the diagnosis. Consequently, the diagnosis of poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis rarely requires a renal biopsy. A subclinical disease is reported in some series to be four to five times as common as clinical nephritis, and these latter cases are characterized by asymptomatic microscopic hematuria with low serum C3 complement levels.
# Chunk 4363
Endocarditis-associated glomerulonephritis is typically a complication of subacute bacterial endocarditis, particularly in patients who remain untreated for a long time, have negative blood cultures, or have right-sided endocarditis. Glomerulonephritis is unusual in acute bacterial endocarditis because it takes 10–14 days to develop immune complex–mediated injury, by which time the patient has been treated, often with emergent surgery. Grossly, the kidneys in subacute bacterial endocarditis have subcapsular hemorrhages with a “flea-bitten” appearance, and microscopy on renal biopsy reveals focal proliferation around foci of necrosis associated with abundant mesangial, subendothelial, and subepithelial immune deposits of IgG, IgM, and C3. Patients who present with a clinical picture of RPGN have crescents. Embolic infarcts or septic abscesses may also be present. The pathogenesis hinges on the renal deposition of circulating immune complexes in the kidney with complement activation. Patients present with gross or microscopic hematuria, pyuria, and mild proteinuria or, less commonly, RPGN with rapid loss of renal function. A normocytic anemia, elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate, hypocomplementemia, high titers of rheumatoid factor, type III cryoglobulins, circulating immune complexes, and ANCAs may be present. Levels of serum creatinine may be elevated at diagnosis, but with modern therapy there is little progression to chronic renal failure. Primary treatment is eradication of the infection with 4–6 weeks of antibiotics, and if accomplished expeditiously, the prognosis for renal recovery is good. ANCA-associated vasculitis sometimes accompanies or is confused 1838 with subacute bacterial endocarditis (SBE) and should be ruled out, as the treatment is different. As variants of persistent bacterial infection in blood-associated glomerulonephritis, postinfectious glomerulonephritis can occur in patients with ventriculoatrial and ventriculoperitoneal shunts; pulmonary, intraabdominal, pelvic, or cutaneous infections; and infected vascular prostheses. In developed countries, a significant proportion of cases afflict adults, especially the immunocompromised, and the predominant organism is Staphylococcus. The clinical presentation of these conditions is variable and includes proteinuria, microscopic hematuria, acute renal failure, and hypertension. Serum complement levels are low, and there may be elevated levels of C-reactive proteins, rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibodies, and cryoglobulins. Renal lesions include membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis (MPGN), diffuse proliferative and exudative glomerulonephritis (DPGN), or mesangioproliferative glomerulonephritis, sometimes leading to RPGN. Treatment focuses on eradicating the infection, with most patients treated as if they have endocarditis. The prognosis is guarded.
# Chunk 4364
Lupus nephritis is a common and serious complication of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and most severe in African-American female adolescents. Thirty to 50% of patients will have clinical manifestations of renal disease at the time of diagnosis, and 60% of adults and 80% of children develop renal abnormalities at some point in the course of their disease. Lupus nephritis results from the deposition of circulating immune complexes, which activate the complement cascade leading to complement-mediated damage, leukocyte infiltration, activation of procoagulant factors, and release of various cytokines. In situ immune complex formation following glomerular binding of nuclear antigens, particularly necrotic nucleosomes, also plays a role in renal injury. The presence of antiphospholipid antibodies may also trigger a thrombotic microangiopathy in a minority of patients.
# Chunk 4365
The clinical manifestations, course of disease, and treatment of lupus nephritis are closely linked to renal pathology. The most common clinical sign of renal disease is proteinuria, but hematuria, hypertension, varying degrees of renal failure, and active urine sediment with red blood cell casts can all be present. Although significant renal pathology can be found on biopsy even in the absence of major abnormalities in the urinalysis, most nephrologists do not biopsy patients until the urinalysis is convincingly abnormal. The extrarenal manifestations of lupus are important in establishing a firm diagnosis of systemic lupus because, while serologic abnormalities are common in lupus nephritis, they are not diagnostic. Anti-dsDNA antibodies that fix complement correlate best with the presence of renal disease. Hypocomplementemia is common in patients with acute lupus nephritis (70–90%) and declining complement levels may herald a flare. Although urinary biomarkers of lupus nephritis are being identified to assist in predicting renal flares, renal biopsy is the only reliable method of identifying the morphologic variants of lupus nephritis.
# Chunk 4366
with proliferation or scarring, often involving only a segment of the glomerulus (see Fig. 62e-12). Class III lesions have the most varied course. Hypertension, an active urinary sediment, and proteinuria are common with nephrotic-range proteinuria in 25–33% of patients. Elevated serum creatinine is present in 25% of patients. Patients with mild proliferation involving a small percentage of glomeruli respond well to therapy with steroids alone, and fewer than 5% progress to renal failure over 5 years. Patients with more severe proliferation involving a greater percentage of glomeruli have a far worse prognosis and lower remission rates. Treatment of those patients is the same as that for class IV lesions. Many nephrologists believe that class III lesions are simply an early presentation of class IV disease. Others believe severe class III disease is a discrete lesion requiring aggressive therapy. Class IV describes global, diffuse proliferative lesions involving the vast majority of glomeruli. Patients with class IV lesions commonly have high anti-DNA antibody titers, low serum complement, hematuria, red blood cell casts, proteinuria, hypertension, and decreased renal function; 50% of patients have nephrotic-range proteinuria. Patients with crescents on biopsy often have a rapidly progressive decline in renal function (see Fig. 62e-12). Without treatment, this aggressive lesion has the worst renal prognosis. However, if a remission—defined as a return to near-normal renal function and proteinuria ≤330 mg/dL per day—is achieved with treatment, renal outcomes are excellent. Current evidence suggests that inducing a remission with administration of high-dose steroids and either cyclophosphamide or mycophenolate mofetil for 2–6 months, followed by maintenance therapy with lower doses of steroids and mycophenolate mofetil or azathioprine, best balances the likelihood of successful remission with the side effects of therapy. There is no consensus on use of high-dose intravenous methylprednisolone versus oral prednisone, monthly intravenous cyclophosphamide versus daily oral cyclophosphamide, or other immunosuppressants such as cyclosporine, tacrolimus, rituximab, or belimumab. Nephrologists tend to avoid prolonged use of cyclophosphamide in patients of childbearing age without first banking eggs or sperm.
# Chunk 4367
Patients with any of the above lesions also can transform to another lesion; hence patients often require reevaluation, including repeat renal biopsy. Lupus patients with class VI lesions have greater than 90% sclerotic glomeruli and end-stage renal disease with interstitial fibrosis. As a group, approximately 20% of patients with lupus nephritis will reach end-stage disease, requiring dialysis or transplantation. Systemic lupus tends to become quiescent once there is renal failure, perhaps due to the immunosuppressant effects of uremia. However, patients with lupus nephritis have a markedly increased mortality compared with the general population. Renal transplantation in renal failure from lupus, usually performed after approximately 6 months of inactive disease, results in allograft survival rates comparable to patients transplanted for other reasons.
# Chunk 4368
Patients who develop autoantibodies directed against glomerular basement antigens frequently develop a glomerulonephritis termed antiglomerular basement membrane (anti-GBM) disease. When they present with lung hemorrhage and glomerulonephritis, they have a pulmonary-renal syndrome called Goodpasture’s syndrome. The target epitopes for this autoimmune disease lie in the quaternary structure of α3 NC1 domain of collagen IV. Indeed, anti-GBM disease may be considered an autoimmune “conformeropathy” that involves the perturbation of quaternary structure of the α 345NC1 hexamer. MHC-restricted T cells initiate the autoantibody response because humans are not tolerant to the epitopes created by this quaternary structure. The epitopes are normally sequestered in the collagen IV hexamer and can be exposed by infection, smoking, oxidants, or solvents. Goodpasture’s syndrome appears in two age groups: in young men in their late twenties and in men and women in their sixties and seventies. Disease in the younger age group is usually explosive, with hemoptysis, a sudden fall in hemoglobin, fever, dyspnea, and hematuria. Hemoptysis is largely confined to smokers, and those who present with lung hemorrhage as a group do better than older populations who have prolonged, asymptomatic renal injury; presentation with oliguria is often associated with a particularly bad outcome. The performance of an urgent kidney biopsy is important in suspected cases of Goodpasture’s syndrome to confirm the diagnosis and assess prognosis. Renal biopsies typically show focal or segmental necrosis that later, with aggressive destruction of the capillaries by cellular proliferation, leads to crescent formation in Bowman’s space (see Fig. 62e-14). As these lesions progress, there is concomitant interstitial nephritis with fibrosis and tubular atrophy.
# Chunk 4369
The presence of anti-GBM antibodies and complement is recognized on biopsy by linear immunofluorescent staining for IgG (rarely IgA). In testing serum for anti-GBM antibodies, it is particularly important that the α3 NC1 domain of collagen IV alone be used as the target. This is because nonnephritic antibodies against the α1 NC1 domain are seen in paraneoplastic syndromes and cannot be discerned from assays that use whole basement membrane fragments as the binding target. Between 10 and 15% of sera from patients with Goodpasture’s syndrome also contain ANCA antibodies against myeloperoxidase. This subset of patients has a vasculitis-associated variant, which has a surprisingly good prognosis with treatment. Prognosis at presentation is worse if there are >50% crescents on renal biopsy with advanced fibrosis, if serum creatinine is >5–6 mg/dL, if oliguria is present, or if there is a need for acute dialysis. Although frequently attempted, most of these latter patients will not respond to plasmapheresis and steroids. Patients with advanced renal failure who present with hemoptysis should still be treated for their lung hemorrhage, as it responds to plasmapheresis and can be lifesaving. Treated patients with less severe 1839 disease typically respond to 8–10 treatments of plasmapheresis accompanied by oral prednisone and cyclophosphamide in the first 2 weeks. Kidney transplantation is possible, but because there is risk of recurrence, experience suggests that patients should wait for 6 months and until serum antibodies are undetectable.
# Chunk 4370
IgA nephropathy is predominantly a sporadic disease but susceptibility to it has been shown uncommonly to have a genetic component depending on geography and the existence of “founder effects.” Familial forms of IgA nephropathy are more common in northern Italy and eastern Kentucky. No single causal gene has been identified. Clinical and laboratory evidence suggests close similarities between Henoch-Schönlein purpura and IgA nephropathy. Henoch-Schönlein purpura is distinguished clinically from IgA nephropathy by prominent systemic symptoms, a younger age (<20 years old), preceding infection, and abdominal complaints. Deposits of IgA are also found in the glomerular mesangium in a variety of systemic diseases, including chronic liver disease, Crohn’s disease, gastrointestinal adenocarcinoma, chronic bronchiectasis, idiopathic interstitial pneumonia, dermatitis herpetiformis, mycosis fungoides, leprosy, ankylosing spondylitis, relapsing polychondritis, and Sjögren’s syndrome. IgA deposition in these entities is not usually associated with clinically significant glomerular inflammation or renal dysfunction and thus is not called IgA nephropathy.
# Chunk 4371
IgA nephropathy is an immune complex–mediated glomerulonephritis defined by the presence of diffuse mesangial IgA deposits often associated with mesangial hypercellularity. (See Glomerular Schematic 2.) IgM, IgG, C3, or immunoglobulin light chains may be codistributed with IgA. IgA deposited in the mesangium is typically polymeric and of the IgA1 subclass, the pathogenic significance of which is not clear. Abnormalities have been described in IgA production by plasma cells, particularly secretory IgA; in IgA clearance, predominately by the liver; in mesangial IgA clearance and receptors for IgA; and in growth factor and cytokine-mediated events. Currently, however, abnormalities in the O -glycosylation of the hinge region of IgA seem to best account for the pathogenesis of sporadic IgA nephropathy. Despite the presence of elevated serum IgA levels in 20–50% of patients, IgA deposition in skin biopsies in 15–55% of patients, or elevated levels of secretory IgA and IgA-fibronectin complexes, a renal biopsy is necessary to confirm the diagnosis. Although the immunofluorescent pattern of IgA on renal biopsy defines IgA nephropathy in the proper clinical context, a variety of histologic lesions may be seen on light microscopy (see Fig. 62e-8), including DPGN; segmental sclerosis; and, rarely, segmental necrosis with cellular crescent formation, which typically presents as RPGN.
# Chunk 4372
The two most common presentations of IgA nephropathy are recurrent episodes of macroscopic hematuria during or immediately following an upper respiratory infection often accompanied by proteinuria or persistent asymptomatic microscopic hematuria. Nephrotic syndrome is uncommon. Proteinuria can also first appear late in the course of the disease. Rarely patients present with acute renal failure and a rapidly progressive clinical picture. IgA nephropathy is a benign disease for the majority of patients, and 5–30% of patients may go into a complete remission, with others having hematuria but well preserved renal function. In the minority of patients who have progressive disease, progression is slow, with renal failure seen in only 25–30% of patients with IgA nephropathy over 20–25 years. This risk varies considerably among populations. Cumulatively, risk factors for the loss of renal function identified thus far account for less than 50% of the variation in observed outcome but include the presence of hypertension or proteinuria, the absence of episodes of macroscopic hematuria, male sex, older age of onset, and extensive glomerulosclerosis or interstitial fibrosis on renal biopsy. Several analyses in large populations of patients found persistent proteinuria for 6 months or longer to have the greatest predictive power for adverse renal outcomes.
# Chunk 4373
A group of patients with small-vessel vasculitis (arterioles, capillaries, and venules; rarely small arteries) and glomerulonephritis have serum ANCA; the antibodies are of two types, anti-proteinase 3 (PR3) or anti-myeloperoxidase (MPO) (Chap. 385); Lamp-2 antibodies have also been reported experimentally as potentially pathogenic. ANCA are produced with the help of T cells and activate leukocytes and monocytes, which together damage the walls of small vessels. Endothelial injury also attracts more leukocytes and extends the inflammation. Granulomatosis with polyangiitis, microscopic polyangiitis, and Churg-Strauss syndrome belong to this group because they are ANCA-positive and have a pauci-immune glomerulonephritis with few immune complexes in small vessels and glomerular capillaries. Patients with any of these three diseases can have any combination of the above serum antibodies, but anti-PR3 antibodies are more common in granulomatosis with polyangiitis and anti-MPO antibodies are more common in microscopic polyangiitis or Churg-Strauss. Although each of these diseases has some unique clinical features, most features do not predict relapse or progression, and as a group, they are generally treated in the same way. Since mortality is high without treatment, virtually all patients receive urgent treatment. Induction therapy usually includes some combination of plasmapheresis, methylprednisolone, and cyclophosphamide. Monthly “pulse” IV cyclophosphamide to induce remission of ANCA-associated vasculitis is as effective as daily oral cyclophosphamide but may be associated with increased relapses. Steroids are tapered soon after acute inflammation subsides, and patients are maintained on cyclophosphamide or azathioprine for up to a year to minimize the risk of relapse. Benefit with using mycophenolate mofetil or rituximab has not been proven.
# Chunk 4374
Churg-Strauss Syndrome When small-vessel vasculitis is associated with peripheral eosinophilia, cutaneous purpura, mononeuritis, asthma, and allergic rhinitis, a diagnosis of Churg-Strauss syndrome is considered. Hypergammaglobulinemia, elevated levels of serum IgE, or the presence of rheumatoid factor sometimes accompanies the allergic state. Lung inflammation, including fleeting cough and pulmonary infiltrates, often precedes the systemic manifestations of disease by years; lung manifestations are rarely absent. A third of patients may have exudative pleural effusions associated with eosinophils. Small-vessel vasculitis and focal segmental necrotizing glomerulonephritis can be seen on renal biopsy, usually absent eosinophils or granulomas. The cause of Churg-Strauss syndrome is autoimmune, but the inciting factors are unknown.
# Chunk 4375
Type I MPGN, the most proliferative of the three types, shows mesangial proliferation with lobular segmentation on renal biopsy and mesangial interposition between the capillary basement membrane and endothelial cells, producing a double contour sometimes called tram-tracking (see Fig. 62e-9). (See Glomerular Schematic 3.) Subendothelial deposits with low serum levels of C3 are typical, although 50% of patients have normal levels of C3 and occasional intramesangial deposits. Low serum C3 and a dense thickening of the GBM containing ribbons of dense deposits and C3 characterize type II MPGN, sometimes called dense deposit disease (see Fig. 62e-10). Classically, the glomerular tuft has a lobular appearance; intramesangial deposits are rarely present and subendothelial deposits are generally absent. Proliferation in type III MPGN is less common than the other two types and is often focal; mesangial interposition is rare, and subepithelial deposits can occur along widened segments of the GBM that appear laminated and disrupted.
# Chunk 4376
Type I MPGN is secondary to glomerular deposition of circulating immune complexes or their in situ formation. Types II and III MPGN may be related to “nephritic factors,” which are autoantibodies that stabilize C3 convertase and allow it to activate serum C3. MPGN can also result from acquired or genetic abnormalities in the alternative complement pathway. Patients with MPGN present with proteinuria, hematuria, and pyuria (30%); systemic symptoms of fatigue and malaise that are most common in children with type I disease; or an acute nephritic picture with RPGN and a speedy deterioration in renal function in up to 25% of patients. Low serum C3 levels are common. Fifty percent of patients with MPGN develop end-stage disease 10 years after diagnosis, and 90% have renal insufficiency after 20 years. Nephrotic 1841 syndrome, hypertension, and renal insufficiency all predict poor outcome. In the presence of proteinuria, treatment with inhibitors of the renin-angiotensin system is prudent. Evidence for treatment with dipyridamole, Coumadin (warfarin), or cyclophosphamide is not strongly established. There is some evidence supporting the efficacy of treatment of primary MPGN with steroids, particularly in children, as well as reports of efficacy with plasma exchange and other immunosuppressive drugs. If defects in the complement pathway are found, treatment with eculizumab is of hypothetical but unproven benefit. In secondary MPGN, treating the associated infection, autoimmune disease, or neoplasms is of demonstrated benefit. In particular, pegylated interferon and ribavirin are useful in reducing viral load. Although all primary renal diseases can recur over time in transplanted renal allografts, patients with MPGN are well known to be at risk for not only a histologic recurrence but also a clinically significant recurrence with loss of graft function.
# Chunk 4377
Minimal change disease (MCD), sometimes known as nil lesion, causes 70–90% of nephrotic syndrome in childhood but only 10–15% of nephrotic syndrome in adults. Minimal change disease usually presents as a primary renal disease but can be associated with several other conditions, including Hodgkin’s disease, allergies, or use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents; significant interstitial nephritis often accompanies cases associated with nonsteroidal drug use. Minimal change disease on renal biopsy shows no obvious glomerular lesion by light microscopy and is negative for deposits by immunofluorescent microscopy, or occasionally shows small amounts of IgM in the mesangium (see Fig. 62e-1). (See Glomerular Schematic 4.) Electron microscopy, however, consistently demonstrates an effacement of the foot process supporting the epithelial podocytes with weakening of slit-pore membranes. The pathophysiology of this lesion is uncertain. Most agree there is a circulating cytokine, perhaps related to a T cell response that alters capillary charge and podocyte integrity. The evidence for cytokine-related immune injury is circumstantial and is suggested by the presence of preceding allergies, altered cell-mediated immunity during viral infections, and the high frequency of remissions with steroids.
# Chunk 4378
Minimal change disease presents clinically with the abrupt onset of edema and nephrotic syndrome accompanied by acellular urinary sediment. Average urine protein excretion reported in 24 h is 10 g with severe hypoalbuminemia. Less common clinical features include hypertension (30% in children, 50% in adults), microscopic hematuria (20% in children, 33% in adults), atopy or allergic symptoms (40% in children, 30% in adults), and decreased renal function (<5% in children, 30% in adults). The appearance of acute renal failure in adults is often seen more commonly in patients with low serum albumin and intrarenal edema (nephrosarca) that is responsive to intravenous albumin and diuretics. This presentation must be distinguished from acute renal failure secondary to hypovolemia. Acute tubular necrosis and interstitial inflammation are also reported. In children, the abnormal urine principally contains albumin with minimal amounts of highermolecular-weight proteins, and is sometimes called selective proteinuria. Although up to 30% of children have a spontaneous remission, all children today are treated with steroids; only children who are nonresponders are biopsied in this setting. Primary responders are patients who have a complete remission (<0.2 mg/24 h of proteinuria) after a single course of prednisone; steroid-dependent patients relapse as their steroid dose is tapered. Frequent relapsers have two or more relapses in the 6 months following taper, and steroid-resistant patients fail to respond to steroid therapy. Adults are not considered steroid-resistant until after 4 months of therapy. Ninety to 95% of children will develop a complete remission after 8 weeks of steroid therapy, and 80–85% of adults will achieve complete remission, but only after a longer course of 20–24 weeks. Patients with steroid resistance may have FSGS on repeat biopsy. Some hypothesize that if the first renal biopsy does not have a sample of deeper corticomedullary glomeruli, then the correct diagnosis of FSGS may be missed.
# Chunk 4379
Within 1–2 years after the onset of clinical diabetes, morphologic changes appear in the kidney. Thickening of the GBM is a sensitive indicator for the presence of diabetes but correlates poorly with the presence or absence of clinically significant nephropathy. The composition of the GBM is altered notably with a loss of heparan sulfate moieties that form the negatively charged filtration barrier. This change results in increased filtration of serum proteins into the urine, predominately negatively charged albumin. The expansion of the mesangium due to the accumulation of extracellular matrix correlates with the clinical manifestations of diabetic nephropathy (see stages in Fig. 62e-20). This expansion in mesangial matrix is associated with the development of mesangial sclerosis. Some patients also develop eosinophilic, PAS+ nodules called nodular glomerulosclerosis or Kimmelstiel-Wilson nodules. Immunofluorescence microscopy often reveals the nonspecific deposition of IgG (at times in a linear pattern) or complement staining without immune deposits on electron microscopy. Prominent vascular changes are frequently seen with hyaline and hypertensive arteriosclerosis. This is associated with varying degrees of chronic glomerulosclerosis and tubulointerstitial changes. Renal biopsies from patients with types 1 and 2 diabetes are largely indistinguishable.
# Chunk 4380
Patients with small increases in albuminuria increase their levels of urinary albumin excretion, typically reaching dipstick positive levels of proteinuria (>300 mg albuminuria) 5–10 years after the onset of early albuminuria. Microalbuminuria is a potent risk factor for cardiovascular events and death in patients with type 2 diabetes. Many patients with type 2 diabetes and microalbuminuria succumb to cardiovascular events before they progress to proteinuria or renal failure. Proteinuria in frank diabetic nephropathy can be variable, ranging from 500 mg to 25 g/24 h, and is often associated with nephrotic syndrome. More than 90% of patients with type 1 diabetes and nephropathy have diabetic retinopathy, so the absence of retinopathy in type 1 patients with proteinuria should prompt consideration of a diagnosis other than diabetic nephropathy; only 60% of patients with type 2 diabetes with nephropathy have diabetic retinopathy. There is a significant correlation between the presence of retinopathy and the presence of Kimmelstiel-Wilson nodules (see Fig. 62e-20). Also, characteristically, patients with advanced diabetic nephropathy have normal to enlarged kidneys, in contrast to other glomerular diseases where kidney size is usually decreased. Using the above epidemiologic and clinical data, and in the absence of other clinical or serologic data suggesting another disease, diabetic nephropathy is usually diagnosed without a renal biopsy. After the onset of proteinuria, renal function inexorably declines, with 50% of patients reaching renal failure over another 5–10 years; thus, from the earliest stages of microalbuminuria, it usually takes 10–20 years to reach end-stage renal disease. Once renal failure appears, however, survival on dialysis is shorter for patients with diabetes compared to other dialysis patients. Survival is best for patients with type 1 diabetes who receive a transplant from a living related donor.
# Chunk 4381
Renal Amyloidosis Most renal amyloidosis is either the result of primary fibrillar deposits of immunoglobulin light chains known as amyloid L (AL), or secondary to fibrillar deposits of serum amyloid A (AA) protein fragments (Chap. 137). Even though both occur for different reasons, their clinicopathophysiology is quite similar and will 1845 be discussed together. Amyloid infiltrates the liver, heart, peripheral nerves, carpal tunnel, upper pharynx, and kidney, producing restrictive cardiomyopathy, hepatomegaly, macroglossia, and heavy proteinuria sometimes associated with renal vein thrombosis. In systemic AL amyloidosis, also called primary amyloidosis, light chains produced in excess by clonal plasma cell dyscrasias are made into fragments by macrophages so they can self-aggregate at acid pH. A disproportionate number of these light chains (75%) are of the lambda class. About 10% of these patients have overt myeloma with lytic bone lesions and infiltration of the bone marrow with >30% plasma cells; nephrotic syndrome is common, and about 20% of patients progress to dialysis. AA amyloidosis is sometimes called secondary amyloidosis and also presents as nephrotic syndrome. It is due to deposition of β-pleated sheets of serum amyloid A protein, an acute phase reactant whose physiologic functions include cholesterol transport, immune cell attraction, and metalloproteases activation. Forty percent of patients with AA amyloid have rheumatoid arthritis, and another 10% have ankylosing spondylitis or psoriatic arthritis; the rest derive from other lesser causes. Less common in Western countries but more common in Mediterranean regions, particularly in Sephardic and Iraqi Jews, is familial Mediterranean fever (FMF). FMF is caused by a mutation in the gene encoding pyrin, whereas Muckle-Wells syndrome, a related disorder, results from a mutation in cryopyrin; both proteins are important in the apoptosis of leukocytes early in inflammation; such proteins with pyrin domains are part of a new pathway called the inflammasome. Receptor mutations in tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 (TNFR1)-associated periodic syndrome also produce chronic inflammation and secondary amyloidosis. Fragments of serum amyloid A protein increase and self-aggregate by attaching to receptors for advanced glycation end products in the extracellular environment; nephrotic syndrome is common, and about 40–60% of patients progress to dialysis. AA and AL amyloid fibrils are detectable with Congo red or in more detail with electron microscopy (see Fig. 62e-15). Currently developed serum free light chain nephelometry assays are useful in the early diagnosis and follow-up of disease progression. Biopsy of involved liver or kidney is diagnostic 90% of the time when the pretest probability is high; abdominal fat pad aspirates are positive about 70% of the time, but apparently less so when looking for AA amyloid. Amyloid deposits are distributed along blood vessels and in the mesangial regions of the kidney. The treatment for primary amyloidosis, melphalan and autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, can delay the course of disease in about 30% of patients. Secondary amyloidosis is also relentless unless the primary disease can be controlled. Some new drugs in development that disrupt the formation of fibrils may be available in the future.
# Chunk 4382
Patients with nail-patella syndrome develop iliac horns on the pelvis and dysplasia of the dorsal limbs involving the patella, elbows, and nails, variably associated with neural-sensory hearing impairment, glaucoma, and abnormalities of the GBM and podocytes, leading to hematuria, proteinuria, and FSGS. The syndrome is autosomal dominant, with haploinsufficiency for the LIM homeodomain transcription factor LMX1B; pedigrees are extremely variable in the penetrance for all features of the disease. LMX1B regulates the expression of genes encoding α3 and α4 chains of collagen IV, interstitial type III collagen, podocin, and CD2AP that help form the slit-pore membranes connecting podocytes. Mutations in the LIM domain region of LMX1B associate with glomerulopathy, and renal failure appears in as many as 30% of patients. Proteinuria or isolated hematuria is discovered throughout life, but usually by the third decade, and is inexplicably more common in females. On renal biopsy there is lucent damage to the lamina densa of the GBM, an increase in collagen III fibrils along glomerular capillaries and in the mesangium, and damage to the slit-pore membrane, producing heavy proteinuria not unlike that seen in congenital nephrotic syndrome. Patients with renal failure do well with transplantation.
# Chunk 4383
Aging in the developed world is commonly associated with the occlusion of coronary and systemic blood vessels. The reasons for this include obesity, insulin resistance, smoking, hypertension, and diets rich in lipids that deposit in the arterial and arteriolar circulation, producing local inflammation and fibrosis of small blood vessels. When the renal arterial circulation is involved, the glomerular microcirculation is damaged, leading to chronic nephrosclerosis. Patients with GFRs <60 mL/min have more cardiovascular events and hospitalizations than those with higher filtration rates. Several aggressive lipid disorders can accelerate this process, but most of the time atherosclerotic progression to chronic nephrosclerosis is associated with poorly controlled hypertension. Approximately 10% of glomeruli are normally sclerotic by age 40, rising to 20% by age 60 and 30% by age 80. Serum lipid profiles in humans are greatly affected by apolipoprotein E polymorphisms; the E4 allele is accompanied by increases in serum cholesterol and is more closely associated with atherogenic profiles in patients with renal failure. Mutations in E2 alleles, particularly in Japanese patients, produce a specific renal abnormality called lipoprotein glomerulopathy associated with glomerular lipoprotein thrombi and capillary dilation.
# Chunk 4384
Uncontrolled systemic hypertension causes permanent damage to the kidneys in about 6% of patients with elevated blood pressure. As many as 27% of patients with end-stage kidney disease have hypertension as a primary cause. Although there is not a clear correlation between the extent or duration of hypertension and the risk of end-organ damage, hypertensive nephrosclerosis is fivefold more frequent in African Americans than whites. Risk alleles associated with APOL1, a functional gene for apolipoprotein L1 expressed in podocytes 1848 substantially explains the increased burden of end-stage renal disease among African Americans. Associated risk factors for progression to end-stage kidney disease include increased age, male gender, race, smoking, hypercholesterolemia, duration of hypertension, low birth weight, and preexisting renal injury. Kidney biopsies in patients with hypertension, microhematuria, and moderate proteinuria demonstrate arteriolosclerosis, chronic nephrosclerosis, and interstitial fibrosis in the absence of immune deposits (see Fig. 62e-21). Today, based on a careful history, physical examination, urinalysis, and some serologic testing, the diagnosis of chronic nephrosclerosis is usually inferred without a biopsy. Treating hypertension is the best way to avoid progressive renal failure; most guidelines recommend lowering blood pressure to <130/80 mmHg if there is preexisting diabetes or kidney disease. In the presence of kidney disease, most patients begin antihypertensive therapy with two drugs, classically a thiazide diuretic and an ACE inhibitor; most will require three drugs. There is strong evidence in African Americans with hypertensive nephrosclerosis that therapy initiated with an ACE inhibitor can slow the rate of decline in renal function independent of effects on systemic blood pressure. Malignant acceleration of hypertension complicates the course of chronic nephrosclerosis, particularly in the setting of scleroderma or cocaine use (see Fig. 62e-24). The hemodynamic stress of malignant hypertension leads to fibrinoid necrosis of small blood vessels, thrombotic microangiography, a nephritic urinalysis, and acute renal failure. In the setting of renal failure, chest pain, or papilledema, the condition is treated as a hypertensive emergency. Slightly lowering the blood pressure often produces an immediate reduction in GFR that improves as the vascular injury attenuates and autoregulation of blood vessel tone is restored.
# Chunk 4385
Although there is no agreement on how much they share a final common pathophysiology, two general groups of patients are recognized: childhood HUS associated with enterohemorrhagic diarrhea and TTP/HUS in adults. Childhood HUS is caused by a toxin released by Escherichia coli 0157:H7 and occasionally by Shigella dysenteriae. This shiga toxin (verotoxin) directly injures endothelia, enterocytes, and renal cells, causing apoptosis, platelet clumping, and intravascular hemolysis by binding to the glycolipid receptors (Gb3). These receptors are more abundant along endothelia in children compared to adults. Shiga toxin also inhibits the endothelial production of ADAMTS13. In familial cases of adult TTP/HUS, there is a genetic deficiency of the ADAMTS13 metalloprotease that cleaves large multimers of von Willebrand’s factor. Absent ADAMTS13, these large multimers cause platelet clumping and intravascular hemolysis. An antibody to ADAMTS13 is found in many sporadic cases of adult TTP/HUS, but not all; many patients also have antibodies to the thrombospondin receptor on selected endothelial cells in small vessels or increased levels of plasminogen-activator inhibitor 1 (PAI-1). Some children with complement protein deficiencies express atypical HUS (aHUS), which can be treated with liver transplant. The treatment of adult TTP/HUS is daily plasmapheresis, which can be lifesaving. Plasmapheresis is given until the platelet count rises, but in relapsing patients it normally is continued well after the platelet count improves, and in resistant patients twice-daily exchange may be helpful. Most patients respond within 2 weeks of daily plasmapheresis. Since TTP/HUS often has an autoimmune basis, there is an anecdotal role in relapsing patients for using splenectomy, steroids, immunosuppressive drugs, bortezomib, or rituximab, an anti-CD20 antibody. Patients with childhood HUS from infectious diarrhea are not given antibiotics, because antibiotics are thought to accelerate the release of the toxin and the diarrhea is usually self-limited. No intervention appears superior to supportive therapy in children with postdiarrheal HUS.
# Chunk 4386
Human Immunodeficiency Virus Renal disease is an important complication of HIV disease. The risk of development of end-stage renal disease is much higher in HIV-infected African Americans than in HIV-infected whites. About 50% of HIV-infected patients with kidney disease have HIV-associated nephropathy (HIVAN) on biopsy. The lesion in HIVAN is FSGS, characteristically revealing a collapsing glomerulopathy (see Fig. 62e-3) with visceral epithelial cell swelling, microcystic dilatation of renal tubules, and tubuloreticular inclusion. Renal epithelial cells express replicating HIV virus, but host immune responses also play a role in the pathogenesis. MPGN and DPGN have also been reported but more commonly in HIV-infected whites and in patients coinfected with hepatitis B or C. HIV-associated TTP has also been reported. Other renal lesions include DPGN, IgA nephropathy, and MCD. Renal biopsy may be indicated to distinguish between these lesions.
# Chunk 4387
Hepatitis B and C Typically infected patients present with microscopic hematuria, nonnephrotic or nephrotic-range proteinuria, and hypertension. There is a close association between hepatitis B infection and polyarteritis nodosa with vasculitis appearing generally in the first 6 months following infection. Renal manifestations include renal artery aneurysms, renal infarction, and ischemic scars. Alternatively, the hepatitis B carrier state can produce a MGN that is more common in children than adults, or MPGN that is more common in adults than in children. Renal histology is indistinguishable from idiopathic MGN or type I MPGN. Viral antigens are found in the renal deposits. There are no good treatment guidelines, but interferon α-2b and lamivudine have been used to some effect in small studies. Children have a good prognosis, with 60–65% achieving spontaneous remission within 4 years. In contrast, 30% of adults have renal insufficiency and 10% have renal failure 5 years after diagnosis.
# Chunk 4388
Malaria There are 300–500 million incident cases of malaria each year worldwide, and the kidney is commonly involved. Glomerulonephritis is due to immune complexes containing malarial antigens that are implanted in the glomerulus. In malaria from P. falciparum, mild proteinuria is associated with subendothelial deposits, mesangial deposits, and mesangioproliferative glomerulonephritis that usually resolve with treatment. In quartan malaria from infection with Plasmodium malariae, children are more commonly affected and renal involvement is more severe. Transient proteinuria and microscopic hematuria can resolve with treatment of the infection. However, resistant nephrotic syndrome with progression to renal failure over 3–5 years does happen, as <50% of patients respond to steroid therapy. Affected patients with nephrotic syndrome have thickening of the glomerular capillary walls, with subendothelial deposits of IgG, IgM, and C3 associated with a sparse membranoproliferative lesion. The rare mesangioproliferative glomerulonephritis reported with Plasmodium vivax or Plasmodium ovale typically has a benign course.
# Chunk 4389
Intracranial aneurysm (ICA) occurs four to five times more frequently in ADPKD patients than in the general population and causes high mortality. The disease gene products PC1 and PC2 may be directly responsible for defects in arterial smooth muscle cells and myofibroblasts. The focal nature and the natural history of ICA in ADPKD remain unclear. A family history of ICA is a risk factor of aneurysm rupture in ADPKD, but whether hypertension and cigarette smoking are independent risk factors is not clear. About 20–50% of patients may experience “warning headaches” preceding the index episode of subarachnoid hemorrhage due to ruptured ICA. A CT scan is generally used as the first diagnostic test. A lumbar puncture may be used to confirm the diagnosis. The role of radiologic screening for ICA in asymptomatic patients with ADPKD remains unclear. ADPKD patients with a positive family history of ICAs may undergo presymptomatic screening of ICAs by magnetic resonance angiography. Other vascular abnormalities in ADPKD patients include diffuse arterial dolichoectasias of the anterior and posterior cerebral circulation, which can predispose to arterial dissection and stroke. Mitral valve prolapse occurs in up to 30% of patients with ADPKD, and tricuspid valve prolapse is less common. Other valvular abnormalities occurring with increased frequency in ADPKD patients include insufficiency of the mitral, aortic, and tricuspid valves. Most patients are asymptomatic, but some may progress and require valve replacement. The prevalence of colonic diverticulae and abdominal wall hernias is also increased in ADPKD patients.
# Chunk 4390
No specific treatment to prevent cyst growth or the decline of renal function has been approved by U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Blood pressure control to a target of 140/90 mmHg is recommended according to the guidelines from the eighth report of the Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure (JNC VIII report) for reducing cardiovascular complications in ADPKD and renal disease progression. More rigorous blood pressure control does not equal greater clinical benefits. Maintaining a target systolic blood pressure to 110 mmHg in patients with moderate or advanced disease may increase the risk of renal disease progression by reducing renal blood flow. Lipid-soluble antibiotics against common gram-negative enteric organisms, such as trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, quinolones, and chloramphenicol, are preferred for cyst infection because most renal cysts are not connected to glomerular filtration and antibiotics that are capable of penetrating the cyst walls are likely to be more effective. Treatment often requires 4–6 weeks. The treatment of kidney stones in ADPKD includes standard measures such as analgesics for pain relief and hydration to ensure adequate urine flow. Management of chronic flank, back, or abdominal pain due to renal enlargement may include both pharmacologic (nonnarcotic and narcotic analgesics) and nonpharmacologic measures (transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation, acupuncture, and biofeedback). Occasionally, surgical decompression of cysts may be necessary. More than half of ADPKD patients eventually require peritoneal dialysis, hemodialysis, or kidney transplantation. Peritoneal dialysis may not be suitable for some patients with massively enlarged polycystic kidneys due to the small intraabdominal space for efficient peritoneal exchange of fluid and solutes and increased chance of abdominal hernia and back pain. Patients with very large polycystic kidneys and recurrent renal cyst infection may require pretransplant nephrectomy or bilateral nephrectomy to accommodate the allograft and reduce the pain.
# Chunk 4391
Clinical Features Classic ARPKD is generally diagnosed in utero or within the neonatal period and characterized by greatly enlarged echogenic kidneys in diseased fetuses. Reduced fetal urine production may contribute to oligohydramnios and pulmonary hypoplasia. About 30% of affected neonates die shortly after birth due to respiratory insufficiency. Close to 60% of mortality occurs within the first month of life. In the classic group, most patients are born with renal insufficiency and ESRD. However, infants often have a transient improvement in their GFR; death from renal insufficiency at this stage is rare. Some patients are diagnosed after the neonatal stage and form the older group. Morbidity and mortality in this group often involve systemic hypertension, progressive renal insufficiency, and liver manifestations. The hallmarks of ARPKD liver disease are biliary dysgenesis due to a primary ductal plate malformation with associated periportal fibrosis, namely congenital hepatic fibrosis (CHF) and dilatation of intrahepatic bile ducts (Caroli’s disease). CHF and Caroli’s disease can then lead to portal hypertension exhibiting hepatosplenomegaly, variceal bleeding, and cholangitis. Some patients with the diagnosis of ARPKD at 1 year of age with nephromegaly exhibit slowly declining renal function over 20 years with only minimally enlarged kidneys at ESRD and markedly atrophic kidneys following renal transplantation. The slow progression of renal disease is likely due to increasing fibrosis rather than the development of cysts. Systemic hypertension is common in all ARPKD patients, even those with normal renal function.
# Chunk 4392
Neuromuscular disease is the best recognized part of this complex phenotype. Kidney disease is now recognized as a common component as well. Tubulointerstitial disease may be seen on kidney biopsy, and progression to kidney failure may occur. Glomerular involvement, manifest as proteinuria and glomerulosclerosis, can also develop. Changes in proximal tubule activity are the most common renal phenotype. Patients may have several defects in proximal tubule transport, including the Fanconi syndrome. Some patients may also have acidosis, hypophosphatemic rickets, hypercalciuria, glycosuria, and tubular proteinuria. Decreased urine concentrating ability is common.
# Chunk 4393
The clinical features of chronic TIN are more indolent and may manifest with disorders of tubular function, including polyuria from impaired concentrating ability (nephrogenic diabetes insipidus), defective proximal tubular reabsorption leading to features of Fanconi’s syndrome (glycosuria, phosphaturia, aminoaciduria, hypokalemia, and type II renal tubular acidosis [RTA] from bicarbonaturia), or non-anion-gap metabolic acidosis and hyperkalemia (type IV RTA) due to impaired ammoniagenesis, as well as progressive azotemia (rising creatinine and blood urea nitrogen [BUN]). There is often modest proteinuria (rarely >2 g/d) attributable to decreased tubular reabsorption of filtered proteins; however, nephrotic-range albuminuria may occur in some conditions due to the development of secondary focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS). Renal ultrasonography may reveal changes of “medical renal disease,” such as increased echogenicity of the renal parenchyma with loss of corticomedullary differentiation, prominence of the renal pyramids, and cortical scarring in some conditions. The predominant pathology in chronic TIN is interstitial fibrosis with patchy mononuclear cell infiltration and widespread tubular atrophy, luminal dilation, and thickening of tubular basement membranes. Because of the nonspecific nature of the histopathology, biopsy specimens rarely provide a specific diagnosis. Thus, diagnosis relies on careful analysis of history, drug or toxin exposure, associated symptoms, and imaging studies.
# Chunk 4394
more than ~15% of cases of unexplained acute renal failure, this is likely a substantial underestimate of the true incidence. This is because potentially offending medications are more often identified and empirically discontinued in a patient noted to have a rising serum creatinine, without the benefit of a renal biopsy to establish the diagnosis of AIN.
# Chunk 4395
Source: Modified from S Reddy, DJ Salant: Ren Fail 20:829, 1998.

FIGuRE 340-2 Acute interstitial nephritis (AIN) in a patient who presented with acute iritis, low-grade fever, erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 103, pyuria and cellular casts on urinalysis, and a newly elevated serum creatinine of 2.4 mg/dL. Both the iritis and AIN improved after intravenous methylprednisolone. This PAS-stained renal biopsy shows a mononuclear cell interstitial infiltrate (asterisks) and edema separating the tubules (T) and a normal glomerulus (G). Some of the tubules contain cellular debris and infiltrating inflammatory cells. The findings in this biopsy are indistinguishable from those that would be seen in a case of drug-induced AIN. PAS, Periodic acid–Schiff.
# Chunk 4396
often confounded by the fact that the ocular symptoms precede or accompany the renal disease in only one-third of cases. Additional extrarenal features include fever, anorexia, weight loss, abdominal pain, and arthralgia. The presence of such symptoms as well as elevated creatinine, sterile pyuria, mild proteinuria, features of Fanconi’s syndrome, and elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate should raise suspicion for this disorder. Serologies suggestive of the more common autoimmune diseases are usually negative, and TINU is often a diagnosis of exclusion after other causes of uveitis and renal disease, such as Sjögren’s syndrome, Behçet’s disease, sarcoidosis, and systemic lupus erythematosus, have been considered. Clinical symptoms are typically self-limited in children, but are more apt to follow a relapsing course in adults. The renal and ocular manifestations generally respond well to oral glucocorticoids, although maintenance therapy with agents such as methotrexate, azathioprine, or mycophenolate may be necessary to prevent relapses (Fig. 340-1 and Table 340-2).
# Chunk 4397
Acute tubular obstruction is also the cause of oliguric renal failure in patients with acute urate nephropathy. It typically results from severe hyperuricemia from tumor lysis syndrome in patients with lymphoor myeloproliferative disorders treated with cytotoxic agents, but also may occur spontaneously before the treatment has been initiated (Chap. 331). Uric acid crystallization in the tubules and collecting system leads to partial or complete obstruction of the collecting ducts, renal pelvis, or ureter. A dense precipitate of birefringent uric acid crystals is found in the urine, usually in association with microscopic or gross hematuria. Prophylactic allopurinol reduces the risk of uric acid nephropathy but is of no benefit once tumor lysis has occurred. Once oliguria has developed, attempts to increase tubular flow and solubility of uric acid with alkaline diuresis may be of some benefit; however, emergent treatment with hemodialysis or rasburicase, a recombinant urate oxidase, is usually required to rapidly lower uric acid levels and restore renal function.
# Chunk 4398
Diagnosis Clinical clues to the diagnosis include anemia, bone pain, hypercalcemia, and an abnormally narrow anion gap due to hypoalbuminemia and hypergammaglobulinemia. Urinary dipsticks detect albumin but not immunoglobulin light chains; however, laboratory detection of increased amounts of protein in a spot urine specimen and a negative dipstick result are highly suggestive that the urine contains Bence-Jones protein. Serum and urine should both be sent for protein electrophoresis and for immunofixation for the detection and identification of a potential monoclonal band. A sensitive method is available to detect urine and serum free light chains.
# Chunk 4399
Two seemingly unrelated forms of CIN, Chinese herbal nephropathy and Balkan endemic nephropathy, have recently been linked by the underlying etiologic agent aristolochic acid and are now collectively termed aristolochic acid nephropathy (AAN). In Chinese herbal nephropathy, first described in the early 1990s in young women tak-1861 ing traditional Chinese herbal preparations as part of a weight-loss regimen, one of the offending agents has been identified as aristolochic acid, a known carcinogen from the plant Aristolochia. Multiple Aristolochia species have been used in traditional herbal remedies for centuries and continue to be available despite official bans on their use in many countries. Molecular evidence has also implicated aristolochic acid in Balkan endemic nephropathy, a chronic tubulointerstitial nephritis found primarily in towns along the tributaries of the Danube River and first described in the 1950s. Although the exact route of exposure is not known with certainty, contamination of local grain preparations with the seeds of Aristolochia species seems most likely. Aristolochic acid, after prolonged exposure, produces renal interstitial fibrosis with a relative paucity of cellular infiltrates. The urine sediment is bland, with rare leukocytes and only mild proteinuria. Anemia may be disproportionately severe relative to the level of renal dysfunction. Definitive diagnosis of AAN requires two of the following three features: characteristic histology on kidney biopsy; confirmation of aristolochic acid ingestion; and detection of aristolactam-DNA adducts in kidney or urinary tract tissue. These latter lesions represent a molecular signature of aristolochic acid–derived DNA damage and often consist of characteristic A:T-to-T:A transversions. Due to this mutagenic activity, AAN is associated with a very high incidence of upper urinary tract urothelial cancers, with risk related to cumulative dose. Surveillance with computed tomography, ureteroscopy, and urine cytology is warranted, and consideration should be given to bilateral nephroureterectomy once a patient has reached ESRD.
# Chunk 4400
The use of lithium salts for the treatment of manic-depressive illness may have several renal sequelae, the most common of which is nephrogenic diabetes insipidus manifesting as polyuria and polydipsia. Lithium accumulates in principal cells of the collecting duct by entering through the epithelial sodium channel (ENaC), where it inhibits glycogen synthase kinase 3β and downregulates vasopressin-regulated aquaporin water channels. Less frequently, chronic tubulointerstitial nephritis develops after prolonged (>10–20 years) lithium use and is most likely to occur in patients who have experienced repeated episodes of toxic lithium levels. Findings on renal biopsy include interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy that are out of proportion to the degree of glomerulosclerosis or vascular disease, a sparse lymphocytic infiltrate, and small cysts or dilation of the distal tubule and collecting duct that are highly characteristic of this disorder. The degree of interstitial fibrosis correlates with both duration and cumulative dose of lithium. Individuals with lithium-associated nephropathy are typically asymptomatic, with minimal proteinuria, few urinary leukocytes, and normal blood pressure. Some patients develop more severe proteinuria due to secondary FSGS, which may contribute to further loss of renal function.
# Chunk 4401
(See also Chap. 424) Chronic hypercalcemia, as occurs in primary hyperparathyroidism, sarcoidosis, multiple myeloma, vitamin D intoxication, or metastatic bone disease, can cause tubulointerstitial disease and progressive renal failure. The earliest lesion is a focal degenerative change in renal epithelia, primarily in collecting ducts, distal tubules, and loops of Henle. Tubular cell necrosis leads to nephron obstruction and stasis of intrarenal urine, favoring local precipitation of calcium salts and infection. Dilation and atrophy of tubules eventually occur, as do interstitial fibrosis, mononuclear leukocyte infiltration, and interstitial calcium deposition (nephrocalcinosis). Calcium deposition may also occur in glomeruli and the walls of renal arterioles.
# Chunk 4402
Clinically, the most striking defect is an inability to maximally concentrate the urine, due to reduced collecting duct responsiveness to arginine vasopressin and defective transport of sodium and chloride in the loop of Henle. Reductions in both glomerular filtration rate and renal blood flow can occur, both in acute and in prolonged hypercalcemia. Eventually, uncontrolled hypercalcemia leads to severe tubulointerstitial damage and overt renal failure. Abdominal x-rays may demonstrate nephrocalcinosis as well as nephrolithiasis, the latter due to the hypercalciuria that often accompanies hypercalcemia.
# Chunk 4403
E. coli (EHEC) HUS. Most cases involve children <5 years of age, but adults also are susceptible, as evidenced by a 2011 outbreak in northern Europe. Diarrhea, often bloody, precedes MAHA within 1 week in >80% of cases. Abdominal pain, cramping, and vomiting 1863 are frequent, whereas fever is typically absent. Neurologic symptoms, including dysphasia, hyperreflexia, blurred vision, memory deficits, encephalopathy, perseveration, and agraphia, often develop, especially in adults. Seizures and cerebral infarction can occur in severe cases. STEC HUS is caused by the Shiga toxins (Stx1 and Stx2), which are also referred to as verotoxins. These toxins are produced by certain strains of E. coli and Shigella dysenteriae. In the United States and Europe, the most common STEC strain is O157:H7, but HUS due to other strains (O157/H−, O111:H−, O26:H11/H−, O145:H28, and
# Chunk 4404
HSCT-TMA develops after HSCT, with an incidence of 8.2%. Etiologic factors include conditioning regimens, immunosuppression, infections, and graft-versus-host disease. Other risk factors include female sex and human leukocyte antigen (HLA)–mismatched donor grafts. HSCT-TMA usually occurs within the first 100 days of HSCT. Table 341-1 lists definitions of HSCT-TMA currently used for clinical trials. Diagnosis may be difficult since thrombocytopenia, anemia, and renal insufficiency are common after HSCT. HSCTTMA carries a high mortality rate (75% within 3 months). The majority of patients have >5% ADAMTS13 activity, and plasma exchange is beneficial in <50% of patients. Discontinuation of calcineurin inhibitors and substitution with daclizumab (antibody to >4% schistocytes in the blood RBC fragmentation and at least 2 schistocytes per high-power field
# Chunk 4405
Either local or total body irradiation can produce microangiopathic injury. The kidney is one of the most radiosensitive organs, and injury can result with as little as 4–5 Gy. Such injury is characterized by renal insufficiency, proteinuria, and hypertension usually developing ≥6 months after radiation exposure. Renal biopsy reveals classic TMA with damage to glomerular, tubular, and vascular cells, but systemic evidence of MAHA is uncommon. Because of its high incidence after allogeneic HSCT, radiation nephropathy is often referred to as bone marrow transplant nephropathy. No specific therapy is available, although observational evidence supports renin-angiotensin system blockade.
# Chunk 4406
This lesion is described as “onion-skinning” and can be accompanied by glomerular collapse due to reduced blood flow. Histologically, scleroderma renal crisis is indistinguishable from malignant hypertension, with which it can coexist. Fibrinoid necrosis and thrombosis are common. Before the availability of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, the mortality rate for scleroderma renal crisis was >90% at 1 month. Introduction of renin-angiotensin system blockade has lowered the mortality rate to 30% at 3 years. Nearly two-thirds of patients with scleroderma renal crisis may require dialysis support, with recovery of renal function in 50% (median time, 1 year). Glomerulonephritis and vasculitis associated with antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies and systemic lupus erythematosus have been described in patients with scleroderma. An association has been found with a speckled pattern of antinuclear antibodies and with antibodies to RNA polymerases I and III. Anti-U3-RNP may identify young patients at risk for scleroderma renal crisis. Anticentromere antibody, in contrast, is a negative predictor of this disorder. Because of the overlap between scleroderma renal crisis and other autoimmune disorders, a renal biopsy is recommended for patients with atypical renal involvement, especially if hypertension is absent.
# Chunk 4407
HELLP (hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, low platelets) syndrome is a dangerous complication of pregnancy associated with microvascular injury. Occurring in 0.2–0.9% of all pregnancies and in 10–20% of women with severe preeclampsia, this syndrome carries a mortality rate of 7.4–34%. Most commonly developing in the third trimester, 10% of cases occur before week 27 and 30% post-partum. Although a strong association exists between HELLP syndrome and preeclampsia, nearly 20% of cases are not preceded by recognized preeclampsia. Risk factors include abnormal placentation, family history, and elevated levels of fetal mRNA for FLT1 (vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 1) and endoglin. Patients with HELLP syndrome have higher levels of inflammatory markers (C-reactive protein, IL-1Ra, and IL-6) and soluble HLA-DR than do those with preeclampsia alone.
# Chunk 4408
Renal complications in sickle cell disease result from occlusion of the vasa recta in the renal medulla. The low partial pressure of oxygen and high osmolarity predispose to hemoglobin S polymerization and erythrocyte sickling. Sequelae include hyposthenuria, hematuria, and papillary necrosis (which can also occur in sickle trait). The kidney responds by increases in blood flow and glomerular filtration rate mediated by prostaglandins. This dependence on prostaglandins may explain the greater reduction of glomerular filtration rate by nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in these patients than in others. The glomeruli are typically enlarged. Intracapillary fragmentation and phagocytosis of sickled erythrocytes are thought to be responsible for the membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis–like lesion, and focal segmental glomerulosclerosis is seen in more advanced cases. Proteinuria is present in 20–30%, and nephrotic-range proteinuria is associated with progression to renal failure. ACE inhibitors reduce proteinuria, although data are lacking on prevention of renal failure. Patients with sickle cell disease are also more prone to acute renal failure. The cause is thought to reflect microvascular occlusion associated with nontraumatic rhabdomyolysis, high fever, infection, and
# Chunk 4409
Dietary Risk Factors Patients who develop stones often change their diet; therefore, studies that retrospectively assess diet may be hampered by recall bias. Some studies have examined the relation between diet and changes in the lithogenic composition of the urine, often using calculated supersaturation. However, the composition of the urine does not perfectly predict risk, and not all components that modify risk are included in the calculation of supersaturation. Thus, dietary associations are best investigated by prospective studies that examine actual stone formation as the outcome. Dietary factors that are associated with an increased risk of nephrolithiasis include animal protein, oxalate, sodium, sucrose, and fructose. Dietary factors associated with a lower risk include calcium, potassium, and phytate.
# Chunk 4410
URINE CALCIUM Higher urine calcium excretion increases the likelihood of formation of calcium oxalate and calcium phosphate stones. While the term hypercalciuria is often used, there is no widely accepted cutoff that distinguishes between normal and abnormal urine calcium excretion. In fact, the relation between urine calcium and stone risk appears to be continuous; thus the use of an arbitrary threshold should be avoided. Levels of urine calcium excretion are higher in individuals with a history of nephrolithiasis; however, the mechanisms remain poorly understood. Greater gastrointestinal calcium absorption is one important contributor, and greater bone turnover (with a resultant reduction in bone mineral density) may be another. Primary renal calcium loss, with lower serum calcium concentrations and elevated serum levels of parathyroid hormone (PTH) (and a normal 25-hydroxy vitamin D level), is rare.
# Chunk 4411
Other diagnoses may be confused with acute renal colic. If the stone is lodged at the right ureteral pelvic junction, symptoms may mimic those of acute cholecystitis. If the stone blocks the ureter as it crosses over the right pelvic brim, symptoms may mimic acute appendicitis, whereas blockage at the left pelvic brim may be confused with acute diverticulitis. If the stone lodges in the ureter at the ureterovesical junction, the patient may experience urinary urgency and frequency. In female patients, the latter symptoms may lead to an incorrect diagnosis of bacterial cystitis; the urine will contain red and white blood cells, but the urine culture will be negative. An obstructing stone with proximal infection may present as acute pyelonephritis. A UTI in the setting of ureteral obstruction is a medical emergency that requires immediate restoration of drainage by placement of either a ureteral stent or a percutaneous nephrostomy tube. Other conditions to consider in the differential diagnosis include muscular or skeletal pain, herpes zoster, duodenal ulcer, abdominal aortic aneurysm, gynecologic conditions, ureteral stricture, and ureteral obstruction by materials other than a stone, such as a blood clot or sloughed papilla. Extraluminal processes can lead to ureteral compression and obstruction; however, because of the gradual onset, these conditions do not typically present with renal colic.
# Chunk 4412
Diagnosis and Intervention Serum chemistry findings are typically normal, but the white blood cell count may be elevated. Examination of the urine sediment will usually reveal red and white blood cells and occasionally crystals (Fig. 342-1). The absence of hematuria does not exclude a stone, particularly when urine flow is completely obstructed by a stone.
# Chunk 4413
History A detailed history, obtained from the patient and from a thorough review of medical records, should include the number and frequency of episodes (distinguishing stone passage from stone formation) and previous imaging studies, interventions, evaluations, and treatments. Inquiries about the patient’s medical history should cover UTIs, bariatric surgery, gout, hypertension, and diabetes mellitus. A family history of stone disease may reveal a genetic predisposition. A complete list of current prescription and over-the-counter medications as well as vitamin and mineral supplements is essential. The review of systems should focus on identifying possible etiologic factors related to low urine volume (e.g., high insensible losses; low fluid intake) and gastrointestinal malabsorption as well as on ascertaining how frequently the patient voids during the day and overnight.
# Chunk 4414
Laboratory Evaluation If not recently measured, the following serum levels should be determined: electrolytes (to uncover hypokalemia or renal tubular acidosis), creatinine, calcium, and uric acid. The PTH level should be measured if indicated by high-normal or elevated serum and urine calcium concentrations. Often, 25-hydroxy vitamin D is measured in concert with PTH to investigate the possible role of secondarily elevated PTH levels in the setting of vitamin D insufficiency.
# Chunk 4415
The results from 24-h urine collections serve as the cornerstone on which therapeutic recommendations are based. Recommendations on lifestyle modification should be deferred until urine collection is complete. As a baseline assessment, patients should collect at least two 24-h urine samples while consuming their usual diet and usual volume of fluid. The following factors should be measured: total volume, calcium, oxalate, citrate, uric acid, sodium, potassium, phosphorus, pH, and creatinine. When available, the calculated supersaturation is also informative. There is substantial day-to-day variability in the 24-h excretion of many relevant factors; therefore, obtaining values from two collections is important before committing a patient to long-term lifestyle changes or medication. The interpretation of the 24-h urine results should take into account that the collections are usually performed on a weekend day when the patient is staying at home; an individual’s habits may differ dramatically (beneficially or detrimentally) at work or outside the home. Specialized testing, such as calcium loading or restriction, is not recommended as it does not influence clinical recommendations.
# Chunk 4416
For all stone types, consistently diluted urine reduces the likelihood of crystal formation. The urine volume should be at least 2 L/d. Because of differences in insensible fluid losses and fluid intake from food sources, the required total fluid intake will vary from person to person. Rather than specify how much to drink, it is more helpful to educate patients about how much more they need to drink in light of their 24-h urine volume. For example, if the daily urine volume is 1.5 L, then the patient should be advised to drink at least 0.5 L more per day in order to increase the urine volume to the goal of 2 L/day.
# Chunk 4417
Individuals with higher urine calcium excretion tend to absorb a higher percentage of ingested calcium. Nevertheless, dietary calcium restriction is not beneficial and, in fact, is likely to be harmful (see “Dietary Risk Factors,” above). In a randomized trial in men with high urine calcium and recurrent calcium oxalate stones, a diet containing 1200 mg of calcium and a low intake of sodium and animal protein significantly reduced subsequent stone formation from that with a low-calcium diet (400 mg/d). Excessive calcium intake (>1200 mg/d) should be avoided.
# Chunk 4418
A thiazide diuretic, in doses higher than those used to treat hypertension, can substantially lower urine calcium excretion. Several randomized controlled trials have demonstrated that thiazide diuretics can reduce calcium oxalate stone recurrence by ~50%. When a thiazide is prescribed, dietary sodium restriction is essential to obtain the desired reduction in urinary calcium excretion. While bisphosphonates may reduce urine calcium excretion in some individuals, there are no data on whether this class of medication can reduce stone formation; therefore, bisphosphonates cannot be recommended solely for stone prevention at present.
# Chunk 4419
Citrate is a natural inhibitor of calcium oxalate and calcium phosphate stones. Higher-level consumption of foods rich in alkali (i.e., fruits and vegetables) can increase urine citrate. For patients with lower urine citrate in whom dietary modification does not adequately increase urine citrate, the addition of supplemental alkali (typically potassium citrate) will lead to an increase in urinary citrate excretion. Sodium salts, such as sodium bicarbonate, while successful in raising urine citrate, are typically avoided due to the adverse effects of sodium on urine calcium excretion.
# Chunk 4420
There are no randomized trials on which to base preventive recommendations for calcium phosphate stone formers, so the interventions are focused on modification of the recognized risk factors. Thiazide diuretics (with sodium restriction) may be used to reduce urine calcium, as described above for calcium oxalate stones. In patients with low urine citrate levels, alkali supplements (e.g., potassium citrate) may be used to increase these concentrations. However, the urine pH of these patients should be monitored carefully because supplemental alkali can raise urine pH, thereby potentially increasing the risk of stone formation. Reduction of dietary phosphate may be beneficial by reducing urine phosphate excretion.
# Chunk 4421
uric Acid The two main risk factors for uric acid stones are persistently low urine pH and higher uric acid excretion. Urine pH is the predominant influence on uric acid solubility; therefore, the mainstay of prevention of uric acid stone formation entails increasing urine pH. While acidifying the urine is not easily done, alkalinizing the urine can be readily achieved by increasing the intake of foods rich in alkali (e.g., fruits and vegetables) and reducing the intake of foods that produce acid (e.g., animal flesh). If necessary, supplementation with bicarbonate or citrate salts (preferably potassium citrate) can be used to reach the recommended pH goal of 6 to 7 throughout the day and night.
# Chunk 4422
Urine uric acid excretion is determined by uric acid generation. Uric acid is the end product of purine metabolism; thus reduced consumption of purine-containing foods can lower urine uric acid excretion. It is noteworthy that the serum uric acid level is dependent on the fractional excretion of uric acid and therefore does not provide information on urine uric acid excretion. For example, an individual with high uric acid generation and concurrent high fractional excretion of uric acid will have high urine uric acid excretion with a normal (or even low) serum uric acid level. If alkalinization of the urine alone is not successful and if dietary modifications do not reduce urine uric acid sufficiently, then the use of a xanthine oxidase inhibitor, such as allopurinol or febuxostat, can reduce urine uric acid excretion by 40–50%.
# Chunk 4423
Cystine Cystine excretion is not easily modified. Long-term dietary cystine restriction is not feasible and is unlikely to be successful; thus the focus for cystine stone prevention is on increasing cystine solubility. This goal may be achieved by treatment with medication that covalently binds to cystine (tiopronin and penicillamine) and a medication that raises urine pH. Tiopronin is the preferred choice due to its better adverse event profile. The preferred alkalinizing agent is potassium citrate as sodium salts may increase cystine excretion. As with all stone types, and especially in patients with cystinuria, maintaining a high urine volume is an essential component of the preventive regimen.
# Chunk 4424
Struvite Struvite stones, also known as infection stones or triple-phosphate stones, form only when the upper urinary tract is infected with urease-producing bacteria such as Proteus mirabilis, Klebsiella pneumoniae, or Providencia species. Urease produced by these bacteria hydrolyzes urea and may elevate the urine pH to a supraphysiologic level (>8.0). Struvite stones may grow quickly and fill the renal pelvis (staghorn calculi).
# Chunk 4425
Retroperitoneal fibrosis Aortic aneurysm Trauma Uterine leiomyomata Carcinoma of uterus, prostate, bladder, colon, rectum Lymphoma Pelvic inflammatory disease, 1872 cervix or colon) or inflammatory disorders. Lymphomas and pelvic or colonic neoplasms with retroperitoneal involvement are causes of ureteral obstruction. As many as 50% of men over 40 years old may have lower urinary tract symptoms associated with benign prostatic hypertrophy, but these symptoms may occur without bladder outlet obstruction. Functional impairment of urine flow occurs when voiding is altered by abnormal pontine or sacral centers of micturition control. It may be asymptomatic or associated with lower urinary tract symptoms such as frequency, urgency, urge and postmicturition incontinence, nocturia, straining to void, slow stream, hesitancy, or a feeling of incomplete emptying. A history should be sought for trauma, back injury, surgery, diabetes, neurologic or psychiatric conditions, and medications. Causes include neurogenic bladder, often with adynamic ureter, and vesicoureteral reflux. Reflux in children may result in severe unilateral or bilateral hydroureter and hydronephrosis. Urinary retention may be the consequence of α-adrenergic and anticholinergic agents, as well as opiates. Hydronephrosis in pregnancy is due to relaxational effects of progesterone on smooth muscle of the renal pelvis, as well as ureteral compression by the enlarged uterus. Diagnostic tools to identify anatomic obstruction include urinary flow measurements and a postvoid residual. Cystourethroscopy and urodynamic studies may be reserved for the symptomatic patient to assess the filling phase (cystometry), pressure-volume relationship of the bladder, bladder compliance, and capacity. Pressure-flow analysis evaluates bladder contractility and bladder outlet resistance during voiding. Bladder obstruction is characterized by high pressures in women, whereas in men, a diagnosis of bladder outlet obstruction is based on flow rate and voiding pressures. A voiding cystourethrogram may be useful in evaluating incomplete emptying and bladder neck and urethral pathology.
# Chunk 4426
In the acute setting, partial, bilateral obstruction may mimic prerenal azotemia with concentrated urine and sodium retention. However, with more prolonged obstruction, symptoms of polyuria and nocturia commonly accompany partial UTO and result from diminished renal concentrating ability. Impairment of transcellular salt reabsorption in the proximal tubule, medullary thick ascending limb of Henle, and collecting duct cells is due to downregulation of transport proteins including the Na+, K+ adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase), NaK2Cl cotransporter (NKCC) in the thick ascending limb, and the epithelial Na+ channel (ENaC) in collecting duct cells. Consequences include failure to produce urine free of salt (natriuresis) and loss of medullary hypertonicity producing a urinary concentrating defect. In addition to direct effects on renal transport mechanisms, increased prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) (due to induction of cyclooxygenase-2 [COX-2]), angiotensin II (with its downregulation of Na+ transporters), and atrial or B-type natriuretic peptides (ANP or BNP) (due to volume expansion in the azotemic patient) contribute to the decreased salt reabsorption along the nephron.
# Chunk 4427
Urinalysis may reveal hematuria, pyuria, and bacteriuria. The urine sediment is often normal, even when obstruction leads to marked azotemia and extensive structural damage. An abdominal scout film may detect nephrocalcinosis or a radiopaque stone. As indicated in Fig. 343-1, if UTO is suspected, a bladder catheter should be inserted. Abdominal ultrasonography should be performed to evaluate renal and bladder size, as well as pyelocalyceal contour. Ultrasonography is approximately 90% specific and sensitive for detection of hydronephrosis. False-positive results are associated with diuresis, renal cysts, or the presence of an extrarenal pelvis, a normal congenital variant. Congenital ureteropelvic junction (UPJ) obstruction may be mistaken for renal cystic disease. Hydronephrosis may be absent on ultrasound when obstruction is less than 48 h in duration or associated with volume contraction, staghorn calculi, retroperitoneal fibrosis, or infiltrative renal disease. Duplex Doppler ultrasonography may detect an increased resistive index in urinary obstruction.
# Chunk 4428
Relief of bilateral, but not unilateral, complete obstruction commonly results in polyuria, which may be massive. The urine is usually hypo-tonic and may contain large amounts of sodium chloride, potassium, phosphate, and magnesium. The natriuresis is due in part to the normal correction of extracellular volume expansion, the increase in natriuretic factors accumulated during the period of renal failure, and depressed salt and water reabsorption when urine flow is reestablished. The retained urea is excreted with improved GFR, resulting in an osmotic diuresis which increases the urine volume of electrolyte-free water. In the majority of patients, this diuresis results in the appropriate excretion of the excesses of retained salt and water. When extracellular volume and composition return to normal, the diuresis usually abates spontaneously. Occasionally, iatrogenic expansion of extracellular volume is responsible for, or sustains, the diuresis observed in the postobstructive period. Replacement with intravenous fluids in amounts less than urinary losses usually prevents this complication. More aggressive fluid management is required in the setting of hypovolemia, hypotension, or disturbances in serum electrolyte concentrations.
# Chunk 4429
The loss of electrolyte-free water with urea may result in hypernatremia. Serum and urine sodium and osmolal concentrations should guide the use of appropriate intravenous replacement. Often replacement with 0.45% saline is required. Relief of obstruction may be followed by urinary salt and water losses severe enough to provoke profound dehydration and vascular collapse. In these patients, decreased tubule reabsorptive capacity is probably responsible for the marked diuresis. Appropriate therapy in such patients includes intravenous administration of salt-containing solutions to replace sodium and volume deficits.
# Chunk 4430
The most common GI symptoms are abdominal pain, heartburn, nausea and vomiting, altered bowel habits, GI bleeding, and jaundice (Table 344-1). Others are dysphagia, anorexia, weight loss, fatigue, and extraintestinal symptoms.
# Chunk 4431
Abdominal Pain Abdominal pain results from GI disease and extra-intestinal conditions involving the genitourinary tract, abdominal wall, thorax, or spine. Visceral pain generally is midline in location and vague in character, whereas parietal pain is localized and precisely described. Common inflammatory diseases with pain include peptic ulcer, appendicitis, diverticulitis, inflammatory bowel disease, and infectious enterocolitis. Other intraabdominal causes of pain include gallstone disease and pancreatitis. Noninflammatory visceral sources include mesenteric ischemia and neoplasia. The most common causes of abdominal pain are irritable bowel syndrome and functional dyspepsia.
# Chunk 4432
Other Symptoms Other symptoms are manifestations of GI disease. Dysphagia, odynophagia, and unexplained chest pain suggest esophageal disease. A globus sensation is reported with esophagopharyngeal conditions, but also occurs with functional GI disorders. Weight loss, anorexia, and fatigue are nonspecific symptoms of neoplastic, inflammatory, gut motility, pancreatic, small-bowel mucosal, and psychiatric conditions. Fever is reported with inflammatory illness, but malignancies also evoke febrile responses. GI disorders also produce extraintestinal symptoms. Inflammatory bowel disease is associated with hepatobiliary dysfunction, skin and eye lesions, and arthritis. Celiac disease may present with dermatitis herpetiformis. Jaundice can produce pruritus. Conversely, systemic diseases can have GI consequences. Systemic lupus may cause gut ischemia, presenting with pain or bleeding. Overwhelming stress or severe burns may lead to gastric ulcer formation.
# Chunk 4433
Symptom relation to other factors narrows the list of diagnostic possibilities. Obstructive symptoms with prior abdominal surgery raise concern for adhesions, whereas loose stools after gastrectomy or gallbladder excision suggest dumping syndrome or postcholecystectomy diarrhea. Symptom onset after travel prompts a search for enteric infection. Medications may produce pain, altered bowel habits, or GI bleeding. Lower GI bleeding likely results from neoplasms, diverticula, or vascular lesions in an older person and from anorectal abnormalities or inflammatory bowel disease in a younger individual. Celiac disease is prevalent in people of northern European descent, whereas inflammatory bowel disease is more common in certain Jewish populations. A sexual history may raise concern for sexually transmitted diseases or immunodeficiency.
# Chunk 4434
Approach to the Patient with Gastrointestinal Disease 1878 criteria are the Rome criteria. When tested against findings of structural investigations, the Rome criteria exhibit diagnostic specificities exceeding 90% for many of the functional bowel disorders.
# Chunk 4435
The physical exam complements information from the history. Abnormal vital signs provide diagnostic clues and determine the need for acute intervention. Fever suggests inflammation or neoplasm. Orthostasis is found with significant blood loss, dehydration, sepsis, or autonomic neuropathy. Skin, eye, or joint findings may point to specific diagnoses. Neck exam with swallowing assessment evaluates dysphagia. Cardiopulmonary disease may present with abdominal pain or nausea; thus lung and cardiac exams are important. Pelvic examination tests for a gynecologic source of abdominal pain. Rectal exam may detect blood, indicating gut mucosal injury or neoplasm or a palpable inflammatory mass in appendicitis. Metabolic conditions and gut motor disorders have associated peripheral neuropathy.
# Chunk 4436
Inspection of the abdomen may reveal distention from obstruction, tumor, or ascites or vascular abnormalities with liver disease. Ecchymoses develop with severe pancreatitis. Auscultation can detect bruits or friction rubs from vascular disease or hepatic tumors. Loss of bowel sounds signifies ileus, whereas high-pitched, hyperactive sounds characterize intestinal obstruction. Percussion assesses liver size and can detect shifting dullness from ascites. Palpation assesses for hepatosplenomegaly as well as neoplastic or inflammatory masses. Abdominal exam is helpful in evaluating unexplained pain. Intestinal ischemia elicits severe pain but little tenderness. Patients with visceral pain may exhibit generalized discomfort, whereas those with parietal pain or peritonitis have directed pain, often with involuntary guarding, rigidity, or rebound. Patients with musculoskeletal abdominal wall pain may note tenderness exacerbated by Valsalva or straight-leg lift maneuvers.
# Chunk 4437
Laboratory Selected laboratory tests facilitate the diagnosis of GI disease. Iron-deficiency anemia suggests mucosal blood loss, whereas vitamin B12 deficiency results from small-intestinal, gastric, or pancreatic disease. Either also can result from inadequate oral intake. Leukocytosis and increased sedimentation rates and C-reactive protein levels are found in inflammatory conditions, whereas leukopenia is seen in viremic illness. Severe vomiting or diarrhea elicits electrolyte disturbances, acid-base abnormalities, and elevated blood urea nitrogen. Pancreaticobiliary or liver disease is suggested by elevated pancreatic or liver chemistries. Thyroid chemistries, cortisol, and calcium levels are obtained to exclude endocrinologic causes of GI symptoms. Pregnancy testing is considered for women with unexplained nausea. Serologic tests can screen for celiac disease, inflammatory bowel disease, rheumatologic diseases like lupus or scleroderma, and paraneoplastic dysmotility syndromes. Hormone levels are obtained for suspected endocrine neoplasia. Intraabdominal malignancies produce other tumor markers including the carcinoembryonic antigen CA 19-9 and α-fetoprotein. Blood testing also monitors medication therapy in some diseases, as with thiopurine metabolite levels in inflammatory bowel disease. Other body fluids are sampled under certain circumstances. Ascitic fluid is analyzed for infection, malignancy, or findings of portal hypertension. Cerebrospinal fluid is obtained for suspected central nervous system causes of vomiting. Urine samples screen for carcinoid, porphyria, and heavy metal intoxication.
# Chunk 4438
Endoscopy The gut is accessible with endoscopy, which can provide the diagnosis of the causes of bleeding, pain, nausea and vomiting, weight loss, altered bowel function, and fever. Table 344-2 lists the most common indications for the major endoscopic procedures. Upper endoscopy evaluates the esophagus, stomach, and duodenum, whereas colonoscopy assesses the colon and distal ileum. Upper endoscopy is advocated as the initial structural test performed in patients with suspected ulcer disease, esophagitis, neoplasm, malabsorption, and Barrett’s metaplasia because of its ability to directly visualize as well as biopsy the abnormality. Colonoscopy is the procedure of choice for colon cancer screening and surveillance as well as diagnosis of colitis secondary to infection, ischemia, radiation, and inflammatory bowel disease. Sigmoidoscopy examines the colon up to the splenic flexure and is currently used to exclude distal colonic inflammation or obstruction in young patients not at significant risk for colon cancer. For elusive GI bleeding secondary to arteriovenous malformations or superficial ulcers, small-intestinal examination is performed with push enteroscopy, capsule endoscopy, or double-balloon enteroscopy. Capsule endoscopy also can visualize small-intestinal Crohn’s disease in individuals with negative barium radiography. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreaticography (ERCP) provides diagnoses of pancreatic and biliary disease. Endoscopic ultrasound is useful for evaluating extent of disease in GI malignancy as well as exclusion of choledocholithiasis, evaluation of pancreatitis, drainage of pancreatic pseudocysts, and assessment of anal continuity.
# Chunk 4439
Radiography/Nuclear Medicine Radiographic tests evaluate diseases of the gut and extraluminal structures. Oral or rectal contrast agents like barium provide mucosal definition from the esophagus to the rectum. Contrast radiography also assesses gut transit and pelvic floor dysfunction. Barium swallow is the initial procedure for evaluation of dysphagia to exclude subtle rings or strictures and assess for achalasia, whereas small-bowel contrast radiology reliably diagnoses intestinal tumors and Crohn’s ileitis. Contrast enemas are performed when colonoscopy is unsuccessful or contraindicated. Ultrasound and computed tomography (CT) evaluate regions not accessible by endoscopy or contrast studies, including the liver, pancreas, gallbladder, kidneys, and retroperitoneum. These tests are useful for diagnosis of mass lesions, fluid collections, organ enlargement, and, in the case of ultrasound, gallstones. CT and magnetic resonance (MR) colonography are being evaluated as alternatives to colonoscopy for colon cancer screening. MR imaging assesses the pancreaticobiliary ducts to exclude neoplasm, stones, and sclerosing cholangitis, and the liver to characterize benign and malignant tumors. Specialized CT or MR enterography can assess intensity of inflammatory bowel disease. Angiography excludes mesenteric ischemia and determines spread of malignancy. Angiographic techniques also access the biliary tree in obstructive jaundice. CT and MR techniques can be used to screen for mesenteric occlusion, thereby limiting exposure to angiographic dyes. Positron emission tomography can facilitate distinguishing malignant from benign disease in several organ systems.
# Chunk 4440
1880 Prescription Drugs Prescription drugs for GI diseases are a major focus of attention from pharmaceutical companies. Potent acid suppressants, including drugs that inhibit the proton pump, are advocated for acid reflux when over-the-counter preparations are inadequate. Cytoprotective agents rarely are used for upper gut ulcers. Prokinetic drugs stimulate GI propulsion in gastroparesis and pseudoobstruction. Prosecretory drugs are prescribed for constipation refractory to other agents. Prescription antidiarrheals include opiate drugs, anticholinergic antispasmodics, tricyclics, bile acid binders, and serotonin antagonists. Antispasmodics and antidepressants also are useful for functional abdominal pain, whereas narcotics are used for pain control in organic conditions such as disseminated malignancy and chronic pancreatitis. Antiemetics in several classes reduce nausea and vomiting. Potent pancreatic enzymes decrease malabsorption and pain from pancreatic disease. Antisecretory drugs such as the somatostatin analogue octreotide treat hypersecretory states. Antibiotics treat ulcer disease secondary to Helicobacter pylori, infectious diarrhea, diverticulitis, intestinal bacterial overgrowth, and Crohn’s disease. Some cases of irritable bowel syndrome (especially those with diarrhea) respond to nonabsorbable antibiotic therapy. Anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive drugs are used in ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s disease, microscopic colitis, refractory celiac disease, and gut vasculitis. Chemotherapy with or without radiotherapy is offered for GI malignancies. Most GI carcinomas respond poorly to such therapy, whereas lymphomas may be cured with such intervention.
# Chunk 4441
Push enteroscopy is performed with a long endoscope similar in design to an upper endoscope. The enteroscope is pushed down the small bowel, sometimes with the help of a stiffening overtube that extends from the mouth to the small intestine. The proximal to mid-jejunum is usually reached, and the instrument channel of the endoscope allows for biopsy or endoscopic therapy.
# Chunk 4442
Bedside evaluation also suggests an upper or lower gastrointestinal source of bleeding in most patients. Over 90% of patients with melena are bleeding proximal to the ligament of Treitz, and about 85% of patients with hematochezia are bleeding from the colon. Melena can result from bleeding in the small bowel or right colon, especially in older patients with slow colonic transit. Conversely, some patients with massive hematochezia may be bleeding from an upper gastrointestinal source, such as a gastric Dieulafoy lesion or duodenal ulcer, with rapid intestinal transit. Early upper endoscopy should be considered in such patients.
# Chunk 4443
Interval Between Last Dose Drug of Procedure Management and Procedure Comments aLow-risk endoscopic procedures include esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) or colonoscopy with or without biopsy, endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) without fine-needle aspiration (FNA), and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) with stent exchange. bHigh-risk endoscopic procedures include EGD or colonoscopy with dilation, polypectomy, or thermal ablation; percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy; EUS with FNA; and ERCP with sphincterotomy or pseudocyst drainage. cBridging therapy with heparin may be considered for patients discontinuing warfarin who are at high risk for thromboembolism, including those with mitral valve replacement or aortic valve replacement with other risk factors; those with nonvalvular atrial fibrillation with a history of stroke, embolic event, cardiac thrombus, or CHADS2 score ≥4; and those with venous thromboembolism within the past 3 months or severe underlying thrombophilia.
# Chunk 4444
FIGURE 345-28 Gastrointestinal vascular ectasias. A. Gastric antral vascular ectasia (“watermelon window of approximately 24 h during stomach”) characterized by stripes of prominent flat or raised vascular ectasias. B. Cecal vascular ectasias. which biliary drainage should be estab-C. Radiation-induced vascular ectasias of the rectum in a patient previously treated for prostate cancer. lished, typically by ERCP. Undue delay jaundice, abdominal pain, and fever is present in about 70% of patients with ascending cholangitis and biliary sepsis. These patients are managed initially with fluid resuscitation and intravenous antibiotics. Abdominal ultrasound is often performed to assess for gallbladder stones and bile duct dilation. However, the bile duct may not be dilated early in the course of acute biliary obstruction. Medical management usually improves the patient’s clinical status, providing a colon on plain abdominal radiography. The radiographic appearance can be characteristic of a particular condition, such as sigmoid volvulus (Fig. 345-34). Both structural obstruction and pseudoobstruction may lead to colonic perforation if left untreated. Acute colonic pseudoobstruction is a form of colonic ileus that is usually attributable to electrolyte disorders, narcotic and anticholinergic medications, immobility (as after surgery), and retroperitoneal hemorrhage or mass. Multiple causative factors are often present. Colonoscopy, water-soluble contrast enema, or CT may be used to assess for an obstructing lesion and differentiate obstruction from pseudoobstruction. One of these diagnostic studies should be strongly considered if the patient does not have clear risk factors for pseudoobstruction, if radiographs do not show air in the rectum, or if the patient fails to improve when underlying causes of pseudoobstruction have been addressed. The risk of cecal perforation in pseudoobstruction rises when the cecal diameter exceeds 12 cm, and decompression of the colon may be achieved using intravenous neostigmine or via colonoscopic decompression (Fig. 345-35). Most patients should receive a trial of conservative therapy (with correction of electrolyte disorders, removal of offending medications, and increased mobilization) before undergoing an invasive decompressive procedure for colonic pseudoobstruction.
# Chunk 4445
Peptic ulcer classically causes epigastric gnawing or burning, often occurring nocturnally and promptly relieved by food or antacids. Although endoscopy is the most sensitive diagnostic test for peptic ulcer, it is not a cost-effective strategy in young patients with ulcer-like dyspeptic symptoms unless endoscopy is available at low cost. Patients with suspected peptic ulcer should be evaluated for Helicobacter pylori infection. Serology (past or present infection), urea breath testing (current infection), and stool tests are noninvasive and less costly than endoscopy with biopsy. Patients with alarm symptoms and those with persistent symptoms despite treatment should undergo endoscopy to exclude gastric malignancy and other etiologies.
# Chunk 4446
About 50% of patients presenting with difficulty swallowing have a mechanical obstruction; the remainder has a motility disorder, such as achalasia or diffuse esophageal spasm. Careful history-taking often points to a presumptive diagnosis and leads to the appropriate use of diagnostic tests. Esophageal strictures (Fig. 345-39) typically cause progressive dysphagia, first for solids, then for liquids; motility disorders often cause intermittent dysphagia for both solids and liquids. Some underlying disorders have characteristic historic features: Schatzki’s ring (Fig. 345-40) causes episodic dysphagia for solids, typically at the beginning of a meal; oropharyngeal motor disorders typically present with difficulty initiating deglutition (transfer dysphagia) and nasal reflux or coughing with swallowing; and achalasia may cause nocturnal regurgitation of undigested food.
# Chunk 4447
When mechanical obstruction is suspected, endoscopy is a useful initial diagnostic test, because it permits immediate biopsy and/or dilatation of strictures, masses, or rings. The presence of linear furrows and multiple corrugated rings throughout a narrowed esophagus (feline esophagus) should raise suspicion for eosinophilic esophagitis, an increasingly recognized cause for recurrent dysphagia and food impaction (Fig. 345-41). Blind or forceful passage of an endoscope may lead to perforation in a patient with stenosis of the cervical esophagus or a Zenker’s diverticulum, but gentle passage of an endoscope under direct visual guidance is reasonably safe. Endoscopy can miss a subtle stricture or ring in some patients.
# Chunk 4448
The small intestine may be the source of chronic intestinal bleeding, especially if colonoscopy and upper endoscopy are not diagnostic. The utility of small-bowel evaluation varies with the clinical setting and is most important in patients in whom bleeding causes chronic or recurrent anemia. In contrast to the low diagnostic yield of small-bowel radiography, positive findings on capsule endoscopy are seen in 50–70% of patients with suspected small intestinal bleeding. The most common finding is mucosal vascular ectasias. CT or MR enterography accurately detects small-bowel masses and inflammation and is also useful for initial small-bowel evaluation. Deep enteroscopy may follow capsule endoscopy for biopsy of lesions or to provide specific therapy, such as argon plasma coagulation of vascular ectasias (Fig. 345-44).
# Chunk 4449
Many patients with chronic diarrhea do not fit either of these patterns. In the setting of a long-standing history of alternating constipation and diarrhea dating to early adulthood, without findings such as blood in the stool or anemia, a diagnosis of irritable bowel syndrome may be made without direct visualization of the bowel. Steatorrhea and upper abdominal pain may prompt evaluation of the pancreas rather than the gut. Patients whose chronic diarrhea is not easily categorized often undergo initial colonoscopy to examine the entire colon and terminal ileum for inflammatory or neoplastic disease (Fig. 345-47).
# Chunk 4450
About 20% of patients with pancreatitis have no identified cause after routine clinical investigation (including a review of medication and alcohol use, measurement of serum triglyceride and calcium levels, abdominal ultrasonography, and CT). Endoscopic assessment leads to a specific diagnosis in the majority of such patients, often altering clinical management. Endoscopic investigation is particularly appropriate if the patient has had more than one episode of pancreatitis.
# Chunk 4451
Esophageal dysphagia (Chap. 53) is often described as a feeling of food “sticking” or even lodging in the chest. Important distinctions are between uniquely solid food dysphagia as opposed to liquid and solid, episodic versus constant dysphagia, and progressive versus static dysphagia. If the dysphagia is for liquids as well as solid food, it suggests a motility disorder such as achalasia. Conversely, uniquely solid food dysphagia is suggestive of a stricture, ring, or tumor. Of note, a patient’s localization of food hang-up in the esophagus is notoriously imprecise. Approximately 30% of distal esophageal obstructions are perceived as cervical dysphagia. In such instances, the absence of concomitant symptoms generally associated with oropharyngeal dysphagia such as aspiration, nasopharyngeal regurgitation, cough, drooling, or obvious neuromuscular compromise should suggest an esophageal etiology.
# Chunk 4452
There is no known way of preventing or reversing achalasia. Therapy is directed at reducing LES pressure so that gravity and esophageal pressurization promote esophageal emptying. Peristalsis rarely, if ever, recovers. However, in many instances, remnants of peristalsis masked by esophageal pressurization and dilatation prior to therapy are demonstrable following effective treatment. LES pressure can be reduced by pharmacologic therapy, pneumatic balloon dilatation, or surgical myotomy. No large, controlled trials of the therapeutic alternatives exist, and the optimal approach is debated. Pharmacologic therapies are relatively ineffective but are often used as temporizing therapies. Nitrates or calcium channel blockers are administered before eating, advising caution because of their effects on blood pressure. Botulinum toxin, injected into the LES under endoscopic guidance, inhibits acetylcholine release from nerve endings and improves dysphagia in about 66% of cases for at least 6 months. Sildenafil and alternative phosphodiesterase inhibitors effectively decrease LES pressure, but practicalities limit their clinical use in achalasia.
# Chunk 4453
The only durable therapies for achalasia are pneumatic dilatation and Heller myotomy. Pneumatic dilatation, with a reported efficacy ranging from 32–98%, is an endoscopic technique using a noncompliant, cylindrical balloon dilator positioned across the LES and inflated to a diameter of 3–4 cm. The major complication is perforation with a reported incidence of 0.5–5%. The most common surgical procedure for achalasia is laparoscopic Heller myotomy, usually performed in conjunction with an antireflux procedure (partial fundoplication); good to excellent results are reported in 62–100% of cases. A European randomized controlled trial demonstrated an equivalent response rate of approximately 90% for both pneumatic dilation and laparoscopic Heller myotomy at 2-year follow-up. Occasionally, patients with advanced disease fail to respond to pneumatic dilatation or Heller myotomy. In such refractory cases, esophageal resection with gastric pull-up or interposition of a segment of transverse colon may be the only option other than gastrostomy feeding.
# Chunk 4454
Jackhammer esophagus Diffuse esophageal spasm account for about 90% of reflux in normal subjects or GERD patients without hiatus hernia, but patients with hiatus hernia have a more heterogeneous mechanistic profile. Factors tending to exacerbate reflux regardless of mechanism are abdominal obesity, pregnancy, gastric hypersecretory states, delayed gastric emptying, disruption of esophageal peristalsis, and gluttony.
# Chunk 4455
Laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication, wherein the proximal stomach is wrapped around the distal esophagus to create an antireflux barrier, is a surgical alternative to the management of chronic GERD. Just as with PPI therapy, evidence on the utility of fundoplication is strongest for treating esophagitis, and controlled trials suggest similar efficacy to PPI therapy. However, the benefits of fundoplication must be weighed against potential deleterious effects, including surgical morbidity and mortality, postoperative dysphagia, failure or breakdown requiring reoperation, an inability to belch, and increased bloating, flatulence, and bowel symptoms after surgery.
# Chunk 4456
EoE should be strongly considered in children and adults with dysphagia and esophageal food impactions. In preadolescent children, symptom presentations of EoE include chest or abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and food aversion. Other symptoms in adults may include atypical chest pain and heartburn, particularly heartburn that is refractory to PPI therapy. An atopic history of food allergy, asthma, eczema, or allergic rhinitis is present in the majority of patients. Peripheral blood eosinophilia is demonstrable in up to 50% of patients, but the specificity of this finding is problematic in the setting of concomitant atopy. The characteristic endoscopic esophageal findings are loss of vascular markings (edema), multiple esophageal rings, longitudinally oriented furrows, and punctate exudate (Fig. 347-11). Histologic confirmation is made with the demonstration of esophageal mucosal eosinophilia (greatest density ±15 eosinophils per high-power field) (Fig. 347-12). Complications of EoE include esophageal stricture, narrow-caliber esophagus, food impaction, and esophageal perforation.
# Chunk 4457
The goals of EoE management are symptom control and the prevention of complications. Once esophageal eosinophilia is demonstrated, patients typically undergo a trial of PPI therapy as a practical means of excluding a contribution of GERD to the esophageal mucosal inflammation. PPI-responsive esophageal eosinophilia, characterized by elimination of mucosal eosinophilia, occurs in 30–50% of cases of suspected EoE. Patients with persistent symptoms and eosinophilic inflammation following PPI therapy are subsequently considered for EoE treatments such as elimination diets or swallowed topical glucocorticoids. Elemental formula diets are a highly effective therapy that have primarily been studied in children but are limited by palatability. Notably, allergy testing by means of either serum IgE or skin prick testing has demonstrated poor sensitivity and specificity in the identification of foods that incite the esophageal inflammatory response. Allergy testing combining skin prick and atopy patch testing has been effective in children with EoE, but additional validation is needed. Empiric elimination of common food allergies (milk, wheat, egg, soy, nuts, and seafood) followed by systematic reintroduction has been an effective diet therapy in both children and adults with EoE. The intent of the elimination diet approach is the identification of a single food trigger or a small number of food triggers. Swallowed, topical glucocorticoids (fluticasone propionate or budesonide) are highly effective, but recurrence of disease is common following the cessation of therapy. Systemic glucocorticoids are reserved for severely afflicted patients refractory to less morbid treatments. Esophageal dilation is very effective at relieving dysphagia in patients with fibrostenosis. Dilation should be approached conservatively because of the risk of deep, esophageal mural laceration or perforation in the stiff-walled esophagus that is characteristic of the disease.
# Chunk 4458
1910 CANDIDA ESOPHAGITIS Candida is normally found in the throat, but can become pathogenic and produce esophagitis in a compromised host; C. albicans is most common. Candida esophagitis also occurs with esophageal stasis secondary to esophageal motor disorders and diverticula. Patients complain of odynophagia and dysphagia. If oral thrush is present, empirical therapy is appropriate, but co-infection is common, and persistent symptoms should lead to prompt endoscopy with biopsy, which is the most useful diagnostic evaluation. Candida esophagitis has a characteristic appearance of white plaques with friability. Rarely, Candida esophagitis is complicated by bleeding, perforation, stricture, or systemic invasion. Oral fluconazole (200–400 mg on the first day, followed by 100–200 mg daily) for 14–21 days is the preferred treatment. Patients refractory to fluconazole may respond to itraconazole, voriconazole, or posaconazole. Alternatively, poorly responsive patients or those who cannot swallow medications can be treated with an intravenous echinocandin (caspofungin 50 mg daily for 7–21 days).
# Chunk 4459
Herpes simplex virus type 1 or 2 may cause esophagitis. Vesicles on the nose and lips may coexist and are suggestive of a herpetic etiology. Varicella-zoster virus can also cause esophagitis in children with chickenpox or adults with zoster. The characteristic endoscopic findings are vesicles and small, punched-out ulcerations. Because herpes simplex infections are limited to squamous epithelium, biopsies from the ulcer margins are most likely to reveal the characteristic ground-glass nuclei, eosinophilic Cowdry’s type A inclusion bodies, and giant cells. Culture or polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays are helpful to identify acyclovir-resistant strains. Acyclovir (200 mg orally five times a day for 7–10 days) can be used for immunocompetent hosts, although the disease is typically self-limited after a 1to 2-week period in such patients. Immunocompromised patients are treated with acyclovir (400 mg orally five times a day for 14–21 days), famciclovir (500 mg orally three times a day), or valacyclovir (1 g orally three times a day). In patients with severe odynophagia, intravenous acyclovir, 5 mg/kg every 8 h for 7–14 days, reduces this morbidity.
# Chunk 4460
Radiation esophagitis can complicate treatment for thoracic cancers, especially breast and lung, with the risk proportional to radiation dosage. Radiosensitizing drugs such as doxorubicin, bleomycin, cyclophosphamide, and cisplatin also increase the risk. Dysphagia and odynophagia may last weeks to months after therapy. The esophageal mucosa becomes erythematous, edematous, and friable. Submucosal fibrosis and degenerative tissue changes and stricturing may occur years after the radiation exposure. Radiation exposure in excess of 5000 cGy has been associated with increased risk of esophageal stricture. Treatment for acute radiation esophagitis is supportive. Chronic strictures are managed with esophageal dilation.
# Chunk 4461
Physiology of Gastric Secretion Hydrochloric acid and pepsinogen are the two principal gastric secretory products capable of inducing mucosal injury. Gastric acid and pepsinogen play a physiologic role in protein digestion; absorption of iron, calcium, magnesium, and vitamin B12; and killing ingested bacteria. Acid secretion should be viewed as occurring under basal and stimulated conditions. Basal acid production occurs in a circadian pattern, with highest levels occurring during the night and lowest levels during the morning hours. Cholinergic input via the vagus nerve and histaminergic input from local gastric sources are the principal contributors to basal acid secretion. Stimulated gastric acid secretion occurs primarily in three phases based on the site where the signal originates (cephalic, gastric, and intestinal). Sight, smell, and taste of food are the components of the cephalic phase, which stimulates gastric secretion via the vagus nerve. The gastric phase is activated once food enters the stomach. This component of secretion is driven by nutrients (amino acids and amines) that directly stimulate the G cell to release gastrin, which in turn activates the parietal cell via direct and indirect mechanisms. Distention of the stomach wall also leads to gastrin release and acid production. The last phase of gastric acid secretion is initiated as food enters the intestine and is mediated by luminal distention and nutrient assimilation. A series of pathways that inhibit gastric acid production are also set into motion during these phases. The GI hormone somatostatin is released from endocrine cells found in the gastric mucosa (D cells) in response to HCl. Somatostatin can inhibit acid production by both direct (parietal cell) and indirect mechanisms (decreased histamine release from ECL cells and gastrin release from G cells). Additional neural (central and peripheral) and humoral (amylin, atrial natriuretic peptide [ANP], cholecystokinin, ghrelin, interleukin 11 [IL-11], obestatin, secretin, and serotonin) factors play a role in counterbalancing acid secretion. Under physiologic circumstances, these phases occur simultaneously. Ghrelin, the appetite-regulating hormone expressed in Gr cells in the
# Chunk 4462
epidemiology The prevalence of H. pylori varies throughout the world and depends largely on the overall standard of living in the region. In developing parts of the world, 80% of the population may be infected by the age of 20, whereas the prevalence is 20–50% in industrialized countries. In contrast, in the United States this organism is rare in childhood. The overall prevalence of H. pylori in the United States is ~30%, with individuals born before 1950 having a higher rate of infection than those born later. About 10% of Americans <30 years of age are colonized with the bacteria. The rate of infection with H. pylori in industrialized countries has decreased substantially in recent decades.
# Chunk 4463
pathophysiology H. pylori infection is virtually always associated with a chronic active gastritis, but only 10–15% of infected individuals develop frank peptic ulceration. The basis for this difference is unknown, but is likely due to a combination of host and bacterial factors some of which are outlined below. Initial studies suggested that >90% of all DUs were associated with H. pylori, but H. pylori is present in only 30–60% of individuals with GUs and 50–70% of patients with DUs. The pathophysiology of ulcers not associated with H. pylori or NSAID ingestion (or the rare Zollinger-Ellison syndrome [ZES]) is becoming more relevant as the incidence of H. pylori is dropping, particularly in the Western world (see below).
# Chunk 4464
Epigastric pain described as a burning or gnawing discomfort can be present in both DU and GU. The discomfort is also described as an ill-defined, aching sensation or as hunger pain. The typical pain pattern in DU occurs 90 minutes to 3 hours after a meal and is frequently relieved by antacids or food. Pain that awakes the patient from sleep (between midnight and 3 A.M.) is the most discriminating symptom, with two-thirds of DU patients describing this complaint. Unfortunately, this symptom is also present in one-third of patients with NUD (see below). Elderly patients are less likely to have abdominal pain as a manifestation of PUD and may instead present with a complication such as ulcer bleeding or perforation. The pain pattern in GU patients may be different from that in DU patients, where discomfort may actually be precipitated by food. Nausea and weight loss occur more commonly in GU patients. Endoscopy detects ulcers in <30% of patients who have dyspepsia.
# Chunk 4465
Variation in the intensity or distribution of the abdominal pain, as well as the onset of associated symptoms such as nausea and/or vomiting, may be indicative of an ulcer complication. Dyspepsia that becomes constant, is no longer relieved by food or antacids, or radiates to the back may indicate a penetrating ulcer (pancreas). Sudden onset of severe, generalized abdominal pain may indicate perforation. Pain worsening with meals, nausea, and vomiting of undigested food suggest gastric outlet obstruction. Tarry stools or coffee-ground emesis indicate bleeding.
# Chunk 4466
Differential Diagnosis The list of GI and non-GI disorders that can mimic ulceration of the stomach or duodenum is quite extensive. The most commonly encountered diagnosis among patients seen for upper abdominal discomfort is NUD. NUD, also known as functional dyspepsia or essential dyspepsia, refers to a group of heterogeneous disorders typified by upper abdominal pain without the presence of an ulcer. Dyspepsia has been reported to occur in up to 30% of the U.S. population. Up to 60% of patients seeking medical care for dyspepsia have a negative diagnostic evaluation. The etiology of NUD is not established, and the potential role of H. pylori in NUD remains controversial.
# Chunk 4467
Diagnostic Evaluation In view of the poor predictive value of abdominal pain for the presence of a gastroduodenal ulcer and the multiple disease processes that can mimic this disease, the clinician is often confronted with having to establish the presence of an ulcer. Documentation of an ulcer requires either a radiographic (barium study) or an endoscopic procedure. However, a large percentage of patients with symptoms suggestive of an ulcer have NUD; testing for H. pylori and antibiotic therapy (see below) is appropriate for individuals who are otherwise healthy and <45 years of age, before embarking on a diagnostic evaluation (Chap. 54).
# Chunk 4468
Barium studies of the proximal GI tract are still occasionally used as a first test for documenting an ulcer. The sensitivity of older single-contrast barium meals for detecting a DU is as high as 80%, with a double-contrast study providing detection rates as high as 90%. Sensitivity for detection is decreased in small ulcers (<0.5 cm), with presence of previous scarring, or in postoperative patients. A DU appears as a well-demarcated crater, most often seen in the bulb (Fig. 348-10A). A GU may represent benign or malignant disease. Typically, a benign GU also appears as a discrete crater with radiating mucosal folds originating from the ulcer margin (Fig. 348-10B). Ulcers >3 cm in size or those associated with a mass are more often malignant. Unfortunately, up to 8% of GUs that appear to be benign by radiographic appearance are malignant by endoscopy or surgery. Radiographic studies that show a GU must be followed by endoscopy and biopsy.
# Chunk 4469
Although the methods for diagnosing H. pylori are outlined in Chap. 181, a brief summary will be included here (Table 348-2). Several biopsy urease tests have been developed (PyloriTek, CLOtest, Hpfast, Pronto Dry) that have a sensitivity and specificity of >90–95%. Several noninvasive methods for detecting this organism have been developed. Three types of studies routinely used include serologic testing, the 13Cor 14C-urea breath test, and the fecal
# Chunk 4470
Occasionally, specialized testing such as serum gastrin and gastric acid analysis or sham feeding may be needed in individuals with complicated or refractory PUD (see “Zollinger-Ellison Syndrome [ZES],” below). Screening for aspirin or NSAIDs (blood or urine) may also be necessary in refractory H. pylori–negative PUD patients.
# Chunk 4471
Proton Pump (H+,K+-ATPase) Inhibitors Omeprazole, esomeprazole, lansoprazole, rabeprazole, and pantoprazole are substituted benzimidazole derivatives that covalently bind and irreversibly inhibit H+,K+-ATPase. Esomeprazole, one of the newest members of this drug class, is the S-enantiomer of omeprazole, which is a racemic mixture of both Sand R-optical isomers. The R-isomer of lansoprazole, dexlansoprazole, is the most recent PPI approved for clinical use. Its reported advantage is a dual delayed-release system, aimed at improving treatment of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). These are the most potent acid inhibitory agents available. Omeprazole and lansoprazole are the PPIs that have been used for the longest time. Both are acid-labile and are administered as enteric-coated granules in a sustained-release capsule that dissolves within the small intestine at a pH of 6. Lansoprazole is available in an orally disintegrating tablet that can be taken with or without water, an advantage for individuals who have significant dysphagia. Absorption kinetics are similar to the capsule. In addition, a lansoprazole-naproxen combination preparation that has been made available is targeted at decreasing NSAID-related GI injury (see below). Omeprazole is available as nonenteric-coated granules mixed with sodium bicarbonate in a powder form that can be administered orally or via gastric tube. The sodium bicarbonate has two purposes: to protect the omeprazole from acid degradation and to promote rapid gastric alkalinization and subsequent proton pump activation, which facilitates rapid action of the PPI. Pantoprazole and rabeprazole are available as enteric-coated tablets. Pantoprazole is also available as a parenteral formulation for intravenous use. These agents are lipophilic compounds; upon entering the parietal cell, they are protonated and trapped within the acid environment of the tubulovesicular and canalicular system. These agents potently inhibit all phases of gastric acid secretion. Onset of action is rapid, with a maximum acid inhibitory effect between 2 and 6 h after administration and duration of inhibition lasting up to 72–96 h. With repeated daily dosing, progressive acid inhibitory effects are observed, with basal and secretagogue-stimulated acid production being inhibited by >95% after 1 week of therapy. The half-life of PPIs is ~18 h; thus, it can take between 2 and 5 days for gastric acid secretion to return to normal levels once these drugs have been discontinued. Because the pumps need to be activated for these agents to be effective, their efficacy is maximized if they are administered before a meal (except for the immediate-release formulation of omeprazole) (e.g., in the morning before breakfast). Mild to moderate hypergastrinemia has been observed in patients taking these drugs. Carcinoid tumors developed in some animals given the drugs preclinically; however, extensive experience has failed to demonstrate gastric carcinoid tumor development in humans. Serum gastrin levels return to normal levels within 1–2 weeks after drug cessation. Rebound gastric acid hypersecretion has been described in H. pylori–negative individuals after discontinuation of PPIs. It occurs even after relatively short-term usage (2 months) and may last for up to 2 months after the PPI has been discontinued. The mechanism involves gastrininduced hyperplasia and hypertrophy of histamine-secreting ECL cells. The clinical relevance of this observation is that individuals may have worsening symptoms of GERD or dyspepsia upon stopping the PPI. Gradual tapering of the PPI and switching to an H2 receptor antagonist may prevent this from occurring. H. pylori– induced inflammation and concomitant decrease in acid production may explain why this does not occur in H. pylori–positive patients. IF production is also inhibited, but vitamin B12-deficiency anemia is uncommon, probably because of the large stores of the vitamin. As with any agent that leads to significant hypochlorhydria, PPIs may interfere with absorption of drugs such as ketoconazole, ampicillin, iron, and digoxin. Hepatic cytochrome P450 can be inhibited by the earlier PPIs (omeprazole, lansoprazole). Rabeprazole, pantoprazole, and esomeprazole do not appear to interact significantly with drugs metabolized by the cytochrome P450 system. The overall clinical significance of this observation is not definitely established. Caution should be taken when using theophylline, warfarin, diazepam, atazanavir, and phenytoin concomitantly with PPIs. Long-term acid suppression, especially with PPIs, has been associated with a higher incidence of community-acquired pneumonia as well as community and hospital acquired Clostridium difficile–associated disease. These observations require confirmation but should alert the practitioner to take caution when recommending these agents for long-term use, especially in elderly patients at risk for developing pneumonia or C. difficile infection. A population-based study revealed that long-term use of PPIs was associated with the development of hip fractures in older women. The absolute risk of fracture remained low despite an observed increase associated with the dose and duration of acid suppression. The mechanism for this observation is not clear, and this finding must be confirmed before making broad recommendations regarding the discontinuation of these agents in patients who benefit from them. Long-term use of PPIs has also been implicated in the development of iron and magnesium deficiency, but here again, the studies are limited and inconclusive. PPIs may exert a negative effect on the antiplatelet effect of clopidogrel. Although the evidence is mixed and inconclusive, a small increase in mortality and readmission rate for coronary events was seen in patients receiving a PPI while on clopidogrel in earlier studies. Subsequently, three meta-analyses reported an inverse correlation between clopidogrel and PPI use; therefore, the influence of this drug interaction on mortality is not clearly established. The mechanism involves the competition of the PPI and clopidogrel with the same cytochrome P450 (CYP2C19). Whether this is a class effect of PPIs is unclear; there appears to be at least a theoretical advantage of pantoprazole over the other PPIs, but this has not been confirmed. This drug interaction is particularly relevant in light of the common use of aspirin and clopidogrel for prevention of coronary events and the efficacy of PPIs in preventing GI bleeding in these patients. The FDA has made several recommendations while awaiting further evidence to clarify the impact of PPI therapy on clopidogrel use. Health care providers should continue to prescribe clopidogrel to patients who require it and 1921 should reevaluate the need for starting or continuing treatment with a PPI. From a practical standpoint, additional recommendations to consider include the following: Patients taking clopidogrel with aspirin, especially with other GI risk factors for bleeding, should receive GI protective therapy. Although high-dose H2 blockers have been considered an option, these do not appear to be as effective as PPIs. If PPIs are to be given, some have recommended that there be a 12-h separation between administration of the PPI and clopidogrel to minimize competition of the two agents with the involved cyto chrome P450. One option is to give the PPI 30 min before breakfast and the clopidogrel at bedtime. Insufficient data are available to firmly recommend one PPI over another. Patients 65 years of age or older have a higher risk for some of the long-term side effects of PPIs highlighted above, in part due to the higher prevalence of concomitant chronic diseases. It is therefore important to carefully select individuals, especially among the elderly, who need long-term PPI therapy and discontinue it in those individuals who do not need it.
# Chunk 4472
One important concern with treating patients who may not need therapy is the potential for development of antibiotic-resistant strains. The incidence and type of antibiotic-resistant H. pylori strains vary worldwide. Strains resistant to metronidazole, clarithromycin, amoxicillin, and tetracycline have been described, with the latter two being uncommon. Antibiotic-resistant strains are the most common cause for treatment failure in compliant patients. Unfortunately, in vitro resistance does not predict outcome in patients. Culture and sensitivity testing of H. pylori is not performed routinely. Although resistance to metronidazole has been found in as many as 30% of isolates in North America and 80% in developing countries, triple therapy is effective in eradicating the organism in >50% of patients infected with a resistant strain. Clarithromycin resistance is seen in 13% of individuals in the United States, with resistance to amoxicillin being <1% and resistance to both metronidazole and clarithromycin in the 5% range.
# Chunk 4473
In view of the observation that 15–25% of patients treated with first-line therapy may still remain infected with the organism, new approaches to treatment have been explored. One promising approach is sequential therapy. Regimens examined consist of 5 days of amoxicillin and a PPI, followed by an additional 5 days of PPI plus tinidazole and clarithromycin or levofloxacin. One promising regimen that has the benefit of being shorter in duration, easier to take, and less expensive is 5 days of concomitant therapy (PPI twice daily, amoxicillin 1 g twice daily, levofloxacin 500 mg twice daily, and tinidazole 500 mg twice daily). Initial studies have demonstrated eradication rates of >90% with good patient tolerance. Confirmation of these findings and applicability of this approach in the United States are needed, although some experts are recommending abandoning clarithromycin-based triple therapy in the United States for the concomitant therapy or the alternative sequential therapies highlighted above.
# Chunk 4474
Once an ulcer (GU or DU) is documented, the main issue at stake is whether H. pylori or an NSAID is involved. With H. pylori present, independent of the NSAID status, triple therapy is recommended for 14 days, followed by continued acid-suppressing drugs (H2 receptor antagonist or PPIs) for a total of 4–6 weeks. Selection of patients for documentation of H. pylori eradication (organisms gone at least 4 weeks after completing antibiotics) is an area of some debate. The test of choice for documenting eradication is the laboratory-based validated monoclonal stool antigen test or a urea breath test (UBT). The patient must be off antisecretory agents when being tested for eradication of H. pylori with UBT or stool antigen. Serologic testing is not useful for the purpose of documenting eradication because antibody titers fall slowly and often do not become undetectable. Two approaches toward documentation of eradication exist: (1) Test for eradication only in individuals with a complicated course or in individuals who are frail or with multisystem disease who would do poorly with an ulcer recurrence, and (2) test all patients for >40 y/o Alarm Symptoms New-Onset Dyspepsia – Noninvasive Hp testing Confirm eradication UBT + Anti-Hp therapy Empiric trial H2 blocker 4 weeks after therapy or – Refer to gastroenterologist + Symptoms remain or recur Exclude by history GERD, biliary pain, IBS, aerophagia, medication-related
# Chunk 4475
FIGURE 348-12 Overview of new-onset dyspepsia. GERD, gastroesophageal reflux disease; Hp, Helicobacter pylori; IBS, irritable bowel syndrome; UBT, urea breath test. (Adapted from BS Anand and DY Graham: Endoscopy 31:215, 1999.) successful eradication. Some recommend that patients with complicated ulcer disease, or who are frail, should be treated with longterm acid suppression, thus making documentation of H. pylori eradication a moot point. In view of this discrepancy in practice, it would be best to discuss with the patient the different options available.
# Chunk 4476
Several issues differentiate the approach to a GU versus a DU. GUs, especially of the body and fundus, have the potential of being malignant. Multiple biopsies of a GU should be taken initially; even if these are negative for neoplasm, repeat endoscopy to document healing at 8–12 weeks should be performed, with biopsy if the ulcer is still present. About 70% of GUs eventually found to be malignant undergo significant (usually incomplete) healing. Repeat endoscopy is warranted in patients with DU if symptoms persist despite medical therapy or a complication is suspected.
# Chunk 4477
The majority (>90%) of GUs and DUs heal with the conventional therapy outlined above. A GU that fails to heal after 12 weeks and a DU that does not heal after 8 weeks of therapy should be considered refractory. Once poor compliance and persistent H. pylori infection have been excluded, NSAID use, either inadvertent or surreptitious, must be excluded. In addition, cigarette smoking must be eliminated. For a GU, malignancy must be meticulously excluded. Next, consideration should be given to a gastric acid hypersecretory state such as ZES (see “Zollinger-Ellison Syndrome,” below) or the idiopathic form, which can be excluded with gastric acid analysis. Although a subset of patients have gastric acid hypersecretion of unclear etiology as a contributing factor to refractory ulcers, ZES should be excluded with a fasting gastrin or secretin stimulation test (see below). More than 90% of refractory ulcers (either DUs or GUs) heal after 8 weeks of treatment with higher doses of PPI (omeprazole, 40 mg/d; lansoprazole 30–60 mg/d). This higher dose is also effective in maintaining remission. Surgical intervention may be a consideration at this point; however, other rare causes of refractory ulcers must be excluded before recommending surgery. Rare etiologies of refractory ulcers that may be diagnosed by gastric or duodenal biopsies include ischemia, Crohn’s disease, amyloidosis, sarcoidosis, lymphoma, eosinophilic gastroenteritis, or infection (cytomegalovirus [CMV], tuberculosis, or syphilis).
# Chunk 4478
FIGURE 348-13 Schematic representation of Billroth I and II procedures.

1926 anastomosis is the treatment of choice for an antral ulcer. Vagotomy is performed only if a DU is present. Although ulcer excision with vagotomy and drainage procedure has been proposed, the higher incidence of ulcer recurrence makes this a less desirable approach. Ulcers located near the esophagogastric junction may require a more radical approach, a subtotal gastrectomy with a Roux-en-Y esophagogastrojejunostomy (Csendes’ procedure). A less aggressive approach, including antrectomy, intraoperative ulcer biopsy, and vagotomy (Kelling-Madlener procedure), may be indicated in fragile patients with a high GU. Ulcer recurrence approaches 30% with this procedure.
# Chunk 4479
recurrent ulceration The risk of ulcer recurrence is directly related to the procedure performed. Ulcers that recur after partial gastric resection tend to develop at the anastomosis (stomal or marginal ulcer). Epigastric abdominal pain is the most frequent presenting complaint (>90%). Severity and duration of pain tend to be more progressive than observed with DUs before surgery.
# Chunk 4480
Ulcers may recur for several reasons, including incomplete vagotomy, inadequate drainage, retained antrum, and, less likely, persistent or recurrent H. pylori infection. ZES should have been excluded preoperatively. Surreptitious use of NSAIDs is an important reason for recurrent ulcers after surgery, especially if the initial procedure was done for an NSAID-induced ulcer. Once H. pylori and NSAIDs have been excluded as etiologic factors, the question of incomplete vagotomy or retained gastric antrum should be explored. For the latter, fasting plasma gastrin levels should be determined. If elevated, retained antrum or ZES (see below) should be considered. Incomplete vagotomy can be ruled out by gastric acid analysis coupled with sham feeding. In this test, gastric acid output is measured while the patient sees, smells, and chews a meal (without swallowing). The cephalic phase of gastric secretion, which is mediated by the vagus, is being assessed with this study. An increase in gastric acid output in response to sham feeding is evidence that the vagus nerve is intact. A rise in serum pancreatic polypeptide >50% within 30 min of sham feeding is also suggestive of an intact vagus nerve.
# Chunk 4481
afferent loop synDromes Although rarely seen today as a result of the decrease in the performance of Billroth II anastomosis, two types of afferent loop syndrome can occur in patients who have undergone this type of partial gastric resection. The more common of the two is bacterial overgrowth in the afferent limb secondary to stasis. Patients may experience postprandial abdominal pain, bloating, and diarrhea with concomitant malabsorption of fats and vitamin B12. Cases refractory to antibiotics may require surgical revision of the loop. The less common afferent loop syndrome can present with severe abdominal pain and bloating that occur 20–60 min after meals. Pain is often followed by nausea and vomiting of bile-containing material. The pain and bloating may improve after emesis. The cause of this clinical picture is theorized to be incomplete drainage of bile and pancreatic secretions from an afferent loop that is partially obstructed. Cases refractory to dietary measures may need surgical revision or conversion of the Billroth II anastomosis to a Roux-en-Y gastrojejunostomy.
# Chunk 4482
DumpinG synDrome Dumping syndrome consists of a series of vasomotor and GI signs and symptoms and occurs in patients who have undergone vagotomy and drainage (especially Billroth procedures). Two phases of dumping, early and late, can occur. Early dumping takes place 15–30 min after meals and consists of crampy abdominal discomfort, nausea, diarrhea, belching, tachycardia, palpitations, diaphoresis, light-headedness, and, rarely, syncope. These signs and symptoms arise from the rapid emptying of hyperosmolar gastric contents into the small intestine, resulting in a fluid shift into the gut lumen with plasma volume contraction and acute intestinal distention. Release of vasoactive GI hormones (vasoactive intestinal polypeptide, neurotensin, motilin) is also theorized to play a role in early dumping.
# Chunk 4483
postvaGotomy DiarrHea Up to 10% of patients may seek medical attention for the treatment of postvagotomy diarrhea. This complication is most commonly observed after truncal vagotomy, which is rarely performed today. Patients may complain of intermittent diarrhea that occurs typically 1–2 h after meals. Occasionally the symptoms may be severe and relentless. This is due to a motility disorder from interruption of the vagal fibers supplying the luminal gut. Other contributing factors may include decreased absorption of nutrients (see below), increased excretion of bile acids, and release of luminal factors that promote secretion. Diphenoxylate or loperamide is often useful in symptom control. The bile salt–binding agent cholestyramine may be helpful in severe cases. Surgical reversal of a 10-cm segment of jejunum may yield a substantial improvement in bowel frequency in a subset of patients.
# Chunk 4484
bile reflux GastropatHy A subset of post–partial gastrectomy patients who present with abdominal pain, early satiety, nausea, and vomiting will have mucosal erythema of the gastric remnant as the only finding. Histologic examination of the gastric mucosa reveals minimal inflammation but the presence of epithelial cell injury. This clinical picture is categorized as bile or alkaline reflux gastropathy/gastritis. Although reflux of bile is implicated as the reason for this disorder, the mechanism is unknown. Prokinetic agents, cholestyramine, and sucralfate have been somewhat effective treatments. Severe refractory symptoms may require using either nuclear scanning with 99mTc-HIDA to document reflux or an alkaline challenge test, where 0.1 N NaOH is infused into the stomach in an effort to reproduce the patient’s symptoms. Surgical diversion of pancreaticobiliary secretions away from the gastric remnant with a Roux-en-Y gastrojejunostomy consisting of a long (50–60 cm) Roux limb has been used in severe cases. Bilious vomiting improves, but early satiety and bloating may persist in up to 50% of patients.
# Chunk 4485
Malabsorption of vitamin D and calcium resulting in osteoporosis and osteomalacia is common after partial gastrectomy and gastrojejunostomy (Billroth II). Osteomalacia can occur as a late complication in up to 25% of post–partial gastrectomy patients. Bone fractures occur twice as commonly in men after gastric surgery as in a control population. It may take years before x-ray findings demonstrate diminished bone density. Elevated alkaline phosphatase, reduced serum calcium, bone pain, and pathologic fractures may be seen in patients with osteomalacia. The high incidence of these abnormalities in this subgroup of patients justifies treating them with vitamin D and calcium supplementation indefinitely. Therapy is especially important in females. Copper deficiency has also been reported in patients undergoing surgeries that bypass the duodenum, where copper is primarily absorbed. Patients may present with a rare syndrome that includes ataxia, myelopathy, and peripheral neuropathy.
# Chunk 4486
Gastric aDenocarcinoma The incidence of adenocarcinoma in the gastric stump is increased 15 years after resection. Some have reported a fourto fivefold increase in gastric cancer 20–25 years after resection. The pathogenesis is unclear but may involve alkaline reflux, bacterial proliferation, or hypochlorhydria. The role of endoscopic screening is not clear, and most guidelines do not support its use.
# Chunk 4487
Diarrhea, the next most common clinical manifestation, is found in up to 50% of patients. Although diarrhea often occurs concomitantly with acid peptic disease, it may also occur independent of an ulcer. Etiology of the diarrhea is multifactorial, resulting from marked volume overload to the small bowel, pancreatic enzyme inactivation by acid, and damage of the intestinal epithelial surface by acid. The epithelial damage can lead to a mild degree of maldigestion and malabsorption of nutrients. The diarrhea may also have a secretory component due to the direct stimulatory effect of gastrin on enterocytes or the co-secretion of additional hormones from the tumor such as vasoactive intestinal peptide.
# Chunk 4488
Family history of pancreatic islet, pituitary, or parathyroid tumor subsequently lead to failure of the feedback inhibitory pathway, resulting in net hypergastrinemia. Gastrin levels will thus be high in patients using antisecretory agents for the treatment of acid peptic disorders and dyspepsia. H. pylori infection can also cause hypergastrinemia. Additional causes of elevated gastrin include retained gastric antrum; G cell hyperplasia; gastric outlet obstruction; renal insufficiency; massive small-bowel obstruction; and conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis, vitiligo, diabetes mellitus, and pheochromocytoma. Although a fasting gastrin >10 times normal is highly suggestive of ZES, two-thirds of patients will have fasting gastrin levels that overlap with levels found in the more common disorders outlined above, especially if a PPI is being taken by the patient. The effect of the PPI on gastrin levels and acid secretion will linger several days after stopping the PPI; therefore, it should be stopped for a minimum of 7 days before testing. During this period, the patient should be placed on a histamine H2 antagonist, such as famotidine, twice to three times per day. Although this type of agent has a short-term effect on gastrin and acid secretion, it needs to be stopped 24 h before repeating fasting gastrin levels or performing some the tests highlighted below. The patient may take antacids for the final day, stopping them approximately 12 h before testing is performed. Heightened awareness of complications related to gastric acid hypersecretion during the period of PPI cessation is critical.
# Chunk 4489
Up to 50% of patients have metastatic disease at diagnosis. Success in controlling gastric acid hypersecretion has shifted the emphasis of therapy toward providing a surgical cure. Detecting the primary tumor and excluding metastatic disease are critical in view of this paradigm shift. Once a biochemical diagnosis has been confirmed, the patient should first undergo an abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), or OctreoScan (depending on availability) to exclude metastatic disease. In addition, the positron emitter 68Ga has been used to label somatostatin analogues for positron emission tomography (PET) with some success. In addition, hybrid scanners combining CT scan with PET scan are also available in certain specialized centers. Once metastatic disease has been excluded, an experienced endocrine surgeon may opt for exploratory laparotomy with intraoperative ultrasound or transillumination. In other centers, careful examination of the peripancreatic area with EUS, accompanied by endoscopic exploration of the duodenum for primary tumors, will be performed before surgery. Selective arterial secretin injection may be a useful adjuvant for localizing tumors in a subset of patients. The extent of the diagnostic and surgical approach must be carefully balanced with the patient’s overall physiologic condition and the natural history of a slow-growing gastrinoma.
# Chunk 4490
The ultimate goal of surgery would be to provide a definitive cure. Improved understanding of tumor distribution has led to immediate cure rates as high as 60% with 10-year disease-free intervals as high as 34% in sporadic gastrinoma patients undergoing surgery. A positive outcome is highly dependent on the experience of the surgical team treating these rare tumors. Surgical therapy of gastrinoma patients with MEN 1 remains controversial because of the difficulty in rendering these patients disease-free with surgery. In contrast to the encouraging postoperative results observed in patients with spo-1929 radic disease, only 6% of MEN 1 patients are disease free 5 years after an operation. Moreover, in contrast to patients with sporadic ZES, the clinical course of MEN 1 patients is benign and rarely leads to disease-related mortality, recommending that early surgery be deferred. Some groups suggest surgery only if a clearly identifiable, nonmetastatic lesion is documented by structural studies. Others advocate a more aggressive approach, where all patients free of hepatic metastasis are explored and all detected tumors in the duodenum are resected; this is followed by enucleation of lesions in the pan creatic head, with a distal pancreatectomy to follow. The outcome of the two approaches has not been clearly defined. Laparoscopic surgical interventions may provide attractive approaches in the future but currently seem to be of some limited benefit in patients with gastrinoma because a significant percentage of the tumors may be extrapancreatic and difficult to localize with a laparoscopic approach. Finally, patients selected for surgery should be individuals whose health status would lead them to tolerate a more aggressive operation and obtain the long-term benefits from such aggressive surgery, which are often witnessed after 10 years.
# Chunk 4491
The overall 5and 10-year survival rates for gastrinoma patients are 62–75% and 47–53%, respectively. Individuals with the entire tumor resected or those with a negative laparotomy have 5and 10-year survival rates >90%. Patients with incompletely resected tumors have 5and 10-year survival rates of 43% and 25%, respectively. Patients with hepatic metastasis have <20% survival at 5 years. Favorable prognostic indicators include primary duodenal wall tumors, isolated lymph node tumor, the presence of MEN 1, and undetectable tumor upon surgical exploration. Poor outcome is seen in patients with shorter disease duration; higher gastrin levels (>10,000 pg/mL); large pancreatic primary tumors (>3 cm); metastatic disease to lymph nodes, liver, and bone; and Cushing’s syndrome. Rapid growth of hepatic metastases is also predictive of poor outcome.
# Chunk 4492
Antibodies to parietal cells have been detected in >90% of patients with pernicious anemia and in up to 50% of patients with type A gastritis. The parietal cell antibody is directed against H+,K+-ATPase. T cells are also implicated in the injury pattern of this form of gastritis. A subset of patients infected with H. pylori develop antibodies against H+,K+-ATPase, potentially leading to the atrophic gastritis pattern seen in some patients infected with this organism. The mechanism is thought to involve molecular mimicry between H. pylori LPS and H+,K+-ATPase.
# Chunk 4493
The clinical presentation in adults is usually insidious and progressive. Epigastric pain, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, peripheral edema, and weight loss are signs and symptoms in patients with MD. Occult GI bleeding may occur, but overt bleeding is unusual and, when present, is due to superficial mucosal erosions. In fact, bleeding is more often seen in one of the common mimics of MD, gastric polyposis. Twenty to 100% of patients (depending on time of presentation) develop a protein-losing gastropathy due to hypersecretion of gastric mucus accompanied by hypoalbuminemia and edema. Gastric acid secretion is usually reduced or absent because of the decreased parietal cells. Large gastric folds are readily detectable by either radiographic (barium meal) or endoscopic methods. Endoscopy with deep mucosal biopsy, preferably full thickness with a snare technique, is required to establish the diagnosis and exclude other entities that may present similarly. A nondiagnostic biopsy may lead to a surgically obtained full-thickness biopsy to exclude malignancy. Although MD is considered premalignant by some, the risk of neoplastic progression is not defined. Complete blood count, serum gastrin, serum albumin, CMV and H. pylori serology, and pH testing of gastric aspirate during endoscopy should be included as part of the initial evaluation of patients with large gastric folds.
# Chunk 4494
Bile acids are not present in the diet but are synthesized in the liver by a series of enzymatic steps that also represent cholesterol catabolism. Indeed, interruption of the enterohepatic circulation of bile acids can reduce serum cholesterol levels by 10% before a new steady state is established. Bile acids are either primary or secondary. Primary bile acids are synthesized in the liver from cholesterol, and secondary bile acids are synthesized from primary bile acids in the intestine by colonic bacterial enzymes. The two primary bile acids in humans are cholic acid and chenodeoxycholic acid; the two most abundant secondary bile acids are deoxycholic acid and lithocholic acid. The liver synthesizes ~500 mg of bile acids daily; the bile acids are conjugated to either taurine or glycine (to form tauroconjugated and glycoconjugated bile acids, respectively) and are secreted into the duodenum in bile. The primary functions of bile acids are (1) to promote bile flow, (2) to solubilize cholesterol and phospholipid in the gallbladder by mixed micelle formation, and (3) to enhance dietary lipid digestion and absorption by forming mixed micelles in the proximal small intestine.
# Chunk 4495
As lactose digestion is rate-limiting compared to glucose/galactose absorption, lactase deficiency is associated with significant lactose malabsorption. Some individuals with lactose malabsorption develop symptoms such as diarrhea, abdominal pain, cramps, and/or flatus. Most individuals with primary lactase deficiency do not have symptoms. Since lactose intolerance may be associated with symptoms suggestive of irritable bowel syndrome, persistence of such symptoms in an individual who exhibits lactose intolerance while on a strict lactose-free diet suggests that the person’s symptoms were related to irritable bowel syndrome.
# Chunk 4496
Nevertheless, routine laboratory studies (i.e., complete blood count, prothrombin time, serum protein determination, alkaline phosphatase) may suggest dietary nutrient depletion, especially deficiencies of iron, folate, cobalamin, and vitamins D and K. Additional studies include measurement of serum carotene, cholesterol, albumin, iron, folate, and cobalamin levels. The serum carotene level can also be reduced if the patient’s dietary intake of leafy vegetables is poor.
# Chunk 4497
If steatorrhea and/or altered absorption of other nutrients is suspected, then history, clinical observations, and laboratory testing can help detect deficiency of a nutrient, especially of a fat-soluble vitamin (A, D, E, or K). Thus, evidence of metabolic bone disease with elevated alkaline phosphatase concentrations and/or reduced serum calcium levels suggests vitamin D malabsorption. A deficiency of vitamin K is suggested by an elevated prothrombin time in an individual without liver disease who is not taking anticoagulants. Macrocytic anemia leads to an evaluation for possible cobalamin or folic acid malabsorption. Iron-deficiency anemia in the absence of occult bleeding from the gastrointestinal tract in either a male patient or a nonmenstruating female patient requires an evaluation for iron malabsorption and the exclusion of celiac disease, as iron is absorbed exclusively in the proximal small intestine.
# Chunk 4498
The urinary d-xylose test for carbohydrate absorption provides an assessment of proximal small-intestinal mucosal function. d-Xylose, a pentose, is absorbed almost exclusively in the proximal small intestine. The d-xylose test is usually performed by administering 25 g of d-xylose and collecting urine for 5 h. An abnormal test (excretion of <4.5 g) primarily reflects duodenal/jejunal mucosal disease. The d-xylose test can also be abnormal in patients with blind loop syndrome (as a consequence primarily of an abnormal intestinal mucosa) and, as a false-positive study, in patients with large collections of fluid in a third space (i.e., ascites, pleural fluid). The ease of obtaining a mucosal biopsy of the small intestine by endoscopy and the false-negative rate of the d-xylose test have led to its diminished use. When small-intestinal mucosal disease is suspected, a small-intestinal mucosal biopsy should be performed.
# Chunk 4499
D. Crohn’s disease. (Courtesy of Morton Burrell, MD, Yale University; with permission.) histologic material from the proximal small-intestinal mucosa. The primary indications for a small-intestinal biopsy are evaluation of a patient (1) either with documented or suspected steatorrhea or with chronic diarrhea, and (2) with diffuse or focal abnormalities of the small intestine defined on a small-intestinal series. Lesions seen on small-bowel biopsy can be classified into three categories (Table 349-6): 1.
# Chunk 4500
Several microorganisms can be identified in small-intestinal biopsy samples, establishing a correct diagnosis. At times, the biopsy is performed specifically to diagnose infection (e.g., Whipple’s disease or giardiasis). In most other instances, the infection is detected incidentally during the workup for diarrhea or other abdominal symptoms. Many of these infections occur in immunocompromised patients with diarrhea; the etiologic agents include Cryptosporidium, Isospora belli, microsporidia, Cyclospora, Toxoplasma, cytomegalovirus, adenovirus, Mycobacterium aviumintracellulare, and G. lamblia. In immunocompromised patients, when Candida, Aspergillus, Cryptococcus, or Histoplasma organisms are seen on duodenal biopsy, their presence generally reflects systemic infection. Apart from Whipple’s disease and infections in the immunocompromised host, small-bowel biopsy is seldom used as the primary mode of diagnosis of infection. Even giardiasis is more easily diagnosed by stool antigen studies and/or duodenal aspiration than by duodenal biopsy.
# Chunk 4501
Failure to Respond to Gluten Restriction The most common cause of persistent symptoms in a patient who fulfills all the criteria for the diagnosis of celiac disease is continued intake of gluten. Gluten is ubiquitous, and a significant effort must be made to exclude all gluten from the diet. Use of rice flour in place of wheat flour is very helpful, and several support groups provide important aid to patients with celiac disease and to their families. More than 90% of patients who have the characteristic findings of celiac disease respond to complete dietary gluten restriction. The remainder constitute a heterogeneous group (whose condition is often called refractory celiac disease or refractory sprue) that includes some patients who (1) respond to restriction of other dietary protein (e.g., soy); (2) respond to glucocorticoid treatment; (3) are “temporary” (i.e., whose clinical and morphologic findings disappear after several months or years); or (4) fail to respond to all measures and have a fatal outcome, with or without documented complications of celiac disease, such as the development of intestinal T cell lymphoma or autoimmune enteropathy.
# Chunk 4502
Broad-spectrum antibiotics and folic acid are most often curative, especially if the patient leaves the tropical area and does not return. Tetracycline should be used for up to 6 months and may be associated with improvement within 1–2 weeks. Folic acid alone induces hematologic remission as well as improvement in appetite, weight gain, and some morphologic changes in small-intestinal biopsy. Because of marked folate deficiency, folic acid is most often given together with antibiotics.
# Chunk 4503
Abdominal pain Bowel distention or inflammation, pancreatitis

Bone pain Calcium, vitamin D malabsorption, protein deficiency, osteoporosis
# Chunk 4504
With After 58Co-Labeled With Intrinsic Pancreatic 5 Days of Cobalamin Factor Enzymes Antibiotics inflammatory Bowel Disease Sonia Friedman, Richard S. Blumberg Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is an immune-mediated chronic intestinal condition. Ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn’s disease (CD) are the two major types of IBD. GLOBAL CONSIDERATIONS: EPIDEMIOLOGY 351
# Chunk 4505
IBD is a familial disease in 5–10% of patients (Fig. 351-2). Some of these patients may exhibit early-onset disease during the first decade of life and, in CD, a concordance of anatomic site and clinical type within families. In the remainder of patients, IBD is observed in the absence of a family history (i.e., sporadic disease). If a patient has IBD, the lifetime risk that a first-degree relative will be affected is ∼10%. If two parents have IBD, each child has a 36% chance of being affected. In twin studies, 38–58% of monozygotic twins are concordant for CD and 6–18% are concordant for UC, whereas 4% of dizygotic twins are concordant for CD and 0–2% are concordant for UC in Swedish and Danish cohorts. The risks of developing IBD are higher in first-degree relatives of Jewish versus non-Jewish patients: 7.8% versus 5.2% for CD and 4.5% versus 1.6% for UC.
# Chunk 4506
CROHN’S DISEASE: MACROSCOPIC FEATURES

CD can affect any part of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract from the mouth to the anus. Some 30–40% of patients have small bowel disease alone, 40–55% have disease involving both the small and large intestines, and 15–25% have colitis alone. In the 75% of patients with small intestinal disease, the terminal ileum is involved in 90%. Unlike UC, which almost always involves the rectum, the rectum is often spared in CD. CD is segmental with skip areas in the midst of diseased intestine (Fig. 351-5). Perirectal fistulas, fissures, abscesses, and anal stenosis are present in one-third of patients with CD, particularly those with
# Chunk 4507
Laboratory, Endoscopic, and Radiographic Features Active disease can be associated with a rise in acute-phase reactants (C-reactive protein [CRP]), platelet count, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and a decrease in hemoglobin. Fecal lactoferrin is a highly sensitive and specific marker for detecting intestinal inflammation. Fecal calprotectin levels correlate well with histologic inflammation, predict relapses, and detect pouchitis. Both fecal lactoferrin and calprotectin are becoming an integral part of IBD management and are used frequently to rule out active inflammation versus symptoms of irritable bowel or bacterial overgrowth. In severely ill patients, the serum albumin level will fall rather quickly. Leukocytosis may be present but is not a specific indicator of disease activity. Proctitis or proctosigmoiditis rarely causes a rise in CRP. Diagnosis relies on the patient’s history; clinical symptoms; negative stool examination for bacteria, C. difficile toxin, and ova and parasites; sigmoidoscopic appearance (see Fig. 345-4A); and histology of rectal or colonic biopsy specimens.
# Chunk 4508
Complications Only 15% of patients with UC present initially with catastrophic illness. Massive hemorrhage occurs with severe attacks of disease in 1% of patients, and treatment for the disease usually stops the bleeding. However, if a patient requires 6–8 units of blood within 24–48 h, colectomy is indicated. Toxic megacolon is defined as a transverse or right colon with a diameter of >6 cm, with loss of haustration in patients with severe attacks of UC. It occurs in about 5% of attacks and can be triggered by electrolyte abnormalities and narcotics. About 50% of acute dilations will resolve with medical therapy alone, but urgent colectomy is required for those that do not improve. Perforation is the most dangerous of the local complications, and the physical signs of peritonitis may not be obvious, especially if the patient is receiving glucocorticoids. Although perforation is rare, the mortality rate for perforation complicating a toxic megacolon is about 15%. In addition, patients can develop a toxic colitis and such severe ulcerations that the bowel may perforate without first dilating.
# Chunk 4509
An inflammatory mass may be palpated in the right lower quadrant of the abdomen. The mass is composed of inflamed bowel, adherent and indurated mesentery, and enlarged abdominal lymph nodes.
# Chunk 4510
Severe inflammation of the ileocecal region may lead to localized wall thinning, with microperforation and fistula formation to the adjacent bowel, the skin, or the urinary bladder, or to an abscess cavity in the mesentery. Enterovesical fistulas typically present as dysuria or recurrent bladder infections or, less commonly, as pneumaturia or fecaluria. Enterocutaneous fistulas follow tissue planes of least resistance, usually draining through abdominal surgical scars. Enterovaginal fistulas are rare and present as dyspareunia or as a feculent or foul-smelling, often painful vaginal discharge. They are unlikely to develop without a prior hysterectomy.
# Chunk 4511
JeJunoileitis Extensive inflammatory disease is associated with a loss of digestive and absorptive surface, resulting in malabsorption and steatorrhea. Nutritional deficiencies can also result from poor intake and enteric losses of protein and other nutrients. Intestinal malabsorption can cause anemia, hypoalbuminemia, hypocalcemia, hypomagnesemia, coagulopathy, and hyperoxaluria with nephrolithiasis in patients with an intact colon. Many patients need to take oral and often intravenous iron. Vertebral fractures are caused by a combination of vitamin D deficiency, hypocalcemia, and prolonged glucocorticoid use. Pellagra from niacin deficiency can occur in extensive small-bowel disease, and malabsorption of vitamin B12 can lead to megaloblastic anemia and neurologic symptoms. Other important nutrients to measure and replete if low are folate and vitamins A, E, and K. Levels of minerals such as zinc, selenium, copper, and magnesium are often low in patients with extensive small-bowel inflammation or resections, and these should be repleted as well. Most patients should take a daily multivitamin, calcium, and vitamin D supplements.
# Chunk 4512
colitis anD perianal Disease Patients with colitis present with low-grade fevers, malaise, diarrhea, crampy abdominal pain, and sometimes hematochezia. Gross bleeding is not as common as in UC and appears in about one-half of patients with exclusively colonic disease. Only 1–2% bleed massively. Pain is caused by passage of fecal material through narrowed and inflamed segments of the large bowel. Decreased rectal compliance is another cause for diarrhea in Crohn’s colitis patients. Toxic megacolon is rare but may be seen with severe inflammation and short duration disease.
# Chunk 4513
Endoscopic features of CD include rectal sparing, aphthous ulcerations, fistulas, and skip lesions. Colonoscopy allows examination and biopsy of mass lesions or strictures and biopsy of the terminal ileum. Upper endoscopy is useful in diagnosing gastroduodenal involvement in patients with upper tract symptoms. Ileal or colonic strictures may be dilated with balloons introduced through the colonoscope. Strictures ≤4 cm and those at anastomotic sites respond better to endoscopic dilation. The perforation rate is as high as 10%. Most endoscopists dilate only fibrotic strictures and not those associated with active inflammation. Wireless capsule endoscopy (WCE) allows direct visualization of the entire small-bowel mucosa (Fig. 351-8). The diagnostic yield of detecting lesions suggestive of active CD is higher with WCE than CT or magnetic resonance (MR) enterography or small-bowel series. WCE cannot be used in the setting of a small-bowel stricture. Capsule retention occurs in <1% of patients with suspected CD, but retention rates of 4–6% are seen in patients with established CD. It is helpful to give the patient with CD a patency capsule, which is made of barium and starts to dissolve 30 h after ingestion. An abdominal x-ray can be taken at around 30 h after ingestion to see if the capsule is still present in the small bowel, which would indicate a stricture.
# Chunk 4514
Both CT and MRI of the small bowel can be performed by enterography (CTE or MRE), using oral and IV contrast, as well as enteroclysis. Although institutional preference guides technique selection, CTE and MRE tend to be preferred over enteroclysis due to ease and patient preference. Although CTE, MRE, and small-bowel follow-through (SBFT) have been shown to be equally accurate in the identification of active small-bowel inflammation, CTE and MRE have been shown to be superior to SBFT in the detection of extraluminal complications, including fistulas, sinus tracts, and abscesses. Currently, the use of CT scans is more common than MRI due to institutional availability and expertise. However, MRI is thought to offer superior soft tissue contrast and has the added advantage of avoiding radiation exposure changes (Figs. 351-9 and 351-10). The lack of ionizing radiation is particularly appealing in younger patients and when monitoring response to therapy where serial images will be obtained. Either CTE or MRE is the first-line test for the evaluation of suspected CD and its complications. Pelvic MRI is superior to CT for demonstrating pelvic lesions such as ischiorectal abscesses and perianal fistulae (Fig. 351-11).
# Chunk 4515
Complications Because CD is a transmural process, serosal adhesions develop that provide direct pathways for fistula formation and reduce the incidence of free perforation. Perforation occurs in 1–2% of patients, usually in the ileum but occasionally in the jejunum or as a complication of toxic megacolon. The peritonitis of free perforation, especially colonic, may be fatal. Intraabdominal and pelvic abscesses occur in 10–30% of patients with CD at some time in the course of their illness. CT-guided percutaneous drainage of the abscess is standard therapy. Despite adequate drainage, most patients need resection of the offending bowel segment. Percutaneous drainage has an especially high failure rate in abdominal wall abscesses. Systemic glucocorticoid therapy increases the risk of intraabdominal and pelvic abscesses in CD patients who have never had an operation. Other complications include intestinal obstruction in 40%, massive hemorrhage, malabsorption, and severe perianal disease.
# Chunk 4516
FIGURE 351-9 A coronal magnetic resonance image was obtained using a half Fourier single-shot T2-weighted acquisition with fat saturation in a 27-year-old pregnant (23 weeks’ gestation) woman. The patient had Crohn’s disease and was maintained on 6-mercaptopurine and prednisone. She presented with abdominal pain, distension, vomiting, and small-bowel obstruction. The image reveals a 7to 10-cm long stricture at the terminal ileum (white arrows) causing obstruction and significant dilatation of the proximal small bowel (white asterisk). A fetus is seen in the uterus (dashed white arrows). (Courtesy of Drs. J. F. B. Chick and
# Chunk 4517
P. B. Shyn, Abdominal Imaging and Intervention, Department of Radiology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts; with permission.) perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (pANCAs) and anti-Saccharomyces cerevisiae antibodies (ASCAs). Unfortunately, these serologic markers are only marginally useful in helping to make the diagnosis of UC or CD and in predicting the course of disease. For success in diagnosing IBD and in differentiating between CD and UC, the efficacy of these serologic tests depends on the prevalence of IBD in a specific population. pANCA positivity is found in about 60–70% of UC patients and 5–10% of CD patients; 5–15% of first-degree relatives of UC patients are pANCA positive, whereas only 2–3% of the general population is pANCA positive. Sixty to 70% of CD patients, 10–15% of UC patients, and up to 5% of non-IBD controls are ASCA positive. In a patient population with a combined prevalence of UC and CD of 62%, pANCA/ASCA serology showed a sensitivity of 64% and a specificity of 94%. Positive and negative predictive values (PPVs and NPVs) for pANCA/ASCA also vary based on the prevalence of IBD in a given population. For the patient population with a prevalence of IBD of 62%, the PPV is 94%, and the NPV is 63%.
# Chunk 4518
Other serologic tests include antibodies to Escherichia coli outer membrane porin protein C (OmpC), which is found in 55% of CD patients; antibodies to I2, a homologue of the bacterial transcription factor families from a Pseudomonas fluorescens–associated sequence that is found in 50–54% of CD patients; and anti-flagellin (anti-CBir1) antibodies, which have been identified in approximately 50% of CD patients.
# Chunk 4519
FIGURE 351-10 A coronal balanced, steady-state, free precession, T2-weighted image with fat saturation was obtained in a 32-year-old man with Crohn’s disease and prior episodes of bowel obstruction, fistulas, and abscesses. He was being treated with 6-mercaptopurine and presented with abdominal distention and diarrhea. The image demonstrates a new gastrocolic fistula (solid white arrows). Multifocal involvement of the small bowel and terminal ileum is also present (dashed white arrows). (Courtesy of Drs. J. F. B. Chick and P. B. Shyn, Abdominal Imaging and Intervention, Department of Radiology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts; with permission.)
# Chunk 4520
FIGURE 351-11 Axial T2-weighted magnetic resonance image obtained in a 37-year-old man with Crohn’s disease shows a linear fluid-filled perianal fistula (arrow) in the right ischioanal fossa. (Courtesy of Dr. K. Mortele, Gastrointestinal Radiology, Department of Radiology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; with permission.) 1956 and/or stricturing disease. However, larger prospective studies in both children and adults have not yet been performed and compared to CRP or other markers. Clinical factors described at diagnosis are more helpful than serologies at predicting the natural history of CD. The initial requirements for glucocorticoid use, an age at diagnosis below 40 years and the presence of perianal disease at diagnosis, have been shown to be independently associated with subsequent disabling CD after 5 years. Except in special circumstances (such as before consideration of an ileoanal pouch anastomosis [IPAA] in a patient with indeterminate colitis), serologic markers have only minimal clinical utility.
# Chunk 4521
GI involvement with mycobacterial infection occurs primarily in the immunosuppressed patient but may occur in patients with normal immunity. Distal ileal and cecal involvement predominates, and patients present with symptoms of small-bowel obstruction and a tender abdominal mass. The diagnosis is made most directly by colonoscopy with biopsy and culture. Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare complex infection occurs in advanced stages of HIV infection and in other immunocompromised states; it usually manifests as a systemic infection with diarrhea, abdominal pain, weight loss, fever, and malabsorption. Diagnosis is established by acid-fast smear and culture of mucosal biopsies.
# Chunk 4522
Although most of the patients with viral colitis are immunosuppressed, cytomegalovirus (CMV) and herpes simplex proctitis may occur in immunocompetent individuals. CMV occurs most commonly in the esophagus, colon, and rectum but may also involve the small intestine. Symptoms include abdominal pain, bloody diarrhea, fever, and weight loss. With severe disease, necrosis and perforation can occur. Diagnosis is made by identification of characteristic intranuclear inclusions in mucosal cells on biopsy. Herpes simplex infection of the GI tract is limited to the oropharynx, anorectum, and perianal areas. Symptoms include anorectal pain, tenesmus, constipation, inguinal adenopathy, difficulty with urinary voiding, and sacral paresthesias. Diagnosis is made by rectal biopsy with identification of characteristic cellular inclusions and viral culture. HIV itself can cause diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, and anorexia. Small intestinal biopsies show partial villous atrophy; small bowel bacterial overgrowth and fat malabsorption may also be noted.
# Chunk 4523
Protozoan parasites include Isospora belli, which can cause a self-limited infection in healthy hosts but causes a chronic profuse, watery diarrhea, and weight loss in AIDS patients. Entamoeba histolytica or related species infect about 10% of the world’s population; symptoms include abdominal pain, tenesmus, frequent loose stools containing blood and mucus, and abdominal tenderness. Colonoscopy reveals focal punctate ulcers with normal intervening mucosa; diagnosis is made by biopsy or serum amebic antibodies. Fulminant amebic colitis is rare but has a mortality rate of >50%.
# Chunk 4524
Diverticulitis can be confused with CD clinically and radiographically. Both diseases cause fever, abdominal pain, tender abdominal mass, leukocytosis, elevated ESR, partial obstruction, and fistulas. Perianal disease or ileitis on small-bowel series favors the diagnosis of CD. Significant endoscopic mucosal abnormalities are more likely in CD than in diverticulitis. Endoscopic or clinical recurrence following segmental resection favors CD. Diverticular-associated colitis is similar to CD, but mucosal abnormalities are limited to the sigmoid and descending colon.
# Chunk 4525
Ischemic colitis is commonly confused with IBD. The ischemic process can be chronic and diffuse, as in UC, or segmental, as in CD. Colonic inflammation due to ischemia may resolve quickly or may persist and result in transmural scarring and stricture formation. Ischemic bowel disease should be considered in the elderly following abdominal aortic aneurysm repair or when a patient has a hyper-coagulable state or a severe cardiac or peripheral vascular disorder. Patients usually present with sudden onset of left lower quadrant pain, urgency to defecate, and the passage of bright red blood per rectum. Endoscopic examination often demonstrates a normal-appearing rectum and a sharp transition to an area of inflammation in the descending colon and splenic flexure.
# Chunk 4526
The effects of radiotherapy on the GI tract can be difficult to distinguish from IBD. Acute symptoms can occur within 1–2 weeks of starting radiotherapy. When the rectum and sigmoid are irradiated, patients develop bloody, mucoid diarrhea and tenesmus, as in distal UC. With small-bowel involvement, diarrhea is common. Late symptoms include malabsorption and weight loss. Stricturing with obstruction and bacterial overgrowth may occur. Fistulas can penetrate the bladder, vagina, or abdominal wall. Flexible sigmoidoscopy reveals mucosal granularity, friability, numerous telangiectasias, and occasionally discrete ulcerations. Biopsy can be diagnostic.
# Chunk 4527
Pyoderma gangrenosum (PG) is seen in 1–12% of UC patients and less commonly in Crohn’s colitis. Although it usually presents after the diagnosis of IBD, PG may occur years before the onset of bowel symptoms, run a course independent of the bowel disease, respond poorly to colectomy, and even develop years after proctocolectomy. It is usually associated with severe disease. Lesions are commonly found on the dorsal surface of the feet and legs but may occur on the arms, chest, stoma, and even the face. PG usually begins as a pustule and then spreads concentrically to rapidly undermine healthy skin. Lesions then ulcerate, with violaceous edges surrounded by a margin of erythema. Centrally, they contain necrotic tissue with blood and exudates. Lesions may be single or multiple and grow as large as 30 cm. They are sometimes very difficult to treat and often require IV antibiotics, IV glucocorticoids, dapsone, azathioprine, thalidomide, IV cyclosporine, or infliximab.
# Chunk 4528
Sacroiliitis is symmetric, occurs equally in UC and CD, is often asymptomatic, does not correlate with bowel activity, and does not always progress to AS. Other rheumatic manifestations include hyper-trophic osteoarthropathy, pelvic/femoral osteomyelitis, and relapsing polychondritis.
# Chunk 4529
The bile acid ursodeoxycholic acid (ursodiol) may reduce alkaline phosphatase and serum aminotransferase levels, but histologic improvement has been marginal. High doses (25–30 mg/kg per day) may decrease the risk of colorectal dysplasia and cancer in patients with UC and PSC. Endoscopic stenting may be palliative for cholestasis secondary to bile duct obstruction. Patients with symptomatic disease develop cirrhosis and liver failure over 5–10 years and eventually require liver transplantation. PSC patients have a 10–15% lifetime risk of developing cholangiocarcinoma and then cannot be transplanted. Patients with IBD and PSC are at increased risk of colon cancer and should be surveyed yearly by colonoscopy and biopsy.
# Chunk 4530
Olsalazine is composed of two 5-ASA radicals linked by an azo bond, which is split in the colon by bacterial reduction, and two 5-ASA molecules are released. Olsalazine is similar in effectiveness to sulfasalazine in treating UC, but up to 17% of patients experience nonbloody diarrhea caused by increased secretion of fluid in the small bowel.
# Chunk 4531
Glucocorticoids are also effective for treatment of moderate to severe CD and induce a 60–70% remission rate compared to a 30% placebo response. The systemic effects of standard glucocorticoid formulations have led to the development of more potent formulations that are less well-absorbed and have increased first-pass metabolism. Controlled ileal-release budesonide has been nearly equal to prednisone for ileocolonic CD with fewer glucocorticoid side effects. Budesonide is used for 2–3 months at a dose of 9 mg/d, and then tapered. Budesonide 6 mg/d is effective in reducing relapse rates at 3–6 months but not at 12 months in CD patients with a medically induced remission.
# Chunk 4532
Glucocorticoids play no role in maintenance therapy in either UC or CD. Once clinical remission has been induced, they should be tapered according to the clinical activity, normally at a rate of no more than 5 mg/week. They can usually be tapered to 20 mg/d within 4–5 weeks but often take several months to be discontinued altogether. The side effects are numerous, including fluid retention, abdominal striae, fat redistribution, hyperglycemia, subcapsular cataracts, osteonecrosis, osteoporosis, myopathy, emotional disturbances, and withdrawal symptoms. Most of these side effects, aside from osteonecrosis, are related to the dose and duration of therapy.
# Chunk 4533
The SONIC (Study of Biologic and Immunomodulator-Naive Patients with Crohn’s Disease) trial compared infliximab plus azathioprine, infliximab alone, and azathioprine alone in immunomodulatorand biologic-naive patients with moderate to severe CD. At 1 year, the infliximab plus azathioprine group had a glucocorticoid-free remission rate of 46% compared with 35% for infliximab alone and 1961 24% for azathioprine alone. There was also complete mucosal healing at week 26 with the combined approach relative to either infliximab or azathioprine alone (44% vs 30% vs 17%). The adverse events were equal between groups.
# Chunk 4534
Adalimumab is a recombinant human monoclonal IgG1 antibody containing only human peptide sequences and is injected subcu taneously. Adalimumab binds TNF and neutralizes its function by blocking the interaction between TNF and its cell-surface receptor. Therefore, it seems to have a similar mechanism of action to infliximab but with less immunogenicity. Adalimumab has been approved for treatment of moderate to severe CD. CHARM (Crohn’s Trial of the Fully Human Adalimumab for Remission Maintenance) is an adalimumab maintenance study in patients who responded to adalimumab induction therapy. About 50% of the patients in this trial were previously treated with infliximab. Remission rates ranged from 42–48% of infliximab-naïve patients at 1 year compared with remission rates of 31–34% in patients who had previously received infliximab. Another trial showed a remission rate of 21% at 4 weeks in patients who had initially responded to and then failed infliximab. In clinical practice, the remission rate in patients taking adalimumab increases with a dose increase to 40 mg weekly instead of every other week. Adalimumab is now also approved for the treatment of moderately to severely active UC.
# Chunk 4535
The FDA approved a commercial enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kit to assay anti-JC viral antibodies (Stratify JCV Antibody ELISA; Focus Diagnostics, Cypress, CA) in early 2012. The test is 99% accurate in stratifying risk of PML. It is recommended that all patients be tested prior to initiating natalizumab therapy. JC virus serologies are then measured every 6 months because 1–2% of patients will seroconvert yearly. All patients taking natalizumab and their providers must be enrolled in the TOUCH (Tysabri Outreach Unified Commitment for Health) pharmacovigilance program. Natalizumab is administered IV, 300 mg every 4 weeks. Labeling requirements mandate that it not be used in combination with any immunosuppressant medications.
# Chunk 4536
Patients with IPAA usually have about 6–10 bowel movements a day. On validated quality-of-life indices, they report better performance in sports and sexual activities than ileostomy patients. The most frequent complication of IPAA is pouchitis in about 30–50%
# Chunk 4537
Crohn’s Disease Most patients with CD require at least one operation in their lifetime. The need for surgery is related to duration of disease and the site of involvement. Patients with small-bowel disease have an 80% chance of requiring surgery. Those with colitis alone have a 50% chance. Surgery is an option only when medical treatment has failed or complications dictate its necessity. The indications for surgery are shown in Table 351-8.
# Chunk 4538
There is evidence that mesalamine, nitroimidazole antibiotics, 6-MP/azathioprine, infliximab, and adalimumab are all superior to placebo for the prevention of postoperative recurrence of CD. Mesalamine is the least effective, and the side effects of the nitroimidazole antibiotics limit their use. Risk factors for early recurrence of disease include cigarette smoking, penetrating disease (internal fistulas, abscesses, or other evidence of penetration through the wall of the bowel), early recurrence since a previous surgery, multiple surgeries, and a young age at the time of the first surgery. Aggressive postoperative treatment with 6-MP/ 1964 azathioprine, infliximab, or adalimumab should be considered for this group of patients. It is also recommended to evaluate for endoscopic recurrence of CD via a colonoscopy, if possible, 6 months after surgery.
# Chunk 4539
Surgery in UC should be performed only for emergency indications, including severe hemorrhage, perforation, and megacolon refractory to medical therapy. Total colectomy and ileostomy carry a 50% risk of postoperative spontaneous abortion. Fetal mortality is also high in CD requiring surgery. Patients with IPAAs have increased nighttime stool frequency during pregnancy that resolves postpartum. Transient small-bowel obstruction or ileus has been noted in up to 8% of patients with ileostomies.
# Chunk 4540
IBD patients are also at greater risk for other malignancies. Patients with CD may have an increased risk of non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, leukemia, and myelodysplastic syndromes. Severe, chronic, complicated perianal disease in CD patients may be associated with an increased risk of cancer in the lower rectum and anal canal (squamous cell cancers). Although the absolute risk of small-bowel adenocarcinoma in CD is low (2.2% at 25 years in one study), patients with long-standing, extensive, small-bowel disease should consider screening.
# Chunk 4541
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a functional bowel disorder characterized by abdominal pain or discomfort and altered bowel habits in the absence of detectable structural abnormalities. No clear diagnostic markers exist for IBS; thus the diagnosis of the disorder is based on clinical presentation. In 2006, the Rome II criteria for the diagnosis of IBS were revised (Table 352-1). Throughout the world, about 10–20% of adults and adolescents have symptoms consistent with IBS, and most studies show a female predominance. IBS symptoms tend to come and go over time and often overlap with other functional disorders such as fibromyalgia, headache, backache, and genitourinary symptoms. Severity of symptoms varies and can significantly impair quality of life, resulting in high health care costs. Advances in basic, mechanistic, and clinical investigations have improved our understanding of this disorder and its physiologic and psychosocial determinants. Altered
# Chunk 4542
Improvement with defecation 2.

Onset associated with a change in frequency of stool 3.

Onset associated with a change in form (appearance) of stool aCriteria fulfilled for the last 3 months with symptom onset at least 6 months prior to diagnosis. bDiscomfort means an uncomfortable sensation not described as pain. In pathophysiology research and clinical trials, a pain/discomfort frequency of at least 2 days a week during screening evaluation is required for subject eligibility.
# Chunk 4543
IBS is a disorder that affects all ages, although most patients have their first symptoms before age 45. Older individuals have a lower reporting frequency. Women are diagnosed with IBS two to three times as often as men and make up 80% of the population with severe IBS. As indicated in Table 352-1, pain or abdominal discomfort is a key symptom for the diagnosis of IBS. These symptoms should be improved with defecation and/or have their onset associated with a change in frequency or form of stool. Painless diarrhea or constipation does not fulfill the diagnostic criteria to be classified as IBS. Supportive symptoms that are not part of the diagnostic criteria include defecation straining, urgency or a feeling of incomplete bowel movement, passing mucus, and bloating.
# Chunk 4544
Abdominal Pain According to the current IBS diagnostic criteria, abdominal pain or discomfort is a prerequisite clinical feature of IBS. Abdominal pain in IBS is highly variable in intensity and location. It is frequently episodic and crampy, but it may be superimposed on a background of constant ache. Pain may be mild enough to be ignored or it may interfere with daily activities. Despite this, malnutrition due to inadequate caloric intake is exceedingly rare with IBS. Sleep deprivation is also unusual because abdominal pain is almost uniformly present only during waking hours. However, patients with severe IBS frequently wake repeatedly during the night; thus, nocturnal pain is a poor discriminating factor between organic and functional bowel disease. Pain is often exacerbated by eating or emotional stress and improved by passage of flatus or stools. In addition, female patients with IBS commonly report worsening symptoms during the premenstrual and menstrual phases.
# Chunk 4545
1966 Some patients with bloating may also experience visible distention with increase in abdominal girth. Both symptoms are more common among female patients and in those with higher overall Somatic Symptom Checklist scores. IBS patients who experienced bloating alone have been shown to have lower thresholds for pain and desire to defecate compared to those with concomitant distention irrespective of bowel habit. When patients were grouped according to sensory threshold, hyposensitive individuals had distention significantly more than those with hypersensitivity and this was observed more in the constipation subgroup. This suggests that the pathogenesis of bloating and distention may not be the same.
# Chunk 4546
Upper Gastrointestinal Symptoms Between 25 and 50% of patients with IBS complain of dyspepsia, heartburn, nausea, and vomiting. This suggests that other areas of the gut apart from the colon may be involved. Prolonged ambulant recordings of small-bowel motility in patients with IBS show a high incidence of abnormalities in the small bowel during the diurnal (waking) period; nocturnal motor patterns are not different from those of healthy controls. The overlap between dyspepsia and IBS is great. The prevalence of IBS is higher among patients with dyspepsia (31.7%) than among those who reported no symptoms of dyspepsia (7.9%). Conversely, among patients with IBS, 55.6% reported symptoms of dyspepsia. In addition, the functional abdominal symptoms can change over time. Those with predominant dyspepsia or IBS can flux between the two. Although the prevalence of functional gastrointestinal disorders is stable over time, the turnover in symptom status is high. Many episodes of symptom disappearance are due to subjects changing symptoms rather than total symptom resolution. Thus it is conceivable that functional dyspepsia and IBS are two manifestations of a single, more extensive digestive system disorder. Furthermore, IBS symptoms are prevalent in noncardiac chest pain patients, suggesting overlap with other functional gut disorders.
# Chunk 4547
APPROACH TO THE PATIENT:

Because IBS is a disorder for which no pathognomonic abnormalities have been identified, its diagnosis relies on recognition of positive clinical features and elimination of other organic diseases. Symptom-based criteria have been developed for the purpose of differentiating patients with IBS from those with organic diseases. These include the Manning, Rome I, Rome II, and Rome III criteria (Table 352-1). The diagnostic values of these criteria are shown in Table 352-3. In a validation study, Rome III performed less well than either the Rome I and II criteria and all criteria studied to date showed positive predictive values of <50%, which underscores the need for developing diagnostic strategies for IBS that are more cost-effective than the current approaches. A careful history and physical examination are frequently helpful in establishing the diagnosis. Clinical features suggestive of IBS include the following: recurrence of lower abdominal pain with altered bowel habits over a period of time without progressive deterioration, onset of symptoms during periods of stress or emotional upset, absence of other systemic symptoms such as fever and weight loss, and small-volume stool without any evidence of blood.
# Chunk 4548
Because the major symptoms of IBS—abdominal pain, abdominal bloating, and alteration in bowel habits—are common complaints of many GI organic disorders, the list of differential diagnoses is a long one. The quality, location, and timing of pain may be helpful to suggest specific disorders. Pain due to IBS that occurs in the epigastric or periumbilical area must be differentiated from biliary tract disease, peptic ulcer disorders, intestinal ischemia, and carcinoma of the stomach and pancreas. If pain occurs mainly in the lower abdomen, the possibility of diverticular disease of the colon, inflammatory bowel disease (including ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease), and carcinoma of the colon must be considered. Postprandial pain accompanied by bloating, nausea, and vomiting suggests gastroparesis or partial intestinal obstruction. Intestinal infestation with Giardia lamblia or other parasites may cause similar symptoms. When diarrhea is the major complaint, the possibility of lactase deficiency, laxative abuse, malabsorption, celiac sprue, hyperthyroidism, inflammatory bowel disease, and infectious diarrhea must be ruled out. On the other hand, constipation may be a side effect of many different drugs, such as anticholinergic, antihypertensive, and antidepressant medications. Endocrinopathies such as hypothyroidism and hypoparathyroidism must also be considered in the differential diagnosis of constipation, particularly if other systemic signs or symptoms of these endocrinopathies are present. In addition, acute intermittent porphyria and lead poisoning may present in a fashion similar to IBS, with painful constipation as the major complaint. These possibilities are suspected on the basis of their clinical presentations and are confirmed by appropriate serum and urine tests.
# Chunk 4549
Few tests are required for patients who have typical IBS symptoms and no alarm features. Unnecessary investigations may be costly and even harmful. The American Gastroenterological Association has delineated factors to be considered when determining the aggressiveness of the diagnostic evaluation. These include the duration of symptoms, the change in symptoms over time, the age and sex of the patient, the referral status of the patient, prior diagnostic studies, a family history of colorectal malignancy, and the degree of psychosocial dysfunction. Thus, a younger individual with mild symptoms requires a minimal diagnostic evaluation, while an older person or an individual with rapidly progressive symptoms should undergo a more thorough exclusion of organic disease. Most patients should have a complete blood count and sigmoidoscopic examination; in addition, stool specimens should be examined for ova and parasites in those who have diarrhea. In patients with persistent diarrhea not responding to simple antidiarrheal agents, a sigmoid colon biopsy should be performed to rule out microscopic colitis. In those age >40 years, an air-contrast barium enema or colonoscopy should also be performed. If the main symptoms are diarrhea and increased gas, the possibility of lactase deficiency should be ruled out with a hydrogen breath test or with evaluation after a 3-week lactose-free diet. Some patients with IBS-D may have undiagnosed celiac sprue. Because the symptoms of celiac sprue respond to a gluten-free diet, testing for celiac sprue in IBS may prevent years of morbidity and attendant expense. Decision-analysis studies show that serology testing for celiac sprue in patients with IBS-D has an acceptable cost when the prevalence of celiac sprue is >1% and is the dominant strategy when the prevalence is >8%. In patients with concurrent symptoms of dyspepsia, upper GI radiographs or esophagogastroduodenoscopy may be advisable. In patients with postprandial right upper quadrant pain, an ultrasonogram of the gallbladder should be obtained. Laboratory features that argue against IBS include evidence of anemia, elevated sedimentation rate, presence of leukocytes or blood in stool, and stool volume >200–300 mL/d. These findings would necessitate other diagnostic considerations.
# Chunk 4550
The beneficial effects of dietary fiber on colonic physiology suggest that dietary fiber should be an effective treatment for IBS patients, but controlled trials of dietary fiber have produced variable results. This is not surprising since IBS is a heterogeneous disorder, with some patients being constipated and other having predominant diarrhea. Most investigations report increases in stool weight, decreases in colonic transit times, and improvement in constipation. Others have noted benefits in patients with alternating diarrhea and constipation, pain, and bloating. However, most studies observe no responses in patients with diarrheaor pain-predominant IBS. It is possible that different fiber preparations may have dissimilar effects on selected symptoms in IBS. A cross-over comparison of different fiber preparations found that psyllium produced greater improvements in stool pattern and abdominal pain than bran. Furthermore, psyllium preparations tend to produce less bloating and distention. Despite the equivocal data regarding efficacy, most gastroenterologists consider stool-bulking agents worth trying in patients with IBS-C. Fiber should be started at a nominal dose and slowly titrated up as tolerated over the course of several weeks to a targeted dose of 20–30 g of total dietary and supplementary fiber per day. Even when used judiciously, fiber can exacerbate bloating, flatulence, constipation, and diarrhea.
# Chunk 4551
A number of studies indicate that tricyclic antidepressants may be effective in some IBS patients. In a 2-month study of desipramine, abdominal pain improved in 86% of patients compared to 59% given placebo. Another study of desipramine in 28 IBS patients showed improvement in stool frequency, diarrhea, pain, and depression.
# Chunk 4552
Modulation of Gut Flora Antibiotic treatment benefits a subset of IBS patients. In a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled study, neomycin dosed at 500 mg twice daily for 10 days was more effective than placebo at improving symptom scores among IBS patients. The nonabsorbed oral antibiotic rifaximin is the most thoroughly studied antibiotic for the treatment of IBS. In a double-blind, placebo-controlled study, patients receiving rifaximin at a dose of 550 mg two times daily for 2 weeks experienced substantial improvement of global IBS symptoms over placebo. Rifaximin is the only antibiotic with demonstrated sustained benefit beyond therapy cessation in IBS patients. The drug has a favorable safety and tolerability profile compared with systemic antibiotics. A systematic review and meta-analysis of five studies of IBS patients found that rifaximin is more effective than placebo for global symptoms and bloating (odds ratio 1.57) with a number needed to treat (NNT) of 1970 10.2. The modest therapeutic gain was similar to that yielded by other current available therapies for IBS. However, currently there are still insufficient data to recommend routine use of this antibiotic in the treatment of IBS. Because altered colonic flora may contribute to the pathogenesis of IBS, this has led to great interest in using probiotics to naturally alter the flora. A meta-analysis of 10 probiotic studies in IBS patients found significant relief of pain and bloating with the use of Bifidobacterium breve, B. longum, and Lactobacillus acidophilus species compared to placebo. However, there was no change in stool frequency or consistency. Large-scale studies of well-phenotyped IBS patients are needed to establish the efficacy of these probiotics.
# Chunk 4553
Serotonin Receptor Agonist and Antagonists Serotonin receptor antagonists have been evaluated as therapies for IBS-D. Serotonin acting on 5-HT3 receptors enhances the sensitivity of afferent neurons projecting from the gut. In humans, a 5-HT3 receptor antagonist such as alosetron reduces perception of painful visceral stimulation in IBS. It also induces rectal relaxation, increases rectal compliance, and delays colonic transit. Meta-analysis of 14 randomized controlled trials of alosetron or cilansetron showed that these antagonists are more effective than placebo in achieving global improvement in IBS symptoms and relief of abdominal pain and discomfort. These agents are more likely to cause constipation in IBS patients with diarrhea alternating with constipation. Also, 0.2% of patients using 5-HT3 antagonists developed ischemic colitis versus none in the control group. In postrelease surveillance, 84 cases of ischemic colitis were observed, including 44 cases that required surgery and 4 deaths. As a consequence, the medication was voluntarily withdrawn by the manufacturer in 2000. Alosetron has been reintroduced under a new risk-management program where patients have to sign a patient-physician agreement. This has significantly limited its usage.
# Chunk 4554
Chloride Channel Activators Lubiprostone is a bicyclic fatty acid that stimulates chloride channels in the apical membrane of intestinal epithelial cells. Chloride secretion induces passive movement of sodium and water into the bowel lumen and improves bowel function. Oral lubiprostone was effective in the treatment of patients with constipation-predominant IBS in large phase II and phase III randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled multicenter trials. Responses were significantly greater in patients receiving lubiprostone 8 μg twice daily for 3 months than in those receiving placebo. In general, the drug was quite well tolerated. The major side effects are nausea and diarrhea. Lubiprostone is a new class of compounds for treatment of chronic constipation with or without IBS.
# Chunk 4555
Guanylate Cyclase-C Agonist Linaclotide is a minimally absorbed 14-amino-acid peptide guanylate cyclase-C (GC-C) agonist that binds to and activates GC-C on the luminal surface of intestinal epithelium. Activation of GC-C results in generation of cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP), which triggers secretion of fluid, sodium, and bicarbonate. In animal models, linaclotide accelerates GI transit and reduces visceral nociception. The analgesic action of linaclotide appears to be mediated by cGMP acting on afferent pain fibers innervating the GI tract. A phase III, double-blind, controlled trial showed that linaclotide, 290 μg given once daily, significantly improved abdominal pain, bloating, and spontaneous bowel movement. The only significant side effect was diarrhea, which occurred in 4.5% of the patients. The drug has been approved for treatment of constipation in IBS-C patients.
# Chunk 4556
Anatomy and Pathophysiology Two types of diverticula occur in the intestine: true and false (or pseudo diverticula). A true diverticulum is a saclike herniation of the entire bowel wall, whereas a pseudo diverticulum involves only a protrusion of the mucosa and submucosa through the muscularis propria of the colon (Fig. 353-1). The type of diverticulum affecting the colon is the pseudodiverticulum. Diverticula commonly affect the left and sigmoid colon; the rectum is always spared. However, in Asian populations, 70% of diverticula are seen in the right colon and cecum as well. Diverticulitis is inflammation of a diverticulum. Previous understanding of the pathogenesis of diverticulosis attributed a low-fiber diet as the sole culprit, and onset of diverticulitis would occur acutely when these diverticula become obstructed. However, evidence now suggests that the pathogenesis is more complex and multifactorial. The diverticula occur at the point where the nutrient artery, or vasa recti, penetrates through the muscularis propria, resulting in a break in the integrity of the colonic wall. This anatomic restriction may be a result of the relative high-pressure zone within the muscular sigmoid colon. Thus, higher-amplitude contractions combined with constipated, high-fat-content stool within the sigmoid lumen in an area of weakness in the colonic wall results in the creation of these diverticula. Consequently, the vasa recti is either compressed or eroded, leading to either perforation or bleeding. Chronic low-grade inflammation is thought to play a key role. Furthermore, better understanding of the gut microbiota suggests that dysbiosis is an important aspect of disease.
# Chunk 4557
The diagnosis of diverticulitis is best made on CT with the following findings: sigmoid diverticula, thickened colonic wall >4 mm, and inflammation within the periodic fat ± the collection of contrast material or fluid. In 16% of patients, an abdominal abscess may be present. Symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome (Chap. 352) may mimic those of diverticulitis. Therefore, suspected diverticulitis that does not meet CT criteria or is not associated with a leukocytosis or fever is not diverticular disease. Other conditions that can mimic diverticular disease include an ovarian cyst, endometriosis, acute appendicitis, and pelvic inflammatory disease.
# Chunk 4558
Treatment strategies targeting dysbiosis in diverticular disease are also beneficial. Use of the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) on stool specimens from consumers of a high-fiber diet has shown different bacterial content than stool of consumers of a low-fiber, high-fat diet. Probiotics are being increasingly used by gastroenterologists for multiple bowel disorders and have been shown to prevent recurrence of diverticulitis. Specifically probiotics containing Lactobacillus acidophilus and Bifidobacterium strains have been shown to be beneficial. Furthermore, rifaximin (a poorly absorbed broad-spectrum antibiotic), when compared to fiber alone, is associated with 30% less frequent recurrent symptoms from uncomplicated diverticular disease.
# Chunk 4559
Recurrent Symptoms Recurrent abdominal symptoms following surgical resection for diverticular disease occur in 10% of patients. Recurrent diverticular disease develops in patients following inadequate surgical resection. A retained segment of diseased rectosigmoid colon is associated with twice the incidence of recurrence. The presence of irritable bowel syndrome may also cause recurrence of initial symptoms. Patients undergoing surgical resection for presumed diverticulitis and symptoms of chronic abdominal cramping and irregular loose bowel movements consistent with irritable bowel syndrome have poorer functional outcomes.
# Chunk 4560
Anatomy and Pathophysiology Rectal prolapse (procidentia) is a circumferential, full-thickness protrusion of the rectal wall through the anal orifice. It is often associated with a redundant sigmoid colon, pelvic laxity, and a deep rectovaginal septum (pouch of Douglas). Initially, rectal prolapse was felt to be the result of early internal rectal intussusception, which occurs in the upper to mid rectum. This was considered to be the first step in an inevitable progression to full-thickness external prolapse. However, only 1 of 38 patients with internal prolapse followed for >5 years developed full-thickness prolapse. Others have suggested that full-thickness prolapse is the result of damage to the nerve supply to the pelvic floor muscles or pudendal nerves from repeated stretching with straining to defecate. Damage to the pudendal nerves would weaken the pelvic floor muscles, including the external anal sphincter muscles. Bilateral pudendal nerve injury is more significantly associated with prolapse and incontinence than unilateral injury.
# Chunk 4561
Presentation and Evaluation In external prolapse, the majority of patient complaints include anal mass, bleeding per rectum, and poor perianal hygiene. Prolapse of the rectum usually occurs following defecation and will spontaneously reduce or require the patient to manually reduce the prolapse. Constipation occurs in ~30–67% of patients with rectal prolapse. Differing degrees of fecal incontinence occur in 50–70% of patients. Patients with internal rectal prolapse will present with symptoms of both constipation and incontinence. Other associated findings include outlet obstruction (anismus) in 30%, colonic inertia in 10%, and solitary rectal ulcer syndrome in 12%.
# Chunk 4562
Office evaluation is best performed after the patient has been given an enema, which enables the prolapse to protrude. An important distinction should be made between full-thickness rectal prolapse and isolated mucosal prolapse associated with hemorrhoidal disease (Fig. 353-4). Mucosal prolapse is known for radial grooves rather than circumferential folds around the anus and is due to increased laxity of the connective tissue between the submucosa and underlying muscle of the anal canal. The evaluation of prolapse should also include cystoproctography and colonoscopy. These examinations evaluate for associated pelvic floor disorders and rule out a malignancy or a polyp as the lead point for prolapse. If rectal prolapse is associated with chronic constipation, the patient should undergo a defecating proctogram and a sitzmark study. This will evaluate for the presence of anismus or colonic inertia. Anismus is the result of attempting to defecate against a closed pelvic floor and is also known as nonrelaxing puborectalis. This can be seen when straightening of the rectum fails to occur on fluoroscopy while the patient is attempting to defecate. In colonic inertia, a sitzmark study will demonstrate retention of >20% of markers on abdominal x-ray 5 days after swallowing. For patients with fecal incontinence, endoanal ultrasound and manometric evaluation, including pudendal nerve testing of their anal sphincter muscles, may be performed before surgery for prolapse (see “Fecal Incontinence,” below).
# Chunk 4563
procedure), or placement of a Tirsch wire encircling the anus. The goal of the transperineal approach is to remove the redundant rectosigmoid colon. Common transabdominal approaches include presacral suture or mesh rectopexy (Ripstein) with (Frykman-Goldberg) or without resection of the redundant sigmoid. Colon resection, in general, is reserved for patients with constipation and outlet obstruction. Ventral rectopexy is an effective method of abdominal repair of full-thickness prolapse that does not require sigmoid resection (see description below). This repair may have improved functional results over other abdominal repairs. Transabdominal procedures can be performed effectively with laparoscopic and, more recently, robotic techniques without increased incidence of recurrence. The goal of the transabdominal approach is to restore normal anatomy by removing redundant bowel and reattaching the supportive tissue of the rectum to the presacral fascia. The final alternative is abdominal proctectomy with end-sigmoid colostomy. If total colonic inertia is present, as defined by a history of constipation and a positive sitzmark study, a subtotal colectomy with an ileosigmoid or rectal anastomosis may be required at the time of rectopexy.
# Chunk 4564
FECAL INCONTINENCE Incidence and Epidemiology Fecal incontinence is the involuntary passage of fecal material for at least 1 month in an individual with a developmental age of at least 4 years. The prevalence of fecal incontinence in the United States is 0.5–11%. The majority of patients are women and
# Chunk 4565
FIGURE 353-6 Laparoscopic ventral rectopexy (LVR). To reduce the internal prolapse and close any rectovaginal septal defect, the pouch of Douglas is opened and mesh is secured to the anterolateral rec-tum, vaginal fornix, and sacrum. (From A D’Hoore et al: Br J Surg 91:1500, 2004.) • Myopathies, above the age of 65. A higher incidence of incontinence is seen among parous women. One-half of patients with fecal incontinence also suffer from urinary incontinence. The majority of incontinence is a result of obstetric injury to the pelvic floor, either while carrying a fetus or during the delivery. An anatomic sphincter defect may occur in up to 32% of women following childbirth regardless of visible damage to the perineum. Risk factors at the time of delivery include prolonged labor, the use of forceps, and the need for an episiotomy. Symptoms of incontinence can present after two or more decades following obstetric injury. Medical conditions known to contribute to the development of fecal incontinence are listed in Table 353-4.
# Chunk 4566
The “gold standard” for the treatment of fecal incontinence with an isolated sphincter defect has been the overlapping sphincteroplasty. The external anal sphincter muscle and scar tissue as well as any identifiable internal sphincter muscle are dissected free from the surrounding adipose and connective tissue and then an overlapping repair is performed in an attempt to rebuild the muscular ring and restore its function. Long-term results following overlapping sphincteroplasty show about a 50% failure rate over 5 years. Poorer outcome has been seen in patients with prolonged pudendal nerve terminal motor latency.
# Chunk 4567
Sacral neuromodulation, collagen-enhancing injectables, radio-frequency therapy, and the artificial bowel sphincter are other options. Sacral nerve stimulation and the artificial bowel sphincter are both adaptations of procedures developed for the management of urinary incontinence. Sacral nerve stimulation is ideally suited for patients with intact but weak anal sphincters. A temporary nerve stimulator is placed on the third sacral nerve. If there is at least a 50% improvement in symptoms, a permanent nerve stimulator is placed under the skin. The artificial bowel sphincter is a cuff and reservoir apparatus that allows for manual inflation of a cuff placed around the anus, increasing anal tone. This allows the patient to manually close off the anal canal until defecation is necessary. Long-term results for sacral stimulation have been promising, with nearly 80% of patients having a reduction in incontinence episodes by at least 50%. This reduction has been sustainable in studies out to 5 years. Unfortunately, the artificial bowel sphincter has been associated with a 30% infection rate. Accordingly, implantation is performed less often.
# Chunk 4568
Collagen-enhancing injectables have been around for several years. The largest open trial involved 115 incontinent patients treated with nonanimal stabilized hyaluronic acid (NASHA/DX) gel. In this study, patients underwent injections of NASHA/DX (Solesta) into the anal mucosa and were followed for 12 months. The results were promising, with over 50% achieving greater than 50% reduction in incontinence episodes, and these results were sustainable up to 2 years. This method is another less invasive therapy for patients with fecal incontinence.
# Chunk 4569
Radiofrequency energy delivery to the anal canal in patients with fecal incontinence aids in the development and restructuring of collagen fibers and provides tensile strength to the sphincter muscles. The radiofrequency is delivered as an office procedure with sedation. The results have been variable, with 20–50% of patients having a sustained reduction in incontinence episodes for 5 years.
# Chunk 4570
The blood supply to the intestines is depicted in Fig. 354-1. To prevent ischemic injury, extensive collateralization occurs between major mesenteric trunks and branches of the mesenteric arcades. Collateral vessels within the small bowel are numerous and meet within the duodenum and the bed of the pancreas. Collateral vessels within the colon meet at the splenic flexure and descending/sigmoid colon. These areas, which are inherently at risk for decreased blood flow, are known as Griffiths’ point and Sudeck’s point, respectively, and are the most common locations for colonic ischemia (Fig. 354-1, shaded areas). The splanchnic circulation can receive up to 30% of the cardiac output. Protective responses to prevent intestinal ischemia include abundant
# Chunk 4571
Acute mesenteric ischemia resulting from arterial embolus or thrombosis presents with severe acute, nonremitting abdominal pain strikingly out of proportion to the physical findings. Associated symptoms may include nausea and vomiting, transient diarrhea, anorexia, and bloody stools. With the exception of minimal abdominal distention and hypoactive bowel sounds, early abdominal examination is unimpressive. Later findings will demonstrate peritonitis and cardiovascular collapse. In the evaluation of acute intestinal ischemia, routine laboratory tests should be obtained, including complete blood count, serum chemistry, coagulation profile, arterial blood gas, amylase, lipase, lactic acid, blood type and cross match, and cardiac enzymes. Regardless of the need for urgent surgery, emergent admission to a monitored bed or intensive care unit is recommended for resuscitation and further evaluation. If the diagnosis of intestinal ischemia is being considered, consultation with a surgical service is necessary. Often the decision to operate is made on a high index of suspicion from the history and physical exam despite normal laboratory findings.
# Chunk 4572
Other diagnostic modalities that may be useful in diagnosis but should not delay surgical therapy include electrocardiogram (ECG), echocardiogram, abdominal radiographs, computed tomography (CT), and mesenteric angiography. More recently, mesentery duplex scanning and visible light spectroscopy during colonoscopy have been demonstrated to be beneficial. The ECG may demonstrate an arrhythmia, indicating the possible source of the emboli. A plain abdominal film may show evidence of free intraperitoneal air, indicating a perforated viscus and the need for emergent exploration. Earlier features of intestinal ischemia seen on abdominal radiographs include bowel-wall edema, known as “thumbprinting.” If the ischemia progresses, air can be seen within the bowel wall (pneumatosis intestinalis) and within the portal venous system. Other features include calcifications of the aorta and its tributaries, indicating atherosclerotic disease. With the administration of oral and IV contrast, dynamic CT angiography with three-dimensional reconstruction is a highly sensitive test for intestinal ischemia. In acute embolic disease, mesenteric angiography is best performed intraoperatively. A mesenteric duplex scan demonstrating a high peak velocity of flow in the superior mesenteric artery (SMA) is associated with an approximately 80% positive predictive value of mesenteric ischemia. More significantly, a negative duplex scan virtually precludes the diagnosis of mesenteric ischemia. Duplex imaging serves as a screening test; further investigations with angiography are needed. The biggest limitation of duplex scanning is body habitus; in obese patients, imaging is poor yield. However, in patients with chronic disease, “food fear” often leads to a decreased appetite and therefore less abdominal fat, and duplex imaging is very high yield. The endoscopic techniques using visible light spectroscopy can be used in the diagnosis of chronic ischemia. When suspecting mesenteric ischemia involving the colon, performing an endoscopy to evaluate up to the splenic
# Chunk 4573
Nonocclusive or vasospastic mesenteric ischemia presents with generalized abdominal pain, anorexia, bloody stools, and abdominal distention. Often these patients are obtunded, and physical findings may not assist in the diagnosis. The presence of a leukocytosis, metabolic acidosis, elevated amylase or creatinine phosphokinase levels, and/or lactic acidosis is useful in support of the diagnosis of advanced intestinal ischemia; however, these markers may not be indicative of either reversible ischemia or frank necrosis. Investigational markers for intestinal ischemia include D-dimer, glutathione S-transferase, platelet-activating factor (PAF), and mucosal pH monitoring. Regardless of the need for urgent surgery, emergent admission to a monitored bed or intensive care unit is recommended for resuscitation and further evaluation. Early manifestations of intestinal ischemia include fluid sequestration within the bowel wall leading to a loss of interstitial volume. Aggressive fluid resuscitation may be necessary. To optimize oxygen delivery, nasal O2 and blood transfusions may be given. Broad-spectrum antibiotics should be given to provide sufficient coverage for enteric pathogens, including gram-negative and anaerobic organisms. Frequent monitoring of the patient’s vital signs, urine output, blood gases, and lactate levels is paramount, as is frequent abdominal examination. All vasoconstricting agents should be avoided; fluid resuscitation is the intervention of choice to maintain hemodynamics.
# Chunk 4574
If ischemic colitis is a concern, colonoscopy should be performed to assess the integrity of the colon mucosa. Visualization of the rectosigmoid region may demonstrate decreased mucosal integrity, associated more commonly with nonocclusive mesenteric ischemia, or, on occasion, occlusive disease as a result of acute loss of inferior mesenteric arterial flow following aortic surgery. Ischemia of the colonic mucosa is graded as mild with minimal mucosal erythema or as moderate with pale mucosal ulcerations and evidence of extension to the muscular layer of the bowel wall. Severe ischemic colitis presents with severe ulcerations resulting in black or green discoloration of the mucosa, consistent with full-thickness bowel-wall necrosis. The degree of reversibility can be predicted from the mucosal findings: mild erythema is nearly 100% reversible, moderate is approximately 50% reversible, and frank necrosis is simply dead bowel. Follow-up colonoscopy can be performed to rule out progression of ischemic colitis.
# Chunk 4575
Patients with mesenteric venous thrombosis may present with a gradual or sudden onset. Symptoms include vague abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. Examination findings include abdominal distention with mild to moderate tenderness and signs of dehydration. The diagnosis of mesenteric thrombosis is frequently made on abdominal spiral CT with oral and IV contrast. Findings on CT angiography with venous phase include bowel-wall thickening and ascites. Intravenous contrast will demonstrate a delayed arterial phase and clot within the superior mesenteric vein. The goal of management is to optimize hemodynamics and correct electrolyte abnormalities with massive fluid resuscitation. Intravenous antibiotics as well as anticoagulation should be initiated. If laparotomy is performed and 1981 mesenteric venous thrombosis is suspected, heparin anticoagulation is Acute intestinal obstruction immediately initiated, and compromised bowel is resected. Of all acute
# Chunk 4576
Chronic intestinal ischemia presents with intestinal angina or postprandial abdominal pain associated with need for increased blood flow to the intestine following meals. Patients report abdominal cramping and pain following ingestion of a meal. Weight loss and chronic diarrhea may also be noted. Abdominal pain without weight loss is not chronic mesenteric angina. Physical examination will often reveal a malnourished patient with an abdominal bruit as well as other manifestations of atherosclerosis. Duplex ultrasound evaluation of the mesenteric vessels has gained in popularity. It is important to perform the test fasting because the presence of increased bowel gas prevents adequate visualization of flow disturbances within the vessels or the lack of a vasodilation response to feeding during the test. This tool is frequently used as a screening test for patients with symptoms suggestive of chronic mesenteric ischemia. The gold standard for confirmation of mesenteric arterial occlusion is mesenteric angiography. Evaluation with mesenteric angiography allows for identification and possible intervention for the treatment of atherosclerosis within the vessel lumen and will also evaluate the patency of remaining mesenteric vessels. The use of mesenteric angiography may be limited in the presence of renal failure or contrast allergy. Magnetic resonance angiography is an alternative if the administration of contrast dye is contraindicated.
# Chunk 4577
Determination of intestinal viability intraoperatively in patients with suspected intestinal ischemia can be challenging. After revascularization, the bowel wall should be observed for return of a pink color and peristalsis. Palpation of major arterial mesenteric vessels can be performed, as well as applying a Doppler flowmeter to the antimesenteric border of the bowel wall, but neither is a definitive indicator of viability. In equivocal cases, 1 g of IV sodium fluorescein is administered, and the pattern of bowel reperfusion is observed under ultraviolet illumination with a standard (3600 A) Wood’s lamp. An area of nonfluorescence >5 mm in diameter suggests nonviability. If doubt persists, reexploration performed 24–48 h following surgery will allow demarcation of nonviable bowel. Primary intestinal anastomosis in patients with ischemic bowel is always worrisome; thus, delayed bowel reconstruction and reanastomosis should be deferred to the time of second-look laparotomy.
# Chunk 4578
Extrinsic diseases most commonly cause mechanical obstruction of the small intestine. In the United States and Europe, almost all cases are caused by postoperative adhesions (>50%), carcinomatosis, or herniation of the anterior abdominal wall. Carcinomatosis most often originates from the ovary, pancreas, stomach, or colon, although rarely, metastasis from distant organs like the breast and skin can occur. Adhesions are responsible for >90% of cases of early postoperative obstruction that require intervention.
# Chunk 4579
Bezoars, feces, foreign bodies including inspissated barium, gallstones (entering the lumen via a cholecystoenteric fistula), enteroliths adhesions that can cause bowel obstruction (Table 355-2). Overall, small-bowel obstruction is slightly more common in women. The risk of internal herniation is increased by abdominal procedures such as laparoscopic or open Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. Although laparoscopic procedures may generate fewer postoperative adhesions compared with open surgery, the risk of obstructive adhesion formation is not eliminated.
# Chunk 4580
In many patients who are successfully treated for adhesive small-bowel obstruction, obstruction will recur. The rate varies according to how patients were initially managed. Approximately 20% of patients who were treated conservatively and between 5 and 30% of patients who were managed operatively will require readmission within 10 years.
# Chunk 4581
Volvulus, which occurs when bowel twists on its mesenteric axis, can cause partial or complete obstruction and vascular insufficiency. The sigmoid colon is most commonly affected, accounting for approximately two-thirds of all cases of volvulus and 4% of all cases of large-bowel obstruction. The cecum and terminal ileum can also volvulize, or the cecum alone may be involved as a cecal bascule. Risk factors include institutionalization, the presence of neuropsychiatric conditions requiring psychotropic medication, chronic constipation, and aging; patients typically present in their seventies or eighties. Colonic volvulus is more common in Eastern Europe, Russia, and Africa than it is in the United States. It is rare for adhesions or hernias to obstruct the colon. Cancer of the descending colon and rectum is responsible for approximately two-thirds of all cases, followed by diverticulitis and volvulus.
# Chunk 4582
The cardinal signs are colicky abdominal pain, abdominal distention, emesis, and obstipation. More intraluminal fluid accumulates in patients with distal obstruction, which typically leads to greater distention, more discomfort, and delayed emesis. This emesis is feculent when there is bacterial overgrowth. Patients with more proximal obstruction commonly present with less abdominal distention but more pronounced vomiting. Elements of the history that might be helpful include any prior history of surgery, including herniorrhaphy, as well as any history of cancer or inflammatory bowel disease.
# Chunk 4583
Collapsed bowel distal to obstruction should increase the concern about the presence of complications such as ischemia, necrosis, or peritonitis. Severe pain with localization or signs of peritoneal irritation is suspicious for strangulated or closed-loop obstruction. It is important to remember that the discomfort may be out of proportion to physical findings mimicking the complaints of patients with acute mesenteric ischemia. Every patient should have a rectal examination. Patients with colonic volvulus present with the classic manifestations of closed-loop obstruction: severe abdominal pain, vomiting, and obstipation. Asymmetrical abdominal distension and a tympanic mass may be evident.
# Chunk 4584
Patients with ileus or pseudo-obstruction may have signs and symptoms similar to those of bowel obstruction. Although abdominal distention is present, colicky abdominal pain is typically absent, and patients may not have nausea or emesis. Ongoing, regular discharge of stool or flatus can sometimes help distinguish patients with ileus from those with complete mechanical bowel obstruction.
# Chunk 4585
Laboratory testing should include a complete blood count and serum electrolyte and creatinine measurements. Serial assessments are often useful. Mild hemoconcentration and slight elevation of the white blood cell count commonly occur after simple bowel obstruction. Emesis and dehydration may cause hypokalemia, hypochloremia, elevated blood urea nitrogen–to–creatinine ratios, and metabolic alkalosis. Patients may be hyponatremic on admission because many have attempted to rehydrate themselves with hypotonic fluids. The presence of guaiac-positive stools and iron-deficiency anemia are strongly suggestive of malignancy.
# Chunk 4586
Higher white blood cell counts with the presence of immature forms or the presence of metabolic acidosis are worrisome for severe volume 1984 depletion or ischemic necrosis and sepsis. At this time, there are no laboratory tests that are especially useful for identifying the presence of simple or strangulated obstruction, although increases in serum D-lactate, creatine kinase bb isoenzymes, or intestinal fatty acid binding protein levels may be suggestive of the latter. In all cases, when considering diagnostic imaging, the key is not to delay surgical consultation and operative intervention when the patient’s signs or symptoms strongly suggest that high-grade or complete obstruction or bowel compromise is present. Plain films of the abdomen, which must include upright or cross-table lateral views, can be completed quickly and may confirm the clinical suspicion 60% of the time. Interpretation immediately after operation is difficult. A “staircasing” pattern of dilated air and fluid-filled small-bowel loops >2.5 cm in diameter with little or no air seen in the colon are classical findings in patients with small-bowel obstruction, although findings may be equivocal in some patients with documented disease. Little bowel gas appears in patients with proximal bowel obstruction or in patients whose intestinal lumens are filled with fluid. Upright plain films of the abdomen of patients with large-bowel obstruction typically show colon dilatation. Small-bowel air-fluid levels will not be obvious if the ileocecal valve is competent. Although it can be difficult to distinguish from ileus, small-bowel obstruction is more likely when air-fluid levels are seen without significant colonic distension. Free air suggests that perforation has occurred in patients who have not recently undergone surgical procedures. Radiopaque foreign bodies or enteroliths may be visualized. A gas-filled, “coffee bean”–shaped dilated shadow may be seen in patients with volvulus. More sophisticated imaging can be beneficial when the diagnosis is unclear. Magnetic resonance imaging has been used to diagnose small-bowel obstruction, but it is more expensive and, typically, provides less spatial resolution. Ultrasonographic evaluations are especially difficult to interpret but may be sensitive and appropriate studies to evaluate patients who are pregnant or for whom x-ray exposure is otherwise contraindicated or inappropriate. Computed tomography (CT) is the most commonly used imaging modality. Its sensitivity for detecting bowel obstruction is approximately 95% (78–100%) in patients with high-grade obstruction, with a specificity of 96% and an accuracy of ≥95%. Its accuracy in diagnosing closed-loop obstruction is much lower (60%). Examples of some CT images are reproduced in Fig. 355-2. It may also provide useful information regarding location or identify particular circumstances where surgical intervention is needed urgently. Patients who have evidence of contrast appearing within the cecum within 4–24 h of oral administration can be expected to improve with high sensitivity and specificity (~95% each). For example, contrast studies may demonstrate a “bird’s beak,” a “c-loop,” or “whorl” deformity on CT imaging at the site where twisting obstructs the lumen when a colonic volvulus is present. CT imaging with enteral and IV contrast can also identify ischemia. Altered bowel wall enhancement is the most specific early finding, but its sensitivity is low. Mesenteric venous gas, pneumoperitoneum, and pneumatosis intestinalis are late findings indicating the presence of bowel necrosis. CT scanning after a water-soluble contrast enema may help distinguish ileus or pseudo-obstruction from distal large-bowel obstruction in patients who present with evidence of small-bowel and colonic distention. CT enteroclysis can accurately identify neoplasia as a cause of bowel obstruction. Contrast enemas or colonoscopies are almost always needed to identify causes of acute colonic obstruction. Barium studies are generally contraindicated in patients with firm evidence of complete or high-grade bowel obstruction, especially when they present acutely. Barium should never be given orally to a patient with possible obstruction until that diagnosis has been excluded. In every other case, such investigations should only be performed in exceptional circumstances and with great caution because patients with significant obstruction may develop barium concretions as an additional source of blockage and some who would have otherwise recovered will require operative intervention. Barium opacification also renders cross-sectional imaging studies or angiography uninterpretable.
# Chunk 4587
An improved understanding of the pathophysiology of bowel obstruction and the importance of fluid resuscitation, electrolyte repletion, intestinal decompression, and the selected use of antibiotics have likely contributed to a reduction in the mortality from acute bowel obstruction. Every patient should be stabilized as quickly as possible. Nasogastric tube suction decompresses the stomach, minimizes further distention from swallowed air, improves patient comfort, and reduces the risk of aspiration. Urine output should be assessed using a Foley catheter. In some cases, for example, in patients with cardiac disease, central venous pressures should be monitored. The use of antibiotics is controversial, although prophylactic administration is warranted if surgery is required. Complete bowel obstruction is an indication for intervention. Stenting may be possible and warranted for some patients with high-grade obstruction due to unresectable stage IV malignancy. Stenting may also allow elective mechanical bowel preparation before surgery is undertaken. Because treatment options are so variable, it is helpful to make as precise a diagnosis as possible preoperatively.
# Chunk 4588
The wisdom and expertise of Dr. William Silen are gratefully acknowledged.

Danny O. Jacobs

Appendicitis occurs more frequently in Westernized societies. Although its incidence is decreasing for uncertain reasons, acute appendicitis remains the most common emergency general surgical disease affecting the abdomen, with a rate of approximately 100 per 100,000 person-years in Europe and the Americas or about 11 cases per 10,000 people annually. Approximately 9% of men and 7% of women will experience an episode during their lifetime. Appendicitis occurs most commonly in 10to 19-year-olds, although the average age at diagnosis appears to be gradually increasing, as is the frequency of the disease in African Americans, Asians, and Native Americans. Overall, 70% of patients are less than 30 years old and most are men; the male-to-female ratio is 1.4:1.
# Chunk 4589
1986 PATHOGENESIS OF APPENDICITIS AND APPENDICEAL PERFORATION Appendicitis was first described in 1886 by Reginald Fitz. Its etiology is still not completely understood. Fecaliths, incompletely digested food residue, lymphoid hyperplasia, intraluminal scarring, tumors, bacteria, viruses, and inflammatory bowel disease have all been associated with inflammation of the appendix and appendicitis. Although not proven, obstruction of the appendiceal lumen is believed to be an important step in the development of appendicitis. In some cases, obstruction leads to bacterial overgrowth and luminal distension, with an increase in intraluminal pressure that can inhibit the flow of lymph and blood in some cases. Then, vascular thrombosis and ischemic necrosis with perforation of the distal appendix may occur. Any perforation that occurs near the base of the appendix should raise concerns about another disease process. Most patients who will perforate do so before they are evaluated by surgeons. Appendiceal fecaliths (or appendicoliths) are found in approximately 50% of patients with gangrenous appendicitis who perforate but are rarely identified in those who have simple disease. As mentioned earlier, the incidence of perforated, but not simple, appendicitis is increasing. The rate of perforated and nonperforated appendicitis is correlated in men but not in women. Together these observations suggest that the underlying pathophysiologic processes are different and that simple appendicitis does not always progress to perforation. Furthermore, some cases of simple acute appendicitis may resolve spontaneously or with antibiotic therapy, and recurrent disease is remotely possible. The relative frequency of these events is unknown. When perforation occurs, the resultant leak may be contained by the omentum or other surrounding tissues to form an abscess. Free perforation normally causes severe peritonitis. These patients may also develop infective suppurative thrombosis of the portal vein and its tributaries along with intrahepatic abscesses. The prognosis of the very unfortunate patients who develop this dreaded complication is very poor.
# Chunk 4590
What is the classic history? Nonspecific complaints occur first. Patients may notice changes in bowel habits or malaise and vague, perhaps intermittent, crampy, abdominal pain in the epigastric or periumbilical region. The pain subsequently migrates to the right lower quadrant over 12–24 h, where it is sharper and can be definitively localized as transmural inflammation when the appendix irritates the parietal peritoneum. Parietal peritoneal irritation may be associated with local muscle rigidity and stiffness. Patients with appendicitis
# Chunk 4591
Arriving at the correct diagnosis is even more challenging when the appendix is not located in the right lower quadrant, in women of childbearing age, and in the very young or elderly. Because the differential diagnosis of appendicitis is so broad, often the key question to answer expeditiously is whether the patient has appendicitis or some other condition that requires immediate operative intervention. A major concern is that the likelihood of a delay in diagnosis is greater if the appendix is unusually positioned. All patients should undergo a rectal examination. An inflamed appendix located behind the cecum or below the pelvic brim may prompt very little tenderness of the anterior abdominal wall.
# Chunk 4592
Patients with pelvic appendicitis are more likely to present with dysuria, urinary frequency, diarrhea, or tenesmus. They may only experience pain in the suprapubic region on palpation or on rectal or pelvic examination. A pelvic examination in women is mandatory to rule out conditions affecting urogynecologic organs that can cause abdominal pain and mimic appendicitis such as pelvic inflammatory disease, ectopic pregnancy, and ovarian torsion. The relative frequencies of some presenting signs are displayed in Table 356-3.
# Chunk 4593
Laboratory testing does not identify patients with appendicitis but can help the clinician work through the differential diagnosis. The white blood cell count is only mildly to moderately elevated in approximately 70% of patients with simple appendicitis (with a leukocytosis of 10,000–18,000 cells/μL). A “left shift” toward immature polymorphonuclear leukocytes is present in >95% of cases. A sickle cell preparation may be prudent to obtain in those of African, Spanish, Mediterranean, or Indian ancestry. Serum amylase and lipase levels should be measured.
# Chunk 4594
In the absence of contraindications, a patient who has a strongly suggestive medical history and physical examination with supportive laboratory findings should undergo appendectomy urgently. In this instance, imaging studies are not required. In patients in whom the evaluation is suggestive but not convincing, imaging and further study are appropriate. Pelvic ultrasonography is indicated in women of childbearing age. Thereafter, CT may accurately indicate the presence of appendicitis or other intraabdominal processes that warrant intervention. Whenever the diagnosis is uncertain, it is prudent to observe the patient and repeat the abdominal examination over 6–8 h. Any evidence of progression is an indication for operation. Narcotics can be given to patients with severe discomfort, especially if the first abdominal examination is completed before drugs are administered.
# Chunk 4595
All patients should be fully prepared for surgery and have any fluid and electrolyte abnormalities corrected. Either laparoscopic or open appendectomy is a satisfactory choice for patients with uncomplicated appendicitis. Management of those who present with a mass representing a phlegmon or abscess can be more difficult. Such patients are best served by treatment with broad-spectrum antibiotics, drainage if there is an abscess >3 cm in diameter, and parenteral fluids and bowel rest if they appear to respond to conservative management. The appendix can then be more safely removed 6–12 weeks later when inflammation has diminished.
# Chunk 4596
Infective organisms may contaminate the peritoneal cavity after spillage from a hollow viscus, because of a penetrating wound of the abdominal wall, or because of the introduction of a foreign object like a peritoneal dialysis catheter or port that becomes infected. Secondary peritonitis most commonly results from perforation of the appendix, colonic diverticuli, or the stomach and duodenum. It may also occur as a complication of bowel infarction or incarceration, cancer, inflammatory bowel disease, and intestinal obstruction or volvulus. Conditions that may cause secondary bacterial peritonitis and their mechanisms are listed in Table 356-5. Over 90% of the cases of primary or spontaneous bacterial peritonitis occur in patients with ascites or hypoproteinemia (<1 g/L).
# Chunk 4597
The cardinal signs and symptoms of peritonitis are acute, typically severe, abdominal pain with tenderness and fever. How the patient’s complaints of pain are manifested depends on their overall physical health and whether the inflammation is diffuse or localized. Elderly and immunosuppressed patients may not respond as aggressively to the irritation. Diffuse, generalized peritonitis is most often recognized as diffuse abdominal tenderness with local guarding, rigidity, and other evidence of parietal peritoneal irritation. Physical findings may only be identified in a specific region of the abdomen if the intraperitoneal inflammatory process is limited or otherwise contained as may occur in patients with uncomplicated appendicitis or diverticulitis. Bowel sounds are usually absent to hypoactive.
# Chunk 4598
Most patients present with tachycardia and signs of volume depletion with hypotension. Laboratory testing typically reveals a significant leukocytosis, and patients may be severely acidotic. Radiographic studies may show dilatation of the bowel and associated bowel wall edema. Free air, or other evidence of leakage, requires attention and could represent a surgical emergency. In stable patients in whom ascites is present, diagnostic paracentesis is indicated, where the fluid is tested for protein and lactate dehydrogenase and the cell count is measured.
# Chunk 4599
1990 The majority of cells in the liver are hepatocytes, which constitute two-thirds of the organ’s mass. The remaining cell types are Kupffer cells (members of the reticuloendothelial system), stellate (Ito or fat-storing) cells, endothelial and blood vessel cells, bile ductular cells, and cells of supporting structures. Viewed by light microscopy, the liver appears to be organized in lobules, with portal areas at the periphery and central veins in the center of each lobule. However, from a functional point of view, the liver is organized into acini, with both hepatic arterial and portal venous blood entering the acinus from the portal areas (zone 1) and then flowing through the sinusoids to the terminal hepatic veins (zone 3); the intervening hepatocytes constitute zone 2. The advantage of viewing the acinus as the physiologic unit of the liver is that this perspective helps to explain the morphologic patterns and zonality of many vascular and biliary diseases not explained by the lobular arrangement. Portal areas of the liver consist of small veins, arteries, bile ducts, and lymphatics organized in a loose stroma of supporting matrix and small amounts of collagen. Blood flowing into the portal areas is distributed through the sinusoids, passing from zone 1 to zone 3 of the acinus and draining into the terminal hepatic veins (“central veins”). Secreted bile flows in the opposite direction—i.e., in a counter-current pattern from zone 3 to zone 1. The sinusoids are lined by unique endothelial cells that have prominent fenestrae of variable sizes, allowing the free flow of plasma but not of cellular elements. The plasma is thus in direct contact with hepatocytes in the subendothelial space of Disse. Hepatocytes have distinct polarity. The basolateral side of the hepatocyte lines the space of Disse and is richly lined with microvilli; it exhibits endocytotic and pinocytotic activity, with passive and active uptake of nutrients, proteins, and other molecules. The apical pole of the hepatocyte forms the canalicular membranes through which bile components are secreted. The canaliculi of hepatocytes form a fine network, which fuses into the bile ductular elements near the portal areas. Kupffer cells usually lie within the sinusoidal vascular space and represent the largest group of fixed macrophages in the body. The stellate cells are located in the space of Disse but are not usually prominent unless activated, when they produce collagen and matrix. Red blood cells stay in the sinusoidal space as blood flows through the lobules, but white blood cells can migrate through or around endothelial cells into the space of Disse and from there to portal areas, where they can return to the circulation through lymphatics. Hepatocytes perform numerous and vital roles in maintaining homeostasis and health. These functions include the synthesis of most essential serum proteins (albumin, carrier proteins, coagulation factors, many hormonal and growth factors), the production of bile and its carriers (bile acids, cholesterol, lecithin, phospholipids), the regulation of nutrients (glucose, glycogen, lipids, cholesterol, amino acids), and the metabolism and conjugation of lipophilic compounds (bilirubin, anions, cations, drugs) for excretion in the bile or urine. Measurement of these activities to assess liver function is complicated by the multiplicity and variability of these functions. The most commonly used liver “function” tests are measurements of serum bilirubin, serum albumin, and prothrombin time. The serum bilirubin level is a measure of hepatic conjugation and excretion; the serum albumin level and prothrombin time are measures of protein synthesis. Abnormalities of bilirubin, albumin, and prothrombin time are typical of hepatic dysfunction. Frank liver failure is incompatible with life, and the functions of the liver are too complex and diverse to be sub-served by a mechanical pump; a dialysis membrane; or a concoction of infused hormones, proteins, and growth factors.
# Chunk 4600
The clinical history should focus on the symptoms of liver disease— their nature, patterns of onset, and progression—and on potential risk factors for liver disease. The manifestations of liver disease include constitutional symptoms such as fatigue, weakness, nausea, poor appetite, and malaise and the more liver-specific symptoms of jaundice, dark urine, light stools, itching, abdominal pain, and bloating. Symptoms can also suggest the presence of cirrhosis, end-stage liver disease, or complications of cirrhosis such as portal hypertension. Generally, the constellation of symptoms and their patterns of onset rather than a specific symptom points to an etiology.
# Chunk 4601
A history of alcohol intake is important in assessing the cause of liver disease and also in planning management and recommendations. In the United States, for example, at least 70% of adults drink alcohol to some degree, but significant alcohol intake is less common; in population-based surveys, only 5% of individuals have more than two drinks per day, the average drink representing 11–15 g of alcohol. Alcohol consumption associated with an increased rate of alcoholic liver disease is probably more than two drinks (22–30 g) per day in women and three drinks (33–45 g) in men. Most patients with alcoholic cirrhosis have a much higher daily intake and have drunk excessively for ≥10 years before onset of liver disease. In assessing alcohol intake, the history should also focus on whether alcohol abuse or dependence is present. Alcoholism is usually defined by the behavioral patterns and consequences of alcohol intake, not by the amount. Abuse is defined by a repetitive pattern of drinking alcohol that has adverse effects on social, family, occupational, or health status. Dependence is defined by alcohol-seeking behavior, despite its adverse effects. Many
# Chunk 4602
Typical physical findings in liver disease are icterus, hepatomegaly, hepatic tenderness, splenomegaly, spider angiomata, palmar erythema, and excoriations. Signs of advanced disease include muscle wasting, ascites, edema, dilated abdominal veins, hepatic fetor, asterixis, mental confusion, stupor, and coma. In male patients with cirrhosis, particularly that related to alcohol use, signs of hyperestrogenemia such as gynecomastia, testicular atrophy, and loss of male-pattern hair distribution may be found.
# Chunk 4603
Laboratory Testing Diagnosis of liver disease is greatly aided by the availability of reliable and sensitive tests of liver injury and function. A typical battery of blood tests used for initial assessment of liver disease includes measurement of levels of serum alanine and aspartate aminotransferases, alkaline phosphatase, direct and total serum bilirubin and albumin, and prothrombin time. The pattern of abnormalities generally points to hepatocellular versus cholestatic liver disease and helps determine whether the disease is acute or chronic and whether cirrhosis and hepatic failure are present. On the basis of these results, further testing over time may be necessary. Other laboratory tests may be helpful, such as γ-glutamyl transpeptidase to define whether alkaline phosphatase elevations are due to liver disease; hepatitis serology to define the type of viral hepatitis; and autoimmune markers to diagnose primary biliary cirrhosis (antimitochondrial antibody), scleros ing cholangitis (peripheral antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody), and autoimmune hepatitis (antinuclear, smooth-muscle, and liver-kidney microsomal antibody). A simple delineation of laboratory abnormalities and common liver diseases is given in Table 357-3.
# Chunk 4604
Approach to the Patient with Liver Disease

Suspected Liver Disease Abnormal liver tests Acute < 6 months Chronic > 6 months Diagnostic evaluation 1. IgM Anti-HAV 2. HBsAg 3. IgM Anti-HBc 4. Anti-HCV 5. ANA, SMA 6. Monospot,    heterophile 7. Ceruloplasmin 8. Alcohol history 9. Drug history Diagnostic evaluation 1. AMA 2. Drug history 3. Ultrasound/MRI 4. MRCP/ERCP Liver biopsy in acute liver disease: Reserved for patients in whom the diagnosis remains unclear despite medical evaluation Liver biopsy in chronic liver disease: Often valuable for diagnosis as well as staging and grading liver disease Diagnostic evaluation 1. HBsAg 2. Anti-HCV 3. Fe saturation,    ferritin 4. Ceruloplasmin 5. ˜1AT 6. ANA, SMA 7. Ultrasound 8. Alcohol history Diagnostic evaluation 1. Drug history 2. AMA 3. P-ANCA 4. Ultrasound 5. MRCP/ERCP Hepatitic: °°ALT Mixed: ˛ALT, ˛AlkP Cholestatic: °°AlkP, °°gGT, ˛ALT Hepatitic: °°ALT Mixed: ˛ALT, ˛AlkP Cholestatic: °°AlkP, °°gGT, ˛ALT
# Chunk 4605
FIGURE 357-1 Algorithm for evaluation of abnormal liver tests. For patients with suspected liver disease, an appropriate approach to evaluation is initial routine liver testing—e.g., measurement of serum bilirubin, albumin, alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), and alkaline phosphatase (AlkP). These results (sometimes complemented by testing of γ-glutamyl transpeptidase; gGT) will establish whether the pattern of abnormalities is hepatic, cholestatic, or mixed. In addition, the duration of symptoms or abnormalities will indicate whether the disease is acute or chronic. If the disease is acute and if history, laboratory tests, and imaging studies do not reveal a diagnosis, liver biopsy is appropriate to help establish the diagnosis. If the disease is chronic, liver biopsy can be helpful not only for diagnosis but also for grading of the activity and staging the progression of disease. This approach is generally applicable to patients without immune deficiency. In patients with HIV infection or recipients of bone marrow or solid organ transplants, the diagnostic evaluation should also include evaluation for opportunistic infections (e.g., with adenovirus, cytomegalovirus, Coccidioides, hepatitis E virus) as well as for vascular and immunologic conditions (veno-occlusive disease, graft-versus-host disease). HAV, hepatitis A virus; HCV, hepatitis C virus; HBsAg, hepatitis B surface antigen; anti-HBc, antibody to hepatitis B core (antigen); ANA, antinuclear antibody; SMA, smooth-muscle antibody; MRCP, magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography; ERCP, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography; α1 AT, α1 antitrypsin; AMA; antimitochondrial antibody; P-ANCA, peripheral antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody.
# Chunk 4606
Grading refers to an assessment of the severity or activity of liver disease, whether acute or chronic; active or inactive; and mild, moderate, or severe. Liver biopsy is the most accurate means of assessing severity, particularly in chronic liver disease. Serum aminotransferase levels serve as convenient and noninvasive markers for disease activity but do not always reliably reflect disease severity. Thus, normal serum aminotransferase levels in patients with hepatitis B surface antigen in serum may indicate the inactive carrier state or may reflect mild chronic hepatitis B or hepatitis B with fluctuating disease activity. Serum testing for hepatitis B e antigen and hepatitis B virus DNA can help sort out these different patterns, but these markers can also fluctuate and change over time. Similarly, in chronic hepatitis C, serum aminotransferase levels can be normal despite moderate disease activity. Finally, in both alcoholic and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis, aminotransferase levels are quite unreliable in reflecting severity. In these conditions, liver biopsy is helpful in guiding management and identifying appropriate therapy, particularly if treatment is difficult, prolonged, and expensive, as is often the case in chronic viral hepatitis. Of the several well-verified numerical scales for grading activity in chronic liver disease, the most commonly used are the histology activity index and the Ishak histology scale.
# Chunk 4607
Liver biopsy is also the most accurate means of assessing stage of disease as early or advanced, precirrhotic, and cirrhotic. Staging of disease pertains largely to chronic liver diseases in which progression to cirrhosis and end-stage disease can occur but may require years or decades. Clinical features, biochemical tests, and hepatic imaging studies are helpful in assessing stage but generally become abnormal only in the middle to late stages of cirrhosis. Noninvasive tests that suggest advanced fibrosis include mild elevations of bilirubin, prolongation of prothrombin time, slight decreases in serum albumin, and mild thrombocytopenia (which is often the first indication of worsening fibrosis). Combinations of blood test results have been used to create models for predicting advanced liver disease, but these models are not reliable enough to use on a regular basis and only separate advanced from early disease. Recently, elastography and noninvasive breath tests using 13C-labeled compounds have been proposed as a means of detecting early stages of fibrosis and liver dysfunction, but their reliability and reproducibility remain to be proven. Thus, at present, mild to moderate stages of hepatic fibrosis are detectable only by liver biopsy.
# Chunk 4608
decompressive surgery. The Child-Pugh score is a reasonably reliable predictor of survival in many liver diseases and predicts the likelihood of major complications of cirrhosis, such as bleeding from varices and spontaneous bacterial peritonitis. This classification scheme was used to assess prognosis in cirrhosis and to provide standard criteria for listing a patient as a candidate for liver transplantation (Child-Pugh class B). Recently, the Child-Pugh system has been replaced by the Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) system for the latter purpose. The MELD score is a prospectively derived system designed to predict the prognosis of patients with liver disease and portal hypertension. This score is calculated from three noninvasive variables: the prothrombin time expressed as the international normalized ratio (INR), the serum bilirubin level, and the serum creatinine concentration. (http://optn .transplant.hrsa.gov/resources/MeldPeldCalculator.asp?index=98).
# Chunk 4609
The MELD system provides a more objective means of assessing disease severity and has less center-to-center variation than the Child-Pugh score as well as a wider range of values. MELD is currently used to establish priority listing for liver transplantation in the United States. A similar system, PELD (pediatric end-stage liver disease), is based on bilirubin, INR, serum albumin, age, and nutritional status and is used for children <12 years of age.
# Chunk 4610
To increase both the sensitivity and the specificity of laboratory tests in the detection of liver disease, it is best to use them as a battery. Tests usually employed in clinical practice include the bilirubin, aminotransferases, alkaline phosphatase, albumin, and prothrombin time tests. When more than one of these tests provide abnormal findings or the findings are persistently abnormal on serial determinations, the probability of liver disease is high. When all test results are normal, the probability of missing occult liver disease is low.
# Chunk 4611
Evaluation of Liver Function

Review drug list Hepatitis C antibody Hepatitis B surface Ag Iron, TIBC, ferritin ANA, SPEP Ceruloplasmin (if patient < 40) Ultrasound to look for fatty liver <15% Direct Gilbert’s  syndrome Isolated elevation of the bilirubin Hepatocellular pattern (see Table 358-1) W/U negative W/U negative W/U negative Dilated ducts W/U positive Isolated elevation of the alkaline phosphatase Cholestatic pattern (see Table 358-1) Consider liver biopsy ERCP/Liver Bx CT/MRCP/ERCP Liver Bx Ducts not dilated Dilated ducts AMA positive AMA  negative Alkaline phos.  of liver origin Alkaline phos.  of bone origin Bone Eval Ducts not dilated  and/or AMA positive MRCP Evaluation for  hemolysis Dubin-Johnson or Rotor syndrome Hemolysis Fractionate  bilirubin >15% Direct Check AMA Review drugs Ultrasound Liver Tests Fractionate the alkaline  phosphatase or check  GGT or 5' nucleotidase to assess origin of  alkaline phosphatase Ultrasound Review drug list Check AMA Liver biopsy R/O Celiac disease Consider other nonhepatic cause
# Chunk 4612
FIGURE 358-1 Algorithm for the evaluation of chronically abnormal liver tests. AMA, antimitochondrial antibody; ANA, antinuclear antibody; Bx, biopsy; CT, computed tomography; ERCP, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography; GGT, γ glutamyl transpeptidase; MRCP, magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography; R/O, rule out; SPEP, serum protein electrophoresis; TIBC, total iron-binding capacity; W/U, workup.
# Chunk 4613
Urine Bilirubin Unconjugated bilirubin always binds to albumin in the serum and is not filtered by the kidney. Therefore, any bilirubin found in the urine is conjugated bilirubin; the presence of bilirubinuria implies the presence of liver disease. A urine dipstick test can theoretically give the same information as fractionation of the serum bilirubin. This test is almost 100% accurate. Phenothiazines may give a false-positive reading with the Ictotest tablet. In patients recovering from jaundice, the urine bilirubin clears prior to the serum bilirubin.
# Chunk 4614
Blood Ammonia Ammonia is produced in the body during normal protein metabolism and by intestinal bacteria, primarily those in the colon. The liver plays a role in the detoxification of ammonia by converting it to urea, which is excreted by the kidneys. Striated muscle also plays a role in detoxification of ammonia, where it is combined with glutamic acid to form glutamine. Patients with advanced liver disease typically have significant muscle wasting, which likely contributes to hyperammonemia in these patients. Some physicians use the blood ammonia for detecting encephalopathy or for monitoring hepatic synthetic function, although its use for either of these indications has problems. There is very poor correlation between either the presence or the severity of acute encephalopathy and elevation of blood ammonia; it can be occasionally useful for identifying occult liver disease in patients with mental status changes. There is also a poor correlation of the blood serum ammonia and hepatic function. The ammonia can be elevated in patients with severe portal hypertension and portal blood shunting around the liver even in the presence of normal or near-normal hepatic function. Elevated arterial ammonia levels have been shown to correlate with outcome in fulminant hepatic failure.
# Chunk 4615
enzymes tHat reflect DamaGe to Hepatocytes The aminotransferases (transaminases) are sensitive indicators of liver cell injury and are most helpful in recognizing acute hepatocellular diseases such as hepatitis. They include aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT). AST is found in the liver, cardiac muscle, skeletal muscle, kidneys, brain, pancreas, lungs, leukocytes, and erythrocytes in decreasing order of concentration. ALT is found primarily in the liver and is therefore a more specific indicator of liver injury. The aminotransferases are normally present in the serum in low concentrations. These enzymes are released into the blood in greater amounts when there is damage to the liver cell membrane resulting in increased permeability. Liver cell necrosis is not required for the release of the aminotransferases, and there is a poor correlation between the degree of liver cell damage and the level of the aminotransferases. Thus, the absolute elevation of the aminotransferases is of no prognostic significance in acute hepatocellular disorders.
# Chunk 4616
The normal range for aminotransferases varies widely among laboratories, but generally ranges from 10–40 IU/L. The interlaboratory variation in normal range is due to technical reasons; no reference standards exist to establish upper limits of normal for ALT and AST. Some have recommended revisions of normal limits of the aminotransferases to adjust for sex and body mass index, but others have noted the potential costs and unclear benefits of implementing this change.
# Chunk 4617
Any type of liver cell injury can cause modest elevations in the serum aminotransferases. Levels of up to 300 IU/L are nonspecific and may be found in any type of liver disorder. Minimal ALT elevations in asymptomatic blood donors rarely indicate severe liver disease; studies have shown that fatty liver disease is the most likely explanation. Striking elevations—i.e., aminotransferases >1000 IU/L—occur almost exclusively in disorders associated with extensive hepatocellular injury such as (1) viral hepatitis, (2) ischemic liver injury (prolonged hypo-tension or acute heart failure), or (3) toxinor drug-induced liver injury.
# Chunk 4618
The pattern of the aminotransferase elevation can be helpful diagnostically. In most acute hepatocellular disorders, the ALT is higher than or equal to the AST. Whereas the AST:ALT ratio is typically <1 in patients with chronic viral hepatitis and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, a number of groups have noted that as cirrhosis develops, this ratio rises to >1. An AST:ALT ratio >2:1 is suggestive, whereas a ratio >3:1 is highly suggestive, of alcoholic liver disease. The AST in alcoholic liver disease is rarely >300 IU/L, and the ALT is often normal. A low level of ALT in the serum is due to an alcohol-induced deficiency of pyridoxal phosphate.
# Chunk 4619
enzymes tHat reflect cHolestasis The activities of three enzymes— alkaline phosphatase, 5ʹ-nucleotidase, and γ-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT)—are usually elevated in cholestasis. Alkaline phosphatase and 5ʹ-nucleotidase are found in or near the bile canalicular membrane of 1997 hepatocytes, whereas GGT is located in the endoplasmic reticulum and in bile duct epithelial cells. Reflecting its more diffuse localization in the liver, GGT elevation in serum is less specific for cholestasis than are elevations of alkaline phosphatase or 5ʹ-nucleotidase. Some have advocated the use of GGT to identify patients with occult alcohol use. Its lack of specificity makes its use in this setting questionable.
# Chunk 4620
The normal serum alkaline phosphatase consists of many distinct isoenzymes found in the liver; bone; placenta; and, less commonly, small intestine. Patients over age 60 can have a mildly elevated alkaline phosphatase (1–1.5 times normal), whereas individuals with blood types O and B can have an elevation of the serum alkaline phosphatase after eating a fatty meal due to the influx of intestinal alkaline phosphatase into the blood. It is also nonpathologically elevated in children and adolescents undergoing rapid bone growth because of bone alkaline phosphatase, and late in normal pregnancies due to the influx of placental alkaline phosphatase.
# Chunk 4621
If an elevated serum alkaline phosphatase is the only abnormal finding in an apparently healthy person, or if the degree of elevation is higher than expected in the clinical setting, identification of the source of elevated isoenzymes is helpful (Fig. 358-1). This problem can be approached in two ways. First, and most precise, is the fractionation of the alkaline phosphatase by electrophoresis. The second, best substantiated, and most available approach involves the measurement of serum 5′-nucleotidase or GGT. These enzymes are rarely elevated in conditions other than liver disease.
# Chunk 4622
In the absence of jaundice or elevated aminotransferases, an elevated alkaline phosphatase of liver origin often, but not always, suggests early cholestasis and, less often, hepatic infiltration by tumor or granulomata. Other conditions that cause isolated elevations of the alkaline phosphatase include Hodgkin’s disease, diabetes, hyperthyroidism, congestive heart failure, amyloidosis, and inflammatory bowel disease.
# Chunk 4623
The level of serum alkaline phosphatase elevation is not helpful in distinguishing between intrahepatic and extrahepatic cholestasis. There is essentially no difference among the values found in obstructive jaundice due to cancer, common duct stone, sclerosing cholangitis, or bile duct stricture. Values are similarly increased in patients with intrahepatic cholestasis due to drug-induced hepatitis; primary biliary cirrhosis; rejection of transplanted livers; and, rarely, alcohol-induced steatohepatitis. Values are also greatly elevated in hepatobiliary disorders seen in patients with AIDS (e.g., AIDS cholangiopathy due to cytomegalovirus or cryptosporidial infection and tuberculosis with hepatic involvement).
# Chunk 4624
Evaluation of Liver Function 1998 associated with prolonged increases in levels of serum interleukin 1 and/or tumor necrosis factor, cytokines that inhibit albumin synthesis. Serum albumin should not be measured for screening in patients in whom there is no suspicion of liver disease. A general medical clinic study of consecutive patients in whom no indications were present for albumin measurement showed that although 12% of patients had abnormal test results, the finding was of clinical importance in only 0.4%.
# Chunk 4625
With the exception of factor VIII, which is produced by vascular endothelial cells, the blood clotting factors are made exclusively in hepatocytes. Their serum half-lives are much shorter than albumin, ranging from 6 h for factor VII to 5 days for fibrinogen. Because of their rapid turnover, measurement of the clotting factors is the single best acute measure of hepatic synthetic function and helpful in both diagnosis and assessing the prognosis of acute parenchymal liver disease. Useful for this purpose is the serum prothrombin time, which collectively measures factors II, V, VII, and X. Biosynthesis of factors II, VII, IX, and X depends on vitamin K. The international normalized ratio (INR) is used to express the degree of anticoagulation on warfarin therapy. The INR standardizes prothrombin time measurement according to the characteristics of the thromboplastin reagent used in a particular lab, which is expressed as an International Sensitivity Index (ISI); the ISI is then used in calculating the INR.
# Chunk 4626
The prothrombin time may be elevated in hepatitis and cirrhosis as well as in disorders that lead to vitamin K deficiency such as obstructive jaundice or fat malabsorption of any kind. Marked prolongation of the prothrombin time, >5 s above control and not corrected by parenteral vitamin K administration, is a poor prognostic sign in acute viral hepatitis and other acute and chronic liver diseases. The INR, along with the total serum bilirubin and creatinine, are components of the MELD score, which is used as a measure of hepatic decompensation and to allocate organs for liver transplantation.
# Chunk 4627
Percutaneous Liver Biopsy Percutaneous biopsy of the liver is a safe procedure that can be easily performed at the bedside with local anesthesia and ultrasound guidance. Liver biopsy is of proven value in the following situations: (1) hepatocellular disease of uncertain cause, (2) prolonged hepatitis with the possibility of autoimmune hepatitis, (3) unexplained hepatomegaly, (4) unexplained splenomegaly, (5) hepatic filling defects by radiologic imaging, (6) fever of unknown origin, (7) and staging of malignant lymphoma. Liver biopsy is most accurate in disorders causing diffuse changes throughout the liver and is subject to sampling error in focal infiltrative disorders such as hepatic metastases. Liver biopsy should not be the initial procedure in the diagnosis of cholestasis. The biliary tree should first be assessed for signs of obstruction. Contraindications to performing a percutaneous liver biopsy include significant ascites and prolonged INR. Under these circumstances, the biopsy can be performed via the transjugular approach.
# Chunk 4628
Type of Disorder Bilirubin Aminotransferases Alkaline Phosphatase Albumin Prothrombin Time

Acute hepatocellular necrosis (viral and drug hepatitis, hepatotoxins, acute heart failure)
# Chunk 4629
As previously noted, the best way to increase the sensitivity and specificity of laboratory tests in the detection of liver disease is to employ a battery of tests that includes the aminotransferases, alkaline phosphatase, bilirubin, albumin, and prothrombin time along with the judicious use of the other tests described in this chapter. Table 358-1 shows how patterns of liver tests can lead the clinician to a category of disease that will direct further evaluation. However, it is important to remember that no single set of liver tests will necessarily provide a diagnosis. It is often necessary to repeat these tests on several occasions over days to weeks for a diagnostic pattern to emerge. Figure 358-1 is an algorithm for the evaluation of chronically abnormal liver tests.
# Chunk 4630
Bilirubin is the end product of heme degradation. Some 70–90% of bilirubin is derived from degradation of the hemoglobin of senescent red blood cells. Bilirubin produced in the periphery is transported to the liver within the plasma, where, due to its insolubility in aqueous solutions, it is tightly bound to albumin. Under normal circumstances, bilirubin is removed from the circulation rapidly and efficiently by hepatocytes. Transfer of bilirubin from blood to bile involves four distinct but interrelated steps (Fig. 359-1).
# Chunk 4631
amino acids common to all of the isoforms. mRNAs for specific isoforms are assembled by splicing a particular first exon such as the bilirubin-specific exon A1 to exons 2 to 5. The resulting message Renal Excretion of Bilirubin Conjugates encodes a complete enzyme, in this particular case bilirubin-UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT1A1). Unconjugated bilirubin is not excreted Mutations in a first exon affect only a single isoform. Those in exons 2–5 affect all enzymes encoded in urine, as it is too tightly bound to by the UGT1 complex. albumin for effective glomerular filtra tion and there is no tubular mechanism for its renal secretion. In contrast, the bilirubin conjugates are readily filtered other substrates have been designated the UGT1 family. These at the glomerulus and can appear in urine in disorders characterizedare expressed from a single gene complex by alternative promoter by increased bilirubin conjugates in the circulation.usage. This gene complex contains multiple substrate-specific first exons, designated A1, A2, etc. (Fig. 359-2), each with its own DISORDERS OF BILIRUBIN METABOLISM LEADING promoter and each encoding the amino-terminal half of a specific TO UNCONJUGATED HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA isoform. In addition, there are four common exons (exons 2–5) that encode the shared carboxyl-terminal half of all of the UGT1 isoforms. The various first exons encode the specific aglycone Hemolysis Increased destruction of erythrocytes leads to increased substrate binding sites for each isoform, while the shared exons bilirubin turnover and unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia; the hyper-encode the binding site for the sugar donor, UDP-glucuronic bilirubinemia is usually modest in the presence of normal liver funcacid, and the transmembrane domain. Exon A1 and the four tion. In particular, the bone marrow is only capable of a sustained common exons, collectively designated the UGT1A1 gene (Fig. eightfold increase in erythrocyte production in response to a hemo359-2), encode the physiologically critical enzyme bilirubin-UDP-lytic stress. Therefore, hemolysis alone cannot result in a sustained glucuronosyltransferase (UGT1A1). A functional corollary of the hyperbilirubinemia of more than ∼68 μmol/L (4 mg/dL). Higher values organization of the UGT1 gene is that a mutation in one of the imply concomitant hepatic dysfunction. When hemolysis is the only first exons will affect only a single enzyme isoform. By contrast, a abnormality in an otherwise healthy individual, the result is a purely mutation in exons 2–5 will alter all isoforms encoded by the UGT1 unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia, with the direct-reacting fraction as gene complex. measured in a typical clinical laboratory being ≤15% of the total serum 4. Biliary excretion: It has been thought until recently that biliru-bilirubin. In the presence of systemic disease, which may include a bin monoand diglucuronides are excreted directly across the degree of hepatic dysfunction, hemolysis may produce a component canalicular plasma membrane into the bile canaliculus by an ATP-of conjugated hyperbilirubinemia in addition to an elevated uncondependent transport process mediated by a canalicular membrane jugated bilirubin concentration. Prolonged hemolysis may lead to the protein called multidrug resistance–associated protein 2 (MRP2). precipitation of bilirubin salts within the gallbladder or biliary tree, Mutations of MRP2 result in the Dubin-Johnson syndrome (see resulting in the formation of gallstones in which bilirubin, rather than below). However, studies in patients with Rotor syndrome (see cholesterol, is the major component. Such pigment stones may lead to below) indicate that after formation, a portion of the glucuro-acute or chronic cholecystitis, biliary obstruction, or any other biliary nides are transported into the portal circulation by a sinusoidal tract consequence of calculous disease. membrane protein called multidrug resistance–associated protein
# Chunk 4632
Crigler-Najjar Syndrome, Type I CN-I is characterized by striking uncon jugated hyperbilirubinemia of about 340–765 μmol/L (20–45 mg/dL) that appears in the neonatal period and persists for life. Other conventional hepatic biochemical tests such as serum aminotransferases and alkaline phosphatase are normal, and there is no evidence of hemolysis. Hepatic histology is also essentially normal except for the occasional presence of bile plugs within canaliculi. Bilirubin glucuronides are virtually absent from the bile, and there is no detectable constitutive expression of UGT1A1 activity in hepatic tissue. Neither UGT1A1 activity nor the serum bilirubin concentration responds to administration of phenobarbital or other enzyme inducers. In the absence of conjugation, unconjugated bilirubin accumulates in plasma, from which it is eliminated very slowly by alternative pathways that include direct passage into the bile and small intestine. These account for the small amounts of urobilinogen found in feces. No bilirubin is found in the urine. First described in 1952, the disorder is rare (estimated prevalence, 0.6–1.0 per million). Many patients are from geographically or socially isolated communities in which consanguinity is common, and pedigree analyses show an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance. The majority of patients (type IA) exhibit defects in the glucuronide conjugation of a spectrum of substrates in addition to bilirubin, including various drugs and other xenobiotics. These individuals have mutations in one of the common exons (2–5) of the UGT1 gene (Fig. 359-2). In a smaller subset (type IB), the defect is limited largely to bilirubin conjugation, and the causative mutation is in the bilirubin-specific exon A1. Estrogen glucuronidation is mediated by UGT1A1 and is defective in all CN-I patients. More than 30 different genetic lesions of UGT1A1 responsible for CN-I have been identified,
# Chunk 4633
Gilbert Syndrome (GS) This syndrome is characterized by mild unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia, normal values for standard hepatic biochemical tests, and normal hepatic histology other than a modest increase of lipofuscin pigment in some patients. Serum bilirubin concentrations are most often <51 μmol/L (<3 mg/dL), although both higher and lower values are frequent. The clinical spectrum of hyperbilirubinemia fades into that of CN-II at serum bilirubin concentrations of 86–136 μmol/L (5–8 mg/dL). At the other end of the scale, the distinction between mild cases of GS and a normal state is often blurred. Bilirubin concentrations may fluctuate substantially in any given individual, and at least 25% of patients will exhibit temporarily normal values during prolonged follow-up. More elevated values are associated with stress, fatigue, alcohol use, reduced caloric intake, and intercurrent illness, while increased caloric intake or administration of enzyme-inducing agents produces lower bilirubin levels. GS is most often diagnosed at or shortly after puberty or in adult life during routine examinations that include multichannel biochemical analyses. UGT1A1 activity is typically reduced to 10–35% of normal, and bile pigments exhibit a characteristic increase in bilirubin monoglucuronides. Studies of radiobilirubin kinetics indicate that hepatic bilirubin clearance is reduced to an average of one-third of normal. Administration of phenobarbital normalizes both the serum bilirubin concentration and hepatic bilirubin clearance; however, failure of UGT1A1 activity to improve in many such instances suggests the possible coexistence of an additional defect. Compartmental analysis of bilirubin kinetic data suggests that GS patients have a defect in bilirubin uptake as well as in conjugation. Defect(s) in the hepatic uptake of other organic anions that at least partially share an uptake mechanism with bilirubin, such as sulfobromophthalein and indocyanine green (ICG), are observed in a minority of patients. The metabolism and transport of bile acids that do not utilize the bilirubin uptake mechanism are normal. The magnitude of changes in the serum bilirubin concentration induced by provocation tests such as 48 hours of fasting or the IV administration of nicotinic acid have been reported to be of help in separating GS patients from normal individuals. Other studies dispute this assertion. Moreover, on theoretical grounds, the results of such studies should provide no more information than simple measurements of the baseline serum bilirubin concentration. Family studies indicate that GS and hereditary hemolytic anemias such as hereditary spherocytosis, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency, and β-thalassemia trait sort independently. Reports of hemolysis in up to 50% of GS patients are believed to reflect better case finding, since patients with both GS and hemolysis have higher bilirubin concentrations, and are more likely to be jaundiced, than patients with either defect alone.
# Chunk 4634
Patients with DJS are usually asymptomatic, although some may have vague constitutional symptoms. These latter patients have usually undergone extensive and often unnecessary diagnostic examinations for unexplained jaundice and have high levels of anxiety. In women, the condition may be subclinical until the patient becomes pregnant or receives oral contraceptives, at which time chemical hyperbilirubinemia becomes frank jaundice. Even in these situations, other routine liver function tests, including serum alkaline phosphatase and transaminase activities, are normal.
# Chunk 4635
Rotor Syndrome This benign, autosomal recessive disorder is clinically similar to DJS (Table 359-2), although it is seen even less frequently. A major phenotypic difference is that the liver in patients with Rotor syndrome has no increased pigmentation and appears totally normal. The only abnormality in routine laboratory tests is an elevation of total serum bilirubin, due to a predominant rise in conjugated bilirubin. This is accompanied by bilirubinuria. Several additional features differentiate Rotor syndrome from DJS. In Rotor syndrome, the gallbladder is usually visualized on oral cholecystography, in contrast to the nonvisualization that is typical of DJS. The pattern of urinary coproporphyrin excretion also differs. The pattern in Rotor syndrome resembles that of many acquired disorders of hepatobiliary function, in which coproporphyrin I, the major coproporphyrin isomer in bile, refluxes from the hepatocyte back into the circulation and is excreted in urine. Thus, total urinary coproporphyrin excretion is substantially increased in Rotor syndrome, in contrast to the normal levels seen in DJS. Although the fraction of coproporphyrin I in urine is elevated, it is usually <70% of the total, compared with ≥80% in DJS. The disorders also can be distinguished by their patterns of BSP excretion. Although clearance of BSP from plasma is delayed in Rotor syndrome, there is no reflux of conjugated BSP back into the circulation as seen in DJS. Kinetic analysis of plasma BSP infusion studies suggests the presence of a defect in intrahepatocellular storage of this compound. This has never been demonstrated directly. Recent studies indicate that the molecular basis of Rotor syndrome results from simultaneous deficiency of the plasma membrane transporters OATP1B1 and OATP1B3. This results in reduced reuptake of conjugated bilirubin that has been pumped out of the cell into the portal circulation by MRP3 (Fig. 359-1).
# Chunk 4636
Benign Recurrent Intrahepatic Cholestasis (BRIC) This rare disorder is characterized by recurrent attacks of pruritus and jaundice. The typical episode begins with mild malaise and elevations in serum aminotransferase levels, followed rapidly by rises in alkaline phosphatase and conjugated bilirubin and onset of jaundice and itching. The first one or two episodes may be misdiagnosed as acute viral hepatitis. The cholestatic episodes, which may begin in childhood or adulthood, can vary in duration from several weeks to months, followed by a complete clinical and biochemical resolution. Intervals between attacks may vary from several months to years. Between episodes, physical examination is normal, as are serum levels of bile acids, bilirubin, transaminases, and alkaline phosphatase. The disorder is familial and has an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance. BRIC is considered a benign disorder in that it does not lead to cirrhosis or end-stage liver disease. However, the episodes of jaundice and pruritus can be prolonged and debilitating, and some patients have undergone liver transplantation to relieve the intractable and disabling symptoms. Treatment during the cholestatic episodes is symptomatic; there is no specific treatment to prevent or shorten the occurrence of episodes.
# Chunk 4637
HBsAg-positive serum containing HBeAg is more likely to be highly infectious and to be associated with the presence of hepatitis B virions (and detectable HBV DNA, see below) than HBeAg-negative or anti-HBe-positive serum. For example, HBsAg-positive mothers who are HBeAg-positive almost invariably (>90%) transmit hepatitis B infection to their offspring, whereas HBsAg-positive mothers with anti-HBe rarely (10–15%) infect their offspring.
# Chunk 4638
seroloGic anD viroloGic markers After a person is infected with HBV, the first virologic marker detectable in serum within 1–12 weeks, usually between 8 and 12 weeks, is HBsAg (Fig. 360-4). Circulating HBsAg precedes elevations of serum aminotransferase activity and clinical symptoms by 2–6 weeks and remains detectable during the entire icteric or symptomatic phase of acute hepatitis B and beyond. In typical cases, HBsAg becomes undetectable 1–2 months after the onset of jaundice and rarely persists beyond 6 months. After HBsAg disappears, antibody to HBsAg (anti-HBs) becomes detectable in serum and remains detectable indefinitely thereafter. Because HBcAg is intracellular and, when in the serum, sequestered within an HBsAg coat, naked core particles do not circulate in serum, and therefore, HBcAg is not detectable routinely in the serum of patients with HBV infection. By contrast, anti-HBc is readily demonstrable in serum, beginning within the first 1–2 weeks after the appearance of HBsAg and preceding detectable levels of anti-HBs by weeks to months.
# Chunk 4639
of acute hepatitis B. ALT, alanine aminotransferase.

Because variability exists in the time of appearance of anti-HBs after 2007 HBV infection, occasionally a gap of several weeks or longer may separate the disappearance of HBsAg and the appearance of anti-HBs. During this “gap” or “window” period, anti-HBc may represent the only serologic evidence of current or recent HBV infection, and blood containing anti-HBc in the absence of HBsAg and anti-HBs has been implicated in transfusion-associated hepatitis B. In part because the sensitivity of immunoassays for HBsAg and anti-HBs has increased, however, this window period is rarely encountered. In some persons, years after HBV infection, anti-HBc may persist in the circulation longer than anti-HBs. Therefore, isolated anti-HBc does not necessarily indicate active virus replication; most instances of isolated anti-HBc represent hepatitis B infection in the remote past. Rarely, however, isolated anti-HBc represents low-level hepatitis B viremia, with HBsAg below the detection threshold, and, occasionally, isolated anti-HBc represents a cross-reacting or false-positive immunologic specificity. Recent and remote HBV infections can be distinguished by determination of the immunoglobulin class of anti-HBc. Anti-HBc of the IgM class (IgM anti-HBc) predominates during the first 6 months after acute infection, whereas IgG anti-HBc is the predominant class of anti-HBc beyond 6 months. Therefore, patients with current or recent acute hepatitis B, including those in the anti-HBc window, have IgM anti-HBc in their serum. In patients who have recovered from hepatitis B in the remote past as well as those with chronic HBV infection, anti-HBc is predominantly of the IgG class. Infrequently, in ≤1–5% of patients with acute HBV infection, levels of HBsAg are too low to be detected; in such cases, the presence of IgM anti-HBc establishes the diagnosis of acute hepatitis B. When isolated anti-HBc occurs in the rare patient with chronic hepatitis B whose HBsAg level is below the sensitivity threshold of contemporary immunoassays (a low-level carrier), anti-HBc is of the IgG class. Generally, in persons who have recovered from hepatitis B, anti-HBs and anti-HBc persist indefinitely.
# Chunk 4640
Departing from the pattern typical of acute HBV infections, in chronic HBV infection, HBsAg remains detectable beyond 6 months, anti-HBc is primarily of the IgG class, and anti-HBs is either undetectable or detectable at low levels (see “Laboratory Features”) (Fig. 360-5). During early chronic HBV infection, HBV DNA can be detected both in serum and in hepatocyte nuclei, where it is present in free or episomal form. This relatively highly replicative stage of HBV infection is type chronic hepatitis B. HBeAg and hepatitis B virus (HBV) DNA can be detected in serum during the relatively replicative phase of chronic infection, which is associated with infectivity and liver injury. Seroconversion from the replicative phase to the relatively nonreplicative phase occurs at a rate of ~10% per year and is heralded by an acute hepatitis–like elevation of alanine aminotransferase (ALT) activity; during the nonreplicative phase, infectivity and liver injury are limited. In HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis B associated with mutations in the precore region of the HBV genome, replicative chronic hepatitis B occurs in the absence of HBeAg.
# Chunk 4641
In chronic HDV infection, anti-HDV circulates in high titer, and both IgM and IgG anti-HDV can be detected. HDV 5' 3'C E1 E2 NS2 NS3 NS4B NS5A NS5B 2010 membrane, and the HCV polyprotein is cleaved during translation and posttranslationally by host cellular proteases as well as HCV NS2-3 and NS3-4A proteases. Host cofactors involved in HCV replication include cyclophilin A, which binds to NS5A and yields conformational changes required for viral replication, and liver-specific host microRNA miR-122. At least six distinct major genotypes (and a minor genotype 7), as well as >50 subtypes within genotypes, of HCV have been identified by nucleotide sequencing. Genotypes differ from one another in sequence homology by ≥30%, and subtypes differ by approximately 20%. Because divergence of HCV isolates within a genotype or subtype and within the same host may vary insufficiently to define a distinct genotype, these intragenotypic differences are referred to as quasispecies and differ in sequence homology by only a few percent. The genotypic and quasispecies diversity of HCV, resulting from its high mutation rate, interferes with effective humoral immunity. Neutralizing antibodies to HCV have been demonstrated, but they tend to be short lived, and HCV infection does not induce lasting immunity against reinfection with different virus isolates or even the same virus isolate. Thus, neither heterologous nor homologous immunity appears to develop commonly after acute HCV infection. Some HCV genotypes are distributed worldwide, whereas others are more geographically confined (see “Epidemiology and Global Features”). In addition, differences exist among genotypes in responsiveness to antiviral therapy but not in pathogenicity or clinical progression (except for genotype 3, in which hepatic steatosis and clinical progression are more likely). Currently available, third-generation immunoassays, which incorporate proteins from the core, NS3, and NS5 regions, detect anti-HCV antibodies during acute infection. The most sensitive indicator of HCV infection is the presence of HCV RNA, which requires molecular amplification by PCR or transcription-mediated amplification (TMA) (Fig. 360-7). To allow standardization of the quantification of HCV RNA among laboratories and commercial assays, HCV RNA is reported as international units (IUs) per milliliter; quantitative assays with a broad dynamic range are available that allow detection of HCV RNA with a sensitivity as low as 5 IU/mL. HCV RNA can be detected within a few days of exposure to HCV—well before the appearance of anti-HCV—and tends to persist for the duration of HCV infection. Application of sensitive molecular probes for HCV RNA has revealed the presence of replicative HCV in peripheral blood lymphocytes of infected persons; however, as is the case for HBV in lymphocytes, the clinical relevance of HCV lymphocyte infection is not known.
# Chunk 4642
In patients with chronic hepatitis B, other types of immune-complex disease may be seen. Glomerulonephritis with the nephrotic syndrome is observed occasionally; HBsAg, immunoglobulin, and C3 deposition has been found in the glomerular basement membrane. Whereas generalized vasculitis (polyarteritis nodosa) develops in considerably fewer than 1% of patients with chronic HBV infection, 20–30% of patients with polyarteritis nodosa have HBsAg in serum (Chap. 385). In these patients, the affected smalland medium-size arterioles contain 2012 HBsAg, immunoglobulins, and complement components. Another extrahepatic manifestation of viral hepatitis, essential mixed cryoglobulinemia (EMC), was reported initially to be associated with hepatitis
# Chunk 4643
A more severe histologic lesion, bridging hepatic necrosis, also termed subacute or confluent necrosis or interface hepatitis, is observed occasionally in acute hepatitis. “Bridging” between lobules results from large areas of hepatic cell dropout, with collapse of the reticulin framework. Characteristically, the bridge consists of condensed reticulum, inflammatory debris, and degenerating liver cells that span adjacent portal areas, portal to central veins, or central vein to central vein. This lesion had been thought to have prognostic significance; in many of the originally described patients with this lesion, a subacute course terminated in death within several weeks to months, or severe chronic hepatitis and cirrhosis developed; however, the association between bridging necrosis and a poor prognosis in patients with acute hepatitis has not been upheld. Therefore, although demonstration of this lesion in patients with chronic hepatitis has prognostic significance (Chap. 362), its demonstration during acute hepatitis is less meaningful, and liver biopsies to identify this lesion are no longer undertaken routinely in patients with acute hepatitis. In massive hepatic necrosis (fulminant hepatitis, “acute yellow atrophy”), the striking feature at postmortem examination is the finding of a small, shrunken, soft liver. Histologic examination reveals massive necrosis and dropout of liver cells of most lobules with extensive collapse and condensation of the reticulin framework. When histologic documentation is required in the management of fulminant or very severe hepatitis, a biopsy can be done by the angiographically guided transjugular route, which permits the performance of this invasive procedure in the presence of severe coagulopathy.
# Chunk 4644
Hepatitis A This agent is transmitted almost exclusively by the fecal-oral route. Person-to-person spread of HAV is enhanced by poor personal hygiene and overcrowding; large outbreaks as well as sporadic cases have been traced to contaminated food, water, milk, frozen raspberries and strawberries, green onions imported from Mexico, and shellfish. Intrafamily and intrainstitutional spread are also common. Early epidemiologic observations supported a predilection for hepatitis A to occur in late fall and early winter. In temperate zones, epidemic waves have been recorded every 5–20 years as new segments of nonimmune population appeared; however, in developed countries, the incidence of hepatitis A has been declining, presumably as a function of improved sanitation, and these cyclic patterns are no longer observed. No HAV carrier state has been identified after acute hepatitis A; perpetuation of the virus in nature depends presumably on nonepidemic, inapparent subclinical infection, ingestion of contaminated food or water in, or imported from, endemic areas, and/or contamination linked to environmental reservoirs.
# Chunk 4645
In sub-Saharan Africa, intimate contact among toddlers is considered instrumental in contributing to the maintenance of the high frequency of hepatitis B in the population. Perinatal transmission occurs primarily in infants born to mothers with chronic hepatitis B or (rarely) mothers with acute hepatitis B during the third trimester of pregnancy or during the early postpartum period. Perinatal transmission is uncommon in North America and western Europe but occurs with great frequency and is the most important mode of HBV perpetuation in East Asia and developing countries. Although the precise mode of perinatal transmission is unknown, and although ~10% of infections may be acquired in utero, epidemiologic evidence suggests that most infections occur approximately at the time of delivery and are not related to breast-feeding. The likelihood of perinatal transmission of HBV correlates with the presence of HBeAg and high-level viral replication; 90% of HBeAg-positive mothers but only 10–15% of anti-HBe-positive mothers transmit HBV infection to their offspring. In most cases, acute infection in the neonate is clinically asymptomatic, but the child is very likely to remain chronically infected.
# Chunk 4646
Prevalence of infection, modes of transmission, and human behavior conspire to mold geographically different epidemiologic patterns of HBV infection. In East Asia and Africa, hepatitis B, a disease of the newborn and young children, is perpetuated by a cycle of maternal-neonatal spread. In North America and western Europe, hepatitis B is primarily a disease of adolescence and early adulthood, the time of life when intimate sexual contact and recreational and occupational percutaneous exposures tend to occur. To some degree, however, this dichotomy between high-prevalence and low-prevalence geographic regions has been minimized by immigration from high-prevalence to low-prevalence areas. The introduction of hepatitis B vaccine in the early 1980s and adoption of universal childhood vaccination policies in many countries resulted in a dramatic, ~90% decline in the incidence of new HBV infections in those countries as well as in the dire
# Chunk 4647
Hepatitis C Routine screening of blood donors for HBsAg and the elimination of commercial blood sources in the early 1970s reduced the frequency of, but did not eliminate, transfusion-associated hepatitis. During the 1970s, the likelihood of acquiring hepatitis after transfusion of voluntarily donated, HBsAg-screened blood was ~10% per patient (up to 0.9% per unit transfused); 90–95% of these cases were classified, based on serologic exclusion of hepatitis A and B, as “non-A, non-B” hepatitis. For patients requiring transfusion of pooled products, such as clotting factor concentrates, the risk was even higher, up to 20–30%.
# Chunk 4648
During the 1980s, voluntary self-exclusion of blood donors with risk factors for AIDS and then the introduction of donor screening for anti-HIV reduced further the likelihood of transfusion-associated hepatitis to <5%. During the late 1980s and early 1990s, the introduction first of “surrogate” screening tests for non-A, non-B hepatitis (alanine aminotransferase [ALT] and anti-HBc, both shown to identify blood donors with a higher likelihood of transmitting non-A, non-B hepatitis to recipients) and, subsequently, after the discovery of HCV, first-generation immunoassays for anti-HCV reduced the frequency of transfusion-associated hepatitis even further. A prospective analysis of transfusion-associated hepatitis conducted between 1986 and 1990 showed that the frequency of transfusion-associated hepatitis at one urban university hospital fell from a baseline of 3.8% per patient (0.45% per unit transfused) to 1.5% per patient (0.19% per unit) after the introduction of surrogate testing and to 0.6% per patient (0.03% per unit) after the introduction of first-generation anti-HCV assays. The introduction of second-generation anti-HCV assays reduced the frequency of transfusion-associated hepatitis C to almost imperceptible levels—1 in 100,000—and these gains were reinforced by the application of third-generation anti-HCV assays and of automated PCR testing of donated blood for HCV RNA, which has resulted in a reduction in the risk of transfusion-associated HCV infection to 1 in 2.3 million transfusions.
# Chunk 4649
Serologic evidence for HCV infection occurs in 90% of patients with a history of transfusion-associated hepatitis (almost all occurring before 1992, when second-generation HCV screening tests were introduced); hemophiliacs and others treated with clotting factors; injection drug users; 60–70% of patients with sporadic “non-A, non-B” hepatitis who lack identifiable risk factors; 0.5% of volunteer blood donors; and, in a survey conducted in the United States between 1999 and 2002, 1.6% of the general population in the United States, which translates into 4.1 million persons (3.2 million with viremia), the majority of whom are unaware of their infections. Moreover, such population surveys do not include higher-risk groups such as incarcerated prisoners and active injection drug users, indicating that the actual prevalence is even higher. Comparable frequencies of HCV infection occur in most countries around the world, with 170 million persons infected worldwide, but extraordinarily high prevalences of HCV infection occur in certain countries such as Egypt, where >20% of the population (as high as 50% in persons born prior to 1960) in some cities is infected. The high frequency in Egypt is attributable to contaminated equipment used for medical procedures and unsafe injection practices in the 1950s to 1980s (during a campaign to eradicate schistosomiasis with intravenous tartar emetic). In the United States, African Americans and Mexican Americans have higher frequencies of HCV infection than whites. Between 1988 and 1994, 30to 40-year-old adult males had the highest prevalence of HCV infection; however, in a survey conducted between 1999 and 2002, the peak age decile had shifted to those age 40–49 years; an increase in hepatitis C–related mortality has paralleled this secular trend, increasing since 1995 predominantly in the 45to 65-year age group. Thus, despite an 80% reduction in new HCV infections during the 1990s, the prevalence of HCV infection in the population was sustained by an aging cohort that had acquired their infections three to four decades earlier, during the 1960s and 1970s, as a result predominantly of self-inoculation with recreational drugs. As death resulting from HIV infection fell after 1999, age-adjusted mortality associated with HCV infection surpassed that of HIV infection in 2007; >70% of HCV-associated deaths occurred in the “baby boomer” cohort born between 1945 and 1965. Compared to the 1.6% prevalence of HCV infection in the population at large, the prevalence in the 1945–1965 birth cohort was 3.2%, representing three-quarters of all infected persons. Therefore, in 2012, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommended that all persons born between 1945 and 1965 be screened for hepatitis C, without ascertainment of risk, a recommendation shown to be cost-effective and predicted to identify 800,000 infected persons. Because of the availability of highly effective antiviral therapy, such screening would have the potential to avert 200,000 cases of cirrhosis and 47,000 cases of hepatocellular carcinoma and to prevent 120,000 hepatitis-related deaths.
# Chunk 4650
Hepatitis C accounts for 40% of chronic liver disease, is the most frequent indication for liver transplantation, and is estimated to account for 8000–10,000 deaths per year in the United States. The distribution of HCV genotypes varies in different parts of the world. Worldwide, genotype 1 is the most common. In the United States, genotype 1 accounts for 70% of HCV infections, whereas genotypes 2 and 3 account for the remaining 30%; among African Americans, the frequency of genotype 1 is even higher (i.e., 90%). Genotype 4 predominates in Egypt; genotype 5 is localized to South Africa, genotype 6 to Hong Kong, and genotype 7 to Central Africa. Most asymptomatic blood donors found to have anti-HCV and ~20–30% of persons with reported cases of acute hepatitis C do not fall into a recognized risk group; however, many such blood donors do recall risk-associated behaviors when questioned carefully.
# Chunk 4651
CLINICAL AND LABORATORY FEATURES Symptoms and Signs Acute viral hepatitis occurs after an incubation period that varies according to the responsible agent. Generally, incubation periods for hepatitis A range from 15–45 days (mean, 4 weeks), for hepatitis B and D from 30–180 days (mean, 8–12 weeks), for hepatitis C from 15–160 days (mean, 7 weeks), and for hepatitis E from 14–60 days (mean, 5–6 weeks). The prodromal symptoms of acute viral hepatitis are systemic and quite variable. Constitutional symptoms of anorexia, nausea and vomiting, fatigue, malaise, arthralgias, myalgias, headache, photophobia, pharyngitis, cough, and coryza may precede the onset of jaundice by 1–2 weeks. The nausea, vomiting, and anorexia are frequently associated with alterations in olfaction and taste. A low-grade fever between 38° and 39°C (100°–102°F) is more often present in hepatitis A and E than in hepatitis B or C, except when hepatitis B is heralded by a serum sickness–like syndrome; rarely, a fever of 39.5°–40°C (103°–104°F) may accompany the constitutional symptoms. Dark urine and clay-colored stools may be noticed by the patient from 1–5 days before the onset of clinical jaundice.
# Chunk 4652
With the onset of clinical jaundice, the constitutional prodromal symptoms usually diminish, but in some patients, mild weight loss (2.5–5 kg) is common and may continue during the entire icteric phase. The liver becomes enlarged and tender and may be associated with right upper quadrant pain and discomfort. Infrequently, patients present with a cholestatic picture, suggesting extrahepatic biliary obstruction. Splenomegaly and cervical adenopathy are present in 10–20% of patients with acute hepatitis. Rarely, a few spider angiomas appear during the icteric phase and disappear during convalescence. During the recovery phase, constitutional symptoms disappear, but usually some liver enlargement and abnormalities in liver biochemical tests are still evident. The duration of the posticteric phase is variable, ranging from 2–12 weeks, and is usually more prolonged in acute hepatitis B and C. Complete clinical and biochemical recovery is to be expected 1–2 months after all cases of hepatitis A and E and 3–4 months after the onset of jaundice in three-quarters of uncomplicated, self-limited cases of hepatitis B and C (among healthy adults, acute hepatitis B is self-limited in 95–99%, whereas hepatitis C is self-limited in only ~15%). In the remainder, biochemical recovery may be delayed. A substantial proportion of patients with viral hepatitis never become icteric.
# Chunk 4653
Laboratory Features The serum aminotransferases aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) (previously designated SGOT and SGPT) increase to a variable degree during the prodromal phase of acute viral hepatitis and precede the rise in bilirubin level (Figs. 360-2 and 360-4). The level of these enzymes, however, does not correlate well with the degree of liver cell damage. Peak levels vary from 400–4000 IU or more; these levels are usually reached at the time the patient is clinically icteric and diminish progressively during the recovery phase of acute hepatitis. The diagnosis of anicteric hepatitis is based on clinical features and on aminotransferase elevations.
# Chunk 4654
Neutropenia and lymphopenia are transient and are followed by a relative lymphocytosis. Atypical lymphocytes (varying between 2 and 20%) are common during the acute phase. Measurement of the prothrombin time (PT) is important in patients with acute viral hepatitis, because a prolonged value may reflect a severe hepatic synthetic defect, signify extensive hepatocellular necrosis, and indicate a worse prognosis. Occasionally, a prolonged PT may occur with only mild increases in the serum bilirubin and aminotransferase levels. Prolonged nausea and vomiting, inadequate carbohydrate intake, and poor hepatic glycogen reserves may contribute to hypoglycemia noted occasionally in patients with severe viral hepatitis. Serum alkaline phosphatase may be normal or only mildly elevated, whereas a fall in serum albumin is uncommon in uncomplicated acute viral hepatitis. In some patients, mild and transient steatorrhea has been noted, as well as slight microscopic hematuria and minimal proteinuria.
# Chunk 4655
After immunization with hepatitis B vaccine, which consists of HBsAg alone, anti-HBs is the only serologic marker to appear. The commonly encountered serologic patterns of hepatitis B and their interpretations are summarized in Table 360-5. Tests for the detection of HBV DNA in liver and serum are now available. Like HBeAg, serum HBV DNA is an indicator of HBV replication, but tests for HBV DNA are more sensitive and quantitative. First-generation hybridization assays for HBV DNA had a sensitivity of 105−106 virions/mL, a relative threshold below which infectivity and liver injury are limited and HBeAg is usually undetectable. Currently, testing for HBV DNA has shifted from insensitive hybridization assays to amplification assays (e.g., the PCR-based assay, which can detect as few as 10 or 100 virions/mL); among the commercially available PCR assays, the most useful are those with the highest sensitivity (5–10 IU/mL) and the largest dynamic range (100–109 IU/mL). With increased sensitivity, fied. The other involves target ampli + − IgM + − Acute hepatitis B, high infectivitya fication (i.e., synthesis of multiple − IgG + − Chronic hepatitis B, high infectivity copies of the viral genome) by PCR − IgG − + 1. Late acute or chronic hepatitis B, low infectivity or TMA, in which the viral RNA is 2. HBeAg-negative (“precore-mutant”) hepatitis B reverse transcribed to complemen(chronic or, rarely, acute) tary DNA and then amplified by + + + +/− +/− 1. HBsAg of one subtype and heterotypic anti-HBs repeated cycles of DNA synthesis. (common) Both can be used as quantitative 2. Process of seroconversion from HBsAg to anti-assays and a measurement of relative HBs (rare) “viral load”; PCR and TMA, with − − IgM +/− +/− 1. Acute hepatitis Ba a sensitivity of 10–102 IU/mL, are more sensitive than bDNA, with a 2. Anti-HBc “window” sensitivity of 103 IU/mL; assays are − − IgG − +/− 1. Low-level hepatitis B carrier available with a wide dynamic range 2. Hepatitis B in remote past (10–107 IU/mL). Determination of
# Chunk 4656
Virtually all previously healthy patients with hepatitis A recover completely with no clinical sequelae. Similarly, in acute hepatitis B, 95–99% of previously healthy adults have a favorable course and recover completely. Certain clinical and laboratory features, however, suggest a more complicated and protracted course. Patients of advanced age and with serious underlying medical disorders may have a prolonged course and are more likely to experience severe hepatitis. Initial presenting features such as ascites, peripheral edema, and symptoms of hepatic encephalopathy suggest a poorer prognosis. In addition, a prolonged PT, low serum albumin level, hypoglycemia, and very high serum bilirubin values suggest severe hepatocellular disease. Patients with these clinical and laboratory features deserve prompt hospital admission. The case fatality rate in hepatitis A and B is very low (~0.1%) but is increased by advanced age and underlying debilitating disorders. Among patients ill enough to be hospitalized for acute hepatitis B, the fatality rate is 1%. Hepatitis C is less severe during the acute phase than hepatitis B and is more likely to be anicteric; fatalities are rare, but the precise case fatality rate is not known. In outbreaks of waterborne hepatitis E in India and Asia, the case fatality rate is 1–2% and up to 10–20% in pregnant women. Contributing to fulminant hepatitis E in endemic countries are instances of acute hepatitis E superimposed on underlying chronic liver disease (“acute-on-chronic” liver disease). Patients with simultaneous acute hepatitis B and hepatitis D do not necessarily experience a higher mortality rate than do patients with acute hepatitis B alone; however, in several outbreaks of acute simultaneous HBV and HDV infection among injection drug users, the case fatality rate was ~5%. When HDV superinfection occurs in a person with chronic hepatitis B, the likelihood of fulminant hepatitis and death is increased substantially. Although the case fatality rate for hepatitis D is not known definitively, in outbreaks of severe HDV superinfection in isolated populations with a high hepatitis B carrier rate, a mortality rate >20% has been recorded.
# Chunk 4657
Documenting the disappearance of HBsAg after apparent clinical recovery from acute hepatitis B is particularly important. Before laboratory methods were available to distinguish between acute hepatitis and acute hepatitis-like exacerbations (spontaneous reactivations) of chronic hepatitis B, observations suggested that ~10% of previously healthy patients remained HBsAg-positive for >6 months after the onset of clinically apparent acute hepatitis B. One-half of these persons cleared the antigen from their circulations during the next several years, but the other 5% remained chronically HBsAg-positive. More recent observations suggest that the true rate of chronic infection after clinically apparent acute hepatitis B is as low as 1% in normal, immunocompetent, young adults. Earlier, higher estimates may have been confounded by inadvertent inclusion of acute exacerbations in chronically infected patients; these patients, chronically HBsAg-positive before exacerbation, were unlikely to seroconvert to HBsAg-negative thereafter. Whether the rate of chronicity is 10% or 1%, such patients have IgG anti-HBc in serum; anti-HBs is either undetected or detected at low titer against the opposite subtype specificity of the antigen (see “Laboratory Features”). These patients may (1) be inactive carriers; (2) have low-grade, mild chronic hepatitis; or (3) have moderate to severe chronic hepatitis with or without cirrhosis. The likelihood of remaining chronically infected after acute HBV infection is especially high among neonates, persons with Down’s syndrome, chronically hemodialyzed patients, and immunosuppressed patients, including persons with HIV infection.
# Chunk 4658
Chronic hepatitis is an important late complication of acute hepatitis B occurring in a small proportion of patients with acute disease but more common in those who present with chronic infection without having experienced an acute illness, as occurs typically after neonatal infection or after infection in an immunosuppressed host (Chap. 362). The following clinical and laboratory features suggest progression of acute hepatitis to chronic hepatitis: (1) lack of complete resolution of clinical symptoms of anorexia, weight loss, fatigue, and the persistence of hepatomegaly; (2) the presence of bridging/interface or multilobular hepatic necrosis on liver biopsy during protracted, severe acute viral hepatitis; (3) failure of the serum aminotransferase, bilirubin, and globulin levels to return to normal within 6–12 months after the acute illness; and (4) the persistence of HBeAg for >3 months or HBsAg for >6 months after acute hepatitis.
# Chunk 4659
After acute HCV infection, the likelihood of remaining chronically infected approaches 85–90%. Although many patients with chronic hepatitis C have no symptoms, cirrhosis may develop in as many as 20% within 10–20 years of acute illness; in some series of cases reported by referral centers, cirrhosis has been reported in as many as 50% of patients with chronic hepatitis C. Although chronic hepatitis C accounts for at least 40% of cases of chronic liver disease and of patients undergoing liver transplantation for end-stage liver disease in the United States and Europe, in the majority of patients with chronic hepatitis C, morbidity and mortality are limited during the initial 20 years after the onset of infection. Progression of chronic hepatitis C may be influenced by advanced age of acquisition, long duration of infection, immunosuppression, coexisting excessive alcohol use, concomitant hepatic steatosis, other hepatitis virus infection, or HIV co-infection. In fact, instances of severe and rapidly progressive chronic hepatitis B and C are being recognized with increasing frequency in patients with HIV infection (Chap. 226). In contrast, neither HAV nor HEV causes chronic liver disease in immunocompetent hosts; 2019 however, cases of chronic hepatitis E have been observed in immunosuppressed organ-transplant recipients, persons receiving cytotoxic chemotherapy, and persons with HIV infection.
# Chunk 4660
Viral diseases such as infectious mononucleosis; those due to cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex, and coxsackieviruses; and toxoplasmosis may share certain clinical features with viral hepatitis and cause elevations in serum aminotransferase and, less commonly, in serum bilirubin levels. Tests such as the differential heterophile and serologic tests for these agents may be helpful in the differential diagnosis if HBsAg, anti-HBc, IgM anti-HAV, and anti-HCV determinations are negative. Aminotransferase elevations can accompany almost any systemic viral infection; other rare causes of liver injury confused with viral hepatitis are infections with Leptospira, Candida, Brucella, Mycobacteria, and Pneumocystis. A complete drug history is particularly important because many drugs and certain anesthetic agents can produce a picture of either acute hepatitis or cholestasis (Chap. 361). Equally important is a past history of unexplained “repeated episodes” of acute hepatitis. This history should alert the physician to the possibility that the underlying disorder is chronic hepatitis. Alcoholic hepatitis must also be considered, but usually the serum aminotransferase levels are not as markedly elevated, and other stigmata of alcoholism may be present. The finding on liver biopsy of fatty infiltration, a neutrophilic inflammatory reaction, and “alcoholic hyaline” would be consistent with alcohol-induced rather than viral liver injury. Because acute hepatitis may present with right upper quadrant abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting, fever, and icterus, it is often confused with acute cholecystitis, common duct stone, or ascending cholangitis. Patients with acute viral hepatitis may tolerate surgery poorly; therefore, it is important to exclude this diagnosis, and in confusing cases, a percutaneous liver biopsy may be necessary before laparotomy. Viral hepatitis in the elderly is often misdiagnosed as obstructive jaundice resulting from a common duct stone or carcinoma of the pancreas. Because acute hepatitis in the elderly may be quite severe and the operative mortality high, a thorough evaluation including biochemical tests, radiographic studies of the biliary tree, and even liver biopsy may be necessary to exclude primary parenchymal liver disease. Another clinical constellation that may mimic acute hepatitis is right ventricular failure with passive hepatic congestion or hypoperfusion syndromes, such as those associated with shock, severe hypotension, and severe left ventricular failure. Also included in this general category is any disorder that interferes with venous return to the heart, such as right atrial myxoma, constrictive pericarditis, hepatic vein occlusion (Budd-Chiari syndrome), or venoocclusive disease. Clinical features are usually sufficient to distinguish among these vascular disorders and viral hepatitis. Acute fatty liver of pregnancy, cholestasis of pregnancy, eclampsia, and the HELLP (h emolysis, e levated l iver tests, and l ow p latelets) syndrome can be confused with viral hepatitis during pregnancy. Very rarely, malignancies metastatic to the liver can mimic acute or even fulminant viral hepatitis. Occasionally, genetic or metabolic liver disorders (e.g., Wilson’s disease, α1 antitrypsin deficiency) and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease are confused with acute viral hepatitis.
# Chunk 4661
In hepatitis B, among previously healthy adults who present with clinically apparent acute hepatitis, recovery occurs in ~99%; therefore, antiviral therapy is not likely to improve the rate of recovery and is not required. In rare instances of severe acute hepatitis B, treatment with a nucleoside analogue at oral doses used to treat chronic hepatitis B (Chap. 362) has been attempted successfully. Although clinical trials have not been done to establish the efficacy or duration of this approach, most authorities would recommend institution of antiviral therapy with a nucleoside analogue (entecavir or tenofovir, the most potent and least resistance-prone agents) for severe, but not mild–moderate, acute hepatitis B. Treatment should continue until 3 months after HBsAg seroconversion or 6 months after HBeAg seroconversion.
# Chunk 4662
In typical cases of acute hepatitis C, recovery is rare, progression to chronic hepatitis is the rule, and meta-analyses of small clinical trials suggest that antiviral therapy with interferon α monotherapy (3 million units SC three times a week) is beneficial, reducing the rate of chronicity considerably by inducing sustained responses in 30–70% of patients. In a German multicenter study of 44 patients with acute symptomatic hepatitis C, initiation of intensive interferon α therapy (5 million units SC daily for 4 weeks, then three times a week for another 20 weeks) within an average of 3 months after infection resulted in a sustained virologic response rate of 98%. Although treatment of acute hepatitis C is recommended, the optimum regimen, duration of therapy, and time to initiate therapy remain to be determined. Many authorities now opt for a 24-week course (beginning within 2–3 months after onset) of long-acting pegylated interferon plus the nucleoside analogue ribavirin, although the value of adding ribavirin has not been demonstrated (see Chap. 362 for doses). Patients with jaundice and women are more likely to recover from acute hepatitis C, and now that genetic markers associated with spontaneous recovery (IL28B CC haplotype) versus persistence (non-CC haplotypes) have been defined, such genetic testing can help determine the need for and immediacy of treating acute hepatitis C—maintaining a high threshold for treating patients with CC and a very low threshold for early intervention in patients with non-CC genotypes. Protease inhibitor–based antiviral therapy with telaprevir or boceprevir, now approved for chronic hepatitis C, genotype 1 (Chap. 362), has not been approved for acute hepatitis C. Moreover, given the high efficacy of pegylated interferon–based therapy for acute hepatitis C, in all likelihood, the addition of a protease inhibitor would add costs and side effects without incremental efficacy. When, however, after 2014, all-oral, brief-duration, low-resistance antiviral regimens replace the current standard of care, the new approaches will be applied to acute hepatitis C and, potentially (pending the outcome of clinical trials), could even be used immediately after exposure (e.g., occupational) to prevent infection and the onset of hepatitis. Because of the marked reduction over the past two decades in the frequency of acute hepatitis C, opportunities to identify and treat patients with acute hepatitis C are rare, except in injection drug users and health workers who sustain hepatitis C–contaminated needle sticks. After such occupational accidents, when monitoring for ALT elevations and the presence of HCV RNA identifies acute hepatitis C (risk only ~3%), therapy should be initiated.
# Chunk 4663
Hepatitis A Both passive immunization with IG and active immunization with killed vaccines are available. All preparations of IG contain anti-HAV concentrations sufficient to be protective. When administered before exposure or during the early incubation period, IG is effective in preventing clinically apparent hepatitis A. For postexposure prophylaxis of intimate contacts (household, sexual, institutional) of persons with hepatitis A, the administration of 0.02 mL/kg is recommended as early after exposure as possible; it may be effective even when administered as late as 2 weeks after exposure. Prophylaxis is not necessary for those who have already received hepatitis A vaccine, for casual contacts (office, factory, school, or hospital), for most elderly persons, who are very likely to be immune, or for those known to have anti-HAV in their serum. In day care centers, recognition of hepatitis A in children or staff should provide a stimulus for immunoprophylaxis in the center and in the children’s family members. By the time most common-source outbreaks of hepatitis A are recognized, it is usually too late in the incubation period for IG to be effective; however, prophylaxis may limit the frequency of secondary cases. For travelers to tropical countries, developing countries, and other areas outside standard tourist routes, IG prophylaxis had been recommended before a vaccine became available. When such travel lasted <3 months, 0.02 mL/ kg was given; for longer travel or residence in these areas, a dose of 0.06 mL/kg every 4–6 months was recommended. Administration of plasma-derived globulin is safe; all contemporary lots of IG are subjected to viral inactivation steps and must be free of HCV RNA as determined by PCR testing. Administration of IM lots of IG has not been associated with transmission of HBV, HCV, or HIV.
# Chunk 4664
For pre-exposure prophylaxis against hepatitis B in settings of frequent exposure (health workers exposed to blood; first-responder public safety workers; hemodialysis patients and staff; residents and staff of custodial institutions for the developmentally handicapped; injection drug users; inmates of long-term correctional facilities; persons with multiple sexual partners or who have had a sexually transmitted disease; men who have sex with men; persons such as hemophiliacs who require long-term, high-volume therapy with blood derivatives; household and sexual contacts of persons with chronic HBV infection; persons living in or traveling extensively in endemic areas; unvaccinated children under the age of 18; unvaccinated children who are Alaskan natives, Pacific Islanders, or residents in households of first-generation immigrants from endemic countries; persons born in countries with a prevalence of HBV infection ≥2%; patients with chronic liver disease; persons <age 60 with diabetes mellitus [those ≥60 at the discretion of their physicians]; persons with end-stage renal disease; persons with HIV infection), three IM (deltoid, not gluteal) injections of hepatitis B vaccine are recommended at 0, 1, and 6 months (other, optional schedules are summarized in Table 360-8). Pregnancy is not a contraindication to vaccination. In areas of low HBV endemicity such as the United States, despite the availability of safe and effective hepatitis B vaccines, a strategy of vaccinating persons in high-risk groups was not effective. The incidence of new hepatitis B cases continued to increase in the United States after the introduction of vaccines; <10% of all targeted persons in high-risk groups were actually vaccinated, and ~30% of persons with sporadic acute hepatitis B did not fall into any highrisk-group category. Therefore, to have an impact on the frequency of HBV infection in an area of low endemicity such as the United States, universal hepatitis B vaccination in childhood has been recommended. For unvaccinated children born after the implementation of universal infant vaccination, vaccination during early adolescence, at age 11–12 years, was recommended, and this recommendation has been extended to include all unvaccinated children age 0–19 years. In HBVhyperendemic areas (e.g., Asia), universal vaccination of children has resulted in a marked 10to 15-year decline in hepatitis B and its complications, including hepatocellular carcinoma.
# Chunk 4665
The precise duration of protection afforded by hepatitis B vaccine is unknown; however, ~80–90% of immunocompetent adult vaccinees retain protective levels of anti-HBs for at least 5 years, and 60–80% for 10 years, and protective antibody has been documented to last for at least two decades after vaccination in infancy. Thereafter and even after anti-HBs becomes undetectable, protection persists against clinical hepatitis B, hepatitis B surface antigenemia, and chronic HBV infection. Currently, booster immunizations are not recommended routinely, except in immunosuppressed persons who have lost dence for hepatotoxicity detected during clinical trials for drug development is the most common reason for failure of compounds to reach approval status. Drug-induced liver injury requires careful history taking to identify unrecognized exposure to chemicals used in work or at home, drugs taken by prescription or bought over the counter, and herbal or dietary supplement medicines. Hepatotoxic drugs can injure the hepatocyte directly, e.g., via a free-radical or metabolic intermediate that causes peroxidation of membrane lipids and that results in liver cell injury. Alternatively, a drug or its metabolite may activate components of the innate or adaptive immune system, stimulate apoptotic pathways, or initiate damage to bile excretory pathways (Fig. 361-1). Interference with bile canalicular pumps can allow endogenous bile acids, which can injure the liver, to accumulate. Such secondary injury, in turn, may lead to necrosis of hepatocytes; injure bile ducts, producing cholestasis; or block pathways of lipid movement, inhibit protein synthesis, or impair mitochondrial oxidation of fatty acids, resulting in lactic acidosis and intracellular triglyceride accumulation (expressed histologically as microvesicular steatosis). In other instances, drug metabolites sensitize hepatocytes to toxic cytokines. The differences observed between susceptible and nonsusceptible drug recipients may be attributable to HLA haplotypes that determine binding of drug-related haptens on the cell surface as well as to polymorphisms in elaboration of competing, protective cytokines, as has been suggested for acetaminophen hepatotoxicity (see below). Immune mechanisms may include cytotoxic lymphocytes or antibody-mediated cellular cytotoxicity. In addition, a role has been shown for activation of nuclear transporters, such as the constitutive androstane receptor (CAR) or, more recently, the pregnane X receptor (PXR), in the induction of drug hepatotoxicity.
# Chunk 4666
In idiosyncratic drug reactions, the occurrence of hepatitis is usually 2023 infrequent (1 in 103–105 patients) and unpredictable; the response is not as clearly dose-dependent as is injury associated with direct hepatotoxins, and liver injury may occur at any time during or shortly after exposure to the drug. That said, recent data suggest that most agents causing idiosyncratic toxicity are given at a daily dose exceeding 100 mg, suggesting a role for dose—drugs with low potency must be given in higher doses that engender greater chances for “off-target” effects. Adding to the difficulty of predicting or identifying idiosyncratic drug hepatotoxicity is the occurrence of mild, transient, nonprogressive serum aminotransferase elevations that resolve with continued drug use. Such “adaptation,” the mechanism of which is unknown, is well recognized for drugs such as isoniazid, valproate, phenytoin, and HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins). Extrahepatic manifestations of hypersensitivity, such as rash, arthralgias, fever, leukocytosis, and eosinophilia, occur in about one-quarter of patients with idiosyncratic hepatotoxic drug reactions but are characteristic for certain drugs and not others. Both primary immunologic injury and direct hepatotoxicity related to idiosyncratic differences in generation of toxic metabolites have been invoked to explain idiosyncratic drug reactions. The most current data appear to implicate the adaptive immune system responding to the formation of immune stimulatory compounds resulting from phase I metabolic activation of the offending drug. Differences in host susceptibility may result from varying kinetics of toxic metabolite generation and genetic polymorphisms in downstream drug-metabolizing pathways or cytokine activation; in addition, certain HLA haplotypes have been associated with hepatotoxicity of certain drugs such as amoxicillin-clavulanate and flucloxacillin. Occasionally, however, the clinical features of an allergic reaction (prominent tissue eosinophilia, autoantibodies, etc.) are difficult to ignore and suggest activation of IgE pathways. A few instances of drug hepatotoxicity are observed to be associated with autoantibodies, including a class of antibodies to liver-kidney microsomes, anti-LKM2, directed against a cytochrome P450 enzyme.
# Chunk 4667
Idiosyncratic reactions lead to a morphologic pattern that is more variable than those produced by direct toxins; a single agent is often capable of causing a variety of lesions, although certain patterns tend to predominate. Depending on the agent involved, idiosyncratic hepatitis may result in a clinical and morphologic picture indistinguishable from that of viral hepatitis (e.g., isoniazid or ciprofloxacin). So-called hepatocellular injury is the most common form, featuring spotty necrosis in the liver lobule with a predominantly lymphocytic infiltrate resembling that observed in acute hepatitis A, B, or C. Drug-induced cholestasis ranges from mild to increasingly severe: (1) bland cholestasis with limited hepatocellular injury (e.g., estrogens, 17,α-substituted androgens); (2) inflammatory cholestasis (e.g., amoxicillin-clavulanic acid [the most frequently implicated antibiotic among cases of drug-induced liver injury], oxacillin, erythromycin estolate); (3) sclerosing cholangitis (e.g., after intrahepatic infusion of the chemotherapeutic agent floxuridine for hepatic metastases from a primary colonic carcinoma); and (4) disappearance of bile ducts, “ductopenic” cholestasis, similar to that observed in chronic rejection (Chap. 368) following liver transplantation (e.g., carbamazepine, levofloxacin). Cholestasis may result from binding of drugs to canalicular membrane transporters, accumulation of toxic bile acids resulting from canalicular pump failure, or genetic defects in canalicular transporter proteins. Clinically, the distinction between a hepatocellular and a cholestatic reaction is indicated by the R value, the ratio of alanine aminotransferase (ALT) to alkaline phosphatase values, both expressed as multiples of the upper limit of normal. An R value of >5.0 is associated with hepatocellular injury, R <2.0 with cholestatic injury, and R between 2.0 and 5.0 with mixed hepatocellular-cholestatic injury.
# Chunk 4668
The following are patterns of adverse hepatic reactions for some prototypic agents.

Acetaminophen represents the most prevalent cause of acute liver failure in the Western world; up to 72% of patients with acetaminophen hepatotoxicity in Scandinavia—somewhat lower frequencies in the United Kingdom and the United States—progress to encephalopathy and coagulopathy. Acetaminophen causes dose-related centrilobular hepatic necrosis after single-time-point ingestions, as intentional self-harm, or over extended periods, as unintentional overdoses, when multiple drug preparations or inappropriate drug amounts are used daily for several days, e.g., for relief of pain or fever. In these instances, 8 g/d, twice the daily recommended maximum dose, over several days can readily lead to liver failure. Use of opioid-acetaminophen combinations appears to be particularly harmful, because habituation to the opioid may occur with a gradual increase in opioid-acetaminophen combination dosing over days or weeks. A single dose of 10–15 g, occasionally less, may produce clinical evidence of liver injury. Fatal fulminant disease is usually (although not invariably) associated with ingestion of ≥25 g. Blood levels of acetaminophen correlate with severity of hepatic injury (levels >300 μg/mL 4 h after ingestion are predictive of the development of severe damage; levels <150 μg/mL suggest that hepatic injury is highly unlikely). Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, and shock are early manifestations occurring 4–12 h after ingestion. Then 24–48 h later, when these features are abating, hepatic injury becomes apparent. Maximal abnormalities and hepatic failure are evident 3–5 days after ingestion, and aminotransferase levels exceeding 10,000 IU/L are not uncommon (i.e., levels far exceeding those in patients with viral hepatitis). Renal failure and myocardial injury may be present. Whether or not a clear history of overdose can be elicited, clinical suspicion of acetaminophen hepatotoxicity should be raised by the presence of the extremely high aminotransferase levels in association with low bilirubin levels that are characteristic of this hyperacute injury. This biochemical signature should trigger further questioning of the subject if possible; however, denial or altered mentation may confound diagnostic efforts. In this setting, a presumptive diagnosis is reasonable, and the proven antidote, N-acetylcysteine— both safe and presumed to be effective even when injury has already begun to evolve—should be instituted.
# Chunk 4669
Acetaminophen is metabolized predominantly by a phase II reaction to innocuous sulfate and glucuronide metabolites; however, a small proportion of acetaminophen is metabolized by a phase I reaction to a hepatotoxic metabolite formed from the parent compound by the cytochrome P450 CYP2E1. This metabolite, N-acetyl-p-benzoquinoneimine (NAPQI), is detoxified by binding to “hepatoprotective” glutathione to become harmless, water-soluble mercapturic acid, which undergoes renal excretion. When excessive amounts of NAPQI are formed, or when glutathione levels are low, glutathione levels are depleted and overwhelmed, permitting covalent binding to nucleophilic hepatocyte macromolecules forming acetaminophen-protein “adducts.” These adducts, which can be measured in serum by high-performance liquid chromatography, hold promise as diagnostic markers of acetaminophen hepatotoxicity, and a point-of-care assay for acetaminophen-Cys adducts is under development. The binding of acetaminophen to hepatocyte macromolecules is believed to lead to hepatocyte necrosis; the precise sequence and mechanism are 2027 unknown. Hepatic injury may be potentiated by prior administration of alcohol, phenobarbital, isoniazid, or other drugs; by conditions that stimulate the mixed-function oxidase system; or by conditions such as starvation (including inability to maintain oral intake during severe febrile illnesses) that reduce hepatic glutathione levels. Alcohol induces cytochrome P450 CYP2E1; consequently, increased levels of the toxic metabolite NAPQI may be produced in chronic alcoholics after acetaminophen ingestion, but the role of alcohol in potentiating acute acetaminophen injury is still debated. Alcohol also suppresses hepatic glutathione production. Therefore, in chronic alcoholics, the toxic dose of acetaminophen may be as low as 2 g, and alcoholic patients should be warned specifically about the dangers of even standard doses of this commonly used drug. In a 2006 study, aminotransferase elevations were identified in 31–44% of normal subjects treated for 14 days with the maximal recommended dose of acetaminophen, 4 g daily (administered alone or as part of an acetaminophen-opioid combination); because these changes were transient and never associated with bilirubin elevation, the clinical relevance of these findings remains to be determined. Although underlying hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection was found to be associated with an increased risk of acute liver injury in patients hospitalized for acetaminophen overdose, generally, in patients with nonalcoholic liver disease, acetaminophen taken in recommended doses is well tolerated. Acetaminophen use in cirrhotic patients has not been associated with hepatic decompensation. On the other hand, because of the link between acetaminophen use and liver injury, and because of the limited safety margin between safe and toxic doses, the FDA has recommended that the daily dose of acetaminophen be reduced from 4 g to 3 g (even lower for persons with chronic alcohol use), that all acetaminophen-containing products be labeled prominently as containing acetaminophen, and that the potential for liver injury be prominent in the packaging of acetaminophen and acetaminophen-containing products. Within opioid combination products, the limit for the acetaminophen component has been lowered to 325 mg per tablet.
# Chunk 4670
Survivors of acute acetaminophen overdose rarely, if ever, have ongoing liver injury or sequelae.

Isoniazid (INH) remains central to most antituberculous prophylactic and therapeutic regimens, despite its long-standing recognition as a hepatotoxin. In 10% of patients treated with INH, elevated serum aminotransferase levels develop during the first few weeks of therapy; however, these elevations in most cases are self-limited, mild (values for ALT <200 IU/L), and resolve despite continued drug use. This adaptive response allows continuation of the agent if symptoms and progressive enzyme elevations do not follow the initial elevations. Acute hepatocellular drug-induced liver injury secondary to INH is evident with a variable latency period up to 6 months and is more frequent in alcoholics and patients taking certain other medications, such as barbiturates, rifampin, and pyrazinamide. If the clinical threshold of encephalopathy is reached, severe hepatic injury is likely to be fatal or to require liver transplantation. Liver biopsy reveals morphologic changes similar to those of viral hepatitis or bridging hepatic necrosis. Substantial liver injury appears to be age-related, increasing substantially after age 35; the highest frequency is in patients over age 50, and the lowest is in patients under the age of 20. Even for patients >50 years of age monitored carefully during therapy, hepatotoxicity occurs in only ~2%, well below the risk estimate derived from earlier experiences. Fever, rash, eosinophilia, and other manifestations of drug allergy are distinctly unusual. Recently, antibodies to INH have been detected in INH recipients, but a link to causality of liver injury remains unclear. A clinical picture resembling chronic hepatitis has been observed in a few patients. Many public health programs that require INH prophylaxis for a positive tuberculin skin test or Quantiferon test include monthly monitoring of aminotransferase levels, although this practice has been called into question. Even more effective in limiting serious outcomes may be encouraging patients to be alert for symptoms such as nausea, fatigue, or jaundice, because most fatalities occur in the setting of continued INH use despite clinically apparent illness.
# Chunk 4671
Sodium valproate, an anticonvulsant useful in the treatment of petit mal and other seizure disorders, has been associated with the development of severe hepatic toxicity and, rarely, fatalities, predominantly in children but also in adults. Among children listed as candidates for liver transplantation, valproate is the most common antiepileptic drug implicated. Asymptomatic elevations of serum aminotransferase levels have been recognized in as many as 45% of treated patients. These “adaptive” changes, however, appear to have no clinical importance, because major hepatotoxicity is not seen in the majority of patients despite continuation of drug therapy. In the rare patients in whom jaundice, encephalopathy, and evidence of hepatic failure are found, examination of liver tissue reveals microvesicular fat and bridging hepatic necrosis, predominantly in the centrilobular zone. Bile duct injury may also be apparent. Most likely, sodium valproate is not directly hepatotoxic, but its metabolite, 4-pentenoic acid, may be responsible for hepatic injury. Valproate hepatotoxicity is more common in persons with mitochondrial enzyme deficiencies and may be ameliorated by IV administration of carnitine, which valproate therapy can deplete. Recently, valproate toxicity has been linked to HLA haplotypes (DR4 and B*1502) and to mutations in mitochondrial DNA polymerase gamma 1.
# Chunk 4672
This commonly used antibiotic for urinary tract infections may cause an acute hepatitis leading to fatal outcome or, more frequently, chronic hepatitis of varying severity but indistinguishable from autoimmune chronic hepatitis. These two scenarios may reflect the frequent use and reuse of the drug for treatment of recurrent cystitis in women. Although most toxic agents manifest injury within 6 months of first ingestion, nitrofurantoin may have a longer latency period, in part perhaps because of its intermittent, recurrent use. Autoantibodies to nuclear components, smooth muscle, and mitochondria are seen and may subside after resolution of infection; however, glucocorticoid or other immunosuppressive medication may be necessary to resolve the autoimmune injury, and cirrhosis may be seen in cases that are not recognized quickly. Interstitial pulmonary fibrosis presenting as chronic cough and dyspnea may be present and resolve slowly with medication withdrawal. Histologic findings are identical to those of autoimmune hepatitis. A similar disease pattern can be observed with minocycline that is used repeatedly for the treatment of acne in teenagers as well as with hydralazine and alpha methyldopa.
# Chunk 4673
Therapy with this potent antiarrhythmic drug is accompanied in 15–50% of patients by modest elevations of serum aminotransferase levels that may remain stable or diminish despite continuation of the drug. Such abnormalities may appear days to many months after beginning therapy. A proportion of those with elevated aminotransferase levels have detectable hepatomegaly, and clinically important liver disease develops in <5% of patients. Features that represent a direct effect of the drug on the liver and that are common to the majority of long-term recipients are ultrastructural phospholipidosis, unaccompanied by clinical liver disease, and interference with hepatic mixed-function oxidase metabolism of other drugs. The cationic amphiphilic drug and its major metabolite desethylamiodarone accumulate in hepatocyte lysosomes and mitochondria and in bile duct epithelium. The relatively common elevations in aminotransferase levels are also considered a predictable, dose-dependent, direct hepatotoxic effect. On the other hand, in the rare patient with clinically apparent, symptomatic liver disease, liver injury resembling that seen in alcoholic liver disease is observed. The so-called pseudoalcoholic liver injury can range from steatosis to alcoholic hepatitis–like neutrophilic infiltration and Mallory’s hyaline to cirrhosis. Electron-microscopic demonstration of phospholipid-laden lysosomal lamellar bodies can help to distinguish amiodarone hepatotoxicity from typical alcoholic hepatitis. This category of liver injury appears to be a metabolic idiosyncrasy that allows hepatotoxic metabolites to be generated. Rarely, an acute idiosyncratic hepatocellular injury resembling viral hepatitis or cholestatic hepatitis occurs. Hepatic granulomas have occasionally been observed. Because amiodarone has a long half-life, liver injury may persist for months after the drug is stopped.
# Chunk 4674
The most important adverse effect associated with erythromycin, more common in children than adults, is the infrequent occurrence of a cholestatic reaction. Although most of these reactions have been associated with erythromycin estolate, other erythromycins may also be responsible. The reaction usually begins during the first 2 or 3 weeks of therapy and includes nausea, vomiting, fever, right upper quadrant abdominal pain, jaundice, leukocytosis, and moderately elevated aminotransferase and alkaline phosphatase levels. The clinical picture 2029 can resemble acute cholecystitis or bacterial cholangitis. Liver biopsy reveals variable cholestasis; portal inflammation comprising lymphocytes, polymorphonuclear leukocytes, and eosinophils; and scattered foci of hepatocyte necrosis. Symptoms and laboratory findings usually subside within a few days of drug withdrawal, and evidence of chronic liver disease has not been found on follow-up. The precise mechanism remains ill-defined.
# Chunk 4675
The most common form of liver injury caused by complementary and alternative medications is the profound cholestasis associated with anabolic steroids used by body builders. Unregulated agents sold in gyms and health food stores as diet supplements, which are taken by athletes to improve their performance, may contain anabolic steroids. Jaundice in a young male that is accompanied by a cholestatic, rather than a hepatitic, laboratory profile almost invariably will turn out to be caused by the use of one of a variety of androgen congeners. Such agents have the potential to injure bile transport pumps and to cause intense cholestasis; the time to onset is variable, and resolution, which is the rule, may require many weeks to months. Initially, anorexia, nausea, and malaise may occur, followed by pruritus in some but not all patients. Serum aminotransferase levels are usually <100 IU/L and serum alkaline phosphatase levels are generally moderately elevated with bilirubin levels frequently exceeding 342 μmol/L (20 mg/dL). Examination of liver tissue reveals cholestasis without substantial inflammation or necrosis. Anabolic steroids have also been used by prescription to treat bone marrow failure. In this setting, hepatic sinusoidal dilatation and peliosis hepatis have been reported in rare patients, as have hepatic adenomas and hepatocellular carcinoma.
# Chunk 4676
The recognition of drug hepatotoxicity in persons with HIV infection is complicated in this population by the many alternative causes of liver injury (chronic viral hepatitis, fatty infiltration, infiltrative disorders, mycobacterial infection, etc.), but drug hepatotoxicity associated with HAART is an emerging and common type of liver injury in HIV-infected persons (Chap. 226). Although no one antiviral agent is recognized as a potent hepatotoxin, combination regimens including reverse transcriptase and protease inhibitors cause hepatotoxicity in ~10% of treated patients. Implicated most frequently are combinations including nucleoside analogue reverse transcriptase inhibitors zidovudine, didanosine, and, to a lesser extent, stavudine; protease inhibitors ritonavir and indinavir (and amprenavir when used together with ritonavir), as well as tipranavir; and nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors nevirapine and, to a lesser extent, efavirenz. These drugs cause predominantly hepatocellular injury but cholestatic injury as well, and prolonged (>6 months) use of reverse transcriptase inhibitors has been associated with mitochondrial injury, steatosis, and lactic acidosis. Indirect hyperbilirubinemia, resulting from direct inhibition of bilirubin-conjugating activity by UDP-glucuronosyltransferase, usually without elevation of aminotransferase or alkaline phosphatase activities, occurs in ~10% of patients treated with the protease inhibitor indinavir. Distinguishing the impact of HAART hepatotoxicity in patients with HIV and hepatitis virus co-infection is made challenging by the following: (1) both chronic hepatitis B and hepatitis C can affect the natural history of HIV infection and the response to HAART, and (2) HAART can have an impact on chronic viral hepatitis. For example, immunologic reconstitution with HAART can result in immunologically mediated liver-cell injury in patients with chronic hepatitis B co-infection if treatment with an antiviral agent for hepatitis B (e.g., the nucleoside analogue lamivudine) is withdrawn or if nucleoside analogue resistance emerges. Infection with HIV, especially with low CD4+ T cell counts, has been reported to increase the rate of hepatic fibrosis associated with chronic hepatitis C, and HAART therapy can increase levels of serum aminotransferases and HCV RNA in patients with hepatitis C co-infection. Didanosine or stavudine should not be used with ribavirin in patients with HIV/HCV co-infection because of an increased risk of severe mitochondrial toxicity and lactic acidosis.
# Chunk 4677
Compared to patients with HBeAg-reactive chronic chronic hepatitis C. Hepatology 24:289, 1996. cNecroinflammatory grade: A0 = none; A1 = mild; A2 = moderate; A3 = severe. hepatitis B, patients with HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis B have levels of HBV DNA that are several orders of magnitude lower (no more than 105−106 IU/mL) than those observed in the HBeAg-reactive subset. Most such with chronic hepatitis B, histologic features are of prognostic impor-cases represent precore or core-promoter mutations acquired late in the tance. In one long-term study of patients with chronic hepatitis B, natural history of the disease (mostly early-life onset; age range 40−55 investigators found a 5-year survival rate of 97% for patients with mild years, older than that for HBeAg-reactive chronic hepatitis B); these chronic hepatitis, 86% for patients with moderate to severe chronic mutations prevent translation of HBeAg from the precore component of hepatitis, and only 55% for patients with chronic hepatitis and postne-the HBV genome (precore mutants) or are characterized by downregucrotic cirrhosis. The 15-year survival in these cohorts was 77%, 66%, lated transcription of precore mRNA (core-promoter mutants; Chap. and 40%, respectively. On the other hand, more recent observations 360). Although their levels of HBV DNA tend to be lower than among do not allow us to be so sanguine about the prognosis in patients with patients with HBeAg-reactive chronic hepatitis B, patients with HBeAgmild chronic hepatitis; among such patients followed for 1−13 years, negative chronic hepatitis B can have progressive liver injury (compliprogression to more severe chronic hepatitis and cirrhosis has been cated by cirrhosis and HCC) and experience episodic reactivation of observed in more than a quarter of cases. liver disease reflected in fluctuating levels of aminotransferase activity More important to consider than histology alone in patients with (“flares”). The biochemical and histologic activity of HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis B is the degree of hepatitis B virus (HBV) replication. disease tends to correlate closely with levels of HBV replication, unlike As reviewed in Chap. 360, chronic HBV infection can occur in the the case mentioned above of Asian patients with HBeAg-reactive presence or absence of serum hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg), and gen-chronic hepatitis B during the early decades of their HBV infection. An erally, for both HBeAg-reactive and HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis important point worth reiterating is the observation that the level of B, the level of HBV DNA correlates with the level of liver injury and HBV replication is the most important risk factor for the ultimate develrisk of progression. In HBeAg-reactive chronic hepatitis B, two phases opment of cirrhosis and HCC in both HBeAg-reactive and HBeAghave been recognized based on the relative level of HBV replication. negative patients. Although levels of HBV DNA are lower and more readily suppressed by therapy to undetectable levels in HBeAg-negative (compared to HBeAg-reactive) chronic hepatitis B, achieving sustained responses that permit discontinuation of antiviral therapy is less likely in HBeAg-negative patients (see below). Inactive carriers are patients with circulating hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), normal serum aminotransferase levels, undetectable HBeAg, and levels of HBV DNA that are either undetectable or present at a threshold of ≤103 IU/mL. This serologic profile can occur not only in inactive carriers but also in patients with HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis B during periods of relative inactivity; distinguishing between the two requires sequential biochemical and virologic monitoring over many months.
# Chunk 4678
Laboratory features of chronic hepatitis B do not distinguish adequately between histologically mild and severe hepatitis. Aminotransferase elevations tend to be modest for chronic hepatitis B but may fluctuate in the range of 100−1000 units. As is true for acute viral hepatitis B, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) tends to be more elevated than aspartate aminotransferase (AST); however, once cirrhosis is established, AST tends to exceed ALT. Levels of alkaline phosphatase activity tend to be normal or only marginally elevated. In severe cases, moderate elevations in serum bilirubin (51.3−171 μmol/L [3−10 mg/ dL]) occur. Hypoalbuminemia and prolongation of the prothrombin time occur in severe or end-stage cases. Hyperglobulinemia and detectable circulating autoantibodies are distinctly absent in chronic hepatitis B (in contrast to autoimmune hepatitis). Viral markers of chronic HBV infection are discussed in Chap. 360.
# Chunk 4679
Although progression to cirrhosis is more likely in severe than in mild or moderate chronic hepatitis B, all forms of chronic hepatitis B can be progressive, and progression occurs primarily in patients with active HBV replication. Moreover, in populations of patients with chronic hepatitis B who are at risk for HCC (Chap. 111), the risk is highest for those with continued, high-level HBV replication and lower for persons in whom initially high-level HBV DNA falls spontaneously over time. Therefore, management of chronic hepatitis B is directed at suppressing the level of virus replication. Although clinical trials tend to focus on clinical endpoints achieved over 1−2 years (e.g., suppression of HBV DNA to undetectable levels, loss of HBeAg/HBsAg, improvement in histology, normalization of ALT), these short-term gains translate into reductions in the risk of clinical progression, hepatic decompensation, and death. To date, seven drugs have been approved for treatment of chronic hepatitis B: injectable interferon (IFN) α; pegylated interferon (long-acting IFN 2033 bound to polyethylene glycol, PEG [PEG IFN]); and the oral agents lamivudine, adefovir dipivoxil, entecavir, telbivudine, and tenofovir.
# Chunk 4680
IFN-α was the first approved therapy for chronic hepatitis B. Although it is no longer used to treat hepatitis B, standard IFN is important historically, having provided important lessons about antiviral therapy in general. For immunocompetent adults with HBeAg-reactive chronic hepatitis B (who tend to have high-level HBV DNA [>105−106 virions/mL] and histologic evidence of chronic hepatitis on liver biopsy), a 16-week course of IFN given subcutaneously at a daily dose of 5 million units, or three times a week at a dose of 10 million units, results in a loss of HBeAg and hybridization-detectable HBV DNA (i.e., a reduction to levels below 105−106 virions/mL) in ~30% of patients, with a concomitant improvement in liver histology. Seroconversion from HBeAg to anti-HBe occurred in approximately 20%, and, in early trials, approximately 8% lost HBsAg. Successful IFN therapy and seroconversion are often accompanied by an acute hepatitis-like elevation in aminotransferase activity, which has been postulated to result from enhanced cytolytic T cell clearance of HBV-infected hepatocytes. Relapse after successful therapy is rare (1 or 2%). The likelihood of responding to IFN is higher in patients with lower levels of HBV DNA and substantial elevations of ALT. Although children can respond as well as adults, IFN therapy has not been effective in very young children infected at birth. Similarly, IFN therapy has not been effective in immunosuppressed persons, Asian patients with neonatal acquisition of infection and minimal-to-mild ALT elevations, or patients with decompensated chronic hepatitis B (in whom such therapy can actually be detrimental, sometimes precipitating decompensation, often associated with severe adverse effects). Among patients with HBeAg loss during therapy, long-term follow-up has demonstrated that 80% experience eventual loss of HBsAg (i.e., all serologic markers of infection, and normalization of ALT over a 9-year posttreatment period). In addition, improved long-term and complication-free survival as well as a reduction in the frequency of HCC have been documented among IFN responders, supporting the conclusion that successful antiviral therapy improves the natural history of chronic hepatitis B.
# Chunk 4681
The first of the nucleoside analogues to be approved, the dideoxynucleoside lamivudine inhibits reverse transcriptase activity of both HIV and HBV and is a potent and effective agent for patients with chronic hepatitis B. Although generally superseded by newer, more potent agents, lamivudine is still used in regions of the world where newer agents are not yet approved are or not affordable. In clinical trials among patients with HBeAg-reactive chronic hepatitis B, lamivudine therapy at daily doses of 100 mg for 48−52 weeks suppressed HBV DNA by a median of approximately 5.5 log10 copies/ mL and to undetectable levels, as measured by PCR amplification assays, in approximately 40% of patients. Therapy was associated with HBeAg loss in 32−33%; HBeAg seroconversion (i.e., conversion from HBeAg-reactive to anti-HBe-reactive) in 16−21%; normalization of ALT in 40−75%; improvement in histology in 50−60%; retardation in fibrosis in 20−30%; and prevention of progression to cirrhosis. HBeAg responses can occur even in subgroups who are resistant to IFN (e.g., those with high-level HBV DNA) or who failed in the past to respond to it. As is true for IFN therapy of chronic hepatitis B, patients with near-normal ALT activity tend not to experience HBeAg responses (despite suppression of HBV DNA), and those with ALT levels exceeding 5 × the upper limit of normal can expect 1-year HBeAg seroconversion rates of 50−60%. Generally, HBeAg seroconversions are confined to patients who achieve suppression of HBV DNA to <104 copies/mL (equivalent to ~103 IU/mL). Lamivudine-associated HBeAg responses are accompanied by a posttreatment HBsAg seroconversion rate comparable to that seen after IFN-induced HBeAg responses. Among Western patients who undergo HBeAg responses during a year-long course of therapy and in whom the response is sustained for 4−6 months after cessation of therapy, the response is durable thereafter in the vast majority (>80%); therefore, the achievement of an HBeAg response represents a viable stopping point in therapy. Reduced durability has been reported in Asian patients; therefore, to support the durability of HBeAg responses, patients should receive a period of consolidation therapy of ≥6 months in Western patients and ≥1 year in Asian patients after HBeAg seroconversion. Close posttreatment monitoring is necessary to identify HBV reactivation promptly and to resume therapy. If HBeAg is unaffected by lamivudine therapy, the current approach is to continue therapy until an HBeAg response occurs, but long-term therapy may be required to suppress HBV replication and, in turn, limit liver injury; HBeAg seroconversions can increase to a level of 50% after 5 years of therapy. Histologic improvement continues to accrue with therapy beyond the first year; after a cumulative course of 3 years of lamivudine therapy, necroinflammatory activity is reduced in the majority of patients, and even cirrhosis has been shown to regress to precirrhotic stages in as many as three-quarters of patients.
# Chunk 4682
In patients with HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis B (i.e., in those with precore and core-promoter HBV mutations), 1 year of lamivudine therapy results in HBV DNA suppression and normalization of ALT in three-quarters of patients and in histologic improvement in approximately two-thirds. Therapy has been shown to suppress HBV DNA by approximately 4.5 log10 copies/mL (baseline HBV DNA levels are lower than in patients with HBeAg-reactive hepatitis B) and to undetectable levels in approximately 70%, as measured by sensitive PCR amplification assays. Lacking HBeAg at the outset, patients with HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis B cannot achieve an HBeAg response—a stopping point in HBeAg-reactive patients; almost invariably, when therapy is discontinued, reactivation is the rule. Therefore, these patients require long-term therapy; with successive years, the proportion with suppressed HBV DNA and normal ALT increases.
# Chunk 4683
Clinical and laboratory side effects of lamivudine are negligible and indistinguishable from those observed in placebo recipients. Still, lamivudine doses should be reduced in patients with reduced creatinine clearance. During lamivudine therapy, transient ALT elevations, resembling those seen during IFN therapy and during spontaneous HBeAg-to-anti-HBe seroconversions, occur in one-fourth of patients. These ALT elevations may result from restored cytolytic T cell activation permitted by suppression of HBV replication. Similar ALT elevations, however, occur at an identical frequency in placebo recipients, but ALT elevations associated with HBeAg seroconversion are confined to lamivudine-treated patients. When therapy is stopped after a year of therapy, twoto threefold ALT elevations occur in 20−30% of lamivudine-treated patients, representing renewed liver-cell injury as HBV replication returns. Although these posttreatment flares are almost always transient and mild, rare severe exacerbations, especially in cirrhotic patients, have been observed, mandating close and careful clinical and virologic monitoring after discontinuation of treatment. Many authorities caution against discontinuing therapy in patients with cirrhosis, in whom posttreatment flares could precipitate decompensation.
# Chunk 4684
Long-term monotherapy with lamivudine is associated with methionine-to-valine (M204V) or methionine-to-isoleucine (M204I) mutations, primarily at amino acid 204 in the tyrosine-methionineaspartate-aspartate (YMDD) motif of HBV DNA polymerase, analogous to mutations that occur in HIV-infected patients treated with this drug. During a year of therapy, YMDD mutations occur in 15−30% of patients; the frequency increases with each year of therapy, reaching 70% at year 5. Ultimately, patients with YMDD mutants experience degradation of clinical, biochemical, and histologic responses; therefore, if treatment is begun with lamivudine monotherapy, the emergence of lamivudine resistance, reflected clinically by a breakthrough from suppressed levels of HBV DNA and ALT, is managed by adding another antiviral to which YMDD variants are sensitive (e.g., adefovir, tenofovir; see below).
# Chunk 4685
At an oral daily dose of 10 mg, the acyclic nucleotide analogue adefovir dipivoxil, the prodrug of adefovir, reduces HBV DNA by approximately 3.5−4 log10 copies/mL and is equally effective in treatmentnaïve patients and IFN nonresponders. In HBeAg-reactive chronic hepatitis B, a 48-week course of adefovir dipivoxil was shown to achieve histologic improvement (and reduce the progression of fibrosis) and normalization of ALT in just over one-half of patients, HBeAg seroconversion in 12%, HBeAg loss in 23%, and suppression to an undetectable level of HBV DNA in 13−21%, as measured by PCR. Similar to IFN and lamivudine, adefovir dipivoxil is more likely to achieve an HBeAg response in patients with high baseline ALT (e.g., among adefovir-treated patients with ALT level >5 × the upper limit of normal), and HBeAg seroconversions occurred in 25%. The durability of adefovir-induced HBeAg responses is high (91% in one study); therefore, HBeAg response can be relied upon as a stopping point for adefovir therapy, after a period of consolidation therapy, as outlined above. Although data on the impact of additional therapy beyond 1 year are limited, biochemical, serologic, and virologic outcomes improve progressively as therapy is continued.
# Chunk 4686
In patients with HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis B, a 48-week course of 10 mg/d of adefovir dipivoxil resulted in histologic improvement in two-thirds, normalization of ALT in three-fourths, and suppression of HBV DNA to PCR-undetectable levels in one-half to two-thirds. As was true for lamivudine, because HBeAg responses— a potential stopping point—cannot be achieved in this group, reactivation is the rule when adefovir therapy is discontinued, and indefinite, long-term therapy is required. Treatment beyond the first year consolidates the gain of the first year; after 5 years of therapy, improvement in hepatic inflammation and regression of fibrosis were observed in three-fourths of patients, ALT was normal in 70%, and HBV DNA was undetectable in almost 70%. In one study, stopping adefovir after 5 years was followed by sustained suppression of HBV DNA and ALT, but most HBeAg-negative patients are treated indefinitely unless HBsAg loss, albeit very rare, is achieved.
# Chunk 4687
Adefovir contains a flexible acyclic linker instead of the L-nucleoside ring of lamivudine, avoiding steric hindrance by mutated amino acids. In addition, the molecular structure of phosphorylated adefovir is very similar to that of its natural substrate; therefore, mutations to adefovir would also affect binding of the natural substrate, dATP. Hypothetically, these are among the reasons that resistance to adefovir dipivoxil is much less likely than resistance to lamivudine; no resistance was encountered in 1 year of clinical trial therapy. In subsequent years, however, adefovir resistance begins to emerge (asparagine to threonine at amino acid 236 [N236T] and alanine to valine or threonine at amino acid 181 [A181V/T], primarily), occurring in 2.5% after 2 years, but in 29% after 5 years of therapy (reported in HBeAg-negative patients). Among patients co-infected with HBV and HIV and who have normal CD4+ T cell counts, adefovir dipivoxil is effective in suppressing HBV dramatically (by 5 logs10 in one study). Moreover, adefovir dipivoxil is effective in lamivudine-resistant, YMDD-mutant HBV and can be used when such lamivudine-induced variants emerge. When lamivudine resistance occurs, adding adefovir (i.e., maintaining lamivudine to preempt the emergence of adefovir resistance) is superior to switching to adefovir. Almost invariably, patients with adefovir-mutant HBV respond to lamivudine (or newer agents, such as entecavir, see below). When, in the past, adefovir had been evaluated as therapy for HIV infection, doses of 60−120 mg were required to suppress HIV, and, at these doses, the drug was nephro-2035 toxic. Even at 30 mg/d, creatinine elevations of 44 μmol/L (0.5 mg/ dL) occurred in 10% of patients; however, at the HBV-effective dose of 10 mg, such elevations of creatinine are rarely encountered. If any nephrotoxicity does occur, it rarely appears before 6−8 months of therapy. Although renal tubular injury is a rare potential side effect, and although creatinine monitoring is recommended during treatment, the therapeutic index of adefovir dipivoxil is high, and the nephrotoxicity observed in clinical trials at higher doses was reversible. For patients with underlying renal disease, frequency of administration of adefovir dipivoxil should be reduced to every 48 h for creatinine clearances of 30−49 mL/min; to every 72 h for creatinine clearances of 10−29 mL/min; and once a week, following dialysis, for patients undergoing hemodialysis. Adefovir dipivoxil is very well tolerated, and ALT elevations during and after withdrawal of therapy are similar to those observed and described above in clinical trials of lamivudine. An advantage of adefovir is its relatively favorable resistance profile; however, it is not as potent as the other approved oral agents, it does not suppress HBV DNA as rapidly or as uniformly as the others, it is the least likely of all agents to result in HBeAg seroconversion, and 20−50% of patients fail to suppress HBV DNA by 2 log10 (“primary nonresponders”). For these reasons, adefovir, which has been supplanted in both treatment-naïve and lamivudine-resistant patients by the more potent, less resistance-prone nucleotide analogue tenofovir (see below), is no longer recommended as first-line therapy.
# Chunk 4688
In HBeAg-reactive chronic hepatitis B, two large-scale studies were done. One study evaluated PEG IFN-α 2b (100 μg weekly for 32 weeks, then 50 μg weekly for another 20 weeks for a total of 52 weeks, with a comparison arm of combination PEG IFN with oral lamivudine) in 307 subjects. The other study involved PEG IFN-α 2a (180 μg weekly for 48 weeks) in 814 primarily Asian patients, three-fourths of whom had ALT ≥2 × the upper limit of normal, with comparison arms of lamivudine monotherapy and combination PEG IFN plus lamivudine. At the end of therapy (48−52 weeks) in the PEG IFN monotherapy arms, HBeAg loss occurred in approximately 30%, HBeAg seroconversion in 22−27%, undetectable HBV DNA (<400 copies/mL by PCR) in 10−25%, normal ALT in 34−39%, and a mean reduction in HBV DNA of 2 log10 copies/mL (PEG IFN-α 2b) to 4.5 log10 copies/mL (PEG IFN-α 2a). Six months after completing PEG IFN monotherapy in these trials, HBeAg losses were present in approximately 35%, HBeAg seroconversion in approximately 30%, undetectable HBV DNA in 7−14%, normal ALT in 32−41%, and a mean reduction in HBV DNA of 2−2.4 log10 copies/mL. Although the combination of PEG IFN and lamivudine was superior at the end of therapy in one or more serologic, virologic, or biochemical outcomes, neither the combination arm (in both studies) nor the lamivudine monotherapy arm (in the PEG IFN-α 2a trial) demonstrated any benefit compared to the PEG IFN monotherapy arms 6 months after therapy. Moreover, HBsAg seroconversion occurred in 3−7% of PEG IFN recipients (with or without lamivudine); some of these seroconversions were identified by the end of therapy, but many were identified during the posttreatment follow-up period. The likelihood of HBeAg loss in PEG IFN−treated HBeAg-reactive patients is associated with HBV genotype A > B > C > D (shown for PEG IFN-α2b but not for α-2a).
# Chunk 4689
Based on these results, some authorities concluded that PEG IFN monotherapy should be the first-line therapy of choice in HBeAgreactive chronic hepatitis B; however, this conclusion has been challenged. Although a finite, 1-year course of PEG IFN results in a higher 2036 rate of sustained response (6 months after treatment) than is achieved with oral nucleoside/nucleotide analogue therapy, the comparison is confounded by the fact that oral agents are not discontinued at the end of 1 year. Instead, taken orally and free of side effects, therapy with oral agents is extended indefinitely or until after the occurrence of an HBeAg response. The rate of HBeAg responses after 2 years of oral-agent nucleoside analogue therapy is at least as high as, if not higher than, that achieved with PEG IFN after 1 year; favoring oral agents is the absence of injections, difficult-to-tolerate side effects, and laboratory monitoring as well as lower direct and indirect medical care costs and inconvenience. The association of HBsAg responses with PEG IFN therapy occurs in such a small proportion of patients that subjecting everyone to PEG IFN for the marginal gain of HBsAg responses during or immediately after therapy in such a very small minority is questionable. Moreover, HBsAg responses occur in a comparable proportion of patients treated with early-generation nucleoside/nucleotide analogues in the years after therapy, and, with the newer, more potent nucleoside analogues, the frequency of HBsAg loss during the first year of therapy equals that of PEG IFN and is exceeded during year 2 and beyond (see below). Of course, resistance is not an issue during PEG IFN therapy, but the risk of resistance is much lower with new agents (≤1% up to 3−6 years in previously treatment-naïve, entecavirtreated and tenofovir-treated patients; see below). Finally, the level of HBV DNA inhibition that can be achieved with the newer agents, and even with lamivudine, exceeds that which can be achieved with PEG IFN, in some cases by several orders of magnitude. In HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis B, a trial of PEG IFN-α 2a (180 μg weekly for 48 weeks versus comparison arms of lamivudine monotherapy and of combination therapy) in 564 patients showed that PEG IFN monotherapy resulted at the end of therapy in suppression of HBV DNA by a mean of 4.1 log10 copies/mL, undetectable HBV DNA (<400 copies/mL by PCR) in 63%, normal ALT in 38%, and loss of HBsAg in 4%. Although lamivudine monotherapy and combination lamivudine−PEG IFN therapy were both superior to PEG IFN at the end of therapy, no advantage of lamivudine monotherapy or combination therapy was apparent over PEG IFN monotherapy 6 months after therapy—suppression of HBV DNA by a mean of 2.3 log10 copies/mL, undetectable HBV DNA in 19%, and normal ALT in 59%. In subjects involved in this trial followed for up to 5 years, among the two-thirds followed who had been treated initially with PEG IFN, 17% maintained HBV DNA suppression to <400 copies/mL, but ALT remained normal in only 22%; HBsAg loss increased gradually to 12%. Among the half followed who had been treated initially with lamivudine monotherapy, HBV DNA remained <400 copies/mL in 7% and ALT normal in 16%; by year 5, 3.5% had lost HBsAg. As was the case for standard IFN therapy in HBeAg-negative patients, only a small proportion maintained responsiveness after completion of PEG IFN therapy, raising questions about the relative value of a finite period of PEG IFN, versus a longer course with a potent, low-resistance oral nucleoside analogue in these patients. Moreover, the value of PEG IFN for HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis B has not been confirmed. In the only other controlled clinical trial of PEG IFN for HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis B, the hepatitis C regimen of PEG IFN plus ribavirin was compared to PEG IFN monotherapy. In this trial, HBV DNA suppression (<400 copies/mL) occurred in only 7.5% of the two groups combined, and no study subject lost HBsAg. In patients treated with PEG IFN, HBeAg and HBsAg responses have been associated with IL28B genotype CC, the favorable genotype identified in trials of PEG IFN for chronic hepatitis C. Also, reductions in quantitative HBsAg levels have been shown to correlate with and to be predictive of responsiveness to PEG IFN in chronic hepatitis B. If HBsAg levels fail to fall within the first 12–24 weeks or to reach <20,000 IU/mL by week 24, PEG IFN therapy is unlikely to be effective and should be discontinued.
# Chunk 4690
Entecavir, an oral cyclopentyl guanosine analogue polymerase inhibitor, appears to be the most potent of the HBV antivirals and is just as well tolerated as lamivudine. In a 709-subject clinical trial among HBeAg-reactive patients, oral entecavir, 0.5 mg daily, was compared to lamivudine, 100 mg daily. At 48 weeks, entecavir was superior to lamivudine in suppression of HBV DNA (mean 6.9 versus 5.5 log10 copies/mL), percentage with undetectable HBV DNA (<300 copies/mL by PCR; 67% versus 36%), histologic improvement (≥2-point improvement in necroinflammatory HAI score; 72% versus 62%), and normal ALT (68% versus 60%). The two treatments were indistinguishable in percentage with HBeAg loss (22% versus 20%) and seroconversion (21% versus 18%). Among patients treated with entecavir for 96 weeks, HBV DNA was undetectable cumulatively in 80% (versus 39% for lamivudine), and HBeAg seroconversions had occurred in 31% (versus 26% for lamivudine). After 3–6 years of entecavir, HBeAg seroconversions have been observed in 39–44% and HBsAg loss in 5–6%. Similarly, in a 638-subject clinical trial among HBeAg-negative patients, at week 48, oral entecavir, 0.5 mg daily, was superior to lamivudine, 100 mg daily, in suppression of HBV DNA (mean 5.0 versus 4.5 log10 copies/mL) and in percentage with undetectable HBV DNA (90% versus 72%), histologic improvement (70% versus 61%), and normal ALT (78% versus 71%). No resistance mutations were encountered in previously treatment-naïve, entecavir-treated patients during 96 weeks of therapy, and in a cohort of subjects treated for up to 6 years, resistance emerged in only 1.2%. Entecavir-induced HBeAg seroconversions are as durable as those achieved with other antivirals. Its high barrier to resistance coupled with its high potency renders entecavir a first-line drug for patients with chronic hepatitis B.
# Chunk 4691
Entecavir is also effective against lamivudine-resistant HBV infection. In a trial of 286 lamivudine-resistant patients, entecavir, at a higher daily dose of 1 mg, was superior to lamivudine, as measured at week 48, in achieving suppression of HBV DNA (mean 5.1 versus 0.48 log10 copies/mL), undetectable HBV DNA (72% versus 19%), normal ALT (61% versus 15%), HBeAg loss (10% versus 3%), and HBeAg seroconversion (8% versus 3%). In this population of lamivudine-experienced patients, however, entecavir resistance emerged in 7% at 48 weeks. Although entecavir resistance requires both a YMDD mutation and a second mutation at one of several other sites (e.g., T184A, S202G/I, or M250V), resistance to entecavir in lamivudine-resistant chronic hepatitis B has been recorded to increase progressively to 43% at 4 years; therefore, entecavir is not as attractive a choice as adefovir or tenofovir for patients with lamivudine-resistant hepatitis B.
# Chunk 4692
Telbivudine, a cytosine analogue, is similar in efficacy to entecavir but slightly less potent in suppressing HBV DNA (a slightly less profound median 6.4 log10 reduction in HBeAg-reactive disease and a similar 5.2 log10 reduction in HBeAg-negative disease). In its registration trial, telbivudine at an oral daily dose of 600 mg suppressed HBV DNA to <300 copies/mL in 60% of HBeAg-positive and 88% of HBeAg-negative patients, reduced ALT to normal in 77% of HBeAg-positive and 74% of HBeAg-negative patients, and improved histology in 65% of HBeAg-positive and 67% of HBeAgnegative patients. Although resistance to telbivudine (M204I, not M204V, mutations) was less frequent than resistance to lamivudine at the end of 1 year, resistance mutations after 2 years of treatment occurred in up to 22%. Generally well tolerated, telbivudine has been associated with a low frequency of asymptomatic creatine kinase elevations and with a very low frequency of peripheral neuropathy; frequency of administration should be reduced for patients with impaired creatinine clearance. Its excellent potency notwithstanding, the inferior resistance profile of telbivudine has limited its appeal; telbivudine is neither recommended as first-line therapy nor widely used.
# Chunk 4693
Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate, an acyclic nucleotide analogue and potent antiretroviral agent used to treat HIV infection, is similar to adefovir but more potent in suppressing HBV DNA and inducing HBeAg responses; it is highly active against both wild-type and lamivudineresistant HBV and active in patients whose response to adefovir is slow and/or limited. At an oral once-daily dose of 300 mg for 48 weeks, tenofovir suppressed HBV DNA by 6.2 log10 (to undetectable levels [<400 copies/mL] in 76%) in HBeAg-positive patients and by 4.6 log10 (to undetectable levels in 93%) in HBeAg-negative patients; reduced ALT to normal in 68% of HBeAg-positive and 76% of HBeAg-negative patients; and improved histology in 74% of HBeAg-positive and 72% of HBeAg-negative patients. In HBeAg-positive patients, HBeAg seroconversions occurred in 21% by the end of year 1, 27% by year 2, 34% by year 3, and 40% by year 5 of tenofovir treatment; HBsAg loss occurred in 3% by the end of year 1 and 6% at year 2, and 8% by year 5. After 5 years of tenofovir therapy, 87% of patients experienced histologic 2037 improvement, including reduction in fibrosis score (51%) and regression of cirrhosis (71%). The 5-year safety (negligible renal toxicity, in 1%, and mild reduction in bone density, in ~0.5%) and resistance profiles (none recorded through 5 years) of tenofovir are very favorable as well; therefore, tenofovir has supplanted adefovir both as first-line therapy for chronic hepatitis B and as add-on therapy for lamivudineresistant chronic hepatitis B. Frequency of tenofovir administration should be reduced for patients with impaired creatinine clearance.
# Chunk 4694
HBeAg seroconversion 1 yr Rx 18–20% 16–21% 12% 21% 22% 21% >1 yr Rx NA up to 50% @ 5 yrs 43% @ 3 yrsd 31% @ 2 yrs 30% @ 2 yrs 40% @ 5 yrs (mean copies/mL) HBeAg-reactive 4.5 5.5 median 3.5–5 6.9 6.4 6.2 HBeAg-negative 4.1 4.4–4.7 median 3.5–3.9 5.0 5.2 4.6
# Chunk 4695
HBV DNA PCR negative (<300–400 copies/mL; <1000 copies/mL for adefovir) at end of yr 1

HBsAg loss yr 1 3–4% ≤1% 0% 2% <1% 3% >yr 1 12% 5 yr after No data 5% at yr 5 6% at yr 6 No data 8% at yr 5 1 yr of Rx Histologic improvement (≥2 point reduction in HAI) at yr 1 HBeAg-reactive 38% 6 months 49–62% 53–68% 72% 65% 74% after HBeAg-negative 48% 6 months 61–66% 64% 70% 67% 72% after Viral resistance None 15–30% @ 1 yr None @ 1 yr ≤1% @ 1 yre Up to 5% @ yr 1 0% @ yr 1 70% @ 5 yrs 29% @ 5 yrs 1.2% @ 6 yrse Up to 22% @ yr 2 0% through yr 5 Pregnancy category C Cf C CBB Cost (US$) for 1 yr ~$18,000 ~$2,500 ~$6,500 ~$8,700g ~$6,000 ~$6,000 aGenerally, these comparisons are based on data on each drug tested individually versus placebo in registration clinical trials; because, with rare exception, these comparisons are not based on head-to-head testing of these drugs, relative advantages and disadvantages should be interpreted cautiously. bAlthough standard interferon α administered daily or three times a week is approved as therapy for chronic hepatitis B, it has been supplanted by PEG IFN, which is administered once a week and is more effective. Standard interferon has no advantages over PEG IFN. cDuration of therapy in clinical efficacy trials; use in clinical practice may vary. dBecause of a computer-generated randomization error that resulted in misallocation of drug versus placebo during the second year of clinical trial treatment, the frequency of HBeAg seroconversion beyond the first year is an estimate (Kaplan-Meier analysis) based on the small subset in whom adefovir was administered correctly. e7% during a year of therapy (43% at year 4) in lamivudine-resistant patients. fDespite its Class C designation, lamivudine has an extensive pregnancy safety record in women with HIV/AIDS. gApproximately $17,400 for lamivudine-refractory patients.
# Chunk 4696
Abbreviations: ALT, alanine aminotransferase; HAI, histologic activity index; HBeAg, hepatitis B e antigen; HBsAg, hepatitis B surface antigen; HBV, hepatitis B virus; NA, not applicable; PEG IFN, pegylated interferon; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; Rx, therapy; yr, year.
# Chunk 4697
Several learned societies and groups of expert physicians have issued treatment recommendations for patients with chronic hepatitis B; the most authoritative and updated (and free of financial support by pharmaceutical companies) are those of the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases (AASLD) and of the European Association for the Study of the Liver (EASL). Although the recommendations differ slightly, a consensus has emerged on most of the important points (Table 362-4). No treatment is recommended or available for inactive “nonreplicative” hepatitis B carriers (undetectable HBeAg with normal ALT and HBV DNA ≤103 IU/mL documented serially over time). In patients with detectable HBeAg and HBV DNA levels >2 × 104 IU/mL, treatment is recommended by the AASLD for those with ALT levels above 2 × the upper limit of normal. (The EASL recommends treatment in HBeAg-positive patients for HBV DNA levels >2 × 103 IU/mL and ALT above the upper limit of normal.) For HBeAg-positive patients with ALT ≤2 × the upper limit of normal, in whom sustained responses are not likely and who would require multiyear therapy, antiviral therapy is not recommended currently. This pattern is common during the early decades of life among Asian patients infected at birth; even in this group, therapy would be considered for those >40 years of age, ALT persistently at the high end of the twofold range, and/ or with a family history of HCC, especially if the liver biopsy shows moderate to severe necroinflammatory activity or fibrosis. In this group, when, eventually, ALT becomes elevated later in life, antiviral therapy should be instituted. For patients with HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis B, ALT >2 × the upper limit of normal (above the upper limit of normal according to EASL), and HBV DNA >2 × 103 IU/ mL, antiviral therapy is recommended. If HBV DNA is >2 × 103 IU/mL and ALT is 1 to >2 × the upper limit of normal, liver biopsy should be considered to help in arriving at a decision to treat if substantial liver injury is present (treatment in this subset would be recommended according to EASL guidelines, because ALT is elevated).
# Chunk 4698
Chronic hepatitis >103 1 to >2 × ULNd Consider liver biopsy; treath if biopsy shows moderate to severe inflammation or fibrosis Chronic hepatitis >104 >2 × ULNd Treath,i Cirrhosis compensated >2 × 103 < or > ULN Treate with oral agents, not PEG IFN <2 × 103 < or > ULN Treath with oral agentsg, not PEG IFN; refer for liver transplantation Undetectable aBased on practice guidelines of the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases (AASLD). Except as indicated in footnotes, these guidelines are similar to those issued by the European Association for the Study of the Liver (EASL). bLiver disease tends to be mild or inactive clinically; most such patients do not undergo liver biopsy. cThis pattern is common during early decades of life in Asian patients infected at birth. dAccording to the EASL guidelines, treat if HBV DNA is >2 × 103 IU/mL and ALT >ULN. eOne of the potent oral drugs with a high barrier to resistance (entecavir or tenofovir) or PEG IFN can be used as first-line therapy (see text). These oral agents, but not PEG IFN, should be used for interferon-refractory/ intolerant and immunocompromised patients. PEG IFN is administered weekly by subcutaneous injection for a year; the oral agents are administered daily for at least a year and continued indefinitely or until at least 6 months after HBeAg seroconversion. fAccording to EASL guidelines, patients with compensated cirrhosis and detectable HBV DNA at any level, even with normal ALT, are candidates for therapy. Most authorities would treat indefinitely, even in HBeAg-positive disease after HBeAg seroconversion. gBecause the emergence of resistance can lead to loss of antiviral benefit and further deterioration in decompensated cirrhosis, a low-resistance regimen is recommended—entecavir or tenofovir monotherapy or combination therapy with the more resistance-prone lamivudine (or telbivudine) plus adefovir. Therapy should be instituted urgently. hBecause HBeAg seroconversion is not an option, the goal of therapy is to suppress HBV DNA and maintain a normal ALT. PEG IFN is administered by subcutaneous injection weekly for a year; caution is warranted in relying on a 6-month posttreatment interval to define a sustained response, because the majority of such responses are lost thereafter. Oral agents, entecavir or tenofovir, are administered daily, usually indefinitely or until, as very rarely occurs, virologic and biochemical responses are accompanied by HBsAg seroconversion. iFor older patients and those with advanced fibrosis, consider lowering the HBV DNA threshold to >2 × 103 IU/mL.
# Chunk 4699
Administration Weekly injection Daily, orally

Tolerability Poorly toler-Well tolerated, limited moniated, intensive toring monitoring
# Chunk 4700
During 1 year of therapy ~30% ~20% During >1 year of Not applicable 30% (year 2) to up to 50% therapy
# Chunk 4701
During 1 year of therapy 3–4% 0–3% During >1 year of therapy Not applicable 3–8% @ 5 years of therapy After 1 year of therapy– 12% @ 5 years 3.5% @ 5 years HBeAg-negative
# Chunk 4702
Antiviral resistance None Lamivudine: ~30% year 1, ~70% year 5 Adefovir: 0% year 1, ~30%

Telbivudine: up to 4% year 1, 22% year 2 Entecavir: ≤1.2% through year 6 Tenofovir: 0% through year 5
# Chunk 4703
Management is not well defined. Glucocorticoids are ineffective and are not used. Preliminary experimental trials of IFN-α suggested that conventional doses and durations of therapy lower levels of HDV RNA and aminotransferase activity only transiently during treatment but have no impact on the natural history of the disease. In contrast, high-dose IFN-α (9 million units three times a week) for 12 months may be associated with a sustained loss of HDV replication and clinical improvement in up to 50% of patients. Moreover, the beneficial impact of treatment has been observed to persist for 15 years and to be associated with a reduction in grade of hepatic necrosis and inflammation, reversion of advanced fibrosis (improved stage), and clearance of HDV RNA in some patients. A suggested approach to therapy has been high-dose, long-term IFN for at least a year and, in responders, extension of therapy until HDV RNA and HBsAg clearance. PEG IFN has also been shown to be effective in the treatment of chronic hepatitis D (e.g., after 48 weeks of therapy, associated with undetectable HDV RNA, durable for at least 24 posttreatment weeks, in a quarter of patients) and is a more convenient replacement for standard IFN. None of the nucleoside analogue antiviral agents for hepatitis B are effective in hepatitis D. In patients with end-stage liver disease secondary to chronic hepatitis D, liver transplantation has been effective. If hepatitis D recurs in the new liver without the expression of hepatitis B (an unusual serologic profile in immunocompetent persons but common in transplant patients), liver injury is limited. In fact, the outcome of transplantation for chronic hepatitis D is superior to that for chronic hepatitis B; in such patients, combination hepatitis B immune globulin and nucleoside analogue therapy for hepatitis B is indicated (Chap. 368).
# Chunk 4704
Regardless of the epidemiologic mode of acquisition of hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection, chronic hepatitis follows acute hepatitis C in 50−70% of cases; chronic infection is common even in those with a return to normal in aminotransferase levels after acute hepatitis C, adding up to an 85% likelihood of chronic HCV infection after acute hepatitis C. Few clues had emerged to explain host differences associated with chronic infection until recently, when variation in a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) on chromosome 19, IL28B (which codes for IFN-λ3), was identified that distinguished between responders and nonresponders to antiviral therapy (see below). The same variants correlated with spontaneous resolution after acute infection: 53% in genotype C/C, 30% in genotype C/T, but only 23% in genotype T/T. The association with HCV clearance after acute infection is even stronger when IL28B haplotype is combined with haplotype G/G of an SNP near HLA class II DBQ1*03:01.
# Chunk 4705
In patients with chronic hepatitis C followed for 20 years, progression to cirrhosis occurs in about 20−25%. Such is the case even for patients with relatively clinically mild chronic hepatitis, including those without symptoms, with only modest elevations of aminotransferase activity, and with mild chronic hepatitis on liver biopsy. Even in cohorts of well-compensated patients with chronic hepatitis C referred for clinical research trials (no complications of chronic liver disease and with normal hepatic synthetic function), the prevalence of cirrhosis may be as high as 50%. Most cases of hepatitis C are identified initially in asymptomatic patients who have no history of acute hepatitis C (e.g., those discovered while attempting to donate blood, while undergoing lab testing as part of an application for life insurance, or as a result of routine laboratory tests). The source of HCV infection in many of these cases is not defined, although a long-forgotten percutaneous exposure (e.g., injection drug use) in the remote past can be elicited in a substantial proportion and probably accounts for most infections; most of these infections were acquired in the 1960s and 1970s, coming to clinical attention decades later.
# Chunk 4706
Despite this substantial rate of progression of chronic hepatitis C, and despite the fact that liver failure can result from end-stage chronic hepatitis C, the long-term prognosis for chronic hepatitis C in a majority of patients is relatively benign. Mortality over 10−20 years among patients with transfusion-associated chronic hepatitis C has been shown not to differ from mortality in a matched population of transfused patients in whom hepatitis C did not develop. Although death in the hepatitis group is more likely to result from liver failure, and although hepatic decompensation may occur in ~15% of such patients over the course of a decade, the majority (almost 60%) of patients remain asymptomatic and well compensated, with no clinical sequelae of chronic liver disease. Overall, chronic hepatitis C tends to be very slowly and insidiously progressive, if at all, in the vast majority of patients, whereas in approximately one-fourth of cases, chronic hepatitis C will progress eventually to end-stage cirrhosis. In fact, because HCV infection is so prevalent, and because a proportion of patients progress inexorably to end-stage liver disease, hepatitis C is the most frequent indication for liver transplantation (Chap. 368). In the United States, hepatitis C accounts for up to 40% of all chronic liver disease, and, as of 2007, mortality caused by hepatitis C surpassed that associated with HIV/AIDS. Moreover, because the prevalence of HCV infection is so much higher in the “baby boomer” cohort borne between 1945 and 1965, three-quarters of the mortality associated with hepatitis C occurs in this age cohort. Referral bias may account for the more severe outcomes described in cohorts of patients reported from tertiary care centers (20-year progression of ≥20%) versus the more benign outcomes in cohorts of patients monitored from initial bloodproduct-associated acute hepatitis or identified in community settings (20-year progression of only 4−7%). Still unexplained, however, are the wide ranges in reported progression to cirrhosis, from 2% over 17 years in a population of women with hepatitis C infection acquired from contaminated anti-D immune globulin to 30% over ≤11 years in recipients of contaminated intravenous immune globulin.
# Chunk 4707
Perhaps the best prognostic indicator in chronic hepatitis C is liver histology; the rate of hepatic fibrosis may be slow, moderate, or rapid. Patients with mild necrosis and inflammation as well as those with limited fibrosis have an excellent prognosis and limited progression to cirrhosis. In contrast, among patients with moderate to severe necroinflammatory activity or fibrosis, including septal or bridging 2041 fibrosis, progression to cirrhosis is highly likely over the course of 10−20 years. The pace of fibrosis progression may be accelerated by such factors as concomitant HIV infection, other causes of liver disease, excessive alcohol use, and hepatic steatosis. Among patients with compensated cirrhosis associated with hepatitis C, the 10-year survival rate is close to 80%; mortality occurs at a rate of 2−6% per year; decompensation at a rate of 4−5% per year; and, as noted above, HCC at a rate of 1−4% per year. A discussion of the pathogenesis of liver injury in patients with chronic hepatitis C appears in Chap. 360. Clinical features of chronic hepatitis C are similar to those described above for chronic hepatitis B. Generally, fatigue is the most common symptom; jaundice is rare. Immune complex−mediated extrahepatic complications of chronic hepatitis C are less common than in chronic hepatitis B (despite the fact that assays for immune complexes are often positive in patients with chronic hepatitis C), with the exception of essential mixed cryoglobulinemia (Chap. 360), which is linked to cutaneous vasculitis and membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis as well as lymphoproliferative disorders such as B-cell lymphoma and unexplained monoclonal gammopathy. In addition, chronic hepatitis C has been associated with extrahepatic complications unrelated to immune-complex injury. These include Sjögren’s syndrome, lichen planus, porphyria cutanea tarda, type 2 diabetes mellitus, and the metabolic syndrome (including insulin resistance and steatohepatitis).
# Chunk 4708
Therapy for chronic hepatitis C has evolved substantially in the two decades since IFN-α was introduced for this indication. The therapeutic armamentarium has grown to include PEG IFN with ribavirin and, in 2011, the introduction of protease inhibitors telaprevir and boceprevir used in combination with PEG IFN and ribavirin in patients with HCV genotype 1. When first approved, IFN-α was administered via subcutaneous injection three times a week for 6 months but achieved a sustained virologic response (SVR) (Fig. 362-2) (a reduction of HCV RNA to undetectable levels by PCR when measured ≥6 months after completion of therapy) below 10%. Doubling the duration of therapy—but not increasing the dose or changing IFN preparations—increased the SVR rate to ~20%, and addition to the regimen of daily ribavirin, an oral guanosine nucleoside, increased the SVR rate to 40%. When used alone, ribavirin is ineffective and does not reduce HCV RNA levels appreciably, but ribavirin enhances the efficacy of IFN by reducing the likelihood of virologic relapse after the achievement of an end-treatment response (Fig. 362-2) (response measured during, and maintained to the end of, treatment). Proposed mechanisms to explain the role of ribavirin include subtle direct reduction of HCV replication, inhibition of host inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase activity (and associated depletion –8–4–2 0 4 8 12162024324048526072 Weeks after start of therapy
# Chunk 4709
FIGURE 362-2 Classification of virologic responses based on outcomes during and after a 48-week course of pegylated interferon (PEG IFN) plus ribavirin antiviral therapy in patients with hepatitis C, genotype 1 or 4 (for genotype 2 or 3, the course would be 24 weeks). Nonresponders can be classified as null responders (hepatitis C virus [HCV] RNA reduction of <2 log10 IU/mL) or partial responders (HCV RNA reduction ≥2 log10 IU/mL but not suppressed to undetectable) by week 24 of therapy. In responders, HCV RNA can become undetectable, as shown with sensitive amplification assays, within 4 weeks (RVR, rapid virologic response); can be reduced by ≥2 log10 IU/mL within 12 weeks (early virologic response, EVR; if HCV RNA is undetectable at 12 weeks, the designation is “complete” EVR); or at the end of therapy, 48 weeks (ETR, end-treatment response). In responders, if HCV RNA remains undetectable for 24 weeks after ETR, week 72, the patient has a sustained virologic response (SVR), but if HCV RNA becomes detectable again, the patient is considered to have relapsed. In patients treated with protease inhibitor–based therapy, several additional milestones are monitored: (1) among boceprevirtreated patients, the level of HCV RNA reduction (>1 log10 or ≥1 log10 IU/mL) during the 4-week PEG IFN–ribavirin lead-in phase; (2) during boceprevir therapy, undetectable HCV RNA at week 8 (week 4 of triple-drug therapy; RVR); and (3) among telaprevir-treated patients, undetectable HCV RNA at week 4 and 12 (extended RVR). (Reproduced with permission, courtesy of Marc G. Ghany, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health and the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases. Hepatology 49:1335, 2009.) of guanosine pools), immune modulation, induction of virologic mutational catastrophe, and enhancement of IFN-stimulated gene expression. IFN therapy results in activation of the JAK-STAT signal transduction pathway, which culminates in the intracellular elaboration of genes and their protein products that have antiviral properties. Hepatitis C proteins inhibit JAK-STAT signaling at several steps along the pathway, and exogenous IFN restores expression of IFN-stimulated genes and their antiviral effects.
# Chunk 4710
Treatment with the combination of PEG IFN and ribavirin increased responsiveness (frequency of SVR) to as high as 55% overall, to >40% in genotypes 1 and 4, and to >80% in genotypes 2 and 3. Still, many important lessons about antiviral therapy for chronic hepatitis C were learned from the experience with IFN monotherapy and combination IFN-ribavirin therapy. Even in the absence of biochemical and virologic responses, histologic improvement occurs in approximately three-fourths of all treated patients. In chronic hepatitis C, unlike the case in hepatitis B, responses to therapy are not accompanied by transient, acute hepatitis-like aminotransferase elevations. Instead, ALT levels fall precipitously during therapy. Up to 90% of virologic responses are achieved within the first 12 weeks of therapy; responses thereafter are rare. Most relapses occur within the first 12 weeks after treatment; therefore, an SVR at week 12 posttreatment is roughly equivalent to a 24-week SVR. SVRs are very durable; normal ALT, improved histology, and absence of HCV RNA in serum and liver have been documented a decade after successful therapy, and “relapses” 2 years after sustained responses are almost unheard of. Thus, an SVR to antiviral therapy of chronic hepatitis C is tantamount to a cure.
# Chunk 4711
Two PEG IFNs are available: PEG IFN-α2b and -α2a. PEG IFN-α2b consists of a 12-kD, linear PEG molecule bound to IFN-α2b, whereas PEG IFN-α2a consists of a larger, 40-kD, branched PEG molecule bound to IFN-α2a; because of its larger size and smaller volume of extravascular distribution, PEG IFN-α2a can be given at a uniform dose independent of weight, whereas the dose of the smaller PEG IFN-α2b, which has a much wider volume distribution, must be weight-based (Table 362-6). In the registration trial for PEG IFN-α2b plus ribavirin, the best regimen was 48 weeks of 1.5 μg/kg of PEG IFN once a week plus 800 mg of ribavirin daily. A post hoc analysis suggested that weight-based dosing of ribavirin would have been more effective than the fixed 800-mg dose used in the study (a broader dose/weight range was approved subsequently; see below). In the first registration trial for PEG IFN-α2a plus ribavirin, the best regimen was 48 weeks of 180 μg of PEG IFN plus 1000 mg (for patients <75 kg) to 1200 mg (for patients ≥75 kg) of ribavirin. SVRs of 54 and 56% were reported in these two studies, respectively. A subsequent aIn the registration trial for PEG IFN-α2b plus ribavirin, the optimal regimen was 1.5 μg of PEG IFN plus 800 mg of ribavirin; however, a post hoc analysis of this study suggested that higher ribavirin doses are better. In subsequent trials of PEG IFN-α2b with ribavirin in patients with genotype 1, the following daily ribavirin doses have been validated: 800 mg for patients weighing <65 kg, 1000 mg for patients weighing >65–85 kg, 1200 for patients weighing >85–105 kg, and 1400 mg for patients weighing >105 kg. b1000 mg for patients weighing <75 kg; 1200 mg for patients weighing ≥75 kg. cIn the registration trial for PEG IFN-α2b plus ribavirin, all patients were treated for 48 weeks; however, data from other trials of standard interferons and the other PEG IFN demonstrated that 24 weeks suffices for patients with genotypes 2 and 3. For patients with genotype 3 who have advanced fibrosis/cirrhosis and/or high-level HCV RNA, a full 48 weeks is preferable. dAttempts to compare the two PEG IFN preparations based on the results of registration clinical trials are confounded by differences between trials of the two agents in methodologic details (different ribavirin doses, different methods for recording depression, and other side effects) and study-population composition (different proportion with bridging fibrosis/ cirrhosis, proportion from the United States versus international, mean weight, proportion with genotype 1, and proportion with high-level HCV RNA). In the head-to-head comparison of the two PEG IFN preparations in the IDEAL trial reported in 2009, the two drugs were comparable in tolerability and efficacy. PEG IFN-α2b was administered at a weekly weight-based dose of 1.0 μg/kg or 1.5 μg/kg, and PEG IFN-α2a at a weekly fixed dose of 180 μg. For PEG IFN-α2b, daily ribavirin weight-based doses ranged between 800 and 1400 mg based on weight criteria (see footnote a, above), whereas for PEG IFN-α2a, daily ribavirin weight-based doses ranged between 1000 and 1200 mg (see footnote b, above). For the two PEG IFN-α2b study arms, ribavirin dose reductions for ribavirin-associated adverse effects were done in 200to 400-mg decrements; for PEG IFN-α2a, the ribavirin dose was reduced to 600 mg for intolerability. Sustained virologic responses occurred in 38.0% of the low-dose PEG IFN-α2b group, 39.8% of the standard, full-dose PEG IFN-α2b group, and 40.9% of the PEG IFN-α2a group.
# Chunk 4712
In the initial registration trials for combination PEG IFN plus ribavirin, both combination PEG IFN regimens were compared to standard IFN-α2b plus ribavirin. Side effects of the combination PEG IFN-α2b regimen were comparable to those for the combination standard IFN regimen; however, when the combination PEG IFN-α2a regimen was compared with the combination standard IFN-α2b regimen, flu-like symptoms and depression were less common in the combination PEG IFN group. Although ascertainment of side effects differed between studies of the two drugs, when each was tested against standard IFN-α2b plus ribavirin, combination PEG IFN-α2a plus ribavirin appeared to be better tolerated. In a head-to-head trial of the two PEG IFNs (the IDEAL trial), the two PEG IFNs were found to be comparable in efficacy (achievement of SVR) and tolerability, although headache, nausea, fever, myalgia, depression, and drug 2044 discontinuation for any reason were less frequent in patients treated with PEG IFN-α2a than standard-dose PEG IFN-α2b. In contrast, neutropenia and rash were more frequent in patients treated with PEG IFN-α2a than standard-dose PEG IFN-α2b. In two subsequent head-to-head trials and a systematic review of randomized trials, PEG IFN-α2a was more effective than PEG IFN-α2b (SVR in genotypes 1–4: 48–55% versus 32–40%, respectively). In trials of PEG IFN-α2b among patients with HCV genotype 1, a broader range of weight-based daily ribavirin doses has been validated: 800 mg for weight <65 kg, 1000 mg for weight 65−85 kg, 1200 mg for weight >85−105 kg, and 1400 mg for weight >105 kg. Recommended doses for the two PEG IFNs plus ribavirin and other comparisons between the two therapies are shown in Table 362-6. Until the 2011 introduction of protease inhibitors, unless ribavirin was contraindicated (see above), combination PEG IFN plus ribavirin was the recommended course of therapy—24 weeks for genotypes 2 and 3 and 48 weeks for genotype 1. For patients with genotypes 1 and 4, the standard of care now includes protease inhibitors or other direct-acting antiviral agents (see below); however, PEG IFN– ribavirin remained the standard of care for patients with genotypes 2 and 3 until late 2013. For patients treated with combination PEG IFN–ribavirin, measurement of quantitative HCV RNA levels at 12 weeks is helpful in guiding therapy; if a 2-log10 drop in HCV RNA has not been achieved by this time, chances for an SVR are negligible, and additional therapy is futile. If the 12-week HCV RNA has fallen by 2 log10 (EVR), the chances for an SVR at the end of therapy are approximately two-thirds; if the 12-week HCV RNA is undetectable (“complete” EVR), the chances for an SVR exceed 80% (Fig. 362-2). Because absence of an EVR is such a strong predictor of the absence of an ultimate SVR, therapy is discontinued for failure to achieve a 12-week 2-log10 drop in HCV RNA (EVR). Studies have suggested that the frequency of an SVR to PEG IFN– ribavirin therapy can be increased in patients with baseline variables weighing against a response (e.g., HCV RNA >8 × 105 IU/mL, weight >85 kg) by raising the dose of PEG IFN (e.g., to as high as 270 μg of PEG IFN-α2a) and/or the dose of ribavirin to as high as 1600 mg daily (if tolerated or supplemented by erythropoietin) or by tailoring treatment based on viral response to prolong the duration of viral clearance before discontinuing therapy, i.e., extending therapy from 48 to 72 weeks for patients with genotype 1 and a slow virologic response (i.e., those whose HCV RNA has not fallen rapidly to undetectable levels within 4 weeks [absence of RVR]). Tailoring therapy based on the kinetics of HCV RNA reduction has also been applied to abbreviating the duration of therapy in patients with genotype 1 (and 4). The results of several clinical trials suggest that, in patients with genotype 1 (and 4) who have a 4-week RVR (which occurs in ≤20%), especially in the subset with low baseline HCV RNA, 24 weeks of therapy with PEG IFN and weight-based ribavirin suffices, yielding SVR rates of ~90% and comparable to those achieved in this cohort with 48 weeks of therapy. Although initial reports suggested that, for patients with genotype 2 and (somewhat less so) genotype 3, in rapid virologic responders with undetectable HCV RNA at week 4, the total duration of therapy required to achieve an SVR could be as short as 12−16 weeks, a very sizable, definitive subsequent trial showed that relapse is increased if treatment duration is curtailed and that a full 24 weeks is superior for these genotypes (except for the minority with very low baseline levels of HCV RNA). Persons with chronic HCV infection have been shown to suffer increased liver-related mortality. On the other hand, successful antiviral therapy of chronic hepatitis C resulting in an SVR has been shown to improve survival (and to reduce the need for liver transplantation), to lower the risk of liver failure and liver-related death and all-cause deaths, to slow the progression of chronic hepatitis C, and to reverse fibrosis and even cirrhosis. Although successful treatment reduces mortality in cirrhotic patients (and those with advanced fibrosis) and reduces the likelihood of HCC, the risk of liver-related death and HCC persists, albeit at a much reduced level, necessitating continued clinical monitoring and cancer surveillance after SVR in cirrhotics. On the other hand, in the absence of an SVR, routine-dose/duration IFN-based therapy does not reduce the risk of HCC. Similarly, for nonresponders to PEG IFN–ribavirin therapy, three trials of long-term maintenance therapy with PEG IFN have shown no benefit in reducing the risk of histologic progression or clinical decompensation, including the development of HCC. For PEG IFN–ribavirin nonresponders who have had a full, adequate course of therapy, the benefit of retreatment—with higher doses or a longer course of the original PEG IFN regimen or the alternative PEG IFN regimen or with a different type of IFN preparation (e.g., consensus IFN)—is marginal at best. Fortunately, such non-responders can now be retreated with protease inhibitor-based therapy (see following).
# Chunk 4713
For patients with HCV genotype 1, protease inhibitors have significantly improved the frequency of RVRs and SVRs as compared to PEG IFN plus ribavirin alone. In treatment-naïve patients treated with telaprevir, an SVR was seen in up to 79% of patients who received 12 weeks of triple therapy followed by 12–36 weeks of dual therapy, and among those with EVRs (undetectable HCV RNA at weeks 4 and 12) and response-guided therapy stopped at week 24 (12 weeks of triple therapy, then 12 weeks of dual therapy), the rate of SVRs was 83–89% (92% in a subsequent study). In studies with boceprevir in treatment-naïve patients, SVRs were seen in 59–66% of patients, and among those with undetectable HCV RNA at 8 weeks, the SVR rate increased to 86–88%.
# Chunk 4714
Protease inhibitors have also been studied in patients previously treated unsuccessfully with PEG IFN plus ribavirin. In studies with telaprevir, SVRs were seen in 83–88% of patients who had a previous relapse, 54–59% of partial responders (HCV RNA reduced by ≥2 log10 IU/mL but not to undetectable levels), and 29–33% of null responders (HCV RNA reduced by <2 log10 IU/mL). With boceprevir, SVRs occurred in 75% of prior relapsers and in 40–52% of previous partial responders; response rates in null responders are similar to those achieved with telaprevir-based therapy. In a substantial proportion of protease inhibitor nonresponders, resistance-associated variants can be identified, but these variants are not archived, and wild-type HCV reemerges in almost all cases within 1.5 to 2 years. SVRs to these protease inhibitors are highest in prior relapsers and
# Chunk 4715
Detectable HCV RNA (with or without elevated ALT) Portal/bridging fibrosis or moderate to severe hepatitis on liver biopsy (the necessity of a pretreatment biopsy is no longer embraced universally) Indications for IFN/ribavirin-based therapy apply to adults as well as to children age 2–17, in whom treatment may be considered at reduced weight-based doses (see product inserts); protease inhibitors are not recommended for children age <18 years
# Chunk 4716
PEG IFN-α2a 180 μg weekly plus weight-based ribavirin 1000 mg/d (<75 kg) to 1200 mg/d (≥75 kg) or PEG IFN-α2b 1.5 μg/kg weekly plus weight-based ribavirin 800 mg/d (≤65 kg), 1000 mg/d (>65–85 kg), 1200 mg/d (>85–105 kg), or 1400 mg/d (>105 kg) Plus response-guided therapy with a protease inhibitor consisting of either: Boceprevir 800 mg three times daily with food started after a lead-in treatment of 4 weeks with PEG IFN–ribavirin • Patients with undetectable HCV RNA at 8 and 24 weeks should receive triple-drug therapy (PEG IFN, ribavirin, boceprevir) through week 28 (4 weeks of PEG
# Chunk 4717
• Stopping rules for futility: HCV RNA ≥100 IU/mL at week 12 or any detectable HCV RNA at week 24

Telaprevir 750 mg three times daily with fatty food started at the beginning of therapy without a PEG IFN–ribavirin lead-in with undetectable HCV RNA at 4 and 12 weeks should receive triple-drug therapy (PEG IFN, ribavirin, telaprevir) for 12 weeks then PEG IFN and ribavirin for another 12 weeks, for a total of 24 weeks.
# Chunk 4718
PEG IFN-α2a 180 μg weekly plus weight-based ribavirin 1000 mg/d (<75 kg) to 1200 mg/d (≥75 kg) or PEG IFN-α2b 1.5 μg/kg weekly plus weight-based ribavirin 800 mg/d (≤65kg), 1000 mg/d (>65–85 kg), 1200 mg/d (>85–105 kg), or 1400 mg/d (>105 kg) Plus a protease inhibitor consisting of either: Response-guided therapy with boceprevir 800 mg three times daily with food started after a lead-in treatment of 4 weeks with PEG IFN–ribavirin • For prior relapsers and partial responders (HCV RNA reduction of ≥2 log10 during previous therapy), follow the response-guided algorithm below; for prior null responders (HCV RNA reduction <2 log10 during previous therapy), a full 48-week course of therapy (4-week PEG IFN–ribavirin lead-in, followed by 44 weeks of triple-drug therapy [PEG IFN, ribavirin, boceprevir]) is recommended.
# Chunk 4719
For HCV/HIV co-infected patients: 48 weeks, regardless of genotype, of weekly PEG IFN-α2a (180 μg) or PEG IFN-α2b (1.5 μg/kg) plus a daily ribavirin dose of at least 600–800 mg, up to full weight-based 1000–1400 mg dosing if tolerated. Protease inhibitors may be used for genotype 1; however, because of potential drug-drug interactions between HCV protease inhibitors and HIV antiretroviral drugs, HCV protease inhibitors should be used cautiously in HCV/HIV co-infected patients. If protease inhibitors are used, a full 48-week course is recommended without response-guided therapy. For boceprevir, 4 weeks of PEG IFN–ribavirin lead-in, followed by 44 weeks of triple-drug therapy (PEG IFN, ribavirin, boceprevir). For telaprevir, 12 weeks of triple-drug therapy (PEG IFN, ribavirin, telaprevir), followed by 36 weeks of PEG IFN–ribavirin therapy. Stopping rules for futility are as noted above.
# Chunk 4720
FIGURE 362-3 Maximal efficacy (sustained virologic responses, SVR) of telaprevir (blue bars) and boceprevir (yellow bars) reported in phase III clinical trials. (Figure created using data from Bacon BR et al: N Engl J Med 364:1207, 2011; Jacobson IM et al: N Engl J Med 364:2405, 2011; Poordad F et al: N Engl J Med 364:1195, 2011; Zeuzem S et al: N Engl J Med 364:2417, 2011; Vierling JM et al: Hepatology 54 [Suppl 1]:796A-797A, 2011; Ghany MG et al: Hepatology 54:1433, 2011.) occasionally requiring transfusion. Complete blood counts should be obtained at baseline and then at 2, 4, 8, and 12 weeks after starting telaprevir. Anemia can occur in half of boceprevir-treated patients, as can neutropenia in up to 30% and thrombocytopenia in 3–4%. Complete blood counts should be obtained at baseline and then at 4, 8, and 12 weeks after starting boceprevir. Other side effects of boceprevir include fatigue, nausea, headache, dysgeusia (altered or unpleasant taste), dry mouth, vomiting, and diarrhea.
# Chunk 4721
Prior to therapy, HCV genotype should be determined, because the genotype dictates the duration of therapy and potentially the agents to be used. PEG IFN plus ribavirin represents the foundation of treatment for all HCV genotypes; patients infected with genotype 1 should also receive a protease inhibitor (telaprevir or boceprevir) when these are available and not contraindicated (Table 362-7). For chronic HCV genotype 1 infection, the AASLD and EASL published treatment guidelines in 2011 reflecting FDA-approved indications for the new protease inhibitors, and in 2012, United Kingdom and French consensus guidelines were published. For treatment-naïve patients and prior relapsers, response-guided therapy with telaprevir or boceprevir is recommended. For telaprevir, the regimen consists of 12 weeks of triple therapy, followed by 12 or 36 weeks of PEG IFN–ribavirin consolidation, depending on whether extended RVR milestones (HCV RNA undetectable at weeks 4 and 12) are met.
# Chunk 4722
For boceprevir, the regimen consists of a 4-week PEG IFN–ribavirin 2047 lead-in period, followed by 24–32 weeks of triple-drug therapy, depending on whether HCV RNA milestones (undetectable at weeks 8 and 24) are met; if HCV RNA is detectable at week 8 but undetectable at week 24, after 36 weeks of therapy (4-week PEG IFN–ribavirin lead-in plus 32 weeks of triple-drug therapy), an additional 12 weeks of PEG IFN–ribavirin consolidation is recommended. For prior partial and null responders, a full 48-week course of telaprevir (no lead-in period, no response-guided therapy) is recommended; for boceprevir, a 4-week PEG IFN–ribavirin lead-in period is followed by response-guided therapy (32 weeks of triple-drug therapy if HCV RNA is undetectable at weeks 8 and 24 or, if HCV RNA is still detectable at week 8 [but undetectable at week 24], 32 weeks of triple-drug therapy followed by 12 weeks of PEG IFN–ribavirin consolidation). For cirrhotic patients (and for any boceprevir-treated patient whose HCV RNA does not fall by >1 log10 by week 4), a full 48-week course without response-guided therapy should be considered.
# Chunk 4723
Monitoring of HCV plasma RNA is crucial in assessing response to therapy. The goal of treatment is to eradicate HCV RNA, which is predicted by the absence of HCV RNA by PCR 6 months after stopping treatment (SVR). When therapy relied on PEG IFN and ribavirin, failure to achieve a 2-log10 drop in HCV RNA by week 12 of therapy (EVR) rendered it unlikely that further therapy would result in an SVR. When PEG IFN and ribavirin are part of a protease inhibitor regimen, HCV RNA should be measured at baseline and at weeks 4, 8 (for boceprevir), 12, and 24 to assess response to treatment and to aid in decisions regarding treatment duration (response-guided therapy), as well as 12 and 24 weeks after therapy. Stopping rules are important to prevent the emergence of resistance; if HCV RNA is >1000 IU/ mL at 4 or 12 weeks of telaprevir (or still detectable at week 24), or if HCV RNA is ≥100 IU/mL at week 12 of boceprevir (or detectable at week 24), all treatment should be stopped.
# Chunk 4724
Patients with chronic hepatitis C who have detectable HCV RNA in serum, whether or not aminotransferase levels are increased, and chronic hepatitis of at least moderate grade and stage (portal or bridging fibrosis) are candidates for antiviral therapy with PEG IFN plus ribavirin. Most authorities recommend 800 mg of ribavirin for patients with genotypes 2 and 3 for both types of PEG IFN and weight-based 1000−1200 mg (when used with PEG IFN-α2a) or 800−1400 mg (when used with PEG IFN-α2b) ribavirin for patients with genotype 1 (and 4), unless ribavirin is contraindicated (Table 362-7). These PEG IFN and ribavirin doses are used with protease inhibitors for patients with genotype 1 (Table 362-7). Although patients with persistently normal ALT activity tend to progress histologically very slowly or not at all, they respond to antiviral therapy just as well as do patients with elevated ALT levels; therefore, although observation without therapy is an option, such patients are potential candidates for antiviral therapy. As noted above, therapy with IFN has been shown to improve survival and complication-free survival and to slow progression of (and to reverse) fibrosis.
# Chunk 4725
HCV genotype determines the duration of PEG IFN and ribavirin therapy: 24 weeks for those with genotypes 2 and 3 and 48 weeks for patients with genotypes 4 and 1 (in patients for whom protease inhibitors are not available or contraindicated). For patients with genotype 4, treatment should be discontinued in patients who do not achieve an EVR at week 12. For patients with genotypes 2 and 3, a full, 24-week course is most effective, although the duration may be reduced to 12−16 weeks for patients with genotype 2, a low baseline level of viremia, and an RVR, especially to be considered for patients who tolerate therapy poorly. Also, consideration should be given to increasing the duration of therapy to 48 weeks for patients with genotype 3 who have advanced fibrosis and/or a high baseline level of viremia. As noted above, the absence of a 2-log10 drop in HCV RNA at week 12 (EVR) weighs heavily against the likelihood of an SVR; therefore, measuring HCV RNA at 12 weeks is recommended routinely (Fig. 362-2), and therapy can be discontinued if an EVR is not achieved. Among patients with genotype 4 who achieve an 2048 EVR (≥2-log10 HCV RNA reduction) but in whom HCV RNA remains detectable at week 24, an SVR is unlikely, and therapy can be discontinued. Although response rates are lower in patients with certain pretreatment variables, selection for treatment should not be based on symptoms, genotype, HCV RNA level, mode of acquisition of hepatitis C, or advanced hepatic fibrosis. Patients with cirrhosis can respond and should not be excluded as candidates for therapy. For patients being treated with telaprevir and boceprevir, treating physicians should explain the negative impact of non-C IL28B genotype and advanced fibrosis on outcome. Patients who have relapsed after, or failed to respond to (Fig. 362-2), a course of IFN monotherapy are potential candidates for retreatment with PEG IFN plus ribavirin (i.e., a more effective treatment regimen is required), and this approach remains current for patients with genotypes 2, 3, or 4; however, for patients with genotype 1, combination protease inhibitor/PEG IFN/ribavirin therapy is indicated. For patients with genotypes 2, 3, or 4 who were nonresponders to a prior course of IFN monotherapy, retreatment with IFN monotherapy or combination IFN plus ribavirin therapy is unlikely to achieve an SVR; however, a trial of combination PEG IFN plus ribavirin may be worthwhile, although an SVR is the outcome in <15−20% of patients. SVRs to retreatment of nonresponders are more frequent in those who had never received ribavirin in the past, those with genotypes 2 and 3, those with low pretreatment HCV RNA levels, and noncirrhotics, but less frequent in African Americans, those who failed to achieve a substantial reduction in HCV RNA during their previous course of therapy (null responders, Fig. 362-2), and those who required ribavirin dose reductions. Potential approaches to improving responsiveness to PEG IFN–ribavirin in prior nonresponders include longer duration of treatment; higher doses of PEG IFN, ribavirin, or both; and switching to a different IFN preparation; however, as noted above, none of these approaches achieves more than a marginal benefit. Treatment with a protease inhibitor–based regimen should be pursued in patients with genotype 1 who have relapsed after or not responded to prior treatment with IFN monotherapy or PEG IFN plus ribavirin, unless these protease inhibitors are not available or contraindicated (Table 362-7). Early PEG IFN treatment is indicated for persons with acute hepatitis C; ribavirin, which is used frequently in such instances, has not been shown to improve efficacy over that of PEG IFN alone, and the new protease inhibitors have not been approved for acute hepatitis C (Chap. 360). In patients with biochemically and histologically mild chronic hepatitis C, the rate of progression is slow, and monitoring without therapy is an option; however, such patients respond just as well to combination PEG IFN plus ribavirin therapy or triple-drug, protease-based therapy (for genotype 1) as those with elevated ALT and more histologically severe hepatitis. Therefore, therapy for these patients should be considered and the decision made based on such factors as patient motivation, genotype, stage of fibrosis, age, and comorbid conditions. A pretreatment liver biopsy to assess histologic grade and stage provides substantial information about progression of hepatitis C in the past, has prognostic value for future progression, and can identify such histologic factors as steatosis and stage of fibrosis, which can influence responsiveness to therapy. As therapy has improved for patients with a broad range of histologic severity, and as noninvasive laboratory markers and imaging correlates of fibrosis have gained popularity, some authorities, especially in Europe, place less value on, and do not recommend, pretreatment liver biopsies. On the other hand, serum markers of fibrosis are not considered sufficiently accurate, and histologic findings provide important prognostic information to physician and patient. Therefore, although the contemporary role of a pretreatment liver biopsy commands less of a consensus, a pretreatment liver biopsy still provides useful information and should be considered. Patients with compensated cirrhosis can respond to therapy, although their likelihood of a sustained response is lower than in noncirrhotics; moreover, survival has been shown to improve after successful antiviral therapy in cirrhotics. Similarly, although several retrospective studies have suggested that antiviral therapy in cirrhotics with chronic hepatitis C, independent of treatment outcome per se, reduces the frequency of HCC, less advanced disease in the treated cirrhotics, not treatment itself (i.e., lead-time bias), may have accounted for the reduced frequency of HCC observed in the treated cohorts in these reports; prospective studies to address this question have failed to demonstrate benefit, unless an SVR is achieved. Patients with decompensated cirrhosis are not candidates for IFN-based antiviral therapy but should be referred for liver transplantation. Some liver transplantation centers have evaluated progressively escalated, low-dose antiviral therapy in an attempt to eradicate hepatitis C viremia prior to transplantation; however, such therapy has been shown to reduce but not to prevent the risk of HCV reinfection after transplantation. After liver transplantation for end-stage liver disease caused by hepatitis C, recurrent hepatitis C is the rule, and the pace of disease progression is more accelerated than in immunocompetent patients (Chap. 368). Current therapy with PEG IFN and ribavirin after liver transplantation is unsatisfactory in most patients, but attempts to minimize immunosuppression are beneficial. Early experience with protease inhibitor–based therapy is encouraging, but inhibition of CYP3A4 by protease inhibitors can lead to markedly increased levels of immunosuppressive calcineurin inhibitors (especially tacrolimus), which requires intensive monitoring and can be very challenging. The cutaneous and renal vasculitis of HCV-associated essential mixed cryoglobulinemia (Chap. 360) may respond to antiviral therapy, but sustained responses are rare after discontinuation of therapy; therefore, prolonged, perhaps indefinite, therapy (as reported with IFN-based therapy) is recommended in this group (no indication for prolonged protease inhibitor therapy exists currently). Anecdotal reports suggest that antiviral therapy may be effective in porphyria cutanea tarda or lichen planus associated with hepatitis C.
# Chunk 4726
In patients with HCV/HIV co-infection, hepatitis C is more progressive and severe than in HCV-monoinfected patients. Although patients with HCV/HIV co-infection respond to antiviral therapy for hepatitis C, they do not respond as well as patients with HCV infection alone. Four large national and international trials of antiviral therapy among patients with HCV/HIV co-infection have shown that PEG IFN (both α2a and α2b) plus ribavirin (daily doses ranging from flat-dosed 600−800 mg to weight-based 1000/1200 mg) is superior to standard IFN regimens; however, SVR rates were lower than in HCV-monoinfected patients, ranging from 14 to 38% for patients with genotypes 1 and 4 and from 44 to 73% for patients with genotypes 2 and 3. In the three largest trials, all patients, including those with genotypes 2 and 3, were treated for a full 48 weeks. In addition, tolerability of therapy was lower than in HCV-monoinfected patients; therapy was discontinued because of side effects in 12−39% of patients in these clinical trials. Based on these trials, weekly PEG IFN plus daily ribavirin at a daily dose of at least 600−800 mg, up to full weight-based doses, at doses recommended for HCV-monoinfected patients, if tolerated, is recommended for a full 48 weeks, regardless of genotype. An alternative recommendation for ribavirin doses was issued by a European Consensus Conference and consisted of standard, weight-based 1000−1200 mg for genotypes 1 and 4, but 800 mg for genotypes 2 and 3. A head-to-head trial of combination PEG IFN–ribavirin therapy in HCV/HIV co-infection demonstrated statistically indistinguishable efficacy of the two types of PEG IFN, despite a small advantage for PEG IFN-α2a: For PEG IFN-α2b and -α2a, SVRs occurred in 28% versus 32%, respectively, of patients with genotypes 1 and 4 and in 62% versus 71%, respectively, of patients with genotypes 2 and 3.
# Chunk 4727
Patients with a history of injection drug use and alcoholism can be treated successfully for chronic hepatitis C, preferably in conjunction with drug and alcohol treatment programs. Because ribavirin is excreted renally, patients with end-stage renal disease, including those undergoing dialysis (which does not clear ribavirin), are not ideal candidates for ribavirin therapy. Rare reports suggest that reduced-dose ribavirin can be used, but the frequency of anemia is very high, and data on efficacy are limited. If patients with renal failure (glomerular filtration rate <60 mL/min) are treated, the PEG IFNα2a dose should be reduced from 180 to 135 μg weekly and the PEG IFN-α2b dose reduced from 1.5 to 1 μg/kg weekly; similarly, the daily ribavirin dose in this population should be reduced to 200−800 mg (but not used or used cautiously at very low doses) if hemodialysis is required. Neither the optimal regimen nor the efficacy of therapy is well established in this population.
# Chunk 4728
Autoimmune hepatitis is a chronic disorder characterized by continuing hepatocellular necrosis and inflammation, usually with fibrosis, which can progress to cirrhosis and liver failure. When fulfilling criteria of severity, this type of chronic hepatitis, when untreated, may have a 6-month mortality of as high as 40%. Based on contemporary estimates of the natural history of autoimmune hepatitis, the 10-year survival is 80−98% for treated and 67% for untreated patients. The prominence of extrahepatic features of autoimmunity and seroimmunologic abnormalities in this disorder supports an autoimmune process in its pathogenesis; this concept is reflected in the prior labels lupoid and plasma cell hepatitis. Autoantibodies and other typical features of autoimmunity, however, do not occur in all cases; among the broader categories of “idiopathic” or cryptogenic chronic hepatitis, many, perhaps the majority, are probably autoimmune in origin. Cases in which hepatotropic viruses, metabolic/genetic derangements (including nonalcoholic fatty liver disease), and hepatotoxic drugs have been excluded represent a spectrum of heterogeneous liver disorders of unknown cause, a proportion of which are most likely autoimmune hepatitis.
# Chunk 4729
The course of autoimmune hepatitis may be variable. In patients with mild disease or limited histologic lesions (e.g., piecemeal necrosis without bridging), progression to cirrhosis is limited, but, even in this subset, clinical monitoring is important to identify progression; up to half left untreated can progress to cirrhosis over the course of 15 years. In North America, cirrhosis at presentation is more common in African Americans than in whites. In those with severe symptomatic autoimmune hepatitis (aminotransferase levels >10 times normal, marked hyperglobulinemia, “aggressive” histologic lesions—bridging necrosis or multilobular collapse, cirrhosis), the 6-month mortality without therapy may be as high as 40%. Such severe disease accounts for only 20% of cases; the natural history of milder disease is variable, often accentuated by spontaneous remissions and exacerbations. Especially poor prognostic signs include the presence histologically of multilobular collapse at the time of initial presentation and failure of serum bilirubin to improve after 2 weeks of therapy. Death may result from hepatic failure, hepatic coma, other complications of cirrhosis (e.g., variceal hemorrhage), and intercurrent infection. In patients with established cirrhosis, HCC may be a late complication (Chap. 111) but occurs less frequently than in cirrhosis associated with viral hepatitis.
# Chunk 4730
Laboratory features of autoimmune hepatitis are similar to those seen in chronic viral hepatitis. Liver biochemical tests are invariably abnormal but may not correlate with the clinical severity or histopathologic features in individual cases. Many patients with autoimmune hepatitis have normal serum bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, and globulin levels with only minimal aminotransferase elevations. Serum AST and ALT levels are increased and fluctuate in the range of 100−1000 units. In severe cases, the serum bilirubin level is moderately elevated (51−171 μmol/L [3−10 mg/dL]). Hypoalbuminemia occurs in patients with very active or advanced disease. Serum alkaline phosphatase levels may be moderately elevated or near normal. In a small proportion of patients, marked elevations of alkaline phosphatase activity occur; in such patients, clinical and laboratory features overlap with those of primary biliary cirrhosis (Chap. 365). The prothrombin time is often prolonged, particularly late in the disease or during active phases.
# Chunk 4731
An international group has suggested a set of criteria for establishing a diagnosis of autoimmune hepatitis. Exclusion of liver disease caused by genetic disorders, viral hepatitis, drug hepatotoxicity, and alcohol are linked with such inclusive diagnostic criteria as hyperglobulinemia, autoantibodies, and characteristic histologic features. This international group has also suggested a comprehensive diagnostic scoring system that, rarely required for typical cases, may be helpful when typical features are not present. Factors that weigh in favor of the diagnosis include female gender; predominant aminotransferase elevation; presence and level of globulin elevation; presence of nuclear, smooth muscle, LKM1, and other autoantibodies; concurrent other autoimmune diseases; characteristic histologic features (interface hepatitis, plasma cells, rosettes); HLA-DR3 or -DR4 markers; and response to treatment (see below). A more simplified, more specific scoring system relies on four variables: autoantibodies, serum IgG level, typical or compatible histologic features, and absence of viral hepatitis markers. Weighing against the diagnosis are predominant alkaline phosphatase elevation, mitochondrial antibodies, markers of viral hepatitis, history of hepatotoxic drugs or excessive alcohol, histologic evidence of bile duct injury, or such atypical histologic features as fatty infiltration, iron overload, and viral inclusions.
# Chunk 4732
Early during the course of chronic hepatitis, autoimmune hepatitis may resemble typical acute viral hepatitis (Chap. 360). Without histologic assessment, severe chronic hepatitis cannot be readily distinguished based on clinical or biochemical criteria from mild chronic hepatitis. In adolescence, Wilson’s disease (Chaps. 365 and 429) may present with features of chronic hepatitis long before neurologic manifestations become apparent and before the formation of Kayser-Fleischer rings (copper deposition in Descemet’s membrane in the periphery of the cornea). In this age group, serum ceruloplasmin and serum and urinary copper determinations plus measurement of liver copper levels establish the correct diagnosis. Postnecrotic or cryptogenic cirrhosis and primary biliary cirrhosis (Chap. 365) share clinical features with autoimmune hepatitis, and both alcoholic hepatitis (Chap. 363) and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (Chap. 367e) may present with many features common to autoimmune hepatitis; historic, biochemical, serologic, and histologic assessments are usually sufficient to allow these entities to be distinguished from autoimmune hepatitis. Of course, the distinction between autoimmune and chronic viral hepatitis is not always straightforward, especially when viral antibodies occur in patients with autoimmune disease or when autoantibodies occur in patients with viral disease. Furthermore, the presence of extrahepatic features such as arthritis, cutaneous vasculitis, or pleuritis—not to mention the presence of circulating autoantibodies—may cause confusion with rheumatologic disorders such as rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus erythematosus. The existence of clinical and biochemical features of progressive necroinflammatory liver disease distinguishes chronic hepatitis from these other disorders, which are not associated with severe liver disease. Rarely, hepatic venous outflow obstruction (Budd-Chiari syndrome) may present with features suggestive of autoimmune hepatitis, but painful hepatomegaly, ascites, and vascular imaging provide distinguishing diagnostic clues. Other diagnostic considerations would include celiac disease and ischemic liver disease, which would be readily distinguishable by clinical and laboratory features from autoimmune hepatitis.
# Chunk 4733
The mainstay of management in autoimmune hepatitis is glucocorticoid therapy. Several controlled clinical trials have documented that such therapy leads to symptomatic, clinical, biochemical, and histologic improvement as well as increased survival. A therapeutic response can be expected in up to 80% of patients. Unfortunately, therapy has not been shown in clinical trials to prevent ultimate progression to cirrhosis; however, instances of reversal of fibrosis and cirrhosis have been reported in patients responding to treatment, and rapid treatment responses within 1 year do translate into a reduction in progression to cirrhosis. Although some advocate the use of prednisolone (the hepatic metabolite of prednisone), prednisone is just as effective and is favored by most authorities. Therapy may be initiated at 20 mg/d, but a popular regimen in the United States relies on an initiation dose of 60 mg/d. This high dose is tapered successively over the course of a month down to a maintenance level of 20 mg/d. An alternative, but equally effective, approach is to begin with half the prednisone dose (30 mg/d) along with azathioprine (50 mg/d). With azathioprine maintained at 50 mg/d, the prednisone dose is tapered over the course of a month down to a maintenance level of 10 mg/d. The advantage of the combination approach is a reduction, over the span of an 18-month course of therapy, in serious, life-threatening complications of steroid therapy (e.g., cushingoid features, hypertension, diabetes, osteoporosis) from 66% down to under 20%. Genetic analysis for thiopurine S-methyltransferase allelic variants does not correlate with azathioprine-associated cytopenias or efficacy and is not assessed routinely in patients with autoimmune hepatitis. In combination regimens, 6-mercaptopurine may be substituted for its prodrug azathioprine, but this is rarely required. Azathioprine alone, however, is not effective in achieving remission, nor is alternate-day glucocorticoid therapy. Limited experience with budesonide in noncirrhotic patients suggests that this steroid side effect−sparing drug may be effective. Although therapy has been shown to be effective for severe autoimmune hepatitis (AST ≥10 × the upper limit of normal or ≥5 × the upper limit of normal in conjunction with serum globulin greater than or equal to twice normal; bridging necrosis or multilobular necrosis on liver biopsy; presence of symptoms), therapy is not indicated for mild forms of chronic hepatitis, and the efficacy of therapy in mild or asymptomatic autoimmune hepatitis has not been established.
# Chunk 4734
Improvement of fatigue, anorexia, malaise, and jaundice tends to occur within days to several weeks; biochemical improvement occurs over the course of several weeks to months, with a fall in serum bilirubin and globulin levels and an increase in serum albumin. Serum aminotransferase levels usually drop promptly, but improvements in AST and ALT alone do not appear to be reliable markers of recovery in individual patients; histologic improvement, characterized by a decrease in mononuclear infiltration and in hepatocellular necrosis, may be delayed for 6−24 months. Still, if interpreted cautiously, aminotransferase levels are valuable indicators of relative disease activity, and many authorities do not advocate for serial liver biopsies to assess therapeutic success or to guide decisions to alter or stop therapy. Rapidity of response is more common in older patients (≥69 years) and those with HLA DBR1*04; although rapid responders may progress less slowly to cirrhosis and liver transplantation, they are no less likely than slower responders to relapse after therapy. Therapy should continue for at least 12−18 months. After tapering and cessation of therapy, the likelihood of relapse is at least 50%, even if posttreatment histology has improved to show mild chronic hepatitis, and the majority of patients require therapy at maintenance doses indefinitely. Continuing azathioprine alone (2 mg/kg body weight daily) after cessation of prednisone therapy has been shown to reduce the frequency of relapse. Long-term maintenance with low-dose prednisone (≤10 mg daily) has also been shown to keep autoimmune hepatitis in check, but maintenance azathioprine is more effective in maintaining remission.
# Chunk 4735
2052 In medically refractory cases, an attempt should be made to intensify treatment with high-dose glucocorticoid monotherapy (60 mg daily) or combination glucocorticoid (30 mg daily) plus high-dose azathioprine (150 mg daily) therapy. After a month, doses of prednisone can be reduced by 10 mg a month, and doses of azathioprine can be reduced by 50 mg a month toward ultimate, conventional maintenance doses. Patients refractory to this regimen may be treated with cyclosporine, tacrolimus, or mycophenolate mofetil; however, to date, only limited anecdotal reports support these approaches. If medical therapy fails, or when chronic hepatitis progresses to cirrhosis and is associated with life-threatening complications of liver decompensation, liver transplantation is the only recourse (Chap. 368); failure of the bilirubin to improve after 2 weeks of therapy should prompt early consideration of the patient for liver transplantation. Recurrence of autoimmune hepatitis in the new liver occurs rarely in most experiences but in as many as 35−40% of cases in others. Like all patients with chronic liver disease, patients with autoimmune hepatitis should be vaccinated against hepatitis A and B, ideally before immunosuppressive therapy is begun, if practical.
# Chunk 4736
Mark E. Mailliard, Michael F. Sorrell

Chronic and excessive alcohol ingestion is one of the major causes of liver disease. The pathology of alcoholic liver disease consists of three major lesions, with the progressive injury rarely existing in a pure form: (1) fatty liver, (2) alcoholic hepatitis, and (3) cirrhosis. Fatty liver is present in >90% of daily as well as binge drinkers. A much smaller percentage of heavy drinkers will progress to alcoholic hepatitis, thought to be a precursor to cirrhosis. The prognosis of severe alcoholic liver disease is dismal; the mortality of patients with alcoholic hepatitis concurrent with cirrhosis is nearly 60% at 4 years. Although alcohol is considered a direct hepatotoxin, only between 10 and 20% of alcoholics will develop alcoholic hepatitis. The explanation for this apparent paradox is unclear but involves the complex interaction of facilitating factors, such as drinking patterns, diet, obesity, and gender. There are no diagnostic tools that can predict individual susceptibility to alcoholic liver disease.
# Chunk 4737
The transition between fatty liver and the development of alcoholic hepatitis is blurred. The hallmark of alcoholic hepatitis is hepatocyte injury characterized by ballooning degeneration, spotty necrosis, polymorphonuclear infiltrate, and fibrosis in the perivenular and perisinusoidal space of Disse. Mallory-Denk bodies are often present in florid cases but are neither specific nor necessary to establish the diagnosis. Alcoholic hepatitis is thought to be a precursor to the development of cirrhosis. However, like fatty liver, it is potentially reversible with cessation of drinking. Cirrhosis is present in up to 50% of patients with biopsy-proven alcoholic hepatitis, and its regression is uncertain, even with abstention.
# Chunk 4738
The clinical manifestations of alcoholic fatty liver are subtle and characteristically detected as a consequence of the patient’s visit for a seemingly unrelated matter. Previously unsuspected hepatomegaly is often the only clinical finding. Occasionally, patients with fatty liver will present with right upper quadrant discomfort, nausea, and, rarely, jaundice. Differentiation of alcoholic fatty liver from nonalcoholic fatty liver is difficult unless an accurate drinking history is ascertained. In every instance where liver disease is present, a thoughtful and sensitive drinking history should be obtained. Standard, validated questions accurately detect alcohol-related problems (Chap. 467). Alcoholic hepatitis is associated with a wide gamut of clinical features. Fever, spider nevi, jaundice, and abdominal pain simulating an acute abdomen represent the extreme end of the spectrum, while many patients will be entirely asymptomatic. Portal hypertension, ascites, or variceal bleeding can occur in the absence of cirrhosis. Recognition of the clinical features of alcoholic hepatitis is central to the initiation of an effective and appropriate diagnostic and therapeutic strategy. It is important to recognize that patients with alcoholic cirrhosis often exhibit clinical features identical to other causes of cirrhosis.
# Chunk 4739
Patients with alcoholic liver disease are often identified through routine screening tests. The typical laboratory abnormalities seen in fatty liver are nonspecific and include modest elevations of aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), and γ-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGTP), often accompanied by hypertriglyceridemia and hyperbilirubinemia. In alcoholic hepatitis and in contrast to other causes of fatty liver, AST and ALT are usually elevated twoto sevenfold. They are rarely >400 IU, and the AST/ALT ratio is >1 (Table 363-2). Hyperbilirubinemia is accompanied by modest increases in the alkaline phosphatase level. Derangement in hepatocyte synthetic function indicates more serious disease. Hypoalbuminemia and coagulopathy are common in advanced liver injury. Ultrasonography is useful in detecting fatty infiltration of the liver and determining liver size. The demonstration by ultrasound of portal vein flow reversal, ascites, and intraabdominal venous collaterals indicates serious liver injury with less potential for complete reversal.
# Chunk 4740
AST Increased twoto sevenfold, <400 IU/L, greater than ALT

ALT Increased twoto sevenfold, <400 IU/L
# Chunk 4741
Critically ill patients with alcoholic hepatitis have short-term (30-day) mortality rates >50%. Severe alcoholic hepatitis is heralded by coagulopathy (prothrombin time increased >5 s), anemia, serum albumin concentrations <25 g/L (2.5 mg/dL), serum bilirubin levels >137 μmol/L (8 mg/dL), renal failure, and ascites. A discriminant function calculated as 4.6 X (the prolongation of the prothrombin time above control [seconds]) + serum bilirubin (mg/dL) can identify patients with a poor prognosis (discriminant function >32). A Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) score (Chap. 368) ≥21 also is associated with significant mortality in alcoholic hepatitis. The presence of ascites, variceal hemorrhage, deep encephalopathy, or hepatorenal syndrome predicts a dismal prognosis. The pathologic stage of the injury can be helpful in predicting prognosis. Liver biopsy should be performed whenever possible to establish the diagnosis and to guide the therapeutic decisions.
# Chunk 4742
Population-based abdominal imaging studies have demonstrated fatty liver in at least 25% of American adults. Because the vast majority of these subjects deny hazardous levels of alcohol consumption (defined as greater than one drink per day in women or two drinks per day in men), they are considered to have NAFLD. NAFLD is strongly associated with overweight/obesity and insulin resistance. However, it can also occur in lean individuals and is particularly common in those with a paucity of adipose depots (i.e., lipodystrophy). Ethnic/racial factors also appear to influence liver fat accumulation; the documented prevalence of NAFLD is lowest in African Americans (~25%), highest in Americans of Hispanic ancestry (~50%), and intermediate in American whites (~33%).
# Chunk 4743
Abdominal imaging is not able to determine which individuals with NAFLD have associated liver cell death and inflammation (i.e., NASH), and specific blood tests to diagnose NASH are not yet available. However, population-based studies that have used elevated serum ALT as a marker of liver injury indicate that about 6–8% of American adults have serum ALT elevations that cannot be explained by excessive alcohol consumption, other known causes of fatty liver disease (Table 364-1), viral hepatitis, or drug-induced or congenital liver diseases. Because the prevalence of such “cryptogenic” ALT elevations increases with body mass index, it is presumed that they are due to NASH. Hence, at any given point in time, NASH is present in about 25% of individuals who have NAFLD (i.e., about 6% of the general
# Chunk 4744
Diagnosing NAFLD requires demonstration of increased liver fat in the absence of hazardous levels of alcohol consumption. Thresholds for potentially dangerous alcohol ingestion have been set at more than one drink per day in women and two drinks per day in men based on epidemiologic evidence that the prevalence of serum aminotransferase elevations increases when alcohol consumption habitually exceeds these levels. In those studies, one drink was defined as having 10 g of ethanol and, thus, is equivalent to one can of beer, 4 ounces of wine, or 1.5 ounces (one shot) of distilled spirits. Other causes of liver fat accumulation (particularly exposure to certain drugs; Table 364-2) and liver injury (e.g., viral hepatitis, autoimmune liver disease, iron or copper overload, α1 antitrypsin deficiency) must also be excluded. Thus, establishing the diagnosis of NAFLD does not require invasive testing: it can be accomplished by history and physical examination, liver imaging (ultrasound is an acceptable first-line test; computed tomography [CT] or magnetic resonance imaging [MRI] enhances sensitivity for liver fat detection but adds expense), and blood tests to exclude other liver diseases. It is important to emphasize that the liver may not be enlarged, and serum aminotransferases and liver function tests (e.g., bilirubin, albumin, prothrombin time) may be completely normal, in individuals with NAFLD. Because there is yet no one specific blood test for NAFLD, confidence in the diagnosis of NAFLD is increased by identification of NAFLD risk factors. The latter include increased body mass index, insulin resistance/type 2 diabetes mellitus, and other parameters indicative of the metabolic syndrome (e.g., systemic hypertension, dyslipidemia, hyperuricemia/gout, cardiovascular disease; Chap. 422) in the patient or family members.
# Chunk 4745
Staging approaches can be separated into noninvasive testing (i.e., blood testing, physical examination, and imaging) and invasive approaches (i.e., liver biopsy). Blood test evidence of hepatic dysfunction (e.g., hyperbilirubinemia, hypoalbuminemia, prothrombin time earths of low atomic number • 4,4’-Diethylaminoethoxyhexesterol prolongation) or portal hypertension (e.g., thrombocytopenia) and stigmata of portal hypertension on physical examination (e.g., spider angiomata, palmar erythema, splenomegaly, ascites, clubbing, encephalopathy) suggest a diagnosis of advanced NAFLD. Currently, however, liver biopsy is the gold standard for establishing the severity of liver injury and fibrosis because it is both more sensitive and specific than these other tests for establishing NAFLD severity. Although invasive, liver biopsy is seldom complicated by serious adverse sequelae such as significant bleeding, pain, or inadvertent puncture of other organs and thus is relatively safe. However, biopsy suffers from potential sampling error unless tissue cores of 2 cm or longer are acquired. Also, examination of tissue at a single point in time is not reliable for determining whether the pathologic processes are progressing or regressing. The risk of serial liver biopsies within short time intervals is generally deemed as unacceptable outside of research studies. These limitations of liver biopsy have stimulated efforts to develop noninvasive approaches to stage NAFLD. As is true for many other types of chronic liver disease, in NAFLD the levels of serum aminotransferases (aspartate aminotransferase [AST] and alanine aminotransferase [ALT]) do not reliably reflect the severity of liver cell injury, extent of liver cell death, or related liver inflammation and fibrosis. Thus, they are imperfect for determining which individuals with NAFLD have NASH. This has stimulated research to identify superior markers of liver injury. Serum levels of keratin 8 and keratin 18 appear to be promising surrogates. Keratins 8 and 18 (K8/18) are epithelial cytoskeletal proteins that undergo cleavage during programmed cell death (apoptosis). Both cleaved and full-length K8/18 are released into the blood as hepatocytes die, and studies suggest that serum levels of K8/18 differentiate individuals with NASH from those with simple steatosis or normal livers more reliably than do serum aminotransferase levels. Moreover, K8/18 levels appear to parallel the severity of liver fibrosis, with higher levels marking individuals who are likely to have worse scarring (i.e., advanced liver fibrosis or cirrhosis). While promising, testing for K8/18 has not yet become standard clinical practice. Other blood tests and imaging approaches that quantify liver fibrosis are also being developed. Recently, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved an ultrasound-based test that measures liver stiffness as a surrogate marker of fibrosis (FibroScan®) (Chap. 358). This new tool will likely be used serially to monitor fibrosis progression and regression in NAFLD patients. Studies that compare the receiver operator characteristics of K8/18 plus FibroScan® versus liver biopsy for monitoring NAFLD evolution are forthcoming.
# Chunk 4746
Most subjects with NAFLD are asymptomatic. The diagnosis is often made when abnormal liver aminotransferases or features of fatty liver are noted during an evaluation performed for other reasons. NAFLD may also be diagnosed during the workup of vague right upper quadrant abdominal pain, hepatomegaly, or an abnormal-appearing liver at time of abdominal surgery. Obesity is present in 50–90% of subjects. Most patients with NAFLD also have other features of the metabolic syndrome (Chap. 422). Some have subtle stigmata of chronic liver disease, such as spider angiomata, palmer erythema, or splenomegaly. In a small minority of patients with advanced NAFLD, complications of end-stage liver disease (e.g., jaundice, features of portal hypertension such as ascites or variceal hemorrhage) may be the initial findings.
# Chunk 4747
At present, there are no FDA-approved therapies for the treatment of NAFLD. Thus, the current approach to NAFLD management focuses on treatment to improve the risk factors for NASH (i.e., obesity, insulin resistance, metabolic syndrome, dyslipidemia). Based on our understanding of the natural history of NAFLD, only patients with NASH or those with features of hepatic fibrosis on liver biopsy are considered currently for targeted pharmacologic therapies. This approach may change as our understanding of disease pathophysiology improves and potential targets of therapy evolve.
# Chunk 4748
Laboratory tests may be completely normal in patients with early compensated alcoholic cirrhosis. Alternatively, in advanced liver disease, many abnormalities usually are present. Patients may be anemic either from chronic GI blood loss, nutritional deficiencies, or hypersplenism related to portal hypertension, or as a direct suppressive effect of alcohol on the bone marrow. A unique form of hemolytic anemia (with spur cells and acanthocytes) called Zieve’s syndrome can occur in patients with severe alcoholic hepatitis. Platelet counts are often reduced early in the disease, reflective of portal hypertension with hypersplenism. Serum total bilirubin can be normal or elevated with advanced disease. Direct bilirubin is frequently mildly elevated in patients with a normal total bilirubin, but the abnormality typically progresses as the disease worsens. Prothrombin times are often prolonged and usually do not respond to administration of parenteral vitamin K. Serum sodium levels are usually normal unless patients have ascites and then can be depressed, largely due to ingestion of excess free water. Serum alanine and aspartate aminotransferases (ALT, AST) are typically elevated, particularly in patients who continue to drink, with AST levels being higher than ALT levels, usually by a 2:1 ratio.
# Chunk 4749
Diagnosis Patients who have any of the above-mentioned clinical features, physical examination findings, or laboratory studies should be considered to have alcoholic liver disease. The diagnosis, however, requires accurate knowledge that the patient is continuing to use and abuse alcohol. Furthermore, other forms of chronic liver disease (e.g., 2059 chronic viral hepatitis or metabolic or autoimmune liver diseases) must be considered or ruled out, or if present, an estimate of relative causality along with the alcohol use should be determined. Liver biopsy can be helpful to confirm a diagnosis, but generally when patients present with alcoholic hepatitis and are still drinking, liver biopsy is withheld until abstinence has been maintained for at least 6 months to determine residual, nonreversible disease.
# Chunk 4750
In patients who have had complications of cirrhosis and who continue to drink, there is a <50% 5-year survival. In contrast, in patients who are able to remain abstinent, the prognosis is significantly improved. In patients with advanced liver disease, the prognosis remains poor; however, in individuals who are able to remain abstinent, liver transplantation is a viable option.
# Chunk 4751
Abstinence is the cornerstone of therapy for patients with alcoholic liver disease. In addition, patients require good nutrition and longterm medical supervision to manage underlying complications that may develop. Complications such as the development of ascites and edema, variceal hemorrhage, or portosystemic encephalopathy all require specific management and treatment. Glucocorticoids are occasionally used in patients with severe alcoholic hepatitis in the absence of infection. Survival has been shown to improve in certain studies. Treatment is restricted to patients with a discriminant function (DF) value of >32. The DF is calculated as the serum total bilirubin plus the difference in the patient’s prothrombin time compared to control (in seconds) multiplied by 4.6. In patients for whom this value is >32, there is improved survival at 28 days with the use of glucocorticoids.
# Chunk 4752
Of patients exposed to the hepatitis C virus (HCV), approximately 80% develop chronic hepatitis C, and of those, about 20–30% will develop cirrhosis over 20–30 years. Many of these patients have had concomitant alcohol use, and the true incidence of cirrhosis due to hepatitis C alone is unknown. Nonetheless, this represents a significant number of patients. It is expected that an even higher percentage will go on to develop cirrhosis over longer periods of time. In the United States, approximately 5 to 6 million people have been exposed to HCV, with about 4 million who are chronically viremic. Worldwide, about 170 million individuals have hepatitis C, with some areas of the world (e.g., Egypt) having up to 15% of the population infected. HCV is a noncytopathic virus, and liver damage is probably immune-mediated. Progression of liver disease due to chronic 2060 hepatitis C is characterized by portal-based fibrosis with bridging fibrosis and nodularity developing, ultimately culminating in the development of cirrhosis. In cirrhosis due to chronic hepatitis C, the liver is small and shrunken with characteristic features of a mixed microand macronodular cirrhosis seen on liver biopsy. In addition to the increased fibrosis that is seen in cirrhosis due to hepatitis C, an inflammatory infiltrate is found in portal areas with interface hepatitis and occasionally some lobular hepatocellular injury and inflammation. In patients with HCV genotype 3, steatosis is often present. Similar findings are seen in patients with cirrhosis due to chronic hepatitis B. Of adult patients exposed to hepatitis B, about 5% develop chronic hepatitis B, and about 20% of those patients will go on to develop cirrhosis. Special stains for hepatitis B core (HBc) and hepatitis B surface (HBs) antigen will be positive, and ground-glass hepatocytes signifying hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) may be present. In the United States, there are about 2 million carriers of hepatitis B, whereas in other parts of the world where hepatitis B virus (HBV) is endemic (i.e., Asia, Southeast Asia, sub-Saharan Africa), up to 15% of the population may be infected, having acquired the infection vertically at the time of birth. Thus, over 300–400 million individuals are thought to have hepatitis B worldwide. Approximately 25% of these individuals may ultimately develop cirrhosis.
# Chunk 4753
Clinical Features Currently, most patients with PBC are diagnosed well before the end-stage manifestations of the disease are present, and, as such, most patients are actually asymptomatic. When symptoms are present, they most prominently include a significant degree of fatigue out of proportion to what would be expected for either the severity of the liver disease or the age of the patient. Pruritus is seen in approximately 50% of patients at the time of diagnosis, and it can be debilitating. It might be intermittent and usually is most bothersome in the evening. In some patients, pruritus can develop toward the end of pregnancy, and there are examples of patients having been diagnosed with cholestasis of pregnancy rather than PBC. Pruritus that presents prior to the development of jaundice indicates severe disease and a poor prognosis.
# Chunk 4754
Laboratory Findings Laboratory findings in PBC show cholestatic liver enzyme abnormalities with an elevation in γ-glutamyl transpeptidase and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) along with mild elevations in aminotransferases (ALT and AST). Immunoglobulins, particularly IgM, are typically increased. Hyperbilirubinemia usually is seen once cirrhosis has developed. Thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, and anemia may be seen in patients with portal hypertension and hypersplenism. Liver biopsy shows characteristic features as described above and should be evident to any experienced hepatopathologist. Up to 10% of patients with characteristic PBC will have features of AIH as well and are defined as having “overlap” syndrome. These patients are usually treated as PBC patients and may progress to cirrhosis with the same frequency as typical PBC patients. Some patients require immunosuppressive medications as well.
# Chunk 4755
Laboratory Findings Patients with PSC typically are identified in the course of an evaluation of abnormal liver enzymes. Most patients have at least a twofold increase in ALP and may have elevated aminotransferases as well. Albumin levels may be decreased, and prothrombin times are prolonged in a substantial proportion of patients at the time of diagnosis. Some degree of correction of a prolonged prothrombin time may occur with parenteral vitamin K. A small subset of patients have aminotransferase elevations greater than five times the upper limit of normal and may have features of AIH on biopsy. These individuals are thought to have an overlap syndrome between PSC and AIH. Autoantibodies are frequently positive in patients with the overlap syndrome but are typically negative in patients who only have PSC. One autoantibody, the perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (p-ANCA), is positive in about 65% of patients with PSC. Over 50% of patients with PSC also have ulcerative colitis (UC); accordingly, once a diagnosis of PSC is established, colonoscopy should be performed to look for evidence of UC.
# Chunk 4756
Wilson’s disease is an inherited disorder of copper homeostasis with failure to excrete excess amounts of copper, leading to an accumulation in the liver. This disorder is relatively uncommon, affecting 1 in 30,000 individuals. Wilson’s disease typically affects adolescents and young adults. Prompt diagnosis before end-stage manifestations become irreversible can lead to significant clinical improvement. Diagnosis requires determination of ceruloplasmin levels, which are low; 24-h urine copper levels, which are elevated; typical physical examination findings, including Kayser-Fleischer corneal rings; and characteristic liver biopsy findings. Treatment consists of copper-chelating medications.
# Chunk 4757
Portal hypertension is defined as the elevation of the hepatic venous pressure gradient (HVPG) to >5 mmHg. Portal hypertension is caused by a combination of two simultaneously occurring hemodynamic processes: (1) increased intrahepatic resistance to the passage of blood flow through the liver due to cirrhosis and regenerative nodules, and (2) increased splanchnic blood flow secondary to vasodilation within the splanchnic vascular bed. Portal hypertension is directly responsible for the two major complications of cirrhosis: variceal hemorrhage and ascites. Variceal hemorrhage is an immediate life-threatening problem with a 20–30% mortality rate associated with each episode of bleeding. The portal venous system normally drains blood from the stomach, intestines, spleen, pancreas, and gallbladder, and the portal vein is formed by the confluence of the superior mesenteric and splenic veins. Deoxygenated blood from the small bowel drains into the superior mesenteric vein along with blood from the head of the pancreas, the ascending colon, and part of the transverse colon. Conversely, the splenic vein drains the spleen and the pancreas and is joined by the inferior mesenteric vein, which brings blood from the transverse and descending colon as well as from the superior two-thirds of the rectum. Thus, the portal vein normally receives blood from almost the entire GI tract.
# Chunk 4758
Patients with small amounts of ascites can usually be managed with dietary sodium restriction alone. Most average diets in the United States contain 6–8 g of sodium per day, and if patients eat at restaurants or fast-food outlets, the amount of sodium in their diet can exceed this amount. Thus, it is often extremely difficult to get patients to change their dietary habits to ingest <2 g of sodium per day, which is the recommended amount. Patients are frequently surprised to realize how much sodium is in the standard U.S. diet; thus, it is important to make educational pamphlets available to the patient. Often, a simple recommendation is to eat fresh or frozen foods, avoiding canned or processed foods, which are usually preserved with sodium. When a moderate amount of ascites is present, diuretic therapy is usually necessary. Traditionally, spironolactone at 100–200 mg/d as a single dose is started, and furosemide may be added at 40–80 mg/d, particularly in patients who have peripheral edema. In patients who have never received diuretics before, the failure of the above-mentioned dosages suggests that they are not being compliant with a low-sodium diet. If compliance is confirmed and ascitic fluid is not being mobilized, spironolactone can be increased to 400–600 mg/d and furosemide increased to 120–160 mg/d. If ascites is still present with these dosages of diuretics in patients who are compliant with a low-sodium diet, then they are defined as having refractory ascites, and alternative treatment modalities including repeated large-volume paracentesis or a TIPS procedure should be considered (Fig. 365-5). Recent studies have shown that TIPS, while managing the ascites, does not improve survival in these patients. Unfortunately, TIPS is often associated with an increased frequency of hepatic encephalopathy and must be considered carefully on a case-by-case basis. The prognosis for patients with cirrhosis with ascites is poor, and some studies have shown that <50% of patients survive 2 years after the onset of ascites. Thus, there should be consideration for liver transplantation in patients with the onset of ascites.
# Chunk 4759
2066 into mesenteric lymph nodes, leading to bacteremia and seeding of the ascitic fluid. The most common organisms are Escherichia coli and other gut bacteria; however, gram-positive bacteria, including Streptococcus viridans, Staphylococcus aureus, and Enterococcus sp., can also be found. If more than two organisms are identified, secondary bacterial peritonitis due to a perforated viscus should be considered. The diagnosis of SBP is made when the fluid sample has an absolute neutrophil count >250/μL. Bedside cultures should be obtained when ascitic fluid is tapped. Patients with ascites may present with fever, altered mental status, elevated white blood cell count, and abdominal pain or discomfort, or they may present without any of these features. Therefore, it is necessary to have a high degree of clinical suspicion, and peritoneal taps are important for making the diagnosis. Treatment is with a second-generation cephalosporin, with cefotaxime being the most commonly used antibiotic. In patients with variceal hemorrhage, the frequency of SBP is significantly increased, and prophylaxis against SBP is recommended when a patient presents with upper GI bleeding. Furthermore, in patients who have had an episode(s) of SBP and recovered, once-weekly administration of antibiotics is used as prophylaxis for recurrent SBP.
# Chunk 4760
The hepatorenal syndrome (HRS) is a form of functional renal failure without renal pathology that occurs in about 10% of patients with advanced cirrhosis or acute liver failure. There are marked disturbances in the arterial renal circulation in patients with HRS; these include an increase in vascular resistance accompanied by a reduction in systemic vascular resistance. The reason for renal vasoconstriction is most likely multifactorial and is poorly understood. The diagnosis is made usually in the presence of a large amount of ascites in patients who have a stepwise progressive increase in creatinine. Type 1 HRS is characterized by a progressive impairment in renal function and a significant reduction in creatinine clearance within 1–2 weeks of presentation. Type 2 HRS is characterized by a reduction in glomerular filtration rate with an elevation of serum creatinine level, but it is fairly stable and is associated with a better outcome than that of type 1 HRS.
# Chunk 4761
At present, if patients have an elevated transferrin saturation or ferritin level, genetic testing should be performed; if they are a C282Y homozygote or a compound heterozygote (C282Y/H63D), the diagnosis is confirmed. If liver enzymes (alanine aminotransferase [ALT], aspartate aminotransferase [AST]) are elevated or the ferritin is >1000 μg/L, the patient should be considered for liver biopsy because there is an increased frequency of advanced fibrosis in these individuals. If liver biopsy is performed, iron deposition is found in a periportal distribution with a periportal to pericentral gradient; iron is found predominantly in parenchymal cells, and Kupffer cells are spared.
# Chunk 4762
Diagnosis of α1AT deficiency is confirmed by blood tests showing reduced levels of serum α1AT, accompanied by Pi determinations. Most patients with liver disease have either PiZZ or PiSZ; occasionally, patients with PiMZ have reduced levels of α1AT, but they usually do not have a low enough level to cause disease. Liver biopsy is often performed to determine stage of hepatic fibrosis and shows characteristic PAS-positive, diastase-resistant globules in the periphery of the hepatic lobule.
# Chunk 4763
Porphyrias The porphyrias are a group of metabolic disorders in which there are defects in the biosynthesis of heme necessary for incorporation into numerous hemoproteins such as hemoglobin, myoglobin, catalase, and the cytochromes (Chap. 430). Porphyrias can present as either acute or chronic diseases, with the acute disorder causing recurring bouts of abdominal pain, and the chronic disorders characterized by painful skin lesions. Porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT) is the most commonly encountered porphyria. Patients present with characteristic vesicular lesions on sun-exposed areas of the skin, principally the dorsum of the hands, the tips of the ears, or the cheeks. About 40% of patients with PCT have mutations in the gene for hemochromatosis (HFE), and ~50% have hepatitis C; thus, iron studies and HFE mutation analysis as well as hepatitis C testing should be considered in all patients who present with PCT. PCT is also associated with excess alcohol use and some medications, most notably estrogens.
# Chunk 4764
Lymphoma Involvement of the liver with lymphoma can sometimes be with bulky mass lesions but can also be as a difficult-to-diagnose infiltrative disorder that does not show any characteristic findings on abdominal imaging studies (Chap. 134). Patients may present with severe liver disease, jaundice, hypoalbuminemia, mild to moderately elevated aminotransferases, and an elevated alkaline phosphatase.
# Chunk 4765
CHAPTER 367e Genetic, Metabolic, and Infiltrative Diseases Affecting the Liver

Liver TransplantationCHAPTER 368liver Transplantation Raymond T. Chung, Jules L. Dienstag Liver transplantation—the replacement of the native, diseased liver by a normal organ (allograft)—has matured from an experimental pro-cedure reserved for desperately ill patients to an accepted, lifesaving operation applied more optimally in the natural history of end-stage 368 liver disease. The preferred and technically most advanced approach is orthotopic transplantation, in which the native organ is removed and the donor organ is inserted in the same anatomic location. Pioneered in the 1960s by Thomas Starzl at the University of Colorado and, later, at the University of Pittsburgh and by Roy Calne in Cambridge, England, liver transplantation is now performed routinely worldwide. Success measured as 1-year survival has improved from ~30% in the 1970s to >90% today. These improved prospects for prolonged survival resulted from refinements in operative technique, improvements in organ procurement and preservation, advances in immunosuppressive therapy, and, perhaps most influentially, more enlightened patient selection and timing. Despite the perioperative morbidity and mortality, the technical and management challenges of the procedure, and its costs, liver transplantation has become the approach of choice for selected patients whose chronic or acute liver disease is progressive, life-threatening, and unresponsive to medical therapy. Based on the current level of success, the number of liver transplants has continued to grow each year; in 2012, 6256 patients received liver allografts in the United States. Still, the demand for new livers continues to outpace availability; as of mid-2013, 15,806 patients in the United States were on a waiting list for a donor liver. In response to this drastic shortage of donor organs, many transplantation centers supplement cadaver-organ liver transplantation with living-donor transplantation.
# Chunk 4766
undergo transplantation for hepatic vein thrombosis (Budd-Chiari syndrome), postoperative anticoagulation is essential; underlying myeloproliferative disorders may have to be treated but are not a contraindication to liver transplantation. If a donor organ can be located quickly, before life-threatening complications—including cerebral edema—set in, patients with acute liver failure are candidates for liver transplantation. Routine candidates for liver transplantation are patients with alcoholic cirrhosis, chronic viral hepatitis, and primary hepatocellular malignancies. Although all three of these categories are considered to be high risk, liver transplantation can be offered to carefully selected patients. Currently, chronic hepatitis C and alcoholic liver disease are the most common indications for liver transplantation, accounting for over 40% of all adult candidates who undergo the procedure. Patients with alcoholic cirrhosis can be considered as candidates for transplantation if they meet strict criteria for abstinence and reform; however, these criteria still do not prevent recidivism in up to a quarter of cases. In highly selected cases in a limited number of centers, transplantation for severe acute alcoholic hepatitis has been performed with success; however, because patients with acute alcoholic hepatitis are still actively using alcohol, and because continued alcohol abuse remains a concern, acute alcoholic hepatitis is not a routine indication for liver transplantation. Patients with chronic hepatitis C have early allograft and patient survival comparable to those of other subsets of patients after transplantation; however, reinfection in the donor organ is universal, recurrent hepatitis C is insidiously progressive, allograft cirrhosis develops in 20–30% at 5 years, and cirrhosis and late organ failure occur at a higher frequency beyond 5 years. With the introduction of highly effective direct acting antiviral agents targeting HCV, it is expected that allograft outcomes will improve significantly in the coming years. In patients with chronic hepatitis B, in the absence of measures to prevent recurrent hepatitis B, survival after transplantation is reduced by approximately 10–20%; however, prophylactic use of hepatitis B immune globulin (HBIg) during and after transplantation increases the success of transplantation to a level comparable to that seen in patients with nonviral causes of liver decompensation. Specific oral antiviral drugs (e.g., entecavir, tenofovir disoproxil fumarate) (Chap. 362) can be used both for prophylaxis against and for treatment of recurrent hepatitis B, facilitating further the management of patients undergoing liver transplantation for end-stage hepatitis B; most transplantation centers rely on antiviral drugs with or without HBIg to manage patients with hepatitis B. Issues of disease recurrence are discussed in more detail below. Patients with nonmetastatic primary hepatobiliary tumors—primary hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), cholangiocarcinoma, hepatoblastoma, angiosarcoma, epithelioid hemangioendothelioma, and multiple or massive hepatic adenomata—have undergone liver transplantation; however, for some hepatobiliary malignancies, overall survival is significantly lower than that for other categories of liver disease. Most transplantation centers have reported 5-year recurrence-free survival rates in patients with unresectable HCC for single tumors <5 cm in diameter or for three or fewer lesions all <3 cm comparable to those seen in patients undergoing transplantation for nonmalignant indications. Consequently, liver transplantation is currently restricted to patients whose hepatic malignancies meet these criteria. Expanded criteria for patients with HCC continue to be evaluated. Because the likelihood of recurrent cholangiocarcinoma is very high, only highly selected patients with limited disease are being evaluated for transplantation after intensive chemotherapy and radiation.
# Chunk 4767
Cadaver donor livers for transplantation are procured primarily from victims of head trauma. Organs from brain-dead donors up to age 60 are acceptable if the following criteria are met: hemodynamic stability, adequate oxygenation, absence of bacterial or fungal infection, absence 2069 of abdominal trauma, absence of hepatic dysfunction, and serologic exclusion of hepatitis B (HBV) and C viruses and HIV. Occasionally, organs from donors with hepatitis B and C are used (e.g., for recipients with prior hepatitis B and C, respectively). Organs from donors with antibodies to hepatitis B core antigen (anti-HBc) can also be used when the need is especially urgent, and recipients of these organs are treated prophylactically with antiviral drugs. Cardiovascular and respiratory functions are maintained artificially until the liver can be removed. Transplantation of organs procured from deceased donors who have succumbed to cardiac death can be performed successfully under selected circumstances, when ischemic time is minimized and liver histology preserved. Compatibility in ABO blood group and organ size between donor and recipient are important considerations in donor selection; however, ABO-incompatible, split liver, or reduced-donor-organ transplants can be performed in emergencies or marked donor scarcity. Tissue typing for human leukocyte antigen (HLA) matching is not required, and preformed cytotoxic HLA antibodies do not preclude liver transplantation. Following perfusion with cold electrolyte solution, the donor liver is removed and packed in ice. The use of University of Wisconsin (UW) solution, rich in lactobionate and raffinose, has permitted the extension of cold ischemic time up to 20 h; however, 12 h may be a more reasonable limit. Improved techniques for harvesting multiple organs from the same donor have increased the availability of donor livers, but the availability of donor livers is far outstripped by the demand. Currently in the United States, all donor livers are distributed through a nationwide organ-sharing network (United Network for Organ Sharing [UNOS]) designed to allocate available organs based on regional considerations and recipient acuity. Recipients who have the highest disease severity generally have the highest priority, but allocation strategies that balance highest urgency against best outcomes continue to evolve to distribute cadaver organs most effectively. Allocation based on the Child-Turcotte-Pugh (CTP) score, which uses five clinical variables (encephalopathy stage, ascites, bilirubin, albumin, and prothrombin time) and waiting time, has been replaced by allocation based on urgency alone, calculated by the Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) score. The MELD score is based on a mathematical model that includes bilirubin, creatinine, and prothrombin time expressed as international normalized ratio (INR) (Table 368-3). Neither waiting time (except as a tie breaker between two potential recipients with the same MELD scores) nor posttransplantation outcome is taken into account, but use of the MELD score
# Chunk 4768
2070 has been shown to reduce waiting list mortality, to reduce waiting time prior to transplantation, to be the best predictor of pretransplantation mortality, to satisfy the prevailing view that medical need should be the decisive determinant, and to eliminate both the subjectivity inherent in the CTP scoring system (presence and degree of ascites and hepatic encephalopathy) and the differences in waiting times among different regions of the country. Recent data indicate that liver recipients with MELD scores <15 experienced higher posttransplantation mortality rates than similarly classified patients who remained on the wait list. This observation led to the modification of UNOS policy to allocate donor organs to candidates with MELD scores exceeding 15 within the local or regional procurement organization before offering the organ to local patients whose scores are <15. In addition, serum sodium, another important predictor of survival in liver transplantation candidates, is taken into consideration in allocating donor livers. The highest priority (status 1) continues to be reserved for patients with fulminant hepatic failure or primary graft nonfunction. Because candidates for liver transplantation who have HCC may not be sufficiently decompensated to compete for donor organs based on urgency criteria alone, and because protracted waiting for cadaver donor organs often results in tumor growth beyond acceptable limits for transplantation, such patients are assigned disease-specific MELD points (Table 368–3). Other disease-specific MELD exceptions include portopulmonary hypertension, hepatopulmonary syndrome, familial amyloid polyneuropathy, primary hyperoxaluria (necessitating liver-kidney transplantation), cystic fibrosis liver disease, and highly selected cases of hilar cholangiocarcinoma.
# Chunk 4769
Living donor transplantation can reduce waiting time and coldischemia time; is done under elective, rather than emergency, circumstances; and may be lifesaving in recipients who cannot afford to wait for a cadaver donor. The downside, of course, is the risk to the healthy donor (a mean of 10 weeks of medical disability; biliary complications in ~5%; postoperative complications such as wound infection, small-bowel obstruction, and incisional hernias in 9–19%; and even, in 0.2–0.4%, death) as well as the increased frequency of biliary (15–32%) and vascular (10%) complications in the recipient. Potential donors must participate voluntarily without coercion, and transplantation teams should go to great lengths to exclude subtle coercive or inappropriate psychological factors as well as outline carefully to both donor and recipient the potential benefits and risks of the procedure. Donors for the procedure should be 18–60 years old; have a compatible blood type with the recipient; have no chronic medical problems or history of major abdominal surgery; be related genetically or emotionally to the recipient; and pass an exhaustive series of clinical, biochemical, and serologic evaluations to unearth disqualifying medical disorders. The recipient should meet the same UNOS criteria for liver transplantation as recipients of a cadaver donor allograft. Comprehensive outcome data on adult-to-adult living donor liver transplantation are being collected (www.nih-a2all.org).
# Chunk 4770
Removal of the recipient’s native liver is technically difficult, particularly in the presence of portal hypertension with its associated collateral circulation and extensive varices and especially in the presence of scarring from previous abdominal operations. The combination of portal hypertension and coagulopathy (elevated prothrombin time and thrombocytopenia) may translate into large blood product transfusion requirements. After the portal vein and infrahepatic and suprahepatic inferior vena cavae are dissected, the hepatic artery and common bile duct are dissected. Then the native liver is removed and the donor organ inserted. During the anhepatic phase, coagulopathy, hypoglycemia, hypocalcemia, and hypothermia are encountered and must be managed by the anesthesiology team. Caval, portal vein, hepatic artery, and bile duct anastomoses are performed in succession, the last by end-to-end suturing of the donor and recipient common bile ducts (Fig. 368-1) or by choledochojejunostomy to a Roux-en-Y loop if the recipient common bile duct cannot be used for reconstruction (e.g., in sclerosing cholangitis). A typical transplant operation lasts 8 h, with a range of 6–18 h. Because of excessive bleeding, large volumes of blood, blood products, and volume expanders may be required during surgery; however, blood requirements have fallen sharply with improvements in surgical technique, blood-salvage interventions, and experience.
# Chunk 4771
Hepatic dysfunction after liver transplantation is similar to the hepatic complications encountered after major abdominal and cardiothoracic surgery; however, in addition, hepatic complications include primary graft failure, vascular compromise, failure or stricture of the biliary anastomoses, and rejection. As in nontransplantation surgery, postoperative jaundice may result from prehepatic, intrahepatic, and posthepatic sources. Prehepatic sources represent the massive hemoglobin pigment load from transfusions, hemolysis, hematomas, ecchymoses, and other collections of blood. Early intrahepatic liver injury includes effects of hepatotoxic drugs and anesthesia; hypoperfusion injury associated with hypotension, sepsis, and shock; and benign postoperative cholestasis. Late intrahepatic sources of liver injury include exacerbation of primary disease. Posthepatic sources of hepatic dysfunction include biliary obstruction and reduced renal clearance of conjugated bilirubin. Hepatic complications unique to liver transplantation include primary graft failure associated with ischemic injury to the organ during harvesting; vascular compromise associated with thrombosis or stenosis of the portal vein or hepatic artery anastomoses; vascular anastomotic leak; stenosis, obstruction, or leakage of the anastomosed common bile duct; recurrence of primary hepatic disorder (see below); and rejection.
# Chunk 4772
Despite the use of immunosuppressive drugs, rejection of the transplanted liver still occurs in a proportion of patients, beginning 1–2 weeks after surgery. Clinical signs suggesting rejection are fever, right upper quadrant pain, and reduced bile pigment and volume. Leukocytosis may occur, but the most reliable indicators are increases in serum bilirubin and aminotransferase levels. Because these tests lack specificity, distinguishing among rejection, biliary obstruction, primary graft nonfunction, vascular compromise, viral hepatitis, CMV infection, drug hepatotoxicity, and recurrent primary disease may be difficult. Radiographic visualization of the biliary tree and/or percutaneous liver biopsy often help to establish the correct diagnosis. 2073 Morphologic features of acute rejection include a mixed portal cellular infiltrate, bile duct injury, and/or endothelial inflammation (“endothelialitis”); some of these findings are reminiscent of graft-versus-host disease, primary biliary cirrhosis, or recurrent allograft hepatitis C. As soon as transplant rejection is suspected, treatment consists of IV methylprednisolone in repeated boluses; if this fails to abort rejection, many centers use thymoglobulin or OKT3. Caution should be exercised when managing acute rejection with pulse glucocorticoids or OKT3 in patients with HCV infection, because of the high risk of triggering recurrent allograft hepatitis C.
# Chunk 4773
The survival rate for patients undergoing liver transplantation has improved steadily since 1983. One-year survival rates have increased from ~70% in the early 1980s to 85–90% from 2003 to the present time. Currently, the 5-year survival rate exceeds 60%. An important observation is the relationship between clinical status before transplantation and outcome. For patients who undergo liver transplantation when their level of compensation is high (e.g., still working or only partially disabled), a 1-year survival rate of >85% is common. For those whose level of decompensation mandates continuous in-hospital care prior to transplantation, the 1-year survival rate is ~70%, whereas for those who are so decompensated that they require life support in an intensive care unit, the 1-year survival rate is ~50%. Since the adoption by UNOS in 2002 of the MELD system for organ allocation, posttransplantation survival has been found to be affected adversely for candidates with MELD scores >25, considered high disease severity. Thus, irrespective of allocation scheme, high disease severity before transplantation corresponds to diminished posttransplantation survival. Another important distinction in survival has been drawn between highand low-risk patient categories. For patients who do not fit any “high-risk” designations, 1-year and 5-year survival rates of 85 and 80%, respectively, have been recorded. In contrast, among patients in high-risk categories—cancer, fulminant hepatitis, age >65, concurrent renal failure, respirator dependence, portal vein thrombosis, and history of a portacaval shunt or multiple right upper quadrant operations—survival statistics fall into the range of 60% at 1 year and 35% at 5 years. Survival after retransplantation for primary graft non-function is ~50%. Causes of failure of liver transplantation vary with time. Failures within the first 3 months result primarily from technical complications, postoperative infections, and hemorrhage. Transplant failures after the first 3 months are more likely to result from infection, rejection, or recurrent disease (such as malignancy or viral hepatitis).
# Chunk 4774
Features of autoimmune hepatitis, primary sclerosing cholangitis, and primary biliary cirrhosis overlap with those of rejection or post-transplantation bile duct injury. Whether autoimmune hepatitis and sclerosing cholangitis recur after liver transplantation is controversial; data supporting recurrent autoimmune hepatitis (in up to one-third of patients in some series) are more convincing than those supporting recurrent sclerosing cholangitis. Similarly, reports of recurrent primary biliary cirrhosis after liver transplantation have appeared; however, the histologic features of primary biliary cirrhosis and chronic rejection are virtually indistinguishable and occur as frequently in patients with 2074 primary biliary cirrhosis as in patients undergoing transplantation for other reasons. The presence of a florid inflammatory bile duct lesion is highly suggestive of the recurrence of primary biliary cirrhosis, but even this lesion can be observed in acute rejection. Hereditary disorders such as Wilson’s disease and α1-antitrypsin deficiency have not recurred after liver transplantation; however, recurrence of disordered iron metabolism has been observed in some patients with hemochromatosis. Hepatic vein thrombosis (Budd-Chiari syndrome) may recur; this can be minimized by treating underlying myeloproliferative disorders and by anticoagulation. Because cholangiocarcinoma recurs almost invariably, few centers now offer transplantation to such patients; however, a few highly selected patients with operatively confirmed stage I or II cholangiocarcinoma who undergo liver transplantation combined with neoadjuvant chemoradiation may experience excellent outcomes. In patients with intrahepatic HCC who meet criteria for transplantation, 1and 5-year survivals are similar to those observed in patients undergoing liver transplantation for nonmalignant disease. Finally, metabolic disorders such as nonalcoholic steatohepatitis recur frequently, especially if the underlying metabolic predisposition is not altered. The metabolic syndrome occurs commonly after liver transplantation as a result of recurrent nonalcoholic fatty liver, immunosuppressive medications, and/or, in patients with hepatitis C related to the impact of HCV infection on insulin resistance, diabetes and fatty liver. Hepatitis A can recur after transplantation for fulminant hepatitis A, but such acute reinfection has no serious clinical sequelae. In fulminant hepatitis B, recurrence is not the rule; however, in the absence of any prophylactic measures, hepatitis B usually recurs after transplantation for end-stage chronic hepatitis B. Before the introduction of prophylactic antiviral therapy, immunosuppressive therapy sufficient to prevent allograft rejection led inevitably to marked increases in hepatitis B viremia, regardless of pretransplantation levels. Overall graft and patient survival were poor, and some patients experienced a rapid recapitulation of severe injury—severe chronic hepatitis or even fulminant hepatitis—after transplantation. Also recognized in the era before availability of antiviral regimens was fibrosing cholestatic hepatitis, rapidly progressive liver injury associated with marked hyperbilirubinemia, substantial prolongation of the prothrombin time (both out of proportion to relatively modest elevations of aminotransferase activity), and rapidly progressive liver failure. This lesion has been suggested to represent a “choking off” of the hepatocyte by an overwhelming density of HBV proteins. Complications such as sepsis and pancreatitis were also observed more frequently in patients undergoing liver transplantation for hepatitis B prior to the introduction of antiviral therapy. The introduction of long-term prophylaxis with HBIg revolutionized liver transplantation for chronic hepatitis B. Preoperative hepatitis B vaccination, preoperative or postoperative interferon (IFN) therapy, or short-term (≤2 months) HBIg prophylaxis has not been shown to be effective, but a retrospective analysis of data from several hundred European patients followed for 3 years after transplantation has shown that long-term (≥6 months) prophylaxis with HBIg is associated with a lowering of the risk of HBV reinfection from ~75 to 35% and a reduction in mortality from ~50 to 20%. As a result of long-term HBIg use following liver transplantation for chronic hepatitis B, similar improvements in outcome have been observed in the United States, with 1-year survival rates between 75% and 90%. Currently, with HBIg prophylaxis, the outcome of liver transplantation for chronic hepatitis B is indistinguishable from that for chronic liver disease unassociated with chronic hepatitis B; essentially, medical concerns regarding liver transplantation for chronic hepatitis B have been eliminated. Passive immunoprophylaxis with HBIg is begun during the anhepatic stage of surgery, repeated daily for the first 6 postoperative days, and then continued with infusions that are given either at regular intervals of 4–6 weeks or, alternatively, when anti-hepatitis B surface (HBs) levels fall below a threshold of 100 mIU/mL. The current approach in most centers is to continue HBIg indefinitely, which can add approximately $20,000 per year to the cost of care; some centers are evaluating regimens that shift to less frequent administration or to IM administration in the late posttransplantation period or, in low-risk patients, maintenance with antiviral therapy (see below) alone. Still, “breakthrough” HBV infection occasionally occurs.
# Chunk 4775
Further improving the outcome of liver transplantation for chronic hepatitis B is the current availability of such antiviral drugs as lamivudine, adefovir, entecavir, and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (Chap. 362). When these drugs are administered to patients with decompensated liver disease, a proportion improve sufficiently to postpone imminent liver transplantation. In addition, antiviral therapy can be used to prevent recurrence of HBV infection when administered prior to transplantation; to treat hepatitis B that recurs after transplantation, including in patients who break through HBIg prophylaxis; and to reverse the course of otherwise fatal fibrosing cholestatic hepatitis. Clinical trials have shown that lamivudine antiviral therapy reduces the level of HBV replication substantially, sometimes even resulting in clearance of hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg); reduces alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels; and improves histologic features of necrosis and inflammation. Long-term use of lamivudine is safe and effective, but after several months, a proportion of patients become resistant to lamivudine, resulting from YMDD (tyrosine-methionine-aspartate-aspartate) mutations in the HBV polymerase motif (Chap. 362). In approximately one-half of such resistant patients, hepatic deterioration may ensue. Fortunately, adefovir and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate are available as well and can be used to treat lamivudine-associated YMDD variants, effectively “rescuing” patients experiencing hepatic decompensation after lamivudine breakthrough. Currently, most liver transplantation centers combine HBIg plus lamivudine, adefovir, entecavir, or tenofovir disoproxil fumarate. In low-risk patients with no detectable hepatitis B viremia at the time of transplantation, a number of clinical trials have suggested that antiviral prophylaxis can suffice, without HBIg or with a finite duration of HBIg, to prevent recurrent HBV infection of the allograft. Antiviral prophylactic approaches applied to patients undergoing liver transplantation for chronic hepatitis B are being used as well for patients without hepatitis B who receive organs from donors with antibody to hepatitis B core antigen (anti-HBc). Patients who undergo liver transplantation for chronic hepatitis B plus D are less likely to experience recurrent liver injury than patients undergoing liver transplantation for hepatitis B alone; still, such co-infected patients would also be offered standard posttransplantation prophylactic therapy for hepatitis B.
# Chunk 4776
Accounting for up to 40% of all liver transplantation procedures, the most common indication for liver transplantation is end-stage liver disease resulting from chronic hepatitis C. Recurrence of HCV infection after liver transplantation can be documented in almost every patient. The clinical consequences of recurrent hepatitis C are limited during the first 5 years after transplantation. Nonetheless, despite the relative clinical benignity of recurrent hepatitis C in the early years after liver transplantation, and despite the negligible impact on patient survival during these early years, histologic studies have documented the presence of moderate to severe chronic hepatitis in more than one-half of all patients and cirrhosis in ~20% at 5 years. Allograft cirrhosis is even more common, occurring in up to two-thirds of patients at 5 years, if moderate hepatitis is detected in a 1-year liver biopsy. Not surprisingly, then, for patients undergoing liver transplantation for hepatitis C, allograft and patient survival are diminished substantially between 5 and 10 years after transplantation.
# Chunk 4777
Gallstones are formed because of abnormal bile composition. They are divided into two major types: cholesterol stones and pigment stones. Cholesterol stones account for more than 90% of all gallstones in Western industrialized countries. Cholesterol gallstones usually contain >50% cholesterol monohydrate plus an admixture of calcium salts, bile pigments, proteins, and fatty acids. Pigment stones are composed primarily of calcium bilirubinate; they contain <20% cholesterol and are classified into “black” and “brown” types, the latter forming secondary to chronic biliary infection.
# Chunk 4778
CHAPTER 369 Diseases of the Gallbladder and Bile Ducts 2078 not recur for at least 2 years. In 60%, biliary sludge disappeared and reappeared; in 14%, gallstones (8% asymptomatic, 6% symptomatic) developed; and in 6%, severe biliary pain with or without acute pancreatitis occurred. In 12 patients, cholecystectomies were performed, 6 for gallstone-associated biliary pain and 3 in symptomatic patients with sludge but without gallstones who had prior attacks of pancreatitis; the latter did not recur after cholecystectomy. It should be emphasized that biliary sludge can develop with disorders that cause gallbladder hypomotility; i.e., surgery, burns, total parenteral nutrition, pregnancy, and oral contraceptives—all of which are associated with gallstone formation. However, the presence of biliary sludge implies supersaturation of bile with either cholesterol or calcium bilirubinate. Two other conditions are associated with cholesterol-stone or biliary-sludge formation: pregnancy and rapid weight reduction through a very-low-calorie diet. There appear to be two key changes during pregnancy that contribute to a “cholelithogenic state”: (1) a marked increase in cholesterol saturation of bile during the third trimester and (2) sluggish gallbladder contraction in response to a standard meal, resulting in impaired gallbladder emptying. That these changes are related to pregnancy per se is supported by several studies that show reversal of these abnormalities quite rapidly after delivery. During pregnancy, gallbladder sludge develops in 20–30% of women and gallstones in 5–12%. Although biliary sludge is a common finding during pregnancy, it is usually asymptomatic and often resolves spontaneously after delivery. Gallstones, which are less common than sludge and frequently associated with biliary colic, may also disappear after delivery because of spontaneous dissolution related to bile becoming unsaturated with cholesterol postpartum. Approximately 10–20% of persons with rapid weight reduction achieved through very-low-calorie dieting develop gallstones. In a study involving 600 patients who completed a 3-month, 520-kcal/d diet, UDCA in a dosage of 600 mg/d proved highly effective in preventing gallstone formation; gallstones developed in only 3% of UDCA recipients, compared to 28% of placebo-treated patients. In obese patients treated by gastric banding, 500 mg/d of UDCA reduced the risk of gallstone formation from 30% to 8% within a follow-up of 6 months. To summarize, cholesterol gallstone disease occurs because of several defects, which include (1) bile supersaturation with cholesterol, (2) nucleation of cholesterol monohydrate with subsequent crystal retention and stone growth, and (3) abnormal gallbladder motor function with delayed emptying and stasis. Other important factors known to predispose to cholesterol-stone formation are summarized in Table 369-1.
# Chunk 4779
The plain abdominal film may detect gallstones containing sufficient calcium to be radiopaque (10–15% of cholesterol and ∼50% of pigment stones). Plain radiography may also be of use in the diagnosis of emphysematous cholecystitis, porcelain gallbladder, limey bile, and gallstone ileus.
# Chunk 4780
Biliary colic begins quite suddenly and may persist with severe intensity for 30 min to 5 h, subsiding gradually or rapidly. It is steady rather than intermittent, as would be suggested by the word colic, which must be regarded as a misnomer, although it is in widespread use. An episode of biliary pain persisting beyond 5 h should raise the suspicion of acute cholecystitis (see below). Nausea and vomiting frequently accompany episodes of biliary pain. An elevated level of serum bilirubin and/or alkaline phosphatase suggests a common duct stone. Fever or chills (rigors) with biliary pain usually imply a complication, i.e., cholecystitis, pancreatitis, or cholangitis. Complaints of short-lasting, vague epigastric fullness, dyspepsia, eructation, or flatulence, especially following a fatty meal, should not be confused with biliary pain. Such symptoms are frequently elicited from patients with or without gallstone disease
# Chunk 4781
In carefully selected patients with a functioning gallbladder and with radiolucent stones <10 mm in diameter, complete dissolution can be achieved in ∼50% of patients within 6 months to 2 years. For good results within a reasonable time period, this therapy should be limited to radiolucent stones smaller than 5 mm in diameter. The dose of UDCA should be 10–15 mg/kg per day. Stones larger than 10 mm in size rarely dissolve. Pigment stones are not responsive to UDCA therapy. Probably ≤10% of patients with symptomatic cholelithiasis are candidates for such treatment. However, in addition to the vexing problem of recurrent stones (30–50% over 3–5 years of follow-up), there is also the factor of taking an expensive drug for up to 2 years. The advantages and success of laparoscopic cholecystectomy have largely reduced the role of gallstone dissolution to patients who wish to avoid or are not candidates for elective cholecystectomy. However, patients with cholesterol gallstone disease who develop recurrent choledocholithiasis after cholecystectomy should be on long-term treatment with UDCA.
# Chunk 4782
A low-grade fever is characteristically present, but shaking chills or rigors are not uncommon. The RUQ of the abdomen is almost invariably tender to palpation. An enlarged, tense gallbladder is palpable in 25–50% of patients. Deep inspiration or cough during subcostal palpation of the RUQ usually produces increased pain and inspiratory arrest (Murphy’s sign). Localized rebound tenderness in the RUQ is common, as are abdominal distention and hypoactive bowel sounds from paralytic ileus, but generalized peritoneal signs and abdominal rigidity are usually lacking, in the absence of perforation.
# Chunk 4783
Diseases of the Gallbladder and Bile Ducts 2082 thought to predispose to fistula formation by gradual erosion through the gallbladder fundus. Diagnostic confirmation may occasionally be found on the plain abdominal film (e.g., small-intestinal obstruction with gas in the biliary tree and a calcified, ectopic gallstone) or following an upper gastrointestinal series (cholecystoduodenal fistula with small-bowel obstruction at the ileocecal valve). Laparotomy with stone extraction (or propulsion into the colon) remains the procedure of choice to relieve obstruction. Evacuation of large stones within the gallbladder should also be performed. In general, the gallbladder and its attachment to the intestines should be left alone.
# Chunk 4784
Overall, cholecystectomy is a very successful operation that provides total or near-total relief of preoperative symptoms in 75–90% of patients. The most common cause of persistent postcholecystectomy symptoms is an overlooked symptomatic nonbiliary disorder (e.g., reflux esophagitis, peptic ulceration, pancreatitis, or—most often— irritable bowel syndrome). In a small percentage of patients, however, a disorder of the extrahepatic bile ducts may result in persistent symptomatology. These so-called postcholecystectomy syndromes may be due to (1) biliary strictures, (2) retained biliary calculi, (3) cystic duct stump syndrome, (4) stenosis or dyskinesia of the sphincter of Oddi, or (5) bile salt–induced diarrhea or gastritis.
# Chunk 4785
Choledochal Cysts Cystic dilatation may involve the free portion of the 2083 CBD, i.e., choledochal cyst, or may present as diverticulum formation in the intraduodenal segment. In the latter situation, chronic reflux of pancreatic juice into the biliary tree can produce inflammation and stenosis of the extrahepatic bile ducts leading to cholangitis or biliary obstruction. Because the process may be gradual, ∼50% of patients present with onset of symptoms after age 10. The diagnosis may be made by ultrasound, abdominal CT, MRC, or cholangiography. Only one-third of patients show the classic triad of abdominal pain, jaundice, and an abdominal mass. Ultrasonographic detection of a cyst separate from the gallbladder should suggest the diagnosis of choledochal cyst, which can be confirmed by demonstrating the entrance of extrahepatic bile ducts into the cyst. Surgical treatment involves excision of the “cyst” and biliary-enteric anastomosis. Patients with choledochal cysts are at increased risk for the subsequent development of cholangiocarcinoma.
# Chunk 4786
Diseases of the Gallbladder and Bile Ducts 2084 obstructive JaunDice Gradual obstruction of the CBD over a period of weeks or months usually leads to initial manifestations of jaundice or pruritus without associated symptoms of biliary colic or cholangitis. Painless jaundice may occur in patients with choledocholithiasis, but is much more characteristic of biliary obstruction secondary to malignancy of the head of the pancreas, bile ducts, or ampulla of Vater. In patients whose obstruction is secondary to choledocholithiasis, associated chronic calculous cholecystitis is very common, and the gallbladder in this setting may be unable to distend. The absence of a palpable gallbladder in most patients with biliary obstruction from duct stones is the basis for Courvoisier’s law, i.e., that the presence of a palpably enlarged gallbladder suggests that the biliary obstruction is secondary to an underlying malignancy rather than to calculous disease. Biliary obstruction causes progressive dilatation of the intra-hepatic bile ducts as intrabiliary pressures rise. Hepatic bile flow is suppressed, and reabsorption and regurgitation of conjugated bilirubin into the bloodstream lead to jaundice accompanied by dark urine (bilirubinuria) and light-colored (acholic) stools. CBD stones should be suspected in any patient with cholecystitis whose serum bilirubin level is >85.5 μmol/L (5 mg/dL). The maximum bilirubin level is seldom >256.5 μmol/L (15.0 mg/dL) in patients with choledocholithiasis unless concomitant hepatic or renal disease or another factor leading to marked hyperbilirubinemia exists. Serum bilirubin levels ≥342.0 μmol/L (20 mg/dL) should suggest the possibility of neoplastic obstruction. The serum alkaline phosphatase level is almost always elevated in biliary obstruction. A rise in alkaline phosphatase often precedes clinical jaundice and may be the only abnormality in routine liver function tests. There may be a twoto tenfold elevation of serum aminotransferases, especially in association with acute obstruction. Following relief of the obstructing process, serum aminotransferase elevations usually return rapidly to normal, while the serum bilirubin level may take 1–2 weeks to return to normal. The alkaline phosphatase level usually falls slowly, lagging behind the decrease in serum bilirubin.
# Chunk 4787
pancreatitis The most common associated entity discovered in patients with nonalcoholic acute pancreatitis is biliary tract disease. Biochemical evidence of pancreatic inflammation complicates acute cholecystitis in 15% of cases and choledocholithiasis in >30%, and the common factor appears to be the passage of gallstones through the common duct. Coexisting pancreatitis should be suspected in patients with symptoms of cholecystitis who develop (1) back pain or pain to the left of the abdominal midline, (2) prolonged vomiting with paralytic ileus, or (3) a pleural effusion, especially on the left side. Surgical treatment of gallstone disease is usually associated with resolution of the pancreatitis.
# Chunk 4788
TRAUMA, STRICTURES, AND HEMOBILIA

Most benign strictures of the extrahepatic bile ducts result from surgical trauma and occur in about 1 in 500 cholecystectomies. Strictures may present with bile leak or abscess formation in the immediate postoperative period or with biliary obstruction or cholangitis as long as 2 years or more following the inciting trauma. The diagnosis is established by percutaneous or endoscopic cholangiography. Endoscopic brushing of biliary strictures may be helpful in establishing the nature of the lesion and is more accurate than bile cytology alone. When positive exfoliative cytology is obtained, the diagnosis of a neoplastic stricture is established. This procedure is especially important in patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) who are predisposed to the development of cholangiocarcinomas. Successful operative correction of non-PSC bile duct strictures by a skillful surgeon with duct-to-bowel anastomosis is usually possible, although mortality rates from surgical complications, recurrent cholangitis, or secondary biliary cirrhosis are high.
# Chunk 4789
Immunoglobulin G4 (IgG4)–associated cholangitis is a recently described biliary disease of unknown etiology that presents with biochemical and cholangiographic features indistinguishable from PSC, is often associated with autoimmune pancreatitis and other fibrosing conditions, and is characterized by elevated serum IgG4 and infiltration of IgG4-positive plasma cells in bile ducts and liver tissue. In contrast to PSC, it is not associated with inflammatory bowel disease and should be suspected if associated with increased serum IgG4 and unexplained pancreatic disease. Glucocorticoids are regarded as the initial treatment of choice. Relapse is common after steroid withdrawal, especially with proximal strictures. Long-term treatment with glucocorticoids and/or azathioprine may be needed after relapse or for inadequate response (Chap. 371).
# Chunk 4790
Patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis often present with signs and symptoms of chronic or intermittent biliary obstruction: RUQ abdominal pain, pruritus, jaundice, or acute cholangitis. Late in the course, complete biliary obstruction, secondary biliary cirrhosis, hepatic failure, or portal hypertension with bleeding varices may occur. The diagnosis is usually established by finding multifocal, diffusely distributed strictures with intervening segments of normal or dilated ducts, producing a beaded appearance on cholangiography (Fig. 369-2D). The cholangiographic techniques of choice in suspected 2086 cases are MRCP and ERCP. When a diagnosis of sclerosing cholangitis has been established, a search for associated diseases, especially for chronic inflammatory bowel disease, should be carried out. A recent study describes the natural history and outcome for 305 patients of Swedish descent with primary sclerosing cholangitis; 134 (44%) of the patients were asymptomatic at the time of diagnosis and, not surprisingly, had a significantly higher survival rate. The independent predictors of a bad prognosis were advanced age, serum bilirubin concentration, and liver histologic changes. Cholangiocarcinoma was found in 24 patients (8%). Inflammatory bowel disease was closely associated with primary sclerosing cholangitis and had a prevalence of 81% in this study population. Small duct PSC is defined by the presence of chronic cholestasis and hepatic histology consistent with PSC but with normal findings on cholangiography. Small duct PSC is found in ∼5% of patients with PSC and may represent an earlier stage of PSC associated with a significantly better long-term prognosis. However, such patients may progress to classic PSC and/or end-stage liver disease with consequent necessity of liver transplantation. In patients with AIDS, cholangiopancreatography may demonstrate a broad range of biliary tract changes as well as pancreatic duct obstruction and occasionally pancreatitis (Chap. 226). Further, biliary tract lesions in AIDS include infection and cholangiopancreatographic changes similar to those of PSC. Changes noted include: (1) diffuse involvement of intrahepatic bile ducts alone, (2) involvement of both intraand extrahepatic bile ducts, (3) ampullary stenosis, (4) stricture of the intrapancreatic portion of the CBD, and (5) pancreatic duct involvement. Associated infectious organisms include Cryptosporidium, Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare, cytomegalovirus, Microsporidia, and Isospora. In addition, acalculous cholecystitis occurs in up to 10% of patients. ERCP sphincterotomy, while not without risk, provides significant pain reduction in patients with AIDS-associated papillary stenosis. Secondary sclerosing cholangitis may occur as a long-term complication of choledocholithiasis, cholangiocarcinoma, operative or traumatic biliary injury, or contiguous inflammatory processes.
# Chunk 4791
Therapy with cholestyramine may help control symptoms of pruritus, and antibiotics are useful when cholangitis complicates the clinical picture. Vitamin D and calcium supplementation may help prevent the loss of bone mass frequently seen in patients with chronic cholestasis. Glucocorticoids, methotrexate, and cyclosporine have not been shown to be efficacious in PSC. UDCA in high dosage (20 mg/kg) improves serum liver tests, but an effect on survival has not been documented. In cases where high-grade biliary obstruction (dominant strictures) has occurred, balloon dilatation or stenting may be appropriate. Only rarely is surgical intervention indicated. Efforts at biliary-enteric anastomosis or stent placement may, however, be complicated by recurrent cholangitis and further progression of the stenosing process. The prognosis is unfavorable, with a median survival of 9–12 years following the diagnosis, regardless of therapy. Four variables (age, serum bilirubin level, histologic stage, and splenomegaly) predict survival in patients with PSC and serve as the basis for a risk score. PSC is one of the most common indications for liver transplantation.
# Chunk 4792
The diagnosis of acute pancreatitis is generally clearly defined based on a combination of laboratory, imaging, and clinical symptoms. The diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis, especially in mild disease, is hampered by the relative inaccessibility of the pancreas to direct examination and the nonspecificity of the abdominal pain associated with chronic pancreatitis. Many patients with chronic pancreatitis do not have elevated blood amylase or lipase levels. Some patients with chronic pancreatitis develop signs and symptoms of pancreatic exocrine insufficiency, and thus, objective evidence for pancreatic disease can be demonstrated. However, there is a very large reservoir of pancreatic exocrine function. More than 90% of the pancreas must be damaged before maldigestion of fat and protein is manifested. Noninvasive, indirect tests of pancreatic exocrine function (fecal elastase) are much more likely to give abnormal results in patients with obvious advanced pancreatic disease (i.e., pancreatic calcification, steatorrhea, or diabetes mellitus) than in patients with occult disease. Invasive, direct tests of pancreatic secretory function (secretin tests) are the most sensitive and specific tests to detect early chronic pancreatic disease when imaging is equivocal or normal.
# Chunk 4793
Pancreatic Enzymes in Body Fluids The serum amylase and lipase levels are widely used as screening tests for acute pancreatitis in the patient with acute abdominal pain or back pain. Values greater than three times the upper limit of normal in combination with epigastric pain strongly suggest the diagnosis if gut perforation or infarction is excluded. In acute pancreatitis, the serum amylase and lipase are usually elevated within 24 h of onset and remain so for 3–7 days. Levels usually return to normal within 7 days unless there is pancreatic ductal disruption, ductal obstruction, or pseudocyst formation. Approximately 85% of patients with acute pancreatitis have a threefold or greater elevated serum lipase and amylase levels. The values may be
# Chunk 4794
Diagnostic accuracy best if value is <100 mg/g performed on a solid stool normal if (1) there is a delay (of 2–5 days) before blood samples are obtained, (2) the underlying disorder is chronic pancreatitis rather than acute pancreatitis, or (3) hypertriglyceridemia is present. Patients with hypertriglyceridemia and proven pancreatitis have been found to have spuriously low levels of amylase and perhaps lipase activity. In the absence of objective evidence of pancreatitis by abdominal ultrasound, CT scan, MRCP, or EUS, mild to moderate elevations of amylase and/ or lipase are not helpful in making a diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis.
# Chunk 4795
Elevation of ascitic fluid amylase occurs in acute pancreatitis as well as in (1) ascites due to disruption of the main pancreatic duct or a leaking pseudocyst and (2) other abdominal disorders that simulate pancreatitis (e.g., intestinal obstruction, intestinal infarction, or perforated peptic ulcer). Elevation of pleural fluid amylase can occur in acute pancreatitis, chronic pancreatitis, carcinoma of the lung, and esophageal perforation. Lipase is the single best enzyme to measure for the diagnosis of acute pancreatitis. No single blood test is reliable for the diagnosis of acute pancreatitis in patients with renal failure. Pancreatic enzyme elevations are usually less than three times the upper limit of normal. Determining whether a patient with renal failure and abdominal pain has pancreatitis remains a difficult clinical problem. One study found that serum amylase levels were elevated in patients with renal dysfunction only when creatinine clearance was <0.8 mL/s (<50 mL/min). In such patients, the serum amylase level was invariably <500 IU/L in the absence of objective evidence of acute pancreatitis. In that study, serum lipase and trypsin levels paralleled serum amylase values. With these limitations in mind, the recommended screening test for acute pancreatitis in renal disease is serum lipase.
# Chunk 4796
Ultrasonography (US) can provide important information in patients with acute pancreatitis, chronic pancreatitis, pseudocysts, and pancreatic carcinoma. Echographic appearances can indicate the presence of edema, inflammation, and calcification (not obvious on plain films of the abdomen), as well as pseudocysts, mass lesions, and gallstones. In acute pancreatitis, the pancreas is characteristically enlarged. In pancreatic pseudocyst, the usual appearance is primarily that of smooth, round fluid collection. Pancreatic carcinoma distorts the usual landmarks, and mass lesions >3.0 cm are usually detected as localized, solid lesions. US is often the initial investigation for most patients with suspected pancreatic disease. However, obesity and excess smalland large-bowel gas can interfere with pancreatic imaging by US studies.
# Chunk 4797
Recent U.S. estimates from the National Inpatient Sample report that acute pancreatitis is the most common inpatient principal gastrointestinal diagnosis. The incidence of acute pancreatitis also varies in different countries and depends on cause (e.g., alcohol, gallstones, metabolic factors, drugs [Table 371-1]). The annual incidence ranges from 13–45/100,000 persons. Acute pancreatitis results in >250,000 hospitalizations per year. The median length of hospital stay is 4 days, with a median hospital cost of $6,096 and a mortality of 1%. The estimated cost annually approaches $2.6 billion. Hospitalization rates increase with age, are 88% higher among blacks, and are higher among males than females. The age-adjusted rate of hospital discharges with an acute pancreatitis diagnosis increased 62% between 1988 and 2004. From 2000 to 2009, the rate increased 30%. Thus, acute pancreatitis is increasing and is a significant burden on health care costs and resource utilization.
# Chunk 4798
Several recent studies have suggested that pancreatitis is a disease that evolves in three phases. The initial phase is characterized by intrapancreatic digestive enzyme activation and acinar cell injury. Trypsin activation appears to be mediated by lysosomal hydrolases such as cathepsin B that become colocalized with digestive enzymes in intracellular organelles; it is currently believed that acinar cell injury is the consequence of trypsin activation. The second phase of pancreatitis involves the activation, chemoattraction, and sequestration of leukocytes and macrophages in the pancreas, resulting in an enhanced intrapancreatic inflammatory reaction. Neutrophil depletion induced by prior administration of an antineutrophil serum has been shown to reduce the severity of experimentally induced pancreatitis. There is also evidence to support the concept that neutrophils can activate trypsinogen. Thus, intrapancreatic acinar cell activation of trypsinogen could be a two-step process (i.e., an early neutrophil-independent and a later neutrophil-dependent phase). The third phase of pancreatitis is due to the effects of activated proteolytic enzymes and cytokines, released by the inflamed pancreas, on distant organs. Activated proteolytic enzymes, especially trypsin, not only digest pancreatic and peripancreatic tissues but also activate other enzymes such as elastase and phospholipase A2. The active enzymes and cytokines then digest cellular membranes and cause proteolysis, edema, interstitial hemorrhage, vascular damage, coagulation necrosis, fat necrosis, and parenchymal cell necrosis. Cellular injury and death result in the liberation of bradykinin peptides, vasoactive substances, and histamine that can produce vasodilation, increased vascular permeability, and edema with profound effects on many organs. The systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), as well as multiorgan failure, may occur as a result of this cascade of local and distant effects.
# Chunk 4799
Physical examination frequently reveals a distressed and anxious patient. Low-grade fever, tachycardia, and hypotension are fairly common. Shock is not unusual and may result from (1) hypovolemia secondary to exudation of blood and plasma proteins into the retroperitoneal space; (2) increased formation and release of kinin peptides, which cause vasodilation and increased vascular permeability; and (3) systemic effects of proteolytic and lipolytic enzymes released into the circulation. Jaundice occurs infrequently; when present, it usually is due to edema of the head of the pancreas with compression of the intrapancreatic portion of the common bile duct or passage of a biliary stone or sludge. Erythematous skin nodules due to subcutaneous fat necrosis may rarely occur. In 10–20% of patients, there are pulmonary findings, including basilar rales, atelectasis, and pleural effusion, the latter most frequently left sided. Abdominal tenderness and muscle rigidity are present to a variable degree, but compared with the intense pain, these signs may be less impressive. Bowel sounds are usually diminished or absent. An enlarged pancreas from acute fluid collection, walled off necrosis, or a pseudocyst may be palpable in the upper abdomen later in the course of the disease (i.e., 4–6 weeks). A faint blue discoloration around the umbilicus (Cullen’s sign) may occur as the result of hemoperitoneum, and a blue-red-purple or green-brown discoloration of the flanks (Turner’s sign) reflects tissue catabolism of hemoglobin from severe necrotizing pancreatitis with hemorrhage.
# Chunk 4800
Serum amylase and lipase values threefold or more above normal virtually clinch the diagnosis if gut perforation, ischemia, and infarction are excluded. Serum lipase is the preferred test. However, it should be noted that there is no correlation between the severity of pancreatitis and the degree of serum lipase and amylase elevations. After 3–7 days, even with continuing evidence of pancreatitis, total serum amylase values tend to return toward normal. However, pancreatic isoamylase and lipase levels may remain elevated for 7–14 days. It should be recognized that amylase elevations in serum and urine occur in many conditions other than pancreatitis (see Chap. 370, Table 370-2). Importantly, patients with acidemia (arterial pH ≤7.32) may have spurious elevations in serum amylase. This finding explains why patients with diabetic ketoacidosis may have marked elevations in serum amylase without any other evidence of acute pancreatitis. Serum lipase activity increases in parallel with amylase activity and is more specific than amylase. A serum lipase measurement can be instrumental in differentiating a pancreatic or nonpancreatic cause for hyperamylasemia. Leukocytosis (15,000–20,000 leukocytes/μL) occurs frequently. Patients with more severe disease may show hemoconcentration with hematocrit values >44% and/or prerenal azotemia with a blood urea nitrogen (BUN) level >22 mg/dL resulting from loss of plasma into the retroperitoneal space and peritoneal cavity.
# Chunk 4801
Source: Modified from P Banks et al: Gut 62:102, 2013.

an increased output of adrenal glucocorticoids and catecholamines. Hypocalcemia occurs in ~25% of patients, and its pathogenesis is incompletely understood. Although earlier studies suggested that the response of the parathyroid gland to a decrease in serum calcium is impaired, subsequent observations have failed to confirm this phenomenon. Intraperitoneal saponification of calcium by fatty acids in areas of fat necrosis occurs occasionally, with large amounts (up to 6.0 g) dissolved or suspended in ascitic fluid. Such “soap formation” may also be significant in patients with pancreatitis, mild hypocalcemia, and little or no obvious ascites. Hyperbilirubinemia (serum bilirubin >68 2093 mmoL or >4.0 mg/dL) occurs in ~10% of patients. However, jaundice is transient, and serum bilirubin levels return to normal in 4–7 days. Serum alkaline phosphatase and aspartate aminotransferase levels are also transiently elevated, and they parallel serum bilirubin values and may point to gallbladder-related disease or inflammation in the pancreatic head. Hypertriglyceridemia occurs in 5–10% of patients, and serum amylase levels in these individuals are often spuriously normal (Chap. 370). Approximately 5–10% of patients have hypoxemia (arterial PO2 ≤60 mmHg), which may herald the onset of ARDS. Finally, the electrocardiogram is occasionally abnormal in acute pancreatitis with ST-segment and T-wave abnormalities simulating myocardial ischemia.
# Chunk 4802
Any severe acute pain in the abdomen or back should suggest the possibility of acute pancreatitis. The diagnosis is established by two of the following three criteria: (1) typical abdominal pain in the epigastrium that may radiate to the back, (2) threefold or greater elevation in serum lipase and/or amylase, and (3) confirmatory findings of acute pancreatitis on cross-sectional abdominal imaging. Patients also have associated nausea, emesis, fever, tachycardia, and abnormal findings on abdominal examination. Laboratory studies may reveal leukocytosis, hypocalcemia, and hyperglycemia. Although not required for diagnosis, markers of severity may include hemoconcentration (hematocrit >44%), admission azotemia (BUN >22 mg/dL), SIRS, and signs of organ failure (Table 371-3).
# Chunk 4803
The differential diagnosis should include the following disorders: perforated viscus, especially peptic ulcer; (2) acute cholecystitis and biliary colic; (3) acute intestinal obstruction; (4) mesenteric vascular occlusion; (5) renal colic; (6) inferior myocardial infarction; (7) dissecting aortic aneurysm; (8) connective tissue disorders with vasculitis; pneumonia; and (10) diabetic ketoacidosis. It may be difficult to differentiate acute cholecystitis from acute pancreatitis, because an elevated serum amylase may be found in both disorders. Pain of biliary tract origin is more right sided or epigastric than periumbilical or left upper quadrant and can be more severe; ileus is usually absent. Ultrasound is helpful in establishing the diagnosis of cholelithiasis and cholecystitis. Intestinal obstruction due to mechanical factors can be differentiated from pancreatitis by the history of crescendo-decrescendo pain, findings on abdominal examination, and CT of the abdomen showing changes characteristic of mechanical obstruction. Acute mesenteric vascular occlusion is usually suspected in elderly debilitated patients with brisk leukocytosis, abdominal distention, and bloody diarrhea, confirmed by CT or magnetic resonance angiography. Vasculitides secondary to systemic lupus erythematosus and polyarteritis nodosa may be confused with pancreatitis, especially because pancreatitis may develop as a complication of these diseases. Diabetic ketoacidosis is often accompanied by abdominal pain and elevated total serum amylase levels, thus closely mimicking acute pancreatitis. However, the serum lipase level is not elevated in diabetic ketoacidosis.
# Chunk 4804
Markers of Severity During Hospitalization

Abbreviations: APACHE II, Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation II; BMI, body mass index; BISAP, Bedside Index of Severity in Acute Pancreatitis; BP, blood pressure; BUN, blood urea nitrogen; SIRS, systemic inflammatory response syndrome.
# Chunk 4805
Severity of Acute Pancreatitis Three severity classifications have also been defined: mild, moderately severe, and severe. Mild acute pancreatitis is without local complications or organ failure. Most patients with interstitial acute pancreatitis have mild pancreatitis. In mild acute pancreatitis, the disease is self-limited and subsides spontaneously, usually within 3–7 days after treatment is instituted. Oral intake can be resumed if the patient is hungry, has normal bowel function, and is without nausea and vomiting. Typically, a clear or full liquid diet has been recommended for the initial meal; however, a low-fat solid diet is a reasonable choice following recovery from mild acute pancreatitis.
# Chunk 4806
Imaging in Acute Pancreatitis Two types of pancreatitis are recognized on imaging as interstitial or necrotizing based on pancreatic perfusion. CT imaging is best evaluated 3–5 days into hospitalization when patients are not responding to supportive care to look for local complications such as necrosis. Recent studies report the overutilization of CT imaging in acute pancreatitis and its inability to be better than clinical judgment in the early days of acute pancreatitis management. The revised criteria also outline the terminology for local complications and fluid collections along with a CT imaging template to guide reporting of findings. Local morphologic features are summarized in Table 371-1. Interstitial pancreatitis occurs in 90–95% of admissions for acute pancreatitis and is characterized by diffuse gland enlargement, homogenous contrast enhancement, and mild inflammatory changes or peripancreatic stranding. Symptoms generally resolve with a week of hospitalization. Necrotizing pancreatitis occurs in 5–10% of acute pancreatitis admissions and does not evolve until several days of hospitalization. It is characterized by lack of pancreatic parenchymal enhancement by intravenous contrast agent and/ or presence of findings of peripancreatic necrosis. According to the revised Atlanta criteria, the natural history of pancreatic and peripancreatic necrosis is variable because it may remain solid or liquefy, remain sterile or become infected, and persist or disappear over time. CT identification of local complications, particularly necrosis, is critical in patients who are not responding to therapy because patients with infected and sterile necrosis are at greatest risk of mortality (Figs. 371-1B, 3712, and 371-3). The median prevalence of organ failure is 54% in necrotizing pancreatitis. The prevalence of organ failure is perhaps slightly higher in infected versus sterile necrosis. With single-organ system failure, the mortality is 3–10% but increases to 47% with multisystem organ failure.
# Chunk 4807
We will briefly describe the management of patients with acute pancreatitis from the time of diagnosis in the emergency ward to ongoing hospital admission and, finally, to time of discharge, highlighting salient features based on severity and complications. It is important to note that 85–90% of cases of acute pancreatitis are self-limited and subside spontaneously, usually within 3–7 days after initiation of treatment, and do not exhibit organ failure or local complications.
# Chunk 4808
Intravenous fluids of lactated Ringer’s or normal saline are initially bolused at 15–20 cc/kg (1050–1400 mL), followed by 3 mg/kg per hour (200–250 mL/h), to maintain urine output >0.5 cc/kg per hour. Serial bedside evaluations are required every 6–8 h to assess vital signs, oxygen saturation, and change in physical examination. Lactated Ringer’s solution has been shown to decrease systemic inflammation and may be a better crystalloid than normal saline. A targeted resuscitation strategy with measurement of hematocrit and BUN every 8–12 h is recommended to ensure adequacy of fluid resuscitation and monitor response to therapy, noting less aggressive resuscitation strategy may be needed in milder forms of pancreatitis. A rising BUN during hospitalization is not only associated with inadequate hydration but also higher in-hospital mortality.
# Chunk 4809
Special Considerations Based on Etiology A careful history, review of medications, selected laboratory studies (liver profile, serum triglycerides, serum calcium), and an abdominal ultrasound are recommended in the emergency ward to assess for etiologies that may impact acute management. An abdominal ultrasound is the initial imaging modality of choice and will evaluate the gallbladder and common duct and assess the pancreatic head.
# Chunk 4810
necrosis The management of necrosis requires a multidisciplinary team approach. Percutaneous aspiration of necrosis with Gram stain and culture should be performed if there are ongoing signs of possible pancreatic infection such as sustained leukocytosis, fever, or organ failure. There is currently no role for prophylactic antibiotics in necrotizing pancreatitis. It is reasonable to start broad-spectrum antibiotics in a patient who appears septic while awaiting the results of Gram stain and cultures. If cultures are negative, the antibiotics should be discontinued to minimize the risk of developing opportunistic or fungal superinfection. Repeated fine-needle aspiration and Gram stain with culture of pancreatic necrosis may be done every 5–7 days in the presence of persistent fever. Repeated CT or MRI imaging should also be considered with any change in clinical course to monitor for complications (e.g., thromboses, hemorrhage, abdominal compartment syndrome).
# Chunk 4811
Weight loss and new onset of diabetes may also occur. An obstructive pattern on liver tests is common (i.e., disproportionately elevated serum alkaline phosphatase and minimally elevated serum aminotransferases). Elevated serum levels of IgG4 provide a marker for the disease, particularly in Western populations. Serum IgG4 normally accounts for only 5–6% of the total IgG4 in healthy patients but is elevated to values >280 mg/dL in those with AIP. CT scans reveal abnormalities in the majority of patients and include diffuse enlargement, focal enlargement, and a distinct enlargement at the head of the pancreas. ERCP or MRCP reveals strictures in the bile duct in more than one-third of patients with AIP; these may include common bile duct strictures, intrahepatic bile duct strictures, or proximal bile duct strictures, with accompanying narrowing of the pancreatic portion of the bile duct. This has been termed autoimmune IgG4 cholangitis. Characteristic histologic findings include extensive lymphoplasmacytic infiltrates
# Chunk 4812
CliniCAl fEATuRES of AuToimmunE PAnCREATiTiS (AiP) • Mild symptoms, usually abdominal pain, but without frequent attacks of swelling and enlargement of the pancreas of patients present with either obstructive jaundice or a “mass” in the head of the pancreas mimicking carcinoma irregular narrowing of the pancreatic duct (MRCP or ERCP) levels of serum gamma globulins, especially IgG4 of other autoantibodies (ANA), rheumatoid factor (RF) occur with other autoimmune diseases: Sjögren’s syndrome, primary sclerosing cholangitis, ulcerative colitis, rheumatoid arthritis • Extrapancreatic bile duct changes such as stricture of the common bile • Glucocorticoids are effective in alleviating symptoms, decreasing size of the pancreas, and reversing histopathologic changes
# Chunk 4813
Glucocorticoids have shown efficacy in alleviating symptoms, decreasing the size of the pancreas, and reversing histopathologic features in patients with AIP. Patients may respond dramatically to glucocorticoid therapy within a 2to 4-week period. Prednisone is usually administered at an initial dose of 40 mg/d for 4 weeks followed by a taper of the daily dosage by 5 mg/wk based on monitoring of clinical parameters. Relief of symptoms, serial changes in abdominal imaging of the pancreas and bile ducts, decreased serum γ-globulin and IgG4 levels, and improvements in liver tests are parameters to follow. A poor response to glucocorticoids over a 2to 4-week period should raise suspicion of pancreatic cancer or other forms of chronic pancreatitis. A recent multicenter international report reviewed 1064 patients with
# Chunk 4814
AIP. Clinical remission was achieved in 99% of type I and 92% of type II AIP patients with steroids. However, disease relapse occurred in 31% of type I and 9% of type II AIP patients. For treatment of disease relapse in type 1 AIP, glucocorticoids were successful in 201 of 295 (68%) patients, and azathioprine was successful in 52 of 58 patients (85%). A small number of patients responded favorably to 6-mercaptapurine, rituximab, cyclosporine, and cyclophosphamide. Types 1 and 2 AIP are highly responsive to initial glucocorticoid treatment. Relapse is common in type 1 patients, especially those with biliary tract strictures. Most relapses occur after glucocorticoids are discontinued. Patients with refractory symptoms and strictures generally require immunomodulator therapy as noted above. Appearance of interval cancers following a diagnosis of AIP is uncommon.
# Chunk 4815
The diagnosis of early or mild chronic pancreatitis can be challenging because there is no biomarker for the disease. In contrast to acute pancreatitis, the serum amylase and lipase levels are usually not strikingly elevated in chronic pancreatitis. Elevation of serum bilirubin and alkaline phosphatase may indicate cholestasis secondary to common bile duct stricture caused by chronic inflammation. Many patients have impaired glucose tolerance with elevated fasting blood glucose levels. The fecal elastase-1 and small-bowel biopsy are useful in the evaluation of patients with suspected pancreatic steatorrhea. The fecal elastase level will be abnormal and small-bowel histology will be normal in such patients. A decrease of fecal elastase level to <100 μg per gram of stool strongly suggests severe pancreatic exocrine insufficiency.
# Chunk 4816
Endoscopic treatment of chronic pancreatitis pain may involve 2101 sphincterotomy, stenting, stone extraction, and drainage of a pancreatic pseudocyst. Therapy directed to the pancreatic duct would seem to be most appropriate in the setting of a dominant stricture, especially if a ductal stone has led to obstruction. The use of endoscopic stenting for patients with chronic pain, but without a dominant stricture, has not been subjected to any controlled trials. It is now appreciated that significant complications can occur from stenting (i.e., bleeding, cholangitis, stent migration, pancreatitis, and stent clogging). In patients with large-duct disease usually from alcohol-induced chronic pancreatitis, ductal decompression with surgical therapy has been the therapy of choice. Among such patients, 80% seem to obtain immediate relief; however, at the end of 3 years, one-half of the patients have recurrence of pain. Two randomized prospective trials comparing endoscopic to surgical therapy for chronic pancreatitis demonstrated that surgical therapy was superior to endoscopy at decreasing pain and improving quality of life in selected patients with dilated ducts and abdominal pain. This would suggest that chronic pancreatitis patients with dilated ducts and pain should be considered for surgical intervention. The role of preoperative stenting prior to surgery as a predictor of response has yet to be proven.
# Chunk 4817
Hereditary pancreatitis is a rare disease that is similar to chronic pancreatitis except for an early age of onset and evidence of hereditary factors. A genomewide search using genetic linkage analysis identified the hereditary pancreatitis gene on chromosome 7. Mutations in ion codons 29 (exon 2) and 122 (exon 3) of the cationic trypsinogen gene cause autosomal dominant forms of hereditary pancreatitis. The codon 122 mutations lead to a substitution of the corresponding arginine with another amino acid, usually histidine. This substitution, when it occurs, eliminates a fail-safe trypsin self-destruction site necessary to eliminate trypsin that is prematurely activated within the acinar cell. These patients have recurring attacks of severe abdominal pain that may last from a few days to a few weeks. The serum amylase and lipase levels may be elevated during acute attacks but are usually normal. Patients frequently develop pancreatic calcification, diabetes mellitus, and steatorrhea; in addition, they have an increased incidence of pancreatic carcinoma, with the cumulative incidence being as high as 40% by age 70 years. A recent natural history study of hereditary pancreatitis in more than 200 patients from France reported that abdominal pain started in childhood at age 10 years, steatorrhea developed at age 29 years, diabetes at age 38 years, and pancreatic carcinoma at age 55 years. Such patients often require surgical ductal decompression for pain relief. Abdominal complaints in relatives of patients with hereditary pancreatitis should raise the question of pancreatic disease.
# Chunk 4818
In macroamylasemia, amylase circulates in the blood in a polymer form too large to be easily excreted by the kidney. Patients with this condition demonstrate an elevated serum amylase value and a low urinary amylase value. The presence of macroamylase can be documented by chromatography of the serum. The prevalence of macroamylasemia is 1.5% of the nonalcoholic general adult hospital population. Usually macroamylasemia is an incidental finding and is not related to disease of the pancreas or other organs. Macrolipasemia has now been documented in a few patients with cirrhosis or non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. In these patients, the pancreas appeared normal on ultrasound and CT examination. Lipase was shown to be complexed with immunoglobulin A. Thus, the possibility of both macroamylasemia and macrolipasemia should be considered in patients with elevated blood levels of these enzymes.
# Chunk 4819
Source: Compiled from T Kishimoto et al (eds): Leukocyte Typing VI. New York: Garland Publishing, 1997; R Brines et al: Immunology Today 18S:1, 1997; and S Shaw (ed): Protein reviews on the Web. http://mpr.nci.nih.gov/prow/.
# Chunk 4820
Mature T lymphocytes constitute 70–80% of normal peripheral blood lymphocytes (only 2% of the total-body lymphocytes are containedinperipheralblood),90%ofthoracicductlymphocytes,30–40% of lymph node cells, and 20–30% of spleen lymphoid cells. In lymph nodes, T cells occupy deep paracortical areas around B cell germinal centers, and in the spleen, they are located in periarteriolar areas of whitepulp(Chap. 79).Tcellsaretheprimaryeffectorsofcell-mediated immunity, withsubsetsofT cellsmaturing into CD8+ cytotoxic Tcells capable of lysis of virus-infected or foreign cells (short-lived effector T cells) and CD4+ T cells capable of T cell help for CD8+ T cell and B cell development. Two populations of long-lived memory T cells are triggered by infections: effector memory and central memory T cells.
# Chunk 4821
B CELLS Mature B cells constitute 10–15% of human peripheral blood lymphocytes, 20–30% of lymph node cells, 50% of splenic lymphocytes, and ~10% of bone marrow lymphocytes. B cells express on their surface intramembrane immunoglobulin (Ig) molecules that function as B cell receptors (BCRs) for antigen in a complex of Ig-associated α and β signaling molecules with properties similar to those described in T cells (Fig. 372e-8). Unlike T cells, which recognize only processed peptide fragments of conventional antigens embedded in the notches of MHC class I and class II antigens of APCs, B cells are capable of
# Chunk 4822
Introduction to the Immune System

Autoantigen Autoimmune Diseases Autoantigen Autoimmune Diseases Cellor Organ-Specific Autoimmunity Acetylcholine receptor Myasthenia gravis Insulin receptor Type B insulin resistance, acanthosis, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) Actin Chronic active hepatitis, primary biliary cirrhosis Intrinsic factor type 1 Pernicious anemia Adenine nucleotide translator (ANT) Dilated cardiomyopathy, myocarditis Leukocyte function-associated antigen (LFA-1) Treatment-resistant Lyme arthritis β-Adrenoreceptor Dilated cardiomyopathy Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 (APS-1) Myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG) Polyneuropathy Asialoglycoprotein receptor Autoimmune hepatitis Myelin-basic protein Multiple sclerosis, demyelinating diseases Bactericidal/permeability-increasing protein (Bpi) Cystic fibrosis vasculitides Myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) Multiple sclerosis Calcium-sensing receptor Acquired hypoparathyroidism Myosin Rheumatic fever Cholesterol side-chain cleavage enzyme (CYPlla) Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome-1 p-80-Collin Atopic dermatitis Collagen type IV-α3-chain Goodpasture’s syndrome Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex-E2 (PDC-E2) Primary biliary cirrhosis Cytochrome P450 2D6 (CYP2D6) Autoimmune hepatitis Desmin Crohn’s disease, coronary artery disease Sodium iodide symporter (NIS) Graves’ disease, autoimmune hypothyroidism Desmoglein 1 Pemphigus foliaceus Desmoglein 3 Pemphigus vulgaris SOX-10 Vitiligo F-actin Autoimmune hepatitis Thyroid and eye muscle shared protein Thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy GM gangliosides Guillain-Barré syndrome Glutamate decarboxylase (GAD65) Type 1 diabetes, stiff-person syndrome Thyroglobulin Autoimmune thyroiditis Glutamate receptor (GLUR) Rasmussen encephalitis Thyroid peroxidase Autoimmune Hashimoto’s thyroiditis H/K ATPase Autoimmune gastritis Thyrotropin receptor Graves’ disease 17-α-Hydroxylase (CYP17) Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome-1 Tissue transglutaminase Celiac disease 21-Hydroxylase (CYP21) Addison’s disease Transcription coactivator p75 Atopic dermatitis IA-2 (ICA512) Type 1 diabetes Tryptophan hydroxylase Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome-1 Insulin Type 1 diabetes, insulin hypoglycemic syndrome (Hirata’s disease) Tyrosinase Tyrosine hydroxylase Vitiligo, metastatic melanoma Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome-1 Systemic Autoimmunity ACTH ACTH deficiency Histone H2A-H2B-DNA Systemic lupus erythematosus Aminoacyl-tRNA histidyl synthetase Myositis, dermatomyositis IgE receptor Chronic idiopathic urticaria Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase (several) Polymyositis, dermatomyositis Keratin Rheumatoid arthritis Cardiolipin Systemic lupus erythematosus, antiphospholipid syndrome Ku-DNA-protein kinase Systemic lupus erythematosus Carbonic anhydrase II Systemic lupus erythematosus, Sjögren’s syndrome, systemic sclerosis Ku-nucleoprotein La phosphoprotein (La 55-B) Connective tissue syndrome Sjögren’s syndrome Collagen (multiple types) Rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, progressive systemic sclerosis Myeloperoxidase Necrotizing and crescentic glomerulo-nephritis (NCGN), systemic vasculitis Centromere-associated proteins Systemic sclerosis Proteinase 3 (PR3) Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s), Churg-Strauss syndrome DNA-dependent nucleoside-stimulated ATPase Dermatomyositis RNA polymerase I–III (RNP) Systemic sclerosis, systemic lupus erythematosus Fibrillarin Scleroderma Signal recognition protein (SRP54) Polymyositis Fibronectin Systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, morphea Topoisomerase-1 (Scl-70) Scleroderma, Raynaud’s syndrome Glucose-6-phosphate isomerase Rheumatoid arthritis Tublin Chronic liver disease, visceral leishmaniasis β2-Glycoprotein I (B2-GPI) Primary antiphospholipid syndrome Golgin (95, 97, 160, 180) Heat shock protein Sjögren’s syndrome, systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis Various immune-related disorders Vimentin Systemic autoimmune disease Hemidesmosomal protein 180 Bullous pemphigoid, herpes gestationis, cicatricial pemphigoid taBle 372e 13 recomBInant or purIfIed autoantIgenS recognIzed By autoantIBodIeS aSSocIated wIth human autoImmune dISorderS
# Chunk 4823
The third stage of leukocyte emigration in HEVs is sticking and arrest. Sticking of the lymphocyte to endothelial cells and arrest at the site of sticking are mediated predominantly by ligation of a1β2 integrin LFA-1 to the integrin ligand ICAM-1 on HEVs. Whereas the first three stages of lymphocyte attachment to HEVs take only a few seconds, the fourth stage of lymphocyte emigration, transendothelial migration,takes ~10min.Althoughthemolecularmechanismsthatcontrol lymphocyte transendothelial migration are not fully characterized, the HEV CD44 molecule and molecules of the HEV glycocalyx (extracellular matrix) are thought to play important regulatory roles in this process (Fig. 372e-11). Finally, expression of matrix metalloproteases 1. Tethering and rolling 2. Chemokine signal 3. Arrest 4. Polarization and diapedesis 5. Junctional rearrangement 6. Proteolysis 8. DC migration to draining LN 7. Interstitial migration Cytokine-stimulated parenchymal cell Damaged or inflamed tissue Basement membrane Lymph vessel DC Blood vesssel lumen
# Chunk 4824
Many therapies for autoimmune and inflammatory diseases involve the use of nonspecific immune-modulating or immunosuppressive agents such as glucocorticoids or cytotoxic drugs. The goal of development of new treatments for immune-mediated diseases is to design ways to specifically interrupt pathologic immune responses, leaving nonpathologic immune responses intact. Novel ways to interrupt pathologic immune responses that are under investigation include the use of anti-inflammatory cytokines or specific cytokine inhibitors as anti-inflammatory agents, the use of monoclonal antibodies against T or B lymphocytes as therapeutic agents, the use of intravenous Ig for certain infections and immune complex–mediated diseases, the use of specific cytokines to reconstitute components of the immune system, and bone marrow transplantation to replace the pathogenic immune system with a more normal immune system (Chaps. 80, 374, and 226). In particular, the use of a monoclonal antibody to B cells (rituximab, anti-CD20 MAb) is approved in the United States for the treatment of non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (Chap. 134) and, in combination with methotrexate, for treatment of adult patients with severe rheumatoid arthritis resistant to TNF-α inhibitors (Chap. 380). The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved the use of CTLA-4 antibodies in 2010 to block T cell anergy for use in cancer immunotherapy, and it was the first agent to demonstrate survival benefit in patients with advanced melanoma. Early-stage clinical trials have now shown that PD-1 blockade to reverse T cell exhaustion can induce tumor regression.
# Chunk 4825
It is important to realize the potential risks of these immunosuppressive monoclonal antibodies. Natalizumab is a humanized IgG antibody against an a4 integrin that inhibits leukocyte migration into tissues and has been approved for treatment of multiple sclerosis in the United States. Both it and anti-CD20 (rituximab) have been associated with the onset of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML)—a serious and usually fatal CNS infection caused by JC polyomavirus. Efalizumab, a humanized IgG monoclonal antibody previously approved for treatment of plaque psoriasis, has now been taken off the market due to reactivation of JC virus leading to fatal PML. Thus, use of any currently approved immunosuppressant immunotherapies should be undertaken with caution and with careful monitoring of patients according to FDA guidelines.
# Chunk 4826
Although the associations of human disease with particular HLA alleles or haplotypes predominantly involve the class II region, there are also several prominent disease associations with class I alleles. These include the association of Behçet’s disease (Chap. 387) with HLA-B51, psoriasis vulgaris (Chap. 71) with HLA-Cw6, and, most notably, the spondyloarthritides (Chap. 384) with HLA-B27. Twenty-five HLA-B locus alleles, designated HLA-B*27:01–B*27:25, encode the family of 373e-7 B27 class I molecules. All of the subtypes share a common B pocket in the peptide-binding groove—a deep, negatively charged pocket that shows a strong preference for binding the arginine side chain. In addition, B27 is among the most negatively charged of HLA class I heavy chains, and the overall preference is for positively charged peptides. HLA-B*27:05 is the predominant subtype in whites and most other non-Asian populations, and this subtype is very highly associated with ankylosing spondylitis (AS) (Chap. 384), both in its idiopathic form and in association with chronic inflammatory bowel disease or psoriasis vulgaris. It is also associated with reactive arthritis (ReA) (Chap. 384), with other idiopathic forms of peripheral arthritis (undifferentiated spondyloarthropathy), and with recurrent acute anterior uveitis. B27 is found in 50–90% of individuals with these conditions, compared with a prevalence of ∼7% in North American whites.
# Chunk 4827
absence of natural filtration of microbes in the blood, asplenia predisposes affected individuals to fulminant infections by encapsulated bacteria. Although most infections occur in the first years of life, cases may also arise in adulthood. The diagnosis is confirmed by abdominal ultrasonography and the detection of Howell-Jolly bodies in red blood cells. Effective prophylactic measures (twice-daily oral penicillin and appropriate vaccination programs) usually prevent fatal outcomes.
# Chunk 4828
Chronicgranulomatousdiseases(CGDs)arecharacterizedbyimpaired phagocytic killingofmicroorganismsby neutrophils and macrophages (Chap. 80). The incidence is approximately 1 per 200,000 live births. About 70% of cases are associated with X-linked recessive inheritance versusautosomalinheritanceintheremaining30%.CGDcausesdeeptissue bacterial and fungal abscesses in macrophage-rich organs such as the lymph nodes, liver, and lungs. Recurrent skin infections (such as folliculitis) are common and can promptan early diagnosis of CGD. The infectious agents are typically catalase-positive bacteria (such as Staphylococcus aureus and Serratia marcescens) but also include Burkholderia cepacia, pathogenic mycobacteria (in certain regions of the world), and fungi (mainly filamentous molds, such as Aspergillus).
# Chunk 4829
Severe Combined Immunodeficiencies Severe combined immunodefi-2107 ciencies (SCIDs) constitute a group of rare PIDs characterized by a profound block in T cell development and thus the complete absence of these cells. The developmental block is always the consequence of an intrinsic deficiency. The incidence of SCID is estimated to be 1 in 50,000 live births. Given the severity of the T cell deficiency, clinical consequences occur early in life (usually within 3 to 6 months of birth). The most frequent clinical manifestations are recurrent oral candidiasis, failure to thrive, and protracted diarrhea and/or acute interstitial pneumonitis caused by Pneumocystis jiroveci (although the latter can also be observed in the first year of life in children with B cell deficiencies). Severe viral infections or invasive bacterial infections can also occur. Patients may also experience complications related to infections caused by live vaccines (notably bacille Calmette-Guérin [BCG]) that may lead not only to local and regional infection but also to disseminated infection manifested by fever, splenomegaly, and skin and lytic bone lesions. A scaly skin eruption can be observed in a context of maternal T cell engraftment (see below). A diagnosis of SCID can be suspected based on the patient’s clinical history and, possibly, a family history of deaths in very young children (suggestive of either X-linked or recessive inheritance). Lymphocytopenia is strongly suggestive of SCIDinmorethan90%ofcases (Table 316-2).Theabsenceofathymic shadow on a chest x-ray can also be suggestive of SCID. An accurate diagnosis relies on precise determination of the number of circulating T, B, and NK lymphocytes and their subsets. T cell lymphopenia may be masked in some patients by the presence of maternal T cells ˜IFN, etc...
# Chunk 4830
Even with the most profound of B cell deficiencies, infections rarely occur before the age of 6 months; this is because of transient protection provided by the transplacental passage of immunoglobulins during the last trimester of pregnancy. Conversely, a genetically nonimmunodeficient child born to a mother with hypogammaglobulinemia is, in the absence of maternal Ig substitution, usually prone to severe bacterial infections in utero and for several months after birth.
# Chunk 4831
Hyper-IgM (HIGM) Syndromes HIGM is a rare B cell PID characterized by defective Ig CSR. It results in very low serum levels of IgG and IgA and elevated or normal serum IgM levels. The clinical severity is similar to that seen in agammaglobulinemia, although chronic lung disease and sinusitis are less frequent and enteroviral infections are uncommon. As discussed above, a diagnosis of HIGM involves screening for an X-linked CD40L deficiency and an autosomal recessive CD40 deficiency, which affect both B and T cells. In 50% of cases affecting only B cells, these isolated HIGM syndromes result from mutations in the gene encodingactivation-induceddeaminase,theproteinthatinducesCSRin B cell germinal centers. These patients usually have enlarged lymphoid organs. In the other 50% of cases, the etiology is unknown (except for rareUNGandPMS2deficiencies).Furthermore,IgM-mediatedautoimmunity and lymphomas can occur in HIGM syndrome. It is noteworthy that HIGM can result from fetal rubella syndrome or can be a predominant immunologic feature of other PIDs, such as the immunodeficiency associated with ectodermic anhydrotic hypoplasia X-linked NEMO deficiency and the combined T and B cell PIDs caused by DNA repair defects such as AT and Cernunnos deficiency.
# Chunk 4832
Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS) is characterized by nonmalignant T and B lymphoproliferation causing splenomegaly and enlargedlymphnodes;70%ofpatientsalsodisplayautoimmunemanifestations such as autoimmune cytopenias, Guillain-Barré syndrome, uveitis, and hepatitis (Chaps. 79 and 372e). A hallmark of ALPS is the presence of CD4–CD8– TCRαβ+ T cells (2–50%) in the blood of affectedindividuals.HypergammaglobulinemiainvolvingIgGandIgA is also frequently observed. The syndrome is caused by a defect in Fas-mediated apoptosis of lymphocytes, which can thus accumulate and mediate autoimmunity. Furthermore, ALPS can lead to malignancies.
# Chunk 4833
Proteoglycans • Globopentaosylceramide production that facilitate the immune response by direct initiation of cytokine generation from innate cell types such as basophils, mast cells, eosinophils, • Activation of matrix and others. The TH2 response is associated with activation of specific B cells that can also pres • Activation of coagulation cascade • GM-CSF • Augmented venular permeability for antibody production. Synthesis and release Activated mast cell • IL-13 • Leukocyte adherence into the plasma of allergen-specific IgE results in sensitization of FcεR1-bearing cells such as mast • TNF–° cells and basophils, which become activated on exposure to the specific allergen. In certain dis-FIGUrE 376-2 Bioactive mediators of three categories generated by IgE-dependent eases, including those associated with atopy, the activation of murine mast cells can elicit common but sequential target cell effects lead-monocyte and eosinophil populations can express ing to acute and sustained inflammatory responses. GM-CSF, granulocyte-macrophage a trimeric FcεR1, which lacks the β chain, and yet colony-stimulating factor; IL, interleukin; IFN, interferon; LT, leukotriene; PAF, platelet-respond to its aggregation. An additional recently activating factor; PGD2, prostaglandin D2; TNF, tumor necrosis factor. recognized class of c-kit-expressing innate cells chemokines. Bronchial biopsy specimens from patients with asthma 2115 reveal that mast cells are immunohistochemically positive for IL-4 and IL-5, but that the predominant localization of IL-4, IL-5, and GM-CSF is to T cells, defined as TH2 by this profile. IL-4 modulates the T cell phenotype to the TH2 subtype, determines the isotype switch to IgE (as does IL-13), and upregulates FcεRI-mediated expression of cytokines by mast cells based on in vitro studies.
# Chunk 4834
The materials capable of eliciting the systemic anaphylactic reaction in humans include the following: heterologous proteins in the form of hormones (insulin, vasopressin, parathormone); enzymes (trypsin, chymotrypsin, penicillinase, streptokinase); pollen extracts (ragweed, grass, trees); nonpollen allergen extracts (dust mites, dander of cats, dogs, horses, and laboratory animals); food (peanuts, milk, eggs, seafood, nuts, grains, beans, gelatin in capsules); monoclonal antibodies; occupation-related products (latex rubber products); Hymenoptera venom (yellow jacket, yellow and white-faced hornets, paper wasp, honey bee, imported fire ants); polysaccharides such as dextran and thiomersal as a vaccine preservative; drugs such as protamine; antibiotics (penicillins, cephalosporins, amphotericin B, nitrofurantoin, quinolones); chemotherapy agents (carboplatin, paclitaxel, doxorubicin); local anesthetics (procaine, lidocaine); muscle relaxants (suxamethonium, gallamine, pancuronium); vitamins (thiamine, folic acid); diagnostic agents (sodium dehydrocholate, sulfobromophthalein); biologics (omalizumab, rituximab, etanercept); and occupation-related chemicals (ethylene oxide). Drugs function as haptens that form immunogenic conjugates with host proteins. The conjugating hapten may be the parent compound, a nonenzymatically derived storage product, or a metabolite formed in the host. Recombinant biologics can also induce the formation of IgE against the proteins or against glycosylated structures that serve as immunogens. Most recently, outbreaks of anaphylaxis to the anti-epidermal growth factor antibody cetuximab were reported in association with elevated titers of serum IgE to alpha-1,3-galactose, an oligosaccharide found on certain nonprimate proteins. Alpha-galactose antibodies also account for some episodes of delayed anaphylaxis to beef, lamb, and pork.
# Chunk 4835
A different form of protection involves the development of blocking antibody of the IgG class, which protects against Hymenoptera venom– induced anaphylaxis by interacting with antigen so that less reaches the sensitized tissue mast cells. The maximal risk for systemic anaphylactic reactions in persons with Hymenoptera sensitivity occurs in association withacurrentlypositiveskintest.Althoughthereislittlecross-reactivity between honey bee and yellow jacket venoms, there is a high degree of cross-reactivity between yellow jacket venom and the rest of the vespid venoms (yellow or white-faced hornets and wasps). Prevention involves modification of outdoor activities to exclude bare feet, wearing perfumed toiletries, eating in areas attractive to insects, clipping hedges or grass, and hauling away trash or fallen fruit. As with each anaphylactic sensitivity, the individual should wear an informational bracelet and have immediate access to an unexpired autoinjectable epinephrine kit. Venom immunotherapy for 5 years can induce a state of resistance to sting reactions that is independent of serum levels of specific IgG or IgE. Forchildren under the ageof 10 with a systemic reaction limitedto skin, the likelihood of progression to more serious respiratory or vascular manifestations is low, and thus immunotherapy is not recommended.
# Chunk 4836
The classification of urticarial and angioedematous states presented in Table 376-1 in terms of possible mechanisms necessarily includes some differential diagnostic points. Hypocomplementemia is not observed in IgE-mediated mast cell disease and may reflect either an acquired abnormality generally attributed to the formation of immune complexes or a genetic or acquired deficiency of C1INH. Chronic recurrent urticaria, generally in females, associated with arthralgias, an elevated sedimentation rate, and normo-or hypocomplementemia suggests an underlying cutaneous necrotizing angiitis. Vasculitic urti-2119 cariatypicallypersistslongerthan 72h,whereasconventionalurticaria often has a duration of 12–36 h. Confirmation depends on a biopsy that reveals cellular infiltration, nuclear debris, and fibrinoid necrosis of the venules. The same pathobiologic process accounts for the urticariainassociationwith suchdiseasesassystemiclupus erythematosus or viral hepatitis with or without associated arteritis. Serum sickness per se or a similar clinical entity due to drugs includes not only urticaria but also pyrexia, lymphadenopathy, myalgia, and arthralgia or arthritis. Urticarial reactions to blood products or intravenous administration of immunoglobulin are defined by the event andgenerally are not progressive unless the recipient is IgA-deficient in the former case or the reagent is aggregated in the latter.
# Chunk 4837
The cutaneous lesions of urticaria pigmentosa are reddish-brown macules or papules that respond to trauma with urtication and erythema (Darier’s sign). The apparent incidence of these lesions is ≥80% in patients with ISM and <50% in those with SM-AHNMD or ASM. Approximately 1% of patients with ISM have skin lesions that appear as tan-brown macules with striking patchy erythema and associated telangiectasia (telangiectasia macularis eruptiva perstans). In the upper gastrointestinal tract, gastritis and peptic ulcer are significant problems. In the lower intestinal tract, the occurrence of diarrhea and abdominal pain is attributed to increased motility due to mast cell mediators; this problem can be aggravated by malabsorption, which can also cause secondary nutritional insufficiency and osteomalacia. The periportal fibrosis associated with mast cell infiltration and a prominence of eosinophils may lead to portal hypertension and ascites. In some patients, flushing and recurrent vascular collapse are markedly aggravated by an idiosyncratic response to a minimal dosage of NSAIDs. The neuropsychiatric disturbances are clinically most evident as impaired recent memory, decreased attention span, and “migraine-like” headaches. Patients may experience exacerbation of a specific clinical sign or symptom with alcohol ingestion, temperature changes, stress, use of mast cell–interactive narcotics, or ingestion of NSAIDs.
# Chunk 4838
Although the diagnosis of mastocytosis is generally suspected on the basis of the clinical history and physical findings, and can be supported by laboratory procedures, it can be established only by a tissue diagnosis. By convention, the diagnosis of systemic mastocytosis depends heavily on bone marrow biopsy to meet the criteria of one major plus one minor or three minor findings (Table 376-3). The bone marrow provides the major criterion by revealing aggregates of mast cells, often in paratrabecular and perivascular locations with lymphocytes and eosinophils, as well as the minor criteria of an abnormal mast cell morphology, an aberrant mast cell membrane immunophenotype, or a codon 816 mutation in any cell type. A serum total tryptase level
# Chunk 4839
The management of systemic mastocytosis uses a stepwise and symptom/sign–directed approach that includes an H1 antihistamine for flushing and pruritus, an H2 antihistamine or proton pump inhibitor for gastric acid hypersecretion, oral cromolyn sodium for diarrhea and abdominal pain, and aspirin for severe flushing with or without associated vascular collapse, despite use of H1 and H2 antihistamines, to block biosynthesis of PGD2. Systemic glucocorticoids appear to alleviate the malabsorption. Mast cell cytoreductive therapy consisting of IFN-α or cladribine is generally reserved for advanced, nonindolent variants of systemic mastocytosis. Their efficacy in ASM is variable, perhaps because of dosage limitations due to side effects. Chemotherapy is appropriate for the frank leukemias. A self-injectable epinephrine prescription is recommended for most patients due to increased incidence of anaphylaxis. Although c-kit is a receptor tyrosine kinase, the gain-in-function mutation of codon 816 is not susceptible to inhibition by imatinib mesylate.
# Chunk 4840
Although allergen avoidance is the most cost-effective means of managing allergic rhinitis, treatment with pharmacologic agents represents the standard approach to seasonal or perennial allergic rhinitis. Oral H1 antihistamines are effective for nasopharyngeal itching, sneezing, and watery rhinorrhea and for such ocular manifestations as itching, tearing, and erythema, but they are less efficacious for the nasal congestion. The older antihistamines are sedating, and they induce psychomotor impairment, including reduced eye-hand coordination and impaired automobile driving skills. Their anticholinergic (muscarinic) effects include visual disturbance, urinary retention, and constipation. Because the newer H1 antihistamines such as fexofenadine, loratadine, desloratadine, cetirizine, levocetirizine, olopatadine, bilastine, and azelastine are less lipophilic and more H1 selective, their ability to cross the blood-brain barrier is reduced, and thus their sedating and anticholinergic side effects are minimized. These newer antihistamines do not differ appreciably in efficacy for relief of rhinitis and/or sneezing. Azelastine nasal spray may benefit individuals with nonallergic vasomotor rhinitis, but it has an adverse effect of dysgeusia (taste perversion) in some patients. Because antihistamines have little effect on congestion, α-adrenergic agents such as phenylephrine or oxymetazoline are generally used topically to alleviate nasal congestion and obstruction. However, the duration of their efficacy is limited because of rebound rhinitis (i.e., 7-to 14-day use can lead to rhinitis medicamentosa) and such systemic responses as hypertension. Oral α-adrenergic agonist decongestants containing pseudoephedrine are standard for the management of nasal congestion, generally in combination with an antihistamine. While oral antihistamines typically reduce nasal and ocular symptoms by about one-third, pseudoephedrine must be added to achieve a similar reduction in nasal congestion. These pseudoephedrine combination products can cause insomnia and are precluded from use in patients with narrow angle glaucoma, urinary retention, severe hypertension, marked coronary artery disease, or a first-trimester pregnancy. The CysLT1 blocker montelukast is approved for treatment of both seasonal and perennial rhinitis, and it reduces both nasal and ocular symptoms by about 20%. Cromolyn sodium, a nasal spray, is essentially without side effects and is used prophylactically on a continuous basis during the season. Intranasal high-potency glucocorticoids are the most potent drugs available for the relief of established rhinitis, seasonal or perennial, and are effective in relieving nasal congestion. They provide efficacy with substantially reduced side effects as compared with this same class of agent administered orally. Their most frequent side effect is local irritation, with Candida overgrowth being a rare occurrence. The currently available intranasal glucocorticoids— beclomethasone, flunisolide, triamcinolone, budesonide, fluticasone propionate, fluticasone furoate, ciclesonide, and mometasone furoate—are equally effective for nasal symptom relief, including nasal congestion; these agents all achieve up to 70% overall symptom relief with some variation in the time period for onset of benefit. Topical ipratropium is an anticholinergic agent effective in reducing rhinorrhea, including that in patients with perennial symptoms, and it can be additionally efficacious when combined with intranasal glucocorticoids. Local treatment with cromolyn sodium is effective in treating mild allergic conjunctivitis. Topical antihistamines such as olopatadine, azelastine, ketotifen, or epinastine administered to the eye provide rapid relief of itching and redness and are more effective than oral antihistamines.
# Chunk 4841
Allergies, Anaphylaxis, and Systemic Mastocytosis 2124 signs. The duration of such immunotherapy is –5 years, with discontinuation being based on minimal symptoms over two consecutive seasons of exposure to the allergen. Clinical benefit appears related to the administration of a high dose of relevant allergen, advancing from weekly to monthly intervals. Patients should remain at the treatment site for at least 20 minutes after allergen administration so that any anaphylactic conseuence can be managed. Local reactions with erythema and induration are not uncommon and may persist for 1– days. Immunotherapy is contraindicated in patients with significant cardiovascular disease or unstable asthma and should be conducted with particular caution in any patient reuiring adrenergic blocking therapy because of the difficulty in managing an anaphylactic complication. The response to immunotherapy is associated with a complex of cellular and humoral effects that includes a modulation in T cell cytokine production. Immunotherapy should be reserved for clearly documented seasonal or perennial rhinitis that is clinically related to defined allergen exposure with confirmation by the presence of allergen-specific IgE. Systemic treatment with a monoclonal antibody to IgE (omalizumab) that blocks mast cell and basophil sensitization has efficacy for allergic rhinitis and can be used with immunotherapy to enhance safety and efficacy. However, current approval is only for treatment of patients with persistent allergic asthma not controlled by inhaled glucocorticoid therapy. A seuence for the management of allergic or perennial rhinitis based on an allergen-specific diagnosis and stepwise management as reuired for symptom control would include the following(1) identification of the offending allergen(s) by history with confirmation of the presence of allergen-specific IgE by skin test andor serum assay(2) avoidance of the offending allergenand () medical management in a stepwise fashion (Fig. 376-4). Mild intermittent symptoms of allergic rhinitis are treated with oral antihistamines, oral CysLT1 receptor antagonists, intranasal antihistamines, or intranasal cromolyn prophylaxis. Moderate to more severe allergic rhinitis is managed with intranasal glucocorticoids plus oral antihistamines, oral CysLT1 receptor antagonists, or antihistamine-decongestant combinations. Persistent allergic rhinitis reuiring the daily use of intranasal glucocorticoids with add-on interventions such as oral antihistamines, decongestant combinations, or topical ipratropium merits consideration of allergen-specific immunotherapy. Even a brief course of oral prednisone can be indicated for rapid relief of severe allergic rhinitis symptoms.
# Chunk 4842
Autoantibodies can also interfere with normal physiologic functions of cells or soluble factors. Autoantibodies to hormone receptors can lead to stimulation of cells or to inhibition of cell function through interference with receptor signaling. For example, long-acting thyroid stimulators—autoantibodies that bind to the receptor for thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)—are present in Graves’ disease and function as agonists, causing the thyroid to respond as if there were an excess of TSH. Alternatively, antibodies to the insulin receptor can cause insulin-resistant diabetes mellitus through receptor blockade. In myasthenia gravis, autoantibodies to the acetylcholine receptor can be detected in 85–90% of patients and are responsible for muscle weakness. The exact location of the antigenic epitope, the valence and affinity of the antibody, and perhaps other characteristics determine whether activation or blockade results from antibody binding.
# Chunk 4843
Several environmental stimuli may influence SLE (Fig. 378-1). Exposure to ultraviolet light causes flares of SLE in approximately 70% of patients, possibly by increasing apoptosis in skin cells or by altering DNA and intracellular proteins to make them antigenic. Some infections induce normal immune responses that involve certain T and B cells that recognize self-antigens; such cells are not appropriately regulated, and autoantibody production occurs. Most SLE patients have autoantibodies for 3 years or more before the first symptoms of disease, suggesting that regulation controls the degree of autoimmunity for years before quantities and qualities of autoantibodies and pathogenic B and T cells cause clinical disease. Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) may be one infectious agent that can trigger SLE in susceptible individuals. Children and adults with SLE are more likely to be infected by EBV than age-, sex-, and ethnicity-matched controls. EBV contains amino acid sequences that mimic sequences on human spliceosomes (RNA/protein antigens) often recognized by autoantibodies in people with SLE. Current tobacco smoking increases risk for SLE (odds ratio [OR] 1.5). Prolonged occupational exposure to silica (e.g., inhalation of soap powder dust or soil in farming activities) increases risk (OR 4.3) in African-American women. Thus, interplay between genetic susceptibility, environment, gender, and abnormal immune responses results in autoimmunity (Chap. 377e).
# Chunk 4844
ThediagnosisofSLEisbasedoncharacteristicclinicalfeaturesandautoantibodies. Current criteria for classification are listed in Table 378-3, and an algorithm for diagnosis and initial therapy is shown in Fig. 378-2. The criteria are intended for confirming the diagnosis of SLE in patients included in studies; the author uses them in individual patients for estimating the probability that a disease is SLE. Any combination of four or more criteria, with at least one in the clinical and one in the immunologic category, well documented at any time during an individual’s history, makes it likely that the patient has SLE. (Specificity and sensitivity are ~93% and ~92%, respectively.) In many patients, criteria accrue over time. Antinuclear antibodies (ANA) are positive in >98% of patients during the course of disease; repeated negative tests by immunofluorescent methods suggest that the diagnosis is not SLE, unless other autoantibodies are present (Fig. 378-2). High-titer IgG antibodies to double-stranded DNA and antibodies to the Sm antigen are both specific for SLE and, therefore, favor the diagnosis in the presence of compatible clinical manifestations. The
# Chunk 4845
Nephritis is usually the most serious manifestation of SLE, particularly because nephritis and infection are the leading causes of mortality in the first decade of disease. Because nephritis is asymptomatic in most lupus patients, urinalysis should be ordered in any person suspected of having SLE. The classification of lupus nephritis is primarily histologic (see “Pathology,” above, and Table 378-2). Renal biopsy is recommended for every SLE patient with any clinical evidence of nephritis; results are used to plan current andnear-futuretherapies.Patients withdangerous proliferative forms of glomerular damage (ISN III and IV) usually have microscopic hematuria and proteinuria (>500 mg per 24 h); approximately one-half develop nephrotic syndrome, and most develop hypertension. If diffuse proliferative glomerulonephritis (DPGN) is inadequately treated, virtually all patients develop ESRD within 2 years of diagnosis. Therefore, aggressive immunosuppressionisindicated(usuallysystemicglucocorticoids plus a cytotoxic drug), unless damage is irreversible (Fig. 378-2, Table 378-5). African Americans are more likely to develop ESRD than are whites, even with the most current therapies. Overall in the United States, ~20% ofindividualswithlupusDPGNdieordevelop ESRD within 10 years of diagnosis. Such individuals require aggressive control of SLE and of the complications of renal disease and of therapy. Approximately 20% of SLE patients with proteinuria (usually nephrotic) have membranous glomerular changes without proliferative changes on renal biopsy. Their outcome is better than for those with DPGN, but patients with class V and nephrotic range proteinuria should be treated in the same way as those with classes III or IV proliferative disease. Lupus nephritis tends to be an ongoing disease, with flares requiring re-treatment chronic dermatitis in lupus; lesions are roughly circular with slightly or increased treatment over many years. For most people with lupus raised, scaly hyperpigmented erythematous rims and depigmented, nephritis, accelerated atherosclerosis becomes important after several atrophic centers in which all dermal appendages are permanently years of disease; attention must be given to control of systemic inflamdestroyed. Lesions can be disfiguring, particularly on the face and mation, blood pressure, hyperlipidemia, and hyperglycemia. scalp. Treatment consists primarily of topical or locally injected glucocorticoids and systemic antimalarials. Only 5% of people with NErVOUS SYSTEM MaNIFESTaTIONS DLE have SLE (although half have positive ANA); however, among There are many central nervous system (CNS) and peripheral nerindividuals with SLE, as many as 20% have DLE. The most common vous system manifestations of SLE; in some patients, these are the acute SLE rash is a photosensitive, slightly raised erythema, occasion-major cause of morbidity and mortality. It is useful to approach ally scaly, on the face (particularly the cheeks and nose—the “butter-this diagnostically by asking first whether the symptoms result from fly” rash), ears, chin, V region of the neck and chest, upper back, and SLE or another condition (such as infection in immunosuppressed
# Chunk 4846
Abbreviations: ARDS, acute respiratory distress syndrome; TIA, transient ischemic attack.

individuals or side effects of therapies). If symptoms are related to 2129 SLE, it should be determined whether they are caused by a diffuse process (requiring immunosuppression) or vascular occlusive disease (requiring anticoagulation). The most common manifestation of diffuse CNS lupus is cognitive dysfunction, including difficulties with memory and reasoning. Headaches are also common. When excruciating, they often indicate SLE flare; when milder, they are difficult to distinguish from migraine or tension headaches. Seizures of any type may be caused by lupus; treatment often requires both antiseizure and immunosuppressive therapies. Psychosis can be the dominant manifestation of SLE; it must be distinguished from glucocorticoid-induced psychosis. The latter usually occurs in the first weeks of glucocorticoid therapy, at daily doses of ≥40 mg of prednisone or equivalent; psychosis resolves over several days after glucocorticoids are decreased or stopped. Myelopathy is not rare and is often disabling; rapid initiation ofimmunosuppressivetherapystartingwithhigh-doseglucocorticoids is standard of care.
# Chunk 4847
Glucocorticoids, orala (several specific brands are approved by FDA for use in SLE)

Methylprednisolone sodium succinate, IVa (FDA approved for lupus nephritis)
# Chunk 4848
Nausea, sometimes with vomiting, and diarrhea can be manifestations of an SLE flare, as can diffuse abdominal pain probably caused by autoimmune peritonitis and/or intestinal vasculitis. Increases in serum aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) are common when SLE is active. These manifestations usually improve promptly during systemic glucocorticoid therapy. Vasculitis involving the intestine may be life-threatening; perforations, ischemia, bleeding, and sepsis are frequent complications. Aggressive immunosuppressive therapy with high-doseglucocorticoidsis recommendedfor short-term control;evidenceofrecurrenceis anindicationforadditionaltherapies.
# Chunk 4849
Antiphospholipid antibodies are not specific for SLE, but their pres-2131 ence fulfills one classification criterion, and they identify patients at increased risk for venous or arterial clotting, thrombocytopenia, and fetal loss. There are three widely accepted tests that measure different antibodies (anticardiolipin, anti-β2-glycoprotein, and the lupus anticoagulant). ELISA is used for anticardiolipin and anti-β2-glycoprotein (both internationally standardized with good reproducibility); a sensitive phospholipid-based activated prothrombin time such as the dilute Russell venom viper test is used to identify the lupus anticoagulant. The higher the titers of IgG anticardiolipin (>40 IU is considered high), and the greater the number of different antiphospholipid antibodies that are detected, the greater is the risk for a clinical episode of clotting. Quantities of antiphospholipid antibodies may vary markedly over time; repeated testing is justified if clinical manifestations of the antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) appear (Chap. 379). To classify a patient as having APS, with or without SLE, by international criteria requires the presence of one or more clotting episodes and/or repeated fetal losses plus at least two positive tests for antiphospholipid anti bodies, at least 12 weeks apart; however, many patients with APS do not meet these stringent criteria, which are intended for inclusion of patients into studies.
# Chunk 4850
It is useful to follow tests that indicate the status of organ involvement known to be present during SLE flares. These might include urinalysis for hematuria and proteinuria, hemoglobin levels, platelet counts, and serum levels of creatinine or albumin. There is great interest in identification of additional markers of disease activity. Candidates include levels of anti-DNA and anti-C1q antibodies, several components of complement (C3 is most widely available), activated complement products (including those that bind to the C4d receptor on erythrocytes), IFN-inducible gene expression in peripheral blood cells, serum levels of BLyS (B lymphocyte stimulator, also called BAFF), and urinary levels of TNF-like weak inducer of apoptosis (TWEAK), neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL), or monocyte chemotactic protein1(MCP-1).Noneisuniformlyagreeduponasareliableindicator of flare or of response to therapeutic interventions. It is likely that a panelof multiple proteins willbe developed topredictbothimpending flare and response to recently instituted therapies. For now, the physician should determine for each patient whether certain laboratory test changes predict flare. If so, altering therapy in response to these changes may be advisable (30 mg of prednisone daily for 2 weeks has been shown to prevent flares in patients with rising anti-DNA plus falling complement). In addition, given the increased prevalence of atherosclerosis in SLE, it is advisable to follow the recommendations of the National Cholesterol Education Program for testing and treatment, including scoring of SLE as an independent risk factor, similar to diabetes mellitus.
# Chunk 4851
LIFE-THrEaTENING SLE: PrOLIFEraTIVE FOrMS OF LUPUS NEPHrITIS

Guidelines for management of lupus nephritis have been published recently by the American College of Rheumatology and the European LeagueAgainstRheumatism(encompassedandreferencedinFig. 378-2 andTable378-5).Themainstayoftreatmentforanyinflammatorylifethreatening or organ-threatening manifestations of SLE is systemic glucocorticoids(0.5–1mg/kgperdayPOor500–1000mgofmethylprednisolone sodium succinate IV daily for 3 days followed by 0.5–1 mg/kg of daily prednisone or equivalent). Evidence that glucocorticoid therapy is life-saving comes from retrospective studies from the predialysis era; survival was significantly better in people with DPGN treated with high-dose daily glucocorticoids (40–60 mg of prednisone daily for 4–6 months) versus lower doses. Currently, high doses are recommended for much shorter periods; recent trials of interventions for severe SLE use 4–6 weeks of 0.5–1 mg/kg per day of prednisone or equivalent. Thereafter, doses are tapered as rapidly as the clinical situation permits, usually to a maintenance dose ranging from 5 to 10 mg of prednisone or equivalent per day. Most patients with an episode of severe SLE require many years of maintenance therapy with low-dose glucocorticoids, which can be increased to prevent or treat disease flares. Frequent attempts to gradually reduce the glucocorticoid requirement are recommended because virtually everyone develops important adverse effects (Table 378-5). High-quality clinical studies regarding initiating therapy for severe, active SLE with IV pulses of high-dose glucocorticoids are not available. Most recent clinical trials in lupus nephritis have initiated therapy with high-dose IV glucocorticoid pulses (500–1000 mg daily for 3–5 days). This approach must be tempered by safety considerations, such as the presence of conditions adversely affected by glucocorticoids (e.g., infection, hyperglycemia, hypertension, osteoporosis).
# Chunk 4852
Cytotoxic/immunosuppressive agents added to glucocorticoids are recommended to treat serious SLE. Almost all prospective controlled trials in SLE involvingcytotoxicagentshavebeen conducted incombinationwithglucocorticoidsinpatientswithlupusnephritis.Therefore, the following recommendations apply to treatment of nephritis. Either cyclophosphamide (an alkylating agent) or mycophenolate mofetil (a relatively lymphocyte-specific inhibitor of inosine monophosphatase andthereforeofpurine synthesis)isan acceptablechoiceforinduction of improvement in severely ill patients; azathioprine (a purine analogue and cycle-specific antimetabolite) may be effective but is slower to influence response and associated with more flares. In patients whose renal biopsies show ISN grade III or IV disease, early treatment with combinations of glucocorticoids and cyclophosphamide reduces progression to ESRD and death. Shorter-term studies with glucocorticoids plus mycophenolate mofetil (prospective randomized trials of 6 months, follow-up studies of 36 months) show that this regimen is similar to cyclophosphamide in achieving improvement. Comparisons are complicated by effects of race, since higher proportions of African Americans (and other non-Asian, nonwhite races) respond to mycophenolate than to cyclophosphamide, whereas similar proportions of whitesandAsiansrespondtoeachdrug.Regardingtoxicity,diarrheais more common with mycophenolate mofetil; amenorrhea, leukopenia, and nausea are more common with cyclophosphamide. Importantly, rates of severe infections and death are similar in meta-analyses. Two different regimens of IV cyclophosphamide are available. For white patients with northern European backgrounds, low doses of cyclophosphamide (500 mg every 2 weeks for six total doses, followed by azathioprine or mycophenolate maintenance) are as effective as standard high doses, with less toxicity. Ten-year follow-up has shown no differences between the high-dose and low-dose groups (death or ESRD in 9–20% of patients in each group). The majority of the European patients were white; it is not clear whether the data apply to U.S. populations. High-dose cyclophosphamide (500–1000 mg/m2 body surface area given monthly IV for 6 months, followed by azathioprine or mycophenolate maintenance) is an acceptable approach for patients with severe nephritis (e.g., multiple cellular crescents and/or fibrinoid necrosis on renal biopsy, or rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis). Cyclophosphamide and mycophenolate responses begin 3–16 weeks after treatment is initiated, whereas glucocorticoid responses may begin within 24 h.
# Chunk 4853
For maintenance therapy, mycophenolate and azathioprine probably are similar in efficacy and toxicity; both are safer than cyclophosphamide. In a recently published multicenter study, mycophenolate was superior to azathioprine in maintaining renal function and survival in patients who responded to induction therapy with either cyclophosphamide or mycophenolate. The incidence of ovarian failure, a common effect of high-dose cyclophosphamide therapy (but probably not of low-dose therapy), can be reduced by treatment with a gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist (e.g., leuprolide 3.75 mg intramuscularly) prior to each monthly cyclophosphamide dose. Patients with high serum creatinine levels (e.g., ≥265 μmol/L [≥3.0 mg/dL]) many months in duration and high chronicity scores on renal biopsy are not likely to respond to any of these therapies. In general, it may be better to induce improvement in an African-American or Hispanic patient with proliferative glomerulonephritis with mycophenolate mofetil (2–3 g daily) rather than cyclophosphamide, with the option to switch if no evidence of response is detectable after 3–6 months of treatment. For whites and Asians, induction with either mycophenolate mofetil or cyclophosphamide is acceptable. Cyclophosphamide may be discontinued when it is clear that a patient is improving. The number of SLE flares is reduced by maintenance therapy with mycophenolate mofetil (1.5–2 g daily) or azathioprine (1–2.5 mg/kg per day). Both cyclophosphamide and mycophenolate mofetil are potentially teratogenic; patients should be off either medication for at least 3 months before attempting to conceive. Azathioprine can be used if necessary to control active SLE in patients who are pregnant. If azathioprine is used either for induction or maintenance therapy, patients may be prescreened for homozygous deficiency of the TMPT enzyme (which is required to metabolize the 6-mercaptopurine product of azathioprine) because they are at higher risk for bone marrow suppression.
# Chunk 4854
Good improvement occurs in ~80% of lupus nephritis patients receiving either cyclophosphamide or mycophenolate at 1–2 years of follow-up. However, in some studies, at least 50% of these individuals have flares of nephritis over the next 5 years, and re-treatment is required; such individuals are more likely to progress to ESRD. Long-term outcome of lupus nephritis to most interventions is better in whites than in African Americans. Methotrexate (a folinic acid antagonist) may have a role in the treatment of arthritis and dermatitis but probably not in nephritis or other life-threatening disease. Small controlled trials (in Asia) of leflunomide, a relatively lymphocyte-specific pyrimidine antagonist licensed for use in rheumatoid arthritis, have suggested it can suppress disease activity in some SLE patients. Cyclosporine and tacrolimus, which inhibit production of IL-2 and T lymphocyte functions, have not been studied in prospective controlled trials in SLE in the United States; several studies in Asia have shown they are effective in lupus nephritis. Because they have potential nephrotoxicity but little bone marrow toxicity, the author uses them for periods of a few months in patients with steroid-resistant cytopenias of SLE or in steroid-resistant patients who have developed bone marrow suppression from standard cytotoxic agents.
# Chunk 4855
Use of biologics directed against B cells for active SLE is under intense study. Use of anti-CD20 (rituximab), particularly in patients with SLE who are resistant to the more standard combination therapies discussed above, is controversial. Several open trials have shown efficacy in a majority of such patients, both for nephritis and for extrarenal lupus. However, recent prospective placebo-controlled randomized trials, one in renal and one in nonrenal SLE, did not show a difference between anti-CD20 and placebo when added to standard combination therapies. In contrast, recent trials of standard therapy plus belimumab (anti-BLyS, which binds soluble BLyS/BAFF, which is required for maturation of naïve and transitional B cells to plasma cellsandmemory Bcells) showed improvement in51%ofSLEpatients compared to 36% of those on placebo; these differences were statistically significant. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved belimumab for treatment of seropositive patients with SLE who have failed standard treatments. The belimumab trial did not includepatientswithactivenephritisorCNSdisease.Posthocanalyses have shown that the SLE patient most likely to respond to belimumab has fairly robust clinical activity (a Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Disease Activity Index [SLEDAI] score of ≥10), positive anti-DNA, and low serum complement. SLEDAI is a widely used measure of SLE diseaseactivity;scores>3reflectclinicallyactivedisease.Atthistime,it is useful to add belimumab to the therapeutic armamentarium in SLE, and it is clear that some patients benefit. However, its role in management of lupus nephritis is not yet known.
# Chunk 4856
Studies of highly targeted experimental therapies for SLE are in progress. They include targeting (1) activated B lymphocytes with anti-CD22 or TACI-Ig, (2) inhibition of IFN-α, (3) inhibition of B/T cell second signal coactivation with CTLA-Ig, (4) inhibition of innate immune activation via TLR7 or TLR7 and 9, (5) induction of regulatory T cells with peptides from immunoglobulins or autoantigens; (6) suppression of T cells, B cells, and monocyte/macrophages with laquinimod; and (7) inhibition of lymphocyte activation by blockade of Jak/Stat. A few studies have used vigorous untargeted immunosuppression with high-dose cyclophosphamide plus anti-T cell strategies, with rescue by transplantation of autologous hematopoietic stem cells forthetreatmentofsevereandrefractory SLE. OneU.S.report showed an estimated mortality rate over 5 years of 15% and sustained remission in 50%. It is hoped that in the next edition of this text, we will be able to recommend more effective and less toxic approaches to treatment of SLE based on some of these strategies.
# Chunk 4857
PaTIENT OUTCOMES, PrOGNOSIS, aND SUrVIVaL

Survival in patients with SLE in the United States, Canada, Europe, and China is approximately 95% at 5 years, 90% at 10 years, and 78% at 20 years. In the United States, African Americans and Hispanic Americans with a mestizo heritage have a worse prognosis than whites, whereas Africans in Africa and Hispanic Americans with a Puerto Rican origin do not. The relative importance of gene mixtures and environmental differences accounting for ethnic differences is not known. Poor prognosis (~50% mortality in 10 years) in most series is associated with (at the time of diagnosis) high serum creatinine levels (>124 μmol/L [>1.4 mg/dL]), hypertension, nephrotic syndrome (24-h urine protein excretion >2.6 g), anemia (hemoglobin <124 g/L [<12.4 g/dL]), hypoalbuminemia, hypocomplementemia, antiphospholipid antibodies, male sex, ethnicity (African American, Hispanic with mestizo heritage), and low socioeconomic status. Data regarding outcomes in SLE patients with renal transplants show mixed results: some series show a twofold increase in graft rejection compared to patients with other causes of ESRD, whereas others show no differences. Overall patient survival is comparable (85% at 2 years). Lupus nephritis occurs in approximately 10% of transplanted kidneys. Disability in patients with SLE is common due primarily to chronic fatigue, arthritis, and pain, as well as renal disease. As many as 25% of patients may experience remissions, sometimes for a few years, but these are rarely permanent. The leading causes of death in the first decade of disease are systemic disease activity, renal failure, and infections; subsequently, thromboembolic events become increasingly frequent causes of mortality.
# Chunk 4858
ThediagnosisofAPSshouldbeseriouslyconsideredincasesofthrombosis, cerebral vascular accidents in individuals younger than 55 years of age, or pregnancy morbidity in the presence of livedo reticularis or thrombocytopenia. In these cases, aPL antibodies should be measured. The presence of at least one clinical and one laboratory criterion ensures the diagnosis even in the presence of other causes of thrombophilia. Clinical criteria include: (1) vascular thrombosis defined as one ormoreclinicalepisodesofarterial,venous,orsmallvesselthrombosis in any tissue or organ; and (2) pregnancy morbidity, defined as (a) one or more unexplained deaths of a morphologically normal fetus at or beyond the tenth week of gestation; (b) one or more premature births of a morphologically normal neonate before the thirty-fourth week of gestation because of eclampsia, severe preeclampsia, or placental insufficiency; or (c) three or more unexplained consecutive spontaneous abortions before the tenth week of gestation. Laboratory criteria include (1) LA, (2) anticardiolipin (aCL), and/or (3) anti-β2GPI antibodies, at intermediate or high titers on two occasions, 12 weeks apart.
# Chunk 4859
After the first thrombotic event, APS patients should be placed on warfarin for life, aiming to achieve an international normalized ratio (INR) ranging from 2.5 to 3.5, alone or in combination with 80 mg of aspirin daily. Pregnancy morbidity is prevented by a combination of heparin with aspirin 80 mg daily. IV immunoglobulin (IVIg) 400 mg/ kg every day for 5 days may also prevent abortions, whereas glucocorticoids are ineffective. Patients with aPL in the absence of any clinical event who are simultaneously positive for aCL, anti-β2GPI, and LA or have SLE are at risk to develop thrombotic events and can be protected by aspirin 80 mg daily.
# Chunk 4860
Some patients with APS and patients with CAPS have recurrent thrombotic events despite appropriate anticoagulation. In these cases, IVIg 400 mg/kg every day for 5 days may be of benefit. Patients with CAPS, who are treated in the intensive care unit, are unable to receive warfarin; in this situation, therapeutic doses of low-molecular-weight heparin should be administered. In cases of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia and thrombosis syndrome, inhibitors of phospholipid-bound activated factor X (FXa), such as fondaparinux 7.5 mg SC daily or rivaroxaban 10 mg PO daily, are effective. The above drugs are administered by fixed doses and do not require close monitoring; their safety during the first trimester of pregnancy has not been clearly established.
# Chunk 4861
The incidence of RA increases between 25 and 55 years of age, after which it plateaus until the age of 75 and then decreases. The presenting symptoms of RA typically result from inflammation of the joints, tendons, and bursae. Patients often complain of early morning joint stiffness lasting more than 1 h that eases with physical activity. The earliest involved joints are typically the small joints of the hands and feet. The initial pattern of joint involvement may be monoarticular, oligoarticular (≤4 joints), or polyarticular (>5 joints), usually in a symmetric distribution. Some patients with inflammatory arthritis will present with too few affected joints to be classified as having RA— so-calledundifferentiatedinflammatoryarthritis.Thosewithanundifferentiated arthritis who are most likely to be diagnosed later with RA have a higher number of tender and swollen joints, test positive for serum rheumatoid factor (RF) or anti-CCP antibodies, and have higher scores for physical disability.
# Chunk 4862
A normochromic, normocytic anemia often develops in patients with RA and is the most common hematologic abnormality. The degree of anemia parallels the degree of inflammation, correlating with the levels of serum C-reactive protein (CRP) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR). Platelet counts may also be elevated in RA as an acute-phase reactant. Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia is rare in this disease.
# Chunk 4863
US: 0.7-1.3% Brazil: 0.4-1.4% Jamaica: 1.9-2.2% UK: 0.8-1.1% South Africa: 2.5-3.6% Lesotho: 1.7-4.5% Saudi Arabia: 0.1-0.2% Java: 0.1-0.2% Liberia: 2-3% Norway: 0.4% Spain: 0.2-0.8% Greece: 0.3-1% Bulgaria: 0.2-0.6% Iraq: 0.4-1.5% India: 0.1-0.4% Japan: 0.2-0.3% Hong Kong: 0.1-0.5%
# Chunk 4864
The amount of clinical disease activity in patients with RA reflects the overall burden of inflammation and is the variable most influencing treatment decisions. Joint inflammation is the main driver of joint damage and is the most important cause of functional disability in the early stages of disease. Several composite indices have been developed to assess clinical disease activity. The ACR 20, 50, and 70 improvement criteria (which corresponds to a 20%, 50%, and 70% improvement, respectively, in joint counts, physician/patient assessment of disease severity, pain scale, serum levels of acute-phase reactants [ESR or CRP], and a functional assessment of disability using a self-administered patient questionnaire) are a composite index with a dichotomous response variable. The ACR improvement criteria are commonly used in clinical trials as an endpoint for comparing the proportion of responders between treatment groups. In contrast, the Disease Activity Score (DAS), Simplified Disease Activity Index (SDAI), and the Clinical Disease Activity Index (CDAI) are continuous measures of disease activity. These scales are increasingly used in clinical practice for tracking disease status and, in particular, for documenting treatment response.
# Chunk 4865
Approximately 3–6% of any population may be susceptible to ARF, and this proportion does not vary dramatically between populations. Findings of familial clustering of cases and concordance in mono-zygotic twins—particularly for chorea—confirm that susceptibility to ARF is an inherited characteristic, with 44% concordance in mono-zygotic twins compared to 12% in dizygotic twins, and heritability more recently estimated at 60%. Most evidence for host factors focuses on immunologic determinants. Some human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class II alleles, particularly HLA-DR7 and HLA-DR4, appear to be associated with susceptibility, whereas other class II alleles have been associated with protection (HLA-DR5, HLA-DR6, HLA-DR51, HLA-DR52, and HLA-DQ). Associations have also been described with polymorphisms at the tumor necrosis factor α locus (TNF-α-308 and TNF-α-238), high levels of circulating mannose-binding lectin, and Toll-like receptors.
# Chunk 4866
There is a latent period of ~3 weeks (1–5 weeks) between the precipitating group A streptococcal infection and the appearance of the clinical features of ARF. The exceptions are chorea and indolent carditis, which may follow prolonged latent periods lasting up to 6 months. Although many patients report a prior sore throat, the preceding group A streptococcal infection is commonly subclinical; in these cases, it can only be confirmed using streptococcal antibody testing. The most common clinical features are polyarthritis (present in 60–75% of cases) and carditis (50–60%). The prevalence of chorea in ARF varies substantially between populations, ranging from <2 to 30%. Erythema marginatum and subcutaneous nodules are now rare, being found in <5% of cases.
# Chunk 4867
FIGUrE 381-2 Transthoracic echocardiographic image from a 5-year-old boy with chronic rheumatic heart disease. This diastolic image demonstrates leaflet thickening, restriction of the anterior mitral valve leaflet tip and doming of the body of the leaflet toward the inter-ventricular septum. This appearance (marked by the arrowhead) is commonly described as a “hockey stick” or an “elbow” deformity. AV, aortic valve; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; MV, mitral valve; RV, right ventricle. (Courtesy of Dr. Bo Remenyi, Department of Paediatric and Congenital Cardiac Services, Starship Children’s Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand.) affected, sometimes together with the aortic valve; isolated aortic valve involvement is rare. Damage to the pulmonary or tricuspid valves is usually secondary to increased pulmonary pressures resulting from left-sided valvular disease. Early valvular damage leads to regurgitation. Over ensuing years, usually as a result of recurrent episodes, leaflet thickening, scarring, calcification, and valvular stenosis may develop (Fig. 381-2). See Videos 381-1 and 381-2 on the DVD. Therefore, the characteristic manifestation of carditis in previously unaffected individuals is mitral regurgitation, sometimes accompanied by aortic regurgitation. Myocardial inflammation may affect electrical conduction pathways, leading to P-R interval prolongation (first-degree atrioventricular block or rarely higher level block) and softening of the first heart sound.
# Chunk 4868
Sydenham’s chorea commonly occurs in the absence of other manifestations, follows a prolonged latent period after group A streptococcal infection, and is found mainly in females. The choreiform movements affect particularly the head (causing characteristic darting movements of the tongue) and the upper limbs (Chap. 448). They may be generalized or restrictedtoonesideofthebody(hemi-chorea).Inmildcases,choreamay be evident only on careful examination, whereas in the most severe cases, the affected individuals are unable to perform activities of daily living. Thereisoftenassociatedemotionallabilityorobsessive-compulsivetraits, 2152 which may last longer than the choreiform movements (which usually resolve within 6 weeks but sometimes may take up to 6 months).
# Chunk 4869
Minor manifestations Clinical: fever, polyarthralgia

Laboratory: elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate or leukocyte counte
# Chunk 4870
Electrocardiogram: prolonged P-R interval

Supporting evidence of a preceding Elevated or rising anti-streptolysin streptococcal infection within the last O or other streptococcal antibody, or 45 days
# Chunk 4871
White blood cell count Erythrocyte sedimentation rate C-reactive protein Blood cultures if febrile Electrocardiogram (if prolonged P-R interval or other rhythm abnormality, repeat in 2 weeks and again at 2 months if still abnormal) Chest x-ray if clinical or echocardiographic evidence of carditis Echocardiogram (consider repeating after 1 month if negative) Throat swab (preferably before giving antibiotics)—culture for group A streptococcus Antistreptococcal serology: both anti-streptolysin O and anti-DNase B titers, if available (repeat 10–14 days later if first test not confirmatory)
# Chunk 4872
symptoms are substantially resolved, usually within the first 2 weeks, patients on higher doses can have the dose reduced to 50–60 mg/kg per day for a further 2–4 weeks. Fever, joint manifestations, and elevated acute-phase reactants sometimes recur up to 3 weeks after the medication is discontinued. This does not indicate a recurrence and can be managed by recommencing salicylates for a brief period. Naproxen at a dose of 10–20 mg/kg per day is a suitable alternative to aspirin and has the advantage of twice-daily dosing.
# Chunk 4873
Medications to control the abnormal movements do not alter the duration or outcome of chorea. Milder cases can usually be managed by providing a calm environment. In patients with severe chorea, carbamazepine or sodium valproate is preferred to haloperidol. A response may not be seen for 1–2 weeks, and medication should be continued for 1–2 weeks after symptoms subside.  There is recent evidence that corticosteroids are effective and lead to more rapid 2153 symptom reduction in chorea. They should be considered in severe or refractory cases. Prednisone or prednisolone may be commenced at 0.5 mg/kg daily, with weaning as early as possible, preferably after 1 week if symptoms are reduced, although slower weaning or temporary dose escalation may be required if symptoms worsen.
# Chunk 4874
Untreated, ARF lasts on average 12 weeks. With treatment, patients are usually discharged from hospital within 1–2 weeks. Inflammatory markers should be monitored every 1–2 weeks until they have normalized (usually within 4–6 weeks), and an echocardiogram should be performed after 1 month to determine if there has been progression of carditis. Cases with more severe carditis need close clinical and echocardiographic monitoring in the longer term.
# Chunk 4875
The mainstay of controlling ARF and RHD is secondary prevention. Because patients with ARF are at dramatically higher risk than the generalpopulationofdevelopingafurtherepisodeofARFafteragroupA streptococcal infection, they should receive long-term penicillin prophylaxis to prevent recurrences. The best antibiotic for secondary prophylaxis is benzathine penicillin G (1.2 million units, or 600,000 units if ≤27 kg) delivered every 4 weeks. It can be given every 3 weeks, or even every 2 weeks, to persons considered to be at particularly high risk, although in settings where good compliance with an every-	4-week dosing schedule can be achieved, more frequent dosing is rarely needed. Oral penicillin V (250 mg) can be given twice daily instead but is less effective than benzathine penicillin G. Penicillin-allergic patients can receive erythromycin (250 mg) twice daily.
# Chunk 4876
VIDEO 381-2a Transthoracic echocardiographic images are from a 5-year-old boy with chronic rheumatic heart disease with severe mitral valve regurgitation and moderate mitral valve stenosis.
# Chunk 4877
A. Chronic rheumatic heart disease (parasternal long-axis view).

VIDEO 381-2B Transthoracic echocardiographic images are from a 5-year-old boy with chronic rheumatic heart disease with severe mitral valve regurgitation and moderate mitral valve stenosis. Images demonstrate the typical echocardiographic findings in advanced chronic rheumatic heart disease. Both the anterior and posterior mitral valve leaflets are markedly thickened. During diastole, the motion of the anterior mitral valve leaflet tip is restricted with doming of the body of the leaflet toward the interventricular septum. This appearance is commonly described as a “hockey stick” or an “elbow” deformity. B. Chronic rheumatic heart disease (apical two-chamber view echocardiogram).
# Chunk 4878
FIGUrE 382-8 HRCT images of the chest from patients with systemic sclerosis. Top panel: Early interstitial lung disease. Mild changes with sub pleural reticulations and ground glass opacities in the lower lobes of the lung. Patient in supine position. Bottom panel: Extensive lung fibrosis with ground glass opacities, coarse reticular honeycombing, and traction bronchiectasis. (Courtesy of Rishi Agrawal, MD.) the course of the disease (within the first 3 years), when the FVC can decline by 30% per year.
# Chunk 4879
The initial symptom of PAH is typically exertional dyspnea and reduced exercise capacity. With disease progression, angina, exertional near-syncope, and symptoms and signs of right-sided heart failure appear. Physical examination may show tachypnea, a prominent split S2heartsound,palpablerightventricularheave,elevatedjugularvenous pressure, and dependent edema. Doppler echocardiography provides a noninvasive method for estimating the pulmonary arterial pressure. In light of the poor prognosis of untreated PAH, all SSc patients should be screened for its presence at initial evaluation. Echocardiographic estimates of pulmonary arterial systolic pressures >40 mmHg at rest suggest PAH. Pulmonary function testing may show a reduced DLcoin isolation or out of proportion with the severity of restriction. Right heart catheterization is the gold standard for diagnosing PAH. Because echocardiography can result in over-or underestimation of pulmonary arterial pressures in SSc, cardiac catheterization is always required to confirm the presence of PAH; accurately assess its severity, including thedegreeofrightheartdysfunction;andruleoutvenoocclusivedisease and other cardiac causes of pulmonary hypertension. Yearly echocardiographic screening for PAH is recommended in most patients with SSc; an isolated decline in DLcomay also be indicative of developing PAH. Serum levels of brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) and N-terminal pro-BNPcorrelatewith the presenceandseverity of PAHinSSc,aswell as survival. While BNP measurements can be useful in screening for PAH and in monitoring the response to treatment, elevated BNP levels are not specific for PAH and also occur in other forms of right and left heart disease. The prognosis of SSc-associated PAH is worse, and treatment response poorer, than in idiopathic PAH
# Chunk 4880
Upper Gastrointestinal Tract Involvement Oropharyngeal manifestations due to a combination of xerostomia, reduced oral aperture, periodontal disease, and resorption of the mandibular condyles are frequent and cause much distress. The frenulum of the tongue may be shortened. Most patients have symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD): heartburn, regurgitation, and dysphagia. A combination of reduced lower esophageal sphincter pressure resulting in gastroesophageal reflux, impaired esophageal clearance of refluxed gastric contents due to diminished motility in the distal two-thirds of the esophagus, and delayed gastric emptying accounts for GERD. Manometry shows abnormal upper intestinal motility in most patients with SSc. Extraesophageal manifestations of GERD include hoarseness, chronic cough, and aspiration pneumonitis, which may aggravate underlying ILD. Chest computed tomography (CT) scan characteristically shows a dilated esophagus with intraluminal air. Endoscopy may be necessary to rule out opportunistic infections with Candida, herpes virus, and cytomegalovirus.Severeerosiveesophagitismay befoundonendoscopy in patients with minimal symptoms. Esophageal strictures and Barrett’s esophagus may complicate chronic GERD. Because Barrett’s esophagus isassociatedwithanincreasedriskofadenocarcinoma,SScpatientswith Barrett’s esophagus need periodic endoscopy and esophageal biopsy.
# Chunk 4881
rENaL INVOLVEMENT: SCLErODErMa rENaL CrISIS

Scleroderma renal crisis occurs in 10–15% of patients and generally within4yearsoftheonsetofthedisease.Priortotheadventofangiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, short-term survival in scleroderma renalcrisiswas <10%. The pathogenesis involves obliterative vasculopathy and luminal narrowing of the renal arcuate and interlobular arteries. Progressive reduction in renal blood flow, aggravated by vasospasm, leads to juxtaglomerular hyperplasia, increased renin secretion, and activation of angiotensin, with further renal vasoconstriction resulting in a vicious cycle that culminates in accelerated hypertension. Risk factors for scleroderma renal crisis include African-American race, male gender, and dcSSc with extensive and progressive skin involvement. Up to 50% of patients with scleroderma renal crisis have anti-RNA polymeraseIIIantibodies.Palpabletendonfrictionrubs,pericardialeffusion, new unexplained anemia, and thrombocytopenia may be harbingers of impending scleroderma renal crisis. High-risk patients with early SSc should be counseled to check their blood pressure daily. Patients with lcSSc or anticentromere antibodies rarely develop scleroderma renal crisis. Because there is an association between glucocorticoid use and scleroderma renal crisis, prednisone should be used in high-risk SSc patients only when absolutely required and at low doses (<10 mg/d).
# Chunk 4882
Patients characteristically present with accelerated hypertension and progressive oliguric renal insufficiency. However, approximately 10% of patients with scleroderma renal crisis present with normal blood pressure. Normotensive renal crisis is generally associated with a poor outcome.Headache,blurred vision, and congestiveheartfailure mayaccompanyelevationofbloodpressure.Urinalysistypicallyshows mild proteinuria, granular casts, and microscopic hematuria; thrombocytopenia and microangiopathic hemolysis with fragmented red blood cells can be seen. Progressive oliguric renal failure over several days generally follows. In some cases, scleroderma renal crisis is misdiagnosed as thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura or other forms of thrombotic microangiopathy. In these cases, a renal biopsy may be of some benefit. In addition, biopsy findings of vascular thrombosis and glomerular ischemic collapse predict poor renal outcomes. Oliguria or a creatinine >3 mg/dL at presentation predicts poor outcome, with permanent hemodialysis and high mortality. Rarely, crescentic glomerulonephritis occurs in the setting of SSc and may be associated with myeloperoxidase-specific antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies. Membranous glomerulonephritis may occur in patients treated with d-penicillamine. Asymptomatic renal function impairment occurs in up to half of SSc patients. Such subclinical renal involvement is associated with other vascular manifestations of SSc and rarely progresses.
# Chunk 4883
Although it is often silent, cardiac involvement in SSc is frequently detected when patients are screened with sensitive diagnostic tools. Clinically evident cardiac involvement is associated with poor outcomes. Cardiac disease in SSc may be primary or secondary to PAH, ILD, or renal involvement. It occurs more frequently in patients with dcSSc than in those with lcSSc and generally develops within 3 yearsoftheonsetofskinthickening.Clinicallyevidentcardiacinvolvement in SSc is a poor prognostic factor. The endocardium, myocardium, and pericardium may each be affected separately or together. Manifestations of pericardial involvement include acute pericarditis, pericardial effusions, constrictive pericarditis, and cardiac tamponade. Conduction system fibrosis occurs commonly and may be silent or manifested by atrial and ventricular tachycardias or heart block. Recurrent vasospasm and ischemia-reperfusion injury contribute to myocardial fibrosis, resulting in asymptomatic systolic or diastolic left ventricular dysfunction that may progress to overt heart failure. Systemic and pulmonary hypertension and lung and renal involvement may alsoimpact ontheheart. Despitethepresenceof widespread obliterative vasculopathy, the frequency of clinical or pathologic epicardial coronary artery disease in SSc is not increased. While conventional echocardiography has low sensitivity for detecting SSc preclinical heart involvement, newer modalities such as tissue Doppler echocardiography(TDE),cardiacmagneticresonanceimaging(cMRI), thallium perfusion, and nuclear imaging (single photon emission CT [SPECT]) reveal a high prevalence of abnormal myocardial function or perfusion in SSc patients. The serum level of N-terminal pro-BNP, a ventricular hormone, is a marker for PAH in SSc, but may also have utility as a marker of primary cardiac involvement.
# Chunk 4884
A mild normocytic or microcytic anemia is frequent in patients with SSc and may indicate gastrointestinal bleeding caused by GAVE or chronic esophagitis. Macrocytic anemia may be caused by folate and vitamin B12 deficiency due to small-bowel bacterial overgrowth and malabsorption or by drugs such as methotrexate or alkylating agents. Microangiopathic hemolytic anemia caused by mechanical fragmentation of red blood cells during their passage through microvessels coated withfibrin orplateletthrombi isahallmark of the thromboticmicroangiopathy associated with scleroderma renal crisis. Thrombocytopenia and leukopenia may indicate drug toxicity. In contrast to other connective tissue diseases, the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) is generally normal; an elevation may signal coexisting myositis or malignancy.
# Chunk 4885
DIaGNOSIS, STaGING, aND MONITOrING

ThediagnosisofSScismadeprimarilyonclinicalgroundsandisgenerally straightforward in patients with established disease. The presence of skin induration,withacharacteristicsymmetricdistributionpatternassociated with typical visceral organ manifestations, establishes the diagnosis with a highdegreeofcertainty.AlthoughtheconditionslistedinTable382-1can beassociatedwithskininduration,thedistributionpatternofskinlesions, together with the absence of Raynaud’s phenomenon or typical visceral organ manifestations or SSc-specific autoantibodies, differentiates these conditions from SSc. Occasionally, full-thickness biopsy of the skin is requiredforestablishingthediagnosisofscleredema, scleromyxedema,or nephrogenic systemic fibrosis. In lcSSc, a history of antecedent Raynaud’s phenomenon and gastroesophageal reflux symptoms, coupled with the presenceofsclerodactylyandcapillarychangesonnailfoldcapillaroscopy, often in combinations with cutaneous telangiectasia and calcinosis, helps toestablishthediagnosis.Thefindingofdigitaltippittingscarsandradiologic evidence of pulmonary fibrosis in the lower lobes are particularly helpful diagnostically. Primary Raynaud’s phenomenon is a common benign condition that must be differentiated from early or limited SSc. Nailfoldmicroscopyisparticularlyhelpfulinthissituation,becauseinprimaryRaynaud’sphenomenon,thenailfoldcapillariesarenormal,whereas in SSc, capillary abnormalities, as well as serum autoantibodies, can be detected even before other disease manifestations.
# Chunk 4886
TrEaTMENT OF GaSTrOINTESTINaL COMPLICaTIONS Because oral problems including decreased oral aperture, decreased saliva production, gum recession and periodontal disease leading to teeth loss are common, regular dental care is recommended. Gastroesophageal reflux is very common and may occur in the absence of symptoms; therefore all patients with SSc should be treated. Patients should be instructed to elevate the head of the bed, eat frequent small meals, and avoid oral intake before bedtime. Proton pump inhibitors reduce acid reflux and may need to be given in relatively high doses. Prokinetic agents such as domperidone may be helpful, especially if delayed gastric emptying is present. Episodic gastrointestinal bleeding from gastric antral vascular ectasia (watermelon stomach) may be amenable to treatment with endoscopic laser photocoagulation, although recurrence can occur. Bacterial overgrowth due to small-bowel dysmotility causes abdominal bloating and diarrhea and may lead to malabsorption and severe malnutrition. Treatment with short courses of rotating broad-spectrum antibiotics such as metronidazole, erythromycin, and tetracycline can eradicate bacterial overgrowth. Parenteral hyperalimentation is indicated if malnutrition develops. Chronic hypomotility of the small bowel may respond to octreotide, but pseudo-obstruction is difficult to treat. Fecal incontinence, a frequently underreported complication of SSc, may respond to anti-diarrheal medication and biofeedback therapy.
# Chunk 4887
TrEaTMENT OF rENaL CrISIS Scleroderma renal crisis is a medical emergency. Since the outcome is largely determined by the extent of renal damage present at the time that aggressive therapy is initiated, prompt recognition of impending or early scleroderma renal crisis is essential, and efforts should be made to avoid its occurrence. High-risk SSc patients with early disease, extensive and progressive skin involvement, tendon friction rubs, and anti-RNA polymerase III antibodies should be instructed to monitor their blood pressure daily and report significant alterations immediately. Potentially nephrotoxic drugs should be avoided, and glucocorticoids should be used only when absolutely necessary and at low doses. Patients presenting with scleroderma renal crisis should be immediately hospitalized. Once other causes of renal disease are excluded, treatment should be started promptly with titration of short-acting ACE inhibitors, with the goal of achieving rapid normalization of the blood pressure. In patients with hypertension persisting despite ACE inhibitor therapy, addition of angiotensin II receptor blockers, calcium channel blockers, and direct renin inhibitors should be considered. Anecdotal evidence indicates responses to endothelin-1 receptor blockers and prostacyclins. Up to two-thirds of patients with scleroderma renal crisis go on to dialysis. The outcome of scleroderma renal crisis is worse in patients with antibodies to topoisomerase I compared to those with antibodies to RNA polymerase III. Substantial renal recovery can occur following scleroderma renal crisis, and dialysis can be discontinued, in 30–50% of the patients. Kidney transplantation is appropriate for those unable to discontinue dialysis after 2 years. Survival of transplanted SSc patients is comparable to that of patients with other connective tissue diseases, and recurrence of renal crisis is rare.
# Chunk 4888
SSc confers a substantial increase in the risk of premature death. Age-and gender-adjusted mortality rates are fivefold to eightfold higher compared to the general population, and more than half of all patients with SSc die from their disease. In one population-based study of SSc, the median survival was 11 years. In patients with dcSSc, 5-and 10-year survival rates are 70% and 55%, respectively, whereas in patients with lcSSc, 5-and 10-year survival rates are 90% and 75%, respectively. The prognosis correlates with the extent of skin involvement, which itself is a surrogate for visceral organ involvement. Major causes of death are PAH, pulmonary fibrosis, gastrointestinal involvement, and cardiac disease. Scleroderma renal crisis is associated with a 30% 3-year mortality. Lung cancer and excess cardiovascular deaths also contribute to increased mortality. Markers of poor prognosis include male gender, African-American race, older age at disease onset, extensive skin thickening with truncal involvement, palpable tendon friction rubs, and evidence of significant or progressive visceral organ involvement. Laboratory predictors of increased mortality at initial evaluation include an elevated ESR, anemia, proteinuria and anti–topoisomerase I antibodies. In one study, SSc 2165 patients with extensive skin involvement, lung vital capacity <55% predicted, significant gastrointestinal involvement (pseudoobstruction ormalabsorption), evidenceof cardiac involvement(arrhythmias or congestive heart failure), or scleroderma renal crisis had a cumulative 9-year survival <40%. The severity of PAH is strongly associated with mortality, and SSc patients who had a mean pulmonary arterial pressure ≥45 mmHg had a 33% 3-year survival. The advent of ACE inhibitors in scleroderma renal crisis had a dramatic impact on survival, increasing from <10% at 1 year in the pre–ACE inhibitor era to >70% 3-year survival at the present time. Moreover, 10-year survival inSSc has improvedfrom<60%inthe 1970s to >66–78%inthe 1990s, a trend that reflects both earlier detection and better management of complications.
# Chunk 4889
Routine laboratory tests in Sjögren’s syndrome reveal mild normochromic, normocytic anemia. An elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate is found in ~70% of patients.
# Chunk 4890
Primary Sjögren’s syndrome is diagnosed if (1) the patient presents with eye and/or mouth dryness, (2) eye tests disclose keratoconjunctivitis sicca, (3) mouth evaluation reveals the classic manifestations of the syndrome, and/or(4) the patient’s serum reacts with Ro/SS-A and/or La/SS-B auto-antigens. Labial biopsy is needed when the diagnosis is uncertain or to rule out other conditions that may cause dry mouth or eyes or parotid glandenlargement (Tables 383-3 and 383-4). Validated diagnosticcriteriahavebeenestablishedbyaEuropeanstudyandhavenowbeenfurther improvedbyaEuropean-Americanstudygroup(Table 383-5).Hepatitis C virus infection should be ruled out since, apart from serologic tests, the clinicopathologic picture is almost identical to that of Sjögren’s syndrome. Enlargement of major salivary glands, particularly in seronegative patients, should raise the suspicion of IgG4-related syndrome, which may present also as chronic pancreatitis, interstitial nephritis, retroperitoneal fibrosis, and aortitis.
# Chunk 4891
Avoid Smoking areas, windy, low humidity environment, drugs with anticholinergic action, diuretics Lubrication Artificial tears without preservatives, bicarbonate-buffered electrolyte solutions Oral hygiene after each meal Topical application of fluoride Lubrication Water Local stimulation Sugar-free, flavored lozenges or gum Systemic stimulation As for dry eyes Oral candidiasis Topical nystatin or clotrimazole lozenges Apply Local wet heat Treat superinfection Antibiotics, analgesics Persistent, hard Rule out lymphoma Local stimulation Cyclic adenosine mono-phosphate, cyclosporine 2% olive solution Systemic stimulation Pilocarpine (5 mg thrice daily orally); cevimeline (30 mg thrice daily orally) Severe dry eyes Nasolacrimal duct occlusion (temporary or permanent); soft contact lenses; corneal transplantation Glandular manifestations Extraglandular manifestations Parotid gland enlargement Dry mouth Dry eyes Arthritis Cold protection: gloves Raynaud’s phenomenon Bicarbonate replacement Renal tubular acidosis CHOP + anti-CD20 Vasculitis Standard treatment Lymphoma Hydroxychloroquine (200–400 mg/d) or Methotrexate (0.2–0.3 mg/kg body weight weekly) plus Prednisolone (<10 mg daily orally)
# Chunk 4892
In population surveys, AS is present in 1–6% of adults inheriting B27, whereas the prevalence is 10–30% among B27+ adult first-degree relatives of AS probands. Concordance rate in identical twins is about 65%. Susceptibility to AS is determined largely by genetic factors, with B27 comprising less than one-half of the genetic component. Genome-wide single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) analysis has identified over 30 additional susceptibility alleles.
# Chunk 4893
The pathogenesis of AS is immune-mediated, but there is little direct evidence for antigen-specific autoimmunity, and there is evidence to suggest more of an autoinflammatory pathogenesis. Uncertainty remains regarding the primary site of disease initiation. The dramatic responseofthediseasetotherapeuticblockadeoftumornecrosisfactor α (TNF-α) indicates that this cytokine plays a central role in the immunopathogenesis of AS. Other genes related to TNF pathways show association with AS, including TNFRSF1A, LTBR, and TBKBP1. More recent evidence strongly implicates the interleukin (IL) 23/IL-17 cytokine pathway in AS pathogenesis. At least five genes in this pathway show association with AS, including IL23R, PTER4, IL12B, CARD9, and TYK2. All of these genes are also associated with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), and three of them are associated with psoriasis. Serum levels of IL-23 and IL-17 are elevated in AS patients. Mice expressing high levels of IL-23 show spontaneous infiltration in the entheses of CD3+CD4–CD8– cells bearing IL-23 receptors and producing IL-17 and IL-22. This finding suggests the possibility that site-specific innate immune cells may play a critical role in the anatomic specificity of the lesions. Mast cells and, to a lesser extent, neutrophils appear to be the major IL-17-producing cells in peripheral arthritis, whereas neutrophils producing IL-17 are prominent in apophyseal joints. High levels of circulating γδ T cells expressing IL-23 receptors and producing IL-17 have been found in AS patients.
# Chunk 4894
No laboratory test is diagnostic of AS. In most ethnic groups, HLAB27 is present in 80–90% of patients. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)andC-reactiveprotein (CRP) are often,but notalways, elevated. Mildanemia maybe present. Patients with severe disease may show an elevatedalkalinephosphataselevel.ElevatedserumIgAlevelsarecommon. Rheumatoid factor, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (CCP), and antinuclear antibodies (ANAs) are largely absent unless caused by a coexistentdisease, although ANAs may appear with anti-TNF therapy. Circulating levels of CD8+ T cells tend to be low, and serum matrix metalloproteinase 3 levels correlate with disease activity. Synovial fluid from peripheral joints in AS is nonspecifically inflammatory. In cases with restriction of chest wall motion, decreased vital capacity and increased functional residual capacity are common, but airflow is normal and ventilatory function is usually well maintained.
# Chunk 4895
AS must be differentiated from numerous other causes of low-back pain, some far more common than AS. To qualify as the criterion for inflammatory back pain of axial SpA (Table 384-1), the chronic (≥3 months) back pain should have four or more of the following characteristic features: (1) age of onset <40 years old; (2) insidious onset; (3) improvement with exercise; (4) no improvement with rest; and (5)painatnightwithimprovementupongettingup.Othercommon features of inflammatory back pain include morning stiffness >30 min, awakening from back pain during only the second half of the night, and alternating buttock pain. In clinical decision-making, all of these features are additive. The most common causes of back pain other than AS are primarily mechanical or degenerative rather than primarily inflammatory and tend not to show clustering of these features.
# Chunk 4896
All management of AS should include an exercise program designed to maintain posture and range of motion. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are the first line of pharmacologic therapy for AS. These agents reduce pain and tenderness and increase mobility in many patients with AS. There is mounting evidence that continuous high-dose NSAID therapy slows radiographic progression, particularly in patients who are at higher risk for progression. However, many patients with AS have continued symptoms despite NSAID therapy and are likely to benefit from anti-TNF-α therapy. Patients with AS treated with infliximab (chimeric human/mouse anti-TNF-α monoclonal antibody), etanercept (soluble p75 TNF-α receptor–IgG fusion protein), adalimumab, or golimumab (human anti-TNF-α monoclonal antibodies, or certolizumab pegol [humanized mouse anti-TNF-α monoclonal antibody]) have shown rapid, profound, and sustained reductions in all clinical and laboratory measures of disease activity. In a good response, there is significant improvement in both objective and subjective indicators of disease activity and function, including morning stiffness, pain, spinal mobility, peripheral joint swelling, CRP, and ESR. MRI studies indicate substantial resolution of bone marrow edema, enthesitis, and joint effusions in the sacroiliac joints, spine, and peripheral joints (Fig. 384-2). Similar results have been obtained in large randomized controlled trials of all four agents and many open-label studies. About one-half of the patients achieve a ≥50% reduction in the BASDAI. The response tends to be stable over time, and partial or full remissions are common. Predictors of the best responses include younger age, shorter disease duration, higher baseline inflammatory markers, and lower baseline functional disability. Nonetheless, some patients with long-standing disease and even spinal ankylosis can obtain significant benefit. Increased bone mineral density is found as early as 24 weeks after onset of therapy. There is evidence that anti-TNF therapy does not prevent syndesmophyte formation, although this may apply mainly during the early years of therapy. A mechanism for this has been proposed based on the observation that TNF-α inhibits new bone formation by upregulating DKK-1, a negative regulator of the wingless (Wnt) signaling pathway that promotes osteoblast activity. Serum DKK-1 levels are inappropriately low in AS patients and are also suppressed by anti-TNF therapy.
# Chunk 4897
Infliximab is given intravenously, 3–5 mg/kg body weight, and then repeated 2 weeks later, again 6 weeks later, and then at 8-week intervals. Etanercept is given by subcutaneous injection, 50 mg once weekly. Adalimumab is given by subcutaneous injection, 40 mg biweekly. Golimumab is given by subcutaneous injection, 50 or 100 mg every 4 weeks. Certolizumab pegol is given by subcutaneous injection, 400 mg every 4 weeks.
# Chunk 4898
Because of the expense, potentially serious side effects, and unknown long-term effects of these agents, their use should be restricted to patients with a definite diagnosis and active disease (BASDAI ≥4 out of 10 and expert opinion) that is inadequately responsive to therapy with at least two different NSAIDs. Before initiation of anti-TNF therapy, all patients should be tested for tuberculin (TB) reactivity, and reactors (≥5 mm on PPD testing or a positive quantiferon test) should be treated with anti-TB agents. Contraindications include active infection or high risk of infection; malignancy or premalignancy; and history of systemic lupus erythematosus, multiple sclerosis, or related autoimmunity. Pregnancy and breast-feeding are relative contraindications. Continuation beyond 12 weeks of therapy requires either a 50% reduction in BASDAI or absolute reduction of ≥2 out of 10, and favorable expert opinion. Switching to a second anti-TNF agent may be effective, especially if there was a response to the first that was lost rather than primary failure. Sulfasalazine, in doses of 2–3 g/d, has been shown to be of modest benefit, primarily for peripheral arthritis. A therapeutic trial of this agent should precede any use of anti-TNF agents in patients with predominantly peripheral arthritis. Methotrexate, although widely used, has not been shown to be of benefit in AS, nor has any therapeutic role for gold or oral glucocorticoids been documented. Potential benefit in AS has been reported for thalidomide, 200 mg/d, perhaps acting through inhibition of TNF-α.
# Chunk 4899
TheattackrateofpostentericReAgenerallyrangesfrom1%toabout 30%dependingonthestudyandcausativeorganism,whereastheattack rate of postchlamydial ReA is about 4–8%. The gender ratio in ReA following enteric infection is nearly 1:1, whereas venereally acquired ReA occurs mainly in men. The overall prevalence and incidence of ReA are difficult to assess because of the lack of validated diagnostic criteria, variable prevalence and arthritogenic potential of the triggering infectious agents, and inconstant genetic susceptibility factors in different populations. In Scandinavia, an annual incidence of 10–28:100,000 has been reported. Thespondyloarthritides were formerly almostunknown in sub-Saharan Africa. However, ReA and other peripheral SpAs have now become the most common rheumatic diseases in Africans in the wake of the AIDS epidemic, without association to B27, which is very rare in these populations. ReA is often the first manifestation of HIV infection and often remits with disease progression. In contrast,
# Chunk 4900
The ESR and acute-phase reactants are usually elevated during the acute phase of the disease, often markedly so. Mild anemia may be present. Synovial fluid is nonspecifically inflammatory. In most ethnic groups, 30–50% of the patients are B27-positive. The triggering infection usually does not persist at the site of primary mucosal infection through the time of onset of the reactive disease, but it may be possible to culture the organism, e.g., in the case of Yersinia-or Chlamydia-induced disease. Serologic evidence of exposure to one of the causative organisms with elevation of antibodies is nonspecific and is of questionable utility. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for chlamydial DNA in first-voided urine specimens may have high sensitivity in the acute stage but is less useful with chronic disease.
# Chunk 4901
Prompt, appropriate antibiotic treatment of acute chlamydial 2175 urethritis or enteric infection may prevent the emergence of ReA, but is not universally successful. Data regarding the potential benefit of antibiotic therapy that is initiated after onset of arthritis are conflicting, but several trials suggest no benefit. One long-term follow-up study suggested that although antibiotic therapy had no effect on the acute episode of ReA, it helped prevent subsequent chronic SpA. Another such study failed to demonstrate any longterm benefit. A promising recent double-blind placebo-controlled study assessing combination antibiotics showed that a majority of patients with chronic ReA due to Chlamydia benefited significantly from a 6-month course of rifampin 300 mg daily plus azithromycin 500 mg daily for 5 days, then twice weekly, or 6 months of rifampin 300 mg daily plus doxycycline 100 mg twice daily. The possibility remains that acute Chlamydia-induced ReA might respond more favorably to antibiotic therapy than the postenteric variety.
# Chunk 4902
The Spondyloarthritides 2176 1–3%. Psoriasis and PsA are less common in other races in the absence of HIV infection, and the prevalence of PsA in individuals with psoriasis may be less common. First-degree relatives of PsA patients have an elevated risk for psoriasis, for PsA itself, and for other forms of SpA. Of patientswithpsoriasis,upto30%haveanaffectedfirst-degreerelative.In monozygotic twins, the reported concordance for psoriasis varies from 35 to 72%, and for PsA from 10 to 30%. A variety of HLA associations have been found. The HLA-Cw*0602 gene is directly associated with psoriasis,particularlyfamilialjuvenile-onset(typeI)psoriasis.HLA-B27 is associated with psoriatic spondylitis (see below). HLA-DR7, -DQ3, and -B57 areassociated with PsA becauseof linkage disequilibrium with Cw6. Other associations with PsA include HLA-B13, -B37, -B38, -B39, -C12, and -DR4. A recent genome-wide scan found association of both psoriasisandPsAwithapolymorphismattheHCP5locuscloselylinked to HLA-B, and also to IL-23R, IL-12B (chromosome 5q31), IL-13, and several other chromosomal regions. Certain genetic loci are associated with PsA but not psoriasis, e.g., RUNX3 and IL-13.
# Chunk 4903
PsA is almost certainly immune-mediated and probably shares pathogenic mechanisms with psoriasis. PsA synovium is characterized by lining layer hyperplasia; diffuse infiltration with T cells, B cells, macrophages, and NK receptor–expressing cells, with upregulation of leukocyte homing receptors; and neutrophil proliferation with angiogenesis. Clonally expanded T cell subpopulations are frequent and have been demonstrated both in the synovium and the skin. Plasmacytoid dendritic cells are thought to play a key role in psoriasis, and there is some evidence for their participation in PsA. There is abundant synovial overexpression of proinflammatory cytokines, and synovial tissue staining has identified an overexpression of monocyte-derived cytokines, such as myeloid-related protein (S100A8/A9). Interferon γ, TNF-α, and IL-1β, -2, -6, -8, -10, -12, -13, and -15 are found in PsA synovium or synovial fluid. TH17-derived cytokines are important in PsA, given the genetic association with genes in the IL-12/IL-23 axis and the therapeutic response to an antibody to the shared IL-12/23 p40 subunit (see below). TH17 cells have been identified from the dermal extracts of psoriatic lesions and the synovial fluid of PsA patients. The majority of these CD4+ IL-17+ T cells are of memory phenotype (CD4RO[+]CD45RA[–]CD11a[+]). Consistent with the extensive bone remodeling in PsA, patients with PsA have been found to have a marked increase in osteoclastic precursors in peripheral blood and upregulation of receptor activator of nuclear factor κβ ligand (RANKL) in the synovial lining layer. Increased serum levels of TNF-α, RANKL, leptin, and omentin positively correlate with these osteoclastic precursors.
# Chunk 4904
Nail changes in the fingers or toes occur in up to 90% of patients with PsA, compared with 40% of psoriatic patients without arthritis, and pustular psoriasis is said to be associated with more severe arthritis. Several articular features distinguish PsA from other joint disorders;such hallmark featuresinclude dactylitis and enthesitis.Dactylitis occurs in >30%; enthesitis and tenosynovitis are also common and are probably present in most patients, although often not appreciated on physical examination. Shortening of digits because of underlying osteolysis is particularly characteristic of PsA (Fig. 384-3), and there is a much greater tendency than in RA for both fibrous and bony ankylosis of small joints. Rapid ankylosis of one or more proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joints early in the course of disease is not uncommon. Back and neck pain and stiffness are also common in PsA.
# Chunk 4905
To meet the CASPAR criteria, a patient must have inflammatory articular disease (joint, spine, or entheseal) with ≥3 points from any of the following five categories: 1. Evidence of current psoriasis,b, c a personal history of psoriasis, or a family history of psoriasisd 2. Typical psoriatic nail dystrophye observed on current physical examination 3. A negative test result for rheumatoid factor 4. Either current dactylitisf or a history of dactylitis recorded by a rheumatologist 5. Radiographic evidence of juxtaarticular new bone formationg in the hand or foot aSpecificity of 99% and sensitivity of 91%. bCurrent psoriasis is assigned 2 points; all other features are assigned 1 point. cPsoriatic skin or scalp disease present at the time of examination, as judged by a rheumatologist or dermatologist. dHistory of psoriasis in a first-or second-degree relative. eOnycholysis, pitting, or hyperkeratosis. fSwelling of an entire digit. gIll-defined ossification near joint margins, excluding osteophyte formation.
# Chunk 4906
There are two major categories of ANCA based on different targets for the antibodies. The terminology of cytoplasmic ANCA (cANCA) refers to the diffuse, granular cytoplasmic staining pattern observed by immunofluorescence microscopy when serum antibodies bind to indicator neutrophils. Proteinase-3, a 29-kDa neutral serine proteinase present in neutrophil azurophilic granules, is the major cANCA antigen. More than 90% of patients with typical active granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s) have detectable antibodies to proteinase-3 (see below). The terminology of perinuclear ANCA (pANCA) refers to the more localized perinuclear or nuclear staining pattern of the indicator neutrophils. The major target for pANCA is the enzyme myeloperoxidase; other targets that can produce a pANCA pattern of staining include elastase, cathepsin G, lactoferrin, lysozyme, and bactericidal/permeability-increasing protein. However, only antibodies to myeloperoxidase have been convincingly associated with vasculitis. Antimyeloperoxidase antibodies have been reported to occur in variable percentages of patients with microscopic polyangiitis, eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Churg-Strauss), isolated necrotizing crescentic glomerulonephritis, and granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s) (see below). A pANCA pattern of staining that is not due to antimyeloperoxidase antibodies has been associated with nonvasculitic entities such as rheumatic and nonrheumatic autoimmune diseases, inflammatory bowel disease, certain drugs, and infections such as endocarditis and bacterial airway infections in patients with cystic fibrosis.
# Chunk 4907
Physicians should be thoroughly aware of the toxic side effects of therapeutic agents employed that can include both acute and long-term complications (Table 385-4). Morbidity and mortality can occur as a result of treatment, and strategies to monitor for and prevent toxicity represent an essential part of patient care. Glucocorticoids are an important part of treatment for most vasculitides but are associated with substantial toxicities. Monitoring and prevention of glucocorticoid-induced bone loss are important in all patients. With the use of daily cyclophosphamide, strategies are particularly important and are directed toward minimization of bladder toxicity and prevention of leukopenia. Instructing the patient to take cyclophosphamide all at once in the morning with a large amount of fluid throughout the day in order to maintain a dilute urine can reduce the risk of bladder injury. Bladder cancer can occur several years after discontinuation of cyclophosphamide therapy; therefore, monitoring for bladder cancer should continue indefinitely in patients who have received cyclophosphamide. Bone marrow suppression is an important toxicity of cyclophosphamide and can be observed during glucocorticoid tapering or over time, even after periods of stable measurements. Monitoring of the complete bloodcountevery1–2weeks foraslong asthepatient receives cyclophosphamide can effectively prevent cytopenias. Maintaining the white blood cell (WBC) count at >3000/μL and the neutrophil count at >1500/μL is essential to reduce the risk of life-threatening infections.
# Chunk 4908
Methotrexate and azathioprine are also associated with bone marrow suppression, and complete blood counts should be obtained every 1–2 weeks for the first 1–2 months after their initiation and once a month thereafter. To lessen toxicity, methotrexate is often given together with folic acid, 1 mg daily, or folinic acid, 5–10 mg once a week 24 h following methotrexate. Prior to initiation of azathioprine, thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT), an enzyme involved in the metabolism of azathioprine, should be assayed because inadequate levels may result in severe cytopenia.
# Chunk 4909
Source: GS Hoffman et al: Ann Intern Med 116:488, 1992.

The Vasculitis Syndromes 2184 Pulmonary involvement may be manifested as asymptomatic infiltrates or may be clinically expressed as cough, hemoptysis, dyspnea, and chest discomfort. It is present in 85–90% of patients. Endobronchial disease, either in its active form or as a result of fibrous scarring, may lead to obstruction with atelectasis. Eye involvement (52% of patients) may range from a mild conjunctivitis to dacryocystitis, episcleritis, scleritis, granulomatous sclerouveitis, ciliary vessel vasculitis, and retroorbital mass lesions leading to proptosis. Skin lesions (46% of patients) appear as papules, vesicles, palpable purpura, ulcers, or subcutaneous nodules; biopsy reveals vasculitis, granuloma, or both. Cardiac involvement (8% of patients) manifests as pericarditis, coronary vasculitis, or, rarely, cardiomyopathy. Nervous system manifestations (23% ofpatients) includecranial neuritis,mononeuritis multiplex, or, rarely, cerebral vasculitis and/or granuloma. Renal disease (77% of patients) generally dominates the clinical picture and, if left untreated, accounts directly or indirectly for most of the mortality rate in this disease. Although it may smolder in some cases as a mildglomerulitis withproteinuria, hematuria, andredblood cell casts, it is clear that once clinically detectable renal functional impairment occurs, rapidly progressive renal failure usually ensues unless appropriate treatment is instituted. While the disease is active, most patients have nonspecific symptoms and signs such as malaise, weakness, arthralgias, anorexia, and weight loss. Fever may indicate activity of the underlying disease but more often reflects secondary infection, usually of the upper airway. Characteristic laboratory findings include a markedly elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), mild anemia and leukocytosis, mild hypergammaglobulinemia (particularly of the IgA class), and mildly elevated rheumatoid factor. Thrombocytosis may be seen as an acute-phase reactant. Approximately 90% of patients with active granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s) have a positive antiproteinase-3 ANCA. However, in the absence of active disease, the sensitivity drops to ∼60–70%. A small percentage of patients with granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s) may have antimyeloperoxidase rather than antiproteinase-3 antibodies, and up to 20% may lack ANCA. Patients with granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s) have been found to have an increased incidence of venous thrombotic events. Although routine anticoagulation for all patients is not recommended, a heightened awareness for any clinical features suggestive of deep venous thrombosis or pulmonary emboli is warranted.
# Chunk 4910
Prior to the introduction of effective therapy, granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s) was universally fatal within a few months of diagnosis. Glucocorticoids alone led to some symptomatic improvement, with little effect on the ultimate course of the disease. The development of treatment with cyclophosphamide dramatically changed patient outcome such that marked improvement was seen in >90% of patients, complete remission in 75% of patients, and 5-year patient survival was seen in over 80%.
# Chunk 4911
Cyclophosphamide is given in doses of 2 mg/kg per day orally, but as it is renally eliminated, dosage reduction should be considered in patients with renal insufficiency. Some reports have indicated therapeutic success with less frequent and severe toxic side effects using IV cyclophosphamide. In a recent randomized trial, IV cyclophosphamide 15 mg/kg, three infusions given every 2 weeks, then every 3 weeks thereafter, was compared to cyclophosphamide 2 mg/kg daily given for 3 months followed by 1.5 mg/kg daily. Although IV cyclophosphamide was found to have a comparable rate of remission with a lower cumulative cyclophosphamide dose and occurrence of leukopenia, the use of a consolidation phase and an insufficient frequency of blood count monitoring may have negatively influenced the results in those who received daily cyclophosphamide. Of note in this study was that relapse occurred in 19% of those who received IV cyclophosphamide as compared to 9% who received daily oral administration. We continue to strongly favor daily cyclophosphamide with utilization of blood count monitoring every 1–2 weeks (as discussed above) and limiting the duration of induction exposure to 3–6 months.
# Chunk 4912
After 3–6 months of induction treatment, cyclophosphamide should be stopped and switched to another agent for remission maintenance. The agents with which there has been the greatest published experience are methotrexate and azathioprine. Methotrexate is administered orally or subcutaneously starting at a dosage of 0.3 mg/kg as a single weekly dose, not to exceed 15 mg/week. If the treatment is well tolerated after 1–2 weeks, the dosage should be increased by 2.5 mg weekly up to a dosage of 20–25 mg/week and maintained at that level. Azathioprine, 2 mg/kg per day, has also proved effective in maintaining remission following induction with daily cyclophosphamide. In a randomized trial comparing methotrexate to azathioprine for remission maintenance, comparable rates of toxicity and relapse were seen. Therefore, the choice of agent is often based on toxicity profile, because methotrexate cannot be given to patients with renal insufficiency or chronic liver disease, as well as on other individual patient factors. In patients who are unable to receive methotrexate or azathioprine or who have relapsed through such treatment, mycophenolate mofetil, 1000 mg twice a day, may also sustain remission following cyclophosphamide induction.
# Chunk 4913
Rituximab is a chimeric monoclonal antibody directed against CD20 present on normal and malignant B lymphocytes that is U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved for the treatment of granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s) and microscopic polyangiitis. In two randomized trials that enrolled ANCA-positive patients with severe active granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s) or microscopic polyangiitis, rituximab 375 mg/m2 once a week for 4 weeks in combination with glucocorticoids was found to be as effective as cyclophosphamide with glucocorticoids for inducing disease remission. In the trial, which also enrolled patients with relapsing disease, rituximab was found to be statistically superior to cyclophosphamide.
# Chunk 4914
The 5-year survival rate for patients with treated microscopic polyangiitis is 74%, with disease-related mortality occurring from alveolar hemorrhage or gastrointestinal, cardiac, or renal disease. Studies on treatment have come from trials that have included patients with granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s) or microscopic polyangiitis. Currently, the treatment approach for microscopic polyangiitis is the same as is used for granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s) (see “Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis [Wegener’s]” for a detailed description of this therapeutic regimen), and patients with immediately life-threatening disease should be treated with the combination of prednisone and daily cyclophosphamide or rituximab. Disease relapse has been observed in at least 34% of patients. Treatment for such relapses would be similar to that used at the time of initial presentation and based on site and severity of disease.
# Chunk 4915
The prognosis of untreated eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Churg-Strauss) is poor, with a reported 5-year survival of 25%. With treatment, prognosis is favorable, with one study finding a 78-month actuarial survival rate of 72%. Myocardial involvement is the most frequent cause of death and is responsible for 39% of patient mortality. Echocardiography should be performed in all newly diagnosed patients because this may influence therapeutic decisions.
# Chunk 4916
The prognosis of untreated polyarteritis nodosa is extremely poor, with a reported 5-year survival rate between 10 and 20%. Death usually results from gastrointestinal complications, particularly bowel infarcts and perforation, and cardiovascular causes. Intractable hypertension often compounds dysfunction in other organ systems, such as the kidneys, heart, and CNS, leading to additional late morbidity and mortality in polyarteritis nodosa. With the introduction of treatment, survival rate has increased substantially. Favorable therapeutic results have been reported in polyarteritis nodosa with the combination of prednisone and cyclophosphamide (see “Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis [Wegener’s]” for a detailed description of this therapeutic regimen). In less severe cases of polyarteritis nodosa, glucocorticoids alone have resulted in disease remission. In patients with hepatitis B who have a polyarteritis nodosa–like vasculitis, antiviral therapy represents an important part of therapy and has been used in combination with glucocorticoids and plasma exchange. Careful attention to the treatment of hypertension can lessen the acute and late morbidity and mortality rates associated with renal, cardiac, and CNS complications of polyarteritis nodosa. Following successful treatment, relapse of polyarteritis nodosa has been estimated to occur in 10–20% of patients.
# Chunk 4917
Characteristic laboratory findings in addition to the elevated ESR include a normochromic or slightly hypochromic anemia. Liver function abnormalities are common, particularly increased alkaline phosphatase levels. Increased levels of IgG and complement have been reported. Levels of enzymes indicative of muscle damage such as serum creatine kinase are not elevated.
# Chunk 4918
The diagnosis of giant cell arteritis and its associated clinicopathologic syndromecanoftenbesuggestedclinicallybythedemonstrationofthecomplex of fever, anemia, and high ESR with or without symptoms of polymyalgia rheumatica in a patient >50 years. The diagnosis is confirmed by biopsy of the temporal artery. Since involvement of the vessel may be segmental, positive yield is increased by obtaining a biopsy segment of 3–5 cm together with serial sectioning of biopsy specimens. Ultrasonography of the temporal artery has been reported to be helpful in diagnosis. A temporal artery biopsy should be obtained as quickly as possible in the setting of ocular signs and symptoms, and under these circumstances, therapyshouldnotbedelayedpendingabiopsy.Inthisregard,ithasbeen reported that temporal artery biopsies may show vasculitis even after ∼14 days of glucocorticoid therapy. A dramatic clinical response to a trial of glucocorticoid therapy can further support the diagnosis.
# Chunk 4919
The goals of treatment in giant cell arteritis are to reduce symptoms and, most importantly, to prevent visual loss. The treatment approach for cranial and large-vessel disease in giant cell arteritis is currently the same. Giant cell arteritis and its associated symptoms are exquisitely sensitive to glucocorticoid therapy. Treatment should begin with prednisone, 40–60 mg/d for ∼1 month, followed by a gradual tapering. When ocular signs and symptoms occur, consideration should be given for the use of methylprednisolone 1000 mg daily for 3 days to protect remaining vision. Although the optimal duration of glucocorticoid therapy has not been established, most series have found that patients require treatment for ≥2 years. Symptom recurrence during prednisone tapering develops in 60–85% of patients with giant cell arteritis, requiring a dosage increase. The ESR can serve as a useful indicator of inflammatory disease activity in monitoring and tapering therapy and can be used to judge the pace of the tapering schedule. However, minor increases in the ESR can occur as glucocorticoids are being tapered and do not necessarily reflect an exacerbation of arteritis, particularly if the patient remains symptom-free. Under these circumstances, the tapering should continue with caution. Glucocorticoid toxicity occurs in 35–65% of patients and represents an important cause of patient morbidity. Aspirin 81 mg daily has been found to reduce the occurrence of cranial ischemic complications in giant cell arteritis and should be given in addition to glucocorticoids in patients who do not have contraindications. The use of weekly methotrexate as a glucocorticoid-sparing agent has been examined in two randomized placebo-controlled trials that reached conflicting conclusions. Infliximab, a monoclonal antibody to TNF, was studied in a randomized trial and was not found to provide benefit. Recent reports have shown favorable response of giant cell arteritis to tocilizumab (antiIL-6 receptor), but this treatment requires further study before use in clinical practice.
# Chunk 4920
Visual changes, dizziness

Abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting Abdominal pain, nausea, vomit ing Leg claudication Atypical chest pain, dyspnea Chest pain, myocardial infarc aArteriographic lesions at these locations are usually asymptomatic but may potentially cause these symptoms.
# Chunk 4921
In pediatric patients, palpable purpura is seen in virtually all patients; most patients develop polyarthralgias in the absence of frank arthritis. Gastrointestinal involvement, which is seen in almost 70% of pediatric patients, is characterized by colicky abdominal pain usually associated with nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, or constipation and is frequently accompanied by the passage of blood and mucus per rectum; bowel intussusception may occur. Renal involvement occurs in 10–50% of patients and is usually characterized by mild glomerulonephritis leadingtoproteinuriaandmicroscopic hematuria, with redblood cell casts in the majority of patients (Chap. 338); it usually resolves spontaneously without therapy. Rarely, a progressive glomerulonephritis will develop. In adults, presenting symptoms are most frequently related to the skin and joints, while initial complaints related to the gut are less common. Although certain studies have found that renal disease is more frequentandmore severe inadults,thishasnot beenaconsistent finding. However, the course of renal disease in adults may be more insidious and thus requires close follow-up. Myocardial involvement can occur in adults but is rare in children.
# Chunk 4922
Theterm cutaneous vasculitis isdefinedbroadlyasinflammationofthe blood vessels of the dermis. Due to its heterogeneity, cutaneous vasculitis has been described by a variety of terms including hypersensitivity vasculitis and cutaneous leukocytoclastic angiitis. However, cutaneous vasculitis is not one specific disease but a manifestation that can be seen in a variety of settings. In >70% of cases, cutaneous vasculitis occurs either as part of a primary systemic vasculitis or as a secondary vasculitis related to an inciting agent or an underlying disease (see “Secondary Vasculitis,” below). In the remaining 30% of cases, cutaneous vasculitis occurs idiopathically.
# Chunk 4923
FIGUrE 385-4 Cerebral arteriogram from a 32-year-old male with primary central nervous system vasculitis. Dramaticbeading(arrow)typicalofvasculitisisseen.
# Chunk 4924
Apart from the up to 2.8% of patients who develop fatal complications, the prognosis of this disease for uneventful recovery is excellent. High-dose IV γ-globulin (2 g/kg as a single infusion over 10 h) together with aspirin (100 mg/kg per day for 14 days followed by 3–5 mg/kg per day for several weeks) have been shown to be effective in reducingtheprevalenceofcoronaryarteryabnormalitieswhenadministered early in the course of the disease. Surgery may be necessary for Kawasaki disease patients who have giant coronary artery aneurysms or other coronary complications. Surgical treatment most commonly includes thromboendarterectomy, thrombus clearing, aneurysmal reconstruction, and coronary artery bypass grafting.
# Chunk 4925
These reactions are characterized by the occurrence of fever, urticaria, polyarthralgias, and lymphadenopathy 7–10 days after primary exposure and 2–4 days after secondary exposure to a heterologous protein (classicserumsickness)oranonproteindrugsuchaspenicillinorsulfa (serum sickness–like reaction). Most of the manifestations are not due to a vasculitis; however, occasional patients will have typical cutaneous venulitis that may progress rarely to a systemic vasculitis.
# Chunk 4926
Kidney biopsy findings of a focal, segmental, crescentic, necrotizing glomerulonephritis with few to no immune complexes (pauci-immune glomerulonephritis) are characteristic in patients with granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s), microscopic polyangiitis, or eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Churg-Strauss), who have active renal disease. These findings not only distinguish these entities from other causes of glomerulonephritis, but can also confirm the presence of active glomerulonephritis that requires treatment. As a result, renal biopsies can also be helpful to guide management decisions in these diseases when an established patient has worsening renal function and an inactive or equivocal urine sediment. Cryoglobulinemic vasculitis and IgA vasculitis (Henoch-Schlein) are other vasculitides 386e-1 where renal involvement may occur and where biopsy may be important in diagnosis or prognosis.
# Chunk 4927
Figure 386e-11 Upper-extremity arteriogram demonstrating a long stenotic lesion of the axillary artery in a 75-year-old female with giant cell arteritis.
# Chunk 4928
Figure 386e-12 Magnetic resonance imaging demonstrating extensive aneurysmal disease of the thoracic aorta in an 80-year-old female. The patient had been diagnosed with biopsy-proven giant cell arteritis 10 years prior to presenting with this aneurysm.
# Chunk 4929
Figure 386e-14 Arteriogram demonstrating stenosis of the abdominal aorta in a 25-year-old female with Takayasu arteritis.
# Chunk 4930
Superficial or deep peripheral vein thrombosis is seen in 30% of patients. Pulmonary emboli are a rare complication. The superior vena cava is obstructed occasionally, producing a dramatic clinical picture. Arterial involvement occurs in less than 5% of patients and presents with aortitis or peripheral arterial aneurysm and arterial thrombosis. Pulmonary artery vasculitis presenting with dyspnea, cough,chestpain,hemoptysis,andinfiltratesonchestroentgenograms has been reported in 5% of patients and should be differentiated from thromboembolic disease since it warrants anti-inflammatory and not thrombolytic therapy.
# Chunk 4931
Polymyositis The actual onset of PM is often not easily determined, 2195 and patients typically delay seeking medical advice for several weeks or even months. This is in contrast to DM, in which the rash facilitates early recognition (see below). PM mimics many other myopathies and is a diagnosis of exclusion. It is a subacute inflammatory myopathy affecting adults, and rarely children, who do not have any of the following: rash, involvement of the extraocular and facial muscles, family history of a neuromuscular disease, history of exposure to myotoxic drugs or toxins, endocrinopathy, neurogenic disease, muscular dystrophy, biochemical muscle disorder (deficiency of a muscle enzyme), or IBM as excluded by muscle biopsy analysis (see below). As an isolated entity, PM is a rare (and overdiagnosed) disorder; more commonly, PM occurs in association with a systemic autoimmune or connective tissue disease or with a known viral or bacterial infection. Drugs, especially D-penicillamine, statins, or zidovudine (AZT), may also trigger an inflammatory myopathy similar to PM.
# Chunk 4932
association with Malignancies Although all the inflammatory myopathies can have a chance association with malignant lesions, especially in older age groups, the incidence of malignant conditions appears to be specifically increased only in patients with DM and not in those with PM or IBM. The most common tumors associated with DM are ovarian cancer, breast cancer, melanoma, colon cancer, and non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. The extent of the search that should be conducted for an occult neoplasm in adults with DM depends on the clinical circumstances. Tumors in these patients are usually uncovered by abnormal findings in the medical history and physical examination and not through an extensive blind search. The weight of evidence argues against performing expensive, invasive, and nondirected tumor searches. A complete annual physical examination with pelvic, breast (mammogram, if indicated), and rectal examinations (with colonoscopy according to age and family history); urinalysis; complete blood count; blood chemistry tests; and a chest film should suffice in most cases. In Asians, nasopharyngeal cancer is common, and a careful examination of ears, nose, and throat is indicated. If malignancy is clinically suspected, screening with a whole-body positron emission tomography (PET) scan should be considered.
# Chunk 4933
VCAM-1 TCR CD28 CTLA-4 LFA-1 Chemokines (MCP-1, Mig, IP-10) Infection? Co-stimulation Clonal expansion Cytokines Systemic immune compartment MHC TCR Macrophage Antigen Integrins LFA-4 CD8 CD8CD8 ICAM-1 MHC-I MMP-9 MMP-9 MMP-2 IFN-˜IFN-˜TFN-°TNF-°IL-1, 2 IL-1, 2 MMPs Perforin Necrosis Endoplasmic reticulum BB1 ˛2m Calnexin MHC-I TAP Ag (virus, muscle peptide) CD8 2198 with very high levels of serum CK (often in the thousands), painful muscle cramps, rhabdomyolysis, and myoglobinuria, it may be due to a necrotizing autoimmunemyositis,asdiscussedbelow,aviralinfection or a metabolic disorder such as myophosphorylase deficiency, or carnitine palmitoyltransferase deficiency (Chap. 462e).Several animal parasites,including protozoa (Toxoplasma, Trypanosoma), cestodes (cysticerci), and nematodes (trichinae), may produce a focal or diffuse inflammatory myopathy known as parasitic polymyositis.Staphylococcus aureus,Yersinia, Streptococcus, or anaerobic bacteria may produce a suppurative myositis, known as tropical polymyositis, or pyomyositis. Pyomyositis, previously rare in the west,isnowoccasionallyseeninAIDSpatients.Other bacteria, such as Borrelia burgdorferi (Lyme disease) and Legionella pneumophila (Legionnaire’s disease), may infrequently cause myositis. Patients with periodic paralysis experience recurrent episodes of acute muscle weakness without pain, always beginning in childhood. Chronic alcoholics may develop painful myopathy with myoglobinuria after a bout of heavy drinking. Acute painless muscle weakness with myoglobinuria may occur with prolonged hypokalemia, or hypophosphatemia and hypomagnesemia, usually in chronic alcoholics or in patients on nasogastric suction receiving parenteral hyperalimentation.
# Chunk 4934
Myofasciitis This distinctive inflammatory disor-FIGUrE 388-2 Cell-mediated mechanisms of muscle damage in polymyositis (PM) der affecting muscle and fascia presents as diffuse and inclusion body myositis (IBM). Antigen-specific CD8 cells are expanded in the myalgias, skin induration, fatigue, and mild muscle periphery, cross the endothelial barrier, and bind directly to muscle fibers via T cell recep-weakness; mild elevations of serum CK are usually tor (TCR) molecules that recognize aberrantly expressed major histocompatibility com-present. The most common form is eosinophilic plex (MHC)-I. Engagement of co-stimulatory molecules (BB1 and ICOSL) with their ligands myofasciitischaracterizedbyperipheralbloodeosin(CD28, CTLA-4, and ICOS), along with ICAM-1/LFA-1, stabilize the CD8–muscle fiber inter-ophiliaandeosinophilicinfiltratesinthe endomysial action. Metalloproteinases (MMPs) facilitate the migration of T cells and their attachment tissue. In some patients, the eosinophilic myositis/ to the muscle surface. Muscle fiber necrosis occurs via perforin granules released by the fasciitis occurs in the context of parasitic infections, autoaggressive T cells. A direct myocytotoxic effect exerted by the cytokines interferon vasculitis, mixed connective tissue disease, hypereo(IFN) γ, interleukin (IL) 1, or tumor necrosis factor (TNF) α may also play a role. Death of sinophilic syndrome, or toxic exposures (e.g., toxic the muscle fiber is mediated by necrosis. MHC class I molecules consist of a heavy chain oil syndrome, contaminated l-tryptophan) or with and a light chain (β2 microglobulin [β2m]) complexed with an antigenic peptide that is mutations in the calpain gene. A distinct subset of transported into the endoplasmic reticulum by TAP proteins (Chap. 373e). myofasciitis is characterized by pronounced infiltra tion of the connective tissue around the muscle by sheets of periodic acid–Schiff-positive macrophages the dystrophinopathies where inflammatory cell infiltration is often and occasional CD8 T cells (macrophagic myofasciitis or inflammatory found early in the disease. Such doubtful cases should always be given myositis with abundant macrophages [IMAM]). A focal form of this anadequatetrialofglucocorticoidtherapyandundergogenetictesting disorder,limitedtositesofpreviousvaccinations,administeredmonths to exclude muscular dystrophy. Identification of the MHC/CD8 lesion or years earlier, has been linked to an aluminum-containing substrate by muscle biopsy is helpful to identify cases of PM. Some metabolic in vaccines. This disorder, which to date has not been observed outside myopathies,including glycogenstoragedisease dueto myophosphory-of France, responds to glucocorticoid therapy, and the overall prognosis lase or acid maltase deficiency, lipid storage myopathies due to carni-seems favorable. tine deficiency, and mitochondrial diseases produce weakness that is often associated with other characteristic clinical signs; diagnosis rests
# Chunk 4935
Hyperacute Necrotizing Fasciitis/Myositis (Flesh-Eating Disease) This a fulminant infectious disease, seen most often in the tropics or in conditions with poor hygiene, characterized by widespread necrosis of the superficial fascia and muscle of a limb; if the scrotum, perineum, and abdominal wall are affected, the condition is referred to as Fournier’s gangrene. It may be caused by group A β-hemolytic Streptococcus, methicillin-sensitive S. aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Vibrio vulnificus, clostridial species (gas gangrene; Chap. 179), or polymicrobial infection with anaerobes and facultative bacteria (Chap. 201); toxins from these bacteria may act as superantigens (Chap. 372e). The port of bacterial entry is usually a trivial cut or skin abrasion, and the source is contactwithcarriersoftheorganism.Individualswithdiabetesmellitus, immunodeficiency states, or systemic illnesses such as liver failure are most susceptible. Systemic varicella is a predisposing factor in children.
# Chunk 4936
“Weakness” due to Muscle Pain and Muscle Tenderness A number of conditions including polymyalgia rheumatica (Chap. 385) and arthritic disorders of adjacent joints may enter into the differential diagnosis of inflammatory myopathy, even though they do not cause myositis. The muscle biopsy is either normal or discloses type II muscle fiber atrophy. Patients with fibrositis and fibromyalgia (Chap. 396) complain of focal or diffuse muscle tenderness, fatigue, and aching, which is sometimes poorly differentiated from joint pain. Some patients, however, have muscle tenderness, painful muscles on movement, and signs suggestive of a collagen vascular disorder, such as an increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, antinuclear antibody, or rheumatoid factor, along with modest elevation of the serum CK and aldolase. They demonstrate a “break-away” pattern of weaknesswithdifficultysustainingeffortbutnottruemuscleweakness. Themusclebiopsyisusuallynormalornonspecific.Manysuchpatients show some response to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents or glucocorticoids, although most continue to have indolent complaints. An indolent fasciitis in the setting of an ill-defined connective tissue disorder may be at times present, and these patients should not be labeled as having a psychosomatic disorder. Chronic fatigue syndrome, which may follow a viral infection, can present with debilitating fatigue, sore throat, painful lymphadenopathy, myalgia, arthralgia, sleep disorder, and headache (Chap. 464e). These patients do not have muscle weakness, and the muscle biopsy is normal.
# Chunk 4937
The clinically suspected diagnosis of PM, DM, IBM, or necrotizing myositis is confirmed by analysis of serum muscle enzymes, EMG findings, and muscle biopsy (Table 388-2).
# Chunk 4938
In IBM (Fig. 388-5), there is endomysial inflammation with T cells invading MHC-I-expressing nonvacuolated muscle fibers; basophilic granular deposits distributed around the edge of slit-like vacuoles (rimmed vacuoles); loss of fibers, replaced by fat and connective tissue, hypertrophic fibers, and angulated or round fibers; rare eosinophilic cytoplasmic inclusions; abnormal mitochondria characterized by the presence of ragged-red fibers or cytochrome oxidase–negative fibers; andamyloiddepositswithinornexttothevacuolesbestvisualizedwith crystal violet or Congo-red staining viewed with fluorescent optics. Electron microscopy demonstrates filamentous inclusions in the vicinity of the rimmed vacuoles. In at least 15% of patients with the typical clinical phenotype of IBM, there is brisk inflammation in the muscle biopsy but no vacuoles or amyloid deposits, leading to an erroneous diagnosis of PM. Such patients are often referred to as having “clinical IBM.” Close clinicopathologic correlations are therefore essential; if uncertain, a repeat muscle biopsy from another site is often helpful.
# Chunk 4939
The goal of therapy is to improve muscle strength, thereby improving function in activities of daily living, and ameliorate the extra-muscular manifestations (rash, dysphagia, dyspnea, fever). When strength improves, the serum CK falls concurrently; however, the reverse is not always true. Unfortunately, there is a common tendency to “chase” or treat the CK level instead of the muscle weakness, a practice that has led to prolonged and unnecessary use of immunosuppressive drugs and erroneous assessment of their efficacy. It is prudent to discontinue these drugs if, after an adequate trial, there is no objective improvement in muscle strength whether or not CK levels are reduced. Agents used in the treatment of PM and DM include the following: 1. Glucocorticoids. Oral prednisone is the initial treatment of choice; the effectiveness and side effects of this therapy determine the future need for stronger immunosuppressive drugs. High-dose prednisone, at least 1 mg/kg per day, is initiated as early in the disease as possible. After 3–4 weeks, prednisone is tapered slowly over a period of 10 weeks to 1 mg/kg every other day. If there is evidence of efficacy and no serious side effects, the dosage is then further reduced by 5 or 10 mg every 3–4 weeks until the lowest possible dose that controls the disease is reached. The efficacy of prednisone is determined by an objective increase in muscle strength and activities of daily living, which almost always occurs by the third month of therapy. A feeling of increased energy or a reduction of the CK level without a concomitant increase in muscle strength is not a reliable sign of improvement. If prednisone provides no objective benefit after ~3 months of high-dose therapy, the disease is probably unresponsive to the drug and tapering should be accelerated while the next-in-line immunosuppressive drug is started. Although controlled trials have not been performed, almost all patients with true PM or DM respond to glucocorticoids to some degree and for some period of time; in general, DM responds better than PM.
# Chunk 4940
The following drugs are commonly used but have never been tested in controlled studies: (1) Azathioprine is well tolerated, has few side effects, and appears to be as effective for longterm therapy as other drugs. The dose is up to 3 mg/kg daily. (2) Methotrexate has a faster onset of action than azathioprine. It is given orally starting at 7.5 mg weekly for the first 3 weeks (2.5 mg every 12 h for 3 doses), with gradual dose escalation by 2.5 mg per week to a total of 25 mg weekly. A rare side effect is methotrexate pneumonitis, which can be difficult to distinguish from the interstitial lung disease of the primary myopathy associated with Jo-1 antibodies (described above). (3) Mycophenolate mofetil also has a faster onset of action than azathioprine. At doses up to 2.5 or 3 g/d in two divided doses, it is well tolerated for long-term use. (4) Monoclonal anti-CD20 antibody (rituximab) has been shown in a small uncontrolled series to benefit patients with DM and PM, but a controlled study did not show differences between patients randomized 8 weeks apart. (5) Cyclosporine has inconsistent and mild benefit. (6) Cyclophosphamide (0.5–1 g/m2 IV monthly for 6 months) has limited success and significant toxicity.
# Chunk 4941
Immune-Mediated, Inflammatory, and Rheumatologic Disorders relapsing polychondritis Carol A. Langford Relapsingpolychondritisisanuncommondisorderofunknowncausecharacterizedbyinflammationofcartilagepredominantlyaffectingtheears,nose,andlaryngotracheobronchialtree.Othermanifesta-tionsincludescleritis,neurosensoryhearingloss,polyarthritis,cardiac389 2202 A patient with presumed PM who has not responded to any form of immunotherapy most likely has IBM or another disease, usually a metabolic myopathy, a muscular dystrophy, a drug-induced myopathy, or an endocrinopathy. In these cases, a repeat muscle biopsy and a renewed search for another cause of the myopathy is indicated. Calcinosis, a manifestation of DM, is difficult to treat; however, new calcium deposits may be prevented if the primary disease responds to the available therapies. Bisphosphonates, aluminum hydroxide, probenecid, colchicine, low doses of warfarin, calcium blockers, and surgical excision have all been tried without success. IBM is generally resistant to immunosuppressive therapies. Prednisone together with azathioprine or methotrexate is often tried for a few months in newly diagnosed patients, although results are generally disappointing. Because occasional patients may feel subjectively weaker after these drugs are discontinued, some clinicians prefer to maintain these patients on low-dose, every-otherday prednisone along with mycophenolate in an effort to slow disease progression, even though there is no objective evidence or controlled study to support this practice. In two controlled studies of IVIg in IBM, minimal benefit in up to 30% of patients was found; the strength gains, however, were not of sufficient magnitude to justify its routine use. Another trial of IVIg combined with prednisone was ineffective. Nonetheless, some experts believe that a 2to 3-month trial with IVIg may be reasonable for selected patients with IBM who experience rapid progression of muscle weakness or choking episodes due to worsening dysphagia.
# Chunk 4942
The 5-year survival rate for treated patients with PM and DM is ~95%, and the 10-yearsurvivalrateis 84%; deathisusuallyduetopulmonary, cardiac, or other systemic complications. The prognosis is worse for patients who are severely affected at presentation, when initial treatment is delayed, and in cases with severe dysphagia or respiratory difficulties. Older patients and those with associated cancer also have a worse prognosis. DM responds more favorably to therapy than PM and thus has a better prognosis. Most patients improve with therapy, and many make a full functional recovery, which is often sustained with maintenance therapy. Up to 30% may be left with some residual muscle weakness. Relapses may occur at any time.
# Chunk 4943
Immunologic mechanisms play a role in the pathogenesis of relapsing polychondritis. The accumulating data strongly suggest that both humoral and cell-mediated immunity play an important role in the pathogenesis of relapsing polychondritis. Immunoglobulin and complement deposits are found at sites of inflammation. In addition,	 antibodies to type II collagen and to matrilin-1 and immune complexes are detected in the sera of some patients. The possibility that an immune response to type II collagen may be important in the pathogenesis is supported experimentally by the occurrence of auricular chondritis in rats immunized with type II collagen. Antibodies to type II collagen are found in the sera of these animals, and immune deposits are detected at sites of ear inflammation. Humoral immune responses to type IX and type XI collagen, matrilin-1, and cartilage oligomeric matrix protein have been demonstrated in some patients. In a study, rats immunized with matrilin-1 were found to develop severe inspiratory stridor and swelling of the nasal septum. The rats had severe inflammation with erosions of the involved cartilage, which was characterized by increased numbers of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells in the lesions. The cartilage of the joints and ear pinna was not involved. All had IgG antibodies to matrilin-1. Matrilin-1 is a noncollagenous protein present in the extracellular matrix in cartilage. It is present in high concentrations in the trachea and is also present in the nasal septum but not in articular cartilage. A subsequent study demonstrated serum anti-matrilin-1 antibodies in approximately 13% of patients withrelapsingpolychondritis;approximately70%ofthesepatientshad respiratory symptoms. Cell-mediated immunity may also be operative in causing tissue injury, since lymphocyte transformation can be demonstrated when lymphocytes of patients are exposed to cartilage extracts. T cells specific for type II collagen have been found in some
# Chunk 4944
The onset of relapsing polychondritis is frequently abrupt, with the appearance of one or two sites of cartilaginous inflammation. The pattern of cartilaginous involvement and the frequency of episodes vary widely among patients. Noncartilaginous presentations may also occur. Systemic inflammatory features such as fever, fatigue, and weight loss occur and may precede the clinical signs of relapsing polychondritis by several weeks. Relapsing polychondritis may go unrecognized for several months or even years in patients who only initially manifest intermittent joint pain and/or swelling, or who have unexplained eye inflammation, hearing loss, valvular heart disease, or pulmonary symptoms.
# Chunk 4945
Joint involvement is the presenting manifestation in relapsing polychondritis in approximately one-third of patients and may be present for several months before other features appear. Eventually, more than one-half of the patients will have arthralgias or arthritis. The arthritis is usually asymmetric and oligo-or polyarticular, and it involves both large and small peripheral joints. An episode of arthritis lasts from a few days to several weeks and resolves spontaneously without joint erosion or deformity. Attacks of arthritis may not be temporally related to other manifestations of relapsing polychondritis. Joint fluid has been reported to be noninflammatory. In addition to peripheral joints, inflammation may involve the costochondral, sternomanubrial, and sternoclavicular cartilages. Destruction of these cartilages may result in a pectus excavatum deformity or even a flail anterior chest wall.
# Chunk 4946
PaTIENT OUTCOME, PrOGNOSIS, aND SUrVIVaL

The course of relapsing polychondritis is highly variable. Some patients experience inflammatory episodes lasting from a few days to several weeks that then subside spontaneously or with treatment. Attacks may recur at intervals varying from weeks to months. In other patients, the disease has a chronic, smoldering course that may be severe.Inonestudy,the5-yearestimatedsurvivalratewas74%andthe 10-year survival rate was 55%. In contrast to earlier series, only about one-half of the deaths could be attributed to relapsing polychondritis or complications of treatment. Airway complications accounted for only 10% of all fatalities. In general, patients with more widespread disease have a worse prognosis.
# Chunk 4947
2206 gene signatures have been associated with more severe disease, such as cardiac, neurologic, and fibrotic pulmonary disease. At diagnosis the natural history of the disease may be difficult to predict. One form of the disease, Löfgren’s syndrome, consists of erythema nodosum and hilar adenopathy on chest roentgenogram. In some cases, periarticular arthritis may be identified without erythema nodosum. Löfgren’s syndrome is associated with a good prognosis, with >90% of patients experiencing disease resolution within 2 years. Recent studies have demonstrated that the HLA-DRB1*03 was found in two-thirds of Scandinavian patients with Löfgren’s syndrome. More than 95% of those patients who were HLA-DRB1*03 positive had resolution of their disease within 2 years, whereas nearly one-half of the remaining patients had disease for more than 2 years. It remains to be determined whether these observations can be applied to a non-Scandinavian population.
# Chunk 4948
Pulmonary arterial hypertension is reported in at least 5% of sarcoidosis patients. Either direct vascular involvement or the consequence of fibrotic changes in the lung can lead to pulmonary arterial hypertension. In sarcoidosis patients with end-stage fibrosis awaiting lung transplant, 70% will have pulmonary arterial hypertension. This is a much higher incidence than that reported for other fibrotic lung diseases. In less advanced, but still symptomatic, patients, pulmonary arterial hypertension has been noted in up to 50% of thecases. Because sarcoidosis-associated pulmonary arterial hypertension may respond to therapy, evaluation for this should be considered in persistently dyspneic patients.
# Chunk 4949
The frequency of ocular manifestations for sarcoidosis varies depending on race. In Japan, >70% of sarcoidosis patients develop ocular disease, whereas in the United States only 30% have eye disease, with problems more common in African Americans than whites. Although the most common manifestation is an anterior uveitis, over a quarter ofpatientswill have inflammationat the posteriorof theeye, including retinitis and pars planitis. Although symptoms such as photophobia, blurred vision, and increased tearing can occur, some asymptomatic patients still have active inflammation. Initially asymptomatic patients with ocular sarcoidosis can eventually develop blindness. Therefore, it is recommended that all patients with sarcoidosis receive a dedicated ophthalmologic examination. Sicca is seen in over one-half of the chronic sarcoidosis patients. Dry eyes appear to be a reflection of prior lacrimal gland disease. Although the patient may no longer have active inflammation, the dry eyes may require natural tears or other lubricants.
# Chunk 4950
Using biopsies to detect granulomatous disease, liver involvement can be identified in over one-half of sarcoidosis patients. However, using liver function studies, only 20–30% of patients will have evidence of liver involvement. The most common abnormality of liver function is an elevation of the alkaline phosphatase level, consistent with an obstructive pattern. In addition, elevated transaminase levels can occur. An elevated bilirubin level is a marker for more advanced liver disease. Overall, only 5% of sarcoidosis patients have sufficient symptoms from their liver disease to require specific therapy. Although symptoms can be due to hepatomegaly, more frequently symptoms 2208 result from extensive intrahepatic cholestasis leading to portal hypertension. In this case, ascites and esophageal varices can occur. It is rare that a sarcoidosis patient will require a liver transplant, because even the patient with cirrhosis due to sarcoidosis can respond to systemic therapy. On a cautionary note, patients with both sarcoidosis and hepatitis C should avoid therapy with interferon a because of its association with the development or worsening of granulomatous disease.
# Chunk 4951
Hypercalcemia and/or hypercalciuria occurs in about 10% of sarcoidosis patients. It is more common in whites than African Americans and in men. The mechanism of abnormal calcium metabolism is increased production of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D by the granuloma itself. The 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D causes increased intestinal absorption of calcium, leading to hypercalcemia with a suppressed parathyroid hormone (PTH) level (Chap. 424). Increased exogenous vitaminDfromdietorsunlightexposuremayexacerbatethisproblem. Serumcalciumshould be determinedaspartoftheinitialevaluationof all sarcoidosis patients, and a repeat determination may be useful during the summer months with increased sun exposure. In patients with a history of renal calculi, a 24-h urine calcium measurement should be obtained. If a sarcoidosis patient with a history of renal calculi is to be placed on calcium supplements, a follow-up 24-h urine calcium level should be measured.
# Chunk 4952
The presence of cardiac involvement is influenced by race. Although over a quarter of Japanese sarcoidosis patients develop cardiac disease, only 5% of sarcoidosis patients in the United States and Europe develop symptomatic cardiac disease. However, there is no apparent racial predilection between whites and African Americans. Cardiac disease,whichusually presentsas either congestiveheartfailureor cardiac arrhythmias, results from infiltration of the heart muscle by granulomas. Diffuse granulomatous involvement of the heart muscle can lead to profound dysfunction with left ventricular ejection fractions below 10%. Even in this situation, improvement in the ejection fraction can occur with systemic therapy. Arrhythmias can also occur with diffuse infiltration or with more patchy cardiac involvement. If the atrioventricular (AV) node is infiltrated, heart block can occur, which can be detected by routine electrocardiography. Ventricular arrhythmias and sudden death due to ventricular tachycardia are common causes of death. Arrhythmias are best detected using 24-h ambulatory monitoring, and electrophysiology studies may be negative. Other screening tests for cardiac disease include routine electrocardiography and echocardiography. The confirmation of cardiac sarcoidosis is usually performed with either MRI or positron emission tomography (PET) scanning. Because ventricular arrhythmias are usually multifocal due to patchy multiple granulomas in the heart, ablation therapy is not useful. Patients with significant ventricular arrhythmias should be considered for an implanted defibrillator, which appears to have reduced the rate of death in cardiac sarcoidosis. Although systemic therapy can be useful in treating the arrhythmias, patients may still have malignant arrhythmias up to 6 months after starting successful treatment, and the risk for recurrent arrhythmias occurs whenever medications are tapered.
# Chunk 4953
Direct granulomatous involvement of bone and muscle can be documented by radiography (x-ray, MRI, PET scan [Fig. 390-7], or gallium scan) or confirmed by biopsy in about 10% of sarcoidosis patients. However, alargerpercentageofsarcoidosis patients complain of myalgias and arthralgias. These complaints are similar to those reported by patients with other inflammatory diseases, including chronic infections such as mononucleosis. Fatigue associated with sarcoidosis may be overwhelming formany patients. Recentstudies have demonstrated a link between fatigue and small peripheral nerve fiber disease in sarcoidosis.
# Chunk 4954
The PET scan has increasingly replaced gallium-67 scanning to identify areas of granulomatous disease in the chest and other parts of the body (Fig. 390-7). Both tests can be used to identify potential areas for biopsy. Cardiac PET scanning has also proved useful in assessing cardiac sarcoidosis. The identification of hypermetabolic activity may be due to the granulomas from sarcoidosis and not to disseminated malignancy.
# Chunk 4955
MRI has also proved useful in the assessment of extrapulmonary sarcoidosis. Gadolinium enhancement has been demonstrated in areas of inflammation in the brain, heart, and bone. MRI scans may detect asymptomatic lesions. Like PET scan, MRI changes appear similar to those seen with malignancy and infection. In some cases, biopsy may be necessary to determine the cause of the radiologic abnormality.
# Chunk 4956
Serum levels of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) can be helpful in the diagnosis of sarcoidosis. However, the test has somewhat low sensitivity and specificity. Elevated levels of ACE are reported in 60% of patients with acute disease and only 20% of patients with chronic disease. Although there are several causes for mild elevation of ACE, including diabetes, elevations of >50% of the upper limit of normal are seen in only a few conditions including sarcoidosis, leprosy, Gaucher’s disease, hyperthyroidism, and disseminated granulomatous infections such as miliary tuberculosis. Because the ACE level is determined by a biologic assay, the concurrent use of an ACE inhibitor such as lisinopril will lead to a very low ACE level.
# Chunk 4957
The risk of death or loss of organ function remains

Features highly consistent with sarcoidosis: low in sarcoidosis. Poor outcomes usually occur in patients who present with advanced disease in whom treatment seems to have little impact. In these cases, irreversible fibrotic changes have frequently occurred. Over the past 20 years, the reported mortality from sarcoidosis has increased in the United States and England. Whether this is due to heightened awareness of the chronic nature of this disease or to other factors such as more
# Chunk 4958
If the biopsy reveals granulomas, an alternative diagnosis such as form of the disease that does not resolve within the first 2–5 years.
# Chunk 4959
Pancreas Type 1 autoimmune pancreatitis, presenting as mild abdominal pain; weight loss; acute, obstructive jaundice, mimicking adenocarcinoma of the pancreas (including a pancreatic mass); between 20 and 50% of patients present with acute glucose intolerance; imaging shows diffuse (termed “sausage-shaped pancreas”) or segmental pancreatic enlargement, with loss of normal lobularity; a mass often raises the suspicion of malignancy
# Chunk 4960
The majority of patients with IgG4-RD have elevated serum IgG4 concentrations; however, the range of elevation varies widely. Serum concentrations of IgG4 as high as 30 or 40 times the upper limit of normal sometimes occur, usually in patients with disease that affects multiple organ systems simultaneously. Approximately 30% of patients have normal serum IgG4 concentrations despite classic histopathologic and immunohistochemical findings. Such patients tend to have disease that affects fewer organs. Patients with IgG4-related retroperitoneal fibrosis have a high likelihood of normal serum IgG4 concentrations, perhaps because the process has advanced to a fibrotic stage by the time the diagnosis is considered.
# Chunk 4961
Glucocorticoids are the first line of therapy. Treatment regimens, extrapolated from experience with the management of type 1 AIP, generally begin with 40 mg/d of prednisone, with tapering to discontinuation or maintenance doses of 5 mg/d within 2 or 3 months. The clinical response to glucocorticoids is usually swift and striking; however, longitudinal data indicate that disease flares occur in more than 90% of patients within 3 years. Conventional steroid-sparing agents such as azathioprine and mycophenolate mofetil have been used in some patients; however, evidence for their efficacy is lacking.
# Chunk 4962
For patients with relapsing or glucocorticoid-resistant disease, B cell depletion with rituximab is an excellent second-line therapy. Rituximab treatment (two doses of 1 g IV, separated by approximately 15 days) leads to a targeted, precipitous decline in serum IgG4 concentrations, suggesting that rituximab achieves its effects in part by preventing the repletion of short-lived plasma cells that produce IgG4. More important than its effects on IgG4 concentrations, however, may be the effect of B cell depletion on T cell function. Specific effects of rituximab on CD4+ effector T cells have been documented in IgG4-RD.
# Chunk 4963
domains, and caspase recruitment domains. PYRIN domains medi-Over 90% of FMF patients experience abdominal attacks at some ate homotypic protein-protein interactions and have been found in time. Episodes range in severity from dull, aching pain and distention severalotherproteins,includingcryopyrin(NLRP3),whichismutated withmildtenderness ondirectpalpation toseveregeneralizedpain in three other recurrent fever syndromes. Through a number of with absent bowel sounds, rigidity, rebound tenderness, and air-fluid mechanisms, including the interaction of the PYRIN domain with an levels on upright radiographs. Computed tomography (CT) scanning intermediary adaptor protein, pyrin regulates caspase-1 (interleukin may demonstrate a small amount of fluid in the abdominal cavity. If [IL]1β-convertingenzyme),andtherebyIL-1βsecretion.Micebearing such patients undergo exploratory laparotomy, a sterile, neutrophilFMF-associated pyrin mutations exhibit inflammation and excessive rich peritoneal exudate is present, sometimes with adhesions from IL-1 production. previous episodes. Ascites is rare.
# Chunk 4964
If measured, fever is nearly always present throughout FMF attacks. advent of colchicine prophylaxis, chronic arthritis of the knee or hip Severehyperpyrexiaand evenfebrileseizuresmaybe seenininfants, wasseenin~5%ofFMFpatientswitharthritis.Chronicsacroiliitiscan andfeverissometimestheonlymanifestationofFMFinyoungchildren. occurinFMFirrespectiveoftheHLA-B27antigen,eveninthefaceof 2214 colchicine therapy. In the United States, FMF patients are much more likely to have arthralgia than arthritis. The most characteristic cutaneous manifestation of FMF is erysipelas-like erythema, a raised erythematous rash that most commonly occurs on the dorsum of the foot, ankle, or lower leg alone or in combination with abdominal pain, pleurisy, or arthritis. Biopsy demonstrates perivascular infiltrates of granulocytes and monocytes. This rash is seen most often in M694V homozygotes and is relatively rare in the United States. Exercise-induced (nonfebrile) myalgia is common in FMF, and a small percentage of patients develop a protracted febrile myalgia that can last several weeks. Symptomatic pericardial disease is rare, although some patients have small pericardial effusions as an incidental echocardiographic finding. Unilateral acute scrotal inflammation may occur in prepubertal boys. Aseptic meningitis has been reported in FMF, but the causal connection is controversial. Vasculitis, including Henoch-Schönlein purpura and polyarteritis nodosa (Chap. 385), may be seen at increased frequency in FMF. The M694V FMF mutation has recently been shown to be a risk factor for Behçet’s disease. Laboratory features of FMF attacks are consistent with acute inflammation and include an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate, leukocytosis, thrombocytosis (in children), and elevations in C-reactiveprotein,fibrinogen,haptoglobin,andserumimmunoglobulins. Transient albuminuria and hematuria may also be seen.
# Chunk 4965
Before the advent of colchicine prophylaxis, systemic amyloidosis was a common complication of FMF. It is caused by deposition of a fragment of serum amyloid A, an acute-phase reactant, in the kidneys, adrenals, intestine, spleen, lung, and testes (Chap. 137). Amyloidosis should be suspected in patients who have proteinuria between attacks; renal or rectal biopsy is used most often to establish the diagnosis. Risk factors include the M694V homozygous genotype, positive family history (independent of FMF mutational status), the SAA 1 genotype, male gender, noncompliance with colchicine therapy, and having grown up in the Middle East.
# Chunk 4966
The treatment of choice for FMF is daily oral colchicine, which decreases the frequency and intensity of attacks and prevents the development of amyloidosis in compliant patients. Intermittent dosing at the onset of attacks is not as effective as daily prophylaxis and is of unproven value in preventing amyloidosis. The usual adult dose of colchicine is 1.2–1.8 mg/d, which causes substantial reduction in symptoms in two-thirds of patients and some improvement in >90%. Children may require lower doses, although not proportionately to body weight.
# Chunk 4967
For FMF patients who do not respond to colchicine or cannot tolerate therapeutic doses, injectable IL-1 inhibitors appear to be effective in preventing the acute attacks. In a small randomized placebo-controlled trial, weekly subcutaneous rilonacept, a recombinant IL-1 receptor fusion protein, significantly reduced the frequency of attacks. There is also substantial anecdotal experience with daily subcutaneous anakinra, a recombinant IL-1 receptor antagonist, in preventing the acute attacks of FMF, and in some cases reducing established amyloid deposits. Canakinumab, a monoclonal antibody to IL-1β, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) inhibitors may also have a role in the treatment of colchicine-unresponsive or intolerant patients. Bone marrow transplantation has been suggested for refractory FMF, but the risk-benefit ratio is currently regarded as unacceptable.
# Chunk 4968
TRAPS is caused by dominantly inherited mutations in the extracellular domains of the 55-kDa TNF receptor (TNFR1, p55). Although originallydescribedinalargeIrishfamily(andhencethenamefamilial Hibernian fever), TRAPS has a broad ethnic distribution. TRAPS episodes often begin in childhood. The duration of attacks ranges from 1–2 days to as long as several weeks, and in severe cases symptoms maybe nearly continuous. Inadditionto peritoneal, pleural,and synovial attacks similar to FMF, TRAPS patients frequently have ocular inflammation (most often conjunctivitis and/or periorbital edema), and a distinctive migratory myalgia with overlying painful erythema may be present. TRAPS patients generally respond better to glucocorticoids than to prophylactic colchicine. Untreated, about 15% develop amyloidosis. The diagnosis of TRAPS is based on the demonstration of TNFRSF1A mutations in the presence of characteristic symptoms. Two particular variants, R92Q and P46L, are common in certain populations and may act more as functional polymorphisms than as disease-causing mutations. In contrast, pathogenic TNFRSF1A mutations, including a number of substitutions at highly conserved cysteine residues, are associated with intracellular TNFR1 misfolding, aggregation, and retention, with consequent ligand-independent kinase activation,mitochondrialreactiveoxygenspeciesproduction,andproinflammatorycytokinerelease.Etanercept,aTNFinhibitor,ameliorates TRAPS attacks, but the long-term experience with this agent has been less favorable. Perhaps because of the ligand-independent signaling abnormalities in TRAPS, IL-1 inhibition has been beneficial in a large percentage of the patients in whom it has been used. Monoclonal antiTNFantibodiesshouldbeavoided,becausetheymayexacerbateTRAPS attacks.
# Chunk 4969
HIDS is a recessively inherited recurrent fever syndrome found primarily in individuals of northern European ancestry. It is caused by mutations in mevalonate kinase (MVK), encoding an enzyme involved in the synthesis of cholesterol and nonsterol isoprenoids. Attacks usually begin in infancy and last 3–5 days. Clinically distinctive features include painful cervical adenopathy, a diffuse maculopapular rash sometimes affecting the palms and soles, and aphthous ulcers; pleurisy is rare, as is amyloidosis. Although originally defined by the persistent elevation of serum IgD, disease activity is not related to IgD levels, and some patients with FMF or TRAPS may have modestly increased serum IgD. Moreover, occasional patients with MVK mutations and recurrent fever have normal IgD levels. For these reasons, some have proposed renaming this disorder mevalonate kinase deficiency (MKD). All patients with mutations have markedly elevated urinary mevalonatelevels duringtheir febrileattacks, althoughtheinflammatorymanifestations are likely to be due to a deficiency of isoprenoids rather than an excess of mevalonate. There is currently no established treatment for HIDS/MKD, although intermittent or continuous IL-1 inhibition and TNF inhibitors have been effective in small series.
# Chunk 4970
The incidence of rheumatic diseases rises with age, such that 58% of those >65 years will have joint complaints. Musculoskeletal disorders inelderlypatientsareoftennotdiagnosed becausethesigns and symptoms may be insidious, overlooked, or overshadowed by comorbidities. These difficulties are compounded by the diminished reliability of laboratory testing in the elderly, who often manifest nonpathologic abnormal results. For example, the ESR may be misleadingly elevated, and low-titer positive tests for rheumatoid factor and antinuclear antibodies (ANAs) may be seen in up to 15% of elderly patients. Although nearly all rheumatic disorders afflict the elderly, geriatric patients are particularly prone to OA, osteoporosis, osteoporotic fractures, gout, pseudogout, polymyalgia rheumatica, vasculitis, and drug-induced disorders (Table 393-2). The elderly should be approached in the same manner as other patients with musculoskeletal complaints, but with an emphasis on identifying the potential rheumatic consequences of medicalcomorbiditiesandtherapies.The physicalexaminationshould identify the nature of the musculoskeletal complaint as well as coexisting diseases that may influence diagnosis and choice of treatment.
# Chunk 4971
Serum uric acid determinations are useful in the diagnosis of gout and in monitoring the response to urate-lowering therapy. Uric acid, the end product of purine metabolism, is primarily excreted in the urine. Serum values range from 238 to 516 μmol/L (4.0–8.6 mg/dL) in men; the lower values (178–351 μmol/L [3.0–5.9 mg/dL]) seen in women are caused by the uricosuric effects of estrogen. Urinary uric acid levels are normally <750 mg per 24 h. Although hyperuricemia (especiallylevels>535μmol/L[9mg/dL])isassociatedwithanincreased incidence of gout and nephrolithiasis, levels may not correlate with the severity of articular disease. Uric acid levels (and the risk of gout) may be increased by inborn errors of metabolism (Lesch-Nyhan syndrome), disease states (renal insufficiency, myeloproliferative disease, psoriasis), or drugs (alcohol, cytotoxic therapy, thiazides). Although nearly all patients with gout will demonstrate hyperuricemia at some time during their illness, up to 50% of patients with an acute gouty attack will have normal serum uric acid levels. Monitoring serum uric acid may be useful in assessing the response to urate-lowering therapy or chemotherapy, with the target goal being a serum urate <6 mg/dL.
# Chunk 4972
FIGUrE 393-7 Dual-energy computed tomography (DECT) scan from a 45-year-old woman with right ankle swelling around the lateral malleolus. Three-dimensionalvolume-renderedcoronalreformattedDECTimageshowsthatthemassiscomposedofmonosodiumurate(red)inkeepingwithtophus(arrow).(Used with permission from S Nicolaou et al: AJR 194:1072, 2010.) 18F-Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) is the most commonly used radio-pharmaceutical in PET scanning. FDG-PET/CT scans have been seldom used in the evaluation of septic or inflammatory arthritis. Dual-energy CT (DECT) scanning, developed in urology to identify urinary calculi, has been a highly sensitive and specific method used to identify and quantify uric acid deposition in tissues (Fig. 393-7).
# Chunk 4973
A 45-year-old woman receiving high-dose glucocorticoids developed right hip pain. Conventional x-rays (top) demonstrated only mild sclerosis of the right femoral head. T1-weighted MRI (bottom) demonstrated low-density signal in the right femoral head, diagnostic of osteonecrosis.
# Chunk 4974
Adherence over the long term is the major challenge to an exer-2231 cise prescription. In trials involving patients with knee OA, who are engaged in exercise treatment, from a third to over half of patients stopped exercising by 6 months. Less than 50% continued regular exercise at 1 year. The strongest predictor of a patient’s continued exercise is a previous personal history of successful exercise. Physicians should reinforce the exercise prescription at each clinic visit, help the patient recognize barriers to ongoing exercise, and identify convenient times for exercise to be done routinely. The combination of exercise with calorie restriction and weight loss is especially effective in lessening pain.
# Chunk 4975
NSAIDs are the most popular drugs to treat osteoarthritic pain. They can be administered either topically or orally. In clinical trials, oral NSAIDs produce ~30% greater improvement in pain than high-dose acetaminophen. Occasional patients treated with NSAIDs experience dramatic pain relief, whereas others experience little improvement. Initially, NSAIDs should be administered topically or taken orally on an “as needed” basis because side effects are less frequent with low intermittent doses. If occasional medication use is insufficiently effective, then daily treatment may be indicated, with
# Chunk 4976
Serum uric acid levels can be normal or low at the time of an acute attack, as inflammatory cytokines can be uricosuric and effective initiation of hypouricemic therapy can precipitate attacks. This limits the value of serum uric acid determinations for the diagnosis of gout. Nevertheless, serum urate levels are almost always elevated at some time and are important to use to follow the course of hypouricemic therapy. A 24-h urine collection for uric acid can, in some cases, be useful in assessing the risk of stones, elucidating overproduction or underexcretion of uric acid, and deciding whether it may be appropriate to use a uricosuric therapy (Chap. 431e). Excretion of >800 mg of uric acid per 24 h on a regular diet suggests that causes of overproduction of purine should be considered. Urinalysis, serum creatinine, hemoglobin, white blood cell (WBC) count, liver function tests, and serum lipids should be obtained because of possible pathologic sequelae of gout and other associated diseases requiring treatment and as baselines because of possible adverse effects of gout treatment.
# Chunk 4977
Ultimate control of gout requires correction of the basic underlying defect: the hyperuricemia. Attempts to normalize serum uric acid to <300–360 μmol/L (5.0–6.0 mg/dL) to prevent recurrent gouty attacks and eliminate tophaceous deposits are critical and entail a commitment to hypouricemic regimens and medications that generally are required for life. Hypouricemic drug therapy should be considered when, as in most patients, the hyperuricemia cannot be corrected by simple means (control of body weight, low-purine diet, increase in liquid intake, limitation of ethanol use, decreased use of fructose-containing foods and beverages, and avoidance of diuretics). The decision to initiate hypouricemic therapy usually is made taking into consideration the number of acute attacks (urate lowering may be cost-effective after two attacks), serum uric acid levels (progression is more rapid in patients with serum uric acid >535 μmol/L [>9.0 mg/dL]), the patient’s willingness to commit to lifelong therapy, or the presence of uric acid stones. Urate-lowering therapy should be initiated in any patient who already has tophi or chronic gouty arthritis. Uricosuric agents such as probenecid can be used in patients with good renal function who underexcrete uric acid, with <600 mg in a 24-h urine sample. Urine volume should be maintained by ingestion of 1500 mL of water every day. Probenecid can be started at a dose of 250 mg twice daily and increased gradually as needed up to 3 g per day to achieve and maintain a serum uric acid level of less than 6 mg/dL. Probenecid is generally not effective in patients with serum creatinine levels >177 μmol/L (2 mg/dL). These patients may require allopurinol or benzbromarone (not available in the United States). Benzbromarone is another uricosuric drug that is more effective in patients with chronic kidney disease. Some agents used to treat common comorbidities, including losartan, fenofibrate, and amlodipine, have some mild uricosuric effects.
# Chunk 4978
The xanthine oxidase inhibitor allopurinol is by far the most commonly used hypouricemic agent and is the best drug to lower serum urate in overproducers, urate stone formers, and patients with renal disease. It can be given in a single morning dose, usually 100 mg initially and increasing up to 800 mg if needed. In patients with chronic renal disease, the initial allopurinol dose should be lower and adjusted depending on the serum creatinine concentration; for example, with a creatinine clearance of 10 mL/min, one generally would use 100 mg every other day. Doses can be increased gradually to reach the target urate level of less than 6 mg/dL. Toxicity of allopurinol has been recognized increasingly in patients who use thiazide diuretics, in patients allergic to penicillin and ampicillin, and in Asians expressing HLA-B*5801. The most serious side effects include life-threatening toxic epidermal necrolysis, systemic vasculitis, bone marrow suppression, granulomatous hepatitis, and renal failure. Patients with mild cutaneous reactions to allopurinol can reconsider the use of a uricosuric agent, undergo an attempt at desensitization to allopurinol, or take febuxostat, a new, chemically unrelated specific xanthine oxidase inhibitor. Febuxostat is approved in the United States at 40 or 80 mg once a day and does not require dose adjustment in mild to moderate renal disease. Pegloticase is a pegylated uricase, now available for patients who do not tolerate or fail full doses of other treatments. It is given intravenously usually at 8 mg every 2 weeks and can dramatically lower serum uric acid in up to 50% of such patients. New uricosurics are also undergoing investigation.
# Chunk 4979
Urate-lowering drugs are generally not initiated during acute attacks but after the patient is stable and low-dose colchicine has been initiated to decrease the risk of the flares that often occur with urate lowering. Colchicine anti-inflammatory prophylaxis in doses of 0.6 mg one to two times daily should be given along with the hypouricemic therapy until the patient is normouricemic and without gouty attacks for 6 months or as long as tophi are present. Colchicine should not be used in dialysis patients and is given in lower doses in patients with renal disease or with P glycoprotein or CYP3A4 inhibitors such as clarithromycin that can increase toxicity of colchicine.
# Chunk 4980
The deposition of CPP crystals in articular tissues is most common in the elderly, occurring in 10–15% of persons age 65–75 years and 30–50% of those >85years. In most cases,this processis asymptomatic and the cause of CPPD is uncertain. Because >80% of patients are >60 years and 70% have preexisting joint damage from other conditions, it is likely that biochemical changes in aging or diseased cartilage favor crystal nucleation. In patients with CPPD arthritis, there is increased production of inorganic pyrophosphate and decreased levels of pyrophosphatases in cartilage extracts. Mutations in the ANKH gene, as described in both familial and sporadic cases, can increase elaboration and extracellular transport of pyrophosphate. The increase in pyrophosphate production appears to be related to enhanced activity of ATP pyrophosphohydrolase and 5′-nucleotidase, which catalyze the reaction of ATP to adenosine and pyrophosphate. This pyrophosphate could combine with calcium to form CPP crystals in matrix vesicles or on collagen fibers. There are decreased levels of cartilage glycosaminoglycans that normally inhibit and regulate crystal nucleation. Highactivities of transglutaminaseenzymes also may contribute to the deposition of CPP crystals.
# Chunk 4981
A minority of patients with CPPD arthropathy have metabolic abnormalities or hereditary CPP disease (Table 395-2). These associations suggest that a variety of different metabolic products may enhance CPP crystal deposition either by directly altering cartilage or by inhibiting inorganic pyrophosphatases. Included among these conditions are hyperparathyroidism, hemochromatosis, hypophosphatasia, hypomagnesemia, and possibly myxedema. The presence of CPPD arthritis in individuals <50 years old should lead to consideration of these metabolic disorders (Table 395-2) and inherited forms of disease, including those identified in a variety of ethnic groups. Genomic DNA studies performed on different kindreds have shown a possible location of genetic defects on chromosome 8q or on chromosome 5p in a region that expresses the gene of the membrane pyrophosphate channel (ANKH gene). As noted above, mutations described in the ANKH gene in kindreds with CPPD arthritis can increase extracellular pyrophosphate and induce CPP crystal formation. Investigation of younger patients with CPPD should include inquiry for evidence of familial aggregation and evaluation of serum calcium, phosphorus, alkaline phosphatase, magnesium, iron, and transferrin.
# Chunk 4982
Inasmanyas50%ofcases,episodesofCPPD-inducedinflammation are associated with low-grade fever and, on occasion, temperatures as high as 40°C (104°F). In such cases, synovial fluid analysis with microbial cultures is essential to rule out the possibility of infection. In fact, infection in a joint with any microcrystalline deposition process can lead to crystal shedding and subsequent synovitis from both crystals and microorganisms. The leukocyte count in synovial fluid in acute CPPD can range from several thousand cells to 100,000 cells/μL, with the mean being about 24,000 cells/μL and the predominant cell being the neutrophil. CPP crystals may be seen inside tissue fragments and fibrin clots and in neutrophils (Fig. 395-2). CPP crystals may coexist with MSU and apatite in some cases.
# Chunk 4983
Periarticular or articular deposits may occur and may be associated with acute reversible inflammation and/or chronic damage to the joint capsule, tendons, bursa, or articular surfaces. The most common sites of apatite deposition include bursae and tendons in and/or around the knees, shoulders, hips, and fingers. Clinical manifestations include asymptomatic radiographic abnormalities, acute synovitis, bursitis, tendinitis, and chronic destructive arthropathy. Although the true incidence of apatite arthritis is not known, 30–50% of patients with osteoarthritis have apatite microcrystals in their synovial fluid. Such crystals frequently can be identified in clinically stable osteoarthritic joints, but they are more likely to come to attention in persons experiencing acute or subacute worsening of joint pain and swelling. The synovial fluid leukocyte count in apatite arthritis is usually low (<2000/μL) despite dramatic symptoms, with predominance of mononuclear cells.
# Chunk 4984
Treatment of apatite arthritis or periarthritis is nonspecific. Acute attacks of bursitis or synovitis may be self-limiting, resolving in days to several weeks. Aspiration of effusions and the use of either NSAIDs or oral colchicine for 2 weeks or intraor periarticular injection of a depot glucocorticoid appear to shorten the duration and intensity of symptoms. Local injection of disodium ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) and SC anakinra have been suggested as effective in single studies of acute calcific tendinitis at the shoulder. Other reports have described that IV gamma globulin, rituximab, calcium channel blockers, or bisphosphonates may help diffuse calcinosis. Periarticular apatite deposits may be resorbed with resolution of attacks. Agents to lower serum phosphate levels may lead to resorption of deposits in renal failure patients receiving hemodialysis. In patients with underlying severe destructive articular changes, response to medical therapy is usually less rewarding.
# Chunk 4985
2238 fibromyalgia Leslie J. Crofford DEFINITION Fibromyalgia(FM)ischaracterizedbychronicwidespreadmuscu-loskeletalpainandtenderness.AlthoughFMisdefinedprimarilyasapainsyndrome,patientsalsocommonlyreportassociatedneuro-396 psychological symptoms of fatigue, unrefreshing sleep, cognitive dysfunction, anxiety, and depression. Patients with FM have an increased prevalence of other syndromes associated with pain and fatigue, including chronic fatigue syndrome (Chap. 464e), temporomandibular disorder, chronic headaches, irritable bowel syndrome, interstitial cystitis/painful bladder syndrome, and other pelvic pain syndromes. Available evidence implicates the central nervous system askeytomaintainingpainandothercoresymptomsofFMandrelated conditions. The presence of FM is associated with substantial negative consequences for physical and social functioning.
# Chunk 4986
Osteoarthritis is a common feature, most often affecting the knees, shoulders, hips, and hands. Single or multiple joints may be affected. Hypertrophy of cartilage initially produces radiographic widening of the joint space. The newly synthesized cartilage is abnormally susceptible to fissuring, ulceration, and destruction. Ligamental laxity of joints further contributes to the development of osteoarthritis. Cartilage degrades, the joint space narrows, and subchondral sclerosis and osteophytes develop. Joint examination reveals crepitus and laxity. Joint fluid is noninflammatory. Calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate crystals are found in the cartilage in some cases of acromegaly arthropathy and, when shed into the joint, can elicit attacks of pseudogout. Chondrocalcinosis may be observed on radiographs. Back pain is extremely common, perhaps as a result of spine hyper-mobility. Spine radiographs show normal or widened intervertebral disk spaces, hypertrophic anterior osteophytes, and ligamental calcification. The latter changes are similar to those observed in patients with diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis. Dorsal kyphosis in conjunction with elongation of the ribs contributes to the development of the barrel chest seen in acromegalic patients. The hands and feet become enlarged as a result of soft tissue proliferation. The fingers are thickened and have spadelike distal tufts. One-third of patients have a thickened heel pad. Approximately 25% of patients exhibit Raynaud’s phenomenon.Carpaltunnelsyndromeoccursinabouthalfofpatients. The median nerve is compressed by excess connective tissue in the carpal tunnel. Patients with acromegaly may develop proximal muscle weakness, which is thought to be caused by the effect of growth hormone on muscle. Serum muscle enzyme levels and electromyographic findings arenormal. Muscle biopsy specimens containmuscle fibers of varying size without inflammation.
# Chunk 4987
Thalassemia A congenital disorder of hemoglobin synthesis, β thalassemia is characterized by impaired production of β chains (Chap. 127). Bone and joint abnormalities occur in β thalassemia, being most common in the major and intermedia groups. In one study, ~50% of patients with β thalassemia had evidence of symmetric ankle arthropathy characterized by a dull aching pain that was aggravated by weight bearing. The onset came most often in the second or third decade of life. The degree of ankle pain in these patients varied. Some patients experienced self-limited ankle pain that occurred only after strenuous physical activity and lasted several days or weeks. Other patients had chronic ankle pain that became worse with walking. Symptoms eventually abated in a few patients. Compression of the ankle, calcaneus, or forefoot was painful in some patients. Synovial fluid from two patients was noninflammatory. Radiographs of the ankle showed osteopenia, widened medullary spaces, thin cortices, and coarse trabeculations— findings that are largely the result of bone marrow expansion. The joint space was preserved. Specimens of bone from three patients revealed osteomalacia, osteopenia, and microfractures. Increased numbers of osteoblasts as well as increased foci of bone resorption were present on the bone surface. Iron staining was found in the bone trabeculae, in osteoid, and in the cement line. Synovium showed hyperplasia of lining cells, which contained deposits of hemosiderin. This arthropathy was considered to be related to the underlying bone pathology. The role of iron overload or abnormal bone metabolism in the pathogenesis of this arthropathy is not known. The arthropathy was treated with analgesics and splints. Patients also received transfusions to decrease hematopoiesis and bone marrow expansion.
# Chunk 4988
(See also Chap. 421) Musculoskeletal or cutaneous manifestations may be the first clinical indication of a specific hereditary disorder of lipoprotein metabolism. Patients with familial hypercholesterolemia (previously referred to as type II hyperlipoproteinemia) may have recurrent migratory polyarthritis involving the knees and other large peripheral joints and, to a lesser degree, peripheral small joints. Pain ranges from moderate to incapacitating. The involved joints can be warm, erythematous, swollen, and tender. Arthritis usually has a sudden onset, lasts from a few days to 2 weeks, and does not cause joint damage. Episodes may suggest acute gout attacks. Several attacks occur per year. Synovial fluid from involved joints is not inflammatory and contains few white cells and no crystals. Joint involvement may actually represent inflammatory periarthritis or peritendinitis and not true arthritis. The recurrent, transient nature of the arthritis may suggest rheumatic fever, especially because patients with hyperlipoproteinemia may have an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate and elevated antistreptolysin O titers (the latter being quite common). Attacks of tendinitis, including the large Achilles and patellar tendons, may come on gradually and last only a few days or may be acute as described above. Patients may be asymptomatic between attacks. Achilles tendinitis and other joint manifestations often precede the appearance of xanthomas and may be the first clinical indication of hyperlipoproteinemia. Attacks of tendinitis may follow treatment with a lipid-lowering drug. Over time, patients may develop tendinous xanthomas in the Achilles, patellar, and extensor tendons of the hands and feet. Xanthomas have also been reported in the peroneal tendon, the plantar aponeurosis, and the periosteum overlying the distal tibia. These xanthomas are located within tendon fibers. Tuberous xanthomas are soft subcutaneous masses located over the extensor surfaces of the elbows, knees, and hands as well as on the buttocks. They appear during childhood in homozygous patients and after the age of 30 in heterozygous patients. Patients with elevated plasma levels of verylow-density lipoprotein (VLDL) and triglycerides (previously referred to as type IV hyperlipoproteinemia)may also have a mild inflammatory arthritis affecting large and small peripheral joints, usually in an asymmetric pattern, with only a few joints involved at a time. The onset of arthritis usually comes in middle age. Arthritis may be persistent or recurrent, with episodes lasting a few days or weeks. Some patients may experience severejointpainor morning stiffness.Joint tenderness and periarticular hyperesthesia may also be present, as may synovial thickening.Jointfluidisusuallynoninflammatoryandwithoutcrystals but may have increased white blood cell counts with predominantly mononuclear cells. Radiographs may show juxtaarticular osteopenia and cystic lesions. Large bone cysts have been noted in a few patients. Xanthoma and bone cysts are also observed in other lipoprotein disorders. The pathogenesis of arthritis in patients with familial hypercholesterolemia or with elevated levels of VLDL and triglycerides is not well understood. NSAIDs or analgesics usually provide adequate relief of symptoms when used on an as-needed basis.
# Chunk 4989
Tietze syndrome is manifested by painful swelling of one or more costochondral articulations. The age of onset is usually before 40, and both sexes are affected equally. In most patients, only one joint is involved, usually the second or third costochondral joint. The onset of anterior chest pain may be sudden or gradual. The pain may radiate to the arms or shoulders and is aggravated by sneezing, coughing, deep inspirations, or twisting motions of the chest. The term costochondritis is often used interchangeably with Tietze syndrome, but some workers restrict the former term to pain of the costochondral articulations without swelling. Costochondritis is observed in patients over age 40; tends to affect the third, fourth, and fifth costochondral joints; and occurs more often in women. Both syndromes may mimic cardiac or upper abdominal causes of pain. Rheumatoid arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, and reactive arthritis may involve costochondral joints but are distinguished easily by their other clinical features. Other skeletal causes of anterior chest wall pain are xiphoidalgia and the slipping rib syndrome, which usually involves the tenth rib. Malignancies such as breast cancer, prostate cancer, plasma cell cytoma, and sarcoma can invade the ribs, thoracic spine, or chest wall and produce symptoms suggesting Tietze syndrome. Patients with osteomalacia may have significant rib pain, with or without documented microfractures. These conditions should be distinguishable by radiography, bone scanning, vitamin D measurement, or biopsy. Analgesics, anti-inflammatory drugs, and local glucocorticoid injections usually relieve symptoms of costochondritis/Tietze syndrome. Care should be taken to avoid overdiagnosing these syndromes in patients with acute chest pain syndromes; many patients will be tender to overly vigorous palpation of the costochondral joints.
# Chunk 4990
Synovial sarcoma is a malignant neoplasm often found near a large joint of both upper and lower extremities, being more common in the lower extremity. It seldom arises within the joint itself. Synovial sarcomas constitute 10% of soft tissue sarcomas. The tumor is believed to arise from primitive mesenchymal tissue that differentiates into epithelial cells and/or spindle cells. Small foci of calcification may be present in the tumor mass. Synovial sarcoma occurs most often in young adults and is more common in men. The tumor presents as a slowly growing deep-seated mass near a joint, without much pain. The area of the knee is the most common site, followed by the foot, ankle, elbow, and shoulder.Other primary sitesincludethebuttocks,abdominal wall, retroperitoneum, and mediastinum. The tumor spreads along tissue planes. The most common site of visceral metastasis is the lung. The diagnosis is made by biopsy. Treatment consists of wide resection of the tumor, including adjacent muscle and regional lymph nodes, followed by chemotherapy and radiation therapy. Amputation of the involved distal extremity may be required. Chemotherapy may be beneficial in some patients with metastatic disease. Isolated sites of pulmonary metastasis can be surgically removed. The 5-year survival rate with treatment is variable and depends on the staging of the tumor, ranging from ~25% to ≥60%. Synovial sarcomas tend to recur locally and metastasize to regional lymph nodes, lungs, and skeleton.
# Chunk 4991
The treatment is usually rest along with administration of an NSAID. Ultrasound, icing, and friction massage may also help relieve pain. When pain is severe, the elbow is placed in a sling or splinted at 90° of flexion. When the pain is acute and well localized, injection of a glucocorticoid using a small-gauge needle may be effective. Following injection, the patient should be advised to rest the arm for at least 1 month and avoid activities that would aggravate the elbow. Once symptoms have subsided, the patient should begin rehabilitation to strengthen and increase flexibility of the extensor muscles before resuming physical activity involving the arm. A forearm band placed 2.5–5.0 cm (1–2 in.) below the elbow may help to reduce tension on the extensor muscles at their attachment to the lateral epicondyle. The patient should be advised to restrict activities requiring forcible extension and supination of the wrist. Improvement may take several months. The patient may continue to experience mild pain but, with care, can usually avoid the return of debilitating pain. Occasionally, 2249 surgical release of the extensor aponeurosis may be necessary.
# Chunk 4992
Medial epicondylitis is an overuse syndrome resulting in pain over the medial side of the elbow with radiation into the forearm. The cause of this syndrome is considered to be repetitive resisted motions of wrist flexion and pronation, which lead to microtears and granulation tissue at the origin of the pronator teres and forearm flexors, particularly the flexor carpi radialis. This overuse syndrome is usually seen in patients >35 years and is much less common than lateral epicondylitis. It occurs most often in work-related repetitive activities but also occurs with recreational activities such as swinging a golf club or throwing a baseball. On physical examination, there is tenderness just distal to the medial epicondyle over the origin of the forearm flexors. Pain can be reproduced by resisting wrist flexion and pronation with the elbow extended. Radiographs are usually normal. The differential diagnosis of patients with medial elbow symptoms includes tears of the pronator teres, acute medial collateral ligament tear, and medial collateral ligament instability. Ulnar neuritis has been found in 25–50% of patients with medial epicondylitis and is associated with tenderness over the ulnar nerve at the elbow as well as hypesthesia and paresthesia on the ulnar side of the hand.
# Chunk 4993
Most hormone measurements are based on plasma or serum samples. However, urinary hormone determinations remain useful for the evaluation of some conditions. Urinary collections over 24 h provide an integrated assessment of the production of a hormone or metabolite, many of which vary during the day. It is important to assure complete collections of 24-h urine samples; simultaneous measurement of creatinine provides an internal control for the adequacy of collection and can be used to normalize some hormone measurements. A 24-h urine free cortisol measurement largely reflects the amount of unbound cortisol, thus providing a reasonable index of biologically available hormone. Other commonly used urine determinations include 17-hydroxycorticosteroids, 17-ketosteroids, vanillylmandelic acid, metanephrine, catecholamines, 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid, and calcium.
# Chunk 4994
Median age, 51 15% in women with amenorrhea or galactorrhea 0.2%, men 0.03%, women Calculate BMI Measure waist circumference Exclude secondary causes Consider comorbid complications Beginning at age 45, screen every 3 years, or earlier in high-risk groups: Fasting plasma glucose (FPG) >126 mg/dL Random plasma glucose >200 mg/dL An elevated HbA1c Consider comorbid complications Cholesterol screening at least every 5 years; more often in high-risk groups Lipoprotein analysis (LDL, HDL) for increased cholesterol, CAD, diabetes Consider secondary causes Measure waist circumference, FPG, BP, lipids TSH; confirm with free T4 Screen women after age 35 and every 5 years thereafter TSH, free T4
# Chunk 4995
Physical examination of thyroid Fine-needle aspiration biopsy Bone mineral density measurements in women >65 years or in post- menopausal women or men at risk Exclude secondary causes Serum calcium PTH, if calcium is elevated Assess comorbid conditions Investigate both members of couple Semen analysis in male Assess ovulatory cycles in female Specific tests as indicated Free testosterone, DHEAS Consider comorbid conditions Free testosterone, DHEAS Exclude secondary causes Additional tests as indicated FSH PRL level MRI, if not medication-related Careful history, PRL, testosterone Consider secondary causes (e.g., diabetes) Testosterone, LH Often, no tests are indicated Consider Klinefelter’s syndrome Consider medications, hypogonadism, liver disease Karyotype Testosterone Measure serum 25-OH vitamin D Consider secondary causes Karyotype Consider comorbid conditions 411, 412 aThe prevalence of most disorders varies among ethnic groups and with aging. Data based primarily on U.S. population. bSee individual chapters for additional information on evaluation and treatment. Early testing is indicated in patients with signs and symptoms of disease and in those at increased risk.
# Chunk 4996
An understanding of circulating hormone half-life is important for achieving physiologic hormone replacement, as the frequency of dosing and the time required to reach steady state are intimately linked to rates of hormone decay. T4, for example, has a circulating half-life of 7 days. Consequently, >1 month is required to reach a new steady state, and single daily doses are sufficient to achieve constant hormone levels. T3, in contrast, has a half-life of 1 day. Its administration is associated with more dynamic serum levels, and it must be administered two to three times per day. Similarly, synthetic glucocorticoids vary widely in their half-lives; those with longer half-lives (e.g., dexamethasone) are associated with greater suppression of the hypothalamic-pituitaryadrenal (HPA) axis. Most protein hormones (e.g., ACTH, GH, prolactin [PRL], PTH, LH) have relatively short half-lives (<20 min), leading to sharp peaks of secretion and decay. The only accurate way to profile the pulse frequency and amplitude of these hormones is to measure levels in frequently sampled blood (every 10 min or less) over long durations (8–24 h). Because this is not practical in a clinical setting, an alternative strategy is to pool three to four samples drawn at about 30-min intervals, or interpret the results in the context of a relatively wide normal range. Rapid hormone decay is useful in certain clinical settings. For example, the short half-life of PTH allows the use of intraoperative PTH determinations to confirm successful removal of an adenoma. This is particularly valuable diagnostically when there is a possibility of multicentric disease or parathyroid hyperplasia, as occurs with multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) or renal insufficiency.
# Chunk 4997
The feedback regulatory systems described above are superimposed on hormonal rhythms that are used for adaptation to the environment. Seasonal changes, the daily occurrence of the light-dark cycle, sleep, meals, and stress are examples of the many environmental events that affect hormonal rhythms. The menstrual cycle is repeated on average every 28 days, reflecting the time required to follicular maturation and ovulation (Chap. 412). Essentially all pituitary hormone rhythms are entrained to sleep and to the circadian cycle, generating reproducible patterns that are repeated approximately every 24 h. The HPA axis, for example, exhibits characteristic peaks of ACTH and cortisol production in the early morning, with a nadir during the night. Recognition of these rhythms is important for endocrine testing and treatment. Patients with Cushing’s syndrome characteristically exhibit increased midnight cortisol levels compared with normal individuals (Chap. 406). In contrast, morning cortisol levels are similar in these groups, as cortisol is normally high at this time of day in normal individuals. The HPA axis is more susceptible to suppression by glucocorticoids administered at night as they blunt the early-morning rise of ACTH. Understanding these rhythms allows glucocorticoid replacement that mimics diurnal production by administering larger doses in the morning than in the afternoon. Disrupted sleep rhythms can alter hormonal regulation. For example, sleep deprivation causes mild insulin resistance, food craving, and hypertension, which are reversible, at least in the short term. Emerging evidence indicates that circadian clock pathways not only regulate sleep-wake cycles but also play important roles in virtually every cell type. For example, tissue-specific deletion of clock genes alters rhythms and levels of gene expression, as well as metabolic responses in liver, adipose, and other tissues.
# Chunk 4998
Other endocrine rhythms occur on a more rapid time scale. Many peptide hormones are secreted in discrete bursts every few hours. LH and FSH secretion are exquisitely sensitive to GnRH pulse frequency. Intermittent pulses of GnRH are required to maintain pituitary sensitivity, whereas continuous exposure to GnRH causes pituitary gonadotrope desensitization. This feature of the hypothalamic-pituitarygonadotrope axis forms the basis for using long-acting GnRH agonists to treat central precocious puberty or to decrease testosterone levels in the management of prostate cancer. It is important to be aware of the pulsatile nature of hormone secretion and the rhythmic patterns of hormone production in relating serum hormone measurements to normal values. For some hormones, integrated markers have been developed to circumvent hormonal fluctuations. Examples include 24-h urine collections for cortisol, IGF-I as a biologic marker of GH action, and HbA1c as an index of long-term (weeks to months) blood glucose control.
# Chunk 4999
Tissue-specific T-Pit Prop-1, Pit-1 Prop-1, Pit-1 Prop-1, Pit-1, TEF SF-1, DAX-1 transcription factor Fetal appearance 6 weeks 8 weeks 12 weeks 12 weeks 12 weeks Hormone POMC GH PRL TSH FSH, LH Protein Polypeptide Polypeptide Polypeptide Glycoprotein α, β Glycoprotein α, β subunits subunits Amino acids 266 (ACTH 1–39) 191 199 211 210, 204 Stimulators CRH, AVP, gp-130 GHRH, ghrelin Estrogen, TRH, VIP TRH GnRH, activins, estrogen cytokines Inhibitors Glucocorticoids Somatostatin, IGF-I Dopamine T3, T4, dopamine, soma-Sex steroids, inhibin tostatin, glucocorticoids Target gland Adrenal Liver, bone, other tissues Breast, other tissues Thyroid Ovary, testis Trophic effect Steroid production IGF-I production, Milk production T4 synthesis and Sex steroid production, growth induction, secretion follicle growth, germ cell insulin antagonism maturation Normal range ACTH, 4–22 pg/L <0.5 μg/La M <15 μg/L; F <20 μg/L 0.1–5 mU/L M, 5–20 IU/L, F (basal), 5–20 IU/L aHormone secretion integrated over 24 h.
# Chunk 5000
Serum PRL levels rise transiently after exercise, meals, sexual intercourse, minor surgical procedures, general anesthesia, chest wall injury, acute myocardial infarction, and other forms of acute stress. PRL levels increase markedly (about tenfold) during pregnancy and decline rapidly within 2 weeks of parturition. If breast-feeding is initiated, basal PRL levels remain elevated; suckling stimulates transient reflex increases in PRL levels that last for about 30–45 min. Breast suckling activates neural afferent pathways in the hypothalamus that tion are induced by estrogen.
# Chunk 5001
GH secretion is pulsatile, with highest peak levels occurring at night, generally correlating with sleep onset. GH secretory rates decline markedly with age so that hormone levels in middle age are about 15% of pubertal levels. These changes are paralleled by an age-related decline in lean muscle mass. GH secretion is also reduced in obese individuals, although IGF-I levels may not be suppressed, suggesting a change in the setpoint for feedback control. Elevated GH levels occur within an 401e-3 hour of deep sleep onset as well as after exercise, physical stress, and trauma and during sepsis. Integrated 24-h GH secretion is higher in women and is also enhanced by estrogen replacement likely reflective of increased peripheral GH-resistance. Using standard assays, random GH measurements are undetectable in ~50% of daytime samples obtained from healthy subjects and are also undetectable in most obese and elderly subjects. Thus, single random GH measurements do not distinguish patients with adult GH deficiency from normal persons.
# Chunk 5002
GH induces protein synthesis and nitrogen retention and impairs glucose tolerance by antagonizing insulin action. GH also stimulates lipolysis, leading to increased circulating fatty acid levels, reduced omental fat mass, and enhanced lean body mass. GH promotes sodium, potassium, and water retention and elevates serum levels of inorganic phosphate. Linear bone growth occurs as a result of complex hormonal and growth factor actions, including those of IGF-I. GH stimulates epiphyseal prechondrocyte differentiation. These precursor cells produce IGF-I locally, and their proliferation is also responsive to the growth factor.
# Chunk 5003
Lymphocytic Hypophysitis This occurs most often in postpartum women; it usually presents with hyperprolactinemia and MRI evidence of a prominent pituitary mass that often resembles an adenoma, with mildly elevated PRL levels. Pituitary failure caused by diffuse lymphocytic infiltration may be transient or permanent but requires immediate evaluation and treatment. Rarely, isolated pituitary hormone deficiencies have been described, suggesting a selective autoimmune process targeted to specific cell types. Most patients manifest symptoms of progressive mass effects with headache and visual disturbance. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate often is elevated. Because the MRI image may be indistinguishable from that of a pituitary adenoma, hypophysitis should be considered in a postpartum woman with a newly diagnosed pituitary mass before an unnecessary surgical intervention is undertaken. The inflammatory process often resolves after several months of glucocorticoid treatment, and pituitary function may be restored, depending on the extent of damage.
# Chunk 5004
About 30% of patients exhibit reversible dose-related fluid retention, joint pain, and carpal tunnel syndrome, and up to 40% exhibit myalgias and paresthesia. Patients receiving insulin require careful monitoring for dosing adjustments, as GH is a potent counterregulatory hormone for insulin action. Patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus initially develop further insulin resistance. However, glycemic control usually improves with the sustained loss of abdominal fat associated with long-term GH replacement. Headache, increased intracranial pressure, hypertension, and tinnitus occur rarely. Pituitary tumor regrowth and progression of skin lesions or other tumors are being assessed in long-term surveillance programs. To date, development of these potential side effects does not appear significant.
# Chunk 5005
Glucocorticoid replacement therapy improves most features of ACTH deficiency. The total daily dose of hydrocortisone replace- regulate GnRH neuron migration, development, and function (see above). Mutations in GPR54, DAX1, kisspeptin, the GnRH receptor, and the LHβ or FSHβ subunit genes also cause pituitary gonadotropin ment preferably should not exceed 25 mg daily, divided into two or three doses. Prednisone (5 mg each morning) is longer acting and has fewer mineralocorticoid effects than hydrocortisone. Some authorities advocate lower maintenance doses in an effort to avoid cushingoid side effects. Doses should be increased severalfold dur-ing periods of acute illness or stress. GONADOTROPIN DEFICIENC Y Hypogonadism is the most common presenting feature of adult hypo-pituitarism even when other pituitary hormones are also deficient. It is often a harbinger of hypothalamic or pituitary lesions that impair GnRH production or delivery through the pituitary stalk. As noted below, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism is a common presenting feature of hyperprolactinemia. A variety of inherited and acquired disorders are associated with isolated hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (IHH) (Chap. 411). Hypothalamic defects associated with GnRH deficiency includeKallmann syndrome and mutations in more than a dozen genes that History of pituitary pathology Clinical features present Evoked GH < 3 °g/L Treat with GH 0.1–0.3 mg/d Exclude contraindications Titrate GH dose up to 1.25 mg/d Check IGF-I after 1 mo No response Response 6 mo Discontinue Rx Monitor IGF-I Levels 2261deficiency. Acquired forms of GnRH deficiency leading to hypogonado-tropism are seen in association with anorexia nervosa, stress, starvation, and extreme exercise but also may be idiopathic. Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism in these disorders is reversed by removal of the stressful stimulus or by caloric replenishment. PRESENTATION AND DIAGNOSIS In premenopausal women, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism presents as diminished ovarian function leading to oligomenorrhea or amenor-rhea, infertility, decreased vaginal secretions, decreased libido, and breast atrophy. In hypogonadal adult men, secondary testicular failure is associated with decreased libido and potency, infertility, decreased muscle mass with weakness, reduced beard and body hair growth, soft testes, and characteristic fine facial wrinkles. Osteoporosis occurs in both untreated hypogonadal women and men. LABORATORY INVESTIGATION Central hypogonadism is associated with low or inappropriately normal serum gonadotropin levels in the setting of low sex hormone concentrations (testosterone in men, estradiol in women). Because gonadotropin secretion is pulsatile, valid assessments may require repeated measurements or the use of pooled serum samples. Men have reduced sperm counts. Intravenous GnRH (100 μg) stimulates gonadotropes to secrete LH (which peaks within 30 min) and FSH (which plateaus during the ensuing 60 min). Normal responses vary according to menstrual cycle stage, age, and sex of the patient. Generally, LH levels increase about threefold, whereas FSH responses are less pronounced. In the setting of gonadotropin deficiency, a normal gonadotropin response to GnRH indicates intact pituitary gonadotrope function and sug-gests a hypothalamic abnormality. An absent response, however, does not reliably distinguish pituitary from hypothalamic causes of hypogonadism. For this reason, GnRH testing usually adds little to the information gained from baseline evaluation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadotrope axis except in cases of isolated GnRH defi-ciency (e.g., Kallmann syndrome). MRI examination of the sellar region and assessment of other pituitary functions usually are indicated in patients with documented central hypogonadism. In males, testosterone replacement is necessary to achieve and maintain normal growth and development of the external genitalia, secondary sex characteristics, male sexual behavior, and andro-genic anabolic effects, including maintenance of muscle function and bone mass. Testosterone may be administered by intramus-cular injections every 1–4 weeks or by using skin patches that are replaced daily (Chap. 411). Testosterone gels are also available. Gonadotropin injections (hCG or human menopausal gonadotropin [hMG]) over 12–18 months are used to restore fertility. Pulsatile GnRH therapy (25–150 ng/kg every 2 h), administered by a subcuta-neous infusion pump, is also effective for treatment of hypothalamic hypogonadism when fertility is desired. In premenopausal women, cyclical replacement of estrogen and progesterone maintains secondary sexual characteristics and integrity of genitourinary tract mucosa and prevents premature osteoporosis (Chap. 412). Gonadotropin therapy is used for ovula-tion induction. Follicular growth and maturation are initiated using hMG or recombinant FSH; hCG or human luteinizing hormone (hLH) is subsequently injected to induce ovulation. As in men, pulsatile GnRH therapy can be used to treat hypothalamic causes of gonado-tropin deficiency. Anterior Pituitary Tumor Syndromes Shlomo Melmed, J. Larry Jameson HYPOTHALAMIC, PITUITARY, AND OTHER SELLAR MASSES EVALUATION OF SELLAR MASSES 403
# Chunk 5006
Side Effects In the short term, radiation may cause transient nausea and weakness. Alopecia and loss of taste and smell may be more long-lasting. Failure of pituitary hormone synthesis is common in patients who have undergone head and neck or pituitary-directed irradiation. More than 50% of patients develop loss of GH, adrenocorticotropin 2264 hormone (ACTH), thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), and/or gonadotropin secretion within 10 years, usually due to hypothalamic damage. Lifelong follow-up with testing of anterior pituitary hormone reserve is therefore required after radiation treatment. Optic nerve damage with impaired vision due to optic neuritis is reported in about 2% of patients who undergo pituitary irradiation. Cranial nerve damage is uncommon now that radiation doses are ≤2 Gy (200 rad) at any one treatment session and the maximum dose is <50 Gy (5000 rad). The use of stereotactic radiotherapy may reduce damage to adjacent structures. Radiotherapy for pituitary tumors has been associated with adverse mortality rates, mainly from cerebrovascular disease. The cumulative risk of developing a secondary tumor after conventional radiation is 1.3% after 10 years and 1.9% after 20 years.
# Chunk 5007
Hypothalamic Lesions Lesions involving the anterior and preoptic hypothalamic regions cause paradoxical vasoconstriction, tachycardia, and hyperthermia. Acute hyperthermia usually is due to a hemorrhagic insult, but poikilothermia may also occur. Central disorders of thermoregulation result from posterior hypothalamic damage. The periodic hypothermia syndrome is characterized by episodic attacks of rectal temperatures <30°C (86°F), sweating, vasodilation, vomiting, and bradycardia (Chap. 478e). Damage to the ventromedial hypothalamic nuclei by craniopharyngiomas, hypothalamic trauma, or inflammatory disorders may be associated with hyperphagia and obesity. This region appears to contain an energy-satiety center where melanocortin receptors are influenced by leptin, insulin, pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) products, and gastrointestinal peptides (Chap. 415e). Polydipsia and hypodipsia are associated with damage to central osmoreceptors located in preoptic nuclei (Chap. 404). Slow-growing hypothalamic lesions can cause increased somnolence and disturbed sleep cycles as well as obesity, hypothermia, and emotional outbursts. Lesions of the central hypothalamus may stimulate sympathetic neurons, leading to elevated serum catecholamine and cortisol levels. These patients are predisposed to cardiac arrhythmias, hypertension, and gastric erosions.
# Chunk 5008
Surgery alone is curative in less than half of patients because of recurrences due to adherence to vital structures or because of small tumor deposits in the hypothalamus or brain parenchyma. The goal of surgery is to remove as much tumor as possible without risking complications associated with efforts to remove firmly adherent or inaccessible tissue. In the absence of radiotherapy, about 75% of craniopharyngiomas recur, and 10-year survival is less than 50%. In patients with incomplete resection, radiotherapy improves 10-year survival to 70–90% but is associated with increased risk of secondary malignancies. Most patients require lifelong pituitary hormone replacement.
# Chunk 5009
Cabergoline An ergoline derivative, cabergoline is a long-acting dopamine agonist with high D2 receptor affinity. The drug effectively suppresses PRL for >14 days after a single oral dose and induces prolactinoma shrinkage in most patients. Cabergoline (0.5–1.0 mg twice weekly) achieves normoprolactinemia and resumption of normal gonadal function in ~80% of patients with microadenomas; galactorrhea improves or resolves in 90% of patients. Cabergoline normalizes PRL and shrinks ~70% of macroprolactinomas. Mass
# Chunk 5010
The ergot alkaloid bromocriptine mesylate is a dopamine receptor agonist that suppresses prolactin secretion. Because it is short-acting, the drug is preferred when pregnancy is desired. In microadenomas, bromocriptine rapidly lowers serum prolactin levels to normal in up to 70% of patients, decreases tumor size, and restores gonadal function. In patients with macroadenomas, prolactin levels are also normalized in 70% of patients, and tumor mass shrinkage (≥50%) is achieved in most patients.
# Chunk 5011
Side effects of dopamine agonists include constipation, nasal stuffiness, dry mouth, nightmares, insomnia, and vertigo; decreasing the dose usually alleviates these problems. Nausea, vomiting, and postural hypotension with faintness may occur in ~25% of patients after the initial dose. These symptoms may persist in some patients. In general, fewer side effects are reported with cabergoline. For the approximately 15% of patients who are intolerant of oral bromocriptine, cabergoline may be better tolerated. Intravaginal administration of bromocriptine is often efficacious in patients with intractable gastrointestinal side effects. Auditory hallucinations, delusions, and mood swings have been reported in up to 5% of patients and may be due to the dopamine agonist properties or to the lysergic acid derivative of the compounds. Rare reports of leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, pleural fibrosis, cardiac arrhythmias, and hepatitis have been described. Patients with Parkinson’s disease who receive at least 3 mg of cabergoline daily have been reported to be at risk for development of cardiac valve regurgitation. Studies analyzing over 500 prolactinoma patients receiving recommended doses of cabergoline (up to 2 mg weekly) have shown no evidence for an increased incidence of valvular disorders. Nevertheless, because no controlled prospective studies in pituitary tumor patients are available, it is prudent to perform echocardiograms before initiating standard-dose cabergoline therapy.
# Chunk 5012
Surgery Indications for surgical adenoma debulking include dopamine resistance or intolerance and the presence of an invasive macroadenoma with compromised vision that fails to improve after drug treatment. Initial PRL normalization is achieved in about 70% of microprolactinomas after surgical resection, but only 30% of macroadenomas can be resected successfully. Follow-up studies have shown that hyperprolactinemia recurs in up to 20% of patients within the first year after surgery; long-term recurrence rates exceed 50% for macroadenomas. Radiotherapy for prolactinomas is reserved for patients with aggressive tumors that do not respond to maximally tolerated dopamine agonists and/or surgery.
# Chunk 5013
FIGURE 403-4 Features of acromegaly/gigantism. A 22-year-old man with gigantism due to excess growth hormone is shown to the left of his identical twin. The increased height and prognathism (A) and enlarged hand (B) and foot (C) of the affected twin are apparent. Their clinical features began to diverge at the age of approximately 13 years. (Reproduced from R Gagel, IE McCutcheon: N Engl J Med 324:524, 1999; with permission.) main disadvantages of radiotherapy. Irradiation is also relatively SURGERY ineffective in normalizing IGF-I levels. Stereotactic ablation of Transsphenoidal surgical resection by an experienced surgeon is the GH-secreting adenomas by gamma-knife radiotherapy is promising, preferred primary treatment for both microadenomas (remission but initial reports suggest that long-term results and side effects are rate ~70%) and macroadenomas (<50% in remission). Soft tissue similar to those observed with conventional radiation. Somatostatin swelling improves immediately after tumor resection. GH levels analogues may be required while awaiting the full benefits of return to normal within an hour, and IGF-I levels are normalized radiotherapy. Systemic co-morbid sequelae of acromegaly, includ-within 3–4 days. In ~10% of patients, acromegaly may recur several ing cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and arthritis, should be man-years after apparently successful surgery; hypopituitarism develops aged aggressively. Mandibular surgical repair may be indicated. in up to 15% of patients after surgery.
# Chunk 5014
The long-acting somatostatin depot formulations, octreotide and lanreotide, are the preferred medical treatment for patients with acromegaly. Sandostatin-LAR is a sustained-release, long-acting formulation of octreotide incorporated into microspheres that sustain drug levels for several weeks after intramuscular injection. GH suppression occurs for as long as 6 weeks after a 30-mg intramuscular injection; long-term monthly treatment sustains GH and IGF-I suppression and also reduces pituitary tumor size in ~50% of patients. Lanreotide autogel, a slow-release depot somatostatin preparation, is a cyclic somatostatin octapeptide analogue that suppresses GH and IGF-I hypersecretion after a 60-mg subcutaneous injection. Longterm (4–6 weeks) administration controls GH hypersecretion in about two-thirds of treated patients and improves patient compliance because of the long interval required between drug injections. Rapid relief of headache and soft tissue swelling occurs in ~75% of patients within days to weeks of somatostatin analogue initiation. Most patients report symptomatic improvement, including amelioration of headache, perspiration, obstructive apnea, and cardiac failure.
# Chunk 5015
Side Effects Somatostatin analogues are well tolerated in most patients. Adverse effects are short-lived and mostly relate to drug-induced suppression of gastrointestinal motility and secretion. Transient nausea, abdominal discomfort, fat malabsorption, diarrhea, and flatulence occur in one-third of patients, and these symptoms usually remit within 2 weeks. Octreotide suppresses postprandial gallbladder contractility and delays gallbladder emptying; up to 30% of patients develop long-term echogenic sludge or asymptomatic cholesterol gallstones. Other side effects include mild glucose intolerance due to transient insulin suppression, asymptomatic bradycardia, hypothyroxinemia, and local injection site discomfort.
# Chunk 5016
Pegvisomant antagonizes endogenous GH action by blocking peripheral GH binding to its receptor. Consequently, serum IGF-I levels are suppressed, reducing the deleterious effects of excess endogenous GH. Pegvisomant is administered by daily subcutaneous injection (10–20 mg) and normalizes IGF-I in ~70% of patients. GH levels, however, remain elevated as the drug does not target the pituitary adenoma. Side effects include reversible liver enzyme elevation, lipodystrophy, and injection site pain. Tumor size should be monitored by MRI.
# Chunk 5017
However, 50% of patients require at least 8 years for GH levels to 2271 be suppressed to <5 μg/L; this level of GH reduction is achieved in about 90% of patients after 18 years but represents suboptimal GH suppression. Patients may require interim medical therapy for several years before attaining maximal radiation benefits. Most patients also experience hypothalamic-pituitary damage, leading to gonadotropin, ACTH, and/or TSH deficiency within 10 years of therapy.
# Chunk 5018
Rapid development of features of hypercortisolism associated with skin hyperpigmentation and severe myopathy suggests an ectopic tumor source of ACTH. Hypertension, hypokalemic alkalosis, glucose intolerance, and edema are also more pronounced in these patients. Serum potassium levels <3.3 mmol/L are evident in ~70% of patients with ectopic ACTH secretion but are seen in <10% of patients with pituitary-dependent Cushing’s syndrome.
# Chunk 5019
be used to identify patients with hypercortisolism. As nadir levels of cortisol occur at night, elevated midnight serum or salivary samples of cortisol are suggestive of Cushing’s syndrome. Basal plasma ACTH levels often distinguish patients with ACTH-independent (adrenal or exogenous glucocorticoid) from those with ACTH-dependent (pituitary, ectopic ACTH) Cushing’s syndrome. Mean basal ACTH levels are about eightfold higher in patients with ectopic ACTH secretion than in those with pituitary ACTH-secreting adenomas. However, extensive overlap of ACTH levels in these two disorders precludes using ACTH measurements to make the distinction. Preferably, dynamic testing based on differential sensitivity to glucocorticoid feedback or ACTH stimulation in response to CRH or cortisol reduction is used to distinguish ectopic from pituitary sources of excess ACTH (Table 403-8). Very rarely, circulating CRH levels are elevated, reflecting ectopic tumor-derived secretion of CRH and often ACTH. For further discussion of dynamic testing for Cushing’s syndrome, see Chap. 406.
# Chunk 5020
hyperglycemia and diabetes in about 70% of patients, likely due to suppressed pancreatic secretion of insulin and incretins. Because patients with hypercortisolism are insulin-resistant, hyperglycemia should be rigorously managed. Other side effects are similar to those encountered for somatostatin analogs and include transient abdominal discomfort, diarrhea, nausea, and gallstones (20% of patients). The drug requires consistent long-term administration.
# Chunk 5021
FIGURE 403-7 Management of a nonfunctioning pituitary mass. MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.

possible to remove all adenoma tissue surgically, vision improves in 70% of patients with preoperative visual field defects. Preexisting hypopituitarism that results from tumor mass effects may improve or resolve completely. Beginning about 6 months postoperatively, MRI scans should be performed yearly to detect tumor regrowth. Within 5–6 years after successful surgical resection, ~15% of non-functioning tumors recur. When substantial tumor remains after transsphenoidal surgery, adjuvant radiotherapy may be indicated to prevent tumor regrowth. Radiotherapy may be deferred if no postoperative residual mass is evident. Nonfunctioning pituitary tumors respond poorly to dopamine agonist treatment and somatostatin analogues are largely ineffective for shrinking these tumors. The selective GnRH antagonist Nal-Glu GnRH suppresses FSH hypersecretion but has no effect on adenoma size.
# Chunk 5022
FIGURE 404-1 Primary structures of arginine vasopressin (AVP), oxytocin, and desmopressin (DDAVP).

to small changes in the plasma concentration of sodium and its anions but normally are insensitive to other solutes such as urea and glucose. The osmoreceptors appear to include inhibitory as well as stimulatory components that function in concert to form a threshold, or set point, control system. Below this threshold, plasma AVP is suppressed to levels that permit the development of a maximum water diuresis. Above it, plasma AVP rises steeply in direct proportion to plasma osmolarity, quickly reaching levels sufficient to effect a maximum antidiuresis. The absolute levels of plasma osmolarity/sodium at which minimally and maximally effective levels of plasma AVP occur, vary appreciably from person to person, apparently due to genetic influences on the set and sensitivity of the system. However, the average threshold, or set point, for AVP release corresponds to a plasma osmolarity or sodium of about 280 mosmol/L or 135 meq/L, respectively; levels only 2–4% higher normally result in maximum antidiuresis.
# Chunk 5023
Disorders of the Neurohypophysis

FIGURE 404-2 Antidiuretic effect of arginine vasopressin (AVP) in the regulation of urine volume. In a typical 70-kg adult, the kidney filters ~180 L/d of plasma. Of this, ~144 L (80%) is reabsorbed isosmotically in the proximal tubule and another 8 L (4–5%) is reabsorbed without solute in the descending limb of Henle’s loop. The remainder is diluted to an osmolarity of ~60 mmol/kg by selective reabsorption of sodium and chloride in the ascending limb. In the absence of AVP, the urine issuing from the loop passes largely unmodified through the distal tubules and collecting ducts, resulting in a maximum water diuresis. In the presence of AVP, solute-free water is reabsorbed osmotically through the principal cells of the collecting ducts, resulting in the excretion of a much smaller volume of concentrated urine. This antidiuretic effect is mediated via a G protein–coupled V2 receptor that increases intracellular cyclic AMP, thereby inducing translocation of aquaporin 2 (AQP 2) water channels into the apical membrane. The resultant increase in permeability permits an influx of water that diffuses out of the cell through AQP 3 and AQP 4 water channels on the basal-lateral surface. The net rate of flux across the cell is determined by the number of AQP 2 water channels in the apical membrane and the strength of the osmotic gradient between tubular fluid and the renal medulla. Tight junctions on the lateral surface of the cells serve to prevent unregulated water flow.
# Chunk 5024
Metabolic Hypercalcemia, hypercalciuria Hypokalemia causes excessive intake of fluids and an increase in 2277 body water that reduces plasma osmolarity/sodium, AVP secretion, and urinary concentration. Dilution of the urine, in turn, results in a compensatory increase in urinary free-water excretion that usually offsets the increase in intake and stabilizes plasma osmolarity/sodium at a level only 1–2% below basal. Thus, hyponatremia or clinically appreciable overhydration is uncommon unless the polydipsia is very severe or the compensatory water diuresis is impaired by a drug or disease that stimulates or mimics the antiduretic effect of endogenous AVP. A rise in plasma osmolarity and sodium produced by fluid deprivation or hypertonic saline infusion increases plasma AVP normally. However, the resultant increase in urine concentration is often subnormal because polyuria per se temporarily reduces the capacity of the kidney to concentrate the urine. Thus, the maximum level of urine osmolarity achieved during fluid deprivation is often indistinguishable from that in patients with partial pituitary or partial nephrogenic DI.
# Chunk 5025
The type of DI can sometimes be inferred from the clinical setting or medical history. Often, however, such information is lacking, ambiguous, or misleading, and other approaches to differential diagnosis are needed. If basal plasma osmolarity and sodium are within normal limits, the traditional approach is to determine the effect of fluid deprivation and injection of antidiuretic hormone on urine osmolarity. This approach suffices for differential diagnosis if fluid deprivation raises plasma osmolarity and sodium above the normal range without inducing concentration of the urine. In that event, primary polydipsia and partial defects in AVP secretion and action are excluded, and the effect on urine osmolarity of injecting 2 μg of the AVP analogue, desmopressin, indicates whether the patient has severe pituitary DI or severe nephrogenic DI. However, this approach is of little or no diagnostic value if fluid deprivation results in concentration of the urine because the increases in urine osmolarity achieved both before and after the injection of desmopressin are similar in patients with partial pituitary DI,
# Chunk 5026
Disorders of the Neurohypophysis

In pituitary and nephrogenic DI, the severity of the defect in AVP partial nephrogenic DI, and primary polydipsia. These disorders can secretion or action varies significantly from patient to patient. In some, the be differentiated by measuring plasma AVP during fluid deprivation defect is so severe that it cannot be overcome by even an intense stimulus and relating it to the concurrent level of plasma and urine osmolarity such as nausea or severe dehydration. In others, the defect in AVP secre-(Fig. 404-3). However, this approach does not always differentiate tion or action is incomplete, and a modest stimulus such as a few hours clearly between partial pituitary DI and primary polydipsia unless of fluid deprivation, smoking, or a vasovagal reaction can raise urine the measurement is made when plasma osmolarity and sodium are at osmolarity as high as 800 mosmol/L. However, even when the defects are or above the normal range. This level is difficult to achieve by fluid partial, the relation of urine osmolarity to plasma AVP in patients with deprivation alone once urinary concentration occurs. Therefore it nephrogenic DI (Fig. 404-3A) or of plasma AVP to plasma osmolarity is usually necessary to give a short infusion of 3% saline condition and sodium in patients with pituitary DI (Fig. 404-3B) is subnormal. (0.1 mL/kg body weight per minute for 60 to 90 minutes) and repeat
# Chunk 5027
If MRI and/or AVP assays with the requisite sensitivity and specificity are unavailable and a fluid deprivation test is impractical or undesirable, a third way to differentiate between pituitary DI, nephrogenic DI, and primary polydipsia is a trial of desmopressin therapy. Such a trial should be conducted with very close monitoring of serum sodium as well as urine output, preferably in hospital, because desmopressin will produce hyponatremia in 8–24 h if the patient has primary polydipsia.
# Chunk 5028
The signs and symptoms of uncomplicated pituitary DI can be eliminated by treatment with desmopressin (DDAVP), a synthetic analogue of AVP (Fig. 404-1). DDAVP acts selectively at V2 receptors to increase urine concentration and decrease urine flow in a dose-dependent manner. It is also more resistant to degradation than is AVP and has a threeto fourfold longer duration of action. DDAVP can be given by IV or SC injection, nasal inhalation, or orally by means of a tablet of melt. The doses required to control pituitary DI completely vary widely, depending on the patient and the route of administration. However, among adults, they usually range from 1–2 μg qd or bid by injection, 10–20 μg bid or tid by nasal spray, or 100–400 μg bid or tid orally. The onset of antidiuresis is rapid, ranging from as little as 15 min after injection to 60 min after oral administration. When given in a dose that normalizes 24-h urinary osmolarity (400–800 mosmol/L) and volume (15–30 mL/kg body weight), DDAVP produces a slight (1–3%) increase in total body water and a decrease in plasma osmolarity/sodium that rapidly eliminates thirst and polydipsia (Fig. 404-5). Consequently, water balance is maintained within the normal range. Hyponatremia does not develop unless urine volume is reduced too far (to less than 10 mL/kg per day) or fluid intake is excessive due to an associated
# Chunk 5029
of hypovolemia such as tachycardia, postural hypotension, azotemia, 2279 hyperuricemia, and hypokalemia due to secondary hyperaldosteronism. Muscle weakness, pain, rhabdomyolysis, hyperglycemia, hyperlipidemia, and acute renal failure may also occur. Obtundation or coma may be present but are often absent. Despite inappropriately low levels of plasma AVP, DI usually is not evident at presentation but may develop during rehydration as blood volume, blood pressure, and plasma osmolarity/ sodium return toward normal, further reducing plasma AVP.
# Chunk 5030
The polyuria and polydipsia of nephrogenic DI are not affected by treatment with standard doses of DDAVP. If resistance is partial, it may be overcome by tenfold higher doses, but this treatment is too expensive and inconvenient for long-term use. However, treatment with conventional doses of a thiazide diuretic and/or amiloride in conjunction with a low-sodium diet and a prostaglandin synthesis inhibitor (e.g., indomethacin) usually reduces the polyuria and polydipsia by 30–70% and may eliminate them completely in some patients. Side effects such as hypokalemia and gastric irritation can be minimized by the use of amiloride or potassium supplements and by taking medications with meals.
# Chunk 5031
Clinical Characteristics Hypodipsic hypernatremia is a syndrome characterized by chronic or recurrent hypertonic dehydration. The hypernatremia varies widely in severity and usually is associated with signs adipsic hypernatremia (AH) and the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis (SIAD). Each line depicts schematically the relationship of plasma arginine vasopressin (AVP) to plasma osmolarity during water loading and/or infusion of 3% saline in a patient with either AH (open symbols) or SIAD (closed symbols). The shaded area indicates the normal range of the relationship. The horizontal broken line indicates the plasma AVP level below which the hormone is undetectable and urinary concentration usually does not occur. Lines P and T represent patients with a selective deficiency in the osmoregulation of thirst and AVP that is either partial ( ) or total ( ). In the latter, plasma AVP does not change in response to increases or decreases in plasma osmolarity but remains within a range sufficient to concentrate the urine even if overhydration produces hypotonic hyponatremia. In contrast, if the osmoregulatory deficiency is partial ( ), rehydration of the patient suppresses plasma AVP to levels that result in urinary dilution and polyuria before plasma osmolarity and sodium are reduced to normal. Lines a –d represent different defects in the osmoregulation of plasma AVP observed in patients with SIADH or SIAD. In a ( ), plasma AVP is markedly elevated and fluctuates widely without relation to changes in plasma osmolarity, indicating complete loss of osmoregulation. In b ( ), plasma AVP remains fixed at a slightly elevated level until plasma osmolarity reaches the normal range, at which point it begins to rise appropriately, indicating a selective defect in the inhibitory component of the osmoregulatory mechanism. In c ( ), plasma AVP rises in close correlation with plasma osmolarity before the latter reaches the normal range, indicating downward resetting of the osmostat. In d ( ), plasma AVP appears to be osmoregulated normally, suggesting that the inappropriate antidiuresis is caused by some other abnormality.
# Chunk 5032
Pathophysiology Hypodipsia results in a failure to drink enough water to replenish obligatory renal and extrarenal losses. Consequently, plasma osmolarity and sodium rise often to extremely high levels before the disorder is recognized. In most cases, urinary loss of water contributes little, if any, to the dehydration because AVP continues to be secreted in the small amounts necessary to concentrate the urine. In some patients this appears to be due to hypovolemic stimulation and/or incomplete destruction of AVP osmoreceptors because plasma AVP declines and DI develops during rehydration (Fig. 404-6). In others, however, plasma AVP does not decline during rehydration even if they are overhydrated. Consequently, they develop a hyponatremic syndrome indistinguishable from inappropriate antidiuresis. This suggests that the AVP osmoreceptors normally provide inhibitory and stimulatory input to the neurohypophysis and the patients can no longer osmotically stimulate or suppress tonic secretion of the hormone because both inputs have been totally eliminated by the same pathology that destroyed the osmoregulation of thirst. In a few patients, the neurohypophysis is also destroyed, resulting in a combination of chronic pituitary DI and hypodipsia that is particularly difficult to manage.
# Chunk 5033
Hypodipsic hypernatremia should be treated by administering water orally if the patient is alert and cooperative or by infusing hypotonic fluids (0.45% saline or 5% dextrose and water) if the patient is not. The amount of free water in liters required to correct the deficit (ΔFW) can be estimated from body weight in kg (BW) and the serum sodium concentration in mmol/L (SNa) by the formula ΔFW = 0.5BW × ([S – 140]/140). If serum glucose (S ) is elevated, the mea- sured S should be corrected (S *) by the formula S *= S + ([S – 90]/36).
# Chunk 5034
This amount plus an allowance for continuing insensible and urinary losses should be given over a 24to 48-h period. Close monitoring of serum sodium as well as fluid intake and urinary output is essential because, depending on the extent of osmoreceptor deficiency, some patients will develop AVP-deficient DI, requiring DDAVP therapy to complete rehydration; others will develop hyponatremia and a syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis (SIAD)-like picture if overhydrated. If hyperglycemia and/or hypokalemia are present, insulin and/or potassium supplements should be given with the expectation that both can be discontinued soon after rehydration is complete. Plasma urea/creatinine should be monitored closely for signs of acute renal failure caused by rhabdomyolysis, hypovolemia, and hypotension.
# Chunk 5035
Once the patient has been rehydrated, an MRI of the brain and tests of anterior pituitary function should be performed to look for the cause and collateral defects in other hypothalamic functions. A long-term management plan to prevent or minimize recurrence of the fluid and electrolyte imbalance also should be developed. This should include a practical method to regulate fluid intake in accordance with variations in water balance as indicated by changes in body weight or serum sodium determined by home monitoring analyzers. Prescribing a constant fluid intake is ineffective and potentially dangerous because it does not take into account the large, uncontrolled variations in insensible loss that inevitably result from changes in ambient temperature and physical activity.
# Chunk 5036
A decrease in plasma osmolarity/sodium below the normal range (hypotonic hyponatremia) can be due to any of three different types of salt and water imbalance: (1) an increase in total body water that exceeds the increase in total body sodium (hypervolemic hyponatremia); (2) a decrease in body sodium greater than the decrease in body water (hypovolemic hyponatremia); or (3) an increase in body water with little or no change in body sodium (euvolemic hyponatremia) (Chap. 63). All three forms are associated with a failure to fully dilute the urine and mount a water diuresis in the face of hypotonic hyponatremia. The hypervolemic form typically occurs in disorders like severe congestive heart failure or cirrhosis. The hypovolemic form typically occurs in disorders such as severe diarrhea, diuretic abuse, or mineralocorticoid deficiency. Euvolemic hyponatremia, however, is due mainly to expansion of total body water caused by excessive intake in the face of a defect in urinary dilution. The impaired dilution is usually caused by a defect in the osmotic suppression of AVP that can have either of two causes. One is a nonhemodynamic stimulus such as nausea or a cortisol deficiency, which can be corrected quickly by treatment with antiemetics or cortisol. The other is a primary defect in osmoregulation caused by another disorder such as malignancy, stroke, or pneumonia that cannot be easily or quickly corrected. The latter is commonly known as the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH). Much less often, euvolemic hyponatremia can also result from AVP-independent activation of renal V2 receptors, a variant known as nephrogenic inappropriate antidiuresis or NSIAD. Both of the latter will be discussed in this chapter.
# Chunk 5037
Etiology In SIADH, the inappropriate secretion of AVP can have many different causes. They include ectopic production of AVP by lung cancer or other neoplasms; eutopic release induced by various diseases or drugs; and exogenous administration of AVP, DDAVP, or large doses of oxytocin (Table 404-2). The ectopic forms result from abnormal expression of the AVP-NPII gene by primary or metastatic malignancies. The eutopic forms occur most often in patients with acute infections or strokes but have also been associated with many other neurologic diseases and injuries. The mechanisms by which these diseases interfere with osmotic suppression of AVP are not known. The defect in osmoregulation can take any of four distinct forms (Fig. 404-6). In one of the most common (reset osmostat), AVP secretion remains fully responsive to changes in plasma osmolarity/sodium, but the threshold, or set point, of the osmoregulatory system is abnormally low. These patients differ from those with the other types of SIADH in that they are able to maximally suppress plasma AVP and dilute their urine if their fluid intake is high enough to reduce their plasma osmolarity and/or sodium to the new set point. In most patients, SIADH is self-limited and remits spontaneously within 2–3 weeks, but about 10% of cases are chronic. Another, smaller subgroup (~10% of the total) has inappropriate antidiuresis without a demonstrable defect in the osmoregulation of plasma AVP (Fig. 404-6). In some of them, all young boys, the inappropriate antidiuresis has been traced to a constitutively activating mutation of the V2 receptor gene. This unusual variant may be referred to as familial nephrogenic SIAD (NSIAD) to distinguish it from
# Chunk 5038
In type I (hypervolemic) or type II (hypovolemic) hyponatremia, osmotic suppression of AVP secretion appears to be counteracted by a hemodynamic stimulus resulting from a large reduction in cardiac output and/or effective blood volume. The resultant antidiuresis is enhanced by decreased distal delivery of glomerular filtrate that results from increased reabsorption of sodium in proximal nephron. 2281 If the reduction in urine output is not associated with a commensurate reduction in water intake or an increase in insensible loss, body fluids are expanded and diluted, resulting in hyponatremia despite an increase in body sodium. Unlike SIADH and other forms of euvolemic hyponatremia, however, glomerular filtration is reduced and plasma renin activity and aldosterone are elevated. Thus, the rate of urinary sodium excretion is low (unless sodium reabsorption is impaired by a diuretic), and the hyponatremia is usually accompanied by edema, hypokalemia, azotemia, and hyperuricemia. In type II (hypovolemic) hyponatremia, sodium and water are also retained as an appropriate compensatory response to the severe depletion.
# Chunk 5039
If the plasma osmolarity and/or corrected plasma sodium are below normal limits, hypotonic hyponatremia is present and further evaluation to determine the type should be undertaken in order to administer safe and effective treatment. This differentiation is usually possible by evaluating standard clinical indicators of the extracellular fluid volume (Table 404-3). If these findings are ambiguous or contradictory, measuring plasma renin activity or the rate of urinary sodium excretion may be helpful provided that the hyponatremia is not in the recovery phase or is due to a primary defect in renal conservation of sodium, diuretic abuse, or hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism. The latter may be suspected if serum potassium is elevated instead of low, as it usually is in types I and II hyponatremia. Measurements of plasma AVP are currently of no value in differentiating SIADH from the other types of hyponatremia since the plasma levels are elevated similarly in all. In patients who fulfill the clinical criteria for type III (euvolemic) hyponatremia, morning plasma cortisol should also be measured to exclude secondary adrenal insufficiency. If it is normal and there is no history of nausea/vomiting, the diagnosis of SIADH is confirmed, and a careful search for occult lung cancer or other common causes of the syndrome (Table 404-2) should be undertaken.
# Chunk 5040
The management of hyponatremia differs depending on the type and the severity and duration of symptoms. In acute symptomatic SIADH, the aim should be to raise plasma osmolarity and/or plasma sodium at a rate approximating 1% an hour until they reach levels of about 270 mosmol/L or 130 meq/L, respectively. This can be accomplished in either of two ways. One is to infuse hypertonic (3%) saline at a rate of about 0.05 mL/kg body weight per minute. This treatment also has the advantage of correcting the sodium deficiency that is partly responsible for the hyponatremia and often produces a solute diuresis that serves to remove some of the excess water. The other treatment is to reduce body water by giving an AVP receptor-2 antagonist (vaptan) to block the antidiuretic effect of AVP and increase urine output (Fig. 404-7). One of the vaptans, a combined V2/V1a antagonist (Conivaptan), has been approved for short-term, in-hospital IV treatment of SIADH, and others are in various stages of development. With either approach, fluid intake should be restricted to less than urine
# Chunk 5041
output, and serum sodium should be checked at least once every 2h to ensure it is not raised too fast or too far. Doing so may result in central pontine myelinolysis, an acute, potentially fatal neurologic syndrome characterized by quadriparesis, ataxia, and abnormal extraocular movements.
# Chunk 5042
In chronic and/or minimally symptomatic SIADH, the hyponatremia can and should be corrected more gradually. This can be achieved by restricting total fluid intake to less than the sum of urinary and insensible losses. Because the water derived from food (300–700 mL/d) usually approximates basal insensible losses in adults, the aim should be to reduce total discretionary intake (all liquids) to approximately 500 mL less than urinary output. Adherence to this regimen is often problematic and, even if achieved, usually reduces body water and increases serum sodium by only about 1–2% per day. Hence, additional approaches are usually desirable if not necessary. The best approach for treatment of chronic SIADH is the administration of an oral vaptan, tolvaptan, a selective V2 antagonist that also increases urinary water excretion by blocking the antidiuretic effect of AVP. Some restriction of fluid intake may also be necessary to achieve satisfactory control of the hyponatremia. It is approved for treatment of nonemergent SIADH with initial in-hospital dosing. Other approaches include demeclocycline, 150–300 mg PO tid or qid, or fludrocortisone, 0.05–0.2 mg PO bid. The effect of the demeclocycline manifests in 7–14 days and is due to induc- tion of a reversible form of nephrogenic DI. Potential side effects include phototoxicity and azotemia. The effect of fludrocortisone also requires 1–2 weeks and is partly due to increased retention of sodium and possibly inhibition of thirst. It also increases urinary potassium excretion, which may require replacement through dietary adjustments or supplements and may induce hypertension, occasionally necessitating discontinuation of the treatment.
# Chunk 5043
vomiting or isolated glucocorticoid deficiency (type III), all abnormalities can be corrected quickly and completely by giving an antiemetic or stress doses of hydrocortisone (for glucocorticoid deficiency). As with other treatments, care must be taken to ensure that serum sodium does not rise too quickly or too far.
# Chunk 5044
In SIAD due to an activating mutation of the V2 receptor, the V2

FIGURE 404-7 The effect of vaptan therapy on water balance in a patient with chronic syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH). The periods of vaptan (V) therapy are indicated by the green shaded boxes at the top. Urine output is indicated by orange bars. Fluid intake is shown by the open bars. Intake was restricted to 1 L/d throughout. Serum sodium is indicated by the black line. Note that sodium increased progressively when vaptan increased urine output to levels that clearly exceeded fluid intake.
# Chunk 5045
antagonists usually do not block the antidiuresis or raise plasma osmolarity/sodium. In that condition, use of an osmotic diuretic such as urea is reported to be effective in preventing or correcting hyponatremia. However, some vaptans may be effective in patients with a different type of activating mutation so the response to this therapy may be neither predictable nor diagnostic.
# Chunk 5046
Iodine Metabolism and Transport Iodide uptake is a critical first step in thyroid hormone synthesis. Ingested iodine is bound to serum proteins, particularly albumin. Unbound iodine is excreted in the urine. The thyroid gland extracts iodine from the circulation in a highly efficient manner. For example, 10–25% of radioactive tracer (e.g., 123I) is taken up by the normal thyroid gland over 24 h; this value can rise to 70–90% in Graves’ disease. Iodide uptake is mediated by NIS, which is expressed at the basolateral membrane of thyroid follicular cells. NIS is most highly expressed in the thyroid gland, but low levels are present in the salivary glands, lactating breast, and placenta. The iodide transport mechanism is highly regulated, allowing adaptation to variations in dietary supply. Low iodine levels increase the amount of NIS and stimulate uptake, whereas high iodine levels suppress NIS expression and uptake. The selective expression of NIS in the thyroid allows isotopic scanning, treatment of hyperthyroidism, and ablation of thyroid cancer with radioisotopes of iodine, without significant effects on other organs. Mutation of the NIS gene is a rare cause of congenital hypothyroidism, underscoring its importance in thyroid hormone synthesis. Another iodine transporter, pendrin, is located on the apical surface of thyroid cells and mediates iodine efflux into the lumen. Mutation of the pendrin gene causes Pendred syndrome, a disorder characterized by defective organification of iodine, goiter, and sensorineural deafness.
# Chunk 5047
CHAPTER 405 Disorders of the Thyroid Gland 2288 LABORATORY EVALUATION Measurement of Thyroid Hormones The enhanced sensitivity and specificity of TSH assays have greatly improved laboratory assessment of thyroid function. Because TSH levels change dynamically in response to alterations of T4 and T3, a logical approach to thyroid testing is to first determine whether TSH is suppressed, normal, or elevated. With rare exceptions (see below), a normal TSH level excludes a primary abnormality of thyroid function. This strategy depends on the use of immunochemiluminometric assays (ICMAs) for TSH that are sensitive enough to discriminate between the lower limit of the reference range and the suppressed values that occur with thyrotoxicosis. Extremely sensitive (fourth-generation) assays can detect TSH levels ≤0.004 mIU/L, but, for practical purposes, assays sensitive to ≤0.1 mIU/L are sufficient. The widespread availability of the TSH ICMA has rendered the TRH stimulation test obsolete, because the failure of TSH to rise after an intravenous bolus of 200–400 μg TRH has the same implications as a suppressed basal TSH measured by ICMA. The finding of an abnormal TSH level must be followed by measurements of circulating thyroid hormone levels to confirm the diagnosis of hyperthyroidism (suppressed TSH) or hypothyroidism (elevated TSH). Radioimmunoassays are widely available for serum total T4 and total T3. T4 and T3 are highly protein-bound, and numerous factors (illness, medications, genetic factors) can influence protein binding. It is useful, therefore, to measure the free, or unbound, hormone levels, which correspond to the biologically available hormone pool. Two direct methods are used to measure unbound thyroid hormones: (1) unbound thyroid hormone competition with radiolabeled T4 (or an analogue) for binding to a solid-phase antibody, and (2) physical separation of the unbound hormone fraction by ultracentrifugation or equilibrium dialysis. Although early unbound hormone immunoassays suffered from artifacts, newer assays correlate well with the results of the more technically demanding and expensive physical separation methods. An indirect method that is now less commonly used to estimate unbound thyroid hormone levels is to calculate the free T3 or free T4 index from the total T4 or T3 concentration and the thyroid hormone binding ratio (THBR). The latter is derived from the T3-resin uptake test, which determines the distribution of radiolabeled T3 between an absorbent resin and the unoccupied thyroid hormone binding proteins in the sample. The binding of the labeled T3 to the resin is increased when there is reduced unoccupied protein binding sites (e.g., TBG deficiency) or increased total thyroid hormone in the sample; it is decreased under the opposite circumstances. The product of THBR and total T3 or T4 provides the free T3 or T4 index. In effect, the index corrects for anomalous total hormone values caused by abnormalities in hormone-protein binding. Total thyroid hormone levels are elevated when TBG is increased due to estrogens (pregnancy, oral contraceptives, hormone therapy, tamoxifen, selective estrogen receptor modulators, inflammatory liver disease) and decreased when TBG binding is reduced (androgens, nephrotic syndrome). Genetic disorders and acute illness can also cause abnormalities in thyroid hormone binding proteins, and various drugs (phenytoin, carbamazepine, salicylates, and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs [NSAIDs]) can interfere with thyroid hormone binding. Because unbound thyroid hormone levels are normal and the patient is euthyroid in all of these circumstances, assays that measure unbound hormone are preferable to those for total thyroid hormones. For most purposes, the unbound T4 level is sufficient to confirm thyrotoxicosis, but 2–5% of patients have only an elevated T3 level (T3 toxicosis). Thus, unbound T3 levels should be measured in patients with a suppressed TSH but normal unbound T4 levels. There are several clinical conditions in which the use of TSH as a screening test may be misleading, particularly without simultaneous unbound T4 determinations. Any severe nonthyroidal illness can cause abnormal TSH levels (see below). Although hypothyroidism is the most common cause of an elevated TSH level, rare causes include a TSH-secreting pituitary tumor (Chap. 403), thyroid hormone resistance, and assay artifact. Conversely, a suppressed TSH level, particularly <0.01 mIU/L, usually indicates thyrotoxicosis. However, subnormal TSH levels between 0.01 and 0.1 mIU/L may be seen during the first trimester of pregnancy (due to hCG secretion), after treatment of hyperthyroidism (because TSH can remain suppressed for several months), and in response to certain medications (e.g., high doses of glucocorticoids or dopamine). Importantly, secondary hypothyroidism, caused by hypothalamic-pituitary disease, is associated with a variable (low to high-normal) TSH level, which is inappropriate for the low T4 level. Thus, TSH should not be used as an isolated laboratory test to assess thyroid function in patients with suspected or known pituitary disease.
# Chunk 5048
Thyroid scintigraphy is not used in the routine evaluation of patients with thyroid nodules, but should be performed if the serum TSH level is subnormal to determine if functioning thyroid nodules are present. Functioning or “hot” nodules are almost never malignant, and fine-needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy is not indicated. The vast majority of thyroid nodules do not produce thyroid hormone (“cold” nodules), and these are more likely to be malignant (~5–10%). Whole-body and thyroid scanning is also used in the treatment and surveillance of thyroid cancer. After thyroidectomy for thyroid cancer, the TSH level is raised by either using a thyroid hormone withdrawal protocol or recombinant human TSH injection (see below). Administration of 131I allows whole-body scanning (WBS) to confirm remnant ablation and to detect any functioning metastases. In addition, WBS may be helpful in surveillance of patients at risk for recurrence.
# Chunk 5049
Once clinical or subclinical hypothyroidism is confirmed, the etiology is usually easily established by demonstrating the presence of TPO antibodies, which are present in >90% of patients with autoimmune hypothyroidism. TBII can be found in 10–20% of patients, but measurement is not needed routinely. If there is any doubt about the cause of a goiter associated with hypothyroidism, FNA biopsy can be used to confirm the presence of autoimmune thyroiditis. Other abnormal laboratory findings in hypothyroidism may include increased creatine phosphokinase, elevated cholesterol and triglycerides, and anemia (usually normocytic or macrocytic). Except when accompanied by iron deficiency, the anemia and other abnormalities gradually resolve with thyroxine replacement.
# Chunk 5050
Adult patients under 60 years old without evidence of heart disease may be started on 50–100 μg levothyroxine (T4) daily. The dose is adjusted on the basis of TSH levels, with the goal of treatment being a normal TSH, ideally in the lower half of the reference range. TSH responses are gradual and should be measured about 2 months after instituting treatment or after any subsequent change in levothyroxine dosage. The clinical effects of levothyroxine replacement are slow to appear. Patients may not experience full relief from symptoms until 3–6 months after normal TSH levels are
# Chunk 5051
T to T is nonphysiologic. The use of levothyroxine combined with levels are suppressed by hyperthyroidism, unbound T4 levels are a 34 liothyronine (triiodothyronine, T ) has been investigated, but benefit better measure of thyroid function than TSH in the months following 3 has not been confirmed in prospective studies. There is no place radioiodine treatment. Mild hypothyroidism after subtotal thyroidec for liothyronine alone as long-term replacement, because the short tomy may also resolve after several months, as the gland remnant is half-life necessitates three or four daily doses and is associated with stimulated by increased TSH levels.
# Chunk 5052
thyroid function tests is otherwise suggestive of disorders associated

Secondary hypothyroidism is usually diagnosed in the context of with inappropriate TSH secretion (Table 405-3). Because T has a long half-life (7 days), patients who miss a dose can be advised to take is very rare (Chap. 402). TSH levels may be low, normal, or even two doses of the skipped tablets at once. Other causes of increased slightly increased in secondary hypothyroidism; the latter is due to levothyroxine requirements must be excluded, particularly malab secretion of immunoactive but bioinactive forms of TSH. The diagno sorption (e.g., celiac disease, small-bowel surgery), estrogen or selec sis is confirmed by detecting a low unbound T level. The goal of treat 4 tive estrogen receptor modulator therapy, ingestion with a meal, ment is to maintain T levels in the upper half of the reference range, 4 and drugs that interfere with T absorption or metabolism such as because TSH levels cannot be used to monitor therapy. 4 cholestyramine, ferrous sulfate, calcium supplements, proton pump inhibitors, lovastatin, aluminum hydroxide, rifampicin, amiodarone, carbamazepine, phenytoin, and tyrosine kinase inhibitors.
# Chunk 5053
If there is no residual thyroid function, the daily replacement dose By definition, subclinical hypothyroidism refers to biochemical of levothyroxine is usually 1.6 μg/kg body weight (typically 100–150 evidence of thyroid hormone deficiency in patients who have few μg), ideally taken at least 30 min before breakfast. In many patients, or no apparent clinical features of hypothyroidism. There are no universally accepted recommendations for the management of subclinical hypothyroidism, but levothyroxine is recommended if the patient is a woman who wishes to conceive or is pregnant, or when TSH levels are above 10 mIU/L. When TSH levels are below 10 mIU/L, treatment should be considered when patients have suggestive symptoms of hypothyroidism, positive TPO antibodies, or any evidence of heart disease. It is important to confirm that any elevation of TSH is sustained over a 3-month period before treatment is given. As long as excessive treatment is avoided, there is no risk in correcting a slightly increased TSH. Treatment is administered by starting with a low dose of levothyroxine (25–50 μg/d) with the goal of normalizing TSH. If levothyroxine is not given, thyroid function should be evaluated annually.
# Chunk 5054
Women with a history or high risk of hypothyroidism should ensure that they are euthyroid prior to conception and during early pregnancy because maternal hypothyroidism may adversely affect fetal neural development and cause preterm delivery. The presence of thyroid autoantibodies alone, in a euthyroid patient, is also associated with miscarriage and preterm delivery; it is unclear if levothyroxine therapy improves outcomes. Thyroid function should be evaluated immediately after pregnancy is confirmed and every 4 weeks during the first half of the pregnancy, with less frequent testing after 20 weeks’ gestation (every 6–8 weeks depending on whether levothyroxine dose adjustment is ongoing). The levothyroxine dose may need to be increased by up to 50% during pregnancy, with a goal TSH of less than 2.5 mIU/L during the first trimester and less than 3.0 mIU/L during the second and third trimesters. After delivery, thyroxine doses typically return to prepregnancy levels. Pregnant women should be counseled to separate ingestion of prenatal vitamins and iron supplements from levothyroxine by at least 4 h.
# Chunk 5055
Levothyroxine can initially be administered as a single IV bolus of 500 μg, which serves as a loading dose. Although further levothyroxine is not strictly necessary for several days, it is usually continued at a dose of 50–100 μg/d. If suitable IV preparation is not available, the same initial dose of levothyroxine can be given by nasogastric tube (although absorption may be impaired in myxedema). An alternative is to give liothyronine (T3) intravenously or via nasogastric tube, in doses ranging from 10 to 25 μg every 8–12 h. This treatment has been advocated because T4 → T3 conversion is impaired in myxedema coma. However, excess liothyronine has the potential to provoke 2293 arrhythmias. Another option is to combine levothyroxine (200 μg) and liothyronine (25 μg) as a single, initial IV bolus followed by daily treatment with levothyroxine (50–100 μg/d) and liothyronine (10 μg every 8 h).
# Chunk 5056
Abbreviations: TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone.

Disorders of the Thyroid Gland 2294 Pathogenesis As in autoimmune hypothyroidism, a combination of environmental and genetic factors, including polymorphisms in HLA-DR, the immunoregulatory genes CTLA-4, CD25, PTPN22, FCRL3, and CD226, as well as the TSH-R, contribute to Graves’ disease susceptibility. The concordance for Graves’ disease in monozygotic twins is 20–30%, compared to <5% in dizygotic twins. Indirect evidence suggests that stress is an important environmental factor, presumably operating through neuroendocrine effects on the immune system. Smoking is a minor risk factor for Graves’ disease and a major risk factor for the development of ophthalmopathy. Sudden increases in iodine intake may precipitate Graves’ disease, and there is a threefold increase in the occurrence of Graves’ disease in the postpartum period. Graves’ disease may occur during the immune reconstitution phase after highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) or alemtuzumab treatment. The hyperthyroidism of Graves’ disease is caused by TSI that are synthesized in the thyroid gland as well as in bone marrow and lymph nodes. Such antibodies can be detected by bioassays or by using the more widely available TBII assays. The presence of TBII in a patient with thyrotoxicosis implies the existence of TSI, and these assays are useful in monitoring pregnant Graves’ patients in whom high levels of TSI can cross the placenta and cause neonatal thyrotoxicosis. Other thyroid autoimmune responses, similar to those in autoimmune hypothyroidism (see above), occur concurrently in patients with Graves’ disease. In particular, TPO antibodies occur in up to 80% of cases and serve as a readily measurable marker of autoimmunity. Because the coexisting thyroiditis can also affect thyroid function, there is no direct correlation between the level of TSI and thyroid hormone levels in Graves’ disease. In the long term, spontaneous autoimmune hypothyroidism may develop in up to 15% of patients with Graves’ disease. Cytokines appear to play a major role in thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy. There is infiltration of the extraocular muscles by activated T cells; the release of cytokines such as IFN-γ, TNF, and IL-1 results in fibroblast activation and increased synthesis of glycosaminoglycans that trap water, thereby leading to characteristic muscle swelling. Late in the disease, there is irreversible fibrosis of the muscles. Orbital fibroblasts may be particularly sensitive to cytokines, perhaps explaining the anatomic localization of the immune response. Though the pathogenesis of thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy remains unclear, there is mounting evidence that the TSH-R may be a shared autoantigen that is expressed in the orbit; this would explain the close association with autoimmune thyroid disease. Increased fat is an additional cause of retrobulbar tissue expansion. The increase in intraorbital pressure can lead to proptosis, diplopia, and optic neuropathy.
# Chunk 5057
Primary thyrotoxicosis Features of Graves’ diseasea? T3 toxicosis Subclinical hyperthyroidism TSH low, unbound T4 high Measure TSH, unbound T4 Normal Measure unbound T3 TSH normal or increased, high unbound T4 TSH-secreting pituitary adenoma or thyroid hormone resistance syndrome Follow up in 6-12 weeks High TSH low, unbound T4 normal TSH and unbound T4 normal No further tests
# Chunk 5058
Clinical Course Clinical features generally worsen without treatment; mortality was 10–30% before the introduction of satisfactory therapy. Some patients with mild Graves’ disease experience spontaneous relapses and remissions. Rarely, there may be fluctuation between hypoand hyperthyroidism due to changes in the functional activity of TSH-R antibodies. About 15% of patients who enter remission after treatment develop hypothyroidism 10–15 years later as a result of the destructive autoimmune process.
# Chunk 5059
The clinical course of ophthalmopathy does not follow that of the thyroid disease. Ophthalmopathy typically worsens over the initial 3–6 months, followed by a plateau phase over the next 12–18 months, with spontaneous improvement, particularly in the soft tissue changes. However, the course is more fulminant in up to 5% of patients, requiring intervention in the acute phase if there is optic nerve compression or corneal ulceration. Diplopia may appear late in the disease due to fibrosis of the extraocular muscles. Radioiodine treatment for hyperthyroidism worsens the eye disease in a small proportion of patients (especially smokers). Antithyroid drugs or surgery have no adverse effects on the clinical course of ophthalmopathy. Thyroid dermopathy, when it occurs, usually appears 1–2 years after the development of Graves’ hyperthyroidism; it may improve spontaneously.
# Chunk 5060
Thyroid function tests and clinical manifestations are reviewed 4–6 weeks after starting treatment, and the dose is titrated based on unbound T4 levels. Most patients do not achieve euthyroidism until 6–8 weeks after treatment is initiated. TSH levels often remain suppressed for several months and therefore do not provide a sensitive index of treatment response. The usual daily maintenance doses of antithyroid drugs in the titration regimen are 2.5–10 mg of carbimazole or methimazole and 50–100 mg of propylthiouracil. In the block-replace regimen, the initial dose of antithyroid drug is held constant, and the dose of levothyroxine is adjusted to maintain normal unbound T4 levels. When TSH suppression is alleviated, TSH levels can also be used to monitor therapy.
# Chunk 5061
Certain radiation safety precautions are necessary in the first few days after radioiodine treatment, but the exact guidelines vary depending on local protocols. In general, patients need to avoid close, prolonged contact with children and pregnant women for 5–7 days because of possible transmission of residual isotope and exposure to radiation emanating from the gland. Rarely, there may be mild pain due to radiation thyroiditis 1–2 weeks after treatment. Hyperthyroidism can persist for 2–3 months before radioiodine takes full effect. For this reason, β-adrenergic blockers or antithyroid drugs can be used to control symptoms during this interval. Persistent hyperthyroidism can be treated with a second dose of radioiodine, usually 6 months after the first dose. The risk of hypothyroidism after radioiodine depends on the dosage but is at least 10–20% in the first year and 5% per year thereafter. Patients should be informed of this possibility before treatment and require close follow-up during the first year followed by annual thyroid function testing.
# Chunk 5062
Pregnancy and breast-feeding are absolute contraindications to radioiodine treatment, but patients can conceive safely 6 months after treatment. The presence of severe ophthalmopathy requires caution, and some authorities advocate the use of prednisone, 40 mg/d, at the time of radioiodine treatment, tapered over 6–12 weeks to prevent exacerbation of ophthalmopathy. The overall risk of cancer after radioiodine treatment in adults is not increased. Although many physicians avoid radioiodine in children and adolescents because of the theoretical risks of malignancy, emerging evidence suggests that radioiodine can be used safely in older children.
# Chunk 5063
The titration regimen of antithyroid drugs should be used to manage Graves’ disease in pregnancy because transplacental passage of these drugs may produce fetal hypothyroidism and goiter if the maternal dose is excessive. If available, propylthiouracil should be used in early gestation because of the association of rare cases of fetal aplasia cutis and other defects, such as choanal atresia with carbimazole and methimazole. As noted above, because of its rare association with hepatotoxicity, propylthiouracil should be limited to the first trimester and then maternal therapy should be converted to methimazole (or carbimazole) at a ratio of 15–20 mg of propylthiouracil to 1 mg of methimazole The lowest effective antithyroid drug dose should be used throughout gestation to maintain the maternal serum free T4 level at the upper limit of the nonpregnant normal reference range. It is often possible to stop treatment in the last trimester because TSIs tend to decline in pregnancy. Nonetheless, the transplacental transfer of these antibodies rarely causes fetal or neonatal thyrotoxicosis. Poor intrauterine growth, a fetal heart rate of >160 beats/min, and high levels of maternal TSI in the last trimester may herald this complication. Antithyroid drugs given to the mother can be used to treat the fetus and may be needed for 1–3 months after delivery, until the maternal antibodies disappear from the baby’s circulation. The postpartum period is a time of major risk for relapse of Graves’ disease. Breast-feeding is safe with low doses of antithyroid drugs. Graves’ disease in children is usually managed with methimazole or carbimazole (avoid propylthiouracil), often given as a prolonged 2297 course of the titration regimen. Surgery or radioiodine may be indicated for severe disease.
# Chunk 5064
Thyrotoxic crisis, or thyroid storm, is rare and presents as a life-threatening exacerbation of hyperthyroidism, accompanied by fever, delirium, seizures, coma, vomiting, diarrhea, and jaundice. The mortality rate due to cardiac failure, arrhythmia, or hyperthermia is as high as 30%, even with treatment. Thyrotoxic crisis is usually precipitated by acute illness (e.g., stroke, infection, trauma, diabetic ketoacidosis), surgery (especially on the thyroid), or radioiodine treatment of a patient with partially treated or untreated hyperthyroidism. Management requires intensive monitoring and supportive care, identification and treatment of the precipitating cause, and measures that reduce thyroid hormone synthesis. Large doses of propylthiouracil (500–1000 mg loading dose and 250 mg every 4 h) should be given orally or by nasogastric tube or per rectum; the drug’s inhibitory action on T4 → T3 conversion makes it the antithyroid drug of choice. If not available, methimazole can be used in doses up to 30 mg every 12 h. One hour after the first dose of propylthiouracil, stable iodide is given to block thyroid hormone synthesis via the Wolff-Chaikoff effect (the delay allows the antithyroid drug to prevent the excess iodine from being incorporated into new hormone). A saturated solution of potassium iodide (5 drops SSKI every 6 h) or, where available, ipodate or iopanoic acid (500 mg per 12 h) may be given orally. Sodium iodide, 0.25 g IV every 6 h, is an alternative but is not generally available. Propranolol should also be given to reduce tachycardia and other adrenergic manifestations (60–80 mg PO every 4 h; or 2 mg IV every 4 h). Although other β-adrenergic blockers can be used, high doses of propranolol decrease T4 → T3 conversion, and the doses can be easily adjusted. Caution is needed to avoid acute negative inotropic effects, but controlling the heart rate is important, as some patients develop a form of high-output heart failure. Short-acting IV esmolol can be used to decrease heart rate while monitoring for signs of heart failure. Additional therapeutic measures include glucocorticoids (e.g., hydrocortisone 300 mg IV bolus, then 100 mg every 8 h), antibiotics if infection is present, cooling, oxygen, and IV fluids.
# Chunk 5065
Acute thyroiditis is rare and due to suppurative infection of the thyroid. In children and young adults, the most common cause is the presence of a piriform sinus, a remnant of the fourth branchial pouch that connects the oropharynx with the thyroid. Such sinuses are predominantly left-sided. A long-standing goiter and degeneration in a thyroid malignancy are risk factors in the elderly. The patient presents with thyroid pain, often referred to the throat or ears, and a small, tender goiter that may be asym-metric. Fever, dysphagia, and erythema over the thyroid are common, as are systemic symptoms of a febrile illness and lymphadenopathy. TAblE 405-9 CAuSES of THyRoiDiTiS Acute Bacterial infection: especially Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, and Enterobacter Fungal infection: Aspergillus, Candida, Coccidioides, Histoplasma, and Pneumocystis Radiation thyroiditis after 131I treatment 50 ESR TSH (mU/L)UT4 (pmol/L)5 0.5 0.01 40 30 10 0 20ESR (mm/h) 100 0 50 UT4 TSH
# Chunk 5066
The differential diagnosis of thyroid pain includes subacute or, rarely, chronic thyroiditis; hemorrhage into a cyst; malignancy including lymphoma; and, rarely, amiodarone-induced thyroiditis or amyloidosis. However, the abrupt presentation and clinical features of acute thyroiditis rarely cause confusion. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and white cell count are usually increased, but thyroid function is normal. FNA biopsy shows infiltration by polymorphonuclear leukocytes; culture of the sample can identify the organism. Caution is needed in immunocompromised patients as fungal, mycobacterial, or Pneumocystis thyroiditis can occur in this setting. Antibiotic treatment is guided initially by Gram stain and, subsequently, by cultures of the FNA biopsy. Surgery may be needed to drain an abscess, which can be localized by CT scan or ultrasound. Tracheal obstruction, septicemia, retropharyngeal abscess, mediastinitis, and jugular venous thrombosis may complicate acute thyroiditis but are uncommon with prompt use of antibiotics.
# Chunk 5067
Pathophysiology The thyroid shows a characteristic patchy inflammatory infiltrate with disruption of the thyroid follicles and multinucleated giant cells within some follicles. The follicular changes progress to granulomas accompanied by fibrosis. Finally, the thyroid returns to normal, usually several months after onset. During the initial phase of follicular destruction, there is release of Tg and thyroid hormones, leading to increased circulating T4 and T3 and suppression of TSH (Fig. 405-10). During this destructive phase, radioactive iodine uptake is low or undetectable. After several weeks, the thyroid is depleted of stored thyroid hormone and a phase of hypothyroidism typically occurs, with low unbound T4 (and sometimes T3) and moderately increased TSH levels. Radioactive iodine uptake returns to normal or is even increased as a result of the rise in TSH. Finally, thyroid hormone and TSH levels return to normal as the disease subsides.
# Chunk 5068
FIGURE 405-10 Clinical course of subacute thyroiditis. The release of thyroid hormones is initially associated with a thyrotoxic phase and suppressed thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH). A hypothyroid phase then ensues, with low T4 and TSH levels that are initially low but gradually increase. During the recovery phase, increased TSH levels combined with resolution of thyroid follicular injury lead to normalization of thyroid function, often several months after the beginning of the illness. ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; UT4, free or unbound T4.
# Chunk 5069
Laboratory Evaluation As depicted in Fig. 405-10, thyroid function tests characteristically evolve through three distinct phases over about 6 months: (1) thyrotoxic phase, (2) hypothyroid phase, and (3) recovery phase. In the thyrotoxic phase, T4 and T3 levels are increased, reflecting their discharge from the damaged thyroid cells, and TSH is suppressed. The T4/T3 ratio is greater than in Graves’ disease or thyroid autonomy, in which T3 is often disproportionately increased. The diagnosis is confirmed by a high ESR and low uptake of radioiodine (<5%) or 99mTc pertechnetate (as compared to salivary gland pertechnetate concentration). The white blood cell count may be increased, and thyroid antibodies are negative. If the diagnosis is in doubt, FNA biopsy may be useful, particularly to distinguish unilateral involvement from bleeding into a cyst or neoplasm.
# Chunk 5070
Painless thyroiditis, or “silent” thyroiditis, occurs in patients with underlying autoimmune thyroid disease and has a clinical course similar to that of subacute thyroiditis. The condition occurs in up to 5% of women 3–6 months after pregnancy and is then termed postpartum thyroiditis. Typically, patients have a brief phase of thyrotoxicosis lasting 2–4 weeks, followed by hypothyroidism for 4–12 weeks, and then resolution; often, however, only one phase is apparent. The condition is associated with the presence of TPO antibodies antepartum, and it is three times more common in women with type 1 diabetes mellitus. As in subacute thyroiditis, the uptake of 99mTc pertechnetate or radioactive iodine is initially suppressed. In addition to the painless goiter, silent thyroiditis can be distinguished from subacute thyroiditis by a normal ESR and the presence of TPO antibodies. Glucocorticoid treatment is not indicated for silent thyroiditis. Severe thyrotoxic symptoms can be managed with a brief course of propranolol, 20–40 mg three or four times daily. Thyroxine replacement may be needed for the hypothyroid phase but should be withdrawn after 6–9 months, as recovery is the rule. Annual follow-up thereafter is recommended, because a proportion of these individuals develop permanent hypothyroidism. The condition may recur in subsequent pregnancies.
# Chunk 5071
Very sick patients may exhibit a dramatic fall in total T4 and T3 levels (low T4 syndrome). With decreased tissue perfusion, muscle and liver expression of the type 3 deiodinase leads to accelerated T4 and T3 metabolism. This state has a poor prognosis. Another key factor in the fall in T4 levels is altered binding to TBG. The commonly used free T4 assays are subject to artifact when serum binding proteins are low and underestimate the true free T4 level. Fluctuation in TSH levels also creates challenges in the interpretation of thyroid function in sick patients. TSH levels may range from <0.1 mIU/L in very ill patients, especially with dopamine or glucocorticoid therapy, to >20 mIU/L during the recovery phase of SES. The exact mechanisms underlying the subnormal TSH seen in 10% of sick patients and the increased TSH seen in 5% remain unclear but may be mediated by cytokines including IL-12 and IL-18.
# Chunk 5072
Amiodarone is a commonly used type III antiarrhythmic agent (Chap. 277). It is structurally related to thyroid hormone and contains 39% iodine by weight. Thus, typical doses of amiodarone (200 mg/d) are associated with very high iodine intake, leading to greater than forty-fold increases in plasma and urinary iodine levels. Moreover, because amiodarone is stored in adipose tissue, high iodine levels persist for >6 months after discontinuation of the drug. Amiodarone inhibits deiodinase activity, and its metabolites function as weak antagonists of thyroid hormone action. Amiodarone has the following effects on thyroid function: (1) acute, transient suppression of thyroid function; (2) hypothyroidism in patients susceptible to the inhibitory effects of a high iodine load; and (3) thyrotoxicosis that may be caused by either a Jod-Basedow effect from the iodine load, in the setting of MNG or incipient Graves’ disease, or a thyroiditis-like condition.
# Chunk 5073
Disorders of the Thyroid Gland 2302 substernal locations, it is not possible to palpate all nodules. Pemberton’s sign, characterized by facial suffusion when the patient’s arms are elevated above the head, suggests that the goiter has increased pressure in the thoracic inlet. A TSH level should be measured to exclude subclinical hyperor hypothyroidism, but thyroid function is usually normal. Tracheal deviation is common, but compression must usually exceed 70% of the tracheal diameter before there is significant airway compromise. Pulmonary function testing can be used to assess the functional effects of compression, which characteristically causes inspiratory stridor. CT or MRI can be used to evaluate the anatomy of the goiter and the extent of substernal extension or tracheal narrowing. A barium swallow may reveal the extent of esophageal compression. The risk of malignancy in MNG is similar to that in solitary nodules. Ultrasonography can be used to identify which nodules should be biopsied based on sonographic features (see section above on ultrasound) and size. For nodules with more suspicious imaging characteristics (e.g., hypoechogenicity, microcalcifications, irregular margins), biopsy is recommended when ≥1 cm.
# Chunk 5074
Most nontoxic MNGs can be managed conservatively. T4 suppression is rarely effective for reducing goiter size and introduces the risk of subclinical or overt thyrotoxicosis, particularly if there is underlying autonomy or if it develops during treatment. If levothyroxine is used, it should be started at low doses (50 μg daily) and advanced gradually while monitoring the TSH level to avoid excessive suppression. Contrast agents and other iodine-containing substances should be avoided because of the risk of inducing the Jod-Basedow effect, characterized by enhanced thyroid hormone production by autonomous nodules. Radioiodine is used with increasing frequency in areas where large goiters are more prevalent because it can decrease goiter size and may selectively ablate regions of autonomy. Dosage of 131I depends on the size of the goiter and radioiodine uptake but is usually about 3.7 MBq (0.1 mCi) per gram of tissue, corrected for uptake (typical dose 370–1070 MBq [10 to 29 mCi]). Repeat treatment may be needed and effectiveness may be increased by concurrent administration of low-dose recombinant TSH (0.1 mg IM). It is possible to achieve a 40–50% reduction in goiter size in most patients. Earlier concerns about radiation-induced thyroid swelling and tracheal compression have diminished, as studies have shown this complication to be rare. When acute compression occurs, glucocorticoid treatment or surgery may be needed. Radiation-induced hypothyroidism is less common than after treatment for Graves’ disease. However, posttreatment autoimmune thyrotoxicosis may occur in up to 5% of patients treated for nontoxic MNG. Surgery remains highly effective but is not without risk, particularly in older patients with underlying cardiopulmonary disease.
# Chunk 5075
is aggressive, responds poorly to treatment, and is associated with a bleak prognosis.

The incidence of thyroid cancer is ~12/100,000 per year in the United States and increases with age. Prognosis is worse in older persons (>65 years). Thyroid cancer is twice as common in women as men, but male gender is associated with a worse prognosis. Additional important risk factors include a history of childhood head or neck irradiation, large nodule size (≥4 cm), evidence for local tumor fixation or invasion into lymph nodes, and the presence of metastases (Table 405-11). Several unique features of thyroid cancer facilitate its management: (1) thyroid nodules are amenable to biopsy by FNA; (2) iodine radioisotopes can be used to diagnose (123I) and treat (131I) differentiated thyroid cancer, reflecting the unique uptake of this anion by the thyroid gland; and (3) serum markers allow the detection of
# Chunk 5076
TSH and Growth Factors Many differentiated thyroid cancers express TSH receptors and, therefore, remain responsive to TSH. Higher serum TSH levels, even within normal range, are associated with increased thyroid cancer risk in patients with thyroid nodules. These <45 years >45 years Stage I Any T, any N, M0 T1, N0, M0 Stage II Any T, any N, M1 T2, N0, M0 Stage III — T3, N0, M0
# Chunk 5077
Although these mutations induce thyroid cell growth, this type of nodule is almost always benign.

Activation of the RET-RAS-BRAF signaling pathway is seen in up to 70% of PTCs, although the types of mutations are heterogeneous. A variety of rearrangements involving the RET gene on chromosome 10 bring this receptor tyrosine kinase under the control of other promoters, leading to receptor overexpression. RET rearrangements occur in 20–40% of PTCs in different series and were observed with increased frequency in tumors developing after the Chernobyl radiation accident. Rearrangements in PTC have also been observed for another tyrosine kinase gene, TRK1, which is located on chromosome 1. To date, the identification of PTC with RET or TRK1 rearrangements has not proven useful for predicting prognosis or treatment responses. BRAF V600E mutations appear to be the most common genetic alteration in PTC. These mutations activate the kinase, which stimulates the mitogen-activated protein MAP kinase (MAPK) cascade. RAS mutations, which also stimulate the MAPK cascade, are found in about 20–30% of thyroid neoplasms (NRAS > HRAS > KRAS), including both PTC and FTC. Of note, simultaneous RET, BRAF, and RAS mutations rarely occur in the same tumor, suggesting that activation of the MAPK cascade is critical for tumor development, independent of the step that initiates the cascade.
# Chunk 5078
131I Thyroid Ablation and Treatment As noted above, the decision to use 131I for thyroid ablation should be coordinated with the surgical approach, because radioablation is much more effective when there is minimal remaining normal thyroid tissue. Radioiodine is administered after iodine depletion (patient follows a low-iodine diet for 1≤2 weeks) and in the presence of elevated serum TSH levels to stimulate uptake of the isotope into both the remnant and potentially any residual tumor. To achieve high serum TSH levels, there are two approaches. A patient may be withdrawn from thyroid hormone so that endogenous TSH is secreted and, ideally, the serum TSH level is >25 mIU/L at the time of 131I therapy. A typical strategy is to treat the patient for several weeks postoperatively with liothyronine (25 μg qd or bid), followed by thyroid hormone withdrawal for 2 weeks. Alternatively, recombinant human TSH (rhTSH) is administered as two daily consecutive injections (0.9 mg) with administration of 131I 24 h after the second injection. The patient can continue to take levothyroxine and remains euthyroid. Both approaches have equal success in achieving remnant ablation.
# Chunk 5079
Follow-Up Whole-Body Thyroid Scanning and Thyroglobulin Determinations Serum thyroglobulin is a sensitive marker of residual/ recurrent thyroid cancer after ablation of the residual postsurgical thyroid tissue. However, newer Tg assays have functional sensitivities as low as 0.1 ng/mL, as opposed to older assays with functional sensitivities of 1 ng/mL, reducing the number of patients with truly undetectable serum Tg levels. Because the vast majority of papillary thyroid cancer recurrences are in cervical lymph nodes, a neck ultrasound should be performed about 6 months after thyroid ablation; ultrasound has been shown to be more sensitive than WBS in this scenario.
# Chunk 5080
In low-risk patients who have no clinical evidence of residual disease after ablation and a basal Tg <1 ng/mL on levothyroxine, an rhTSH-stimulated Tg level should be obtained 6–12 months after ablation, without WBS. If stimulated Tg levels are low (<1 ng/mL) and, ideally, undetectable, the risk of recurrence is <5% at 5 years. Newer data indicate that rhTSH stimulation may not be required for patients with undetectable basal Tg levels in sensitive assays, if there is documented absence of Tg antibodies. These patients can be followed with unstimulated Tg every 6–12 months and neck ultrasound as indicated. Levothyroxine dosing may then be titrated to a higher TSH level of 0.5–1.5 mIU/L.
# Chunk 5081
Cytology results indicative of malignancy mandate surgery, after performing preoperative sonography to evaluate the cervical lymph nodes. Nondiagnostic cytology specimens generally result from cystic lesions but may also occur in fibrous long-standing nodules. Ultrasound-guided FNA is indicated when a repeat FNA is necessary. Repeat FNA will yield a diagnostic cytology in about 50% of cases. Benign nodules should be monitored by ultrasound for growth, and repeat FNA should be considered if the nodule enlarges. The use of levothyroxine to suppress serum TSH is not effective in shrinking nodules in iodine-replete populations, and therefore, levothyroxine should not be used.
# Chunk 5082
On the other hand, the majority of nodules with AUS/FLUS and follicular neoplasm cytology results are benign; only 10–30% are malignant. The traditional approach for these patients is diagnostic lobectomy for histopathologic diagnosis. Therefore, up to 85% of patients undergo surgery for benign nodules. A high-sensitivity (~90%) novel molecular test using gene expression profiling technology may reduce the need for unnecessary surgery in these two groups. In a multicenter trial of over 265 such nodules, a negative gene expression classifier test reduced the risk of malignancy to about 6%, leading to clinical recommendations for follow-up rather than surgery.
# Chunk 5083
FIGURE 406-7 Prereceptor inactivation of cortisol and mineralocorticoid receptor action. ENaC, epithelial sodium channel; HRE, hormone response element; NADH, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide; SGK-1, serum glucocorticoid-inducible kinase-1.
# Chunk 5084
Analogous to cortisol action via the GR, aldosterone (or cortisol) binding to the MR in the kidney tubule cell dissociates the HSP–receptor complex, allowing homodimerization of the MR, and translocation of the hormone-bound MR dimer to the nucleus (Fig. 406-7). The activated MR enhances transcription of the epithelial sodium channel (ENaC) and serum glucocorticoid-inducible kinase 1 (SGK-1). In the cytosol, interaction of ENaC with Nedd4 prevents cell surface expression of ENaC. However, SGK-1 phosphorylates serine residues within the Nedd4 protein, reduces the interaction between Nedd4 and ENaC, and consequently, enhances the trafficking of ENaC to the cell surface, where it mediates sodium retention.
# Chunk 5085
Pos.

Neg.

Neg.

Adrenal tumor workup Differential diagnosis 1: Plasma ACTH ACTH normal or high>15 pg/ml CRH test and highdose DEX positive ACTH suppressed to <5 pg/ml ACTH-dependent Cushing’s ACTH-independent Cushing’s Bilateral micronodular or macronodular adrenal hyperplasia Bilateral adrenal-ectomy Unilateral Unilateral adrenal mass CRH test and highEquivocal adrenal-ectomy Differential diagnosis 2 • MRI pituitary Unenhanced CT• CRH test (ACTH increase >40% at 15-30 min + cortisol increase >20%at 45-60 min after CRH 100 µg IV)• High dose DEX test (Cortisol suppression >50% after q6h 2 mg DEX for 2 days) Trans-Inferior petrosal sinus sampling Locate and sphenoidal(petrosal/peripheralremove surgery ACTH ratio >2 atbaseline, >3 at 2–5 minectopic after CRH 100 µg i.v.) source ACTH Ectopic ACTH production Cushing’s disease pituitary dose DEX negative results adrenals
# Chunk 5086
The clinical hallmark of mineralocorticoid excess is hypokalemic hypertension; serum sodium tends to be normal due to the concurrent fluid retention, which in some cases can lead to peripheral edema. Hypokalemia can be exacerbated by thiazide drug treatment, which leads to increased delivery of sodium to the distal renal tubule, thereby driving potassium excretion. Severe hypokalemia can be associated with muscle weakness, overt proximal myopathy, or even hypokalemic paralysis. Severe alkalosis contributes to muscle cramps and, in severe cases, can cause tetany.
# Chunk 5087
Diagnostic confirmation of mineralocorticoid excess in a patient with positive ARR screening result should be undertaken by an endocrinologist as the tests lack optimized validation. The most straightforward is the saline infusion test, which involves the IV administration of 2 L of physiologic saline over a 4-h period. Failure of aldosterone to suppress below 140 pmol/L (5 ng/dL) is indicative of autonomous mineralocorticoid excess. Alternative tests are the oral sodium loading test (300 mmol NaCl/d for 3 days) or the fludrocortisone suppression test (0.1 mg q6h with 30 mmol NaCl q8h for 4 days); the latter can be difficult because of the risk of profound hypokalemia and increased hypertension. In patients with overt hypokalemic hypertension, strongly positive ARR, and concurrently increased aldosterone levels, confirmatory testing is usually not necessary.
# Chunk 5088
Abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting Dizziness, postural hypotension Salt craving Low blood pressure, postural hypotension Increased serum creatinine (due to volume depletion) Hyponatremia Hyperkalemia
# Chunk 5089
the oral administration of 15–25 mg hydrocortisone in two to three divided doses. Pregnancy may require an increase in hydrocortisone dose by 50% during the last trimester. In all patients, at least one-half of the daily dose should be administered in the morning. Currently available glucocorticoid preparations fail to mimic the physiologic cortisol secretion rhythm (Fig. 406-3). Long-acting glucocorticoids such as prednisolone or dexamethasone are not preferred because they result in increased glucocorticoid exposure due to extended glucocorticoid receptor activation at times of physiologically low cortisol secretion. There are no well-established dose equivalencies, but as a guide, equipotency can be assumed for 1 mg hydrocortisone, 1.6 mg cortisone acetate, 0.2 mg prednisolone, 0.25 mg prednisone, and 0.025 mg dexamethasone.
# Chunk 5090
Monitoring of glucocorticoid replacement is mainly based on the history and examination for signs and symptoms suggestive of glucocorticoid overor underreplacement, including assessment of body weight and blood pressure. Plasma ACTH, 24-h urinary free cortisol, or serum cortisol day curves reflect whether hydrocortisone has been taken or not, but do not convey reliable information about replacement quality. In patients with isolated primary adrenal insufficiency, monitoring should include screening for autoimmune thyroid disease, and female patients should be made aware of the possibility of premature ovarian failure. Supraphysiologic glucocorticoid treatment with doses equivalent to 30 mg hydrocortisone or more will affect bone metabolism, and these patients should undergo regular bone mineral density evaluation. All patients with adrenal insufficiency need to be instructed about the requirement for stress-related glucocorticoid dose adjustments. These generally consist of doubling the routine oral glucocorticoid dose in the case of intercurrent illness with fever and bed rest and the need for IV hydrocortisone injection at a daily dose of 100 mg in cases of prolonged vomiting, surgery, or trauma. Patients living or traveling in regions with delayed access to acute health care should carry a hydrocortisone self-injection emergency kit, in addition to their usual steroid emergency cards and bracelets.
# Chunk 5091
Mineralocorticoid replacement in primary adrenal insufficiency should be initiated at a dose of 100–150 μg fludrocortisone. The adequacy of treatment can be evaluated by measuring blood pressure, sitting and standing, to detect a postural drop indicative of hypovolemia. In addition, serum sodium, potassium, and plasma renin should be measured regularly. Renin levels should be kept in the upper normal reference range. Changes in glucocorticoid dose may also impact on mineralocorticoid replacement as cortisol also binds the mineralocorticoid receptor; 40 mg hydrocortisone is equivalent to 100 μg fludrocortisone. In patients living or traveling in areas with hot or tropical weather conditions, the fludrocortisone dose should be increased by 50–100 μg during the summer. Mineralocorticoid dose may also need to be adjusted during pregnancy, due to the antimineralocorticoid activity of progesterone, but this is less often required than hydrocortisone dose adjustment.
# Chunk 5092
Screening/confirmation of diagnosis

CBC, serum sodium, potassium, creatinine, urea, TSH

Differential diagnosis Plasma ACTH, plasma renin, serum aldosterone
# Chunk 5093
Disorders of the Adrenal Cortex exact step of enzymatic block, they may also have excess production of mineralocorticoids or deficient production of sex steroids (Table 406-10). The diagnosis of CAH is readily established by measurement of the steroids accumulating before the distinct enzymatic block, either in serum or in urine, preferably by the use of mass spectrometry–based assays (Table 406-10).
# Chunk 5094
The VHL gene (among other genes) encodes an E3 ubiquitin ligase that regulates expression of hypoxia-inducible factor 1. Loss of VHL is associated with increased expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), which induces angiogenesis. Although the VHL gene can be inactivated by all types of mutations, patients with pheochromocytoma predominantly have missense mutations. About 20–30% of patients with VHL have pheochromocytomas, but in some families the incidence can reach 90%. The recognition of pheochromocytoma as a VHL-associated feature provides an opportunity to diagnose retinal, central nervous system, renal, and pancreatic tumors at a stage when effective treatment may still be possible.
# Chunk 5095
Parathyroid Tumors (See also Chap. 424) Primary hyperparathyroidism occurs in approximately 90% of patients and is the most common feature of MEN 1. Patients may have asymptomatic hypercalcemia or vague symptoms associated with hypercalcemia (e.g., polyuria, polydipsia, constipation, malaise, or dyspepsia). Nephrolithiasis and osteitis fibrosa cystica (less commonly) may also occur. Biochemical investigations reveal hypercalcemia, usually in association with elevated circulating parathyroid hormone (PTH) (Table 408-3). The hypercalcemia is usually mild, and severe hypercalcemia or parathyroid cancer is a rare occurrence. Additional differences in the primary hyperparathyroidism of patients with MEN 1, as opposed to those without MEN 1, include an earlier age at onset (20–25 years vs 55 years) and an equal male-to-female ratio (1:1 vs 1:3). Preoperative imaging (e.g., neck ultrasound with 99mTc-sestamibi parathyroid scintigraphy) is of limited benefit because all parathyroid glands may be affected, and neck exploration may be required irrespective of preoperative localization studies.
# Chunk 5096
Ultrasonography, endoscopic ultrasonography, computed tomography (CT), nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), selective abdominal angiography, venous sampling, and somatostatin receptor scintigraphy are helpful in localizing the tumor prior to surgery. Gastrinomas represent more than 50% of all pancreatic NETs in patients with MEN 1, and approximately 20% of patients with gastrinomas will be found to have MEN 1. Gastrinomas, which may also occur in the duodenal mucosa, are the major cause of morbidity and mortality in patients with MEN 1. Most MEN 1 gastrinomas are malignant and metastasize before a diagnosis is established.
# Chunk 5097
Medical treatment of patients with MEN 1 and Zollinger-Ellison syndrome is directed toward reducing basal acid output to <10 mmol/L. Parietal cell H+-K+-adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) inhibitors (e.g., omeprazole or lansoprazole) reduce acid output and are the drugs of choice for gastrinomas. Some patients may also require additional treatment with the histamine H2 receptor antagonists, cimetidine or ranitidine. The role of surgery in the treatment of gastrinomas in patients with MEN 1 is controversial. The goal of surgery is to reduce the risk of distant metastatic disease and improve survival. For a nonmetastatic gastrinoma situated in the pancreas, surgical excision is often effective. However, the risk of hepatic metastases increases with tumor size, such that 25–40% of patients with pancreatic NETs >4 cm develop hepatic metastases, and 2337 50–70% of patients with tumors 2–3 cm in size have lymph node metastases. Survival in MEN 1 patients with gastrinomas <2.5 cm in size is 100% at 15 years, but 52% at 15 years, if metastatic disease is present. The presence of lymph node metastases does not appear to adversely affect survival. Surgery for gastrinomas that are >2–2.5 cm has been recommended, because the disease-related survival in these patients is improved following surgery. In addition, duodenal gastrinomas, which occur more frequently in patients with MEN 1, have been treated successfully with surgery. However, in most patients with MEN 1, gastrinomas are multiple or extrapancreatic, and with the exception of duodenal gastrinomas, surgery is rarely successful. For example, the results of one study revealed that only ~15% of patients with MEN 1 were free of disease immediately after surgery, and at 5 years, this number had decreased to ~5%; the respective outcomes in patients without MEN 1 were better, at 45% and 40%. Given these findings, most specialists recommend a nonsurgical management for gastrinomas in MEN 1, except as noted earlier for smaller, isolated lesions. Treatment of disseminated gastrinomas is difficult. Chemotherapy with streptozotocin and 5-fluorouracil; hormonal therapy with octreotide or lanreotide, which are human somatostatin analogues; hepatic artery embolization; administration of human leukocyte interferon; and removal of all resectable tumor have been successful in some patients.
# Chunk 5098
Insulinoma These β islet cell insulin-secreting tumors represent 10–30% of all pancreatic tumors in patients with MEN 1. Patients with an insulinoma present with hypoglycemic symptoms (e.g., weakness, headaches, sweating, faintness, seizures, altered behavior, weight gain) that typically develop after fasting or exertion and improve after glucose intake. The most reliable test is a supervised 72-h fast. Biochemical investigations reveal increased plasma insulin concentrations in association with hypoglycemia (Table 408-3). Circulating concentrations of C peptide and proinsulin, which are also increased, are useful in establishing the diagnosis. It also is important to demonstrate the absence of sulfonylureas in plasma and urine samples obtained during the investigation of hypoglycemia (Table 408-3). Surgical success is greatly enhanced by preoperative localization by endoscopic ultrasonography, CT scanning, or celiac axis angiography. Additional localization methods may include preoperative and perioperative percutaneous transhepatic portal venous sampling, selective intraarterial stimulation with hepatic venous sampling, and intraoperative direct pancreatic ultrasonography. Insulinomas occur in association with gastrinomas in 10% of patients with MEN 1, and the two tumors may arise at different times. Insulinomas occur more often in patients with MEN 1 who are younger than 40 years, and some arise in individuals younger than 20 years. In contrast, in patients without MEN 1, insulinomas generally occur in those older than 40 years. Insulinomas may be the first manifestation of MEN 1 in 10% of patients, and approximately 4% of patients with insulinomas will have MEN 1.
# Chunk 5099
FIGURE 408-1 Pancreatic nonfunctioning neuroendocrine tumor (NET) in a 14-year-old patient with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN 1). A. An abdominal magnetic resonance imaging scan revealed a low-intensity >2.0 cm (anteroposterior maximal diameter) tumor within the neck of pancreas. There was no evidence of invasion of adjacent structures or metastases. The tumor is indicated by white dashed circle. B. The pancreatic NET was removed by surgery, and macroscopic examination confirmed the location of the tumor (white dashed circles) in the neck of the pancreas. Immunohistochemistry showed the tumor to immunostain for chromogranin A, but not gastrointestinal peptides or menin, thereby confirming that it was a non-secreting NET due to loss of menin expression. (Part A adapted with permission from PJ Newey et al: J Clin Endocrinol Metab 10:3640, 2009.) assessment is complete. Alternatively, other experts recommend surgery based on tumor size, using either >1 cm or >3 cm at different centers. Pancreatoduodenal surgery is successful in removing the tumors in 80% of patients, but more than 40% of patients develop complications, including diabetes mellitus, frequent steatorrhea, early and late dumping syndromes, and other gastrointestinal symptoms. However, ~50–60% of patients treated surgically survive >5 years. When considering these recommendations, it is important to consider that occult metastatic disease (e.g., tumors not detected by imaging investigations) is likely to be present in a substantial proportion of these patients at the time of presentation. Inhibitors of tyrosine kinase receptors (TKRs) and of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling pathway have been reported to be effective in treating pancreatic NETs and in doubling the progression-free survival time.
# Chunk 5100
Other Pancreatic NETs NETs secreting growth hormone–releasing hormone (GHRH), GHRHomas, have been reported rarely in patients with MEN 1. It is estimated that ~33% of patients with GHRHomas have other MEN 1–related tumors. GHRHomas may be diagnosed by demonstrating elevated serum concentrations of growth hormone and GHRH. More than 50% of GHRHomas occur in the lung, 30% occur in the pancreas, and 10% are found in the small intestine. Somatostatinomas secrete somatostatin, a peptide that inhibits the secretion of a variety of hormones, resulting in hyperglycemia, cholelithiasis, low acid output, steatorrhea, diarrhea, abdominal pain, anemia, and weight loss. Although 7% of pancreatic NETs secrete somatostatin, the clinical features of somatostatinoma syndrome are unusual in patients with MEN 1.
# Chunk 5101
Pituitary Tumors (See also Chap. 403) Pituitary tumors occur in 15–50% of patients with MEN 1 (Table 408-1). These occur as early as 5 years of age or as late as the ninth decade. MEN 1 pituitary adenomas are more frequent in women than men and significantly are macroadenomas (i.e., diameter >1 cm). Moreover, about one-third of these pituitary tumors show invasive features such as infiltration of tumor cells into surrounding normal juxtatumoral pituitary tissue. However, no specific histologic parameters differentiate between MEN 1 and non–MEN 1 pituitary tumors. Approximately 60% of MEN 1–associated pituitary tumors secrete prolactin, <25% secrete growth hormone, 5% secrete adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), and the remainder appear to be nonfunctioning, with some secreting glycoprotein subunits (Table 408-1). However, pituitary tumors derived from MEN 1 patients may exhibit immunoreactivity to several hormones. In particular, there is a greater frequency of somatolactotrope tumors. Prolactinomas are the first manifestation of MEN 1 in ~15% of patients, whereas somatotrope tumors occur more often in patients older than 40 years of age. Fewer than 3% of patients with anterior pituitary tumors will have MEN 1. Clinical manifestations are similar to those in patients with sporadic pituitary tumors without MEN 1 and depend on the hormone secreted and the size of the pituitary tumor. Thus, patients may have symptoms of hyperprolactinemia (e.g., amenorrhea, infertility, and galactorrhea in women, or impotence and infertility in men) or have features of acromegaly or Cushing’s disease. In addition, enlarging pituitary tumors may compress adjacent structures such as the optic chiasm or normal pituitary tissue, causing visual disturbances and/or hypopituitarism. In asymptomatic patients with MEN 1, periodic biochemical monitoring of serum prolactin and insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) levels, as well as MRI of the pituitary, can lead to early identification of pituitary tumors (Table 408-3). In patients with abnormal results, hypothalamic-pituitary testing should characterize the nature of the pituitary lesion and its effects on the secretion of other pituitary hormones.
# Chunk 5102
Carcinoid Tumors (See also Chap. 113) Carcinoid tumors occur in more than 3% of patients with MEN 1 (Table 408-1). The carcinoid tumor may be located in the bronchi, gastrointestinal tract, pancreas, or 2339 thymus. At the time of diagnosis, most patients are asymptomatic and do not have clinical features of the carcinoid syndrome. Importantly, no hormonal or biochemical abnormality (e.g., plasma chromogranin A) is consistently observed in individuals with thymic or bronchial carcinoid tumors. Thus, screening for these tumors is dependent on radiologic imaging. The optimum method for screening has not been established. CT and MRI are sensitive for detecting thymic and bronchial tumors (Table 408-3), although repeated CT scanning raises concern about exposure to repeated doses of ionizing radiation. Octreotide scintigraphy may also reveal some thymic and bronchial carcinoids, although there is insufficient evidence to recommend its routine use. Gastric carcinoids, of which the type II gastric enterochromaffin-like (ECL) cell carcinoids (ECLomas) are associated with MEN 1 and Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, may be detected incidentally at the time of gastric endoscopy for dyspeptic symptoms in MEN 1 patients. These tumors, which may be found in >10% of MEN 1 patients, are usually multiple and smaller than 1.5 cm. Bronchial carcinoids in patients with MEN 1 occur predominantly in women (male-to-female ratio, 1:4). In contrast, thymic carcinoids in European patients with MEN 1 occur predominantly in men (male-to-female ratio, 20:1), with cigarette smokers having a higher risk for these tumors; thymic carcinoids in Japanese patients with MEN 1 have a less marked sex difference (male-to-female ratio 2:1). The course of thymic carcinoids in MEN 1 appears to be particularly aggressive. The presence of thymic tumors in patients with MEN 1 is associated with a median survival after diagnosis of approximately 9.5 years, with 70% of patients dying as a direct result of the tumor.
# Chunk 5103
Facial Angiofibromas and Collagenomas The occurrence of multiple facial angiofibromas in patients with MEN 1 may range from >20 to >90%, and occurrence of collagenomas may range from 0 to >70% (Table 408-1). These cutaneous findings may allow presymptomatic diagnosis of MEN 1 in the relatives of a patient with MEN 1. Treatment for these cutaneous lesions is usually not required.
# Chunk 5104
Mutational analysis in asymptomatic individuals should be undertaken at the earliest opportunity and, if possible, in the first decade of life because tumors have developed in some children by the age of 5 years. Appropriate biochemical and radiologic investigations (Table 408-3) aimed at detecting the development of tumors should then be undertaken in affected individuals. Mutant gene carriers should undergo biochemical screening at least once per annum and also have baseline pituitary and abdominal imaging (e.g., MRI or CT), which should then be repeated at 1to 3-year intervals (Table 408-3). Screening should commence after 5 years of age and should continue for life because the disease may develop as late as the eighth decade. The screening history and physical examination elicit the symptoms and signs of hypercalcemia, nephrolithiasis, peptic ulcer disease, neuroglycopenia, hypopituitarism, galactorrhea and amenorrhea in women, acromegaly, Cushing’s disease, and visual field loss and the presence of subcutaneous lipomas, angiofibromas, and collagenomas. Biochemical screening should include measurements of serum calcium, PTH, gastrointestinal hormones (e.g., gastrin, insulin with a fasting glucose, glucagon, VIP, PP), chromogranin A, prolactin, and IGF-I in all individuals. More specific endocrine function tests should be undertaken in individuals who have symptoms or signs suggestive of a specific clinical syndrome. Biochemical screening for the development of MEN 1 tumors in asymptomatic members of families with MEN 1 is of great importance to reduce morbidity and mortality from the associated tumors.
# Chunk 5105
MULTIPLE ENDOCRINE NEOPLASIA TYPE 2 AND TYPE 3 Clinical Manifestations MEN type 2 (MEN 2), which is also called Sipple’s syndrome, is characterized by the association of medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC), pheochromocytomas, and parathyroid tumors (Table 408-1). Three clinical variants of MEN 2 are recognized: MEN 2A, MEN 2B, and MTC only. MEN 2A, which is often referred to as MEN 2, is the most common variant. In MEN 2A, MTC is associated with pheochromocytomas in 50% of patients (may be bilateral) and with parathyroid tumors in 20% of patients. MEN 2A may rarely occur in association with Hirschsprung’s disease, caused by the absence of autonomic ganglion cells in the terminal hindgut, resulting in colonic dilatation, severe constipation, and obstruction. MEN 2A may also be associated with cutaneous lichen amyloidosis, which is a pruritic lichenoid lesion that is usually located on the upper back. MEN 2B, which is also referred to as MEN 3, represents 5% of all cases of MEN 2 and is characterized by the occurrence of MTC and pheochromocytoma in association with a Marfanoid habitus; mucosal neuromas of the lips, tongue, and eyelids; medullated corneal fibers; and intestinal autonomic ganglion dysfunction leading to multiple diverticulae and megacolon. Parathyroid tumors do not usually occur in MEN 2B. MTC only (FMTC) is a variant in which MTC is the sole manifestation of the syndrome. However, the distinction between aAdapted from American Thyroid Association Guidelines, RT Kloos et al: Thyroid 6:565, 2009. bRisk for early development of metastasis and aggressive growth of medullary thyroid cancer: ++++, highest; +++, high; ++, intermediate; and +, lowest. cMutations associated with MEN 2A (or medullary thyroid carcinoma only). dConsider surgery at 5 years or later if serum calcitonin is normal, neck ultrasound is normal, and there is a less aggressive family history and family preference. eConsider surgery before 5 years or later if serum calcitonin is normal, neck ultrasound is normal, and there is a less aggressive family history and family preference. fMutations associated with MEN 2B (MEN 3). gNot required because PHPT is not a feature of MEN 2B (MEN 3).
# Chunk 5106
Medullary Thyroid Carcinoma MTC is the most common feature of MEN 2A and MEN 2B and occurs in almost all affected individuals. MTC represents 5–10% of all thyroid gland carcinomas, and 20% of MTC patients have a family history of the disorder. The use of RET mutational analysis to identify family members at risk for hereditary forms of MTC has altered the presentation of MTC from that of symptomatic tumors to a preclinical disease for which prophylactic thyroidectomy (Table 408-4) is undertaken to improve the prognosis and ideally result in cure. However, in patients who do not have a known family history of MEN 2A, FMTC, or MEN 2B, and therefore have not had RET mutational analysis, MTC may present as a palpable mass in the neck, which may be asymptomatic or associated with symptoms of pressure or dysphagia in >15% of patients. Diarrhea occurs in 30% of patients and is associated either with elevated circulating concentrations of calcitonin or tumor-related secretion of serotonin and prostaglandins. Some patients may also experience flushing. In addition, ectopic ACTH production by MTC may cause Cushing’s syndrome. The diagnosis of MTC relies on the demonstration of hypercalcitoninemia (>90 pg/mL in the basal state); stimulation tests using IV pentagastrin (0.5 mg/kg) and or calcium infusion (2 mg/kg) are rarely used now, reflecting improvements in the assay for calcitonin. Neck ultrasonography with fine-needle aspiration of the nodules can confirm the diagnosis. Radionucleotide thyroid scans may reveal MTC tumors as “cold” nodules. Radiography may reveal dense irregular calcification within the involved portions of the thyroid gland and in lymph nodes involved with metastases. Positron emission tomography (PET) may help to identify the MTC and metastases (Fig. 408-2). Metastases of MTC usually occur to the cervical lymph nodes in the early stages and to the mediastinal nodes, lung, liver, trachea, adrenal, esophagus, and bone in later stages. Elevations in serum calcitonin concentrations are often the first sign of recurrence or persistent disease, and the serum calcitonin doubling time is useful for determining prognosis. MTC can have an aggressive clinical course, with early metastases and death in approximately 10% of patients. A family history of aggressive MTC or MEN 2B may be elicited.
# Chunk 5107
(Reproduced with permission from A Naziat et al: Clin Endocrinol [Oxf] 78:966, 2013.) 2342 the value of undertaking a central neck dissection has been subject to debate. Prophylactic thyroidectomy, with life-long thyroxine replacement, has dramatically improved outcomes in patients with MEN 2 and MEN 3, such that ~90% of young patients with RET mutations who had a prophylactic thyroidectomy have no evidence of persistent or recurrent MTC at 7 years after surgery. In patients with clinically evident MTC, a total thyroidectomy with bilateral central resection is recommended, and an ipsilateral lateral neck dissection should be undertaken if the primary tumor is >1 cm in size or there is evidence of nodal metastasis in the central neck. Surgery is the only curative therapy for MTC. The 10-year survival in patients with metastatic MTC is ~20%. For inoperable MTC or metastatic disease, the tyrosine kinase inhibitors, vandetanib and cabozantinib, have improved the progression-free survival times. Other types of chemotherapy are of limited efficacy, but radiotherapy may help to palliate local disease.
# Chunk 5108
Pheochromocytoma (See also Chap. 407) These noradrenalineand adrenaline-secreting tumors occur in >50% of patients with MEN 2A and MEN 2B and are a major cause of morbidity and mortality. Patients may have symptoms and signs of catecholamine secretion (e.g., headaches, palpitations, sweating, poorly controlled hypertension), or they may be asymptomatic with detection through biochemical screening based on a history of familial MEN 2A, MEN 2B, or MTC. Pheochromocytomas in patients with MEN 2A and MEN 2B differ significantly in distribution when compared with patients without MEN 2A and MEN 2B. Extra-adrenal pheochromocytomas, which occur in 10% of patients without MEN 2A and MEN 2B, are observed rarely in patients with MEN 2A and MEN 2B. Malignant pheochromocytomas are much less common in patients with MEN 2A and MEN 2B. The biochemical and radiologic investigation of pheochromocytoma in patients with MEN 2A and MEN 2B is similar to that in non– MEN 2 patients and includes the measurement of plasma (obtained from supine patients) and urinary free fractionated metanephrines (e.g., normetanephrine and metanephrines measured separately), CT or MRI scanning, radionuclide scanning with meta-iodo-(123I or 131I)-benzyl guanidine (MIBG), and PET using (18F)-fluorodopamine or (18F)-fluoro-2-dexoxy-d-glucose (Fig. 408-2).
# Chunk 5109
Screening for MEN 2/MEN 3–associated tumors in patients with RET germline mutations should be undertaken annually and include serum calcitonin measurements, a neck ultrasound for MTC, plasma and 24-h urinary fractionated metanephrines for pheochromocytoma, and albumin-corrected serum calcium or ionized calcium with PTH for primary hyperparathyroidism. In patients with MEN 2–associated RET mutations, screening for MTC should begin by 3 to 5 years; for pheochromocytoma by 20 years; and for primary hyperparathyroidism by 20 years of age (Table 408-4).
# Chunk 5110
Parathyroid Serum Ca, PTH 6–12 months

Ossifying jaw fibroma Panoramic jaw x-ray with neck 5 years shieldingc
# Chunk 5111
Renal Abdominal MRIc,d 5 years aScreening for most common HPT-JT–associated tumors is considered. Assessment for other reported tumor types may be indicated (e.g., pancreatic, thyroid, testicular tumors). bFrequency of repeating test after baseline tests performed. cX-rays and imaging involving ionizing radiation should ideally be avoided to minimize risk of generating subsequent mutations. dUltrasound scan recommended if MRI unavailable. eSuch selective pelvic imaging should be considered after obtaining a detailed menstrual history.
# Chunk 5112
Source: Reproduced from PJ Newey et al: Hum Mutat 31:295, 2010.

by compressing adjacent structures and/or increasing intracranial pressure. In the CNS, the cerebellum and spinal cord are the most frequently involved sites. The renal abnormalities consist of cysts and carcinomas, and the lifetime risk of a renal cell carcinoma (RCC) in VHL is 70%. The endocrine tumors in VHL consist of pheochromocytomas and pancreatic islet cell tumors. The clinical presentation of pheochromocytoma in VHL disease is similar to that in sporadic cases, except there is a higher frequency of bilateral or multiple tumors, which may involve extra-adrenal sites in VHL disease. The most frequent pancreatic lesions in VHL are multiple cyst-adenomas, which rarely cause clinical disease. However, nonsecreting pancreatic islet cell tumors occur in <10% of VHL patients, who are usually asymptomatic. The pancreatic tumors in these patients are often detected by regular screening using abdominal imaging. Pheochromocytomas should be investigated and treated as described earlier for MEN 2. The pancreatic islet cell tumors frequently become malignant, and early surgery is recommended.
# Chunk 5113
Chronic candidiasis is nearly always present and is not very responsive to treatment. Hypoparathyroidism is found in >85% of cases, and Addison’s disease is found in nearly 80%. Gonadal failure appears to affect women more than men (70% vs 25%, respectively), and hypoplasia of the dental enamel also occurs frequently (77% of patients). Other endocrine disorders that occur less frequently include type 1 diabetes (23%) and autoimmune thyroid disease (18%). Nonendocrine manifestations that present less frequently include alopecia (40%), vitiligo (26%), intestinal malabsorption (18%), pernicious anemia (31%), chronic active hepatitis (17%), and nail dystrophy. An unusual and debilitating manifestation of the disorder is the development of refractory diarrhea/obstipation that may be related to autoantibody-mediated destruction of enterochromaffin or enterochromaffin-like cells.
# Chunk 5114
Addison’s disease Sodium, potassium, ACTH, cortisol, 21and 17-hydroxylase autoantibodies

Hypoparathyroidism Serum calcium, phosphate, PTH
# Chunk 5115
APS-2 (OMIM 269200) is more common than APS-1 with a prevalence of 1 in 100,000. It has a gender bias and occurs more often in female patients with a ratio of at least 3:1 compared to male patients. In contrast to APS-1, APS-2 often has its onset in adulthood with a peak incidence between 20 and 60 years of age. It shows a familial, multigenerational heritage (Table 409-2). The presence of two or more of the following endocrine deficiencies in the same patient defines the presence of APS-2: primary adrenal insufficiency (Addison’s disease; 50–70%), Graves’ disease or autoimmune thyroiditis (15–69%), type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1D; 40–50%), and primary hypogonadism.
# Chunk 5116
Screening tests for thyroid disease can include anti–thyroid peroxidase (TPO) or anti-thyroglobulin autoantibodies or anti-TSH receptor antibodies for Graves’ disease. Yearly measurements of TSH can then be used to follow these individuals. Celiac disease can be screened for using the anti–tissue transglutaminase (tTg) antibody test. For those <20 years of age, testing every 1–2 years should be performed, whereas less frequent testing is indicated after the age of 20 because the majority of individuals who develop celiac disease have the antibody earlier in life. Positive tTg antibody test results should be confirmed on repeat testing, followed by small-bowel biopsy to document pathologic changes of celiac disease. Many patients have asymptomatic celiac disease that is nevertheless associated with osteopenia and impaired growth. If left untreated, symptomatic celiac disease has been reported to be associated with an increased risk of gastrointestinal malignancy, especially lymphoma.
# Chunk 5117
This is a very rare disorder where severe insulin resistance (type B) is caused by the presence of anti-insulin receptor antibodies. It is associated with acanthosis nigricans, which can also be associated with other forms of less severe insulin resistance. About one-third of patients have an associated autoimmune illness such as systemic lupus erythematosus or Sjögren’s syndrome. Therefore, the presence of antinuclear antibodies, elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate, hyperglobulinemia, leukopenia, and hypocomplementemia may accompany the presentation. The presence of anti-insulin receptor autoantibodies leads to marked insulin resistance, requiring more than 100,000 units of insulin to be given daily with only partial control of hyperglycemia. Patients can also have severe hypoglycemia due to partial activation of the insulin receptor by the antibody. The course of the disease is variable, and several patients have had spontaneous remissions. Therapy targeting B lymphocytes including rituximab, cyclophosphamide, and pulse steroids can induce remission of the disease.
# Chunk 5118
POEMS (polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, M-protein, and skin changes; also known as Crow-Fukase syndrome; OMIM 192240) patients usually present with a progressive sensorimotor polyneuropathy, diabetes mellitus (50%), primary gonadal failure (70%), and a plasma cell dyscrasia with sclerotic bony lesions. Associated findings can be hepatosplenomegaly, lymphadenopathy, and hyper-pigmentation. Patients often present in the fifth to sixth decade of life and have a median survival after diagnosis of less than 3 years. The syndrome is assumed to be secondary to circulating immunoglobulins, but patients have excess vascular endothelial growth factor as well as elevated levels of other inflammatory cytokines such as IL1-β, IL-6, and tumor necrosis factor α. A small series of patients have been treated with thalidomide, leading to a decrease in vascular endothelial growth factor. Hyperglycemia responds to small, subcutaneous doses of insulin. The hypogonadism is due to primary gonadal disease with elevated plasma levels of follicle-stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormone. Temporary resolution of the features of POEMS, including normalization of blood glucose, may occur after radiotherapy for localized plasma cell lesions of bone or after chemotherapy, thalidomide, plasmapheresis, autologous stem cell transplantation, or treatment with all-trans-retinoic acid.
# Chunk 5119
FIGURE 410-3 Sex development. A. Internal urogenital tract. B. External genitalia. (After E Braunwald et al [eds]: Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 15th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2001.) defects (CHDs) (30%) (bicuspid aortic valve, 30–50%; coarctation of to regimens may be beneficial. Girls with evidence of ovarian the aorta, 30%; aortic root dilation, 5%) require long-term follow-up insufficiency require estrogen replacement to induce breast and by an experienced cardiologist, antibiotic prophylaxis for dental or uterine development, support growth, and maintain bone miner-surgical procedures, and serial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) alization. Most physicians now initiate low-dose estrogen therapy of aortic root dimensions, because progressive aortic root dilation is (one-tenth to one-eighth of the adult replacement dose) to induce associated with increased risk of aortic dissection. Individuals found puberty at an age-appropriate time (~12 years). Doses of estrogen to have congenital renal and urinary tract malformations (30%) are are increased gradually to allow development over a 2to 4-year at risk for urinary tract infections, hypertension, and nephrocalci-period. Progestins are added later to regulate withdrawal bleeds. nosis. Hypertension can occur independently of cardiac and renal Some women with TS have achieved successful pregnancy after malformations and should be monitored and treated as in other ovum donation and in vitro fertilization but are high risk, and car-patients with essential hypertension. Clitoral enlargement or other diac assessment is required. Long-term follow-up of women with evidence of virilization suggests the presence of covert, translocated TS involves careful surveillance of sex hormone replacement and Y chromosomal material and is associated with increased risk of reproductive function, bone mineralization, cardiac function and gonadoblastoma. Regular assessment of thyroid function, weight, aortic root dimensions, blood pressure, weight and glucose tolerdentition, hearing, speech, vision, and educational issues should be ance, hepatic and lipid profiles, thyroid function, and hearing. This performed during childhood. Otitis media and middle-ear disease service is provided by a dedicated TS clinic in some centers. are prevalent in childhood (50–85%), and sensorineural hearing loss becomes progressively common with age (70–90%). Autoimmune hypothyroidism (15–30%) can occur in childhood but has a mean 45,X/46,XY MOSAICISM (MIXED GONADAL DYSGENESIS) age of onset in the third decade. Counseling about long-term The phenotype of individuals with 45,X/46,XY mosaicism (sometimes growth and fertility issues should be provided. Patient support called mixed gonadal dysgenesis) can vary considerably. Some have a groups are active throughout the world and can play an invaluable predominantly female phenotype with somatic features of TS, streak role. gonads, and müllerian structures, and are managed as TS with a Y
# Chunk 5120
Females with the classic simple virilizing form of 21-OHD also present with genital ambiguity. They have impaired cortisol biosynthesis but do not develop salt loss. Patients with nonclassic 21-OHD produce normal amounts of cortisol and aldosterone but at the expense of producing excess androgens. Hirsutism (60%), oligomenorrhea (50%), and acne (30%) are the most common presenting features. This is one of the most common recessive disorders in humans, with an incidence as high as 1 in 100 to 500 in many populations and 1 in 27 in Ashkenazi Jews of Eastern European origin.
# Chunk 5121
• External genitalia• Prostate growth• Acne• Facial/body hair• Scalp hair loss• Hypothalamic/  pituitary feedback• Bone resorption• Epiphyseal closure• Gynecomastia• Some vascular and  behavioral effectsAlbumin(50-70%)Estradiol• Wolffian duct• Bone formation• Muscle mass• SpermatogenesisSHBG(30-45%)Unbound(0.5-3.0%)TestosteroneExcretion(90%)Dihydrotestosterone(DHT)Aromatase(0.3%)5˜-Reductase(6-8%)Testosterone (5 mg/d)
# Chunk 5122
Semen analysis is the most important step in the evaluation of male infertility. Samples are collected by masturbation following a period of abstinence for 2–3 days. Semen volumes and sperm concentrations vary considerably among fertile men, and several samples may be needed before concluding that the results are abnormal. Analysis should be performed within an hour of collection. Using semen samples from over 4500 men in 14 countries, whose partners had a time-to-pregnancy of less than 12 months, the World Health Organization (WHO) has generated the following one-sided reference limits for semen parameters: semen volume, 1.5 mL; total sperm number, 39 million per ejaculate; sperm concentration, 15 million/mL; vitality, 58% live; progressive motility, 32%; total (progressive + nonprogressive) motility, 40%; morphologically normal forms, 4.0%. Some men with low sperm counts are nevertheless fertile. A variety of tests for sperm function can be performed in specialized laboratories, but these add relatively little to the treatment options.
# Chunk 5123
If therapy is considered appropriate, it can begin with 25–50 mg testosterone enanthate or testosterone cypionate every 2 weeks, or by using a 2.5-mg testosterone patch or 25-mg testosterone gel. Because aromatization of testosterone to estrogen is obligatory for mediating androgen effects on epiphyseal fusion, concomitant treatment with aromatase inhibitors may allow attainment of greater final adult height. Testosterone treatment should be interrupted after 6 months to determine if endogenous LH and FSH secretion have ensued. Other causes of delayed puberty should be considered when there are associated clinical features or when boys do not enter puberty spontaneously after a year of observation or treatment.
# Chunk 5124
Mutations in a number of genes involved in the development and migration of GnRH neurons or in the regulation of GnRH secretion have been linked to GnRH deficiency, although the genetic defect remains elusive in nearly two-thirds of cases. Familial hypogonadotropic hypogonadism can be transmitted as an X-linked (20%), autosomal recessive (30%), or autosomal dominant (50%) trait. Some individuals with idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (IHH) have sporadic mutations in the same genes that cause inherited forms of the disorder. The genetic defects associated with GnRH deficiency can be conveniently classified as anosmic (Kallmann’s syndrome) or normosmic (Table 411-2), although the occurrence of both anosmic and normosmic forms of GnRH deficiency in the same families suggests commonality of pathophysiologic mechanisms. Kallmann’s syndrome, the anosmic form of GnRH deficiency, can result from mutations in one or more genes associated with olfactory bulb morphogenesis and the migration of GnRH neurons from their origin in the region of the olfactory placode, along the scaffold established by the olfactory nerves, through the cribriform plate into their final location into the preoptic region of the hypothalamus. Thus, mutations in KAL1, FGF8, FGFR1, NELF, PROK2, PROK2R, and CHD7 have been described in patients with Kallmann’s syndrome. An X-linked form of IHH is caused by mutations in the KAL1 gene, which encodes anosmin, a protein that mediates the migration of neural progenitors of the olfactory bulb and GnRH-producing neurons. These individuals have GnRH deficiency and variable combinations of anosmia or hyposmia, renal defects, and neurologic abnormalities including mirror movements. Mutations in the FGFR1 gene cause an autosomal dominant form of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism that clinically resembles Kallmann’s syndrome; mutations in its putative ligand, FGF8 gene product, have also been associated with IHH. Prokineticin 2 (PROK2) also encodes a protein involved in migration and development of olfactory and GnRH neurons. Recessive mutations in PROK2 or in its receptor, PROKR2, have been associated with both anosmic and normosmic forms of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism.
# Chunk 5125
Cryptorchidism Cryptorchidism occurs when there is incomplete descent of the testis from the abdominal cavity into the scrotum. About 3% of full-term and 30% of premature male infants have at least one undescended testis at birth, but descent is usually complete by the first few weeks of life. The incidence of cryptorchidism is <1% by 9 months of age. Androgens regulate predominantly the inguinoscrotal descent of the testes through degeneration of the craniosuspensory ligament and a shortening of the gubernaculums, respectively. Mutations in INSL3 and leucine-rich repeat family of G protein–coupled receptor 8 (LGR8), which regulate the transabdominal portion of testicular descent, have been found in some patients with cryptorchidism.
# Chunk 5126
Increased aromatization of androgen to estrogen (obesity,  feminizing adrenal tumors, Sertoli cell tumors, inherited dysregulation of aromatase) Breast enlargement True glandular enlargement Breast mass hard or fixed to the underlying tissue Recent onset and rapid growth Mammography and/or biopsy to exclude malignancy Follow-up with serial examinations Increased E2, normal T, altered E2/T ratio Increased hCG˜Exclude hCG secreting tumors Low T, high E2/T ratio Androgen deficiency syndrome Serum T, LH, FSH, estradiol, and hCG˜Onset in neonatal or peripubertal period Causative drugs Known liver disease Size <4 cm Clinical evidence of androgen deficiency Breast tenderness Very small testes Glandular tissue >4 cm in diameter Absence of causative drugs or liver disease Increased adipose tissue FIGURE 411-5 Evaluation of gynecomastia. E2, 17β-estradiol; hCGβ, human chorionic gonadotropin β; T, testosterone.
# Chunk 5127
Gonadotropin therapy is used to establish or restore fertility in patients with gonadotropin deficiency of any cause. Several gonadotropin preparations are available. Human menopausal gonadotropin (hMG; purified from the urine of postmenopausal women) contains 75 IU FSH and 75 IU LH per vial. hCG (purified from the urine of pregnant women) has little FSH activity and resembles LH in its ability to stimulate testosterone production by Leydig cells. Recombinant LH is now available. Because of the expense of hMG, treatment is usually begun with hCG alone, and hMG is added later to promote the FSH-dependent stages of spermatid development. Recombinant human FSH (hFSH) is now available and is indistinguishable from purified urinary hFSH in its biologic activity and pharmacokinetics in vitro and in vivo, although the mature β subunit of recombinant hFSH has seven fewer amino acids. Recombinant hFSH is available in ampoules containing 75 IU (~7.5 μg FSH), which accounts for >99% of protein content. Once spermatogenesis is restored using combined FSH and LH therapy, hCG alone is often sufficient to maintain spermatogenesis.
# Chunk 5128
Although a variety of treatment regimens are used, 1000–2000 IU of hCG or recombinant human LH (rhLH) administered intramuscularly three times weekly is a reasonable starting dose. Testosterone levels should be measured 6–8 weeks later and 48–72 h after the hCG or rhLH injection; the hCG/rhLH dose should be adjusted to achieve testosterone levels in the mid-normal range. Sperm counts should be monitored on a monthly basis. It may take several months for spermatogenesis to be restored; therefore, it is important to forewarn patients about the potential length and expense of the treatment and to provide conservative estimates of success rates. If testosterone levels are in the mid-normal range but the sperm concentrations are low after 6 months of therapy with hCG alone, FSH should be added. This can be done by using hMG, highly purified urinary hFSH, or recombinant hFSH. The selection of FSH dose is empirical. A common practice is to start with the addition of 75 IU FSH three times each week in conjunction with the hCG/rhLH injections. If sperm densities are still low after 3 months of combined treatment, the FSH dose should be increased to 150 IU. Occasionally, it may take ≥18–24 months for spermatogenesis to be restored.
# Chunk 5129
Buccal Adhesive Testosterone A buccal testosterone tablet, which adheres to the buccal mucosa and releases testosterone as it is slowly dissolved, has been approved. After twice-daily application of 30-mg tablets, serum testosterone levels are maintained within the normal male range in a majority of treated hypogonadal men. 2371 The adverse effects include buccal ulceration and gum problems in a few subjects. The effects of food and brushing on absorption have not been studied in detail.
# Chunk 5130
After initial priming, long-acting testosterone undecanoate in oil, when administered intramuscularly every 12 weeks, maintains serum testosterone, estradiol, and DHT in the normal male range and corrects symptoms of androgen deficiency in a majority of treated men. However, large injection volume (4 mL) is its relative drawback.
# Chunk 5131
Male Hormonal Contraception Based on Combined Administration of Testosterone and Gonadotropin Inhibitors Supraphysiologic doses of testosterone (200 mg testosterone enanthate weekly) suppress LH and FSH secretion and induce azoospermia in 50% of Caucasian men and >95% of Chinese men. The WHO-supported multicenter efficacy trials have demonstrated that suppression of spermatogenesis to azoospermia or severe oligozoospermia (<3 million/mL) by administration of testosterone enanthate to men results in highly effective contraception. Because of concern about long-term adverse effects of supraphysiologic testosterone doses, regimens that combine other gonadotropin inhibitors, such as GnRH antagonists and progestins with replacement doses of testosterone, are being investigated. Oral etonogestrel daily in combination with intramuscular testosterone decanoate every 4–6 weeks induced azoospermia or severe oligozoospermia (sperm density <1 million/mL) in 99% of treated men over a 1-year period. This regimen was associated with weight gain, deceased testicular volume, and decreased plasma high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol, and its long-term safety has not been demonstrated. SARMs that are more potent inhibitors of gonadotropins than testosterone and spare the prostate hold promise for their contraceptive potential.
# Chunk 5132
Recommended Regimens for Androgen Replacement Testosterone esters are administered typically at doses of 75–100 mg intramuscularly every week, or 150–200 mg every 2 weeks. One or two 5-mg nongenital testosterone patches can be applied daily over the skin of the back, thigh, or upper arm away from pressure areas. Testosterone gels are typically applied over a covered area of skin at initial doses that vary with the formulation; patients should wash their hands after gel application. Bioadhesive buccal testosterone tablets at a dose of 30 mg are typically applied twice daily on the buccal mucosa.
# Chunk 5133
Contraindications for Androgen Administration Testosterone administration is contraindicated in men with a history of prostate or breast cancer (Table 411-4). Testosterone therapy should not be administered without further urologic evaluation to men with a palpable prostate nodule or induration; to men with prostate-specific antigen levels >4 ng/mL or >3 ng/mL in men at high risk for prostate cancer such as African Americans or men with first-degree relatives with prostate cancer; or to men with severe lower urinary tract symptoms (American Urological Association lower urinary tract symptom score >19). Testosterone replacement should not be administered to men with baseline hematocrit ≥50%, severe untreated obstructive sleep apnea, uncontrolled or poorly controlled congestive heart failure, or myocardial infarction, stroke, or acute coronary syndrome in the preceding 6 months.
# Chunk 5134
2.

Monitor testosterone level 3–6 months after initiation of testosterone therapy:

Therapy should aim to raise serum testosterone level into the mid-normal range.
# Chunk 5135
Transdermal gels and solution: Assess testosterone level 2–8 h after patient has been on treatment for at least 2 weeks; adjust dose to achieve serum testosterone level in the mid-normal range.
# Chunk 5136
6.

Obtain urologic consultation if there is:

An increase in serum PSA concentration >1.4 ng/mL within any 12-month period of testosterone treatment.
# Chunk 5137
A PSA velocity of >0.4 ng/mL per year using the PSA level after 6 months of testosterone administration as the reference (only applicable if PSA data are available for a period exceeding 2 years).
# Chunk 5138
Disorders of the Testes and Male Reproductive System levels, due to increased erythropoiesis, suppression of hepcidin, and increased iron availability for erythropoiesis. The magnitude of hemoglobin increase during testosterone therapy is greater in older men than younger men and in men who have sleep apnea, a significant smoking history, or chronic obstructive lung disease. The frequency of erythrocytosis is higher in hypogonadal men treated with injectable testosterone esters than in those treated with transdermal formulations, presumably due to the higher testosterone dose delivered by the typical regimens of testosterone esters. Erythrocytosis is the most frequent adverse event reported in testosterone trials in middle-aged and older men and is also the most frequent cause of treatment discontinuation in these trials. If hematocrit rises above 54%, testosterone therapy should be stopped until hematocrit has fallen to <50%. After evaluation of the patient for hypoxia and sleep apnea, testosterone therapy may be reinitiated at a lower dose.
# Chunk 5139
Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) levels are lower in testosterone-deficient men and are restored to normal after testosterone replacement. There is considerable test-retest variability in PSA measurements. Increments in PSA levels after testosterone supplementation in androgen-deficient men are generally <0.5 ng/mL, and increments >1.0 ng/mL over a 3to 6-month period are unusual. The 90% confidence interval for the change in PSA values in men with benign prostatic hypertrophy, measured 3–6 months apart, is 1.4 ng/mL. Therefore, the Endocrine Society expert panel suggested that an increase in PSA >1.4 ng/mL in any 1 year after starting testosterone therapy, if confirmed, should lead to urologic evaluation. PSA velocity criterion can be used for patients who have sequential PSA measurements for >2 years; a change of >0.40 ng/mL per year merits closer urologic follow-up.
# Chunk 5140
The high rates of mortality and morbidities observed in AAS users are alarming. One Finnish study reported 4.6 times the risk of death among elite power lifters than in age-matched men from the general population. The causes of death among power lifters included suicides, myocardial infarction, hepatic coma, and non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. A retrospective review of patient records in Sweden also reported higher standardized mortality ratios for AAS users than for nonusers. Thiblin and colleagues found that 32% of deaths among AAS users were suicidal, 26% homicidal, and 35% accidental. The median age of death among AAS users (24 years) is even lower than that for heroin or amphetamine users.
# Chunk 5141
After birth and the loss of placenta-derived steroids, gonadotropin levels rise. FSH levels are much higher in girls than in boys. This rise in FSH results in ovarian activation (evident on ultrasound) and increased inhibin B and estradiol levels. Studies that have identified mutations in TAC3, which encodes neurokinin B, and its receptor, TAC3R, in patients with GnRH deficiency indicate that both are involved in control of GnRH secretion and may be particularly important at this early stage of development. By 12–20 months of age, the reproductive axis is again suppressed, and a period of relative quiescence persists until puberty (Fig. 412-5). At the onset of puberty, pulsatile GnRH secretion induces pituitary gonadotropin production. In the early stages of puberty, LH and FSH secretion are apparent only during sleep, but as puberty develops, pulsatile gonadotropin secretion occurs throughout the day and night.
# Chunk 5142
The follicular phase is characterized by recruitment of a cohort of secondary follicles and the ultimate selection of a dominant preovulatory follicle (Fig. 412-8). The follicular phase begins, by convention, on the first day of menses. However, follicle recruitment is initiated by the rise in FSH that begins in the late luteal phase of the previous cycle in conjunction with the loss of negative feedback of gonadal steroids and likely inhibin A. The fact that a 20–30% increase in FSH is adequate for follicular recruitment speaks to the marked sensitivity of the resting follicle pool to FSH. The resultant granulosa cell proliferation is responsible for increasing early follicular phase levels of inhibin B. Inhibin B in conjunction with rising levels of estradiol, and
# Chunk 5143
Women who report regular monthly bleeding with cycles that do not vary by >4 days generally have ovulatory cycles, but several other clinical signs can be used to assess the likelihood of ovulation. Some women experience mittelschmerz, described as midcycle pelvic discomfort that is thought to be caused by the rapid expansion of the dominant follicle at the time of ovulation. A constellation of premenstrual moliminal symptoms such as bloating, breast tenderness, and food cravings often occur several days before menses in ovulatory cycles, but their absence cannot be used as evidence of anovulation. Methods that can be used to determine whether ovulation is likely include a serum progesterone level >5 ng/mL ~7 days before expected menses, an increase in basal body temperature of 0.24°C (>0.5°F) in the second half of the cycle due to the thermoregulatory effect of progesterone, or the detection of the urinary LH surge using ovulation predictor kits. Because ovulation occurs ~36 h after the LH surge, urinary LH can be helpful in timing intercourse to coincide with ovulation.
# Chunk 5144
The first menstrual period (menarche) occurs relatively late in the series of developmental milestones that characterize normal pubertal development (Table 412-1). Menarche is preceded by the appearance of pubic and then axillary hair (adrenarche) as a result of maturation of the zona reticularis in the adrenal gland and increased adrenal androgen secretion, particularly dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA). The triggers for adrenarche remain unknown but may involve increases in body mass index, as well as in utero and neonatal factors. Menarche is also preceded by breast development (thelarche). The breast is exquisitely sensitive to the very low levels of estrogen that result from peripheral conversion of adrenal androgens and the low levels of estrogen secreted from the ovary early in pubertal maturation. Breast development precedes the appearance of pubic and axillary hair in ~60% of girls. The interval between the onset of breast development and menarche is ~2 years. There has been a gradual decline in the age of menarche over the past century, attributed in large part to improvement in nutrition, and there is a relationship between adiposity and earlier sexual maturation in girls. In the United States, menarche occurs at an average age of 12.5 years (Table 412-1). Much of the variation in the timing of puberty is due to genetic factors, with heritability estimates of 50–80%. Both adrenarche and thelarche occur ~1 year earlier in black compared with white girls, although the timing of menarche differs by only 6 months between these ethnic groups.
# Chunk 5145
Onset of Breast/ Age of Peak woman is ±2 days. Luteal phase length is relatively constant between 12 and 14 days in normal cycles; thus, the major variability in cycle length is due to variations in the fol-White 10.2 11.9 12.6 14.3 17.1 licular phase. The duration of menstrual bleeding in ovula-Black 9.6 11.5 12 13.6 16.5 tory cycles varies between 4 and 6 days. There is a gradual Source: From FM Biro et al: J Pediatr 148:234, 2006.
# Chunk 5146
menopause and Postmenopausal Hormone Therapy JoAnn E. Manson, Shari S. Bassuk Menopause is the permanent cessation of menstruation due to loss of ovarian follicular function. It is diagnosed retrospectively after 12 413 LH or FSH, IU/L perimenopause precedes the final menses by 2–8 years, with a mean 2381 duration of 4 years. Smoking accelerates the menopausal transition by 2 years.
# Chunk 5147
Determining whether symptoms that develop in midlife are due to ovarian senescence or to other age-related changes is difficult. There is strong evidence that the menopausal transition can cause hot flashes, night sweats, irregular bleeding, and vaginal dryness, and there is moderate evidence that it can cause sleep disturbances in some women. There is inconclusive or insufficient evidence that ovarian aging is a major cause of mood swings, depression, impaired memory or concentration, somatic symptoms, urinary incontinence, or sexual dysfunction. In one U.S. study, nearly 60% of women reported hot flashes in the 2 years before their final menses. Symptom intensity, duration, frequency, and effects on quality of life are highly variable.
# Chunk 5148
Fractures Data from observational studies indicate a 50–80% lower risk of vertebral fracture and a 25–30% lower risk of hip, wrist, and other peripheral fractures among current estrogen users; addition of a progestogen does not appear to modify this benefit. In the WHI, 5–7 years of either combined estrogen-progestin or estrogen-only therapy was associated with a 33% reduction in hip fractures and 25–30% fewer total fractures among a population unselected for osteoporosis. Bisphosphonates (such as alendronate, 10 mg/d or 70 mg once per week; risedronate, 5 mg/d or 35 mg once per week; or ibandronate, 2.5 mg/d or 150 mg once per month or 3 mg every 3 months IV) and raloxifene (60 mg/d), a selective estrogen receptor modulator (SERM), have been shown in randomized trials to increase bone mass density and decrease fracture rates. Other options for treatment of osteoporosis are bazedoxifene in combination with conjugated estrogens and parathyroid hormone (teriparatide, 20 μg/d SC). These agents, unlike 2383 estrogen, do not appear to have adverse effects on the endometrium or breast. Increased physical activity, adequate calcium intake (1000–1200 mg/d through diet or supplements in two or three divided doses), and adequate vitamin D intake (600–1000 IU/d) may also reduce the risk of osteoporosis-related fractures. According to the Institute of Medicine’s 2011 report, 25-hydroxyvitamin D blood levels of ≥50 nmol/L are sufficient for bone-density maintenance and fracture prevention. The Fracture Risk Assessment (FRAX®) score, an algorithm that combines an individual’s bone-density score with age and other risk factors to predict her 10-year risk of hip and major osteoporotic fracture, may be of use in guiding decisions about pharmacologic treatment (see www .shef.ac.uk/FRAX/).
# Chunk 5149
Definite Risks • endometrial cancer (WitH eStroGen alone) A combined analysis of 30 observational studies found a tripling of endometrial cancer risk among short-term users (1–5 years) of unopposed estrogen and a nearly tenfold increased risk among long-term users (≥10 years). These findings are supported by results from the randomized Postmenopausal Estrogen/Progestin Interventions (PEPI) trial, in which 24% of women assigned to unopposed estrogen for 3 years developed atypical endometrial hyperplasia—a premalignant lesion— as opposed to only 1% of women assigned to placebo. Use of a progestogen, which opposes the effects of estrogen on the endometrium, eliminates these risks and may even reduce risk (see later).
# Chunk 5150
Global indexg Probable increase in risk or no effect ↑12% increased risk 20.5 excess cases No increase in riske No difference in riske among older women and women many (189 vs. 168) years past menopause; possible decrease in risk or no effect in younger or recently menopausal women (p for trend by age = 0.02 for estrogen alone) aThe estrogen-progestin arm of the WHI assessed 5.6 years of conjugated equine estrogen (0.625 mg/d) plus medroxyprogesterone acetate (2.5 mg/d) versus placebo. The estrogen-alone arm of the WHI assessed 7.1 years of conjugated equine estrogen (0.625 mg/d) versus placebo. bNumber of cases per 10, 000 women per year. cThe WHI was not designed to assess the effect of HT on menopausal symptoms. Data from other randomized trials suggest that HT reduces risk for menopausal symptoms by 65–90%. dCoronary heart disease is defined as nonfatal myocardial infarction or coronary death. eThere was a significant interaction by age; that is, the association between HT and the specified outcome was different in younger women and older women. f This is the risk reduction that was observed during a cumulative 12-year follow-up period (5.6 years of treatment plus 6.8 years of postintervention observation). gThe global index is a composite outcome representing the first event for each participant from among the following: coronary heart disease, stroke, pulmonary embolism, breast cancer, colorectal cancer, endometrial cancer (estrogen-progestin arm only), hip fracture, and death. Because participants can experience more than one type of event, the global index cannot be derived by a simple summing of the component events. hIncludes some outcomes where results were divergent between the estrogen-progestin arm and the estrogen-alone arm.
# Chunk 5151
Probable or Uncertain Risks and Benefits • coronary Heart diSeaSe/ StroKe Until recently, HT had been enthusiastically recommended as a possible cardioprotective agent. In the past three decades, multiple observational studies suggested, in the aggregate, that estrogen use leads to a 35–50% reduction in CHD incidence among postmenopausal women. The biologic plausibility of such an association is supported by data from randomized trials demonstrating that exogenous estrogen lowers plasma low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol levels and raises high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol levels by 10–15%. Administration of estrogen also favorably affects lipoprotein(a) levels, LDL oxidation, endothelial vascular function, fibrinogen, and plasminogen activator inhibitor 1. However, estrogen therapy has unfavorable effects on other biomarkers of cardiovascular risk: it boosts triglyceride levels; promotes coagulation via factor VII, prothrombin fragments 1 and 2, and fibrinopeptide A elevations; and raises levels of the inflammatory marker C-reactive protein.
# Chunk 5152
However, a closer look at available data suggests that timing of initiation of HT may critically influence the association between such therapy and CHD. Estrogen may slow early stages of atherosclerosis but have adverse effects on advanced atherosclerotic lesions. It has been hypothesized that the prothrombotic and proinflammatory effects of estrogen manifest themselves predominantly among women with subclinical lesions who initiate HT well after the menopausal transition, whereas women with less arterial damage who start HT early in menopause may derive cardiovascular benefit because they have not yet developed advanced lesions. Nonhuman primate data support this concept. Conjugated estrogens had no effect on the extent 2385 of coronary artery plaque in cynomolgus monkeys assigned to receive estrogen alone or combined with progestin starting 2 years (∼6 years in human terms) after oophorectomy and well after the establishment of atherosclerosis. However, administration of exogenous hormones immediately after oophorectomy, during the early stages of atherosclerosis, reduced the extent of plaque by 70%.
# Chunk 5153
Lending further credence to this hypothesis are results of subgroup analyses of observational and clinical trial data. For example, among women who entered the WHI trial with a relatively favorable cholesterol profile, estrogen with or without progestin led to a 40% lower risk of incident CHD. Among women who entered with a worse cholesterol profile, therapy resulted in a 73% higher risk (p for interaction = .02). The presence or absence of the metabolic syndrome (Chap. 422) also strongly influenced the relation between HT and incident CHD. Among women with the metabolic syndrome, HT more than doubled CHD risk, whereas no association was observed among women without the syndrome. Moreover, although there was no association between estrogen-only therapy and CHD in the WHI trial cohort as a whole, such therapy was associated with a CHD risk reduction of 40% among participants age 50–59; in contrast, a risk reduction of only 5% was observed among those age 60–69, and a risk increase of 9% was found among those age 70–79 (p for trend by age = .08). For the outcome of total myocardial infarction, estrogen alone was associated with a borderline-significant 45% reduction and a nonsignificant 24% increase in risk among the youngest and oldest women, respectively (p for trend by age = .02). Estrogen was also associated with lower levels of coronary artery calcified plaque in the younger age group. Although age did not have a similar effect in the estrogen-progestin arm of the WHI, CHD risks increased with years since menopause (p for trend = .08), with a significantly elevated risk among women who were ≥20 years past menopause. For the outcome of total myocardial infarction, estrogen-progestin was associated with a 9% risk reduction among women <10 years past menopause as opposed to a 16% increase in risk among women 10–19 years past menopause and a twofold increase in risk among women >20 years past menopause (p for trend = .01). In the large observational Nurses’ Health Study, women who chose to start HT within 4 years of menopause experienced a lower risk of CHD than did nonusers, whereas those who began therapy ≥10 years after menopause appeared to receive little coronary benefit. Observational studies include a high proportion of women who begin HT within 3–4 years of menopause, whereas clinical trials include a high proportion of women ≥12 years past menopause; this difference helps to reconcile some of the apparent discrepancies between the two types of studies.
# Chunk 5154
Long-term use (≥5 years for estrogen-progestogen and ≥7 years for estrogen alone) is more problematic because a heightened risk of breast cancer must be factored into the decision, especially for estrogen-progestogen. Reasonable candidates for such use include the small percentage of postmenopausal women who have persistent severe vasomotor symptoms along with an increased risk of osteoporosis (e.g., those with osteopenia, a personal or family history of nontraumatic fracture, or a weight below 125 lbs), who also have no personal or family history of breast cancer in a first-degree relative or other contraindications, and who have a strong personal preference for therapy. Poor candidates are women with elevated cardiovascular risk, those at increased risk of breast cancer (e.g., women who have a first-degree relative with breast cancer, susceptibility genes such as BRCA1 or BRCA2, or a personal history of cellular atypia detected by breast biopsy), and those at low risk of osteoporosis. Even for reasonable candidates, strategies to minimize dose and duration of use should be employed. For example, women using HT to relieve intense vasomotor symptoms in early postmenopause should consider discontinuing therapy within 5 years, resuming it only if such symptoms persist. Because of the role of progestogens in increasing breast cancer risk, regimens that employ cyclic rather than continuous progestogen exposure as well as formulations other than medroxyprogesterone acetate should be considered if treatment is extended. For prevention of osteoporosis, alternative therapies such as bisphosphonates or SERMs should be considered. Research on alternative progestogens and androgen-containing preparations has been limited, particularly with respect to long-term safety. Additional research on the effects of these agents on cardiovascular disease, glucose tolerance, and breast cancer will be of particular interest.
# Chunk 5155
Low (5% to <10%)

Moderate (10% to 20%) 6 to 10

Decision about duration of use: continued moderate-to-severe symptoms; patient preference; weigh baseline risks of breast cancer vs osteoporosis FIGURE 413-3 Chart for identifying appropriate candidates for postmenopausal hormone therapy (HT).a aReassess each step at least once every 6–12 months (assuming the patient’s continued preference for HT). bWomen who are at high risk of osteoporotic fracture but are unable to tolerate alternative preventive medications may also be reasonable candidates for systemic HT even if they do not have moderate to severe vasomotor symptoms. Women who have vaginal dryness without moderate to severe vasomotor symp-toms may be candidates for vaginal estrogen. cTraditional contraindications are unexplained vaginal bleeding; active liver disease; history of venous thromboembolism due to pregnancy, oral contraceptive use, or an unknown etiology; blood-clotting disorder; history of breast or endo-metrial cancer; and diabetes. Oral HT should be avoided but transdermal HT may be an option (see g below) for other contraindications, includ-ing high triglyceride levels (>400 mg/dL); active gallbladder disease; and history of venous thromboembolism due to past immobility, surgery, or bone fracture. dTen-year risk of stroke, based on Framingham Stroke Risk Score (RB D’Agostino et al: Stroke risk profile: Adjustment for antihyper-tensive medication. The Framingham Study. Stroke 25:40, 1994), as modified by JE Manson, SS Bassuk: Hot Flashes, Hormones & Your Health. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2007. eTen-year risk of CHD, based on Framingham Coronary Heart Disease Risk Score (Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Cholesterol in Adults: JAMA 285:2486, 2001), as modified by JE Manson, SS Bassuk: Hot Flashes, Hormones & Your Health. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2007. f Women >10 years past menopause are not good candidates for initiation (first use) of HT. gAvoid oral HT. Transdermal HT may be an option because it has a less adverse effect on clotting factors, triglyceride levels, and inflammation factors than oral HT. hConsider selective serotonin or serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor, gabapentin, clonidine, soy, or another alternative. Abbreviations: CHD, coronary heart disease; h/o, history of; TIA, transient ischemic attack. (Adapted from JE Manson, SS Bassuk: Hot Flashes, Hormones & Your Health. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2007. Copyright © 2007 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College. All rights reserved.) infertility and Contraception Janet E. Hall INFERTILITY DEFINITION AND PREVALENCE Infertility has traditionally been defined as the inability to conceive after 12 months of unprotected sexual intercourse. In women who ultimately conceived, pregnancy occurred in ~50% within 3 months, 75–82% within 6 months, and 85–92% within 12 months. The World Health Organization (WHO) considers infertility as a disability (an impairment of function) and thus access to health care falls under the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disability. Thirty-four mil-lion women, predominantly from developing countries, have infertility resulting from maternal sepsis and unsafe abortion. In populations <60 years old, infertility is ranked the fifth highest serious global dis-ability. In the United States, the rate of infertility in married women age 15–44 is 6% based on the National Survey of Family Growth, 414 although prospective studies suggest that it may be as high as 12–15%. The infertility rate has remained relatively stable over the past 30 years in most countries. However, the proportion of couples without children has risen, reflecting both higher numbers of couples in childbearing years and a trend to delay childbearing. This trend has important implications because of an age-related decrease in fecundability: the incidence of primary infertility increases from ~8% between the ages of 18 and 38 to 25% and 30% between the ages of 35 and 39 and 40 and 44, respectively. It is estimated that 14% of couples in the United States have received medical assistance for infertility; of these, two-thirds received counseling, ~12% underwent infertility testing of the female and/or male partner, and 17% received drugs to induce ovulation.
# Chunk 5156
The spectrum of infertility ranges from reduced conception rates or the need for medical intervention to irreversible causes of infertility. Infertility can be attributed primarily to male factors in 25% of couples and female factors in 58% of couples and is unexplained in about 17% of couples (Fig. 414-1). Not uncommonly, both male and female factors contribute to infertility. Decreases in the ability to conceive as a
# Chunk 5157
Infertility14% of reproductive aged women 5 million couples in the U.S. Female causes 58% Male causes 25% Unexplained 17% Primary hypogonadism ( FSH) 30–40% Secondary hypogonadism ( FSH, LH) 2% Disordered sperm transport 10–20% Unknown 40–50%
# Chunk 5158
FIGURE 414-1 Causes of infertility. FSH, follicle-stimulating hormone; LH, luteinizing hormone.

function of age in women has led to recommendations that women >34 years old who are not at increased risk of infertility seek attention after 6 months, rather than 12 months as suggested for younger women, and receive an expedited work-up and approach to treatment.
# Chunk 5159
Tubal Disease Tubal dysfunction may result from pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), appendicitis, endometriosis, pelvic adhesions, tubal surgery, previous use of an intrauterine device (IUD), and a previous ectopic pregnancy. However, a cause is not identified in up to 50% of patients with documented tubal factor infertility. Because of the high prevalence of tubal disease, evaluation of tubal patency by hysterosalpingogram (HSG) or laparoscopy should occur early in the majority of couples with infertility. Subclinical infections with Chlamydia trachomatis may be an underdiagnosed cause of tubal infertility and requires the treatment of both partners.
# Chunk 5160
In addition to addressing the negative impact of smoking on fertility and pregnancy outcome, counseling about nutrition and weight is a fundamental component of infertility and pregnancy management. Both low and increased body mass index (BMI) are associated with infertility in women and with increased morbidity during pregnancy. Obesity has also been associated with infertility in men. The treatment of infertility should be tailored to the problems unique to each couple. In many situations, including unexplained infertility, mild-to-moderate endometriosis, and/or borderline semen parameters, a stepwise approach to infertility is optimal, beginning with low-risk interventions and moving to more invasive, higher risk interventions only if necessary. After determination of all infertility factors and their correction, if possible, this approach might include, in increasing order of complexity: (1) expectant management, (2) clomiphene citrate or an aromatase inhibitor (see below) with or without intrauterine insemination (IUI), (3) gonadotropins with or without IUI, and (4) in vitro fertilization (IVF). The time used for evaluation, correction of problems identified, and expectant management can be longer in women age <30 years, but this process should be advanced rapidly in women age >35 years. In some situations, expectant management will not be appropriate.
# Chunk 5161
Vasectomy is a highly effective outpa- tient surgical procedure that has little risk.

The development of azoospermia may be delayed for 2–6 months, and other forms sterility. Reanastomosis may restore fertilaAdapted from J Trussel et al: Obstet Gynecol 76:558, 1990. bAdapted from Contraceptive Technology Update. Contraceptive ity in 30–50% of men, but the success rateTechnology, Feb. 1996, Vol 17, No 1, pp 13–24. cAdapted from LJ Piccinino, WD Mosher: Fam Plan Perspective 30:4, 1998.
# Chunk 5162
No single contraceptive method is ideal, although all are safer than INTRAUTERINE DEVICES carrying a pregnancy to term. The effectiveness of a given method of IUDs inhibit pregnancy through several mechanisms, primarily via a contraception does not just depend on the efficacy of the method itself. spermicidal effect caused by a sterile inflammatory reaction induced Discrepancies between theoretical and actual effectiveness emphasize by the presence of a foreign body in the uterine cavity (copper IUDs) the importance of patient education and compliance when consider-or by the release of progestins (Progestasert, Mirena). IUDs provide aing various forms of contraception (Table 414-1). Knowledge of the high level of efficacy in the absence of systemic metabolic effects, and advantages and disadvantages of each contraceptive is essential for ongoing motivation is not required to ensure efficacy once the devicecounseling an individual about the methods that are safest and most has been placed. However, only 1% of women in the United States consistent with his or her lifestyle. The WHO has extensive family use this method compared to a utilization rate of 15–30% in much ofplanning resources for the physician and patient that can be accessed Europe and Canada, despite evidence that the newer devices are notonline. Similar resources for determining medical eligibility are avail-associated with increased rates of pelvic infection and infertility, asable through the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). occurred with earlier devices. An IUD should not be used in women at Considerations for contraceptive use in obese patients and after bariat-high risk for development of STI or in women at high risk for bacterialric surgery are discussed below. endocarditis. The IUD may not be effective in women with uterine leiomyomas because they alter the size or shape of the uterine cavity.
# Chunk 5163
androgenic of the progestins and should be avoided in patients with STERILIzATION hyperandrogenism. The three major formulations of oral contracep-Sterilization is the method of birth control most frequently chosen tives are (1) fixed-dose estrogen-progestin combination, (2) phasic by fertile men and multiparous women >30 years old (Table 414-1). estrogen-progestin combination, and (3) progestin only. Each of these Sterilization refers to a procedure that prevents fertilization by formulations is administered daily for 3 weeks followed by a week of
# Chunk 5164
no medication during which menstrual bleeding generally occurs. Two extended oral contraceptives are approved for use in the United States; Seasonale is a 3-month preparation with 84 days of active drug and 7 days of placebo, whereas Lybrel is a continuous preparation. Current doses of ethinyl estradiol range from 10 to 50 μg. However, indications for the 50-μg dose are rare, and the majority of formulations contain 30–35 μg of ethinyl estradiol. The reduced estrogen and progestin content in the secondand third-generation pills has decreased both side effects and risks associated with oral contraceptive use (Table 414-2). At the currently used doses, patients must be cautioned not to miss pills due to the potential for ovulation. Side effects, including breakthrough bleeding, amenorrhea, breast tenderness, and weight gain, often respond to a change in formulation. Even the lower dose oral contraceptives have been associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular disease (myocardial infarction, stroke, venous thromboembolism [VTE]), but the absolute excess risk is extremely low. VTE risk is higher with the third-generation than the second-generation progestins, and the risk of stroke and VTE is also higher with drospirenone (although not cyproterone), but the absolute excess risk is small and may be outweighed by contraceptive benefits and reduction in ovarian and endometrial cancer risk.
# Chunk 5165
Alternative Methods A weekly contraceptive patch (Ortho Evra) is available and has similar efficacy to oral contraceptives. Approximately 2% of patches fail to adhere, and a similar percentage of women have skin reactions. Efficacy is lower in women weighing >90 kg. The amount of estrogen delivered may be comparable to that of a 40-μg ethinyl estradiol oral contraceptive, raising the possibility of increased risk of 2391 VTE, which must be balanced against potential benefits for women not able to successfully use other methods. A monthly contraceptive estrogen/progestin injection (Lunelle) is highly effective, with a first-year failure rate of <0.2%, but it may be less effective in obese women. Its use is associated with bleeding irregularities that diminish over time. Fertility returns rapidly after discontinuation. A monthly vaginal ring (NuvaRing) that is intended to be left in place during intercourse is also available for contraceptive use. It is highly effective, with a 12-month failure rate of 0.7%. Ovulation returns within the first recovery cycle after discontinuation.
# Chunk 5166
CHAPTER 415e Biology of Obesity with obesity (BMI >30) has increased from 14.5% (between 1976 and 1980) to 35.7% (between 2009 and 2010). As many as 68% of U.S. adults aged ≥20 years were overweight (defined as BMI >25) between the years of 2007 and 2008. Extreme obesity (BMI ≥40) has also increased and affects 5.7% of the population. The increasing prevalence of medically significant obesity raises great concern. Overall, the prevalence of obesity is comparable in men and women. In women, poverty is associated with increased prevalence. Obesity is more common among blacks and Hispanics. The prevalence in children and adolescents has been rising at a worrisome rate, reaching 15.9% in 2009/2010, but may be leveling off.
# Chunk 5167
Energy expenditure includes the following components: (1) resting or basal metabolic rate; (2) the energy cost of metabolizing and storing food; (3) the thermic effect of exercise; and (4) adaptive thermo-genesis, which varies in response to long-term caloric intake (rising with increased intake). Basal metabolic rate accounts for ~70% of daily energy expenditure, whereas active physical activity contributes 5–10%. Thus, a significant component of daily energy consumption is fixed.
# Chunk 5168
Same as above

Hyperphagia due to uncharacterized hypothalamic defect (Fig. 415e-5). The results of genomewide association studies to identify genetic loci responsible for obesity in the general population have so far been disappointing. More than 40 replicated loci linked to obesity have been identified, but together they account for less than 3% of interindividual variation in BMI. The most replicated of these is a gene named FTO, which is of unknown function, but like many of the other recently described candidates, is expressed in the brain. Because the heritability of obesity is estimated to be 40–70%, it is likely that many more loci remain to be identified. It is possible that epistatic interactions between causative loci or unknown gene-environment interactions explain the poor success at identifying causal loci.
# Chunk 5169
Other Specific Syndromes Associated with Obesity • CUSHING’S SYNDROME

Although obese patients commonly have central obesity, hypertension, and glucose intolerance, they lack other specific stigmata of Cushing’s syndrome (Chap. 406). Nonetheless, a potential diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome is often entertained. Cortisol production and urinary metabolites (17OH steroids) may be increased in simple obesity. Unlike in Cushing’s syndrome, however, cortisol levels in blood and urine in the basal state and in response to corticotropinreleasing hormone (CRH) or ACTH are normal; the overnight 1-mg dexamethasone suppression test is normal in 90%, with the remainder being normal on a standard 2-day low-dose dexamethasone suppression test. Obesity may be associated with excessive local reactivation of cortisol in fat by 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 1, an enzyme that converts inactive cortisone to cortisol.
# Chunk 5170
CHAPTER 415e Biology of Obesity individuals, mostly due to cardiovascular causes. Obesity and overweight together are the second leading cause of preventable death in the United States, accounting for 300,000 deaths per year. Mortality rates rise as obesity increases, particularly when obesity is associated with increased intraabdominal fat (see above). Life expectancy of a moderately obese individual could be shortened by 2–5 years, and a 20to 30-year-old male with a BMI >45 may lose 13 years of life. It is likely that the degree to which obesity affects particular organ systems is influenced by susceptibility genes that vary in the population.
# Chunk 5171
Not all patients who are deemed obese by BMI alone need to be treated, as exemplified by the concepts of obesity paradox or the metabolically healthy obese. However, patients who present with obesity-related comorbidities and who would benefit from weight loss intervention should be managed proactively. Therapy for obesity always begins with lifestyle management and may include pharmacotherapy or surgery, depending on BMI risk category (Table 416-5). Setting an initial weight-loss goal of 8–10% over 6 months is a realistic target.
# Chunk 5172
The macronutrient composition of the diet will vary with the patient’s preference and medical condition. The 2010 U.S. Department of Agriculture Dietary Guidelines for Americans (Chap. 95e), which focus on health promotion and risk reduction, can be applied to treatment of overweight or obese patients. The recommendations include maintaining a diet rich in whole grains, fruits, vegetables, and dietary fiber; consuming two servings (8 oz) of fish high in omega 3 fatty acids per week; decreasing sodium intake to <2300 mg/d; consuming 3 cups of milk (or equivalent low-fat or fat-free dairy products) per day; limiting cholesterol intake to <300 mg/d; and keeping total fat intake at 20–35% of daily calories and saturated fat intake at <10% of daily calories. Application of these guidelines to specific calorie goals can be found on the website www.choosemyplate.gov. The revised Dietary Reference Intakes for Macronutrients released by the Institute of Medicine recommends that 45–65% of calories come from carbohydrates, 20–35% from fat, and 10–35% from protein. The guidelines also recommend daily fiber intake of 38 g (men) and 25 g (women) for persons over 50 years of age and 30 g (men) and 21 g (women) for those under age 50.
# Chunk 5173
Patient encounter Hx of ˜ 25 BMI? BMI measured in past 2 years? No • Measure weight,   height and waist   circumference • Calculate BMI BMI ˜ 25 OR waist circumference > 88 cm (F) >102 cm (M) Hx BMI ˜ 25? Brief reinforcement/ educate on weight management Advise to maintain weight, address other risk factors Assess risk factors BMI ˜ 30 OR {[BMI 26 to 29.9 OR waist circumference > 88 cm (F) >102 cm (M)] AND ˜ 2 risk factors} Does patient want to lose weight? Progress being made/goal achieved? Maintenance counseling: • Dietary therapy • Behavior therapy • Physical therapy Assess reasons for failure to lose weight Periodic weight check 4 5 6 Yes 7 Yes Yes No 8 9 12 11 10 No Yes 1315 14 No Yes 16 No No Clinician and patient devise goals and treatment strategy for weight loss and risk factor control
# Chunk 5174
Source: From the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, North American Association for the Study of Obesity (2000). yolks, potato chips, and red meat have a high-energy 2396 density. Diets containing low-energy-dense foods have been shown to control hunger and thus to result in decreased caloric intake and weight loss. Occasionally, very low-calorie diets (VLCDs) are prescribed as a form of aggressive dietary therapy. The primary purpose of a VLCD is to promote a rapid and significant (13to 23-kg) short-term weight loss over a 3to 6-month period. The proprietary formulas designed for this purpose typically supply ≤800 kcal, 50–80 g of protein, and 100% of the recommended daily intake for vitamins and minerals. According to a review by the National Task Force on the Prevention and Treatment of Obesity, indications for initiating a VLCD include the involvement of well-motivated individuals who are moderately to severely obese (BMI, >30 kg/m2), have failed at more conservative approaches to weight loss, and have a medical condition that would be immediately improved with rapid weight loss. These conditions include poorly controlled type 2 diabetes, hypertriglyceridemia, obstructive sleep apnea, and symptomatic peripheral edema. The risk for gallstone formation increases exponentially at rates of weight loss >1.5 kg/week (3.3 lb/week). Prophylaxis against gallstone formation with ursodeoxycholic acid (600 mg/d) is effective in reducing this risk. Because of the need for close metabolic monitoring, VLCDs usually are prescribed by physicians specializing in obesity care.
# Chunk 5175
Physical Activity Therapy Although exercise alone is only moderately effective for weight loss, the combination of dietary modification and exercise is the most effective behavioral approach for the treatment of obesity. The most important role of exercise appears to be in the maintenance of the weight loss. The 2008 Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans (www.health.gov/paguidelines) recommend that adults should engage in 150 min of moderate-intensity or 75 min a week of vigorous-intensity aerobic physical activity per week, performed in episodes of at least 10 min and preferably spread throughout the week. Focusing on simple ways to add physical activity into the normal daily routine through leisure activities, travel, and domestic work should be suggested. Examples include walking, using the stairs, doing housework and yard work, and engaging in sports. Asking the patient to wear a pedometer or accelerometer to monitor total accumulation of steps or kcal expended as part of the activities of daily living is a useful strategy. Step counts are highly correlated with activity level. Studies have demonstrated that lifestyle activities are as effective as structured exercise programs for improving cardiorespiratory fitness and weight loss. A high level of physical activity (>300 min of moderate-intensity activity per week) is often needed to lose weight and sustain weight loss. These exercise recommendations are daunting to most patients and need to be implemented gradually. Consultation with an exercise physiologist or personal trainer may be helpful.
# Chunk 5176
Lorcaserin has undergone two randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind trials for efficacy and safety. Participants were randomized to receive lorcaserin (10 mg bid) or placebo in the BLOOM study and to receive lorcaserin (10 mg bid or qd) or placebo in the BLOSSOM study. All participants received diet and exercise counseling. Participant numbers, eligibility, characteristics, and weight loss outcomes are displayed in Table 416-6. Overweight or obese subjects had at least one coexisting condition (hypertension, dyslipidemia, cardiovascular disease, impaired glucose tolerance, or sleep apnea)—medical conditions that are commonly seen in the office setting. Intention-to-treat 1-year placebo-subtracted weight loss was 3.6% and 3.0%, respectively, in the BLOOM and BLOSSOM trials. Echocardiography was performed at the screening visit and at scheduled time points over the course of the studies. There was no difference in the development of FDA-defined valvulopathy between drug-treated and placebo-treated participants at 1 year or 2 years. Modest statistical improvements consistent with the weight loss were seen in selected cardiovascular and metabolic outcome measurements. The most common adverse events experienced by the drug group were headache, dizziness, and nausea.
# Chunk 5177
In approving both PHEN/TPM and lorcaserin, the FDA introduced a new provision with important clinical relevance: a prescription trial period to assess effectiveness. Response to both medications should be assessed after 3 months of treatment. For lorcaserin, the medication should be discontinued if the patient has not lost at least 5% of body weight by that point. For PHEN/TPM, if the patient has not lost at least 3% of body weight at 3 months, the clinician can either escalate the dose and reassess progress at 6 months or discontinue treatment entirely.
# Chunk 5178
Antiobesity Drugs in Development Two additional medications are currently in development. Bupropion and naltrexone (ContraveTM)—a dopamine and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor and an opioid receptor antagonist, respectively—are theoretically combined to dampen the motivation/reinforcement that food brings (dopamine effect) and the pleasure/palatability of eating (opioid effect). In the COR-1 randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, 1742 enrolled participants, who were 18–65 years of age and had BMIs of 30–45 kg/m2, were randomized to receive naltrexone (16 mg/d) plus bupropion (360 mg/d), naltrexone (32 mg/d) plus bupropion (360 mg/d), or placebo. Mean change in body weight for the three groups was 5.0%, 6.1%, and 1.3%, respectively. The most common adverse events were nausea, headache, constipation, dizziness, vomiting, and dry mouth. However, the FDA rejected the drug in 2011 because of cardiovascular concerns and concluded that a large-scale study of the long-term cardiovascular effects of naltrexone would be needed before approval could be considered.
# Chunk 5179
Liraglutide, a glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist currently approved for the treatment of type 2 diabetes, has independent weight loss effects via hypothalamic neural activation causing appetite suppression. In a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, 564 adults with BMIs of 30–40 kg/m2 were randomized to receive once-daily SC liraglutide (1.2, 1.8, 2.4, or 3.0 mg), placebo, or open-label orlistat (120 mg tid) for 1 year. The liraglutide and placebo recipients were switched to 2.4 mg of liraglutide during the second year and then to 3.0 mg for an additional year. One-year placebo-subtracted mean weight loss was 5.8 kg for liraglutide and 3.8 kg more than those on orlistat. The most common side effects were nausea, vomiting, and change in bowel habits.
# Chunk 5180
Evaluation and Management of Obesity 2398 SURGERY Bariatric surgery (Fig. 416-2) can be considered for patients with severe obesity (BMI, ≥40 kg/m2) or for those with moderate obesity (BMI, ≥35 kg/m2) associated with a serious medical condition. Weight loss surgeries have traditionally been classified into three categories on the basis of anatomic changes: restrictive, restrictive malabsorptive, and malabsorptive. More recently, however, the clinical benefits of bariatric surgery in achieving weight loss and alleviating metabolic comorbidities have been attributed largely to changes in the physiologic responses of gut hormones and in adipose tissue metabolism. Metabolic effects resulting from bypassing the foregut include altered responses of ghrelin, glucagon-like peptide 1, peptide YY3-36, and oxyntonodulin. Additional effects on food intake and body weight control may be attributed to changes in vagal signaling. The loss of fat mass, particularly visceral fat, is associated with multiple metabolic, adipokine, and inflammatory changes that include improved insulin sensitivity and glucose disposal; reduced free fatty acid flux; increased adiponectin levels; and decreased interleukin 6, tumor necrosis factor α, and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein levels. Restrictive surgeries limit the amount of food the stomach can hold and slow the rate of gastric emptying. Laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding is the prototype of this category. The first banding device, the LAP-BAND, was approved for use in the United States in 2001 and the second, the REALIZE band, in 2007. In contrast to previous devices, these bands have diameters that are adjustable by way of their connection to a reservoir that is implanted under the skin. Injection of saline into the reservoir and removal of saline from the reservoir tighten and loosen the band’s internal diameter, respectively, thus changing the size of the gastric opening. The mean percentage of total body weight lost at 5 years is estimated at 20–25%. In laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy, the stomach is restricted by stapling and dividing it vertically, removing ~80% of the greater curvature, and leaving a slim banana-shaped remnant stomach along the lesser curvature. Weight loss after this procedure is superior to that after laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding.
# Chunk 5181
Among the observed improvements in comorbidities, the prevention and treatment of type 2 diabetes resulting from bariatric surgery has garnered the most attention. Fifteen-year data from the Swedish Obese Subjects study demonstrated a marked reduction (i.e., by 78%) in the incidence of type 2 diabetes development among obese patients who underwent bariatric surgery. Several randomized controlled studies have shown greater weight loss and more improved glycemic control at 1 and 2 years among surgical patients than among patients receiving conventional medical therapy. A retrospective cohort study of more than 4000 adults with diabetes found that, overall, 68.2% of patients experienced an initial complete type 2 diabetes remission within 5 years after surgery. However, among these patients, one-third redeveloped type 2 diabetes within 5 years. The rapid improvement seen in diabetes after restrictive-malabsorptive procedures is thought to be due to surgery-specific, weight-independent effects on glucose homeostasis brought about by alteration of gut hormones.
# Chunk 5182
FIGURE 417-2 Worldwide prevalence of diabetes mellitus. Global estimate is 382 million indi-viduals with diabetes. Regional estimates of the number of individuals with diabetes (20–79 years of age) are shown (2013). (Used with permission from the IDF Diabetes Atlas, the International Diabetes Federation, 2013.) million), India (65.1 million), United States (24.4 million), Brazil (11.9 million), and the Russian Federation (10.9 million). Up to 80% of individuals with diabetes live in low-income or medium-income countries. In the most recent estimate for the United States (2012), the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimated that 9.3% of the population had diabetes (~28% of the individuals with diabetes were undiagnosed; globally, it is estimated that 50% of individuals may be undiagnosed). The CDC estimated that the incidence and prevalence of diabetes doubled from 1990–2008, but appears to have plateaued from 2008–2012. DM increases with age. In 2012, the prevalence of DM in the United Sates was estimated to be 0.2% in individuals age <20 years and 12% in individuals age >20 years. In individuals age >65 years, the prevalence of DM was 26.9%. The prevalence is similar in men and women throughout most age ranges (14% and 11%, respectively, in individuals age >20 years). Worldwide, most individuals with diabetes are between the ages of 40 and 59 years.
# Chunk 5183
There is considerable geographic variation in the incidence of both type 1 and type 2 DM. Scandinavia has the highest incidence of type 1 DM; the lowest incidence is in the Pacific Rim where it is 20to 30-fold lower. Northern Europe and the United States have an intermediate rate. Much of the increased risk of type 1 DM is believed to reflect the frequency of high-risk human leukocyte antigen (HLA) alleles among ethnic groups in different geographic locations. The prevalence of type 2 DM and its harbinger, IGT, is highest in certain Pacific islands and the Middle East and intermediate in countries such as India and the United States. This variability is likely due to genetic, behavioral, and environmental factors. DM prevalence also varies among different ethnic populations within a given country, with indigenous populations usually having a greater incidence of diabetes than the general population of the country. For example, the CDC estimated that the age-adjusted prevalence of DM in the United States (age >20 years; 2010–2012) was 8% in non-Hispanic whites, 9% in Asian Americans, 13% in Hispanics, 13% in non-Hispanic blacks, and 16% in American-Indian and Alaskan native populations. The onset of type 2 DM occurs, on average, at an earlier age in ethnic groups other than non-Hispanic whites. In Asia, the prevalence of diabetes is increasing rapidly, and the diabetes phenotype appears to be somewhat different from that in the United States and Europe, with an onset at a lower body mass index (BMI) and younger age, greater visceral adiposity, and reduced insulin secretory capacity.
# Chunk 5184
Widespread use of the FPG or the HbA1c as a screening test for type 2 DM is recommended because (1) a large number of individuals who meet the current criteria for DM are asymptomatic and unaware that they have the disorder, (2) epidemiologic studies suggest that type 2 DM may be present for up to a decade before diagnosis, (3) some individuals with type 2 DM have one or more diabetes-specific complications at the time of their diagnosis, (4) treatment of type 2 DM may favorably alter the natural history of DM, diagnosis of prediabetes should spur efforts for diabetes prevention. The ADA recommends screening all individuals >45 years every 3 years and screening individuals at an earlier age if they are overweight (BMI >25 kg/m2 or ethnically relevant definition for overweight) and have one additional risk factor for diabetes (Table 417-3). In contrast to type 2 DM, a long asymptomatic period of hyperglycemia is rare prior to the diagnosis of type 1 DM. A number of immunologic markers for type 1 DM are becoming available (discussed below), but their routine use outside a clinical trial is discouraged, pending the identification of clinically beneficial interventions for individuals at high risk for developing type 1 DM.
# Chunk 5185
Immunologic Markers Islet cell autoantibodies (ICAs) are a composite of several different antibodies directed at pancreatic islet molecules such as GAD, insulin, IA-2/ICA-512, and ZnT-8, and serve as a marker of the autoimmune process of type 1 DM. Assays for autoantibodies to GAD-65 are commercially available. Testing for ICAs can be useful in classifying the type of DM as type 1 and in identifying nondiabetic individuals at risk for developing type 1 DM. ICAs are present in the majority of individuals (>85%) diagnosed with new-onset type 1 DM, in a significant minority of individuals with newly diagnosed type 2 DM (5–10%), and occasionally in individuals with GDM (<5%). ICAs are present in 3–4% of first-degree relatives of individuals with type 1 DM. In combination with impaired insulin secretion after IV glucose tolerance testing, they predict a >50% risk of developing type 1 DM within 5 years. At present, the measurement of ICAs in nondiabetic individuals is a research tool because no treatments have been demonstrated to prevent the occurrence or progression to type 1 DM.
# Chunk 5186
Prevention Type 2 DM is preceded by a period of IGT or IFG, and a number of lifestyle modifications and pharmacologic agents prevent or delay the onset of DM. Individuals with prediabetes or increased risk of diabetes should be referred to a structured program to reduce body weight and increase physical activity as well as being screened for cardiovascular disease. The Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP) demonstrated that intensive changes in lifestyle (diet and exercise for 30 min/d five times/week) in individuals with IGT prevented or delayed the development of type 2 DM by 58% compared to placebo. This effect was seen in individuals regardless of age, sex, or ethnic group. In the same study, metformin prevented or delayed diabetes by 31% compared to placebo. The lifestyle intervention group lost 5–7% of their body weight during the 3 years of the study. Studies in Finnish and Chinese populations noted similar efficacy of diet and exercise in preventing or delaying type 2 DM. A number of agents, including α-glucosidase inhibitors, metformin, thiazolidinediones, GLP-1 receptor pathway modifiers, and orlistat, prevent or delay type 2 DM but are not approved for this purpose. Individuals with a strong family history of type 2 DM and individuals with IFG or IGT should be strongly encouraged to maintain a normal BMI and engage in regular physical activity. Pharmacologic therapy for individuals with prediabetes is currently controversial because its cost-effectiveness and safety profile are not known. The ADA has suggested that metformin be considered in individuals with both IFG and IGT who are at very high risk for progression to diabetes (age <60 years, BMI ≥35 kg/m2, family history of diabetes in first-degree relative, and women with a history of GDM). Individuals with IFG, IGT, or an HbA1c of 5.7–6.4% should be monitored annually to determine if diagnostic criteria for diabetes are present.
# Chunk 5187
The etiology of diabetes in an individual with new-onset disease can usually be assigned on the basis of clinical criteria. Individuals with type 1 DM tend to have the following characteristics: (1) onset of disease prior to age 30 years; (2) lean body habitus; (3) requirement of insulin as the initial therapy; (4) propensity to develop ketoacidosis; and (5) an increased risk of other autoimmune disorders such as autoimmune thyroid disease, adrenal insufficiency, pernicious anemia, celiac disease, and vitiligo. In contrast, individuals with type 2 DM often exhibit the following features: (1) develop diabetes after the age of 30 years; (2) are usually obese (80% are obese, but elderly individuals may be lean); (3) may not require insulin therapy initially; and (4) may have associated conditions such as insulin resistance, hypertension, cardiovascular disease, dyslipidemia, or PCOS. In type 2 DM, insulin resistance is often associated with abdominal obesity (as opposed to hip and thigh obesity) and hypertriglyceridemia. Although most individuals diagnosed with type 2 DM are older, the age of diagnosis is declining, and there is a marked increase among overweight children and adolescents. Some individuals with phenotypic type 2 DM present with diabetic ketoacidosis but lack autoimmune markers and may be later treated with oral glucose-lowering agents rather than insulin (this clinical picture is sometimes referred to as ketosis-prone type 2 DM). On the other hand, some individuals (5–10%) with the phenotypic appearance of type 2 DM do not have absolute insulin deficiency but have autoimmune markers (GAD and other ICA autoantibodies) suggestive of type 1 DM (termed latent autoimmune diabetes of the adult). Such individuals are more likely to be <50 years of age, thinner, and have a personal or family history of other autoimmune disease than individuals with type 2 DM. They are much more likely to require insulin treatment within 5 years. Monogenic forms of diabetes (discussed above) should be considered in those with diabetes onset at <30 years of age, an autosomal pattern of diabetes inheritance, and the lack of nearly complete insulin deficiency. Despite recent advances in the understanding of the pathogenesis of diabetes, it remains difficult to categorize some patients unequivocally. Individuals who deviate from the clinical profile of type 1 and type 2 DM, or who have other associated defects such as deafness, pancreatic exocrine disease, and other endocrine disorders, should be classified accordingly (Table 417-1).
# Chunk 5188
The morbidity and mortality rates of DM-related complications (Chap. 419) can be greatly reduced by timely and consistent surveillance procedures (Table 418-1). These screening procedures are indicated for all individuals with DM, but many individuals with diabetes do not receive comprehensive diabetes care. A comprehensive eye examination should be performed by a qualified optometrist or ophthalmologist. Because many individuals with type 2 DM have had asymptomatic diabetes for several years before diagnosis, the American Diabetes Association (ADA) recommends the following ophthalmologic examination schedule: (1) individuals with type 1 DM should have an initial eye examination within 5 years of diagnosis, (2) individuals with type 2 DM should have an initial eye examination at the time of diabetes diagnosis, (3) women with DM who are pregnant or contemplating pregnancy should have an eye examination prior to conception and during the first trimester, and (4) if eye exam is normal, repeat examination in 2–3 years is appropriate.
# Chunk 5189
Diabetes Mellitus: Management and Therapies 2410 DM or individuals with type 2 DM taking multiple insulin injections each day should routinely measure their plasma glucose three or more times per day to estimate and select mealtime boluses of short-acting insulin and to modify long-acting insulin doses. Most individuals with type 2 DM require less frequent monitoring, although the optimal frequency of SMBG has not been clearly defined. Individuals with type 2 DM who are taking insulin should use SMBG more frequently than those on oral agents. Individuals with type 2 DM who are on oral medications should use SMBG as a means of assessing the efficacy of their medication and the impact of diet. Because plasma glucose levels fluctuate less in these individuals, one to two SMBG measurements per day (or fewer in patients who are on oral agents or are diet-controlled) may be sufficient. Most measurements in individuals with type 1 or type 2 DM should be performed prior to a meal and supplemented with postprandial measurements to assist in reaching postprandial glucose targets (Table 418-2). Devices for continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) have been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), and others are in various stages of development. These devices do not replace the need for traditional glucose measurements and require calibration with SMBG. This rapidly evolving technology requires substantial expertise on the part of the diabetes management team and the patient. Current CGM systems measure the glucose in interstitial fluid, which is in equilibrium with the blood glucose. These devices provide useful short-term information about the patterns of glucose changes as well as an enhanced ability to detect hypoglycemic episodes. Alarms notify the patient if the blood glucose falls into the hypoglycemic range. Clinical experience with these devices is rapidly growing, and they are most useful in individuals with hypoglycemia unawareness, individuals with frequent hypoglycemia, or those who have not achieved glycemic targets despite major efforts. The utility of CGM in the intensive care unit (ICU) setting remains to be determined.
# Chunk 5190
Assessment of Long-Term Glycemic Control Measurement of glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) is the standard method for assessing long-term glycemic control. When plasma glucose is consistently elevated, there is an increase in nonenzymatic glycation of hemoglobin; this alteration reflects the glycemic history over the previous 2–3 months, because erythrocytes have an average life span of 120 days (glycemic level in the preceding month contributes about 50% to the HbA1c value). Measurement of HbA1c at the “point of care” allows for more rapid feedback and may therefore assist in adjustment of therapy.
# Chunk 5191
HbA1c should be measured in all individuals with DM during their initial evaluation and as part of their comprehensive diabetes care. As the primary predictor of long-term complications of DM, the HbA1c should mirror, to a certain extent, the short-term measurements of SMBG. These two measurements are complementary in that recent intercurrent illnesses may impact the SMBG measurements but not the HbA1c. Likewise, postprandial and nocturnal hyperglycemia may not be detected by the SMBG of fasting and preprandial capillary plasma glucose but will be reflected in the HbA1c. In standardized assays, the HbA1c approximates the following mean plasma glucose values: an HbA1c of 6% = 7.0 mmol/L (126 mg/dL), 7% = 8.6 mmol/L (154 mg/dL), 8% = 10.2 mmol/L (183 mg/dL), 9% = 11.8 mmol/L (212 mg/dL), 10% = 13.4 mmol/L (240 mg/dL), 11% = 14.9 mmol/L (269 mg/dL), and 12% = 16.5 mmol/L (298 mg/dL). In patients achieving their glycemic goal, the ADA recommends measurement of the HbA1c at least twice per year. More frequent testing (every 3 months) is warranted when glycemic control is inadequate or when therapy has changed. Laboratory standards for the HbA1c test have been established and should be correlated to the reference assay of the Diabetes Control and Complications Trial (DCCT). Clinical conditions such hemoglobinopathies, anemias, reticulocytosis, transfusions, and uremia may interfere with the HbA1c result. The degree of glycation of other proteins, such as albumin, can be used as an alternative indicator of glycemic control when the HbA1c is inaccurate. The fructosamine assay (measuring glycated albumin) reflects the glycemic status over the prior 2 weeks.
# Chunk 5192
Insulin Preparations Current insulin preparations are generated by recombinant DNA technology and consist of the amino acid sequence of human insulin or variations thereof. In the United States, most insulin is formulated as U-100 (100 units/mL). Regular insulin formulated as U-500 (500 units/mL) is available and sometimes useful in patients with severe insulin resistance. Human insulin has been formulated with distinctive pharmacokinetics or genetically modified to more closely mimic physiologic insulin secretion. Insulins can be classified as short-acting or long-acting (Table 418-4). For example, one short-acting insulin formulation, insulin lispro, is an insulin analogue in which the 28th and 29th amino acids (lysine and proline) on the insulin B chain have been reversed by recombinant DNA technology. Insulin aspart and insulin glulisine are genetically modified insulin analogues with properties similar to lispro. All three of the insulin analogues have full biologic activity but less tendency for self-aggregation, resulting in more rapid absorption and onset of action and a shorter duration of action. These characteristics are particularly advantageous for allowing entrainment of insulin injection and action to rising plasma glucose levels following meals. The shorter duration of action also appears to be associated with a decreased number of hypoglycemic episodes, primarily because the decay of insulin action corresponds to the decline in plasma glucose after a meal. Thus, insulin aspart, lispro, or glulisine is preferred over regular insulin for prandial coverage. Insulin glargine is a long-acting biosynthetic human insulin that differs from normal insulin in that asparagine is replaced by glycine at amino acid 21, and two arginine residues are added to the C terminus of the B chain. Compared to neutral protamine Hagedorn (NPH) insulin, the onset of insulin glargine action is later, the duration of action is longer (~24 h), and there is a less pronounced peak. A lower incidence of hypoglycemia, especially at night, has been reported with insulin glargine when compared to NPH insulin. The most recent evidence does not support an association between glargine and increased cancer risk. Insulin detemir has a fatty acid side chain that prolongs its action by slowing absorption and catabolism. Twice-daily injections of glargine or detemir are sometimes required to provide 24-h coverage. Regular and NPH insulin have the native insulin amino acid sequence.
# Chunk 5193
are usually prescribed with short-acting insulin in an attempt to mimic physiologic insulin release with meals. Although mixing of NPH and short-acting insulin formulations is common practice, this mixing may alter the insulin absorption profile (especially the short-acting insulins). For example, lispro absorption is delayed by mixing with NPH. The alteration in insulin absorption when the patient mixes different insulin formulations should not prevent mixing insulins. However, the following guidelines should be followed: (1) mix the different insulin formulations in the syringe immediately before injection (inject within 2 min after mixing); (2) do not store insulin as a mixture; (3) follow the same routine in terms of insulin mixing and administration to standardize the physiologic response to injected insulin; and (4) do not mix insulin glargine or detemir with other insulins. The miscibility of some insulins allows for the production of combination insulins that contain 70% NPH and 30% regular (70/30), or equal mixtures of NPH and regular (50/50). By including the insulin analogue mixed with protamine, several combinations have a short-acting and long-acting profile (Table 418-4). Although more convenient for the patient (only two injections/day), combination insulin formulations do not allow independent adjustment of short-acting and long-acting activity. Several insulin formulations are available as insulin “pens,” which may be more convenient for some patients. Insulin delivery by inhalation has recently been approved but is not yet available. Other insulins, such as one with a duration of action of several days, are under development but are not currently available in the United States.
# Chunk 5194
In the past, one commonly used regimen consisted of twice-daily injections of NPH mixed with a short-acting insulin before the morning and evening meals (Fig. 418-1B). Such regimens usually prescribe two-thirds of the total daily insulin dose in the morning (with about two-thirds given as long-acting insulin and one-third as short-acting) and one-third before the evening meal (with approximately one-half given as long-acting insulin and one-half as short-acting). The drawback to such a regimen is that it forces a rigid schedule on the patient, in terms of daily activity and the content and timing of meals. Although it is simple and effective at avoiding severe hyperglycemia, it does not generate near-normal glycemic control in individuals with type 1 DM. Moreover, if the patient’s meal pattern or content varies or if physical activity is increased, hyperglycemia or hypoglycemia may result. Moving the long-acting insulin from before the evening meal to bedtime may avoid nocturnal hypoglycemia and provide more insulin as glucose levels rise in the early morning (so-called dawn phenomenon). The insulin dose in such regimens should be adjusted based on SMBG results with the following general assumptions: (1) the fasting glucose is primarily determined by the prior evening long-acting insulin; (2) the pre-lunch glucose is a function of the morning short-acting insulin; (3) the pre-supper glucose is a function of the morning long-acting insulin; and (4) the bedtime glucose is a function of the pre-supper, short-acting insulin. This is not an optimal regimen for the patient with type 1 DM, but is sometimes used for patients with type 2 DM.
# Chunk 5195
inSulin SecretaGoGueS—aGentS tHat affect tHe atp-SenSitive K+ cHannel Insulin secretagogues stimulate insulin secretion by interacting with the ATP-sensitive potassium channel on the beta cell (Chap. 417). These drugs are most effective in individuals with type 2 DM of relatively recent onset (<5 years) who have residual endogenous insulin production. First-generation sulfonylureas (chlorpropamide, tolazamide, tolbutamide) have a longer half-life, a greater incidence of hypoglycemia, and more frequent drug interactions, and are no longer used. Second-generation sulfonylureas have a more rapid onset of action and better coverage of the postprandial glucose rise, but the shorter half-life of some agents may require more than once-a-day dosing. Sulfonylureas reduce both fasting and postprandial glucose and should be initiated at low doses and increased at 1to 2-week intervals based on SMBG. In general, sulfonylureas increase insulin acutely and thus should be taken shortly before a meal; with chronic therapy, though, the insulin release is more sustained. Glimepiride and glipizide can be given in a single daily dose and are preferred over glyburide, especially in the elderly. Repaglinide, nateglinide, and mitiglinide are not sulfonylureas but also interact with the ATP-sensitive potassium channel. Because of their short half-life, these agents are given with each meal or immediately before to reduce meal-related glucose excursions.
# Chunk 5196
insulin secreTagogues—agenTs THaT enHance glP-1 recePTor signaling peptidase IV [DPP-IV]). Thus, exenatide has prolonged GLP-1-like “Incretins” amplify glucose-stimulated insulin secretion (Chap. 417). action and binds to GLP-1 receptors found in islets, the gastrointesti-Agents that either act as a GLP-1 receptor agonist or enhance endog-nal tract, and the brain. Liraglutide, another GLP-1 receptor agonist, enous GLP-1 activity are approved for the treatment of type 2 DM is almost identical to native GLP-1 except for an amino acid substitu(Table 418-5). Agents in this class do not cause hypoglycemia because tion and addition of a fatty acyl group (coupled with a γ-glutamic acid of the glucose-dependent nature of incretin-stimulated insulin secre-spacer) that promote binding to albumin and plasma proteins and protion (unless there is concomitant use of an agent that can lead to long its half-life. GLP-1 receptor agonists increase glucose-stimulated hypoglycemia—sulfonylureas, etc.). Exenatide, a synthetic version of insulin secretion, suppress glucagon, and slow gastric emptying. These a peptide initially identified in the saliva of the Gila monster (exen-agents do not promote weight gain; in fact, most patients experience din-4), is an analogue of GLP-1. Unlike native GLP-1, which has a modest weight loss and appetite suppression. Treatment with these half-life of >5 min, differences in the exenatide amino acid sequence agents should start at a low dose to minimize initial side effects (nausea render it resistant to the enzyme that degrades GLP-1 (dipeptidyl being the limiting one). GLP-1 receptor agonists, available in twice daily, daily, and weekly injectable formulations, can be used as combination therapy with metformin, sulfonylureas, and thiazolidinediones. Some patients taking insulin secretagogues may require a reduction in those agents to prevent hypoglycemia. The major side effects are nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. Some formulations carry a black box warning from the FDA because of an increased risk of thyroid C-cell tumors in rodents and are contraindicated in individuals with medullary carcinoma of the thyroid or multiple endocrine neoplasia. Because GLP-1 receptor agonists slow gastric emptying, they may influence the absorption of other drugs. Whether GLP-1 receptor agonists enhance beta cell survival, promote beta cell proliferation, or alter the natural history of type 2 DM is not known. Other GLP-1 receptor agonists and formulations are under development.
# Chunk 5197
α-GlucoSidaSe inHiBitorS α-Glucosidase inhibitors reduce postprandial hyperglycemia by delaying glucose absorption; they do not affect glucose utilization or insulin secretion (Table 418-5). Postprandial hyperglycemia, secondary to impaired hepatic and peripheral glucose disposal, contributes significantly to the hyperglycemic state in type 2 DM. These drugs, taken just before each meal, reduce glucose absorption by inhibiting the enzyme that cleaves oligosaccharides into simple sugars in the intestinal lumen. Therapy should be initiated at a low dose with the evening meal and increased to a maximal dose over weeks to months. The major side effects (diarrhea, flatulence, abdominal distention) are related to increased delivery of oligosaccharides to the large bowel and can be reduced somewhat by gradual upward dose titration. α-Glucosidase inhibitors may increase levels of sulfonylureas and increase the incidence of hypoglycemia. Simultaneous treatment with bile acid resins and antacids should be avoided. These agents should not be used in individuals with inflammatory bowel disease, gastroparesis, or a serum creatinine >177 μmol/L (2 mg/dL). This class of agents is not as potent as other oral agents in lowering the HbA1c but is unique because it reduces the postprandial glucose rise even in individuals with type 1 DM. If hypoglycemia from other diabetes treatments occurs while taking these agents, the patient should consume glucose because the degradation and absorption of complex carbohydrates will be retarded.
# Chunk 5198
Individuals with type 1 or type 2 DM and severe hyperglycemia (>16.7 mmol/L [300 mg/dL]) should be assessed for clinical stability, including mentation and hydration. Depending on the patient and the rapidity and duration of the severe hyperglycemia, an individual may require more intense and rapid therapy to lower the blood glucose. However, many patients with poorly controlled diabetes and hyperglycemia have few symptoms. The physician should assess if the patient is stable or if diabetic ketoacidosis or a hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state should be considered. Ketones, an indicator of diabetic ketoacidosis, should be measured in individuals with type 1 DM when the plasma glucose is >16.7 mmol/L (300 mg/dL), during a concurrent illness, or with symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, or abdominal pain. Blood measurement of β-hydroxybutyrate is preferred over urine testing with nitroprusside-based assays that measure only acetoacetate and acetone.
# Chunk 5199
DIABETIC KETOACIDOSIS Clinical Features The symptoms and physical signs of DKA are listed in Table 418-7 and usually develop over 24 h. DKA may be the initial symptom complex that leads to a diagnosis of type 1 DM, but more frequently, it occurs in individuals with established diabetes. Nausea and vomiting are often prominent, and their presence in an individual with diabetes warrants laboratory evaluation for DKA. Abdominal pain may be severe and can resemble acute pancreatitis or ruptured viscus. Hyperglycemia leads to glucosuria, volume depletion, and tachycardia. Hypotension can occur because of volume depletion in combination with peripheral vasodilatation. Kussmaul respirations and a fruity odor on the patient’s breath (secondary to metabolic acidosis and increased acetone) are classic signs of the disorder. Lethargy and central nervous system depression may evolve into coma with severe DKA but should also prompt evaluation for other reasons for altered mental status (e.g., infection, hypoxemia). Cerebral edema, an extremely serious complication of DKA, is seen most frequently in children. Signs of infection, which may precipitate DKA, should be sought on physical examination, even in the absence of fever. Tissue ischemia (heart, brain) can also be a precipitating factor. Omission of insulin because of an eating disorder, mental health disorders, or an unstable psychosocial environment may sometimes be a factor precipitating DKA.
# Chunk 5200
Laboratory Abnormalities and Diagnosis The timely diagnosis of DKA is crucial and allows for prompt initiation of therapy. DKA is characterized by hyperglycemia, ketosis, and metabolic acidosis (increased anion gap) along with a number of secondary metabolic derangements (Table 418-6). Occasionally, the serum glucose is only minimally elevated. Serum bicarbonate is frequently <10 mmol/L, and arterial pH ranges between 6.8 and 7.3, depending on the severity of the acidosis. Despite a total-body potassium deficit, the serum potassium at presentation may be mildly elevated, secondary to the acidosis. Total-body stores of sodium, chloride, phosphorus, and magnesium are reduced in DKA but are not accurately reflected by their levels in the serum because of hypovolemia and hyperglycemia. Elevated blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and serum creatinine levels reflect intravascular volume depletion. Interference from acetoacetate may falsely elevate the serum creatinine measurement. Leukocytosis, hypertriglyceridemia, and hyperlipoproteinemia are commonly found as well. Hyperamylasemia may suggest a diagnosis of pancreatitis, especially when accompanied by abdominal pain. However, in DKA the amylase is usually of salivary origin and thus is not diagnostic of pancreatitis. Serum lipase should be obtained if pancreatitis is suspected.
# Chunk 5201
The measured serum sodium is reduced as a consequence of the hyperglycemia (1.6-mmol/L [1.6-meq] reduction in serum sodium for each 5.6-mmol/L [100-mg/dL] rise in the serum glucose). A normal serum sodium in the setting of DKA indicates a more profound water deficit. In “conventional” units, the calculated serum osmolality (2 × [serum sodium + serum potassium] + plasma glucose [mg/dL]/ 18 + BUN/2.8) is mildly to moderately elevated, although to a lesser degree than that found in HHS (see below).
# Chunk 5202
In DKA, the ketone body, β-hydroxybutyrate, is synthesized at a threefold greater rate than acetoacetate; however, acetoacetate is preferentially detected by a commonly used ketosis detection reagent (nitroprusside). Serum ketones are present at significant levels (usually positive at serum dilution of ≥1:8). The nitroprusside tablet, or stick, is often used to detect urine ketones; certain medications such as captopril or penicillamine may cause false-positive reactions. Serum or plasma assays for β-hydroxybutyrate are preferred because they more accurately reflect the true ketone body level.
# Chunk 5203
After the initial bolus of normal saline, replacement of the sodium and free water deficit is carried out over the next 24 h (fluid deficit is often 3–5 L). When hemodynamic stability and adequate urine output are achieved, IV fluids should be switched to 0.45% saline depending on the calculated volume deficit. The change to 0.45% saline helps to reduce the trend toward hyperchloremia later in the course of DKA. Alternatively, initial use of lactated Ringer’s IV solution may reduce the hyperchloremia that commonly occurs with normal saline.
# Chunk 5204
Renal function (creatinine, urine output) 4.

Replace fluids: 2–3 L of 0.9% saline over first 1–3 h (10–20 mL/kg per hour); subsequently, 0.45% saline at 250–500 mL/h; change to 5% glucose and 0.45% saline at 150–250 mL/h when plasma glucose reaches 250 mg/dL (13.9 mmol/L).
# Chunk 5205
9.

Replace K+: 10 meq/h when plasma K+ <5.0–5.2 meq/L (or 20–30 meq/L of infusion fluid), ECG normal, urine flow and normal creatinine documented; administer 40–80 meq/h when plasma K+ <3.5 meq/L or if bicarbonate is given. If initial serum potassium is >5.2 mmol/L (5.2 meq/L), do not supplement K+ until the potassium is corrected.
# Chunk 5206
Potassium stores are depleted in DKA (estimated deficit 3–5 mmol/kg [3–5 meq/kg]). During treatment with insulin and fluids, various factors contribute to the development of hypokalemia. These include insulin-mediated potassium transport into cells, resolution of the acidosis (which also promotes potassium entry into cells), and urinary loss of potassium salts of organic acids. Thus, potassium repletion should commence as soon as adequate urine output and a normal serum potassium are documented. If the initial serum potassium level is elevated, then potassium repletion should be delayed until the potassium falls into the normal range. Inclusion of 20–40 meq of potassium in each liter of IV fluid is reasonable, but additional potassium supplements may also be required. To reduce the amount of chloride administered, potassium phosphate or acetate can be substituted for the chloride salt. The goal is to maintain the serum potassium at >3.5 mmol/L (3.5 meq/L).
# Chunk 5207
Despite a bicarbonate deficit, bicarbonate replacement is not usually necessary. In fact, theoretical arguments suggest that bicarbonate administration and rapid reversal of acidosis may impair cardiac function, reduce tissue oxygenation, and promote hypokalemia. The results of most clinical trials do not support the routine use of bicarbonate replacement, and one study in children found that bicarbonate use was associated with an increased risk of cerebral edema. However, in the presence of severe acidosis (arterial pH <7.0), the ADA advises bicarbonate (50 mmol/L [meq/L] of sodium bicarbonate in 200 mL of sterile water with 10 meq/L KCl per hour for 2 h until the pH is >7.0). Hypophosphatemia may result from increased glucose usage, but randomized clinical trials have not demonstrated that phosphate replacement is beneficial in DKA. If the serum phosphate is <0.32 mmol/L (1 mg/dL), then phosphate supplement should be considered and the serum calcium monitored. Hypomagnesemia may develop during DKA therapy and may also require supplementation.
# Chunk 5208
Diabetes Mellitus: Management and Therapies 2420 With appropriate therapy, the mortality rate of DKA is low (<1%) and is related more to the underlying or precipitating event, such as infection or myocardial infarction. Venous thrombosis, upper gastrointestinal bleeding, and acute respiratory distress syndrome occasionally complicate DKA. The major nonmetabolic complication of DKA therapy is cerebral edema, which most often develops in children as DKA is resolving. The etiology of and optimal therapy for cerebral edema are not well established, but overreplacement of free water should be avoided. Following treatment, the physician and patient should review the sequence of events that led to DKA to prevent future recurrences. Foremost is patient education about the symptoms of DKA, its precipitating factors, and the management of diabetes during a concurrent illness. During illness or when oral intake is compromised, patients should (1) frequently measure the capillary blood glucose; (2) measure urinary ketones when the serum glucose is >16.5 mmol/L (300 mg/dL); (3) drink fluids to maintain hydration; (4) continue or increase insulin; and (5) seek medical attention if dehydration, persistent vomiting, or uncontrolled hyperglycemia develop. Using these strategies, early DKA can be prevented or detected and treated appropriately on an outpatient basis.
# Chunk 5209
HYPERGLYCEMIC HYPEROSMOLAR STATE Clinical Features The prototypical patient with HHS is an elderly individual with type 2 DM, with a several-week history of polyuria, weight loss, and diminished oral intake that culminates in mental confusion, lethargy, or coma. The physical examination reflects profound dehydration and hyperosmolality and reveals hypotension, tachycardia, and altered mental status. Notably absent are symptoms of nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain and the Kussmaul respirations characteristic of DKA. HHS is often precipitated by a serious, concurrent illness such as myocardial infarction or stroke. Sepsis, pneumonia, and other serious infections are frequent precipitants and should be sought. In addition, a debilitating condition (prior stroke or dementia) or social situation that compromises water intake usually contributes to the development of the disorder.
# Chunk 5210
Laboratory Abnormalities and Diagnosis The laboratory features in HHS are summarized in Table 418-6. Most notable are the marked hyperglycemia (plasma glucose may be >55.5 mmol/L [1000 mg/dL]), hyperosmolality (>350 mosmol/L), and prerenal azotemia. The measured serum sodium may be normal or slightly low despite the marked hyperglycemia. The corrected serum sodium is usually increased (add 1.6 meq to measured sodium for each 5.6-mmol/L [100-mg/dL] rise in the serum glucose). In contrast to DKA, acidosis and ketonemia are absent or mild. A small anion-gap metabolic acidosis may be present secondary to increased lactic acid. Moderate ketonuria, if present, is secondary to starvation.
# Chunk 5211
Fluid replacement should initially stabilize the hemodynamic status of the patient (1–3 L of 0.9% normal saline over the first 2–3 h). Because the fluid deficit in HHS is accumulated over a period of days to weeks, the rapidity of reversal of the hyperosmolar state must balance the need for free water repletion with the risk that too rapid a reversal may worsen neurologic function. If the serum sodium is >150 mmol/L (150 meq/L), 0.45% saline should be used. After hemodynamic stability is achieved, the IV fluid administration is directed at reversing the free water deficit using hypotonic fluids (0.45% saline initially, then 5% dextrose in water [D5W]). The calculated free water deficit (which averages 9–10 L) should be reversed over the next 1–2 days (infusion rates of 200–300 mL/h of hypotonic solution). Potassium repletion is usually necessary and should be dictated by repeated measurements of the serum potassium. In patients taking diuretics, the potassium deficit can be quite large and may be accompanied by magnesium deficiency. Hypophosphatemia may occur during therapy and can be improved by using KPO4 and beginning nutrition.
# Chunk 5212
The Diabetes Control and Complications Trial (DCCT) provided definitive proof that reduction in chronic hyperglycemia can prevent many complications of type 1 DM (Fig. 419-1). This large multicenter clinical trial randomized more than 1400 individuals with type 1 DM to either intensive or conventional diabetes management and prospectively evaluated the development of diabetes-related complications during a mean follow-up of 6.5 years. Individuals in the intensive diabetes management group received multiple administrations of insulin each day (injection or pump) along with extensive educational, psychological, and medical support. Individuals in the conventional diabetes management group received twice-daily insulin injections and quarterly nutritional, educational, and clinical evaluation. The goal in the former group was normoglycemia; the goal in the latter group was prevention of symptoms of diabetes. Individuals in the intensive diabetes management group achieved a substantially lower HbA1c (7.3%) than individuals in the conventional diabetes management group (9.1%). After the DCCT results were reported in 1993, study participants continue to be followed in the Epidemiology of Diabetes Intervention and Complications (EDIC) trial, which recently completed 30 years of follow-up (DCCT + EDIC). At the end of the DCCT phase, study participants in both intensive and conventional arms were offered intensive therapy. However, during the subsequent follow-up of more than 18 years, the initial separation in glycemic control disappeared with both arms maintaining a mean HbA1c of 8.0%.
# Chunk 5213
The appearance of neovascularization in response to retinal hypoxemia is the hallmark of proliferative diabetic retinopathy (Fig. 419-2). These newly formed vessels appear near the optic nerve and/or macula and rupture easily, leading to vitreous hemorrhage, fibrosis, and ultimately retinal detachment. Not all individuals with nonproliferative retinopathy go on to develop proliferative retinopathy, but the more severe the nonproliferative disease, the greater the chance of evolution to proliferative retinopathy within 5 years. This creates an important opportunity for early detection and treatment of diabetic retinopathy. Clinically significant macular edema can occur in the context of non-proliferative or proliferative retinopathy. Fluorescein angiography and optical coherence tomography are useful to detect macular edema, which is associated with a 25% chance of moderate visual loss over the next 3 years. Duration of DM and degree of glycemic control are the best predictors of the development of retinopathy; hypertension and nephropathy are also risk factors. Nonproliferative retinopathy is found in many individuals who have had DM for >20 years. Although there is genetic susceptibility for retinopathy, it confers less influence than either the duration of DM or the degree of glycemic control.
# Chunk 5214
The natural history of diabetic nephropathy is characterized by a fairly predictable sequence of events that was initially defined for individuals with type 1 DM but appears to be similar in type 2 DM (Fig. 419-3). Glomerular hyperperfusion and renal hypertrophy occur in the first years after the onset of DM and are associated with an increase of the glomerular filtration rate (GFR). During the first 5 years of DM, thickening of the glomerular basement membrane, glomerular hypertrophy, and mesangial volume expansion occur as the GFR returns to normal. After 5–10 years of type 1 DM, many individuals begin to excrete small amounts of albumin in the urine. The American Diabetes Association (ADA) recently suggested that the terms previously used to refer to increased urinary protein (microalbuminuria as defined as 30–299 mg/d in a 24-h collection or 30–299 μg/mg creatinine in a spot collection or macroalbuminuria as defined as >300 mg/24 h) be replaced by the phrases “persistent albuminuria (30–299 mg/24 h)” and “persistent albuminuria (≥300 mg/24 h)” to better reflect the continuous nature of albumin excretion in the urine as risk factor for nephropathy and cardiovascular disease (CVD). This chapter uses the terms microalbuminuria and macroalbuminuria. Although the appearance of microalbuminuria in type 1 DM is an important risk factor for progression to macroalbuminuria, only ~50% of individuals progress to macroalbuminuria over the next 10 years. In some individuals with type 1 diabetes and microalbuminuria of short duration, the microalbuminuria regresses. Microalbuminuria is also a risk factor for CVD. Once macroalbuminuria is present, there is a steady decline in GFR, and ~50% of individuals reach ESRD in 7–10 years. Once macroalbuminuria develops, blood pressure rises slightly and the pathologic changes are likely irreversible.
# Chunk 5215
An annual microalbuminuria measurement (albumin-to-creatinine ratio in spot urine) is advised in individuals with type 1 or type 2 DM (Fig. 419-4). The urine protein measurement in a routine urinalysis does not detect these low levels of albumin excretion. Screening for albuminuria should commence 5 years after the onset of type 1 DM and at the time of diagnosis of type 2 DM.
# Chunk 5216
FIGURE 419-3 Time course of development of diabetic nephropathy. The relationship of time from onset of diabetes, the glomerular filtration rate (GFR), and the serum creatinine are shown. (Adapted from RA DeFranzo, in Therapy for Diabetes Mellitus and Related Disorders, 3rd ed. American Diabetes Association, Alexandria, VA, 1998.) 2426 Improved glycemic control reduces the rate at which microalbuminuria appears and progresses in type 1 and type 2 DM. However, once macroalbuminuria is present, it is unclear whether improved glycemic control will slow progression of renal disease. During the later phase of declining renal function, insulin requirements may fall as the kidney is a site of insulin degradation. As the GFR decreases with progressive nephropathy, the use and dose of glucose-lowering agents should be reevaluated (see Table 418-5). Some glucose-lowering medications (sulfonylureas and metformin) are contraindicated in advanced renal insufficiency. Many individuals with type 1 or type 2 DM develop hypertension. Numerous studies in both type 1 and type 2 DM demonstrate the effectiveness of strict blood pressure control in reducing albumin excretion and slowing the decline in renal function. Blood pressure should be maintained at <140/90 mmHg in diabetic individuals. Either ACE inhibitors or ARBs should be used to reduce the albuminuria and the associated decline in GFR that accompanies it in individuals with type 1 or type 2 DM (see “Hypertension,” below). Although direct comparisons of ACE inhibitors and ARBs are lacking, most experts believe that the two classes of drugs are equivalent in patient with diabetes. ARBs can be used as an alternative in patients who develop ACE inhibitor–associated cough or angioedema. After 2–3 months of therapy in patients with microalbuminuria, the drug dose is increased until the maximum tolerated dose is reached. Recent studies do not show benefit of intervention prior to onset of microalbuminuria. The combination of an ACE inhibitor and an ARB is not recommended and appears to be detrimental. If use of either ACE inhibitors or ARBs is not possible or the blood pressure is not controlled, then, diuretics, calcium channel blockers (nondihydropyridine class), or beta blockers should be used. These salutary effects are mediated by reducing intraglomerular pressure and inhibition of angiotensin-driven sclerosing pathways, in part through inhibition of TGF-β-mediated pathways. The ADA does not suggest restriction of protein intake in diabetic individuals with albuminuria because studies have failed to show benefit. Nephrology consultation should be considered when albuminuria appears and again when the estimated GFR is <60 mL/min per 1.743 m2. As compared with nondiabetic individuals, hemodialysis in patients with DM is associated with more frequent complications, such as hypotension (due to autonomic neuropathy or loss of reflex tachycardia), more difficult vascular access, and accelerated progression of retinopathy. Complications of atherosclerosis are the leading cause of death in diabetic individuals with nephropathy and hyperlipidemia should be treated aggressively. Renal transplantation from a living related donor is the preferred therapy but requires chronic immunosuppression. Combined pancreas-kidney transplant offers the promise of normoglycemia and freedom from dialysis.
# Chunk 5217
Diabetic neuropathy occurs in ~50% of individuals with long-standing type 1 and type 2 DM. It may manifest as polyneuropathy, mononeuropathy, and/or autonomic neuropathy. As with other complications of DM, the development of neuropathy correlates with the duration of diabetes and glycemic control. Additional risk factors are body mass index (BMI) (the greater the BMI, the greater the risk of neuropathy) and smoking. The presence of CVD, elevated triglycerides, and hypertension is also associated with diabetic peripheral neuropathy. Both myelinated and unmyelinated nerve fibers are lost. Because the clinical features of diabetic neuropathy are similar to those of other neuropathies, the diagnosis of diabetic neuropathy should be made only after other possible etiologies are excluded (Chap. 459).
# Chunk 5218
Polyneuropathy/Mononeuropathy The most common form of diabetic neuropathy is distal symmetric polyneuropathy. It most frequently presents with distal sensory loss and pain, but up to 50% of patients do not have symptoms of neuropathy. Hyperesthesia, paresthesia, and dysesthesia also may occur. Any combination of these symptoms may develop as neuropathy progresses. Symptoms may include a sensation of numbness, tingling, sharpness, or burning that begins in the feet and spreads proximally. Neuropathic pain develops in some of these individuals, occasionally preceded by improvement in their glycemic control. Pain typically involves the lower extremities, is usually present at rest, and worsens at night. Both an acute (lasting <12 months) and a chronic form of painful diabetic neuropathy have been described. The acute form is sometimes treatment-related, occurring in the context of improved glycemic control. As diabetic neuropathy progresses, the pain subsides and eventually disappears, but a sensory deficit in the lower extremities persists. Physical examination reveals sensory loss, loss of ankle deep-tendon reflexes, and abnormal position sense.
# Chunk 5219
Long-standing type 1 and 2 DM may affect the motility and function of the gastrointestinal (GI) and genitourinary systems. The most prominent GI symptoms are delayed gastric emptying (gastroparesis) and altered smalland large-bowel motility (constipation or diarrhea). Gastroparesis may present with symptoms of anorexia, nausea, vomiting, early satiety, and abdominal bloating. Microvascular complications (retinopathy and neuropathy) are usually present. Nuclear medicine scintigraphy after ingestion of a radiolabeled meal may document delayed gastric emptying, but may not correlate well with the patient’s symptoms. Noninvasive “breath tests” following ingestion of a radio-labeled meal have been developed, but are not yet validated. Although parasympathetic dysfunction secondary to chronic hyperglycemia is important in the development of gastroparesis, hyperglycemia itself also impairs gastric emptying. Nocturnal diarrhea, alternating with constipation, is a feature of DM-related GI autonomic neuropathy. In type 1 DM, these symptoms should also prompt evaluation for celiac sprue because of its increased frequency. Esophageal dysfunction in long-standing DM may occur but is usually asymptomatic.
# Chunk 5220
HypertenSion Hypertension can accelerate other complications of DM, particularly CVD, nephropathy, and retinopathy. In targeting a goal of blood pressure of <140/80 mmHg, therapy should first emphasize lifestyle modifications such as weight loss, exercise, stress management, and sodium restriction. The BP goal should be individualized. In some younger individuals, the provider may target a blood pressure of <130/80 mmHg. Realizing that more than one agent is usually required to reach the blood pressure goal, the ADA recommends that all patients with diabetes and hypertension be treated with an ACE inhibitor or an ARB. Subsequently, agents that reduce cardiovascular risk (beta blockers, thiazide diuretics, and calcium channel blockers) should be incorporated into the regimen. ACE inhibitors and ARBs are likely equivalent in most patients with diabetes and renal disease. Serum potassium and renal function should be monitored.
# Chunk 5221
Insulinomas are uncommon, with an estimated yearly incidence of 1 in 250, 000. Because more than 90% of insulinomas are benign, they are a treatable cause of potentially fatal hypoglycemia. The median age at presentation is 50 years in sporadic cases, but the tumor usually presents in the third decade when it is a component of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (Chap. 408). More than 99% of insulinomas are within the substance of the pancreas, and the tumors are usually small (<2.0 cm in diameter in 90% of cases). Therefore, they come to clinical attention because of hypoglycemia rather than mass effects. CT or MRI detects ∼70–80% of insulinomas. These methods detect metastases in the roughly 10% of patients with a malignant insulinoma. Transabdominal ultrasound often identifies insulinomas, and endoscopic ultrasound has a sensitivity of ∼90%. Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy is thought to detect insulinomas in about half of patients. Selective pancreatic arterial calcium injections, with the endpoint of a sharp increase in hepatic venous insulin levels, regionalize insulinomas with high sensitivity, but this invasive procedure is seldom necessary except to confirm endogenous hyperinsulinism in the diffuse islet disorders. Intraoperative pancreatic ultrasonography almost invariably localizes insulinomas that are not readily palpable by the surgeon. Surgical resection of a solitary insulinoma is generally curative. Diazoxide, which inhibits insulin secretion, or the somatostatin analogue octreotide can be used to treat hypoglycemia in patients with unresectable tumors; everolimus, an mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin) inhibitor, is promising.
# Chunk 5222
Abetalipoproteinemia The synthesis and secretion of apoB-containing lipoproteins in the enterocytes of the proximal small bowel and in the hepatocytes of the liver involve a complex series of events that coordinate the coupling of various lipids with apoB-48 and apoB100, respectively. Abetalipoproteinemia is a rare autosomal recessive disease caused by loss-of-function mutations in the gene encoding microsomal TG transfer protein (MTP; gene name MTTP), a protein that transfers lipids to nascent chylomicrons and VLDLs in the intestine and liver, respectively. Plasma levels of cholesterol and TG are extremely low in this disorder, and chylomicrons, VLDLs, LDLs, and apoB are undetectable in plasma. The parents of patients with abetalipoproteinemia (obligate heterozygotes) have normal plasma lipid and apoB levels. Abetalipoproteinemia usually presents in early childhood with diarrhea and failure to thrive due to fat malabsorption. The initial neurologic manifestations are loss of deep tendon reflexes, followed by decreased distal lower extremity vibratory and proprioceptive sense, dysmetria, ataxia, and the development of a spastic gait, often by the third or fourth decade. Patients with abetalipoproteinemia also develop a progressive pigmented retinopathy presenting with decreased night and color vision, followed by reductions in daytime visual acuity and ultimately progressing to near-blindness. The presence of spinocerebellar degeneration and pigmented retinopathy in this disease has resulted in some patients with abetalipoproteinemia being misdiagnosed as having Friedreich’s ataxia.
# Chunk 5223
A critical first step in managing a lipoprotein disorder is to attempt to determine the class or classes of lipoproteins that are increased or decreased in the patient. Once the hyperlipidemia is accurately classified, efforts should be directed to rule out any possible secondary causes of the hyperlipidemia (Table 421-4). Although many patients with hyperlipidemia have a primary (i.e., genetic) cause of their lipid disorder, secondary factors frequently contribute to the hyperlipidemia. A careful social, medical, and family history should be obtained. A fasting glucose should be obtained in the initial workup of all subjects with an elevated TG level. Nephrotic syndrome and chronic renal insufficiency should be excluded by obtaining urine protein and serum creatinine. Liver function tests should be performed to rule out hepatitis and cholestasis. Hypothyroidism should be ruled out by measuring serum thyroid-stimulating hormone.
# Chunk 5224
The prevalence of the metabolic syndrome varies around the world, in part reflecting the age and ethnicity of the populations studied and the diagnostic criteria applied. In general, the prevalence of the metabolic syndrome increases with age. The highest recorded prevalence worldwide is among Native Americans, with nearly 60% of women ages 45–49 and 45% of men ages 45–49 meeting the criteria of the National Cholesterol Education Program and Adult Treatment Panel III (NCEP:ATPIII). In the United States, the metabolic syndrome is less common among African-American men and more common among Mexican-American women. Based on data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) 2003–2006, the age-adjusted prevalence of the metabolic syndrome in U.S. adults without diabetes is 28% for men and 30% for women. In France, studies of a cohort of 30to 60-year-olds have shown a <10% prevalence for each sex, although 17.5% of people 60–64 years of age are affected. Greater global industrialization is associated with rising rates of obesity, which are expected to increase the prevalence of the metabolic syndrome dramatically, especially as the population ages. Moreover, the rising prevalence and severity of obesity among children is reflected in features of the metabolic syndrome in a younger population.
# Chunk 5225
Hypertension The relationship between insulin resistancefrom those in visceral fat; this distinction requires CT or MRI. With and hypertension is well established. Paradoxically, under increases in visceral adipose tissue, adipose tissue–derived free fatty normal physiologic conditions, insulin is a vasodilator withacids are directed to the liver. In contrast, increases in abdominal SC secondary effects on sodium reabsorption in the kidney. However, infat release lipolysis products into the systemic circulation and avert the setting of insulin resistance, the vasodilatory effect of insulin is lostmore direct effects on hepatic metabolism. Relative increases in vis- but the renal effect on sodium reabsorption is preserved. Sodium reabceral versus SC adipose tissue with increasing waist circumference sorption is increased in whites with the metabolic syndrome but not inin Asians and Asian Indians may explain the greater prevalence of
# Chunk 5226
Obesity (See also Chap. 416) In some patients with the metabolic syndrome, treatment options need to extend beyond lifestyle intervention. Weight-loss drugs come in two major classes: appetite suppressants and absorption inhibitors. Appetite suppressants approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration include phentermine (for short-term use [3 months] only) as well as the more recent additions phentermine/topiramate and lorcaserin, which are approved without restrictions on the duration of therapy. In clinical trials, the phentermine/topiramate combination has resulted in ~10% weight loss in 50% of patients. Side effects include palpitations, headache, paresthesias, constipation, and insomnia. Lorcaserin results in less weight loss—typically ~5% beyond placebo—but can cause headache and nasopharyngitis. Orlistat inhibits fat absorption by ~30% and is moderately effective compared with placebo (~5% more weight loss). Orlistat has been shown to reduce the incidence of type 2 diabetes, an effect that was especially evident among patients with impaired glucose tolerance at baseline. This drug is often difficult of take because of oily leakage per rectum.
# Chunk 5227
LDL CHOLESTEROL (SEE ALSO CHAP. 421)

The rationale for the NCEP:ATPIII’s development of criteria for the metabolic syndrome was to go beyond LDL cholesterol in identifying and reducing the risk of CVD. The working assumption by the panel was that LDL cholesterol goals had already been achieved and that increasing evidence supports a linear reduction in CVD events as a result of progressive lowering of LDL cholesterol with statins. For patients with the metabolic syndrome and diabetes, a statin should be prescribed. For those patients with diabetes and known CVD, the current evidence supports a maximum of penultimate dose of a potent statin (e.g., atorvastatin or rosuvastatin). For those patients with the metabolic syndrome but without diabetes, a score that predicts a 10-year CVD risk exceeding 7.5% should also take a statin. With a 10-year risk of <7.5%, use of statin therapy is not evidence based.
# Chunk 5228
The Metabolic Syndrome

Endocrinology and Metabolism Health and Disease F. Richard Bringhurst, Marie B. Demay, Stephen M. Krane, Henry M. Kronenberg BONE STRUCTURE AND METABOLISM 423 SEC Tion 4 2454 clear evidence that fibrates reduce CVD risk; however, post hoc analyses of several studies demonstrated that patients with baseline triglyceride levels >200 mg/dL and HDL cholesterol levels <35 mg/ dL did benefit. Other drugs that lower triglyceride levels include statins, nicotinic acid, and—in high doses—omega-3 fatty acids. For this purpose, an intermediate or high dose of the “more potent” statins (atorvastatin, rosuvastatin) is needed. The effect of nicotinic acid on fasting triglycerides is dose related and ~20–35%, an effect that is less pronounced than that of fibrates. In patients with the metabolic syndrome and diabetes, nicotinic acid may increase fasting glucose levels. Omega-3 fatty acid preparations that include high doses of docosahexaenoic acid plus eicosapentaenoic acid (~1.5–4.5 g/d) or eicosapentaenoic acid alone lower fasting triglyceride levels by ~30–40%. No drug interactions with fibrates or statins occur, and the main side effect of their use is eructation with a fishy taste. This taste can be partially blocked by ingestion of the nutraceutical after freezing. Clinical trials of nicotinic acid or high-dose omega-3 fatty acids in patients with the metabolic syndrome have not been reported.
# Chunk 5229
The extracellular components of bone consist of a solid mineral phase in close association with an organic matrix, of which 90–95% is type I collagen (Chap. 427). The noncollagenous portion of the organic matrix is heterogeneous and contains serum proteins such as albumin as well as many locally produced proteins, whose functions are incompletely understood. Those proteins include cell attachment/ with hypertension (>140/90 mmHg), patients with pre-hypertension (>120/80 mmHg but <140/90 mmHg), and individuals with normal blood pressure (<120/80 mmHg). In patients who have the metabolic syndrome without diabetes, the best choice for the initial antihypertensive medication is an angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor or an angiotensin II receptor blocker, as these two classes of drugs appear to reduce the incidence of new-onset type 2 diabetes. In all patients with hypertension, a sodium-restricted dietary pattern enriched in fruits and vegetables, whole grains, and low-fat dairy products should be advocated. Home monitoring of blood pressure may assist in maintaining good blood-pressure control.
# Chunk 5230
(Modified from T Suda et al: Endocr Rev 20:345, 1999, with permission.) forming bone. As an osteoblast secretes matrix, which then is mineralized, the cell becomes an osteocyte, still connected with its blood supply through a series of canaliculi. Osteocytes account for the vast majority of the cells in bone. They are thought to be the mechanosensors in bone that communicate signals to surface osteoblasts and their progenitors through the canalicular network and thereby serve as master regulators of bone formation and resorption. Remarkably, osteocytes also secrete fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23), a major regulator of phosphate metabolism (see below). Mineralization of the matrix, both in trabecular bone and in osteones of compact cortical bone (Haversian systems), begins soon after the matrix is secreted (primary mineralization) but is not completed for several weeks or even longer (secondary mineralization). Although this mineralization takes advantage of the high concentrations of calcium and phosphate, already near saturation in serum, mineralization is a carefully regulated process that is dependent on the activity of osteoblast-derived alkaline phosphatase, which probably works by hydrolyzing inhibitors of mineralization.
# Chunk 5231
cartilage cells and the endochondral sequence at the growth plate. Osteoblast activity can be assessed by measuring serum bone-specific Growth in width and thickness is accomplished by formation of alkaline phosphatase. Similarly, osteocalcin, a protein secreted from bone at the periosteal surface and by resorption at the endosteal osteoblasts, is made virtually only by osteoblasts. Osteoclast activity surface, with the rate of formation exceeding that of resorption. In can be assessed by measurement of products of collagen degradation. adults, after the growth plates of cartilage close, growth in length and Collagen molecules are covalently linked to each other in the extracelendochondral bone formation cease except for some activity in the lular matrix through the formation of hydroxypyridinium cross-links cartilage cells beneath the articular surface. Even in adults, however, (Chap. 427). After digestion by osteoclasts, these cross-linked peptides remodeling of bone (within Haversian systems as well as along the can be measured both in urine and in blood. surfaces of trabecular bone) continues throughout life. In adults, ~4% of the surface of trabecular bone (such as iliac crest) is involved in active resorption, whereas 10–15% of trabecular surfaces are covered with osteoid, unmineralized new bone formed by osteoblasts. Over 99% of the 1–2 kg of calcium present normally in the adult Radioisotope studies indicate that as much as 18% of the total skeletal human body resides in the skeleton, where it provides mechanical stacalcium is deposited and removed each year. Thus, bone is an active bility and serves as a reservoir sometimes needed to maintain extracelmetabolizing tissue that requires an intact blood supply. The cycle of lular fluid (ECF) calcium concentration (Fig. 423-3). Skeletal calcium bone resorption and formation is a highly orchestrated process carried accretion first becomes significant during the third trimester of fetalout by the basic multicellular unit, which is composed of a group of life, accelerates throughout childhood and adolescence, reaches a peak osteoclasts and osteoblasts (Fig. 423-2). in early adulthood, and gradually declines thereafter at rates that rarely 0.4–1.5 g 0.25–0.5 g 0.25–0.5 g 0.1–0.2 g 0.25–0.5 g 7.9–9.7 g 0.3–1 g 0.15–.3 g
# Chunk 5232
The concentration of ionized calcium in the ECF must be maintained within a narrow range because of the critical role calcium plays in a wide array of cellular functions, especially those involved in neuromuscular activity, secretion, and signal transduction. Intracellular cytosolic free calcium levels are ~100 nmol/L and are 10,000-fold lower than ionized calcium concentrations in the blood and ECF (1.1–1.3 mmol/L). Cytosolic calcium does not play the structural role played by extracellular calcium; instead, it serves a signaling function. The steep chemical gradient of calcium from outside to inside the cell promotes rapid calcium influx through various membrane calcium channels that can be activated by hormones, metabolites, or neurotransmitters, swiftly changing cellular function. In blood, total calcium concentration is normally 2.2–2.6 mM (8.5–10.5 mg/dL), of which ~50% is ionized. The remainder is bound ionically to negatively charged proteins (predominantly albumin and immunoglobulins) or loosely complexed with phosphate, citrate, sulfate, or other anions. Alterations in serum protein concentrations directly affect the total blood calcium concentration even if the ionized calcium concentration remains normal. An algorithm to correct for protein changes adjusts the total serum calcium (in mg/dL) upward by 0.8 times the deficit in serum albumin (g/dL) or by 0.5 times the deficit in serum immunoglobulin (in g/dL). Such corrections provide only rough approximations of actual free calcium concentrations, however, and may be misleading, particularly during acute illness. Acidosis also alters ionized calcium by reducing its association with proteins. The best practice is to measure blood ionized calcium directly by a method that employs calcium-selective electrodes in acute settings during which calcium abnormalities might occur.
# Chunk 5233
Normal dietary calcium intake in the United States varies widely, ranging from 10–37 mmol/d (400–1500 mg/d). An Institute of Medicine report recommends a daily allowance of 25–30 mmol (1000–1200 mg) for most adults. Intestinal absorption of ingested calcium involves both active (transcellular) and passive (paracellular) mechanisms. Passive calcium absorption is nonsaturable and approximates 5% of daily calcium intake, whereas active absorption involves apical calcium entry via specific ion channels (TRPV5 and TRPV6), whose expression is controlled principally by 1,25(OH)2D, and normally ranges from 20 to 70%. Active calcium transport occurs mainly in the proximal small bowel (duodenum and proximal jejunum), although some active calcium absorption occurs in most segments of the small intestine. Optimal rates of calcium absorption require gastric acid. This is especially true for weakly dissociable calcium supplements such as calcium carbonate. In fact, large boluses of calcium carbonate are poorly absorbed because of their neutralizing effect on gastric acid. In achlorhydric subjects and for those taking drugs that inhibit gastric acid secretion, supplements should be taken with meals to optimize their absorption. Use of calcium citrate may be preferable in these circumstances. Calcium absorption may also be blunted in disease states such as pancreatic or biliary insufficiency, in which ingested calcium remains bound to unabsorbed fatty acids or other food constituents. At high levels of calcium intake, synthesis of 1,25(OH)2D is reduced; this decreases the rate of active intestinal calcium absorption. The opposite occurs with dietary calcium restriction. Some calcium, ~2.5–5 mmol/d (100–200 mg/d), is excreted as an obligate component of intestinal secretions and is not regulated by calciotropic hormones.
# Chunk 5234
The feedback-controlled hormonal regulation of intestinal absorptive efficiency results in a relatively constant daily net calcium absorption of ~5–7.5 mmol/d (200–400 mg/d) despite large changes in daily dietary calcium intake. This daily load of absorbed calcium is excreted by the kidneys in a manner that is also tightly regulated by the concentration of ionized calcium in the blood. Approximately 8–10 g/d of calcium is filtered by the glomeruli, of which only 2–3% appears in the urine. Most filtered calcium (65%) is reabsorbed in the proximal tubules via a passive, paracellular route that is coupled to concomitant NaCl reabsorption and not specifically regulated. The cortical thick ascending limb of Henle’s loop (cTAL) reabsorbs roughly another 20% of filtered calcium, also via a paracellular mechanism. Calcium reabsorption in the cTAL requires a tight-junctional protein called paracellin-1 and is inhibited by increased blood concentrations of calcium or magnesium, acting via the CaSR, which is highly expressed on basolateral membranes in this nephron segment. Operation of the renal CaSR provides a mechanism, independent of those engaged directly by PTH or 1,25(OH)2D, by which serum ionized calcium can control renal calcium reabsorption. Finally, ~10% of filtered calcium is reabsorbed in the distal convoluted tubules (DCTs) by a transcellular mechanism. Calcium enters the luminal surface of the cell through specific apical calcium channels (TRPV5), whose number is regulated. It then moves across the cell in association with a specific calcium-binding protein (calbindin-D28k) that buffers cytosolic calcium concentrations from the large mass of transported calcium. Ca2+-ATPases and Na+/Ca2+ exchangers actively extrude calcium across the basolateral surface and thereby maintain the transcellular calcium gradient. All these processes are stimulated directly or indirectly by PTH. The DCT is also the site of action of thiazide diuretics, which lower urinary calcium excretion by inducing sodium depletion and thereby augmenting proximal calcium reabsorption. Conversely, dietary sodium loads, or increased distal sodium delivery caused by loop diuretics or saline infusion, induce calciuresis.
# Chunk 5235
Although 85% of the ~600 g of body phosphorus is present in bone mineral, phosphorus is also a major intracellular constituent both as the free anion(s) and as a component of numerous organophosphate compounds, including structural proteins, enzymes, transcription factors, carbohydrate and lipid intermediates, high-energy stores (adenosine triphosphate [ATP], creatine phosphate), and nucleic acids. Unlike calcium, phosphorus exists intracellularly at concentrations close to those present in ECF (e.g., 1–2 mmol/L). In cells and in the ECF, phosphorus exists in several forms, predominantly as H2PO4− or NaHPO4−, with perhaps 10% as HPO42−. This mixture of anions will be referred to here as “phosphate.” In serum, about 12% of phosphorus is bound to proteins. Concentrations of phosphates in blood and ECF generally are expressed in terms of elemental phosphorus, with the normal range in adults being 0.75–1.45 mmol/L (2.5–4.5 mg/dL). Because the volume of the intracellular fluid compartment is twice that of the ECF, measurements of ECF phosphate may not accurately reflect phosphate availability within cells that follows even modest shifts of phosphate from one compartment to the other.
# Chunk 5236
Phosphate is widely available in foods and is absorbed efficiently (65%) by the small intestine even in the absence of vitamin D. However, phosphate absorptive efficiency may be enhanced (to 85–90%) via active transport mechanisms that are stimulated by 1,25(OH)2D. These mechanisms involve activation of Na+/PO42− co-transporters that move phosphate into intestinal cells against an unfavorable electrochemical gradient. Daily net intestinal phosphate absorption varies widely with the composition of the diet but is generally in the range of 500–1000 mg/d. Phosphate absorption can be inhibited by large doses of calcium salts or by sevelamer hydrochloride (Renagel), strategies commonly used to control levels of serum phosphate in renal failure. Aluminum hydroxide antacids also reduce phosphate absorption but are used less commonly because of the potential for aluminum toxicity. Low serum phosphate stimulates renal proximal tubular synthesis of 1,25(OH)2D, perhaps by suppressing blood levels of FGF23 (see below).
# Chunk 5237
Serum phosphate levels vary by as much as 50% on a normal day. This reflects the effect of food intake but also an underlying circadian rhythm that produces a nadir between 7:00 and 10:00 a.m. Carbohydrate administration, especially as IV dextrose solutions in fasting subjects, can decrease serum phosphate by >0.7 mmol/L (2 mg/ dL) due to rapid uptake into and utilization by cells. A similar response is observed in the treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis and during metabolic or respiratory alkalosis. Because of this wide variation in serum phosphate, it is best to perform measurements in the basal, fasting state.
# Chunk 5238
Hypophosphatemia also can occur transiently (over weeks to months) during the phase of accelerated net bone formation that follows parathyroidectomy for severe primary hyperparathyroidism or during treatment of vitamin D deficiency or lytic Paget’s disease. This is usually most prominent in patients who preoperatively have evidence of high bone turnover (e.g., high serum levels of alkaline phosphatase). Osteoblastic metastases can also lead to this syndrome.
# Chunk 5239
Neuromuscular manifestations of severe hypophosphatemia are variable but may include muscle weakness, lethargy, confusion, disorientation, hallucinations, dysarthria, dysphagia, oculomotor palsies, anisocoria, nystagmus, ataxia, cerebellar tremor, ballismus, hyporeflexia, impaired sphincter control, distal sensory deficits, paresthesia, hyperesthesia, generalized or Guillain-Barré–like ascending paralysis, seizures, coma, and even death. Serious sequelae such as paralysis, confusion, and seizures are likely only at phosphate concentrations <0.25 mmol/L (<0.8 mg/dL). Rhabdomyolysis may develop during rapidly progressive hypophosphatemia. The diagnosis of hypophosphatemiainduced rhabdomyolysis may be overlooked, as up to 30% of patients with acute hypophosphatemia (<0.7 mM) have creatine phosphokinase 2460 elevations that peak 1–2 days after the nadir in serum phosphate, when the release of phosphate from injured myocytes may have led to a near normalization of circulating levels of phosphate. Respiratory failure and cardiac dysfunction, which are reversible with phosphate treatment, may occur at serum phosphate levels of 0.5–0.8 mmol/L (1.5–2.5 mg/dL). Renal tubular defects, including tubular acidosis, glycosuria, and impaired reabsorption of sodium and calcium, may occur. Hematologic abnormalities correlate with reductions in intracellular ATP and 2,3-diphosphoglycerate and may include erythrocyte microspherocytosis and hemolysis; impaired oxyhemoglobin dissociation; defective leukocyte chemotaxis, phagocytosis, and bacterial killing; and platelet dysfunction with spontaneous gastrointestinal hemorrhage.
# Chunk 5240
Severe hypophosphatemia (<0.75 mmol/L [<2 mg/dL]), particularly in the setting of underlying phosphate depletion, constitutes a dangerous electrolyte abnormality that should be corrected promptly. Unfortunately, the cumulative deficit in body phosphate cannot be predicted easily from knowledge of the circulating level of phosphate, and therapy must be approached empirically. The threshold for IV phosphate therapy and the dose administered should reflect consideration of renal function, the likely severity and duration of the underlying phosphate depletion, and the presence and severity of symptoms consistent with those of hypophosphatemia. In adults, phosphate may be safely administered IV as neutral mixtures of sodium or potassium phosphate salts at initial doses of 0.2–0.8 mmol/kg of elemental phosphorus over 6 h (e.g., 10–50 mmol over 6 h), with doses >20 mmol/6 h reserved for those who have serum levels <0.5 mmol/L (1.5 mg/dL) and normal renal function. A suggested approach is presented in Table 423-2. Serum levels of phosphate and calcium must be monitored closely (every 6–12 h) throughout treatment. It is necessary to avoid a serum calcium-phosphorus product >50 to reduce the risk of heterotopic calcification. Hypocalcemia, if present, should be corrected before administering IV phosphate. Less severe hypophosphatemia, in the range of 0.5–0.8 mmol/L (1.5–2.5 mg/dL), usually can be treated with oral phosphate in divided doses of 750–2000 mg/d as elemental phosphorus; higher doses can cause bloating and diarrhea.
# Chunk 5241
Likely severity of underlying phosphate depletion Concurrent parenteral glucose administration Presence of neuromuscular, cardiopulmonary, or hematologic complications of hypophosphatemia Renal function (reduce dose by 50% if serum creatinine >220 μmol/L [>2.5 mg/dL]) Serum calcium level (correct hypocalcemia first; reduce dose by 50% in hypercalcemia) Guidelines
# Chunk 5242
Serum Phosphorus, mM (mg/dL) Rate of Infusion, mmol/h Duration, h Total Administered, mmol <0.8 (<2.5) 2 6 12 <0.5 (<1.5) 4 6 24 <0.3 (<1) 8 6 48 Note: Rates shown are calculated for a 70-kg person; levels of serum calcium and phosphorus must be measured every 6–12 h during therapy; infusions can be repeated to achieve stable serum phosphorus levels >0.8 mmol/L (>2.5 mg/dL); most formulations available in the United States provide 3 mmol/mL of sodium or potassium phosphate.
# Chunk 5243
Magnesium is the major intracellular divalent cation. Normal concentrations of extracellular magnesium and calcium are crucial for normal neuromuscular activity. Intracellular magnesium forms a key complex with ATP and is an important cofactor for a wide range of enzymes, transporters, and nucleic acids required for normal cellular function, replication, and energy metabolism. The concentration of magnesium in serum is closely regulated within the range of 0.7–1 mmol/L (1.5–2 meq/L; 1.7–2.4 mg/dL), of which 30% is protein-bound and another 15% is loosely complexed to phosphate and other anions. One-half of the 25 g (1000 mmol) of total body magnesium is located in bone, only one-half of which is insoluble in the mineral phase. Almost all extraskeletal magnesium is present within cells, where the total concentration is 5 mM, 95% of which is bound to proteins and other macromolecules. Because only 1% of body magnesium resides in the ECF, measurements of serum magnesium levels may not accurately reflect the level of total body magnesium stores.
# Chunk 5244
Dietary magnesium content normally ranges from 6 to 15 mmol/d (140–360 mg/d), of which 30–40% is absorbed, mainly in the jejunum and ileum. Intestinal magnesium absorptive efficiency is stimulated by 1,25(OH)2D and can reach 70% during magnesium deprivation. Urinary magnesium excretion normally matches net intestinal absorption and is ~4 mmol/d (100 mg/d). Regulation of serum magnesium concentrations is achieved mainly by control of renal magnesium reabsorption. Only 20% of filtered magnesium is reabsorbed in the proximal tubule, whereas 60% is reclaimed in the cTAL and another 5–10% in the DCT. Magnesium reabsorption in the cTAL occurs via a paracellular route that requires both a lumen-positive potential, created by NaCl reabsorption, and tight-junction proteins encoded by members of the Claudin gene family. Magnesium reabsorption in the cTAL is increased by PTH but inhibited by hypercalcemia or hypermagnesemia, both of which activate the CaSR in this nephron segment.
# Chunk 5245
Clinical and Laboratory Findings Hypomagnesemia may cause generalized alterations in neuromuscular function, including tetany, tremor, seizures, muscle weakness, ataxia, nystagmus, vertigo, apathy, depression, irritability, delirium, and psychosis. Patients are usually asymptomatic when serum magnesium concentrations are >0.5 mmol/L (1 meq/L; 1.2 mg/dL), although the severity of symptoms may not correlate with serum magnesium levels. Cardiac arrhythmias may occur, including sinus tachycardia, other supraventricular tachycardias, and ventricular arrhythmias. Electrocardiographic abnormalities may include prolonged PR or QT intervals, T-wave flattening or inversion, and ST straightening. Sensitivity to digitalis toxicity may be enhanced.
# Chunk 5246
Mild, asymptomatic hypomagnesemia may be treated with oral magnesium salts (MgCl2, MgO, Mg[OH]2) in divided doses totaling 20–30 mmol/d (40–60 meq/d). Diarrhea may occur with larger doses. More severe hypomagnesemia should be treated parenterally, preferably with IV MgCl2, which can be administered safely as a continuous infusion of 50 mmol/d (100 meq Mg2+/d) if renal function is normal. If GFR is reduced, the infusion rate should be lowered by 50–75%. Use of IM MgSO4 is discouraged; the injections are painful and provide relatively little magnesium (2 mL of 50% MgSO4 supplies only 4 mmol). MgSO4 may be given IV instead of MgCl2, although the sulfate anions may bind calcium in serum and urine and aggravate hypocalcemia. Serum magnesium should be monitored at intervals of 12–24 h during therapy, which may continue for several days because of impaired renal conservation of magnesium (only 50–70% of the daily IV magnesium dose is retained) and delayed repletion of intracellular deficits, which may be as high as 1–1.5 mmol/kg (2–3 meq/kg).
# Chunk 5247
The mounting concern about the relationship between solar exposure and the development of skin cancer has led to increased reliance on dietary sources of vitamin D. Although the prevalence of vitamin D deficiency varies, the third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES III) revealed that vitamin D deficiency is prevalent throughout the United States. The clinical syndrome of vitamin D deficiency can be a result of deficient production of vitamin D in the skin, lack of dietary intake, accelerated losses of vitamin D, impaired vitamin D activation, or resistance to the biologic effects of 1,25(OH)2D (Table 423-6). The elderly and nursing home residents are particularly at risk for vitamin D deficiency, since both the efficiency of vitamin D synthesis in the skin and the absorption of vitamin D from the intestine decline with age. Similarly, intestinal malabsorption of dietary fats and short bowel syndrome, including that associated with intestinal bypass surgery, can lead to vitamin D deficiency. This is further exacerbated in the presence of terminal ileal disease, which results in impaired enterohepatic circulation of vitamin D metabolites. In addition to intestinal diseases, accelerated inactivation of vitamin D metabolites can be seen with drugs that induce hepatic cytochrome P450 mixed-function oxidases such as barbiturates, phenytoin, and rifampin. Impaired 25-hydroxylation, associated with severe liver disease or isoniazid, is an uncommon cause of vitamin D deficiency. A mutation in the gene responsible for 25-hydroxylation has been identified in one kindred. Impaired 1α-hydroxylation is prevalent in the population with profound renal dysfunction due to an increase in circulating FGF23 levels and a decrease in functional renal mass. Thus, therapeutic interventions should be considered in patients whose creatinine clearance is <0.5 mL/s (30 mL/min). Mutations in the renal 1α-hydroxylase are the basis for the genetic disorder, pseudovitamin D–deficiency rickets. This autosomal recessive disorder presents with the syndrome of vitamin D deficiency in the first year of life. Patients present with growth retardation, rickets, and hypocalcemic seizures. Serum 1,25(OH)2D levels are low despite normal 25(OH)D levels and elevated PTH levels. Treatment with vitamin D metabolites that do not require 1α-hydroxylation results in disease remission, although lifelong therapy is required. A second autosomal recessive disorder, hereditary vitamin D–resistant rickets, a consequence of vitamin D receptor mutations, is a greater therapeutic challenge. These patients present in a similar fashion during the first year of life, but alopecia often accompanies the disorder, demonstrating a functional role of the VDR in postnatal hair regeneration. Serum levels of 1,25(OH)2D are dramatically elevated in these individuals both because of increased production due to stimulation of 1α-hydroxylase activity as a consequence of secondary hyperparathyroidism and because of impaired inactivation, since induction of the 24-hydroxylase by 1,25(OH)2D requires an intact VDR. Because the receptor mutation results in hormone resistance, daily calcium and phosphorus infusions may be required to bypass the defect in intestinal mineral ion absorption.
# Chunk 5248
Diagnosis of Vitamin D Deficiency, Rickets, and Osteomalacia The most specific screening test for vitamin D deficiency in otherwise healthy individuals is a serum 25(OH)D level. Although the normal ranges vary, levels of 25(OH)D <37 nmol/L (<15 ng/mL) are associated with increasing PTH levels and lower bone density. The Institute of Medicine has defined vitamin D sufficiency as a vitamin D level >50 nmol/L (>20 ng/mL), although higher levels may be required to 2466 optimize intestinal calcium absorption in the elderly and those with underlying disease states. Vitamin D deficiency leads to impaired intestinal absorption of calcium, resulting in decreased serum total and ionized calcium values. This hypocalcemia results in secondary hyperparathyroidism, a homeostatic response that initially maintains serum calcium levels at the expense of the skeleton. Due to the PTH-induced increase in bone turnover, alkaline phosphatase levels are often increased. In addition to increasing bone resorption, PTH decreases urinary calcium excretion while promoting phosphaturia. This results in hypophosphatemia, which exacerbates the mineralization defect in the skeleton. With prolonged vitamin D deficiency resulting in osteomalacia, calcium stores in the skeleton become relatively inaccessible, since osteoclasts cannot resorb unmineralized osteoid, and frank hypocalcemia ensues. Because PTH is a major stimulus for the renal 25(OH)D 1α-hydroxylase, there is increased synthesis of the active hormone, 1,25(OH)2D. Paradoxically, levels of this hormone are often normal in severe vitamin D deficiency. Therefore, measurements of 1,25(OH)2D are not accurate reflections of vitamin D stores and should not be used to diagnose vitamin D deficiency in patients with normal renal function. Radiologic features of vitamin D deficiency in children include a widened, expanded growth plate that is characteristic of rickets. These findings not only are apparent in the long bones but also are present at the costochondral junction, where the expansion of the growth plate leads to swellings known as the “rachitic rosary.” Impairment of intramembranous bone mineralization leads to delayed fusion of the calvarial sutures and a decrease in the radiopacity of cortical bone in the long bones. If vitamin D deficiency occurs after epiphyseal fusion, the main radiologic finding is a decrease in cortical thickness and relative radiolucency of the skeleton. A specific radiologic feature of osteomalacia, whether associated with phosphate wasting or vitamin D deficiency, is pseudofractures, or Looser’s zones. These are radiolucent lines that occur where large arteries are in contact with the underlying skeletal elements; it is thought that the arterial pulsations lead to the radiolucencies. As a result, these pseudofractures are usually a few millimeters wide, are several centimeters long, and are seen particularly in the scapula, the pelvis, and the femoral neck.
# Chunk 5249
Based on the Institute of Medicine 2010 report, the recommended daily intake of vitamin D is 600 IU from 1 to 70 years of age, and 800 IU for those over 70. Based on the observation that 800 IU of vitamin D, with calcium supplementation, decreases the risk of hip fractures in elderly women, this higher dose is thought to be an appropriate daily intake for prevention of vitamin D deficiency in adults. The safety margin for vitamin D is large, and vitamin D toxicity usually is observed only in patients taking doses in the range of 40,000 IU daily. Treatment of vitamin D deficiency should be directed at the underlying disorder, if possible, and also should be tailored to the severity of the condition. Vitamin D should always be repleted in conjunction with calcium supplementation because most of the consequences of vitamin D deficiency are a result of impaired mineral ion homeostasis. In patients in whom 1α-hydroxylation is impaired, metabolites that do not require this activation step are the treatment of choice. They include 1,25(OH)2D3 (calcitriol [Rocaltrol], 0.25–0.5 μg/d) and 1α-hydroxyvitamin D2 (Hectorol, 2.5–5 μg/d). If the pathway required for activation of vitamin D is intact, severe vitamin D deficiency can be treated with pharmacologic repletion initially (50,000 IU weekly for 3–12 weeks), followed by maintenance therapy (800 IU daily). Pharmacologic doses may be required for maintenance therapy in patients who are taking medications, such as barbiturates or phenytoin, that accelerate metabolism of or cause resistance to 1,25(OH)2D. Calcium supplementation should include 1.5–2 g/d of elemental calcium. Normocalcemia is usually observed within 1 week of the institution of therapy, although increases in PTH and alkaline phosphatase levels may persist for 3–6 months. The most efficacious methods to monitor treatment and resolution of vitamin D deficiency are serum and urinary calcium measurements. In patients who are vitamin D replete and are taking adequate calcium supplementation, the 24-h urinary calcium excretion should be in the range of 100–250 mg/24 h. Lower levels suggest problems with adherence to the treatment regimen or with absorption of calcium or vitamin D supplements. Levels >250 mg/24 h predispose to nephrolithiasis and should lead to a reduction in vitamin D dosage and/or calcium supplementation.
# Chunk 5250
PTH and PTHrP, although products of different genes, exhibit con-1α-hydroxylase in the kidney. The responses in bone include effects siderable functional and structural homology (Fig. 424-1) and have on collagen synthesis, alkaline phosphatase, ornithine decarboxylase, evolved from a shared ancestral gene. The structure of the gene encod-citrate decarboxylase, and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase activiing human PTHrP, however, is more complex than that of PTH, con-ties; phospholipid synthesis; and calcium and phosphate transport. taining multiple additional exons, which can undergo alternate splic-Ultimately, these biochemical events lead to an integrated hormonal ing patterns during formation of the mature mRNA. Protein products response in bone turnover and calcium homeostasis. PTH also actiof 139, 141, and 173 amino acids are produced, and other molecular vates Na+/Ca2+ exchangers at renal distal tubular sites and stimulates forms may result from tissue-specific degradation at accessible internal translocation of preformed calcium transport channels, moving them cleavage sites. The biologic roles of these various molecular species and from the interior to the apical surface to increase tubular uptake of the nature of the circulating forms of PTHrP are unclear. In fact, it is calcium. PTH-dependent stimulation of phosphate excretion (reducuncertain whether PTHrP circulates at any significant level in adults. ing reabsorption—the opposite effect from actions on calcium in As a paracrine factor, PTHrP may be produced, act, and be destroyed the kidney) involves the downregulation of two sodium-dependent locally within tissues. In adults, PTHrP appears to have little influence phosphate co-transporters, NPT2a and NPT2c, and their expression on calcium homeostasis, except in disease states, when large tumors, at the apical membrane, thereby reducing phosphate reabsorption in
# Chunk 5251
Clinical features are helpful in differential diagnosis. Hypercalcemia in an adult who is asymptomatic is usually due to primary hyperparathyroidism. In malignancy-associated hypercalcemia, the disease is usually not occult; rather, symptoms of malignancy bring the patient to the physician, and hypercalcemia is discovered during the evaluation. In such patients, the interval between detection of hypercalcemia and death, especially without vigorous treatment, is often <6 months. Accordingly, if an asymptomatic individual has had hypercalcemia or some manifestation of hypercalcemia such as kidney stones for more than 1 or 2 years, it is unlikely that malignancy
# Chunk 5252
The annual incidence of the disease is calculated to be as high as 0.2% in patients >60, with an estimated prevalence, including undiscovered asymptomatic patients, of ≥1%; some reports suggest the incidence may be declining. If confirmed, these changing estimates may reflect less frequent routine testing of serum calcium in recent years, earlier overestimates in incidence, or unknown factors. The disease has a peak incidence between the third and fifth decades but occurs in young children and in the elderly.
# Chunk 5253
FIGURE 424-4 Levels of immunoreactive parathyroid hormone (PTH) detected in patients with primary hyperparathyroidism, hypercalcemia of malignancy, and hypoparathyroidism. Boxed area represents the upper and normal limits of blood calcium and/or immunoreactive PTH. (From SR Nussbaum, JT Potts, Jr, in L DeGroot, JL Jameson [eds]: Endocrinology, 4th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2001; with permission.) 2474 cardiovascular, and neuropsychiatric disease, even in mild hyperparathyroidism. Two surgical approaches are generally practiced. The conventional parathyroidectomy procedure was neck exploration with general anesthesia; this procedure is being replaced in many centers, whenever feasible, by an outpatient procedure with local anesthesia, termed minimally invasive parathyroidectomy. Parathyroid exploration is challenging and should be undertaken by an experienced surgeon. Certain features help in predicting the pathology (e.g., multiple abnormal glands in familial cases). However, some critical decisions regarding management can be made only during the operation. With conventional surgery, one approach is still based on the view that typically only one gland (the adenoma) is abnormal. If an enlarged gland is found, a normal gland should be sought. In this view, if a biopsy of a normal-sized second gland confirms its histologic (and presumed functional) normality, no further exploration, biopsy, or excision is needed. At the other extreme is the minority viewpoint that all four glands be sought and that most of the total parathyroid tissue mass be removed. The concern with the former approach is that the recurrence rate of hyperparathyroidism may be high if a second abnormal gland is missed; the latter approach could involve unnecessary surgery and an unacceptable rate of hypoparathyroidism. When normal glands are found in association with one enlarged gland, excision of the single adenoma usually leads to cure or at least years free of symptoms. Long-term follow-up studies to establish true rates of recurrence are limited. Recently, there has been growing experience with new surgical strategies that feature a minimally invasive approach guided by improved preoperative localization and intraoperative monitoring by PTH assays. Preoperative 99mTc sestamibi scans with single-photon emission CT (SPECT) are used to predict the location of an abnormal gland and intraoperative sampling of PTH before and at 5-min intervals after removal of a suspected adenoma to confirm a rapid fall (>50%) to normal levels of PTH. In several centers, a combination of preoperative sestamibi imaging, cervical block anesthesia, minimal surgical incision, and intraoperative PTH measurements has allowed successful outpatient surgical management with a clear-cut cost benefit compared to general anesthesia and more extensive neck surgery. The use of these minimally invasive approaches requires clinical judgment to select patients unlikely to have multiple gland disease (e.g., MEN or secondary hyperparathyroidism). The growing acceptance of the technique and its relative ease for the patient has lowered the threshold for surgery. Severe hypercalcemia may provide a preoperative clue to the presence of parathyroid carcinoma. In such cases, when neck exploration is undertaken, the tissue should be widely excised; care is taken to avoid rupture of the capsule to prevent local seeding of tumor cells. Multiple-gland hyperplasia, as predicted in familial cases, poses more difficult questions of surgical management. Once a diagnosis of hyperplasia is established, all the glands must be identified. Two schemes have been proposed for surgical management. One is to totally remove three glands with partial excision of the fourth gland; care is taken to leave a good blood supply for the remaining gland. Other surgeons advocate total parathyroidectomy with immediate transplantation of a portion of a removed, minced parathyroid gland into the muscles of the forearm, with the view that surgical excision is easier from the ectopic site in the arm if there is recurrent hyperfunction. In a minority of cases, if no abnormal parathyroid glands are found in the neck, the issue of further exploration must be decided. There are documented cases of five or six parathyroid glands and of unusual locations for adenomas such as in the mediastinum. When a second parathyroid exploration is indicated, the minimally invasive techniques for preoperative localization such as ultrasound, CT scan, and isotope scanning are combined with venous sampling and/or selective digital arteriography in one of the centers specializing in these procedures. Intraoperative monitoring of PTH levels by rapid PTH immunoassays may be useful in guiding the surgery. At one center, long-term cures have been achieved with selective embolization or injection of large amounts of contrast material into the end-arterial circulation feeding the parathyroid tumor.
# Chunk 5254
A decline in serum calcium occurs within 24 h after successful surgery; usually blood calcium falls to low-normal values for 3–5 days until the remaining parathyroid tissue resumes full hormone secretion. Acute postoperative hypocalcemia is likely only if severe bone mineral deficits are present or if injury to all the normal parathyroid glands occurs during surgery. In general, there are few problems encountered in patients with uncomplicated disease such as a single adenoma (the clear majority), who do not have symptomatic bone disease or a large deficit in bone mineral, who are vitamin D and magnesium sufficient, and who have good renal and gastrointestinal function. The extent of postoperative hypocalcemia varies with the surgical approach. If all glands are biopsied, hypocalcemia may be transiently symptomatic and more prolonged. Hypocalcemia is more likely to be symptomatic after second parathyroid explorations, particularly when normal parathyroid tissue was removed at the initial operation and when the manipulation and/or biopsy of the remaining normal glands are more extensive in the search for the missing adenoma.
# Chunk 5255
Signs of hypocalcemia include symptoms such as muscle twitching, a general sense of anxiety, and positive Chvostek’s and Trousseau’s signs coupled with serum calcium consistently <2 mmol/L (8 mg/dL). Parenteral calcium replacement at a low level should be instituted when hypocalcemia is symptomatic. The rate and duration of IV therapy are determined by the severity of the symptoms and the response of the serum calcium to treatment. An infusion of 0.5–2 mg/kg per hour or 30–100 mL/h of a 1-mg/mL solution usually suffices to relieve symptoms. Usually, parenteral therapy is required for only a few days. If symptoms worsen or if parenteral calcium is needed for >2–3 days, therapy with a vitamin D analogue and/or oral calcium (2–4 g/d) should be started (see below). It is cost-effective to use calcitriol (doses of 0.5–1 μg/d) because of the rapidity of onset of effect and prompt cessation of action when stopped, in comparison to other forms of vitamin D. A rise in blood calcium after several months of vitamin D replacement may indicate restoration of parathyroid function to normal. It is also appropriate to monitor serum PTH serially to estimate gland function in such patients.
# Chunk 5256
The guidelines for recommending surgical intervention, if feasible (Table 424-2), as well as for monitoring patients with asymptomatic hyperparathyroidism who elect not to undergo parathyroidectomy (Table 424-3), reflect the changes over time since the first conference on the topic in 1990. Medical monitoring rather than corrective surgery is still acceptable, but it is clear that surgical intervention is the more frequently recommended option for the reasons noted above. Tightened guidelines favoring surgery include lowering the recommended level of serum calcium elevation, more careful attention to skeletal integrity through reference to peak skeletal mass at baseline (T scores) rather than age-adjusted bone density (Z scores), as well as the presence of any fragility fracture. The other changes noted in the two guidelines (Tables 424-2 and 424-3) reflect accumulated experience and practical consideration, such as a difficulty in quantity of urine collections. Despite the usefulness of the guidelines, the importance of individual patient and physician judgment and preference is clear in all recommendations.
# Chunk 5257
These measures, plus discontinuation of vitamin D, usually lead to resolution of hypercalcemia. However, vitamin D stores in fat may be substantial, and vitamin D intoxication may persist for weeks after vitamin D ingestion is terminated. Such patients are responsive to glucocorticoids, which in doses of 100 mg/d of hydrocortisone or its equivalent usually return serum calcium levels to normal over several days; severe intoxication may require intensive therapy.
# Chunk 5258
Thiazides Administration of benzothiadiazines (thiazides) can cause hypercalcemia in patients with high rates of bone turnover. Traditionally, thiazides are associated with aggravation of hypercalcemia in primary hyperparathyroidism, but this effect can be seen in other high-boneturnover states as well. The mechanism of thiazide action is complex. Chronic thiazide administration leads to reduction in urinary calcium; the hypocalciuric effect appears to reflect the enhancement of proximal tubular resorption of sodium and calcium in response to sodium depletion. Some of this renal effect is due to augmentation of PTH action and is more pronounced in individuals with intact PTH secretion. However, thiazides cause hypocalciuria in hypoparathyroid patients on high-dose vitamin D and oral calcium replacement if sodium intake is restricted. This finding is the rationale for the use of thiazides as an adjunct to therapy in hypoparathyroid patients, as discussed below. Thiazide administration to normal individuals causes a transient increase in blood calcium (usually within the high-normal range) that reverts to preexisting levels after a week or more of continued administration. If hormonal function and calcium and bone metabolism are normal, homeostatic controls are reset to counteract the calcium-elevating effect of the thiazides. In the presence of hyperparathyroidism or increased bone turnover from another cause, homeostatic mechanisms are ineffective. The abnormal effects of the thiazide on calcium metabolism disappear within days of cessation of the drug.
# Chunk 5259
2480 whereby signs and symptoms of the underlying malignancy are evident within months of the detection of hypercalcemia. Although clinical considerations are helpful in arriving at the correct diagnosis of the cause of hypercalcemia, appropriate laboratory testing is essential for definitive diagnosis. The immunoassay for PTH usually separates hyperparathyroidism from all other causes of hypercalcemia (exceptions are very rare reports of ectopic production of excess PTH by nonparathyroid tumors). Patients with hyperparathyroidism have elevated PTH levels despite hypercalcemia, whereas patients with malignancy and the other causes of hypercalcemia (except for disorders mediated by PTH such as lithium-induced hypercalcemia) have levels of hormone below normal or undetectable levels. Assays based on the double-antibody method for PTH exhibit very high sensitivity (especially if serum calcium is simultaneously evaluated) and specificity for the diagnosis of primary hyperparathyroidism (Fig. 424-4). In summary, PTH values are elevated in >90% of parathyroid-related causes of hypercalcemia, undetectable or low in malignancy-related hypercalcemia, and undetectable or normal in vitamin D– related and high-bone-turnover causes of hypercalcemia. In view of the specificity of the PTH immunoassay and the high frequency of hyperparathyroidism in hypercalcemic patients, it is cost-effective to measure the PTH level in all hypercalcemic patients unless malignancy or a specific nonparathyroid disease is obvious. False-positive PTH assay results are rare. Immunoassays for PTHrP are helpful in diagnosing certain types of malignancy-associated hypercalcemia. Although FHH is parathyroid-related, the disease should be managed distinctively from hyperparathyroidism. Clinical features and the low urinary calcium excretion can help make the distinction. Because the incidence of malignancy and hyperparathyroidism both increase with age, they can coexist as two independent causes of hypercalcemia. 1,25(OH)2D levels are elevated in many (but not all) patients with primary hyperparathyroidism. In other disorders associated with hypercalcemia, concentrations of 1,25(OH)2D are low or, at the most, normal. However, this test is of low specificity and is not cost-effective, as not all patients with hyperparathyroidism have elevated 1,25(OH)2D levels and not all nonparathyroid hypercalcemic patients have suppressed 1,25(OH)2D. Measurement of 1,25(OH)2D is, however, critically valuable in establishing the cause of hypercalcemia in sarcoidosis and certain lymphomas. A useful general approach is outlined in Fig. 424-6. If the patient is asymptomatic and there is evidence of chronicity to the hypercalcemia, hyperparathyroidism is almost certainly the cause. If PTH levels (usually measured at least twice) are elevated, the clinical impression is confirmed and little additional evaluation is necessary. If there is only a short history or no data as to the duration of the hypercalcemia, occult malignancy must be considered; if the PTH levels are not elevated, then a thorough workup must be undertaken for malignancy, including chest x-ray, CT of chest and abdomen, and bone scan. Immunoassays for PTHrP may be especially useful in such situations. Attention should also be paid to clues for underlying hematologic disorders such as anemia, increased plasma globulin, and abnormal serum immunoelectrophoresis; bone scans can be negative in some patients with metastases such as in multiple myeloma. Finally, if a patient with chronic hypercalcemia is asymptomatic and malignancy therefore seems unlikely on clinical grounds, but PTH values are not elevated, it is useful to search for other chronic causes of hypercalcemia such as occult sarcoidosis. A careful history of dietary supplements and drug use may suggest intoxication with vitamin D or vitamin A or the use of thiazides.
# Chunk 5260
HYDRATION, INCREASED SALT INTAKE, MILD AND FORCED DIURESIS

The first principle of treatment is to restore normal hydration. Many hypercalcemic patients are dehydrated because of vomiting, inanition, and/or hypercalcemia-induced defects in urinary concentrating ability. The resultant drop in glomerular filtration rate is accompanied by an additional decrease in renal tubular sodium and calcium clearance. Restoring a normal ECF volume corrects these abnormalities and increases urine calcium excretion by 2.5–7.5 mmol/d (100–300 mg/d). Increasing urinary sodium excretion to 400–500 mmol/d increases urinary calcium excretion even further than simple rehydration. After rehydration has been achieved, saline can be administered, or furosemide or ethacrynic acid can be given twice daily to depress the tubular reabsorptive mechanism for calcium (care must be taken to prevent dehydration). The combined use of these therapies can increase urinary calcium excretion to ≥12.5 mmol/d (500 mg/d) in most hypercalcemic patients. Because this is a substantial percentage of the exchangeable calcium pool, the serum calcium concentration usually falls 0.25–0.75 mmol/L (1–3 mg/dL) within 24 h. Precautions should be taken to prevent potassium and magnesium depletion; calcium-containing renal calculi are a potential complication.
# Chunk 5261
Glucocorticoids have utility, especially in hypercalcemia complicating certain malignancies. They increase urinary calcium excretion and decrease intestinal calcium absorption when given in pharmacologic doses, but they also cause negative skeletal calcium balance. In normal individuals and in patients with primary hyperparathyroidism, glucocorticoids neither increase nor decrease the serum calcium concentration. In patients with hypercalcemia due to certain osteolytic malignancies, however, glucocorticoids may be effective as a result of antitumor effects. The malignancies in which hypercalcemia responds to glucocorticoids include multiple myeloma, leukemia, Hodgkin’s disease, other lymphomas, and carcinoma of the breast, at least early in the course of the disease. Glucocorticoids are also effective in treating hypercalcemia due to vitamin D intoxication and sarcoidosis. Glucocorticoids are also useful in the rare form of hypercalcemia, now recognized in certain autoimmune disorders in which inactivating antibodies against the receptor imitate FHH. Elevated PTH and calcium levels are effectively lowered by the glucocorticoids. In all the preceding situations, the hypocalcemic effect develops over several days, and the usual glucocorticoid dosage is 40–100 mg prednisone (or its equivalent) daily in four divided doses. The side effects of chronic glucocorticoid therapy may be acceptable in some circumstances.
# Chunk 5262
Disorders of the Parathyroid Gland and Calcium Homeostasis 2482 should be measured after dialysis, and phosphate supplements should be added to the diet or to dialysis fluids if necessary. Phosphate therapy, PO or IV, has a limited role in certain circumstances (Chap. 423). Correcting hypophosphatemia lowers the serum calcium concentration by several mechanisms, including bone/calcium exchange. The usual oral treatment is 1–1.5 g of phosphorus per day for several days, given in divided doses. It is generally believed, but not established, that toxicity does not occur if therapy is limited to restoring serum inorganic phosphate concentrations to normal. Raising the serum inorganic phosphate concentration above normal decreases serum calcium levels, sometimes strikingly. Intravenous phosphate is one of the most dramatically effective treatments available for severe hypercalcemia but is toxic and even dangerous (fatal hypocalcemia). For these reasons, it is used rarely and only in severely hypercalcemic patients with cardiac or renal failure where dialysis, the preferable alternative, is not feasible or is unavailable.
# Chunk 5263
The various therapies for hypercalcemia are listed in Table 424-4. The choice depends on the underlying disease, the severity of the hypercalcemia, the serum inorganic phosphate level, and the renal, hepatic, and bone marrow function. Mild hypercalcemia (≤3 mmol/L [12 mg/dL]) can usually be managed by hydration. Severe hypercalcemia (≥3.7 mmol/L [15 mg/dL]) requires rapid correction. Calcitonin should be given for its rapid, albeit short-lived, blockade of bone resorption, and IV pamidronate or zoledronate should be administered, although its onset of action is delayed for 1–2 days. In addition, for the first 24–48 h, aggressive sodium-calcium diuresis with IV saline should be given and, following rehydration, large doses of furosemide or ethacrynic acid, but only if appropriate monitoring is available and cardiac and renal function are adequate. Intermediate degrees of hypercalcemia between 3 and 3.7 mmol/L (12 and 15 mg/dL) should be approached with vigorous hydration and then the most appropriate selection for the patient of the combinations used with severe hypercalcemia.
# Chunk 5264
Oral calcium and vitamin D restore the overall calcium-phosphate balance but do not reverse the lowered urinary calcium reabsorption typical of hypoparathyroidism. Therefore, care must be taken to avoid excessive urinary calcium excretion after vitamin D and calcium replacement therapy; otherwise, nephrocalcinosis and kidney stones can develop, and the risk of CKD is increased. Thiazide diuretics lower urine calcium by as much as 100 mg/d in hypoparathyroid patients on vitamin D, provided they are maintained on a low-sodium diet. Use of thiazides seems to be of benefit in mitigating hypercalciuria and easing the daily management of these patients.
# Chunk 5265
Diminished peripheral responsiveness to PTH also occurs in some patients, as documented by subnormal response in urinary phosphorus and urinary cAMP excretion after administration of exogenous PTH to patients who are hypocalcemic and hypomagnesemic. Both blunted PTH secretion and lack of renal response to administered PTH can occur in the same patient. When acute magnesium repletion is undertaken, the restoration of PTH levels to normal or supra-normal may precede restoration of normal serum calcium by several days.
# Chunk 5266
The epidemiology of fractures follows the trend for loss of bone density, with exponential increases in both hip and vertebral fractures with age. Fractures of the distal radius have a somewhat different epidemiology, increasing in frequency before age 50 and plateauing by age 60, with only a modest age-related increase thereafter. In contrast, incidence rates for hip fractures double every 5 years after age 70 (Fig. 425-1). This distinct epidemiology may be related to the way the elderly fall as they age, with fewer falls on an outstretched hand and more falls directly on the hip. About 300,000 hip fractures occur each year in the United States, most of which require hospital admission and surgical intervention. The probability that a 50-year-old white individual will have a hip fracture during his or her lifetime is 14% for women and 5% for men; the risk for African Americans is lower (about one-half those rates), and the risk for Asians is roughly equal to that for whites. Hip fractures are associated with a high incidence of deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism (20–50%) and a mortality rate between 5 and 20% during the year after surgery.
# Chunk 5267
(See also Chap. 423) Severe vitamin D deficiency causes rickets in children and osteomalacia in adults. However, there is accumulating evidence that vitamin D insufficiency may be more prevalent than previously thought, particularly among individuals at increased risk such as the elderly; those living in northern latitudes; and individuals with poor nutrition, malabsorption, or chronic liver or renal disease. Dark-skinned individuals are also at high risk of vitamin D deficiency. There is controversy regarding optimal levels of serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D [25(OH)D], with some advocating levels >20 ng/mL and others advocating optimal targets >75 nmol/L (30 ng/mL). To achieve this level for most adults requires an intake of 800–1000 units/d, particularly in individuals who avoid sunlight or routinely use ultraviolet-blocking lotions. Vitamin D insufficiency leads to compensatory secondary hyperparathyroidism and is an important risk factor for osteoporosis and fractures. Some studies have shown that >50% of inpatients on a general medical service exhibit biochemical features of vitamin D deficiency, including increased levels of PTH and alkaline phosphatase and lower levels of ionized calcium. In women living in northern latitudes, vitamin D levels decline during the winter months. This is associated with seasonal bone loss, reflecting increased bone turnover. Even among healthy ambulatory individuals, mild vitamin D deficiency is increasing in prevalence, in part due to decreased exposure to sunlight coupled with increased use of potent sunscreens.
# Chunk 5268
Several noninvasive techniques are available for estimating skeletal mass or density. They include dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA), single-energy x-ray absorptiometry (SXA), quantitative CT, and ultrasound (US). DXA is a highly accurate x-ray technique that has become the standard for measuring bone density. Although it can be used for measurement in any skeletal site, clinical determinations usually are made of the lumbar spine and hip. DXA also can be used to measure body composition. In the DXA technique, two x-ray energies are used to estimate the area of mineralized tissue, and the mineral content is divided by the area, which partially corrects for body size. However, this correction is only partial because DXA is a two-dimensional scanning technique and cannot estimate the depth or posteroanterior length of the bone. Thus, small slim people tend to have lower than average bone mineral density (BMD), a feature that is important in interpreting BMD measurements when performed in young adults, and something that must be taken into account at any age. Bone spurs, which are common in osteoarthritis, tend to falsely increase bone density of the spine and are a particular problem in measuring the spine in older individuals. Because DXA instrumentation is provided by several different manufacturers, the output varies in absolute terms. Consequently, it has become standard practice to relate the results to “normal” values by using T-scores (a T-score of 1 equals 1 SD), which compare individual results to those in a young population that is matched for race and sex. Z-scores (also measured in SD) compare individual results to those of an age-matched population that also is matched for race and sex. Thus, a 60-year-old woman with a Z-score of –1 (1 SD below mean for age) has a T-score of –2.5 (2.5 SD below mean for a young control group) (Fig. 425-6). A T-score below –2.5 in the lumbar spine, femoral neck, or total hip has been defined as a diagnosis of osteoporosis. As noted above, because more than 50% of fractures occur in individuals with low bone mass rather than BMD osteoporosis, attempts are ongoing to redefine the disease as a fracture risk rather than a specific BMD. Consistent with this concept, fractures of the spine and hip that occur in the absence of major trauma would be considered to be sufficient to diagnose osteoporosis, regardless of BMD. Fractures of other sites, such as pelvis, proximal humerus, and wrist, would be tantamount to an osteoporosis diagnosis in the presence of low BMD. CT can also be used to measure the spine and the
# Chunk 5269
All of these techniques for measuring BMD have been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) on the basis of their capacity to predict fracture risk. The hip is the preferred site of measurement in most individuals, because it predicts the risk of hip fracture, the most important consequence of osteoporosis, better than any other bone density measurement site. When hip measurements are performed by DXA, the spine can be measured at the same time. In younger individuals such as perimenopausal or early postmenopausal women, spine measurements may be the most sensitive indicator of bone loss. A risk assessment tool (FRAX) incorporates femoral neck BMD to assess 10-year fracture risk (see below).
# Chunk 5270
There is no established algorithm for the evaluation of women who present with osteoporosis. A general evaluation that includes complete blood count, serum and 24-h urine calcium, renal and hepatic function tests, and a 25(OH)D level is useful for identifying selected secondary causes of low bone mass, particularly for women with fractures or very low Z-scores. An elevated serum calcium level suggests hyperparathyroidism or malignancy, whereas a reduced serum calcium level may reflect malnutrition and osteomalacia. In the presence of hypercalcemia, a serum PTH level differentiates between hyperparathyroidism (PTH↑) and malignancy (PTH↓), and a high PTHrP level can help document the presence of humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy (Chap. 424). A low urine calcium (<50 mg/24 h) suggests osteomalacia, malnutrition, or malabsorption; a high urine calcium (>300 mg/24 h) is indicative of hypercalciuria and must be investigated further. Hypercalciuria occurs primarily in three situations: (1) a renal calcium leak, which is more common in males with osteoporosis; (2) absorptive hypercalciuria, which can be idiopathic or associated with increased 1,25(OH)2D in granulomatous disease; or (3) hematologic malignancies or conditions associated with excessive bone turnover such as Paget’s disease, hyperparathyroidism, and hyperthyroidism. Renal hypercalciuria is treated with thiazide diuretics, which lower urine calcium and help improve calcium economy.
# Chunk 5271
osteoporosis. Hyperthyroidism should be evaluated by measuring thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH).

When there is clinical suspicion of Cushing’s syndrome, urinary free cortisol levels or a fasting serum cortisol should be measured after overnight dexamethasone. When bowel disease, malabsorption, or malnutrition is suspected, serum albumin, cholesterol, and a complete blood count should be checked. Asymptomatic malabsorption may be heralded by anemia (macrocytic—vitamin B12 or folate deficiency; microcytic—iron deficiency) or low serum cholesterol or urinary calcium levels. If these or other features suggest malabsorption, further evaluation is required. Asymptomatic celiac disease with selective malabsorption is being found with increasing frequency; the diagnosis can be made by testing for antigliadin, antiendomysial, or transglutaminase antibodies but may require endoscopic biopsy. A trial of a gluten-free diet can be confirmatory (Chap. 349). When osteoporosis is found associated with symptoms of rash, multiple allergies, diarrhea, or flushing, mastocytosis should be excluded by using 24-h urine histamine collection or serum tryptase.
# Chunk 5272
Myeloma can masquerade as generalized osteoporosis, although it more commonly presents with bone pain and characteristic “punched-out” lesions on radiography. Serum and urine electrophoresis and or serum free light chains are required to exclude this diagnosis. More commonly, a monoclonal gammopathy of unclear significance (MGUS) is found, and the patient is subsequently monitored to ensure that this is not an incipient myeloma. Approximately 1% of patients with MGUS progress to myeloma each year. A bone marrow biopsy may be required to rule out myeloma (in patients with equivocal electrophoretic results) and also can be used to exclude mastocytosis, leukemia, and other marrow infiltrative disorders such as Gaucher’s disease. MGUS syndromes, although benign, may also be associated with reduced bone mass and elevated bone turnover.
# Chunk 5273
Biochemical markers of bone turnover may:

Predict risk of fracture independently of bone density.

Predict extent of fracture risk reduction when repeated after 3–6 months of treatment with FDA-approved therapies.
# Chunk 5274
Biochemical markers of bone resorption may help in the prediction of fracture risk, independently of bone density, particularly in older individuals. In women ≥65 years, when bone density results are greater than the usual treatment thresholds noted above, a high level of bone resorption should prompt consideration of treatment. The primary use of biochemical markers is for monitoring the response to treatment. With the introduction of antiresorptive therapeutic agents, bone remodeling declines rapidly, with the fall in resorption occurring earlier than the fall in formation. Inhibition of bone resorption is maximal within 3 months or so. Thus, measurement of bone resorption (C-telopeptide [CTX] is the preferred marker) before initiating therapy and 3–6 months after starting therapy provides an earlier estimate of patient response than does bone densitometry. A decline in resorptive markers can be ascertained after treatment with potent antiresorptive agents such as bisphosphonates, denosumab, or standard-dose estrogen; this effect is less marked after treatment with weaker agents such as raloxifene or intranasal calcitonin. A biochemical marker response to therapy is particularly useful for asymptomatic patients and may help ensure long-term adherence to treatment. Bone turnover markers are also useful in monitoring the effects of osteoanabolic agents such as 1-34hPTH, or teriparatide, which rapidly increases bone formation (P1NP is preferred, but osteocalcin is a reasonable alternative) and later bone resorption. The recent suggestion of “drug holidays” (see below) has created another use for biochemical markers, allowing evaluation of the off effect of drugs such as bisphosphonates.
# Chunk 5275
Severe pain usually resolves within 6–10 weeks. More chronic severe pain might suggest the possibility of multiple myeloma or underlying metastatic disease. Chronic pain following vertebral fracture is probably not bony in origin; instead, it is related to abnormal strain on muscles, ligaments, and tendons and to secondary facet-joint arthritis associated with alterations in thoracic and/or abdominal shape. Chronic pain is difficult to treat effectively and may require analgesics, sometimes including narcotic analgesics. Frequent intermittent rest in a supine or semireclining position is often required to allow the soft tissues, which are under tension, to relax. Back-strengthening exercises (paraspinal) may be beneficial. Heat treatments help relax muscles and reduce the muscular component of discomfort. Various physical modalities, such as US and trans-cutaneous nerve stimulation, may be beneficial in some patients. Pain also occurs in the neck region, not as a result of compression fractures (which almost never occur in the cervical spine as a result of osteoporosis) but because of chronic strain associated with trying to elevate the head in a person with a significant thoracic kyphosis.
# Chunk 5276
vitamin d Vitamin D is synthesized in skin under the influence of heat and ultraviolet light (Chap. 423). However, large segments of the population do not obtain sufficient vitamin D to maintain what is now considered an adequate supply [serum 25(OH)D consistently >75 μmol/L (30 ng/mL)]. Because vitamin D supplementation at doses that would achieve these serum levels is safe and inexpensive, the Institute of Medicine (based on obtaining a serum level of 20 ng/mL) recommends daily intakes of 200 IU for adults <50 years of age, 400 IU for those 50–70 years, and 600 IU for those >70 years. Multivitamin tablets usually contain 400 IU, and many calcium supplements also contain vitamin D. Some data suggest 2497 that higher doses (≥1000 IU) may be required in the elderly and chronically ill. The Institute of Medicine report suggests that it is safe to take up to 4000 IU/d. For those with osteoporosis or those at risk of osteoporosis, 1000–2000 IU/d can usually maintain serum 25(OH)D above 30 ng/mL.
# Chunk 5277
Progestins In women with a uterus, daily progestin or cyclical progestins at least 12 days per month are prescribed in combination with estrogens to reduce the risk of uterine cancer. Medroxyprogesterone acetate and norethindrone acetate blunt the high-density lipoprotein response to estrogen, but micronized progesterone does not. Neither medroxyprogesterone acetate nor micronized progesterone appears to have an independent effect on bone; at lower doses of estrogen, norethindrone acetate may have an additive benefit. On breast tissue, progestins may increase the risk of breast cancer.
# Chunk 5278
Tamoxifen reduces bone turnover and bone loss in postmenopausal women compared with placebo groups. These findings support the concept that tamoxifen acts as an estrogenic agent in bone. There are limited data on the effect of tamoxifen on fracture risk, but the Breast Cancer Prevention Study indicated a possible reduction in clinical vertebral, hip, and Colles’ fractures. The major benefit of tamoxifen is on breast cancer occurrence. The breast cancer prevention trial indicated that tamoxifen administration over 4–5 years reduced the incidence of new invasive and noninvasive breast cancer by ~45% in women at increased risk of breast cancer. The incidence of ER-positive breast cancers was reduced by 65%. Tamoxifen increases the risk of uterine cancer and increases risk of venous thrombosis, cataracts, and possibly stroke in post-menopausal women, limiting its use for breast cancer prevention in women at low or moderate risk.
# Chunk 5279
Raloxifene, like tamoxifen and estrogen, has effects in other organ systems. The most beneficial effect appears to be a reduction in invasive breast cancer (mainly decreased ER-positive) occurrence of ~65% in women who take raloxifene compared to placebo. In a head-to-head study, raloxifene was as effective as tamoxifen in preventing breast cancer in high-risk women, and raloxifene is now FDA approved for this indication. In a further study, raloxifene had no effect on heart disease in women with increased risk for this outcome. In contrast to tamoxifen, raloxifene is not associated with an increase in the risk of uterine cancer or benign uterine disease. Raloxifene increases the occurrence of hot flashes but reduces serum total and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, lipoprotein(a), and fibrinogen. Raloxifene, with positive effects on breast cancer and vertebral fractures, has become a useful agent for the treatment of the younger asymptomatic postmenopausal woman. In some women, a recurrence of menopausal hot flashes may occur. Usually this is evanescent, but occasionally, it is sufficiently impactful on daily life and sleep that the drug must be withdrawn. Raloxifene increases the risk of deep vein thrombosis and may increase the risk of death from stroke among older women. Consequently, it is not usually recommended for women over 70 years of age.
# Chunk 5280
Alendronate has been shown to decrease bone turnover and increase bone mass in the spine by up to 8% versus placebo and by 6% versus placebo in the hip. Multiple trials have evaluated its effect on fracture occurrence. The Fracture Intervention Trial provided evidence in >2000 women with prevalent vertebral fractures that daily alendronate treatment (5 mg/d for 2 years and 10 mg/d for 9 months afterward) reduces vertebral fracture risk by about 50%, multiple vertebral fractures by up to 90%, and hip fractures 2499 by up to 50%. Several subsequent trials have confirmed these findings (Fig. 425-9). For example, in a study of >1900 women with low bone mass treated with alendronate (10 mg/d) versus placebo, the incidence of all nonvertebral fractures was reduced by ~47% after only 1 year. In the United States, the 10-mg dose is approved for treatment of osteoporosis and 5 mg/d is used for prevention.
# Chunk 5281
Trials comparing once-weekly alendronate, 70 mg, with daily 10-mg dosing have shown equivalence with regard to bone mass and bone turnover responses. Consequently, once-weekly therapy generally is preferred because of the low incidence of gastrointestinal side effects and ease of administration. Alendronate should be given with a full glass of water before breakfast, because bisphosphonates are poorly absorbed. Because of the potential for esophageal irritation, alendronate is contraindicated in patients who have stricture or inadequate emptying of the esophagus. It is recommended that patients remain upright for at least 30 min after taking the medication to avoid esophageal irritation. Cases of esophagitis, esophageal ulcer, and esophageal stricture have been described, but the incidence appears to be low. In clinical trials, overall gastrointestinal symptomatology was no different with alendronate than with placebo. Alendronate is also available in a preparation that contains vitamin D.
# Chunk 5282
Risedronate also reduces bone turnover and increases bone mass. Controlled clinical trials have demonstrated 40–50% reduction in vertebral fracture risk over 3 years, accompanied by a 40% reduction in clinical nonspine fractures. The only clinical trial specifically designed to evaluate hip fracture outcome (HIP) indicated that risedronate reduced hip fracture risk in women in their seventies with confirmed osteoporosis by 40%. In contrast, risedronate was not effective at reducing hip fracture occurrence in older women (80+ years) without proven osteoporosis. Studies have shown that 35 mg of risedronate administered once weekly is therapeutically equivalent to 5 mg/d and that 150 mg once monthly is therapeutically equivalent to 35 mg once weekly. Patients should take risedronate with a full glass of plain water to facilitate delivery to the stomach and should not lie down for 30 min after taking the drug. The incidence of gastrointestinal side effects in trials with risedronate was similar to that of placebo. A new preparation, which allows risedronate to be taken with food, was recently approved.
# Chunk 5283
Etidronate was the first bisphosphonate to be approved, initially for use in Paget’s disease and hypercalcemia. This agent has also been used in osteoporosis trials of smaller magnitude than those performed for alendronate and risedronate but is not approved by the FDA for treatment of osteoporosis. Etidronate probably has some efficacy against vertebral fracture when given as an intermittent cyclical regimen (2 weeks on, 2.5 months off). Its effectiveness against nonvertebral fractures has not been studied.
# Chunk 5284
Zoledronic acid is a potent bisphosphonate with a unique administration regimen (5 mg by slow IV infusion annually). The data confirm that it is highly effective in fracture risk reduction. In a study of >7000 women followed for 3 years, zoledronic acid (three annual infusions) reduced the risk of vertebral fractures by 70%, nonvertebral fractures by 25%, and hip fractures by 40%. These results were associated with less height loss and disability. In the treated population, there was an increased risk of transient postdose symptoms (acute-phase reaction) manifested by fever, arthralgia, myalgias, and headache. The symptoms usually last less than 48 h. An increased risk of atrial fibrillation and transient but
# Chunk 5285
Cumulative incidence of hip fractures over 3 years

Time to first hip fracture (months)

FIGURE 425-9 Effects of various bisphosphonates on clinical vertebral fractures (A), nonvertebral fractures (B), and hip fractures (C). PLB, placebo; RRR, relative risk reduction. (After DM Black et al: J Clin Endocrinol Metab 85:4118, 2000; C Roux et al: Curr Med Res Opin 4:433, 2004; CH Chesnut et al: J Bone Miner Res 19:1241, 2004; DM Black et al: N Engl J Med 356:1809, 2007; JT Harrington et al: Calcif Tissue Int 74:129, 2003.) not permanent reduction in renal function was seen in comparison fractures was reduced significantly by about 35%, and there was to placebo. Detailed evaluation of all bisphosphonates failed to a trend toward reduced risk of a second hip fracture (effect size confirm that these agents increased the risk of atrial fibrillation. similar to that seen above). There was also a reduction in mortality Zoledronic acid is the only osteoporosis agent that has been stud-of about 30% that was not completely accounted for the reduced ied in the elderly with a prior hip fracture. The risk of all clinical hip fracture risk.
# Chunk 5286
Calcitonin Calcitonin is a polypeptide hormone produced by the thyroid gland (Chap. 424). Its physiologic role is unclear because no skeletal disease has been described in association with calcitonin deficiency or excess. Calcitonin preparations are approved by the FDA for Paget’s disease, hypercalcemia, and osteoporosis in women >5 years past menopause. Concerns have been raised about an increase in the incidence of cancer associated with calcitonin use. Initially, the cancer noted was of the prostate, but an analysis of all data suggested a more general increase in cancer risk. In Europe, the European Medicines Agency (EMA) has removed the osteoporosis indication, and an FDA Advisory Committee has voted for a similar change in the United States.
# Chunk 5287
Number of women with

Effect of teriparatide on the risk of nonvertebral fragility fractures (time to first fracture) *P <0.05 vs. placebo PlaceboTPTD20 TPTD40 * * % of women** tures (A) and nonvertebral fragility fractures (B and C). (After RM Neer et al: N Engl J Med 344:1434, 2001.) a single daily injection given for a maximum of 2 years. Teriparatide produces increases in bone mass and mediates architectural improvements in skeletal structure. These effects are lower when patients have been exposed previously to bisphosphonates, possibly in proportion to the potency of the antiresorptive effect. When teriparatide is being considered for treatment-naive patients, it is best administered as monotherapy and followed by an antiresorptive agent such as a bisphosphonate. If teriparatide treatment is not followed by an antiresorptive agent, the bone gained is rapidly lost.
# Chunk 5288
Parathyroid Hormone Endogenous PTH is an 84-amino-acid peptide that is largely responsible for calcium homeostasis (Chap. 424). Although chronic elevation of PTH, as occurs in hyperparathyroidism, is associated with bone loss (particularly cortical bone), PTH when given exogenously as a daily injection exerts anabolic effects on bone. Teriparatide (1-34hPTH) is approved for the treatment of osteoporosis in both men and women at high risk for fracture. In a pivotal study (median time of treatment, 19 months’ duration), 20 μg of teriparatide daily by SC injection reduced vertebral fractures by 65% and nonvertebral fractures by 45% (Fig. 425-12). Treatment is administered as PTH might be effective when used intermittently. Cost also may be a limiting factor. In some settings, the effect of PTH might be enhanced by combination with an antiresorptive agent. This might be particularly important in patients who have been treated previously with bisphosphonate medications.
# Chunk 5289
FIGURE 425-13 Effect of parathyroid hormone (PTH) treatment on bone microarchitecture. Paired biopsy specimens from a 64-year-old woman before (A) and after (B) treatment with PTH. (From DW Dempster et al: J Bone Miner Res 16:1846, 2001.) mode of action Exogenously administered PTH appears to have direct actions on osteoblast activity, with biochemical and histomorphometric evidence of de novo bone formation early in response to PTH, before activation of bone resorption. Subsequently, PTH activates bone remodeling but still appears to favor bone formation over bone resorption. PTH stimulates Wnt signaling, IGF-I, and collagen production and appears to increase osteoblast number by stimulating replication, enhancing osteoblast recruitment, and inhibiting apoptosis. Unlike all other treatments, PTH produces a true increase in bone tissue and an apparent restoration of bone microarchitecture (Fig. 425-13).
# Chunk 5290
Biochemical evaluation is useful in the diagnosis and management of Paget’s disease. The marked increase in bone turnover can be monitored using biochemical markers of bone formation and resorption. The parallel rise in markers of bone formation and resorption confirms the coupling of bone formation and resorption in Paget’s disease. The degree of bone marker elevation reflects the extent and severity of the disease. Patients with the highest elevation of ALP (10 × the upper limit of normal) typically have involvement of the skull and at least one other skeletal site. Lower values suggest less extensive involvement or a quiescent phase of the disease. For most patients, serum total ALP remains the test of choice both for diagnosis and assessing response to therapy. Occasionally, a symptomatic patient with evidence of progression at a single site may have a normal total ALP level but increased bone-specific ALP. For unclear reasons, serum osteocalcin, another marker of bone formation, is not always elevated and is not recommended for use in diagnosis or management of Paget’s disease. Bone resorption markers (serum or urine N-telopeptide or C-telopeptide measured in the blood or urine) are also elevated in active Paget’s disease and decrease more rapidly in response to therapy than does ALP.
# Chunk 5291
Dose and Mode Name of Delivery Normalization of ALP the following circumstances: to control symptoms caused by metabolically active Paget’s disease such as bone pain, fracture, headache, pain from pagetic radiculopathy or arthropathy, or neurologic complications; to decrease local blood flow and minimize operative blood loss in patients who need surgery at an active pagetic site; to reduce hypercalciuria that may occur during immobilization; and to decrease the risk of complications when disease activity is high (elevated ALP) and when the site of involvement involves weight-bearing bones, areas adjacent to major joints, vertebral bodies, and the skull. Whether or not early therapy prevents late complications remains to be determined. A randomized study of over 1200 patients from the United Kingdom showed no difference in bone pain, fracture rates, quality of life, and hearing loss between patients who received pharmacologic therapy to control symptoms (bone pain) and those receiving bisphosphonates to normalize serum ALP. However, the most potent agent (zoledronic acid) was not used, and the duration of observation (mean of 3 years with a range of 2 to 5 years) may not be long enough to assess the impact of treatment on long-term outcomes. It seems likely that the restoration of normal bone architecture following suppression of pagetic activity will prevent further deformities and complications.
# Chunk 5292
Agents approved for treatment of Paget’s disease suppress the very high rates of bone resorption and secondarily decrease the high rates of bone formation (Table 426e-1). As a result of decreasing bone turnover, pagetic structural patterns, including areas of poorly mineralized woven bone, are replaced by more normal cancellous or lamellar bone. Reduced bone turnover can be documented by a decline in serum ALP and urine or serum resorption markers (N-telopeptide, C-telopeptide).
# Chunk 5293
The first clinically useful agent, etidronate, is now rarely used because the doses required to suppress bone resorption may impair mineralization, necessitating that the drug be given for a maximum of 6 months followed by a 6-month drug-free period. The second-generation oral bisphosphonates—tiludronate, alendronate, and risedronate—are more potent than etidronate in controlling bone turnover and, thus, induce a longer remission at a lower dose. The lower doses reduce the risks of impaired mineralization and osteomalacia. Oral bisphosphonates should be taken first thing in the morning on an empty stomach, followed by maintenance of upright posture with no food, drink, or other medications for 30–60 min. The efficacy of different agents, based on their ability to normalize or decrease ALP levels, is summarized in Table 426e-1, although the response rates are not comparable because they are obtained from different studies.
# Chunk 5294
CHAPTER 426e Paget’s Disease and Other Dysplasias of Bone infusions in those with higher levels of ALP. In many patients, particularly those who have severe disease or need rapid normalization of bone turnover (neurologic symptoms, severe bone pain due to a lytic lesion, risk of an impending fracture, or pretreatment prior to elective surgery in an area of active disease), treatment with zoledronic acid is the first choice. It normalizes ALP in about 90% of patients by 6 months, and the therapeutic effect persists for at least 6 more months in most patients. About 10–20% of patients experience a flulike syndrome after the first infusion, which can be partly ameliorated by pretreatment with acetaminophen or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). In patients with high bone turnover, vitamin D and calcium should be provided to prevent hypocalcemia and secondary hyperparathyroidism. Remission following treatment with IV bisphosphonates, particularly zoledronic acid, may persist for well over 1 year. Bisphosphonates should not be used in patients with renal insufficiency (glomerular filtration rate <35 mL/min).
# Chunk 5295
Hepatitis C–associated osteosclerosis (HCAO) is a rare acquired diffuse osteosclerosis in adults with prior hepatitis C infection. After a latent period of several years, patients develop diffuse appendicular bone pain and a generalized increase in bone mass with elevated serum ALP. Bone biopsy and histomorphometry reveal increased rates of bone formation, decreased bone resorption with a marked decrease in osteoclasts, and dense lamellar bone. One patient had increased serum OPG levels, and bone biopsy showed large numbers of osteoblasts positive for OPG and reduced osteoclast number. Empirical therapy includes pain control, and there may be beneficial response to bisphosphonate. Long-term antiviral therapy may reverse the bone disease.
# Chunk 5296
Perinatal hypophosphatasia becomes manifest during pregnancy and is often complicated by polyhydramnios and intrauterine death. The infantile form becomes clinically apparent before the age of 6 months with failure to thrive, rachitic deformities, functional craniosynostosis despite widely open fontanels (which are actually hypomineralized areas of the calvarium), raised intracranial pressure, and flail chest with predisposition to pneumonia. Hypercalcemia and hypercalciuria are common. This form has a mortality rate of about 50%. Prognosis seems to improve for the children who survive infancy. Childhood hypophosphatasia has variable clinical presentation. Premature loss of deciduous teeth (before age 5) is the hallmark of the disease. Rickets causes delayed walking with waddling gait, short stature, and dolichocephalic skull with frontal bossing. The disease often improves during puberty but may recur in adult life. Adult hypophosphatasia presents during middle age with painful, poorly healing metatarsal stress fractures or thigh pain due to femoral pseudofractures.
# Chunk 5297
All of the North American patients reported have been African American. The disease usually presents in childhood and continues throughout the patient’s life. The calcific masses are typically painless and grow at variable rates, sometimes becoming large and bulky. The masses are often located near major joints but remain extracapsular. Joint range of motion is not usually restricted unless the tumors are very large. Complications include compression of neural structures and ulceration of the overlying skin with drainage of chalky fluid and risk of secondary infection. Small deposits not detected by standard radiographs may be detected by 99mTc bone scanning. The most common laboratory findings are hyperphosphatemia and elevated serum 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D levels. Serum calcium, parathyroid hormone, and ALP levels are usually normal. Renal function is also usually normal. Urine calcium and phosphate excretions are low, and calcium and phosphate balances are positive.
# Chunk 5298
HFE-associated hemochromatosis mutations are among the most common inherited disease alleles, although the prevalence varies in different ethnic groups. It is most common in populations of northern European extraction in whom approximately 1 in 10 persons are heterozygous carriers and 0.3–0.5% are homozygotes. However, expression of the disease is variable and modified by several factors, especially alcohol consumption and dietary iron intake, blood loss associated with menstruation and pregnancy, and blood donation. Recent population studies indicate that approximately 30% of homozygous men develop iron overload–related disease and about 6% develop hepatic cirrhosis; for women, the figure is closer to 1%. Presumably there are as yet unidentified modifying genes responsible for expression and there is some early evidence to support this. Nearly 70% of untreated patients develop the first symptoms between ages 40 and 60. The disease is rarely evident before age 20, although with family screening (see “Screening for Hemochromatosis,” below) and periodic health examinations, asymptomatic subjects with iron overload can be identified, including young menstruating women.
# Chunk 5299
FIGURE 428-1 Pathways of normal iron homeostasis. Dietary inorganic iron traverses the brush border membrane of duodenal enterocytes via the divalent metal-ion transporter 1 (DMT1) after reduction of ferric (Fe3+) iron to the ferrous (Fe2+) state by duodenal cytochrome B (DcytB). Iron then moves from the enterocyte to the circulation via a process requiring the basolateral iron exporter ferroportin (FPN) and the iron oxidase hephaestin (Heph). In the circulation, iron binds to plasma transferrin and is thereby distributed to sites of iron utilization and storage. Much of the diferric transferrin supplies iron to immature erythrocyte cells in the bone marrow for hemoglobin synthesis. At the end of their life, senescent red blood cells (RBCs) are phagocytosed by macrophages, and iron is returned to the circulation after export through ferroportin. The liver-derived peptide hepcidin represses basolateral iron transport in the gut as well as iron released from macrophages and other cells and serves as a central regulator of body-iron traffic. Hepcidin responds to changes in body-iron requirements by signals mediated by diferric transferrin through two mechanisms. One involves HFE and TfR2, whereas the other involves hemojuvelin (HJV) and the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)/SMAD pathway. TMPRSS6 is a protease that modulates HJV activity. Heme is metabolized by heme oxygenase within the enterocytes, and the released iron then follows the same pathway. Mutations in the genes encoding HFE, TfR2, hemojuvelin, and hepcidin all lead to decreased hepcidin release and increased iron absorption, resulting in hemochromatosis (Table 428-1).
# Chunk 5300
The liver is usually the first organ to be affected, and hepatomegaly is present in more than 95% of symptomatic patients. Hepatic enlargement may exist in the absence of symptoms or of abnormal liver-function tests. Manifestations of portal hypertension and esophageal varices occur less commonly than in cirrhosis from other causes. Hepatocellular carcinoma develops in about 30% of patients with cirrhosis, and it is the most common cause of death in treated patients— hence the importance of early diagnosis and therapy. The incidence increases with age, it is more common in men, and it occurs almost exclusively in cirrhotic patients.
# Chunk 5301
The degree of increase in total body iron stores can be assessed by (1) measurement of serum iron and the percent saturation of transferrin (or the unsaturated iron-binding capacity), (2) measurement of serum ferritin concentration, (3) liver biopsy with measurement of the iron concentration and calculation of the hepatic iron index (Table 428-2), and (4) magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the liver. In addition, a retrospective assessment of body-iron storage is also provided by performing weekly phlebotomy and calculating the amount of iron removed before iron stores are exhausted (1 mL blood = approximately 0.5 mg iron).
# Chunk 5302
The role of liver biopsy in the diagnosis and management of hemochromatosis has been reassessed as a result of the widespread availability of genetic testing for the C282Y mutation. The absence of severe fibrosis can be accurately predicted in most patients using clinical and biochemical variables. Thus, there is virtually no risk of severe fibrosis in a C282Y homozygous subject with (1) serum ferritin level less than 1000 μg/L, (2) normal serum alanine aminotransferase values, (3) no hepatomegaly, and (4) no excess alcohol intake. However, it should be emphasized that liver biopsy is the only reliable method for establishing or excluding the presence of hepatic cirrhosis, which is the critical factor determining prognosis and the risk of developing hepatocellular carcinoma. Biopsy also permits histochemical estimation of tissue iron and measurement of hepatic iron concentration. Increased density of the liver due to iron deposition can be demonstrated by computed tomography (CT) or MRI, and with improved technology, MRI has become more accurate in determining hepatic iron concentration.
# Chunk 5303
Adult first-degree relative of patient with HH Subjects with unexplained liver disease Individual with suggestive symptoms (see text) Transferrin saturation and serum ferritin* TS <45% SF <300 TS ˜45% and/or SF >300 °gL Reassure, possibly retest later HFE Genotype PhlebotomyNormal Counsel and consider non-HFE hemochromatosis Serum ferritin – 300–1000 °g/L LFT normal Serum ferritin > 1000 °g/L and/or LFT abnormal Serum ferritin <300 °g/L LFT normal Observe retest in 1–2 years C282Y Homozygote C282Y/H63D (Compound Heterozygote) Confirmed iron overload *For convenience both genotype and phenotype (iron tests) can be performed together at a single visit in first-degree relatives. Liver biopsy No iron overload Investigate and treat as appropriate
# Chunk 5304
The therapy of hemochromatosis involves removal of the excess body iron and supportive treatment of damaged organs. Iron removal is best accomplished by weekly or twice-weekly phlebotomy of 500 mL. Although there is an initial modest decline in the volume of packed red blood cells to about 35 mL/dL, the level stabilizes after several weeks. The plasma transferrin saturation remains increased until the available iron stores are depleted. In contrast, the plasma ferritin concentration falls progressively, reflecting the gradual decrease in body-iron stores. One 500-mL unit of blood contains 200–250 mg of iron, and up to 25 g of iron or more may have to be removed. Therefore, in patients with advanced disease, weekly phlebotomy may be required for 1–2 years, and it should be continued until the serum ferritin level is <50 μg/L. Thereafter, phlebotomies are performed at appropriate intervals to maintain ferritin levels between 50 and 100 μg/L. Usually one phlebotomy every 3 months will suffice.
# Chunk 5305
ATP7B protein deficiency impairs biliary copper excretion, resulting in positive copper balance, hepatic copper accumulation, and copper toxicity from oxidant damage. Excess hepatic copper is initially bound to metallothionein; liver damage begins as this storage capacity is exceeded, sometimes by 3 years of age. Defective copper incorporation into apoceruloplasmin leads to excess catabolism and low blood levels of ceruloplasmin. Serum copper levels are usually lower than normal because of low blood levels of ceruloplasmin, which normally binds >90% of serum copper. As the disease progresses, nonceruloplasmin serum copper (“free” copper) levels increase, resulting in copper buildup in other parts of the body (e.g., in the brain, with consequent neurologic and psychiatric disease).
# Chunk 5306
Neurologic Features The neurologic manifestations of Wilson’s dis-2519 ease typically occur in patients in their early twenties, although the age of onset extends into the sixth decade of life. MRI and CT scans reveal damage in the basal ganglia and occasionally in the pons, medulla, thalamus, cerebellum, and subcortical areas. The three main movement disorders include dystonia, incoordination, and tremor. Dysarthria and dysphagia are common. In some patients, the clinical picture closely resembles that of Parkinson’s disease. Dystonia can involve any part of the body and eventually leads to grotesque positions of the limbs, neck, and trunk. Autonomic disturbances may include orthostatic hypotension and sweating abnormalities as well as bowel, bladder, and sexual dysfunction. Memory loss, migraine-type headaches, and seizures may occur. Patients have difficulty focusing on tasks, but cognition usually is not grossly impaired. Sensory abnormalities and muscular weakness are not features of the disease.
# Chunk 5307
Diagnostic tests for Wilson’s disease are listed in Table 429-1. Serum ceruloplasmin levels should not be used for definitive diagnosis, because they are normal in up to 10% of affected patients and are reduced in 20% of carriers. Kayser-Fleischer rings (Fig. 429-1) can be definitively diagnosed only by an ophthalmologist using a slit lamp. They are present in >99% of patients with neurologic/psychiatric forms of the disease and have been described very rarely in the absence of Wilson’s disease. Kayser-Fleischer rings are present in only ∼30–50% of patients diagnosed in the hepatic or presymptomatic state; thus, the absence of rings does not exclude the diagnosis.
# Chunk 5308
Urine copper measurement is an important diagnostic tool, but urine must be collected carefully to avoid contamination. Symptomatic patients invariably have urine copper levels >1.6 μmol (>100 μg) per 24 h. Heterozygotes have values <1.3 μmol (<80 μg) per 24 h. About half of presymptomatic patients who are ultimately affected have diagnostically elevated urine copper values, but the other half have levels that are in an intermediate range between 0.9 and 1.6 μmol (60–100 μg) per 24 h. Because heterozygotes may have values up to 1.3 μmol (80 μg) per 24 h, patients in this range may require a liver biopsy for definitive diagnosis.
# Chunk 5309
The gold standard for diagnosis remains liver biopsy with quantitative copper assays. Affected patients have values >3.1 μmol/g (>200 μg/g [dry weight] of liver). Copper stains are not reliable. False-positive results can occur with long-standing obstructive liver disease, which can elevate hepatic and urine copper concentrations and rarely causes Kayser-Fleischer rings.
# Chunk 5310
When trientine or penicillamine is first used, it is necessary to monitor for drug toxicity, particularly bone marrow suppression and proteinuria. Complete blood counts, standard biochemical profiles, and a urinalysis should be performed at weekly intervals for 1 month, then at twice-weekly intervals for 2 or 3 months, then at monthly intervals for 3 or 4 months, and at 4to 6-month intervals thereafter.
# Chunk 5311
The anticopper effects of trientine and penicillamine can be monitored by following 24-h “free” serum copper levels. Changes in urine copper levels are more difficult to interpret because excretion reflects the effect of the drug as well as body loading with copper. Free serum copper is calculated by subtracting the ceruloplasmin copper from aZinc acetate is supplied as Galzin, manufactured by Gate Pharmaceutical. The recommended adult dose for all the above indications is 50 mg of elemental zinc three times daily, with each dose separated by at least 1 h from consumption of food and beverages other than water as well as from trientine or penicillamine doses. bTrientine is supplied as Syprine and penicillamine as Cuprimine, both manufactured by Merck. The recommended adult dosage for both drugs is 500 mg twice daily, with each dose at least 0.5 h before or 2 h after meals and separated by at least 1 h from zinc administration. cTetrathiomolybdate is being studied in clinical trials.
# Chunk 5312
Zinc treatment does not require monitoring of blood or urine for toxicity. Its only significant side effect is gastric burning or nausea in ∼10% of patients, usually with the first morning dose. This effect can be mitigated if the first dose is taken an hour after breakfast or if zinc is taken with a small amount of protein. Because zinc mainly affects stool copper, 24-h urine copper can be used to reflect body loading. The typical value in untreated symptomatic patients is >3.1 μmol (>200 μg) per 24 h. This level should decrease during the first 1–2 years of therapy to <2.0 μmol (<125 μg) per 24 h. A normal value (0.3–0.8 μmol [20–50 μg]) is rarely reached during the first decade of therapy and should raise concern about overtreatment (copper deficiency), the first sign of which is anemia and/or leukopenia.
# Chunk 5313
These eight enzymes are encoded by nine genes, as the first enzyme in the cytosol. Heme is required for a variety of hemoproteins such in the pathway, 5′-aminolevulinate synthase (ALA synthase), has as hemoglobin, myoglobin, respiratory cytochromes, and the cytochrome two genes that encode unique housekeeping (ALAS1) and erythroid-P450 enzymes (CYPs). Hemoglobin synthesis in erythroid precurspecific (ALAS2) isozymes. The first and last three enzymes in the sor cells accounts for approximately 85% of daily heme synthesis pathway are located in the mitochondrion, whereas the other four are in humans. Hepatocytes account for most of the rest, primarily for
# Chunk 5314
The Porphyrias

Abbreviations: ADP, 5-ALA dehydratase-deficient porphyria; AIP, acute intermittent porphyria; ALA, 5-aminolevulinic acid; CEP, congenital erythropoietic porphyria; COPRO I, coproporphyrin I; COPRO III, coproporphyrin III; EPP, erythropoietic protoporphyria; F, fecal; HCP, hereditary coporphyria; HEP, ; ISOCOPRO, isocoproporphyrin; P, plasma; PBG, porphobilinogen; PCT, porphyria cutanea tarda; PROTO, protoporphyrin IX; RBC, erythrocytes; U, urine; URO I, uroporphyrin I; URO III, uroporphyrin III; VP, variegate porphyria; XLP, X-linked protoporphyria.
# Chunk 5315
Acute Porphyrias An acute porphyria should be suspected in patients with neurovisceral symptoms after puberty, such as abdominal pain, and when the initial clinical evaluation does not suggest another cause. The urinary porphyrin precursors (ALA and PBG) should be measured (Fig. 430-2). Urinary PBG is virtually always increased during acute attacks of AIP, HCP, and VP and is not substantially increased in any other medical condition. Therefore, this measurement is both sensitive and specific. A method for rapid, in-house testing for urinary PBG, such as the Trace PBG kit (Thermo Scientific), can be used. Results from spot (single-void) urine specimens are highly informative because very substantial increases in PBG are expected during acute attacks of porphyria. A 24-h collection can unnecessarily delay diagnosis. The same spot urine specimen should be saved for quantitative determination of ALA, PBG, and creatinine, in order to confirm the qualitative PBG result and also to detect patients with ADP. Urinary porphyrins may remain increased longer than porphyrin precursors in HCP and VP. Therefore, it is useful to measure total urinary porphyrins in the same sample, keeping in mind that urinary porphyrin increases are often nonspecific. Measurement of urinary porphyrins alone should be avoided for screening, because these may be increased in disorders other than porphyrias, such as chronic liver disease, and misdiagnoses of porphyria can result from minimal increases in urinary porphyrins that have no diagnostic significance. Measurement of erythrocyte HMB synthase is not useful as a first-line test. Moreover, the enzyme activity is not decreased in all AIP patients, a borderline low normal value is not diagnostic, and the enzyme is not deficient in other acute porphyrias.
# Chunk 5316
Because the neurovisceral symptoms rarely occur before puberty and are often nonspecific, a high index of suspicion is required to make the diagnosis. The disease can be disabling but is rarely fatal. Abdominal pain, the most common symptom, is usually steady and poorly localized but may be cramping. Ileus, abdominal distention, and decreased bowel sounds are common. However, increased bowel sounds and diarrhea may occur. Abdominal tenderness, fever, and leukocytosis are usually absent or mild because the symptoms are neurologic rather than inflammatory. Nausea; vomiting; constipation; tachycardia; hypertension; mental symptoms; pain in the limbs, head, neck, or chest; muscle weakness; sensory loss; dysuria; and urinary
# Chunk 5317
Mental symptoms such as anxiety, insomnia, depression, disorientation, hallucinations, and paranoia can occur in acute attacks. Seizures can be due to neurologic effects or to hyponatremia. Treatment of seizures is difficult because most antiseizure drugs can exacerbate AIP (clonazepam may be safer than phenytoin or barbiturates). Hyponatremia results from hypothalamic involvement and inappropriate vasopressin secretion or from electrolyte depletion due to vomiting, diarrhea, poor intake, or excess renal sodium loss. Persistent hypertension and impaired renal function may occur. When an attack resolves, abdominal pain may disappear within hours, and paresis begins to improve within days and may continue to improve over several years.
# Chunk 5318
During acute attacks, narcotic analgesics may be required for abdominal pain, and phenothiazines are useful for nausea, vomiting, anxiety, and restlessness. Chloral hydrate can be given for insomnia, and benzodiazepines are probably safe in low doses if a minor tranquilizer is required. Carbohydrate loading, usually with intravenous glucose (at least 300 g daily), may be effective in milder acute attacks of porphyria (without paresis, hyponatremia, etc.) if hemin is not available. Intravenous hemin is more effective and should be used as first-line therapy for all acute attacks. The standard regimen is 3–4 mg/kg of heme, in the form of lyophilized hematin (Recordati Pharmaceuticals), heme albumin (hematin reconstituted with human albumin), or heme arginate (Orphan Europe), infused daily for 4 days. Heme arginate and heme albumin are chemically stable and are less likely than hematin to produce phlebitis or an anticoagulant effect. Recovery depends on the degree of neuronal damage and usually is rapid if therapy is started early. Recovery from severe motor neuropathy may require months or years. Identification and avoidance of inciting factors can hasten recovery from an attack and prevent future attacks. Inciting factors are usually multiple, and removal of one or more hastens recovery and helps prevent future attacks. Frequent attacks that occur during the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle may be prevented with a gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogue, which prevents ovulation and progesterone production, or by prophylactic hematin administration.
# Chunk 5319
Type 2 PCT and HEP can be distinguished from type 1 by finding decreased URO decarboxylase in erythrocytes. URO decarboxylase activity in liver, erythrocytes, and cultured skin fibroblasts in type 2 PCT is approximately 50% of normal in affected individuals and in family members with latent disease. In HEP, the URO decarboxylase activity is markedly deficient, with typical levels of 3–10% of normal. Over 121 mutations have been identified in the UROD gene (Human Gene Mutation Database; www.hgmd.org). Of the mutations listed in the database, ~65% are missense or nonsense and ~10% are splice-site mutations. Most UROD mutations have been identified in only one or two families.
# Chunk 5320
Alcohol, estrogens, iron supplements, and, if possible, any drugs that may exacerbate the disease should be discontinued, but this step does not always lead to improvement. A complete response can almost always be achieved by the standard therapy, repeated phlebotomy, to reduce hepatic iron. A unit (450 mL) of blood can be removed every 1–2 weeks. The aim is to gradually reduce excess hepatic iron until the serum ferritin level reaches the lower limits of normal. Because iron overload is not marked in most cases, remission may occur after only five or six phlebotomies; however, PCT patients with hemochromatosis may require more treatments to bring their iron levels down to the normal range. To document improvement in PCT, it is most convenient to follow the total plasma porphyrin concentration, which becomes normal some time after the target ferritin level is reached. Hemoglobin levels or hematocrits and serum ferritin should be followed closely to prevent development of iron deficiency and anemia. After remission, continued phlebotomy may not be needed. Plasma porphyrin levels are followed at 6to 12-month intervals for early detection of recurrences, which are treated by additional phlebotomy.
# Chunk 5321
The primary source of excess protoporphyrin is the bone marrow reticulocytes. Erythrocyte protoporphyrin is free (not complexed with zinc) and is mostly bound to hemoglobin. In plasma, protoporphyrin is bound to albumin. Hemolysis and anemia are usually absent or mild.
# Chunk 5322
In XLP, the erythrocyte protoporphyrin levels appear to be higher than other forms of EPP and the proportions of free and zinc protopophyrins may reach 50%. To date, four ALAS2 mutations, three deletions of one to four bases, and one novel nonsense mutation have been described, which markedly increase ALA synthase 2 activity and cause XLP. XLP accounts for about 2% of patients with the EPP phenotype in Western Europe. Recent studies show that about 10% of North American patients with the EPP phenotype have XLP.
# Chunk 5323
The kidneys clear urate from the plasma and maintain physiologic balance by utilizing specific organic anion transporters (OATs), including urate transporter 1 (URAT1, SLC22A12) (Fig. 431e-2). In humans, OAT1 (SLC22A6), OAT2 (SLC22A7), and OAT3 (SLC22A8) are located on the basolateral membrane of renal proximal tubule cells. OAT4 (SLC22A11), OAT10 (SLC22A13), and URAT1 are located on the apical brush-border membrane of these cells. The latter transporters carry urate and other organic anions into the tubular cells from the lumen in exchange for intracellular organic anions. Once inside the cell, urate must pass to the basolateral side of the lumen in a process controlled by voltage-dependent carriers, including glucose transporter 9 (GLUT9, SLC2A9). Uricosuric compounds (Table 431e-1) directly inhibit URAT1 on the apical side of the tubular cell (so-called cisinhibition). In contrast, antiuricosuric compounds (those that promote hyperuricemia), such as nicotinate, pyrazinoate, lactate, and other aromatic organic acids, serve as the exchange anion inside the cell, thereby stimulating anion exchange and urate reabsorption (trans-stimulation). The activities of URAT1, other OATs, and sodium anion transporters result in excretion of 8–12% of the filtered urate as uric acid.
# Chunk 5324
In general, hyperuricemia is defined as a plasma (or serum) urate concentration >405 μmol/L (>6.8 mg/dL). The risk of developing gouty arthritis or urolithiasis increases with higher urate levels and escalates in proportion to the degree of elevation. The prevalence of hyperuricemia is increasing among ambulatory adults and even more markedly among hospitalized patients. The prevalence of gout in the United States more than doubled between the 1960s and the 1990s. Based on NHANES data from 2007–2008, these trends continue, with an approximate prevalence of gout among men of 5.9% (6.1 million) and among women of 2.0% (2.2 million). Mean serum urate levels rose to 6.14 mg/dL among men and 4.87 mg/dL among women, with consequent hyperuricemia prevalences of 21.2% and 21.6%, respectively (with hyperuricemia defined as a serum urate level of >7.0 mg/ dL [415 μmol/L] for men and >5.7 mg/dL [340 μmol/L] for women). These numbers represent a 1.2% increase in the prevalence of gout, a 0.15-mg/dL increase in the serum urate level, and a 3.2% increase in the prevalence of hyperuricemia over figures reported in NHANESIII (1988–1994). These rises are thought to be driven by increased obesity and hypertension and perhaps also by better medical care and increased longevity.
# Chunk 5325
serum creatinine, urea nitrogen, and urate concentrations is poor. Extrarenal clearance of uric acid increases as renal damage becomes more severe.
# Chunk 5326
GLUT9 (SLC2A9) is an electrogenic hexose transporter with splicing variants that mediate co-reabsorption of uric acid along with glucose and fructose at the apical membrane (GLUT9ΔN/SLC2A9v2) as well as through the basolateral membrane (SLC2A9v1) and thus into the circulation. GLUT9 has recently been identified as a high-capacity urate transporter, with rates 45–60 times faster than its glucose/fructose transport activity. GLUT9 may be responsible for the observed association of the consumption of fructose-sweetened soft drinks with an increased risk of hyperuricemia and gout. Genome-wide association scanning suggests that polymorphisms in SLC2A9 may play an important role in susceptibility to gout in the Caucasian population. The presence of one predisposing variant allele increases the relative risk of developing gout by 30–70%, most likely by increasing expression of the shorter isoform, SLC2A9v2 (GLUT9ΔN). Notably, though, genetic polymorphisms explain only ~6% of the differences in serum uric acid levels in Caucasians. Clearly, gout is polygenic and complex, and at this time the utility of genetic testing for relevant polymorphisms remains investigational and of no clinical utility.
# Chunk 5327
Nephrolithiasis Uric acid nephrolithiasis occurs most commonly, but not exclusively, in individuals with gout. In gout, the prevalence of nephrolithiasis correlates with the serum and urinary uric acid levels, reaching ~50% with serum urate levels of 770 μmol/L (13 mg/dL) or urinary uric acid excretion >6.5 mmol/d (1100 mg/d).
# Chunk 5328
If recognized, uric acid nephropathy is potentially reversible. Appropriate therapy has reduced the mortality rate from ~50% to practically nil. Serum levels cannot be relied on for diagnosis because this condition has developed in the presence of urate concentrations varying from 720 to 4800 μmol/L (12–80 mg/dL). The distinctive feature is the urinary uric acid concentration. In most forms of acute renal failure with decreased urine output, urinary uric acid content is either normal or reduced, and the ratio of uric acid to creatinine is <1. In acute uric acid nephropathy, the ratio of uric acid to creatinine in a random urine sample or a 24-h specimen is >1, and a value that high is essentially diagnostic.
# Chunk 5329
Metabolic syndrome (Chap. 422) is characterized by abdominal obesity with visceral adiposity, impaired glucose tolerance due to insulin resistance with hyperinsulinemia, hypertriglyceridemia, increased low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, decreased high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and hyperuricemia. Hyperinsulinemia reduces the renal excretion of uric acid and sodium. Not surprisingly, hyperuricemia resulting from euglycemic hyperinsulinemia may precede the onset of type 2 diabetes, hypertension, coronary artery disease, and gout in individuals with metabolic syndrome.
# Chunk 5330
See Chap. 395 for treatment of gout, including urate nephrosis.

Nephrolithiasis Antihyperuricemic therapy is recommended for the individual who has both gouty arthritis and either uric acid– or calcium-containing stones, both of which may occur in association with hyperuricaciduria. Regardless of the nature of the calculi, fluid ingestion should be sufficient to produce a daily urine volume >2 L. Alkalinization of the urine with sodium bicarbonate or acetazolamide may be justified to increase the solubility of uric acid. Specific treatment of uric acid calculi requires reducing the urine uric acid concentration with a xanthine oxidase inhibitor, such as allopurinol or febuxostat. These agents decrease the serum urate concentration and the urinary excretion of uric acid in the first 24 h, with a maximal reduction within 2 weeks. Allopurinol can be given once a day because of the long half-life (18 h) of its active metabolite, oxypurinol. In the febuxostat trials, the generally recommended dose of allopurinol (300 mg/d) was effective at achieving a target serum urate concentration below 6.0 mg/dL (357 μmol/L) in <50% of patients; this result suggested that higher doses should be considered. The drug is effective in patients with renal insufficiency, but the dose should be reduced. Allopurinol is also useful in reducing the recurrence of calcium oxalate stones in patients with gout and in individuals with hyperuricemia or hyperuricaciduria who do not have gout. Febuxostat (40–80 mg/d) is also taken once daily, and doses do not need to be adjusted in the presence of mild to moderate renal dysfunction. Potassium citrate (30–80 mmol/d orally in divided doses) is an alternative therapy for patients with uric acid stones alone or mixed calcium/uric acid stones. A xanthine oxidase inhibitor is also indicated for the treatment of 2,8-dihydroxyadenine kidney stones.
# Chunk 5331
Uric Acid Nephropathy Uric acid nephropathy is often preventable, and immediate appropriate therapy has greatly reduced the mortality rate. Vigorous IV hydration and diuresis with furosemide dilute the uric acid in the tubules and promote urine flow to ≥100 mL/h. The administration of acetazolamide (240–500 mg every 6–8 h) and sodium bicarbonate (89 mmol/L) IV enhances urine alkalinity and thereby solubilizes more uric acid. It is important to ensure that the urine pH remains >7.0 and to watch for circulatory overload. In addition, antihyperuricemic therapy in the form of allopurinol in a single dose of 8 mg/kg is administered to reduce the amount of urate that reaches the kidney. If renal insufficiency persists, subsequent daily doses should be reduced to 100–200 mg because oxypurinol, the active metabolite of allopurinol, accumulates in renal failure. Despite these measures, hemodialysis may be required. Urate oxidase (rasburicase) can also be administered IV to prevent or to treat tumor lysis syndrome.
# Chunk 5332
Hypouricemia, defined as a serum urate concentration <120 μmol/L (<2.0 mg/dL), can result from decreased production of urate, increased excretion of uric acid, or a combination of both mechanisms. This condition occurs in <0.2% of the general population and <0.8% of hospitalized individuals. Hypouricemia causes no symptoms or pathology and therefore requires no therapy.
# Chunk 5333
The angiokeratomas and acroparesthesias may appear in childhood. Angiokeratomas are punctate, dark red to blue-black, flat or slightly raised, and usually symmetric; they do not blanch with pressure. They range from barely visible to several millimeters in diameter and have a tendency to increase in size and number with age. They usually are most dense between the umbilicus and the knees—the “bathing suit area”—but may occur anywhere, including the mucosal surfaces. Angiokeratomas also occur in several other very rare LSDs. Corneal and lenticular lesions, detectable on slit-lamp examination, may help in establishing a diagnosis of Fabry disease. Debilitating episodic burning pain of the hands, feet, and proximal extremities (acroparesthesia) can last from minutes to days and can be precipitated by changes in temperature, exercise, fatigue, or fever. Abdominal pain can resemble that from appendicitis or renal colic. Proteinuria, isosthenuria, and progressive renal dysfunction occur in the second to fourth decades; ~5% of male patients with idiopathic renal failure have α-galactosidase A mutations. Hypertension, left ventricular hypertrophy, anginal chest pain, and congestive heart failure can occur in the third to fourth decades. About 1–3% of patients with idiopathic hypertrophic myocardiopathy have Fabry disease. Similarly, ~3–5% of male patients with idiopathic stroke at 35–50 years of age have α-galactosidase A mutations. Leg lymphedema without hypoproteinemia and episodic diarrhea also occur. Death is due to renal failure or cardiovascular or cerebrovascular disease in untreated male patients. Variants with residual α-galactosidase A activity may have late-onset manifestations that are limited to the cardiovascular system and resemble hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Variants with predominant cardiac, renal, or central nervous system (CNS) manifestations are becoming better defined. Up to 70% of heterozygous females may exhibit clinical manifestations. However, in females, heart disease is the most common life-threatening manifestation, followed in frequency by stroke and then renal disease.
# Chunk 5334
Gaucher disease type 1 is a nonneuronopathic disease that can present in childhood to adulthood as slowly to rapidly progressive visceral disease. About 55–60% of patients are diagnosed at <20 years of age in white populations and at even younger ages in other groups. This pattern of presentation is distinctly bimodal, with peaks at <10–15 years and at ~25 years. Younger patients tend to have a greater degree of hepatosplenomegaly and accompanying blood cytopenias. In contrast, the older group has a greater tendency for chronic bone disease. Hepatosplenomegaly occurs in virtually all symptomatic patients and can be minor or massive. Accompanying anemia and thrombocytopenia are variable and are not directly related to liver or spleen volumes. Severe liver dysfunction is unusual. Splenic infarctions can resemble an acute abdomen. Pulmonary hypertension and alveolar Gaucher cell accumulation are uncommon but life-threatening and can occur at any age. GBA1 mutations in the heteroor homozygous state are a significant risk factor for early-onset or more rapidly progressive Parkinson disease.
# Chunk 5335
Niemann-Pick diseases are autosomal recessive disorders that result from defects in acid sphingomyelinase. Types A and B are distinguished by the early age of onset and progressive CNS disease in type A. Type A typically has its onset in the first 6 months of life, with rapidly progressive CNS deterioration, spasticity, failure to thrive, and massive hepatosplenomegaly. Type B has a later, more variable onset and is characterized by a progression of hepatosplenomegaly, with eventual development of cirrhosis and hepatic replacement by foam cells. Affected patients develop progressive pulmonary disease with dyspnea, hypoxemia, and a reticular infiltrative pattern on chest x-ray. Foam cells are present in alveoli, lymphatic vessels, and pulmonary arteries. Progressive hepatic or lung disease leads to death in adolescence or early adulthood.
# Chunk 5336
Lysosomal acid lipase deficiency may result in Wolman disease (severe deficiency) or CESD, which presents later and has some (3–10%) residual enzyme activity. Wolman disease presents in early infancy with hepatosplenomegaly, diarrhea, vomiting, and abdominal distention, sometimes accompanied by adrenal calcification, anemia, and mixed hyperlipidemia. Death occurs before the age of 1 year and is often due to severe intestinal malabsorption. CESD is heterogeneous and presents with hepatomegaly and hepatosteatosis at any age in childhood or adulthood. CESD should be included in the differential diagnosis for all patients with isolated hypercholesterolemia. The disease may progress to hepatic fibrosis, cirrhosis, and liver failure. In addition, patients often develop very early-onset atherosclerotic vascular disease, which may be life-threatening in childhood. Preliminary results of treatment with enzyme replacement therapy are promising for Wolman disease and CESD.
# Chunk 5337
CliniCal and laboratory findings Persons with type I GSD may develop hypoglycemia and lactic acidosis during the neonatal period; however, more commonly, they exhibit hepatomegaly at 3–4 months of age. Hypoglycemia, hypoglycemic seizures, and lactic acidosis can develop after a short fast. These children usually have doll-like faces with fat cheeks, relatively thin extremities, short stature, and a protuberant abdomen that is due to massive hepatomegaly. The kidneys are enlarged, but the spleen and heart are of normal size. The hepatocytes are distended by glycogen and fat, with large and prominent lipid vacuoles. Despite hepatomegaly, liver enzyme levels are usually normal or near normal. Easy bruising and epistaxis are associated with a prolonged bleeding time as a result of impaired platelet aggregation/adhesion. Hyperuricemia is present. Hyperlipidemia includes elevation of triglycerides, low-density lipoproteins, and phospholipids. Type Ib patients have additional findings of neutropenia and impaired neutrophil function, which result in recurrent bacterial infections and oral and intestinal mucosal ulceration. GSD I patients may experience intermittent diarrhea, which can worsen with age. In GSD Ib, diarrhea is largely due to loss of mucosal barrier function caused by inflammation.
# Chunk 5338
CliniCal and laboratory findings Deficiency of glycogen debranching enzyme causes hepatomegaly, hypoglycemia, short stature, variable skeletal myopathy, and cardiomyopathy. The disorder usually involves both liver and muscle and, in such cases, is termed type IIIa GSD. However, in ~15% of patients, the disease appears to involve only the liver and is classified as type IIIb. Hypoglycemia and hyperlipidemia occur in children. In type III disease (as opposed to type I disease), fasting ketosis can be prominent, aminotransferase levels are elevated, and blood lactate and uric acid concentrations are usually normal. Serum creatine kinase (CK) levels can sometimes be used to identify patients with muscle involvement, but normal levels do not rule out muscle enzyme deficiency. In most patients with type III disease, hepatomegaly improves with age; however, liver cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma may occur in late adulthood. Hepatic adenomas may occur, although less commonly than in GSD I. Left ventricular hypertrophy and life-threatening arrhythmias have been reported. Patients with type IIIa disease may experience muscle weakness in childhood that can become severe after the third or fourth decade of life. Polycystic ovaries are common in GSD III, and some patients develop features of polycystic ovarian syndrome, such as hirsutism and irregular menstrual cycles. Reports of successful pregnancy in women with GSD III suggest that fertility is normal.
# Chunk 5339
CHAPTER 433e Glycogen Storage Diseases and Other Inherited Disorders of Carbohydrate Metabolism

Type IX GSD (Liver Phosphorylase Kinase Deficiency) Defects of PhK cause a heterogeneous group of glycogenoses. The PhK enzyme complex consists of four subunits (α, β, γ, and δ). Each subunit is encoded by different genes (X chromosome as well as autosomes) that are differentially expressed in various tissues. PhK deficiency can be divided into several subtypes on the basis of the gene/subunit involved, the tissues primarily affected, and the mode of inheritance. The most common subtype is X-linked liver PhK deficiency, which is also one of the most common liver glycogenoses. PhK activity may also be deficient in erythrocytes and leukocytes but is normal in muscle. Typically, a child between the ages of 1 year and 5 years presents with growth retardation and hepatomegaly. Children tend eventually to exhibit normal growth patterns initiated by a delayed growth spurt during puberty. Liver fibrosis has been identified in some patients, including children. Levels of cholesterol, triglycerides, and liver enzymes are mildly elevated. Fasting ketosis is another feature of the disease. Lactic and uric acid levels are usually normal. Hypoglycemia is typically mild; however, phenotypic variability is being increasingly recognized, with significant involvement in some cases of the X-linked form. The accumulated glycogen in liver (β particles, rosette form) has a frayed or burst appearance and is less compact than the glycogen seen in type I or type III GSD. Hepatomegaly and abnormal blood chemistries gradually return to normal with age. Most adults reach a normal final height and are practically asymptomatic, despite persistent PhK deficiency. The prognosis is usually good, and adult patients have minimal hepatomegaly. Some patients have significant ketosis and progressive liver disease that can advance to fibrosis and liver failure. It is recommended that adult patients be monitored for hepatic complications with regular CT or MRI scans.
# Chunk 5340
Adults typically present between the second and seventh decades with slowly progressive myopathy without overt cardiac involvement. The clinical picture is dominated by slowly progressive proximal limb girdle muscle weakness. The pelvic girdle, paraspinal muscles, and diaphragm are most seriously affected. Respiratory symptoms include somnolence, morning headache, orthopnea, and exertional dyspnea. In rare instances, patients present with respiratory insufficiency as the initial symptom. Basilar artery aneurysms and dilation of the ascending aorta have been observed in patients with Pompe disease. Ptosis, lingual weakness, gastrointestinal dysmotility, and incontinence due to poor sphincter tone are now being recognized as part of the clinical spectrum. Individuals with advanced disease often require some form of ventilation and are dependent on a walking aid or wheelchair.
# Chunk 5341
Laboratory findings include elevated levels of serum CK, aspartate aminotransferase, and lactate dehydrogenase. Levels of urine glucose tetrasaccharide (Hex4), a breakdown product of glycogen, are elevated, especially on the severe end of the disease spectrum. In infants, chest x-ray shows massive cardiomegaly, and electrocardiographic findings include a high-voltage QRS complex and a shortened PR interval. Muscle biopsy shows vacuoles that stain positive for glycogen; the muscle acid phosphatase level is increased, presumably from a compensatory increase of lysosomal enzymes. Electromyography reveals myopathic features, with irritability of muscle fibers and pseudomyotonic discharges. Serum CK is not always elevated in adults, and, depending on the muscle biopsied or tested, muscle histology or electromyography may not be abnormal. The affected muscle should be examined.
# Chunk 5342
GSD Mimicking Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Deficiency of LAMP2— also called Danon’s disease—or of the protein kinase, AMP-activated gamma 2 noncatalytic subunit (PRKAG2), results in the accumulation of glycogen in the heart and skeletal muscle. LAMP2 deficiency is X-linked, whereas PRKAG2 deficiency is autosomal dominant. Clinically, both subsets of patients present primarily with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Their electrophysiologic abnormalities, particularly ventricular preexcitation and conduction defects, can distinguish them from patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy resulting from defects in sarcomere-protein genes. In patients with LAMP2 deficiency, mental delays are common and the onset of cardiac symptoms, including chest pain, palpitation, syncope, and cardiac arrest, can occur between the ages of 8 and 15 years—i.e., earlier than the average age of 33 years for patients with PRKAG2 deficiency. Patients as young as 9 years old have presented with PRKAG2 deficiency. A rapidly fatal congenital form of PRKAG2 presents in early infancy with severe hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome. In these patients, levels of PhK have been found to be low. The prognosis for LAMP2 deficiency is poor, with progressive end-stage heart failure early in adulthood. By contrast, except in the fatal congenital form, long-term survival is possible for patients with cardiomyopathy due to PRKAG2 mutations. Some patients may require the implantation of a pacemaker and aggressive control of arrhythmias. Congestive heart failure has been documented in patients with PRKAG2 deficiency.
# Chunk 5343
The hyperphenylalaninemias (Table 434e-1) result from impaired conversion of phenylalanine to tyrosine. The most common and clinically important is phenylketonuria (frequency 1:10,000), which is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by an increased concentration of phenylalanine and its by-products in body fluids and by severe mental retardation if untreated in infancy. It results from reduced activity of phenylalanine hydroxylase. The accumulation of phenylalanine inhibits the transport of other amino acids required for protein or neurotransmitter synthesis, reduces synthesis and increases degradation of myelin, and leads to inadequate formation of norepinephrine and serotonin. Phenylalanine is a competitive inhibitor of tyrosinase, a key enzyme in the pathway of melanin synthesis, and accounts for the hypopigmentation of hair and skin. Untreated children with classic phenylketonuria are normal at birth but fail to attain early developmental milestones, develop microcephaly, and demonstrate progressive impairment of cerebral function. Hyperactivity, seizures, and severe intellectual disability are major clinical problems later in life. Electroencephalographic abnormalities; “mousy” odor of skin, hair, and urine (due to phenylacetate accumulation); and a tendency to develop hypopigmentation and eczema complete the devastating clinical picture. In contrast, affected children who are detected and treated at birth show none of these abnormalities.
# Chunk 5344
Infants with classic urea cycle defects present at 1–4 days of life with refusal to eat and lethargy progressing to coma and death. Milder enzyme deficiencies present with protein avoidance, recurrent vomiting, migraine, mood swings, chronic fatigue, irritability, and disorientation that can progress to coma. Females with ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency can present at time of childbirth due to the combination of involuntary fasting and stress that favors catabolism. The diagnosis requires measurement of plasma ammonia, plasma amino acids, and urine orotic acid, useful for differentiating ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency from carbamyl phosphate synthase-1 and N-acetylglutamate synthase deficiency. Hyperammonemia can also be 434e-5 caused by liver disease from any cause and several organic acidemias and fatty acid oxidation defects (the latter two excluded by the analysis of urine organic acids and plasma acylcarnitine profile).
# Chunk 5345
Therapy is aimed at stopping catabolism and ammonia production by providing adequate calories (as IV glucose and lipids in the comatose patient) and, if needed, insulin. Excess nitrogen is removed by IV phenylacetate and benzoate (0.25 g/kg for the priming dose and subsequently as an infusion over 24 h) that conjugate with glutamine and glycine, respectively, to form phenylacetylglutamine and hippuric acid, water-soluble molecules efficiently excreted in urine. Arginine (200 mg/kg per day) becomes an essential amino acid (except in arginase deficiency) and should be provided intravenously to resume protein synthesis. If these measures fail to reduce ammonia, hemodialysis should be initiated promptly. Chronic therapy consists of a protein-restricted diet, phenylbutyrate, glycerol phenylbutyrate (a liquid drug better tolerated by most patients), arginine, or citrulline supplements, depending on the specific diagnosis. Liver transplantation should be considered in patients with severe urea cycle defects that are difficult to control medically.
# Chunk 5346
Management is aimed at preventing cystine crystal formation by increasing urinary volume and by maintaining an alkaline urine pH. Fluid ingestion in excess of 4 L/d is essential, and 5–7 L/d is optimal. Urinary cystine concentration should be <1000 μmol/L (250 mg/L). The daily fluid ingestion necessary to maintain this dilution of excreted cystine should be spaced over 24 h, with one-third of the total volume ingested between bedtime and 3 A.M. Cystine solubility rises sharply above pH 7.5, and urinary alkalinization (with bicarbonate or potassium citrate) can be therapeutic. Penicillamine (1–3 g/d) and tiopronin (α-mercaptopropionylglycine, 800–1200 mg/d in four divided doses) undergo sulfhydryl-disulfide exchange with cystine to form mixed disulfides. Because these disulfides are much more soluble than cystine, pharmacologic therapy can prevent and promote dissolution of calculi. Penicillamine can have significant side effects and should be reserved for patients who fail to respond to hydration alone or who are in a high-risk category (e.g., one remaining kidney, renal insufficiency). When medical management fails, shock wave lithotripsy, ureteroscopy, and percutaneous nephrolithotomy are effective for most stones. Open urologic surgery is considered for complex staghorn stones or when the patient has concomitant renal or ureteral abnormalities. Occasional patients progress to renal failure and require kidney transplantation.
# Chunk 5347
This disorder is characterized by a defect in renal tubular reabsorption of the three dibasic amino acids lysine, arginine, and ornithine but not cystine (lysinuric protein intolerance). Homozygotes show defective intestinal transport of dibasic amino acids as well as exaggerated renal losses. Lysinuric protein intolerance is most common in Finland (1 in 60,000), southern Italy, and Japan, but is rare elsewhere. The transport defect affects basolateral rather than luminal membrane transport and is associated with impairment of the urea cycle. The defective gene (SLC7A7, chromosome 14q11.2) encodes the y+LAT membrane transporter, which associates with the cell-surface glycoprotein 4F2 heavy chain to form the complete sodium-independent transporter y+L.
# Chunk 5348
CHAPTER 436e Atlas of Clinical Manifestations of Metabolic Diseases

Figure 436e-2 Scurvy (vitamin C deficiency). Note perifollicular hemorrhage on the leg. The follicles are often plugged by keratin (perifollicular hyperkeratosis). This eruption occurred in a 46-year-old alcoholic, homeless man who also had bleeding gums and loose teeth. (Source: K Wolff et al: Fitzpatrick’s Color Atlas & Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology, 5th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2005.) See Chap. 96e.
# Chunk 5349
Figure 436e-15 A 17-year-old patient with abetalipoproteinemia, with generalized weakness, kyphoscoliosis, and lordosis. (Courtesy of Drs. Peter Herbert, Gerd Assmann, Antonio M. Gotto, Jr., and Donald Fredrickson; with permission.) See Chap. 421.
# Chunk 5350
CHAPTER 436e Atlas of Clinical Manifestations of Metabolic Diseases

Figure 436e-17 Mucopolysaccharidosis type IH (Hurler’s syndrome) in a 4-year-old boy. The diagnosis was made at the age of 15 months, at which time he had developmental delay, hepatomegaly, and skeletal involvement. At the time of the picture, the patient had short stature, an enlarged tongue, persistent nasal discharge, stiff joints, and hydrocephalus. Verbal language skills consisted of four or five words. The patient had a severe hearing loss and wore hearing aids. (Source: CR Scriver et al [eds]: The Metabolic and Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease online, 8th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, www.ommbid .com.) See Chap. 432e.
# Chunk 5351
Figure 436e-19 Progressive myopathy in a patient with type IIIa glycogen storage disease. The patient has a debrancher deficiency in both liver and muscle (subtype IIIa). As a child, he had hepatomegaly, hypoglycemia, and growth retardation. After puberty, he no longer had hepatomegaly, and his final height is normal. Note the muscle wasting in the lower legs and both hands at age 44 years of age (left panel); this condition progressed to pronounced muscle atrophy at age 53 years (two right panels). (Source: CR Scriver et al [eds]: The Metabolic and Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease online, 8th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, www.ommbid.com.) See Chap. 433e.
# Chunk 5352
Figure 436e-22 Ochronotic pigmentation of the femur of a 56-year-old alkaptonuric patient. (Courtesy of Dr. H. W. Edmonds of the Washington Hospital Center, Washington, DC; with permission.) See Chap. 434e.
# Chunk 5353
Figure 436e-24 Two patients with type B Niemann-Pick disease (NPD). A. A 4.7-year-old patient. (From DS Fredrickson, HR Sloan, in JB Stanbury et al: The Metabolic Basis of Inherited Disease, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 1972. Used by permission.) B. A 44-year-old patient. See Chap. 432e.
# Chunk 5354
Figure 436e-27 Anterior view of patients with different forms of lipodystrophy. A. Congenital generalized lipodystrophy: a 16-year-old girl with generalized loss of fat, acromegaloid features, severe acanthosis nigricans affecting the axillae and abdomen, and umbilical hernia. (From A Garg et al: J Clin Endocrinol Metab 84:3390, 1999; with permission.) B. Familial partial lipodystrophy, Dunnigan variety: a 43-year-old woman with marked loss of subcutaneous fat from both the limbs and the trunk and excess fat deposition in the face, chin, supraclavicular area, and labia majora. (From JM Peters et al: Nat Genet 18;292, 1998; with permission.) C. Acquired generalized lipodystrophy: a 10-year-old boy who developed generalized loss of fat that also affected the palms and soles after panniculitis at the age of 3 months. D. Acquired partial lipodystrophy: a 30-year-old woman with onset of lipodystrophy at age 14 years. Note loss of fat from the face, neck, upper limbs, trunk, and anterior thighs. There is accumulation of excess fat in the hips and other regions of the lower limbs.
# Chunk 5355
Cutaneous Reflexes The plantar reflex is elicited by stroking, with a noxious stimulus such as a tongue blade, the lateral surface of the sole of the foot beginning near the heel and moving across the ball of the foot to the great toe. The normal reflex consists of plantar flexion of the toes. With upper motor neuron lesions above the S1 level of the spinal cord, a paradoxical extension of the toe is observed, associated with fanning and extension of the other toes (termed an extensor plantar response, or Babinski sign). However, despite its popularity, the reliability and validity of the Babinski sign for identifying upper motor neuron weakness is limited—it is far more useful to rely on tests of tone, strength, stretch reflexes, and coordination. Superficial abdominal reflexes are elicited by gently stroking the abdominal surface near the umbilicus in a diagonal fashion with a sharp object (e.g., the wooden end of a cotton-tipped swab) and observing the movement of the umbilicus. Normally, the umbilicus will pull toward the stimulated quadrant. With upper motor neuron lesions, these reflexes are absent. They are most helpful when there is preservation of the upper (spinal cord level T9) but not lower (T12) abdominal reflexes, indicating a spinal lesion between T9 and T12, or when the response is asymmetric. Other useful cutaneous reflexes include the cremasteric (ipsilateral elevation of the testicle following stroking of the medial thigh; mediated by L1 and L2) and anal (contraction of the anal sphincter when the perianal skin is scratched; mediated by S2, S3, S4) reflexes. It is particularly important to test for these reflexes in any patient with suspected injury to the spinal cord or lumbosacral roots.
# Chunk 5356
Contrast nephropathy may result from hemodynamic changes, renal tubular obstruction and cell damage, or immunologic reactions to contrast agents. A rise in serum creatinine of at least 85 μmol/L (1 mg/dL) within 48 h of contrast administration is often used as a definition of contrast nephropathy, although other causes of acute renal failure must be excluded. The prognosis is usually favorable, with serum creatinine levels returning to baseline within 1–2 weeks. Risk factors for contrast nephropathy include advanced age (>80 years), preexisting renal disease (serum creatinine exceeding 2 mg/dL), solitary kidney, diabetes mellitus, dehydration, paraproteinemia, concurrent use of nephrotoxic medication or chemotherapeutic agents, and high contrast dose. Patients with diabetes and those with mild renal failure should be well hydrated prior to the administration of contrast agents, although careful consideration should be given to alternative imaging techniques such as MRI, noncontrast CT, or ultrasound (US). Nonionic, low-osmolar media produce fewer abnormalities in renal blood flow and less endothelial cell damage but should still be used carefully in patients at risk for allergic reaction. Estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) is a more reliable indicator of renal function compared to creatinine alone because it takes into account age, race, and sex. In one study, 15% of outpatients with a normal serum creatinine had an estimated creatinine clearance of 50 mL/min/1.73 m2 or less (normal is ≥90 mL/min/1.73 m2). The exact eGFR threshold, below which withholding intravenous contrast should be considered, is controversial. The risk of contrast nephropathy increases in patients with an eGFR <60 mL/min/1.73 m2; however, the majority of these patients will only have a temporary rise in creatinine. The risk of dialysis after receiving contrast significantly increases in patients with eGFR <30 mL/min/1.73 m2. Thus, an eGFR threshold between 60 and 30 mL/ min/1.73 m2 is appropriate; however, the exact number is somewhat arbitrary. A creatinine of 1.6 in a 70-year-old, non-African-American male corresponds to an eGFR of approximately 45 mL/min/1.73 m2. The American College of Radiology suggests using an eGFR of 45 mL/ min/1.73 m2 as a threshold below which iodinated contrast should not be given without serious consideration of the potential for contrast nephropathy. If contrast must be administered to a patient with an eGFR below 45 mL/min/1.73 m2, the patient should be well hydrated, and a reduction in the dose of contrast should be considered. Use of other agents such as bicarbonate and acetylcysteine may reduce the incidence of contrast nephropathy.
# Chunk 5357
MRI is a complex interaction between hydrogen protons in biologic tissues, a static magnetic field (the magnet), and energy in the form of radiofrequency (Rf) waves of a specific frequency introduced by coils placed next to the body part of interest. Images are made by computerized processing of resonance information received from protons in the body. Field strength of the magnet is directly related to signal-to-noise ratio. While 1.5-T magnets have become the standard high-field MRI units, 3-T magnets are now widely available and have distinct advantages in the brain and musculoskeletal systems. Even higher field magnets (7-T) and positron emission tomography (PET) MR machines promise increased resolution and anatomic-functional information on a variety of disorders. Spatial localization is achieved by magnetic gradients surrounding the main magnet, which impart slight changes in magnetic field throughout the imaging volume. Rf pulses transiently excite the energy state of the hydrogen protons in the body. Rf is administered at a frequency specific for the field strength of the magnet. The subsequent return to equilibrium energy state (relaxation) of the hydrogen protons results in a release of Rf energy (the echo), which is detected by the coils that delivered the Rf pulses. Fourier analysis is used to transform the echo into the information used to form an MR image. The MR image thus consists of a map of the distribution of hydrogen protons, with signal intensity imparted by both density of hydrogen protons and differences in the relaxation times (see below) of hydrogen protons on different molecules. Although clinical MRI currently makes use of the ubiquitous hydrogen proton, research into sodium and carbon imaging and spectroscopy appears promising.
# Chunk 5358
Activating procedures are generally undertaken while the EEG is 442e-1 recorded in an attempt to provoke abnormalities. Such procedures commonly include hyperventilation (for 3 or 4 min), photic stimulation, sleep, and sleep deprivation on the night prior to the recording.
# Chunk 5359
Unfractionated Heparin, Therapeutic Dosing The ASRA 2010 Practice Advisory recommends discontinuing unfractionated heparin (UFH) 2–4 h prior to removal of spinal or epidural catheters to minimize risk 443e-1 of hematoma. Similar guidelines are reasonable for patients undergoing LP: discontinue UFH 2–4 h prior to LP; document normal partial thromboplastin time (PTT) prior to the procedure; and document a normal platelet count in patients who have received heparin for 4 days or longer because of the risk of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT). The half-life of heparin is 60–90 min.
# Chunk 5360
Unfractionated Heparin, Prophylactic Dosing There are only a few case reports of spinal hematoma resulting from spinal or epidural anesthetic procedures in patients receiving low-dose subcutaneous UFH; ASRA guidelines state that there is no contraindication to the use of these techniques for anesthesia in patients receiving prophylactic UFH at a dose of 5000 U subcutaneously twice daily. Similarly, LP in patients receiving 5000 U of UFH subcutaneously twice daily is unlikely to cause spinal hematoma. Precautions to minimize risk include the following: document a normal PTT prior to the LP; document a normal platelet count in patients who have received heparin for 4 days or longer; and perform the LP 1–2 h prior to the next heparin dose, when the heparin effect should be minimal.
# Chunk 5361
Ticlopidine/Clopidogrel The actual risk of spinal hematoma with these drugs is unknown. Based on drug prescribing information and surgical reviews, ASRA guidelines suggest discontinuing ticlopidine 14 days prior to a spinal or epidural procedure and discontinuing clopidogrel 7 days prior to the procedure. Similar guidelines are reasonable for performing LP.
# Chunk 5362
The principal complication of LP is headache, occurring in 10–30% of patients. Younger age and female gender are associated with an increased risk of post-LP headache. Headache usually begins within 48 h but may be delayed for up to 12 days. Head pain is dramatically positional; it begins when the patient sits or stands upright; there is relief upon reclining or with abdominal compression. The longer the patient is upright, the longer the latency before head pain subsides. The pain is usually a dull ache but may be throbbing; its location is occipitofrontal. Nausea and stiff neck often accompany headache, and occasionally, patients report blurred vision, photophobia, tinnitus, and vertigo. In more than three-quarters of patients, symptoms completely resolve within a week, but in a minority they can persist for weeks or even months.
# Chunk 5363
Total 0–5 mononuclear cells per mm3 Differential Lymphocytes 60–70% Monocytes 30–50% Neutrophils None aBecause CSF concentrations are equilibrium values, measurements of the same parameters in blood plasma obtained at the same time are recommended. However, there is a time lag in attainment of equilibrium, and cerebrospinal levels of plasma constituents that can fluctuate rapidly (such as plasma glucose) may not achieve stable values until after a significant lag phase. bIgG index = CSF IgG (mg/dL) × Serum albumin (g/dL)/Serum IgG (g/dL) × CSF albumin (mg/dL).
# Chunk 5364
FIGURE 444e-5 Video game training can enhance cognitive performance. A. An older participant engaging in NeuroRacer training (driving while responding to target signs), with (B) a screen shot of the experimental training session. C. NeuroRacer multitasking costs for target discrimination increased (i.e., a larger percentage decrease from single task performance when multitasking) in (i) a linear fashion across the lifespan and with (ii) costs before training 1 month after training and 6 months after training, showing a differential benefit of multitasking training compared to a no-contact control group and a single-task training group. D. Midline frontal theta activity obtained with electroencephalogram showed significantly enhanced activity only following multitasking training, mimicking the pattern of change in the behavioral data as well as performance improvements on untrained tests of working memory and sustained attention (not presented). For details, see JA Anguera et al:
# Chunk 5365
Routine blood studies are indicated to identify the more common metabolic causes of seizures such as abnormalities in electrolytes, glucose, calcium, or magnesium, and hepatic or renal disease. A screen for toxins in blood and urine should also be obtained from all patients in appropriate risk groups, especially when no clear precipitating factor has been identified. A lumbar puncture is indicated if there is any suspicion of meningitis or encephalitis, and it is mandatory in all patients infected with HIV, even in the absence of symptoms or signs suggesting infection. Testing for autoantibodies in the serum and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) should be considered in patients presenting with a seemingly aggressive form of epilepsy associated with other abnormalities such as cognitive disturbances.
# Chunk 5366
Psychogenic seizures are nonepileptic behaviors that resemble seizures. They are often part of a conversion reaction precipitated by underlying psychological distress. Certain behaviors such as sideto-side turning of the head, asymmetric and large-amplitude shaking movements of the limbs, twitching of all four extremities without loss of consciousness, and pelvic thrusting are more commonly associated with psychogenic rather than epileptic seizures. Psychogenic seizures minutes to hours. However, the distinction is sometimes difficult on clinical grounds alone, and there are many examples of diagnostic errors made by experienced epileptologists. This is especially true for psychogenic seizures that resemble focal seizures with dyscognitive features, because the behavioral manifestations of focal seizures (especially of frontal lobe origin) can be extremely unusual, and in both cases, the routine surface EEG may be normal. Video-EEG monitoring is very useful when historic features are nondiagnostic. Generalized tonic-clonic seizures always produce marked EEG abnormalities during and after the seizure. For suspected focal seizures of temporal lobe origin, the use of additional electrodes beyond the standard scalp locations (e.g., sphenoidal electrodes) may be required to localize a seizure focus. Measurement of serum prolactin levels may also help to distinguish between organic and psychogenic seizures, because most generalized seizures and some focal seizures are accompanied by rises in serum prolactin (during the immediate 30-min postictal period), whereas psychogenic seizures are not. The diagnosis of psychogenic seizures does not exclude a concurrent diagnosis of epilepsy, because the two often coexist.
# Chunk 5367
In addition to efficacy, factors influencing the choice of an initial medication include the convenience of dosing (e.g., once daily versus three or four times daily) and potential side effects. In this regard, a number of the newer drugs have the advantage of reduced drug-drug interactions and easier dosing. Almost all of the commonly used antiepileptic drugs can cause similar, dose-related side effects such as sedation, ataxia, and diplopia. Long-term use of some agents in adults, especially the elderly, can lead to osteoporosis. Close follow-up is required to ensure these side effects are promptly recognized and reversed. Most of the older drugs and some of the newer ones can also cause idiosyncratic toxicity such as rash, bone marrow suppression, or hepatotoxicity. Although rare, these side effects should be considered during drug selection, and patients must be instructed about symptoms or signs that should signal the need to alert their health care provider. For some drugs, laboratory tests (e.g., complete blood count and liver function tests) are recommended prior to the institution of therapy (to establish baseline values) and during initial dosing and titration of the agent. Importantly, studies have shown that Asian individuals carrying the human leukocyte antigen allele, HLA-B*1502, are at particularly high risk of developing serious skin reactions from carbamazepine and phenytoin. As a result, racial background and genotype are additional factors to consider in drug selection.
# Chunk 5368
Antiepileptic Drug Selection for focAl SeizureS Carbamazepine (or a related drug, oxcarbazepine), lamotrigine, phenytoin, and levetiracetam are currently the drugs of choice approved for the initial treatment of focal seizures, including those that evolve into generalized seizures. Overall they have very similar efficacy, but differences in pharmacokinetics and toxicity are the main determinants for use in a given patient. For example, an advantage of carbamazepine (which is also available in an extended-release form) is that its metabolism follows first-order pharmacokinetics, which allows for a linear relationship between drug dose, serum levels, and toxicity. Carbamazepine can cause leukopenia, aplastic anemia, or hepatotoxicity and would therefore be contraindicated in patients with predispositions to these problems. Oxcarbazepine has the advantage of being metabolized in a way that avoids an intermediate metabolite associated with some of the side effects of carbamazepine. Oxcarbazepine also has fewer drug interactions than carbamazepine. Lamotrigine tends to be well tolerated in terms of side effects. However, patients need to be particularly vigilant about the possibility of a skin rash during the initiation of therapy. This can be extremely severe and lead to Stevens-Johnson syndrome if unrecognized and if the medication is not discontinued immediately. This risk can be reduced by the use of low initial doses and slow titration. Lamotrigine must be started at lower initial doses when used as add-on therapy with valproic acid, because valproic acid inhibits lamotrigine metabolism and results in a substantially prolonged half-life. Phenytoin has a relatively long half-life and offers the advantage of once or twice daily dosing compared to two or three times daily dosing for many of the other drugs. However, phenytoin shows properties of nonlinear kinetics, such that small increases in phenytoin doses above a standard maintenance dose can precipitate marked side effects. This is one of the main causes of acute phenytoin toxicity. Long-term use of phenytoin is associated with untoward cosmetic effects (e.g., hirsutism, coarsening of facial features, gingival hypertrophy) and effects on bone metabolism. Due to these side effects, phenytoin is often avoided in young patients who are likely to require the drug for many years. Levetiracetam has aExamples only; please refer to other sources for comprehensive listings of all potential drug-drug interactions. bPhenytoin, carbamazepine, phenobarbital. cExtended-release product available.
# Chunk 5369
Overall, about 70% of children and 60% of adults who have their seizures completely controlled with antiepileptic drugs can eventually discontinue therapy. The following patient profile yields the greatest chance of remaining seizure free after drug withdrawal: (1) complete medical control of seizures for 1–5 years; (2) single seizure type, either focal or generalized; (3) normal neurologic examination, including intelligence; and (4) normal EEG. The appropriate seizure-free interval is unknown and undoubtedly varies for different forms of epilepsy. However, it seems reasonable to attempt withdrawal of therapy after 2 years in a patient who meets all of the above criteria, is motivated to discontinue the medication, and clearly understands the potential risks and benefits. In most cases, it is preferable to reduce the dose of the drug gradually over 2–3 months. Most recurrences occur in the first 3 months after discontinuing therapy, and patients should be advised to avoid potentially dangerous situations such as driving or swimming during this period.
# Chunk 5370
Advances in presurgical evaluation and microsurgical techniques have led to a steady increase in the success of epilepsy surgery. Clinically significant complications of surgery are <5%, and the use of functional mapping procedures has markedly reduced the neurologic sequelae due to removal or sectioning of brain tissue. For example, about 70% of patients treated with temporal lobectomy will become seizure free, and another 15–25% will have at least a 90% reduction in seizure frequency. Marked improvement is also usually seen in patients treated with hemispherectomy for catastrophic seizure disorders due to large hemispheric abnormalities. Postoperatively, patients generally need to remain on antiepileptic drug therapy, but the marked reduction of seizures following resective surgery can have a very beneficial effect on quality of life.
# Chunk 5371
Most women with epilepsy who become pregnant will have an uncomplicated gestation and deliver a normal baby. However, epilepsy poses some important risks to a pregnancy. Seizure frequency during pregnancy will remain unchanged in ~50% of women, increase in 30%, and decrease in 20%. Changes in seizure frequency are attributed to endocrine effects on the CNS, variations in antiepileptic drug pharmacokinetics (such as acceleration of hepatic drug metabolism or effects on plasma protein binding), and changes in medication compliance. It is useful to see patients at frequent intervals during pregnancy and monitor serum antiepileptic drug levels. Measurement of the unbound drug concentrations may be useful if there is an increase in seizure frequency or worsening of side effects of antiepileptic drugs.
# Chunk 5372
Enzyme-inducing drugs such as phenytoin, carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, topiramate, phenobarbital, and primidone cause a transient and reversible deficiency of vitamin K–dependent clotting factors in ~50% of newborn infants. Although neonatal hemorrhage is uncommon, the mother should be treated with oral vitamin K (20 2559 mg/d, phylloquinone) in the last 2 weeks of pregnancy, and the infant should receive intramuscular vitamin K (1 mg) at birth.
# Chunk 5373
The National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) rtPA Stroke Study showed a clear benefit for IV rtPA in selected patients with acute stroke. The NINDS study used IV rtPA (0.9 mg/kg to a 90-mg maximum; 10% as a bolus, then the remainder over 60 min) versus placebo in ischemic stroke within 3 h of onset. One-half of the patients were treated within 90 min. Symptomatic intra-cranial hemorrhage occurred in 6.4% of patients on rtPA and 0.6% 2562 on placebo. In the rTPA group, there was a significant 12% absolute increase in the number of patients with only minimal disability (32% on placebo and 44% on rtPA) and a nonsignificant 4% reduction in mortality (21% on placebo and 17% on rtPA). Thus, despite an increased incidence of symptomatic intracranial hemorrhage, treatment with IV rtPA within 3 h of the onset of ischemic stroke improved clinical outcome. Three subsequent trials of IV rtPA did not confirm this benefit, perhaps because of the dose of rtPA used, the timing of its delivery, and small sample size. When data from all randomized IV rtPA trails were combined, however, efficacy was confirmed in the <3-h time window, and efficacy likely extended to 4.5 h and possibly to 6 h. Based on these combined results, the European Cooperative Acute Stroke Study (ECASS) III explored the safety and efficacy of rtPA in the 3to 4.5-h time window. Unlike the NINDS study, patients older than 80 years of age and diabetic patients with a previous stroke were excluded. In this 821-patient randomized study, efficacy was again confirmed, although the treatment effect was less robust than in the 0to 3-h time window. In the rtPA group, 52.4% of patients achieved a good outcome at 90 days, compared to 45.2% of the placebo group (odds ratio [OR] 1.34, p = .04). The symptomatic intra-cranial hemorrhage rate was 2.4% in the rtPA group and 0.2% in the placebo group (p = .008). Based on these data, rtPA is approved in the 3to 4.5-h window in Europe and Canada, but is still only approved for 0–3 h in the United States and Canada. Use of IV tPA is now considered a central component of primary stroke centers (see below). It represents the first treatment proven to improve clinical outcomes in ischemic stroke and is cost-effective and cost-saving. Advanced neuroimaging techniques (see neuroimaging section below) may help to select patients beyond the 4.5-h window who will benefit from thrombolysis, but this is currently investigational. The time of stroke onset is defined as the time the patient’s symptoms were witnessed to begin or the time the patient was last seen as normal. Patients who awaken with stroke have the onset defined as when they went to bed. Table 446-1 summarizes eligibility criteria and instructions for administration of IV rtPA.
# Chunk 5374
Endovascular mechanical thrombectomy has been studied as an alternative or adjunctive treatment of acute stroke in patients who are ineligible for, or have contraindications to, thrombolytics or in those who failed to achieve vascular recanalization with IV thrombolytics (see Fig. 446-15). The Mechanical Embolus Removal in Cerebral Ischemia (MERCI) and multi-MERCI single-arm trials found that an endovascular thrombectomy device restored patency of occluded intracranial vessels within 8 h of ischemic stroke symptoms compared with a historical control group. Recanalization of the target vessel occurred in 48–58% of treated patients and in 60–69% of patients after use of adjuvant endovascular methods, and successful recanalization at 90 days correlated well with favorable outcomes. Based on these nonrandomized data, the FDA approved this device as the first device for revascularization of occluded vessels in AIS even if the patient has been given rtPA and that therapy has failed.
# Chunk 5375
The Penumbra Pivotal Stroke trial tested another mechanical device that showed even higher rates of recanalization and led to FDA clearance of the tested device as well. More recently, two Stentriever devices (nondetachable stents) were shown to significantly improve vascular recanalization compared to the first approved MERCI device, approaching recanalization rates of 90% in most large intra-cranial vessels.
# Chunk 5376
ANTITHROMBOTIC TREATMENT Platelet Inhibition Aspirin is the only antiplatelet agent that has been proven effective for the acute treatment of ischemic stroke; there are several antiplatelet agents proven for the secondary prevention of stroke (see below). Two large trials, the International Stroke Trial (IST) and the Chinese Acute Stroke Trial (CAST), found that the use of aspirin within 48 h of stroke onset reduced both stroke recurrence risk and mortality minimally. Among 19,435 patients in IST, those allocated to aspirin, 300 mg/d, had slightly fewer deaths within 14 days (9.0 vs 9.4%), significantly fewer recurrent ischemic strokes (2.8 vs 3.9%), no excess of hemorrhagic strokes (0.9 vs 0.8%), and a trend toward a reduction in death or dependence at 6 months (61.2 vs 63.5%). In CAST, 21,106 patients with ischemic stroke received 160 mg/d of aspirin or a placebo for up to 4 weeks. There were very small reductions in the aspirin group in early mortality (3.3 vs 3.9%), recurrent ischemic strokes (1.6 vs 2.1%), and dependency at discharge or death (30.5 vs 31.6%). These trials demonstrate that the use of aspirin in the treatment of AIS is safe and produces a small net benefit. For every 1000 acute strokes treated with aspirin, about 9 deaths or nonfatal stroke recurrences will be prevented in the first few weeks and ~13 fewer patients will be dead or dependent at 6 months.
# Chunk 5377
Clinical examination should focus on the peripheral and cervical vascular system (carotid auscultation for bruits and blood pressure), the heart (dysrhythmia, murmurs), extremities (peripheral emboli), and retina (effects of hypertension and cholesterol emboli [Hollenhorst plaques]). A complete neurologic examination is performed to localize the anatomic site of stroke. An imaging study of the brain is nearly always indicated and is required for patients being considered for thrombolysis; it may be combined with CTor MRI-based angiography to visualize the vasculature of the neck and intracranial vessels (see “Imaging Studies,” below). A chest x-ray, electrocardiogram (ECG), urinalysis, complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), serum electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, blood glucose, serum lipid profile, prothrombin time (PT), and partial thromboplastin time (PTT) are often useful and should be considered in all patients. An ECG may demonstrate arrhythmias or reveal evidence of recent myocardial infarction (MI). Of all these studies, only brain imaging, blood glucose, and perhaps PTT/international normalized ratio (INR) are necessary prior to IV rtPA; the results of other studies should not delay the rapid administration of IV rtPA if the patient is eligible.
# Chunk 5378
Venous sinus thrombosis of the lateral or sagittal sinus or of small cortical veins (cortical vein thrombosis) occurs as a complication of oral contraceptive use, pregnancy and the postpartum period, inflammatory bowel disease, intracranial infections (meningitis), and dehydration. It is also seen in patients with laboratory-confirmed thrombophilia including polycythemia, sickle cell anemia, deficiencies of proteins C and S, factor V Leiden mutation (resistance to activated protein C), antithrombin III deficiency, homocysteinemia, and the prothrombin G20210 mutation. Women who take oral contraceptives and have the prothrombin G20210 mutation may be at particularly high risk for sinus thrombosis. Patients present with headache and may also have focal neurologic signs (especially paraparesis) and seizures. Often, CT imaging is normal unless an intracranial venous hemorrhage has occurred, but the venous sinus occlusion is readily visualized using magnetic resonance (MR) or CT venography or conventional x-ray angiography. With greater degrees of sinus thrombosis, the
# Chunk 5379
Basilar a. Basilar a. Vertebral a. Deep branches

Hypertension 2–5 38% 100–300 50–100 Atrial fibrillation 1.8–2.9 68% warfarin, 21% aspirin 20–83 13 Diabetes 1.8–6 No proven effect Smoking 1.8 50% at 1 year, baseline risk at 5 years postcessation
# Chunk 5380
FIGURE 446-5 Cerebral angiogram from a 32-year-old male with central nervous system vasculopathy. Dramatic beading (arrows) typical of vasculopathy is seen.
# Chunk 5381
Several trials have confirmed that statin drugs reduce the risk of 2569 stroke even in patients without elevated LDL or low HDL. The Stroke Prevention by Aggressive Reduction in Cholesterol Levels (SPARCL) trial showed benefit in secondary stroke reduction for patients with recent stroke or TIA who were prescribed atorvastatin, 80 mg/d. The primary prevention trial, Justification for the Use of Statins in Prevention: An Intervention Trial Evaluating Rosuvastatin (JUPITER), found that patients with low LDL (<130 mg/dL) caused by elevated C-reactive protein benefitted by daily use of this statin. Primary stroke occurrence was reduced by 51% (hazard ratio 0.49, p = .004), and there was no increase in the rates of intracranial hemorrhage. Meta-analysis has also supported a primary treatment effect for statins given acutely for ischemic stroke. Therefore, a statin should be considered in all patients with prior ischemic stroke. Tobacco smoking should be discouraged in all patients (Chap. 470). The use of pioglitazone (an agonist of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma) in patients with type 2 diabetes and previous stroke may lower risk of recurrent stroke, MI, or vascular death, but no trial sufficiently powered to definitively detect a significant reduction in stroke in the general diabetic population has yet been performed.
# Chunk 5382
Ticlopidine and clopidogrel block the adenosine diphosphate (ADP) receptor on platelets and thus prevent the cascade resulting in activation of the glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor that leads to fibrinogen binding to the platelet and consequent platelet aggregation. Ticlopidine is more effective than aspirin; however, it has the disadvantage of causing diarrhea, skin rash, and, in rare instances, neutropenia and thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP). Clopidogrel rarely causes TTP but does not cause neutropenia. The Clopidogrel versus Aspirin in Patients at Risk of Ischemic Events (CAPRIE) trial, which led to FDA approval, found that it was only marginally more effective than aspirin in reducing risk of stroke. The Management of Atherothrombosis with Clopidogrel in High-Risk Patients (MATCH) trial was a large multicenter, randomized, double-blind study that compared clopidogrel in combination with aspirin to clopidogrel alone in the secondary prevention of TIA or stroke. The MATCH trial found no difference in TIA or stroke prevention with this combination, but did show a small but significant increase in major bleeding complications (3 vs 1%). In the Clopidogrel for High Atherothrombotic Risk and Ischemic Stabilization, Management, and Avoidance (CHARISMA) trial, which included a subgroup of patients with prior stroke or TIA along with other groups at high risk of cardiovascular events, there was no benefit of clopidogrel combined with aspirin compared to aspirin alone. Lastly, the SPS3 trial looked at the long-term combination of clopidogrel and aspirin versus clopidogrel alone in small-vessel stroke and found no 2570 improvement in stroke prevention and a significant increase in both hemorrhage and death. Thus, the long-term use of clopidogrel in combination with aspirin is not recommended for stroke prevention. The short-term combination of clopidogrel with aspirin may be effective in preventing second stroke, however. A trial of 5170 Chinese patients enrolled within 24 h of TIA or minor ischemic stroke found that a clopidogrel-aspirin regimen (clopidogrel 300 mg load then 75 mg/d with aspirin 75 mg for the first 21 days) was superior to aspirin (75 mg/d) alone, with 90-day stroke risk decreased from 11.7 to 8.2% (p < .001) and no increase in major hemorrhage. An international NIH-sponsored trial of similar design is ongoing. Dipyridamole is an antiplatelet agent that inhibits the uptake of adenosine by a variety of cells, including those of the vascular endothelium. The accumulated adenosine is an inhibitor of aggregation. At least in part through its effects on platelet and vessel wall phosphodiesterases, dipyridamole also potentiates the antiaggregatory effects of prostacyclin and nitric oxide produced by the endothelium and acts by inhibiting platelet phosphodiesterase, which is responsible for the breakdown of cyclic AMP. The resulting elevation in cyclic AMP inhibits aggregation of platelets. Dipyridamole is erratically absorbed depending on stomach pH, but a newer formulation combines timed-release dipyridamole, 200 mg, with aspirin, 25 mg, and has better oral bioavailability. This combination drug was studied in three trials. The European Stroke Prevention Study (ESPS) II showed efficacy of both 50 mg/d of aspirin and extended-release dipyridamole in preventing stroke, and a significantly better risk reduction when the two agents were combined. The open-label ESPRIT (European/Australasian Stroke Prevention in Reversible Ischaemia Trial) trial confirmed the ESPS-II results. After 3.5 years of follow-up, 13% of patients on aspirin and dipyridamole and 16% on aspirin alone (hazard ratio 0.80, 95% confidence index [CI] 0.66– 0.98) met the primary outcome of death from all vascular causes. In the Prevention Regimen for Effectively Avoiding Second Strokes (PRoFESS) trial, the combination of extended-release dipyridamole and aspirin was compared directly with clopidogrel with and without the angiotensin receptor blocker telmisartan; there were no differences in the rates of second stroke (9% each) or degree of disability in patients with median follow-up of 2.4 years. Telmisartan also had no effect on these outcomes. This suggests that these anti-platelet regimens are similar and also raises questions about default prescription of agents to block the angiotensin pathway in all stroke patients. The principal side effect of dipyridamole is headache. The combination capsule of extended-release dipyridamole and aspirin is approved for prevention of stroke.
# Chunk 5383
Many large clinical trials have demonstrated clearly that most antiplatelet agents reduce the risk of all important vascular atherothrombotic events (i.e., ischemic stroke, MI, and death due to all vascular causes) in patients at risk for these events. The overall relative reduction in risk of nonfatal stroke is about 25–30% and of all vascular events is about 25%. The absolute reduction varies considerably, depending on the particular patient’s risk. Individuals at very low risk for stroke seem to experience the same relative reduction, but their risks may be so low that the “benefit” is meaningless. Conversely, individuals with a 10–15% risk of vascular events per year experience a reduction to about 7.5–11%.
# Chunk 5384
Symptomatic carotid stenosis was studied in the North American Symptomatic Carotid Endarterectomy Trial (NASCET) and the European Carotid Surgery Trial (ECST). Both showed a substantial benefit for surgery in patients with stenosis of ≥70%. In NASCET, the average cumulative ipsilateral stroke risk at 2 years was 26% for patients treated medically and 9% for those receiving the same medical treatment plus a carotid endarterectomy. This 17% absolute reduction in the surgical group is a 65% relative risk reduction favoring surgery (Table 446-4). NASCET also showed a significant, although less robust, benefit for patients with 50–70% stenosis. ECST found harm for patients with stenosis <30% treated surgically.
# Chunk 5385
A patient’s risk of stroke and possible benefit from surgery are related to the presence of retinal versus hemispheric symptoms, degree of arterial stenosis, extent of associated medical conditions (of note, NASCET and ECST excluded “high-risk” patients with sig-2571 nificant cardiac, pulmonary, or renal disease), institutional surgical morbidity and mortality, timing of surgery relative to symptoms, and other factors. A recent meta-analysis of the NASCET and ECST trials demonstrated that endarterectomy is most beneficial when performed within 2 weeks of symptom onset. In addition, benefit is more pronounced in patients >75 years, and men appear to benefit more than women.
# Chunk 5386
The indications for surgical treatment of asymptomatic carotid disease have been clarified by the results of the Asymptomatic Carotid Atherosclerosis Study (ACAS) and the Asymptomatic Carotid Surgery Trial (ACST). ACAS randomized asymptomatic patients with ≥60% stenosis to medical treatment with aspirin or the same medical treatment plus carotid endarterectomy. The surgical group had a risk over 5 years for ipsilateral stroke (and any perioperative stroke or death) of 5.1%, compared to a risk in the medical group of 11%. Although this demonstrates a 53% relative risk reduction, the absolute risk reduction is only 5.9% over 5 years, or 1.2% annually (Table 446-4). Nearly one-half of the strokes in the surgery group were caused by preoperative angiograms. ACST randomized asymptomatic patients with >60% carotid stenosis to endarterectomy or medical therapy. The 5-year risk of stroke in the surgical group (including perioperative stroke or death) was 6.4%, compared to 11.8% in the medically treated group (46% relative risk reduction and 5.4% absolute risk reduction).
# Chunk 5387
Balloon angioplasty coupled with stenting is being used with increasing frequency to open stenotic carotid arteries and maintain their patency. These techniques can treat carotid stenosis not only at the bifurcation but also near the skull base and in the intracranial segments. The Stenting and Angioplasty with Protection in Patients at High Risk for Endarterectomy (SAPPHIRE) trial randomized high-risk patients (defined as patients with clinically significant coronary or pulmonary disease, contralateral carotid occlusion, restenosis after endarterectomy, contralateral laryngeal-nerve palsy, prior radical neck surgery or radiation, or age >80) with symptomatic carotid stenosis >50% or asymptomatic stenosis >80% to either stenting combined with a distal emboli-protection device or endarterectomy. The risk of death, stroke, or MI within 30 days and ipsilateral stroke or death within 1 year was 12.2% in the stenting group and 20.1% in the endarterectomy group (p = .055), suggesting that stenting is at the very least comparable to endarterectomy as a treatment option for this patient group at high risk of surgery. However, the outcomes with both interventions may not have been better than leaving the carotid stenoses untreated, particularly for the asymptomatic patients, and much of the benefit seen in the 2572 stenting group was due to a reduction in periprocedure MI. Two randomized trials comparing stents to endarterectomy in lower-risk patients have been published. The Carotid Revascularization Endarterectomy versus Stenting Trial (CREST) enrolled patients with either asymptomatic or symptomatic stenosis. The 30-day risk of stroke was 4.1% in the stent group and 2.3% in the surgical group, but the 30-day risk of MI was 1.1% in the stent group and 2.3% in the surgery group, suggesting relative equivalence of risk between the procedures. At median follow-up of 2.5 years, the combined endpoint of stroke, MI, and death was the same (7.2% stent vs 6.8% surgery). The rate of restenosis at 2 years was also similar in both groups. The International Carotid Stenting (ICSS) trial randomized symptomatic patients to stents versus endarterectomy and found a different result: At 120 days, the incidence of stroke, MI, or death was 8.5% in the stenting group versus 5.2% in the endarterectomy group (p = .006); longer-term follow-up is currently under way. Differences between trial designs, selection of stent, and operator experience may explain these important differences. Until more data are available, there remains controversy as to who should receive a stent or have endarterectomy; it is likely that the procedures carry similar risks if performed by experienced physicians.
# Chunk 5388
2584 It accounts for some intracranial hemorrhages associated with IV thrombolysis given for MI. This disorder can be suspected in patients who present with multiple hemorrhages (and infarcts) over several months or years or in patients with “microbleeds” seen on brain MRI sequences sensitive for hemosiderin (iron-sensitive imaging), but it is definitively diagnosed by pathologic demonstration of Congo red staining of amyloid in cerebral vessels. The ε2 and ε4 allelic variations of the apolipoprotein E gene are associated with increased risk of recurrent lobar hemorrhage and may therefore be markers of amyloid angiopathy. Currently, there is no specific therapy. OACs are typically avoided. Cocaine and methamphetamine are frequent causes of stroke in young (age <45 years) patients. ICH, ischemic stroke, and SAH are all associated with stimulant use. Angiographic findings vary from completely normal arteries to large-vessel occlusion or stenosis, vasospasm, or changes consistent with vasculopathy. The mechanism of sympathomimetic-related stroke is not known, but cocaine enhances sympathetic activity causing acute, sometimes severe, hypertension, and this may lead to hemorrhage. Slightly more than one-half of stimulant-related intracranial hemorrhages are intracerebral, and the rest are subarachnoid. In cases of SAH, a saccular aneurysm is usually identified. Presumably, acute hypertension causes aneurysmal rupture. Head injury often causes intracranial bleeding. The common sites are intraparenchymal (especially temporal and inferior frontal lobes) and into the subarachnoid, subdural, and epidural spaces. Trauma must be considered in any patient with an unexplained acute neurologic deficit (hemiparesis, stupor, or confusion), particularly if the deficit occurred in the context of a fall (Chap. 457e). Intracranial hemorrhages associated with anticoagulant therapy can occur at any location; they are often lobar or subdural. Anticoagulant-related ICHs may continue to evolve over 24–48 h, especially if coagulopathy is insufficiently reversed. Coagulopathy and thrombocytopenia should be reversed rapidly, as discussed below. ICH associated with hematologic disorders (leukemia, aplastic anemia, thrombocytopenic purpura) can occur at any site and may present as multiple ICHs. Skin and mucous membrane bleeding may be evident and offers a diagnostic clue. Hemorrhage into a brain tumor may be the first manifestation of neoplasm. Choriocarcinoma, malignant melanoma, renal cell carcinoma, and bronchogenic carcinoma are among the most common metastatic tumors associated with ICH. Glioblastoma multiforme in adults and medulloblastoma in children may also have areas of ICH. Hypertensive encephalopathy is a complication of malignant hypertension. In this acute syndrome, severe hypertension is associated with headache, nausea, vomiting, convulsions, confusion, stupor, and coma. Focal or lateralizing neurologic signs, either transitory or permanent, may occur but are infrequent and therefore suggest some other vascular disease (hemorrhage, embolism, or atherosclerotic thrombosis). There are retinal hemorrhages, exudates, papilledema (hypertensive retinopathy), and evidence of renal and cardiac disease. In most cases, ICP and CSF protein levels are elevated. MRI brain imaging shows a pattern of typically posterior (occipital > frontal) brain edema that is reversible and termed reversible posterior leukoencephalopathy. The hypertension may be essential or due to chronic renal disease, acute glomerulonephritis, acute toxemia of pregnancy, pheochromocytoma, or other causes. Lowering the blood pressure reverses the process, but stroke can occur, especially if blood pressure is lowered too rapidly. Neuropathologic examination reveals multifocal to diffuse cerebral edema and hemorrhages of various sizes from petechial to massive. Microscopically, there are necrosis of arterioles, minute cerebral infarcts, and hemorrhages. The term hypertensive encephalopathy should be reserved for this syndrome and not for chronic recurrent headaches, dizziness, recurrent TIAs, or small strokes that often occur in association with high blood pressure. Primary intraventricular hemorrhage is rare and should prompt investigation for an underlying vascular anomaly. Sometimes bleeding begins within the periventricular substance of the brain and dissects into the ventricular system without leaving signs of intraparenchymal hemorrhage. Alternatively, bleeding can arise from periependymal veins. Vasculitis, usually polyarteritis nodosa or lupus erythematosus, can produce hemorrhage in any region of the central nervous system; most hemorrhages are associated with hypertension, but the arteritis itself may cause bleeding by disrupting the vessel wall. Nearly one-half of patients with primary intraventricular hemorrhage have identifiable bleeding sources seen using conventional angiography.
# Chunk 5389
2586 Headache (without bleeding) may be hemicranial and throbbing, like migraine, or diffuse. Focal seizures, with or without generalization, occur in ~30% of cases. One-half of AVMs become evident as ICHs. In most, the hemorrhage is mainly intraparenchymal with extension into the subarachnoid space in some cases. Blood is usually not deposited in the basal cisterns, and symptomatic cerebral vasospasm is rare. The risk of AVM rupture is strongly influenced by a history of prior rupture. Although unruptured AVMs have a hemorrhage rate of ~2–4% per year, previously ruptured AVMs may have a rate as high as 17% a year, at least for the first year. Hemorrhages may be massive, leading to death, or may be as small as 1 cm in diameter, leading to minor focal symptoms or no deficit. The AVM may be large enough to steal blood away from adjacent normal brain tissue or to increase venous pressure significantly to produce venous ischemia locally and in remote areas of the brain. This is seen most often with large AVMs in the territory of the MCA. Large AVMs of the anterior circulation may be associated with a systolic and diastolic bruit (sometimes self-audible) over the eye, forehead, or neck and a bounding carotid pulse. Headache at the onset of AVM rupture is generally not as explosive as with aneurysmal rupture. MRI is better than CT for diagnosis, although noncontrast CT scanning sometimes detects calcification of the AVM and contrast may demonstrate the abnormal blood vessels. Once identified, conventional x-ray angiography is the gold standard for evaluating the precise anatomy of the AVM. Surgical treatment of AVMs presenting with hemorrhage often done in conjunction with preoperative embolization to reduce operative bleeding is usually indicated for accessible lesions. Stereotaxic radiation, an alternative to surgery, can produce a slow sclerosis of the AVM over 2–3 years. Several angiographic features can be used to help predict future bleeding risk. Paradoxically, smaller lesions seem to have a higher hemorrhage rate. The presence of deep venous drainage, venous outflow stenosis, and intranidal aneurysms may increase rupture risk. Because of the relatively low annual rate of hemorrhage and the risk of complications due to surgical or endovascular treatment, the indication for surgery in asymptomatic AVMs is debated. The ARUBA (A Randomized Trial of Unruptured Brain Arteriovenous Malformations) trial randomized patients to medical management versus intervention (surgery, endovascular embolization, combination embolization and surgery, or gamma-knife). The trial was stopped prematurely for harm, with the medical arm achieving the combined endpoint of death or symptomatic stroke in 10.1% of patients compared to 30.7% in the intervention group at an average follow-up time of 33 months. This highly significant finding argues against routine intervention for patients presenting without hemorrhage, although debate ensues regarding the generalizability of these results. Venous anomalies are the result of development of anomalous cerebral, cerebellar, or brainstem venous drainage. These structures, unlike AVMs, are functional venous channels. They are of little clinical significance and should be ignored if found incidentally on brain imaging studies. Surgical resection of these anomalies may result in venous infarction and hemorrhage. Venous anomalies may be associated with cavernous malformations (see below), which do carry some bleeding risk. Capillary telangiectasias are true capillary malformations that often form extensive vascular networks through an otherwise normal brain structure. The pons and deep cerebral white matter are typical locations, and these capillary malformations can be seen in patients with hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (Osler-Rendu-Weber) syndrome. If bleeding does occur, it rarely produces mass effect or significant symptoms. No treatment options exist.
# Chunk 5390
2.

3.

4.

1.1 Migraine without aura 1.2 Migraine with aura 1.2.1 Migraine with typical aura 1.2.1.1 Typical aura with headache 1.2.1.2 Typical aura without headache 1.2.2 Migraine with brainstem aura 1.2.3 Hemiplegic migraine 1.2.3.1 Familial hemiplegic migraine (FHM) 1.2.3.1.1 Familial hemiplegic migraine type 1 1.2.3.1.2 Familial hemiplegic migraine type 2 1.2.3.1.3 Familial hemiplegic migraine type 3 1.2.3.2 Sporadic hemiplegic migraine 1.2.4 Retinal migraine 1.3 Chronic migraine 1.4 Complications of migraine 1.4.1 Status migrainosus 1.4.2 Persistent aura without infarction 1.4.3 Migrainous infarction 1.4.4 Migraine aura-triggered seizure 1.5 Probable migraine 1.5.1 Probable migraine without aura 1.5.2 Probable migraine with aura 1.6 Episodic syndromes that may be associated with migraine 1.6.1 Recurrent gastrointestinal disturbance 1.6.1.1 Cyclical vomiting syndrome 1.6.1.2 Abdominal migraine 1.6.2 Benign paroxysmal vertigo 1.6.3 2.1 2.2 Frequent episodic tension-type headache 2.3 3.1 3.1.1 Episodic cluster headache 3.1.2 Chronic cluster headache 3.2 Paroxysmal hemicrania 3.2.1 Episodic paroxysmal hemicrania 3.2.2 Chronic paroxysmal hemicrania 3.3 Short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks 3.3.1 Short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks with conjunctival injection and tearing (SUNCT) 3.3.2 Short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks with cranial autonomic symptoms (SUNA) 3.4 4.1 4.2 Primary exercise headache 4.3 Primary headache associated with sexual activity 4.4 Primary thunderclap headache 4.5 Cold-stimulus headache 4.5.1 Headache attributed to external application of a cold stimulus 4.5.2 Headache attributed to ingestion or inhalation of a cold stimulus 4.6 External-pressure headache 4.6.1 External-compression headache 4.6.2 External-traction headache 4.7 Primary stabbing headache 4.8 Nummular headache 4.9 Hypnic headache 4.10 New daily persistent headache (NDPH)
# Chunk 5391
Migraine genes identified by studying families with familial hemiplegic migraine (FHM) reveal involvement of ion channels, suggesting that alterations in membrane excitability can predispose to migraine. Mutations involving the Cav2.1 (P/Q)–type voltage-gated calcium channel CACNA1A gene are now known to cause FHM 1; this mutation is responsible for about 50% of FHMs. Mutations in the Na+-K+ATPase ATP1A2 gene, designated FHM 2, are responsible for about 20% of FHMs. Mutations in the neuronal voltage-gated sodium channel SCN1A cause FHM 3. Functional neuroimaging has suggested that brainstem regions in migraine (Fig. 447-2) and the posterior hypothalamic gray matter region close to the human circadian pacemaker cells of the suprachiasmatic nucleus in cluster headache (Fig. 447-3) are good candidates for specific involvement in primary headache.
# Chunk 5392
A headache diary can often be helpful in making the diagnosis; this is also helpful in assessing disability and the frequency of treatment for acute attacks. Patients with episodes of migraine that occur daily or near-daily are considered to have chronic migraine (see “Chronic Daily Headache” in Chap. 21). Migraine must be differentiated from tension-type headache (discussed below), the most common primary headache syndrome seen in the population. Migraine has several forms that have been defined (Table 447-1): migraine with and without aura and chronic migraine, the latter occurring 15 days or more a month, as the most important. Migraine at its most basic level is headache with associated features, and tension-type headache is headache that is featureless. Most patients with disabling headache probably have migraine.
# Chunk 5393
Parenteral Administration of drugs by injection, such as dihydroergotamine and sumatriptan, is approved by the FDA for the rapid relief of a migraine attack. Peak plasma levels of dihydroergotamine are achieved 3 min after IV dosing, 30 min after IM dosing, and 45 min after SC dosing. If an attack has not already peaked, SC or IM administration of 1 mg of dihydroergotamine suffices for about 80–90% of patients. Sumatriptan, 4–6 mg SC, is effective in ~50–80% of patients, and can now be administered by a needle-free device.
# Chunk 5394
Acute attack medications, particularly opioid or barbiturate-containing compound analgesics, have a propensity to aggravate headache frequency and induce a state of refractory daily or near-daily headache called medication-overuse headache. This condition is likely not a separate headache entity but a reaction of the migraine patient to a particular medicine. Migraine patients who have two or more headache days a week should be cautioned about frequent analgesic use (see “Chronic Daily Headache” in Chap. 21).
# Chunk 5395
Drugs that have the capacity to stabilize migraine are listed in Table 447-6. Drugs must be taken daily, and there is usually a lag of between 2 to 12 weeks before an effect is seen. The drugs that have been approved by the FDA for the prophylactic treatment of migraine include propranolol, timolol, sodium valproate, topiramate, and methysergide (not available). In addition, a number of other drugs appear to display prophylactic efficacy. This group includes amitriptyline, nortriptyline, flunarizine, phenelzine, gabapentin, and cyproheptadine. Placebo-controlled trials of onabotulinum toxin type A in episodic migraine were negative, whereas, overall, placebo-controlled trials in chronic migraine were positive. Phenelzine and methysergide are usually reserved for recalcitrant cases because of their serious potential side effects. Phenelzine is a monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOI); therefore, tyramine-containing foods, decongestants, and meperidine are contraindicated. Methysergide may cause retroperitoneal or cardiac valvular fibrosis when it is used for >6 months, and thus monitoring is required for patients using this drug; the risk of fibrosis is about 1:1500 and is likely to reverse after the drug is stopped.
# Chunk 5396
relatively short-duration unilateral pain for 8 to 10 weeks a year; this is usually followed by a pain-free interval that averages a little less than 1 year. Cluster headache is characterized as chronic when there is less than 1 month of sustained remission without treatment. Patients are generally perfectly well between episodes. Onset is nocturnal in about 50% of patients, and men are affected three times more often than women. Patients with cluster headache tend to move about during attacks, pacing, rocking, or rubbing their head for relief; some may even become aggressive during attacks. This is in sharp contrast to patients with migraine, who prefer to remain motionless during attacks.
# Chunk 5397
The choice of a preventive treatment in cluster headache depends in part on the length of the bout. Patients with long bouts or those with chronic cluster headache require medicines that are safe when taken for long periods. For patients with relatively short bouts, limited courses of oral glucocorticoids or methysergide (not available in the United States) can be very useful. A 10-day course of prednisone, beginning at 60 mg daily for 7 days and followed by a rapid taper, may interrupt the pain bout for many patients. Lithium (400–800 mg/d) appears to be particularly useful for the chronic form of the disorder.
# Chunk 5398
2596 at high doses. Verapamil can cause heart block by slowing conduction in the atrioventricular node, a condition that can be monitored by following the PR interval on a standard electrocardiogram (ECG). Approximately 20% of patients treated with verapamil develop ECG abnormalities, which can be observed with doses as low as 240 mg/d; these abnormalities can worsen over time in patients on stable doses. A baseline ECG is recommended for all patients. The ECG is repeated 10 days after a dose change in patients whose dose is being increased above 240 mg daily. Dose increases are usually made in 80-mg increments. For patients on long-term verapamil, ECG monitoring every 6 months is advised.
# Chunk 5399
Primary Headache Associated with Sexual Activity Three types of sex headache are reported: a dull bilateral ache in the head and neck that intensifies as sexual excitement increases; a sudden, severe, explosive headache occurring at orgasm; and a postural headache developing after coitus that resembles the headache of low CSF pressure. The last arises from vigorous sexual activity and is a form of low CSF pressure headache (Chap. 21). Headaches developing at the time of orgasm are not always benign; 5–12% of cases of subarachnoid hemorrhage are precipitated by sexual intercourse. Sex headache is reported by men more often than women and may occur at any time during the years of sexual activity. It may develop on several occasions in succession and then not trouble the patient again, even without an obvious change in sexual activity. In patients who stop sexual activity when headache is first noticed, the pain may subside within a period of 5 min to 2 h. In about half of patients, sex headache will subside within 6 months.
# Chunk 5400
Hypnic Headache This headache syndrome typically begins a few hours after sleep onset. The headaches last from 15 to 30 min and are typically moderately severe and generalized, although they may be unilateral and can be throbbing. Patients may report falling back to sleep only to be awakened by a further attack a few hours later; up to three repetitions of this pattern occur through the night. Daytime naps can also precipitate head pain. Most patients are female, and the onset is usually after age 60 years. Headaches are bilateral in most, but may be unilateral. Photophobia, phonophobia, and nausea are usually absent. The major secondary consideration in this headache type is poorly controlled hypertension; 24-h blood pressure monitoring is recommended to detect this treatable condition.
# Chunk 5401
In the early stages of typical amnestic AD, the memory loss may go unrecognized or be ascribed to benign forgetfulness of aging. Once the memory loss becomes noticeable to the patient and spouse and falls 1.5 standard deviations below normal on standardized memory tests, the term mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is applied. This construct provides useful prognostic information, because approximately 50% of patients with MCI (roughly 12% per year) will progress to AD over 4 years. Increasingly, the MCI construct is being replaced by the notion of “early symptomatic AD” to signify that AD is considered the underlying disease (based on clinical or biomarker evidence) in a patient who remains functionally compensated. Even earlier in the course, “prodromal AD” refers to a person with biomarker evidence of AD (amyloid imaging positive with positron emission tomography or low cerebrospinal Aβ42 and mildly elevated tau) in the absence of symptoms. These refinements have been developed in anticipation of early-stage treatment and prevention trials that have already begun in humans. New evidence suggests that partial and sometimes generalized seizures herald AD and can occur even prior to dementia onset.
# Chunk 5402
Early in the disease course, other etiologies of dementia should be excluded (see Tables 35-1, 35-3, and 35-4). Neuroimaging studies (computed tomography [CT] and magnetic resonance imaging [MRI]) do not show a single specific pattern with AD and may be normal early in the disease. As AD progresses, more distributed but usually posterior-predominant cortical atrophy becomes apparent, along with atrophy of the medial temporal memory structures (see Chap. 35, Fig. 35-1). The main purpose of imaging is to exclude other disorders, such as primary and secondary neoplasms, vascular dementia, diffuse white matter disease, and normal-pressure hydrocephalus (NPH). Imaging also helps to distinguish AD from other degenerative disorders, such as frontotemporal dementia (FTD) or Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease (CJD), which feature distinctive imaging patterns. Functional imaging studies, such as positron emission tomography (PET), reveal hypometabolism in the posterior temporal-parietal cortex in AD (see Fig. 35-1). PET can also be used to detect the presence of fibrillar amyloid in the brain (see Fig. 35-4), and amyloid PET positivity is becoming required for entry into treatment trials for AD. Barriers to interpretation continue, however, to limit the use of amyloid PET in routine clinical evaluation. Although amyloid binding with PET is typical for AD, many asymptomatic healthy older individuals show amyloid uptake, and the likelihood that these individuals will convert to clinical AD is still under study. Similarly, dementia due to a non-AD disorder can be the underlying etiology in a patient who is amyloid positive on imaging. Electroencephalogram (EEG) is normal or shows nonspecific slowing; prolonged EEG can be used to seek out intermittent non-convulsive seizures. Routine spinal fluid examination is also normal. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) Aβ42 level is reduced, whereas the tau protein is elevated, but the test characteristics of these assays still make interpretation challenging in individual patients. Slowly progressive decline in memory and orientation, normal results on laboratory tests, and an MRI 2599 or CT scan showing only distributed or posteriorly predominant cortical and hippocampal atrophy are highly suggestive of AD. A clinical diagnosis of AD reached after careful evaluation is confirmed at autopsy about 90% of the time, with misdiagnosed cases usually representing one of the other dementing disorders described later in this chapter, a mixture of AD with vascular pathology, or DLB.
# Chunk 5403
Investigation of large families with multigenerational FAD led to the discovery of two additional AD-causing genes, the presenilins. Presenilin-1 (PS-1) is on chromosome 14 and encodes a protein called S182. Mutations in this gene cause an early-age-of-onset AD, with onset before the age of 60 and often before age 50, transmitted in an autosomal dominant, highly penetrant fashion. More than 100 different mutations have been found in the PS-1 gene in families from a wide range of ethnic backgrounds. Presenilin-2 (PS-2) is on chromosome 1 and encodes a protein called STM2. A mutation in the PS-2 gene was first found in a group of American families with Volga German ethnic background. Mutations in PS-1 are much more common than those in PS-2. The presenilins are highly homologous and encode similar proteins that at first appeared to have seven transmembrane domains (hence the designation STM), but subsequent studies have suggested eight such domains, with a ninth submembrane region. Both S182 and STM2 are cytoplasmic neuronal proteins that are widely expressed throughout the nervous system. They are homologous to a cell-trafficking protein, sel 12, found in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Patients with mutations in the presenilin genes have elevated plasma levels of Aβ42, and PS-1 mutations produce increased Aβ42 in the media in cell culture. There is evidence that PS-1 is involved in the cleavage of APP at the γ secretase site and mutations in either gene (PS-1 or APP) may disturb γ secretase cleavage. Mutations in PS-1 are the most common cause of early-age-of-onset FAD, representing perhaps 40–70% of all cases. Mutations in PS-1 tend to produce AD with an earlier age of onset (mean onset 45 years) and a shorter, more rapidly progressive course (mean duration 6–7 years) than the disease caused by mutations in PS-2 (mean onset 53 years; duration 11 years). Although some carriers of PS-2 mutations have had onset of dementia after the age of 70, mutations in the presenilins rarely lead to late-ageof-onset AD. Clinical genetic testing for these uncommon mutations is available but likely to be revealing only in early-age-of-onset FAD and should be performed in association with formal genetic counseling.
# Chunk 5404
The Apo ε gene on chromosome 19 is involved in the pathogenesis of AD. The protein, apolipoprotein E, participates in cholesterol transport (Chap. 421), and the gene has three alleles: ε2, ε3, and ε4. The Apo ε4 allele confers increased risk of AD in the general population, including sporadic and late-age-of-onset familial forms. Approximately 24–30% of the nondemented white population has at least one ε4 allele (12–15% allele frequency), and about 2% are ε4/ε4 homozygotes. Among patients with AD, 40–65% have at least one ε4 allele, a highly significant elevation compared with controls. Conversely, many AD patients have no ε4 allele, and ε4 carriers may never develop AD. Therefore, ε4 is neither necessary nor sufficient to cause AD. Nevertheless, the Apo ε4 allele represents the most important genetic risk factor for sporadic AD and acts as a dose-dependent disease modifier, with the earliest age of onset associated with the ε4 homozygosity. Precise mechanisms through which Apo ε4 confers AD risk or hastens onset remain unclear, but ε4 leads to less efficient amyloid clearance and to the production of toxic fragments from cleavage of the molecule. Apo ε can be identified in neuritic plaques and may also be involved in neurofibrillary tangle formation, because it binds to tau protein. Apo ε4 decreases neurite outgrowth in dorsal root ganglion neuronal cultures, perhaps indicating a deleterious role in the brain’s response to injury. Some evidence suggests that the ε2 allele may reduce AD risk. Use of Apo ε testing in AD diagnosis remains controversial. It is not indicated as a predictive test in normal persons because its precise predictive value is unclear, and many individuals with the ε4 allele never develop dementia. Many cognitively normal ε4 heterozygotes and homozygotes show decreased cerebral cortical metabolic function with PET, suggesting presymptomatic abnormalities due to AD or an inherited vulnerability of the AD-targeted network. In demented persons who meet clinical criteria for AD, finding an ε4 allele increases the reliability of diagnosis; however, the absence of an ε4 allele cannot be considered evidence against AD. Furthermore, all patients with dementia, including those with an ε4 allele, require a search for reversible causes of their cognitive impairment. Nevertheless, Apo ε4 remains the single most important biologic marker associated with 2601 AD risk, and studies of ε4’s functional role and diagnostic utility are progressing rapidly. The ε4 allele is not associated with risk for FTD, DLB, or CJD, although some evidence suggests that ε4 may exacerbate the phenotype of non-AD degenerative disorders, head trauma, and other brain injuries. Additional genes are also likely to be involved in AD, especially as minor risk alleles for sporadic forms of the disease. Genome-wide association studies have implicated the clusterin (CLU), phosphatidylinositol-binding clathrin assembly protein (PICALM), and complement component (3b/4b) receptor 1 (CR1) genes. CLU may play a role in synapse turnover, PICALM participates in clathrinmediated endocytosis, and CR1 may be involved in amyloid clearance through the complement pathway. TREM2 is a gene involved with inflammation that increases the likelihood of dementia. Homozygous mutation carriers develop a frontal dementia with bone cysts (Nasu-Hakola disease), whereas heterozygotes are predisposed to the development of AD.
# Chunk 5405
Donepezil (target dose, 10 mg daily), rivastigmine (target dose, 6 mg twice daily or 9.5-mg patch daily), galantamine (target dose 24 mg daily, extended-release), and memantine (target dose, 10 mg twice daily) are approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of AD. Due to hepatotoxicity, tacrine is no longer used. Dose escalations for each of these medications must be carried out over 4–6 weeks to minimize side effects. The pharmacologic action of donepezil, rivastigmine, and galantamine is inhibition of the cholinesterases, primarily acetylcholinesterase, with a resulting increase in cerebral acetylcholine levels. Memantine appears to act by blocking overexcited N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) glutamate receptors. Double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover studies with cholinesterase inhibitors and memantine in moderate to severe AD have shown them to be associated with improved caregiver ratings of patients’ functioning and with an apparent decreased rate of decline in cognitive test scores over periods of up to 3 years. The average patient on an anticholinesterase inhibitor maintains his or her mini-mental state examination (MMSE) score for close to a year, whereas a placebo-treated patient declines 2–3 points over the same time period. Memantine, used in conjunction with cholinesterase inhibitors or by itself, slows cognitive deterioration and decreases caregiver burden for patients with moderate to severe AD but is not approved for mild AD. Each of these compounds has only modest efficacy for AD. Cholinesterase inhibitors are relatively easy to administer, and their major side effects are gastrointestinal symptoms (nausea, diarrhea, cramps), altered sleep with unpleasant or vivid dreams, bradycardia (usually benign), and muscle cramps.
# Chunk 5406
2602 In a prospective observational study, the use of estrogen replacement therapy appeared to protect—by about 50%—against development of AD in women. This study seemed to confirm the results of two earlier case-controlled studies. Sadly, a prospective placebo-controlled study of a combined estrogen-progesterone therapy for asymptomatic postmenopausal women increased, rather than decreased, the prevalence of dementia. This study markedly dampened enthusiasm for hormonal treatments to prevent dementia. Additionally, no benefit has been found in the treatment of AD with estrogen alone. A controlled trial of an extract of Ginkgo biloba found modest improvement in cognitive function in subjects with AD and vascular dementia. Unfortunately, a comprehensive 6-year multicenter prevention study using ginkgo found no slowing of progression to dementia in the treated group. Vaccination against Aβ42 has proved highly efficacious in mouse models of AD, helping clear brain amyloid and preventing further amyloid accumulation. In human trials, this approach led to life-threatening complications, including meningoencephalitis, in a minority of patients. Another experimental approach to AD treatment has been the use of β and γ secretase inhibitors that diminish the production of Aβ42, but the first two placebo-controlled trials of γ secretase inhibitors, tarenflurbil and semagacestat, were negative, and semagacestat may have accelerated cognitive decline compared to placebo. Passive immunization with monoclonal antibodies against Aβ42 has been tried in mild to moderate AD. These studies were negative, leading some to suggest that the patients treated were too advanced to respond to amyloid-lowering therapies. Therefore, new trials have started in asymptomatic individuals with mild AD, in asymptomatic autosomal dominant forms of AD, and in cognitively normal elderly who are amyloid positive with PET. Medications that modify tau phosphorylation and aggregation, including tau antibodies, are beginning to be studied as possible treatments for both AD and non-AD tau-related disorders including FTD and progressive supranuclear palsy. Several retrospective studies suggest that nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents and 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitors (statins) may have a protective effect on dementia if used prior to the onset of disease but do not influence clinically symptomatic AD. Finally, there is now a strong interest in the relationship between diabetes and AD, and insulin-regulating studies are being conducted. Mild to moderate depression is common in the early stages of AD and may respond to antidepressants or cholinesterase inhibitors. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are commonly used due to their low anticholinergic side effects (for example, escitalopram, target dose 5–10 mg daily). Seizures can be treated with levetiracetam unless the patient had a different regimen that was effective prior to the onset of AD. Agitation, insomnia, hallucinations, and belligerence are especially troublesome characteristics of some AD patients, and these behaviors can lead to nursing home placement. The newer generation of atypical antipsychotics, such as risperidone, quetiapine, and olanzapine, are being used in low doses to treat these neuropsychiatric symptoms. The few controlled studies comparing drugs against behavioral intervention in the treatment of agitation suggest mild efficacy with significant side effects related to sleep, gait, and cardiovascular complications, including an increased risk of death. All antipsychotics carry a black box FDA warning and should be used with caution in the demented elderly; however, careful, daily, nonpharmacologic behavior management is often not available, rendering medications necessary for some patients. Finally, medications with strong anticholinergic effects should be vigilantly avoided, including prescription and over-the-counter sleep aids (e.g., diphenhydramine) or incontinence therapies (e.g., oxybutynin).
# Chunk 5407
Some individuals with dementia are discovered on MRI to have bilateral T2 signal hyperintensities in the subcortical white matter, termed diffuse white matter disease, often occurring in association with lacunar infarctions (see Fig. 35-2). The dementia may be insidious in onset and progress slowly, features that distinguish it from multi-infarct dementia, but other patients show a stepwise deterioration more typical of multi-infarct dementia. Early symptoms include mild confusion, apathy, anxiety, psychosis, and memory, spatial, or executive deficits. Marked difficulties in judgment and orientation and dependence on others for daily activities develop later. Euphoria, elation, depression, or aggressive behaviors are common as the disease progresses. Pyramidal and cerebellar signs may be present, and a gait disorder is seen in at least half of these patients. With advanced disease, urinary incontinence and dysarthria with or without other pseudobulbar features (e.g., dysphagia, emotional lability) are frequent. Seizures and myoclonic jerks appear in a minority of patients. Often, this disorder results from chronic ischemia due to occlusive disease of small, penetrating cerebral arteries and arterioles (microangiopathy). Any disease-causing stenosis of small cerebral vessels may be the critical underlying factor, although hypertension is the major cause. The term Binswanger’s disease should be used with caution, because it does not clearly identify a single entity.
# Chunk 5408
Mitochondrial disorders can present with stroke-like episodes and can selectively injure basal ganglia or cortex. Many such patients show other findings suggestive of a neurologic or systemic disorder such as ophthalmoplegia, retinal degeneration, deafness, myopathy, neuropathy, or diabetes. Diagnosis is difficult, but serum or (especially) CSF levels of lactate and pyruvate may be abnormal, and biopsy of affected tissue, preferably muscle, may be diagnostic.
# Chunk 5409
Although early studies suggested that 15–30% of patients with FTD showed underlying AD at autopsy, progressive refinement in clinical diagnosis has improved pathologic prediction accuracy, and most patients diagnosed with FTD at a dementia clinic with expertise in FTD will show underlying FTLD pathology. Microscopic findings seen across all patients with FTLD include gliosis, microvacuolation, and neuronal loss, but the disease is subtyped according to the protein composition of neuronal and glial inclusions, which contain either tau or TDP-43 in ~90% of patients, with the remaining ~10% showing inclusions containing FUS (Fig. 448-4).
# Chunk 5410
Although the term Pick’s disease was once used to describe a progressive degenerative disorder characterized by selective involvement of the anterior frontal and temporal neocortex and pathologically by intraneuronal cytoplasmic inclusions (Pick bodies), it is now used only in reference to a specific FTLD-tau histopathologic entity. Classical Pick bodies are argyrophilic, staining positively with the Bielschowsky silver method (but not with the Gallyas method) and also with immunostaining for hyperphosphorylated tau. Recognition of the three FTLD major molecular classes has allowed delineation of distinct FTLD subtypes within each class. These subtypes, based on the morphology and distribution of the neuronal and glial inclusions (Fig. 448-5), account for the vast majority of patients, and some subtypes show strong clinical or genetic associations (Fig. 448-4). Despite this progress, available data do not allow reliable prediction of the underlying FTLD subtype, or even the major molecular class, based on clinical features alone. Molecular PET imaging with ligands chosen to bind misfolded tau protein shows great promise and is already being applied to the study of patients with AD and FTD. Because FTLD-tau and FTLD-TDP account for 90% of FTLD patients, the ability to detect pathologic tau protein deposition in vivo will greatly improve prediction accuracy, especially when amyloid PET imaging is negative.
# Chunk 5411
Vitamin B12 deficiency, as can occur in pernicious anemia, causes a megaloblastic anemia and may also damage the nervous system (Chaps. 128 and 456). Neurologically, it most commonly produces a spinal cord syndrome (myelopathy) affecting the posterior columns (loss of vibration and position sense) and corticospinal tracts (hyperactive tendon reflexes with Babinski signs); it also damages peripheral nerves (neuropathy), resulting in sensory loss with depressed tendon reflexes. Damage to myelinated axons may also cause dementia. The mechanism of neurologic damage is unclear but may be related to a deficiency of S-adenosyl methionine (required for methylation of myelin phospholipids) due to reduced methionine synthase activity or accumulation of methylmalonate, homocysteine, and propionate, providing abnormal substrates for fatty acid synthesis in myelin. Use of histamine blockers or metformin, vegan diets, autoimmunity against gastric parietal cells, and various causes of malabsorption are the typical causes for vitamin B12 deficiency. The neurologic sequelae of vitamin B12 deficiency may occur in the absence of hematologic manifestations, making it critical to avoid using the complete blood count (CBC) and blood smear as a substitute for measuring B12 blood levels. Treatment with parenteral vitamin B12 (1000 μg intramuscularly daily for a week, weekly for a month, and monthly for life for pernicious anemia) stops progression of the disease if instituted promptly, but complete reversal of advanced nervous system damage will not occur.
# Chunk 5412
Chronic metal exposure represents a rare cause of dementia. The key to diagnosis is to elicit a history of exposure at work or home. Chronic lead poisoning from inadequately fire-glazed pottery has been reported. Fatigue, depression, and confusion may be associated with episodic abdominal pain and peripheral neuropathy. Gray lead lines appear in the gums, usually accompanied by an anemia with basophilic stippling of red blood cells. The clinical presentation can 2608 resemble that of acute intermittent porphyria, including elevated levels of urine porphyrins as a result of the inhibition of δ-aminolevulinic acid dehydrase. The treatment is chelation therapy with agents such as ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA). Chronic mercury poisoning produces dementia, peripheral neuropathy, ataxia, and tremulousness that may progress to a cerebellar intention tremor or choreoathetosis. The confusion and memory loss of chronic arsenic intoxication is also associated with nausea, weight loss, peripheral neuropathy, pigmentation and scaling of the skin, and transverse white lines of the fingernails (Mees’ lines). Treatment is chelation therapy with dimercaprol (BAL). Aluminum poisoning is rare but was documented with the dialysis dementia syndrome, in which water used during renal dialysis was contaminated with excessive amounts of aluminum. This poisoning resulted in a progressive encephalopathy associated with confusion, nonfluent aphasia, memory loss, agitation, and, later, lethargy and stupor. Speech arrest and myoclonic jerks were common and associated with severe and generalized EEG changes. The condition has been eliminated by the use of deionized water for dialysis. Recurrent head trauma in professional athletes may lead to a dementia previously referred to as “punch-drunk” syndrome or dementia pugilistica but now known as chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) to signify its relevance to contact sport athletes other than boxers. The symptoms can be progressive, beginning late in an athlete’s career or, more often, after retirement. Early in the course, a personality change associated with social instability and sometimes paranoia and delusions occurs. Later, memory loss progresses to full-blown dementia, often associated with parkinsonian signs and ataxia or intention tremor. At autopsy, the cerebral cortex shows changes tau-immunoreactive NFTs that are more prominent than amyloid plaques (which are usually diffuse or absent rather than neuritic). NFTs and tau-positive reactive astrocytes are often clustered in the depths of cortical sulci, and TDP-43 inclusions have also been reported, highlighting the overlap with the FTLD spectrum. Loss of neurons in the substantia nigra is a variable feature. Chronic subdural hematoma (Chap. 457e) is also occasionally associated with dementia, often in the context of underlying cortical atrophy from conditions such as AD or HD. Transient global amnesia (TGA) is characterized by the sudden onset of a severe episodic memory deficit, usually occurring in persons over the age of 50 years. Often the amnesia occurs in the setting of an emotional stimulus or physical exertion. During the attack, the individual is alert and communicative, general cognition seems intact, and there are no other neurologic signs or symptoms. The patient may seem confused and repeatedly ask about his or her location in place and time. The ability to form new memories returns after a period of hours, and the individual returns to normal with no recall for the period of the attack. Frequently no cause is determined, but cerebrovascular disease, epilepsy (7% in one study), migraine, or cardiac arrhythmias have all been implicated. Approximately one-quarter of patients experience recurrent attacks. Rare instances of permanent memory loss have been reported in patients with TGA-like spells, usually representing ischemic infarction of the hippocampus or dorsomedial thalamic nucleus bilaterally. Seizure activity due to AD should always be suspected in this syndrome. The ALS/parkinsonian/dementia complex of Guam is a rare degenerative disease that has occurred in the Chamorro natives on the island of Guam. Individuals may have any combination of parkinsonian features, dementia, and MND. The most characteristic pathologic features are the presence of NFTs in degenerating neurons of the cortex and substantia nigra and loss of motor neurons in the spinal cord, although recent reanalysis has shown that some patients with this illness also show coexisting TDP-43 pathology. Epidemiologic evidence supports a possible environmental cause, such as exposure to a neurotoxin or an infectious agent with a long latency period. One interesting but unproven candidate neurotoxin occurs in the seed of the false palm tree, which Guamanians traditionally used to make flour. The ALS syndrome is no longer present in Guam, but a dementing illness with rigidity continues to be seen. Rarely, adult-onset leukodystrophies, lysosomal storage diseases, and other genetic disorders can present as a dementia in middle to late life. Metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD) causes a progressive psychiatric or dementia syndrome associated with extensive, confluent frontal white matter abnormality. MLD is diagnosed by measuring arylsulfatase A enzyme activity in white blood cells. Adult-onset presentations of adrenoleukodystrophy have been reported in female carriers, and these patients often feature spinal cord and posterior white matter involvement. Adrenoleukodystrophy is diagnosed with measurement of plasma very-long-chain fatty acids. CADASIL is another genetic syndrome associated with white matter disease, often frontally and temporally predominant. Diagnosis is made with skin biopsy, which shows osmophilic granules in arterioles, or, increasingly, through genetic testing for mutations in Notch 3. The neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses are a genetically heterogeneous group of disorders associated with myoclonus, seizures, vision loss, and progressive dementia. Diagnosis is made by finding eosinophilic curvilinear inclusions within white blood cells or neuronal tissue.
# Chunk 5413
Imaging of the brain dopamine system in PD with positron emission tomography (PET) or single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) shows reduced uptake of striatal dopaminergic markers, particularly in the posterior putamen with relative sparing of the caudate nucleus (Fig. 449-3), reflecting the degeneration of nigrostriatal dopamine neurons. Imaging can be useful in patients where there is diagnostic uncertainty (e.g., dystonic tremor, essential tremor) or in research studies, but is rarely necessary in routine practice because the diagnosis can usually be established on clinical criteria alone. This may change in the future when there is a disease-modifying therapy and it is important to make the diagnosis as early as possible. Genetic testing is not routinely used at present, but can be helpful for identifying at-risk individuals in a research setting. Mutations of the LRRK2 gene (see below) have attracted particular interest because they are the commonest cause of familial PD and are responsible for approximately 1% of typical sporadic cases of the disease. Mutations in LRRK2 are a particularly common cause of PD in Ashkenazi Jews and North African Berber Arabs. The penetrance of the most common LRRK2 mutation ranges from 28 to 74% and is strongly correlated to the age of the carrier, with 50% affected by age 60 years. Mutations in the parkin gene should be considered in patients with onset prior to 40 years of age.
# Chunk 5414
Side effects of COMT inhibitors are primarily dopaminergic (nausea, vomiting, increased dyskinesia) and can usually be controlled by down-titrating the dose of levodopa by 20–30%. Severe diarrhea has been described with tolcapone, and to a lesser degree with entacapone, and necessitates stopping the medication in 5–10% of individuals. Cases of fatal hepatic toxicity have been reported with tolcapone, and periodic monitoring of liver function is required. This problem has not been encountered with entacapone. Discoloration of urine can be seen with both COMT inhibitors due to accumulation of a metabolite, but it is of no clinical concern.
# Chunk 5415
ET is the commonest movement disorder, affecting approximately 5–10 million persons in the United States. It can present in childhood but dramatically increases in prevalence over the age of 70 years. ET is characterized by a high-frequency tremor (6–10 Hz) that predominantly affects the upper extremities. The tremor is most often manifest as a postural or action (kinetic) tremor and, in severe cases, can interfere with functions such as eating and drinking. It is typically bilateral and symmetric but may begin on one side and remain asymmetric. Patients with severe ET can have an intention tremor with overshoot and slowness of movement. Tremor involves the head in ~30% of cases, voice in ~20%, tongue in ~20%, face/jaw in ~10%, and lower limbs in ~10%. The tremor is characteristically improved by alcohol and worsened by stress. Subtle impairment of coordination or tandem walking may be present, and disturbances of hearing, cognition, personality, mood, and olfaction have also been described, but usually the neurologic examination is normal aside from tremor. The major differential is a dystonic tremor (see below) or PD. PD can usually be differentiated from ET based on the presence of bradykinesia, rigidity, micrographia, and other parkinsonian features. However, the examiner should be aware that PD patients may have a postural tremor and ET patients may develop a rest tremor. These typically begin after a latency of a few seconds (emergent tremor). The examiner must take care to differentiate the effect of tremor on measurement of tone in ET from the cogwheel rigidity found in PD.
# Chunk 5416
Many cases are mild and require no treatment other than reassurance. Occasionally, tremor can be severe and interfere with eating, writing, and activities of daily living. This is more likely to occur as the patient ages and is often associated with a reduction in tremor frequency. Beta blockers and primidone are the standard drug therapies for ET and help in about 50% of cases. Propranolol (20–120 mg daily, given in 2620 divided doses) is usually effective at relatively low doses, but higher doses may be effective in some patients. The drug is contraindicated in patients with bradycardia or asthma. Hand tremor tends to be most improved, while head tremor is often refractory. Primidone can be helpful but should be started at low doses (12.5 mg) and gradually increased (125–250 mg tid) to avoid sedation. Benefits have also been reported with gabapentin and topiramate. Botulinum toxin injections may be helpful for limb or voice tremor, but treatment can be associated with secondary muscle weakness. Surgical therapies targeting the VIM nucleus of the thalamus can be very effective for severe and drug-resistant cases.
# Chunk 5417
At least 16 gene mutations are associated with dystonia and classified as DYT1–DYT16. Idiopathic torsion dystonia (DYT1) or Oppenheim’s dystonia is predominantly a childhood-onset form of dystonia with an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance that primarily affects Ashkenazi Jewish families. The majority of patients have an age of onset younger than 26 years (mean 14 years). In young-onset patients, dystonia typically begins in the foot or the arm and in 60–70% progresses to involve other limbs as well as the head and neck. In severe cases, patients can suffer disabling postural deformities that compromise mobility. Severity can vary within family members, with some affected relatives having severe disability and others a mild dystonia that may not even be appreciated. Most childhood-onset cases are linked to a mutation in the DYT1 gene located on chromosome 9q34, resulting in a trinucleotide GAG deletion with loss of one of a pair of glutamic acid residues in the protein torsin A. DYT1 mutations are found in 90% of Ashkenazi Jewish patients with DYT1 dystonia and probably relate to a founder effect that occurred about 350 years ago. There is variable penetrance, with only about 30% of gene carriers expressing a clinical phenotype. Why some gene carriers express dystonia and others do not is not known. The function of torsin A is unknown, but it is a member of the AAA+ (ATPase) family that resembles heat-shock proteins and may be related to protein processing and transport. The precise pathology responsible for DYT1 dystonia is not known.
# Chunk 5418
Dopa-responsive dystonia (DRD) or the Segawa variant (DYT5) is a dominantly inherited form of childhood-onset dystonia caused by a mutation in the gene that encodes GTP cyclohydrolase-I, the rate-limiting enzyme for the synthesis of tetrahydrobiopterin. This mutation leads to a defect in the biochemical synthesis of tyrosine hydroxylase, the rate-limiting enzyme in the formation of dopamine. DRD typically presents in early childhood (1–12 years) and is characterized by foot dystonia that interferes with walking. Patients often experience diurnal fluctuations, with worsening of gait as the day progresses and improvement with sleep. DRD is typified by an excellent and sustained response to small doses of levodopa. Some patients may present with parkinsonian features, but can be differentiated from juvenile PD by normal striatal dopamine imaging and the absence of levodopainduced dyskinesias. DRD may occasionally be confused with cerebral palsy because patients appear to have spasticity, increased reflexes, and Babinski responses (which likely reflect a dystonic contraction rather than an upper motor neuron lesion). Any patient suspected of having a childhood-onset dystonia should receive a trial of levodopa to exclude this treatable condition.
# Chunk 5419
Paroxysmal kinesigenic dyskinesia (PKD) is characterized by brief, self-limited attacks induced by movement onset such as running but also occasionally by unexpected sound or photic stimulation. Attacks may affect one side of the body, last seconds to minutes at a time, and recur several times a day. They usually manifest as dystonic posturing of a limb but may also become generalized. PKD is most commonly familial with an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance but may also occur secondary to various brain disorders such as multiple sclerosis or hyperglycemia. PKD is more frequent in males (4:1), and the onset is typically in the first or second decade of life. About 70% report sensory symptoms such as tingling or numbness of the affected limb preceding the attack by a few milliseconds. The evolution is relatively benign, and there is a trend toward resolution of the attacks over time. The cause is not known, but a mutation in the prolinerich transmembrane protein 2 (PRRT2) gene that may be involved in neurotransmitter release has now been identified. Treatment with low-dose anticonvulsant therapy such as carbamazepine or phenytoin is advised when the attacks are frequent and interfere with daily life activities and is effective in about 80% of patients. Some clinical features of PKD (abrupt and short-lasting attacks preceded by an “aura”) and its favorable response to anticonvulsant drugs have led to speculation that it is epileptic in origin, but this has not been established.
# Chunk 5420
Restless legs syndrome (RLS) is a neurologic disorder that affects approximately 10% of the adult population (it is rare in Asians) and can cause significant morbidity in some. It was first described in the seventeenth century by an English physician (Thomas Willis), but has only recently been recognized as being a bona fide movement disorder. The four core symptoms required for diagnosis are as follows: an urge to move the legs, usually caused or accompanied by an unpleasant sensation in the legs; symptoms that begin or worsen with rest; partial or complete relief by movement; and worsening during the evening or night.
# Chunk 5421
WD should always be considered in the differential diagnosis of a movement disorder in the first decades of life. Low levels of blood copper and ceruloplasmin and high levels of urinary copper may be present, but normal levels do not exclude the diagnosis. A computed tomography (CT) scan usually reveals generalized brain atrophy in established cases, and ~50% have signal hypointensity in the caudate head, putamen, globus pallidum, substantia nigra, and red nucleus on T2-weighted MRI. However, correlation of imaging changes with clinical features is not good. It is very rare for WD patients with neurologic features not to have KF rings, and therefore when the diagnosis is considered, examination by slit-lamp is essential. Liver biopsy with demonstration of high copper levels remains the gold standard for the diagnosis.
# Chunk 5422
In the absence of treatment, the course is progressive and leads to severe neurologic dysfunction and early death. Treatment is directed at reducing tissue copper levels and maintenance therapy to prevent reaccumulation. There is no clear consensus on treatment, and all patients should be managed in a unit with expertise in WD. Penicillamine is frequently used to increase copper excretion, but it may lead to a worsening of symptoms in the initial stages of therapy. Side effects are common and can to some degree be attenuated by coadministration of pyridoxine. Tetrathiomolybdate blocks the absorption of copper and can be used instead of penicillamine. Trientine and zinc are useful drugs for maintenance therapy. Effective treatment can reverse the neurologic features in most patients, particularly when started early. Some patients stabilize, and a few may still progress, especially those with hepatocerebral disease. KF rings tend to decrease after 3–6 months and disappear by 2 years. Adherence to maintenance therapy is a major challenge in long-term care.
# Chunk 5423
The subacute development of ataxia of gait over weeks to months (degeneration of the cerebellar vermis) may be due to the combined effects of alcoholism and malnutrition, particularly with deficiencies of vitamins B1 and B12. Hyponatremia has also been associated with ataxia. Paraneoplastic cerebellar ataxia is associated with a number of different tumors (and autoantibodies) such as breast and ovarian cancers (anti-Yo), small-cell lung cancer (anti-PQ-type voltage-gated calcium channel), and Hodgkin’s disease (anti-Tr) (Chap. 122). Another paraneoplastic syndrome associated with myoclonus and opsoclonus occurs with breast (anti-Ri) and lung cancers and neuroblastoma. Elevated serum anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) antibodies have been associated with a progressive ataxic syndrome affecting speech and gait. For all of these paraneoplastic ataxias, the neurologic syndrome may be the presenting symptom of the cancer. Another immune-mediated progressive ataxia is associated with antigliadin (and antiendomysium) antibodies and the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) DQB1*0201 haplotype; in some affected patients, biopsy of the small intestine reveals villus atrophy consistent with gluten-sensitive enteropathy (Chap. 349). Finally, subacute progressive ataxia may be caused by a prion disorder,
# Chunk 5424
The most important goal in management of patients with ataxia is to identify treatable disease entities. Mass lesions must be recognized promptly and treated appropriately. Paraneoplastic disorders can often be identified by the clinical patterns of disease that they produce, measurement of specific autoantibodies, and uncovering the primary cancer; these disorders are often refractory to therapy, but some patients improve following removal of the tumor or immunotherapy (Chap. 122). Ataxia with antigliadin antibodies and gluten-sensitive enteropathy may improve with a gluten-free diet. Malabsorption syndromes leading to vitamin E deficiency may lead to ataxia. The vitamin E deficiency form of Friedreich’s ataxia must be considered, and serum vitamin E levels measured. Vitamin E therapy is indicated for these rare patients. Vitamin B1 and B12 levels in serum should be measured, and the vitamins administered to patients having deficient levels. Hypothyroidism is easily treated. The cerebrospinal fluid should be tested for a syphilitic infection in patients with progressive ataxia and other features of tabes dorsalis. Similarly, antibody titers for Lyme disease and Legionella should be measured and appropriate antibiotic therapy should be instituted in antibody-positive patients. Aminoacidopathies, leukodystrophies, urea-cycle abnormalities, and mitochondrial encephalomyopathies may produce ataxia, and some dietary or metabolic therapies are available for these disorders. The deleterious effects of phenytoin and alcohol on the cerebellum are well known, and these exposures should be avoided in patients with ataxia of any cause.
# Chunk 5425
Gait ataxia, dementia, parkinsonism, dystonia, chorea, seizures; hyperreflexia; dysarthria and dysphagia; MRI shows cerebral and cerebellar atrophy; genetic testing available
# Chunk 5426
Spinocerebellar ataxia with neuropathy (SCAN1) (autosomal recessive) 9q34.3

Xq13; ATP-binding cassette 7 (ABCB7; ABC7) transporter; mitochondrial inner membrane; iron homeostasis; export from matrix to the intermembrane space 10q23.3-q24.1; twinkle protein (gene); homozygous for Tyr508Cys missense mutations 1q42;ADCK3 (CABC1); aarf-domain containing kinase 3; elevation of serum lactate and decreased coenzyme Q10 level 18q11; NPCI; NPCH1 and 2; skin biopsy (filipin staining) Ataxia; hypotonia; seizures; mental retardation; increased deep tendon reflexes; extensor plantar responses; coenzyme Q10 levels reduced with about 25% of patients with a block in transfer of electrons to complex 3; may respond to coenzyme 10
# Chunk 5427
Another important entity in the differential diagnosis of ALS is multifocal motor neuropathy with conduction block (MMCB), discussed below. A diffuse, lower motor axonal neuropathy mimicking ALS sometimes evolves in association with hematopoietic disorders such as lymphoma or multiple myeloma. In this clinical setting, the presence of an M-component in serum should prompt consideration of a bone marrow biopsy. Lyme disease (Chap. 210) may also cause an axonal, lower motor neuropathy, although typically with intense proximal limb pain and a CSF pleocytosis.
# Chunk 5428
SELECTED DISORDERS OF THE UPPER MOTOR NEURON Primary Lateral Sclerosis This exceedingly rare disorder arises sporadically in adults in mid to late life. Clinically PLS is characterized by progressive spastic weakness of the limbs, preceded or followed by spastic dysarthria and dysphagia, indicating combined involvement of the corticospinal and corticobulbar tracts. Fasciculations, amyotrophy, and sensory changes are absent; neither electromyography nor muscle biopsy shows denervation. On neuropathologic examination, there is selective loss of the large pyramidal cells in the precentral gyrus and degeneration of the corticospinal and corticobulbar projections. The peripheral motor neurons and other neuronal systems are spared. The course of PLS is variable; although long-term survival is documented, the course may be as aggressive as in ALS, with ~3-year survival from onset to death. Early in its course, PLS raises the question of multiple sclerosis or other demyelinating diseases such as adrenoleukodystrophy as diagnostic considerations (Chap. 458). A myelopathy suggestive of PLS is infrequently seen with infection with the retrovirus human T cell lymphotropic virus 1 (HTLV-1) (Chap. 456). The clinical course and laboratory testing will distinguish these possibilities.
# Chunk 5429
Human growth Hormone and Pituitary gonadotropin Therapy The transmission of CJD prions from contaminated human growth hormone (hGH) preparations derived from human pituitaries has been responsible for fatal cerebellar disorders with dementia in >180 patients ranging in age from 10 to 41 years. These patients received injections of hGH every 2–4 days for 4–12 years. If it is thought that these patients developed CJD from injections of prion-contaminated hGH preparations, the possible incubation periods range from 4 to 30 years. Only recombinant hGH is now used therapeutically so that possible contamination with prions is no longer an issue. Four cases of CJD have occurred in women receiving human pituitary gonadotropin.
# Chunk 5430
Clinical Course In documented cases of accidental transmission of CJD to humans, an incubation period of 1.5–2 years preceded the development of clinical disease. In other cases, incubation periods of up to 40 years have been suggested. Most patients with CJD live 6–12 months after the onset of clinical signs and symptoms, whereas some live for up to 5 years.
# Chunk 5431
Variations in the typical course appear in inherited and transmitted forms of the disease. fCJD has an earlier mean age of onset than sCJD. In GSS disease, ataxia is usually a prominent and presenting feature, with dementia occurring late in the disease course. GSS disease presents earlier than CJD (mean age 43 years) and is typically more slowly progressive than CJD; death usually occurs within 5 years of onset. FFI is characterized by insomnia and dysautonomia; dementia occurs only in the terminal phase of the illness. Rare sporadic cases have been identified. vCJD has an unusual clinical course, with a prominent psychiatric prodrome that may include visual hallucinations and early ataxia, whereas frank dementia is usually a late sign of vCJD.
# Chunk 5432
Spinal cord lesions from any cause may result in focal autonomic deficits or autonomic hyperreflexia (e.g., spinal cord transection or hemisection) affecting bowel, bladder, sexual, temperature-regulation, or cardiovascular functions. Quadriparetic patients exhibit both supine hypertension and OH after upward tilting. Autonomic dysreflexia describes a dramatic increase in BP in patients with traumatic spinal cord lesions above the T6 level, often in response to stimulation of the bladder, skin, or muscles. A distended or obstructed bladder, suprapubic palpation, catheter insertion, and urinary infection are common triggers. Associated symptoms can include facial flushing, headache, hypertension, or piloerection. Potential complications
# Chunk 5433
Amyloidosis Autonomic neuropathy occurs in both sporadic and familial forms of amyloidosis (Chap. 137). The AL (immunoglobulin light chain) type is associated with primary amyloidosis or amyloidosis secondary to multiple myeloma. The ATTR type, with transthyretin as the primary protein component, is responsible for the most common form of inherited amyloidosis. Although patients usually present with a distal painful polyneuropathy accompanied by sensory loss, autonomic insufficiency can precede the development of the polyneuropathy or occur in isolation. The diagnosis can be made by protein electrophoresis of blood and urine, tissue biopsy (abdominal fat pad, rectal mucosa, or sural nerve) to search for amyloid deposits, and genetic testing for transthyretin mutations in familial cases. Treatment of familial cases with liver transplantation can be successful. The response of primary amyloidosis to melphalan and stem cell transplantation has been mixed. Death is usually due to cardiac or renal involvement. Postmortem studies reveal amyloid deposition in many organs, including two sites that contribute to autonomic failure: intraneural blood vessels and autonomic ganglia. Pathologic examination reveals a loss of both unmyelinated and myelinated nerve fibers.
# Chunk 5434
Porphyria (Chap. 430) Autonomic dysfunction is most extensively documented in acute intermittent porphyria but can also occur with variegate porphyria and hereditary coproporphyria. Autonomic symptoms include tachycardia, sweating, urinary retention, abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting, insomnia, hypertension, and (less commonly) hypotension. Another prominent symptom is anxiety. Abnormal autonomic function can occur both during acute attacks and during remissions. Elevated catecholamine levels during acute attacks correlate with the degree of tachycardia and hypertension that is present.
# Chunk 5435
Drugs and toxins may also be responsible, including sympathomimetics such as phenylpropanolamine, cocaine, amphetamines, and tricyclic antidepressants; tetanus; and, less often, botulinum toxin. Cocaine, including “crack,” can cause a hypertensive state with CNS hyperstimulation. Tricyclic overdose, such as from amitriptyline, can cause flushing, hypertension, tachycardia, fever, mydriasis, anhidrosis, and a toxic psychosis. The hyperadrenergic state associated with Guillain-Barré syndrome can produce a moderate autonomic storm. Pheochromocytoma presents with a paroxysmal or sustained hyperadrenergic state, headache, hyperhidrosis, palpitations, anxiety, tremulousness, and hypertension. Neuroleptic malignant syndrome refers to a syndrome of muscle rigidity, hyperthermia, and hypertension in psychotic patients treated with phenothiazines (Chap. 449). Management of autonomic storm includes ruling out other causes of autonomic instability, including malignant hyperthermia, porphyria, and seizures. Sepsis and encephalitis need to be excluded with appropriate studies. An electroencephalogram (EEG) should be done to search for seizure activity; MRI of the brain and spine is often necessary. The patient should be managed in an intensive care unit. Management with morphine sulphate (10 mg every 4 h) and labetalol (100–200 mg twice daily) may be helpful. Supportive treatment may need to be maintained for several weeks. For chronic and milder autonomic storm, propranolol and/or clonidine can be effective.
# Chunk 5436
Anemia should be corrected with erythropoietin, administered subcutaneously at doses of 25–75 U/kg three times per week. The hematocrit increases after 2–6 weeks. A weekly maintenance dose is usually necessary. However, the increased intravascular volume that accompanies the rise in hematocrit can exacerbate supine hypertension.
# Chunk 5437
If these measures are not sufficient, pharmacologic treatment may be necessary. Midodrine, a directly acting α1-agonist that does not cross the blood-brain barrier, is effective. It has a duration of action of 2–4 h. The usual dose is 5–10 mg orally tid, but some patients respond best to a decremental dose (e.g., 15 mg on awakening, 10 mg at noon, and 5 mg in the afternoon). Midodrine should not be taken after 6:00 P.M. Side effects include pruritus, uncomfortable piloerection, and supine hypertension especially at higher doses. Droxidopa (Northera) was recently approved by the FDA for treatment of neurogenic OH associated with PAF, PD, or MSA; oral droxidopa is converted to NE and in short-term clinical trails was effective in decreasing symptoms of OH. Pyridostigmine (Mestinon) appears to improve OH without aggravating supine hypertension by enhancing ganglionic transmission (maximal when orthostatic, minimal when supine). Fludrocortisone will reduce OH but aggravates supine hypertension. At doses between 0.1 mg/d and 0.3 mg bid orally, it enhances renal sodium conservation and increases the sensitivity of arterioles to NE. Susceptible patients may develop fluid overload, congestive heart failure, supine hypertension, or hypokalemia. Potassium supplements are often necessary with chronic administration of fludrocortisone. Sustained elevations of supine BP >180/110 mmHg should be avoided. Supine hypertension (>180/110 mmHg) can be self-treated by avoiding the supine position (e.g., sleeping in a recumbent chair) and reducing fludrocortisone. A daily glass of wine, if requested by the patient, can be taken shortly before bedtime. If these simple measures are not adequate, drugs to be considered include oral hydralazine (25 mg qhs), oral nifedipine (Procardia; 10 mg qhs), or a nitroglycerin patch.
# Chunk 5438
TRIGEMINAL NEURALGIA (TIC DOULOUREUX) Clinical Manifestations Trigeminal neuralgia is characterized by excruciating paroxysms of pain in the lips, gums, cheek, or chin and, very rarely, in the distribution of the ophthalmic division of the fifth nerve. The pain seldom lasts more than a few seconds or a minute or two but may be so intense that the patient winces, hence the term tic. The paroxysms, experienced as single jabs or clusters, tend to recur frequently, both day and night, for several weeks at a time. They may occur spontaneously or with movements of affected areas evoked by speaking, chewing, or smiling. Another characteristic feature is the presence of trigger zones, typically on the face, lips, or tongue, that provoke attacks; patients may report that tactile stimuli—e.g., washing the face, brushing the teeth, or exposure to a draft of air—generate excruciating pain. An essential feature of trigeminal neuralgia is that objective signs of sensory loss cannot be demonstrated on examination.
# Chunk 5439
Drug therapy with carbamazepine is effective in ~50–75% of patients. Carbamazepine should be started as a single daily dose of 100 mg taken with food and increased gradually (by 100 mg daily in divided doses every 1–2 days) until substantial (>50%) pain relief is achieved. Most patients require a maintenance dose of 200 mg qid. Doses >1200 mg daily provide no additional benefit. Dizziness, imbalance, sedation, and rare cases of agranulocytosis are the most important side effects of carbamazepine. If treatment is effective, it is usually continued for 1 month and then tapered as tolerated. Oxcarbazepine (300–1200 mg bid) is an alternative to carbamazepine that has less bone marrow toxicity and probably is equally efficacious. If these agents are not well tolerated or are ineffective, lamotrigine, 400 mg daily, and phenytoin, 300–400 mg daily, are other options. Baclofen may also be tried, either alone or in combination with an anticonvulsant. The initial dose is 5–10 mg tid, gradually increasing as needed to 20 mg qid.
# Chunk 5440
Symptomatic measures include (1) the use of paper tape to depress the upper eyelid during sleep and prevent corneal drying, and (2) massage of the weakened muscles. A course of glucocorticoids, given as prednisone 60–80 mg daily during the first 5 days and then tapered over the next 5 days, modestly shortens the recovery period and improves the functional outcome. Although large and well-controlled randomized trials found no added benefit of the antiviral agents valacyclovir (1000 mg daily for 5–7 days) or acyclovir (400 mg five times daily for 10 days) compared to glucocorticoids alone, some earlier data suggested that combination therapy with prednisone plus valacyclovir might be marginally better than prednisolone alone, especially in patients with severe clinical presentations. For patients with permanent paralysis from Bell’s palsy, a number of cosmetic surgical procedures have been used to restore a relatively symmetric appearance to the face.
# Chunk 5441
In infectious cases, prompt administration of broad-spectrum antibiotics, drainage of any abscess cavities, and identification of the offending organism are essential. Anticoagulant therapy may benefit cases of primary thrombosis. Repair or occlusion of the carotid artery may be required for treatment of fistulas or aneurysms. The Tolosa-Hunt syndrome generally responds to glucocorticoids. A dramatic improvement in pain is usually evident within a few days; oral prednisone (60 mg daily) is usually continued for 2 weeks and then gradually tapered over a month, or longer if pain recurs. Occasionally an immunosuppressive medication, such as azathioprine or methotrexate, needs to be added to maintain an initial response to glucocorticoids.
# Chunk 5442
Determining the Level of the Lesion The presence of a horizontally defined level below which sensory, motor, and autonomic function is impaired is a hallmark of a lesion of the spinal cord. This sensory level is sought by asking the patient to identify a pinprick or cold stimulus applied to the proximal legs and lower trunk and successively moved up toward the neck on each side. Sensory loss below this level is the result of damage to the spinothalamic tract on the opposite side, one to two segments higher in the case of a unilateral spinal cord lesion, and at the level of a bilateral lesion. The discrepancy in the level of a unilateral lesion is the result of the course of the second-order sensory fibers, which originate in the dorsal horn, and ascend for one or two levels as they cross anterior to the central canal to join the opposite spinothalamic tract. Lesions that transect the descending corticospinal and other motor tracts cause paraplegia or quadriplegia with heightened deep tendon reflexes, Babinski signs, and eventual spasticity (the upper motor neuron syndrome). Transverse damage to the cord also produces autonomic disturbances consisting of absent sweating below the implicated cord level and bladder, bowel, and sexual dysfunction.
# Chunk 5443
thorAcic corD Lesions here are localized by the sensory level on the trunk and, if present, by the site of midline back pain. Useful markers of the sensory level on the trunk are the nipples (T4) and umbilicus (T10). Leg weakness and disturbances of bladder and bowel function accompany the paralysis. Lesions at T9-T10 paralyze the lower—but not the upper—abdominal muscles, resulting in upward movement of the umbilicus when the abdominal wall contracts (Beevor’s sign).
# Chunk 5444
Management of cord compression includes glucocorticoids to reduce cord edema, local radiotherapy (initiated as early as possible) to the symptomatic lesion, and specific therapy for the underlying tumor type. Glucocorticoids (dexamethasone, up to 40 mg daily) can be administered before an imaging study if there is clinical suspicion of cord compression and the medication is continued at a lower dose until definitive treatment with radiotherapy (generally 3000 cGy administered in 15 daily fractions) and/or surgical decompression is completed. In one randomized controlled trial, initial management with surgery followed by radiotherapy was more effective than radiotherapy alone for patients with a single area of spinal cord compression by extradural tumor; however, patients with recurrent cord compression, brain metastases, radiosensitive tumors, or severe motor symptoms of >48 h in duration were excluded from this study. Radiotherapy alone may be effective even for some typically radio-resistant metastases. A good response to therapy can be expected in individuals who are ambulatory at presentation. Treatment usually prevents new weakness, and some recovery of motor function occurs in up to one-third of patients. Motor deficits (paraplegia or quadriplegia), once established for >12 h, do not usually improve, and beyond 48 h the prognosis for substantial motor recovery is poor. Although most patients do not experience recurrences in the months following radiotherapy, with survival beyond 2 years, recurrence becomes
# Chunk 5445
Spinal Epidural Abscess Spinal epidural abscess presents with midline back or neck pain, fever, and progressive limb weakness. Prompt recognition of this distinctive process may prevent permanent sequelae. Aching pain is almost always present, either over the spine or in a radicular pattern. The duration of pain prior to presentation is generally ≤2 weeks but may on occasion be several months or longer. Fever is typically but not invariably present, accompanied by elevated white blood cell count, sedimentation rate, and C-reactive protein. As the abscess expands, further spinal cord damage results from venous congestion and thrombosis. Once weakness and other signs of myelopathy appear, progression may be rapid and irreversible. A more chronic sterile granulomatous form of abscess is also known, usually after treatment of an acute epidural infection.
# Chunk 5446
5.

Sarcoidosis: Serum angiotensin-converting enzyme; serum Ca; 24-h urine Ca; chest x-ray; chest CT; total-body gallium scan; lymph node biopsy.
# Chunk 5447
7.

Vascular causes: MRI, CT myelogram; spinal angiogram.

Abbreviations: ANA, antinuclear antibodies; CMV, cytomegalovirus; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; CT, computed tomography; EBV, Epstein-Barr virus; ENA, epithelial neutrophil-activating peptide; ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; HHV, human herpes virus; HSV, herpes simplex virus; HTLV, human T cell leukemia/lymphoma virus; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; O&P, ova and parasites; p-ANCA, perinuclear antineutrophilic cytoplasmic antibodies; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; RPR, rapid plasma reagin (test); VDRL, Venereal Disease Research Laboratory; VZV, varicella-zoster virus.
# Chunk 5448
multiple ScleroSiS MS may present with acute myelitis, particularly in individuals of Asian or African ancestry. In Caucasians, MS attacks rarely cause a transverse myelopathy (i.e., attacks of bilateral sensory disturbances, unilateral or bilateral weakness, and bladder or bowel symptoms), but it is among the most common causes of a partial cord syndrome. MRI findings in MS-associated myelitis typically consist of mild swelling of the cord and diffuse or multifocal “shoddy” areas of abnormal signal on T2-weighted sequences. Contrast enhancement, indicating disruption in the blood-brain barrier associated with inflammation, is present in many acute cases. A brain MRI is most helpful in gauging the likelihood that a case of myelitis represents an initial attack of MS. A normal scan indicates that the risk of evolution to MS is low, ~10–15% over 5 years; in contrast, the finding of multiple periventricular T2-bright lesions indicates a much higher risk, >50% over 5 years and >90% by 14 years. The CSF may be normal, but more often there is a mild mononuclear cell pleocytosis, with normal or mildly elevated CSF protein levels; the presence of oligoclonal bands is variable, but when they are found, a diagnosis of MS is more likely.
# Chunk 5449
neuromyelitiS opticA NMO is an immune-mediated demyelinating disorder consisting of a severe myelopathy that is typically longitudinally extensive, meaning that the lesion spans three or more vertebral segments. NMO is associated with optic neuritis that is often bilateral and may precede or follow myelitis by weeks or months, and also by brainstem and, in some cases, hypothalamic involvement. Recurrent myelitis without optic nerve involvemement can also occur in NMO; affected individuals are usually female and often of Asian ancestry. CSF studies reveal a variable mononuclear pleocytosis of up to several hundred cells per microliter; unlike MS, oligoclonal bands are generally absent. Diagnostic serum autoantibodies against the water channel protein aquaporin-4 are present in 60–70% of patients with NMO. NMO has also been associated with SLE and antiphospholipid antibodies (see below) as well as with other systemic autoimmune diseases; rare cases are paraneoplastic in origin. Treatment is with glucocorticoids and, for refractory cases, plasma exchange (as for MS, above). Preliminary studies suggest that treatment with azathioprine, mycophenylate, or anti-CD20 (anti–B cell) monoclonal antibody may protect against subsequent relapses; treatment for 5 years or longer is generally recommended. NMO is discussed in Chap. 458.
# Chunk 5450
Another important consideration in this group is sarcoid myelopathy that may present as a slowly progressive or relapsing disorder. MRI reveals an edematous swelling of the spinal cord that may mimic tumor; there is almost always gadolinium enhancement of active lesions and in some cases nodular enhancement of the adjacent surface of the cord; lesions may be single or multiple, and on axial images, enhancement of the central cord is usually present. The typical CSF profile consists of a mild lymphocytic pleocytosis and mildly elevated protein level; in a minority of cases, reduced glucose and oligoclonal bands are found. The diagnosis is particularly difficult when systemic manifestations of sarcoid are minor or absent (nearly 50% of cases) or when other typical neurologic manifestations of the disease—such as cranial neuropathy, hypothalamic involvement, or meningeal enhancement visualized by MRI—are lacking. A slit-lamp examination of the eye to search for uveitis, chest x-ray and CT to assess pulmonary involvement and mediastinal lymphadenopathy, serum or CSF angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE; CSF values elevated in only a minority of cases), serum calcium, and a gallium scan may assist in the diagnosis. The usefulness of spinal fluid ACE is uncertain. Initial treatment is with oral glucocorticoids; immunosuppressant drugs, including the tumor necrosis factor α inhibitor infliximab, have been used for resistant cases. Sarcoidosis is discussed in Chap. 390.
# Chunk 5451
In cases of suspected viral myelitis, it may be appropriate to begin specific therapy pending laboratory confirmation. Herpes zoster, HSV, and EBV myelitis are treated with intravenous acyclovir (10 mg/kg q8h) or oral valacyclovir (2 g tid) for 10–14 days; CMV is treated with ganciclovir (5 mg/kg IV bid) plus foscarnet (60 mg/kg IV tid) or cidofovir (5 mg/kg per week for 2 weeks).
# Chunk 5452
The myelopathy associated with HTLV-1, formerly called tropical spastic paraparesis, is a slowly progressive spastic syndrome with variable sensory and bladder disturbance. Approximately half of patients have mild back or leg pain. The neurologic signs may be asymmetric, often lacking a well-defined sensory level; the only sign in the arms may be hyperreflexia after several years of illness. The onset is insidious, and the illness is slowly progressive at a variable rate; most patients are unable to walk within 10 years of onset. This presentation may resemble primary progressive MS or a thoracic AVM. Diagnosis is made by demonstration of HTLV-1-specific antibody in serum by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), confirmed by radioimmunoprecipitation or Western blot analysis. Especially in endemic areas, a finding of HTLV-1 seropositivity in a patient with myelopathy does not necessarily prove that HTLV-1 is causative. The CSF/serum antibody index may provide support by establishing intrathecal synthesis of antibodies favoring HTVL-1 myelopathy over asymptomatic carriage. Measuring proviral DNA by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in serum and CSF cells can be useful as an ancillary part of diagnosis, because proviral DNA levels may be higher in patients with myelopathy. The myelopathy appears to result from an
# Chunk 5453
Diseases of the Spinal Cord

FIGURE 456-6 Arteriovenous malformation. Sagittal magnetic resonance scans of the thoracic spinal cord: T2 fast spin-echo technique (left) and T1 postcontrast image (right). On the T2-weighted image (left), abnormally high signal intensity is noted in the central aspect of the spinal cord (arrowheads). Numerous punctate flow voids indent the dorsal and ventral spinal cord (arrow). These represent the abnormally dilated venous plexus supplied by a dural arteriovenous fistula. After contrast administration (right), multiple, serpentine, enhancing veins (arrows) on the ventral and dorsal aspect of the thoracic spinal cord are visualized, diagnostic of arteriovenous malformation. This patient was a 54-year-old man with a 4-year history of progressive paraparesis.
# Chunk 5454
This treatable myelopathy presents with subacute paresthesias in the hands and feet, loss of vibration and position sensation, and a progressive spastic and ataxic weakness. Loss of reflexes due to an associated peripheral neuropathy in a patient who also has Babinski signs is an important diagnostic clue. Optic atrophy and irritability or other cognitive changes may be prominent in advanced cases and are occasionally the presenting symptoms. The myelopathy of subacute combined degeneration tends to be diffuse rather than focal; signs are generally symmetric and reflect predominant involvement of the posterior and lateral tracts, including Romberg’s sign. The diagnosis is confirmed by the finding of macrocytic red blood cells, a low serum B12 concentration, elevated serum levels of homocysteine and methylmalonic acid, and in uncertain cases, testing for anti–parietal cell antibodies and a Schilling test. Treatment is by replacement therapy, beginning with 1000 μg of intramuscular vitamin B12 repeated at regular intervals or by subsequent oral treatment (Chap. 128).
# Chunk 5455
The classic syphilitic syndromes of tabes dorsalis and meningovascular inflammation of the spinal cord are now less frequent than in the past but must be considered in the differential diagnosis of spinal cord disorders. The characteristic symptoms of tabes are fleeting and repetitive lancinating pains, primarily in the legs or less often in the back, thorax, abdomen, arms, and face. Ataxia of the legs and gait due to loss of position sense occurs in half of patients. Paresthesias, bladder disturbances, and acute abdominal pain with vomiting (visceral crisis) occur in 15–30% of patients. The cardinal signs of tabes are loss of reflexes in the legs; impaired position and vibratory sense; Romberg’s sign; and, in almost all cases, bilateral Argyll Robertson pupils, which fail to constrict to light but accommodate. Diabetic polyradiculopathy may simulate tabes.
# Chunk 5456
A paroxysmal autonomic hyperreflexia may occur following lesions above the major splanchnic sympathetic outflow at T6. Headache, flushing, and diaphoresis above the level of the lesion, as well as hypertension with bradycardia or tachycardia, are the major symptoms. The trigger is typically a noxious stimulus—for example, bladder or bowel distention, a urinary tract infection, or a decubitus ulcer—below the level of the cord lesion. Treatment consists of removal of offending stimuli; ganglionic blocking agents (mecamylamine, 2.5–5 mg) or other short-acting antihypertensive drugs are useful in some patients.
# Chunk 5457
Almost 10 million head injuries occur annually in the United States, about 20% of which are serious enough to cause brain damage. Among men <35 years, accidents, usually motor vehicle collisions, are the chief cause of death and >70% of these involve head injury. Furthermore, minor head injuries are so common that almost all physicians will be called upon to provide immediate care or to see patients who are suffering from various sequelae.
# Chunk 5458
Concussion and Other traumatic Brain Injuries Allan H. Ropper Almost 10 million head injuries occur annually in the United States, about 20% of which are serious enough to cause brain damage. Among 457e men <35 years, accidents, usually motor vehicle collisions, are the chief cause of death and >70% of these involve head injury. Furthermore, minor head injuries are so common that almost all physicians will be called upon to provide immediate care or to see patients who are suffering from various sequelae.
# Chunk 5459
The cranial nerves most often injured with head trauma are the olfactory, optic, oculomotor, and trochlear; the first and second branches of the trigeminal nerve; and the facial and auditory nerves. Anosmia and an apparent loss of taste (actually a loss of perception of aromatic flavors, with retained elementary taste perception) occur in ~10% of persons with serious head injuries, particularly from falls on the back of the head. This is the result of displacement of the brain and shearing of the fine olfactory nerve filaments that course through the cribriform bone. At least partial recovery of olfactory and gustatory function is expected, but if bilateral anosmia persists for several months, the prognosis is poor. Partial optic nerve injuries from closed trauma result in blurring of vision, central or paracentral scotomas, or sector defects. Direct orbital injury may cause short-lived blurred vision for close objects due to reversible iridoplegia. Diplopia limited to downward gaze and corrected when the head is tilted away from the side of the affected eye indicates trochlear (fourth nerve) nerve damage. It occurs frequently as an isolated problem after minor head injury or may develop for unknown reasons after a delay of several days. Facial nerve injury caused by a basilar fracture is present immediately in up to 3% of severe injuries; it may also be delayed for 5–7 days. Fractures through the petrous bone, particularly the less common transverse type, are liable to produce facial palsy. Delayed facial palsy occurring up to a week after injury, the mechanism of which is unknown, has a good prognosis. Injury to the eighth cranial nerve from a fracture of the petrous bone causes loss of hearing, vertigo, and nystagmus immediately after injury. Deafness from eighth nerve injury is rare and must be distinguished from blood in the middle ear or disruption of the middle ear ossicles. Dizziness, tinnitus, and high-tone hearing loss occur from cochlear concussion, most typically after blast injury.
# Chunk 5460
Convulsions are surprisingly uncommon immediately after a head injury, but a brief period of tonic extensor posturing or a few clonic movements of the limbs just after the moment of impact can occur. However, the cortical scars that evolve from contusions are highly epileptogenic and may later manifest as seizures, even after many months or years (Chap. 445). The severity of injury roughly determines the risk of future seizures. It has been estimated that 17% of individuals with brain contusion, subdural hematoma, or prolonged loss of consciousness will develop a seizure disorder and that this risk extends for an indefinite period of time, whereas the risk is ≤2% after mild injury. The majority of convulsions in the latter group occur within 5 years of injury but may be delayed for decades. Penetrating injuries have a much higher rate of subsequent epilepsy.
# Chunk 5461
testing do not affect daily functioning. Test scores tend to improve rapidly during the first 6 months after injury and then more slowly for years.
# Chunk 5462
Geographical gradients have been repeatedly observed in MS, with the highest known prevalence for MS (250 per 100,000) in the Orkney Islands, located north of Scotland. In other temperate zone areas (e.g., northern North America, northern Europe, southern Australia, and southern New Zealand), the prevalence of MS is 0.1–0.2%. By contrast, in the tropics (e.g., Asia, equatorial Africa, and the Middle East), the prevalence is often 10to 20-fold less.
# Chunk 5463
Weakness of the limbs may manifest as loss of strength, speed, or dexterity, as fatigue, or as a disturbance of gait. Exercise-induced weakness is a characteristic symptom of MS. The weakness is of the upper motor neuron type (Chap. 30) and is usually accompanied by other pyramidal signs such as spasticity, hyperreflexia, and Babinski signs. Occasionally a tendon reflex may be lost (simulating a lower motor neuron lesion) if an MS lesion disrupts the afferent reflex fibers in the spinal cord (see Fig. 30-2).
# Chunk 5464
Bladder dysfunction is present in >90% of MS patients, and in a third of patients, dysfunction results in weekly or more frequent episodes of incontinence. During normal reflex voiding, relaxation of the bladder sphincter (α-adrenergic innervation) is coordinated with contraction of the detrusor muscle in the bladder wall (muscarinic cholinergic innervation). Detrusor hyperreflexia, due to impairment of suprasegmental inhibition, causes urinary frequency, urgency, nocturia, and uncontrolled bladder emptying. Detrusor sphincter dyssynergia, due to loss of synchronization between detrusor and sphincter muscles, causes difficulty in initiating and/or stopping the urinary stream, producing hesitancy, urinary retention, overflow incontinence, and recurrent infection.
# Chunk 5465
Constipation occurs in >30% of patients. Fecal urgency or bowel incontinence is less common (<15%) but can be socially debilitating.
# Chunk 5466
Fatigue (Chap. 29) is experienced by 90% of patients; this symptom is the most common reason for work-related disability in MS. Fatigue can be exacerbated by elevated temperatures, depression, expending exceptional effort to accomplish basic activities of daily living, or sleep disturbances (e.g., from frequent nocturnal awakenings to urinate).
# Chunk 5467
DIAGNOSTIC TESTS Magnetic Resonance Imaging MRI has revolutionized the diagnosis and management of MS (Fig. 458-3); characteristic abnormalities are found in >95% of patients, although more than 90% of the lesions visualized by MRI are asymptomatic. An increase in vascular permeability from a breakdown of the BBB is detected by leakage of intravenous gadolinium (Gd) into the parenchyma. Such leakage occurs early in the development of an MS lesion and serves as a useful marker of inflammation. Gd enhancement typically persists for approximately 1 month, and the residual MS plaque remains visible indefinitely as a focal area of hyperintensity (a lesion) on spin-echo (T2-weighted) and proton-density images. Lesions are frequently oriented perpendicular to the ventricular surface, corresponding to the pathologic pattern of perivenous demyelination (Dawson’s fingers). Lesions are multifocal within the brain, brainstem, and spinal cord. Lesions larger than 6 mm located in the corpus callosum, periventricular white matter, brain-stem, cerebellum, or spinal cord are particularly helpful diagnostically. Current criteria for the use of MRI in the diagnosis of MS are shown in Table 458-3.
# Chunk 5468
No single clinical sign or test is diagnostic of MS. The diagnosis is readily made in a young adult with relapsing and remitting symptoms involving different areas of CNS white matter. The possibility of an alternative diagnosis should always be considered (Table 458-4), particularly when (1) symptoms are localized exclusively to the posterior fossa, craniocervical junction, or spinal cord; (2) the patient is <15 or >60 years of age; (3) the clinical course is progressive from onset; (4) the patient has never experienced visual, sensory, or bladder symptoms; or (5) laboratory findings (e.g., MRI, CSF, or EPs) are atypical. Similarly, uncommon or rare symptoms in MS (e.g., aphasia, parkinsonism, chorea, isolated dementia, severe muscular atrophy, peripheral neuropathy, episodic loss of consciousness, fever, headache, seizures, or coma) should increase concern about an alternative diagnosis. Diagnosis is also difficult in patients with a rapid or explosive (stroke-like) onset or with mild symptoms and a normal neurologic examination. Rarely, intense inflammation and swelling may produce a mass lesion that mimics a primary or metastatic tumor. In the current era, the disorders most likely to be mistaken for MS are neuromyelitis optica (see below), sarcoid, vascular disorders (including antiphospholipid syndrome and vasculitis), and rarely CNS lymphoma. The specific tests required to exclude alternative diagnoses will vary with each clinical situation; however, an erythrocyte sedimentation rate, serum B12 level, ANA, and treponemal antibody should probably be obtained in all patients with suspected MS.
# Chunk 5469
Glucocorticoid treatment is usually administered as intravenous methylprednisolone, 500–1000 mg/d for 3–5 days, either without a taper or followed by a course of oral prednisone beginning at a dose of 60–80 mg/d and gradually tapered over 2 weeks. Orally administered methylprednisolone or dexamethasone (in equivalent dosages) can be substituted for the intravenous portion of the therapy, although gastrointestinal complications are more common by this route. Outpatient treatment is almost always possible.
# Chunk 5470
Dose, Route, and Schedule Attack Rate, Mean Change in Disease Severity New T2 Lesionsd Total Burden of Disease aPercentage reductions (or increases) have been calculated by dividing the reported rates in the treated group by the comparable rates in the placebo group, except for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) disease burden, which was calculated as the difference in the median percent change between the treated and placebo groups. bSeverity = 1 point Expanded Disability Status Score progression, sustained for 3 months (in the IFN-β-1a 30 μg qw trial, this change was sustained for 6 months; in the IFN-β-1b trial, this was over 3 years). cDifferent studies measured these MRI measures differently, making comparisons difficult (numbers for new T2 represent the best case scenario for each trial). dNew lesions seen on T2-weighted MRI. ep = .001. fp = .01. gp = .05.
# Chunk 5471
Abbreviations: DMF, dimethyl fumarate; FDA, U.S. Food and Drug Administration; FGM, fingolimod; GA, glatiramer acetate; IFN-β, interferon β; IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; MTX, mitoxantrone; NR, not reported; NS, not significant; NTZ, natalizumab; PO, oral; q3mo, once every 3 months; qd, daily; qmo, once per month; qod, every other day; qw, once per week; qyr, once per year; SC, subcutaneous; TF, teriflunomide; tiw, three times per week.
# Chunk 5472
the balance between proinflammatory and regulatory cytokines. Glatiramer acetate reduces the attack rate (whether measured clinically or by MRI) in RRMS. Glatiramer acetate also benefits disease severity measures, although, for clinical disability, this is less well established than for IFN-β. Nevertheless, two very large head-tohead trials demonstrated that the impact of glatiramer acetate on clinical relapse rates and disability was comparable to high-dose, high-frequency IFN-β. Therefore, glatiramer acetate should be considered as an equally effective alternative to IFN-β in RRMS patients. Its usefulness in progressive disease is unknown. Glatiramer acetate is administered by subcutaneous injection of either 20 mg every day or 40 mg thrice weekly. Injection-site reactions also occur with glatiramer acetate. Initially, these were thought to be less severe than with IFN-β, although two recent head-to-head comparisons of high-dose, high-frequency IFN-β to daily glatiramer acetate did not bear out this impression. In addition, approximately 15% of patients experience one or more episodes of flushing, chest tightness, dyspnea, palpitations, and anxiety after injection. This systemic reaction is unpredictable, brief (duration <1 h), and tends not to recur. Finally, some patients experience lipoatrophy, which, on occasion, can be disfiguring and require cessation of treatment.
# Chunk 5473
Natalizumab Natalizumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody directed against the α4 subunit of α4β1 integrin, a cellular adhesion molecule expressed on the surface of lymphocytes. It prevents lymphocytes from binding to endothelial cells, thereby preventing lymphocytes from penetrating the BBB and entering the CNS. Natalizumab is highly effective in reducing the attack rate and significantly improves all measures of disease severity in MS (both clinical and MRI). Moreover, it is well-tolerated, and the dosing schedule of monthly intravenous infusions makes it very convenient for patients. However, progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML), a life-threatening condition resulting from infection by the John Cunningham (JC) virus, has occurred in approximately 0.3% of patients treated with natalizumab. The incidence of PML is very low in the first year of treatment but then rises by the second year to reach a level of about 2 cases per 1000 patients per year. Nevertheless, the measurement of antibodies against the JC virus in the serum can be used to stratify this risk. Thus, in patients who do not have these antibodies, the risk of PML is either minimal or nonexistent (as long as they remain JC antibody free). Conversely, in patients who have these antibodies (especially those who have them in high titer), the risk may be as high as 0.6% or greater. The risk is also high in patients who have previously received immunosuppressive therapy. Natalizumab is currently recommended only for JC antibody–negative patients, unless they have failed alternative therapies or if they have a particularly aggressive disease course. Head-to-head data show that natalizumab is superior to low-dose (weekly) IFN-β-1a in RRMS. However, its relative efficacy compared to other agents has not been established conclusively.
# Chunk 5474
Fingolimod Fingolimod is a sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) inhibitor that prevents the egress of lymphocytes from the secondary lymphoid organs such as the lymph nodes and spleen. Its mechanism of action is probably due, in part, to the trapping of lymphocytes in the periphery and inhibiting their trafficking to the CNS. Fingolimod reduces the attack rate and significantly improves all measures of disease severity in MS. It is well tolerated, and the daily oral dosing schedule makes it very convenient for patients. A large head-to-head phase 3 randomized study demonstrated the superiority of fingolimod over low-dose (weekly) IFN-β-1a. However, its relative efficacy compared to other agents has not been established conclusively.
# Chunk 5475
Teriflunomide Teriflunomide inhibits the mitochondrial enzyme dihydro-orotate dehydrogenase, which is a key part of the pathway for de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis from carbamoyl phosphate and aspartate. It is the active metabolite of the drug leflunomide (FDA-approved for rheumatoid arthritis), and it exerts its anti-inflammatory effects by limiting the proliferation of rapidly dividing T and B cells. This enzyme is not involved in the so-called “salvage pathway,” by which existing pyrimidine pools are recycled for DNA and RNA synthesis in resting and homeostatically proliferating cells. Consequently, teriflunomide is considered to be cytostatic rather than cytotoxic. Teriflunomide reduces the attack rate and significantly improves all measures of disease severity in MS patients. It is well tolerated, and its daily oral dosing schedule makes it very convenient for patients. A head-to-head trial suggested the equivalence, but not superiority, of teriflunomide and high-dose (thriceweekly) IFN-β-1a. Teriflunomide, either 7 or 14 mg, is administered orally each day. In the pivotal clinical trials, mild hair thinning and gastrointestinal symptoms (nausea and diarrhea) were more common than in controls, but in general, treatment with teriflunomide was well tolerated. As with any new agent, the long-term safety is not guaranteed by the results of short-term trials. A major limitation, especially in women of childbearing age, is its possible teratogenicity (pregnancy category X); teriflunomide can remain in the bloodstream for 2 years, and it is recommended that exposed men and women who wish to conceive receive cholestyramine or activated charcoal to eliminate residual drug.
# Chunk 5476
Alemtuzumab Alemtuzumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody directed against the CD52 antigen, which is expressed on both monocytes and lymphocytes. It causes lymphocyte depletion (of both B and T cells) and a change in the composition of lymphocyte subsets. Both of these changes, particularly the impact on lymphocyte subsets, are long lasting. In preliminary trials, alemtuzumab markedly reduced the attack rate and significantly improved all measures of disease severity in MS patients. In two phase 3 trials, however, its impact on clinical disability was less convincing. Notably, both trials used the active comparator of thrice-weekly, high-dose IFN-β-1a. The European and Canadian drug agencies were the first to approve this agent for use in RRMS; the FDA has also approved alemtuzumab, but only after an appeal following initial disapproval. The reasons for the initial disapproval were based on a perceived lack of a convincing disability effect and concerns over potential toxicity. The toxicities of concern were the occurrence (during the trial or thereafter) of (1) autoimmune diseases including thyroiditis, Graves’ disease, thrombocytopenia, hemolytic anemia, pancytopenia, antiglomerular basement membrane disease, and membranous glomerulonephritis; (2) malignancies including thyroid cancer, melanoma, breast cancer, and human papillomavirus (HPV)–related cancers; (3) serious infections; and (4) infusion reactions.
# Chunk 5477
Methotrexate (7.5–20 mg/week) was shown in one study to slow the progression of upper extremity dysfunction in SPMS. Because of the possibility of developing irreversible liver damage, some experts recommend a blind liver biopsy after 2 years of therapy.
# Chunk 5478
Bladder dysfunction management is best guided by urodynamic testing. Evening fluid restriction or frequent voluntary voiding may help detrusor hyperreflexia. If these methods fail, propantheline bromide (10–15 mg/d), oxybutynin (5–15 mg/d), hyoscyamine sulfate (0.5–0.75 mg/d), tolterodine tartrate (2–4 mg/d), or solifenacin (5–10 mg/d) may help. Coadministration of pseudoephedrine (30–60 mg) is sometimes beneficial.
# Chunk 5479
Acute MS (Marburg’s variant) is a fulminant demyelinating process that in some cases progresses inexorably to death within 1–2 years. Typically, there are no remissions. When acute MS presents as a solitary, usually cavitary, lesion, a brain tumor is often suspected. In such cases, a brain biopsy is usually required to establish the diagnosis. An antibody-mediated process appears to be responsible for most cases. Marburg’s variant does not seem to follow infection or vaccination, and it is unclear whether this syndrome represents an extreme form of MS or another disease altogether. No controlled trials of therapy exist; high-dose glucocorticoids, plasma exchange, and cyclophosphamide have been tried, with uncertain benefit.
# Chunk 5480
Disease-modifying therapies have not been rigorously studied in NMO. Acute attacks of NMO are usually treated with high-dose glucocorticoids (solumedrol 1–2 g/d for 5–10 days followed by a prednisone taper). Plasma exchange (typically 7 qod exchanges of 1.5 plasma volumes) has also been used empirically for acute episodes that fail to respond to glucocorticoids. Given the unfavorable natural history of untreated NMO, prophylaxis against relapses is recommended for most patients using one of the following regimens: mycophenylate mofetil (250 mg bid gradually increasing to 1000 mg bid); B cell depletion with anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody (rituximab); or a combination of glucocorticoids (500 mg IV methylprednisolone daily for 5 days; then oral prednisone 1 mg/kg per day for 2 months, followed by slow taper) plus azathioprine (2 mg/kg per day started on week 3). Available evidence suggests that use of IFN-β is ineffective and paradoxically may increase the risk of NMO relapses.
# Chunk 5481
Postinfectious encephalomyelitis is most frequently associated with the viral exanthems of childhood. Infection with measles virus is the most common antecedent (1 in 1000 cases). Worldwide, measles encephalomyelitis is still common, although use of the live measles vaccine has dramatically reduced its incidence in developed countries. An ADEM-like illness rarely follows vaccination with live measles vaccine (1–2 in 106 immunizations). ADEM is now most frequently associated with varicella (chickenpox) infections (1 in 4000–10,000 cases). It may also follow infection with rubella, mumps, influenza, parainfluenza, EBV, HHV-6, HIV, other viruses, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae. Some patients may have a nonspecific upper respiratory infection or no known antecedent illness. In addition to measles, postvaccinal encephalomyelitis may also follow the administration 2674 of vaccines for smallpox (5 cases per million), the Semple rabies, and with predominantly cerebral involvement, acute encephalitis due to Japanese encephalitis. Modern vaccines that do not require viral cul-infection with herpes simplex or other viruses including HIV may beture in CNS tissue have reduced the ADEM risk. difficult to exclude (Chap. 164); other considerations include hyper-All forms of ADEM presumably result from a cross-reactive coagulable states including the antiphospholipid antibody syndrome,immune response to the infectious agent or vaccine that then triggers vasculitis, neurosarcoid, primary CNS lymphoma, or metastatic can-an inflammatory demyelinating response. Autoantibodies to MBP and cer. An explosive presentation of MS can mimic ADEM, and especially to other myelin antigens have been detected in the CSF from some in adults, it may not be possible to distinguish these conditions atpatients with ADEM. Attempts to demonstrate direct viral invasion of onset. The simultaneous onset of disseminated symptoms and signs isthe CNS have been unsuccessful. common in ADEM and rare in MS. Similarly, meningismus, drowsi ness, coma, and seizures suggest ADEM rather than MS. Unlike MS, CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS in ADEM, optic nerve involvement is generally bilateral and transverse In severe cases, onset is abrupt and progression rapid (hours to days). myelopathy complete. MRI findings that favor ADEM include exten-In postinfectious ADEM, the neurologic syndrome generally begins sive and relatively symmetric white matter abnormalities, basal ganglialate in the course of the viral illness as the exanthem is fading. Fever or cortical gray matter lesions, and Gd enhancement of all abnormalreappears, and headache, meningismus, and lethargy progressing to areas. By contrast, OCBs in the CSF are more common in MS. In onecoma may develop. Seizures are common. Signs of disseminated study of adult patients initially thought to have ADEM, 30% experineurologic disease are consistently present (e.g., hemiparesis or enced additional relapses over a follow-up period of 3 years, and they quadriparesis, extensor plantar responses, lost or hyperactive ten-were reclassified as having MS. Occasional patients with “recurrent don reflexes, sensory loss, and brainstem involvement). In ADEM ADEM” have also been reported, especially children; however, it is not due to chickenpox, cerebellar involvement is often conspicuous. possible to distinguish this entity from atypical MS. CSF protein is modestly elevated (0.5–1.5 g/L [50–150 mg/dL]). Lymphocytic pleocytosis, generally 200 cells/μL or greater, occurs in 80% of patients. Occasional patients have higher counts or a mixed polymorphonuclear-lymphocytic pattern during the initial days of the
# Chunk 5482
In patients with generalized symmetric peripheral neuropathy, a standard laboratory evaluation should include a complete blood count, basic chemistries including serum electrolytes and tests of renal and hepatic function, fasting blood glucose (FBS), HbA1c, urinalysis, thyroid function tests, B12, folate, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibodies (ANA), serum protein electrophoresis (SPEP) and immunoelectrophoresis or immunofixation, and urine for Bence Jones protein. Quantification of the concentration of serum free light chains and the kappa/lambda ratio is more sensitive than SPEP, immunoelectrophoresis, or immunofixation in looking for a monoclonal gammopathy and therefore should be done if one suspects amyloidosis. A skeletal survey should be performed in patients with acquired demyelinating neuropathies and M-spikes to look for osteosclerotic or lytic lesions. Patients with monoclonal gammopathy should also be referred to a hematologist for consideration of a bone marrow biopsy. An oral glucose tolerance test is indicated in patients with painful sensory neuropathies even if FBS and HbA1c are normal, 2677 as the test is abnormal in about one-third of such patients. In addition to the above tests, patients with a mononeuropathy multiplex pattern of involvement should have a vasculitis workup, including antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), cryoglobulins, hepatitis serology, Western blot for Lyme disease, HIV, and occasionally a cytomegalovirus (CMV) titer.
# Chunk 5483
Serum phytanic acid levels are elevated. Sensory and motor NCS reveal reduced amplitudes, prolonged latencies, and slowed conduction velocities. Nerve biopsy demonstrates a loss of myelinated nerve fibers, with remaining axons often thinly myelinated and associated with onion bulb formation.
# Chunk 5484
An acute attack of porphyria may begin with sharp abdominal pain. Subsequently, patients may develop agitation, hallucinations, or seizures. Several days later, back and extremity pain followed by weakness ensues, mimicking GBS. Weakness can involve the arms or the legs and can be asymmetric, proximal, or distal in distribution, as well as affecting the face and bulbar musculature. Dysautonomia and signs of sympathetic overactivity are common (e.g., pupillary dilation, tachycardia, and hypertension). Constipation, urinary retention, and incontinence can also be seen.
# Chunk 5485
Patients with TTR-related FAP usually develop insidious onset of numbness and painful paresthesias in the distal lower limbs in the third to fourth decade of life, although some patients develop the disorder later in life. Carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) is common. Autonomic involvement can be severe, leading to postural hypotension, constipation or persistent diarrhea, erectile dysfunction, and impaired sweating. Amyloid deposition also occurs in the heart, kidneys, liver, and corneas. Patients usually die 10–15 years after the onset of symptoms from cardiac failure or complications from malnutrition. Because the liver produces much of the body’s TTR, liver transplantation has been used to treat FAP related to TTR mutations. Serum TTR levels decrease after transplantation, and improvement in clinical and EDx features has been reported.
# Chunk 5486
Approximately 30% of patients with AL primary amyloidosis present with a polyneuropathy, most typically painful dysesthesias and burning sensations in the feet. However, the trunk can be involved, and some patients manifest with a mononeuropathy multiplex pattern. CTS occurs in 25% of patients and may be the initial manifestation. The neuropathy is slowly progressive, and eventually weakness 2682 develops along with large-fiber sensory loss. Most patients develop autonomic involvement with postural hypertension, syncope, bowel and bladder incontinence, constipation, impotence, and impaired sweating. Patients generally die from their systemic illness (renal failure, cardiac disease). The monoclonal protein may be composed of IgG, IgA, IgM, or only free light chain. Lambda (λ) is more common than κ light chain (>2:1) in AL amyloidosis. The CSF protein is often increased (with normal cell count), and thus the neuropathy may be mistaken for CIDP (Chap. 460). Nerve biopsies reveal axonal degeneration and amyloid deposition in either a globular or diffuse pattern infiltrating the perineurial, epineurial, and endoneurial connected tissue and in blood vessel walls. The median survival of patients with primary amyloidosis is less than 2 years, with death usually from progressive congestive heart failure or renal failure. Chemotherapy with melphalan, prednisone, and colchicine, to reduce the concentration of monoclonal proteins, and autologous stem cell transplantation may prolong survival, but whether the neuropathy improves is controversial.
# Chunk 5487
DSPN is the most common form of diabetic neuropathy and manifests as sensory loss beginning in the toes that gradually progresses over time up the legs and into the fingers and arms. When severe, a patient may develop sensory loss in the trunk (chest and abdomen), initially in the midline anteriorly and later extending laterally. Tingling, burning, deep aching pains may also be apparent. NCS usually show reduced amplitudes and mild to moderate slowing of conduction velocities (CVs). Nerve biopsy reveals axonal degeneration, endothelial hyperplasia, and, occasionally, perivascular inflammation. Tight control of glucose can reduce the risk of developing neuropathy or improve the underlying neuropathy. A variety of medications have been used with variable success to treat painful symptoms associated with DSPN, including antiepileptic medications, antidepressants, sodium channel blockers, and other analgesics (Table 459-6).
# Chunk 5488
Patients with neuropathy due to Sjögren’s syndrome may have ANAs, SS-A/Ro, and SS-B/La antibodies in the serum, but most do not. NCS demonstrate reduced amplitudes of sensory studies in the affected limbs. Nerve biopsy demonstrates axonal degeneration. Nonspecific perivascular inflammation may be present, but only rarely is there necrotizing vasculitis. There is no specific treatment for neuropathies related to Sjögren’s syndrome. When vasculitis is suspected, immunosuppressive agents may be beneficial. Occasionally, the sensory neuronopathy/ganglionopathy stabilizes or improves with immunotherapy, such as IVIg.
# Chunk 5489
Peripheral neuropathy occurs in at least 50% of patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and may be vasculitic in nature (Chap. 380). Vasculitic neuropathy can present with a mononeuropathy multiplex, a generalized symmetric pattern of involvement, or a combination of these patterns (Chap. 385). Neuropathies may also be due to drugs used to treat the RA (e.g., tumor necrosis blockers, leflunomide). Nerve biopsy often reveals thickening of the epineurial and endoneurial blood vessels as well as perivascular inflammation or vasculitis, with transmural inflammatory cell infiltration and fibrinoid necrosis of vessel walls. The neuropathy often is responsive to immunomodulating therapies.
# Chunk 5490
Leprosy, caused by the acid-fast bacteria Mycobacterium leprae, is the most common cause of peripheral neuropathy in Southeast Asia, Africa, and South America (Chap. 203). Clinical manifestations range from tuberculoid leprosy at one end to lepromatous leprosy at the other end of the spectrum, with borderline leprosy in between. Neuropathies are most common in patients with borderline leprosy. Superficial cutaneous nerves of the ears and distal limbs are commonly affected. Mononeuropathies, multiple mononeuropathies, or a slowly progressive symmetric sensorimotor polyneuropathy may develop. Sensory NCS are usually absent in the lower limb and are reduced in amplitude in the arms. Motor NCS may demonstrate reduced amplitudes in affected nerves but occasionally can reveal demyelinating features. Leprosy is usually diagnosed by skin lesion biopsy. Nerve biopsy can also be diagnostic, particularly when there are no apparent skin lesions. The tuberculoid form is characterized by granulomas, and bacilli are not seen. In contrast, with lepromatous leprosy, large numbers of infiltrating bacilli, TH2 lymphocytes, and organism-laden, foamy macrophages with minimal granulomatous infiltration are evident. The bacilli are best appreciated using the Fite stain, where they can be seen as red-staining rods often in clusters free in the endoneurium, within macrophages, or within Schwann cells.
# Chunk 5491
Diphtheria is caused by the bacteria Corynebacterium diphtheriae (Chap. 175). Infected individuals present with flulike symptoms of generalized myalgias, headache, fatigue, low-grade fever, and irritability within a week to 10 days of the exposure. About 20–70% of patients develop a peripheral neuropathy caused by a toxin released by the bacteria. Three to 4 weeks after infection, patients may note decreased sensation in their throat and begin to develop dysphagia, dysarthria, hoarseness, and blurred vision due to impaired accommodation. A generalized polyneuropathy may manifest 2 or 3 months following the initial infection, characterized by numbness, paresthesias, and weakness of the arms and legs and occasionally ventilatory failure. CSF protein can be elevated with or without lymphocytic pleocytosis. EDx suggests a diffuse axonal sensorimotor polyneuropathy. Antitoxin and antibiotics should be given within 48 h of symptom onset. Although early treatment reduces the incidence and severity of some complications (i.e., cardiomyopathy), it does not appear to alter the natural history of the associated peripheral neuropathy. The neuropathy usually resolves after several months.
# Chunk 5492
Peripheral neuropathy from herpes varicella-zoster (HVZ) infection results from reactivation of latent virus or from a primary infection (Chap. 217). Two-thirds of infections in adults are characterized by dermal zoster in which severe pain and paresthesias develop in a dermatomal region followed within a week or two by a vesicular rash in the same distribution. Weakness in muscles innervated by roots corresponding to the dermatomal distribution of skin lesions occurs in 5–30% of patients. Approximately 25% of affected patients have continued pain (postherpetic neuralgia [PHN]). A large clinical trial demonstrated that vaccination against zoster reduces the incidence of HVZ among vaccine recipients by 51% and reduces the incidence of PHN by 67%. Treatment of PHN is symptomatic (Table 459-6).
# Chunk 5493
Multiple myeloma (MM) usually presents in the fifth to seventh decade of life with fatigue, bone pain, anemia, and hypercalcemia (Chap. 136). Clinical and EDx features of neuropathy occur in as many as 40% of patients. The most common pattern is that of a distal, axonal, sensory, or sensorimotor polyneuropathy. Less frequently, a chronic demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy may develop (see POEMS, Chap. 460). MM can be complicated by amyloid polyneuropathy and should be considered in patients with painful paresthesias, loss of pinprick and 2686 temperature discrimination, and autonomic dysfunction (suggestive of a small-fiber neuropathy) and CTS. Expanding plasmacytomas can compress cranial nerves and spinal roots as well. A monoclonal protein, usually composed of γ or μ heavy chains or κ light chains, may be identified in the serum or urine. EDx usually shows reduced amplitudes with normal or only mildly abnormal distal latencies and conduction velocities. A superimposed median neuropathy at the wrist is common. Abdominal fat pad, rectal, or sural nerve biopsy can be performed to look for amyloid deposition. Unfortunately, the treatment of the underlying MM does not usually affect the course of the neuropathy.
# Chunk 5494
Chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine can cause a toxic myopathy characterized by slowly progressive, painless, proximal weakness and atrophy, which is worse in the legs than the arms. In addition, neuropathy can also develop with or without the myopathy leading to sensory loss and distal weakness. The “neuromyopathy” usually appears in patients taking 500 mg daily for a year or more but has been reported with doses as low as 200 mg/d. Serum CK levels are usually elevated due to the superimposed myopathy. NCS reveal mild slowing of motor and sensory NCVs with a mild to moderate reduction in the amplitudes, although NCS may be normal in patients with only the myopathy. EMG demonstrates myopathic muscle action potentials (MUAPs), increased insertional activity in the form of positive sharp waves, fibrillation potentials, and occasionally myotonic potentials, particularly in the proximal muscles. Neurogenic MUAPs and reduced recruitment are found in more distal muscles. Nerve biopsy demonstrates autophagic vacuoles within Schwann cells. Vacuoles may also be evident in muscle biopsies. The pathogenic basis of the neuropathy is not known but may be related to the amphiphilic properties of the drug. These agents contain both hydrophobic and hydrophilic regions
# Chunk 5495
Source: From AA Amato, J Russell: Neuromuscular Disease. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2008.

that allow them to interact with the anionic phospholipids of cell axonal degeneration. Colchicine inhibits the polymerization of tubulin membranes and organelles. The drug-lipid complexes may be resis-into microtubules. The disruption of the microtubules probably leads to tant to digestion by lysosomal enzymes, leading to the formation of defective intracellular movement of important proteins, nutrients, and autophagic vacuoles filled with myeloid debris that may in turn cause waste products in muscle and nerves. degeneration of nerves and muscle fibers. The signs and symptoms of the neuropathy and myopathy are usually reversible following discon-THALIDOMIDE tinuation of medication. Thalidomide is an immunomodulating agent used to treat mul tiple myeloma, GVHD, leprosy, and other autoimmune disorders. AMIODARONE Thalidomide is associated with severe teratogenic effects as well as Amiodarone can cause a neuromyopathy similar to chloroquine peripheral neuropathy that can be dose-limiting. Patients develop and hydroxychloroquine. The neuromyopathy typically appears numbness, painful tingling, and burning discomfort in the feet and after patients have taken the medication for 2–3 years. Nerve biopsy hands and less commonly muscle weakness and atrophy. Even after demonstrates a combination of segmental demyelination and axonal stopping the drug for 4–6 years, as many as 50% patients continue loss. Electron microscopy reveals lamellar or dense inclusions in to have significant symptoms. NCS demonstrate reduced amplitudes Schwann cells, pericytes, and endothelial cells. The inclusions in or complete absence of SNAPs, with preserved conduction velocities muscle and nerve biopsies have persisted as long as 2 years following when obtainable. Motor NCS are usually normal. Nerve biopsy reveals discontinuation of the medication. a loss of large-diameter myelinated fibers and axonal degeneration.
# Chunk 5496
The nucleoside analogues zalcitabine (dideoxycytidine or ddC), didanosine (dideoxyinosine or ddI), stavudine (d4T), lamivudine (3TC), and antiretroviral nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NRTI) are used to treat HIV infection. One of the major dose-limiting side effects of these medications is a predominantly sensory, length-dependent, symmetrically painful neuropathy. Zalcitabine (ddC) is the most extensively studied of the nucleoside analogues, and at doses greater than 0.18 mg/kg per day, it is associated with a subacute onset of severe burning and lancinating pains in the feet and hands. NCS reveal decreased amplitudes of the SNAPs with normal motor studies. The nucleoside analogues inhibit mitochondrial DNA polymerase, which is the suspected pathogenic basis for the neuropathy. Because of a “coasting effect,” patients can continue to worsen even 2–3 weeks after stopping the medication. Following dose reduction, improvement in the neuropathy is seen in most patients after several months (mean time about 10 weeks).
# Chunk 5497
Lead neuropathy is uncommon, but it can be seen in children who accidentally ingest lead-based paints in older buildings and in industrial workers exposed to lead-containing products. The most common presentation of lead poisoning is an encephalopathy; however, symptoms and signs of a primarily motor neuropathy can also occur. The neuropathy is characterized by an insidious and progressive onset of weakness usually beginning in the arms, in particular involving the wrist and finger extensors, resembling a radial neuropathy. Sensation is generally preserved; however, the autonomic nervous system can be affected. Laboratory investigation can reveal a microcytic hypo-chromic anemia with basophilic stippling of erythrocytes, an elevated serum lead level, and an elevated serum coproporphyrin level. A 24-h urine collection demonstrates elevated levels of lead excretion. The NCS may reveal reduced CMAP amplitudes, while the SNAPs are typically normal. The pathogenic basis may be related to abnormal porphyrin metabolism. The most important principle of management is to remove the source of the exposure. Chelation therapy with calcium disodium ethylene-diaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), British anti-Lewisite (BAL), and penicillamine also demonstrates variable efficacy.
# Chunk 5498
Thallium can exist in a monovalent or trivalent form and is primarily used as a rodenticide. The toxic neuropathy usually manifests as burning paresthesias of the feet, abdominal pain, and vomiting. Increased thirst, sleep disturbances, and psychotic behavior may be noted. Within the first week, patients develop pigmentation of the hair, an acne-like rash in the malar area of the face, and hyperreflexia. By the second and third week, autonomic instability with labile heart rate and blood pressure may be seen. Hyporeflexia and alopecia also occur but may not be evident until the third or fourth week following exposure. With severe intoxication, proximal weakness and involvement of the cranial nerves can occur. Some patients require mechanical ventilation due to respiratory muscle involvement. The lethal dose of thallium is variable, ranging from 8 to 15 mg/kg body weight. Death can result in less than 48 h following a particularly large dose. NCS demonstrate features of a primarily axonal sensorimotor polyneuropathy. With acute intoxication, potassium ferric ferrocyanide II may be effective in preventing absorption of thallium from the gut. However, there may be no benefit once thallium has been absorbed. Unfortunately, chelating agents are not very efficacious. Adequate diuresis is essential to help eliminate thallium from the body without increasing tissue availability from the serum.
# Chunk 5499
Arsenic is another heavy metal that can cause a toxic sensorimotor polyneuropathy. The neuropathy manifests 5–10 days after ingestion of arsenic and progresses for several weeks, sometimes mimicking GBS. The presenting symptoms are typically an abrupt onset of abdominal discomfort, nausea, vomiting, pain, and diarrhea followed within several days by burning pain in the feet and hands. Examination of the skin can be helpful in the diagnosis as the loss of the superficial epidermal layer results in patchy regions of increased or decreased pigmentation on the skin several weeks after an acute exposure or with chronic low levels of ingestion. Mee’s lines, which are transverse lines at the base of the fingernails and toenails, do not become evident until 1 or 2 months after the exposure. Multiple Mee’s lines may be seen in patients with long fingernails who have had chronic exposure to arsenic. Mee’s lines are not specific for arsenic toxicity as they can also be seen following thallium poisoning. Because arsenic is cleared from blood rapidly, the serum concentration of arsenic is not diagnostically helpful. However, arsenic levels are increased in the urine, hair, and fingernails of patients exposed to arsenic. Anemia with stippling of erythrocytes is common, and occasionally pancytopenia and aplastic anemia can develop. Increased CSF protein levels without pleocytosis can be seen; this can lead to misdiagnosis as GBS. NCS are usually suggestive of an axonal sensorimotor polyneuropathy; however, demyelinating features can be present. Chelation therapy with BAL has yielded inconsistent results; therefore, it is not generally recommended.
# Chunk 5500
Pernicious anemia is the most common cause of cobalamin deficiency. Other causes include dietary avoidance (vegetarians), gastrectomy, gastric bypass surgery, inflammatory bowel disease, pancreatic insufficiency, bacterial overgrowth, and possibly histamine-2 blockers and proton pump inhibitors. An underappreciated cause of cobalamin deficiency is food-cobalamin malabsorption. This typically occurs in older individuals and results from an inability to adequately absorb 2690 cobalamin in food protein. No apparent cause of deficiency is identified in a significant number of patients with cobalamin deficiency. The use of nitrous oxide as an anesthetic agent or as a recreational drug can produce acute cobalamin deficiency neuropathy and subacute combined degeneration. Complaints of numb hands typically appear before lower extremity paresthesias are noted. A preferential large-fiber sensory loss affecting proprioception and vibration with sparing of small-fiber modalities is present; an unsteady gait reflects sensory ataxia. These features, coupled with diffuse hyperreflexia and absent Achilles reflexes, should always focus attention on the possibility of cobalamin deficiency. Optic atrophy and, in severe cases, behavioral changes ranging from mild irritability and forgetfulness to severe dementia and frank psychosis may appear. The full clinical picture of subacute combined degeneration is uncommon. CNS manifestations, especially pyramidal tract signs, may be missing, and in fact some patients may only exhibit symptoms of peripheral neuropathy. EDx shows an axonal sensorimotor neuropathy. CNS involvement produces abnormal somatosensory and visual evoked potential latencies. The diagnosis is confirmed by finding reduced serum cobalamin levels. In up to 40% of patients, anemia and macrocytosis are lacking. Serum methylmalonic acid and homocysteine, the metabolites that accumulate when cobalamin-dependent reactions are blocked, are elevated. Antibodies to intrinsic factor are present in approximately 60%, and antiparietal cell antibodies in about 90%, of individuals with pernicious anemia. Cobalamin deficiency can be treated with various regimens of cobalamin. One typical regimen consists of 1000 μg cyanocobalamin IM weekly for 1 month and monthly thereafter. Patients with food cobalamin malabsorption can absorb free cobalamin and therefore can be treated with oral cobalamin supplementation. An oral cobalamin dose of 1000 μg per day should be sufficient. Treatment for cobalamin deficiency usually does not completely reverse the clinical manifestations, and at least 50% of patients exhibit some permanent neurologic deficit.
# Chunk 5501
Blood and urine assays for thiamine are not reliable for diagnosis of deficiency. Erythrocyte transketolase activity and the percentage increase in activity (in vitro) following the addition of thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP) may be more accurate and reliable. EDx shows nonspecific findings of an axonal sensorimotor polyneuropathy. When a diagnosis of thiamine deficiency is made or suspected, thiamine replacement should be provided until proper nutrition is restored. Thiamine is usually given intravenously or intramuscularly at a dose of 100 mg/d. Although cardiac manifestations show a striking response to thiamine replacement, neurologic improvement is usually more variable and less dramatic.
# Chunk 5502
Clinical features may not appear until many years after the onset of deficiency. The onset of symptoms tends to be insidious, and progression is slow. The main clinical features are spinocerebellar ataxia and polyneuropathy, thus resembling Friedreich’s ataxia or other spinocerebellar ataxias. Patients manifest progressive ataxia and signs of posterior column dysfunction, such as impaired joint position and vibratory sensation. Because of the polyneuropathy, there is hyporeflexia, but plantar responses may be extensor as a result of the spinal cord involvement. Other neurologic manifestations may include ophthalmoplegia, pigmented retinopathy, night blindness, dysarthria, pseudoathetosis, dystonia, and tremor. Vitamin E deficiency may present as an isolated polyneuropathy, but this is very rare. The yield of checking serum vitamin E levels in patients with isolated polyneuropathy is extremely low, and this test should not be part of routine practice.
# Chunk 5503
Following oral or IV copper replacement, some patients show neurologic improvement, but this may take many months or not occur at all. Replacement consists of oral copper sulfate or gluconate 2 mg one to three times a day. If oral copper replacement is not effective, elemental copper in the copper sulfate or copper chloride forms can be given as 2 mg IV daily for 3–5 days, then weekly for 1–2 months until copper levels normalize. Thereafter, oral daily copper therapy can be resumed. In contrast to the neurologic manifestations, most of the hematologic indices completely normalize in response to copper replacement therapy.
# Chunk 5504
Clinical Manifestations GBS manifests as a rapidly evolving areflexic motor paralysis with or without sensory disturbance. The usual pattern is an ascending paralysis that may be first noticed as rubbery legs. Weakness typically evolves over hours to a few days and is frequently accompanied by tingling dysesthesias in the extremities. The legs are usually more affected than the arms, and facial diparesis is present in 50% of affected individuals. The lower cranial nerves are also frequently involved, causing bulbar weakness with difficulty handling secretions and maintaining an airway; the diagnosis in these patients may initially be mistaken for brainstem ischemia. Pain in the neck, shoulder, back, or diffusely over the spine is also common in the early stages of GBS, occurring in ~50% of patients. Most patients require hospitalization, and in different series, up to 30% require ventilatory assistance at some time during the illness. The need for mechanical ventilation is associated with more severe weakness on admission, a rapid tempo of progression, and the presence of facial and/or bulbar weakness during the first week of symptoms. Fever and constitutional symptoms are absent at the onset and, if present, cast doubt on the diagnosis. Deep tendon reflexes attenuate or disappear within the first few days of onset. Cutaneous sensory deficits (e.g., loss of pain and temperature sensation) are usually relatively mild, but functions subserved by large sensory fibers, such as deep tendon reflexes and proprioception, are more severely affected. Bladder dysfunction may occur in severe cases but is usually transient. If bladder dysfunction is a prominent feature and comes early in the course, diagnostic possibilities other than GBS should be considered, particularly spinal cord disease. Once clinical worsening stops and the patient reaches a plateau (almost always within 4 weeks of onset), further progression is unlikely.
# Chunk 5505
Antecedent Events Approximately 70% of cases of GBS occur 1–3 weeks after an acute infectious process, usually respiratory or gastrointestinal. Culture and seroepidemiologic techniques show that 20–30% of all cases occurring in North America, Europe, and Australia are preceded by infection or reinfection with Campylobacter jejuni. A similar proportion is preceded by a human herpes virus infection, often CMV or Epstein-Barr virus. Other viruses (e.g., HIV, hepatitis E) and also Mycoplasma pneumoniae have been identified as agents involved in antecedent infections, as have recent immunizations. The swine influenza vaccine, administered widely in the United States in 1976, is the most notable example. Influenza vaccines in use from 1992 to 1994, however, resulted in only one additional case of GBS per million persons vaccinated, and the more recent seasonal influenza vaccines appear to confer a GBS risk of <1 per million. Epidemiologic studies looking at H1N1 vaccination demonstrated at most only a slight increased risk of GBS. Meningococcal vaccinations (Menactra) does not appear to carry an increased risk. Older-type rabies vaccine, prepared in nervous system tissue, is implicated as a trigger of GBS in developing countries where it is still used; the mechanism is presumably immunization against neural antigens. GBS also occurs more frequently than can be attributed to chance alone in patients with lymphoma (including Hodgkin’s disease), in HIV-seropositive individuals, and in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). C. jejuni has also been implicated in summer outbreaks of AMAN among children and young adults exposed to chickens in rural China.
# Chunk 5506
Circumstantial evidence suggests that all GBS results from immune responses to nonself antigens (infectious agents, vaccines) that misdirect to host nerve tissue through a resemblance-of-epitope (molecular mimicry) mechanism (Fig. 460-1). The neural targets are likely to be glycoconjugates, specifically gangliosides (Table 460-2; Fig. 460-2). Gangliosides are complex glycosphingolipids that contain one or more sialic acid residues; various gangliosides participate in cell-cell interactions (including those between axons and glia), modulation of receptors, and regulation of growth. They are typically exposed on the plasma membrane of cells, rendering them susceptible to an antibody-mediated attack. Gangliosides and other glycoconjugates are present in large quantity in human nervous tissues and in key sites, such as nodes of Ranvier. Antiganglioside antibodies, most frequently to GM1, are common in GBS (20–50% of cases), particularly in AMAN and AMSAN and in those cases preceded by C. jejuni infection. Furthermore, isolates of C. jejuni from stool cultures of patients with GBS have surface glycolipid structures that antigenically cross react with gangliosides, including GM1, concentrated in human nerves. Sialic acid residues from pathogenic C. jejuni strains can also trigger activation of dendritic cells via signaling through a toll-like receptor (TLR4), promoting B cell differentiation and further amplifying humoral autoimmunity. Another line of evidence is derived from experience in Europe with parenteral use of purified bovine brain gangliosides for treatment of various neuropathic disorders. Between 5 and 15 days after injection, some recipients developed acute motor axonal GBS with high titers of anti-GM1 antibodies that recognized epitopes at nodes of Ranvier and motor endplates. Experimentally, anti-GM1 antibodies can trigger complement-mediated injury at paranodal axon-glial junctions, disrupting the clustering of sodium channels and likely contributing to conduction block (see “Pathophysiology,” below).
# Chunk 5507
Laboratory Features CSF findings are distinctive, consisting of an elevated CSF protein level (1–10 g/L [100–1000 mg/dL]) without accompanying pleocytosis. The CSF is often normal when symptoms have been present for ≤48 h; by the end of the first week, the level of protein is usually elevated. A transient increase in the CSF white cell count (10–100/μL) occurs on occasion in otherwise typical GBS; however, a sustained CSF pleocytosis suggests an alternative diagnosis (viral myelitis) or a concurrent diagnosis such as unrecognized HIV infection, leukemia or lymphoma with infiltration of nerves, or neurosarcoidosis. Edx features are mild or absent in the early stages of GBS and lag behind the clinical evolution. In AIDP, the earliest features are prolonged F-wave latencies, prolonged distal latencies, and reduced amplitudes of compound muscle action potentials (CMAPs), probably owing to the predilection for involvement of nerve roots and distal motor nerve terminals early in the course. Later, slowing of conduction velocity, conduction block, and temporal dispersion may be appreciated (Table 460-1). Occasionally, sensory nerve action potentials (SNAPs) may be normal in the feet (e.g., sural nerve) when abnormal in the arms. This is also a sign that the patient does not have one of the more typical “length-dependent” polyneuropathies. In cases with primary axonal pathology, the principal Edx finding is reduced ampli-2697 tude of CMAPs (and also SNAPS with AMSAN) without conduction slowing or prolongation of distal latencies. Diagnosis GBS is a descriptive entity. The diagnosis of AIDP is made by recognizing the pattern of rapidly evolving paralysis with areflexia, absence of fever or other systemic symptoms, and characteristic antecedent events. In 2011, the Brighton Collaboration developed a new set of case definitions for GBS in response to needs of epidemiologic studies of vaccination and assessing risks of GBS (Table 460-3). These criteria have subsequently been validated. Other disorders that may enter into the differential diagnosis include acute myelopathies (especially with prolonged back pain and sphincter disturbances); diphtheria (early oropharyngeal disturbances); Lyme polyradiculitis and other tick-borne paralyses; porphyria (abdominal pain, seizures, psychosis); vasculitic neuropathy (check erythrocyte sedimentation rate, described below); poliomyelitis (fever and meningismus common); West Nile virus; CMV polyradiculitis (in immunocompromised patients); critical illness neuropathy or myopathy; neuromuscular junction disorders such as myasthenia gravis and botulism (pupillary reactivity lost early); poisonings with organophosphates, thallium, or arsenic; paralytic shellfish poisoning; or severe hypophosphatemia (rare). Laboratory tests are helpful primarily to exclude mimics of GBS. Edx features may be minimal, and the CSF protein level may not rise until the end of the first week. If the diagnosis is strongly suspected, treatment should be initiated without waiting for evolution of the characteristic Edx and CSF findings to occur. GBS patients with risk factors for HIV or with CSF pleocytosis should have a serologic test for HIV.
# Chunk 5508
In the vast majority of patients with GBS, treatment should be initiated as soon after diagnosis as possible. Each day counts; ~2 weeks after the first motor symptoms, it is not known whether immunotherapy is still effective. If the patient has already reached the plateau stage, then treatment probably is no longer indicated, unless the patient has severe motor weakness and one cannot exclude the possibility that an immunologic attack is still ongoing. Either high-dose intravenous immune globulin (IVIg) or plasmapheresis can be initiated, as they are equally effective for typical GBS. A combination of the two therapies is not significantly better than either alone. IVIg is often the initial therapy chosen because of its ease of administration and good safety record. Anecdotal data have also suggested that IVIg may be preferable to plasma exchange (PE) for the AMAN and MFS variants of GBS. IVIg is administered as five daily infusions for a total dose of 2 g/kg body weight. There is some evidence that GBS autoantibodies are neutralized by anti-idiotypic antibodies present in IVIg preparations, perhaps accounting for the therapeutic effect. A course of plasmapheresis usually consists of ~40–50 mL/kg PE four to five times over a week. Meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials indicates that treatment reduces the need for mechanical ventilation by nearly half (from 27% to 14% with PE) and increases the likelihood of full recovery at 1 year (from 55% to 68%). Functionally significant improvement may occur toward the end of the first week of treatment or may be delayed for several weeks. The lack of noticeable improvement following a course of IVIg or PE is not an indication to treat with the alternate treatment. However, there are occasional patients who are treated early in the course of GBS and improve, who then relapse within a month. Brief retreatment with the original therapy is usually effective in such cases. Glucocorticoids have not been found to be effective in GBS. Occasional patients with very mild forms of GBS, especially those who appear to have already reached a plateau when initially seen, may be managed conservatively without IVIg or PE.
# Chunk 5509
of intubation) of tracheotomy, and chest physiotherapy. As noted, ~30% of patients with GBS require ventilatory assistance, sometimes for prolonged periods of time (several weeks or longer). Frequent turning and assiduous skin care are important, as are daily range-ofmotion exercises to avoid joint contractures and daily reassurance as to the generally good outlook for recovery.
# Chunk 5510
Diagnosis The diagnosis rests on characteristic clinical, CSF, and electrophysiologic findings. The CSF is usually acellular with an elevated protein level, sometimes several times normal. As with GBS, a CSF pleocytosis should lead to the consideration of HIV infection, leukemia or lymphoma, and neurosarcoidosis. Edx findings reveal variable degrees of conduction slowing, prolonged distal latencies, distal and temporal dispersion of CMAPs, and conduction block as the principal features. In particular, the presence of conduction block is a certain sign of an acquired demyelinating process. Evidence of axonal loss, presumably secondary to demyelination, is present in >50% of patients. Serum protein electrophoresis with immunofixation is indicated to search for monoclonal gammopathy and associated conditions (see “Monoclonal Gammopathy of Undetermined Significance,” below). In all patients with presumptive CIDP, it is also reasonable to exclude vasculitis, collagen vascular disease (especially SLE), chronic hepatitis, HIV infection, amyloidosis, and diabetes mellitus. Other associated conditions include inflammatory bowel disease and lymphoma.
# Chunk 5511
Pathogenesis Although there is evidence of immune activation in CIDP, the precise mechanisms of pathogenesis are unknown. Biopsy typically reveals little inflammation and onion-bulb changes (imbricated layers of attenuated Schwann cell processes surrounding an axon) that result from recurrent demyelination and remyelination (Fig. 460-1). The response to therapy suggests that CIDP is immune-mediated; CIDP responds to glucocorticoids, whereas GBS does not. Passive transfer of demyelination into experimental animals has been accomplished using IgG purified from the serum of some patients with CIDP, lending support for a humoral autoimmune pathogenesis. A minority of patients have serum antibodies against P0, myelin P2 protein, PMP22, or neurofascin. It is also of interest that a CIDP-like illness developed spontaneously in the nonobese diabetic (NOD) mouse when the immune co-stimulatory molecule B7-2 (CD86) was genetically deleted; this suggests that CIDP can result from altered triggering of T cells by antigen-presenting cells.
# Chunk 5512
Most authorities initiate treatment for CIDP when progression is rapid or walking is compromised. If the disorder is mild, management can be expectant, awaiting spontaneous remission. Controlled studies have shown that high-dose IVIg, PE, and glucocorticoids are all more effective than placebo. Initial therapy is usually with IVIg, administered as 2.0 g/kg body weight given in divided doses over 2–5 days; three monthly courses are generally recommended before concluding a patient is a treatment failure. If the patient responds, the infusion intervals can be gradually increased or the dosage decreased (e.g., 1 g/kg per month). PE, which appears to be as effective as IVIg, is initiated at two to three treatments per week for 6 weeks; periodic re-treatment may also be required. Treatment with glucocorticoids is another option (60–80 mg prednisone PO daily for 1–2 months, followed by a gradual dose reduction of 10 mg per month as tolerated), but long-term adverse effects including bone demineralization, gastrointestinal bleeding, and cushingoid changes are problematic. As many as one-third of patients with CIDP fail to respond adequately to the initial therapy chosen; a different treatment should then be tried. Patients who fail therapy with IVIg, PE, and glucocorticoids may benefit from treatment with immunosuppressive agents such as azathioprine, methotrexate, cyclosporine, and cyclophosphamide, either alone or as adjunctive therapy. Early experience with anti-CD20 (rituximab) has also shown promise. Use of these therapies requires periodic reassessment of their risks and benefits. In patients with a CIDP-like neuropathy who fail to respond to treatment, it is important to evaluate for POEMS syndrome (polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, monoclonal gammopathy, skin changes; see below).
# Chunk 5513
Approximately one-third of biopsy-proven cases of vasculitic neuropathy are “nonsystemic” in that the vasculitis appears to affect only peripheral nerves. Constitutional symptoms are absent, and the course is more indolent than that of PAN. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate may be elevated, but other tests for systemic disease are negative. Nevertheless, clinically silent involvement of other organs is likely, and vasculitis is frequently found in muscle biopsied at the same time as nerve.
# Chunk 5514
ANTI-Hu PARANEOPLASTIC NEUROPATHY (CHAP. 122)

This uncommon immune-mediated disorder manifests as a sensory neuronopathy (i.e., selective damage to sensory nerve bodies in dorsal root ganglia). The onset is often asymmetric with dysesthesias and sensory loss in the limbs that soon progress to affect all limbs, the torso, and the face. Marked sensory ataxia, pseudoathetosis, and inability to walk, stand, or even sit unsupported are frequent features and are secondary to the extensive deafferentation. Subacute sensory neuronopathy may be idiopathic, but more than half of cases are paraneoplastic, primarily related to lung cancer, and most of those are small-cell lung cancer (SCLC). Diagnosis of the underlying SCLC requires awareness of the association, testing for the paraneoplastic antibody, and often positron emission tomography (PET) scanning for the tumor. The target antigens are a family of RNA-binding proteins (HuD, HuC, and Hel-N1) that in normal tissues are only expressed by neurons. The same proteins are usually expressed by SCLC, triggering in some patients an immune response characterized by antibodies and cytotoxic T cells that cross-react with the Hu proteins of the dorsal root ganglion neurons, resulting in immune-mediated neuronal destruction. An encephalomyelitis may accompany the sensory neuronopathy and presumably has the same pathogenesis. Neurologic symptoms usually precede, by ≤6 months, the identification of SCLC. The sensory neuronopathy runs its course in a few weeks or months and stabilizes, leaving the patient disabled. Most cases are unresponsive to treatment with glucocorticoids, IVIg, PE, or immunosuppressant drugs.
# Chunk 5515
Diplopia, ptosis, dysarthria, dysphagia, dyspnea

Weakness in characteristic distribution: proximal limbs, neck extensors, generalized
# Chunk 5516
Antibodies to AChR, MuSK, or lpr4 As noted above, anti-AChR antibodies are detectable in the serum of ~85% of all myasthenic patients but in only about 50% of patients with weakness confined to the ocular muscles. The presence of anti-AChR antibodies is virtually diagnostic of MG, but a negative test does not exclude the disease. The measured level of anti-AChR antibody does not correspond well with the severity of MG in different patients. However, in an individual patient, a treatment-induced fall in the antibody level often correlates with clinical improvement, whereas a rise in the level may occur with exacerbations. Antibodies to MuSK have been found to be present in ~40% of AChR antibody–negative patients with generalized MG, and their presence is a useful diagnostic test in these patients. MuSK antibodies are rarely present in AChR antibody–positive patients or in patients with MG limited to ocular muscles. These antibodies may interfere with clustering of AChRs at neuromuscular junctions, as MuSK is known to do during early development. A small proportion of MG patients without antibodies to AChR or MuSK may have antibodies to lrp4, although a test for lrp4 antibodies is not yet commercially available. Finally, antibodies against agrin have recently been found in some patients with MG. Agrin is a protein derived from motor nerves that normally binds to lrp4 and thus may also interfere with clustering of AChRs at neuromuscular junctions. There may well be other—as yet undefined—antibodies that impair neuromuscular transmission.
# Chunk 5517
Botulism (Chap. 178) is due to potent bacterial toxins produced by any of eight different strains of Clostridium botulinum. The toxins enzymatically cleave specific proteins essential for the release of ACh from the motor nerve terminal, thereby interfering with neuromuscular transmission. Most commonly, botulism is caused by ingestion of improperly prepared food containing toxin. Rarely, the nearly ubiquitous spores of C. botulinum may germinate in wounds. In infants, the spores may germinate in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract and release toxin, causing muscle weakness. Patients present with myasthenia-like bulbar weakness (e.g., diplopia, dysarthria, dysphagia) and lack sensory symptoms and signs. Weakness may generalize to the limbs and may result in respiratory failure. Reflexes are present early, but they may be diminished as the disease progresses. Mentation is normal. Autonomic findings include paralytic ileus, constipation, urinary retention, dilated or poorly reactive pupils, and dry mouth. The demonstration of toxin in serum by bioassay is definitive, but the results usually take a relatively long time to be completed and may be negative. Nerve stimulation studies reveal findings of presynaptic neuromuscular blockade with reduced compound muscle action potentials (CMAPs) that increase in amplitude following high-frequency repetitive stimulation. Treatment includes ventilatory support and aggressive inpatient supportive care (e.g., nutrition, deep vein thrombosis prophylaxis) as needed. Antitoxin should be given as early as possible to be effective and can be obtained through the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. A preventive vaccine is available for laboratory workers or other highly exposed individuals.
# Chunk 5518
Anticholinesterase medication produces at least partial improvement in most myasthenic patients, although improvement is complete in only a few. Patients with anti-MuSK MG generally obtain less benefit from anticholinesterase agents than those with AChR antibodies. Pyridostigmine is the most widely used anticholinesterase drug. The beneficial action of oral pyridostigmine begins within 15–30 min and lasts for 3–4 h, but individual responses vary. Treatment is begun with a moderate dose, e.g., 30–60 mg three to four times daily. The frequency and amount of the dose should be tailored to the patient’s individual requirements throughout the day. For example, patients with weakness in chewing and swallowing may benefit by taking the medication before meals so that peak strength coincides with mealtimes. Long-acting pyridostigmine may occasionally be useful to get the patient through the night but should not be used for daytime medication because of variable absorption. The maximum useful dose of pyridostigmine rarely exceeds 120 mg every 4–6 h during daytime. Overdosage with anticholinesterase medication may cause increased weakness and other side effects. In some patients, muscarinic side effects of the anticholinesterase medication (diarrhea, abdominal cramps, salivation, nausea) may limit the dose tolerated. Atropine/diphenoxylate or loperamide is useful for the treatment of GI symptoms.
# Chunk 5519
Until recently, azathioprine has been the most commonly used 2705 immunosuppressive agent for MG because of its relative safety in most patients and long track record. Its therapeutic effect may add to that of glucocorticoids and/or allow the glucocorticoid dose to be reduced. However, up to 10% of patients are unable to tolerate azathioprine because of idiosyncratic reactions consisting of flu-like symptoms of fever and malaise, bone marrow suppression, or abnormalities of liver function. An initial dose of 50 mg/d should be used for several days to test for these side effects. If this dose is tolerated, it is increased gradually to about 2–3 mg/kg of total body weight, or until the white blood count falls to 3000–4000/μL. The beneficial effect of azathioprine takes 3–6 months to begin and even longer to peak. In patients taking azathioprine, allopurinol should never be used to treat hyperuricemia. Because the two drugs share a common degradation pathway; the result may be severe bone marrow suppression due to increased effects of the azathioprine.
# Chunk 5520
Rituximab (Rituxan) is a monoclonal antibody that binds to the CD20 molecule on B lymphocytes. It has been widely used for the treatment of B cell lymphomas and has also proven successful in the treatment of several autoimmune diseases including rheumatoid arthritis, pemphigus, and some IgM-related neuropathies. There is now an extensive literature on the benefit of rituximab in MG. It is particularly effective in MuSK antibody–positive MG, although some patients with AChR antibody MG respond to it as well. The usual dose is 375 mg/m2, given IV in 4 weekly infusions, or 1 g, given IV on two occasions 2 weeks apart.
# Chunk 5521
The indications for the use of IVIg are the same as those for plasma exchange: to produce rapid improvement to help the patient through a difficult period of myasthenic weakness or prior to surgery. This treatment has the advantages of not requiring special equipment or large-bore venous access. The usual dose is 2 g/ kg, which is typically administered over 5 days (400 mg/kg per day). If tolerated, the total dose of IVIg can be given over a 3to 4-day period. Improvement occurs in ~70% of patients, beginning during
# Chunk 5522
There are two painful muscle conditions of particular importance, neither of which is associated with muscle weakness. Fibromyalgia is a common, yet poorly understood, type of myofascial pain syndrome. Patients complain of severe muscle pain and tenderness and have specific painful trigger points, sleep disturbances, and easy fatigability. Serum creatine kinase (CK), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), electromyography (EMG), and muscle biopsy are normal (Chap. 396). Polymyalgia rheumatica occurs mainly in patients >50 years and is characterized by stiffness and pain in the shoulders, lower back, hips, and thighs (Chap. 385). The ESR is elevated, while serum CK, EMG, and muscle biopsy are normal. Temporal arteritis, an inflammatory
# Chunk 5523
A limited battery of tests can be used to evaluate a suspected myopathy. Nearly all patients require serum enzyme level measurements and electrodiagnostic studies as screening tools to differentiate muscle disorders from other motor unit diseases. The other tests described— DNA studies, the forearm exercise test, and muscle biopsy—are used to diagnose specific types of myopathies.
# Chunk 5524
Serum Enzymes CK is the preferred muscle enzyme to measure in the evaluation of myopathies. Damage to muscle causes the CK to leak from the muscle fiber to the serum. The MM isoenzyme predominates in skeletal muscle, whereas creatine kinase-myocardial bound (CKMB) is the marker for cardiac muscle. Serum CK can be elevated in normal individuals without provocation, presumably on a genetic basis or after strenuous activity, minor trauma (including the EMG needle), a prolonged muscle cramp, or a generalized seizure. Aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aldolase, and lactic dehydrogenase (LDH) are enzymes sharing an origin in both muscle and liver. Problems arise when the levels of these enzymes are found to be elevated in a routine screening battery, leading to the erroneous assumption that liver disease is present when in fact muscle could be the cause. An elevated γ-glutamyl transferase (GGT) helps to establish a liver origin because this enzyme is not found in muscle.
# Chunk 5525
LGMD1A Onset second to eighth decade Serum CK 2× normal Myotilin playing. Running, jumping, and hopping are invariably abnormal. By age 5 years, muscle weakness is obvious by muscle testing. On getting up from the floor, the patient uses his hands to climb up himself (Gowers’ maneuver [Fig. 462e-4]). Contractures of the heel cords and iliotibial bands become apparent by age 6 years, when toe walking is associated with a lordotic posture. Loss of muscle strength is progressive, with predilection for proximal limb muscles and the neck flexors; leg involvement is more severe than arm involvement. Between ages 8 and 10 years, walking may require the use of braces; joint contractures and limitations of hip flexion, knee, elbow, and wrist extension are made worse by prolonged sitting. Prior to the use of glucocorticoids, most boys became wheelchair dependent by 12 years of age. Contractures become fixed, and a progressive scoliosis often develops that may be associated with pain. The chest deformity with scoliosis impairs pulmonary function, which is already diminished by muscle weakness. By age 16–18 years, patients are predisposed to serious, sometimes fatal pulmonary infections. Other causes of death include aspiration of food and acute gastric dilation.
# Chunk 5526
Laboratory Features Serum CK levels are invariably elevated to between 20 and 100 times normal. The levels are abnormal at birth but decline late in the disease because of inactivity and loss of muscle mass. EMG demonstrates features typical of myopathy. The muscle biopsy shows muscle fibers of varying size as well as small groups of necrotic and regenerating fibers. Connective tissue and fat replace lost muscle fibers. A definitive diagnosis of Duchenne dystrophy can be established on the basis of dystrophin deficiency in a biopsy of muscle tissue or mutation analysis on peripheral blood leukocytes, as discussed below.
# Chunk 5527
Laboratory Features Serum CK levels, results of EMG, and muscle biopsy findings closely resemble those in Duchenne dystrophy. The diagnosis of Becker muscular dystrophy requires Western blot analysis of muscle biopsy samples, demonstrating a reduced amount or abnormal size of dystrophin or mutation analysis of DNA from peripheral blood leukocytes. Genetic testing reveals deletions or duplications of the dystrophin gene in 65% of patients with Becker dystrophy, approximately the same percentage as in Duchenne dystrophy. In both Becker and Duchenne dystrophies, the size of the DNA deletion does not predict clinical severity; however, in ~95% of patients with Becker dystrophy, the DNA deletion does not alter the translational reading frame of messenger RNA. These “in-frame” mutations allow for production of some dystrophin, which accounts for the presence of altered rather than absent dystrophin on Western blot analysis.
# Chunk 5528
Laboratory Features Serum CK may be elevated twoto tenfold. EMG is myopathic. Muscle biopsy usually shows nonspecific dystrophic features, although cases associated with FHL1 mutations have features of myofibrillar myopathy. Immunohistochemistry reveals absent emerin staining of myonuclei in X-linked EDMD due to emerin mutations. ECGs demonstrate atrial and atrioventricular rhythm disturbances.
# Chunk 5529
Laboratory Features The diagnosis of myotonic dystrophy can usually be made on the basis of clinical findings. Serum CK levels may be normal or mildly elevated. EMG evidence of myotonia is present in most cases of DM1 but may be more patchy in DM2. Muscle biopsy shows muscle atrophy, which selectively involves type 1 fibers in 50% of cases, and ringed fibers in DM1 but not in DM2. Typically, numerous internalized nuclei can be seen in individual muscle fibers as well as atrophic fibers with pyknotic nuclear clumps in both DM1 and DM2. Necrosis of muscle fibers and increased connective tissue, common in other muscular dystrophies, are less apparent in myotonic dystrophy.
# Chunk 5530
Laboratory Features The serum CK level may be normal or mildly elevated. EMG usually indicates a myopathic pattern. The muscle biopsy shows nonspecific features of a myopathy. A prominent inflammatory 462e-11 infiltrate, which is often multifocal in distribution, is present in some biopsy samples. The cause or significance of this finding is unknown.
# Chunk 5531
Laboratory Features The serum CK level may be two to three times normal. Myopathic EMG findings are typical. On biopsy, muscle fibers are found to contain rimmed vacuoles, which by electron microscopy are shown to contain membranous whorls, accumulation of glycogen, and other nonspecific debris related to lysosomes. A distinct feature of oculopharyngeal dystrophy is the presence of tubular filaments, 8.5 nm in diameter, in muscle cell nuclei.
# Chunk 5532
Laboratory Features Serum CK level is particularly helpful in diagnosing Miyoshi’s myopathy because it is very elevated. In the other conditions, serum CK is only slightly increased. EMGs are myopathic. In the MFMs, myotonic or pseudomyotonic discharges are common. Muscle biopsy shows nonspecific dystrophic features and, with the exception of Laing’s and Miyoshi’s myopathies, often shows rimmed vacuoles. MFM is associated with the accumulation of dense inclusions, as well as amorphous material best seen on Gomori trichrome and myofibrillar disruption on electron microscopy. Immune staining sometimes demonstrates accumulation of desmin and other proteins in MFM, large deposits of myosin heavy chain in the subsarcolemmal region of type 1 muscle fibers in Laing’s myopathy, and reduced or absent dysferlin in Miyoshi’s myopathy.
# Chunk 5533
The serum CK level is usually normal. Needle EMG demonstrates a myopathic pattern. Muscle biopsy shows fibers with single or multiple central or eccentric discrete zones (cores) devoid of oxidative enzymes. Cores occur preferentially in type 1 fibers and represent poorly aligned sarcomeres associated with Z disk streaming.
# Chunk 5534
The term nemaline refers to the distinctive presence in muscle fibers of rods or threadlike structures (Greek nema, “thread”). Nemaline myopathy is clinically heterogeneous. A severe neonatal form presents with hypotonia and feeding and respiratory difficulties, leading to early death. Nemaline myopathy usually presents in infancy or childhood with delayed motor milestones. The course is nonprogressive or slowly progressive. The physical appearance is striking because of the long, narrow facies, high-arched palate, and open-mouthed appearance due to a prognathous jaw. Other skeletal abnormalities include pectus excavatum, kyphoscoliosis, pes cavus, and clubfoot deformities. Facial and generalized muscle weakness, including respiratory muscle weakness, is common. An adult-onset disorder with progressive proximal or distal weakness may be seen. Myocardial involvement is occasionally present in both the childhood and adult-onset forms. The serum CK level is usually normal or slightly elevated. The EMG demonstrates a myopathic pattern. Muscle biopsy shows clusters of small rods (nemaline bodies), which occur preferentially, but not exclusively, in the sarcoplasm of type 1 muscle fibers. Occasionally, the rods are also apparent in myonuclei. The muscle often shows type 1 muscle fiber predominance. Rods originate from the Z disk material of the muscle fiber.
# Chunk 5535
The serum CK level is 2–10 times normal in infantile or childhood-onset Pompe’s disease but can be normal in adult-onset cases. EMG examination demonstrates a myopathic pattern, but other features are especially distinctive, including myotonic discharges, trains of fibrillation and positive waves, and complex repetitive discharges. EMG discharges are very prominent in the paraspinal muscles. The muscle biopsy in infants typically reveals vacuoles containing glycogen and the lysosomal enzyme acid phosphatase. Electron microscopy reveals membrane-bound and free tissue glycogen. However, muscle biopsies in late-onset Pompe’s disease may demonstrate only nonspecific abnormalities. Enzyme analysis of dried blood spots is a sensitive technique to screen for Pompe’s disease. A definitive diagnosis is established by enzyme assay in muscle or cultured fibroblasts or by genetic testing.
# Chunk 5536
In all of these conditions, the serum CK levels fluctuate widely and may be elevated even during symptom-free periods. CK levels >100 times normal are expected, accompanying myoglobinuria. All patients with suspected glycolytic defects leading to exercise intolerance should undergo a forearm exercise test. An impaired rise in venous lactate is highly indicative of a glycolytic defect. In lactate dehydrogenase deficiency, venous levels of lactate do not increase, but pyruvate rises to normal. A definitive diagnosis of glycolytic disease is made by muscle biopsy and subsequent enzyme analysis or by genetic testing.
# Chunk 5537
Serum CK levels and EMG findings are both usually normal between episodes. A normal rise of venous lactate during forearm exercise distinguishes this condition from glycolytic defects, especially myophosphorylase deficiency. Muscle biopsy does not show lipid accumulation and is usually normal between attacks. The diagnosis requires direct measurement of muscle CPT or genetic testing.
# Chunk 5538
KSS is a widespread multiorgan system disorder with a defined triad of clinical findings: onset before age 20, CPEO, and pigmentary retinopathy, plus one or more of the following features: complete heart block, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) protein >1 g/L (100 mg/dL), or cerebellar ataxia. Some patients with CPEO and ragged red fibers may not fulfill all of the criteria for KSS. The cardiac disease includes syncopal attacks and cardiac arrest related to the abnormalities in the cardiac conduction system: prolonged intraventricular conduction time, bundle branch block, and complete atrioventricular block. Death attributed to heart block occurs in ~20% of the patients. Varying degrees of progressive limb muscle weakness and easy fatigability affect activities of daily living. Endocrine abnormalities are common, including gonadal dysfunction in both sexes with delayed puberty, short stature, and infertility. Diabetes mellitus is a cardinal sign of mitochondrial disorders and is estimated to occur in 13% of KSS patients. Other less common endocrine disorders include thyroid disease, hyperaldosteronism, Addison’s disease, and hypoparathyroidism. Both mental retardation and dementia are common accompaniments to this disorder. Serum CK levels are normal or slightly elevated. Serum lactate and pyruvate levels may be elevated. EMG is myopathic. Nerve conduction studies may be abnormal related to an associated neuropathy. Muscle biopsies reveal ragged red fibers, highlighted in oxidative enzyme stains, many showing defects in cytochrome oxidase. By electron microscopy, there are increased numbers of mitochondria that often appear enlarged and contain paracrystalline inclusions.
# Chunk 5539
This condition is caused by nuclear DNA mutations affecting mtDNA copy number and integrity and is thus inherited in a Mendelian fashion. Onset is usually after puberty. Fatigue, exercise intolerance, and complaints of muscle weakness are typical. Some patients notice swallowing problems. The neurologic examination confirms the ptosis and ophthalmoplegia, usually asymmetric in distribution. A sensorineural hearing loss may be encountered. Mild facial, neck flexor, and proximal weakness are typical. Rarely, respiratory muscles may be progressively affected and may be the direct cause of death. Serum CK is normal or mildly elevated. The resting lactate level is normal or slightly elevated but may rise excessively after exercise. CSF protein is normal. The EMG is myopathic, and nerve conduction studies are usually normal. Ragged red fibers are prominently displayed in the muscle biopsy. Southern blots of muscle reveal a normal mtDNA band at 16.6 kb and several additional mtDNA deletion bands with genomes varying from 0.5 to 10 kb.
# Chunk 5540
Serum CK levels are normal or slightly increased. The serum lactate may be elevated. EMG is myopathic, and in some patients nerve conduction studies show a neuropathy. The electroencephalogram is abnormal, corroborating clinical findings of epilepsy. Typical ragged red fibers are seen on muscle biopsy. MERRF is caused by maternally inherited point mutations of mitochondrial tRNA genes. The most common mutation found in 80% of MERRF patients is an A to G substitution at nucleotide 8344 of tRNA lysine (A8344G tRNAlys). Other tRNAlys mutations include base-pair substitutions T8356C and G8363A. Only supportive treatment is possible, with special attention to epilepsy.
# Chunk 5541
The acute paralysis improves after the administration of potassium. Muscle strength and ECG should be monitored. Oral KCl (0.2–0.4 mmol/kg) should be given every 30 min. Only rarely is IV therapy necessary (e.g., when swallowing problems or vomiting is present). Administration of potassium in a glucose solution should be avoided because it may further reduce serum potassium levels. Mannitol is the preferred vehicle for administration of IV potassium. The long-term goal of therapy is to avoid attacks. This may reduce late-onset, fixed weakness. Patients should be made aware of the importance of a low-carbohydrate, low-sodium diet and consequences of intense exercise. Prophylactic administration of acetazolamide (125–1000 mg/d in divided doses) reduces or may abolish attacks in HypoKPP type 1. Paradoxically the potassium is lowered, but this is offset by the beneficial effect of metabolic acidosis. If attacks persist on acetazolamide, oral KCl should be added. Some patients require treatment with triamterene (25–100 mg/d) or spironolactone (25–100 mg/d). However, in patients with HypoKPP type 2, attacks of weakness can be exacerbated with acetazolamide.
# Chunk 5542
The muscle biopsy shows vacuoles that are smaller, less numerous, and more peripheral compared to the hypokalemic form or tubular aggregates. Provocative tests by administration of potassium can induce weakness but are usually not necessary to establish the diagnosis. HyperKPP and potassium-aggravated myotonia are inherited as autosomal dominant disorders. Mutations of the voltage-gated sodium channel SCN4A gene (Fig. 462e-8) cause these conditions. For patients with frequent attacks, acetazolamide (125–1000 mg/d) is helpful. We have found mexiletine to be helpful in patients with significant myotonia.
# Chunk 5543
Serum CK is normal or mildly elevated. The muscle biopsy shows hypertrophied fibers. The disease is inherited as dominant or recessive and is caused by mutations of the chloride channel gene (Fig. 462e-8) that increase muscle cell excitability. Many patients will not require treatment and learn that the symptoms improve with activity. Medications that can be used to decrease myotonia include quinine, phenytoin, and mexiletine.
# Chunk 5544
Hypothyroidism Patients with hypothyroidism have frequent muscle complaints, and proximal muscle weakness occurs in about one-third of them. Muscle cramps, pain, and stiffness are common. Some patients have enlarged muscles. Features of slow muscle contraction and relaxation occur in 25% of patients; the relaxation phase of muscle stretch reflexes is characteristically prolonged and best observed at the ankle or biceps brachii reflexes. The serum CK level is often elevated (up to 10 times normal), even when there is minimal clinical evidence of muscle disease. EMG is typically normal. The cause of muscle enlargement has not been determined, and muscle biopsy shows no distinctive morphologic abnormalities.
# Chunk 5545
461) and a progressive ocular myopathy associated with proptosis (Graves’ ophthalmopathy). Serum CK levels are not elevated in thyrotoxic myopathy, the EMG is normal, and muscle histology usually shows only atrophy of muscle fibers.
# Chunk 5546
Hypoparathyroidism An overt myopathy due to hypocalcemia rarely occurs. Neuromuscular symptoms are usually related to localized or generalized tetany. Serum CK levels may be increased secondary to muscle damage from sustained tetany. Hyporeflexia or areflexia is usually present and contrasts with the hyperreflexia in hyperparathyroidism.
# Chunk 5547
(See also Chap. 406) Conditions associated with glucocorticoid excess cause a myopathy; in fact, steroid myopathy is the most commonly diagnosed endocrine muscle disease. Glucocorticoid excess, either endogenous or exogenous (see “Drug-Induced Myopathies,” below), produces various degrees of proximal limb weakness. Muscle wasting may be striking. A cushingoid appearance usually accompanies clinical signs of myopathy. Histologic sections demonstrate muscle fiber atrophy, preferentially affecting type 2b fibers, rather than degeneration or necrosis of muscle fibers. Adrenal insufficiency commonly causes muscle fatigue. The degree of weakness may be difficult to assess but is typically mild. In primary hyperaldosteronism (Conn’s syndrome), neuromuscular complications are due to potassium depletion. The clinical picture is one of persistent muscle weakness. Long-standing hyperaldosteronism may lead to proximal limb weakness and wasting. Serum CK levels may be elevated, and a muscle biopsy may demonstrate degenerating fibers, some with vacuoles. These changes relate to hypokalemia and are not a direct effect of aldosterone on skeletal muscle.
# Chunk 5548
All classes of lipid-lowering agents have been implicated in muscle toxicity, including fibrates (clofibrate, gemfibrozil), HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (referred to as statins), niacin (nicotinic acid), and ezetimibe. Myalgia, malaise, and muscle tenderness are the most common manifestations. Muscle pain may be related to exercise. Patients may exhibit proximal weakness. Varying degrees of muscle necrosis are seen, and in severe reactions rhabdomyolysis and myoglobinuria occur. Concomitant use of statins with fibrates and cyclosporine is more likely to cause adverse reactions than use of one agent alone. Elevated serum CK is an important indication of toxicity. Muscle weakness is accompanied by a myopathic EMG, and muscle necrosis is observed by muscle biopsy. Severe myalgias, muscle weakness, significant elevations in serum CK (>three times baseline), and myoglobinuria are indications for stopping the drug. Patients usually improve with drug cessation, although this may take several weeks. Rare cases continue to progress after the offending agent is discontinued. It is possible that in such cases the statin may have triggered an immune-mediated necrotizing myopathy, as these individuals require aggressive immunotherapy (e.g., prednisone and sometimes other agents) to improve and often relapse when these therapies are discontinued. Interestingly, antibodies directed against the 100-kDa HMG-CoA reductase receptor on muscle fibers have been identified in many of these cases.
# Chunk 5549
Glucocorticoid myopathy occurs with chronic treatment or as “acute quadriplegic” myopathy secondary to high-dose IV glucocorticoid use. Chronic administration produces proximal weakness accompanied by cushingoid manifestations, which can be quite debilitating; the chronic use of prednisone at a daily dose of ≥30 mg/d is most often associated with toxicity. Patients taking fluorinated glucocorticoids (triamcinolone, betamethasone, dexamethasone) appear to be at especially high risk for myopathy. In chronic steroid myopathy, the serum CK is
# Chunk 5550
usually normal. Serum potassium may be low. The muscle biopsy in chronic cases shows preferential type 2 muscle fiber atrophy; this is not reflected in the EMG, which is usually normal.
# Chunk 5551
Myopathy is a well-established complication of this agent. Patients present with myalgias, muscle weakness, and atrophy affecting the thigh and calf muscles. The complication occurs in about 17% of patients treated with doses of 1200 mg/d for 6 months. The introduction of protease inhibitors for treatment of HIV infection has led to lower doses of zidovudine therapy and a decreased incidence of myopathy. Serum CK is elevated and EMG is myopathic. Muscle biopsy shows ragged red fibers with minimal inflammation; the lack of inflammation serves to distinguish zidovudine toxicity from HIV-related myopathy. If the myopathy is thought to be drug related, the medication should be stopped or the dosage reduced.
# Chunk 5552
Focal myopathies from self-administration of meperidine, heroin, and pentazocine can cause pain, swelling, muscle necrosis, and hemorrhage. The cause is multifactorial; needle trauma, direct toxicity of the drug or vehicle, and infection may all play a role. When severe, there may be overlying skin induration and contractures with replacement of muscle by connective tissue. Elevated serum CK and myopathic EMG are characteristic of these reactions. The muscle biopsy shows widespread or focal areas of necrosis. In conditions leading to rhabdomyolysis, patients need adequate hydration to reduce serum myoglobin and protect renal function. In all of these conditions, counseling is essential to limit drug abuse.
# Chunk 5553
The normal range of serum osmolality is around 275–295 mOsm/kg, but neurologic manifestations are usually seen only at levels >325 mOsm/kg. Hyperosmolality is usually due to hypernatremia, hyperglycemia, azotemia, or the addition of extrinsic osmoles such as mannitol, which is commonly used in critically ill neurologic patients. Hyperosmolality itself can lead to a generalized encephalopathy that is nonspecific and without focal findings; however, an underlying lesion such as a mass can become symptomatic under the metabolic stress of a hyperosmolar state, producing focal neurologic signs. Some patients with hyperosmolality from severe hyperglycemia can present, for unclear reasons, with generalized seizures or unilateral movement disorders, which usually respond to lowering of the serum glucose. The treatment of all forms of hyperosmolality involves calculation of apparent water losses and slow replacement so that the serum sodium declines no faster than 2 mmol/L (2 meq/L) per hour.
# Chunk 5554
Hypernatremia leads to the loss of intracellular water, leading to cell shrinkage. In the cells of the brain, solutes such as glutamine and urea are generated under these conditions in order to minimize this shrinkage. Despite this corrective mechanism, when hypernatremia is severe (serum sodium >160 mmol/L [>160 meq/L]) or occurs rapidly, cellular metabolic processes fail and encephalopathy will result. There are many etiologies of hypernatremia including, most commonly, renal and extrarenal losses of water. Causes of neurologic relevance include central diabetes insipidus, where hyperosmolality is accompanied by submaximal urinary concentration due to inadequate release of arginine vasopressin (AVP) from the posterior pituitary, resulting often from pituitary injury in the setting of surgery, hemorrhage, infiltrative processes, or cerebral herniation.
# Chunk 5555
Hyponatremia is commonly defined as a serum sodium <135 mmol/L (<135 meq/L). Neurologic symptoms occur at different levels of low sodium, depending not only on the absolute value but also on the rate of fall. In patients with hyponatremia that develops over hours, life-threatening seizures and cerebral edema may occur at values as high as 125 mmol/L. In contrast, some patients with more chronic hyponatremia that has slowly developed over months to years may be asymptomatic even with serum levels <110 mmol/L. Correction of hyponatremia, especially when chronic, must take place slowly in order to avoid additional neurologic complications. Cells in the brain swell in hypotonic hyponatremic states but may compensate over time by excreting solute into the extracellular space, leading to restoration of cell volume when water follows the solute out of the cells. If treatment of hyponatremia results in a rapid rise in serum sodium, cells in the brain may quickly shrink, leading to osmotic demyelination, a process that previously was thought to be limited exclusively to the brainstem (central pontine myelinolysis; see Fig. 330-6), but now has been described elsewhere in the CNS.
# Chunk 5556
Hypokalemia, defined as a serum potassium level < 3.5 mmol/L (<3.5 meq/L), occurs either because of excessive potassium losses (from the kidneys or gut) or due to an abnormal potassium distribution between the intracellular and extracellular spaces. At very low levels (<1.5 mmol/L), hypokalemia may be life threatening due to the risk of cardiac arrhythmia and may present neurologically with severe muscle weakness and paralysis. Hypokalemic periodic paralysis is a rare disorder caused by excessive intracellular potassium uptake in the setting of a calcium or sodium channel mutation. Treatment of hypokalemia is dependent on the etiology but usually includes replacement of potassium through oral or IV routes as well as correcting the cause of potassium balance problems (e.g., eliminating β2-adrenergic agonist medications or treating the underlying cause of severe diarrhea).
# Chunk 5557
Hyperkalemia is defined as a serum potassium level >5.5 mmol/L (>5.5 meq/L) and can neurologically present as muscle weakness with or without paresthesias. Hyperkalemia becomes life threatening when it produces electrocardiographic abnormalities such as peaked T waves or a widened QRS complex. In these cases, prompt treatment is essential and consists of strategies that protect the heart against arrhythmias (calcium gluconate administration); promote potassium redistribution into cells (with glucose, insulin, and β2-agonist medications); and increase potassium removal (through sodium polystyrene sulfonate, loop diuretics, or hemodialysis).
# Chunk 5558
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome Gijs Bleijenberg, Jos W. M. van der Meer DEFINITION Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) is a disorder characterized by persis-tent and unexplained fatigue resulting in severe impairment in daily functioning. Besides intense fatigue, most patients with CFS report 464e SECTion 4 concomitant symptoms such as pain, cognitive dysfunction, and unrefreshing sleep. Additional symptoms can include headache, sore throat, tender lymph nodes, muscle aches, joint aches, feverishness, difficulty sleeping, psychiatric problems, allergies, and abdominal cramps. Criteria for the diagnosis of CFS have been developed by the
# Chunk 5559
U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (Table 464e-1).

CFS is seen worldwide, with adult prevalence rates varying between 0.2% and 0.4%. In the United States, the prevalence is higher among women (∼75% of cases), members of minority groups (African and Native Americans), and individuals with lower levels of education and occupational status. The mean age of onset is between 29 and 35 years. Many patients probably go undiagnosed and/ or do not seek help.
# Chunk 5560
In addition to a thorough history, a systematic physical examination is warranted to exclude disorders causing fatigue (e.g., endocrine disorders, neoplasms, heart failure). The heart rate of CFS patients is often slightly above normal. Laboratory tests serve primarily to exclude other diagnoses; no test can diagnose CFS. The following laboratory screen usually suffices: complete blood count; erythrocyte sedimentation rate; C-reactive protein; serum creatinine, electrolytes, calcium, and iron; blood glucose; creatine kinase; liver function tests; thyroid-stimulating hormone; anti-gliadin antibodies; and urinalysis. Serology for viral or bacterial infections usually is not helpful. No specific abnormalities have been identified on MRI or CT scans. The decrease in gray matter volume observed at a population level by MRI is not useful for diagnosis in the individual patient. Extensive, unfocused, and expensive testing in a search for the “hidden” cause of the fatigue is not productive. CFS is a constellation of symptoms with no pathognomonic features and remains a diagnosis of exclusion.
# Chunk 5561
CBT and graded exercise therapy (GET) have been found to be the only beneficial interventions in CFS. Some patient groups argue against these approaches because of the implication that CFS is a purely mental disorder. CBT is a psychotherapeutic approach directed at changing unhealthy disease-perpetuating patterns of thoughts and behaviors. It includes educating the patient about the etiologic model, setting goals, restoring fixed bedtimes and wakeup times, challenging and changing fatigueand activity-related concerns, reducing a focus on symptoms, spreading activities evenly throughout the day, gradually increasing physical activity, planning a return to work, and resuming other activities. The intervention, which typically consists of 12–14 sessions spread over 6 months, helps CFS patients gain control over their symptoms.
# Chunk 5562
PANIC DISORDER Clinical Manifestations Panic disorder is defined by the presence of recurrent and unpredictable panic attacks, which are distinct episodes of intense fear and discomfort associated with a variety of physical symptoms, including palpitations, sweating, trembling, shortness of breath, chest pain, dizziness, and a fear of impending doom or death. Paresthesias, gastrointestinal distress, and feelings of unreality are also common. Diagnostic criteria require at least 1 month of concern or worry about the attacks or a change in behavior related to them. The lifetime prevalence of panic disorder is 2–3%. Panic attacks have a sudden onset, developing within 10 min and usually resolving over the course of an hour, and they occur in an unexpected fashion. Some may occur when waking from sleep. The frequency and severity of panic attacks vary, ranging from once a week to clusters of attacks separated by months of well-being. The first attack is usually outside the home, and onset is typically in late adolescence to early adulthood. In some individuals, anticipatory anxiety develops over time and results in a generalized fear and a progressive avoidance of places or situations in which a panic attack might recur. Agoraphobia, which occurs commonly in patients with panic disorder, is an acquired irrational fear of being in places where one might feel trapped or unable to escape. It may, however, be diagnosed even if panic disorder is not present. Typically, it leads the patient into a progressive restriction in lifestyle and, in a literal sense, in geography. Frequently, patients are embarrassed that they are housebound and dependent on the company of others to go out into the world and do not volunteer this information; thus, physicians will fail to recognize the syndrome if direct questioning is not pursued.
# Chunk 5563
When the history is nonspecific, physical examination and focused laboratory testing must be used to rule out anxiety states resulting from medical disorders such as pheochromocytoma, thyrotoxicosis, or hypoglycemia. Electrocardiogram (ECG) and echocardiogram may detect some cardiovascular conditions associated with panic such as paroxysmal atrial tachycardia and mitral valve prolapse. In two studies, panic disorder was the primary diagnosis in 43% of patients with chest pain who had normal coronary angiograms and was present in 9% of all outpatients referred for cardiac evaluation. Panic disorder has also been diagnosed in many patients referred for pulmonary function testing or with symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome.
# Chunk 5564
GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER Clinical Manifestations Patients with generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) have persistent, excessive, and/or unrealistic worry associated with muscle tension, impaired concentration, autonomic arousal, feeling “on edge” or restless, and insomnia (Table 466-5). Onset is usually before age 20 years, and a history of childhood fears and social inhibition may be present. The lifetime prevalence of GAD is 5–6%; the risk is higher in first-degree relatives of patients with the diagnosis. Interestingly, family studies indicate that GAD and panic disorder segregate independently. More than 80% of patients with GAD also suffer from major depression, dysthymia, or social phobia. Comorbid substance abuse is common in these patients, particularly alcohol and/or sedative/hypnotic abuse. Patients with GAD worry excessively over minor matters, with life-disrupting effects; unlike in panic disorder, complaints of shortness of breath, palpitations, and tachycardia are relatively rare.
# Chunk 5565
Buspirone is a nonbenzodiazepine anxiolytic agent. It is non-sedating, does not produce tolerance or dependence, does not interact with benzodiazepine receptors or alcohol, and has no abuse or disinhibition potential. However, it requires several weeks to take effect and requires thrice-daily dosing. Patients who were previously responsive to a benzodiazepine are unlikely to rate buspirone as equally effective, but patients with head injury or dementia who have symptoms of anxiety and/or agitation may do well with this agent. Escitalopram, paroxetine, and venlafaxine are FDA approved for the treatment of GAD, usually at doses that are comparable to their efficacy in major depression, and may be preferable to usage of benzodiazepines in the treatment of chronic anxiety. Benzodiazepines are contraindicated during pregnancy and breast-feeding.
# Chunk 5566
Equivalent PO Name Dose, mg Onset of Action Half-Life, h Comments

Benzodiazepines Diazepam (Valium) 5 Fast 20–70 Active metabolites; quite sedating Flurazepam (Dalmane) 15 Fast 30–100 Flurazepam is a prodrug; metabolites are active; quite sedating Triazolam (Halcion) 0.25 Intermediate 1.5–5 No active metabolites; can induce confusion and delirium, especially in elderly Lorazepam (Ativan) 1 Intermediate 10–20 No active metabolites; direct hepatic glucuronide conjugation; quite sedating; FDA approved for anxiety with depression Alprazolam (Xanax) 0.5 Intermediate 12–15 Active metabolites; not too sedating; FDA approved for panic disorder and anxiety with depression; tolerance and dependence develop easily; difficult to withdraw Chlordiazepoxide (Librium) 10 sedating Temazepam (Restoril) 15 Slow 9–12 No active metabolites; moderately sedating Clonazepam (Klonopin) 0.5 Slow 18–50 No active metabolites; moderately sedating; FDA approved for panic disorder Clorazepate (Tranxene) 15 Fast 40–200 Low sedation; unreliable absorption Nonbenzodiazepines Buspirone (BuSpar) 7.5 2 weeks 2–3 Active metabolites; tid dosing—usual daily dose 10–20 mg tid; nonsedating; no additive effects with alcohol; useful for controlling agitation in demented or brain-injured patients Abbreviation: FDA, U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
# Chunk 5567
Beta blockers (e.g., propranolol, 20–40 mg orally 2 h before the event) are particularly effective in the treatment of “performance anxiety” (but not general social phobia) and appear to work by blocking the peripheral manifestations of anxiety such as perspiration, tachycardia, palpitations, and tremor. MAOIs alleviate social phobia independently of their antidepressant activity, and paroxetine, sertraline, and venlafaxine have received FDA approval for treatment of social anxiety. Benzodiazepines can be helpful in reducing fearful avoidance, but the chronic nature of phobic disorders limits their usefulness.
# Chunk 5568
Acute stress reactions are usually self-limited, and treatment typically involves the short-term use of benzodiazepines and supportive/expressive psychotherapy. The chronic and recurrent nature of PTSD, however, requires a more complex approach using drug and behavioral treatments. PTSD is highly correlated with peritraumatic dissociative symptoms and the development of an acute stress disorder at the time of the trauma. The SSRIs (paroxetine and sertraline are FDA approved for PTSD), venlafaxine, and topiramate can all reduce anxiety, symptoms of intrusion, and avoidance behaviors, as can prazosin, an α1 antagonist. Propranolol and opiates such as morphine, given during the acute stress period, may have beneficial effects in preventing the development of PTSD, and adjunctive naltrexone can be effective when comorbid alcoholism is present. Trazodone, a sedating antidepressant, is frequently used at night
# Chunk 5569
Between 20 and 30% of cardiac patients manifest a depressive disorder; an even higher percentage experience depressive symptomatology when self-reporting scales are used. Depressive symptoms following unstable angina, myocardial infarction, cardiac bypass surgery, or heart transplant impair rehabilitation and are associated with higher rates of mortality and medical morbidity. Depressed patients often show decreased variability in heart rate (an index of reduced parasympathetic nervous system activity), which may predispose individuals to ventricular arrhythmia and increased morbidity. Depression also appears to increase the risk of developing coronary heart disease, possibly through increased platelet aggregation. TCAs are contraindicated in patients with bundle branch block, and TCA-induced tachycardia is an additional concern in patients with congestive heart failure. SSRIs appear not to induce ECG changes or adverse cardiac events and thus are reasonable first-line drugs for patients at risk for TCA-related complications. SSRIs may interfere with hepatic metabolism of anticoagulants, however, causing increased anticoagulation.
# Chunk 5570
DEPRESSIVE DISORDERS Clinical Manifestations Major depression is defined as depressed mood on a daily basis for a minimum duration of 2 weeks (Table 466-7). An episode may be characterized by sadness, indifference, apathy, or irritability and is usually associated with changes in sleep patterns, appetite, and weight; motor agitation or retardation; fatigue; impaired concentration and decision making; feelings of shame or guilt; and thoughts of death or dying. Patients with depression have a profound loss of pleasure in all enjoyable activities, exhibit early morning awakening, feel that the dysphoric mood state is qualitatively different from sadness, and often notice a diurnal variation in mood (worse in morning hours). Patients experiencing bereavement or grief may exhibit many of the same signs and symptoms of major depression, although the emphasis is usually on feelings of emptiness and loss, rather than
# Chunk 5571
SSRIs such as fluoxetine, sertraline, paroxetine, citalopram, and escitalopram cause a lower frequency of anticholinergic, sedating, and cardiovascular side effects but a possibly greater incidence of gastrointestinal complaints, sleep impairment, and sexual dysfunction than do TCAs. Akathisia, involving an inner sense of restlessness and anxiety in addition to increased motor activity, may also be more common, particularly during the first week of treatment. One concern is the risk of “serotonin syndrome,” which is thought to result from hyperstimulation of brainstem 5-HT1A receptors and characterized by myoclonus, agitation, abdominal cramping, hyperpyrexia, hypertension, and potentially death. Serotonergic agonists taken in combination should be monitored closely for this reason. Considerations such as half-life, compliance, toxicity, and drug-drug interactions may guide the choice of a particular SSRI. Fluoxetine and its principal active metabolite, norfluoxetine, for example, have a combined half-life of almost 7 days, resulting in a delay of 5 weeks before steady-state levels are achieved and a similar delay for complete drug excretion once its use is discontinued. All the SSRIs may impair sexual function, resulting in diminished libido, impotence, or difficulty in achieving orgasm. Sexual dysfunction frequently results in noncompliance and should be asked about specifically. Sexual dysfunction can sometimes be ameliorated by lowering the dose, by instituting weekend drug holidays (two or three times a month), or by treatment with amantadine (100 mg tid), bethanechol (25 mg tid), buspirone (10 mg tid), or bupropion (100–150 mg/d). Paroxetine appears to be more anticholinergic than either fluoxetine or sertraline, and sertraline carries a lower risk of producing an adverse drug interaction than the other two. Rare side effects of SSRIs include angina due to vasospasm and prolongation of the prothrombin time. Escitalopram is the most specific of currently available SSRIs and appears to have no specific inhibitory effects on the P450 system.
# Chunk 5572
(Table 466-9) Lithium carbonate is the mainstay of treatment in bipolar disorder, although sodium valproate and carbamazepine, as well as a number of second-generation antipsychotic agents (aripiprazole, asenapine, olanzapine, quetiapine, risperidone, ziprasidone), also have FDA approval for the treatment of acute mania. Oxcarbazepine is not FDA approved, but appears to enjoy carbamazepine’s spectrum of efficacy. The response rate to lithium carbonate
# Chunk 5573
In this condition, individuals who have no demonstrable associated gastrointestinal or other medical condition repeatedly regurgitate their food after eating and then either rechew or swallow it or spit it out. The behavior typically occurs on a daily basis and must persist for at least 1 month. Weight loss and malnutrition are common sequelae, and individuals may attempt to conceal their behavior, either by covering their mouth or through social avoidance while eating. In infancy, the onset is typically between 3 to 12 months, and the behavior may remit spontaneously, although in some it appears to be recurrent.
# Chunk 5574
Onset is most common in adolescence, although onset in later life can occur. Many more females than males are affected, with a lifetime prevalence in women of up to 4%. The disorder appears 2720 most prevalent in postindustrialized and urbanized countries and is frequently comorbid with preexisting anxiety disorders. The medical consequences of prolonged anorexia nervosa are multisystemic and can be life-threatening in severe presentations. Changes in blood chemistry include leukopenia with lymphocytosis, elevations in blood urea nitrogen, and metabolic alkalosis and hypokalemia when purging is present. History and physical examination may reveal amenorrhea in females, skin abnormalities (petechiae, lanugo hair, dryness), and signs of hypometabolic function, including hypotension, hypothermia, and sinus bradycardia. Endocrine effects include hypogonadism, growth hormone resistance, and hypercortisolemia. Osteoporosis is a longer-term concern. The course of the disorder is variable, with some individuals recovering after a single episode, while others exhibit recurrent episodes or a chronic course. Untreated anorexia has a mortality of 5.1/1000, the highest among psychiatric conditions. Maudsley family-based therapy has proven to be an effective therapy in younger individuals, with strict behavioral contingencies used when weight loss becomes critical. No pharmacologic intervention has proven to be specifically beneficial, but comorbid depression and anxiety should be treated. Weight gain should be undertaken gradually with a goal of 0.5 to 1 pound per week to prevent refeeding syndrome. Most individuals are able to achieve remission within 5 years of the original diagnosis.
# Chunk 5575
Schizophrenia is a heterogeneous syndrome characterized by perturbations of language, perception, thinking, social activity, affect, and volition. There are no pathognomonic features. The syndrome commonly begins in late adolescence, has an insidious (and less commonly acute) onset, and, often, a poor outcome, progressing from social withdrawal and perceptual distortions to recurrent delusions and hallucinations. Patients may present with positive symptoms (such as conceptual disorganization, delusions, or hallucinations) or negative symptoms (loss of function, anhedonia, decreased emotional expression, impaired concentration, and diminished social engagement) and must have at least two of these for a 1-month period and continuous signs for at least 6 months to meet formal diagnostic criteria. Disorganized thinking or speech and grossly disorganized motor behavior, including catatonia, may also be present. As individuals age, positive psychotic symptoms tend to attenuate, and some measure of social and occupational function may be regained. “Negative” symptoms predominate in one-third of the schizophrenic population and are associated with a poor long-term outcome and a poor response to drug treatment. However, marked variability in the course and individual character of symptoms is typical.
# Chunk 5576
Antipsychotic agents are effective in 70% of patients presenting with a first episode. Improvement may be observed within hours or days, but full remission usually requires 6–8 weeks. The choice of agent depends principally on the side effect profile and cost of treatment or on a past personal or family history of a favorable response to the drug in question. Atypical agents appear to be more effective in treating negative symptoms and improving cognitive function. An equivalent treatment response can usually be achieved with relatively low doses of any drug selected (i.e., 4–6 mg/d of haloperidol, 10–15 mg of olanzapine, or 4–6 mg/d of risperidone). Doses in this range result in >80% D2 receptor blockade, and there is little evidence that higher doses increase either the rapidity or degree of response. Maintenance treatment requires careful attention to the possibility of relapse and monitoring for the development of a movement disorder. Intermittent drug treatment is less effective than regular dosing, but gradual dose reduction is likely to improve social functioning in many schizophrenic patients who have been maintained at high doses. If medications are completely discontinued, however, the relapse rate is 60% within 6 months. Long-acting injectable preparations (risperidone, paliperidone, olanzapine, aripiprazole) are considered when noncompliance with oral therapy leads to relapses but should not be considered interchangeable, because the agents differ in their indications, injection intervals and sites/volumes, and possible adverse reactions, among other factors. In treatment-resistant patients, a transition to clozapine usually results in rapid improvement, but a prolonged delay in response in some cases necessitates a 6to 9-month trial for maximal benefit to occur.
# Chunk 5577
Repeated use of alcohol contributes to acquired tolerance, a phenomenon involving at least three compensatory mechanisms. (1) After 1–2 weeks of daily drinking, metabolic or pharmacokinetic tolerance can be seen, with up to 30% increases in the rate of hepatic ethanol metabolism. This alteration disappears almost as rapidly as it develops.
# Chunk 5578
The cellular changes caused by chronic ethanol exposure may not resolve for several weeks or longer following cessation of drinking. Rapid decreases in blood alcohol levels before that time can produce a withdrawal syndrome, which is most intense during the first 5 days, but some symptoms (e.g., disturbed sleep and anxiety) can take up to 4–6 months to resolve.
# Chunk 5579
Approximately 35% of drinkers (and a much higher proportion of alcoholics) experience a blackout, an episode of temporary anterograde amnesia, in which the person forgets all or part of what occurred during a drinking evening. Another common problem, one seen after as few as one or two drinks shortly before bedtime, is disturbed sleep. Although alcohol might initially help a person fall asleep, it disrupts sleep throughout the rest of the night. The stages of sleep are altered, and time spent in rapid eye movement (REM) and deep sleep is reduced. Alcohol relaxes muscles in the pharynx, which can cause snoring and exacerbate sleep apnea; symptoms of the latter occur in 75% of alcoholic men older than age 60 years. Patients may also experience prominent and sometimes disturbing dreams later in the night. All of these sleep problems are more pronounced in alcoholics, and their persistence may contribute to relapse.
# Chunk 5580
Many psychiatric syndromes can be seen temporarily during heavy drinking and subsequent withdrawal. These alcohol-induced conditions include an intense sadness lasting for days to weeks in the midst of heavy drinking seen in 40% of alcoholics, which tends to disappear over several weeks of abstinence (alcohol-induced mood disorder); temporary severe anxiety in 10–30% of alcoholics, often beginning during alcohol withdrawal, which can persist for a month or more after cessation of drinking (alcohol-induced anxiety disorder); and auditory hallucinations and/or paranoid delusions in a person who is alert and oriented, seen in 3–5% of alcoholics (alcohol-induced psychotic disorder).
# Chunk 5581
Even in affluent locales, ~20% of patients have an alcohol use disorder. These men and women can be identified by asking questions about alcohol problems and noting laboratory test results that can reflect regular consumption of six to eight or more drinks per day. The two blood tests with ≥60% sensitivity and specificity for heavy alcohol consumption are γ-glutamyl transferase (GGT) (>35 U) and carbohydrate-deficient transferrin (CDT) (>20 U/L or >2.6%); the combination of the two is likely to be more accurate than either alone. The values for these serologic markers are likely to return toward normal within several weeks of abstinence. Other useful blood tests include high-normal MCVs (≥91 μm3) and serum uric acid (>416 mol/L, or 7 mg/dL).
# Chunk 5582
7.

How often during the last year have you had a feeling of guilt or remorse after drinking?

8.

How often during the last year have you been unable to remember what happened the night before because you had been drinking?
# Chunk 5583
Thus, the first step is a thorough physical examination in all alcoholics considering abstinence, including a search for evidence of liver failure, gastrointestinal bleeding, cardiac arrhythmia, infection, and glucose or electrolyte imbalances. It is also important to offer adequate nutrition and oral multiple B vitamins, including 50–100 mg of thiamine daily for a week or more. Because most alcoholics who enter withdrawal are either normally hydrated or mildly overhydrated, IV fluids should be avoided unless there is a relevant medical problem or significant recent bleeding, vomiting, or diarrhea.
# Chunk 5584
The next step is to recognize that because withdrawal symptoms reflect the rapid removal of a CNS depressant, alcohol, the symptoms can be controlled by administering any depressant in doses that decrease symptoms (e.g., a rapid pulse and tremor) and then tapering the dose over 3–5 days. Although most depressants are effective, benzodiazepines (Chap. 466) have the highest margin of safety and lowest cost and are, therefore, the preferred class of drugs. Short-half-life benzodiazepines can be considered for patients with serious liver impairment or evidence of significant brain damage, but they must be given every 4 h to avoid abrupt blood-level fluctuations that may increase the risk for seizures. Therefore, most clinicians use drugs with longer half-lives (e.g., chlordiazepoxide), adjusting the dose if signs of withdrawal escalate, and withholding the drug if the patient is sleeping or has orthostatic hypotension. The average patient requires 25–50 mg of chlordiazepoxide or 10 mg of diazepam given PO every 4–6 h on the first day, with doses then decreased to zero over the next 5 days. Although alcohol withdrawal can be treated in a hospital, patients in good physical condition who demonstrate mild signs of withdrawal despite low blood alcohol concentrations and who have no prior history of DTs or withdrawal seizures can be considered for outpatient detoxification. For the next 2728 4 or 5 days, these patients should return daily for evaluation of vital signs and can be hospitalized if signs and symptoms of withdrawal escalate.
# Chunk 5585
BUPRENORPHINE MAINTENANCE While France and Australia have had sublingual buprenorphine maintenance since 1996, it was first approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 2002 as a Schedule III drug for managing opioid use disorder. Unlike the full agonist methadone, buprenorphine is a partial agonist of mu-opioid receptors with a slow onset and long duration of action. Its partial agonism reduces the risk of unintentional overdose but limits its efficacy to patients who need the equivalent of only 60–70 mg of methadone, and many patients in methadone maintenance require higher doses up to 150 mg daily. Buprenorphine is combined with naloxone at a 4:1 ratio in order to reduce its abuse liability. Because of pediatric exposures and diversion of buprenorphine to illicit use, a new formulation, using mucosal films rather than sublingual pills that were crushed and snorted, is now marketed. A subcutaneous buprenorphine implant that lasts up to 6 months has also been tested and is pending FDA approval as a formulation improvement to prevent pediatric exposures and illicit diversion and enhance compliance.
# Chunk 5586
In the United States, the ability of primary care physicians to prescribe buprenorphine for opioid use disorder represents an important opportunity to improve access and quality of treatment as well as reduce social harm. Europe, Asia, and Australia have found reduced opioid-related deaths and drug-injection-related medical morbidity with buprenorphine available in primary care. Retention in office-based buprenorphine treatment has been high as 70% at 6-month follow-ups.
# Chunk 5587
Opioid Antagonist Medications The rationale for using narcotic antagonist therapy is that blocking the action of self-administered opioids should eventually extinguish the habit, but this therapy is poorly accepted by patients. Naltrexone, a long-acting orally active pure opioid antagonist, can be given three times a week at doses of 100–150 mg. Because it is an antagonist, the patient must first be detoxified from opioid dependence before starting naltrexone. It is safe even when taken chronically for years, is associated with few side effects (headache, nausea, abdominal pain), and can be given to patients infected with hepatitis B or C without producing hepatotoxicity. However, most providers refrain from prescribing naltrexone if liver function tests are three times above normal levels. Naltrexone maintenance combined with psychosocial therapy is effective in reducing heroin use, but medication adherence is low. Depot injection formulations lasting up to 4 weeks markedly improve adherence, retention, and drug use. Subcutaneous naltrexone implants in Russia, China, and Australia have doubled treatment retention and reduced relapse to half that of oral naltrexone. In the United States, a depot naltrexone formulation is available for monthly use and maintains blood levels equivalent to 25 mg of daily oral use.
# Chunk 5588
Treatment of cocaine overdose is a medical emergency that is best managed in an intensive care unit. Cocaine toxicity produces a hyperadrenergic state characterized by hypertension, tachycardia, tonic-clonic seizures, dyspnea, and ventricular arrhythmias. IV diazepam in doses up to 0.5 mg/kg administered over an 8-h period has been shown to be effective for control of seizures. Ventricular arrhythmias have been managed successfully by administration of 0.5–1.0 mg of propranolol IV. Because many instances of cocaine-related mortality have been associated with concurrent use of other illicit drugs (particularly heroin), the physician must be prepared to institute effective emergency treatment for multiple drug toxicities.
# Chunk 5589
Treatment of acute methamphetamine overdose is largely symptomatic. Ammonium chloride may be useful to acidify the urine and enhance clearance of the drug. Hypertension may respond to sodium nitroprusside or α-adrenergic antagonists. Sedatives may reduce agitation and other signs of central nervous system hyperactivity. Treatment of chronic methamphetamine dependence may be accomplished in either an inpatient or outpatient setting using strategies similar to those described earlier for cocaine abuse.
# Chunk 5590
Cathinone is the primary psychoactive ingredient in khat leaves. Chewing the leaves of the khat shrub (Catha edulis) produces mild stimulant and euphoric effects and remains a common practice in east Africa that has persisted for centuries. Cathinone is structurally similar to amphetamine, and mephedrone is structurally similar to methamphetamine. Cathinones, like amphetamines, inhibit dopamine, serotonin, and norepinephrine transporters to varying degrees, and this probably accounts for variations in the behavioral effects observed. The effects of cathinone derivatives are often described as similar to the effects of MDMA or Ecstasy. Synthetic cathinones can be inhaled, snorted, injected, or taken orally. These drugs may be taken repeatedly over several hours in episodes lasting for hours or days. The onset of effects after oral ingestion is relatively rapid for MDPV (15–30 min) and slightly slower for mephedrone and methylone (30–45 min). The duration of action varies from 2 to 5 or 7 h. After mephedrone inhalation, effects occur within minutes and only last for 1 h or less, but mood changes may persist for several days. Evaluation of the neurotoxic effects of prolonged synthetic cathinone abuse is just beginning, and the long-term consequences are unknown.
# Chunk 5591
Discovery of the psychedelic effects of LSD led to an epidemic of LSD abuse during the 1960s. Imposition of stringent constraints on the manufacture and distribution of LSD (classified as a Schedule I substance by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration [FDA]) and public recognition that psychedelic experiences induced by LSD were a health hazard have resulted in a reduction in LSD abuse. LSD still remains popular among adolescents and young adults, and there are indications that LSD use among young persons has been increasing in some areas in the United States. In 2011, an estimated 358,000 persons used LSD, whereas 200,000 and 271,000 persons reported LSD use in 2003 and 2007, respectively.
# Chunk 5592
In 2011, more than 75,000 emergency ward admissions involved PCP. The diagnosis of PCP overdose is difficult because the patient’s initial symptoms (anxiety, paranoia, delusions, and hallucinations) may suggest an acute schizophrenic reaction. Confirmation of PCP use is possible by determination of PCP levels in serum or urine. PCP assays are available at most toxicologic centers. PCP remains in urine for 1–5 days following high-dose intake.
# Chunk 5593
Cigarette smokers are more likely than nonsmokers to develop both large-vessel atherosclerosis and small-vessel disease. Approximately 90% of peripheral vascular disease in the nondiabetic population can be attributed to cigarette smoking, as can ~50% of aortic aneurysms. In contrast, 20–30% of coronary artery disease and ~10% of ischemic and hemorrhagic strokes are caused by cigarette smoking. There is a multiplicative interaction between cigarette smoking and other cardiac risk factors such that the increment in risk produced by smoking among individuals with hypertension or elevated serum lipids is substantially greater than the increment in risk produced by smoking for individuals without these risk factors.
# Chunk 5594
Cigarette smoking is responsible for 90% of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Within 1–2 years of beginning to smoke regularly, many young smokers will develop inflammatory changes in their small airways, although lung function measures of these changes do not predict development of chronic airflow obstruction. After 20 years of smoking, pathophysiologic changes in the lungs develop and progress proportional to smoking intensity and duration. Chronic mucous hyperplasia of the larger airways results in a chronic productive cough in as many as 80% of smokers >60 years of age. Chronic inflammation and narrowing of the small airways and/or enzymatic digestion of alveolar walls resulting in pulmonary emphysema can result in reduced expiratory airflow sufficient to produce clinical symptoms of respiratory limitation in ~15–25% of smokers.
# Chunk 5595
The process of stopping smoking is commonly a cyclical one, with the smoker sometimes making multiple attempts to quit and failing before finally being successful. Approximately 70–80% of smokers would like to quit smoking. More than one-half of current smokers attempted to quit in the last year, but only 6% quit for 6 months, and only 3% remain abstinent for 2 years. Clinician-based smoking interventions should repeatedly encourage smokers to try to quit and to use different forms of cessation assistance with each new cessation attempt rather than focusing exclusively on immediate cessation at the time of the first visit.
# Chunk 5596
22 is an important health concern; and offered assistance if they become interested in quitting in the future. Many of those not currently expressing an interest in quitting may nevertheless make an attempt to quit in the subsequent year. For those interested in quitting, a quit date should be negotiated, usually not the day of the visit but within the next few weeks, and a follow-up contact by office staff around the time of the quit date should be provided. There is a relationship between the amount of assistance a patient is willing to accept and the success of the cessation attempt. There are a variety of nicotine-replacement products, including over-the-counter nicotine patches, gum, and lozenges, as well as nicotine nasal and oral inhalers available by prescription. These products can be used for up to 3–6 months, and some products are formulated to allow a gradual step-down in dosage with increasing duration of abstinence. Antidepressants such as bupropion (300 mg in divided doses for up to 6 months) have also been shown to be effective, as has varenicline, a partial agonist for the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (initial dose 0.5 mg daily increasing to 1 mg twice daily at day 8; treatment duration up to 6 months). Severe psychiatric symptoms, including suicidal ideation, have been reported with varenicline, resulting in a U.S. Food and Drug Administration–mandated warning and a recommendation for closer therapeutic supervision, but evidence to establish the frequency of these responses and the specificity of their association with varenicline remains unclear. Some evidence supports the combined use of nicotine-replacement therapy (NRT) and antidepressants as well as the use of gum or lozenges for acute cravings in patients using patches. Pretreatment with antidepressants or varenicline is recommended for 1–2 weeks prior to the quit date, and pretreatment with nicotine-replacement products is also being explored, as is longer duration of nicotine replacement as a maintenance therapy for those who are unsuccessful in quitting with a shorter duration of use. NRT is provided in different dosages, with higher doses being recommended for more intense smokers. Clonidine or nortriptyline may be useful for patients who have failed on first-line pharmacologic treatment or who are unable to use other therapies. Antidepressants are more effective in those with a history of depression symptoms. Current recommendations are to offer pharmacologic treatment, usually with NRT or varenicline, to all who will accept it and to provide counseling and other support as a part of the cessation attempt. There are some data to suggest that longer term use of NRT may enable cessation in some smokers who are unable to quit with shorter duration use and that some individuals are able to achieve abstinence from tobacco through use of NRT chronically. Cessation advice alone by a physician or his or her staff is likely to increase success compared with no intervention; a more comprehensive approach with advice, pharmacologic assistance, and counseling can increase cessation success nearly threefold. Incorporation of cessation assistance into a practice requires a change of the care delivery infrastructure. Simple changes include (1) adding questions about smoking and interest in cessation on patient-intake questionnaires, (2) asking patients whether they smoke as part of the initial vital sign measurements made by office staff, (3) listing smoking as a problem in the medical record, and (4) automating follow-up contact with the patient on the quit date. These changes are essential to institutionalizing smoking intervention within the practice setting; without this institutionalization, the best intentions of physicians to intervene with their patients who smoke are often lost in the time crush of a busy practice.
# Chunk 5597
Advances in our understanding of lead toxicity have recently benefited by the development of K x-ray fluorescence (KXRF) instruments for making safe in vivo measurements of lead levels in bone (which, in turn, reflect cumulative exposure over many years, as opposed to blood lead levels, which mostly reflect recent exposure). Higher bone lead levels measured by KXRF have been linked to increased risk of hypertension and accelerated declines in cognition in both men and women from an urban population. Upon reviewing these studies in conjunction with other epidemiologic and toxicologic studies, a recent federal expert panel concluded that the impact of lead exposure on hypertension and cognition in adults was causal. Prospective studies have also demonstrated that higher bone lead levels are a major risk factor for increased cardiovascular morbidity and mortality rates in both community-based and occupational-exposed populations. Lead exposure at community levels has also been recently associated with increased risks of hearing loss, Parkinson’s disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. With respect to pregnancy-associated risks, high maternal bone lead levels were found to predict lower birth weight, head circumference, birth length, and neurodevelopmental performance in offspring by age 2 years. In a randomized trial, calcium supplementation (1200 mg daily) was found to significantly reduce the mobilization of lead from maternal bone into blood during pregnancy.
# Chunk 5598
Lethal dose: 120–200 mg (adults); 2 mg/kg (children).

Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, delirium, coma, seizures; garlicky odor on breath; hyperkeratosis, hyperpigmentation, exfoliative dermatitis, and Mees’ lines (transverse white striae of the fingernails); sensory and motor polyneuritis, distal weakness. Radiopaque sign on abdominal x-ray; ECG–QRS broadening, QT prolongation, ST depression, T-wave flattening; 24-h urinary arsenic >67 μmol/d or 50 μg/d; (no seafood × 24 h); if recent exposure, serum arsenic >0.9 μmol/L (7 μg/dL). High arsenic in hair or nails.
# Chunk 5599
With inhalation: pleuritic chest pain, dyspnea, cyanosis, fever, tachycardia, nausea, noncardiogenic pulmonary edema. With ingestion: nausea, vomiting, cramps, diarrhea. Bone pain, fractures with osteomalacia. If recent exposure, serum cadmium >500 nmol/L (5 μg/dL). Urinary cadmium >100 nmol/L (10 μg/g creatinine) and/or urinary β2-microglobulin >750 μg/g creatinine (but urinary β2-microglobulin also increased in other renal diseases such as pyelonephritis).
# Chunk 5600
Absorbed through ingestion or inhalation; organic lead (e.g., tetraethyl lead) absorbed dermally. In blood, 95–99% sequestered in RBCs—thus, must measure lead in whole blood (not serum). Distributed widely in soft tissue, with half-life ~30 days; 15% of dose sequestered in bone with half-life of >20 years. Excreted mostly in urine, but also appears in other fluids including breast milk. Interferes with mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation, ATPases, calcium-dependent messengers; enhances oxidation and cell apoptosis.
# Chunk 5601
U.S.

children when they begin to crawl (~6 months) is recommended by the CDC; source identification and intervention is begun if the BPb >10 μg/dL. In adults, acute exposure causes similar symptoms as in children as well as headaches, arthralgias, myalgias, depression, impaired short-term memory, loss of libido. Physical exam may reveal a “lead line” at the gingiva-tooth border, pallor, wrist drop, and cognitive dysfunction (e.g., declines on the mini-mental state exam); lab tests may reveal a normocytic, normochromic anemia, basophilic stippling, an elevated blood protoporphyrin level (free erythrocyte or zinc), and motor delays on nerve conduction.
# Chunk 5602
Abbreviations: ATPase, adenosine triphosphatase; BPb, blood lead; CDC, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; CNS, central nervous system; DMSA, dimercaptosuccinic acid; ECG, electrocardiogram; GI, gastrointestinal; ICU, intensive care unit; IQ, intelligence quotient; LFT, liver function tests; OSHA, Occupational Safety and Health Administration; RBC, red blood cell.
# Chunk 5603
A few additional metals deserve brief mention but are not covered tings is associated with an increased risk of lung cancer. Overexposure in Table 472e-1 because of the relative rarity of their being clinically to selenium may cause local irritation of the respiratory system and encountered or the uncertainty regarding their potential toxicities. eyes, gastrointestinal irritation, liver inflammation, loss of hair, depig-Aluminum contributes to the encephalopathy in patients with severe mentation, and peripheral nerve damage. Workers exposed to certain renal disease, who are undergoing dialysis (Chap. 424). High levels organic forms of tin (particularly trimethyl and triethyl derivatives) of aluminum are found in the neurofibrillary tangles in the cerebral have developed psychomotor disturbances, including tremor, convulcortex and hippocampus of patients with Alzheimer’s disease, as well sions, hallucinations, and psychotic behavior. as in the drinking water and soil of areas with an unusually high inci-Thallium, which is a component of some insecticides, metal alloys, dence of Alzheimer’s. The experimental and epidemiologic evidence and fireworks, is absorbed through the skin as well as by ingestion and for the aluminum–Alzheimer’s disease link remains relatively weak, inhalation. Severe poisoning follows a single ingested dose of >1 g or however, and it cannot be concluded that aluminum is a causal agent >8 mg/kg. Nausea and vomiting, abdominal pain, and hematemesis or a contributing factor in neurodegenerative disease. Hexavalent precede confusion, psychosis, organic brain syndrome, and coma. chromium is corrosive and sensitizing. Workers in the chromate and Thallium is radiopaque. Induced emesis or gastric lavage is indicated chrome pigment production industries have consistently had a greater within 4–6 h of acute ingestion; Prussian blue prevents absorption risk of lung cancer. The introduction of cobalt chloride as a fortifier in and is given orally at 250 mg/kg in divided doses. Unlike other types beer led to outbreaks of fatal cardiomyopathy among heavy consum-of metal poisoning, thallium poisoning may be less severe when actiers. Occupational exposure (e.g., of miners, dry-battery manufacturers, vated charcoal is used to interrupt its enterohepatic circulation. Other and arc welders) to manganese can cause a parkinsonian syndrome measures include forced diuresis, treatment with potassium chloride within 1–2 years, including gait disorders; postural instability; a (which promotes renal excretion of thallium), and peritoneal dialysis.
# Chunk 5604
The physical examination should focus initially on vital signs, the cardiopulmonary system, and neurologic status. The neurologic examination should include documentation of neuromuscular abnormalities such as dyskinesia, dystonia, fasciculations, myoclonus, rigidity, and tremors. The patient should also be examined for evidence of trauma and underlying illnesses. Focal neurologic findings are uncommon in poisoning, and their presence should prompt evaluation for a structural central nervous system (CNS) lesion. Examination of the eyes (for nystagmus and pupil size and reactivity), abdomen (for bowel activity and bladder size), and skin (for burns, bullae, color, warmth, moisture, pressure sores, and puncture marks) may reveal findings of diagnostic value. When the history is unclear, all orifices should be examined for the presence of chemical burns and drug packets. The odor of breath or vomitus and the color of nails, skin, or urine may provide important diagnostic clues.
# Chunk 5605
Laboratory assessment may be helpful in the differential diagnosis. Increased AGMA is most common in advanced methanol, ethylene glycol, and salicylate intoxication but can occur with any poisoning that results in hepatic, renal, or respiratory failure; seizures; or shock. The serum lactate concentration is more commonly low (less than the anion gap) in the former and high (nearly equal to the anion gap) in the latter. An abnormally low anion gap can be due to elevated blood levels of bromide, calcium, iodine, lithium, or magnesium. An increased osmolal gap—a difference of >10 mmol/L between serum osmolality (measured by freezing-point depression) and osmolality calculated from serum sodium, glucose, and blood urea nitrogen levels— suggests the presence of a low-molecular-weight solute such as acetone; an alcohol (benzyl, ethanol, isopropanol, methanol); a glycol (diethylene, ethylene, propylene); ether (ethyl, glycol); or an “unmeasured” cation (calcium, magnesium) or sugar (glycerol, mannitol, sorbitol). Ketosis suggests acetone, isopropyl alcohol, salicylate poisoning, or alcoholic ketoacidosis. Hypoglycemia may be due to poisoning with β-adrenergic blockers, ethanol, insulin, oral hypoglycemic agents, quinine, and salicylates, whereas hyperglycemia can occur in poisoning with acetone, β-adrenergic agonists, caffeine, calcium channel blockers, iron, theophylline, or N-3-pyridylmethyl-N′-p-nitrophenylurea (PNU [Vacor]). Hypokalemia can be caused by barium, β-adrenergic agonists, caffeine, diuretics, theophylline, or toluene; hyperkalemia suggests poisoning with an α-adrenergic agonist, a β-adrenergic blocker, cardiac glycosides, or fluoride. Hypocalcemia may be seen in ethylene glycol, fluoride, and oxalate poisoning.
# Chunk 5606
Toxicologic analysis of urine and blood (and occasionally of gastric contents and chemical samples) can sometimes confirm or rule out suspected poisoning. Interpretation of laboratory data requires knowledge of the qualitative and quantitative tests used for screening and confirmation (enzyme-multiplied, fluorescence polarization, and radio-immunoassays; colorimetric and fluorometric assays; thin-layer, gas-liquid, or high-performance liquid chromatography; gas chromatography; mass spectrometry), their sensitivity (limit of detection) and specificity, the preferred biologic specimen for analysis, and the 473e-4 optimal time of specimen sampling. Personal communication with the hospital laboratory is essential to an understanding of institutional testing capabilities and limitations. Rapid qualitative hospital-based urine tests for drugs of abuse are only screening tests that cannot confirm the exact identity of the detected substance and should not be considered diagnostic or used for forensic purposes: False-positive and false-negative results are common. A positive screen may result from other pharmaceuticals that interfere with laboratory analysis (e.g., fluoroquinolones commonly cause “false-positive” opiate screens). Confirmatory testing with gas chromatography/mass spectrometry can be requested, but it often takes weeks to obtain a reported result. A negative screening result may mean that the responsible substance is not detectable by the test used or that its concentration is too low for detection at the time of sampling. For instance, recent new drugs of abuse that often result in emergency department evaluation for unexpected complications, such as synthetic cannabinoids (spice), cathinones (bath salts), and opiate substitutes (kratom), are not detectable by hospital-based tests. In cases where a drug concentration is too low to be detected early during clinical evaluation, repeating the test at a later time may yield a positive result. Patients symptomatic from drugs of abuse often require immediate management based on the history, physical examination, and observed toxidrome without laboratory confirmation (e.g., apnea from opioid intoxication). When the patient is asymptomatic or when the clinical picture is consistent with the reported history, qualitative screening is neither clinically useful nor cost-effective. Thus, qualitative drug screens are of greatest value for the evaluation of patients with severe or unexplained toxicities, such as coma, seizures, cardiovascular instability, metabolic or respiratory acidosis, and nonsinus cardiac rhythms. In contrast to qualitative drug screens, quantitative serum tests are useful for evaluation of patients poisoned with acetaminophen (Chap. 361), alcohols (including ethylene glycol and methanol), anticonvulsants, barbiturates, digoxin, heavy metals, iron, lithium, salicylate, and theophylline as well as for the presence of carboxyhemoglobin and methemoglobin. The serum concentration in these cases guides clinical management, and results are often available within an hour. The response to antidotes is sometimes useful for diagnostic purposes. Resolution of altered mental status and abnormal vital signs within minutes of IV administration of dextrose, naloxone, or flumazenil is virtually diagnostic of hypoglycemia, opioid poisoning, and benzodiazepine intoxication, respectively. The prompt reversal of dystonic (extrapyramidal) signs and symptoms following an IV dose of benztropine or diphenhydramine confirms a drug etiology. Although complete reversal of both central and peripheral manifestations of anticholinergic poisoning by physostigmine is diagnostic of this condition, physostigmine may cause some arousal in patients with CNS depression of any etiology.
# Chunk 5607
During the toxic phase—the interval between the onset of poisoning and its peak effects—management is based primarily on clinical and laboratory findings. Effects after an overdose usually begin sooner, peak later, and last longer than they do after a therapeutic dose. A drug’s published pharmacokinetic profile in standard references such as the Physician’s Desk Reference (PDR) is usually different from its toxicokinetic profile in overdose. Resuscitation and stabilization are the first priority. Symptomatic patients should have an IV line placed and should undergo oxygen saturation determination, cardiac monitoring, and continuous observation. Baseline laboratory, ECG, and x-ray evaluation may also be appropriate. Intravenous glucose (unless the serum level is documented to be normal), naloxone, and thiamine should be considered in patients with altered mental status, particularly those with coma or seizures. Decontamination should also be considered, but it is less likely to be effective during this phase than during the pretoxic phase.
# Chunk 5608
Supraventricular tachycardia associated with hypertension and CNS excitation is almost always due to agents that cause generalized physiologic excitation (Table 473e–1). Most cases are mild or moderate in severity and require only observation or nonspecific sedation with a benzodiazepine. In severe cases or those associated with hemodynamic instability, chest pain, or ECG evidence of ischemia, specific therapy is indicated. When the etiology is sympathetic hyperactivity, treatment with a benzodiazepine should be prioritized. Further treatment with a combined alpha and beta blocker (labetalol), a calcium channel blocker (verapamil or diltiazem), or a combination of a beta blocker and a vasodilator (esmolol and nitroprusside) may be considered for cases refractory to high doses of benzodiazepines. Treatment with an α-adrenergic antagonist (phentolamine) alone may sometimes be appropriate. If the cause is anticholinergic poisoning, physostigmine alone can be effective. Supraventricular tachycardia without hypertension is generally secondary to vasodilation or hypovolemia and responds to fluid administration.
# Chunk 5609
For ventricular tachyarrhythmias due to tricyclic antidepressants and other membrane-active agents (Table 473e-1), sodium bicarbonate is indicated, whereas class IA, IC, and III antiarrhythmic agents are contraindicated because of similar electrophysiologic effects. Although lidocaine and phenytoin are historically safe for ventricular tachyarrhythmias of any etiology, sodium bicarbonate should be considered first for any ventricular arrhythmia suspected to have a toxicologic etiology. Intravenous emulsion therapy has shown benefit for treatment of arrhythmias and hemodynamic instability from various membrane-active agents. Beta blockers can be hazardous if the arrhythmia is due to sympathetic hyperactivity. Magnesium sulfate and overdrive pacing (by isoproterenol or a pacemaker) may be useful in patients with torsades des pointes and prolonged QT intervals. Magnesium and anti-digoxin antibodies should be considered in patients with severe cardiac glycoside poisoning. Invasive (esophageal or intracardiac) ECG recording may be necessary to determine the origin (ventricular or supraventricular) of wide-complex tachycardias (Chaps. 276 and 277). If the patient is hemodynamically stable, however, it is reasonable to simply observe him or her rather than to administer another potentially proarrhythmic agent. Arrhythmias may be resistant to drug therapy until underlying acid-base, electrolyte, oxygenation, and temperature derangements are corrected.
# Chunk 5610
Activated charcoal has comparable or greater efficacy; has fewer contraindications and complications; and is less aversive and invasive than ipecac or gastric lavage. Thus it is the preferred method of gastrointestinal decontamination in most situations. Activated charcoal suspension (in water) is given orally via a cup, straw, or small-bore nasogastric tube. The generally recommended dose is 1 g/kg body weight because of its dosing convenience, although in vitro and in vivo studies have demonstrated that charcoal adsorbs ≥90% of most substances when given in an amount equal to 10 times the weight of the substance. Palatability may be increased by adding a sweetener (sorbitol) or a flavoring agent (cherry, chocolate, or cola syrup) to the suspension. Charcoal adsorbs ingested poisons within the gut lumen, allowing the charcoal-toxin complex to be evacuated with stool. Charged (ionized) chemicals such as mineral acids, alkalis, and highly dissociated salts of cyanide, fluoride, iron, lithium, and other inorganic compounds are not well adsorbed by charcoal. In studies with animals and human volunteers, charcoal decreases the absorption of ingestants by an average of 73% when given within 5 min of ingestant administration, 51% when given at 30 min, and 36% when given at 60 min. For this reason, charcoal given before hospital arrival increases the potential clinical benefit. Side effects of charcoal include nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea or constipation. Charcoal may also prevent the absorption of orally administered therapeutic agents. Complications include mechanical obstruction of the airway, aspiration, vomiting, and bowel obstruction and infarction caused by inspissated charcoal. Charcoal is not recommended for patients who have ingested corrosives because it obscures endoscopy.
# Chunk 5611
Cathartics are salts (disodium phosphate, magnesium citrate and sulfate, sodium sulfate) or saccharides (mannitol, sorbitol) that historically have been given with activated charcoal to promote the rectal evacuation of gastrointestinal contents. However, no animal, volunteer, or clinical data have ever demonstrated any decontamination benefit from cathartics. Abdominal cramps, nausea, and occasional vomiting are side effects. Complications of repeated dosing include severe electrolyte disturbances and excessive diarrhea. Cathartics are contraindicated in patients who have ingested corrosives and in those with preexisting diarrhea. Magnesium-containing cathartics should not be used in patients with renal failure.
# Chunk 5612
Urinary Alkalinization Ion trapping via alteration of urine pH may prevent the renal reabsorption of poisons that undergo excretion by glomerular filtration and active tubular secretion. Since membranes are more permeable to non-ionized molecules than to their ionized counterparts, acidic (low-pK a) poisons are ionized and trapped in alkaline urine, whereas basic ones become ionized and trapped in acid urine. Urinary alkalinization (producing a urine pH ≥7.5 and a urine output of 3–6 mL/kg of body weight per hour by the addition of sodium bicarbonate to an IV solution) enhances the excretion of chlorophenoxyacetic acid herbicides, chlorpropamide, diflunisal, fluoride, methotrexate, phenobarbital, sulfonamides, and salicylates. Contraindications include congestive heart failure, renal failure, and cerebral edema. Acid-base, fluid, and electrolyte parameters should be monitored carefully. Although acid diuresis may make theoretical sense for some overdoses (amphetamines), it is never indicated and is potentially harmful.
# Chunk 5613
Physiologic depression (Table 473e-2). Muscarinic signs and symptoms: seizures, excessive secretions (lacrimation, salivation, bronchorrhea and wheezing, diaphoresis), and increased bowel and bladder activity with nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal cramps, and incontinence of feces and urine. Nicotinic signs and symptoms: hypertension, tachycardia, muscle cramps, fasciculations, weakness, and paralysis. Death is usually due to respiratory failure. Cholinesterase activity in plasma and red cells is <50% of normal in acetylcholinesterase inhibitor poisoning.
# Chunk 5614
Ethylene glycol causes CNS depression and increased serum osmolality. Metabolites (primarily glycolic acid) cause AGMA, CNS depression, and renal failure. Precipitation of oxalic acid metabolite as calcium salt in tissues and urine results in hypocalcemia, tissue edema, and crystalluria.
# Chunk 5615
Whole-bowel irrigation for large ingestions; endoscopy and gastrostomy if clinical toxicity and large number of tablets are still visible on x-ray; IV hydration; sodium bicarbonate for acidemia; IV deferoxamine for systemic toxicity, iron level >90 μmol/L (500 μg/dL)
# Chunk 5616
Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, ataxia, choreoathetosis, encephalopathy, hyperreflexia, myoclonus, nystagmus, nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, falsely elevated serum chloride with low anion gap, tachycardia; coma, seizures, arrhythmias, hyperthermia, and prolonged or permanent encephalopathy and movement disorders in severe cases; delayed onset after acute overdose, particularly with delayed-release formulations. Toxicity occurs at lower drug levels in chronic poisoning than in acute poisoning.
# Chunk 5617
Blockade of fast sodium membrane channels prolongs phase 0 (depolarization) of the cardiac action potential, which prolongs QRS duration and promotes reentrant (monomorphic) ventricular tachycardia. Class Ia, Ic, and III antiarrhythmics also block potassium channels during phases 2 and 3 (repolarization) of the action potential, prolonging the JT interval and promoting early after-depolarizations and polymorphic (tor-sades des pointes) ventricular tachycardia. Similar effects on neuronal membrane channels cause CNS dysfunction. Some agents also block α-adrenergic and cholinergic receptors or have opioid effects (see above and Chap. 468e).
# Chunk 5618
Altered mental status (agitation, confusion, mutism, coma, seizures), neuromuscular hyperactivity (hyperreflexia, myoclonus, rigidity, tremors), and autonomic dysfunction (abdominal pain, diarrhea, diaphoresis, fever, flushing, labile hypertension, mydriasis, tearing, salivation, tachycardia). Complications include hyperthermia, lactic acidosis, rhabdomyolysis, and multisystem organ failure.
# Chunk 5619
Hypertonic sodium bicarbonate (or hypertonic saline) for cardiac conduction delays and monomorphic ventricular tachycardia; lidocaine for monomorphic ventricular tachycardia (except when due to class Ib antiarrhythmics); magnesium, isoproterenol, and overdrive pacing for polymorphic ventricular tachycardia; physostigmine for anticholinergic effects (see above); naloxone for opioid effects (see Chap. 468e); extra-corporeal removal for some agents (see text).
# Chunk 5620
2734 Proteolytic enzymes cause local tissue necrosis, affect the coagulation pathway at various steps, and impair organ function. Hyaluronidases promote the spread of venom through connective tissue. Myocardial depressant factors reduce cardiac output, and bradykinins cause vasodilation and hypotension. Neurotoxins act either preor postsynaptically to block transmission at the neuromuscular junction, causing muscle paralysis. Most snake venoms have multisystem effects on their victims. After a venomous snakebite, the time to symptom onset and clinical presentation can be quite variable and depend on the species involved, the anatomic location of the bite, and the amount of venom injected. Envenomations by most viperids and some elapids with necrotizing venoms cause progressive local pain, swelling, ecchymosis (Fig. 474-1), and (over a period of hours to days) hemorrhagic or serum-filled vesicles and bullae. In serious bites, tissue loss can be significant (Figs. 474-2 and 474-3). Systemic findings are extremely variable and can include tachycardia or bradycardia, hypotension, generalized weakness, changes in taste, mouth numbness, muscle fasciculations, pulmonary edema, renal dysfunction, and spontaneous hemorrhage (from essentially any anatomic site). Envenomations by neurotoxic elapids such as kraits (Bungarus species), many Australian elapids (e.g., death adders [Acanthophis species] and tiger snakes [Notechis species]), some cobras (Naja species), and some viperids (e.g., the South American rattlesnake [Crotalus durissus] and some Indian Russell’s vipers [Daboia russelii]) cause neurologic dysfunction. Early findings may consist of nausea and vomiting, headache, paresthesias or numbness, and altered mental status. Victims may develop cranial nerve abnormalities (e.g., ptosis, difficulty swallowing) followed by peripheral motor weakness. Severe envenomation may result in muscle paralysis, including the muscles of respiration, and lead to death from respiratory failure and aspiration. Sea snake envenomation results in
# Chunk 5621
Adverse reactions to antivenom administration include immediate (nonallergic and, less commonly, allergic anaphylaxis) and delayed-type hypersensitivity reactions (serum sickness). Clinical manifestations of immediate hypersensitivity include urticaria, laryngeal edema, bronchospasm, and hypotension. Skin testing for potential hypersensitivity, although recommended by some antivenom manufacturers, is insensitive and nonspecific and should be omitted. Worldwide, the quality of antivenoms is highly variable. Rates of acute nonallergic anaphylactic reactions to some of these products exceed 50%. For this reason, some authorities have recommended pretreatment with IV antihistamines (e.g., diphenhydramine, 1 mg/kg to a maximum of 100 mg; and cimetidine, 5–10 mg/kg to a maximum of 300 mg) or even a prophylactic SC or IM dose of epinephrine (0.01 mg/kg, up to 0.3 mg). Further research is necessary, however, to determine whether any pretreatment measures are truly beneficial. Modest expansion of the patient’s intra-vascular volume with crystalloids may blunt acute adverse blood pressure decline. Epinephrine and airway equipment should always be immediately available during antivenom infusion. An acute anaphylactic reaction may be heralded by a single hive or mild itching or may present as bronchospasm or acute cardiovascular collapse. If the patient develops an acute reaction to antivenom, the infusion should be temporarily stopped and the reaction immediately treated with IM epinephrine and IV antihistamines and glucocorticoids. Once the reaction has been controlled, if the severity of the envenomation warrants additional antivenom, the dose should be diluted further in isotonic saline and restarted as soon as possible. Rarely, in cases of recalcitrant hypotension, a concomitant IV infusion of epinephrine may be initiated and titrated to clinical effect while antivenom is administered. The patient must be monitored very closely during such therapy, preferably in an intensive care setting. Serum sickness typically develops 1–2 weeks after antivenom administration and may present as fever, chills, urticaria, myalgias, arthralgias, lymphadenopathy, and renal or neurologic dysfunction. Treatment of serum sickness consists of systemic glucocorticoids (e.g., oral prednisone, 1–2 mg/kg daily) until all symptoms have resolved, followed by a taper over 1–2 weeks. Oral antihistamines and analgesics may provide additional relief of symptoms.
# Chunk 5622
2738 attempt to obviate endotracheal intubation. Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors are not a substitute for administration of an appropriate antivenom when available. Care of the bite wound includes simple cleansing with soap and water; application of a dry, sterile dressing; and splinting of the affected extremity with padding between the digits. Once antivenom therapy has been initiated, the extremity should be elevated above heart level to reduce swelling. Tetanus immunization should be updated as appropriate. Prophylactic antibiotics are generally unnecessary after bites by North American snakes, as the incidence of secondary infection is low. In some regions, secondary bacterial infection is more common and the consequences are dire; in these regions, prophylactic antibiotics (e.g., cephalosporins) are used commonly. Antibiotics may also be considered if misguided first aid efforts have included incision or mouth suction of the bite site. Pain control should be achieved with acetaminophen or narcotic analgesics. Salicylates and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents should be avoided because of their effects on blood clotting. Most snake envenomations involve SC deposition of venom. On occasion, however, venom can be injected more deeply into muscle compartments, particularly if the offending snake was large and the bite occurred on the lower leg, forearm, or hand. Intramuscular swelling of the affected extremity may be accompanied by severe pain, decreased strength, altered sensation, cyanosis, and apparent pulselessness—signs suggesting a muscle compartment syndrome. If there is clinical concern that subfascial muscle edema may be impeding tissue perfusion, intracompartmental pressures should be measured by a minimally invasive technique (e.g., wick catheter or digital readout device). If the intracompartmental pressure is high (>30–40 mmHg), the extremity should be kept elevated while antivenom is administered. A dose of IV mannitol (1 g/kg) can be given in an effort to reduce muscle edema if the patient is hemodynamically stable. If the intracompartmental pressure remains elevated after 1 h of such therapy, a surgical consultation should be obtained for possible fasciotomy. Although evidence from animal studies suggests that fasciotomy may actually worsen myonecrosis, compartmental decompression is still necessary to preserve nerve function. Fortunately, the incidence of compartment syndrome is very low after a snakebite, with fasciotomies required in <1% of cases. Nevertheless, vigilance is essential. If a fasciotomy is deemed necessary, it should be undertaken with the patient’s informed consent whenever possible. Wound care in the days after the bite should include careful aseptic debridement of clearly necrotic tissue once coagulation has been restored. Intact serum-filled vesicles or hemorrhagic blebs should be left undisturbed. If ruptured, they should be debrided with sterile technique. Any debridement of damaged muscle should be conservative because there is evidence that such muscle may recover to a significant degree after antivenom therapy. Physical therapy should be started as soon as possible so that the victim can return to a functional state. The incidence of long-term loss of function (e.g., reduced range of motion, impaired sensory function) is unclear but is probably quite high (>30%), particularly after viperid bites. Any patient with signs of envenomation should be observed in the hospital for at least 24 h. In North America, a patient with an apparently “dry” viperid bite should be watched for at least 8 h before discharge, as significant toxicity occasionally develops after a delay of several hours. The onset of systemic symptoms commonly is delayed for a number of hours after bites by several of the elapids (including coral snakes, Micrurus species), some non–North American viperids (e.g., the hump-nosed pit viper [Hypnale hypnale]), and sea snakes. Patients bitten by these snakes should be observed in the hospital for at least 24 h. Patients whose condition is not stable should be admitted to an intensive care setting. At hospital discharge, victims of venomous snakebites should be warned about symptoms and signs of wound infection, antivenomrelated serum sickness, and potential long-term sequelae, such as pituitary insufficiency from Russell’s viper (D. russelii) bites. If coagulopathy developed in the acute stages of envenomation, it can recur during the first 2–3 weeks after the bite. In such cases, victims should be warned to avoid elective surgery or activities posing a high risk of trauma during this period. Outpatient analgesic treatment, wound management, and physical therapy should be provided.
# Chunk 5623
Rescuers should note that envenomations by different cnidarians (typified by jellyfish) may respond differently to similar topical therapies; thus, the recommendations in this chapter must be tailored to local species and clinical practices. During stabilization, the skin should be decontaminated immediately with a generous application of lidocaine (up to 4%), an all-purpose agent that appears to be useful for relieving pain caused by a large number of species. Vinegar (5% acetic acid), rubbing alcohol (40–70% isopropyl alcohol), baking soda (sodium bicarbonate, especially for sea nettle stings), papain (unseasoned meat tenderizer), fresh lemon or lime juice, olive oil, or sugar may be effective, depending on the species of stinging creature. Household ammonia may in and of itself cause skin irritation.
# Chunk 5624
Octopuses Serious envenomations and deaths have followed bites of Australian blue-ringed octopuses (Octopus maculosus and Octopus lunulata). Although these animals rarely exceed 20 cm in length, their salivary venom contains a potent neurotoxin (maculotoxin) that inhibits peripheral nerve transmission by blocking sodium conductance. Oral numbness and facial numbness develop within several minutes of a serious envenomation and rapidly progress to total flaccid paralysis, including failure of respiratory muscles. Immediately after envenomation, a circumferential pressure-immobilization dressing 15 cm wide should be applied over a gauze pad (~7 × 7 × 2 cm) that has been placed directly over the sting. The dressing should be applied at venous-lymphatic pressure, with the preservation of distal arterial pulses. The limb should then be splinted. Once the victim has been transported to the nearest medical facility, the bandage can be released. Because there is no antidote and passive immunotherapy (rabbit IgG antibody) has been proven effective only against tetrodotoxin in mice, treatment is supportive. Patients with respiratory failure may need to be mechanically ventilated. If respirations are assisted, the victim may remain awake although completely paralyzed. Even with serious envenomations, significant recovery often takes place within 4–10 h, although complete recovery may require 2–4 days. Sequelae are uncommon unless related to hypoxia.
# Chunk 5625
The stings of all marine vertebrates are treated in a similar fashion. Except for stonefish and serious scorpionfish envenomations (see below), no antivenom is available. The affected part should be immersed immediately in nonscalding hot water (45°C/113°F) for 30–90 min or until there is significant relief from pain. Recurrent pain may respond to repeated hot-water treatment. Cryotherapy is contraindicated, and no data support the use of antihistamines or steroids. Opiates will help alleviate the pain, as will local wound infiltration or regional nerve block with 1% lidocaine, 0.5% bupivacaine, and sodium bicarbonate mixed in a 5:5:1 ratio. After soaking and anesthetic administration, the wound must be explored and debrided. Radiography (in particular, MRI) may be helpful in identification of foreign bodies. After exploration and debridement, the wound should be irrigated vigorously with warm sterile water, saline, or 1% povidone-iodine in solution. Bleeding usually can be controlled by sustained local pressure for 10–15 min. In general, wounds should be left open to heal by secondary intention or treated by delayed primary closure. Tetanus immunization should be updated. Antibiotic treatment should be considered for serious wounds and for envenomation in immunocompromised hosts. The initial antibiotics should cover Staphylococcus and Streptococcus species. If the victim is immunocompromised, if a wound is primarily repaired and is more than minor, or if an infection develops, antibiotic coverage should be broadened to include Vibrio species. Infection with Aeromonas species is of similar concern for wounds associated with natural freshwater.
# Chunk 5626
Clinical Manifestations The onset of symptoms may come within 15–30 min of ingestion and typically takes place within 2–6 h. Symptoms increase in severity over the ensuing 4–6 h. Most victims develop symptoms within 12 h of ingestion, and virtually all are afflicted within 24 h. The more than 150 signs and symptoms reported include those shown in Table 474-3. Diarrhea, vomiting, and abdominal pain usually develop 3–6 h after ingestion of a ciguatoxic fish. Symptoms may persist for 48 h and then generally resolve (even without treatment). A pathognomonic symptom is the reversal of hot and cold tactile perception, which develops in some persons after 3–5 days and may last for months. More severe reactions tend to occur in persons previously stricken with the disease. Persons who have ingested parrotfish (scaritoxin) may develop classic ciguatera poisoning as well as a “second-phase” syndrome (after 5–10 days’ delay) of disequilibrium
# Chunk 5627
Gastrointestinal Abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea

Neurologic Paresthesias, pruritus, tongue and throat numbness or burning, sensation of “carbonation” during swallowing, odontalgia or dental dysesthesias, dysphagia, tremor, fasciculations, athetosis, meningismus, aphonia, ataxia, vertigo, pain and weakness in the lower extremities, visual blurring, transient blindness, hyporeflexia, seizures, coma
# Chunk 5628
Symptoms include diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and chills. Onset occurs within 30 min to 12 h. The illness is usually self-limited; most patients recover in 3 or 4 days, and only a few require hospitalization. Treatment is supportive and focused on hydration. Toxins can be detected in food samples by a mouse bioassay, an immunoassay, and high-performance liquid chromatography with fluorometric detection (HPLC-FLD).
# Chunk 5629
Paralytic shellfish poisoning is induced by ingestion of any of a variety of feral or aquacultured filter-feeding organisms, including clams, oysters, scallops, mussels, chitons, limpets, starfish, and sand crabs. The origin of their toxicity is the chemical toxin they accumulate and concentrate by feeding on various planktonic dinoflagellates (e.g., Protogonyaulax, Ptychodiscus, and Gymnodinium) and protozoan organisms. The unicellular phytoplanktonic organisms form the foundation of the food chain, and in warm summer months these organisms “bloom” in nutrient-rich coastal temperate and semitropical waters. In the United States, paralytic shellfish poisoning is acquired primarily from seafood harvested in the Northeast, the Pacific Northwest, and Alaska. These planktonic species can release massive amounts of toxic metabolites into the water and cause mortality in bird and marine populations. The paralytic shellfish toxins are water soluble as well as heat and acid stable; they cannot be destroyed by ordinary cooking or freezing. Contaminated seafood looks, smells, and tastes normal. The best-characterized, most potent, and most frequently identified paralytic shellfish toxin is saxitoxin, which takes its name from the Alaska butter clam Saxidomus giganteus. Saxitoxin appears to block sodium conductance, inhibiting neuromuscular transmission at the axonal and muscle membrane levels. A toxin concentration of >75 µg/100 g of foodstuff is considered hazardous to humans. In the 1972 New England “red tide,” the concentration of saxitoxin in blue mussels exceeded 9000 µg/100 g of foodstuff.
# Chunk 5630
The onset of intraoral and perioral paresthesias (notably of the lips, tongue, and gums) comes within minutes to a few hours after ingestion of contaminated shellfish, and these paresthesias progress rapidly to involve the neck and distal extremities. The tingling or burning sensation later changes to numbness. Other symptoms rapidly develop and include light-headedness, disequilibrium, incoordination, weakness, hyperreflexia, incoherence, dysarthria, sialorrhea, dysphagia, thirst, diarrhea, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, nystagmus, dysmetria, headache, diaphoresis, loss of vision, chest pain, and tachycardia. Flaccid paralysis and respiratory insufficiency may follow 2–12 h after ingestion. In the absence of hypoxia, the victim often remains alert but paralyzed. Up to 12% of patients die.
# Chunk 5631
The abnormalities noted within 24 h of ingesting contaminated mussels (Mytilus edulis) include arousal, confusion, disorientation, and memory loss. The median time of onset is 5.5 h. Other prominent signs and symptoms include severe headache, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal cramps, hiccups, arrhythmias, hypotension, seizures, ophthalmoplegia, pupillary dilation, piloerection, hemiparesis, mutism, grimacing, agitation, emotional lability, coma, copious bronchial secretions, and pulmonary edema. Histologic study of brain tissue taken at autopsy has shown neuronal necrosis or cell loss and astrocytosis, most prominently in the hippocampus and the amygdaloid nucleus—findings similar to those in animals poisoned with kainic acid. Several months after the primary intoxication, victims still display chronic residual memory deficits and motor neuronopathy or axonopathy. Nonneurologic illness does not persist.
# Chunk 5632
Under conditions of inadequate preservation or refrigeration, the musculature of these darkor red-fleshed fish undergoes decomposition by Proteus morganii and Klebsiella pneumoniae bacteria, with consequent decarboxylation of the amino acid l-histidine to histamine, histamine phosphate, and histamine hydrochloride. Histamine levels of 20–50 mg/100 g are noted in toxic fish, with levels >400 mg/100 g on occasion. However, it is possible that some other compound may be responsible for this intoxication, because large doses of oral histamine do not reproduce the affliction. It is proposed that this unknown agent works by inhibiting the metabolism of histamine, promoting degranulation of mast cells to release endogenous histamine, or acting as a histamine receptor agonist. Whatever toxin or toxins are involved 2744 are heat stable and are not destroyed by domestic or commercial cooking. Affected fish typically have a sharply metallic or peppery taste; however, they may be normal in appearance, color, and flavor. Not all persons who eat a contaminated fish necessarily become ill, perhaps because of uneven distribution of decay within the fish. Symptoms develop within 15–90 min of ingestion. Most cases are mild, with tingling of lips and mouth, mild abdominal discomfort, and nausea. The more severe and commonly described presentation includes flushing (sharply demarcated; exacerbated by ultraviolet exposure; particularly pronounced on the face, neck, and upper trunk), a sensation of warmth without elevated core temperature, conjunctival hyperemia, pruritus, urticaria, and angioneurotic edema. This syndrome may progress to bronchospasm, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, epigastric pain, abdominal cramps, dysphagia, headache, thirst, pharyngitis, gingival burning, palpitations, tachycardia, dizziness, and hypotension. Without treatment, the symptoms generally resolve within 8–12 h. Because of blockade of gastrointestinal tract histaminase, the reaction may be more severe in a person who is concurrently ingesting isoniazid.
# Chunk 5633
Permethrin cream (5%) is less toxic than 1% lindane preparations and is effective against lindane-tolerant infestations. Scabicides are applied thinly but thoroughly behind the ears and from the neck down after bathing—with careful application to interdigital spaces and the umbilicus and under the fingernails—and are removed 8–14 h later with soap and water. Successful treatment of crusted scabies requires preapplication of a keratolytic agent such as 6% salicylic acid and then of scabicides to the scalp, face, and ears. Repeated treatments or the sequential use of several agents may be necessary. Ivermectin has not been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for treatment of any form of scabies, but a single oral dose (200 μg/kg) is effective in otherwise healthy persons; patients with crusted scabies may require two doses separated by an interval of 1–2 weeks. All FDA-approved scabicides are available solely by prescription.
# Chunk 5634
Ticks attach superficially to skin and feed painlessly; blood is their only food. Their salivary secretions are biologically active and can produce local reactions, induce fevers, and cause paralysis in addition to transmitting diverse pathogens. The two main families of ticks are the hard (ixodid) and soft (argasid) ticks. Generally, soft ticks attach for <1 h, leaving red macules after they drop off. Some species in Africa, the western United States, and Mexico produce painful hemorrhagic lesions. Hard ticks are much more common and transmit most of the 2745 tick-borne infections that are familiar to physicians and patients. Hard ticks attach to the host and feed for several days or sometimes for >1 week. At the site of hard-tick bites, small areas of induration, often purpuric, develop and may be surrounded by an erythematous rim. A necrotic eschar, called a tâche noire, occasionally develops. Chronic nodules (persistent tick-bite granulomas) can be several centimeters in diameter and may linger for months after the feeding tick has been removed. These granulomas can be treated with injected intralesional glucocorticoids or by surgical excision. Tick-induced fever, unas sociated with transmission of any pathogen, is often accompanied by headache, nausea, and malaise but usually resolves ≤36 h after the tick is removed.
# Chunk 5635
Weakness begins symmetrically in the lower extremities ≤6 days after the tick’s attachment, ascends symmetrically during several days, and may culminate in complete paralysis of the extremities and cranial nerves. Deep tendon reflexes are diminished or absent, but sensory examination and findings on lumbar puncture are typically normal. Removal of the tick generally leads to rapid improvement within a few hours and complete recovery after several days, although the patient’s condition may continue to deteriorate for a full day. Failure to remove the tick may lead to dysarthria, dysphagia, and ultimately death from aspiration or respiratory paralysis. Diagnosis depends on finding the tick, which is often hidden beneath scalp hair. An antiserum to the saliva of Ixodes holocyclus, the usual cause of tick paralysis in Australia, effectively reverses paralysis caused by these ticks.
# Chunk 5636
In forested parts of Central and South America, larvae of the human botfly (Dermatobia hominis) produce furuncular (boil-like) papules or subcutaneous nodules ≤3 cm in diameter. A gravid adult female botfly captures a mosquito or another bloodsucking insect and deposits her eggs on its abdomen. When the carrier insect attacks a human or bovine host several days later, the warmth and moisture of the host’s skin stimulate the eggs to hatch. The emerging larvae promptly penetrate intact skin. After 6–12 weeks of development, mature larvae emerge from the skin and drop to the ground to pupate and then become adults.
# Chunk 5637
Pentastomids (tongue worms) inhabit the respiratory passages of reptiles and carnivorous mammals. Human infestation by Linguatula serrata is common in the Middle East and results from the consumption of encysted larval stages in raw liver or lymph nodes of sheep and goats, which are true intermediate hosts for the tongue worms. Larvae migrate to the nasopharynx and produce an acute self-limiting syndrome—known as halzoun or marrara—characterized by pain and itching of the throat and ears, coughing, hoarseness, dysphagia, and dyspnea. Severe edema may cause obstruction that requires tracheostomy. In addition, ocular invasion has been described. Diagnostic larvae measuring ≤10 mm in length appear in copious nasal discharge or vomitus. Individuals become infected with another type of tongue worm, Armillifer armillatus, by consuming its eggs in contaminated food or drink or after handling the definitive host, the African python. Larvae encyst in various organs but rarely cause symptoms. Cysts may require surgical removal as they enlarge during molting, but they usually are encountered as an incidental finding at autopsy. Parasite-induced lesions may be misinterpreted as a malignancy, with the correct diagnosis confirmed histopathologically. Cutaneous larva migrans–type syndromes of other pentastomes have been reported from Southeast Asia and Central America.
# Chunk 5638
Initially, the bite is painless or may produce a stinging sensation. Within the next few hours, the site becomes painful and pruritic, with central induration surrounded by a pale ischemic zone that itself is encircled by a zone of erythema. In most cases, the lesion resolves without treatment in just a few days. In severe cases, the erythema spreads, and the center of the lesion becomes hemorrhagic or necrotic with an overlying bulla. A black eschar forms and sloughs several weeks later, leaving an ulcer that eventually may create a depressed scar. Healing usually takes place in ≤6 months but may take as long as 3 years if adipose tissue is involved. Local complications include injury to nerves and secondary bacterial infection. Fever, chills, weakness, headache, nausea, vomiting, myalgia, arthralgia, maculopapular rash, and leukocytosis may develop ≤72 h after the bite. Reports of deaths attributed to bites of North American brown recluse spiders have not been verified.
# Chunk 5639
Widow spiders spin their webs under stones, logs, plants, or rock piles and in dark spaces in barns, garages, and outhouses. Bites are most common in the summer and early autumn and occur when a web is disturbed or a spider is trapped or provoked. The initial bite 2748 is perceived as a sharp pinprick or may go unnoticed. Fang-puncture marks are uncommon. The venom that is injected does not produce local necrosis, and some persons experience no other symptoms. α-Latrotoxin, the most active component of the venom, binds irreversibly to presynaptic nerve terminals and causes release and eventual depletion of acetylcholine, norepinephrine, and other neurotransmitters from those terminals. Painful cramps may spread within 60 min from the bite site to large muscles of the extremities and trunk. Extreme rigidity of the abdominal muscles and excruciating pain may suggest peritonitis, but the abdomen is not tender on palpation and surgery is not warranted. The pain begins to subside during the first 12 h but may recur during several days or weeks before resolving spontaneously. A wide range of other neurologic sequelae may include salivation, diaphoresis, vomiting, hypertension, tachycardia, labored breathing, anxiety, headache, weakness, fasciculations, paresthesia, hyperreflexia, urinary retention, uterine contractions, and premature labor. Rhabdomyolysis and renal failure have been reported, and respiratory arrest, cerebral hemorrhage, or cardiac failure may end fatally, especially in very young, elderly, or debilitated persons.
# Chunk 5640
Of the 40 or so scorpion species in the United States, only bark scorpions—e.g., Centruroides sculpturatus (C. exilicauda) in the Southwest—produce venom that is potentially lethal to humans. This venom contains neurotoxins that cause sodium channels to remain open. Such envenomations usually are associated with little swelling, but prominent pain, paresthesia, and hyperesthesia can be accentuated by tapping on the affected area (the tap test). These symptoms soon spread to other locations; dysfunction of cranial nerves and hyperexcitability of skeletal muscles develop within hours. Patients present with restlessness, blurred vision, abnormal eye movements, profuse salivation, lacrimation, rhinorrhea, slurred speech, difficulty in handling secretions, diaphoresis, nausea, and vomiting. Muscle twitching, jerking, and shaking may be mistaken for a seizure. Complications include tachycardia, arrhythmias, hypertension, hyperthermia, rhabdomyolysis, and acidosis. Symptoms progress to maximal severity in ~5 h and subside within a day or two, although pain and paresthesia can last for weeks. Fatal respiratory arrest is most common among young children and the elderly.
# Chunk 5641
In the process of feeding on vertebrate blood and tissue fluids, adults of certain flies inflict painful bites, produce local allergic reactions, and may transmit pathogenic agents. Bites of mosquitoes, tiny “no-seeum” (ceratopogonid) midges, and phlebotomine sand flies typically produce a wheal and a pruritic papule. Small humpbacked black flies (simuliids) lacerate skin, resulting in a lesion with serosanguineous discharge that is often painful and pruritic. Regional lymphadenopathy, fever, or anaphylaxis occasionally ensues. The widely distributed deerflies and horseflies as well as the tsetse flies of Africa are stout flies measuring ≤25 mm in length that attack during the day and produce large and painful bleeding punctures. Houseflies (Musca domestica) do not consume blood but use rasping mouthparts to scarify skin and feed upon tissue fluids and salt. Beyond direct injury from bites of any kind 2750 of fly, risks include transmission of diverse pathogens and secondary infection of the lesion.
# Chunk 5642
Several true bugs of the family Reduviidae inflict bites that produce allergic reactions and are sometimes painful. The cone-nose bugs, so called because of their elongated heads, include the assassin and wheel bugs, which feed on other insects and bite vertebrates only in self-defense, and the kissing bugs, which routinely feed on vertebrate blood. The bites of the night-feeding kissing bugs are painless. Reactions to such bites depend on prior sensitization and include tender and pruritic papules, vesicular or bullous lesions, extensive urticaria, fever, lymphadenopathy, and (rarely) anaphylaxis. Bug bites are treated with topical antipruritics or oral antihistamines. Persons with anaphylactic reactions to reduviid bites should keep an epinephrine kit available. Some reduviids transmit Trypanosoma cruzi, the agent of New World trypanosomiasis (also called Chagas disease) (Chap. 252).
# Chunk 5643
The cosmopolitan bedbugs (Cimex species) hide in crevices of mattresses, bed frames and other furniture, walls, and picture frames and under loose wallpaper. Bedbug populations have resurged, recently attaining levels and spreading to an extent not encountered since the mid-twentieth century. These bugs are now a common pest in homes, dormitories, and hotels; on cruise ships; and even in medical facilities. Generally, the bugs hide during the day and take blood meals at night. Their bite is painless, but minutes to days later, sensitized persons develop erythema, itching, and wheals around a central hemorrhagic punctum. Bedbugs are not known to transmit pathogens.
# Chunk 5644
Several families of beetles have independently developed the ability to produce chemically unrelated vesicating toxins. When disturbed, blister beetles (family Meloidae) extrude cantharidin, a low-molecularweight toxin that produces thin-walled blisters (≤5 cm in diameter) 2–5 h after contact. The blisters are not painful or pruritic unless broken and resolve without treatment in ≤10 days. Nephritis may follow unusually heavy cantharidin exposure. Contact occurs when individuals sit on the ground, work in the garden, or deliberately handle the beetles. The hemolymph of certain rove beetles (Staphylinidae) contains pederin, a potent vesicant. When these beetles are crushed or brushed against the skin, the released fluid causes painful, red, flaccid bullae. These beetles occur worldwide but are most numerous and problematic in parts of Africa (where they are called “Nairobi fly”) and southwestern Asia. Ocular lesions may develop after impact with flying beetles at night or unintentional transfer of the vesicant on the fingers. Treatment is rarely necessary, although ruptured blisters should be kept clean and bandaged.
# Chunk 5645
476e-1 altitude Illness Buddha Basnyat, Geoffrey Tabin EPIDEMIOLOGY Mountains cover one-fifth of the earth’s surface; 38 million people live permanently at altitudes ≥2400 m, and 100 million people travel to high-altitude locations each year. Skiers in the Alps or Aspen; religious pilgrims to Lhasa or Kailash; trekkers and climbers to Kilimanjaro, Aconcagua, or Everest; and military personnel deployed ACUTE MOUNTAIN SICKNESS AND HIGH-ALTITUDE CEREBRAL EDEMA AMS is a neurologic syndrome characterized by nonspecific symp-toms (headache, nausea, fatigue, and dizziness), with a paucity of physical findings, developing 6–12 h after ascent to a high altitude. AMS is a clinical diagnosis. For uniformity in research studies, the Lake Louise Scoring System, created at the 1991 International Hypoxia Symposium, is generally used. AMS must be distinguished from exhaustion, dehydration, hypothermia, alcoholic hangover, and hyponatremia. AMS and HACE are thought to represent oppo-site ends of a continuum of altitude-related neurologic disorders. HACE (but not AMS) is an encephalopathy whose hallmarks are ataxia and altered consciousness with diffuse cerebral involvement 476e PART 19: Disorders Associated with Environmental Exposures to high-altitude locations are all at risk of developing acute mountain sickness (AMS), high-altitude cerebral edema (HACE), high-altitude pulmonary edema (HAPE), and other altitude-related problems. AMS is the benign form of altitude illness, whereas HACE and HAPE are life-threatening. Altitude illness is likely to occur above 2500 m but has been documented even at 1500–2500 m. In the Mount Everest region of Nepal, ~50% of trekkers who walk to altitudes >4000 m over ≥5 days develop AMS, as do 84% of people who fly directly to 3860 m. The incidences of HACE and HAPE are much lower than that of AMS, with estimates in the range of 0.1–4%.
# Chunk 5646
Ascent to a high altitude subjects the body to a decrease in barometric pressure that results in a decreased partial pressure of oxygen in the inspired gas in the lungs. This change leads in turn to less pressure driving oxygen diffusion from the alveoli and throughout the oxygen cascade. A normal initial “struggle response” to such an ascent includes increased ventilation—the cornerstone of acclimation—mediated by the carotid bodies. Hyperventilation may cause respiratory alkalosis and dehydration. Alkalosis may depress the ventilatory drive during sleep, with consequent periodic breathing and hypoxemia. During early acclimation, renal suppression of carbonic anhydrase and excretion of dilute alkaline urine combat alkalosis and tend to bring the pH of the blood to normal. Other physiologic changes during normal acclimation include increased sympathetic tone; increased erythropoietin levels, leading to increased hemoglobin levels and red blood cell mass; increased tissue capillary density and mitochondrial numbers; and higher levels of 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate, enhancing oxygen utilization. Even with normal acclimation, however, ascent to a high altitude decreases maximal exercise capacity (by ~1% for every 100 m gained above 1500 m) and increases susceptibility to cold injury due to peripheral vasoconstriction. Finally, if the ascent is made faster than the body can adapt to the stress of hypobaric hypoxemia, altitude-related disease states can result.
# Chunk 5647
HIGH-ALTITUDE PULMONARY EDEMA Risk Factors and Manifestations Unlike HACE (a neurologic disorder), HAPE is primarily a pulmonary problem and therefore is not necessarily preceded by AMS. HAPE develops within 2–4 days after arrival at high altitude; it rarely occurs after more than 4 or 5 days at the same altitude, probably because of remodeling and adaptation that render the pulmonary vasculature less susceptible to the effects of hypoxia. A rapid rate of ascent, a history of HAPE, respiratory tract infections, and cold environmental temperatures are risk factors. Men are more susceptible than women. People with abnormalities of the cardiopulmonary circulation leading to pulmonary hypertension—e.g., large patent foramen ovale, mitral stenosis, primary pulmonary hypertension, and unilateral absence of the pulmonary artery—are at increased risk of HAPE, even at moderate altitudes. For example, patent foramen ovale is four times more common among HAPE-susceptible individuals than in the general population. Echocardiography is recommended when HAPE develops at relatively low altitudes (<3000 m) and whenever cardiopulmonary abnormalities predisposing to HAPE are suspected.
# Chunk 5648
Another proposed mechanism for HAPE is impaired transepithelial clearance of sodium and water from the alveoli. β-Adrenergic agonists upregulate the clearance of alveolar fluid in animal models. In a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled study of HAPE-susceptible mountaineers, prophylactic inhalation of the β-adrenergic agonist salmeterol reduced the incidence of HAPE by 50%. Other effects of β agonists may also contribute to the prevention of HAPE, but these findings are in keeping with the concept that alveolar fluid clearance may play a pathogenic role in this illness.
# Chunk 5649
Early recognition is paramount in the treatment of HAPE, especially when it is not preceded by the AMS symptoms of headache and nausea. Fatigue and dyspnea at rest may be the only initial manifestations. Descent and the use of supplementary oxygen (aimed at bringing oxygen saturation to >90%) are the most effective therapeutic interventions. Exertion should be kept to a minimum, and the patient should be kept warm. Hyperbaric therapy in a portable altitude chamber may be used if descent is not possible and oxygen is not available. Oral sustained-release nifedipine (30 mg once or twice daily) can be used as adjunctive therapy. Inhaled β agonists, which are safe and convenient to carry, are useful in the prevention of HAPE and may be effective in its treatment, although no trials have yet been carried out. Inhaled nitric oxide and expiratory positive airway pressure may also be useful therapeutic measures but may not be available in high-altitude settings. No studies have investigated phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors in the treatment of HAPE, but reports have described their use in clinical practice. The mainstays of treatment remain descent and (if available) oxygen.
# Chunk 5650
Clinical Evidence The typical course of HBO2T consists of 20–30 once-daily compressions to 2–2.4 ATA for 1.5–2 h each session, but is highly dependent on the clinical response. There are many case series in the literature supporting the use of HBO2T for a wide range of problem wounds. Both retrospective and prospective cohort studies suggest that 6 months after a course of therapy, about 70% of indolent ulcers will be substantially improved or healed. Often these ulcers have been present for many months or years, suggesting that the application of HBO2T has a profound effect, either primarily or as a facilitator of other strategies. A recent Cochrane review included nine randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and concluded that the chance of ulcer healing improved about fivefold with HBO2T (RR 5.20; 95% CI 1.25–21.66; p = .02).
# Chunk 5651
Clinical Evidence The typical course of HBO2T consists of two to three compressions to 2–2.8 ATA for 1.5–2 h each session. It is common for the first two compressions to be delivered within 24 h of the exposure. CO poisoning is one of the longest-standing indications for HBO2T— based largely on the obvious connection between exposure, tissue hypoxia, and the ability of HBO2T rapidly to overcome this hypoxia. CO is eliminated rapidly via the lungs on application of HBO2T, with a half-life of about 21 min at 2.0 ATA versus 5.5 h breathing air and 71 min breathing oxygen at sea level. In practice, however, it seems unlikely that HBO2T can be delivered in time to prevent either acute hypoxic death or irreversible global cerebral hypoxic injury. If HBO2T is beneficial in CO poisoning, it must reduce the likelihood of persisting and/or delayed neurocognitive deficit through a mechanism other than the simple reversal of arterial hypoxia due to high levels of COHb. The difficulty in accurately assessing neurocognitive deficit has been one of the primary sources of controversy surrounding the clinical evidence in this area. To date there have been six randomized controlled trials of HBO2T for CO poisoning, although only four have been reported in full. While a Cochrane review suggested that overall there is insufficient evidence to confirm a beneficial effect of HBO2T on the chance of persisting neurocognitive deficit following poisoning (34% of patients treated with oxygen at 1 atmosphere vs 29%, of those treated with HBO2T; odds ratio [OR] 0.78; 95% CI 0.54–1.1), this may have more to do with poor reporting and inadequate follow-up than with evidence that HBO2T is not effective. The interpretation of the literature has much to do with how one defines neurocognitive deficit. In the most methodologically rigorous of these studies (Weaver et al.), a professionally administered battery of validated neuropsychological tests and a definition based on the deviation of individual subtest scores from the age-adjusted normal values was used; if the patient complained of memory, attention, or concentration difficulties, the required decrement was decreased. Using this approach, 6 weeks after poisoning, 46% of patients treated with normobaric oxygen alone had cognitive sequelae compared to 25% of those who received HBO2T (p = .007; number needed to treat [NNT] = 5; 95% CI 3–16). At 12 months, the difference remained significant (32% vs 18%; p = .04; NNT = 7; 95% CI 4–124) despite considerable loss to follow-up.
# Chunk 5652
EEG abnormalities; pro-Progressive decrease Hypoventilation; 50% 50% increase in renal gressive depression of in pulse and cardiac decrease in carbon blood flow; renal level of consciousness; output; increased atrial dioxide production autoregulation intact; pupillary dilation; para-and ventricular arrhyth-per 8°C (46°F) drop in impaired insulin action doxical undressing; hal-mias; suggestive (Jtemperature; absence lucinations wave) ECG changes of protective airway
# Chunk 5653
There are two forms of heatstroke with significantly different manifestations (Table 479e-2). Classic (epidemic) heatstroke (CHS) usually occurs during long periods of high ambient temperature and humidity, as during summer heat waves. Patients with CHS commonly have chronic diseases that predispose to heat-related illness, and they may have limited access to oral fluids. Heat dissipation mechanisms are overwhelmed by both endogenous heat production and exogenous heat stress. Patients with CHS are often compliant with prescribed medications that can impair tolerance to a heat stress. In many of these dehydrated CHS patients, sweating has ceased and the skin is hot and dry. If cooling is delayed, severe hepatic dysfunction, renal failure, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and fulminant multisystem organ failure may occur. Hepatocytes are very heat sensitive. On presentation, the serum level of aspartate aminotransferase (AST) is routinely elevated. Eventually, levels of both AST and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) often increase to >100 times the normal values. Coagulation studies commonly demonstrate decreased platelets, fibrinogen, and prothrombin. Most patients with CHS require cautious crystalloid resuscitation, electrolyte monitoring, and—in certain refractory cases—consideration of central venous pressure (CVP) measurements. Hypernatremia is secondary to dehydration in CHS. Many patients exhibit significant stress leukocytosis, even in the absence of infection.
# Chunk 5654
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance

Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance

B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) P Age and gender specific: <100 ng/L Age and gender specific: <100 pg/mL Bence Jones protein, serum qualitative S Not applicable None detected Bence Jones protein, serum quantitative S 3.3–19.4 mg/L 0.33–1.94 mg/dL Free lambda 5.7–26.3 mg/L 0.57–2.63 mg/dL K/L ratio 0.26–1.65 0.26–1.65 Beta-2-microglobulin S 1.1–2.4 mg/L 1.1–2.4 mg/L Bile acids S 0–1.9 μmol/L 0–1.9 μmol/L Chenodeoxycholic acid 0–3.4 μmol/L 0–3.4 μmol/L Deoxycholic acid 0–2.5 μmol/L 0–2.5 μmol/L Ursodeoxycholic acid 0–1.0 μmol/L 0–1.0 μmol/L Total 0–7.0 μmol/L 0–7.0 μmol/L Bilirubin S Total 5.1–22 μmol/L 0.3–1.3 mg/dL Direct 1.7–6.8 μmol/L 0.1–0.4 mg/dL Indirect 3.4–15.2 μmol/L 0.2–0.9 mg/dL C peptide S 0.27–1.19 nmol/L 0.8–3.5 ng/mL C1-esterase-inhibitor protein S 210–390 mg/L 21–39 mg/dL CA 125 S <35 kU/L <35 U/mL CA 19-9 S <37 kU/L <37 U/mL CA 15-3 S <33 kU/L <33 U/mL CA 27-29 S 0–40 kU/L 0–40 U/mL Calcitonin S 0–7.5 ng/L 0–7.5 pg/mL Female 0–5.1 ng/L 0–5.1 pg/mL Calcium S 2.2–2.6 mmol/L 8.7–10.2 mg/dL Calcium, ionized WB 1.12–1.32 mmol/L 4.5–5.3 mg/dL Carbon dioxide content (TCO2) P (sea level) 22–30 mmol/L 22–30 meq/L Carboxyhemoglobin (carbon monoxide content) WB 0.0–0.025 0–2.5% of total hemoglobin (Hgb) value Smokers 0.04–0.09 4–9% of total Hgb value Loss of consciousness and death >0.50 >50% of total Hgb value Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) S Nonsmokers 0.0–3.0 μg/L 0.0–3.0 ng/mL Smokers 0.0–5.0 μg/L 0.0–5.0 ng/mL Ceruloplasmin S 250–630 mg/L 25–63 mg/dL Chloride S 102–109 mmol/L 102–109 meq/L
# Chunk 5655
Abbreviations: P, plasma; RC, red cells; S, serum; WB, whole blood.

Electrolytes Sodium 137–145 mmol/L 137–145 meq/L Potassium 2.7–3.9 mmol/L 2.7–3.9 meq/L Calcium 1.0–1.5 mmol/L 2.1–3.0 meq/L Magnesium 1.0–1.2 mmol/L 2.0–2.5 meq/L Chloride 116–122 mmol/L 116–122 meq/L CO2 content 20–24 mmol/L 20–24 meq/L
# Chunk 5656
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance the Clinical Laboratory in Modern health Care Anthony A. Killeen Modern medicine relies extensively on the clinical laboratory as a 480e key component of health care. It is estimated that, in current practice, at least 60–70% of all clinical decisions rely to some extent on a laboratory result. For many diseases, the clinical laboratory provides essential diagnostic information. As an example, histopathologic analysis provides basic information about histologic type and classification of tumors and their degree of invasion into adjacent tissues. Microbiologic testing is required to identify infectious organisms and determine antibiotic susceptibility. For many common diseases, expert groups have produced standard guidelines for diagnosis that rely on defined clinical laboratory values, e.g., blood glucose or hemoglobin A1C levels form the basis for diagnosis of diabetes mellitus; the presence of specific serum antibodies is required for diagnosis of many rheumatologic diseases; and serum levels of cardiac markers are a mainstay in diagnosis of acute coronary syndromes.
# Chunk 5657
The commonly used metrics of a clinical laboratory test are the diagnostic sensitivity, specificity, and positive and negative predictive values. These concepts are discussed in Chap. 3. In the clinical laboratory, the terms sensitivity and specificity have alternative meanings that are applied to tests, and the different uses of these terms may cause confusion. Analytic sensitivity can refer to the lowest detectable concentration of analyte that can be measured with some defined certainty or to the rate of change of signal intensity as analyte concentration changes. For example, newer generations of laboratory assays frequently exhibit improved sensitivity over that of earlier generations, i.e., they can detect lower concentrations of the analyte—a feature that is often of value in disease diagnosis. Analytic specificity refers to the extent to which other substances in the test system interfere with measurement of the analyte of interest. This concept is frequently applied to immunoassays, in which a detection antibody may also bind with compounds that have a structure similar to the substance sought. For instance, immunoassays for drugs may show cross-reactivity with drug metabolites, and immunoassays for glucocorticoids may show cross-reactivity with other glucocorticoids of similar structure. Certain chemical assays are also subject to nonspecificity. For example, the Jaffe reaction, a chemical method commonly used to measure creatinine, is subject to positive interference from a number of other compounds, including glucose, certain ketones, and cephalosporin antibiotics. Elevated concentrations of bilirubin, free hemoglobin, or turbidity in plasma or serum specimens may also interfere with some assays. The clinical laboratory should be able to provide advice about the presence or magnitude of these effects in the assays it performs.
# Chunk 5658
7.

Recommended clinical laboratory tests change with time. As new markers of disease emerge, they may replace older markers. For example, measurement of serum creatine kinase (CK) levels was introduced for diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction in the 1980s. Use of the cardiac-specific isoenzyme CK-MB later became widespread in clinical practice. Today, cardiac troponins are replacing CK (or CK-MB) measurements in recommended guidelines. Many other assays have fallen out of use as better assays have become available. Measurement of urine 17-ketosteroids (arising from androgens) and of urine 17-hydroxycorticosteroids (arising from glucocorticoids) has been supplanted by immunoassays or mass spectroscopy determinations of specific steroid hormones. Today, many steroid hormones are measured by mass spectrometry, often with better analytic specificity than is provided by immunoassays. As new tests are introduced, it is essential that they be evaluated critically before adoption for clinical use. At a minimum, consideration needs to be given to questions of clinical validation, specimen stability, diagnostic sensitivity and specificity, positive and negative predictive values, analytic accuracy and precision, and relative costs.
# Chunk 5659
range for this analyte when attempting to gauge a patient’s renal function. A large decrease in glomerular filtration rate (GFR) is associated with slight increases in the plasma creatinine concentration within the typical reference range provided by many laboratories (Fig. 480e-2). A 60-year-old white woman with a serum creatinine level of 1.00 mg/dL, which is well within the typical reference range, has an estimated GFR of only 57 mL/min per 1.73 m2, whereas the same creatinine concentration in a 20-year-old African-American male is consistent with normal renal function. To better estimate the GFR, which is widely considered to be the most useful index of overall renal function, it has become customary to use equations that incorporate plasma creatinine with other parameters. The most widely used of these equations in current practice is the 4-parameter Modification of Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD) equation that incorporates plasma creatinine, age, gender, and ethnic group (African American or not African American). The more recent CKD-EPI equation, which uses the same 4 parameters, is beginning to replace the MDRD equation. Recommended clinical laboratory practice is to report the estimated GFR with all creatinine measurements in adults. This addition provides more useful information than would a creatinine reference range alone.
# Chunk 5660
One of the largest markets for point-of-care testing is home testing by patients, which has long been an important element in the management of persons with diabetes who monitor their own blood glucose levels. Over-the-counter kits for home pregnancy testing have been available for decades. More recently, kits have become available for home testing of the international normalized ratio or prothrombin time by patients taking oral anticoagulants. Kits are also available for cholesterol monitoring, fecal occult-blood detection, and hemoglobin measurement. In these areas, there is often little information on the quality of test performance, the accuracy of the results, or the correctness of result interpretation.
# Chunk 5661
Although public attention has been most closely focused on DNA testing, other clinical laboratory investigations that are not usually thought of as genetic may provide important genetic information about the person being tested. For example, serum protein electrophoresis may reveal α-1 antitrypsin deficiency. Depending on the clinical laboratory technology used, measurement of hemoglobin A1C, commonly used for monitoring diabetes control, may reveal a hemoglobin variant such as HbS (sickle cell). Measurement of cholesterol and triglyceride levels may reveal any of a number of hereditary disorders. All of these results are types of genetic information.
# Chunk 5662
Clinical procedures are an important component of medical student and resident training, and some are required for board and hospital certification. In these Harrison’s Chaps. 481e–486e, video tutorials are presented for performing abdominal paracentesis, thoracentesis, endotracheal intubation, central venous catheter placement, percutaneous arterial blood gas sampling, and lumbar puncture. These videos have been created specifically for Harrison’s. Each includes the indications, contraindications, equipment, potential complications, and related patient safety considerations. Additional video tutorials covering clinical procedures such as breast biopsy, IV line insertion, phlebotomy, arterial line insertion, arthrocentesis, bone marrow biopsy, pelvic examination, thyroid aspiration, basic suturing, and urethral catheterization are available to subscribers of Harrison’s Online and AccessMedicine (available at www.accessmedicine.com).
# Chunk 5663
CHAPTER 481e Clinical Procedure Tutorial: Central Venous Catheter Placement

Clinical Procedure Tutorial: Thoracentesis Charles A. Morris, Andrea Wolf Clinical procedures are an important component of medical student and resident training, and some are required for board and hospital 482e certification. In these new Harrison’s Chaps. 481e–486e, video tutorials are presented for performing abdominal paracentesis, thoracentesis, endotracheal intubation, central venous catheter placement, percutaneous arterial blood gas sampling, and lumbar puncture. These videos have been created specifically for Harrison’s. Each includes the indications, contraindications, equipment, potential complications, and related patient safety considerations. Additional video tutorials covering clinical procedures such as breast biopsy, IV line insertion, phlebotomy, arterial line insertion, arthrocentesis, bone marrow biopsy, pelvic examination, thyroid aspiration, basic suturing, and urethral catheterization are available to subscribers of Harrison’s Online and AccessMedicine (available at www.accessmedicine.com).
# Chunk 5664
CHAPTER 482e Clinical Procedure Tutorial: Thoracentesis

Clinical Procedure Tutorial: Abdominal Paracentesis Maria A. Yialamas, Anna E. Rutherford, Lindsay King Clinical procedures are an important component of medical student and resident training, and some are required for board and hospital cer-483e tification. In these new Harrison’s Chaps. 481e–486e video tutorials are presented for performing abdominal paracentesis, thoracentesis, endotracheal intubation, central venous catheter placement, percutaneous arterial blood gas sampling, and lumbar puncture. These videos have been created specifically for Harrison’s. Each includes the indications, contraindications, equipment, potential complications, and related patient safety considerations. Additional video tutorials covering clinical procedures such as breast biopsy, IV line insertion, phlebotomy, arterial line insertion, arthrocentesis, bone marrow biopsy, pelvic examination, thyroid aspiration, basic suturing, and urethral catheterization are available to subscribers of Harrison’s Online and AccessMedicine (available at www.accessmedicine.com).
# Chunk 5665
CHAPTER 483e Clinical Procedure Tutorial: Abdominal Paracentesis

Clinical Procedure Tutorial: Endotracheal Intubation Charles A. Morris, Emily Page Nelson Clinical procedures are an important component of medical student and resident training, and some are required for board and hospital 484e certification. In these new Harrison’s Chaps. 481e–486e, video tutorials are presented for performing abdominal paracentesis, thoracentesis, endotracheal intubation, central venous catheter placement, percutaneous arterial blood gas sampling, and lumbar puncture. These videos have been created specifically for Harrison’s. Each includes the indications, contraindications, equipment, potential complications, and related patient safety considerations. Additional video tutorials covering clinical procedures such as breast biopsy, IV line insertion, phlebotomy, arterial line insertion, arthrocentesis, bone marrow biopsy, pelvic examination, thyroid aspiration, basic suturing, and urethral catheterization are available to subscribers of Harrison’s Online and AccessMedicine (available at www.accessmedicine.com).
# Chunk 5666
CHAPTER 485e Clinical Procedures Tutorial: Percutaneous Arterial Blood Gas Sampling

Clinical Procedures Tutorial: Lumbar Puncture Beth Rapaport, Stephen Krieger, Corey McGraw Medical Editors: Sean Sadikot, Jeremy Matloff Clinical procedures are an important component of medical student 486e and resident training, and some are required for board and hospital certification. In these Harrison’s Chaps. 481e–486e, video tutorials are presented for performing abdominal paracentesis, thoracentesis, endotracheal intubation, central venous catheter placement, percutaneous arterial blood gas sampling, and lumbar puncture. These videos have been created specifically for Harrison’s. Each includes the indications, contraindications, equipment, potential complications, and related patient safety considerations. Additional video tutorials covering clinical procedures such as breast biopsy, IV line insertion, phlebotomy, arterial line insertion, arthrocentesis, bone marrow biopsy, pelvic examination, thyroid aspiration, basic suturing, and urethral catheterization are available to subscribers of Harrison’s Online and AccessMedicine (available at www.accessmedicine.com).
# Chunk 5667
A traumatic tap, in which blood from the epidural venous plexus has been introduced into the spinal fluid, may seriously confuse the diagnosis if it is incorrectly interpreted as indicating a preexistent subarachnoid hemorrhage. To distinguish between these two types of “bloody taps,” two or three serial samples of fluid may be collected. With a traumatic tap, there is usually a decreasing number of RBCs in the subsequent tubes. Also with a traumatic tap, the CSF pressure is usually normal, and if a large amount of blood is mixed with the fluid, it will clot or form fibrinous webs. These changes are not seen with preexistent hemorrhage because the blood has been greatly diluted with CSF and defibrinated by enzymes in the CSF. In subarachnoid hemorrhage, the RBCs begin to hemolyze within a few hours, imparting a pink-red discoloration (erythrochromia) to the supernatant fluid; if the spinal fluid is sampled more than a day following the hemorrhage, the fluid will have become yellow-brown (xanthochromia). Prompt centrifugation of bloody fluid from a traumatic tap will yield a colorless supernatant; only with large amounts of venous blood (RBC >100,000/mm3) will the supernatant fluid be faintly xanthochromic due to contamination with serum bilirubin and lipochromes.
# Chunk 5668
Not all xanthochromia of the CSF is caused by hemolysis of RBCs. With severe jaundice, both conjugated and unconjugated bilirubin diffuses into the CSF. The quantity of bilirubin in the CSF ranges from one-tenth to one-hundredth that in the serum. Elevation of CSF protein from any cause results in a faint opacity and xanthochromia. Only at protein levels greater than 150 mg/100 mL does the coloration become visible to the naked eye. Hypercarotenemia and hemoglobinemia (through hemoglobin breakdown products, particularly oxyhemoglobin) also impart a yellow tint to the CSF, as do blood clots in the subdural or epidural space of the cranium or spinal column. Myoglobin does not appear in the CSF because a low renal threshold for this pigment permits rapid clearing from the blood.
# Chunk 5669
As one would expect, bleeding into the ventricles or subarachnoid space results in spillage not only of RBCs but of serum proteins. If the serum protein concentrations are normal, the CSF protein should increase by about 1 mg/1,000 RBCs. The same holds for a traumatic puncture that allows seepage of venous blood into the CSF at the puncture site. However, in the case of subarachnoid hemorrhage, caused by the irritating effect of hemolyzed RBC upon the leptomeninges, the CSF protein may be increased by many times this ratio.
# Chunk 5670
The utility of serum serologic tests for viruses is limited by the time required to obtain results, but they are useful in determining retrospectively the source of meningitis or encephalitis. More rapid tests that use the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in CSF, which amplifies viral DNA fragments, are now widely available for diagnosis, particularly for herpesviruses, cytomegalovirus, and JC virus. These tests are most useful in the first week of infection, when the virus is being reproduced and its genomic material is most prevalent; after this time, serologic techniques for viral infection are more sensitive. Amplification of DNA by PCR is particularly useful in the rapid detection of tubercle bacilli in the CSF, the conventional culture of which takes several weeks at best. Tests for the detection of 14-3-3 protein that reflects the presence of prion agents in the spinal fluid are available and may aid in the diagnosis of the spongiform encephalopathies, but the results have been erratic (Chap. 32). Testing for anti-Hu and anti-NMDA and other antibodies has become practical for paraneoplastic and non-paraneoplastic encephalitides (Chap. 30).
# Chunk 5671
The average osmolality of the CSF (295 mOsm/L) is identical to that of plasma. As the osmolality of the plasma is increased by the intravenous injection of hypertonic solutions such as mannitol or urea, there is a delay of up to several hours in the rise of osmolality of the CSF. It is during this period that the hyperosmolality of the blood maximally dehydrates the brain and decreases the volume of CSF. Table 2-2 lists the CSF and serum levels of sodium, potassium, calcium, and magnesium. Neurologic disease does not alter the CSF concentrations of these constituents in any characteristic way. The low CSF concentration of chloride that occurs in bacterial meningitis is not specific but a reflection of hypochloremia and, to a slight degree, of a greatly elevated CSF protein. Acid–base balance in the CSF is of interest in relation to metabolic acidosis and alkalosis but pH is not routinely measured. Normally, the pH of the CSF is approximately 7.33—that is, somewhat lower than that of arterial blood, which is 7.41. The PCO2 in the CSF is in the range of 45 to 49 mm Hg—that is, higher than in arterial blood (about 40 mm Hg). The bicarbonate levels of the two fluids are about the same, 23 mEq/L. The pH of the CSF is precisely regulated, and it tends to remain relatively unchanged even in the face of severe systemic acidosis and alkalosis. Acid–base changes in the lumbar CSF do not necessarily reflect the presence of similar changes in the brain, nor are the CSF data as accurate an index of the systemic changes as direct measurements of arterial blood gases.
# Chunk 5672
The ammonia content of the CSF is one-third to one-half that of the arterial blood; it is increased in hepatic encephalopathy, the inherited hyperammonemias, and the Reye syndrome; the concentration corresponds roughly with the severity of the encephalopathy. The uric acid content of CSF is approximately 5 percent of that in serum and varies with changes in the serum level (high in gout, uremia, and meningitis, and low in Wilson disease). The urea concentration in the CSF is slightly lower than that in the serum; in uremia, it rises in parallel with that in the blood. An intravenous injection of urea raises the blood level immediately and the CSF level more slowly, exerting an osmotic dehydrating effect on the central nervous tissues and CSF. All 24 amino acids have been isolated from the CSF. The concentration of amino acids in the CSF is approximately one-third that in plasma. Elevations of glutamine are found in all the portosystemic encephalopathies, including hepatic coma and the Reye syndrome. Concentrations of phenylalanine, histidine, valine, leucine, isoleucine, tyrosine, and homocystine are increased in the corresponding aminoacidurias.
# Chunk 5673
Risks of CT

The primary risk of CT is radiation exposure, and overexposure can have clinical consequences ranging from relatively benign alopecia to leukomalacia and neoplasia. The interested reader should refer to FDA guidelines on the subject (http://www.fda.gov/Radiation-emittingProducts/RadiationEmittingProductsandProcedures/MedicalImaging/MedicalX-Rays/ucm115317.htm). Given the need for repeated CT examinations in certain patients, tracking of total radiation exposure may be advisable and may find greater use in the future. CT is usually deferred during pregnancy unless the mother’s health is at imminent risk (i.e., following trauma). The potential harm to a fetus from radiation depends on gestational age and total absorbed dose. It is noteworthy that the fetal radiation dose from maternal cranial CT is lower than from maternal pelvic CT.
# Chunk 5674
Fibrillation potentials Destruction of a motor neuron or interruption of its axon causes the distal part of the axon to degenerate, a process that takes several days or more. The muscle fibers formerly innervated by the branches of the dead axon—that is, the motor unit—are thereby disconnected from the nervous system. By mechanisms that are still obscure, the chemosensitive region of the sarcolemma at the motor endplate “spreads” after denervation to involve the entire surface of the muscle fiber. Then, 10 to 25 days after interruption of the axon, the denervated fibers develop spontaneous activity; each fiber contracts at its own rate and without relation to the activity of neighboring fibers. This spontaneous activity, fibrillation, is associated with a random conglomeration of brief dior triphasic fibrillation potentials (Fig. 2-18A) having a duration of 1 to 5 ms and rarely exceeding 300 μV in amplitude. When brief spontaneous fibrillation potentials of this sort are observed firing at two or three different locations (outside the endplate zone) of a resting muscle, one may conclude that the fibers are denervated. In addition, fibrillation potentials may take the form of positive sharp waves, that is, spontaneous, initially positive diphasic potentials of longer duration and slightly greater amplitude than the spikes of fibrillation potentials. Usually, fibrillation potentials discharge at an almost regular rate but after 6 to 8 weeks, irregularly firing fibrillation potentials may be observed.
# Chunk 5675
BIOPSY OF BRAIN, NERVE, MUSCLE, AND OTHER TISSUE

The application of light, phase, and electron microscopy to the study of these tissues may be highly informative. The findings are discussed in Chaps. 36 (skin and conjunctivum in the diagnosis of metabolic storage diseases), 45 (muscle), and 46 (nerve). Temporal artery biopsy is indicated when giant cell arteritis is suspected (Chap. 33). Brain biopsy, aside from its main use in the direct sampling of a suspected neoplasm, may be diagnostic in cases of granulomatous angiitis, some forms of encephalitis, and infectious abscesses. Biopsy of the pachymeninges or leptomeninges may disclose vasculitis, sarcoidosis, other granulomatous infiltrations, or an obscure infection, but its sensitivity is low. This is usually performed in concert with a biopsy of the underlying brain. Biopsy is now generally avoided in cases of suspected prion disease because of the risk of transmitting the causative agent. Abdominal fat pad biopsy is used in the diagnosis of amyloidosis.
# Chunk 5676
Paralysis due to Lesions of the Lower Motor Neurons

If all, or practically all, peripheral motor fibers supplying a muscle are interrupted, the voluntary, postural, and reflex movements of that muscle are abolished. The muscle becomes lax and soft and does not resist passive stretching, a condition known as flaccidity. Muscle tone—the slight resistance that normal relaxed muscle offers to passive movement—is reduced (hypotonia or atonia). The denervated muscle undergoes extreme atrophy, being reduced to 20 or 30 percent of its original bulk within 3 to 4 months. The reaction of the muscle to sudden stretch, as by tapping its tendon, is lost (areflexia). Damage restricted to only a portion of the motor fibers supplying the muscle results in partial paralysis, or paresis, and a proportionate diminution in the force and speed of contraction. The atrophy will be less and the tendon reflex reduced instead of lost. The electrodiagnosis of denervation depends upon finding fibrillations, fasciculations, and other abnormalities on needle electrode examination as mentioned in the previous chapter. However, some of these abnormalities do not appear until several days or a week or two after nerve injury.
# Chunk 5677
Spasticity, Hyperreflexia, and the Babinski Sign

The identifying characteristics of paralysis from an upper motor neuron lesion are a predilection for involvement of certain muscle groups, a specific pattern of response of muscles to passive stretch (where resistance increases linearly in relation to velocity of stretch), and a manifest exaggeration of tendon reflexes. The antigravity muscles—the flexors of the arms and the extensors of the legs—are predominantly affected. The arm tends to assume a flexed and pronated position and the leg an extended and adducted one, indicating that certain spinal neurons are reflexly more active than others.
# Chunk 5678
This is most often caused by a lesion of the cerebral cortex or the spinal cord (where it causes a monoplegia of the leg). Infrequently monoplegia or fragments of it result from a restricted subcortical lesion that interrupts the motor pathways to one limb. A cerebral vascular lesion is the most common cause; a circumscribed tumor or abscess may have the same effect. Small cortical lesions in the motor strip may rarely be so selective as to cause restricted regions of weakness, for example, of parts of the hand. Multiple sclerosis and spinal cord tumor, early in their course, may cause weakness of one limb, usually the leg. Monoplegia caused by a lesion of the upper motor neuron is usually accompanied by spasticity, increased reflexes, and an extensor plantar reflex (Babinski sign). In acute diseases of the lower motor neurons, the tendon reflexes are reduced or abolished, but atrophy may not appear for several weeks.
# Chunk 5679
A distinct subset of patients with an idiopathic dystonia (Segawa disease, described also by Nygaard et al and discussed in Chap. 38) responds to extremely small doses of L-dopa. This disorder is familial, usually autosomal dominant, and the dystonia-athetosis may be combined with elements of parkinsonism. Marked diurnal fluctuation of symptoms is characteristic, with the movement disorder worsening as the day wears on and improving with sleep. Another rare hereditary dystonia, termed rapid-onset dystonia-parkinsonism, has its onset in adolescence or early adulthood and is of interest because of the rapid evolution, at times within an hour but more often over days, of severe dystonic spasms, dysarthria, dysphagia, and postural instability with bradykinesia (Dobyns et al). Dystonia is a component of a number of obscure multisystem degenerations that may include diverse features such as optic neuropathy and striatal necrosis.
# Chunk 5680
The most widely used form of treatment is the periodic (every 3 to 6 months) injection of small amounts of botulinum toxin directly into several sites in the affected muscles. The injections are best guided by palpation of muscles in spasm and by EMG analysis to determine which of the tonically contracted muscles are most responsible for the aberrant posture. All but 10 percent of patients with torticollis have had some degree of relief from symptoms with this treatment. Adverse effects (excessive weakness of injected muscles, local pain, and dysphagia—the latter from a systemic effect of the toxin) are usually mild and transitory. Five to 10 percent of patients eventually become resistant to repeated injections because of the development of neutralizing antibodies to the toxin (Dauer et al).
# Chunk 5681
Dopamine and noradrenergic-depleting drugs such as reserpine and tetrabenazine have also been successful if used carefully but the more effective of the two, tetrabenazine, may be difficult to obtain. The dystonias also respond to anticholinergic drugs (trihexyphenidyl 2.5 mg once or twice daily, increased by small increments weekly up to 12.5 mg) if high enough doses can be tolerated.
# Chunk 5682
Two classes of drugs are used in treatment of intractable and multiple tics; alpha agonists and antipsychosis medications. The alpha2-adrenergic agonists clonidine and guanfacine have been useful in several studies. These are not as potent as treatment with neuroleptic drugs, but their side effects are less severe and they are recommended as the first treatment. Guanfacine has the advantage over clonidine of daily dosing and less sedating effect. The initial dose is 0.5 to 1 mg given at bedtime and gradually increased as needed to a total dose of 4 mg. Clonidine is started as a bedtime dose of 0.05 mg and increased every several days by 0.05 mg until a total dose of about 0.1 mg three times daily. The neuroleptics haloperidol and pimozide, (and less frequently used sulpiride and tiapride) have proved to be effective therapeutic agents but should be used only in severely affected patients and usually after the adrenergic agents have been tried. Haloperidol is instituted in small doses (0.25 mg initially, increasing the dosage gradually to 2 to 10 mg daily). The atypical neuroleptics, such as risperidone, have also been used with some success. Pimozide, which has a more specific antidopaminergic action than haloperidol, may be more effective than haloperidol; it should be given in small amounts (0.5 mg daily) to begin with and increased gradually to 8 to 9 mg daily. The addition of benztropine mesylate (0.5 mg daily) at the outset of treatment may help to prevent the adverse motor effects of haloperidol. The potent agent tetrabenazine, a drug that depletes monoamines and blocks dopamine receptors, may be useful if high doses can be tolerated. Further details of the use of these drugs can be found in the reviews by Leckman and by Kurlan. According to a trial conducted by the Tourette’s Syndrome Study Group, the hyperactivity component of the Tourette syndrome can be treated safely with methylphenidate or clonidine without fear of worsening the tics.
# Chunk 5683
The distribution of pain fibers from deep structures, although not fully corresponding to those from the skin, also follows a roughly segmental pattern. The first to fourth thoracic nerve roots are the important sensory pathways for the heart and lungs; the sixth to eighth thoracic, for the upper abdominal organs; the lower thoracic and upper lumbar, for the lower abdominal viscera; and lower pelvic organs such as the bladder and rectum, the second through fourth sacral roots. These areas of pain projection from visceral structures roughly correspond to the areas of skin innervation by the same roots, with some exceptions, such as the testicles, because of routing of sensory nerves to organs that migrate caudally with development.
# Chunk 5684
The conduction of diffuse, poorly localized pain arising from deep and visceral structures (gut, periosteum, peritoneum) has been ascribed to these slow-conducting, indirect pathways. Melzack and Casey have proposed that this fiber system (which they referred to as paramedian), with its diffuse projection via brainstem and thalamus to the limbic and frontal lobes, subserves the affective aspects of pain, that is, the unpleasant feelings engendered by pain. It is evident that these spinoreticulothalamic pathways continue to evoke the psychic experience of pain even when the direct spinothalamic pathways have been interrupted. Also, the pathways for visceral pain from the esophagus, stomach, small bowel, and proximal colon are carried largely in the vagus nerve and terminate in the nucleus of the solitary tract (nucleus tractus solitarius [NTS]) before projecting to the thalamus, as described below. Other abdominal viscera still activate the NTS when the vagus is severed in animals, probably transmitting impulses through the splanchnic plexus. However, it is the direct spinothalamic pathway, which projects to the ventroposterolateral (VPL) nucleus of the thalamus and thence to discrete areas of the sensory cortex, that subserves the sensory-discriminative detection of the location, quality, and possibly the intensity of the noxious stimulus.
# Chunk 5685
In addition to the sensory ataxia, numbness or paresthesia and “lightning” or lancinating pains are frequent complaints; areflexia, and hypotonia without significant muscle weakness is found. The sensory loss may involve only vibration and position senses in the lower extremities but loss or impairment of superficial or deep pain sense or of touch may appear in severe cases. Loss of deep tendon reflexes distinguishes the sensory root syndrome from a lesion in the posterior columns. The feet and legs are most affected in tabes, much less often the arms and trunk. The Romberg sign is prominent, as noted earlier. In extreme cases, atonicity of the bladder with retention of urine and trophic joint changes (Charcot joints) and crises of abdominal (“gastric”) pains are associated.
# Chunk 5686
Similarly, statements about the intensity of the pain are inherently subjective, as they reflect as much the patient’s temperament, attitudes, and customary ways of experiencing and reacting to pain. One useful index of severity is the degree to which the pain has incapacitated the patient. A severe migraine attack seldom allows the migraineur to perform the day’s work. Other rough indices of the severity of headache are its propensity to awaken the patient from sleep or to prevent sleep, and autonomic reactions to the pain such as sweating and tachycardia. The most intense cranial pains are those associated with meningitis and subarachnoid hemorrhage, which can have grave consequences, but also migraine, cluster headache, or tic douloureux that do not have the same implications.
# Chunk 5687
With regard to characteristic temporal patterns, migraine of the typical type usually has its onset in the early morning hours or in the daytime, reaches its peak of severity over several to 30 min, and lasts, unless treated, for 4 to 24 h, occasionally longer. Often, it is terminated by sleep. A migrainous patient having several attacks per week usually proves to have a chronic form of migraine or a combination of migraine and analgesic “overuse headache,” meaning that the headache returns when the effect of the drug has worn off, or rarely, some unexpected intracranial lesion. By contrast, cluster headache is characterized by the occurrence of unbearably severe unilateral orbitotemporal pain coming on within 1 or 2 h after falling asleep or at predictable times during the day and recurring nightly or daily for a period of several weeks to months; usually an individual attack of “cluster” dissipates in 30 to 45 min but may occasionally last several hours. The headache of intracranial tumor may appear at any time of the day or night; it may interrupt sleep, vary in intensity, and last a few minutes to hours as the tumor raises intracranial pressure. With posterior fossa masses, the headache tends to be worse in the morning, on awakening. Tension headaches (now called “tension-type headache”) can persist with varying intensity for weeks to months or even longer; when such headaches are protracted, there is often an associated depressive illness. In general, headaches that have recurred regularly for many years prove to be migraine or tension in type.
# Chunk 5688
The relationship of headache to certain biologic events and also to certain precipitating, aggravating, or relieving factors can be of great significance in diagnosis. Headaches that occur regularly in the premenstrual period are usually generalized and mild in degree, but attacks of migraine may also occur at this time (catamenial migraine). Headaches that have their origin in cervical spine disease are most typically intense after a period of inactivity, such as a night’s sleep, and the first movements of the neck are stiff and painful. Headache, or more often face ache, from infection of the nasal sinuses may appear upon awakening or in midmorning and is characteristically worsened by stooping and changes in atmospheric pressure; there is associated midfrontal or maxillary tenderness. Eyestrain after long-sustained periods of reading, or exposure to the glare of video displays, may be associated with head pain but it is transient and not an important cause of headache. In certain individuals, alcohol, intense exercise (such as weight lifting), stooping, straining, coughing, and sexual intercourse are known to initiate a bursting (thunderclap) headache, lasting a few seconds to minutes. If a headache is made worse by sudden movement or by coughing or straining, an intracranial source is tentatively suggested. Migraine often occurs several hours or a day following a period of intense activity and stress (“weekend,” or “letdown” migraine). Some patients have discovered that their migraine is relieved momentarily by gentle compression of the carotid or superficial temporal artery on the painful side, and others report that the carotid near the angle of the jaw is tender during the headache. Pain that is noticed when the scalp is stroked in combing or fixing the hair (allodynia) is common in migraine but could be a symptom of inflammation of the temporal arteries (temporal arteritis). Certain medications, most vasodilators such as nitroglycerin and dipyridamole but also monosodium glutamate, are apt to cause headaches. The headaches that follow a period or excessive alcohol (hangover) or a concussion are well known. In many of these instances, a propensity for migraine may create a susceptibility to an induced headache.
# Chunk 5689
In some individuals, migraine attacks, for unaccountable reasons, may increase in frequency for several months. As many as three or four attacks may occur each week, leaving the scalp on one side continuously tender. When this occurs for more than half of the days in a month, the International Headache Society terms the condition chronic migraine.
# Chunk 5690
Alternatives, depending upon other comorbidities, are an antiepileptic medication, or our preference, a tricyclic antidepressant. Valproic acid 250 mg taken three to four times daily, other antiepileptic drug such as topiramate, or amitriptyline, 25 to 125 mg nightly may be tried. The newer antidepressants (e.g., specific serotonin reuptake inhibitors) are not as effective and may even cause headache in our experience. If these three main approaches are unsuccessful, calcium channel blockers (e.g., verapamil, 320 to 480 mg/d; nifedipine, 90 to 360 mg/d) are also reportedly effective in decreasing the frequency and severity of migraine attacks in some patients, but there is typically a lag of several weeks before benefit is attained and our success with them has been limited. Indomethacin, 150 to 200 mg/d; and cyproheptadine, 4 to 16 mg/nightly are found to be helpful in some patients and may be particularly useful in preventing predictable attacks of perimenstrual migraine.
# Chunk 5691
Methysergide, an ergot derivative that was more widely used in the past, in doses of 2 to 6 mg daily for several weeks or months had been effective in the prevention of migraine. Retroperitoneal and pulmonary fibroses are rare but serious complications so that the drug is no longer easily available in the United States or Canada. Some clinicians have used oral methergine as a surrogate but apparently with disappointing results according to our colleagues.
# Chunk 5692
This type of headache has been described in the past under a variety of names, including paroxysmal nocturnal cephalalgia, migrainous neuralgia, histamine cephalalgia (Horton’s headache), and others. Kunkle and colleagues, who were impressed with the characteristic temporal “cluster pattern” of the attacks, coined the term in current use—cluster headache. This headache pattern occurs predominantly in adult men (age range: 20 to 50 years; male-to-female ratio approximately 5:1) and is characterized by a severe consistent unilateral orbital localization. The pain is felt deep in and around the eye, is very intense and nonthrobbing as a rule, and often radiates into the forehead, temple, and cheek—less often to the ear, occiput, and neck. Its denominative feature is the nightly recurrence, between 1 and 2 h after the onset of sleep, or several times during the night for several or more consecutive days; thus “cluster.” Less often, it occurs during the day or early evening, unattended by aura or vomiting. The headache has been called the “alarm clock headache” because it may recur with remarkable regularity each night for periods extending as long as many weeks, followed thereafter by complete freedom for many months or even years. However, in approximately 10 percent of patients, the headache becomes chronic, persisting over days, months, or even years.
# Chunk 5693
Treatment of Cluster Headache

Inhalation of 100 percent oxygen via mask for 10 to 15 min at the onset of cluster headache may abort the attack, but this is not always practical. Termination of a cycle of cluster can also be achieved with verapamil, starting with 80 mg qid and increasing the dose over days, but electrocardiogram (ECG) monitoring is recommended in the older individual. The usual nocturnal attacks of cluster headache can be treated with a single anticipatory dose of ergotamine at bedtime (2 mg orally) or with possibly lesser efficacy, an equivalent dose of serotonin agonist. Intranasal lidocaine or sumatriptan (or zolmitriptan as for migraine, see above) can also be used to abort an acute attack. In other patients, ergotamine given once or twice during the day, before an attack of pain is expected, has been helpful.
# Chunk 5694
With regard to prevention of cluster headache, if ergotamine and sumatriptan are ineffective or become ineffective in subsequent bouts, many headache experts prefer to use verapamil, up to 480 mg/d. Ekbom introduced lithium therapy for cluster headache (600 mg, up to 900 mg daily), and Kudrow has confirmed its efficacy in chronic cases. Lithium and verapamil may be given together, but lithium toxicity is a frequent problem. A course of prednisone, beginning with 75 mg daily for 3 days and then reducing the dose at 3-day intervals, has been beneficial in many patients. Usually, it can be decided within a week if any one of these medications is effective. In brief, no method is effective in all cases, but the best initial approach probably involves the use of one of the triptan compounds. Rare cases of intractable cluster headache, in which the syndrome persists for weeks or longer without remission, have been treated by partial section of the trigeminal nerve, as described by Jarrar and colleagues, but these ablative measures are now always a last resort, especially when hypothalamic stimulation has been shown to be possibly effective, as mentioned earlier.
# Chunk 5695
This, said to be the most common variety of headache, is usually bilateral, with occipitonuchal, temporal, or frontal predominance, or diffuse extension over the top of the cranium. The pain is usually described as dull and aching, but questioning often uncovers other sensations, such as fullness, tightness, or pressure (as though the head were surrounded by a band or clamped in a vise) or a feeling that the head is swollen and may burst. On these sensations, waves of aching pain are superimposed. These may be interpreted as paroxysmal or throbbing and, if the pain is slightly more on one side, the headache may suggest a migraine without aura. However, absent in tension headache are the persistent throbbing quality, nausea, photophobia, phonophobia, and clear lateralization of migraine. Nor do most tension headaches seriously interfere with daily activities, as migraine does. The onset is more gradual than that of migraine, and the headache, once established, may persist with only mild fluctuations for days, weeks, months, or even years. In fact, this is the only one of the few types of headache that exhibits the peculiarity of being present throughout the day, day after day, for long periods of time for which the term chronic tension-type headache is used. There is often self-acknowledged anxiety and depression, as noted below. Although sleep is usually undisturbed, the headache develops soon after awakening, and the common analgesic remedies have limited effect if the pain is of more than mild to moderate severity.
# Chunk 5696
Treatment of Tension Headache

Simple analgesics, such as aspirin or acetaminophen or other NSAIDs, may be helpful, if only for brief periods. Persistent or frequent tension headaches respond best to the cautious use of one of several drugs that relieve anxiety or depression such as amitriptyline given as a single dose at night, especially when symptoms of these conditions are present. Stronger analgesic medication should be avoided. Raskin reports success with calcium channel blockers, phenelzine, and cyproheptadine. Ergotamine and propranolol are ineffective unless there are symptoms of both migraine and tension headache. Some patients respond to ancillary measures such as massage, meditation, and biofeedback techniques. Relaxation techniques may be helpful in teaching patients how to deal with underlying anxiety and stress. Gradual withdrawal of daily doses of analgesics, ergotamines, or triptan medications is an important aspect of treating chronic daily headache.
# Chunk 5697
Headaches of Temporal Arteritis (Giant Cell Arteritis) (See Also Chap. 33)

This type of inflammatory disease of cranial arteries is an important cause of headache in older persons. All of our patients have been older than 55 years of age, most of them older than age 65. From a state of normal health, the patient develops an increasingly intense throbbing or nonthrobbing headache, often with superimposed sharp, stabbing pains. In a few patients the headache has had an almost explosive onset. The pain is usually unilateral, sometimes bilateral, and often localized to the site of the affected arteries in the scalp. The pain persists to some degree throughout the day and is particularly severe at night. It lasts for many months if untreated. The superficial temporal and other scalp arteries are frequently thickened and tender and without pulsation. Jaw claudication and ischemic nodules on the scalp, with ulceration of the overlying skin, have been described in severe cases.
# Chunk 5698
The administration of prednisone, 45 to 60 mg/d in single or divided doses over a period of several weeks, is indicated in all cases, with gradual reduction to 10 to 20 mg/d and maintenance at this dosage for several months or years, if necessary, to prevent relapse. The headache can be expected to improve within a day or two of beginning treatment; failure to do so brings the diagnosis into question. When the sedimentation rate or CRP is elevated, its return to normal, usually over months, is a reliable index of therapeutic response. Whether symptoms or the blood tests are a better guide to reducing the steroid dose is unclear, one should probably be cautious in lowering the medication if the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and CRP remain high.
# Chunk 5699
A patient may complain of very severe, transient cranial pain on coughing, sneezing, laughing heartily, lifting heavy objects including weight lifting, stooping, and straining at stool. Pain is usually felt in the front of the head, sometimes occipitally, and may be unilateral or bilateral. As a rule, it follows the initiating action within a second or two and lasts a few seconds to a few minutes. The pain is often described as having a bursting quality and may be of such severity as to cause the patient to cradle his head in his hands, thereby simulating the headache of acute subarachnoid hemorrhage.
# Chunk 5700
Most often this syndrome is a benign idiopathic state that recurs over a period of several months to a year or two and then disappears. Many decades ago, Symonds emphasized the benignity of the condition. In a report of 103 patients followed for 3 years or longer, Rooke found that additional symptoms of neurologic disease developed in only 10. The cause and mechanism have not been determined. During the headache, the CSF pressure is normal. Bilateral jugular compression may induce an attack, possibly because of traction on the walls of large veins and dural sinuses. In a few instances, we have observed this type of headache after lumbar puncture or after a hemorrhage from an arteriovenous malformation.
# Chunk 5701
A special variant of exertional headache is “weight-lifter’s headache.” It occurs either as a single event or repeatedly over a period of several months, but each episode of headache may last many hours or days, again raising the suspicion of subarachnoid hemorrhage. The pain begins immediately or within minutes of heavy lifting. If the pain resolves in an hour or less and there is no meningismus or sign of bleeding on the CT, we have foregone lumbar puncture and angiography but have suggested that weight lifting not be resumed for several weeks. Athletes and runners in general seem to suffer exertional headaches quite often in our experience, and the episodes usually have migrainous features.
# Chunk 5702
OTHER CRANIOFACIAL PAINS (SEE CHAP. 44)

This is a common disorder of middle age and later life, consisting of paroxysms of intense, stabbing pain in the distribution of the mandibular and maxillary divisions (rarely the ophthalmic division) of the fifth cranial nerve. The pain seldom lasts more than a few seconds or rarely a minute or two, but it is often so intense that the patient winces involuntarily; hence the term tic. It is uncertain whether the tic is reflexive or quasivoluntary. The paroxysms recur frequently, both day and night, for several weeks or months at a time. Another characteristic feature is the initiation of a jab or a series of jabs of pain by stimulation of certain areas of the face, lips, or gums, as in shaving or brushing the teeth, or by movement of these parts in chewing, talking, or yawning, or even by a breeze—the so-called trigger factors. Sensory or motor loss in the distribution of the fifth nerve cannot be demonstrated, though there are minor exceptions to this rule. In addition to the paroxysmal pain, some patients complain of a more or less continuous discomfort, itching, or sensitivity of restricted areas of the face, features regarded as atypical even though not infrequent.
# Chunk 5703
The acute discomfort associated with the herpetic eruption usually subsides after several days or weeks, or it may linger for several months. It is mostly in the elderly that the pain becomes chronic and intractable. Usually it is described as a constant burning, with superimposed waves of stabbing pain, and the skin in the territory of the preceding eruption is exquisitely sensitive to the slightest tactile stimuli, even though the threshold of pain and thermal perception is elevated. This unremitting postherpetic neuralgia of long duration represents one of the most difficult pain problems with which the physician must deal. Some relief may be provided by application of capsaicin cream, use of a mechanical or electrical cutaneous stimulator, or administration of one of the antiepileptic drugs.
# Chunk 5704
Referred pain in reference to the spine may be projected from the spine to viscera and other structures lying within the territory of the lumbar and upper sacral dermatomes, or conversely, projected from pelvic and abdominal viscera to the spine. For example, pain caused by disease of the upper part of the lumbar spine may be referred to the medial flank, lateral hip, groin, and anterior thigh. This has been attributed to irritation of the superior cluneal nerves, which are derived from the posterior divisions of the first three lumbar spinal nerves and innervate the superior portions of the buttocks. Pain from the lower part of the lumbar spine is usually referred to the lower buttocks and posterior thighs and is a result of irritation of lower spinal nerves, which activate the same pool of intraspinal neurons as the nerves that innervate the posterior thighs. Pain of this type is usually diffuse and has a deep, aching quality, but it tends to be more superficially projected. In general, the intensity of referred pain parallels that of local pain and maneuvers that alter local pain have a similar effect on referred pain. McCall and colleagues and Kellgren have verified these areas of reference by the injection of hypertonic saline into the facet joints and the sclerotomes they determined are discussed in Chap. 7; however, as Sinclair and coworkers have pointed out, the sites of reference are inexact and cannot be relied on for precise anatomic localization.
# Chunk 5705
Abdominal, rectal, and pelvic examinations may lead to the discovery of neoplastic or inflammatory diseases in these body parts that are referred to the lower part of the spine.
# Chunk 5706
Depending on the circumstances, these may include a blood count, the acute phase reactants, erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein (especially helpful in screening for spinal osteomyelitis, epidural abscess, or myeloma). Other useful blood tests are calcium, alkaline phosphatase, and prostate-specific antigen (if one suspects metastatic carcinoma of the prostate); serum protein immunoelectrophoresis (myeloma proteins); in special cases, a tuberculin test or serologic test for Brucella; a test for rheumatoid factor; and human leukocyte antigen (HLA) typing (for ankylosing spondylitis), all in the appropriate settings.
# Chunk 5707
Gynecologic disorders may manifest themselves by back pain, and their diagnosis may prove difficult. Thorough abdominal palpation, as well as vaginal and rectal examination by an experienced physician, supplemented by ultrasonography and CT scanning or MRI, usually discloses the source of pain. The uterosacral ligaments are the most important pelvic source of chronic back pain. Endometriosis or carcinoma of the uterus (body or cervix) may invade these structures, causing pain localized to the sacrum either centrally or more to one side. In endometriosis, the pain begins premenstrually and often merges with menstrual pain, which also may be felt in the sacral region. Rarely, cyclic engorgement of ectopic endometrial tissue may give rise to sciatica and other radicular pain. Changes in posture may also evoke pain here when a fibroma of the uterus pulls on the uterosacral ligaments. Low back pain with radiation into one or both thighs is a common phenomenon during the last weeks of pregnancy.
# Chunk 5708
Pain from neoplastic infiltration of pelvic nerve plexuses may be projected to the low back and is continuous, becoming progressively more severe; it tends to be more intense at night and may have a burning quality. The primary lesion can be inconspicuous and may be inevident on pelvic examination.
# Chunk 5709
Nonetheless, the discomfort of acute low back strain can be severe, and the patient may assume unusual postures related to spasm of the lower lumbar and sacrospinalis muscles. The pain is usually confined to the lower part of the back, in the midline, across the posterior waist, or just to one side of the spine. The diagnosis of lumbosacral strain is dependent on the biomechanics of the injury or activity that precipitated the pain. The injured structures are identified by the localized tenderness, augmentation of pain by postural changes—for example, bending forward, twisting, or standing up from a sitting position, and by the absence of signs of radicular involvement. In more than 80 percent of cases of acute low back strain of this type, the pain resolves in a matter of several days or a week, even with no specific treatment.
# Chunk 5710
It is a safe clinical rule that most patients who complain of low back pain have some type of primary or secondary disease of the spine and its supporting structures or of the abdominal or pelvic viscera. However, even after careful examination, there remains a sizable group of patients in whom no basis for the back pain can be found. Two categories can be recognized: one with postural back pain and pain after injury, and another with aggravating psychiatric illness, but there are always cases where the diagnosis remains obscure.
# Chunk 5711
Management of Herniated Cervical Disc

Conservative measures should be instituted before turning to surgical removal of the disc unless there are signs of a rapidly or subacutely progressing myelopathy (i.e., leg and arm weakness, hyperreflexia in the legs, gait ataxia, sphincteric dysfunction). In the case of cervical disc with radicular pain, a close-fitting foam collar is sometimes beneficial although there is controversy about the efficacy of this type of immobilization. The collar should be fitted so that minimal flexion and extension of the neck are allowed, but it must remain comfortable enough to encourage consistent use. The patient is advised to wear the collar at all times during the day, especially while riding in a car, unless this becomes completely impractical. Although of uncertain value, traction with a halter around the occiput and chin may be of some benefit in cervical disc syndromes. Analgesic medication may be required for a few days.
# Chunk 5712
Treatment This disorder is self-limiting, lasting 6 months to 2 years, and responds dramatically to corticosteroid therapy, although this may have to be continued in low dosage for several months or a year or longer. We begin treatment with 20 mg of prednisone if there is no evidence of temporal arteritis (which requires higher doses). The absence of improvement in a day or two should bring the diagnosis into question. The degree of hip and shoulder pain is the best guide to the duration of steroid therapy and the rate at which the drug is withdrawn, usually in very small increments every 2 weeks. The sedimentation rate or C-reactive protein can be used as a guide, but neither alone is adequate to alter the medication schedule.
# Chunk 5713
A cancer-associated retinopathy (CAR) has been described in patients with small-cell lung cancer and other tumors as a paraneoplastic illness (see Chap. 30). The typical presentation is of positive visual phenomenon and rapid bilateral visual loss. Antibodies against the recoverin protein, which modulates rhodopsin kinase, have been demonstrated in the serum of affected patients (Grunwald et al; Kornguth et al; Jacobson et al). A melanoma-associated retinopathy (MAR) that produces night blindness and affects primarily rods has also been described. These paraneoplastic processes are further described in Chap. 30.
# Chunk 5714
Both orbital pseudotumor and Tolosa-Hunt syndrome are treated with corticosteroids. A marked response with reduction in pain and improved ophthalmoplegia in 1 or 2 days is typical; however, as pointed out in the review by Kline and Hoyt, tumors of the parasellar region that cause ophthalmoplegia may also respond, albeit not to the same extent. In both diseases, we have generally given prednisone 60 mg and tapered the medication slowly; although there are no data to guide the proper treatment, corticosteroids should be continued for several weeks or longer. The absence of a response to steroids should cause reconsideration of the diagnosis of Tolosa-Hunt syndrome.
# Chunk 5715
This disorder of labyrinthine function is more frequent than Ménière disease and—while it does not have the same implications in the long term, an acute attack can be quite disabling. It is characterized by paroxysmal vertigo and nystagmus that occur only with the assumption of certain positions of the head, particularly lying down or rolling over in bed, bending over and straightening up, or tilting the head backward. It is common for the patient to report that the paroxysm of vertigo began in the middle of the night or early morning, presumably while shifting position during sleep and rapidly making one ear dependent, on rolling over to get out of bed, or to turn off an alarm. Brandt and colleagues (1994) prefers the descriptive adjective positioning vertigo to positional vertigo, insofar as the symptoms are induced not by a particular head position but only by rapid changes in head position. This disorder was first described by Bárány (1921) but Dix and Hallpike emphasized its benign nature and were responsible for its further characterization, particularly the discrete positional movements that provoke it. Individual episodes last for less than a minute, but these may recur periodically for several days or for many months—rarely for years. As a rule, examination discloses no abnormalities of hearing or other identifiable lesions in the ear or elsewhere. A thorough summary of the condition has been given by Furman and Cass.
# Chunk 5716
(Tonic-Clonic, Grand Mal)

In the common primary type of seizure, most often a convulsion starts with little or no warning. Sometimes the patient senses the approach of a seizure by several subjective phenomena (prodrome) even prior to an epileptic aura, which represents a focal seizure. For some hours, the patient may feel apathetic, depressed, irritable, or, rarely, the opposite—ecstatic. In a patient with generalized epilepsy (juvenile myoclonic epilepsy being one typical type), one or more myoclonic jerks of the trunk or limbs on awakening may herald a seizure later in the day. Abdominal pains or cramps, a sinking, rising, or gripping feeling in the epigastrium, pallor or redness of the face, throbbing headache, constipation, or diarrhea have been given prodromal status, but they do not occur consistently enough to be predictive of an oncoming seizure.
# Chunk 5717
The well-known uncomplicated febrile seizure, specific to infants and children between 6 months and 5 years of age (peak incidence ages 9 to 20 months) and with a strong inherited tendency, is generally regarded as a benign condition. The frequency has been estimated to be approximately 4 per 1,000 children under the age of 5 but reportedly twice as high in Japanese children. It usually takes the form of a single, generalized motor seizure occurring as the patient’s core temperature rises or reaches its peak. Seldom does the seizure last longer than a few minutes and by the time an EEG can be obtained, there is no abnormality and recovery is complete. The seizures do not recur during the same episode of fever. The temperature is usually above 38°C (100.4°F).
# Chunk 5718
The clinical differences between a seizure and a syncopal attack are considered in Chap. 17; there it was emphasized that no single criterion stands inviolate. Particularly emphasized because of their potential gravity are episodes of cardiac syncope from a serious arrhythmia, especially ventricular tachycardia. Cardiac arrhythmias may present as episodes of unheralded loss of consciousness, sometimes with associated convulsive movements that simulate epileptic disorders and the failure to pursue the diagnosis of arrhythmia may have important consequences. Palpitations, previous myocardial infarction, ECG abnormalities, valvular disease, and thoracic trauma may direct attention to the proper diagnosis.
# Chunk 5719
Regarding the distinction of seizures from odd disorders such as cataplexy, paroxysmal ataxia or choreoathetosis, transient global amnesia, it is sufficient to be aware of the diagnostic features for each of these conditions. REM sleep behavior disorder tend to occur later in the sleep cycle, as they require REM, whereas frontal epileptic seizures with violent motions or acts that might be mistaken for REM sleep behavior disorder, can occur at any time of the night and tend to be briefer than the sleep disorder. Drop attacks (falling to the ground without loss of consciousness as discussed in Chap. 6) remain an enigma. In most cases, it has not been possible to substantiate an association with circulatory disturbances of the vertebrobasilar system and seldom have we observed drop attacks to be an expression of atonic or myoclonic epilepsy.
# Chunk 5720
Neonatal seizures occurring within 24 to 48 h of a difficult birth are usually indicative of severe cerebral damage, usually anoxic, either antenatal or parturitional. Such infants often succumb, and about half of the survivors are seriously handicapped. Seizures having their onset several days or weeks after birth are more often an expression of acquired or hereditary metabolic disease. In the latter group, hypoglycemia is the most frequent cause; another, hypocalcemia with tetany, has become infrequent. A hereditary form of pyridoxine deficiency is a rare but treatable cause, sometimes also inducing seizures in utero and characteristically responding promptly to massive doses (100 mg) of vitamin B6 given intravenously. Biotinidase deficiency is another rare but correctable cause. Nonketotic hyperglycemia, maple syrup urine disease, as well as other metabolic disorders may lead to seizures in the first week or two of life and are expressive of a more diffuse encephalopathy.
# Chunk 5721
However, many seizure-like events in this age group are the result of a cardiac arrhythmia, particularly ventricular tachycardia but also cardiac disorders not related to rhythm such as aortic stenosis. Therefore, ECG and long-term monitoring of heart rhythm are useful ancillary tests if the episode remains unexplained.
# Chunk 5722
Other acute metabolic illnesses and electrolytic disorders complicated by generalized and multifocal motor seizures are hyponatremia and its opposite, the hypernatremic, hyperglycemic and other hyperosmolar states, hypoglycemia, thyrotoxicity, porphyria, hypomagnesemia, and hypocalcemia. In all these cases, rapidly evolving electrolyte abnormalities are more likely to cause seizures than those occurring gradually. For this reason it is not possible to assign absolute levels of sodium, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), osmolarity, or glucose concentrations above or below which seizures are likely to occur. Lead (in children) and mercury (in children and adults) are the most frequent of the metallic poisons, still rare as a group, that cause convulsions. The presence of these heavy metals in homeopathic treatments should not be overlooked.
# Chunk 5723
An additional question regards whether to start treatment immediately in an adult with a first unprovoked seizure. The MESS trial, which randomized large groups of patients after a first unprovoked seizure to either immediate treatment or none (Marson and colleagues) concluded that the treated group had fewer subsequent seizures at 6 months (18 vs 26 percent), 2 years (32 vs 39 percent), and 5 years (42 vs 51 percent) and the differences were larger for those who had multiple seizures before randomization and the time to the next seizure was delayed. However, the differences became less significant over time and the side effects of the medications, as judged by practical factors such as keeping a job, were no different between groups. The death rates were comparable. Therefore, factors such as tolerance of the medications, patient preferences, and nature of work must be taken into account when making decisions regarding antiepileptic medicines. Guidelines from the American Academy of Neurology generally accord with these views (Krumholz et al).
# Chunk 5724
Table 15-5 lists the most commonly used drugs along with their dosages, effective blood levels, and serum half-lives. Because of the long half-lives of phenytoin, phenobarbital, and ethosuximide, these drugs need be taken only once daily, preferably at bedtime. Valproate and carbamazepine have shorter half-lives, and their administration should be spaced during the day. It is useful to be familiar with the serum protein-binding characteristics of antiepileptic drugs and the interactions among these drugs, and between antiepileptic and other drugs.
# Chunk 5725
The therapeutic dose for any given patient must be determined, to some extent by clinical effect, guided by measurement of serum levels, as described below. Inquiry regarding seizure control and drug side effects is more valuable than adjustment of medication based solely on drug concentrations. Blood for serum levels is ideally drawn in the morning before the first dose of antiepileptic medication (“trough levels”), a practice that introduces consistency in measurement. A drug should not be discarded as being ineffective, even at the upper limits of therapeutic blood levels, when a slight increase in dosage would have led to suppression of attacks. On the other hand, drug levels can be helpful in detecting noncompliance or poor absorption in instances of inadequate seizure control. The management of seizures is facilitated by having patients chart their daily medication and the number, time, and circumstances of each episode. Furthermore, in some instances, asking the patients about seizure frequency may be unreliable. Some patients find it helpful to use a dispenser that is filled with medications with sufficient pills to last the week. This indicates to the patient whether a dose had been missed and whether the supply of medications is running low.
# Chunk 5726
Finally, the pharmacokinetics of each drug plays a role in toxicity and the serum level that is achieved with each alteration in the dose. This is particularly true of phenytoin, which, as the result of saturation of liver enzymatic capacity, has nonlinear kinetics once serum concentration exceeds 10 mg/mL. For this reason, a typical increase in dose from 300 to 400 mg daily results in a disproportionate elevation of the serum level and toxic side effects. Elevations in drug concentrations are also accompanied by prolongation of the serum half-life, which increases the time to reach a steady-state concentration of phenytoin after dosage adjustments. Contrariwise, carbamazepine is known to induce its own metabolism, so that doses adequate to control seizures at the outset of therapy are no longer effective several weeks later.
# Chunk 5727
Discontinuation of Antiepileptic Drugs

Withdrawal of medications may be undertaken in patients who have been free of seizures for a prolonged period. There are few firm rules to guide the physician in this decision. One plan, applicable to most forms of epilepsy, is to obtain an EEG whenever withdrawal of medication is contemplated. We have taken the approach that if the tracing is abnormal by way of showing paroxysmal activity, it is generally better to continue treatment. However, a normal EEG may not be helpful in making the decision to discontinue medications. A prospective study by Callaghan and colleagues showed that in patients who had been seizure-free during 2 years of treatment with a single drug, one-third relapsed after discontinuation of the drug, and this relapse rate was much the same in adults and children and whether the drug was reduced over a period of weeks or months. The relapse rate was lower in patients with absence and generalized-onset seizures than in patients with focal seizures. Another study by Specchio and colleagues gave results similar to those of the large Medical Research Council Antiepileptic Drug Withdrawal Study—namely, that after 2 years on a single anticonvulsant during which no seizures had occurred, the rate of relapse was 40 percent 2.5 years later and 50 percent at 5 years after discontinuation; this compared to a seizure recurrence rate of 20 percent for patients remaining on medication. Some have suggested that a longer seizure-free period is associated with a lesser rate of relapse.
# Chunk 5728
Phenytoin This sodium channel blocker has been used for decades for focal and generalized seizures. Its advantages are low cost, wide availability, ease of monitoring of blood levels and ability to rapidly achieve therapeutic levels with, oral, intravenous, and intramuscular preparations. Rash, fever, lymphadenopathy, eosinophilia and other blood dyscrasias, and polyarteritis are manifestations of idiosyncratic phenytoin hypersensitivity; their occurrence calls for discontinuation of the medication. Overdose with phenytoin causes ataxia, diplopia, and stupor. The prolonged use of phenytoin leads to hirsutism, enlargement of gums from hyperplasia of connective tissue and epithelium with subsequent periodontal disease, and coarsening of facial features in children. A clinical trial conducted by Arya and colleagues suggested that folate supplementation may prevent gingival hyperplasia in children. Chronic phenytoin use over several decades may occasionally be associated with peripheral neuropathy and probably with a form of cerebellar degeneration (Lindvall and Nilsson); it is not clear if these are strictly dose-related effects or idiosyncratic reactions. An antifolate effect on blood and interference with vitamin K metabolism have also been reported, for which reason pregnant women taking phenytoin (and in fact most other antiepileptic drugs) should be given folate supplementation and vitamin K before delivery and the newborn infant also should receive vitamin K to prevent bleeding. Phenytoin should not be used together with disulfiram, chloramphenicol, sulfamethizole, or cyclophosphamide, and the use of either phenobarbital or phenytoin is not advisable in patients receiving warfarin because of the undesirable interactions already described. Choreoathetosis is a rare idiosyncratic side effect. Fosphenytoin for intramuscular and intravenous administration allows somewhat faster attainment of serum levels and may have minor advantages in special circumstances, especially the availability of the IM route. Intravenous phenytoin and fosphenytoin, including their risks, are discussed further in the section on status epilepticus.
# Chunk 5729
Valproate This drug in all its related forms is considered to be GABA-ergic, acting through glutamic acid decarboxylase, but also displaying some sodium channel blocking features. All preparations of this drug are occasionally hepatotoxic, an adverse effect that is usually (but not invariably) limited to children 2 years of age and younger. The use of valproate with hepatic enzyme-inducing drugs increases the risk of liver toxicity. However, mild elevations of serum ammonia and mild impairments of liver function tests in an adult do not require discontinuation of the drug. An increasingly emphasized problem with valproate has been weight gain during the first months of therapy. In one study there was an average addition of 5.8 kg, and even more in those disposed to obesity. In addition, menstrual irregularities and polycystic ovarian syndrome may appear in young women taking the drug, perhaps as a consequence of the aforementioned weight gain. Pancreatitis is a rare but important complication of valproate. Tremor and slight bradykinesias have been seen and they vaguely simulate parkinsonism. The major issues, however, pertain to its use in pregnancy as discussed earlier.
# Chunk 5730
Lamotrigine This drug closely resembles phenytoin in having a broad spectrum of antiseizure activity but has different features relating to toxicity. It functions by selectively blocking the slow sodium channel, thereby preventing the release of the excitatory transmitters glutamate and aspartate. It is effective as a first-line and adjunctive drug for generalized and focal seizures, and may be an alternative to valproate in young women because it does not provoke weight gain and ovarian problems. The main limitation to its use has been a serious rash in approximately 1 percent of patients, requiring discontinuation of the drug, and lesser dermatologic eruptions in 12 percent. It should be pointed out that some registries have reported considerably lower rates of these complications and the slow introduction of the medication may reduce the incidence of drug eruptions (see below). Rare cases of reversible chorea have been reported, especially with the concurrent use of phenytoin. Combined use with valproate greatly increases the serum level of lamotrigine. It has been said to have a more favorable teratogenic profile than most other drugs. Dosing depends greatly on the concurrent use of other drugs, reducing its dose and rapidity of escalation if used with other enzyme-inducing AEDs such as phenytoin or carbamazepine and particularly with valproate.
# Chunk 5731
Safety and Regulation of Physical

A person with incompletely controlled epilepsy should not be allowed to drive an automobile. Only a few states in the United States and most provinces of Canada mandate that physicians report patients with seizures under their care to the state motor vehicle bureau. Nonetheless, physicians should counsel such a patient regarding the obvious danger to himself and others if a seizure should occur while driving (the same holds for the risks of swimming unattended). What few data are available suggest that accidents caused directly by a seizure are rare and, in any case, 15 percent have been the result of a first episode of seizure that could not have been anticipated. In some states where a driver’s license has been suspended on the occurrence of a seizure, there is usually some provision for its reinstatement—such as a physician’s declaration that the patient is under medical care and has been seizure-free for some period of time (usually 6 months or 1 to 2 years). The Epilepsy Foundation website can be consulted for updated information regarding restrictions on driving, and this serves as an excellent general resource for patients and their families (http://www.efa.org).
# Chunk 5732
Many events that involve the confused patient leave no trace in memory; in fact, the capacity to recall events of the past hours or days is one of the most delicate tests of mental clarity. Another is the use of “working memory,” which requires the temporary storage of the solution of one task for use in the next. A deficit in working memory, which is a common feature of the confusional states, can be demonstrated by tests of serial subtraction, and the spelling of words (or repeating a phone number) forward and then backward. Careful analysis will show these defects to be tied to impaired registration of information rather than to a fault in memory. These phenomena again betray inattention as central features of most confusional states. As already stated, the observed behavior of a confused person transcends inattention alone. It may incorporate elements of clouded interpretation of internal and external experience, and an inability to integrate and attach symbolic meaning to experience (apperception). The degree of confusion often varies from hour to hour and one time of day to another. It tends to be least pronounced in the morning and increases as the day wears on, peaking in the early evening hours (“sundowning”) when the patient is fatigued, and environmental cues are not as clear.
# Chunk 5733
These observations notwithstanding, there is little doubt that the neuroanatomic and neurophysiologic basis of the vegetative state will prove to be complex or at least separable into categories defined by the locus of brain damage. In particular, a striking observation has been made by Owen and colleagues in a 23-year-old woman who had been vegetative for 5 months after a head injury. They observed localized cortical activity in the middle and superior temporal gyri in response to the presentation of spoken sentences that was comparable to the brain activity in normal individuals. Di and colleagues have similarly demonstrated in a limited proportion of vegetative patients that there can be brain activation to the patient’s own name and not to other names. These data suggest that some forms of mental processing can go on during a vegetative state but it is not clear if this situation is representative nor does it provide information about self-awareness, a requisite for consciousness. Further compelling demonstration of cognitive processing in vegetative and minimally conscious patients has been provided by Monti and colleagues by functional MRI. Five of their 54 patients, all with traumatic brain injury but none after anoxic ischemic damage, could willfully modulate focal brain activity by imagining playing tennis (frontal lobe activation) or mentally navigating a familiar place such as their home (temporal lobe activation). In one patient, this activity was used as a means of communication.
# Chunk 5734
It is difficult to predict which comatose patients will later fall permanently into the vegetative or minimally conscious categories. Plum and Posner reported that of 45 patients with signs of the vegetative state at 1 week after onset, 13 had awakened and 5 of these had satisfactory outcomes. After being vegetative for close to 2 weeks, only 1 recovered to a level of moderate disability; after 2 weeks, the prognosis was uniformly poor. Larger studies by Higashi and colleagues have given similar results. As a rough guide to prognosis specifically in head injury, Braakman and colleagues found that among a large group of comatose patients, 59 percent regained consciousness within 6 h, but of those in a vegetative state at 3 months, none became independent. At no time before 3 or 6 months was it possible to distinguish patients who would remain in a vegetative state from those who would die. Further comments regarding recovery are made in the next section on the minimally conscious state.
# Chunk 5735
It is useful to maintain a critical view of reports of remarkable recuperation after months or years of prolonged coma or the vegetative state. When the details of such cases become known, it is sometimes evident that recovery might reasonably have been expected. There are, however, numerous reported instances of partial recovery in patients—particularly children and young adults—who display vegetative features for several weeks or, as Andrews and Childs and Mercer describe, even several months after injury. Such observations cast doubt on unqualified claims of success with certain therapies, such as specialized sensory stimulation. Nevertheless, the rare occurrence of late recovery in adults must be acknowledged (see Andrews; Higashi et al; and Rosenberg et al, 1977) and a relation of awakening to the recovery of connections to the parietal lobes has already been mentioned.
# Chunk 5736
Cases of improvement from the “minimally conscious state” are more plausible than those from the vegetative state. Contrasting the notion that late recovery is exceptional, a case series reported by Estraneo and colleagues of 50 consecutive patients in PVS for a year, 10 showed improvement at an average of 2 years but all were severely impaired. In the series by Luaté and coworkers, none of 12 vegetative patients improved at 5 years but 13 of 39 minimally conscious cases emerged to consciousness with severe disability. Of course, the application of these terms to a patient often leads to the withdrawal of care, and a self-fulfilling poor prognosis. This is a much discussed problem that has not been satisfactorily addressed but it emphasizes that simply labeling patients with PVS or MCS has implications for accurately assessing the natural history of some diseases.
# Chunk 5737
There are cases on record in which a patient with an isoelectric EEG has had preserved brainstem reflexes so that cerebral unresponsiveness and a flat EEG do not alone signify brain death; isoelectric EEG may also be reversible in states of profound hypothermia or intoxication with sedative-hypnotic drugs and immediately following cardiac arrest. Therefore, it has been recommended that the diagnosis of brain death not be entertained until several hours have passed from the time of initial observation. If the examination is performed at least approximately 6 h after the precipitating event, and there is prima facie evidence of overwhelming brain injury from trauma, or massive cerebral hemorrhage (the most common conditions causing brain death), there is probably no need for serial testing. If cardiac arrest was the antecedent event, or the cause of neurologic damage is unclear, or drug or alcohol intoxication could reasonably have played a role in suppressing the brainstem reflexes, it is advisable to wait about 24 h before repeating the testing and pronouncing the patient dead. Toxicologic screening of the serum or urine is requisite in these circumstances.
# Chunk 5738
If poisoning or drug overdosage is suspected, aspiration and analysis of the gastric contents are sometimes helpful, but greater reliance should be placed on chromatographic analysis of the blood and urine (“toxic screen”). Accurate means are available for measuring the blood concentrations of most antiepileptic drugs, opiates, diazepines, barbiturates, alcohol, and a wide range of other toxic substances. These screening procedures vary widely between hospitals and certain toxins must be specifically sought. A specimen of urine is obtained by catheter for determination of specific gravity and for glucose, acetone, and protein content. Proteinuria may also be found for 2 or 3 days after a subarachnoid hemorrhage or with high fever. Urine of high specific gravity, glycosuria, and acetonuria occurs almost invariably in diabetic coma; but transient glycosuria and hyperglycemia may be precipitated solely by a massive cerebral lesion. Blood counts should be obtained and in malarial districts, a blood smear should be examined for parasites. Neutrophilic leukocytosis occurs in bacterial infections and mild elevations of the white blood cell counts also with brain hemorrhage and infarction, although rarely exceeding 12,000/mm3. Venous blood should be examined for the concentrations of glucose, urea, carbon dioxide, bicarbonate, ammonia, sodium, potassium, chloride, calcium, and AST (aspartate serum transaminase); analysis of blood gases and carboxyhemoglobin should be obtained in appropriate cases of anoxia or exposure to carbon monoxide by smoke inhalation or faulty heating systems. Determination of ammonia level may be added in instances where hepatic failure is a possible cause of stupor or coma.
# Chunk 5739
The duration of the prodromal symptoms is variable from a few minutes to only a few seconds. If, during the prodromal period, the person is able to lie down promptly, the attack may be averted before complete loss of consciousness occurs; otherwise, consciousness is lost and the patient falls to the ground. The more or less deliberate onset of this type of syncope enables patients to lie down or at least to protect themselves as they slump. A hurtful fall is exceptional in the young, although an elderly person may be injured.
# Chunk 5740
As described by Low and colleagues, postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS) consists of intolerance of the standing position accompanied by tachycardia up to 120 beats per minute or more, but without orthostatic hypotension. Dyspnea, fatigue, and tremulousness and a complaint of “dizziness” accompany the assumption of an upright posture, and the same constellation of symptoms may be brought out by upright tilting. There is a frequent association with longer term fatigue and with exercise intolerance. The situation is comparable to orthostatic intolerance in the chronic fatigue and postviral syndromes, with which POTS shares many features. An impairment of cerebral autoregulation has been hypothesized; others consider the condition to be a limited form of dysautonomia. The component of the syndrome that simulates anxiety makes it difficult in some cases to differentiate the anticipation of symptoms from a genuine form of autonomic dysfunction.
# Chunk 5741
Cardiac syncope occurs most frequently in patients with complete atrioventricular block and a heart rate of 40 beats or less per minute (Stokes-Adams attacks, or Adams-Stokes-Morgagni syndrome). The block may be persistent or intermittent; it is often preceded by fascicular or second-degree heart block. Ventricular arrest of 4 to 8 s, if the patient is upright, is enough to cause syncope; if the patient is supine, the asystole must last 12 to 15 s. After asystole of 12 s, according to Engel, the patient turns pale and becomes momentarily weak or may lose consciousness without warning; this may occur regardless of the position of the body. If the duration of cerebral ischemia exceeds 15 to 20 s, there are a few clonic jerks. With still longer asystole, the clonic jerks merge with tonic spasms and stertorous respirations and the ashen-gray pallor gives way to cyanosis, incontinence, fixed pupils, and bilateral Babinski signs. As heart action resumes, the face and neck become flushed. The report of this sequence of signs by a dependable observer helps to distinguish syncope from epilepsy. In cases of even more prolonged asystole (4 to 5 min), or if the patient is trapped in an upright or seated position for briefer periods, there may be cerebral injury caused by a combination of hypoxia and ischemia. Coma may persist or may be replaced by confusion and other neurologic signs. Focal ischemic changes, often irreversible, may then be traced to the fields of occluded atherosclerotic cerebral arteries or the border zones between the areas of supply of major arteries. Cardiac faints of the Stokes-Adams type may recur several times a day. The heart block is usually intermittent at first, and between attacks the electrocardiogram (ECG) may show no evidence of heart disease. A continuous ECG using a Holter monitor or telemetry is then needed to demonstrate the arrhythmia (see further on).
# Chunk 5742
In epilepsy, whether convulsive or not, the arrest in consciousness is almost instantaneous and, as revealed by the EEG, is accompanied by a paroxysm of electrical activity occurring simultaneously in all of the cerebral cortex and thalamus. There are a number of important clinical distinctions between epileptic and syncopal attacks. The epileptic attack may occur day or night, regardless of the position of the patient; syncope rarely appears when the patient is recumbent, the only common exception being the Stokes-Adams attack. The patient’s color usually does not change at the onset of an epileptic attack; pallor is an early and almost invariable finding in most types of syncope except those caused by chronic orthostatic hypotension or hysteria, and it precedes unconsciousness. If an aura is present, it rarely lasts longer than a few seconds before consciousness is abolished. The onset of syncope is usually more gradual, and the prodromal symptoms are quite distinctive and different from those of seizures. In general, injury from falling is more frequent in epilepsy than in syncope, because protective reflexes are instantaneously abolished in the former. (Nevertheless, cardiogenic syncope is an important cause of hurtful falls, especially in the elderly.) The return of consciousness is slow in epilepsy, prompt in syncope; mental confusion, headache, and drowsiness are common sequelae of seizures, and physical weakness with clear sensorium, of syncope (a brief period of grogginess may follow vasodepressor syncope). Biting of the tongue is well known, albeit not always present in convulsion; it is exceptional in syncope. Repeated spells of unconsciousness in a young person at a rate of several per day or month are much more suggestive of epilepsy than of syncope.
# Chunk 5743
The EEG may be helpful in differentiating syncope from epilepsy. In the interval between epileptic seizures, the EEG, particularly if repeated once or twice, shows some degree of abnormality in 50 to 75 percent of cases, whereas it should be normal between syncopal attacks. Sometimes one must resort to continuous EEG monitoring to clarify the situation (this can be combined with continuous ECG recording). Another useful laboratory marker of a seizure, especially if unwitnessed, is an elevation of the serum creatine kinase (CK) concentration; such a finding occurs only infrequently in the rare case of syncope associated with extensive muscle trauma. Elevated prolactin levels have not proved discriminating enough for routine use in separating seizure from syncope but remain useful in distinguishing both of these from other causes of loss of consciousness, particularly hysteria, in which such elevations do not occur.
# Chunk 5744
The pattern of sleeping, which is adjusted to the 24-h day, also varies in the different epochs of life. The circadian rhythm, with predominance of daytime wakefulness and nighttime sleep, begins to appear only after the first few weeks of postnatal life of the full-term infant; as the child matures, the morning nap is omitted, then the afternoon nap; by the fourth or fifth year, sleep becomes consolidated into a single long nocturnal period. (Actually, a large part of the world’s population continues to have an afternoon nap, or siesta, as a lifelong sleep–wake pattern.) Fragmentation of the sleep pattern begins in late adult life. Over ensuing years, night awakenings tend to increase in frequency, and the daytime waking period may be interrupted by episodic sleep lasting seconds to minutes (microsleep), as well as by longer naps. From about 35 years of age onward, women tend to sleep slightly more than men.
# Chunk 5745
If the eyelids are raised gently during sleep, the globes are usually seen to be exotropic and the pupils are even smaller than before, but with retained responses to light. An additional stage of the sleep cycle, which follows the others intermittently throughout the night, is associated with further reduction in muscle tone except in the extraocular muscles and with bursts of rapid eye movement; thus the term rapid eye movement (REM) sleep designates this stage. The EEG becomes desynchronized, that is, it has a low-voltage, high-frequency discharge pattern. The first three stages of sleep are called nonrapid eye movement (NREM) sleep or synchronized sleep; the last stage, in addition to REM sleep, is variously designated as fast-wave, nonsynchronized, or desynchronized sleep. Figure 18-2 illustrates these features.
# Chunk 5746
In the first portion of a typical night’s sleep, the normal young and middle-aged adult passes successively through stages N1, N2, N3, and R (REM) sleep. After about 70 to 100 min, a large proportion of which consists of stage N3 sleep, the first REM period occurs, usually heralded briefly by a transient increase in body movements and a shift in the EEG pattern from that of stage N3 to stage N2. This NREM–REM cycle is repeated at about the same interval four to six times during the night, depending on the total duration of sleep. The first REM period may be brief; the later cycles have less stage N3 sleep or none at all. In the latter portion of a night’s sleep, the cycles consist essentially of two alternating stages—REM sleep and stage N2 (spindle–K-complex) sleep. The relation of dreaming to these sleep stages is described further on.
# Chunk 5747
A comparison of the physiologic changes in NREM and REM sleep is of interest. The change in the EEG pattern has already been indicated. Cortical neurons tend to discharge in synchronized bursts during NREM sleep and in nonsynchronized bursts during wakefulness. In REM sleep, the EEG pattern is generally asynchronous as well. Much of the night’s complex visual dreaming has been found to occur in the REM period, with the qualifications noted below, and dreams are recalled most consistently if the subject is awakened during this time. It is important to point out, however, that dreaming activity is reported by subjects awakened from NREM sleep, although less consistently. Because the overall time spent in NREM is so much greater than that in REM, approximately 20 percent of dreaming occurs outside of REM periods but REM sleep nonetheless maintains a special relationship to dreaming.
# Chunk 5748
Urine excretion decreases during sleep and the absolute quantity of sodium and potassium that is eliminated also decreases; however, urine specific gravity and osmolality increase, presumably because of increased antidiuretic hormone excretion, and reabsorption of water. Parasympathetic outflow is activated periodically in REM sleep; sympathetic activity is suppressed. It has also been recognized that there is a drop in blood pressure and heart rate during slow-wave sleep and the loss of this dip, for example, as a result of sleep apnea, has been associated with daytime hypertension and increased risk for cardiovascular events. As mentioned, in REM sleep, there is an increase in sympathetic tone. Breathing is more irregular, and heart rate and blood pressure fluctuate. Penile erections appear periodically, usually during REM periods.
# Chunk 5749
Prolactin secretion increases during the night in both men and women, the highest plasma concentrations being found soon after the onset of sleep. Secretion of prolactin is influenced by sleep stages. Circadian mechanisms and the stages of sleep alter testosterone secretion and are therefore disrupted by sleep disorders, especially in younger individuals. Also, an increased sleep-associated secretion of luteinizing hormone occurs in pubertal boys and girls.
# Chunk 5750
Solms (1995, 1996) and others have questioned the traditional view that dreaming and REM sleep are obligately or even closely connected and has presented an alternative perspective. Among patients with cerebral lesions that eliminate or disrupt REM sleep, he cites several cases, in which dreaming was retained. Conversely, in his patients with basal forebrain (frontal) lesions, dreaming was lost, at least for a time, while REM periods remained undisturbed through the night. This same observation had been made in patients who had prefrontal leukotomies. Solms has proposed that the dopaminergic systems in the basal forebrain areas elicit or modulate dreaming. This view is supported by reports of diminished dreaming in patients being treated with dopaminergic blockers and the enhancement of dreaming reported by patients taking l-dopa or dopamine agonsits. Notable in this regard is the fact that major intracortical dopaminergic pathways originate in the frontal lobes.
# Chunk 5751
Illnesses in which anxiety and fear are prominent symptoms also result in difficulty in falling asleep and in light, fitful, or intermittent sleep. Disturbing dreams are frequent in these situations and may awaken the patient. Exceptionally, a patient may even try to stay awake in order to avoid them. In contrast, depressive illness produces early morning waking and inability to return to sleep; the quantity of sleep is reduced, and nocturnal motility is increased. REM sleep in depression, although not always reduced, comes earlier in the night. If anxiety is combined with depression, there is a tendency for both the above patterns to be observed. Yet another common pattern of disturbed sleep can be discerned in individuals who are under great tension and worry or are overworked and tired out. These people sink into bed and sleep through sheer exhaustion, but they awaken early with their worries and are unable to get back to sleep.
# Chunk 5752
Chronic and even short-term use of alcohol, barbiturates, and certain nonbarbiturate sedative-hypnotic drugs markedly reduces REM sleep as well as stages 3 and 4 of NREM sleep (N3). Following withdrawal of these drugs, there is a rapid and marked increase of REM sleep, sometimes with vivid dreams and nightmares. “Rebound insomnia,” a worsening of sleep compared with pretreatment levels, has also been reported upon discontinuation of short-half-life benzodiazepine hypnotics, notably triazolam (Gillin et al) and including the newer sleep agents mentioned below. Furthermore, a form of drug-withdrawal or rebound insomnia may actually occur during the same night in which the drug is administered. The drug produces its hypnotic effect in the first half of the night and a worsening of sleep during the latter half of the night, as the effects of the drug wear off; the patient and the physician may be misled into thinking that these latter symptoms require more of the hypnotic drug or a different one. Alcohol taken in the evening acts in the same way. Rebound insomnia must be distinguished from the early morning awakening that accompanies anxiety and depressive states.
# Chunk 5753
The sleep rhythm is totally deranged in acute confusional states and especially in delirium, and the patient may doze for only short periods, both day and night, the total amount and depth of sleep in a 24-h period being reduced. Frightening hallucinations may prevent sleep. The senile patient tends to catnap during the day and to remain alert for progressively longer periods during the night, until sleep is obtained in a series of short naps throughout the 24 h; the total amount of sleep may be increased or decreased.
# Chunk 5754
The chronic insomniac who has no other symptoms should be discouraged from using sedative drugs. The solution of this problem is rarely to be found in medication. One should search out and correct, if possible, any underlying situational or psychologic difficulty, using medication only as a temporary measure. Patients should be encouraged to regularize their daily schedules, including their bedtimes, and to be physically active during the day but to avoid strenuous physical and mental activity before bedtime. It has been suggested that illumination from broad-spectrum light (television) in the late evening is detrimental. Dietary excesses must be corrected, and all nonessential medications interdicted. Coffee and alcohol should be avoided at night, if not throughout the day. A number of simple behavioral modifications may be useful, such as using the bedroom only for sleeping, arising at the same time each morning regardless of the duration of sleep, avoiding daytime naps, and limiting the time spent in bed strictly to the duration of sleep. A helpful approach is to lessen the patient’s concern about sleeplessness by pointing out that he will always get as much sleep as needed and that there is pleasure to be derived from staying awake and reading, or viewing a movie.
# Chunk 5755
Fatigue worsens restless legs syndrome, and there is a tendency for it to be worse in warm weather. In a few patients, mainly older ones with a severe form of the nighttime disorder, these movements and an associated myoclonus spill over into wakefulness and are accompanied by restlessness, foot spasms, foot stamping, body rocking, and marching that are only partly under voluntary control. The daytime phenomena may require several medications used simultaneously for control.
# Chunk 5756
The problem of augmentation, or enhancement of the restless leg syndrome with the long-term use of dopaminergic drugs has led to studies of alternatives, mainly gabapentin, pregabalin, but also diazepines such as clonazepam (0.5 to 2.0 mg), or temazepam (30 mg), taken 30 min before retiring. A clinical trial conducted by Allen and associates showed that pregabalin was as effective as pramipexole in reducing restless leg symptoms and had similar rates of augmentation as pramipexole 0.25 mg but lower rates than 0.5 mg. Suicidal ideation may have been more frequent as an adverse event with pregabalin. Other drugs—for example, baclofen, opioids, carbamazepine seem to be helpful in certain patients, but they are infrequently required. The lengthy list of medications that have been effective is given in Earley’s review. It is sometimes useful to give a medication in two divided doses, the first early in the evening, and the second just before sleep or, in severe cases, during the night by setting an alarm clock before the anticipated time of symptoms.
# Chunk 5757
Disorders of Sleep Associated With Changes in Circadian Rhythm

Sleep is also disturbed and diminished when the normal circadian rhythm of the sleep–wake cycle is exogenously altered. This is observed most often in shift workers, who periodically change their work schedule from day to night, and as a result of transmeridian air travel—that is, jet lag (Baker and Zee). Eastbound travelers fall asleep late and face an early sunrise. The consequent fatigue is a product of both sleep deprivation and a phase change required by changing time zones. A review of the subject can be found by Sack. One antidote is to reset one’s watch on the plane and conform to the routine of the destination—that is, to stay awake all day until the usual evening hour for sleep—and to take a short-acting sedative at bedtime. Melatonin is also used for this purpose, and a meta-analysis by Herxheimer and Petrie of four trials suggests it is slightly effective. These measures facilitate the resetting of the circadian rhythm. Westbound travelers face a late sunset and a long night’s sleep and adjust more readily to resetting of the circadian rhythm than do those traveling east. Exposure to light during the extended day is helpful in entraining the sleep cycle; this adjustment is also accomplished more easily when traveling west than east. Shifting of the circadian rhythm in animals suggests that brief exposure to light at crucial times effectively resets the sleep–wake cycle; apparently, the period just before 4 a.m. is a nodal time for susceptibility to this phase change. The sleep problems caused by shift work are more complicated (see Monk).
# Chunk 5758
The delayed-sleep-phase syndrome is a chronic inability to fall asleep and to arise at conventional clock times. Sleep onset is delayed until 3 to 6 a.m.; the subject then sleeps normally until 11 a.m. to 2 p.m. An imposed sleep period from 11 p.m. to 7 a.m. leads to a prolonged sleep latency and daytime sleepiness. By contrast, the advanced-sleep-phase syndrome is characterized by an early evening sleep onset (8 to 9 p.m.) and early morning awakening (3 to 5 a.m.). Simply delaying the onset of sleep usually fails to prevent early morning awakening. This pattern is not uncommon among healthy elderly persons (and also among college students), in whom it should probably not be defined as an insomnia syndrome. Still other persons show a completely irregular sleep–wake pattern; sleep consists of persistent but variable short or long naps throughout the night and day, with a nearly normal 24-h accumulation of sleep.
# Chunk 5759
Several interesting and distressing sleep disturbances are known in completely blind persons, the most troubling being the lack of entrainment to the day-night cycle. As a result of the absence of retinal-hypothalamic entrainment of the circadian rhythm, there is an innate cycle that is just longer than 24 hours, resulting in bouts of insomnia as hypothalamic function moves in and out of phase with the day. In clinical trials, the melatonin receptor agonist tasimelteon has helped entrain the sleep cycle in blind individuals (Lockley et al).
# Chunk 5760
The night terror (pavor nocturnus) is mainly a problem of childhood. It usually occurs soon after falling asleep, during stage 3 or 4 sleep and therefore is not aligned with nightmares. The child awakens abruptly in a state of intense fright, screaming or moaning, with marked tachycardia (150 to 170 beats/min) and deep, rapid respirations. Children with night terrors are often sleepwalkers as well, and both kinds of attack may occur simultaneously. The entire episode lasts several minutes and in the morning the child recalls nothing of it or only a vague unpleasant dream. It has been suggested that night terrors and somnambulism represent impaired or partial arousal from deep sleep, as EEGs taken during such episodes show a waking type of mixed frequency and alpha pattern. Children with night terrors and somnambulism do not show an increased incidence of psychologic abnormalities and tend to outgrow these disorders. The persistence of such problems into adult life, however, has, in a small number of cases, been associated with psychopathology (Kales et al). It has been found that diazepam, which reduces the duration of the deep stages of sleep, will prevent night terrors. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors have also been used successfully, especially when night terrors are associated with sleepwalking. Frequent night terrors have reportedly been eliminated by having parents awaken the child for several successive nights, just prior to the usual time of the attack or at the first sign of restlessness and autonomic arousal (Lask).
# Chunk 5761
This condition occurs far more commonly in children (average age, 4 to 6 years) than in adults, and is often associated with nocturnal enuresis and night terrors, as indicated previously. It is estimated that 15 percent of children have at least one episode of sleepwalking, and that 1 in 5 sleepwalkers has a family history of this disorder. Motor performance and responsiveness during the sleepwalking incident vary considerably. The most common behavioral abnormality is for a patient to sit up in bed or on the edge of the bed without actually walking. When walking about the house, he may turn on a light or perform some other familiar act. There may be no outward show of emotion, or the patient may be frightened (night terror), but the frenzied, aggressive behavior of some adult sleepwalkers, described below, is rare in the child. Usually the eyes are open, and such sleepwalkers are guided by vision, thus avoiding familiar objects; the sight of an unfamiliar object may awaken them. Sometimes they make no attempt to avoid obstacles and may injure themselves. If spoken to, they make no response; if told to return to bed, they may do so, but more often they must be led back. Sometimes they repeatedly mutter strange phrases or perform certain repetitive acts, such as pushing against a wall or turning a doorknob back and forth. The episode lasts for only a few minutes, and the following morning, they usually have no memory of it, or only a fragmentary recollection.
# Chunk 5762
A popular belief is that the sleepwalker is acting out a dream. The observations of sleep laboratories are entirely at variance with this view, as somnambulism has been found to occur almost exclusively during deeper stages of NREM sleep (stage N3) and during the first third of the night when dreaming is least likely to occur. In fact, the entire nocturnal sleep pattern of such individuals does not differ from normal. Also, there is no evidence that somnambulism is a form of epilepsy. It is probably allied to talking in one’s sleep, although the two conditions seldom occur together. Sleepwalking must be distinguished from fugue states and ambulatory automatisms of complex partial seizures discussed below and in Chap. 15.
# Chunk 5763
In contrast to somnambulism in children the onset of sleepwalking or night terrors for the first time in adult life is most unusual, and occasionally suggests the presence of psychiatric disease or drug intoxication. Almost always, the adult sleepwalker has a history of sleepwalking as a child, although there may have been a period of freedom between the childhood episodes and their reemergence in the third and fourth decades. Adult somnambulism also occurs during N3 of NREM sleep, but unlike the childhood type, is not confined to the earlier part of the night. If one extends the category of somnambulism to all forms of nocturnal wandering, it seems to be remarkably common, with a lifetime prevalence of 29% of U.S. adults according to the survey by Ohayon and colleagues (2012).
# Chunk 5764
Somnambulism in the adult, as in the child, can be a purely passive event unaccompanied by fear or other signs of emotion. More frequently, however, the attack is characterized by frenzied or violent behavior associated with fear and tachycardia, like that of a night terror and sometimes with self-injury. Very rarely, crimes have reportedly been committed during sleepwalking, but the authors are skeptical that organized and planned sequential activity is possible. The finding of normal sleep patterns on polysomnography distinguishes these attacks from complex partial seizures. They can be eliminated or greatly reduced by the administration of clonazepam (0.5 to 1.0 mg) at bedtime. Some patients respond better to a combination of clonazepam and phenytoin or to flurazepam (Kavey et al).
# Chunk 5765
REM Sleep Behavior Disorder (RBD, RSBD)

This is a recognized parasomnic disorder, occurring in adult life, most commonly in older men without a history of childhood sleepwalking. It is characterized by attacks of vigorous, agitated, and often dangerous motor activity accompanied by vivid dreams (Mahowald and Schenck). The characteristic features are angry speech with shouting, violent activity with injury to self and bed mate, a very high arousal threshold, and the variable but sometimes detailed recall of a nightmare of being attacked and fighting back or attempting to flee. The episodes vary in frequency in affected individuals, occurring once every week or two or several times nightly. The episodes, which occur exclusively during REM sleep, usually in the second half of the night, are out of keeping with the patient’s waking personality. Polysomnographic recordings during these episodes have disclosed augmented muscle tone but no seizure activity.
# Chunk 5766
Nocturnal Epilepsy (See Also Chap. 15)

It has long been known that seizures, both convulsive and nonconvulsive, often occur during sleep, especially in children. This is such a frequent occurrence that the practice of inducing sleep has been adopted as an activating EEG procedure to obtain confirmation of epilepsy. Seizures may occur soon after the onset of sleep or at any time during the night, but mainly in stages 1 and 2 of NREM sleep or, rarely, in REM sleep. They are also common during the first hour after awakening. On the other hand, deprivation of sleep may also be conducive to a seizure.
# Chunk 5767
Sleeping epileptic patients may attract attention to their seizures by a cry, violent motor activity, unusual but stereotyped actions, such as sitting up and crossing the arms over the chest, the adoption of a “fencing” posture, or labored breathing. After the tonic-clonic phase, patients become quiet and fall into a state resembling deep sleep, but they cannot be aroused from it for some minutes or longer. If the nocturnal seizure is unobserved, the only indication of it may be disheveled bedclothes, a few drops of blood on the pillow from a bitten tongue, wet bed linen from urinary incontinence, or sore muscles. Or the occurrence of a seizure may be disclosed only by confusion, muscle soreness, or headache, the common aftermaths of a major generalized seizure. Rarely, a patient may die in an epileptic seizure during sleep, sometimes from smothering in the bed clothes or aspirating vomitus or for some obscure reason (possibly respiratory or cardiac dysrhythmia). The question sometimes arises whether night terrors or sleep walking represent epileptic automatisms. Usually no such relationship is established. Measurement of serum creatine kinase concentration in the hours following an event may distinguish seizure from night terrors, and the other described sleep-related motor behaviors.
# Chunk 5768
Hypoxia or perhaps other stimuli induce an arousal response, either a lightening of sleep or a very brief awakening, which is followed by an immediate resumption of breathing. The patient quickly falls asleep again and the sequence is repeated, several hundred times a night in severe cases, greatly disrupting the sleep pattern and reducing the total sleep time. Paradoxically, these patients are very difficult to rouse at all times during the night.
# Chunk 5769
Obstructive sleep apnea is predominantly a disorder of overweight, middle-aged men and usually presents as excessive daytime sleepiness, a complaint that is sometimes mistaken for narcolepsy (see below). Other patients, usually those with the much-less-common central form of apnea, complain mainly of a disturbance of sleep at night, or insomnia, which may be incorrectly attributed to anxiety or depression. The occurrence of an obstructive sleep apnea is accompanied after a period of weeks or months by progressive hemoglobin oxygen desaturation, hypercapnia and hypoxia, a transient increase in systemic and pulmonary arterial pressures, and sinus bradycardia or other arrhythmias. Morning headache, inattentiveness, grogginess, and decline in school or work performance are other symptoms attributable to sleep apnea. Ultimately, systemic and pulmonary arterial hypertension, cor pulmonale, polycythemia, and heart failure may develop. When combined with obesity, these symptoms have been referred to as the “pickwickian syndrome,” so named by Burwell and coworkers, who identified this clinical syndrome with that of the extraordinarily sleepy, red-faced, fat boy described by Dickens in The Pickwick Papers.
# Chunk 5770
In addition to these symptomatic forms of sleep apnea, there is a disorder referred to as primary, or idiopathic, hypoventilation syndrome (“Ondine’s curse,” as described in Chap. 25). This last term is now applied to many forms of total loss of automatic breathing, especially during sleep. Awakenings during the night are frequent, usually after an apneic period, and insomnia is a common complaint. Snoring is mild and intermittent. In the few autopsied cases of congenital central hypoventilation of childhood, Liu and colleagues found the external arcuate nuclei of the medulla to be absent, and the neuron population in the medullary respiratory areas to be depleted.
# Chunk 5771
As a rule, narcolepsy has a gradual onset between the ages of 15 and 35 years; in fully 90 percent of narcoleptics, the condition is established by age 25. Narcolepsy is usually the first symptom, less often cataplexy, and rarely sleep paralysis. The essential disorder is one of frequent attacks of irresistible sleepiness. Several times a day, usually after meals or while sitting in class or in other boring or sedentary situations, the affected person is assailed by an uncontrollable desire to sleep. The eyes close, the muscles relax, breathing deepens slightly, and by all appearances, the individual is dozing. A noise, a touch, or even the cessation of the lecturer’s voice is enough to awaken the patient. The periods of sleep rarely last longer than 15 min unless the patient is reclining, when he may continue to sleep for an hour or longer. At the conclusion of a nap, the patient feels somewhat refreshed. It should be emphasized that there are many narcoleptics who tend to be pervasively drowsy throughout the day. What distinguishes the typical narcoleptic sleep attacks from commonplace postprandial drowsiness and napping is the frequent occurrence of the former (two to six times every day as a rule), their irresistibility, and their occurrence in unusual situations, as while standing, eating, or carrying on a conversation. Blurring of vision, diplopia, and ptosis may attend the drowsiness and may bring the patient first to an ophthalmologist.
# Chunk 5772
Approximately 70 percent of narcoleptics first seeking help will report having some form of cataplexy, and about half of the remainder will develop cataplexy later in life. Cataplexy refers to a sudden loss of muscle tone brought on by strong emotion—that is, circumstances in which hearty laughter or, more rarely, excitement, surprise, anger, or intense athletic activity cause the patient’s head to fall forward, the jaw to drop, the knees to buckle, even with sinking to the ground—all with perfect preservation of consciousness. Cataplectic attacks occur without provocation in perhaps 5 percent of cases. The attacks last only a few seconds or a minute or two and are of variable frequency and intensity. In most of our patients, they have appeared at intervals of a few days or weeks. Exceptionally, there are many attacks daily and even status cataplecticus, in which the atonia lasts for hours. This is more likely to happen at the beginning of the illness or upon discontinuing tricyclic medication.
# Chunk 5773
Our understanding of narcolepsy was greatly advanced by the demonstration by Dement and his group that this disorder is associated with a reversal in the order of the two states of sleep, with REM rather than NREM sleep occurring at the onset of the sleep attacks. Not all the sleep episodes of the narcoleptic begin with REM sleep, but almost always a number of sleep attacks with such an onset can be identified in narcoleptic-cataplectic patients in the course of a polysomnographic sleep study. The hypnagogic hallucinations, cataplexy, and sleep-onset paralysis (caused by inhibition of anterior horn cells) all coincide with the REM period. These investigators have also shown that the night sleep pattern of patients with narcolepsy-cataplexy may begin with a REM period. This may occur in normal subjects, though infrequently and usually with severe sleep deprivation. Furthermore, the nocturnal sleep pattern is altered in narcoleptics, who have frequent body movements and transient awakenings and a decrease in sleep stage N3, as well as in total sleep duration. Another important finding in narcoleptics is that sleep latency (the interval between the point when an individual tries to sleep and the point of onset of EEG sleep patterns), measured repeatedly in diurnal nap situations, is greatly reduced. Thus, narcolepsy is not simply a matter of excessive diurnal sleepiness (essential daytime drowsiness) or even a disorder of REM sleep but a generalized disorganization of sleep–wake function.
# Chunk 5774
No single therapy will control all the symptoms. Narcolepsy responds best to (1) strategically placed 15to 20-min naps (during lunch hour, before or after dinner, etc.); (2) the use of stimulant drugs in the daytime—modafinil, dextroamphetamine sulfate, or methylphenidate hydrochloride to heighten alertness; and (3) antidepressants (sertraline, venlafaxine, protriptyline, imipramine, or clomipramine) for control of cataplexy. All these drugs are potent suppressants of REM sleep. Monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors also inhibit REM sleep and can be used if they are tolerated. Modafinil (200 mg daily, up to 600 mg in divided doses) may prove to be the safest of the stimulants (Fry), but experience with this agent is still being acquired. Methylphenidate, because of its prompt action and relative lack of side effects, is also widely used. It is usually given in doses of 10 to 20 mg tid on an empty stomach. Alternatively, amphetamine 5 to 10 mg may be given 3 to 5 times a day; this is ordinarily well tolerated and does not cause wakefulness at night. Pemoline, a potent stimulant (50 to 75 mg daily) is no longer available in the United States because of potential hepatic toxicity. The tricyclic antidepressants had been used to reduce cataplexy, but they have been overtaken by selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors such as sertraline and by norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors such as venlafaxine. Sodium oxybate, whose active agent is gamma-hydroxybutyrate, is also beneficial for cataplexy and narcolepsy in many individuals.
# Chunk 5775
Patients with coronary arteriosclerosis may show electrocardiogram (ECG) changes during REM sleep, and nocturnal angina has been recorded at this time. Snoring is strongly associated with chronic hypertension. Asthmatics frequently have their attacks at night, but not concomitantly with any specific stage of sleep; they do have a decreased amount of stage N3 sleep and frequent awakenings, however. Patients with hypothyroidism have shown a decrease of stages N3 sleep, and a return to a normal pattern when they become euthyroid. Demented patients generally exhibit reduced amounts of REM and slow-wave sleep, as do children with Down syndrome, phenylketonuria, and other forms of brain damage. Alcohol, barbiturates, and other sedative-hypnotic drugs that suppress REM sleep produce extraordinary excesses of REM during withdrawal periods. This may, in part, account for the hyperactivity and confusion, and perhaps the hallucinosis, seen in withdrawal states.
# Chunk 5776
Figure 18-3. Sleep architecture, or sleep cycles. REM sleep (darkened areas) occurs cyclically throughout the night at intervals of approximately 90 min in all age groups. REM sleep shows little variation in the different age groups, whereas stage 4 sleep decreases with age. Stages 3 and 4 are now considered N3. (Redrawn by permission from Kales, Kales, and Soldatos.)
# Chunk 5777
In the Korsakoff amnesic syndrome, newly presented material appears to be correctly registered but cannot be retained for more than a few minutes (anterograde amnesia, or failure of learning). In this syndrome, there is always an associated defect in the recall and reproduction of memories that had been formed several days, weeks, or even years before the onset of the illness (retrograde amnesia). The fabrication of stories, called confabulation, constitutes a third feature of the syndrome but is neither specific nor invariably present. Intact retention with failure of recall (retrograde amnesia without anterograde amnesia) when it is severe and extends to all events of past life and even personal identity, is usually a manifestation of hysteria or malingering. Certain other characteristic defects occur in almost all memory disorders, for example, the relative retention of older memories in preference to newer ones (Ribot’s rule). Chapter 19 discusses this subject more fully.
# Chunk 5778
Characteristically, the confusional states fluctuate in severity, typically being worse at night (“sundowning”). In the mildest form, the patient appears alert and may even pass for normal; only the failure to recollect and accurately reproduce happenings of the past few hours or days reveals the subtle inadequacy of his mental function. The more obviously confused patient spends much of his time in idleness, and what he does may be inappropriate and annoying to others. Only the more automatic acts and verbal responses are performed properly, but these may permit the examiner to obtain a number of relevant replies to questions about age, occupation, and residence. Orientation to the date, day of the week, and place is imprecise, often with the date being off by several days, the year being given as several years or one decade previous, or with the last two numbers transposed, for example, 2015 given as 2051. Such patients may, before answering, repeat every question that is put to them, and their responses tend to be brief and mechanical. It is difficult or impossible for them to sustain a conversation. Their attention wanders and they constantly have to be brought back to the subject at hand. They may even fall asleep during the interview, and if left alone are observed to sleep more hours each day than is natural or to sleep at irregular intervals.
# Chunk 5779
All that has been stated above is true of the patient with a nondescript postoperative confusional state, in which a number of factors, such as fever, infection, dehydration, and drug and anesthetic effects, are implicated. In a study of 1,218 postoperative patients by Moller and colleagues, older age was by far the most important factor associated with persistent confusion after an operation; but a number of other factors—including the duration of anesthesia, need for a second operation soon after the first, postoperative infection, and respiratory complications—were also predictive of mental difficulty in the days after the procedure. As discussed further on, confusion appearing after a surgical procedure may suggest an underlying dementia or be predictive of the future development of dementia. What is as important is the confusional episode may not entirely resolve for weeks or months as commented below. Careful questioning of the family often reveals subtle decline is daily functioning over the prior months or years. Unacknowledged alcoholism and withdrawal effects undoubtedly cause the same problem quite often on surgical services (see also “Stroke with Cardiac Surgery” in Chap. 33).
# Chunk 5780
Finally, the physician should be aware of the benefit of many small therapeutic measures that allay fear and suspicion and reduce the tendency to hallucinations. The room should be kept dimly lighted at night, and, if possible, the patient should not be moved from one room to another. Every procedure should be explained to the patient, even such simple ones as the taking of blood pressure or temperature. It may be some consolation and also a source of professional satisfaction to remember that most confused and delirious patients recover if they receive competent medical and nursing care (and are almost always amnestic for the ordeal). The family may be reassured on this point but forewarned that improvement may take several days or weeks and that episodes of confusion may be exposing an underlying dementia. They must also understand that the patient’s abnormal behavior is not willful but rather symptomatic of a transitory brain disease. (See also Chap. 41 for specific aspects of management of delirium due to withdrawal of alcohol and other sedative-hypnotic drugs.)
# Chunk 5781
Ancillary examinations—such as CT, MRI, lumbar puncture, measurement of blood urea nitrogen, calcium, electrolytes, and liver function tests—should be carried out in appropriate cases. Brain MRI and CT are of major importance in objectifying hydrocephalus, lobar atrophy, cerebrovascular disease, tumor, and subdural hematoma. Functional imaging, particularly with PET, including with the use of radioligands to amyloid, tau and other substances is assuming great importance in identifying Alzheimer, Lew body and corticobasal degeneration. Testing for syphilis, vitamin B12 deficiency, and thyroid function is also undertaken in many clinics almost as a matter of routine because the tests are simple and the dementias they cause are reversible. These are supplemented in individual circumstances by serologic testing for HIV infection, measurement of copper and ceruloplasmin levels (Wilson disease), heavy metal concentrations in serum, urine or tissues, autoantibodies including anti-Hu for paraneoplastic encephalitis, and drug toxicology screening. The final step is to determine, from the total clinical picture, the particular disease within each category.
# Chunk 5782
In a survey conducted in the Rochester, Minnesota, area, transient global amnesia (TGA) occurred at an annual rate of 5.2 cases per 100,000 population. The recurrence of such attacks is not uncommon, having been noted in 66 of 277 older adults who were observed for an average period of 80 months (Miller et al) and in 16 of 74 patients followed for 7 to 210 months (Hinge et al). Hinge and colleagues estimate the mean annual recurrence rate to be so low (4.7 percent) that most patients are likely to experience only one attack. One of our patients had more than 50 attacks, but among all the rest (more than 100 cases), 5 was the maximum. It seems children are not susceptible to the condition; however, a 13-year-old and 16-year-old with migraine were reported to have had similar attacks during participation in sports (Tosi and Righetti).
# Chunk 5783
b. Time: What is the date today (day of week and of month, year)? What time of the day is it? What meals have you had? When was the last holiday?
# Chunk 5784
b. Recent past: Tell me about your recent illness (compare with previous statements). What is my name (or the nurse’s name)? When did you see me for the first time? What tests were done yesterday? What were the headlines of the newspaper today?
# Chunk 5785
Questions asked by the patient’s family must be answered patiently and sensitively by the physician. Common questions are “Should I correct or argue with the patient?” (No.) Orientation as to date, circumstances, and planned appointments is, however, helpful in preparing the patient for the day activities. “Can the patient be left alone?” “Must I be there constantly?” (Depends on specific circumstances and the severity of dementia.) “Should the patient manage his own money?” (Generally not.) “Will a change of environment or a trip help?” (Generally not; often the disruption in daily routine worsens behavior and orientation.) “Can he drive?” (Best to advise against driving in most instances.) “What shall we do about the patient’s fears at night and his hallucinations?” (Medication under supervision may help.) “When is a nursing home appropriate?” “How will the condition worsen? What should the family expect, and when?” (Uncertain, but usually a 5to 10-year course.) Many families have found the information on the Alzheimer Association website, http://www.Alz.org, helpful, but physician guidance is required to make the material applicable to individual circumstances.
# Chunk 5786
Several features are common to the psychiatric group with fatigue. Tests of peak muscle power on command, with the patient exerting full effort, reveal no weakness. The sense of fatigue may be worse in the morning. The fatigue is worsened by mild exertion and relates more to some activities than to others. Inquiry may disclose that the symptom was first experienced in temporal relation to a grief reaction, a surgical procedure, physical trauma such as an automobile accident, or a medical illness such as myocardial infarction. The feeling of fatigue interferes with both mental and physical activities; the patient is easily worried, is “full of complaints,” and finds it difficult to concentrate in attempting to solve a problem or to read a book, or in carrying on a complicated conversation. Also, sleep is disturbed, with a tendency to early morning waking, so that such persons are at their worst in the morning, both in spirit and in energy output. Their tendency is to improve as the day wears on, and they may even feel fairly normal by evening. Severe fatigue that causes the patient consistently to go to bed right after dinner and makes all mental activity effortful should suggest an associated depression. It may be difficult to decide whether the fatigue is a primary manifestation of the disease or secondary to a lack of interest.
# Chunk 5787
The current criteria for the diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome are the presence of persistent and disabling fatigue for at least 6 months, coupled with an arbitrary number (6 or 8) of persistent or recurrent somatic and neuropsychologic symptoms including low-grade fever, cervical or axillary lymphadenopathy, myalgias, migrating arthralgias, sore throat, forgetfulness, headaches, difficulties in concentration and thinking, irritability, and sleep disturbances (Holmes et al). A number of such patients in our experience have complained of paresthesias in the feet or hands. On close questioning, many of these sensations prove to be odd, particularly numbness in the bones or muscles or fluctuating patches of numbness or paresthesia on the chest, face, or nose. Unusual descriptions may be given if the patient is allowed adequate time to describe the symptoms. A few have reported blurred or “close to” double vision; in neither case are there physical findings to corroborate the sensory experiences. With regard to headache, it is worth consulting the section in Chap. 9 regarding “recent onset daily headache,” an unusual entity in which severe bilateral headache without distinguishing features arises very rapidly, sometimes after a viral illness, is unremitting for months or longer and resistant to treatment.
# Chunk 5788
There also occurs a state, difficult to classify, of overwhelming emotionality in patients who are in severe, acute pain. The patient’s attention can be captured only briefly, and within moments, there is a return to an extreme state of angst, groaning, and anger. We have encountered this with spinal subdural hemorrhage, subarachnoid hemorrhage, explosive migraine, trauma with multiple fractures, and intense pelvic, renal, or abdominal pain.
# Chunk 5789
Axons of the sympathetic ganglion cells are also of small caliber but are unmyelinated. Most of the postganglionic fibers pass via gray communicating rami to their adjacent spinal nerves of T5 to L3; they supply blood vessels, sweat glands, and hair follicles, and also form plexuses that supply the heart, bronchi, kidneys, intestines, pancreas, bladder, and sex organs. The postganglionic fibers of the prevertebral ganglia (located in the retroperitoneal posterior abdomen rather than paravertebrally, along the sides of the spinal column) form the hypogastric, splanchnic, and mesenteric plexuses, which innervate the glands, smooth muscle, and blood vessels of the abdominal and pelvic viscera (see Fig. 25-3).
# Chunk 5790
There are 3 cervical (superior, middle, and inferior, or stellate), 11 thoracic, and 4 to 6 lumbar sympathetic ganglia. The head receives its sympathetic innervation from the eighth cervical and first two thoracic cord segments, the fibers of which pass through the inferior to the middle and superior cervical ganglia. Postganglionic fibers from cells of the superior cervical ganglion follow the internal and external carotid arteries and innervate the blood vessels and smooth muscle, as well as the sweat, lacrimal, and salivary glands of the head. Included among these postganglionic fibers, issuing mainly from T1, are the pupillodilator fibers and those innervating the Müller muscle of the upper eyelid (it connects the upper tarsus to the undersurface of the levator); there is a separate small inferior tarsus muscle that is also sympathetically innervated. The arm receives its postganglionic innervation from the inferior cervical ganglion and uppermost thoracic ganglia (the two are fused to form the stellate ganglion). The cardiac plexus and other thoracic sympathetic nerves are derived from the stellate ganglion and the abdominal visceral plexuses, from the fifth to the ninth or tenth thoracic ganglia. The lowermost thoracic ganglia have no abdominal visceral connections; their axons course rostrally and caudally in the sympathetic chain. The upper lumbar ganglia supply the descending colon, pelvic organs, and legs.
# Chunk 5791
Since this condition was first reported by Young and colleagues in 1975, many more cases in both adults and children have been placed on record. Over a period of a week or a few weeks with or without a preceding systemic or respiratory infection, the patient develops some combination of anhidrosis, orthostatic hypotension, paralysis of pupillary reflexes, loss of lacrimation and salivation, erectile dysfunction, impaired bladder and bowel function (urinary retention, postprandial bloating, and ileus or constipation), and loss of certain pilomotor and vasomotor responses in the skin (flushing and heat intolerance). Fatigue, sometimes severe, is a prominent complaint in most patients, and abdominal pain and vomiting in others. A few develop sleep apnea or the syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone (SIADH), leading to hyponatremia. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) protein is normal or slightly increased.
# Chunk 5792
Clinical and laboratory findings indicate that both the sympathetic and parasympathetic parts of the autonomic nervous system are affected, mainly at the postganglionic level. Somatosensory and motor nerve fibers appear to be spared or are affected to only a slight extent, although many patients complain of paresthesias, and tendon reflexes are frequently lost. In one of the patients described by Low and colleagues, there was physiologic and morphologic (sural biopsy) evidence of loss of small myelinated and unmyelinated somatic fibers and foci of epineurial mononuclear cells; in other cases, sural nerve fiber counts have been normal; and in an autopsied case, in which there had also been sensory loss, there was lymphocytic infiltration in sensory and autonomic nerves (Fagius et al). The original patient described by Young and colleagues and most of the other patients reported with pure dysautonomia are said to have recovered completely or almost so within several months, but many of our patients have been left with disordered gastrointestinal and sexual functions. In addition to an idiopathic form of autonomic paralysis, some cases are postinfectious, and there is a similar but rare paraneoplastic form (see Chap. 30 under “Paraneoplastic Sensory Neuronopathy”). Antibodies against ganglionic acetylcholine receptors have been found in half of idiopathic cases and one-quarter of paraneoplastic ones (Vernino et al).
# Chunk 5793
Treatment of orthostatic hypotension consists of adequate hydration (at least 1.5 L of fluids per day) with high salt intake, up 8 g of sodium per day, small and frequent meals (to reduce postprandial hypotension) and compression stockings or corset. Fainting can sometimes be avoided by the countermaneuvers of having the patient tightly cross his legs upon standing. Medical treatment can be initiated if nonmedical approaches fail. The peripherally acting alpha agonist, midodrine can be started at 2.5 mg q4h, slowly raising the dose to 5 mg q4h, taking the last dose before about 7 p.m. to void supine hypertension while asleep. The mineralocorticoid fludrocortisone acetate (Florinef) alleviates orthostatic hypotension by volume expansion due to the sodium retention by kidneys. Florinef can be started at dose 0.1 mg daily which may be slowly (over weeks) titrated up 0.9 mg daily. Fludrocortisone may cause hypokalemia and should be used cautiously in patients with severe supine hypertension; its effect may take up to 2 weeks to be manifest so rapid elevation of the dose is not advised. Pyridostigmine stimulates sympathetic ganglia and at doses 30 to 60 mg twice to thrice a day was also reported to be effective in treatment of orthostatic hypotension. Compared to florinef and midodrin, pyridostigmine is less potent pressor but it is much less likely causing supine hypertension. Pyridostigmine also may help to reduce constipation. A newer addition is droxidopa that is a prodrug to the neurotransmitter norepinephrine, acting both centrally and peripherally. Northera is usually started at the dose 100 mg three times a day which can be titrated up to 600 mg three times a day. Northera also increases risk of supine hypertension.
# Chunk 5794
Complete destruction of the cord below T12 This occurs with lesions of the conus, as from trauma, myelodysplasias, tumor, venous angioma, and necrotizing myelitis. The bladder is paralyzed for voluntary and reflex activity and there is no awareness of the state of fullness; voluntary initiation of micturition is impossible; the tonus of the detrusor muscle is abolished and the bladder distends as urine accumulates until there is overflow incontinence; voiding is possible only by the Credé maneuver, that is, lower abdominal compression and abdominal straining. Usually the anal sphincter and colon are similarly affected, and there is “saddle” anesthesia and abolition of the bulbocavernosus and anal reflexes as well as the tendon reflexes in the legs. The cystometrogram shows low pressure and no emptying contractions.
# Chunk 5795
Stretch injury of the bladder wall This occurs with anatomic obstruction at the bladder neck and occasionally with psyhcogenic retention of urine. Repeated overdistention of the bladder wall often results in varying degrees of decompensation of the detrusor muscle and permanent atonia or hypotonia, although the evidence for this mechanism is uncertain. The bladder wall becomes fibrotic and bladder capacity is greatly increased. Emptying contractions are inadequate, and there is a large residual volume even after the Credé maneuver (manual abdominal compression) and strong contraction of the abdominal muscles. As with motor and sensory paralyses, the patient is subject to cystitis, ureteral reflux, hydronephrosis and pyelonephritis, and calculus formation.
# Chunk 5796
Patients with chronic but stable weakness of the respiratory muscles, demonstrate signs of CO2 retention, such as daytime somnolence, headache upon awakening, nightmares, and, in extreme cases, papilledema. The accessory muscles of respiration are recruited in an attempt to maximize tidal volume, and there is a tendency for the patient to gulp or assume a rounded “fish mouth” appearance in an effort to inhale additional air. In general, patients with chronic respiratory difficulty tolerate lower tidal volumes without dyspnea than do patients with acute disease, and symptoms in the former may occur only at night, when respiratory drive is diminished and compensatory mechanisms for obtaining additional air are in abeyance.
# Chunk 5797
We frequently encounter patients in whom the earliest feature of neuromuscular disease is subacute respiratory failure; this is manifest as dyspnea and exercise intolerance but without other overt signs of neuromuscular disease. Most such cases prove to be motor neuron disease, but rare instances of myasthenia gravis (especially the type associated with the MUSK autoantibody), acid maltase deficiency, polymyositis, nemaline myopathy, Lambert-Eaton syndrome, or chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy may present in this way. The neurologist may be consulted in these cases after other physicians have found no evidence of intrinsic pulmonary disease. The spirometric flow-volume loop in cases of neuromuscular respiratory failure shows low airflow rates with diminished lung volumes that together simulate restrictive lung disease. Among such patients we have also found instances of isolated unilateral or bilateral phrenic nerve paresis that followed abdominal or cardiac surgery or an infectious illness. The least of these is probably a form of brachial neuritis (see Chap. 46 for a discussion of brachial neuritis).
# Chunk 5798
Reflex swallowing requires only medullary functioning and is retained in the vegetative and locked-in states as well as in normal and anencephalic neonates. The integrated sequence of muscle activity for swallowing is organized in a region of brainstem that roughly comprises a swallowing center, located in the region of the NTS, close to the respiratory centers. This juxtaposition ostensibly allows the refined coordination of swallowing with the cycle of breathing. Besides a programmed period of apnea, there is a slight forced exhalation after each swallow that further prevents aspiration. The studies of Jean, Kessler, and others (cited by Blessing), using microinjections of excitatory neurotransmitters, have localized the swallowing center in animals to a region adjacent to the termination of the superior laryngeal nerve. Unlike the generators of respiratory rhythm, the entire reflex apparatus for swallowing may be located in the NTS. There is, however, no direct connection between the NTS and the cranial nerve motor nuclei. Thus it is presumed that control must be exerted through premotor neurons located in adjacent reticular brainstem regions. There have been few comparable anatomic studies of the structures responsible for swallowing in humans. As to the cortical regions that are involved in swallowing, it appears from PET studies that the inferior precentral gyrus and the posterior inferior frontal gyrus are activated, and lesions in these parts of the brain give rise to the most profound cases of dysphagia.
# Chunk 5799
Because of its frequency, the neurologist will encounter stroke in a cerebral hemisphere as a cause of discoordinated swallowing. The problem is most evident during the first few days after a hemispheral stroke on either side of the brain (Meadows). These effects last days or weeks and render the patient subject to pneumonia and fever. In the clinical and fluoroscopic study by Mann and colleagues, half of patients still had manifest abnormalities of swallowing 6 months after their strokes. For this reason, it has become customary for patients to have swallowing evaluations in the days after acute stroke. Some insight into the nature of swallowing dysfunction after stroke is provided by Hamdy and colleagues, who correlated the presence of dysphagia with a lesser degree of motor representation of pharyngeal muscles in the unaffected hemisphere, as assessed by magnetic stimulation of the cortex.
# Chunk 5800
Disorders of Sodium and Fluid Homeostasis

This is a state of production of excessively dilute urine that results from the loss of action of antidiuretic hormone. As long ago as 1913, Farini of Venice and von den Velden of Dusseldorf (quoted by Martin and Reichlin) independently discovered that diabetes insipidus was associated with destructive lesions of the hypothalamus. They showed, moreover, that in patients with this disorder, the polyuria could be corrected by injections of extracts of the posterior pituitary. Ranson elucidated the anatomy of the neurohypophysis; the Scharrers traced the substance secreted by the posterior pituitary to granules in the cells of the supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei and followed their passage to axon terminals in the posterior lobe of the pituitary. As mentioned in the introductory section, DuVigneaud and colleagues determined the chemical structure of the two neurohypophyseal peptides, vasopressin and oxytocin, of which these granules were composed.
# Chunk 5801
Diagnosis of diabetes insipidus The diagnosis is suggested by the passage of large quantities of dilute urine accompanied by polydipsia and polyuria lasting throughout the night. The thirst mechanism and drinking usually prevent dehydration and hypovolemia, but if the patient is stuporous or the thirst mechanism is inoperative, severe dehydration and hypernatremia can occur, leading to coma, seizures, and death. In an unresponsive patient careful measurement of fluid output and input are needed to expose the disorder.
# Chunk 5802
A low urine osmolality and specific gravity are found in DI, in conjunction with high serum osmolality and sodium values. Osmotic dehydration as a cause of the polydipsia–polyuria syndrome, such as occurs with the glycosuria of diabetes mellitus must, of course, be excluded. A period of 6 to 8 h of dehydration increases urinary osmolality in a person with normal kidneys and neurohypophysis; it is this change in urine concentration that is most useful in the differential diagnosis of polyuria, particularly in distinguishing compulsive water drinkers from those with DI. In water intoxication, urinary volume and serum electrolytes normalize with water restriction. Proof that the patient has a central cause of DI and not nephrogenic unresponsiveness to vasopressin is obtained by injecting 5 U of vasopressin subcutaneously; this will diminish urine output and increase urine osmolality when there is a central cause of DI. Diagnosis is also aided by the radioimmunoassay for plasma ADH; ADH is usually reduced to less than 1.0 pg/mL in patients with central DI (normal: 1.4 to 2.7 pg/mL).
# Chunk 5803
Treatment of diabetes insipidus A long-acting analogue of arginine vasopressin (desmopressin [DDAVP]) administered by nasal insufflation (10 to 20 mg or 0.1 to 0.2 mL) is the most commonly used treatment to control chronic DI. Vasopressin tannate in oil and a synthetic vasopressin nasal spray have also been used. The nasal form of DDAVP is generally preferred because of its long antidiuretic action and few side effects. In unconscious patients, aqueous vasopressin, 5 to 10 U given subcutaneously, is effective for 3 to 6 h; DDAVP, 1 to 4 mg subcutaneously, is effective for 12 to 24 h (in rare, critical situations, these drugs are given intravenously). The brief duration of action of the medication is advantageous in postoperative states and after head injury, for it allows the recognition of recovery of neurohypophyseal function and the avoidance of water intoxication. In the unconscious patient, great care must be taken in the acute stages to replace the fluid lost in the urine, but not to the point of water intoxication. These problems can be avoided by matching the amount of intravenous fluids to the urinary volume and by evaluating serum and urine osmolalities every 8 to 12 h. For patients with partial preservation of ADH function, chlorpropamide, clofibrate, or carbamazepine can be used to stimulate release of the hormone.
# Chunk 5804
Derangement of this delicately regulated mechanism, taking the form of dilutional hyponatremia and water retention without edema, is observed under a variety of clinical circumstances in which the plasma ADH is above normal or inappropriately normal despite plasma hypoosmolality. The term syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH) was applied to this syndrome by Schwartz and Bartter because of its similarity to that produced in animals by the chronic administration of ADH. The same syndrome can arise from ectopic production of the hormone by tumor tissue. In such cases, the thirst mechanism is not inhibited by decreased osmolality, continued drinking further increases blood volume and reduces its solute concentration, and ADH levels are found to be persistently elevated. The physiologic hallmarks of this condition are concentrated urine, usually with an osmolality above 300 mOsm/L, and low serum osmolality and sodium concentrations. Because of the dilutional effects, the concentrations of urea nitrogen and uric acid are reduced in the blood and serve as markers for excessive total body water. Tissue edema is not seen because sodium excretion in the urine is maintained by suppression of the renin–angiotensin system and by increased atrial natriuretic peptide secretion (see below).
# Chunk 5805
A fall in serum sodium to 125 mEq/L usually has few clinical effects, although signs of an associated neurologic disease, such as a previous stroke or a subdural hematoma, may worsen. Sodium levels of less than 120 mEq/L are attended by nausea and vomiting, inattentiveness, drowsiness, stupor, and generalized seizures. There may be asterixis. As is characteristic of most metabolic encephalopathies, the more rapid the decline of the serum sodium, the more likely there will be accompanying neurologic symptoms.
# Chunk 5806
Treatment of SIADH If hyponatremia has been of several days or more duration, the rapid restitution of serum sodium to normal or above-normal levels carries a risk of producing osmotic demyelination (also called central pontine myelinolysis; see Chap. 40). Our usual procedure in patients with serum sodium concentrations of 117 to 125 mEq/L is to slowly correct the sodium concentration by restricting water to 400 to 800 mL/d and to verify the desired urinary loss of water by checking the patient’s weight and serum sodium until it reaches approximately 130 mEq/L. If there is drowsiness, confusion, or seizures that cannot be confidently attributed to the underlying neurologic illness, or if the serum sodium is in the range of 100 to 115 mEq/L, isotonic or 3 percent NaCl should be infused over 3 to 4 h and furosemide 20 to 40 mg administered to prevent fluid overload. In order to avoid osmotic demyelination, a safe clinical rule is to raise the serum sodium by no more than 12 mEq/L in the first 24 h and by no more than 20 mEq/L in 48 h.
# Chunk 5807
A moderate reduction in the serum sodium concentration is a common finding in patients with acute intracranial diseases and postoperatively in neurosurgical patients. Originally it was described as a “cerebral salt-wasting” syndrome by Peters and colleagues. Later it was erroneously identified as SIADH, until the pathophysiological understanding of this disorder subsequently returned to the concept of natriuresis rather than water retention caused by ADH secretion. As Nelson and colleagues demonstrated many years ago, neurosurgical patients with hyponatremia have a reduction in blood volume, suggesting sodium loss rather than water retention. This distinction has important clinical implications because fluid restriction, which is used to treat SIADH, can have disastrous results when a patient has volume depletion associated with salt wasting.
# Chunk 5808
In addition to head trauma, salt wasting has also been reported with cerebral tumors, after pituitary surgery, and in the dysautonomia of Guillain-Barré syndrome, conditions that have all also been associated with SIADH. As already stated, in each of these disorders, should the patient be hyponatremic, it is desirable to determine the intravascular volume and the urine sodium output before instituting treatment.
# Chunk 5809
Other Disturbances of Antidiuretic Hormone and Thirst

Conditions have been described in which the osmoreceptor control of ADH and of thirst appear to be dissociated. As reported by Hayes and coworkers, rare patients have been reported to repeatedly developed severe hypernatremia (levels as high as 180 to 190 mEq/L), presenting with confusion and stupor. Although the patient reported was able to initiate a release of ADH, his thirst mechanism was nonfunctional. Only when the patient was compelled to drink water at regular intervals did his serum sodium fall. Robertson and others have described similar cases with abnormalities of thirst causing a type of “central” or “essential” hypernatremia.
# Chunk 5810
In a series of experiments with monkeys, Ranson demonstrated a number of autonomic effects upon stimulation of the hypothalamus. Subsequently, Byer and colleagues described large, upright T waves and prolonged QT intervals in patients with stroke, and since then it has been appreciated that other acute lesions of the brain—particularly subarachnoid hemorrhage and head trauma—may be accompanied by supraventricular tachycardia, ectopic ventricular beats, ventricular fibrillation, and other changes in the electrocardiogram. Cropp and Manning found that the changes seen in the ECG, particularly “cerebral T waves” and other reversible repolarization abnormalities, could occur almost instantaneously (too quickly for attribution to circulating factors) during surgery for a cerebral aneurysm. Most of the same effects can also be induced by very high levels of circulating norepinephrine and corticosteroids. Extreme emotional states can also provoke arrhythmias and other changes in the ECG. The hypothalamus, with its limbic connections and ability to mount a massive sympathoadrenal discharge, is the likely source of the autonomic changes in these various clinical situations.
# Chunk 5811
For diagnostic purposes, measurement of the excretion of cortisol over 24 h in the urine is the most expeditious test and superior to serum sampling because of fluctuations in the serum levels of ACTH. If a 24-h urine collection is not feasible, it is advisable to obtain two or three daily urine determinations, as the values may vary considerably. The normal value for urinary excretion of cortisol is approximately 12 to 40 mg in 24 h, but some assays that measure additional metabolites of the hormone may allow normal values up to 100 mg. This should be followed by lowor high-dose dexamethasone suppression testing. A test using high doses of dexamethasone (2 mg every 6 h orally for 2 d, or a single dose of 8 mg at midnight) is the most dependable screening method for separating Cushing disease from ectopic secretion of ACTH. In the latter condition, the urinary excretion of cortisol is not suppressed by the administration of dexamethasone; in contrast, 60 to 70 percent of patients with Cushing disease show a 90 percent reduction in urinary cortisol excretion.
# Chunk 5812
In the past, the most common cause of primary adrenal disease was tuberculosis. Now, most cases are designated as idiopathic and thought to represent an autoimmune disorder, often associated with Hashimoto thyroiditis and diabetes mellitus and rarely with other polyglandular autoimmune endocrine disorders. A less-frequent cause is a hereditary metabolic disease of the adrenals—in combination with a demyelinating disease of brain, spinal cord, and nerves and occurring predominantly in males (adrenoleukodystrophy; see Chap. 37). In primary adrenal disease, plasma concentrations of cortisol are low and the serum ACTH level rises as a consequence. Adrenal insufficiency of whatever cause is a life- threatening condition; there is always a danger of collapse and even death, particularly during periods of infection, surgery, and extreme injury. Lifelong replacement therapy is usually required with a glucocorticoid (cortisone, 25 to 50 mg, or prednisone, 7.5 to 15 mg daily) and a mineralocorticoid, such as fludrocortisone acetate (Florinef), 0.05 to 0.2 mg daily.
# Chunk 5813
Behavior during infancy and early childhood is also the subject of a substantial literature, contributed more by psychologists than neurologists. In particular they have explored sensorimotor performance in the first year and language and social development in early childhood. In the first 6 years of life, the infant and young child traverse far more ground developmentally than they ever will again in a similar period. From the newborn state, when the infant demonstrates a few primitive feeding and postural reflexes, there are acquired, within a few months, smiling and head and hand–eye control; by 6 months, the ability to sit; by 10 months, the strength to stand; by 12 months, the muscle coordination required to walk; by 2 years, the ability to run; and by 6 years, mastery of the rudiments of a game of baseball or a musical skill. On the perceptual side, the neonate progresses, in less than 3 months, from a state in which ocular control is tentative and tonic deviation of the eyes occurs only in response to labyrinthine stimulation to one in which he is able to fixate on and follow an object. (This last corresponds to the development of the macula.) Later, the child is able to make fine discriminations of color, form, and size. Gesell has provided a graphic summation of the variety and developmental sweep of a child’s behavior. He writes
# Chunk 5814
Sensation in the newborn infant must be judged largely by its motor reactions, so that sensory and motor developments seem to run in parallel but this may be partly artifactual. There are nonetheless discernible maturational stages that constitute sensory milestones, so to speak. This is most apparent in the visual system, which is more easily studied than the other senses. Sustained ocular fixation on an object is observable at term and even in some preterm infants; at these ages it is essentially a reflexive phototropic reaction. It has been observed that the neonate will consistently gaze at some stimuli more often than others, suggesting, according to Fantz, that there must already be some elements of perception and differentiation at this early stage. Voluntary fixation (i.e., following a moving object) is a later development. Horizontal following occurs at about 50 days; vertical following, at 55 days; and following an object that is moving in a circle, at 75 days. Preference for a colored stimulus over a gray one was recorded by Staples by the end of the third month. By 6 months the infant discriminates between colors, and saturated colors can be matched at 30 months. Perception of form, at least as judged by the length of time spent in looking at different visual presentations, is evident at 2 or 3 months of age (Fantz). At this time infants are attracted more to certain patterns than to colors. At 3 months, most infants have discovered their hands and spend considerable time watching their movements. The ages at which infants begin to observe color, size, shape, and numbers can be determined by means of the Terman-Merrill and Stutzman intelligence tests (see Gibson and Olum). Perception of size becomes increasingly accurate in the preschool years. An 18-month-old child discriminates among pictures of familiar animals and recognizes them equally well if they are upside down.
# Chunk 5815
Neurologists who need a quick and practical method of ascertaining whether an infant or preschool child is measuring up to normal standards for a particular age will find Table 27-4 useful. The main items are drawn from Gesell and Amatruda and from the Denver Developmental Test. In addition, a variety of intelligence tests have been designed to measure the child’s special abilities and increasing success in learning in accordance with age (these are listed in Table 27-5). Starting at age 6 to 7 years, there is a steady improvement in intelligence scores that parallels chronologic age up to about age 13 years; thereafter the rate of advance diminishes. By age 16 to 17 years, performance reaches a plateau, but this is probably an artifact of the commonly used tests, which are designed to predict success in school. Only late in life do test scores begin to diminish, in a manner that is described in the next chapter on aging. Individuals with high or low IQs at 6 years of age tend to maintain their rank at 10, 15, and 20 years unless the early scores were impaired by anxiety, poor motivation, or a gross lack of opportunity to acquire the skills that are necessary to take such tests (language skill in particular). Even then, performance tasks, which largely eliminate verbal and mathematical skills, will disclose many individual differences.
# Chunk 5816
During the second year of life, the child begins to use word combinations. They form the propositions, which, according to Hughlings Jackson, are the essence of language (a notion in part echoed by modern linguists as noted in Chap. 22). On average, at 18 months the child can combine an average of 1.5 words; at 2 years, 2 words; at 2.5 years, 3 words; and at 3 years, 4 words. Pronunciation of words undergoes a similar progression; 90 percent of children can articulate all vowel sounds by the age of 3 years. At a slightly later age the consonants p, b, m, h, w, d, n, t, and k are enunciated; ng by the age of 4 years; y, j, zh, and wh by 5 to 6 years; and f, l, v, sh, ch, s, v, and th by 7 years. Girls tend to acquire articulatory facility earlier than boys. The vocabulary increases, so that at 18 months the child knows 6 to 20 words; by 24 months, 50 to 200 words; by 3 years, 200 to 400 words. By 4 years, the child is normally capable of telling stories, but with little distinction between fact and imagination. By 6 years, the average child knows several thousand words. Also by that age, children can indicate spatial and temporal relationships and start to inquire about causality. The understanding of spoken language always exceeds the child’s speaking vocabulary; that is to say, most children understand more than they can say.
# Chunk 5817
In the formation of personality, especially the part concerned with feeling and emotional sensitivity, basic temperament surely plays a large part. By nature, some children from the beginning seem to be happy, cheerful, and unconcerned about immediate frustrations; others are the opposite. By the third month of life, Birch and Belmont recognized individual differences in activity–passivity, regularity–irregularity, intensity of action, approach–withdrawal, adaptivity–unadaptivity, high–low threshold of response to stimulation, positive–negative mood, high–low selectivity, and high–low distractibility. Ratings at this early age were found to correlate with the results of examinations made at age 5 years. Kagan and Moss recognized the trait of timidity as early as 6 months of age and noted that it persists lifelong.
# Chunk 5818
Again, two groups of overactive children can be discerned early in life. In one, infants are constitutionally overactive from birth, sleeping less and feeding poorly; by the age of 2 years, the syndrome is obvious. In the other group, an inability to sit quietly only becomes apparent at the preschool age (4 to 6 years). Seldom do such children remain in one position for more than a few seconds, even when watching television. They are seen as fidgety, constantly in motion, and a bit wild in public places such as restaurants. Attention to any task cannot be sustained, hence the term attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. As a rule, there is also an abnormal impulsivity and often an intolerance of all measures of restraint.
# Chunk 5819
Methylphenidate is the drug most widely used and its use has been validated in several studies. Children weighing less than 30 kg are given 5 mg each morning on school days for 2 weeks, after which the dose can be raised to 5 mg morning and noon. Children weighing more than 30 kg can be given a single 20-mg sustained-release tablet each morning. If methylphenidate proves ineffective after several weeks or cannot be tolerated, dextroamphetamine 2.5 to 5 mg three times daily or a mixed amphetamine-dextroamphetamine is suitable substitute. Atomoxetine, a norepinephrine inhibitor, is also effective and is not classified as a stimulant but has caused a few cases of liver failure. If these agents control the activity and improve school performance (they can be continued for a number of years), there is then no need to alter the child’s school program. It is not clear if there should be a long-term concern about hypertension, but the blood pressure is not generally measured at frequent intervals. If stimulants are ineffective, tricyclic antidepressants, particularly desipramine, may be tried. Multiple medications should be generally avoided. Classroom behavioral conditioning techniques and psychotherapy may be needed for brief periods but are not as effective as medication. Remedial education is reserved for recalcitrant cases. Biederman and Faraone have summarized approaches to treatment.
# Chunk 5820
When a child 5 years of age or older wets the bed nearly every night and is dry by day, the child is said to have nocturnal enuresis. This condition afflicts approximately 10 percent of children between 4 and 14 years of age, boys more than girls, and continues in many cases to be a problem even into adolescence and adulthood. Although developmentally delayed children are notably late in acquiring sphincter control (some never do), the majority of enuretic individuals are normal in other respects.
# Chunk 5821
Figure 27-2. Cox-Golgi preparations of the leg area of the motor cortex (area 4). Upper row, left to right: 1 month premature (8 months gestation); newborn at term; 1 month; 3 months; and 6 months. Lower row, left to right: 15 months; 2 years; 4 years; 6 years. Apical dendrites of Betz cells have been shortened, all to the same degree, for the purposes of display. (Courtesy of T. Rabinowicz, University of Lausanne.) 4SENSORY ROOTS2567FETAL MONTHSFIRST YEAR, MONTHS3STATO ACOUSTIC TECTUM & TEGMENTUM5INNER DIV INF CEREB PED6OUTER DIV INF CEREB PED89101234567891011122 yrs3 yrs4 yrs7 yrs10 yrsOLDER2ndDECADE3rdDECADE11BR SUP COL & OPTIC NERVE & TRACT1MOTOR ROOTS4MEDIAL LEMNISCUS8MID CEREBELLAR PED.9?RETICULAR FORMATION10BR. INF. COL.7SUP CEREBELLAR PED.12THALAMIC FASCICULUS AND MAMMILOTHALAMIC TRACT14FASCICULUS LENTICULARIS AND PUTAMEN15OPTIC RAD.13ANSA LENTICULARIS AND PALLIDUM16SOMESTHETIC RAD.17ACOUSTIC RAD.18NON-SPECIFIC THALAMIC RAD.2419?STRIATUM23CINGULUM20PYRAMIDAL TRACTS21FRONTO-PONTINE TRACT22?FORNIX25INTRA-CORTIC,NEUROPIL. ASSOC. AREAS?GREAT CEREBRAL COMMISSURES
# Chunk 5822
Cerebral blood flow has been extensively investigated in the elderly population. Most studies show that flow declines with age and that the cerebral metabolic rate declines in parallel. There is also an age-related increase in cerebrovascular resistance. Declines in flow are somewhat greater in the cortex than in white matter and greater in prefrontal regions than in other parts of the hemispheres. Obrist demonstrated a 28 percent reduction in cerebral flow by age 80. It is noteworthy, however, that every cohort of elderly persons tested in this way contained a significant proportion in which cerebral blood flow was equivalent to that in young control subjects. In fact, in a group of 72-year-old men rigorously selected on the basis of freedom from disease, Sokoloff demonstrated that cerebral blood flow and oxygen consumption did not differ from those of normal men 22 years of age. Nevertheless, cerebral glucose metabolism was reduced in all the elderly subjects.
# Chunk 5823
Passive diffusion gradients appear to determine the entry of serum electrolytes and some small proteins into the CSF, and also the exchanges of CO2. Water and sodium diffuse as readily from blood to CSF and intercellular spaces as in the reverse direction. This explains the rapid effects on CSF sodium and water of intravenously injected hypotonic and hypertonic fluids.
# Chunk 5824
When there has been doubt as to the effects of lumbar puncture, one appropriate course is to admit the patient to the hospital, and insert a lumbar drain for up to 3 days, removing approximately 50 mL of CSF daily in order to observe the response in gait and mentation. It is worthwhile to quantify the speed and facility of gait two or three times before the lumbar puncture or drainage and to perform this testing at periodic intervals for several days after the procedure in order to be certain that improvement is genuine. Even more persuasive is a definite improvement followed days later by worsening of gait.
# Chunk 5825
Although shunting is relatively simple as a surgical procedure, it has complications, the main ones being a postoperative subdural hematoma (the bridging dural veins stretch and rupture but the procedure has been performed safely in patients who must take anticoagulants after shunting); infection of the valve and catheter, sometimes with ventriculitis and occasionally bacteremia; occlusion of the tip of the catheter in the ventricle; and, particularly in infants and children, the “slit ventricle syndrome” (see below). Orthostatic headaches can be overcome by raising the opening pressure of the shunt valve. Misplacement of the catheter may rarely transect tracts in the deep hemispheral white matter and cause serious neurologic deficits, mainly hemiplegia. It is our impression that this occurs more often when the catheter is inserted from the posterior rather than through the frontal or parietal regions. The incidence of catheter blockage is reduced by placing it in the anterior horn of the ventricle (usually the right side is used), where there is no choroid plexus. Meticulous aseptic technique and the preoperative and postoperative administration of antibiotics have apparently reduced the incidence of shunt infections but the latter has been difficult to establish. Most shunts in adults are brought to termination in the peritoneum (ventriculoperitoneal shunt). Perforation of the stomach or bowel is possible. Rare complications of ventriculoatrial shunting are pulmonary hypertension and pulmonary embolism and nephritis, which are caused by low-level infection of the shunt tube with Staphylococcus.
# Chunk 5826
Treatment of Pseudotumor Cerebri

This has proven difficult and a variety of methods have been proposed. The main concern, as alluded to earlier, is the prevention of visual loss but headache may become disabling enough to require special attention. Most patients with idiopathic intracranial hypertension will be found initially to have no, or minor visual changes aside from the papilledema; the headache and lumbar puncture pressure then guide treatment. Besides symptomatic relief of headaches, the progression of visual loss is the main concern. At least one-fourth of patients have recovered within 6 months after treatment by repeated lumbar punctures and drainage of sufficient CSF to maintain the pressure at normal or near-normal levels (<200 mm H2O). The lumbar punctures have been performed daily or on alternate days at first, and then at longer intervals, according to the level of pressure. While cumbersome and sometimes impractical, evidently, this is sometimes sufficient to restore the balance between CSF formation and absorption for at least several months. At the same time, weight loss has been encouraged and the best results have been reported when weight reduction was successful (see further on regarding weight loss).
# Chunk 5827
Sahs A, Joynt RJ: Brain swelling of unknown cause. Neurology 6:791, 1956.

Samuels MA, Gonzolez RG, Yim AY, Stemmer-Rachaminov A: Cabot Case 34–2007: A 77-year-old man with ear pain, difficulty speaking, and altered mental status. N Engl J Med 357:1957, 2007.
# Chunk 5828
In patients who have brain edema and who require intravenous fluids, one avoids solutions containing water (“free water”) not matched by equivalent amounts of sodium. Normal saline (314 mOsm/L) is preferable, and lactated Ringer solution (osmolarity 289 mOsm/L) is acceptable, but dextrose solutions alone, in any concentration (except D5/NS), are avoided because of their hypoosmolar concentration.
# Chunk 5829
The natural history of untreated glioblastoma is well characterized. Fewer than 20 percent of patients survive for 1 year after the onset of symptoms and only about 10 percent live beyond 2 years (Shapiro). Age is an important prognostic factor; fewer than 10 percent of patients older than age 60 years survive for 18 months, in comparison to two-thirds of patients younger than age 40 years. Survival with anaplastic astrocytoma is somewhat better, typically 3 to 5 years. Cerebral edema and increased intracranial pressure are usually the causes of death. Survival rates with treatment are discussed in the following text.
# Chunk 5830
The methylating agent temozolomide, given in the form of an orally administered prodrug, has lower toxicity and has been shown in several trials to produce slightly superior results to the aforementioned agents. In a large trial conducted by Stupp and colleagues, the median survival was 14.6 months with radiation and temozolomide, compared to 12.1 months with radiation alone, but 2-year survival was more than doubled from 10 to 27 percent. The drug is administered daily (75 mg/m2) concurrently with radiotherapy and, after a hiatus of 4 weeks, given for 5 days every 28 days for 6 cycles. Its main complications are thrombocytopenia or leukopenia in 5 to 10 percent of patients, and rare cases of Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia. Furthermore, high levels of a methyltransferase protein (MGMT) in some glioblastomas lead to resistance to chemotherapy. Hegi and colleagues found a relationship between the epigenetic silencing of the promoter of this gene (“methylation status”) and the response to temozolomide. In fact, almost all the marginal benefit of the drug in their study could be attributed to improved survival in this group who displayed a methylated gene. However, there is still activity of temozolomide in nonmethylated tumors and it is used in almost all cases. Additionally, there may be an interaction between MGMT methylation and mutations in other genes such as IDH1 (Wick et al).
# Chunk 5831
In the current WHO classification, diffuse astrocytoma is considered grade II and anaplastic astrocytoma, grade III as in Table 30-2. The lower-grade astrocytomas constitute a minority of adult tumors but a larger proportion of (infratentorial) tumors in children. The median survival in cases of anaplastic astrocytoma is considerably longer than for glioblastoma, 2 to 5 years in adults, often longer. Favored sites of occurrence are the cerebrum in adults and in children, are cerebellum, hypothalamus, optic nerve and chiasm, and pons. Astrocytomas of the cerebral hemispheres arise mainly in adults in their third and fourth decades or earlier; astrocytomas in other parts of the nervous system, particularly the posterior fossa and optic nerves, are more frequent in children and adolescents. These tumors had been classified further according to their histologic characteristics: protoplasmic or fibrillary; gemistocytic (enlarged cells distended with hyaline and eosinophilic material); pilocytic (elongated, bipolar cells); and mixed astrocytoma-oligodendroglioma types; the current terminology is in Table 30-2 wherein these are subsumed by the larger category of astrocytoma. The most common type is composed of well-differentiated fibrillary astrocytes. The tumor cells contain glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), which is a useful diagnostic marker in biopsy specimens. Some cerebral astrocytomas present as mixed astrocytomas and glioblastomas. The most common low-grade fibrillary type (grade II) is distinguished from the more benign WHO grade I pilocytic tumor (with a very good prognosis) and the rare pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma. These distinctions correlate to a degree with the biologic behavior of the astrocytomas and therefore have prognostic importance but are eclipsed by certain genetic characteristics discussed above.
# Chunk 5832
Treatment These tumors are too infrequent for categorical assessments of therapy, but the overall response to all antitumor treatments has been disappointing and the prognosis, as mentioned, is poor, survival usually being measured in months. Corticosteroids have little clinical effect, probably because of a paucity of vasogenic edema. Most trials suggest a benefit to radiation treatment, but the absolute prolongation of life has been only several weeks (Leibel et al). The addition of chemotherapy may confer a marginal further benefit when survival at 1 year is considered. Small series of patients treated with temozolomide suggest it may be a promising agent for this tumor but it will be difficult to conduct a randomized trial given its rarity. When a large region is infiltrated, particularly in the temporal lobe, surgical debulking may prolong life, but otherwise surgery is futile except to obtain a diagnosis. Stereotactic biopsy is usually undertaken.
# Chunk 5833
Despite all of these measures, survival is only slightly prolonged by treatment. The average period of survival in cases of brain metastases, even with therapy, is about 6 months, but it varies widely and is dominated by the extent of other systemic metastases. Between 15 and 30 percent of patients live for a year and 5 to 10 percent for 2 years; with certain radiosensitive tumors (lymphoma, testicular carcinoma, choriocarcinoma, some breast cancers), however, survival can be much longer. It has been stated, without strong corroboration, that patients with bone metastases tend to live longer than those with brain and meningeal metastases.
# Chunk 5834
Treatment and outcome of malignant meningitis

This consists mainly of radiation therapy to the symptomatic areas (cranium, posterior fossa, or spine) followed in selected cases by the intraventricular administration of methotrexate, but these measures rarely stabilize neurologic symptoms for more than a few weeks or months. The methotrexate is typically administered into the lateral ventricle via an Ommaya reservoir (12 mg diluted in preservative-free saline) or into the lumbar subarachnoid space through a lumbar puncture needle. Several regimens have been devised, including daily instillation for 3 to 4 days followed by radiation, or methotrexate doses on days 1, 4, 8, 11, and 15.
# Chunk 5835
MRI shows multiple nodular or variegated abnormalities on T2-weighted images throughout the white matter of the brain; most lesions are enhanced by gadolinium, and some demonstrate restricted diffusion resulting from microvascular occlusion and infarction. In one of the cases we studied there were numerous hemorrhagic lesions. Definitive diagnosis is possible through a biopsy of involved lung, skin, kidney, or nervous tissue that contains an adequate number of intrinsic blood vessels. A feature may be the presence of antibodies to nuclear cytoplasmic antigens (c-ANCA), in some cases, as they are in a number of other vasculitic and granulomatous processes. We are uncertain of the frequency of this finding. A small number of our patients have also had adrenal or renal enlargement, as mentioned earlier, presumably because of infiltration of the vessels of these organs by the neoplasm. The spinal fluid has a variable lymphocytic pleocytosis and protein elevation, but malignant cells are not found. The sedimentation rate and serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) are reported to be elevated in most patients, but this has not been consistently so in our experience.
# Chunk 5836
Upon first presentation, a number of patients with brain tumors show the characteristic symptoms and signs of increased intracranial pressure, namely periodic bifrontal and bioccipital headaches that awaken the patient during the night or are present upon awakening, projectile vomiting, mental torpor, unsteady gait, sphincteric incontinence, and papilledema. In the tumors listed above, most of the symptoms and the associated increase in ICP are the result of hydrocephalus rather than being attributable to the tumor mass.
# Chunk 5837
Symptoms may be present for 1 or 2 years before diagnosis. About two-thirds of the patients come to notice because of increased intracranial pressure; in the remainder, vomiting, difficulty in swallowing, paresthesia of the extremities, abdominal pain, vertigo, and neck flexion or head tilt are prominent manifestations. Some patients with impending cerebellar–tonsillar herniation are disinclined to sit and have vertical downbeating nystagmus. Surgical removal offers the only hope of survival. The addition of radiation therapy and sometimes ventriculoperitoneal shunting of CSF may prolong life. Myxopapillary ependymomas of the spinal cord and filum are discussed with the spinal cord tumors further on and in Chap. 42.
# Chunk 5838
Although Cushing originally referred to the disease as pituitary basophilism and attributed it to a basophil adenoma, the pathologic change may consist only of hyperplasia of basophilic cells or of a nonbasophilic microadenoma. Seldom is the sella turcica enlarged: Consequently, visual symptoms or signs as a result of involvement of the optic chiasm or nerves and extension to the cavernous sinus are rare. The diagnosis of Cushing disease is made by demonstrating increased concentration of plasma and urinary cortisol; these levels are not suppressed by the administration of relatively small doses of dexamethasone (0.5 mg qid), but they are suppressed by high doses (8 mg daily). A low level of ACTH and a high level of cortisol in the blood, increased free cortisol in the urine, and nonsuppression of adrenal function after administration of high doses of dexamethasone are evidence of an adrenal source of the Cushing syndrome—usually a tumor and less often a micronodular hyperplasia of the adrenal gland.
# Chunk 5839
Treatment This varies with the type and size of the pituitary tumor, the status of the endocrine and visual systems, and the age and childbearing plans of the patient. The administration of the dopamine agonist bromocriptine (which inhibits prolactin) in a beginning dosage of 0.5 to 1.25 mg daily (taken with food) may be the only therapy needed for small or even large prolactinomas, and is a useful adjunct in the treatment of the amenorrhea–galactorrhea syndrome. The dose should be slowly increased by 2.5 mg or less every several days until a therapeutic response is obtained. Under the influence of bromocriptine, the tumor decreases in size within days, the prolactin level falls, and the visual field defect improves.
# Chunk 5840
A single brief exposure was all that was necessary. An endocrine deficit will follow in most instances and must be corrected by hormone replacement therapy. Several equivalent methods (Gamma Knife, Cyberknife) are more accessible and have become widely used. The advantage of these radiotherapeutic methods is that tumor recurrence is rare. A disadvantage is that the radiation effect is obtained only after several months. Estrada and colleagues have also reported that external beam-radiation therapy may be employed after unsuccessful transsphenoidal surgery for Cushing disease. After approximately 3.5 years following radiation, 83 percent of their patients showed no signs of tumor growth. There are a few reports, however, of a decline in memory ability after radiation treatment of all types.
# Chunk 5841
The cranial neurologic syndrome caused by this tumor is remarkable in that all or any combination of cranial nerves from the 2nd to 12th on one or both sides may be involved. Associated signs in the series of Kendall and Lee were facial pain, conductive deafness, and cerebellar ataxia, the result of pontomedullary and cerebellar compression. A characteristic feature is neck pain radiating to the vertex of the skull on neck flexion. The tumors at the base of the skull may destroy the clivus and bulge into the nasopharynx, causing nasal obstruction and discharge and sometimes dysphagia. Extension to the cervical epidural space may result in cord compression. Thus, chordoma is one of the lesions that may present both as an intracranial and extracranial mass, the others being meningioma, neurofibroma, glomus jugulare tumor, and carcinoma of the sinuses or pharynx. CT of the skull base is useful for defining the bony margins of the tumor, and MRI can identify involved and adjacent neural and vascular structures. Midline (Wegener) granulomas, histiocytosis, Erdheim-Chester disease, and sarcoidosis also figure in the differential diagnosis. Chondrosarcoma of the clivus produces a similar syndrome.
# Chunk 5842
Anti-Purkinje cell antibodies (termed anti-Yo) can be found in the sera of about half of patients with paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration and in the large majority of those related to carcinoma of the breast or female genital tract, linking the clinical syndrome and this antibody closely. Antibodies against a nuclear antigen, termed anti-Hu, may also be present; they are more closely linked to the paraneoplastic encephalomyelitis discussed further on. (Hu and Yo are taken from the names of patients in whom the antibody was first found.) In the Mayo Clinic series of 32 patients with paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration, 16 had such antibodies; all were women and most of them had breast or ovarian cancers. Anderson and colleagues report a similar proportion but point out that several other anti-Purkinje antibodies besides the highly characteristic one may be found (see Table 30-6). Death occurred in 4 to 18 months. In an equal number of cases without antibodies, half are men with lung cancer, some of whom display the anti-Hu antibody. This leaves a proportion who have no circulating antibody but who are nonetheless found to have a concealed tumor that must be sought by other ancillary tests including CT or positron emission tomography (PET) of the body. In another small group, it must be conceded that no underlying tumor can be found despite extensive examinations and even at autopsy. The survival in these cases has varied widely from 6 months to several years and depends on the behavior of the underlying tumor.
# Chunk 5843
In recent years, there have been reports of retinopathy as a paraneoplastic syndrome that is distinct from the above-described optic neuropathy. Small cell carcinoma of the lung has been the most common underlying malignancy. In about half of the reported cases, retinal symptoms preceded the discovery of the tumor by several months. The lesion is in the photoreceptor cells, and antiretinal antibodies (directed against a calcium-binding protein, recoverin) have been identified in the serum. Photosensitivity, ring scotomas, and attenuation of the retinal arterioles are the main clinical features; Jacobson and coworkers suggested that they constitute a diagnostic triad.
# Chunk 5844
In the production of radiation necrosis, the total and fractional doses of radiation and the time over which treatment is administered are obviously important factors, but the exact amounts that produce such damage cannot be stated. Accepted levels of large-field radiation are tolerated in amounts approaching 6,000 cGy, provided it is given in small daily doses (200 to 300 cGy) 5 days per week over a period of 6 weeks. Other factors, still undefined, must play a part, as similar courses of radiation treatment may damage one patient and leave another unaffected. The severe necrotizing encephalopathy that has followed the combined use of methotrexate (intrathecally but also intravenously) was discussed earlier, under “Involvement of the Nervous System in Leukemia,” the condition in which it was first described and formerly was most prevalent.
# Chunk 5845
CT and MRI show a contrast-enhancing lesion, and by angiography there is an avascular mass. Small calcifications may appear many years after the radiation. MRI is somewhat more sensitive in distinguishing radiation necrosis from tumor and peritumor products, but PET is the most reliable way of differentiating the two, perhaps obviating the need for biopsy (Glantz et al, 1991). Single-photon emission tomography (SPECT) can be useful for this purpose as well (Carvalho et al). CT or MRI perfusion imaging can also be used to differentiate radiation necrosis from tumor progression; cerebral blood volume is reduced in the former and most often elevated in the latter.
# Chunk 5846
Figure 30-27. Stroke-like migraine attacks after radiation therapy (SMART). A 68-year-old man who had prophylactic cranial radiation presented several years later with dysphasia and right hemiparesis. MRI showed abnormal T2 hyperintensity (left) and more prominent enhancement (right) of the cortex of the left hemisphere. These imaging abnormalities resolved after several weeks. (Images reproduced from Olsen et al with permission from Wolters Kluwer.)
# Chunk 5847
During the process of resolution, the inflammatory cells disappear in almost the reverse order as they had appeared. Neutrophils begin to disintegrate by the fourth to fifth day, and soon thereafter, with treatment, no new ones appear. Lymphocytes, plasma cells, and macrophages disappear more slowly, and a few lymphocytes and mononuclear cells may remain in small numbers for several months. The completeness of resolution depends on the stage at which the infection is arrested. If it is controlled in the very early stages, there may not be any residual change in the arachnoid; following an infection of several weeks’ duration, there is a permanent fibrous overgrowth of the meninges, resulting in a thickened, cloudy, or opaque arachnoid and often in adhesions between the pia and arachnoid and even between the arachnoid and dura.
# Chunk 5848
L. monocytogenes, which together account for approximately 75 percent of sporadic cases as noted by Thigpen and coworkers. As discussed in the introduction, the following are less frequent causes: Staphylococcus aureus and group A (Streptococcus pyogenes) and group D streptococci, usually in association with brain abscess, epidural abscess, head trauma, neurosurgical procedures, or cranial thrombophlebitis; E. coli and group B streptococci in newborns; Pseudomonas and the Enterobacteriaceae, such as Klebsiella, Proteus, which are usually a consequence of lumbar puncture, spinal anesthesia, or shunting procedures to relieve hydrocephalus. Less-common meningeal pathogens include Salmonella, Shigella, Clostridium,
# Chunk 5849
A number of other facts about the natural history of neonatal meningitis are noteworthy. It is more common in males than in females. Obstetric abnormalities in the third trimester (premature birth, prolonged labor, premature rupture of fetal membranes) occur frequently in mothers of infants who develop meningitis in the first weeks of life. The most significant factor in the pathogenesis of the meningitis is maternal infection (usually a urinary tract infection or puerperal fever of unknown cause). The infection in both mother and infant is most often caused by gram-negative enterobacteria, particularly E. coli, and group B streptococci, and less often to Pseudomonas, Listeria, S. aureus, or Staphylococcus epidermidis (formerly albus), and group A streptococci. Analysis of postmortem material indicates that in most cases infection occurs at or near the time of birth, although clinical signs of meningitis may not become evident until several days or a week later.
# Chunk 5850
In addition to CSF cultures, blood cultures should be obtained if possible because they are positive in 40 to 60 percent of patients with H. influenzae, meningococcal, and pneumococcal meningitis, and may provide the only definite clue as to the causative agent. Routine cultures of the oropharynx are as often misleading as helpful, because pneumococci, H. influenzae, and meningococci are common in the throats of healthy persons. In contrast, cultures of the nasopharynx may aid in diagnosis, although often not in a timely way; the finding of encapsulated H. influenzae or groupable meningococci may provide the clue to the etiology of the meningeal infection. Conversely, the absence of such a finding prior to antibiotic treatment makes an H. influenzae and meningococcal etiology unlikely. The leukocyte count in the blood is generally elevated, and immature forms are usually present. Meningitis may be complicated after several days by severe hyponatremia, the result of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone (ADH).
# Chunk 5851
CSF rhinorrhea (or otorrhea) is present in some cases of posttraumatic meningitis, but it may be transient and difficult to find. Suspicion of its presence is raised by the recent onset of anosmia or by the occurrence of a watery nasal discharge that is salty to the taste and increases in volume when the head is dependent. One way of confirming the presence of a CSF leak is to measure the glucose concentration of nasal secretions; ordinarily they contain little glucose, but in CSF rhinorrhea the amount of glucose approximates that obtained by lumbar puncture (two-thirds of the serum value). A “dipstick” used for urine testing is sometimes adequate but these are regrettably decresingly available on general hospital wards. Another bedside test for CSF rhinorrhea or otorrhea is to estimate the amount of protein in the fluid. A high protein, sufficient to make a handkerchief stiff on drying, suggests it is of nasal mucosal origin. If the fluid fails to cause a handkerchief to stiffen on drying, a spinal fluid leak is suspected. The most specific and sensitive test for CSF otorrhea and rhinorrhea may be the finding of β2-transferrin (tau), in fluid collected in a polypropylene tube, a substance not found in fluids other than CSF.
# Chunk 5852
Prophylaxis Household contacts of patients with meningococcal meningitis should be protected with antibiotic treatment. The risk of secondary cases is small for adolescents and adults, but ranges from 2 to 4 percent for those younger than 5 years of age and is probably higher in the elderly. A single dose of ciprofloxacin is effective. An alternative is a daily oral dose of rifampin—600 mg q12h in adults and 10 mg/kg q12h in children—for 2 days. If 2 weeks or more have elapsed since the index case was found, no prophylaxis is needed.
# Chunk 5853
The infection may take the form of a brainstem encephalitis, or “rhombencephalitis,” specifically with several days of headache, fever, nausea, and vomiting followed by asymmetrical cranial-nerve palsies, signs of cerebellar dysfunction, hemiparesis, quadriparesis, or sensory loss. Respiratory failure has been reported. Of 62 cases of Listeria brainstem encephalitis reported 25 years ago by Armstrong and Fung 8 percent were in immunosuppressed patients, however, in the current era 20 percent or fewer of affected patients are immunocompetent. In the elderly, no additional cause of immune disorder appears to be necessary. Meningeal signs were present in the only half the patients in the above mentioned series, and the spinal fluid often showed misleadingly mild abnormalities. CSF cultures yielded Listeria in only 40 percent of cases (blood cultures were even more often normal). Consistent with our experience, the early CT scan was often normal; MRI, however, has revealed abnormal signals in the parenchyma of the brainstem.
# Chunk 5854
This is a rare but often-discussed disorder, predominantly of middle-aged men. Weight loss, fever, anemia, steatorrhea, abdominal pain and distention, arthralgia, lymphadenopathy, and hyperpigmentation are the usual systemic manifestations. Less often, infection is associated with a number of neurologic syndromes. It is caused by a gram-positive bacillus, Tropheryma whipplei, which resides predominantly in the gut. Biopsy of the jejunal mucosa, which discloses macrophages filled with the periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)-positive organisms, is diagnostic. PAS-positive histiocytes have also been identified in the CSF, as well as in periventricular regions, in the hypothalamic and tuberal nuclei, and diffusely scattered in the brain.
# Chunk 5855
Approximately half of the patients have a mild pleocytosis and some of these have PAS-positive material in the CSF. A variety of brain imaging abnormalities have been recorded, none characteristic, but either enhancing focal lesions or a normal scan may be found. The diagnosis is made mainly from PAS staining of an intestinal (jejunal) biopsy, as already mentioned, supplemented by PCR testing of the bowel tissue or biopsy material from brain or lymph node. In cases of subacute progressive limb and gait ataxia occurring in middle-aged or older men in whom no cause is uncovered by less-invasive means, it is justifiable to perform these tests (see Chap. 5). Rarely, the neurologic symptoms may occur in the absence of gastrointestinal disease (Adams et al, 1987). In the review of 84 cases of cerebral Whipple disease by Louis and colleagues, 71 percent had cognitive changes, half with psychiatric features; 31 percent had myoclonus; 18 percent had ataxia; and 20 percent had the oculomasticatory and skeletal myorhythmias (Schwartz et al).
# Chunk 5856
In cases originating after cranial surgery, staphylococcus is involved. Streptococci (nonhemolytic and viridans) are the most common organisms if the sinuses are the origin of infection, followed by facultative anaerobic streptococci (often Streptococcus milleri) or Bacteroides. Less often S. aureus, E. coli, Proteus, and Pseudomonas are causative. In about half the cases unrelated to surgery, no organisms can be cultured or seen on Gram stain.
# Chunk 5857
Within several days, the intensity of the reaction begins to subside and the infection tends to become delimited. The center of the abscess takes on the character of pus; at the periphery, fibroblasts proliferate from the adventitia of newly formed blood vessels and form granulation tissue, which is readily identified pathologically within 2 weeks of the onset of the infection but it is evident earlier as restriction of diffusion on MRI (see Fig. 31-2). As the abscess becomes more chronic, the granulation tissue is replaced by collagenous connective tissue. It has also been noted, both in experimental animals and in humans, that the capsule of the abscess is not of uniform thickness, frequently being thinner on its medial (paraventricular) aspect. These factors account for the propensity of cerebral abscesses to spread deeply into the white matter and to produce daughter abscesses or a chain of abscesses and extensive surrounding cerebral edema. In some instances, the process culminates in a catastrophic rupture into the ventricles.
# Chunk 5858
In approximately two-thirds of patients with tuberculous meningitis there is evidence of active tuberculosis elsewhere, usually in the lungs and occasionally in the small bowel, bone, kidney, or ear. In some patients, however, only inactive pulmonary lesions are found, and in others there is no evidence of tuberculosis outside of the nervous system. As mentioned, among our adult patients, tuberculous meningitis is now seen largely in those with HIV, but also in alcoholics, and in people who have emigrated from Asia, Africa, India, and certain locations in the former Soviet Union. Except for the emergence of drug-resistant organisms, the HIV infection does not appear to much change the clinical manifestations or the outcome of tuberculous meningitis. However, others disagree with this statement, pointing out that the course of the bacterial infection is accelerated in HIV patients, with more frequent involvement of organs other than the lungs. Whether or not HIV infection alters the natural history of tuberculous meningitis, treatment of the HIV infection is of paramount importance and it has been recommended that it should be started within 2 weeks of the onset of antituberculous therapy.
# Chunk 5859
The most important diagnostic test is lumbar puncture, which preferably should be performed before the administration of antibiotics. The CSF is usually under increased pressure and contains between 50 and 500 white cells per cubic millimeter, rarely more. Early in the disease there may be a more-or-less-equal number of polymorphonuclear leukocytes and lymphocytes, but after several days lymphocytes predominate in the majority of cases. In some cases, however, M. tuberculosis causes a persistent polymorphonuclear pleocytosis, the other usual causes of this CSF formula being Nocardia, Aspergillus, and Actinomyces (Peacock). The protein content of the CSF is always elevated, between 100 and 200 mg/dL in most cases, but much higher if the flow of CSF is blocked around the spinal cord. Glucose is reduced to levels below 40 mg/dL, but rarely to the very low values observed in conventional bacterial meningitis; the glucose falls slowly and a reduction may become manifest only several days after the patient has been admitted to the hospital. The serum sodium is often reduced, in most instances because of inappropriate ADH secretion or an addisonian state due to tuberculosis of the adrenals. In the past, much was made of a low concentration of CSF chloride.
# Chunk 5860
Corticosteroids may be used in patients whose lives are threatened by the effects of subarachnoid block or raised intracranial pressure but only in conjunction with antituberculous drugs. A randomized study conducted in Vietnam, including patients with and without HIV, showed that the addition of intravenous dexamethasone (0.4 mg/kg daily for a week and then tapering doses for 3 to 6 weeks) reduced mortality from 41 percent to 32 percent but had no effect on residual disability (Thwaites et al).
# Chunk 5861
The clinical picture in its fully developed form includes progressive dementia, dysarthria, myoclonic jerks, action tremor, seizures, hyperreflexia, Babinski signs, and Argyll Robertson pupils. However, greater importance attaches to diagnosis at an earlier stage, when few of these manifestations are conspicuous. The insidious onset of memory defect, impairment of reasoning, and reduction in executive function—along with minor oddities of deportment and conduct, irritability, and lack of interest in personal appearance—are not too different from the general syndrome of dementia outlined in Chaps. 20 and 38, especially of the frontotemporal variety. One can appreciate how elusive the disease may be at any one point in its early evolution. Indeed, with the currently low index of suspicion of the disease, diagnosis at this predemented stage is more often accidental than deliberate.
# Chunk 5862
Treatment of Neurosyphilis

The treatment of all of these forms of neurosyphilis consists of the administration of penicillin G, given intravenously in a dosage of 18 to 24 million units daily (3 to 4 million units q4h) for 10 to 14 days. The CDC recommends procaine penicillin and probenecid, and ceftriaxone as an alternative to penicillin if there is an allergy to either drug. Penicillin is so much preferred that even these patients are ideally desensitized to the drug. The Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction, which occurs after the first dose of penicillin and is a matter of concern in the treatment of primary syphilis, is of little consequence in neurosyphilis; it usually consists of no more than a mild temperature elevation and systemic leukocytosis.
# Chunk 5863
In all forms of neurosyphilis, the patient should be reexamined every 3 to 6 months after treatment and the CSF should be retested after a 6-month interval. If after 6 months the patient is free of symptoms and the CSF abnormalities have been reversed (disappearance of cells as well as reduction in protein, gamma globulin, and serology titers), no further treatment is indicated. Followup should include clinical examinations at approximately 12 months and another lumbar puncture. If a pleocytosis remains, these procedures should be repeated every 6 months. In the opinion of most experts, a persistent weakly positive serologic (VDRL) test after the cells and protein levels have returned to normal does not constitute an indication for additional treatment. Such a CSF formula ensures that the disease is quiescent or arrested. Others are not convinced of the reliability of this concept and prefer to give more penicillin. If at the end of 6 months there are still an increased number of cells and an elevated protein in the fluid, another full course of penicillin should be given. Clinical relapse is almost invariably attended by recurrence of cells and increase in protein levels. Rapid clinical progression in the face of a negative CSF suggests the presence of a nonsyphilitic disease of the brain or cord.
# Chunk 5864
Diagnosis is not difficult during the summer season in regions where the disease is endemic and when all the clinical manifestations are present. But in some cases, a skin lesion is not observed or may have been forgotten, or there may have been only a few or no secondary lesions and the patient is first seen in the neurologic phase of the illness. Then clinical diagnosis may be difficult.
# Chunk 5865
The recommended treatment in the first stage of the disease, mainly referring to the initial rash and the subsequent presence of facial or other cranial nerve palsies alone, is oral doxycycline (100 mg bid) for 14 days. Alternate therapies include amoxicillin 500 mg tid, used sometimes in children, or cefuroxime axetil 500 mg bid. CNS cardiac and arthritic disease can thereby be prevented in almost all cases. It follows that one is justified in being suspect of cases of “late Lyme” in patients who have undergone adequate early treatment. Once the meninges and central or peripheral nervous system are implicated, treatment in the U.S has been ceftriaxone, 2 g daily, usually given intravenously for 4 weeks. In other regions, oral treatment has been used.
# Chunk 5866
In most instances, this infection has presented as a chronic sinusitis (particularly sphenoidal), with osteomyelitis at the base of the skull or as a complication of otitis and mastoiditis. Cranial nerves adjacent to the infected bone or sinus may be involved. We have also observed brain abscesses and cranial and spinal dural granulomas. In one of our patients, the Aspergillus organisms had formed a granulomatous mass that compressed the cervical spinal cord. Aspergillosis does not present as meningitis but hyphal invasion of cerebral vessels may occur, with thrombosis, necrosis, and hemorrhage; that is, an infectious vasculitis. In some cases, the infection is acquired in the hospital, and in most it is preceded by a pulmonary infection that is unresponsive to antibiotics. Diagnosis can often be made by finding the organism in a biopsy specimen or by culturing it directly from a lesion. Also, specific antibodies and galactomannan are detectable in the blood.
# Chunk 5867
The congenital infection has attracted attention because of its severe destructive effects on the neonatal brain, as discussed in Chap. 37. Signs of active infection—fever, rash, seizures, hepatosplenomegaly—may be present at birth. More often, chorioretinitis, hydrocephalus or microcephaly, cerebral calcifications, and psychomotor retardation are the major manifestations. These may become evident soon after birth or, more often, the infection is asymptomatic and becomes manifest only several months or years later with choriretinitis. Most infants succumb; others survive with varying degrees of the aforementioned abnormalities.
# Chunk 5868
Treatment Patients with a presumptive diagnosis of cerebral toxoplasmosis, are treated with oral sulfadiazine (4 g initially, then 4 to 6 g daily) and pyrimethamine (200 mg initially, then 50 to 100 mg daily) or, when cost or availability of these drugs are issues, the combination of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim is used. Leucovorin, 15 to 20 mg daily, should be given to counteract the antifolate action of pyrimethamine. Treatment must be continued for at least 6 weeks. In patients with HIV, treatment at lower doses is continued until the CD4 count exceeds 200 to 250/μL for 6 months or more; otherwise treatment must be lifelong to prevent relapses. Institution of treatment of HIV may precipitate a fulminant inflammatory response (immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome, IRIS) around the parasite abscess.
# Chunk 5869
Subacute and chronic granulomatous meningoencephalitis from ameba is a rare disease in humans. Isolated instances have been reported in debilitated and immunosuppressed patients (Gonzalez et al). The organism may be difficult to culture from the CSF; most diagnoses are made from biopsy. A fatal case of ours, in a leukopenic patient who had been receiving granulocyte-stimulating factor, ran a subacute course over 1 month with headache, mild fever, stupor, and unmeasurably low CSF glucose toward the end of life (Katz et al). Initially, there were scattered, round, enhancing lesions on the MRI that disappeared with corticosteroids, much like lymphoma; later, there were more irregular confluent white matter lesions. A brain biopsy revealed amoebae that could have been easily mistaken for macrophages or cellular debris; the organism proved to be Balamuthia.
# Chunk 5870
An eosinophilic leukocytosis usually appears when the muscles are invaded. Serologic (precipitin) tests become positive early in the third week. The heart is often involved, manifested by tachycardia and electrocardiographic changes; sterile brain embolism may follow the myocarditis. These findings may aid in the diagnosis, which can be confirmed by finding the larvae in a muscle biopsy, using the technique of low-power scan of wet tissue pressed between two glass slides.
# Chunk 5871
Schistosomiasis is widespread in tropical regions; 80 percent of cases are in sub-Saharan Africa. North American neurologists have little contact with it except in travelers who have bathed in lakes or rivers where the snail hosts of the parasite are plentiful. The initial manifestation may be a local skin irritation at the site of entry of the parasite (swimmer’s itch), or a large serpiginous urticarial rash on the trunk, Katayama fever, particularly likely to occur in prior exposure, but the patient frequently does not offer this information unless sought. A small proportion of patients develop neurologic symptoms several months after exposure. Headaches, convulsions (either focal or generalized), and other cerebral signs appear; with lesions of larger size, papilledema may develop, simulating a brain tumor. It has been hypothesized that travelers are more prone to develop symptomatic nervous system disease because of an intense inflammatory reaction surrounding the deposited eggs.
# Chunk 5872
Figure 31-2. MRI showing a right frontal brain abscesses associated with bacterial endocarditis (S. aureus) in a 55-year-old man. There is characteristic rim enhancement with gadolinium (left panel) and restricted diffusion within the abscess (right panel).
# Chunk 5873
Panels of serologic tests for the main viruses that cause aseptic meningitis are available; most use complement fixation or enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) techniques; an infection is demonstrated by a fourfold increase in titer from acute to convalescent serum drawn at least 10 days apart, but these, of course, do no more than confirm the diagnosis after the illness has mostly passed. In some instances, elevation of specific IgM antibody directed at an infectious agent is useful. Serologic reactions of CSF for syphilis should be interpreted with caution, because inflammation of many types, including infectious mononucleosis, can produce a false-positive reaction. In the last few years, the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) has been applied to the diagnosis of viral infections of the nervous system, among them being CMV and HSV. The test is most sensitive during the active stage of viral replication, in contrast to serologic tests, which are more accurate later in the course of the infection. There are numerous false-negative and fewer false-positive PCR tests for CMV, but they are nonetheless useful in some circumstances, such as the early diagnosis of fulminant CMV infection in HIV patients (see later in this chapter). Even more recently, sequencing of DNA from spinal fluid allows comparison to reference sources for a wide variety infectious organisms and the identification of obscure infections in a matter of days or less (see Wilson and Tyler); the findings can then be confirmed by PCR. For the most part, neither serologic nor PCR testing is required in clinical practice.
# Chunk 5874
A trial of broad-spectrum antibiotics may be justified until cultures are negative, although we have had limited success in our last several patients. We sometimes resort to a biopsy of the meninges over the frontal convexity or at a site that demonstrates infiltration or marked enhancement if the diagnosis has not been clarified in 6 to 12 months or if febrile meningitis persists for more than several weeks, but examination of this tissue has proved to be of limited value. In Anderson et al’s (1995) series, mentioned earlier, biopsy yielded a diagnosis in 5 of 25 patients. Finally, if bacterial and fungal infection, including tuberculosis, has been reasonably excluded, corticosteroids may be administered for several weeks and then tapered while observing the patient and resampling the CSF.
# Chunk 5875
The CSF formula in a number of other chronic or acutely recurring meningitides corresponds to that of aseptic meningitis. These include (1) the Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome, which is characterized by various combinations of iridocyclitis, depigmentation of a thick swath of hair (poliosis circumscripta) and of the skin, vitiligo, loss of eyelashes, dysacusis, and deafness (the pathologic basis of the syndrome is not known). (2) Mollaret recurrent meningitis, many instances of which have been associated with HSV-1 (Steel) and others (perhaps most) with HSV-2 infection (Cohen et al). The syndrome is characterized by episodes of acute meningitis with severe headache and sometimes low-grade fever, lasting for about 2 weeks, and recurring over a period of several months or years. In a few patients of ours, in whom no virus could be identified in the CSF, antiviral therapy met with some success, although corticosteroids seemed to reduce the severity of acute episodes. A proportion of these cases follow bouts of genital herpes and individual cases have been reported with EBV, herpes-6 in children, and other viruses. A special syndrome that has been associated with HSV-2 is that of aseptic meningitis and bladder failure and vaginal or vulvar pain after a bout of genital herpes (Elsberg syndrome as reviewed by Ellie and colleagues). (3) In some patients, the recurrent attacks are associated with encephalopathy and headache; this is probably identical to the illness called “pseudomigraine with temporary neurological symptoms” by Gomez-Aranda et al and described earlier by Bartleson et al. The entity, also known as HaNDL syndrome (“headache neurologic deficit and lymphocytic pleocytosis”) is allied more closely with the headache syndromes as discussed and cited in Chap. 9. (4) Allergic or hypersensitivity meningitis, in the past occurring in the course of serum sickness and now more commonly of autoimmune diseases such as lupus erythematosus, and in relation to certain medications such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and intravenously administered immunoglobulin. (5) Behçet disease, which is an important acute, recurrent inflammatory CNS disease, particularly in individuals of Middle Eastern origin. It is essentially a diffuse inflammatory disease of small blood vessels that has several other characteristic features such as oral and genital ulcers and is more appropriately considered with the vasculitides in Chap. 33.
# Chunk 5876
The types of viral encephalitis that occur with sufficient frequency to be of clinical importance are relatively few. HSV is by far the most common sporadic cause of encephalitis and has no seasonal or geographic predilections. Its age distribution is slightly skewed and biphasic, affecting persons mainly between ages 5 and 30 years and those older than age 50 years. Many other viruses, exemplified by the arboviral encephalitides, have a characteristic geographic and seasonal incidence. The most important of these is the Japanese encephalitis serogroup (Flaviviruses), of which the now common West Nile virus is a member. In recent outbreaks in the United States, the West Nile virus has been more frequent than any of the other arboviruses and has had a wide geographic distribution (Solomon). In the United States, eastern equine encephalitis, as the name implies, is observed mainly in the eastern states and on both the Atlantic and Gulf coasts. Western equine encephalitis is fairly uniformly distributed west of the Mississippi. St. Louis encephalitis, another arthropod-borne late-summer encephalitis, occurs nationwide but especially along the Mississippi River in the South; outbreaks occur in August through October, slightly later than is customary for the other arboviruses. Venezuelan equine encephalitis is common in South and Central America; in the United States it is practically confined to Florida and the southwestern states. California virus encephalitis predominates in the northern Midwest and northeastern states. After West Nile, the La Crosse variety had in the past been the most frequent identifiable arbovirus encephalitis in the United States.
# Chunk 5877
The common arthropod-borne viruses (arboviruses) that cause encephalitis in the United States and their geographic range have been mentioned earlier. Most of the agents are in the category of Flaviviruses. There are alternating cycles of viral infection in mosquitoes and vertebrate hosts; the mosquito becomes infected by taking a blood meal from a viremic host (horse or bird) and injects virus into the host, including humans. The seasonal incidence of these infections is practically limited to the summer and early fall, when mosquitoes are biting. In the equine encephalitides, regional deaths in horses usually precede human epidemics. For St. Louis encephalitis, the urban bird or animal or possibly the human becomes the intermediate host. West Nile outbreaks are preceded by illness in common birds such as crows and jays. St. Louis, California, and La Crosse agents are endemic in the United States because of the cycle of infection in small rodents. Powassan virus from the deer tick has been added to the list of causes of Flavivirus encephalitis in North America as in the report by Tavakoli and coworkers.
# Chunk 5878
The clinical manifestations of the arbovirus infections are almost indistinguishable from one another, although they do vary with the age of the patient. The incubation period after mosquito or tick bite transmission is 5 to 15 days. There may be a brief prodromal fever with arthralgia or rash (e.g., West Nile fever). In infants, there may be only an abrupt onset of fever and convulsions, whereas in older children and adults the onset is usually less abrupt, with complaints of headache, listlessness, nausea, or vomiting, drowsiness, and fever for several days before medical attention is sought; convulsions, confusion, stupor, and varying degrees of stiff neck then become prominent. Photophobia, diffuse myalgia, and tremor (of either action or intention type) may be observed. Asymmetry of tendon reflexes, hemiparesis, extensor plantar signs, myoclonus, chorea, and sucking and grasping reflexes may also occur. McJunkin and colleagues described the clinical features of 127 patients with La Crosse infection seen at their medical center over a decade, and their descriptions are representative of other arboviral infections. In addition to the typical features of viral encephalitis they emphasize aspects that occur in a proportion of patients: hyponatremia, raised intracranial pressure with cerebral swelling, and, most notable to us, signal changes in the MRI that simulate herpes encephalitis.
# Chunk 5879
Diagnosis The CSF findings are much the same as in aseptic meningitis (lymphocytic pleocytosis, mild protein elevation, normal glucose values). Occasionally, early sampling of CSF may show few or no cells and subsequent tests may be more typical of an inflammatory disorder. Recovery of virus from blood or CSF is usually not possible and PCR testing is routinely only applied during local epidemics and for the detection of herpes viruses. Recently, it has been possible to use next generation sequencing to identify obscure causes of encephalitis. However, antiviral immunoglobulin (Ig) M antibody is present in the serum and CSF within the first days of symptomatic disease and can be detected and quantified by means of ELISA, making it preferable to other testing serologic for specific diagnosis. Some patients have not developed antibodies by the time of admission to the hospital and the test may have to be repeated in several days. The MRI may be normal or show signal changes and edema in the cortex, basal ganglia, or thalamus (the latter is described particularly in the
# Chunk 5880
A rising titer of neutralizing antibodies can be demonstrated from the acute to the convalescent stage, but this is not of diagnostic help in the acutely ill patient and may not be significant in patients with recurrent herpes infections of the oral mucosa. Tests for the detection of HSV antigen in the CSF by PCR have been developed and are useful in diagnosis while the virus is replicating in the first few days of the illness (Rowley et al). A refinement in this technique (a nested PCR assay described by Aurelius and coworkers) reportedly has a sensitivity of 95 percent and gives very few false-positive tests in the first 3 weeks of illness. In the experience of Lakeman and colleagues, the test was 98 percent positive in cases proven by cultures of brain biopsy material and gave 6 percent false positives. Antiviral treatment did not appear to affect the results. False-negative tests are most likely to occur in the first 48 h of febrile infection. When the clinical features are consistent with the disease and the PCR test is negative, it is advisable to repeat it in several days, and to obtain PCR testing for HSV-2 as well, while antiviral treatment is continued.
# Chunk 5881
Alternative ways to establish the diagnosis of acute HSV encephalitis are by fluorescent antibody study or culture of cerebral tissue obtained from brain biopsy. The approach to biopsy as a diagnostic test is now infrequently employed with the availability of PCR. We have found it necessary to perform biopsy in only exceptional cases.
# Chunk 5882
Prognosis The outcome of this disease, both mortality and morbidity, is governed to a large extent by the patient’s age and state of consciousness, particularly at the time of institution of acyclovir therapy. If the patient is unconscious (except immediately after a convulsion), the outcome is usually poor. However, if treatment is begun within 4 days of onset of the illness in an awake patient, survival is greater than 90 percent (Whitley 1990). Evaluation of patients 2 years after treatment showed 38 percent to be normal or nearly normal, whereas 53 percent were dead or severely impaired. The neurologic sequelae are often of the most serious type, consisting of a Korsakoff amnesic defect or a global dementia, seizures, and aphasia as described by Drachman and Adams in the era before treatment became available. If there were seizures during the acute illness, it may be advisable to continue antiepileptic medications for a year or more and then judge the risk of discontinuing them on the basis of further seizures, the EEG, and the patient’s exposure to situations that pose a danger, such as driving. With the exception of the rare relapsing cases mentioned earlier, the infection does not recur.
# Chunk 5883
With modern intensive-care techniques, there have been a number of survivors of the encephalitic illness, all of whom had received postexposure immunization. In addition to mechanical respiratory support, several secondary abnormalities must be addressed, including raised intracranial pressure, excessive release of antidiuretic hormone, diabetes insipidus, and extremes of autonomic dysfunction, especially hyperand hypotension. Willoughby and colleagues were successful in treating a 15-year-old girl who had not received vaccine by using an empirical approach of induced coma with ketamine and midazolam supplemented by ribavirin and amantadine. The goal was to support the patient while her antibody response matured. At least two other cases treated in a similar manner, reported anecdotally, did not survive.
# Chunk 5884
Acute Cerebellitis (Acute Ataxia of Childhood)

A comment is made here concerning a dramatic syndrome of acute ataxia that occurs in the context of an infectious illness, mainly in children. The syndrome was originally described by Westphal in 1872 following smallpox and typhoid fever in adults, but Batten is credited with drawing attention to the more common ataxic illness that occurs after common childhood infections such as measles, pertussis, and scarlet fever. Currently, acute ataxia of childhood is most often associated with chickenpox (about one-quarter of 73 consecutive cases reported by Connolly et al), but it can occur during or after any of the childhood exanthems, as well as in association with infections caused by enteroviruses (mainly Coxsackie virus), EBV, Mycoplasma, CMV, Q fever, vaccinia, a number of vaccinations, rarely following HSV, and also after nondescript respiratory infections (see Weiss and Guberman). The condition, as mentioned, is far less frequent in adults, but we encounter a case every few years in adolescents and individuals in their twenties; besides a case of varicella that we observed in a 25-year-old, the most common preceding organisms in these individuals have been EBV and Mycoplasma.
# Chunk 5885
In a span of 45 years, HIV infection and AIDS have attained pandemic proportions. At the time of this writing it was estimated by the World Health Organization (WHO) that approximately 37 million persons are infected worldwide and that approximately 1 million adults in the United States are seropositive for the virus with approximately 40,000 new cases yearly, a number which gas been slowly declining. The CDC furthermore estimates that 18 percent of infections have not been diagnosed. Though the incidence is decreasing, particularly startling are the statistics from sub-Saharan Africa and Southeast Asia, where the WHO estimated that approximately 20,000,000 adults—or almost 9 percent of the adult population—were infected. In some areas of East Africa, 30 percent of adults are infected with the virus.
# Chunk 5886
It has already been mentioned that HIV infection may present as an acute asymptomatic meningitis with a mild lymphocytic pleocytosis and modest elevation of CSF protein. The acute illness may also take the form of a meningoencephalitis or even a myelopathy or neuropathy (see Myelopathy, Peripheral Neuropathy, and Myopathy). Most patients recover from the initial acute neurologic illnesses; the relationship to HIV may pass unrecognized, as these illnesses are quite nonspecific clinically and may precede or coincide with seroconversion. Once seroconversion has occurred, the patient becomes vulnerable to all the late complications of HIV infection. In adults, the interval between infection and the development of AIDS ranges from several months to 15 years or even longer; the mean latency is 8 to 10 years and 1 year or less in infants.
# Chunk 5887
The disorder in adults takes the form of a slowly or subacutely progressive dementia (loss of retentive memory, inattentiveness, language disorder, and apathy) accompanied variably by abnormalities of motor function (see Navia and Price). Patients complain of being unable to follow conversations, taking longer to complete daily tasks, and becoming forgetful. Incoordination of the limbs, ataxia of gait, and impairment of smooth pursuit and saccadic eye movements may be early accompaniments of the dementia. Heightened tendon reflexes, Babinski signs, grasp and suck reflexes, weakness of the legs progressing to paraplegia, bladder and bowel incontinence reflecting spinal cord or cerebral involvement, and abulia or mutism are prominent in the later stages of the disease. In the untreated case, the dementia evolves over a period of weeks or months; survival after the onset of dementia was in the past generally 3 to 6 months but is considerably longer if treatment is instituted. Treatment with antiretroviral drugs can result in cognitive improvement. There is an interest in rare cases of poor penetration of antiretroviral drugs into the central nervous system, allowing for viral replication and reemergence despite elimination of HIV from the peripheral blood.
# Chunk 5888
Antibody tests for toxoplasmosis may be obtained; the absence of IgG antibodies makes infection unlikely and raises the consideration of brain lymphoma. Also, if antitoxoplasmal therapy with pyrimethamine and sulfadiazine fails to reduce the size of the lesions within several weeks, another cause should be sought, again mainly lymphoma. In those patients who cannot tolerate the frequent side effects of pyrimethamine or sulfonamides (rash or thrombocytopenia), clindamycin may be of value. Recently, it has been suggested that positron emission tomography (PET) and other metabolic imaging techniques can identify lymphoma as the cause of a mass lesion in the HIV patient. The less frequent possibilities of tuberculous or bacterial brain abscess should be kept in mind if none of these avenues allow a confident diagnosis.
# Chunk 5889
The important paralytic disease in this category nonetheless remains poliomyelitis. Although no longer a scourge in areas where vaccination is routine, its lethal and crippling effects are still fresh in the memory of physicians who practiced in the 1950s. In the summer of 1955, when New England experienced its last epidemic, 3,950 cases of acute poliomyelitis were reported in Massachusetts alone, and 2,771 were paralytic. The details of this epidemic described by Pope and colleagues are worth reviewing by any student of the disease. Polio has essentially vanished from the Americas, the only cases currently being imported ones. Live polio vaccine, which had been the source of approximately 150 cases in previous decades, is no longer used in the United States.
# Chunk 5890
Coarse fasciculations are seen as the muscles weaken; they are transient as a rule, but occasionally they persist. Tendon reflexes are diminished and lost as the weakness evolves and paralyzed muscles become flaccid. Patients frequently complain of paresthesias in the affected limbs but objective sensory loss is seldom demonstrable. Retention of urine is a common occurrence during the early phase in adult patients, rarely persisting. Atrophy of muscle can be detected within 3 weeks of onset of paralysis, is maximal at 12 to 15 weeks, and is permanent.
# Chunk 5891
Personality changes and intellectual impairment may introduce the neurologic syndrome, which then evolves over a period of several days to weeks. Any one or some combination of hemiparesis progressing to quadriparesis, visual field defects, cortical blindness, aphasia, ataxia, dysarthria, dementia, confusional states, and coma are manifestations. Some of the cases under our observation had a predominantly an asymmetric cerebellar syndrome. Seizures are infrequent, occurring in only about 10 percent of cases. If untreated, usually meaning that immunosuppression is not ameliorated, death occurs in 3 to 6 months from the onset of neurologic symptoms and even more rapidly in patients with HIV unless antiretroviral treatment is undertaken. In the current era, the duration of disease is generally much longer.
# Chunk 5892
Children and adolescents were affected for the most part, the disease rarely appearing beyond the age of 10 years. Typically, there is a history of primary measles infection at a very early age, often before 2 years, followed by a 6to 8-year asymptomatic period. The illness evolved in several stages. Initially there was a decline in proficiency at school, temper outbursts and other changes in personality, difficulty with language, and loss of interest in usual activities. These soon give way to a severe and progressive intellectual deterioration in association with focal or generalized seizures, widespread myoclonus, ataxia, and sometimes visual disturbances caused by progressive chorioretinitis. As the disease advances, rigidity, hyperactive reflexes, Babinski signs, progressive unresponsiveness, and signs of autonomic dysfunction appear. In the final stage, the child lies insensate, virtually “decorticated.”
# Chunk 5893
The course is usually steadily progressive, death occurring within 1 to 3 years. A series of 39 such adult cases from India with mean age of 21 years was reported by Prashanth and coworkers, the oldest patient a 43-year-old. The main features were similar in most ways to childhood cases, except that several had visual disturbances and two had extrapyramidal features, raising the possibility of prion disease. Myoclonus was present early in the illness in 26 and developed later in all cases; the movements were described as “slow,” a characteristic alluded to in other series. In two cases that occurred in pregnant women, blurred vision and weakness of limbs was followed by akinetic mutism, without a trace of myoclonus or cerebellar ataxia. Nevertheless, the progressive ataxic-myoclonic chronic dementia in a child is so typical that bedside diagnosis was usually possible.
# Chunk 5894
Management No specific treatment is known. Antiviral agents have been ineffective. In view of the transmissibility of the disease from humans to primates and iatrogenically from person to person with infected materials, certain precautions should be taken in the medical care and handling of materials from affected patients. Special isolation rooms are unnecessary, and the families of affected patients and nursing staff can be reassured that casual contact poses no risk. Needle punctures and cuts are not thought to pose a risk, but some uncertainty remains. The transmissible agent is resistant to boiling, treatment with formalin and alcohol, and ultraviolet radiation but can be inactivated by autoclaving at 132°C (269.6°F) at 15 lb/in2 for 1 h or by immersion for 1 h in 5 percent sodium hypochlorite (bleach). Workers exposed to infected materials (butchers, abattoir workers, healthcare workers) should wash thoroughly with ordinary soap. Needles, glassware, needle electrodes, and other instruments should be handled with great care and immersed in appropriate disinfectants and autoclaved or incinerated. The performance of a brain biopsy or autopsy requires that a set of special precautions be followed, as outlined by Brown but this surgical procedure is not necessary as more diagnostic tools have become available. Obviously such patients or any others known to have been demented should not be donors of organs or corneas for transplantation or blood for transfusion.
# Chunk 5895
There are several categories of neurologic disease, the temporal profile of which mimic the cerebrovascular disorders. Migraine may do so, but the history usually provides the diagnosis. A seizure may be followed by a prolonged focal deficit (Todd paralysis) but is rarely the initial event in a stroke; the setting in which these symptoms occur and their subsequent course clarify the clinical situation. Tumor, infection, inflammation, degeneration, and nutritional deficiency are unlikely to manifest themselves precipitously, although rarely a primary or metastatic brain tumor produces a focal deficit of abrupt onset (see later). Trauma, of course, occurs abruptly but usually offers no problem in diagnosis. In multiple sclerosis and other demyelinative diseases, there may be an abrupt onset or exacerbation of symptoms, but for the most part they occur in a different age group and clinical setting. Conversely, a stroke-like onset of cerebral symptoms in a young adult should always raise a suspicion of demyelinative disease. A stroke developing over a period of several days usually progresses in a stepwise fashion, increments of deficit being added abruptly from time to time. A slow, gradual, downhill course over a period of 2 weeks or more indicates that the lesion is probably not vascular but rather neoplastic, demyelinative, infectious (abscess) or granulomatous, or a subdural hematoma.
# Chunk 5896
Also somewhat characteristic of atherothrombotic events in many, but not all cases, is the occurrence of the stroke during sleep; the patient awakens paralyzed, either during the night or in the morning. Unaware of any difficulty, he may arise and fall helplessly to the floor with the first step. This is the story given by many patients with thrombotic strokes, as well as by a number with embolic strokes.
# Chunk 5897
A determination of prothrombin and partial thromboplastin activity is needed before therapy is started with warfarin, but if this is not feasible, the initial doses of anticoagulant drugs can usually be given safely if there is no clinical evidence of bleeding anywhere in the body and there has been no recent surgery. Warfarin, beginning with a dose of 5 to 10 mg daily, is relatively safe provided that the international normalized ratio (INR) is brought only to 2 to 3 (formerly measured as a prothrombin time between 16 and 19 s) and the level is determined regularly (an approximate plan is once a day for the first 5 days, then 2 or 3 times a week for 1 to 2 weeks, and finally once every several weeks).
# Chunk 5898
There is evidence that well-executed surgery or stenting in appropriately chosen cases arrests the TIAs and diminishes the risk of future strokes. These views initially received strong affirmation from two often-cited randomized studies—the North American Symptomatic Carotid Endarterectomy Trial (NASCET) and the European Carotid Surgery Trial (ECST). The conclusion reached in each of these studies was that carotid endarterectomy for symptomatic lesions causing degrees of stenosis greater than 70 to 80 percent in diameter reduces the incidence of ipsilateral hemispheral strokes and shows greater benefit with increasing degrees of stenosis. The results apply generally only if surgical complication rates are below 3 percent. These two trials differed in the method of estimating the degree of stenosis, but when adjustments are made, the results are comparable (Donnan et al, 1998). Further analysis of the North American trial by Gasecki and colleagues indicated that the risk of cerebral infarction on the side of the symptomatic stenosis is increased if there is a contralateral carotid stenosis but that operated patients (on the side of symptomatic stenosis) still had fewer strokes than those treated with medication alone. In those with bilateral carotid disease, the risk of stroke after 2 years was 69 percent, and if operated, 22 percent. As to the timing of endarterectomy, opinions have diverged but a meta-analysis reported by Rothwell and colleagues (2004) has suggested that the maximum benefit is accrued if surgery is performed within 2 weeks of a TIA or minor stroke.
# Chunk 5899
Endarterectomy, in a small number of cases may be followed by a new hemiplegia or aphasia that becomes evident in the hours after the procedure, usually by the time the patient arrives in the recovery room. In these cases, surgeons prefer to return the patient to the operating room and open the artery, as discussed earlier on. An intimal flap at the distal end of the endarterectomy and varying amounts of fresh clot proximal to it are usually encountered; but after removal and repair of the vessel, the effects of the stroke, if one has occurred, are not usually improved. The postoperative care of carotid endarterectomy focuses on reversing reflex hypotension that is induced by exposing the carotid wall to high perfusion pressure. This phenomenon can be reduced by infiltrating the carotid sinus with anesthetic prior to the operation. An uncommon but rather striking hyperperfusion syndrome develops several days to a week after carotid endarterectomy. The features are headache, focal deficits, seizures, brain edema, or cerebral hemorrhage. These are thought to reflect autoregulatory failure of the cerebral vasculature in the face of abrupt restoration of normal blood pressure and perfusion. After a long period of autoregulatory compensation for a stenotic carotid artery, then a normal cerebral perfusion pressure may result in endothelial incompetence with leakage of water across the blood–brain barrier. Unilateral severe headache is the most common symptom and may be the only manifestation. On occasion, cerebral edema is so massive as to lead to death (Breen et al). Treatment is by control of hypertension; it is unclear whether antiepileptic medications are required if there has been a seizure as a component of the syndrome. We mention here that an identical syndrome of focal cerebral deficits and brain edema, perhaps with the exception of seizures, has been seen, rarely and with no explanation spontaneously, in migraineurs (not those who have had endarterectomy), including two patients under our care.
# Chunk 5900
Many attempts have been made to clarify the role of correcting asymptomatic carotid stenosis by means of endarterectomy. The Asymptomatic Carotid Atherosclerotic Study (ACAS) found that the frequency of strokes could be reduced from 11 to 5 percent over 5 years by removing the plaque if there was a stenosis greater than 60 percent (in diameter). These conclusions have been tempered by a reanalysis of the ACAS data, in which almost half of the strokes were of lacunar or cardioembolic (Inzitari et al). Data from a European trial, encompassing 3,120 patients (MRC Asymptomatic Carotid Surgery Trial [ACST] Collaborative Group), have indicated that asymptomatic carotid stenosis of more than 70 percent carries a 2 percent annual risk of stroke over a 5-year period and that the risk is reduced to 1 percent with endarterectomy. It was concluded that endarterectomy may be justified for asymptomatic carotid stenosis of this degree in men (not so in women) but that an audited surgical risk below 3 percent was required to obtain favorable results (just as for symptomatic carotid stenosis). However, all of these trials were conducted before the ubiquitous use of statin drugs, which seemingly stabilize carotid plaques. Several trials comparing endarterectomy to stenting, some of which were commented on earlier, included asymptomatic patients but there were too few on which to base conclusions and, as for symptomatic cases, they were performed before the epoch of aggressive risk factor management. In a trial involving asymptomatic patients with severe carotid stenosis (mean stenosis by diameter of 74 percent) who were not at high risk for surgical complications, comparing endarterectomy to stenting with a device that captured embolic material, 5-year stroke rates were approximately 7 percent in both groups ACTI, reported by Rosenfield et al).
# Chunk 5901
During the period 1970–1974 in Rochester, Minnesota, 94 percent of patients with ischemic strokes survived for 5 days and 84 percent for 1 month (Garraway et al, 1983a and b). The survival rate was 54 percent at 3 years and 40 percent at 7 years. These were significantly greater than had been the case during the period 1965–1969. These figures, which were gathered retrospectively, are comparable to more recent ones reported by Bamford and colleagues from patients who had strokes in the 1980s. The mortality rate following cerebral infarcts (no separation being made between thrombotic and embolic types) at the end of 1 month was 19 percent and at the end of 1 year, 23 percent. Of the survivors, 65 percent were capable of an independent existence. In every series, among long-term survivors, heart disease is a more frequent cause of death than additional strokes. It has been repeatedly pointed out that pneumonia as a result of disordered swallowing is a major determinant of survival; further discussion regarding aspiration problems following stroke are found in later sections of the chapter.
# Chunk 5902
As for the eventual prognosis of the neurologic deficits, some improvement is the rule. The patient with a lacunar infarct usually fares well but may take months to improve to the maximum extent. With other small infarcts, recovery may start within a day or two, and restoration may be complete or nearly complete within a week. In cases of severe deficit, there may be little significant recovery; after months of assiduous efforts at rehabilitation, the patient may remain bereft of speech and understanding, with the upper extremity still useless and the lower extremity serving only as an uncertain prop during attempts to walk. Between these two extremes there is every gradation of recovery. Measurement of central motor conduction by magnetic stimulation has been somewhat predictive of motor recovery but is not widely used for clinical work. If clinical recovery does not begin in 1 or 2 weeks, the outlook is poorer for both motor and language functions. Constructional apraxia, uninhibited anger (with left and rarely with right temporal lesions), nonsensical logorrhea and placidity, unawareness of the paralysis and neglect (with nondominant parietal lesions), and confusion and delirium (with nondominant temporal lesions) all tend to diminish and may disappear within a few weeks. A hemianopia that has not cleared in a few weeks will usually be permanent, although reading and color discrimination may continue to improve. In lateral medullary infarction, difficulty in swallowing may be protracted, lasting 8 weeks or longer, yet relatively normal function is finally restored in nearly every instance. Aphasia, dysarthria, cerebellar ataxia, and walking may improve for a year or longer, but for all practical purposes it may be said that whatever motor and language deficits remain after 5 to 6 months will be permanent.
# Chunk 5903
In all but the most seriously ill patients, beginning within a few days of the stroke the paralyzed limbs ideally should be carried through a full range of passive movement several times a day. The purpose is to avoid contracture (and capsulitis), especially at the shoulder, elbow, hip, and ankle. Soreness and aching in the paralyzed limbs should not be allowed to interfere with exercises to the extent possible. Patients should be moved from bed to chair as soon as the stroke is completed and blood pressure is stable. Prophylaxis for deep venous thrombosis with compression boots or anticoagulation is appropriate if the patient cannot be mobilized. An assessment for swallowing difficulty should be made early during recovery and dietary adjustments on the insertion of a nasogastric tube made if there is a risk of aspiration. Nearly all hemiplegic patients regain the ability to walk to some extent, usually within a 3to 6-month period, and this should be a primary aim in rehabilitation. The presence of deep sensory loss or anosognosia in addition to hemiplegia, are the main limiting factors. A short or long leg brace is often required. By teaching patients with cerebellar ataxia new strategies, balance and gait disorders can be made less disabling. As motor function improves and if mentality is preserved, instruction in the activities of daily living and the use of various special devices can help the patient become at least partly independent at home. Whatever little research is available on the effectiveness of stroke rehabilitation suggests that a greater intensity of physical therapy does indeed achieve better scores on some measures of walking ability and dexterity. In a randomized trial, Kwakkel and colleagues achieved these results by applying an additional 30 min/d beyond conventional physical therapy of focused treatments to the leg or arm, 5 d/week, for 20 weeks. Other studies have demonstrated clearly the undesirable effects of immobilizing a limb in a splint after a stroke.
# Chunk 5904
Mainly at increased risk of stroke are women taking high-dose (0.50-mg) estrogen pills; in recent years, lowering the estrogen content has substantially reduced, but not eliminated, this risk. The use of progestin-only pills or of subcutaneously implanted capsules of progestin has not been associated with stroke as far as can be currently determined (Petitti et al). The epidemiologic study reported by Lidegaard and colleagues puts the risk of hormonal contraception in perspective; in a large cohort of Danes, the risks of thrombotic strokes and myocardial infarction over 15 years was very low with estradiol-containing compounds but it increased with age and with the dose of estradiol. It has also become apparent that mutations of the prothrombin gene are more frequent in patients who have cerebral venous thrombosis while on oral contraceptive pills than they are in the general population. Martinelli and associates propose that these genetic abnormalities account for 35 percent of idiopathic cases of cerebral vein thrombosis; and they have contended that contraceptives increase this risk 20-fold.
# Chunk 5905
Imaging techniques demonstrate a predictable sequence of changes as shown in Fig. 33-24. On CT, fresh blood is visualized as a white mass as soon as it is shed. The “spot sign,” the appearance of contrast within the hemorrhage during CT angiography, is associated with a high rate of hematoma expansion. The mass effect and the surrounding extruded serum and edema are hypodense on CT. After 2 to 3 weeks, the surrounding edema begins to recede and the density of the hematoma decreases, first at the periphery. Gradually the clot becomes isodense with brain. There may be a ring of enhancement from the hemosiderin-filled macrophages and the reacting cells that form a capsule for the hemorrhage. At one point several weeks after the bleed, the appearance may transiently simulate a tumor or abscess. By MRI, either in conventional T1or T2-weighted images, the hemorrhage is not easily visible in the 2 or 3 days after bleeding, as oxyhemoglobin is diamagnetic or, at most, is slightly hypointense, so that only the mass effect is evident. MR gradient echo or equivalent sequences that display areas of magnetic susceptibility show hemorrhages earlier and detect remnants of deposited hemosiderin even years afterward.
# Chunk 5906
The most common syndrome is the one caused by putaminal hemorrhage with extension to the adjacent internal capsule (see Fig. 33-24A). Neurologic symptoms and signs vary slightly with the precise site and size of the extravasation, but hemiplegia from interruption of the capsule is a consistent feature of medium-sized and large clots. Vomiting occurs in about half the patients. Headache is frequent but not invariable. With large hemorrhages, patients lapse almost immediately into a stupor with hemiplegia and their condition visibly deteriorates as the hours pass. As often, there is headache or some other abnormal cephalic sensation. Within a few minutes or less the face sags on one side, speech becomes slurred or aphasic, the arm and leg weaken and are flaccid, and the eyes tend to deviate away from the side of the paretic limbs. These events, occurring gradually over a period of several minutes or more, are strongly suggestive of intracerebral bleeding. More advanced stages are characterized by signs of upper brainstem compression (coma); bilateral Babinski signs; irregular or intermittent respiration; dilated, fixed pupils, first on the side of the clot; and decerebrate rigidity.
# Chunk 5907
Hemorrhage into the pons is almost invariably associated with deep coma within a few minutes; the remainder of the clinical picture is dominated by total paralysis with bilateral Babinski signs, decerebrate rigidity, and small (1 mm) pupils that react to light. Lateral eye movements, evoked by head turning or caloric testing, are impaired or absent. Death usually occurs within a few hours, but there are exceptions in which consciousness is retained and the clinical manifestations indicate a smaller lesion in the tegmentum of the pons (disturbances of lateral ocular movements, crossed sensory or motor disturbances, small pupils, and cranial-nerve palsies) in addition to signs of bilateral corticospinal tract involvement. A number of our patients with limited tegmental hemorrhages and blood in the CSF have survived with good functional recovery. In a series of 60 patients with pontine hemorrhage reviewed by Nakajima, 19 survived (8 of whom had remained alert). Similarly, Wijdicks and St. Louis reported that 21 percent made a good recovery—mostly those who were awake on admission. Figure 33-24C depicts a typical pontine hemorrhage.
# Chunk 5908
In where subarachnoid hemorrhage is suspected but not apparent on imaging studies, a lumbar puncture should be undertaken. Usually the CSF becomes grossly bloody within 30 min or sooner of the hemorrhage, with RBC counts up to 1 million/mm3 or even higher, however, blood may not be easily apparent in a lumbar puncture minutes after the hemorrhage. The CSF in the first days is under increased pressure, as high as 500 mm H2O—but usually closer to 250 mm H2O—an important finding in differentiating spontaneous subarachnoid hemorrhage from a traumatic tap. With a relatively mild hemorrhage, there may be only a few thousand cells but a severe headache syndrome from subarachnoid hemorrhage is usually associated with at least several hundred cells. It is also probably not possible for an aneurysm to rupture entirely into brain tissue without some leakage of blood into the subarachnoid fluid. In other words, the diagnosis of ruptured saccular aneurysm is essentially excluded if blood is not present in the CSF, provided the spinal fluid is examined more than 30 min after the event. Xanthochromia is found after centrifugation of the CSF if several hours or more have elapsed from the moment of the ictus. In a patient who reports a headache that was consistent with subarachnoid hemorrhage but that had occurred several days earlier, the CT may be normal and xanthochromia is the only diagnostic finding. To determine whether xanthochromia is present, fresh CSF must be centrifuged in a tube with a conical bottom and the supernatant compared to clear water in good light or preferably examined by spectrophotometric techniques. It has been our experience that most hospital laboratories cannot be depended on to give accurate results for this test from visual inspection alone. Also helpful after several days is the MRI taken with the FLAIR sequence as mentioned, which will demonstrate blood (the proton-density sequence is more sensitive to blood in the first day).
# Chunk 5909
Digital subtraction angiography with bilateral carotid and vertebral contrast injections is the most sensitive means of demonstrating an aneurysm. In addition to other causes of subarachnoid hemorrhage, approximately 5 to 10 percent of patients with apparent aneurysmal rupture will not have an aneurysm evident. Some of these instances may be the result of the obliteration of the lesion in the process of rupture. Patients with the typical clinical picture of spontaneous subarachnoid hemorrhage in whom an aneurysm or arteriovenous malformation cannot be demonstrated angiographically have a better prognosis than those in whom the lesion is visualized (Nishioka et al). In a series of 323 angiographically negative cases followed for an average of 10 years, there was rebleeding in only 12 (Hawkins et al). After 22 years, 69 percent of these patients had survived. If the first angiogram does not reveal an aneurysm, it is customary to repeat the study in several weeks, in part because it has been considered that vascular spasm may have earlier obscured the aneurysm. Even when no vasospasm visualized, it is occasionally the case that a second study shows the lesion. If the first study involves all cerebral vessels and uses several views of the basal circulation, it has been our experience that the second arteriogram is infrequently revealing, but we follow general practice and repeat it nonetheless. Imaging of the spinal vasculature rarely reveals a source in these circumstances, 3 of 75 patients in a series reported by Germans and colleagues.
# Chunk 5910
It has not been firmly established if alternative forms of imaging, namely CT and MRI angiography are as dependable as conventional angiography in excluding and aneurysm but several series suggest they may not be entirely adequate. Even when MR angiography demonstrates the aneurysm, if surgery is contemplated, the surgeon usually requires the kind of anatomic definition that can be better obtained by conventional digital subtraction angiography. CT and MRI angiographic have the potential advantages of showing the lesion in relation to the adjacent brain, soft tissue and bone in multiple views (Fig. 33-27). Digital subtraction angiography with bilateral carotid and vertebral artery contrast injections is the most sensitive means of demonstrating an aneurysm. In addition to other causes of subarachnoid hemorrhage, approximately 5 to 10 percent of patients with subarachnoid hemorrhage due to aneurysmal rupture will not have an aneurysm evident. Some of these instances may be the result of obliteration of the lesion in the process of rupture. Patients with the typical clinical picture of spontaneous subarachnoid hemorrhage in whom an aneurysm or arteriovenous malformation cannot be demonstrated angiographically have a better prognosis than those in whom the lesion is visualized (Nishioka et al). In a series of 323 angiographically negative cases followed for an average of 10 years, there was rebleeding in only 12 (Hawkins et al). After 22 years, 69 percent of these patients had survived. If the first angiogram does not reveal an aneurysm, it is customary to repeat an angiogram in several weeks in part because it has been considered that arterial spasm may have earlier obscured the aneurysm. Even when no vasospasm is visualized, it is occasionally the case that a second study shows the aneurysm. It has not been firmly established if alternative forms of arterial imaging, namely CT and MRI angiography, are as dependable as digital subtraction angiography in identifying an aneurysm but several series suggest they may not be entirely adequate. Even when CT or MR angiography demonstrates the aneurysm, if surgery is contemplated, the surgeon usually requires the kind of anatomic definition that is better obtained by conventional digital subtraction angiography. CT and MR angiographic techniques do have the potential advantage of showing the vascular lesion in relation to adjacent brain parenchyma, soft tissue, or bone (Fig. 33-26).
# Chunk 5911
As regards prognosis of aneurysmal hemorrhage,

McKissock and colleagues decades ago found that the patient’s state of consciousness at the time of arteriography was the single best index of outcome, and this remains largely true today. Their data, representative of the status of aneurysm management in the 1950s and consonant with the natural history before the advent of modern surgical and intensive care techniques, indicated that of every 100 patients reaching a hospital and coming to arteriography, 17 were stuporous or comatose and 83 appeared to be recovering from the ictus. At the end of 6 months, 8 of every 100 patients had died of the original hemorrhage and 59 had a recurrence (with 40 deaths), making a total of 48 deaths and 52 survivors. In regard to recurrence of bleeding, it was found that of 50 patients seen on the first day of the illness, 5 rebled in the first week (all fatal), 8 in the second week (5 fatal), 6 in the third and fourth weeks (4 fatal), and 2 in the next 4 weeks (2 fatal), making a total of 21 recurrences (16 fatal) in 8 weeks.
# Chunk 5912
A comprehensive and still instructive, but now dated, long-term analysis of the natural history of the disease is contained in the report of the Cooperative Study of Intracranial Aneurysms and Subarachnoid Hemorrhage (Sahs et al, 1984). The study was based on long-term observations of 568 patients who sustained an aneurysmal bleed between 1958 and 1965 and were managed only by a conservative medical program. A followup search in 1981 and 1982 disclosed that 378, or two-thirds of the patients, had died; 40 percent of the deaths had occurred within 6 months of the original hemorrhage. For the patients who survived the original hemorrhage for 6 months, the chances of survival during the next two decades were significantly worse than those of a matched normal population. Rebleeding occurred at a rate of 2.2 percent per year during the first decade and 0.86 percent per year during the second, and these were fatal in 78 percent of cases. Although these statistics reflect the outcome prior to the modern era of microsurgery and neurologic intensive care management, current figures are only modestly better. In respect to rebleeding, all series indicate that the risk is greatest in the first day but extends for weeks. The observations of Aoyagi and Hayakawa are representative of other series; they found that rebleeding occurred within 2 weeks in 20 percent of patients, with a peak incidence in the 24 h after the initial episode. Surgical treatment is largely oriented toward reducing this complication.
# Chunk 5913
The most notable advances in this disease have been in the techniques for the early obliteration of aneurysms, particularly the operating microscope and endovascular approaches, and in the management of circulatory volume. In the majority of patients, intravascular volume is depleted in the days after subarachnoid hemorrhage. This, in turn, greatly increases the chances of ischemic infarction from vasospasm. In part, this volume contraction can be attributed to bed rest, but sodium loss, probably resulting from the release of atrial natriuretic factor (ANF), a potent oligopeptide stimulator of sodium loss in renal tubules, may also be a factor. Hyponatremia develops in the first week after hemorrhage, but it is unclear whether this also results from the natriuretic effects of ANF or is an effect of antidiuretic hormone, causing water retention. The work of Diringer and coworkers (1988) suggests that both mechanisms are operative but it is the volume depletion, not hyponatremia per se, that is of the greatest clinical consequence.
# Chunk 5914
Several primary hematologic disorders are also complicated by hemorrhage into the brain. The most frequent of these are leukemia, aplastic anemia, and thrombocytopenia of various causes. Often they give rise to multiple intracranial hemorrhages, some in the subdural and subarachnoid spaces. As a rule, this complication signals a fatal outcome. Other, less-common causes of intracerebral bleeding are advanced liver disease, uremia that is being treated with dialysis, and lymphoma. Usually several factors are operative in these hematologic cases: reduction in prothrombin or other clotting elements (fibrinogen, factor V), bone marrow suppression by antineoplastic drugs, and disseminated intravascular coagulation. Any part of the brain may be involved, and the hemorrhagic lesions are usually multiple. Frequently there is also evidence of abnormal bleeding elsewhere (skin, mucous membranes, kidneys) by the time cerebral hemorrhage occurs. Plasma exchange, used in the treatment of myasthenia gravis and Guillain-Barré disease, lowers the serum fibrinogen to a marked degree, but we have not observed a single instance of intracerebral hemorrhage in more than 500 patients treated in this way.
# Chunk 5915
The patients we have seen with RCVS, after several days or weeks of dramatically fluctuating focal neurologic symptoms and disabling headache, have recovered completely or nearly so, but several have had small strokes. The longest recovery in our patients has taken 12 weeks in an idiopathic case. The syndrome is said to recur but two of our patients have had more than one attack, spaced years apart.
# Chunk 5916
Constitutional symptoms such as malaise, fever, anorexia, weight loss, and night sweats usually introduce the illness. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate is elevated in the early and active stages. Later there is evidence of occlusion of the brachiocephalic, subclavian, carotid, vertebral, and other arteries that may be asymptomatic or cause neurologic ischemic symptoms. The affected arteries no longer pulsate, hence the descriptive term pulseless disease. When renal arteries are involved, hypertension results, and there may be coronary occlusion, which may be fatal. Involvement of the pulmonary artery may lead to pulmonary hypertension. Coolness of the hands and weak radial pulses are common indicators of the disease and headaches are frequent. Blurring of vision, especially upon physical activity or fever, dizziness, and hemiparetic and hemisensory syndromes are the usual neurologic manifestations (Lupi-Herrera et al). The frequency of posturally induced neurologic symptoms has been emphasized, as well as the relative infrequency of major strokes despite multiple TIA-like spells. The inflamed vessels in the thorax are revealed by radionuclide scans using gallium. Pathologic studies disclose a periarteritis of the large vessels, often with giant cells and reparative fibrosis.
# Chunk 5917
The Sneddon syndrome (described by him in a 1965 article) is an arteriopathy producing deep blue-red skin lesions of livedo reticularis and livedo racemosa in association with multiple ischemic strokes. Many, but not all, patients have high titers of antiphospholipid antibodies. Although the skin lesions show a noninflammatory vasculopathy with intimal thickening, the pathology of the occlusive disease has not been adequately studied. In a report of 17 such patients by Stockhammer and coworkers, 8 had strokes and MRI showed lesions in 16 patients. The age of patients with strokes was 30 to 35 years; hence this condition is considered in young adults with cerebrovascular disease. Many of the lesions on MRI were small, deep, and multiple. Although there is a tendency for strokes to recur, many of the patients have remained well for years after a single stroke. Skin biopsy aids in diagnosis.
# Chunk 5918
Treatment During the period in which the diagnosis is being established by repeating the antibody tests, or after just a single arterial ischemic stroke, consensus groups have stated that it is reasonable to treat these patients with antiplatelet or anticoagulant agents (see Lim and colleagues). (Venous thrombosis is treated initially with heparin). Warfarin, perhaps the more the definitive therapy, alters the testing for antibodies and several guidelines recommend confirming the presence of antibodies after an interval of 2 weeks before starting treatment. However, warfarin has been used with greatest benefit and we have sometimes started this medication on suspicion of the syndrome. Khamashta and colleagues have found that the INR must be maintained close to 3 for effective prevention of stroke. According to the study conducted by Crowther and colleagues, an INR of 2 to 3 conferred the same degree of protection from thrombosis as did higher levels, but the number of thrombotic events was low in both groups and there was only 1 stroke in 114 patients over a period of about 3 years. Patients with severe thrombocytopenia and with other intrinsic coagulopathies should be treated with warfarin very cautiously. Although the INR is used as a gauge of the level of anticoagulation, it is also altered by the antibodies; no ideal method for monitoring the treatment has been devised. Aspirin, on uncertain grounds, is thought not to confer protection for stroke, but in only a few small series has its effect been analyzed. In “catastrophic” cases with repetitive strokes, intravenous immunoglobulin and plasma exchange have been used with some effect.
# Chunk 5919
The Patient With a History of an Ischemic Attack or Small Stroke in the Past

The patient may be functioning normally when examined, but it has been ascertained by the history or radiologic procedures that a stroke or TIA occurred in the past. The problem is what measures should be taken to reduce the risk of further strokes. This is particularly problematic if a surgical procedure is planned. A brief focal TIA, several minutes or less in duration, or many stereotyped spells usually represent severe stenosis of the internal carotid artery on the side of the affected cerebral hemisphere. If the symptoms have occurred recently, these may be forerunners of complete occlusion. If the TIA was far in the past—more than several weeks previously—the immediate risks of occlusion are reduced. The initial approach is to establish the patency of the carotid arteries by ultrasonography or MRA. If there is a reduction in diameter of greater than 70 percent when compared with an adjacent normal segment of vessel, and probably if there is a severely ulcerated but not critically stenotic plaque, carotid surgery (or angioplasty with stenting) is advisable. If a single TIA lasted more than 1 h or the neurologic examination discloses minor signs referable to the region of the hemisphere affected by the TIA, a search for a source of embolus is indicated. Appropriate diagnostic studies include electrocardiography (ECG), a transesophageal echocardiogram, monitoring for cardiac arrhythmia, ultrasonography of the carotid arteries, and a CT or MRI if it has not already been performed. Control of elevated blood pressure and addressing high cholesterol levels are ancillary steps. The mistake is to ignore the potential significance of a prior small stroke or TIA.
# Chunk 5920
Figure 33-34. Axial susceptibility-weighted MR images from a 65-year-old man with cerebral amyloid angiopathy. The left image shows innumerable cortical and subcortical microhemorrhages. The right panel shows cortical gyriform hemosiderosis, with additional cortical and subcortical microhemorrhages.
# Chunk 5921
With fractures of large bones, particularly the femur, with or without head injury, after 24 to 72 h there may be an acute onset of pulmonary symptoms (dyspnea and hyperpnea) followed by coma with or without focal signs or seizures. This sequence is a result of systemic fat embolism, first of the lungs and then of the brain. Cranial trauma is not required. In some cases the onset of pulmonary symptoms is associated with a petechial rash over the thorax, especially in the axillae and also in the conjunctivea and 1 in 3 cases is said to show fat globules in the urine. The specificity of the last of these findings has been questioned. Respiratory distress is the most important and often the only feature of the fat embolism syndrome, evident in the chest film as fluffy infiltrates in both lungs; however, cases have been reported without respiratory involvement.
# Chunk 5922
There is that relatively small, distressing group of severely brain-injured patients in whom the vital signs become normal but who never regain full consciousness. As the weeks pass, the prospects become bleaker. Such a patient, especially if a child, may still emerge from coma after 6 to 12 weeks or longer and make a relatively good, although usually incomplete, recovery. Some of those who survive for long periods open their eyes and move their heads and eyes from side to side but betray no evidence of seeing or recognizing even the closest members of their families. They do not speak and are capable of only primitive postural or reflex withdrawal movements. Jennett and Plum referred to this as the “persistent vegetative state” (see Chap. 16 for a full discussion of this subject). Fourteen percent of the patients in the Traumatic Coma Data Bank remained in this state. Hemiplegia or quadriplegia with varying degrees of decerebrate or decorticate posturing are usually present. Life is sometimes terminated after several months or years by some medical complication but may patients have survived for decades. Our colleague R.D. Adams examined the brains of 14 patients who remained in coma and in vegetative states from 1 to 14 years. All showed extensive zones of necrosis and hemorrhage in the upper brainstem. Among patients who survived and remained vegetative until death, J.H. Adams and colleagues (2000) found that 80 percent had thalamic damage and 71 percent had findings of diffuse axonal injury. Moreover, trauma of extracranial organs and tissues is frequent and obviously contributes to the fatal outcome. Recent functional studies have shown that a limited proportion of patients who are in a vegetative or minimally conscious state can be trained to purposefully engage parts of the cerebrum.
# Chunk 5923
As a rule, epidural hematoma arises under a temporal or parietal fracture and laceration of the middle meningeal artery or vein. Less often, there is a tear in a dural venous sinus. The injury, even when it fractures the skull, may not have produced coma initially, or it may be part of a devastating craniocerebral injury. A typical example is that of a child who has fallen from a bicycle or swing or has suffered some other hard blow to the head and was unconscious only momentarily. A few hours later (exceptionally, with venous bleeding the interval may be several days or a week), headache of increasing severity develops, with vomiting, drowsiness, confusion, aphasia, seizures (which may be one sided), hemiparesis with slightly increased tendon reflexes, and a Babinski sign. As coma develops, the hemiparesis may give way to bilateral spasticity of the limbs and Babinski signs. The heart rate is often and is bounding as a result of a rise in systolic blood pressure (Cushing effect). The pupil may dilate on the side of the hematoma. The diagnosis can be established rapidly by revealing a lens-shaped clot with a smooth inner margin with CT and MRI (Fig. 34-8). Death, which is frequent if an expanding clot is not removed surgically, comes at the end of a comatose period and is a result of respiratory arrest. The visualization of a fracture line across the groove of the middle meningeal artery and knowledge of which side of the head was struck (the clot is on that side) are of aid in diagnosis and lateralization of the lesion. However, meningeal vessels may occasionally be torn without fracture.
# Chunk 5924
Treatment of epidural hematoma The surgical procedure consists of placement of burr holes in a truly emergency situation in the ED or at the bedside or, preferably a craniotomy, drainage of the hematoma, and identification and ligation of the bleeding vessel. The operative results are excellent except in cases with extended fractures and laceration of the dural venous sinuses, in which the epidural hematoma may be bilateral rather than unilateral. If coma, bilateral Babinski signs, spasticity, or decerebrate rigidity supervene before operation, it usually means that displacement of central structures and compression of the midbrain have already occurred; prognosis is then poor, but a few patients do well if surgery is not greatly delayed. Small epidural hemorrhages can be followed by serial CT scanning and will be seen to enlarge gradually for a week or two and then be absorbed. There is controversy about the benefit of removing these smaller clots in a patient who has no symptoms or signs; with sequential clinical and imaging surveillance, can be left alone.
# Chunk 5925
The term “posttraumatic epilepsy” usually refers to late epilepsy, that is, to seizures that develop several weeks or months after closed head injury (1 to 3 months in most cases). Approximately 6 months after injury, half the patients who will develop epilepsy have had their first episode; by the end of 2 years, the figure rises to 80 percent (Walker). Data derived from a 15-year study of military personnel with severe (penetrating) brain wounds indicate that patients who escape seizures for 1 year after injury can be 75 percent certain of remaining seizure free; patients without seizures for 2 years can be 90 percent certain; and for 3 years, 95 percent certain. For the less-severely injured (mainly closed head injuries), the corresponding times are 2 to 6 months, 12 to 17 months, and 21 to 25 months (Weiss et al). Despite this, there is no doubt that seizures in adulthood occur for which there is no other explanation than a small scarred cortical contusion that had been acquired decades before. The interval between head injury and development of seizures is said to be longer in children.
# Chunk 5926
Posttraumatic seizures (both focal and generalized) tend to decrease in frequency as the years pass, and a significant number of patients (10 to 30 percent, according to Caviness) eventually stop having them. Status epilepticus is uncommon. Individuals who have early attacks (within a week of injury) are more likely to have a complete remission of their seizures than those whose attacks begin a year or so after injury. A low frequency of attacks is another favorable prognostic sign. Alcoholism is considered to have an adverse effect on this seizure state, but there are no systematic studies of this subject. Our colleague, M. Victor, observed some 25 patients with posttraumatic epilepsy in whom seizures had ceased altogether for several years, only to recur in relation to drinking. In these patients the seizures were precipitated by a weekend or even one evening of heavy drinking and occurred, as a rule, not when the patient was intoxicated but in the withdrawal period.
# Chunk 5927
General measures The first step in lowering elevated ICP is to control the incidental factors that are known to raise pressure, such as hypoxia, hypercarbia, particularly hyperthermia, awkward head positions that compress the jugular veins, and high mean airway pressures from positive pressure ventilation (see the monograph by Ropper and colleagues [2004] and Chap. 29 for further details). The avoidance of hyponatremia and serum hypoosmolarity that would allow water to enter the brain and increase its volume is accomplished by infusing only isoosmolar or hyperosmolar solutions such as normal saline. Elevations in serum osmolality as a consequence of excessive concentrations of diffusible solutes such as glucose are not useful in reducing intracranial volume because they do not create gradient for water and solutes across the cerebral vasculature. Consequently, fluids such as 5 percent dextrose in water, 0.5 normal saline, and 5 percent dextrose in 0.5 normal saline are avoided; lactated Ringer solution is permissible; normal saline, with or without added dextrose, is ideal. In a post hoc study of a cohort of severely injured patients, resuscitation with albumin was found to have a detrimental effect compared to saline (SAFE Investigators).
# Chunk 5928
Hyperosmolar therapy The basis for this class of treatments is the creation of a gradient of water concentration from the brain to the blood that reduces brain volume. Mannitol, glycerol, and urea are effective in lowering ICP by producing serum hyperosmolarity initially and then causing a diuresis that sustains this state and secondarily causes hypernatremia and hypovolemia. Hyperosmolar saline, in contrast, raises serum sodium directly and expands intravascular volume.
# Chunk 5929
The effects of mannitol have been of great interest to those who treat head trauma, but the ideal plan for its use has never been established. If ICP exceeds a predetermined level, for example, 20 mm Hg as recommended by aforementioned guidelines for the treatment of traumatic brain injury, mannitol 20 percent, 0.25 to 1.0 g/kg is given every 3 to 6 h to maintain serum sodium above approximately 142 mEq/L and osmolarity of 290 to 315 mOsm/L. Even if ICP monitoring is not used, an attempt may be made to maintain this level of serum osmolality for the first days after injury if contusion and brain swelling are detected on the CT scan.
# Chunk 5930
Hypertonic saline, 3 percent, can be used in boluses of 150 mL; a 7.5 percent solution, in 75 mL boluses; and 23 percent, in volumes of approximately 30 mL. All but the lowest concentration of saline require a central venous catheter to prevent sclerosis of veins. The same levels of sodium concentration as noted for mannitol are used as a reference to guide graduated increments of sodium administration, with serum sodium higher than about 156 mEq/L infrequently providing additional reductions in ICP.
# Chunk 5931
As has been intimated, the outcome in severe injury is particularly discouraging, more so with increasing age. Some aspects of prognosis were mentioned earlier but the following general comments serve to frame the problem. In the survey of the large European Brain Injury Consortium, comprising 10,005 adult patients, the injury proved fatal in 31 percent; 3 percent were left in a persistent vegetative state, and 16 percent remained severely disabled neurologically (Murray et al). Data from the extensively analyzed Traumatic Coma Data Bank are comparable, as reported by Marshall and coworkers (1983). The signs of focal brain disease, whether because of closed head injuries or open and penetrating ones, tend always to ameliorate as the months pass. A hemiplegia is often reduced to a minimal hemiparesis or to ineptitude of voluntary motor function with exaggerated reflexes and an equivocal Babinski sign on that side, and aphasia is gradually transformed into a stuttering or hesitant paraphasia or dysnomia that is not disabling. Many of the signs of brainstem disease (cranial nerve dysfunction and ataxia) improve also, usually within the first 6 months after injury (Jennett and Bond) and often to a surprising extent. Most patients who had been in coma for many hours or days—that is, those with severe brain injuries—are left with memory impairment and other cognitive defects and with personality changes. These may be the only lasting sequelae as detailed earlier. According to Jennett and Bond, these mental and personality changes are a greater handicap than focal neurologic ones as far as social adjustment is concerned. In open head wounds and penetrating brain injuries, Grafman and coworkers found that the magnitude of tissue loss and location of the lesion were the main factors affecting the outcome.
# Chunk 5932
As a general statement, children recover more completely than adults. Russell pointed out long ago that the severity of the injury as measured by the duration of traumatic amnesia is a useful prognostic index. Of patients with a period of amnesia lasting less than 1 h, 95 percent were back at work within 2 months; if the amnesia lasted longer than 24 h, only 80 percent had returned to work within 6 months. However, approximately 60 percent of the patients in his large series still had symptoms at the end of 2 months, and 40 percent at the end of 18 months. Of the most severely injured (those comatose for several days), many remained permanently disabled. However, the degree of recovery was often better than one had expected; the motor impairment, aphasia, and dementia tended to lessen and sometimes cleared. Improvement could continue over a period of 3 or more years. Obviously, multiple-organ injury and, particularly, hypotension in the hours immediately after injury, have major effects, not just on survival, but in some studies, with neurocognitive and behavioral outcome.
# Chunk 5933
Several studies indicate that persons who migrate from a high-risk to a low-risk zone carry with them at least part of the risk of their country of origin and genetic makeup, even though the disease may not become apparent until 20 years after migration. Such a pattern has been demonstrated in both South Africa and Israel. Dean determined that the prevalence of MS in native-born white South Africans was 3 to 11 per 100,000, whereas the rate in immigrants from northern Europe was approximately 50 per 100,000, only slightly less than among the nonimmigrating natives of those countries. The data of Dean and Kurtzke indicate further that in persons who had immigrated before the age of 15, the risk was similar to that of native-born South Africans; whereas in persons who had immigrated after that age, the risk was similar to that of their birthplace. Alter and colleagues found that in the descendants of European immigrants born in Israel, the risk of MS was low, similar to that of other native-born Israelis, whereas among recent immigrants the incidence in each national group approached that of the land of birth. Again, the critical age of immigration appeared to be about 15 years. These older epidemiologic studies and others have suggested that MS is associated with particular localities rather than with a particular ethnic group in those localities, and implicate environmental factors but not to the exclusion of genetic susceptibility. However, more current studies suggest the opposite; that genetic factors in a population predominate.
# Chunk 5934
McAlpine and coworkers (1972) analyzed the mode of onset of MS in 219 patients and found that in 20 percent the neurologic symptoms were fully developed in a matter of minutes, and, in a similar number, in a matter of hours. In approximately 30 percent the symptoms evolved more slowly, over a period of a day or several days, and in another 20 percent more slowly still, over several weeks to months. In the remaining 10 percent the symptoms had an insidious onset and slow, steady, or intermittent progression over months and years. The typical relapsing–remitting pattern of disease is more likely to appear in patients who are younger than 40 years of age. Certain paroxysmal symptoms and signs may occur in the established phase of the disease and discussed in the following text. The inflammatory process of MS affects no organ system other than the CNS.
# Chunk 5935
Optic Neuritis (See Chap. 12)

In approximately 25 percent of all MS patients (and possibly in a larger proportion of children), the initial manifestation is an episode of optic neuritis. It will be recalled that the optic nerve is in fact a tract of the brain, and involvement of the optic nerves is therefore consistent with the rule that lesions of MS are confined to the CNS. Characteristically, over a period of several days, there is partial or total loss of vision in one eye. Many patients, for a day or two before the visual loss, experience pain within the orbit, worsened by eye movement or palpation of the globe. Rarely, the visual loss is steadily progressive for several weeks, mimicking a compressive lesion or intrinsic tumor of the optic nerve (Ormerod and McDonald). Usually a scotoma involving the macular area and blind spot (cecocentral) can be demonstrated, but a wide variety of other field defects may occur, rarely even hemianopic involvement (sometimes homonymous). In some patients, both optic nerves are involved, either simultaneously or, more commonly, within a few days or weeks of one another, and at least 1 in 8 patients will have repeated attacks.
# Chunk 5936
As noted in Chap. 12, about half of patients with optic neuritis recover completely, and most of the remaining ones improve significantly, even those who present initially with profound visual loss (Slamovitis et al). Pain around the eye is short-lived and persistent pain should prompt an evaluation for local disease. In a cohort of 397 patients enrolled in the Optic Neuritis Treatment Trial and examined 5 years after the initial attack of optic neuritis, visual acuity had returned to 20/25 or better in 87 percent of patients and to 20/40 or better in 94 percent—even if there had been a recurrence of optic neuritis during the 5-year period. Moreover, the mode of treatment did not appear to influence the final visual outcome. Dyschromatopsia and impaired contrast sensitivity frequently persist, as does the Pulfrich effect, wherein an object such as a pendulum that is swinging perpendicular to the patient’s line of sight appears to move in a three-dimensional, circular path.
# Chunk 5937
Fewer than half the patients have evidence of an asymptomatic demyelinating lesion elsewhere in the nervous system or develop clinical evidence of dissemination within 5 years of the initial attack of acute myelitis (Ropper and Poskanzer). Not entirely in accord with our experience is the analysis of subgroups in a trial of interferon therapy conducted by Beck and colleagues (2002), in which the cumulative probability of developing MS after 2 years was similar after either optic neuritis or transverse myelitis. Our sense has been that acute transverse myelitis is somewhat less often an initial expression of MS than is optic neuritis.
# Chunk 5938
Paroxysmal attacks of neurologic deficit, lasting a few seconds or minutes and sometimes recurring many times daily, are a relatively infrequent but well-recognized feature of MS (see Mathews and also Osterman and
# Chunk 5939
The possible role of trauma in precipitating MS is more difficult to assess. McAlpine and Compston found that the incidence of trauma within a 3-month period preceding the onset of MS was slightly greater than in a control group of hospital patients. Furthermore, there appeared to be a relationship between the site of the injury and the site of initial symptoms, particularly in patients who developed symptoms within a week of injury. We do not find this evidence convincing, particularly when given as an explanation for a large number of attacks. Other forms of trauma (including lumbar puncture and general surgical procedures) that occur after the onset of the neurologic disorder have not been shown to have an adverse effect on the course of the illness. Matthews, who has extensive personal experience with survivors of penetrating head wounds, did not find a single instance of MS among them. One of the most meaningful prospective studies of the relation of physical injury to MS is that of Sibley and colleagues, who followed 170 MS patients and 134 controls for an average of 5 years, during which they recorded all (1,407) instances of trauma and measured their effects on exacerbation rate and progression of the disease. With the possible exception of a case or 2 of electrical injury, there was no correlation between traumatic episodes and exacerbations.
# Chunk 5940
Rarely, MS takes a rapidly progressive and highly malignant form; Marburg’s name has been attached to this variant. A combination of cerebral, brainstem, and spinal manifestations evolves over a few weeks, rendering the patient stuporous, comatose, or decerebrate with prominent cranial nerve and corticospinal abnormalities. Death may end the illness within a few weeks to months without any remission having occurred, or there may be partial recovery, as noted below. At autopsy the lesions are of macroscopic dimensions, in essence very large acute plaques of MS. The only difference from the usual form of MS is that many plaques are of the same age and the confluence of many perivenous zones of demyelination is more obvious. Two of our most striking examples of this rapidly fatal form were in a 6-year-old girl and a 16-year-old boy, both of whom died within 5 weeks of the onset of symptoms. Another was a 30-year-old man who lived 2 months. In none of them had there been a preceding exanthem or inoculation or any symptoms suggestive of demyelinating disease. Usually the CSF shows a cellular response but no oligoclonal bands. Some have made an astonishing recovery after several months, and a few have then remained well for 25 to 30 years. Others have relapsed, and the subsequent clinical course was typical of MS.
# Chunk 5941
A related but confusing entity, which had been the subject of much discussion in the earlier part of the last century, is that of diffuse sclerosis, or Schilder disease. In these exceptional cases, which are more frequent in childhood and adolescence than adulthood, the cerebrum is the site of diffuse and massive demyelination. Despite the undoubted occurrence of such cases, to call them “Schilder disease” is to refer to a clinical entity of ambiguous standing. The term diffuse sclerosis was first used by Strümpell (1879) to describe the hard texture of the freshly removed brain of an alcoholic; later the term was applied to widespread cerebral gliosis of whatever cause. In 1912, Schilder described an instance of what he considered to be “diffuse sclerosis.” The case was that of a 14-year-old girl with progressive mental deterioration and signs of increased intracranial pressure, terminating fatally after 19 weeks. Postmortem examination disclosed large, well-demarcated areas of demyelination in the white matter of both cerebral hemispheres, as well as a number of smaller demyelinating foci, resembling the common lesions of MS. Because of the similarities of the pathologic changes to those of MS (prominence of the inflammatory reaction and relative sparing of axons), Schilder called this disease encephalitis periaxialis diffusa, bringing it in line with encephalitis periaxialis scleroticans, a term that Marburg had used to describe a case of acute MS. Unfortunately, in subsequent publications, Schilder applied the same term to 2 other conditions of different types. One appears to have been a familial leukodystrophy (probably adrenoleukodystrophy) in a boy, and the other, quite unlike either of the first 2 cases, was suggestive of an infiltrative lymphoma. The last 2 reports seriously confused the subject, and for many years the terms Schilder disease and diffuse sclerosis were indiscriminately attached to quite different conditions.
# Chunk 5942
The duration of the disease before death is exceedingly variable. A small number of patients die within several months or years of the onset, but the average duration of the illness is in excess of 30 years. A 60-year appraisal of the resident population of Rochester, Minnesota, disclosed that 74 percent of patients with MS survived 25 years, as compared with 86 percent of the general population. At the end of 25 years, one-third of the surviving patients were still working and two-thirds were still ambulatory (Percy et al). Other statistical analyses have given a less optimistic prognosis; these were reviewed by Matthews. Patients with mild and quiescent forms of the disease are, of course, less likely to be included in such surveys. Although exceptional, one of our patients relapsed and developed massive brainstem demyelination and coma after 30 years (confirmed by postmortem examination) and cases of an aggressive myelopathy that appears after years are well known.
# Chunk 5943
Glucocorticoids Under the influence of corticosteroids, recovery from an acute attack, including an attack of optic neuritis, appears to be hastened. However, a substantial group of patients with acute exacerbations fails to respond; in others, benefit is not apparent for a month or longer after the course of treatment has been completed and is difficult to distinguish from the natural course of disease. Apart from a transient effect on the duration of a relapse, chronic administration of steroids generally does not have a significant effect on the ultimate course of this disease or that they prevent recurrences. Although this strategy should only apply to a minority of patients, it is of interest that a study of intravenous methylprednisolone administered at 1 g/d for 5 days per month over 5 years showed a reduction in disability as well as in the degree of brain atrophy and total volume of hypodense lesions on T1-weighted MRI (Zivadinov et al).
# Chunk 5944
The intravenous administration of massive doses of methylprednisolone (a bolus of 500 to 1,000 mg daily for 3 to 5 days) followed by high oral doses of prednisone (beginning with 60 to 80 mg daily and tapering to a lower dosage over a 12to 20-day period) is generally effective in shortening an acute or subacute exacerbation of MS or optic neuritis. Whether the tapering oral course is necessary is unclear. When it is impractical to administer parenteral methylprednisolone, one may substitute oral methylprednisolone (48 mg in a single daily dose for 1 week, followed by 24 mg daily for 1 week, and finally 12 mg daily for 1 week) or the equivalent amount of prednisone (Barnes et al).
# Chunk 5945
Treatment of optic neuritis (see Chap. 12) The Optic Neuritis Treatment Trial, reported by Beck and colleagues, cautioned against the use of oral prednisone in the treatment of acute optic neuritis (see also Lessell). In this study, it was found that the use of intravenous methylprednisolone followed by oral prednisone did, indeed, speed the recovery from visual loss, although at 6 months there was little difference in visual outcome between patients treated in this way and those treated with placebo. They reported that treatment with oral prednisone alone slightly increased the risk of new episodes of optic neuritis. In a subsequent randomized trial conducted by Sellebjerg and colleagues, it was found that methylprednisolone 500 mg orally for 5 days had a beneficial effect on visual function at 1 and 3 weeks. However, at 8 weeks, no effect could be shown (compared with the placebo-treated group), nor was there an effect on the subsequent relapse rate. The putative deleterious effects of oral glucocorticoids on relapse of optic neuritis have been disputed and most clinicians consider them equivalent to intravenous administration for this disorder.
# Chunk 5946
Interferon-beta Interferon and glatiramer were the first main disease-modifying therapies introduced for MS following ACTH and corticosteroids. These injectable drugs, which are still used in some cases, modestly alter the natural history relapsing-remitting MS. IFN-β-1b, a nonglycosylated bacterial cell product with an amino acid sequence identical to that of natural IFN-β, was the first of these agents to be tested (Arnason). Several trials showed that the subcutaneous injection of this agent every second day for up to 5 years decreases the frequency and severity of relapses by almost one-third and also the number of new or enlarging lesions (“lesion burden”) in serial MRIs. A large-scale trial (European Study Group, PRISMS Study Group) extended the observations with IFN-β-1b to patients with the secondarily progressive type of MS; progression of the disease was delayed for 9 to 12 months in a study period of 2 to 3 years. The treatment of relapsing–remitting MS with IFN-β-1a in a once weekly intramuscular regimen is similarly effective.
# Chunk 5947
One issue with the longer term administration of interferon is the development of antibodies to the drug. The rate of such antibody emergence increases with the frequency of use of interferon. After a period of years, 30 percent of patients demonstrate antibodies with daily administration, 18 percent with alternate-day use, and less than 5 percent with weekly use. More recent changes in the preparation of interferon have led to reported rates of only 2 percent with antibodies after 1 year of use. There is some evidence that the presence of these antidrug antibodies diminishes the effectiveness of interferon.
# Chunk 5948
The question of whether to institute disease modifying therapy with an interferon was addressed in the Controlled High Risk Subjects Avonex Multiple Sclerosis Prevention Study (CHAMPS) study, which examined the effect of interferon (weekly) in patients with a first episode of optic neuritis and at least 2 lesions on MRI that were compatible with MS. Over 3 years, there was a modest reduction in clinical progression or relapse from 37 percent to 28 percent; if further MRI lesions were used as evidence of clinical progression, the difference from placebo treatment was even greater.
# Chunk 5949
Glatiramer Copolymer I (glatiramer acetate), which was synthesized to mimic the actions of MBP, a putative autoantigen in MS, is given daily in subcutaneous doses of 20 mg. Antibodies do not develop to glatiramer, and this has been emphasized as a relative advantage of the drug. Patients receiving glatiramer acetate should be warned of a reaction consisting of flushing, chest tightness, dyspnea, palpitations, and severe anxiety. Injection site reactions occur with both classes of drugs but are rarely troublesome if the sites are rotated. Trials that combine interferon and glatiramer have not produced benefit over either agent alone (Lublin and colleagues).
# Chunk 5950
The advantages of this drug are once monthly intravenous treatment and a virtual lack of acute side effects. However, the appearance of cases of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML as discussed in Chap. 32) has led to a restriction on its use. Programs are in place to facilitate the early detection of PML since recovery may be possible if the drug is stopped promptly and removed by plasma exchange. However, the methods to detect the infection and to predict which patients will become symptomatic are imperfect. It can be stated that the absence of both JC virus in the urine and of serum antibodies to JC virus makes it very unlikely that PML will occur but there still may be rare cases. In those who have anti-JC virus antibodies, the risk is dependent on the duration of use of natalizumab (particularly if over 24 months) and the prior or concurrent use of other immunosuppressive medications. With both of these factors present, the risk of PML is approximately 11 per 1,000 patients (Bloomgren et al). Serum JC virus antibody ELISA testing is performed for all patients in whom treatment with natalizumab is being considered; periodic retesting is important to reduce false-negative results or detect seroconversion, but the optimal frequency of retesting is unknown.
# Chunk 5951
Fingolimod is a sphingosine-1 phosphate 1 (S1P1) receptor analogue that interferes with egress of mature lymphocytes from lymph nodes. Two large phase 3 clinical trials (FREEDOMS and TRANSFORMS) showed a significant effect on MRI lesion burden and relapse rate that is comparable or superior to injectable agents (Cohen and colleagues, 2010; Kappos and colleagues, 2006 and 2010). The approved 0.5 mg daily dose showed 54 percent reduction in relapse rate and 17 percent reduction in risk of disability progression in these 2 year trials. The systemic side effects of fingolimod likely relate to consequences of S1P1 inactivation in several nonneural tissues. Discontinuation of the drug is sometimes required because of extremes of bradycardia or atrioventricular block, macular edema, herpes infections, occurrence of melanoma, or elevations in liver function tests, the last of these, in approximately 10 percent of patients. Patients are monitored for bradyarrhythmias for 6 hours following the first dose, including an electrocardiogram before and after the observation period. Eye examinations to screen for macular edema should occur before and 3 months after initiation of the drug.
# Chunk 5952
The severe and disabling tremor that is brought out by the slightest movement of the limbs, if unilateral, can be managed surgically by ventrolateral thalamotomy or implanted stimulator of the type used for the treatment of Parkinson disease. Most surgical series report that about two-thirds of patients achieve a satisfactory reduction in their intention tremor (Critchley and Richardson; Geny et al). In the experience of others, the results have not been quite this reliable. In the series reported by Hooper and Whittle, only 3 of 10 MS patients who underwent thalamotomy for a severe tremor had sustained improvement. Hallett and colleagues have reported that severe postural tremor of this type can be improved by the administration of isoniazid (300 mg daily, increased by weekly increments of 300 mg to a dose of 1,200 mg daily) in combination with 100 mg of pyridoxine daily. How isoniazid produces its beneficial effects is not known, and careful monitoring of liver tests is required. Variable success may also be achieved with carbamazepine or clonazepam.
# Chunk 5953
This entity, the most fulminant form of demyelinating disease, almost certainly represents the severe end of the spectrum of ADEM. It affects mainly young adults and children. It is usually preceded by a respiratory infection of variable duration (1 to 14 days), sometimes caused by M. pneumoniae, but more often it follows a mundane infection or is of indeterminate cause. The neurologic symptoms appear abruptly, beginning with headache, fever, stiff neck, and confusion. These are followed in short order by signs of disease of one or both cerebral hemispheres and brainstem—focal seizures, hemiplegia or quadriplegia, pseudobulbar paralysis, and progressively deepening coma. Peripheral leukocytosis is usually present, sometimes reaching 30,000 cells/mm3, and the sedimentation rate is elevated. The CSF is often under increased pressure; cells vary in number from a few lymphocytes to a polymorphonuclear pleocytosis of up to 3,000 cells/mm3; red cells may be present in variable numbers; protein content is increased, but glucose values are normal. Diagnosis is greatly facilitated by CT scanning and MRI, which reveal bilateral but asymmetrical large, confluent, edematous lesions in the cerebral white matter with a myriad of punctate hemorrhages in gray and white matter (Fig. 35-5). The size of the lesions, their hemorrhagic character, and the extent of the surrounding edema distinguish them from the typical postinfectious ADEM. In many other ways they are similar, except for their severity. Many cases terminate fatally in 2 to 4 days, but in others, survival is longer. Patients with a similar clinical picture who are thought to have the same disease on the basis of brain biopsy examinations have recovered with almost no residual symptoms. In one of the fatal cases reported by Adams and colleagues, the illness evolved more slowly—over a period of 2 to 3 weeks—while another patient died with temporal lobe herniation within 12 h. A single recurrence of the disease after an interval of 2 years was observed in one of our patients.
# Chunk 5954
Two approaches to the neonatal metabolic disorders are possible—one, to screen every newborn, using a battery of biochemical tests of blood and urine, and the other, to undertake in the days following birth a detailed neurologic assessment that will detect the earliest signs of these diseases. Unfortunately, not all the biochemical tests have been simplified to the point where they can be adapted to a mass screening program, and many of the commonly used clinical tests at this age have yet to be validated as markers of disease. Moreover, many of the biochemical tests are costly, and practical issues, such as cost-effectiveness, insinuate themselves, to the distress of the pediatrician. The introduction of tandem mass spectrometry for the evaluation of blood and urine has allayed some of the latter concerns. The extent of screening varies across countries. In the U.S. screening includes several disorders relevant to neurologic development including the categories of endocrine (particularly hypothyroidism), amino acid, organic acid, fatty acid, mucopolysaccharide, and other disorders. A hearing screening test is also usually mandatory before an infant is discharged. These tests are organized and operated at the state level.
# Chunk 5955
The neuropathology has been studied in only a few cases. One patient of our colleague R.D. Adams, a 13.5-year-old boy affected in the neonatal period, was left in a state of mental retardation, with pale optic discs and spastic legs; the brain weight was 350 g below normal. There was a decreased amount of central white matter in the cerebral hemispheres and a depletion of neurons in the thalamic nuclei and cerebellum, with gliosis (Lott et al). Most importantly, in pyridoxine deficiency, the administration of 50 to 100 mg of vitamin B6 suppresses the seizure state, and daily doses of 40 mg permit normal development.
# Chunk 5956
Some patients with increased concentrations of serum phenylalanine in the neonatal period are unresponsive to measures that lower phenylalanine. They are usually found to have a defect in biopterin metabolism. The defect is usually the result of a mutation in tetrahydrobiopterin or BH4. If this condition is unrecognized and not treated promptly, it leads to seizures of both myoclonic and, later, grand mal types, combined with a poor level of responsiveness and generalized hypotonia. Swallowing difficulty is another prominent symptom. Within a few months, developmental delay becomes prominent. Unlike in PKU, phenylalanine hydroxylase enzyme levels are normal, but there is a lack of tetrahydrobiopterin, which is a cofactor of phenylalanine hydroxylase. Treatment consists of administration of tetrahydrobiopterin in a dosage of 7.5 mg/kg/d in combination with a low-phenylalanine diet. It is important to recognize this condition early in life by the measurement of urine pterins and to institute appropriate therapy before irreversible brain injury occurs. A later onset form with diurnally fluctuating dystonia has also been described but its nature is not certain.
# Chunk 5957
Infantile Gaucher Disease (Type II Neuronopathic Form, Glucocerebrosidase Deficiency, GBA Mutation)

This is an autosomal recessive disease without ethnic predominance, first described by Gaucher in 1882. The onset of the neuronopathic form is usually before 6 months and frequently before 3 months. The clinical course is more rapid than that of Tay-Sachs disease (most patients with infantile Gaucher disease do not survive beyond 1 year and 90 percent not beyond 2 years). Oculomotor apraxia and bilateral strabismus are early signs and are accompanied by rapid loss of head control, of ability to roll over and sit, and of purposeful movements of the limbs—along with apathy, irritability, frequent crying, and difficulty in sucking and swallowing. In some cases, progression is slower, with acquisition of single words by the first year, bilateral corticospinal signs (Babinski signs and hyperactive tendon reflexes), persistent retroflexion of the neck, and strabismus. Laryngeal stridor and trismus, diminished reaction to stimuli, smallness of the head, rare seizures, normal optic fundi, enlarged spleen and slightly enlarged liver, poor nutrition, yellowish skin and scleral pigmentation, osteoporosis, vertebral collapse and kyphoscoliosis, and sometimes lymphadenopathy complete the clinical picture. The CSF is normal; the EEG is abnormal, but nonspecifically so.
# Chunk 5958
This is probably an autosomal recessive disease without ethnic predominance. The infants appear abnormal at birth. They have dysmorphic facial features, like those of the mucopolysaccharidoses: depressed and wide nasal bridge, frontal bossing, hypertelorism, puffy eyelids, long upper lip, gingival and alveolar hypertrophy, macroglossia, and low-set ears. These features, with the bone changes mentioned below, account for the term pseudo-Hurler. Other indications of the disease are the onset of impaired awareness and reduced responsivity in the first days or weeks of life; lack of psychomotor development after 3 to 6 months; hypotonia, and later hypertonia with lively tendon reflexes and Babinski signs. Seizures are frequent. The head size is variable (microcephaly more often than macrocephaly). Loss of vision, coarse nystagmus and strabismus, macular cherry-red spots (in half the cases), flexion pseudocontractures of elbows and knees, kyphoscoliosis, and enlarged liver and sometimes enlarged spleen are the other important clinical findings. Radiographic abnormalities include subperiosteal bone formation, midshaft widening and demineralization of long bones, and hypoplasia and beaking of the thoracolumbar vertebrae. Vacuoles are seen in 10 to 80 percent of blood lymphocytes and foam cells in the urinary sediment.
# Chunk 5959
Globoid Cell Leukodystrophy (Krabbe Disease, Galactocerebrosidase Deficiency, GALC Mutation)

This is an autosomal recessive disease without ethnic predilection, first described by Krabbe, a Danish neurologist, in 1916. The onset is usually before the sixth month and often before the third month (10 percent after 1 year). Early manifestations are generalized rigidity, loss of head control, diminished alertness, frequent vomiting, irritability and bouts of inexplicable crying, and spasms induced by stimulation. With increasing muscular tone, opisthotonic recurvation of the neck and trunk develops. Later signs are adduction and extension of the legs, flexion of the arms, clenching of the fists, hyperactive tendon reflexes, and Babinski signs. Later still, the tendon reflexes are depressed or lost but Babinski signs remain, an indication that neuropathy is added to corticospinal damage. This finding, shared with some of the other leukodystrophies, is of diagnostic value. Blindness and optic atrophy supervene. Convulsions occur but are rare and difficult to distinguish from tonic spasms. Myoclonus in response to auditory stimuli is present in some cases. The head size is normal or, rarely, slightly increased. In the last stage of the disease, which may occur from one to several months after the onset, the child is blind and usually deaf, opisthotonic, irritable, and cachectic. Most patients die by the end of the first year and survival beyond 2 years is unusual, although a considerable number of cases of later onset have been reported (see below).
# Chunk 5960
Parenteral administration of cupric salts, usually in the form of copper histidine administered subcutaneously twice daily by the parents, restores the serum and hepatic copper and may allow normal development in a few children as noted above but it does not materially influence the neurologic symptoms if treatment is started later. However, even early treated cases showing limited neurodevelopment survive and show some neurologic advance, unlike the past experience in which few survived beyond 5 or 6 years.
# Chunk 5961
Diagnosis of Inherited Metabolic Diseases of Infancy

It will be recognized from the foregoing synopses that many of the neurologic manifestations of the inherited metabolic diseases of infancy are nonspecific and are common to most or all of the diseases in this group. In general, in the early stages of all these diseases, there is a loss of postural tone and a paucity of movement without paralysis or loss of reflexes; later there is spasticity with hyperreflexia and Babinski signs. Equally nonspecific are features such as irritability and prolonged crying; poor feeding, difficulty in swallowing, inanition, and retarded growth; failure of fixation of gaze and following movements of the eyes (often misinterpreted as blindness); and tonic spasms, clonic jerks, and focal and generalized seizures.
# Chunk 5962
The finding of high levels of serum phenylalanine (above 15 mg/dL) and of phenylpyruvic acid in the blood, CSF, and urine is diagnostic of PKU. The level is normal at birth and rises only after the first few days. But screening by the Guthrie (ferric chloride) test will reliably identify the patient at risk. The addition of 3 to 5 drops of 10 percent ferric chloride to 1 mL of urine is a simple and informative test that was used at the neonates or child’s bedside in the past. It yields an emerald-green color that reaches peak intensity in 3 to 4 min and fades in 20 to 40 min. In contrast, the green-brown color in the urine of patients with histidinemia is permanent. In maple syrup urine disease, the ferric chloride test gives a navy-blue color; propionic and methylmalonic acidemia and either ketones or salicylates in the urine yield a purple color.
# Chunk 5963
Genetic testing is now widely available but the diagnostic laboratory findings, in addition to the MRI and histologic changes, are the elevated CSF protein (75 to 250 mg/dL) and a marked increase in sulfatide in urine and an absence of arylsulfatase A in white blood cells, in serum, and in cultured fibroblasts. Assays of arylsulfatase A activity in cultured fibroblasts and amniocytes permit the identification of carriers and prenatal diagnosis of the disease but a pseudodeficiency of the enzyme is known (the Pd allelic variant). In this condition, measured enzyme activity is 10 percent of normal, but no clinical manifestations result.
# Chunk 5964
In type 2 or so-called juvenile GM1 gangliosidosis, the onset is between 12 and 24 months, with survival for 3 to 10 years. The first sign is usually difficulty in walking, with frequent falls, followed by awkwardness of arm movements, loss of speech, severe mental regression, gradual development of spastic quadriparesis and pseudobulbar palsy (dysarthria, dysphagia, drooling), and seizures. Retinal changes are variable—usually they are absent—but macular red spots may be seen at the age of 10 to 12 years; vision is usually retained, but strabiusmus is common. There is a facial dysmorphism resembling that of the Hurler syndrome, and the liver and spleen are enlarged. Important laboratory findings are hypoplasia of the thoracolumbar vertebral bodies, mild hypoplasia of the acetabula, and the presence in the bone marrow of histiocytes with clear vacuoles or wrinkled cytoplasm. As noted in the discussion of Tay-Sachs disease, leukocytes and cultured skin fibroblasts show a deficiency or absence of beta-galactosidase activity. GM1 ganglioside accumulates in the cerebral neurons.
# Chunk 5965
In the late infantile-juvenile Jansky-Bielschowsky type (NCL 2, TPP1 mutation), the onset of symptoms is between 2 and 4 years, after normal or slightly slow earlier development, with survival to 4 to 8 years of age. Usually the first neurologic manifestations are seizures (petit mal or grand mal) and myoclonic jerks evoked by proprioceptive and other sensory stimuli, including voluntary movement and emotional excitement. Incoordination, tremor, ataxia, and spastic weakness with lively tendon reflexes and Babinski signs, deterioration of mental faculties, and dysarthria proceed to dementia and eventually to mutism. In patients with relatively late onset, a progressive dementia is the cardinal manifestation. Visual failure may occur early in some cases because of retinal degeneration (of rods and cones) with pigmentary deposits, but in others vision is normal. The electroretinogram becomes isoelectric if vision is affected. Abnormal inclusions (translucent vacuoles) are seen in 10 to 30 percent of circulating lymphocytes, and azurophilic granules in neutrophils. High-voltage EEG spikes are induced by photic stimuli. Only in early-onset cases is there microcephaly. It is in this type of Batten disease that an intraventricularly administered enzyme replacement treatment (cerolipinase alpha) by Schulz and coworkers has met with provocative success in reducing the degree and rapidity of cognitive decline compared to historical controls, at the price of serious adverse events, many from the intraventricular catheter.
# Chunk 5966
Hunter Disease (MPS II, IDS Mutation)

Unlike the Hurler and other types, the Hunter form (MPS II) is transmitted as an X-linked trait. The Hurler and Hunter syndromes are clinically alike except that the Hunter form is milder: developmental delay is less severe than in the Hurler type, deafness is less common, and corneal clouding is usually absent. Probably there are two forms of the syndrome—a more severe one, in which the patients do not survive beyond their midteens, and a less severe form with relatively normal intelligence and survival to middle age. Excessive amounts of dermatan and heparan sulfate are excreted in the urine. The basic abnormality is a deficiency of iduronate sulfatase. The enzyme replacement therapy, idursulfase, administered weekly, intravenously may delay some of the features of the disorder.
# Chunk 5967
Sanfilippo Disease (MPS III, Several Genes Implicated)

This form, or MPS III, expresses itself clinically between 2 and 3 years of age, with progressive intellectual deterioration. The patients are of short stature, but in other respects the physical changes are fewer and less severe than in the Hunter and Hurler syndromes. Four types of Sanfilippo disease, designated A, B, C, and D, are distinguished on the basis of their enzymatic defects. All subtypes are phenotypically similar, and all of them may excrete excessive amounts of heparan sulfate in the urine.
# Chunk 5968
One of the most difficult diagnostic problems in this age period is distinguishing neuroaxonal dystrophy, metachromatic leukodystrophy, subacute necrotizing encephalomyelopathy (Leigh disease), some cases of lipofuscinosis, and the late form of GM1 gangliosidosis. In none of these diseases is the clinical picture entirely stereotyped. The clinician is aided in identifying neuroaxonal dystrophy by noting an onset, at 1 to 2 years of age, of severe hypotonia with retained reflexes and Babinski signs, early visual involvement without retinal changes, lack of seizures, normal CSF, physiologic evidence of denervation of muscles, fast-frequency EEG, normal CT, but the definitive diagnosis is established by the genetic signature of each. Metachromatic leukodystrophy can be excluded if the CSF protein is normal and if nerve conduction velocities are normal. Similar criteria enable one to rule out GM1 gangliosidosis. Mitochondrial disorders (Leigh disease) may begin at the same age; in many cases lactic acidosis and pyruvate decarboxylase defect will corroborate the diagnosis. Mitochondrial genetic testing allows definitive diagnosis in most cases, as described in a later section. Also in Leigh disease, imaging of the brain may disclose hypodense lesions in the basal ganglia and brainstem, in contrast to the normal CT in neuroaxonal dystrophy. In metachromatic leukodystrophy, the cerebral white matter shows a diffusely decreased attenuation and the MR images are striking. Lipofuscinosis cannot always be diagnosed accurately; curvilinear bodies in nerve twigs and in the endothelial cells in skin biopsies and the gene mutations are the most informative laboratory tests.
# Chunk 5969
The initial symptoms, occurring between 6 and 12 years (range: 2 to 20 years), are weakness of the limbs with areflexia and ataxia of sensory (tabetic) type, to which a cerebellar component is added later (the first two aspects relating to a peripheral neuropathy are discussed in
# Chunk 5970
No biochemical abnormalities of the blood, urine, or CSF have been detected. The genetics have been mentioned and testing can be used to affirm the diagnosis. Skin biopsy, showing Lafora bodies, may be helpful ion diagnosis, especially if none of the known mutations is detected. The EEG shows diffuse slow waves and spikes as well as bursts of focal or multifocal discharges. Altered hepatocytes with homogeneous PAS-positive bodies that displace the nuclei have been observed in both the presymptomatic and symptomatic stages of the disease. These inclusions have been seen in skin and liver biopsies, even though liver function tests were normal. Neuropathologic examinations have shown a slight loss of granule and Purkinje cells and loss of neurons in the dentate nuclei, inner segment of globus pallidus, and cerebral cortex in addition to the Lafora bodies. The latter may also be seen in the retina, cerebral cortex, myocardium, and striated muscles. Antiepileptic drugs, especially methsuximide and valproic acid, help in the control of the seizures but have no effect on the basic process.
# Chunk 5971
Juvenile Ceroid Lipofuscinosis (Batten Disease,

As stated earlier, this is one of the most variable forms of the lipidoses. The salient clinical features of the later-onset types are severe myoclonus, seizures, and visual loss. In the juvenile type, the first lesions are seen in the maculae; they appear as yellow-gray areas of degeneration and stand in contrast to the cherry-red spot and the encircling white ring of Tay-Sachs disease. At first, the particles of retinal pigment are fine and dust-like; later they aggregate to resemble more the bone-corpuscular shapes of retinitis pigmentosa. The liver and spleen are not enlarged and there are no osseous changes. The usual development of these and other manifestations of the disease were outlined by Sjögren, who studied a large number of the late infantile and juvenile types of cases in Sweden. He divided the illness into stages, the first of which was visual impairment, followed approximately sequentially by generalized seizures and myoclonus, often with irritability, poor control of emotions, and stuttering, jerky speech at 2 years, then gradual intellectual deterioration to which were added cerebellar ataxia and intention tremor, in this respect coming to resemble Wilson disease. Finally, the patient lies curled up in bed, blind and speechless, with strong extensor plantar reflexes, occasionally adopting dystonic postures. Life usually ends in 10 to 15 years.
# Chunk 5972
The onset of neurologic symptoms is usually in the second, and less often in the third, decade, but rarely beyond that time. Half of patients are symptomatic by age 15 years, but exceptional cases, including two under our care, had their first clinical manifestations as late as their midfifties. In all instances the initial event is a deposition of copper in the liver, leading to an acute or chronic hepatopathy and eventually to multilobular cirrhosis and splenomegaly (Scheinberg and Sternlieb). In childhood, the liver disorder often takes the form of attacks of jaundice, unexplained hepatosplenomegaly, or hypersplenism with thrombocytopenia and bleeding. Rarely is there clear evidence of cirrhosis alone. The hepatic abnormalities may be asymptomatic (except for elevated serum transaminases), in which case the initial clinical presentation is neurologic. In some instances, a hemolytic anemia or, less often, renal tubular acidosis may first draw attention to the disease.
# Chunk 5973
Laboratory findings Although the diagnosis is currently established by sequencing the ATP7B gene for specific mutations, in both the typical and variant forms of the disease, the finding of a low serum ceruloplasmin level (less than 20 mg/dL in 80 to 90 percent of patients), low serum copper (3 to 10 mM/L; normal 11 to 24 mM/L), and increased urinary copper excretion (more than 100 mg Cu/24 h) serve to make the diagnosis likely. Because 90 percent of copper is carried by ceruloplasmin and the latter is generally reduced in Wilson disease, serum copper values alone may be misleadingly normal. In the past, the reliable findings early in the course of high copper content in a biopsy of liver tissue (more than 200 µg Cu/g dry weight) and a failure to incorporate labeled 64Cu into ceruloplasmin were used. The latter test, however, fails to dependably differentiate asymptomatic carriers from affected individuals. Measurement of increased cupruresis after the administration of penicillamine was also not been shown to be more sensitive than an unenhanced 24-h urine collection for copper.
# Chunk 5974
Persistent aminoaciduria, reflecting a renal tubular abnormality, is present in most but not all patients. Liver function tests are usually abnormal; some patients are jaundiced and other signs of liver failure may appear late in the illness. In these patients, the serum ammonia may be elevated and the symptomatology may worsen with increases in dietary protein. The cirrhosis is not always evident in a liver biopsy (some regenerative nodules are large, and the biopsy may be taken from one of them). On the other hand, the diagnosis in children may be revealed when a liver biopsy is taken for the evaluation of cirrhosis.
# Chunk 5975
Treatment Ideally, treatment should be started before the appearance of neurologic signs; if this can be implemented, neurologic deterioration can be prevented to a large extent. Treatment consists of (1) reduction of dietary copper to less than 1 mg/d, which can usually be accomplished by avoidance of copper-rich foods (liver, mushrooms, cocoa, chocolate, nuts, and shellfish), and (2) administration of the copper chelating agent d-penicillamine (1 to 3 g/d) by mouth, in divided doses. Pyridoxine 25 mg/d should be added in order to prevent anemia. The use of d- penicillamine is associated with a number of problems. Sensitivity reactions to the drug (rash, arthralgia, fever, leukopenia) develop in 20 percent of patients and require a temporary reduction of dosage or a course of prednisone to bring them under control. Reinstitution of drug therapy should then be undertaken, using low dosages (250 mg daily) and, later, small, widely spaced increases. If the patient is still sensitive to d-penicillamine or if severe reactions (lupus-like or nephrotic syndromes or myasthenia gravis) occur, the drug should be discontinued and another chelating agent, triethylene tetramine (trientine) or ammonium tetrathiomolybdate may be substituted. Zinc, which blocks the intestinal absorption of copper, is also a suitable treatment, but ineffective alone. It is given as zinc acetate, 100 to 150 mg daily in 3 to 4 divided doses at least 1 h before meals (Hoogenraad et al). The appropriate drug must then be continued for the patient’s lifetime. Some women report improvement in neurologic symptoms during pregnancy, although there is no apparent change in copper metabolism during this time. In most patients, neurologic signs improve in response to decoppering agents. The Kayser-Fleischer rings disappear and liver function tests may return to normal, although the abnormalities of copper metabolism remain unchanged. In moderately severe and advanced cases, clinical improvement may not begin for several months despite full doses of d-penicillamine, and it is important to resist discontinuing the drug during this latent period.
# Chunk 5976
This disease, recently renamed because of ignoble associations of the eponymous Hallervorden and Spatz, is also known as pigmentary degeneration of the globus pallidus. It is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait and is caused by, in all classic cases, a defect in the gene encoding pantothenate kinase 2 (PANK2), usually in the form of a missense mutation. The onset of symptoms is in late childhood or early adolescence with slow progression over a period of 10 or more years. The early signs are highly variable but are predominantly motor, both corticospinal (spasticity, hyperreflexia, Babinski signs) and extrapyramidal (rigidity, dystonia, and choreoathetosis). General deterioration of intellect is conjoined. In individual cases, ataxia and myoclonus have appeared at some phase of the illness. The spasticity and rigidity are most prominent in the legs, but in some instances they begin in the bulbar muscles, interfering with speech and swallowing, as happens in Wilson disease. We have observed patients who, over a period of years, exhibited only dystonia of the tongue, blepharospasm, or arching of the back. The relationship of this restricted form to the complete syndrome remains unsettled. Eventually, the patient becomes almost completely inarticulate and unable to walk or use his or her arms. Hayflick and colleagues found that only one-third of patients with atypical forms of the disease have mutations of the PANK2 gene. Moreover, variant cases tended not to show the characteristic changes on MRI described below.
# Chunk 5977
This rare metabolic disease is inherited as an X-linked recessive trait. Although it carries the names of Lesch and Nyhan (see their 1964 description), the occurrence of uricemia in association with spasticity and choreoathetosis in early childhood had been described earlier by Cateland Schmidt. Essentially, it is a hereditary choreoathetosis with self-mutilation and hyperuricemia. The affected children appear normal at birth and usually develop on schedule up to 3 to 6 months of age. Maturational delay then sets in, initially with hypotonia that later gives way to hypertonia. Also, the patient’s behavior becomes abnormal, with aggressiveness and compulsive actions. The uncontrollable self-mutilation, mainly of the lips, occurs early (during the second and third year), and spasticity, choreoathetosis, and tremor come later. Most of the children learn to walk. Speech is delayed, and once attained, it is dysarthric and remains so throughout life. Mental retardation is moderately severe. In patients more than 10 years of age, gouty tophi appear on the ears, and there is increasing risk from gouty nephropathy. The serum levels of uric acid are in the range of 7 to 10 mg/dL.
# Chunk 5978
Other laboratory findings are low serum sodium and chloride levels and elevated potassium levels reflecting the atrophy of the adrenal glands. The latter results in reduced excretion of corticosteroids, low serum cortisol levels, and lack of rise in 17-hydroxyketosteroids after adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) stimulation. The CSF protein may be elevated. As a research tool, Öz and colleagues have shown that magnetic resonance spectroscopy that measures the concentrations of several metabolites can be used as a guide to the progression of the disease and to gauge the effects of new therapies as they are introduced.
# Chunk 5979
This form of leukodystrophy was described in relation to the inherited metabolic disorders of late infancy and early childhood in an earlier section. We mention it here to emphasize that the disease may have its onset at almost any age. Juvenile forms may begin between 4 and 12 years of age and adult forms between the midteens and the seventh decade of life. The mutations of the aryl sulfatase gene giving rise to these various forms are described in the earlier section on metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD). Some of the sporadic cases reported in the adult probably were examples of cerebral multiple sclerosis, but we have seen, as have others, cases of MLD appearing as late as middle adult life. In almost all cases, the clinical picture, like those described by Turpin and Baumann, was one of slowly evolving intellectual decline or behavioral abnormality, followed by spastic weakness, hyperreflexia, Babinski signs, and stiff, short-stepped gait, with or without a polyneuropathy. Without manifest neurologic signs, misdiagnosis of psychiatric disease is common. As the disease progresses over a period of 3 to 5 years there may be a loss of vision and speech, then of hearing, and finally a state of virtual decerebration.
# Chunk 5980
This rare disease is transmitted in an autosomal recessive pattern as a result of mutation in CYP27A, which codes for a hydroxylase involved in the metabolic pathway for cholesterol and resulting in an excess of cholestanol. It usually begins in late childhood, with cataracts and xanthomas of tendon sheaths and lungs. As it progresses, difficulty in learning, impairment of retentive memory, and deficits in attention and visuospatial perception (the earliest neurologic manifestations) give way to dementia, ataxic or ataxic-spastic gait, dysarthria and dysphagia, and polyneuropathy. In the late stages (after 5 to 15 years), the patient becomes bedfast and helpless; death occurs at 20 to 30 years of age. In other cases, the clinical course is much more benign. Neuropathologic examination shows masses of crystalline cholesterol in the brainstem and cerebellum and sometimes in the spinal cord, with symmetrical destruction of myelin in the involved areas. The white matter lesions are visible by CT and MRI.
# Chunk 5981
Homocysteine is elevated in the blood and CSF, and homocystine in the urine. This is because of an inherited cystathionine synthase deficiency that results in an inadequacy of cystathionine formation, a substance essential to many tissues including the brain. This may be the explanation of the developmental delay. Plasma methionine levels are also elevated. The infarcts in the brain are clearly related to thrombotic and embolic arterial occlusions. The administration of large doses (50 to 500 mg) of pyridoxine (a cystathionine synthase coenzyme), folate 5 mg daily and cobalamin (vitamin B12) 1,000 µg daily, reduces the excretion of homocystine. If vascular lesions have occurred, anticoagulants probably prevent further occlusions.
# Chunk 5982
This disorder was discussed briefly with the neonatal metabolic disorders. The occurrence of stroke as a complication of this disorder was placed on record by our colleagues Shih et al (1977). A child 4.5 years of age, whose development had been retarded since birth (seizures and opisthotonos had been present), became hemiplegic. Another unrelated child, supposedly normal until 2 years of age, entered the hospital with fever, confusion, generalized seizures, right hemiplegia, and aphasia (infantile hemiplegia); subluxation of the lenses (upward) was discovered later. There was an increased level of sulfite and thiosulfate and an abnormal amino acid, S-sulfocysteine, in the blood. One child appeared to respond to a low-sulfur–amino-acid diet.
# Chunk 5983
In the late encephalopathic forms of the metabolic and mitochondrial diseases, the diagnosis is usually made only after symptoms have been present for months or years, the disease having been mistaken for some other condition, particularly depression or a degenerative dementia. Even a manifest psychosis may have occurred in relation to some of these disorders, but such occurrences are admittedly rare. For example, one of our patients with metachromatic leukodystrophy, a 30-year-old man, began failing in college years and was later unsuccessful in holding a job because of carelessness and mistakes in his work and indifference to criticism, irritability, and stubbornness (clearly traceable to a mild dementia). Only when Babinski signs and loss of tendon reflexes in the legs were detected was the correct diagnosis entertained for the first time. By then he had been ill for nearly 10 years. Bosch and Hart described a patient with the onset of dementia at 62 years of age and drew attention to 27 other similar cases of adult-onset metachromatic leukoencephalopathy (see also the 7 cases reported by Turpin and Baumann). Overt signs of neuropathy are usually lacking in these adult-onset cases, but EMG and sural nerve biopsy will disclose the characteristic abnormalities.
# Chunk 5984
The mildest form of muscle disorder caused by mitochondrial disease is a benign and relatively static proximal weakness that tends to be more severe in the arms. Exercise intolerance alone is reported by more than half of these patients. There are adult-onset cases, but careful questioning usually reveals lifelong symptoms (weakness, poor endurance, discomfort, exertional dyspnea, and tachycardia), which may be so slight and slowly progressive that the patient leads a relatively normal life for decades. Less-frequent patterns of muscle disease include a fascioscapulohumeral or limb-girdle pattern of weakness as well as occasional episodes of exertional myoglobinuria. Some patients develop PEO several years after the limb weakness becomes evident. Several mutations are associated with a pure or predominant myopathic syndrome, the most common one being located at position 3250 of the mitochondrial genome. Rare variants, such as combined skeletal weakness and cardiomyopathy, are referable to other loci.
# Chunk 5985
Figure 36-2. Krabbe disease. Axial T2-weighted MRI of a 6-month old with difficulty feeding, irritability, upper extremity hypertonia and lower extremity hypotonia, which began at 3 months. Laboratory testing confirmed low levels of leukocyte galactocerebrosidase activity. There is abnormal hyperintensity of the cerebral peduncles (corticospinal tract atrophy) as well as enlargement of the prechiasmatic optic nerves. Thalamic hypointensity, not shown here, is a common finding as well. (Image courtesy of Drs. Edward Yang and Sanjay Prabhu.)
# Chunk 5986
Figure 36-9. Idiopathic basal ganglionic and cerebellar calcification discovered in a 54-year-old woman with a slowly progressive rigid Parkinson syndrome.
# Chunk 5987
3. Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome. Autosomal recessive inheritance with microcephaly, broad nasal tip and anteverted nares, wide-set eyes, epicanthal folds, ptosis, small chin, low-set ears, enlarged alveolar maxillary ridge, cutaneous syndactyly, hypospadias in boys, short stature, subnormal neonatal activity, and normal amino acids and serum immunoglobulins. Older survivors are bereft of language and are paraparetic, with increased reflexes and Babinski signs. The hips are usually dislocated. The responsible mutation is in DHCR7. The brain is small but has not been fully examined. Two of our patients were sibling girls.
# Chunk 5988
In the case of meningomyelocele, the child is born with a large externalized lumbosacral sac covered by delicate, weeping skin. The defect may have ruptured in utero or during birth, but more often the covering is intact. There is severe dysfunction of the cauda equina roots or conus medullaris contained in the sac. Stroking of the sac may elicit involuntary movements of the legs. As a rule, the legs are motionless, urine dribbles, keeping the patient constantly wet, there is no response to pinprick over the lumbosacral dermatomal zones, and the tendon reflexes are absent. In contrast, craniocervical structures are normal unless a Chiari malformation is associated, as it often is (see further on). Differences are noted in the neurologic picture depending on the level of the lesion. If the lesion is entirely sacral, bladder and bowel sphincters are affected but legs escape; if lower lumbar and sacral, the buttocks, legs, and feet are more impaired than hip flexors and quadriceps; if upper lumbar, the feet and legs are sometimes spared and ankle reflexes retained, and there may be Babinski signs. The two common complications of these severe spinal defects are meningitis and progressive hydrocephalus from a Chiari malformation (see below). The subject of spina bifida and neural tube defects was reviewed by Botto and colleagues and by Mitchell and coworkers.
# Chunk 5989
Familiarity with the condition permits its recognition at birth, but the somatic appearance becomes more obvious with advancing age. The round head, open mouth, stubby hands, slanting palpebral fissures, and short stature impart an unmistakable appearance. The ears are low-set and oval, with small lobules. The palpebral fissures slant slightly upward and outward owing to the presence of medial epicanthal folds that partly cover the inner canthi (hence the old term mongolism, considered pejorative and not in use). The bridge of the nose is poorly developed and the face is flattened (hypoplasia of the maxillae). The tongue is usually enlarged, heavily fissured, and protruded. Gray-white specks of depigmentation are seen in the irides (Brushfield spots). The little fingers are often short (hypoplastic middle phalanx) and incurved (clinodactyly). The fontanels are patent and slow to close. The hands are broad, with a single transverse (simian) palmar crease and other characteristic dermal markings. Lenticular opacities and congenital heart lesions (septal and other defects), as well as gastrointestinal abnormalities (stenosis of duodenum), are frequent. The patient with Down syndrome is slightly below average size at birth and is characteristically of short stature at later periods of life. The height attained in adult life seldom exceeds that of a 10-year-old child.
# Chunk 5990
Infantile hemiplegia and quadriplegia Hemiplegia is a common condition of infancy and early childhood. The functional difference between the two sides may be noticed soon after birth, but more often it is not perceived by the mother until after the first 4 to 6 months of life. In a second group, the child is in excellent health for a year or longer before the abrupt onset of hemiplegia (see below). In hemiplegia that dates from earliest infancy—that is, congenital hemiplegia—the parents first notice that movements of prehension and exploration are carried out with only one arm. A manifest hand preference at an early age should always raise the suspicion of a unilateral motor defect. The affection of the leg is usually recognized later, that is, during the first attempts to stand and walk. Sitting and walking are usually delayed by a few months. In the older child, there is evident hyperactivity of tendon reflexes and usually a Babinski sign. The arm is held flexed, adducted, and pronated, and the foot assumes an equinovarus posture. Sensory and visual field defects can be detected in some patients. Cognitive slowing may be associated with infantile hemiplegia but is less common and lesser in degree than with cerebral diplegia. There may also be speech delay, regardless of the side of the lesion; when this is present, there is usually developmental delay and bilaterality of motor abnormality. Convulsions occur in 35 to 50 percent of children with congenital hemiplegia, and these may persist throughout life. They may be generalized but are frequently unilateral and limited to the hemiplegic side (or the contralateral side if the hemiplegia is severe). After a series of seizures, the weakness on the affected side will be increased for several hours or longer (Todd paralysis). Gastaut and associates have described a hemiconvulsive–hemiplegic syndrome in which progressive paralysis and cerebral atrophy are attributed to the convulsions. As months and years pass, the osseous and muscular growth of the hemiplegic limbs is impeded, leading to an obvious hemiatrophy of the body.
# Chunk 5991
Early infection of the fetus may result in a malformation of the brain; later, there is only inflammatory necrosis from encephalitis in parts of the normally formed brain. Disseminated inflammatory foci have been observed in the cerebrum, brainstem, and retinae. Here there were aggregates of lymphocytes, mononuclear cells, and plasma cells. The mononuclear histiocytes (microglia cells) contain inclusion bodies; some astrocytes are similarly affected. Granulomas form and later calcify, particularly in the periventricular regions. Often there is hydrocephalus. In the low-birth-weight or full-term infant, the clinical picture is one of jaundice, petechiae, hematemesis, melena, direct hyperbilirubinemia, thrombocytopenia, hepatosplenomegaly, microcephaly, mental defect, and convulsions. Cells in the urine may show cytomegalic changes. There is a pleocytosis and an increased protein in the CSF.
# Chunk 5992
It is estimated that HIV infection and AIDS occur in 15 to 30 percent of infants born to HIV-seropositive mothers (see Prober and Gerson). Infected infants present special difficulties in diagnosis, and the infection runs a more accelerated course in them than in adults. In the perinatal period, infected and noninfected infants can only rarely be distinguished clinically, and laboratory diagnosis is hampered by the presence of maternally derived antibody to HIV. The initial clinical signs usually appear within a few months after birth; practically all infected infants become ill before their first birthday, and very few are asymptomatic beyond 3 years of age. Early signs consist of lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, hepatomegaly, failure to thrive, oral candidiasis, and parotitis. In the European Collaborative Study, comprising 600 children born to HIV-infected mothers, 83 percent of infected children showed laboratory or clinical features of HIV infection by 6 months of age. By 12 months, 26 percent had clinical symptoms of AIDS and 17 percent had died of HIV-related diseases. Once AIDS is established in children, it does not differ materially from the syndrome in adults as described in Chap. 32.
# Chunk 5993
It came as somewhat of a surprise that an outbreak occurred in Micronesia and French Polynesia and subsequently in parts of South America, particularly Brazil, and in parts of Africa several years ago and that offspring of infected mothers had severe microcephaly. There is viral transmission from infected mother to child and an estimated one-third of infants are affected by microcephaly. Viral genome is found in infant brains and the brain is extremely small with reduced gyration in the few autopsy studies available (Mlakar and colleagues). An association with Guillain-Barré syndrome has been established in adults.
# Chunk 5994
One principle that emerges is that the form taken by seizures in early life is in part age-linked. Neonatal seizures are predominantly partial or focal; infantile seizures take the form of myoclonic flexor (sometimes extensor) spasms; and the various forms of petit mal are essentially diseases of childhood (4 to 13 years). The motor phenomena of epilepsy in young children are often termed myoclonic, but this should not be confused with other, later-occurring epilepsies that are endowed with the same name. Furthermore, certain epileptic states tend to occur only during certain epochs of life—one type of febrile seizure from 6 months to 6 years, generalized or temporal spike-wave activity with benign motor and complex partial seizures from 6 to 16 years, and juvenile myoclonic epilepsy in the midand late-adolescent years. In general, idiopathic epilepsy, so called because the cause cannot be determined, is predominantly a pediatric neurologic problem. This is not to say that seizures of unknown cause do not occur for the first time in adult life but rather that the onset of such seizures is far more frequent in childhood and tends to diminish once adulthood is reached.
# Chunk 5995
It is not known whether there is a characteristic brain pathology, but one 35-year-old patient examined by Golden and associates showed no cerebral abnormalities except for Alzheimer changes, mainly plaque formation in the entorhinal cortex and amygdala. The laboratory diagnosis can be established by the use of ELN-specific probes or other techniques that show only one allele of the gene. A most interesting related finding by Somerville and colleagues is that duplication at the same site on chromosome 7 implicated in Williams syndrome can cause a delay in the acquisition of expressive speech. The reader is referred to an extremely thorough clinical and genetic review of the syndrome by Pober.
# Chunk 5996
Golden JA, Nielsen GP, Pober BR, et al: The neuropathology of Williams syndrome: Report of a 35-year-old man with presenile beta/A4 amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles. Arch Neurol 52:209, 1995.
# Chunk 5997
For research purposes and to establish certain inclusive and exclusive criteria for the diagnosis of Alzheimer disease, a working group of the National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke (NINCDS) and the Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Diseases Association (ADRDA) in the past proposed the following criteria: (1) dementia defined by clinical examination, the Mini-Mental Scale, the Blessed Dementia Scale, or similar mental status examination—currently the Alzheimer Disease Assessment Scale (ADAS, which has 2 components, 1 for cognition, ADAS-cog and the other for activities of daily living, ADAS-ADL) is often used; (2) patient older than age 40 years; (3) deficits in 2 or more areas of cognition and progressive worsening of memory and other cognitive functions, such as language, perception, and motor skills (praxis); (4) absence of disturbed consciousness; and (5) exclusion of other brain diseases (McKhann et al, 1984; Tierney et al, 1988). These criteria have essentially been reaffirmed by more recent consensus panels (see McKhann et al, 2011). Using these measures, the correct diagnosis is achieved in more than 85 percent of patients, but this is not surprising given that Alzheimer disease is overwhelmingly the most common cause of adult dementia. Most cases are identifiable without resorting to restrictive lists such as these, especially if the patient is observed serially over a period of months or years. There is strong interest in the addition of biomarkers such as positron emission tomography (PET) ligand for amyloid and tau/amyloid ratio in CSF to the diagnostic criteria for the disease but the diagnosis remains predominantly a clinical one, aided by imaging and other tests.
# Chunk 5998
Experienced neuropathologists recognize a form of Alzheimer disease, particularly in older patients (beyond 75 years of age), in which there are senile plaques but few or no neuronal tangles (about 20 percent of 150 cases reported by Joachim et al). Increasingly, other pathologic changes are being appreciated in Alzheimer cases with fewer plaques and tangles than anticipated for the degree of dementia; Lewy bodies in particular are found by sophisticated techniques. Another problem for the neuropathologist is to distinguish between the normal-aged brain and that of Alzheimer disease. This accords with the difficulty in understanding the role of aging in this disease, as mentioned earlier. It is not unusual to find a scattering of senile plaques in individuals who were ostensibly mentally normal during life. Anderson and Hubbard studied 27 demented individuals aged 64 to 92 years and 20 age-matched nondemented controls. In the former, 3 to 38 percent of the hippocampal neurons contained neurofibrillary tangles; in all but 2 of the controls, the number of hippocampal neurons with tangles fell below 2.5 percent. Moreover, an increased number of tangles in the aged are associated with mild cognitive impairment and a higher likelihood of progression to Alzheimer disease.
# Chunk 5999
It has been clear that an excess or aberrant amyloid alone is an incomplete explanation for the disease. Certain sequence variants in normal genes confer an increased risk of the disease. The one first discovered was Apo E, a regulator of lipid metabolism that has an affinity for Aβ in Alzheimer plaques, has been found to modify the risk of acquiring Alzheimer disease. Of the several isoforms of Apo E, the presence of E4 (and its corresponding allele e4 on chromosome 19) is associated with a tripling of the risk of developing sporadic Alzheimer disease (Roses; Strittmatter et al; Polvikoski et al). This is the same allele that contributes to an elevated low-density lipoprotein fraction in the serum. Possession of two e4 alleles virtually assures the development of disease in those who survive to their eighties. The e4 allele also modifies the age of onset of some of the familial forms of the disease. In contrast, the e2 allele is underrepresented among Alzheimer patients. For these reasons it has been proposed that Apo E, by interacting with APP or tau protein in some way, modifies the formation of plaques. Indeed, possession of the e4 allele correlates with increased deposition of Aβ in the brain (McNamara). As pointed out by Hardy, Apo E appears to act at a point in the pathogenesis that is after the various genetic mutations have influenced the cellular pathology that ostensibly causes Alzheimer disease. However, these relationships do not invariably connect an allele to the disease in a particular individual. In other words, the e4 allele does not act as a mendelian trait but as a susceptibility (risk) factor. It follows that many, if not most, individuals who develop Alzheimer disease do not have the risk allele. Moreover, many individuals with the e4 allele live into their seventies and eighties without developing Alzheimer disease. All that can be stated with certainty is that, on average, the presence of the e4 allele accelerates the appearance of Alzheimer disease by about 5 years.
# Chunk 6000
The abnormality of movement is subtle at first and most evident in the hands and face; often the patient is merely considered to be fidgety, restless, or “nervous.” Slowness of movement of the fingers and hands, a reduced rate of finger tapping, and difficulty in performing a sequence of hand movements are early signs. Gradually these abnormalities become more pronounced until the entire musculature is implicated with chorea. The frequency of blinking is increased (the opposite of parkinsonism), and voluntary protrusion of the tongue, like other attempts at sustained posture, is constantly interrupted by unwanted darting movements. In the advanced stage of the disease the patient is seldom still for more than a few seconds. The choreic movements are slower than the brusque jerks and postural lapses of Sydenham chorea, and they involve many more muscles. They tend to recur in stereotyped patterns yet are not as stereotyped as tics. In advanced cases, they acquire an athetoid or dystonic quality. Muscle tone is usually decreased until late in the illness, when there may also be some degree of rigidity, tremor, and bradykinesia, elements suggestive of Parkinson disease. Parkinsonism with rigidity characterizes the Westphal or “rigid” variant, which is more common with a childhood onset, or the HDL2 genetic variant noted earlier. Tendon reflexes are exaggerated in one-third of patients, but only a few have Babinski signs. Voluntary movements are initiated and executed more slowly than normal, but there is no weakness and no ataxia, although speech, which becomes dysarthric and explosive because of incoordination between tongue and diaphragm, may convey the impression of a cerebellar disorder. Inability to hold the tongue protruded is characteristic. In late-onset cases there may be an almost constant rapid movement of the tongue and mouth, simulating the tardive dyskinesia that follows the use of neuroleptic drugs. These disorders of movement that characterize Huntington chorea are described more fully in Chap. 4.
# Chunk 6001
Chorea in early adult life always raises the question of a late form of Sydenham chorea, of lupus erythematosus with antiphospholipid antibodies, or of cocaine use, but neither familial occurrence nor mental deterioration is part of these processes. A “benign inherited chorea,” transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait without prolongation of a triplet sequence, has been traced to chromosome 14q. It is differentiated from Huntington disease by onset before age 5 years, progressing little, and having no associated mental deterioration (Breedveld et al). Other progressive neurologic disorders inherited as autosomal dominant traits and beginning in adolescence or adult life (e.g., polymyoclonus with or without ataxia, acanthocytosis with progressive chorea, and dentatorubropallidoluysian degeneration) can closely mimic Huntington disease, as described further on; sometimes only the genetic and pathologic findings settle the matter. A midlife progressive chorea without dementia (after more than 25 years of followup) that does not display the Huntington genotype has been reported. In at least one family in which this clinical picture is dominantly inherited, the fundamental defect is a mutation in the gene encoding the light chain of ferritin (Curtis). Affected individuals have axonal changes in the pallidum with swollen, ubiquitinand tau- positive aggregates; serum ferritin levels may be depressed. The implication of this mutation is that perturbations of iron metabolism may be toxic to neurons, a feature that also characterizes Hallervorden-Spatz disease, now called PANK disease, mentioned below.
# Chunk 6002
The dopamine antagonist haloperidol, in daily doses of 2 to 10 mg, is effective partially in suppressing the movement disorder. Because of the danger of superimposing tardive dyskinesia on the chronic disorder, the chorea should be treated only if it is functionally disabling, using the smallest possible dosages. Haloperidol may also help alleviate abnormalities of behavior or emotional lability, but it does not alter the progress of the disease. The authors have not been impressed with the therapeutic effectiveness of other currently available drugs. Levodopa and other dopamine agonists make the chorea worse and, in the rigid form of the disease, evoke chorea. Drugs that deplete dopamine or block dopamine receptors—such as reserpine, clozapine, and particularly tetrabenazine, which is an inhibitor of vesicular monoamine oxidase transporter 2 (VMAT2) and has been validated in a controlled study (Huntington Study Group)—suppress the chorea to some degree, but their side effects (drowsiness, akathisia, and tardive dyskinesia) usually outweigh their desired effects. Deutetrabenazine is a newer VMAT2 inhibitor, which has been approved for use in HD. Both tetrabenazine and deutrabenazine are contraindicated in patients with active suicidality or inadequately treated depression. The juvenile (rigid) form of the disease is probably best treated with antiparkinsonian drugs. Preliminary studies of the transplantation of fetal ganglionic tissue into the striatum have achieved mixed results. The psychologic and social consequences of the disease require supportive therapy, and genetic counseling is essential. Antidepression drugs are widely implemented because of the high incidence of depression and suicidality but their efficacy is not clear. Huntington disease pursues a steadily progressive course and death occurs as mentioned, on average 15 to 20 years after onset, sometimes much earlier or later.
# Chunk 6003
Our experience is in general agreement with that of Marsden, who found that of 263 patients given dopamine agonists as the sole treatment, 181 had abandoned medication after 6 months because of lack of effect or adverse reactions. Nevertheless, the fact that a large enough proportion of patients continue to benefit for up to 3 to 5 years indicates that the initial use of dopamine agonists has merit (see also Rascol et al). A development of some interest is the transdermally absorbed dopamine agonist such as rotigotine. Several trials suggest that the transdermal system can maintain a stable plasma level of the drug. In the study by LeWitt and associates, the main effect was a doubling of “on” time without unwanted dyskinesias. The effects on the quality of life in Parkinson patients appear to be positive but minor in degree. Skin reactions are common and the sulfites used in the patch formulation can cause severe systemic reactions in sensitive individuals.
# Chunk 6004
Several synthetic preparations of anticholinergic drugs are available, the most widely used ones being trihexyphenidyl (beginning with 1 to 2 mg/d and increased up to 6 to 8 mg over several weeks) and benztropine mesylate (1 to 4 mg/d in divided doses). When it has been available, we have also had success with the related agent ethopropazine (50 to 200 mg daily in divided doses; but it has become difficult to obtain). The effects on tremor are cumulative and may not be evident for several days. To obtain maximum benefit from the use of these drugs, they should be given in gradually increasing dosage to the point where toxic effects appear: dryness of the mouth (which can be beneficial when drooling of saliva is a problem), blurring of vision from pupillary mydriasis, constipation, and urinary retention as mentioned (especially with prostatism). The presence of angle closure glaucoma is a contraindication to its use. Tremor abates in several days and most of our patients have become tolerant to the dry mouth after several weeks. Pyridostigmine, propantheline, or glycopyrrolate can be given to reduce the oral dryness.
# Chunk 6005
Recently, DBS has been introduced early in the course of illness, when the patient is still largely responsive to l-dopa and before severe motor complications such as dyskinesias arise. These patients are, of course, younger and have had a shorter duration of disease. In a trial conducted by Schuepbach and coworkers, in patients with mean durations of illness of 7.5 years and 52 years of age, there was a significant and sustained benefit in quality of life measures, motor complications and “on time,” for subthalamic DBS.
# Chunk 6006
The disease has its onset typically in the sixth decade (range: 45 to 75 years), with some combination of difficulty in balance, abrupt falls, visual and ocular disturbances (giving the syndrome its name), slurred speech, dysphagia, and sometimes vague changes in personality, including apprehensiveness and fretfulness suggestive of an agitated depression. The most common early complaint is unsteadiness of gait and unexplained falling without loss of consciousness. The patient has difficulty in describing his imbalance, using terms such as “dizziness,” “toppling,” or an ambiguous problem with walking. The falls are frequently backward. At first, the neurologic and ophthalmologic examinations may be unrevealing, and it may take a year or longer for the characteristic syndrome comprising supranuclear ophthalmoplegia, pseudobulbar palsy, and axial dystonia to develop fully.
# Chunk 6007
The stiffness, slowness of movement, difficulty in turning and sitting down, and hypomimia may suggest a diagnosis of Parkinson disease. However, the facial expression of the PSP patient is more a matter of tonic grimace than of lack of movement, and the lack of tremor, the erect rather than stooped posture, and prominence of oculomotor abnormalities serve to distinguish the two disorders. The signs of pseudobulbar palsy are eventually prominent, and this feature, along with the eye movements, distinguishes the process most conspicuously from other degenerative conditions. The face becomes less expressive (“masked”), speech is slurred in a slowed spastic fashion, quite different from Parkinson disease, the mouth tends to be held open, and swallowing is difficult. Many patients complain of sleep disturbances. The total sleep time and REM sleep are reduced, and spontaneous awakenings during the night are more frequent and longer than in normal individuals of the same age. Complaints of urinary frequency and urgency have also been frequent in advanced cases under our care. Dubois and colleagues proposed an “applause sign” as distinctive to this disease; the patient fails to stop clapping after being asked to do so only 3 times.
# Chunk 6008
Clinical features The first manifestations of the generalized disease may be rather subtle. Intermittently, and usually after activity (late in the day), the patient (usually a child between 6 and 14 years of age, less often an adolescent) begins to invert one foot, to extend one leg and foot in an unnatural way, or to hunch one shoulder, raising the question of a nervous tic. As time passes, the motor disturbance becomes more persistent and interferes increasingly with the patient’s activities. Soon the muscles of the spine and shoulder or pelvic girdle become implicated in involuntary spasmodic twisting movements. The cardinal feature of these severe dystonic muscle contractions is the simultaneous contraction of both agonists and antagonists at a joint. These cocontraction spasms are intermittent at first; in intervals that are free of the dystonia, muscular tone and volitional movements are normal. In some instances, the muscles are hypotonic. Gradually, the spasms become more frequent; finally, they are continuous and the body may become grotesquely contorted, as shown in Fig. 4-5A. Lateral and rotatory scoliosis uniformly results as secondary deformities. For a time, recumbency relieves the spasms, but later on position has no influence. The hands are seldom involved, although at times they may be held in a fisted posture. Cranial muscles do not escape, and in a few instances a slurring, staccato-type speech was the initial manifestation. Uncontrollable blepharospasm was the initial disorder in one of our patients; in two others, severe dysarthria and dysphagia were the first signs, caused by dystonia of the tongue, pharyngeal, and laryngeal muscles.
# Chunk 6009
Treatment Early in the course of the illness, several drugs including l-dopa, bromocriptine, carbamazepine, diazepam, and tetrabenazine seem to be helpful, but only in a few patients, and the benefit is not lasting. Intrathecal baclofen has been somewhat more successful in children. The rare hereditary form of dystonia-parkinsonism (described below) responds well to small doses of l-dopa and dopamine agonists and is exceptional in this respect. Burke and coworkers advocate the use of very high doses (up to 30 mg daily or more) of trihexyphenidyl (Artane). Apparently, dystonic children can tolerate these high doses if the medication is raised gradually, by 5-mg increments weekly. In adults, high-dose anticholinergic treatment is less successful but worthy of a trial. Clonazepam is beneficial in some patients with segmental myoclonus.
# Chunk 6010
Diagnosis Friedreich disease and its variants must be distinguished from familial cerebellar cortical atrophy described next, and from familial spastic paraparesis with ataxia, as well as from peroneal muscular atrophy and the Levy-Roussy syndrome, which are discussed also with the hereditary neuropathies in Chap. 43. It is advisable to assay serum vitamin E levels, as a rare (except in North Africa) but treatable inherited deficiency of a vitamin E transport protein causes a spinocerebellar syndrome with areflexia in children that resembles Friedreich disease (see
# Chunk 6011
Customarily, motor system disease is subdivided into several subtypes on the basis of the grouping of symptoms and signs. The most frequent form, in which amyotrophy and hyperreflexia are combined, is ALS (amyotrophy is the term applied to denervation atrophy and weakness of muscles). Less frequent are cases in which weakness and atrophy occur alone, without evidence of corticospinal tract dysfunction; for these the term progressive muscular atrophy is used. When the weakness and wasting predominate in muscles innervated by the motor nuclei of the lower brainstem (i.e., muscles of the jaw, face, tongue, pharynx, and larynx), it is customary to speak of progressive bulbar palsy. In a small proportion of patients, the clinical state is dominated by spastic weakness, hyperreflexia, and Babinski signs, with lower motor neuron aspects becoming apparent only at a later stage of the illness, or not at all. This is designated primary lateral sclerosis, an infrequent form of motor system disease in which the degenerative process remains confined to the corticospinal pathways, sparing the anterior horn cells (Pringle et al); it’s relation to ALS has always been a matter of uncertainty. The pure spastic paraplegias without amyotrophy may represent a special class of disease hence they are described separately. There are also relatively common familial forms of spastic paraplegia in which the disease is confined to the corticospinal tracts or, in some cases, combined with posterior column or other neurologic signs.
# Chunk 6012
As the weeks and months pass, the other hand and arm become similarly affected with weakness, stiffness, slowness, atrophy or cramps. Before long, the triad of atrophic weakness of the hands and forearms, fasciculations, slight spasticity of the arms or legs, and generalized hyperreflexia—all in the absence of sensory change—leaves little doubt as to the diagnosis. Muscle strength and bulk diminish in parallel or there is a relative preservation of power early in the illness. Despite the amyotrophy, the tendon reflexes are notable for their liveliness. Babinski and Hoffmann signs are variably present; surprisingly, they may not appear even as the illness progresses. Abductors, adductors, and extensors of fingers and thumb tend to become weak before the long flexors, on which the handgrip depends, and the dorsal interosseous spaces become hollowed, giving rise to the “cadaveric” or “skeletal” hand. The muscles of the upper arm and shoulder girdles are typically involved later. There is a general tendency for adjacent areas to be involved before more distant ones. When an arm is the first limb affected, all this occurs while the thigh and leg muscles seem relatively normal, and there may come a time in some cases when the patient walks about with useless, dangling arms. Later the atrophic weakness spreads to the neck, tongue, pharyngeal, and laryngeal muscles, and eventually those in the trunk and lower extremities yield to the onslaught of the disease.
# Chunk 6013
These purely lower motor neuron amyotrophies tend to progress at a slower pace than the usual case of ALS, some patients surviving for 15 years or longer. Chio and colleagues (1985), who analyzed the factors affecting life expectancy in 155 patients with progressive muscular atrophy (PMA), found that younger patients had a more benign course: The 5-year survival was 72 percent in patients with an onset before age 50 years and 40 percent in patients with onset after age 50 years. Some of the most chronic varieties of PMA are familial. It has been revealed that the original report of a familial variety of this illness by William Osler is in a family now known to have had a mutation in the SOD1 gene, as discussed earlier. In about half the patients, the illness takes the form of a symmetrical (sometimes asymmetrical) wasting of intrinsic hand muscles, slowly advancing to the more proximal parts of the arms; less often, the legs and thighs are the sites of the initial atrophic weakness; or the proximal parts of the limbs are affected before the distal ones. Fascicular twitchings and cramping are variably present. Otherwise, they differ from ALS only in that the tendon reflexes are diminished or absent, and signs of corticospinal tract disease cannot be detected. Nonetheless, many cases of ostensible PMA are found to have indications of corticospinal tract degeneration at autopsy (Ince et al).
# Chunk 6014
Because it may produce a motor-predominant radiculopathy, Lyme infection is sometimes considered in the differential diagnosis of ALS. Some clinics screen for Lyme antibodies using both an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and the more sensitive and specific Western immunoblot, but we have never detected such a case and doubt there is much similarity. Infrequently, we have seen myelopathic motor findings and motor radiculopathy with vitamin B12 deficiency (or copper deficiency), and there are exceptional reports of myeloradiculopathy with lead poisoning; we sometimes include tests for these conditions. Another entity that may simulate ALS is inclusion body myositis (IBM), an atypical myopathy that begins asymmetrically and involves distal muscles, usually without much elevation of serum CPK levels. In a recent series of 70 patients with this condition, 13 percent were initially diagnosed as having ALS (Dabby et al). Features distinguishing the IBM cases included normal corticospinal function, preservation of deep tendon reflexes in weak muscles, and finger flexor weakness. One concludes from this series that a detailed, quantitative EMG and possibly a muscle biopsy are indicated in cases that display predominantly lower motor features. Fully developed ALS is difficult to confuse with these conditions. Acid maltase deficiency may also simulate ALS in causing fatigability and early respiratory failure.
# Chunk 6015
Important in the management of ALS is periodic monitoring of respiratory function. We have typically performed pulmonary function tests every few months after the first year or so of illness. Our experience has been that the vital capacity in cubic centimeters can be estimated by multiplying the highest number to which a patient can count with 1 deep breath by 100. Thus, the ability to count to 25 with a full effort in a single breath corresponds to a vital capacity of approximately 2.5 L. Significant practical advances have been made in the respiratory management of ALS. The introduction of bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP) has allowed patients to sleep better and reduce daytime somnolence. Many patients do not initially tolerate the device, usually because of maladjusted face masks or excessive applied airway pressures. Almost always, a seasoned pulmonary technologist can find solutions to these problems. It is appropriate to begin BiPAP at (or before) the earliest sign of carbon dioxide retention, a state that is heralded by disruption of sleep, nightmares, early morning headaches, and daytime drowsiness. With noninvasive respiratory assistance, it may be possible to defer tracheostomy for months or years. Ultimately, as the diaphragm fails, BiPAP is needed not only at night but also during the day. As BiPAP use approaches 20 to 24 h per day, patients must usually address the difficult question of tracheostomy and mechanical ventilation. We broach this subject early enough in the course of the disease to allow ample time for discussion and reflection. In practice, most patients elect not to undergo tracheostomy and full ventilation.
# Chunk 6016
Clinical manifestations of Werdnig-Hoffmann disease (SMA 1) The most frequent form of these spinal muscular atrophies, the severe infantile type, is a common disease, occurring once in every 20,000 live births. After cystic fibrosis, it is also the most frequent cause of death from a recessively inherited disease. Characteristically the infant, usually born normally, is noted from birth to be unnaturally weak and limp (“floppy”). Some mothers report that fetal movement in utero had been less than expected or lacking altogether. In severe cases, arthrogryposis at the ankles and wrists or dislocation of the hips is noted at birth (arthrogryposis and its differential diagnosis is discussed in Chap. 45 in the section on the congenital neuromuscular disorders). The muscle weakness in these children is generalized from the beginning, and death comes early, usually within the first year. Other infants seem to develop normally for several months before the weakness becomes apparent. In these, the trunk, pelvic, and shoulder-girdle muscles are at first disproportionately affected, while the fingers and hands, toes and feet, and cranial muscles retain mobility. Hypotonia accompanies the weakness, and because passive displacement of articulated parts in testing muscle tone is easier to judge than power of contraction at this early age, it may be singled out as the dominant clinical characteristic. As a rule, the tendon reflexes are unobtainable. Volume of muscle is diminished but is difficult to evaluate in the infant because of the coverings of adipose tissue. Fasciculations are seldom visible except sometimes in the tongue. Perception of tactile and painful stimuli is undiminished, and emotional and social development measures up to age.
# Chunk 6017
Pathologic findings Muscle biopsy after 1 month of age reveals a typical picture of group atrophy; shortly after birth this change is difficult to discern. Aside from denervative atrophy, the essential abnormalities are in the anterior horn cells in the spinal cord and the motor nuclei in the lower brainstem. Nerve cells are greatly reduced in number, and many of the remaining ones are in varying stages of degeneration; a few are chromatolytic and contain cytoplasmic inclusions. It is not unusual to see figures of neuronophagia. There is replacement gliosis and secondary degeneration in roots and nerves. Other systems of neurons, including the corticospinal and corticobulbar systems, are entirely unaffected.
# Chunk 6018
The disease begins insidiously, with weakness and atrophy of the pelvic girdle and proximal leg muscles, followed by involvement of the shoulder girdle and upper arm muscles. Unlike the sporadic form of spinal muscular atrophy, the Wohlfart-Kugelberg-Welander variety (also listed in other books and monographs as Kugelberg-Welander disease) is bilaterally symmetrical from the beginning, and fasciculations are observed in only half the cases. Ultimately, the distal limb muscles are involved and tendon reflexes are lost. Bulbar musculature and corticospinal tracts are spared, although Babinski signs and an associated ophthalmoplegia (presumably neural) have been reported in rare instances.
# Chunk 6019
Clinical features In most patients, the visual loss begins between 18 and 25 years of age, but the range of age of onset is much broader. Usually the visual loss has a fairly rapid onset and a subacute evolution suggesting a retrobulbar neuritis; moreover, in these instances, aching in the eye or brow may accompany the visual loss, just as it does in the demyelinative variety. Subjective visual phenomena are reported by some. Usually both eyes are affected simultaneously, although in many, one eye is affected first, followed by the other after an interval of several weeks or months. In practically all cases, the second eye is affected within a year of the first. In the unimpaired eye, abnormalities of visual evoked potentials may antedate impairment of visual acuity (Carroll and Mastaglia).
# Chunk 6020
3. Hereditary hearing loss and other neurologic syndromes These include dominantly inherited sensory radicular neuropathy (Denny-Brown); progressive polyneuropathy, kyphoscoliosis, skin atrophy, eye defects (myopia, cataracts, atypical retinitis pigmentosa), bone cysts, and osteoporosis (Flynn-Aird syndrome); chronic polyneuropathy and nephritis (Lemieux-Neemeh syndrome); congenital pain asymbolia and auditory imperception (Osuntokun syndrome); and bulbopontine paralysis (facial weakness, dysarthria, dysphagia, and atrophy of the tongue with fasciculations) with progressive neural hearing loss. The onset of the last syndrome occurs at 10 to 35 years of age; the pattern of inheritance is autosomal recessive. The disease progresses to death. It resembles the progressive hereditary bulbar paralysis of Fazio-Londe except for the progressive deafness and loss of vestibular responses. Regrettably, in most of these syndromes, there are no data regarding labyrinthine function.
# Chunk 6021
Figure 38-4. Axial CT from a 54-year-old mildly demented woman with a 10-year history of Huntington chorea. The bulge in the inferolateral border of the lateral ventricle, normally created by the head of the caudate nucleus, is absent. There is also diffuse enlargement of the lateral ventricles.
# Chunk 6022
Laboratory examinations are highly informative in the investigation of the acquired metabolic diseases. In patients with symptoms suggestive of a metabolic encephalopathy the following determinations are usually made: serum Na, K, Cl, Ca, Mg, glucose, HCO3, renal function tests (blood urea nitrogen [BUN] and creatinine), liver function tests (aspartate aminotransferase [AST], alanine aminotransferase [ALT], bilirubin, NH3), thyroid function tests (T4 and thyroid-stimulating hormone [TSH]), and osmolality and, in certain cases, oxygen saturation and blood gas determinations. These are almost always supplemented by toxicology tests and measurement of the serum concentrations of relevant medications as discussed in the next chapter. Serum osmolality can be measured directly or calculated from the values of Na, glucose, and BUN (in mg/dL), using the following formula:
# Chunk 6023
Early symptoms include headache, nausea, dyspnea, confusion, dizziness, and clumsiness. These occur when the carboxyhemoglobin level reaches 20 to 30 percent of total hemoglobin. Exposure to relatively low levels of CO from faulty furnaces and gasoline engines should be suspected as the cause of recurrent headaches and confusion that clear upon hospitalization or other change of venue. A cherry-red color of the skin may appear, but is actually an infrequent finding; cyanosis is more common. At slightly higher levels of carboxyhemoglobin, blindness, visual field defects, and papilledema develop, and levels of 50 to 60 percent are associated with coma, decerebrate or decorticate posturing, seizures in a few patients, and generalized slowing of the EEG rhythms. The initial CT or MRI is normal or shows mild cerebral edema; later scans may show a characteristic lesion in the pallidum, as described below. Only if there has been associated hypotension does one see the same types of vascular border-zone infarctions that appear after cardiac arrest.
# Chunk 6024
In diabetic acidosis, the familiar picture is one of dehydration, fatigue, weakness, headache, abdominal pain, dryness of the mouth, stupor or coma, and Kussmaul type of breathing. Usually the condition has developed over a period of days in a patient known or proven to be diabetic. Often, the patient had failed to take a regular insulin dose. The blood glucose level is found to be more than 400 mg/dL, the pH of the blood less than 7.20, and the bicarbonate less than 10 mEq/L. Ketone bodies and b-hydroxybutyric acid are elevated in the blood and urine, and there is marked glycosuria. The prompt administration of insulin and repletion of intravascular volume correct the clinical and chemical abnormalities over a period of hours.
# Chunk 6025
The clinical picture of acute, subacute, or chronic hepatic encephalopathy consists of a derangement of consciousness, presenting first as mental slowing and confusion, occasionally with hyperactivity, followed by progressive drowsiness, stupor, and coma. The confusional state is combined with a characteristic intermittency of sustained muscle contraction; this phenomenon, which was originally described in patients with hepatic stupor by Adams and Foley and called asterixis (from the Greek sterixis, a “fixed position”). It is now recognized as a sign of various metabolic encephalopathies but is most prominent in this disorder (see Chap. 4). It is conventionally demonstrated by having the patient hold his arms outstretched with the wrists extended, but the same tremor can be elicited by any sustained posture, including that of the protruded tongue. We have seen patients in whom asterixis of the large antigravity muscles (e.g., iliopsoas or quadriceps) causes falling. A variable, fluctuating rigidity of the trunk and limbs, grimacing, suck and grasp reflexes, exaggeration or asymmetry of tendon reflexes, Babinski signs, and focal or generalized seizures round out the clinical picture in a few patients.
# Chunk 6026
Pathogenesis of Hepatic Encephalopathy

The most plausible hypothesis relates hepatic coma to an abnormality of nitrogen metabolism, wherein ammonia, which is formed in the bowel by the action of urease-containing organisms on dietary protein, is carried to the liver in the portal circulation but fails to be converted into urea because of hepatocellular disease, portal– systemic shunting of blood, or both. As a result, excess NH3 reaches the systemic circulation, where it interferes with cerebral metabolism in a way that is not fully understood. The ammonia theory best explains the basic neuropathologic change. Because the brain is lacking in urea cycle enzymes, Norenberg has proposed that the hypertrophy of the astrocytic cytoplasm and proliferation of mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum, as well as the increase in the astroglial glutamic dehydrogenase activity, all reflect heightened metabolic activity of these systems within astrocytes associated with ammonia detoxification. Removal of brain ammonia depends on the formation of glutamine, a reaction that is catalyzed by the ATP-dependent enzyme glutamine synthetase, which is compartmentalized to astrocytes. It has been shown in experimental animals that hyperammonemia leads to a depletion of ATP in midbrain reticular nuclei. Whether this is the primary cause of cerebral dysfunction has not been resolved.
# Chunk 6027
Most patients are children, boys and girls being equally affected, but rare instances are known in infants (Huttenlocher and Trauner) and young adults. In most cases, the encephalopathy is preceded for several days to a week by fever, symptoms of upper respiratory infection, and protracted vomiting. These are followed by the rapid evolution of stupor and coma, associated in many cases with focal and generalized seizures, signs of sympathetic overactivity (tachypnea, tachycardia, mydriasis), decorticate and decerebrate rigidity, and loss of pupillary, corneal, and vestibuloocular reflexes. One or two such cases were included in the series of acute “toxic encephalopathy” reported by Lyon and colleagues (see “Acute Toxic Encephalopathy” in Chap. 31). In infants, respiratory distress, tachypnea, and apnea are the most prominent features.
# Chunk 6028
The liver may be greatly enlarged, often extending to the pelvis and providing an important diagnostic clue as to the cause of the cerebral changes. Initially there is a metabolic acidosis, followed by a respiratory alkalosis (rising arterial pH and falling Pco2). The CSF is usually under increased pressure and is acellular; glucose values may be low, reflecting the hypoglycemia. The serum ALT, coagulation times, and blood ammonia are increased, sometimes to an extreme degree. The EEG is characterized by diffuse arrhythmic delta activity, progressing to electrocerebral silence in patients who fail to survive. CT and MRI show the cerebral swelling but are difficult to interpret in these young individuals, who lack any adult brain atrophy.
# Chunk 6029
Improvement of encephalopathic symptoms may not be evident for 1 or 2 days after institution of dialysis. Convulsions, which occur in about one-third of cases, often preterminally, may be resistant to treatment until the uremia is addressed. However, some seizures may be suppressed with relatively low-plasma concentrations of antiepileptic drugs, the reason being that serum albumin is depressed in uremia, increasing the unbound, therapeutically active portion of a drug. If there are severe associated metabolic disturbances, such as hyponatremia, the seizures may be difficult to control. One must be cautious in prescribing any of a large number of drugs in the face of renal failure, for inordinately high, toxic blood levels may result. Examples that affect the nervous system are aminoglycoside antibiotics (vestibular damage); furosemide (cochlear damage); and nitrofurantoin, isoniazid, and hydralazine (peripheral nerve damage).
# Chunk 6030
This term refers to a group of symptoms that may occur during and following hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis as a by-product of some degree of cerebral edema. The symptoms include headache, nausea, muscle cramps, nervous irritability, agitation, drowsiness, and convulsions. The headache, which may be bilateral and throbbing and resemble common migraine, develops in approximately 70 percent of patients, whereas the other symptoms are observed in 5 to 10 percent, usually in those undergoing rapid dialysis or in the early stages of a dialysis program. The symptoms tend to occur in the third or fourth hour of dialysis and last for several hours. Sometimes they appear 8 to 48 h after the completion of dialysis. Originally, these symptoms were attributed to the rapid lowering of serum urea, leaving the brain with a higher concentration of urea than the serum and resulting in a shift of water into the brain to equalize the osmotic gradient (reverse urea syndrome). Now it is believed that the shift of water into the brain is akin to water intoxication and is a result of the inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone.
# Chunk 6031
Hyponatremia and Syndrome of Inappropriate Antidiuretic Hormone

Hyponatremia is defined as a serum sodium level below 135 mEq/L. The hyponatremic state may be isotonic, hypertonic, or hypotonic, depending on the mechanism of reduced sodium concentration. The hypotonic variety is most common in neurologic practice but one also encounters cases of pseudohyponatremia caused by hyperlipidemia or hyperproteinemia (isotonic), hyperglycemic or mannitol-induced hyponatremia (hypertonic), and also cases of water intoxication. The last of these may be associated with systemic hypovolemic (blood loss, salt wasting), hypervolemic (edematous states such as renal, hepatic or heart failure), or isovolemic states (retention of free water).
# Chunk 6032
Treatment Most instances of hyponatremia have developed slowly, allowing for maintenance of brain volume by the extrusion from cells of various osmotic substances. Rapid correction of sodium in these circumstances risks a reversal of osmotic gradient and a reduction in brain volume. This, in turn, is associated with a special type of central nervous system demyelination (“osmotic demyelination” and central pontine myelinolysis) discussed below. One’s first impulse is to administer NaCl intravenously, but this must be done cautiously to avoid these complications. Most cases of SIADH respond to the restriction of fluid intake—to 500 mL per 24 h if the serum Na is less than 120 mEq/L and to 1,000 mL per 24 h if less than 130 mEq/L. Even when the Na reaches 130 mEq/L, the fluid intake should not exceed 1,500 mL per 24 h.
# Chunk 6033
48 h) hyponatremia with stupor or seizures, the mechanisms for maintaining cerebral cellular volume have not yet been engaged and therefore infusion of NaCl is necessary to prevent cerebral edema. The amount of NaCl to be infused can be calculated from the current and the target levels of serum Na by assuming that the infused sodium load is distributed throughout the total body water content (0.6 × weight in kilograms): ([target Na − starting Na] × 0.6) × weight (kg)
# Chunk 6034
The desired volume of normal saline can then be determined by keeping in mind that its sodium concentration is 154 mEq/L and that of 3 percent (hypertonic) saline solution is 513 mEq/L. If hypertonic saline is administered, it is usually necessary to simultaneously reduce intravascular volume with furosemide, beginning with a dose of 0.5 mg/kg intravenously, and to increase the dosage until a diuresis is obtained. (As a rule of thumb, 300 to 500 mL of 3 percent saline, infused rapidly intravenously, will increase the serum sodium concentration by about 1 mEq/L/h for 4 h.) Guidelines to prevent an overly rapid correction of Na are elaborated further on in relation to central pontine myelinolysis (no more rapidly than 10 mmol/L in the first 24 h). Although the syndrome of SIADH is usually self-limiting, it may continue for weeks or months, depending on the type of associated brain disease.
# Chunk 6035
As is true for hyponatremia, the degree of CNS disturbance in hypernatremia is generally related to the rate at which the serum Na rises. Slowly rising values, to levels as high as 170 mEq/L, may be surprisingly well tolerated. Rapid elevations of sodium shrink the brain, especially in infants. Extremely high levels cause impairment of consciousness with asterixis, myoclonus, seizures, and choreiform movements. In addition, muscular weakness, rhabdomyolysis, and myoglobinuria have been reported.
# Chunk 6036
Central Pontine Myelinolysis and Other Patterns of Osmotic Demyelination

Adams et al observed a rapidly evolving quadriplegia and pseudobulbar palsy in a young alcoholic man who had entered the hospital 10 days earlier with symptoms of alcohol withdrawal. Postmortem examination several weeks later disclosed a large, symmetrical, essentially demyelinative lesion occupying the greater part of the base of the pons. Over the next 5 years, 3 additional cases (2 alcoholic patients and 1 with scleroderma) were studied clinically and pathologically, and in 1959 these 4 cases were reported by Adams and colleagues under the heading of central pontine myelinolysis (CPM). This term was chosen because it reflects both the main anatomic localization of the disease and its essential pathologic attribute: the remarkable dissolution of the sheaths of myelinated fibers and the sparing of neurons. Once attention was focused on this distinctive lesion, many other reports appeared and it became apparent that other areas of myelin in the brain could be similarly affected. The exact incidence of this disease is not known, but in a series of 3,548 consecutive autopsies in adults, the typical lesion was found in 9 cases, or 0.25 percent (Victor and Laureno).
# Chunk 6037
More than half the cases have appeared in the late stages of chronic alcoholism, often in association with Wernicke disease and polyneuropathy. Most cases occur in the context of other serious medical conditions, and diseases with which osmotic demyelination has been conjoined are chronic renal failure being treated with dialysis, hepatic failure, advanced lymphoma, cancer, cachexia from a variety of other causes, severe bacterial infections, dehydration and electrolyte disturbances, acute hemorrhagic pancreatitis, and pellagra. The changes in serum sodium concentration, with which the process is closely aligned, are discussed below. The 2 sexes are affected equally, and the patients do not fall into any one age period. Whereas the cases first reported had occurred in adults, there are now many reports of the disease in children, particularly in those with severe burns (McKee et al).
# Chunk 6038
Variants of this syndrome are being encountered with increasing frequency. Two of our elderly patients, with confusion and stupor but without signs of corticospinal or pseudobulbar palsy, recovered; however, they were left with a severe dysarthria and cerebellar ataxia lasting many months. After 6 months, these patients’ nervous system function was essentially restored to normal. In reference to the pathogenesis of this lesion, originally both patients had serum Na levels of 99 mEq/L, but information about the rate of correction of serum Na was not available. Another of our patients developed a typical locked-in syndrome after the rapid correction of a serum sodium of 104 mEq/L. He had large symmetrical lesions of the frontal cortex and underlying white matter but no pontine lesion.
# Chunk 6039
As mentioned in the section on hyponatremia, a rapid rise in serum osmolality to normal or higher-than-normal levels is an almost obligate antecedent of this process. One encounters this most commonly in the rapid correction of hyponatremia. In cases related to the correction of hyponatremia, the initial serum sodium concentration is less than 130 mEq/L and usually much lower; this was the case in all the patients reported by Burcar and colleagues and by Karp and Laureno. Laureno (1983) demonstrated the importance of serum sodium in the pathogenesis of this disease experimentally. Dogs made severely hyponatremic (100 to 115 mEq/L) had the electrolyte disorder corrected rapidly by infusion of hypertonic (3 percent) saline; this led to spastic quadriparesis and pontine and extrapontine lesions were found at autopsy, indistinguishable in their distribution and histologic features from those of the human disease. Hyponatremia alone or slowly corrected hyponatremia (<15 mEq/dL in the initial 24 h) did not produce the disease.
# Chunk 6040
The situation is further complicated by the finding that antigliadin antibodies (which are not autoantibodies but are directed against gluten, the offending agent), while not specific for celiac disease, do correspond to the presence of neurologic manifestations (ataxia and neuropathy); however, the more specific antiendomysium and antitransglutaminase autoantibody markers of sprue have little apparent relation to the presence of neurologic disease. Even more confusing is the claim that half of these patients will have one or another antibody but no clinical enteropathy, making it necessary to perform a small-bowel biopsy to detect villous atrophy.
# Chunk 6041
A gluten-free diet is necessary, not only to reduce the enteropathy, if present, but also to reduce the chances of the later development of a bowel lymphoma. The medical issues relating to celiac disease and the use of antibody tests and bowel biopsy are reviewed by Farrell and Kelly.
# Chunk 6042
We have sought evidence by antibody testing and bowel biopsy of sprue in numerous patients with an ataxia of obscure origin and have only rarely found it. Nevertheless, the evidence presented in the writings of several authors, particularly Hadjivassiliou, suggest that sprue may underlie some cases of subacute ataxia in adults. Paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease should always be considered in the differential diagnosis of a case of subacute cerebellar ataxia. Vitamin E deficiency may induce a similar syndrome with features of spinocerebellar dysfunction.
# Chunk 6043
The congenital mental disorder ranges from apathy and absence of social interaction to an alert, cooperative state but slowness in higher-order thinking and verbal facility is always evident. The status of the thyroid gland varies; among patients with the neurologic features of cretinism, about half have goiters or have palpable glands; in the rest, the glands are atrophied; practically all patients with myxedematous cretinism are athyrotic. Although typical examples of neurologic and myxedematous hypothyroidism are readily distinguished, both types may exist in the same endemic area, and stigmata of both forms may be recognized in the same individual. The QRS complex of the ECG is of low voltage; the EEG is slower than normal, with less alpha activity; the CSF contains an excess of protein (50 to 150 mg/dL); and the serum T3 and T4, protein-bound iodine, and radioactive iodine uptake are all subnormal. Serum cholesterol is increased (300 to 600 mg/dL).
# Chunk 6044
As Korsakoff pointed out, signs of peripheral neuropathy are common, found in more than 80 percent of patients with the Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome. In most, the neuropathic disease is mild and does not account for the disorder of gait, but in some it may be severe and particularly painful. In a small number, retrobulbar optic neuropathy is added. Despite the frequency of peripheral neuropathy, overt signs of beriberi heart disease are rare. However, indications of disordered cardiovascular function such as tachycardia, exertional dyspnea, postural hypotension, and minor electrocardiographic abnormalities are frequent; occasionally, the patient dies suddenly following only slight exertion. These patients may show an elevation of cardiac output associated with low peripheral vascular resistance, abnormalities that revert to normal after the administration of thiamine. Postural hypotension and syncope are common findings in Wernicke disease and are probably a result of impaired function of the autonomic nervous system, more specifically to a defect in the sympathetic outflow (Birchfield). There may be mild hypothermia, loss of libido, and erectile dysfunction.
# Chunk 6045
Most patients respond in a fairly predictable manner to the administration of thiamine, as detailed further on. The most dramatic improvement is in the ocular manifestations. Recovery often begins within hours or sooner after the administration of thiamine and practically always within several days. This effect is so constant that a failure of the nystagmus and ocular palsies to respond to thiamine should raise doubts about the diagnosis of Wernicke disease. Horizontal nystagmus sometimes disappears in minutes. Sixth-nerve palsies, ptosis, and vertical gaze palsies recover completely within a week or two in most cases, but vertical nystagmus may sometimes persist for several months. Horizontal gaze palsies usually recover completely, but in 60 percent of cases a fine horizontal nystagmus remains as a permanent sequela. In this respect, horizontal nystagmus is unique among the ocular signs.
# Chunk 6046
NUTRITIONAL POLYNEUROPATHY (NEUROPATHIC BERIBERI) (SEE ALSO CHAP. 43)

Beriberi is a distinct clinical entity characterized by a predominantly cardiac disorder occurring among people whose diet is dominated by polished rice. The milling process, or “polishing,” removes the husk that contains most of the vitamin nutrients. In fact, beriberi is not confined to any particular part of the world. In addition to affecting the heart, it also affects the peripheral nerves (which may be affected separately), with or without edema, the latter feature providing the basis for the old division into “wet” and “dry” forms. The cardiac manifestations range from tachycardia and exertional dyspnea to acute and rapidly fatal heart failure, the latter being the most dramatic but uncommon manifestation of beriberi. Here we emphasize the peripheral neuropathy associated with beriberi.
# Chunk 6047
In most patients with nutritional polyneuropathy, only the limbs are involved and the abdominal, thoracic, and bulbar muscles are usually spared; however, we have encountered 2 cases in which there was sensory loss in the pattern of an escutcheon over the anterior thorax and abdomen. In the most advanced instances of neuropathy, hoarseness and weakness of the voice and dysphagia as a result of degeneration of the vagus nerves may be added to the clinical picture.
# Chunk 6048
The diagnosis of pernicious anemia demands the administration of vitamin B12 and the continuation of treatment for the rest of the patient’s life. In cases of pernicious anemia, the patient is given 1,000 µg of cyanocobalamin or hydroxocobalamin intramuscularly each day for several days. The usual approach is to repeat the injection weekly for a month and then monthly for an indefinite period. Although most of the injected cobalamin is excreted, these patients must be given excessive doses of the vitamin because the repletion of cobalamin tissue stores is a function of the dose.
# Chunk 6049
Ataxia, loss of tendon reflexes, ophthalmoparesis, proximal muscle weakness with elevated serum creatine kinase, and decreased sensation are the usual manifestations of vitamin E deficiency. These symptoms are referable to parts of the nervous system and musculature that are found to be diseased in animals deprived of vitamin E: degeneration of Clark columns, spinocerebellar tracts, posterior columns, nuclei of Goll and Burdach, and sensory roots (Nelson et al). Local differences in the natural concentration of vitamin E in various parts of the nervous system and musculature are believed to account for the distribution of the lesions. In affected children, neurologic function improves after long-term daily supplementation with high doses of vitamin E.
# Chunk 6050
The most common single manifestation of the abstinence syndrome is tremulousness, often referred to as “the shakes” or “the jitters,” combined with general irritability and gastrointestinal symptoms, particularly nausea and vomiting. These symptoms first appear after several days of drinking, usually in the morning after a night’s abstinence. The patient “quiets his nerves” with a few drinks and is then able to drink for the rest of the day without undue distress. The symptoms return on successive mornings with increasing severity. The symptoms then become augmented, reaching their peak intensity 24 to 36 h after the complete cessation of drinking. Generalized tremor is the most obvious feature. It is of fast frequency (6 to 8 Hz), slightly irregular, and variable in severity, tending to diminish when the patient is in quiet surroundings and to increase with motor activity or emotional stress. The tremor may be so violent that the patient cannot stand without help, speak clearly, or eat without assistance. Sometimes there is little objective evidence of tremor, and the patient complains only of being “shaky inside.”
# Chunk 6051
Within a few days, flushed facies, anorexia, tachycardia, and tremor characteristic of the mild withdrawal syndrome subside to a large extent, but overalertness, tendency to startle easily, and jerkiness of movement may persist for a week or longer. Feelings of uneasiness may not leave the patient completely for 10 to 14 days. According to Porjesz and Begleiter, certain electrophysiologic abnormalities (diminished amplitudes of sensory evoked potentials and prolonged latencies and conduction velocities of auditory brainstem potentials) remain altered long after the clinical abnormalities have subsided.
# Chunk 6052
A special type of alcoholic psychosis consisting of a more or less pure auditory hallucinosis has been recognized for many years. Kraepelin referred to it as the “hallucinatory insanity of drunkards,” or “alcoholic mania.” A report of 75 such cases was made by Victor and Hope. The central feature of the illness, in the beginning, is the occurrence of auditory hallucinations despite an otherwise clear sensorium during the withdrawal period; that is, the patients are not disoriented or obtunded, and they have an intact memory. The hallucinations may take the form of unstructured sounds such as buzzing, ringing, gunshots, or clicking (the elementary hallucinations of Bleuler), or they may have a musical quality, like a low-pitched hum or chant. The most common hallucinations, however, are human voices. When the voices can be identified, they are often attributed to the patient’s family, friends, or neighbors—rarely to God, radio, or television. The voices may be addressed directly to the patient, but more frequently, they discuss him in the third person. In the majority of cases, the voices are maligning, reproachful, or threatening in nature and are disturbing to the patient; a significant proportion, however, are not unpleasant and leave the patient undisturbed. To the patient, the voices are clearly audible and intensely real, and they tend to be exteriorized; that is, they come from behind a radiator or door, from the corridor, or through a wall, window, or floor. Another feature of auditory hallucinosis is that the patient’s response is more or less understandable in light of the hallucinatory content. The patient may call on the police for protection or erect a barricade against invaders; he may even attempt suicide to avoid what the voices threaten. The hallucinations are most prominent during the night, and their duration varies greatly: they may be momentary, or they may recur intermittently for days on end and, in exceptional instances, for weeks or months.
# Chunk 6053
It is important to note that the common idiopathic or posttraumatic forms of epilepsy are also influenced by alcohol. In these types of epilepsy, a seizure or seizures may be precipitated by only a short period of drinking (e.g., a weekend, or even one evening of heavy social drinking); perhaps unsurprisingly in these circumstances, the seizures occur not when the patient is intoxicated but usually the morning after, in the “sobering-up” period. Except for the transient dysrhythmia in the withdrawal period, the incidence of EEG abnormalities in patients who have had rum fits is no greater than in normal persons, in sharp contrast to the EEGs of nonalcoholic patients with recurrent seizures.
# Chunk 6054
Delirium tremens develops in one of several settings. The patient, an excessive and steady drinker for many years, may have been admitted to the hospital for an unrelated illness, accident, or operation and, after 2 to 4 days, occasionally even later, becomes delirious. Or, following a prolonged drinking binge, the patient may have experienced several days of tremulousness and hallucinosis or one or more seizures and may even be recovering from these symptoms when delirium tremens develops, rather abruptly as a rule.
# Chunk 6055
Laboratory findings Rarely, blood glucose is seriously depressed in the alcohol withdrawal states. Ketoacidosis with normal blood glucose is another infrequent finding. Disturbances of electrolytes are of varying frequency and significance. Serum sodium levels are altered infrequently and are more often increased than decreased. The same is true for chloride and phosphate. Serum calcium and potassium are lowered in about one-quarter of patients. Most patients show some degree of hypomagnesemia, low Pco2, and high arterial pH—abnormalities that are probably important in the pathogenesis of withdrawal symptoms (see later). Abnormalities of the CSF occur unpredictably (it is usually normal), as do changes on brain imaging studies; they may indicate the presence of some medical or surgical complication. Enlargement of the third and lateral ventricles is a common finding (see later). The MRI is normal unless there is an incipient Wernicke disease, in which case lesions in the periaqueductal region and hypothalamus may be evident, as described in the previous chapter.
# Chunk 6056
An additional important element in treatment is the correction of fluid and electrolyte imbalance, particularly hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia. Severe degrees of agitation and perspiration may require the administration of up to 5 L of fluid daily, of which at least 1,500 to 2,000 mL should be normal saline. The specific electrolytes and the amounts that must be administered are governed by the laboratory values for these electrolytes. If the serum sodium is extremely low, one must be cautious in raising the level lest a central pontine myelinolysis be induced (see Chap. 39). In the rare case of hypoglycemia, the administration of glucose is an urgent matter. Patients who present with severe alcoholic ketoacidosis and normal or only slightly elevated blood glucose concentrations usually recover promptly, without the use of insulin.
# Chunk 6057
Treatment of the Opioid Abstinence Syndrome

Views on the nature of drug addiction and appropriate methods of treatment are as much national and sociologic as they are biologic. One approach that has achieved some degree of success over the past 40 years has been the substitution of methadone for opioid, in the ratio of 1 mg methadone for 3 mg morphine, 1 mg heroin, or 20 mg meperidine. Because methadone is long acting and effective orally, it needs to be given only twice daily by mouth—10 to 20 mg per dose being sufficient to suppress abstinence symptoms. After a stabilization period of 3 to 5 days, this dosage of methadone is reduced and the drug is withdrawn over a similar period. An alternative but probably less effective method has been the use of clonidine (0.2 to 0.6 mg bid for a week), a drug that counteracts most of the noradrenergic withdrawal symptoms; however, the hypotension that is induced by this drug may be a problem (Jasinski et al).
# Chunk 6058
Treatment of opiate habituation This is in some ways far more demanding than the treatment of opioid withdrawal and can be best accomplished in special facilities and programs that are devoted wholly to the problem. These are available in most communities. The most effective ones have been the ambulatory methadone maintenance clinics, where more than 100,000 former heroin addicts are participating in rehabilitation programs approved by the FDA. Methadone, in a dosage of 60 to 100 mg daily (sufficient to suppress the craving for heroin), is given under supervision day by day (less often with long-acting methadone) for months or years. Various forms of psychotherapy and social service counseling often administered by former heroin addicts are integral parts of the program.
# Chunk 6059
1. A parkinsonian syndrome is the most common complication—masked facies, slight symmetric tremor, reduced blinking, generalized rigidity, shuffling gait, and slowness of movement. These symptoms may appear after several days of drug therapy but more often after several weeks. Suppression of dopamine in the striatum (similar to the effect of loss of dopaminergic nigral cells that project to the striatum) is presumably the basis of the parkinsonian signs.
# Chunk 6060
The symptoms of a “serotonin syndrome” that results from excessive intake of the above listed drugs or from the concurrent use of MAO inhibitors include confusion and restlessness, tremor, tachycardia, hypertension, clonus and hyperreflexia, shivering, and diaphoresis, as summarized by Boyer and Shannon. The long list of other medications, when used concurrently with SSRIs can produce the syndrome (including “triptans” for migraine), are noted in this reference.
# Chunk 6061
Discontinuing lithium in the intoxicated patient, which is the initial step in therapy, does not result in immediate disappearance of toxic symptoms. This may be delayed by a week or two, and the diabetes insipidus may persist even longer. Fluids, sodium chloride, aminophylline, and acetazolamide promote the excretion of lithium. Lithium coma may require hemodialysis, which has proved to be the most rapid means of reducing the blood lithium concentration.
# Chunk 6062
Mescaline, LSD, and Psilocybin

These drugs produce much the same clinical effects if given in comparable amounts. The perceptual changes are the most dramatic: the user describes vivid visual hallucinations, alterations in the shape and color of objects, unusual dreams, and feelings of depersonalization. An increase in auditory acuity has been described but auditory hallucinations are rare. Cognitive functions are difficult to assess because of inattention, drowsiness, and inability to cooperate in mental testing. The somatic symptoms consist of dizziness, nausea, paresthesia, and blurring of vision. Sympathomimetic effects—pupillary dilatation, piloerection, hyperthermia, and tachycardia—are prominent, and the user may also show hyperreflexia, incoordination of the limbs, and ataxia.
# Chunk 6063
During the early 1970s, the abuse of phencyclidine (PCP) and its analogues was a significant problem. The popularity of these drugs has dropped, but some illicit use continues because they are relatively cheap, easily available, and quite potent. (Their manufacture as a veterinary anesthetic was stopped in 1979.) Phencyclidine is taken in the form of a granular powder, frequently mixed with other drugs, and is smoked or snorted. It is usually classified as a hallucinogen, although it also has stimulant and depressant properties. The effects of intoxication are like those of LSD and other hallucinogens, and resemble those of an acute schizophrenic episode, which may last several days to a week or longer. After the ingestion of a large amount (10 mg or more) of phencyclidine, it is present in the blood and urine for only a few hours sometimes making its detection difficult.
# Chunk 6064
Local tetanus This is the most benign form. The initial symptoms are stiffness, tightness, and pain in the muscles in the neighborhood of a wound, followed by twitchings and brief spasms of the affected muscles. Local tetanus occurs most often in relation to a wound of the hand or forearm, rarely in the abdominal or paravertebral muscles. Gradually, some degree of continuous involuntary spasm becomes evident. There is sustained tautness of the affected muscles and resistance of the part to passive movement. Superimposed on this background of more or less continuous motor activity are brief, intense spasms, lasting from a few seconds to minutes and occurring spontaneously or in response to all variety of stimulation (Struppler et al). Early in the course of the illness there may be periods when the affected muscles are palpably soft and appear to be relaxed. A useful diagnostic maneuver at this stage is to have the patient perform some repetitive voluntary movements, such as opening and closing the hand, in response to which there occurs a gradual increase in the tonic contraction and spasms of the affected muscles, followed by spread to neighboring muscle groups (recruitment spasm). Even with mild localized tetanus there may be slight trismus, a useful diagnostic sign.
# Chunk 6065
Cephalic tetanus This form of tetanus follows wounds of the face and head. The incubation period is short, 1 or 2 days as a rule. The affected muscles (most often facial) are weak or paralyzed. Nevertheless, during accessions of tetanic spasm, the palsied muscles are seen to contract. Apparently, the disturbance in the facial motoneurons is sufficient to prevent voluntary movement but insufficient to prevent the strong reflex impulses that elicit facial spasm. The spasms may involve the tongue and throat, with persistent dysarthria, dysphonia, and dysphagia. Ophthalmoparesis is known to occur but is difficult to verify because of severe blepharospasm. In a strict sense, these cephalic forms of tetanus are examples of local tetanus that frequently becomes generalized. Many cases prove fatal.
# Chunk 6066
The involvement of the nervous system follows a predictable and biphasic pattern (Fisher and Adams). It begins locally, with palatal paralysis (nasal voice, regurgitation, and dysphagia) between the 5th and 12th days of illness. At this time or shortly afterward, other cranial nerves (trigeminal, facial, vagus, and hypoglossal) may also be affected. Ciliary body paralysis with loss of accommodation and blurring of vision but with preserved light reaction usually appears in the second or third week (the opposite of the Argyll Robertson reaction). Rarely, the extraocular muscles are weakened. The cranial nerve signs may clear without further involvement of the nervous system, or a delayed sensorimotor polyneuropathy may develop between the fifth and eighth weeks of the disease. The latter varies in severity from a mild, predominantly distal polyneuropathy of the limbs to a rapidly evolving, ascending paralysis, like that of the Guillain-Barré syndrome; CSF findings are similar as well (acellular fluid with elevated protein). The neuropathic symptoms progress for a week or two, and if the patient does not succumb to respiratory paralysis or cardiac failure (cardiomyopathy), these conditions stabilize and then improve slowly and more or less completely.
# Chunk 6067
Symptoms usually appear within 12 to 36 h of ingestion of the tainted food. Anorexia, nausea, and vomiting occur in most patients. As a rule, blurred vision and diplopia are the initial neural symptoms; their association with ptosis, strabismus, and extraocular muscle palsies, particularly of the sixth nerve, may at first suggest a diagnosis of myasthenia gravis. In botulism, however, accommodation is lost and the pupils are often unreactive to light. Other symptoms of bulbar involvement—nasality of voice, hoarseness, dysarthria, dysphagia, and an inability to phonate—follow in quick succession. These, in turn, are followed by progressive weakness of the muscles of the face, neck, trunk, and limbs, and by respiratory insufficiency. Despite the oropharyngeal weakness, it is not unusual for the gag reflex to be retained. Tendon reflexes are lost in cases of severe generalized weakness. These symptoms and signs evolve rapidly, over 2 to 4 days as a rule, and may be mistaken for those of the Guillain-Barré syndrome. Sensation remains intact, however, and the spinal fluid shows no abnormalities. Severe constipation is characteristic of botulism, perhaps as a result of paresis of smooth muscle of the intestine. Consciousness is retained throughout the illness unless severe degrees of anoxia develop as a result of respiratory failure. In the past, the mortality was greater than 60 percent, but it has declined greatly in recent decades, with improvements in the intensive care of acute respiratory failure and the effectiveness of C. botulinum antitoxins.
# Chunk 6068
The three types of botulinum toxins—A, B, and E—cannot be distinguished by their clinical effects alone, so that the patient should receive the trivalent antiserum as soon as the clinical diagnosis is made. This antitoxin can be obtained from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta, Georgia. An initial dose of 10,000 U is given intravenously after intradermal testing for sensitivity to horse serum, followed by daily doses of 50,000 U intramuscularly until improvement begins. Penicillin or metronidazole are given to eradicate the organism in a wound (but are not as useful if the exogenous preformed toxin has been ingested).
# Chunk 6069
The neurotoxin causes a generalized, flaccid, areflexic paralysis, appearing over 1 or 2 days and thereby mimicking the Guillain-Barré syndrome. In a few cases, several days of ataxia and areflexia precede the paralysis but sensory loss tends to be minimal. External ophthalmoplegia, which occurred in 5 of the 6 children described by Grattan-Smith and colleagues, is exceptional, judging by other reports; internal ophthalmoplegia and pharyngeal weakness are also known to occur, and while not typical, raise the possibility of botulism or diphtheria. The CSF is normal and electrophysiologic studies show reduction in the amplitude of the muscle action potentials but normal or only slightly slowed nerve conduction. Prominent ptosis and neck weakness may also raise the question of a neuromuscular process, but repetitive stimulation testing is normal or evokes only a slight decrement or increment in some cases.
# Chunk 6070
Clinical manifestations These develop over a period of 3 to 6 weeks. The child becomes anorectic, less playful and less alert, and more irritable. These symptoms may be misinterpreted as a behavior disorder or a manifestation of mental retardation. Intermittent vomiting, vague abdominal pain, clumsiness, and ataxia may be added. If these early signs of intoxication are not recognized and the child continues to ingest lead, more flagrant signs of acute encephalopathy may develop—most frequently in the summer months, for reasons that are not understood. Vomiting becomes more persistent, apathy progresses to drowsiness and stupor interspersed with periods of hyperirritability, and, finally, seizures and coma supervene. This syndrome may evolve in a period of a week or less, most rapidly in children younger than 2 years of age; in older children, it is more likely to develop in recurrent and less severe episodes. This clinical syndrome must be distinguished from tuberculous meningitis, viral meningoencephalitis, and the various conditions causing acute increased intracranial pressure. Usually, in lead encephalopathy, the CSF is under increased pressure with manifest papilledema, and there may be a slight lymphocytic pleocytosis and elevated protein but normal glucose values. It follows that lumbar puncture should be done with caution and only if it is essential for diagnosis.
# Chunk 6071
Diagnosis Because the symptoms of plumbism are nonspecific, the diagnosis depends on an appreciation of the potential causative factors and the results of certain laboratory tests. Lead lines at the metaphyses of long bones and basophilic stippling of red cells are seen but are too inconstant to be relied on, but basophilic stippling of bone marrow erythroblasts is uniformly increased. Impairment of hemoglobin synthesis, which is exquisitely sensitive to the toxic effects of lead, results in the increased excretion of urinary coproporphyrin (UCP) and of Δ-aminolevulinic acid (ALA). These urinary indices and the lead concentrations in the serum bear an imperfect relationship to the clinical manifestations. In the test for UCP, which is readily performed in the clinic and emergency department, a few milliliters of urine are acidified with acetic acid and shaken with an equal volume of ether; if coproporphyrin is present, the ether layer will reveal a reddish fluorescence under a Wood lamp. This test is strongly positive when the whole blood concentration of lead exceeds 80 mcg/dL. The diagnosis can be confirmed by promoting lead excretion with calcium disodium edetate (CaNa2 ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid [EDTA]), given in three doses (25 mg/kg) at 8-h intervals. Excretion of over 500 mg in 24 h is indicative of plumbism. The measurement of zinc protoporphyrin (ZPP) in the blood is another reliable means of determining the presence and degree of lead exposure. The binding of erythrocyte protoporphyrin to zinc occurs when lead impairs the normal binding of erythrocyte protoporphyrin to iron. Elevated ZPP can also be induced when access to iron is limited by other conditions, such as iron deficiency anemia.
# Chunk 6072
Treatment The plan of therapy includes the establishment of urinary flow, following which intravenous fluid therapy is restricted to basal water and electrolyte requirements. In cases of acute encephalopathy, combined chelation therapy with 2,3-dimercaprol (British anti-Lewisite [BAL]; 12 to 24 mg/kg) and CaNa2 EDTA (0.5 to 1.5 g/m2 body surface area) for 5 to 7 days. This is followed by a course of oral penicillamine (40 mg/kg, not exceeding 1 g/d). In acute cases the goal is to reduce the serum lead levels below 40 mcg/dL. Once the absorption of lead has ceased, chelating agents remove lead only from soft tissues and not from bone, where most of the lead is stored. Any intercurrent illness may result in a further mobilization of lead from bones and soft tissues and an exacerbation of symptoms of lead intoxication.
# Chunk 6073
The oral lead chelator succimer is approved for outpatient treatment of asymptomatic children with blood lead levels higher than 45 mcg/dL. A 3-week course of treatment is given, with weekly monitoring of blood lead levels to identify lead mobilization from bones and soft tissues (Jorgensen).
# Chunk 6074
Lead intoxication in adults is much less common than in children. The hazards to adults are the result of inhaling the dust of inorganic lead salts and the fumes from the burning of objects containing lead or involvement in processes that require the remelting of lead. Painting, printing, pottery glazing, lead smelting, welding, and storage battery manufacturing are the industries in which these hazards are likeliest to occur. In the past, miners and brass foundry and garage workers (during automobile radiator repair, when soldered joints are being heated; see Goldman et al) were the ones most at risk. Currently, other, sometimes idiosyncratic, sources are more common. For example, the authors have encountered a striking case of lead encephalopathy in a man of Indian origin who was taking large amounts of an Ayurvedic herbal remedy for arthritis. The first manifestation was a series of generalized seizures followed by a fluctuating encephalopathy. His serum lead level was 70 mcg/dL, and 24-h urine collection contained 1,550 mg of lead (normal being less than 400 mg). There was a T2-weighted hyperintensity in the cerebral cortex. Whitfield and colleagues reviewed 23 instances of lead encephalopathy in adults. At the time of their report most cases were caused by moonshine (homemade whiskey from lead-lined stills). More recently, most cases have been from various herbal medications, as already mentioned. Combined lead and arsenic poisoning from herbal compounds is also known.
# Chunk 6075
The diagnosis of arsenical poisoning depends on the demonstration of increased levels of arsenic in the hair and urine. Several of the aspects of testing have been reviewed by Moyer. Arsenic is deposited in the hair within 2 weeks of exposure and may remain fixed there for long periods. Concentrations of more than 0.1 mg arsenic per 100 mg hair are indicative of poisoning. Arsenic also remains within bones for long periods and is slowly excreted in the urine and feces. Excretion of more than 0.1 mg arsenic per liter of urine is considered abnormal; levels greater than 1 mg/L may occur soon after acute exposure. We would caution, however, that individuals who consume fish on a regular basis, as occurs in coastal regions, may have slightly or moderately elevated levels of arsenic and that various conditions such as neuropathy and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) may be mistakenly attributed to this innocuous finding. The levels return to normal within a few months of abstaining from fish.
# Chunk 6076
This drug, long used in the treatment of acute nonlymphocytic leukemia, is not neurotoxic when given in the usual systemic daily doses of 100 to 200 mg/m2. The administration of very high doses (up to 30 times the usual dose) induces remissions in patients’ refractory to conventional treatments. It also may produce, however, a severe degree of cerebellar degeneration in a considerable proportion of cases (4 of 24 reported by Winkelman and Hines). Ataxia of gait and limbs, dysarthria, and nystagmus develop as early as 5 to 7 days after the beginning of high-dose treatment and worsen rapidly. Postmortem examination has disclosed a diffuse degeneration of Purkinje cells, most marked in the depths of the folia, as well as a patchy degeneration of other elements of the cerebellar cortex. Other patients receiving high-dose ara-C have developed a mild, reversible cerebellar syndrome with the same clinical features. Because patients older than 50 years of age are said to be far more likely to develop cerebellar degeneration than those younger than 50 years of age, the former should be treated with a lower dosage (Herzig et al).
# Chunk 6077
Another strategy for treating certain malignancies, mostly hematologic, involves the use of host T-cells that have been genetically engineered to express an antigen receptor that binds specifically to tumor cells. This binding facilitates cytotoxic destruction of tumor cells by the modified T-cells, and several trials have demonstrated not only a favorable response rate in patients with otherwise refractory malignancies but also occasional durable remissions. The most common toxicity associated with CAR-T-cell therapy is a cytokine-release syndrome that can manifest on a spectrum from mild constitutional symptoms to severe multi-organ dysfunction including, rarely, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. An encephalopathy termed CAR-T-cell-related encephalopathy syndrome (CRES) is the second most common toxicity and is associated with a confusional state and seizures that result from cerebral edema and elevated intracranial pressure. The disorder most often occurs about 5 days after initiation of therapy, coincident with other cytokine-release symptoms, but may occur later as well. Efforts aimed at identifying and grading the symptoms have been established, as reviewed by Neelapu and colleagues. Current recommendations include obtaining a baseline brain MRI and initiating seizure prophylaxis before initiation of CAR-T-cell therapy, and frequent neurological assessments thereafter. Symptoms of cytokine-release syndrome and CRES can be managed with glucocorticoids, though at the expense of suppressing T-cell function. Interestingly, a high serum level of interleukin-6 (IL-6), one of the many cytokines released by activated T-cells, has been associated with more severe neurotoxicity. Antibody drugs that bind to and inhibit the IL-6 receptor, such as tocilizumab, have been shown to reduce CRES, particularly in the early period following initiation of CAR-T-cell therapy.
# Chunk 6078
Chap. 43. Here we mention mainly that penicillin and its derivatives such as imipenem, and to a lesser degree, the cephalosporins, are capable of causing seizures when high serum concentrations are attained. Cefepime, for example, has often been presumptively implicated in otherwise unexplained encephalopathies in patients we see as consultants on the wards and ICU. This complication is favored in most instances by concomitant renal failure.
# Chunk 6079
Spinal shock The loss of motor function at the time of injury, tetraplegia with lesions of the fourth to fifth cervical segments or above, and paraplegia with lesions of the thoracic cord, are accompanied by immediate atonic paralysis of bladder and bowel, gastric atony, loss of sensation below a level corresponding to the spinal cord lesion, muscular flaccidity, and almost complete suppression of spinal segmental reflex activity below the lesion. As a result of their sudden separation from higher levels of control, the neural elements below the lesion essentially fail to perform their normal function. As dramatic as this state of reflex paralysis is, its physiologic basis is incompletely understood. Also impaired in the segments below the lesion is the control of autonomic function. Vasomotor tone, sweating, and piloerection in the lower parts of the body are temporarily abolished. As a result, there may be severe systemic hypotension that itself contributes to spinal cord damage. The lower extremities lose heat if left uncovered, and they swell if dependent. The skin over time becomes dry and pale, and ulcerations may develop over bony prominences. The sphincters of the bladder and the rectum remain contracted to some degree because of the loss of the normal inhibitory influence of higher centers, but the detrusor of the bladder and smooth muscle of the rectum become atonic. Urine accumulates until the intravesicular pressure is sufficient to overcome the sphincters, causing overflow incontinence. There is also passive distention of the bowel, retention of feces, and absence of peristalsis (paralytic ileus). Genital reflexes (penile erection, bulbocavernosus reflex, contraction of dartos muscle) are abolished or profoundly depressed.
# Chunk 6080
Stage of heightened reflex activity This is the more familiar condition of spasticity that emerges sometime  after spinal injury and is also typical of most of the nontraumatic subacute myelopathies that have developed more slowly than traumatic injuries and have not had a period of spinal shock. A few weeks after an acute traumatic injury, all reflex responses, which are initially minimal and unsustained, become stronger and more easily elicitable and as time passes, come to include additional and more proximal muscles. Gradually, the typical pattern of heightened flexion reflexes emerges: dorsiflexion of the big toe (Babinski sign); fanning of the other toes; and later, flexion or slow withdrawal movements of the foot, leg, and thigh with contraction of the tensor fascia lata muscle (the last several features referred to as “triple flexion”). Tactile stimulation of the foot may suffice as a stimulus, but a painful stimulus is more effective. The Achilles reflexes and then the patellar reflexes return. Retention of urine becomes less complete, and at irregular intervals urine is expelled by spontaneous contractions of the detrusor muscle. Reflex defecation also begins. After several months the withdrawal reflexes become greatly exaggerated, to the point of flexor spasms, and they may be accompanied by profuse sweating, piloerection, and automatic emptying of the bladder (occasionally of the rectum). This is the “mass reflex,” which can be evoked by stimulation of the skin of the legs or by some interoceptive stimulus, such as a full bladder. Varying degrees of heightened flexor reflex activity may last for years, or indefinitely. Heat-induced sweating is defective, but reflex-evoked (“spinal”) sweating may be profuse (see Kneisley). In such cases the lateral horn cells in much of the thoracic cord are still viable and have been disinhibited. Above the level of the lesion, thermoregulatory sweating may be exaggerated in order to compensate for the loss of evaporative cooling of lower segments, and there is cutaneous flushing, hypertension that causes pounding headache and reflex bradycardia. This syndrome (“autonomic dysreflexia”) is episodic and occurs in response to a certain stimuli, such as a distended bladder or rectum. It has been ascribed to the reflex release of adrenaline from the adrenal medulla and of norepinephrine from the disinhibited sympathetic terminals caudal to the lesion but is exaggerated by defective baroreceptor compensatory reflexes as discussed in Chap. 25.
# Chunk 6081
Extensor reflexes and tone eventually develop in most cases (18 of 22 of Kuhn’s patients who survived more than 2 years), but their appearance does not lead to the abolition of the exaggerated flexor reflexes. The overactivity of extensor muscles may appear as early as 6 months after the injury, but this only happens, as a rule, after the flexor responses are fully developed. Extensor responses are at first manifest in certain muscles of the hip and thigh and later of the leg. In a few patients, extensor reflexes are organized into support reactions sufficient to permit spinal standing. Kuhn observed that extensor movements were at first provoked most readily by a sudden shift from a sitting to a supine position and later by proprioceptive stimuli (squeezing of the thigh muscles) and tactile stimuli from wide areas. Marshall, in a study of 44 patients with chronic spastic paraplegia of spinal origin, found all possible combinations of flexor and extensor reflexes; the type of reflex obtained was determined by the intensity and duration of the stimulus (a mild prolonged noxious stimulus evoked an ipsilateral extensor reflex; an intense brief stimulus, a flexor response).
# Chunk 6082
The aftercare of patients with paraplegia, in addition to substantial psychological support to allow accommodation to new limitations while encouraging a productive life, is concerned with management of bladder and bowel disturbances, care of the skin, prevention of pulmonary embolism, and maintenance of nutrition. At first, continual catheterization is necessary; then, after several weeks, the bladder can be managed by intermittent catheterization once or twice daily, using a scrupulous aseptic technique. Bacteriuria alone is common and does not require treatment with antibiotics unless there is associated pyuria. Morning suppositories and periodically spaced enemas are effective means of controlling fecal incontinence. Chronic pain (present in 30 to 50 percent of cases) requires the use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medication, injections of local anesthetics, and transcutaneous nerve stimulation. A combination of carbamazepine or gabapentin and either clonazepam or tricyclic antidepressants may be helpful in cases of burning leg and trunk pain. Remaining pain may require more aggressive therapy, such as epidural injections of analgesics or corticosteroids or an implanted spinal cord stimulator that is applied to the dorsal columns or an analgesic pump, but often even these measures are ineffective. Fentanyl transcutaneous patches may be tried. Spasticity and flexor spasms may be troublesome; oral baclofen, diazepam, or tizanidine may provide some relief. In permanent spastic paraplegia with severe stiffness and adductor and flexor spasms of the legs, intrathecal baclofen, delivered by an automated pump in doses up to 400 mg/d, has also been helpful. The drug is believed to act at the synapses of spinal reflexes (Penn and Kroin). Selective injection of botulinum toxin may provide relief of some spastic deformities and of spasms. One must be alert to the threat of pulmonary embolism from deep-vein thrombi, although the incidence is surprisingly low after the first several months.
# Chunk 6083
Clinical features The neurologic disorder first appears 6 months or more after the course of radiation therapy, usually between 12 and 15 months (latent periods as long as 60 months or longer have been reported). The onset is insidious, usually with sensory symptoms—paresthesias and dysesthesias of the feet or a Lhermitte phenomenon, and similar symptoms in the hands in cases of cervical cord damage. Weakness of one or both legs usually follows the sensory loss. Initially, local pain is absent, in distinction to the effects of spinal metastases. In some cases, the sensory abnormalities are transitory as in the syndrome described above; more often, additional signs make their appearance and progress, at first rapidly and then more slowly and irregularly, over a period of several weeks or months, with involvement of the corticospinal and spinothalamic pathways. The neurologic disturbance may take the form of a Brown-Séquard syndrome, but with progression it is usually overtaken by a transverse myelopathy.
# Chunk 6084
Neurologists associated with cancer treatment centers are sometimes confronted with a patient who exhibits the late development (up to 10 to 15 years after radiation) of a slowly progressive sensorimotor paralysis of only one limb (motor weakness predominates) or one region of the body. This usually represents damage in the peripheral nervous system. Examples that we have encountered are multiple cranial neuropathies after radiation of nasopharyngeal tumors, cervical and especially brachial neuropathies after laryngeal and breast cancers, and lumbosacral plexopathies and cauda equina damage with pelvic radiation. These are discussed further in Chap. 43, on diseases of the peripheral nerves.
# Chunk 6085
Treatment and prevention Kagan and colleagues have determined the tolerance of the adult human spinal cord to radiation, taking into account the volume of tissue irradiated, the duration of the irradiation, and the total dose. They reviewed all of the cases in the literature up to 1980 and concluded that radiation injury could be avoided if the total dose was kept below 6,000 cGy and was given over a period of 30 to 70 days, provided that each daily fraction did not exceed 200 cGy and the weekly dose was not in excess of 900 cGy. It is noteworthy that in the cases reported by Sanyal and associates, the amount of radiation surpassed these limits. Forewarned with this knowledge, radiation specialists have the impression that the incidence of this complication is decreasing, especially as newer sterotactic methods of delivering radiation are introduced.If the underlying neoplasm is likely to be imminently fatal, palliative radiation can exceed these limits.
# Chunk 6086
Spinal cord disease of this type has been reported from the Caribbean islands, southeastern United States, southern Japan, South America, and Africa. The clinical picture is one of a slowly progressive paraparesis with increased tendon reflexes and Babinski signs; disorder of sphincteric control is usually an early feature but symmetric paresthesias, reduced vibratory and position senses, and ataxia follow over several months or years. A few patients have had an associated polyneuropathy, as in Cruickshank’s early cases. The upper extremities are usually spared (except for lively tendon reflexes), as are cerebral and brainstem functions.
# Chunk 6087
The usual history in these cases is of weakness and numbness of the feet and legs (less often of the hands and arms), which typically develop over a few days, and for the sensory symptoms to ascend from the feet to the trunk. Paresthesias in the feet and legs, which simulate a polyneuropathy, are common early symptoms. Sphincteric disturbances and backache are also common in the first days but as often arise later. A slight asymmetry of the symptoms and signs, a sensory level on the trunk, or a Babinski sign clearly marks the disease as a myelopathy and serves to distinguish it from a rapidly progressive polyneuropathy such as the Guillain-Barré syndrome. Back pain of varying degree and headache and stiff neck may or may not be present. In about half of cases the patient can identify a recent infectious illness, usually a mundane upper respiratory syndrome, but the fever has usually abated when the neurologic symptoms begin. The illness evolves over several days, sometimes a single day or on the other extreme, over 1 or 2 weeks. Despite the term transverse myelitis, fewer than half of cases demonstrate a truly “transverse” involvement of the cord; more often there is an incomplete corticospinal and spinothalamic syndrome affecting one side more than the other. As discussed further on, it is usually not possible to distinguish an acute episode of postinfectious myelitis from the first attack of multiple sclerosis, but a well-defined preceding infection with certain organisms favors the former process. The latency between infection and myelitis is an uncertain matter but there are well-documented instances in which the febrile episode blends into the neurologic syndrome and others in which the latency has been 2 weeks; considerably longer intervals make the association suspect.
# Chunk 6088
The clinical picture was well described by Wyburn-Mason. Acute cramp-like, lancinating pain, sometimes in a sciatic distribution, is often a prominent early feature. It may occur in a series of episodes over a period of several days or weeks; sometimes it is worse in recumbency. Almost always there is weakness or paralysis of one or both legs and numbness and paresthesias in the same distribution with a highly variable duration of evolution; an abrupt apoplectic onset is known or the neurologic signs may appear over months, most cases conforming to the middle of these extremes. Wasting and weakness of the legs may introduce the disease in some instances, with uneven progression, sometimes in a series of abrupt episodes. Severe disability of gait is usually present within 6 months, and half of the patients described by Aminoff and Logue were chair-bound within 3 years; the average survival in the past was 5 to 6 years, but the disorder has rarely been fatal in our patients. These lesions only infrequently give rise to intramedullary or subarachnoid hemorrhage. The spinal fluid shows high protein but little or no cellular reaction.
# Chunk 6089
Copper Deficiency Myelopathy (Combined System Disease of Nonpernicious Anemia Type)

This refers to a metabolic disease of the spinal cord caused by low copper, affecting the posterior and lateral columns, in this sense, also a combined system degeneration. The clinical syndrome and potential causes were elegantly elaborated by Kumar and colleagues. A homologous disease exists as “swayback” in lambs. A deficiency of vitamin B12 is not causative, but may coexist in some cases, probably on the basis of a shared inadequacy of dietary intake. Women are more often affected than men. Imbalance is the most common presenting complaint. Posterior column signs and gait ataxia tend to predominate but a degree of spasticity is usually conjoined and there may be Babinski signs and reduced ankle reflexes. The problem is typically one of impaired absorption of copper, for example, after gastric bypass or bowel surgery, which together account for half of cases. Of importance in causation in some patients is excess zinc intake in the form of health supplements, coin swallowing, and denture creams (see Nations et al).
# Chunk 6090
Treatment In the early stages of arachnoiditis, corticosteroids have been given to control the inflammatory reaction and to prevent progress of the disease, but their value is questionable. Surgery may be effective in the case of localized “cyst” formation and cord compression. Severe radicular pain can be effectively relieved by posterior rhizotomy, but there is a strong tendency for the pain to return after an interval of several months or 1 or 2 years so that this approach has been all but abandoned. For chronic adhesive lumbar arachnoiditis in which diffuse back and limb pain is the most distressing symptom, there is little effective surgical or medical treatment, although relief has reportedly been provided in isolated instances by painstaking microsurgical dissection of the lumbar roots. In some cases, the loculations return. Administration of corticosteroids, systemic and epidural, has not been consistently beneficial but may be tried. Immune-suppressant medication such as azathioprine or interferons have been tried but not studied systematically. Transcutaneous stimulator treatment and gabapentin have also been used with inconsistent results.
# Chunk 6091
Sensorimotor spinal tract syndrome The clinical picture is related predominantly to compression and less often to invasion and destruction of spinal cord tracts. The signs of compression consist of a combination of (1) an asymmetrical spastic weakness of the legs with thoracolumbar lesions and of the arms and legs with cervical lesions, (2) a sensory level on the trunk below which perception of pain and temperature is reduced or lost, (3) posterior column signs, and (4) a spastic bladder under weak voluntary control. The onset of the compressive symptoms is usually gradual and the course progressive over a period of weeks and months, frequently with back pain. With extradural tumors, paralysis usually develops over a period of days to several weeks, but the tempo of progression may be more rapid or more leisurely. The initial disturbance may be of motor or sensory function and the distribution may be asymmetrical. High cervical or foramen magnum lesions produce special clinical syndromes, as described in Chap. 3 and below. With thoracic lesions, one leg usually becomes weak and stiff before the other one. Subjective sensory symptoms of the dorsal column type (tingling paresthesias) assume similar distributions. Pain and thermal senses are more likely to be affected than tactile, vibration, and position senses. Nevertheless, the posterior columns are frequently involved as the process progresses. Initially, the sensory disturbance is contralateral to the maximum motor weakness, but a sharply defined Brown-Séquard hemicord syndrome is rarely observed. The bladder and bowel usually become paralyzed coincident with paralysis of the legs. If the compression is relieved, there is recovery from these sensory and motor symptoms, often in the reverse order of their appearance; the first part affected is the last to recover, and sensory symptoms tend to disappear before motor ones.
# Chunk 6092
In the analysis of a polyneuropathy, it is of further value to determine whether the process is predominantly motor with less sensory involvement or the converse, or purely sensory, motor, or mainly autonomic. The time course of the disease also informs diagnosis. An acute onset (i.e., rapid evolution) is nearly always an inflammatory, immunologic, toxic, or vascular polyneuropathy. The other extreme, a polyneuropathy evolving over many years, is indicative of a hereditary or, rarely, a metabolic disease. Most of the toxic, nutritional, and systemic diseases of nerve develop subacutely over several weeks and months. In addition to the patient’s report of the progress of symptoms, signs such as muscle atrophy signify a process of relatively long duration, at least several months.
# Chunk 6093
The typical case is readily identified. Paresthesias and slight numbness in the toes and fingers are the earliest symptoms; only infrequently are they absent throughout the illness. The major clinical manifestation is weakness that evolves more or less symmetrically over a period of several days to a week or two, or somewhat longer. The proximal as well as distal muscles of the limbs are involved, usually the lower extremities before the upper (thus the older term Landry ascending paralysis); the trunk, intercostal, neck, and cranial muscles may be affected later. Weakness progresses in approximately 5 percent of patients to total motor paralysis with respiratory failure within a few days. In severe cases, the ocular motor nerves are paralyzed and even the pupils may be unreactive.
# Chunk 6094
Disturbances of autonomic function include sinus tachycardia and, less often, bradycardia, facial flushing, fluctuating hypertension and hypotension, loss of sweating, or episodic profuse diaphoresis; one or more are common in minor form and infrequently they become pronounced or persist for more than a week. Urinary retention occurs in approximately 15 percent of patients soon after the onset of weakness, but catheterization is seldom required for more than a few days. Numerous medical complications follow in severe cases as a result of immobilization and respiratory failure, as discussed further on under “Treatment.”
# Chunk 6095
Measurement of maximal inspiratory force and expiratory vital capacity usually suffices for the bedside estimation of diaphragmatic strength and respiratory function. The trend of these measurements is a guide to the likelihood of respiratory failure. As had been observed in poliomyelitis, the strength of the neck muscles and trapezii, which share the same segmental innervation as the diaphragm, tends to parallel diaphragmatic power. A rough estimate of breathing capacity may be obtained by having the patient count quickly on one deep breath. The ability to reach 20 generally corresponds to a vital capacity of greater than 1.5 L. If a downward trend in these measurements is recognized and the vital capacity diminishes to below about 10 mL/kg, endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation are usually necessary (see further on). However, a fairly severe impairment of ventilation may occur before the first sign of dyspnea appears and before there is elevation of arterial carbon dioxide content. Incipient respiratory failure may be evident by tachypnea and a decrease in arterial oxygen tension (Po2 less than 85 mm Hg) reflecting pulmonary atelectasis. When respiratory failure arises gradually as the patient weakens over days, there is slight tachycardia, diaphoresis, restlessness, and tachypnea. Attempts to forestall intubation and positive-pressure ventilation by using negative-pressure cuirass-type devices have been unsatisfactory in our experience. Patients with oropharyngeal weakness require intubation even earlier so as to prevent aspiration, but full mechanical ventilation is not always necessary at the same time. Patients in these circumstances should obviously be admitted to an intensive care unit staffed by personnel skilled in maintaining ventilation and airway patency.
# Chunk 6096
In patients who are bedbound, prevention of electrolyte imbalances, gastrointestinal hemorrhage, and particularly pulmonary embolism (by the use of subcutaneous heparin or pneumatic compression boots) requires careful attention. Adynamic ileus is a problem in some cases, manifest by abdominal pain coincident with nasogastric tube feeding and by bloating; it may lead to bowel perforation even if feeding is discontinued. As mentioned, a number of patients become hyponatremic, usually from SIADH but occasionally from a natriuresis, and the drop in sodium is exaggerated by positive-pressure mechanical ventilation. The distinction between the two conditions that cause hyponatremia determines the course of treatment: fluid restriction in the case of SIADH or salt replacement in the case of sodium loss. Many patients have bizarre waking dreams or hallucinations after weeks of immobilization (oneiric hallucinations). A dependable mode of communication should be established by the nursing staff, preferably before the patient is intubated. A Plexiglas or opaque board with letters and phrases is useful for this purpose.
# Chunk 6097
As effective as plasma exchange is, IVIg (0.4 g/kg per day for 5 consecutive days) is easier to administer and probably safer because there is no need for large intravenous access. The results of the first trial conducted by van der Meché and colleagues were corroborated in an international study led by Hughes, in which we participated (see Plasma Exchange/Sandoglobulin Guillain-Barré Syndrome Trial Group). That trial compared plasma exchange to IVIg and also evaluated their use sequentially. There was a tenuous trend toward a better outcome in patients who received plasma exchange and results were perhaps slightly better in a group who were treated with plasma exchange followed immediately by 5 days of immune globulin infusions; in both instances, however, the differences failed to attain statistical significance and the three modes of treatment were said to be equivalent. Renal failure, proteinuria, and aseptic meningitis, manifested most often by severe headache, are infrequent complications of IVIg. The only serious reactions we have encountered have been in a very few patients who congenitally lacked IgA and in whom pooled gamma globulin caused anaphylaxis, and a few cases of inflammatory local venous thrombosis in the region of the infusion site. The pharmacokinetics of IVIg are highly variable among individuals and some groups have found an association between a high rate of clearance of agent and poorer clinical outcome (see Kuitwaard and colleagues). This group has suggested that patients who show only a small increment in serum IgG levels might benefit from higher doses or a second course of IVIg.
# Chunk 6098
After the use of either plasma exchange or IVIg, 5 to 10 percent of patients who initially improve will have a relapse that becomes apparent several days or up to 3 weeks after completion of treatment. If there had been a response to the initial therapy, the same treatment may be repeated or the alternative treatment may be tried; either can be successful. A few such patients relapse repeatedly and have the course of chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (see further on). In some patients under our care, this form of the disease stabilized after several months in response to the administration of corticosteroids, with very gradual tapering of the dose over several months, or in combination with repeated courses of IVIg or plasma exchanges.
# Chunk 6099
The neurotoxic effects of Corynebacterium diphtheriae and the mode of action of the exotoxin elaborated by the bacillus are described in Chap. 41. Local action of the exotoxin may paralyze pharyngeal and laryngeal muscles (dysphagia, nasal voice) within 1 or 2 weeks after the onset of the infection and shortly thereafter may cause blurring of vision because of paralysis of accommodation, but these and other cranial nerve symptoms may be overlooked. At this stage, the cranial neuropathy must be distinguished from that of GBS, botulism, and most of all, from myasthenia gravis.
# Chunk 6100
In summary, the most characteristic features of porphyric neuropathy are the relapsing nature, acute onset, abdominal pain, psychotic symptoms, predominant motor neuropathy, often with an early bibrachial distribution of weakness, truncal sensory loss, and tachycardia. Rarely, the neuropathy develops without other symptoms.
# Chunk 6101
Treatment The use of intravenous glucose and intravenous hematin (4 mg/kg daily for 3 to 14 days) is recommended as the most effective therapy. Other aspects of treatment include respiratory support, use of beta-blocking agents (labetalol) if tachycardia and hypertension are severe, continued intravenous glucose to suppress the heme biosynthetic pathway, and pyridoxine (100 mg bid) on the supposition that vitamin B6 depletion has occurred. Attempted prevention is of the utmost importance, since attacks can be precipitated by the aforementioned drugs as well as numerous others that are porphyrinogenic.
# Chunk 6102
Thallium salts, when taken in sufficient amount, produce a clinical picture resembling that of GBS or an acute sensory polyneuropathy. If the salts are taken orally, there is first abdominal pain, vomiting, and diarrhea, followed within a few days by pain and tingling in the toes and fingertips and then rapid weakening of muscles of the limbs, initially the distal ones. As the weakness progresses, the tendon reflexes diminish. Pain sensation is reduced more than tactile, vibratory, and position sense. Persistent acral pain with allodynia has been a major feature in 3 of the 5 patients we have examined; in 2 of our patients there was no weakness, only sensory loss and ataxia. All cranial nerves except the first and eighth may be affected; facial palsies, ophthalmoplegia, nystagmus, optic neuritis with visual impairment, and vocal cord palsies are additional abnormalities but only in the most severely affected patients. The CSF protein rises to more than 100 mg. Death may occur in the first 10 days as a result of cardiac arrest. The early onset of painful paresthesias, sensory loss, and pain localized to joints, back, and chest, as well as rapid loss of hair (after 1 or 2 weeks), all serve to differentiate this neuropathy from GBS, porphyria, and other acute polyneuropathies. Relative preservation of reflexes is noteworthy and rapidly evolving complete alopecia is a striking feature. Patients with lesser degrees of intoxication may recover completely within weeks or months. Thallium salts act like potassium and a high intake of potassium chloride hastens the excretion of thallium. Chelating agents are of unproven value but are usually included in treatment.
# Chunk 6103
Of the neuropathies caused by metallic poisoning, that caused by arsenic has been particularly well characterized. In cases of chronic poisoning, the neuropathic symptoms develop rather slowly, over a period of several weeks or months and have the same sensory and motor distribution as the nutritional polyneuropathies. Gastrointestinal symptoms, the result of ingestion of arsenic compounds, may precede the polyneuropathy, which is nearly always associated with anemia, jaundice, brownish cutaneous pigmentation, hyperkeratosis of palms and soles, and later with white transverse banding of the nails (Mees lines). The disease is accompanied by an excess of arsenic in the urine and hair. Pathologically, this form of arsenical neuropathy is categorized as of the dying-back (axonal degeneration) type.
# Chunk 6104
The diagnosis is established by the history of lead exposure, the predominant and restricted motor involvement, associated medical findings (anemia, basophilic stippling of red blood cell precursors in the bone marrow, a “lead line” along the gingival margins, colicky abdominal pain, and constipation), and the urinary excretion of lead and coproporphyrins. Blood lead levels of more than 70 mg/dL are always abnormal. In patients with lower levels, doubling of the 24-h urinary lead excretion following an infusion of the chelating agent CaNa2 ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) indicates a significant degree of lead intoxication. Coproporphyrin in the urine is abnormal in any amount, but it may also be found in porphyria, alcoholism, iron deficiency, and other disorders as well as in lead intoxication.
# Chunk 6105
For decades it has been known that peripheral neuropathy commonly complicates the use of vincristine, an antineoplastic agent most widely used in treatment of the lymphomas and leukemia. Paresthesias are the most common early symptom, and loss of ankle jerks is an early sign. Some degree of weakness usually precedes objective sensory loss; the extensor muscles of the fingers and wrists are affected; later the dorsiflexors of the toes and feet causing foot-drop become involved either early or late in the clinical course. With the dose regimens currently used, the weakness is usually mild, but in the past, some patients became quadriparetic and bedbound. Adults are more severely affected than are children, as are persons with preexisting polyneuropathies. The neuropathy is strictly dose-related and reduction in dosage is followed by improvement of neuropathic symptoms although this may take several months. Many patients are then able to tolerate vincristine in low dosage, such as 1 mg every 2 weeks, for many months. Thalidomide produces a similar sensory neuropathy. It is finding use in the treatment of inflammatory conditions such as Behçhet disease, graft versus host reactions, erythema nodosum, lepromatous eruptions, aphthous stomatitis in HIV patients and highly vascular tumors and certain tumors such as renal cell cancer.
# Chunk 6106
The most characteristic syndrome affects the lumbar roots. Pain, which can be severe, begins in the low back or hip and spreads to the thigh and knee on one side; the discomfort has a deep, aching character with superimposed lancinating jabs and there is a propensity for pain to be most severe at night. Weakness and later atrophy are evident in the pelvic girdle and thigh muscles, although the distal muscles of the leg may also be affected. The weakness can progress for days or weeks (rarely, months). The patellar reflex is lost on the affected side. Curiously, we have found the opposite patellar reflex to be absent in some patients, without explanation. Deep and superficial sensation may be intact or mildly impaired, conforming to either a multiple nerve or multiple adjacent root distribution (i.e., L2 and L3, or L4 and L5). The pain lasts for several days and then gradually abates. Motor recovery is the rule although months and even years may elapse before it is complete. The same syndrome may recur after an interval of months or years in the opposite leg. The EMG shows denervation in the lumbar and sometimes adjacent myotomes.
# Chunk 6107
Treatment Based on the response to the systemic vasculitides with ANCA activity, mononeuritis multiplex caused by vasculitis has been treated with corticosteroids and either rituximab 375 mg/m2 weekly for 4 weeks, or cyclophosphamide 1 g/m2 intravenously once a month for several months, but other equivalent regimens have been suggested. For the corticosteroid regimen, we have used intravenous methylprednisolone, 1.5 mg/kg, for several days, followed by oral corticosteroid treatment. It appears from clinical experience that corticosteroids alone are often inadequate, but some clinicians have taken this approach initially. Azathioprine is a reasonable alternative if cyclophosphamide is not tolerated. Treatment usually must be continued for at least several months. In intractable cases and in those with systemic involvement, treatment with methotrexate may be indicated, or this may be used initially. Spontaneous remission and therapeutic arrest are known, but many cases have a fatal outcome from kidney and systemic complications. The infarctive nerve palsies and sensory loss of the mononeuropathies generally persist to a large degree even when the systemic disease is brought under control.
# Chunk 6108
Unlike the cases of sarcoid polyneuropathy we have reported (Zuniga et al), in the series of 11 patients with sarcoid neuropathy studied by Said and colleagues (2002), only 2 were known to have pulmonary granulomas before the onset of neuropathic symptoms; 6 had a focal or multifocal neuropathic syndrome (including 1 with a clinical and electrophysiologic pattern that simulated multifocal conduction block). The remainder had a nonspecific symmetric polyneuropathy, 1 of which had an acute onset. Facial diplegia was common in sarcoid, as is well known. The pathologic changes in nerve and muscle biopsy specimens consisted mainly of epineurial granulomas and endoneurial inflammatory infiltrates, but there were indications of necrotizing vasculitis in 7 cases. Among the cases we studied, 6 of 10 had a subacute or chronic sensorimotor polyneuropathy. It is notable that in only 2 of Said’s patients were levels of angiotensin-converting enzyme elevated in the serum.
# Chunk 6109
The nerve conduction tests show preservation of sensory potentials, which marks the process as radicular. Headache and a marked pleocytosis (over 100 mononuclear cells/mm3) in the spinal fluid may accompany the pain and usually precedes the radiculopathies by days. Polymerase chain reaction for the detection of the organism in the CSF gives variable results, especially after several days of neurologic illness. A value above unity of CSF to serum anti-Lyme antibodies is probably a dependable indicator of acute or subacute disease, but there have been few systematic studies of this measurement. Oligoclonal bands in the CSF are common as a reflection of these antibodies.
# Chunk 6110
Treatment Treatment of the Lyme neuropathic syndromes is with intravenous antibiotics, preferably ceftriaxone 2 g daily for 1 month. More prolonged or intravenous treatment has not been shown to be superior. Corticosteroids have an uncertain role in the painful radicular syndromes, but we have used them in low doses and they relieved pain. In most series, there is recovery or virtually complete resolution of radicular symptoms in approximately 90 percent of patients, although this may take months. Facial palsies also tend to improve, but with a lower rate of complete resolution. It has been stated that many of the peripheral and cranial neuropathies improve even without treatment, but this has not been studied systematically.
# Chunk 6111
The sensory polyneuropathies of the Sjögren syndrome are of particular interest to neurologists, as they will encounter most cases before other physicians (Griffin et al). More than 80 percent of affected patients are older women. The polyneuropathic syndrome often begins with paresthesias of the feet, usually mild in degree. The main clinical features are subacute and widespread sensory loss that may include the trunk and sometimes, profoundly diminished kinesthetic sense, giving rise to sensory ataxia of the limbs and of gait that reflect a ganglionitis. Loss of pain and temperature sensation is variable; tendon reflexes are abolished. A nondescript largeor small-fiber distal sensory neuropathy is also known, for which reason testing for Sjögren-related serum antibodies is included in the general evaluation of polyneuropathies in older patients, and the heterogeneity of sensory neuropathy presentation has been emphasized by several authors. In time, some patients develop autonomic abnormalities such as bowel atony, urinary retention, loss of sweating, and pupillary changes. There is usually little or no pain, but there have been exceptions.
# Chunk 6112
Treatment Corticosteroids in doses of approximately 60 mg daily of prednisone, cyclophosphamide (100 mg per day), and rituximab (1,000 mg per day, 2 weeks apart) have been used when the neuropathy is severe and are indicated when there is vasculitis involving renal and pulmonary structures. We have initially administered prednisone 60 mg daily, sometimes in tandem with intermittent plasma exchange, but with little evidence of response, before adding a second immunosuppressive agent.
# Chunk 6113
Among the multitude of odd neurologic manifestations attributed to this disease, the best known ones are cerebellar ataxia and myoclonus. In addition, Hadjivassiliou and colleagues have reported patients with a range of neuromuscular disorders in whom the neurologic symptoms antedated the diagnosis of the bowel disorder. A nondescript sensorimotor neuropathy was the most frequent, but one patient had mononeuropathy multiplex and Chin and colleagues have reported a multifocal neuropathy pattern. In a small prospective survey of treated celiac disease, Luostarinen and colleagues found 23 percent with evidence of a polyneuropathy by nerve conduction testing, but the clinical findings were scant. Antigliadin antibodies (simple antibodies directed against gluten), as well as more specific anti-transglutaminase antibodies and histologic examination of a duodenal biopsy are confirmatory of the diagnosis. Luostarinen and colleagues suggested that a search be made for these antibodies in patients with polyneuropathies of obscure origin. It is not clear how many of their cases could be attributed to nutritional deficiency. We have not encountered a definite instance despite attempts to detect the special sprue antibodies in the evaluation of over 200 cases of otherwise obscure polyneuropathy.
# Chunk 6114
The presence of the disease can be suspected from the presence of demyelinating features on the nerve conduction studies, an immunoglobulin spike in the blood, sometimes polyclonal or biclonal rather than monoclonal and, as mentioned, possessing a lambda light chain component. The diagnosis requires the demonstration of one or more osteosclerotic lesions by a radiographic survey of the long bones, pelvis, spine, and skull as well as a PET study, which usually shows the osteosclerotic lesions as highly active (a bone scan is insensitive) and a bone marrow examination, which shows a moderate increase in the number of well-differentiated plasma cells. In most of our patients there have been several discrete bone lesions concentrated in the ribs and spine; the skull and long bones may harbor such lesions as well, or there may be a single lesion, which is often situated in the spinal column. Biopsy of a bone lesion is justified. The organomegaly and skin changes are apparently the result of high levels of circulating VEGF that is produced by the tumor and is useful in confirming the diagnosis.
# Chunk 6115
Analysis of the serum and urine, searching for an abnormal paraprotein, is the most useful screening test for amyloid neuropathy. Next in value is a microscopic examination of a biopsy of the abdominal fat pad, gingiva, or rectal mucosa for deposition of amyloid in tissue or blood vessels. Biopsy of the sural nerve or of the involved viscera has a high diagnostic yield; muscle tissue gives variable results. The liver biopsy is positive in virtually all cases of primary amyloid and the kidney shows amyloid infiltration in 85 percent. In several of our patients with a clinical syndrome typical of amyloid neuropathy but in whom amyloid was absent in the sural nerve, the diagnosis was established only after sequential biopsy of numerous sites (fat pad, kidney, liver). If the sural nerve is severely depopulated of nerve fibers, the amount of congophilic staining and the characteristic amyloid birefringence may be meager and yield a spuriously negative result. It is also critical to ensure the accuracy of congophilic staining by comparison with positive and negative control tissue from the same laboratory. The CSF has a normal or mildly elevated protein concentration, but this does not distinguish the neuropathic process from many others.
# Chunk 6116
Prineas and McLeod.

Treatment Several trials have shown a short-term benefit from the intravenous infusion of high doses of gamma globulin (IVIg, total 2 g/kg in divided infusions over 2 to 5 days), see Hahn et al 1996b. More than half of our patients have responded to this treatment, albeit for only several weeks or months, after which the infusions must be repeated to maintain clinical improvement. A desire to spare patients the side effects of indefinite prednisone administration (see later) makes this mode of therapy a reasonable alternative, in some cases for almost 10 years without ill effects. Patients who require treatment at such short intervals as to be impractical have benefited from the addition of small doses of prednisone or of an immunosuppressive drug as described in the following text. The main drawbacks of IVIg are its expense and the several hours required for its infusion. Rare instances of nephrotic syndrome, aseptic meningitis, serum sickness, thrombotic venous, or arterial occlusion, including stroke and hypotension, have been reported, particularly if the infusion is too rapid.
# Chunk 6117
A number of patients will have no response to glucocorticoids within the first 1 or 2 months but will improve if treatment is continued. Barohn and colleagues (1989) have found that the earliest improvement occurs only after 2 months of treatment and is maximal at approximately 6 months. In addition to all the well-known side effects, the drug may produce tremor or exaggerate the tremor caused by the neuropathy. Long remissions lasting several years have been reported with the use of pulses of orally administered high-dose or daily corticosteroids, for example, by Eftimov and colleagues, who used dexamethasone 40 mg per day for 4 days, repeated for 6 cycles, or daily prednisolone, 60 mg for 6 weeks. Should a sustained trial of prednisone therapy prove unsuccessful, a course of azathioprine (for at least 3 months), 3 mg/kg in a single daily dose, has been recommended (Dalakas and Engel, 1981a), but a controlled trial has failed to show benefit from this combination and we have had little success with it.
# Chunk 6118
High-dose cyclophosphamide has proven helpful in several cases under our care, although it has often failed (see Brannagan et al and the review by Brannagan that lists the applicable clinical trials). The usual regimen is 50 mg/kg IV daily for 4 days followed by granulocyte-stimulating factor beginning on the tenth day until the absolute neutrophil count recovers. Individual reports of successful treatment by autologous stem cell transplantation after high-dose chemotherapy have appeared but 1 patient relapsed after 5 years (Vermuelen and van Oers). This may become an option in severe and treatment-resistant cases. We have no explanation for the remarkable improvement and continued good health of a few of our patients after a severe toxic bacterial infection (Ropper, 1996).
# Chunk 6119
This is the best example of an infectious neuritis, caused by the direct invasion of nerves by the acid-fast Mycobacterium leprae. The disease is still frequent in India and Central Africa and there are many lesser endemic foci, including parts of South America and Florida, Texas, and Louisiana, which border the Gulf of Mexico. Limited outbreaks have been reported during treatment for HIV, with armadillos as the probable intermediate host.
# Chunk 6120
From time to time we have observed children and young adults with unmistakable progressive spastic paraplegia superimposed on a sensorimotor polyneuropathy of extremely chronic evolution. Sural nerve biopsy in 2 of our cases disclosed a typical “hypertrophic” polyneuropathy. In another case, only loss of nerve fibers was found. Cavanaugh and colleagues and Harding and Thomas (1984) reported similar patients. Our patients were severely disabled, being barely able to stand on their atrophic legs. An even more ambiguous form of disease was described by Vucic and colleagues in which there is typical CMT but with brisk reflexes. There were Babinski signs in half the patients and spastic dysphonia in a few others. The mutation is not known.
# Chunk 6121
Diagnosis of Early Chronic Polyneuropathy

A sensorimotor paralysis, which evolves over several weeks (subacutely) or more slowly, over many months or a year or two, and involves legs more than arms and distal parts more than proximal should lead to a search for diabetes, occult neoplasia (carcinoma, lymphoma, multiple myeloma, or plasmacytoma), HIV, paraproteinemia (including amyloid neuropathy), systemic autoimmune disease, and CIDP. In our experience, the subacute and chronically evolving demyelinating neuropathies (over months) that have slowed motor conduction velocities, conduction block, and relatively normal needle EMG studies generally turn out to be variants of CIDP, some with a paraproteinemia. Marked weakness and reduced muscle action potential amplitudes in the face of minimal denervation, even if present in only a few nerves, also indicate the presence of focal demyelination. Most of the mixed axonal–demyelinating cases in which one eventually arrives at a diagnosis will also be related to an immune (paraproteinemic) or inflammatory (CIDP) process. In exceptional cases, a neoplastic process may remain hidden for as long as 2 or 3 years after the onset of neuropathy. An environmental toxin, endocrine disorder (except for diabetes), or nutritional cause is seldom identified, despite the frequent attribution of obscure polyneuropathies to such causes. Nonetheless, history of exposure to industrial or hobbyist toxins, sociopathy or psychopathy that would lead to toxin ingestion, or foreign travel should be sought and the evaluation should include testing for heavy metals in obscure cases. Unusual causes of nutritional deficiency such as celiac-sprue and other malabsorption syndromes (Whipple disease, Crohn disease, chronic hepatic disease, and particularly intestinal bypass surgery) have usually been obvious enough when present, so that the experienced clinician rarely overlooks them. Perhaps sprue is able to cause a neuropathy with minimal gastrointestinal symptoms. Vitamin B12 deficiency should be sought in cases of large-fiber neuropathy. A difficult problem is that of an older person with a mild, nonprogressive sensorimotor polyneuropathy in whom there is evidence of mild hypothyroidism, marginally low vitamin B12 and folic acid levels in the blood, a somewhat unbalanced diet, perhaps an excessive alcohol intake, and an abnormal glucose tolerance response. It is easy to propose but hard to prove that any of these factors is relevant. Vitamin replacement should be undertaken nonetheless if no other cause is found.
# Chunk 6122
Recovery of paralysis and restoration of sensation are usually complete in 6 to 12 weeks, but sometimes not for a year or longer. In approximately 10 percent of cases there is residual weakness and wasting of the affected muscles and a similar number have had a recurrence some time later on the same or the opposite side. A number of our elderly patients with this condition have had little recovery of motor function over 5 years. In a series of 246 cases described by van Alfen and colleagues that may be consulted for descriptions of the many clinical variations of this illness, they found that a considerable proportion had chronic pain and residual weakness. (Their series included idiopathic and hereditary brachial pleoxopathy, of the type addressed in the next section.)
# Chunk 6123
The syndrome is essentially a sensory one; the loss or impairment of superficial sensation affects the palmar aspect of the thumb and the index and middle fingers (especially the index finger) and may or may not split the ring finger (splitting does not occur with a plexus or root lesion). The paresthesias are characteristically worse during the night. As pointed out in Chap. 10, the pain in carpal tunnel syndrome may radiate into the forearm and even into the region of the biceps and rarely, to the shoulder. Weakness and atrophy of the abductor pollicis brevis and other median-innervated muscles occur in only advanced cases of compression. Electrophysiologic testing confirms the diagnosis by demonstrating prolonged sensory conduction across the wrist and explains cases in which operation has failed (see the review by Stevens).
# Chunk 6124
Extending as it does from the upper lumbar area to the lower sacrum and passing near several lower abdominal and pelvic organs, this plexus is subject to a number of special injuries and diseases. The cause may be difficult to ascertain because the primary disease is often not within reach of the palpating fingers, either from the abdominal side or through the anus and vagina; even refined radiologic techniques may not reveal it. Diagnosis involves exclusion of spinal root (cauda equina) lesions by EMG, examination of CSF if root disease is likely, and MRI of the plexus. The clinical findings help to focus studies on the appropriate part of the lumbosacral plexus.
# Chunk 6125
The types of lesions that involve the lumbosacral plexus are rather different from those affecting the brachial plexus. Cancer, diabetes, and an idiopathic variety have dominated our material. Trauma is a rarity except with massive pelvic, spinal, and abdominal injuries because the plexus is so well protected. Occasionally, a pelvic fracture will damage the sciatic nerve as it issues from the plexus. In contrast, some part of the plexus may be damaged during surgical procedures on abdominal and pelvic organs, often for reasons that may not be entirely clear. For example, hysterectomy has on a number of occasions led to neurologic consultation in our hospitals because of numbness and weakness of the anterior thigh. Either the cords of the upper part of the plexus or the femoral nerve were compressed by retraction against the psoas muscle, or in vaginal hysterectomy (when thighs are flexed, abducted, and externally rotated) the femoral nerve was compressed against the inguinal ligament. A similar injury may be associated with vaginal delivery (see further on). Lumbar sympathectomy has also been associated with upper plexus lesions, of which the most disabling sequelae are burning pain and hypersensitivity of the anterior thigh. Appendectomy, pelvic explorations, and hernial repair may injure branches of the upper plexus (ilioinguinal, iliohypogastric, and genitofemoral nerves), with severe pain and slight sensory loss in the distribution of one of these nerves. The pain may last for months or a year or more.
# Chunk 6126
Traumatic Interruption of Nerves

Although the management of such lesions is best delegated to specialized neurosurgeons, several aspects involve the neurologist. Surgical advances have allowed the successful apposition of severed nerve ends. The current recommendation is that end-to-end suturing of the stumps within 72 h should be undertaken to repair a sharp and clean division. In cases where the nerve is found on exploration to be bluntly severed with ragged ends, most surgeons recommend tacking the free ends to adjacent connective tissue planes and attempting the repair in 2 to 4 weeks. Most injuries, however, are blunt and retain some continuity of the nerve. If such continuity across the traumatized region can be demonstrated by electrophysiologic examination, operation is unnecessary. In the absence of improvement in the clinical and electrophysiologic features after several months (up to 6 months for plexus lesions), surgical repair may facilitate limited healing. Pain that appears months or years after injury suggests the development of a neuroma at the site of nerve section; a Tinel sign at that site aids in identifying this problem.
# Chunk 6127
Fully 70 percent of patients recover completely within a month or two and 85 percent achieve near-normal facial function, as reviewed by Gilden. Recovery of taste precedes recovery of motor function; if taste returns in the first week, it is a good prognostic sign. But early recovery of some motor function in the first 5 to 7 days is the most favorable sign. EMG may be of value in distinguishing temporary conduction defects from a pathologic interruption of nerve fibers; if there is evidence of denervation after 10 days, one may expect a long delay in the onset of recovery, measured in terms of months. Recovery then proceeds by axonal regeneration, a process that may take 2 years or longer and is often incomplete.
# Chunk 6128
A fact of some importance is that the left recurrent laryngeal nerve, because of its long course under the aortic arch, can become damaged as a result of lesions in the thorax. There is no dysphagia with lesions at this point in the nerve because the branches to the pharynx (but not to the larynx) have already been given off. For this reason, an aneurysm of the aortic arch, an enlarged left atrium, mediastinal lymph nodes from bronchial carcinoma, and a mediastinal or superior sulcus lung tumor are more frequent causes of an isolated (left) vocal cord palsy than are intracranial diseases. It is estimated that in one-quarter to one-third of all cases of paralysis of the recurrent laryngeal nerve no cause can be established, that is, they are idiopathic. The highest incidence is in the third decade, and males are more susceptible than females. Of the 21 cases reported by Blau and Kapadia, 5 recovered completely and 5 partially within a few months; no other disease appeared in the 8-year period that followed. Berry and Blair described palsies of the superior and recurrent laryngeal nerves, occurring as part of isolated vagal neuropathies. A few were bilateral and, again, the majority of the cases were idiopathic and had much the same prognosis as isolated palsies of the recurrent laryngeal nerve.
# Chunk 6129
This topographic pattern occurs most often in idiopathic polymyositis and IBM, in which cases it is often combined with mild dysphagia, dysphonia, and weakness of girdle muscles. The same symptom may be a feature of motor neuron disease and is infrequently the presenting feature of that process. Myasthenic patients commonly complain of an inability to hold up their heads late in the day; both flexors and extensors of the neck are found to be weak. Occasionally, this pattern of weakness is observed in patients with nemaline rod myopathy. Cases of hanging head have appeared many years after local radiation of the neck and thorax for Hodgkin disease as described by Rowin and colleagues and with syringomyelia (Nalini and Ravishankar).
# Chunk 6130
From this exposition of the topographic aspects of weakness, one can appreciate that each neuromuscular disease exhibits a predilection for particular groups of muscles. Apart from these patterns that suggest certain possibilities of disease and exclude others, diagnosis depends on the age of the patient at the time of onset and tempo of progression, the coexistence of medical disorders, certain laboratory findings (serum concentrations of muscle enzymes, EMG, and biopsy findings), and genetic determinants.
# Chunk 6131
Diagnosis Clinically, one should suspect the disease in a patient who presents with a puffy face and tender muscles. Eosinophilia is practically always present in the peripheral blood (>700 cells/mm3), although the sedimentation rate is often normal. The CK level is moderately elevated. A skin test using Trichinella antigen is available, but it is unreliable. The enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) blood test is more accurate, but it becomes positive only after 1 or 2 weeks of illness. Biopsy of almost any muscle (usually the deltoid or gastrocnemius), regardless of whether it is painful or tender, is probably the most reliable confirmatory test. More than 500 mg of muscle may be required to demonstrate larvae, but smaller specimens will almost invariably show an inflammatory myopathy. Muscle fibers undergo segmental necrosis, and the interstitial inflammatory infiltrates contain a predominance of eosinophils. This accounts for the edema, pain, and tenderness of heavily infested muscles. The capsules of the larvae gradually thicken in the first month of the infection and then calcify. The EMG may exhibit profuse fibrillation potentials, a phenomenon attributed on theoretical grounds to the disconnection of segments of muscle fibers from their motor endplates (Gross and Ochoa).
# Chunk 6132
The clinical features of putative ZVD-induced myopathy are much the same as those of HIV myopathy except that moderate pain is said to be characteristic of the drug-induced variety. The myopathy has been attributed to the mitochondrial toxicity of the drug, which may account for the presence of “ragged red” fibers in biopsy specimens. The onset of symptoms appears to be related to the sustained administration of high doses of the drug (1,200 mg daily for a year or longer). Cessation or reduction in dosage of the drug diminishes the muscular discomfort within weeks, but strength recovers more slowly.
# Chunk 6133
This is the representative example of inflammatopry myopathy. The onset is usually insidious and the course progressive over a period of several weeks or months. It may develop at almost any age and in either sex; however, the majority of patients are 30 to 60 years of age, and a smaller group shows a peak incidence at 15 years of age; women predominate in all age groups. A febrile illness or benign infection may precede the weakness, but in most patients the first symptoms develop in the absence of these or other apparent initiating events.
# Chunk 6134
When the patient is first seen, many of the muscles of the trunk, shoulders, hips, upper arms, and thighs are usually involved. The posterior and anterior neck muscles (the head may loll) and the pharyngeal, striated esophageal, and laryngeal muscles (dysphagia and dysphonia) may be involved as well. In restricted forms of the disease, only the neck or paraspinal muscles (camptocormia) may be implicated. Ocular muscles are not affected but there are rare instances of combined myositis and myasthenia gravis. The facial, tongue, and jaw muscles are only occasionally affected, and the distal muscles, namely the forearm, hand, leg, and foot are spared in 75 percent of cases. The respiratory muscles are weakened to a minor degree and in only an exceptional case is there dyspnea, the cause of which is revealed only by an intercostal muscle biopsy (Thomas and Lancaster). Occasionally, the early symptoms predominate in one proximal limb before becoming generalized. As emphasized further on, onset after age 50 years, normal CK, or aberrant patterns of weakness, such as early wrist or finger flexor, quadriceps, or ankle dorsiflexor involvement, are indicative of IBM (see further on).
# Chunk 6135
Symptoms of weakness, stiffness, and pain in the muscles usually follow but may precede the skin manifestations. The weakness is generalized but always more severe in the muscles of the shoulders and hips and proximal portions of the limbs. A tiptoe gait, the result of fibrous contractures of flexors of the ankles, is a common late abnormality. Tendon reflexes are depressed or abolished, but only commensurate with the degree of muscle weakness. Intermittent low-grade fever, substernal and abdominal pain (like that of peptic ulcer), melena, and hematemesis from bowel infarction may occur, the result of an accompanying systemic vasculitis.
# Chunk 6136
In the overlap syndromes that incorporate autoimmune disease and myositis, there is usually greater muscular weakness and atrophy than can be accounted for by the muscle changes alone. Inasmuch as arthritis or periarticular inflammation may limit motion because of pain, result in disuse atrophy, and also at times cause a vasculitic polyneuropathy, the interpretation of diminished strength in these autoimmune diseases is not simple. Malaise, aches, and pains are common and attributable mostly to the systemic disease. Sometimes the diagnosis of myositis must depend on muscle biopsy, EMG findings, and measurements of muscle enzymes in the serum. In these complicated cases, myositis may accompany the connective tissue disease or occur many years later.
# Chunk 6137
Most clinicians agree that glucocorticoids (e.g., prednisone, 1 mg/kg, as a single daily dose orally, or intravenously) are a reasonable first therapy for both PM and DM. The response to treatment is monitored by testing of strength and measurement of CK (not by following the erythrocyte sedimentation rate [ESR]). In patients who respond clinically, the serum CK decreases before the weakness subsides; with relapse, the serum CK rises before weakness returns. Once the CK level normalizes and strength improves, typically several weeks or longer, one approach is to reduce the dosage gradually—by no more than 5 mg every 2 weeks—toward 20 mg daily. It is then appropriate to attempt to control the disease with an alternate-day schedule with double this amount (i.e., prednisone, 40 mg every other day) so as to reduce the side effects of the drug. After cautious reduction of prednisone over a period of 6 months to 1 year or longer, the patient can usually be maintained on doses of 7.5 to 20 mg daily, with the aim of eventual discontinuation of the drug. Corticosteroids should not be discontinued prematurely, for the relapse that may follow is often more difficult to treat than the original illness. Some clinicians prefer to add an immunosuppressive agent at this time rather than wait for failure of glucocorticoids or as a means of reducing steroid dependence, as discussed below.
# Chunk 6138
Some patients who cannot tolerate, or are refractory to, prednisone may respond favorably to oral azathioprine with care being taken to avoid severe leukopenia. Methotrexate is currently favored by many groups over azathioprine as an adjunct to steroids (5 to 10 mg/week in 3 divided oral doses, increased by 2.5 mg/week, to a total dose of 20 mg weekly). Methotrexate or azathioprine should generally be given along with the lowest effective doses (15 to 25 mg) of prednisone. Although one study failed to show efficacy (Oddis et al), in cases that have been refractory to corticosteroids and methotrexate, we and our colleagues have had success with rituximab intravenously, 750 mg/m2, repeated in 2 weeks and sometimes required every 6 to 18 months. Some clinicians favor, from the beginning, a combination of prednisone in low dosage and one of these immunosuppressant drugs, and this approach is generally necessary when myocarditis or interstitial pneumonitis is coupled with DM. It has been suspected that patients with anti-Jo or other antibodies may respond more favorably. Mycophenolate mofetil has also been introduced and has allowed a reduction in steroid dose within several months in both PM and DM, according to a number of anecdotal reports, but has not proven clearly effective in a randomized trial; the reasons for this failure are being actively discussed and we have not abandoned its use. Cyclosporine has also been used in recalcitrant cases; it has few advantages over other immunosuppressant drugs and has a number of potentially serious side effects, including nephrotoxicity. Cyclophosphamide, which is a useful drug in the treatment of Wegener granulomatosis, polyarteritis, and other vasculitides, is said to be of lesser value in PM, but it may be useful in refractory cases and has perhaps the highest toxicity of the immunosuppressive medications that are used for inflammatory myopathies; we no longer use it with any regularity.
# Chunk 6139
Except for patients with malignancy, the prognosis in adult PM and DM is generally favorable. Only a small proportion of patients with PM succumb to the disease and then usually from a secondary pulmonary complication or from myocarditis as already mentioned. Several of our patients have had severe aspiration pneumonias as a result of their dysphagia. The period of activity of disease varies considerably but is typically 2 to 3 years in both the child and adult. As indicated earlier, the majority improves with corticosteroid therapy, but many are left with varying degrees of weakness of the shoulders and hips. Approximately 20 percent of our patients have recovered completely after steroid therapy and long-term remissions have been achieved after withdrawal of medication in about an equal number. The extent of recovery is roughly proportional to the acuteness and severity of the disease and the duration of symptoms prior to institution of therapy. Patients with acute or subacute PM in whom treatment is begun soon after the onset of symptoms have the best prognosis. In the series collected by DeVere and Bradley, in which patients were treated early, there was remission in more than 50 percent of cases, whereas Riddoch and Morgan-Hughes reported a far lower rate in patients who were treated more than 2 years after onset of the disease. Those patients who have come to our attention after a long period of proximal weakness and with substantial muscle atrophy have not recovered completely, although some improvement occurred over years.
# Chunk 6140
Problems in Diagnosis of Inflammatory Myopathy

The main issue here is differentiation of DM and PM from inclusion body myopathy. The specific problem of determining which patients with DM or PM should have an extensive evaluation for a systemic malignancy and for connective tissue disease has been partially settled. We have adopted the practice of careful inspection of the chest radiograph, routine blood tests and stool examination for blood for all patients, and of undertaking a more extensive evaluation in patients older than 55 years and in smokers of any age. The evaluation of patients over 55 and smokers includes chest and abdominal computed tomographic (CT) scans, colonoscopy, pelvic ultrasound, cancer antigen (CA)-125, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), as well as other tests. In patients with recent weight loss, anorexia, or other symptoms suggestive of malignancy, we have included upper endoscopy and resorted to a body positron emission tomography scanning.
# Chunk 6141
In addition to these main issues of distinguishing PM and DM from IBM, currently aided by antibody testing, we call attention to the following problems that we have encountered in connection with diagnosis: 1. The patient with proximal muscle weakness is incorrectly diagnosed as having progressive muscular dystrophy (actually, the opposite pertains more often). Points in favor of myositis are (1) lack of family history (although many dystrophies have recessive inheritance); (2) older age at onset; (3) rapid evolution of weakness; (4) evidence, past or present, of other connective tissue diseases; (5) high serum CK values (again, can be high in certain dystrophies); (6) marked degeneration and regeneration in muscle biopsy; and, finally, if there is still doubt, (7) unmistakable improvement with corticosteroid therapy.
# Chunk 6142
2. The patient with a systemic autoimmune disease (rheumatoid arthritis, scleroderma, lupus erythematosus, Sjögren syndrome) is suspected of having PM in addition. Pain in these conditions prevents strong exertion (algesic pseudoparesis). Points against the coexistence of myositis are (1) the inability to document weakness out of proportion to muscle atrophy and the presence of pain on passive movement of the limbs; (2) normal EMG; (3) normal serum CK; and (4) normal muscle biopsy except possibly for areas of infiltration of chronic inflammatory cells in the endomysial and perimysial connective tissue (interstitial myositis).
# Chunk 6143
Chap. 9).

4. The patient has restricted muscle weakness. Weakness or paralysis of the posterior neck muscles, with inability to hold up the head, restricted bilateral quadriceps weakness, and other limited pelvocrural palsies are examples. Most often, the head-hanging or head-lolling syndrome proves to be caused by PM, and the other syndromes are caused by restricted forms of dystrophy or by motor neuron disease. IBM is the main alternative consideration in cases of neck or quadriceps weakness, particularly if the latter weakness is asymmetric; muscle enzymes in the serum are normal or slightly elevated. EMG and biopsy are helpful in diagnosis.
# Chunk 6144
5. The patient has diffuse myalgia and fatigability. Most such patients have proved to be depressed and only rarely to have a myopathy. A few will be found to be caused by a toxic myopathy, particularly from one of the statin class of drugs. Hypothyroidism, McArdle disease, hyperparathyroidism, steroid myopathy, adrenal insufficiency, and early rheumatoid arthritis must be excluded by appropriate studies. Features that virtually exclude a myositis are (1) lack of reduced peak power of contraction and (2) normal EMG, serum enzymes, and muscle biopsy.
# Chunk 6145
Sarcoid Myopathy, Granulomatous Myositis, and Localized Nodular Myositis

There are undoubted examples of muscle involvement in patients with sarcoidosis, but they seem to be less frequent and less certain than would appear from the medical literature. In some cases, sarcoid myopathy becomes evident as a slowly progressive, occasionally fulminant, painless proximal or distal weakness. The CK levels are elevated. Muscle biopsy discloses numerous noncaseating granulomas. However, such lesions may also be found in patients with sarcoidosis who have no weakness. Treatment with moderate doses of corticosteroids (prednisone, 25 to 50 mg daily) is usually effective in symptomatic cases, but an additional immunosuppressive agent, such as cyclosporine, may have to be instituted if improvement is not evident in several weeks.
# Chunk 6146
Muscles of the pelvic girdle, lumbosacral spine, and shoulders become weak and wasted, accounting for certain clinical peculiarities. Weakness of abdominal and paravertebral muscles accounts for a lordotic posture and protuberant abdomen when standing and the rounded back when sitting. Weakness of the extensors of the knees and hips interferes with equilibrium and with activities such as climbing stairs or rising from a chair or from a stooped posture. In standing and walking, the patient places his feet wide apart so as to increase his base of support. To rise from a sitting position, he first flexes his trunk at the hips, puts his hands on his knees, and pushes the trunk upward by working the hands up the thighs. In rising from the ground, the child first assumes a four-point position by extending the arms and legs to the fullest possible extent and then works each hand alternately up the corresponding thigh (the sign traditionally attached to Gowers’ name). In getting up from a recumbent position, the patient turns his head and trunk and pushes himself sideways to a sitting position. S.A.K. Wilson used an alliterative phrase to describe the characteristic abnormalities of stance and gait: The patient “straddles as he stands and waddles as he walks.” The waddle is the result of bilateral weakness of the gluteus medius. Many affected boys have a tendency to walk on their toes as a consequence of contractures in the gastrocnemii muscles. Calf pain is frequent. Weakening of the muscles that fix the scapulae to the thorax (serratus anterior, lower trapezius, rhomboids) causes winging of the scapulae, and the scapular angles can sometimes be seen above the shoulders when one is facing the patient.
# Chunk 6147
The limbs are usually loose and slack, but as the disability progresses, fibrous contractures appear as a result of the limbs remaining in one position and the imbalance between agonists and antagonists. Early in the ambulatory phase of the disease, the feet assume an equinovarus position as a result of shortening of the posterior calf muscles, which act without the normal opposition of the pretibial and peroneal muscles. Later, the hamstring muscles become permanently shortened because of a lack of counteraction of the weaker quadriceps muscles. Similarly, contractures occur in the hip flexors because of the relatively greater weakness of hip extensors and abdominal muscles. This leads to a pelvic tilt and compensatory lordosis to maintain standing equilibrium. The consequences of these contractures account for the habitual posture of the patient with Duchenne dystrophy: lumbar lordosis, hip flexion and abduction, knee flexion, and plantar flexion. As they become severe, these contractures contribute importantly to the eventual loss of ambulation. Scoliosis, as a result of unequal weakening of the paravertebral muscles, and flexion contractures of the forearms appear, usually after walking is no longer possible.
# Chunk 6148
The serum CK values are 25 to 200 times normal, which, with the EMG and muscle biopsy findings, help exclude spinal muscular atrophy. The EMG shows fibrillations, positive waves, low-amplitude and brief polyphasic motor unit potentials, and, sometimes, high-frequency discharges. The female carrier may occasionally display the same abnormalities, but to a much milder degree. The molecular and genetic bases of the disease are discussed further on.
# Chunk 6149
This milder dystrophy is closely related to the Duchenne type clinically, genetically, and ultrastructurally, involving the same DMD gene as in the Duchenne type. It had long been noted that mixed with the Duchenne group were relatively benign cases. In 1955, Becker and Keiner proposed that the latter be separated as a distinct entity, now called Becker muscular dystrophy. The incidence is difficult to ascertain, but it has been estimated as 3 to 6 per 100,000 male births. Like the Duchenne form, it is an X-linked disorder, practically limited to males and transmitted by females. It causes weakness and hypertrophy in the same muscles as Duchenne dystrophy, but the onset is much later (mean age: 12 years; range: 5 to 45 years). While boys with Duchenne dystrophy are usually dependent on a wheel-chair by early in the second decade, it is not uncommon for those with Becker dystrophy to walk well into adult life. In comparison to Duchenne dystrophy, those with Becker and intermediate types retain their ability to raise the head fully off the bed. We have, for example, encountered patients who served in the military with the disease undetected. If maternal uncles are affected by the disease and are still walking, the diagnosis is relatively easy. Mentation is usually normal and cardiac involvement is far less frequent than in Duchenne dystrophy, but there are cases that present with a cardiomyopathy and we have been made aware of 2 brothers who had cardiac transplantation before the disease was detected. Kuhn and associates have reported a genealogy in which early myocardial disease and cramping myalgia were prominent features. The molecular-genetic basis of this form is discussed below.
# Chunk 6150
Although less common than the Duchenne and myotonic dystrophies, FSH is not rare (an estimated yearly incidence rate of 5:100,000) and we have seen 1 or more cases yearly. The age of onset is usually between 6 and 20 years, but cases beginning in early adult life are occasionally encountered. Weakness and atrophy of the involved muscles are the major physical findings; pseudohypertrophy occurs only rarely and is slight. As a rule, the first manifestations are difficulty in raising the arms above the head and winging of the scapulae, although bifacial weakness may have initially attracted attention, even in early childhood. There is involvement especially of the orbicularis oculi, the zygomaticus, and the orbicularis oris, whereas the masseters, as well as the temporalis, extraocular, pharyngeal, and respiratory muscles are spared. There is an inability to close the eyes firmly, to purse the lips, and to whistle; the lips have a peculiar looseness and tendency to protrude. The lower parts of the trapezius muscles and the sternal parts of the pectorals are almost invariably affected. By contrast, the deltoids may seem to be unusually large and strong, an appearance that may be mistaken for pseudohypertrophy. The advancing atrophic process involves the sternocleidomastoid, serratus magnus, rhomboid, erector spinae, latissimus dorsi, and eventually the deltoid muscles as well. The bones of the shoulders become prominent; the scapulae are winged and elevated (“angel-wing” appearance), and the clavicles stand out. The anterior axillary folds slope down and out as a result of wasting of the pectoral muscles. Usually the biceps waste less than the triceps, and the brachioradialis muscles even less, so that the upper arm may be thinner than the forearm (“Popeye” effect). Pelvic muscles are involved later and to a milder degree, giving rise to a slight lordosis and pelvic instability. The pretibial muscles weaken, and foot-drop is added to the waddling gait. The Beevor sign, an upward movement of the umbilicus on flexing the neck as a result of weakness of the lower abdominal muscles, is reportedly common (Awerbuch et al), but we have not seen it in early cases. Life expectancy is said to not be shortened.
# Chunk 6151
An interesting feature of this group of diseases is the occasional congenital absence of a muscle (amyoplasia of one pectoral, brachioradialis, or biceps femoris) or part of a muscle in patients who later develop the typical features of the disease. The external ocular muscles are known to occasionally become affected late in the illness. Although cardiac involvement is rare, in a few cases tachycardia, cardiomegaly, and arrhythmias have occurred. Mental function is normal. Serum CK values are normal or slightly elevated.
# Chunk 6152
Limb-Girdle Muscular Dystrophy 2I (FKRP, Fukutin Mutation)

The discovery of the “fukutin-related protein” initially came about because mutant forms caused a severe congenital muscular dystrophy (CMD). It later became apparent that certain mutations also cause a common type of later onset limb-girdle dystrophy. As the designation “2” indicates, it is transmitted in an autosomal recessive manner. This is the most common form of limb-girdle dystrophy in patients of Northern European descent. In a series of 16 patients from 14 families, Poppe and colleagues characterized the main features as having an onset of proximal girdle weakness in the second to fourth decades of life (but as early as age 2 years). The majority of patients eventually had respiratory failure and several displayed varying degrees of congestive heart failure, features that also accompany some of the other limb-girdle dystrophies. In most other ways, this disease reflects the heterogeneity of clinical presentation of the other subtypes of limb-girdle disease. A period of stabilization lasting several to 35 years is common, followed by a decade or more of progression that eventually involves the shoulder muscles. Most patients, particularly those with later onset, remained able to walk into their forties. Other features are variable, for example, dysphagia and ptosis; however, distal weakness is not seen and intelligence is normal.
# Chunk 6153
These forms of limb-girdle dystrophies have been described in large kindreds, in Indiana (among the Amish people), on the island of Réunion in the Indian Ocean, in Brazil, Great Britain, Italy and Spain, and elsewhere, affecting males and females equally. Both the shoulder and pelvic girdles are involved. The degree of weakness has varied considerably. In one form of the disease, called LGMD 2A, the abnormal gene codes for a calcium-activated neutral protease, or calpain (see Fig. 45-3). This “calpainopathy” is currently believed to account for approximately 40 percent of patients with LGMD. Frequently, and early in the course of disease, there are Achilles tendon contractures and very high serum CK levels (at least 10 times normal), features that may permit distinction from the sarcoglycanopathies.
# Chunk 6154
Difficulty in swallowing and change in voice are associated with slowly progressive ptosis. Swallowing becomes so difficult that food intake is limited, resulting in cachexia, which can be ameliorated by cutting the cricopharyngeus muscles, or, if that fails, by a gastrostomy or nasogastric tube. Later in the disease, in some families the external ocular muscles and shoulder and pelvic muscles become weakened and atrophic to a varying extent. In the few autopsied cases, a loss of fibers of modest proportions was widespread in these and many other muscles. Rimmed vacuoles in the sarcoplasm and, by electron microscopy, intranuclear tubular filaments are characteristic but not specific histologic findings (these features are seen in other myopathies, particularly in inclusion body myositis). The brainstem nuclei and cranial nerves are normal. As in the other mild and restricted muscular dystrophies, the serum CK and aldolase levels are normal and the EMG is altered only in the affected muscles.
# Chunk 6155
Defined as a muscle dystrophy already present at birth, often with contractures of proximal muscles and trunk, the severity of the weakness and degree of progression have varied widely. Of the 8 cases reported by Rotthauwe and colleagues, 1 had a benign course, but the others all had weakness and hypotonia at birth, and difficulty in sucking and swallowing had interfered with nutrition. Their oldest patients, 14 and 23 years of age, and several others had walked, but at a late age. In the Finnish series of Donner and associates, congenital dystrophy accounted for 9 percent of the 160 cases of neuromuscular disease seen at their hospital over a decade. The weakness and hypotonia were generalized, and 3 had ECG abnormalities. The CK values were elevated and the EMGs were myopathic.
# Chunk 6156
Problems in Diagnosis of the Muscular Dystrophies

The following are some of the common problems that arise in the diagnosis of muscular dystrophy: 1. The diagnosis of muscular dystrophy in a child who has just begun to walk or in whom walking is delayed. Tests of peak power on command cannot be used with reliability in small children. The most helpful points in identifying Duchenne dystrophy are (1) unusual difficulty in climbing stairs or arising from a crouch or from a recumbent position on the floor, showing greater weakness at the hips and knees than at the ankles; (2) unusually large, firm calves; (3) male sex; (4) high serum CK, aldolase, and myoglobin levels; (5) myopathic EMG; (6) biopsy findings; and (7) special methods of testing for dystrophin protein (see previous discussion).
# Chunk 6157
2. The adult patient with diffuse or proximal muscle weakness of several months’ duration, raising the question of polymyositis versus dystrophy. Even biopsy may be misleading in showing a few inflammatory foci in an otherwise dystrophic picture. As a rule, polymyositis evolves more rapidly than dystrophy. It may be associated with higher CK and aldolase values than most of the dystrophies except the Duchenne and distal Miyoshi types. With these points in mind, if immunostaining of a muscle biopsy fails to reveal the diagnosis of a dystrophy, there may still be uncertainty, in which instance a trial of prednisone may be indicated for a period of 6 months. Unmistakable improvement favors polymyositis; questionable improvement (physician’s and patient’s judgment not in accord) leaves the diagnosis unsettled but suggests inclusion of body myositis or a dystrophy. Pompe disease, a treatable metabolic glycogen storage myopathy discussed elsewhere in this chapter, may simulate Becker or limb-girdle dystrophy in an adult or child. Clues to the diagnosis are early respiratory involvement, myotonic or pseudomyotonic discharges in the EMG. Muscle biopsy with immunohistochemistry establishes the diagnosis, but the standard stains may be unrevealing.
# Chunk 6158
Treatment of the Muscular Dystrophies

There has, until recently, been no specific treatment for any of the muscular dystrophies. The physician is forced to stand by and witness the unrelenting progression of weakness and wasting. The various vitamins, amino acids, testosterone, and drugs, such as penicillamine, recommended in the past, have all proved to be ineffective. The administration of prednisone appears to slightly retard the tempo of progression of Duchenne dystrophy for a period of up to 3 years (Fenichel et al). The optimal dose is 0.75 mg/kg given daily, but it must often be reduced because of intolerable side effects (weight gain, behavioral and gastrointestinal disorders).
# Chunk 6159
Respiratory failure occurs in virtually all patients affected with Duchenne dystrophy after they become wheelchair-bound, as well as in some of the other dystrophic diseases. It may be so insidious as to become evident only as sleep apnea, as retention of carbon dioxide that causes morning headache, or as progressive weight loss that reflects the excessive work of breathing. If there are frequent episodes of oxygen desaturation, some improvement in daytime strength and alertness can be attained by assisting ventilation at night. This may be accomplished in the early stages of disease by a negative-pressure cuirass-type of device that expands the chest wall periodically or, more conveniently, by nasal-positive pressure (NIPPV [noninvasive positive-pressure ventilation] or BiPAP [bilevel positive airway pressure]). Later, positive-pressure ventilation through a fenestrated tracheostomy is required that allows nighttime ventilation but leaves the patient free to speak and breathe during the day. With regard to earlier or anticipatory treatment, in patients free of respiratory failure with vital capacities between 20 and 50 percent of predicted values, a randomized trial of nasal mechanical ventilation failed to demonstrate improvement or prolonged survival (Raphael et al). There has been a clinical impression that even more severely affected patients can be managed at home for prolonged periods with respiratory assistance. Needless to say, the common complications of muscular dystrophy—pulmonary infections and cardiac decompensation—must be treated symptomatically. Surgical management of cataracts is indicated when they become mature.
# Chunk 6160
As noted earlier, a vital element in the care of patients with certain of the dystrophies is monitoring for early evidence cardiac arrhythmias. In disorders such as myotonic dystrophy, Emery-Dreifuss dystrophy, the myofibrillar myopathies, and some of the mitochondrial disorders, it is imperative that cardiac status should be evaluated on a regular basis (typically yearly) with ECG and echocardiography and periodically with 24-h rhythm monitoring if the ECG is abnormal or the patient reports episodic symptoms referable to an arrhythmia such as lightheadedness, palpitations, or dyspnea. The timely use of cardiac pacemakers or defibrillators, implemented at the earliest sign of arrhythmia or prophylactically, is often needed in this patient population to reduce the chance of sudden death.
# Chunk 6161
Acid Maltase Deficiency (Glycogenosis Type II; Pompe Disease and Related Disorders, GAA Mutation)

A deficiency of the enzyme acid maltase (also called acid alpha-glucosidase and due to mutations in the GAA gene) takes three clinical forms, of which the first (Pompe disease) is the most serious. Pompe disease typically develops in infancy, between 2 and 6 months; dyspnea and cyanosis call attention to enlargement of the heart, and the liver may be enlarged as well. The skeletal muscles are weak and hypotonic, although their bulk may be increased. The tongue may be enlarged, giving the infant a cretinoid appearance. Hepatomegaly, while often present, is not pronounced. Exceptionally, the heart is normal in size and the CNS and muscles bear the brunt of the disorder. The clinical picture then resembles infantile spinal muscular atrophy (Werdnig-Hoffmann disease) and, to add to difficulty in differential diagnosis, there may be fasciculations. The infantile disease is rapidly progressive and ends fatally in a few months. The EMG shows myopathic changes, but there are, in addition, fibrillation potentials, heightened insertional activity, and pseudomyotonia. Large amounts of glycogen accumulate in muscle, heart, liver, and neurons of the spinal cord and brain. All tissues lack acid maltase (also called alpha-glucosidase) because of a mutation in its gene.
# Chunk 6162
In the second (childhood) form, onset is during the second year, with delay in walking and slowly progressive weakness of shoulder, pelvic girdle, and trunk muscles. The toe walking, waddling gait, enlargement of calf muscles, and lumbar lordosis resemble those of Duchenne dystrophy. Cardiomyopathy is exceptional, hepatomegaly is less frequent than in the infantile form, and developmental delay is present in a minority. Death occurs between 3 and 24 years of age, usually from ventilatory failure and recurrent pulmonary infections.
# Chunk 6163
This disorder, first noted by Graves and Basedow in the early nineteenth century, is characterized by progressive weakness and wasting of the skeletal musculature, occurring in conjunction with overt or covert (“masked”) hyperthyroidism. The thyroid disease is usually chronic and the goiter is usually of the nodular rather than the diffuse type. Exophthalmos and other classic signs of hyperthyroidism are often present but need not be. This complication of hyperthyroidism is most frequent in middle age, and men are more susceptible than women. Some degree of myopathy has been found when sought in more than 50 percent of thyrotoxic patients, although the manifestations may be subtle. The onset is insidious, and the weakness progresses over weeks and months. The muscular disorder as noted is most often mild in degree, but it may be so severe as to suggest progressive spinal muscular atrophy (motor system disease). Muscles of the pelvic girdle and thighs are weakened more than others (Basedow paraplegia), although all are affected to some extent, even the bulbar muscles and, albeit rarely, the ocular ones. However, the shoulder and hand muscles show the most conspicuous atrophy (not an obligatory feature). Tremor and twitching during contraction may occur, but we have not seen fasciculations. The tendon reflexes are of average briskness, possibly more lively than normal. Both the contraction and relaxation phases of the tendon reflexes are shortened, but usually this cannot be detected by the clinician.
# Chunk 6164
Exophthalmic Ophthalmoplegia (Graves Ophthalmopathy) (See discussion in Chap. 13)

This refers to the cooccurrence of weakness of the ocular muscles and exophthalmos in patients with Graves disease (pupillary and ciliary muscles are always spared). The exophthalmos varies in degree, sometimes being absent at an early stage of the disease, and it is not in itself responsible for the muscle weakness. Often there is some degree of orbital pain. Both the exophthalmos and the weakness of the extraocular muscles may precede the signs of hyperthyroidism, be associated with the other classic features of hyperthyroidism (tachycardia, weight loss, tremor), or may follow effective treatment of the disorder.
# Chunk 6165
Examination of the eye muscles in biopsy and autopsy material has shown prominent fibroblasts, many degenerated fibers, and infiltrations of lymphocytes, mononuclear leukocytes, and lipocytes; hence the term infiltrative ophthalmopathy. These histopathologic findings are suggestive of an autoimmune disease—a hypothesis supported by the finding of serum antibodies that react (inconsistently) with extracts of eye muscles (Kodama et al). Possibly the antibodies target glycosaminoglycans of the orbital fibroblasts. A sensitivity of muscle fibers to beta-adrenergic activity caused by excessive thyroid hormone has also been postulated. Other factors are almost certainly involved, such as the small size of oculomotor motor units, the absence of dystrophin, and the rich mitochondrial content.
# Chunk 6166
This disorder closely resembles familial hypokalemic periodic paralysis (as described in Chap. 46). It consists of attacks of mild to severe weakness of the muscles of the trunk and limbs; usually the cranial muscles are spared. The weakness develops over a period of a few minutes or hours and lasts for part of a day or longer. In some series of patients with periodic paralysis, as many as half have had hyperthyroidism and most of them have been Asian males. Unlike the typical hypokalemic form, thyrotoxic periodic paralysis is not a familial disorder and its onset is usually in early adult life. Nevertheless, in most of the thyrotoxic cases, the serum potassium levels have been low during the attacks of weakness and the administration of 100 to 200 mg of potassium chloride has terminated the episodes. Propranolol in doses of 160 mg daily in divided doses is also helpful in preventing the episodes. More importantly, effective treatment of the hyperthyroidism abolishes the periodic attacks of weakness in more than 90 percent of cases. A mutation in the potassium channel, Kir2.6, has been found to confer susceptibility to the disease. Other aspects of periodic paralysis are discussed in Chap. 46.
# Chunk 6167
Ropper, Lacomis et al, and Barohn et al).

Patients who acquire this problem may have been exposed to high doses of corticosteroids for only brief periods. Exceptional instances have been reported in which the myopathy was induced by doses as low as 60 mg prednisone administered for 5 days, but we have not encountered such a case. The degree and type of simultaneous exposure to neuromuscular blocking agents have varied, but the doses have generally also been quite high, falling in the range of a total dose of 500 to 4,000 mg of pancuronium or an equivalent, over several days.
# Chunk 6168
Serum CK is elevated, at least early in the process. The EMG discloses the characteristic features of a myopathy; often there are fibrillations as well, theorized to be a result of separation of the motor endplate region from intact segments of muscle fibers. A concurrent polyneuropathy and any residual effects of neuromuscular blockade can be excluded by appropriate electrophysiologic studies. Muscle biopsy shows varying degrees of necrosis and vacuolation affecting mainly type 2 fibers. The identifying histologic feature is a striking loss of thick (myosin) filaments. Severe degrees of muscle necrosis occur and have been accompanied by massively elevated CK levels and by myoglobinuria with renal failure.
# Chunk 6169
Proximal muscle weakness and atrophy have been recorded as late developments in many acromegalic patients. Formerly thought to be caused by neuropathy, these symptoms in acromegaly have been convincingly shown by Mastaglia and colleagues to be the result of a generalized myopathy. The serum CK is slightly elevated in some cases, and myopathic potentials are observed in the EMG. Biopsy specimens have shown atrophy and reduced numbers of type 2 fibers, but necrosis of only a few fibers. Treatment of the pituitary adenoma and correction of the hormonal changes restores strength. A mild peripheral neuropathy of sensorimotor type has also been reported in a few patients with acromegaly but is far less frequent than carpal tunnel syndrome and other focal entrapments in this disease.
# Chunk 6170
In any disease that results in rapid destruction of striated muscle fibers (rhabdomyolysis), myoglobin and other muscle proteins enter the bloodstream and appear in the urine. The latter is “cola”-colored (burgundy red or brown), much like the urine in hemoglobinuria. In hemoglobinuria, however, the serum is pink, because hemoglobin (but not myoglobin) is bound to haptoglobin, and this complex is not excreted in the urine as readily as myoglobin; also in addition, the hemoglobin molecule is three times as large as the myoglobin molecule. (The hemoglobin–haptoglobin complex is removed from the blood plasma over a period of hours and haptoglobin may be depleted, so that hemoglobinuria is present without grossly evident hemoglobinemia.) Differentiation of the two pigments in urine is difficult; both are guaiac-positive and may be detected by the “dipstick” test that can be used to advantage at the bedside in appropriate circumstances. Only small differences are seen on spectroscopic examination. The most sensitive means of detecting myoglobin is by radioimmunoassay. It should be mentioned that porphyrins are another cause of discoloration of the urine. The clinical picture in porphyria is one of a polyneuropathy and not a myopathy.
# Chunk 6171
Treatment of myoglobinuria Alkalinization of the urine by ingestion or infusion of sodium bicarbonate is said to protect the kidneys by preventing myoglobin casts, but in severe cases it is of doubtful value and the sodium may actually be harmful if anuria has already developed. Diuresis induced by mannitol or by loop diuretics such as furosemide and by the administration of intravenous fluids reduces the chances of anuric renal failure if given in time. Therapy is much the same as for the anuria that follows shock (see Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine). In cases of focal muscle injury, for example, as occurs in diabetics or from vascular occlusion, surgical decompression of the overlying fascia and skin may be necessary to prevent ongoing ischemia, the “compartment syndrome.”
# Chunk 6172
With the widespread use of these lipid-lowering medications, myotoxicity has become a well-described but possibly overrated problem. Symptoms range in severity from mild muscular aches with slightly elevated CK concentrations in the serum to a rare but potentially fatal rhabdomyolytic syndrome. (Myalgias alone are as common in patients taking placebo as in those taking stains). The incidence of true myopathy with statins has been estimated to be approximately 1 in 10,000 people treated per year. There appear to be two types of mypathy—one idiosyncratic and associated with direct toxicity and another, now thought to be more common, due to an antibody reaction. The first generation of these drugs were fungal metabolites (lovastatin, pravastatin, simvastatin) and were infrequently implicated in muscle damage, but the newer synthetic ones (atorvastatin, fluvastatin, cerivastatin) are more frequently toxic, especially when given with gemfibrozil (which has reportedly led to a small number of deaths from myoglobinuric renal failure and has been removed from the market). Few cases are this dramatic. The subject has been reviewed by Thompson and associates and by Mammen. Drugs in the statin class with higher lipid solubility appear to have a greater potential for toxicity as a result of their increased muscle penetration.
# Chunk 6173
The serum CK concentration may be elevated or normal. The muscle biopsy shows elements of both myopathic and neuropathic disease, with the special feature in muscle of rimmed vacuoles on the Gomori trichrome stain that are more central in the muscle fibers than those seen with inclusion body myositis. The mechanism of the muscle damage is unknown but is probably attributable to the drug’s interference with tubulin, a protein required for the polymerization of microtubules in muscle and nerve. Weakness resolves in a matter of days or weeks when the drug is discontinued, but the neuropathic features may remain.
# Chunk 6174
Alcohol Myopathy (See Also Chap. 41)

Several forms of muscle weakness have been ascribed to alcoholism. In one type, a painless and predominantly proximal weakness develops over a period of several days or weeks in the course of a prolonged drinking bout and is associated with severe degrees of hypokalemia (serum levels <2 mEq/L). The urinary excretion of potassium is not significantly increased, and depletion is probably the result of vomiting and diarrhea. In addition, serum levels of liver and muscle enzymes are markedly elevated. Biopsies from severely weakened muscles show single-fiber necrosis and vacuolation. Treatment consists of the administration of potassium chloride intravenously (about 120 mEq daily for several days), after which oral administration suffices. Strength returns gradually in 7 to 14 days, and enzyme levels return to normal concomitantly.
# Chunk 6175
A more dramatic myopathic syndrome, occurring acutely at the height of a prolonged drinking bout and appropriately termed acute alcoholic myopathy, is manifest by severe pain, tenderness, and edema of the muscles of the limbs and trunk, accompanied in severe cases by renal damage (see Hed et al). Hypokalemia is not implicated. The myonecrosis is generalized in some patients, and remarkably focal in others. A swollen, painful, tender limb or part of a limb may give the appearance of a deep venous thrombosis or lymphatic obstruction. Myonecrosis is reflected by high serum levels of CK and aldolase and the appearance of myoglobin in the urine, leading in the most severe cases to fatal myoglobinuric renal failure. Indeed, in a general hospital, alcoholism is one of the most common causes of rhabdomyolysis and myoglobinuria, rivaled only by status epilepticus and trauma. Some patients recover within a few weeks, but others require several months, and relapse during another drinking spree occurs frequently. Restoration of motor power occurs with muscle regeneration but may be hindered by polyneuropathy and other syndromes of neuromuscular disability associated with alcoholism. Haller and Drachman have produced rhabdomyolysis in rats by subjecting the animals to a brief fast following a 2to 4-week exposure to alcohol, suggesting that a similar mechanism may be operative in alcoholic individuals.
# Chunk 6176
An infant with arthrogryposis should be evaluated with an EMG that is interpreted by an experienced electromyographer, and by a biopsy of muscle for the detection of group atrophy and of the congenital myopathies described further on in this chapter. Both these tests are difficult to interpret in the incompletely formed nervous system of the premature infant. In many circumstances, it is valuable to delay the tests until several weeks of postterm development when the results are usually clearer. Sometimes, the electrophysiologic and biopsy tests may have to be repeated after several weeks or more to give a definitive diagnosis. If the initial evaluations are unrevealing, an imaging study of the brain to detect cerebral malformations (and sequencing of the PWCR locus chromosome 5 for Prader-Willi syndrome) may prove useful.
# Chunk 6177
In the original family described by Shy and Magee, 5 members (4 males) in 3 successive generations were affected, suggesting an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. The youngest was 2 years old; the oldest, 65 years. In each there was weakness and hypotonia soon after birth (again, “floppy infant”) and a general delay in motor development, particularly in walking, which was not achieved until the age of 4 to 5 years. These patients had difficulty in rising from a chair, climbing stairs, and running. The weakness was greater in proximal than in distal muscles, although the latter did not escape, and shoulder-girdle muscles were affected less than those of the pelvic girdle. Facial, bulbar, and ocular muscles were spared. The tendon reflexes were hypoactive and symmetrical. Muscle atrophy was not a prominent feature, although poor muscular development was present in 1 patient and has since been reported in others. There were no fasciculations, cramps, or myotonia, but cramps following exercise have been described in other families. The ECGs were normal.
# Chunk 6178
Muscle Cramp (See Also Chap. 46)

This subject was introduced at the beginning of this chapter, where it is pointed out that everyone at some time or other experiences muscle cramps. Cramps often occur during the night, after a day of unusually strenuous activity; less frequently they occur during the day, either during a period of relaxation or occasionally after a strong voluntary contraction or postural adjustment. A random restless or stretching movement may induce a hard contraction of a single muscle (most frequently of the foot or leg) that cannot be voluntarily relaxed. The muscle is visibly and palpably taut and painful, and the condition is readily distinguished from an illusory cramp, in which the sensation of cramp is experienced with little or no contraction of muscle. The latter phenomenon may occur in normal persons as well as in those with peripheral nerve diseases. Massage and vigorous stretch of the cramped muscle will cause the spasm to yield, although for a time the muscle remains excitable and subject to recurrent cramps. Visible fasciculations may precede and follow the cramp, indicating excessive excitability of the terminal branches of motor neurons supplying the muscle. Sometimes the cramp is so intense that the muscle is injured; it remains sore to touch and painful upon use for a day or longer. Cramps of precordial chest muscles or diaphragm may arouse fear of heart or lung disease. In the EMG, the cramp is marked by bursts of high-frequency, high-voltage action potentials, and the precramp phase shows runs of activity in motor units. Why cramps should be painful is not known; probably the demands of the overactive muscle exceed metabolic supply, causing a relative ischemia and accumulation of metabolites. Overwork of muscle with or without impairment of circulation is also painful. Between cramps, the muscles are normal clinically and electromyographically.
# Chunk 6179
Satoyoshi described a group of patients who, in addition to widespread and severe cramping of muscle, developed universal alopecia, amenorrhea, intestinal malabsorption with frequent diarrhea, and some developed epiphyseal destruction and retarded growth. Most Japanese patients he described were younger than 20 years, but the 2 cases we have observed in whites were middle-aged. The serum calcium in these patients is normal, and the EMG shows only high-frequency discharges that are characteristic of cramps. A patient of ours with this condition had decades of chronic diarrhea, alopecia, and continuous, extremely painful calf cramps that had the gross appearance of fasciculations. This triad virtually identifies the disease. The cause of the disorder is obscure but is tentatively presumed to be autoimmune. Glucocorticoids, particularly in high doses over short periods, have been tried with some success; dantrolene has also been used and we had the impression that plasma exchange may have been helpful in one case.
# Chunk 6180
An impressive polymyalgia follows excessive exercise. Often, the patient observes that aching pain occurs not at the time of activity but some hours or even a day or two later, resembling the discomfort following the excessive use of unconditioned muscles. The muscles are sore and there is an intolerance of exercise and physical exertion. The serum CK concentration is mildly to moderately elevated. This is a natural phenomenon and is self-limiting. When such a state persists indefinitely and a program of conditioning exercises does not alleviate the pain, it represents a special category of disease. In a few instances an increased sedimentation rate or other laboratory aids may clarify the diagnosis, and muscle biopsy may reveal a nonspecific interstitial nodular myositis or the giant cell arteritis associated with polymyalgia rheumatica. Whether or not patients on lipid-lowering statin medications are particularly susceptible to this problem is not clear. A few individuals go on to have the features of the previously described fibromyalgic syndrome. However, this cluster of symptoms most often occurs without explanation, and one can only suspect an obscure infection or a subtle aberration of muscle metabolism, presently impossible to demonstrate. Reference has been made in the literature to the controversial finding of a myoadenylate deaminase deficiency in some of these cases. There is also a group of patients who have idiopathic leg pain during rest after activity. Some families afflicted in this way are forced to live a sedentary existence. The condition does not respond to analgesics. In 2 cases, a deficiency of calcium ATPase was found and reportedly alleviated by a calcium channel blocker such as verapamil, 120 mg (Walton). It must be distinguished from the syndromes of painful legs and moving toes, and from the restless leg syndrome discussed in Chap. 18.
# Chunk 6181
Muscles of facial expression, mastication, swallowing, and speech are affected in 80 percent of patients at some time in the illness, and in 5 to 10 percent, these are the first or only muscles to be involved. Less frequent is early involvement of the flexors and extensors of the neck, muscles of the shoulder girdle, and flexors of the hips. (This pattern may be associated with a special autoantibody as will be discussed later.) Of the trunk muscles, the erector spinae are the most frequently affected. In the most advanced cases, all muscles are weakened, including the diaphragmatic, abdominal, and intercostal, and even the external (skeletal muscle) sphincters of the bladder and bowel. As the disease progresses, the involvement of any group of muscles closely parallels their degree of weakness early in the disease. The clinical rule also holds that the proximal muscles are far more vulnerable than distal ones, as they are in most other forms of myopathy.
# Chunk 6182
Another characteristic and understandable feature of myasthenic weakness is its tendency to increase as the day wears on or with repeated use of an affected muscle group but curiously, patients seldom volunteer this information. A few patients report paradoxical worsening on awakening, especially if they have not taken medication during the night but a larger proportion of patients are close to asymptomatic after a night’s rest. In general terms, therefore, myasthenia gravis may be conceived as a fluctuating and fatigable oculofaciobulbar palsy.
# Chunk 6183
A later age at onset was also associated with a higher incidence of fatal respiratory crises. In general, patients whose disease begins at a younger age run a more benign course. Grob and colleagues, who recorded the course of an astonishing 1,036 patients for a mean duration of 12 years, found that the clinical manifestations remained confined to the extraocular muscles and orbicularis oculi in 16 percent. Their data further indicated that localized ocular myasthenia present for only a month was associated with a 60 percent likelihood that the disease would generalize, but in those cases that remained restricted for more than a year, only 16 percent became generalized. In contrast, of 37 consecutive cases carefully studied by Weinberg et al with only ocular signs, 17 had more widespread weakness within a period of 6 years. Also informative in Grob’s series was that in 67 percent the disease attained its maximum severity within a year of onset, and in 83 percent, within 3 years. It has been stated that the progression of symptoms is more rapid in male than in female patients.
# Chunk 6184
Anticholinesterase drugs The two drugs that give the best results in ameliorating myasthenic weakness are neostigmine (Prostigmin) and pyridostigmine (Mestinon), the latter being preferred by most clinicians and patients. The usual dose of pyridostigmine is 30 to 90 mg given every 6 h (typically a 60-mg pill is tried first); the oral dose of neostigmine ranges from 7.5 to 45 mg given every 2 to 6 h. Extended-action forms of both drugs are available but are given at bedtime mainly to patients who complain of weakness during the night or early morning hours. The dosage of these drugs and their frequency of administration vary considerably from patient to patient, but we agree with Drachman (2003) that the maximal useful dosage of pyridostigmine rarely exceeds 120 mg given every 3 h. Table 46-1 lists the approximate dose-equivalents of these various drugs.
# Chunk 6185
Plasma exchange and intravenous immune globulin For severe myasthenia that is refractory to treatment with anticholinesterase drugs and prednisone, or during an acute period of worsening, one must resort to other measures. Striking temporary remissions (2 to 8 weeks) may be obtained by the use of plasma exchange. This form of treatment may be lifesaving during a myasthenic crisis. It also finds use before and after thymectomy and at the start of immunosuppressive drug therapy. Plasma exchange is also helpful in limiting the aforementioned weakness that is often induced by the institution of high-dose corticosteroids. The number and volume of exchanges required in these circumstances is somewhat arbitrary but they tend to be less than those required for GBS; several exchanges of 2 to 3.5 L each (totaling approximately 125 mL/kg) performed over a week usually suffice. The removed plasma is replaced with albumin and saline. It has been estimated that a 2-L exchange will remove 80 percent of circulating antibodies and that this will be reflected in reduced ACh antibody levels in 3 to 5 days. There is only an approximate correlation between a reduction in the titer of anti-AChR antibody and the degree of clinical improvement. In a crisis requiring plasma exchanges and mechanical ventilation, it has been our practice to discontinue or curtail the use of anticholinesterase drugs and resume them as the patient is being weaned from the ventilator. Also, it may be that sensitivity to these drugs may be enhanced in the hours after an exchange so that their dosages must be adjusted accordingly.
# Chunk 6186
Intravenous immune globulin is similarly useful in the short-term control of acutely worsening myasthenia. The usual dose is 2 g/kg given in divided doses over 3 to 5 days. Several small series suggest that the effect is equivalent to a series of plasma exchanges. However, plasma exchange and immune globulin have been subjected to only limited systematic study or comparison and, while these treatments are invaluable in deteriorated patients or those in crisis, they offer only short-term benefit. In two separate small studies, Gajdos and colleagues and Barth et al found no difference between intravenous immune globulin (IVIg) and plasma exchange (1997) and no difference between IVIg 1 g/kg/d given for 1 or 2 days (2005) in myasthenic exacerbations, most cases of which were less severe than typical crisis.
# Chunk 6187
Thymectomy This operation, first introduced by Blalock, despite the absence of proof in trials, is considered an appropriate procedure for many patients with generalized myasthenia gravis between puberty and 55 years of age. The surgery is performed electively and not during an acute deterioration of myasthenia. The remission rate after thymectomy is approximately 35 percent provided that the procedure is done in the first year or 2 after onset of the disease, and another 50 percent will improve to some extent (Buckingham et al). The remission rate is progressively lower, but not negligible, if the operation is postponed beyond this time. In patients with myasthenia restricted to the ocular muscles for a year or longer, the prognosis is so good that thymectomy is unnecessary. The response to thymectomy is not evident for several months and is usually maximal by approximately 3 years. In favorably responding cases, levels of circulating receptor antibody are reduced or disappear entirely. If possible, thymectomy should be postponed until puberty because of the importance of the gland in the development of the immune system, but juvenile myasthenia is also quite responsive. The results are not as predictable in patients who harbor a thymoma.
# Chunk 6188
It is only recently that an adequate randomized trial by Wolfe and colleagues has affirmed the usefulness of thymectomy. Beyond the demonstration of effect of the procedure over 3 years when coupled with alternate day prednisone compared to alternate day prednisone alone, certain of the outcomes of the trial were instructive but tentative due to the small number of patients enrolled: medical complications were lower in the surgical group as a result of reduced requirement for prednisone and immunosuppressive drugs, and the effects of the operation were clearer in women than in men. Viewing the Kaplan-Meier curves of that trial, it appears broadly that the effect of thymectomy was maximal at approximately 6 months and remained stable thereafter.
# Chunk 6189
Patients with myasthenic crisis generally respond to plasma exchange or to immunoglobulin infusions in 1 or 2 days, but more often a week or more is required for recovery after a full course of 4 to 5 exchanges or 3 to 5 g/kg IVIg given in divided daily doses. Whether the previously mentioned studies (e.g., Gajdos et al) comparing the 2 treatments and comparing doses of IVIg in myasthenic exacerbations are pertinent to crisis is unknown but we almost always institute one or the other soon after it as it is apparent that respiratory failure is imminent or worsening.
# Chunk 6190
Most patients with myasthenic crisis take several weeks to recover, and a few of our patients have remained ventilator-dependent for months. In the extensive experience of 53 patients from Columbia-Presbyterian, half of the patients could be safely extubated within 2 weeks and three-quarters by a month (Thomas et al). There were 7 deaths among 53 patients, reflecting the gravity of this syndrome even in the modern era of intensive care. Atelectasis, severe anemia, congestive heart failure, and clostridial diarrhea (associated with antibiotic use) portend a prolonged period of generalized weakness and intubation. From time to time, one encounters a patient in whom respiration and ambulation do not improve for many months after a myasthenic crisis. In our experience these have been middle-aged or older patients, usually women, in whom an element of hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism may have been operative. They become wasted as the proximal limb and axial muscles, including the diaphragm, fail to recover their power, even though the ocular and oropharyngeal muscles improve. The role of corticosteroids in producing a concomitant proximal myopathy is a consideration that can be solved by careful electrophysiologic examination.
# Chunk 6191
The Myasthenic-Myopathic Syndrome of

This special form of neuromuscular disorder that in a few ways simulates myasthenia gravis, is observed most often in patients with small cell carcinoma of the lung, was first described by Lambert, Eaton, and Rooke in 1956 and further by Eaton and Lambert in 1957. Unlike myasthenia gravis, the muscles of the trunk, shoulder girdle, pelvic girdle, and lower extremities are the ones that become weak and fatigable. The first symptoms are difficulty in arising from a chair, climbing stairs, and walking; the shoulder muscles are usually affected later. Although ptosis, diplopia, dysarthria, and dysphagia may occur, presentation with these symptoms is distinctly unusual. Increasing weakness after exertion stamps the condition as myasthenic, but in direct contrast to myasthenia gravis, there may be a temporary increase in muscle power during the first few contractions. The tendon reflexes are often diminished but complete abolition of the reflexes should raise the question of an associated carcinomatous polyneuropathy. Fasciculations are not seen.
# Chunk 6192
Treatment Most patients with this disorder benefit mildly or moderately from administration of 3,4-diaminopyridine (3,4-DAP), an agent that blocks potassium channels in the distal motor terminal, thus prolonging depolarizations and enhancing the release of ACh vesicles. The drug is given as 20 mg, up to 5 times a day, either alone or in conjunction with pyridostigmine (Lundh et al). It is not approved by the FDA in the United States and must be obtained from specialty pharmacies but nonetheless, has replaced the formerly used guanidine hydrochloride that had hematologic and renal toxicity with long-term use. With regard to long-term relief, numerous regimens have been tried and favored by different groups. Streib and Rothner were able to achieve improvement with prednisone. Dau and Denys have claimed the best results in nontumor cases with repeated courses of plasmapheresis in combination with prednisone and azathioprine. Intravenous immune globulin has also been effective in a few reported cases. Bain and coworkers indicate that the benefit is a result of reduction in calcium channel autoantibodies, but the mechanism whereby intravenous immune globulin produces this effect could not be established. Many clinicians prefer alternate-day administration of prednisone and azathioprine (prednisone 25 to 60 mg/d, and azathioprine 2 to 3 mg/kg body weight daily) supplemented intermittently as needed by intravenous immune globulin. The response to treatment tends to be slow, over a period of months and sometimes up to a year. Some patients recover fully; in others, restoration of power is incomplete.
# Chunk 6193
Despite their muscular appearance, these patients are inept in athletic pursuits as a result of the myotonia. When severe, myotonia affects all skeletal muscles but is especially prominent in the lower limbs. Attempts to walk and run are impeded to the extent that the patient stumbles and falls. Other limb and trunk muscles are also thrown into spasm, as are those of the face and upper limbs. One of the characteristic features is grip myotonia in which the patient is unable to release a handshake and must slowly open the fingers one at a time. Occasionally a sudden noise or fright may cause generalized stiffness and falling. Small, gentle movements such as blinking or elicitation of a tendon reflex do not initiate myotonia, whereas strong closure of the eyelids, as in a sneeze, sets up a spasm that may prevent complete opening of the eyes for many seconds. Spasms of extraocular muscles occur in some instances, leading to strabismus. If the patient has not spoken for a time, there is sometimes a striking dysarthria. Arising at night, the patient cannot walk without first moving the legs for a few minutes. After a period of rest, the patient may have difficulty in arising from a chair or climbing stairs. Loosening of one set of muscles after a succession of contractions does not prevent the appearance of myotonia in another area, nor in the same ones if used in another pattern of movement. Smooth and cardiac muscles are not affected and intelligence is normal. Lacking also are the narrow face, frontal balding, cataracts, and endocrine changes typical of myotonic dystrophy that is discussed in Chap. 45. Myotonia that is evident in infancy is far more likely to represent myotonia congenita than myotonic dystrophy, in which myotonia rarely has its onset in the first few years of life.
# Chunk 6194
The essential features of this disease are episodic generalized weakness of fairly rapid onset and a rise in serum potassium during attacks. Weakness appearing after a period of rest that follows exercise is particularly characteristic. This type of periodic paralysis was first described and distinguished from the more common (hypokalemic) form by Tyler and colleagues in 1951. Five years later, Gamstorp described 2 additional families with the disorder and named it adynamia episodica hereditaria. As further examples were reported, it was noted that in many of them there were minor degrees of myotonia, which brought the condition into relation with paramyotonia congenita (see further on). Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis is associated with a defect in the alpha subunit of the sodium channel gene (Fontaine et al, 1990). It is now appreciated that there are distinct variants of hyperkalemic periodic paralysis that are genetically distinct. All are associated with membrane hyperexcitability because of delays in sodium channel inactivation following membrane depolarization, as discussed later.
# Chunk 6195
During the attack of weakness serum K rises, often, but not always, up to 5 to 6 mmol/L. This is associated with increased amplitude of T waves in the electrocardiogram (ECG) and a fall in the serum Na level (because of entry of Na into muscle). With increased urinary excretion of K, the serum K falls and the attack terminates. Between attacks serum K is usually normal or only slightly elevated.
# Chunk 6196
The provocative test, undertaken under careful supervision when the patient is functioning normally, consists of the oral administration of 2 g of KCl in a sugar-free liquid repeated every 2 h for 4 doses, if that many are necessary to provoke an attack. The test is given in the fasting state, ideally just after exercise. The weakness typically has a latency of 1 to 2 h after the administration of K. The patient must be carefully monitored by ECG and frequent serum estimations of serum potassium. The test should never be undertaken in the presence of an attack of weakness, or when there is reduced renal function, or in those with diabetes requiring insulin.
# Chunk 6197
Laboratory findings In both hyperkalemic periodic paralysis and paramyotonia congenita, the serum K is usually above the normal range during bouts of weakness, but paralysis has been observed at levels of 5 mEq/L and lower. Each patient appears to have a critical level of serum K, which, if exceeded, will be associated with weakness. (This has led some authors to term the periodic paralysis as potassium dependent.) The administration of KCl, raising serum K to above 7 mEq/L, a level that has no effect on normal individuals, invariably induces an attack. As mentioned earlier, the ECG must be monitored during such provocative testing. The EMG shows myotonic discharge in all muscles, even at normal temperatures. The CK may be elevated.
# Chunk 6198
The administration of diuretics such as hydrochlorothiazide (0.5 g daily), keeping the serum K below 5 mEq/L, also prevents attacks but risks inducing dangerous degrees of hypokalemia. When the myotonia is more troublesome than the weakness, mexiletine 200 mg tid is perhaps the best alternative, because it prevents both coldand exercise-induced myotonia but it does not influence frequency of acute attacks. Some additional benefit may be gained by adding inhaled beta-adrenergic agonists such as albuterol or salbutamol. Some studies suggest that 1 agent in this class, clenbuterol, may have a direct effect in blocking the sodium channel, independent of its activation of adrenergic receptors. Procainamide or the lidocaine derivative tocainide, in doses of 400 to 1,200 mg daily, is also useful for the myotonia (tocainide carries a small risk of agranulocytosis).
# Chunk 6199
For the treatment of an acute and severe episode, intravenous calcium gluconate (1 to 2 g) often restores power. If after a few minutes this treatment is unsuccessful, intravenous glucose or glucose and insulin and hydrochlorothiazide should be tried so as to reduce the serum potassium concentration.
# Chunk 6200
Trudell and colleagues studied 14 patients from a large kindred with autosomal dominant myotonia, the main feature of which was periodic worsening of myotonia accompanied by muscle pain and stiffness, most severe in the face and hands. The symptoms were enhanced by cold (suggesting paramyotonia) and severe stiffness and palpable rigidity followed within 15 min of the ingestion of potassium but neither of these measures provoked muscle weakness. Muscle biopsy disclosed a normal ratio of types 1, 2A, and 2B fibers, further distinguishing this disorder from typical myotonia congenita, where 2B fibers may be reduced in number. All patients in this family who were treated with the carbonic anhydrase inhibitor acetazolamide had a dramatic resolution of symptoms within 24 h, hence the name acetazolamide-responsive myotonia. This disorder has been linked to the same molecular alteration of the sodium channel gene as occurs in hyperkalemic periodic paralysis (Ptácek et al, 1994b).
# Chunk 6201
Clinical manifestations In our experience, this disease has become clinically apparent after adolescence and has been much more severe in males. We note, however, that in Talbott’s review of 152 cases, there were 40 in which symptoms began before the tenth year of life and 92 before the sixteenth year. The typical attack comes on during the second half of the night or the early morning hours, after a day of unusually strenuous exercise; a meal rich in carbohydrates favors its development. Excessive hunger or thirst, dry mouth, palpitation, sweating, diarrhea, nervousness, and a sense of weariness or fatigue are mentioned as prodromata but do not necessarily precede an attack. Usually, the patient awakens to discover a mild or severe weakness of the limbs. However, diurnal attacks also occur, especially after a nap that follows a large meal. The attack evolves over minutes to several hours; at its peak, it may render the patient so helpless as to be unable to call for assistance. Once established, the weakness lasts a few hours if mild or several days if severe.
# Chunk 6202
Treatment A low-sodium diet (less than 160 mEq/d), avoidance of large meals and of exposure to cold, and acetazolamide 250 mg tid may be helpful in preventing attacks. That acetazolamide reduces attacks is somewhat surprising as it is kaluretic, but it may work through the production of acidosis; a few patients have worsened with the drug. Patients who are unresponsive to acetazolamide may be treated with the more potent carbonic anhydrase inhibitor, dichlorphenamide, 50 to 150 mg/d, or with the potassium-sparing diuretics spironolactone or triamterene (both in doses of 25 to 100 mg/d), but caution must then be exercised with the simultaneous administration of oral potassium supplements. The daily administration of 5 to 10 g of KCl orally in an unsweetened aqueous solution prevents attacks in many patients and apparently, this program can be maintained indefinitely. If this approach fails, a low-carbohydrate, low-salt, high-K diet combined with a slow-release K preparation may be effective.
# Chunk 6203
The full clinical picture is striking but anesthesiologists have become adept at detecting its earliest stages and aborting the process. As halothane or a similar inhalational anesthesia is induced, or succinylcholine is given for muscular relaxation, the jaw muscles unexpectedly become tense rather than relaxed and soon rigidity extends to all of the muscles. Thereafter, the body temperature rises to 42çC or 43çC and there is tachypnea and tachycardia. Blood pH may fall to 7 or below. There may be gross myoglobinuria and serum CK reaches extraordinarily high levels. Circulatory collapse and death may ensue in approximately 10 percent of cases, or the patient may survive with gradual recovery. In some cases there is the same sequence of events (increased temperature and acidosis) without muscular spasm. In cases of early death, the muscle may appear normal by light microscopy. With survival for several days, samples of muscle reveal scattered segmental necrosis and phagocytosis of sarcoplasm without inflammation. Patients with a particular congenital myopathy (central core myopathy), and those with King-Denborough syndrome mentioned later, have a propensity to malignant hyperthermia as noted in Chap. 45.
# Chunk 6204
The toxin produced by this spider within a few minutes of the bite leads to a striking syndrome of cramps and spasms and then a painful rigidity of abdominal, trunk, and leg muscles. The spasms are followed by weakness. There is also vasoconstriction, hypertension, and autonomic hyperactivity. If death does not occur in the first 24 to 48 h, recovery is complete. The spider venom has a presynaptic localization and rapidly releases quanta of ACh. The vesicles became depleted. There is some evidence that the venom prevents endocytosis of the vesicles by inserting itself into the presynaptic membranes, causing a disturbance of ionic conductance channels (Swift).
# Chunk 6205
Occasionally, benign fasciculations are widespread and may last for months or even years. In several of our patients they have recurred in bouts separated by months and lasting several weeks. No reflex changes, sensory loss, nerve conduction, EMG abnormality (other than fasciculations), or increase in serum muscle enzymes is found. Low energy and fatigability in some of these patients may suggest an endogenous depressive illness yet the fasciculations are not explained by this mechanism. Patients commonly report a sense that the muscles affected by the twitching are weak but this cannot be confirmed by testing and several of our patients, curiously most of whom have been physicians, complained of equally troubling migratory zones of paresthesias. Pain of aching or burning type may increase after activity and cease during rest. Fatigue and a sense of weakness are frequent complaints. We suspect that this fasciculatory state reflects a disease of the terminal motor nerves, for a few of our patients have shown slowing of distal latencies, and Cöers and associates have found degeneration and regeneration of motor nerve terminals in similar cases. However, most such cases are of benign nature and settle down in a matter of weeks or months. In the cases reported by Hudson and colleagues, the condition, even after years, did not progress to spinal muscular atrophy, polyneuropathy, or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. This conforms to our experience and to that reported from the Mayo Clinic where 121 patients with benign fasciculations, followed in some cases for more than 30 years, showed no progression of symptoms and did not acquire motor neuron disease or neuropathy (Blexrud et al). It should be acknowledged, however, that there are infrequent patients with seemingly benign fasciculations in whom the EMG shows some abnormal features (e.g., rare fibrillations) in numerous muscles and who later develop the other features of motor neuron disease. Carbamazepine, and to a lesser extent phenytoin and other antiepileptic drugs, has been helpful in reducing the fasciculations and sensations of weakness in a proportion of cases and numerous other medications have been reportedly helpful.
# Chunk 6206
In the stiff man syndrome, diazepam in doses of up to 50 to 250 mg/d, increased gradually, is most effective; clonazepam, vigabatrin, or baclofen is sometimes effective as well. In keeping with the presumed autoimmune mechanism of most cases, plasma exchange, high-dose corticosteroids, or intravenous gamma globulin are helpful in some patients, albeit for only several weeks or months before another infusion is required. Several of our patients have required intravenous gamma globulin for several years at intervals of 6 to 12 weeks but nevertheless became disabled if the dose of diazepam was reduced below 100 mg/d. A small randomized trial of intravenous immune globulin conducted by Dalakas and colleagues has demonstrated the efficacy of this treatment; in their study, the benefits varied in duration from 6 weeks to 1 year. The typical dose is 0.4 mg/kg daily for 4 or 5 consecutive days. Immunosuppression with rituximab is being used increasingly, on the basis of case reports and small series but a small randomized trial has been negative (Dalakas et al, 2017). For intractable cases, particularly when 1 limb is involved, propofol has been anecdotally effective in doses that do not produce sedation (Hattan et al).
# Chunk 6207
Tricyclic antidepressants and drugs that raise serotonin concentrations in the nervous system (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors [SSRIs]) may also be effective in the prevention of panic attacks and agoraphobia, but their onset of action is delayed for weeks. They become useful for symptoms of anxiety that recur or persist for more than several months. The doses are similar to those used to treat depression, and small differences between them do not seem to be clinically important (see Chap. 48). Buspirone, a specific serotonin 5-HT2 agonist, has been promoted as effective in the treatment of anxiety and as a surrogate for benzodiazepines, but to us its benefit has seemed to be slight. It is important to point out that during the initial weeks of administration of antidepressants, the underlying anxiety symptoms may worsen and an anxiolytic is usually required until the antidepressant becomes effective. Propranolol, 10 to 20 mg tid, or a long-acting form of adrenergic blocker, can reduce many of the autonomic accompaniments of anxiety and is useful to many patients. Psychiatric consultation is, of course, invaluable. With regard to psychotherapy, behavioral therapy (progressive exposure of the patient to panic-provoking situations) is said to be beneficial, particularly if agoraphobia is a major symptom. Relaxation activities, including biofeedback and meditation, help many patients, although persistence is required in performing these exercises at least once daily and they are less helpful once a panic attack has begun. Cognitive-behavioral psychotherapy, which is discussed in relation to the treatment of depression in Chap. 48, also appears to be useful in the treatment of panic disorder, according to Andreasen and Black.
# Chunk 6208
Hysteria in its fullest form is a polysymptomatic disorder, implicating at some time and in some patients, almost every organ system. In a study of 50 unmistakable cases of hysteria (as compared with a control group of 50 healthy women), the most frequent symptoms reported by Purtell and colleagues were headache, blurred vision, lump in the throat, loss of voice, dyspnea, palpitation, anxiety attacks, anorexia, nausea and vomiting, abdominal pain, unusual food allergies, severe menstrual pain, urinary retention, painful intercourse, paresthesias, dizzy spells, nervousness, and easy crying.
# Chunk 6209
The success of any of these programs over a long period is unknown. The eradication of recently acquired hysterical symptom is relatively easy. The real test is whether it enables the patient to adjust satisfactorily to family and society and to perform daily activities effectively, and whether it prevents addiction, unnecessary medical treatments, and operations. Estimates of the recurrence rate of hysterical symptoms vary widely from 12 to 80 percent. In the series reported by Gatfield and Guze and by Merskey, the recurrence of somatic symptoms of similar or of other types was as high as in sociopathies. We have seen a few patients with monosymptomatic hysteria (paraparesis, bizarre gait, crippling dystonia) that persisted for years on end regardless of treatment. The use of a wheelchair for more than several days has been a bad prognostic sign in these cases.
# Chunk 6210
On average, 50 percent of patients recover completely or almost completely (Steinhausen and Seidel). In the remainder, the outcome is quite unfavorable. They either relapse after an initial period of improvement or remain chronically anorectic. Many patients are said to lapse into a chronic dysfunctional state characterized by a persistent preoccupation with food, weight, and dieting. It is not generally appreciated that chronic anorexia nervosa significantly shortens life; after a mean followup period of 12 years, 11 percent of a group of 84 patients had died (Deter and Herzog), and 15 percent after 20 years (Ratnasuriya et al). Suicide is a major contributor to this high mortality rate (Sullivan). The addition of antidepression drugs to a behavioral regimen has been tried with generally disappointing results.
# Chunk 6211
In some depressions, hypochondriacal preoccupation with bowel and digestive functions accounts for repeated visits to the physician. In one study, 21 of 120 such patients were subsequently diagnosed as being depressed. Persistent insomnia may be the major complaint of the depressed patient. Early awakening is typical, and the morning hours are then the worst period of the day for the low emotional state. Other patients have difficulty falling asleep, especially if there is an associated anxiety state. A complaint in the male of loss of libido and erectile dysfunction is another monosymptomatic presentation; only with probing inquiry about other disturbances common to depression will the diagnosis become evident.
# Chunk 6212
First attacks of either depression or mania last an average of 6 months if untreated, although the duration varies greatly. With treatment, this can be reduced according to some trials by more than half in many patients. Although most attacks of bipolar disease subside in a matter of months, a significant number, remain chronically ill for long periods. According to Winokur and colleagues, 14 percent of their bipolar patients had not recovered after 2 years and 5 percent had not recovered after 5 years. Comparative figures for primary unipolar patients were 19 and 12 percent, respectively. The majority of depressed patients have one or more recurrences. Variables that are predictive of an unfavorable outcome are high degrees of anxiety, strongly positive family history of a similar psychiatric illness, and presence of depression-provoking circumstances (Hirschfeld et al). Perhaps most important is the duration of illness before treatment, that is, earlier treatment is generally associated with a more favorable prognosis.
# Chunk 6213
Treatment of Bipolar Disease

This has for decades, until very recently, been the drug of choice in treating the manic phase of bipolar disease and it is useful in preventing relapses of depression in some patients. Certain of the newer antipsychotic drugs, discussed in the next chapter, have overtaken lithium for the treatment of bipolar disease, with little evidence that they are superior. During an acute manic attack, hospitalization may be required to protect the manic patient from impulsive and aggressive behavior that might cause personal and interpersonal difficulty or jeopardize a career. Haloperidol (Haldol), or one of the newer antipsychosis agents discussed in Chap. 49—or electroconvulsive therapy (ECT, see further on) if these drugs are ineffective—can be used to control the mania until lithium carbonate becomes effective, usually a matter of 4 or 5 days. The usual dosage of lithium is 1,200 to 2,400 mg daily in divided oral doses, which produces a desired serum level of 0.9 to 1.4 mEq/L. The serum level of lithium must be checked frequently, both to ensure that a therapeutic dose is being taken and to guard against toxicity (see later).
# Chunk 6214
Clozapine, olanzapine, risperidone, quetiapine, and others listed in Table 49-2 are the more recently introduced atypical drugs with incompletely defined pharmacologic properties but with narrower affinities for certain receptors. In addition to their reduced motor side effects, they produce clinical improvement in about half of patients who have proved to be unresponsive to other antipsychotic medications. These drugs bind to and inhibit serotonin receptors and, to some extent, dopamine receptors (Meltzer and Nash), but have a much lower affinity for striatal dopamine receptors, thus providing a major advantage—the absence of immediate or tardive extrapyramidal side effects. This has led most psychiatrists to use one of the newer drugs, rather than the phenothiazines, as a first choice. The addition of a second drug, specifically combining clozapine with risperidone, was not found to be useful in the trial conducted by Honer and colleagues. Moreover, in another one of the effectiveness trials sponsored by the National Institutes of Mental Health, Lieberman and colleagues (“CATIE” Investigators) found that the majority of chronic schizophrenics discontinued their antipsychosis drugs within 18 months. Among the medications they compared, olanzapine was slightly more effective than quetiapine, risperidone, and ziprasidone; of equal interest, the phenothiazine perphenazine was equivalent in efficacy and tolerability to the last 3 second-generation (atypical) drugs. Approximately 1 percent of patients treated with one of the most effective drugs, clozapine, develop leukopenia, which may prove fatal; there is less risk with the related agent, olanzapine, but leukopenia and agranulocytosis have been reported in rare instances with it as well. Orthostatic hypotension, tachycardia, fever, and hypersalivation may be troublesome in the first days and weeks of therapy with any agent in this class. Risperidone is a potent serotonin and dopamine receptor antagonist. Low doses reportedly attenuate the negative symptoms of schizophrenia (apathy, emotional withdrawal, lack of social interaction) and the incidence of extrapyramidal side effects is low provided that the dosage is kept below 6 mg daily.
# Chunk 6215
First described in arthritic patients being treated with cortisone, these syndromes are now occurring far less frequently than when corticosteroids were introduced into medical practice. The psychosis usually develops over a period of a few days after the patient has received the hormone for a week or more. The features are extremely variable. Depression and insomnia are the most frequent early symptoms, but some patients become elated, agitated, excited, and talkative, as though under pressure to speak, whereas others are mute; or the prevailing emotional response may be one of anxiety and panic. Thinking may be slightly illogical, tangential, or incoherent. Hallucinations and sensory misinterpretations may appear. However, clouding of the sensorium and disorientation, the hallmarks of deliria and the confusional psychoses, have been less prominent. Nevertheless, the state of awareness is not altogether normal, and at times the patient is frankly bewildered. If administration of the hormone is discontinued as soon as symptoms appear, the psychosis subsides but only gradually over several days to weeks, with complete recovery.
# Chunk 6216
Labor-Examples: noncephalic presentation, glucocorticoids for fetal lung maturation, antibiotics during labor Delivery-Examples: unsuccessful operative vaginal delivery, trial of labor with prior cesarean delivery Newborn-Examples: assisted ventilation, surfactant therapy, congenital anomalies applied. For example, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists recommends that reporting include all fetuses and neonates born weighing at minimum 500 g, whether alive or dead. But, not all states follow this recommendation. Speciically, 28 states stipulate that fetal deaths beginning at 20 weeks' gestation should be recorded as such; eight states report all products of conception as fetal deaths; and still others use a minimum birthweight of 350 g, 400 g, or 500 g to deine fetal death. To further the confusion, the National Vital Statistics Reports tabulates fetal deaths from gestations that are 20 weeks or older (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2016). his is problematic because the 50th percentile for fetal weight at 20 weeks approximates 325 to 350 g-considerably less than the 500-g deinition. Indeed, a birthweight of 500 g corresponds closely with the 50th percentile for 22 weeks' gestation.
# Chunk 6217
MUSCULOSKELETAL PELVIC ANATOMY . .. 29

As the mechanism of labour is essentialy a process of accommodation between the oetus and the passage through which it must pass, it is apparent that obstetrics lacked a scientiic oundation until the anatomy of the bony pelvis and of the sot parts connected with it was cleary understood -J. Whitridge Williams (1903) • Skin, Subcutaneous Layer, and Fascia he anterior abdominal wall confines abdominal viscera, stretches to accommodate the expanding uterus, and provides surgical access to the internal reproductive organs. hus, a comprehensive knowledge of its layered structure is required to surgically enter the peritoneal cavity.
# Chunk 6218
Several ligaments extend from the uterine surface toward the pelvic sidewalls and include the round, broad, cardinal, and uterosacral ligaments (Figs. 2-10 and 2-11) . Despite their appellation, the round and broad ligaments provide no substantial uterine support, which contrasts with the cardinal and uterosacral ligaments.
# Chunk 6219
External iliac a. & v.

Lateral vaginal sulcus Adventitial layer of anterior vaginal wall Rectum

FIGURE 2-1 1 Pelvic viscera and their connective tissue support. (Reproduced with permission from Corton MM: Anatomy. In Hoffman BL, Schorge JO, Bradshaw KD, et al (eds): Williams Gynecology, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw-Hili Education, 2016.) his is important if pelvic adhesions limit tubal mobility and thus, hinder fimbria visualization and tubal confirmation prior to ligation. Each round ligament extends laterally and down into the inguinal canal, through which it passes, to terminate in the upper portion of the ipsilateral labium majus. Sampson artery, a branch of the uterine artery, runs within this ligament. In nonpregnant women, the round ligament varies from 3 to 5 mm in diameter and is composed of smooth muscle bundles separated by ibrous tissue septa (Mahran, 1965). During pregnancy, these ligaments undergo considerable hypertrophy and increase appreciably in both length and diameter.
# Chunk 6220
The broad ligaments are two winglike structures that extend from the lateral uterine margins to the pelvic sidewalls. Each broad ligament consists of a double-layer drape of peritoneum. The anterior and posterior layers of this drape are termed the anterior and posterior leaves, respectively. In forming the broad ligament, this peritoneum folds over structures extending from each cornu. Peritoneum that folds over the fallopian tube is termed the mesosalpinx, that around the round ligament is the mesoteres, and that over the ovarian ligament is the mesovarium. Peritoneum that extends beneath the imbriated end of the fallopian tube toward the pelvic wall forms the suspensory ligament or the infundibulopelvic ligament of the ovary. This contains nerves and the ovarian vessels, and during pregnancy, these vessels, especially the venous plexuses, are dramatically enlarged. Speciically, the diameter of the ovarian vascular pedicle increases from 0.9 cm to reach 2.6 cm at term (Hodgkinson, 1953).
# Chunk 6221
Very early during embryo formation, a bilaminar cloacal membrane lies at the caudal end of the germinal disc and forms the infraumbilical abdominal wall. Normally, an ingrowth of mesoderm between the ectodermal and endodermal layers of the cloacal membrane leads to formation of the lower abdomi nal musculature and pelvic bones. Without this reinforcement, the cloacal membrane may prematurely rupture, and depend ing on the extent of the infraumbilical defect, cloacal exstrophy, bladder exstrophy, or epispadias may result.
# Chunk 6222
Retrolexion describes posterior uterine fundal angling in the sagittal plane. A growing retrolexed uterus will occasionally become incarcerated in the hollow of the sacrum. Symptoms include abdominal discomfort, pelvic pressure, and voiding dysfunction or retention. During bimanual pelvic examination, the cervix will be anterior and behind the symphysis pubis, whereas the uterus is appreciated as a mass wedged in the pelvis. Sonography or MR imaging can aid the clinical diagnosis (Gardner, 2013; Grossenburg, 2011; van Beekhuizen, 2003).
# Chunk 6223
he uterus commonly rotates to the maternal right during pregnancy. Rarely, uterine rotation exceeds 180 degrees to cause torsion. Most cases of torsion result from uterine leiomyomas, miillerian anomalies, fetal malpresentation, pelvic adhesions, or laxity of the abdominal wall or uterine ligaments. Jensen (1992) reviewed 212 cases and reported that associated symptoms may include obstructed labor, intestinal or urinary
# Chunk 6224
For the first few weeks, the uterus maintains its original piriform or pear shape. But, as pregnancy advances, the corpus and fundus become globular and almost spherical by 12 weeks' gestation. Subsequently, the organ grows more rapidly in length than in width and becomes ovoid. By the end of 12 weeks, the enlarged uterus extends out of the pelvis. With this, it contacts the anterior abdominal wall, displaces the intestines laterally and superiorly, and ultimately reaches almost to the liver. With uterine ascent, it usually rotates to the right, and this dextrorotation likely is caused by the rectosigmoid on the left side of the pelvis. As the uterus rises, tension is exerted on the broad and round ligaments.
# Chunk 6225
With the pregnant woman standing, the longitudinal axis of the uterus corresponds to an extension of the pelvic inlet axis. The abdominal wall supports the uterus and maintains this axis, unless the wall is lax. When the pregnant woman lies supine, the uterus falls back to rest on the vertebral column and the adjacent great vessels.
# Chunk 6226
Beginning in early pregnancy, the uterus contracts irregularly, and these may be perceived as mild cramps. During the second trimester, these contractions can be detected by bimanual examination. In 1872, J. Braxton Hicks first brought attention to these contractions, which now bear his name. hese appear unpredictably and sporadically and are usually nonrhythmic. Their intensity varies between 5 and 25 mm Hg (Alvarez, 1950). Until near term, these Braxton Hicks contractions are infrequent, but their number rises during the last week or two. At this time, the uterus may contract as often as every 10 to 20 minutes and with some degree of rhythmicity. Correspondingly, uterine electrical activity is low and uncoordinated early in gestation, but becomes progressively more intense and synchronized by term (Garield, 2005; Rabotti, 2015). This synchrony develops twice as fast in multiparas compared with nulliparas (Govindan, 2015). Late in pregnancy, these contractions may cause some discomfort and account for so-called false labor.
# Chunk 6227
An extrauterine decidual reaction on and jusr beneath the ovarian surface is common in pregnancy and is usually observed ar cesarean delivery. 1l1ese slighdy elevated clear or red patches bleed easily and may, on irst glance, resemble freshly torn adhesions. Similar decidual reactions arc seen on the uterine serosa and other pelvic, or even extrapelvic, abdominal organs (Bloom. 2010). These areas arise from subcoelomic mesenchyme or eniomcrcioric lesions that have been stimulated by progesterone. They histologically appear similar to progestin-stimulated intrauterine endometrial stroma (Kim. 2015).
# Chunk 6228
This protein hormone is secreted by the corpus lureum, the decidua. and the placenta in a pattern similar to that of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) (Chap. 5. p. 102). Relaxin is also expressed in brain, hean, and kidney. Ie is mentioned here because its secretion by the corpus lureum appears to aid many maternal physiological adaptations, such as remodeling of reproductive-tract connective tissue to accommodate labor (Conrad. 2013; Vrachnis. 2015). Relaxin also appears importam in initiating augmented renal hemodynamics, lowering serum osmolality, and increasing arterial compliance, which are all associated with normal pregnancy (Conrad. 2014a). Despite its name, serum relaxin levels do nOt contribute to greater peripheral joint laxity or pelvic girdle pain during pregnancy (Aldabe. 2012; Marnach. 2003; V0l1estad. 2012).
# Chunk 6229
Weeks of pregnancy

FIGURE 4-3 Mean values (black line) ± standard deviations (blue lines) for plasma osmolality (Posm) measured at weekly intervals in nine women from preconception to 16 weeks. LMP = last menstrual period; MP = menstrual period. (Redrawn with permission from Davison JM, Dunlop W: Renal hemodynamics and tubular function in normal human pregnancy. Kidney Int 18:1o52, 1980.) (Davison, 1981; Lindheimer, 2001). Relaxin and other hormones are thought to playia role (Conrad, 2013).
# Chunk 6230
During normal pregnancy, nearly 1000 mEq of sodium and 300 mEq of potassium are retained (Lindheimer, 1987). Although the glomerular filtration rate of sodium and potassium is increased, the excretion of these electrolytes is unchanged during pregnancy as a result of enhanced tubular resorption (Brown, 1986, 1988). Although total accumulations of sodium and potassium are elevated, their serum concentrations are diminished slightly (Appendix, p. 1257). Several mechanisms may explain these lower levels (Odutayo, 2012). In the case of potassium, it possibly involves the expanded plasma volume of pregnancy. With respect to sodium, osmoregulation is altered and the threshold for arginine vasopressin release is lowered. his promotes free water retention and diminished sodium levels.
# Chunk 6231
FIGURE 4-6 Estimated daily iron requirements during pregnancy in a 55-kg woman. (Modified from Koenig, 2014.) (n 10) and singletons (n 40). Data shown as medians. (Data from Thomsen, 1994.) several weeks of pregnancy (Fig. 4-5). Blood volume accrues even more dramatically in twin gestations. During blood volume expansion, plasma volume and erythrocyte number rise. Although more plasma than erythrocytes is usually added to the maternal circulation, the increase in erythrocyte volume is considerable and averages 450 mL (Pritchard, 1960). Moderate erythroid hyperplasia develops in the bone marrow, and the reticulocyte count is elevated slightly during normal pregnancy. These changes are almost certainly related to an elevated maternal plasma erythropoietin level.
# Chunk 6232
As shown in Figure 4-6, because most iron is used during the latter halfofpregnancy, the iron requirement becomes large after midpregnancy and averages 6 to 7 mg/d (Pritchard, 1970). In most women, this amount is usually not available from iron stores or diet. Thus, without supplemental iron, the optimal rise in maternal erythrocyte volume will not develop, and the hemoglobin concentration and hematocrit will fall appreciably as plasma volume rises. At the same time, fetal red cell production is not impaired because the placenta transfers iron even if the mother has severe iron-deficiency anemia. In severe cases, we have documented maternal hemoglobin values of 3 gldL, and at the same time, fetuses had hemoglobin concentrations of 16 gldL. The mechanisms of placental iron transport and regulation are complex (Koenig, 2014; McArdle, 2014).
# Chunk 6233
CD8 T lymphocytes does not change (Kuhnert, 1998).

Many tests performed to diagnose inlammation cannot be used reliably during pregnancy. For example, leukocyte alkaline phosphatase levels-used to evaluate myeloproliferative disorders-are elevated beginning early in pregnancy. he concentration of C-reactive protein, an acute-phase serum reactant, rises rapidly in response to tissue trauma or inflammation. Median C-reactive protein levels in pregnancy and labor are higher than for nonpregnant women (Anderson, 2013; Watts, 1991). Of nonlaboring gravidas, 95 percent had levels of 1.5 mg/ dL or less, and gestational age did not afect serum levels. Another marker of inlammation, the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), is increased in normal pregnancy because of elevated plasma globulins and ibrinogen levels. Complement actors C3 and C4 levels also significantly rise during the second and third trimesters (Gallery, 1981; Richani, 2005). Last, concentrations ofprocalcitonin, a normal precursor of calcitonin, increase at the end of the third trimester and through the irst few postpartum days. Procalcitonin levels rise with severe bacterial infections but remain low in viral infections and nonspecific inlammatory disease. However, measured levels poorly predict development of overt or subclinical chorioamnionitis after premature rupture of membranes (Thornburg, 2016).
# Chunk 6234
Clark and associates (1989) conducted invasive studies to measure hemodynamic function late in pregnancy (Table 4-4). Right heart catheterization was performed in 10 healthy nulliparas at 35 to 38 weeks' gestation, and again at 11 to 13 weeks postpartum. Late pregnancy was associated with the expected increases in heart rate, stroke volume, and cardiac output. Systemic vascular and pulmonary vascular resistance both dropped signiicantly, as did colloid osmotic pressure. Pulmonary capillary wedge pressure and central venous pressure did not change appreciably. Thus, although cardiac output rises, left ventricular function as measured by stroke work index remains similar to the nonpregnant normal range (see Fig. 4-9). Put another way, normal pregnancy is not a continuous "high-output" state.
# Chunk 6235
Elevated prostaglandin production during pregnancy is thought to have a central role in control of vascular tone, blood pressure, and sodium balance. Renal medullary prostaglandin E2 synthesis is markedly elevated during late pregnancy and is presumed to be natriuretic. Levels of prostacyclin (PGI2), the principal prostaglandin of endothelium, also rise during late pregnancy. PGI2 regulates blood pressure and platelet function. It helps maintain vasodilation during pregnancy, and its deiciency is associated with pathological vasoconstriction (Shah, 2015). Thus, the ratio of PGI2 to thromboxane in maternal urine and blood is considered important in preeclampsia pathogenesis (Majed, 2012).
# Chunk 6236
Can be confused with obstructive uropathy; retained urine leads to collection errors; renal infections are more virulent; may be responsible for "distention syndrome"; elective pyelography should be deferred to at least 12 weeks postpartum
# Chunk 6237
Of renal function tests, serum creatinine levels decline during normal pregnancy from a mean of 0.7 to 0.5 mg/dL. Values of 0.9 mg/dL or reater sugest underying renal disease and prompt further evaluation. Creatinine clearance in pregnancy averages 30 percent higher than the 100 to 115 mLi min in nonpregnant women. his is a useful test to estimate renal function, provided that complete urine collection is made during an accurately timed period. If this is not done precisely, results are misleading (Lindheimer, 2000, 2010). During the day, pregnant women tend to accumulate water as dependent edema, and at night, while recumbent, they mobilize this fluid with diuresis. This reversal of the usual nonpregnant diurnal pattern of urinary flow causes nocturia, and urine is more dilute than in nonpregnant women. Failure of a pregnant woman to excrete concentrated urine after withholding fluids for approximately 18 hours does not necessarily signiy renal damage. In fact, the kidneys in these circumstances function perfectly normally by excreting mobilized extracellular fluid of relatively low osmolality.
# Chunk 6238
he bladder shows few significant anatomical changes before 12 weeks' gestation. Subsequently, however, increased uterine size, the hyperemia that afects all pelvic organs, and hyperplasia of bladder muscle and connective tissues elevate the trigone and thicken its intraureteric margin. Continuation of this process to term produces marked deepening and widening of the trigone. The bladder mucosa is unchanged other than an increase in the size and tortuosity of its blood vessels.
# Chunk 6239
Some laboratory test results of hepatic function are altered in normal pregnancy (Appendix, p. 1257). Total alkaline phosphatase activity almost doubles, but much of the rise is attributable to heat-stable placental alkaline phosphatase isozymes. Serum aspartate transaminase (AST) , alanine transaminase (AL T), 1-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT), and bilirubin levels are slightly lower compared with nonpregnant values (Cattozzo, 2013; Ruiz-Extremera, 2005).
# Chunk 6240
During the first trimester, growth hormone is secreted predominantly from the maternal pituitary gland, and concentrations in serum and amnionic luid lie within the nonpregnant range of 0.5 to 7.5 ng/mL (Kletzky, 1985). As early as 6 weeks' gestation, growth hormone secreted from the placenta becomes detectable, and by approximately 20 weeks, the placenta is the principal source of growth hormone secretion (Perez-Ibave, 2014). Maternal serum values rise slowly from approximately 3.5 ng/mL at 10 weeks to plateau at about 14 ng/mL after 28 weeks. Growth hormone in amnionic fluid peaks at 14 to 15 weeks and slowly declines thereafter to reach baseline values after 36 weeks.
# Chunk 6241
As early as 15 weeks' gestation, the maternal adrenal glands secrete considerably increased amounts of aldosterone, the principal mineralocorticoid. By the third trimester, approximately 1 mg/d is released. If sodium intake is restricted, aldosterone secretion is even further elevated (Watanabe, 1963). Concurrently, levels of renin and angiotensin II substrate normally rise, especially during the latter half of pregnancy. his scenario promotes greater plasma levels of angiotensin II, which acts on the zona glomerulosa of the maternal adrenal glands and accounts for the markedly elevated aldosterone secretion. Some suggest the increased aldosterone secretion during normal pregnancy afords protection against the natriuretic efect of progesterone and atrial natriuretic peptide. Gennari-Moser and colleagues (2011) provide evidence that aldosterone, as well as cortisol, may modulate trophoblast growth and placental size.
# Chunk 6242
Maternal serum and urine levels of dehydroepiandrosterone suate are lower during normal pregnancy. his stems from a greater metabolic clearance through extensive maternal hepatic 16.-hydroxylation and placental conversion to estrogen (Chap. 5, p. 103).
# Chunk 6243
Beginning as early as 12 weeks' gestation and extending through the first 2 months postpartum, women have diiculty with falling asleep, frequent awakenings, fewer hours of night sleep, and reduced sleep eiciency (Pavlova, 2011). Abdullah and colleagues (2016b) concluded that sleep apnea is more common in pregnancy, especially in obese patients. he greatest disruption of sleep is encountered postpartum and may contribute to postpartum blues or to frank depression auulia Paavonen, 2017).
# Chunk 6244
Taylor BD, Ness RB, Olsenr], et al: Serum leptin measured in early pregnancy is higher in women with preeclampsia compared with normotensive pregnant women. Hypertension 65:594, 2015 homsen ]K, Fogh-Andersen N, Jaszczak P, et al: Atrial natriuretic peptide, blood volume, aldosterone, and sodium excretion during twin pregnancy. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 73(1):14,r1994
# Chunk 6245
The average cycle duration approximates 28 days but ranges from 25 to 32 days, even for a given woman. The follicular or proliferative phase shows considerable phase-length variation. This contrasts with the luteal or secretory POStovulatory phase of the cycle, which is remarkably constant at 12 to 14 days.
# Chunk 6246
With ovulation, the secondary oocyte and adhered cells of the cumulus-oocyte complex are freed from the ovary. Although technically this mass of cells is released into the peritoneal cavity, the oocyte is quickly engulfed by the fallopian tube infundibulum. Further transport through the tube is accomplished by directional movement of cilia and tubal peristalsis. Fertilization, which normally occurs in the oviduct, must take place within a few hours, and no more than a day after ovulation. Because of this narrow window, spermatozoa must be present in the fallopian tube at the time of oocyte arrival. Almost all pregnancies result when intercourse occurs during the 2 days preceding or on the day of ovulation.
# Chunk 6247
Uteroplacental vessel development proceeds in two waves or stages (Ramsey, 1980). The irst occurs before 12 weeks' postfertilization, and spiral arteries are invaded and modiied up to the border between the decidua and myometrium. he second wave, between 12 and 16 weeks, involves some invasion of the intramyometrial segments of spiral arteries. Remodeling converts narrow-lumen, muscular spiral arteries into dilated, low-resistance uteroplacental vessels. Molecular mechanisms of these crucial events, their regulation by cytokines, signaling pathways, and their significance in the pathogenesis of preeclampsia and fetal-growth restriction has been reviewed by several authors (Pereira de Sousa, 2017; ie, 2016; Zhang, 2016).
# Chunk 6248
Intact hCG circulates as multiple highly related isoforms with variable cross-reactivity between commercial assays. hus, calculated serum hCG levels can vary considerably among the more than a hundred available assays. his emphasizes the need to use the same assay type when clinically measuring serial hCG levels. Peak maternal plasma levels reach approximately 50,000 to 100,000 mIU/mL between the 60th and 80th days after menses. At 10 to 12 weeks' gestation, plasma levels begin to decline, and a nadir is reached by approximately 16 weeks. Plasma levels are maintained at this lower level for the remainder of pregnancy.
# Chunk 6249
�-core fragment. Concentrations of this fragment follow the same general pattern as that in maternal plasma, peaking at approximately 10 weeks' gestation. Importantly, the so-called �-subunit antibody used in most pregnancy tests reacts with both intact hCG-the major form in the plasma, and with fragments of hCG-the major forms found in urine.
# Chunk 6250
here are ive genes in the growth hormone-placental lactogen gene cluster that are linked and located on chromosome 17. hPL is concentrated in syncytiotrophoblast, but similar to hCG, hPL is demonstrated in cytotrophoblasts before 6 weeks (Grumbach, 1964; Maruo, 1992). Within 5 to 10 days after conception, hPL is demonstrable in the placenta and can be detected in maternal serum as early as 3 weeks. Levels of mRNA for hPL in syncytiotrophoblast remain relatively con stant throughout pregnancy. his inding supports the idea that the hPL secretion rate is proportional to placental mass. Levels rise steadily until 34 to 36 weeks' gestation. The hPL produc tion rate near term-approximately 1 g/d-is by far the great est of aRY known hormone in humans. The hal-life of hPL in maternal plasma is between 10 and 30 minutes (Walker, 1991).
# Chunk 6251
In late pregnancy, maternal serum concentrations reach levels of5 to 15 �g/mL (see Fig. 5-18).

Very little hPL is detected in fetal blood or in the urine of the mother or newborn. Amnionic fluid levels are somewhat lower than in maternal plasma. hPL is secreted primarily into the maternal circulation, with only very small amounts in cord blood. hus, its role in pregnancy is believed to be mediated through actions in maternal rather than in fetal tissues. None theless, interest continues for the possibility that hPL serves select functions in fetal growth.
# Chunk 6252
Wallace EM, Swanston A, McNeilly AS, et al: Second trimester screening for Down's syndrome using maternal serum dimeric inhibin A. Clin Endocrinol (Ox) 44(1):17,s1996
# Chunk 6253
This is a collection of coagulated maternal blood normally found in the intervillous space mixed with fetal blood from a break in a villus. Grossly, these round or oval collections vary in size up to several centimeters. hey appear red if recent or white-yellow if older, and they develop at any placental depth. Intervillous thrombi are common and typically not associated with adverse fetal sequelae. Because there is potential for a communication between maternal and fetal circulations, large lesions can cause elevated maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein levels (Salaia, 1988).
# Chunk 6254
In all pregnancies, otherwise unexplained vaginal bleeding of vasa previa and a lacerated fetal vessel. In many cases, bleed ing is rapidly fatal, and infant salvage is not possible. With less hemorrhage, however, it may be possible to distinguish fetal ver sus maternal bleeding. Various tests may be used, and each relies on the increased resistance of fetal hemoglobin to denaturing by alkaline or acid reagents (Odunsi, 1996; Oyelese, 1999).
# Chunk 6255
he embryofetal crown-rump length in the first trimester is accurate ±5 to 7 days. hus, if sonographic assessment of gestational age difers by more than 5 days prior to 9 weeks' gestation, or by more than 7 days later in the irst trimester, the estimated delivery date is changed.
# Chunk 6256
During the irst 2 weeks after ovulation and then fertilization, the zygote-or preembryo-develops to the blastocyst stage. The blastocyst implants 6 or 7 days following fertilization. The 58-cell blastocyst diferentiates into ive embryo-producing cells-the inner cel mass-and the remaining 53 cells form placental trophoblast. Details of implantation and early development of the blastocyst and placenta are described in Chapter 5 (p. 87).
# Chunk 6257
This is the midpoint of pregnancy as estimated from the LMP. The fetus now weighs somewhat more than 300 g, and weight increases substantially in a linear manner. From this point onward, the fetus moves approximately every minute and is active 10 to 30 percent of the day (DiPietro, 2005). Brown fat forms, and the fetal skin becomes less transparent. Downy lanugo covers its entire body, and some scalp hair can be seen. Cochlear function develops between 22 and 25 weeks, and its maturation continues for 6 months after delivery.
# Chunk 6258
After birth, the umbilical vessels, ductus arteriosus, foramen ovale, and ductus venosus normally constrict or collapse. With the functional closure of the ductus arteriosus and the expansion of the lungs, blood leaving the right ventricle preferentially enters the pulmonary vasculature to become oxygenated before it returns to the left heart (Hillman, 2012). Virtually instantaneously, the ventricles, which had worked in parallel in fetal life, now efectively work in series. The more distal portions of the hypogastric arteries undergo atrophy and obliteration within 3 to 4 days after birth. hese become the umbilicaliligaments, whereas the intraabdominal remnants of the umbilical vein form the ligamentum teres. The ductus venosus constricts by 10 to 96 hours after birth and is anatomically closed by 2 to 3 weeks. This ultimately forms the ligamentum venosum (Fineman, 2014).
# Chunk 6259
he amount of hemoglobin F in fetal erythrocytes begins to decrease in the last weeks of pregnancy. At term, approximately three fourths oftotal hemoglobin levels are hemoglobin F. During the irst 6 to 12 months of life, the hemoglobin F proportion continues to decline and eventually reaches the low levels found in adult erythrocytes.
# Chunk 6260
The hepatic diverticulum is an outgrowth of the endodermal lining of the foregut. Epithelial liver cords and primordial cells diferentiate into hepatic parenchyma. Serum liver enzyme levels increase with gestational age. Still, the fetal liver has a gestational-age-related diminished capacity for converting free unconjugated bilirubin to conjugated bilirubin (Morioka, 2015). Because of hepatic immaturity, the preterm newborn is at particular risk for hyperbilirubinemia (Chap. 33, p. 626). And because the life span of normal fetal macrocytic erythrocytes is shorter than that of the adult, relatively more unconjugated bilirubin is produced. As just noted, the fetal liver conjugates only a small fraction, and this is excreted into the intestine and ultimately oxidized to biliverdin. Most of the unconjugated bilirubin is excreted into the amnionic luid after 12 weeks and transferred across the placenta (Bashore, 1969).
# Chunk 6261
from the endoderm of the foregut. Gene regulation of its development was recently reviewed Qennings, 2015). Insu lin-containing granules can be identiied by 9 to 10 weeks, and insulin is detectable in fetal plasma at 12 weeks (Adam, 1969). The pancreas responds to hyperglycemia by secreting insulin (Obenshain, 1970). Glucagon has been identified in the fetal pancreas at 8 weeks. Although hypoglycemia does not cause an increase in fetal glucagon levels, similar stimuli do so by 12 hours after birth (Chez, 1975). At the same time, however, fetal pancreatic a cells do respond to L-dopa infu sions (Epstein, 1977). Therefore, unresponsiveness to hypo glycemia is likely the consequence of failed glucagon release rather than inadequate production. This is consistent with developmental expression of pancreatic genes in the fetus (Mally, 1994).
# Chunk 6262
Renal development involves interaction between pluripotential stem cells, undiferentiated mesenchymal cells, and epithelial components (Fanos, 2015). Two primitive urinary systemsthe pronephros and the mesonephros-precede development of the metanephros, which forms the inal kidney (Chap. 3, p. 33). The pronephros involutes by 2 weeks, and the mesonephros produces urine at 5 weeks and degenerates by 11 to 12 weeks. Failure of these two structures either to form or to regress may result in anomalous urinary system development. Between 9 and 12 weeks, the ureteric bud and the nephrogenic blastema interact to produce the metanephros. he kidney and ureter develop from intermediate mesoderm. The bladder and urethra develop from the urogenital sinus. The bladder also develops in part from the allantois.
# Chunk 6263
Renal vascular resistance is high, and the filtration fraction is low compared with adult values (Smith, 1992). Fetal renal blood low and thus urine production are controlled or inluenced by the renin-angiotensin system, the sympathetic nervous system, prostaglandins, kallikrein, and atrial natriuretic peptide. The glomerular filtration rate increases with gestational age from less than 0.1 mLimin at 12 weeks to 0.3 mLi min at 20 weeks. In later gestation, the rate remains constant when corrected for fetal weight (Smith, 1992). Hemorrhage or hypoxia generally results in a decrease in renal blood flow, glomerular filtration rate, and urine output.
# Chunk 6264
Urine usually is found in the bladder even in small fetuses.

The fetal kidneys start producing urine at 12 weeks. By 18 weeks, they are producing 7 to 14 mLi day, and at term, this increases to 650 mLiday (Wladimirof, 1974). Maternally administered furosemide increases fetal urine formation, whereas uteroplacental insuiciency, fetal growth restriction, and other fetal disorders can lower it. Obstruction of the urethra, bladder, ureters, or renal pelves can damage renal parenchyma and distort fetal anatomy (Muller Brochut, 2014). Kidneys are not essential for survival in utero but inluence control of amnionic luid composition and volume. hus, abnormalities that cause chronic fetal anuria are usually accompanied by oligohydramnios and pulmonary hypoplasia. Pathological correlates and prenatal therapy of urinary tract obstruction are discussed in Chapter 16 (p. 325).
# Chunk 6265
This gland arises from the endoderm of the second pharyngeal pouch. he thyroid migrates to its inal position and the obliterated thyroglossal duct connects to the foramen cecum of the tongue. he pituitary-thyroid system is functional by the end of the first trimester. The thyroid gland is able to synthesize hormones by 10 to 12 weeks, and thyrotropin, thyroxine, and thyroid-binding globulin (TBG) have been detected in fetal serum as early as 11 weeks (Bernal, 2007). he placenta actively concentrates iodide on the fetal side, and by 12 weeks and throughout pregnancy, the fetal thyroid concentrates iodide more avidly than does the maternal thyroid. hus, maternal administration of either radioiodide or appreciable amounts of ordinary iodide is hazardous after this time (Chap. 58, p. 1121). Normal fetal levels of free thyroxine (T4), free triiodothyronine (T3)' and thyroxin-binding globulin increase steadily throughout gestation (Ballabio, 1989). Compared with adult levels, by 36 weeks, fetal serum concentrations of TSH are higher, total and free T3 concentrations are lower, and T4 is similar. This suggests that the fetal pituitary may not become sensitive to feedback until late pregnancy (horpeBeeston, 1991).
# Chunk 6266
Immediately after birth, thyroid function and metabolism undergo major change. Cooling to room temperature evokes sudden and marked increase in TSH secretion. his in turn causes a progressive increase in serum T 4 levels that are maximal 24 to 36 hours after birth. here are nearly simultaneous eleva tions of serum T levels.
# Chunk 6267
Maternal IgG transport to the fetus begins at approximately 16 weeks and increases thereafter. he bulk of IgG is acquired during the last 4 weeks of pregnancy (Gitlin, 1971). Accordingly, preterm neonates are poorly endowed with protective maternal antibodies. Newborns begin to slowly produce IgG, and adult values are not attained until age 3 years. In certain situations, the transfer of IgG antibodies from mother to fetus can be harmful rather than protective to the fetus. The classic example is hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn resulting from Rh-antigen alloimmunization (Chap. 15, p. 301).
# Chunk 6268
With a sensitive test, the hormone can be detected in maternal serum or urine by 8 to 9 days after ovulation. he doubling time of serum hCG concentration is 1.4 to 2.0 days. As shown in Figure 9-2, serum levels range widely and increase from the day of implantation. They reach peak levels at 60 to 70 days. Thereafter, the concentration declines slowly until a plateau is reached at approximately 16 weeks' gestation.
# Chunk 6269
FIGURE 9-2 Mean concentration (95% CI) of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) in serum of This speciicity allows its detecwomen throughout normal pregnancy. tion, and numerous commercial immunoassays are available for measuring serum and urine hCG levels. Although each immunoassay detects a slightly diferent mixture of hCG variants, its free subunits, or its metabolites, all are appropriate for pregnancy testing (Braunstein, 2014).
# Chunk 6270
Over-the-counter pregnancy test kits have been available since the early 1970s, and millions are sold annually in the United States. More than 60 such tests are available in this country (Grenache, 2015). Unfortunately, many of these are not as accurate as advertised Gohnson, 2015). For example, Cole and associates (201i1) found that a detection limit of 12.5 mIU/mL would be required to diagnose 95 percent of pregnancies at the time of missed menses, but they reported that only one brand had this degree of sensitivity. Two other brands gave false-positive or invalid results. In fact, with an hCG concentration of 100 mIU/mL, clearly positive results were displayed by only 44 percent of brands. Accordingly, only about 15 percent of pregnancies could be diagnosed at the time of the missed menses. Some manufacturers of even newer home urine assays claim >99-percent accuracy of tests done on the day of-and some up to 4 days before-the expected day of menses. Again, careful analysis suggests that these assays are often not as sensitive as advertised Gohnson, 2015).
# Chunk 6271
If the yolk sac-a brightly echogenic ring with an anechoic center-is seen within the gestational sac, an intrauterine location for the pregnancy is confirmed. The yolk sac can normally be seen by the middle of the ifth week. As shown in Figure 9-3, after 6 weeks, an embryo is seen as a linear structure immediately adjacent to the yolk sac. Cardiac motion is typically noted at this point. Up to 12 weeks' gestation, the crown-rump length is predictive of gestational age within 4 days (Chap. 10, p. 183).
# Chunk 6272
Bimanual examination is completed by palpation, with special attention given to the consistency, length, and dilatation of the cervix; to uterine and adnexal size; to the bony pelvic architecture; and to any vaginal or perineal anomalies. Later in pregnancy, fetal presentation often can also be determined. Lesions of the cevix, vagina, or vulva are further evaluated as needed by colposcopy, biopsy, culture, or dark-field examination. The perianal region is visualized, and digital rectal examination performed as required for complaints of rectal pain, bleeding, or mass.
# Chunk 6273
Precise knowledge of gestational age is one of the most important aspects of prenatal care because several pregnancy complications may develop for which optimal treatment will depend on fetal age. As discussed earlier and in Chapter 7 (p. 124), irst-trimester sonographic assessment is best correlated with menstrual history. That said, gestational age can also be estimated with considerable precision by carefully performed clinical uterine size examination that is coupled with knowledge of the last menses. Uterine size similar to a small orange roughly correlates with a 6-week gestation; a large orange, with an 8-week pregnancy; and a grapefruit, with one at 12 weeks (Margulies, 2001).
# Chunk 6274
hese are traditionally scheduled at 4-week intervals until 28 weeks, then every 2 weeks until 36 weeks, and weekly thereafter. Women with complicated pregnancies-for example, with twins or diabetes-often require return visits at 1-to 2-week intervals (Luke, 2003; Power, 2013). In 1986, the Department of Health and Human Services convened an expert panel to review the content of prenatal care. his report was subsequently reevaluated and revised in 2005 (Gregory, 2006). he panel recommended, among other things, early and continuing risk assessment that is patient speciic. It also endorsed lexibility in clinical visit spacing; health promotion and education, including preconceptional care; medical and psychosocial interventions; standardized documentation; and expanded prenatal care objectives-to include family health up to 1 year after birth.
# Chunk 6275
At each return visit, the well-being of mother and fetus are assessed (see Table 9-1). Fetal heart rate, growth, and activity and amnionic fluid volume are evaluated. Maternal blood pressure and weight and their extent of change are examined. Symptoms such as headache, altered vision, abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting, bleeding, vaginal luid leakage, and dysuria are sought. Mter 20 weeks' gestation, uterine examination measures size from the symphysis to the fundus. In late pregnancy, vaginal examination often provides valuable information that includes conirmation of the presenting part and its station, clinical estimation of pelvic capacity and configuration, amnionic luid volume adequacy, and cervical consistency, efacement, and dilatation (Chap. 22, p. 435).
# Chunk 6276
Instruments incorporating Doppler ultrasound are often used to easily detect fetal heart action, and in the absence of maternal obesity, heart sounds are almost always detectable by 10 weeks with such instruments (Chap. 10, p. 213). he fetal heart rate ranges from 11e0 to 160 beats per minute and is typically heard as a double sound. Using a standard nonampliied stethoscope, the fetal heart is audible by 20 weeks in 80 percent of women, and by 22 weeks, heart sounds are expected to be heard in all (Herbert, 1987). Because the fetus moves freely in amni onic fluid, the site on the maternal abdomen where fetal heart sounds can be heard best will vary.
# Chunk 6277
If initial results were normal, most tests need not be repeated. Hematocrit or hemoglobin determination, along with serology for syphilis if it is prevalent in the population, is repeated at 28 to 32 weeks (Hollier, 2003; Kiss, 2004). For women at increased risk for HIV acquisition during pregnancy, repeat testing is recommended in the third trimester, preferably before 36 weeks (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 20 16). Similarly, women who engage in behaviors that place them at high risk for hepatitis B virus infection are retested at the time of hospitalization for delivery. Women who are D (h) negative and are unsensitized should have an antibody screening test repeated at 28 to 29 weeks, and anti-D immunoglobulin is given if they remain unsensitized (Chap. 15, p. 305).
# Chunk 6278
Not all the weight gained during pregnancy is lost during and immediately after delivery. Schauberger and coworkers (1992) studied prenatal and postpartum weights in 795 women. Their average weight gain was 28.6 Ib or 12.9 kg. As shown in Figure 9-4, most maternal weight loss was at deliveryapproximately 12 lb or 5.4 kg-and in the ensuing 2 weeksapproximately 9 Ib or 4 kg. An additional 5.5 lb or 2.5 kg was lost between 2 weeks and 6 months postpartum. Thus, average retained pregnancy weight was 2.1 Ib or 1 kg. Excessive weight gain is manifest by accrual of fat and may be partially retained as long-term fat (Berggren, 2016; Widen, 2015). Overall, the more weight that was gained during pregnancy, the more that was lost postpartum. Interestingly, there is no relationship between pre pregnancy BMI or prenatal weight gain and weight retention.
# Chunk 6279
FIGURE 9-4 Cumulative weight loss from last antepartum visit to 6 months postpartum. *Significantly different from 2-week weight loss; **Significantly different from 6-week weight loss. (Redrawn from Schauberger CW, Rooney BL, Brimer LM: Factors that influence weight loss in the puerperium. Obstet Gynecol 79:424, 1992.)
# Chunk 6280
Iron requirements are greatly increased during pregnancy, and reasons for this are discussed in Chapter 4 (p. 58). Of the approximately 300 mg of iron transferred to the fetus and placenta and the 500 mg incorporated into the expanding maternal hemoglobin mass, nearly all is used after midpregnancy. During that time, iron requirements imposed by pregnancy and maternal excretion total approximately 7 mg/ d (Pritchard, 1970). Few women have suicient iron stores or dietary intake to supply this amount. Thus, the American Academy of Pediatrics and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (20e17) endorse the recommendation by the National Academy of Sciences that at least 27 mg of elemental iron be supplemented daily to pregnant women. his amount is contained in most prenatal vitamins.
# Chunk 6281
Scott and coworkers (1970) established that as little as 30 mg of elemental iron, supplied as ferrous gluconate, sulfate, or fumarate and taken daily throughout the latter half of pregnancy, provides suicient iron to meet pregnancy requirements and protect preexisting iron stores. his amount will also provide for iron requirements of lactation. he pregnant woman may benefit from 60 to 100 mg of elemental iron per day if she is large, has a multifetal gestation, begins supplementation late in pregnancy, takes iron irregularly, or has a somewhat depressed hemoglobin level. he woman who is overtly anemic from iron deficiency responds well to oral supplementation with iron salts. In response, serum ferritin levels rise more than the hemoglobin concentration (Daru, 2016).
# Chunk 6282
Iodine is also needed, and the recommended iodine allowance is 220 Lg/d (see Table 9-5). The use of iodized salt and bread products is recommended during pregnancy to ofset the increased fetal requirements and maternal renal losses of iodine. Despite this, iodine intake has declined substantially in the past 15 years, and in some areas it is probably inadequate (Casey, 2017). Severe maternal iodine deficiency predisposes ofspring to endemic cretinism, which is characterized by multiple severe neurological defects. In parts of China and Africa where this condition is common, iodide supplementation very early in pregnancy prevents some cretinism cases (Cao, 1994). To obviate this, many prenatal supplements now contain various quantities of iodine.
# Chunk 6283
6.

Recheck the hematocrit or hemoglobin concentration at 28 to 32 weeks' gestation to detect signiicant anemia.
# Chunk 6284
Tetanus Postexposure prophylaxis One dose 1M Used in conjunction with tetanus

Varicella Should be considered for One dose 1M within 96 hours of Indicated also for newborns or exposed pregnant women exposure women who developed varicella to protect against maternal, within 4 days before delivery or not congenital, infection 2 days following delivery
# Chunk 6285
Nausea and vomiting are common complaints during the first half of pregnancy. These vary in severity and usually commence between the first and second missed menstrual period and continue until 14 to 16 weeks' gestation. Although nausea and vomiting tend to be worse in the morning-thus erroneously termed morning sickness-both symptoms frequently continue throughout the day. Lacroix and coworkers (2000) found that nausea and vomiting were reported by three fourths of pregnant women and lasted an average of35 days. Halfhad reliefby 14 weeks, and 90 percent by 22 weeks. In 80 percent of these women, nausea lasted all day.
# Chunk 6286
As examples, in one study of more than 40,000 pregnancies undergoing sonographic aneuploidy screening between 11 and 14 weeks, basic anatomical evaluation yielded a detection rate of approximately 40 percent for structural abnormalities (Syngelaki, 2011). Bromley and colleagues (2014) similarly found that late irst-trimester sonography identiied major abnormalities in 0.5 percent of pregnancies, representing approximately 40 percent of pregnancies with anomalies detected prenatally. Detection rates are very high for anencephaly, alobar holoprosencephaly, and ventral wall defects. But, in one analysis of more than 60,000 pregnancies with these early scans, only a third of major cardiac anomalies were identiied, and no cases of microcephaly, agenesis of the corpus callosum, cerebellar abnormalities, congenital pulmonary airway malformations, or bowel obstruction were detected (Syngelaki, 2011). In another study of low-risk or unselected pregnancies, 32 percent of anomalies were detected, whereas in pregnancies described as high-risk, anomaly detection exceeded 60 percent (Karim, 2017).
# Chunk 6287
It is recommended that sonography be routinely ofered to all pregnant women between 18 and 22 weeks' gestation (American
# Chunk 6288
Standard sonographic evaluation of the fetal brain includes three transverse (axial) views. The transthalamic view is used to measure the BPD and HC and includes the midline falx, cavum septum pellucidum (CSP), and thalami (see Fig. 10-IA). The CSP is the space between the two laminae that separate the frontal horns of the lateral ventricles. Inability to visualize a normal CSP may indicate a midline brain abnormality such as agenesis of the corpus callosum, lobar holoprosencephaly, or septo-optic dysplasia (de Morsier syndrome). The transventricular view includes the lateral ventricles, which contain the echogenic choroid plexus (Fig. 10-6). The ventricles are measured at their atrium, which is the confluence of the temporal and occipital horns. The transcerebellar view is obtained by angling the transducer back through the posterior fossa (Fig. 10-7). In this view, the cerebellum and cisterna magna are measured, and between 15 and about 20 weeks, the nuchal skinfold thickness may also be measured. From 15 until 22 weeks' gestation, the cerebellar diameter in millimeters is roughly equivalent to the gestational age in weeks (Goldstein, 1987). The cisterna magna normally measures between 2 and 10 mm. Efacement of the cisterna magna is present in the Chiari II maormation, discussed later (p. 193).
# Chunk 6289
40 percent of those with major cardiac anomalies before 22 weeks' gestation, and specialized sonography may identiy 80 percent (Romosan, 2009; Trivedi, 2012). For selected anoma lies, prenatal detection may improve neonatal survival. his requiring prostaglandin infusion after birth to keep the duc tus arteriosus open (Franklin, 2002; Mahle, 2001; Tworetzky, 2001).
# Chunk 6290
FIGURE 10-27 The four-chamber view. A. Diagram demonstrat ing measurement of the cardiac axis from the four-chamber view of the fetal heart. B. Sonogram of the four-chamber view at 22 weeks' gestation shows the normal symmetry of the atria and ventricles, normal position of the mitral and triscuspid valves, pulmonary veins entering the left atrium, and descending aorta (Ao). L = left; LA = left atrium; LV = left ventricle; R = right; RA = right atrium; RV = right ventricle.
# Chunk 6291
pause that follows the premature contraction.

P ACs sometimes occur with an atrial septal aneurysm but are not associated with major structural cardiac abnormalities. Older case reports describe an association with maternal cafeine consumption and with hydralazine (Lodeiro, 1989; Oei, 1989). In approximately 2 percent of cases, afected fetuses are later identified to have a supraventricular tachycardia (S) that requires urgent treatment (Copel, 2000). Accordingly, pregnancies with fetal PACs are often followed with fetal heart rate assessment as often as every 1 to 2 weeks until ectopy resolves. T reatment of fetal SVT and other arrhythmias is discussed in Chapter 16 (p. 316) .
# Chunk 6292
Ventral wall defects include gastroschisis, omphalocele, and body stalk anomaly.

Gastroschisis is a full-thickness abdominal wall defect located to the right of the umbilical cord insertion. Bowel herniates through the defect into the amnionic cavity (Fig. 10-36). he prevalence is approximately 1 in 2000 births Oones, 2016; Nelson, 2015). Gastroschisis is the one major anomaly more common in fetuses of younger mothers, and the average maternal age is 20 years (Santiago-Munoz, 2007). Coexisting bowel abnormalities such as jjunal atresia are found in approximately 15 percent of cases (Nelson, 2015; Overcash, 2014). Gastroschisis is not associated with aneuploidy, and the survival rate is 90 to 95 percent (Kitchanan, 2000; Nelson, 2015; Nembhard, 2001).
# Chunk 6293
When sonographic viewing of fetal abdominal abnormalities is limited by oligohydramnios or maternal obesity, MR imaging may add value (Caire, 2003). Hawkins and coworkers (2008) found that lack of signal in a contracted fetal bladder on T2-weighted sequences was associated with lethal renal abnormalities (Fig. 10-58). Diferences in signal characteristics between meconium in the fetal colon and urine in the bladder may permit deinition of cystic abdominal abnormalities (Farhataziz, 2005). Given the predictable pattern of meconium accumulation within the gastrointestinal tract and high signal intensity on T1-weighted sequences, MR imaging is a complementary tool in diagnosing gastrointestinal abnormalities and complex cloacal malformations (Furey, 2016). Peritoneal calciications related to meconium peritonitis are more readily apparent
# Chunk 6294
FIGURE 10-57 A. Coronal image of normal lungs on a balanced sequence at 29 weeks' gestation. The liver (L) and stomach (5) lie below the diaphragm. B. Left-sided congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) (dotted ellipse) seen on balanced sequence at 33 weeks. C. The T1o-weighted sequence confirms the subdiaphragmatic position of the liver and better delineates the small bowel (arrow) and meconium-containing colon (arrowhead) that have herniated into the chest. D. Another image of a left-sided CDH at 22 weeks demonstrates no normal lung, the heart (H) displaced into the right chest, and an elevated liver (dotted ellipse).
# Chunk 6295
Pilu G: Prenatal diagnosis of cerebrospinal anomalies. In: Fleischer AC, Toy EC, Lee W, et al (eds): Sonography in Obstetrics and Gynecology: Principles and Practice, 7th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 201o1 Prayer D, Malinger G, Brugger PC, et al: ISUOG Practice Guidelines: performance of fetal magnetic resonance imaging. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 49(5):671,o2017 Rabinowitz R, Peters MT, Vyas S, et al: Measurement of fetal urine production in normal pregnancy by real-time ultrasonography. Am ] Obstet Gynecol 161:1264, 1989 Rahemtullah A, McGillivray B, Wilson RD: Suspected skeletal dysplasias: femur length to abdominal circumference ratio can be used in ultrasonographic prediction of fetal outcome. Am ] Obstet Gynecol 177:864, 1997 Ramos GA, Romine LE, Gindes L, et al: Evaluation of the fetal secondary palate by 3-dimensional sonography. ] Ultrasound Med 29:357, 2010 Ramus RM, Martin LB, Twickler DM: Ultrasonographic prediction of fetal outcome in suspected skeletal dysplasias with use of the femur lengthto-abdominal circumference ratio. Am ] Obstet Gynecol 179(5): 1348, 1998
# Chunk 6296
Amnionic luid volume increases from approximately 30 mL at 10 weeks to 200 mL by 16 weeks and reaches 800 mL by the mid-third trimester (Brace, 1989; Magann, 1997). The luid is approximately 98-percent water. A full-term fetus contains roughly 2800 mL of water and the placenta another 400 mL, such that the term uterus holds nearly 4 liters of water (Modena, 2004). Abnormally decreased luid volume is termed oligohydramnios, whereas abnormally increased luid volume is termed hydramnios or poyhydramnios.
# Chunk 6297
With advancing gestation, four pathways playia major role in amnionic luid volume regulation (Table

First, fetal urination is the primary source of amnionic luid in the second half of pregnancy. By term, fetal urine production may exceed 1 liter per day, and the entire amnionic luid volume is recirculated on a daily basis. Fetal urine osmolality is similar to that of amnionic luid and significantly hypotonic to that of maternal and fetal plasma. Speciically, the osmolality of maternal
# Chunk 6298
Brace and Wolf (1989) reviewed 12 studies done through the 1960s in which amnionic fluid volume was assessed using these measurement techniques. Although fluid volume increased across gestation, they found that the mean value did not change significantly between 22 and 39 weeks-it was approximately 750 mL. There was considerable variation at each week of gestation, especially in the mid-third trimester, when the 5th percentile was 300 mL and the 95th percentile nearly 2000 mL. In contrast, Magann and colleagues (1997), using dye-dilution measurements, found that amnionic fluid volume rose with advancing gestation. Specifically, the average fluid volume was approximately 400 mL between 22 and 30 weeks, doubling thereafter to a mean of 800 mL. he volume remained at this level until 40 weeks and then declined by approximately 8 percent per week. The two reports difered in the regression methodology employed, and despite diferent conclusions, both identiied a wide normal range, particularly in the third trimester. This normal variation is similarly observed sonographically.
# Chunk 6299
or a gestational age-specific percentile reference range. he AFI is generally considered normal if greater than 5 cm and below 24 or 25 cm. Values outside these ranges indicate oligohydramnios and hydramnios, respectively. The upper threshold of 24 cm is used in consensus documents (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2016; Reddy, 2014). The 25-cm threshold is oten applied in research studies (Khan, 2017; Luo, 2017; Pri-Paz, 2012). Moore and Cayle (1990) have provided normal curves for AFI values based on a cross-sectionl evaluation of nearly 800 uncomplicated pregnancies. he mean AFI was found to be between 12 and 15 cm from 16 weeks until 40 weeks' gestation. Other investigators have published nomograms with similar mean values (Hinh, 2005; Machado, 2007). Figure 11-1 depicts these AFI nomogram reference values in relation to commonly used thresholds for hydramnios and oligohydramnios.
# Chunk 6300
Symptoms may arise from pressure exerted within the overdistended uterus and upon adjacent organs. When distention is excessive, such as that shown in Figure 11-2, the mother may sufer dyspnea and orthopnea to such a degree that she may be able to breathe comfortably only when upright. Edema may develop as a consequence of major venous system compression by the enlarged uterus, and it tends to be most pronounced in the lower extremities, vulva, and abdominal wall. Rarely, oliguria may result from ureteral obstruction by the enlarged uterus (Chap. 53, p. 1037). Maternal complications such as these are typically associated with severe hydramnios from an underlying etiology.
# Chunk 6301
s previously noted, treatment is directed to the underlying cause. Occasionally, severe hydramnios may result in early preterm labor or the development of maternal respiratory compromise. In such cases, large-volume amniocentesis-termed amnioreduction-may be needed. he technique is similar to that for genetic amniocentesis, described in Chapter 14 (p. 292). One diference is that it is generally done with a larger needle, 18-or 20-gauge, and uses either an evacuated container bottle or a larger syringe. Approximately 1000 to 2000 mL of luid is slowly withdrawn over 20 to 30 minutes, depending on the severity of hydramnios and gestational age. he goal is to restore amnionic fluid volume to the upper normal range. Hydramnios severe enough to necessitate amnioreduction almost invariably has an underlying cause, and subsequent amnioreduction procedures may be required as oten as weekly or even semiweekly.
# Chunk 6302
he study of medication safetyor teratogenicity-in pregnant women is fraught with complications. First, animal studies are considered necessary but insuicient. For example, thalidomide is harmless in sveral animal species but resulted in phocomelia in thousands of children born across Europe in the late 1950s and early 1960s. Second, medications are rarely approved by the FDA for a pregnancy-related indication. Instead, pregnant women are considered a special population and summarily excluded from medication trials. Last, drug concentration and thus embyo-fetl exposure are afected by pregnancy physiology. hese include changes in volume of distribution, cardiac output, gastrointestinal absorption, hepatic metabolism, and renal clearance. In the absence of research trials, counseling is based on case reports or series, casecontrol studies, cohort studies, and pregnancy registry data.
# Chunk 6303
However, when taken in late pregnancy, indomethacin may cause constriction of the fetal ductus arteriosus and subsequent pulmonary hypertension. Fetal ductal constriction is more likely when the drug is taken in the third trimester for longer than 72 hours. he risk is IS-fold higher among indomethacin-exposed pregnancies (Koren, 2006). he drug also may decrease fetal urine production and amnionic luid volume (Rasanen, 1995; van der Heijden, 1994; Walker, 1994). In one systematic review, indomethacin tocolysis was associated with neonatal morbidity (Hammers, 2015a,b). Specifically, the risk for bronchopulmonary dysplasia, severe intraventricular hemorrhage, and necrotizing enterocolitis was increased approximately 50 percent (odds ratio 1.5).
# Chunk 6304
The number of drugs used to treat viral infections has increased rapidly during the past 20 years. For most, experience in pregnant women is limited.
# Chunk 6305
This nucleoside analogue is a component of therapy for hepatitis C infection, discussed in Chapter 55 (p. 1065). Ribavirin causes birth defects in multiple animal species at doses signiicantly lower than those recommended for human use. Reported malformations include skull, palate, eye, skeleton, and gastrointestinal abnormalities. he drug has a half-life of 12 days and persists in extravascular compartments following therapy discontinuation. Treated women must use two forms of contraception and have monthly pregnancy tests while on therapy and for 6 months following drug discontinuation (Genentech, 2015). Ribavirin use is also contraindicated in men whose partners are pregnant.
# Chunk 6306
Eze N, Smith LM, LaGasse LL, et al: School-aged outcomes following prenatal methamphetamine exposure: 7.5-year follow-up from the infant development, environment, and lifestyle study. J Pediatr 170:34.e1, 2016 Feldkamp M, Carey JC: Clinical teratology counseling and consultation case report: low dose methotrexate exposure in the early weeks of pregnancy. Teratology 47(6):533, 1993 Feldkamp ML, Carey Jc, Byrne JL, et al: Etiology and clinical presentation of birth defects: population based study. BMJ 357:j2249, 2017 Finnegan LP, Connaughton JF, Kron E et al: Neonatal abstinence syndrome: assessment and management. Addict Dis 2(1-2):141, 1975 Fisher SC, Van Zutphen AR, Werler MM, et al: Maternal antihypertensive medication use and congenital heart defects: updated results from the National Birth Defects Prevention Study. Hypertension 69(5):798,o2017 Food and Drug Administration: Advice about eating fish, from the Environmental Protection Agency and Food and Drug Administration; revised fish advice; availability. Federal Register 82(12):6571, 2017a Food and Drug Administration: Antipsychotic drug labels updated on use during pregnancy and risk of abnormal muscle movements and withdrawal symptoms in newborns. 2011. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/ DrugSafety/ucm243903.htm. Accessed September 24, 2017 Food and Drug Administration: Content and format of labeling for human prescription drug and biological products; requirements for pregnancy and lactation labeling. Final rule. Fed Regist 79(233):72036,o2014
# Chunk 6307
During pregnancy, women with PKU whose phenylalanine levels remain above the recommended range are at risk to have otherwise normal (heterozygous) ofspring who sustain in utero damage as a result of being exposed to toxic phenylalanine concentrations. Phenylalanine is actively transported to the fetus. Hyperphenylalaninemia raises the risk for miscarriage and for PKU embryopathy, characterized by intellectual disability, microcephaly, seizures, growth impairment, and cardiac anomalies. Among women on unrestricted diets, the risk to have a child with intellectual disability exceeds 90 percent, microcephaly occurs in more than 70 percent, and as many as 1 in 6 children have cardiac defects (Lenke, 1980). he Maternal Phenylketonuria Collaborative Study, which included 572 pregnancies followed more than 18 years, reported that maintenance of serum phenylalanine levels in the recommended range between 2 and 6 mg/dL signiicantly reduced the fetal abnormality risk and resulted in childhood IQ scores in the normal range (Koch, 2003; Platt, 2000). Preconceptional counseling and consultation with providers from experienced PKU centers is recommended.
# Chunk 6308
Fluorescent probe illuminates chromosome region of interest 50 to 100 kilobases. Direct CMA can yield results in 3 to 5 days, whereas if cultured cells are required, results may take 10 to 14 days (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2016b). Microarrays use either a comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) platform, a single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) platform, or a combination of the two. he CGH microarray platform compares test specimen DNA with a normal control sample. Shown in Figure 13-13, the CGH chip contains reference DNA fragments of known sequenceoligonucleotides. Fetal DNA from the amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling specimen is labeled with a fluorescent dye and then hybridized to the DNA on the chip. Normal control DNA is labeled with a diferent probe and also hybridized to the chip. hen, the intensity of the luorescent signals from the two samples is compared. With an SNP array, the chip contains known DNA sequence variants-single-nucleotide polymorphisms. When fetal DNA is labeled and hybridized to the chip, the luorescent signal intensity indicates copy number variation.
# Chunk 6309
Most fetuses with structural abnormalities have a normal karyotype and a normal CMA result. Whole genome sequencing (WGS) is a technique for analyzing the entire genome. Whole exome sequencing (WES) analyzes just the DNA coding regions, which account for approximately 1 percent of the genome. These next-generation sequencing tools are increasingly used in the postnatal setting to evaluate suspected genetic syndromes and intellectual disability. The American College of Medical Genetics Board of Directors (2012) states that WGS and WES may be considered for evaluation of the fetus with a likely genetic disorder in which CMA has failed to arrive at a diagnosis. The American College of 0bstetricians and Gynecologists (201i6a) suggests that this be in only selected circumstances, for example, with recurrent or lethal anomalies in which other approaches have been noninformative. Importantly, WGS and WES have signiicant limitations in their current form, including turnaround times that may be prohibitively long and a high rate of variants of uncertain signiicance (American College of �1edical Genetics, 2012; Atwal, 2014). As a result, the clinical utility of this promising technology for prenatal cases is currently limited. • Fetal DNA in the Maternal Circulation Fetal cells are present in maternal blood at a very low concentration, only 2 to 6 cells per milliliter (Bianchi, 2006). Sometimes, intact fetal cells may persist in the maternal circulation for decades following delivery. Persistent fetal cells may engraft in the mother and result in microchimerism, which has been implicated in maternal autoimmune diseases such as scleroderma, systemic lupus erythematosus, and Hashimoto thyroiditis. For prenatal diagnosis, the use of intact fetal cells from maternal blood is limited by low cell concentration, cell persistence into successive pregnancies, and diiculties in distinguishing fetal from maternal cells. In these cases, however, cell-free DNA overcomes these limitations. Cell-Free DNA hese DNA fragments are derived from maternal cells and from apoptotic placental trophoblast cells-although DNA from the latter is often termed "fetal." Cell-free DNA can be reliably genotyping Maternal Real-time quantitative PCR Detection of single-gene disorders Genetics 273 detected in maternal blood after 9 to 10 weeks' gestation (American College of 0bstetricians and Gynecologists, 20 17b). he proportion of cell-free DNA that is placental is called the fetal fraction, and it composes approximately 10 percent of the total circulating cell-free DNA in maternal plasma. Unlike intact fetal cells, cell-free DNA is cleared within minutes from maternal blood. In research settings, cell-free DNA has been used to detect numerous single-gene disorders transmitted through paternally inherited alleles. These include myotonic dystrophy, achondroplasia, Huntington disease, congenital adrenal hyperplasia, cystic fibrosis, and a-thalassemia (Wright, 2009). Clinical applications of cell-free DNA are aneuploidy screening, fetal sex determination, and h D genotyping (Fig. 13-14). Aneuploidy Screening. Several diferent types of assays are used to screen for fetal autosomal trisomies and sex chromosomal aneuploidies. hese include whole-genome sequencing, which is also called massively parallel or shotgun sequencing; chromosome selective or targeted sequencing; and analysis of SNPs (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2016a,b). By simultaneously sequencing millions of DNA fragments, investigators can identiy whether the proportion or ratio of fragments from one chromosome is higher than expected. Sequences of fetal DNA are specific to individual chromosomes. hus, samples from women with a Down syndrome fetus have a larger proportion of DNA sequences from chromosome 21. The screening performance of cell-free DNA is excellent. In a metaanalysis of 37 studies of largely high-risk pregnancies, the pooled sensitivity to detect Down syndrome was 99 percent, and to identiy trisomies 18 and 13, 96 and 91 percent, respectively. For each, the speciicity was 99.9 percent (Gil, 2015). The false-positive rate is cumulative for each aneuploidy for which screening is performed, but it is usually below 1 percent. As a result, cell-free DNA screening is recommended as !DNA isolation Cell-free fetal DNA determination Massively parallel genomic sequencing Trisomy 21, 18, and 13screening FIGURE 13-14 Cell-free DNA is actually derived from apoptotic trophoblast. The DNA is isolated from maternal plasma, and real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) may be used to target specific regions or sequences. This may be used for Rh D genotyping, detection of paternally inherited single-gene disorders, or fetal sex determination. Screening for autosomal trisomies and sex chromosomal aneuploidies is performed using whole-genome sequencing, chromosome selective or targeted sequencing, and analysis of single nucleotide polymorphisms.
# Chunk 6310
More than 40 years ago, Brock (1972, 1973) observed that pregnancies complicated by neural-tube defects had higher levels of alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) in maternal serum and amnionic luid. his formed the basis for the irst maternal serum screening test for a fetal condition. The beginning of widespread serum screening came in 1977, after a collaborative trial from the United Kingdom established the association between elevated maternal serum AFP levels (MSAFP) and fetal open neural-tube defects (Wald, 1977). When screening was performed at 16 to 18 weeks' gestation, detection approached 90 percent for pregnancies with fetal anencephaly and 80 percent for those with myelomeningocele (spina biida). hese sensitivities are comparable to current testing (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 20 16a).
# Chunk 6311
The terms level I and level II sonography were coined in this context. In the California MSAFP Screening Program of the 1980s and early 1990s, women received serum screening prior to sonography, and those with an elevated MSAFP level would undergo level I sonography to identiy an incorrect gestational age, mulrifetal gestation, or fetal demise (Filly, 1993). A third of pregnancies with an elevated MSAFP level had one of these three etiologies. Although birth defects were occasionally detected during level I sonography, this was not the expectation. If level I sonography did not identiy an etiology for the MSAFP level elevation, amniocentesis would be ofered. Then, only if the amnionic luid AFP concentration were elevated would the woman undergo level II sonography. his more detailed and comprehensive survey of fetal anatomy was performed to detect and characterize the fetal abnormality.
# Chunk 6312
For more than a decade after its introduction, serum aneuploidy screening was intended for women younger than 35, because it simply did not have suicient sensitivity to be ofered to women who had higher a priori risk. This is also no longer the case. And, because the prevalence of fetal aneuploidy rises sharply with maternal age, the positive-predictive value of all aneuploidy screening tests-whether analyte-based or cellfree DNA tests-is higher in women aged 35 years or older. Women 35 and older now make up more than 15 percent of deliveries in the United States (Fig. 14-1). At Parkland Hospital, this age group accounts for half of births with Down syndrome (Hussamy, 2017).
# Chunk 6313
Aneuploidy screening can be challenging because the test characteristics of each option may vary with maternal age and with whether the test is analyte-based or cell-free DNA-based. The test sensitivity is the detection rate-that is, the proportion of aneuploid fetuses identiied by the screening test. Its converse, the false-negative rate, is the percentage of cases that the test is expected to miss. A first-trimester screening test with a sensitivity of 80 percent is expected to miss 1 in 5 cases. The sensitivity of screening tests for Down syndrome has increased steadily during the past 30 years, from just 25 percent with serum AFP alone to more than 90 percent with integrated or sequential screening.
# Chunk 6314
Stepwise 92% 5.1l% 5%

Contingent 91% 4.5% 5%

Cell-free DNA screening:

Positive result 99% 0.1% Table 14-5 aThe positive-predictive value represents the overall population studied and cannot be applied to any individual patient.
# Chunk 6315
Each maternal serum analyte is measured as a concentration-for example, nanograms per milliliter of AFP. he concentration is converted to a multiple of the median (MoM) by adjusting for maternal age, maternal weight, and gestational age. he nuchal translucency measurement increases with crown-rump length (CRL) , and thus its value is adjusted for CRL and also reported as an MoM. The AFP analyte is further adjusted for maternal race and ethnicity and for presence of diabetes, which all afect the calculation of neural-tube defect risk rather than of aneuploidy risk (Greene, 1988; Huttly, 2004). Reporting these results as an MoM of the unafected population normalizes the distribution of analyte levels and permits comparison of results from diferent laboratories and populations.
# Chunk 6316
Currently, the only second-trimester multiple marker test widely used in the United States is the quadruple marker or "quad" screening test. It is performed from 15 to 21 weeks' gestation, and inclusive gestational age ranges vary according to individual laboratories. Pregnancies with fetal Down syndrome are characterized by lower maternal serum AFP, higher hCG, lower unconjugated estriol, and higher dimeric inhibin levels. When the quad screen was initially described, the Down syndrome detection rate approximated 70 percent. But, by the early 2000s, the reported detection rate in two large prospective trials had improved to 81 to 83 percent, with a 5-percent screen-positive rate (Malone, 2005b; Wald, 1996, 2003). The improved detection rate is attributable, at least in part, to accurate gestational age assessment with sonography. In a review of more than 500,000 pregnancies receiving quadruple-marker screening through the statewide California Prenatal Screening Program, trisomy 21 detection was 78 percent with sonographic gestational age assessment but only 67 percent when the screen was calculated based on last menstrual period alone (Kazerouni, 2011). As with first-trimester screening, aneuploidy detection rates are lower in younger women and higher in women older than 35 years at delivery. If second-trimester serum screening is used in twin pregnancies, aneuploidy detection rates are significantly lower (Vink, 2012). With trisomy 18, the levels of the first three analytes are all decreased, and inhibin is not part of the calculation. Trisomy 18 detection is similar to that for Down syndrome, with a false-positive rate of only 0.5 percent (Benn, 1999).
# Chunk 6317
Maternal Serum AFP Elevation: Neural-Tube Defect Screening. All pregnant women are ofered screening for fetal open neural-rube defects in the second trimester, either with MSAFP screening or with sonography (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 20 16c). Measurement of the MSAFP concentration between 15 and 20 weeks' gestation has been ofered as part of routine prenatal care for more than 30 years. Because AFP is the major protein in fetal serum, analogous to albumin in a child or adult, the normal concentration gradient between fetal plasma and maternal serum is on the order of 50,000: 1. Defects in fetal integument, such as neural-tube and ventral-wall defects, permit AFP to leak into the amnionic fluid, resulting in dramatically increased maternal serum levels. he AFP value rises by about 15 percent per week during the screening window (Knight, 1992). he MoM is generally recalculated if the irst-trimester CRL or second-trimester biparietal diameter difers from the stated gestational age by more than 1 week.
# Chunk 6318
For three decades, investigators have recognized that the sonographic detection of aneuploidy, particularly Down syndrome, may be improved by minor markers that are collectively referred to as "sot signs." Minor markers are normal variants rather than fetal abnormalities, and in the absence of aneuploidy or an associated abnormality, they do not significantly afect prognosis. They are present in at least 10 percent of unafected pregnancies (Bromley, 2002; Nyberg, 2003). Examples of these sonographic findings are listed in Table 14-8 and depicted in Figure 14-3. Findings are generally useful from 15 to 20 or 22 weeks' gestation. Six of these markers have been the focus of sonographic studies, in which likelihood ratios have been derived that allow a numerical aneuploidy risk to be calculated (Table 14-9). The risk rises steeply with the number of markers identiied. Alternatively, absence of a minor marker has been used to reduce the calculated risk (Agathokleous, 2013). This should be done systematically, following a protocol that specifies the markers included in a model, the definition for what constitutes a inding, and positive-and negative-likelihood ratios (Reddy, 2014).
# Chunk 6319
Data from Bromley, 2002; Nyberg, 2001; Smith-Bindman, 2001l.

at the inner borders of the fluid collection (see Fig. 14-3C). A measurement �4 mm is found in about 2 percent of fetuses and approximately doubles the risk for Down syndrome. he degree of pelvic dilatation beyond 4 mm correlates with the likelihood of an underlying renal abnormality, and additional evaluation is generally performed at approximately 32 weeks.
# Chunk 6320
0.5 percent of pregnancies and most commonly represents small amounts of swallowed blood, frequently in the setting of maternal serum AFP level elevation. Although typically associated with normal outcomes, it raises the risk for Down syndrome approximately sixfold. Echogenic bowel has also been associated with fetal cytomegalovirus infection and cystic ibrosisrepresenting inspissated meconium in the latter.
# Chunk 6321
Data from American College of Medical Genetics, 2006.

located on the long arm of chromosome 5 (5q 13.2) and encodes the SMN protein. Types I and II account for 80 percent of cases and are both lethal (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2017b). SMA type I, known as WerdnigHofmann, is the most severe. Disease onset is within the first 6 months, and afected children die of respiratory failure by age 2 years. Type II generally has onset before age 2 years, and the age at death can range from 2 years to the third decade of life. Type III also presents before age 2 years, with disease severity that is milder and more variable. Type IV does not present until adulthood.
# Chunk 6322
4.

Biochemical analysis of the hexosaminidase A serum level has a sensitivity of 98 percent and is the test that should be performed in individuals from low-risk ethnicities. Leukocyte testingmust be used if the woman is already pregnant or taking oral contraceptives.
# Chunk 6323
This is the most common prenatal diagnostic procedure. T ransabdominal withdrawal of amnionic luid is generally done between 15 and 20 weeks but may be performed at any point later in gestation. Indications include diagnosis of fetal genetic disorders, congenital infections, and alloimmunization, as well as assessment of fetal lung maturity. The most common types of prenatal diagnostic tests are CMA to assess copy-number gains or losses, karyotype analysis to test for aneuploidy, and FISH to identiY gain or loss of specific chromosomes or chromosome regions (Chap. 13, p. 270). Because amniocytes must be cultured before fetal karyotype can be assessed, the time needed for karyotyping is 7 to 10 days. In contrast, FISH studies are usually completed within 24 to 48 hours. CMA can oten be performed directly on uncultured amniocytes with a turnaround time of only 3 to 5 days, and if amniocyte culture is required, turnaround time is 10 to 14 days (merican College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 20 16b).
# Chunk 6324
Wald NJ, Rodeck C, Hackshaw AK, et al: First and second trimester antenatal screening for Down's syndrome: the results of the Serum, Urine and Ultrasound Screening Study (SURUSS). Health Technol Assess 7(11):1, 2003
# Chunk 6325
The prevalence of D alloimmunization complicating pregnancy ranges from 0.5 to 0.9 percent (Koelewijn, 2008; \1artin, 2005). Without anti-D immune globulin prophylaxis, a D-negative woman delivered of a D-positive, ABO-compatible newborn has a 16-percent likelihood of developing alloimmunization. Two percent will become sensitized by the time of delivery, 7 percent by 6 months postpartum, and the remaining 7 percent will be "sensibilized"-producing detectable antibodies only in a subsequent pregnancy (Bowman, 1985). If there is ABO incompatibility, the D alloimmunization risk approximates 2 percent without prophylaxis (Bowman, 2006). The reason for the difering rates relative to ABO blood type results from erythrocyte destruction of ABO-incompatible cells, which thereby limits sensitizing opportunities. D sensitization also may occur following irst-trimester pregnancy complications, prenatal diagnostic procedures, and maternal trauma (Table 15-2).
# Chunk 6326
Initial evaluation of alloimmunization begins with determining the paternal erythrocyte antigen status. Provided that paternity is certain, if the father is negative for the red cell antigen to which the mother is sensitized, the pregnancy is not at risk. In a D-alloimmunized pregnancy in which the father is D-positive, it is helpful to determine paternal zygosity for the D antigen using DNA-based analysis. If the father is heterozygous-or if paternity is not known-the woman should be ofered assessment of fetal genotype. Traditionally, this was done with amniocentesis and PCR testing of uncultured amniocytes, which has a positive-predictive value of 100 percent and negative-predictive value of approximately 97 percent (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2016; Van den Veyver, 1996). Fetal testing for other antigens-such as E/e, C/c, Duy, Kell, Kidd, and �1/N-is also available with this method. Chorionic villus sampling is not recommended because of greater risk for fetomaternal hemorrhage and subsequent worsening of alloimmunization.
# Chunk 6327
Amnionic Fluid Spectral Analysis. This test is included for historical interest. More than 50 years ago, Liley (1961) demonstrated the utility ofamnionic fluid spectral analysis to measure bilirubin concentration and to thereby estimate hemolysis severity. Amnionic luid bilirubin concentration was measured by a spectrophotometer and was represented as the change in optical density absorbance at 450 nm-10D450. The likelihood of fetal anemia was determined by plotting the 10D45o value on a graph that was divided into zones. hese zones roughly correlated with fetal hemoglobin concentration, and thus with anemia severity. he original Liley graph was valid from 27 to 42 weeks' gestation and was subsequently modiied by Queenan (1993) to include gestational ages as early as 14 weeks. However, the amnionic luid bilirubin level is normally high in midpregnancy, limiting the reliability ofthis technique.
# Chunk 6328
Transfusion is generally recommended only if the fetal hematocrit is <30 percent (Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2015a). Once hydrops has developed, the hematocrit is generally 15 percent or lower. The red cells transfused are type 0, D-negative, cytomegalovirus-negative, packed to a hematocrit of approximately 80 percent to prevent volume overload, irradiated to prevent fetal graft-versus-host reaction, and leukocyte-poor. he fetal-placental volume allows rapid infusion ofa relatively large quantity ofblood. Before transfusion, a paralytic agent such as vecuronium may be given to the fetus to minimize movement. In a nonhydropic fetus, the target hematocrit is generally 40 to 50 percent. he volume transfused may be estimated by multiplying the estimated fetal weight in grams by 0.02 for each 10-percent rise in hematocrit needed (Giannina, 1998). In the severely anemic fetus at 18 to 24 weeks' gestation, less blood is transfused initially, and another transfusion may be planned for approximately 2 days later. Subsequent transfusions usually take place every 2 to 4 weeks, depending on the hematocrit.
# Chunk 6329
Approximately 2 percent of fetuses with premature atrial contractions are later found to have a supraventricular tachycardia (Copel, 2000; Srinivasan, 2008). Given the importance of identiying and treating supraventricular tachyarrhythmias, a fetus with premature atrial contractions is often monitored with heart rate assessment every 1 to 2 weeks until the ectopy resolves. This requires neither sonography nor fetal echocardiography, as the rate and rhythm may be easily ascertained with handheld Doppler.
# Chunk 6330
Friedman and colleagues (2008, 2009) conducted a prospective multicenter trial of pregnancies with anti-SSA/Ro antibodies the PR Interval and Dexamethasone (PRIDE) study. Weekly sonographic surveillance was performed, and heart block was treated with maternal oral dexamethasone 4 mg daily. Unfortu nately, progression from second-to third-degree block was not prevented with maternal dexamethasone therapy, and third degree atrioventricular block was irreversible. In rare cases, there block. However, irst-degree block did not generally progress even without treatment. In a subsequent review of 156 preg nancies with isolated second-or third-degree fetal heart block, sion, need for pacemaker in the neonatal period, or overall sur vival rates (Izmirly, 2016). hus, dexamethasone use cannot be recommended for this indication.
# Chunk 6331
A goal of prenatal diagnosis is to limit dexamethasone expo sure in males and in unafected females. Prenatal diagnosis villi-at 10 to 12 weeks' gestation-or on amniocytes after 15 weeks. Cell-free DNA testing of maternal serum has potential to replace invasive tests such as chorionic villus sampling and amniocentesis for CAH (Chap. 13, p. 273). Determination of (Devaney, 2011). In the research setting, cell-free DNA testing using hybridization probes lanking the CP21A2 gene can be efective as early as 5617 weeks' gestation (New, 2014).
# Chunk 6332
Untreated fetal thyrotoxicosis may present with goiter, tachycardia, growth restriction, hydramnios, accelerated bone maturation, and even heart failure and hydrops (Huel, 2009; Peleg, 2002). The cause is usually maternal Graves disease with transplacental passage ofIgG thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulins. Fetal blood sampling may confirm the diagnosis (Duncombe, 2001; Heckel, 1997; Srisupundit, 2008). Conirmed fetal thyrotoxicosis is followed by maternal antithyroid treatment. During this, if the mother develops hypothyroidism, she is given supplementalilevothyroxine (Hui, 2011).
# Chunk 6333
Potential candidates are fetuses without other severe anomalies or genetic syndromes and without sonographic features that confer poor prognosis, for example, renal cortical cysts. herapy is generally ofered only if the fetus is male, because in females, the underlying anomaly tends to be even more severe. Serial bladder drainage-vesicocentesis-performed under sonographic guidance at approximately 48-hour intervals is used to evaluate fetal urine electrolyte and protein content. Fetal urine is normally hypotonic due to tubular resorption of sodium and chloride, whereas isotonic urine in the setting of obstruction suggests renal tubular damage. Serial assessment permits classiication of the renal prognosis as good or poor and helps guide candidate selection (Table 16-4).
# Chunk 6334
Data from Mann, 2010.

Shunt placement allows urine to drain from the bladder into the amnionic cavity. When successful, this often prevents pulmonary hypoplasia, however, renal function is not reliably preserved. Before shunting, amnioinfusion of warmed lactated Ringer solution is generally performed to aid catheter placement. Amnioinfusion also aids sonographic evaluation of fetal anatomy. A small trocar and cannula are then inserted into the fetal bladder under sonographic guidance. he shunt is placed as low as possible within the bladder to avoid dislodgement after bladder decompression. A double-pigtail catheter is used. The distal end lies within the fetal bladder, and the proximal end drains into the amnionic cavity.
# Chunk 6335
Fetuses spend most of their time in states IF and 2F. For example, at 38 weeks, 75 percent of time is spent in these two states. hese behavioral states-particularly IF and 2F, which correspond to quiet sleep and active sleep-have been used to develop an increasingly sophisticated understanding offetal behavior. In a study offetal urine production, bladder volumes increased during state IF quiet sleep (Fig. 17-1). Duringstate 2F, the fetal heart rate baseline bandwidth increased appreciably, and bladder volume was signiicantly diminished due to decreased urine production and infrequent fetal voiding. These phenomena were interpreted to represent reduced renal blood flow during active sleep.
# Chunk 6336
Figure 1i7-2 shows fetal movements during the last half ofgestation in 127 pregnancies with normal outcomes. he mean number of weekly movements calculated from 12-hour daily recording periods rose from approximately 200 at 20 weeks' gestation to a maximum of 575 movements at 32 weeks. Fetal movements then declined to an average of 282 at 40 weeks. Normal weekly maternal counts of fetal movements ranged between 50 and 950. Count showed large daily variations, with included counts as low as 4 to 10 per 12-hour period in normal pregnancies.
# Chunk 6337
C)..=20

Time of day

FIGURE 17-4 The percentage of time spent breathing by 11 fetuses at 38 to 39 weeks. There is a significant increase in fetal breathing activity after breakfast. Breathing activity diminished during the day and reached its minimum between 20:00 and 24:00 hours. There was a significant increase in the percentage of time spent breathing between 04:00 and 07:00 hours, when mothers were asleep. (Adapted with permission from Patrick J, Campbell K, Carmichael L, et al: Patterns of human fetal breathing during the last 10 weeks of pregnancy, Obstet Gynecol. 1980 Jul;56(1 ):24-30.)
# Chunk 6338
Figure 17-4 displays the percentages of time spent breathing near term. Clearly, there is diurnal variation, because breathing substantively diminishes during the night. In addition, breathing activity increases somewhat following maternal meals. Total absence of breathing was observed in some of these normal fetuses for up to 122 minutes, indicating that fetal evaluation to diagnose absent respiratory motion may require long periods of observation.
# Chunk 6339
Ray and colleagues (1972) used this concept in 66 complicated pregnancies and developed the oytocin challenge test, which was later called the contraction stress test. Intravenous oxytocin is used to stimulate contractions, and the criterion for a positive test result, that is, an abnormal result, is uniform repetitive late fetal heart rate decelerations. These reflected the uterine contraction waveform and had an onset at or beyond the contraction acme. Such late decelerations could be the result of uteroplacental insuiciency. In their study, the tests were generally repeated on a weekly basis, and the investigators concluded that negative contraction stress test results, that is, normal results, forecasted fetal health. A major disadvantage is that the average contraction stress test requires 90 minutes to complete.
# Chunk 6340
TABLE 17-1. Criteria for Interpretation of the Contraction Stress Test

Negative: no late or significant variable decelerations Positive: late decelerations following 50% or more of contractions (even if the contraction frequency is fewer than three in 10 minutes) Equivocal-suspicious: intermittent late decelerations or significant variable decelerations Equivocal-hyperstimulatory: fetal heart rate decelerations that occur in the presence of contractions more frequent than every 2 minutes or lasting longer than 90 seconds Unsatisfactory: fewer than three contractions in 10 minutes or an uninterpretable tracing health. he nonstress test was easier to perform, and normal results were used to urther discriminate false-positive contraction stress tests. Simplistically, the nonstress test is primarily a test ofetal condition, and it difers from the contraction stress test, which is considered a test of uteropacentalonction. Currently, nonstress testing is the most widely used primary testing method for assessment of fetal well-being. It has lso been incorporated into the biophysical profile testing system, subsequently discussed.
# Chunk 6341
The National Institute of Child Health and Human Development Fetal Monitoring Workshop defined normal acceleration based on gestational age (Macones, 2008). In fetuses at or beyond 32 weeks' gestation, the acceleration acme is 15 bpm or more above the baseline rate, and the acceleration lasts 15 seconds or longer but less than 2 minutes. Before 32 weeks, normal accelerations are defined as having an acme that is 10 bpm or more above baseline for 10 seconds or longer. Cousins and associates (2012) compared the Workshop criteria recommended before 32 weeks, that is, 10 bpm/10 seconds, with standard 15 bpm/15 seconds criteria in a randomized trial of 143 women. They found no diferences in perinatal outcomes.
# Chunk 6342
Set originally rather arbitrarily at 7 days, the interval between tests appears to have been shortened as experience evolved with nonstress testing. According to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2016), more frequent testing is advocated by some investigators for women with postterm pregnancy, multifetal gestation, pregestational diabetes, fetalgrowth restriction, or pregnancy hypertension. In these circumstances, some investigators perform twice-weekly tests, with additional testing completed for maternal or fetal deterioration regardless of the time elapsed since the last test. Others perform nonstress tests daily or even more frequently, such as with severe preeclampsia remote from term.
# Chunk 6343
Smith and associates (1987) performed a detailed analysis of the causes of fetal death within 7 days of normal nons tress tests. The most common indication for testing was postterm pregnancy. he mean interval between testing and death was 4 days, with a range of 1 to 7 days. he single most common autopsy inding was meconium aspiration, oten associated with some type of umbilical cord abnormality. They concluded that an acute asphyxial insult had provoked fetal gasping. hey also concluded that nonstress testing was inadequate to preclude such an acute asphyxial event and that other biophysical characteristics might be beneicial. Importantly, assessment of amnionic luid volume was considered valuable. Other ascribed frequent causes of fetal death included intrauterine infection, abnormal cord position, malformations, and placental abruption.
# Chunk 6344
he importance of amnionic fluid volume estimation is indicated by its inclusion into virtually all schemes in which fetal health is assessed (Ff0en, 2008). This is based on the rationale that diminished utero placental perfusion may lead to lower fetal renal blood low, decreased urine production, and ultimately, oligohydramnios (Chap. 11, p. 231). The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2016) concludes that data available from randomized trials indicate that the use of the deepest vertical pocket measurement, as opposed to the AFI, to diagnose oligohydramnios is associated with a reduction in unnecessary interventions without an increase in adverse perinatal outcomes (Nabhan, 2008; Reddy, 2014).
# Chunk 6345
Spinillo and associates (2005) studied neurodevelopmental outcome at 2 years of age in 266 growth-restricted fetuses delivered between 24 and 35 weeks' gestation. Of infants who had shown absent or reversed umbilical artery low, 8 percent had evidence of cerebral palsy compared with 1 percent of those in whom Doppler low had been normal.
# Chunk 6346
Platt and coworkers (1987) reviewed the eicacy of antenatal testing between 1971 and 1985 at Los Angeles County Hospital. During this 15-year period, more than 200,000 pregnancies were managed, and nearly 17,000 of these women underwent antepartum testing of various types. Fetal surveillance rose from < 1 percent of pregnancies in the early 1970s to 15 percent in the mid-1980s. hese authors concluded that such testing was clearly beneicial because the fetal death rate was signiicantly less in the tested high-risk pregnancies compared with the rate in those not tested. he study, however, did not consider other innovations incorporated into practice during those 15 years. Preliminary results from Ghana suggest that nonstress testing may be beneicial in low-resource countries (Lawrence, 2016). In an observational study of 316 pregnancies complicated by gestational hypertension, women undergoing nons tress testing had a nonsignificant decreased risk for stillbirth compared with those not tested-3.6 versus 9.2 percent, respectively.
# Chunk 6347
Nageotte MP, Towers CV, Asrat T, et al: Perinatal outcome with the modiied biophysical proile. Am J Obstet Gynecol 170: 2, 1994 Nijhuis JG, Prechtl HF, Martin CB J r, et al: Are there behavioural states in the human fetus? Early Hum Dev 6: , 1982 Oepkes 0, Seaward PG, andenbussche FP, et al: Doppler ultrasonography versus amniocentesis to predict fetal anemia. N Engl J Med 355: 156, 2006 Oosterhof H, vd Stege JG, Lander M, et al: Urine production rate is related to behavioural states in the near term human fetus. BJOG 100:920, 1993 Ott ('], Mora G, Arias F, et al: Comparison of the modiied biophysical proile to a "new" biophysical proile incorporating the middle cerebral artery to umbilical artery velocity low systolic/diastolic ratio. Am J Obstet Gynecol 178:1346,r1998 Ozkaya E, Baser E, Cinar M, et al: Does diurnal rhythm have an impact on fetal biophysical profile? J Maten Fetal Neonatal Med 25(4):335, 2012 Patrick J, Campbell K, Carmichael L, et al: Patterns of gross fetal body movements over 24-hour observation intervals during the last 10 weeks of pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 142:363, 1982 Patrick J, Campbell K, Carmichael L, et al: Patterns of human fetal breathing during the last 10 weeks of pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 56:24, 1980 Pazos R, Vuolo K, Aladjem S, et al: Association of spontaneous fetal heart rate decelerations during antepartum nonstress testing and intrauterine growth retardation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 144:574, 1982 Perez-Oelboy A, Weiss J, Michels A, et al: A randomized trial of vibroacoustic stimulation for antenatal fetal testing. Am J Obstet Gynecol 187:S 146, 2002 Pillai M, James 0: Behavioural states in normal mature human fetuses. Arch Dis Child 65:39, 1990a Pillai M, James 0: The development of fetal heart rate patterns during normal pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 6:812, 1990b Platt LD, Paul RH, Phelan J, et al: Fifteen years of experience with antepartum fetal testing. Am J Obstet Gynecol 156:1509, 198 Ray M, Freeman R, Pine S, et al: Clinical experience with the oxytocin challenge test. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1r14: 1, 2 Raybun WF: Clinical signiicance of perceptible fetal motion. Am J Obstet Gynecol 138:210, 1980 Reddy UM, Abuhamad Z, Levine 0, et al: Fetal imaging: executive summary of a joint Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Sociery for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, American College of Radiology, Society for Pediatric Radiology, and Society of Radiologists in Ultrasound Fetal Imaging Workshop. Obstet Gynecol 123(5):10 0,r2014 Reddy UM, Filly A, Copel JA, et al: Prenatal imaging: ultrasonography and magnetic resonance imaging. Obstet Gynecol 112(1):145,r2008 Saastad E, Winje BA, Stray Penderson B, et al: Fetal movement counting improved identiication of fetal growth restriction and perinatal outcomesa multi-centre, randomized, controlled trial. PLoS One 6(12):e28482, 2011 Sadovsky E, Evron S, Weinstein 0: Daily fetal movement recording in normal pregnancy. Riv Obstet Ginecol Practica Med Perinatal 59:395, J 9a Sadovsky E, Laufer N, Allen JW: he incidence of diferent types of fetal movement during pregnancy. BJOG 86:10, 1979b Sadovsky E, Yafe H: Daily fetal movement recording and fetal prognosis. Obstet Gynecol 41:845,r1973
# Chunk 6348
Increasing paternal age is signiicantly associated with an greater risk for abortion (de La Rochebrochard, 2003). In the Jerusalem Perinatal Study, this risk was lowest before age 25 years, after which it progressively increased at 5-year intervals (Kleinhaus, 2006). The etiology of this association is not well studied, but chromosomal abnormalities in spermatozoa likely play a role (Sartorius, 2010).
# Chunk 6349
From Lykke, 2010; Saraswat, 2010; Weiss, 2004; Wijesiriwardana,s2006.

Every woman with an early pregnancy, vaginal bleeding, and pain should be evaluated. he primary goal is prompt diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy, and serial quantitative serum S-hCG levels and transvaginal sonography are integral tools. Because these are not 100-percent accurate to confirm early embryo death or location, repeat evaluations are often necessary. With a robust uterine pregnancy, serum S-hCG levels should rise at least 53 to 66 percent every 48 hours (Barnhart, 2004c; Kadar, 1982). Although a less-used marker, serum progesterone concentrations <5 ng/mL suggest a dying pregnancy. Values >20 ng/mL support the diagnosis of a healthy one (Daily, 1994).
# Chunk 6350
With spontaneous miscarriage, 2 percent of h D-negative women will become alloimmunized if not provided passive isoimmunization. With an induced abortion, this rate may reach 5 percent. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017g) recommends anti-Rho (D) immunoglobulin given as 300 �g intramuscularly (IY!) for all gestational ages. Doses may also be graduated, with 50 �g given Hvl for pregnancies :;12 weeks and 300 �g for ::13 weeks. This is administered immediately following surgical evacuation. For planned medical or expectant management, the injection is given within 72 hours of pregnancy failure diagnosis.
# Chunk 6351
Regarding alloimmunity, one provocative theory suggests that normal pregnancy requires formation of blocking factors that avert maternal rejection of foreign fetal antigens that are paternally derived (Chap. 5, p. 95). Factors that prevent this tolerance may underlie RPL (Berger, 2010). However, proposed therapies using paternal or third-party leukocyte immunization or intravenous immunoglobulin (IlG) have not proved beneicial in aAt least one clinical and one laboratory criteria must be present for diagnosis. bThese tests must be positive on two or more occasions at least 12 weeks apart.
# Chunk 6352
Cervical length screening is now recommended by both the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2016b) and the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2015) for women with prior preterm birth. Between 16 and 24 weeks' gestation, sonographic cervical measurement is completed every 2 weeks. If an initial or subsequent cervical length is 25 to 29 mm, then a weekly interval is considered. If the cervical length measures <25 mm, cerclage is ofered to this group of women. Notably, for women without a history of preterm birth but with a short cervix incidentally identiied sonographically, progesterone therapy is ofered instead of cerclage.
# Chunk 6353
If the clinical indication for cerclage is questionable, a woman may instead be observed. Most undergo cervical examinations weekly or every 2 weeks to assess efacement and dilatation. Unfortunately, rapid efacement and dilation can develop despite such precautions (Witter, 1984).
# Chunk 6354
Several dosing schemes are efective, and some are shown in Table 18-7. Because of its greater e.cacy, mifepristonel misoprostol combinations are favored. Presently, for gestations up to 63 days, the most widely accepted regimen is mifepristone, 200 mg given orally on day 0 and followed in 24 to 48 hours by misoprostol 800 �g, administered by a vaginal, buccal, or sublingual route (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2016c). Another earlier regimen used a 600-mg oral mifepristone dose followed in 48 hours by a 400-�g oral misoprostol dose (Spitz, 1998). If desired, mifepristone and misoprostol may be self-administered at home (Chong, 2015). At Planned Parenthood clinics, for irst-trimester medical abortion, doxycycline 100 mg is taken orally daily for 7 days and begins with abortifacient administration (Fjerstad, 2009). he woman is then discharged home and appointed to return in 1 to 2 weeks.
# Chunk 6355
Christiansen OB, Larsen EC, Egerup P, et al: Intravenous immunoglobulin treatment for secondary recurrent miscarriage: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. BJOG 122(4):500,2015 Chung K, Sammel M, Zhou L, et al: Deining the curve when initial levels of human chorionic gonadotropin in patients with spontaneous abortions are low. Ferril Steril 85(2): 508, 2006 Clark W, Bracken H, T anenhaus J, et al: lternatives to a routine follow-up visit for early medical abortion. Obstet Gynecol 115(2 Pt 1):264,r2010 C10wse ME, Jamison M, Myers E, et al: A national study of the complications of lupus in pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 199: 127.el, 2008 Cnattingius S, Signorello LB, Anneren G, et al: Cafeine intake and the risk of irst-trimester spontaneous abortion. N Engl J Med 343: 1839, 2000 Cocksedge A, Li TC, Saravelos SH, et a1: A reappraisal of the role of polycystic ovary syndrome in recurrent miscarriage. Reprod Biomed Online 17:151,r2008 Condous G, Okaro E, Khalid A, et al: Do we need to follow up complete miscarriages with serum human chorionic gonadotrophin levels? BJOG 112:827, 2005 Conforti A, lviggi C, Mollo A, et al: he management of Asherman syndrome: a review of literature. Reprod BioI Endocrinol 11: 118, 2013 Connolly A, Ryan DH, Stuebe AM, et al: Reevaluation of discriminatory and threshold levels for serum j-hCG in early pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 121(1):65,r2013 Contag SA, Woo J, Schwartz DB, et al: Reinforcing cerclage for a short cevix at follow-up after the primary cerclage procedure. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 29(15):2423, 2016 Curtis M, Tepper NK, Jatlaoui TC, et al: U.S. medical e1igibiliry criteria for contraceptive use, 2016. MMWR 65(3):1, 2016 DaifJL, Levie M, ChudnofS, et al: Group A streptococcus causing necrotizing fasciitis and toxic shock syndrome after medical termination of pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 113(2 Pt 2):504, 2009 Daily CA, Laurent SL, Nunley WC J r: The prognostic value of serum progesterone and quantitative beta-human chorionic gonadotropin in early human pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 171 (2):380, 1994 Dao B, Blum J, Thieba B, et al: Is misoprostol a safe, efective and acceptable alternative to manual vacuum aspiration for postabortion care? Results from a randomized trial in Burkina Faso, West Africa. BJOG 114(11): 1368, 2007 Daya S: Accuracy of gestational age estimation by means of fetal crown-rump length measurement. Am J Obstet Gynecol 168(3 Pt 1):903, 1993 Dean G, Colarossi L, Porsch L, et al: Manual compared with electric vacuum aspiration for abortion at less than 6 weeks of gestation: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 125(5):1121,2015 de La Rochebrochard E, honneau P: Paternal age >or = 40 years: an important risk factor for infertiliry. Am J Obstet Gynecol 189(4):901,2003 Devi Wold AS, Pham N, Arici A: Anatomic factors in recurrent pregnancy loss. Semin Reprod Med 1 :25, 2006 Dickey RP, Olar TT, Taylor SN, et al: Relationship of small gestational saccrown-rump length diferences to abortion and abortus karyorypes. Obstet Gynecol 79(4):554, 1992 Dickinson JE, Jennings BG, Doherry DA: Mifepristone and oral, vaginal, or sublingual misoprostol for second-trimester abortion: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 123(6):1162,2014 Diedrich J, Drey E, Sociery of Family Planning: Induction of fetal demise before abortion. Contraception 81r(6):462, 2010 Doret M, Cartier R, Miribel J, et al: Premature preterm rupture of the membrane diagnosis in early pregnancy: PAMG-l and IGFBP-l detection in amniotic fluid with biochemical tests. C1in Biochem 46(18):1816, 2013
# Chunk 6356
-J. Whitridge Williams (1903)

Following fertilization and fallopian tube transit, the blastocyst normally implants in the endometrial lining of the uterine cavity. Implantation elsewhere is considered ectopic and accounts for 0.5 to 1.5 percent of all irst-trimester pregnancies in the United States (Hoover, 2011; Stulberg, 2014). his small proportion disparately accounts for 3 percent of all pregnancyrelated deaths (Creanga, 2017). Fortunately, urine and serum beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (�-hCG) assays and transvaginal sonography allow earlier diagnosis. As a result, both maternal survival rates and conservation of reproductive capacity are improved.
# Chunk 6357
Distinctions beween "acute" ectopic pregnancy just described and "chronic" ectopic pregnancy can be drawn. The more common acute ectopic pregnancies are those with a high serum 3hCG level and rapid growth, leading to a timely diagnosis. hese carry a higher risk of tubal rupture (Barnhart, 2003c). With chronic ectopic pregnancy, abnormal trophoblast dies early, and thus negative or low, static serum 3-hCG levels are found (Brennan, 2000). Chronic ectopic pregnancies typically rupture late, if at all, but commonly form a complex pelvic mass, which oten is the reason prompting diagnostic surgery (Cole, 1982; Ugur, 1996).
# Chunk 6358
With later diagnosis, the classic triad is delayed menstruation, pain, and vaginal bleeding or spotting. With tubal rupture, lower abdominal and pelvic pain is usually severe and frequently described as sharp, stabbing, or tearing. Abdominal palpation elicits tenderness. Bimanual pelvic examination, especially cervical motion, causes exquisite pain. The posterior vaginal fornix may bulge from blood in the rectouterine cul-de-sac, or a tender, boggy mass may be felt beside the uterus. The uterus can also be slightly enlarged due to hormonal stimulation. Symptoms of diaphragmatic irritation, characterized by neck or shoulder pain, especially on inspiration, develop in perhaps half of women with sizable hemoperitoneum.
# Chunk 6359
he diferential diagnosis for abdominal pain coexistent with pregnancy is extensive. Pain may derive from uterine conditions such as miscarriage, infection, degenerating or enlarging leiomyomas, or round-ligament pain. Adnexal disease may include ectopic pregnancy; hemorrhagic, ruptured, or torsed ovarian masses; salpingitis; or tuboovarian abscess. Last, appendicitis, cystitis, renal stone, and gastroenteritis are more common nongynecological sources of lower abdominal pain in early pregnancy.
# Chunk 6360
apid and accurate determination of pregnancy is essential to iden tiY an ectopic pregnancy. Current pregnancy tests use enzyme linked immunosorbent ssays (ELISAs) for the beta subunit of hCG. With these assays, lower limits of detection are 20 to 25 mIU/mL for urine and :;5 mIU/mL for serum (Greene, 2015).
# Chunk 6361
Once 15% decline achieved, then weekly serum �-hCG levels until undetectable

Intrauterine pregnancy Immunodeficiency Peptic ulcer disease Hepatic, renal, or hematologic dysfunction Active pulmonary disease
# Chunk 6362
hese regimens are associated with minimal laboratory changes and symptoms, although occasional toxicity may be severe. Kooi and Kock (1992) reviewed 16 studies and reported that adverse efects resolved by 3 to 4 days ater MTX was discontinued. he most common were liver involvement-12 percent; stomatitis6 percent; and gastroenteritis-1 percent. One woman had bone marrow depression. Fortunately, MTX treatment does not diminish ovarian reserve (Boots, 2016; Dyar, 2013). Moreover, conceptions within the irst 6 months after MTX treatment for this indication are not associated with elevated rates of miscarriage or fetal malformations and growth restriction (Svirsy, 2009).
# Chunk 6363
As shown in Table 19-1, monitoring single-dose therapy calls for serum 3-hCG determinations at days 4 and 7 following initial injection on day 1. After single-dose MTX, mean serum 3-hCG levels may rise or fall during the first 4 days and then gradually decline. If the level fails to drop more than 15 percent between days 4 and 7, then a second dose of MTX is required. This is necessary in 15 to 20 percent of women treated with single-dose therapy (Cohen, 2014a; Kirk, 2007).
# Chunk 6364
Once appropriately dropping levels are achieved in either regimen, serum 3-hCG determinations are then measured weekly until undetectable. Outpatient monitoring is preferred, but if patient safety or compliance is questioned, the woman is hospitalized during initial surveillance. Lipscomb and colleagues (1998) used single-dose MTX to successfully treat 287 women and reported that the average time to resolutiondeined as a serum 3-hCG level < 15 mID/mL, was 34 days. Importantly, the longest time was 109 days.
# Chunk 6365
Incomplete removal of trophoblast can be identiied by stable or rising 3-hCG levels. v1onitoring approaches are not codified. One scheme measures serum 3-hCG levels on postoperative day 1, and values dropping < 50 percent of the preoperative value relect risk for persistent trophoblast (Spandorfer, 1997). Another measures weekly levels (Mol, 2008). With stable or increasing 3-hCG levels, additional surgical or medical therapy is necessary. Without evidence for tubal rupture, standard therapy for this is single-dose MTX, 50 mg/m2 X body surface area (BSA). Rupture and bleeding require surgical intervention.
# Chunk 6366
With transvaginal sonography and serum �-hCG assays, interstitial pregnancy can now be diagnosed early in many cases, but diagnosis can be challenging. hese pregnancies sonographically can appear similar to an eccentrically implanted uterine pregnancy, especially in a uterus with a miillerian anomaly. Criteria that may aid diferentiation include: an empty uterus, a gestational sac seen separate from the endometrium and > 1 cm away from the most lateral edge of the uterine cavity, and a thin, < 5-mm myometrial mantle surrounding the sac (Timor-Tritsch, 1992). Moreover, an echo genic line, known as the "interstitial line sign," extending from the gestational sac to the endometrial cavity most likely represents the interstitial portion of the fallopian tube and is highly sensitive and specific (Ackerman, 1993a). In unclear cases, three-dimensional (3-D) sonography, magnetic resonance (MR) imaging, or diagnostic laparoscopy can help clariy anatomy (Parker, 2012; Tanaka, 2014). Laparoscopically, an enlarged protuberance is found lying outside the round ligament and coexistent with a normal distal fallopian tube and ovary.
# Chunk 6367
Diagnosis may be diicult. First, symptoms may be absent or vague. Laboratory tests are typically uninformative, although maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein levels can be elevated. Clinically, abnormal fetal positions may be palpated, or the cervix is displaced (Zeck, 2007). Sonographically, the diagnosis is often missed (Costa, 1991). Oligohydramnios is common but nonspecific. Other clues include a fetus seen separate from the uterus or eccentrically positioned within the pelvis; lack of myometrium beween the fetus and the maternal anterior abdominal wall or bladder; extrauterine placental tissue; or bowel loops surrounding the gestational sac (Allibone, 1981; Chukus, 2015). If additional anatomical information is needed, MR imaging can help confirm the diagnosis and provide maximal information concerning placental implantation (Bertrand, 2009; Mittal, 2012).
# Chunk 6368
Some advocate leaving the placenta in place as the lesser of two evils. It decreases the chance of immediate life-threatening hemorrhage, but at the expense of long-term sequelae. If let in the abdominal cavity, the placenta commonly becomes infected, with subsequent formation of abscesses, adhesions, intestinal or ureteral obstruction, and wound dehiscence (Bergstrom, 1998; Martin, 1988). In many of these cases, surgical removal becomes inevitable. If the placenta is let, its involution may be monitored using sonography and serum �-hCG levels (France, 1980; Martin, 1990). Color Doppler sonography can be used to assess changes in blood low. In some cases, and usually depending on its size, placental function rapidly declines, and the placenta is resorbed. But placental resorption may take years (Roberts, 2005; Valenzano, 2003).
# Chunk 6369
Maheux-Lacroix S, Li F, Bujold E, et al: Cesarean scar pregnancies: a systematic review of treatment options. J Minim Invasive Gynecol 24(6):915, 2017 Marcellin L, Menard S, Lamau MC, et al: Conservative management of an advanced abdominal pregnancy at 22 weeks. AJP Rep 4(1):55, 2014
# Chunk 6370
Memtsa M, Jami! A, Sebire N, et al: Rarity revisited: diagnosis and management of intramural ectopic pregnancy. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 42(3):359,o2013 Menon S, Colins J, Barnhart KT: Establishing a human chorionic gonadotropin cutof to guide methotrexate treatment of ectopic pregnancy: a systematic review. Ferti! Steri! 87(3):481, 2007 Mittal SK, Singh N, VermaoAK, et al: Fetal MRI in the pre-operative diagnosis and assessment of secondary abdominal pregnancy: a rare sequela of a previous caesarean section. Diagn Interv RadioIo18(5):496, 2012 Moawad NS, Mahajan ST, Moniz MH, et al: Current diagnosis and treatment of interstitial pregnancy. AmJ Obstet GynecoIo202(1):15, 2010 Mol BWJ, Lijmer JG, Ankum WM, et al: he accuracy of single serum progesterone measurement in the diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy: a meta-analysis. Hum Reprod 13:3220, 1998 Mol F, Strandell A, Jurkovic 0, et al: The ESEP study: salpingostomy versus salpingectomy for tubal ectopic pregnancy; the impact on future ferti!ity: a randomized controlled trial. BMC Womens Health 8:11, 2008 Mol F, van Mello NM, Strandell A, et al: Salpingotomy versus salpingectomy in women with tubal pregnancy (ESEP study): an open-label, multicentre, randomized controlled trial. Lancet 383(9927): 1483, 2014 Moschos E, Sreenarasimhaiah S, Twickler OM: First-trimester diagnosis of cesarean scar ectopic pregnancy. J Clin Ultrasound 36(8):504, 2008a Moschos E, Twickler OM: Endometrial thickness predicts intrauterine pregnancy in patients with pregnancy of unknown location. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 32(7):929, 2008b Murji A, Garbedian K, Thomas J, et al: Conservative management of cervical ectopic pregnancy. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 37(11):1016, 2015 Murphy A, Nager CW, Wujek JJ, et al: Operative laparoscopy versus laparotomy for the management of ectopic pregnancy: a prospective trial. Ferti! Steril 57(6):1180, 1992 Nadim B, Infante F, Lu e, et al: he morphological ultrasound types known as 'blob' and 'bagel' signs should be reclassiied from probable to deinite ectopic pregnancy. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol February 13, 2017 [Epub ahead of print] Nieuwkerk PT, Hajenius PJ, Ankum WM, et al: Systemic methotrexate therapy versus laparoscopic salpingostomy in patients with tubal pregnancy. Part 1. Impact on patients' health-related quality oflife. Fertil Steril 70:511, 1998
# Chunk 6371
Uyar I, Yucel OU, Gezer C, et al: Efect of single-dose methotrexate on ovarian reserve in women with ectopic pregnancy. Fertil Sterilo100(5):1310, 2013 Valenzano M, Nicoletti L, Odicino F, et al: Five-year follow-up of placental involution after abdominal pregnancy. J Clin Ultrasound 31 (1):39, 2003 van Mello NM, Mol F, Verhoeve HR, et al: Methotrexate or expectant management in women with an ectopic pregnancy or pregnancy of unknown location and low serum hCG concentrations? A randomized comparison. Hum Reprod 28(1):60,o2013
# Chunk 6372
With a complete molar pregnancy, serum �-hCG levels are commonly elevated above those expected for gestational age. With more advanced moles, values in the millions are not unusual. Importantly, these high values can lead to erroneous false-negative urine pregnancy test results. Termed a "hook efect," excessive �-hCG hormone levels oversaturate the assay's targeting antibody and create a falsely low reading (Cormano, 2016). In these cases, serum �-hCG determinations with or without sample dilution will clariy the conundrum. With a partial mole, �-hCG levels may also be significantly elevated, but more commonly concentrations fall into ranges expected for gestational age.
# Chunk 6373
Serum hCG levels: within 48 hours of evacuation, weekly until undetectable, then monthly for 6 months alntrauterine devices are not suitable during surveillance.
# Chunk 6374
Close biochemical surveillance for persistent gestational neoplasia follows each hydatidiform mole evacuation. This monitoring is by serial measurement of serum 3-hCG to detect persistent or renewed trophoblastic proliferation. s a glycoprotein, hCG shows structural heterogeneity and exists in diferent isoforms. Thus for surveillance, an hCG assay that can detect all forms of hCG should be used (Harvey, 2010; Ngan, 2015). hese are different from those used for routine pregnancy testing (de Medeiros, 2009). he initial 3-hCG level is obtained within 48 hours ater evacuation. This serves as the baseline, which is compared with 3-hCG quantiication done thereater every 1 to 2 weeks until levels progressively decline to become undetectable.
# Chunk 6375
Rise of serum �-hCG levels> 10 percent during three weekly consecutive measurements or longer, during a period of 2 weeks or more-days '1, 7, 14 3.
# Chunk 6376
Once the diagnosis is veriied, in addition to a baseline serum J-hCG level and hemogram, a search for local disease and metastases includes tests of liver and renal function, transvaginal sonography, chest CT scan or radiograph, and brain and abdominopelvic CT scan or MR imaging. Less commonly, positron-emission tomographic (PET) scanning and cerebrospinal luid J-hCG level determination are used to identiy metastases (Lurain, 2011).
# Chunk 6377
Hassadia A, Kew FM, Tidy]A, et al: Ectopic gestational trophoblastic disease: a case series review.o] Reprod Med 57(7-8):297, 20o12 ]oergensen MW, Niemann I, Rasmussen A,et al: Triploid pregnancies: genetic and clinical features of 158 cases. Am] Obstet GynecoIo211(4):370.e1, 2014 ]oneborg U, Eloranta S, Johansson L, et al: Hydatidiform mole and subsequent pregnancy outcome: a population-based cohort study. Am ] Obstet GynecoIo211(6):681.e1,o2014 Kang WD, Choi HS, Kim SM: Prediction of persistent gestational trophoblastic neoplasia: the role of hCG level and ratio in 2 weeks after evacuation of complete mole. Gynecol OncoIo124(2):250, 2012 Kerkmeijer LG, Massuger LF, Ten Kate-Booij M], et al: Earlier diagnosis and serum human chorionic gonadotropin regression in complete hydatidiform moles. Obstet Gynecol 113:326,o2009
# Chunk 6378
Labor is the last few hours of human pregnancy. It is characterized by forceful and painful uterine contractions that efect cervical dilation and cause the fetus to descend through the birth canal. Extensive preparations take place in both the uterus and cervix long before this. During the irst 36 to 38 weeks of normal gestation, the myometrium is in a preparatory yet unresponsive state. Concurrently, the cervix begins an early stage of remodeling yet maintains structural integrity. Following this prolonged uterine quiescence, a transitional phase follows during which myometrial unresponsiveness is suspended and the cervix undergoes ripening, efacement, and loss of structural cohesion.
# Chunk 6379
Many adaptive changes are required for pregnancy and for labor and delivery. According to Nygaard (2015), vaginal delivery is a traumatic event. To assess this in part, Staer-] ensen and colleagues (2015) obtained transperineal sonographic measurements of the pelvic loor muscles at 21 weeks' and 37 weeks' gestation, and again at 6 weeks, 6 months, and 12 months postpartum. In 300 nulliparas, they measured bladder neck mobility and the area within the urogenital hiatus during Valsalva. This hiatus is the U-shaped opening in the pelvic loor muscles through which the urethra, vagina, and rectum pass (Chap. 2, p. 19). In this study, the levator hiatus area was signiicantly larger at 37 weeks' gestation and at 6 weeks postpartum compared with earlier pregnancy. hen, by 6 months postpartum, the hiatus had improved and narrowed to return to an area comparable to that at 21 weeks' gestation. However, no further improvement was noted by 12 months postpartum. Of note, hiatal area enlargement was only seen in those who delivered vaginally.
# Chunk 6380
Efective contractions, adequate head lexion, and average fetal size together permit most posteriorly positioned occiputs to rotate promptly as soon as they reach the pelvic loor, and labor is not lengthened appreciably. In perhaps 5 to 10 percent of cases, however, rotation may be incomplete or may not take place at all, especially if the fetus is large (Gardberg, 1994b). Poor contractions, faulty head lexion, or epidural analgesia, which diminishes abdominal muscular pushing and relaxes pelvic floor muscles, may predispose to incomplete rotation. If rotation is incomplete, transverse arrest may result. If no rotation toward the symphysis takes place, the occiput may remain in the direct occiput posterior position, a condition known as persistent occiput posterior. Both can lead to dystocia and cesar ean delivery. Techniques to manually rotate from OP to OA positions are illustrated in Chapter 29 (p. 560).
# Chunk 6381
Hendricks and coworkers (1970) challenged Friedman's conclusions about the course of normal human labor. Their principal diferences included: (1) absence of a latent phase, (2) no deceleration phase, (3) brevity ofilabor, and (4) dilation at similar rates for nulliparas and multiparas after 4 cm. They disputed the concept of a latent phase because they observed that the cervix dilated and efaced slowly during the 4 weeks preceding labor. They contended that the latent phase actually progressed over several weeks. hey also reported that labor was relatively rapid. Specifically, the average time from admission to complete dilation was 4.8 hours for nulliparas and 3.2 hours for multiparas.
# Chunk 6382
Other tests to identiY amnionic luid include arborization or ferning of vaginal luid, which suggests amnionic rather than cervical luid. Amnionic luid crystallizes to form a fernlike pattern due to its relative concentrations of sodium chloride, proteins, and carbohydrates. Detection of alpha-fetoprotein in the vaginal vault has been used to identiY amnionic luid (Yamada, 1998). Although rarely required, identiication may also follow injection of indigo carmine into the amnionic sac via abdominal amniocentesis. Last, speciic amnionic luid proteins can be sought using point-of-care assays. These include AmniSure, which binds placental alpha microglobulin-1, and ROM Plus, which detects insulin growth factor binding protein-1 plus alpha-fetoprotein (Doret, 2013; Igbinosa, 2017).
# Chunk 6383
When a woman is admitted in labor, most often the hematocrit or hemoglobin concentration is checked. he hematocrit can be measured easily and quickly. At Parkland Hospital, blood is collected in a standard collection tube with anticoagulant. From this, a heparinized capillary tube is filled to spin in a microhematocrit centrifuge in the labor and delivery unit. his provides a hematocrit value within 3 minutes. he initial collection tube is also sent to the hematology laboratory for evaluation if the point-of-care hematocrit is <30 volume percent. Another labeled tube of blood is allowed to clot and sent to the blood bank for blood type and antibody screen, if needed. A final sample is collected for syphilis and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) serology. In some labor units, a cleancatch voided specimen is examined in all women for protein and glucose. At Parkland Hospital, however, we obtain a urine specimen for protein determination in hypertensive women only (Table 40-1, p. 712).
# Chunk 6384
This is discussed in detail in Chapter 24. Briely, the American Academy of Pediatrics and American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017) recommend that during irst-stage labor, in the absence of any abnormalities, the fetal heart rate should be checked immediately after a contraction at least every 30 minutes and then every 15 minutes during the second stage. If continuous electronic monitoring is used, the tracing is evaluated at least every 30 minutes during the irst stage and at least every 15 minutes during second-stage labor. For women with pregnancies at risk, fetal heart auscultation is performed at least every 15 minutes during irst-stage labor and every 5 minutes during the second stage. Continuous electronic monitoring may be used with evaluation of the tracing every 15 minutes during the first stage of labor, and every 5 minutes during the second stage.
# Chunk 6385
Although an intravenous (IV) infusion system is often routinely established early in labor, real need for this in the normal pregnant woman is limited, at least until analgesia is administered. However, venous access is advantageous during the immediate puerperium to administer oxytocin prophylactically and at times therapeutically when uterine atony persists. Moreover, with longer labors, the administration of glucose, sodium, and water to the otherwise fasting woman at the rate of 60 to 120 mLlhr prevents dehydration and acidosis. Shrivastava and associates (2009) noted shorter labors in nulliparas delivering vaginally who were provided an intravenous normal saline with dextrose solution compared with those given saline solution only. In another study, 195 women in labor received lactated Ringer or isotonic sodium chloride solution at a rate of either 125 or 250 mLlhr. The mean volume of total IV luid was 2008 mL in the 125 mL/hr group and 2487 mL in the 250 mL/hr group (Garite, 2000). Labor lasted more than 12 hours in signiicantly more of the women given a 125 mLlhr infusion compared with those given 250 mLlhr-26 versus 13 percent, respectively. In yet another study, 31i1 nulliparas with uncomplicated pregnancies in spontaneous labor at term received one of three IV infusions (Edwards, 2014). Group 1 was given 125 mLlhr of lactated Ringer solution with 5 percent dextrose (D5LR), Group 2 received 250 mLihour of the same solution (D5LR), and Group 3 was administered 25 mL/hr of D5LR. Groups 1 and 2 were allowed ice chips, Popsicles, and hard candy, and Group 3 also received Gatorade. Oral intake was limited in Groups 1 and 2 but was ad libitum in Group 3. The authors concluded that any of the regimens studied was safe but none was superior for labor performance.
# Chunk 6386
In Dublin more than 30 years ago, O'Driscoll and associates (1984) pioneered the concept that a disciplined, standardized labor management protocol reduced the number of cesarean deliveries for dystocia. Their overall cesarean delivery rate was 5 percent in the 1970s and 1980s with such management. The approach is now referred to as active management of labor. Two of its components-amniotomy and oxytocinhave been widely used, especially in English-speaking countries outside the United States. With this protocol, labor is diagnosed when painful contractions are accompanied by complete cervical efacement, bloody "show," or ruptured membranes. Women with such indings are committed to delivery within 12 hours. Pelvic examination is performed each hour for the next 3 hours, and thereafter at 2-hour intervals. When dilation has not increased by at least 1 cm/hr, amniotomy is performed. Progress is again assessed at 2 hours, and high-dose oxytocin infusion, described in Chapter 26 (p. 509), is started unless dilation of at least 1 cm/hr is attained. Women are constantly attended by midwives. If membranes rupture before admission, oxytocin is begun for no progress at the I-hour mark.
# Chunk 6387
At Parkland Hospital, women are admitted if active labor is diagnosed or if ruptured membranes are conirmed. Labor is defined as cervical dilation of 3 to 4 cm or more in the presence of uterine contractions. Management guidelines direct that a pelvic examination be performed approximately every 2 hours. Inefective labor is suspected when the cervix does not dilate within approximately 2 hours of admission. Amniotomy is then performed, and labor progress determined at the next 2-hour evaluation. In women whose labors do not progress, an intrauterine pressure catheter is placed to assess uterine function. Hypotonic contractions and no cervical dilation after an additional 2 to 3 hours result in stimulation of labor using the high-dose oxytocin regimen described in Chapter 26 (p. 509). The goal is uterine activity of 200 to 250 Montevideo units for 2 to 4 hours before dystocia can be diagnosed. If hypotonic contractions are strongly suspected, internal monitors may be placed with amniotomy and again cervical change and contraction pattern are assessed in 2 hours. Conirmation of deicient Montevideo units at that time may prompt oxytocin augmentation for maternal or fetal indications.
# Chunk 6388
Vallier (2012) reviewed experiences with pelvic fractures and pregnancy. Trauma from automobile collisions was the most common cause. Moreover, they note that fracture pattern, minor malalignment, and retained hardware are not absolute indications for cesarean delivery. In determining suitability for vaginal delivery, fracture healing requires 8 to 12 weeks and thus recent fracture merits cesarean delivery (Amorosa, 2013). A history of pelvic fracture warrants careful review of previous radiographs and possible imaging pelvimetry later in pregnancy.
# Chunk 6389
Fistula ormation may result from dystocia, as the presenting part is irmly wedged into the pelvic inlet. Tissues of the birth canal lying between the leading part and the pelvic wall may be subjected to excessive pressure. Because of impaired circula tion, necrosis can result and become evident several days after delivery as vesicovaginal, vesicocervical, or rectovaginal istulas.
# Chunk 6390
The baseline fetal heart rate is the approximate mean rate rounded to increments of 5 bpm during a 10-minute tracing segment. In any 10-minute window, the minimum interpretable baseline duration must be at least 2 minutes. If the baseline fetal heart rate is less than 110 bpm, it is termed bradycardia . If the baseline rate is greater than 160 bpm, it is called tachycardia. The average fetal heart rate is considered the result of tonic balance between accelerator and decelerator influences on pacemaker cells. In this concept, the sympathetic system is the accelerator influence, and the parasympathetic system is the decelerator factor mediated by vagal slowing of heart rate (Dawes, 1985). Heart rate also is under the control of arterial chemoreceptors such that both hypoxia and hypercapnia can modulate rate. More severe and prolonged hypoxia, with a
# Chunk 6391
At 32 weeks of gestation and beyond, an acceleration has a peak of 15 bpm or more above baseline, with a duration of 15 sec or more but less than 2 minutes from onset to return
# Chunk 6392
Before 32 weeks, an acceleration has a peak of 10 bpm or more above baseline, with a duration of 10 seconds or more but less than 2 minutes from onset to return
# Chunk 6393
When fetal cardiac arrhythmias are irst suspected using electronic monitoring, indings can include baseline bradycardia, tachycardia, or most commonly in our experience, abrupt baseline spiking (Fig. 24-9). An arrhythmia can only be documented, practically speaking, when scalp electrodes are used. Some fetal monitors can be adapted to output the scalp electrode signals into an ECG recorder. Because only a single lead is obtained, analysis and interpretation of rhythm and rate disturbances are severely limited.
# Chunk 6394
hese are abrupt heart rate increases above the fetal heart rate baseline and defined by n onset-to-peak rise within 30 seconds (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2017a). At 32 weeks' gestation and beyond, an acceleration has a peak � 15 bpm above baseline. Its duration is � 15 sec but <2 minutes from onset to baseline return (see Table 24-1). Before 32 weeks, a peak �10 bpm for 10 seconds to 2 minutes is considered normal. Prolonged acceleration is defined as �2 minutes but < 10 minutes.
# Chunk 6395
FHR = fetal heart rate.

Principal management options for variant fetal heart rate patterns consist of correcting any fetal insult, if possible. Suggestions are listed in Table 24-3. he woman is moved to a lateral position, and supplemental oxygen is provided by mask. Correcting maternal hypotension caused by regional analgesia and discontinuing oxytocin both serve to improve uteroplacental perfusion. Vaginal examination excludes a prolapsed cord or impending delivery. Simpson and James (2005) assessed the beneits of three maneuvers in 52 women with fetal oxygen saturation sensors already in place. They used intravenous hydration-500 to 1000 mL of lactated Ringer solution given over 20 minutes; lateral versus supine positioning; and administration of supplemental oxygen at lOiLl min using a nonrebreathing mask. Each of these maneuvers signiicantly raised fetal oxygen saturation levels.
# Chunk 6396
hese manifestations generally develop later than those of cerebral toxicity. Moreover, no symptoms may develop because signs are usually induced by higher serum drug levels. he notable exception is bupivacaine, which is associated with neurotoxicity and cardiotoxicity at virtually idenricalilevels (Mulroy, 2002). Because of its toxicity risk, use of a 0.75-percent solution of bupivacaine for epidural injection has been proscribed by the FDA. Similar to neurotoxicity, cardiovascular toxicity is characterized first by stimulation and then by depression. Accordingly, hypertension and tachycardia are soon followed by hypotension, cardiac arrhythmias, and impaired uteroplacental perfusion.
# Chunk 6397
Blood pressure every 1 to 2 minutes for 15 minutes ater giving a bolus of local anesthetic Continuous matenal heart rate monitoring during analgesia induction
# Chunk 6398
3.

For women receiving once-daily, low-dose low-molecularweight heparin, regional analgesia should not be placed until 12 hours after the last injection.
# Chunk 6399
Before anesthesia induction, several steps are taken to help minimize complication risks: 1.

Antacid administration shortly before anesthesia induction has probably lowered mortality rates from general anesthesia more than any other single practice. The American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Obstetrical Anesthesia (2016) recommends timely administration of a nonparticulate antacid, an Hrreceptor antagonist, or metoclopramide. For many years, we have administered 30 mL of Bicitra-sodium citrate with citric acid-a few minutes before anesthesia induction by either general or major neuraxial block. If more than 1 hour has passed ater the first dose was given and anesthesia has not yet been induced, then a second dose is given.
# Chunk 6400
Of anesthetics, intravenous propofol or etomidate is widely used and ofers a smooth, rapid induction. Propofol is associated with a quick onset and recovery, and it may lower the incidence of nausea and vomiting. Since thiopental is no longer available, propofol is used as the primary agent for induction of general anesthesia with a reasonable safety record. Etomidate is the induction agent of choice for hemodynamically unstable parturients. Alternatively, ketamine can be used but is avoided in hypertensive women. For muscle relaxation, succinylcholine is an ultrafast-onset, short-acting agent commonly used in obstetrics. It ofers intense muscle relaxation to aid endotracheal intubation but also allows for the rapid return of spontaneous respiration in the case of failed intubation. Rocuronium is an alternative muscle relaxant if succinylcholine is contraindicated or unavailable. Its duration is much longer than succinylcholine unless its efect is reversed by sugammadex (Bridion), a specific binding agent recently approved by the FDA. To decrease the incidence of fetal respiratory depression, an intermediate or long-acting opioid is usually avoided upon induction of general anesthesia. The intense stimulation from direct laryngoscopy may worsen hypertension and tachycardia in certain women. Remifentanil, an ultrashort-acting narcotic, has been used during induction for cesarean deliveries with favorable maternal hemodynamics and fetal outcome (Heesen, 2013).
# Chunk 6401
he American Society of Anesthesiologists (2016) recommends neuraxial opioids for postoperative analgesia. Although most cesarean deliveries in the United States are performed under neuraxial anesthesia, in certain situations a peripheral nerve block such as a transversus abdominis plane (TAP) block may be considered (McDonnell, 2007). hese include cases in which the parturient did not receive neuraxial opioids, underwent general anesthesia, or has persistent pain following neuraxial anesthesia. It is usually performed under ultrasound guidance and involves injection of a local anesthetic into the transversus abdominis plane between the internal oblique and transversus abdominis muscles. he nerves lying in this plane supply the anterior abdominal wall at the T 6 to L1 dermatomes. A metaanalysis of 31 controlled trials showed that ultrasoundguided TAP block marginally reduced opioid consumption at 6 hours following abdominal surgery (Baeriswyl, 2015).
# Chunk 6402
Local application of its gel form-Prepidil-is available in a 2.5-mL syringe for an intracervical application of 0.5 mg of dinoprostone. With the woman supine, the tip of a prefilled syringe is placed intracervically, and the gel is deposited just below the internal cervical os. After application, the woman remains reclined for at least 30 minutes. Doses may be repeated every 6 hours, with a maximum of three doses recommended in 24 hours.
# Chunk 6403
The sac has a long attached tail to allow easy removal from the vagina. The insert provides slower release of medication-0.3 mg/hr-than the gel form. Cervidil is used as a single dose placed transversely in the posterior vaginal fornix. Lubricant is used sparingly, if at all, because it can coat the device and hinder dinoprostone release. Following insertion, the woman remains recumbent for at least 2 hours. he insert is removed after 12 hours or with labor onset and at least 30 minutes before the administration of oxytocin.
# Chunk 6404
Administration. PGE2 preparations should only be administered in or near the delivery suite. Moreover, uterine activity and fetal heart rate should be monitored (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2016). These guidelines stem from the risk of uterine tachysystole. When contractions begin, they are usually apparent in the irst hour and show peak activity in the irst 4 hours. According to manufacturer guidelines, oxytocin induction that follows prostaglandin use for cervical ripening should be delayed for 6 to 12 hours following PGE2 gel administration or for at least 30 minutes after removal of the vaginal insert.
# Chunk 6405
Other investigators reported even more frequent incremental increases. F rigoletto (1995) and Xenakis (1995) and their coworkers gave oxytocin at 4 mU/min with increases as needed every 15 minutes. Merrill and Zlatnik (1999) started with 4.5 mU/min doses and increased this every 30 minutes. L6pez-Zeno and associates (1992) used 6 mU/min doses and 15-minute intervals. Thus, there are several acceptable oxytocin protocols that at least appear dissimilar. But, a comparison of protocols from two institutions indicates that this is not so: 1.
# Chunk 6406
Preventively, early labor induction has yielded conflicting results. In one study, approximately 800 women with suspected macrosomic fetuses were randomized either to early induction between 37 and 39 weeks or to expectant care (Boulvain, 2015). Dystocia rates were lowered by two thirds in the intervention group, and neither group sufered brachial plexus injury. Although not measured, this practice is balanced against morbidity of early delivery. Moreover, the poor accuracy of antepartum fetal weight prediction should be considered as well (Hoopmann, 2010; Mlin, 2016; Noumi, 2005). In contrast, an earlier randomized study of 284 women showed that rates of shoulder dystocia were not lowered by early induction at 38 weeks (Gonen, 1997).
# Chunk 6407
The hour immediately following delivery of the placenta is critical. During this time, lacerations are repaired. Although utero tonics are administered, postpartum hemorrhage as the result of uterine atony is most likely at this time. Hematomas may expand. Consequently, uterine tone and the perineum are frequently evaluated. The American Academy of Pediatrics and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (20 17b) recommend that maternal blood pressure and pulse be recorded immediately after delivery and every 15 minutes for the first 2 hours. The placenta, membranes, and umbilical cord are examined for completeness and for anomalies, as described in Chapter 6 (p. 111).
# Chunk 6408
Leopold maneuvers to ascertain fetal presentation are discussed in Chapter 22 (p. 424). With the irst maneuver, the hard, round fetal head occupies the fundus. he second maneuver identifies the back to be on one side of the abdomen and the small parts on the other. With the third maneuver, if not engaged, the softer breech is movable above the pelvic inlet.
# Chunk 6409
Evidence regarding long-term neurodevelopmental outcomes in children born by operative delivery is reassuring. In an older study, Seidman and colleagues (1991) evaluated more than 52,000 Israeli Defense Forces dratees at age 17 years and found that regardless of delivery mode, rates of physical or cognitive impairments were similar. Wesley and associates (1992) noted similar intelligence scores among 5-year-olds following spontaneous, forceps, or vacuum deliveries. Murphy and coworkers (2004) found no association between forceps delivery and epilepsy in a cohort of more than 21,000 adults. In their epidemiological review, O'Callaghan and colleagues (2011) found no association between cerebral palsy and operative delivery. Last, Bahl and associates (2007) noted that the incidence of neurodevelopmental morbidity was similar in those undergoing successul forceps delivery, failed forceps with cesarean delivery, or cesarean delivery without forceps.
# Chunk 6410
Because traditional hands-on training has evolved, residency programs should have readily available skilled operators to teach these procedures by simulation as well as through actual cases (Skinner, 2017; Spong, 2012). And, the efectiveness of simulation training has been reported (Dupuis, 2006, 2009; Leslie, 2005). In one program, maternal and neonatal morbidity rates with operative delivery decreased after the implementation of a formal education program that included a manikin and pelvic model (Cheong, 2004). In another, a 59-percent increase in forceps deliveries over 2 years was related to a single experienced and proactive instructor assigned to teach forceps to residents in labor and delivery (Solt, 2011).
# Chunk 6411
Forceps refers to the paired instrument, and each member of this pair is called a branch. Branches are designated left or right according to the side of the maternal pelvis to which they are applied (Fig. 29-2). Each branch has four components: blade, shank, lock, and handle (Fig. 29-3). Each blade has a toe, a heel, and two curves. Of these, the outward cephalic curve conforms to the round fetal head, whereas the upward pelvic curve corresponds more or less to the curve of the birth canal. Some blades have an opening within or a depression along the blade surface and are termed enestrated or pseudoenestrated, respectively. True fenestration reduces the degree of head slippage during forceps rotation. Disadvantageously, it can increase friction between the blade and vaginal wall. With pseudo fenestration, the forceps blade is smooth on the outer maternal side but indented on the inner fetal surface. he goal is to reduce head slipping yet improve the ease and safety of application and removal of forceps compared with pure fenestrated blades. In general, fenestrated blades are used for a fetus with a molded head or for rotation. In most situations, however, despite these subtle diferences any are appropriate.
# Chunk 6412
Dolan LM, Hilton P: Obstetric risk factors and pelvic loor dysfunction 20 years ater first delivery. Int Urogynecol] Pelvic Floor Dysfunct 21:535, 2010
# Chunk 6413
In some instances, abdominal hysterectomy is indicated following delivery. When performed at the time of cesarean delivery, the operation is termed cesarean hysterectomy. If done within a short time after vaginal delivery, it is termedpospartum hysterectomy. Peripartum hysterectomy is a broader term that combines these two. In most cases, hysterectomy is total, but supracervical hysterectomy is an option. The adnexa are not usually removed. In most instances, a simple or type I hysterectomy is performed. However, for women with invasive cervical cancer, radical hysterectomy removes the uterus, parametrium, and proximal vagina to achieve tumor excision with negative margins. Also, for cases of placenta percreta that extend toward the pelvic sidewall, similar radical excision of the parametrium may be needed.
# Chunk 6414
If cesarean delivery is scheduled, a sedative may be given at bedtime the night before surgery. In general, no other sedatives, narcotics, or tranquilizers are administered until after the fetus is born. In one small randomized trial, no benefits were gained from a presurgical enema (Lurie, 2012). Solid food intake is stopped at least 6 to 8 hours before the procedure. Uncomplicated patients may have moderate amounts of clear liquids up to 2 hours before surgery (American Society of Anesthesiologists, 2016). his comports with Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) protocols that strive to maintain anabolic homeostasis and advocate clear carbohydrate drinks up to 2 hours before scheduled surgery and early postoperative feeding (Ljungqvist, 2017). Although evidence supports an ERAS approach for many procedures, data specifically addressing this for cesarean delivery are scarce (Wrench, 2015).
# Chunk 6415
Of urther preparations, hair removal at the surgical site does not lower surgical site infection (SSI) rates (Kowalski, 2016). However, if hair is obscuring, it is removed the day of surgery by clipping, which is associated with fewer SSIs than shaving (Tanner, 2011). Chemical depilation the night before surgery compared with clipping has similar SSI rates (Lefebvre, 2015). An electrosurgical grounding pad is placed near the surgical incision and typically on the lateral thigh. n indwelling bladder catheter is typically placed at Parkland Hospital to collapse the bladder away from the hysterotomy incision, to avert urinary retention secondary to regional analgesia, and to allow accurate postoperative urine measurement. Small studies show that catheterization may be withheld in hemodynamically stable women to minimize urinary infections (Abdel-Aleem, 2014; Li, 2011; Nasr, 2009).
# Chunk 6416
FIGURE 30-10 The cut edges of the uterine incision are approximated with a running, locking suture.

Following cesarean delivery, adhesions commonly form within the vesicouterine space or between the anterior abdominal wall and uterus. And, with each successive pregnancy, the percentage of afected women and adhesion severity rise (Morales, 2007; Tulandi, 2009). Adhesions can significantly lengthen incision-to-delivery time and total operative time (Rossouw, 2013; Sikirica, 2012). Although occurring infrequently, rates of cystotomy and bowel injury are also increased because of adhesive disease (Rahman, 2009; Silver, 2006).
# Chunk 6417
hese injuries occur most oten during repair of hysterotomy extensions into the broad ligament or vagina (Eisenkop, 1982). If ureteral injury is suspected, methylene blue is administered. The pelvis is directly inspected for dye extravasation, which suggests ureteral transection. Next, brisk dye-stained urine jets are sought from each oriice to exclude ureteral kinking or ligation. Oriice viewing may be via cystoscopy, if available; through a comorbid traumatic cystotomy; or through a diagnostic cystotomy. With sluggish or absent jets, consultation with a specialist is typically requested. A ureteral catheter is irst threaded to identiY a potential obstruction site and guide ureterolysis. Kinked or ligated ureters can be relieved by release of ensnaring sutures. Crush injuries are inspected to ensure vital tissue. In these cases, stents are let to avert ureteral stricture. A Foley cath�ter remains for 7 to 10 days, and the ureteral catheters are removed via cystoscopy ater 14 days. Intravenous pyelography (IVP) is usually not necessary before removal of the stent if it was placed as a precautionary measure ater relatively minor injury (Davis, 1999).
# Chunk 6418
he amount of vaginal bleeding is closely monitored for at least an hour in the immediate postoperative period. he uterine fundus is also identiied frequently by palpation to ensure that the uterus remains irmly contracted. Unfortunately, as conduction analgesia fades or the woman awakens from general anesthesia, abdominal palpation is likely to produce pain. A patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) pump can be efective. Once regional analgesia begins to fade or the woman becomes fully awake following general anesthesia, criteria for transfer to the postpartum ward include minimal bleeding, stable vital signs, and adequate urine output.
# Chunk 6419
Vital signs, uterine tone, urine output, and bleeding are evalu ated. The hematocrit is routinely measured the morning after surgery. It is checked sooner if there was unusual blood loss or if there is hypotension, tachycardia, oliguria, or other evidence to suggest hypovolemia. If the hematocrit is decreased signii cantly from the preoperative level, the measurement is repeated and a search is instituted to identiy the cause. If the hematocrit stabilizes, the mother can be allowed to ambulate, and if there is little likelihood of further blood loss, iron therapy is preferred to transfusion.
# Chunk 6420
In uncomplicated cases, liquids or solid food may be ofered within hours of surgery and advanced as tolerated (Guo, 2015). Some degree of adynamic ileus follows virtually every abdominal operation, but in most cases of cesarean delivery, it is negligible. Postoperative ileus symptoms include abdominal distention, gas pains, and an inability to pass flatus or stool. With persistent nausea and vomiting or with prolonged bowel function delay, radiological imaging may aid exclusion of bowel obstruction. A plain abdominal radiograph is a frequent first choice. However, in the general population, this study is diagnostic in only 50 to 60 percent of small bowel obstruction cases (Maglinte, 1997). Thus, a radiograph may best serve as a triage tool in cases in which ileus is the suspected diagnosis. Notably, an enlarged postpartum uterus can compress the rectosigmoid and prevent it from illing with gas. Thus, indings suggesting a distal colonic obstruction may confuse true cases of transient ileus (Kammen, 2000). In comparison, CT with intravenous contrast provides greater accuracy for small bowel obstruction. Oral contrast is concurrently given when SBO is a consideration (Katz, 2013). Last, although uncommon, an unrecognized bowel injury may be responsible for otherwise unexplained fever and poor bowel function. Here, CT may be most diagnostic of potential etiologies.
# Chunk 6421
For prevention, intraoperative goals strive to minimize bowel manipulation, avoid excess intravenous luids or profound hypovolemia, and limit surgery length (Bragg, 2015). Postoperatively, gum chewing enhances early bowel function recovery by nearly 7 hours after cesarean delivery (Zhu, 2014). Among studies, chewing was initiated immediately or up to 12 hours later, lasted 15 to 60 minutes, and was repeated in at least three sessions daily (Pereira Gomes Morais, 2016).
# Chunk 6422
lthough not evidence based, we remove the surgical dressing after 24 hours and inspect the incision daily. One small randomized trial showed no wound healing diferences if removed at 6 hours (Peleg, 2016). By the third postpartum day, showering is not harmful to the incision. Prior to this, a plastic cover can maintain dryness during showers. If used, staples often are removed on the fourth day. Once removed, dressing strips (Steri-Strips) can be placed as needed for 1 week to reinforce skin edge integrity. If there is concern for supericial wound separation, staples remain in place for 7 to 10 days.
# Chunk 6423
Chai AH, Wong T, Mak HL, et al: Prevalence and associated risk factors of retention of urine after caesarean section. 1m Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct 194(4):537,r2008
# Chunk 6424
Dolan LM, Hilton P: Obstetric risk factors and pelvic floor dysfunction 20 years after first delivery. Int Urogynecol] 21(5):535,r2010
# Chunk 6425
Gyhagen M, Bullarbo M, Nielsen TF, et al: Prevalence and risk factors for pelvic organ prolapse 20 years after childbirth: a national cohort study in singleton primiparae after vaginal or caesarean delivery. BJOG 120(2): 152, 2013a
# Chunk 6426
Johnson DD: Cesarean delivety. In Yeomans ER, Hofman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap's Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2017 Kammen BF, Levine MS, Rubesin SE, et al: Adynamic ileus after caesarean section mimicking intestinal obstruction: indings on abdominal radiographs. Br J Radiol 73(873):951, 2000 Kandadai P, Kandadai V, Saini J, et al: Acute urinary retention ater cesarean delivery: a case-conttol study. Female Pelvic Med Reconstr Surg 20(5):276,o2014 Kapustian V, Anteby EY, Gdalevich M, et al: Efect of closure versus nonclosure of peritoneum at cesarean section on adhesions: a prospective randomized study. Am J Obstet GynecoI206(1):56.e1, 2012 Katz DS, Baker ME, Rosen MP, et al: ACR Appropriateness Criteria� suspected small-bowel obstruction. American College of Radiology, 1996, Reairmed 20o13 Kerr Jlvl: he lower uterine segment incision in conservative caesarean section. J Obstet Gynaecol Br Emp 28:4 5, 1921 Kiefer DG, Muscat Jc, Santorelli J, et al: Efectiveness and short-term safety of modiied sodium hyaluronic acid-carboxymethylcellulose at cesarean delivery: a randomized trial. Am J Obstet GynecoIo214(3):373.e1, 2016 Kirscht J, Weiss C, Nickol J, et al: Dilatation or no dilatation of the cervix during cesarean section (Dondi Trial): a randomized controlled trial. Arch Gynecol Obstet 295(1):39,o2017 Klingel ML, Patel SV: A meta-analysis of the efect of inspired oxygen concentration on the incidence of surgical site infection following cesarean section. Int J Obstet Anesth 22(2):104,o2013 Kowalski TJ, Kothari SN, Mathiason MA, et al: Impact of hair removal on surgical site infection rates: a prospective randomized noninferiority trial. J Am Coll Surg 223(5):704,o2016 Kronig B: Transperitonealer cervikaler Kaiserschnitt. In: Doderlein A, Kronig B (eds): Operative Gynakologie, 3rd ed. Leipzig, Thieme, 1912
# Chunk 6427
Imaging of Prior Incision

Sonographic measurement of a prior hysterotomy incision has been used to predict the likelihood of rupture. Large defects in a nonpregnant uterus forecast a greater risk for subsequent rupture (Osser, 201i1). Naji and coworkers (20l3a,b) found that the residual myometrial thickness decreased as pregnancy progressed and that rupture correlated with a thinner scar. In a systematic review, women with a prior low-transverse cesarean incision underwent third-trimester sonographic evaluation (Jastrow, 2010a). Investigators concluded that the thickness of the lower uterine segment was a strong predictor for a uterine scar defect in women with prior cesarean delivery. They deined this segment as the smallest measurement between urine in the maternal bladder and amnionic luid. hat said, they could not ind an ideal threshold value to recommend TOLAC. his same group subsequently recruited 1856 women contemplating vaginal birth after a single low-transverse incision, and they sonographically measured lower uterine segment thickness by between 34 weeks and 39 weeks G as trow, 2016). hey grouped women into three risk categories for uterine rupture during TOLAC based on the measured segment value: high risk <2.0 mm; intermediate risk 2.0-2.4 mm; and low risk �2.5 mm. he TOAC rates were 9,42, and 61 percent in the three categories, respectively. Of the 984 TOLACs, there were no symptomatic uterine ruptures. Overall, data are limited, and this evaluation is currently not part of our routine practice.
# Chunk 6428
Fetal heart sounds have been documented for 30 weeks by Doppler ultrasound.

3.

A positive serum or urine �-human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) test result has been documented for :36 weeks.
# Chunk 6429
If the fetal presenting part has already entered the pelvis with labor, loss of station may be detected by pelvic examination. If the fetus is partly or totally extruded from the uterine rupture site, abdominal palpation or vaginal examination may be help ful to identiY the presenting part, which will have moved away from the pelvic inlet. A irm contracted uterus may at times be felt alongside the fetus. Sonography may be helpful.
# Chunk 6430
The Network addressed issues of increased morbidity in a cohort of30,132 women who had from one to six repeat cesarean deliveries (Silver, 2006). he rates of some of the more frequent or serious complications are depicted in Figure 31-6. In addition, rates of bowel or bladder injury, admission to an intensive care unit or need for ventilator therapy, and maternal mortality, as well as operative and hospitalization length, showed significantly rising trends. Similar results have been reported by others (Nisenblat, 2006; Usta, 2005). More diicult to quantiY are risks for bowel obstruction and pelvic pain from peritoneal �.� c0 4 ..A 2�): E0u
# Chunk 6431
Juhasz G, Gyami C, Gyami P, et al: Efect of body mass index and excessive weight gain on success of vaginal birth after cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol lO6:741, 2005 Kaczmarczyk M, Span�n P, Terry P, et al: Risk factors for uterine rupture and neonatal consequences of uterine rupture: a population-based study of successive pregnancies in Sweden. BJOG 114:1208,r2007 Kayani SI, lfirevic Z: Uterine rupture after induction of labour in women with previous caesarean section. BJOG 112:45r1,r2005 Kieser E, Baskett TF: A 10-year population-based study of uterine rupture. Obstet Gynecol 100:749,r2002 Landon MB, Hauth Jc, Leveno KJ, et al: Maternal and perinatal outcomes associated with a trial of labor after prior cesarean delivery. N Engl J Med 351 :2581, 2004 Landon MB, Leindecker S, Spong CY, et al: he IvfFMU Cesarean Registry: factors afecting the success of trial of labor after previous cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 193:1016,r2005 Landon MB, Spong CY, Thon E, et al: Risk of uterine rupture with a trial of labor in women with multiple and single prior cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol 108: 12, 2006 Lannon SM, Guthrie A, Vanderhoeven JP, et al: Uterine rupture risk after periviable cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol 125: 1 095, 2015 Lavin JP, DiPasquale L, Crane S, et al: A state-wide assessment of the obstetric, anesthesia, and operative team personnel who are available to manage the labors and deliveries and to treat the complications of women who attempt vaginal birth after cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 187:611, 2002 Leeman Uvl, Beagle M, Espey E, et al: Diminishing availability of trial of labor ater cesarean delivery in New Mexico hospitals. Obstet GynecoIr122:242, 2013 Lydon-Rochelle M, Holt VL, Easterling TR, et al: Risk of uterine rupture during labor among women with a prior cesarean delivery. N Engl J Med 345:3,r2001 Macones GA, Cahill A, Pare E, et al: Obstetric outcomes in women with two prior cesarean deliveries: is vaginal birth after cesarean delivery a viable option? Am J Obstet GynecoIr192:1223, 2005a Macones GA, Cahill AG, Stamilio DM, et al: Can uterine rupture in patients attempting vaginal birth ater cesarean delivery be predicted? Am J Obstet Gynecol 195:1148,2006 Macones GA, Peipert J, Nelson DB, et al: Maternal complications with vaginal birth after cesarean delivery: a multicenter study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 193: 1656, 2005b Mankuta D, Mansour M, Alon SA: Ivlaternal and fetal morbidity due to abdominal adhesions after repeated cesarean section. Abstract No. 792, Am J Obstet Gynecol 208(1 Suppl):S332, 2013 Marshall NE, Fu R, Guise JM: Impact of multiple cesarean deliveries on maternal morbidity: a systematic review. Am J Obstet GynecoI205:262.e1, 2011 Martin IN, Perry KG, Roberts WE, et al: The care for trial of labor in the patients with a prior low-segment vertical cesarean incision. Am J Obstet Gynecol 177: 144, 1997 McMahon MJ, Luther ER, Bowes WA J r, et al: Comparison of a trial of labor with an elective second cesarean section. N Engl J Med 335:689, 1996 Mercer BM, Gilbert S, Landon MB, et al: Labor outcomes with increasing number of prior vaginal births after cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol 111:285,r2008 Metz TD, Stoddard GJ, Henry E, et al: Simple, validated vaginal birth after cesarean delivery prediction model for use at the time of admission. Obstet Gynecol 122:571,r2013 Miller DA, Diaz FG, Paul RH: Vaginal birth after cesarean: a 10-year experience. Obstet GynecoIr84(2):255, 1994 Mozurkewich EL, Hutton EK: Elective repeat cesarean delivery versus trial of labor: a meta-analysis of the literature from 1989 to 1999. Am J Obstet Gynecol 183(5):1187,2000 Naji 0, Daemen A, Smith A, et al: Changes in cesarean section scar dimensions during pregnancy: a prospective longitudinal study. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 41(5):556, 2013a
# Chunk 6432
Conjunctivitis in a newborn up to age 3 months should prompt consideration for chlamydial infection (Moore, 2015). Treatment for pediatric chlamydial infection is with oral azithromycin for 5 days or oral erythromycin for 14 days.
# Chunk 6433
Aseptic precautions are observed in the immediate care of the cord. The American Academy of Pediatrics has concluded that keeping the cord dry is suicient care (Stewart, 2016). he umbilical cord begins to lose water from Wharton jelly shortly after birth. Within 24 hours, the cord stump loses its characteristic bluish-white, moist appearance and soon becomes dry and black. Within several days to weeks, the stump sloughs and leaves a small, granulating wound, which after healing forms the umbilicus. Separation usually takes place within the irst 2 weeks. The range is 3 to 45 days (Novack, 1988). he umbilical cord dries more quickly and separates more readily when exposed to air. Thus, a dressing is not recommended.
# Chunk 6434
In 2016, 81 percent of U.S. newborns were initially breastfed, 52 percent were still breastfed at 6 months, and 31 percent at 1 year (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2016). According to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017 e), exclusive breastfeeding is preferred until 6 months. In many hospitals, breastfeeding begins in the delivery room. Most term newborns thrive best when fed 8 to 12 times daily for approximately 15 minutes each episode. Preterm or growth-restricted newborns require feedings at shorter intervals. Breastfeeding is discussed further in Chapter 36 (p. 656).
# Chunk 6435
Meconium stooling is seen in 90 percent of newborns within the irst 24 hours, and most of the rest within 36 hours. Usually, newborns irst void shortly ater birth but may not until the second day. Meconium and urine passage indicates patency of the gastro intestinal and urinary tracts, respectively. Failure of the newborn to stool or urinate ater these times suggests a congenital defect, such as Hirschsprung disease, imperforate anus, or posterior urethral valve. Ater the third or fourth day, as a result of milk ingestion, meconium is replaced by light-yellow, soter, homogenous feces.
# Chunk 6436
Traditionally, the newborn is discharged with its mother, and in most cases, maternal stay has determined that of the neonate. From 1970 to the mid-1990s, average maternal postpartum length of stay declined steadily, and many mothers were discharged before 48 hours. The World Health Organization (2014) cites a minimal stay of only 24 hours. Although it is clear that most newborns can be safely discharged within 48 hours, this is not uniformly true. For example, in more than 2.1 million neonates in Canada, Liu and associates (2000) examined readmission rates following initial neonatal discharge. As the length of hospital stay dropped from 4.2 days in 1990 to 2.7 days in 1997, the readmission rate rose from 27 to 38 per 1000. Dehydration and jaundice accounted for most of these readmissions. Using Washington state data, Malkin and coworkers (2000) found that the 28-day mortality rate was increased fourfold in newborns discharged within 30 hours of birth, and the I-year mortality rate grew twofold. Safe discharge for latepreterm newborns has special concerns (Whyte, 2012).
# Chunk 6437
Because of the increased scrutiny regarding short hospital stays, federal legislation-he Newbons' and Mothers' Health Protection Act of 199-was enacted to prohibit insurers from restricting hospital stays for mothers and newborns to less than 2 days for vaginal delivery or 4 days for cesarean delivery. In an analysis of more than 662,000 births in California, Datar and Sood (2006) found that readmission rates declined by 9, 12, and 20 percent, respectively, at 1, 2, and 3 years after the legislation was implemented.
# Chunk 6438
3. Magnetic resonance imaging will detect some abnormalities on the irst da. Within 24 hours, MR imaging may show restricted water difusion that peaks at approximately 5 days and disappears within 2 weeks. Acquisitions with Tl-and T2-weighted images show variable abnormalities, which have an onset from less than 24 hours to several days. In a study of 175 term neonates with acute encephalopathy, it was reported that MR imaging showing basal ganglia lesions accurately predicted motor impairment at 2 years of age (Martinez-Biarge, 2012).
# Chunk 6439
fter 35 weeks' gestation, the mean cord hemoglobin concentration approximates 17 g/dL, and values below 14 g/dL are considered abnormal. he American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (20 17b) now recommends a 30-to 60-second delay in cord clamping in all healthy newborns. A review of nearly 4000 deliveries found that this delayed cord clamping was associated with a mean neonatal hemoglobin rise of 1.5 g/dL (McDonald, 2013). At the same time, this practice almost doubled the incidence of hyperbilirubinemia requiring phototherapy.
# Chunk 6440
Even in term fetuses, hepatic maturation is not complete, and thus some unconjugated bilirubin-either albumin bound or free-is cleared by placental transfer to be conjugated in the maternal liver (Chap. 7, p. 135). Fetal protection from unconjugated bilirubin is lost after delivery if not cleared rapidly. Because clearance is totally dependent on neonatal hepatic function, varying degrees of neonatal hyperbilirubinemia result. Even in the mature newborn, serum bilirubin levels usually rise for 3 to 4 days to reach up to 10 mg/ dL. After this, concentrations usually fall rapidly. In one large study, 1 to 2 percent of neonates delivered at 35 weeks' gestation or later had a maximum serum bilirubin level >20 mg/ dL (Eggert, 2006). Concomitant glucose-6-phosphate deiciency worsens hyperbilirubinemia (Chang, 2017). In approximately 15 percent of term newborns, bilirubin levels cause clinically visible skin yellowing termed physiological jaundice (Burke, 2009). As expected, in preterm neonates, the bilirubin elevation is greater and more prolonged.
# Chunk 6441
• Hemorrhagic Disease of the Newborn his disorder is characterized by spontaneous internal or external bleeding beginning any time after birth. Most hemorrhagic disease results from abnormally low levels of the vitamin K-dependent clotting factors-V, VII, IX, X, prothrombin, and proteins C and S (Zipursky, 1999). Newborns whose mothers took anticonvulsant drugs are at higher risk because these suppress maternal hepatic synthesis of some of these factors. Classic hemorrhagic disease is usually apparent 2 to 5 days after birth in neonates not given vitamin K prophylaxis at delivery (Busield, 2013). Delayed hemorrhage may occur at 2 to 12 weeks in exclusively breastfed infants because breast milk contains little vitamin K. Other causes of neonatal hemorrhage not related to vitamin K include hemophilia, congenital syphilis, sepsis, thrombocytopenia purpura, erythroblastosis, and intracranial hemorrhage.
# Chunk 6442
Newborns who have traumatic subdural or infratentorial hemorrhage tears will have neurological abnormalities from the time of birth (Volpe, 1995). Those most severely afected have stupor or coma, nuchal rigidity, and opisthotonos that worsen over minutes to hours. Some newborns who are born depressed appear to improve until about 12 hours of age, when drowsiness, apathy, feeble cry, pallor, failure to nurse, dyspnea, cyanosis, vomiting, and convulsions become evident.
# Chunk 6443
This newborn bowel disorder has clinical findings that include abdominal distention, emesis, ileus, bilious gastric aspirates,
# Chunk 6444
Medical treatment includes abdominal decompression, bowel rest, broad-spectrum antibiotics, and parenteral nutrition. Surgery is reserved for neonates with intestinal perforation or deteriorating clinical or biochemical status. Possible surgical procedures include drain placement, exploratory laparotomy with resection of diseased bowel, or enterostomy with creation of a stoma (Neu, 2010).
# Chunk 6445
If fragile capillaries in the germinal matrix rupture, blood escapes into surrounding tissues and may extend into the ventricular system and brain parenchyma. This type of hemorrhage is common in preterm neonates, especially those born before 32 weeks. However, it can also develop at later gestational ages and even in term neonates. Most hemorrhages develop within 72 hours of birth, but they have been observed as late as 24 days (Whitelaw, 20ll). Because IVH usually is recognized within 3 days of delivery, its genesis is often erroneously attributed to birth events. It is important to realize that prelabor IVH can also occur (Achiron, 1993; Nores, 1996).
# Chunk 6446
Ventricular hemorrhage incidences depends on gestational age at birth. From the Neonatal Research Network, approximately 65 percent of all neonates born before 28 weeks' gestation demonstrated some evidence of hemorrhage or PVL (Stoll, 2010). he incidence ranged from 60 percent in those born at 23 weeks to only 23 percent in those at 28 weeks. Importantly, grade IV intraventricular hemorrhage was documented in 21 percent of 23-week-old neonates but in only 3 percent of those at 28 weeks.
# Chunk 6447
Reporting requirements for fetal deaths in the United States are determined by each state, and thus, criteria difer signiicantly (Chap. 1, p. 3). Most states mandate reporting of deaths of fetuses that are 20 weeks' gestation or older or have a minimum birthweight of 350 g (roughly equivalent to 20 weeks) or some combination of these two. However, several states require reporting of fetal deaths at all periods of gestation, and one sets the threshold at 16 weeks. lternatively, two states require reporting of deaths for fetuses with birthweights of 500 g, which approximates that at 22 weeks. here is substantial evidence that not all fetal deaths for which reporting is required are actually recorded (MacDorman, 2015). This is most likely for those at earlier gestational ages.
# Chunk 6448
Adapted from Fretts, 2005.

structural anomalies (Faye-Petersen, 1999). Approximately 20 percent have dysmorphic features or skeletal anomalies, and 8 percent have chromosomal abnormalities (Pauli, 1994; Saller, 1995). In the absence of anatomic dysmorphology, up to 5 percent of stillborn fetuses will have a chromosomal abnormality (Korteweg, 2008). Although the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (20a1a6a) previously recommended karyotyping all stillborn fetuses, technological advancements of high-resolution, whole-genome sequencing-such as with chromosomal microarray anaysis ()-are now replacing standard karyotyping for chromosomal analysis of stillborn fetuses being placed in lactated Ringer solution or sterile cytogenetic medium. Notably, placement in formalin or alcohol kills viable cells. If conventional karyotyping is the only test available and the timing of death is recent, amnionic luid can be obtained by amniocentesis, as those cells obtained in a sterile fashion provide a greater likelihood of cell growth and eventual result compared with tissue obtained after delivery. Maternal blood is obtained for Kleihauer-Betke staining; for anti phospholipid antibody and lupus anticoagulant testing if indicated; and for serum glucose measutement to exclude overt diabetes (Silver, 20al3).
# Chunk 6449
Following declines between 2000 and 2006, the United States fetal mortality rate has been relatively unchanged since 2006 (MacDorman, 2015). Interpretation of these fetal mortality rates in the context of changing national healthcare strategies has spawned considerable debate. One example is the efort to prevent non-medically indicated deliveries before 39 weeks and its subsequent efect on term stillbirth rates. he value of this practice for neonatal outcome is described in Chapter 26 (p. 504). To analyze whether implementation of this "39week rule" has altered the term stillbirth rate, Nicholson and coworkers (2016) examined data from 45 states and the District of Columbia during a 7 -year period. The proportion of births before 39 weeks progressively declined from 2007 and 2013, but the term stillbirth rate rose. his suggested that the 39-week rule may cause unintended harm. MacDorman and associates (2015) also evaluated trends in stillbirth rates by gestational ages in the United States between 2006 and 2012. They used a "traditional stillbirth rate," which was calculated using a denominator composed of the live-birth number plus the stillbirth number at a given gestational age. They found increased rates at 24 to 27, 34 to 36, and 38 weeks' gestation. Alternatively, no diferences were found in "prospective stillbirth rates." These rates were calculated using a denominator composed of the number of women who are pregnant at a given gestational age for weeks 21 through 42. he discrepancies in stillbirth rates appear to be primarily due to the decline in the number of births in the preterm and early-term gestational ages.
# Chunk 6450
Uterine involution and rapid dissipation of size progresses in the first week (Fig. 36-2). Sonographically, the uterus and endometrium return to pregravid size by 8 weeks postpartum (Bae, 2012; Steinkeler, 2012). In a study of 42 normal puerperas, Tekay and Jouppila (1993) identiied fluid in the endometrial cavity in 78 percent of women at 2 weeks, 52 percent at 3 weeks, 30 percent at 4 weeks, and 10 percent at 5 weeks. Belachew and coworkers (2012) used three-dimensional sonography and visualized intracavitary tissue matter in a third on day 1, in 95 percent on day 7, in 87 percent on day 14, and in 28 percent on day 28. By day 56, the small cavity was empty. Sohn and associates (l9��) described Doppler ultrasound results showing continuously increasing uterine artery vascular resistance during the first 5 days postpartum. Weintraub and colleagues (2013) posited that uterine involution may be diferent in preeclamptic women because they more likely had early diastolic notches seen on uterine artery velocimetry.
# Chunk 6451
Endometrial regeneration is rapid, except at the placental site. Within a week or so, the free surface becomes covered by epithelium, and Sharman (1953) identified ully restored endometrium in all biopsy specimens obtained from the 16th day onward. Histological endometritis is part of the normal reparative process.
# Chunk 6452
Lochia. Early in the puerperium, sloughing of decidual tissue results in a vaginal discharge of variable quantity. he discharge is termed lochia and contains erythrocytes, shredded decidua, epithelial cells, and bacteria. For the irst few days ater delivery, there is blood suicient to color it red-lochia rubra. Ater 3 or 4 days, lochia becomes progressively pale in color-lochia serosa. ter approximately the 10th day, because of an admixture of leukocytes and reduced fluid content, lochia assumes a white or yellow-white color-lochia alba. he average duration of lochial discharge ranges from 24 to 36 days (Fletcher, 2012). Because of this expected leukocyte component, saline preparations of lochia for microscopic evaluation in cases of suspected puerperal metritis are typically uninformative and not recommended.
# Chunk 6453
In some cases, uterine involution is hindered because of infection, retained placental fragments, or other causes. Such subinvolution is accompanied by varied intervals of prolonged lochia as well as irregular or excessive uterine bleeding. During bimanual examination, the uterus is larger and soter than would be expected. With bleeding, pelvic sonography may help exclude retained placenta or, less-commonly, vascular malformations as the source (lraha, 2017). Methylergonovine (Methergine), 0.2 mg orally every 3 to 4 hours for 24 to 48 hours, is recommended by many, but its eicacy is questionable. If there is infection, antimicrobial therapy usually leads to a good response. In an earlier study, Wager and coworkers (1980) reported that a third of these late cases of postpartum metritis are caused by Chamydia trachomatis. For mild infection, empirical therapy with azithromycin or doxycycline usually prompts resolution regardless of bacterial etiology. At our institution, common oral options taken for 7 to 10 days include doxycycline, 100 mg twice daily; azithromycin, 500 mg twice daily; or ampicillin-clavulanate (Augmentin), 875 mg twice daily. Serious metritis is treated with intravenous broad-spectrum antibiotics listed in Table 37-2.
# Chunk 6454
Normal pregnancy-induced glomerular hyperiltration persists during the puerperium but returns to prepregnancy baseline by 2 weeks (Hladunewich, 2004). Dilated ureters and renal pelves return to their prep regnant state by 2 to 8 weeks postpartum. Because of this dilated collecting system, coupled with residual urine and bacteriuria in a traumatized bladder, symptomatic urinary tract infection remains a concern in the puerperium.
# Chunk 6455
The broad and round ligaments require considerable time to recover from stretching and loosening during pregnancy. As a result of ruptured elastic ibers in the skin and prolonged distention by the pregnant uterus, the abdominal wall remains soft and laccid. If the abdomen is unusually labby or pendulous, an ordinary girdle is often satisfactory. n abdominal binder is another temporary measure. Several weeks are required for these structures to return to normal, and recovery is aided by exercise. hese may be started anytime following vaginal delivery. Ater cesarean delivery, a 6-week interval to allow fascia to heal and abdominal soreness to diminish is reasonable. Silvery abdominal striae commonly develop as striae graviarum (Chap. 4, p. 53). Except for these, the abdominal wall usually resumes its prep regnancy appearance. When muscles remain atonic, however, the abdominal wall also remains lax. Marked separation of the rectus abdominis muscles-diastasis recti-may result.
# Chunk 6456
After delivery, the breasts begin to secrete colostrum, which is a deep lemon-yellow liquid. It usually can be expressed from the nipples by the second postpartum day. Compared with mature milk, colostrum is rich in immunological components and contains more minerals and amino acids (Ballard, 2013). It also has more protein, much of which is globulin, but less sugar and fat. Secretion persists for 5 days to 2 weeks, with gradual conversion from "transitional" to mature milk by 4 to 6 weeks. The colostrum content of immunoglobulin A (IgA) ofers the newborn protection against enteric pathogens. Other host resistance factors found in colostrum and milk include complement, macrophages, lymphocytes, lactoferrin, lactoperoxidase, and lysozymes.
# Chunk 6457
Radioactive isotopes of copper, gallium, indium, iodine, sodium, and technetium rapidly appear in breast milk. Con sultation with a nuclear medicine specialist is recommended before performing a diagnostic study with these isotopes (Chap. 46, p. 908). he goal is to use a radionuclide with the shortest excretion time in breast milk. The mother should pump her breasts before the study and store enough milk in a freezer to feed the infant. After the study, she should pump her breasts to maintain milk low but discard all milk produced during the time that radioactivity is present. his ranges from 15 hours to 2 weeks, depending on the isotope used. Importantly, radioactive iodine concentrates and persists in the thyroid. Its special considerations are discussed in Chapter 63 (p. 1201).
# Chunk 6458
his is common in women who do not breastfeed. It is typified by milk leakage and breast pain, which peak 3 to 5 days after delivery (Spitz, 1998). Up to half of afected women require analgesia for breast pain relief, and as many as 10 percent report severe pain for up to 14 days.
# Chunk 6459
For 2 hours after delivery, blood pressure and pulse are taken every 15 minutes, or more frequently if indicated. Temperature is assessed every 4 hours for the first 8 hours and then at least every 8 hours subsequently (American Academy of Pediatrics, 2017). The amount of vaginal bleeding is monitored, and the fundus palpated to ensure that it is well contracted. If relaxation is detected, the uterus should be massaged through the abdominal wall until it remains contracted. U terotonics are also sometimes required. Blood can accumulate within the uterus without external bleeding. his may be detected early by uterine enlargement during fundal palpation in the irst postdelivery hours. Because the likelihood of signiicant hemorrhage is greatest immediately postpartum, even in normal births, the uterus is closely monitored for at least 1 hour after delivery. Postpartum hemorrhage is discussed in Chapter 41 (p. 758). If regional analgesia or general anesthesia was used for labor or delivery, the mother should be observed in an appropriately equipped and stafed recovery area.
# Chunk 6460
Women who breastfeed ovulate much less frequently compared with those who do not, but variation is great. Timing of ovulation depends on individual biological variation and the intensity of breastfeeding. Lactating women may first menstruate as early as the second or as late as the 18th month after delivery. Campbell and Gray (1993) analyzed daily urine specimens to determine the time of ovulation in 92 lactating women. As shown in Figure 36-8, breastfeeding in general delays resumption of ovulation, although as already empha 8..) 50
# Chunk 6461
Resumption of ovulation was frequently marked by return of normal menstrual bleeding.

2.

Breastfeeding episodes lasting 15 minutes seven times daily delayed ovulation resumption.
# Chunk 6462
No evidence-based data guide resumption of coitus after delivery, and practices are individualized (Minig, 2009). After 2 weeks, coitus may be resumed based on desire and comort. Barrett and colleagues (2000) reported that almost 90 percent of 484 primiparous women resumed sexual activity by 6 months. And although 65 percent of these reported problems, only 15 percent discussed them with a health-care provider.
# Chunk 6463
Postpartum, the vulvovaginal epithelium is thin, and very little lubrication follows sexual stimulation. his stems from the hypoestrogenic state following delivery, which lasts until ovulation resumes. It may be particularly problematic in breastfeeding women who are hypoestrogenic for many months postpartum (Palmer, 2003). For treatment, small amounts of topical estrogen cream can be applied daily for several weeks to vulvar tissues. Additionally, vaginal lubricants may be used with coitus.
# Chunk 6464
Jong DE, Kikkert HR, Fidler V, et al: Efects of long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acid supplementation of infant formula on cognition and behavior at 9 years of age. Dev Med Child Neurol 54(12):1102, 2012 Kamel H, Navi B, Sriram N, et al: Risk of a thrombotic event after the 6-week postpartum period. N Engl J Med 370: 1307, 2014 Kandadai P, Kandadai V, Saini J, et al: Acute urinary retention after cesarean delivery: a case-control study. Female Pelvic Med Reconstr Surg 20(5):276, 2014 Kaneshiro BE, Acoba JD, Holzman J, et al: Efect of delivery route on natural history of cervical dysplasia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 192(5): 1452, 2005 Kanotra S, D'Angelo 0, Phares TM, et al: Challenges faced by new mothers in the early postpartum period: an analysis of comment data from the 2000 Pregnancy Risk Assessment Monitoring System (PRAMS) survey. Matern Child Health J 11 (6):549, 2007 Kavalar R, Arko D, Fokter Dovnik N, et al: Subinvolution of placental bed vessels: case report and review of the literature. Wien Klin Wochenschr 124(19-20):725, 2012 Kelly LS, Sheeder J, Stevens-Simon C: Why lightning strikes twice: postpartum resumption of sexual activity during adolescence. J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol 18:327, 2005 Kenny LC, McCrae R, Cunningham FG: Platelets, coagulation, and the liver. In Taylor N, Roberts JM, Cunningham FG (eds): Chesley's Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy, 4th ed. Amsterdam, Academic Press, 2014 Kharrazi FD, Rodgers B, Kennedy JG, et al: Parturition-induced pelvic dislocation: a report oHour cases. J Orthop Trauma 11:277, 1997 Kramer MS, Aboud F, Mironova E, et al: Breastfeeding and child cognitive development: new evidence from a large randomized trial. Arch Gen Psychiatry 65(5):578, 2008 Lasbleiz J, Sevestre FX, Moquet PY: Using an elastic band device after a severe obstetric pubic symphyseal separation: clinical and imaging evaluation. Obstet Gynecol 130(3):625, 2017 Lawford M, Scott K, Lust K: A case of massive vulvar oedema due to septic pubic symphysitis complicating pregnancy. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 50(6):576, 2010
# Chunk 6465
-J. Whitridge Williams (1903)

Although the woman who recently gave birth is susceptible to several potentially serious complications, pelvic infection continues to be the most important source of maternal morbidity and mortality. Other infections include mastitis and breast abscesses. hat said, puerperal complications include many of those encountered during pregnancy. For example, as discussed in Chapter 52 (p. 1004), venous thromboembolism during the short 6-week puerperium is as frequent as during all 40 antepartum weeks. Other puerperal issues and care are discussed in Chapter 36.
# Chunk 6466
Most female pelvic infections are caused by bacteria indigenous to the genital tract. Over the past 25 years, there have been reports of group A 3-hemolytic streptococcus causing toxic shock-like syndrome and life-threatening infection (Castagnola, 2008; Nathan, 1994). Prematurely ruptured membranes are a prominent risk factor in these infections (Anteby, 1999). In reviews by Crum (2002) and Udagawa (1999) and their colleagues, women in whom group A streptococcal infection was manifested before, during, or within 12 hours of delivery had a maternal mortality rate of almost 90 percent and fetal mortality rater> 50 percent. In the past 10 years, skin and sot-tissue infections due to community-acquired methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (A-MRSAJ have become common (Chap. 64, p. 1223). Although this variant is not a frequent cause of puerperal metritis, it is oten implicated in abdominal incisional infections (Anderson, 2007; Patel, 2007). Rotas and coworkers (2007) reported a woman with episiotomy cellulitis from CA-MRSA and hematogenously spread necrotizing pneumonia.
# Chunk 6467
Fever is the most important criterion or the diagnosis of postpartum metritis. Intuitively, the degree of fever is believed proportional to the extent of infection and sepsis syndrome. Temperatures commonly are 38 to 39°C. Chills that accompany fever suggest bacteremia or endotoxemia. Women usually complain of abdominal pain, and parametrial tenderness is elicited on abdominal and bimanual examination. Leukocytosis may range from 15,000 to 30,000 cells/�L, but recall that delivery itself increases the leukocyte count (Hartmann, 2000). Although an ofensive odor may develop, many women have foul-smelling lochia without evidence for infection, and vice versa. Some other infections, notably those caused by group A j-hemolytic streptococci, may be associated with scant, odorless lochia (Anderson, 2014).
# Chunk 6468
If nonsevere metritis develops following vaginal delivery, then treatment with an oral or intramuscular antimicrobial agent may be suicient (Meaney-Delman, 2015). For moderate to severe infections, however, intravenous therapy with a broad-spectrum antimicrobial regimen is indicated. Improvement follows in 48 to 72 hours in nearly 90 percent of women treated with one of several regimens discussed below. Persistent fever after this interval mandates a careful search for causes of refractory pelvic infection. hese include a parametrial phlegmon-an area of intense cellulitis; an abdominal incisional or pelvic abscess or infected hematoma; and septic pelvic thrombophlebitis. In our experience, persistent fever is seldom due to antimicrobial-resistant bacteria or due to drug side efects. he woman may be discharged home after she has been afebrile for at least 24 hours, and further oral antimicrobial therapy is not needed (French, 2004; Nlackeen, 2015).
# Chunk 6469
TABLE 37-2. Antimicrobial Regimens for Pelvic Infections Following Cesarean Delivery

Clindamycin + gentamicin "Gold standard," 90-97% eficacy, once-daily gentamicin dosing acceptable
# Chunk 6470
Vancomycin Added to other regimens for suspected Staphylococcus aureus infections Metronidazole + Metronidazole has excellent anaerobic coverage ampicillin + gentamicin Carbapenems Imipenemlcilastatin, meropenem, ertapenem .eserved for special indications therapy, some add ampicillin to the clindamycin-gentamicin regimen, either initially or if there is no response by 48 to 72 hours (Brumfield, 2000).
# Chunk 6471
• Complications of Uterine and Pelvic Infections

In more than 90 percent of women, metritis responds to antimicrobial treatment within 48 to 72 hours. In some of the remainder, any of several complications may arise. These include wound infections, complex pelvic infections such as phlegmons or abscesses, and septic pelvic thrombophlebitis (Jaiyeoba, 2012). As with other aspects of puerperal infections, the incidence and severity of these complications are remarkably decreased by perioperative antimicrobial prophylaxis.
# Chunk 6472
This uncommon, severe wound infection is associated with high mortality rates. In obstetrics, necrotizing fasciitis may involve abdominal incisions, or it may complicate episiotomy or other perineal lacerations. As the name implies, tissue necrosis is significant. Of the risk factors for fasciitis summarized by Owen and Andrews (1994), three of these-diabetes, obesity, and hypertension-are relatively common in gravidas. Like pelvic these wound complications usually are polymicrobial and are caused by organisms that make up the normal vaginal lora. In some cases, however, infection is caused by a single virulent bacterial species such as group A O-hemolytic streptococcus (Anderson, 2014; Rimawi, 2012). Occasionally, necrotizing infections are caused by rarely encountered pathogens (Chong, 2016; Swartz, 2004).
# Chunk 6473
Peritonitis is rarely encountered ater vaginal delivery, and many such cases are due to virulent strains of group A 3-hemolytic streptococci or similar organisms. Importantly in postpartum women, abdominal rigidity may not be prominent with puerperal peritonitis because of physiological abdominal wall laxity from pregnancy. Pain may be severe, but frequently, the irst symptoms of peritonitis are those of adynamic ileus. Marked bowel distention may develop, which is unusual ater uncomplicated cesarean delivery. If the infection begins in an intact uterus and extends into the peritoneum, antimicrobial treatment alone usually sufices. Conversely, peritonitis caused by uterine incisional necrosis as discussed subsequently, or from bowel perforation, must be treated promptly with surgical intervention .
# Chunk 6474
If the inflammatory reaction is more intense, cellulitis extends along natural lines of cleavage. he most common form of extension is laterally along the broad ligament, with a tendency to extend to the pelvic sidewall. Occasionally, posterior extension may involve the rectovaginal septum, producing a firm mass posterior to the cervix. In most women with a phlegmon, clinical improvement follows continued treatment with a broad-spectrum antimicrobial regimen. Typically, fever resolves in 5 to 7 days, but in some cases, it persists longer. Absorption of the induration may require several days to weeks.
# Chunk 6475
Persistent puerperal infections can be evaluated using computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance (MR) imaging. Brown and associates (1991) used CT imaging in74 women in whom pelvic infection was refractory to antimicrobial therapy given for 5 days. hey found at least one abnormal radiological inding in 75 percent of these women, and in most, these were nonsurgical lesions. In most cases, imaging can be used to dissuade surgical exploration. Uterine incisional dehiscence such as shown in Figure 37-4 can sometimes be confirmed based on CT scanning images. hese indings must be interpreted within the clinical context because apparent uterine incisional defects thought to represent edema can be seen even after uncomplicated cesarean delivery (Twickier, 1991). Shown in 37-5 is a necrotic hysterotomy incision that leaked into the peritoneal cavity.
# Chunk 6476
The incidence of septic phlebitis has varied in several reports.

In a 5-year survey of 45,000 women who were delivered at Parkland Hospital, Brown and associates (1999) found an incidence of septic pelvic thrombophlebitis in 1 per 9000 gravidas following vaginal delivery and 1 per 800 after cesarean delivery. he overall incidence of 1 per 3000 deliveries was similar to the 1 per 2000 reported by Dunnihoo and colleagues (1991). In large studies of women with cesarean delivery, the incidence was 1 in 400 to 1 in 1000 surgeries (Dotters-Katz, 2017; Rouse 2004). Chorioamnionitis, endometritis, and wound complications were other risks.
# Chunk 6477
Common iliac vein Figure 37-7, the diagnosis can be con firmed by pelvic CT or MR imaging (Klima, 2008). Using either, Brown and colleagues (1r999) found that 20 percent of 69 women with metritis who had fever despite >5 days of appropriate antimicrobial therapy Internal iliac vein had septic pelvic thrombophlebitis.
# Chunk 6478
The most efective treatment has not been reported Oahanfar, 2013). hus, the initial antimicrobial choice is influenced by the current experience with staphylococcal infections at a given institution. Dicloxacillin, 500 mg orally four times daily, may be started empirically. Erythromycin is given to women who are penicillin sensitive. If the infection is caused by resistant, penicillinase-producing staphylococci or if resistant organisms are suspected while awaiting the culture results, then vancomycin, clindamycin, or trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole is given (Sheield, 2013). Although clinical response may be prompt, treatment is recommended for 10 to 14 days.
# Chunk 6479
JPrior to evaluation.

kThose on chronic corticosteroids and at risk for bone fracture.

= antiretroviral; BP = blood pressure; BMI = body mass index; CHTN = chronic hypertension; Cu-IUD = copper intrauterine device; DM = diabetes mellitus; DMPA = depot medroxyprogesterone acetate; GC/CT = gonorrhea/chlamydial infection; GTD = gestational trophoblastic disease; ISHD = ischemic heart disease; LNG-IUS = levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system; MS = multiple sclerosis; PI = protease inhibitor; PID = pelvic inflammatory disease; POP = progestin-only pills; SLE = system lupus erythematosus; VTE = venous thromboembolism. Compiled from Curtis, 2016b; Merck, 2015; Teva Women's Health, 2014.
# Chunk 6480
Expulsion of an IUD from the uterus is most common during the first month. hus, women are examined approximately 1 month following IUD insertion, usually after menses, to identiy the tails trailing from the cervix. Following this, a woman is instructed to palpate the strings each month after menses. Regardless of IUD type, the cumulative 3-year expulsion rate approximates 10 percent (Madden, 2014; Simonatto, 2016). This rate is higher in those :;25 years Qatlaoui, 2017).
# Chunk 6481
With chronic perforation, a device can penetrate the muscular uterine wall to varying degrees. A patient may be asymptomatic but abdominal pain, uterine bleeding, or missing strings can be clues (Kaislasuo, 2013). hose with a predominantly intrauterine location are usually managed by hysteroscopic IUD removal. In contrast, devices that have nearly or completely perforated through the uterine wall are more easily removed laparoscopically. Notably, an extrauterine Cu-IUD frequently induces an intense local inlammatory reaction and adhesions (Kho, 2014). Laparotomy may be necessary, and bowel preparation is considered. Sigmoid and bladder perforations and small-bowel obstruction have been reported remote from insertion (Sano, 2017; Xu, 2015; Zeino, 2011).
# Chunk 6482
Dysmenorrhea and bleeding irregularities can complicate IUD use (Aoun, 2014; Grunloh, 2013). These can be treated with some degree of success by nonsteroidal antiinlammatory drugs (NSAIDs) or tranexamic acid, which is an antiibrinolytic (Godfrey, 2013; Madden, 2012; S0rdal, 2013). Of the two IUDs, heavy bleeding more often complicates Cu-IUD use and may cause iron-deiciency anemia, for which oral iron salts are given. With the LNG-IUS, irregular spotting for up to 6 months after placement often gives way to progressive amenorrhea, which is reported by 30 percent of women after 2 years and by 60 percent after 12 years (Ronnerdag, 1999). his is frequently associated with improved dysmenorrhea.
# Chunk 6483
If infection does develop, it may take several forms and typically requires broad-spectrum antimicrobials. Pelvic inlammatoy disease (PID) without abscess is treated with antibiotics on an outpatient or inpatient basis, depending on infection severity. here are theoretical concerns that a coexistent IUD may worsen the infection or delay resolution. A provider may choose to remove an IUD in this setting, although some evidence supports allowing a device to remain during treatment in those hospitalized with mild or moderate PID (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2015; Tepper, 2013). Ifinfection fails to improve during 48 to 72 hours of treatment, the device is removed. Tuboovarian abscess can complicate PID and is treated aggressively with intravenous broad-spectrum antibiotics and IUD removal. Last, septic abortion mandates immediate uterine evacuation and antibiotics.
# Chunk 6484
he irst progestin implants contained levonorgestrel (LNG), and systems are still available outside the United States. Jadelle, originally named Norplant-2, provides LNG and contraception for 5 years through two subdermally implanted Silastic rods. Ater this time, rods may be removed and if desired, new rods inserted at the same site (Bayer Group, 2015). Jadele is approved by the FDA, however, it is not marketed or distributed in the United States. Sino-implant II is a two-rod system with the same amount (150 mg) of LNG and same mechanism of action asJadele but provides 4 years of contraception. Sinoimplant II is manufactured in China and approved for use by 20 countries in Asia and Mrica (FHI 360, 2012).
# Chunk 6485
For those not currently using hormonal contraception, the etonogestrel implant is ideally inserted within 5 days of menses onset. With LNG-releasing implants, contraception is established within 24 hours if inserted within the first 7 days of the menstrual cycle (Sivin, 1997; Steiner, 2010). For transitioning methods, an implant is placed on the day of the first placebo combination oral contraceptive (COC) pill; on the day that the next depot-medroxyprogesterone injection would be due; or within 24 hours of taking the last POP (Merck, 2016a). In women certain that they are not pregnant, insertion at other times of the cycle is followed by alternative contraception for 7 days. Related to pregnancy, an implant may be inserted before discharge following delivery or abortion (Sothornwit, 2017).
# Chunk 6486
Hormones are taken daily for a specified time (21 to 81 days) and then replaced by placebo for a speciied time (4 to 7 days), which is called the "pill-free interval." During these pill-free days, withdrawal bleeding is expected.
# Chunk 6487
Alternatively, longer durations of active hormone, designed to minimize the number of withdrawal episodes, have similar eicacy and safety proiles as more traditional administration (Edelman, 2014). These extended-cycle products produce a 13-week cycle, that is, 12 weeks of hormone use, followed by a week for withdrawal menses. The product Amethyst provides continuous active hormone pills for 365 days each year. Such extended or continuous regimens may be especially suited for women with significant menstrual symptoms (Mendoza, 2014).
# Chunk 6488
For maximum eiciency, pills are best taken at the same time each day. If one dose is missed, the missed pill is taken immediately; the scheduled dose for that day is taken on time; and then daily pills are continued. If two or more doses are missed, the most recent missed pill is taken immediately; the scheduled dose for that day is taken on time; and an efective barrier technique used for 7 days while daily pills are then continued (Curtis, 2016a). If withdrawal bleeding fails to occur during the pill-free interval, a woman should continue her pills but seek attention to exclude pregnancy.
# Chunk 6489
Initiation of the patch is the same as for COCs, and a new patch is applied weekly for 3 weeks, followed by a patch-free week to allow withdrawal bleeding. Although a patch is ideally worn no longer than 7 days, hormone levels remain in an efective range for up to 9 days. This afords a 2-day window for patch-change delays (Abrams, 2001).
# Chunk 6490
DMPA is efective, and as with other progestin-only methods, contraception is provided by ovulation inhibition, greater cervical mucus viscosity, and creation of an endometrium unfavorable for ovum implantation. Initial injection is given within the irst 5 days following menses onset. Serum levels suicient for contraception are observed by 24 hours. Thus, no additional contraceptive method is required for initiation within this window. Alternatively, limited data support a "quick weart," or initiation of DMPA regardless of cycle day. If so implemented, investigators recommend an initial negative pregnancy test result before injection, a supplemental contraceptive method during the 7 days following injection, and a second pregnancy test after 3 to 6 weeks to identiy an early pregnancy (Rickert, 2007; Sneed, 2005). Pregnancies conceived during DMPA use are not associated with a higher risk of fetal malformation (Katz, 1985). For women who present for intramuscular DMPA reinjection more than 13 weeks or for subcutaneous DMPA reinjection more than 14 weeks ater the prior dose, the manufacturer recommends exclusion of pregnancy before reinjection (Pfizer, 2015a,b).
# Chunk 6491
he Cervical Mucus Method, also called the Two-Day Method or Billings Method, relies on awareness of vaginal "dryness" and "wetness." hese reflect changes in the amount and quality of cervical mucus at diferent times in the menstrual cycle. With the Billings Method, abstinence is required from the beginning of menses until 4 days after slippery mucus is identified. With the T wo-Day Method, intercourse is considered safe if a woman did not note mucus on the day of planned intercourse or the day prior.
# Chunk 6492
The Today contraceptive sponge is an over-the-counter, onesize-fits-all device. The nonoxynol-9-impregnated polyurethane disc is 2.5 cm thick and 5.5 cm wide and has a dimple on one side and satin loop on the other (Fig. 38-8). The sponge can be inserted up to 24 hours prior to intercourse, and while in place, it provides contraception regardless of coital frequency. It should remain in place for 6 hours after intercourse. Pregnancy is prevented primarily by the spermicide nonoxynol-9 and to a lesser extent by covering the cervix and absorbing semen.
# Chunk 6493
For women who are candidates, Cu-IUD insertion is the most efective emergency contraceptive method and provides an efective 10-year method of contraception (Cheng, 2012). If an IUD is placed up to 5 days after unprotected coitus, the failure rate approximates only 0.1 percent (Cleland, 2012; Wu, 2010).
# Chunk 6494
Croxatto HB, Makirainen L: he pharmacodynamics and eicacy of Implanon. An overview of the data. Contraception 58:915, 1998 Curtis EM, Pine L: Actinomyces in the vaginas of women with and without intrauterine contraceptive devices. Am J Obstet Gynecol 140:880, 1981 Curtis M,Jadaoui TC, Tepper NK, et al: U.S. selected practice recommendations for contraceptive use, 2016. MMWR 65(4):1, 2016a Curtis KM, Tepper NK, Jadaoui TC, et al: U.S. medical eligibility criteria for contraceptive use, 2016. MMWR 65(3):1, 2016b Daniels K, Daugherty J, Jones J, et al: Current contraceptive use and variation by selected characteristics among women aged 15-44: United States, 2011-2013. Nat! Health Stat Report 86:1, 2015 Dieben TO, Roumen FJ, Apter 0: Eicacy, cycle control, and user acceptability of a novel combined contraceptive vaginal ring. Obstet Gynecol 100:585,2002 Dorlinger LJ: Metabolic efects of implantable steroid contraceptives for women. Contraception 65(1):47, 2002 Dragoman M, Curtis M, Gaield ME: Combined hormonal contraceptive use among women with known dyslipidemias: a systematic review of critical safety outcomes. Contraception 94(3):280, 2016 Drey EA, Reeves MF, Ogawa DO, et al: Insertion of intrauterine contraceptives immediately following first-and second-trimester abortions. Contraception 79(5):397, 2009 Eaton EF, Hoesley CJ: Barrier methods for human immunodeiciency virus prevention. Infect Dis Clin North Am 28(4):585,n2014 Edelman A, Micks E, Gallo MF, et al: Continuous or extended cycle vs. cyclic use of combined hormonal contraceptives for contraception. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 7:CD004695, 2014 ESHRE Capri Workshop Group: Venous thromboembolism in women: a speciic reproductive health risk. Hum Reprod Update 19(5):471,n2013 Etminan M, Takkouche B, Isorna FC, et al: Risk ofischaemic stroke in people with migraine: systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies. BMJ 330:63, 2005 European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology-ESHRE Capri Workshop Group: Ovarian and endometrial function during hormonal contraception. Hum Reprod 16(7):1527,n2001 Farley TM, Rosenberg MJ, Rowe PJ, et al: Intrauterine devices and pelvic inlammatory disease: an international perspective. Lancet 339: 85, 1992 Fehring RJ, Schneider M, Raviele K, et al: Randomized comparison of two internet-supported fertility-awareness-based methods of family planning. Contraception 88(1):24, 2013 Ferguson CA, Costescu 0, Jamieson MA, et al: Transmural migration and perforation of a levonorgestrel intrauterine system: a case report and review of the literature. Contraception 93(1):81, 2016 FHI 360: Sino-implant (II) project. 2012. Available at: https:llwww.urbanreproductivehealth.org/sites/mle/iles/hi360_factsheecsino-implanc5.30.2012. pd. Accessed July 1, 2016 Finer LB, Zolna MR: Declines in unintended pregnancy in the United States, 2008-2011. N Engl J Med 374(9):843, 2016 Food and Drug Administration: Citizen petition partial approval and denial response from FDA COER to state of Wisconsin (Department of Justice). 2015a. Available at: https:llwww.regulations.gov/document?D = FDA2001-P-0123-0188. Accessed October 10, 2016 Food and Drug Administration: FDA approves Plan B One-Step emergency contraceptive for use without a prescription for all women of child-bearing potential. 2013. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/NewsEvents/Newsroom/ PressAnnouncements/ucm358082.htm. Accessed June 21, 2016 Food and Drug Administration: FDA Drug Safety Communication: Updated information about the risk of blood clots in women taking birth control pills containing drospirenone. 2012. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/Drugsl DrugSafety/ucm299305.htm. Accessed July 7,n2016 Food and Drug Administration: FDA MedWatch 2004 Safety Alert-DepoProvera (medroxyprogesterone acetate injectable suspension). 2004. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch/Safetylnformation/SafetyAlertsforHumanMedicalProducts/ucm154784.htm. Accessed October 10, 2016
# Chunk 6495
Pfizer: Depo-Provera (medroxyprogesterone acetate) injectable suspension: highlights of prescribing information. 201n5a. Available at: http://labeling. pizer.com/ShowLabeling.aspx?id = 522. Accessed October 11,n2016 Pfizer: Depo-subQ Provera 104: physician information. 2015b. Available at: http://labeling.pizer.com/ShowLabeling.aspx?id = 549. Accessed October 11,n2016 Phillips SJ, Tepper NK, Kapp N, et al: Progestogen-only contraceptive use among breastfeeding women: a systematic review. Contraception 94(3):226, 2015 Raps M, Curvers], Helmerhorst FM, et al: hyroid function, activated protein C resistance and the risk of venous thrombosis in users of hormonal contraceptives. hromb Res 133(4):640,n2014 Remington KM, Buller RS, Kelly JR: Efect of the Today contraceptive sponge on growth and toxic shock syndrome toxin-1 production by StaphyLococcus aureus. Obstet Gynecol 69:563, 1987 Rickert VI, Tiezzi L, Lipshutz J, et al: Depo Now: preventing unintended pregnancies among adolescents and young adults.] Adolesc Health 40(1):22,2007 Robinson GE, Burren T, Mackie IJ, et al: Changes in haemostasis after stopping the combined contraceptive pill: implications for major surgely. BMJ 302:269, 1991 Rodriguez MI, Godfrey EM, Warden M, et al: Prevention and management of nausea and vomiting with emergency contraception: a systematic review. Contraception 87(5):583, 2013
# Chunk 6496
For several days postpartum, the uterine fundus lies at the level of the umbilicus, and fallopian tubes are accessible directly beneath the abdominal wall. Moreover, abdominal laxity allows easy repositioning of the incision over each uterine cornu.
# Chunk 6497
Evidence suggests that the fallopian tube may be the origin of pelvic serous carcinomas, especially those of the ovary. With this knowledge, the Society of Gynecologic Oncologists (2013) and American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017b) recommend consideration of salpingectomy to lower cancer risks. Speciically, for women at average risk of ovarian cancer, risk-reducing salpingectomy should be discussed and considered with patients at the time of abdominal or pelvic surgery, at hysterectomy, or in lieu of tubal ligation.
# Chunk 6498
FIGURE 39-3 A. With salpingectomy, the mesosalpinx is sequentially clamped, cut, and ligated. B. At the cornu, clamps are placed across the fallopian tube and its adjacent mesosalpinx prior to tubal transection. (Reproduced with permission from Stuart GS: Puerperal sterilization. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap, III, et al (eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap's Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw-Hili, 201o7.) 0.5 percent. The study found puerperal sterilization to be highly efective. The 5-year failure rate was 5 per 1000, and for 12 years, it was 7 per 1000.
# Chunk 6499
Several prostaglandins are thought to be central to preeclampsia syndrome pathophysiology. Specifically, the blunted pressor response seen in normal pregnancy is at least partially due to diminished vascular responsiveness mediated by endothelial prostaglandin synthesis. For example, compared with normal pregnancy, endothelial prostacyclin (PGI2) production is lower in preeclampsia. This action appears to be mediated by phospholipase A2 (Davidge, 2015). At the same time, thromboxane A2 secretion by platelets is increased, and the prostacyclin:thromboxane A2 ratio declines. The net result favors greater sensitivity to infused angiotensin II and, ultimately, vasoconstriction (Spitz, 1988). hese changes are apparent as early as 22 weeks' gestation in gravidas who later develop preeclampsia (Chavarria, 2003).
# Chunk 6500
The frequency and intensity of thrombocytopenia vary and are dependent on the severity and duration of the preeclampsia syn drome (Heilmann, 2007; Hupuczi, 2007). Overt thrombocy topenia-deined by a platelet count < 100,000/�L-indicates severe disease (see Table 40-2). In general, the lower the platelet count, the higher the rates of maternal and fetal morbidity and mortality (Leduc, 1992). In most cases, delivery is advisable because worsening thrombocytopenia usually ensues. Mter delivery, the platelet count may continue to decline for the irst day or so. It then usually rises progressively to reach a normal level within 3 to 5 days. As discussed later (p. 722), in some instances with HELLP syndrome, the platelet count continues to fall after delivery. If these do not reach a nadir until 48 to 72 hours, then preeclampsia syndrome may be incorrectly attrib uted to one of the thrombotic microangiopathies discussed in
# Chunk 6501
Severe preeclampsia is frequently accompanied by hemolysis, which manifests as elevated serum lactate dehydrogenase levels and reduced haptoglobin levels. Other evidence comes from schizocytosis, spherocytosis, and reticulocytosis in peripheral blood (Cunningham, 1985; Pritchard, 1954, 1976). hese derangements result in part from microangiopathic hemoysis caused by endothelial disruption with platelet adherence and ibrin deposition. Cunningham and coworkers (1995) postulated that erythrocyte morphology was partially caused by serum lipid alterations. Related, substantively decreased longchain fatty acid content is found in erythrocytes of preeclamptic women (Mackay, 2012).
# Chunk 6502
Subtle changes consistent with intravascular coagulation, and less often erythrocyte destruction, commonly are found with preeclampsia and especially eclampsia (Cunningham, 2015; Kenny, 2015). Some of these changes include elevated factor VIII consumption, increased levels of ibrinopeptides A and B and of D-dimers, and reduced levels of regulatory proteinsantithrombin III and proteins C and S. Coagulation aberrations generally are mild and are seldom clinically signiicant (Kenny, 2015; Pritchard, 1984). Unless placental abruption is comorbid, plasma ibrinogen levels do not difer remarkably from levels found in normal pregnancy. Fibrin degradation products such as D-dimers are minimally elevated. As preeclampsia worsens, so do abnormal indings with thromboelastography (Pisani-Conway, 2013). Despite these changes, routine laboratory assessments of coagulation, such as prothrombin time (PT), activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), and plasma ibrinogen level, are not required in the management of pregnancy-associated hypertensive disorders.
# Chunk 6503
In most preeclamptic women, the urine sodium concentration is elevated. Urine osmolality rises, urine:plasma creatinine ratio is elevated, and fractional excretion of sodium is low, which all indicated that a prerenal mechanism is involved. Sodium-containing crystalloid infusion raises left ventricular illing pressure, and although oliguria temporarily improves, rapid infusions may cause clinically apparent pulmonary edema. Intensive intravenous fluid therapy is not indicated as "treatment" for preeclamptic women with oliguria unless urine output is diminished from hemorrhage or luid loss from vomiting or fever.
# Chunk 6504
2009; Yoshihara, 2016).

Second, elevations of serum • Liver AST and ALT levels are markers for severe preeclampsia. Values seldom exceed 500 U/L, but levels reaching more than 2000
# Chunk 6505
unusual. Sheehan and Lynch (1973) described that some degree As a third presentation, hemorrhagic infarction may extend of hepatic infarction accompanied hemorrhage in almost half of to form a hepatic hematoma. This in turn can extend to form women who died with eclampsia. hese findings corresponded a subcapsular hematoma that may rupture. Computed tomogwith reports during the 1960s that described elevated serum raphy (CT) scanning or magnetic resonance (MR) imaginghepatic transaminase levels. Along with the earlier observations greatly aids diagnosis (Fig. 40-9). Unruptured hematomasby Pritchard and associates (1954), who described hemolysis are probably more common than clinically suspected and areand thrombocytopenia with eclampsia, this constellation of more likely to be found with HELLP syndrome. Althoughhemolysis, hepatocellular necrosis, and thrombocytopenia was later termed HELLP syndrome.
# Chunk 6506
Antithrombin-III(AT-3), atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP), 32-microglobulin, haptoglobin, transferrin, ferritin, 25-hydroxyvitamin 0, genetic markers, cell-free fetal DNA, serum and urine proteomics and metabolomic markers, hepatic aminotransferases
# Chunk 6507
Somewhat related, Abenhaim and coworkers (2008) reported a retrospective cohort study of 677 nonhypertensive women hospitalized for bed rest because of threatened preterm delivery. When outcomes of these women were compared with those of the general obstetrical population, bed rest was associated with a signiicantly reduced relative risk-0.27-of developing preeclampsia. From two small randomized trials, prophylactic bed rest for 4 to 6 hours daily at home was successful in signiicantly lowering the incidence of preeclampsia in women with normal blood pressures (\1eher, 2006).
# Chunk 6508
Reduced physical activity throughout much of the day is likely beneficial, but as the 2013 Task Force concluded, absolute bed rest is not desirable. Ample protein and calories are included in the diet, and sodium and fluid intake are not limited or forced.
# Chunk 6509
Many clinicians believe that further hospitalization is not warranted if hypertension abates within a few days, and this has legitimized third-party payers to deny hospitalization reimbursement. Consequently, many women with mild-tomoderate hypertension are managed at home. Outpatient management may continue as long as preeclampsia syndrome does not worsen and fetal jeopardy is not suspected. Sedentary activity throughout the greater part of the day is recommended. These women are instructed in detail to report symptoms. Home blood pressure and urine protein monitoring or frequent evaluations by a visiting nurse may prove beneficial.
# Chunk 6510
Several studies have compared continued hospitalization and outpatient care. In a pilot study from Parkland Hospital, 72 nulliparas with new-onset hypertension from 27 to 37 weeks were assigned either to continued hospitalization or to outpatient care (Horsager, 1995). he only significant diference was that women in the home care group developed severe preeclampsia significantly more frequently than hospitalized women42 versus 25 percent. In another trial, ater hospital evaluation, 218 women with mild gestational nonprotein uric hypertension were similarly divided (Crowther, 1992). As shown in Table 40-7, the mean hospital duration was 22.2 days for women with inpatient management compared with only 6.5 days in the home care group. Preterm delivery before 34 and before 37 weeks' gestation was increased twofold in the outpatient group. However, maternal and newborn outcomes were otherwise similar.
# Chunk 6511
Because of their early study, the Memphis group redeined criteria and performed a randomized trial of aggressive versus expectant management for 95 women who had severe preeclampsia but with more advanced gestations of 28 to 32 weeks (Sibai, 1994). Women with HELLP syndrome were excluded rom this tria. Aggressive management included glucocorticoid administration for fetal lung maturation followed by delivery in 48 hours. Expectantly managed women were observed at bed rest and given either labetalol or nifedipine orally for severe hypertension. In this study, pregnancy was prolonged for a mean of 15.4 days in the expectant management group. An overall improvement in neonatal outcomes was also reported.
# Chunk 6512
Daily fetal assessment and evaluation of serial growth and amnionic fluid

FIGURE 40-14 Clinical management algorithm for severe preeclampsia at <34 weeks. HELLP = hemolysis, elevated liver enzyme levels, low platelet count; L&D = labor and delivery; MgS04= magnesium sulfate; UOP = urine output. (Adapted from the Society for 2008; Budden, 2006; Gaugler-Senden, Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2011.) 2006). Maternal complications developed in 60 percent, and there was one maternal death. he perinatal mortality rate was 650 per 1000 births. At this time, no comparative studies attest to perinatal benefits of such expectant treatment versus early delivery in the face of serious maternal complications, which approach rates of 50 percent. We do not recommend such management.
# Chunk 6513
As with severe preeclampsia, urinary output rises after delivery and is usually an early sign of improvement. With renal dysfunction, serum creatinine levels are serially monitored. Proteinuria and edema ordinarily disappear within a week postpartum. In most cases, blood pressure returns to normal within a few days to 2 weeks after delivery (Berks, 2009). As subsequently discussed, persisting and severe hypertension likely predicts underlying chronic vascular disease (Podymow, 2010).
# Chunk 6514
Rarely, eclampsia is followed by psychosis, and the woman becomes violent. This may last for several days to 2 weeks. The prognosis for return to normal function is good, provided there was no preexisting mental illness. It is presumed to be similar to postpartum psychosis discussed in Chapter 61 (p. 1179). Antipsychotic medications have proven efective in the few cases of posteclampsia psychosis treated at Parkland Hospital.
# Chunk 6515
Using United States Pharmacopeia (USP) standards, magnesium sulfate USP is MgS04·7H20, and it contains 8.12 mEq magnesium per 1 g. Parenterally administered magnesium is cleared almost totally by renal excretion, and magnesium intoxication is unusual when the glomerular iltration rate is normal or only slightly reduced. Adequate urine output usualy correlates with preserved glomerular iltration rates. That said, magnesium excretion is not urine Row dependent, and urinary volume per unit time does not, per se, predict renal unction. Thus, serum creatinine leves must be mesured to etect a decreased glomeruar iltration rate.
# Chunk 6516
Eclamptic convulsions are almost always prevented or arrested by plasma magnesium levels maintained at 4 to 7 mEq/L, 4.8 to 8.4 mg/dL, or 2.0 to 3.5 mmollL. But, one review of magnesium pharmacokinetics showed that most regimens result in much lower serum magnesium levels (Okusanya, 2016). This was especially true if only 1 g/hr was infused (Yefet, 2017). Importantly, the obesity epidemic has afected these observations (Cunningham, 2016). Tudela and colleagues (2013) described our observations from Parkland Hospital with magnesium administration to obese women. More than 60 percent of women whose body mass index (BMI) exceeded 30 kg/mrand who were receiving the 2 g/hr dose had sub therapeutic levels at 4 hours. hus, obese women would require 3 gl hr to maintain efective plasma levels. That said, most currently do not recommend routine magnesium level measurements (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2013; Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, 2006).
# Chunk 6517
This efective intravenous antihypertensive agent is an Q-and nonselective 3-blocker. Some prefer its use over hydralazine because of fewer side efects. At Parkland Hospital, we give 10 mg intravenously initially. If the blood pressure has not decreased to the desirable level in 10 minutes, then 20 mg is given. The next 10-minute incremental dose is 40 mg and is followed by another 40 mg if needed. If a salutary response is not achieved, then an 80-mg dose is given. Sibai (2003) recommends 20 to 40 mg every 10 to 15 minutes as needed and a maximum dose of 220 mg per treatment cycle. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017a) recommends starting with a 20-mg intravenous bolus. If not efective within 10 minutes, this is followed by 40 mg, then 80 mg every 10 minutes. If hypertension persists, hydralazine is then given.
# Chunk 6518
Lactated Ringer solution is administered routinely at a rate between 60 and 125 mL per hour, unless luid loss is unusual from vomiting, diarrhea, or diaphoresis, or, more likely, excessive blood loss with delivery. Oliguria is common with severe preeclampsia. hus, coupled with the knowledge that maternal blood volume is likely constricted compared with that of normal pregnancy, it is tempting to administer intravenous fluids more vigorously. But controlled, conservative luid administration is preferred for the typical woman with severe preeclampsia who already has excessive extracellular luid that is inappropriately distributed between intravascular and extravascular spaces. Infusion of large luid volumes enhances the maldistribution and thereby appreciably elevates the risk of pulmonary and cerebral edema (Dennis, 2012a; Sciscione, 2003; Zinaman, 1985). hus, for preeclamptic women with anuria, small incremental boluses can be given to maintain urine output above 30 mL per hour. Diminished intravascular volume from hemorrhage or luid loss from vomiting or fever can similarly be replaced by gradual incremental boluses. For labor analgesia with neuraxial analgesia, crystalloid solutions are infused slowly in graded amounts (Chap. 25, p. 496).
# Chunk 6519
Systolic BP : 160 r diastolic BP : 110 mm Hg

Proteinuria :2+ by dipstick in a catheterized urine

Serum creatininen> 1n.1 mg/dL
# Chunk 6520
During the past 20 years, the use of conduction analgesia for women with preeclampsia syndrome has proven ideal. Initial problems with this method included hypotension and diminished uterine perfusion caused by sympathetic blockade in preeclamptic women, with already attenuated hypervolemia. But pulmonary edema was mitigated by techniques that used slow induction of epidural analgesia with dilute solutions of anesthetic agents. his countered the need for rapid infusion of large volumes of crystalloid or colloid to correct maternal hypotension from neural blockade (Hogg, 1999; Wallace, 1995). These techniques are described in detail in Chapter 25 (p. 496). Importantly, epidural blockade avoids general anesthesia, in which the stimulation of tracheal intubation may cause sudden severe hypertension. Such blood pressure spikes, in turn, can cause pulmonary edema, cerebral edema, or intracranial hemorrhage. Finally, tracheal intubation may be particularly diicult and thus hazardous in women with airway edema due to preeclampsia (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 20 17b).
# Chunk 6521
Because persistence of severe hypertension corresponds to the onset and length of diuresis and extracellular fluid mobilization, it seems logical that furosemide-augmented diuresis might serve to hasten blood pressure control. One randomized trial included 264 postpartum preeclamptic women who, ater onset of spontaneous diuresis, were assigned to 20-mg oral furosemide given daily or to no therapy (Ascarelli, 2005). Women with mild disease had similar blood pressure control regardless of whether they received treatment or placebo. However, ater 2 days, women with severe preeclampsia who were treated, compared with those receiving placebo, had a lower mean systolic blood pressure-142 versus 153 mm Hg. They also less frequently required supplemental antihypertensive therapy during the remainder of hospitalization-14 versus 26 percent, respectively. In a recent randomized study, Veena and colleagues (2017) treated severe postpartum eclampsia with nifedipine plus furosemide or nifedipine alone. They reported that this prophylactic therapy signiicantly lowered the need for an additional antihypertensive-26 versus 8 percent, respectively.
# Chunk 6522
Evidence has accrued that the preeclampsia syndrome is a marker for subsequent long-term cardiovascular and related morbidity and mortality (Table 40-16). hus, women with hypertension identified during pregnancy should be evaluated during the first several months postpartum. he working group of the NHBPEP (2000) concluded that hypertension attributable to pregnancy should resolve within 12 weeks of delivery. Hypertension persisting beyond this time is considered chronic (Chap. 50, p. 976). he Magpie Trial Follow-Up Collaborative Group (2007) reported that 20 percent of 3375 preeclamptic women seen at a median of 26 months postpartum had hypertension. Importantly, even if hypertension does not persist in the short term, convincing evidence suggests a higher risk for long-term cardiovascular morbidity.
# Chunk 6523
Preeclampsia is also a marker for subsequent renal disease. lmost 15 percent of previously preeclamptic women have renal dysfunction (Lopes van Balen, 2017). In a 40-year study of Norwegian birth and end-stage renal disease linked registries, although the absolute risk of renal failure was small, preeclampsia was associated with a fourfold greater risk (Vikse, 2008). Women with recurrent preeclampsia had an even higher risk. These data need to be considered in light of the indings that 15 to 20 percent of women with preeclampsia who undergo renal biopsy have evidence of chronic renal disease (Chesley, 1978). In another long-term study, Spaan and coworkers (2009) compared formerly preeclamptic women with a cohort of women who were normotensive at delivery. At 20 years following delivery, preeclamptic women were signiicantly more likely to be chronically hypertensive-55 versus 7 percent-compared with control women. They also had higher peripheral vascular and renovascular resistance and decreased renal blood low. These data do not permit conclusions as to cause versus efect.
# Chunk 6524
Enthusiasm has developed for specially constructed intrauterine balloons to treat hemorrhage from uterine atony and other causes. A Bakri Pospartum Baloon or BT-Cath may be inserted and inlated to tamponade the endometrial cavity and stop bleeding (Fig. 41-5). Insertion requires two or three team members. he irst performs abdominal sonography during the procedure. The second places the delated balloon into the uterus and stabilizes it. The third member instills luid to inlate the balloon, rapidly infusing at least 150 mL followed by further instillation over a few minutes for a total of 300 to 500 mL to arrest hemorrhage. It is reasonable to remove the balloon after approximately 12 hours (Einerson, 2017).
# Chunk 6525
Perineal, vulvar, and paravaginal hematomas can develop rapidly and frequently cause excruciating pain (Fig. 41-12). A tense, tender swelling of varying size rapidly develops, encroaches on the vaginal lumen, and causes overlying skin or epithelium to become ecchymotic. A paravaginal hematoma may escape detection initially. However, symptoms of pelvic pressure, pain, or inability to void should prompt evaluation. Others may go undetected until other measures of hypovolemia become evident. When there is a supralevator extension, the hematoma extends upward in the paravaginal space and between the leaves of the broad ligament. The hematoma may escape detection until it can be felt on abdominal palpation or until hypovolemia develops. Imaging with sonography or computed tomographic scanning may be useful (Cichowski, 2017; Kawamura, 2014; Takeda, 2014).
# Chunk 6526
Blunt abdominal trauma can precipitate uterine rupture. Although the distended pregnant uterus is surprisingly resistant, pregnant women sustaining such trauma should be watched carefully for signs of a ruptured uterus (Chap. 47, p. 927). In one study of 13 cases of primary uterine rupture, trauma accounted for three cases (Miller, 1996). Other causes of traumatic rupture that are uncommon today are those due to internal podalic version and extraction, diicult forceps delivery, breech extraction, and unusual fetal enlargement such as with hydrocephaly.
# Chunk 6527
Expectant Management with a Preterm Fetus

If possible, delaying delivery may benefit an immature fetus. Bond and colleagues (1989) expectantly managed 43 women with placental abruption before 35 weeks' gestation, and 31 of them were given tocolytic therapy. he mean interval-todelivery for all 43 was approximately 12 days. Cesarean delivery was performed in 75 percent, and there were no stillbirths. As discussed earlier, women with a very early abruption may develop chronic abruption-oligohydramnios sequence. In one report, Elliott and coworkers (1998) described four women with an abruption at a mean gestational age of 20 weeks who developed oligohydramnios and delivered at an average gestational age of 28 weeks. In a description of 256 women with an abruption at <28 weeks' gestation, Sabourin and colleagues (2012) reported that a mean of 1.6 weeks was gained. Of the group, 65 percent were delivered <29 weeks, and half of all women underwent emergent cesarean delivery.
# Chunk 6528
Maternal serum aphaetoprotein (MSAFP) levels, if abnormally elevated for otherwise unexplained reasons during prenatal screening, raise the risk for previa and a host of other abnormalities. Moreover, women with a previa and comorbid MSAFP level :2.0 multiples of the median (MoM) at 16 weeks' preterm birth (Chap. 14, p. 283).
# Chunk 6529
Accuracy depends on the sonographic technique used. In a comprehensive study, the internal os was visualized in all cases with transvaginal sonography but in only 30 percent with transabdominal sonography (Farine, 1988). As discussed, according to the Fetal Imaging Workshop, if the placental edge is <2 cm from the internal os, but not covering it, the placenta is considered low lying (Reddy, 2014). In the absence of any other indication, sonography need not be frequently repeated simply to document placental position. At Parkland, women with a placenta previa identiied at 18 to 22 weeks' gestation with a prior cesarean delivery are evaluated again at 28 weeks and those without at 32 weeks. Restriction of activity is not necessary unless a previa persists beyond 28 weeks or if clinical findings such as bleeding or contractions develop before this time. At 32 weeks' gestation, if the placental edge is still <2 cm from the os, then transvaginal sonography is repeated at 36 weeks.
# Chunk 6530
Ater bleeding has ceased for approximately 2 days and the fetus is judged to be healthy, a woman can usually be discharged home with instructions for "pelvic rest." Importantly, the woman and her family must ully appreciate the possibility of recurrent bleeding and be prepared for immediate transport back to the hospital. In other cases, prolonged hospitalization may be ideal.
# Chunk 6531
Another risk marker became apparent with widespread use of MSAFP and human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) screening for neural-tube defects and aneuploidies. In one study of more than 9300 women screened at 14 to 22 weeks' gestation, the risk for accrete syndromes was eightfold higher with MSAFP levels >2.5 110M, and it was increased fourfold with maternal serum free �-hCG levels >2.5 MoM (Hung, 1999).
# Chunk 6532
eOata from AI-Khan, 2014. fData from Erfani, 2017b; Shamshirsaz, 2015.

FFP = fresh-frozen plasma; ICU = intensive care unit; LOS = length of stay; NS = not stated; RBC = red blood cells.
# Chunk 6533
Consumptive coagulopathy associated with prolonged reten tion of a dead fetus is unusual today because fetal death can be easily conirmed and there are highly efective methods for labor induction. With singleton pregnancies, if the dead fetus is unde livered, most women enter spontaneous labor within 2 weeks.
# Chunk 6534
Of serious known risks, transfusion of an incompatible blood component may result in acute hemolysis. If severe, this can cause DIC, acute kidney injury, and death. Preventable errors responsible for most of such reactions frequently include mislabeling of a specimen or incorrectly transfusing a patient not slated for those products. The rate of such errors in the United States is estimated to be 1 in 14,000 units, but these events are likely underreported (Lerner, 2010). A transfusion reaction is characterized by fever, hypotension, tachycardia, dyspnea, chest or back pain, lushing, severe anxiety, and hemoglobinuria. Immediate supportive measures include stopping the transfusion, treating hypotension and hyperkalemia, provoking diuresis, and alkalinizing the urine.
# Chunk 6535
Transfusion-related acute lung injury (TAIl) is the most common cause of transfusion-related mortality. The syndrome is characterized by severe dyspnea, hypoxia, and noncardiogenic pulmonary edema that develop within 6 hours of transfusion (Peters, 2015). TRALI is estimated to complicate at least 1 in 12,000 transfusions (Carson, 2017). Although the pathogenesis is incompletely understood, injury to the pulmonary capillaries may arise from anti-human leukocyte antigen (HA) and neutrophil (HNA) antibodies in donor plasma (Lerner, 2010). A delayed form ofTRALI has been reported to begin 6 to 72 hours following transfusion (Marik, 2008). Management is supportive and may include mechanical ventilation (Chap. 47, p. 919).
# Chunk 6536
Happe SK, Yule CS, Wells EC: Outcomes in pregnancies complicated by uterine rupture. Unpublished data, 201 Hardardottir H, Borgida AF, Sanders MM, et al: Histologic myometrial ibers adherent to the placenta: impact of method of placental removal. Am ] Obstet Gynecol 174:358, 1996 Hardin MO, Ritchie ]0, Aden ]K, et al: Plasma-to-red cell ratio and mechanism of injury in massively transfused combat casualties. Mil Med 179(1):92,n2014 Harper LM, Odibo AO, Macones GA, et al: Efect of placenta previa on fetal growth. Am] Obstet GynecoIn203(4):330.e1, 2010 Hayman RG, Arulkumaran S, Steer P]: Uterine compression sutures: surgical management of postpartum hemorrhage. Obstet Gynecol 99:502, 2002 Hebert PC: Anemia and red cell transfusion in critical care. Transfusion Requirements in Critical Care Investigators and the Canadian Critical Care Trials Group. Minerva Anestesiol 65(5)293, 1999 Heller HT, Mullen M, Gordon RW, et al: Outcomes of pregnancies with a low-lying placenta diagnosed on second-trimester sonography. ] Ultrasound Med 33(4):691, 2014 Hellman LM, Pritchard ]A (eds): Placenta previa. In Williams Obstetrics, 14th ed. New York, Appleton Century Crofts, 1971 Hernandez ]S, Alexander ]M, Sarode R, et al: Calculated blood loss in severe obstetric hemorrhage and its relation to body mass index. Am ] Perinatol 29(7):557,n2012 Herrera C, Meehan R, Poddutori V, et al: Maternal deaths due to Clostridium novyi in an injection drug user. Obstet Gynecol 128:876,n2016 Hofmeyr G], Abdel-Aleem H, Abdel-Aleem A: Uterine massage for preventing postpartum haemorrhage. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 7:CD006431, 2013 Hogberg V, Rasmussen S, Irgens L: The efect of smoking and hypertensive disorders on abruptio placentae in Norway 1999-2002. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 86:304, 2007 Holst LB, Haase N, Wetterslev], et al: Lower versus higher hemoglobin threshold for transfusion in septic shock. N Engl] Med 371(15):1381, 2014 Hossain N, Paidas M]: Disseminated intravascular coagulation. Semin Perinatol 37(4):257, 2013 Howard R], Straughnn]M ]r, Huh K, et al: Pelvic umbrella pack for refractory obstetric hemorrhage secondary to posterior uterine rupture. Obstet Gynecol 100(5 Pt 2):1061, 2002 Hui C, Lili M, Libin C, et al: Changes in coagulation and hemodynamics during pregnancy: a prospective longitudinal study of 58 cases. Arch Gynecol Obstet 285(5):1231,n2012 Hung TH, Shau Y, Hsieh CC, et al: Risk factors for placenta accreta. Obstet Gynecol 93:545, 1999 Hunt BJ: Bleeding and coagulopathies in critical care. N Engl] Med 370:847, 2014 Hurd W, Miodovnik M, Hertzberg V, et al: Selective management of abruptio placentae: a prospective study. Obstet Gynecol 61 :467, 1983 Ibrahim Ml, Raafat TA, Ellaithy MI, et al: Risk of postpartum uterine synechiae following uterine compression suturing during postpartum haemorrhage. Aust N Z] Obstet Gynecol 53(1):37, 2013 Ida A, Ito K, Kubota Y, et al: Successful reduction of acute puerperal uterine inversion with the use of a Bakri postpartum balloon. Case Rep Obstet GynecoIn2015:424891,n2015 Iskender C, Topcu HO, Timur H, et al: Evaluation of risk factors in women with puerperal genital hematomas. ] Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 29(9):1435,n2016
# Chunk 6537
Gestational age: <34 weeks 133,503 (3) 13,284 (100) 34-36 weeks 313,858 (8) 2268 (7) <37 weeks 447,361 (1n1) 15,552 (35) 37-38 weeks 974,162 (25) before 39 weeks (Spong, 2011). An unintended consequence of this health-care strategy has been a rise in stillbirth rates in the United States. One concern is that the rule may be misapplied to gestations with true medical indications for early delivery (Hill, 2017; Nicholson, 2016). Spong (2016) has emphasized the need to perform necessary obstetrical interventions when indicated.
# Chunk 6538
An external tocodynamometer belted around the abdomen and connected to an electronic waist recorder allows a woman to ambulate while uterine activity is recorded. Results are transmitted via telephone daily. Women are educated concerning signs and symptoms of preterm labor, and clinicians are kept apprised of their progress. The 1985 approval of this monitor by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) prompted its widespread clinical use. Subsequently, it was proven that the use of this expensive and time-consuming system does not reduce preterm birth rates (Collaborative Home Uterine Monitoring Study Group, 1995; lams, 2002; Urquhart, 2017). Despite improvements in technology with the internet and cellular telephones, use of such monitoring is discouraged (merican College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 20 16c).
# Chunk 6539
17 -OHP-C is a synthetic progestogen, and the first and only drug approved by the FDA for prevention of recurrent preterm birth. The approval in 2011 was supported by a study by the Maternal-Fetal Medicine Units (MFNIU) Network (Meis, 2003). In this trial, 463 women with a prior preterm birth were randomly assigned to receive weekly intramuscular injections of inert oil or 17-0HP-C from 16 through 36 weeks' gestation. They reported a significantly reduced recurrence of preterm birth in 36 percent of women receiving 17-0HP-C compared with 55 percent of those given placebo.
# Chunk 6540
Caritis and colleagues (2012) examined 61 women receiving 17-0HP-C therapy and found that the hlf-life was relatively long (median 16.2 days). Pharmacokinetic parameters were ffected by maternal body habitus and varied widely between subjects. In addition, 17 -OHP-C crossed the placental barrier and was detectible in cord plasma 44 days ater the last maternal injection (Caritis, 2012). Despite this, evidence to date suggests that 17-0HP-C is safe for the fetus. No abnormalities, including abnormal genitlia, were found in a 48-month follow-up study of infants exposed in the 2003 MFMU Network trial (Northen, 2007).
# Chunk 6541
bp values are one-sided.

Reproduced with permission from Nelson, 2017.

a local compounding pharmacy provided 250-mg, single-dose From the foregoing studies, evidence to support the use of vials of 17-0HP-C in sesame oil at a cost of $25 per dose. 17-0HP-C to prevent recurrent preterm birth is problematic Nelson and colleagues (2017) recently reported their indings (Young, 2017). he mechanism of action remains unknown, from this program in a prospective study of 430 women given and the pharmacological properties have yet to be established. compounded 17-0HP-C. Use of 17-0HP-C was inefective Evidence of clinical efectiveness has yet to be replicated. A confor prevention of recurrent preterm birth at 35 weeks or less dition of the FDA approval for 17-0HP-C was that a conircompared with a historical cohort from Parkland. As shown matory multicenter, double-blind randomized controlled trial in Table 42-6, 17-0HP-C did not signiicantly reduce the be conducted with a preferred primary end point of delivery rates of recurrent preterm birth regardless of prior preterm <35 weeks. This international trial-PRO LONG-is currently birth number or sequence. Moreover, plasma concentrations of underway with scheduled completion in 2018 and with an esti17-0HP-C were not diferent at 24 weeks or 32 weeks between mated enrollment of 1707 participants (PROLONG, 2014). women delivered :;35 weeks and those delivered later. Interestingly, levels were consistent with those previously reported using castor oil as a vehicle (Caritis, 2014). Last, the gestational age interval at which preterm birth recurred did not difer after use of 17-0HP-C. A side efect of 17-0HP-C was a signifiThree randomized trials are at the center of whether progestocant increase in the rate of gestational diabetes. Taken together, gen therapy should be used in women without prior preterm 17 -0 HP -C use was inefective to prevent recurrent preterm births. hese trials, shown in Table 42-7, hinge on sonographbirth and was associated with a significant side efect. ically determined cervical length. In the irst trial, Fonseca and
# Chunk 6542
Most clinicians hospitalize women with ruptured membranes. Concerns regarding the costs oflengthy hospitalizations are usually moot, because most women enter labor within a week or less after membrane rupture. Carlan and coworkers (1993) randomly assigned 67 women with ruptured membranes ro home or hospital management. No benefitswere found for hospitalization, and maternal hospital stays were reduced by 50 percent in those sent home-14 versus 7 days. Importantly, the investigators emphasized that this study was too small to conclude that home management was safe in regard to umbilical cord prolapse.
# Chunk 6543
• Considerations with Expectant Management

Several scenarios during expectant management merit consideration. One is performance of digital cervical examination. Alexander and colleagues (2000) analyzed findings in women with PPROM expectantly managed between 24 and 32 weeks' gestation. hey compared those who had one or two digital cervical examinations with women who were not examined. Those who were examined had a rupture-to-delivery interval of 3 days compared with 5 days in those not examined. This diference did not worsen maternal or neonatal outcomes.
# Chunk 6544
To further address this issue, the MFMU Network designed a trial to study expectant management combined with placebo or with a 7 -day antibiotic regimen. Treatment included intravenous ampicillin plus erythromycin every 6 hours for 48 hours, which was followed by oral amoxicillin plus erythromycin, every 8 hours for 5 days. The women had membrane rupture between 24 and 32 weeks' gestation. Neither tocolytics nor corticosteroids were given. Antimicrobial-treated women had signiicantly fewer newborns with RDS, necrotizing enterocolitis, and composite adverse outcomes (Mercer, 1997). The latency period was also significantly longer. Specifically, 50 percent of women given an antimicrobial regimen remained undelivered after 7 days of treatment compared with only 25 percent of those given placebo. lso, a significantly greater number of treated pregnancies were undelivered at 14 and 21 days. Cervico vaginal group B streptococcal colonization did not alter these results.
# Chunk 6545
Single versus additional courses of intramuscular corticosteroids for lung maturation has been the topic of two major trials. Although both found repeated courses to be beneicial in reducing neonatal respiratory morbidity rates, the long-term consequences were much diferent. In one randomized study by Crowther and associates (2007), all women at risk for preterm birth were given a primary course of betamethasone. Women were then given serial weekly doses of 11e.4 mg of betamethasone for persistent risk or were given placebo. hese investigators found no adverse efects in the infants followed to age 2 years. Wapner and coworkers (2007) studied infants born to 495 women who were randomly assigned to receive a single corticosteroid course that contained two doses or assigned to repeated courses that were given weekly. A nonsignificant rise in the cerebral palsy rate was identified in infants exposed to repeated courses. The doubled betamethasone dose in this study was worrisome because some experimental evidence supports the view that adverse efects are dose dependent (Bruschettini, 2006). Stiles (2007) summarized these two studies as "early gain, long-term questions." We agree, and at Parkland Hospital, we follow the recommendation by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017a) for singlecourse therapy.
# Chunk 6546
Garite and coworkers (2009) randomly assigned 437 women with singletons or twins <33 weeks' gestation and with intact membranes to one rescue course of either betamethasone or dexamethasone or placebo. These women had all previously completed a single course of corticosteroids before 30 weeks' gestation and at least 14 days before the rescue course. RDS developed in 41 percent of the newborns given rescue corticosteroids compared with 62 percent of those randomized to placebo. Rates of other morbidities attributable to prematurity did not difer. In a metaanalysis, Crowther and colleagues (201e1) concluded that a single course of corticosteroids should be considered in women whose prior course was administered at least 7 days previously and who were <34 weeks' gestation. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017 a) has taken the position that a single rescue course of antenatal corticosteroids be considered in women before 34 weeks whose prior course was administered at least 7 days previously. Efects of rescue therapy beyond 34 weeks are currently unknown. At Parkland Hospital, we currently do not provide additional courses of corticosteroids beyond the initial single-course therapy.
# Chunk 6547
Some evidence supports the concept that cervical incompetence and preterm labor lie along a spectrum leading to preterm delivery. Consequently, investigators have evaluated cerclage placement after preterm labor begins to manifest clinically. Althuisius and colleagues (2003) randomly assigned 23 women with cervical incompetence before 27 weeks to bed rest, with or without emergency McDonald cerclage. Delivery delay was significantly greater in the cerclage group compared with those assigned to bed rest-54 versus 24 days, respectively. Terkildsen and coworkers (2003) studied 116 women who underwent second-trimester emergency cerclage. Nulliparity, membranes extending beyond the external cervical os, and cerclage before 22 weeks were associated with a signiicantly decreased chance of signiicant pregnancy continuation. For women facing a poor pregnancy prognosis due to cervical dilation at midgestation, it seems reasonable to ofer emergency or rescue cerclage with appropriate counseling. However, it is unclear if such interventions truly confer a beneit or merely increase the risk of membrane rupture and infection (Hawkins, 2017).
# Chunk 6548
3-Agonist drug infusion has resulted in serious and even fatal maternal side efects. Pulmonary edema is a special concern, and its contribution to morbidity is discussed in Chapter 47 (p. 917). In one early study, tocolysis was the third most common cause of acute respiratory distress and death in pregnant women during a 14-year period in Mississippi (Perry, 1998). The cause of pulmonary edema is multifactorial. isk factors include tocolytic therapy with 3-agonist drugs, multifetal gestation, concurrent corticosteroid therapy, tocolysis for more than 24 hours, and intravenous infusion of large volumes of crystalloid. 3-Agonist agents cause retention of sodium and water, and with time-usually 24 to 48 hours-these can cause volume overload (Hankins, 1988). The drugs have been implicated in increased capillary permeability, cardiac rhythm disturbances, and myocardial ischemia.
# Chunk 6549
Only two randomized studies have evaluated tocolysis with magnesium sulfate. Cotton and colleagues (1984) compared magnesium sulfate, ritodrine, and placebo in 54 women with preterm labor. They identified few diferences in outcomes. Cox and coworkers (1990) randomly assigned 156 women to receive magnesium sulfate or infusions of normal saline. Magnesium-treated women and their neonates had identical outcomes compared with those given placebo. Because of these findings, this method of tocolysis was abandoned at Parkland Hospital. Similarly, Crowther and associates (2014) reviewed magnesium sulfate as a tocolytic agent and concluded it was inefective and potentially harmful. Last, the FDA (2013) has warned against prolonged use of magnesium sulfate given to arrest preterm labor because of bone thinning and fractures in fetuses exposed for more than 5 to 7 days. This was attributed to low calcium levels in the fetus.
# Chunk 6550
The international definition of prolonged pregnancy, endorsed by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2016b,d) is one that exceeds 42°/7 weeks, namely, 294 days or more from the first day of the last menstrual period. Importantly, this is 42 "completed weeks," as pregnancies between 41 weeks 1 day and 41 weeks 6 days, although in the 42nd week, do not complete 42 weeks until the seventh day has elapsed. The method that we use widely in this book is to divide the 42nd week into 7 days, that is, 42°/7 through 426' weeks.
# Chunk 6551
To identiy potential predisposing factors for postterm pregnancy, Olesen and associates (2006) analyzed various characteristics in the Danish Birth Cohort. Only prepregnancy body mass index (BMI) :25 and nulliparity were signiicantly associated with prolonged pregnancy. Mission (2015) and Arrowsmith (2011) and their coworkers also reported similar associations. In nulliparas, those whose cervical length at midpregnancy is longer, that is, in the third or fourth quartile, are twice as likely to deliver after 42 weeks (van der Ven, 2016).
# Chunk 6552
Table 43-1, the major cause of death in these studies includes gestational hypertension, prolonged labor with cephalopelvic disproportion, birth injuries, and hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy. Similar outcomes were reported by Olesen and colleagues (2003) in 78,022 women with postterm pregnancies delivered before routine labor induction was adopted in Denmark. Moster and associates (2010) found higher rates of cerebral palsy in postterm births, and Yang and coworkers (2010) reported lower intelligence quotient (IQ) scores at age 6.5 years in children born :42 weeks' gestation. Conversely, autism was not associated with postterm birth (Gardener, 2011).
# Chunk 6553
Alexander and colleagues (2000a) reviewed 56,317 consecutive singleton pregnancies delivered at :40 weeks between 1988 and 1998 at Parkland Hospital. Labor was induced in 35 percent of pregnancies completing 42 weeks. he rate of cesarean delivery for dystocia and fetal distress was signiicantly greater at 42 weeks compared with earlier deliveries. More newborns of postterm pregnancies were admitted to intensive care units. Importantly, the incidence of neonatal seizures and deaths was doubled at 42 weeks. Smith (2001) has challenged analyses such as these because the population at risk for perinatal mortality in a given week consists ofall ongoing pregnancies rather than just the births in a givenweek. He calculated perinatal mortality rates calculated using only births in a given week of gestation from 37 to 43 completedweeks comparedwith the cumulative probabilitythe perinatal index-of death when all ongoing pregnancies are included in the denominator. Using this computation, delivery at 38 weeks had the lowest risk index for perinatal death.
# Chunk 6554
FIGURE 43-3 Mean daily fetal growth during previous week of gestation. (Redrawn from Hendricks CH: Patterns of fetal and placental growth: the second half of pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 24:357, 1964.) rate of placental apoptosis-programmed cell death-is significantly greater at 41 to 42 completed weeks compared with that at 36 to 39 weeks (Smith, 1999). Several proapoptotic genes such as kisspeptin are upregulated in postterm placental explants compared with the same genes in term placental explants (Torricelli, 2012). The clinical significance of such apoptosis is currently unclear.
# Chunk 6555
Although some intervention is indicated for prolonged pregnancies, the method and timing of this are not unanimous. he decision focuses on whether labor induction is warranted or if expectant management with fetal surveillance is best. In a survey done more than 10 years ago, Cleary-Goldman and associates (2006) reported that 73 percent of members of the American College ofObstetricians and Gynecologists routinely induced women at 41 weeks. Most of the remainder performed twice weekly fetal testing until 42 weeks.
# Chunk 6556
Although all obstetricians know what an "unfavorable cervix" is, the term unfortunately defies precise objective deinition. Thus, investigators have used difering criteria for studies of prolonged pregnancies. Harris and coworkers (1983) defin�d an unfavorable cervix by a Bishop score <7 and reported thiS m 92 percent of women at 42 weeks (Chap. 26, p. 505). Hannah and colleagues (1992) found that 40 percent of 3407 women with a 41-week pregnancy had an "undilated cervix." In a study of 800 women undergoing induction for postterm pregnancy at Parkland Hospital, Alexander and associates (2000b) reported that women in whom there was no cervical dilation had a twofold higher cesarean delivery rate fore" dystocia. " Yang and coworkers (2004) found that cervical length 53 em measured with transvaginal sonography was predictive of successful induction. In a similar study, Vankayalapati and associates (2008) found that cervical length 525 mm was predictive of spontaneous labor or successful induction.
# Chunk 6557
FIGURE 43-6 Algorithm for management of postterm pregnancy. (Summarized from American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,o201o6d.) complications to be normal. hus, no interventions are practiced solely based on fetal age until 42 completed weeks. With complications such as hypertension, decreased fetal movement, or oligohydramnios, labor induction is carried out. It is our view that large, randomized trials should be performed before otherwise uncomplicated 41-week gestations are routinely considered pathologically prolonged. In women in whom a certain gestational age is known, labor is induced at the completion of 42 weeks. Almost 90 percent of such women are induced successfully or enter labor within 2 days of induction. For those who do not deliver with the first induction, a second induction is performed within 3 days. lmost all women are delivered using this management plan, but in the unusual few who are not delivered, management decisions involve a third-or even more-induction versus cesarean delivery. Women classiied as having uncertain postterm pregnancies are managed with weekly nonstress fetal testing and assessment ofamnionic luid volume. Women with an AFI ;5 cm or with reports ofdiminished fetal movement undergo labor induction.
# Chunk 6558
Fetal growth has been divided into three phases. The initial phase of hyperplasia occurs in the irst 16 weeks and is characterized by a rapid increase in cell number. The second phase, which extends up to 32 weeks' gestation, includes both cellular hyperplasia and hypertrophy. After 32 weeks, fetal mass accrues by cellular hypertrophy, and it is during this phase that most fetal fat and glycogen are accumulated. The corresponding c 5..,
# Chunk 6559
Fetal-Growth Disorders 100 -Morbidity 175 90 -Mortality) 150U) 80D �S s· C 70 > 0 100g0 60 30 0-E �� 75 50 -30 � u 0S 20 0E 259J) 10 >1010987654321<1 Birthweightpercentile FIGURE 44-3 Relationship between birthweight percentile and perinatal mortality and morbidity rates in 1560 small-for-gestationalage fetuses. A progressive increase in both mortality and morbidity rates is observed as birthweight percentile decreases.. (Data from Manning, 1995.) • Symmetrical versus Asymmetrical Growth Restriction Campbell and Thoms (1977) described the use of the sonographically determined head-to-abdomen circumerence ratio (HCIA) to diferentiate growth-restricted fetuses. Those who were symmetrical were proportionately small, and those who were asymmetrical had disproportionately lagging abdominal growth compared with head growth. The onset or etiology of a particular fetal insult is hypothetically linked to either type of growth restriction. In the instance ofsymmetricalgrowth restriction, an early insult could result in a relative decrease in cell number and size. For example, early global insults such as those from chemical exposure, viral infection, or cellular maldevelopment with aneuploidy may cause a proportionate reduction of both head and body size. Asymmetricalgrowth restriction might follow a later pregnancy insult such as placental insuiciency from hypertension. In this variation, resultant diminished glucose transfer and hepatic storage would primarily afect cell size and not number. Thereby, fetal abdominal circumferencewhich relects liver size-would be reduced. Brain Sparing Such somatic growth restriction is proposed to result from preferential shunting of oxygen and nutrients to the brain. This allows normal brain and head growth, that is-brain sparing. Accordingly, the ratio of brain weight to liver weight during the last 12 weeks-usually about 3 to I-may be increased to 5 to 1 or more in severely growth-restricted infants. Because of brainsparing efects, asymmetrical fetuses were thought to be preferentially protected from the full efects ofgrowth restriction. Considerable evidence has since accrued that fetal growth patterns are much more complex. For example, fetuses with 847 .�..,40
# Chunk 6560
Ifnoindications for immediate delivery, Ifnoindications for immediate delivery: begin antepartum fetal surveillance: -Antepartum fetal surveillance-BPP, NST, etc. -Regular fetal testing -Umbilical artery Doppler velocimetry weekly -Weekly umbilical artery Doppler velocimetry -Amnionic fluid evaluation weekly -Weekly evaluation of amnionic fluid surveillance until delivery 38 weeks, then deliver delivery 34 weeks, then begin
# Chunk 6561
One management algorithm is shown in Figure 44-9. In pregnancies with suspected fetal-growth restriction, antepartum fetal surveillance includes periodic Doppler velocimetry of the umbilical arteries in addition to more frequent fetal testing. At Parkland Hospital, for women whose fetus measures ;3rd percentile and has reached a viable age, we encourage hospitalization on our High-Risk Pregnancy Unit. Daily fetal heart rate tracings, weekly Doppler velocimetry, and sonographic assessment of fetal growth every 3 to 4 weeks are initiated. Other modalities of Doppler velocimetry, such as middle cerebral arteries or ductus venosus assessment, are considered experimental. he American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2015) recommends that antenatal corticosteroids for pulmonary maturation be given to pregnancies complicated by fetal-growth restriction and at risk for birth before 34 weeks' gestation.
# Chunk 6562
he timing of delivery is crucial, and the risks of fetal death versus the hazards of preterm birth must be considered. Several multicenter studies address these problems, but unfortunately, none have elucidated the optimal timing of delivery. For the preterm fetus, the only randomized trial of delivery timing is the Growth Restriction Intervention Trial (GRIT) (hornton, 2004). This trial involved 548 women between 24 and 36 weeks' gestation with clinical uncertainty regarding delivery timing. Women were randomly assigned to immediate delivery or to delayed delivery until the situation worsened. he primary outcome was perinatal death or disability after reaching age 2 years. Mortality rates did not difer through 2 years of age. Moreover, children aged 6 to 13 years did not show clinically signiicant diferences between the two groups (Walker, 2011).
# Chunk 6563
In the Trial of Randomized Umbilical and Fetal Flow in Europe (TRUFFLE), ductus venosus Doppler evaluation was compared with fetal heart rate monitoring. There were 310 pregnancies between 26 and 32 weeks' gestation with fetuses displaying an abdominal circumference < 10th percentile and an umbilical artery pulsatility index >95th percentile (Lees, 2015). Delivery timing was determined by the results of three difering antenatal fetal assessment arms that were: short-term fetal heart rate variability, early ductus venosus Doppler velocimetry changes, or late ductus changes. he proportion of children with neuroimpairment at 2 years of age was not diferent among the groups. Of note, only 32 percent of the newborns overall were delivered according to this randomization. Safety net criteria and other maternal/fetal indications prompted these protocol deviations (Visser, 2016). In a post-hoc analysis, these authors concluded that before 32 weeks, delaying delivery until ductus venosus Doppler or fetal heat rate abnormalities occur is likely safe and possibly beneits long-term outcome (Ganzevoort, 2017).
# Chunk 6564
Management of the Near-Term Fetus

As shown in Figure 44-9, delivery of a suspected growthrestricted fetus with normal umbilical artery Doppler velocimetry, normal amnionic luid volume, and reassuring fetal heart rate testing can likely be deferred until 38 weeks' gestation. Said another way, uncertainty regarding the diagnosis should preclude intervention until fetal lung maturity is assured. Expectant management can be guided using antepartum fetal surveillance techniques described in Chapter 17. Most clinicians, however, recommend delivery at 34 weeks or beyond if there is clinically signiicant oligohydramnios. Consensus statements by the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (Spong, 2011) and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017a) are similar. These recommend delivery between 34 and 37 weeks when there are comorbid conditions such as oligohydramnios. With a reassuring fetal heart rate pattern, vaginal delivery is planned. Notably, some of these fetuses do not tolerate labor.
# Chunk 6565
As long as interval fetal growth and fetal surveillance test results are normal, pregnancy is allowed to continue until fetal lung maturity is reached (see Fig. 44-9). Reassessment of fetal growth is typically made no sooner than 3 to 4 weeks. Weekly assessment of umbilical artery Doppler velocimetry and amnionic fluid volume is combined with periodic nons tress testing, although the optimal frequency has not been determined. As mentioned, we hospitalize these women in our High-Risk Pregnancy Unit and monitor their fetuses daily. If interval growth, amnionic luid volume, and umbilical artery Doppler velocimetry are normal, then the mother is discharged home and seen intermittently for outpatient surveillance.
# Chunk 6566
A. At 0 to 4 days postfertilization, an early conceptus may divide into two. Division at this early stage creates two chorions and two amnions (dichorionic, diamnionic). Placentas may be separate or fused. B. Division between 4 to 8 days leads to formation of a blastocyst with two separate embryoblasts (inner cell masses). Each embryoblast will form its own amnion within a shared chorion (monochorionic, diamnionic). C. Between 8 and 12 days, the amnion and amnionic cavity form above the germinal disc. Embryonic division leads to two embryos with a shared amnion and shared chorion (monochorionic, monoamnionic). D. Difering theories explain conjoined twin development. One describes an incomplete splitting of one embryo into two. The other describes fusion of a portion of one embryo from a monozygotic pair onto the other.
# Chunk 6567
No biochemical test reliably identifies multifetal gestations.

Serum and urine levels of 3-hCG and maternal serum levels of alpha-fetoprotein (MSAFP) are generally higher with twins compared with those in singletons. However, levels may vary considerably and overlap with those of singletons.
# Chunk 6568
Organizations that include the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2016), Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2013), and North American Fetal herapy Network (Emery, 2015) recommend sonography surveillance of pregnancies at risk for TTTS. To aid earlier identification of amnionic luid abnormalities and other complications of monochorionic twins, these examinations begin at approximately 16 weeks' gestation, and subsequent studies are considered every 2 weeks. Once identiied, TTTS is typically classiied by the Quintero (1999) staging system (Fig. 45-21):
# Chunk 6569
With prenatal management of multifetal pregnancy, primary goals aim to prevent or interdict complications as they develop. A major imperative is to prevent preterm delivery of markedly immature neonates. At Parkland Hospital, women with multifetal gestations are seen every 2 weeks beginning at 22 weeks' gestation. A digital cervical examination is performed at each visit to screen for cervical shortening or dilation. Identification of other unique complications discussed earlier may also lead to interventions including admission or early delivery.
# Chunk 6570
long with more frequent prenatal VISItS, the maternal diet should provide additional requirements for calories, protein, minerals, vitamins, and essential fatty acids. he Institute of Medicine (2009) recommends a 37-to 54-lb weight gain for women with twins and a normal BMI. In their review, Goodnight and Newman (2009) endorse supplementation of micronutrients such as calcium, magnesium, zinc, and vitamins C, D, and E. his is based on upper intake levels from the Food and Nutrition Board of the Institute of Medicine. he daily recommended augmented caloric intake for women with twins is 40 to 45 kcal/kg/d. Diets contain 20 percent protein, 40 percent carbohydrate, and 40 percent fat divided into three meals and three snacks daily.
# Chunk 6571
A vaginal pessary that encircles and theoretically compresses the cervix, alters the inclination of the cervical canal, and relieves direct pressure on the internal cervical os has been proposed as an alternative to cerclage. One of the most popular is the silicone Arabin pessary. In a study of its use in women with a short cervix between 18 and 22 weeks' gestation, a subgroup analysis of 23 women with twins showed a signiicant reduction in the delivery rate before 32 weeks compared with the rate in 23 control pregnancies (Arabin, 2003). In another randomized trial, women treated with a cervical pessary had signiicantly fewer births before 34 weeks (Goya, 2016).
# Chunk 6572
The frequency of preterm premature rupture of membranes (PPROM) rises with increasing plurality. In a populationbased study of more than 290,000 live births, the proportion of preterm birth complicated by premature rupture was 13.2 percent in singletons (Pakrashi, 2013). This rate compared with rates of 17, 20, 20, and 100 percent in twins, triplets, quadruplets, and even higher-order multiples, respectively. Multifetal gestations with PPROM are managed expectantly similar to singleton pregnancies (Chap. 42, p. 820). Ehsanipoor and colleagues (2012) compared outcomes of 41 twin and 82 singleton pregnancies, both with ruptuted membranes between 24 and 32 weeks. They found the median number of days to subsequent delivery was overall shorter for twins-3.6 days compared with 6.2 days for singletons. This latency diference was significant in pregnancies after 30 weeks-l.7 days and 6.9 days. Importantly, latency beyond 7 days approximated 40 percent in both groups.
# Chunk 6573
To add insight into the clinical complexities just discussed, a randomized trial was designed by the Twin Birth Study Collaborative Group from Canada. he study results described by Barrett and associates (2013) included 2804 women carrying a presumed diamnionic twin pregnancy with the irst fetus presenting cephalic. Women were randomly assigned between 32 and 38 weeks' gestation to planned cesarean or vaginal delivery. The time from randomization to delivery-12.4 versus 13.3 days, the mean gestational age at delivery-36.7 versus 36.8 weeks, and use of regional analgesia-92 versus 87 percent, were similar in both groups. Salient maternal and perinatal outcomes are shown in Table 45-3. No significant diferences in outcomes were noted between the two groups of women. Although risks to mother or fetuses with planned vaginal delivery in these circumstances were not increased, Greene (2013) posited that this trial would have only modest efects on the cesarean delivery rate of women with twins.
# Chunk 6574
In the past, the safest interval between delivery of the irst and second twins was frequently cited as <30 minutes. Rayburn and colleagues (1984) and others have shown that if continuous fetal monitoring is used, a good outcome is usually achieved even if this interval is longer. A direct correlation between worsening umbilical cord blood gas values and increasing time between delivery of irst and second twins has been shown (Leung, 2002; Stein, 2008). From review of 239 twin gestations, Gourheux and associates (2007) determined that mean umbilical arterial pH was signiicantly lower after the delivery interval exceeded 15 minutes. In a study of more than 175,000 twin pairs, Cheng and colleagues (2017) reached similar conclusions for maternal and perinatal morbidity.
# Chunk 6575
If the occiput or breech presents immediately over the pelvic inlet, but is not ixed in the birth canal, the presenting part can often be guided into the pelvis by one hand in the vagina, while a second hand on the uterine fundus exerts moderate pressure caudally. A presenting shoulder may be gently converted into a cephalic presentation. Alternatively, with abdominal manipulation, an assistant can guide the presenting part into the pelvis. Sonography can aid guidance and allow heart rate monitoring. Intrapartum external version of a noncephalic second twin has also been described.
# Chunk 6576
Prerequisites to selective termination include a precise diagnosis for the anomalous fetus and absolute certainty of fetal location. Unless a special procedure such as umbilical cord interruption is used, selective termination should be performed only in multichorionic multifetal gestations to avoid damaging the surviving fetuses (Lewi, 2006). Roman and coworkers (2010) compared 40 cases of bipolar umbilical cord coagulation with 20 cases of radiofrequency ablation for treatment of complicated monochorionic multifetal gestations at midpregnancy. hey found similar survival rates of 87 and 88 percent, and a median gestational age > 36 weeks at delivery in both. Prefumo and colleagues (2013) reported their preliminary experience with microwave ablation of the umbilical cord for selective termination in two monochorionic twin pregnancies. One pregnancy aborted within 7 days, and the other resulted in a term singleton delivered at 39 weeks' gestation.
# Chunk 6577
FIGURE 46-3 A 37-year-old with intrapartum eclampsia at term.

renchymal hematoma (H) with intraventricular extension (arrow heads). The midline (arrow) is shifted to the right due to mass effect from the hematoma. (Reproduced with permission from Kho KA:
# Chunk 6578
hese can be given intravenously or taken orally. Intravenous contrast agents are considered category B by the FDA. The types of intravenous contrast employed for imaging today are iodinated and low osmolality, thus, they cross the placenta to the fetus. With water-soluble iodinated contrast, no cases of neonatal hypothyroidism or other adverse efects have been documented (American College of Radiology, 2015). Oral contrast preparations, typically containing iodine or barium, have minimal systemic absorption and are unlikely to afect the fetus.
# Chunk 6579
Boyd CA, Benarroch-Gampel J, Kilic G, et al: Pancreatic neoplasms in pregnancy: diagnosis, complications, and management. J Gastrointest Surg 16(5):1064,t2012 Brenner OJ, Hall JH, Phil 0: Computed tomography-an increasing source of radiation exposure. N Engl J Med 357:2277, 2007 Brent L: Carcinogenic risks of prenatal ionizing radiation. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med 19(3):203,t2014 Brent L: Developmental and reproductive risks of radiological procedures utilizing ionizing radiation during pregnancy. Proceedings No. 21 in Radiation Protection in Medicine: Contemporary Issues. Proceedings of the ThirtyFifth Annual Meeting of the National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements. Arlington, VA, April 7-8, 1999a Brent L: Saving lives and changing family histories: appropriate counseling of pregnant women and men and women of reproductive age, concerning risk of diagnostic radiation exposure during and before pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 200(1):4, 2009 Brent L: Utilization of developmental basic science principles in the evaluation of reproductive risks from pre-and postconception environmental radiation exposures. Teratology 59: 182, 1999b Briggs GG, Freeman RK: Drugs in Pregnancy and Lactation, 10th ed. Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2015 Brown AM, Cronin CG, NiMhuircheartaigh J, et al: Evaluation of imaging quality of pulmonary 64-vlDCT angiography in pregnancy and puerperium. AJR An1 J Roentgenol 202(1):60, 2014 Brown CE, Stettler RW, Twickler 0, et al: Puerperal septic pelvic thrombophlebitis: incidence and response to heparin therapy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 181:143, 1999 Bunyavejchevin 5, Phupong V: Laparoscopic surgery for presumed benign ovarian tumor during pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 1:CD005459, 2013 Caire JT, Ramus RM, Magee KP, et al: MRI of fetal genitourinary anomalies. AJR Am J Roentgenol 181:1381,t2003 Chan WS, Ray JG, Murray 5, et al: Suspected pulmonary embolism in pregnancy. Arch Intern Med 152: 1170, 2002 Chew 5, Ahmadi A, Goh PS, et al: The efects of 1.5T magnetic resonance imaging on early murine in-vitro embryo development. J Magn Reson Imaging 13:417, 2001 Choi JS, Han JY, Ahn HK, et al: Fetal and neonatal outcomes in irst-trimester pregnant women exposed to abdominal or lumbar radiodiagnostic procedures without administration of radionucleotides. Intern Med J 43(5):513, 2012 Clements H, Duncan KR, Fielding K, et al: Infants exposed to MRI in utero have a normal paediatric assessment at 9 months of age. Br J Radiol 73 (866):190,t2000 Committee on Biological Efects of Ionizing Radiation: Other somatic and fetal efects. In BEIR V: Efects of Exposure to Low Levels ofIonizing Radiation. Washington, National Academy Press, 1990 Corneille MG, Gallup TM, Bening T, et al: he use of laparoscopic surgery in pregnancy: evaluation of safety and eicacy. Am J Surg 200:363,t2010 Cox TC, Huntington CR, Blair LJ, et al: Laparoscopic appendectomy and cholecystectomy versus open: a study in 1999 pregnant patients. Surg Endosc 30(2):593,t2016 Czeizel E, Pataki T, Rockenbauer M: Reproductive outcome ater exposure to surgery under anesthesia during pregnany. Arch Gynecol Obstet 261: 193, 1998 Daykan Y, Klein Z, Bugin R, et al: Ovarian torsion during pregnancy-perinatal and delivery outcome after surgical treatment. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214:5110,t2016 Dekaban AS: Abnormalities in children exposed to x-irradiation during various stages of gestation: tentative timetable of radiation injury to the human fetus. J Nucl Med 9:471, 1968 De Santis M, Straface G, Cavaliere AF, et al: Gadolinium periconceptional exposure: pregnancy and neonatal outcome. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 86:99,t2007
# Chunk 6580
Furey A, Bailey M, Pedrosa I: Magnetic resonance imaging of acute abdominal and pelvic pain in pregnancy. Top Magn Reson Imaging 23(4):225,t2014 Gazmararian JA, Petersen R, Jamieson OJ, et al: Hospitalizations during preg nancy among managed care enrollees. Obstet Gynecol 100:94, 2002 Gernsheimer T, .McCrae R: Immune thrombocytopenic purpura in pregnancy. Curr Opin Hematol 14:574,t2007
# Chunk 6581
Kramer CM: Role of cardiac MR imaging in cardiomyopathies. J Nucl Med 56 SuppIt4):39S, 2015 Kuo e, Jamieson DJ, McPheeters ML, et al: Injury hospitalizations of pregnant women in the United States, 2002. Am J Obstet Gynecoltl96:t161, 2007 Laifer-Narin S, Budorick NE, Simpson LL, et al: Fetal magnetic resonance imaging: a review. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol 19: 151, 2007 Lazarus E, Mayo-Smith W, Mainiero MB, et al: CT in the evaluation of nontraumatic abdominal pain in pregnant women. Radiology 244:784,t2007 Leung AN, Bull TM, Jaeschke R, et al: American Thoracic Sociery documents: an oicial American horacic Sociery/Sociery of Thoracic Radiology Clinical Practice Guidelines-evaluation of suspected pulmonary embolism in pregnancy. Radiology 262(2):635,t20t12 Levine LD, Schulkin J, Mercer BM, et al: Role of the hospital and maternal fetal medicine physician in obstetrical inpatient care. Am J Perinatol 33(2):123,t2016 Magin L, Le JK, Klintsova A, et al: Biological efects of long duration, highfield (4T) MRI on growth and development in the mouse. J Magn Res Imaging 12(1):t140,t2000 Mala T, Harsem NK, Rostad S, et al: Perforation of the pregnant uterus during laparoscopy for suspected internal herniation after gastric bypass. Case Rep Obstet Gynecol 20t181, 2014 Matzon JL, Lutsky KF, Ricci EK, et al: Considerations in the radiologic evaluation of the pregnant orthopaedic patient. J Am Acad Orthop Surg 23(8):485, 20t15 Mazonakis M, Damilakis J, Varveris H, et al: A method of estimating fetal dose during brain radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Bioi Phys 44:455, 1999 Mazonakis M, Varveris H, Damilakis J, et al: Radiation dose to conceptus resulting from tangentil breast irradiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Bioi Phys 55:386, 2003 Mazze RI, Kallen B: Reproductive ourcome after anesthesia and operation during pregnancy: a registry study of 5405 cases. Am J Obstet Gynecol 161:1t178, 1989 Miller MA, Mazzaglia PJ, Larson L, et al: Laparoscopic adrenalectomy for phaeochromocytoma in a twin gestation. J Obstet Gynaecol 32(2): 186, 2012 Moore HB, Juarez-Colunga E, Bronsert M, et al: Efect of pregnancy on adverse outcomes after general surgery. JAMA Surg 150(7):637,t2015 Mountford PJ: Risk assessment of the nuclear medicine patient. Br J Radiol 100:671, 199 Mullins JK, Semins MJ, Hayams ES, et al: Half Fourier single-shot turbo-echo magnetic resonance urography for the evaluation of suspected renal colic in pregnancy. Urology 79(6):1252,t20t12 National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements: Medical X-ray, electron beam and gamma-ray protection for energies up to 50 MeV. Report No. 102, Bethesda, 1989 National Research Council: Health efects of exposure to low levels of ionizing radiation BEIR V. Committee on the Biological Efects of Ionizing Radiations. Board on Radiation Efects Research Commission on Life Sciences. Washington, National Academy Press, 1990 National Research Council: Health risks from exposure to low levels of ionizing radiation BEIR VII Phase 2. Committee to assess health risks from exposure to low levels of ionizing radiation. Board on Radiation Efects Research Division on Earth and Life Studies. Washington, National Academies Press, 2006 Nelson DB, Stewart RD, Matulevicius SA, et al: he efects of maternal position and habitus on maternal cardiovascular parameters as measured by cardiac magnetic resonance. Am J PerinatoIt32(14):t1318, 2015 Newman EA, Newman LA: Lymphatic mapping techniques and sentinel lymph node biopsy in breast cancer. Surg Clin North Am 87:353, 2007 Nuyttens J], Prado L, Jenrette JM, et al: Fetal dose during radiotherapy: clinical implementation and review of the literature. Cancer Radiother 6:352, 2002 Oh Y, RobertS H, Schabel Me, et al: Gadolinium chelate contrast material in pregnancy: fetal biodistribution in the nonhuman primate. Radiology 276(1):t110,t2015 O'Rourke N, Kodali BS: Laparoscopic surgery during pregnancy. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 19:254, 2006 Otake M, Yoshimaru H, Schull WJ: Severe mental retardation among the prenatally exposed survivors of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki: a comparison of the old and new dosimetry systems. Radiation Efects Research Foundation, Technical Report No. 16-8 , 198 Patenaude Y, Pugash 0, Lim K, el al: Sociery of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada. he use of magnetic resonance imaging in the obstetric patient. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 36(4):349, 2014 Pearl JP, Price RR, Tonkin E, et al: SAGES guidelines for the use of laparoscopy during pregnancy. Surg Endosc 31t(10):3767,t20t1 Pedrosa I, Lafornara M, Pandharipande PV, et al: Pregnant patients suspected of having acute appendicitis: efect of MR imaging on negative laparotomy rate and appendiceal rate. Radiology 250(3):749, 2009
# Chunk 6582
Although the sepsis syndrome in obstetrics may be caused by several pathogens, most cases represent a small group. For example, pyelonephritis complicating pregnancy caused by Escherichia coli and Klebsiela species commonly is associated with bacteremia and sepsis syndrome (Cunningham, 1987; Snyder, 2013). And although pelvic infections are usually polymicrobial, bacteria that cause severe sepsis syndrome are frequently endotoxin-producing Enterobacteriaceae, most commonly E coli (Eschenbach, 2015). Other pelvic pathogens are aerobic and anaerobic streptococci, Bacteroides species, and Clostridium species. Some strains of group A 3-hemolytic ) SIRS-fever, tachycardia, tachypnea, leukocytosis, leukopenia t::,
# Chunk 6583
Broad-spectrum antimicrobials are chosen empirically based on the probable source of infection. They are given promptly in maximal doses after appropriate cultures are taken of blood, urine, or exudates not contaminated by normal flora. In severe sepsis, appropriate empirical coverage results in better survival rates (Barochia, 2010; MacArthur, 2004). In obstetrics acute pyelonephritis is usually caused by Enterobacteriaceae, as discussed in Chapter 53 (p. 1028). For pelvic infections, empirical coverage with regimens such as ampicillin plus gentamicin plus clindamycin generally suices (Chap. 37, p. 668). Associated incisional and other soft-tissue infections are increasingly likely to be caused by methicillin-resistant S aureus, thus vancomycin therapy may be added (Klevens, 2007; Rotas, 2007). With a septic abortion, a Gram-stained smear may be helpful in identiying Clostridium species or group A streptococcal organisms. his is also true for deep fascial infections.
# Chunk 6584
Puerperal Infections. Most cases of puerperal pelvic sepsis are clinically manifested in the first several days postpartum, and
# Chunk 6585
First, massive uterine myonecrosis can be caused by group A be excluded-usually by CT scanning-then in our experiences, 3-hemolytic streptococcal or clostridial infections (Soper, 2011; as well as in others, hysterectomy may not be necessary (Soper, Sugiyama, 2010; Yamada, 2010). hose with early-onset disease 2011). Still, these infections are highly lethal (Yamada, 2010). present with findings listed in Table 47-6. The mortality rate in As a second exception, necrotizing fasciitis of the episiotomy these women with gangrene s shown in Figure 47-7 is high, and site or of the abdominal surgical incision is a surgical emergency. prompt hysterectomy may be lifesaving (Mabie, 1997; Nathan, As described by Gallup and coworkers (2002), these infections 1993). Group A 3-hemolytic streptococci and clostridial coloare aggressively managed as discussed in Chapter 37 (p. 671). nization or infection also cause toxic-shock syndrome without Sinha and colleagues (2015) described a woman with Fournier obvious gangrene (Mason, 2012). These are due to either strepgangrene who required radical debridement and colostomy. tococcal toxic-shock-syndrome-like toxin or clostridial exotoxin As a inal exception, persistent or aggressive postpartum that evolved from 5 aureus (Chap. 37, p. 675). In many of these uterine infection with necrosis, uterine incision dehiscence, and severe peritonitis may lead to sepsis (Chap. 37, p. 672). In this regard, women following cesarean delivery who are suspected of having peritonitis should be carefully evaluated for uterine incisional necrosis or bowel perforation. These infections tend to be less aggressive than necrotizing group A streptococcal infections and develop later postpartum. CT imaging of the abdomen and pelvis can frequently disclose these. If either is suspected, then prompt surgical exploration is indicated. With incisional necrosis, hysterectomy is usually necessary (Fig. 37-5, p. 673). Finally, peritonitis and sepsis much less commonly may result from a ruptured parametrial, intraabdominal, or ovarian abscess (Chap. 37, p. 671).
# Chunk 6586
exposure is high aFor nonpregnant women, doxycycline, 100 mg orally twice daily for 7 days, can be given instead. bpregnancy category C.
# Chunk 6587
Following emergency resuscitation, evaluation is continued for fractures, internal injuries, bleeding sites, and placental, uterine, and fetal trauma. Radiography is not proscribed, but special attention is given each indication. Not surprisingly, one report observed that pregnant trauma victims had less radiation exposure than nonpregnant controls (Ylagan, 2008). Some advocate screening abdominal sonography followed by CT scanning for positive sonographic findings (Brown, 2005; Saphier, 2014). Procedures used include the FAST scan ocused 4ssessment with �onography or t.rauma. his examination is ars-minute, four-to six-view imaging study that evaluates perihepatic, perisplenic, pelvic, and pericardial views (MendezFigueroa, 2016). In general, if fluid is seen in any of these views, then the volume is >500 mL (Fig. 47-11). Importantly, this amount has not been corroborated for pregnancy. In some cases, open peritoneal lavage may be informative (Tsuei, 2006).
# Chunk 6588
Because fetal well-being may relect the status of the mother, fetal monitoring is another "vital sign" that helps evaluate the extent of maternal injuries. Even if the mother is stable, electronic monitoring may suggest placental abruption. In a study by Pearlman and coworkers (1990), no woman had an abruption if uterine contractions were less often than every 10 minutes within the 4 hours after trauma was sustained. lmost 20 percent ofwomen who had contractions more frequently than every 10 minutes in the irst 4 hours had an associated placental abruption. In these cases, abnormal tracings were common and included fetal tachycardia and late decelerations. Conversely, no adverse outcomes were reported in women who had normal monitor tracings (Connolly, 1997). Importantly, if tocolytics are used for these contractions, they may obfuscate findings, and we do not recommend them.
# Chunk 6589
Filbin MR, Ring DC, Wessels MR, et al: Case 2-2009: a 25-year-old man with pain and swelling of the right hand and hypotension. N Engl ] Med 360:281, 2009
# Chunk 6590
Herridge MS, Cheung M, Tansey CM, et al: One-year outcomes in survivors of the acute respiratory distress syndrome. N Engl J Med 348:683, 2003 Herridge MS, Tansey CM, Matte A, et al: Functional disability 5 years after acute respiratory distress syndrome. N Engl J Med 364(14): 1293,t2011 Higgins SO, Garite TJ: Late abruptio placentae in trauma patients: implications for monitoring. Obstet Gynecol 63: lOS, 1984
# Chunk 6591
Data from Kim, 2016; Lisonkova, 2017; Ovesen, 20n1n1; Schummers, 2015; Sebire, 2001n.

normal-weight women. LDL-III predominance is a hallmark of ectopic liver fat accumulation that is typical of NAFLD. At Parkland Hospital, we are now frequently encountering obese gravidas who have NAFLD and evidence of steatohepatitis manifest by elevated serum hepatic transaminase levels. In rare cases, liver biopsy is necessary to exclude other causes.
# Chunk 6592
Compared with normal-weight women, obese women are twice as likely to undergo labor induction (Denison, 2008). Unfortunately, obese women are also twice as likely to experience a failed induction, and this risk rises with greater degrees of obesity (Wolfe, 2011). In a retrospective analysis of 470 nul liparous women with a BMI >30 kg/mrand an unfavorable cervix, those who underwent labor induction at 39 weeks' gestation were compared with those expectantly managed beyond 39 weeks (Wolfe, 2014). Two thirds of pregnancies expectantly managed either labored or had spontaneously ruptured membranes. Compared with this cohort, those who underwent planned labor induction had an elevated cesarean delivery rate-26 versus 40 percent. Moreover, their newborns were more frequently admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit-6 versus 18 percent. Conversely, Lee and associates (2016) reviewed statistics from 74,725 deliveries in obese women and reported that elective induction at 37 to 39 weeks in nulliparas and especially multiparas was actually associated with a lower cesarean delivery rate. hese conflicting results highlight the diiculties faced by obstetrical providers as they contemplate the seemingly competing interests of the fetus and the obese mother. To address this, the Maternal-Fetal Medicine Units Network is conducting a randomized trial of planned labor induction at 39 weeks' gestation in nulliparous women.
# Chunk 6593
he frequency of abdominal wound infections is directly related to BM!. Conner and associates (2014) found the risk of wound infection is threefold higher for super-morbidly obese women compared with nonobese women-23 versus 7 percent. Among women with a BMI >45 kg/mr, wound complication rates range from 14 to 19 percent (Smid, 2015;
# Chunk 6594
Several interventions maybe preventive. Closure ofsubcuta tion rates (Tipton, 2011). Studies have also examined the use of higher doses of perioperative prophylactic antibiotics. Phar macokinetic studies indicate that tissue concentrations of pro phylactic antibiotics are lower with increasing BMI (Pevzner, 2011; Young, 2015). One prospective study showed that a 3-g dose of cefazolin resulted in higher tissue concentrations com pared with a 2-g dose (Swank, 2015). hat said, a retrospective analysis of 335 women with a median weight of 310 pounds found that the higher dose of cefazolin did not result in few surgical site infections (Ahmadzia, 2015). In one recent study, phylaxis had a surgical infection rate of 13.4 percent compared with a rate of 6.4 percent for those given a 2-day course of oral cephalexin and metronidazole in addition to perioperative prophylaxis (Valent, 2017).
# Chunk 6595
herniation, which is protrusion of the bowel through a mesentery defect. Petersen and associates (2017) described outcomes in a birth cohort including 139 pregnancies. Upper abdominal pain complicated 46 percent, and a third of these had internal herniation. The preterm birth rate was 14 of 64 among those with upper abdominal pain versus 1 of75 in those without pain. Intussusception and small bowel obstruction can develop from internal herniation, and maternal deaths from herniation and obstruction have been reported (Moore, 2004; Renault, 2012). Bowel obstruction is notoriously diicult to diagnose (Vannevel, 2016; Wx, 2013).
# Chunk 6596
Cardiac magnetic resonance (MR) imaging increasingly is used to evaluate cardiac structure and function. Stewart and associates (2016) performed cardiac MR imaging studies in 23 women longitudinally across pregnancy and at 12 weeks postpartum. Compared with studies performed at 12 to 16 weeks' gestation, left ventricular mass grew significantly for both normal-weight and overweight women. he calculated geometrical ratio of left ventricular mass to left ventricular end-diastolic volume demonstrated concentric remodeling throughout gestation, which resolved by 12 weeks' postpartum. he right ventricle also remodels (Martin, 2017) . Taken together, these observations likely mean that pregnancy causes a mixture of eccentric and concentric ventricular remodeling.
# Chunk 6597
FIGURE 49-2 Normal electrocardiograph (ECG) adaptations durPersistent tachycardia and/or arrhythmia ing pregnancy, including a reduced mean PR interval, increased Persistent split second sound heart rate, left axis deviation, inverted or flattened T waves and a
# Chunk 6598
Based on her review, Simpson (2012) recommends cesarean delivery for women with the following: (1) dilated aortic root >4 cm or aortic aneurysm; (2) acute severe congestive heart failure; (3) recent myocardial infarction; (4) severe symptomatic aortic stenosis; (5) warfarin administration within 2 weeks of delivery; and (6) need for emergency valve replacement immediately after delivery. Although we agree with most of these, we have some caveats. For example, we prefer aggressive medical stabilization of pulmonary edema followed by vaginal delivery if possible. Also, warfarin anticoagulation can be reversed with vitamin K, plasma, or prothrombin concentrates.
# Chunk 6599
4 to 6 hours postdose (Nishimura, 2014).

Several diferent treatment options-none of which are completely ideal-are principally based on consensus opinion. Two are from the American College of Chest Physicians and the other jointly from the merican College of Cardiology and the American Heart Association (Bates, 2012; Nishimura, 2014). Any of four regimens is recommended. First, adjusted-dose LMWH is given twice daily, with a peak anti-Xa level drawn 4 hours ater dosing. In another, adjusted UFH is dosed every 12 hours to keep the midinterval aPTT twice control or anti Xa level between 0.35 0.70 U/mL. As a third option, LMWH or UFH is given as just described until 13 weeks, and then warfarin is substituted until near delivery, at which time it is replaced by LMWH or UFH. Last, in women judged to carry a high risk of thrombosis and for whom the eicacy and safety of heparins are concerns, warfarin is suggested throughout pregnancy. Heparin is then substituted close to delivery. In addition, aspirin, 75 to 100 mg, is given daily.
# Chunk 6600
Heparin is discontinued just before delivery. If delivery supervenes while the anticoagulant is still efective, and extensive bleeding is encountered, then protamine sulfate is given intravenously. nticoagulant therapy with warfarin or heparin may be restarted 6 hours following vaginal delivery, usually with no problems. Following cesarean delivery, full anticoagulation is withheld, but the optimal duration is not exactly nown. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017) advises resuming unfractionated or low-molecular-weight heparin 6 to 12 hours ater cesarean delivery. It is our practice, however, to wait at least 24 hours following a major surgical procedure.
# Chunk 6601
he transplanted heart appears to responds normally to preg nancy-induced alterations (Key, 1989; Kim, 1996). Despite this, complications are common during pregnancy (Dashe, 1998). Of 53 pregnancies in 37 heart recipients, almost half developed hypertension, and 22 percent sufered at least one rejection episode during pregnancy (Armenti, 2002; Miniero, 2004). They were delivered-usually by cesarean-at a mean of 37 to 38 weeks' gestation. hree fourths of neonates were liveborn. At follow-up, at least ive women had died more than 2 years postpartum. Another analysis of 25 such women with 42 pregnancies found no maternal deaths. Major complica tions included two rejections during the early puerperium, two cases of renal failure, and 11 spontaneous abortions (Estensen, 2011). Five women died 2 to 12 years after delivery. And from the United Kingdom, Mohamed-Ahmed and colleagues (2014) identiied 14 women with transplants between 2007 and 2011r.
# Chunk 6602
II at delivery (Esteves, 2006). At a mean of 44 months, the

B. Second-stage labor 15 to 30 minutes before delivery. C. Postpartotal event-free maternalsurvival rate was 54 percent. However, tum 5 to 15 minutes. D. Postpartum 4 to 6 hours. E. Postpartum 18 eight women required another surgical intervention. All of the to 24 hours. (Data from Clark, 1985, 1989.) from a now-empty, contracted uterus and from the lower extremities and pelvis (Clark, 1985).
# Chunk 6603
Most afected women are asymptomatic, but dyspnea, anginal or atypical chest pain, syncope, and arrhythmias may develop. Complex arrhythmias may progress to sudden death, which is the most frequent cause of death. Asymptomatic patients with runs of ventricular tachycardia are especially prone to sudden death. Symptoms usually worsen with exercise.
# Chunk 6604
Approximately half of women sufering from peripartum cardiomyopathy recover baseline ventricular function within 6 months of delivery. But in those with persistent cardiac failure, the mortality rate approaches 85 percent over 5 years (Moioli, 2010). In a group of 100 women with newly diagnosed peripartum cardiomyopathy, 72 percent had a left ventricular ejection fraction ::50 percent, and 93 percent had event-free survival (McNamara, 2015). However, six women experienced nine major events that included four deaths, four left ventricular assist device implantations, and one heart transplantation. Recovery to a left ventricular ejection fraction ::50 percent occurred in almost 90 percent of women whose baseline ejection fraction was at least 30 percent. This compared with <40 percent in women whose baseline ventricular ejection fraction was < 30 percent. Recovery was also related to the baseline left ventricular end-diastolic diameter. Li and colleagues (2016) also found that a baseline left ventricular ejection fraction <34 percent and a brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) level > 1860 pg/ mL were associated with an approximately threefold greater risk of persistent left ventricular systolic dysfunction.
# Chunk 6605
Congestive heart failure can have a gradual onset or may present as acute "flash" pulmonary edema. Heart failure onset is most likely at the end of the second/beginning of the third trimester and peripartum (Ruys, 2014). Of symptoms, dyspnea is universal and others are orthopnea, palpitations, substernal chest pain, a sudden decline in the ability to complete usual duties, and nocturnal cough. Clinical findings include persistent basilar rales, hemoptysis, progressive edema, tachypnea, and tachycardia (Sheield, 1999). Hallmark radiographic findings usually are cardiomegaly and pulmonary edema (see Fig. 49-5).
# Chunk 6606
Infective endocarditis symptoms vary and often develop insidiously. Fever, often with chills, is seen in 80 to 90 percent of cases, a murmur is heard in up to 85 percent, and anorexia, fatigue, and other constitutional symptoms are common (Karchmer, 2015). Clinical clues are anemia, proteinuria, and manifestations of embolic lesions that include petechiae, focal neurological changes, chest or abdominal pain, and ischemia in an extremity. In some cases, heart failure develops. Symptoms may persist for several weeks before the diagnosis is found, and a high index of suspicion is necessary.
# Chunk 6607
Diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction during pregnancy does not difer from that in nonpregnant patients and is based on clinical presentation, characteristic ECG changes, and evidence of myocardial necrosis relected by elevated serum troponin levels (Pacheco, 2014). Of note, troponin I levels are undetectable near term in normal pregnancy and do not rise following either vaginal or cesarean delivery (Koscica, 2002; Shivvers, 1999). Importantly, however, troponin I levels are higher in preeclamptic women compared with normotensive controls (Atalay, 2005; Yang, 2006). With spontaneous coronary artery dissection, establishing the diagnosis requires a high index of suspicion in the gravida presenting with chest pain (Codsi, 2016). For this condition, coronary angiography is considered the diagnostic gold standard and should be expediently performed if acute coronary syndrome-deined as myocardial infarction or unstable angina-is present.
# Chunk 6608
For hypertensive women with disease lasting longer than 5 years or with comorbid diabetes, cardiovascular and renal function is assessed (August, 2015; Gainer, 2005). Women with evidence for organ dysfunction or those with prior adverse events such as a stroke, myocardial infarction (MI), arrhythmias, or ventricular failure are at markedly higher risk for a recurrence or worsening dysfunction during pregnancy. Renal function is evaluated by serum creatinine measurement. Also, if
# Chunk 6609
Summarized from Eckel, 2013; Kotchen, 2015.

a urine spot protein/creatinine ratio is abnormally high (>0.3), proteinuria is further quantified with a 24-hour urine collection (Hladunewich, 2011; Kuper, 2016; Morgan, 2016a). The Working Group Report on High Blood Pressure in Pregnancy (2000) of the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute concluded that the risks of fetal loss and accelerated renal disease deterioration are increased if the serum creatinine level is above 1.4 mg/dL (Chap. 53, p. 1034).
# Chunk 6610
he antihypertensive regimen given antepartum can be restarted in the puerperium. It is also possible in many women to forestall postpartum hypertension by administering intravenous or oral furosemide to augment the normal postpartum diuresis. In one study, 20-mg oral furosemide given daily for 5 days to postpartum women with severe preeclampsia aided blood pressure control (Ascarelli, 2005). Daily weights are helpful in this regard. On average, a woman should weigh 15 pounds less immediately after delivery. Excessive extracellular fluid can then be estimated. Other studies are in progress to determine aspects of postpartum blood pressure management (Cursino, 2015).
# Chunk 6611
Women with asthma have had improved pregnancy outcomes during the past 20 years. he incidence of spontaneous abortion in women with asthma may be slightly increased (Blais, 2013).
# Chunk 6612
Clinical improvement is usually evident in 48 to 72 hours with resolution of fever in 2 to 4 days. Radiographic abnormalities may take up to 6 weeks to completely resolve (Torres, 2008). Worsening disease is a poor prognostic feature, and subsequent radiography is recommended if fever persists. Even with improvement, however, approximately 20 percent of women develop a pleural eusion. Treatment of uncomplicated pneumonia is recommended for 5 to 7 days (Musher, 2014). Treatment failure may occur in up to 15 percent of cases, and a wider antimicrobial regimen and more extensive diagnostic testing is warranted.
# Chunk 6613
Supportive treatment is recommended for uncomplicated influenza, and early antiviral treatment is efective Gamieson, 2011; Oboho, 2016). Hospitalization is considered for severely ill women, and for those with pneumonia. As discussed, inluenza hospitalization rates for those with advanced pregnancy are increased compared with nonpregnant women (Dodds, 2007; Schanzer, 2007). he CDC (2016b) recommends neuraminidase inhibitors given within 2 days of symptom onset for chemoprophylaxis and treatment of influenza A and B (Chap. 64, p. 1214). he drugs interfere with release of progeny virus from infected host cells and thus prevent infection of new host cells (Cohen, 2015). Oseltamivir is given orally, 75 mg twice daily, or zanamivir is given by inhalation, 10 mg twice daily. Recommended treatment duration with either is 5 days. The drugs shorten the course of illness by 1 to 2 days, and they probably reduce the risk for pneumonitis (Belgi, 2014; Muthuri, 2014). Our practice is to treat all pregnant women with influenza whether or not pneumonitis is identiied (Rasmussen, 2014). Few data guide use of these agents in pregnant women, but the drugs are not teratogenic in animal studies and are considered low risk (Briggs, 2015).
# Chunk 6614
Fungal and parasitic pulmonary infections are usually of greatest consequence in immunocompromised hosts, especially in women with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). Of these, lung infection with Pneumoystis jiroveci, formerly called Pneumoystis carinii, is a common complication. The opportunistic fungus causes interstitial pneumonia characterized by dry cough, tachypnea, dyspnea, and difuse radiographic infiltrates. Although this organism can be identiied by sputum culture, bronchoscopy with lavage or biopsy may be necessary.
# Chunk 6615
The considerable influx of women into the United States from Asia, Africa, Mexico, and Central America has been accompanied by an increased frequency of tuberculosis in pregnancy. Sackof and coworkers (2006) reported positive tuberculin test results in half of 678 foreign-born women attending prenatal clinics in New York City. Almost 60 percent were newly diagnosed. Pillay and colleagues (2004) stress the prevalence of tuberculosis in HIV-positive pregnant women. At Jackson Memorial Hospital in Miami, Schulte and associates (2002) reported that 21 percent of 207 HIV-infected pregnant women had a positive skin test result. Recall also that silent endometrial tuberculosis can cause tubal infertility (Levison, 2010; Raviglione, 2015).
# Chunk 6616
Latent Infection. In nonpregnant tuberculin-positive patients with latent infection who are younger than 35 years and who have no evidence of active disease, isoniazid, 300 mg orally daily, is given for 9 months. Isoniazid has been used for decades, and it is considered safe in pregnancy (Briggs, 2015; Taylor, 2013). Compliance is a major problem, and Sackof (2006) and Cruz (2005) and their associates reported a disappointing 10-percent treatment completion. One obvious disconnect is that care for tuberculosis is given in diferent health systems than prenatal care (Zenner, 2012). hese observations are important because most recommend that isoniazid therapy be delayed until ater delivery. Because of possibly increased isoniazid-induced hepatitis risk in postpartum women, some even recommend withholding treatment until 3 to 6 months ater delivery. hat said, neither method is as efective as antepartum treatment to prevent active infection. Boggess and colleagues (2000) reported that only 42 percent of 167 tuberculin-positive asymptomatic women delivered at San Francisco General Hospital completed 6-month therapy that was not begun until the irst postpartum visit.
# Chunk 6617
Glucocorticoids are the most widely used treatment for symptomatic disease. Permanent organ derangement is seldom reversed by their use (Paramothayan, 2002). Thus, the deci sion to treat is based on symptoms, physical indings, chest radiograph, and pulmonary function tests. Unless respiratory symptoms are prominent, therapy is usually withheld for a several-month observation period. If inlammation does not subside, then prednisone, 1 mg/kg, is given daily and tapered to < 10 mg by 6 months (Baughman, 2015). For those with an inadequate response, immunosuppressive or cytotoxic agents and cytokine modulators can be used.
# Chunk 6618
Lung involvement is commonplace and is usually the cause of death. Bronchial gland hypertrophy with mucous plugging and small-airway obstruction leads to subsequent infection that ultimately causes chronic bronchitis and bronchiectasis. For complex and not completely explicable reasons, chronic inflammation from Pseudomonas aeruginosa occurs in more than 90 percent of patients. In a minority,aS aureus, H inluenzae, and Burkholderia cepacia are recovered (Rowe, 2005). Colonization with the last has been reported to signiy a worse prognosis, especially in pregnancy (Gillet, 2002). Acute and chronic parenchymal inlammation ultimately causes extensive fibrosis, and along with airway obstruction, ventilation-perfusion mismatch develops. Pulmonary insuiciency is the end result. Lung or heart-lung transplantation has a 5-year survival rate of only 50 to 60 percent (Sorscher, 2015). A few women have successfully undergone pregnancy following lung transplantation (Kruszka, 2002; Shaner, 2012).
# Chunk 6619
Because hemoglobin F has an even higher ainity for carbon monoxide, fetal carboxyhemoglobin levels are 10 to 15 percent higher than those in the mother. This may be due to facilitated difusion (Longo, 1977). Importantly, the half-life of carboxyhemoglobin is 2 hours in the mother but 7 hours in the fetus. Because carbon monoxide is bound so tightly to hemoglobin F, the fetus may be hypoxic even before maternal carbon monoxide levels are appreciably elevated. Several anomalies are associated with embryonic exposure, and anoxic encephalopathy is the primary sequela of later fetal exposure (Alehan, 2007; Aubard,a2000).
# Chunk 6620
Mansour MK, Ackman ]B, Branda]A, et al: Case 32-2015: a 57-year-old man with severe pneumonia and hypoxemic respiratory failure. New Engl ] Med 373:1554,t2015
# Chunk 6621
Wallmiiller e, Domanovits H, Mayr FB, et al: Cardiac arrest in a 35-year-old pregnant woman with sarcoidosis. Resuscitation 83(6)eI51, 2012
# Chunk 6622
Over several days, leg pain dissipates. Mter symptoms have abated, graded ambulation is begun. Elastic stockings are itted, and anticoagulation is continued. Recovery to this stage usually takes 7 to 10 days. Graduated compression stockings are continued for 2 years after the diagnosis to reduce the incidence of postthrombotic syndrome (Brandjes, 1997). This syndrome can include chronic leg paresthesias or pain, intractable edema, skin changes, and leg ulcers.
# Chunk 6623
his agent should be considered for the initial treatment of thromboembolism and in situations in which delivery, surgery, or thrombolysis may be necessary (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 20 17b). U nfractionated heparin can be administered by one of two alternatives: (I) initial intravenous therapy followed by adjusted-dose subcutaneous UFH given every 12 hours; or (2) twice-daily, adjusted-dose subcutaneous UFH with doses adjusted to prolong the activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) into the therapeutic range 6 hours postinjection (Bates, 2012). As shown in Table 52-5, the therapeutic dose for subcutaneous UFH is usually 10,000 units or more every 12 hours.
# Chunk 6624
Therapeutic LMWHb Enoxaparin, 1 mg/kg every 12 hours Dalteparin, 200 units/kg once daily Tinzaparin, 175 units/kg once daily Dalteparin, 100 units/kg every 12 hours
# Chunk 6625
UFH, 10,000 units SC every 12 hours in the third trimester, unless the aPTI is elevated

Therapeutic UFHb UFH, 10,000 units or more SC every 12 hours in doses adjusted to target aPTI in the therapeutic range (1n.5-2.5) 6 hours after injection
# Chunk 6626
The duration of full anticoagulation varies, and no studies have defined the optimal duration for pregnancy-related thromboembolism. In nonpregnant patients with TE, evidence supports a minimum treatment duration of 3 months (Kearon, 2012). For pregnant patients, the American College of Chest Physicians recommends anticoagulation throughout pregnancy and postpartum for a minimum total duration of 3 months (Bates, 2012). Lockwood (2012) recommends that full anticoagulation be continued for at least 20 weeks followed by prophylactic doses if the woman is still pregnant. Prophylactic doses of subcutaneous UFH can range from 5000 to 10,000 U every 12 hours titrated to maintain an anti-factor Xa level of 0.1 to 0.2 U/mL, measured 6 hours after the last injection. If the TE occurs during the postpartum period, Lockwood (2012) recommends a minimum of 6 months of anticoagulation treatment.
# Chunk 6627
LMWHs available for use in pregnancy include enoxaparin, tinzaparin, and dalteparin. Enoxaparin (Lovenox) pharmacokinetics were studied in 36 women with TE during pregnancy or immediately postpartum (Rodie, 2002). he dose was approximately 1 mg/kg given twice daily based on early pregnancy weight. Treatment was monitored by peak anti-factor Xa activity at 3 hours postinjection, with a target therapeutic range of 0.4 to 1.0 U/mL. In 33 women, enoxaparin provided satisfactory anticoagulation. In the other three women, dose reduction was necessary. None developed recurrent thromboembolism or bleeding complications. In postcesarean women with a body mass index (BMI) �35, Stephenson and associates (2016) found that weight-based dosing of enoxaparin 0.5 mg/kg twice daily more efectively achieved prophylactic peak anti-Xa levels between 0.2 to 0.6 U/mL than a ixed dose of 40 mg daily. Similar indings were reported by Overcash and colleagues (2015).
# Chunk 6628
Women receiving either therapeutic or prophylactic anticoagulation should be converted from LMWH to the shorter halflife UFH in the last month of pregnancy or sooner if delivery appears imminent. he purpose of conversion to UFH has less to do with any risk of maternal bleeding at the time of delivery, but rather with neuraxial blockade complicated by an epidural or spinal hematoma (Chap. 25, p. 496). The American College of Chest Physicians recommends that women scheduled for a planned delivery who are receiving twice-daily adjusteddose subcutaneous UFH or fWH discontinue their heparin 24 hours before labor induction or cesarean delivery (Bates, 2012). Patients receiving once-daily LMWH should take only 50 percent of their normal dose on the morning of the day before delivery. he American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017 c) advises that adjusted-dose subcutaneous LlvfWH or UFH can be discontinued 24 to 36 hours before an induction of labor or scheduled cesarean delivery. he American Society of Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine advises withholding neuraxial blockade for 10 to 12 hours after the last prophylactic dose of LMWH or 24 hours after the last therapeutic dose (Horlocker, 2010).
# Chunk 6629
Bone loss may develop with long-term heparin administration-usually 6 months or longer-and is more prevalent in cigarette smokers. UFH can cause osteopenia, and this is less likely with LMWHs (Deruelle, 2007). Women treated with any heparin should be encouraged to take an oral daily 1500-mg calcium supplement (Cunningham, 2005; Lockwood, 2012). In one study, Rodger and colleagues (2007) found that long-term use of dalteparin for a mean of212 days was not associated with a signiicant decline in bone mineral density.
# Chunk 6630
The efects of heparin on blood loss at delivery depend on several variables: (1) dose, route, and timing of administration; (2) number and depth of incisions and lacerations; (3) intensity of postpartum myometrial contractions; and (4) presence of other coagulation defects. Blood loss should not be greatly increased with vaginal delivery if the episiotomy is modest in depth, there are no lacerations, and the uterus promptly contracts. Unfortunately, such ideal circumstances do not always prevail. For example, Mueller and Lebherz (1969) described 10 women with antepartum thrombophlebitis treated with heparin. hree women who continued to receive heparin during labor and delivery bled remarkably and developed large hematomas. Thus, heparin therapy generally is stopped during labor and delivery. The American Academy of Pediatrics and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (20a17) recommend restarting UFH or LMWH no sooner than 4 to 6 hours after vaginal delivery or 6 to 12 hours after cesarean delivery. We wait at least 24 hours to restart therapy after cesarean delivery or after vaginal delivery with significant lacerations.
# Chunk 6631
In almost 2500 nonpregnant patients with a proven pulmonary embolism, symptoms included dyspnea in S2 percent, chest pain in 49 percent, cough in 20 percent, syncope in 14 percent, and hemoptysis in 7 percent (Goldhaber, 1999). Pollack and coworkers (2011) found similar symptoms. Other predominant clinical indings typically include tachypnea, apprehension, and tachycardia. In some cases, an accentuated pulmonic closure sound, rales, and/or friction rub is heard.
# Chunk 6632
Kinane TB, Grabowski EF, Sharma A, et al: Case 7-2008: a 17-year-old girl with chest pain and hemoptysis. N Engl] Med 358:941,t2008
# Chunk 6633
Evidence of functional renal hypertrophy becomes apparent very soon ater conception. Glomeruli are larger, although cell numbers do not grow (Strevens, 2003). Pregnancy-induced intrarenal vasodilatation develops, and both aferent and eferent resistances decline. This leads to greater efective renal plasma flow and glomerular filtration (Helal, 2012; Hussein, 2014). By 12 weeks' gestation, the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) is already augmented 20 percent above nonpregnant values (Hladunewich, 2004). Ultimately, plasma low and GFR rise by 40 and 65 percent, respectively. Consequently, serum concentrations of creatinine and urea drop substantively across pregnancy, and values within a nonpregnant normal range may be abnormal for pregnancy (Appendix, p. 1257). Other alterations include those related to maintaining normal acid-base homeostasis, osmoregulation, and fluid and electrolyte retention.
# Chunk 6634
If the serum creatinine level in pregnancy persistently exceeds 0.9 mg/dL (75 LmollL), then intrinsic renal disease is suspected. In these cases, some determine the creatinine clearance as an estimate of the GFR. Of other assessment tools, sonography provides imaging of renal size, relative consistency, and elements of obstruction (see Fig. 53-1). Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging of renal masses provides excellent anatomic information (Putra, 2009). Full-sequence intravenous pyelography is not done routinely, but injection of contrast media with one or two abdominal radiographs may be indicated by the clinical situation. The usual clinical indications for cystoscopy are followed. Ureteroscopy is another available tool when indicated.
# Chunk 6635
Most studies indicate that if asymptomatic bacteriuria is not treated, approximately 25 percent of infected women will develop symptomatic infection during pregnancy (Smaill, 2015). In a more recent study, only 2.4 percent of treated women developed pyelonephritis (Kazemier, 2015). Eradication of bacteriuria with antimicrobial agents prevents most of these serious infections. The American Academy of Pediatrics and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017), as well as the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (2008), recommend screening for bacteriuria at the first prenatal visit. Standard urine cultures may not be cost efective when the prevalence is low. Less expensive screening tests such as the leukocyte esterase/nitrite dipstick are cost efective when the prevalence is ;2 percent (Rogozinska, 2016; Rouse, 1995). Also, a dipstick culture technique has excellent positive-and negative-predictive values (Mignini, 2009). With this, a special agar-coated dipstick is first placed into urine and then also serves as the culture plate. Because of a high prevalence-5 to 8 percent-at Parkland Hospital, most women are screened by traditional urine culture. Susceptibility determination is not necessary because initial treatment is empirical (Hooton, 2012).
# Chunk 6636
Nitrofurantoin, 100 mg four times daily for 10 days Nitrofurantoin, 100 mg twice daily for 5 to 7 days Nitrofurantoin, 100 mg at bedtime for 10 days
# Chunk 6637
If this infection is suspected, a urine sample obtained by catheterization may be preferred to avoid obscuring contamination from the lower genital tract. he urinary sediment contains many leukocytes, frequently in clumps, and numerous bacteria. Bacteremia is demonstrated in 15 to 20 percent of these women. E coli is isolated from urine or blood in 70 to 80 percent of infections, Klebsiela pneumoniae in 3 to 5 percent, Enterobacter or Proteus species in 3 to 5 percent, and gram-positive organisms, including group B Streptococcus and Staphylococcus aureus, in up to 10 percent of cases (Hill, 2005; Wing, 2000).
# Chunk 6638
Discharge when afebrile 24 hours, consider antimicrobial therapy for 7 to 10 days

Repeat urine culture 1 to 2 weeks after antimicrobial
# Chunk 6639
Antimicrobial therapy usually is empirical, and ampicillin plus gentamicin; cefazolin or ceftriaxone; or an extended-spectrum antibiotic are all 95-percent efective in randomized trials (Sanchez-Ramos, 1995; Wing, 1998,a2000). Fewer than half of E coli strains are sensitive to ampicillin in vitro, but cephalosporins and gentamicin generally have excellent activity. Serum creatinine levels are monitored if nephrotoxic drugs are given. Initial treatment at Parkland Hospital is ampicillin plus gentamicin. Some recommend suitable substitutes if bacterial studies show in vitro resistance. With any of the regimens discussed, response is usually prompt, and 95 percent of women are afebrile by 72 hours (Hill, 2005; Sheield, 2005). ter discharge, most recommend oral therapy for a total of7 to 14 days (Hooton, 2012).
# Chunk 6640
Persistent Infection. Generally, intravenous hydration and antimicrobial therapy are followed by stepwise defervescence of approximately 1°F per day. With persistent spiking fever or lack of clinical improvement by 48 to 72 hours, urinary tract obstruction, another complication, or both are considered. In these women, renal sonography is recommended to search for obstruction, which is manifest by abnormal ureteral or pyelo caliceal dilatation (Seidman, 1998). Although most women with continuing infection have no evidence of obstruction, some are found to have calculi. Although renal sonography will detect hydronephrosis, stones are not always seen in preg nancy (Butler, 2000; Maikranz, 1987). If stones are strongly suspected despite a nondiagnostic sonographic examination, a plain abdominal radiograph will identiy nearly 90 percent.
# Chunk 6641
Several requisites should be satisfied by renal transplantation patients before attempting pregnancy G osephson, 2011; Lopez, 2014). First, women should be in good general health for at least 1 to 2 years after transplantation. Also, renal function should be stable and without severe renal insuiciency. Thus, serum creatinine is <2 mg/dL and preferably < 1.5 mg/ dL, and proteinuria is <500 mg/d. Evidence for graft rejection should be absent for 6 months, and pyelocalyceal distention by urography should not be seen. Moreover, hypertension should be absent or well controlled. And last, women should be taking no teratogenic drugs, and drug therapy should be reduced to maintenance levels.
# Chunk 6642
Renal function is monitored, and the GFR usually increases 20 to 25 percent. If a signiicant rise in the serum creatinine level is detected, then its cause must be determined. Possibilities include acute rejection, cyclosporine toxicity, preeclampsia, infection, and urinary tract obstruction. Evidence of pyelonephritis or graft rejection should prompt aggressive management. Imaging studies and kidney biopsy may be indicated. The woman is carefully monitored for development or worsening of underlying hypertension, and especially superimposed preeclampsia. Management of hypertension during pregnancy is the same as for patients without a transplant.
# Chunk 6643
Serious long-term adverse outcomes are a risk for women identiied to have nephrotic syndromes either before or during pregnancy (Su, 2017). In our series above, at least 20 percent of women followed for 10 years progressed to end-stage renal disease (Stettler, 1992). Similarly, in another group of 15 women, by 2 years postpartum, three had died, three had developed chronic renal failure, and two had progressed to end-stage renal disease (Chen, 2001). Of predictors, serum creatinine levela> 1.4 mg/ dL and 24-hour protein excretiona> 1 g/d are associated with the shortest renal survival times following pregnancy (Imbasciati, 2007).
# Chunk 6644
In some women, pregnancy may accelerate chronic renal disease progression by increasing hyperfiltration and glomerular pressure to worsen nephrosclerosis (Baylis, 2003; Helal, 2012). his is more likely in women with severe chronic renal insuficiency (Abe, 1991 ; Jones, 1996). For example, Jungers and associates (1995) reported few long-term pregnancy-related adverse efects in 360 women with chronic glomerulonephritis and antecedent normal renal function. However, at 1 year after pregnancy, Jones and Hayslett (1996) reported that 10 percent of such women with moderate or severe renal insuiciency had developed end-stage renal failure-stage 5 chronic kidney disease. In a study from Parkland Hospital, we found that 20 percent of pregnant women with similar insuiciency had developed end-stage renal failure by a mean of 4 years (Cunningham, 1990). Similar indings in women with a median follow-up of 3 years were described by Imbasciati and coworkers (2007). By this time, end-stage disease was apparent in 30 percent of women whose serum creatinine was ::l.4 mg/dL and who had proteinuriaa> 1 g/d. Chronic proteinuria is also a marker for subsequent development of renal failure. In another report from Parkland Hospital, 20 percent of women with chronic proteinuria discovered during pregnancy progressed to end-stage renal failure within several years (Stettler, 1992).
# Chunk 6645
Outcomes are similar with either hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis. hus, for the woman already undergoing either method, it seems reasonable to continue that method with consideration for its increasing frequency. In the woman who has never been dialyzed, the threshold for initiation during pregnancy is unclear. Lindheimer and colleagues (2007a) recommend dialysis when serum creatinine levels are between 5 and 7 mg/ dL. Because it is imperative to avoid abrupt volume changes that cause hypotension, dialysis frequency may be extended to five to six times weekly (Reddy, 2007).
# Chunk 6646
Rarely, bilateral ureteral compression by a very large pregnant uterus is greatly exaggerated. Resultant ureteral obstruction in turn may cause severe oliguria and azotemia. An extreme example is shown in Figure 53-6. In their series of 13 obstruction cases, Brandes and Fritsche (1991) described one woman with twins who developed anuria and a serum creatinine level of 12.2 mg/dL at 34 weeks' gestation. After amniotomy, urine flow resumed at 500 mL/hr, and her serum creatinine levels rapidly dropped to normal range. Eckford and Gingell (1991) described 10 women in whom ureteral obstruction was relieved by stenting. he stents were left in place for a mean of 15.5 weeks and removed 4 to 6 weeks postpartum. Others have reported similar experiences (Sadan, 1994; Satin, 1993).
# Chunk 6647
Goes NB, Calvin RB: Case 12-2007: A 56-year-old woman with renal failure after heart-lung transplantation. N Engl ] Med 356: 1657,
# Chunk 6648
For visualization of the large bowel, lexible sigmoidoscopy can be used safely in pregnant women (Siddiqui, 2006). Coonoscopy is indispensible for viewing the entire colon and distal ileum to aid diagnosis and management of several bowel disorders. Except for the midtrimester, reports of colonoscopy during pregnancy are limited, but most results indicate that it should be performed if indicated (Cappell, 2010, 2011; De Lima, 2015). Bowel preparation is completed using polyethylene glycol electrolyte or sodium phosphate solutions. With these, serious maternal dehydration that may cause diminished uteroplacental perusion should be avoided.
# Chunk 6649
Esophageal rupture-Boerhaave syndrome Hypoprothrombinemia-vitamin K deficiency Hyperalimentation complications Mallory-Weiss tears-bleeding, pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum, pneumopericardium Rhabdomyolysis degrees of acute kidney injury from dehydration are encountered (Nwoko, 2012). An extreme example was a woman we cared for who required 5 days of dialysis when her serum creatinine level rose to 10.7 mg/dL (Hill, 2002). One complication from continuous retching is a Mallory-Weiss tear. Others are pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum, diaphragmatic rupture, and gastroesophageal rupture-Boerhaave syndrome (American College of 0bstetricians and Gynecologists, 2015; Chen, 2012).
# Chunk 6650
With active ulcers, a search for H pylori is undertaken.

Diagnostic aids include the urea breath test, serological testing, or endoscopic biopsy. If any of these yield positive results, combination antimicrobial and proton-pump inhibitor therapy is indicated. Several efective oral treatment regimens do not include tetracycline and can be used during pregnancy. hese 14-day regimens include amoxicillin, 1000 mg twice daily plus clarithromycin, 250 to 500 mg twice daily, plus metronidazole, 500 mg twice daily given along with the proton-pump inhibitor omeprazole (Del Valle, 2015).
# Chunk 6651
The small bowel has diminished motility during pregnancy.

Using a nonabsorbable carbohydrate, Lawson (1985) showed that small bowel mean transit times were 99, 125, and 137 minutes in each trimester, compared with 75 minutes when nonpregnant. In a study cited by Everson (1992), mean tran sit time for a mercury-illed balloon from the stomach to the cecum was 58 hours in term pregnant women compared with 52 hours in nonpregnant women.
# Chunk 6652
The mainstay of treatment is intravenous hydration using normal saline or Ringer lactate with potassium supplementation in amounts to restore maternal blood volume and to ensure uteroplacental perfusion. Vital signs and urine output are monitored for signs of sepsis syndrome. For moderately severe nonfebrile illness without bloody diarrhea, antimobility agents such as loperamide (Imodium) may be useful. Bismuth subsalicylate (Pepto-Bismol) may also alleviate symptoms.
# Chunk 6653
Data from Camilleri, 201 5; DuPont, 201 4.

Judicious use of antimicrobial agents is warranted. For moderate to severely ill women, some recommend empirical treatment with ciprofloxacin, 500 mg twice daily for 3 to 5 days. Speciic pathogens are treated as needed when identiied (see Table 54-4). Syndromes for which treatment is usually unnecessary include those caused by Escherichia coli, staphylococcal species, Bacilus cereus, and Norwalk-like virus. Severe illness caused by Salmonela spp is treated with ciprofloxacin or trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole; by Campylobacter spp with azithromycin; by Clostridium diicile with oral metronidazole or vancomycin; and by Giardia spp and Entamoeba histoytica with metronidazole (DuPont, 2014; Rocha-Castro, 2016).
# Chunk 6654
Major symptoms of ulcerative colitis include diarrhea, rectal also the deeper layers, and sometimes involvement is transmural bleeding, tenesmus, and abdominal cramps. The disease can be (see Fig. 54-2). Lesions can be seen throughout the entire gasacute or intermittent and is characterized by exacerbations and trointestinal tract, from the mouth to the anus, but it typically remissions. Toxic megacolon and catastrophic hemorrhage are is segmental (Friedman, 2015). Approximately 30 percent of particularly dangerous complications that may necessitate colpatients have small-bowel involvement, 25 percent have isolated ectomy. Extraintestinal maniestations include arthritis, uveitis, colonic involvement, and 40 percent have both, usually with the terminal ileum and colon involved. Perianal fistulas and abscesses develop in a third of those with colonic involvement.
# Chunk 6655
Symptoms depend on which bowel segment(s) is involved. Thus, complaints may include lower-right-sided cramping abdominal pain, diarrhea, weight loss, lowgrade fever, and obstructive symptoms. The disease is chronic with exacerbations and remissions, and importantly, it cannot be cured medically or surgically. Approximately a third of patients require surgery within the first year ater diagnosis, and thereater, 5 percent per year. Reactive arthritis is common, and the gastrointestinal cancer risk, although not as great as. with ulcerative colitis, is increased substantially.
# Chunk 6656
Because ulcerative colitis and Crohn disease are relatively common in young women, they are encountered with some frequency in pregnancy. In this regard, a few generalizations can be made. First, consensus supports that pregnancy does not increase the likelihood of an inlammatory bowel disease flare (.1ahadevan, 2015). Indeed, in a 10-year surveillance of women in the European Collaborative on Inflammatory Bowel Disease, the likelihood of a lare during pregnancy was decreased compared with the preconceptional rate (Riis, 2006). Although most women with quiescent disease in early pregnancy do not have relapses, when a lare develops, it may be severe. lso, active disease in early pregnancy increases the likelihood of poor pregnancy outcome, which is discussed subsequently. In general, most usual treatment regimens may be continued during pregnancy. Diagnostic evaluations should be undertaken if needed to direct management, and surgery should be performed if indicated. For women who successfully complete pregnancy, about half experience improvement in their health-relate.d q uali ty of life (Ananthakrishnan, 2012).
# Chunk 6657
Endoscopy or conservative surgery is indicated for complications. Patients with small-bowel involvement are more likely to require surgery for complications that include istulas, strictures, abscesses, and intractable disease. An abdominal surgical procedure was required during 5 percent of pregnancies described by Woolfson (1990). Parenteral hyperalimentation
# Chunk 6658
Meyerson (1995) reported a 20-year incidence of 1 in 17,000 deliveries at two Detroit hospitals. In one study, adhesive dis ease leading to small-bowel obstruction was the second most common cause of an acute abdomen in pregnancy following appendicitis-15 versus 30 percent, respectively (Unal, 2011). Approximately half of cases are due to adhesions from previous pelvic surgery that includes cesarean delivery (Al-Sunaidi, 2006; Andolf, 2010; Lyell, 2011). Another 25 percent of bowel obstruction cases are caused by volvulus-sigmoid, cecal, or small bowel. hese have been reported in late pregnancy or early puerperium (Bade, 2014; Biswas, 2006; l Maksoud, 2015). Small-bowel obstruction has been reported in pregnancy following the currently popular Roux-en-Y gastric bypass for weight loss (Bokslag, 2014; Wax, 2013). Intussusception is occasionally encountered (Bosman, 2014; Harma, 201l). Bowel obstruction subsequent to colorectal surgery for cancer was increased threefold in women who had open versus laparoscopic surgery (Haggar, 2013). Finally, Serra and colleagues (2014) described a massive ventral hernia with intestinal obstruction.
# Chunk 6659
Most cases of intestinal obstruction during pregnancy result from pressure of the growing uterus on intestinal adhesions. According to Davis and Bohon (1983), this more likely occurs around midpregnancy when the uterus becomes an abdominal organ; in the third trimester when the fetal head descends; or immediately postpartum when uterine size acutely shrinks. Perdue (1992) reported that 98 percent of afected pregnant women had either continuous or colicky abdominal pain, and 80 percent had nausea and vomiting. Abdominal tenderness was found in 70 percent, and abnormal bowel sounds noted in only 55 percent. Plain abdominal radiographs following soluble contrast showed evidence of obstruction in 90 percent of women (Fig. 54-3). Plain radiographs, however, are less accurate for diagnosing small-bowel obstruction, and we and others have found that CT and MR imaging can be diagnostic (Biswas, 2006; Essilie, 2007; McKenna, 2007). Colonoscopy can be both diagnostic and therapeutic for colonic volvulus (Dray, 2012; Khan, 2012).
# Chunk 6660
Also known as Ogilvie syndrome, pseudo-obstruction is caused by adynamic colonic ileus. It is characterized by massive abdominal distention with cecal and right-hemicolon dilatation. Approximately 10 percent of all cases are associated with pregnancy, and its frequency has been reported as high as 1 in 1500 deliveries (Reeves, 2015). he syndrome usually develops postpartum-most commonly after cesarean delivery-but it has been reported antepartum (Tung, 2008). Rarely, the large bowel may rupture (Singh, 2005). Treatment with an intravenous infusion of neostigmine, 2 mg, usually results in prompt decompression (Song, 2015). In some cases, colonoscopic decompression is performed, and laparotomy is needed for perforation (De Giorgio, 2009; Rawlings, 2010).
# Chunk 6661
Customarily, liver diseases complicating pregnancy are placed into three general categories. he first includes those specifically related to pregnancy that resolve either spontaneously or following delivery. Examples are intrahepatic cholestasis and acute fatty liver, both discussed in the next sections. Also, hepatic dysfunction from hyperemesis gravidarum may involve the liver. Mild hyperbilirubinemia with elevated serum transaminase levels is seen in up to half of afected women requiring hospitalization. However, these levels seldom exceed 200 U/L (Table 55-1). Liver biopsy may show minimal fatty changes. Hyperemesis gravidarum is discussed in detail in Chapter 54 (p. 1043). Another in this first category is hepatocellular damage with preeclampsia-the HELLP syndrome-which is characterized by hemolysis, �levated serum liver enzyme levels, and low 2latelet counts. hese changes are discussed in detail in Chapter 40 (p. 721).
# Chunk 6662
Importantly, several normal pregnancy-induced physiological changes induce appreciable liver-related clinical and laboratory manifestations (Chap. 4, p. 68, and Appendix, p. 1257). Findings such as elevated serum alkaline phosphatase levels, palmar erythema, and spider angiomas, which might suggest liver disease, are common during normal pregnancy. Metabolism is also afected, due to altered expression of the cytochrome P450 system. This alteration is mediated by higher levels of estrogen, progesterone, and other pregnancy hormones. For example, hepatic CYFIA2 expression declines, whereas that of CYF2D6 and CYF3A4 rises. Importantly, cytochrome enzymes are expressed in many organs besides the liver, most notably the
# Chunk 6663
Whatever the inciting cause(s), bile acids are cleared incompletely and accumulate in plasma. Hyperbilirubinemia results from retention of conjugated pigment, but total plasma concentrations rarely exceed 4 to 5 mg/ dL. Alkaline phosphatase levels are usually elevated even more than in normal pregnancy. Serum transaminase levels are normal to moderately elevated but seldom exceed 250 U/L (see Table 55-1). Liver biopsy shows mild cholestasis with bile plugs in the hepatocytes and canaliculi of the centrilobular regions, but without inflammation or necrosis. These changes disappear after delivery but often recur in subsequent pregnancies or with estrogencontaining contraceptives.
# Chunk 6664
Earlier reports describe excessive adverse pregnancy outcomes in women with cholestatic jaundice. That said, data accrued during the past two decades are ambiguous concerning increased perinatal mortality rates and whether close fetal surveillance is preventative. Several studies also illustrate this. In one evaluation of 693 Swedish women, perinatal mortality rates were slightly increased, but only in mothers with severe disease (Glantz, 2004). Sheiner and coworkers (2006) described no diferences in perinatal outcomes in 376 afected pregnancies compared with their overall obstetrical population. However, rates of labor induction and cesarean delivery in afected women signiicantly rose. Lee and associates (2009) described two cases of sudden fetal death not predicted by nonstress testing. In another study of 101 afected women, no term fetuses died, but 87 percent of women underwent labor induction, ostensibly to avoid adverse outcomes (Rook, 2012). Nonetheless, neonatal complications developed in a third of the pregnancies, particularly respiratory distress, fetal distress, and meconium-stained amnionic luid. These problems were noted more frequently in those with higher total bile acid levels. Herrera and coworkers (2017) reported similar results. Finally, Wikstrom Shemer and colleagues (2013) reported outcomes in 5477 women with cholestasis from a database of 1,213,668 births. They described novel associations of cholestasis with preeclampsia and gestational diabetes. Although neonates were more likely to have a low 5-minute Apgar score and to be large for gestational age, the stillbirth rate was not increased. This was thought to reflect higher induction and preterm birth rates. Thus, by this time, many had now recommended early labor induction to avoid stillbirth. Relecting this, at Parkland Hospital, some maternal-fetal specialists ofer induction at 38 weeks, whereas others suggest 39 weeks.
# Chunk 6665
Perhaps half of afected women have hypertension, protein uria, and edema, alone or in combination-signs suggestive of preeclampsia. As shown in Tables 55-1 and 55-2, degrees of moderate to severe liver dysfunction are manifest by hypofi brinogenemia, hypoalbuminemia, hypocholesterolemia, and prolonged clotting times. Serum bilirubin levels usually are < 10 mgl dL, and serum transaminase levels are modestly ele vated and usually < 1000 U/L.
# Chunk 6666
Hemolysis can be severe and evidenced by leukocytosis, nucleated red cells, mild to moderate thrombocytopenia, and elevated serum levels of lactic acid dehydrogenase (LDH). Because of hemoconcentration, however, the hematocrit is often within the normal range. The peripheral blood smear demonstrates echinocytosis, and hemolysis is thought to stem from efects of hypocholesterolemia on erythrocyte membranes (Cunningham, 1985).
# Chunk 6667
Acute infections are most often subclinical and anicteric.

When they are clinically apparent, nausea and vomiting, headache, and malaise may precede jaundice by 1 to 2 weeks. Lowgrade fever is more common with hepatitis A. By the time jaundice develops, symptoms are usually improving. Serum transaminase levels vary, and their peaks do not correspond with disease severity (see Table 55-1). Peak levels that range from 400 to 4000 U/L are usually reached by the time jaundice develops. Serum bilirubin values typically continue to rise, despite falling serum transaminase levels, and peak at 5 to 20 mgl dL.
# Chunk 6668
Any evidence for severe disease should prompt hospitalization. These include persistent nausea and vomiting, prolonged prothrombin time, low serum albumin level, hypoglycemia, high serum bilirubin level, or central nervous system symptoms. In most cases, however, clinical and biochemical recovery is complete within 1 to 2 months in all cases of hepatitis A, in most cases of hepatitis B, but in only a small proportion of cases of hepatitis C.
# Chunk 6669
Vaccination has reduced the incidence of hepatitis by 95 percent since 1995. In 2014, the rate was 0.4 per 100,000 individuals (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2016b). his 27-nm RNA picornavirus is transmitted by the fecal-oral route, usually by ingestion of contaminated food or water. The incubation period is approximately 4 weeks. Individuals shed virus in their feces, and during the relatively brief period of viremia, their blood is also infectious. Signs and symptoms are oten nonspecific and usually mild, although jaundice develops in most patients. Symptoms usually last less than 2 months, although 10 to 15 percent of patients may remain symptomatic or relapse for up to 6 months (Dienstag, 20 15a). Early serological testing identifies IgVl anti-AV antibody, which may persist for several months. During convlescence, IgG antibody predominates, and it persists and provides subsequent immunity. here is no chronic stage of hepatitis A.
# Chunk 6670
Preventatively, vaccination during childhood with foninactivated hepatitis viral vaccine is more than 90-percent efective. HA V vaccination is recommended by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2016) and the Advisory Committee on Immunization (Kim, 20 15a) for highrisk adults. This category includes behavioral and occupational populations and travelers to high-risk countries. These countries are listed in the CDC (2016c) Health Information for International Travel "yellow book," which is available on the CDC website. Passive immunization for the pregnant woman recently exposed by close personal or sexual contact with a person with hepatitis A is provided by a 0.02 mLlkg dose of immune globulin (Kim, 2015a). Victor and colleagues (2007) reported that a single dose of HA V vaccine given in the usual dosage within 2 weeks of contact with an afected person was as efective as immune serum globulin to prevent hepatitis A. In both groups, HA V developed in 3 to 4 percent.
# Chunk 6671
Acute hepatitis B develops after an incubation period of 30 to 180 days with a mean of 8 to 12 weeks. At least half of acute infections are asymptomatic. If symptoms are present, they are usually mild and include anorexia, nausea, vomiting, fever, abdominal pain, and jaundice. Acute HBV accounts for half of cases of fulminant hepatitis. Symptoms completely resolve within 3 to.4 months in more than 90 percent of patients.
# Chunk 6672
A recombinant HEV vaccine has been developed and licensed in China. It is >95 percent efective for 12 months after vaccination. Long-term eicacy is 87 percent, and protective titers are maintained for up to 4.5 years (Zhang, 2015). Preliminary data from inadvertently vaccinated pregnant women show no adverse maternal or fetal events (Wu, 2012). At this time, it is unclear if this Chinese-licensed vaccine is efective in other areas of the world where other genotypes predominate. Genotype 4 is most common in China, and types 2 and 3 are more common in the Americas. A Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved vaccine is not available at this time.
# Chunk 6673
After 14 weeks' gestation, the fetus has some cytochrome P450 activity necessary for metabolism of acetaminophen to the toxic metabolite. Riggs and colleagues (1989) reported follow-up data from the Rocky Mountain Poison and Drug Center in 60 women sufering overdose. he likelihood of maternal and fetal survival was better if the antidote was given soon after overdose. At least one 33-week fetus appears to have died as a direct result of hepatotoxicity 2 days after maternal ingestion. In another case, Crowell and associates (2008) reported a case of acetaminophen overdose at 32 weeks' gestation. The woman had taken 9.75 grams of acetaminophen approximately 1.5 hours prior to arrival. With treatment, the patient survived and went on to deliver a healthy term neonate.
# Chunk 6674
Acute pancreatitis is characterized by mild to incapacitating epigastric pain, nausea and vomiting, and abdominal distention. Patients are usually distressed and have low-grade fever, tachycardia, hypotension, and abdominal tenderness. As many as 10 percent have systemic inlammatory response syndrome (SIRS), which causes endothelial activation and can lead to acute respiratory distress syndrome (Chap. 47, p. 921).
# Chunk 6675
Of laboratory tests, serum amylase levels usually measure three times values considered the upper limit of normal. In 173 pregnant women with pancreatitis, the mean amylase value approximated 2000 lUlL, and the mean lipase value approached 3000 lUlL (Table 55-5). Importanty, the degree of enzyme elevation and disease severiy do not reliaby correlate. Indeed, by 48 to 72 hours, amylase levels may return to normal despite other evidence for continuing pancreatitis. Serum lipase activity is also increased and usually remains elevated with continued inlammation. Leukocytosis is usually found, and 25 percent of patients have hypocalcemia. Elevated serum bilirubin and aspartate transaminase levels may signiY gallstone disease.
# Chunk 6676
Control and Prevention, 1989.) childbearing age (1ujica-Coopman, 2015). Rates are also high in Israel, China, India, South Asia, and Africa (Azulay, 2015; Kumar, 2013, Stevens, 2013). Figure 56-2 highlights the global trends in hemoglobin concentrations and anemia thresholds in pregnant and nonpregnant women.
# Chunk 6677
Classic morphological evidence of iron-deiciency anemia is erythrocyte hypochromia and microcytosis (Fig. 56-3). This may be less prominent in the pregnant woman. Serum ferritin levels are lower. And, levels of hepcidin-the master regulator of iron availability-are decreased normally in pregnancy. With iron deiciency, hepcidin levels follow those of serum ferritin (Camaschella, 2015; Koenig, 2014).
# Chunk 6678
FIGURE 56-3 This peripheral blood smear from a women with iron-deficiency anemia contains many scattered microcytic and hypochromic red cells with characteristic central pallor. These exhibit moderate anisopoikilocytosis, namely, varying sizes and shapes including occasional elliptocytes, which can be oval or pencil-shaped. (Reproduced with permission from Werner Cl, Richardson Dl, Chang SY, et al (eds): Perioperative Considerations. In Williams Gynecology Study Guide, 3rd ed. New York, McGrawHill Education, 201o6: Photo contributor: Dr. Weina Chen.) he initial evaluation of a pregnant woman with moderate anemia includes measurements of hemoglobin, hematocrit, and red cell indices; careful examination of a peripheral blood smear; a sickle-cell preparation if the woman has African origin; and evaluation of serum iron or ferritin levels, or both (Appendix p. 1255). Serum ferritin levels normally decline during pregnancy, and levels < 10 to 15 mg/L confirm iron-deficiency anemia.
# Chunk 6679
When pregnant women with moderate iron-deficiency anemia are given adequate iron therapy, a hematological response is detected by an elevated reticulocyte count. The rate of rise of hemoglobin concentration or hematocrit is typically slower than in nonpregnant women due to the increasing and larger blood volumes during pregnancy.
# Chunk 6680
Routinely in pregnancy, daily oral supplementation with 30 to 60 of iron and 400 �g of folic acid is recommended (World Health Organization, 2012). A Cochrane review found that intermittent oral iron supplementation may also be appropriate (Pena-Rosas, 2015). For iron-deficiency anemia, resolution and restitution of iron stores can be accomplished with simple iron salts that provide approximately 200 mg daily of elemental iron. hese include ferrous sulfate, fumarate, or gluconate. If a woman cannot or will not take oral iron preparations, then parenteral therapy is given. Although both are administered intravenously, ferrous sucrose is safer than iron-dextran (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2017a; Camaschella, 2015; Shi, 2015). Hemoglobin and ferritin levels show equivalent rises in women treated with either oral or parenteral iron therapy (Breymann, 2017; Daru, 20r16).
# Chunk 6681
For treatment, folic acid is given along with iron, and a nutritious diet is encouraged. By 4 to 7 days after beginning folic acid treatment, the reticulocyte count is increased, and leukopenia and thrombocytopenia are corrected.
# Chunk 6682
In our limited experience, vitamin Bl2 deiciency in pregnancy is more likely encountered following gastric resection. hose who have undergone total gastrectomy require 1 000 �g of vitamin B12 given intramuscularly each month. Those with a partial gastrectomy usually do not need supplementation, but adequate serum vitamin B12 levels should be ensured (Appendix, p. 1258). Other causes of megaloblastic anemia from vitamin B12 deiciency include Crohn disease, ileal resection, some drugs, and bacterial overgrowth in the small bowel (Hesdorfer, 2015; Stabler, 2013).
# Chunk 6683
Pregnancy. In general, women with inherited red-cell membrane defects do well during pregnancy. Folic acid supplementation of 4 mg daily is given orally to sustain erythropoiesis. Women with hereditary spherocytosis cared for at Parkland Hospital had hematocrits ranging from 23 to 41 volumes percent mean 31 (Maberry, 1992). Reticulocyte counts ranged from 1 to 23 percent. Among 50 pregnancies in 23 women, eight women miscarried. Four of 42 infants were born preterm, but none was growth restricted. Infection in four women intensified hemolysis, and three of these required transusions. Similar results were reported by Pajor and coworkers (1993).
# Chunk 6684
Red cells with hemoglobin S undergo sickling when they are deoxygenated, and the hemoglobin aggregates. Constant sickling and unsickling cause membrane damage, and the cell may become irreversibly sickled. Events that slow erythrocyte transit through the microcirculation include adhesion to endothelial cells, erythrocytic dehydration, and vasomotor dysregulation. Clinically, the hallmarks of sickling episodes are periods during which there is ischemia and infarction in various organs. The sickle-cell crisis produces clinical symptoms, predominately pain, which is often severe. There may be aplastic, megaloblastic, sequestration, and hemolytic crises.
# Chunk 6685
Chronic and acute changes from sickling include bony abnormalities such as osteonecrosis of femoral and humeral heads, renal medullary damage, autosplenectomy in homozygous SS patients and splenomegaly in other variants, hepatomegaly, ventricular hypertrophy, pulmonary infarctions, pulmonary hypertension, cerebrovascular accidents, leg ulcers, and a propensity for infection and sepsis (Benz, 2015; Gladwin, 2004). Other sequelae are cerebrovascular aneurysms and sickle-cell vasculopathy (Buonanno, 2016). Pulmonary hypertension can develop and is found in 20 percent of adults with SS hemoglobin (Gladwin, 2008).
# Chunk 6686
Prophylactic Red Cell Transfusions. Chronic transfusion therapy prevents strokes in high-risk children (DeBaun, 2014). During pregnancy, the most dramatic beneit of prophylactic transfusions has been on maternal morbidity rates (Benites, 2016). In an observational 10-year prospective study at Parkland Hospital, we ofered prophylactic transfusions to all pregnant women with sickle-cell syndromes. Transfusions were given throughout pregnancy to maintain the hematocrit above 25 volumes percent and the portion of hemoglobin S <60 percent (Cunningham, 1979). Maternal morbidity was minimal, and erythropoiesis suppression was not problematic. Their outcomes were compared with historical controls who were not routinely transfused. Overall, morbidity and hospitalization rates were signiicantly reduced in the transfused group (Asma, 2015; Cunningham, 1983; Grossetti, 2009). Still, adverse perinatal outcomes are prevalent (Ngo, 2010).
# Chunk 6687
Data from Maberry, 1990.

Although uncommon in the United States, hemoglobin E is the second most frequent hemoglobin variant worldwide. The heterozygous E trait is common in Southeast Asia. Hurst and coworkers (1983) identified homozygous hemoglobin E, hemoglobin E plus 3-thalassemia, or hemoglobin E trait in 36 percent of Cambodians and 25 percent of Laotians. Hemoglobin EE is associated with little or no anemia, hypochromia, marked microcytosis, or erythrocyte targeting. Kemthong and colleagues (2016) studied 1073 women and 2146 controls and found that hemoglobin E trait does not increase pregnancy risks other than asymptomatic bacteriuria. Conversely, doubly heterozygous E-3-thalassemia is a common cause of severe childhood anemia in Southeast Asia (DeLoughery, 2014). In a cohort study of 54 women with singleton pregnancies, Luewan and associates (2009) reported a threefold greater risk of preterm birth and fetal-growth restriction in afected women. It is unclear if hemoglobin SE disease is ominous during pregnancy.
# Chunk 6688
Initially, prednisone, 1 mg/kg daily, is given to suppress the phagocytic activity of the splenic monocyte-macrophage sys tem. IYlG given in a total dose of 2 g/kg during 2 to 5 days is also efective.
# Chunk 6689
Medof BD, Shepard JO, Smith RN, et al: Case 17-2005: a 22-year-old woman with back and leg pain and respiratory failure. N Engl J Med 352:2425, 2005
# Chunk 6690
MODY = maturit I-onset diabetes of the young. Data from Powers, 21n2.

Diabetes is the most common medical complication of pregnancy. Women can be separated into those who were known to have diabetes before pregnancy-pregestationalior overt, and those diagnosed during pregnancy-gestational diabetes. The proportion of pregnancies complicated by diabetes more than doubled between 1994 and 2008, after which rates seem to have stabilized Oovanovic, 2015). Almost 258,000-6.5 percent-of gravidas in the United States had pregnancies coexistent with some form of diabetes in 2015 (Martin, 2017). Prevalence of diabetes is highest among non-Hispanic blacks, Mexican-Americans, Puerto Rican-Americans, and Native Americans (Golden, 2012). he incidence of gestational diabetes during the past 20 years, shown in Figure 57-1, is reminiscent of similar statistics for obesity (Chap. 48, p. 936).
# Chunk 6691
random plasma glucose level >200 mg/dL plus classic signs and symptoms such as polydipsia, polyuria, and unexplained weight loss, or those with a fasting glucose levelr> 125 mg/dL are considered by the ADA (2017 a) and the World Health Organization (2013) to have overt diabetes first detected in pregnancy. Women with only minimal metabolic derangement may be more diicult to identiY. To diagnose overt diabetes in pregnancy, he International Association of Diabetes and Pregnancy Study Groups (IADPSG) Consensus Panel (2010) recognizes the threshold values found in Table 57-4 for fasting or random plasma glucose and glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1J levels at prenatal care initiation. The ADA (2017a) and the World Health Organization (2013) now also consider a plasma glucose level >200 mg/dL measured 2 hours after a 75 g oral glucose load to be diagnostic. No consensus has been reached as to whether such testing should be universal or limited to those women classiied as high risk. Regardless, the tentative diagnosis of overt diabetes during pregnancy based on these thresholds should be conirmed postpartum. isk factors for impaired carbohydrate metabolism in pregnant women include a strong familial history of diabetes, prior delivery of a large newborn, persistent glucosuria, or unexplained fetal losses.
# Chunk 6692
FIGURE 57-3 This 6050-g macrosomic infant was born to a woman with gestational diabetes.

15.8 400.) 11.7 30 25 5 3/1e9 5 2/1e7 0 <6 6-6.9 7-7.9 �8 FIGURE 57-2 The frequency of major congenital malformations in newborns ofwomen with pregestational diabetes stratified by hemoglobin Ale levels at first prenatal visit. (Data from Galindo A, Burguillo AG, Azriel S, et al: Outcome offetuses in women with pregestational diabetes mellitus, J Perinat Med. 2006;34(4):323-331.) reported that the macrosomia rates for Nordic women with type 1, type 2, or gestational diabetes were 35 percent, 28 percent, and 24 percent, respectively. As shown in 57-4, the birthweight distribution of neonates of diabetic mothers is skewed toward consistently heavier birthweights. In the study by Hammoud and colleagues (2013), fetal growth profiles from 897 sonographic examinations in 244 women with diabetes were compared with 843 examinations in 145 control women. he abdominal circumference grew disproportionately larger in the diabetic groups. Analysis of head circumference/abdominal circumference (HC/AC) ratios shows that this disproportionate growth occurs mainly ..0
# Chunk 6693
Infections. The rates of many infections are higher in diabetic pregnancies. Common ones include candidal vulvovaginitis, urinary and respiratory tract infections, and puerperal pelvic sepsis. However, in one study of more than 1250 diabetic gravidas screened before 16 weeks' gestation, rates of bacterial vaginosis or vaginal colonization with Candida or Tricho monas species were not increased (Marschalek, 2016). But, in their population-based study of almost 200,000 pregnancies, Sheiner and coworkers (2009) found a twofold greater risk of asymptomatic bacteruria in women with diabetes. Similarly, Alvarez and associates (2010) reported positive urine culture results in 25 percent of diabetic women. In a 2-year analysis of pyelonephritis at Parkland Hospital, 5 percent of women with diabetes developed pyelonephritis compared with 1.3 percent of the nondiabetic population (Hill, 2005). Fortunately, these latter infections can be minimized by screening and eradication of asymptomatic bacteriuria (Chap. 53, p. 1027). Finally, Johnston and colleagues (2017) reported that 16.5 percent of women with pregestational diabetes had postoperative wound complications following cesarean delivery.
# Chunk 6694
Hemoglobin Ale :;6% associated with lower fat mass in ofspring at birth (Renault, 2015). Allotted carbohydrates are distributed throughout the day in three small-to moderate-sized meals and two to four snacks. Weight loss is not recommended, but modest caloric restriction may be appropriate for overweight or obese women. An ideal dietary composition is 55 percent carbohydrate, 20 percent protein, and 25 percent fat, of which < 10 percent is saturated fat.
# Chunk 6695
At Parkland Hospital, women with diabetes are seen in a specialized obstetrical clinic every 2 weeks. During these visits, glycemic control records are evaluated and insulin adjusted. Women are routinely instructed to perform fetal kick counts beginning early in the third trimester. At 34 weeks, admission is ofered to all insulin-treated women. While in the hospital, they continue daily fetal movement counts and undergo fetal heart rate monitoring three times a week. Delivery is planned for 38 weeks.
# Chunk 6696
The Hyperglycemia and Adverse Pregnancy Outcome Study

This was a 7 -year international epidemiological study of 23,325 pregnant women at 15 centers in nine countries (HAPO Study Cooperative Research Group, 2008). The investigation analyzed the association of various levels of glucose intolerance during the third trimester with adverse infant outcomes in women with gestational diabetes. Between 24 and 32 weeks' gestation, the general population of pregnant women underwent a 75-g OGTT after an overnight fasting. Blood glucose levels were measured fasting and then 1 and 2 hours after glucose ingestion. Caregivers were blinded to results except for women whose glucose levels exceeded values that required treatment and removal from the study. Glucose values at each of these three time posts were stratiied into seven categories (Fig. 57-6). hese values were then correlated with rates for birthweight >90th percentile (LGA) , primary cesarean delivery, neonatal hypoglycemia, and cord-serum C-peptide levels >90th percentile. Odds of each outcome were calculated using the lowest category-for example, fasting plasma glucose :;75 mg/dL-as the referent group. Their indings in general supported the supposition that increasing plasma glucose levels were associated with increasing adverse outcomes. Ecker and diagnosis rates but not with reduced macrosomia rates compared with a twostep approach. Remarkably, they identi � rate associated with adoption of the : IADPSG recommendations. he ADA ) (2013, 2017a) initially recommended ) adopting this new approach, however, ..J,approach described on page 1108, they now concede that data support a twostep strategy as well.
# Chunk 6697
Maternal Obesity. In women with gestational diabetes, maternal body mass index (BMI) is an independent and more substantial risk factor for fetal macrosomia than is glucose intolerance (Ehrenberg, 2004; Mission, 2013). Stuebe and associates (2012) completed a secondary analysis of women with either untreated mild gestational diabetes or normal glucose tolerance testing results. They found that higher BMI levels were associated with rising birthweight, regardless of glucose levels. In one analysis of more than 600,000 pregnant women, gestational diabetes, compared with obesity or gestational weight gain, contributed the least to the population-attributable fraction of LGA neonates (Kim, 2014). he highest fraction of LGA neonates was attributable to maternal obesity plus excessive gestational weight gain. Similarly, Egan and colleagues (2014) found that excessive gestational weight gain is common in women with gestational diabetes and confers an additive risk for fetal macrosomia. Weight distribution also seems to playra role because the risk of gestational diabetes is greater with maternal truncal obesity. Suresh and colleagues (2012) veriied that increased maternal abdominal subcutaneous fat thickness as measured by sonography at 18 to 22 weeks' gestation correlated with BMI and was a better predictor of gestational diabetes.
# Chunk 6698
Hawkins and colleagues (2008) compared outcomes in 315 women with diet-treated gestational diabetes who used personal glucose monitors with those of 615 gestational diabetics who were also diet-treated but who underwent intermittent fasting glucose evaluation during weekly obstetrical visits. Women using daily blood-glucose self monitoring had significantly fewer macrosomic newborns. They also gained less weight after diagnosis than women evaluated during clinic visits only. hese indings support the common practice of blood-glucose self monitors for women with diet-treated gestational diabetes.
# Chunk 6699
Postprandial surveillance for gestational diabetes has been shown to be superior to preprandial surveillance (De Veciana, 1995). At Parkland Hospital, we reviewed the impact of changing to postprandial monitoring in women with diet-treated gestational diabetes and demonstrated a signiicant reduction in maternal weight gain per week-0.63lb/week to 0.45 lb/weekin women managed with a postprandial monitoring schema. The merican College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017 a) and the ADA (20 17b) recommend glucose assessment four times daily. The first check is performed fasting, and the remainder are done 1 or 2 hours ater each meal.
# Chunk 6700
If insulin is initiated, the starting dose is typically 0.7 to 1.0 units/kg/d and is given in divided doses (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2017a). A combination of intermediate-acting and short -acting insulin may be used, and dose adjustments are based on glucose levels at particular times of the day. At Parkland Hospital, the starting daily dose is divided so that two thirds is given in the morning before breakfast and one third in the evening before dinner. In the morning dose, one third is regular insulin and two thirds are NPH (neutral protamine Hagedorn). For the evening dose, one half is regular insulin and the other half is NPH. Insulin instruction for these women is accomplished either in a specialized outpatient clinic or during a short hospital stay. As shown in Table 57-8, insulin analogues such as insulin aspart and insulin lispro have a more rapid onset of action than regular insulin and theoretically could be helpful in postprandial glucose management. Experience with these analogues with gestational diabetes is limited, and Singh and coworkers (2009) were unable to demonstrate a beneit compared with conventional insulins.
# Chunk 6701
Metformin reaches fetal serum concentrations similar to maternal levels. However, in one study of 751 women with gestational diabetes who were randomly assigned to metformin or insulin treatment, short-term perinatal adverse events did not difer between groups (Rowan, 2008). Outcomes included neonatal hypoglycemia, respiratory distress syndrome, photo therapy, birth trauma, 5-minute Apgar score .7, and preterm birth. Overall growth of ofspring at age 2 years also did not difer (Rowan, 2011). Nevertheless, the fat distribution in chil dren exposed to metformin showed a tendency toward a more favorable pattern. From a smaller randomized metformin trial, at 18 months, ofspring exposed to metformin were slightly heavier, but markers of early motor or language development did not difer compared with those in ofspring exposed to insulin (Ijas, 2015).
# Chunk 6702
Women with gestational diabetes and adequate glycemic control are managed expectantly. Elective labor induction to prevent shoulder dystocia compared with spontaneous labor remains controversial. Alberico and colleagues (2017) recently described their truncated randomized trial of 425 women with tation. Although underpowered, this GINEXMAL Trial dem onstrated no clinically meaningful diference in the cesarean delivery rate between the induction and expectant management groups-12.6 versus 11.8 percent. However, with early labor induction, neonatal hyperbilirubinemia rates were signiicantly higher, and ironically, there was a nonsigniicant threefold greater shoulder dystocia rate. In a retrospective cohort study of 8392 Canadian women with gestational diabetes, Melamed 39 weeks was associated with a lower rate of cesarean delivery but with an elevated rate of neonatal intensive care unit admis sion. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 39 weeks' gestation. At Parkland Hospital, women with diet treated gestational diabetes are not electively induced for this indication. However, those treated with insulin are delivered at 38 weeks' gestation.
# Chunk 6703
Data from American Diabetes Association, 2013, 2017a; Metzger, 2007.

of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017a) recommends either a fasting glucose or the 75-g, 2-hour OGTT at 4 to 12 weeks postpartum for the diagnosis of overt diabetes. he ADA (2017a) recommends testing at least every 3 years in women with a history of gestational diabetes but normal postpartum glucose screening.
# Chunk 6704
Se3 1.0 �2 : 0.5 0.0 o 10 20 30 40

FIGURE 58-1 Gestational age specific values for serum thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) levels (black lines) and free thyroxine (T4) levels (blue lines). Data were derived from 17,298 women tested during pregnancy. For each color, the dark solid lines represent the 50th percentile, whereas the upper and lower light lines represent the 25th and 975th percentiles, respectively. (Data from Casey, 2005; Dashe, 2005.) by placental trophoblast. Because TSH does not cross the placenta, it has no direct fetal efects. During the irst 12 weeks of gestation, when maternal hCG serum levels are maximal, thyroid hormone secretion is stimulated. he resulting greater serum free thyroxine (T4) levels act to suppress hypothalamic thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) and in turn limit pituitary TSH secretion (Fig.
# Chunk 6705
hroughout pregnancy, maternal thyroxine is transferred to the fetus (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2017). Maternal thyroxine is important for normal fetal brain development, especially before the onset of fetal thyroid gland function (Bernal, 2007; Korevaar, 2016). And, even though the fetal gland begins concentrating iodine and synthesizing thyroid hormone after 12 weeks' gestation, maternal thyroxine contribution remains important. In fact, maternal sources account for 30 percent of thyroxine in fetal serum at term (horpe-Beeston, 1991). Still, developmental risks associated with maternal hypothyroidism after midpregnancy remain poorly understood (Morreale de Escobar, 2004; Sarkhail, 2016).
# Chunk 6706
Autoimmune thyroid disease is much more common in women than in men. One intriguing explanation for this disparity is fetal-to-maternal cell traicking (Greer, 201l). Fetal cells are known to enter maternal circulation during pregnancy. When fetal lymphocytes enter maternal circulation, they can live for more than 20 years. Stem cell interchange can lead to engraftment in several maternal tissues and is termed etal microchimerism. In some cases, this may involve the thyroid gland (Bianchi, 2003; Boddy, 2015; Khosrotehrani, 2004). A high prevalence of Y-chromosome-positive cells has been identiied using luorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) in the thyroid glands of women with Hashimoto thyroiditis-60 percent, or with Graves disease-40 percent (Renne, 2004). In another study of women giving birth to a male fetus, Lepez and colleagues (201l) identiied signiicantly more circulating male mononuclear cells in those with Hashimoto thyroiditis. Ironically, such micro chimerism may have a protective role for autoimmune thyroid disorders (Cirello, 2015).
# Chunk 6707
Because normal pregnancy simulates some clinical findings similar to thyroxine excess, clinically mild thyrotoxicosis may be diicult to diagnose. Suggestive indings include tachycardia that exceeds that usually seen with normal pregnancy, thyromegaly, exophthalmos, and failure to gain weight despite adequate food intake. Laboratory testing is confirmatory. TSH levels are markedly depressed, while serum free T4 (IT4) levels are elevated Qameson, 2015). Rarely, hyperthyroidism is caused by abnormally high serum triiodothyronine (T 3) levels-so-called Trtoxicosis.
# Chunk 6708
The initial thionamide dose is empirical. For nonpregnant patients, the American hyroid Association recommends that methimazole be used at an initial higher daily dose of 10 to 20 mg orally followed by a lower maintenance dose of 5 to 10 mg. If PTU is selected, a dose of 50 to 150 mg orally three times daily may be initiated depending on clinical severity (Bahn, 2011). At Parkland Hospital, we usually initially give 300 or 450 mg of PTU daily in three divided doses for pregnant women. Occasionally, daily doses of 600 mg or higher are necessary. As discussed, we generally do not transition women to methimazole during the second trimester. he goal is treatment with the lowest possible thionamide dose to maintain thyroid hormone levels slightly above or in the high normal range, while TSH levels remains suppressed (Bahn, 2011). Serum free T 4 concentrations are measured every 4 to 6 weeks.
# Chunk 6709
The fetus or neonate who was exposed to excessive maternal thyroxine may have any of several clinical presentations. First, goitrous thyrotoxicosis is caused by placental transfer of thyroidstimulating immunoglobulins. Nonimmune hydrops and fetal demise have been reported with fetal thyrotoxicosis (Nachum, 2003; Stulberg, 2000). The best predictor of perinatal thyrotoxicosis is presence of thyroid-stimulating TSH-receptor antibodies in women with Graves disease (Nathan, 2014). This is especially true if their levels are more than threefold higher than the upper normal limit (Barbesino, 2013). In a study of 72 pregnant women with Graves disease, Luton and associates (2005) reported that none of the fetuses in 31 low-risk mothers had a goiter, and all were euthyroid at delivery. Low risk was defined as no requirement for antithyroid medications during the third trimester or an absence of antithyroid antibodies. Conversely, in a group of 41 women who either were taking antithyroid medication at delivery or had thyroid receptor antibodies, 11 fetuses-27 percent-had sonographic evidence of a goiter at 32 weeks' gestation. Seven of these 11 fetuses were determined to be hypothyroid, and the remaining fetuses were hyperthyroid. In response to these results, the merican Thyroid Association and American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists (201r1) recommend routine evaluation of TSH-receptor antibodies between 22 and 26 weeks' gestation in women with Graves disease. he American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017), however, does not recommend such testing. If the fetus is thyrotoxic, maternal thionamide drugs are adjusted even though maternal thyroid function may be within the targeted range (Mestman, 2012). lthough usually short-lived, neonatal thyrotoxicosis may require short-course antithyroid drug treatment (Levy-Shraga, 2014; Nathan, 2014).
# Chunk 6710
Management. Treatment is similar for thyroid storm and heart failure and should be carried out in an intensive care area that may include special-care units within labor and delivery (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2017). Shown in Figure 58-4 is our stepwise approach to medical management of thyroid storm or thyrotoxic heart failure. An hour or two ater initial thionamide administration, iodide is given to inhibit thyroidal release ofT3 and T4. It can be given intravenously as sodium iodide or orally as either saturated solution of potassium iodide (SSKI) or Lugol solution. With a history of iodine-induced anaphylaxis, lithium carbonate, 300 mg every 6 hours, is given instead. Most authorities recommend dexamethasone, 2 mg intravenously every 6 hours for four doses, to further block peripheral conversion ofT4 to T3. If a 3-blocker drug is given to control tachycardia, its efect on heart failure must be considered. Propranolol, labetalol, and esmolol have all been used successfully. Coexisting severe preeclampsia, infection, or anemia should be aggressively managed before delivery is considered.
# Chunk 6711
Treatment. The American hyroid Association and American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists (2011) recommend replacement therapy for overt hypothyroidism beginning with levothyroxine in doses of 1 to 2 ILg/kgl d or approximately 100 Lg daily. Women who are athyreotic after thyroidectomy or radioiodine therapy may require higher doses. Surveillance is with TSH levels measured at 4-to 6-week intervals, and the thyroxine dose is adjusted by 25-to 50-lLg increments until TSH values become normal. Pregnancy is associated with an increased thyroxine requirement in approximately a third of supplemented women (Abalovich, 2010; Alexander, 2004). The increased demand in pregnancy is believed to be related to augmented estrogen production (Arafah, 2001).
# Chunk 6712
Greater thyroxine requirements begin as early as 5 weeks' gestation. In a randomized trial that provided an increased levothyroxine dose at pregnancy confirmation in 60 mothers, Yassa and coworkers (2010) found that a 29-to 43-percent increase in the weekly dose maintained serum TSH values <5.0 mUlL during the first trimester in all women. Importantly, however, this increase caused TSH suppression in more than a third of women. Significant hypothyroidism may develop early in women without thyroid reserve, such as those with a previous thyroidectomy, those with prior radioiodine ablation, or those undergoing assisted reproductive techniques (Alexander, 2004; Loh, 2009). Anticipatory 25-percent increases in thyroxine replacement at pregnancy conirmation will reduce this likelihood. All other women with hypothyroidism should instead undergo TSH testing at initiation of prenatal care.
# Chunk 6713
All women with symptomatic hyperparathyroidism should be surgically treated (Potts, 2015). Indications for parathyroidectomy include a serum calcium level 1.0 mg/dL above the upper normal range, a calculated creatinine clearance < 60 mLi min, reduced bone density, or age >50 years (Bilezikian, 2009). Those not meeting these criteria should undergo annual serum calcium and creatinine level measurement and bone density assessment every 1 to 2 years (Pallan, 2012).
# Chunk 6714
Medical management may be appropriate in asymptomatic pregnant women with mild hypercalcemia (Hirsch, 2015). If so, patients are careully monitored in the puerperium for hypercalcemic crisis. Initial medical management might include cacitonin to decrease skeletal calcium release, or oral phosphate, 1 to 1.5 g daily in divided doses, to bind excess calcium. For women with dangerously elevated serum calcium levels or those who are mentally obtunded with hypercacemic crisis, emergency treatment is instituted. Diuresis with intravenous normal saline is begun so that urine low exceeds 150 mLlhr. Furosemie is given in conventional doses to block tubular calcium reabsorption. Importantly, hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia should be prevented. Adjunctive therapy includes mithramycin, which inhibits bone resorption.
# Chunk 6715
he typical cushingoid body habitus is caused by adipose tissue deposition that characteristically results in moon acies, a builo hump, and truncal obesiy. Fatigability and weakness, hypertension, hirsutism, and amenorrhea are each encountered in 75 to 85 percent of nonpregnant patients (Hatipoglu, 2012). Personality changes, easy bruisability, and cutaneous striae are common. Up to 60 percent may have impaired glucose tolerance. Diagnosis can be diicult and is suggested by elevated plasma cortisol levels that cannot be suppressed by dexamethasone or by elevated 24-hour urine free cortisol excretion (Arit, 2015; Loriaux, 2017). Neither test is totally accurate, and each is more diicult to interpret in obese patients. Serum corticotropin levels and CT and MR imaging are used to localize pituitary and adrenal tumors or hyperplasia.
# Chunk 6716
Hyperaldosteronism is caused by an adrenal adenoma-Conn syndrome-in approximately 75 percent of cases. Idiopathic bilateral adrenal hyperplasia makes up the remainder, except for rare cases of adrenal carcinoma (Abdelmannan, 2011; Eschler, 2015). Findings include hypertension, hypokalemia, and muscle weakness. High serum or urine levels of aldosterone confirm the diagnosis.
# Chunk 6717
Sheehan (1937) reported that pituitary ischemia and necrosis associated with obstetrical blood loss could result in hypopituitarism. With modern methods of hemorrhagic shock treatment, Sheehan syndrome is now seldom encountered (Feinberg, 2005; Pappachan, 2015; Robalo, 2012). Afected women may have persistent hypotension, tachycardia, hypoglycemia, and lactation failure. Because deficiencies of some or all pituitary-responsive hormones may develop after the initial insult, Sheehan syndrome can be heterogenous and may not be identified for years (Tessnow, 2010). In one cohort study of 60 women from Costa Rica with Sheehan syndrome, the average time to diagnosis was 13 years (Gei-Guardia, 2011). Because adrenal insuiciency is the most life-threatening complication, adrenal function should be immediately assessed in any woman suspected of having Sheehan syndrome. Mter glucocorticoid replacement, subsequent analyses and replacement of thyroid, gonadal, and growth hormones is considered.
# Chunk 6718
Yoshihara A, Noh ]Y, Mukasa K, attel: Serum human chorionic gonadotropin levels and thyroid hormone levels in gestational transient thyrotoxicosis: is the serum hCG level useful for diferentiating berween active Graves' disease and GTT? Endocr] 62(6):557,t2015
# Chunk 6719
The survival rate for women with SLE is 95 percent at 5 years, 90 percent at 10 years, and 78 percent at 20 years (Hahn, 2015). In general, women with lupus and chronic vascular or renal disease may limit family size because of morbidity associated with the disease and greater risks for adverse perinatal outcomes. For contraception, combination oral contraceptives did not increase the incidence oflupus lares in two large multicenter trials (Petri, 2005; Sanchez-Guerrero, 2005). Progestinonly implants and injections provide efective contraception with no known efects on lupus lares (Sammaritano, 2014). Concerns that intrauterine device (IUD) use and immunosuppressive therapy lead to greater infection rates in these patients are not evidenced-based. Notably, comorbid antiphospholipid antibodies are a contraindication to hormonal methods. Tubal sterilization may be advantageous and is performed with greatest safety postpartum or whenever SLE is quiescent.
# Chunk 6720
Unractionated heparin is given subcutaneously in dosages of 5000 to 10,000 units every 12 hours. Some prefer lowmolecular-weight heparin, such as 40 mg enoxaparin (Lovenox) once daily (Kwak-Kim, 2013). With therapeutic dosing, measurement of heparin levels may be useful because clotting tests can be altered by LAC. he rationale for heparin therapy is to prevent venous and arterial thrombotic episodes. Heparin therapy also prevents thrombosis in the microcirculation, including the decidual-trophoblastic interface (Toglia, 1996). As discussed, heparin binds to 3rglycoprotein I, which coats the syncytiotrophoblast. This prevents binding of ACAs and anti-3rglycoprotein I antibodies to their surfaces, which likely prevents cellular damage (Tsokos, 2011). Heparin also binds to antiphospholipid antibodies in vitro and likely in vivo. Aspirin plus heparin therapy is the most eicacious regimen (de
# Chunk 6721
Glucocorticoid therapy in low-to-moderate doses is given to achieve more rapid symptom control. Of these, prednisone, 7.5 mg orally daily for the first 2 years of active disease, substantively reduces progressive joint erosions (Kirwan, 1995; Shah, 201r5).
# Chunk 6722
The American College of Rheumatology recommends several DMARDs that may reduce or prevent joint damage (Singh, 2016). Lelunomide, like methotrexate, is teratogenic (Briggs, 2015) (Chap. 12, p. 241). Sulfasalazine and hydroxychloroquine are safe for use in pregnancy (Pardett, 201r1). These, combined with COX-2 inhibitors and with relatively low-dose prednisone-7.5 to 20 mg daily-usually successfully treat flares. In one review of drug exposure, a fourth of women with rheumatoid arthritis took a DMARD within 6 months of conception (Kuriya, 2011). During pregnancy, 4 percent of 393 pregnant women were given a category D or X medication. Methotrexate was the most common 2.9 percent.
# Chunk 6723
Half of patients have symptoms from esophageal involve ment, especially fullness and epigastric burning pain. Pulmo nary involvement is frequent and causes dyspnea. The 10-year cumulative survival rate is 70 percent in those with pulmo nary fibrosis, and pulmonary arterial hypertension is the main cause of death Goven, 2010; Varga, 2015). Women with lim ited cutaneous disease such as the CEST syndrome-falcinosis,
# Chunk 6724
Poymyositis is a subacute inflammatory myopathy that is frequently associated with one of the autoimmune connective tissue disorders. Dermatomyositis manifests as a characteristic rash accompanying or preceding weakness. Laboratory findings include elevated muscle enzyme levels in serum and an abnormal electromyogram. Conirmation is by biopsy, which shows perivascular and perimysial inlammatory infiltrates, vasculitis, and muscle iber degeneration. It usually develops alone but can overlap with systemic sclerosis or mixed connective tissue disease.
# Chunk 6725
Cerebral angiography with contrast injection, usually via the femoral artery, is a valuable adjunct to the diagnosis and treatment of some cerebrovascular diseases. Fluoroscopy delivers more radiation but can be performed with abdominal shielding. Positron emission tomography (PET) and functional MR imaging (fMI) have not been evaluated for use in pregnant patients (Chiapparini, 2010).
# Chunk 6726
Women with epilepsy ideally are counseled before pregnancy and relevant points are presented also in Chapter 8 (p. 148). Folic acid supplementation with 0.4 mg per day is begun at least 1 month before conception. The dose is increased to 4 mg when the woman taking antiepileptic medication becomes pregnant. hese medications are assessed and adjusted with a goal of mono therapy using the least teratogenic medication. If this is not feasible, then attempts are made to reduce the number of medications used and to use them at the lowest efective dose (Patel, 2016). Medication withdrawal should be considered if a woman is seizure free for 2 years or more.
# Chunk 6727
FIGURE 60-3 A 37-year-old gravida with intrapartum eclampsia at term. A noncontrast computed tomography axial head image demonstrates a large intraparenchymal hemorrhage.
# Chunk 6728
4.

Progressive-relapsing MS refers to primary progressive vIS with apparent relapses.

Classic findings of MS include sensory loss, visual symptoms from optic neuritis, weakness, paresthesias, and a host of other neurological symptoms. Almost 75 percent of women with isolated optic neuritis develop MS within 15 years. Clinical diagnosis is confirmed by MR imaging and cerebrospinal fluid analysis. In greater than 95 percent of cases, MR imaging shows characteristic multifocal white matter plaques that represent discrete areas of demyelination (Fig. 60-4). Their appearance and extent are less helpful for predicting treatment response. Similarly, identification of serum antibodies against myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein and myelin basic protein is not predictive of recurrent disease activity (Kuhle, 2007).
# Chunk 6729
Goals are to arrest acute or initial attacks, employ diseasemodiying agents, and provide symptomatic relief. Some treatments may need to be modiied during pregnancy. Acute or initial attacks are treated with high-dose intravenous methylprednisolone-500 to 1000 mg daily for 3 to 5 days, followed by oral prednisone for 2 weeks. Plasma exchange may be considered. Symptomatic relief can be provided by analgesics; carbamazepine, phenytoin, or amitriptyline for neurogenic pain; baclofen for spasticity; :Tadrenergic blockade for bladder neck relaxation; and cholinergic and anticholinergic drugs to stimulate or inhibit bladder contractions.
# Chunk 6730
Prevention of relapses postpartum is aforded by treatment with intravenous immunoglobulin (I I G) , given in a dose of 0.4 g/kg daily for 5 days during weeks 1, 6, and 12 (Argyriou, 2008).
# Chunk 6731
Guillain-Barre syndrome is not more common in pregnancy, and its clinical course mirrors that for nonpregnant individuals. After an insidious onset, paresis and paralysis most oten continue to ascend to cause ventilatory weakness. Management is supportive and incorporates venous thromboembolism prophylaxis, pressure ulcer prevention, and enteral nutrition. In the worsening phase, patients are hospitalized, and a fourth requires ventilatory assistance. IVIG or plasmapheresis is beneficial if begun within 1 to 2 weeks of motor symptoms, however, neither decreases mortality rates (Cortese, 2011; Gwathmey, 2011; Pritchard, 2016). Up to 10 percent of patients deteriorate after initial improvement on therapy, and retreatment with 2 g/kg IVIG over 5 days is recommended. Although most patients recover fully within several months to a year, the mortality rate is 5 percent, mainly due to pulmonary complications and arrhythmias (Hauser, 20 15a; Pacheco, 2016).
# Chunk 6732
Bell palsy usually has an abrupt and painful onset with maximum weakness by 48 hours. In some cases, hyperacusis and loss of taste accompany paralysis (Beal, 2015). Management includes supportive care with facial muscle massage and eye protection against corneal lacerations from drying. here is general consensus that prednisone, 1 mg/kg given orally daily for 5 days, will improve outcomes and shorten the recovery period (Salinas, 2016; Sullivan, 2007). It is controversial whether addition of an antiviral medication will add benefits (de Almeida, 2009; Gagyor, 2015; Quant, 2009).
# Chunk 6733
Second, women with lesions above T 5-T6 are at risk for autonomic dysrlexia. With this, stimuli from structures innervated below the level of the spinal lesion lead to massive, disordered sympathetic stimulation. Abrupt catecholamine release can cause vasoconstriction with severe hypertension and symptoms that include throbbing headaches, facial flushing, sweating, bradycardia, tachycardia, arrhythmias, and respiratory distress . Dysrelexia can be precipitated by various stimuli. hese include urethral catheterization, bladder distention from urinary retention, rectal or cervical stretch during digital examinations, uterine contractions and cervical dilation, or any manipulation of other pelvic structures (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2016; Krassioukov, 2009). In one report, 12 of 15 women at risk for autonomic dysreflexia sufered at least one episode during pregnancy (Westgren, 1993).
# Chunk 6734
Shown in Figure 61-1 is one algorithm regarding treatment of mood disorders. Some of these medications are listed in 1 able 61-3. For women with severe depression, a selective sero tonin-reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) is selected initially. In contrast, tricyclic antidepressants and monoamine oxidase inhibitors are infrequently selected in contemporary practice. If depressive symptoms improve during a 6-week trial, the medication is continued for a minimum of 6 months to prevent relapse (Wisner, 2002). At least 60 percent of women taking antidepressant medication before pregnancy have symptoms during pregnancy. According to Hayes and colleagues (2012), approximately three fourths of women taking antidepressants before pregnancy stopped taking them before or during early pregnancy. For those who discontinue treatment, almost 70 percent have a relapse compared with approximately 25 percent who continue therapy. If the response is suboptimal or a relapse occurs, another SSRI is substituted, or psychiatric referral is considered.
# Chunk 6735
Signs of illness begin approximately at age 20 years, and commonly, work and psychosocial functioning deteriorate over time. Women have a slightly later onset than men and are less susceptible to autism and other neurodevelopmental abnormalities. hus, many investigators theorize that estrogen is protective. Afected women may become pregnant before symptoms manifest. With appropriate treatment, patients can experience a decrease or cessation of symptoms. Within 5 years from the irst signs of illness, 60 percent have social recovery, 50 percent are employed, 30 percent are mentally handicapped, and 10 percent require continued hospitalization (American Psychiatric Association, 2013).
# Chunk 6736
Skin biopsy and serum antibody assays are informative.

Immunofluorescent staining of a skin punch biopsy sample is the gold standard, and C3 complement and sometimes IgC are seen deposited along the basement membrane between the epidermis and the dermis (Katz, 1976). Also, in many cases, circulating IgC antibodies against collagen V1I can be detected in maternal serum (Powell, 2005; Sitaru, 2004).
# Chunk 6737
PUPPP may be compared with several skin eruptions. Some include contact dermatitis, drug eruption, viral exanthem, insect bites, scabies infestation, pityriasis rosea, and the other pregnancy-speciic dermatoses. It also may appear similar to early PC that has not yet blistered. In unclear cases, skin biopsy and negative serum collagen V1I antibody levels help to differentiate the two. Pruritus will usually respond to treatment with oral antihistamines, skin emollients, and topical corticosteroids. A few women will need systemic corticosteroids to relieve severe itching (Scheinfeld, 2008).
# Chunk 6738
Hidradenitis suppurativa is said to improve with pregnancy, but in our experiences, it is not appreciably changed. Twice daily topically applied I-percent clindamycin gel for 12 weeks aims to prevent new lesions. This can be supplemented by 7-to 10-day courses of oral amoxicillin plus clavulanic acid or oral clindamycin to reduce lesion progression (Margesson, 2014). Other options are reviewed by Perng and coworkers (2017).
# Chunk 6739
Local skin care, oral antihistamines, and topical corticosteroids are commonly used for many dermatoses. Oral antihistamines are given for pruritus. Suitable options include irst-generation agents such s diphenhydramine (Benadryl), 25 to 50 mg every 6 hours, or chlorpheniramine (Chlor-Trimeton), 4 mg every 6 hours. Second-generation agents-Ioratadine (Claritin) 10 mg daily or cetirizine (Zyrtec) 5 or 10 mg daily-may produce less sedation and are also pregnancy category B.
# Chunk 6740
Scheinfeld N: Pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy wholly abated with one week twice daily application of fluticasone propionate lotion: a case report and review of the literature. Dermatol Online 14(11):4,2008
# Chunk 6741
herapeutic radiation often results in signiicant fetal exposure depending on the dose, tumor location, field size, and gestational age. Potential adverse efects include fetal malformation, intellectual disability, growth restriction, sterility, and carcinogenesis (Brent, 1999; Stovall, 1995). In the 2 weeks following fertilization, exposure typically leads to chromosomal damage and embryonic death. he next most susceptible period is during organogenesis in weeks 2 through 8, and exposure can cause malformation. These might develop above a threshold dose of 0.1 to 0.2 Gy. During weeks 8 through 25, the fetal central nervous system is especially vulnerable. The threshold dose for intellectual disability at 8 to 15 weeks' gestation approximates 0.06 Gy, and at 16 to 25 weeks it is about 0.25 Gy (Kal, 2005; Otake, 1996). After 25 weeks' gestation, susceptibility is less, although no gestational age is considered safe for therapeutic radiation exposure. hus, radiotherapy to the maternal abdomen is contraindicated. With some head and neck cancers, however, radiotherapy to supradiaphragmatic areas can be used relatively safely with abdominal shielding of the fetus (Amant, 2015a).
# Chunk 6742
Fertility may be diminished after chemotherapy or radiotherapy. Counseling ideally takes place before cancer treatment, and guidelines for this have been developed (American Society for Reproductive Medicine, 2013a; Lambertini, 2016; Loren, 2013; Peccatori, 2013). Prior to therapy, cryopreservation of embryos or of oocytes is a recognized fertility-preserving option (American Society for Reproductive Medicine, 2013b,c). Surgical transposition of the ovaries can be considered if pelvic radiation is planned. For this, ovaries and their intact primary blood supply are carried out of the pelvis and ixed to the lateral abdominal wall at a site 3 to 4 cm above the level of the umbilicus. In one review, functional preservation was reported in 65 to 94 percent, depending on radiotherapy type (Gubbala, 2014). Also, such transposition requires transabdominal egg retrieval if later in vitro fertilization is planned (American Society for Reproductive Medicine, 20 13a).
# Chunk 6743
Screening guidelines also applicable in pregnant women were updated in 2012 by the American Society for Colposcopy and Cervical Pathology (ASCCP). hese include: (1) no screening until age 21, (2) cytology alone every 3 years in those aged 21 to 29 years, and (3) in those older than 30, human papillomavirus (HPV) and cytology co-testing every 5 years, or cytology alone every 3 years (Massad, 2013). High-risk conditions for cervical neoplasia include human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, other immunocompromised states, and in utero diethylstilbestrol (DES) exposure. For women with HIV infection, initiation of cervical cancer screening with cytology alone begins within the first year after HIV diagnosis (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 20 16b).
# Chunk 6744
Women with histologically confirmed CIN during pregnancy may be allowed to deliver vaginally, with further evaluation planned after delivery. For those with CIN 1, the recommended management is reevaluation postpartum. For those with CIN 2 or 3 in which invasive disease has been excluded, deferring reevaluation until at least 6 weeks postpartum is acceptable. Alternatively, repeat colposcopic and cytological evaluations are performed at intervals no more frequent than 12 weeks. Repeat biopsy is recommended only if appearance of the lesion worsens or if cytology suggests invasive cancer (Massad,r2013).
# Chunk 6745
Cervical cancer is staged clinically, and 70 to 75 percent of cases that are diagnosed in pregnancy are stage I (Bigelow, 2017; Morice, 2012). Physiological pregnancy changes may impede accurate staging, and the extent of cancer is more likely to be underestimated in pregnant women. Specifically, induration of the broad ligament base, which characterizes tumor spread beyond the cervix, may be less prominent due to cervical, paracervical, and parametrial pregnancy-induced softening. Staging in pregnancy typically incorporates indings from pelvic examination and from renal sonography, chest radiography, cystoscopy, proctoscopy, and perhaps cone biopsy. Although MR imaging is not formally considered for clinical staging, it can be used without gadolinium contrast to ascertain involvement of the urinaty tract and lymph nodes (Fig. 63-3).
# Chunk 6746
If the adnexum is healthy, there are options. First, neoplasms are resected. However, ovarian cystectomy in an ischemic, edematous ovary may be technically diicult, and adnexectomy may be necessary. Second, unilateral or bilateral oophoropexy has been described to minimize the risk of repeated torsion (Djavadian, 2004; Germain, 1996). Techniques described include shortening of the utero ovarian ligament or fixing the utero ovarian ligament to the posterior uterus, the lateral pelvic wall, or the round ligament (Fuchs, 2010; Weitzman, 2008).
# Chunk 6747
he most common cause of ovarian hemorrhage follows rupture of a corpus luteum cyst. If the diagnosis is certain and symptoms abate, then observation and surveillance is usually suicient. Concern for ongoing bleeding will typically prompt surgical evaluation. If the corpus luteum is removed before 10 weeks' gestation, progestational support is recommended to maintain the pregnancy. Suitable regimens include: (1) micronized progesterone (Prometrium) 200 or 300 mg orally once daily; (2) 8-percent progesterone vaginal gel (Crinone), one premeasured applicator vaginally daily plus micronized progesterone 100 or 200 mg orally once daily; or (3) intramuscular 17 -hydroxyprogesterone caproate, 150 mg. The first two regimens are given until 10 completed weeks. For the last, if given between 8 and 10 weeks' gestation, only one injection is required immediately after surgery. If the corpus luteum is excised between 6 and 8 weeks' gestation, then two additional doses should be given 1 and 2 weeks after the irst.
# Chunk 6748
Generally, luteomas do not require surgical intervention unless there is torsion, rupture, or hemorrhage (Masarie, 2010). hese tumors spontaneously regress during the irst few months postpartum, and androgen levels drop precipitously during the irst 2 weeks following delivery (Wang, 2005). Lactation may be delayed a week or so by hyperandrogenemia (Dahl, 2008). Recurrence in subsequent pregnancies is rare.
# Chunk 6749
In women successfully treated for breast cancer, recurrence is a concern. Because recurrences are more common soon after treatment, it seems reasonable to delay conception for 2 to 3 years. Hormonal contraceptive methods are contraindicated, and a copper-containing intrauterine device is an excellent long-acting reversible method for many. That said, women who conceive do not appear to have diminished survival rates (Ives, 2006). Notably, women treated with tamoxifen are at risk for several months after its discontinuation to have a newborn with congenital anomalies. This drug has an extremely long half-life, and thus delaying conception is recommended for at least 2 months after tamoxifen completion (Braems, 2011).
# Chunk 6750
The Ann Arbor staging system, shown in Table 63-2, is applied to Hodgkin and other lymphomas. For staging, pregnancy limits the use of some radiographic studies, but at minimum, chest radiography, abdominal imaging with sonography or MR imaging, and bone marrow biopsy are completed (Williams, 2001). MR imaging is excellent for evaluating thoracic and abdominal paraaortic lymph nodes (Brenner, 2012). Staging laparotomy is seldom done today (Longo, 2015).
# Chunk 6751
Stage-for-stage, survival is equivalent between pregnant and nonpregnant women (Driscoll, 2016; Johansson, 2014). In one study, half of pregnant women had stage III or IV lesions (de Haan, 2017). Therapeutic abortion does not improve maternal survival rates. Clinical stage is the strongest determinant of survival, and women with deep cutaneous invasion or regional node involvement have the worst prognosis. Approximately 60 percent of recurrences will manifest within 2 years, and 90 percent by 5 years. Thus, most recommend that pregnancy be avoided for 3 to 5 years after surgical resection. Interim contraception can include combination oral contraceptives, as they do not appear to have adverse cancer efects (Gandini, 2011). Related, subsequent pregnancies in women with localized melanoma do not lower cancer survival rates (Driscoll, 2009).
# Chunk 6752
The active immunological capacity of the fetus and neonate is compromised compared with that of older children and adults. That said, fetal cell-mediated and humoral immunity begin to develop by 9 to 15 weeks' gestation (Warner, 2010). The primary fetal response to infection is immunoglobulin M (Ig.1). Passive immunity is provided by IgG transferred across the placenta. By 16 weeks, this transfer begins to rise rapidly, and by 26 weeks, fetal concentrations are equivalent to those of the mother. After birth, breastfeeding is protective against some infections, although this protection begins to decline at
# Chunk 6753
2 months of age. Current World Health Organization (2013) recommendations are to exclusively breastfeed for the first 6 months of life with partial breastfeeding until 2 years of age.
# Chunk 6754
Neonatal infection, especially in its early stages, may be dificult to diagnose because these newborns often fail to express classic clinical signs. If the fetus was infected in utero, there may be depression and acidosis at birth for no apparent reason. The neonate may suck poorly, vomit, or show abdominal distention. Respiratory insuiciency can develop, which may present similarly to idiopathic respiratory distress syndrome. he neonate may be lethargic or jittery. he response to sepsis may be hypothermia rather than hyperthermia, and the total leukocyte and neutrophil counts may be depressed.
# Chunk 6755
Several fetal abnormalities associated with CMV infection may be seen with sonography, computed tomography, or magnetic resonance imaging. In some cases, they are found at the time of routine prenatal sonographic screening, but in others they are part of a specific evaluation in women with CMV infection. Findings include microcephaly, ventriculomegaly, and cerebral calciications; ascites, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, and hyperechoic bowel; hydrops; and oligohydramnios (Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2016). Abnormal sonographic findings seen in combination with positive findings in fetal blood or amnionic fluid are predictive of an approximate 75-percent risk of symptomatic congenital infection (Enders, 2001).
# Chunk 6756
Currently, no proven treatments are available for CMV infection (Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2016). Leruez-Ville and associates (2016) recently reported that oral treatment with valacyclovir, 8 g daily, apparently mitigated adverse outcomes in eight of 11 afected fetuses treated beginning at median of 25.9 weeks' gestation. Kimberlin and colleagues (2015) previously showed that intravenous valganciclovir administered for 6 weeks to neonates with symptomatic central nevous system (CNS) disease prevented hearing deterioration at 6 months and possibly later. Passive immunization with CMV-specific hyperimmune globulin may lower the risk of congenital CMV infection when given to pregnant women with primary disease (Nigro, 2005, 2012; Visentin, 2012). he Maternal-Fetal Medicine Units Network currently is conducting a randomized trial designed to address this.
# Chunk 6757
Primary infection-varicela or chickenpox-is transmitted by direct contact with an infected individual, although respiratory transmission has been reported. The incubation period is 10 to 21 days, and a nonimmune woman has a 60-to 95-percent risk of becoming infected after exposure (Whitley, 2015). Primary varicella presents with a 1-to 2-day flulike prodrome, which is followed by pruritic vesicular lesions that crust after 3 to 7 days. Infection tends to be more severe in adults (Marin, 2007). Afected patients are then contagious from 1 day before the onset of the rash until the lesions become crusted.
# Chunk 6758
Symptoms of VZV pneumonia usually appear 3 to 5 days into the course of illness. Fever, tachypnea, dry cough, dyspnea, and pleuritic pain are characteristic. Nodular iniltrates are similar to other viral pneumonias (Chap. 51, p. 994). Although resolution of pneumonitis parallels that of skin lesions, fever and compromised pulmonary function may persist for weeks.
# Chunk 6759
If the fetus or neonate is exposed to active infection just before or during delivery, and therefore before maternal antibody has been formed, the newborn faces a serious threat. Attack rates range from 25 to 50 percent, and mortality rates approach 30 percent. In some instances, neonates develop disseminated visceral and CNS disease, which is commonly fatal. For this reason, varicella-zoster immune globulin (VZIG) should be administered to neonates born to mothers who have clinical evidence of varicella 5 days before and up to 2 days ater delivery.
# Chunk 6760
Experience with all of these antiviral agents in pregnant women is limited (Beau, 2014; Beigi, 2014; Dunstan, 2014). hey are Food and Drug Administration category C drugs and thus used when potential benefits outweigh risks. At Parkland Hospital, we start oral oseltamivir treatment within 48 hours of symptom onset-75 mg twice daily for 5 days. Earlyadministration may reduce length of hospital stays (Meijer, 2015; Oboho, 2016). Prophylaxis with oseltamivir, 75 mg orally once daily for 7 days, is also recommended for signiicant exposures. Antibacterial medications are added when a secondary bacterial pneumonia is suspected (Chap. 51, p. 993).
# Chunk 6761
Maternal rubella is usually a mild febrile illness with a generalized maculopapular rash beginning on the face and spreading to the trunk and extremities. hat said, 25 to 50 percent of infections are asymptomatic. Other symptoms may include arthralgias or arthritis, head and neck lymphadenopathy, and conjunctivitis. he incubation period is 12 to 23 days. Viremia usually precedes clinical signs by about a week, and adults are infectious during viremia and through 7 days after the rash appears. Up to half of maternal infections are subclinical despite viremia that may cause devastating fetal infection (McLean, 2013).
# Chunk 6762
Rubella virus may be isolated from the urine, blood, nasopharynx, and cerebrospinal fluid for up to 2 weeks after rash onset. The diagnosis is usually made, however, with serological analysis. In one study, 6 percent of nonimmune women seroconverted to rubella virus during pregnancy (Hutton, 2014). Specific IgM antibody can be detected using enzyme-linked immunoassay for 4 to 5 days after onset of clinical disease, but antibody can persist for up to 6 weeks after appearance of the rash. Importantly, rubella virus reinfection can give rise to transient low levels of IgM. With this, fetal infection can rarely occur, but no adverse fetal efects have been described. Serum IgG antibody titers peak 1 to 2 weeks after rash onset. his rapid antibody response may complicate serodiagnosis unless samples are initially collected within a few days after the onset of the rash. If, for example, the first specimen was obtained 10 days after the rash, detection of IgG antibodies would fail to diferentiate between very recent disease and preexisting immunity to rubella. IgG avidity testing is performed concomitant with the serological tests above. High-avidity IgG antibodies indicate an infection at least 2 months in the past.
# Chunk 6763
The rubella virus is one of the most complete teratogens, and efects of fetal infection are worst during organogenesis (Adams Waldorf, 2013). Pregnant women with rubella and a rash during the first 12 weeks of gestation have an afected fetus with congenital infection in up to 90 percent of cases (Miller, 1982). At 13 to 14 weeks' gestation, this incidence is 50 percent, and by the end of the second trimester, it is 25 percent. Defects are rare after 20 weeks' gestation. Features of congenital rubella syndrome amenable to prenatal diagnosis are cardiac septal defects, pulmonary stenosis, microcephaly, cataracts, microphthalmia, and hepatosplenomegaly (Yazigi, 2017). Other abnormalities include sensorineural deafness, intellectual disability, neonatal purpura, and radiolucent bone disease. Neonates born with congenital rubela may shed the virus or many months and thus be a threat to other inants and to susceptible adults who contact them. Reports of delayed morbidities associated with congenital rubella syndrome may include a rare, progressive panencephalitis, insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, and thyroid disorders (Sever, 1985; Webster, 1998).
# Chunk 6764
here is no speciic treatment for rubella. Droplet precautions for 7 days after the onset of the rash are recommended. Postexposure passive immunization with polyclonal immunoglobulin may be of benefit if given within 5 days of exposure (Young, 2015).
# Chunk 6765
In 20 to 30 percent of adults, infection is asymptomatic. Fever, headache, and flulike symptoms may begin in the last few days of the viremic phase. Several days later, a bright red rash with erythroderma afects the face and gives a slapped-cheek appearance. The rash becomes lacelike and spreads to the trunk and extremities. Adults often have milder rashes and develop symmetrical polyarthralgia that may persist several weeks. Mayama and associates (2014) described a pregnant woman in whom B 19 infection was associated with hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. No evidence suggests that parvovirus infection is altered by pregnancy. With recovery, IgM antibody is generated 7 to 10 days postinfection, and production persists for 3 to 4 months. Several days after IgM is produced, IgG antibody is detectable and persists for life with natural immunity (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2017).
# Chunk 6766
Hydrops develops in only approximately 1 percent of fetuses of women infected with parvovirus (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2017; Pasquini, 2016; Puccetti, 2012). Still, it is the most frequent infectious agent of nonimmune hydrops in autopsied fetuses (Rogers, 1999). Hydrops usually stems from infection in the irst half of gestation. In one report, more than 80 percent of hydrops cases were found in the second trimester, with a mean gestational age of 22 to 23 weeks (Yaegashi, 2000). At least 85 percent of cases of fetal infection developed within 10 weeks of maternal infection, and the mean interval was 6 to 7 weeks. he critical period for maternal infection leading to fetal hydrops was estimated to be between 13 and 16 weeks' gestation, which coincided with the period in which fetal hepatic hemopoiesis is greatest.
# Chunk 6767
An algorithm for diagnosis of maternal parvoviral infection is illustrated in Figure 64 4. Diagnosis is generally made by maternal serological testing for speciic IgG and IgM antibodies (Bonvicini, 2011; Brown, 2015). Viral DNA may be detectable by PCR in maternal serum during the prodrome and persist for months to years after infection. Fetal infection is diagnosed by detection of B 19 viral DNA in amnionic luid or IgM antibodies in fetal serum obtained by cordocentesis (de long, 2011; Weifenbach, 2012). Fetal and maternal viral loads do not predict fetal morbidity and mortality (de Haan, 2007).
# Chunk 6768
Most cases of parvovirus-associated hydrops develop in the first 10 weeks after infection. Thus, serial sonography every 2 weeks should be performed in women with recent infection (see Fig. 64-4). As discussed in Chapter 10 (p. 214), middle cerebral artery (MCA) Doppler interrogation can also be used to predict fetal anemia (Chauvet, 2011). Fetal blood sampling is warranted with hydrops to assess the degree of fetal anemia.
# Chunk 6769
Concurrent fetal thrombocytopenia worsens the prognosis (Melamed,r2015).

Reports describing neurodevelopmental outcomes in fetuses transfused for B 19 infection-induced anemia are conlicting. In one review of 24 transfused hydropic fetuses, abnormal neurodevelopment was noted in ive of 16 survivors-32 percent-at 6 months to 8 years (Nagel, 2007). Outcomes were not related to severity of fetal anemia or acidemia, and these investigators hypothesized that the infection itself induced cerebral damage. In another study of 28 children treated with intrauterine transfusion, 11 percent had neurodevelopmental impairment during evaluation at a median age of 5 years (de long, 2012). Conversely, Dembinski (2003) found no signiicant neurodevelopmental delay despite severe fetal anemia.
# Chunk 6770
This mosquito-borne RNA flavivirus is a human neuropathogen. It has become the most common cause of arthropod-borne viral encephalitis in the United States (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2017f; Krow-Lucal, 2017). West Nile viral infections are typically acquired through mosquito bites in late summer or perhaps through blood transfusion. The incubation period is 2 to 14 days, and most persons have mild or no symptoms. Fewer than 1 percent of infected adults develop meningoencephalitis or acute laccid paralysis (Granwehr, 2004). Presenting symptoms may include fever, mental status changes, muscle weakness, and coma (Stewart, 2013).
# Chunk 6771
Reminiscent of the rubella epidemic in the 1960s, in adults Zika infection may be asymptomatic or cause mild symptoms of rash, fever, headache, arthralgia, and conjunctivitis lasting a few days. Virus is typically detectable in blood around the time of symptom onset and may persist days to months in pregnant women (Driggers, 2016; Meaney-Delman, 2016). Serum IgM antibodies typically become detectable within the first two weeks after symptom onset and remain a median of four months (Oduyebo, 2017). Rarely, Guillain-Barre syndrome may develop following infection (da Silva, 2017; Parra, 2016).
# Chunk 6772
The fetus can be severely infected whether or not the mother is symptomatic. Honein and coworkers (2017) describe a fetus with congenital Zika infection. Findings shown include a thin cerebral cortex, increased extraaxial space (, dilated ventricles (F,), and absent cavum septum pellucidum. (Reproduced with permission from Driggers RW, Ho (Y, Korhonen EM, et al: Zika virus infection with prolonged maternal viremia and fetal brain abnor malities, N Engl J Med. 2016 Jun 2;374(22):2142-2151.) a 6-percent overall fetal infection rate. In one report of 134 women with positive RT-PCR results, fetal mortality was 7 percent (Brasil, 2016). Among live births, the rate of fetal birth defects ranges from 5 percent-among women with possible Zika infection-to 15 percent among pregnant women with laboratory-confirmed infection in the irst trimester (Reynolds, 2017). In the most severely afected fetuses, a congenital Zika syndrome has been described that includes microcephaly, lissencephaly, ventriculomegaly, intracranial calcifications, ocular abnormalities, and congenital contractures (Honein, 2017; Moore, 2017; Soares de Oliveira-Szejnfeld, 2016). Sonographic findings from a Zika-infected fetus are shown in 64-5.
# Chunk 6773
Diagnosis of this infection in pregnant women is made with detection of Zika virus RNA in blood or urine or by serological testing. Detection of Zika virus RNA by PCR confirms infection. Serological assays for Zika IgM antibodies may cross react with other flaviviruses. Thus, a positive assay result is followed by another assay containing virus-specific neutralizing antibodies (Oduyebo, 2017) . Testing recommendations and interpretation have evolved for pregnant women who are symptomatic and those who are asymptomatic but have ongoing exposure risk. his risk includes living in or traveling to an area with active local transmission. Large-scale screening programs have been described to identiy women at high risk for travelassociated Zika infection (Adhikari, 2017).
# Chunk 6774
Neonatal sepsis has received the most attention due to its devastating consequences and available efective preventative measures. Infection <7 days after birth is deined as eary-onset disease and is seen in 0.21/1000 live births (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2015). Many investigators use a threshold of <72 hours of life as most compatible with intrapartum acquisition of disease (Stoll, 2011). We and others have also encountered unexpected intrapartum stillbirths from GBS infections (Nan, 2015). Tudela and associates (2012) reported that newborns with early-onset CBS infection often had clinical evidence of fetal infection during labor or at delivery.
# Chunk 6775
Optimal treatment of Lyme disease was published by the Infectious Diseases Society of America (Sanchez, 2016). For early infection, treatment with doxycycline, amoxicillin, or cefuroxime is recommended for 14 days, although doxycycline is usually avoided in pregnancy. A 14-to 28-day course of IV ceftriaxone, cefotaxime, or penicillin G is given for complicated early infections that include meningitis, carditis, or disseminated infections. Chronic arthritis and post-Lyme disease syndrome are treated with prolonged oral or IV regimens, however, symptoms respond poorly to treatment (Steere, 2015).
# Chunk 6776
No vaccine is commercially available. Avoiding areas with endemic Lyme disease and improving tick control in those areas is the most efective prevention. Self-examination with removal of unengorged ticks within 36 hours of attachment reduces infection risk (Hayes, 2003). For tick bites recognized within 72 hours, a single 200-mg oral dose of doxycycline may reduce infection development.
# Chunk 6777
Congenital toxoplasmosis is suspected when sonography reveals findings such as hydrocephaly, intracranial or hepatic calciications, ascites, placental thickening, hyperechoic bowel, and growth restriction. Prenatal diagnosis of congenital toxoplasmosis is performed using PCR ampliication of toxoplasma DNA in amnionic luid (Filisetti, 2015; Montoya, 2008). he sensitivity of PCR varies with gestational age and is lowest before 18 weeks (Romand, 2001).
# Chunk 6778
Gonococcal bacteremia may cause disseminated infections that manifest as petechial or pustular skin lesions, arthralgias, or septic arthritis. For treatment of septic arthritis, the CDC recommends ceftriaxone, 1 g intramuscularly or intravenously (IV) every 24 hours plus a single 1-g oral dose of azithromycin (Workowski, 2015). Treatment is continued for 24 to 48 hours ater clinical improvement, and therapy is then changed to an oral agent to complete 1 week of therapy. Prompt recognition and antimicrobial treatment will usually yield favorable outcomes in pregnancy (Bleich, 2012). Meningitis and endocarditis rarely complicate pregnancy, but they may be fatal (Bataskov, 1991; Burgis, 2006). For gonococcal endocarditis, ceftriaxone 1 to 2 g IV every 12 hours should be continued for at least 4 weeks, and for meningitis, 10 to 14 days. A single 1-g oral dose of azithromycin is also provided for chlamydial co-infection (Workowski, 2015).
# Chunk 6779
For treatment during pregnancy, erythromycin base, 500 mg orally four times daily, is given for 21 days (Workowski, 2015). Some authorities instead use szithromycin, 1 g orally weekly for 21 days, although data regarding eicacy are scarce.
# Chunk 6780
Direct virological tests are can be performed on a specimen from the mucocutaneous lesion. PCR or culture of the sample is a testing option. Of the two, PCR assays are more sensitive, the results generally are available in 1 to 2 days, and specimen handling is easier. In contrast, for viral culture, the sensitivity of HSV isolation is relatively low as vesicular lesions ulcerate and then crust. Also, results sometimes are not available for 7 to 14 days (Strick, 2006). Regardless of the test performed, HSV viral types should be diferentiated (LeGof, 2014). Importantly, a negative culture or PCR result does not exclude infection. In contrast, false-positive results are rare.
# Chunk 6781
Valacyclovir, 1 9 twice daily for 7-1r0 days

Acyclovir, 400 mg three times daily for 5 days

Acyclovir, 800 mg twice daily for 5 days
# Chunk 6782
Acyclovir, 800 mg three times daily for 2 d

Valacyclovir, 500 mg twice daily for 3 days

Valacyclovir, 1 9 once daily for 5 days
# Chunk 6783
Haemophilus ducryi can cause painul, nonindurated genital ulcers termed sot chancres. At times, these are accompanied by painul suppurative inguinal lymphadenopathy. Although common in some developing countries, only 11 cases were reported in the United States in 2015 (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 20 16c). Appropriate media are not widely accessible, and no Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-cleared PCR test is yet available. Instead, painul genital ulcer(s) and negative screening for syphilis or HSV leads to a presumptive diagnosis. Treatment in pregnancy is azithromycin, 1 g orally as a single dose; erythromycin base, 500 mg orally three times daily for 7 days; or cetriaxone, 250 mg in a single intramuscular dose (Workowski, 2015).
# Chunk 6784
There are three vaccines available for long-term prevention.

Gardasil (HPV 4) is a quadrivalent vaccine against HPV types 6,11, 16, and 18. his is being replaced by Gardasil9 (HPV9), a nonavalent vaccine that protects against all the types in HPV 4 plus types 31,r33,r45, 52, and 58. Cervarix (HPV2) is a bivalent vaccine against HPVs 16 and 18. One of these vaccines is selected and given as a three-dose series on a schedule of 0, 1-2, and 6 months for those aged 15 to 26 years. A two-dose regimen, given at 0 and again at 6 to 12 months, is now recommended for girls aged 9 to 14 years (Meites, 2016). Vaccines are licensed for females aged 9 to 26 years, and the target age is 11 to 12 years. he vaccines are not recommended for pregnant women, however, inadvertent exposures do occur. No adverse pregnancy outcomes are associated with the vaccines (Moreira, 2016; Panagiotou, 2015; Vichnin, 2015). If a woman is found to be pregnant after starting the vaccination series, the remaining doses are delayed and given after delivery (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2017a). Women who are breastfeeding may receive the vaccine.
# Chunk 6785
Treatment is reserved for symptomatic women. Preferred drugs are metronidazole, 500 mg twice daily orally for 7 days; metronidazole 0.75-percent gel, one applicator intravaginally, daily for 5 days; or clindamycin 2-percent cream, one applicator intravaginally nightly for 7 days. Alternatives are clindamycin, 300 mg orally twice daily for 7 days, or 100-mg clindamycin ovules placed intravaginally nightly for 3 days (Workowski, 2015). It is still debated whether BV is a sexually transmitted infection. But, treatment of a male partner does not appear to lower recurrence rates (Amaya-Guio, 2016).
# Chunk 6786
Metronidazole, administered orally in a single 2-g dose, is efective in eradicating T vaginalis. For those with HIV infection, treatment instead with metronidazole 500 mg orally twice daily for 7 days improves eicacy. Because of the high rate of reinfection among women treated for trichomoniasis, retesting for T vaginalis is recommended for all sexually active women within 3 months following initial treatment (Workowski, 2015).
# Chunk 6787
For symptoms, efective treatment is a 100-mg miconazole vaginal suppository or a 2-percent butoconazole, I-percent clotrimazole, 2-percent miconazole, or 0.4-percent terconazole cream, any of which is used daily for 7 days. A shorter, 3-day regimen is daily 2-percent clotrimazole, 4-percent miconazole, or 0.8-percent tioconazole cream, or daily 200-mg miconazole or 80-mg terconazole suppository (Workowski, 2015). In some women, infection is likely to recur and require repeated treatment during pregnancy. In these cases, symptomatic infection usually subsides after pregnancy (Sobel, 2007). For treatment, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017 c) and the CDC recommend topical rather than oral azoles for symptoms. As discussed urther in Chapter 12 (p. 241), oral fluconazole is generally not considered teratogenic, but in 2016, the FDA released a safety alert regarding a possible link with miscarriage (M0Igaard-Nielsen, 2016).
# Chunk 6788
In some cases, cesarean delivery lowers HIV prenatal transmission (European Mode of Delivery Collaboration, 1999; International Perinatal HIV Group, 1999). The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017b) recommends that scheduled cesarean delivery be discussed and recommended for HIV-infected women with HIV-1 RNA loads > 1000 copies/mL. Scheduled delivery is recommended at 38 weeks' gestation in these women to avert spontaneous labor.
# Chunk 6789
CD4+ count should be monitored at the initial visit and every 3-6 mo

Intrapartum care If HIV RNA levelr> 1 000 copies/mL or is unknown before labor or ROM, plan cesarean delivery at 38 weeks' gestation If HIV RNA levelsr> 1000 or is unknown but labor or ROM has ensued, benefits of cesarean delivery are unclear and labor plans are individualized If HIV RNA levelr:;1 000 copies/mL, vaginal delivery is permitted; cesarean delivery not routinely recommended Start IV ZDV if HIV RNA levelr> 1 000 copies/mL near delivery or is unknown.
# Chunk 6790
Desseauve D, Chantrel J, Fruchart A, et al: Prevalence and risk factors ofbacterial vaginosis during the first trimester of pregnancy in a large French population-based study. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Bioi 163(1):30, 2012 de Voux A, Kidd S, Grey JA, et al: State-specific rates of primaty and secondary syphilis among men who have sex with men-United States, 2015. MvIWR 66(13):349,t2017 Diguet A, Patrier S, Eurin D, et al: Prenatal diagnosis of an exceptional intrauterine herpes simplex type 1 infection. Prenat Diagn 26(2):154, 2006 Duf P: Maternal and fetal infections. In Creasy K, Resnik R, lams JD, et al (eds): Creasy and Resnik's Maternal-Fetal Medicine: Principles and Practice, 7th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2014 European Mode of Delivery Collaboration: Elective caesarean-section versus vaginal delivery in prevention of vertical HIV-1 transmission: a randomized clinical trial. Lancet 353(1):1035, 1999 Fanfair N, Zaidi A, Taylor LD, et al: Trends in seroprevalence of herpes simplex virus type 2 among non-Hispanic blacks and non-Hispanic whites aged 14 to 49 years-United States, 1988 to 2010. Sex Transm Dis 40(11):860,t2013 Fauci AS: Pathogenesis of HI V disease: opportunities for new prevention interventions. Clin Infect Dis 45:S206, 2007 Fettweis JM, Brooks JP, Serrano MG, et al: Diferences in vaginal microbiome in African American women versus women of European ancestry. Microbiology 160(Pt 10):2272, 2014 Fiumara NJ: Syphilis in newborn children. Clin Obstet GynecoIt18:183, 1975 Flagg EW, Weinstock H: Incidence of neonatal herpes simplex virus infections in the United States, 2006. Pediatrics 127(1):e1, 2011 Floridia M, Masuelli G, Meloni A, et al: Amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling in HIV-infected pregnant women: a multicentre case series. BJOG 124(8):1218,t2017 Food and Drug Administration: FDA drug safety communication: FDA to review study examining use of oral luconazole (Diflucan) in pregnancy. 2016. Available at: https:llwww.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm497482. htm. Accessed March 26, 2017 Fredricks DN, Fiedler TL, Marrazzo JM: Molecular identification of bacteria associated with bacterial vaginosis. N Engl J Med 353:1899, 2005 French CE, Thorne C, Tariq S, et al: Immunologic status and virologic outcomes in repeat pregnancies to HIV-positive women not on antiretroviral therapy at conception: a case for lifelong antiretroviral therapy? AIDS 28(9):1369,t2014 Gardella C, Huang ML, Wald A, et al: Rapid polymerase chain reaction assay to detect herpes simplex virus in the genital tract of women in labor. Obstet GynecoIt115(6):1209,t2010 Garnett GP, Aral SO, Hoyle DV, et al: he natural history of syphilis. Implications for the transmission dynamics and control of infection. Sex Transm Dis 24(4):185, 1997 Gibbs RS, Schachter J: Chlamydial serology in patients with intra-amniotic infection and controls. Sex Transm Dis 14:213, 1987 Gomez GB, Kamb ML, Newman LM, et al: Untreated maternal syphilis and adverse outcomes of pregnancy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Bull World Health Organ 91(3):217, 2013 Grange PA, Gressier L, Dion PL, et al: Evaluation of a PCR test for detection of Treponema pallidum in swabs and blood. J Clin Microbiol 50(3):546, 2012 Greer L, Wendel GD: Rapid diagnostic methods in sexually transmitted infections. Infect Dis Clin North Am 22:601, 2008 Gumbo FZ, Duri K, Kandawasvika GQ, et al: Risk factors of HIV vertical transmission in a cohort of women under a PMTCT program at three periurban clinics in a resource-poor setting. J Perinatol 30: 717, 2010 Hawkes S, Matin N, Broutet N, et al: Efectiveness of interventions to improve screening for syphilis in pregnancy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Infect Dis 11 :684, 2011
# Chunk 6791
III. FETAL SONOGRAPHIC MEASUREMENTS ...r........ 1262

APPENDIX I. Serum and Blood Constituents

Erythropoietinb (U/L) 4-27 12-25 8-67 14-222 7,10,47
# Chunk 6792
Sodium (mEq/L) 136-146 133-148 129-148 130-148 17,26,29,39,42,63,66 Urea nitrogen (mg/dL) 7-20 7-1r2 3-1r3 3-1r1 20,r39,r42
# Chunk 6793
Milman N, Graudal N, Nielsen OJ: Serum erythropoietin during normal pregnancy: relationship to hemoglobin and iron status markers and impact of iron supplementation in a longitudinal, placebo-controlled study on 118 women. Int] HematoI66:159, 199 48.
# Chunk 6794
Romslo I, Haram K, Sagen N, et al: Iron requirement in normal pregnancy as assessed by serum ferritin, serum transferrin saturation and erythrocyte protoporphyrin determinations. BJOG 90: 101, 1983 62A. Savu 0, Jurcu� R, Giu�ca S, et al: Morphological and functional adaptation of the maternal heart during pregnancy. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging 5:289, 2012 63.
# Chunk 6795
Fig. 2.5 ). For example, myocardial cells become noncontractile after 1 to 2 minutes of ischemia, but may not die until 20 to 30 minutes of ischemia have elapsed. Morphologic features indicative of the death of ischemic myocytes appear by electron microscopy within 2 to 3 hours after the death of the cells, but are not evident by light microscopy until 6 to 12 hours later.
# Chunk 6796
Leakage of intracellular proteins through the damaged cell membrane and ultimately into the circulation provides a means of detecting tissue-specific necrosis using blood or serum samples. Cardiac muscle, for example, contains a unique isoform of the enzyme creatine kinase and of the contractile protein troponin, whereas hepatic bile duct epithelium contains the enzyme alkaline phosphatase, and hepatocytes contain transaminases. Irreversible injury and cell death in these tissues elevate the serum levels of these proteins, which makes them clinically useful markers of tissue damage.
# Chunk 6797
P-450 in the smooth ER of the liver and other organs. Although the metabolites might cause membrane damage and cell injury by direct covalent binding to protein and lipids, the most important mechanism of cell injury involves the formation of free radicals. Carbon tetrachloride (CCl4)—once widely used in the dry cleaning industry but now banned—and the analgesic acetaminophen belong in this category. The effect of CCl4 is still instructive as an example of chemical injury. CCl4 is converted to a toxic free radical, principally in the liver, and this free radical is the cause of cell injury, mainly by membrane phospholipid peroxidation. In less than 30 minutes after exposure to CCl4, there is sufficient damage to the ER membranes of hepatocytes to cause a decline in the synthesis of enzymes and plasma proteins; within 2 hours, swelling of the smooth ER and dissociation of ribosomes from the RER have occurred. There also is decreased synthesis of apoproteins that form complexes with triglycerides and thereby facilitate triglyceride secretion; this defect results in the accumulation of lipids in hepatocytes and other cells and the “fatty liver” of CCl4 poisoning. Mitochondrial injury follows, and subsequently diminished ATP stores result in defective ion transport and progressive cell swelling; the plasma membranes are further damaged by fatty aldehydes produced by lipid peroxidation in the ER. The end result can be cell death.
# Chunk 6798
The nature of the leukocyte infiltrate varies with the age of the inflammatory response and the type of stimulus. In most forms of acute inflammation, neutrophils predominate in the inflammatory infiltrate during the first 6 to 24 hours and are gradually replaced by monocyte-derived macro phagesover24to48hours(Fig.3.5 ).Thereareseveralreasons for the early preponderance of neutrophils: they are more numerous in the blood than other leukocytes, they respond more rapidly to chemokines, and they may attach more firmly to the adhesion molecules that are rapidly induced on endothelial cells, such as P-and E-selectins. After entering tissues, neutrophils are short-lived; they undergo apoptosis and disappear within 24 to 48 hours. Macrophages not only survive longer but also may proliferate in the tissues, and thus they become the dominant population in prolonged inflammatory reactions. There are, however, exceptions to this stereotypic pattern of cellular infiltration. In certain infections—for example, those produced by Pseudomonas bacteria—the cellular infiltrate is dominated by neutrophils for several days; in viral infections, lymphocytes may be the first cells to arrive; some hypersensitivity reactions are dominated by activated lymphocytes, macrophages, and plasma cells (reflecting the immune response); and in allergic reactions, eosinophils may be a prominent cell type.
# Chunk 6799
Because of the destructive effects of granule enzymes, the initial leukocytic infiltration, if unchecked, can potentiate further inflammation by damaging tissues. These harmful proteases, however, are normally controlled by a system of anti-proteases in the serum and tissue fluids. Foremost among these is α1-anti-trypsin, which is the major inhibitor of neutrophil elastase. A deficiency of these inhibitors may lead to sustained action of leukocyte proteases, as is the case in patients with α1-anti-trypsin deficiency (Chapter 13).
# Chunk 6800
Acute-phase proteins are plasma proteins, mostly synthesized in the liver, whose plasma concentrations may increase several hundred-fold as part of the response to inflammatory stimuli. Three of the best-known of these proteins are C-reactive protein (CRP), fibrinogen, and serum amyloid A (SAA) protein. Synthesis of these molecules in hepatocytes is stimulated by cytokines. Many acute-phase proteins, such as CRP and SAA, bind to microbial cell walls, and they may act as opsonins and fix complement. Fibrinogen binds to red cells and causes them to form stacks (rouleaux) that sediment more rapidly at unit gravity than do individual red cells. This is the basis for measuring the erythrocyte sedimentation rate as a simple test for an inflammatory response caused by any stimulus. Acute-phase proteins have beneficial effects during acute inflammation, but prolonged production of these proteins (especially SAA) in states of chronic inflammation can, in some cases, cause secondary amyloidosis (Chapter 5). Elevated serum levels of CRP serve as a marker for increased risk of myocardial infarction in patients with coronary artery disease. It is postulated that inflammation involving atherosclerotic plaques in the coronary arteries predisposes to http://ebooksmedicine.net thrombosis and subsequent infarction. Another peptide whose production is increased in the acute-phase response is the iron-regulating peptide hepcidin. Chronically elevated plasma concentrations of hepcidin reduce the availability of iron and are responsible for the anemia associated with chronic inflammation (Chapter 12).
# Chunk 6801
Reduction of plasma albumin concentrations leads to decreased colloid osmotic pressure of the blood and loss of fluid from the circulation. Under normal circumstances, albumin accounts for almost half of the total plasma protein. Therefore, conditions in which albumin is either lost from the circulation or synthesized in inadequate amounts are common causes of reduced plasma osmotic pressure. Nephrotic syndrome is the most important cause of albumin loss from the blood. In diseases that are characterized by nephrotic syndrome (Chapter 14), the glomerular capillaries become leaky, leading to the loss of albumin (and other plasma proteins) in the urine and the development of generalized edema. Reduced albumin synthesis occurs in the setting of severe liver disease (e.g., cirrhosis) (Chapter 16) and protein malnutrition (Chapter 8). Regardless of cause, low albumin levels lead in a stepwise fashion to edema, reduced intravascular volume, renal hypo-perfusion, and secondary hyperaldosteronism. Unfortunately, increased salt and water retention by the kidney not only fails to correct the plasma volume deficit but also exacerbates the edema, because the primary defect—low serum protein—persists.
# Chunk 6802
Fig. 4.16 Unusualtypesofemboli.(A)Bonemarrowembolus.Theembolusiscomposedofhematopoieticmarrowandmarrowfatcells(clear spaces) attachedtoathrombus.(B)Amnioticfluidemboli.Twosmallpulmonaryarteriolesarepackedwithlaminatedswirlsoffetalsquamouscells.Thesurroundinglungisedematousandcongested.(Courtesy of Dr. Beth Schwartz, Baltimore, MD.) symptomatic fat embolism syndrome characterized by pulmonary insufficiency, neurologic symptoms, anemia, thrombocytopenia, and a diffuse petechial rash that is fatal in 10% of cases. Clinical signs and symptoms appear 1 to 3 days after injury as the sudden onset of tachypnea, dyspnea, tachycardia, irritability, and restlessness, which can progress rapidly to delirium or coma. Thrombocytopenia is attributed to platelet adhesion to fat globules and subsequent aggregation or splenic sequestration; anemia can result from similar red cell aggregation and/or hemolysis. A diffuse petechial rash (seen in 20%–50% of cases) is related to rapid onset of thrombocytopenia and can be a useful diagnostic feature.
# Chunk 6803
Septic shock is responsible for 2% of all hospital admissions in the United States. Of these, 50% require treatment in intensive care units. The number of cases in the United States exceeds 750,000/year and the incidence is rising, which is ironically due to improvements in life support for critically ill patients, as well as the growing ranks of immunocompromised hosts (because of chemotherapy, immunosuppression, advanced age, or human immunodeficiency virus infection) and the increasing prevalence of multidrugresistant organisms in the hospital setting. Despite ing 20% to 30%.
# Chunk 6804
Development of Allergies

Susceptibility to immediate hypersensitivity reactions is genetically determined. An increased propensity to develop immediate hypersensitivity reactions is called atopy. Atopic individuals tend to have higher serum IgE levels and more IL-4–producing TH2 cells than does the general population. A positive family history of allergy is found in 50% of atopic individuals. The basis of familial predisposition is not clear, but genes that are implicated in susceptibility to asthma and other atopic disorders include those encoding HLA molecules (which may confer immune responsiveness to particular allergens), cytokines (which may control TH2 responses), a component of the FcεRI, and ADAM33, a metalloproteinase that may be involved in tissue remodeling in the airways.
# Chunk 6805
Often, the IgE-triggered reaction has two well-defined phases (

Fig. 5.13 ): (1) the immediate response, which is stimulated by mast cell granule contents and lipid mediators and is characterized by vasodilation, vascular leakage, and smooth muscle spasm, usually evident within 5 to 30 minutes after exposure to an allergen and subsiding by 60 minutes; and (2) a second, late-phase reaction stimulated mainly by cytokines, which usually sets in 2 to 8 hours later, may last for several days, and is characterized by inflammation as well as tissue destruction, such as mucosal epithelial cell damage. The dominant inflammatory cells in the late-phase reaction are neutrophils, eosinophils, and lymphocytes, especially TH2 cells. Neutrophils are recruited by various chemokines; their roles in inflammation were described in Chapter 3. Eosinophils are recruited by eotaxin and other chemokines released from epithelium and are important effectors of tissue injury in the late-phase response. Eosinophils produce major basic protein and eosinophil cationic protein, which are toxic to epithelial cells, and LTC4 and platelet-activating factor, which promote inflammation. The TH2 cells produce cytokines that have multiple actions, as described earlier. These recruited leukocytes can amplify and sustain the inflammatory response, even in the absence of continuous allergen exposure. In addition, inflammatory leukocytes are responsible for much of the epithelial cell injury in immediate hypersensitivity. Because inflammation is a major component of many allergic diseases, notably asthma and atopic dermatitis, therapy includes anti-inflammatory drugs such as corticosteroids.
# Chunk 6806
Inflammation and Tissue Injury. Once deposited in tissues, immune complexes initiate an acute inflammatory reaction via complement activation and engagement of leukocyte Fc receptors. Typically, the antibodies are IgG or IgM. Deposition of complement proteins can be detected at the site of injury. Consumption of complement during the active phase of the disease decreases serum levels of C3, which can be used as a marker for disease activity. During this phase (approximately 10 days after antigen administration), clinical features such as fever, urticaria, joint pain (arthralgia), lymph node enlargement, and proteinuria appear. Wherever complexes deposit, the tissue damage is similar. The resultant inflammatory lesion is termed vasculitis if it occurs in blood vessels, glomerulonephritis if it occurs in renal glomeruli, arthritis if it occurs in the joints, and so on.
# Chunk 6807
The course of SLE is variable and unpredictable. Rare acute cases result in death within weeks to months. More often, with appropriate therapy, SLE follows a relapsing and remitting course over a period of years or decades. During acute flares, increased formation of immune complexes results in complement activation, often leading to hypocomplementemia. Disease flares are usually treated with corticosteroids or other immunosuppressive drugs. Even without therapy, in some patients the disease runs an indolent course for years with relatively mild manifestations, such as skin changes and mild hematuria. The overall 5-year and 10-year survivals are approximately 90% and 80%, respectively. The most common causes of death are renal failure and intercurrent infections. Coronary artery disease also is becoming an important cause of death. Patients treated with steroids and immunosuppressive drugs incur the usual risks associated with such therapy.
# Chunk 6808
Table 5.11 ), can be detected in as many as 90% of patients by sensitive techniques. High titers of antibodies to SS-A are associated with early disease onset, longer disease duration, and extraglandular manifestations, such as cutaneous vasculitis and nephritis. These autoantibodies also are present in a smaller percentage of patients with SLE and hence are not diagnostic of Sjögren syndrome. In addition, about 75% of patients have rheumatoid factor (an antibody reactive with self IgG), and 50% to 80% of patients have ANAs.
# Chunk 6809
Kidneys. Renalabnormalitiesoccurintwo-thirdsofpatients.Themostprominentarethevascularlesions.Interlobulararteriesshowintimalthickeningasaresultofdepositionofmucinousmaterialcontainingglycoproteinsandacidmucopolysaccharidesandconcentricproliferationofintimalcells.Thesechangesresemblethoseseeninmalignanthypertension,butinsystemicsclerosisthealterationsarerestrictedtovessels150to500µmindiameterandarenotalwaysassociatedwithhypertension.Hypertension,however,doesoccurin30%ofpatients,andin20%ittakesanominouslyrapid,downhillcourse(malignanthypertension).Inhypertensivepatients,vascularalterationsaremorepronouncedandareoftenassociatedwithfibrinoidnecrosisofarteriolesthatcanleadtothrombosisandinfarction.Suchpatientsoftendieofrenalfailure,whichaccountsforabout50%ofdeaths.Therearenospecificglomerularchanges.
# Chunk 6810
Systemic sclerosis has a female-to-male ratio of 3:1 and a peak incidence in the 50to 60-year age group. Although systemic sclerosis shares features with SLE, rheumatoid arthritis (Chapter 21), and polymyositis (Chapter 22), it is distinguished by the striking cutaneous changes, notably skin thickening. Raynaud phenomenon, caused by episodic vasoconstriction of the arteries and arterioles of the extremities, is seen in virtually all patients and precedes other symptoms in 70% of cases. Progressive collagen deposition in the skin leads to increasing stiffness, especially of the hands, with eventually complete immobilization of the joints. Nailfold capillary loops are distorted early in the disease, and later disappear. Dysphagia attributable to esophageal fibrosis and its resultant hypomotility are present in more than 50% of patients. Eventually, destruction of the esophageal wall leads to atony and dilation, especially at its lower end. Abdominal pain, intestinal obstruction, or malabsorption syndrome reflect involvement of the small intestine. Respiratory difficulties caused by the pulmonary fibrosis may result in right-sided cardiac dysfunction, and myocardial fibrosis may cause either arrhythmias or cardiac failure. Mild proteinuria occurs in as many as 30% of patients, but rarely is severe enough to cause nephrotic syndrome. The most ominous manifestation is malignant hypertension, with the subsequent development of fatal renal failure (Chapter 14), but in its absence progression of the disease may be slow. In most patients the disease pursues a steady downhill course over the span of many years, although life span is improving with better treatment of the complications. The disease tends to be more severe in blacks, especially black women. As treatment of the renal complications has improved, pulmonary and cardiac complications have become the major cause of death.
# Chunk 6811
Primary immunodeficiency diseases are inherited genetic disorders that impair mechanisms of innate immunity (phagocytes, NK cells, or complement) or the humoral and/or cellular arms of adaptive immunity (mediated by B lymphocytes and T lymphocytes, respectively). These immunodeficiencies are usually detected in infancy, between 6 months and 2 years of age, the telltale signs being susceptibility to recurrent infections. With advances in genetic analyses, the mutations responsible for many of these diseases are now known (
# Chunk 6812
The disease usually does not become apparent until about 6 months of age, as maternal antibodies that were transported via the placenta are depleted. In most cases, recurrent bacterial infections of the respiratory tract, such as acute and chronic pharyngitis, sinusitis, otitis media, bronchitis, and pneumonia, call attention to the underlying immune defect. Almost always, the causative organisms are Haemophilus influenzae, Streptococcus pneumoniae, or Staphylococcus aureus, organisms that are normally opsonized by antibodies and cleared by phagocytosis. Because antibodies are important for neutralizing certain infectious viruses, individuals with this disease also are susceptible to some viral infections, especially those caused by enteroviruses. These viruses infect the gastrointestinal tract, and from there they can disseminate to the nervous system via the blood. Thus, immunization with live poliovirus carries the risk for paralytic poliomyelitis, and infections with echovirus can cause fatal encephalitis. For similar reasons, Giardia lamblia, an intestinal protozoan that is normally resisted by secreted IgA, causes persistent infections in individuals with this disorder. Many intracellular viral, fungal, and protozoal infections are handled quite well by the intact T cell–mediated immunity. For unclear reasons, autoimmune diseases (such as rheumatoid arthritis and dermatomyositis) occur in as many as 35% of patients with this disease.
# Chunk 6813
Table 5.14 Causes of Secondary (Acquired) Immunodeficiencies infections, secondary neoplasms, and neurologic manifestations. Although AIDS was first recognized as a distinct entity as recently as the 1980s, it has become one of the most devastating afflictions in history. Of the estimated 36 million HIV-infected individuals worldwide, about 70% are in Africa and 20% in Asia. More than 25 million deaths are attributable to HIV/AIDS, with 1 to 2 million deaths annually. Effective anti-retroviral drugs have been developed, but the infection continues to spread in parts of the world where these therapies are not widely available, and in some African countries, more than 30% of the population is HIV infected. Despite the remarkable progress in drug therapy of AIDS, cure is still a distant goal. The advent of these drugs also raises its own tragic concern; because more individuals are living with HIV, the risk of spreading the infection will increase if vigilance is relaxed.
# Chunk 6814
Kaposi Sarcoma. Kaposi sarcoma (KS), a vascular tumor that is otherwise rare in the United States, is considered an AIDS-defining malignancy. The morphology of KS and its occurrence in patients not infected with HIV are discussed in Chapter 10. At the onset of the AIDS epidemic, up to 30% of infected homosexual or bisexual men had KS, but with use of HAART there has been a dramatic decline in its incidence in recent years. In contrast, in areas of sub-Saharan Africa where HIV infection is both frequent and largely untreated, Kaposi sarcoma is one of the most common tumors.
# Chunk 6815
The diagnosis of amyloidosis depends on the histologic demonstration of amyloid deposits in tissues. The most common sites biopsied are the kidney, when renal manifestations are present, or rectal or gingival tissues in patients suspected of having systemic amyloidosis. Examination of abdominal fat aspirates stained with Congo red can also be used for the diagnosis of systemic amyloidosis. The test is quite specific, but its sensitivity is low. In suspected cases of AL amyloidosis, serum and urine protein electrophoresis and immunoelectrophoresis should be performed. Bone marrow aspirates in such cases often show a monoclonal population of plasma cells, even in the absence of overt multiple myeloma. Scintigraphy with radiolabeled serum amyloid P (SAP) component is a rapid and specific test, since SAP binds to the amyloid deposits and reveals their presence. It also gives a measure of the extent of amyloidosis and can be used to follow patients undergoing treatment. Mass spectroscopy is a useful tool for identification of the protein component of amyloid. It can be performed on paraffin embedded tissues.
# Chunk 6816
Loss-of-function mutations involving CDKIs. CDKIs frequently are disabled by mutation or gene silencing in many human malignancies. For example, germline mutations of CDKN2A, a gene that encodes the CDK inhibitor p16, are present in 25% of melanoma-prone kindreds, and acquired deletion or inactivation of CDKN2A is seen in 75% of pancreatic carcinomas, 40% to 70% of glioblastomas, 50% of esophageal cancers and certain leukemias, and 20% of non–small cell lung carcinomas, soft-tissue sarcomas, and bladder cancers.
# Chunk 6817
The transcription of VEGF also is influenced by signals from the RAS-MAP kinase pathway, and gain-offunction mutations in RAS or MYC upregulate the production of VEGF. Notably, elevated levels of VEGF can be detected in the serum and urine of a significant fraction of cancer patients.
# Chunk 6818
A few other agents merit brief mention. Aflatoxin B1 is of interest because it is a naturally occurring agent produced by some strains of Aspergillus, a mold that grows on improperly stored grains and nuts. A strong correlation has been found between the dietary level of this food contaminant and the incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma in some parts of Africa and the Far East. Additionally, vinyl chloride, arsenic, nickel, chromium, insecticides, fungicides, and polychlorinated biphenyls are potential carcinogens in the workplace and about the house. Finally, nitrites used as food preservatives have caused concern, since they cause nitrosylation of amines contained in food. The nitrosamines thus formed are suspected to be carcinogenic.
# Chunk 6819
Biochemical assays for tumor-associated enzymes, hormones, and other tumor markers in the blood cannot be utilized for definitive diagnosis of cancer; however, they are used with varying success as screening tests and have utility in monitoring the response to therapy or detecting disease recurrence. The application of these assays is considered with many of the specific forms of neoplasia discussed in other chapters, so only a few examples suffice here. PSA, used to screen for prostatic adenocarcinoma, is one of the most frequently used tumor markers in clinical practice. Prostatic carcinoma can be suspected when elevated levels of PSA are found in the blood. However, PSA screening also highlights problems encountered with use of virtually every tumor marker. Although PSA levels often are elevated in cancer, PSA levels also may be elevated in benign prostatic hyperplasia (Chapter 18). Furthermore, there is no PSA level that ensures that a patient does not have prostate cancer. Thus, the PSA test suffers from both low sensitivity and low specificity, and its use as a screening tool has become quite controversial. The PSA assay is extremely valuable, however, for detecting residual disease or recurrence following treatment for prostate cancer. Other tumor markers used in clinical practice include carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), which is elaborated by carcinomas of the colon, pancreas, stomach, and breast, and alpha fetoprotein (AFP), which is produced by hepatocellular carcinomas, yolk sac remnants in the gonads, and occasionally teratocarcinomas and embryonal cell carcinomas. Like PSA, CEA and AFP can be elevated in a variety of non-neoplastic conditions and thus also lack the specificity and sensitivity required for the early detection of cancers, but they may be useful in monitoring disease once the diagnosis is established. With successful resection of the tumor, these markers disappear from the serum; their reappearance almost always signifies recurrence. CEA is further discussed in Chapter 15 and alpha fetoprotein in Chapter 16.
# Chunk 6820
In few childhood diseases are clinical manifestations as protean as those of CF (

Fig. 7.4 ). Approximately 5% to 10% of the cases come to clinical attention at birth or soon after because of an attack of meconium ileus. Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency occurs in a majority (85% to 90%) of patients and is associated with “severe” CFTR mutations on both alleles (e.g., ΔF508/ΔF508). By contrast, 10% to 15% of patients, who have one “severe” and one “mild” CFTR mutation, or two “mild” CFTR mutations, retain sufficient pancreatic exocrine function that enzyme supplementation is not required—the pancreas-sufficient phenotype. Pancreatic insufficiency is associated with malabsorption of protein and fat and increased fecal loss. Manifestations of malabsorption (e.g., large, foul-smelling stools; abdominal distention; poor weight gain) appear during the first year of life. The faulty fat absorption may induce deficiency states of the fat-soluble vitamins, resulting in manifestations of avitaminosis A, D, or K. Hypoproteinemia may be severe enough to cause generalized edema. Persistent diarrhea may result in rectal prolapse in as many as 10% of children with CF. The pancreas-sufficient phenotype usually is not associated with other gastrointestinal complications, and in general, these patients demonstrate excellent growth and development. In contrast to exocrine insufficiency, endocrine insufficiency (i.e., diabetes) is uncommon in CF and occurs late in the course of the disease especially with improved survival of patients with CF.
# Chunk 6821
Cardiorespiratory complications, such as chronic cough, persistent lung infections, obstructive pulmonary disease, and cor pulmonale, constitute the most common cause of death (accounting for approximately 80% of fatalities) in patients who receive follow-up care in most CF centers in the United States. By 18 years of age, 80% of patients with classic CF harbor P. aeruginosa, and 3.5% harbor B. cepacia. With the indiscriminate use of antibiotic prophylaxis, there has been an unfortunate resurgence of resistant strains of Pseudomonas in many patients. Significant liver disease occurs late in the natural history of CF and is foreshadowed by pulmonary and pancreatic involvement; with increasing life expectancy, liver disease is now the third most common cause of death in patients with CF (after cardiopulmonary and transplant-related complications). More extensive DNA sequencing has shown that the spectrum of diseases caused by germline CFTR mutations (either biallelic or in heterozygous carriers) is broader than the “classic” multisystem disease described earlier. For example, some patients suffering from recurrent bouts of abdominal pain and pancreatitis since childhood who were previously classified as having “idiopathic” chronic pancreatitis are now known to harbor biallelic CFTR variants that are distinct from those seen in “classic” CF. Patients with isolated pancreatitis or bilateral absence of vas deferens (see earlier) resulting from CFTR mutations are included under the umbrella of “CFTRopathies.” Similarly, whereas CF carriers were initially thought to be asymptomatic, studies suggest that they have an increased lifetime risk for chronic lung disease (especially bronchiectasis) and recurrent sinonasal polyps. In most cases, the diagnosis of CF is based on persistently elevated sweat electrolyte concentrations (often the mother makes the diagnosis because her infant “tastes salty”), characteristic clinical findings (sinopulmonary disease and gastrointestinal manifestations), or a family history. Sequencing the CFTR gene is the gold standard for diagnosis of CF.
# Chunk 6822
Almost from birth, affected infants fail to thrive. Vomiting and diarrhea appear within a few days of milk ingestion. Jaundice and hepatomegaly usually become evident during the first week of life. Accumulation of galactose and galactose-1-phosphate in the kidney impairs amino acid transport, resulting in aminoaciduria. Fulminant Escherichia coli septicemia occurs with increased frequency. Newborn screening tests are widely utilized in the United States. They depend on fluorometric assay of GALT enzyme activity on a dried blood spot. A positive screening test must be confirmed by assay of GALT levels in RBC. Antenatal diagnosis is possible by assay of GALT activity in cultured amniotic fluid cells or determination of galactitol level in amniotic fluid supernatant.
# Chunk 6823
In the most common acute infantile variant of Tay-Sachs disease, infants appear normal at birth, but motor weakness begins at 3 to 6 months of age, followed by neurologic impairment, onset of blindness, and progressively more severe neurologic dysfunctions. Death occurs within 2 to 3 years.
# Chunk 6824
One variant, type 1, also called the chronic nonneuronopathic form, accounts for 99% of cases of Gaucher disease. It is characterized by clinical or radiographic bone involvement (osteopenia, focal lytic lesions, and osteonecrosis) in 70% to 100% of cases. Additional features are hepatosplenomegaly and the absence of CNS involvement. The spleen often enlarges to massive proportions, filling the entire abdomen. Gaucher cells are found in the liver, spleen, lymph nodes, and bone marrow. Marrow replacement and cortical erosion may produce radiographically visible skeletal lesions, and peripheral blood cytopenias. It is believed that bone changes are caused by the aforementioned macrophage-derived cytokines. Type 1 is most common in Ashkenazi Jews; unlike other variants, it is compatible with long life. Neurologic signs and symptoms characterize types 2 and 3 variants. In type 2, these manifestations appear during infancy (acute infantile neuronopathic form) and are more severe, whereas in type 3, they emerge later and are milder (chronic neuronopathic form). Although the liver and spleen also are involved, the clinical features in types 2 and 3 are dominated by neurologic disturbances, including convulsions and progressive mental deterioration. As mentioned earlier mutation of the glucocerebroside gene is a very important risk factor for Parkinson disease. Patients with Gaucher disease have a 20 fold higher risk of developing Parkinson disease (compared to controls) and 5–10% of patients with Parkinson disease have mutations in the gene encoding glucocerebrosidase.
# Chunk 6825
Down syndrome, characterized by extra copy of genes on chromosome 21, is the most common of the chromosomal disorders. About 95% of affected persons have trisomy 21, so their chromosome count is 47. As mentioned earlier, the most common cause of trisomy, and therefore of Down syndrome, is meiotic nondisjunction. The parents of such children are normal in all respects. Maternal age has a strong influence on the incidence of Down syndrome. It occurs in 1 in 1550 live births in women younger than 20 years, in contrast with 1 in 25 live births in women older than 45 years. The correlation with maternal age suggests http://ebooksmedicine.net
# Chunk 6826
Affected females. From 30% to 50% of carrier women with the fragile X mutation on one chromosome might show features of mild cognitive impairment or other behavioral disturbances. Approximately 20% develop features of premature reproductive failure (see below). The presence of symptoms in carrier females, albeit mild, is unusual for an X-linked recessive disease.
# Chunk 6827
http://ebooksmedicine.net scourge of the 19th and early 20th centuries. Fortunately, maternal rubella and the resultant rubella embryopathy have been virtually eliminated in developed countries as a result of vaccination. As mentioned later, maternal infection with Zika Virus can give rise to severe malformations of the central nervous system. A variety of drugs and chemicals have been suspected to be teratogenic, but perhaps less than 1% of congenital malformations are caused by these agents. The list includes thalidomide, alcohol, anticonvulsants, warfarin (oral anti-coagulant), and 13-cisretinoic acid, which is used in the treatment of severe acne. For example, thalidomide, formerly used as a tranquilizer in Europe and currently used for treatment of certain cancers, causes an extremely high incidence (50% to 80%) of limb malformations. Alcohol, perhaps the most widely used agent today, is an important environmental teratogen. Infants born of mothers who abuse alcohol show prenatal and postnatal growth retardation, facial anomalies (microcephaly, short palpebral fissures, maxillary hypoplasia), and psychomotor disturbances. These features in combination are designated the fetal alcohol syndrome. Although cigarette smoke–derived nicotine has not been convincingly demonstrated to be a teratogen, there is a high incidence of spontaneous abortions, premature labor, and placental abnormalities among pregnant smokers, and babies born to mothers who smoke often have a low birth weight and may be prone to the sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS). In light of these findings, it is best to avoid nicotine exposure altogether during pregnancy. Among maternal conditions listed in
# Chunk 6828
The clinical course is fairly typical, with the onset of bloody stools, abdominal distention, and development of circulatory collapse. Abdominal radiographs often demonstrate gas within the intestinal wall (pneumatosis intestinalis). When detected early, NEC often can be managed conservatively, but many cases (20% to 60%) require operative intervention including resection of the necrotic segments of bowel. NEC is associated with high perinatal mortality; infants who survive often develop post-NEC strictures from fibrosis caused by the healing process.
# Chunk 6829
Table 7.7 ); these should not be labeled as SIDS, but rather as sudden unexpected infant death (SUID). The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates that SIDS accounts for approximately half of the cases of SUID in the United States. An aspect of SIDS that is not stressed in the definition is that the infant usually dies while asleep—hence the lay terms crib death and cot death. SIDS is the leading cause of death between the ages of 1 month and 1 year in U.S. infants, and the third leading cause of death overall in this age group, after congenital anomalies and diseases of prematurity and low birth weight. In 90% of cases, the infant is younger than 6 months; most are between the ages of 2 and 4 months. SIDS in an earlier sibling is associated with a fivefold relative risk of recurrence; traumatic child abuse must be carefully excluded under these circumstances.
# Chunk 6830
Fig. 7.32 ). In view of the overlap in the mechanisms underlying congenital malformations and oncogenesis, it is interesting that approximately 10% of sacrococcygeal teratomas are associated with congenital anomalies, primarily defects of the hindgut and cloacal region and other midline defects (e.g., meningocele, spina bifida) not believed to result from local effects of the tumor. Approximately 75% of these tumors are mature teratomas with a benign course, and about 12% are unmistakably malignant and lethal (Chapter 18). The remainder are designated immature teratomas, and their malignant potential correlates with the amount of immature tissue elements present. Most of the benign teratomas are encountered in younger infants (4 months of age or younger), whereas children with malignant lesions tend to be somewhat older.
# Chunk 6831
Fig. 7.34 (A)FISHusingafluorescein-labeledcosmidprobeforN-myc onatissuesectioncontainingneuroblastomaattachedtothekidney.Notetheneuroblastomacellsontheupperhalfofthephotowithlargeareasofstaining(yellow-green);thiscorrespondstoamplifiedN-MYC intheformofhomogeneouslystainingregions.Renaltubularepithelialcellsinthelowerhalfofthephotographshownonuclearstainingandbackground(green) cytoplasmicstaining.(B)AKaplan-Meiersurvivalcurveofinfantsyoungerthan1yearofagewithmetastaticneuroblastoma.The3-yearevent-freesurvivalofinfantswhosetumorslackedMYCN amplificationwas93%,whereasthosewithtumorsthathadMYCN amplificationhadonlya10%event-freesurvival.(A, Courtesy Dr. Timothy Triche, Children’s Hospital, Los Angeles, California. B, Reproduced with permission from Brodeur GM: Neuroblastoma: biological insights into a clinical enigma, NatRevCancer3:203–216, 2003.) from an abdominal mass, fever, and weight loss. In older children the neuroblastomas may remain unnoticed until metastases cause hepatomegaly, ascites, and bone pain. Neuroblastomas may metastasize widely through the hematogenous and lymphatic systems, particularly to liver, lungs, bones, and the bone marrow. In neonates, disseminated neuroblastomas may manifest with multiple cutaneous metastases associated with deep blue discoloration to the skin (earning the rather unfortunate moniker of “blueberry muffin baby”). About 90% of neuroblastomas, regardless of location, produce catecholamines (similar to the catecholamines associated with pheochromocytomas), which constitutes an important diagnostic feature (i.e., elevated blood levels of catecholamines and elevated urine levels of catecholamine metabolites such as vanillylmandelic acid [VMA] and homovanillic acid [HVA]). Despite the elaboration of catecholamines, hypertension is much less frequent with these neoplasms than with pheochromocytomas (Chapter 20).
# Chunk 6832
Environmental diseases are sometimes the consequence of major disasters, such as the methyl mercury contamination of Minamata Bay in Japan in the 1960s, the leakage of methyl isocyanate gas in Bhopal, India, in 1984, the Chernobyl nuclear accident in 1986, the Fukushima nuclear meltdown following the tsunami in 2011, and lead poisoning resulting from contaminated drinking water in the city of Flint in the United States in 2016. Fortunately, these are unusual and infrequent occurrences. Less dramatic, but much more common, are diseases and injury produced by chronic exposure to relatively low levels of contaminants. It should be noted that a host of factors, including complex interactions between pollutants producing multiplicative effects, as well as the age, genetic predisposition, and different tissue sensitivities of exposed persons, create wide variations in individual sensitivity. Disease related to malnutrition is even more pervasive. In 2010, it was estimated that 925 million people were malnourished—one in every seven persons worldwide. Children are disproportionately affected by undernutrition, which accounts for more than 50% of childhood mortality worldwide.
# Chunk 6833
Carbon monoxide (CO) is a nonirritating, colorless, tasteless, odorless gas. It is produced by the incomplete oxidation of carbonaceous materials. Its sources include automotive engines, industries using fossil fuels, home oil burners, and cigarette smoke. The low levels often found in ambient air may contribute to impaired respiratory function but usually are not life threatening. However, persons working in confined environments with high exposure to fumes, such as tunnel and underground garage workers, may develop chronic poisoning. CO is included here as an air pollutant, but it also is an important cause of accidental and suicidal death. In a small, closed garage, exhaust from a running car engine can induce a lethal coma within 5 minutes. CO is a systemic asphyxiant that kills by binding to hemoglobin and preventing oxygen transport. Hemoglobin has a 200-fold greater affinity for CO than for O2. The carboxyhemoglobin, that is formed by binding of CO is incapable of carrying oxygen. Hypoxia leads to central nervous system (CNS) depression, which develops so insidiously that victims often are unaware of their plight and are unable to help themselves. Systemic hypoxia appears when the hemoglobin is 20% to 30% saturated with CO, and unconsciousness and death are probable with 60% to 70% saturation. The diagnosis of CO poisoning is based on detection of high levels of carboxyhemoglobin in the blood.
# Chunk 6834
Today, the main sources of exposure to mercury are contaminated fish and dental amalgams, which release mercury vapors. In some areas of the world, mercury used in gold mining has contaminated rivers and streams. Inorganic mercury from the natural degassing of the earth’s crust or from industrial contamination is converted to organic compounds such as methyl mercury by bacteria. Methyl mercury enters the food chain, and in carnivorous fish such as swordfish, shark, and bluefish, mercury levels may be 1 million times higher than in the surrounding water. Almost 90% of the ingested mercury is absorbed in the GI tract. The consumption of contaminated fish from the release of methyl mercury in Minamata Bay and the Agano River in Japan, and the consumption of bread containing grain treated with a methyl mercury–based fungicide in Iraq, caused widespread morbidity and many deaths.
# Chunk 6835
Carcinogensis. Components of cigarette smoke, particularly polycyclic hydrocarbons and nitrosamines ( 8.4 ), are potent carcinogens in animals and probably are involved in the causation of lung carcinomas in humans (see Chapter 13). The risk of developing lung cancer is related to the intensity of exposure, frequently expressed in terms of “pack years” (e.g., one pack daily for 20 years equals 20 pack years) or in cigarettes smoked per day (
# Chunk 6836
Acetaldehyde toxicity may be responsible for some of the acute effects of alcohol. Acetaldehyde metabolism differs between populations because of genetic variation. Most notably, about 50% of Asians express a defective form of acetaldehyde dehydrogenase. After ingesting alcohol, such persons experience flushing, tachycardia, and hyperventilation owing to the accumulation of acetaldehyde.
# Chunk 6837
• MHT increases the risk of stroke and venous thromboembolism (VTE), including deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism. The increase in VTE is more pronounced during the first 2 years of treatment and in women who have other risk factors, such as immobilization and hypercoagulable states caused by prothrombin or factor V Leiden mutations (Chapter 4). Whether risks of VTE and stroke are lower with transdermal than oral routes of estrogen administration warrants further study.
# Chunk 6838
In 2014, it was estimated that there were 1.5 million users of cocaine in the United States, of which approximately 15% to 20% were users of “crack” cocaine. Use is highest among adults 18 to 25 years of age, of whom 1.4% reported taking cocaine within the past month. Extracted from the leaves of the coca plant, cocaine usually is prepared as a water-soluble powder, cocaine hydrochloride, but when sold on the street it is liberally diluted with talcum powder, lactose, or other look-alikes. Crystallization of the pure alkaloid from cocaine hydrochloride yields nuggets of crack (so called because of the popping sound it makes when heated). The pharmacologic actions of cocaine and crack are identical, but crack is far more potent. Both forms can be snorted, smoked after mixing with tobacco, ingested, or injected subcutaneously or intravenously.
# Chunk 6839
Fig. 8.18 ). Retinol is then transported in chylomicrons, where it is taken up into liver cells through the apolipoprotein E receptor. More than 90% of the body’s vitamin A reserves are stored in the liver, predominantly in the perisinusoidal stellate (Ito) cells. In healthy persons who consume an adequate diet, these reserves are sufficient to support the body’s needs for at least 6 months. Retinol esters stored in the liver can be mobilized; before release, retinol binds to a specific retinol-binding protein (RBP), synthesized in the liver. The uptake of retinol and RBP in peripheral tissues is dependent on cell surface RBP receptors. After uptake by cells, retinol is released, and the RBP is recycled back into the blood. Retinol may be stored in peripheral tissues as retinyl ester or may be oxidized to form retinoic acid.
# Chunk 6840
of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D (<20 ng/mL) are associated with a 30% to 50% increase in the incidence of colon, prostate, and breast cancers, but whether or not vitamin D supplementation can reduce cancer risk has not been firmly established.
# Chunk 6841
Table8.9 listsvitaminfunctionsanddeficiencysyndromes).

Excess adiposity (obesity) and excess body weight are associated with increased incidence of several of the most important diseases of humans, including type 2 diabetes, dyslipidemias, cardiovascular disease, hypertension, and cancer. It is a major public health problem in developed countries and an emerging health problem in developing nations, such as India. In the United States, obesity has reached epidemic proportions. The prevalence of obesity increased from 13% to 34% between 1960 and 2008, and as of 2015, 68.6% of Americans between 20 and 75 years of age were overweight as were 17% of the children. Globally, the World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that in 2015, 700 million adults were obese. The causes of this epidemic are complex but undoubtedly are related to societal changes in diet and levels of physical activity. Obesity is defined as a state of increased body weight, caused by adipose tissue accumulation, that is of sufficient magnitude to produce adverse health effects. How does one measure fat accumulation? Several high-tech methods have been devised, but for practical purposes the body mass index (BMI) is most commonly used. BMI is calculated as (weight in kilograms)/(height in meters)2, or kg/m2.
# Chunk 6842
Hypoventilation syndrome is a constellation of respiratory abnormalities in very obese persons. It has been called the pickwickian syndrome, after the fat lad who was constantly falling asleep in Charles Dickens’ The Pickwick Papers. Hypersomnolence, both at night and during the day, is characteristic and is often associated with apneic pauses during sleep (sleep apnea), polycythemia, and eventual right-sided heart failure.
# Chunk 6843
Currently, one of the most important and controversial issues is the contribution of diet to atherogenesis. The central question is whether dietary modification— specifically, reduction in the consumption of foods high in cholesterol and saturated animal fats (e.g., eggs, butter, beef)—can reduce serum cholesterol levels and prevent or retard the development of atherosclerosis (of most importance, coronary heart disease) in those with no previous episode of cardiovascular disease. This is called “primary prevention”. We know some but not all the answers. The average adult in the United States consumes a large amount of fat and cholesterol daily, with a ratio of saturated fatty acids to polyunsaturated fatty acids of about 3:1. Lowering the level of saturates to the level of the polyunsaturates causes a 10% to 15% reduction in serum cholesterol within a few weeks. Vegetable oils (e.g., corn and safflower oils) and fish oils contain polyunsaturated fatty acids and are good sources of such cholesterol-lowering lipids. Fish oil fatty acids belonging to the omega-3, or n-3, family have more double bonds than do the omega-6, or n-6, fatty acids found in vegetable oils. A corollary of this idea is that supplementation of diet with fish oils might protect against atherosclerosis. One study of Dutch men whose usual daily diet contained 30 g of fish showed a substantially lower frequency of death from coronary heart disease than that among comparable control subjects. However, other studies have shown that omega-3 fatty acid supplements do not reduce the risk of cardiovascular diseases, suggesting that yet unknown components of fish may be required for cardioprotection.
# Chunk 6844
The concern about endogenous synthesis of carcinogens or promoters from components of the diet relates principally to gastric carcinomas. Nitrosamines and nitrosamides are suspected to generate these tumors in humans, as they induce gastric cancer in animals. These compounds are formed in the body from nitrites and amines or amides derived from digested proteins. Sources of nitrites include sodium nitrite, added to foods as a preservative, and nitrates, present in common vegetables, which are reduced in the gut by bacterial flora. There is, then, the potential for endogenous production of carcinogenic agents from dietary components, which might well have an effect on the stomach.
# Chunk 6845
Molecular diagnostics. Nucleic acid amplification techniques, such as polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and transcription-mediated amplification, are used for diagnosis of gonorrhea, chlamydial infection, tuberculosis, and herpes encephalitis. Molecular assays are much more sensitive than conventional testing for some pathogens. PCR testing of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) for HSV encephalitis has a sensitivity of about 80%, whereas viral culture of CSF has a sensitivity of less than 10%. Similarly, nucleic acid tests for genital Chlamydia detect 10% to 30% more cases than conventional Chlamydia culture does. For other infections, such as gonorrhea, the sensitivity of nucleic acid testing is similar to that of culture. Quantitative PCR for BK virus, CMV, and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is used to assess viral loads in transplant recipients. Molecular panels for detection of 20 or more pathogens are now routinely used to diagnose respiratory bacterial and viral infections, as well as gastrointestinal bacterial, viral and parasitic infections. Quantitative assays for viral nucleic acids are used to guide the medical management of patients infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), HBV, and hepatitis C virus (HCV). Next-generation sequencing, with or without initial PCR amplification, is being used for the detection of novel or rare pathogens, and for epidemiologic investigations.
# Chunk 6846
Additional clinical syndromes may be recognized after the pathogen has been known for some time, possibly due to new contributing factors. Although Zika virus was discovered in 1947 in Uganda, very few human cases were reported for many years, until the virus more recently spread through additional countries, expanding the range from Africa, Asia, and the Pacific to the Americas, causing newly recognized clinical cases. The virus is contracted primarily via the Aedes species mosquito but also via sexual transmission and possibly blood transfusion. Although many individuals infected have no or mild nonspecific symptoms, infection may be associated with Guillain-Barre syndrome, a form of rapid-onset muscle weakness caused by immune system damage to the nervous system. Infection with Zika virus during pregnancy is associated with birth defects, including microcephaly. Many more congenital cases were diagnosed in the 2015 outbreak beginning in Brazil compared to earlier outbreaks, creating a Public Health Emergency of International Concern. Further investigation is ongoing to determine if other variables may be contributing to the CNS effects such as genetics, co-infections, immunity from past infections, or yet to be defined environmental factors.
# Chunk 6847
Fig.

10.4 ). Each day, the kidneys on average filter 170 liters of plasma containing 23 moles of salt. Thus, with a typical diet containing 100 mEq of sodium, 99.5% of the filtered salt must be reabsorbed to maintain total body sodium levels. About 98% of the filtered sodium is reabsorbed by several constitutively active transporters. Recovery of the remaining 2% of sodium occurs by way of the epithelial sodium channel (ENaC), which is tightly regulated by aldosterone, a downstream effector of the renin-angiotensin system; it is this pathway that determines net sodium balance.
# Chunk 6848
Aldosterone. Adrenal aldosterone increases blood pressure by its effect on blood volume; aldosterone increases sodium resorption (and thus water) in the distal convoluted and collecting tubules while also driving potassium excretion into the urine.
# Chunk 6849
Men 8.7 5.5 13.7 9.2 16.5 11.3 23.4 17 28.827.7 3836.8 57.556.4 Women

Fig. 10.8 Estimated10-yearriskforcoronaryarterydiseasein55-year-oldmenandwomenasafunctionofestablishedriskfactors—hyperlipidemia,hypertension,smoking,anddiabetes.BP,bloodpressure;ECG,electrocardiogram;HDL-C,high-densitylipoproteincholesterol;LVH,leftventricularhypertrophy.(Data from O’Donnell CJ, Kannel WB: Cardiovascular risks of hypertension: lessons from observational studies, JHypertension16[Suppl 6]:3, 1998.) http://ebooksmedicine.net
# Chunk 6850
that tissue demand exceeds supply. In the coronary artery (and other) circulations, this typically occurs when the vessel is approximately 70% occluded. At rest, affected patients have adequate cardiac perfusion; but with even modest exertion, demand exceeds supply, and chest pain develops because of cardiac ischemia (stable angina) (Chapter 11). The toll of chronic arterial hypoperfusion due to atherosclerosis in various vascular beds includes bowel ischemia, sudden cardiac death, chronic IHD, ischemic encephalopathy, and intermittent claudication (ischemic leg pain).
# Chunk 6851
The risk for rupture is related to the size of AAAs. Those 4 cm or less in diameter almost never burst, while those between 4 and 5 cm do so at a rate of 1% per year. The risk rises to 11% per year for AAAs 5 to 6 cm in diameter, and to 25% per year for aneurysms greater than 6 cm in diameter. Thus, aneurysms 5 cm in diameter or larger are managed surgically, either by open placement of tubular prosthetic grafts or with endoluminal insertion of stented grafts (expandable wire frames covered by a cloth sleeve). Timely intervention is critical, because the mortality rate for elective procedures is approximately 5%, whereas the rate for emergency surgery after rupture is roughly 50%.
# Chunk 6852
In type A dissections, rapid diagnosis and institution of intensive anti-hypertensive therapy coupled with surgical plication of the aortic intimal tear can save 65% to 85% of the patients. However, the mortality rate approaches 70% in patients who present with hemorrhage or symptoms related to distal ischemia, and the overall 10-year survival rate is only 40% to 60%. Most type B dissections can be managed conservatively; patients have a 75% survival rate whether they are treated with surgery or with anti-hypertensive medication only.
# Chunk 6853
IgA Cryoglobulin Other (e.g., (e.g., Henoch-(e.g., cryoglobulin Goodpasture Schönlein purpura) vasculitis) disease) http://ebooksmedicine.net complex–mediated disorders, such as the Arthus phenomenon and serum sickness, and in some cases contain readily identifiable antibody and complement. Often, however, this type of vasculitis is a diagnostic challenge. Only rarely is the specific antigen responsible for immune complex formation known, and in most instances it is not clear whether the pathogenic antigen-antibody complexes are deposited into the vessel wall from the circulation or form in situ. In fact, in many suspected cases, even the antigen-antibody deposits are scarce, perhaps because the immune complexes have been degraded by the time of biopsy.
# Chunk 6854
http://ebooksmedicine.net

Temporal arteritis is rare before 50 years of age. Signs and symptoms may be vague and constitutional (e.g., fever, fatigue, weight loss) or take the form of facial pain or headache, most intense along the course of the superficial temporal artery, which is painful to palpation. Ocular symptoms (associated with involvement of the ophthalmic artery) abruptly appear in about 50% of patients; these range from diplopia to complete vision loss. Diagnosis depends on biopsy and histology; however, because the vascular inflammation is patchy, a negative biopsy result does not exclude the diagnosis. Corticosteroid or anti-TNF therapies are effective treatments.
# Chunk 6855
PAN is primarily a disease of young adults but can occur in all age groups. The clinical course typically is episodic, with long symptom-free intervals. The systemic findings—malaise, fever, and weight loss—are nonspecific, and the vascular involvement is widely scattered, so that the clinical manifestations can be varied and puzzling. A “classic” presentation involves involve some combination of rapidly accelerating hypertension due to renal artery involvement; abdominal pain and bloody stools caused by gastrointestinal lesions; diffuse muscular aches and pains; and peripheral neuritis, predominantly affecting motor nerves. Renal involvement often is prominent and is a major cause of death. Untreated, PAN typically is fatal; however, with immunosuppression, 5-year survival is close to 80%. Relapse occurs in up to 25% of the cases, more often in non–HBV-associated cases than those that follow HBV infection. The latter have a better long-term prognosis.
# Chunk 6856
Endemic African KS typically occurs in younger (under 40 years of age) HIV-seronegative individuals and can follow an indolent or aggressive course; it involves lymph nodes much more frequently than in the classic variant. In combination with AIDS-associated KS (see later), KS is now the most common tumor in central Africa. A particularly severe form, with prominent lymph node and visceral involvement, occurs in prepubertal children; the prognosis is poor, with an almost 100% mortality within 3 years.
# Chunk 6857
Angiosarcomas are malignant endothelial neoplasms ranging from highly differentiated tumors resembling hemangiomas to wildly anaplastic lesions. Older adults are more commonly affected, without gender predilection; lesions can occur at any site, but most often involve the skin, soft tissue, breast, and liver. Clinically, angiosarcomas are aggressive tumors that invade locally and metastasize. Current 5-year survival rates are only about 30%.
# Chunk 6858
Consequently, when small-bore vessel replacement is needed (e.g., for coronary artery bypass surgeries), the grafts are fashioned either from autologous saphenous vein (taken from the patient’s own leg) or left internal mammary artery. The long-term patency of saphenous vein grafts is only 50% at 10 years; these grafts occlude through thrombosis (typically early), intimal thickening (months to years postoperatively), and vein graft atherosclerosis. By contrast, more than 90% of internal mammary artery grafts are patent after 10 years.
# Chunk 6859
Table 11.1

Fig. 11.3 ). The ventricular septum normally is formed by a muscular ridge that grows upward from the heart apex fusing with a thinner membranous partition that grows downward from the endocardial cushions. The basal (membranous) region is the last part of the septum to develop and is the site of approximately 90% of VSDs. Most VSDs close spontaneously in childhood, but only 20% to 30% of VSDs occur in isolation; the remainder are associated with other cardiac malformations.
# Chunk 6860
Fixed obstructions that occlude less than 70% of a coronary vessel lumen typically are asymptomatic, even with exertion. In comparison, lesions that occlude more than 70% of a vessel lumen—resulting in so-called “critical stenosis”—generally cause symptoms in the setting of increased demand; with critical stenosis, certain levels of exertion predictably cause chest pain, and the patient is said to have stable angina. A fixed stenosis that occludes 90% or more of a vascular lumen can lead to inadequate coronary blood flow with symptoms even at rest—one of the forms ofunstable angina (see “ ” later in the chapter).
# Chunk 6861
In a majority of cases, the “culprit lesion” in patients who suffer an MI was not critically stenotic or even symptomatic before its rupture. As noted previously, anginal symptoms typically occur with fixed lesions exhibiting greater than 70% chronic occlusion. Pathologic and clinical studies show that two thirds of ruptured plaques are less than or equal to 50% stenotic before plaque rupture, and 85% exhibit initial stenotic occlusion of less than or equal to 70%. Thus, the worrisome conclusion is that a large number of asymptomatic adults are at significant risk for a catastrophic coronary event. At present, it is impossible to predict plaque rupture in any given patient.
# Chunk 6862
Subendocardial infarctions are MIs limited to the inner third of the myocardium; these infarcts typically do not exhibit ST segment elevations or Q waves on the ECG tracing (so-called “non–ST-segment elevated MIs” or “NSTEMIs”), although they can have ST-segment depressions or T wave abnormalities. As mentioned earlier, the subendocardial region is most vulnerable to hypoperfusion and hypoxia. Thus, in the setting of http://ebooksmedicine.net severe coronary artery disease, transient decreases in oxygen delivery (as from hypotension, anemia, or pneumonia) or increases in oxygen demand (as with tachycardia or hypertension) can cause subendocardial ischemic injury. This pattern also can occur when an occlusive thrombus lyses before a full-thickness infarction can develop.
# Chunk 6863
MORPHOLOGYNearlyalltransmuralinfarcts(involving50%ormoreoftheventriclethickness)affectatleastaportionoftheleftventricleand/orinterventricularseptum.Roughly15%to30%ofMIsthatinvolvetheposteriororposteroseptalwallalsoextendintotherightventricle.Isolatedrightventricleinfarctsoccurinonly1%to3%ofcases.Evenintransmuralinfarcts,anarrowrim(approximately0.1mm)ofviablesubendocardialmyocardiumispreservedbydiffusionofoxygenandnutrientsfromtheventricularlumen.
# Chunk 6864
Arrhythmias. MIs lead to myocardial irritability and conduction disturbances that can cause sudden death. Approximately 90% of patients develop some form of rhythm disturbance, with the incidence being higher in STEMIs versus NSTEMIs. MI-associated arrhythmias include heart block of variable degree (including asystole), bradycardia, supraventricular tachyarrhythmias, ventricular premature contractions or ventricular tachycardia, and ventricular fibrillation. The risk for serious arrhythmias (e.g., ventricular fibrillation) is greatest in the first hour and declines thereafter.
# Chunk 6865
Sudden cardiac death (SCD) is defined as unexpected death due to a lethal arrhythmia such as asystole or sustained ventricular fibrillation. Roughly 400,000 individuals are victims of SCD each year in the United States. Coronary artery disease is the leading cause of SCD, being responsible for 80% to 90% of cases. Unfortunately, SCD may be the first manifestation of IHD. Of interest, autopsy typically shows severe atherosclerotic disease without evidence of acute plaque disruption. Thus, in the vast majority of cases, there is no associated myocardial infarction; 80% to 90% of patients who suffer SCD but are successfully resuscitated do not show any enzymatic or ECG evidence of myocardial necrosis—even if the cause is IHD! Healed remote MIs are present in about 40% of cases.
# Chunk 6866
In severe disease, valve orifices can be compromised by as much as 70% to 80% (from a normal area of approximately 4 cm2). Cardiac output is maintained only by virtue of concentric left ventricular hypertrophy; the chronic outflow obstruction can drive left ventricular pressures to 200 mm Hg or more. The hypertrophied myocardium is prone to ischemia, and angina may develop. Systolic and diastolic dysfunction collude to cause CHF, and cardiac decompensation eventually ensues. The development of angina, CHF, or syncope in aortic stenosis heralds the exhaustion of compensatory cardiac hyperfunction and carries a poor prognosis; without surgical intervention, 50% to 80% of patients die within 2 to 3 years.
# Chunk 6867
hematuria, albuminuria, or renal failure (Chapter 14). Clinical features of septicemia, arrhythmias (suggesting extension to underlying myocardium and conduction system), and systemic embolization bode ill for the patient. Left untreated, IE generally is fatal. However, with appropriate long-term (6 weeks or more) antibiotic therapy and/or valve replacement, mortality is reduced. For infections with low-virulence organisms (e.g., Streptococcus viridans or Streptococcus bovis), the cure rate is 98%, and for enterococci and Staphylococcus aureus infections, cure rates range from 60% to 90%; however, infections with aerobic gram-negative bacilli or fungi are associated with fatality rate of approximately 50%.
# Chunk 6868
The fundamental defect in DCM is ineffective contraction. Thus, in end-stage DCM, the cardiac ejection fraction typically is less than 25% (normal is 50% to 65%). Secondary mitral regurgitation and abnormal cardiac rhythms are common, and embolism from intracardiac (mural) thrombi can occur. DCM most commonly is diagnosed between 20 and 50 years of age. It typically manifests with signs of slowly progressive CHF, including dyspnea, easy fatigability, and poor exertional capacity. One half of patients die within 2 years and only 25% survive longer than 5 years; death is usually due to progressive cardiac failure or arrhythmia. Cardiac transplantation is the only definitive treatment, although implantation of long-term ventricular assist devices is increasingly utilized; in some patients, a course of mechanical assistance can produce durable regression of cardiac dysfunction.
# Chunk 6869
Fig.11.27B

Although HCM can present at any age, it typically manifests during the postpubertal growth spurt. The clinical symptoms can be best understood in the context of the functional abnormalities. It is characterized by massive left ventricular hypertorphy associated with (paradoxically) a markedly reduced stroke volume. This latter occurs as a consequence of impaired diastolic filling and overall smaller chamber size. In addition, roughly 25% of patients have dynamic obstruction to the left ventricular outflow by the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve. Reduced cardiac output and a secondary increase in pulmonary venous pressure cause exertional dyspnea, with a harsh systolic ejection murmur. A combination of massive hypertrophy, high left ventricular pressures, and compromised intramural arteries frequently leads to myocardial ischemia (with angina), even in the absence of concomitant CAD. Major clinical problems include atrial fibrillation with mural thrombus formation, ventricular fibrillation leading to sudden cardiac death, infectious endocarditis of the mitral valve, and CHF. Most patients’ symptoms are improved by therapy that promotes ventricular relaxation; partial surgical excision or controlled alcohol-induced infarction of septal muscle also can relieve the outflow tract obstruction. As mentioned earlier, HCM is an important cause of sudden cardiac death. In almost one third of cases of sudden cardiac death in athletes younger than 35 years of age, the underlying cause is HCM.
# Chunk 6870
Although permanent ventricular assist device implantation is increasingly an option for management of end-stage heart disease, cardiac transplantation remains the treatment of choice for patients with intractable heart failure. Without transplantation, medically managed end-stage heart failure carries a 50% 1-year mortality rate, and less than 10% of patients survive 5 years. Over 5000 heart transplantation procedures are performed annually worldwide, mostly for DCM and IHD.
# Chunk 6871
Despite these problems, the outlook for transplant recipients generally is good, with a 1-year survival rate of 90% and a 5-year survival rate of more than 70%.
# Chunk 6872
Table 12.2 . Depending on the differential diagnosis, a number of other blood tests also may be performed to evaluate anemia, including (1) serum iron indices (iron levels, iron-binding capacity, transferrin saturation, and ferritin concentrations), which help distinguish among microcytic anemia caused by iron deficiency, chronic inflammation, and thalassemia; (2) plasma unconjugated bilirubin, haptoglobin, and lactate dehydrogenase levels, which are abnormal in hemolytic anemia; (3) serum and red cell folate and vitamin B12 concentrations, which are low in megaloblastic anemia; (4) hemoglobin electrophoresis, which is used to detect abnormal hemoglobin; and (5) the Coombs test, which is used to detect antibodies or complement bound to red cells in suspected cases of antibody-mediated hemolytic anemia. In isolated anemia, tests performed on the peripheral blood usually suffice to establish the cause. By contrast, when anemia occurs along with thrombocytopenia and/or granulocytopenia, it is much more likely to be associated with marrow aplasia or infiltration; in such instances a marrow examination usually is warranted.
# Chunk 6873
Hemoglobinemia, hemoglobinuria, and hemosiderinuria. Hemoglobin released into the circulation is small enough to pass into the urinary space. Here, it is partially resorbed by renal tubular cells and processed into hemosiderin, which is then lost in the urine when renal tubular cells are sloughed.
# Chunk 6874
A final feature of both intravascular and extravascular hemolysis is decreased serum levels of haptoglobin, a plasma protein that binds free hemoglobin and is then removed from the circulation. Apparently macrophages “regurgitate” sufficient hemoglobin during consumption of red cells to cause haptoglobin levels to fall, even when hemolysis is entirely extravascular.
# Chunk 6875
Sickle cell anemia is the most common familial hemolytic anemia. In parts of Africa where malaria is endemic, the gene frequency approaches 30% as a result of a protective effect against Plasmodium falciparum malaria. In the United States, approximately 8% of blacks are heterozygous HbS carriers and about 1 in 600 have sickle cell anemia.
# Chunk 6876
Three factors are particularly important in determining whether clinically significant polymerization of HbS occurs in patients: • The intracellular levels of hemoglobins other than HbS. In heterozygotes approximately 40% of Hb is HbS and the remainder is HbA, which interacts only weakly with deoxygenated HbS. Because HbA greatly retards HbS polymerization, the red cells of HbS heterozygotes have little tendency to sickle in vivo. Such persons are said to have sickle cell trait. Similarly, because fetal hemoglobin (HbF) interacts weakly with HbS, newborns with sickle cell anemia do not manifest the disease until HbF falls to adult levels, generally around the age of 5 to 6 months. Hemoglobin C (HbC), another mutant β-globin, has a lysine residue instead of the normal glutamic acid residue at position 6. About 2.3% of American blacks are heterozygous carriers of HbC and about 1 in 1250 newborns are compound HbC/HbS heterozygotes. HbC has a greater tendency to aggregate with HbS than does HbA, and as a result HbS/HbC compound heterozygotes have a symptomatic sickling disorder called HbSC disease.
# Chunk 6877
Clinical Features. From its onset, the disease runs an unremitting course punctuated by sudden crises. Homozygous sickle cell disease usually is asymptomatic until 6 months of age when the shift from HbF to HbS is complete. The anemia is moderate to severe; most patients have hematocrits of 18% to 30% (normal range, 38%–48%). The http://ebooksmedicine.net
# Chunk 6878
The life cycle of plasmodia is complex (

Fig. 12.8 ). As mosquitoes feed on human blood, sporozoites are introduced from the saliva and within a few minutes infect liver cells. Here the parasites multiply rapidly to form a schizont containing thousands of merozoites. After a period of days to several weeks that varies with the Plasmodium species, the infected hepatocytes release the merozoites, which quickly infect red cells. Intraerythrocytic parasites either continue asexual reproduction to produce more merozoites or give rise to gametocytes capable of infecting the next hungry mosquito. During their asexual reproduction in red cells, each of the four forms of malaria develops into trophozoites. The asexual phase is completed when the trophozoites give rise to new merozoites, which escape by lysing the red cells.
# Chunk 6879
The normal total body iron mass is about 2.5 g for women and 3.5 g for men. Approximately 80% of functional body iron is present in hemoglobin, with the remainder located in myoglobin and iron-containing enzymes (e.g., catalase, cytochromes). The iron storage pool, consisting of hemosiderin and ferritin-bound iron in the liver, spleen, bone marrow, and skeletal muscle, contains on average 15% to 20% of total body iron. Because serum ferritin is largely derived from this storage pool, the serum ferritin level is a good measure of iron stores. Assessment of bone marrow iron is another reliable but more invasive method for estimating iron stores. Iron is transported in the plasma bound to the protein transferrin. In normal persons, transferrin is about 33% saturated with iron, yielding serum iron levels that average 120 µg/dL in men and 100 µg/dL in women. Thus, the normal total iron-binding capacity of serum is 300 to 350 µg/dL.
# Chunk 6880
Regardless of the cause, iron deficiency develops insidiously. Iron stores are depleted first, marked by a decline in serum ferritin and the absence of stainable iron in the bone marrow. These changes are followed by a decrease in serum iron and a rise in the serum transferrin. Ultimately, the capacity to synthesize hemoglobin, myoglobin, and other iron-containing proteins is diminished, leading to microcytic anemia, impaired work and cognitive performance, and even reduced immunocompetence.
# Chunk 6881
Cat-scratch disease is a self-limited lymphadenitis caused by the bacterium Bartonella henselae. It is primarily a disease of childhood; 90% of the patients are younger than 18 years of age. It manifests with regional lymphadenopathy, most frequently in the axilla and the neck. The nodal enlargement appears approximately 2 weeks after a feline scratch or, less commonly, after a splinter or thorn injury. An inflammatory nodule, vesicle, or eschar is sometimes visible at the site of the skin injury. In most patients the lymph node enlargement regresses during a period of 2 to 4 months. Rarely, encephalitis, osteomyelitis, or thrombocytopenia may develop in patients.
# Chunk 6882
MORPHOLOGYInleukemicpresentations,the marrow is hypercellular and packed with lymphoblasts, whichreplacenormalmarrowelements.Mediastinal masses occurin50%to70%ofT-ALLs,whicharealsomorelikelytobeassociatedwithlymphadenopathyandsplenomegaly.InbothB-andT-ALL,thetumorcellshavescantbasophiliccytoplasmandnucleiwithdelicate,finelystippledchromatinandsmallnucleoli(
# Chunk 6883
Clinical Features. When first detected, CLL/SLL often is asymptomatic. The most common signs and symptoms are nonspecific and include easy fatigability, weight loss, and anorexia. Generalized lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly are present in 50% to 60% of patients. The leukocyte count may be increased only slightly (in SLL) or may exceed 200,000 cells/µL. Hypogammaglobulinemia develops in more than 50% of the patients, usually late in the course, and leads to an increased susceptibility to bacterial infections. Less commonly, autoimmune hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia are seen.
# Chunk 6884
Clinical Features. Both the endemic and nonendemic sporadic forms affect mainly children and young adults. Burkitt lymphoma accounts for approximately 30% of childhood NHLs in the United States. The disease usually arises at extranodal sites. Endemic tumors often manifest as maxillary or mandibular masses, whereas abdominal tumors involving the bowel, retroperitoneum, and ovaries are more common in North America. Leukemic presentations sometimes occur and must be distinguished from ALL, which is treated with different drug regimens. Burkitt lymphoma is highly aggressive; however, with very intensive chemotherapy regimens, a majority of patients can be cured.
# Chunk 6885
Laboratory analyses typically show increased levels of immunoglobulins in the blood and/or Bence Jones proteins in the urine. Free light chains and an M protein component are observed together in 60% to 70% of cases, whereas in about 20% of patients only free light chains are present. Around 1% of myelomas are nonsecretory; hence, the absence of detectable M component does not completely exclude the diagnosis.
# Chunk 6886
The outlook, even for those with advanced disease, is very good. The 5-year survival rate for patients with stage I-A or II-A disease is more than 90%. Even with advanced disease (stage IV-A or IV-B), the overall 5-year disease-free survival rate is around 50%. Among long-term survivors treated with radiotherapy, a higher risk of certain malignancies, including lung cancer and breast cancer, as well as cardiovascular disease, has been reported. These sobering results have spurred development of new regimens that minimize the use of radiotherapy and use less toxic chemotherapy. As already mentioned, anti-PD-1 antibodies have produced excellent responses in patients with relapsed,
# Chunk 6887
AML remains a devastating disease. Tumors with “good-risk” karyotypic abnormalities (t[8;21], inv[16]) are associated with a 50% chance of long-term disease-free survival, but the overall survival in all patients is only 15% to 30% with conventional chemotherapy. AML associated with TP53 mutations has emerged as a subtype with a particularly poor prognosis. A bright spot is the improvement in outcomes in acute promyelocytic leukemia brought about by targeted treatment with ATRA and arsenic salts. IDH inhibitors also have produced encouraging results, apparently (like ATRA) by inducing the differentiation of AML blasts. An increasing number of patients with AML are being treated with more aggressive approaches, such as allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, which can be curative in some patients.
# Chunk 6888
The natural history of CML initially is one of slow progression. Even without treatment, the median survival is 3 years. After a variable (and unpredictable) period, approximately half of CML cases enter an accelerated phase marked by increasing anemia and new thrombocytopenia, the appearance of additional cytogenetic abnormalities, and finally transformation into a picture resembling acute leukemia (blast crisis). In the remaining 50% of cases, blast crisis occurs abruptly, without an accelerated phase. Of note, in 30% of cases the blast crisis resembles precursor-B cell ALL, further attesting to the origin of CML from hematopoietic stem cells. In the remaining 70% of cases, the blast crisis resembles AML. Less commonly, CML progresses to a phase of extensive bone marrow fibrosis resembling primary myelofibrosis.
# Chunk 6889
• Multisystem Langerhans cell histiocytosis (Letterer-Siwe disease) usually occurs in children younger than 2 years of age. It typically manifests with multifocal cutaneous lesions that grossly resemble seborrheic skin eruptions and are composed of Langerhans cells. Most affected patients have hepatosplenomegaly, lymphadenopathy, pulmonary lesions, and (later in the course) destructive osteolytic bone lesions. Extensive marrow infiltration often leads to pancytopenia and predisposes the patient to recurrent bacterial infections. The disease is rapidly fatal if untreated. With intensive chemotherapy, 50% of patients survive 5 years.
# Chunk 6890
Nevertheless, complications still occur. Most are minor and transient. The most common is referred to as a febrile nonhemolytic reaction, which takes the form of fever and chills, sometimes with mild dyspnea, within 6 hours of a transfusion of red cells or platelets. It is thought that these reactions are caused by inflammatory mediators derived from donor leukocytes. The frequency of these reactions increases with the storage age of the product and is decreased by measures that limit donor leukocyte contamination. Symptoms respond to anti-pyretics and are short-lived.
# Chunk 6891
Thymomas are rare. They may arise at any age, but most occur in middle-aged adults. In a large series about 30% were asymptomatic; 30% to 40% produced local manifestations such as cough, dyspnea, and superior vena cava syndrome; and the remainder were associated with a systemic disease, most commonly myasthenia gravis, in which a concomitant thymoma is discovered in 15% to 20% of patients. Removal of the tumor often leads to improvement of the neuromuscular disorder. In addition to myasthenia gravis , thymomas may be associated with several other pareneoplastic syndromes. These include in rough order of frequency , pure red cell aplasia, hypogammaglobulinemia, and multi organ autoimmunity. The latter bears resemblance with graft versus host disease.
# Chunk 6892
Severe ARDS is characterized by rapid onset of life-threatening respiratory insufficiency, cyanosis, and severe arterial hypoxemia that is refractory to oxygen therapy. The histologic manifestation of ARDS in the lungs is known as diffuse alveolar damage (DAD). ARDS may occur in a multitude of clinical settings and is associated with primary pulmonary diseases and severe systemic inflammatory disorders such as sepsis. The most frequent triggers of ARDS are pneumonia (35%–45%) and sepsis (30%–35%), followed by aspiration, trauma (including brain injury, abdominal surgery, and multiple fractures), pancreatitis, and transfusion reactions. ARDS should not be confused with respiratory distress syndrome of the newborn; the latter is caused by a deficiency of surfactant caused by prematurity.
# Chunk 6893
The clinical syndrome of acute lung injury or ARDS affects approximately 190,000 patients per year in the United States. In 85% of cases, it develops within 72 hours of the initial insult. The overall hospital mortality rate is 38.5% (27%, 32%, and 45% for mild, moderate, and severe ARDS, respectively). Predictors of poor prognosis include advanced age, bacteremia (sepsis), and the development of multiorgan failure. Most patients who survive the acute insult recover normal respiratory function within 6 to 12 months, but the rest develop diffuse interstitial fibrosis leading to chronic respiratory insufficiency.
# Chunk 6894
The idea that proteases are important is based in part on the observation that patients with a genetic deficiency of the anti-protease α1-anti-trypsin have a predisposition to develop pulmonary emphysema, which is compounded by smoking. About 1% of all patients with emphysema have this defect. α1-anti-trypsin, normally present in serum, tissue fluids, and macrophages, is a major inhibitor of proteases (particularly elastase) secreted by neutrophils during inflammation. α1-anti-trypsin is encoded by a gene in the proteinase inhibitor (Pi) locus on chromosome 14. The Pi locus is polymorphic, and approximately 0.012% of the U.S. population is homozygous for the Z allele, a genotype that is associated with markedly decreased serum levels of α1-anti-trypsin. More than 80% of these individuals develop symptomatic panacinar emphysema, which occurs at an earlier age and is of greater severity if the individual smokes.
# Chunk 6895
The classic presentation of emphysema with no “bronchitic” component is one in which the patient is barrel-chested and dyspneic, with obviously prolonged expiration, sitting forward in a hunched-over position. In these patients, air space enlargement is severe and diffusing capacity is low. Dyspnea and hyperventilation are prominent, so that until very late in the disease, gas exchange is adequate and blood gas values are relatively normal. Because of prominent dyspnea and adequate oxygenation of hemoglobin, these patients sometimes are sometimes called “pink puffers.”
# Chunk 6896
http://ebooksmedicine.net

Chronic bronchitis is diagnosed on clinical grounds: it is defined by the presence of a persistent productive cough for at least 3 consecutive months in at least 2 consecutive years. It is common among cigarette smokers and urban dwellers in smog-ridden cities; some studies indicate that 20% to 25% of men in the 40to 65-year-old age group have the disease. In early stages of the disease, the cough raises mucoid sputum, but airflow is not obstructed. Some patients with chronic bronchitis have evidence of hyperresponsive airways, with intermittent bronchospasm and wheezing (asthmatic bronchitis), while other bronchitic patients, especially heavy smokers, develop chronic outflow obstruction, usually with associated emphysema (COPD).
# Chunk 6897
IPF usually presents with the gradual onset of a nonproductive cough and progressive dyspnea. On physical examination, most patients have characteristic “dry” or “Velcrolike” crackles during inspiration. Cyanosis, cor pulmonale, and peripheral edema may develop in later stages of the disease. The characteristic clinical and radiologic findings (subpleural and basilar fibrosis, reticular abnormalities, and “honeycombing”) often are diagnostic. Anti-inflammatory therapies have proven to be of little use, in line with the idea that inflammation is of secondary pathogenic importance. By contrast, anti-fibrotic therapies such as nintedanib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, and pirfenidone, an inhibitor of TGF-β, have produced positive outcomes in clinical trials and are now approved for use in patients with IPF. The overall prognosis remains poor, however; survival is only 3 to 5 years, and lung transplantation is the only definitive treatment.
# Chunk 6898
The clinical findings in asbestosis are indistinguishable from those of any other chronic interstitial lung disease. Progressively worsening dyspnea appears 10 to 20 years after exposure. It is usually accompanied by a cough and production of sputum. The disease may remain static or progress to congestive heart failure, cor pulmonale, and death. Pleural plaques are usually asymptomatic and are detected on radiographs as circumscribed densities.
# Chunk 6899
Drugs can cause a variety of acute and chronic alterations in respiratory structure and function. For example, bleomycin, an anti-cancer agent, causes pneumonitis and interstitial fibrosis as a result of direct toxicity of the drug and by stimulating the influx of inflammatory cells into the alveoli. Amiodarone, an anti-arrhythmic agent, also is associated with risk for pneumonitis and fibrosis. Radiation pneumonitis is a well-known complication of irradiation of pulmonary and other thoracic tumors. Acute radiation pneumonitis, which typically occurs 1 to 6 months after therapy in as many as 20% of the patients, is manifested by fever, dyspnea out of proportion to the volume of irradiated lung, pleural effusion, and pulmonary infiltrates in the irradiated lung bed. These signs and symptoms may resolve with corticosteroid therapy or progress to chronic radiation pneumonitis, associated with pulmonary fibrosis.
# Chunk 6900
http://ebooksmedicine.net

In many affected individuals, the disease is entirely asymptomatic, discovered on routine chest films as bilateral hilar adenopathy or as an incidental finding at autopsy. In others, peripheral lymphadenopathy, cutaneous lesions, eye involvement, splenomegaly, or hepatomegaly may be presenting manifestations. In about two-thirds of symptomatic cases, there is gradual appearance of respiratory symptoms (shortness of breath, dry cough, or vague sub-sternal discomfort) or constitutional signs and symptoms (fever, fatigue, weight loss, anorexia, night sweats). A definitive diagnostic test for sarcoidosis does not exist, and establishing a diagnosis requires the presence of clinical and radiologic findings that are consistent with the disease, the exclusion of other disorders with similar presentations, and the identification of noncaseating granulomas in involved tissues. In particular, tuberculosis must be excluded.
# Chunk 6901
Sarcoidosis follows an unpredictable course characterized by either progressive chronicity or periods of activity interspersed with remissions. The remissions may be spontaneous or initiated by steroid therapy and often are permanent. Overall, 65% to 70% of affected individuals recover with minimal or no residual manifestations. Another 20% develop permanent lung dysfunction or visual impairment. Of the remaining 10% to 15%, most succumb to progressive pulmonary fibrosis and cor pulmonale.
# Chunk 6902
Idiopathic chronic eosinophilic pneumonia, characterized by aggregates of lymphocytes and eosinophils within the septal walls and the alveolar spaces, typically in the periphery of the lung fields, and accompanied by high fever, night sweats, and dyspnea. This is a disease of exclusion, once other causes of pulmonary eosinophilia have been ruled out.
# Chunk 6903
Pulmonary hypertension produces symptoms when the disease is advanced. Idiopathic pulmonary hypertension is most common in women 20 to 40 years of age and occurs occasionally in young children. The presenting features are usually dyspnea and fatigue, but some patients have anginal chest pain. Over time, respiratory distress, cyanosis, and right ventricular hypertrophy appear, and death from decompensated cor pulmonale, often with superimposed thromboembolism and pneumonia, ensues within 2 to 5 years in 80% of patients.
# Chunk 6904
L. pneumophila is the agent of Legionnaire disease, an eponym for the epidemic and sporadic forms of pneumonia caused by this organism. Pontiac fever is a related self-limited upper-respiratory tract infection caused by L. pneumophila, without pneumonic symptoms. L. pneumophila flourishes in artificial aquatic environments, such as water-cooling towers and within the tubing system of domestic (potable) water supplies. The mode of transmission is thought to be either inhalation of aerosolized organisms or aspiration of contaminated drinking water. Legionella pneumonia is common in individuals with some predisposing condition such as cardiac, renal, immunologic, or hematologic disease. Organ transplant recipients are particularly susceptible. Legionella pneumonia may be quite severe, frequently requiring hospitalization and producing a fatality rate of 30% to 50% in immunosuppressed individuals. Rapid diagnosis is facilitated by demonstration of Legionella antigens in the urine or by a positive fluorescent antibody test on sputum samples; culture remains the standard diagnostic modality. PCR-based tests can be used on bronchial secretions in atypical cases.
# Chunk 6905
The most common methodology for diagnosis of tuberculosis remains demonstration of acid-fast organisms in sputum by staining or by use of fluorescent auramine rhodamine. Conventional cultures for mycobacteria require up to 10 weeks, but liquid media–based radiometric assays that detect mycobacterial metabolism are able to provide an answer within 2 weeks. PCR amplification can be performed on liquid media with growth, as well as on tissue sections, to identify the mycobacterium. However, culture remains the standard diagnostic modality because it can identify the occasional PCR-negative case and also allows testing of drug susceptibility. Of concern, multidrug resistance (MDR), defined as resistance of mycobacteria to two or more of the primary drugs used for treatment of tuberculosis, is becoming more common, and the WHO estimated that 500,000 individuals were newly infected with multidrug-resistant tuberculosis in 2014. This represents approximately 3% of new cases and 20% of previously treated cases. The epicenter of this troubling epidemic lies in Eastern Europe and Russia, where in some locales up to 20% of new infections are with multidrug-resistant strains. Of even greater concern, approximately 5% to 10% of such cases exhibit extensive multidrug resistance, defined by resistance to a broad spectrum of antibiotics in current use against tuberculosis.
# Chunk 6906
Fig.13.40).Within thecytoplasmofthesecells,smallerbasophilicinclusionsalsomaybeseen.

In healthy young children and adults, the disease is nearly always asymptomatic. In surveys around the world, 50% to 100% of adults demonstrate anti-CMV antibodies in the serum, indicating previous exposure. The most common clinical manifestation of CMV infection in immunocompetent hosts beyond the neonatal period is an infectious mononucleosis–like illness marked by fever, atypical lymphocytosis, lymphadenopathy, and hepatomegaly accompanied by abnormal liver function test results, suggesting mild hepatitis. Most patients recover from CMV mononucleosis without any sequelae, although excretion of the virus may occur in body fluids for months to years. Irrespective of the presence or absence of symptoms after infection, an individual who is once infected becomes seropositive for life. The virus remains latent within leukocytes, which are the major reservoirs.
# Chunk 6907
In all of these settings, serious disseminated CMV infections primarily affect the lungs (pneumonitis), gastrointestinal tract (colitis), and retina (retinitis); the central nervous system usually is spared. In the lung, infection is associated with typical cytomegalic changes, mononculear infiltrates, and foci of necrosis, which may progress to acute respiratory distress syndrome. Intestinal necrosis and ulceration can develop and may be extensive, leading to the formation of “pseudomembranes” (Chapter 15) and debilitating diarrhea. CMV retinitis, by far the most common form of opportunistic CMV disease, can occur either alone or in combination with involvement of the lungs and intestinal tract. Diagnosis of CMV infection is made by demonstration of characteristic viral inclusions in tissue sections, successful viral culture, rising anti-viral antibody titer, and qualitative or quantitative PCR assay–based detection of CMV DNA. The latter has revolutionized the approach to monitoring patients after transplantation.
# Chunk 6908
Fig.13.41B

The diagnosis of Pneumocystis pneumonia should be considered in any immunocompromised patient with respiratory symptoms and abnormal findings on chest radiograph. Fever, dry cough, and dyspnea occur in 90% to 95% of patients, in whom radiographic evidence of bilateral perihilar and basilar infiltrates is typical. Hypoxia is frequent; pulmonary function studies show a restrictive lung defect. The most sensitive and effective method of diagnosis is to identify the organism in induced sputum or bronchoalveolar lavage fluid using immunofluorescence. If http://ebooksmedicine.net
# Chunk 6909
AdenocarcinomaAcinar,papillary,micropapillary,solid,lepidicpredominant,mucinous statistics reflect the fact that the incidence of smoking in women increased markedly over the past half century. The peak incidence of lung cancer is in individuals in their fifties and sixties. At diagnosis, more than 50% of patients already have distant metastases, while an additional one-fourth have disease in the regional lymph nodes. The prognosis remains dismal: the 5-year survival rate for all stages of lung cancer combined is about 16%, a figure that has not changed much over the last 35 years; even with disease localized to the lung, the 5-year survival rate is only 45%.
# Chunk 6910
With regard to carcinogenic influences, there is strong evidence that cigarette smoking and, to a much lesser extent, other environmental carcinogens are the main culprits responsible for the mutations that give rise to lung cancers. About 90% of lung cancers occur in active smokers or those who stopped recently. Moreover, there is a nearly linear correlation between the frequency of lung cancer and pack-years of cigarette smoking. The increased risk is 60 times greater among habitual heavy smokers (two packs a day for 20 years) than among nonsmokers. For unclear reasons, women are more susceptibile to carcinogens in tobacco smoke than men. Although cessation of smoking decreases the risk for developing lung cancer over time, it never returns to baseline levels, and genetic changes that predate the full development of lung cancer can persist for many years in the bronchial epithelium of former smokers. Passive smoking (proximity to cigarette smokers) also increases the risk for developing lung cancer, as does smoking of pipes and cigars, albeit only modestly.
# Chunk 6911
Most carcinoid tumors manifest with signs and symptoms related to their intraluminal growth, including cough, hemoptysis, and recurrent bronchial and pulmonary infections. Peripheral tumors are often asymptomatic and are discovered incidentally on chest radiographs. Only rarely do pulmonary carcinoids induce the carcinoid syndrome, characterized by intermittent attacks of diarrhea, flushing, and cyanosis. The reported 5and 10-year survival rates for typical carcinoids are above 85%, while these rates drop to 56% and 35%, respectively, for atypical carcinoids.
# Chunk 6912
The three histologic variants are keratinizing squamous cell carcinoma, nonkeratinizing squamous cell carcinoma, and undifferentiated carcinoma; the last-mentioned is the most common and the one most closely linked with EBV. The undifferentiated neoplasm is characterized by large epithelial cells with indistinct cell borders (reflecting “syncytial” growth) and prominent eosinophilic nucleoli. In nasopharyngeal carcinomas, the tumor cells are often accompanied by a striking influx of T cells, which are believed to be responding to viral antigens. Nasopharyngeal carcinomas invade locally, spread to cervical lymph nodes, and then metastasize to distant sites. They tend to be radiosensitive, and 5-year survival rates of 50% are reported, even for patients with advanced cancers. Responses to immune checkpoint inhibitors also have been reported, providing a new therapeutic strategy for tumors that do not respond to conventional therapy.
# Chunk 6913
Azotemia is an elevation of blood urea nitrogen and creatinine levels and usually reflects a decreased glomerular filtration rate (GFR). GFR may be decreased as a consequence of intrinsic renal disease or extra-renal causes. Prerenal azotemia is encountered when there is hypoperfusion of the kidneys (usually due to reduced extracellular fluid volume). This decreases GFR in the absence of renal parenchymal damage and is usually reversible if the hypoperfusion is corrected in time. Postrenal azotemia results when urine outflow is obstructed. Relief of the obstruction is followed by correction of the azotemia.
# Chunk 6914
Nephrotic syndrome is characterized by the following:

Proteinuria, with daily protein loss in the urine of 3.5 g or more in adults (said to be in the “nephrotic range”)
# Chunk 6915
Acute kidney injury refers to abrupt onset of renal dysfunction characterized by an acute increase in serum creatinine often associated with oliguria or anuria (decreased or no urine flow). It can result from glomerular injury (such as rapidly progressive GN), interstitial injury, vascular injury (such as thrombotic microangiopathy), or acute tubular epithelial cell injury.
# Chunk 6916
http://ebooksmedicine.net

Once renal disease, glomerular or otherwise, destroys sufficient nephrons to reduce the GFR to 30% to 50% of normal, symptoms appear and progression to end-stage renal disease proceeds at varying rates. Affected individuals have proteinuria, and their glomeruli show widespread scarring, called glomerulosclerosis. Such progressive sclerosis is exacerbated by adaptive changes that occur in response to the loss of nephrons. Specifically, intact glomeruli undergo hypertrophy to maintain renal function, an alteration that is associated with hemodynamic changes, including increases in single-nephron GFR, blood flow, and transcapillary pressure (capillary hypertension). These alterations are ultimately “maladaptive” and lead to further endothelial and podocyte injury, increased glomerular permeability to proteins, and accumulation of proteins and lipids in the mesangial matrix. This is followed by capillary obliteration, increased deposition of mesangial matrix and plasma proteins, and finally segmental (affecting a portion) or global (complete) sclerosis of glomeruli. The latter results in further reduction of nephron mass, initiating a vicious cycle of progressive glomerulosclerosis.
# Chunk 6917
The disease typically manifests with abrupt development of the nephrotic syndrome in an otherwise healthy child. There is no hypertension, and renal function is preserved in most of these patients. The protein loss usually is confined to smaller plasma proteins, chiefly albumin (selective proteinuria). The prognosis for children with this disorder is favorable. More than 90% of children respond to a short course of corticosteroid therapy; however, proteinuria recurs in more than two-thirds of the initial responders, some of whom become steroid-dependent with proteinuria recurring when steroids are withdrawn. Less than 5% develop chronic kidney disease after 25 years, and it is likely that most individuals in this subgroup had nephrotic syndrome caused by focal segmental glomerulosclerosis http://ebooksmedicine.net
# Chunk 6918
Fig.14.4A

Most cases of membranous nephropathy are sudden in onset and present as full-blown nephrotic syndrome, usually without antecedent illness; other individuals have lesser degrees of proteinuria. In contrast to minimal-change disease, the proteinuria is nonselective, and usually fails to respond to corticosteroid therapy. Secondary causes of membranous nephropathy should be ruled out. Membranous nephropathy follows a notoriously variable and often indolent course. Overall, although proteinuria persists in greater than 60% of patients, only about 40% progress to renal failure over a period of 2 to 20 years. An additional 10% to 30% of cases have a more benign course with partial or complete remission of proteinuria.
# Chunk 6919
The mode of presentation in approximately 50% of cases is the nephrotic syndrome, although it may begin as acute nephritis or mild proteinuria. The prognosis generally is poor. In one study, none of the 60 patients followed for 1 to 20 years showed complete remission; 40% progressed to end-stage renal failure, 30% had variable degrees of renal insufficiency, and the remaining 30% had persistent nephrotic syndrome without renal failure. MPGN type I also may occur in association with other disorders (secondary MPGN), such as systemic lupus erythematosus, hepatitis B and C, chronic liver disease, and chronic bacterial infections. Indeed, many so-called “idiopathic” cases are believed to be associated with hepatitis C and related cryoglobulinemia.
# Chunk 6920
The most common clinical presentation is acute nephritic syndrome. Edema and hypertension are common, with mild to moderate azotemia. Characteristically, there is gross hematuria, the urine appearing smoky brown rather than bright red due to oxidation of hemoglobin to methemoglobin. Some degree of proteinuria is a constant feature, and, as mentioned earlier, it occasionally may be severe enough to produce the nephrotic syndrome. Serum complement levels are low during the active phase of the disease, and serum anti–streptolysin O antibody titers are elevated in poststreptococcal cases.
# Chunk 6921
IgA nephropathy is one of the most common causes of recurrent microscopic or gross hematuria and is the most common glomerular disease revealed by renal biopsy worldwide. This condition usually affects children and young adults and begins as an episode of gross hematuria that occurs within 1 or 2 days of a nonspecific upper-respiratory tract infection. Typically, the hematuria lasts several days and then subsides, but it recurs periodically, usually in the setting of a viral infection. It may be associated with local pain.
# Chunk 6922
IgA nephropathy most often affects children and young adults. More than half of those affected present with gross hematuria after an infection of the respiratory or, less commonly, gastrointestinal or urinary tract; 30% to 40% have only microscopic hematuria, with or without proteinuria, and 5% to 10% develop a typical acute nephritic syndrome. The hematuria typically lasts for several days and initially subsides, but then recurs periodically, usually in the setting of a viral infection. The course is highly variable. Many patients maintain normal renal function for decades. Slow progression to end-stage renal disease occurs in 25% to 50% of cases over a period of 20 years. Renal biopsy findings may help identify those with a poorer prognosis, as indicated by diffuse mesangial proliferation, segmental sclerosis, endocapillary proliferation, or tubulointerstitial fibrosis.
# Chunk 6923
The disease begins about 15 days after exposure to the drug and is characterized by fever, eosinophilia (which may be transient), rash (in about 25% of individuals), and renal abnormalities. Urinary findings include hematuria, minimal or no proteinuria, and leukocyturia (sometimes including eosinophils). A rising serum creatinine or acute kidney injury with oliguria develops in about 50% of cases, particularly in older patients. Clinical recognition of drug-induced kidney injury is imperative, because withdrawal of the offending drug is followed by recovery, although it may take several months for renal function to return to normal.
# Chunk 6924
Acute tubular injury (ATI) is a clinicopathologic entity characterized by damage to tubular epithelial cells and an acute decline in renal function, often associated with shedding of granular casts and tubular cells into the urine. Clinicians use the term acute tubular necrosis, but frank necrosis is rarely observed in a kidney biopsy, so pathologists prefer the term acute tubular injury. The constellation of changes, broadly termed acute kidney injury, manifests clinically as decreased GFR with concurrent elevation of serum creatinine. ATI is the most common cause of acute kidney injury and may produce oliguria (defined as urine output of <400 mL/day).
# Chunk 6925
Ischemia causes numerous structural alterations in epithelial cells. Loss of cell polarity is an early reversible event caused by ischemia. It leads to the redistribution of membrane proteins (e.g., Na+,K+-ATPase) from the basolateral to the luminal surface of tubular cells, resulting in decreased sodium reabsorption by proximal tubules and hence increased sodium delivery to distal tubules. The latter, through a tubuloglomerular feedback mechanism, contributes to afferent arteriolar vasoconstriction and a decrease in GFR, further worsening the perfusion (discussed below). Injury to the epithelial cells causes detachment of the damaged cells from the basement membranes, and their shedding into the urine. If sufficient tubular debris builds up, it can block the outflow of urine (obstruction by casts), increasing intratubular pressure and thereby exacerbating the decline in GFR. Additionally, fluid from the damaged tubules may leak back into the interstitium, resulting in decreased urine output, increased interstitial pressure, and collapse of the tubules. Ischemic tubular cells also express chemokines, cytokines, and adhesion molecules such as P-selectin that recruit leukocytes (interstitial inflammation) and can participate in tissue injury. Necrotic tubular cells also may elicit an inflammatory reaction that contributes to the tubular injury and functional derangements.
# Chunk 6926
Fig. 14.19 Malignanthypertension.(A)Fibrinoidnecrosisofafferentarteriole(periodicacid–Schiffstain).(B)Hyperplasticarteriolosclerosis(onion-skinlesion).(Courtesy of Dr. H. Rennke, Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.) eyes. At the onset of rapidly mounting blood pressure, there is marked proteinuria and microscopic, or sometimes macroscopic, hematuria but no significant alteration in renal function. Soon, however, acute kidney injury develops. The syndrome represents a true medical emergency that requires prompt and aggressive anti-hypertensive therapy before irreversible renal lesions develop. About 50% of patients survive at least 5 years; 90% of deaths are caused by uremia, and the other 10% are caused by cerebral hemorrhage or cardiac failure.
# Chunk 6927
The initial manifestations are usually polyuria and polydipsia, a consequence of diminished tubular function. Progression to end-stage renal disease ensues over a 5-to 10-year period. The disease is difficult to diagnose because there are no serologic markers, and the cysts may be too small to be seen with radiologic imaging. Adding to this difficulty, cysts may not be apparent on renal biopsy if the corticomedullary junction is not well sampled. A positive family history and unexplained chronic renal failure in young patients should lead to suspicion of nephronophthisis.
# Chunk 6928
Table 14.5 , 50% of patients who develop calcium stones have hypercalciuria that is not associated with hypercalcemia. Most patients in this group absorb calcium from the gut in excessive amounts (absorptive hypercalciuria) and promptly excrete it in the urine, and some have a primary renal defect of calcium reabsorption (renal hypercalciuria).
# Chunk 6929
The causes of the other types of renal stones are better understood. Magnesium ammonium phosphate (struvite) stones almost always occur in individuals with a persistently alkaline urine resulting from UTIs. In particular, infections with urea-splitting bacteria, such as Proteus vulgaris and staphylococci, predispose individuals to urolithiasis. Moreover, bacteria may serve as particulate nidi for the formation of any kind of stone. In avitaminosis A, desquamated cells from the metaplastic epithelium of the collecting system act as nidi.
# Chunk 6930
Fig. 14.25 Theclearcellpatternofrenalcellcarcinoma.

Renal cell carcinomas have several peculiar clinical characteristics that create especially difficult and challenging diagnostic problems. The signs and symptoms vary, but the most frequent presenting manifestation is hematuria, occurring in more than 50% of cases. Macroscopic hematuria tends to be intermittent and fleeting, superimposed on a steady microscopic hematuria. Less commonly, the tumor may declare itself simply by virtue of its size, when it has grown large enough to produce flank pain and a palpable mass. Because of the widespread use of imaging studies for unrelated conditions, even smaller tumors are detected. Extrarenal effects are fever and polycythemia, which, because they are nonspecific, may be misinterpreted for some time before their association with the renal tumor is appreciated. Polycythemia affects 5% to 10% of affected individuals and results from production of erythropoietin by the cancer cells. Uncommonly, these tumors produce other hormone-like substances, resulting in hypercalcemia, hypertension, Cushing syndrome, or feminization or masculinization. These, as noted in Chapter 6, are paraneoplastic syndromes. In some patients, the primary tumor remains silent and is discovered only after metastases produce symptoms. The common locations for metastases are the lungs and the bones. It must be apparent that renal cell carcinoma manifests in many ways, some quite devious, but the triad of painless hematuria, a palpable abdominal mass, and dull flank pain is characteristic.
# Chunk 6931
Approximately 95% of cancers of the oral cavity are squamous cell carcinomas, with the remainder largely consisting of adenocarcinomas of salivary glands. Squamous cell carcinoma, an aggressive epithelial malignancy, is the sixth most common neoplasm in the world today. Despite numerous advances in treatment, the overall long-term survival rate has remained less than 50% for the past 50 years. This dismal outlook is due to several factors, in large part because oral cancer often is diagnosed at an advanced stage.
# Chunk 6932
Bacterial sialadenitis is a common infection that most often involves the major salivary glands, particularly the submandibular glands. The most frequent pathogens are Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus viridans. Duct obstruction by stones (sialolithiasis) is a common antecedent to infection; it may also be induced by impacted food debris or by edema consequent to injury. Dehydration and decreased secretory function can also predispose to bacterial invasion. Systemic dehydration, with decreased salivary secretions, may predispose to suppurative bacterial parotitis in older adult patients following major thoracic or abdominal surgery. Such obstruction and bacterial invasion lead to nonspecific inflammation of the affected glands that may be largely interstitial or, when induced by staphylococci or other pyogens, may be associated with suppurative necrosis and abscess formation.
# Chunk 6933
Table 15.1 ). A small number of these neoplasms account for more than 90% of tumors. Overall, salivary gland tumors are relatively uncommon and represent less than 2% of all human tumors. Approximately 65% to 80% arise within the parotid, 10% in the submandibular gland, and the remainder in the minor salivary glands, including the sublingual glands. Approximately 15% to 30% of tumors in the parotid glands are malignant. By contrast, approximately 40% of submandibular, 50% of minor salivary gland, and 70% to 90% of sublingual tumors are cancerous. Thus, the likelihood that a salivary gland tumor is malignant is inversely proportional, roughly, to the size of the gland.
# Chunk 6934
Carcinoma arising in a pleomorphic adenoma is referred to variously as a carcinoma ex pleomorphic adenoma or malignant mixed tumor. The incidence of malignant transformation increases with time from 2% of tumors present for less than 5 years to almost 10% for those present for more than 15 years. The cancer usually takes the form of an adenocarcinoma or undifferentiated carcinoma. Unfortunately, these are among the most aggressive malignant neoplasms of salivary glands, with mortality rates of 30% to 50% at 5 years.
# Chunk 6935
Clinical course and prognosis depend on histologic grade. Low-grade tumors may invade locally and recur in about 15% of cases but metastasize only rarely and afford a 5-year survival rate of over 90%. By contrast, high-grade neoplasms and, to a lesser extent, intermediate-grade tumors are invasive and difficult to excise. As a result, they recur in 25% to 30% of cases, and about 30% metastasize to distant sites. The 5-year survival rate is only 50%.
# Chunk 6936
Ectopic tissues (developmental rests) are common in the gastrointestinal tract. The most frequent site of ectopic gastric mucosa is the upper third of the esophagus, where it is referred to as an inlet patch. Although the presence of such tissue generally is asymptomatic, acid released by gastric mucosa within the esophagus can result in dysphagia, esophagitis, Barrett esophagus, or, rarely, adenocarcinoma. Gastric heterotopia, small patches of ectopic gastric mucosa in the small bowel, particularly within a Meckel diverticulum, or colon, may present with occult blood loss due to local injury caused by acid secretion.
# Chunk 6937
In the United States, esophageal squamous cell carcinoma typically occurs in adults older than 45 years of age and affects males four times more frequently than females. Risk factors include alcohol and tobacco use, poverty, caustic esophageal injury, achalasia, Plummer-Vinson syndrome, frequent consumption of very hot beverages, and previous radiation therapy to the mediastinum. It is nearly six times more common in African Americans than in whites—a striking risk disparity that cannot be accounted for by differences in rates of alcohol and tobacco use. The incidence of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma can vary by more than 100-fold between and within countries, being more common in rural and underdeveloped areas. The countries with highest incidences are Iran, central China, Hong Kong, Argentina, Brazil, and South Africa.
# Chunk 6938
In addition to histologic identification of the organism, several diagnostic tests have been developed including a noninvasive serologic test for anti–H. pylori antibodies, a stool test for the organism, and the urea breath test, based on the generation of ammonia by bacterial urease. Gastric biopsy specimens also can be analyzed by the rapid urease test, bacterial culture, or polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay for bacterial DNA. Effective treatments include combinations of antibiotics and proton pump inhibitors. Patients with H. pylori gastritis usually improve after treatment, although relapses can follow incomplete eradication or reinfection.
# Chunk 6939
Peptic ulcers are chronic, recurring lesions that occur most often in middle-aged to older adults without obvious precipitating conditions, other than chronic gastritis. A majority of peptic ulcers come to clinical attention after patient complaints of epigastric burning or aching pain, although a significant fraction manifest with complications such as iron deficiency anemia, frank hemorrhage, or perforation. The pain tends to occur 1 to 3 hours after meals during the day, is worse at night, and is relieved by alkali or food. Nausea, vomiting, bloating, and belching may be present. Healing may occur with or without therapy, but the tendency to develop subsequent ulcers remains.
# Chunk 6940
http://ebooksmedicine.net

Adenocarcinoma is the most common malignancy of the stomach, comprising more than 90% of all gastric cancers. Early symptoms resemble those of chronic gastritis, including dyspepsia, dysphagia, and nausea. As a result, the cancer is often diagnosed at advanced stages when clinical manifestations such as weight loss, anorexia, altered bowel habits, anemia, and hemorrhage trigger diagnostic evaluation.
# Chunk 6941
The depth of invasion and the extent of nodal and distant metastasis at the time of diagnosis remain the most powerful prognostic indicators for gastric cancer. Local invasion into the duodenum, pancreas, and retroperitoneum is also characteristic. When possible, surgical resection remains the preferred treatment for gastric adenocarcinoma. After surgical resection, the 5-year survival rate for early gastric cancer can exceed 90%, even if lymph node metastases are present. By contrast, the 5-year survival rate for advanced gastric cancer remains below 20%, in large part because current chemotherapy regimens are have limited impact. This is changing slowly with individualized therapies. For example, patients whose tumors over-express the epidermal growth factor receptor HER2 benefit from agents that inhibit HER2 signaling. Nevertheless, most gastric cancers are discovered at advanced stage in the United States, and the overall 5-year survival rate is less than 30%.
# Chunk 6942
Ischemic damage to the bowel can range from mucosal infarction, extending no deeper than the muscularis mucosa; to mural infarction of mucosa and submucosa; to transmural infarction involving all three layers of the wall. While mucosal or mural infarctions often are secondary to acute or chronic hypoperfusion, transmural infarction is generally caused by acute vascular obstruction. Important causes of acute arterial obstruction include severe atherosclerosis (which is often prominent at the origin of mesenteric vessels), aortic aneurysm, hypercoagulable states, oral contraceptive use, and embolization of cardiac vegetations or aortic atheromas. Intestinal hypo-perfusion can also be associated with cardiac failure, shock, dehydration, or vasoconstrictive drugs. Systemic vasculitides also may damage intestinal arteries. While mesenteric venous thrombosis can lead to ischemic disease, it is uncommon. Other causes include invasive neoplasms, cirrhosis, portal hypertension, trauma, or abdominal masses that compress the portal drainage.
# Chunk 6943
Ischemic bowel disease tends to occur in older adults with coexisting cardiac or vascular disease. Acute transmural infarction typically manifests with sudden, severe abdominal pain and tenderness, sometimes accompanied by nausea, vomiting, bloody diarrhea, or grossly melanotic stool. This presentation may progress to shock and vascular collapse within hours as a result of blood loss. Peristaltic sounds diminish or disappear, and muscular spasm creates boardlike rigidity of the abdominal wall. Because these physical signs overlap with those of other abdominal emergencies, including acute appendicitis, perforated ulcer, and acute cholecystitis, the diagnosis of intestinal infarction may be delayed or missed, with disastrous consequences. As the mucosal barrier breaks down, bacteria enter the circulation and sepsis can develop; the mortality rate in these cases may exceed 50%.
# Chunk 6944
Pediatric celiac disease, which affects male and female children equally, may manifest with classic symptoms, typically between 6 and 24 months of age (after introduction of gluten to the diet) with irritability, abdominal distention, anorexia, diarrhea, failure to thrive, weight loss, or muscle wasting. Children with nonclassic symptoms tend to present at older ages with complaints of abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, bloating, or constipation. A characteristic pruritic, blistering skin lesion, dermatitis herpetiformis, is also present in as many as 10% of patients, and the incidence of lymphocytic gastritis and lymphocytic colitis is increased as well.
# Chunk 6945
The term environmental enteric dysfunction, or environmental enteropathy, refers to a syndrome of stunted growth and impaired intestinal function that is common in developing countries, including many parts of sub-Saharan Africa, such as Zambia; aboriginal populations within northern Australia; and some groups within South America and Asia, such as residents of impoverished communities within Brazil, Guatemala, India, and Pakistan. The impact of environmental enteric dysfunction, which was previously grouped under headings of tropical enteropathy or tropical sprue, cannot be overstated, as it is estimated to affect over 150 million children worldwide. Although malnutrition most likely contributes to the pathogenesis of this disorder, neither supplementary feeding nor vitamin and mineral supplementation are able to fully reverse the syndrome. Repeated bouts of diarrhea suffered within the first 2 or 3 years of life are most closely linked to environmental enteropathy, but no single infectious agent has been established as causal in these diarrheal episodes. Intestinal biopsy specimens have been examined in only a small number of cases, and the reported histopathology has some overlap with severe celiac disease as well as infectious enteritis.
# Chunk 6946
This global problem is responsible for more than 1 million deaths annually and greater than 10% of all deaths in patients younger than 5 years of age worldwide. Enterocolitis presents with a broad range of signs and symptoms, including diarrhea, abdominal pain, urgency, perianal discomfort, incontinence, and hemorrhage. Bacterial infections, such as enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli, are frequently responsible, but the most common pathogens vary with age, nutrition, and host immune status, as well as environment (
# Chunk 6947
Most exposed individuals are asymptomatic or suffer only mild diarrhea. Those with severe disease have an abrupt onset of watery diarrhea and vomiting after an incubation period of 1 to 5 days. The volume of diarrhea may reach 1 L per hour, leading to dehydration, hypotension, electrolyte imbalances, muscular cramping, anuria, shock, loss of consciousness, and death. Most deaths occur within the first 24 hours of presentation. Although the mortality rate for severe cholera is 50% to 70% without treatment, fluid replacement can save more than 99% of patients.
# Chunk 6948
Fig.15.23B

Ingestion of as few as 500 C. jejuni organisms can cause disease after an incubation period of up to 8 days. Watery diarrhea, either acute or with onset after an influenza like prodrome, is the primary manifestation, and dysentery develops in 15% to 50% of patients. Patients may shed bacteria for 1 month or more after clinical resolution. The disease is self-limited, and antibiotic therapy generally is not required.
# Chunk 6949
After an incubation period of 1 to 7 days, the initial watery diarrhea progresses to a dysenteric phase in approximately 50% of patients, and constitutional symptoms can persist for as long as 1 month. A subacute presentation also can develop in a minority of adults. Antibiotic treatment shortens the clinical course and reduces the duration over which organisms are shed in the stool, but anti-diarrheal medications are contraindicated because they can prolong symptoms by delaying bacterial clearance.
# Chunk 6950
Typhoid fever, also referred to as enteric fever, is caused by Salmonella typhi and Salmonella paratyphi. It affects up to 30 million individuals worldwide each year. Infection by S. typhi is more common in endemic areas, where children and adolescents are most often affected. By contrast, S. paratyphi predominates in travelers and those living in developed countries. Humans are the sole reservoir for S. typhi and S. paratyphi, and transmission occurs from person to person or via contaminated food or water. Gallbladder colonization may be associated with gallstones and a chronic carrier state. Acute infection is associated with anorexia, abdominal pain, bloating, nausea, vomiting, and bloody diarrhea followed by a short asymptomatic phase that gives way to bacteremia and fever with flulike symptoms. It is during this phase that detection of organisms by blood culture may prompt antibiotic treatment and prevent further disease progression. Cultures are positive in 90% of cases during the febrile phase Without such treatment, the febrile phase is followed by up to 2 weeks of sustained high fevers with abdominal tenderness that may mimic appendicitis. Rose spots, small erythematous maculopapular lesions, are seen on the chest and abdomen. Systemic dissemination may cause extraintestinal complications including encephalopathy, meningitis, seizures, endocarditis, myocarditis, pneumonia, and cholecystitis. Patients with sickle cell disease are particularly susceptible to Salmonella osteomyelitis.
# Chunk 6951
Norovirus, previously known as Norwalk-like virus, causes approximately half of all gastroenteritis outbreaks worldwide and is a common cause of sporadic gastroenteritis in developed countries. Local outbreaks are usually related to contaminated food or water, but person-toperson transmission underlies most sporadic cases. Infections spread easily within schools, hospitals, nursing homes and, on other densely populated communities including cruise ships. After a short incubation period, affected individuals develop nausea, vomiting, watery diarrhea, and abdominal pain. Biopsy morphology is nonspecific. The disease is self-limited.
# Chunk 6952
The encapsulated rotavirus infects 140 million individuals and causes 1 million deaths each year, making rota-virus the most common cause of severe childhood diarrhea and diarrhea-related deaths worldwide. Children between 6 and 24 months of age are most vulnerable. Protection in the first 6 months of life is probably due to the presence of antibodies to rotavirus in breast milk, while protection beyond 2 years of age is due to immunity that develops after the first infection. Outbreaks in hospitals and day care centers are common, and infection spreads easily; the estimated minimal infective inoculum is only 10 viral particles. Rotavirus selectively infects and destroys mature (absorptive) enterocytes in the small intestine, and the villus surface is repopulated by immature secretory cells. This change in functional capacity results in loss of absorptive function and net secretion of water and electrolytes, compounded by an osmotic diarrhea from incompletely absorbed nutrients. Like norovirus, rotavirus infection becomes symptomatic after a short incubation period and manifests as several days of vomiting and watery diarrhea. Vaccines are now available, and their use is beginning to change the epidemiology of rotavirus infection. Unfortunately, oral rotavirus vaccines have been less effective in developing countries where they are most needed.
# Chunk 6953
The clinical manifestations of Crohn disease are extremely variable. In most patients, disease begins with intermittent attacks of relatively mild diarrhea, fever, and abdominal pain. Approximately 20% of patients present acutely with right lower-quadrant pain and fever, which may mimic acute appendicitis or bowel perforation. Patients with colonic involvement may present with bloody diarrhea and abdominal pain, creating a differential diagnosis with some colonic infections. Periods of disease activity typically are interrupted by asymptomatic intervals that last for weeks to many months. Disease reactivation can be associated with a variety of external triggers, including physical or emotional stress, specific dietary items, NSAID use, and cigarette smoking.
# Chunk 6954
Iron-deficiency anemia may develop in individuals with colonic disease, while extensive small-bowel disease may result in serum protein loss and hypoalbuminemia, generalized nutrient malabsorption, or malabsorption of vitamin B12 and bile salts. Fibrosing strictures, particularly of the terminal ileum, are common and require surgical resection. Disease often recurs at the site of anastomosis, and as many as 40% of patients require additional resections within 10 years. Fistulas develop between loops of bowel and may also involve the urinary bladder, vagina, and abdominal or perianal skin. Perforations and peritoneal abscesses can also occur.
# Chunk 6955
Ulcerative colitis is a relapsing disorder characterized by attacks of bloody diarrhea with expulsion of stringy, mucoid material and lower abdominal pain and cramps that are temporarily relieved by defecation. These symptoms may persist for days, weeks, or months before they subside, and occasionally the initial attack may be severe enough to constitute a medical or surgical emergency. More than half of patients have mild disease, but almost all experience at least one relapse during a 10-year period. Colectomy cures intestinal disease, but extraintestinal manifestations may persist.
# Chunk 6956
Depth of invasion. Tumors limited to the submucosa (i.e., those that do not cross the muscularis mucosae) have 5-year survival rates approaching 100%, while invasion into the submucosa or muscularis propria reduces 5-year survival to 95% and 70% to 90%, respectively (for tumors limited to the primary site). Invasion through the visceral serosal surface or into adjacent organs and tissues reduces survival further.
# Chunk 6957
The Liver and Bile Ducts

The normal adult liver weighs 1400 to 1600 gm. It has a dual blood supply, with the portal vein providing 60% to 70% of hepatic blood flow and the hepatic artery supplying the remaining 30% to 40%. The portal vein and the hepatic artery enter the inferior aspect of the liver through the hilum, or porta hepatis. Within the liver, the branches of the portal veins, hepatic arteries, and bile ducts travel in parallel within portal tracts, ramifying variably through 10 to 12 orders of branches.
# Chunk 6958
Acute liver failure is defined as a liver disease that produces hepatic encephalopathy within 6 months of the initial diagnosis. The condition is known as fulminant liver failure when the encephalopathy develops within 2 weeks of the onset of jaundice, and as subfulminant liver failure when the encephalopathy develops within 3 months. In the United States, accidental or deliberate ingestion of acetaminophen accounts for almost 50% of cases of acute liver failure, while autoimmune hepatitis, other drugs and toxins, and acute hepatitis A and B infections account for the remainder of cases. In Asia, acute hepatitis B and E predominate as causes of acute liver failure.
# Chunk 6959
• Hepatorenal syndrome is a form of renal failure occurring in individuals with liver failure in whom there are no intrinsic morphologic or functional causes for kidney dysfunction. Sodium retention, impaired free-water excretion, and decreased renal perfusion and glomerular filtration rate are the main renal functional abnormalities. There is decreased renal perfusion pressure due to systemic vasodilation, activation of the renal sympathetic nervous system and vasoconstriction of the afferent renal arterioles, and increased activation of the renin-angiotensin axis, causing vasoconstriction that further decreases glomerular filtration. The syndrome’s onset begins with a decrease in urine output and rising blood urea nitrogen and creatinine levels.
# Chunk 6960
HBV has a prolonged incubation period (2–26 weeks). Unlike HAV, HBV remains in the blood during active episodes of acute and chronic hepatitis. Approximately 70% of adults with newly acquired HBV have mild or no symptoms and do not develop jaundice. The remaining 30% have nonspecific constitutional symptoms such as anorexia, fever, jaundice, and right upper-quadrant pain. In most cases, the infection is self-limited and resolves without treatment, but chronic disease develops in 10% of infected individuals. Fulminant hepatitis is rare, occurring in approximately 0.1% to 0.5% of acutely infected individuals.
# Chunk 6961
Fig. 16.12 ). In symptomatic acute HCV infection, anti-HCV antibodies are detected in only 50% to 70% of patients; in the remaining patients, the anti-HCV antibodies emerge after 3 to 6 weeks. The clinical course of acute HCV hepatitis is milder than that of HBV. It is not known why only a small minority of individuals is capable of clearing HCV infection.
# Chunk 6962
Fig. 16.11 ). Combination therapy with these drugs (a strategy akin to triple drug therapy for HIV) has proven to be remarkably effective. The goal of current treatment is to eradicate HCV RNA, which is defined by the absence of detectable HCV RNA in the blood 6 months after treatment is stopped and is associated with a high probability of cure. Currently, over 95% of HCV infections are curable, and this can be expected to improve further as new anti-viral drugs become available. The major downside of these advances is their very high cost; a curative course of drug therapy costs over $100,000, and it is estimated that treatment of HCV infections in the United States alone may generate expenses of over $50 billion over the next 5 years.
# Chunk 6963
Superinfection of a chronic HBV carrier by HDV. The superinfection presents 30 to 50 days later as severe acute hepatitis in a previously unrecognized HBV carrier or as an exacerbation of preexisting chronic hepatitis B. Chronic HDV infection occurs in 80% to 90% of such patients. The superinfection may have two phases: an acute phase with active HDV replication and suppression of HBV with high ALT levels, followed by a chronic phase in which HDV replication decreases, HBV replication increases, ALT levels fluctuate, and the disease progresses to cirrhosis and hepatocellular cancer.
# Chunk 6964
HEV is an enterically transmitted, water-borne infection that usually produces a self-limiting disease. The virus typically infects young to middle-aged adults. HEV is a zoonotic disease with animal reservoirs that include monkeys, cats, pigs, and dogs. Epidemics have been reported in Asia and the Indian subcontinent, sub-Saharan Africa, and Mexico, and sporadic cases are seen in Western nations, particularly where pig farming is common and in travelers returning from regions of high incidence. Of greater importance, HEV infection accounts for 30% to 60% of cases of sporadic acute hepatitis in India, exceeding the frequency of HAV. A characteristic feature of HEV infection is the high mortality rate among pregnant women, approaching 20%. In most cases, HEV is not associated with chronic liver disease or persistent viremia. The average incubation period following exposure is 4 to 5 weeks.
# Chunk 6965
http://ebooksmedicine.net

Discovered in 1983, HEV is an unenveloped, positive-stranded RNA virus in the Hepevirus genus. Virions are shed in stool during the acute illness. Before the onset of clinical illness, HEV RNA and HEV virions can be detected by PCR in stool and serum. The onset of rising serum aminotransferases, clinical illness, and elevated IgM anti-HEV titers are virtually simultaneous. Symptoms resolve in 2 to 4 weeks, during which time the IgM titers fall and IgG anti-HEV titers rise.
# Chunk 6966
6 months. The clinical features are extremely variable and are not predictive of outcome. In some patients, the only signs of chronic disease are elevations of serum transaminases. Laboratory studies also may reveal prolongation of the prothrombin time and, in some instances, hyperglobulinemia, hyperbilirubinemia, and mild elevations in alkaline phosphatase levels. In symptomatic individuals, the most common finding is fatigue; less commonly, there is malaise, loss of appetite, and bouts of mild jaundice. In precirrhotic chronic hepatitis, physical findings are few, the most common being spider angiomas, palmar erythema, mild hepatomegaly, hepatic tenderness, and mild splenomegaly. Occasionally, in cases of HBV and HCV, immune complex disease develops that results in vasculitis (subcutaneous or visceral, Chapter 10) and glomerulonephritis (Chapter 14). Cryoglobulinemia is found in about 35% of individuals with chronic hepatitis C.
# Chunk 6967
The Carrier State. A carrier is an individual who is chronically infected with a hepatropic virus and has no or sub-clinical evidence of liver disease. In both cases, particularly the latter, these individuals constitute reservoirs for infection. In the case of HBV, “healthy carriers” typically have serum studies that show an absence of HBeAg, the presence of anti-HBe, normal aminotransferases, and low or undetectable serum HBV DNA and liver biopsies showing a lack of significant inflammation or parenchymal injury. HBV infection acquired early in life in endemic areas (such as Southeast Asia, China, and sub-Saharan Africa) gives rise to a carrier state in more than 90% of cases, whereas in non-endemic regions the carrier state is rare. By contrast, it has been estimated that HCV infection in the United States produces a carrier state in 10% to 40% of cases.
# Chunk 6968
Direct invasion, from an adjacent source (e.g., bacterial cholecystitis)

Bacteria that may establish an infection in the liver via the blood include Staphylococcus aureus in toxic shock syndrome, Salmonella typhi in typhoid fever, and Treponema pallidum in secondary or tertiary syphilis. Ascending infections are most common in the setting of partial or complete biliary tract obstruction and are typically caused by gut flora, which may colonize the static bile in the ducts. Whatever the source of the bacteria, with pyogenic organisms intrahepatic abscesses may develop, producing fever, right upper-quadrant pain, and tender hepatomegaly. Although antibiotic therapy may sterilize small abscesses, surgical drainage is often necessary for larger lesions. More commonly, extrahepatic bacterial infections, particularly sepsis, induce mild hepatic inflammation and varying degrees of hepatocellular cholestasis indirectly, without establishing an infectious nidus in the liver.
# Chunk 6969
An acute clinical illness is a common presentation (40%); sometimes the disease is fulminant, progressing to hepatic encephalopathy within 8 weeks of onset. Mortality for patients with severe untreated autoimmune hepatitis is approximately 40% within 6 months of diagnosis, and cirrhosis develops in at least 40% of survivors. Hence, diagnosis and intervention are imperative. Immunosuppressive therapy is usually effective, leading to remission in 80% of patients and enabling long-term survival. End-stage disease is an indication for liver transplantation. The 10-year survival rate after liver transplant is 75%, but recurrence in the transplanted organ occurs in 20% of cases.
# Chunk 6970
Alcoholic steatosis may be innocuous or give rise to hepatomegaly with mild elevations of serum bilirubin and alkaline phosphatase. Severe hepatic compromise is unusual. Alcohol withdrawal and the provision of an adequate diet are sufficient treatment.
# Chunk 6971
It is estimated that 15 to 20 years of excessive drinking are necessary to develop alcoholic cirrhosis, but alcoholic hepatitis can occur after just weeks or months of alcohol abuse. The onset is typically acute and often follows a bout of particularly heavy drinking. Symptoms and laboratory abnormalities range from minimal to severe. Most patients present with malaise, anorexia, weight loss, upper-abdominal discomfort, tender hepatomegaly, and fever. Typical findings include hyperbilirubinemia, elevated serum alkaline phosphatase levels, and neutrophilic leukocytosis. Serum alanine and aspartate aminotransferases are elevated but usually remain below 500 U/mL. The outlook is unpredictable; each bout of alcoholic hepatitis carries a 10% to 20% risk for death. With repeated bouts, cirrhosis appears in about one-third of patients within a few years.
# Chunk 6972
The long-term outlook for alcoholic patients with liver disease is variable. The most important aspect of treatment is abstinence from alcohol. The 5-year survival rate approaches 90% in abstainers who are free of jaundice, ascites, and hematemesis, but drops to 50% to 60% in individuals who continue to imbibe. Among those with end-stage alcoholic liver disease, the immediate causes of death are as follows:
# Chunk 6973
NAFLD is the most common cause of incidental elevation of serum transaminases. Most individuals with steatosis are asymptomatic; patients with active steatohepatitis or fibrosis may also be asymptomatic, but some may have fatigue, malaise, right upper-quadrant discomfort, or more severe symptoms of chronic liver disease. Liver biopsy is required to identify NASH and distinguish it from uncomplicated NAFLD. Fortunately, the frequency of progression from steatosis to active steatohepatitis and then from active steatohepatitis to cirrhosis is low (
# Chunk 6974
http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 16.19 Naturalhistoryofnonalcoholicfattyliverdisease.Isolatedfattyliverdiseaseshowsminimalriskforprogressiontocirrhosisorincreasedmortal-ity,whilenonalcoholicsteatohepatitisshowsincreasedoverallmortalityaswellasincreasedriskforcirrhosisandhepatocellularcarcinoma.DM, Diabetesmellitus.Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) Isolated fatty liver NASH cirrhosis Decompensation HCC Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) >80% ~11% over 15 years, but significant variability ~31% over 8 years ~7% over 6.5 years 1. None to very minimal progression to cirrhosis 2. No increased risk of death compared with the general population
# Chunk 6975
The principal manifestations include hepatomegaly, abdominal pain, skin pigmentation (particularly in sun-exposed areas), deranged glucose homeostasis or frank diabetes mellitus due to destruction of pancreatic islets, cardiac dysfunction (arrhythmias, cardiomyopathy), and atypical arthritis. In some patients, the presenting complaint is hypogonadism (e.g., amenorrhea in the female, impotence and loss of libido in the male). As noted, clinically apparent disease is more common in males and rarely becomes evident before 40 years of age. Death may result from cirrhosis or cardiac disease. In those with untreated disease, the risk for HCC is increased 200-fold, presumably because of ongoing liver damage and the genotoxic effects of oxidants generated by iron in the liver.
# Chunk 6976
External compression (e.g., carcinoma of the pancreas) which is immediately reduced to bilirubin by biliverdin reductase. Bilirubin thus formed is released and binds to serum albumin (step 2), which is critical since bilirubin is virtually insoluble in aqueous solutions at physiologic pH and also highly toxic to tissues. Albumin carries bilirubin to the liver, where bilirubin is taken up into hepatocytes (step 3) and conjugated with one or two molecules of glucuronic acid by bilirubin uridine diphosphate (UDP)–glucuronyltransferase (UGT1A1, step 4) in the endoplasmic reticulum. Water-soluble, nontoxic bilirubin glucuronides are then excreted into the bile. Most bilirubin glucuronides are deconjugated in the gut lumen by bacterial β-glucuronidases and degraded to colorless urobilinogens (step 5). The urobilinogens and the residue of intact pigment are largely excreted in feces. Approximately 20% of the urobilinogens formed are reabsorbed in the ileum and colon, returned to the liver, and reexcreted into bile. A small amount of reabsorbed urobilinogen is excreted in the urine.
# Chunk 6977
Cholestasis is a condition caused by extrahepatic or intrahepatic obstruction of bile channels or by defects in hepatocyte bile secretion. Patients may have jaundice, pruritus, skin xanthomas (focal accumulation of cholesterol), or symptoms related to intestinal malabsorption, including nutritional deficiencies of the fat-soluble vitamins A, D, or K. A characteristic laboratory finding is elevated serum alkaline phosphatase and γ-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT), enzymes that are present on the apical membranes of hepatocytes and cholangiocytes.
# Chunk 6978
Differentiation of biliary atresia from nonobstructive neonatal cholestasis is very important, since definitive treatment of biliary atresia requires surgical intervention (Kasai procedure), whereas surgery may adversely affect a child with other disorders. Fortunately, discrimination can be made on the basis of clinical data in about 90% of cases. In 10% of cases, liver biopsy may be necessary to distinguish neonatal hepatitis from an identifiable cholangiopathy. Affected infants have jaundice, dark urine, light or acholic stools, and hepatomegaly. Variable degrees of hepatic synthetic dysfunction may be identified, such as hypoprothrombinemia.
# Chunk 6979
Most patients are diagnosed while asymptomatic following a workup triggered by the identification of an elevated serum alkaline phosphatase level or severe itching.
# Chunk 6980
Hypercholesterolemia is common. Anti-mitochondrial antibodies are present in 90% to 95% of patients. They are highly characteristic of PBC, although other autoantibodies may be seen in a small number of cases. The disease is confirmed by liver biopsy, which is considered diagnostic if a florid duct lesion is present. When symptoms appear, their onset is insidious, with patients typically complaining of slowly increasing fatigue and pruritus.
# Chunk 6981
Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) is characterized by inflammation and obliterative fibrosis of intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts, leading to dilation of preserved segments. Irregular biliary strictures and dilations cause the characteristic “beading” of the intrahepatic and extrahepatic biliary tree seen by MRI. Inflammatory bowel disease (Chapter 15), most commonly ulcerative colitis, coexists in approximately 70% of individuals with PSC. Conversely, the prevalence of PSC in individuals with ulcerative colitis is about 4%. Like inflammatory bowel disease, PSC tends to occur in the third through fifth decades of life and has a 2:1 male predominance (see
# Chunk 6982
Patients may come to attention only because of persistent elevation of serum alkaline phosphatase, particularly in those with ulcerative colitis who are being routinely screened. Alternatively, progressive fatigue, pruritus, and jaundice may develop. Acute bouts of ascending cholangitis may also signal the presence or progression of PSC. Chronic pancreatitis and chronic cholecystitis due to involvement of the pancreatic ducts and gallbladder are also seen. In some patients, sclerosing cholangitis is associated with autoimmune pancreatitis. In such cases PSC may be one manifestation of IgG4 related chronic disease (Chapter 5).
# Chunk 6983
Globally, HCC, also erroneously known as hepatoma, accounts for approximately 5.4% of all cancers, but its incidence varies widely in different parts of the world. More than 85% of cases occur in countries with high rates of chronic HBV infection. The incidence of HCC is highest in Asia (southeast China, Korea, Taiwan) and sub-Saharan Africa, areas in which HBV is transmitted vertically and, as already discussed, the carrier state starts in infancy. Moreover, many of these populations are exposed to aflatoxin, which when combined with HBV infection increases the risk for HCC dramatically. The peak incidence of HCC in these areas is between 20 and 40 years of age and, in almost 50% of cases, the tumor appears in the absence of cirrhosis.
# Chunk 6984
http://ebooksmedicine.net

The most important underlying factors in hepatocarcinogenesis are viral infections (HBV, HCV) and toxic injuries (aflatoxin, alcohol). Thus, where HBV and HCV are endemic, there is a very high incidence of HCC. Coinfection further increases risk. Aflatoxin is a mycotoxin produced by Aspergillus species that contaminates staple food crops in Africa and Asia. Aflatoxin metabolites are present in the urine of individuals who consume these foods, as are aflatoxin-albumin adducts in serum. These biomarkers identify populations at risk and have helped to confirm the importance of aflatoxin in hepatocarcinogenesis. As discussed earlier, aflatoxin synergizes with HBV (and perhaps also with HCV) to increase risk further.
# Chunk 6985
Fig.16.37

The clinical manifestations of HCC are varied and in Western populations are often masked by symptoms related to underlying cirrhosis or chronic hepatitis. In areas of high incidence, such as tropical Africa where aflatoxin exposure is common, patients usually have no clinical history of liver disease (although cirrhosis may be detected at autopsy). In both populations, most patients have ill-defined upper-abdominal pain, malaise, fatigue, weight loss, and sometimes awareness of an abdominal mass or abdominal fullness. Jaundice, fever, and gastrointestinal or esophageal variceal bleeding are inconstant findings.
# Chunk 6986
Laboratory studies may provide clues but are rarely conclusive. Elevated serum levels of α-fetoprotein are found in 50% of individuals with advanced HCC, but this is neither a sensitive nor specific marker for premalignant or early well-differentiated cancers. Better tests for detection of small tumors are imaging studies, such as ultrasonography, computed tomography, and magnetic resonance imaging. Increasing arterialization during the development and progression of HCC can be identified by imaging and is so characteristic that its detection can be diagnostic, precluding the need for tissue biopsy.
# Chunk 6987
The natural history of HCC involves the progressive enlargement of the primary mass until it disturbs hepatic function or metastasizes, most commonly to the lungs. Death usually occurs from (1) cachexia, (2) gastrointestinal or esophageal variceal bleeding, (3) liver failure with hepatic coma, or rarely (4) rupture of the tumor with fatal hemorrhage. The 5-year survival of large tumors is dismal, and the majority of patients die within 2 years of diagnosis.
# Chunk 6988
HCCisacommontumorinregionsofAsiaandAfrica,anditsincidenceisincreasingintheUnitedStates.

ThemainetiologicagentsforHCCarehepatitisBandC,alcoholiccirrhosis,hemochromatosis,andexposuretoaflatoxins.IntheWesternpopulation,about90%ofHCCsdevelopincirrhoticlivers;inAsia,almost50%ofcasesdevelopinnoncirrhoticlivers.
# Chunk 6989
Gallstones may be present for decades without causing any symptoms, and 70% to 80% of individuals with gallstones remain asymptomatic throughout life. In an unfortunate minority, however, the symptoms are striking. There is usually right upper-quadrant or epigastric pain, often excruciating, which may be constant or, less commonly, spasmodic. Such “biliary” pain is caused by gallbladder or biliary tree obstruction or by inflammation of the gallbladder itself. More severe complications include empyema, perforation, fistulas, inflammation of the biliary tree, obstructive cholestasis and pancreatitis. The larger the stone, the less likely it is to enter the cystic or common ducts to produce obstruction; thus, the very small stones, or “gravel,” are dangerous. Occasionally a large stone may erode directly into an adjacent loop of small bowel, generating intestinal obstruction
# Chunk 6990
Fig.16.41B

Acute calculous cholecystitis presents with biliary pain that lasts for more than 6 hours. The pain is severe, usually steady, upper abdominal in location, and often radiates to the right shoulder. Fever, nausea, leukocytosis, and prostration are classic; the presence of conjugated hyperbilirubinemia suggests obstruction of the common bile duct. The right subcostal region is markedly tender and rigid as a result of spasm of the abdominal muscles; occasionally a http://ebooksmedicine.net
# Chunk 6991
Carcinoma of the gallbladder is the most common malignancy of the extrahepatic biliary tract. It is slightly more common in women and occurs most frequently in the seventh decade of life. The incidence in the United States is 1 in 50,000. Only rarely is it discovered at a resectable stage, and the mean 5-year survival rate has remained unchanged at about 5% to 12% over the past many years. The most important risk factor associated with gallbladder carcinoma is gallstones (cholelithiasis), which are present in 95% of cases. Presumably, gallbladders containing stones or infectious agents develop cancer as a result of chronic inflammation, a known enabler of malignancy in several organs (Chapter 6). Carcinogenic derivatives of bile acids also are suspected to play a role. Primary sclerosing cholangitis is also a risk factor.
# Chunk 6992
Laboratory findings include markedly elevated serum amylase during the first 24 hours, followed (within 72–96 hours) by rising serum lipase levels. Hypocalcemia can result from precipitation of calcium in areas of fat necrosis; if persistent, it is a poor prognostic sign. The enlarged inflamed pancreas can be visualized by computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
# Chunk 6993
The diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis requires a high degree of clinical suspicion. During an attack of abdominal pain, there may be mild fever and modest elevations of serum amylase. In end-stage disease, however, acinar destruction may be so advanced that enzyme elevations are absent. Gallstone-induced obstruction may manifest as jaundice or elevated levels of serum alkaline phosphatase. A very helpful finding is visualization of calcifications within the pancreas by CT or ultrasonography. Weight loss and hypoalbuminemic edema from malabsorption caused by pancreatic exocrine insufficiency can also point to the disease.
# Chunk 6994
Although chronic pancreatitis is usually not acutely life-threatening, the long-term outlook is poor, with a 50% mortality rate over 20 to 25 years. The most common longterm sequelae of chronic pancreatitis is insufficiency of pancreatic exocrine enzymes, with consequent malabsorption and deficiency of fat-soluble vitamins (Chapter 8). Exocrine insufficiency typically predates endocrine dysfunction, and patients with severe loss of islets can develop diabetes mellitus (Chapter 20). In other patients, severe chronic pain may dominate the clinical picture. Pancreatic pseudocysts (discussed earlier) develop in about 10% of patients. The most feared long-term complication of chronic pancreatitis is pancreatic cancer. The risk for malignant transformation in adult-onset disease is modest, with no more than 5% of patients developing cancer at 20 years. In contrast, chronic pancreatitis that begins in childhood, such as hereditary pancreatitis secondary to PRSS1 mutations, confers a 40% to 55% lifetime risk for pancreatic cancer. It is not unusual for patients with PRSS1 mutations to undergo prophylactic pancreatectomy.
# Chunk 6995
Inactivation of the TP53 tumor suppressor gene occurs in 50% to 70% of pancreatic cancers. Its gene

Fig. 17.8 Progression model for the development of pancreatic cancer. It is postulated that telomere shortening and mutations of the KRAS oncogene occur at early stages, inactivation of the p16 tumor suppressor gene occurs at intermediate stages, and inactivation of the TP53, SMAD4, and BRCA2 tumor suppressor genes occurs at late stages. Note that while there is a general temporal sequence of changes, the accumulation of multiple mutations is more important than their occurrence in a specific order. PanIN, Pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasm. The numbers following the labels on the top refer to stages in the development of PanINs. (Modified from Maitra A, Hruban RH: Pancreatic cancer, Annu Rev Pathol Mech Dis 3:157, 2008.) product, p53, acts both to enforce cell-cycle checkpoints and as an inducer of apoptosis or senescence (Chapter 6). BRCA2 is also mutated late in a subset of pancreatic cancers.
# Chunk 6996
Yolksactumor3Poorlydifferentiatedendothelium-like,cuboidal,90%ofpatientshaveelevatedAFPorcolumnarcells 50% of testicular germ cell neoplasms. They are histologically identical to tumors called dysgerminomas, which occur in the ovary, and germinomas, which occur in the central nervous system and other extragonadal sites.
# Chunk 6997
The treatment of testicular germ cell neoplasms is a remarkable clinical success story. Although roughly 8000 new cases of testicular cancer occur in the United States yearly, fewer than 400 men are expected to die of the disease. Seminoma, which is extremely radiosensitive and tends to remain localized for long periods, has the best prognosis. More than 95% of patients with early-stage disease can be cured. Among nonseminomatous germ cell tumors, the histologic subtype does not influence the therapy. Approximately 90% of patients achieve complete remission with aggressive chemotherapy, and most are cured. The exception is choriocarcinoma, which is associated with a poorer prognosis. With all testicular tumors, recurrences, typically in the form of distant metastases, usually occur within the first 2 years after treatment.
# Chunk 6998
Prostatitis is divided into three categories: (1) acute bacterial prostatitis (2%–5% of cases), caused by the same organisms associated with other acute urinary tract infections; (2) chronic bacterial prostatitis (2%–5% of cases), also caused by common uropathogens; and (3) chronic pelvic pain syndrome (90%–95% of cases). The latter can be subdivided into inflammatory cases, which are associated with leukocytes in prostatic secretions, and noninflammatory cases, in which leukocytes are absent.
# Chunk 6999
In the United States, most prostate cancers are small, nonpalpable, asymptomatic lesions discovered on needle biopsy performed to investigate an elevated serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level (discussed later). Some 70% to 80% of prostate cancers arise in the outer (peripheral) glands, and a subset of these may be palpable as irregular hard nodules on digital rectal examination. A minority of carcinomas is discovered unexpectedly during histologic examination of prostate tissue removed by trans-urethral resection for BPH. Because of the peripheral location, prostate cancer is less likely than BPH to cause urethral obstruction in its initial stages. Locally advanced cancers often infiltrate the seminal vesicles and periurethral zones of the prostate and may invade the adjacent soft tissues, the wall of the urinary bladder, or (less commonly) the rectum. Bone metastases, particularly to the axial skeleton, are frequent late in the disease and typically cause osteoblastic (bone-producing) lesions that can be detected on http://ebooksmedicine.net
# Chunk 7000
Interstitial cystitis causes a chronic pelvic pain syndrome, typically in women. It is characterized by suprapubic pain that increases with bladder filling and is relieved by bladder emptying, leading to very frequent urination during both day and night. Other symptoms include urgency, hematuria, and dysuria. Cystoscopic findings are nonspecific and include petechial hemorrhages. Up to 50% of patients have spontaneous remissions. Late in the course, transmural fibrosis may ensue, leading to a contracted bladder.
# Chunk 7001
Bladder cancer accounts for approximately 5% of cancers and 3% of cancer deaths in the United States. The vast majority of bladder cancers (95%–97% in the United States; 60%–90% in Africa) are urothelial carcinomas. Squamous cell carcinomas represent about 3% to 7% of bladder cancers in the United States but are much more common in countries such as Egypt, where urinary schistosomiasis is endemic. Adenocarcinomas of the bladder are rare. Carcinoma of the bladder is more common in men than in women, in industrialized than in developing nations, in urban than in rural dwellers, and in whites than in African-Americans. About 80% of patients are between 50 and 80 years of age.
# Chunk 7002
Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) have complicated human existence for centuries. Globally, approximately 15 million new cases of STD occur every year; of these, 4 million affect 15to 19-year-olds, and 6 million affect 20to 24-year-olds. Women are far more likely to become infected by an STD and to be asymptomatic. Of the 10 leading infectious diseases that require notification of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in the United States, five—chlamydial infection, gonorrhea, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), syphilis, and hepatitis B—are STDs (
# Chunk 7003
C. trachomatis infections are associated with a wide range of clinical features that are virtually indistinguishable from those caused by N. gonorrhoeae. Clinically, patients typically present 1 to 5 weeks after exposure with dysuria with or without urethral discharge. Patients may develop epididymitis, prostatitis, pelvic inflammatory disease, pharyngitis, conjunctivitis, perihepatic inflammation, and, among individuals who engage in anal sex, proctitis. It is the most common cause of epididymitis in young men. Similar to gonococcus, a large percentage of both men and women are asymptomatic. C. trachomatis also causes lymphogranuloma venereum (LGV), discussed in the next section. The infection may be transmitted to newborns during vaginal birth, where up to 15% of exposed newborns develop chlamydial pneumonia and 50% develop chlamydial conjunctivitis.
# Chunk 7004
LGV is a chronic, ulcerative disease caused by certain strains of C. trachomatis that are distinct from those causing the more common nongonococcal urethritis or cervicitis discussed earlier. It is endemic in parts of Asia, Africa, the Caribbean region, and South America. An increased incidence has been noted in the US in the past 15 years, due in large part of infections in men having sex with men, who are often co infected with HIV. As in the case of granuloma inguinale (discussed later), sporadic cases of LGV are seen most often among individuals with multiple sexual partners.
# Chunk 7005
Within 1 to 2 weeks of exposure, primary infection appears at the site of inoculation in the form of a genital ulcer or a mucosal inflammatory reaction. These primary lesions heal spontaneously, but the organisms at these sites seed draining lymph nodes, triggering a necrotizing lymphadenitis 2 to 6 weeks after the initial exposure. The lymphadenitis is usually unilateral and painful, and may lead to abscess formation. Abscesses sometimes rupture, spreading the inflammatory process into surrounding soft tissues. Rectal infections may progress to proctocolitis, associated with pain, constipation, fever, and bleeding, features that mimic inflammatory bowel disease. If untreated, rectal fissures and strictures may develop secondary to inflammation and fibrosis.
# Chunk 7006
Chancroid, sometimes called the “third” venereal disease (after syphilis and gonorrhea), is an acute, ulcerative infection caused by Haemophilus ducreyi, a small, gram-negative coccobacillus. The disease is most common in tropical and subtropical areas and is more prevalent in lower socioeconomic groups, particularly among men who have regular contact with prostitutes. Chancroid is one of the most common causes of genital ulcers in Africa and Southeast Asia, where it serves as an important cofactor in the transmission of HIV infection. Chancroid probably is underdiagnosed in the United States because most STD clinics do not have facilities for isolating H. ducreyi, and PCR-based tests are not widely available.
# Chunk 7007
The primary lesion of chanchroid appears within 4 to 7 days of inoculation. In male patients, the primary lesion is usually on the penis; in female patients, most lesions occur in the vagina or periurethral area. Over the course of several days, the surface of the primary lesion erodes to produce an irregular ulcer, which is more likely to be painful in males than in females. The regional lymph nodes, particularly in the inguinal region, become enlarged and tender in about 50% of cases within 1 to 2 weeks of the primary inoculation. In untreated cases, the inflamed and enlarged nodes (buboes) may erode the overlying skin to produce chronic, draining ulcers. A definitive diagnosis requires the identification of H. ducreyi on special culture media that are not widely available from commercial sources; even when such media are used, sensitivity is less than 80%. Therefore, the diagnosis often is based on clinical grounds alone.
# Chunk 7008
Both forms of vulvar carcinoma tend to remain confined to their site of origin for a few years but ultimately invade and spread, usually first to regional lymph nodes. The risk of metastasis correlates with the depth of invasion. As with most carcinomas, outcome is dependent on tumor stage. The overall 5-year survival is 70% to 93% for patients with negative lymph nodes but decreases to 25% to 41% for patients with lymph node metastases.
# Chunk 7009
Squamous cell carcinoma has a peak incidence at the age of about 45 years, some 10 to 15 years after detection of precursor SIL. As already discussed, progression of SIL to invasive carcinoma is variable and unpredictable and requires HPV infection as well as mutations in tumor suppressor genes and oncogenes. Risk factors for progression include cigarette smoking and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, the latter finding suggesting that immune surveillance plays a role in preventing progression. Although risk factors may help identify patients who are likely to progress from SIL to carcinoma, the only reliable way to monitor the disease course is with frequent physical examinations coupled with Pap smears and biopsy of suspicious lesions.
# Chunk 7010
Unopposed estrogen is also a risk factor for the most common type of endometrial carcinoma (see later), and inactivation of the PTEN tumor suppressor gene has been identified at a substantial frequency in hyperplasia with atypia (approximately 50%) and endometrioid carcinoma (>70%). Along with clinicopathologic and epidemiologic studies, these findings indicate that hyperplasia with atypia is a precursor lesion for endometrioid endometrial carcinoma.
# Chunk 7011
Endometrial carcinomas usually manifest with irregular or postmenopausal bleeding. With progression, the uterus enlarges and may become affixed to surrounding structures as the cancer infiltrates surrounding tissues. Endometrioid carcinoma usually is slow to metastasize, but if left untreated, eventually disseminates to regional nodes and more distant sites. With therapy, the 5-year survival rate for early-stage endometrioid carcinoma is 90%, but survival drops precipitously in higher-stage tumors. The prognosis with serous carcinomas is strongly dependent on operative staging but because of its aggressive behavior it often presents as high-stage disease with a poor prognosis.
# Chunk 7012
Benign tumors that arise from the smooth muscle cells in the myometrium are properly termed leiomyomas, but because of their firmness often are referred to clinically as fibroids. Leiomyomas are the most common benign tumor in females, affecting 30% to 50% of women of reproductive age, and are considerably more frequent in black women. These tumors are associated with several different recurrent chromosomal abnormalities, including rearrangements of chromosomes 6 and 12 that also are found in a variety of other benign neoplasms, such as endometrial polyps and lipomas. Mutations in the MED12 gene, which encodes a component of the RNA polymerase transcription complex, have been identified in up to 70% of leiomyomas. The mechanism by which MED12 mutations contribute to the development of leiomyomas is not presently understood. Estrogens and possibly oral contraceptives stimulate the growth of leiomyomas; conversely, these tumors shrink postmenopausally.
# Chunk 7013
the tubes, giving rise to blood-borne infections that seed to distant sites. Tuberculous salpingitis is far less common and is almost always encountered in combination with tuberculous endometritis. All forms of salpingitis may produce fever, lower abdominal or pelvic pain, and pelvic masses, which are the result of distention of the tubes with either exudate or inflammatory debris (
# Chunk 7014
The prognosis for patients with high-grade serous carcinoma is poor, even after surgery and chemotherapy, and depends heavily on the stage of the disease at diagnosis. The 5-year survival for women with carcinoma confined to one ovary is about 90%, but falls precipitously with higher stage tumors to less than 40% depending on the exact stage. In contrast, borderline tumors are associated with nearly 100% survival. Of note, women with tumors containing BRCA1/2 mutations tend to have a better prognosis than women whose tumors lack these genetic abnormalities.
# Chunk 7015
Benign (mature) cystic teratomas are marked by the presence of mature tissues derived from all three germ cell layers: ectoderm, endoderm, and mesoderm. Usually these tumors contain cysts lined by epidermis replete with adnexal appendages—hence the common designation dermoid cysts. Most are discovered in young women as ovarian masses or are found incidentally on abdominal radiographs or scans because they contain foci of calcification produced by toothlike structures contained within the tumor. About 90% are unilateral, with the right side more commonly affected. Rarely do these cystic masses exceed 10 cm in diameter. On cut section, they often are filled with sebaceous secretion and matted hair that, when removed, reveal a hair-bearing epidermal lining (
# Chunk 7016
With all ovarian neoplasms, management poses a formidable clinical challenge, because symptoms or signs usually appear only when tumors are well advanced. Ovarian tumors of surface epithelial origin usually are asymptomatic until they become large enough to cause local pressure symptoms (e.g., pain, gastrointestinal complaints, urinary frequency). Indeed, about 30% of all ovarian neoplasms are discovered incidentally on routine gynecologic examination. Larger masses, particularly the common epithelial tumors, may cause an increase in abdominal girth. Smaller masses, particularly dermoid cysts, sometimes twist on their pedicles (torsion), producing severe abdominal pain that mimics an acute abdomen. Metastatic seeding of malignant serous tumors often causes ascites, whereas functioning ovarian tumors often come to attention because of the endocrinopathies they produce.
# Chunk 7017
Unfortunately, treatment of ovarian tumors remains unsatisfactory; only a modest increase in survival has been achieved since the mid-1970s. Screening methods that detect early tumors are badly needed, but those evaluated to date are of limited value. One such marker, the protein CA-125, is elevated in the sera of 75% to 90% of women with epithelial ovarian cancer. However, CA-125 is undetectable in up to 50% of women with cancer limited to the ovary; conversely, it often is elevated in a variety of benign conditions and nonovarian cancers. Hence, its usefulness as a screening test in asymptomatic post-menopausal women is limited. Currently, CA-125 measurements are of greatest value in monitoring response to therapy.
# Chunk 7018
Ectopic pregnancy is defined as implantation of a fertilized ovum in any site other than the uterus, which may occur in as many as 1% of pregnancies. In more than 90% of these cases, implantation occurs in the fallopian tube (tubal pregnancy); other sites include the ovaries and the abdominal cavity. Any factor that retards passage of the ovum through the fallopian tube predisposes to ectopic pregnancy. In about half of the cases, slowed passage results from chronic inflammation and scarring in the oviduct; intrauterine tumors and endometriosis may also hamper passage of the ovum. In the other 50% of tubal pregnancies, no anatomic cause is evident. Ovarian pregnancies probably result from rare instances in which the ovum is fertilized just as the follicle ruptures. Gestation within the abdominal cavity occurs when the fertilized egg drops out of the fimbriated end of the fallopian tube and implants on the peritoneum.
# Chunk 7019
Until rupture occurs, an ectopic pregnancy may be indistinguishable from a normal pregnancy, with cessation of menstruation and elevation of serum and urinary placental hormones. Under the influence of these hormones, the endometrium (in approximately 50% of cases) undergoes the characteristic hypersecretory and decidual changes of pregnancy. The absence of elevated gonadotropin levels does not exclude the diagnosis because poor attachment and necrosis of the ectopic placenta are common. Rupture of an ectopic pregnancy may be catastrophic, with the sudden onset of intense abdominal pain and signs of an acute abdomen, often followed by shock. Prompt surgical intervention is necessary.
# Chunk 7020
Choriocarcinoma, a very aggressive malignant tumor, arises from gestational chorionic epithelium or, less frequently, from totipotential cells within the gonads (as a germ cell tumor). These tumors are rare in the Western Hemisphere (they occur in about 1 per 30,000 pregnancies in the United States), but are much more common in Asian and African countries, reaching a frequency of 1 in 2000 pregnancies. Approximately 50% of choriocarcinomas arise from complete hydatidiform moles; about 25% arise after an abortion, while the remainder manifest following an apparently normal pregnancy. In most cases, choriocarcinoma presents as a bloody, brownish discharge accompanied by a rising titer of β-hCG in blood and urine, in the absence of marked uterine enlargement, such as would be seen with a mole. In general, the β-hCG titers are much higher than those associated with a mole.
# Chunk 7021
Fig.19.21

Bythetimeachoriocarcinomaisdiscovered,widespreadvascularspreadusuallyhasoccurredtothelungs(50%),vagina(30%–40%),brain,liver,orkidneys.Lymphaticinvasionisuncommon.
# Chunk 7022
ER positive (HER2 negative; 50%–65% of cancers)

HER2 positive (ER positive or negative; 10%–20% of cancers)
# Chunk 7023
CompleteresponsetoLowgrade(<10%),highergradeERpositive(15%),ERnegative30%chemotherapy(10%)(>30%)

MetastaticsitesBone(70%),viscera(25%),brainBone(70%),viscera(45%),brainBone(40%),viscera(35%),brain(<10%)(30%)(25%)
# Chunk 7024
Fig.19.29B )andeventuallyleadstotheappearanceofahard,palpableirregularmass.About50%to65%ofductalcarcinomasareERpositive,20%areHER2positive,and15%arenegativeforbothERandHER2(
# Chunk 7025
Inflammatorycarcinomaisdefinedbyitsclinicalpresentation,ratherthanaspecificmorphology.Patientspresentwithaswollenerythematousbreastwithoutapalpablemass.Theunderlyinginvasivecarcinomaisgenerallypoorlydifferentiatedanddiffuselyinfiltratesandobstructsdermallymphaticspaces,causingthe“inflamed”appearance;trueinflammationisabsent.Manyofthesetumorsmetastasizetodistantsites;theoverall5-yearsurvivalislessthan50%,andunderstandablyevenlowerinthosewithmetastaticdiseaseatdiagnosis.AbouthalfexpressERand40%to60%overexpressHER2.
# Chunk 7026
The clinically important posterior pituitary syndromes involve ADH underor overproduction.

ADH deficiency causes diabetes insipidus, a condition characterized by excessive urination (polyuria) due to an inability of the kidney to resorb water properly from the urine. Diabetes insipidus can result from several causes, including head trauma, neoplasms, and inflammatory disorders of the hypothalamus and pituitary, and from surgical procedures involving the hypothalamus or pituitary. The condition sometimes arises spontaneously (idiopathic). Diabetes insipidus from ADH deficiency is designated central, to differentiate it from nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, which is caused by renal tubular unresponsiveness to circulating ADH. The clinical manifestations of both diseases are similar and include the excretion of large volumes of dilute urine with an inappropriately low specific gravity. Serum sodium and osmolality are increased as a result of excessive renal loss of free water, resulting in thirst and polydipsia. Patients who can drink water generally compensate for urinary losses, but patients who are obtunded, bedridden, or otherwise limited in their ability to obtain water may develop life-threatening dehydration.
# Chunk 7027
The diagnosis of hyperthyroidism is based on clinical features and laboratory data. The measurement of serum TSH is the most useful single screening test for hyperthyroidism, because TSH levels are decreased even at the earliest stages, when the disease may still be subclinical. In rare cases of pituitaryor hypothalamus-associated (secondary) hyperthyroidism, TSH levels are either normal or raised. A low TSH value usually is associated with increased levels of free T4. In the occasional patient, hyperthyroidism results predominantly from increased circulating levels of T3 (T3 toxicosis). In such cases, free T4 levels may be decreased, and direct measurement of serum T3 may be useful. Once the diagnosis of thyrotoxicosis has been confirmed by a combination of TSH and free thyroid hormone assays, measurement of radioactive iodine uptake by the thyroid gland can be valuable in determining the etiology. For example, such scans may show diffusely increased uptake in Graves disease, increased uptake in a solitary nodule in toxic adenoma, or decreased uptake in thyroiditis.
# Chunk 7028
The onset of this form of thyroiditis often is acute. It is characterized by neck pain (particularly with swallowing), fever, malaise, and variable enlargement of the thyroid. Transient hyperthyroidism may occur, as in other cases of thyroiditis, as a result of disruption of thyroid follicles and release of excessive thyroid hormone. The leukocyte count and erythrocyte sedimentation rates are increased. With progression of the gland destruction, a transient hypothyroid phase may ensue. The condition typically is self-limited, with most patients returning to a euthyroid state within 6 to 8 weeks.
# Chunk 7029
Graves disease has a peak incidence between 20 and 40 years of age, with women being affected up to seven times more commonly than men. This is a common disorder, estimated to affect 1.5% to 2% of women in the United States. Genetic factors are important in Graves disease; the incidence is increased in relatives of affected patients, and the concordance rate in monozygotic twins is as high as 60%. As with other autoimmune disorders, a genetic susceptibility to Graves disease is associated with the presence of certain human leukocyte antigen (HLA) haplotypes, specifically HLA-DR3, and polymorphisms in genes whose products regulate T-cell responses, including the inhibitory T-cell receptor CTLA-4 and the tyrosine phosphatase PTPN22.
# Chunk 7030
The clinical manifestations of Graves disease include those common to all forms of thyrotoxicosis (discussed earlier), as well as those associated uniquely with Graves disease: diffuse hyperplasia of the thyroid, ophthalmopathy, and dermopathy. The degree of thyrotoxicosis varies from case to case, and the related changes may sometimes be less conspicuous than other manifestations of the disease. Increased flow of blood through the hyperactive gland often produces an audible bruit. Sympathetic overactivity produces a characteristic wide, staring gaze and lid lag. The ophthalmopathy of Graves disease results in abnormal protrusion of the eyeball (exophthalmos). The exophthalmos may persist or progress despite successful treatment of the thyrotoxicosis, sometimes resulting in corneal injury. The extraocular muscles often are weak. The infiltrative dermopathy most commonly involves the skin overlying the shins, where it manifests as scaly thickening and induration of the skin (pretibial myxedema). The skin lesions may be slightly pigmented papules or nodules and often have an orange peel texture. Laboratory findings in Graves disease include elevated serum free T4 and T3 and depressed serum TSH. Because of ongoing stimulation of the thyroid follicles by TSIs, radioactive iodine uptake is increased diffusely.
# Chunk 7031
Medullary carcinomas of the thyroid are neuroendocrine tumors derived from the parafollicular cells, or C cells, of the thyroid. Like normal C cells, medullary carcinomas secrete calcitonin, measurement of which plays an important role in the diagnosis and postoperative follow-up of patients. In some cases, the tumor cells elaborate other polypeptide hormones such as somatostatin, serotonin, and vasoactive intestinal peptide. Medullary carcinomas arise sporadically in about 70% of cases. The remaining 30% are familial, occurring in the setting of multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) syndrome 2A or 2B, or familial medullary thyroid carcinoma without an associated MEN syndrome, as discussed later. Both familial and sporadic medullary forms are associated with gain-of-function driver mutations in the RET receptor tyrosine kinase. Sporadic medullary carcinomas, as well as familial cases without an associated MEN syndrome, occur in adults, with a peak incidence in the fifth and sixth decades. Cases associated with MEN-2A or MEN-2B, by contrast, tend to occur in younger patients, including children.
# Chunk 7032
Medullary cancers arenonepithelialneoplasmsarisingfromtheparafollicularCcellsandcanoccurineithersporadic(70%)orfamilial(30%)settings.MulticentricityandCcellhyperplasiaarefeaturesoffamilialcases.Amyloiddepositsareacharacteristichistologicfinding.
# Chunk 7033
Primary hyperparathyroidism traditionally has been associated with a constellation of symptoms that include painful bones, renal stones, abdominal groans, and psychic moans. Pain, secondary to fractures of bones weakened by osteoporosis or osteitis fibrosa cystica and resulting from renal stones, with obstructive uropathy, was at one time a prominent manifestation of primary hyperparathyroidism. Because serum calcium is now routinely assessed in most patients who need blood tests for unrelated conditions, hyperparathyroidism is usually detected early in its course. Hence, many of the classic clinical manifestations, particularly those referable to bone and renal disease, are seen much less frequently. Additional signs and symptoms that may be encountered in some cases include the following:
# Chunk 7034
As with most autoimmune diseases, the pathogenesis of type 1 diabetes involves genetic susceptibility and environmental factors. Genome-wide association studies have identified over 20 susceptibility loci for type 1 diabetes. Of these, the strongest association is with class II MHC (HLA-DR) genes. Between 90% and 95% of white patients with type 1 diabetes have HLA-DR3, or DR4, or both, in contrast with about 40% of normal subjects, and 40% to 50% of patients are DR3/DR4 heterozygotes, in contrast with 5% of normal subjects. Of note, however, most individuals who inherit these HLA alleles do not develop diabetes, indicating that these genes contribute to the disease but do not, by themselves, cause it. Several non-HLA genes also increase susceptibility to type 1 diabetes, including polymorphisms within the gene encoding (?) Precipitating event Genetic Overt loss of release insulin release
# Chunk 7035
Environmental factors, such as a sedentary lifestyle and dietary habits, unequivocally play a role, as described in the subsequent discussion of the association with obesity. Genetic factors also are involved, as evidenced by a concordance rate of 80% to 90% in monozygotic twins, which is even greater than that for type 1 diabetes (approximately 50% concordance rates in twins), suggesting perhaps an even larger genetic component in type 2 diabetes. Additional evidence for a genetic basis has emerged from recent large-scale genome-wide association studies, which have identified dozens of susceptibility loci called diabetogenic genes. Unlike type 1 diabetes, however, the disease is not linked to genes involved in immune tolerance and regulation (e.g., HLA, CTLA4).
# Chunk 7036
Diabetic nephropathy is a leading cause of end-stage renal disease in the United States. The earliest manifestation of diabetic nephropathy is the appearance of small amounts of albumin in the urine (>30 but <300 mg/ day). Without specific interventions, approximately 80% of patients with type 1 diabetes and 20% to 40% of those with type 2 diabetes will develop overt nephropathy with macroalbuminuria (excretion of >300 mg/day) over the ensuing 10 to 15 years, usually accompanied by the appearance of hypertension. The progression from overt nephropathy to end-stage renal disease is highly variable and is evidenced by a progressive drop in glomerular filtration rate. By 20 years after diagnosis, more than 75% of individuals with type 1 diabetes and about 20% of those with type 2 diabetes with overt nephropathy will develop end-stage renal disease, necessitating dialysis or renal transplantation.
# Chunk 7037
Marked hypersecretion of gastrin usually has its origin in gastrin-producing tumors (gastrinomas), which are just as likely to arise in the duodenum and peripancreatic soft tissues as in the pancreas (the so-called “gastrinoma triangle”). The Zollinger-Ellison syndrome refers to the association of pancreatic islet cell lesions with hypersecretion of gastric acid and severe peptic ulceration, present in 90% to 95% of patients with gastrinomas. Hypergastrinemia from a pancreatic or duodenal tumor stimulates extreme gastric acid secretion, which, in turn, causes peptic ulceration. The duodenal and gastric ulcers often are multiple; although they are identical to those found in the general population, they often are unresponsive to usual therapy. In addition, ulcers may occur in unusual locations such as the jejunum; when intractable jejunal ulcers are found, Zollinger-Ellison syndrome should be considered. More than one-half of affected patients have diarrhea; in 30%, it is the presenting manifestation.
# Chunk 7038
In general, clinical manifestations of adrenocortical insufficiency do not appear until at least 90% of the adrenal cortex has been compromised. The initial manifestations often include progressive weakness and easy fatigability, which may be dismissed as nonspecific complaints. Gastrointestinal disturbances are common and include anorexia, nausea, vomiting, weight loss, and diarrhea. In patients with primary adrenal disease, increased levels of ACTH precursor hormone stimulate melanocytes, with resultant hyperpigmentation of the skin and mucosal surfaces. The face, axillae, nipples, areolae, and perineum are particularly common sites of hyperpigmentation. By contrast, hyperpigmentation is not seen in patients with secondary adrenocortical insufficiency because melanotropic hormone levels are not increased. Decreased mineralocorticoid (aldosterone) activity in patients with primary adrenal insufficiency results in potassium retention and sodium loss, with consequent hyperkalemia, hyponatremia, volume depletion, and hypotension, whereas secondary hypoadrenalism is characterized by deficient cortisol and androgen output but normal or near-normal aldosterone synthesis. Hypoglycemia occasionally may occur as a result of glucocorticoid deficiency and impaired gluconeogenesis. It is more common in infants and children than adults. Stresses such as infections, trauma, or surgical procedures in affected patients may precipitate an acute adrenal crisis, manifested by intractable vomiting, abdominal pain, hypotension, coma, and vascular collapse. Death follows rapidly unless corticosteroids are replaced immediately.
# Chunk 7039
The dominant clinical manifestation of pheochromocytoma is hypertension, observed in 90% of patients. Approximately two-thirds of patients with hypertension demonstrate paroxysmal episodes, which are described as an abrupt, precipitous elevation in blood pressure, associated with tachycardia, palpitations, headache, sweating, tremor, and a sense of apprehension. These episodes may also be associated with pain in the abdomen or chest, nausea, and vomiting. Isolated paroxysmal episodes of hypertension occur in fewer than half of patients; more commonly, patients demonstrate a chronic, sustained elevation in blood pressure punctuated by the aforementioned paroxysms. The elevations of blood pressure are induced by the sudden release of catecholamines that may acutely precipitate congestive heart failure, pulmonary edema, myocardial infarction, ventricular fibrillation, and cerebrovascular accidents. The cardiac complications have been attributed to what has been called catecholamine cardiomyopathy, or catecholamine-induced myocardial instability and ventricular arrhythmias. In some cases, pheochromocytomas secrete other hormones such as ACTH and somatostatin and may therefore be associated with clinical features related to the effects of these and other peptide hormones. The laboratory diagnosis is based on demonstration of increased urinary excretion of free catecholamines and their metabolites, such as vanillylmandelic acid and metanephrines. Isolated benign pheochromocytomas are treated with surgical excision. With multifocal lesions, long-term medical treatment for hypertension may be required.
# Chunk 7040
Osteoporosis cannot be reliably detected in plain radio-graphs until 30% to 40% of the bone mass is lost, and measurement of blood levels of calcium, phosphorus, and alkaline phosphatase are not diagnostic. Osteoporosis is thus a difficult condition to screen for in asymptomatic people. The best estimates of bone loss, aside from biopsy (which is rarely performed), are specialized radiographic imaging techniques, such as dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry and quantitative computed tomography, both of which measure bone density.
# Chunk 7041
Fig. 21.11 Mosaic pattern of lamellar bone pathognomonic of Paget disease.

and distorts the femoral heads, resulting in the development of severe secondary osteoarthritis. Chalk stick–type fractures are another frequent complication and usually occur in the long bones of the lower extremities. Compression fractures of the spine result in spinal cord injury and the development of kyphosis. The diagnosis can frequently be made from the radiographic findings. Many affected individuals have elevated serum alkaline phosphatase levels but normal serum calcium and phosphorus.
# Chunk 7042
Staphylococcus aureus is responsible for 80% to 90% of the cases of culture-positive pyogenic osteomyelitis. These organisms express cell wall proteins that bind to bone matrix components such as collagen and facilitate adherence to bone. Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas, and Klebsiella are more frequently isolated from individuals with genitourinary tract infections or who are intravenous drug abusers. Mixed bacterial infections are seen in the setting of direct spread, inoculation of organisms during surgery, or into open fractures. In the neonatal period, Haemophilus influenzae and group B streptococci are frequent pathogens, and individuals with sickle cell disease are predisposed to Salmonella infection. In almost 50% of suspected cases, no organisms can be isolated.
# Chunk 7043
Osteosarcoma is treated with a multimodality approach that consists of (1) neoadjuvant chemotherapy, (2) surgery, and (3) chemotherapy. The amount of chemotherapy-induced necrosis found at surgical resection is an important prognostic finding. These aggressive neoplasms spread hematogenously to the lungs. Although the prognosis has improved substantially since the advent of chemotherapy, with 5-year survival rates reaching 60% to 70% in patients without detectible metastases at initial diagnosis, the outcome for patients with metastases, recurrent disease, or secondary osteosarcoma is still poor.
# Chunk 7044
suppressor gene by DNA methylation are also relatively common in sporadic tumors.

Chondrosarcomas usually present as painful, progressively enlarging masses. Tumor grade predicts outcome, which ranges from 80% 5-year survival for Grade 1 tumors to 43% for Grade 3 tumors. Grade 1 chondrosarcomas rarely metastasize, whereas 70% of grade 3 tumors spread hematogenously, especially to the lungs. The treatment of conventional chondrosarcoma is wide surgical excision. The mesenchymal and dedifferentiated tumors are also excised and are additionally treated with chemotherapy because of their more aggressive clinical course.
# Chunk 7045
Ewing sarcomas are aggressive malignancies treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by surgical excision with or without radiation. With chemotherapy, 5-year survival of 75% and long-term cure in 50% of patients is possible.
# Chunk 7046
as many as 50% of children and young adults aged 2–25 years. It is synonymous with fibrous cortical defect or metaphyseal fibrous defect if localized to the cortex or medulla, respectively. The vast majority arises eccentrically in the metaphysis of the distal femur and proximal tibia. Plain radiographs show a sharply demarcated oval radiolucency with the long axis parallel to the cortex (
# Chunk 7047
The synovium of RA contains germinal centers with secondary follicles and abundant plasma cells that produce antibodies, some of which may be against self-antigens. Many of the serum autoantibodies detected in patients are specific for citrullinated peptides in which arginine residues are posttranslationally converted to citrulline. In RA, complexes of antibodies with citrullinated fibrinogen, type II collagen, α-enolase, and vimentin deposit in the joints. Evidence suggests that the anti-citrullinated protein antibodies (ACPA) in combination with a T cell response to the citrullinated proteins contribute to disease chronicity. Approximately 30% of RA patients do not have ACPA in the blood. About 80% of patients have serum IgM or IgA autoantibodies that bind to the Fc portions of their own IgG. These autoantibodies are called rheumatoid factor and may also deposit in joints as immune complexes, although they are not uniformly present in all patients with RA and can be found in patients without the disease.
# Chunk 7048
Currently, arthritis occurs in less than 10% of cases because most patients are cured at an earlier stage. However, if left untreated approximately 60% to 80% of individuals develop a migratory arthritis (Lyme arthritis) lasting for weeks to months. Spirochetes can only be identified in about 25% of joints with arthritis, but the diagnosis can be confirmed by serologic testing for anti-Borrelia antibodies. Treatment of Lyme disease consists of antibiotics with activity against Borrelia. Cure rates of 90% have been achieved with standard regimens. A vaccine is under development. However, a chronic arthritis that is antibiotic refractory can develop in the late disseminated stage. In many of these patients, Borrelia cannot be detected in the joint fluid even by PCR. It has been proposed that cellular (especially TH1) and humoral responses to Borrelia outer surface protein A may initiate this late, autoimmune, arthritis. The chronic manifestations, in addition to joint pain, can include nonspecific symptoms (fatigue, cognitive complaints), known collectively as posttreatment Lyme disease syndrome (PTLDS).
# Chunk 7049
CPPD is frequently asymptomatic. However, it may produce acute, subacute, or chronic arthritis that can be confused clinically with OA or RA. The joint involvement may last from several days to weeks and may be monoarticular or polyarticular; the knees, followed by the wrists, elbows, shoulders, and ankles, are most commonly affected. Ultimately, approximately 50% of affected individuals experience significant joint damage. Therapy is supportive. There is no known treatment that prevents or slows crystal formation.
# Chunk 7050
Nodular fasciitis is a self-limited fibroblastic and myofibroblastic proliferation that typically occurs the upper extremities of young adults. A history of trauma is present in approximately 25% to 50% of cases, and the tumors grow rapidly during a period of several weeks or months. Whereas nodular fasciitis was historically considered a purely reactive lesion, identification of a t(17;22) translocation producing a MYH9-USP6 fusion gene indicates that it is a clonal, yet self-limited, proliferation. It is hypothesized that the proliferating cells lack some key hallmark of cancer, perhaps the ability to avoid senescence. Intriguingly, ABC (discussed earlier), another tumor that sits in a gray zone between reactive and neoplastic proliferations, also contains a USP6 fusion gene. Nodular fasciitis can spontaneously regress and, if excised, rarely recurs. Malignant transformation is virtually nonexistent.
# Chunk 7051
UPSs are aggressive malignancies that are treated with surgery and adjuvant chemotherapy and/or radiation. The prognosis is generally poor, with metastases arising in 30% to 50% of cases.
# Chunk 7052
Clinically, myasthenia gravis frequently manifests with ptosis (drooping eyelids) or diplopia (double vision) because of weakness in the extraocular muscles. This pattern of weakness is distinctly different from that of most primary myopathic diseases, in which there is relative sparing of facial and extraocular muscles. The severity of the weakness often fluctuates rapidly, sometimes over periods of a few minutes. Characteristically, repetitive firing of muscles makes the weakness more severe, whereas cholinesterase inhibitors improve strength markedly, features that are are diagnostically useful. Effective treatments include cholinesterase inhibitors, immunosuppression, plasmapheresis, and (in patients with thymic lesions) thymectomy. These interventions have improved the 5-year survival rate to greater than 95%.
# Chunk 7053
Often the first symptoms of DMD are clumsiness and an inability to keep up with peers because of muscle weakness. The weakness typically begins in the pelvic girdle and next involves the shoulder girdle. Enlargement of the calves, termed pseudohypertrophy, is an early physical finding. The increased muscle bulk initially stems from myofiber hypertrophy, but as myofibers progressively degenerate, an increasing part of the muscle is replaced by adipose tissue and endomysial fibrosis. Cardiac muscle damage and fibrosis may lead to heart failure and arrhythmias, which may prove fatal. Although no structural abnormalities in the central nervous system have been described, cognitive impairment also may occur and may be severe enough to be classified as mental retardation. Owing to ongoing muscle degeneration, high serum creatine kinase levels are present at birth and persist through the first decade of life but fall as muscle mass is lost as the disease progresses. Death results from respiratory insufficiency, pneumonia, and cardiac decompensation.
# Chunk 7054
• Ion channel myopathies are a group of familial disorders caused by inherited defects in ion channels that are characterized by myotonia, relapsing episodes of hypotonic paralysis associated with abnormal serum potassium levels, or both. Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis results from mutations in the gene encoding the skeletal muscle sodium channel SCN4A, which regulates sodium entry during contraction. Malignant hyperthermia is a rare syndrome characterized by tachycardia, tachypnea, muscle spasms, and hyperpyrexia. It is triggered when patients carrying mutations in the ryanodine receptor RYR1, a calcium efflux channel, receive halogenated anesthetic agents or succinylcholine during surgery. On exposure to anesthetic, the mutated receptor leads to increased efflux of calcium from the sarcoplasmic reticulum, producing tetany and excessive heat production. There is some evidence that people carrying RYR1 mutations also are unusually susceptible to exertional hyperthermia (heat stroke).
# Chunk 7055
Fig.

23.9 ); multiple aneurysms exist in 20% to 30% of cases. The aneurysms are not present at birth but develop over time because of underlying defects in the vessel media. There is an increased risk for aneurysms in patients with autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (Chapter 14) and genetic disorders of extracellular matrix proteins (e.g., Ehler-Danlos syndrome). Overall, roughly 1.3% of aneurysms bleed per year, with the probability of rupture increasing with size. For example, aneurysms larger than 1 cm in diameter have a roughly 50% risk for bleeding per year. In the early period after a subarachnoid hemorrhage, there is an additional risk for ischemic injury from vasospasm of other vessels. Healing and the attendant meningeal fibrosis and scarring sometimes obstruct CSF flow or disrupt CSF resorption, leading to hydrocephalus.
# Chunk 7056
In the first 15 years or so after recognition of AIDS, neuropathologic changes were demonstrated at postmortem examination in as many as 80% to 90% of cases, owing to direct effects of the virus on the nervous system (HIV encephalitis), along with opportunistic infections and primary CNS lymphoma. Introduction of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) has decreased the frequency of these secondary effects of HIV infection. However, cognitive dysfunction ranging from mild to full-blown dementia that is lumped under the umbrella term HIV-associated neurocognitive disorder (HAND) continues to be a source of morbidity. This syndrome is believed to stem from HIV infection of microglial cells in the brain and activation of innate immune responses. Neuronal injury likely stems from a combination of cytokine-induced inflammation and toxic effects of HIV-derived proteins.
# Chunk 7057
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) results from the death of lower motor neurons in the spinal cord and brain stem as well as upper motor neurons (Betz cells) in the motor cortex. The loss of lower motor neurons results in denervation of muscles, muscular atrophy (the “amyotrophy” of the condition), weakness, and fasciculations, while the loss of upper motor neurons results in paresis, hyperreflexia, and spasticity, along with a Babinski sign. An additional consequence of upper motor neuron loss is degeneration of the corticospinal tracts in the lateral portion of the spinal cord (“lateral sclerosis”). Sensation usually is unaffected, but cognitive impairment is not infrequent.
# Chunk 7058
Primary brain germ cell tumors occur along the midline, most commonly in the pineal and the suprasellar regions. They account for 0.2% to 1% of brain tumors in individuals of European descent but in as many as 10% of brain tumors in individuals of Japanese ethnicity. They are a tumor of the young, with 90% occurring during the first 2 decades of life. Germ cell tumors in the pineal region show a strong male predominance. The most common primary CNS germ cell tumor is germinoma, a tumor that closely resembles testicular seminoma (Chapter 18). Secondary CNS involvement by metastatic gonadal germ cell tumors also occurs.
# Chunk 7059
http://ebooksmedicine.net

Lichen planus is an uncommon disorder that usually presents in middle-aged adults. The cutaneous lesions are multiple and are usually symmetrically distributed, particularly on the extremities, and often occur around the wrists and elbows and on the vulva and glans penis. Approximately 70% of cases also involve the oral mucosa, where the lesions manifest as white papules with a reticulate or netlike appearance. The cutaneous lesions of lichen planus usually resolve spontaneously within 1 to 2 years, but the oral lesions may persist and be of sufficient severity to interfere with food intake.
# Chunk 7060
They are most common in children and adolescents, but may be encountered in any age group. HPV infection usually stems from direct contact with an infected individual or autoinoculation. Verrucae generally are self-limited, most often regressing spontaneously within 6 months to 2 years.
# Chunk 7061
E. Diagnosis requires tissue biopsy. Abdominal fat pad and rectum are easily accessible biopsy targets.
# Chunk 7062
i. Due to NADPH oxidase defect (X-linked or autosomal recessive) ii. Leads to recurrent infection and granuloma formation with catalase-positive organisms, particularly Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas cepacia, Serratia marcescens, Nocardia, and Aspergillus iii. Nitroblue tetrazolium test is used to screen for CGD. Leukocytes are incubated with NBT dye, which turns blue ifNADPH oxidase can convert 0 too;, but remains colorless ifNADPH oxidase is defective.
# Chunk 7063
I. 5-year survival is > 90%; renal failure, infection, and accelerated coronary atherosclerosis (occurs late) are common causes of death.
# Chunk 7064
C. Hemoglobin (Hb), hematocrit (Hct), and RBC count are used as surrogates for RBC mass, which is difficult to measure.
# Chunk 7065
B. Normal reticulocyte count (RC) is 1-2%.

1. RBC lifespan is 120 days; each day roughly 1-2% ofRBCs are removed from circulation and replaced by reticulocytes.
# Chunk 7066
Fig. 5.6 Reticulocyte. Fig. 5.7 Spherocytes.

1. Macrophages consume RBCs and break down hemoglobin.
# Chunk 7067
C. Intravascular hemolysis involves destruction of RBCs within vessels.

1. Clinical and laboratory findings include 1. Hemoglobinemia 11. Hemoglobinuria iii. Hemosiderinuria-Renal tubular cells pick up some of the hemoglobin that is filtered into the urine and break it down into iron, which accumulates as hemosiderin; tubular cells are eventually shed resulting in hemosiderinuria.
# Chunk 7068
Hb electrophoresis confirms the presence and amount ofHbS.

Fig. 5.8 Fragment of nuclear remnant (HowellFig. 5.9 Sickle cell disease. Fig. 5.10 Hemoglobin C crystal. Jolly body) within RBC.
# Chunk 7069
E. Complications include iron deficiency anemia (due to chronic loss of hemoglobin in the urine) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML), which develops in 10% of patients.
# Chunk 7070
D. CML is distinguished from a leukemoid reaction (reactive neutrophilic leukocytosis) by 1.

Negative leukocyte alkaline phosphatase (LAP) stain (granulocytes in a leukemoid reaction are LAP positive) 2.
# Chunk 7071
5.

Primary AL amyloidosis-Free light chains circulate in serum and deposit in tissues.

6.

Proteinuria-Free light chain is excreted in the urine as Bence Jones protein; deposition in kidney tubules leads to risk for renal failure (myeloma kidney).
# Chunk 7072
2.

Classically presents in young adults as hypertension (renal artery involvement), abdominal pain with melena (mesenteric artery involvement), neurologic disturbances, and skin lesions. Associated with serum HBsAg pathoma.com 3.
# Chunk 7073
3.

Serum c-ANCA levels correlate with disease activity.

4.

Biopsy reveals large necrotizing granulomas with adjacent necrotizing vasculitis (Fig. 7.4).
# Chunk 7074
C. Clinical features include severe, crushing chest pain (lasting > 20 minutes) that radiates to the left arm or jaw, diaphoresis, and dyspnea; symptoms are not relieved by nitroglycerin.
# Chunk 7075
2.

CK-MB is useful for detecting reinfarction that occurs days after an initial Ml; creatine kinase MB (CK-MB) levels rise 4-6 hours after infarction, peak at 24 hours, and return to normal by 72 hours.
# Chunk 7076
Clinical features include fevers and night sweats, cough with hemoptysis, and weight loss.

5.

Biopsy reveals caseating granulomas; AFB stain reveals acid-fast bacilli (Fig. 9.6B,C).
# Chunk 7077
Most common sources Metastasis to lung are breast and colon carcinoma.

Small cell carcinoma (15%)-usually not amenable to surgical resection (treated with chemotherapy and radiation) Non-small cell carcinoma (85%) i. Usually amenable to surgical resection ii. Major subtypes include adenocarcinoma (50%), squamous cell carcinoma (30%), large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma (5%), and carcinoid tumor (5%).
# Chunk 7078
2 inches long and located in the small bowel within 2 feet of the ileocecal valve 3.

Can present during the first 2 years of life with bleeding (due to heterotopic gastric mucosa), volvulus, intussusception, or obstruction (mimics appendicitis); however, most cases are asymptomatic.
# Chunk 7079
2.

Mucosa! infarction occurs with marked hypotension.

B. Clinical features include abdominal pain, bloody diarrhea, and decreased bowel sounds.
# Chunk 7080
D. Rectal suction biopsy reveals lack of ganglion cells.

E. Treatment involves resection of the involved bowel; ganglion cells are present in the bowel proximal to the diseased segment.
# Chunk 7081
VI. IRRITABLE BOWEL SYNDROME

A. Relapsing abdominal pain with bloating, flatulence, and change in bowel habits (diarrhea or constipation) that improves with defecation; classically seen in middleaged females
# Chunk 7082
F. Complications 1.

Shock-due to peripancreatic hemorrhage and fluid sequestration 2.

i. Presents as an abdominal mass with persistently elevated serum amylase ii. Rupture is associated with release ofenzymes into the abdominal cavity and hemorrhage.
# Chunk 7083
C. Presents with right upper quadrant pain, often radiating to right scapula, fever with t WBC count, nausea, vomiting, and t serum alkaline phosphatase (from duct damage)
# Chunk 7084
6.

Bile is released into the small bowel to aid in digestion.

7.

Intestinal flora convert CB to urobilinogen, which is oxidized to stercobilin (makes stool brown) and urobilin (partially reabsorbed into blood and filtered by kidney, making urine yellow).
# Chunk 7085
t CB, ..J.. urine urobilinogen, and t alkaline phosphatase

Table 11.2: Important Features of Hepatitis Viruses
# Chunk 7086
B. Hepatitis virus causes acute hepatitis, which may progress to chronic hepatitis.

C. Acute hepatitis presents as jaundice (mixed CB and UCB) with dark urine (due to CB), fever, malaise, nausea, and elevated liver enzymes (ALT > AST).
# Chunk 7087
Presents with painful hepatomegaly and elevated liver enzymes (AST > ALT); may result in death

D. Cirrhosis is a complication of long-term, chronic alcohol-induced liver damage; occurs in 10-20% of alcoholics
# Chunk 7088
2.

Labs show t ferritin, -1, TIBC, t serum iron, and t % saturation.

3.

Liver biopsy reveals accumulation of brown pigment in hepatocytes (Fig. 11.llA); Prussian blue stain distinguishes iron (blue) from lipofuscin (Fig. 11.llB).
# Chunk 7089
Kayser-Fleisher rings in the cornea

D. Labs show t urinary copper, -1, serum ceruloplasmin, and t copper on liver biopsy.
# Chunk 7090
C. Reabsorption of fluid and BUN ensues (serum BUN:Cr ratio > 15); tubular function remains intact (fractional excretion of sodium [FENa] < 1% and urine osmolality [osm] > 500 mOsm/kg).
# Chunk 7091
B. Decreased outflow results in ,I, GFR, azotemia, and oliguria.

C. During early stage of obstruction, increased tubular pressure "forces" BUN into the blood (serum BUN:Cr ratio > 15); tubular function remains intact (FENa < 1% and urine osm > 500 mOsm/kg).
# Chunk 7092
D. With long-standing obstruction, tubular damage ensues, resulting in decreased reabsorption of BUN (serum BUN:Cr ratio < 15), decreased reabsorption of sodium (FEN a > 2%), and inability to concentrate urine (urine osm < 500 mOsm/kg).
# Chunk 7093
C. Dysfunctional tubular epithelium results in decreased reabsorption of BUN (serum BUN:Cr ratio < 15), decreased reabsorption of sodium (FEN a > 2%), and inability to concentrate urine (urine osm < 500 mOsm/kg).
# Chunk 7094
C. Laboratory findings 1.

Urinalysis-cloudy urine with > 10 WBCs/high power field (hpf) 2.

Dipstick-Positive leukocyte esterase (due to pyuria) and nitrites (bacteria convert nitrates to nitrites) 3.
# Chunk 7095
Culture-greater than 100,000 colony forming units (gold standard)

D. Etiology 1. E coli (80%) 2. Staphylococcus saprophyticus-increased incidence in young, sexually active women (but E coli is still more common in this population) 3. Klebsiella pneumoniae 4. Proteus mirabilis-alkaline urine with ammonia scent
# Chunk 7096
E. Sterile pyuria is the presence of pyuria (> 10 WBCs/hpf and leukocyte esterase) with a negative urine culture.
# Chunk 7097
1.

Other sites of involvement include the uterine ligaments (pelvic pain), pouch of Douglas (pain with defecation), bladder wall (pain with urination), bowel serosa (abdominal pain and adhesions), and fallopian tube mucosa (scarring increases risk for ectopic tubal pregnancy); implants classically appear as yellow-brown 'gun-powder' nodules (Fig. 13.7B).
# Chunk 7098
Malignant tumor that mimics the yolk sac; most common germ cell tumor in children 2.

Serum AFP is often elevated.
# Chunk 7099
F. Spread to lumbar spine or pelvis is common (Fig. 14.llC); results in osteoblastic metastases that present as low back pain and increased serum alkaline phosphatase, PSA, and prostatic acid phosphatase (PAP)
# Chunk 7100
Laboratory findings include t serum PTH, t serum calcium, J,. serum phosphate, t urinary cAMP, and t serum alkaline phosphatase.
# Chunk 7101
4.

t PTH leads to bone resorption (contributing to renal osteodystrophy).

5.

Lab findings include t PTH, J,. serum calcium, t serum phosphate, and t alkaline phosphatase.
# Chunk 7102
5.

6.

C. Diagnosis is based on 24-hour urine cortisol level (increased), late night salivary cortisol level (increased), and low-dose dexamethasone suppression test.
# Chunk 7103
C. Diagnosed by increased metanephrines and catecholamines in serum and urine

D. Treatment is adrenalectomy.
# Chunk 7104
Fig. 17.1 Anencephaly. (Courtesy of humpath. Fig. 17.2 Dandy-Walker malformation, MRI. Fig. 17.3 Bacterial meningitis, gross appearance. com) (Courtesy of Robert Heng, MD) 2. Lateral corticospinal tract degeneration leads to upper motor neuron signsspastic paralysis with hyperreflexia, increased muscle tone, and positive Babinski sign.
# Chunk 7105
2.

Laboratory findings include --1.-serum calcium, --1.-serum phosphate, t PTH, and t alkaline phosphatase.
# Chunk 7106
Bone density is measured using a DEXA scan.

3.

Serum calcium, phosphate, PTH, and alkaline phosphatase are normal; labs help to exclude osteomalacia (which has a similar clinical presentation).
# Chunk 7107
2.

Open-wound bacteremia (adults) seeds epiphysis.

C. Causes include 1. Staphylococcus aureus-most common cause (90% of cases) 2.
# Chunk 7108
D. Biopsy reveals small, round blue cells that resemble lymphocytes (Fig. 18.5).

1.

Can be confused with lymphoma or chronic osteomyelitis 2.
# Chunk 7109
Complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) practices constitute a part of the broad cultural perspective. Therapeutic modalities for CAM include biochemical, lifestyle, biomechanical, and bioenergetic treatments, as well as homeopathy. It is estimated that 20% to 30% of all children and 50% to 75% of adolescents use CAM. Of children with chronic illness, 30% to 70% use CAM therapies, especially for asthma and cystic fibrosis. Only 30% to 60% of children and families tell their physicians about their use of CAM. Some modalities may be effective, whereas others may be ineffective or even dangerous.
# Chunk 7110
Today the activities of medical professionals are subject to explicit public rules of accountability. Governmental and other authorities grant limited autonomy to the professional organizations and their membership. City and municipal government departments of public health establish and implement health standards and regulations. At the state level, boards of registration in medicine establish the criteria for obtaining and revoking medical licenses. The federal government regulates the standards of services, including Medicare, Medicaid, and the Food and Drug Administration. The Department of Health and Human Services regulates physician behavior in conducting research with the goal of protecting human subjects. The Health Care Quality Improvement Act of 1986 authorized the federal government to establish the National Practitioner Data Bank, which contains information about physicians (and other health care practitioners) who have been disciplined by a state licensing board, professional society, hospital, or health plan or named in medical malpractice judgments or settlements. Hospitals are required to review information in this data bank every 2 years as part of clinician recredentialing. There are accrediting agencies for medical schools, such as the Liaison Committee on Medical Education (LCME), and postgraduate training, such as the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME). The ACGME includes committees that review subspecialty training programs.
# Chunk 7111
Growth is assessed by plotting accurate measurements on growth charts and comparing each set of measurements withprevious measurements obtained at health visits. Please seeexamples in Figures 5-1 to 5-4. Complete charts can be found at www.cdc.gov/growthcharts/who_charts.htm for birth to 2 years and www.cdc.gov/growthcharts for 2 to 20 years. The body massindex is defined as body weight in kilograms divided by height inmeters squared; it is used to classify adiposity and is recommendedas a screening tool for children and adolescents to identify thoseoverweight or at risk for being overweight (see Chapter 29).
# Chunk 7112
Figure 5-2 Head circumference and weight-by-length percentiles for boys, birth to 2 years of age. Developed by the National Center for Health Statistics in collaboration with the National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. (From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: WHO Child Growth Standards, Atlanta, Ga, 2009. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts/who_charts.htm 2to20 years: Girls StatureWeight-for-age percentiles
# Chunk 7113
Figure 5-4 Body mass index–for-age percentiles for girls, 2 to  20 years of age. Developed by the National Center for Health Statistics in collaboration with the National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. (From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Atlanta, Ga, 2001. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/ large when there is familial megalocephaly, hydrocephalus, or merely catch-up growth in a neurologically normal premature infant. A child is considered microcephalic if the head circumference is less than the third percentile, even if length and weight measurements also are proportionately low. Serial measurements of head circumference are crucial during infancy, a period of rapid brain development, and should be plotted regularly until the child is 2 years of age. Any suspicion of abnormal growth warrants at least a close follow-up, further evaluation, or both.
# Chunk 7114
There is a growing body of evidence that notes that children who are in high quality early learning environments are more prepared to succeed in school. Every dollar invested in early childhood education may save taxpayers up to 13 dollars in future costs. These children commit fewer crimes and are better prepared to enter the workforce after school. Early Head Start (less than 3 years), Head Start (3 to 4 years), and prekindergarten programs (4 to 5 years) all demonstrate better educational attainment, although the earlier the start, the better the results.
# Chunk 7115
Screening tests can be categorized as general screening teststhat cover all behavioral domains or as targeted screens thatfocus on one area of development. Some may be administered in the office by professionals, and others may be completed athome (or in a waiting room) by parents. Good developmental/behavioral screening instruments have a sensitivity of 70% to80% in detecting suspected problems and a specificity of 70% to80% in detecting normal development. Although 30% of children screened may be over-referred for definitive developmentaltesting, this group also includes children whose skills are belowaverage and who may benefit from testing that may help addressrelative developmental deficits. The 20% to 30% of children whohave disabilities that are not detected by the single administration of a screening instrument are likely to be identified onrepeat screening at subsequent health maintenance visits.
# Chunk 7116
Figure 8-2 Instructions for the Denver II. Numbers are coded to a scoring form (see Fig. 8-1). “Abnormal” is defined as two or more delays (failure of an item passed by 90% at that age) in two or more categories or two or more delays in one category with one other category having one delay and an age line that does not intersect one item that is passed. (From Frankenburg WK: Denver I Training Manual. ©1967, 1970 William K. Frankenburg and Josiah B. Dodds; 1975, 1976, 1978 William K. Frankenburg; 1990, 1992 William K. Frankenburg and Josiah B. Dodds; © 2009 Wilhelmine R. Frankenburg Contact DDM, Inc. 1-800-419-4729 or Info@denverii.com.) worse. To assist physicians in using the Denver II, the scoring of development. Parent-reported screens have good validity sheet also features a table to document confounding behaviors, compared to office-based screening measures. such as interest, fearfulness, or an apparent short attention span. Autism screening is recommended for all children at 18 Repeat screening at subsequent health maintenance visits often to 24 months of age. Although there are several tools, many detects abnormalities that a single screen was unable to detect. pediatricians use the Modified Checklist for Autism in Tod-
# Chunk 7117
Children 3 Years of Age and Older

At various ages, hearing and vision should be screened objectively using standard techniques as specified in the Bright Futures’ recommendations. Asking the family and child about any concerns or consequences of poor hearing or vision accomplishes subjective evaluation. At 3 years of age, children are screened for vision for the first time if they are developmentally able to be tested. Many children at this age do not have the interactive language or interpersonal skills to perform a vision screen; these children should be re-examined at a 3to 6-month interval to ensure that their vision is normal. Because most of these children do not yet identify letters, using a Snellen eye chart with standard shapes is recommended. When a child is able to identify letters, the more accurate letter-based chart should be used. Audiologic testing of sounds with headphones should be begun on the fourth birthday (although Head Start requires that pediatricians attempt the hearing screening at 3 years of age). Any suspected audiologic problem should be evaluated by a careful history and physical examination, with referral for comprehensive testing. Children who have a documented vision problem, failed screening, or parental concern should be referred, preferably to a pediatric ophthalmologist.
# Chunk 7118
Spastic cerebral palsy: the most common form of cerebral palsy, it accounts for 70%–80% of cases. It results from injury to the upper motor neurons of the pyramidal tract. It may occasionally be bilateral. It is characterized by at least two of the following: abnormal movement pattern, increased tone, or pathologic reflexes (e.g., Babinski response, hyperreflexia).
# Chunk 7119
Hours of fussing per day

Figure 11-1 Distribution of total crying time among 80 infants studied from 2 to 12 weeks of age. Data derived from daily crying diaries recorded by mothers. (From Brazelton TB: Crying in infancy. Pediatrics 29:582, 1962.)
# Chunk 7120
Figure 11-2 Algorithm for medi-cal evaluation of infants with acute excessive crying. (From Barr RG, Hopkins B, Green JA, editors: Cry-ing complaints in the emergency department. In Crying as a Sign, a Symptom, and a Signal, London, 2000, MacKeith Press, p. 99.) INFANT WITH ACUTE EXCESSIVE CRYING History and physical examination Urinalysis and urine culture Assess pattern, observe 1–2 hours Crying ceases spontaneously Follow 24 hours in hospital or at home Consider idiopathic crying episode Crying persists Consider: Radiologic studies   Chemistry tests   Pulse oximetry Toxicology tests Lumbar puncture Continue observation, in hospital, until crying stops or diagnosis made History of recurrent episodes consistent with colic Treat for infantile colic Identify cause and treat Ensure appropriate follow-up Urinary tract infection
# Chunk 7121
This behavior is common in children 18 months to 4 years of age. In U.S. studies, 50% to 80% of 2to 3-year-old children have had regular tantrums, and 20% are reported to have daily tantrums. The behavior appears to peak late in the third year of life. Approximately 20% of 4-year-olds are still having regular temper tantrums, and explosive temper occurs in approximately 5% of school-age children. Tantrums occur equally in boys and girls during the preschool period.
# Chunk 7122
Attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a neurobehavioral disorder defined by symptoms of inattention, hyperactivity, and impulsivity. Clinical guidelines emphasize the use ofthe Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Health Disorders,Fifth Edition, criteria (available at http://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/adhd/diagnosis.html) to diagnose ADHD. Diagnosis of childrenup to the age of 16 years requires the presence of at least 6 symptoms of inattention or 6 symptoms of hyperactivity-impulsivityfor at least 6 months in two or more environments. Children 17 years of age and older must exhibit at least 5 symptoms ofinattention or at least 5 symptoms of hyperactivity-impulsivity.Symptoms of inattention include: failing to pay close attentionto details, appearing to not listen when spoken to directly, failing to follow through on instructions or finish assigned work,having difficulty sustaining attention during tasks or play, having difficulty organizing tasks or activities, avoiding or dislikingactivities that require sustained mental effort (e.g., schoolwork),frequently losing things required for tasks and activities, becoming easily distracted, and experiencing frequent forgetfulness indaily activities. Symptoms of hyperactivity include: being fidgetyor restless, leaving a seat when expected to remain seated, running or climbing excessively in inappropriate situations, havingdifficulty in playing quietly, acting as if “driven by a motor,” andtalking excessively. Symptoms of impulsivity include: blurting out answers before a question has been completed, having difficulty awaiting his or her turn, and causing frequent interruptions or intrusions. In addition, several symptoms must havebeen present prior to 12 years of age; evidence of significantimpairment in social, academic, or work settings must occur;and other mental disorders must be excluded.
# Chunk 7123
Enuresis is the most common urologic condition in children.Nocturnal enuresis has a reported prevalence of 15% in 5-yearolds, 7% in 8-year-olds, and 1% in 15-year-olds. The spontaneous remission rate is reported to be 15% per year. The oddsratio of nocturnal enuresis in boys compared with girls is 1.4:1.The prevalence of daytime enuresis is lower than nocturnalenuresis but has a female predominance, 1.5:1 at 7 years of age.Of children with enuresis, 22% wet during the day only, 17%wet during the day and at night, and 61% wet at night only.
# Chunk 7124
Available @ StudentConsult.com

The history focuses on elucidating the pattern of voiding: How often does wetting occur? Does it occur during the day, night, or both? Are there any associated conditions with wetting episodes (e.g., bad dreams, consumption of caffeinated beverages, or exhausting days)? Has the child had a period of dryness in the past? Did a stressful event precede the change in wetting pattern? A review of systems should include a developmental history and detailed information about the neurologic, urinary, and gastrointestinal systems (including patterns of defecation). A history of sleep patterns also is important, including snoring, parasomnias, and timing of nighttime urination. A family history often reveals that one or both parents had enuresis as children. Although enuresis is rarely associated with child abuse, physical and sexual abuse history should be included as part of the psychosocial history. Many families have tried numerous interventions before seeking a physician’s help. Identifying these interventions and how they were carried out aids the understanding of the child’s condition and its role within the family.
# Chunk 7125
The most widely used conditioning therapy for nocturnal enuresis is the enuresis alarm. Enuresis alarms have an initial success rate of 70% with a relapse rate of 10%. The alarm is worn on the wrist or clipped onto the pajama and has a probe that is placed in the underpants or pajamas in front of the urethra. The alarm sounds when the first drop of urine contacts the probe. The child is instructed to get up and finish voiding in the bathroom when the alarm sounds. After 3 to 5 months, 70% of children are dry through the night.
# Chunk 7126
Pharmacotherapy for nighttime enuresis includes desmopressin acetate and, rarely, tricyclic antidepressants. Desmopressin decreases urine production and has proved to be safe in the treatment of enuresis. The oral medication is started at 0.2 mg per dose (one dose at bedtime) and on subsequent nights is increased to 0.4 mg and then to 0.6 mg if needed. This treatment must be considered symptomatic, not curative, and has a relapse rate of 90% when the medication is discontinued. Imipramine, now rarely used for enuresis, reduces the frequency of nighttime wetting. The initial success rate is 50%. Imipramine is effective during treatment only, with a relapse rate of 90% on discontinuation of the medication. The most important contraindication is risk of overdose (associated with fatal cardiac arrhythmia).
# Chunk 7127
Available @ StudentConsult.com

The presenting complaint for constipation with soiling is typically a complaint of uncontrolled defecation in the underwear. Parents may report that the child has diarrhea because of soiling of liquid stool. Soiling may be frequent or continuous. On further questioning, the clinician learns that the child is passing large-caliber bowel movements that may occasionally block the toilet. Children younger than 3 years of age often present with painful defecation, impaction, and withholding. The history should include a complete review of systems for gastrointestinal, endocrine, and neurologic disorders and a developmental and psychosocial history.
# Chunk 7128
Stool impaction can be felt on abdominal examination in about 50% of patients at presentation. Firm packed stool in the rectum is highly predictive of fecal impaction. A rectal examination allows assessment of sphincter tone and size of the rectal vault. Evaluation of anal placement and existence of anal fissures also is helpful in considering etiology and severity. A neurologic examination, including lower extremity reflexes, anal wink, and cremasteric reflexes, may reveal underlying spinal cord abnormalities.
# Chunk 7129
Abdominal x-ray is not required. It can be helpful to showto the family the degree of colonic distention and fecal impaction. In general further studies, such as barium enema andrectal biopsy, are indicated only if an organic cause for theconstipation is indicated by history or physical examination(see Chapter 129). Similarly although endocrinologic conditions such as hypothyroidism can cause chronic constipation,laboratory studies are not indicated without history or physicalexamination suggesting such a disorder.
# Chunk 7130
X-Prep (senna): 15 mL q12h × 3 Abdominal cramping. May not see output until dose 2 or 3

Magnesium citrate: 1 oz/yr of age to maximum of 10 oz per day for Hypermagnesemia 2–3 days or foot support. The child should be praised for all components of cooperation with this program, and punishment andembarrassment should be avoided. As symptoms resolve, toiletsitting is decreased to twice daily and finally to once a day.
# Chunk 7131
When disimpaction is achieved, the child begins the maintenance phase of treatment. This phase promotes regular stool production and prevents reimpaction. It involves attention to diet, medications to promote stool regularity, and behavioral training. Increasing dietary fiber and fluid are recommended. For children with chronic constipation, the recommended daily dose of fiber is calculated as 10 grams plus the child’s age in years (e.g., a 10-year-old should take 20 grams of fiber per day). At least 2 oz of nondairy fluid intake per gram of fiber intake is recommended. Sorbitol-based juices, including prune, pear, and apple juice, increase the water content of bowel movements. Lubricants or osmotic laxatives are used to promote regular soft bowel movements. Maintenance medications, including side effects, are listed in Table 14-3. Polyethylene glycol powder is well tolerated because the taste and texture are palatable. Some children may require the use of a lubricant in addition to an osmotic laxative; children with severe constipation may require a stimulant laxative.
# Chunk 7132
Bisacodyl: 5-mg tablets, 1–3 tablets/dose 1–2 × daily Abdominal cramping, diarrhea, hypokalemia

Bisacodyl: 10-mg suppositories, 0.5–1 suppository, 1–2 × daily Abdominal cramping, diarrhea, hypokalemia *Single agent may suffice to achieve daily, comfortable stools.
# Chunk 7133
†Stimulants should be reserved for short-term use.

Sleep is a universal phenomenon that is critical to child health, development, and daily functioning. This complex behavioral and physiologic process is characterized by a reversible state of partial unresponsiveness and disengagement from the environment. Sleep is broadly categorized by polysomnographic patterns into rapid eye movement (REM) sleep and non-REM (NREM) sleep. REM sleep is characterized by an active, awake-like electroencephalography (EEG) pattern and muscle atonia. NREM sleep is further divided into three stages—from stage 1 (N1), which is the lightest sleep stage and consists of low-amplitude, high-frequency EEG activity, to stage 3 (N3), also known as deep or slow-wave sleep, characterized by low-frequency, high-amplitude delta waves. REM and NREM sleep alternate in cycles throughout the night.
# Chunk 7134
Sleep architecture changes from fetal life through infancy and childhood. Sleep cycles last approximately 60 minutes in newborns and gradually lengthen to 90 minutes in children and adults. Neonates typically begin their sleep cycle in REM sleep, whereas older children and adults begin sleep in NREM sleep. REM sleep in neonates is termed active sleep, and frequent muscle twitches and facial grimaces are common. REM sleep comprises up to 50% of total sleep time in newborns and gradually decreases to 25% to 30% by adolescence. Slow-wave sleep is not seen before 3 to 6 months of age. Beginning from 6 to 12 months and continuing through adulthood, the amount of REM sleep shifts toward the last third of the night, while NREM sleep predominates during the first third of the night.
# Chunk 7135
The timing and duration of sleep also change with age. Sleep patterns become more diurnal and total daily sleep time gradually decreases. Full-term infants sleep on average 16 to 18 hours per day in fragmented intervals throughout the day and night. One-year-old children sleep on average 10 to 11 hours per night and nap for 2 to 3 hours during the day. Naps decrease from two naps to one during the second year of life. In the United States, over 80% of 2-year-olds nap, decreasing to 50% by age 3. By 12 years old, the average child sleeps 9 to 10 hours per day. By adolescence, the average sleep duration has dropped to 7½ hours per day, even though adolescents need an average of 9 hours per day. Adolescents also develop a physiologically based shift toward later sleep-onset and wake times relative to those in middle childhood.
# Chunk 7136
Available @ StudentConsult.com

Sleep disorders may manifest in a variety of ways and often go unrecognized. Some children present with daytime behavioral problems, including inattentiveness, hyperactivity, or irritability rather than overt sleepiness. Screening for sleep disorders is recommended as part of primary care. Clinicians should inquire about bedtime problems, excessive daytime sleepiness, wakenings during the night, regularity and duration of sleep, and presence of snoring and sleep-disordered breathing.
# Chunk 7137
Parasomnias include sleepwalking, sleep terrors, and confusional arousals. These occur during NREM sleep and are more likely during the first third of the night. They are most common in preschool children and are likely to resolve with time and developmental maturation. Sleepwalking is common and often benign but is sometimes associated with agitation or dangerous behaviors. Sleep terrors consist of an abrupt awakening with a loud scream, agitation, and unresponsiveness to caregivers’ attempts to console. Sleep terrors are differentiated
# Chunk 7138
Sleep-onset the night intervention Minimize nocturnal parental response association subtype

Social disruptions Family stressors Night waking Regularize routines Refusal to sleep Family counseling
# Chunk 7139
DDAVP, 1-desamino-8-D-arginine vasopressin; OSA, obstructive sleep apnea.

from nightmares, which occur later in the night and result from arousal in REM or dreaming sleep. Children typically remember their nightmares but have no recollection of sleep terrors. Confusional arousals are similar to sleep terrors, tend to be less dramatic but last longer.
# Chunk 7140
Sleep-onset association disorder in infancy usually can beprevented by parental understanding of infant sleep physiology, developmentally appropriate expectations, and planningthe infant sleep environment to coincide with family needs.It is recommended that infants be put in bed drowsy, but stillawake, after they have had a diaper change, food, and comfort. Some toleration of infant crying is required for the infantto achieve self-regulation of sleep. A safe sleep environmentis essential. It is important for parents to understand that it isnormal for their infant to wake frequently for the first 6 weeksbefore settling into a routine of waking every 3 to 4 hoursfor feeding. Infants typically do not sleep through the nightbefore 6 months of age, and some do not sleep through thenight before 12 to 18 months of age. Even though co-sleeping(mother and infant sleeping together) is common, it is notrecommended because of increased risk of SIDS. Proactivelyconsidering the desirability of bed sharing allows parents tobe in control rather than ceding control to the young child.
# Chunk 7141
RAP is the most common recurrent pain complaint of childhood and accounts for 2% to 4% of pediatric office visits. It is defined by intermittent pain with full recovery between episodes lasting more than 3 months. There is a strong relation between RAP and anxiety in children. Approximately 90% of pediatric patients have no clinical findings to account for their abdominal pain.
# Chunk 7142
Fatigue is a common physical complaint, affecting up to50% of adolescents. CFS specifically refers to a conditioncharacterized by at least 6 months of severe, disabling fatigueassociated with self-reported limitations in concentration and short-term memory, sleep disturbance, and musculoskeletal aches and pains, where alternative medical andpsychiatric explanations have been excluded. CFS is oftenassociated with depression and can be incapacitating. CFS israre in childhood and uncommon in adolescence, with prevalence below 1%. Onset typically follows an acute post-viralillness in approximately two thirds of pediatric cases. Treatment is nonspecific, unless a psychological or general medical cause is uncovered.
# Chunk 7143
Antidepressant medications (fluoxetine, sertraline, citalopram, and clomipramine) may be of benefit in the treatmentof unexplained headaches, fibromyalgia, BDD, somatoformpain, irritable bowel syndrome, and functional gastrointestinal disorders. Tricyclic antidepressants (clomipramineand others) should be avoided in youth with functional abdominal pain (FAP) because they have no proven efficacyin either pain management or mood disorders and are verydangerous in overdose. In chronic fatigue syndrome with comorbid depression and anxiety, a more activating antidepressant, like bupropion, can be useful. Stimulants may also be helpful in CFS.
# Chunk 7144
Panic disorder is the presence of recurrent, unexpected panic attacks. A panic attack is a sudden unexpected onsetof intense fear associated with a feeling of impending doomin the absence of real danger. At least 1 month of persistentworrying about having another panic attack is required tomake the diagnosis (Table 17-2). Panic disorder most oftenbegins in adolescence or early adulthood. Symptom severitywaxes and wanes. Characteristic symptoms include shortnessof breath, palpitations, chest pain, a choking or smothering sensation, and a fear of losing control or going “crazy” (Table 17-3). Symptoms generally last approximately 15 minutes andare generally time-limited. It is common for patients to thinkthat they are about to die of a heart attack. Panic attacks areclassified as (1) spontaneous, (2) bound to situations (occurimmediately on exposure), and (3) predisposed to situations(attacks occur while at school, but not every time). Agoraphobia is a condition describing fear of situations where escapeis difficult or would draw unwanted attention to the person.Agoraphobia is often persistent and can leave people homebound. Panic disorder is seen in 95% of patients with agoraphobia. The condition is more common in females. Considerthe diagnosis of a specific phobia (as opposed to agoraphobia)if the avoidance is limited to one or a few specific situationsor social phobia if avoidance is limited to social situations ingeneral.
# Chunk 7145
Treatment of depression involves psychopharmacy and psychotherapy. First line antidepressant selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) have response rates of 50% to 70% despite high-placebo response rate. Fluoxetine is the only agent approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for treatment of youth. Citalopram, escitalopram, paroxetine, and venlafaxine have positive clinical trial results as well. An antidepressant should be given an adequate trial (6 weeks at therapeutic doses) before switching or discontinuing unless there are serious side effects. For a first episode of depression in children and adolescents, treatment for 6 to 9 months after remission of symptoms is recommended. Patients with recurrent or chronic depression may need to take antidepressants for extended periods (years or even a lifetime). If a patient does not respond to adequate trials of two or more antidepressants, a child psychiatrist should be consulted. The psychiatrist’s evaluation should focus on diagnostic clarity and psychosocial issues that might be preventing a full response. The psychiatrist may use augmentation strategies that may include lithium, thyroid hormone, lamotrigine, or bupropion.
# Chunk 7146
within 5 years of a depressive episode. Features associated withswitching include early-onset depression, psychomotor retardation, psychosis, mood lability, seasonal pattern, family history ofBD or mood disorders, and antidepressant-induced hypomania.A mixed episode requires 1 week of symptoms of both a manicand major depressive episode. Dysphoric mania is another term used to describe periods of mania that are accompanied by “badfeelings.” Hypomania is used to describe a period of more than 4but fewer than 7 days of manic symptoms. It also is used less specifically to describe less intense mania. The prevalence of psychosis in adolescence (often auditory hallucinations) is 16% to60%. Although high, it is still less than its prevalence in adult BD.
# Chunk 7147
Treatment of BD includes decreasing acute symptoms. The FDA has approved lithium, divalproex sodium, carbamazepine, olanzapine, risperidone, quetiapine, ziprasidone, and aripiprazole for adults with BD. Lithium is the oldest proven treatment for mania in adults and has been used effectively in children and adolescents for years. Common side effects of lithium include hypothyroidism, polyuria, and acne. Divalproex is also a first-line agent (preferable for mixed or rapid cycling cases) for adults. It has been used effectively for decades in youth, but it is not FDA-approved. Periodic monitoring of blood levels for select medications (lithium and divalproex sodium) can help ensure both treatment safety and the receipt of therapeutic amounts of the medication. Anti-psychotics (risperidone, olanzapine, quetiapine, aripiprazole, and ziprasidone) have had positive results in youth with BD. It is likely that newer antipsychotics will also be effective in BD.
# Chunk 7148
At least 50% of youth with OCD have at least one other psychiatric illness. Psychiatric comorbidities include tics (20% to 30%), mood and anxiety disorders (up to 75%), disruptive behavior disorders (attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder [ADHD] and oppositional defiant disorder), developmental disorders, body dysmorphic disorder, hypochondriasis, and obsessive-compulsive personality disorder.
# Chunk 7149
Autism, the prototypic pervasive developmental disorder, ischaracterized by lifelong marked impairment in reciprocal socialinteraction, communication, and a restricted range of activitiesand interests (Table 20-2). Approximately 20% of parents reportrelatively normal development until 1 or 2 years of age, followedby a steady or sudden decline. If no clinical manifestations ofthe disorder are present by 3 years of age, Rett syndrome orchildhood disintegrative disorder need to be considered. As aninfant, there is delayed or absent social smiling. The young childmay spend hours in solitary play and be socially withdrawnwith indifference to attempts at communication. Patients withautism often are not able to understand nonverbal communication (eye contact, facial expressions) and do not interact withpeople as significantly different from objects. Speech often isdelayed and, when present, it is frequently dominated by echolalia (sometimes mistaken as a sign of obsessive-compulsivedisorder [OCD]), perseveration (confused with psychosis or
# Chunk 7150
C. Duration: continuous signs of the disturbance persist for at least 6 months with at least 1 month of symptoms (or less if successfully treated) that meet criterion A (i.e., active-phase symptoms) and may include periods of prodromal or residual symptoms. During prodromal or residual periods, signs of disturbance may be manifested by only negative symptoms or symptoms listed in criterion A present in an attenuated form (e.g., odd beliefs, unusual perceptual experiences).
# Chunk 7151
To meet criteria for diagnosing schizophrenia, clinical symptoms should be present for at least 6 months. If symptoms are present for less than 1 month, the condition is called a brief psychotic disorder. If symptoms are present for more than 1 month but less than 6 months, a diagnosis of schizophreniform disorder is made. Psychotic symptoms that do not meet full diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia but are clinically significant are diagnosed as psychotic disorder not otherwise specified.
# Chunk 7152
The history and physical examination findings should guidethe laboratory evaluation. Simple screening tests are recommended to identify common illnesses that cause growth failureand to search for medical problems resulting from malnutrition. Initial tests may include a complete blood count; screening for iron deficiency anemia and lead toxicity; urinalysis,urine culture, and serum electrolytes to assess renal infection ordysfunction; thyroid stimulating hormone; liver function tests;and a protein purified derivative test to screen for tuberculosis.Human immunodeficiency virus testing may also be indicated.For children with diarrhea, abdominal pain, or malodorousstools, a stool sample for culture and ova and parasites may be indicated. A review of the child’s newborn screen may also bewarranted. Observation during feeding and home visitation, ifpossible, is of great diagnostic value in assessing feeding problems, food preferences, mealtime distractions, unusual or disruptive parent-child interactions, and the home environment.
# Chunk 7153
Figure 22-3 A, Metaphyseal fracture of the distal tibia in a 3-month-old infant admitted to the hospital with severe head injury. There also is periosteal new bone formation of that tibia, perhaps from a previous injury. B, Bone scan of same infant. Initial chest x-ray showed a single fracture of the right posterior fourth rib. A radionuclide bone scan performed 2 days later revealed multiple previously unrecognized fractures of the posterior and lateral ribs. C, Follow-up radiographs 2 weeks later showed multiple healing rib fractures. This pattern of fracture is highly specific for child abuse. The mechanism of these injuries is usually violent squeezing of the chest.
# Chunk 7154
Sexual behaviors occur throughout childhood. Early in life, male infants can have erections and female infants are capable of vaginal lubrication. During the preschool period, masturbation occurs in both sexes. Between 2 and 3 years of age, children identify themselves as a boy or a girl, but the understanding that one is always a male or always a female may not develop until 4 to 5 years of age. Stating that one wants to be a member of the opposite sex and pretending to be a member of the opposite sex are not unusual behaviors in this age group. Preschool children need to begin to learn that genitals and sexual behaviors are private; it is common for preschool children to touch their genitals in public, show their genitals to others, or undress in public. It would be highly unusual for a preschool child to imitate intercourse or other adult sexual behaviors. If this behavior is occurring, the child should be evaluated for exposure to inappropriate sexual material and possible sexual abuse (see Chapter 22).
# Chunk 7155
Although the primary physical residence for most children is still with the mother, the court’s bias toward preferring mothers in custody decisions has decreased, and there is more emphasis on including both parents in the child’s life. In the early 1980s, 50% of children had no contact with their fathers 2 or 3 years after a divorce, whereas today only 20% to 25% of children have no contact with their father. Most states now allow joint physical or legal custody. In joint physical custody, the child spends a significant amount of time with each parent, and in joint legal custody, parents share authority in decision making. Although joint custody arrangements may promote the involvement of both parents in the child’s life, they also can be a vehicle through which parents continue to express their anger at each other. When parents have severe difficulty working together, joint custody is an inappropriate arrangement and has been associated with deterioration in the child’s psychological and social adjustment.
# Chunk 7156
Adequacy of milk intake can be assessed by voidingand stooling patterns of the infant. A well-hydrated infantvoids six to eight times a day. Each voiding should soak, notmerely moisten, a diaper, and urine should be colorless. By5 to 7 days, loose yellow stools should be passed at least fourtimes a day. Rate of weight gain provides the most objectiveindicator of adequate milk intake. Total weight loss after birthshould not exceed 7%, and birth weight should be regained by10 days. The mean feeding frequency during the early weekspostpartum is 8 to 12 times per day. An infant may be adequately hydrated while not receiving enough milk to achieveadequate energy and nutrient intake. Telephone follow-up isvaluable during the interim between discharge and the firstdoctor visit to monitor the progress of lactation. A follow-upvisit should be scheduled by 3 to 5 days of age, and again by 2 weeks of age.
# Chunk 7157
After the first week of life in a breastfed infant, prolongedelevated serum bilirubin may be due to presence of anunknown factor in milk that enhances intestinal absorptionof bilirubin. This is termed breast milk jaundice, which is a diagnosis of exclusion and should be made only if an infantis otherwise thriving, with normal growth and no evidenceof hemolysis, infection, biliary atresia, or metabolic disease(Chapter 62). Breast milk jaundice usually lasts no morethan 1 to 2 weeks. The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends vitamin D supplementation (400 IU/day startingsoon after birth), and, when needed, fluoride after 6 monthsfor breastfed infants.
# Chunk 7158
By approximately 6 months, complementary feeding ofsemisolid foods is suggested. By this age, an exclusivelybreastfed infant requires additional sources of severalnutrients, including protein, iron, and zinc. Cereals commonly are mixed with breast milk, formula, or water andlater with fruits. To help identify possible allergies or foodintolerances that may arise when new foods are added tothe diet, single-grain cereals (rice, oatmeal, barley) are recommended as starting cereals. If juice is given, it shouldbe started only after 6 months of age, be given in a cup (asopposed to a bottle), and limited to 4 oz daily of 100% natural unsweetened juice. An infant should never be put tosleep with a bottle or cup filled with milk, formula, or juicebecause this can result in Early Childhood Caries (ECC)(see Chapter 127).
# Chunk 7159
The “plate” image is divided into five sections: Fruits, Grains,Vegetables, Protein, and Dairy (Figure 28-1; Table 28-1). Halfof the “plate” should be vegetables and fruits, and the other halfgrains and proteins, with dairy on the side. The “plate” is simple,organized, and serves as a guide for healthy eating. A weekly recommendation for vegetable intake is also provided (Table 28-1).Other suggestions include the following: switch to fat free orlow-fat (1%) milk; make at least half of the grains whole insteadof refined grains; avoid oversize proportions; compare sodium(salt) in foods such as soup, bread, and frozen meals; choosefoods with lower sodium content; and drink water instead of sugary drinks. After 2 years, it is recommended that the fatintake gradually be reduced to approximately 30% and not lessthan 20% of calories. Replace proteins from red meat with a mixof fish, chicken, nuts, and legumes. Power struggles over eatingare common between parents and toddlers. The parent’s role is to decide the what, when, and where of the meals. The child’s role is to decide if, what, and how much to eat.
# Chunk 7160
Childhood obesity is an epidemic in the United States. Data indicate that approximately 17% of children in the United States ages 2 to 20 are obese (body mass index of ≥95th percentile) and more than 30% of U.S. adults are obese. Many obese children become obese adults, and the risk of remaining obese increases with age and degree of obesity. Obesity runs in families and is rarely related to genetic influences. The largest increases in the prevalence of obesity are seen in the most severely overweight classifications and in certain ethnic groups, such as African-American and Mexican-American children. In 2008, obesity cost the nation $147 billion in medical costs. The associations between obesity and television watching and excessive dietary intake as well as the different rates of obesity observed in urban versus rural areas support the important influence of environment. One important risk factor is maternal obesity during pregnancy. Children born to obese mothers are three to five times more likely to be obese in childhood. Women who gain much more weight than recommended during pregnancy have children who have a higher BMI than normal in adolescence. Also, some small for gestational age (SGA) newborns have higher risks for abnormal postnatal weight gain and diabetes.
# Chunk 7161
Available @ StudentConsult.com

Complications of obesity in children and adolescents can affect virtually every major organ system. High BMI increases the risk of metabolic and cardiovascular diseases and some cancers; it is also the most important modifiable risk factor for glycemia and diabetes. The history and physical examination should screen for many potential complications noted among obese patients (Table 29-1), in addition to specific syndromes associated with obesity (Table 29-2). Medical complications are often related to the degree of obesity and usually decrease in severity or resolve with weight reduction. Obesity is associated with the presence of precursors of coronary heart disease that are already evident in 12and 13-year-old children. Type 2 diabetes is also increasing in children.
# Chunk 7162
BMI (body mass index; BMI = wt (kg) ÷ Ht2 (m)) is a convenient screening tool that correlates fairly strongly with body fatness in children and adults. BMI age-specific and gender-specific percentile curves (for 2to 20-year-olds) allow an assessment of BMI percentile (available online at http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts ). Table 29-3 provides BMI interpretation guidelines. For children younger than 2 years of age, weight-for-length measurements greater than 95th percentile may indicate overweight and warrant further assessment. A BMI for age and gender above the 95th percentile is strongly associated with excessive body fat and is associated with multiple cardiovascular disease risk factors.
# Chunk 7163
4.

Laboratory studies. These are generally reservedfor children who are obese (BMI > 95th percentile),who have evidence of comorbidities, or both. Other studies should be guided by findings in the historyand physical examination. The American Academy ofPediatrics endorses the government guidelines from2011, which recommend that all 9to 11-year-olds bescreened for cholesterol. Other useful laboratory testsmay include hemoglobin A1c, fasting lipid profile,fasting glucose levels, liver function tests, and thyroidfunction tests (if there is a faster increase in weightthan height).
# Chunk 7164
When nutritional rehabilitation has begun, caloric intakecan be increased 10% to 20% per day, monitoring for electrolyte imbalances, poor cardiac function, edema, or feedingintolerance. If any of these occurs, further caloric increasesare not made until the child’s status stabilizes. Caloric intake is increased until appropriate regrowth or catch-up growth isinitiated. Catch-up growth refers to gaining weight at greaterthan 50th percentile for age and may require 150% or more ofthe recommended calories for an age-matched, well-nourishedchild. A general rule of thumb for infants and children up to3 years of age is to provide 100 to 120 kcal/kg based on ideal weight for height. Protein needs also are increased as anabolismbegins and are provided in proportion to the caloric intake.Vitamin and mineral intake in excess of the daily recommendedintake is provided to account for the increased requirements;this is frequently accomplished by giving an age-appropriatedaily multiple vitamin, with other individual micronutrientsupplements as warranted by history, physical examination,or laboratory studies. Iron supplements are not recommendedduring the acute rehabilitation phase, especially for childrenwith kwashiorkor, for whom ferritin levels are often high. Additional iron may pose an oxidative stress; iron supplementationis associated with higher morbidity and mortality.
# Chunk 7165
In determining the needs for niacin, the content of tryptophan in the diet must be considered because tryptophan is converted to niacin. Niacin is stable in foods and withstands heating and prolonged storage. Approximately 70% of the total niacin equivalents in human milk are derived from tryptophan. Pellagra, or niacin deficiency disease, is characterized by weakness, lassitude, dermatitis, photosensitivity, inflammation of mucous membranes, diarrhea, vomiting, dysphagia, and, in severe cases, dementia.
# Chunk 7166
Children 1–8 yr of age: oral 5,000–10,000 U/kg/day for 5 days or until recovery. Children >8 yr of age and adults: oral 500,000 U/day for 3 days; then 50,000 U/day for 14 days; then 10,000–20,000 U/day for 2 mo.
# Chunk 7167
Depression of serum vitamin B12 and the appearance of hypersegmented neutrophils and macrocytosis (indistinguishable from folate deficiency) are early clinical manifestations of deficiency. Vitamin B12 deficiency also causes neurologic manifestations, including depression, peripheral neuropathy, posterior spinal column signs, dementia, and eventual coma. The neurologic signs do not occur in folate deficiency, but administration of folate may mask the hematologic signs of vitamin B12 deficiency, while the neurologic manifestations progress. Patients with vitamin B12 deficiency also have increased urine levels of methylmalonic acid. Most cases of vitamin B12 deficiency in infants and children are not of dietary origin and require treatment throughout life. Maintenance therapy consists of repeated monthly intramuscular injections, although a form of vitamin B12 is administered intranasally.
# Chunk 7168
The clinical manifestations of rickets are most common during the first 2 years of life and may become evident only after several months of a vitamin D–deficient diet. Craniotabes is caused by thinning of the outer table of the skull, which when compressed feels like a Ping-Pong ball to the touch. Enlargement of the costochondral junction (rachitic rosary) and thickening of the wrists and ankles may be palpated. The anterior fontanelle is enlarged, and its closure may be delayed. In advanced rickets, scoliosis and exaggerated lordosis may be present. Bowlegs or knock-knees may be evident in older infants, and greenstick fractures may be observed in long bones.
# Chunk 7169
The diagnosis of rickets is based on a history of poor vitamin D intake and little exposure to direct ultraviolet sunlight.The serum calcium usually is normal but may be low; the serum phosphorus level usually is reduced, and serum alkaline phosphatase activity is elevated. When serum calciumlevels decline to less than 7.5 mg/dL, tetany may occur. Levelsof 24,25-(OH)2-D are undetectable, and serum 1,25-(OH)2-Dlevels are commonly less than 7 ng/mL, although 1,25-(OH)2-D levels also may be normal. The best measure of vitamin D status is the level of 25-(OH)-D. Characteristic radiographicchanges of the distal ulna and radius include widening; concavecupping; and frayed, poorly demarcated ends. The increasedspace seen between the distal ends of the radius and ulna andthe metacarpal bones is the enlarged, nonossified metaphysis.
# Chunk 7170
The diagnosis of iron deficiency anemia is established by the presence of a microcytic hypochromic anemia, low serum ferritin levels, low serum iron levels, reduced transferrin saturation, normal to elevated red blood cell width distribution, and enhanced iron-binding capacity. The mean corpuscular volume and red blood cell indices are reduced, and the reticulocyte count is low. Iron deficiency may be present without anemia. Clinical manifestations are noted in Table 31-4.
# Chunk 7171
Acrodermatitis enteropathica is an autosomal recessive disorder that begins within 2 to 4 weeks after infants have been weaned from breast milk. It is characterized by an acute perioral and perianal dermatitis, alopecia, and failure to thrive. The disease is caused by severe zinc deficiency from a specific defect of intestinal zinc absorption. Plasma zinc levels are markedly reduced, and serum alkaline phosphatase activity is low. Treatment is with high-dose oral zinc supplements. A relatively uncommon condition associated with presentation of severe zinc deficiency is due to a defect in the secretion of zinc from the mammary gland, resulting in abnormally low milk zinc concentrations. Breastfed infants, especially those born prematurely, present with classic signs of zinc deficiency: growth failure, diarrhea, and dermatitis. Because there is no defect in the infant’s ability to absorb zinc, treatment consists of supplementing the infant with zinc for the duration of breastfeeding, which can be successfully continued. Subsequent infants born to the mother will also need zinc supplementation if breastfed. Zinc is relatively nontoxic. Excess intake produces nausea, emesis, abdominal pain, headache, vertigo, and seizures.
# Chunk 7172
Maintenance fluids are composed of a solution of water, glucose, sodium, potassium, and chloride. This solution replaces electrolyte losses from the urine and stool, as well as water losses from the urine, stool, skin, and lungs. The glucose in maintenance fluids provides approximately 20% of the normal caloric needs of the patient. This percentage is enough to prevent the development of starvation ketoacidosis and diminishes the protein degradation that would occur if the patient received no calories.
# Chunk 7173
Daily water losses are measurable (urine and stool) and not measurable (insensible losses from the skin and lungs). Failure to replace these losses leads to a thirsty child and, ultimately, a dehydrated child. Table 32-1 provides a system for calculating 24-hour maintenance water needs based on the patient’s weight. Sodium and potassium are given in maintenance fluids to replace losses from urine and stool.
# Chunk 7174
Output from surgical drains and chest tubes, when significant, should be measured and replaced. Third space lossesmanifest with edema and ascites and are due to a shift of fluid from the intravascular space into the interstitial space. Thirdspace losses cannot be quantitated. Nonetheless, these lossescan be large and lead to intravascular volume depletion, despiteweight gain from edema or ascites. Replacement of third spacefluid is empirical but should be anticipated in patients who areat risk, such as children who have burns or abdominal surgery.Third space losses and chest tube output are isotonic and usually require replacement with an isotonic fluid, such as normal saline or Ringer’s lactate. Adjustments in the amount ofreplacement fluid for third space losses are based on continuing assessment of the patient’s intravascular volume status.
# Chunk 7175
Serum blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine concentrations are useful in assessing a child with dehydration. Volume depletion without renal insufficiency may cause a disproportionate increase in the BUN, with little or no change in the creatinine concentration. This is secondary to increased passive reabsorption of urea in the proximal tubule caused by appropriate renal conservation of sodium and water. This increase in the BUN may be absent or blunted in a child with poor protein intake because urea production depends on protein degradation. Conversely, the BUN may be disproportionately increased in a child with increased urea production, as occurs in a child with a gastrointestinal bleed or a child who is receiving glucocorticoids. A significant elevation of the creatinine concentration suggests renal injury.
# Chunk 7176
Approach to Dehydration

The child with dehydration requires acute intervention to ensure that there is adequate tissue perfusion (see Chapter 40). This resuscitation phase requires rapid restoration of the circulating intravascular volume, which should be done with an isotonic solution, such as normal saline (NS) or Ringer’s lactate. Blood is an appropriate fluid choice for a child with acute blood loss. The child is given a fluid bolus, usually 20 mL/kg of the isotonic solution, over about 20 minutes. A child with severe dehydration may require multiple fluid boluses and may need to receive fluid at a faster rate. The initial resuscitation and rehydration is complete when signs of intravascular volume depletion resolve. The child typically becomes more alert and has a lower heart rate, normal blood pressure, and improved perfusion.
# Chunk 7177
Restore intravascular volume Normal saline: 20 mL/kg over 20 minutes Repeat as needed

Rapid volume repletion: 20 mL/kg normal saline (maximum = 1 L) over 2 hours
# Chunk 7178
To minimize the risk of cerebral edema during correctionof hypernatremic dehydration, the serum sodium concentration should not decrease more than 12 mEq/L every 24 hours(Figure 33-1). The deficits in severe hypernatremic dehydration may need to be corrected over 2 to 4 days. The choice andrate of fluid are not nearly as important as vigilant monitoring of the serum sodium concentration and adjustment of thetherapy based on the result (see Figure 33-1). Nonetheless, theinitial resuscitation-rehydration phase of therapy remains thesame as for other types of dehydration.
# Chunk 7179
Restore intravascular volume: Normal saline: 20 mL/kg over 20 min (repeat until intravascular volume restored) Determine time for correction based on initial sodium concentration [Na] 145–157 mEq/L: 24hr [Na] 158–170 mEq/L: 48hr [Na] 171–183 mEq/L: 72hr [Na] 184–196 mEq/L: 84hr Administer fluid at a constant rate over the time for correction Typical fluid: D5 1/2 normal saline (with 20 mEq/L KCI unless contraindicated) Typical rate: 1.25–1.5 times maintenance Follow serum sodium concentration and adjust fluid based on clinical status and serum sodium concentration Signs of volume depletion Sodium decreases too rapidly Sodium decreases too slowly Replace excessive ongoing losses as they occur Decrease sodium concentration of IV fluid or increase rate of IV fluid Increase sodium concentration of IV fluid or decrease rate of IV fluid Administer normal saline (20 mL/kg)
# Chunk 7180
The dextrose concentration of peripheral PN is typically 10% to 12%, whereas central PN has a concentration of about 20%, although it may be increased to 25% to 30% in patients who are fluid restricted. To avoid hyperglycemia, the dextrose delivery is increased gradually when starting PN. Protein delivery in PN is via amino acids in the dextrose solution. The goal is 0.8 to 2 g protein/kg/24 hr for older children, 1.5 to 3 g/kg/24 hr for full-term and older infants, and 2.5 to 3.5 g/kg/24 hr for preterm infants.
# Chunk 7181
The electrolyte and mineral composition of PN depends onthe age and the underlying illness. The 20% lipid emulsion provides essential fatty acids and calories. The lipid emulsion isstarted at a rate of 0.5 to 1 g/kg/24 hr, gradually increasing therate so that the patient receives adequate calories; this typicallyrequires 2.5 to 3.5 g/kg/24 hr. The lipid emulsion usually provides 30% to 40% of the required calories; it should not exceed60%. The serum triglyceride concentration is monitored as therate of lipid emulsion is increased, with reduction of the lipidemulsion rate if significant hypertriglyceridemia develops.
# Chunk 7182
The excretion of sodium by the kidney is not determined by the plasma osmolality. The patient’s effective plasma volume regulates the amount of sodium in the urine through a variety of regulatory systems, including the renin-angiotensinaldosterone system. In hyponatremia or hypernatremia, the underlying pathophysiology determines the urinary sodium concentration, not the serum sodium concentration.
# Chunk 7183
Available @ StudentConsult.com

Different mechanisms can cause hyponatremia (Fig. 35-1).Pseudohyponatremia is a laboratory artifact that is present when the plasma contains high concentrations of protein or lipid. It does not occur when a direct ion-selective electrode determines the sodium concentration, a technique that is increasingly used in clinical laboratories. In true hyponatremia, the measured osmolality is low, whereas it is normal in pseudohyponatremia. Hyperosmolality, resulting from mannitol infusion or hyperglycemia, causes a low serum sodium concentration because water moves down its osmotic gradient from the intracellular space into the extracellular space, diluting the sodium concentration. For every 100 mg/dL increment of the serum glucose, the serum sodium decreases by 1.6 mEq/L. Because the manifestations of hyponatremia are due to the low plasma osmolality, patients with hyponatremia caused by hyperosmolality do not have symptoms of hyponatremia and do not require correction of hyponatremia.
# Chunk 7184
Classification of true hyponatremia is based on the patient’svolume status (see Fig. 35-1). In hypovolemic hyponatremia, the child has lost sodium from the body. Water balancemay be positive or negative, but there has been a higher netsodium loss than water loss; this is often due to oral or intravenous (IV) water intake, with water retention by the kidneys to compensate for the intravascular volume depletion. Ifthe sodium loss is due to a nonrenal disease (e.g., diarrhea),the urine sodium concentration is very low, as the kidneysattempt to preserve the intravascular volume by conservingsodium. In renal diseases, the urine sodium is inappropriately elevated.
# Chunk 7185
Patients with hyponatremia and no evidence of volumeoverload or volume depletion have euvolemic hyponatremia. These patients typically have an excess of total bodywater and a slight decrease in total body sodium. Some ofthese patients have an increase in weight, implying that theyare volume overloaded. Nevertheless, they usually appearnormal or have only subtle signs of fluid overload. In syndrome of inappropriate ADH (SIADH), there is secretion of ADH that is not inhibited by either low serum osmolality or expanded intravascular volume. Retention of watercauses hyponatremia, and the expansion of the intravascular volume results in an increase in renal sodium excretion. Hyponatremia in hospitalized patients is often due to SIADHsecondary to stress in the presence of hypotonic fluids.
# Chunk 7186
Figure 35-1 Differential diagnosis of hyponatremia. Assessment of hyponatremia is a three-step process: (1) Determine if the osmolality is low; if yes, the patient has true hyponatremia. (2) Evaluate the patient’s volume status. (3) Determine the urine sodium concentration to help narrow the differential diagnosis. ATN, Acute tubular necrosis; SIADH, syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone.
# Chunk 7187
In hypervolemic hyponatremia, there is an excess of total body water and sodium, although the increase in water isgreater than the increase in sodium. In renal failure, there isan inability to excrete sodium or water; the urine sodium maybe low or high, depending on the cause of the renal insufficiency. In other causes of hypervolemic hyponatremia, there is a decrease in the effective blood volume because of either third space fluid loss or poor cardiac output (see Chapter145). In response to the low effective blood volume, ADHcauses renal water retention, and the kidneys also retainsodium, leading to a low urine sodium concentration. Thepatient’s serum sodium concentration decreases when waterintake exceeds sodium intake, and ADH prevents the normalloss of excess water.
# Chunk 7188
Rapid correction of hyponatremia can produce central pontine myelinolysis. Avoiding more than a 12-mEq/L increase in the serum sodium every 24 hours is prudent, especially in chronic hyponatremia. Treatment of hypovolemic hyponatremia requires administration of IV fluids with sodium to provide maintenance requirements and deficit correction, as well as to replace ongoing losses (see Chapter 33). For children with SIADH, water restriction is the cornerstone of therapy. Children with hyponatremia secondary to hypothyroidism or cortisol deficiency need specific hormone replacement. Acute water intoxication rapidly self-corrects with transient restriction of water intake, which is followed by introduction of a normal diet. Treatment of hypervolemic hyponatremia centers on restriction of water and sodium intake, but disease-specific measures, such as dialysis in renal failure, also may be necessary.
# Chunk 7189
Emergency treatment of symptomatic hyponatremia, such as seizures, uses IV hypertonic saline to increase the serum sodium concentration rapidly, which leads to a decrease in brain edema. One milliliter per kilogram of 3% sodium chloride increases the serum sodium by approximately 1 mEq/L.
# Chunk 7190
In situations with combined sodium and water deficits, analysis of the urine differentiates renal and nonrenal etiologies. When the losses are extrarenal, the kidney responds to volume depletion with low urine volume, a concentrated urine, and sodium retention (urine sodium <10 mEq/L). With renal causes, the urine volume is usually high, the urine is not maximally concentrated, and the urine sodium may be inappropriately elevated.
# Chunk 7191
As hypernatremia develops, the brain generates idiogenic osmoles to increase the intracellular osmolality and prevent the loss of brain water. This mechanism is not instantaneous and is most prominent when hypernatremia has developed gradually. If the serum sodium concentration is lowered rapidly, there is movement of water from the serum into the brain cells to equalize the osmolality in the two compartments. The resultant brain swelling manifests as seizures or coma. Because of these dangers, corrected hypernatremia should be treated gradually. The goal is to decrease the serum sodium by less than 12 mEq/L every 24 hours (see Fig. 33-1). The most important component of correcting moderate or severe hypernatremia is frequent monitoring of the serum sodium to allow adjustment of fluid therapy and provide adequate correction that is neither too slow nor too fast.
# Chunk 7192
In the presence of a high aldosterone level, there is urinary loss of potassium, hypokalemia, and a metabolic alkalosis. There also is renal retention of sodium, leading to hypertension. A variety of genetic and acquired disorders can cause high aldosterone levels. Liddle syndrome, an autosomal dominant disorder caused by constitutively active sodium channels, has the same clinical features as hyperaldosteronism, but the serum aldosterone level is low.
# Chunk 7193
The plasma potassium level, the ECG, and the risk of the problem worsening determine the aggressiveness of the therapeutic approach. A high serum potassium level with ECG changes requires more vigorous treatment. An additional source of concern is a patient with increasing plasma potassium despite minimal intake. This situation can occur if there is cellular release of potassium (tumor lysis syndrome), especially in the setting of diminished excretion (renal failure).
# Chunk 7194
During a primary respiratory process, there is metaboliccompensation mediated by the kidneys. The kidneys respondto a respiratory acidosis by increasing hydrogen ion excretion, increasing bicarbonate generation, and raising the serumbicarbonate concentration. The kidneys increase bicarbonateexcretion to compensate for a respiratory alkalosis; the serum bicarbonate concentration decreases. In contrast to a rapidrespiratory compensation, it takes 3 to 4 days for the kidneysto complete appropriate metabolic compensation. However, there is a small and rapid compensatory change in the bicarbonate concentration during a primary respiratory process. Theexpected appropriate metabolic compensation for a respiratorydisorder depends on whether the process is acute or chronic.
# Chunk 7195
The causes of a metabolic alkalosis are divided into two categories based on the urinary chloride (Table 37-3). The alkalosis in patients with a low urinary chloride is maintained by volume depletion. They are called chloride responsive because volume repletion with fluid containing sodium chloride and potassium chloride is necessary to correct the metabolic alkalosis. Emesis, which causes loss of hydrochloride and volume depletion, is the most common cause of a metabolic alkalosis. Diuretic use increases chloride excretion in the urine. Consequently, while a patient is receiving diuretics, the urinary chloride is typically high (>20 mEq/L). After the diuretic effect resolves, the urinary chloride is low (<15 mEq/L), because of appropriate renal chloride retention in response to volume depletion. Categorization of diuretics based on urinary chloride depends on the timing of the measurement. The metabolic alkalosis from diuretics is clearly chloride responsive; it corrects only after adequate volume repletion. This is the rationale for including it among the chloride-responsive causes of a metabolic alkalosis.
# Chunk 7196
trauma patients is focused on identifying evidence of hemorrhage and organ and tissue injury. For an acutely ill child with respiratory distress, a chest x-ray is important. Appropriate cultures should be obtained when sepsis is suspected. Children with historical or physical evidence of inadequate intra-vascular volume should have serum electrolyte levels obtained, including bicarbonate, blood urea nitrogen, and creatinine.
# Chunk 7197
For symptomatic supraventricular tachycardia* or ventricular tachycardia with a pulse, synchronize signal with ECG Choose paddles, position pads, and notify personnel as above Begin with 0.5–1 J/kg If unsuccessful, use 2 J/kg
# Chunk 7198
ECG, Electrocardiogram. *Consider adenosine first (see Table 38-4)

Table 38-4 Drug Doses for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation DRUG INDICATION DOSE Adenosine Supraventricular tachycardia 0.1 mg/kg (maximum 6 mg); second dose: 0.2 mg/kg (maximum 12 mg)
# Chunk 7199
Data from 2010 American Heart Association Guidelines for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and Emergency Cardiovascular Care. Part 14: Pediatric Advanced Life Support, Circulation 122 [suppl 3]:S876-S908, 2010. ABG, Arterial blood gas; ET, endotracheal; IO, intraosseous; IV, intravenous; VF, ventricular fibrillation; VT, ventricular tachycardia.
# Chunk 7200
Early signs of hypoxic respiratory failure include tachypnea and tachycardia in attempt to improve minute ventilation and cardiac output and to maintain delivery of oxygenated blood to the tissues. Further progression of disease may result in dyspnea, nasal flaring, grunting, use of accessory muscles of respiration, and diaphoresis. Late signs of inadequate oxygen delivery include cyanosis and altered mental status (initially confusion and agitation). Signs and symptoms of hypercarbic respiratory failure include attempts to increase minute ventilation (tachypnea and increased depth of breathing) and altered mental status (somnolence).
# Chunk 7201
Cardiogenic shock is caused by an abnormality in myocardialfunction and is expressed as depressed myocardial contractility and cardiac output with poor tissue perfusion. Compensatory mechanisms may contribute to the progression of shock bydepressing cardiac function further. Neurohormonal vasoconstrictor responses increase afterload and add to the work of thefailing ventricle. Tachycardia may impair coronary blood flow,which decreases myocardial oxygen delivery. Increased central blood volume caused by sodium and water retention andby incomplete emptying of the ventricles during systole resultsin elevated left ventricular volume and pressure, which impairsubendocardial blood flow. As compensatory mechanisms areovercome, the failing left ventricle produces increased ventricularend-diastolic volume and pressure, which leads to increased leftatrial pressure, resulting in pulmonary edema. This sequence alsocontributes to right ventricular failure because of increased pulmonary artery pressure and increased right ventricular afterload.
# Chunk 7202
Hypovolemic shock is distinguished from other causes of shock by history and the absence of signs of heart failure or sepsis. In addition to the signs of sympathoadrenal activity (tachycardia, vasoconstriction), clinical manifestations include signs of dehydration (dry mucous membranes, decreased urine output) or blood loss (pallor). Recovery depends on the degree of hypovolemia, the patient’s preexisting status, and rapid diagnosis and treatment. The prognosis is good, with a low mortality in uncomplicated cases.
# Chunk 7203
Patients with distributive shock usually have tachycardia and alterations of peripheral perfusion. In early stages, when cytokine release results in vasodilation, pulses may be bounding, and vital organ function may be maintained (an alert patient, with rapid capillary refill and some urine output in warm shock). As the disease progresses untreated, extremities become cool and mottled with a delayed capillary refill time. At this stage, the patient has hypotension and vasoconstriction. If the etiology of distributive shock is sepsis, the patient often has fever, lethargy, petechiae, or purpura, and he or she may have an identifiable source of infection.
# Chunk 7204
Cardiogenic shock results when the myocardium is unable to supply the cardiac output required to support tissue perfusion and organ function. Because of this self-perpetuating cycle, heart failure progressing to death may be rapid. Patients with cardiogenic shock have tachycardia and tachypnea. The liver is usually enlarged, a gallop is often present, and jugular venous distention may be noted. Because renal blood flow is poor, sodium and water are retained, resulting in oliguria and peripheral edema.
# Chunk 7205
Shock requires immediate resuscitation before obtaining laboratory or diagnostic studies. Following initial stabilization (including glucose administration if hypoglycemia is present), the type of shock dictates the necessary laboratory studies. All patients with shock may benefit from determination of a baseline arterial blood gas and blood lactate level to assess the impairment of tissue oxygenation. Measurement of mixed venous oxygen saturation aids in the assessment of the adequacy of oxygen delivery. In contrast to other forms of shock, patients with sepsis often have high mixed venous saturation values because of impairment of mitochondrial function and inability of tissues to extract oxygen. A complete blood count can potentially assess intravascular blood volume after equilibration following a hemorrhage. Electrolyte measurements in patients with hypovolemic shock may identify abnormalities from losses. Patients presenting in distributive shock require appropriate bacterial and viral cultures to identify a cause of infection. If cardiogenic or obstructive shock is suspected, an echocardiogram assists with the diagnosis and, in the case of tamponade, assists with placement of a pericardial drain to relieve the fluid. Patients with dissociative shock require detection of the causative agent (carbon monoxide, methemoglobin). The management of shock also requires monitoring of arterial blood gases for oxygenation, ventilation (CO2), and acidosis, and frequently assessing the levels of serum electrolytes, calcium, magnesium, phosphorus, and blood urea nitrogen (BUN).
# Chunk 7206
Poor cardiac output accompanied by decreased renal blood flow may cause prerenal azotemia and oliguria/anuria. Severe hypotension may produce acute tubular necrosis and acute renal failure. Prerenal azotemia is corrected when blood volume deficits are replaced or myocardial contractility is improved, but acute tubular necrosis does not improve immediately when shock is corrected. Prerenal azotemia is associated with a serum BUN-to-creatinine ratio of greater than 10:1 and a urine sodium level less than 20 mEq/L; acute tubular necrosis has a BUN-to-creatinine ratio of 10:1 or less and a urine sodium level between 40 and 60 mEq/L (see Chapter 165). Aggressive fluid replacement is often necessary to improve oliguria associated with prerenal azotemia. Because the management of shock requires administering large volumes of fluid, maintaining urine output greatly facilitates patient management.
# Chunk 7207
The kidney is less frequently injured than the liver or spleen, and when injured is often associated with other injuries. A young child’s kidney is more vulnerable to trauma than an adult’s because of a more compliant rib cage and relatively immature abdominal muscle development. The diagnosis of renal injury is based on history and physical examination coupled with urinalysis showing blood and increased protein levels. An ultrasound or CT may also be useful. Low-grade renal injury is usually managed conservatively, with bed rest, catheter drainage, and monitoring for resolution of injury by ultrasound or CT. Surgery may be required for falling hemoglobin levels, refractory shock, or urinary obstruction caused by clots.
# Chunk 7208
Injuries of the pancreas are less common in children than inadults but are seen in bicycle handlebar injuries, motor vehicle crashes, and nonaccidental trauma. The diagnosis is difficult unless there is obvious injury to overlying structures,such as the stomach or duodenum. Diffuse abdominal tenderness, pain, and vomiting may be accompanied by elevations of amylase and lipase but may not occur until severaldays after the injury. Hemodynamic instability secondaryto retroperitoneal hemorrhage may be the presenting sign.Nasogastric suction and parenteral nutrition are indicatedin the management of these patients. Nonoperative management is appropriate for contusions, but surgical interventionmay be required in patients with distal transection. Drainage of pseudocysts, in patients who develop them, may berequired if they are unresponsive to bowel rest and parenteralnutrition.
# Chunk 7209
Injury to the intestine occurs less frequently than injury to solid intra-abdominal organs and varies with the amount of intestinal contents. A full bowel is likely to shear more easily than an empty bowel. Shearing occurs at points of fixation (the ligament of Treitz, the ileocecal valve, and the ascending and descending peritoneal reflections). Pneumoperitoneum should prompt surgical exploration. Serial physical examinations are useful when the clinical picture is uncertain.
# Chunk 7210
Hypoxemia is the result of laryngospasm and aspiration during drowning. Victims may also develop respiratory distress secondary to pulmonary endothelial injury, increased capillary permeability, and destruction of surfactant. Clinical manifestations include tachypnea, tachycardia, increased work of breathing, and decreased breath sounds with or without crackles. The hypoxic-ischemic injury that may occur can lead to depressed myocardial function resulting in tachycardia, impaired perfusion, and potentially cardiovascular collapse. After resuscitation, acute respiratory distress syndrome is common. Altered mental status may be present and requires frequent monitoring of neurologic status. Following submersion in cold water, hypothermia may result in relative bradycardia and hypotension and place the child at risk for cardiac dysrhythmias.
# Chunk 7211
The systemic capillary leak that occurs after a serious burn makes initial fluid and electrolyte support of a burned child crucial. The first priority is to support the circulating blood volume, which requires the administration of intravenous fluids to provide maintenance fluid and electrolyte requirements and to replace ongoing burn-related losses. Formulas exist to help guide fluid management; however, no formula accurately predicts the fluid needs of every burn patient. Children with a significant burn should receive a rapid bolus of 20 mL/kg of lactated Ringer solution. Thereafter, the resuscitation formula for fluid therapy is determined by the percent of body surface burned. Total fluids are 2 to 4 mL/kg/percent burn/24 hours, with half the estimated burn requirement administered during the first 8 hours. (If resuscitation is delayed, half of the fluid replacement should be completed by the end of the eighth hour post-injury.) Fluids should be titrated to achieve adequate perfusion, one marker of which is urine output greater than 1 mL/kg/hour. Controversy exists over whether and when to administer colloid during fluid resuscitation. Colloid therapy may be needed for patients with extensive burns.
# Chunk 7212
More than 2 million human exposures are called in to poison control centers in the United States each year. More than half of all exposures are in children (63% in 2010) with a male predominance in children under 13, but a female predominance in adolescence. Most ingestions in young children are unintentional, with intentional ingestions becoming more common in children 13 and older. Most ingestions occur at home (91%) and are single substance (90%).
# Chunk 7213
KUB, Kidney-ureter-bladder radiograph.

is assessed easily by measuring arterial blood gases, serum electrolyte levels, and urine pH. An osmolar gap, if present, strongly suggests the presence of an unmeasured component, such as methanol or ethylene glycol. These ingestions require thorough assessment and prompt intervention.
# Chunk 7214
Succimer (2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid ([DMSA]) 35–50 mg/kg/day IV × 5 days; continuous infusion or divided q 12 hours 10 mg/kg/dose PO tid × 5 days, then 10 mg/kg/dose PO bid × 14 days
# Chunk 7215
Paul A. Levy and Robert W. Marion

Among infants born in the United States, 2% to 4% have congenital malformations, abnormalities of form or function identifiable at birth. At 1 year of age, the number approaches 7%, because some anomalies may not be identifiable until after the neonatal period. The prevalence of congenital malformations is much greater in inpatient pediatric populations; 30% to 50% of hospitalized children have congenital anomalies or genetic disorders.
# Chunk 7216
Because the trait can be passed through multiple carrier females, it may skip generations teeth, and eyes. In Rett syndrome, caused by mutations in the MECP2 gene, females are normal at birth, but later in the firstyear of life develop microcephaly and developmental regressionand plateau. About 50% of patients develop seizures. Girls oftenare diagnosed with autism and, by 2 years of age, adopt a hand-washing posture that causes them to lose all purposeful hand movements.
# Chunk 7217
Historically, prenatal screening involved maternal serum screening for α-fetoprotein (AFP), a protein secreted during fetal life by the liver, gastrointestinal tract, and yolk sac. Some of the AFP crosses the placenta and enters the maternal circulation. Although maternal serum screening was initially used to detect high levels of AFP associated with neural tube defects (NTDs) and the disruption of fetal integument such as omphalocele or gastroschisis, low levels of AFP were found to be associated with fetal aneuploidy. Approximately 50% of fetuses with autosomal trisomies (Down syndrome, trisomy 18, trisomy 13) will be detected by low maternal serum AFP levels. Three other proteins—unconjugated estriol (uE3),inhibin A, and human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG)—were added to the maternal serum screening to create the quad screen. The addition of these compounds increased the detection rate to about 80%.
# Chunk 7218
The quad screen is done in the second trimester. Duringthe first trimester, measurement of a fluid collection of the posterior neck of the developing fetus is termed nuchaltranslucency. An increase in the nuchal translucency is amarker for chromosomal anomalies as well as genetic and structural abnormalities in the fetus. This association provided a noninvasive first trimester marker. Once standardization of nuchal translucency measurements was done,the detection rate for aneuploidy approached 70%. Testing for abnormalities with two first trimester analytes, freeβ-HCG and PAPP-A (pregnancy associated plasma protein)has enhanced first trimester screening to a detection rate ofalmost 90%.
# Chunk 7219
Although the risk of nondisjunction resulting in aneuploidy rises as a woman gets older (and more so for womenolder than 35 years of age), all pregnant women should beindividually counseled as to their risk for aneuploidy andother fetal abnormalities. A combination of first and second trimester screening together with the women’s age producesan individualized risk factor. It is important to emphasizethat both of these first and second trimester screening testsare just screens to identify increased risk. If this risk is high,or if there is concern about fetal anomalies from family history, ultrasound, or serum screening, then a more definitivetest, either chorionic villus sampling (CVS) or amniocentesis, is offered as further testing. Fetal cells are usually testedfor chromosomal abnormalities by cytogenetic techniques,but the use of chromosomal microarray is becoming more common. Biochemical testing for a known family history ofan inherited metabolic disorder can also be done on the fetal cells, as well as molecular screening for familial mutations forknown disorders
# Chunk 7220
Polycythemia at birth (hematocrit levels >70%) is common and may require treatment. Some infants with DS showa leukemoid reaction, with markedly elevated white blood cellcounts. Although this resembles congenital leukemia, it is a self-limited condition, resolving on its own over the first monthof life. Nonetheless, children with DS also have an increased risk of leukemia, with a 10to 20-fold increase in risk compared with individuals without DS. In children with DS youngerthan 2 year of age, the type is generally acute megakaryoblasticleukemia; in individuals older than 3 years of age, the types ofleukemia are similar to those of other children, with acute lymphoblastic leukemia being the predominant type.
# Chunk 7221
WAGR syndrome (Wilms tumor, aniridia, genitourinary anomalies, and mental retardation) is caused by a deletion of 11p13 and is generally a de novo deletion. Genitourinary abnormalities include cryptorchidism and hypospadias. Patients often have short stature, and half may have microcephaly. Wilms tumor develops in 50% of patients with aniridia, genitourinary abnormalities, and mental retardation (see Chapter 159).
# Chunk 7222
Hyperammonemia in infants Possible inborn error of metabolism Prematurity, respiratory distress early onset Transient hyperammonemia Fatty acid oxidation defects Lactic acidosis Organic aciduria Short, medium and long chain acyl-CoA   dehydrogenase deficiencies Carnitine disorders PDH PC Mitochondrial disorders Propionic acidemia Methylmalonic acidemia Isovaleric acidemia Multiple carboxylase deficiency Glutaric acidemia 3-Methyl-3-OH-glutaryl-CoA   lyase deficiency Normal or reduced Marked elevation Elevated with ASA in plasma, urine Citrullinemia Argininosuccinic   aciduria OTC deficiency Absent, trace No acidosis or ketosis Respiratory alkalosis Low BUN Metabolic acidosis Ketosis Organic aciduria Urea cycle detects Plasma citrulline Plasma arginine Elevated CPS or NAGS deficiency Normal Argininemia Elevated Lysinuric protein intolerance Hyperornithinemia,   hyperammonemia,   homocitrullinuria syndrome Normal, low Elevated urine lysine, ornithine, arginine Elevated plasma ornithine, urine homocitrulline Urine orotic acid PDH – pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency PC – pyruvate carboxylase deficiency ASA – argininosuccinic acid CPS – carbamylphosphate synthase OTC – ornithine transcarbamylase NAGS – N-acetylglutamate synthase
# Chunk 7223
feature of fatty acid oxidation disorders. In some disorders,such as urea cycle disorders, ketone utilization disorders,milder forms of fatty acid oxidation defects, and intermittent maple syrup urine disease, the laboratory abnormalitiesmay be present only during an acute presentation. Therefore,normal testing in the well state does not rule out a metabolicdisorder.
# Chunk 7224
1-phosphate are elevated. Hypoglycemia is frequent, and albuminuria is present. Galactose frequently is present in the urine and can be detected by a positive reaction for reducing substances without a reaction with glucose oxidase on urine strip tests. The absence of urinary reducing substances cannot be relied on to exclude the diagnosis. The diagnosis is made by showing extreme reduction in erythrocyte galactose-1-phosphate uridyltransferase activity. DNA testing for the mutations in galactose-1-phosphate uridyltransferase confirms the diagnosis and may be useful in predicting prognosis. Renal tubular dysfunction may be evidenced by a normal–anion-gap hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis. Treatment by the elimination of dietary galactose results in rapid correction of abnormalities, but infants who are extremely ill before treatment may die before therapy is effective.
# Chunk 7225
Treatment of Hyperammonemia

During episodes of symptomatic hyperammonemia, proteinintake is reduced, and intravenous glucose is given in sufficient quantity to suppress catabolism of endogenous protein. Ammonia can be eliminated by use of the alternate pathway agents, sodium benzoate and sodium phenylacetate, which are excreted in the urine as conjugates of glycine andglutamine. Arginine, which is usually deficient, is supplied.When ammonia levels are very high (>1000 µM) or refractory to therapy, direct removal of ammonia using hemodialysis or hemofiltration, but not peritoneal dialysis, is required.The neurologic status must be followed closely and cerebraledema treated promptly. Despite successful management ofhyperammonemic crises, the long-term outcome for males with severe neonatal OTC deficiency and all children with severe ASL deficiency is guarded. Early liver transplantationhas increased survival, especially in males with severe OTC deficiency.
# Chunk 7226
Restriction of dietary protein intake to daily needs is the mainstay of ongoing treatment for urea cycle defects. Crystalline essential amino acids can be supplied in amounts just sufficient to support protein synthesis. Arginine is an essential amino acid when arginine synthesis via the urea cycle is grossly impaired; thus arginine must be supplied except in the case of arginase deficiency. Citrulline needs to be supplied for some urea cycle disorders. For OTC deficiency and carbamoyl phosphate synthase deficiency, treatment with phenylbutyrate (which is metabolized to phenylacetate) prevents accumulation of ammonia.
# Chunk 7227
Table 56-1 Lysosomal Storage Diseases—cont'd DISEASE (EPONYM) ENZYME DEFICIENCY CLINICAL ONSET DYSOSTOSIS MULTIPLEX CORNEA RETINA LIVER, SPLEEN CNS FINDINGS STORED MATERIAL IN URINE WBC/BONE MARROW COMMENT MULTIPLE FORMS Farber lipogranulo-matosis Acid ceramidase 1st 4 mo No Usually clear Cherry-red spots (12%) May be enlarged Normal or impaired Usually not — Arthritis, nodules Yes MUCOLIPIDOSES (ML) AND CLINICALLY RELATED DISEASE
# Chunk 7228
CNS, Central nervous system; WBC, white blood cell.

foreheads, flat orbital ridges, widely open fontanelles, hepatomegaly, and hypotonia. Other anomalies are common. Failure to thrive, seizures, and nystagmus develop early, and death occurs within the first year. Refsum disease, neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy, and malonic aciduria are examples of peroxisomal single-enzyme disorders. Diagnostic testing includes measurement of very long chain fatty acids in plasma and pipecolic acid in urine. Specific molecular testing, particularly for the disorders involving one in the series of PEX genes, is available for some disorders. Most of these conditions are untreatable; however, bone marrow transplant can be helpful in X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy before the onset of severe symptoms.
# Chunk 7229
Metab 94(4):397–402, 2008

Clarence W. Gowen, Jr.

ASSESSMENT OF THE MOTHER, FETUS, AND NEWBORN

Pregnancies associated with perinatal morbidity or mortality are considered high risk. Identification of high-risk pregnancies is essential to the care of the infant because they may result in intrauterine fetal death, intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR), congenital anomalies, excessive fetal growth, birth asphyxia and trauma, prematurity (birth at <38 weeks) or postmaturity (birth at ≥42 weeks), neonatal disease, or longterm risks of cerebral palsy, mental retardation, and chronic sequelae of neonatal intensive care. Ten percent to 20% of women may be high risk at some time during their pregnancy. Although some obstetric complications are first seen during labor and delivery and cannot be predicted, more than 50% of perinatal mortality and morbidity results from problems identified before delivery as high risk. After a high-risk pregnancy is identified, measures can be instituted to prevent complications, provide intensive fetal surveillance, and initiate appropriate treatments of the mother and fetus.
# Chunk 7230
Fetal hemoglobin (two alpha and two gamma chains) has a higher affinity for oxygen than adult hemoglobin, facilitating oxygen transfer across the placenta. The fetal hemoglobin-oxygen dissociation curve is shifted to the left of the adult curve (Fig. 58-1); at the same Pao2 level, fetal hemoglobin is more saturated than adult hemoglobin. Because fetal hemoglobin functions on the steep, lower end of the oxygen saturation curve (Pao2, 20 to 30 mm Hg), however, oxygen unloading to the tissue is not deficient. In contrast, at the higher oxygen concentrations present in the placenta, oxygen loading is enhanced. In the last trimester, fetal hemoglobin production begins to decrease as adult hemoglobin production begins to increase, becoming the only hemoglobin available to the infant by 3 to 6 months of life. At this time, the fetal hemoglobin dissociation curve has shifted to the adult position.
# Chunk 7231
A portion of well-oxygenated umbilical venous blood returning to the heart from the placenta perfuses the liver. The remainder bypasses the liver through a shunt (the ductus venosus) andenters the inferior vena cava. This oxygenated blood in the venacava constitutes 65% to 70% of venous return to the right atrium.The crista dividens in the right atrium directs one third of thisblood across the patent foramen ovale to the left atrium, whereit subsequently is pumped to the coronary, cerebral, and upperextremity circulations by the left ventricle. Venous return from the upper body combines with the remaining two thirds of thevena caval blood in the right atrium and is directed to the rightventricle. This mixture of venous low-oxygenated blood fromthe upper and lower body enters the pulmonary artery. Only 8%to 10% of it is pumped to the pulmonary circuit; the remaining80% to 92% of the right ventricular output bypasses the lungsthrough a patent ductus arteriosus and enters the descendingaorta. The amount of blood flowing to the pulmonary systemis low because vasoconstriction produced by medial muscle
# Chunk 7232
Leucine Maple syrup urine disease, transient elevation Clinical evaluation including urine for ketones, acid-base status, amino acid studies, immediate neonatal ICU care if urine ketones positive
# Chunk 7233
Examination of the lungs includes observations of the rate, depth, and nature of intercostal or sternal retractions. Breath sounds should be equal on both sides of the chest, and rales should not be heard after the first 1 to 2 hours of life. Diminished or absent breath sounds on one side suggest pneumothorax, collapsed lung, pleural effusion, or diaphragmatic hernia. Shift of the cardiac impulse away from a tension pneumothorax and diaphragmatic hernia and toward the collapsed lung is a helpful physical finding for differentiating these disorders. Subcutaneous emphysema of the neck or chest also suggests a pneumothorax or pneumomediastinum, whereas bowel sounds auscultated in the chest in the presence of a scaphoid abdomen suggest a diaphragmatic hernia.
# Chunk 7234
Abdominal masses usually represent hydronephrosis or dysplastic-multicystic kidney disease. Less often, masses indicate ovarian cysts, intestinal duplication, neuroblastoma, or mesoblastic nephroma. Masses should be evaluated immediately with ultrasound. Abdominal distention may be caused by intestinal obstructions, such as ileal atresia, meconium ileus, midgut volvulus, imperforate anus, or Hirschsprung disease. Meconium stool is passed normally within 48 hours of birth in 99% of term infants. The anus should be patent. An imperforate anus is not always visible; the first temperature taken with a rectal thermometer should be taken carefully. The abdominal wall musculature may be absent, as in prune-belly syndrome, or weak, resulting in diastasis recti. Umbilical hernias are common in African American infants. The umbilical cord should be inspected to determine the presence of two arteries and one vein and the absence of an urachus or a herniation of abdominal contents, as occurs with an omphalocele. The latter is associated with extraintestinal problems, such as genetic trisomies and hypoglycemia (Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome). Bleeding from the cord suggests a coagulation disorder, and a chronic discharge may be a granuloma of the umbilical stump or, less frequently, a draining omphalomesenteric cyst or urachus. Erythema around the umbilicus is omphalitis and may cause portal vein thrombophlebitis and subsequent extrahepatic portal hypertension. The herniation of bowel through the abdominal wall 2 to 3 cm lateral to the umbilicus is a gastroschisis.
# Chunk 7235
(primitive) reflexes, deep tendon reflexes, spontaneousmotor activity, and cranial nerves (involving retinal examination, extraocular muscle movement, masseter power asin sucking, facial motility, hearing, and tongue function).The Moro reflex, present at birth and gone in 3 to 6 months,is one of the primary newborn reflexes. It is elicited by sudden, slight dropping of the supported head from a slightlyraised supine position, which should elicit opening of thehands and extension and abduction of the arms, followed by upper extremity flexion and a cry. The palmar grasp ispresent by 28 weeks’ gestation and gone by 4 months of age.Deep tendon reflexes may be brisk in a normal newborn; 5to 10 beats of ankle clonus are normal. The Babinski signis extensor (upgoing). The sensory examination can be evaluated by withdrawal of an extremity, grimace, and cryin response to painful stimuli. The rooting reflex (turningof the head toward light tactile stimulation of the perioralarea) is present by 32 weeks’ gestation.
# Chunk 7236
Various congenital anomalies can interfere with vital organ function after birth (see Table 58-9). Some malformations, such as choanal atresia and other lesions obstructing the airway, may complicate ventilation. Intrathoracic lesions, such as cysts or diaphragmatic hernia, interfere with respiration. Other malformations that obstruct the gastrointestinal system at the level of the esophagus, duodenum, ileum, or colon may lead to aspiration pneumonia, intestinal perforation, or gangrene. Gastroschisis and omphalocele are associated with exposed bowel on the abdominal wall. Omphalocele is often associated with other malformations, whereas intestinal necrosis is more common in gastroschisis.
# Chunk 7237
The etiology of hypocalcemia varies with the time of onset and the associated illnesses of the child. Early neonatal hypocalcemia occurs in the first 3 days of life and is often asymptomatic. Transient hypoparathyroidism and a reduced parathyroid response to the usual postnatal decline of serum calcium levels may be responsible for hypocalcemia in premature infants and infants of diabetic mothers. Congenital absences of the parathyroid gland with DiGeorge syndrome is a cause of hypocalcemia. Hypomagnesemia (<1.5 mg/dL) may be seen simultaneously with hypocalcemia, especially in infants of diabetic mothers. Treatment with calcium alone does not relieve symptoms or increase serum calcium levels until hypomagnesemia is also treated. Sodium bicarbonate therapy, phosphate release from cell necrosis, transient hypoparathyroidism, and hypercalcitoninemia may be responsible for early neonatal hypocalcemia associated with asphyxia. Early-onset hypocalcemia associated with asphyxia often occurs with seizures as a result of hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy
# Chunk 7238
Neonatal hypocalcemia may be prevented in high-risk neonates by administration of IV or oral calcium supplementation at a rate of 25 to 75 mg/kg/24 hr. Early asymptomatic hypocalcemia of preterm infants and infants of diabetic mothers often resolves spontaneously. Symptomatic hypocalcemia should be treated with 2 to 4 mL/kg of 10% calcium gluconate given intravenously and slowly over 10 to 15 minutes, followed by a continuous infusion of 75 mg/kg/24 hr of elemental calcium. If hypomagnesemia is associated with hypocalcemia, 50% magnesium sulfate, 0.1 mL/kg, should be given by intramuscular injection and repeated every 8 to 12 hours.
# Chunk 7239
Respiratory distress syndrome Small left colon syndrome Transient tachypnea of the newborn

Graves disease is associated with thyroid-stimulating antibodies. The prevalence of clinical hyperthyroidism in pregnancy has been reported to be about 0.1% to 0.4%; it is thesecond most common endocrine disorder during pregnancy(after diabetes). Neonatal hyperthyroidism is due to thetransplacental passage of thyroid-stimulating antibodies;hyperthyroidism can appear rapidly within the first 12 to 48hours. Symptoms may include intrauterine growth restriction, prematurity, goiter (may cause tracheal obstruction),exophthalmos, stare, craniosynostosis (usually coronal),flushing, heart failure, tachycardia, arrhythmias, hypertension, hypoglycemia, thrombocytopenia, and hepatosplenomegaly. Treatment includes propylthiouracil, iodine drops, and propranolol. Autoimmune induced neonatal hyperthyroidism usually resolves in 2 to 4 months.
# Chunk 7240
Treatment of hypoxemia requires knowledge of normal values. In term infants, the arterial Pao2 level is 55 to 60 mm Hg at 30 minutes of life, 75 mm Hg at 4 hours, and 90 mm Hg at 24 hours. Preterm infants have lower values. Paco2 levels should be 35 to 40 mm Hg, and the pH should be 7.35 to 7.40. It is imperative that arterial blood gas analysis be performed in all infants with significant respiratory distress, whether or not cyanosis is perceived. Cyanosis becomes evident when there is 5 g of unsaturated hemoglobin; anemia may interfere with the perception of cyanosis. Jaundice also may interfere with the appearance of cyanosis. Capillary blood gas determinations are useful in determining blood pH and the Paco2 level but may result in falsely low blood Pao2 readings. Serial blood gas levels may be monitored by an indwelling arterial catheter placed in a peripheral artery or through the umbilical artery. Another method for monitoring blood gas levels is to combine capillary blood gas techniques with noninvasive methods used
# Chunk 7241
Infants at greatest risk for RDS are premature and have an immature L/S ratio. The incidence of RDS increases with decreasing gestational age. RDS develops in 30% to 60% of infants between 28 and 32 weeks of gestation. Other risk factors include delivery of a previous preterm infant with RDS, maternal diabetes, hypothermia, fetal distress, asphyxia, male sex, white race, being the second-born of twins, and delivery by cesarean section without labor.
# Chunk 7242
The Pao2 level should be maintained between 60 and 70 mm Hg (oxygen saturation 90%), and the pH should be maintained above 7.25. An increased concentration of warm and humidified inspired oxygen administered by a nasal cannula or an oxygen hood may be all that is needed for larger premature infants. If hypoxemia (Pao2 <50 mm Hg) is present, and the needed inspired oxygen concentration is 70% to 100%, nasal continuous positive airway pressure should be added at
# Chunk 7243
Treatment of a PDA during RDS involves initial fluid restriction and diuretic administration. If there is no improvement after 24 to 48 hours, a prostaglandin synthetase inhibitor, indomethacin or ibuprofen, is administered. Contraindications to using indomethacin include thrombocytopenia (platelets <50,000/mm3), bleeding, serum creatinine measuring more than 1.8 mg/dL, and oliguria. Because 20% to 30% of infants do not respond initially to indomethacin and because the PDA reopens in 10% to 20% of infants, a repeat course of indomethacin or surgical ligation is required in some patients.
# Chunk 7244
Embryonic hematopoiesis begins by the 20th day of gestationand is evidenced as blood islands in the yolk sac. In midgestation, erythropoiesis occurs in the liver and spleen; the bonemarrow becomes the predominant site in the last trimester.Hemoglobin concentration increases from 8 to 10 g/dL at12 weeks to 16.5 to 18 g/dL at 40 weeks. Fetal red blood cell(RBC) production is responsive to erythropoietin; the concentration of this hormone increases with fetal hypoxia and anemia.
# Chunk 7245
After birth, hemoglobin levels increase transiently at 6 to 12 hours, then decline to 11 to 12 g/dL at 3 to 6 months. A premature infant (<32 weeks’ gestational age) has a lower hemoglobin concentration and a more rapid postnatal decline of hemoglobin level, which achieves a nadir 1 to 2 months after birth. Fetal and neonatal RBCs have a shorter life span (70 to 90 days) and a higher mean corpuscular volume (110 to 120 fL) than adult cells. In the fetus, hemoglobin synthesis in the last two trimesters of pregnancy produces fetal hemoglobin (hemoglobin F), composed of two alpha chains and two gamma chains. Immediately before term, the infant begins to synthesize beta-hemoglobin chains; the term infant should have some adult hemoglobin (two alpha chains and two beta chains). Fetal hemoglobin represents 60% to 90% of hemoglobin at term birth. The levels decline to adult levels of less than 5% by 4 months of age.
# Chunk 7246
Anemia caused by decreased production of RBCs appears at birth with pallor, a low reticulocyte count, and absence of erythroid precursors in the bone marrow. Potential causes of neonatal decreased RBC production include bone marrow failure syndromes (congenital RBC aplasia [Diamond-Blackfan anemia]), infection (congenital viral infections [parvovirus, rubella], acquired bacterial or viral sepsis), nutritional deficiencies (protein, iron, folate, vitamin B12), and congenital leukemia.
# Chunk 7247
Normal or elevated reticulocyte count (> 5−10%) Coombs positive Isoimmunization: Rh (D antigen) ABO, C, c, E, G Duffy, Kell Other minor group Drug-induced (PCN) Coombs negative Blood smear Specific RBC dysmorphology Obtain incubated osmotic fragility test Elliptocytes Poikilocytes Stomatocytes Fragmentation Basophilic stippling Spherocytes Blood cultures, obtain maternal serum for IgG, IgM, HIV, RPR/FTA RBC morphology Hypochromic microcytic RBCs Normal RBC morphology Chronic fetomaternal bleed Chronic twin-to-twin transfusion Alpha-thalassemia trait Gamma-thalassemia Consider acute blood loss due to obstetric complications, external or internal hemorrhage, DIC/sepsis, bleeding dyscrasias Low reticulocyte count (0−2%) Obtain bone marrow Obtain hemoglobin electrophoresis, KB stain Obtain specific enzyme assay Diamond-Blackfan Aase syndrome Congenital dyserythropoietic anemias Refractory sideroblastic anemia Transcobalamin II deficiency Orotic aciduria No jaundiceJaundice Other Galactosemia Alpha or gamma chain hemoglobinopathies Osteopetrosis Congenital leukemia Hemophagocytic histiocytosis syndromes Drugs (valproic acid, oxidizing agents) Congenital Enzymatic Defects G6PD Pyruvate kinase Hexokinase Glucose phosphate isomerase Others Infections Bacterial infections Parvovirus B19 TORCH infections Syphilis Malaria HIV
# Chunk 7248
Figure 62-1 Differential diagnosis of neonatal anemia. The physician obtains information from the family, maternal and labor and delivery histories, and laboratory tests, including hemoglobin, reticulocyte count, blood type, direct Coombs test, peripheral smear, red blood cell (RBC) indices, and bilirubin concentration. DIC, Disseminated intravascular coagulation; FTA, fluorescent treponemal antibody test; G6PD, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; KB, Kleihauer-Betke; PCN, penicillin; RPR, rapid plasma reagin tests; TORCH, toxoplasmosis, other, rubella, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex. (From Ohls RK: Anemia in the neonate. In Christensen RD, editor: Hematologic problems of the neonate, Philadelphia, 2000, Saunders, p 162.) maternal circulation, such as first-trimester abortion, ectopic pregnancy, amniocentesis, manual extraction of the placenta, version (external or internal) procedures, or normal pregnancy.
# Chunk 7249
Three zones of optical densities with decreasing slopes toward term gestation have been developed to predict the severity of the illness. The high optical density zone 3 is associated with severe hemolysis. Fetuses in the lower zones probably are not affected. If a fetus’s optical density measurement for bilirubin falls into zone 3, and the fetus has pulmonary maturity as determined by the lecithin-to-sphingomyelin ratio, the infant should be delivered and treated in the neonatal intensive care unit. If the lungs are immature and the fetus is between 22 and 33 weeks of gestational age, an ultrasound-guided intrauterine transfusion with O-negative blood into the umbilical vein is indicated and may have to be repeated until pulmonary maturity is reached or fetal distress is detected. Indications for fetal intravascular transfusion in sensitized fetuses between 22 and 32 weeks of gestational age include a fetal hematocrit of less than 25% to 30%, fetal hydrops, and fetal distress too early in gestation for delivery. Intravascular intrauterine transfusion corrects fetal anemia, improves the outcome of severe hydrops, and reduces the need for postnatal exchange transfusion, but is associated with neonatal anemia as a result of continued hemolysis plus suppressed erythropoiesis.
# Chunk 7250
Prevention of sensitization of the mother carrying an Rh-positive fetus is possible by treating the mother during gestation (>28 weeks’ gestational age) and within 72 hours after birth with anti-Rh-positive immune globulin (RhoGAM). The dose of RhoGAM (300 μg) is based on the ability of this amount of anti-Rh-positive antibody to bind all the possible fetal Rh-positive erythrocytes entering the maternal circulation during the fetal-to-maternal transfusion at birth (approximately 30 mL). RhoGAM may bind Rh-positive fetal erythrocytes or interfere with maternal anti-Rh-positive antibody production by another, unknown mechanism. RhoGAM is effective only in preventing sensitization to the D antigen. Other blood group antigens that can cause immune hydrops and erythroblastosis include Rh C, E, Kell, and Duffy. Anti-Kell alloimmunity produces lower amniotic bilirubin levels and a lower reticulocyte count because, in addition to hemolysis, it inhibits erythropoiesis.
# Chunk 7251
Available @ StudentConsult.com

Anemia from blood loss at birth is manifested by two patterns of presentation, depending on the rapidity of blood loss.Acute blood loss after fetal-maternal hemorrhage, rupture ofthe umbilical cord, placenta previa, or internal hemorrhage (hepatic or splenic hematoma; retroperitoneal) is characterized by pallor, diminished peripheral pulses, and shock. Thereare no signs of extramedullary hematopoiesis and no hepatosplenomegaly. The hemoglobin content and serum iron levelsinitially are normal, but the hemoglobin levels decline duringthe subsequent 24 hours. Newborns with chronic blood loss caused by chronic fetal-maternal hemorrhage or a twin-totwin transfusion present with marked pallor, heart failure,hepatosplenomegaly with or without hydrops, a low hemoglobin level at birth, a hypochromic microcytic blood smear, anddecreased serum iron stores. Fetal-maternal bleeding occurs in50% to 75% of all pregnancies, with fetal blood losses rangingfrom 1 to 50 mL; most blood losses are 1 mL or less, 1 in 400 are approximately 30 mL, and 1 in 2000 are approximately 100 mL.
# Chunk 7252
Because hydrops, anemia, or jaundice are secondary to many diverse causes of hemolysis, a laboratory evaluation is needed in all patients with suspected hemolysis. A complete blood count, blood smear, reticulocyte count, blood type, and direct Coombs test (to determine the presence of antibody-coated RBCs) should be performed in the initial evaluation of all infants with hemolysis. Reduced hemoglobin levels, reticulocytosis, and a blood smear characterized by polychromasia and anisocytosis are expected with isoimmune hemolysis. Spherocytes commonly are observed in ABO incompatibility. The determination of the blood type and the Coombs test identify the responsible antigen and antibody in immunologically mediated hemolysis.
# Chunk 7253
In the absence of a positive Coombs test and blood group differences between the mother and fetus, other causes of non-immune hemolysis must be considered. RBC enzyme assays, hemoglobin electrophoresis, or RBC membrane tests (osmotic fragility, spectrin assay) should be performed. Internal hemorrhage also may be associated with anemia, reticulocytosis, and jaundice when the hemorrhage reabsorbs; ultrasound evaluation of the brain, liver, spleen, or adrenal gland may be indicated when nonimmune hemolysis is suspected. Shock is more typical in patients with internal hemorrhage, whereas in hemolytic diseases, heart failure may be seen with severe anemia. Evaluation of a possible fetal-maternal hemorrhage should include the Kleihauer-Betke test.
# Chunk 7254
Bilirubin is produced by the catabolism of hemoglobin in the reticuloendothelial system. The tetrapyrrole ring of heme is cleaved by heme oxygenase to form equivalent quantities of biliverdin and carbon monoxide. Because no other biologic source of carbon monoxide exists, the excretion of this gas is stoichiometrically identical to the production of bilirubin. Biliverdin is converted to bilirubin by biliverdin reductase. One gram of hemoglobin produces 35 mg of bilirubin. Sources of bilirubin other than circulating hemoglobin represent 20% of bilirubin production; these sources include inefficient (shunt) hemoglobin production and lysis of precursor cells in bone marrow. Compared with adults, newborns have a twofold to threefold greater rate of bilirubin production (6 to 10 mg/kg/24 hr versus 3 mg/kg/24 hr). This increased production is caused, in part, by an increased RBC mass (higher hematocrit) and a shortened erythrocyte life span of 70 to 90 dayscompared with the 120-day erythrocyte life span in adults.
# Chunk 7255
CMV, Cytomegalovirus; TORCH, toxoplasmosis, other, rubella, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex.

Direct-reacting hyperbilirubinemia (defined as a direct bilirubin level >2 mg/dL or >20% of the total bilirubin) is never physiologic and should always be evaluated thoroughly according to the diagnostic categories (Table 62-2). Direct-reacting bilirubin (composed mostly of conjugated bilirubin) is not neurotoxic to the infant but signifies a serious underlying disorder involving cholestasis or hepatocellular injury. The diagnostic evaluation of patients with direct-reacting hyperbilirubinemia involves the determination of the levels of liver enzymes (aspartate aminotransferase, alkaline phosphatase, alanine aminotransferase, and γ-glutamyl transpeptidase), bacterial and viral cultures, metabolic screening tests, hepatic ultrasound, sweat chloride test, and occasionally liver biopsy. In addition, the presence of dark urine and gray-white (acholic) stools with jaundice after the second week of life strongly suggests biliary atresia. The treatment of disorders manifested by direct bilirubinemia is specific for the diseases that are listed in Table 62-2. These diseases do not respond to phototherapy or exchange transfusion.
# Chunk 7256
Physical evidence of jaundice is observed in infants when bilirubin levels reach 5 to 10 mg/dL (versus 2 to 3 mg/dL in adults). When jaundice is observed, the laboratory evaluation for hyperbilirubinemia should include a total bilirubin measurement to determine the magnitude of hyperbilirubinemia. Bilirubin levels greater than 5 mg/dL on the first day of life or greater than 13 mg/dL thereafter in term infants should be evaluated further with measurement of indirect and direct bilirubin levels, blood typing, Coombs test, complete blood count, blood smear, and reticulocyte count. These tests must be performed before treatment of hyperbilirubinemia with phototherapy or exchange transfusion. In the absence of hemolysis or evidence for either the common or the rare causes of nonhemolytic indirect hyperbilirubinemia, the diagnosis is either physiologic or breast milk jaundice. Jaundice present after 2 weeks of age is pathologic and suggests a direct-reacting hyperbilirubinemia.
# Chunk 7257
Polycythemic patients appear plethoric or ruddy and may develop acrocyanosis. Symptoms are a result of the increased RBC mass and of vascular compromise. Seizures, lethargy, and irritability reflect abnormalities of microcirculation of the brain, whereas hyperbilirubinemia may reflect the poor hepatic circulation or the increased amount of hemoglobin that is being broken down into bilirubin. Additional problems include respiratory distress and primary pulmonary hypertension of the newborn (PPHN) that result in part from elevated pulmonary vascular resistance. The chest radiograph often reveals cardiomegaly, increased vascular markings, pleural effusions, and interstitial edema. Other problems are NEC, hypoglycemia, thrombocytopenia, priapism, testicular infarction, hemiplegic stroke, and feeding intolerance. Many of these complications also are related to the primary condition associated with polycythemia (small for gestational age infants are at risk for hypoglycemia and PPHN after periods of hypoxia in utero).
# Chunk 7258
The management of NEC includes the discontinuation of enteral feedings, gastrointestinal decompression with nasogastric suction, fluid and electrolyte replacement, total parenteralnutrition, and systemic broad-spectrum antibiotics. When thediagnosis of NEC is made, consultation with a pediatric surgeon should be obtained. Even with aggressive and appropriate medical management, 25% to 50% of infants with NEC requiresurgical intervention. The decision to perform surgery is obvious when the presence of a pneumoperitoneum is observed onabdominal radiograph. Other, not so obvious indications forsurgical intervention include rapid clinical deterioration despitemedical therapy, rapid onset and progression of pneumatosis,abdominal mass, and intestinal obstruction. The surgical procedure of choice is laparotomy with removal of the franklynecrotic and nonviable bowel. Many extremely small infants aremanaged initially with primary peritoneal drainage followed bysurgical intervention as needed later, when the infant is stableand a laparotomy can be performed safely. The long-term outcome includes intestinal strictures requiring further surgicalintervention, short bowel syndrome with poor absorption ofenteral fluids and nutrients, associated cholestasis with resultant cirrhosis and liver failure from prolonged parenteral nutrition,and neurodevelopmental delay from prolonged hospitalization.
# Chunk 7259
Seizures noted in the delivery room often are caused by blinking, fluctuation of vital signs, and staring. Continudirect injection of local anesthetic agents into the fetal scalp ous bedside electroencephalographic monitoring can help (associated with transient bradycardia and fixed dilated identify subtle seizures. pupils), severe anoxia, or congenital brain malformation. The diagnostic evaluation of infants with seizures should Seizures after the first 5 days of life may be the result of involve an immediate determination of capillary blood gluinfection or drug withdrawal. Seizures associated with leth-cose levels with a Chemstrip. In addition, blood concenargy, acidosis, and a family history of infant deaths may trations of sodium, calcium, glucose, and bilirubin should be the result of an inborn error of metabolism. An infant be determined. When infection is suspected, cerebrospinal whose parent has a history of a neonatal seizure also is at fluid and blood specimens should be obtained for culture. risk for benign familial seizures. In an infant who appears After the seizure has stopped, a careful examination should well, a sudden onset on day 1 to 3 of life of seizures that are be done to identify signs of increased intracranial pressure, of short duration and that do not recur may be the result congenital malformations, and systemic illness. If signs of elevated intracranial pressure are absent, a lumbar puncture should be performed. If the diagnosis is not apparentat this point, further evaluation should involve magneticresonance imaging, computed tomography, or cerebralultrasound and tests to determine the presence of an inbornerror of metabolism. Determinations of inborn errors of metabolism are especially important in infants with unexplained lethargy, coma, acidosis, ketonuria, or respiratoryalkalosis.
# Chunk 7260
L. monocytogenes. Gram-negative organisms, such as Klebsiella, Salmonella, and Serratia marcescens, are more common in less developed countries, and coagulase-negative staphylococcus needs to be considered in very low birth weight infants. Male infants seem to be more susceptible to neonatal infection than female infants. Severely premature infants are at even greater risk secondary to less effective defense mechanisms and deficient transfer of antibodies from the mother to the fetus (which occurs mostly after 32 weeks’ gestation). Neonates in the neonatal intensive care unit live in a hostile environment, with exposure to endotracheal tubes, central arterial and venous catheters, and blood draws, all predisposing to bacteremia and meningitis. Genetic factors have been implicated in the ability of bacteria to cross the blood-brain barrier. This penetration has been noted for group B streptococci, E. coli, Listeria, Citrobacter, and Streptococcus pneumoniae.
# Chunk 7261
Early-onset sepsis (birth to 7 days) is an overwhelming multiorgan system disease frequently manifested as respiratory failure, shock, meningitis (in 30% of cases), disseminated intravascular coagulation, acute tubular necrosis, and symmetrical peripheral gangrene. Early manifestations—grunting, poor feeding, pallor, apnea, lethargy, hypothermia, or an abnormal cry—may be nonspecific. Profound neutropenia, hypoxia, and hypotension may be refractory to treatment with broad-spectrum antibiotics, mechanical ventilation, and vasopressors such as dopamine and dobutamine. In the initial stages of early-onset septicemia in a preterm infant, it is often difficult to differentiate sepsis from respiratory distress syndrome. Because of this difficulty, premature infants with respiratory distress syndrome receive broad-spectrum antibiotics.
# Chunk 7262
The clinical manifestations of sepsis are difficult to separate from the manifestations of meningitis in the neonate. Infants with early-onset sepsis should be evaluated by blood and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cultures, CSF Gram stain, cell count, and protein and glucose levels. Normal newborns generally have an elevated CSF protein content (100 to 150 mg/dL) and may have 25 to 30/mm3 white blood cells (mean, 9/mm3), which are 75% lymphocytes in the absence of infection. Some infants with neonatal meningitis caused by group B streptococci do not have an elevated CSF leukocyte count but are seen to have microorganisms in the CSF on Gram stain. In addition to culture, other methods of identifying the pathogenic bacteria are the determination of bacterial antigen in samples of blood, urine, or CSF. In cases of neonatal meningitis, the ratio of CSF glucose to blood glucose usually is less than 50%. The polymerase chain reaction test primarily is used to identify viral infections. Serial complete blood counts should be performed to identify neutropenia, an increased number of immature neutrophils (bands), and thrombocytopenia. C-reactive protein levels are often elevated in neonatal patients with bacterial sepsis.
# Chunk 7263
Vertical transmission of Toxoplasma gondii occurs by trans-placental transfer of the organism from the mother to the fetus after an acute maternal infection. Fetal infection rarely can occur after reactivation of disease in an immunocompromised pregnant mother. Transmission from an acutely infected mother to her fetus occurs in about 30% to 40% of cases, but the rate varies directly with gestational age. Transmission rates and the timing of fetal infection correlate directly with placental blood flow; the risk of infection increases throughout gestation to 90% or greater near term, and the time interval between maternal and fetal infection decreases.
# Chunk 7264
Treatment: pyrimethamine plus sulfadiazine

Rubella virus Unimmunized seronegative mother; fever ± rash Detectable defects with infection: by 8 wk, 85% 9–12 wk, 50% 13–20 wk, 16% Virus may be present in infant’s throat for 1 yr Prevention: vaccine Intrauterine growth restriction, microcephaly, microphthalmia, cataracts, glaucoma, “salt and pepper” chorioretinitis, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, PDA, deafness, blueberry muffin rash, anemia, thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, metaphyseal lucencies, B-cell and T-cell deficiency Infant may be asymptomatic at birth
# Chunk 7265
Detection of rubella-specific IgM antibody usually indicates recent infection. Measurement of rubella-specific IgG over several months can be confirmatory. Rubella virus can be isolated from blood, urine, CSF, and throat swab specimens. Infants with congenital rubella are chronically and persistently infected and tend to shed live virus in urine, stools, and respiratory secretions for 1 year. Infants should be isolated while in the hospital and kept away from susceptible pregnant women when sent home.
# Chunk 7266
More than 90% of infants who have congenital CMV infection exhibit no clinical evidence of disease at birth. Approximately 10% of infected infants are small for gestational age and have symptoms at birth. Findings include microcephaly, thrombocytopenia, hepatosplenomegaly, hepatitis, intracranial calcifications, chorioretinitis, and hearing abnormalities. Some infants can present with a blueberry muffin appearance as the result of dermal erythropoiesis. Skull films may reveal periventricular calcifications. An additional 10% of infected infants may not present until later in infancy or early childhood, when they are found to have sensorineural hearing loss and developmental delays. Mortality is 10% to 15% in symptomatic newborns. Perinatal CMV infection acquired during birth or from mother’s milk is not associated with newborn illness or CNS sequelae.
# Chunk 7267
Congenital CMV infection is diagnosed by detection of virus in the urine or saliva. Detection is often accomplished by traditional virus culture methods but can take several weeks to obtain a result. Rapid culture methods using centrifugation to enhance infectivity and monoclonal antibody to detect early antigens in infected tissue culture can give results in 24 hours. PCR also can be used to detect small amounts of CMV DNA in the urine. Detection of CMV within the first 3 weeks after birth is considered proof of congenital CMV infection.
# Chunk 7268
HSV-2 accounts for 90% of primary genital herpes. About 70% to 85% of neonatal herpes simplex infections are caused by HSV-2. Most commonly, neonatal infections are acquired from the mother shortly before (ascending infection) or during passage through the birth canal at delivery. The incidence of neonatal HSV is estimated to range from 1 in 3000 to 1 in 20,000 live births. Infants with HSV infections are more likely to be born prematurely (40% of affected infants are <36 weeks’ gestation). The risk of infection at delivery in an infant born vaginally to a mother with primary genital herpes is about 33% to 50%. The risk to an infant born to a mother with a reactivated infection is less than 5%. More than 75% of infants who acquire HSV infection are born to mothers who have no previous history or clinical findings consistent with HSV infection.
# Chunk 7269
For the diagnosis of neonatal HSV infection, specimens for culture should be obtained from any skin vesicle, nasopharynx, eyes, urine, blood, CSF, stool, or rectum. Positive cultures obtained from these sites more than 48 hours after birth indicate intrapartum exposure. PCR is a sensitive method for detecting HSV DNA in blood, urine, and CSF.
# Chunk 7270
Parenteral penicillin is the preferred drug of choice for treatment of syphilis. Penicillin G for 10 to 14 days is the only documented effective therapy for infants who have congenital syphilis and neurosyphilis. Infants should have repeat nontreponemal antibody titers repeated at 3, 6, and 12 months to document falling titers. Infants with neurosyphilis must be followed carefully with serologic testing and CSF determinations every 6 months for at least 3 years or until CSF findings are normal.
# Chunk 7271
Recommended treatment for isolated infection, such as ophthalmia neonatorum, is one intramuscular dose of ceftriaxone. Infants with gonococcal ophthalmia should receive eye irrigations with saline solution at frequent intervals before discharge. Topical antibiotic therapy alone is inadequate and is unnecessary when recommended systemic antimicrobial therapy is given. Infants with gonococcal ophthalmia should be hospitalized and evaluated for disseminated disease (sepsis, arthritis, meningitis). Disseminated disease should be treated with antimicrobial therapy (ceftriaxone or cefotaxime) for 7 days. Cefotaxime can be used in infants with hyperbilirubinemia. If documented, infants with meningitis should be treated for 10 to 14 days.
# Chunk 7272
Available @ StudentConsult.com

C. trachomatis is the most common reportable sexually transmitted infection, with a high rate of infection among sexually active adolescents and young adults. Prevalence of the organism in pregnant women ranges from 6% to 12% and can be 40% in adolescents. Chlamydia can be transmitted from the genital tract of an infected mother to her newborn. Acquisition occurs in about 50% of infants born vaginally to infected mothers. Transmission also has been reported in some infants delivered by cesarean section with intact membranes. In infected infants, the risk of conjunctivitis is 25% to 50%, and the risk of pneumonia is 5% to 20%. The nasopharynx is the most commonly infected anatomic site.
# Chunk 7273
Neonatal chlamydial conjunctivitis is characterized by ocular congestion, edema, and discharge developing 5 to 14 days to several weeks after birth and lasting for 1 to 2 weeks. Clinical manifestations vary from mild conjunctivitis to intense inflammation and swelling. Both eyes are almost always involved; however, one eye may appear to be more swollen and infected than the other. The cornea is rarely involved, and preauricular adenopathy is rare.
# Chunk 7274
Diagnosis can be made by scraping the conjunctiva and culturing the material. Giemsa staining of the conjunctival scrapings revealing the presence of blue-stained intracytoplasmic inclusions within the epithelial cells is diagnostic. PCR is also available. Infants with conjunctivitis and pneumonia are treated with oral erythromycin for 14 days. Topical treatment of conjunctivitis is ineffective and unnecessary. The recommended topical prophylaxis with silver nitrate, erythromycin, or tetracycline for all newborns for the prevention of gonococcal ophthalmia does not prevent neonatal chlamydial conjunctivitis.
# Chunk 7275
Breast budding under the areola (thelarche) and fine straight pubic hair over the mons pubis (adrenarche or pubarche)are early pubertal changes occurring around 11 years of age (range, 8 to 13 years) (see Chapter 174). These changes mark the sexual maturity rating, or Tanner stage, II of pubertal development (Figs. 67-3 and 67-4). Completion of the Tanner stages should take 4 to 5 years. The peak growth spurt usually
# Chunk 7276
A full pelvic examination is rarely required in a virginal adolescent girl. A bimanual rectal-abdominal examination (all midline internal genitalia are immediately anterior to the rectal wall) is as efficient as a vaginal-abdominal examination. In some girls, anesthesia may be required for a full pelvic examination.
# Chunk 7277
Menarche typically occurs approximately 2 years afterthelarche, at the average age of 12.6 years. The initial menses are anovulatory and tend to be irregular in duration. Thisirregularity may persist for 2 to 5 years, so reassurance may berequired. During this phase, estrogen feedback on the hypothalamus decreases gonadotropin secretion, which reducesestrogen production and induces an estrogen withdrawalbleed that can be prolonged and heavy. Anovulatory bleedingis usually painless. As the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadalaxis matures, the cycle becomes ovulatory, and menses aresecondary to progesterone withdrawal. When ovulation isestablished, the average cycle length is 21 to 45 days. Someadolescents ovulate with their first cycle, as indicated by pregnancy before menarche.
# Chunk 7278
Available @ StudentConsult.com

Breast enlargement in boys is usually a benign, self-limited condition. Gynecomastia is noted in 50% to 60% of boys during early adolescence. It is often idiopathic, but it may be noted in various conditions (Table 68-3). Typical findings include the appearance of a 1to 3-cm, round, freely mobile, often tender, and firm mass immediately beneath the areola during sexual maturity rating stage III. Large, hard, or fixed enlargements and masses associated with any nipple discharge warrant further investigation. Reassurance is usually the only treatment required. If the condition worsens and is associated with psychological morbidity, it may be treated with bromocriptine. Surgical treatment with reduction mammoplasty can be helpful with massive hypertrophy.
# Chunk 7279
In a patient with amenorrhea (primary or secondary), normalsecondary sex characteristics, negative pregnancy test, normalprolactin and thyroid-stimulating hormone, and no evidence of outflow tract obstruction, the total effect of estrogen on theuterus (rather than a single point estradiol level) can be determined by a progesterone withdrawal test. To achieve this, 5 to 10 mg of medroxyprogesterone (depending on body weight)is given daily for 5 days. If the uterus is normal and primed byestrogen (an intact hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis) withno outflow tract obstruction, there should be bleeding within 1week after the last progesterone tablet. If there is bleeding, theamenorrhea is secondary to anovulation. If there is no progesterone withdrawal bleeding, the uterus has been insufficientlyexposed to estrogen, and there is systemic estrogen deficiency.
# Chunk 7280
Available @ StudentConsult.com

Normal, ovulatory menses can occur 21 to 45 days apart, measuring from the first day of menstruation to the first day ofthe next menstruation. The average duration of flow is 3 to 7days, with more than 7 days considered prolonged. More than8 well-soaked pads or 12 tampons per day may be consideredexcessive, although classically blood loss is difficult to estimate. Table 69-1 defines menstrual disorders according to thenew International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetricsnomenclature and classification of abnormal uterine bleeding (AUB). If the menstrual problem is unclear and nonacute,observation and charting on a menstrual calendar are warranted. Excessively heavy, prolonged, or infrequent bleedingin the first year after menarche is often physiologic but shouldbe investigated, especially if there is associated iron deficiencyanemia.
# Chunk 7281
Duration Prolonged menstrual >8 days of flow bleeding Shortened menstrual <2 days of flow bleeding

The differential diagnosis of AUB is found in Table 69-2. Anovulation is the most common etiology of AUB in adolescents. Without progesterone from the corpus luteum, unopposed estrogen causes endometrial hyperplasia and irregularendometrial shedding, which can be prolonged and heavy,sometimes life threatening. Progesterone induces a secretoryendometrium. When progesterone is withdrawn, the endometrium sheds in a synchronous fashion with myometrial and vascular contractions (causing dysmenorrhea but limiting bloodloss). For the first 1 to 2 years post-menarche, the majority ofadolescent cycles are anovulatory. After 1 year of regular cycles,irregular bleeding usually indicates an organic abnormality.
# Chunk 7282
Available @ StudentConsult.com

The most common gynecologic complaint of young women is painful menstruation, or dysmenorrhea, during the first 1 to 3 days of bleeding. Primary dysmenorrhea is defined as pelvic pain during menstruation in the absence of pelvic pathology and is a feature of ovulation, typically developing 1 to 3 years after menarche, with an increasing incidence to the age of 24, as ovulatory cycles are established. The release of prostaglandins and leukotrienes from the degenerating endometrium after progesterone levels decline causes increased uterine tone and increased frequency and dysrhythmia of uterine contractions. This creates excessive uterine pressures and ischemia that heightens the sensitivity of pain fibers to bradykinin and other physical stimuli.
# Chunk 7283
Combined oral contraceptives (COCs) contain a synthetic estrogen and progesterone that suppress gonadotropin secretion and ovarian follicle development and ovulation. COCs also produce an atrophic endometrium (inhospitable for blastocyst implantation) and thicken cervical mucus to inhibit sperm penetration. COCs are 99% effective if taken regularly and have numerous noncontraceptive benefits (decreased acne, less dysmenorrhea, and lighter menstrual flow). After a history and physical examination, COCs can be started on the first day of the next menstrual period or as a Quick Start. The Quick Start method refers to starting on any day of the cycle, usually on the day of the visit to the health care provider, as long as pregnancy has been ruled out. Contraindications and relative contraindications to COCs are listed in Tables 69-4 and 69-5. Blood pressure measurement to rule out preexisting hypertension should be obtained before prescribing a COC. Initially the adolescent should be seen monthly to reinforce good contraceptive use and safer sex. Unless adolescents show the ability to take a pill daily, contraception with COCs should be avoided. When COCs are prescribed, 28-day packets are recommended because they encourage a daily routine. One novel contraceptive regimen has packaged 84 active tablets to be taken sequentially followed by a 7-day hormone-free interval and the next package. Any COC can be used in such a fashion to induce long intervals between withdrawal bleeding.
# Chunk 7284
Contraindications and side effects are the same as those in COCs.

Intramuscular injection of 150 mg of medroxyprogesteroneacetate (Depo-Provera) every 12 to 14 weeks is an effectiveform of birth control. Progestogen-only contraception is associated with menstrual irregularities (70% amenorrhea and 30%frequent menstrual bleeding). Medroxyprogesterone acetate(Depo-SubQ Provera 104) is designed for subcutaneous useevery 12 to 14 weeks and may be self-administered with minimal training. An implant containing the progestin etonogestrel(Implanon) is now available on the U.S. market. This single rodimplant is inserted subcutaneously and is effective for 3 years.These forms of contraception are userand coital-independentand reduce failure secondary to missed doses.
# Chunk 7285
Intrauterine devices (IUDs) are inserted into the uterus wherethey release either copper (ParaGard) that is spermicidal or levonorgestrel (Mirena) that prevents implantation by inducingan atrophic endometrium. The copper IUD, which lasts up to10 years, may increase the amount and duration of bleeding aswell as dysmenorrhea. The levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system is highly effective for up to 5 years while decreasing bleeding and dysmenorrhea, even causing amenorrhea.Although a small increased risk of pelvic inflammatory diseaseexists for 21 days after insertion of an IUD, the risk followingthat transient period lowers and continues at a low rate for theremainder of time that the young woman uses an IUD. Adolescents should be screened for STIs at the time of IUD insertion, with treatment provided as soon as possible for positive resultsor if there is a concern of compliance at the time of IUD insertion. Insertion in nulliparous women can be aided by the use of a paracervical block. IUDs require no active involvement bythe user, thus eliminating error and can be considered as oneof the first line options for adolescent contraception. Condomsshould be encouraged to reduce the risk of STI.
# Chunk 7286
Emergency postcoital contraception should be discussed at every visit. A prescription should be given in advance of need when no over-the-counter access is available. Emergency contraception reduces the risk of pregnancy after unprotected intercourse if used within 5 days, although efficacy is greatest when used as early as possible. Other indications and contraindications to emergency postcoital contraception are listed in Table 69-7. There are two forms of emergency contraception: (a) Plan B (0.75 mg of levonorgestrel), one pill taken twice, 12 hours apart, or two tablets given once and (b) using a CHC pill the equivalent of 50 mg of ethinyl estradiol and 250 μg of norgestrel, each repeated in 12 hours. Plan B is also associated with significantly less nausea and vomiting than the CHC regimen. Mifepristone is also an effective postcoital contraceptive; however it is not approved for this use in the United States. A copper IUD can be inserted 7 days from the act of unprotected intercourse and has an efficacy of greater than 99%. This method is not generally recommended for adolescents.
# Chunk 7287
The frequency, severity, and location of the infection and thepathogens involved can help differentiate infections in a normalhost from infections in an immunodeficient patient (see Table 72-3). Although otitis media and sinopulmonary infectionsare common in children, recurrent infections, invasive or deepseeded infections, infections that require multiple rounds of oralantibiotics or need intravenous antibiotics, or infections with opportunistic infections suggest a primary immunodeficiency.Recurrent sinopulmonary infections with encapsulated bacteria suggest a defect in antibody-mediated immunity becausethese pathogens evade phagocytosis. Failure to thrive, diarrhea,malabsorption, and infections with opportunistic infections (i.e., fungi, Candida sp, Pneumocystis jiroveci [carinii]) suggest T-cell immunodeficiency. Recurrent viral infections can resultfrom T-cell or NK-cell deficiency. Deep-seated abscesses and infections with Staphylococcus aureus, Serratia marcescens, and Aspergillus suggest a disorder of neutrophil function, such as chronic granulomatous disease (CGD). Delayed separation ofthe umbilical cord, especially in the presence of omphalitis andlater onset periodontal disease, in addition to poorly formedabscesses, indicates leukocyte adhesion deficiency.
# Chunk 7288
Recurrent dermatologic infections with bacteria such as Staphylococcus, Pseudomonas, and Escherichia coli, and fungi such as Aspergillus
# Chunk 7289
A diagnosis of primary immunodeficiency disease cannot be established without the use of laboratory tests based on the clinical history (Table 72-5). A complete blood count with differential should always be obtained to identify patients with neutropenia or lymphopenia (SCID) as well as the presence of eosinophils (allergic disease) and anemia (chronic disease). Serum immunoglobulin levels are essential to the workup of suspected primary immunodeficiency. Antibody levels vary with age, with normal adult values of IgG at full-term birth from transplacental transfer of maternal IgG, a physiologic nadir occurring between 3 and 6 months of age, and a gradual increase to adult values over several years. IgA and IgM are low at birth, and levels increase gradually over several years, with IgA taking the longest to reach normal adult values. Low albumin levels with low immunoglobulin levels suggest low synthetic rates for all proteins or increased loss of proteins, as in protein-losing enteropathy. High immunoglobulin levels suggest intact B-cell immunity and can be found in diseases with recurrent infections, such as CGD, immotile cilia syndrome, cystic fibrosis, HIV infection, and autoimmune diseases. Elevated IgE levels can be found in a number of immune deficiencies such as hyper-IgE syndrome, as well as in atopic dermatitis.
# Chunk 7290
Patients with agammaglobulinemia usually present during the first 6 to 12 months of life as maternally derived antibodies wane, although patients can present years later. These patients develop infections with Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae type b, Staphylococcus aureus, and Pseudomonas, organisms for which antibody is an important opsonin. They also have increased susceptibility to giardiasis and enteroviral infections, leading to chronic enteroviral meningoencephalitis and vaccine-associated poliomyelitis (if immunized with oral live, attenuated poliovirus vaccine).
# Chunk 7291
Selective IgA deficiency is defined as serum IgA levels less nadir at 6 months of age is accentuated, with immunoglobuthan 10 mg/dL with normal levels of other immunoglobulins. lin levels less than 200 mg/dL. Immunoglobulin levels remain The diagnosis cannot be confirmed until the patient is at least 4 diminished throughout the first year of life and usually increase years of age when IgA levels should reach adult levels. Selective to normal, age-appropriate levels, generally by 2 to 4 years of IgA deficiency occurs in approximately 1 in 500 individuals. age. The incidence of sinopulmonary infection is increased in Most patients with selective IgA deficiency are asymptomatic. some patients. The diagnosis is supported by normal levels of In others it is associated with recurrent sinopulmonary infec-both B and T cells and by normal antibody responses to protions, IgG2 subclass deficiency, specific antibody deficiency, tein antigens such as diphtheria and tetanus toxoids. The tranfood allergy, autoimmune disease, or celiac disease. IgA defi-sient nature of this disorder cannot be confirmed, however, ciency occurs in families, suggesting autosomal inheritance. until immunoglobulin levels return to normal ranges.
# Chunk 7292
Deficiencies in adenosine deaminase (ADA) and purine nucleoside phosphorylase, two enzymes involved in the purine salvage pathway, also result in SCID. Accumulation of nucleoside substrates or their metabolic products in the plasma and urine is toxic to lymphocytes, including T, B, and NK cells. Most patients exhibit severe infection early in life, although the diagnosis in patients with partial enzyme function may not be established until after 5 years of age or, occasionally, in adulthood. Patients with late-onset diagnosis are generally lymphopenic; they may have B cells and normal total immunoglobulin levels but little functional antibody (Nezelof syndrome). All patients with ADA or purine nucleoside phosphorylase deficiency SCID have lymphopenia and loss of immune function over time.
# Chunk 7293
Use immunoglobulin for severe antibody deficiency states (400–600 mg/kg q3–4 wk IV).

Hyper-IgE syndrome is characterized by markedly elevated serum IgE levels, a rash that resembles atopic dermatitis, eosinophilia, and staphylococcal abscesses of the skin, lungs, joints, and viscera (see Table 73-3). Infections with H. influenzae type b, Candida, and Aspergillus also may occur. These patients have coarse facial features, develop osteopenia, and may have giant pneumatoceles in the lungs after staphylococcal pneumonias. Although serum IgG, IgA, and IgM levels are normal, humoral immune responses to specific antigens are reduced, as is cell-mediated immunity. Long-term treatment with antistaphylococcal medications is indicated, and immunoglobulin replacement therapy may be helpful. Most patients have an autosomal dominant form of inheritance, whereas some patients appear to have an autosomal recessive inheritance. Defects in the TYK2 and DOCK8 genes have been found in a patient with an autosomal recessive hyper-IgE syndrome, and defects in the STAT3 (signal transducer and activator of transcription 3) gene were identified in autosomal dominant hyper-IgE syndrome.
# Chunk 7294
Infections should be treated with appropriate antibiotics;prophylactic antibiotics can be used to prevent recurrent infections, provide a better quality of life, and decrease possible consequences. Antibiotic prophylaxis can be provided withonce-daily administration of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole or amoxicillin at one half of the total daily therapeutic dose.Patients with severe T-cell deficiencies should receive prophylaxis against Pneumocystis and fungi until treated withstem cell transplantation. Patients with milder forms of antibody deficiency diseases may benefit from vaccination with protein-conjugate vaccines to H. influenzae type b and S. pneumoniae, assaying post vaccination titers at least 1 monthlater. These vaccines are administered routinely to youngchildren; older children and adults with antibody deficiencysyndrome should also receive them to generate protectiveantibody levels.
# Chunk 7295
Immunoglobulin replacement therapy, intravenously orsubcutaneously, is a lifesaving therapy for patients with severeantibody deficiency diseases and SCIDs. It provides passiveimmunity against common microorganisms and reduces thefrequency and severity of infection in most patients. Immunoglobulin replacement therapy is usually administered ata total monthly dose of 400 to 600 mg/kg of body weightadministered intravenously every 3 to 4 weeks, or subcutaneously by infusion pump every 1 to 2 weeks. IVIG therapyshould be monitored by regularly measuring trough immunoglobulin levels and, more important, the patient’s clinical course. Patients who continue to have recurrent infections, especially in the last week before the administration of IVIG,may require higher doses or more frequent administration.A combination of prophylactic antibiotics and immunoglobulin replacement therapy may be indicated in patientswho continue to have recurrent infections. Complications of IVIG therapy include transfusion reactions with chills,fever, and myalgias. They usually can be prevented in subsequent infusions by pretreatment with an antihistamine, anantipyretic, and by a slower rate of infusion. Headache fromaseptic meningitis can develop after IVIG therapy, usually inthe first 24 hours. It most often responds to treatment with ibuprofen. Allergic reactions to IVIG can occur in patientswith absent IgA. Allergic reactions are rare and should not occur in patients who have detectable serum IgA levels or patients who cannot synthesize any antibodies. Subcutaneous administration of immunoglobulin has fewer adverseeffects but may be complicated by local reactions at the site(s)of infusion. The risk of transmission of infectious agents,despite preparation from large numbers of selected donors,is extremely low.
# Chunk 7296
Table 74-1 Phagocytic Disorders NAME DEFECT COMMENT Chronic granulomatous disease Bactericidal X-linked recessive (66%), autosomal recessive (33%); eczema, osteomyelitis, granulomas, abscesses caused by Staphylococcus aureus, Burkholderia cepacia, Aspergillus fumigatus
# Chunk 7297
Autoimmune neutropenia usually develops in children 5 to 24 months of age and often persists for prolonged periods. Neutrophil autoantibodies may be IgG, IgM, IgA, or a combination of these. Usually the condition resolves in 6 months to 4 years. Although intravenous immune globulin and corticosteroids have been used, most patients respond to G-CSF. Autoimmune neutropenia rarely may be an early manifestation of systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, or autoimmune lymphoproliferative disease.
# Chunk 7298
Congenital deficiency of C1-inhibitor results in hereditary angioedema, characterized by recurrent episodes of nonpruritic angioedema lasting 48 to 72 hours, which occur spontaneously or after minor trauma, stress, or anxiety. Abdominaledema can cause acute abdominal pain; edema of the upperairway can be life threatening and may necessitate emergencytracheostomy. The disorder is inherited as an autosomal dominant disease and results from a heterozygous deficiency of C1-inhibitor leading to serum levels less than 30% of normal values. Some mutations (type II hereditary angioedema) resultin normal levels of C1-inhibitor with defective function. An acquired form of angioedema results from autoantibodies toC1-inhibitor in lymphoid malignancies or autoimmune disorders but is uncommon in childhood. C1-inhibitor is a regulatorof Hageman factor (clotting factor XIIa), clotting factor XIa,plasma kallikrein, and plasmin in addition to C1r and C1s. Lackof inhibition of the contact system, Hageman factor and plasmakallikrein, is responsible for the development of angioedema.Deficiencies in the complement regulatory proteins factor H,factor I, and MCP result in atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome, membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis type II, and have been linked to age-related macular degeneration.
# Chunk 7299
The CH50 test is a widely available test of classic complement pathway function, based on an antibody-dependent hemolytic assay, which measures the serum dilution that results in lysis of 50% of sheep red blood cells. The CH50 test depends on the function of all nine complement proteins, C1 through C9. The AH50 test, which measures complement activation using red blood cells from different species (e.g., rabbit) that can activate the alternative pathway without antibody, is less widely available than the CH50 test and requires the alternative pathway components and C5 to C9. Abnormal results of both tests indicate a deficiency in a terminal component common to both pathways, whereas an abnormal result of one or the other test indicates a deficiency of an early component of the respective pathway. If the CH50 or AH50 levels are abnormal, individual components can be analyzed in specialized laboratories.
# Chunk 7300
Patients with SCID are ideal candidates for HSCT, which is the only option for treatment of SCID at this time. Patients are unlikely to survive beyond 1 to 2 years of age without transplantation, and they have no T-cell function to reject donor cells. Thus they may not need to undergo conditioning with chemotherapy or irradiation before transplantation. The development of transplantation using T-cell–depleted, haploidentical bone marrow from a parent for SCID has provided almost every patient with SCID a potential donor. The mother is the preferred source for haploidentical bone marrow, if she is able to donate, because some transfer of maternal T cells can occur during pregnancy, and these maternal T cells can reject cells obtained from the father. The survival rate after HSCT for SCID is approximately 90% with MHC-identical and 60% with haploidentical bone marrow transplantation. Early transplant before the acquisition of infection improves outcomes. Because newborn screening for SCID is now possible, stem cell transplantation can occur as early as possible when the infants are healthy, providing the best opportunity for a cure.
# Chunk 7301
Available @ StudentConsult.com

A family history of allergic disease is often present in affected patients. Multiple genes predispose to atopy. If one parent has allergies, the risk that a child will develop an allergic disease is 25%. If both parents have allergies, the risk increases to 50% to 70%. Similar atopic diseases tend to occur in families.
# Chunk 7302
There are two methods for identifying allergen-specific IgE: in vivo skin testing and in vitro serum testing (Table 77-4).In vivo skin testing introduces allergen into the skin via a prick/puncture or intradermal injection. The allergen diffuses through the skin to interact with IgE that is bound to mast cells. Cross-linking of IgE causes mast cell degranulation, which results in a histamine release; this prompts the development of a central wheal and erythematous flare. The wheal and flare are measured 15 to 20 minutes after the allergen has been placed. Properly performed skin tests are the best available method for detecting the presence of allergen-specific IgE.
# Chunk 7303
Allergy skin testing should be included in the evaluation of all children with persistent asthma but not during an exacerbation of wheezing. Positive skin tests results, identifying immediate hypersensitivity to aeroallergens (e.g., as tree and grass pollens, and dust), correlate strongly with bronchial allergen provocative challenges. In vitro serum tests, such as radioallergosorbent test (also known as RAST), fluorescent enzyme immunoassay (also known as FEIA), or enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, are generally less sensitive in defining clinically pertinent allergens, are more expensive, and require several days for results compared to several minutes for skin testing (see Table 77-4).
# Chunk 7304
Avoid sleeping or lying on upholstered furniture Minimize number of stuffed toys in child’s bedroom Reduce indoor humidity to <50% If possible, remove carpets from bedroom and play areas; if not possible, vacuum frequently Animal dander Remove the pet from the home or keep outdoors (if removal is not acceptable) Keep pet out of bedroom
# Chunk 7305
Use a filter on air ducts in child’s room Wash pet weekly (the evidence to support this has not been firmly established)
# Chunk 7306
muscle bronchoconstriction. Leukotriene modifiers are oral, daily-use medications that inhibit these biologic effects in the airway. Two classes of leukotriene modifiers include cysteinyl leukotriene receptor antagonists (zafirlukast and montelukast) and leukotriene synthesis inhibitors (zileuton). The leukotriene receptor antagonists have much wider appeal than zileuton. Zafirlukast is approved for children older than 5 years of age and is given twice daily. Montelukast is dosed once daily, at night, as 4-mg granules or chewable tablets (for children 6 months to 5 years), 5-mg chewable tablets (6 to 14 years), and 10-mg tablets (15 years of age or older). Pediatric studies show the usefulness of leukotriene modifiers in mild asthma and the attenuation of exercise-induced bronchoconstriction. These agents may be helpful as steroid-sparing agents in patients with asthma that is more difficult to control.
# Chunk 7307
Long-Acting β2-Agonists Long-acting β2-agonists, formoterol and salmeterol, have twice-daily dosing and relax airway smooth muscle for 12 hours but do not have any significant anti-inflammatory effects. Adding a long-acting bronchodilator to inhaled corticosteroid therapy is more beneficial than doubling the dose of inhaled corticosteroids. Multiple formulations are available. Formoterol is approved for use in children older than 5 years of age for maintenance asthma therapy and for prevention of exercise-induced asthma. It has a rapid onset of action similar to albuterol (15 minutes). Salmeterol is approved for children 4 years of age or older and has an onset of 30 minutes. Because combination agents administer two medications simultaneously, compliance is generally improved.
# Chunk 7308
Omalizumab (Xolair) is a humanized anti-IgE monoclonal antibody that prevents binding of IgE to high-affinity receptors on basophils and mast cells. It is approved for moderate to severe allergic asthma in children 12 years of age and older. Xolair is delivered by subcutaneous injection every 2 to 4 weeks, depending on body weight and pretreatment serum IgE level.
# Chunk 7309
Short-Acting β2-Agonists Short-acting β2-agonists, such as albuterol, levalbuterol, and pirbuterol, are effective bronchodilators that exert their effect by relaxing bronchial smooth muscle within 5 to 10 minutes of administration. They last for 4 to 6 hours. Generally a short-acting β2-agonist is prescribed for acute symptoms and as prophylaxis before allergen exposure and exercise. The inhaled route is preferred because adverse effects—tremor, prolonged tachycardia, and irritability—are less. Overuse of β2-agonists implies inadequate control; a change in medications may be warranted. The definition of overuse depends on the severity of the child’s asthma; use of more than one metered dose inhaler canister per month or more than eight puffs per day suggests poor control.
# Chunk 7310
Approach to Therapy

Therapy is based on the concept that chronic inflammation is a fundamental feature of asthma and that the processes underlying asthma can vary in intensity over time, requiring treatment to be adjusted accordingly. Classification of asthma severity is emphasized for initiation of therapy in patients not currently receiving controller medications. Assessing control is emphasized for monitoring and adjusting therapy. A stepwise approach is used for management of infants and young children 0 to 4 years, children 5 to 11 years (Fig. 78-1), youths 12 years or older, and adults (Fig. 78-2). Medication type, amount, and scheduling are determined by the level of asthma severity or asthma control. Therapy is then increased (stepped up) as necessary and decreased (stepped down) when possible. A short-acting bronchodilator should be available for all children with asthma. A child with intermittent asthma has asthma symptoms less than two times per week. To determine whether a child is having more persistent asthma, using the Rules of Two is helpful: daytime symptoms occurring two or more times per week or nighttime awakening two or more times per month implies a need for daily anti-inflammatory medication.
# Chunk 7311
Inhaled corticosteroids are the preferred initial long-term control therapy for children of all ages (Fig. 78-3). Daily longterm control therapy is recommended for infants and young children 0 to 4 years of age who had four or more episodes of wheezing in the previous year that lasted more than 1 day, affected sleep, and who have a positive asthma predictive index. For children over 5 years of age with moderate persistent asthma, combining long-acting bronchodilators with low-tomedium doses of inhaled corticosteroids improves lung function and reduces rescue medication use. For children with severe persistent asthma, a high-dose inhaled corticosteroid and a long-acting bronchodilator are the preferred therapy. The guidelines also recommend that treatment be reevaluated within 2 to 6 weeks of initiating therapy. Once asthma is under control, control should be assessed on an ongoing basis every 1 to 6 months. The asthma should be well controlled for at least 3 months before stepping down therapy. Note that asthma management guidelines are based on review of the published evidence, not solely on age recommendations and dosages approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
# Chunk 7312
Step down if possible (and asthma is well controlled at least 3 months)

Preferred Intermittent asthma Persistent asthma: Daily medication Consult with asthma specialist if Step 3 care or higher is required. The stepwise approach is meant to assist, not Consider consultation at Step 2.Intermittent Asthma Persistent Asthma: Daily Medication Consult with asthma specialist if Step 4 care or higher is required. Consider consultation at Step 3. Alternative Alternative Quick-Relief Medication Quick-Relief Medication SABA PRN Low-dose ICS Cromolyn or Montelukast Cromolyn LTRA Nedocromil, or Theophylline Medium-dose ICS Medium-dose ICS + LABA or Montelukast High-dose ICS + LABA or Montelukast High-dose ICS LABA orMontelukast+ +Oral corticosteroids ICS Preferred SABA PRN Low-dose ICS Low-dose ICS Medium-dose ICS + + + LABALABA, LTRA, or Theophylline High-dose ICS + LABA High-dose ICS LABA + + Oral corticosteroids Oral corticosteroids Children 0–4 years of ageChildren 5–11 Years of Age Each Step: Patient Education and Environmental Control Each Step: Patient Education and Environmental Control, and Management of Comorbidities Steps 2–4:  Consider subcutaneous allergen immunotherapy for patients                   who have persistent, allergic asthma.  SABA as needed for symptoms. Intensity of treatment depends on severity of  symptoms.  With viral respiratory symptoms: SABA q 4–6 hours up to 24 hours (longer with  physician consult). Consider short course of oral systemic corticosteroids if exacerbation is severe or patient has history of previous severe exacerbations. Caution: Frequent use of SABA may indicate the need to step up treatment. See text for recommendations on initiating daily long-term-control therapy. Caution: Increasing use of SABA or use >2 days a week for symptom relief (not prevention of EIB) generally indicates inadequate control and the need to step up treatment. OR Medium-dose ICS Medium-dose ICS LTRA or Theophylline + High-dose ICS LTRA or Theophylline + + High-dose ICSLTRA or Theophylline  SABA as needed for symptoms. Intensity of treatment depends on severity of  symptoms: up to 3 treatments at 20-minute intervals as needed. Short course of  oral systemic corticosteroids may be needed.   replace, the clinical decision making required to   meet individual patient needs.  If an alternative treatment is used and response is  inadequate, discontinue it and use the preferred  treatment before stepping up.  If clear benefit is not observed within 4–6 weeks,   and patient’s/family’s medication technique and   adherence are satisfactory, consider adjusting   therapy or an alternative diagnosis.  Studies on children 0–4 years of age are limited.  Step 2 preferred therapy is based on Evidence A. All other recommendations are based on expert opinion and extrapolation from studies in older children.  Clinicians who administer immunotherapy should be prepared and equipped to identify and treat  anaphylaxis that may occur. Key: Alphabetical listing is used when more than one treatment option is listed within either preferred or alternative therapy. ICS, Inhaled corti-costeroid; LABA, inhaled long-acting beta2-agonist; LTRA, leukotriene receptor antagonist, oral corti-costeroids, oral systemic corticosteroids; SABA, inhaled short-acting beta2-agonist  The stepwise approach is meant to assist, not  replace, the clinical decision making required to  meet individual patient needs.  If an alternative treatment is used and response is  inadequate, discontinue it and use the preferred  treatment before stepping up.  Theophylline is a less desirable alternative due to  the need to monitor serum concentration levels. Steps 1 and 2 medications are based on Evidence A.   Step 3 ICS and ICS plus adjunctive therapy are  based on Evidence B for efficacy of each treatment and extrapolation from comparator trials in older   children and adults–comparator trials are not available for this age group; Steps 4–6 are based on expert opinion and extrapolation from studies in   older children and adults.  Immunotherapy for Steps 2–4 is based on Evidence  B for house-dust mites, animal danders, and pollens;  evidence is weak or lacking for molds and cock roaches. Evidence is strongest for immunotherapy  with single allergens. The role of allergy in asthma is  greater in children than adults. Clinicians who administer immunotherapy should be prepared and equipped to identify and treat  anaphylaxis that may occur. Key: Alphabetical listing is used when more than one treatment option is listed within either preferred or alternative therapy. ICS, Inhaled corti-costeroid; LABA, inhaled long-acting beta2-agonist; LTRA, leukotriene receptor antagonist; SABA, inhaled short-acting beta2-agonist
# Chunk 7313
Intermittent asthma Persistent asthma: Daily medication Consult with asthma specialist if Step 4 care or higher is required. Consider consultation at Step 3. Step 1 Preferred:SABA PRN Step 2 Preferred:Low-dose ICS Alternative:Cromolyn, LTRA, Nedocromil, or Theophylline Step 3 Preferred:Low-dose ICS + LABA ORMedium-dose ICS Alternative:Low-dose ICS + either LTRA, Theophylline, or Zileuton Step 4 Preferred:Medium-dose ICS + LABA Alternative:Medium-dose ICS + either LTRA, Theophylline, or Zileuton Step 5 AND Preferred:High-dose ICS + LABA Consider Omalizumab for patients who have allergies Preferred:Step 6 AND High-dose ICS + LABA + oral corticosteroid Consider Omalizumab for patients who have allergies Each step: Patient education, environmental control, and management of comorbidities. Steps 2–4: Consider subcutaneous allergen immunotherapy for patients who have allergic asthma (see Notes). Quick-relief medication for all patients  SABA as needed for symptoms. Intensity of treatment depends on severity of symptoms: up  to 3 treatments at 20-minute intervals as needed. Short course of oral systemic corti costeroids may be needed.  Use of SABA >2 days a week for symptom relief (not prevention of EIB) generally indicates inadequate control and the need to step up treatment. AssesscontrolStep up if needed (first, check adherence, environmental control, and comorbid conditions) Step down if possible (and asthma is well controlled at least 3 months)
# Chunk 7314
http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/guidelines/asthma/asthsumm.pdf

Most asthma exacerbations can be successfully managed at home. Status asthmaticus is an acute exacerbation of asthma that does not respond adequately to therapeutic measures and may require hospitalization. Exacerbations may progress over several days or occur suddenly and can range in severity from mild to life threatening. Significant respiratory distress, dyspnea, wheezing, cough, and a decrease in peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR) characterize deterioration in asthma control. During severe episodes of wheezing, pulse oximetry is helpful in monitoring oxygenation. In status asthmaticus, arterial blood gases may be necessary for measurement of ventilation. As airway obstruction worsens and chest compliance decreases, carbon dioxide retention can occur. In the face of tachypnea, a normal pCO2 (40 mm Hg) indicates impending respiratory arrest.
# Chunk 7315
FEV1 or PEF <40% (severe)      Oxygen to achieve SaO2 ˜90%  High-dose inhaled SABA plus       Ipratropium by nebulizer or MDI plus valved holding chamber, every 20 minutes or continuously for 1 hour      Oral systemic corticosteroids
# Chunk 7316
No cough, wheeze, chest tightness, or Medicine How much to take When to take it shortness of breath during the day or night Can do usual activities
# Chunk 7317
Allergic rhinitis can be seasonal, perennial, or episodicdepending on the particular allergen and the exposure. Somechildren experience perennial symptoms with seasonal exacerbations. Seasonal allergic rhinitis is caused by airborne pollens,which have seasonal patterns. Typically trees pollinate in thespring, grasses in late spring to summer, and weeds in the summer and fall. The pollen, microscopic in size, can travel airbornehundreds of miles and be inhaled easily into the respiratory tract.Perennial allergic rhinitis is primarily caused by indoor allergens, such as house dust mites, animal dander, mold, and cockroaches. Episodic rhinitis occurs with intermittent exposure toallergens, such as visiting a friend’s home where a pet dwells.
# Chunk 7318
Antihistamines are the medications used most frequentlyto treat allergic rhinitis. They are useful in treating rhinorrhea, sneezing, nasal itching, and ocular itching but are lesshelpful in treating nasal congestion. First-generation antihistamines, such as diphenhydramine and hydroxyzine, easily cross the blood-brain barrier, with sedation as the mostcommon reported adverse effect. Use of first-generation antihistamines in children has an adverse effect on cognitive andacademic function. In very young children, a paradoxicalstimulatory central nervous system effect, resulting in irritability and restlessness, has been noted. Other adverse effectsof first-generation antihistamines include anticholinergiceffects, such as blurred vision, urinary retention, dry mouth,tachycardia, and constipation. Second-generation antihistamines, such as cetirizine, loratadine, desloratadine, fexofenadine and levocetirizine, are less likely to cross the blood-brainbarrier, resulting in less sedation. Cetirizine, fexofenadine,and loratadine are over-the-counter medications. Azelastine and olopatadine, topical nasal antihistamine sprays,are approved for children older than 5 years and older than6 years, respectively.
# Chunk 7319
Decongestants, taken orally or intranasally, may be used to relieve nasal congestion. Oral medications, such as pseudoephedrine and phenylephrine, are available either alone or in combination with antihistamines. Adverse effects of oral decongestants include insomnia, nervousness, irritability, tachycardia, tremors, and palpitations. For older children participating in sports, oral decongestant use may be restricted. Topical nasal decongestant sprays are effective for immediate relief of nasal obstruction but should be used for less than 5 to 7 days to prevent rebound nasal congestion (rhinitis medicamentosa).
# Chunk 7320
The prevalence of atopic dermatitis increased twofold to threefold over the past 30 years. Approximately 15% to 20% of children and 2% to 10% of adults are affected. Atopic dermatitis oftenstarts in early infancy. Approximately 50% of affected childrenshow symptoms in the first year of life, and 80% of these childrenexperience disease onset before 5 years of age. Atopic dermatitisis often the first manifestation of other atopic diseases. Approximately 80% of children with atopic dermatitis develop otherallergic diseases, such as asthma or allergic rhinitis. Symptomsof dermatitis often disappear at the onset of respiratory allergy.
# Chunk 7321
History of generally dry skin in the past year 4.

Onset in a child <2 years of age (criterion not used if child is <4 years of age) 5.
# Chunk 7322
The goals of therapy are to reduce the number and severity of flares and to increase the number of disease-free periods. Successful management involves skin hydration, pharmacologic therapy to reduce pruritus, and identification and avoidance of triggers. Patients with atopic dermatitis have a decrease in skin barrier function and enhanced transepidermal water loss. Daily, lukewarm baths for 15 to 20 minutes followed immediately by the application of fragrance-free emollients to retain moisture are a major component of therapy. Prevention of xerosis is important for control of pruritus and for maintaining the integrity of the epithelial barrier. Emollients should be ointments or creams, such as petrolatum, Aquaphor, Eucerin, or Cetaphil. Lotions are not as effective because they contain water or alcohol and may have a drying effect owing to evaporation. A mild nonsoap cleanser also is recommended.
# Chunk 7323
Defective cell-mediated immunity leads to increased susceptibility to many bacterial, viral, and fungal infections of the skin. More than 90% of patients with atopic dermatitis have colonization of lesional skin with Staphylococcus aureus, and more than 75% of patients have colonization of uninvolved skin. Colonization and infection by S. aureus are associated with disease severity. S. aureus secretes exotoxins that act as a superantigen, stimulating T cells and increasing IgE production. Secondarily infected atopic dermatitis often presents as impetiginous, pustular lesions with crusting and honey-colored exudate. Topical antibiotics, such as mupirocin or retapamulin, can be used to treat local areas of infection, or oral antibiotics (such as cephalexin, dicloxacillin, or amoxicillin-clavulanate) can be used for multifocal disease or for infection around the eyes and mouth that is difficult to treat topically. Bacterial cultures may be helpful in patients who do not respond to oral antibiotics or who have infection after multiple antibiotic courses. The incidence of community-acquired methicillin-resistant S. aureus is increasing.
# Chunk 7324
EBV, Epstein-Barr virus; IVIG, intravenous immunoglobulin.

Idiopathic 75%–90% of cases 25%–50% of adult patients have IgG, anti-IgE, and anti-FcεR1 (high-affinity IgE receptor alpha chain) autoantibodies
# Chunk 7325
Hereditary angioedema (HAE) is an autosomal dominant disease due to a deficiency of Cl inhibitor. The genetic defect may be caused by spontaneous mutation; approximately 25% of cases occur in patients without any family history. The disease is estimated to affect approximately 10,000 persons in the United States. It is characterized by unpredictable, recurrent attacks of episodic swelling that involves the face, peripheral extremities, genitalia, abdomen, oropharynx, and pharynx. Episodes are often triggered by trauma. Asphyxiation from laryngeal attacks is a significant cause of mortality. Patients with HAE rarely have urticaria associated with angioedema. The majority of patients (85%) have type I disease, which is due to decreased production of Cl-esterase inhibitor. A minority of patients (15%) have type II disease, which is due to production of dysfunctional Cl-esterase inhibitor. A low C4 level serves as an initial screening test. Patients with reduced C4 should have quantitative and functional levels of Cl-esterase inhibitor measured. C2 levels are low during an acute attack. Type III HAE patients have normal laboratory evaluation. These patients are more typically females, but some males have been reported in the literature. Three products are approved to treat HAE attacks: Berinert (for acute facial or abdominal attacks in children ≥13 years old), Kalbitor (for acute attacks in children ≥16 years of age), and Cinryze (for prophylaxis in adolescents and adults).
# Chunk 7326
The clinical manifestations of anaphylaxis and anaphylactoid reactions are the same for children and adults. The signs and symptoms vary and can range from mild skin findings to a fatal reaction. Ninety percent of patients present with cutaneous symptoms, including urticaria, angioedema, flushing, and warmth; the absence of dermal symptoms does not exclude the diagnosis of anaphylaxis. Other affected organ systems include the respiratory tract (rhinorrhea, oropharyngeal edema, laryngeal edema, hoarseness, stridor, wheezing, dyspnea, and asphyxiation), cardiovascular system (tachycardia, hypotension, shock, syncope, and arrhythmias), gastrointestinal tract (nausea, abdominal pain, crampy diarrhea, and vomiting), and neurologic system (syncope, seizure, dizziness, and a sense of impending doom). The severity of an anaphylactic reaction is often proportionate to the speed of symptom onset.
# Chunk 7327
Philadelphia, 2004, Mosby.)

Complete blood count with If vasculitis is suspected differential Erythrocyte sedimentation rate Antinuclear antibody Urinalysis Skin biopsy
# Chunk 7328
Mosby, p 580.

establishing the diagnosis, but normal tryptase levels do not ruleout the diagnosis. It is best to measure a serum tryptase level 1to 2 hours after the onset of symptoms. It also can be orderedretrospectively on stored serum that is less than 2 days old.
# Chunk 7329
Available @ StudentConsult.com

The symptoms of serum sickness typically occur 7 to 21 daysafter the administration of drugs, foreign proteins, or infections.Symptom onset may be more rapid (within 1 to 4 days) in previously sensitized individuals. The classic clinical manifestationsconsist of fever, polyarticular arthralgias, lymphadenopathy, andcutaneous symptoms. Cutaneous lesions vary and may includeurticaria, angioedema, erythema multiforme, morbilliformrash, and a palpable purpura or serpiginous rash at the interfaceof the dorsal and palmar or plantar aspects of the hands and feet.
# Chunk 7330
Laboratory tests may show an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate, presence of circulating immune complexes, and depressed complement (C3 and C4) levels. Skin biopsy specimens show immune deposits of IgM, IgA, IgE, or C3. Hematuria or proteinuria or both may be present. The diagnosis is established by history of exposure to an inciting cause, characteristic clinical manifestations, and laboratory testing showing circulating immune complexes and depressed complement levels.
# Chunk 7331
Serum sickness is self-limited and resolves within 1 to 2 weeks; therefore, treatment is symptomatic relief. Antihistamines may be administered to relieve pruritus. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are given for fever and joint pain, and, if necessary, prednisone (1 to 2 mg/kg orally daily) is administered with a tapering dose. Allergy skin testing does not predict the likelihood of serum sickness development.
# Chunk 7332
Toxic Follows multiple stings, produced by exogenous vasoactive amines in venom

Unusual Serum sickness, vasculitis, nephrosis, neuritis, encephalitis Symptoms start several days to weeks after the insect sting.
# Chunk 7333
of children, include localized pain, swelling, and erythema at the sting site that usually subside within 24 hours. Large local reactions occur in approximately 10% of patients. They are usually late-phase, IgE-mediated reactions, with large swelling, contiguous to the sting site that develops over 24 to 48 hours and resolves within 2 to 7 days. Virtually all individuals with large local reactions have similar reactions with subsequent stings. Systemic reactions are IgE mediated and occur in 1% of children. They can be mild and nonlife-threatening with cutaneous symptoms only or life-threatening with respiratory, cardiovascular, or neurologic symptoms of anaphylaxis (see Chapter 81). Toxic reactions may result if a person receives a large number of stings (50 to 100). Symptoms include malaise, nausea, and emesis resulting from the toxic effects of the venom. Unusual reactions, such as vasculitis, nephrosis, neuritis, serum sickness, and encephalitis, rarely are associated with insect stings (Table 83-1).
# Chunk 7334
Oral tolerance is the process of suppression of the immune response to the array of dietary elements ingested daily. Food allergy or hypersensitivity reactions are the result of immune reactions to glycoproteins and develop in genetically predisposed individuals. In children, cow’s milk, eggs, peanuts, soybean, wheat, tree nuts, fish, and shellfish cause 90% of IgE-mediated reactions. In older children and adults, peanuts, tree nuts, fish, and shellfish account for most reactions. Exposure to the allergenic food protein results in cross-linking of the IgE receptor found on the mast cells and basophils, which become activated and degranulate, releasing numerous potent mediators and cytokines. Non-IgE-mediated reactions typically occur hours to days after the allergen ingestion and are manifest as gastrointestinal symptoms. A cell-mediated immune mechanism may be responsible.
# Chunk 7335
Table 84-1 Gastrointestinal Food Allergic Disorders DISORDER AGE GROUP CHARACTERISTICS DIAGNOSIS PROGNOSIS/COURSE IgE-MEDIATED Acute gastrointestinal hypersensitivity Any Onset: minutes to 2 h Nausea, abdominal pain, emesis, History, positive PST, and/ or serum food-IgE Variable, food-dependent Milk, soy, egg, and wheat
# Chunk 7336
Allergic eosinophilic esophagitis Any, but especially infants, children, adolescents Children: chronic/intermittent symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux, emesis, dysphagia, abdominal pain, irritability Adults: abdominal pain, dysphagia, food impaction History, positive PST, and/ or food-IgE in 50%, but poor correlation with clinical symptoms Patch testing may be of value Elimination diet and OFC Endoscopy, biopsy provides conclusive diagnosis and response to treatment information Variable, not well established, improvement with elimination diet within 6–8 wk Elemental diet may be required Often responds to swallowed topical steroids
# Chunk 7337
Biopsy diagnostic: villus Lifelong atrophy Screening with serum IgA antitissue transglutaminase and antigliadin Resolution of symptoms with gluten elimination and relapse on oral challenge
# Chunk 7338
Hypersensitivity to egg, milk, wheat, and soy resolves within the first 5 years of life in approximately 80% of children. Sensitivity to certain foods, such as peanuts, tree nuts, fish, and shellfish, tends to be lifelong. However 20% of children who manifested peanut allergy younger than 2 years of age may outgrow it.
# Chunk 7339
Allergic reactions can be classified as immediate (anaphylactic) reactions, which occur within 60 minutes of drug administration; accelerated reactions, which begin l to 72 hours after drug administration; and late reactions, which occur after 72 hours. The most common form of adverse drug reaction is cutaneous. Accelerated reactions are usually dermatologic or serum sickness reactions. Late reactions include desquamating dermatitis, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis, and serum sickness.
# Chunk 7340
Symptoms of localized inflammation vary depending on the involved site. Arthritis, or inflammation of the synovium (synovitis), leads to joint pain, swelling, and impaired ability to use the affected joint. Morning stiffness or gelling is described. The child may be slow to arise in the morning and may have a limp. Children may refrain from usual activities and athletics. Enthesitis is inflammation at the insertion of a ligament to a bone. Serositis, inflammation of serosal lining such as pleuritis, pericarditis, or peritonitis, gives rise to chest pain, shortness of breath, or abdominal pain. Myositis,inflammation of the muscle, may lead to symptoms of muscle pain, weakness, or difficulty performing tasks of daily living. Vasculitis, inflammation of the blood vessels, leads to nonspecific symptoms of rash (petechiae, purpura) and edema when small vessels deep in the papillary dermis are involved; involvement of medium-sized vessels results in a circumscribed tender nodule.
# Chunk 7341
HSP is the most common systemic vasculitis of childhood and cause of nonthrombocytopenic purpura, with an incidence of 13 per 100,000 children. It occurs primarily in children 3 to 15 years of age, although it has been described in adults. HSP is slightly more common in boys than girls and occurs more frequently in the winter than in the summer months.
# Chunk 7342
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, and white blood cell count are elevated in patients with HSP. The platelet count is the most important test, because HSP is characterized by nonthrombocytopenic purpura with a normal, or even high, platelet count, differentiating HSP from other causes of purpura that are associated with thrombocytopenia such as autoimmune thrombocytopenia, systemic lupus erythematosus, or leukemia. A urinalysis screens for evidence of hematuria. A serum blood urea nitrogen and creatinine should be obtained to evaluate renal function. Testing the stool for blood may identify evidence of gut ischemia. Any question of gut perforation requires radiologic investigation.
# Chunk 7343
Therapy for HSP is supportive. A short-term course of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs can be administered for the acute arthritis. Systemic corticosteroids usually are reserved for children with gastrointestinal disease and provide significant relief of abdominal pain. A typical dosing regimen is prednisone, 1 mg/kg/day for 1 to 2 weeks, followed by a taper schedule. Recurrence of abdominal pain as corticosteroids are weaned may necessitate a longer course of treatment. Acute nephritis typically is treated with corticosteroids but may require more aggressive immunosuppressive therapy.
# Chunk 7344
Palpable purpura Raised, palpable hemorrhagic skin lesions in the absence of thrombocytopenia

Bowel angina Diffuse abdominal pain or the diagnosis of bowel ischemia
# Chunk 7345
KD is the second most common vasculitis of childhood. It is more common in children of Asian descent. It has been described in variable frequency in all parts of the world; the highest frequency is in Japan. KD most commonly occurs in children younger than 5 years of age, with a peak between 2 to 3 years, and is rare in children older than 7 years. The incidence in the United States is approximately 6 per 100,000 children who are younger than 5 years of age. A seasonal variability has been described with a peak between February and May, but the disease occurs throughout the year.
# Chunk 7346
Available @ StudentConsult.com

Lymphadenopathy Fever Without a Source Fever of Unknown Origin

The acute phase of KD, which lasts 1 to 2 weeks, is marked by sudden onset of a high, hectic fever (>40 °C) without an apparent source. The onset of fever is followed by conjunctival erythema; mucosal changes, including dry, cracked lips and a strawberry tongue; cervical lymphadenopathy; and swelling of the hands and feet (Fig. 88-1). Conjunctivitis is bilateral, bulbar, and nonsuppurative. Cervical lymphadenopathy is found in 70% of children and should be greater than 1.5 cm in diameter for the purposes of diagnosis. A rash, which can vary in appearance, occurs in 80% of children with KD and may be particularly accentuated in the inguinal area and on the chest. Extreme irritability is prominent, especially in infants. Abdominal pain and hydrops of the gallbladder, cerebrospinal fluid pleocytosis, sterile pyuria, and arthritis, particularly of medium-sized to large joints, may occur. Carditis in the acute phase may be manifested by tachycardia, shortness of breath, or overt congestive heart failure. Giant coronary artery aneurysms, which are rare but occur most commonly in very young children, can appear during this phase.
# Chunk 7347
The diagnosis of incomplete (atypical) KD, which occurs more commonly in infants, is made when fever is present for at least 5 days even if only two or three clinical criteria are present, particularly in the presence of coronary artery aneurysms. The diagnosis of KD should be considered in infants younger than 6 months of age with fever for at least 7 days even if no other criteria are present. Because many of the manifestations of KD are found in other illnesses, many diagnoses must be considered and excluded before the diagnosis of KD can be established (Table 88-2).
# Chunk 7348
JIA is the most common chronic rheumatologic disease of childhood, with a prevalence of 1:1000 children. The disease has two peaks, one at 1 to 3 years and one at 8 to 12 years, but it can occur at any age. Girls are affected more commonly than boys, particularly with the oligoarticular form of the illness.
# Chunk 7349
Oligoarticular JIA is defined as the presence of arthritis in fewer than five joints within 6 months of diagnosis. This is the most common form of JIA, accounting for approximately 50% of cases.
# Chunk 7350
Oligoarticular JIA presents in young children, with a peak at 1 to 3 years and another peak at 8 to 12 years. The arthritis is found in medium-sized to large joints; the knee is the most common joint involved, followed by the ankle and the wrist. It is unusual for small joints, such as the fingers or toes, to be involved, although this may occur. Neck and hip involvement also is uncommon. Children with oligoarticular JIA may be otherwise well without any evidence of systemic inflammation (fever, weight loss, or failure to thrive) or any laboratory evidence of systemic inflammation (elevated white blood cell count or erythrocyte sedimentation rate). A subset of these children later develops polyarticular disease (called extended oligoarthritis).
# Chunk 7351
A small subgroup of patients (approximately 10%) with juvenile arthritis does not present with onset of arthritis but rather with preceding systemic inflammation. This form of JIA, thought to be an autoinflammatory disease, manifests with a typical recurring, spiking fever, usually once or twice per day, which can occur for several weeks to months. This is accompanied by a rash, typically morbilliform and salmon-colored. The rash may be evanescent and occur at times of high fever only. Rarely the rash can be urticarial in nature. Internal organ involvement also occurs. Serositis, such as pleuritis and pericarditis, occurs in 50% of children. Pericardial tamponade rarely may occur. Hepatosplenomegaly occurs in 70% of children. Children with systemic-onset JIA appear sick; they have significant constitutional symptoms, including malaise and failure to thrive. Laboratory findings show the inflammation, with elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, white blood cell count, and platelet counts and anemia. The arthritis of JIA follows the systemic inflammation by 6 weeks to 6 months. The arthritis is typically polyarticular in nature and can be extensive and resistant to treatment, placing these children at highest risk for long-term disability.
# Chunk 7352
Skin disease can be a prominent finding, occurring in up to 95% of patients. A raised, erythematous rash on the cheeks, called a malar butterfly rash, is common (Fig. 90-1). This rash also can occur across the bridge of the nose, on the forehead, and on the chin. Photosensitivity can be problematic, particularly during the summer months. Both of these rashes improve with appropriate therapy. The rash of discoid lupus, by contrast, is an inflammatory process that leads to disruption of the dermal-epidermal junction, resulting in permanent scarring and loss of pigmentation in the affected area. If discoid lupus occurs in the scalp, permanent alopecia ensues because of loss of hair follicles. Raynaud phenomenon, although not specific for SLE, and livedo reticularis also can occur.
# Chunk 7353
Renal involvement is one of the most serious manifestations of SLE and is common in pediatric SLE, occurring in 50% to 70% of children. Renal disease may range from microscopic
# Chunk 7354
Urinalysis may show hematuria and proteinuria, identifying patients with lupus nephritis. Serum blood urea nitrogen and creatinine evaluate renal function. Hypoalbuminemia and hypoproteinemia may be present. Elevation of muscle enzymes may be a clue for the presence of myositis. Elevated cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) protein and an elevated IgG-to-albumin ratio when comparing CSF with serum (IgG index) can indicate antibody production in the CSF and help diagnose SLE affecting the CNS. CNS lupus has a specific pattern on gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging.
# Chunk 7355
Rash typical of dermatomyositis Symmetric proximal muscle weakness Elevated muscle enzymes (ALT, AST, LDH, CPK, and aldolase) EMG abnormalities typical of dermatomyositis (fasciculations, needle insertion irritability, and high-frequency discharges) Positive muscle biopsy specimen with chronic inflammation
# Chunk 7356
Many patients with JDM have no evidence of systemic inflammation (normal blood count and erythrocyte sedimentation rate). Evidence of myositis can be identified in 98% of children with active JDM by elevated serum muscle enzymes, including aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, creatine phosphokinase, aldolase, and lactate dehydrogenase. Electromyography and muscle biopsy can document the myositis. Magnetic resonance imaging is a noninvasive means of showing muscle inflammation.
# Chunk 7357
Hypermobility can be isolated to a specific joint group or can present as a generalized disorder. Symptoms vary depending on the joints involved. The most consistent symptom is pain, which may occur during the day or night. The discomfort may increase after exertion but rarely interferes with regular physical activity. Children with hypermobility of the ankles or feet may complain of chronic leg or back pain.
# Chunk 7358
Gastrointestinal Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain Hypoactive or hyperactive bowel sounds, abdominal tenderness (focal tract (focal or diffuse), anorexia, weight loss or generalized), hematochezia
# Chunk 7359
Liver Anorexia, vomiting, dark urine, light stools Jaundice, hepatomegaly, hepatic tenderness, bleeding diatheses, coma
# Chunk 7360
Cultures are the mainstay of diagnosis of many infections. Blood cultures are sensitive and specific for bacteremia, which may be primary or secondary to a focal infection (osteomyelitis, gastroenteritis, urinary tract, and endocarditis). Urine cultures are important to confirm urinary tract infection, which may be occult in young infants. Cultures should be obtained with every lumbar puncture, aspiration, or biopsy of other fluid collections or masses. Specific types of cultures (bacterial, fungal, viral, or mycobacterial) are guided by the clinical problem. Tissue culture techniques are used to identify viruses and intracellular bacterial pathogens.
# Chunk 7361
H. influenzae type b, S. pneumoniae, and N. meningitidis.

Childhood immunization standards and recommendations in the United States (Figs. 94-1 and 94-2) are formulated by the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (ACIP), the American Academy of Pediatrics, and the American Academy of Family Physicians. In the United States, due to state laws requiring immunization for school entry, approximately 95% of children entering kindergarten are vaccinated for the common infectious diseases. The ACIP recommends that children in the United States routinely receive vaccines against 16 diseases (see Fig. 94-1). This schedule includes up to 21 injections in four to five visits by 18 months of age. Children and adolescents who are at increased risk for pneumococcal infections should receive the pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine, as well. Children who are behind in immunization should receive catch-up immunizations as rapidly as feasible. Infants born prematurely, regardless of birth weight, should be vaccinated at the same chronologic age and according to the same schedule as full-term infants and children (see Fig. 94-2). The single exception to this practice is providing hepatitis B vaccine for infants weighing less than 2000 g if the mother is hepatitis B virus surface antigen (HBsAg)-negative at 1 month instead of at birth. Vaccines for adolescents should be given at 11 to 12 years of age (see Fig. 94-1), with completion of any vaccine series at 13 to 18 years of age and a booster for N. meningitidis at 16 years of age.
# Chunk 7362
Severe immunosuppression resulting from congenital immunodeficiency, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, leukemia, lymphoma, cancer therapy, or a prolonged course of high-dose corticosteroids (>2 mg/kg/day for >2 weeks) predisposes to complications and is a contraindication for live virus vaccines. For HIV-infected children who do not have evidence of severe immunosuppression, MMR vaccination is recommended at 12 months of age with a second dose 1 month later rather than waiting until 4 to 6 years of age. Varicella vaccine is contraindicated for persons with cellular immunodeficiency but is recommended for persons with impaired humoral immunity (hypogammaglobulinemia or dysgammaglobulinemia) and at 12 months of age for HIV-infected children without evidence of severe immunosuppression, given as two doses 3 months apart.
# Chunk 7363
1. Hepatitis B (HepB) vaccine. (Minimum age: birth) Routine vaccination: At birth  Administer monovalent HepB vaccine to all newborns before hospital  discharge.  For infants born to hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg)–positive mothers,  administer HepB vaccine and 0.5 mL of hepatitis B immune globulin  (HBIG) within 12 hours of birth. These infants should be tested for HBsAg and antibody to HBsAg (anti-HBs) 1 to 2 months after completion of the  HepB series, at age 9 through 18 months (preferably at the next well-child visit).  If mother’s HBsAg status is unknown, within 12 hours of birth administer  HepB vaccine to all infants regardless of birth weight. For infants  weighing <2,000 grams, administer HBIG in addition to HepB within 12  hours of birth. Determine mother’s HBsAg status as soon as possible  and, if she is HBsAg-positive, also administer HBIG for infants weighing 2,000 grams (no later than age 1 week). Doses following the birth dose  The second dose should be administered at age 1 or 2 months.  Monovalent HepB vaccine should be used for doses administered before  age 6 weeks.  Infants who did not receive a birth dose should receive 3 doses of a  HepB-containing vaccine on a schedule of 0, 1 to 2 months, and 6  months starting as soon as feasible. See Figure 2.  The minimum interval between dose 1 and dose 2 is 4 weeks and  between dose 2 and 3 is 8 weeks. The final (third or fourth) dose in the  HepB vaccine series should be administered no earlier than age 24  weeks, and at least 16 weeks after the first dose.  Administration of a total of 4 doses of HepB vaccine is recommended  when a combination vaccine containing HepB is administered after the  birth dose. Catch-up vaccination:  Unvaccinated persons should complete a 3-dose series.  A 2-dose series (doses separated by at least 4 months) of adult formulation Recombivax HB is licensed for use in children aged 11  through 15 years.  For other catch-up issues, see Figure 2.
# Chunk 7364
If RV-1 is used, administer a 2-dose series at 2 and 4 months of age.

2.

If RV-5 is used, administer a 3-dose series at ages 2, 4, and 6 months.
# Chunk 7365
5. Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) conjugate vaccine. (Minimum age: 6 weeks) Routine vaccination:  Administer a Hib vaccine primary series and a booster dose to all infants. The primary series doses should be administered at 2, 4, and 6 months  of age; however, if PRP-OMP (PedvaxHib or Comvax) is administered at  2 and 4 months of age, a dose at age 6 months is not indicated. One  booster dose should be administered at age 12 through15 months.  Hiberix (PRP-T) should only be used for the booster (final) dose in  children aged 12 months through 4 years, who have received at least 1  dose of Hib. Catch-up vaccination:  If dose 1 was administered at ages 12-14 months, administer booster (as final dose) at least 8 weeks after dose 1.  If the first 2 doses were PRP-OMP (PedvaxHIB or Comvax), and were  administered at age 11 months or younger, the third (and final) dose should be administered at age 12 through 15 months and at least 8  weeks after the second dose.  If the first dose was administered at age 7 through 11 months, administer the second dose at least 4 weeks later and a final dose at age 12 through  15 months, regardless of Hib vaccine (PRP-T or PRP-OMP) used for first  dose.  For unvaccinated children aged 15 months or older, administer only 1  dose.  For other catch-up issues, see Figure 2. Vaccination of persons with high-risk conditions:  Hib vaccine is not routinely recommended for patients older than 5 years of age. However one dose of Hib vaccine should be administered to  unvaccinated or partially vaccinated persons aged 5 years or older who  have leukemia, malignant neoplasms, anatomic or functional asplenia  (including sickle cell disease), human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)  infection, or other immunocompromising conditions.
# Chunk 7366
6a. Pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV). (Minimum age: 6 weeks) Routine vaccination:  Administer a series of PCV13 vaccine at ages 2, 4, 6 months with a  booster at age 12 through 15 months.  For children aged 14 through 59 months who have received an  age-appropriate series of 7-valent PCV (PCV7), administer a single  supplemental dose of 13-valent PCV (PCV13). Catch-up vaccination:  Administer 1 dose of PCV13 to all healthy children aged 24 through 59 months who are not completely vaccinated for their age.  For other catch-up issues, see Figure 2. Vaccination of persons with high-risk conditions:  For children aged 24 through 71 months with certain underlying medical  conditions (see footnote 6c), administer 1 dose of PCV13 if 3 doses of  PCV were received previously, or administer 2 doses of PCV13 at least 8  weeks apart if fewer than 3 doses of PCV were received previously.  A single dose of PCV13 may be administered to previously unvaccinated  children aged 6 through 18 years who have anatomic or functional  asplenia (including sickle cell disease), HIV infection or an immunocompromising condition, cochlear implant or cerebrospinal fluid  leak. See MMWR 2010;59 (No. RR-11), available at http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/rr/rr5911.pdf.  Administer PPSV23 at least 8 weeks after the last dose of PCV to  children aged 2 years or older with certain underlying medical conditions  (see footnotes 6b and 6c).
# Chunk 7367
6b. Pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPSV23). (Minimum age: 2  years) Vaccination of persons with high-risk conditions:  Administer PPSV23 at least 8 weeks after the last dose of PCV to  children aged 2 years or older with certain underlying medical conditions  (see footnote 6c). A single revaccination with PPSV should be  administered after 5 years to children with anatomic or functional asplenia  (including sickle cell disease) or an immunocompromising condition.
# Chunk 7368
8. Influenza vaccines. (Minimum age: 6 months for inactivated influenza vaccine [IIV]; 2 years for live, attenuated influenza vaccine [LAIV])
# Chunk 7369
Figure 94-1, cont’d

Catch-up vaccination:  Ensure that all persons aged 7 through 18 years without evidence of immunity (see MMWR 2007;56 [No. RR-4], available at http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/rr/rr5604.pdf) have 2 doses of varicella vaccine. For children aged 7 through 12 years the recommended minimum interval between doses is 3 months (if the second dose was administered at least 4 weeks after the first dose, it can be accepted as valid); for persons aged 13 years and older, the minimum interval between doses is 4 weeks.
# Chunk 7370
11. Hepatitis A vaccine (HepA). (Minimum age: 12 months) Routine vaccination:  Initiate the 2-dose HepA vaccine series for children aged 12 through 23 months; separate the 2 doses by 6 to 18 months.  Children who have received 1 dose of HepA vaccine before age 24 months, should receive a second dose 6 to 18 months after the first dose.  For any person aged 2 years and older who has not already received the HepA vaccine series, 2 doses of HepA vaccine separated by 6 to 18 months may be administered if immunity against hepatitis A virus infection is desired. Catch-up vaccination:  The minimum interval between the two doses is 6 months. Special populations:  Administer 2 doses of Hep A vaccine at least 6 months apart to previously unvaccinated persons who live in areas where vaccination programs target older children, or who are at increased risk for infection.
# Chunk 7371
12. Human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccines. (HPV4 [Gardasil] and HPV2  [Cervarix]). (Minimum age: 9 years) Routine vaccination:  Administer a 3-dose series of HPV vaccine on a schedule of 0, 1-2, and 6 months to all adolescents aged 11-12 years. Either HPV4 or HPV2 may be used for females, and only HPV4 may be used for males.  The vaccine series can be started beginning at age 9 years.  Administer the second dose 1 to 2 months after the first dose and the third dose 6 months after the first dose (at least 24 weeks after the first dose). Catch-up vaccination:  Administer the vaccine series to females (either HPV2 or HPV4) and males (HPV4) at age 13 through 18 years if not previously vaccinated.  Use recommended routine dosing intervals (see above) for vaccine series catch-up.
# Chunk 7372
13. Meningococcal conjugate vaccines (MCV). (Minimum age: 6 weeks   for Hib-MenCY, 9 months for Menactra [MCV4-D], 2 years for Menveo [MCV4-CRM]). Routine vaccination:  Administer MCV4 vaccine at age 11–12 years, with a booster dose at age 16 years.  Adolescents aged 11 through 18 years with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection should receive a 2-dose primary series of MCV4, with at least 8 weeks between doses. See MMWR 2011; 60:1018–1019 available at: http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/wk/mm6030.pdf.  For children aged 2 months through 10 years with high-risk conditions, see below. Catch-up vaccination:  Administer MCV4 vaccine at age 13 through 18 years if not previously vaccinated.  If the first dose is administered at age 13 through 15 years, a booster dose should be administered at age 16 through 18 years with a minimum interval of at least 8 weeks between doses.  If the first dose is administered at age 16 years or older, a booster dose is not needed.  For other catch-up issues, see Figure 2. Vaccination of persons with high-risk conditions:  For children younger than 19 months of age with anatomic or functional asplenia (including sickle cell disease), administer an infant series of Hib-MenCY at 2, 4, 6, and 12-15 months.  For children aged 2 through 18 months with persistent complement component deficiency, administer either an infant series of Hib-MenCY at 2, 4, 6, and 12 through 15 months or a 2-dose primary series of MCV4-D starting at 9 months, with at least 8 weeks between doses. For children aged 19 through 23 months with persistent complement component deficiency who have not received a complete series of Hib-MenCY or MCV4-D, administer 2 primary doses of MCV4-D at least 8 weeks apart.  For children aged 24 months and older with persistent complement component deficiency or anatomic or functional asplenia (including sickle cell disease), who have not received a complete series of Hib-MenCY or MCV4-D, administer 2 primary doses of either MCV4-D or MCV4-CRM. If MCV4-D (Menactra) is administered to a child with asplenia (including sickle cell disease), do not administer MCV4-D until 2 years of age and at least 4 weeks after the completion of all PCV13 doses. See MMWR 2011;60:1391–2, available at   http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/wk/mm6040.pdf.  For children aged 9 months and older who are residents of or travelers to countries in the African meningitis belt or to the Hajj, administer an age appropriate formulation and series of MCV4 for protection against serogroups A and W-135. Prior receipt of Hib-MenCY is not sufficient for children traveling to the meningitis belt or the Hajj. See MMWR 2011;60:1391–2, available at http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/wk/mm6040.pdf.  For children who are present during outbreaks caused by a vaccine serogroup, administer or complete an age and formulation-appropriate series of Hib-MenCY or MCV4.  For booster doses among persons with high-risk conditions refer to http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/acip-list.htm#mening.
# Chunk 7373
Figure 94-2, cont’d

Catch-up vaccination:  Ensure that all persons aged 7 through 18 years without evidence of immunity (see MMWR 2007;56 [No. RR-4], available at http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/rr/rr5604.pdf) have 2 doses of varicella vaccine. For children aged 7 through 12 years the recommended minimum interval between doses is 3 months (if the second dose was administered at least 4 weeks after the first dose, it can be accepted as valid); for persons aged 13 years and older, the minimum interval between doses is 4 weeks.
# Chunk 7374
‡Immune globulin intravenous should be used if TIG is not available.

contact with the index patient, or medical personnel without direct exposure to the patient’s oral secretions. Rifampin twice daily for 2 days, ceftriaxone once, and ciprofloxacin once (>18 years of age) are the recommended regimens. Azithromycin may be used in the case of resistant organisms.
# Chunk 7375
Fever or temperature instability in infants younger than3 months of age is associated with a higher risk of serious bacterial infections than in older infants. These youngerinfants usually exhibit only fever and poor feeding, without localizing signs of infection. Most febrile illnesses inthis age group are caused by common viral pathogens, butserious bacterial infections include bacteremia (caused by group B streptococcus [GBS], Escherichia coli, and Listeria monocytogenes in neonates; and Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, nontyphoidal Salmonella, and Neisseria meningitidis in 1to 3-month-old infants), urinary tract infection (UTI) (E. coli), pneumonia (S. pneumoniae, GBS, or Staphylococcus aureus), meningitis (S. pneumoniae,
# Chunk 7376
Differentiation between viral and bacterial infections in young infants is difficult. Febrile infants <3 months of age who appear ill, especially if follow-up is uncertain, and all febrile infants <4 weeks of age should be admitted to the hospital for empirical antibiotics pending culture results. After blood, urine, and cerebrospinal fluid cultures are obtained, broad-spectrum parenteral antibiotics (typically ampicillin with cefotaxime or gentamicin) are administered. The choice of antibiotics depends on the pathogens suggested by localizing findings. The possibility of neonatal HSV should also be considered in febrile children <4 weeks old, and empirical acyclovir begun in those in whom neonatal HSV is a concern. Well-appearing febrile infants ≥4 weeks of age without an identifiable focus and with certainty of follow-up are at a low risk of developing a serious bacterial infection (0.8% develop bacteremia, and 2% develop a serious localized bacterial infection). Specific criteria identifying these low-risk infants include age older than 1 month, well-appearing without a focus of infection, no history of prematurity or prior antimicrobial therapy, a white blood cell (WBC) count of 5000 to 15,000/μL, and urine with less than 10 WBCs/high-power field. Fecal leukocyte testing and chest radiograph can be considered in infants with diarrhea or respiratory signs. Low-risk infants may be followed as outpatients without empirical antibiotic treatment, or, alternatively, may be treated with intramuscular ceftriaxone. Regardless of antibiotic treatment, close follow-up for at least 72 hours, including re-evaluation in 24 hours or immediately with any clinical change, is essential.
# Chunk 7377
Most episodes of fever in children younger than 3 years of age have a demonstrable source of infection elicited by history, physical examination, or a simple laboratory test. In this age group, the most commonly identified serious bacterial infection is a UTI. A blood culture to evaluate for occult bacteremia, and urinalysis and urine culture to evaluate for a UTI, should be considered for all children younger than 3 years of age with fever without localizing signs. Stool culture should be obtained in those with diarrhea marked by blood or mucous. Ill-appearing children should be admitted to the hospital and treated with empirical antibiotics.
# Chunk 7378
Approximately 0.2% of well-appearing febrile children 3 to 36 months of age vaccinated against S. pneumoniae and
# Chunk 7379
Admit, obtain appropriate tests Begin appropriate therapy

Additional tests (special cultures, PCR, serology, biopsy) and imaging studies (CT, MRI, radionuclide scans)
# Chunk 7380
Figure 96-2 Approach to the evaluation of fever of unknown origin (FUO) in children. Screening laboratory tests include a complete blood count and differential white blood cell count, platelet count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, hepatic transaminase levels, urinalysis, bacterial cultures of urine and blood, chest radio-graph, and evaluation for rheumatic disease with antinuclear antibody, rheumatoid factor, and serum complement (C3, C4, CH50). PCR, polymerase chain reaction.
# Chunk 7381
Abscesses: abdominal, brain, dental, hepatic, pelvic, perinephric, rectal, subphrenic, splenic, periappendiceal, psoas Cholangitis Infective endocarditis Mastoiditis Osteomyelitis Pneumonia Pyelonephritis Sinusitis
# Chunk 7382
sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, hepatic transaminase and B. henselae antibody. Consultation with infectious dis-levels, urinalysis, cultures of urine and blood, chest radio-ease, immunology, rheumatic disease, or oncology specialists graph, and evaluation for rheumatic disease with antinuclear should be considered. Further tests may include lumbar puncantibody, rheumatoid factor, and serum complement (C3, C4, ture for cerebrospinal fluid analysis and culture; computed CH50). Additional tests for FUO may include throat culture, tomography or magnetic resonance imaging of the chest, stool culture, tuberculin skin test or interferon-gamma release abdomen, and head; radionuclide scans; and bone marrow assay, HIV antibody, Epstein-Barr virus antibody profile, biopsy for cytology and culture.
# Chunk 7383
Measles (rubeola) is highly contagious and is caused by a single-stranded RNA paramyxovirus with one antigenic type. Humans are the only natural host. Measles virus infects the upper respiratory tract and regional lymph nodes and is spread systemically during a brief, low-titer primary viremia. A secondary viremia occurs within 5 to 7 days as virus-infected monocytes spread the virus to the respiratory tract, skin, and other organs. Virus is present in respiratory secretions, blood, and the urine of infected individuals. Measles virus is transmitted by droplets or the airborne route and is highly contagious. Infected persons are contagious from 1 to 2 days before onset of symptoms—from about 5 days before to 4 days after the appearance of rash—and immunocompromised persons can have prolonged excretion of contagious virus.
# Chunk 7384
Measles infection is divided into four phases: incubation, prodromal (catarrhal), exanthematous (rash), and recovery. The incubation period is 8 to 12 days from exposure to symptom onset and a mean of 14 days (range, 7 to 21) from exposure to rash onset. The manifestations of the 3-day prodromal period
# Chunk 7385
Routine laboratory findings are nonspecific and do not aid in diagnosis. Leukopenia is characteristic. In patients with acute encephalitis, the cerebrospinal fluid reveals an increased protein, a lymphocytic pleocytosis, and normal glucose levels. Measles virus culture is not generally available, though identification of measles RNA via reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (PCR) may be available through state public health departments or the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Serologic testing for IgM antibodies that appear within 1 to 2 days of the rash and persist for 1 to 2 months in unimmunized persons confirms the clinical diagnosis, though IgM antibodies may be present only transiently in immunized people. Suspected cases should be reported immediately to the local or state health department.
# Chunk 7386
Deaths most frequently result from bronchopneumonia orencephalitis, with much higher risk in persons with malignancy,severe malnutrition, age under 5 years, or immunocompromise (such as HIV infection). Late deaths in adolescents andadults usually result from subacute sclerosing panencephalitis. Other forms of measles encephalitis in immunocompetentpersons are associated with a mortality rate of approximately15%, with 20% to 30% of survivors having serious neurologicsequelae.
# Chunk 7387
Live measles vaccine prevents infection and is recommended as measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR) for children at 12 to 15 months and 4 to 6 years of age. The MMRV (MMR combined with varicella vaccine) is an alternative vaccine for children 12 months to 12 years of age, provided there are no contraindications, but is associated with a higher rate of febrile seizures following administration. The second dose of MMR is not a booster dose but significantly reduces the primary vaccine failure rate, from <5% to <1%. Contraindications to measles vaccine include immunocompromised states or an immunosuppressive course of corticosteroids (>2 mg/kg/day for >14 days); pregnancy; or recent administration of immunoglobulin (3 to 11 months, depending on dose). MMR vaccination is recommended for all HIV-infected persons without evidence of severe immunosuppression (low age-specific total CD4 T-lymphocyte count or a low CD4 T-lymphocyte count as a percentage of total lymphocytes), children with cancer in remission who have not received chemotherapy in the previous 3 months, and children who have not received immunosuppressive corticosteroids in the previous month. Susceptible household contacts with a chronic disease or who are immunocompromised should receive postexposure prophylaxiswith measles vaccine within 72 hours of measles exposure or immunoglobulin within 6 days of exposure.
# Chunk 7388
Rubella, also known as German measles or 3-day measles,is caused by a single-stranded RNA virus with a glycolipid envelope and is a member of the togavirus family. Humans are the only natural host. Rubella virus invades the respiratory epithelium and disseminates via a primary viremia. Afterreplication in the reticuloendothelial system, a secondaryviremia ensues, and the virus can be isolated from peripheral blood monocytes, cerebrospinal fluid, and urine. Rubellavirus is most contagious through direct or droplet contactwith nasopharyngeal secretions from 2 days before until5 to 7 days after rash onset, although virus may be present innasopharyngeal secretions from 7 days before until 14 days after the rash.
# Chunk 7389
Infection in utero results in significant morbidity from congenital rubella syndrome (CRS) with associated ophthalmologic, cardiac, and neurologic manifestations (see Chapter 66).Maternal infection during the first trimester results in fetalinfection with generalized vasculitis in more than 90% of cases.Infants with congenital rubella may shed the virus in nasopharyngeal secretions and urine for longer than 12 months afterbirth and may transmit the virus to susceptible contacts.
# Chunk 7390
In unvaccinated populations, rubella usually occurs in the spring, with epidemics occurring in cycles of every 6 to 9 years. Approximately 25% to 50% of cases are subclinical. Fewer than 20 cases of rubella now occur annually in the United States. Outbreaks of rubella occasionally occur in nonvaccinated groups from internationally imported cases. Transplacental antibody is protective during the first 6 months of life.
# Chunk 7391
Routine laboratory findings are nonspecific and generally do not aid in diagnosis. The white blood cell count usually is normal or low, and thrombocytopenia rarely occurs. Diagnosis is confirmed by serologic testing for IgM antibodies (typically positive 5 days after symptom onset) or by a fourfold or greater increase in specific IgG antibodies in paired acute and convalescent sera. CRS cases can have detectable IgM until 3 months of age, and stable or rising IgG titers over the first 7 to 11 months of age. False-positive IgM results can occur. Cases of suspected congenital rubella syndrome and postnatal rubella infection should be reported to the local and state health department.
# Chunk 7392
Contraindications to rubella vaccine include immunocompromised states or an immunosuppressive course of corticosteroids (>2 mg/kg/day for >14 days); pregnancy; or recent administration of immunoglobulin (3 to 11 months, depending on dose). Vaccine virus has been recovered from fetal tissues, although no cases of CRS have been identified among infants born to women inadvertently vaccinated against rubella during pregnancy. Nevertheless women are cautioned to avoid pregnancy after receipt of rubella-containing vaccine for 28 days. All pregnant women should have prenatal serologic testing to determine their immune status to rubella, and susceptible mothers should be vaccinated after delivery and before hospital discharge.
# Chunk 7393
Transplacental antibody protects most infants until 6 months ofage. The incidence of infection increases as maternally derivedantibody levels decline. By 12 months of age, approximately60% to 90% of children have antibodies to HHV-6, and essentially all children are seropositive by 2 to 3 years of age. Thevirus is likely acquired from asymptomatic adults who periodically shed these viruses. HHV-6 is a major cause of acute febrileillnesses in infants and may be responsible for 20% of visits tothe emergency department for children 6 to 18 months of age.
# Chunk 7394
The pattern of high fever for 3 to 5 days without significant physical findings followed by onset of rash with defervescence of fever is characteristic. Many febrile illnesses may be easily confused with roseola during the preeruptive stage. Serious infections must be excluded, although most children are alert, behave normally, and continue with their usual daily activities.
# Chunk 7395
Erythema infectiosum is common. Parvovirus B19 seroprevalence is only 2% to 9% in children younger than 5 years of age but increases to 15% to 35% in children 5 to 18 years and 30% to 60% in adults. Community epidemics usually occur in the spring. The virus is transmitted by respiratory secretions and by blood product transfusions.
# Chunk 7396
Children with shortened erythrocyte life span (e.g., sickle cell disease) may develop a transient aplastic crisis characterized by ineffective erythroid production typically lasting 7 to 10 days (see Chapter 150). Most children with parvovirus B19-induced transient aplastic crisis have multiple symptoms, including fever, lethargy, malaise, pallor, headache, gastrointestinal symptoms, and respiratory symptoms. The reticulocyte count is extremely low, and the hemoglobin level is lower than usual for the patient. Transient neutropenia and thrombocytopenia also commonly occur.
# Chunk 7397
The prognosis for erythema infectiosum is excellent. Fatalities associated with transient aplastic crisis are rare. Parvovirus B19 is not teratogenic, but in utero infection of fetal erythroid cells may result in fetal heart failure, hydrops fetalis, and fetal death. Of the approximately 50% of women of childbearing age susceptible to parvovirus B19 infection, 30% of exposed women develop infection, with 25% of exposed fetuses becoming infected and 10% of these culminating in fetal death.
# Chunk 7398
Chickenpox and zoster are caused by varicella-zoster virus (VZV), an enveloped, icosahedral, double-stranded DNA virus that is a member of the herpesvirus family. Humans are the only natural host. Chickenpox (varicella) is the manifestation of primary infection. VZV infects susceptible individuals via the conjunctivae or respiratory tract and replicates in the nasopharynx and upper respiratory tract. It disseminates by a primary viremia and infects regional lymph nodes, the liver, the spleen, and other organs. A secondary viremia follows, resulting in a cutaneous infection with the typical vesicular rash. After resolution of chickenpox, the virus persists in latent infection in the dorsal root ganglia cells. Zoster (shingles) is the manifestation of reactivated latent infection of endogenous VZV. Chickenpox is highly communicable in susceptible individuals, with a secondary attack rate of more than 90%. The period of communicability ranges from 2 days before to 7 days after the onset of the rash, when all lesions are crusted.
# Chunk 7399
The preeruption phase of zoster includes intense localized and constant pain and tenderness (acute neuritis) along a dermatome, accompanied by malaise and fever. In several days,the eruption of papules, which quickly vesiculate, occurs in thedermatome or in two adjacent dermatomes. Groups of lesions occur for 1 to 7 days and then progress to crusting and healing.Thoracic and lumbar regions are typically involved. Lesionsgenerally are unilateral and are accompanied by regionallymphadenopathy. In one third of patients, a few vesicles occuroutside of the primary dermatome. Any branch of cranial nerveV may be involved, which also may cause corneal and intraorallesions. Involvement of cranial nerve VII may result in facialparalysis and ear canal vesicles (Ramsay Hunt syndrome).Ophthalmic zoster may be associated with ipsilateral cerebralangiitis and stroke. Immunocompromised persons may haveunusually severe, painful herpes zoster that involves cutaneousand, rarely, visceral dissemination (to liver, lungs, and centralnervous system). Postherpetic neuralgia, defined as pain persisting longer than 1 month, is uncommon in children.
# Chunk 7400
A severe form of neonatal varicella may develop in newborns of mothers with varicella (but not shingles) occurring 5 days before to 2 days after delivery. The fetus is exposed to a large inoculum of virus but is born before the maternal antibody response develops and can cross the placenta. These infants should be treated as soon as possible with varicellazoster immunoglobulin (VZIG) or intravenous immunoglobulin if VZIG is unavailable, to attempt to prevent or ameliorate the infection.
# Chunk 7401
Primary varicella usually resolves spontaneously. The mortality rate is much higher for persons older than 20 years of age and for immunocompromised persons. Zoster usually is self-limited, especially in children. Advanced age and severity of pain at presentation and at 1 month are predictors of prolonged pain. Scarring is more common with zoster because of involvement of the deeper layers of the skin.
# Chunk 7402
Ecthyma usually is caused by group A streptococcus and may complicate impetigo. Initially it is characterized by a lesion with a rim of erythematous induration surrounding an eschar, which, if removed, reveals a shallow ulcer. Ecthyma gangrenosum is a serious skin infection occurring in immunocompromised persons due to hematogenous spread of septic emboli to the skin, classically caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa, other gram-negative organisms, or occasionally Aspergillus. The lesions begin as purple macules that undergo central necrosis to become exquisitely tender, deep, punched-out ulcers 2 to 3 cm in diameter with a dark necrotic base, raised red edges, and sometimes a yellowish green exudate. Fever usually is present.
# Chunk 7403
Warts occur at all ages. Common warts (verruca vulgaris),associated with HPV types 1 and 2, are the most common form (71%). They occur frequently in school-age children, with a prevalence of 4% to 20%. They are transmitted by direct contact or by fomites and have an incubation period of approximately 1 month before clinical presentation. The common wart is a painless, well-circumscribed, small (2to 5-mm) papule with a papillated or verrucous surface typically distributed on the fingers, toes, elbows, and knees. They also may be found on the nose, ears, and lips. Filiform warts are verrucous, exophytic, 2-mm papules that have a narrow or pedunculated base. Flat warts (verruca plana) are associated with HPV types 3 and 10 and are multiple, flat-topped 2to 4-mm papules clustered on the dorsal surface of the hands, on the soles of the feet (plantar warts), or on the face. Plantar warts may be painful because of the effect of pressure and friction on the lesions. Genital warts (condylomata acuminata) are associated with the HPV types 6 and 11 (90%). They are flesh-colored, hyperpigmented, or erythematous lesions that are filiform, fungating, or plaquelike in appearance and involve multiple sites on the vulva, vagina, penis, or perineum. Genital warts are the most common sexually transmitted infection, with 1 million new cases annually.
# Chunk 7404
The most serious consequence of HPV infection is cervical cancer (more than 12,000 new cases annually), vulvar, vaginal, penile, and anal cancers. A quadrivalent, recombinant HPV vaccine against serotypes 6, 11, 31, and 33 is recommended for all children at 11 to 12 years of age but may be given to children between 9 and 26 years of age. The three-dose regimen has 98% to 100% efficacy in preventing the precancerous dysplasia that precedes cervical cancer.
# Chunk 7405
The characteristic triad of EBV infectious mononucleosis is fever, pharyngitis, and lymphadenopathy. The pharynx shows enlarged tonsils and exudate and, sometimes, anenanthem with pharyngeal petechiae. Lymphadenopathy ismost prominent in the anterior and posterior cervical andsubmandibular lymph nodes and less commonly involvesaxillary and inguinal lymph nodes. Other findings includesplenomegaly in 50% of cases, hepatomegaly in 10% to 20%, and maculopapular or urticarial rash in 5% to 15%. A diffuse,erythematous rash develops in approximately 80% of mononucleosis patients treated with amoxicillin. Compared with EBV infection, infectious mononucleosis-like illness caused by CMV has minimal pharyngitis and often more prominentsplenomegaly; it often presents with fever only. The mostcommon manifestation of toxoplasmosis is asymptomaticcervical lymphadenopathy, but approximately 10% of casesof acquired toxoplasmosis develop chronic posterior cervical lymphadenopathy and fatigue, usually without significantfever.
# Chunk 7406
Enteroviruses and parechoviruses cause meningitis with peaks during summer and fall in temperate climates. These infections are more prevalent among low socioeconomic groups, young children, and immunocompromised persons. The prevalence of arboviral meningitis is determined by geographic distribution and seasonal activity of the arthropod (mosquito) vectors. In the United States, most arboviral infections occur during the summer and fall.
# Chunk 7407
Table 100-2 Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF) Findings in Various Central Nervous System Disorders CONDITION PRESSURE LEUKOCYTES (/µL) PROTEIN (mg/dL) GLUCOSE (mg/dL) COMMENTS Normal 50–180 mm H2O <4; 60%–70% lymphocytes, 30%–40% monocytes, 1%–3% neutrophils 20–45 >50% of serum glucose
# Chunk 7408
N. meningitidis and H. influenzae. For infants younger than 2 months of age, ampicillin is added to cover the possibility of Listeria monocytogenes. Duration of treatment is 5 to 7 days for N. meningitidis, 7 to 10 days for H. influenzae, and 10 to 14 days for S. pneumoniae.
# Chunk 7409
Dexamethasone (0.6 to 0.8 mg/kg daily in two to three divided doses for 2 days), as adjunctive therapy initiated just before or concurrently with the first dose of antibiotics, significantly diminishes the incidence of hearing loss and neurologic deficits resulting from H. influenzae meningitis. Adjuvant steroids do not appear to decrease mortality or hospital stay in studies in the developed world.
# Chunk 7410
Gingivostomatitis is characteristic of herpes simplex virus-1 (see Chapter 65). Herpangina is an enteroviral infection with sudden onset of high fever, vomiting, headache, malaise, myalgia, backache, conjunctivitis, poor intake, drooling, sore throat,and dysphagia. The oral lesions of herpangina may be nonspecific, but classically there are one or more small, tender, papular,or pinpoint vesicular lesions on an erythematous base scatteredover the soft palate, uvula, and tongue. These vesicles enlargefrom 1 to 2 mm to 3 to 4 mm over 3 to 4 days, rupture, and produce small, punched-out ulcers that persist for several days.
# Chunk 7411
A syndrome of periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis, and cervical adenitis is a rare cause of recurrent fever in children. Recurring nonspecific pharyngitis is accompanied by fever and painful solitary vesicular lesions in the mouth. The fevers begin at a young age (usually <5 years). Episodes last approximately 5 days, with a mean of 28 days between episodes. Episodes are shorter with oral prednisone and unresponsive to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or antibiotics. The syndrome resolves in some but persists in other children. Long-term sequelae do not develop.
# Chunk 7412
Erythromycin estolate: 20–40 mg/kg/day in 2–4 doses (max 1 g/day) for 10 days

Azithromycin, children: 12 mg/kg orally once daily for 5 days (to maximum adult dose); adults: 500 mg orally on day 1, then 250 mg orally on days 2–5
# Chunk 7413
Obstruction to mucociliary flow, such as mucosal edemaresulting from the common cold, impedes sinus drainage andpredisposes to bacterial proliferation. In 90% of children withacute sinusitis, the bacterial causes are Streptococcus pneumoniae, nontypable Haemophilus influenzae, Moraxella catarrhalis,Staphylococcus aureus, and group A streptococcus. Anaerobesemerge as important pathogens in subacute and chronic sinusitis. Indwelling nasogastric and nasotracheal tubes predisposeto nosocomial sinusitis, which may be caused by gram-negativebacteria (Klebsiella or Pseudomonas). Antibiotic therapy predisposes to infection with antibiotic-resistant organisms. Sinusitis in neutropenic and immunocompromised persons may becaused by Aspergillus or the Zygomycetes (e.g., Mucor, Rhizopus).
# Chunk 7414
Amoxicillin-clavulanate for 10 to 14 days is recommended as first-line therapy of sinusitis in children. High-dose therapy is recommended for children at increased risk for resistant bacteria (antibiotic treatment in the preceding 1 to 3 months, day care attendance, age <2 years, high rates of antimicrobial resistance locally). Levofloxacin is recommended for children with type I hypersensitivity to penicillins. Clindamycin plus a third generation cephalosporin (cefixime, cefpodoxime) is recommended for children with non-type I hypersensitivity.
# Chunk 7415
Recommendations for treatment are based on certainty of diagnosis and severity of illness. A certain diagnosis can be made if there is rapid onset, signs of middle ear effusion, and signs and symptoms of middle ear inflammation. The recommended first-line therapy for most children with a certain diagnosis of acute OM or those with an uncertain diagnosis but who are younger than 2 years of age or have fever greater than 39° C or otalgia is amoxicillin (80 to 90 mg/kg/day in two divided doses). Children with an uncertain diagnosis who are older than 2 years of age may be observed if appropriate follow-up can be arranged. Failure of initial therapy with amoxicillin at 3 days suggests infection with β-lactamase-producing H. influenza, M. catarrhalis or resistant S. pneumoniae. Recommended next-step treatments include high-dose amoxicillin-clavulanate (amoxicillin 80 to 90 mg/kg/day), cefuroxime axetil, cefdinir, or ceftriaxone (50 mg/kg intramuscularly in daily doses for 1 to 3 days). Intramuscular ceftriaxone is especially appropriate for children younger than 3 years of age with vomiting that precludes oral treatment. Tympanocentesis may be required for patients who are difficult to treat or who do not respond to therapy. Acetaminophen and ibuprofen are recommended for fever. Decongestants or antihistamines are not effective.
# Chunk 7416
Children identified at high-risk for recurrent acute OM are candidates for prolonged courses of antimicrobial prophylaxis, which can reduce recurrences significantly. Amoxicillin (20 to 30 mg/kg/day) or sulfisoxazole (50 mg/kg/day) given once daily at bedtime for 3 to 6 months or longer is used for prophylaxis.
# Chunk 7417
Otitis externa, also known as swimmer’s ear, is defined byinflammation and exudation in the external auditory canal inthe absence of other disorders, such as otitis media or mastoiditis. The most common bacterial pathogens are Pseudomonas aeruginosa, especially in association with swimming in pools or lakes, and Staphylococcus aureus. Otitis externa develops in approximately 20% of children with tympanostomy tubes, associated with S. aureus, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Moraxellacatarrhalis, Proteus, Klebsiella, and occasionally anaerobes.Coagulase-negative staphylococci and Corynebacterium are isolated frequently from cultures of the external canal but representnormal flora. Malignant otitis externa is caused by P. aeruginosa in immunocompromised persons and adults with diabetes.
# Chunk 7418
Croup, or laryngotracheobronchitis, is the most common infection of the middle respiratory tract (Table 107-1). The most common causes of croup are parainfluenza viruses (types 1, 2, 3, and 4) and respiratory syncytial virus. Laryngotracheal airway inflammation disproportionately affects children because a small decrease in diameter secondary to mucosal edema and inflammation exponentially increases airway resistance and the work of breathing. During inspiration, the walls of the subglottic space are drawn together, aggravating the obstruction and producing the stridor characteristic of croup. Croup is most common in children 6 months to 3 years of age, with a peak in fall and early winter. It typically follows a common cold. Symptomatic reinfection is common, yet reinfections are usually mild. In adolescents, it manifests as laryngitis.
# Chunk 7419
Epiglottitis is a medical emergency because of the risk of sudden airway obstruction. This illness is now rare and usually caused by group A streptococcus or Staphylococcus aureus or Haemophilus influenza type b in unimmunized patients. Patients typically prefer sitting, often with the head held forward, the mouth open, and the jaw thrust forward (sniffing position). Lateral radiograph reveals thickened and bulging epiglottis (thumb sign) and swelling of the aryepiglottic folds. The diagnosis is confirmed by direct observation of the inflamed and swollen supraglottic structures and swollen, cherry-red epiglottitis, which should be performed only in the operating room with an anesthesiologist and a competent surgeon prepared to place an endotracheal tube or perform a tracheostomy if needed. Epiglottitis requires antibiotic therapy and endotracheal intubation to maintain the airway. Clinical recovery is rapid, and most children can be extubated safely within 48 to 72 hours.
# Chunk 7420
+, frequently present; –, absent; ±, may or may not be present; ++, present and usually pronounced.

Figure 107-1 Croup (laryngotracheobronchitis). A, Posteroanterior view of the upper airway shows the so-called steeple sign, the tapered narrowing of the immediate subglottic airway (arrows). B, Lateral view of the upper airway shows good delineation of the supraglottic anatomy. The subglottic trachea is hazy and poorly defined (arrow) because of the inflammatory edema that has obliterated the sharp undersurface of the vocal cords and extends down the trachea in a diminishing manner. (From Bell LM: Middle respiratory tract infections. In Jenson HB, Baltimore RS: Pediatric Infectious Diseases: Principles and Practice, ed 2, Philadelphia, 2002, Saunders, p 774.) phosphate (0.6 to 1 mg/kg) may be given once intramuscularly or dexamethasone (0.6 to 1 mg/kg) once orally. Alternatively prednisolone (2 mg/kg per day) may be given orally in two to three divided doses. For significant airway compromise, administration of aerosolized racemic (Dand L-) epinephrine reduces subglottic edema by adrenergic vasoconstriction, temporarily producing marked clinical improvement. The peak effect is within 10 to 30 minutes and fades within 60 to 90 minutes. A rebound effect may occur, with worsening of symptoms as the effect of the drug dissipates. Aerosol treatment may need to be repeated every 20 minutes (for no more than 1 to 2 hours) in severe cases.
# Chunk 7421
The incubation period is 7 to 10 days. Patients are most contagious during the first 2 weeks of cough. The peak incidence of pertussis in the United States is among those less than 4 months of age—infants too young to be completely immunized and most likely to have severe complications. The annual rate of pertussis was approximately 100 to 200 cases per 100,000 population in the prevaccination era; worldwide there are an estimated 30 to 50 million cases of pertussis and 300,000 deaths annually. In the United States, the incidence of pertussis decreased after the introduction of vaccine but has increased steadily since the 1980s with more than 27,000 cases reported in 2010. Infections in adolescents have also been rising, likely due to waning immunity from previous vaccines. Likewise when vaccination rates are low, pertussis rates increase: there was a steady decline in the incidence of pertussis until the late 1970s in the United Kingdom, when the incidence increased dramatically as the vaccination rate declined. Epidemics also occur in fully immunized patients, as vaccine-induced immunity wanes.
# Chunk 7422
Azithromycin, clarithromycin, or erythromycin are recommended for children under 1 month of age. Azithromycin should be used in neonates due to the association between erythromycin treatment and the development of pyloric stenosis. Treatment during the catarrhal phase eradicates nasopharyngeal carriage of organisms within 3 to 4 days and may lessen symptom severity. Treatment in the paroxysmal stage does not alter the course of illness but decreases the potential for spread to others. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole is an alternative therapy among children older than 2 months, though studies of its use for this indication are limited.
# Chunk 7423
Active immunity is induced with acellular pertussis components given as a vaccine in combination with the tetanus and diphtheria toxoids (DTaP). The acellular pertussis vaccines contain two to five antigens of B. pertussis, including pertussis toxin, pertactin, filamentous hemagglutinin, and fimbrial agglutinogens, FIM-2 and FIM-3. DTaP vaccine is recommended at 2, 4, 6, and 15 to 18 months, with a booster at 4 to 6 years, and has an efficacy of 70% to 90%. A single booster dose of Tdap vaccine is recommended at 11 to 12 years or once for all adults.
# Chunk 7424
Macrolides are effective in preventing secondary cases in contacts exposed to pertussis. Underimmunized close contacts under 7 years of age should receive a booster dose of DTaP (unless a booster dose has been given within the preceding 3 years), whereas those 7 to 10 years of age should receive Tdap. All close contacts should receive prophylactic antibiotics for 5 days (azithromycin) or 7 to 14 days (clarithromycin or erythromycin, duration based on age).
# Chunk 7425
Bronchiolitis is a leading cause of hospitalization of infants. Bronchiolitis occurs almost exclusively during the first 2 years of life, with a peak age at 2 to 6 months. Many healthy children with bronchiolitis can be managed as outpatients; however, premature infants and children with chronic lung disease of prematurity, hemodynamically significant congenital heart disease, neuromuscular weakness, or immunodeficiency are at increased risk of severe, potentially fatal disease. Children acquire infection after exposure to infected family members, who typically have symptoms of an upper respiratory tract infection, or from infected children in day care. In the United States, annual peaks are usually in the late winter months from December through March.
# Chunk 7426
Available @ StudentConsult.com

Bronchiolitis caused by RSV has an incubation period of 4 to6 days. Bronchiolitis classically presents as a progressive respiratory illness similar to the common cold in its early phasewith cough and rhinorrhea. It progresses over 3 to 7 days tonoisy, raspy breathing and audible wheezing. There is usually a low-grade fever accompanied by irritability, which mayreflect the increased work of breathing. In contrast to the classic progression of disease, young infants infected with RSV may not have a prodrome and may have apnea as the first signof infection.
# Chunk 7427
Monthly injections of palivizumab, an RSV-specific monoclonal antibody, initiated just before the onset of the RSV season confers some protection from severe RSV disease. Palivizumab is indicated for some infants under 2 years old with chronic lung disease, very low birth weight, and those with hemodynamically significant cyanotic and acyanotic congenital heart disease. Immunization with influenza vaccine is recommended for all children older than 6 months and may prevent influenza-associated disease.
# Chunk 7428
Infectious agents that commonly cause community-acquired pneumonia vary by age (Table 110-1). Most common causes are respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) in infants (see Chapter 109), other respiratory viruses (parainfluenza viruses, influenza viruses, human metapneumovirus, adenoviruses) in children younger than 5 years old, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae in children older than age 5 years. Streptococcus pneumoniae is the most common bacterial cause of lobar pneumonia, and occurs in children of any age outside the neonatal period.
# Chunk 7429
Causes of pneumonia in immunocompromised persons include gram-negative enteric bacteria, mycobacteria (M. avium complex), fungi (aspergillosis), viruses (CMV), and Pneumocystis jiroveci (carinii). Pneumonia in patients with cystic fibrosis usually is caused by Staphylococcus aureus in infancy and Pseudomonas aeruginosa or Burkholderia cepacia in older patients.
# Chunk 7430
MRSA, Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus.

*Severe pneumonia, from S. pneumoniae, S. aureus, group A streptococcus, H. influenzae, or M. pneumoniae requiring admission to an intensive care unit. Antipseudomonal agents should be added if Pseudomonas is suspected.
# Chunk 7431
Viral respiratory pathogens can be diagnosed using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) or rapid viral antigen detection, but neither rules out concomitant bacterial pneumonia. M. pneumoniae should be suspected if cold agglutinins are present in peripheral blood samples and can be confirmed by Mycoplasma PCR. CMV and enterovirus can be cultured from the nasopharynx, urine, or bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. The diagnosis of M. tuberculosis is established by tuberculin skin test, serum interferon-gamma release assay, or analysis of sputum or gastric aspirates by culture, antigen detection, or PCR.
# Chunk 7432
Frontal and lateral radiographs are required to localize disease and adequately visualize retrocardiac infiltrates and are recommended for diagnosis among hospitalized children, but they are not necessary to confirm the diagnosis in well-appearing outpatients. Although there are characteristic radiographic findings of pneumonia, radiography alone cannot provide a definitive microbiologic diagnosis. Bacterial pneumonia characteristically shows lobar consolidation, or a round pneumonia, with pleural effusion in 10% to 30% of cases (Fig. 110-1).Viral pneumonia characteristically shows diffuse, streaky infiltrates of bronchopneumonia (Fig. 110-2) and hyperinflation. Atypical pneumonia, such as with M. pneumoniae and
# Chunk 7433
Figure 110-3 Mycoplasma pneumoniae infection (atypical pneumonia) in a 14-year-old boy with malaise, dry cough, and mild shortness of breath for 1 week. Frontal chest radiograph shows a diffuse pattern of increased interstitial markings, including Kerley lines. The heart is normal, and there are no focal infiltrates. Cold agglutinins were markedly elevated, and the patient responded to erythromycin. This radiographic pattern of reticulonodular interstitial disease is observed in 25% to 30% of patients with pneumonia caused by Mycoplasma pneumoniae. (From Baltimore RS: Pneumonia. In Jenson HB, Baltimore RS, editors: Pediatric Infectious Diseases: Principles and Practice, ed 2, Philadelphia, Saunders, 2002, p 808.)
# Chunk 7434
Available @ StudentConsult.com

Therapy for pneumonia includes supportive and specific treatment and depends on the degree of illness, complications, and knowledge of the infectious agent likely causing the pneumonia. Most cases of pneumonia in healthy children can be managed on an outpatient basis. However children with hypoxemia, inability to maintain adequate hydration, or moderate to severe respiratory distress should be hospitalized. Hospitalization should be considered in infants under 6 months with suspected bacterial pneumonia, those in whom there is a concern for a pathogen with increased virulence (e.g., methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus), or when concern exists about a family’s ability to care for the child and to assess symptom progression.
# Chunk 7435
Pneumonia that causes necrosis of lung tissue may evolve into a lung abscess. Lung abscess is an uncommon problem in children and usually is caused by aspiration, infection behind an obstructed bronchus, or certain virulent organisms. Anaerobic bacteria usually predominate, along with various streptococci, Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Staphylococcus aureus. Chest radiograph or CT scan reveals a cavitary lesion, often with an air-fluid level, surrounded by parenchymal inflammation. If the cavity communicates with the bronchi, organisms may be isolated from sputum. Diagnostic bronchoscopy may be indicated to exclude a foreign body and obtain microbiologic specimens. Lung abscesses usually respond to appropriate antimicrobial therapy with clindamycin, penicillin G, or ampicillin-sulbactam.
# Chunk 7436
Most children recover from pneumonia rapidly and completely, although radiographic abnormalities may take 6 to 8 weeks to return to normal. In a few children, pneumonia may persist longer than 1 month or may be recurrent. In such cases, the possibility of underlying disease must be investigated further, such as with tuberculin skin test, sweat chloride determination for cystic fibrosis, serum immunoglobulin and IgG subclass determinations, bronchoscopy to identify anatomic abnormalities or foreign body, and barium swallow for gastroesophageal reflux.
# Chunk 7437
Annual influenza vaccine is recommended for all children over 6 months of age (see Chapter 94). Trivalent, inactivated influenza vaccine is licensed for use beginning at 6 months of age; live, attenuated vaccine can be used for persons 2 to 49 years of age. Universal childhood vaccination with conjugate vaccines for H. influenzae type b and S. pneumoniae has greatly diminished the incidence of these pneumonias. The severity of RSV infections can be reduced by use of palivizumab in high-risk patients (see Chapter 109).
# Chunk 7438
The outcome of infective endocarditis caused by the most common organisms is often good. The cure rate is greater than 90% in uncomplicated endocarditis caused by viridans streptococci on a natural valve, 75% to 90% for Enterococcus endocarditis treated by a synergistic combination of antibiotics, and 60% to 75% for S. aureus endocarditis with an acute, severe presentation. The prognosis for endocarditis caused by gram-negative bacilli and rarer organisms is poor. Fungal endocarditis has the poorest prognosis, with a cure rate of about 50% even with valve replacement.
# Chunk 7439
contact with infected animals (chickens, pet iguanas, other reptiles, turtles) or from contaminated food products, such as dairy products, eggs, and poultry. A large inoculum, of 1000 to 10 billion organisms, is required because Salmonella is killed by gastric acidity. The incubation period for gastroenteritis ranges from 6 to 72 hours but usually is less than 24 hours.
# Chunk 7440
Shigella dysenteriae may cause disease by producing Shiga toxin, either alone or combined with tissue invasion. The incubation period is 1 to 7 days. Infected adults may shed organisms for 1 month. Infection is spread by person-to-person contact or by the ingestion of contaminated food with 10 to 100 organisms. The colon is selectively affected. High fever and febrile seizures may occur in addition to diarrhea.
# Chunk 7441
C. difficile-associated diarrhea may follow exposure to any antibiotic.

Important enteric parasites found in North America includeEntamoeba histolytica (amebiasis), Giardia lamblia, and Cryptosporidium parvum. Amebiasis occurs in warmer climates, whereas giardiasis is endemic throughout the United Statesand is common among infants in day care centers. E. histolytica infects the colon; amebae may pass through the bowel walland invade the liver, lung, and brain. Diarrhea is of acute onset,is bloody, and contains leukocytes. G. lamblia is transmitted through ingestion of cysts, either from contact with an infectedindividual or from food or freshwater or well water contaminated with infected feces. The organism adheres to the micro-villi of the duodenal and jejunal epithelium. Insidious onset ofprogressive anorexia, nausea, gaseousness, abdominal distention, watery diarrhea, secondary lactose intolerance, and weightloss is characteristic of giardiasis. Cryptosporidium causes mild, watery diarrhea in immunocompetent persons that resolveswithout treatment. It produces severe, prolonged diarrhea inpersons with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)(see Chapter 125).
# Chunk 7442
Typhoid fever is characterized by bacteremia and fever that usually precede the final enteric phase. Fever, headache, and abdominal pain worsen over 48 to 72 hours with nausea, decreased appetite, and constipation over the first week. If untreated, the disease persists for 2 to 3 weeks marked by significant weight loss and, occasionally, hematochezia or melena. Bowel perforation is a common complication in adults but is rare in children. Infected persons without symptoms, or chronic carriers, serve as reservoirs and sources of continuous spread.
# Chunk 7443
A chief consideration in management of a child with diarrhea is to assess the degree of dehydration as evident from clinical signs and symptoms, ongoing losses, and daily requirements(see Chapter 33). The degree of dehydration dictates the urgencyof the situation and the volume of fluid needed for rehydration.Mild to moderate dehydration usually can be treated with oralrehydration; severe dehydration usually requires intravenous (IV) rehydration and may require ICU admission.
# Chunk 7444
Available @ StudentConsult.com

Abdominal Pain Vomiting Diarrhea Failure to Thrive

Diarrhea can be caused by infection, toxins, gastrointestinal allergy (including allergy to milk or soy proteins), malabsorption defects, inflammatory bowel disease, celiac disease, or any injury to enterocytes. Specific infections are differentiated from each other by the use of stool cultures and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay or polymerase chain reaction tests, when necessary. Acute enteritis may mimic other acute diseases, such as intussusception and acute appendicitis, which are best identified by diagnostic imaging. Many noninfectious causes of diarrhea produce chronic diarrhea, with persistence for more than 14 days. Persistent or chronic diarrhea may require tests for malabsorption or invasive studies, including endoscopy and small bowel biopsy (see Chapter 129).
# Chunk 7445
HAV causes approximately half of all cases of viral hepatitis in the United States. Among U.S. children, approximately 70% to 80% of all new cases of viral hepatitis are caused by HAV, 5% to 30% by HBV, and 5% to 15% by HCV. The major risk factors for HBV and HCV are injectable drug use, frequent exposure
# Chunk 7446
Available @ StudentConsult.com

There is considerable overlap in the characteristic clinical courses of HAV, HBV, and HCV (Fig. 113-1). The preicteric phase, which lasts approximately 1 week, is characterized by headache, anorexia, malaise, abdominal discomfort, nausea, and vomiting and usually precedes the onset of clinically detectable disease. Infants with perinatal acquired HBV may have immune complexes accompanied by urticaria and arthritis before the onset of icterus. Jaundice and tender hepatomegaly are the most common physical findings and are characteristic of the icteric phase. Prodromal symptoms, particularly in children, may abate during the icteric phase. Asymptomatic or mild, nonspecific illness without icterus is common with HAV, HBV, and HCV, especially in young children. Hepatic enzymes may increase 15to 20-fold. Resolution of the hyperbilirubinemia and normalization of the transaminases may take 6 to 8 weeks.
# Chunk 7447
Alanine aminotransferase and aspartate aminotransferase levels are elevated and generally reflect the degree of parenchymal inflammation. Alkaline phosphatase, 5α-nucleotidase, and total and direct (conjugated) bilirubin levels indicate the degree of cholestasis, which results from hepatocellular and bile duct damage. The prothrombin time is a good predictor
# Chunk 7448
Figure 113-1 Clinical course and laboratory findings associated with hepatitis A, hepatitis B, and hepatitis C. ALT, Alanine aminotransferase; HAV, hepatitis A virus; anti-HBc, antibody to hepatitis B core antigen; HBeAg, hepatitis B early antigen; anti-HBe, antibody to hepatitis B early antigen; HBsAg, hepatitis B surface antigen; anti-HBs, antibody to hepatitis B surface antigen; HCV, hepatitis C virus; PCR, polymerase chain reaction.
# Chunk 7449
of severe hepatocellular injury and progression to fulminant hepatic failure (see Chapter 130).

The diagnosis of viral hepatitis is confirmed by serologic testing (see Table 113-1 and Fig. 113-1). The presence of IgM-specific antibody to HAV with low or absent IgG antibody to HAV is presumptive evidence of HAV. There is no chronic carrier state of HAV. The presence of HBsAg signifies acute or chronic infection with HBV. Antigenemia appears early in the illness and is usually transient but is characteristic of chronic infection. Maternal HBsAg status should always be determined when HBV infection is diagnosed in children younger than 1 year of age because of the likelihood of vertical transmission. Hepatitis B early antigen (HBeAg) appears in the serum with acute HBV. The continued presence of HBsAg and HBeAg in the absence of antibody to e antigen (anti-HBe) indicates high risk of transmissibility that is associated with ongoing viral replication. Clearance of HBsAg from the serum precedes a variable window period followed by the emergence of the antibody to surface antigen (anti-HBs), which indicates development of lifelong immunity and is also a marker of immunization. Antibody to core antigen (anti-HBc) is a useful marker for recognizing HBV infection during the window phase (when HBsAg has disappeared but before the appearance of anti-HBs). Anti-HBe is useful in predicting a low degree of infectivity during the carrier state. Seroconversion after HCV infection may occur 6 months after infection. A positive result of HCV enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay should be confirmed with the more specific recombinant immunoblot assay, which detects antibodies to multiple HCV antigens. Detection of HCV RNA by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a sensitive marker for active infection, and results of this test may be positive 3 days after inoculation.
# Chunk 7450
From 5% to 10% of adults with HBV develop persistent infection, defined by persistence of HBsAg in the blood for more than 6 months, compared with 90% of children who acquire HBV by perinatal transmission. Chronic HBsAg carriers are usually HBeAg-negative and have no clinical, biochemical, or serologic evidence of active hepatitis, unless there is superinfection with HDV. Approximately 10% to 15% of HBsAg carriers eventually clear HBsAg.
# Chunk 7451
HBV vaccine is recommended for routine immunization of all infants beginning at birth and for all children and adolescents through 18 years of age who have not been immunized previously (see Fig. 94-1). It also is recommended as a preexposure vaccination for older children and adults at increased risk of exposure to HBV, including persons undergoing hemodialysis, recipients of clotting factor concentrates, residents and staff of institutions for developmentally disabled persons, men who have sex with men, injectable drug users, inmates of juvenile detention and other correctional facilities, and health care workers. HBV vaccine already has shown effectiveness in reducing the incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma in high-risk populations. Routine prenatal screening for HBsAg is recommended for all pregnant women in the United States. Infants born to HBsAg-positive mothers should receive HBV vaccine and hepatitis B immunoglobulin (HBIG) (0.5 mL) within 12 hours of birth, with subsequent vaccine doses at 1 month and 6 months of age followed by testing for HBsAg and anti-HBs at 9 to 15 months of age. Infants born to mothers whose HBsAg status is unknown should receive vaccine within 12 hours of birth. If maternal testing is positive for HBsAg, the infant should receive HBIG as soon as possible (no later than 1 week of age). The combination of HBIG and vaccination is 99% effective in preventing vertical transmission of HBV. Vaccination alone without HBIG may prevent 75% of cases of perinatal HBV transmission and approximately 95% of cases of symptomatic childhood HBV infection.
# Chunk 7452
Urinary tract infections (UTIs) include cystitis (infection localized to the bladder), pyelonephritis (infection of the renal parenchyma, calyces, and renal pelvis), and renal abscess, which may be intrarenal or perinephric. The urinary tract and urine are normally sterile. Escherichia coli, ascending from bowel flora, accounts for 90% of first infections and 75% of recurrent infections. Over 90% of nephritogenic E. coli possess P fimbriae that binds to uroepithelial cells and P blood group antigens. Individuals with high-level expression of P1 blood group antigen are predisposed to pyelonephritis and bacteremia, as well as recurrent UTIs. Other bacteria commonly causing infection include Klebsiella, Proteus, Enterococcus, and Pseudomonas. Staphylococcus saprophyticus is associated with UTI in some children and in sexually active adolescent girls. S. saprophyticus, Chlamydia trachomatis, and E. coli are the chief causes of the acute urethral syndrome, or postcoital urethritis, which typically occur 12 to 72 hours after sexual intercourse.
# Chunk 7453
A short urethra predisposes girls to UTI. Uncircumcised maleinfants are at 5to 12-fold increased risk for UTI compared withcircumcised male infants. Obstruction to urine flow and urinary stasis is the major risk factor and may result from anatomicabnormalities, nephrolithiasis, renal tumor, indwelling urinarycatheter, ureteropelvic junction obstruction, megaureter, extrinsic compression, and pregnancy. Vesicoureteral reflux, whetherprimary (70% of cases) or secondary to urinary tract obstruction, predisposes to chronic infection and renal scarring. Scarring also may develop in the absence of reflux.
# Chunk 7454
Available @ StudentConsult.com

The symptoms and signs of UTI vary markedly with age. Few have high positive predictive values in neonates, with failure to thrive, feeding problems, and fever as the most consistent symptoms. Direct hyperbilirubinemia may develop secondary to gram-negative endotoxin. Infants 1 month to 2 years old may present with feeding problems, failure to thrive, diarrhea, vomiting, or unexplained fever. The symptoms may masquerade as gastrointestinal illness with colic, irritability, and screaming periods. At 2 years of age, children begin to show the classic signs of UTI such as urgency, dysuria, frequency, and abdominal or back pain. The presence of UTI should be suspected in all infants and young children with unexplained fever and in patients of all ages with fever and congenital anomalies of the urinary tract.
# Chunk 7455
The diagnosis of UTI in infants and young children requires the presence of both pyuria and at least 50,000 CFU/mL of a single pathogenic organism. For older children and adolescents, >100,000 CFU/mL indicates infection. Urine samples for urinalysis should be examined promptly (within 20 minutes) or refrigerated until cultured. Urine obtained by midstream, clean-catch technique for older children and adolescents is an appropriate collection method, whereas transurethral catheterization is the appropriate method for younger children and infants in which antibiotics are being started. Perineal bags for urine collection are prone to contamination and are not recommended for urine collection for culture. If there
# Chunk 7456
Urinalysis showing pyuria (leukocyturia of >10 white blood cells [WBCs]/mm3) suggests infection, but also is consistent with urethritis, vaginitis, nephrolithiasis, glomerulonephritis, and interstitial nephritis. Urinary dipstick tests that combine both the leukocyte esterase and nitrite (or positive leukocyte esterase and positive microscopy for bacteria) have sensitivity of 70% and specificity of 99% for detecting a UTI. Either test used alone has poor sensitivity.
# Chunk 7457
The diagnosis of a UTI is confirmed by a positive urine culture, but this does not distinguish between upper tract andlower tract infection. Localization of a UTI is importantbecause upper UTI is associated more frequently with bacteremia and with anatomic abnormalities than is uncomplicated cystitis. The clinical manifestations of UTI do notreliably distinguish the site of infection in neonates, infants,and toddlers. Fever and abdominal pain may occur with either lower or upper UTI, although high fever, costovertebral tenderness, high erythrocyte sedimentation rate, leukocytosis, and bacteremia each suggest upper tract involvement.DMSA scan is sensitive for detecting acute pyelonephritisbut not commonly used.
# Chunk 7458
is uncertainty about diagnosis of UTI in a younger child or Neonates with UTI are treated for 10 to 14 days with par-infant, urine can be collected by the most convenient method enteral antibiotics because of the higher rate of bacteremia. for urinalysis and if suggestive of infection, collect urine by Older children with UTI are treated for 7 to 14 days. Initial catheterization prior to starting antibiotics. treatment with parenteral antibiotics is determined by clinical status. Parenteral antibiotics should be continued until there is clinical improvement (typically 24 to 48 hours). Specificantibiotic therapy should be guided by the local antimicrobial susceptibility patterns and the results of the patient’surine cultures because of increasing problems related to antimicrobial resistance. Commonly used parenteral antibiotics include ceftriaxone or gentamicin. Oral regimens include acephalosporin, amoxicillin plus clavulanic acid, or trimethoprim sulfamethoxazole. Infants and children who do notshow the expected clinical response within 2 days of startingantimicrobial therapy should be re-evaluated, have anotherurine specimen obtained for culture, and undergo imagingpromptly.
# Chunk 7459
Table 116-1 Features of Sexually Transmitted Infections Caused by Chlamydia trachomatis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae* FEATURE C. TRACHOMATIS N. GONORRHOEAE Incubation period 5–12 days 3–14 days Possible presentations Pharyngitis, conjunctivitis (including neonatal conjunctivitis), disseminated disease (arthritis, dermatitis, endocarditis, meningitis)
# Chunk 7460
Nausea, vomiting (variable)

Weakness, syncope, dizziness (variable)

Diagnostic tests NAAT, culture (using Thayer-Martin selective media) NAAT hpf, High-powered field; NAAT, nucleic acid amplification test; PID, pelvic inflammatory disease; PMN, polymorphonuclear cells. *Coinfection is common, and clinical presentations have significant overlap.
# Chunk 7461
Direct extension of N. gonorrhoeae, often in combination with C. trachomatis, to the endometrium, fallopian tubes, and peritoneum causes pelvic inflammatory disease (PID). PID complications include tubo-ovarian abscess, perihepatitis (Fitz-Hugh-Curtis syndrome, an inflammation of the liver capsule), and infertility. The differential diagnosis of PID includes ectopic pregnancy, septic abortion, ovarian cyst torsion or rupture, urinary tract infection, appendicitis, mesenteric lymphadenitis, and inflammatory bowel disease. Pelvic ultrasound may detect thickened adnexal structures and is the imaging study of choice to exclude other possible diagnoses. Minimum clinical criteria for diagnosis of PID are lower abdominal tenderness with uterine, adnexal, or cervical motion tenderness. Additional criteria that support the diagnosis are fever, mucopurulent cervix discharge, elevated white blood cell (WBC) count, elevated inflammatory markers, and documented infection with N. gonorrhoeae or C. trachomatis. Adolescents should be hospitalized for treatment if there is uncertainty about the diagnosis; pregnancy; no clinical response to oral therapy within 72 hours; inability to adhere to or tolerate oral therapy; a tubo-ovarian abscess; or severe illness with high fever, nausea, and vomiting. The recommended parenteral treatment for hospitalized patients is cefotetan or cefoxitin, plus doxycycline orally. The recommended ambulatory treatment of PID for younger persons is ceftriaxone (250 mg) in a single intramuscular (IM) dose, plus doxycycline orally for 14 days, with or without metronidazole for 14 days. Follow-up examination should be performed within 72 hours.
# Chunk 7462
N. gonorrhoeae, a gram-negative coccus, is often seen microscopically as diplococci. Gonorrhea is a common STI among adolescents. The highest incidence in the United States is in 15to 24-year-old females and 20to 24-year-old males, and incidence rates differ by race. The organism causes infection at the site of acquisition, which commonly results in mucopurulent cervicitis and urethritis (see Table 116-1), but infection of the rectum and pharynx can also occur. Disseminated gonococcal infections can occur with hematogenous spread and results in petechial or pustular acral skin lesions, asymmetric arthralgia, tenosynovitis or septic arthritis, and, occasionally, endocarditis or meningitis. Perinatal transmission of maternal infection can lead to neonatal sepsis and meningitis (see Chapter 65) and ophthalmia neonatorum (see Chapter 119).
# Chunk 7463
Chlamydia is the most frequently diagnosed bacterial STI in adolescents and accounts for most cases of nongonococcal urethritis and cervicitis (see Table 116-1). There is a 5:1 female-to-male ratio. Males often have dysuria and a mucopurulent discharge, although approximately 25% may be asymptomatic. Women are more often asymptomatic (approximately 70%) or may have minimal symptoms including dysuria, mild abdominal pain, or vaginal discharge. Prepubertal girls may have vaginitis. At least 30% of persons with gonococcal cervicitis, urethritis, proctitis, or epididymitis have C. trachomatis coinfection.
# Chunk 7464
Chlamydia infection usually is diagnosed by the detection of bacterial nucleic acids (polymerase chain reaction [PCR] tests, using ligase chain reaction and transcription-mediated amplification) of cervical, urethral, and early morning first-voided urine specimens. Amplification tests have supplanted less sensitive culture and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay tests. Because of false positive results, only culture should be used for medicolegal purposes to confirm C. trachomatis infection in cases of suspected sexual abuse.
# Chunk 7465
The treatment of choice for all stages of syphilis is parenteral penicillin G. Primary syphilis, secondary syphilis, and early latent syphilis are treated with a single IM dose of benzathine penicillin G. Tertiary, late latent, and latent syphilis of unknown duration are treated with three doses at 1-week intervals. Neurosyphilis is treated with intravenous aqueous crystalline penicillin G for 10 to 14 days. A systemic, febrile Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction occurs in 15% to 20% of syphilitic patients treated with penicillin.
# Chunk 7466
Primary genital herpes is characterized by multiple painful, grouped vesicles or ulcerative and crusted external genital lesions on an erythematous base (see Table 116-2). Infemales the cervix is also involved. Symptoms may includeregional lymphadenopathy, discharge, and dysuria. Primaryillness lasts 10 to 20 days with recurrences in 50% to 80% ofpatients. Secondary, recurrent, or reactivation eruptions are not as dramatic and are not associated with systemicsymptoms. In primary infection, viral shedding lasts 1 to2 weeks, and the entire course from vesicle and ulcer onset resolves over 16 to 20 days. In recurrent disease, virus shedding lasts for less than 7 days, and the course resolves over8 to 10 days. Many persons experience five to eight recurrences per year. Some primary and many recurrent episodesare asymptomatic.
# Chunk 7467
Viral cultures and PCR are the preferred methods of diagnosis; culture typically shows cytopathic effect in 1 to 3 days and seldom takes longer than 5 days. PCR assays have increased sensitivity over culture. Viral shedding is intermittent after primary infection, so both culture and PCR can fail to detect latent infection. Serologic testing is useful for primary infection only (to show seroconversion between acute and convalescent sera), and positive serologies persist lifelong. Titers are not helpful in guiding management of recurrences.
# Chunk 7468
Oral famciclovir and valacyclovir are effective treatments in reducing the severity and duration of symptoms in primary cases and may reduce recurrences. Once-daily suppressive therapy reduces the frequency of genital herpes recurrences by 70% to 80% among patients who have frequent recurrences (more than six recurrences per year). Local hygiene and sitz baths may relieve discomfort. The use of condoms provides some protection against sexual transmission of HSV.
# Chunk 7469
Available @ StudentConsult.com

Trichomoniasis is caused by the protozoan T. vaginalis and often is associated with other STIs such as gonorrhea and Chlamydia. Infection is asymptomatic in as many as 90% of men and 85% of women. Symptomatic males can have urethritis. Symptomatic females have vaginitis with thin, malodorous, frothy yellow-green discharge, vulvar irritation, and cervical “strawberry hemorrhages” (see Table 116-3). Diagnosis is based on visualization of motile, flagellated protozoans in the urine or in a saline wet mount, which has a sensitivity of only 60% to 70% among symptomatic women. Culture is the most sensitive method of diagnosis. Treatment of both sexual partners with oral metronidazole or tinidazole in a single dose is recommended.
# Chunk 7470
Available @ StudentConsult.com

HPV, the cause of genital warts (condylomata acuminata), is the most common STI in the United States with the highest prevalence rates among 15to 24-year-olds. Most HPV infections are asymptomatic or subclinical. HPV types 6 and 11 cause 90% of genital warts and are nononcogenic. HPV types 16 and 18 are associated with 70% of cases of cervical cancer. HPV types 31, 33, and 35 are also oncogenic.
# Chunk 7471
Usually only one bone is involved. The femur, tibia, or humerus is affected in approximately two thirds of patients. Approximately 15% of cases involve the bones of the hands or feet, and 10% involve the pelvis. Vertebral osteomyelitis is notable for an insidious onset, vague symptoms, backache, occasional spinal cord compression, and, usually, little associated fever or systemic toxicity. Patients with osteomyelitis of the pelvis may present with fever, limp, and vague abdominal, hip, groin, or thigh pain. Pyomyositis of pelvic muscles may mimic osteomyelitis.
# Chunk 7472
Figure 117-2 Multifocal acute osteomyelitis in a 3-week-old infant with multiple joint swelling and generalized malaise. Frontal (A) and lateral (B) radiographs of the left knee show focal destruction of the distal femoral metaphysis with periosteal reaction and generalized soft tissue swelling. Frontal (C) and lateral (D) views of the right knee show an area of focal bone destruction at the distal femoral metaphysis with periosteal reaction and medial soft tissue swelling. Needle aspiration of multiple sites revealed Staphylococcus aureus. (From Moffett KS, Aronoff SC: Osteomyelitis. In Jenson HB, Baltimore RS, editors: Pediatric Infectious Diseases: Principles and Practice, ed 2, Philadelphia, 2002, Saunders, p 1038.) avascular bone that have separated from adjacent bone, frequently are covered with a thickened sheath, or involucrum, both of which are hallmarks of chronic osteomyelitis.
# Chunk 7473
Conjunctivitis is common in young children, especially if they come in contact with other children with conjunctivitis. Predisposing factors for bacterial infection include nasolacrimal duct obstruction, sinus disease, ear infection, and allergic disease when children rub their eyes frequently. Conjunctivitis occurs in 1% to 12% of neonates. A mild to moderate chemical conjunctivitis commonly is present from 24 to 48 hours of age in most newborns who receive ophthalmic silver nitrate as gonococcal prophylaxis. Approximately 50% of infants born vaginally to infected mothers have neonatal acquisition of C. trachomatis, in which the risk of chlamydial conjunctivitis (inclusion conjunctivitis) is 25% to 50%.
# Chunk 7474
Assessing fever and neutropenia in immunocompromised persons requires blood cultures for bacterial and fungal pathogens obtained by peripheral venipuncture and from all lumens of any indwelling vascular catheters. A complete blood count with differential, C-reactive protein, complete chemistry panel, culture of urine and Gram staining/culture of potential sites of specific infection found during history and physical should be performed. Antigen tests, especially for serum cryptococcal antigen, should be considered. Chest radiographs are important to assess for the presence of pulmonary infiltrates. Specialized imaging studies, such as the CT or MRI, can be useful in selected cases, such as with suspected sinusitis or intra-abdominal infection, or to further delineate the location and extent of abnormalities seen on plain radiographs. Sinus infection with bacteria, Aspergillus, or Zygomycetes is common in neutropenic hosts and may be detected only on the CT scan.
# Chunk 7475
Immunocompromised susceptible persons exposed to chickenpox within 2 days before the onset of rash until 5 days after the onset of rash in the index case should receive varicella zoster immune globulin (VZIG). Modified infection after VZIG may not result in protective immunity, and persons who receive VZIG prophylaxis should be considered still at risk with any subsequent exposures.
# Chunk 7476
Many microorganisms cause catheter-related infections, most commonly Staphylococcus aureus, coagulase-negative staphylococci, Enterococcus, and Candida (Table 121-1).Gram-positive cocci, primarily staphylococci, cause more than 50% of central venous catheter associated bacteremias and exit site infections. Other skin flora, diphtheroids, and Bacillus are often involved. Gram-negative organisms cause 25% to 40% of infections. Polymicrobial infections of central venous catheters are common. Fungal catheter infections, usually Candida albicans, are most common among persons receiving broad-spectrum antibiotics or parenteral nutrition.
# Chunk 7477
S. aureus and coagulase-negative staphylococci such as oxacillin, nafcillin, or vancomycin. Antibiotic regimens should be tailored to the specific organism identified. Eradication of infection can be accomplished without removal of the central line in 89% of uncomplicated bacteremic infections, 94% of exit site infections, and 25% of tunnel infections. If the patient is not critically ill and the pathogen is likely to be susceptible to antibiotic therapy, a trial of antibiotics is given through the infected catheter. The total duration of therapy depends on the pathogen and the duration of positive cultures and is usually 10 to 14 days after sterilization of the bloodstream. Catheter removal is indicated with sepsis, septic thrombophlebitis, clinical deterioration (despite appropriate therapy), persistently positive blood culture results after 48 to 72 hours of appropriate antimicrobial therapy, embolic lesions, or fungal infection because of poor response to antifungal therapy alone (see Fig. 121-1). Infection of the pocket around an implanted port is unlikely to respond to antibiotics, and removal of the foreign body is usually necessary.
# Chunk 7478
Indwelling catheters used for peritoneal dialysis may develop exit site infections, tunnel infections, or lead to peritonitis. The usual route of infection is from the skin surface along the tunnel and into the peritoneum. The most common pathogens are skin flora, including Staphylococcus; organisms that contaminate water, such as Pseudomonas and Acinetobacter; enteric flora, such as E. coli and Klebsiella; and fungi, such as
# Chunk 7479
Late disease begins weeks to months after infection. Arthritis is the usual manifestation and may develop in 50% to 60% of untreated patients. The male to female ratio is 7:1. The knee is involved in greater than 90% of cases, but any joint may be affected. Symptoms may resolve over 1 to 2 weeks but often recur in other joints. If untreated most cases resolve, but chronic erosive arthritis persists in 10% of patients as the episodes increase in duration and severity. Cardiac abnormalities occur in approximately 10% of untreated patients. Neuroborreliosis, the late manifestations of Lyme disease involving the central nervous system (CNS), is rarely reported in children.
# Chunk 7480
Epidemic typhus Rickettsia prowazekii Humans Louse feces Africa, South America, Central America, Mexico, Asia
# Chunk 7481
Available @ StudentConsult.com

The incubation period of Rocky Mountain spotted fever is 2 to 14 days, with an average of 7 days. The onset is nonspecific with headache, malaise, and fever. A pale, rose-red macular or maculopapular rash appears in 90% of cases. The rash begins peripherally and spreads to involve the entire body, including palms and soles. The early rash blanches on pressure and is accentuated by warmth. It progresses over hours or days to a petechial and purpuric eruption that appears first on the feet and ankles, then the wrists and hands, and progresses centripetally to the trunk and head. Myalgias, especially of the lower extremities, and intractable headaches are common. Severe cases progress with splenomegaly, myocarditis, renal impairment, pneumonitis, and shock.
# Chunk 7482
Malaria is a worldwide problem with transmission in more than 100 countries with a combined population of more than 1.6 billion people. Malaria is an important cause of fever and morbidity in the tropical world. The principal areas of transmission are sub-Saharan Africa, southern Asia, Southeast Asia, Mexico, Haiti, the Dominican Republic, Central and South America, Papua New Guinea, and the Solomon Islands. Approximately 1000 to 2000 imported cases are recognized annually in the United States, with most cases occurring among infected foreign civilians from endemic areas who travel to the United States and among U.S. citizens who travel to endemic areas without appropriate chemoprophylaxis.
# Chunk 7483
Table 123-1 Characteristics of Plasmodium Species Causing Malaria CHARACTERISTIC P. FALCIPARUM P. VIVAX P. OVALE P. MALARIAE P. KNOWLESI Exoerythrocytic cycle 5.5–7 days 6–8 days 9 days 12–16 days 8-9 days Erythrocytic cycle 48 hours 42–48 hours 49–50 hours 72 hours 24 hours
# Chunk 7484
Usual periodicity of None 48 hours 48 hours 72 hours 24 hours febrile attacks

Duration of febrile 16–36 hours (may be 8–12 hours 8–12 hours 8–10 hours Unknown paroxysm longer)
# Chunk 7485
Available @ StudentConsult.com

Pinworm is caused by Enterobius vermicularis, a nematode that is distributed worldwide. Enterobiasis affects individuals at all socioeconomic levels, especially children. Crowded living conditions predispose to infection. Humans ingest the eggs carried on hands, present in house dust or on bedclothes. The eggs hatch in the stomach, and the larvae migrate to the cecum and mature. At night the females migrate to the perianal area to lay their eggs, which are viable for 2 days.
# Chunk 7486
Adult tapeworm infections T. solium (pork tapeworm) Ingestion of contaminated raw/ Praziquantel undercooked pork and S. japonicum). S. haematobium is prevalent in Africa and the Middle East; S. mansoni in Africa, the Middle East, the Caribbean, and South America; S. japonicum in China, the Philippines, and Indonesia; S. mekongi in the Far East; and S. intercalatum in West Africa.
# Chunk 7487
The manifestations of schistosomiasis result from eggs that are trapped at the site of deposition or at metastatic locations. Within 3 to 12 weeks of infection, while the worms are maturing, a syndrome of fever, malaise, cough, abdominal pain, and rash can occur. This syndrome is followed by a resultant inflammatory response that leads to further symptoms. Katayama fever is an acute condition, with fever, weight loss, hepatosplenomegaly, and eosinophilia. Eggs may be found in the urine (S. haematobium) or stool (S. mansoni and S. japonicum)of infected individuals. Sanitary measures, molluscacides, and therapy for infected individuals may help control the illness.
# Chunk 7488
E. granulosus has a worldwide distribution and is endemic in sheep-raising and cattle-raising areas of Australia, South America, South Africa, the former Soviet Union, and the Mediterranean region. The prevalence is highest in children. Symptoms caused by E. granulosus result from space-occupyingcysts. Pulmonary cysts may cause hemoptysis, cough, dyspnea,and respiratory distress. Brain cysts appear as tumors; livercysts cause problems as they compress and obstruct blood flow.Ultrasonography identifies cystic lesions, and the diagnosis isconfirmed by serologic testing. Large or asymptomatic granulosa cysts are removed surgically. Treatment with albendazolehas shown some benefit.
# Chunk 7489
Several patient-related factors are associated with an increased chance of transmission. Of these a positive acid-fast smear of the sputum most closely correlates with infectivity. Children with primary pulmonary tuberculosis disease rarely, if ever, infect other children or adults. Tubercle bacilli are relatively sparse in the endobronchial secretions of children with primary pulmonary tuberculosis, and a significant cough is usually lacking. When young children cough, they rarely produce sputum, lacking the tussive force necessary to project and suspend infectious particles of the requisite size. Hospitalized children with suspected pulmonary tuberculosis are placed initially in respiratory isolation. Most infectious patients become noninfectious within 2 weeks of starting effective treatment, and many become noninfectious within several days.
# Chunk 7490
Miliary tuberculosis refers to widespread hematogenous dissemination to multiple organs. The lesions are of roughly the same size as a millet seed, from which the name miliary is derived. Miliary tuberculosis is characterized by fever, general malaise, weight loss, lymphadenopathy, night sweats, and hepatosplenomegaly. Diffuse bilateral pneumonitis is common, and meningitis may be present. The chest radiograph reveals bilateral miliary infiltrates, showing overwhelming infection. The TST may be nonreactive as a result of anergy. Liver or bone marrow biopsy is useful for the diagnosis.
# Chunk 7491
Tuberculous meningitis most commonly occurs in children under 5 years old and often within 6 months of primary infection. Tubercle bacilli that seed the meninges during the primary infection replicate, triggering an inflammatory response. This condition may have an insidious onset, initially characterized by low-grade fever, headache, and subtle personality change. Progression of the infection results in basilar meningitis with impingement of the cranial nerves and is manifested by meningeal irritation and, eventually, increased intracranial pressure, deterioration of mental status, and coma. Computed tomography (CT) scans show hydrocephalus, edema, periventricular lucencies, and infarctions. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis reveals pleocytosis (50 to 500 leukocytes/mm3), which early in the course of disease may be either lymphocytes or polymorphonuclear leukocytes. Glucose is low, and protein is significantly elevated. Acid-fast bacilli are not detected frequently in the CSF by either routine or fluorescent staining procedures. Although culture is the standard for diagnosis, PCR for M. tuberculosis is useful to confirm meningitis.
# Chunk 7492
Skeletal tuberculosis results from either hematogenous seeding or direct extension from a caseous lymph node. This is usually a chronic disease with an insidious onset that may be mistaken for chronic osteomyelitis caused by Staphylococcus aureus. Radiographs reveal cortical destruction. Biopsy and culture are essential for proper diagnosis. Tuberculosis of the spine, Pott’s disease, is the most common skeletal site followed by the hip as well as fingers and toes (dactylitis).
# Chunk 7493
Two types of tests are used to detect the immune response to M. tuberculosis and are used to screen patients for latent tuberculosis and investigation of active tuberculosis. The TST response to tuberculin antigen is a manifestation of a T cell−mediated delayed hypersensitivity. The Mantoux test, an intradermal injection of 5 TU (tuberculin units) of purified protein derivative standard (PPD-S), usually on the volar surface of the forearm, is the standard TST. It is usually positive 2 to 6 weeks after onset of infection (occasionally 3 months) and at the time of symptomatic illness. This test is preferred in children less than 5 years of age. It may also be used in other settings such as contact investigations or in older patients. Only persons at high risk should be offered a Mantoux test (Table 124-1). False-negative responses may occur early in the illness, with use of inactivated antigen (as a result of poor storage practice or inadequate administration), or as a result of immunosuppression (secondary to underlying illness, AIDS, malnutrition, or overwhelming tuberculosis). Tests with questionable results should be repeated after several weeks of therapy and adequate nutrition. Because of poor nutrition, a high proportion of internationally adopted children arriving in the United States have an initial false-positive TST. All internationally adopted children with an initially negative TST should have a repeat TST after 3 months in the United States. The TST is interpreted based on the host status and size of induration (Table 124-2).
# Chunk 7494
Isoniazid-susceptible 9 months of isoniazid, once a day If daily therapy is not possible, DOT twice a week can be used for 9 months.
# Chunk 7495
A 9-month regimen of isoniazid and rifampin cures greater than 98% of cases of drug-susceptible pulmonary tuberculosis. After daily administration for the first 1 to 2 months, both drugs can be given daily or twice weekly for the remaining 7 to 8 months, with equivalent results and low rates of adverse reactions. The addition of pyrazinamide for the first 2 months of the regimen reduces the total duration of treatment to 6 months and has similar efficacy. Noncompliance, or nonadherence, is a major problem in tuberculosis control because of the long-term nature of treatment and the sometimes difficult social circumstances of the patients. As treatment regimens become shorter, adherence assumes an even greater importance. Improvement in compliance occurs with directly observed therapy, which means that the health care worker is physically present when the medications are administered, and is the standard of care in most settings.
# Chunk 7496
The only available vaccine against tuberculosis is the bacille Calmette-Guérin vaccine. The original vaccine organism was a strain of Mycobacterium bovis attenuated by subculture every 3 weeks for 13 years. The preferred route of administration is intradermal injection with a syringe and needle because this is the only method that permits accurate measurement of an individual dose. The official recommendation of the World Health Organization is a single dose administered during infancy. This vaccine is not routinely used in the United States. Some studies show bacille Calmette-Guérin to provide 80% to 90% protection from tuberculosis, and other studies show no protective efficacy at all. Many infants who receive bacille Calmette-Guérin vaccine never have a positive TST reaction. When a reaction does occur, the induration size is usually less than 10 mm, and the reaction wanes after several years.
# Chunk 7497
The cause of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) is the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), a single-stranded RNA virus of the retrovirus family that produces a reverse transcriptase enabling the viral RNA to act as a template for DNA transcription and integration into the host genome. HIV-1 causes 99% of all human cases. HIV-2, which is less virulent, causes 1% to 9% of cases in parts of Africa and is very rare in the United States.
# Chunk 7498
Horizontal transmission of HIV is by sexual contact (vaginal, anal, or orogenital), percutaneous contact (from contaminated needles or other sharp objects), or mucous membrane exposure to contaminated blood or body fluid. Transmission by contaminated blood and blood products has been eliminated in developed countries but still occurs in developing countries. Vertical transmission of HIV from mother to infant may occur transplacentally in utero, during birth, or by breastfeeding. Risk factors for perinatal transmission include prematurity, rupture of membranes more than 4 hours, and high maternal circulating levels of HIV at delivery. Perinatal transmission can be decreased from approximately 25% to less than 8% with antiretroviral treatment of the mother before and during delivery and postnatal treatment of the infant. Breastfeeding by HIV-infected mothers increases the risk of vertical transmission by 30% to 50%. In untreated infants, the mean incubation interval for development of an AIDS-defining condition after vertical transmission is 5 months (range, 1 to 24 months) compared with a longer incubation period after horizontal transmission of 7 to 10 years.
# Chunk 7499
Worldwide, as of 2010, approximately 34 million persons are living with HIV and 3.4 million of them are children. Therewere 2.7 million new infections in 2010 with approximately390,000 new infections in children. Roughly 70% of all people living with HIV reside in sub-Saharan Africa. Worldwide, 1.8 million people died from HIV-related illnesses in 2010. In2010 the estimated number of people over the age of 13 yearsand living with HIV in the United States was 1.1 million, and approximately 9800 children are infected. Vertical transmission is much less common than previously, and approximately50 infants are born with HIV infection each year in the UnitedStates. Most pediatric cases now occur in adolescents whoengage in unprotected sexual activities. Worldwide the numberof deaths related to HIV and the number of children infected with HIV have steadily decreased in large part due to treatmentwith antiretroviral therapy.
# Chunk 7500
HIV infection can be diagnosed definitively by 1 month of age and in virtually all infected infants by 6 months of age using viral diagnostic assays (RNA polymerase chain reaction [PCR], DNA PCR, or virus culture). Maternal antibodies may be detectable until 12 to 15 months of age, and a positive serologic test is not considered diagnostic until 18 months of age.
# Chunk 7501
HIV DNA PCR is the preferred virologic method for diagnosing HIV infection during infancy and identifies 38% of infected infants at 48 hours and 96% at 28 days. Diagnostic viral testing should be performed by 48 hours of age, at 1 to 2 months of age, and at 3 to 6 months of age. An additional test at 14 days of age is often performed because the diagnostic sensitivity increases rapidly by 2 weeks of age. HIV RNA PCR has 25% to 40% sensitivity during the first weeks of life, increasing to 90% to 100% by 2 to 3 months of age. However a negative HIV RNA PCR cannot be used to exclude infection and, thus, is not recommended as first-line testing.
# Chunk 7502
HIV infection of an exposed infant is confirmed if virologic tests are positive on two separate occasions. HIV infection can be reasonably excluded in nonbreastfed infants with at least two virologic tests performed at older than 1 month of age, with one test being performed after 4 months of age, or at least two negative antibody tests performed after 6 months of age, with an interval of at least 1 month between the tests. Loss of HIV antibody combined with negative HIV DNA PCR confirms absence of HIV infection. Persistence of a positive HIV antibody test after 18 months of age indicates HIV infection.
# Chunk 7503
Routine immunizations are recommended to prevent vaccine-preventable infections but may result in suboptimal immune responses. In addition to heptavalent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine, 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine is recommended for HIV-infected children at 2 years of age and adolescents and adults with CD4 counts at or above 200/mm3. Because of the risk of fatal measles in children with AIDS, children without severe immunosuppression should receive their first dose of MMR at 12 months of age and may receive the booster as soon as 4 weeks later. Varicella zoster virus (VZV) vaccine should be given only to asymptomatic, nonimmunosuppressed children beginning at 12 months of age as two doses of vaccine at least 3 months apart. Inactivated split influenza virus vaccine should be administered annually to all HIV-infected children at or after 6 months of age. HIV-infected children exposed to varicella or measles should receive varicella zoster immune globulin or immunoglobulin prophylaxis.
# Chunk 7504
The rate of vertical transmission is reduced to less than 8% by chemoprophylaxis with a regimen of zidovudine to the mother (100 mg five times/24 hours orally) started by 4 weeks gestation, continued during delivery (2 mg/kg loading dose intravenously followed by 1 mg/kg/hour intravenously), and then administered to the newborn for the first 6 weeks of life (2 mg/kg every 6 hours orally). Other regimens incorporating single-dose nevirapine for infants have been shown to be similarly effective and are used in developing countries. The current recommendations for the United States include a 6-week prophylactic with zidovudine for the infant in combination with maternal intrapartum therapy. The maternal regimen includes continuation of antiretroviral therapy (if appropriate) and intravenous zidovudine if the mother’s viral load is >400 copies/mL or is unknown ( http://aidsinfo.nih.gov/ contentfiles/lvguidelines/peri_recommendations.pdf ). Scheduled cesarean section at 38 weeks to prevent vertical transmission is recommended for women with HIV RNA levels greater than 1000 copies/mL, but it is unclear whether cesarean section is beneficial when viral load is less than 1000 copies/mL or when membranes have already ruptured.
# Chunk 7505
The history may suggest a diagnosis and direct the evaluation, which should include a full examination as well as a thorough abdominal examination. Extraintestinal disorders may produce GI manifestations (e.g., emesis with group A streptococcal pharyngitis, abdominal pain with lower lobe pneumonia). The examination should begin with a careful external inspection for abdominal distention, bruising or discoloration, abnormal veins, jaundice, surgical scars, and ostomies. Abnormalities of intensity and pitch of bowel sounds can occur with bowel obstruction. When palpating for tenderness, the examiner should note location, facial expression, guarding, and rebound tenderness. Palpation can also detect enlargement of the liver or spleen as well as feces and masses. If detected, organomegaly should be measured (with a tape measure), noting abnormal firmness or contour. A rectal examination, including inspection for fissures, skin tags, abscesses, and fistulous openings, should be performed for children with history suggesting constipation, GI bleeding, abdominal pain, chronic diarrhea, and suspicion of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Digital rectal examination should include assessment of anal sphincter tone, anal canal size and elasticity, tenderness, extrinsic masses, presence of fecal impaction, and caliber of the rectum. Stool should be tested for occult blood.
# Chunk 7506
A complete blood count may provide evidence for inflammation (white blood cell [WBC] and platelet count), poornutrition or bleeding (hemoglobin, red blood cell volume, reticulocyte count), and infection (WBC number and differential, presence of toxic granulation). Serum electrolytes, bloodurea nitrogen (BUN), and creatinine help define hydration status. Tests of liver dysfunction include total and direct bilirubin, alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase for evidence of hepatocellular injury, and γ-glutamyltransferase oralkaline phosphatase for evidence of bile duct injury. Hepatic synthetic function can be assessed by coagulation factor levels,prothrombin time, and albumin level. Pancreatic enzyme tests (amylase, lipase) provide evidence of pancreatic injury or inflammation. Urinalysis can gauge dehydration and identify a possible source of protein loss.
# Chunk 7507
Abdominal pain can result from injury to the intra-abdominal organs or overlying somatic structures in the abdominalwall, or from extra-abdominal diseases. Visceral pain results when autonomic nerves within the gut detect injury, transmitting sensation by nonmyelinated fibers. The pain is vague, dull,slow in onset, and poorly localized. A variety of stimuli, including normal peristalsis and various intraluminal chemical andosmotic states, activate these fibers to some degree. Regardlessof the stimulus, visceral pain is perceived when a threshold ofintensity or duration is crossed. Lower degrees of activation may result in perception of nonpainful or perhaps vaguelyuncomfortable sensations, whereas more intensive stimulation of these fibers results in pain. Overactive sensation may be thebasis of some kinds of abdominal pain, such as functional abdominal pain and irritable bowel syndrome.
# Chunk 7508
Acute abdominal pain can signal the presence of a dangerous intra-abdominal process (e.g., appendicitis or bowel obstruction) or may originate from extraintestinal sources (e.g., lower lobe pneumonia or urinary tract stone). Not all episodes of acute abdominal pain require emergency intervention. Appendicitis and volvulus, for example, must be ruled out as quickly as possible. Few patients presenting with acute abdominal pain actually have a surgical emergency, but they must beseparated from cases that can be managed conservatively.
# Chunk 7509
A standard group of laboratory tests usually is performed for acute abdominal pain (see Table 126-1). An abdominal x-ray series evaluates for bowel obstruction or nephrolithiasis. Ultrasound or computed tomography (CT) can visualize the appendix if appendicitis is suspected but the diagnosis remains in doubt. If the initial evaluation suggests intussusception, a barium or pneumatic (air) enema may be used to diagnose and treat this condition (see Chapter 129).
# Chunk 7510
Table 126-2 lists the differential diagnosis of acute abdominal pain in children. The urgent task of the clinician is to rule out surgical emergencies. In young children, malrotation with volvulus, incarcerated hernia, congenital anomalies, and intussusception are common concerns. In older children and teenagers, appendicitis is more common. An acute surgical abdomen is characterized by signs of peritonitis, including tenderness, abdominal wall rigidity, guarding, and absent or diminished bowel sounds. Helpful characteristics of onset, location, referral, and quality of pain are noted in Table 126-3.
# Chunk 7511
Available @ StudentConsult.com

Recurrent abdominal pain is a common problem, affecting more than 10% of all children. The peak incidence occurs between ages 7 and 12 years. Although the differential diagnosis of recurrent abdominal pain is fairly extensive (Table 126-4),most children do not have a serious (or even identifiable) underlying illness causing the pain.
# Chunk 7512
Associated Fever, vomiting (bilious?), diarrhea (bloody?), symptoms abdominal distention

Extraintestinal Cough, dyspnea, dysuria, urinary frequency, symptoms flank pain
# Chunk 7513
Abdominal Tenderness, distention, bowel sounds, rigidity, guarding, mass

Genitalia Testicular torsion, hernia, pelvic inflammatory disease, ectopic pregnancy
# Chunk 7514
Plain flat Bowel obstruction, appendiceal fecalith, free and upright intraperitoneal air, kidney stones abdominal films
# Chunk 7515
CT scan Intra-abdominal or pelvic abscess, appendicitis, Crohn’s disease, pancreatitis, gallstones, kidney stones
# Chunk 7516
ALT, Alanine aminotransferase; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; CBC, complete blood count; CT, computed tomography; ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; GGT, γ-glutamyltransferase.
# Chunk 7517
Intussusception* Malrotation with volvulus Ileus* Incarcerated hernia Postoperative adhesion

Children with functional abdominal pain characteristically have pain almost daily. The pain is not associated with meals Meconium ileus equivalent (cystic fibrosis) or relieved by defecation and is often associated with a ten-Duplication cyst dency toward anxiety and perfectionism. Symptoms often result from stress at school or in novel social situations. The *Common.
# Chunk 7518
pain often is worst in the morning and often prevents or delays children from attending school. Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a subset of functional abdominal pain, characterized by onset of pain at the time of a change in stool frequency or consistency, a stool pattern fluctuating between diarrhea and constipation, and relief of pain with defecation. Symptoms in IBS are linked to gut motility. Pain is commonly accompanied in both groups of children by school avoidance, secondary gains, anxiety about imagined causes, lack of coping skills, and disordered peer relationships (Table 126-5).
# Chunk 7519
Table 126-3 Distinguishing Features of Abdominal Pain in Children DISEASE ONSET LOCATION REFERRAL QUALITY COMMENTS Functional: irritable bowel syndrome Recurrent Periumbilical, splenic and hepatic flexures None Dull, crampy, intermittent; duration 2 h Family stress, school phobia, diarrhea and constipation; hypersensitive to pain from distention
# Chunk 7520
Treatment of Recurrent Abdominal Pain

A child who is repeatedly kept home from school becauseof pain receives reinforcement in the form of being excusedfrom responsibilities and withdraws from full social functioning. This tends to both increase anxiety and prolong thecourse. To break the cycle of pain and disability, the childwith functional pain must be assisted in returning to normal activities immediately. Instead of being sent home fromschool with stomachaches, a child may be allowed to take ashort break from class until symptoms abate. The child and parents should be informed that pain is likely to be worse onthe day the child returns to school as anxiety worsens dysmotility and enhances pain perception. Medications may behelpful. Fiber supplements may help to manage symptoms ofIBS. Probiotics and peppermint oil can be beneficial in treating IBS. In difficult and persistent cases, cognitive behavioral
# Chunk 7521
C. Diagnostic Criteria for Irritable Bowel Syndrome

Must include all of the following: 1. Abdominal discomfort (an uncomfortable sensation not described as pain) or pain associated with 2 or more of the following at least 25% of the time: a.
# Chunk 7522
malrotation, should be considered. Metabolic disorders (e.g.,organic acidemias, galactosemia, urea cycle defects, adrenogenital syndromes) may present with vomiting in infants. Inolder children with acute vomiting, viruses and food poisoning are common. Other infections, especially streptococcalpharyngitis, urinary tract infections, and otitis media, commonly result in vomiting. When vomiting is chronic, centralnervous system (CNS) causes (increased intracranial pressure,migraine) must be considered. Cyclic vomiting syndrome or migraine may be the etiology of recurrent vomiting. Whenabdominal pain or bilious emesis accompanies vomiting, evaluation for bowel obstruction, peptic disorders, and appendicitismust be immediately initiated.
# Chunk 7523
The history should include the onset of diarrhea, number and character of stools, estimates of stool volume, and presence of other symptoms, such as blood in the stool, fever, and weight loss. Recent travel and exposures should be documented, dietary factors should be investigated, and a list of medications recently used should be obtained. Factors that seem to worsen or improve the diarrhea should be determined. Physical examination should be thorough, evaluating for abdominal distention, tenderness, quality of bowel sounds, presence of blood in the stool or a large fecal mass on rectal examination, and anal sphincter tone.
# Chunk 7524
Laboratory testing should include stool culture and complete blood count if bacterial enteritis is suspected. If diarrhea occurs after a course of antibiotics, a Clostridium difficile toxin assay should be ordered; if stools are reported to be oily orfatty, fecal fat content or fecal elastase to test for pancreatic insufficiency should be measured. Tests for specific diagnosesshould be sent when appropriate (e.g., serum antibody testsfor celiac disease; colonoscopy for suspected ulcerative colitis). A trial of lactose restriction for several days or lactosebreath hydrogen testing is helpful in the evaluation of lactoseintolerance.
# Chunk 7525
Hirschsprung disease is characterized by delayed meconium passage in newborns, abdominal distention, vomiting, occasional fever, and foul-smelling stools. This condition is caused by failure of ganglion cells to migrate into the distal bowel, resulting in spasm and functional obstruction of the aganglionic segment. Only about 6% of infants with Hirschsprung disease pass meconium in the first 24 hours of life, compared with 95% of normal infants. Most affected babies rapidly become ill with symptoms of enterocolitis or obstruction. Affected older children do not pass large-caliber stools because of rectal spasm, and they do not have encopresis. Other causes of constipation include spinal cord abnormalities, hypothyroidism, drugs, cystic fibrosis, and anorectal malformations (see Table 126-10). A variety of systemic disorders affecting metabolism or muscle function can result in constipation. Children with developmental disabilities have a great propensity for constipation because of diminished capacity to cooperate with toileting, reduced effort or control of pelvic floor muscles during defecation, and diminished perception of the need to pass stool.
# Chunk 7526
Table 126-10 Common Causes of Constipation and Characteristic Features CAUSES OF CONSTIPATION CLINICAL FEATURES Hirschsprung disease History: Failure to pass stool in first 24 h, abdominal distention, vomiting, symptoms of enterocolitis (fever, foul-smelling diarrhea, megacolon). Not associated with large-caliber stools or encopresis Examination: Snug anal sphincter, empty, contracted rectum. May have explosive release of stool as examiner’s finger is withdrawn Laboratory: Absence of ganglion cells on rectal suction biopsy specimen, absent relaxation of the internal sphincter, “transition zone” from narrow distal bowel to dilated proximal bowel on barium enema
# Chunk 7527
For a few specific causes of constipation, directed diagnostictesting can make the diagnosis. A narrowed, aganglionic distalbowel and dilated proximal bowel on barium enema suggestsHirschsprung disease. Rectal suction biopsy confirms the absenceof ganglion cells in the rectal submucosal plexus, with hypertrophy of nerve fibers. Lack of internal anal sphincter relaxation canbe shown by anorectal manometry in Hirschsprung’s disease.Hypothyroidism is diagnosed by examination and by thyroidfunction testing. Anorectal malformations are easily detected byrectal examination. Cystic fibrosis (meconium ileus) is diagnosedby sweat chloride determination or CFTR gene mutation analysis (see Chapter 137). Most children with constipation have functional constipation and do not have any laboratory abnormality. Examination reveals normal or reduced anal sphincter tone(owing to stretching by passage of large stools). Fecal impaction isusually present, but a large-caliber, empty rectum may be found ifa stool has just been passed.
# Chunk 7528
Coagulation tests: prothrombin time, partial thromboplastin time Tests of liver dysfunction: AST, ALT, GGT, bilirubin Occult blood test of stool or vomitus Blood type and crossmatch
# Chunk 7529
Risk of caries is associated with lack of dental care and poorsocioeconomic status and, predictably, is greatest in developingcountries. Baby bottle caries is seen in 50% to 70% of low-incomeinfants. Treatment of caries is with dental restorative surgery. Thecarious portion is removed and filled with silver amalgam or plastic. If the damage is severe, a protective crown may be required;extraction of the tooth may be necessary when not salvageable.If not properly treated, dental decay results in inflammation andinfection of the dental pulp and surrounding alveolar bone, whichcan lead to abscess and facial space infections.
# Chunk 7530
Available @ StudentConsult.com

Cough Hoarseness Wheezing Abdominal Pain Failure to Thrive

The presence of GER is easy to observe in an infant who spits up. In older children, the refluxate is usually kept down by reswallowing, but GER may be suspected by associated symptoms, such as heartburn, cough, epigastric abdominal pain, dysphagia, wheezing, aspiration pneumonia, hoarse voice, failure to thrive, and recurrent otitis media or sinusitis. In severe cases of esophagitis, there may be laboratory evidence of anemia and hypoalbuminemia secondary to esophageal bleeding and inflammation.
# Chunk 7531
The presentation of EoE often varies with age. In young children, it may present with oral aversion, vomiting, and failure to thrive. In school-age children, it may present with vague abdominal pain or vomiting. In adolescents and adults, it presents with dysphagia and food impactions. These symptoms are attributed to the inflammatory response in the esophagus leading to edema and poor esophageal motility.
# Chunk 7532
The most common forms of TEF occur with esophageal atresia; the “H-type” TEF without atresia is uncommon, as is esophageal atresia without TEF (Fig. 128-3). Associated defects include the VACTERL association—vertebral anomalies (70%), anal atresia (imperforate anus) (50%), cardiac anomalies (30%), TEF (70%), renal anomalies (50%), and limb anomalies (polydactyly, forearm defects, absent thumbs, tulas (TEF) with relative frequency (%).
# Chunk 7533
Available @ StudentConsult.com

Repetitive vomiting of purely gastric contents results inloss of hydrochloric acid; the classic laboratory finding is a hypochloremic, hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis with elevated blood urea nitrogen (BUN) secondary to dehydration. Jaundice with unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia may also occur. Plain abdominal x-rays typically show a huge stomach and diminished or absent gas in the intestine(Fig. 128-4). Ultrasound examination shows marked elongation and thickening of the pylorus (Fig. 128-5). A bariumupper GI series also may be obtained whenever doubt aboutthe diagnosis exists; this shows a “string sign” caused bybarium moving through an elongated, constricted pyloricchannel.
# Chunk 7534
Endoscopy can be used to diagnose the underlying condition.Empiric therapy with H2 blockers or proton pump inhibitorscan be used but may delay diagnosis of conditions such as H. pylori. For patients with chronic epigastric pain, the possibilities of inflammatory bowel disease, anatomic abnormalitysuch as malrotation, pancreatitis, and biliary disease should beruled out by appropriate testing when suspected (see Chapter126 and Table 128-3 for recommended studies). Testing for H. pylori can be performed by biopsy during endoscopy with useof a urease test or presence histologically on tissue. If endoscopyis not done, noninvasive tests for infection can be done with reasonable accuracy with H. pylori fecal antigen and 13C urea breath tests (urea is metabolized into 13CO2 by the organism).
# Chunk 7535
If H. pylori is present in association with ulcers, it should be treated with a multidrug regimen, such as omeprazole-clarithromycin-metronidazole, omeprazole-amoxicillin-clarithromycin, or omeprazole-amoxicillin-metronidazole, given twice daily for 1 to 2 weeks. Other proton-pump inhibitors may be substituted when necessary. Bismuth compounds are effective against H. pylori and can be considered. In North America, only the subsalicylate salt is available, the use of which raises some concerns about Reye syndrome and potential salicylate toxicity. Tetracycline is useful in adults, but should be avoided in children less than 8 years of age. In the absence of H. pylori, esophagitis and peptic ulcer disease are treated with a pro-ton-pump inhibitor, which yields higher rates of healing than H2 receptor antagonists. Gastric and duodenal ulcers heal in 4 to 8 weeks in at least 80% of patients. Esophagitis requires 4 to 5 months of proton-pump inhibitor treatment for optimal healing.
# Chunk 7536
During early fetal life, the midgut is attached to the yolk sacand loops outward into the umbilical cord. Beginning ataround 10 weeks’ gestation, the bowel reenters the abdomenand rotates counterclockwise around the superior mesentericartery until the cecum arrives in the right lower quadrant.The duodenum rotates behind the artery and terminates atthe ligament of Treitz in the left upper quadrant. The baseof the mesentery becomes fixed along a broad attachmentposteriorly, running from the cecum to the ligament of Treitz (Fig. 129-1A). When rotation is incomplete or otherwiseabnormal, “malrotation” is present. Incomplete rotationoccurs when the cecum stops near the right upper quadrant, and the duodenum fails to move behind the mesenteric artery; this results in an extremely narrow mesenteric root (see Fig. 129-1B) that makes the child susceptible to mid-gut volvulus, causing intestinal obstruction or mesentericartery occlusion and intestinal infarction (Fig. 129-2). It is also common for abnormal mesenteric attachments (Laddbands) to extend from the cecum across the duodenum,causing partial obstruction.
# Chunk 7537
Available @ StudentConsult.com

About 60% of children with malrotation present withsymptoms of bilious vomiting during the first month of life.The remaining 40% present later in infancy or childhood.The emesis initially may be due to obstruction by Ladd bandswithout volvulus. When midgut volvulus occurs, the venousdrainage of the gut is impaired; congestion results in ischemia, pain, tenderness, and often bloody emesis and stools.The bowel undergoes ischemic necrosis, and the child mayappear septic. Physicians must be alert to the possibility ofvolvulus in patients with vomiting and fussiness or abdominal pain.
# Chunk 7538
Treatment is surgical. The bowel is untwisted, and Ladd bands and other abnormal membranous attachments are divided. The mesentery is spread out and flattened against the posterior wall of the abdomen by moving the cecum to the leftside of the abdomen. Sutures may be used to hold the bowel upstream dilation of the bowel and small, disused intestinedistally. When obstruction is complete or high grade, bilious vomiting and abdominal distention are present in thenewborn period. In lesser cases, as in “windsock” types of intestinal webs, the obstruction is partial, and symptoms aremore subtle.
# Chunk 7539
Plain abdominal x-rays may localize the area of atresia andidentify evidence of perforation, such as free air or calcifications typical of meconium peritonitis. Duodenal atresiaappears as a double-bubble sign (gas in the stomach andenlarged proximal duodenum), with no gas distally. Atresiasof the distal intestine are characterized by longer segments ofdilated, air-filled bowel. Contrast studies are helpful if plainfilms are not sufficient. Atresia may be a complication ofmeconium ileus associated with cystic fibrosis. Laboratory evaluation for cystic fibrosis (see Chapter 137) is indicatedin cases of small bowel atresia. A complete blood count, serum electrolytes, liver functions, and amylase should bemeasured to identify dehydration, pancreatitis, and othercomplications.
# Chunk 7540
Gastroschisis is an abdominal wall defect, not involving the umbilicus, through which intestinal contents have herniated. In contrast to omphalocele, the bowel is not covered by peritoneum or amniotic membrane. As a result, prolonged contact with the amniotic fluid typically causes a thick, exudative covering (a “peel”) on the exposed bowel. Gastroschisis is not associated with extraintestinal anomalies, but segments of intestinal atresia are common. After surgical reduction of the defect, return of normal bowel function may be slow and requires prolonged parenteral nutrition for infants with long atretic segments (short bowel syndrome) and infants with a thick peel.
# Chunk 7541
Omphalocele is an abdominal wall defect through the umbilicus caused by failure of the intestine to return to the abdomen during fetal life. The bowel remains within the umbilicalcord and is covered by peritoneum and amniotic membranes. This defect is associated with other congenital anomalies, especially cardiac defects, Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, and intestinal complications. Treatment is surgical closure, whichsometimes must be performed in stages to fit the bowel into acongenitally small abdominal cavity.
# Chunk 7542
Hirschsprung disease is a motility defect caused by failure of ganglion cell precursors to migrate into the distal bowel during fetal life. The aganglionic distal segment doesnot exhibit normal motility and is functionally obstructedsecondary to spasm. In 75% of cases, the involved segmentis limited to the rectosigmoid; total colonic involvement is seen in 8%. Rarely, long segments of small bowel also are aganglionic. “Ultrashort” segment involves only a few centimeters of distal rectum. About 95% of normal infants pass stool spontaneously by 24 hours of age; 95% of infantswith Hirschsprung disease do not. Symptoms of distalbowel obstruction occur with distention and bilious vomiting. If the diagnosis is not made quickly, enterocolitis can result, associated with a high rate of mortality. Diagnosis isbased on examination and one or more diagnostic studies. Abdominal distention is present in most cases. Digital rectalexamination reveals an empty rectum that clenches aroundthe examiner’s finger, giving the impression of an elongatedsphincter. When the finger is withdrawn, a powerful gush ofretained stool is often expelled. A deep rectal biopsy specimen obtained surgically or by using a suction biopsy instrument is required for diagnosis. When no ganglion cells areshown in the submucosal plexus, accompanied by nerve trunk hyperplasia, the diagnosis is certain. Barium enema and anorectal manometry may be used before biopsy, butfalse-negative and false-positive results can occur. Therapy is surgical. When the bowel is markedly distended orinflamed, an initial colostomy usually is performed abovethe aganglionic segment, followed weeks later by one of several definitive repair procedures. The transanal pull-throughexcises the aganglionic bowel and creates a primary colorectal anastomosis without laparotomy. This procedure can beconsidered in patients with uncomplicated involvement limited to the rectosigmoid region.
# Chunk 7543
Clinical manifestations depend on the region of involvement. UC involves only the colon, whereas CD can include the entire gut from mouth to anus. Colitis from either condition results in diarrhea, blood, and mucus in the stool; urgency; and tenesmus, a sensation of incomplete emptying after defecation. When colitis is severe, the child often awakens from sleep to pass stool. Toxic megacolon is a life-threatening complication characterized by fever, abdominal distention and pain, massively dilated colon, anemia, and low serum albumin owing to fecal protein losses. Symptoms of colitis always are present in UC and usually suggest the diagnosis early in its course. Extraintestinal manifestations of UC occur in a few patients and may include primary sclerosing cholangitis, arthritis, uveitis, and pyoderma gangrenosum (Table 129-1).
# Chunk 7544
Blood tests should include complete blood count, albumin,erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and C-reactive protein(Table 129-2). Anemia and elevated platelet counts are typical. Testing for abnormal serum antibodies can be helpfulin diagnosing IBD and in discriminating between the colitis of CD and UC. Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody is found in about 66% of UC patients and in only a few CD
# Chunk 7545
In patients with suspected IBD, an upper GI series with small bowel follow-through is often used to detect small bowel involvement. Colonoscopy is preferred over contrast enemabecause biopsy specimens can be obtained and because visualfeatures can be diagnostic. Findings in UC include diffuse carpeting of the distal or entire colon with tiny ulcers and loss of haustral folds. Within the involved segment, no skip areas arepresent. In CD, ulcerations tend to be much larger with a linear,branching, or aphthous appearance; skip areas are usually present. Upper endoscopy cannot evaluate the jejunum and ileum,but is more sensitive than contrast studies in identifying proximalCD involvement. Other methods to detect small bowel involvement include video capsule endoscopy; computed tomography (CT) scanning, which can detect small bowel disease as well as abscesses; and MR enterography, which has the advantage of noradiation and good sensitivity for finding active bowel disease.
# Chunk 7546
Anti-OmpC, Antibody to outer membrane protein C; ASCA, anti–

Saccharomyces cerevisiae antibody; atypical p-ANCA, atypical perinuclear staining by antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody; CBC, complete blood count; CD, Crohn’s disease; ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; GI, gastrointestinal; IBD, inflammatory bowel disease; SBFT, small bowel follow- through; WBC, white blood cell.
# Chunk 7547
Celiac disease is an injury to the mucosa of the small intestine caused by the ingestion of gluten (a protein component)from wheat, rye, barley, and related grains. Rice does notcontain gluten and can be eaten freely, as can special purepreparations of oats not contaminated by other grains. In itssevere form, celiac disease causes malabsorption and malnutrition. Diagnosis was based on the presence of typicalsymptoms, followed by small bowel biopsy. The availabilityof more sensitive and specific serologic testing has revealedmany patients with few or no gastrointestinal symptoms whohave early, attenuated, or latent disease. Approximately 1 in110 persons in the United States have celiac disease, but onlya small proportion have been diagnosed. The disease is seenin association with type 1 diabetes, thyroiditis, Turner syndrome, and trisomy 21.
# Chunk 7548
Serologic markers include IgA antiendomysial antibody and IgA tissue transglutaminase antibody. Because IgA deficiency iscommon in celiac disease, total serum IgA also must be measured to document the accuracy of these tests. In the absence ofIgA deficiency, either test yields a sensitivity and specificity of95%. An endoscopic small bowel biopsy is essential to confirm the diagnosis and should be performed while the patient is stilltaking gluten. The biopsy specimen shows various degrees ofvillous atrophy (short or absent villi), mucosal inflammation,crypt hyperplasia, and increased numbers of intraepitheliallymphocytes. When there is any question about response totreatment, a repeat biopsy specimen may be obtained severalmonths later. Other laboratory studies should be performed torule out complications, including complete blood count, calcium, phosphate, vitamin D, iron, total protein and albumin,and liver function tests. Mild elevations of the transaminases are common and should normalize with dietary therapy.
# Chunk 7549
SEE CHAPTER 34.

Intussusception is the “telescoping” of a segment of proximalbowel (the intussusceptum) into downstream bowel (the intussuscipiens). Most cases occur in infants 1 to 2 years old; in this age group, nearly all cases are idiopathic. Viral-induced lymphoidhyperplasia may produce a lead point in these children. In olderchildren, the proportion of cases caused by a pathologic leadpoint increases. In young children, ileocolonic intussusceptionis common; the ileum invaginates into the colon, beginning at ornear the ileocecal valve. When pathologic lead points are present,the intussusception may be ileoileal, jejunoileal, or jejunojejunal.
# Chunk 7550
Available @ StudentConsult.com

An infant with intussusception has sudden onset of crampy abdominal pain; the infant’s knees draw up, and the infant cries out and exhibits pallor with a colicky pattern occurring every 15 to 20 minutes. Feedings are refused. As the intussusception progresses, and obstruction becomes prolonged, bilious vomiting becomes prominent, and the dilated, fatigued intestine generates less pressure and less pain. As the intussuscepted bowel is pulled further and further into the downstream intestine by motility, the mesentery is pulled with it and becomes stretched and compressed. The venous outflow from the intussusceptum is obstructed, leading to edema, weeping of fluid, and congestion with bleeding. Third space fluid losses and “currant jelly” stools result. Another unexpected feature of intussusception is lethargy. Between episodes of pain, the infant is glassy-eyed and groggy and appears to have been sedated. A sausage-shaped mass caused by the swollen, intussuscepted bowel may be palpable in the right upper quadrant or epigastrium.
# Chunk 7551
The diagnosis depends on the direct demonstration of bowelwithin-bowel. A simple way of showing this is by abdominalultrasound. If the ultrasound is positive, or if good visualization has not been achieved, a pneumatic or contrast enemaunder fluoroscopy is indicated. This is a potentially useful wayto both identify and treat intussusception. Air and barium canshow the intussusception quickly and, when administered withcontrolled pressure, usually can reduce it completely. The success rate for pneumatic reduction is probably a bit higher thanhydrostatic reduction with barium and approaches 90% if donewhen symptoms have been present for less than 24 hours. Thepneumatic enema has the additional advantages over barium ofnot preventing subsequent radiologic studies and having no riskof causing barium peritonitis if perforation occurs. Nonoperative reduction should not be attempted if the patient is unstableor has evidence of pre-existing perforation or peritonitis.
# Chunk 7552
CBC with differential Urinalysis Amylase and lipase ALT, AST, GGT Flat and upright abdominal radiographs (KUB)
# Chunk 7553
Abdominal ultrasound CT scan of abdomen

ALT, Alanine aminotransferase; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; CBC, complete blood count; CT, computed tomography; GGT, γ-glutamyltransferase; KUB, kidney, ureter, bladder. *Perform when diagnosis remains in doubt.
# Chunk 7554
Abdominal ultrasound Choledochal cyst, gallstones, mass lesion, Caroli disease

Percutaneous liver biopsy Biliary atresia, idiopathic giant cell hepatitis, α1-antitrypsin deficiency
# Chunk 7555
ALT, Alanine aminotransferase; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; CF, cystic fibrosis; GGT, γ-glutamyltransferase; RBC, red blood cell.
# Chunk 7556
Laboratory studies No diagnosis Specific diagnosis Abdominal ultrasound Biliary cyst or obstruction No biliary lesions seen Hepatobiliary scan Excretion into bowel Liver biopsy Surgery Evidence of biliary atresia No evidence of biliary atresia Specific therapy (if available), or Supportive care No excretion
# Chunk 7557
Coagulation tests and serum albumin are used to followhepatic synthetic function. These tests are confounded byadministration of blood products and clotting factors. Vitamin K should be administered to maximize the liver’s abilityto synthesize factors II, VII, IX, and X. In addition to monitoring prothrombin time and partial thromboplastin time,many centers measure factor V serially as a sensitive index ofsynthetic function. Renal function tests, electrolytes, serum
# Chunk 7558
Hypoglycemia IV glucose supplied with ≥10% dextrose solution, electrolytes as appropriate

Ascites Restrict fluid intake to 50%-60% maintenance Restrict sodium intake to 0.5-1 mEq/kg/day Monitor central venous pressure to maintain adequate intravascular volume (avoid renal failure)
# Chunk 7559
Prothrombin time and partial thromboplastin time Serum ammonia CBC with platelet count *Perform when indicated to obtain specific anatomic information.
# Chunk 7560
Laboratory studies include specific tests for diagnosis of the underlying illness and testing to monitor the status of the patient. Children presenting for the first time with evidence of chronic liver disease should have a standard investigation (Table 130-5). Monitoring should include coagulation tests, electrolytes and renal function testing, complete blood count with platelet count, transaminases, alkaline phosphatase, and γ-glutamyltransferase at appropriate intervals. Frequency of testing should be tailored to the pace of the patient’s illness. Ascites fluid can be tested for infection by culture and cell count and generally is found to have an albumin concentration lower than that of serum.
# Chunk 7561
Serum albumin AST, ALT, GGT, alkaline phosphatase Total and direct bilirubin Serum cholylglycine or bile acids Serum cholesterol Ultrasound examination of liver and bile ducts Doppler ultrasound of hepatic vessels* Magnetic resonance cholangiography* Magnetic resonance angiography of hepatic vessels* Percutaneous or endoscopic cholangiography* Liver biopsy*
# Chunk 7562
*May also have peptic ulcerations.

Wilson disease is characterized by abnormal storage of copper in the liver, leading to hepatocellular injury, CNS dysfunction, and hemolytic anemia. It is an autosomal recessive trait caused by mutations in the ATP7B gene. The encoded protein of this gene functions as an ATP-driven copper pump. The diagnosis is made by identifying depressed serum levels of ceruloplasmin, elevated 24-hour urine copper excretion, the presence of Kayser-Fleischer rings in the iris, evidence of hemolysis, and elevated hepatic copper content. In any single patient, one or more of these measures may be normal. Clinical presentation also varies, but seldom occurs before age 3 years. Neurologic abnormalities may predominate, including tremor, decline in school performance, worsening handwriting, and psychiatric disturbances. Anemia may be the first noted symptom. Hepatic presentations include appearance of jaundice, spider hemangiomas, portal hypertension and its consequences, and fulminant hepatic failure. Treatment consists of administration of copper-chelating drugs (penicillimine or trientine), with monitoring of urine copper excretion at intervals. Zinc salts often replace chelating agents after chelation therapy has successfully reduced excessive body copper stores. Adequate therapy must be continued for life to prevent liver and CNS deterioration.
# Chunk 7563
Immune-mediated liver injury may be primary or occurin association with other autoimmune disorders, such as inflammatory bowel disease or systemic lupus erythematosus.Diagnosis is made on the basis of elevated serum total IgGand the presence of an autoantibody, most commonly antinuclear, anti–smooth muscle, or anti–liver-kidney microsomal antibody. Liver biopsy specimen shows the presence ofa plasma cell–rich portal infiltrate with piecemeal necrosis.Treatment consists of corticosteroids initially, usually withthe addition of an immunosuppressive drug after remissionis achieved. Steroids are tapered gradually as tolerated tominimize glucocorticoid side effects. Many patients require lifelong immunosuppressive therapy, but some may be able tostop medications after several years under careful monitoringfor recurrence.
# Chunk 7564
Serial measurement of laboratory studies is importantto monitor for severe complications. At diagnosis, baseline complete blood count, C-reactive protein, electrolytes,blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, glucose, calcium, and phosphorus should be obtained. These should be measured atleast daily, along with amylase and lipase, until the patienthas recovered.
# Chunk 7565
Blood tests should focus on identifying the nature of the inflammation and its underlying cause. An elevated white blood cell count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and C-reactive proteinsuggest infection. In children older than 5 years, appendicitis isthe leading cause. Total serum protein, albumin, and urinalysisshould be ordered to rule out nephrotic syndrome. Liver function tests should be performed to rule out chronic liver diseasecausing ascites. The best way to diagnose suspected peritonitisis to sample the peritoneal fluid with a needle or catheter (paracentesis). Peritoneal fluid in spontaneous bacterial peritonitis has a high neutrophil count of greater than 250 cells/mm3. Other tests that should be run on the peritoneal fluid includeamylase (to rule out pancreatic ascites), culture, albumin, andlactate dehydrogenase concentration. For culture, a large sampleof fluid should be placed into aerobic and anaerobic blood culture bottles immediately on obtaining the sample.
# Chunk 7566
Cough results from stimulation of irritant receptors in the airway mucosa. Acute cough generally is associated with respiratory infections or irritant exposure (smoke) and subsides as the infection resolves or the exposure is eliminated. The characteristics of the cough and the circumstances under which the cough occurs help in determining the cause. Sudden onset after a choking episode suggests foreign body aspiration. Morning cough may be due to the accumulation of excessive secretions during the night from sinusitis, allergic rhinitis, or bronchial infection. Nighttime coughing is a hallmark of asthma and can also be caused by gastroesophageal reflux disease. Cough exacerbated by lying flat may be due to postnasal drip, sinusitis, allergic rhinitis, or reflux. Recurrent coughing with exercise is suggestive of exercise-induced asthma/bronchospasm. Paroxysmal cough suggests pertussis or foreign body aspiration. A repetitive, staccato cough occurs in chlamydial infections in infants. A harsh, brassy, seal-like cough suggests croup, tracheomalacia, or psychogenic (habit) cough. The last, which is most common in teenagers, disappears during sleep. Younger children can develop a throat-clearing habit cough, which also disappears during sleep.
# Chunk 7567
There are both respiratory and metabolic causes of acidosis (see Chapter 37). In the presence of an alkalosis or acidosis, respiratory compensation (altering Pco2 to maintain a normal pH) can occur within minutes, but renal compensation (altering the serum bicarbonate level) may not be complete for several days. Recall that both the respiratory and metabolic compensation are incomplete, so pH will remain on the side of the primary insult (whether acidosis or alkalosis).
# Chunk 7568
Figure 134-1 Schematic representation of the respiratory control system. The respiratory neurons in the brainstem receive information from the chemoreceptors, peripheral sensory receptors, and cerebral cortex. This information is integrated, and the resulting neural output is transmitted to the diaphragms and lungs. The sign denotes stimulation of the receptor. (From Andreoli TE, Bennett JC, Carpenter CJ, et al, editors: Cecil Essentials of Medicine, ed 4, Philadelphia, 1997, WB Saunders, p 171.) apnea, color change (usually blue or pale), sudden limpness, choking, or gagging. The incidence of such events is 0.05% to 1%. Specific causes can be identified in more than 50% of the cases. Gastroesophageal reflux and laryngospasm are the most common causes of ALTE, and they are associated with emesis, choking, or gagging. Central nervous system (CNS) causes (e.g., seizures, breath-holding spells, intracranial bleeding from accidental or nonaccidental trauma) account for approximately 15% of cases, and cardiovascular events and metabolic derangements account for smaller percentages. Acute infection with respiratory viruses (respiratory syncytial virus [RSV] and others), pertussis, and serious bacterial infections (sepsis, meningitis) can also cause apnea in infants.
# Chunk 7569
In most cases, a careful history can lead to a correct diagnosis. Questions should include history of premature birth, prior apnea, level of consciousness at the time of the event, presence or absence of respiratory effort, limpness or stiffness, jerking movements (seizure), feeding history, intercurrent illnesses, any trauma, and the social situation of the family. The physical examination should focus on bruising and injury, the general and neurologic condition of the infant, nutritional status, respiratory pattern, and cardiac status. The laboratory evaluation may include serum electrolytes, serum glucose, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, hemoglobin, hematocrit, white blood cell count, a chest radiograph, and blood gas analysis. Testing for respiratory viruses and pertussis in patients with evidence of respiratory infection should occur. If gastroesophageal reflux is suspected, a barium swallow or pH probe study may be useful. Cardiorespiratory monitoring for 12 to 24 hours in the hospital can provide information on respiratory and cardiac patterns and feeding difficulties (choking, gagging, emesis); provide time to get more history and assess the home situation; and alleviate parental anxiety. Useful tests to determine CNS causes include a head computed tomography (CT) scan, magnetic resonance imaging of the brain, and an electroencephalogram (EEG) (for seizures).
# Chunk 7570
SIDS is defined as the unexpected death of an infant younger than 1 year of age in which the cause remains unexplained after an autopsy, death scene investigation, and review of clinical history. The risk of SIDS is higher in premature and low birth weight infants, infants of young impoverished mothers who smoke cigarettes, African American and Native American infants, and in infants whose mothers have abused drugs. The risk of SIDS is increased threeto fivefold in siblings of infants who have died of SIDS and is highest during the winter. SIDS is rare before 4 weeks or after 6 months of age and is most common between 2 and 4 months of age. The incidence of SIDS has decreased dramatically since the 1980s.
# Chunk 7571
The primary sign of laryngomalacia is inspiratory stridorwith little or no expiratory component. The stridor is typically loudest when the infant is feeding or active and decreases when the infant is relaxed or placed prone, or when the neck is flexed. Any condition that increases upper airway inflammation will exacerbate laryngomalacia, including viral respiratory infections, dysphagia (swallowing dysfunction), and gastroesophageal reflux. Laryngomalacia normally peaks by 3 to 5 months of age and resolves between 6 and 12 months of age. However, occasionally it can persist in otherwise normal children up until 24 months of age and even longer in children with underlying conditions, especially those with neurologic diseases affecting control of upper airway muscles (such as cerebral palsy).
# Chunk 7572
SEE CHAPTER 128.

Compression of the trachea by vascular structures or masses can cause significant respiratory compromise. Tracheal compression by aberrant great vessels (aorta, innominate artery) may cause wheezing, stridor, cough, and dyspnea. The most common cause of tracheal compression is anterior compression from an anomalous innominate artery that arises more distally than normal from the aortic arch. This usually results in mild respiratory symptoms, and surgical correction is rarely necessary. Complete vascular rings, which compress the esophagus posteriorly and the trachea anteriorly, include the double aortic arch and a right aortic arch with a persistent ligamentum arteriosum (most common). Both lesions have right-sided aortic arches, which may be visible on chest radio-graph. In addition to respiratory symptoms, complete vascular rings may cause dysphagia as a result of esophageal compression. The diagnosis of vascular anomalies can often be made by a barium swallow, which identifies the esophageal compression. Bronchoscopy will identify a pulsatile compression of the airway, but the diagnostic procedure of choice is a computed tomography (CT) angiogram of the chest and great vessels. Complete vascular rings almost always require surgical repair. Other causes of extrinsic tracheal compression include enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes (tuberculosis), mediastinal masses (teratoma, lymphoma, thymoma, germ cell tumors), and, rarely, cystic hygromas.
# Chunk 7573
Pulmonary edema is most commonly due to heart failure from left ventricular or biventricular dysfunction. Pulmonary hypertension and associated cor pulmonale (rightventricular dysfunction) do not usually cause pulmonaryedema as the increased vascular resistance is proximal tothe capillary bed. Increased capillary permeability, seen indisease states such as sepsis and acute respiratory distresssyndrome, can lead to pulmonary edema. Pulmonary edemamay also occur with excessive swings in intrathoracic pressure, as seen after tracheal foreign body aspiration or severeobstruction from hypertrophied tonsils and adenoids (postobstructive pulmonary edema). Pulmonary edema mayalso be present in conditions with decreased serum oncotic pressure (hypoalbuminemia); after administration of largevolumes of intravenous (IV) fluids, especially if there iscapillary injury; with ascent to high altitude (high altitude pulmonary edema); and after central nervous system injury (neurogenic pulmonary edema).
# Chunk 7574
Because the pulmonary vascular bed is distensible, small emboli, even if multiple, may be asymptomatic unless they are infected (septic emboli) and cause pulmonary infection. Large emboli may cause acute dyspnea, pleuritic chest pain, cough, and hemoptysis. Hypoxia is common, as are nonspecific ST-segment and T-wave changes on the electrocardiogram (ECG). The P2 heart sound may be increased, and an S4 sound may be present.
# Chunk 7575
The secretory and absorptive characteristics of epithelial cells are affected by abnormal CFTR, resulting in the clinical manifestations of CF. The altered chloride ion conductance in the sweat gland results in excessively high sweat sodium and chloride levels. This is the basis of the sweat chloride test, which is still the standard diagnostic test for this disorder. It is positive (elevated sweat chloride > 60 mEq/L) in 99% of patients with CF. Abnormal airway secretions make the airway more prone to colonization with bacteria. Defects in CFTR may also reduce the function of airway defenses and promote bacterial adhesion to the airway epithelium. This all leads to chronic airway infections and eventually to bronchial damage (bronchiectasis).
# Chunk 7576
CF is a chronic progressive disease that can present with protein and fat malabsorption (failure to thrive, hypoalbuminemia, steatorrhea), liver disease (cholestatic jaundice), or chronic respiratory infection (Table 137-1). Many infants currently are diagnosed based on newborn screening, which has been available in all 50 states and the District of Columbia since 2010. Older children commonly present with pulmonary manifestations such as poorly controlled asthma and chronic respiratory infections. The respiratory epithelium of patients with CF exhibits marked impermeability to chloride and an excessive reabsorption of sodium. This leads to a relative dehydration of airway secretions, which results in airway obstruction and impaired mucociliary transport. This, in turn, leads to endobronchial colonization with bacteria, especially Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Chronic bronchial infection results in persistent or recurrent cough that is often productive of sputum, especially in older children. Chronic airway infection leads to airway obstruction and bronchiectasis and, eventually, to pulmonary insufficiency and premature death. The median age of survival (years) is currently in the mid-30s. Digital clubbing is common in patients with CF, even in those without significant lung disease. Chronic sinusitis and nasal polyposis are common.
# Chunk 7577
The treatment of CF is multifactorial, but it is primarily directed toward the gastrointestinal and pulmonary complications. Presently, there is no effective single cure for cystic fibrosis. Therapies targeted at correcting the underlying CFTR defect are under investigation. Recently, a landmark medication known as small-molecule potentiators targeted to improve function of defective CFTR has been approved for a small subset of CF patients who have an abnormal gating mechanism of their CFTR protein. Management of pulmonary complications is directed toward facilitating clearance of secretions from the airways and minimizing the effects of chronic bronchial infection. Airway secretion clearance techniques (chest physiotherapy) help remove mucus from the airways, and aerosolized DNAse and 7% hypertonic saline, both delivered by nebulizer, decrease the viscosity of mucus. Antibiotic therapy is important in controlling chronic infection. Monitoring pulmonary bacterial flora via airway cultures and providing aggressive therapy with appropriate antibiotics (oral, aerosolized, and IV) help to slow the progression of lung disease. Patients often require 2to 3-week courses of high-dose intravenous antibiotics and aggressive chest physiotherapy to treat pulmonary exacerbations. Antibiotics are selected based on organisms identified by sputum culture. If patients are unable to provide sputum, then a throat culture for CF pathogens can be used to direct therapy. Common infecting organisms are Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus.
# Chunk 7578
Pleural fluid hematocrit/serum hematocrit greater than 0.5

LDH, Lactate dehydrogenase.

chylous, malignant, and tuberculous effusions (Table 138-1).However, the yield of pleural fluid cultures is low. Transudative pleural effusions have a low specific gravity (<1.015) and protein content (<2.5 g/dL), low lactate dehydrogenase activity (<200 IU/L), and a low white blood cell (WBC) count with few polymorphonuclear cells. In contrast, exudates are characterized by high specific gravity and high protein (>3 g/dL) and lactate dehydrogenase (>250 IU/L) levels. They may also have a low pH (<7.2); low glucose level (<40 mg/dL); and a high WBC count with many lymphocytes or polymorphonuclear leukocytes.
# Chunk 7579
The examination starts with vital signs. The normal heart rate varies with age and activity. Newborn resting heart rates are approximately 120 beats/minute, slightly higher in infants 3 to 6 months of age and then gradually declining through adolescence to near 80 beats/minute. The range of normal for any given age is approximately 30 beats/minute above or below the average. Tachycardia may be a manifestation of anemia, dehydration, shock, heart failure, or dysrhythmia. Bradycardia can be a normal finding in patients with high vagal tone (athletes), but may be a manifestation of atrioventricular block. The respiratory rate of infants is best assessed while the infant is quiet. Respiratory rate may be increased when there is a left-to-right shunt or pulmonary venous congestion.
# Chunk 7580
Systemic lupus Pericarditis, Libman-Sacks erythematosus endocarditis, congenital AV block

Lyme disease Arrhythmias, myocarditis, heart failure Graves disease Tachycardia, arrhythmias, heart failure (hyperthyroidism)
# Chunk 7581
Figure 139-2 Nomenclature of electrocardiogram (ECG) waves and intervals.

SVCAoPARARVLVLAABFigure 139-3 A, Parts of the heart whose outlines can be identified on a routine chest x-ray. B, Routine posteroanterior x-ray of the normal cardiac silhouette. Ao, Aorta; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; PA, pulmonary artery; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle; SVC, superior vena cava. (From Andreoli TE, Carpenter CCJ, Plum F, et al, editors: Cecil Essentials of Medicine, ed 2, Philadelphia, 1990, WB Saunders.) less than 55% in infants under 1 year of age and less than 50% in older children and adolescents. An enlarged heart may be due to an increased volume load (left-right shunt) or due to myocardial dysfunction (dilated cardiomyopathy). The shape of the heart may suggest specific congenital heart defects. The most common examples are the boot-shaped heart seen with tetralogy of Fallot, the egg-on-a-string seen with dextroposed transposition of the great arteries, and the “snowman” seen with supracardiac total anomalous pulmonary venous return. The chest x-ray can aid in the assessment of pulmonary blood flow. Defects associated with left-to-right shunting have increased pulmonary blood flow (shunt vascularity) on x-ray. Right-to-left shunts have decreased pulmonary blood flow.
# Chunk 7582
Syncopal episodes may require no more than reassurance to the patient and family. If the episodes have a significant impact on daily activities, further evaluation may be indicated. An electrocardiogram (ECG) should be obtained with attention to the QTc and PR intervals (see Chapter 139). Although reassurance and increasing fluid and salt intake may be adequate to treat most cases of syncope, medical management is sometimes indicated.
# Chunk 7583
Sinus rhythm originates in the sinus node and has a normal axis P wave (upright in leads I and AVF) preceding each QRS complex. Because normal rates vary with age, sinus bradycardia and sinus tachycardia are defined based on age. Sinus arrhythmia is a common finding in children and represents a normal variation in the heart rate associated with breathing. The heart rate increases with inspiration and decreases with expiration, producing a recurring pattern on the electrocardiogram (ECG) tracing. Sinus arrhythmia is normal and does not require further evaluation or treatment.
# Chunk 7584
Supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) is the most common symptomatic dysrhythmia in pediatric patients. The rhythm has a rapid, regular rate with a narrow QRS complex. SVT in infants is often 280 to 300 beats/minute with slower rates for older children and adolescents. The tachycardia has an abrupt onset and termination. In a child with a structurally normal heart, most episodes are relatively asymptomatic other than a pounding heartbeat. If there is structural heart disease or the episode is prolonged (>12 hours), there may be alteration in the cardiac output and development of symptoms of heart failure. Although most patients with SVT have structurally normal hearts and normal baseline ECGs, some children have Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome or preexcitation as the cause of the dysrhythmia.
# Chunk 7585
Sinus tachycardia Rate <240 beats/min Treat cause (fever), remove sympathomimetic drugs

AV, Atrioventricular; ECG, electrocardiogram.
# Chunk 7586
The most important determinant of presentation is the presenceor absence of obstruction to the pulmonary venous drainage.Infants without obstruction have minimal cyanosis and may beasymptomatic. There is a hyperactive right ventricular impulse with a widely split S2 (owing to increased right ventricular volume) and a systolic ejection murmur at the left upper sternalborder. There is usually a mid-diastolic murmur at the lowerleft sternal border from the increased flow across the tricuspidvalve. Growth is relatively poor. Infants with obstruction present with cyanosis, marked tachypnea and dyspnea, and signs ofright-sided heart failure including hepatomegaly. The obstruction results in little, if any, increase in right ventricular volume,so there may be no murmur or changes in S2.
# Chunk 7587
CNS, Central nervous system; RSV, respiratory syncytial virus.

ECG findings include right ventricular hypertrophy with decreased left ventricular forces. The chest x-ray reveals car
# Chunk 7588
Arthritis is the most common major manifestation. It usually involves the large joints and is migratory. Arthralgia cannot be used as a minor manifestation if arthritis is used as a major manifestation. Carditis occurs in about 50% of patients. Tachycardia, a new murmur (mitral or aortic regurgitation), pericarditis, cardiomegaly, and signs of heart failure are evidence of carditis. Erythema marginatum, a serpiginous, nonpruritic, and evanescent rash, is uncommon, occurs on the trunk, and is brought out by warmth. Subcutaneous nodules are seen predominantly with chronic or recurrent disease. They are firm, painless, nonpruritic, mobile nodules found on the extensor surfaces of the large and small joints, the scalp, and the spine. Chorea (Sydenham chorea or St. Vitus dance) consists of neurologic and psychiatric signs. It also is uncommon and often presents long after the infection.
# Chunk 7589
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is initially difficult to diagnose. Infants, but not older children, frequently present withsigns of heart failure. Sudden death may be the initial presentation in older children. Dyspnea, fatigue, chest pain,syncope or near-syncope, and palpitations may be present.A murmur is heard in more than 50% of children referred after identification of an affected family member. Restrictive cardiomyopathies are relatively rare in pediatrics. Presentingsymptoms usually include dyspnea exacerbated by a respiratory illness, syncope, hepatomegaly, and an S4 heart sound on examination.
# Chunk 7590
erythroid line and is made by the juxtaglomerular apparatus of the kidney in response to local tissue hypoxia. Thenormally high hemoglobin level of the fetus is a result of fetal erythropoietin production in the liver in response tolow Po2 in utero. Erythropoietin leads to production of theerythroid colony-forming unit. The earliest recognizableerythroid cell is the erythroblast, which forms eight or moredaughter cells. The RBC nucleus becomes gradually pyknotic and eventually is extruded. The cell is then releasedfrom the marrow as a reticulocyte that maintains residual mitochondrial and protein synthetic capacity. Thesehighly specialized RBC precursors are engaged primarily inthe production of globin chains, glycolytic enzymes, and heme. Iron is taken up via transferrin receptors and incorporated into the heme ring, which combines with globinchains synthesized within the immature RBC. When themessenger RNA and mitochondria are gone from the RBC,heme or protein synthesis is no longer possible; however,the RBC continues to function for its normal life span of about 120 days.
# Chunk 7591
During the first few months of postnatal life, rapid growth, shortened RBC survival, and cessation of erythropoiesis cause a gradual decline in hemoglobin levels, with a nadir at 8 to 10 weeks of life. This so-called physiologic nadir is accentuated in premature infants. Erythropoietin is produced in response to the decline in hemoglobin and decreased oxygen delivery. Erythropoiesis subsequently resumes with an increase in the reticulocyte count. The hemoglobin level gradually increases, accompanied by synthesis of increasing amounts of hemoglobin A. By 6 months of age in healthy infants, only trace gamma chain synthesis occurs.
# Chunk 7592
Normochromic, Normocytic • Hemoglobin SS, S-C, S-° thalassemia

DIC, HUS, TTP

Figure 150-1 Use of the complete blood count, reticulocyte count, and blood smear in the diagnosis of anemia. DIC, Disseminated intra-vascular coagulation; G6PD, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase; HUS, hemolytic uremic syndrome; R/O, rule out; RPI, reticulocyte production index; TTP, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura.
# Chunk 7593
G6PD, Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase.

tolerated in children because of their cardiovascular reserve. Usually, children with chronic anemia will have minimal tachycardia and a flow murmur on examination. The urgency of diagnostic and therapeutic intervention, especially the use of packed RBC transfusion, should be dictated by the extent of cardiovascular or functional impairment more than the absolute level of hemoglobin.
# Chunk 7594
A hemoglobin or hematocrit test indicates the severity of the anemia. Once anemia has been substantiated, the workup should include a complete blood count with differential, platelet count, indices, and reticulocyte count. Examination of the peripheral blood smear assesses the morphology of RBCs (Fig. 150-2), white blood cells (WBCs), and platelets. All cell lines should be scrutinized to determine whether anemia is the result of a process limited to the erythroid line or a process that affects other marrow elements. Using data obtained from the indices and reticulocyte count, the workup can be organized on the basis of whether RBC production is adequate or inadequate and whether the cells are microcytic, normocytic, or macrocytic (see Fig. 150-1).
# Chunk 7595
An appropriate bone marrow response to anemia would be an elevated absolute reticulocyte number, suggestingincreased production and implying either hemolysis orblood loss. Anemia with a normal reticulocyte number suggests decreased or ineffective production for the degree ofanemia. Reticulocytopenia signifies an acute onset so thatthe marrow has not had adequate time to respond, thatreticulocytes are being destroyed in the marrow (antibodymediated), or that intrinsic bone marrow disease is present.The best indicators of the severity of hemolysis are the hemoglobin level and the elevation of the reticulocyte count. Biochemical evidence of hemolysis includes an increase inlevels of bilirubin and lactate dehydrogenase and a decreasein haptoglobin.
# Chunk 7596
Treatment. In an otherwise healthy child, a therapeutic trial of iron is the best diagnostic study for iron deficiency as long as the child is re-examined and a response is documented. The response to oral iron includes rapid subjective improvement, especially in neurologic function (within 24 to 48 hours) and reticulocytosis (48 to 72 hours); increase in hemoglobin levels (4 to 30 days); and repletion of iron stores (in 1 to 3 months). The usual therapeutic dose of 4 to 6 mg/day 10–12 nc/nc ↓ Fe2+ absent, erythroid hyperplasia <12 8–10 hypo/nc ↓ Fe2+ absent, erythroid hyperplasia <12 <8 hypo/micro* ↓ Fe2+ absent, erythroid hyperplasia <12
# Chunk 7597
of elemental iron induces an increase in hemoglobin of 0.25 to 0.4 g/dL/day (a 1%/day increase in hematocrit). If the hemoglobin level fails to increase within 2 weeks after institution of iron treatment, careful re-evaluation for ongoing blood loss, development of infection, poor compliance, or other causes of microcytic anemia is required (Table 150-4; see Fig. 150-1).
# Chunk 7598
Laboratory Testing. The thalassemia minor syndromes are characterized by a mild hypochromic, microcytic anemia with a low absolute reticulocyte count (see Table 150-5). The RBC count is usually elevated. As a result, if the mean corpuscular volume (MCV) divided by the RBC count is less than 12.5 (Mentzer index), the diagnosis is suggestive of thalassemia trait. The blood smear reveals only microcytosis with α-thalassemia trait. Outside the neonatal period, when Bart hemoglobin is detectable, hemoglobin electrophoresis usually is normal in α-thalassemia minor (see Fig. 150-3). Blood smears of patients with β-thalassemia minor show microcytic RBCs. Target cells and basophilic stippled RBCs, caused by precipitation of alpha chain tetramers, also may be present. The diagnosis is based on an elevation of hemoglobin A2 and F levels in β-thalassemia. Molecular testing is indicated for identification of more severe or unusual variants.
# Chunk 7599
Table 150-6 Differentiation of Red Blood Cell Aplasias and Aplastic Anemias DISORDER AGE AT ONSET CHARACTERISTICS TREATMENT CONGENITAL Diamond-Blackfan syndrome (congenital Newborn–1 mo; 90% of patients are <1 yr Pure red blood cell aplasia, autosomal recessive trait, elevated fetal hemoglobin, fetal i antigen Prednisone, transfusion, hematopoietic stem cell hypoplastic anemia) of age present, macrocytic, short stature, webbed neck, transplant cleft lip, triphalangeal thumb; late-onset leukemia, mutation analysis
# Chunk 7600
by which neoplastic cells interfere with RBC and other marrow cell synthesis is multifactorial. The reticulocyte count is often low. Immature myeloid elements may be released into the peripheral blood because of the presence of the offending tumor cells. An examination of the peripheral blood may reveal lymphoblasts; when solid tumors metastasize to the marrow, these cells are seldom seen in the peripheral blood. Teardrop cells may be seen in the peripheral blood. A bone marrow examination is frequently necessary in the face of normochromic, normocytic anemia.
# Chunk 7601
Congenital pure RBC aplasia (Diamond-Blackfan syndrome), a lifelong disorder, usually presents in the first few months of life or at birth with severe anemia and mild macrocytosis or a normocytic anemia. It is due to a deficiency of bone marrow red blood cell precursors (Table 150-6). More than a third of patients have short stature. Many patients (50% to 66%) respond to corticosteroid treatment, but must receive therapy indefinitely. Patients who do not respond to corticosteroid treatment are transfusion dependent and are at risk of the multiple complications of long-term transfusion therapy, especially iron overload. These patients have a higher rate of developing leukemia or other hematologic malignancies than the general population.
# Chunk 7602
In contrast to the congenital hypoplastic anemias, transient erythroblastopenia of childhood, a normocytic anemia causedby suppression of RBC synthesis, usually appears after 6 monthsof age in an otherwise normal infant. Viral infections are thoughtto be the trigger, although the mechanism leading to RBC aplasia is poorly understood. The onset is gradual, but anemia maybecome severe. Recovery usually is spontaneous. Differentiationfrom Diamond-Blackfan syndrome, in which erythroid precursors also are absent or diminished in the bone marrow, may bechallenging. Transfusion of packed RBCs may be necessary ifthe anemia becomes symptomatic before recovery.
# Chunk 7603
Differential Diagnosis. Features that suggest bone marrow failure and mandate an examination of bone marrow include a low reticulocyte count, teardrop forms of RBCs(implying marrow replacement, not just failure), presenceof abnormal forms of leukocytes or myeloid elements lessmature than band forms, small platelets, and an elevatedmean corpuscular volume in the face of a low reticulocytecount. Pancytopenia resulting from bone marrow failure isusually a gradual process, starting with one or two cell lines, but later involving all three cell lines. Features suggestingincreased destruction include reticulocytosis, jaundice,immature erythroid or myeloid elements on the blood smear,large platelets, and increased serum bilirubin and lactic dehydrogenase.
# Chunk 7604
Treatment. Survival rate is about 20% in severe aplastic anemia with supportive care alone, although the duration of survival may be years when vigorous blood product and antibiotic support is provided. For children with severe aplastic anemia—defined by an absolute reticulocyte count less than 50,000/μL, absolute neutrophil count less than 500/mm3, platelet count less than 20,000/mm3, and bone marrow cellularity on biopsy specimen less than 25% of normal—the treatment of choice is hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) from a sibling with identical HLA and compatible mixed lymphocytes. When HSCT occurs before the recipient is sensitized to blood products, survival rate is greater than 80%. The treatment of aplastic anemia without an HLA-matched donor for HSCT is evolving, with two major options: potent immunosuppressive therapy or unrelated or partially matched HSCT. Results of trials using immunosuppressive therapy with antithymocyte globulin, cyclosporine, and corticosteroids in combination with hematopoietic growth factors have been encouraging. Such therapy is often toxic, and relapses often occur when therapy is stopped.
# Chunk 7605
H) in older children and adults (see Table 150-5).

Beta chain hemoglobinopathies in the United States are more prevalent than alpha chain disorders, possibly because these abnormalities are not symptomatic in utero. The major beta hemoglobinopathies include those that alter hemoglobin function, including hemoglobins S, C, E, and D, and those that alter beta chain production, the β-thalassemias. Because each RBC has two copies of chromosome 11 and they express both β-globin genes, most disorders of beta chains are not clinically severe, unless both beta chains are abnormal. By convention, when describing β-thalassemia genes, β0 indicates a thalassemic gene resulting in absent beta chain synthesis, whereas β+ indicates a thalassemic gene that permits reduced but not absent synthesis of normal β chains. Disorders of the beta chain usually manifest themselves clinically between 4 and 12 months of age, unless they have been detected prenatally or by cord blood screening.
# Chunk 7606
Clinical Manifestations and Treatment. A child with sickle cell anemia is vulnerable to life-threatening infection by 4 months of age. By that time, splenic dysfunction is caused by sickling of the RBCs within the spleen, resulting in an inability to filter microorganisms from the bloodstream in most patients. Splenic dysfunction is followed, eventually, by splenic infarction, usually by 2 to 4 years of age. The loss of normal splenic function makes the patient susceptible to overwhelming infection by encapsulated organisms, especially Streptococcus pneumoniae and other pathogens (Table 150-8).The hallmark of infection is fever. A febrile patient with a sickle cell syndrome (temperature >38.5°C) must be evaluated immediately (see Chapter 96). Current precautions to prevent infections include prophylactic daily oral penicillin begun at diagnosis and vaccinations against pneumococcus, Haemophilus influenzae type b, hepatitis B virus, and influenza virus.
# Chunk 7607
The anemia of hemoglobin SS disease is usually a chronic, moderately severe, hemolytic anemia that is not routinely transfusion dependent. The severity depends in part on the patient’s phenotype. Manifestations of chronic anemia include jaundice, pallor, variable splenomegaly in infancy, a cardiac flow murmur, and delayed growth and sexual maturation. Decisions about transfusion should be made on the basis of the patient’s clinical condition, the hemoglobin level, and the reticulocyte count.
# Chunk 7608
Sickle cell disease is complicated by sudden, occasionally severe and life-threatening events caused by the acute intra-vascular sickling of the RBCs, with resultant pain or organ dysfunction (so-called crisis). In two different clinical situations, an acute, potentially life-threatening decline in the hemoglobin level may be superimposed on the chronic compensated anemia. Splenic sequestration crisis is a life-threatening, hyperacute drop in the hemoglobin level (blood volume) secondary to splenic pooling of the patient’s RBCs and sickling within the spleen. The spleen is moderately to markedly enlarged, and the reticulocyte count is elevated. In an aplastic crisis, parvovirus B19 infects RBC precursors in the bone marrow and induces transient RBC aplasia with reticulocytopenia and a rapid worsening of anemia because of the very short life span of sickle RBCs. Simple transfusion therapy is indicated for sequestration and aplastic crises when the anemia is symptomatic.
# Chunk 7609
tumescent penis that will not relax. Therapeutic steps for priapism include the administration of oxygen, fluids, analgesia, and transfusion when appropriate to achieve a hemoglobin S less than 30% (often by partial exchange transfusion). Fluid management requires recognition that renal medullary infarction results in loss of the ability to concentrate urine.
# Chunk 7610
Treatment. Direct therapy of sickle cell anemia is evolving. The mainstay of care is supportive measures. The use of chronic RBC transfusions to treat patients who have had a stroke has been very successful. Chronic RBC transfusions have also been used successfully for short time periods to prevent recurrent vasoocclusive painful events, including acute chest syndrome and priapism. Hydroxyurea, which increases hemoglobin F, decreases the number and severity of vasoocclusive events and frequency of acute chest syndrome in children as early as1 year of age. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, using a haploidentical sibling match, has cured many children with sickle cell disease. HSCT using alternative donors for children, without a suitable sibling match, is being studied.
# Chunk 7611
Epidemiology. The most common variants of G6PD deficiency have been found in areas where malaria is endemic. G6PD deficiency protects against parasitism ofthe erythrocyte. The most common variant with normalactivity is termed type B and is defined by its electrophoretic mobility. The approximate gene frequencies in AfricanAmericans are 70% type B, 20% type A, and 10% type A–. Only the A– variant, termed the African variant, is unstable. Ten percent of black males are affected. A group of variants found in Sardinians, Sicilians, Greeks, Sephardic and Oriental Jews, and Arabs is termed the Mediterranean variant and is associated with chronic hemolysis andpotentially life-threatening hemolytic disease. Because thegene for G6PD deficiency is carried on the X chromosome, clinical hemolysis is most common in males. Heterozygousfemales who have randomly inactivated a higher percentage of the normal gene may become symptomatic, as mayhomozygous females with the A– variant (0.5% to 1% offemales of African descent).
# Chunk 7612
Clinical Manifestations. G6PD deficiency has two common presentations. Individuals with the A– variant havenormal hemoglobin values when well, but develop an acute episode of hemolysis triggered by serious (bacterial) infection or ingestion of an oxidant drug. The RBC morphologyduring episodes of acute hemolysis is striking, appearing to have “bites” taken out of them (cookie cells). These areareas of absent hemoglobin that are produced by phagocytosis of Heinz bodies by splenic macrophages; as a result,the RBCs appear blistered. Clinically evident jaundice, darkurine resulting from bilirubin pigments, hemoglobinuriawhen hemolysis is intravascular, and decreased haptoglobinlevels are common during hemolytic episodes. Early on, thehemolysis usually exceeds the ability of the bone marrowto compensate, so the reticulocyte count may be low for 3to 4 days.
# Chunk 7613
Treatment and Prevention. The treatment of G6PD deficiency is supportive. Transfusions are indicated whensignificant cardiovascular compromise is present. Maintaining hydration and urine alkalization protects the kidneysagainst damage from precipitated free hemoglobin. Hemolysis is prevented by avoidance of known oxidants, particularly long-acting sulfonamides, nitrofurantoin, primaquine,dimercaprol, and moth balls (naphthalene). Fava beans(favism) have triggered hemolysis, particularly in patientswith the Mediterranean variant. Serious infection also is a potential precipitant of hemolysis in G6PD-deficient youngchildren.
# Chunk 7614
Treatment. Splenectomy corrects the anemia and normalizes the RBC survival in patients with hereditaryspherocytosis, but the morphologic abnormalities persist.Splenectomy should be considered for any child with symptoms referable to anemia or growth failure, but should bedeferred until age 5 years, if possible, to minimize the risk ofoverwhelming postsplenectomy sepsis and to maximize theantibody response to the polyvalent pneumococcal vaccine.In several reports, partial splenectomy seems to improvethe hemolytic anemia and maintain splenic function in hostdefense.
# Chunk 7615
Autoimmune hemolytic anemia is usually an acute, self-limited process that develops after an infection (Mycoplasma,Epstein-Barr, or other viral infections). Autoimmune hemolyticanemia may also be the presenting symptom of a chronic autoimmune disease (systemic lupus erythematosus, lymphoproliferative disorders, or immunodeficiency). Drugs may induce aCoombs-positive hemolytic anemia by forming a hapten on theRBC membrane (penicillin) or by forming immune complexes(quinidine) that attach to the RBC membrane. Antibodies thenactivate complement-induced intravascular hemolysis. Thethird type of drug-induced immune hemolysis occurs duringtreatment with α-methyldopa and a few other drugs. In this type,prolonged drug exposure alters the RBC membrane, inducingneoantigen formation. Antibodies are produced that bind to theneoantigen; this produces a positive antiglobulin test result farmore commonly than it actually induces hemolysis. In each ofthese conditions, the erythrocyte is an innocent bystander.
# Chunk 7616
Alterations in the plasma lipids, especially cholesterol, may lead to damage to the RBC membrane and shorten RBC survival. Lipids in the plasma are in equilibrium with lipids in the RBC membrane. High cholesterol levels increase the membrane cholesterol and the total membrane surface without affecting the volume of the cell. This condition produces spur cells that may be seen in abetalipoproteinemia and liver diseases. Hemolysis occurs in the spleen, where poor RBC deformability results in erythrocyte destruction. Circulating toxins (e.g., snake venoms and heavy metals) that bind sulfhydryl groups may damage the RBC membrane and induce hemolysis. Irregularly spiculated RBCs (burr cells) are seen in renal failure. Vitamin E deficiency can also cause an acquired hemolytic anemia as a result of abnormal sensitivity of membrane lipids to oxidant stress. Vitamin E deficiency may occur in premature infants who are not being supplemented with vitamin E or who have insufficient nutrition, in infants with severe malabsorption syndromes (including cystic fibrosis), and in infants with transfusional iron overload, which can lead to severe oxidant exposure.
# Chunk 7617
Laboratory Diagnosis. The peripheral blood smear in autoimmune hemolytic anemia usually reveals spherocytes and occasionally nucleated RBCs. The reticulocyte count varies because some patients have relatively low reticulocyte counts as a result of autoantibodies that cross-react with RBC precursors.
# Chunk 7618
Prothrombin time Extrinsic and common pathway <12 sec beyond neonate; Defect in vitamin K–dependent factors; 12–18 sec in term neonate hemorrhagic disease of newborn, malabsorption, liver disease, DIC, oral anticoagulants, ingestion of rat poison
# Chunk 7619
Treatment and Prognosis. Therapy is seldom indicated for platelet counts greater than 30,000/mm3. Therapy does not affect the long-term outcome of ITP but is intended to increase the platelet count acutely. For moderate and severe clinical bleeding with severe thrombocytopenia (platelet count <10,000/mm3), therapeutic options include prednisone, 2 to 4 mg/kg/24 hours for 2 weeks or IVIG, 1 g/kg/24 hours for 1 to 2 days. All of these approaches seem to decrease the rate of clearance of sensitized platelets, rather than decreasing production of antibody. The optimal choice for therapy (if any) is controversial. Splenectomy is indicated in acute ITP only for life-threatening bleeding. Approximately 80% of children have a spontaneous resolution of ITP within 6 months after diagnosis. Serious bleeding, especially intracranial bleeding, occurs in fewer than 1% of patients with ITP. There is no evidence that early treatment prevents intracranial bleeding.
# Chunk 7620
Hgb, Hemoglobin; RBCs, red blood cells; vWF, von Willebrand factor.

Acute hemolytic transfusion Acute shock, back pain, flushing, early fever, 1. Stop transfusion; return blood to bank with reaction (incidence of 1:250,000 to intravascular hemolysis, hemoglobinemia, fresh sample of patient’s blood 1:1,000,000) hemoglobinuria (may be delayed 5–10 days and 2. Hydrate intravenously*; support blood less severe if anamnestic response is present) pressure, maintain high urine flow, alkalinize urine 3. Check for and correct electrolyte abnormalities (hyperkalemia)
# Chunk 7621
S166–S171, 2012

Thomas W. McLean and Marcia M. Wofford 21

Childhood cancer is rare; only about 1% of new cancer cases in the United States occur among children younger than 19 years of age. Hematopoietic tumors (leukemia, lymphoma) are the most common childhood cancers, followed by brain/central nervous system (CNS) tumors and sarcomas of soft tissue and bone (Fig. 153-1). There is wide variability in the age-specific incidence of childhood cancers. Embryonal tumors, such as neuroblastoma and retinoblastoma, peak during the first 2 years of life; acute lymphoblastic leukemia peaks during early childhood (ages 2 to 5 years); osteosarcoma peaks during adolescence; and Hodgkin disease peaks during late adolescence (Fig. 153-2). The overall incidence of cancer among white children is higher than that among other ethnic groups and is twice that of African American children in the United States.
# Chunk 7622
It is important to explore quality, duration, location, severity,and precipitating events of the chief complaint. A prominentlymph node that does not resolve (with or without antibiotics)may warrant a biopsy. A limp that does not improve within weeksshould prompt a CBC and a radiograph or a bone scan. Persistent headaches or morning vomiting should prompt a computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)scan of the head. Fever, night sweats, or weight loss should raisethe concern for lymphoma. In addition it is important to obtainthe birth history, medical and surgical history, growth history,developmental history, family history, and social history.
# Chunk 7623
The most common manifestations of childhood cancer are fatigue, anorexia, malaise, pain, fever, abnormal lump ormass, pallor, bruising, petechiae, bleeding, headache, vomiting, visual changes, weight loss, and night sweats (Table 153-2). Lymphadenopathy and organomegaly are commonin leukemia, particularly with T-cell acute lymphoblasticleukemia (ALL) or non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Patients withsolid tumors usually have a palpable or measurable mass.Other signs and symptoms may include limp, cough, dyspnea, cranial nerve palsies, and papilledema. In generalmalignant masses are firm, fixed, and nontender, whereas masses that are infectious or inflammatory in nature are relatively softer, mobile, and tender to palpation.
# Chunk 7624
Figure 153-1 Childhood Cancer: SEER Incidence Rates 2005–2009 by ICCC Group (includes myelodysplastic syndromes and Group III benign brain). Under 20 years of age, both sexes, all races. Source: SEER 18 areas (San Francisco, Connecticut, Detroit, Hawaii, Iowa, New Mexico, Seattle, Utah, Atlanta, San Jose-Monterey, Los Angeles, Alaska Native Registry, Rural Georgia, California excluding SF/SJM/LA, Kentucky, Louisiana, New Jersey, and Georgia, excluding ATL/RG). Rates are age-adjusted to the 2000 U.S. Std Population (19 age groups Census P25-1130).
# Chunk 7625
patient with leukemia may also have a normal CBC. Lactate dehydrogenase and uric acid are often elevated in fast-growing tumors (leukemia or lymphoma) and occasionally in sarcomas or neuroblastoma. In many cases, it is appropriate to assess electrolytes and renal and hepatic function in the screening process. Elevated blood pressure, if confirmed by repeat measurements, should prompt a urine analysis, as should the palpation of an abdominal mass.
# Chunk 7626
Abdominal signs or symptoms warrant an ultrasound or CT.Persistent headache, vomiting, or abnormal neurologic findings should lead to a head CT or MRI. For suspected bonetumors, plain radiographs are indicated and will usuallyreveal the lesion(s), if present. Radiographs may be normalwhen a bony pelvic lesion is suspected; a CT or MRI shouldbe obtained. Other imaging studies to delineate a mass and tosearch for suspected metastases are often indicated, but thesedecisions are usually best left to the pediatric oncology team.Table 153-3 shows the general use of diagnostic imaging following confirmation of a diagnosis of cancer, assessing the primary tumor and for metastases. Positron emission tomography(PET) has proved useful for staging and assessing response forsome pediatric cancers, especially lymphomas. Metaiodobenzylguanidine (mIBG) scans are useful for neuroblastoma.
# Chunk 7627
Abdominal mass Abdominal/pelvic organ Neuroblastoma, Wilms tumor, lymphoma, hepatoblastoma, germ cell tumor
# Chunk 7628
Yes, if MRI Yes (brain) ± Yes

AFP, Alpha-fetoprotein; BMA/bx, bone marrow aspirate/biopsy; CNS, central nervous system; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; CT, computed tomography; CXR, chest x-ray; β-hCG, beta-human chorionic gonadotropin; HVA, homovanillic acid; mIBG, metaiodobenzylguanidine; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; PET, positron emission tomography; Rb, retinoblastoma; VMA, vanillylmandelic acid. *Individual cases may require additional studies.
# Chunk 7629
Methotrexate Folic acid Hepatic Renal, 50%–90% ALL, lymphoma, Myelosuppression (nadir 7–10 antagonist; inhibits excreted medulloblastoma, days), mucositis, dermatitis, dihydrofolate unchanged; biliary osteosarcoma hepatitis, renal and CNS reductase effects with high-dose administration; prevent with hydration and leucovorin, monitor levels 6-Mercaptopurine Purine analog Hepatic Renal ALL Myelosuppression; hepatitis; mucositis; allopurinol increases toxicity myopathy, osteoporosis, infection, peptic ulceration, irritability, psychosis, hunger, fluid retention
# Chunk 7630
Patients with ALL generally receive threeor four-agent induction chemotherapy based on their initial risk group assignment. Lowand standard-risk patients receive vincristine, prednisone, and L-asparaginase for 4 weeks; high-risk patients also receive an anthracycline (daunorubicin or doxorubicin). During induction, intrathecal instillation of some combination of methotrexate, cytarabine, and hydro-cortisone is given to treat existing CNS leukemia or prevent its development. Following induction of successful remission, which is achieved in nearly all patients with ALL, the remission is consolidated along with CNS-directed therapy. The intensity of therapy depends on risk factors with higher risk patients receiving more intensive chemotherapy. For patients with CNS disease detected at diagnosis and those with T-cell ALL, cranial radiation therapy is usually provided, although the omission of radiation therapy for all pediatric leukemia patients holds great promise. All patients receive continuation therapy for a total duration of therapy of 2 to 3 years. Continuation therapy generally consists of intermittent vincristine and short courses (5 to 7 days) of oral corticosteroid therapy, plus daily oral 6-mercaptopurine, and weekly methotrexate (orally or intramuscularly).
# Chunk 7631
The incidence of Hodgkin disease has a bimodal distribution with peaks in the adolescent/young adult years and again after age 50; it is rarely seen in children younger than 5 years of age. In children, boys are affected more commonly than girls; in adolescents, the gender ratio is approximately equal. The incidence of NHL increases with age. It is more common in whites than in African Americans and in males than in females. NHL has been described in association with congenital or acquired immunodeficiency states and after organ or stem cell transplantation. Burkitt lymphoma commonly is divided into two forms: a sporadic form commonly seen in North America and an endemic form commonly seen in Africa, which has a strong association to EBV.
# Chunk 7632
Available @ StudentConsult.com

The most common clinical presentation of Hodgkin disease is painless, firm lymphadenopathy often confined to one or two lymph node areas, usually the supraclavicular and cervical nodes. Mediastinal lymphadenopathy producing cough or shortness of breath is another frequent initial presentation. The presence of one of three B symptoms has prognostic value: fever (>38° C for 3 consecutive days), drenching night sweats, and unintentional weight loss of 10% or more within 6 months of diagnosis.
# Chunk 7633
Patients suspected to have lymphoma should have a complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and measurement of serum electrolytes, calcium, phosphorus, lactate dehydrogenase, and uric acid. A chest x-ray assesses for a mediastinal mass (Fig. 156-1). The diagnosis ultimately requires a pathologic confirmation from tissue or fluid sampling. For staging purposes, a bone marrow aspirate, bone scan, and positron emission tomography or gallium scan also are indicated. The pathologic hallmark of Hodgkin disease is the identification of Reed-Sternberg cells. Histopathologic subtypes in childhood Hodgkin disease are similar to those in adults; 10% to 15% have lymphocyte predominant, 50% to 60% have nodular sclerosis, 30% have mixed cellularity, and less than 5% have lymphocyte depletion. All subtypes are responsive to treatment. Staging of Hodgkin disease is according to the Ann Arbor system. Staging laparotomy is no longer used in children because computed tomography scans often identify abdominal (lymph nodes, liver, spleen) involvement.
# Chunk 7634
Figure 156-1 Chest x-ray of a 15-year-old boy demonstrating a large superior anterior mediastinal mass (large arrows) compressing the trachea and deviating it rightward (arrowheads). Biopsy revealed non-Hodgkin lymphoma.
# Chunk 7635
Children and adolescents with Hodgkin disease are classified as low, intermediate, or high risk according to stage andnodal bulk. The prognosis is generally excellent. There is an approximately 90% 5-year overall survival rate, approaching 100% for low-risk patients and 70% to 90% for high-riskpatients. For NHL prognosis also is related to stage. The overall3-year survival rates for B-cell, T-cell, and large cell NHL are70% to 90%.
# Chunk 7636
CNS tumors are the most common solid tumors in children and are second to leukemia in overall incidence during childhood. About 1700 new cases occur each year in the United States; the rate is approximately 33 cases per 1 million children under 15 years of age. The incidence peaks before age 10 years and then decreases until a second peak after age 70. For medulloblastoma and ependymoma, males are more affected than females; for other tumor types, no gender differences exist. In the first 2 to 3 years of life, whites are affected more than multiracial children; otherwise incidence rates are essentially equal for whites and multiracial children.
# Chunk 7637
Infratentorial (posterior fossa) 55–60 Astrocytoma (cerebellum) 20 90 Medulloblastoma 20 50–80 Glioma (brainstem) 15 High grade: 0–5; low grade: 30 Ependymoma 5 50–60 Supratentorial (cerebral 40–55 hemispheres) Astrocytoma 15 50–75 Glioblastoma multiforme 10 0–5 Ependymoma 2.5 50–75 Choroid plexus papilloma 1.5 95 Midline Craniopharyngioma 6 70–90 Pineal (germinoma) 1 65–75 Optic nerve glioma 3 90 have improved overall outcome. The 5-year overall survival rate associated with all childhood CNS tumors is approximately 50% to 60%, resulting in large measure from the high curability of cerebellar astrocytomas and the increasing cure rate for patients with medulloblastoma (Table 157-1). Intrinsic brainstem gliomas and glioblastoma multiforme have extremely poor prognoses.
# Chunk 7638
A complete blood count and plain films may help identify patients with neuroblastoma. Calcification within abdominal neuroblastoma tumors is often observed on plain films of the abdomen.About 90% of neuroblastomas produce catecholamines (Vanillylmandelic acid; Homovanillic acid) that can be detected in the urine. Definitive diagnosis of neuroblastoma requires tissuefor light microscopic, electron microscopic, and immunohistologic examination. A computed tomography (CT) scan of thechest, abdomen, and pelvis; a bone scan and/or metaiodobenzylguanidine scan; bilateral bone marrow aspiration and biopsies;and urinary catecholamines complete the evaluation.
# Chunk 7639
The prognosis for survival is affected by age at diagnosis, stage, primary site, presence or absence of metastasis, cytogenetics, DNA ploidy, MYCN status, and histopathology. Currently children with neuroblastoma can be divided into three groups: low, average, and high risk. Unfavorable biologic factors include lack of cell differentiation, amplification (>10 copies/cell) of the MYCN oncogene, lack of hyperdiploidy, and mutations of chromosome 1p, 11q, or 6p22. Patients with favorable biology tend to be younger and often have localized disease. Patients under 1 year of age generally have a better prognosis than older patients. Older patients with stage 4 disease most commonly have unfavorable biology, and more than 50% will relapse due to drug-resistant residual disease. Although neuroblastoma represents only 8% of cases of childhood cancer, it is responsible for 15% of cancer deaths in children.
# Chunk 7640
Tissue biopsy is needed for a definitive diagnosis of sarcomas. Selection of the biopsy site is important and has implications for future surgical resection and radiation therapy. Under light microscopy, rhabdomyosarcoma and Ewing sarcoma appear as small, round, blue cell tumors. Osteosarcomas are distinguishable by the presence of osteoid substance.
# Chunk 7641
For all children with sarcoma, presence or absence of metastatic disease at presentation is the most important prognostic factor. The outlook remains poor for patients who have distant metastasis from Ewing sarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, or osteosarcoma at diagnosis. Patients with localized rhabdomyosarcomas in favorable sites have an excellent prognosis when treated with surgery followed by vincristine and actinomycin. In patients with osteosarcoma and Ewing sarcoma, another important prognostic factor is the degree of tumor necrosis after preoperative chemotherapy. In general, patients whose tumor specimens show a high degree (>90%) of necrosis following preoperative chemotherapy have an event-free survival rate greater than 80%. Patients who still have large amounts of viable tumor after presurgical chemotherapy have a much worse prognosis. The cure rate for patients with localized osteosarcoma and Ewing sarcoma is approximately 60% to 70%. Patients who have lung metastasis at diagnosis have a cure rate of approximately 30% to 35%. Patients with metastases to other bones have a poor prognosis.
# Chunk 7642
Renal diseases in children may be initially asymptomatic and detected during routine visits. Abnormal growth, hypertension (HTN), dehydration, or edema may suggest occult renal disease (see Chapter 33). Abnormal facial features may suggest syndromes associated with renal disorders (fetal alcohol syndrome, Down syndrome). Preauricular tags, deformities of the external ear, or ophthalmologic abnormalities (keratoconus, aniridia, iridocyclitis, cataracts) can be associated with congenital renal defects. Abdominal examination may reveal renal masses. Bladder distention may suggest a urine-concentrating defect or urinary tract obstruction.
# Chunk 7643
The PT conducts isosmotic reabsorption (see Fig. 161-1)to reabsorb two thirds of the filtered volume, sodium, and chloride. Glucose, amino acids, potassium, and phosphate are almost completely reabsorbed. Approximately 75% of filtered bicarbonate is reabsorbed in the PT. When filtered bicarbonate exceeds the PT threshold, bicarbonate is spilled into the urine. The PT also secretes compounds such as organic acids, penicillins, and other drugs. The most potent vitamin D analog—1,25(OH)2-cholecalciferol (calcitriol)—is produced by PT cells in response to parathyroid hormone and intracellular calcium/phosphorus concentrations.
# Chunk 7644
The DT is composed of the distal convoluted tubule (DCT) and collecting ducts (CD). The DCT is water impermeable and contributes to urine dilution by active sodium chloride absorption. The CD is the primary site of antidiuretic hormone (vasopressin) response, which leads to urine concentration. Sodium-potassium and sodium-hydrogen exchange in the CD is regulated by aldosterone. Active hydrogen ion secretion, which is responsible for the final acidification of the urine, also occurs in the CD.
# Chunk 7645
The maximum urinary concentrating capacity in a preterm newborn (∼400 mOsm/L) is less than that in afull-term newborn (600 to 800 mOsm/L), which is less thanthat in older children and adults (∼1200 mOsm/L). Neonates can dilute urine similar to adults (75 to 90 mOsm/L),but, because the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) is lower,the capacity to excrete a water load is less in infants. GFRreaches adult levels by 1 to 2 years of age. Tubular reabsorption of sodium, potassium, bicarbonate, and phosphateand excretion of hydrogen are all reduced in infants relative to adults. These functions mature independently andat different ages, so a neonate rapidly develops the abilityto reabsorb sodium efficiently, but it takes 2 years for bicarbonate reabsorption to mature. Erythropoietin is secreted by interstitial cells in the renal medulla in response to lowoxygen delivery and helps regulate bone marrow red bloodcell production.
# Chunk 7646
Available @ StudentConsult.com

Renal disorders can be classified as primary or secondary (due to systemic illnesses) (see Table 161-2). Renal diseases may present with obvious signs, such as hematuria oredema, or with subtle signs detected on screening examinations (abdominal or flank mass, HTN, proteinuria). Fever, irritability, and vomiting may be presenting symptoms inneonates and infants with urinary tract infections (UTIs),whereas frequency and dysuria suggest UTI in older children.Chronic kidney disease often is associated with poor growthand feeding but may be first detected on screening examinations (HTN, hematuria). An abnormal urine stream mayindicate posterior urethral valves, other bladder disorders, orobstructive lesions.
# Chunk 7647
The GFR is measured most accurately by infusion of a substance that is freely filtered by the glomerulus but is not metabolized, reabsorbed, or secreted in or by the tubules. The GFR is calculated as follows: where [U] is urine concentration, [P] is serum concentration of a substance (mg/dL) used to measure clearance, and V is urine flow rate (mL/min).
# Chunk 7648
Height is measured in centimeters. Serum creatinine is measured in milligram per deciliter. This formula is most useful when body habitus and muscle mass are reasonably normal andwhen renal function is relatively stable. This formula may bemost accurate in the range of 15 to 75 mL/min per 1.73 m2. Values greater than 75 should be reported as such rather than as aspecific number. Creatinine clearance ([UCr]V/[PCr]) estimatesGFR but overestimates GFR when renal function is decreased.
# Chunk 7649
Urinalysis is a useful screen for renal abnormalities. In addition to urine color and turbidity, macroscopic urinalysis uses a urine dipstick for pH and the presence of protein, glucose, ketones, blood, and leukocytes. Dilute urine may result in a false-negative result for protein; false-positive results may occur with extremely alkaline or concentrated urine or if there is a delay in reading the test. Dipsticks are exquisitely sensitive to the presence of hemoglobin (or myoglobin); there are few false-negative test results but many false-positive results. Glucose is detected via a glucose oxidase-peroxidase reaction, and leukocytes are detected via a leukocyte esterase reaction. The nitrite test may detect bacteriuria if the bacteria reduce nitrate to nitrite and have long contact time with the urine. False-negative results occur with frequent voiding, low urine bacterial count, urinary tract obstruction, and infection with bacteria unable to generate nitrite. Gross hematuria or prolonged contact (uncircumcised boys) may result in a false-positive nitrite test. Microscopic urinalysis is used to confirm pyuria and hematuria and detect casts and crystals.
# Chunk 7650
Congestive heart failure, constrictive blood flow and the glomerular filtration rate are not usually diminished. Edema results from reduction in effective circulating blood volume and increase in tubular sodium chloride reabsorption secondary to activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system. Hypoproteinemia stimulates hepatic lipoprotein synthesis and diminishes lipoprotein metabolism, leading to elevated serum lipids (cholesterol, triglycerides) and lipoproteins.
# Chunk 7651
NS may be primary or secondary (Table 162-1). A child with apparent primary NS, prior to renal biopsy, is considered to have idiopathic nephrotic syndrome. Minimal change nephrotic syndrome (MCNS) is the most common histologic form of primary NS in children. More than 80% of children less than 7 years of age with NS have MCNS. Children 7 to 16 years old with NS have a 50% chance of having MCNS. Males are affected more frequently than females (2:1).
# Chunk 7652
The sudden onset of dependent pitting edema or ascites is the most common presentation for children with NS. Anorexia, malaise, and abdominal pain are often present. Blood pressure may be elevated in up to 25% of children on presentation; acute tubular necrosis and significant hypotension may occur with sudden decline in serum albumin and significant volume depletion. Diarrhea (intestinal edema) and respiratory distress (pulmonary edema or pleural effusion) may be present. Typical MCNS is characterized by the absence of gross hematuria, renal insufficiency, hypertension (HTN), and hypocomplementemia.
# Chunk 7653
In addition to a demonstration of proteinuria, hypercholesterolemia, and hypoalbuminemia, routine testing typically includes a serum C3 complement. A low serum C3implies a lesion other than MCNS, and a renal biopsy isindicated before trial of steroid therapy. Microscopic hematuria may be present in up to 25% of cases of MCNS butdoes not predict response to steroids. Additional laboratorytests, including electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine,total protein, and serum albumin level, are performed basedon history and physical examination features. Renal ultrasound is often useful. Biopsy is performed when MCNS isnot suspected.
# Chunk 7654
Because greater than 80% of children less than 13 years of age with primary NS have steroid-responsive forms (chiefly MCNS), steroid therapy may be initiated without a renal biopsy if a child has typical features of NS. Typical therapy for MCNS is prednisone, 2 mg/kg/day (60 mg/m2/24 h, maximum 60 mg/day), provided once a day or split into multiple doses. Over 90% of children who respond to steroids do so within 4 weeks. Responders should receive steroids for 12 weeks. A renal biopsy is indicated for nonresponders because steroid resistance decreases the chance that MCNS is the underlying disease. Frequent relapses or steroid resistance may necessitate additional immunosuppressive therapy.
# Chunk 7655
History and Physical Urinalysis to confirm RBCs Directed evaluation studies based on suspected cause Cause apparent on H&P e.g. UTI, trauma, kidney stone, GN Urinalysis Cause not apparent on H&P Urine microscopy Negative for blood Positive for blood Hemolytic anemia Rhabdomyolysis Minimal RBCs RBCs confirmed Isolated microscopic hematuria Urine culture Urine calcium to creatinine ratio Urine protein to creatinine ratio Serum chemistries Serum albumin C3 and C4 complement Complete blood count Renal ultrasound Renal biopsy in selected cases RBCs confirmed Symptomatic microscopic hematuria or gross hematuria
# Chunk 7656
Urate crystals in infants Medications, foods, dyes

Tests to consider if hematuria persistent: Urine calcium to creatinine ratio Test first degree relatives for hematuria Hgb electrophoresis to rule out sickle cell Serum chemistries Renal ultrasound
# Chunk 7657
Figure 163-1 Suggested algorithm for evaluation of red urine/hematuria. GN, Glomerulonephritis; H&P, history and physical; Hgb, hemoglobin; RBCs, red blood cells; UTI, urinary tract infection.
# Chunk 7658
Acute tubular necrosis Nephrotoxins (medications, contrast, myoglobin) Infection (sepsis) Interstitial nephritis Glomerular injury (primary glomerulonephritis, vasculitis, hemolytic uremic syndrome) Vascular (renal vein thrombosis, arterial emboli, malignant hypertension) to concentrate urine as well. With intrinsic tubular injury andpostrenal AKI, the UA may show mild hematuria and/or proteinuria with a specific gravity of 1.015 or less. With glomerularand vascular injury, the amount of hematuria and proteinuriais usually moderate to severe. In oliguric states, differentiationbetween prerenal azotemia and acute tubular necrosis may beaided by determining the urine osmolality and fractional excretionof sodium (see Table 165-2). Renal ultrasound is often helpful in determining the AKI category (see Table 165-2). Renal biopsy is indicated in select cases only.
# Chunk 7659
FENa, Fractional excretion of sodium; RBCs, red blood cells; WBCs, white blood cells. *FENa (%) = [(urine sodium/plasma sodium) ÷ (urine creatinine/plasma creatinine)] × 100.
# Chunk 7660
The management of children with advanced CKD requires a multidisciplinary team of pediatric practitioners. Adequate nutrition should be provided even if this requires dietary supplements and tube feedings. In infants a low-solute formula may be indicated. Unless a child is oliguric, fluid restriction is not necessary. Many children with CAKUT require supplemental salt due to urine sodium wasting. Conversely children with GN tend to retain sodium and may become hypertensive or edematous if given excess salt. Common treatment considerations for other CKD complications are given in Table 165-5.
# Chunk 7661
Obstructive sleep apnea Medications, illicit drugs

Most children with HTN have no symptoms. Signs and symptoms associated with severe HTN include encephalopathy (headache, vomiting, seizures), heart failure, stroke, and retinopathy (blurred vision, flame hemorrhage, and cotton wool spots on retinal exam). Neonatal history (low birth weight or use of umbilical artery catheter); family history of HTN, stroke, or heart disease; and dietary history (excessive salt or caffeine, drugs) are important. Additional findings that may suggest specific causes include abdominal bruit; diminished leg pressure and weak femoral pulse (coarctation of aorta); cafe-au-lait spots (neurofibromatosis associated renal artery stenosis); flank mass (hydronephrosis, Wilms tumor); tachycardia with flushing and diaphoresis (pheochromocytoma); and truncal obesity, acne, striae, and buffalo hump (Cushing syndrome). Signs of underlying kidney disease may be present.
# Chunk 7662
Vesicoureteral reflux (VUR) is the retrograde flow of urine from the bladder up to the ureter or even up to the kidney. Most VUR results from congenital incompetence of the ureterovesical (UV) junction, a structure that matures through early childhood. In a significant minority of children, structural UV abnormalities exist that never resolve. VUR may be familial; 30% to 40% of siblings of a child with VUR also have VUR. VUR may also be secondary to distal bladder obstruction or other urinary tract anomalies.
# Chunk 7663
An imaging study can be performed after initiation of UTI treatment with no need to wait days or weeks before performing the test. Renal ultrasound (RUS) is the best study to evaluate the urinary tract in children. A voiding cystourethrogram (VCUG) or radionuclide cystogram (NCG) is performed to detect urethral/bladder abnormalities and/or VUR. Recent American Academy of Pediatrics guidelines for infants with a first UTI between 2 and 24 months of age recommend a VCUG if an RUS reveals hydronephrosis, scarring, or other findings suggestive of either high grade VUR or obstructive uropathy and in other atypical or complex clinical circumstances. VCUG should also be performed if there is a recurrence of a febrile UTI. Although the VCUG provides additional anatomic detail, the NCG may detect more children with mild VUR and involves less radiation. An international grading system has been used to describe reflux (Fig. 167-1).The incidence of renal scarring in patients with low-grade VUR is low (15%) and increases with grade IV or V reflux (65%). Grade I or II VUR is likely to resolve without surgical intervention, but VUR resolves in less than 50% grade IV or V. Nuclear renal scanning best identifies renal scars.
# Chunk 7664
Voiding difficulties are frequent in preschool age children due todelay in maturation of bladder and micturition pathways. Normal micturition and continence rely on structural UT integrity,neurologic maturation, and coordination between somatic andautonomic nervous system units, including the central nervoussystem, spinal cord pathways, nerves innervating the bladder/urinary sphincter, and the autonomic system. Daytime continence is usually achieved before nighttime continence. Mostchildren are dry, day and night, by 4 to 5 years of age. Nocturnalenuresis is the involuntary loss of urine during sleep. Childrenwith primary enuresis have never had a prolonged (usually >3months) span of nighttime continence. Up to 10% of 5-year-oldchildren have primary enuresis with 15% spontaneous resolution per year. Boys are affected more than girls with increasedincidence in families (40% at 6 years of age if one affected parent, 70% if two affected parents). Secondary enuresis involvesloss of nighttime control after an extended period of drynessand generally requires evaluation to uncover the cause.
# Chunk 7665
Surgical correction of testicular torsion is called detorsion and fixation of the testis. If performed within 6 hours of torsion, there is greater than a 90% chance of testicular salvage. The contralateral testis usually is fixed to the scrotum to prevent possible torsion. If torsion of the appendix is found, the necrotic tissue is removed.
# Chunk 7666
Polyuria, polydipsia ADH deficiency Urine analysis (specific gravity), serum electrolytes, urine and serum osmolality, water deprivation test
# Chunk 7667
Antibodies to islet cell antigens may be seen months to years before the onset of beta cell dysfunction (Fig. 171-1). These include islet cell antibodies, insulin autoantibodies, antibodies to tyrosine phosphatase IA-2, antibodies to glutamic acid decarboxylase, and others. The risk for diabetes increases with the number of antibodies detected in the serum. In individuals with one detectable antibody only, the risk is only 10% to 15%; in individuals with three or more antibodies, the risk is 55% to 90%. When 80% to 90% of the beta cell mass have been destroyed, the remaining beta cell mass is insufficient to maintain euglycemia and clinical manifestations of diabetes result (see Fig. 171-1).
# Chunk 7668
Genetic determinants play a role in the susceptibility to DM1, although the mode of inheritance is complex and multigenic. Siblings or offspring of patients with diabetes have a risk of 2% to 8% for the development of diabetes; an identical twin has a 30% to 50% risk. The human leukocyte antigen (HLA) region on chromosome 6 provides the strongest determinant of susceptibility, accounting for approximately 40% of familial inheritance of DM1. Specific class II DR and DQ HLA alleles (HLA DR3 and HLA DR4) increase the risk of developing DM1, whereas other specific HLA alleles exert a protective effect. More than 90% of children with DM1 possess HLA DR3 alleles, HLA DR4 alleles, or both. The insulin gene region variable number tandem repeat on chromosome 11 is also linked to DM1 susceptibility. There is evidence for association, beyond HLA, of more than 100 other loci with DM1. Genetic factors do not fully account for susceptibility to DM1; environmental factors also play a role.
# Chunk 7669
Glycosuria occurs when the serum glucose concentrationexceeds the renal threshold for glucose reabsorption (from 160to 190 mg/dL). Glycosuria causes an osmotic diuresis (includingobligate loss of sodium, potassium, and other electrolytes), leading to dehydration. Polydipsia occurs as the patient attempts tocompensate for the excess fluid losses. Weight loss results fromthe persistent catabolic state and the loss of calories through glycosuria and ketonuria. The classic presentation of DM1 includespolyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia, and weight loss.
# Chunk 7670
or during an intercurrent illness when greater insulin requirements are unmet in the presence of elevated concentrations of the counter-regulatory and stress hormones (glucagon, growth hormone [GH], cortisol, and catecholamines). DKA can be considered to be present if (1) the arterial pH is below 7.3, (2) the serum bicarbonate level is below 15 mEq/L, and (3) ketones are elevated in serum or urine.
# Chunk 7671
In the absence of adequate insulin secretion, persistent partialhepatic oxidation of fatty acids to ketone bodies occurs. Twoof these three ketone bodies are organic acids and lead to metabolic acidosis with an elevated anion gap. Lactic acid maycontribute to the acidosis when severe dehydration results indecreased tissue perfusion. Hyperglycemia causes an osmoticdiuresis that is initially compensated for by increased fluidintake. As the hyperglycemia and diuresis worsen, most patients are unable to maintain the large fluid intake, anddehydration occurs. Vomiting, as a result of increasing acidosis, and increased insensible water losses caused by tachypneacan worsen the dehydration. Electrolyte abnormalities occurthrough a loss of electrolytes in the urine and transmembrane alterations resulting from acidosis. As hydrogen ionsaccumulate as a result of ketoacidosis, intracellular potassium is exchanged for hydrogen ions. Serum concentrationsof potassium increase initially with acidosis then decrease asserum potassium is cleared by the kidney. Depending on theduration of ketoacidosis, serum potassium concentrations at diagnosis may be increased, normal, or decreased, but intracellular potassium concentrations are depleted. A decreasedserum potassium concentration is an ominous sign of totalbody potassium depletion. Phosphate depletion also can occur as a result of the increased renal phosphate excretion required for elimination of excess hydrogen ions. Sodiumdepletion is also common ketoacidosis, resulting from renallosses of sodium caused by osmotic diuresis and from gastrointestinal losses from vomiting (Fig. 171-2).
# Chunk 7672
Laboratory studies reveal hyperglycemia (serum glucose concentrations ranging from 200 mg/dL to >1000 mg/dL).Arterial pH is below 7.30, and the serum bicarbonate concentration is less than 15 mEq/L. Serum sodium concentrationsmay be elevated, normal, or low, depending on the balance ofsodium and free water losses. The measured serum sodium concentration is artificially low, however, because of hyperglycemia. Hyperlipidemia also contributes to the decrease inmeasured serum sodium. The level of blood urea nitrogen(BUN) can be elevated with prerenal azotemia secondary todehydration. The white blood cell count is usually elevatedand can be left-shifted without implying the presence ofinfection. Fever is unusual and should prompt a search forinfectious sources that may have triggered the episode ofDKA.
# Chunk 7673
A patient with severe DKA is assumed to be approximately 10% dehydrated. If a recent weight measurement is available, the precise extent of dehydration can be calculated. An initial intravenous (IV) fluid bolus of a glucose-free isotonic solution (normal saline, lactated Ringer solution) at 10 to 20 mL/kg should be given to restore intravascular volume and renal perfusion. The remaining fluid deficit after the initial bolus should be added to maintenance fluid requirements, and the total should be replaced slowly over 36 to 48 hours. Ongoing losses resulting from osmotic diuresis usually do not need to be replaced unless urine output is large or signs of poor perfusion are present. Osmotic diuresis is usually minimal when the serum glucose concentration decreases to less than 300 mg/dL. To avoid rapid shifts in serum osmolality, 0.9% sodium chloride can be used as the replacement fluid for the initial 4 to 6 hours, followed by 0.45% sodium chloride.
# Chunk 7674
Electrolyte imbalances. Regardless of the serum potassium concentration at presentation, total body potassium depletion is likely. Serum potassium concentrations can decrease rapidly as insulin and then glucose therapy improves acidosis, and potassium is exchanged for intracellular hydrogen ions. When adequate urine output is shown, potassium should be added to the IV fluids. Potassium replacement should be given as 50% potassium chloride and 50% potassium phosphate at a concentration of 20 to 40 mEq/L. This combination provides phosphate for replacement of deficits but avoids excess phosphate administration, which may precipitate hypocalcemia. If the serum potassium level is greater than 6 mEq/L, potassium should not be added to IV fluids until the potassium level decreases.
# Chunk 7675
Monitoring. Initial laboratory measurements should include serum glucose, sodium, potassium, chloride, bicarbonate, BUN, creatinine, calcium, phosphate and magnesium concentrations; arterial or venous pH; and a urinalysis. Serum glucose measurement should be repeated every hour during therapy; electrolyte concentrations should be repeated every 2 to 3 hours. Calcium, phosphate, and magnesium concentrations should be measured every 4 to 6 hours during therapy. Neurologic and mental status should be assessed at frequent intervals. Any complaints of headache or deterioration of mental status should prompt rapid evaluation for possible cerebral edema. Indicative symptoms include a decreased sensorium, sudden severe headache, vomiting, change in vital signs (bradycardia, hypertension, apnea), a dilated pupil, ophthalmoplegia, or seizure.
# Chunk 7676
Clinically apparent cerebral edema occurs in 1% to 5% of cases of DKA. Cerebral edema is the most serious complication of DKA, with a mortality rate of 20% to 80%. The pathogenesis of cerebral edema likely involves osmolar shift resulting in fluid accumulation in the intracellular compartment and cell swelling. Subclinical cerebral edema is common in patients with DKA, but the factors that exacerbate this process leading to symptomatic brain swelling and possible cerebral herniation are not clearly defined. Cerebral edema typically occurs 6 to 12 hours after therapy for DKA is begun, often following a period of apparent clinical improvement. Factors that correlate with increased risk for cerebral edema include higher initial BUN concentration, lower initial Pco2, failure of the serum sodium concentration to increase as glucose concentration decreases during treatment, and treatment with bicarbonate.
# Chunk 7677
In some patients with new onset of DM1, the beta cell mass has not been completely destroyed. The remaining functionalbeta cells seem to recover function with insulin treatment. When this occurs, exogenous insulin requirements decrease.This is a period of stable blood glucose control, often with nearly normal glucose concentrations. This phase of the disease, known as the honeymoon period, usually starts in thefirst weeks of therapy, often continues for 3 to 6 months, andcan last 2 years.
# Chunk 7678
Many types of insulin differ in duration of action and time to peak effect (Table 171-2). These insulins can be used in various combinations, depending on the needs and goals of the individual patient. The most commonly used regimen is that of multiple injections of fast-acting insulin given with meals in combination with long-acting basal insulin given at bedtime. This regimen provides flexibility but requires administration of many injections per day and will require assistance for young children. After the total daily dose of insulin is determined, 30% to 50% are given as long-acting insulin, and the remainder is given as fast-acting insulin, divided according to the need for corrections of high glucose levels and for meals. To correct for hyperglycemia, one can determine the insulin sensitivity using the 1800 rule; dividing 1800 by the total daily dose of insulin to determine how many milligrams per deciliter of glucose will decrease with one unit of insulin. The insulin:carbohydrate ratio is used to calculate insulin for the carbohydrate content of food; 450 divided by the total daily dose determines the number of grams of carbohydrate that requires one unit of insulin.
# Chunk 7679
Newly diagnosed patients in the honeymoon period may require 0.4 to 0.6 U/kg/24 hours. Prepubertal patients with diabetes longer than 1 to 2 years typically require 0.5 to 1 U/kg/24 hours. During middle adolescence when elevated GH concentrations produce relative insulin resistance, insulin requirements increase by 40% to 50%, and doses of 1 to 2 U/kg/24 hours are typical.
# Chunk 7680
Balancing the daily meal plan with the dosages of insulin is crucial for maintaining serum glucose concentrations within the target range and avoiding hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia. The content and schedule of meals vary according to the type of insulin regimen used. It is recommended that carbohydrates contribute 50% to 65% of the total calories, protein 12% to 20%, and fat <30%. Saturated fat should contribute <10% of the total caloric intake, and cholesterol intake should be less than 300 mg/24 hours. High fiber content is recommended.
# Chunk 7681
Patients using multiple daily injections or the insulin pump can maintain a more flexible meal schedule with regard to the timing of meals and the carbohydrate content. These patients give an injection of insulin before or immediately after each meal with the total dose calculated according to the carbohydrate content of the meal. Further adjustments in the dose can be made based on the measured serum glucose concentration and plans for activity during the day. Children using a twice-aday combination of intermediate-acting and fast-acting insulins need to maintain a relatively consistent meal schedule so that carbohydrate absorption and insulin action peaks correspond. A typical meal schedule for a patient using this type of regimen involves three meals and three snacks daily. The total carbohydrate content of the meals and snacks should be kept constant.
# Chunk 7682
Blood glucose should be routinely monitored before each meal and at bedtime. Hypoglycemia during the night or excessive variability in the morning glucose concentrations should prompt additional testing at 2 or 3 am to ensure that there is no consistent hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia. During periods of illness or when blood glucose concentrations are higher than 300 mg/dL, urine ketones also should be tested. Continuous glucose monitors, which provide minute-to-minute blood glucose concentration information, can be useful in following
# Chunk 7683
Measurements of glycohemoglobin or hemoglobin A1c (HgbA1c) reflect the average blood glucose concentration over the preceding 3 months and provide a means for assessing long-term glycemic control. HgbA1c should be measured four times a year, and the results should be used for counseling of patients. The American Diabetes Association has set HgbA1c targets based on age with children less than 6 years having an HgbA1c target of 7.5% to 8.5%, ages 6 to 13 years HgbA1c target of less than 8%, and ages 13 to 18 years HgbA1c target of less than 7.5%. Measurements of HgbA1c are inaccurate in patients with hemoglobinopathies. Glycosylated albumin or fructosamine can be used in these cases.
# Chunk 7684
Patients with DM1 for more than 3 to 5 years should receive an annual ophthalmologic examination for retinopathy. Urine should be collected annually for assessment of microalbuminuria, which suggests early renal dysfunction and indicates a high risk of progression to nephropathy. Treatment with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors may halt the progression of microalbuminuria. In children with DM1, annual cholesterol measurements and periodic assessment of blood pressure are recommended. Early detection of hypertension and hypercholesterolemia with appropriate intervention can help limit future risk of coronary disease.
# Chunk 7685
Long-term complications of DM1 include retinopathy, nephropathy, neuropathy, and macrovascular disease. Evidence of organ damage caused by hyperglycemia is rare in patients with diabetes of less than 5 to 10 years’ duration; clinically apparent disease rarely occurs before 10 to 15 years’ duration. Diabetic retinopathy is the leading cause of blindness in the United States. Nephropathy eventually occurs in 30% to 40% and accounts for approximately 30% of all new adult cases of end-stage renal disease. Neuropathy occurs in 30% to 40% of postpubertal patients with DM1 and leads to sensory, motor, or autonomic deficits. Macrovascular disease results in an increased risk of myocardial infarction and stroke among individuals with diabetes.
# Chunk 7686
Confirmation of GH or cortisol deficiency as the cause of hypoglycemia requires the detection of low serum GH and cortisol concentrations during an episode of hypoglycemia or after other stimulatory testing. In contrast to hyperinsulinism, serum and urine ketones are positive at the time of hypoglycemia and FFAs are elevated. Treatment involves supplementation of the deficient hormones in physiologic doses.
# Chunk 7687
The diagnosis of glycogen storage disease is suggested by a finding of hepatomegaly without splenomegaly. Confirmation of the diagnosis requires specific biochemical studies of leukocytes or liver biopsy specimens. Treatment involves frequent high-carbohydrate feedings during the day and continuous feedings at night via nasogastric tube. Feedings of uncooked cornstarch overnight are sufficient to maintain serum glucose concentrations in some patients.
# Chunk 7688
Mild hepatomegaly may be present along with mild hyperammonemia, hyperuricemia, and mild elevations in hepatic transaminases. Ketone concentrations are low or undetected. The diagnosis is confirmed by the finding of elevated concentrations of dicarboxylic acids in the urine. Treatment involves avoidance of fasting.
# Chunk 7689
Although the list of causes of hypoglycemia is long and complex, establishing the etiology in a particular patient is important. Frequently it is difficult to make an accurate diagnosis until one can obtain a critical sample of blood and urine at the time of the hypoglycemic episode. In a child with unexplained hypoglycemia, a serum sample should be obtained before treatment for the measurement of glucose and insulin, GH, cortisol, FFAs, and β-hydroxybutyrate and acetoacetate. Measurement of serum lactate levels also should be considered. A urine specimen should be obtained for measuring ketones and reducing substances. Hypoglycemia without ketonuria suggests hyperinsulinism or a defect in fatty acid oxidation. The results of this initial testing can establish whether endocrine causes are responsible and, if not, provide initial information regarding which types of metabolic disorders are most likely. Whenever possible, additional samples of blood and urine should be frozen for further analysis, if necessary.
# Chunk 7690
Endocrine Evaluation of Growth Hormone Secretion

Available @ StudentConsult.com

GH is a 191–amino acid protein secreted by the pituitary gland under the control of GRF and SRIF (see Fig. 170-2). GH secretion is enhanced by α-adrenergic stimulation, hypoglycemia, starvation, exercise, early stages of sleep, and stress and inhibited by β-adrenergic stimulation and hyperglycemia. Because concentrations of GH are low throughout the day, except for brief secretory peaks in the middle of the night or early morning, the daytime ascertainment of GH deficiency or sufficiency on the basis of a single determination of a random GH concentration is impossible. Adequacy of GH secretion may be determined by a stimulation test to measure peak GH secretion. A normal response is a vigorous secretory peak after stimulation; the lack of such a peak is consistent with GH deficiency. However there is a high false-positive rate (on any day, about 10% or more of normal children may not reach the normal GH peak after even two stimulatory tests). Indirect measurements of GH secretion, such as serum concentrations of IGF-1 and IGF-BP3, are considered better screens for GH deficiency.
# Chunk 7691
Prolactin Elevated in hypothalamic dysfunction or destruction, suppressed in pituitary disease

BUN, Blood urea nitrogen; CBC, complete blood count; CRP, C-reactive protein; ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; IGF-1, insulin-like growth factor-1; IGF-BP3, insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 3; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.
# Chunk 7692
Classic GH-deficient patients do not show an increase in serum GH levels after stimulation. Some patients release GH in response to secretagogue testing but cannot release GH spontaneously during the day or night. Measuring serum IGF-1 and IGF-BP3 is suggested but not consistently helpful in establishing a diagnosis of GH deficiency. Tests for GH secretion are insensitive, not very specific, and fairly variable. In equivocal cases, an operational definition of GH deficiency might be that patients grow significantly faster when administered a normal dose of GH than before treatment.
# Chunk 7693
In females FSH stimulates the ovarian production of estrogen and, later in puberty, causes the formation and supportof corpus luteum. In males LH stimulates the productionof testosterone from the Leydig cells; later in puberty, FSHstimulates the development and support of the seminiferous tubules. The gonads also produce the protein inhibin.Both sex steroids and inhibin suppress the secretion of gonadotropins. The interplay of the products of the gonadsand GnRH modulates the serum concentrations of gonadotropins. GnRH is released in episodic pulses that vary duringdevelopment and during the menstrual period. These pulsesensure that gonadotropins are released in a pulsatile manner. With the onset of puberty, the amplitude of the pulses ofgonadotropins and, in turn, the sex steroids increases, firstat night and then throughout the day. Adrenarche generallyoccurs several years earlier than gonadarche and is heraldedby increasing circulating dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA)or androstenedione. Serum DHEA increases years before theappearance of its effects.
# Chunk 7694
When no secondary sexual development is present after the upper age limits of normal pubertal development, serum gonadotropin levels should be obtained to determine whether the patient has a hypogonadotropic or hypergonadotropic hypogonadism (see Table 174-2). Based on gonadotropin measurements only, the differentiation between constitutional delay in growth and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism is difficult; the gonadotropin levels are low in both conditions. Sometimes observation for months or years is necessary before the diagnosis is confirmed. Ultrasound of the pelvic structures in females would be helpful in the workup of delayed puberty.
# Chunk 7695
If a permanent condition is apparent, replacement with sexsteroids is indicated. Females are given transdermal estradiol,low-dose ethinyl estradiol (5 to 10 μg) or conjugated estrogens (starting at 0.3 mg daily, increasing to 0.625 mg or 0.9 mg by6 to 12 months later) in low daily doses until breakthroughbleeding occurs, at which time cycling is started with a dosefor 25 days; on days 20 to 25, a progestational agent, such asmedroxyprogesterone acetate (5 mg), is added to mimic thenormal increases in gonadal hormones and to induce a normal menstrual period. Alternatively combined estrogen and progesterone agents (oral contraceptives) may be used after breakthrough bleeding occurs. In males testosterone enanthateor cypionate (50 to 100 mg monthly with a progressive increaseto 100 to 200 mg) is given intramuscularly once every 4 weeks.This starting regimen is appropriate for patients with hypogonadotropic or hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, and doses are increased gradually to adult levels. Oral agents are not usedfor fear of hepatotoxicity. Patients with apparent constitutionaldelay in puberty who have, by definition, passed the upper limits of normal onset of puberty may be given a 3to 6-monthcourse of low-dose, sex-appropriate gonadal steroids to seewhether spontaneous puberty occurs. This course of therapymight be repeated once without undue advancement of boneage. All patients with any form of delayed puberty are at risk fordecreased bone density; adequate calcium intake is essential. Patients with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism may be able toachieve fertility by the administration of gonadotropin therapyor pulsatile hypothalamic-releasing hormone therapy administered by a programmable pump on an appropriate schedule.Subjects with hypergonadotropic hypogonadism have, by definition, a primary gonadal problem and are unlikely to achievespontaneous fertility.
# Chunk 7696
Precocious Puberty in the Female

Benign premature thelarche is the isolated appearance of unilateral or bilateral breast tissue in girls, usually at ages 6 months to 3 years. There are no other signs of puberty and no evidence of excessive estrogen effect (vaginal bleeding, thickening of the vaginal secretions, increased height velocity, or bone age acceleration). Ingestion or dermal application of estrogen-containing compounds must be excluded. Laboratory investigations are not usually necessary, but a pelvic ultrasound study rarely may be indicated to exclude ovarian disease. Girls with this condition should be re-evaluated at intervals of 6 to 12 months to ensure that apparent premature thelarche is not the beginning of progression into precocious puberty. The prognosis is excellent; if no progression occurs, no treatment other than reassurance is necessary.
# Chunk 7697
Clinical manifestations of congenital hypothyroidism in the immediate newborn period usually are subtle but become more evident weeks or months after birth. By then it is too late to ensure that there is not a detriment to the infant’s cognitive development. Newborn screening is crucial to make an early diagnosis and initiate thyroid replacement therapy by younger than 1 month of age. Findings at various stages after birth include hypothermia, acrocyanosis, respiratory distress, large fontanels, abdominal distention, lethargy and poor feeding, prolonged jaundice, edema, umbilical hernia, mottled skin, constipation, large tongue, dry skin, and hoarse cry. Thyroid hormones are crucial for maturation and differentiation of tissues, such as bone and brain (most thyroid-dependent brain maturation occurs 2 to 3 years after birth) (Table 175-3).
# Chunk 7698
When treatment (with levothyroxine) is initiated within 1 month or less after birth, the prognosis for normal intellectual development is excellent; screening programs usually offer therapy within 1 to 2 weeks of birth. If therapy is instituted after 6 months, when the signs of severe hypothyroidism are present, the likelihood of normal intellectual function is markedly decreased. Growth improves after thyroid replacement even in late diagnosed cases. The dose of levothyroxine changes with age; 10 to 15 μg/kg of levothyroxine is used for a newborn, but about 3 μg/kg is used later in childhood. In neonatal hypothyroidism, the goal is to bring the serum free T4 rapidly into the upper half of the range of normal. Suppression of TSH is not seen and not necessary in all cases because such suppression may lead to excessive doses of levothyroxine.
# Chunk 7699
The diagnosis may be confirmed by serum antithyroid peroxidase (previously antimicrosomal) and antithyroglobulin antibodies. Neither biopsy nor thyroid scan is indicated in Hashimoto thyroiditis, although the thyroid scan with reduced uptake may differentiate hashitoxicosis from Graves disease.
# Chunk 7700
Available @ StudentConsult.com

Most children with hyperthyroidism have Graves disease, the autonomous functioning of the thyroid caused by autoantibodies [thyroid stimulating immunoglobulins (TSIs)] stimulating the thyroid. The resulting excessive synthesis, release, and peripheral metabolism of thyroid hormones produce the clinical features. Hashimoto thyroiditis and thyrotoxicosis are on a continuum of autoimmune diseases; there is overlap in their immunologic findings. Antithyroid peroxidase and antithyroglobulin antibodies may be present in thyrotoxicosis, although the values are usually lower than in Hashimoto thyroiditis. Exceptionally high titers of antibodies may indicate the thyrotoxic phase of Hashimoto thyroiditis with the subsequent evolution toward permanent hypothyroidism. In Graves disease, serum free T4 or T3 or both levels are elevated, whereas TSH is suppressed. Rare causes of hyperthyroidism include McCune-Albright syndrome, thyroid nodule (often an adenoma), TSH hypersecretion, subacute thyroiditis, and iodine or thyroid hormone ingestion.
# Chunk 7701
Clinical manifestations. Graves disease presents as hyperthyroidism (Table 175-4) and is about five times more common in girls than in boys, with a peak incidence in adolescence. Personality changes, mood instability, and poor school performance are common initial problems. Tremor, anxiety, inability to concentrate, and weight loss may be insidious and confused with a psychological disorder until thyroid function tests reveal the elevated serum free T4 level. In rare cases, serum free T4 may be near-normal whereas serum T3 is selectively elevated (T3 toxicosis). A firm homogeneous goiter is usually present. Many patients complain of neck fullness. Thyroid gland enlargement is best visualized with the neck only slightly extended and with the examiner lateral to the patient. Palpation of the thyroid gland is best performed with the examiner’s hands around the neck from the back. The patient swallows so that the examiner can feel and examine the size, consistency, nodularity and motion of the gland. The examiner should watch the patient swallow to note any discernible enlargement or asymmetry of the thyroid lobes. Auscultation may reveal a bruit over the gland that needs to be differentiated from a carotid bruit.
# Chunk 7702
twice daily) or propylthiouracil (5 to 7 mg/kg/day dividedevery 8 hours). Both medications are equally effective, however, propylthiouracil is no longer a first-line therapy secondary to concerns of severe liver injury and acute liver failure.A beta blocker, such as propranolol or atenolol, is startedif symptoms are severe to control cardiac manifestations and is tapered as the methimazole takes effect. Antithyroidmedication is usually continued for 1 to 2 years because theremission rate is approximately 25% per year. In patientscomplying with the treatment regimen, the 2-year courseof treatment can be repeated. Medication should suppressthyroid function to normal, without the need to add thyroidhormone replacement to normalize serum free T4. Complications of methimazole are muscle pain, rash, granulocytopenia, and jaundice. The granulocytopenia is an idiosyncraticcomplication of rapid onset, which is observed only in theearly months after institution of antithyroid medication and requires monitoring the complete blood count. If asuppressed white blood cell count is observed, antithyroidtherapy must be discontinued. This potentially lethal rarecomplication affects 3 in 10,000 users a year. After resolution,the other of the two antithyroid medications can be startedbecause there is usually less than a 50% chance of a similarreaction from the other medication. Iodine administration, which may suppress thyroid function but becomes ineffectivein a few weeks, is sometimes used as a preparation for surgery but never for long-term therapy.
# Chunk 7703
This disorder results from transplacental passage of maternal TSIs and may be masked for several days until the short-lived effects of transplacental maternal antithyroid medication wear off (assuming the mother was receiving such medication), at which time the effects of TSIs are observed. Irritability, tachycardia (often with signs of cardiac failure simulating cardiomyopathy), polycythemia, craniosynostosis, bone age advancement, poor feeding, and failure to thrive are the clinical hallmarks. This condition may be anticipated if the mother is known to be thyrotoxic in pregnancy. Cure of hyperthyroidism before pregnancy (surgery or radioiodine treatment) limits or curtails T4 production but not the underlying immune disturbance producing TSIs; thus the infant still may be affected, at least transiently.
# Chunk 7704
Carcinoma of the thyroid is rare in children (1% of all pediatric cancers in the 5to 9-year-old age group and up to 7% of cancers in the 15to 19-year-old age group). Papillary and follicular carcinomas represent 90% of childhood thyroid cancers. A history of therapeutic head or neck irradiation or radiation exposure from nuclear accidents predisposes a child to thyroid cancer. Carcinoma usually presents as a firm to hard, painless nonfunctional solitary nodule and may spread to adjacent lymph nodes. Rapid growth, hoarseness (recurrent laryngeal nerve involvement), and lung metastasis may be present. If the nodule is solid on ultrasound, is cold on radioiodine scanning, and feels hard, the likelihood of a carcinoma is high. Excisional biopsy usually is performed, but FNA biopsy also may be diagnostic.
# Chunk 7705
Pseudohypoparathyroidism is an autosomal dominant condition that may present at birth or later. Pseudohypoparathyroidism is associated with Albright hereditary osteodystrophywhose clinical manifestations include short stature, stockybody habitus, round facies, short fourth and fifth metacarpals,calcification of the basal ganglia, subcutaneous calcification,and developmental delay. Albright hereditary osteodystrophymay be inherited separately so that a patient may have a normal appearance with hypocalcemia or may have the Albrighthereditary osteodystrophy phenotype with normal serum calcium, phosphate, PTH, and response to PTH.
# Chunk 7706
The etiology of hypocalcemia usually can be discerned by combining features of the clinical presentation with determinations of serum ionized calcium, phosphate, alkaline phosphatase, PTH (preferably at a time when the calcium is low), magnesium, and albumin. If the PTH concentration is not appropriately elevated in relation to the low serum calcium, hypoparathyroidism (transient, primary, or caused by hypomagnesemia) is present. Vitamin D stores can be estimated by measuring serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D. Renal function is assessed by a serum creatinine measurement or determination of creatinine clearance (Table 176-1).
# Chunk 7707
Steroids that circulate in the free form (not bound to cortisol-binding protein [transcortin]) may cross the placentafrom mother to fetus, but ACTH does not. The placenta plays an important role in steroid biosynthesis in utero, acting as a metabolic mediator between mother and child.Because the fetal CRH-ACTH-adrenal axis is operationalin utero, deficiencies in cortisol synthesis lead to excessiveACTH secretion. If a virilizing adrenal enzyme defect ispresent, such as 21-hydroxylase deficiency, the fetal adrenalgland secretes excess androgens, virilizing the fetus. Normalvariation of serum cortisol and ACTH levels leads to values that are high early in the morning and lower at night. Thisnormal diurnal variation may take months to years to fullydevelop.
# Chunk 7708
The goals of treatment are to achieve normal linear growth and bone age advancement. Long-term therapy consists of providing glucocorticoids at a dose of approximately 10 to 15 mg/m2/24 hours in three divided doses of oral hydrocortisone or its equivalent. Mineralocorticoid therapy for salt losers consists of fludrocortisone at a dose of 0.1 to 0.2 mg/24 hours, often with sodium chloride supplementation in infancy and early childhood. Surgical correction of ambiguous external genitalia may be considered. The adequacy of glucocorticoid replacement therapy is monitored by determining serum concentrations of adrenal precursors, including androstenedione and 17-OHP for 21-hydroxylase deficiency. In addition, the assessment of linear growth and skeletal age, by bone age determination, is required as a reflection of appropriate therapy. To avoid adrenal insufficiency, threefold higher doses of glucocorticoids are given during stressful states such as febrile illnesses and surgery. Intramuscular hydrocortisone is used in severe emergencies or with illnesses involving emesis. Mineralocorticoid therapy is monitored with serum sodium, potassium, and plasma renin activity levels. Prenatal treatment with dexamethasone to suppress fetal ACTH-induced
# Chunk 7709
Replacement treatment with 10 to 15 mg/m2/24 hours of hydrocortisone is indicated, with supplementation during stress at three times the maintenance dosage or the use of intramuscular hydrocortisone. The dose is titrated to allow a normal growth rate. Mineralocorticoid replacement with fludrocortisone is monitored by plasma renin activity and serum sodium and potassium determinations.
# Chunk 7710
Migraine headaches are another common type of recurrent headaches and frequently begin in childhood. Headaches are stereotyped attacks of frontal, bitemporal, or unilateral, moderate to severe, pounding or throbbing pain that are aggravated by activity and last 1 to 72 hours. Associated symptoms include nausea, vomiting, pallor, photophobia, phonophobia, and an intense desire to seek a quiet dark room for rest. Toddlers may be unable to verbalize the source of their discomfort and exhibit episodes of irritability, sleepiness, pallor, and vomiting. Migraines can be associated with auras that may be typical (visual, sensory, dysphagic) or atypical. Aura can precede or coincide with the headache and typically persists for 15 to 30 minutes. Visual auras consist of spots, flashes, or lines of light that flicker in one or both visual fields. Atypical auras may also consist of brief episodes of unilateral or perioral
# Chunk 7711
Seizures in the setting of fever may be caused by infections of the nervous system (meningitis, encephalitis, brainabscess), unrecognized epilepsy triggered by fever, or febrile seizures. The latter represents the most common cause ofseizures among children between 6 months and 6 years of age, occurring in about 4% of all children. By definition, a febrile seizure occurs in the presence of fever. Simple febrile seizures are generalized at onset, last less than 15 minutes, and occur only once in a 24-hour period in a neurologicallyand developmentally normal child. If there are focal features,the seizure lasts longer than 15 minutes or recurs within 24hours, or if the child has preexisting neurologic challenges,the seizure is referred to as a complex or atypical febrile seizure.
# Chunk 7712
The prognosis of children with simple febrile convulsionsis excellent. Intellectual achievements are normal. Febrile seizures recur in 30% to 50% of children. The risk of subsequentepilepsy is not substantially greater than that for the generalpopulation (approximately 2%). Factors that increase the riskfor the development of epilepsy include abnormal neurologicexamination or development, family history of epilepsy, andcomplex febrile seizures. Because febrile seizures are briefand the outcome is benign, most children require no treatment. Rectal diazepam can be administered during a seizureto abort a prolonged event and is a reasonable option forchildren with a history of prolonged febrile seizures. Becauseof the potential for side effects, daily administration of anticonvulsant medication is not recommended. Administration of antipyretics during febrile illnesses does not preventfebrile seizures.
# Chunk 7713
For an otherwise healthy child with an unprovoked seizure anda normal physical and neurological examination, no laboratoryevaluation is required. Children with simple febrile seizures who have recovered completely require little or no laboratory evaluation other than studies necessary to evaluate the sourceof the fever. If the clinical presentation does not meet thesecriteria and acute symptomatic seizures are suspected, potentially life-threatening causes such as meningitis, sepsis, headtrauma, and toxins should be pursued. A complete laboratoryevaluation for new onset of seizures includes a complete bloodcount and measurement of glucose, calcium, sodium, potassium, chloride, bicarbonate, urea nitrogen, creatinine, magnesium, and phosphorus, as well as blood or urine toxicology
# Chunk 7714
Available @ StudentConsult.com

The earlier in life the process starts, the more severe the progression. Infants with SMA type 1 present in early infancy with severe hypotonia, generalized weakness, and facial involvement. Infants have normal cognitive, social, and language skills and sensation. Fasciculations (quivering of the lateral aspect of the tongue) are best identified by inspecting the mouth when the child is asleep. Deep tendon reflexes are absent. With progression, breathing becomes rapid, shallow, and predominantly abdominal. In an extremely weak child, respiratory compromise leads to atelectasis, pulmonary infection, and death. Most infants with SMA type 1 die within the first 2 years. Children with SMA type 2 may survive to adulthood. Children with SMA type 3 can appear normal, with slower progression of weakness and a normal life expectancy.
# Chunk 7715
The characteristic symptoms are areflexia, flaccidity, and symmetrical ascending weakness. Progression can occur rapidly, in hours, or more indolently over weeks. Typically symptoms start with numbness or paresthesia in the hands and feet, then a heavy, weak feeling in the legs. Weakness ascends to involve the arms, trunk, and bulbar muscles (tongue, pharynx, larynx). Deep tendon reflexes are absent even when strength is relatively preserved. Objective signs of sensory loss are usually minor compared with the dramatic weakness. Bulbar and respiratory insufficiency may progress rapidly. Dysfunction of autonomic nerves can lead to blood pressure changes, tachycardia and other arrhythmias, urinary retention or incontinence, or stool retention. This polyneuropathy can be difficult to distinguish from an acute spinal cord syndrome. Preservation of bowel and bladder function, loss of arm reflexes, absence of a sensory level, and lack of spinal tenderness point toward Guillain-Barré syndrome. A cranial nerve variant of Guillain-Barré syndrome called the Miller Fisher variant manifests with ataxia, partial ophthalmoplegia, and areflexia.
# Chunk 7716
Available @ StudentConsult.com

Infant boys are only rarely symptomatic in early infancy. At about 2 to 3 years of age, boys develop an awkward gait and an inability to run properly. Some have an antecedent history of mild slowness in attaining motor milestones or poor head control during infancy. Examination shows firm calf hypertrophy and mild to moderate proximal leg weakness with a hyperlordotic, waddling gait. The child typically arises from a lying position on the floor by using his arms to climb up his legs and body (Gower sign). Arm weakness is evident by age 6 years, and most boys are wheelchair dependent by age 12 years. Other manifestations include cardiomyopathy, scoliosis, respiratory decline, and, in some boys, cognitive and behavioral dysfunction. Many boys with Duchenne live into adulthood. Most die in their 20s or early 30s, usually as a result of progressive respiratory decline or cardiac dysfunction.
# Chunk 7717
Serum CK levels are always markedly elevated. Diagnosis is established by genetic testing for the dystrophin gene mutation. Prenatal diagnosis is possible. Approximately one third of cases represent new mutations. Occasionally, the diagnosis is not made until a muscle biopsy shows muscle fiber degeneration and regeneration accompanied by increased intrafascicular connective tissue.
# Chunk 7718
Diagnosis is established by genetic testing.

Other Forms of Childhood Muscle Disease

Congenital muscular dystrophies (CMDs) refer to a group of genetically determined conditions that present in infancy or early childhood. The most common subtypes include merosin-deficient congenital muscular dystrophy, Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy, and the dystroglycanopathies. The characteristic clinical features include hypotonia, extremity weakness, delayed motor development, and congenital contractures. Diagnosis is established through the combination of elevated serum CK and dystrophic changes detected on muscle biopsy. In most individuals, the disease course is slow or nonprogressive, although many children with CMD are wheelchair dependent and require some type of respiratory support. Contractures and scoliosis are often progressive and severely worsen; respiratory status diminishes with age.
# Chunk 7719
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD), also known as humeroperoneal muscular dystrophy, can be inherited as an X-linked recessive, autosomal dominant, or autosomal recessive disorder. Symptoms typically begin in childhood, although adult onset has been noted. Patients may experience early contractures, slowly progressive humeroperoneal muscle weakness or wasting, and cardiac disease with conduction defects and arrhythmias. EDMD is associated with mild elevations of serum CK levels, abnormal electrocardiograms (ECG), characteristic changes on muscle imaging, and abnormal but nonspecific muscle biopsies. There are no disease-specific modifying therapies for EDMD, although early placement of defibrillators in patients with abnormal ECGs reduces the incidence of sudden death.
# Chunk 7720
Congenital myopathies (CM) are a relatively common group (prevalence approximately 1:20,000) of nondystrophic muscle disorders that, like congenital muscular dystrophies, most typically present in infancy with hypotonia and weakness. Additional signs and symptoms include congenital contractures, hip subluxation/dislocation, small/atrophic muscles, thin body habitus, and characteristic facial appearance (the “myopathic facies”). Symptoms are often nonprogressive or only slowly progressive, although children often have severe lifelong disabilities including wheelchair dependence, severe scoliosis, and respiratory failure. Clinical finding may distinguish CMDs and other dystrophies (e.g., involvement of the facial musculature in congenital myopathies). Diagnosis is ultimately established based on laboratory studies, biopsy findings, and genetic test results. Histopathologic subtypes are distinguished by characteristic features on muscle biopsy, the most common being nemaline myopathy, centronuclear myopathy, and core myopathy. More than 15 different genetic causes have been established for CMs. However, nearly 50% of cases are genetically unresolved. Although no specific therapies currently exist for any CM subtype, several promising therapies have shown efficacy in preclinical models of disease.
# Chunk 7721
Malignant hyperthermia is a life-threatening syndrome manifested by a rapid increase of body temperature, muscle rigidity, metabolic and respiratory acidosis, hypotension, arrhythmias, and convulsions. Acute episodes are precipitated by exposure to anesthetic agents in patients with a genetic predisposition. Patients with Duchenne muscular dystrophy, central core myopathy, and other myopathies are susceptible, although malignant hyperpyrexia can also occur in children without muscle disease as an autosomal dominant genetic disorder. A family history of unexplained death during anesthesia is often noted. Serum CK levels rise and myoglobinuria can result in tubular necrosis and acute renal failure. Diagnosis of idiopathic malignant hyperthermia is possible with genetic testing or an in vitro muscle contraction test that reveals excessive tonic contracture on exposure to halothane and caffeine. Treatment consists of IV dantrolene, sodium bicarbonate, and cooling.
# Chunk 7722
Postinfectious acute cerebellar ataxia may occur 1 to 3 weeks following varicella, infectious mononucleosis, mild respiratory or gastrointestinal viral illnesses, or other infections. The pathogenesis is uncertain and may represent either a direct viral infection of the cerebellum or, more likely, an autoimmune response precipitated by the viral infection and directed at the cerebellar white matter. Symptoms begin abruptly, causing truncal ataxia, staggering, and frequent falling. Dysmetria of the arms, dysarthria, nystagmus, vomiting, irritability, and lethargy may be present. Symptoms, which may be severe enough to prevent standing or sitting, usually peak within 2 days, then stabilize and resolve over several weeks. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination sometimes shows a mild lymphocytic pleocytosis or mild elevation of protein content. Brain magnetic resonance imaging may reveal cerebellar enhancement. No specific therapy is available except to prevent injury during the ataxic phase.
# Chunk 7723
Routine laboratory testing Glucose Sodium, potassium, chloride, bicarbonate, BUN, creatinine, AST, ALT, blood gases, ammonia Blood and urine analyses for toxic substances
# Chunk 7724
Head CT Brain MRI, MRA, MRV

Secondary laboratory testing (if cause remains unknown) Lead level, pyruvate, lactate, serum amino acids, urine organic acids, acylcarnitine profile
# Chunk 7725
ALT, Alanine aminotransferase; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; BUN, blood urea nitrogen; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; CT, computed tomography; EEG, electroencephalogram; MRI/MRA/MRV, magnetic resonance imaging/angiography/venography; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; PT, prothrombin time;
# Chunk 7726
Metabolic derangements are common causes of altered mental status. Disturbances of blood chemistries (glucose, sodium, calcium, bicarbonate, blood urea nitrogen, ammonia) may produce depressed mental status. Metabolic causes of acute coma are suggested by spontaneous fluctuations in the level of consciousness, tremors, myoclonus, asterixis, visual and tactile hallucinations, and deep coma with preservation of pupillary light reflexes. Acute metabolic or toxic disorders usually produce a hypotonic, limp state, but hypertonia, rigidity, and decorticate and decerebrate posturing are sometimes observed in coma caused by hypoglycemia, hepatic encephalopathy, and short-acting barbiturates. A subacute course of somnolence progressing to difficulty arousing from a deep sleep (stupor) over hours suggests drug intoxication or organ system failure (kidney, liver) producing a metabolic encephalopathy. Care must be taken to investigate background medical conditions that may produce a decline in consciousness (e.g., diabetes mellitus, leukemia, kidney failure, liver disease). Intoxication and ingestion are common causes of acute alteration of consciousness, and a thorough history must be taken to search for the offending agent (Chapter 45). A history of social and emotional difficulties, drug abuse, or depression raises concern for self-inflicted injury or toxic ingestion.
# Chunk 7727
Test: serum ceruloplasmin levels, urinary copper excretion patient with a degenerative neurologic condition of unknown cause should have leukocytes or skin fibroblasts harvested for measurement of a standard battery of lysosomal, peroxisomal, and mitochondrial enzymes (Chapters 56, 57). Neuroimaging, usually with brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), is also typically warranted. The diagnosis of leukodystrophy usually can be made confidently on the basis of extensive cerebral white matter changes on MRI. Histologic and biochemical studies may be normal in gray matter encephalopathy, making the diagnosis much less secure. Acquired lesions (infectious, inflammatory, vascular, toxic) are difficult to exclude completely. Brain biopsy is not likely to be helpful.
# Chunk 7728
Krabbe disease (globoid cell leukodystrophy) is caused by a deficiency of galactocerebrosidase. Individuals with the infantile form (85% to 90% of cases) appear to be normal during the first months of life. Symptoms begin by 6 months of age and include extreme irritability, hyperpyrexia, vomiting, seizures, hypertonia, and blindness. Demyelination of the CNS and peripheral nervous system results in upper and lower motor neuron signs.
# Chunk 7729
The average life expectancy of patients with NF1 may be reduced by 10 to 15 years. Malignancy is the most common cause of death. Genetic and psychological counseling are important components of care for this chronic disorder. Although it is an autosomal dominant disorder, spontaneous mutations account for 30% to 50% of cases.
# Chunk 7730
Defective closure of the caudal neural tube at the end of week 4 of gestation results in anomalies of the lumbar and sacral vertebrae or spinal cord called spina bifida. These anomalies range in severity from clinically insignificant defects of the L5 or S1 vertebral arches to major malformations, leaving the spinal cord uncovered by skin or bone on the infant’s back. The latter severe defect, called a myelomeningocele, results in flaccid paralysis and loss of sensation in the legs and incontinence of bowel and bladder, with the extent and degree of neurologic deficit dependent on the location of the myelomeningocele. In addition, affected children usually have an associated Chiari type II malformation (downward displacement of the cerebellar tonsils and medulla), resulting in hydrocephalus and weakness of face and swallowing. In a meningocele, the spinal canal and cystic meninges are exposed on the back, but the underlying spinal cord is anatomically and functionally intact. In spina bifida occulta, the skin of the back is apparently intact, but defects of the underlying bone or spinal canal are present. Meningoceles and spina bifida occulta may be associated with a lipoma, dermoid cyst, or tethering of the cord to a thick filum terminale. A dimple or tuft of hair may be present over the affected area. Patients may also have an associated dermoid sinus, an epithelial tract extending from the skin surface to the meninges; this increases the risk of meningitis. Patients with spina bifida occulta or meningocele may have weakness and numbness in the feet that can result in recurrent ulcerations, or difficulties controlling bowel or bladder function that may result in recurrent urinary tract infections, reflux nephropathy, and renal insufficiency. In diastematomyelia, a bone spicule or fibrous band divides the spinal cord into two longitudinal sections. An associated lipoma that infiltrates the cord and tethers it to the vertebrae may be present. Symptoms include weakness and numbness of the feet and urinary incontinence.
# Chunk 7731
Classically, acne lasts 3 to 5 years, although some individuals may have disease for 15 to 20 years. Only early treatment with isotretinoin may alter the natural course of acne. Acne lesions often heal with temporary postinflammatory erythema and hyperpigmentation. Depending on the severity, chronicity, and depth of involvement, pitted, atrophic, or hypertrophic scars may develop. Cystic acne has the highest incidence of scarring because rupture of a deep cyst induces the greatest inflammation, though scarring may be caused by milder pustular or even comedonal acne.
# Chunk 7732
Sedating antihistamines (e.g., diphenhydramine, hydroxyzine)are useful adjunctive therapy, especially during flares. These may have only mild effect on pruritus but can improve the sleeplessness due to scratching during the night. A dose before bedtime is most effective, and additional daytime doses can be added on an individual basis when needed. Nonsedating antihistamines are of little benefit in controlling the pruritus of atopic dermatitis.
# Chunk 7733
Seborrheic dermatitis of the scalp is usually asymptomatic andgenerally does not require treatment. Minor amounts of scalecan be removed easily by frequent shampooing. For infantswith cradle cap, oil (such as mineral oil or olive oil) may begently massaged into the scalp and left on for a few minutesbefore gently brushing out the scale and shampooing. Dailyshampooing with ketoconazole, zinc pyrithione, selenium sulfide, or salicylic acid shampoos can treat scalp scale. Seborrheicdermatitis with inflamed lesions responds rapidly to treatmentwith low-potency steroids two times daily.
# Chunk 7734
The most frequently encountered pigmented lesion is dermal melanosis, which occurs in 70% to 90% of African-American, Hispanic, Asian, and Native American infants and in approximately 5% of white infants. This is a congenital lesion caused by entrapment of melanocytes in the dermis during their migration from the neural crest into the epidermis. Although most of these lesions are found in the lumbosacral area (Mongolian spot), they also occur at other sites such as the buttocks, flank, extremities, or, rarely, the face (Fig. 193-1). Single or multiple, poorly demarcated, gray-blue patches up to 10 cm in size may be present. Most lesions gradually disappear during the first few years of life; aberrant lesions in unusual sites are more likely to persist.
# Chunk 7735
Figure 193-3 Congenital melanocytic nevus (buttock).

Figure 193-4 Hairy congenital nevus.

Acquired melanocytic nevi are common skin lesions. Melanocytic nevi may occur at any age; however, the lesions developmost rapidly in prepubertal children and teenagers. Melanocytic nevi are well-delineated, round to oval, brown maculesand papules. Lesions are most common on the face, upper torso,and arms. Family history, fair skin, and sun exposure are considered major risk factors. Irregular pigmentation, rapid growth,bleeding, and a change in configuration or borders suggest signsof malignant degeneration and biopsy should be performed.Malignant melanoma is rare in childhood; however, there isan alarming increase in incidence in adolescence, especially inthose who use indoor tanning. Education of parents and children regarding the risks of sun exposure, appropriate sun protection, and recognition of worrisome lesions is important.
# Chunk 7736
SJS, TEN, and SJS/TEN overlap are severe, life-threatening disorders thought to represent the same disease continuum. Theyare usually preceded by a prodrome of fever, malaise, and upperrespiratory symptoms 1 to 14 days before the onset of cutaneouslesions. Red macules appear suddenly and tend to coalesce intolarge patches, with a predominant distribution over the face andtrunk. Atypical targets may be present, causing diagnostic confusion initially with EM, although the atypical targets lack thecharacteristic three zones. Skin lesions evolve rapidly into bullaeand areas of necrosis. SJS is defined as epidermal detachment ofless than 10% of the body surface area, whereas SJS/TEN overlap has 10% to 30% and TEN has greater than 30% body surface area involvement. Any mucosal surface may be involved.The upper and lower lips are generally swollen and bright redwith erosions and hemorrhagic crusts, and the remainder of theoral mucosa may also be involved. Early in the disease process,there is bilateral conjunctival injection; however, this usuallyprogresses to conjunctival erosions. There may be erosions ofthe penile, vaginal, or perianal mucosa. Urogenital, esophageal,and tracheal surfaces may be involved in the most severe cases.
# Chunk 7737
Curative treatment is achieved by a 12-hour (overnight) application of permethrin 5% cream applied to the entire body. Because permethrin is not effective against the eggs, the treatment should be repeated 1 week later to kill any subsequently hatched larvae. All household members and close contacts should be treated simultaneously, even if asymptomatic. Bed linens, towels, and clothes worn for the previous 2 days before treatment should be machine-washed in hot water and machine-dried using high heat; heat is the most effective scabicide. Items that are not washable may be dry-cleaned or placed in a sealed plastic bag for 7 days.
# Chunk 7738
The treatment of head lice is controversial because of resistance to many established options. Over-the-counter permethrin (1%) and pyrethrin-based products (0.17% to 0.33%)are the first choices of therapy. Because 20% to 30% of eggsmay survive one treatment, a second treatment should beapplied in 7 to 10 days. Drug resistance is on the rise, andmalathion (0.5%) lotion may be used as an alternative forresistant cases.
# Chunk 7739
Everyone in the family should be checked for head lice and treated if live lice are found to reduce the risk of reinfestation. Bed linens, towels, and clothes worn for the previous 2 days before treatment should be machine-washed in hot water and machine-dried using high heat. Items that are not washable may be dry-cleaned or placed in a sealed plastic bag for 2 weeks. Brushes and combs should be soaked in dish detergent or rubbing alcohol for 1 hour. Rugs, furniture, mattresses, and car seats should be vacuumed thoroughly.
# Chunk 7740
This is an oblique fracture of the distal tibia without a fibula fracture. There is often no significant trauma. Patients are usually 1 to 3 years old, but can be as old as 6 and present with limping and pain with weight bearing. There may be minimal swelling and pain. Initial radiographs do not always show the fracture; if symptoms persist, a repeat x-ray in 7 to 10 days may be helpful.
# Chunk 7741
The Pavlik harness is an effective treatment up to 6 months ofage. It provides hip flexion to just over 90° and limits adduction tono more than neutral. This positioning redirects the femoral headtoward the acetabulum. The hip must be reduced within 1 to 2weeks of beginning the Pavlik harness, although the infant willneed more time in the device. The Pavlik harness is successful in treating approximately 95% of dysplastic or subluxated hips, and80% successful for treatment of true dislocations. Persistently dislocated hips should not remain in a Pavlik harness for more than2 weeks for fear of iatrogenic acetabular damage. Patients failingthe Pavlik harness warrant treatment with an abduction orthosis.
# Chunk 7742
Children over 6 months or those who have failed nonoperative treatment should undergo closed reduction using a hip spica cast. This is done under general anesthesia; reduction is evaluated with an intraoperative arthrogram, then confirmed by postoperative computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). If closed reduction fails, open reduction is indicated. Patients over 18 months of age may require a pelvic and femoral osteotomy.
# Chunk 7743
The etiology of transient synovitis is uncertain, but possible causes are viral illness and hypersensitivity. Approximately 70% of children diagnosed with transient synovitis have an upper respiratory tract viral infection in the preceding 7 to 14 days. Biopsies have revealed nonspecific synovial hypertrophy. Hip joint aspirations, when necessary, are negative for bacterial culture or signs of bacterial infection.
# Chunk 7744
True metatarsus adductus resolves spontaneously over 90% of the time without treatment, so reassurance is all that is needed. Metatarsus adductus that does not improve within 2 years needs evaluation by a pediatric orthopedist. Persistent cases may benefit from serial casting or bracing, and potentially surgery. The deformity is not associated with a disability.
# Chunk 7745
The risk of spinal deformity progression in congenital scoliosis is variable and depends on the growth potential of the malformed vertebrae. A unilateral unsegmented bar typically progresses, but a block vertebra has little growth potential. About 75% of patients with congenital scoliosis will show some progression that continues until skeletal growth is complete, and about 50% will require some type of treatment. Progression can be expected during periods of rapid growth (before 2 years and after 10 years).
# Chunk 7746
Available @ StudentConsult.com

The history must include the onset and duration of symptoms. The location, character, and radiation of pain are important. Neurologic symptoms (muscle weakness, sensory changes, and bowel or bladder dysfunction) must be reviewed. Medical history and family history should be obtained, with a focus on back pain, rheumatologic disorders, and neoplastic processes. The review of systems should include detailed questions on overall health, fever, chills, recent weight loss, and recent illnesses. Physical examination should include a complete musculoskeletal and neurologic evaluation. Spinal alignment, range of motion, areas of tenderness, and muscle spasm should be noted. Red flags for childhood back pain include persistent or increasing pain, systemic findings (e.g., fever, weight loss), neurologic deficits, bowel or bladder dysfunction, young age (under 4 is strongly associated with tumor), night waking, pain that restricts activity, and a painful left thoracic spinal curvature.
# Chunk 7747
Spondylolisthesis is classified according to the degree of slippage:Grade 1: less than 25% Grade 2: 25% to 50% Grade 3: 50% to 75% Grade 4: 75% to 99% Grade 5: complete displacement or spondyloptosis
# Chunk 7748
Children may present with back pain, abdominal pain, pelvic pain, irritability, and refusal to walk or sit. Fever is an inconsistent symptom. The child typically holds the spine in a straight or stiff position, generally has a loss of lumbar lordosis due to paravertebral muscular spasm, and refuses to flex the lumbar spine. The white blood cell count is normal or elevated, but the ESR and CRP are usually high.
# Chunk 7749
Intravenous antibiotic therapy is the mainstay of treatment. Blood cultures may occasionally be positive and identify the infectious agent. Aspiration and needle biopsy are reserved for children who are not responding to empirical antibiotic treatment. Symptoms should resolve rapidly with antibiotics, but intravenous antibiotics should be continued for 1 to 2 weeks and be followed by 4 weeks of oral antibiotics. Pain control can be obtained with medications and temporary orthotic immobilization of the back.
# Chunk 7750
Proximal humeral epiphysiolysis is commonly referred to as Little Leaguer’s shoulder. It most commonly occurs in 9to 14-year-olds who participate in overhead (tennis, volleyball) and throwing sports, particularly baseball pitchers. It is a stress injury that potentially can be a fracture (epiphysiolysis) of the proximal humeral physis. Most patients present with pain during or after throwing. There may be tenderness to palpation over the proximal humerus; if the athlete has been resting for a few days, examination may be normal. Radiographs should include comparison views to assess the physis. There may be widening of the proximal humeral physis in the affected arm, but the films may be normal. Treatment is rest from the offending activity, followed by a rehabilitation program designed to improve strength in the shoulder muscles. Pitchers should also be encouraged to follow youth pitching guidelines published by Little League baseball.
# Chunk 7751
Introduction: The Nature of Drugs & Drug Development & Regulation

Bertram G. Katzung, MD, PhD*

A 78-year-old woman is brought to the hospital because of suspected aspirin overdose. She has taken aspirin for joint pain for many years without incident, but during the past year, she has exhibited many signs of cognitive decline. Her caregiver finds her confused, hyperventilating, and vomiting. The care-giver finds an empty bottle of aspirin tablets and calls 9-1-1. In the emergency department, samples of venous and arterial blood are obtained while the airway, breathing, and circulation are evaluated. An intravenous (IV) drip is started, and gastro-intestinal decontamination is begun. After blood gas results are reported, sodium bicarbonate is administered via the IV. What is the purpose of the sodium bicarbonate?
# Chunk 7752
Drugs interact with receptors by means of chemical forces or bonds. These are of three major types: covalent, electrostatic, and hydrophobic. Covalent bonds are very strong and in many cases not reversible under biologic conditions. Thus, the covalent bond formed between the acetyl group of acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin) and cyclooxygenase, its enzyme target in platelets, is not readily broken. The platelet aggregation–blocking effect of aspirin lasts long after free acetylsalicylic acid has disappeared from the bloodstream (about 15 minutes) and is reversed only by the synthesis of new enzyme in new platelets, a process that takes several days.
# Chunk 7753
Application of this principle is made in the manipulation of drug excretion by the kidney (see Case Study). Almost all drugs are filtered at the glomerulus. If a drug is in a lipid-soluble form during its passage down the renal tubule, a significant fraction will be reabsorbed by simple passive diffusion. If the goal is to accelerate excretion of the drug (eg, in a case of drug overdose), it is important to prevent its reabsorption from the tubule. This can often be accomplished by adjusting urine pH to make certain that most of the drug is in the ionized state, as shown in Figure 1–5. As a result of this partitioning effect, the drug is “trapped” in the urine. Thus, weak acids are usually excreted faster in alkaline urine; weak bases are usually excreted faster in acidic urine. Other body fluids in which pH differences from blood pH may cause trapping or reabsorption are the contents of the stomach (normal pH 1.9–3) and small intestine (pH 7.5–8), breast milk (pH 6.4–7.6), aqueous humor (pH 6.4–7.5), and vaginal and prostatic secretions (pH 3.5–7).
# Chunk 7754
In cases of urgent need (eg, cancer chemotherapy), the process of preclinical and clinical testing and FDA review may be accelerated. For serious diseases, the FDA may permit extensive but controlled marketing of a new drug before phase 3 studies are completed; for life-threatening diseases, it may permit controlled marketing even before phase 2 studies have been completed. “Fast track,” “priority approval,” and “accelerated approval” are FDA programs that are intended to speed entry of new drugs into the marketplace. In 2012, an additional special category of “breakthrough” products (eg, for cystic fibrosis) was approved for restricted marketing after expanded phase 1 trials (Table 1–5). Roughly 50% of drugs in phase 3 trials involve early, controlled marketing. Such accelerated approval is usually granted with the requirement that careful monitoring of the effectiveness and toxicity of the drug be carried out and reported to the FDA. Unfortunately, FDA enforcement of this requirement has not always been adequate.
# Chunk 7755
The time from the filing of a patent application to approval for marketing of a new drug may be 5 years or considerably longer. Since the lifetime of a patent is 20 years in the USA, the owner of the patent (usually a pharmaceutical company) has exclusive rights for marketing the product for only a limited time after approval of the new drug application. Because the FDA review process can be lengthy (300–500 days for evaluation of an NDA), the time consumed by the review is sometimes added to the patent life. However, the extension (up to 5 years) cannot increase the total life of the patent to more than 14 years after approval of a new drug application. The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010 provides for 12 years of patent protection for new drugs. After expiration of the patent, any company may produce the drug, file an abbreviated new drug application (ANDA), demonstrate required equivalence, and, with FDA approval, market the drug as a generic product without paying license fees to the original patent owner. Currently, more than half of prescriptions in the USA are for generic drugs. Even biotechnology-based drugs such as antibodies and other proteins are now qualifying for generic (“biosimilar”) designation, and this has fueled regulatory concerns. More information on drug patents is available at the FDA website at http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DevelopmentApprovalProcess/ ucm079031.htm.
# Chunk 7756
An adverse drug event (ADE) or reaction to a drug (ADR) is a harmful or unintended response. Adverse drug reactions are claimed to be the fourth leading cause of death, higher than pulmonary disease, AIDS, accidents, and automobile deaths. The FDA has further estimated that 300,000 preventable adverse events occur in hospitals, many as a result of confusing medical information or lack of information (eg, regarding drug incompatibilities). Adverse reactions occurring only in certain susceptible patients include intolerance, idiosyncrasy (frequently genetic in origin), and allergy (usually immunologically mediated). During IND studies and clinical trials before FDA approval, all adverse events (serious, life-threatening, disabling, reasonably drug related, or unexpected) must be reported. After FDA approval to market a drug, surveillance, evaluation, and reporting must continue for any adverse events that are related to use of the drug, including overdose, accident, failure of expected action, events occurring from drug withdrawal, and unexpected events not listed in labeling. Events that are both serious and unexpected must be reported to the FDA within 15 days. The ability to predict and avoid adverse drug reactions and optimize a drug’s therapeutic index is an increasing focus of pharmacogenetic and personalized (also called “precision”) medicine. It is hoped that greater use of electronic health records will reduce some of these risks (see Chapter 65).
# Chunk 7757
Aspirin overdose commonly causes a mixed respiratory alkalosis and metabolic acidosis. Because aspirin is a weak acid, serum acidosis favors entry of the drug into tissues (increasing toxicity), and urinary acidosis favors reabsorp-tion of excreted drug back into the blood (prolonging the effects of the overdose). Sodium bicarbonate, a weak base, is an important component of the management of aspirin overdose. It causes alkalosis, reducing entry into tissues, and increases the pH of the urine, enhancing renal clearance of the drug. See the discussion of the ionization of weak acids and weak bases in the text.
# Chunk 7758
Pharmacokinetics & Pharmacodynamics: Rational Dosing & the Time Course of Drug Action

Nicholas H. G. Holford, MB, ChB, FRACP is 1 ng/mL. Tablets of digoxin are available that contain 62.5 micrograms (mcg) and 250 mcg. What maintenance dose would you recommend? An 85-year-old, 60-kg woman with a serum creatinine of 1.8 mg/dL has atrial fibrillation. A decision has been made to use digoxin to control the rapid heart rate. The target con-centration of digoxin for the treatment of atrial fibrillation
# Chunk 7759
Note that plasma concentrations of enalapril change by a factor of eight over the first 12 hours (three half-lives) after the peak, but ACE inhibition has only decreased by about 30%. Because the concentrations over this time are so high in relation to the C50, the effect on ACE is almost constant. After 24 hours, ACE is still about 25% inhibited. This explains why a drug with a short half-life can be given once a day and still maintain its effect throughout the day. The key factor is a high initial concentration in relation to the C50. Even though the plasma concentration at 24 hours is only about 1% of its peak, this low concentration is still around half the C50. Once-a-day dosing is common for drugs with minimal adverse effects related to peak concentrations that act on enzymes (eg, ACE inhibitors) or compete at receptors (eg, propranolol).
# Chunk 7760
For example, if a patient is taking 0.25 mg of digoxin a day, a clinician may expect the digoxin concentration to be about 1 ng/ mL. This is based on typical values for bioavailability of 70% and total clearance of about 7 L/h (CLrenal 4 L/h, CLnonrenal 3 L/h). If the patient has heart failure, the nonrenal (hepatic) clearance might be halved because of hepatic congestion and hypoxia, so the expected clearance would become 5.5 L/h. The concentration is then expected to be about 1.3 ng/mL. Suppose that the concentration actually measured is 2 ng/mL. Common sense would suggest halving the daily dose to achieve a target concentration of 1 ng/mL. This approach implies a revised clearance of 3.5 L/h. The smaller clearance compared with the expected value of 5.5 L/h may reflect additional renal functional impairment due to heart failure.
# Chunk 7761
Maria Almira Correia, PhD

A 40-year-old woman presents to the emergency department of her local hospital somewhat disoriented, complaining of midsternal chest pain, abdominal pain, shaking, and vomiting for 2 days. She admits to having taken a “handful” of Lorcet (hydrocodone/acetaminophen, an opioid/nonopioid analgesic combination), Soma (carisoprodol, a centrally acting muscle relaxant), and Cymbalta (duloxetine HCl, an antidepressant/ antifibromyalgia agent) 2 days earlier. On physical examina-tion, the sclera of her eyes shows yellow discoloration. Labora-tory analyses of blood drawn within an hour of her admission reveal abnormal liver function as indicated by the increased indices: alkaline phosphatase 302 (41–133),* alanine amino-transferase (ALT) 351 (7–56),* aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 1045 (0–35),* bilirubin 3.33 mg/dL (0.1–1.2),* and pro-thrombin time of 19.8 seconds (11–15).* In addition, plasma bicarbonate is reduced, and she has ~45% reduced glomerular filtration rate from the normal value at her age, elevated serum creatinine and blood urea nitrogen, markedly reduced blood glucose of 35 mg/dL, and a plasma acetaminophen concentra-tion of 75 mcg/mL (10–20).*Her serum titer is significantly positive for hepatitis C virus (HCV). Given these data, how would you proceed with the management of this case? *Normal values are in parentheses.
# Chunk 7762
FIGURE 4–6 Genetic polymorphism in debrisoquin 4-hydroxylation by CYP2D6 in a Caucasian population. The semilog frequency distribution histogram of the metabolic ratio (MR; defined as percent of dose excreted as unchanged debrisoquin divided by the percent of dose excreted as 4-hydroxydebrisoquin metabolite) in the 8-hour urine collected after oral ingestion of 12.8 mg debrisoquin sulfate (equivalent to 10 mg free debrisoquin base). Individuals with MR values >12.6 were phenotyped as poor metabolizers (PM, red bars), and those with MR values <12.6 but >0.2 were designated as extensive metabolizers (EM, blue bars). Those with MR values <0.2were designated as ultrarapid metabolizers (URM, green bars) based on the MR values (0.01–0.1) of individuals with documented multiple copies of CYP2D6 allelic variants resulting from inherited amplification of this gene. (Data from Woolhouse et al: Debrisoquin hydroxylation polymorphism among Ghanians and Caucasians. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1979;26:584.) these subjects require twofold to threefold higher daily doses of nortriptyline (an antidepressant and a CYP2D6 substrate) to achieve therapeutic plasma levels. The poor responsiveness to antidepressant therapy of the UM phenotype also clinically correlates with a higher incidence of suicides relative to that of deaths due to natural causes in this patient population. Conversely, in these UM populations, the prodrug codeine (another CYP2D6 substrate) is metabolized much faster to morphine, often resulting in undesirable adverse effects of morphine, such as abdominal pain. Indeed, intake of high doses of codeine by a mother of the ultrarapid metabolizer type was held responsible for the morphine-induced death of her breast-fed infant.
# Chunk 7763
Acetaminophen (APAP) is a relatively safe drug, provided it is taken at the recommended therapeutic doses. As discussed in the text, at normally ingested dosages, 95% of APAP is converted by phase II enzymes into much less toxic and more water-soluble APAP-glucuronide and APAP-sulfate, both of which are eliminated in the urine (Figure 4–5). Five percent of parent APAP is converted by phase I P450 enzymes into a reactive toxic product that is conjugated by GSH, excreted in the urine, and thus detoxi-fied. However, APAP’s safety may be greatly compromised in mixed drug overdoses, ie, when ingested with other drugs such as hydrocodone, duloxetine, and carisoprodol, which compete with APAP for phase II-dependent elimination or for cellular cofactors (GSH, UDPGA, PAPS) involved in these processes. Accordingly, more APAP is diverted into its hepatotoxic reactive metabolite pathway, resulting in liver cell damage. Moreover, HCV infection could indeed have further compromised liver function including drug metabolism. APAP’s half-life is 2 hours, and therapeutic and toxic blood levels are 15 mcg/mL and > 300 mcg/mL, respectively (Chapter 3). Given that at 48 hours after inges-tion (ie, 24 half-lives later), the patient’s APAP blood level is 75 mcg/mL, it is obvious that her initial APAP levels were dangerously above the toxic range, and thus upon ED admission, her liver function tests are consistent with ongoing liver failure. She should be given N-acetylcysteine, the APAP-specific antidote (Acetadote, Mucomyst; see Chapter 58) and continuous intravenous glucose infusion to provide the precursor (glucose) for generating the UDPGA cofactor required for APAP glucuronidation, as well as the fluid to induce urine output and accelerate APAP-metabolite elimination.
# Chunk 7764
Jennifer E. Hibma, PharmD, & Kathleen M. Giacomini, PhD

A 35-year-old male with newly diagnosed human immu-nodeficiency virus (HIV) infection was prescribed an anti-retroviral regimen, which included the protease inhibitor atazanavir 300 mg to be taken by mouth once daily, along with ritonavir, a pharmacokinetic enhancer, and two nucleo-side analog antiretroviral agents. Liver function and renal function were normal. After 1 year of treatment, the patient experienced visible yellow discoloration of the skin and eyes. Blood samples were drawn, and grade 4 hyperbilirubinemia was documented. When atazanavir was discontinued and the antiretroviral regimen was modified to include lopinavir, the plasma levels of bilirubin returned to the normal range, and skin and eye color were cleared. Could a UGT1A1*28polymorphism have led to the adverse effects?
# Chunk 7765
The uridine 5′-diphospho(UDP) glucuronosyltransferase 1A1 (UGT1A1) enzyme, encoded by the UGT1A1 gene, conjugates glucuronic acid onto small lipophilic molecules, eg, bilirubin and a wide variety of therapeutic drug substrates so that they may be more readily excreted into bile (Chapter 4). The UGT1A1 gene locus has over 30 defined alleles, some of which lead to reduced or completely abolished UGT1A1 function. Most reduced function polymorphisms within the UGT1A1 gene locus are quite rare; however, the *28 allele is common across three major ethnic groups (Table 5–1). Approximately 10% of European populations are homozygous carriers of the *28 allele, ie, UGT1A1 *28/*28 genotype, and are recognized clinically to have Gilbert’s syndrome. The *28 allele is characterized by an extra TA repeated in the proximal promoter region and is associated with reduced expression of the UGT1A1 enzyme. Clinically, Gilbert’s syndrome is generally benign; however, affected individuals may have 60–70% increased levels of circulating unconjugated bilirubin due to a ∼30% reduction in UGT1A1 activity. Individuals with the UGT1A1*28/*28 genotype are thus at an increased risk for adverse drug reactions with UGT1A1 drug substrates due to reduced biliary elimination.
# Chunk 7766
TABLE 5–3 Classification of G6PD deficiency (WHO Working Group, 1989).

critical role in the prevention of oxidative damage. Under normal conditions, G6PD in RBCs is able to detoxify unstable oxygen species while working at just 2% of its theoretical capacity. Following exposure to exogenous oxidative stressors, eg, infection, fava beans, and certain therapeutic drugs, G6PD activity in RBCs increases proportionately to meet NADPH demands and ultimately to protect hemoglobin from oxidation. Individuals with G6PD deficiency, defined as less than 60% enzyme activity, according to World Health Organization classification (Table 5–3), are at increased risk for abnormal RBC destruction, ie, hemolysis, due to reduced antioxidant capacity under oxidative pressures.
# Chunk 7767
Introduction to Autonomic Pharmacology

Bertram G. Katzung, MD, PhD

A 56-year-old woman is brought to the university eye center with a complaint of “loss of vision.” Because of visual impair-ment, she has lost her driver’s license and has fallen several times in her home. Examination reveals that her eyelids close involuntarily with a frequency and duration sufficient to pre-vent her from seeing her surroundings for more than brief moments at a time. When she holds her eyelids open with her fingers, she can see normally. She has no other muscle dysfunction. A diagnosis of blepharospasm is made. Using a fine needle, several injections of botulinum toxin type A are made in the orbicularis oculi muscle of each eyelid. After observation in the waiting area, she is sent home. Two days later, she reports by telephone that her vision has improved dramatically. How did botulinum toxin improve her vision? How long can her vision be expected to remain normal after this single treatment?
# Chunk 7768
Achilles J. Pappano, PhD

In late morning, a coworker brings 43-year-old JM to the emergency department because he is agitated and unable to continue picking vegetables. His gait is unsteady, and he walks with support from his colleague. JM has difficulty speaking and swallowing, his vision is blurred, and his eyes are filled with tears. His coworker notes that JM was working in a field that had been sprayed early in the morning with a material that had the odor of sulfur. Within 3 hours after starting his work, JM complained of tightness in his chest that made breathing difficult, and he called for help before becoming disoriented. How would you proceed to evaluate and treat JM? What should be done for his coworker?
# Chunk 7769
Nicotine action is the same on both parasympathetic and sympathetic ganglia. Therefore, the initial response often resembles simultaneous discharge of both the parasympathetic and sympathetic nervous systems. In the case of the cardiovascular system, the effects of nicotine are chiefly sympathomimetic. Dramatic hypertension is produced by parenteral injection of nicotine; sympathetic tachycardia may alternate with a bradycardia mediated by vagal discharge. In the gastrointestinal and urinary tracts, the effects are largely parasympathomimetic: nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and voiding of urine are commonly observed. Prolonged exposure may result in depolarizing blockade of the ganglia.
# Chunk 7770
The first group, of which edrophonium is the example, consists of quaternary alcohols. These agents reversibly bind electrostatically and by hydrogen bonds to the active site, thus preventing access of acetylcholine. The enzyme-inhibitor complex does not involve a covalent bond and is correspondingly short-lived (on the order of 2–10 minutes). The second group consists of carbamate esters, eg, neostigmine and physostigmine. These agents undergo a two-step hydrolysis sequence analogous to that described for acetylcholine. However, the covalent bond of the carbamoylated enzyme is considerably more resistant to the second (hydration) process, and this step is correspondingly prolonged (on the order of 30 minutes to 6 hours). The third group consists of the organophosphates. These agents also undergo initial binding and hydrolysis by the enzyme, resulting in a phosphorylated active site. The covalent phosphorus-enzyme bond is extremely stable and hydrolyzes in water at a very slow rate (hundreds of hours). After the initial binding-hydrolysis step, the phosphorylated enzyme complex may undergo a process called aging. This process apparently involves the breaking of one of the oxygen-phosphorus bonds of the inhibitor and further strengthens the phosphorus-enzyme bond. The rate of aging varies with the particular organophosphate compound. For example, aging occurs within 10 minutes with the chemical warfare agent soman, but as much as 48 hours later with the drug VX. If given before aging has occurred, strong nucleophiles like pralidoxime are able to break the phosphorus-enzyme bond and can be used as “cholinesterase regenerator” drugs for organophosphate insecticide poisoning (see Chapter 8). Once aging has occurred, the enzyme-inhibitor complex is even more stable and is more difficult to break, even with oxime regenerator compounds.
# Chunk 7771
B. Gastrointestinal and Urinary Tracts

In clinical disorders that involve depression of smooth muscle activity without obstruction, cholinomimetic drugs with direct or indirect muscarinic effects may be helpful. These disorders include postoperative ileus (atony or paralysis of the stomach or bowel following surgical manipulation) and congenital megacolon. Urinary retention may occur postoperatively or postpartum or may be secondary to spinal cord injury or disease (neurogenic bladder). Cholinomimetics were also sometimes used to increase the tone of the lower esophageal sphincter in patients with reflux esophagitis but proton pump inhibitors are usually indicated (see Chapter 62). Of the choline esters, bethanechol is the most widely used for these disorders. For gastrointestinal problems, it is usually administered orally in a dose of 10–25 mg three or four times daily. In patients with urinary retention, bethanechol can be given subcutaneously in a dose of 5 mg and repeated in 30 minutes if necessary. Of the cholinesterase inhibitors, neostigmine is the most widely used for these applications. For paralytic ileus or atony of the urinary bladder, neostigmine can be given subcutaneously in a dose of 0.5–1 mg. If patients are able to take the drug by mouth, neostigmine can be given orally in a dose of 15 mg. In all of these situations, the clinician must be certain that there is no mechanical obstruction to outflow before using the cholinomimetic. Otherwise, the drug may exacerbate the problem and may even cause perforation as a result of increased pressure.
# Chunk 7772
Long-term therapy for myasthenia gravis is usually accomplished with pyridostigmine; neostigmine is an alternative. The doses are titrated to optimum levels based on changes in muscle strength. These drugs are relatively short-acting and therefore require frequent dosing (every 6 hours for pyridostigmine and every 4 hours for neostigmine; Table 7–4). Sustained-release preparations are available but should be used only at night and if needed. Longer-acting cholinesterase inhibitors such as the organophosphate agents are not used, because the dose requirement in this disease changes too rapidly to permit smooth control of symptoms with long-acting drugs.
# Chunk 7773
Chronic exposure to certain organophosphate compounds, including some organophosphate cholinesterase inhibitors, causes delayed neuropathy associated with demyelination of axons. Triorthocresyl phosphate, an additive in lubricating oils, is the prototype agent of this class. The effects are not caused by cholinesterase inhibition but rather by inhibition of neuropathy target esterase (NTE) whose symptoms (weakness of upper and lower extremities, unsteady gait) appear 1–2 weeks after exposure. Another nerve toxicity called intermediate syndrome occurs 1–4 days after exposure to organophosphate insecticides. This syndrome is also characterized by muscle weakness; its origin is not known but it appears to be related to cholinesterase inhibition.
# Chunk 7774
The patient’s presentation is characteristic of poisoning by organophosphate cholinesterase inhibitors (see Chapter 58). Ask the coworker if he can identify the agent used. Decontami-nate the patient by removal of clothing and washing affected areas. Ensure an open airway and ventilate with oxygen. For muscarinic effects, administer atropine (0.5–5 mg) intrave-nously until signs of muscarinic excess (dyspnea, lacrimation, confusion) subside. To treat nicotinic excess, infuse 2-PAM (initially a 1–2% solution in 15–30 minutes) followed by infu-sion of 1% solution (200–500 mg/h) until muscle fasciculations cease. Respiratory support is required because 2-PAM does not enter the central nervous system and may not reactivate “aged” organophosphate-cholinesterase complex. If needed, decon-taminate the coworker and isolate all contaminated clothing.
# Chunk 7775
Achilles J. Pappano, PhD

JH, a 63-year-old architect, complains of urinary symptoms to his family physician. He has hypertension, and during the last 8 years, he has been adequately managed with a thiazide diuretic and an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor. During the same period, JH developed the signs of benign prostatic hypertrophy, which eventually required prostatectomy to relieve symptoms. He now complains that he has an increased urge to urinate as well as urinary fre-quency, and this has disrupted the pattern of his daily life. What do you suspect is the cause of JH’s problem? What information would you gather to confirm your diagnosis? What treatment steps would you initiate?
# Chunk 7776
D. Metabolism and Excretion

After administration, the elimination of atropine from the blood occurs in two phases: the half-life (t1/2) of the rapid phase is 2 hours and that of the slow phase is approximately 13 hours. About 50% of the dose is excreted unchanged in the urine. Most of the rest appears in the urine as hydrolysis and conjugation products. The drug’s effect on parasympathetic function declines rapidly in all organs except the eye. Effects on the iris and ciliary muscle persist for ≥ 72 hours.
# Chunk 7777
Patients with COPD, a condition that occurs more frequently in older patients, particularly chronic smokers, benefit from bronchodilators, especially antimuscarinic agents. Ipratropium, tiotropium (see Figure 8–3), aclidinium, and umeclidinium, synthetic analogs of atropine, are used as inhalational drugs in COPD either alone or in combination with a long-acting β-adrenoceptor agonist. The aerosol route of administration has the advantage of maximal concentration at the bronchial target tissue with reduced systemic effects. This application is discussed in greater detail in Chapter 20. Tiotropium (t1/2 25 hours) and umeclidinium (t1/2 11 hours) have a longer bronchodilator action than ipratropium (t1/2 2 hours) and can be given once daily because they dissociate slowly from M3 receptors. Aclidinium (t1/2 6 hours) is administered twice daily. Glycopyrrolate is now available in inhalational form for twice daily treatment of COPD. Tiotropium reduces the incidence of COPD exacerbations and is a useful adjunct in pulmonary rehabilitation to increase exercise tolerance. The hyperactive neural bronchoconstrictor reflex present in most individuals with asthma is mediated by the vagus, acting on muscarinic receptors on bronchial smooth muscle cells. Ipratropium and tiotropium are also used as inhalational drugs in asthma.
# Chunk 7778
1.

Antimuscarinic therapy—Both the nicotinic and the muscarinic effects of the cholinesterase inhibitors can be life-threatening. Unfortunately, there is no effective method for directly blocking the nicotinic effects of cholinesterase inhibition, because nicotinic agonists and antagonists cause blockade of transmission (see Chapter 27). To reverse the muscarinic effects, a tertiary (not quaternary) amine drug must be used (preferably atropine) to treat the CNS effects as well as the peripheral effects of the organophosphate inhibitors. Large doses of atropine may be needed to oppose the muscarinic effects of extremely potent agents like parathion and chemical warfare nerve gases: 1–2 mg of atropine sulfate may be given intravenously every 5–15 minutes until signs of effect (dry mouth, reversal of miosis) appear. The drug may have to be given many times, since the acute effects of the cholinesterase inhibitor may last 24–48 hours or longer. In this life-threatening situation, as much as 1 g of atropine per day may be required for as long as 1 month for full control of muscarinic excess.
# Chunk 7779
Pralidoxime is administered by intravenous infusion, 1–2 g given over 15–30 minutes. In spite of the likelihood of aging of the phosphate-enzyme complex, recent reports suggest that administration of multiple doses of pralidoxime over several days may be useful in severe poisoning. In excessive doses, pralidoxime can induce neuromuscular weakness and other adverse effects. Pralidoxime is not recommended for the reversal of inhibition of acetylcholinesterase by carbamate inhibitors. Further details of treatment of anticholinesterase toxicity are given in Chapter 58.
# Chunk 7780
Mushroom poisoning has traditionally been divided into rapid-onset and delayed-onset types. The rapid-onset type is usually apparent within 30 minutes to 2 hours after ingestion of the mushrooms and can be caused by a variety of toxins. Some of these produce simple upset stomach; others can have disulfiram-like effects; some cause hallucinations; and a few mushrooms (eg, Inocybe species) can produce signs of muscarinic excess: nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, urinary urgency, sweating, salivation, and sometimes bronchoconstriction. Parenteral atropine, 1–2 mg, is effective treatment in such intoxications. Despite its name, Amanita muscaria contains not only muscarine (the alkaloid was named after the mushroom), but also numerous other alkaloids, including antimuscarinic agents, and ingestion of A muscaria often causes signs of atropine poisoning, not muscarine excess.
# Chunk 7781
Italo Biaggioni, MD, & David Robertson, MD*

A 68-year-old man presents with a complaint of light-headedness on standing that is worse after meals and in hot environments. Symptoms started about 4 years ago and have slowly progressed to the point that he is disabled. He has fainted several times but always recovers conscious-ness almost as soon as he falls. Review of symptoms reveals slight worsening of constipation, urinary retention out of proportion to prostate size, and decreased sweating. He is otherwise healthy with no history of hypertension, diabetes, or Parkinson’s disease. Because of urinary retention, he was placed on the α1 antagonist tamsulosin, but the fainting spells got worse. Physical examination revealed a blood pres-sure of 167/84 mm Hg supine and 106/55 mm Hg standing. There was an inadequate compensatory increase in heart rate (from 84 to 88 bpm), considering the degree of ortho-static hypotension. Physical examination is otherwise unre-markable with no evidence of peripheral neuropathy or parkinsonian features. Laboratory examinations are negative except for plasma norepinephrine, which is low at 98 pg/mL (normal for his age 250–400 pg/mL). A diagnosis of pure autonomic failure is made, based on the clinical picture and the absence of drugs that could induce orthostatic hypoten-sion and diseases commonly associated with autonomic neuropathy (eg, diabetes, Parkinson’s disease). What precau-tions should this patient observe in using sympathomimetic drugs? Can such drugs be used in his treatment?
# Chunk 7782
David Robertson, MD, & Italo Biaggioni, MD*

A 38-year-old man has been experiencing palpitations and headaches. He enjoyed good health until 1 year ago when spells of rapid heartbeat began. These became more severe and were eventually accompanied by throbbing headaches and drenching sweats. Physical examination revealed a blood pressure of 150/90 mm Hg and heart rate of 88 bpm. During the physical examination, palpation of the abdomen elicited a sudden and typical episode, with a rise in blood pressure to 210/120 mm Hg, heart rate to 122 bpm, profuse sweating, and facial pallor. This was accompanied by severe headache. What is the likely cause of his episodes? What caused the blood pressure and heart rate to rise so high during the examination? What treatments might help this patient?
# Chunk 7783
Prazosin is a competitive piperazinyl quinazoline effective in the management of hypertension (see Chapter 11). It is highly selective for α1 receptors and typically 1000-fold less potent at α2 receptors. This may partially explain the relative absence of tachycardia seen with prazosin compared with that of phentolamine and phenoxybenzamine. Prazosin relaxes both arterial and venous vascular smooth muscle, as well as smooth muscle in the prostate, due to blockade of α1 receptors. Prazosin is extensively metabolized in humans; because of metabolic degradation by the liver, only about 50% of the drug is available after oral administration. The half-life is normally about 3 hours.
# Chunk 7784
Terazosin is another reversible α1-selective antagonist that is effective in hypertension (see Chapter 11); it is also approved for use in men with urinary retention symptoms due to benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). Terazosin has high bioavailability but is extensively metabolized in the liver, with only a small fraction of unchanged drug excreted in the urine. The half-life of terazosin is 9–12 hours.
# Chunk 7785
Doxazosin is efficacious in the treatment of hypertension and BPH. It differs from prazosin and terazosin in having a longer half-life of about 22 hours. It has moderate bioavailability and is extensively metabolized, with very little parent drug excreted in urine or feces. Doxazosin has active metabolites, although their contribution to the drug’s effects is probably small.
# Chunk 7786
In the current era of repurposing established drugs that are well tolerated, unexpected benefits can emerge. Infantile hemangiomas are the most common vascular tumors of infancy, which can disfigure or impair vital functions. Propranolol at 2 mg/kg/d has been found to reduce the volume, color, and elevation of infantile hemangioma in infants younger than 6 months and children up to 5 years of age, perhaps displacing more toxic drugs such as systemic glucocorticoids, vincristine, and interferon-alfa.
# Chunk 7787
Neal L. Benowitz, MD

A 35-year-old man presents with a blood pressure of 150/95 mm Hg. He has been generally healthy, is sedentary, drinks several cocktails per day, and does not smoke cigarettes. He has a family history of hypertension, and his father died of a myocardial infarction at age 55. Physical examination is remarkable only for moderate obesity. Total cholesterol is 220, and high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol level is 40 mg/dL. Fasting glucose is 105 mg/dL. Chest X-ray is normal. Electrocardiogram shows left ven-tricular enlargement. How would you treat this patient?
# Chunk 7788
Hypertension is the most common cardiovascular disease. In a National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) carried out in 2011 to 2012, hypertension was found in 29% of American adults and 65% of adults age 65 years or older. The prevalence varies with age, race, education, and many other variables. According to some studies, 60–80% of both men and women will develop hypertension by age 80. Sustained arterial hypertension damages blood vessels in kidney, heart, and brain and leads to an increased incidence of renal failure, coronary disease, heart failure, stroke, and dementia. Effective pharmacologic lowering of blood pressure has been shown to prevent damage to blood vessels and to substantially reduce morbidity and mortality rates. However, NHANES found that, unfortunately, only one-half of Americans with hypertension had adequate blood pressure control. Many effective drugs are available. Knowledge of their antihypertensive mechanisms and sites of action allows accurate prediction of efficacy and toxicity. The rational use of these agents, alone or in combination, can lower blood pressure with minimal risk of serious toxicity in most patients.
# Chunk 7789
4. Volume       Kidneys 2. Capacitance Venules 1. Resistance Arterioles 3. Pump output    Heart Aldosterone Angiotensin Renin CNS– Sympathetic nerves FIGURE 11–1 Anatomic sites of blood pressure control. potassium or calcium intake) as contributing to the development of hypertension. Increase in blood pressure with aging does not occur in populations with low daily sodium intake. Patients with labile hypertension appear more likely than normal controls to have blood pressure elevations after salt loading. The heritability of essential hypertension is estimated to be about 30%. Mutations in several genes have been linked to vari-ous rare causes of hypertension. Functional variations of the genes for angiotensinogen, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), the angiotensin II receptor, the β2 adrenoceptor, α adducin (a cyto-skeletal protein), and others appear to contribute to some cases of essential hypertension. Normal Regulation of Blood Pressure According to the hydraulic equation, arterial blood pressure (BP) is directly proportionate to the product of the blood flow (cardiac output, CO) and the resistance to passage of blood through precapillary arterioles (peripheral vascular resistance, PVR): BP = CO × PVR Physiologically, in both normal and hypertensive individuals, blood pressure is maintained by moment-to-moment regula-tion of cardiac output and peripheral vascular resistance, exerted at three anatomic sites (Figure 11–1): arterioles, postcapillary venules (capacitance vessels), and heart. A fourth anatomic control site, the kidney, contributes to maintenance of blood pressure by regulating the volume of intravascular fluid. Baroreflexes, medi-ated by autonomic nerves, act in combination with humoral mechanisms, including the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone sys-tem, to coordinate function at these four control sites and to maintain normal blood pressure. Finally, local release of vasoac-tive substances from vascular endothelium may also be involved in the regulation of vascular resistance. For example, endothelin-1
# Chunk 7790
Monotherapy of hypertension (treatment with a single drug) is desirable because compliance is likely to be better and the cost is lower, and because in some cases adverse effects are fewer. However, most patients with hypertension require two or more drugs acting by different mechanisms (polypharmacy). Accord-ing to some estimates, up to 40% of patients may respond inad-equately even to two agents and are considered to have “resistant hypertension.” Some of these patients have treatable secondary hypertension that has been missed, but most do not, and three or more drugs are required. One rationale for polypharmacy in hypertension is that most drugs evoke compensatory regulatory mechanisms for main-taining blood pressure (see Figures 6–7 and 11–1), which may markedly limit their effect. For example, vasodilators such as hydralazine cause a significant decrease in peripheral vascular resistance, but evoke a strong compensatory tachycardia and salt and water retention (Figure 11–4) that are capable of almost completely reversing their effect. The addition of a β blocker prevents the tachycardia; addition of a diuretic (eg, hydrochloro-thiazide) prevents the salt and water retention. In effect, all three drugs increase the sensitivity of the cardiovascular system to each other’s actions. A second reason is that some drugs have only modest maxi-mum efficacy but reduction of long-term morbidity mandates their use. Many studies of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors report a maximal lowering of blood pressure of less than 10 mm Hg. In patients with more severe hypertension (pressure > 160/100 mm Hg), this is inadequate to prevent all the sequelae of hypertension, but ACE inhibitors have important long-term benefits in preventing or reducing renal disease in diabetic persons and in reduction of heart failure. Finally, the toxicity of some effective drugs prevents their use at maximally effective doses. In practice, when hypertension does not respond adequately to a regimen of one drug, a second drug from a different class with a different mechanism of action and different pattern of toxicity is added. If the response is still inadequate and com-pliance is known to be good, a third drug should be added. If three drugs (usually including a diuretic) are inadequate, other causes of resistant hypertension such as excessive dietary sodium intake, use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory or stimu-lant drugs, or the presence of secondary hypertension should be considered. In some instances, an additional drug may be neces-sary, and mineralocorticoid antagonists, such as spironolactone, have been found to be particularly useful. Occasionally patients are resistant to four or more drugs, and nonpharmacologic approaches have been considered. Two promising treatments that are still under investigation, particularly for patients with advanced kidney disease, are renal denervation and carotid barostimulation.
# Chunk 7791
Toxicity of Diuretics

In the treatment of hypertension, the most common adverse effect of diuretics (except for potassium-sparing diuretics) is potassium depletion. Although mild degrees of hypokalemia are tolerated well by many patients, hypokalemia may be hazardous in persons taking digitalis, those who have chronic arrhythmias, or those with acute myocardial infarction or left ventricular dysfunction. Potassium loss is coupled to reabsorption of sodium, and restriction of dietary sodium intake therefore minimizes potassium loss. Diuretics may also cause magnesium depletion, impair glucose tolerance, and increase serum lipid concentrations. Diuretics increase uric acid concentrations and may precipitate gout. The use of low doses minimizes these adverse metabolic effects without impairing the antihypertensive action. Potassium-sparing diuretics may produce hyperkalemia, particularly in patients with renal insufficiency and those taking ACE inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers; spironolactone (a steroid) is associated with gynecomastia.
# Chunk 7792
B. Pharmacokinetics and Dosage

Because of guanethidine’s long half-life (5 days), the onset of sympathoplegia is gradual (maximal effect in 1–2 weeks), and sympathoplegia persists for a comparable period after cessation of therapy. The dose should not ordinarily be increased at intervals shorter than 2 weeks.
# Chunk 7793
Metoprolol and atenolol, which are cardioselective, are the most widely used β blockers in the treatment of hypertension. Metoprolol is approximately equipotent to propranolol in inhibiting stimulation of β1 adrenoceptors such as those in the heart but 50to 100-fold less potent than propranolol in blocking β2 receptors. Relative cardioselectivity is advantageous in treating hypertensive patients who also suffer from asthma, diabetes, or peripheral vascular disease. Although cardioselectivity is not complete, metoprolol causes less bronchial constriction than propranolol at doses that produce equal inhibition of β1-adrenoceptor responses. Metoprolol is extensively metabolized by CYP2D6 with high first-pass metabolism. The drug has a relatively short half-life of 4–6 hours, but the extended-release preparation can be dosed once daily (Table 11–2). Sustained-release metoprolol is effective in reducing mortality from heart failure and is particularly useful in patients with hypertension and heart failure.
# Chunk 7794
Atenolol is not extensively metabolized and is excreted primarily in the urine with a half-life of 6 hours; it is usually dosed once daily. Atenolol is reported to be less effective than metoprolol in preventing the complications of hypertension. A possible reason for this difference is that once-daily dosing does not maintain adequate blood levels of atenolol. The usual dosage is 50–100 mg/d. Patients with reduced renal function should receive lower doses.
# Chunk 7795
Nadolol, Carteolol, Betaxolol, & Bisoprolol

Nadolol and carteolol, nonselective β-receptor antagonists, are not appreciably metabolized and are excreted to a considerable extent in the urine. Betaxolol and bisoprolol are β1-selective blockers that are primarily metabolized in the liver but have long half-lives. Because of these relatively long half-lives, these drugs can be administered once daily. Nadolol is usually begun at a dosage of 40 mg/d, carteolol at 2.5 mg/d, betaxolol at 10 mg/d, and bisoprolol at 5 mg/d. Increases in dosage to obtain a satisfactory therapeutic effect should take place no more often than every 4 or 5 days. Patients with reduced renal function should receive correspondingly reduced doses of nadolol and carteolol.
# Chunk 7796
Nebivolol is a β1-selective blocker with vasodilating properties that are not mediated by α blockade. d-Nebivolol has highly selective β1-blocking effects, while the l-isomer causes vasodilation; the drug is marketed as a racemic mixture. The vasodilating effect may be due to an increase in endothelial release of nitric oxide via induction of endothelial nitric oxide synthase. The hemodynamic effects of nebivolol therefore differ from those of pure β blockers in that peripheral vascular resistance is acutely lowered (by nebivolol) as opposed to increased acutely (by the older agents). Nebivolol is extensively metabolized and has active metabolites. The half-life is 10–12 hours, but the drug can be given once daily. Dosing is generally started at 5 mg/d, with dose escalation as high as 40 mg/d, if necessary. The efficacy of nebivolol is similar to that of other antihypertensive agents, but several studies report fewer adverse effects.
# Chunk 7797
Other than excessive blood pressure lowering, the most serious toxicity is related to accumulation of cyanide; metabolic acidosis, arrhythmias, excessive hypotension, and death have resulted. In a few cases, toxicity after relatively low doses of nitroprusside suggested a defect in cyanide metabolism. Administration of sodium thiosulfate as a sulfur donor facilitates metabolism of cyanide. Hydroxocobalamin combines with cyanide to form the nontoxic cyanocobalamin. Both have been advocated for prophylaxis or treatment of cyanide poisoning during nitroprusside infusion. Thiocyanate may accumulate over the course of prolonged administration, usually several days or more, particularly in patients with renal insufficiency who do not excrete thiocyanate at a normal rate. Thiocyanate toxicity is manifested as weakness, disorientation, psychosis, muscle spasms, and convulsions, and the diagnosis is confirmed by finding serum concentrations greater than 10 mg/ dL. Rarely, delayed hypothyroidism occurs, owing to thiocyanate inhibition of iodide uptake by the thyroid. Methemoglobinemia during infusion of nitroprusside has also been reported.
# Chunk 7798
Oral dosage for hypoglycemia is 3–8 mg/kg/day in 3 divided doses, with a maximum of 15 mg/kg/day. Diazoxide is similar chemically to the thiazide diuretics but has no diuretic activity. It is bound extensively to serum albumin and to vascular tissue. Diazoxide is partially metabolized; its metabolic pathways are not well characterized. The remainder is excreted unchanged. Its half-life is approximately 24 hours, but the relationship between blood concentration and hypotensive action is not well established. The blood pressure-lowering effect after a rapid injection is established within 5 minutes and lasts for 4–12 hours.
# Chunk 7799
When diazoxide was first marketed for use in hypertension, a dose of 300 mg by rapid injection was recommended. It appears, however, that excessive hypotension can be avoided by beginning with smaller doses (50–150 mg). If necessary, doses of 150 mg may be repeated every 5–15 minutes until blood pressure is lowered satisfactorily. Alternatively, diazoxide may be administered by intravenous infusion at rates of 15–30 mg/min. Because of reduced protein binding, smaller doses should be administered to persons with chronic renal failure. The hypotensive effects of diazoxide are also greater when patients are pretreated with β blockers to prevent the reflex tachycardia and associated increase in cardiac output.
# Chunk 7800
Captopril’s pharmacokinetic parameters and dosing recommendations are listed in Table 11–2. Peak concentrations of enalaprilat, the active metabolite of enalapril, occur 3–4 hours after dosing with enalapril. The half-life of enalaprilat is about 11 hours. Typical doses of enalapril are 10–20 mg once or twice daily. Lisinopril has a half-life of 12 hours. Doses of 10–80 mg once daily are effective in most patients. All of the ACE inhibitors except fosinopril and moexipril are eliminated primarily by the kidneys; doses of these drugs should be reduced in patients with renal insufficiency.
# Chunk 7801
Parenteral antihypertensive medications are used to lower blood pressure rapidly (within a few hours); as soon as reasonable blood pressure control is achieved, oral antihypertensive therapy should be substituted because this allows smoother long-term management of hypertension. The goal of treatment in the first few hours or days is not complete normalization of blood pressure because chronic hypertension is associated with autoregulatory changes in cerebral blood flow. Thus, rapid normalization of blood pressure may lead to cerebral hypoperfusion and brain injury. Rather, blood pressure should be lowered by about 25%, maintaining diastolic blood pressure at no less than 100–110 mm Hg. Subsequently, blood pressure can be reduced to normal levels using oral medications over several weeks. The parenteral drugs used to treat hypertensive emergencies include sodium
# Chunk 7802
Treatment of Angina Pectoris

Bertram G. Katzung, MD, PhD*

A 56-year-old woman presents in the office with a history of recent-onset chest discomfort when jogging or swimming vigorously. The pain is dull but poorly localized; it disap-pears after 5–10 minutes of rest. She has never smoked but has a history of hyperlipidemia (total cholesterol level of 245 mg/dL and low-density lipoprotein [LDL] of 160 mg/dL recorded 1 year ago) and admits that she has not been fol-lowing the recommended diet. Her father survived a “heart attack” at age 55, and an uncle died of some cardiac disease at age 60. On physical examination, the patient’s blood pressure is 145/90 mm Hg, and her heart rate is 80 bpm. She is in no acute distress, and there are no other significant physical findings; an electrocardiogram is normal except for slight left ventricular hypertrophy. Assuming that a diagno-sis of stable effort angina is correct, what medical treatment should be implemented?
# Chunk 7803
The liver contains a high-capacity organic nitrate reductase that removes nitrate groups in a stepwise fashion from the parent molecule and ultimately inactivates the drug. Therefore, oral bioavailability of the traditional organic nitrates (eg, nitroglycerin and isosorbide dinitrate) is low (typically < 10–20%). For this reason, the sublingual route, which avoids the first-pass effect, is preferred for achieving a therapeutic blood level rapidly. Nitroglycerin and isosorbide dinitrate both are absorbed efficiently by the sublingual route and reach therapeutic blood levels within a few minutes. However, the total dose administered by this route must be limited to avoid excessive effect; therefore, the total duration of effect is brief (15–30 minutes). When much longer duration of action is needed, oral preparations can be given that contain an amount of drug sufficient to result in sustained systemic blood levels of the parent drug plus active metabolites. Pentaerythritol tetranitrate (PETN) is another organic nitrate that is promoted for oral use as a “long-acting” nitrate (> 6 hours). Other routes of administration available for nitroglycerin include transdermal and buccal absorption from slow-release preparations (described below).
# Chunk 7804
4. Other effects—Nitrite ion (not nitrate) reacts with hemoglobin (which contains ferrous iron) to produce methemoglobin (which contains ferric iron). Because methemoglobin has a very low affinity for oxygen, large doses of nitrites can result in pseudocyanosis, tissue hypoxia, and death. Fortunately, the plasma level of nitrite resulting from even large doses of organic and inorganic nitrates is too low to cause significant methemoglobinemia in adults. In nursing infants, the intestinal flora is capable of converting significant amounts of inorganic nitrate, eg, from well water, to nitrite ion. In addition, sodium nitrite is used as a curing agent for meats, eg, corned beef. Thus, inadvertent exposure to large amounts of nitrite ion can occur and may produce serious toxicity.
# Chunk 7805
Erectile dysfunction in men has long been the subject of research (by both amateur and professional scientists). Among the substances used in the past and generally discredited are “Spanish Fly” (a bladder and urethral irritant), yohimbine (an α2 antagonist; see Chapter 10), nutmeg, and mixtures containing lead, arsenic, or strychnine. Substances currently favored by practitioners of herbal medicine but of dubious value include ginseng and kava. Scientific studies of the process have shown that erection requires relaxation of the nonvascular smooth muscle of the corpora cavernosa. This relaxation permits inflow of blood at nearly arterial pressure into the sinuses of the cavernosa, and it is the pressure of the blood that causes erection. (With regard to other aspects of male sexual function, ejaculation requires intact sympathetic motor function, while orgasm involves independent superficial and deep sensory nerves.) Physiologic erection occurs in response to the release of nitric oxide from nonadrenergic-non-cholinergic nerves (see Chapter 6) associated with parasympa-thetic discharge. Thus, parasympathetic motor innervation must be intact and nitric oxide synthesis must be active. (It appears that a similar process occurs in female erectile tissues.) Certain other smooth muscle relaxants—eg, PGE1 analogs or α-adrenoceptor antagonists—if present in high enough concentration, can inde-pendently cause sufficient cavernosal relaxation to result in erec-tion. As noted in the text, nitric oxide activates guanylyl cyclase, which increases the concentration of cGMP, and the latter second messenger stimulates the dephosphorylation of myosin light chains (Figure 12–2) and relaxation of the smooth muscle. Thus, any drug that increases cGMP might be of value in erectile dys-function if normal innervation is present. Sildenafil (Viagra) acts to increase cGMP by inhibiting its breakdown by phosphodiester-ase isoform 5 (PDE-5). The drug has been very successful in the marketplace because it can be taken orally. However, sildenafil is of little or no value in men with loss of potency due to cord injury or other damage to innervation and in men lacking libido. Furthermore, sildenafil potentiates the action of nitrates used for angina, and severe hypotension and a few myocardial infarctions have been reported in men taking both drugs. It is recommended that at least 6 hours pass between use of a nitrate and the inges-tion of sildenafil. Sildenafil also has effects on color vision, caus-ing difficulty in blue-green discrimination. Three similar PDE-5 inhibitors, tadalafil, vardenafil, and avanafil, are available. It is important to be aware that numerous nonprescription mail-order products that contain sildenafil analogs such as hydroxythio-homosildenafil and sulfoaildenafil have been marketed as “male enhancement” agents. These products are not approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and incur the same risk of dangerous interactions with nitrates as the approved agents. PDE-5 inhibitors have also been studied for possible use in other conditions. Clinical studies show distinct benefit in some patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension but not in patients with advanced idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. The drugs have possible benefit in systemic hypertension, cystic fibrosis, and benign prostatic hyperplasia. Both sildenafil and tadalafil are currently approved for pulmonary hypertension. Preclinical stud-ies suggest that sildenafil may be useful in preventing apoptosis and cardiac remodeling after ischemia and reperfusion. The drug most commonly used for erectile dysfunction in patients who do not respond to sildenafil is alprostadil, a PGE1 analog (see Chapter 18) that can be injected directly into the cav-ernosa or placed in the urethra as a minisuppository, from which it diffuses into the cavernosal tissue. Phentolamine can be used by injection into the cavernosa. These drugs will cause erection in most men who do not respond to sildenafil.
# Chunk 7806
Bertram G. Katzung, MD, PhD*

A 55-year-old man noticed shortness of breath with exer-tion while on a camping vacation in a national park. He has a 15-year history of poorly controlled hypertension. The shortness of breath was accompanied by onset of swelling of the feet and ankles and increasing fatigue. On physical examination in the clinic, he is found to be mildly short of breath lying down but feels better sitting upright. Pulse is 100 bpm and regular, and blood pressure is 165/100 mm Hg. Crackles are noted at both lung bases, and his jugular venous pressure is elevated. The liver is enlarged, and there is 3+ edema of the ankles and feet. An echocardiogram shows an enlarged, poorly contracting heart with a left ven-tricular ejection fraction of about 30% (normal: 60%). The presumptive diagnosis is stage C, class III heart failure with reduced ejection fraction. What treatment is indicated?
# Chunk 7807
Heart failure occurs when cardiac output is inadequate to provide the oxygen needed by the body. It is a highly lethal condition, with a 5-year mortality rate conventionally said to be about 50%. The most common cause of heart failure in the USA is coronary artery disease, with hypertension also an important factor. Two major types of failure may be distinguished. Approximately 50% of younger patients have systolic failure, with reduced mechanical pumping action (contractility) and reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF). The remaining group has diastolic failure, with stiffening and loss of adequate relaxation playing a major role in reducing filling and cardiac output. Ejection fraction may be normal (preserved, HFpEF) in diastolic failure even though stroke volume is significantly reduced. The proportion of patients with diastolic failure increases with age. Because other cardiovascular conditions (especially myocardial infarction) are now being treated more effectively, more patients are surviving long enough for heart failure to develop, making heart failure one of the cardiovascular conditions that is actually increasing in prevalence in some countries.
# Chunk 7808
At higher concentrations, resting membrane potential is reduced (made less negative) as a result of inhibition of the sodium pump and reduced intracellular potassium. As toxicity progresses, oscillatory depolarizing afterpotentials appear following normally evoked action potentials (Figure 13–5, panel C). The afterpotentials (also known as delayed after-depolarizations, DADs) are associated with overloading of the intracellular calcium stores and oscillations in the free intracellular calcium ion concentration. When afterpotentials reach threshold, they elicit action potentials (premature depolarizations, ectopic “beats”) that are coupled to the preceding normal action potentials. If afterpotentials in the Purkinje conducting system regularly reach threshold in this way, bigeminy will be recorded on the electrocardiogram (Figure 13–6). With further intoxication, each afterpotential-evoked action potential will itself elicit a suprathreshold afterpotential, and a self-sustaining tachycardia will be established. If allowed to progress, such a tachycardia may deteriorate into fibrillation; in the case of ventricular fibrillation, the arrhythmia will be rapidly fatal unless corrected.
# Chunk 7809
Milrinone is a bipyridine compound that inhibits phosphodiesterase isozyme 3 (PDE-3). It is active orally as well as parenterally but is available only in parenteral form. It has an elimination half-life of 3–6 hours, with 10–40% being excreted in the urine. An older congener, inamrinone, has been withdrawn in the USA.
# Chunk 7810
Beta blocker therapy in patients with heart failure is based on the hypothesis that excessive tachycardia and adverse effects of high catecholamine levels on the heart contribute to the downward course of heart failure. The results of clinical trials clearly indicate that such therapy is beneficial if initiated cautiously at low doses, even though acutely blocking the supportive effects of catecholamines can worsen heart failure. Several months of therapy may be required before improvement is noted; this usually consists of a slight rise in ejection fraction, slower heart rate, and reduction in symptoms. As noted above, not all β blockers have proved useful, but bisoprolol, carvedilol, metoprolol, and nebivolol have been shown to reduce mortality.
# Chunk 7811
The patient has a low ejection fraction with systolic heart failure, probably secondary to hypertension. His heart fail-ure must be treated first, followed by careful control of the hypertension. He was initially treated with a diuretic (furo-semide, 40 mg twice daily). On this therapy, he was less short of breath on exertion and could also lie flat without dyspnea. An angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhib-itor was added (enalapril, 20 mg twice daily), and over the next few weeks, he continued to feel better. Because of continued shortness of breath on exercise, digoxin at 0.25 mg/d was added with a further modest improvement in exercise tolerance. The blood pressure stabilized at 150/90 mm Hg, and the patient will be educated regarding the relation between his hypertension and heart failure and the need for better blood pressure control. Cautious addition of a β blocker (metoprolol) will be considered. Blood lipids, which are currently in the normal range, will be monitored.
# Chunk 7812
Robert D. Harvey, PhD, & Augustus O. Grant, MD, PhD*

A 69-year-old retired teacher presents with a 1-month history of palpitations, intermittent shortness of breath, and fatigue. She has a history of hypertension. An electrocardiogram (ECG) shows atrial fibrillation with a ventricular response of 122 beats/min (bpm) and signs of left ventricular hypertrophy. She is anticoagulated with warfarin and started on sustained-release metoprolol, 50 mg/d. After 7 days, her rhythm reverts to normal sinus rhythm spontaneously. However, over the ensuing month, she continues to have intermittent palpita-tions and fatigue. Continuous ECG recording over a 48-hour period documents paroxysms of atrial fibrillation with heart rates of 88–114 bpm. An echocardiogram shows a left ven-tricular ejection fraction of 38% (normal ≥ 60%) with no localized wall motion abnormality. At this stage, would you initiate treatment with an antiarrhythmic drug to maintain normal sinus rhythm, and if so, what drug would you choose?
# Chunk 7813
Changes in serum potassium can have profound effects on electrical activity of the heart. An increase in serum potas-sium, or hyperkalemia, can depolarize the resting mem-brane potential due to changes in EK. If the depolarization is great enough, it can inactivate sodium channels, resulting in increased refractory period duration and slowed impulse propagation. Conversely, a decrease in serum potassium, or hypokalemia, can hyperpolarize the resting membrane potential. This can lead to an increase in pacemaker activity due to greater activation of pacemaker channels, especially in latent pacemakers (eg, Purkinje cells), which are more sensitive to changes in serum potassium than normal pacemaker cells. If one only considers what happens to the potassium electrochemical gradient, changes in serum potassium can also produce effects that appear somewhat paradoxical, especially as they relate to action potential duration. This is because changes in serum potassium also affect the potas-sium conductance (increased potassium increases the con-ductance, decreased potassium decreases the conductance), and this effect often predominates. As a result, hyperkalemiacan reduce action potential duration, and hypokalemiacan prolong action potential duration. This effect of potassium probably contributes to the observed increase in sensitivity to potassium channel-blocking antiarrhythmic agents (quini-dine or sotalol) during hypokalemia, resulting in accentuated action potential prolongation and a tendency to cause torsades de pointes arrhythmia.
# Chunk 7814
It is now possible to define the molecular basis of several con-genital and acquired cardiac arrhythmias. The best example is the polymorphic ventricular tachycardia known as torsades de pointes (Figure 14–8), which is associated with prolongation of the QT interval (especially at the onset of the tachycardia), syncope, and sudden death. This represents prolongation of the action potential of at least some ventricular cells (Figure 14–1). The effect can, in theory, be attributed to either increased inward current (gain of function) or decreased outward current (loss of function) during the plateau of the action potential. Action potential prolongation is thought to generate early afterdepo-larizations (Figure 14–5) that then trigger torsades de pointes. Recent molecular genetic studies have identified up to 300 different mutations in at least eight ion channel genes that produce congenital long QT (LQT) syndrome (Table 14–1). Loss-of-function mutations in potassium channel genes (HERG, KCNE2, KCNQ1, KCNE1, and KCNJ2) result in decreased outward plateau current, while gain-of-function mutations in the sodium channel gene (SCN5A) or calcium channel gene (CACNA1c) cause increases in inward plateau current. The identification of the precise molecular mechanisms underlying various forms of the LQT syndromes now raises the possibility that specific therapies may be developed for individu-als with defined molecular abnormalities. Indeed, preliminary reports suggest that the sodium channel blocker mexiletine can correct the clinical manifestations of congenital LQT subtype 3, while β-blockers have been used to prevent arrhythmias trig-gered by sympathetic stimulation in patients with LQT subtype 1. The molecular basis of several other congenital cardiac arrhythmias associated with sudden death has also recently been identified. At least three forms of short QT syndrome have been identified that are linked to gain-of-function mutations in different potassium channel genes (KCNH2, KCNQ1, and KCNJ2). Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia, a disease that is characterized by stressor emotion-induced syncope, can be caused by mutations in at least two different genes (hRyR2 and CASQ2) of proteins expressed in the sarcoplasmic reticulum that control intracellular calcium homeostasis. Mutations in two different ion channel genes (HCN4 and SCN5A) have been linked to congenital forms of sick sinus syndrome. Several forms of Brugada syndrome, which is characterized by ventricular fibrillation associated with persistent ST-segment elevation, and progressive cardiac conduction disorder (PCCD), which is characterized by impaired conduction in the His-Purkinje system and right or left bundle block leading to complete AV block, have been linked to loss-of-function mutations in the sodium channel gene (SCN5A). At least one form of familial atrial fibrillation is caused by a gain-of-function mutation in a potassium channel gene (KCNQ1).
# Chunk 7815
A serious form of conduction abnormality involves reentry (also known as “circus movement”). In this situation, one impulse reenters and excites areas of the heart more than once. The path of the reentering impulse may be confined to very small areas, such as within or near the AV node or where a Purkinje fiber makes contact with the ventricular wall (Figure 14–6), or it may involve large portions of the atria or ventricles. Some forms of reentry are strictly anatomically determined. For example, in Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, the reentry circuit consists of atrial tissue, the AV node, ventricular tissue, and an accessory AV connection (bundle of Kent, a bypass tract). Depending on how many round trips through the pathway a reentrant impulse makes before dying out, the arrhythmia may be manifest as one or a few extra beats or as a sustained tachycardia. Circulating impulses can also give off “daughter impulses” that can spread to the rest of the heart. In cases such as atrial or ventricular fibrillation, multiple reentry circuits may meander through the heart in apparently random paths, resulting in the loss of synchronized contraction.
# Chunk 7816
TABLE 14–1 Molecular and genetic basis of some cardiac arrhythmias.

1Ankyrins are intracellular proteins that associate with a variety of transport proteins including Na+ channels, Na+/K+-ATPase, Na+, Ca2+ exchange, and Ca2+ release channels. 2Also known as Andersen syndrome. 3Also known as Timothy syndrome; multiple organ dysfunction, including autism. 4CPVT, catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia; mutations in intracellular ryanodine Ca2+ release channel or the Ca2+ buffer protein, calsequestrin, may result in enhanced sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ leakage or enhanced Ca2+ release during adrenergic stimulation, causing triggered arrhythmogenesis. 5HCN4 encodes a pacemaker current in sinoatrial nodal cells; mutations in sodium channel gene (SCN5A) cause conduction defects. GF, gain of function; LF, loss of function; LQT, long QT syndrome; PCCD, progressive cardiac conduction disorder; SQT, short QT syndrome.
# Chunk 7817
Antiarrhythmic drugs decrease the automaticity of ectopic pacemakers more than that of the SA node. They also reduce conduction and excitability and increase the refractory period to a greater extent in depolarized tissue than in normally polarized tissue. This is accomplished chiefly by selectively blocking the sodium or calcium channels of depolarized cells (Figure 14–9). Therapeutically useful channel-blocking drugs bind readily to activated channels (ie, during phase 0) or inactivated channels (ie, during phase 2) but bind poorly or not at all to rested channels. Therefore, these drugs block electrical activity when there is a fast tachycardia (many channel activations and inactivations per unit time) or when there is significant loss of resting potential (many inactivated channels during rest). This type of drug action is often described as use-dependent or state-dependent; that is, channels that are being used frequently, or are in an inactivated state, are more susceptible to block. Channels in normal cells that become blocked by a drug during normal activation-inactivation cycles will rapidly lose the drug from the receptors during the resting portion of the cycle (Figure 14–9). Channels in myocardium that is chronically depolarized (ie, has a resting potential more positive than −75 mV) recover from block very slowly if at all (see also right panel, Figure 14–4).
# Chunk 7818
By blocking sodium channels, procainamide slows the upstroke of the action potential, slows conduction, and prolongs the QRS duration of the ECG. The drug also prolongs the APD (a class 3 action) by nonspecific blockade of potassium channels. The drug
# Chunk 7819
Quinidine has actions similar to those of procainamide: it slows the upstroke of the action potential, slows conduction, and prolongs the QRS duration of the ECG, by blockade of sodium channels. The drug also prolongs the action potential duration by blockade of several potassium channels. Its toxic cardiac effects include excessive QT-interval prolongation and induction of torsades de pointes arrhythmia. Toxic concentrations of quinidine also produce excessive sodium channel blockade with slowed conduction throughout the heart. It also has modest antimuscarinic actions in the heart.
# Chunk 7820
Lidocaine blocks activated and inactivated sodium channels with rapid kinetics (Figure 14–10); the inactivated state block ensures greater effects on cells with long action potentials such as Purkinje and ventricular cells, compared with atrial cells. The rapid kinetics at normal resting potentials result in recovery from block between action potentials and no effect on conduction. In depolarized cells, the increased inactivation and slower unbinding kinetics result in the selective depression of conduction. Little effect is seen on the ECG in normal sinus rhythm.
# Chunk 7821
Because of its extensive first-pass hepatic metabolism, only 3% of orally administered lidocaine appears in the plasma. Thus, lidocaine must be given parenterally. Lidocaine has a half-life of 1–2 hours. In adults, a loading dose of 150–200 mg administered over about 15 minutes (as a single infusion or as a series of slow boluses) should be followed by a maintenance infusion of 2–4 mg/min to achieve a therapeutic plasma level of 2–6 mcg/mL. Determination of lidocaine plasma levels is of great value in adjusting the infusion rate. Occasional patients with myocardial infarction or other acute illness require (and tolerate) higher concentrations. This may be due to increased plasma α1-acid glycoprotein, an acute-phase reactant protein that binds lidocaine, making less free drug available to exert its pharmacologic effects.
# Chunk 7822
Propafenone has some structural similarities to propranolol and possesses weak β-blocking activity. Its spectrum of action is very similar to that of quinidine, but it does not prolong the action potential. Its sodium channel-blocking kinetics are similar to those of flecainide. Propafenone is metabolized in the liver, with an average half-life of 5–7 hours. The usual daily dosage of propafenone is 450–900 mg/d in three divided doses. The drug is used primarily for supraventricular arrhythmias. The most common adverse effects are a metallic taste and constipation; arrhythmia exacerbation can also occur.
# Chunk 7823
In the USA, amiodarone is approved for oral and intravenous use to treat serious ventricular arrhythmias. However, the drug is also highly effective in the treatment of supraventricular arrhythmias such as atrial fibrillation. As a result of its broad spectrum of antiarrhythmic action, it is very extensively used for a wide variety of arrhythmias. Amiodarone has unusual pharmacokinetics and important extracardiac adverse effects. Dronedarone, an analog that lacks iodine atoms, has US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval for the treatment of atrial flutter and fibrillation. Celivarone is another noniodinated benzofuran derivative similar to dronedarone that is currently undergoing clinical trials for the prevention of ventricular tachycardia recurrence.
# Chunk 7824
Amiodarone markedly prolongs the action potential duration (and the QT interval on the ECG) by blockade of IKr. During chronic administration, IKs is also blocked. The action potential duration is prolonged uniformly over a wide range of heart rates; that is, the drug does not have reverse use-dependent action. Despite its present classification as a class 3 agent, amiodarone also significantly blocks inactivated sodium channels. Its action potential-prolonging action reinforces this effect. Amiodarone also has weak adrenergic and calcium channel-blocking actions. Consequences of these actions include slowing of the heart rate and AV node conduction. The broad spectrum of actions may account for its relatively high efficacy and its low incidence of torsades de pointes despite significant QT-interval prolongation.
# Chunk 7825
Amiodarone is variably absorbed with a bioavailability of 35–65%. It undergoes hepatic metabolism, and the major metabolite, desethylamiodarone, is bioactive. The elimination half-life is complex, with a rapid component of 3–10 days (50% of the drug) and a slower component of several weeks. After discontinuation of the drug, effects are maintained for 1–3 months. Measurable tissue levels may be observed up to 1 year after discontinuation. A total loading dose of 10 g is usually achieved with 0.8–1.2 g daily doses. The maintenance dose is 200–400 mg daily. Pharmacologic effects may be achieved rapidly by intravenous loading. QT-prolonging effect is modest with this route of administration, whereas bradycardia and AV block may be significant.
# Chunk 7826
Dronedarone is a structural analog of amiodarone in which the iodine atoms have been removed from the phenyl ring and a methanesulfonyl group has been added to the benzofuran ring. The design was intended to eliminate action of the parent drug on thyroxine metabolism and to modify the half-life of the drug. No thyroid dysfunction or pulmonary toxicity has been reported in short-term studies. However, liver toxicity, including two severe cases requiring liver transplantation, has been reported. Like amiodarone, dronedarone has multichannel actions, including blocking IKr, IKs, ICa, and INa. It also has β-adrenergic-blocking action. The drug has a half-life of 24 hours and can be administered twice daily at a fixed dose of 400 mg. Dronedarone absorption increases twofold to threefold when taken with food, and this information should be communicated to patients as a part of the dosing instructions. Dronedarone elimination is primarily nonrenal. It inhibits tubular secretion of creatinine, resulting in a 10–20% increase in serum creatinine; however, because the glomerular filtration rate is unchanged, no adjustments are required. Dronedarone is both a substrate and an inhibitor of CY3A4 and should not be co-administered with potent inhibitors of this enzyme, such as the azole and similar antifungal agents, and protease inhibitors.
# Chunk 7827
Sotalol is well absorbed orally with bioavailability of nearly 100%. It is not metabolized in the liver and is not bound to plasma proteins. Excretion is predominantly by the kidneys in the unchanged form with a half-life of approximately 12 hours. Because of its relatively simple pharmacokinetics, sotalol exhibits few direct drug interactions. Its most significant cardiac adverse effect is an extension of its pharmacologic action: a dose-related incidence of torsades de pointes that approaches 6% at the highest recommended daily dose. Patients with overt heart failure may experience further depression of left ventricular function during treatment with sotalol.
# Chunk 7828
Dofetilide is 100% bioavailable. Verapamil increases peak plasma dofetilide concentration by increasing intestinal blood flow. Eighty percent of an oral dose is eliminated unchanged by the kidneys; the remainder is eliminated in the urine as inactive metabolites. Inhibitors of the renal cation secretion mechanism, eg, cimetidine, prolong the half-life of dofetilide. Since the QT-prolonging effects and risks of ventricular proarrhythmia are directly related to plasma concentration, dofetilide dosage must be based on the estimated creatinine clearance. Treatment with dofetilide should be initiated in hospital after baseline measurement of the rate-corrected QT interval (QTc) and serum electrolytes. A baseline QTc of greater than 450 ms (500 ms in the presence of an intraventricular conduction delay), bradycardia of less than 50 bpm, and hypokalemia are relative contraindications to its use.
# Chunk 7829
Ibutilide, like dofetilide, slows cardiac repolarization by blockade of the rapid component (IKr) of the delayed rectifier potassium current. Activation of slow inward sodium current has also been suggested as an additional mechanism of action potential prolongation. After intravenous administration, ibutilide is rapidly cleared by hepatic metabolism and the elimination half-life averages 6 hours. The metabolites are excreted by the kidney.
# Chunk 7830
Intravenous ibutilide is used for the acute conversion of atrial flutter and atrial fibrillation to normal sinus rhythm. The drug is more effective in atrial flutter than atrial fibrillation, with a mean time to termination of 20 minutes. The most important adverse effect is excessive QT-interval prolongation and torsades de pointes. Patients require continuous ECG monitoring for 4 hours after ibutilide infusion or until QTc returns to baseline.
# Chunk 7831
In adult patients without heart failure or SA or AV nodal disease, parenteral verapamil can be used to terminate supraventricular tachycardia, although adenosine is the agent of first choice. Verapamil dosage is an initial bolus of 5 mg administered over 2–5 minutes, followed a few minutes later by a second 5 mg bolus if needed. Thereafter, doses of 5–10 mg can be administered every 4–6 hours, or a constant infusion of 0.4 mcg/kg/min may be used.
# Chunk 7832
It was recognized over 100 years ago that reentry in simple in vitro models (eg, rings of conducting tissues) was perma-nently interrupted by transecting the reentry circuit. This concept is now applied in cardiac arrhythmias with defined anatomic pathways—eg, atrioventricular reentry using accessory pathways, atrioventricular node reentry, atrial flutter, and some forms of ven-tricular tachycardia—by treatment with radiofrequency catheter ablation or extreme cold, cryoablation. Mapping of reentrant pathways and ablation can be carried out by means of catheters threaded into the heart from peripheral arteries and veins. Studies have also shown that paroxysmal and persistent atrial fibrillation may arise from one or more of the pulmonary veins. Both forms of atrial fibrillation can be cured by electrically isolating the pul-monary veins by radiofrequency or cryotherapy catheter ablation or during concomitant cardiac surgery. Because catheter ablation therapy can often permanently cure atrial fibrillation, and because it does not involve adverse effects of drugs, it has become a very common treatment for chronic atrial fibrillation. Another form of nonpharmacologic therapy is the implant-able cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD), a device that can auto-matically detect and treat potentially fatal arrhythmias such as ventricular fibrillation. ICDs are now widely used in patients who have been resuscitated from such arrhythmias, and several trials have shown that ICD treatment reduces mortality in patients with coronary artery disease who have an ejection fraction ≤ 30% and in patients with class II or III heart failure and no prior history of arrhythmias. The increasing use of nonpharmacologic antiarrhythmic therapies reflects both advances in the relevant technologies and an increasing appreciation of the dangers of long-term therapy with currently available drugs.
# Chunk 7833
Ranolazine was originally developed as an antianginal agent. Subsequent studies have demonstrated antiarrhythmic properties that are dependent on the blockade of multiple ion channels. The drug blocks the early INa and the late component of the Na+ current, INaL, the latter having a tenfold higher sensitivity to the drug. The block of both components of the sodium current is frequencyand voltage-dependent. Ranolazine also blocks the rapid component of the delayed rectifier K+ current IKr. The blockade of both INaL and IKr results in opposing effects on the APD; the net effect depends on the relative contribution of INaL and IKr to the APD. In normal ventricular myocytes, the net effect is prolongation of the APD and the QT interval. In myocytes isolated from mice bearing long QT-associated mutations, the net effect is APD shortening. In normal atrial myocytes, the net effect is prolongation of the APD. At rapid rates, eg, during tachycardia, the atrial action potential arises from the incompletely repolarized membrane and results in voltage-dependent reduction of INa. Ranolazine has relatively little effect on ICa and the remaining K+ currents at therapeutic concentrations.
# Chunk 7834
Ranolazine had been shown to have antiarrhythmic properties in both atrial and ventricular arrhythmias. It prevents the induction of and may terminate atrial fibrillation. It is currently undergoing clinical trials in combination with dronedarone for the suppression of atrial fibrillation. Ranolazine has been shown to suppress ventricular tachycardia in ischemic models and in a major clinical trial of its effects in coronary artery disease. The drug has not yet received FDA approval as an antiarrhythmic drug.
# Chunk 7835
Vernakalant is a multi-ion channel blocker, placing it in several classes of antiarrhythmic action. It causes frequencyand voltage-dependent block of the early and late components of the sodium current. The muscarinic potassium current IKACh, which is constitutively activated in atrial fibrillation, is blocked by vernakalant. The early-activating potassium channels Ito and Ikur are also blocked by the drug. These potassium channel currents play a more prominent role in atrial than ventricular repolarization. As a result, vernakalant produces only mild QT-interval prolongation. It does not produce torsades de pointes. Though not yet approved by the FDA, vernakalant can be administered intravenously for the rapid termination of atrial fibrillation in patients with no or minimal structural heart disease. In a direct comparison trial, vernakalant proved more effective than placebo or amiodarone in terminating atrial fibrillation in a 90-minute period. This relatively rapid action decreases the required observation period for untoward side effects following drug administration. Sinus bradycardia and hypotension are the only noticeable cardiovascular adverse effects.
# Chunk 7836
Originally used for patients with digitalis-induced arrhythmias who were hypomagnesemic, magnesium infusion has been found to have antiarrhythmic effects in some patients with normal serum magnesium levels. The mechanisms of these effects are not known, but magnesium is recognized to influence Na+/ K+-ATPase, sodium channels, certain potassium channels, and calcium channels. Magnesium therapy appears to be indicated in patients with digitalis-induced arrhythmias if hypomagnesemia is present; it is also indicated in some patients with torsades de pointes even if serum magnesium is normal. The usual dosage is 1 g (as sulfate) given intravenously over 20 minutes and repeated once if necessary. A full understanding of the action and indications for the use of magnesium as an antiarrhythmic drug awaits further investigation.
# Chunk 7837
Drugs that markedly slow conduction, such as flecainide, or high concentrations of quinidine can result in an increased frequency of reentry arrhythmias, notably ventricular tachycardia in patients with prior myocardial infarction in whom a potential reentry circuit may be present. Treatment here consists of recognition, withdrawal of the offending agent, and intravenous sodium to reverse unidirectional block.
# Chunk 7838
Atrial fibrillation is the most common sustained arrhythmia observed clinically. Its prevalence increases from approximately 0.5% in individuals younger than 65 years of age to 10% in indi-viduals older than 80. Diagnosis is usually straightforward by means of an ECG. The ECG may also enable the identification of a prior myocardial infarction, left ventricular hypertrophy, and ven-tricular pre-excitation. Hyperthyroidism is an important treatable cause of atrial fibrillation, and a thyroid panel should be obtained at the time of diagnosis to exclude this possibility. With the clini-cal history and physical examination as a guide, the presence and extent of the underlying heart disease should be evaluated, pref-erably using noninvasive techniques such as echocardiography. Treatment of atrial fibrillation is initiated to relieve patient symptoms and prevent the complications of thromboembolism and tachycardia-induced heart failure, the result of prolonged uncontrolled heart rates. The initial treatment objective is con-trol of the ventricular rate. This is usually achieved by use of a calcium channel-blocking drug alone or in combination with a β-adrenergic blocker. Digoxin may be of value in the presence of heart failure. A second objective is a restoration and maintenance of normal sinus rhythm. Several studies show that rate control (maintenance of ventricular rate in the range of 60–80 bpm) has a better benefit-to-risk outcome than rhythm control (conversion to normal sinus rhythm) in the long-term health of patients with atrial fibrillation. If rhythm control is deemed desirable, sinus rhythm is usually restored by DC cardioversion in the USA. This is also the preferred strategy in an emergency, eg, atrial fibrillation associated with hypotension or angina. For the elective restora-tion of sinus rhythm, a single large oral dose of propefenone or flecainide may be used, provided that safety is initially docu-mented in a monitored setting. Intravenous ibutilide can also restore sinus rhythm promptly. The selection of a drug to maintain normal sinus rhythm depends on the presence and type of underlying heart disease. An example of an algorithm for drug selection is given in Figure 14–11. Antiarrhythmic drugs remain the preferred rhythm control strategy. However, a comparison of initial strategies for the mainte-nance of normal sinus rhythm is currently undergoing clinical trial. The pivotal role of oral anticoagulation in the prevention of stroke is established. Currently guidelines identify patients who are at particular risk and should undergo long-term anticoagulation.
# Chunk 7839
Ramin Sam, MD, Harlan E. Ives, MD, PhD, & David Pearce, MD

A 65-year-old man has a history of diabetes and chronic kidney disease with baseline creatinine of 2.2 mg/dL. Despite five different antihypertensive drugs, his clinic blood pres-sure is 176/92 mm Hg; he has mild dyspnea on exertion and 2–3+ edema on exam. He has been taking furosemide 80 mg twice a day for 1 year now. At the clinic visit, hydrochlorothi-azide 25 mg daily is added for better blood pressure control and also to treat symptoms and signs of fluid overload. Two weeks later, the patient presents to the emergency depart-ment with symptoms of weakness, anorexia, and generalized malaise. His blood pressure is now 91/58 mm Hg, and he has lost 15 kg in 2 weeks. His laboratory tests are signifi-cant for a serum creatinine of 10.8 mg/dL. What has led to the acute kidney injury? What is the reason for the weight loss? What precautions could have been taken to avoid this hospitalization?
# Chunk 7840
Technically, a “diuretic” is an agent that increases urine volume, whereas a “natriuretic” causes an increase in renal sodium excretion and an “aquaretic” increases excretion of solute-free water. Because natriuretics almost always also increase water excretion, they are usually called diuretics. Osmotic diuretics and antidiuretic hormone antagonists (see Agents That Alter Water Excretion) are aquaretics and are not directly natriuretic. Most recently, an entirely new class of agents has been developed that block urea transport. These agents result in increased urine output and increased urea excretion but not increased excretion of electrolytes. Even though they are technically aquaretics, they have also been referred to as urearetics. These agents are not yet available for therapy but are in early investigational stages.
# Chunk 7841
(proximal convoluted tubule, PCT). Potassium ions (K+) are reabsorbed via the paracellular pathway. Water is reabsorbed passively, through both a transcellular pathway (mediated by a specific water channel, aquaporin-1 [AQP1]) and a paracellular pathway (likely mediated by claudin-2). Importantly, the water permeability of the PCT is very high, and hence, the osmolality of proximal tubular fluid is maintained at a nearly constant level, and the gradient from the tubule lumen to surrounding interstitium is very small. As tubule fluid is processed along the length of the proximal tubule, the luminal concentrations of most solutes decrease relative to the concentration of inulin, an experimental marker that is filtered but neither secreted nor absorbed by renal tubules. Approximately 66% of filtered sodium ions (Na+), 85% of the NaHCO3, 65% of the K+, 60% of the water, and virtually all of the filtered glucose and amino acids are reabsorbed by the proximal tubule in normal humans.
# Chunk 7842
The thick ascending limb (TAL), which follows the thin limb of Henle’s loop, actively reabsorbs NaCl from the lumen (about 25% of the filtered sodium), but unlike the proximal tubule and the thin descending limb of Henle’s loop, it is nearly impermeable to water. Salt reabsorption in the TAL therefore dilutes the tubular fluid, and for this reason, the TAL is called a diluting segment. Medullary portions of the TAL contribute to medullary hypertonicity and thereby also play an important role in concentration of urine by the collecting duct.
# Chunk 7843
R Cl – Lumen-urine Collecting tubule Interstitium-blood Na+ K+ Cl – Na+ K+ Aldosterone Principal cell Intercalated cell H+ HCO3 – ENaC ++ATP ATP FIGURE 15–5 Ion transport pathways across the luminal and basolateral membranes of collecting tubule and collecting duct cells. Inward diffusion of Na+ via the epithelial sodium channel (ENaC) leaves a lumen-negative potential, which drives reabsorption of Cl− and efflux of K+. R, aldosterone receptor.
# Chunk 7844
The collecting tubule system is also the site at which the final urine concentration is determined. In addition to their role in control of Na+ absorption and K+ secretion (Figure 15–5), principal cells also contain a regulated system of water channels (Figure 15–6). Antidiuretic hormone (ADH, also called arginine vasopressin, AVP) controls the permeability of these cells to water by regulating the insertion of pre-formed water channels (aquaporin-2, AQP2) into the apical membrane. Vasopressin receptors in the vasculature and central nervous system (CNS) are V1 receptors, and those in the kidney are V2 receptors. V2 receptors act via a Gs protein-coupled, cAMP-mediated process. In the absence of ADH, the collecting tubule (and duct) is impermeable to water, and dilute urine is produced. ADH markedly increases water permeability, and this leads to the formation of a more concentrated urine. ADH also stimulates the insertion of urea transporter UT1 (UT-A, UTA-1) molecules into the apical membranes of collecting duct cells in the medulla.
# Chunk 7845
Urea concentration in the medulla plays an important role maintaining the high osmolarity of the medulla and in the concentration of urine. ADH secretion is regulated by serum osmolality and by volume status. A new class of drugs, the vaptans (see Agents That Alter Water Excretion), are ADH antagonists.
# Chunk 7846
Carbonic anhydrase is present in many nephron sites, but the predominant location of this enzyme is the epithelial cells of the PCT (Figure 15–2), where it catalyzes the dehydration of H2CO3 to CO2 at the luminal membrane and rehydration of CO2 to TABLE 15–3 Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors used H2CO3 in the cytoplasm as previously described. By blocking orally in the treatment of glaucoma. carbonic anhydrase, inhibitors blunt NaHCO3 reabsorption and cause diuresis. Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors were the forerunners of mod-Dichlorphenamide 50 mg 1–3 times daily ern diuretics. They were discovered in 1937 when it was found that bacteriostatic sulfonamides caused an alkaline diuresis and hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis. With the development of newer agents, carbonic anhydrase inhibitors are now rarely used at sites other than the kidney. The ciliary body of the eye secretes as diuretics, but they still have several specific applications that are discussed below. The prototypical carbonic anhydrase inhibitor is HCO3− from the blood into the aqueous humor. Likewise, formation of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) by the choroid plexus involves acetazolamide. HCO3− secretion. Although these processes remove HCO3− from the blood (the direction opposite of that in the proximal tubule), they are similarly inhibited by carbonic anhydrase inhibitors. The carbonic anhydrase inhibitors are well absorbed after oral administration. An increase in urine pH from the HCO3− diuresis is apparent within 30 minutes, is maximal at 2 hours, and persists
# Chunk 7847
In the normal individual, the proximal convoluted tubule reabsorbs almost all of the glucose filtered by the glomeruli. Ninety percent of the glucose reabsorption occurs through SGLT2 (Figure 15–2), but inhibiting this transporter using the currently available drugs will result in glucose excretion of only 30–50% of the amount filtered. Although we have known about the proximal tubule sodium/glucose cotransporter for many years, the inhibitors of this transport channel were developed only recently. Four SGLT2 inhibitors (dapagliflozin, canagliflozin, empagliflozin, and ipragliflozin [available in Japan]) are currently available. Angiotensin II has been shown to induce SGLT2 production via the AT1 receptor. Thus, blockade of the renin-angiotensinaldosterone axis may result in lower SGLT2 availability.
# Chunk 7848
The SGLT2 inhibitors are rapidly absorbed by the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. The elimination half-life of dapagliflozin is 10–12 hours, and up to 70% of the given dose is excreted in the urine in the form of 3-O-glucuronide (only around 2% of the drug is excreted unchanged in the urine). Although the drug levels are higher with more severe renal failure, urinary glucose excretion would also decline as chronic kidney disease worsens. The dose of canagliflozin is recommended not to exceed 100 mg/d with an estimated GFR of 45–59. The drugs are not recommended in patients with more severe renal failure or advanced liver disease. Drug-drug interactions are a consideration with these drugs. For example, concomitant rifampin administration reduces the total exposure to dapagliflozin by 22%.
# Chunk 7849
Currently, the only indication for the use of these drugs is as third-line therapy for diabetes mellitus (see Chapter 41). SGLT2 inhibitors will reduce the hemoglobin A1c by 0.5–1.0%, similar to other oral hypoglycemic agents. Even though SGLT2 inhibitors are not indicated for other diagnoses, they do have other minor effects. SGLT2 inhibitors will result in an average weight loss of 3.2 kg versus a weight gain of 1.2 kg with glipizide. It is not clearly established how much of this is due to the diuretic effect, but it is notable that SGLT2 inhibitors also induce a drop in systolic blood pressure by an average of 5.1 mm Hg, compared with an increase in systolic blood pressure of approximately 1 mm Hg after starting sitagliptin. In one study, ipragliflozin resulted in an increase in urine volume from day 1 to day 3. There was a 0.7-kg decrease in body weight by day 3 compared to day 1. Both urine sodium and urine potassium excretion increased with the use of ipragliflozin, but the serum concentrations of both electrolytes remained stable. Thus, it is likely that at least part of the weight loss is due to the diuretic effect of the drugs. Recently there have also been reports of acute kidney injury (AKI) with these drugs. At this point, it is unclear how much the diuretic and blood pressure-lowering effects of these drugs contribute to the reported AKI.
# Chunk 7850
Medullary urine concentration depends in large part on urea movement in the kidney. Two families of urea transporters have been described. UT-A is present in inner medullary collecting duct cells and the thin descending limb of Henle. UT-B is present in the descending vasa recta and several extrarenal tissues. Inhibitors of both UT-A and UT-B (eg, PU-14) have been developed and are currently in preclinical studies. These agents are aquaretics that increase urea and water excretion but not sodium excretion. Urea transport inhibitors have been shown to blunt the increase in urine osmolality seen after desmopressin administration. These agents may prove to be useful in edematous states and even in SIADH; however, their potential clinical role as compared to that of vaptans remains to be established.
# Chunk 7851
The combination of loop diuretics and thiazides can mobilize large amounts of fluid, even in patients who have not responded to single agents. Therefore, close hemodynamic monitoring is essential. Routine outpatient use is not recommended but may be possible with extreme caution and close follow-up. Furthermore, K+ wasting is extremely common and may require parenteral K+ administration with careful monitoring of fluid and electrolyte status. The first large-scale randomized controlled trial of combination loop and thiazide diuretic therapy in patients with heart failure is currently under way in the CLOROTIC (Combination of Loop with Thiazide-type Diuretics in Patients with Decompensated Heart Failure) trial. Clinical experience suggests that in outpatients, adverse effects of thiazides as add-on therapy to loop diuretics can be mitigated by infrequent low-dose therapy. Add-on diuretic therapy with metolazone is started at 2.5 mg weekly and titrated up slowly as needed, with close monitoring of the patient’s blood pressure and serum potassium concentration.
# Chunk 7852
Diabetes insipidus is due to either deficient production of ADH (neurogenic or central diabetes insipidus) or inadequate responsiveness to ADH (nephrogenic diabetes insipidus [NDI]). Administration of supplementary ADH or one of its analogs is effective only in central diabetes insipidus. Thiazide diuretics can reduce polyuria and polydipsia in nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, which is not responsive to ADH supplementation. Lithium, used in the treatment of manic-depressive disorder, is a common cause of NDI, and thiazide diuretics have been found to be helpful in treating it. This seemingly paradoxical beneficial effect of thiazides was previously thought to be mediated through plasma volume reduction, with an associated fall in GFR, leading to enhanced proximal reabsorption of NaCl and water and decreased delivery of fluid to the downstream diluting segments. However, in the case of Li+-induced NDI, it is now known that HCTZ causes increased osmolality in the inner medulla (papilla) and a partial correction of the Li+-induced reduction in aquaporin-2 expression. HCTZ also leads to increased expression of Na+ transporters in the DCT and CCT segments of the nephron. Thus, the maximum volume of dilute urine that can be produced is significantly reduced by thiazides in NDI. Dietary sodium restriction can potentiate the beneficial effects of thiazides on urine volume in this setting. Serum Li+ levels must be carefully monitored in these patients, because diuretics may reduce renal clearance of Li+ and raise plasma Li+ levels into the toxic range (see Chapter 29). Lithium-induced polyuria can also be partially reversed by amiloride, which blocks Li+ entry into collecting duct cells, much as it blocks Na+ entry. As mentioned above, thiazides are also beneficial in other forms of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. It is not yet clear whether this is via the same mechanism that has been found in Li+-induced NDI. Acetazolamide has also shown efficacy in treating polyuria in nephrogenic diabetes insipidus with fewer adverse events.
# Chunk 7853
• Brinzolamide, dorzolamide: Topical for glaucoma

SGLT2 INHIBITORS •CanagliflozinInhibition of sodium/glucose cotransporter (SGLT2) in the PCT results in decreased Na+ and glucose reabsorption Inhibition of glucose reabsorption lowers serum glucose concentration, and reduced Na+ reabsorption causes mild diuresis Diabetes mellitus; approved for the treatment of hyperglycemia, not as a diuretic Available orally. Half-life 10–12h•notrecommendedin severe renal or liver disease •Dapagliflozin, empagliflozin: similar to canagliflozin
# Chunk 7854
Nariai T et al: DSR-71167, a novel mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist with carbonic anhydrase inhibitory activity, separates urinary sodium excretion and serum potassium elevation in rats. Pharmacol Exp Ther 2015;354:2.
# Chunk 7855
Histamine, Serotonin,

Bertram G. Katzung, MD, PhD

A healthy 45-year-old physician attending a reunion in a vacation hotel developed dizziness, redness of the skin over the head and chest, and tachycardia while eating. A short time later, another physician at the table developed similar signs and symptoms with marked orthostatic hypotension. The menu included a green salad, sautéed fish with rice, and apple pie. What is the probable diagnosis? How would you treat these patients?
# Chunk 7856
These agents are rapidly absorbed after oral administration, with peak blood concentrations occurring in 1–2 hours. They are widely distributed throughout the body, and the first-generation H1 blockers enter the central nervous system readily. Some of them are extensively metabolized, primarily by microsomal systems in the liver. Several of the second-generation agents are metabolized by the CYP3A4 system and thus are subject to important interactions when other drugs (such as ketoconazole) inhibit this subtype of P450 enzymes. Most of the drugs have an effective duration of action of 4–6 hours following a single dose, but meclizine and several second-generation agents are longer-acting, with a duration of action of 12–24 hours. The newer agents are considerably less lipid-soluble than the first-generation drugs and are substrates of the P-glycoprotein transporter in the blood-brain barrier; as a result, they enter the central nervous system with difficulty or not at all. Many H1 antagonists have active metabolites. The active metabolites of hydroxyzine, terfenadine, and loratadine are available as drugs (cetirizine, fexofenadine, and desloratadine, respectively).
# Chunk 7857
CHAPTER 16 Histamine, Serotonin, & the Ergot Alkaloids 289

It is said that much of the world is experiencing an “epidemic of obesity.” This statement is based on statistics showing that in the USA and many other countries, 30–40% of the population is above optimal weight, and that the excess weight (especially abdominal fat) is often associated with the metabolic syndrome and increased risks of cardiovascular disease and diabetes. Since eating behavior is an expression of endocrine, neurophysiologic, and psychological processes, prevention and treatment of obe-sity are challenging. There is considerable scientific and financial interest in developing pharmacologic therapy for the condition. Although obesity can be defined as excess adipose tissue, it is currently quantitated by means of the body mass index (BMI), calculated from BMI = weight (in kilograms)/height2 (in meters). Using this measure, the range of normal BMI is defined as 18.5–24.9; overweight, 25–29.9; obese, 30–39.9; and morbidly obese (ie, at very high risk), ≥40. (Underweight persons, ie, those with a BMI < 18, also have an increased [but smaller] risk of health problems.) Some extremely muscular individuals may have a BMI higher than 25 and no excess fat; however, the BMI scale gener-ally correlates with the degree of obesity and with risk. A second metric, which may be an even better predictor of cardiovascular risk, is the ratio of waist measurement to body height; cardiovas-cular risk is lower if this ratio is less than 0.5. Experts consider drug therapy to be justified in patients with increased risk factors and a BMI ≥ 27 and in those without comorbidities but with a BMI ≥ 30. Although the cause of obesity can be simply stated as energy intake (dietary calories) that exceeds energy output (resting metabolism plus exercise), the actual physiology of weight con-trol is extremely complex, and the pathophysiology of obesity is still poorly understood. Many hormones and neuronal mecha-nisms regulate intake (appetite, satiety), processing (absorption, conversion to fat, glycogen, etc), and output (thermogenesis, muscle work). The fact that a large number of hormones reduce appetite might appear to offer many targets for weight-reducing drug therapy, but despite intensive research, no available phar-macologic therapy has succeeded in maintaining a weight loss of over 10% for 1 year. Furthermore, the social and psychological aspects of eating are powerful influences that are independent of or only partially dependent on the physiologic control mecha-nisms. In contrast, bariatric (weight-reducing) surgery readily achieves a sustained weight loss of 10–40%. Furthermore, surgery that bypasses the stomach and upper small intestine (but not simple restrictive banding) rapidly reverses some aspects of the metabolic syndrome even before significant loss of weight. Even a 5–10% loss of weight is associated with a reduction in blood pres-sure and improved glycemic control. Gastrointestinal flora also influence metabolic efficiency, and research in mice suggests that altering the microbiome can lead to weight gain or loss. Until approximately 15 years ago, the most popular and successful appetite suppressants were the nonselective 5-HT2 agonists fenfluramine and dexfenfluramine. Combined with phentermine as Fen-Phen and Dex-Phen, they were moderately effective. However, these 5-HT2 agonists were found to cause pulmo-nary hypertension and cardiac valve defects and were withdrawn. Older drugs still available in the USA and some other countries include phenylpropanolamine, benzphetamine, amphetamine, methamphetamine, phentermine, diethylpropion, mazindol, and phendimetrazine. These drugs are all amphetamine mimics and are central nervous system appetite suppressants; they are generally helpful only during the first few weeks of therapy. Their toxicity is significant and includes hypertension (with a risk of cerebral hemorrhage) and addiction liability. Liraglutide, lorcaserin, orlistat, and phentermine are the only single-agent drugs currently approved in the USA for the treat-ment of obesity. In addition, combination agents (phentermine plus topiramate and naltrexone plus bupropion) are available. These drugs have been intensely studied, and some of their prop-erties are listed in Table 16–5. Clinical trials and phase 4 reports suggest that these agents are modestly effective for the duration of therapy (up to 1 year) and are probably safer than the single-agent amphetamine mimics. However, they do not produce more than a 5–10% loss of weight. Mirabegron, a β3 adrenoceptor agonist approved for the treatment for overactive bladder (see Chapter 9), is of possible future interest because β3 agonists activate brown fat to consume more energy. Sibutramine and rimonabant were marketed for several years but were withdrawn because of increas-ing evidence of cardiovascular and other toxicities. Because of the low efficacy and the toxicity of the available drugs, intensive research continues. Because of the redundancy of the physiologic mechanisms for control of body weight, it seems likely that polypharmacy targeting multiple pathways will be needed to achieve success.
# Chunk 7858
Flibanserin, a 5-HT1a agonist and 5-HT2A antagonist, is approved for treatment of hypoactive sexual desire disorder in women. Due to inadequate evidence of efficacy, it was refused approval in 2010 and 2013. The clinical trials that led to its approval in 2015 showed a very small but significant increase in satisfactory sexual desire and activities over several weeks of daily oral administration. Consumption of alcohol is contraindicated due to increased risk of severe hypotension. Other adverse effects include syncope, nausea, fatigue, dizziness, and somnolence.
# Chunk 7859
Ian A. Reid, PhD

During a routine check and on two follow-up visits, a 45-year-old man was found to have high blood pressure (160–165/95–100 mm Hg). His physician initially prescribed hydrochlorothiazide, a diuretic commonly used to treat hyper-tension. His blood pressure was reduced by hydrochloro-thiazide but remained at a hypertensive level (145/95 mm Hg), and he was referred to the university hypertension clinic. Because the patient had elevated plasma renin activity and aldosterone concentration, hydrochlorothiazide was replaced with enalapril, an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor. Enalapril lowered his blood pressure to almost normotensive levels. However, after several weeks on enalapril, the patient returned complaining of a persistent cough. In addition, some signs of angioedema were detected. How does enalapril lower blood pressure? Why does it occasionally cause coughing and angioedema? What other drugs could be used to inhibit the renin-angiotensin system and decrease blood pressure, without the adverse effects of enalapril?
# Chunk 7860
Administration of ANP increases sodium excretion and urine flow. The ANP-induced natriuresis is due both to an increase in glomerular filtration rate and a decrease in proximal tubular sodium reabsorption. ANP also inhibits the release of renin, aldosterone, and AVP; these changes may also increase sodium and water excretion. Finally, ANP causes vasodilation and decreases arterial blood pressure. Suppression of ANP production or blockade of its action impairs the natriuretic response to volume expansion, and increases blood pressure.
# Chunk 7861
The Eicosanoids:

Prostaglandins, Thromboxanes, Leukotrienes, & Related Compounds

John Hwa, MD, PhD, & Kathleen Martin, PhD* pulmonary pressures, and right ventricular enlargement. Cardiac catheterization confirmed the severely elevated pulmonary pressures. She was commenced on appropri-ate therapies. Which of the eicosanoid agonists have been demonstrated to reduce both morbidity and mortality in patients with such a diagnosis? What are the modes of action? A 40-year-old woman presented to her doctor with a 6-month history of increasing shortness of breath. This was associated with poor appetite and ankle swell-ing. On physical examination, she had elevated jugular venous distention, a soft tricuspid regurgitation murmur, clear lungs, and mild peripheral edema. An echocardio-gram revealed tricuspid regurgitation, severely elevated
# Chunk 7862
The isoeicosanoids, a family of eicosanoid isomers, are formed non-enzymatically by direct free radical-based action on AA and related lipid substrates. The isoprostanes thus formed are prostaglandin stereoisomers. Because prostaglandins have many asymmetric centers, they have a large number of potential stereoisomers. COX is not needed for the formation of the isoprostanes, and its inhibition with aspirin or other NSAIDs should not affect the isoprostane pathway. The primary epimerization mechanism is peroxidation of arachidonate by free radicals. Peroxidation occurs while arachidonic acid is still esterified to the membrane phospholipids. Thus, unlike prostaglandins, these stereoisomers are “stored” as part of the membrane. They are then cleaved by phospholipases, circulate, and are excreted in urine. Isoprostanes are present in relatively large amounts (tenfold greater in blood and urine than the COX-derived prostaglandins). They have potent vasoconstrictor effects when infused into renal and other vascular beds and may activate prostanoid receptors. They also may modulate other aspects of vascular function, including leukocyte and platelet adhesive interactions and angiogenesis. It has been speculated that they may contribute to the pathophysiology of inflammatory responses in a manner insensitive to COX inhibitors. A particular difficulty in assessing the likely biologic functions of isoprostanes—several of which have been shown to serve as incidental ligands at prostaglandin receptors—is that while high concentrations of individual isoprostanes may be necessary to elicit a response, multiple compounds are formed coincidentally in vivo under conditions of oxidant stress. Analogous leukotriene and EET isomers have been described.
# Chunk 7863
For the induction of labor or softening of the cervix, dinoprostone is used either as a gel (0.5 mg PGE2 every 6 hours; maximum 24-hour cumulative dose of 1.5 mg) or as a controlled-release vaginal insert (10 mg PGE2) that releases PGE2 over 12 hours. The softening of the cervix for induction of labor substantially shortens the time to onset of labor and the delivery time. An advantage of the controlled-release formulation is a lower incidence of gastrointestinal effects (<1% versus 5.7%).
# Chunk 7864
A. Pulmonary Hypertension

PGI2 lowers peripheral, pulmonary, and coronary vascular resistance. Pulmonary hypertension is characterized by an increase in vascular resistance in the pulmonary blood vessels. PGI2 has been used to treat pulmonary hypertension arising from primary lung disease and that arising from heart or systemic diseases. In addition, prostacyclin has been used successfully to treat portopulmonary hypertension, which arises secondary to liver disease. The first commercial preparation of PGI2 approved for treatment of pulmonary hypertension (epoprostenol) improves symptoms, prolongs survival, and delays or prevents the need for lung or lung-heart transplantation. Side effects include flushing, headache, hypotension, nausea, and diarrhea. The extremely short plasma half-life (3–5 minutes) of epoprostenol necessitates continuous intravenous infusion through a central line for longterm treatment. Intravenous infusion dosage of epoprostenol is increased in a graded dose-dependent manner, based on recurrence, persistence, or worsening of symptoms. Several prostacyclin analogs with longer half-lives have been developed and used clinically. Iloprost (half-life about 30 minutes) is usually inhaled six to nine times per day (2.5–5 mcg/dose), although it has been delivered by intravenous administration outside the USA. Treprostinil (half-life about 4 hours) may be delivered by subcutaneous or intravenous infusion or by inhalation. Recently, two oral prostacyclin receptor agonists were approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA): selexipag (a prodrug rapidly converted to active prostacyclin agonist) and an oral preparation of treprostinil. Other drugs used in pulmonary hypertension are discussed in Chapter 17.
# Chunk 7865
The word “cytoprotection” was coined to signify the remarkable protective effect of the E prostaglandins against peptic ulcers in animals at doses that do not reduce acid secretion. Since then, numerous experimental and clinical investigations have shown that the PGE compounds and their analogs protect against peptic ulcers produced by either steroids or NSAIDs. Misoprostol is an orally active synthetic analog of PGE1. The FDA-approved indication is for prevention of NSAID-induced peptic ulcers. This and other PGE analogs (eg, enprostil) are cytoprotective at low doses and inhibit gastric acid secretion at higher doses. Because it is also an abortifacient, misoprostol is a pregnancy category X drug. Misoprostol use is low, probably because of its adverse effects including abdominal discomfort and occasional diarrhea. Dose-dependent bone pain and hyperostosis have been described in patients with liver disease who were given long-term PGE treatment.
# Chunk 7866
Joshua M. Galanter, MD, & Homer A. Boushey, MD and respirations are 32/min. Her mother states that she has used her albuterol inhaler several times a day for the past 3 days and twice during the previous night. She took an additional two puffs on her way to the emergency department, but her mother states that “the inhaler didn’t seem to be helping so I told her not to take any more.” What emergency measures are indicated? How should her long-term management be altered? A 14-year-old girl with a history of asthma requiring daily inhaled corticosteroid therapy and allergies to house dust mites, cats, grasses, and ragweed presents to the emergency department in mid-September, reporting a recent “cold” com-plicated by worsening shortness of breath and audible inspi-ratory and expiratory wheezing. She appears frightened and refuses to lie down but is not cyanotic. Her pulse is 120 bpm,
# Chunk 7867
Adrenoceptor agonists are mainstays in the treatment of asthma. Their binding to β-adrenergic receptors—abundant on airway smooth muscle cells—stimulates adenylyl cyclase and increases the formation of intracellular cAMP (Figure 20–3), thereby relaxing airway smooth muscle and inhibiting release of bronchoconstricting mediators from mast cells. They may also inhibit microvascular leakage and increase mucociliary transport. Adverse effects, especially of adrenoceptor agonists that activate β1 as well as β2 receptors, include tachycardia, skeletal muscle tremor, and decreases in serum potassium levels.
# Chunk 7868
Epinephrine is an effective, rapidly acting bronchodilator when injected subcutaneously (0.4 mL of 1:1000 solution) or inhaled as a microaerosol from a pressurized canister (320 mcg per puff). Maximal bronchodilation is achieved within 15 minutes after inhalation and lasts 60–90 minutes. Because epinephrine stimulates α and β1 as well as β2 receptors, tachycardia, arrhythmias, and worsening of angina pectoris are potentially serious adverse effects. Its current use is thus largely for treatment of the acute vasodilation and bronchospasm of anaphylaxis. Aerosol delivery of other, more β-selective agents has largely displaced its use in asthma (see below).
# Chunk 7869
Because of the efficacy and safety of inhaled corticosteroids, national and international guidelines for asthma management recommend their prescription for patients with persistent asthma who require more than occasional inhalations of a β agonist for relief of symptoms. This therapy is continued for 10–12 weeks and then withdrawn to determine whether more prolonged therapy is needed; inhaled corticosteroids are not curative. In most patients, the manifestations of asthma return within a few weeks after stopping therapy even if they have been taken in high doses for 2 or more years. A prospective, placebo-controlled study of the early, sustained use of inhaled corticosteroids in young children with asthma showed significantly greater improvement in asthma symptoms, pulmonary function, and frequency of asthma exacerbations over the 2 years of treatment, but no difference in overall asthma control 3 months after the end of the trial. inhaled corticosteroids are thus properly labeled as “controllers.” They are effective only so long as they are taken.
# Chunk 7870
Another approach to reducing the risk of long-term, twice-daily use of ICS is to administer them only intermittently, when symptoms of asthma flare. Taking a single inhalation of an ICS with each inhalation of a short-acting β-agonist reliever (eg, an inhalation of beclomethasone for each inhalation of albuterol) or taking a 5to 10-day course of twice-daily high-dose budesonide or beclomethasone when asthma symptoms worsen has been found to be nearly as effective as regular daily therapy in adults and children with mild to moderate asthma, although these approaches to treatment are neither endorsed by guidelines for asthma management nor approved by the FDA.
# Chunk 7871
This patient demonstrates the destabilizing effects of a respiratory infection on asthma, and her mother’s comments demonstrate the common (and dangerous) phobia about “overuse” of bronchodilator or steroid inhalers. The patient has signs of imminent respiratory failure, including her refusal to lie down, her fear, and her tachycardia, which can-not be attributed to her minimal treatment with albuterol. Critically important immediate steps are to administer high-flow oxygen and to start albuterol by nebulization. Adding ipratropium (Atrovent) to the nebulized solution is recom-mended. A corticosteroid (0.5–1.0 mg/kg of methylpred-nisolone) should be administered intravenously. It is also advisable to alert the intensive care unit, because a patient with severe bronchospasm who tires can slip into respiratory failure quickly, and intubation can be difficult. Fortunately, most patients treated in hospital emergency departments do well. Asthma mortality is rare (fewer than 4000 deaths per year among a population of more than 20 million asthmatics in the USA), and when it occurs, it is often out of hospital. Presuming this patient recovers, she needs adjustments to her therapy before discharge. The strongest predictor of severe attacks of asthma is their occur-rence in the past. Thus, this patient’s therapy needs to be stepped up to a higher level, like a high-dose inhaled cortico-steroid in combination with a long-acting βagonist. Both the patient and her parents need instruction on the importance of regular adherence to therapy, with reassurance that it can be “stepped down” to a lower dose of inhaled corticosteroid (although still in combination with a long-acting β agonist) once her condition stabilizes. They also need instruction on an action plan for managing severe symptoms. This can be as simple as advising that if the patient has a severe, frightening attack, she can take up to four puffs of albuterol every 15 minutes, but if the first treatment does not bring significant relief, she should take the next four puffs while on her way to an emergency department or urgent care clinic. She should also be given a prescription for prednisone, with instructions to take 40–60 mg orally for severe attacks, but not to wait for it to take effect if she remains severely short of breath even after albuterol inhalations. Asthma is a chronic disease, and good care requires close follow-up and creation of a provider-patient partnership for optimal management. If she has had several previous exacerbations, she should be considered a candidate for monoclonal anti-IgE antibody therapy with omalizumab, which effectively reduces the rate of asthma exacerbations—even those associated with viral respiratory infection—in patients with allergic asthma. Alternatively, if the patient is found to have blood eosino-philia, treatment with an anti-IL-5 monoclonal antibody (eg, mepolizumab) should be considered as well.
# Chunk 7872
Anthony J. Trevor, PhD not overweight, and she takes no prescription drugs. She drinks decaffeinated coffee but only one cup in the morning; however, she drinks as many as six cans per day of diet cola. She drinks a glass of wine with her evening meal but does not like stronger spirits. What other aspects of this patient’s history would you like to know? What therapeutic measures are appropriate for this patient? What drug, or drugs, (if any) would you prescribe? At her annual physical examination, a 53-year-old middle school teacher complains that she has been having difficulty falling asleep, and after falling asleep, she awakens several times during the night. These episodes now occur almost nightly and are interfering with her ability to teach. She has tried various over-the-counter sleep remedies, but they were of little help and she experienced “hangover” effects on the day following their use. Her general health is good, she is
# Chunk 7873
Buspirone has selective anxiolytic effects, and its pharmacologic characteristics are different from those of other drugs described in this chapter. Buspirone relieves anxiety without causing marked sedative, hypnotic, or euphoric effects. Unlike benzo-diazepines, the drug has no anticonvulsant or muscle relaxant properties. Buspirone does not interact directly with GABAergic systems. It may exert its anxiolytic effects by acting as a partial agonist at brain 5-HT1A receptors, but it also has affinity for brain dopamine D2 receptors. Buspirone-treated patients show no rebound anxiety or withdrawal signs on abrupt discontinu-ance. The drug is not effective in blocking the acute withdrawal syndrome resulting from abrupt cessation of use of benzodi-azepines or other sedative-hypnotics. Buspirone has minimal abuse liability. In marked contrast to the benzodiazepines, the anxiolytic effects of buspirone may take 3–4 weeks to become established, making the drug unsuitable for management of acute anxiety states. The drug is used in generalized anxiety states but is less effective in panic disorders. Buspirone is rapidly absorbed orally but undergoes extensive first-pass metabolism via hydroxylation and dealkylation reac-tions to form several active metabolites. The major metabolite is 1-(2-pyrimidyl)-piperazine (1-PP), which has α2-adrenoceptor-blocking actions and which enters the central nervous system to reach higher levels than the parent drug. It is not known what role (if any) 1-PP plays in the central actions of buspirone. The elimination half-life of buspirone is 2–4 hours, and liver dysfunc-tion may slow its clearance. Rifampin, an inducer of cytochrome P450, decreases the half-life of buspirone; inhibitors of CYP3A4 (eg, erythromycin, ketoconazole, grapefruit juice, nefazodone) can markedly increase its plasma levels. Buspirone causes less psychomotor impairment than ben-zodiazepines and does not affect driving skills. The drug does not potentiate effects of conventional sedative-hypnotic drugs, ethanol, or tricyclic antidepressants; and elderly patients do not appear to be more sensitive to its actions. Nonspecific chest pain, tachycardia, palpitations, dizziness, nervousness, headache, tinnitus, gastrointestinal distress, and paresthesias and a dose-dependent pupillary constriction may occur. Blood pressure may be significantly elevated in patients receiving monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors. Buspirone is a US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) category B drug in terms of its use in pregnancy.
# Chunk 7874
2.

Barbiturates—With the exception of phenobarbital, only insignificant quantities of the barbiturates are excreted unchanged. The major metabolic pathways involve oxidation by hepatic enzymes to form alcohols, acids, and ketones, which appear in the urine as glucuronide conjugates. The overall rate of hepatic metabolism in humans depends on the individual drug but (with the exception of the thiobarbiturates) is usually slow. The elimination half-lives of secobarbital and pentobarbital range from 18 to 48 hours in different individuals. The elimination half-life of phenobarbital in humans is 4–5 days. Multiple dosing with these agents can lead to cumulative effects.
# Chunk 7875
C. Excretion

The water-soluble metabolites of sedative-hypnotics, mostly formed via the phase II conjugation of phase I metabolites, are excreted mainly via the kidney. In most cases, changes in renal function do not have a marked effect on the elimination of parent drugs. Phenobarbital is excreted unchanged in the urine to a certain extent (20–30% in humans), and its elimination rate can be increased significantly by alkalinization of the urine. This is partly due to increased ionization at alkaline pH, since phenobarbital is a weak acid with a pKa of 7.4.
# Chunk 7876
Orexin A and B are peptides found in specific hypothalamic neurons that are involved in the control of wakefulness and that are silent during sleep. Orexin levels increase in the day and decrease at night. Loss of orexin neurons is associ-ated with narcolepsy, a disorder characterized by daytime sleepiness and cataplexy. Animal studies show that orexin receptor antagonists have sleep-enabling effects. This has prompted the development of a new class of hypnotic drugs, orexin antagonists, which include the drugs almorexant and suvorexant, the latter agent approved by the FDA.
# Chunk 7877
Sedative-hypnotics should be used with appropriate caution to minimize adverse effects. A dose should be prescribed that does not impair mentation or motor functions during waking hours. Some patients may tolerate the drug better if most of the daily dose is given at bedtime, with smaller doses during the day. Prescriptions should be written for short periods, since there is little justification for long-term therapy (defined as use of therapeutic doses for 2 months or longer). The physician should make an effort to assess the efficacy of therapy from the patient’s subjective responses. Combinations of antianxiety agents should be avoided, and people taking sedatives should be cautioned about the consumption of alcohol and the concurrent use of over-the-counter medications containing antihistaminic or anticholinergic drugs (see Chapter 63).
# Chunk 7878
Sleep disorders are common and often result from inadequate treatment of underlying medical conditions or psychiatric illness. True primary insomnia is rare. Nonpharmacologic therapies that are useful for sleep problems include proper diet and exercise, avoiding stimulants before retiring, ensuring a comfortable sleeping environment, and retiring at a regular time each night. In some cases, however, the patient will need and should be given a sedative-hypnotic for a limited period. It should be noted that the abrupt discontinuance of many drugs in this class can lead to rebound insomnia.
# Chunk 7879
Anthony J. Trevor, PhD*

The Alcohols

A 19-year-old college freshman began drinking alcohol at 8:30 pm during a hazing event at his new fraternity. Between 8:30 and approximately midnight, he and several other pledges consumed beer and a bottle of whiskey, and then he consumed most of a bottle of rum at the urging of upperclassmen. The young man complained of feeling nau-seated, lay down on a couch, and began to lose conscious-ness. Two upperclassmen carried him to a bedroom, placed him on his stomach, and positioned a trash can nearby. Approximately 10 minutes later, the freshman was found unconscious and covered with vomit. There was a delay in treatment because the upperclassmen called the college police instead of calling 911. After the call was transferred to 911, emergency medical technicians responded quickly and discovered that the young man was not breathing and that he had choked on his vomit. He was rushed to the hospital, where he remained in a coma for 2 days before ultimately being pronounced dead. The patient’s blood alcohol concentration shortly after arriving at the hospital was 510 mg/dL. What was the cause of this patient’s death? If he had received medical care sooner, what treatment might have prevented his death?
# Chunk 7880
Over 90% of alcohol consumed is oxidized in the liver; much of the remainder is excreted through the lungs and in the urine. The excretion of a small but consistent proportion of alcohol by the lungs can be quantified with breath alcohol tests that serve as a basis for a legal definition of “driving under the influence” (DUI) in many countries. In most states in the USA, the alcohol level for driving under the influence is set at 80 mg/dL (0.08%). At levels of ethanol usually achieved in blood, the rate of oxidation follows zero-order kinetics; that is, it is independent of time and concentration of the drug. The typical adult can metabolize 7–10 g (150–220 mmol) of alcohol per hour, the equivalent of approximately one “drink” [10 oz (300 mL) beer, 3.5 oz (105 mL) wine, or 1 oz (30 mL) distilled 80-proof spirits]. A commercial product (“Palcohol”), approved in the USA in 2015, consists of a powder to be mixed to form a drink containing 10% ethanol (approximately equivalent to wine).
# Chunk 7881
A. Liver and Gastrointestinal Tract

Liver disease is the most common medical complication of alcohol abuse; an estimated 15–30% of chronic heavy drinkers eventually develop severe liver disease. Alcoholic fatty liver, a reversible condition, may progress to alcoholic hepatitis and finally to cirrhosis and liver failure. In the United States, chronic alcohol abuse is the leading cause of liver cirrhosis and of the need for liver transplantation. The risk of developing liver disease is related both to the average amount of daily consumption and to the duration of alcohol abuse. Women appear to be more susceptible to alcohol hepatotoxicity than men. Concurrent infection with hepatitis B or C virus increases the risk of severe liver disease. Cirrhosis contributes to elevated portal blood pressure and esophageal and gastric venous varices. These varices may rupture and result in massive bleeding.
# Chunk 7882
Abrupt alcohol discontinuation in an individual with alcohol dependence leads to a characteristic syndrome of motor agitation, anxiety, insomnia, and reduction of seizure threshold. The severity of the syndrome is usually proportionate to the degree and duration of alcohol abuse. However, this can be greatly modified by the use of other sedatives as well as by associated factors (eg, diabetes, injury). In its mildest form, the alcohol withdrawal syndrome of increased pulse and blood pressure, tremor, anxiety, and insomnia occurs 6–8 hours after alcohol consumption is stopped (Figure 23–2). These effects usually lessen in 1–2 days, although some, such as anxiety and sleep disturbances, can be seen at decreasing levels for several months. In some patients, more severe acute reactions occur, with withdrawal seizures or alcoholic hallucinations during the first 1–5 days of withdrawal. Alcohol withdrawal is one of the most common causes of seizures in adults. Several days later, individuals can develop the syndrome of delirium tremens, which is characterized by delirium, agitation, autonomic nervous system instability, low-grade fever, and diaphoresis.
# Chunk 7883
After the alcohol withdrawal syndrome has been treated acutely, sedative-hypnotic medications must be tapered slowly over several weeks. Complete detoxification is not achieved with just a few days of alcohol abstinence. Several months may be required for restoration of normal nervous system function, especially sleep.
# Chunk 7884
FIGURE 23–2 Time course of events during the alcohol withdrawal syndrome. The signs and symptoms that manifest earliest are anxiety, insomnia, tremor, palpitations, nausea, and anorexia as well as (in severe syndromes) hallucinations and seizures. Delirium tremens typically develops 48–72 hours after alcohol discontinuation. The earliest symptoms (anxiety, insomnia, etc) can persist, in a milder form, for several months after alcohol discontinuation.
# Chunk 7885
Naltrexone, a relatively long-acting opioid antagonist, blocks μ-opioid receptors (see Chapter 31). Alone and in combination with behavioral counseling, naltrexone has been shown in a number of short-term (12to 16-week), placebo-controlled trials to reduce the rate of relapse to either drinking or alcohol dependence and to reduce craving for alcohol, especially in patients with high rates of naltrexone adherence. Naltrexone is approved by the FDA for treatment of alcohol dependence. Nalmefene, another opioid antagonist, appears to have similar effects in alcohol-use disorder but is not yet approved by the FDA for this indication.
# Chunk 7886
Acamprosate has been used in Europe for a number of years to treat alcohol dependence and is approved for this use by the FDA. Like ethanol, acamprosate has many molecular effects including actions on GABA, glutamate, serotonergic, noradrenergic, and dopaminergic receptors. Probably its best-characterized actions are as a weak NMDA-receptor antagonist and a GABAA-receptor activator. In European clinical trials, acamprosate reduced short-term and long-term (more than 6 months) relapse rates when combined with psychotherapy. However, in a large American trial that compared acamprosate with naltrexone and with combined acamprosate and naltrexone therapy (the COMBINE study), acamprosate did not show a statistically significant effect alone or in combination with naltrexone.
# Chunk 7887
Disulfiram acts by inhibiting aldehyde dehydrogenase. Alcohol is metabolized as usual, but acetaldehyde accumulates. Thus, disulfiram causes extreme discomfort in patients who drink alcoholic beverages. Disulfiram alone has little effect; however, flushing, throbbing headache, nausea, vomiting, sweating, hypotension, and confusion occur within a few minutes after an individual taking disulfiram drinks alcohol. The effects may last 30 minutes in mild cases or several hours in severe ones. Because adherence to disulfiram therapy is low and because evidence from clinical trials for its effectiveness is weak, disulfiram is no longer commonly used.
# Chunk 7888
Disulfiram is rapidly and completely absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract; however, a period of 12 hours is required for its full action. Its elimination is slow, and its action may persist for several days after the last dose. The drug inhibits the metabolism of many other therapeutic agents, including phenytoin, oral anticoagulants, and isoniazid. It should not be administered with medications that contain alcohol, including nonprescription medications such as those listed in Table 63–3. Disulfiram can cause small increases in hepatic transaminases. Its safety in pregnancy has not been demonstrated.
# Chunk 7889
The enzyme chiefly responsible for methanol oxidation in the liver is alcohol dehydrogenase (Figure 23–3). Fomepizole, an alcohol dehydrogenase inhibitor, is approved for the treatment of methanol and ethylene glycol poisoning. It is administered intravenously in a loading dose of 15 mg/kg followed by 10 mg/kg every 12 hours for 48 hours and then 15 mg/kg every 12 hours thereafter until the serum methanol level falls below 20–30 mg/dL. The dosage increase after 48 hours is based on evidence that fomepizole rapidly induces its own metabolism by the cytochrome P450 system. Patients undergoing hemodialysis are given fomepizole more frequently (6 hours after the loading dose and every 4 hours thereafter). Fomepizole appears to be safe during the short time it is administered for treatment of methanol or ethylene glycol poisoning. The most common adverse effects are burning at the infusion site, headache, nausea, and dizziness. Intravenous ethanol is an alternative to fomepizole. It has a higher affinity than methanol for alcohol dehydrogenase; thus, saturation of the enzyme with ethanol reduces formate production. Ethanol is used intravenously as treatment for methanol and ethylene glycol poisoning. The dose-dependent characteristics of ethanol metabolism and the variability of ethanol metabolism require frequent monitoring of blood ethanol levels to ensure appropriate alcohol concentration.
# Chunk 7890
Three stages of ethylene glycol overdose occur. Within the first few hours after ingestion, there is transient excitation followed by CNS depression. After a delay of 4–12 hours, severe metabolic acidosis develops from accumulation of acid metabolites and lactate. Finally, deposition of oxalate crystals in renal tubules occurs, followed by delayed renal insufficiency. The key to the diagnosis of ethylene glycol poisoning is recognition of anion gap acidosis, osmolar gap, and oxalate crystals in the urine in a patient without visual symptoms.
# Chunk 7891
Roger J. Porter, MD, & Michael A. Rogawski, MD, PhD was unchanged, and levetiracetam was gradually increased to 1000 mg bid. The patient had no significant adverse effects from this dosage. At age 21, she had a second tonic-clonic seizure while in college; further discussion with her room-mate at that time revealed a history of two recent episodes of 1–2 minutes of altered consciousness with lip smacking (focal impaired awareness seizure, formerly complex partial seizure). A repeat EEG showed occasional right temporal spikes. What is one possible strategy for controlling her present symptoms? A 23-year-old woman presents to the office for consultation regarding her antiseizure medications. Seven years ago, this otherwise healthy young woman had a tonic-clonic seizure at home. She was rushed to the emergency department, at which time she was alert but complained of headache. A consulting neurologist placed her on levetiracetam, 500 mg bid. Four days later, electroencephalography (EEG) showed rare right temporal sharp waves. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was normal. One year after this episode, a repeat EEG
# Chunk 7892
Antiseizure drugs must have reasonable oral bioavailability and must enter the central nervous system. These drugs are predominantly distributed into total body water. Plasma clearance is relatively slow; many antiseizure drugs are therefore considered to be medium to long acting, such that they are administered twice or three times a day. Some have half-lives longer than 12 hours. A few, such as zonisamide and perampanel, can often be administered once daily. For some drugs with short half-lives, extended-release preparations are now available; as a result, compliance is better. In the remainder of the chapter, the most widely used anti-seizure drugs, as well as some that are used only in special circumstances, are reviewed. The focal (partial onset) seizure medications are described first, followed by medications for generalized onset seizures and certain epileptic syndromes.
# Chunk 7893
Distribution is slow, and the volume of distribution is approximately 1 L/kg. Plasma protein binding is approximately 70%. Carbamazepine has a very low systemic clearance of approximately 1 L/kg/d at the start of therapy. The drug has a notable ability to induce its own metabolism, often causing serum concentrations to fall after a few weeks of treatment. Typically, the half-life of 36 hours observed in subjects after an initial single dose decreases to as little as 8–12 hours in subjects receiving continuous therapy. Considerable dosage adjustments are thus to be expected during the first weeks of therapy.
# Chunk 7894
Oxcarbazepine is the 10-keto analog of carbamazepine. Unlike carbamazepine, it cannot form an epoxide metabolite. Although it has been hypothesized that the epoxide is associated with carbamazepine’s adverse effects, little evidence is available to document the claim that oxcarbazepine is better tolerated. Oxcarbazepine is thought to protect against seizures by blocking voltage-gated sodium channels in the same way as carbamazepine. Oxcarbazepine itself has a half-life of only 1–2 hours; its antiseizure activity resides almost exclusively in the active 10-hydroxy metabolites, S(+)and R(–)-licarbazepine (also referred to as monohydroxy derivatives or MHDs), to which oxcarbazepine is rapidly converted and both of which have half-lives similar to that of carbamazepine (8–12 hours). The bulk (80%) of oxcarbazepine is converted to the S(+) form. The drug is mostly excreted as the glucuronide of the 10-hydroxy metabolite.
# Chunk 7895
Eslicarbazepine acetate, a prodrug of S(+)-licarbazepine, provides an alternative to oxcarbazepine, with some minor differences. Like oxcarbazepine, eslicarbazepine acetate is converted to eslicarbazepine but the conversion occurs more rapidly and it is nearly completely to the S(+) form, with only a small amount of the R(−) isomer (5%) formed by chiral inversion. Whether there is a benefit to the more selective conversion to S(+)-licarbazepine is uncertain, especially since both enantiomers act similarly on voltage-gated sodium channels. The effective half-life of S(+)licarbazepine following oral administration of eslicarbazepine acetate is 20–24 hours so the prodrug can be administered once daily, which is a potential advantage. The drug is administered at a dosage of 400–1600 mg/d; titration is typically required for the higher doses. S(+)-Licarbazepine is eliminated primarily by renal excretion; dose adjustment is therefore required for patients with renal impairment. Minimal pharmacokinetic effects are observed with coadministration of carbamazepine, levetiracetam, lamotrigine, topiramate, and valproate. The dose of phenytoin may need to be decreased if used concomitantly with eslicarbazepine acetate. Oral contraceptives may be less effective with concomitant eslicarbazepine acetate administration.
# Chunk 7896
Lacosamide is approved for the treatment of focal onset seizures in patients age 17 years and older. In clinical trials with more than 1300 patients, lacosamide was effective at doses of 200 mg/d and had greater and roughly similar overall efficacy at 400 and 600 mg/d, respectively. Although the overall efficacy was similar at 400 and 600 mg/d, the higher dose may provide better control of focal-to-bilateral tonic-clonic (secondarily generalized) seizures; however, this dose is associated with a greater incidence of adverse effects. Adverse effects include dizziness, headache, nausea, and diplopia. The drug is typically administered twice daily, beginning with 50-mg doses and increasing by 100-mg increments weekly. An intravenous formulation provides short-term replacement for the oral drug. The oral solution contains aspartame, which is a source of phenylalanine and could be harmful in people with phenylketonuria.
# Chunk 7897
Phenytoin, sometimes referred to as diphenylhydantoin, is the 5,5-diphenyl-substituted analog of hydantoin. Hydantoin is a five-membered ring molecule similar structurally to barbiturates, which are based on a six-member ring. Phenytoin free base (pKa = 8.06–8.33) is poorly water soluble, but phenytoin sodium does dissolve in water (17 mg/mL). Phenytoin is most commonly prescribed in an extended-release capsule containing phenytoin sodium and other excipients to provide a slow and extended rate of absorption with peak blood concentrations from 4 to 12 hours. This form differs from the prompt phenytoin sodium capsule form that provides rapid rate of absorption with peak blood concentration from 1.5 to 3 hours. In addition, the free base is available as an immediate-release suspension and chewable tablets. Phenytoin is available as an intravenous solution containing propylene glycol and alcohol adjusted to a pH of 12. Absorption after intramuscular injection is unpredictable, and some drug precipitation in the muscle occurs; this route of administration is not recommended.
# Chunk 7898
Absorption of phenytoin is highly dependent on the formulation. Particle size and pharmaceutical additives affect both the rate and the extent of absorption. Therefore, while absorption from the gastrointestinal tract is nearly complete in most patients, the time to peak may range from 3 to 12 hours. Phenytoin is extensively (~90%) bound to serum albumin and is prone to displacement in response to a variety of factors (eg, hyperbilirubinemia or drugs such as warfarin or valproic acid), which can lead to toxicity. Also, low plasma albumin (such as in liver disease or nephrotic syndrome) can result in abnormally high free concentrations and toxicity. Small changes in the bound fraction dramatically affect the amount of free (active) drug. Increased proportions of free drug are also present in the neonate and in the elderly. Some agents such as valproic acid, phenylbutazone, and sulfonamides can compete with phenytoin for binding to plasma proteins. Valproic acid also inhibits phenytoin metabolism. The combined effect can result in marked increases in free phenytoin. In all of these situations, patients may exhibit signs of toxicity when total drug levels are within the therapeutic range. Because of its high protein binding, phenytoin has a low volume of distribution (0.6–0.7 L/kg in adults).
# Chunk 7899
The half-life of phenytoin in most patients varies from 12 to 36 hours, with an average of 24 hours in the low to mid therapeutic range. Much longer half-lives are observed at higher concentrations. At low blood levels, 5–7 days are needed to reach steady-state blood levels after every dosage change; at higher levels, it may be 4–6 weeks before blood levels are stable. Phenytoin— like carbamazepine, phenobarbital, and primidone—is a major enzyme-inducing antiseizure drug that stimulates the rate of metabolism of many coadministered antiseizure drugs, including valproic acid, tiagabine, ethosuximide, lamotrigine, topiramate, oxcarbazepine and MHDs, zonisamide, felbamate, many benzodiazepines, and perampanel. Autoinduction of its own metabolism, however, is insignificant.
# Chunk 7900
Gabapentin and pregabalin are not metabolized and do not induce hepatic enzymes; they are eliminated unchanged in the urine. Both drugs are absorbed by the l-amino acid transport system, which is found only in the upper small intestine. The oral bioavailability of gabapentin decreases with increasing dose because of saturation of this transport system. In contrast, pregabalin exhibits linear absorption within the therapeutic dose range. This is explained, in part, by the fact that pregabalin is used at much lower doses than gabapentin so it does not saturate the transport system. Also, pregabalin may be absorbed by mechanisms other than the l-amino acid transport system. Because of dependence on the transport system, absorption of gabapentin shows patient-to-patient variability and dosing requires individualization. Pregabalin bioavailability exceeds 90% and is independent of dose so that it may produce a more predictable patient response. Gabapentinoids are not bound to plasma proteins. Drug-drug interactions are negligible. The half-life of both drugs is relatively short (ranging from 5 to 8 hours for gabapentin and 4.5 to 7.0 hours for pregabalin); they are typically administered two or three times per day. Sustained-release, once-a-day preparations of gabapentin are available. The gabapentin prodrug gabapentin enacarbil is also available in an extended-release formulation. This prodrug is actively absorbed by high-capacity nutrient transporters, which are abundant throughout the intestinal tract, and then converted to gabapentin presumably within the intestine, so there is dose-proportional systemic gabapentin exposure over a wide dose range.
# Chunk 7901
Tiagabine is indicated for the adjunctive treatment of focal seizures, with or without secondary generalization. In adults, the recommended initial dose is 4 mg/d with weekly increments of 4–8 mg/d to total doses of 16–56 mg/d. Initial dosages can be given twice a day, but a change to three times a day is recommended above 30–32 mg/d. Divided doses as often as four times daily are sometimes required. Adverse effects and apparent lack of efficacy limit the use of this drug. Minor adverse events are dose related and include nervousness, dizziness, tremor, difficulty concentrating, and depression. Excessive confusion, somnolence, or ataxia may require discontinuation. Psychosis occurs rarely. The drug can cause seizures in some patients, notably those taking the drug for other indications. Rash is an uncommon idiosyncratic adverse effect.
# Chunk 7902
Tiagabine is 90–100% bioavailable, has linear kinetics, and is highly protein bound. The half-life is 5–8 hours and decreases in the presence of enzyme-inducing drugs. Food decreases the peak plasma concentration but not the area under the concentration curve (see Chapter 3). To avoid adverse effects, the drug should be taken with food. Hepatic impairment causes a slight decrease in clearance and may necessitate a lower dose. The drug is oxidized in the liver by CYP3A. Elimination is primarily in the feces (60–65%) and urine (25%).
# Chunk 7903
Lamotrigine is almost completely absorbed and has a volume of distribution of 1–1.4 L/kg. Protein binding is only about 55%. The drug has linear kinetics and is metabolized primarily by glucuronidation in the liver to the inactive 2-N-glucuronide, which is excreted in the urine. Lamotrigine has a half-life of approximately 24 hours in normal volunteers; this decreases to 13–15 hours in patients taking enzyme-inducing drugs. Lamotrigine is effective in the treatment of focal seizures in adults at dosages typically between 100 and 300 mg/d. The initial dose is 25 mg/d, increasing to 50 mg/d after 2 weeks; thereafter, titration can proceed by 50 mg/d every 1–2 weeks to a usual maintenance dose of 225–375 mg/d (in two divided doses). Therapeutic serum levels have not been established, but toxicity is infrequent with levels < 10 mcg/mL. The combination of lamotrigine and valproate is believed to be particularly efficacious. However, valproate causes a two-fold increase in the half-life of lamotrigine and can increase blood levels correspondingly, leading to a risk of skin rash if valproate is added to a stable regimen of lamotrigine. In patients receiving valproate, the initial dose of lamotrigine must be reduced to 12.5–25 mg every other day, with increases of 25–50 mg/d every 2 weeks as needed to a usual maintenance dose of 100–200 mg/d.
# Chunk 7904
Pharmacokinetics, Therapeutic Levels, & Dosage

For pharmacokinetics, drug interactions, and toxicity of phenobarbital, see Chapter 22. The dose of phenobarbital is individualized based on clinical response. Dosing information from clinical trials is limited. Doses in the range of 60–200 mg, divided two or three times daily, are typically used. The minimally effective dose may be 60 mg/d, and the median effective dose range may be 100–150 mg/d. The accepted serum concentration reference range is 15 to 40 mcg/mL, although many patients tolerate chronic levels above 40 mcg/mL. Mean steady-state plasma phenobarbital levels with 60 and 100 mg/d dosing are 14 and 21 mcg/mL, respectively.
# Chunk 7905
Primidone is most efficacious when plasma levels are in the range of 8–12 mcg/mL. Concomitant levels of its metabolite, phenobarbital, at steady state, usually vary from 15 to 30 mcg/mL. Dosages of 10–20 mg/kg/d are necessary to obtain these levels. Primidone should be started at a low daily dose, which is then gradually escalated over several days to a few weeks to avoid prominent sedation and gastrointestinal complaints. When adjusting doses of the drug, the parent drug reaches steady state rapidly (30–40 hours), but the active metabolites phenobarbital and PEMA reach steady state much more slowly, at approximately 20 days and 3–4 days, respectively.
# Chunk 7906
Felbamate appears to have multiple mechanisms of action. It produces a use-dependent block of N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptors, with selectivity for those containing the GluN2B (NR2B) subunit; the drug also produces a barbiturate-like potentiation of GABAA receptor responses. Oral felbamate is well absorbed (> 90%). Of the absorbed dose, 30–50% is excreted unchanged in the urine. The remainder is metabolized by CYP3A4 and CYP2E1 in the liver. The mean terminal half-life of 20 hours in monotherapy decreases to 13–14 hours in the presence of phenytoin or carbamazepine. The typical starting dose of felbamate is 400 mg three times a day. The dose may be escalated slowly to a maximum dose of 3600 mg/d, although some patients have received doses as high as 6000 mg/d. Effective plasma levels range from 30 to 100 mcg/mL. In addition to its usefulness in focal seizures, felbamate ameliorates atonic seizures as well as other seizure types in the Lennox-Gastaut syndrome. Felbamate decreases the clearance of phenytoin and valproic acid and increases their blood levels; dose reductions of these drugs may be necessary when felbamate is initiated. Felbamate reduces levels of carbamazepine but increases levels of the metabolite carbamazepine epoxide, which may be associated with adverse effects including dizziness, diplopia, or headache.
# Chunk 7907
Valproate is well absorbed after an oral dose, with bioavailability greater than 80%. Peak blood levels are observed within 2 hours. Food may delay absorption, and the drug may have improved tolerability if it is administered after meals. Valproate is highly bound to plasma proteins, but protein binding becomes saturated as the concentration increases at the upper end of the therapeutic range, resulting in an increase in the plasma free fraction of valproate from 10% at plasma concentrations up to 75 mcg/mL to 30% at levels greater that 150 mcg/mL. Such increases lead to an apparent increase in the clearance of total valproate at high doses. The half-life varies from 9 to 18 hours; extended-release formulations are therefore preferred. Because valproate is highly protein bound, it is largely confined to blood plasma; the drug has a low volume of distribution of approximately 0.15 L/kg. Approximately 20% of the drug is excreted as a direct conjugate.
# Chunk 7908
Valproate rarely causes idiosyncratic hepatic toxicity that may be severe and has been fatal. The risk is greatest for patients under 2 years of age and for those taking multiple medications. Initial aspartate aminotransferase values may not be elevated in susceptible patients, although these levels do eventually become abnormal. Most fatalities have occurred within 4 months after initiation of therapy. The other observed idiosyncratic adverse effect with valproate is thrombocytopenia, although documented cases of abnormal bleeding are lacking. Valproate can interfere with conversion of ammonia to urea. It can cause lethargy associated with increased blood ammonia concentrations. Fatal hyperammonemic encephalopathy has occurred in patients with genetic defects in urea metabolism; the drug is contraindicated in these patients.
# Chunk 7909
Topiramate is rapidly absorbed (about 2 hours) and is 80% bioavailable. There is minimal food effect on absorption, minimal (15%) plasma protein binding, and only moderate (20–50%) metabolism; no active metabolites are formed. The drug is primarily excreted in the urine (50–80% is unchanged). The monotherapy half-life is 20–30 hours, but drops to 12–15 hours when administered with concomitant enzyme-inducing drugs. Immediate-release formulations are usually administered in two daily doses. Extended-release formulations are available that have been approved for once-daily administration. Although increased levels are seen with renal failure and hepatic impairment, there is no age or gender effect, no autoinduction, and no inhibition of metabolism, and kinetics are linear. Drug interactions do occur and can be complex, but the major effect is on topiramate levels rather than on the levels of other antiseizure drugs. Birth control pills may be less effective in the presence of topiramate, and alternative modes of contraception are recommended in women taking more than 200 mg/d; however, oral contraceptives with a higher content of ethinyl estradiol (50 mcg) may be satisfactory.
# Chunk 7910
There is little information on the mechanism of action of zonisamide. Although it does block voltage-gated sodium channels, other actions may also contribute to its antiseizure activity. Zonisamide has high bioavailability, modest protein binding (>50–60%), and a half-life of 1–3 days, so it can be administered once daily. The drug is extensively metabolized by acetylation to form N-acetyl-zonisamide, which is excreted in the urine unchanged, and by CYP3A4 to form 2-sulfamoylacetylphenol, which is excreted as the glucuronide. Maintenance doses are 200–400 mg/d in adults (maximum 600 mg/d) and 4–8 mg/kg/d in children (maximum 12 mg/kg/d). Adverse effects include drowsiness, cognitive impairment, renal stones, and potentially serious skin rashes. Zonisamide has no clinically significant effects on the pharmacokinetics of other antiseizure drugs. However, antiseizure drugs such as carbamazepine, phenytoin, and phenobarbital that induce CYP3A4 increase the clearance of zonisamide, shortening its half-life; concomitant use with CYP3A4-inducing agents may therefore require an increase in zonisamide dose. Zonisamide, like topiramate, contains sulphur: zonisamide is a sulfonamide, whereas topiramate contains the same sulfonamide structure but is strictly a sulfamate. They have similar pharmacologic actions, including carbonic anhydrase inhibition like acetazolamide, which is also a sulfonamide. Both zonisamide and topiramate are associated with weight loss. They also both (rarely) cause kidney stones and oligohydrosis. Whether these actions are related to the common sulfonamide structure is not known.
# Chunk 7911
In children, a common starting dose is 10–15 mg/kg/d, with titration according to clinical response to a maintenance dose of 15–40 mg/kg/d. In older children and adults, the initial dose is 250 or 500 mg/d, increasing in 250-mg increments to clinical response to a maximum of 1500 mg/d. While dosing is based on titration to maximal seizure control with acceptable tolerability, the accepted therapeutic serum concentration range is 40–100 mcg/mL (although plasma levels up to 150 mcg/mL may be necessary and tolerated in some patients). There is a linear relationship between ethosuximide dose and steady-state plasma levels. While the long half-life could allow once-daily dosing, ethosuximide is generally administered in two or even three divided doses to minimize adverse gastrointestinal effects.
# Chunk 7912
Rufinamide is well absorbed, and plasma concentrations peak between 4 and 6 hours. The half-life is 6–10 hours, and minimal plasma protein binding is observed. Although cytochrome P450 enzymes are not involved, the drug is extensively metabolized to inactive products. Most of the drug is excreted in the urine; an acid metabolite accounts for about two-thirds of the dose. Most drug-drug interactions are minor except that valproate may decrease the clearance of rufinamide; dosing with valproate, particularly in children, may need to be decreased, typically by 50%.
# Chunk 7913
• Oxcarbazepine:

Similar to carbamazepine; 100% bioavailability; 1-2 h t1/2 but active metabolites with t1/2 of 8-12 h; fewer interactions reported acetate: Similar to oxcarbazepine but shown to be effective when given once daily and may be more rapidly converted to the active metabolite • ValproateUnknown Nearly complete (>90%) absorption •peaklevelsformulationdependent•highly(90%)boundtoplasmaproteins•extensivelymetabolizedinliver•t1/2 5–16 h Generalized tonic-clonic seizures, partial seizures, absence seizures, myoclonic seizures, other generalized seizure; migraine prophylaxis Toxicity: Nausea, tremor, weight gain, hair loss,teratogenic,hepatotoxic•Interactions: Phenobarbital, phenytoin, carbamazepine, lamotrigine, felbamate, rifampin, ethosuximide, primidone • LevetiracetamSV2A ligand Nearly complete (~95%) absorption •peaklevelsin1–2h•notboundtoplasmaproteins•minimalmetabolismin blood to inactive metabolite; ~66% excreted unchanged in urine •t1/2 6–11 h Focal seizures, generalized tonic-clonic seizures, myoclonic seizures Toxicity: Nervousness, dizziness, depression, seizures•Interactions: Rare Brivaracetam: Similar to levetiracetam but interaction with carbamazepine • Lorazepam: Similar to diazepam absorption • peak concentrations in 1–1.5 h • IV for status epilepticus • highly (95–98%) bound to plasma proteins • extensively metabolized to several active metabolites • t1/2 of active metabolite N-desmethyldiazepam up to 100 h
# Chunk 7914
Helge Eilers, MD, & Spencer Yost, MD

An elderly man with type 2 diabetes mellitus and ischemic pain in the lower extremity is scheduled for femoral-to-popliteal artery bypass surgery. He has a history of hyper-tension and coronary artery disease with symptoms of stable angina. He can walk only half a block before pain in his legs forces him to stop. He has a 50-pack-year smoking history but stopped 2 years ago. Medications include atenolol, atorvastatin, and hydrochlorothiazide. The nurse in the preoperative holding area obtains the following vital signs: temperature 36.8°C (98.2°F), blood pressure 168/100 mm Hg, heart rate 78 bpm, oxygen saturation by pulse oximeter 96% while breathing room air, and pain 5/10 in the right lower leg after walking into the hospital. What anesthetic agents will you choose for his anesthetic plan? Why? Does the choice of anesthetic make a difference?
# Chunk 7915
Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility is characterized by genetic heterogeneity, and several predisposing clinical myopathies have been identified. It has been associated with mutations in the gene coding for the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor (RyR1, the calcium release channel on the sarcoplasmic reticulum), and mutant alleles of the gene encoding the α1 subunit of the human skeletal muscle l-type voltage-dependent calcium channel. However, the genetic loci identified to date account for less than 50% of malignant hyperthermia-susceptible individuals, and genetic testing cannot definitively determine malignant hyperthermia susceptibility. Currently, the most reliable test to establish susceptibility is the in vitro caffeine-halothane contracture test using skeletal muscle biopsy samples. Genetic counseling is recommended for family members of a person who has experienced a well-documented malignant hyperthermia reaction in the operating room.
# Chunk 7916
Dexmedetomidine is principally used for the short-term sedation of intubated and ventilated patients in an ICU setting. In the operating room, dexmedetomidine may be used as an adjunct to general anesthesia or to provide sedation, eg, during awake fiberoptic tracheal intubation or regional anesthesia. When administered during general anesthesia, dexmedetomidine (0.5–1 mcg/kg loading dose over 10–15 minutes, followed by an infusion of 0.2–0.7 mcg/kg/h) decreases the dose requirements for inhaled and injected anesthetics. Awakening and the transition to the postoperative setting may benefit from dexmedetomidine-produced sedative and analgesic effects without respiratory depression.
# Chunk 7917
Kenneth Drasner, MD complications might arise from their use? What anesthet-ics would be most appropriate for providing postoperative analgesia via an indwelling epidural or peripheral nerve catheter? A 67-year-old woman is scheduled for elective total knee arthroplasty. What local anesthetic agents would be most appropriate if surgical anesthesia were to be administered using a spinal or an epidural technique, and what potential
# Chunk 7918
Marieke Kruidering-Hall, PhD, & Lundy Campbell, MD

NEUROMUSCULAR BLOCKING DRUGS A 70-kg, 45-year-old single, unrestrained male driver, is involved in a motor vehicle crash. He is rushed to a nearby level 1 trauma center where he is found to have multiple facial fractures, a severe, unstable cervical spine injury, and significant left eye trauma. Further examination of his left eye reveals rupture of his globe. The ophthalmolo-gist requests emergency surgery to repair and save his eye. Because the patient has suffered a recent trauma, you decide to perform a rapid sequence intubation in preparation for the surgical procedure. What muscle relaxant would you use to facilitate tracheal intubation? What is the proper dose for your chosen muscle relaxant? After intravenous infusion of your chosen muscle relaxant, you are unable to adequately visualize the patient’s larynx and vocal cords and cannot successfully pass an endotracheal tube. You switch to mask ventilation but are barely able to mask ventilate the patient, and you become worried that you will soon lose the ability to ventilate at all. Is there a medication that you can give to facilitate rapid return of spontaneous ventilation in this situation?
# Chunk 7919
neuromuscular blockade during or after anesthesia. However, if the parent compound is administered for several days in the ICU setting, the 3-hydroxy metabolite may accumulate and cause prolonged paralysis because it has a longer half-life than the parent compound. The remaining metabolites possess minimal neuromuscular blocking properties.
# Chunk 7920
Tetanic stimulation consists of a very rapid (30–100 Hz) delivery of electrical stimuli for several seconds. During a non-depolarizing neuromuscular block (and a phase II block after succinylcholine), the response is not sustained and fade of the twitch responses is observed. Fade in response to tetanic stimulation is normally considered a presynaptic event. However, the degree of fade depends primarily on the degree of neuromuscular blockade. During a partial nondepolarizing blockade, tetanic nerve stimulation is followed by an increase in the posttetanic twitch response, so-called posttetanic facilitation of neuromuscular transmission. During intense neuromuscular blockade, there is no response to either tetanic or posttetanic stimulation. As the intensity of the block diminishes, the response to posttetanic twitch stimulation reappears. The reappearance of the first response to twitch stimulation after tetanic stimulation reflects the duration of profound (clinical) neuromuscular blockade. To determine the posttetanic count, 5 seconds of 50 Hz tetany is applied, followed by 3 seconds of rest, followed by 1 Hz pulses for about 10 seconds (10 pulses). The counted number of muscle twitches provides an estimation of the depth of blockade. For instance, a posttetanic count of 2 suggests no twitch response (by TOF) for about 20–30 minutes, and a posttetanic count of 5 correlates to a no-twitch response (by TOF) of about 10–15 minutes (Figure 27–6, bottom panel).
# Chunk 7921
Currently, three dose ranges are recommended for sugammadex: 2 mg/kg to reverse shallow neuromuscular blockade (spontaneous recovery has reached the second twitch in TOF stimulation), 4 mg/kg to reverse deeper blockade (1–2 posttetanic count and no response to TOF stimulation), and 16 mg/kg for immediate reversal following administration of a single dose of 1.2 mg/kg of rocuronium. In patients with normal renal function (defined as a creatinine clearance [CrCl] > 80 mL/min), the sugammadexrocuronium complex is typically excreted unchanged in the urine within 24 hours. In patients with renal insufficiency, complete urinary elimination may take much longer. The plasma half-life of sugammadex in patients with renal impairment increases significantly as CrCl is reduced. In mild to moderate renal insufficiency (CrCl between 30 and 80 mL/min), the half-life varies between 4 and 6 hours. This increases dramatically in patients with severe renal impairment (CrCl < 30 mL/min), in whom the half-life is extended to 19 hours. The ability to dialyze sugammadex is variable. Therefore, sugammadex is not recommended for use in patients with severe renal impairment.
# Chunk 7922
Sugammadex is associated with a few significant adverse reactions. Most importantly, sugammadex may cause anaphylaxis, which occurred in 0.3% of patients who received the 16 mg/kg dose in the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) studies. Hypersensitivity reactions, such as nausea, pruritus, and urticaria are more common than anaphylaxis, and also occur more frequently with higher doses of sugammadex. Other significant adverse reactions include marked bradycardia that may progress to cardiac arrest within minutes of administration and coagulopathy, with an approximately 25% elevation of activated partial thromboplastin time and prothrombin time/international normalized ratio values that may last up to 1 hour.
# Chunk 7923
Baclofen is at least as effective as diazepam and tizanidine (discussed below) in reducing spasticity and is less sedating than diazepam. Baclofen does not reduce overall muscle strength as much as dantrolene. It is rapidly and completely absorbed after oral administration and has a plasma half-life of 3–4 hours. Dosage is started at 15 mg twice daily, increasing as tolerated to 100 mg daily. Studies have confirmed that intrathecal catheter administration of baclofen can control severe spasticity and muscle pain that is not responsive to medication by other routes of administration. Owing to the poor egress of baclofen from the spinal cord, peripheral symptoms are rare. Therefore, higher central concentrations of the drug may be tolerated. Partial tolerance to the effect of the drug may occur after several months of therapy, but can be overcome by upward dosage adjustments to maintain the beneficial effect. This tolerance was not confirmed in a recent study and decreased response may represent unrecognized catheter malfunctions. Although a major disadvantage of this therapeutic approach is the difficulty of maintaining the drug delivery catheter in the subarachnoid space, risking an acute withdrawal syndrome upon treatment interruption, long-term intrathecal baclofen therapy can improve the quality of life for patients with severe spastic disorders. Adverse effects of high-dose baclofen include excessive somnolence, respiratory depression, and coma. Patients can become tolerant to the sedative effect with chronic administration. Increased seizure activity has been reported in epileptic patients. Withdrawal from baclofen must be done very slowly. Baclofen should be used with caution during pregnancy; although there are no reports of baclofen directly causing human fetal malformations, animal studies using high doses show that it causes impaired sternal ossification and omphalocele.
# Chunk 7924
The therapeutic use of botulinum toxin (BoNT) for ophthalmic purposes and for local muscle spasm was mentioned in Chapter 6. This neurotoxin produces chemodenervation and local paralysis when injected into a muscle. Seven immunologically distinct toxins share homologous subunits. The single-chain polypeptide BoNT has little activity until it is cleaved into a heavy chain (100 kDa) and a light chain (50 kDa). The light chain, a zinc-dependent protease, prevents release of acetylcholine by interfering with vesicle fusion, through proteolytically cleaving SNAP*-25 (BoNT-A, BoNT-E) or synaptobrevin-2 (BoNT-B, BoNT-D, BoNT-F). Local facial injections of botulinum toxin are widely used for the short-term treatment (1–3 months per treatment) of wrinkles associated with aging around the eyes and mouth. Local injection of botulinum toxin has also become a useful treatment for generalized spastic disorders (eg, cerebral palsy). Most clinical studies to date have involved administration in one or two limbs, and the benefits appear to persist for weeks to several months after a single treatment. BoNT has virtually replaced anticholinergic medications used in the treatment of dystonia. More recently, FDA approval was granted for treatment of incontinence due to overactive bladder and for chronic migraine. Most studies have used several formulations of type A BoNT, but type B is also available.
# Chunk 7925
A 76-year-old retired banker complains of a shuffling gait with occasional falls over the last year. He has developed a stooped posture, drags his left leg when walking, and is unsteady on turning. He remains independent in all activi-ties of daily living, but he has become more forgetful and occasionally sees his long-deceased father in his bedroom. Examination reveals hypomimia, hypophonia, a slight rest tremor of the right hand and chin, mild rigidity, and impaired rapid alternating movements in all limbs. Neuro-logic and general examinations are otherwise normal. What is the likely diagnosis and prognosis? The patient is started on a dopamine agonist, and the dose is gradually built up to the therapeutic range. Was this a good choice of medications? Six months later, the patient and his wife return for follow-up. It now becomes apparent that he is falling asleep at inappropriate times, such as at the dinner table, and when awake, he spends much of the time in arranging and rear-ranging the table cutlery or in picking at his clothes. To what is his condition due, and how should it be managed? Would you recommend surgical treatment?
# Chunk 7926
Levodopa is rapidly absorbed from the small intestine, but its absorption depends on the rate of gastric emptying and the pH of the gastric contents. Ingestion of food delays the appearance of levodopa in the plasma. Moreover, certain amino acids from ingested food can compete with the drug for absorption from the gut and for transport from the blood to the brain. Plasma concentrations usually peak between 1 and 2 hours after an oral dose, and the plasma half-life is usually between 1 and 3 hours, although it varies considerably among individuals. About two thirds of the dose appears in the urine as metabolites within 8 hours of an oral dose, the main metabolic products being 3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenyl acetic acid (homovanillic acid, HVA) and dihydroxyphenylacetic acid (DOPAC). Unfortunately, only about 1–3% of administered levodopa actually enters the brain unaltered; the remainder is metabolized extracerebrally, predominantly by decarboxylation to dopamine, which does not penetrate the blood-brain barrier. Accordingly, levodopa must be given in large amounts when used alone. However, when given in combination with a dopa decarboxylase inhibitor that does not penetrate the blood-brain barrier, the peripheral metabolism of levodopa is reduced, plasma levels of levodopa are higher, plasma half-life is longer, and more dopa is available for entry into the brain (Figure 28–4). Indeed, concomitant administration of a peripheral dopa decarboxylase inhibitor such as carbidopa may reduce the daily requirements of levodopa by approximately 75%.
# Chunk 7927
E. Miscellaneous Adverse Effects

Mydriasis may occur and may precipitate an attack of acute glaucoma in some patients. Other reported but rare adverse effects include various blood dyscrasias; a positive Coombs’ test with evidence of hemolysis; hot flushes; aggravation or precipitation of gout; abnormalities of smell or taste; brownish discoloration of saliva, urine, or vaginal secretions; priapism; and mild—usually transient—elevations of blood urea nitrogen and of serum transaminases, alkaline phosphatase, and bilirubin.
# Chunk 7928
Pramipexole is rapidly absorbed after oral administration, reaching peak plasma concentrations in approximately 2 hours, and is excreted largely unchanged in the urine. It is started at a dosage of 0.125 mg three times daily, doubled after 1 week, and again after another week. Further increments in the daily dose are by 0.75 mg at weekly intervals, depending on response and tolerance. Most patients require between 0.5 and 1.5 mg three times daily. Renal insufficiency may necessitate dosage adjustment. An extended-release preparation is now available and is taken once daily at a dose equivalent to the total daily dose of standard pramipexole. The extended-release preparation is generally more convenient for patients and avoids swings in blood levels of the drug over the day.
# Chunk 7929
Another nonergoline derivative, ropinirole (now available in a generic preparation) is a relatively pure D2 receptor agonist that is effective as monotherapy in patients with mild disease and as a means of smoothing the response to levodopa in patients with more advanced disease and response fluctuations. It is introduced at 0.25 mg three times daily, and the total daily dose is then increased by 0.75 mg at weekly intervals until the fourth week and by 1.5 mg thereafter. In most instances, a dosage between 2 and 8 mg three times daily is necessary. Ropinirole is metabolized by CYP1A2; other drugs metabolized by this isoform may significantly reduce its clearance. A prolonged-release preparation taken once daily is available.
# Chunk 7930
A third monoamine oxidase B inhibitor, safinamide, was approved by the FDA while this book was in production. It is used to reduce response fluctuations in patients taking carbidopalevodopa, diminishing off-periods in patients with wearing-off effect or on-off phenomena. It is not effective as monotherapy for Parkinson’s disease. The starting dose is 50 mg orally once daily, increased after 2 weeks to 100 mg once daily.
# Chunk 7931
The pharmacologic effects of tolcapone and entacapone are similar, and both are rapidly absorbed, bound to plasma proteins, and metabolized before excretion. However, tolcapone has both central and peripheral effects, whereas the effect of entacapone is peripheral. The half-life of both drugs is approximately 2 hours, but tolcapone is slightly more potent and has a longer duration of action. Tolcapone is taken in a standard dosage of 100 mg three times daily; some patients require a daily dose of twice that amount. By contrast, entacapone (200 mg) needs to be taken with each dose of levodopa, up to six times daily.
# Chunk 7932
Adverse effects of the COMT inhibitors relate in part to increased levodopa exposure and include dyskinesias, nausea, and confusion. It is often necessary to lower the daily dose of levodopa by about 30% in the first 48 hours to avoid or reverse such complications. Other adverse effects include diarrhea, abdominal pain, orthostatic hypotension, sleep disturbances, and an orange discoloration of the urine. Tolcapone may cause an increase in liver enzyme levels and has been associated rarely with death from acute hepatic failure; accordingly, it should not be used in patients with abnormal liver function test results. Its use in the USA requires signed patient consent (as provided in the product labeling) plus monitoring of liver function tests every 2–4 weeks during the first 6 months and periodically but less frequently thereafter. The medication should be withdrawn and not reintroduced if hepatic damage becomes evident. No such toxicity has been reported with entacapone.
# Chunk 7933
Subcutaneous injection of apomorphine hydrochloride (Apokyn), a potent nonergoline dopamine agonist that interacts with post-synaptic D2 receptors in the caudate nucleus and putamen, is effective for the temporary relief (“rescue”) of off-periods of akinesia in patients on optimized dopaminergic therapy. It is rapidly taken up in the blood and then the brain, leading to clinical benefit that begins within about 10 minutes of injection and persists for up to 2 hours. The optimal dose is identified by administering increasing test doses until adequate benefit is achieved or a maximum of 0.6 mL (6 mg) is reached, with the supine and standing blood pressures monitored before injection and then every 20 minutes for an hour after it. Most patients require a dose of 0.3–0.6 mL (3–6 mg), and this should be given usually no more than about three times daily, but occasionally up to five times daily.
# Chunk 7934
Nausea is often troublesome, especially at the initiation of apomorphine treatment; accordingly, pretreatment with the anti-emetic trimethobenzamide (300 mg three times daily) for 3 days is recommended before apomorphine is introduced and is then continued for at least 1 month, if not indefinitely. Other adverse effects include dyskinesias, drowsiness, insomnia, chest pain, sweating, hypotension, syncope, constipation, diarrhea, mental or behavioral disturbances, panniculitis, and bruising at the injection site. Apomorphine should be prescribed only by physicians familiar with its potential complications and interactions. It should not be used in patients taking serotonin 5-HT3 antagonists because severe hypotension may result.
# Chunk 7935
Persons with cognitive decline may respond to rivastigmine (1.5–6 mg twice daily), memantine (5–10 mg daily), or donepezil (5–10 mg daily) (see Chapter 60); with affective disorders to antidepressants or anxiolytic agents (see Chapter 30); with psychosis to atypical antipsychotic agents or pimavanserin; with excessive daytime sleepiness to modafinil (100–400 mg in the morning) (see Chapter 9); and with bladder and bowel disorders to appropriate symptomatic therapy (see Chapter 8).
# Chunk 7936
Drugs potentiating GABAA receptors in the central nervous system (such as phenobarbital, primidone, topiramate, and benzodiazepines) also improve tremor, but phenobarbital is not used clinically because of its sedating effect. Primidone (an antiepileptic drug; see Chapter 24), in gradually increasing doses up to 250 mg three times daily, is also effective in providing symptomatic control in some cases. Patients with tremor are very sensitive to primidone and often cannot tolerate the doses used to treat seizures; they should be started on 50 mg once daily and the daily dose increased by 50 mg every 2 weeks depending on response. In many instances a dose of 125 mg two or three times daily is sufficient.
# Chunk 7937
Tetrabenazine (12.5–50 mg orally three times daily) depletes cerebral dopamine and reduces the severity of chorea. It has less troublesome adverse effects than reserpine, which has also been used for this purpose. Tetrabenazine is metabolized by cytochrome P450 (CYP2D6), and genotyping has therefore been recommended to determine metabolizer status (CYP2D6 expression) in patients needing doses exceeding 50 mg/d. For poor metabolizers, the maximum recommended dose is 50 mg daily (25 mg/dose); otherwise, a maximum dose of 100 mg daily can be used. Treatment with postsynaptic dopamine receptor blockers such as phenothiazines and butyrophenones may also be helpful. Haloperidol is started in a small dose, eg, 1 mg twice daily, and increased every 4 days depending on the response. If haloperidol is not helpful, treatment with increasing doses of fluphenazine in a similar dose, eg, 1 mg twice daily, sometimes helps. Several recent reports suggest that olanzapine may also be useful; the dose varies with the patient, but 10 mg daily is often sufficient, although doses as high as 30 mg daily are sometimes required. The pharmacokinetics and clinical properties of these drugs are considered in greater detail elsewhere in this book. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors may reduce depression, aggression, and agitation. However, strong CYP2D6 inhibitors should be used with caution, as it may be necessary to decrease the dose of tetrabenazine taken concurrently.
# Chunk 7938
A novel agent, deutetrabenazine, which is a selective inhibitor of the vesicular monoamine 2 transporter (VMAT2) that modulates dopamine stores was approved by the FDA for the chorea of Huntington’s disease while this book was in press. The dose is built up weekly from  6 mg daily to a maximum of 24 mg twice daily with food (18 mg twice daily in poor CYP2DG metabolizers). Deutetrabenazine is contraindicated in patients on monoamine oxidase inhibitors, reserpine, or tetrabenazine, and in those who are severely depressed or suicidal.
# Chunk 7939
Treatment is with drugs that block dopamine receptors or deplete dopamine stores, such as fluphenazine, pimozide, and tetrabenazine. These drugs reduce the frequency and intensity of tics by about 60%. Pimozide, a dopamine receptor antagonist, may be helpful in patients as a first-line treatment or in those who are either unresponsive to or intolerant of the other agents mentioned. Treatment is started at 1 mg/d, and the dosage is increased by 1 mg every 5 days; most patients require 7–16 mg/d. It has similar side effects to haloperidol but may cause irregularities of cardiac rhythm. Haloperidol has been used for many years to treat tic disorders. Patients are better able to tolerate this drug if treatment is started with a small dosage (eg, 0.25 or 0.5 mg daily) and then increased gradually (eg, by 0.25 mg every 4 or 5 days) over the following weeks depending on response and tolerance. Most patients ultimately require a total daily dose of 3–8 mg. Adverse effects include extrapyramidal movement disorders, sedation, dryness of the mouth, blurred vision, and gastrointestinal disturbances. Aripiprazole (see Chapter 29) has also been found effective in treating tics.
# Chunk 7940
Although not approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of tics or Tourette syndrome, certain α2-adrenergic agonists may be preferred as an initial treatment because they are less likely to cause extrapyramidal side effects than neuroleptic agents. Clonidine reduces motor or vocal tics in about 50% of children so treated. It may act by reducing activity in noradrenergic neurons in the locus coeruleus. It is introduced at a dose of 2–3 mcg/kg/d, increasing after 2 weeks to 4 mcg/ kg/d and then, if required, to 5 mcg/kg/d. It may cause an initial transient fall in blood pressure. The most common adverse effect is sedation; other adverse effects include reduced or excessive salivation and diarrhea. Guanfacine, another α2-adrenergic agonist, has also been used. Both of these drugs may be particularly helpful for behavioral symptoms, such as impulse control disorders.
# Chunk 7941
Symptoms may resolve with correction of coexisting iron-deficiency anemia and often respond to dopamine agonists, levodopa, diazepam, clonazepam, gabapentin, or opiates. Dopaminergic therapy is the preferred treatment for restless legs syndrome and should be initiated with long-acting dopamine agonists (eg, pramipexole 0.125–0.75 mg or ropinirole 0.25–4.0 mg once daily) or with the rotigotine skin patch to avoid the augmentation that may be associated especially with carbidopa-levodopa (25/100 or 50/200 taken about 1 hour before bedtime). Augmentation refers to the earlier onset or enhancement of symptoms; earlier onset of symptoms at rest; and a briefer response to medication. When augmentation occurs with levodopa, a dopamine agonist should be substituted. If it occurs in patients receiving an agonist, the daily dose should be divided, another agonist tried, or other medications substituted. Dopamine agonist therapy may be associated with development of impulse control disorders. Gabapentin is effective in reducing the severity of restless legs syndrome and is taken once or twice daily (in the evening and before sleep). The starting dose is 300 mg daily, building up depending on response and tolerance (to approximately 1800 mg daily). Oral gabapentin enacarbil (600 or 1200 mg once daily) may also be helpful. A recent study suggests that pregabalin, a related drug, is also effective at a daily total dosage of 150–300 mg, taken in divided doses. Clonazepam, 1 mg daily, is also sometimes helpful, especially for those with intermittent symptoms. When opiates are required, those with long half-lives or low addictive potential should be used. Oxycodone is often effective; the dose is individualized.
# Chunk 7942
A recessively inherited (13q14.3–q21.1) disorder of copper metabolism, Wilson’s disease is characterized biochemically by reduced serum copper and ceruloplasmin concentrations, pathologically by markedly increased concentration of copper in the brain and viscera, and clinically by signs of hepatic and neurologic dysfunction. Neurologic signs include tremor, choreiform movements, rigidity, hypokinesia, and dysarthria and dysphagia. Siblings of affected patients should be screened for asymptomatic Wilson’s disease.
# Chunk 7943
Treatment involves the removal of excess copper, followed by maintenance of copper balance. Dietary copper should also be kept below 2 mg daily. Penicillamine (dimethylcysteine) has been used for many years as the primary agent to remove copper. It is a chelating agent that forms a ring complex with copper (see Chapter 57). It is readily absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and rapidly excreted in the urine. A common starting dose in adults is 500 mg three or four times daily. After remission occurs, it may be possible to lower the maintenance dose, generally to not less than 1 g daily, which must thereafter be continued indefinitely. Adverse effects include nausea and vomiting, nephrotic syndrome, a lupus-like syndrome, pemphigus, myasthenia, arthropathy, optic neuropathy, and various blood dyscrasias. In about 10% of instances, neurologic worsening occurs with penicillamine. Treatment should be monitored by frequent urinalysis and complete blood counts.
# Chunk 7944
Charles DeBattista, MD * severe akathisia. Although more costly, lurasidone is then prescribed, which, over the course of several weeks of treatment, improves his symptoms and is tolerated by the patient. What signs and symptoms would support an initial diagnosis of schizophrenia? In the treatment of schizophre-nia, what benefits do the second-generation antipsychotic drugs offer over the traditional agents such as haloperidol? In addition to the management of schizophrenia, what other clinical indications warrant consideration of the use of drugs nominally classified as antipsychotics? A 19-year-old male student is brought into the clinic by his mother who has been concerned about her son’s erratic behavior and strange beliefs. He destroyed a TV because he felt the TV was sending harassing messages to him. In addition, he reports hearing voices telling him that fam-ily members are trying to poison his food. As a result, he is not eating. After a diagnosis is made, haloperidol is prescribed at a gradually increasing dose on an outpatient basis. The drug improves the patient’s positive symptoms but ultimately causes intolerable adverse effects including
# Chunk 7945
Metabolites of chlorpromazine may be excreted in the urine weeks after the last dose of chronically administered drug. Long-acting injectable formulations may cause some blockade of D2 receptors 3–6 months after the last injection. Time to recurrence of psychotic symptoms is highly variable after discontinuation of antipsychotic drugs. The average time for relapse in stable patients with schizophrenia who discontinue their medication is 6 months. Clozapine is an exception in that relapse after discontinuation is usually rapid and severe. Thus, clozapine should never be discontinued abruptly unless clinically needed because of adverse effects such as myocarditis or agranulocytosis, which are true medical emergencies.
# Chunk 7946
Some of the intramuscular antipsychotics have been approved for the control of agitation associated with bipolar disorder and schizophrenia. Antipsychotics such as haloperidol have long been used in the ICU setting to manage agitation in delirious and postsurgical patients. The intramuscular forms of ziprasidone, olanzapine, and aripiprazole have been shown to improve agitation within 1–2 hours, with fewer extrapyramidal symptoms than typical agents such as haloperidol.
# Chunk 7947
Some of the second-generation antipsychotic drugs produce more weight gain and increases in lipids than some first-generation drugs. A small percentage of patients develop diabetes mellitus, most often seen with clozapine and olanzapine. Ziprasidone is the second-generation drug causing the least weight gain. Risperidone, lurasidone, brexpiprazole, paliperidone, and aripiprazole usually produce small increases in weight and lipids. Asenapine and quetiapine have an intermediate effect. Clozapine and olanzapine frequently result in large increases in weight and lipids. Thus, these drugs should be considered as second-line drugs unless there is a specific indication. That is the case with clozapine, which at high doses (300–900 mg/d) is effective in the majority of patients with schizophrenia refractory to other drugs, provided that treatment is continued for up to 6 months. Case reports and several clinical trials suggest that high-dose olanzapine, ie, doses of 30–45 mg/d, may also be efficacious in refractory schizophrenia when given over a 6-month period. Clozapine is the only second-generation antipsychotic drug approved to reduce the risk of suicide in patients with history of schizophrenia. Patients with schizophrenia who have made life-threatening suicide attempts should be seriously evaluated for switching to clozapine.
# Chunk 7948
Antipsychotic drugs are often given in divided daily doses, titrating to an effective dosage. The low end of the dosage range in Table 29–4 should be tried for at least several weeks. After an effective daily dosage has been defined for an individual patient, doses can be given less frequently. Once-daily doses, usually given at night, are feasible for many patients during chronic maintenance treatment. Simplification of dosage schedules leads to better compliance.
# Chunk 7949
D. Metabolic and Endocrine Effects

Weight gain is very common, especially with clozapine and olanzapine, and requires monitoring of food intake, especially carbohydrates. Hyperglycemia may develop, but whether secondary to weight gain-associated insulin resistance or to other mechanisms remains to be clarified. Hyperlipidemia may occur. The management of weight gain, insulin resistance, and increased lipids should include monitoring of weight at each visit and measurement of fasting blood sugar and lipids at 3to 6-month intervals. Measurement of hemoglobin A1C may be useful when it is impossible to be sure of obtaining a fasting blood sugar. Diabetic ketoacidosis has been reported in a few cases. The triglyceride:HDL ratio should be less than 3.5 in fasting samples. Levels higher than that indicate increased risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease.
# Chunk 7950
In contrast to other antipsychotic agents, clozapine causes agranulocytosis in a small but significant number of patients— approximately 1–2% of those treated. This serious, potentially fatal effect can develop rapidly, usually between the 6th and 18th weeks of therapy. It is not known whether it represents an immune reaction, but it appears to be reversible upon discontinuance of the drug. Because of the risk of agranulocytosis, patients receiving clozapine must have weekly blood counts for the first 6 months of treatment and every 3 weeks thereafter.
# Chunk 7951
Clinicians rely on measurements of serum lithium concentrations for assessing both the dosage required for treatment of acute mania and for prophylactic maintenance. These measurements are customarily taken 10–12 hours after the last dose, so all data in the literature pertaining to these concentrations reflect this interval.
# Chunk 7952
An initial determination of serum lithium concentration should be obtained about 5 days after the start of treatment, at which time steady-state conditions should have been attained. If the clinical response suggests a change in dosage, simple arithmetic (new dose equals present dose times desired blood level divided by present blood level) should produce the desired level. The serum concentration attained with the adjusted dosage can be checked after another 5 days. Once the desired concentration has been achieved, levels can be measured at increasing intervals unless the schedule is influenced by intercurrent illness or the introduction of a new drug into the treatment program.
# Chunk 7953
D. Edema

Edema is a common adverse effect of lithium treatment and may be related to some effect of lithium on sodium retention. Although weight gain may be expected in patients who become edematous, water retention does not account for the weight gain observed in up to 30% of patients taking lithium.
# Chunk 7954
F. Use During Pregnancy

Renal clearance of lithium increases during pregnancy and reverts to lower levels immediately after delivery. A patient whose serum lithium concentration is in a good therapeutic range during pregnancy may develop toxic levels after delivery. Special care in monitoring lithium levels is needed at these times. Lithium is transferred to nursing infants through breast milk, in which it has a concentration about one third to one half that of serum. Lithium toxicity in newborns is manifested by lethargy, cyanosis, poor suck and Moro reflexes, and perhaps hepatomegaly.
# Chunk 7955
Therapeutic overdoses of lithium are more common than those due to deliberate or accidental ingestion of the drug. Therapeutic overdoses are usually due to accumulation of lithium resulting from some change in the patient’s status, such as diminished serum sodium, use of diuretics, or fluctuating renal function. Since the tissues will have already equilibrated with the blood, the plasma concentrations of lithium may not be excessively high in proportion to the degree of toxicity; any value over 2 mEq/L must be considered as indicating likely toxicity. Because lithium is a small ion, it is dialyzed readily. Both peritoneal dialysis and hemodialysis are effective, although the latter is preferred.
# Chunk 7956
Charles DeBattista, MD house and has no motivation, interest, or energy to pursue recreational activities that she once enjoyed such as hiking. She describes herself as “chronically miserable and worried all the time.” Her medical history is notable for chronic neck pain from a motor vehicle accident for which she is being treated with tramadol and meperidine. In addition, she is on hydrochlorothiazide and propranolol for hypertension. The patient has a history of one depressive episode after a divorce that was treated successfully with fluoxetine. Medical workup including complete blood cell count, thyroid func-tion tests, and a chemistry panel reveals no abnormalities. She is started on fluoxetine for a presumed major depressive episode and referred for cognitive behavioral psychotherapy. What CYP450 and pharmacodynamic interactions might be associated with fluoxetine use in this patient? Which class of antidepressants would be contraindicated in this patient? A 47-year-old woman presents to her primary care physician with a chief complaint of fatigue. She indicates that she was promoted to senior manager in her company approximately 11 months earlier. Although her promotion was welcome and came with a sizable raise in pay, it resulted in her having to move away from an office and group of colleagues she very much enjoyed. In addition, her level of responsibility increased dramatically. The patient reports that for the last 7 weeks, she has been waking up at 3 am every night and been unable to go back to sleep. She dreads the day and the stresses of the workplace. As a consequence, she is not eating as well as she might and has dropped 7% of her body weight in the last 3 months. She also reports being so stressed that she breaks down crying in the office occasionally and has been calling in sick frequently. When she comes home, she finds she is less motivated to attend to chores around the
# Chunk 7957
B. Serotonin-Norepinephrine Reuptake Inhibitors 1. Selective serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors—Venlafaxine is extensively metabolized in the liver via the CYP2D6 isoenzyme to O-desmethylvenlafaxine (desvenlafaxine). Both have similar half-lives of about 8–11 hours. Despite the relatively short half-lives, both drugs are available in formulations that allow once-daily dosing. Venlafaxine and desvenlafaxine have the lowest protein binding of all antidepressants (27–30%). Unlike most antidepressants, desvenlafaxine is conjugated and does not undergo extensive oxidative metabolism. At least 45% of desvenlafaxine is excreted unchanged in the urine compared with 4–8% of venlafaxine.
# Chunk 7958
2. Tricyclic antidepressants—The TCAs tend to be well absorbed and have long half-lives (Table 30–1). As a result, most are dosed once daily at night because of their sedating effects. TCAs undergo extensive metabolism via demethylation, aromatic hydroxylation, and glucuronide conjugation. Only about 5% of TCAs are excreted unchanged in the urine. The TCAs are substrates of the CYP2D6 system, and the serum levels of these agents tend to be substantially influenced by concurrent administration of drugs such as fluoxetine. In addition, genetic polymorphism for CYP2D6 may result in low or extensive metabolism of the TCAs.
# Chunk 7959
A. Depression

The FDA indication for the use of the antidepressants in the treatment of major depression is fairly broad. Most antidepressants are approved for both acute and long-term treatment of major depression. Acute episodes of MDD tend to last about 6–14 months untreated, but at least 20% of episodes last 2 years or longer.
# Chunk 7960
dosage recommended or to the highest dosage tolerated if the patient is not responsive to lower doses. Some patients may benefit from doses lower than the usual minimum recommended therapeutic dose. TCAs and MAOIs typically require titration to a therapeutic dosage over several weeks. Dosing of the TCAs may be guided by monitoring TCA serum levels.
# Chunk 7961
Suicide attempts are a common and unfortunate consequence of major depression. The lifetime risk of completing suicide in patients previously hospitalized with MDD may be as high as 15%. Overdose is the most common method used in suicide attempts, and antidepressants, especially the TCAs, are frequently involved. Overdose can induce lethal arrhythmias, including ventricular tachycardia and fibrillation. In addition, blood pressure changes and anticholinergic effects including altered mental status and seizures are sometimes seen in TCA overdoses. A 1500 mg dose of imipramine or amitriptyline (less than 7 days’ supply at antidepressant doses) is enough to be lethal in many patients. Toddlers taking 100 mg will likely show evidence of toxicity. Treatment typically involves cardiac monitoring, airway support, and gastric lavage. Sodium bicarbonate is often administered to displace the TCA from cardiac sodium channels.
# Chunk 7962
Since vilazodone is primarily a substrate of CYP3A4, strong CYP3A4 inhibitors such as ketoconazole can increase the serum concentration of vilazodone by 50% or more. On the other hand, vilazodone is neither a potent inhibitor nor a strong inducer of any CYP isoenzymes. It may be a mild inducer of CYP2C19.
# Chunk 7963
E. Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors

MAOIs are associated with two classes of serious drug interactions. The first of these is the pharmacodynamic interaction of MAOIs with serotonergic agents including SSRIs, SNRIs, and most TCAs along with some analgesic agents such as meperidine. These combinations of an MAOI with a serotonergic agent may result in a life-threatening serotonin syndrome (see Chapter 16). The serotonin syndrome is thought to be caused by over-stimulation of 5-HT receptors in the central gray nuclei and the medulla. Symptoms range from mild to lethal and include a triad of cognitive (delirium, coma), autonomic (hypertension, tachycardia, diaphoreses), and somatic (myoclonus, hyperreflexia, tremor) effects. Most serotonergic antidepressants should be discontinued at least 2 weeks before starting an MAOI. Fluoxetine, because of its long half-life, should be discontinued for 4–5 weeks before an MAOI is initiated. Conversely, an MAOI must be discontinued for at least 2 weeks before starting a serotonergic agent.
# Chunk 7964
Even the most severe acute pain (lasting hours to days) can usually be controlled—with significant but tolerable adverse effects—using currently available analgesics, especially the opioids. However, chronic pain (lasting months to years) and especially pain arising from neuropathic causes are not very satisfactorily managed with opioids. It is now known that in chronic pain, receptors on sensory nerve terminals in the periph-ery contribute to increased excitability of these sensory endings (peripheral sensitization). The hyperexcitable sensory neuron bombards the spinal cord, leading to increased excitability and synaptic alterations in the dorsal horn (central sensitization). Such changes are likely important contributors to chronic inflam-matory and neuropathic pain states. In the effort to discover better analgesic drugs for chronic pain, renewed attention is being paid to the molecular basis of peripheral sensory transduction. Potentially important ion chan-nels associated with the primary afferent nociceptor include members of the transient receptor potential family, notably the capsaicin receptor, TRPV1 (which is activated by multiple nox-ious stimuli such as heat, protons, and products of inflammation) as well as TRPA1, activated by inflammatory mediators, and P2X receptors (which are responsive to purines released from tissue damage). Special subtypes of voltage-gated sodium channels (Nav 1.7, 1.8, 1.9) are uniquely associated with nociceptive neurons in dorsal root ganglia. Lidocaine and mexiletine, which are useful in some chronic pain states, may act by blocking this class of channels. Certain centipede toxins appear to selectively inhibit Nav 1.7 channels and may also be useful in the treatment of chronic pain. Genetic polymorphisms of Nav 1.7 are associated with either absence or predisposition to pain, and there may be a direct link between expressed levels of Nav 1.7 and enkephalin in sensory ganglia. Because of the importance of their peripheral sites of action, therapeutic strategies that deliver agents that block peripheral pain transduction or transmission have been introduced in the form of transdermal patches and balms. In addition, products that systemically target peripheral TRPV1, TRPA1, and sodium channel function are in development. Ziconotide, a blocker of voltage-gated N-type calcium channels, is approved for intrathecal analgesia in patients with refractory chronic pain. Ziconotide is a synthetic peptide related to the marine snail toxin Ω-conotoxin, which selec-tively blocks N-type calcium channels. Gabapentin/pregabalin, anticonvulsant analogs of GABA (see Chapter 24) that are effective treatments for neuropathic (nerve injury) pain act at the α2δ1 subunit of voltage-gated calcium channels. N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors appear to play a very important role in central sensitization at both spinal and supraspinal levels. Although certain NMDA antagonists have demonstrated analgesic activity (eg, ketamine), it has been difficult to find agents with an acceptably low profile of adverse effects or neurotoxicity. However, ketamine infused at very small doses improves analgesia and can reduce opioid requirements under conditions of opioid tolerance, eg, after major abdominal and spinal surgery. GABA and acetylcholine (through nicotinic receptors) appear to control the central synaptic release of several transmitters involved in nociception. Nicotine itself and certain nicotine analogs cause analgesia, and their use for postoperative analgesia is under investigation. Use of antibod-ies that bind nerve growth factor (NGF) has been shown to block inflammatory and back pain and is awaiting US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval. Finally, work on cannabinoids and vanilloids and their receptors suggest that Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol, which acts primarily on CB1 canna-binoid receptors, can synergize with μ-receptor analgesics and interact with the TRPV1 capsaicin receptor to produce analgesia under certain circumstances. As our understanding of peripheral and central pain transduction improves, additional therapeutic targets and strategies will become available. Combined with our present knowledge of opioid analgesics, a “multimodal” approach to pain therapy is emerging. Multimodal analgesia involves the administration of multiple agents (eg, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs [NSAIDs], gabapentinoids, selective nor-epinephrine receptor inhibitors, etc) with complementary mechanisms of action to provide analgesia that is superior to that provided by an individual compound. Another benefit of multimodal analgesia is reduced opioid requirements with fewer adverse effects.
# Chunk 7965
The time of onset, intensity, and duration of abstinence syndrome depend on the drug previously used and may be related to its biologic half-life. With morphine or heroin, withdrawal signs usually start within 6–10 hours after the last dose. Peak effects are seen at 36–48 hours, after which most of the signs and symptoms gradually subside. By 5 days, most of the effects have disappeared, but some may persist for months. In the case of meperidine, the withdrawal syndrome largely subsides within 24 hours, whereas with methadone several days are required to reach the peak of the abstinence syndrome, and it may last as long as 2 weeks. The slower subsidence of methadone effects is associated with a less intense immediate syndrome, and this is the basis for its use in the detoxification of heroin addicts. However, despite the loss of physical dependence on the opioid, craving for it may persist. In addition to methadone, buprenorphine and the α2 agonist clonidine are FDA-approved treatments for opioid analgesic detoxification (see Chapter 32).
# Chunk 7966
In the case of agents with mixed effects, withdrawal signs and symptoms can be induced after repeated administration followed by abrupt discontinuance of pentazocine, cyclazocine, or nalorphine, but the syndrome appears to be somewhat different from that produced by morphine and other agonists. Anxiety, loss of appetite and body weight, tachycardia, chills, increase in body temperature, and abdominal cramps have been noted.
# Chunk 7967
Methadone is not only a potent μ-receptor agonist but its racemic mixture of dand l-methadone isomers can also block both NMDA receptors and monoaminergic reuptake transporters. These nonopioid receptor properties may help explain its ability to relieve difficult-to-treat pain (neuropathic, cancer pain), especially when a previous trial of morphine has failed. In this regard, when analgesic tolerance or intolerable side effects have developed with the use of increasing doses of morphine or hydromorphone, “opioid rotation” to methadone has provided superior analgesia at 10–20% of the morphine-equivalent daily dose. In contrast to its use in suppressing symptoms of opioid withdrawal, use of methadone as an analgesic typically requires administration at intervals of no more than 8 hours. However, given methadone’s highly variable pharmacokinetics and long half-life (25–52 hours), initial administration should be closely monitored to avoid potentially harmful adverse effects, especially respiratory depression. Because methadone is metabolized by CYP2B6 and CYP3A4 isoforms in the liver, inhibition of its metabolic pathway or hepatic dysfunction has also been associated with overdose effects, including respiratory depression or, more rarely, prolonged QT-based cardiac arrhythmias.
# Chunk 7968
As noted above, buprenorphine is a potent and long-acting phenanthrene derivative that is a partial μ-receptor agonist (low intrinsic activity) and an antagonist at the δ and κ receptors and is therefore referred to as a mixed agonist-antagonist. Although buprenorphine is used as an analgesic, it can antagonize the action of more potent μ agonists such as morphine. Buprenorphine also binds to ORL1, the orphanin receptor. Whether this property also participates in opposing μ receptor function is under study. Administration by the sublingual route is preferred to avoid significant first-pass effect. Buprenorphine’s long duration of action is due to its slow dissociation from μ receptors. This property renders its effects resistant to naloxone reversal. Buprenorphine was approved by the FDA in 2002 for the management of opioid dependence, and studies suggest it is as effective as methadone for the management of opioid withdrawal and detoxification in programs that include counseling, psychosocial support, and direction by physicians qualified under the Drug Addiction Treatment Act. In the USA, a special Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) license and training are needed to legally prescribe buprenorphine for addiction. In contrast to methadone, high-dose administration of buprenorphine results in a μ-opioid antagonist action, limiting its properties of analgesia and respiratory depression. However, buprenorphine formulations can still cause serious respiratory depression and death, particularly when extracted and injected intravenously in combination with benzodiazepines or used with other CNS depressants (ie, sedatives, antipsychotics, or alcohol). Buprenorphine is also available combined with naloxone, a pure μ-opioid antagonist (as Suboxone), to help prevent its diversion for illicit intravenous misuse. A slow-release transdermal patch preparation that releases drug over a 1-week period is also available (Butrans). Most recently, the FDA approved an implanted buprenorphine rod (Probuphine) that lasts for 6 months and is meant to deter misuse. Psychotomimetic effects, with hallucinations, nightmares, and anxiety, have been reported after use of drugs with mixed agonist-antagonist actions.
# Chunk 7969
Tramadol is a centrally acting analgesic whose mechanism of action is complex and dependent on ability of the parent drug and its metabolites to block serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake. Because its analgesic effect is only partially antagonized by naloxone, it is thought to depend less on its low-affinity binding to the μ receptor for therapeutic activity. The recommended dosage is 50–100 mg orally four times daily; however, its systemic concentration and analgesic effect are dependent on the enzymatic activity of CYP2D6 polymorphisms. Toxicity includes association with seizures; the drug is relatively contraindicated in patients with a history of epilepsy and for use with other drugs that lower the seizure threshold. Another serious risk is the development of serotonin syndrome, especially if selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor antidepressants are being administered (see Chapter 16). Other adverse effects include nausea and dizziness, but these symptoms typically abate after several days of therapy. No clinically significant effects on respiration or the cardiovascular system have thus far been reported when used as monotherapy. Given the fact that the analgesic action of tramadol is largely independent of μ-receptor action, tramadol may serve as an adjunct with pure opioid agonists in the treatment of chronic neuropathic pain.
# Chunk 7970
Low-dose naloxone (0.04 mg) has an increasing role in the treatment of adverse effects that are commonly associated with intravenous or epidural opioids. Careful titration of the naloxone dosage can often eliminate the itching, nausea, and vomiting while sparing the analgesia. For this purpose, oral naloxone, and modified analogs of naloxone and naltrexone, have been approved by the FDA. These include methylnaltrexone bromide for the treatment of constipation in patients with opioid-induced constipation (OIC) with chronic noncancer pain and late-stage advanced illness and naloxegol and alvimopan for the treatment of postoperative ileus following bowel resection surgery. Methylnaltrexone has a quaternary amine preventing it from crossing the blood-brain barrier. Naloxegol is pegylated naloxone, which limits penetration into the CNS and through peripheral μ-antagonism mitigates constipation. Alvimopan has a high affinity for peripheral μ receptors and does not impair the central effects of μ-opioid agonists. The principal mechanism for the selective therapeutic effect of these agents is peripheral enteric μ-receptor antagonism with minimal CNS penetration.
# Chunk 7971
Drugs of Abuse

Christian Lüscher, MD

A 15-year-old high school student is brought to the emergency department after his parents found him in his room staring at the ceiling and visibly frightened. Earlier that evening, he attended a party but was depressed because his girlfriend just broke up with him. Jerry is failing this year at school and has stopped playing soccer. His parents are also worried about a change in his behavior over the last few months. He has lost interest in school, at times seems depressed, and tells his par-ents that his pocket money is not sufficient. When questioned by the intern, he reports that space-cookies were served at the party. He also says that smoking marijuana has become a habit (three to four joints a week) but denies consumption of alcohol and other drugs. How do you explain the state he was found in? What is the difference between hashish and marijuana? What may be the link to his poor performance at school? Are all drug users necessarily using several drugs?
# Chunk 7972
Exogenous cannabinoids, eg, in marijuana, which when smoked contains thousands of organic and inorganic chemical compounds, exert their pharmacologic effects through active substances including Δ9-tetra-hydrocannabinol (THC), a powerful psychoactive substance. Like opioids, THC causes disinhibition of dopamine neurons, mainly by presynaptic inhibition of GABA neurons in the VTA. The half-life of THC is about 4 hours. The onset of effects of THC after smoking marijuana occurs within minutes and reaches a maximum after 1–2 hours. The most prominent effects are euphoria and relaxation. Users also report feelings of well-being, grandiosity, and altered perception of passage of time. Dose-dependent perceptual changes (eg, visual distortions), drowsiness, diminished coordination, and memory impairment may occur. Cannabinoids can also create a dysphoric state and, in rare cases following the use of very high doses, eg, in hashish, result in visual hallucinations, depersonalization, and frank psychotic episodes. Additional effects of THC, eg, increased appetite, attenuation of nausea, decreased intraocular pressure, and relief of chronic pain, have led to the use of cannabinoids in medical therapeutics. The justification of medicinal use of marijuana was comprehensively examined by the Institute of Medicine (IOM) of the National Academy of Sciences in its 1999 report, Marijuana & Medicine. Today, medical use of botanical marijuana has been legalized in 25 states and the District of Columbia. Nevertheless this continues to be a controversial issue, mainly because of the fear that cannabinoids may serve as a gateway to the consumption of “hard” drugs or cause schizophrenia in individuals with a predisposition.
# Chunk 7973
GHB was first synthesized in 1960 and introduced as a general anesthetic. Because of its narrow safety margin and its addictive potential, it is not available in the USA for this purpose. Sodium oxybate can, however, be prescribed (under restricted access rules) to treat narcolepsy, because GHB decreases daytime sleepiness and episodes of cataplexy through a mechanism unrelated to the reward system. Before causing sedation and coma, GHB causes euphoria, enhanced sensory perceptions, a feeling of social closeness, and amnesia. These properties have made it a popular “club drug” that goes by colorful street names such as “liquid ecstasy,” “grievous bodily harm,” or “date rape drug.” As the latter name suggests, GHB has been used in date rapes because it is odorless and can be readily dissolved in beverages. It is rapidly absorbed after ingestion and reaches a maximal plasma concentration 20–30 minutes after ingestion of a 10–20 mg/kg dose. The elimination half-life is about 30 minutes.
# Chunk 7974
LSD is an ergot alkaloid. After synthesis, blotter paper or sugar cubes are sprinkled with the liquid and allowed to dry. When LSD is swallowed, psychoactive effects typically appear after 30 minutes and last 6–12 hours. During this time, subjects have impaired ability to make rational judgments and understand common dangers, which puts them at risk for accidents and personal injury.
# Chunk 7975
In the peripheral nervous system, cocaine inhibits voltage-gated sodium channels, thus blocking initiation and conduction of action potentials (see Chapter 26). This mechanism, underlying its effect as a local anesthetic, seems responsible for neither the acute rewarding nor the addictive effects. In the central nervous system, cocaine blocks the uptake of dopamine, noradrenaline, and serotonin through their respective transporters. The block of the dopamine transporter (DAT), by increasing dopamine concentrations in the nucleus accumbens, has been implicated in the rewarding effects of cocaine (Figure 32–4). In fact, the rewarding effects of cocaine are abolished in mutant mice with a cocaine-insensitive DAT. The activation of the sympathetic nervous system results mainly from blockage of the norepinephrine transporter (NET) and leads to an acute increase in arterial pressure, tachycardia, and often, ventricular arrhythmias. Users typically lose their appetite, are hyperactive, and sleep little. Cocaine exposure increases the risk for intracranial hemorrhage, ischemic stroke, myocardial infarction, and seizures. Cocaine overdose may lead to hyperthermia, coma, and death. In the 1970s, when crack-cocaine appeared in the USA, it was suggested that the drug is particularly harmful to the fetus in addicted pregnant women. The term “crack-baby” was used to describe a specific syndrome of the newborn, and the mothers faced harsh legal consequences. The follow-up of the children, now adults, does not confirm a drug-specific handicap in cognitive performance. Moreover, in this population, the percentage of drug-users is comparable to controls matched for socioeconomic environment.
# Chunk 7976
SECTION VI DRUGS USED TO TREAT DISEASES OF THE BLOOD, INFLAMMATION, & GOUT

James L. Zehnder, MD*

A 25-year-old woman who has been on a strict vegan diet for the past 2 years presents with increasing numbness and paresthesias in her extremities, generalized weakness, a sore tongue, and gastrointestinal discomfort. Physical examina-tion reveals a pale woman with diminished vibration sen-sation, diminished spinal reflexes, and extensor plantar reflexes (Babinski sign). Examination of her oral cavity reveals atrophic glossitis, in which the tongue appears deep red in color and abnormally smooth and shiny due to atro-phy of the lingual papillae. Laboratory testing reveals a mac-rocytic anemia based on a hematocrit of 30% (normal for women, 37–48%), a hemoglobin concentration of 9.4 g/dL, an erythrocyte mean cell volume (MCV) of 123 fL (nor-mal, 84–99 fL), an erythrocyte mean cell hemoglobin con-centration (MCHC) of 34% (normal, 31–36%), and a low reticulocyte count. Further laboratory testing reveals a normal serum folate concentration and a serum vitamin B12 (cobalamin) concentration of 98 pg/mL (normal, 250–1100 pg/mL). Once megaloblastic anemia was identified, why was it important to measure serum concentrations of both folic acid and cobalamin? Should this patient be treated with oral or parenteral vitamin B12?
# Chunk 7977
Iron deficiency is the most common cause of chronic anemia. Like other forms of chronic anemia, iron deficiency anemia leads to pallor, fatigue, dizziness, exertional dyspnea, and other generalized symptoms of tissue hypoxia. The cardiovascular adaptations to chronic anemia—tachycardia, increased cardiac output, vasodilation—can worsen the condition of patients with underlying cardiovascular disease.
# Chunk 7978
Sickle cell disease is an important genetic cause of hemo-lytic anemia, a form of anemia due to increased erythrocyte destruction, instead of the reduced mature erythrocyte pro-duction seen with iron, folic acid, and vitamin B12 deficiency. Patients with sickle cell disease are homozygous for the aberrant β-hemoglobin S (HbS) allele (substitution of valine for glutamic acid at amino acid 6 of β-globin) or heterozygous for HbS and a second mutated β-hemoglobin gene such as hemoglobin C (HbC) or β-thalassemia. Sickle cell disease has an increased preva-lence in individuals of African descent because the heterozygous trait confers resistance to malaria. In the majority of patients with sickle cell disease, anemia is not the major problem; the anemia is generally well com-pensated even though such individuals have a chronically low hematocrit (20–30%), a low serum hemoglobin level (7–10 g/dL), and an elevated reticulocyte count. Instead, the primary problem is that deoxygenated HbS chains form polymeric structures that dramatically change erythrocyte shape, reduce deformability, and elicit membrane permeability changes that further promote hemoglobin polymerization. Abnormal erythrocytes aggregate in the microvasculature—where oxygen tension is low and hemoglobin is deoxygenated—and cause veno-occlusive dam-age. In the musculoskeletal system, this results in characteristic, extremely severe bone and joint pain. In the cerebral vascular system, it causes ischemic stroke. Damage to the spleen increases the risk of infection, particularly by encapsulated bacteria such as Streptococcus pneumoniae. In the pulmonary system, there is an increased risk of infection and, in adults, an increase in embolism and pulmonary hypertension. Supportive treatment includes analgesics, antibiotics, pneumococcal vaccination, and blood transfusions. In addition, the cancer chemotherapeutic drug hydroxyurea (hydroxycarbamide) reduces veno-occlusive events. It is approved in the United States for treatment of adults with recurrent sickle cell crises and approved in Europe in adults and children with recurrent vaso-occlusive events. As an anticancer drug used in the treatment of chronic and acute myelogenous leukemia, hydroxyurea inhibits ribonucleotide reductase and thereby depletes deoxynucleoside triphosphate and arrests cells in the S phase of the cell cycle (see Chapter 54). In the treatment of sickle cell disease, hydroxyurea acts through poorly defined pathways to increase the production of fetal hemoglobin γ (HbF), which interferes with the polymerization of HbS. Clinical trials have shown that hydroxyurea decreases pain-ful crises in adults and children with severe sickle cell disease. Its adverse effects include hematopoietic depression, gastrointesti-nal effects, and teratogenicity in pregnant women.
# Chunk 7979
TfR RBC production F HCP1 Fe2+ DMT1 Fe Blood Intestinal epithelial cells Tf F F Hgb 4 Spleen, other tissues macrophage TfR Senescent RBC HgbHgb 1 Gut lumen 2 Bone marrow erythrocyte precursor Heme 3 Hepatocyte Erythroferrone DB FP FP Hepcidin Hepcidin FP – – – –
# Chunk 7980
FIGURE 33–1 Absorption, transport, and storage of iron. Intestinal epithelial cells actively absorb inorganic iron via the divalent metal transporter 1 (DMT1) and heme iron via the heme carrier protein 1 (HCP1). Iron that is absorbed or released from absorbed heme iron in the intestine (1) is actively transported into the blood by ferroportin (FP) and stored as ferritin (F). In the blood, iron is transported by transferrin (Tf) to erythroid precursors in the bone marrow for synthesis of hemoglobin (Hgb) in red blood cells (RBC); (2) or to hepatocytes for storage as ferritin (3). The transferrin-iron complex binds to transferrin receptors (TfR) in erythroid precursors and hepatocytes and is internalized. After release of iron, the TfR-Tf complex is recycled to the plasma membrane and Tf is released. Macrophages that phagocytize senescent erythrocytes (RBC) reclaim the iron from the RBC hemoglobin and either export it or store it as ferritin (4). Hepatocytes use several mechanisms to take up iron and store the iron as ferritin. High hepatic iron stores increase hepcidin synthesis, and hepcidin inhibits ferroportin; low hepatocyte iron and increased erythroferrone inhibits hepcidin and enhances iron absorption via ferroportin. Ferrous iron (Fe2+), blue diamonds, squares; ferric iron (Fe3+), red; DB, duodenal cytochrome B; F, ferritin; (Modified and reproduced, with permission, from Trevor A et al: Pharmacology Examination & Board Review, 9th ed. McGraw-Hill, 2010. Copyright © The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.) either increased iron requirements (eg, growing children, pregnant women) or increased losses of iron (eg, menstruating women), iron requirements can exceed normal dietary supplies, and iron deficiency can develop.
# Chunk 7981
A. Indications for the Use of Iron

The only clinical indication for the use of iron preparations is the treatment or prevention of iron deficiency anemia. This manifests as a hypochromic, microcytic anemia in which the erythrocyte mean cell volume (MCV) and the mean cell hemoglobin concentration are low (Table 33–2). Iron deficiency is commonly seen in populations with increased iron requirements. These include infants, especially premature infants; children during rapid growth periods; pregnant and lactating women; and patients with chronic kidney disease who lose erythrocytes at a relatively high rate during hemodialysis and also form them at a high rate as a result of treatment with the erythrocyte growth factor erythropoietin (see below). Inadequate iron absorption also can cause iron deficiency. This is seen after gastrectomy and in patients with severe small bowel disease that results in generalized malabsorption.
# Chunk 7982
TABLE 33–2 Distinguishing features of the nutritional anemias.

MCV, mean cell volume; MCHC, mean cell hemoglobin concentration; SI, serum iron; TIBC, transferrin iron-binding capacity.
# Chunk 7983
Different iron salts provide different amounts of elemental iron, as shown in Table 33–3. In an iron-deficient individual, about 50–100 mg of iron can be incorporated into hemoglobin daily, and about 25% of oral iron given as ferrous salt can be absorbed. Therefore, 200–400 mg of elemental iron should be given daily to correct iron deficiency most rapidly. Patients unable to tolerate such large doses of iron can be given lower daily doses of iron, which results in slower but still complete correction of iron deficiency. Treatment with oral iron should be continued for 3–6 months after correction of the cause of the iron loss. This corrects the anemia and replenishes iron stores.
# Chunk 7984
Common adverse effects of oral iron therapy include nausea, epigastric discomfort, abdominal cramps, constipation, and diarrhea. These effects are usually dose-related and often can be overcome by lowering the daily dose of iron or by taking the tablets immediately after or with meals. Some patients have less severe
# Chunk 7985
Sodium ferric gluconate complex and iron-sucrose complex are alternative parenteral iron preparations. Ferric carboxymaltose is a colloidal iron preparation embedded within a carbohydrate polymer. Ferumoxytol is a superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticle coated with carbohydrate. The carbohydrate shell is removed in the reticuloendothelial system, allowing the iron to be stored as ferritin, or released to transferrin. Ferumoxytol may interfere with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies. Thus if imaging is needed, MRI should be performed prior to ferumoxytol therapy or alternative imaging modality used if needed soon after dosing. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has issued a black box warning about risk of potentially fatal allergic reactions associated with the use of ferumoxytol.
# Chunk 7986
A. Acute Iron Toxicity

Acute iron toxicity is seen almost exclusively in young children who accidentally ingest iron tablets. As few as 10 tablets of any of the commonly available oral iron preparations can be lethal in young children. Adult patients taking oral iron preparations should be instructed to store tablets in child-proof containers out of the reach of children. Children who are poisoned with oral iron experience necrotizing gastroenteritis with vomiting, abdominal pain, and bloody diarrhea followed by shock, lethargy, and dyspnea. Subsequently, improvement is often noted, but this may be followed by severe metabolic acidosis, coma, and death. Urgent treatment is necessary. Whole bowel irrigation (see Chapter 58) should be performed to flush out unabsorbed pills. Deferoxamine, a potent iron-chelating compound, can be given intravenously to bind iron that has already been absorbed and to promote its excretion in urine and feces. Activated charcoal, a highly effective adsorbent for most toxins, does not bind iron and thus is ineffective. Appropriate supportive therapy for gastrointestinal bleeding, metabolic acidosis, and shock must also be provided.
# Chunk 7987
The average American diet contains 5–30 mcg of vitamin B12 daily, 1–5 mcg of which is usually absorbed. The vitamin is avidly stored, primarily in the liver, with an average adult having a total vitamin B12 storage pool of 3000–5000 mcg. Only trace amounts of vitamin B12 are normally lost in urine and stool. Because the normal daily requirements of vitamin B12 are only about 2 mcg, it would take about 5 years for all of the stored vitamin B12 to be exhausted and for megaloblastic anemia to develop if B12 absorption were stopped. Vitamin B12 is absorbed after it complexes with intrinsic factor, a glycoprotein secreted by the parietal cells of the gastric mucosa. Intrinsic factor combines with the vitamin B12 that is liberated from dietary sources in the stomach and duodenum, and the intrinsic factor–vitamin B12 complex is subsequently absorbed in the distal ileum by a highly selective receptor-mediated transport system. Vitamin B12 deficiency in humans most often results from malabsorption of vitamin B12 due either to lack of intrinsic factor or to loss or malfunction of the absorptive mechanism in the distal ileum. Nutritional deficiency is rare but may be seen in strict vegetarians after many years without meat, eggs, or dairy products.
# Chunk 7988
The other reaction that requires vitamin B12 is isomerization of methylmalonyl-CoA to succinyl-CoA by the enzyme methylmalonyl-CoA mutase (Figure 33–2B). In vitamin B12 deficiency, this conversion cannot take place and the substrate, methylmalonyl-CoA, as well as methylmalonic acid accumulate. The increase in serum and urine concentrations of methylmalonic acid can be used to support a diagnosis of vitamin B12 deficiency (Table 33–2). In the past, it was thought that abnormal accumulation of methylmalonyl-CoA causes the neurologic manifestations of vitamin B12 deficiency. However, newer evidence implicates the disruption of the methionine synthesis pathway as the cause of neurologic problems. Whatever the biochemical explanation for neurologic damage, the important point is that administration of folic acid in the setting of vitamin B12 deficiency will not prevent neurologic manifestations even though it will largely correct the anemia caused by the vitamin B12 deficiency.
# Chunk 7989
Vitamin B12 for parenteral injection is available as cyanocobalamin or hydroxocobalamin. Hydroxocobalamin is preferred because it is more highly protein-bound and therefore remains longer in the circulation. Initial therapy should consist of 100–1000 mcg of vitamin B12 intramuscularly daily or every other day for 1–2 weeks to replenish body stores. Maintenance therapy consists of 100–1000 mcg intramuscularly once a month for life. If neurologic abnormalities are present, maintenance therapy injections should be given every 1–2 weeks for 6 months before switching to monthly injections. Oral vitamin B12–intrinsic factor mixtures and liver extracts should not be used to treat vitamin B12 deficiency; however, oral doses of 1000 mcg of vitamin B12 daily are usually sufficient to treat patients with pernicious anemia who refuse or cannot tolerate the injections. After pernicious anemia is in remission following parenteral vitamin B12 therapy, the vitamin can be administered intranasally as a spray or gel.
# Chunk 7990
Starting in January 1998, all products made from enriched grains in the United States and Canada were required to be supplemented with folic acid. These rulings were issued to reduce the incidence of congenital neural tube defects (NTDs). Epidemiologic studies show a strong correlation between maternal folic acid deficiency and the incidence of NTDs such as spina bifida and anencephaly. The requirement for folic acid supplementation is a public health mea-sure aimed at the significant number of women who do not receive prenatal care and are not aware of the importance of adequate folic acid ingestion for preventing birth defects in their infants. Observational studies from countries that supplement grains with folic acid have found that supplementation is associated with a significant (20–25%) reduction in NTD rates. Observational stud-ies also suggest that rates of other types of congenital anomalies (heart and orofacial) have fallen since supplementation began. There may be an added benefit for adults. N5-Methyl-tetrahydrofolate is required for the conversion of homocysteine to methionine (Figure 33–2; Figure 33–3, reaction 1). Impaired synthesis of N5-methyltetrahydrofolate results in elevated serum concentrations of homocysteine. Data from several sources sug-gest a positive correlation between elevated serum homocysteine and occlusive vascular diseases such as ischemic heart disease and stroke. Clinical data suggest that the folate supplementation pro-gram has improved the folate status and reduced the prevalence of hyperhomocysteinemia in a population of middle-aged and older adults who did not use vitamin supplements. There is also evidence that adequate folic acid protects against several cancers, including colorectal, breast, and cervical cancer. Although the potential benefits of supplemental folic acid during pregnancy are compelling, the decision to require folic acid in grains was controversial. As described in the text, ingestion of folic acid can partially or totally correct the anemia caused by vitamin B12 deficiency. However, folic acid supple-mentation does not prevent the potentially irreversible neu-rologic damage caused by vitamin B12 deficiency. People with pernicious anemia and other forms of vitamin B12 deficiency are usually identified because of signs and symptoms of ane-mia, which typically occur before neurologic symptoms. Some opponents of folic acid supplementation were concerned that increased folic acid intake in the general population would mask vitamin B12 deficiency and increase the prevalence of neurologic disease in the elderly population. To put this in perspective, approximately 4000 pregnancies, including 2500 live births, in the United States each year are affected by NTDs. In contrast, it is estimated that more than 10% of the elderly population in the United States, or several million people, are at risk for the neuropsychiatric complications of vitamin B12 defi-ciency. In acknowledgment of this controversy, the FDA kept its requirements for folic acid supplementation at a somewhat low level. There is also concern based on observational and prospective clinical trials that high folic acid levels can increase the risk of some diseases, such as colorectal cancer, for which folic acid may exhibit a bell-shaped curve. Further research is needed to more accurately define the optimal level of folic acid fortification in food and recommendations for folic acid supple-mentation in different populations and age groups.
# Chunk 7991
FIGURE 33–4 The structure of folic acid. (Reproduced, with permission, from Murray RK et al: Harper’s Biochemistry, 24th ed. McGraw-Hill, 1996. Copyright © The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.) present in a wide variety of plant and animal tissues; the richest sources are yeast, liver, kidney, and green vegetables. Normally, 5–20 mg of folates is stored in the liver and other tissues. Folates are excreted in the urine and stool and are also destroyed by catabolism, so serum levels fall within a few days when intake is diminished. Because body stores of folates are relatively low and daily requirements high, folic acid deficiency and megaloblastic anemia can develop within 1–6 months after the intake of folic acid stops, depending on the patient’s nutritional status and the rate of folate utilization.
# Chunk 7992
Parenteral administration of folic acid is rarely necessary, since oral folic acid is well absorbed even in patients with malabsorption syndromes. A dose of 1 mg folic acid orally daily is sufficient to reverse megaloblastic anemia, restore normal serum folate levels, and replenish body stores of folates in almost all patients. Therapy should be continued until the underlying cause of the deficiency is removed or corrected. Therapy may be required indefinitely for patients with malabsorption or dietary inadequacy. Folic acid supplementation to prevent folic acid deficiency should be considered in high-risk patients, including pregnant women, patients with alcohol dependence, hemolytic anemia, liver disease, or certain skin diseases, and patients on renal dialysis.
# Chunk 7993
Erythropoietin, a 34to 39-kDa glycoprotein, was the first human hematopoietic growth factor to be isolated. It was originally purified from the urine of patients with severe anemia. Recombinant human erythropoietin (rHuEPO, epoetin alfa) is produced in a mammalian cell expression system. After intravenous administration, erythropoietin has a serum half-life of 4–13 hours in patients with chronic renal failure. It is not cleared by dialysis. It is measured in international units (IU). Darbepoetin alfa is a modified form of erythropoietin that is more heavily glycosylated as a result of changes in amino acids. Darbepoetin alfa has a twofold to threefold longer half-life than epoetin alfa. Methoxy polyethylene glycol–epoetin beta is an isoform of erythropoietin covalently attached to a long polyethylene glycol polymer. This long-lived recombinant product is administered as a single intravenous or subcutaneous dose at 2-week or monthly intervals, whereas epoetin alfa is generally administered three times a week and darbepoetin is administered weekly.
# Chunk 7994
Normally, an inverse relationship exists between the hematocrit or hemoglobin level and the serum erythropoietin level. Nonanemic individuals have serum erythropoietin levels of less than 20 IU/L. As the hematocrit and hemoglobin levels fall and anemia becomes more severe, the serum erythropoietin level rises exponentially. Patients with moderately severe anemia usually have erythropoietin levels in the 100–500 IU/L range, and patients with severe anemia may have levels of thousands of IU/L. The most important exception to this inverse relationship is in the anemia of chronic renal failure. In patients with renal disease, erythropoietin levels are usually low because the kidneys cannot produce the growth factor. These are the patients most likely to respond to treatment with exogenous erythropoietin. In most primary bone marrow disorders (aplastic anemia, leukemias, myeloproliferative and myelodysplastic disorders, etc) and most nutritional and secondary anemias, endogenous erythropoietin levels are high, so there is less likelihood of a response to exogenous erythropoietin (but see below).
# Chunk 7995
The availability of erythropoiesis-stimulating agents (ESAs) has had a significant positive impact for patients with several types of anemia (Table 33–4). The ESAs consistently improve the hematocrit and hemoglobin level, often eliminate the need for transfusions, and reliably improve quality of life indices. The ESAs are used routinely in patients with anemia secondary to chronic kidney disease. In patients treated with an ESA, an increase in reticulocyte count is usually observed in about 10 days and an increase in hematocrit and hemoglobin levels in 2–6 weeks. Dosages of ESAs are adjusted to maintain a target hemoglobin up to, but not exceeding, 10–12 g/dL. To support the increased erythropoiesis, nearly all patients with chronic kidney disease require oral or parenteral iron supplementation. Folate supplementation may also be necessary in some patients.
# Chunk 7996
In selected patients, erythropoietin is also used to reduce the need for red blood cell transfusion in patients undergoing myelosuppressive cancer chemotherapy who have a hemoglobin level of less than 10 g/dL, and for selected patients with low-risk myelodysplastic syndromes and anemia requiring red blood cell transfusion. Patients who have disproportionately low serum erythropoietin levels for their degree of anemia are most likely to respond to treatment. Patients with endogenous erythropoietin levels of less than 100 IU/L have the best chance of response, although patients with erythropoietin levels between 100 and 500 IU/L respond occasionally. Methoxy polyethylene glycol– epoetin beta should not be used for treatment of anemia caused by cancer chemotherapy because a clinical trial found significantly more deaths among patients receiving this form of erythropoietin.
# Chunk 7997
G-CSF and GM-CSF, the two myeloid growth factors currently available for clinical use, were originally purified from cultured human cell lines (Table 33–4). Recombinant human G-CSF (rHuG-CSF; filgrastim) is produced in a bacterial expression system. It is a nonglycosylated peptide of 175 amino acids, with a molecular weight of 18 kDa. Tbo-filgastrim is similar to filgrastim, with minor structural differences and equivalent activity. Recombinant human GM-CSF (rHuGM-CSF; sargramostim) is produced in a yeast expression system. It is a partially glycosylated peptide of 127 amino acids, comprising three molecular species with molecular weights of 15,500, 15,800, and 19,500. These preparations have serum half-lives of 2–7 hours after intravenous or subcutaneous administration. Pegfilgrastim, a covalent conjugation product of filgrastim and a form of polyethylene glycol, has a much longer serum half-life than recombinant G-CSF, and it can be injected once per myelosuppressive chemotherapy cycle instead of daily for several days. Lenograstim, used widely in Europe, is a glycosylated form of recombinant G-CSF.
# Chunk 7998
Like G-CSF and pegfilgrastim, GM-CSF also reduces the duration of neutropenia after cytotoxic chemotherapy. It has been more difficult to show that GM-CSF reduces the incidence of febrile neutropenia, probably because GM-CSF itself can induce fever. In the treatment of chemotherapy-induced neutropenia, G-CSF 5 mcg/kg daily or GM-CSF 250 mcg/m2 daily is usually started within 24–72 hours after completing chemotherapy and is continued until the absolute neutrophil count is greater than 10,000 cells/μL. Pegfilgrastim is given as a single dose of 6 mg.
# Chunk 7999
G-CSF is the cytokine most commonly used for PBSC mobilization because of its increased efficacy and reduced toxicity compared with GM-CSF. To mobilize stem cells for autologous transplantation, donors are given 5–10 mcg/kg daily subcutaneously for 4 days. On the fifth day, they undergo leukapheresis. The success of PBSC transplantation depends on transfusion of adequate numbers of stem cells. CD34, an antigen present on early progenitor cells and absent from later, committed, cells, is used as a marker for the requisite stem cells. The goal is to infuse at least 5 × 106 CD34 cells/kg; this number of CD34 cells usually results in prompt and durable engraftment of all cell lineages. It may take several separate leukaphereses to collect enough CD34 cells, especially from older patients and patients who have been exposed to radiation therapy or chemotherapy.
# Chunk 8000
For patients with multiple myeloma or non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma who respond suboptimally to G-CSF alone, the novel hematopoietic stem cell mobilizer plerixafor can be added to G-CSF. Plerixafor is a bicyclam molecule originally developed as an anti-HIV drug because of its ability to inhibit the CXC chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4), a co-receptor for HIV entry into CD4+ T lymphocytes (see Chapter 49). Early clinical trials of plerixafor revealed a remarkable ability to increase CD34 cells in peripheral blood. Plerixafor mobilizes CD34 cells by preventing chemokine stromal cell-derived factor-1α (CXCL12) from binding to CXCR4 and directing the CD34 cells to “home” to the bone marrow. Plerixafor is administered by subcutaneous injection after 4 days of G-CSF treatment and 11 hours prior to leukapheresis; it can be used with G-CSF for up to 4 continuous days. Plerixafor is eliminated primarily by the renal route and must be dose-adjusted for patients with renal impairment. The drug is well tolerated; the most common adverse effects associated with its use are injection site reactions, gastrointestinal disturbances, dizziness, fatigue, and headache.
# Chunk 8001
Romiplostim is a thrombopoietin agonist peptide covalently linked to antibody fragments that serve to extend the peptide’s half-life. The Mpl-binding peptide has no sequence homology with human thrombopoietin, and there is no evidence in animal or human studies that the Mpl-binding peptide or romiplostim induces antibodies to thrombopoietin. After subcutaneous administration, romiplostim is eliminated by the reticuloendothelial system with an average half-life of 3–4 days. Its half-life is inversely related to the serum platelet count; it has a longer half-life in patients with thrombocytopenia and a shorter half-life in patients whose platelet counts have recovered to normal levels. Romiplostim is approved for therapy of patients with chronic immune thrombocytopenia who have had an inadequate response to other therapies.
# Chunk 8002
Romiplostim has high affinity for the human Mpl receptor. Eltrombopag interacts with the transmembrane domain of the Mpl receptor. Both drugs induce signaling through the Mpl receptor pathway and cause a dose-dependent increase in platelet count. Romiplostim is administered once weekly by subcutaneous injection. Eltrombopag is an oral drug. For both drugs, peak platelet count responses are observed in approximately 2 weeks.
# Chunk 8003
Darbepoetin alfa: Long-acting glycosylated form administered weekly

Methoxy polyethylene glycol-epoetin beta: Long-acting form administered 1–2 times per month • Toxicity: Hypertension, thrombotic complications, and, very rarely, pure red cell aplasia • to reduce the risk of serious cerebrovascular events, hemoglobin levels should be maintained <12 g/dL
# Chunk 8004
Drugs Used in Disorders of Coagulation

James L. Zehnder, MD and edema and is tender to touch. Oxygen saturation by fingertip pulse oximeter while breathing room air is 87% (normal > 90%). Ultrasound reveals a deep vein thrombosis in the left lower extremity; chest computed tomography scan confirms the presence of pulmonary emboli. Laboratory blood tests indicate elevated d-dimer levels. What therapy is indicated acutely? What are the long-term therapy options? How long should she be treated? Should this indi-vidual use oral contraceptives? A 25-year-old woman presents to the emergency depart-ment complaining of acute onset of shortness of breath and pleuritic pain. She had been in her usual state of health until 2 days prior when she noted that her left leg was swollen and red. Her only medication was oral contraceptives. Family history was significant for a history of “blood clots” in mul-tiple members of the maternal side of her family. Physical examination demonstrates an anxious woman with stable vital signs. The left lower extremity demonstrates erythema
# Chunk 8005
Prophylactic enoxaparin is given subcutaneously in a dosage of 30 mg twice daily or 40 mg once daily. Full-dose enoxaparin therapy is 1 mg/kg subcutaneously every 12 hours. This corresponds to a therapeutic anti-factor Xa level of 0.5–1 unit/mL. Selected patients may be treated with enoxaparin 1.5 mg/kg once a day, with a target anti-Xa level of 1.5 units/mL.
# Chunk 8006
Warfarin is generally administered as the sodium salt and has 100% oral bioavailability. Over 99% of racemic warfarin is bound to plasma albumin, which may contribute to its small volume of distribution (the albumin space), its long half-life in plasma (36 hours), and the lack of urinary excretion of unchanged drug. Warfarin used clinically is a racemic mixture composed of equal amounts of two enantiomorphs. The levorotatory S-warfarin is four times more potent than the dextrorotatory R-warfarin. This observation is useful in understanding the stereoselective nature of several drug interactions involving warfarin.
# Chunk 8007
Rivaroxaban has high oral bioavailability when taken with food. Following an oral dose, the peak plasma level is achieved within 2–4 hours; the drug is extensively protein-bound. It is a substrate for the cytochrome P450 system and the P-glycoprotein transporter. Drugs inhibiting both CYP3A4 and P-glycoprotein (eg, ketoconazole) result in increased rivaroxaban effect. One third of the drug is excreted unchanged in the urine and the remainder is metabolized and excreted in the urine and feces. The drug half-life is 5–9 hours in patients age 20–45 years and is increased in the elderly and in those with impaired renal or hepatic function.
# Chunk 8008
Apixaban has an oral bioavailability of 50% and prolonged absorption, resulting in a half-life of 12 hours with repeat dosing. The drug is a substrate of the cytochrome P450 system and P-glycoprotein and is excreted in the urine and feces. As with rivaroxaban, drugs inhibiting both CYP3A4 and P-glycoprotein, as well as impairment of renal or hepatic function, result in increased drug effect.
# Chunk 8009
Edoxaban is a once-daily Xa inhibitor with a 62% oral bioavailability. Peak drug concentrations occur 1–2 hours after dosage and are not affected by food. The drug half-life is 10–14 hours. Edoxaban does not induce CYP450 enzymes. No dose reduction is required with concurrent use of P-glycoprotein inhibitors. Edoxaban is primarily excreted unchanged in the urine.
# Chunk 8010
Rivaroxaban is approved for prevention of embolic stroke in patients with atrial fibrillation without valvular heart disease, prevention of venous thromboembolism following hip or knee surgery, and treatment of venous thromboembolic disease (VTE). The prophylactic dosage is 10 mg orally per day for 35 days for hip replacement or 12 days for knee replacement. For treatment of DVT/PE the dosage is 15 mg twice daily for 3 weeks followed by 20 mg/d. Depending on clinical presentation and risk factors, patients with VTE are treated for 3–6 months; rivaroxaban is also approved for prolonged therapy in selected patients to reduce recurrence risk at the treatment dose. Apixaban is approved for prevention of stroke in nonvalvular atrial fibrillation, for prevention of VTE following hip or knee surgery, and for treatment and long-term prevention of VTE. The dosage for atrial fibrillation is 5 mg twice daily; the dose for VTE is 10 mg twice a day for the first week, followed by 5 mg twice a day. The prophylactic dose for prevention of VTE following hip or knee surgery or long-term prevention of VTE following initial therapy is 2.5 mg twice a day. The recommended duration of therapy in hip and knee replacement is the same as for rivaroxaban. Edoxaban is approved for prevention of stroke in nonvalvular atrial fibrillation, and to treat VTE following treatment with heparin or LMWH for 5–10 days. The dose for atrial fibrillation and VTE treatment is 60 mg once daily. For patients with creatinine clearance of 15–50 mL/min or those taking concomitant P-glycoprotein inhibitors, the dose is
# Chunk 8011
Dabigatran etexilate mesylate is the only oral direct thrombin inhibitor approved by the FDA. Dabigatran is approved for reduction in risk of stroke and systemic embolism with nonvalvular atrial fibrillation, treatment of VTE following 5–7 days of initial heparin or LMWH therapy, reduction of the risk of recurrent VTE, and VTE prophylaxis following hip or knee replacement surgery.
# Chunk 8012
Thrombolytic therapy in the management of acute myocardial infarction requires careful patient selection, the use of a specific thrombolytic agent, and the benefit of adjuvant therapy. Streptokinase is administered by intravenous infusion of a loading dose of 250,000 units, followed by 100,000 units/h for 24–72 hours. Patients with antistreptococcal antibodies can develop fever, allergic reactions, and therapeutic resistance. Urokinase requires a loading dose of 300,000 units given over 10 minutes and a maintenance dose of 300,000 units/h for 12 hours. Alteplase (t-PA) is given as a 15-mg bolus followed by 0.75 mg/kg (up to 50 mg) over 30 minutes and then 0.5 mg/kg (up to 35 mg) over 60 minutes. Reteplase is given as two 10-unit bolus injections, the second administered 30 minutes after the first injection.
# Chunk 8013
Vitamins K1 and K2 require bile salts for absorption from the intestinal tract. Vitamin K1 is available clinically in oral and parenteral forms. Onset of effect is delayed for 6 hours but the effect is complete by 24 hours when treating depression of prothrombin activity caused by excess warfarin or vitamin K deficiency. Intravenous administration of vitamin K1 should be slow, as rapid infusion can produce dyspnea, chest and back pain, and even death. Vitamin K repletion is best achieved with intravenous or oral administration because its bioavailability after subcutaneous administration is erratic. Vitamin K1 is currently administered to all newborns to prevent the hemorrhagic disease of vitamin K deficiency, which is especially common in premature infants.
# Chunk 8014
Deficiencies in plasma coagulation factors can cause bleeding (Table 34–3). Spontaneous bleeding occurs when factor activity is less than 5–10% of normal. Factor VIII deficiency (classic hemophilia, or hemophilia A) and factor IX deficiency (Christmas disease, or hemophilia B) account for most of the heritable coagulation defects. Concentrated plasma fractions and recombinant protein preparations are available for the treatment of these deficiencies. Administration of plasma-derived, heator detergent-treated factor concentrates and recombinant factor concentrates are the standard treatments for prevention and treatment of bleeding associated with hemophilia. Lyophilized factor VIII concentrates are prepared from large pools of plasma. Transmission of viral diseases such as hepatitis B and C and HIV is reduced or eliminated by pasteurization and by extraction of plasma with solvents and detergents. However, this treatment does not remove other potential causes of transmissible diseases such as prions. For this reason, recombinant clotting factor preparations are recommended whenever possible for factor replacement. The best use of these therapeutic materials requires diagnostic specificity of the deficient factor and quantitation of its activity in plasma. Recently, several longer-acting factor VIII and IX preparations have been developed. Eloctate is a factor VIII-Fc domain conjugate that prolongs the factor VIII half-life and allows twice-weekly dosing in many cases. Idelvion is a factor IX-albumin conjugate with a half-life of 100 hours (native factor IX has a half-life of 16 hours) and is FDA-approved for prophylaxis or treatment of bleeding in hemophilia B patients, offering the possibility of once-weekly
# Chunk 8015
Factor VIIa initiates activation of the clotting pathway by activating factor IX and factor X in association with tissue factor (see Figure 34–2). The drug is given by bolus injection. For hemophilia A or B with inhibitors and bleeding, the dosage is 90 mg/kg every 2 hours until hemostasis is achieved, and then continued at 3to 6-hour intervals until stable. For congenital factor VII deficiency, the recommended dosage is 15–30 mg/kg every 4–6 hours until hemostasis is achieved.
# Chunk 8016
FIBRINOLYTIC INHIBITORS: AMINOCAPROIC ACID

Aminocaproic acid (EACA), which is chemically similar to the amino acid lysine, is a synthetic inhibitor of fibrinolysis. It competitively inhibits plasminogen activation (Figure 34–3). It is rapidly absorbed orally and is cleared from the body by the kidney. The usual oral dosage of EACA is 6 g four times a day. When the drug is administered intravenously, a 5-g loading dose should be infused over 30 minutes to avoid hypotension. Tranexamic acid is an analog of aminocaproic acid and has the same properties. It is administered orally with a 15-mg/kg loading dose followed by 30 mg/kg every 6 hours.
# Chunk 8017
This patient has pulmonary embolism secondary to a deep venous thrombosis (DVT). Options for treating this patient include unfractionated heparin or low-molecular-weight heparin followed by warfarin, with INR goal of 2–3; parenteral anticoagulation for 5–7 days followed by edoxaban; or rivaroxaban, apixaban, or dabigatran alone without monitoring. As this situation can be considered a provoked event given the history of oral contraceptive use, the recommended duration of therapy would be 3–6 months depending on individual risk factors and preferences. The patient should be counseled to use an alternative form of contraception.
# Chunk 8018
Mary J. Malloy, MD, & John P. Kane, MD, PhD

A 42-year-old woman has heterozygous familial hyper-cholesterolemia (HeFH) but is otherwise well and has no symptoms of coronary or peripheral vascular disease. A carotid ultrasound was normal. Her mother had a myo-cardial infarction at age 51 and had no known risk factors other than her presumed HeFH. The patient also has ele-vated lipoprotein (a) at 2.5 times normal and low HDL-C (43 mg/dL). She developed muscle symptoms with each of 3 statins (atorvastatin, rosuvastatin, and simvastatin) so they were discontinued although she did not develop elevated levels of creatine kinase. Her untreated LDL-C is 235 mg/dL and triglycerides 125 mg/dL. Her LDL-C goal for primary prevention of arteriosclerotic vascular disease is in the 70-mg/dL range because of her multiple lipopro-tein risk factors and her mother’s history of premature coronary artery disease. She has no other risk factors and her diet and exercise habits are excellent. How would you manage this patient?
# Chunk 8019
Chylomicrons are not present in the serum of normal individuals who have fasted 10 hours. The recessive traits of deficiency of LPL, its cofactor apo C-II, the LMF1 or GPIHBP1 proteins, or ANGPTL4 and Apo A-V, are usually associated with severe lipemia (2000 mg/dL of triglycerides or higher when the patient is consuming a typical American diet). These disorders might not be diagnosed until an attack of acute pancreatitis occurs. Patients may have eruptive xanthomas, hepatosplenomegaly, hypersplenism, and lipid-laden foam cells in bone marrow, liver, and spleen. The lipemia is aggravated by estrogens because they stimulate VLDL production, and pregnancy may cause marked increases in triglycerides despite strict dietary control. Although these patients have a predominant chylomicronemia, they may also have moderately elevated VLDL, presenting with a pattern called mixed lipemia (fasting chylomicronemia and elevated VLDL). Deficiency of lipolytic activity can be diagnosed after intravenous injection of heparin. A presumptive diagnosis is made by demonstrating a pronounced decrease in triglycerides 72 hours after elimination of daily dietary fat. Marked restriction of total dietary fat and abstention from alcohol are the basis of effective long-term treatment. Niacin, a fibrate, or marine omega-3 fatty acids may be of some benefit if VLDL levels are increased. Apo C-III antisense is a potential adjunct to therapy.
# Chunk 8020
General recommendations include limiting total calories from fat to 20–25% of daily intake, saturated fats to less than 7%, and cholesterol to less than 200 mg/d. Reductions in serum cholesterol range from 10% to 20% on this regimen. Use of complex carbohydrates and fiber is recommended, and cis-monounsaturated fats should predominate. Weight reduction, caloric restriction, and avoidance of alcohol are especially important for patients with elevated triglycerides.
# Chunk 8021
Lovastatin and simvastatin are inactive lactone prodrugs that are hydrolyzed in the gastrointestinal tract to the active β-hydroxyl derivatives, whereas pravastatin has an open, active lactone ring. Atorvastatin, fluvastatin, and rosuvastatin are fluorine-containing congeners that are active as given. Absorption of the ingested doses of the reductase inhibitors varies from 40% to 75% with the exception of fluvastatin, which is almost completely absorbed. All have high first-pass extraction by the liver. Most of the absorbed dose is excreted in the bile; 5–20% is excreted in the urine. Plasma half-lives of these drugs range from 1 to 3 hours except for atorvastatin (14 hours), pitavastatin (12 hours), and rosuvastatin (19 hours).
# Chunk 8022
Because cholesterol synthesis occurs predominantly at night, reductase inhibitors—except atorvastatin, rosuvastatin, and pitavastatin—should be given in the evening. Absorption generally (with the exception of pravastatin and pitavastatin) is enhanced by food. Daily doses of lovastatin vary from 10 to 80 mg. Pravastatin is nearly as potent on a mass basis as lovastatin with a maximum recommended daily dose of 80 mg. Simvastatin is twice as potent and is given in doses of 5–80 mg daily. Because of increased risk of myopathy with the 80-mg/d dose, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) issued labeling for scaled dosing of simvastatin and combined ezetimibe/simvastatin in 2011. Pitavastatin is given in doses of 1–4 mg daily. Fluvastatin appears to be about half as potent as lovastatin on a mass basis and is given in doses of 10–80 mg daily. Atorvastatin is given in doses of 10–80 mg/d, and rosuvastatin at 5–40 mg/d. The dose-response curves of pravastatin and especially of fluvastatin tend to level off in the upper part of the dosage range in patients with moderate to severe hypercholesterolemia. Those of other statins are somewhat more linear.
# Chunk 8023
Conversely, drugs such as phenytoin, griseofulvin, barbiturates, rifampin, and thiazolidinediones increase expression of CYP3A4 and can reduce the plasma concentrations of the 3A4-dependent reductase inhibitors. Inhibitors of CYP2C9 such as ketoconazole and its congeners, metronidazole, sulfinpyrazone, amiodarone, and cimetidine may increase plasma levels of fluvastatin and rosuvastatin. Pravastatin and rosuvastatin appear to be the statins of choice for use with verapamil, the ketoconazole group of antifungal agents, macrolides, and cyclosporine. Doses should be kept low and the patient monitored frequently. Plasma levels of lovastatin, simvastatin, and atorvastatin may be elevated in patients ingesting more than 1 liter of grapefruit juice daily. All statins undergo glycosylation, thus creating an interaction with gemfibrozil.
# Chunk 8024
In its role as a vitamin, niacin (vitamin B3) is converted in the body to the amide, which is incorporated into niacinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD), which in turn has a critical role in energy metabolism. In pharmacologic doses, it has important effects on lipid metabolism that are poorly understood. It is excreted in the urine unmodified and as several metabolites. One, N-methyl nicotinamide, creates a draft on methyl groups that can occasionally result in erythrocyte macrocytosis, similar to deficiency of folate or vitamin B12.
# Chunk 8025
Most persons experience a harmless cutaneous vasodilation and sensation of warmth after each dose when niacin is started or the dose increased. Taking 81–325 mg of aspirin 30 minutes beforehand blunts this prostaglandin-mediated effect. Naproxen, 220 mg once daily, also mitigates the flush. Tachyphylaxis to flushing usually occurs within a few days at doses above 1.5–3 g daily. Patients should be warned to expect the flush and understand that it is a harmless side effect. Pruritus, rashes, dry skin or mucous membranes, and acanthosis nigricans have been reported. The latter requires the discontinuance of niacin because of its association with insulin resistance. Some patients experience nausea and abdominal discomfort. Many can continue the drug at reduced dosage, with inhibitors of gastric acid secretion or with antacids not containing aluminum. Niacin should be avoided in patients with significant peptic disease.
# Chunk 8026
Common complaints are constipation and bloating, usually relieved by increasing dietary fiber. Resins should be avoided in patients with diverticulitis. Heartburn and diarrhea are occasionally reported. In patients who have preexisting bowel disease or cholestasis, steatorrhea may occur. Malabsorption of vitamin K occurs rarely, leading to hypoprothrombinemia. Prothrombin time should be measured frequently in patients who are taking resins and anticoagulants. Malabsorption of folic acid has been reported rarely. Increased formation of gallstones, particularly in obese persons, was an anticipated adverse effect but has rarely occurred in practice.
# Chunk 8027
Microsomal triglyceride transfer protein (MTP) plays an essential role in the addition of triglycerides to nascent VLDL in liver, and to chylomicrons in the intestine. Its inhibition decreases VLDL secretion and consequently the accumulation of LDL in plasma. An MTP inhibitor, lomitapide, is available but is currently restricted to patients with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia. It causes accumulation of triglycerides in the liver in some individuals. Elevations in transaminases can occur. Patients must maintain a low fat diet to avoid steatorrhea and should take steps to minimize deficiency of essential fat-soluble nutrients. Lomitapide is given orally in gradually increasing doses of 5-to 60-mg capsules once daily 2 hours after the evening meal. It is available only through a restricted (REMS) program for patients with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia.
# Chunk 8028
Development of inhibitors of proprotein convertase subtilisin/ kexin type 9 (PCSK9) followed on the observation that loss of function mutations result in very low levels of LDL and no apparent morbidity. Therapeutic agents currently available in this class are humanized antibodies to PCSK9 (evolocumab, alirocumab). LDL reductions of up to 70% at the highest doses have been achieved with these agents when administered subcutaneously every two weeks. (Evolocumab can also be given monthly at a higher dose). Triglycerides and apo B-100 are reduced, and Lp(a) levels decrease by about 25%. Rarely, hypersensitivity reactions have occurred. Local reactions at the injection site, upper respiratory and flu-like symptoms have been observed more frequently. Use of these agents is restricted to patients who have familial hypercholesterolemia or clinical atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease who require additional reduction of LDL. They are given with diet and maximal tolerated statin and/or ezetimibe. Development of small molecules and antisense oligonucleotides to inhibit PCSK9 is underway. Studies of PCSK9 inhibition should be approached with caution because of its established role in normal cell biology. These agents are very expensive.
# Chunk 8029
Ahmed A. Negm, MD, & Daniel E. Furst, MD twice daily. His symptoms are reduced at this dosage, but he com-plains of significant heartburn that is not controlled by antacids. He is then switched to celecoxib, 200 mg twice daily, and on this regimen his joint symptoms and heartburn resolve. Two years later, he returns with increased joint symptoms. His hands, wrists, elbows, feet, and knees are all now involved and appear swollen, warm, and tender. What therapeutic options should be considered at this time? What are the possible complications? A 48-year-old man presents with complaints of bilateral morning stiffness in his wrists and knees and pain in these joints on exercise. On physical examination, the joints are slightly swollen. The rest of the examination is unremarkable. His laboratory findings are also negative except for slight anemia, elevated erythrocyte sedi-mentation rate, and positive rheumatoid factor. With the diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis, he is started on a regimen of naproxen, 220 mg twice daily. After 1 week, the dosage is increased to 440 mg
# Chunk 8030
Several NSAIDs (including aspirin) reduce the incidence of colon cancer when taken chronically. Several large epidemiologic studies have shown a 50% reduction in relative risk for this neoplasm when the drugs are taken for 5 years or longer. The mechanism for this protective effect is unclear.
# Chunk 8031
Although not all NSAIDs are approved by the FDA for the whole range of rheumatic diseases, most are probably effective in RA, seronegative spondyloarthropathies (SpA, eg, PsA and arthritis associated with inflammatory bowel disease), OA, localized musculoskeletal syndromes (eg, sprains and strains, low back pain), and gout (except tolmetin, which appears to be ineffective in gout).
# Chunk 8032
1.

Pharmacokinetics: Salicylic acid is a simple organic acid with a pKa of 3.0. Aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid; ASA) has a pKa of 3.5 (see Table 1–3). Aspirin is absorbed as such and is rapidly hydrolyzed (serum half-life 15 minutes) to acetic acid and salicylate by esterases in tissue and blood (Figure 36–3). Salicylate is nonlinearly bound to albumin. Alkalinization of the urine increases the rate of excretion of free salicylate and its water-soluble conjugates.
# Chunk 8033
Although diflunisal is derived from salicylic acid, it is not metabolized to salicylic acid or salicylate. It undergoes an enterohepatic cycle with reabsorption of its glucuronide metabolite followed by cleavage of the glucuronide to again release the active moiety. Diflunisal is subject to capacity-limited metabolism, with serum half-lives at various dosages approximating that of salicylates (Table 36–1). In RA the recommended dose is 500–1000 mg daily in two divided doses. It is rarely used today.
# Chunk 8034
Nabumetone is the only nonacid NSAID in current use; it is given as a ketone prodrug (Figure 36–1) and resembles naproxen in structure. Its half-life of more than 24 hours (Table 36–1) permits once-daily dosing, and the drug does not appear to undergo enterohepatic circulation. Renal impairment results in a doubling of its half-life and a 30% increase in the area under the curve.
# Chunk 8035
Piroxicam, an oxicam (Figure 36–1), is a nonselective COX inhibitor that at high concentrations also inhibits polymorphonuclear leukocyte migration, decreases oxygen radical production, and inhibits lymphocyte function. Its long half-life (Table 36–1) permits once-daily dosing.
# Chunk 8036
RA is a progressive immunologic disease that causes significant systemic effects, shortens life, and reduces mobility and quality of life. Interest has centered on finding treatments that might arrest—or at least slow—this progression by modifying the disease itself. The effects of disease-modifying therapies may take 2 weeks to 6 months to become clinically evident.
# Chunk 8037
2.

Pharmacokinetics: The recommended dose of abatacept for the treatment of adult patients with RA is three intravenous infusion “induction” doses (day 0, week 2, and week 4), followed by monthly infusions. The dose is based on body weight; patients weighing less than 60 kg receiving 500 mg, those 60–100 kg receiving 750 mg, and those more than 100 kg receiving 1000 mg. Abatacept is also available as a subcutaneous formulation and is given as 125 mg subcutaneously once weekly.
# Chunk 8038
JIA can also be treated with abatacept with an induction schedule at day 0, week 2, and week 4, followed by intravenous infusion every 4 weeks. The recommended dose for patients 6–17 years of age and weighing less than 75 kg is 10 mg/kg, while those weighing 75 kg or more follow the adult intravenous doses to a maximum not to exceed 1000 mg. The terminal serum half-life is 13–16 days. Co-administration with methotrexate, NSAIDs, and corticosteroids does not influence abatacept clearance.
# Chunk 8039
2.

Pharmacokinetics: Antimalarials are rapidly absorbed and 50% protein-bound in the plasma. They are very extensively tissue-bound, particularly in melanin-containing tissues such as the eyes. The drugs are deaminated in the liver and have blood elimination half-lives of up to 45 days.
# Chunk 8040
2.

Pharmacokinetics: Methotrexate can be administered either orally or parentally (SC or IM). The drug is approximately 70% absorbed after oral administration (see Chapter 54). Although variable, bioavailability decreased further in one study when more than 25 mg weekly MTX was used. MTX is metabolized to a less active hydroxylated product. Both the parent compound and the metabolite are polyglutamated within cells where they stay for prolonged periods. Methotrexate’s serum half-life is usually only 6–9 hours. Hydroxychloroquine can reduce the clearance or increase the tubular reabsorption of methotrexate. Methotrexate is excreted principally in the urine, but up to 30% may be excreted in bile.
# Chunk 8041
4.

Adverse Effects: Nausea and mucosal ulcers are the most common toxicities. Additionally, many other side effects such as leukopenia, anemia, stomatitis, GI ulcerations, and alopecia are probably the result of inhibiting cellular proliferation. Progressive dose-related hepatotoxicity in the form of enzyme elevation occurs frequently, but cirrhosis is rare (<1%). Liver toxicity is not related to serum methotrexate concentrations. A rare hypersensitivity-like lung reaction with acute shortness of breath has been documented, as have pseudo-lymphomatous reactions. The incidence of GI and liver function test abnormalities can be reduced by the use of leucovorin 24 hours after each weekly dose or by the use of folic acid, although this may decrease the efficacy of the methotrexate by about 10%. This drug is contraindicated in pregnancy.
# Chunk 8042
2.

Pharmacokinetics: Rituximab is given as two intravenous infusions of 1000 mg, separated by 2 weeks. It may be repeated every 6–9 months, as needed. Repeated courses remain effective. Pretreatment with acetaminophen, an antihistamine, and intravenous glucocorticoids (usually 100 mg of methylprednisolone) given 30 minutes prior to infusion decreases the incidence and severity of infusion reactions.
# Chunk 8043
4.

Adverse Effects: About 30% of patients develop rash with the first 1000-mg treatment; this incidence decreases to about 10% with the second infusion and progressively decreases with each course of therapy thereafter. These rashes do not usually require discontinuation of therapy, although an urticarial or anaphylactoid reaction precludes further therapy. Immunoglobulins (particularly IgG and IgM) may decrease with repeated courses of therapy and infections can occur, although they do not seem directly associated with the decreases in immunoglobulins. Serious, and sometimes fatal, bacterial, fungal, and viral infections are reported for up to 1 year of the last dose of rituximab, and patients with severe and active infections should not receive rituximab. Rituximab is associated with reactivation of hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection, which requires monitoring before and several months after the initiation of the treatment. Rituximab has not been associated with either activation of tuberculosis or the occurrence of lymphomas or other tumors (see Chapter 55). Fatal mucocutaneous reactions have been reported in patients receiving rituximab. Different cytopenias can occur, which require complete blood cell monitoring every 2–4 months in RA patients. Other adverse effects, such as cardiovascular events, are rare.
# Chunk 8044
2.

Pharmacokinetics: Only 10–20% of orally administered sulfasalazine is absorbed, although a fraction undergoes enterohepatic recirculation into the bowel where it is reduced by intestinal bacteria to liberate sulfapyridine and 5-aminosalicylic acid (see Figure 62–8). Sulfapyridine is well absorbed while 5-aminosalicylic acid remains unabsorbed. Some sulfasalazine is excreted unchanged in the urine whereas sulfapyridine is excreted after hepatic acetylation and hydroxylation. Sulfasalazine’s half-life is 6–17 hours.
# Chunk 8045
2. Pharmacokinetics: Adalimumab is given subcutaneously and has a half-life of 10–20 days. Its clearance is decreased by more than 40% in the presence of methotrexate, and the formation of human anti-monoclonal antibody is decreased when methotrexate is given at the same time. The usual dose in RA is 40 mg every other week, but dosing is frequently increased to 40 mg weekly. In psoriasis, 80 mg is given at week 0, 40 mg at week 1, and then 40 mg every other week thereafter. The initial dose in inflammatory bowel disease is higher; patients receive 160 mg at week 0, and 80 mg 2 weeks later, followed by a 40-mg maintenance dose every other week. Patients with ulcerative colitis should continue maintenance treatment beyond 8 weeks if they show evidence of remission by that time. Adalimumab dose depends on the body weight in patients with JIA: 20 mg every other week for patients weighing 15–30 kg, and 40 mg every other week in patients weighing 30 kg or more.
# Chunk 8046
2.

Pharmacokinetics: Etanercept is given subcutaneously as 25 mg twice weekly or 50 mg weekly. In psoriasis, 50 mg is given twice weekly for 12 weeks and then is followed by 50 mg weekly. The drug is slowly absorbed, with peak concentration 72 hours after drug administration. Etanercept has a mean serum elimination half-life of 4.5 days. A recent study demonstrated a reduction of radiographic progression with the use of 50 mg of etanercept weekly.
# Chunk 8047
3.

Indications: Etanercept is approved for the treatment of RA, juvenile chronic arthritis, psoriasis, PsA, and AS. It can be used as monotherapy, although over 70% of patients taking etanercept are also using methotrexate. Etanercept decreases the rate of formation of new erosions relative to methotrexate alone. It is also being used in other rheumatic syndromes such as scleroderma, granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s granulomatosis), giant cell arteritis, Behçet’s disease, uveitis, and sarcoidosis. However, a comparative study of ustekinumab (an IL-12 and IL-23 blocker) and etanercept concluded that ustekinumab at a dose of 45 or 90 mg was superior to high-dose etanercept (50 mg twice weekly) over a 12-week period in patients with psoriasis.
# Chunk 8048
2.

Pharmacokinetics: Golimumab is administered subcutaneously and has a half-life of approximately 14 days. Concomitant use with methotrexate increases golimumab serum levels and decreases anti-golimumab antibodies. The recommended dose for the treatment of RA, PsA, and AS is 50 mg given every 4 weeks. A higher dose of golimumab is used for the treatment of ulcerative colitis as follows: 200 mg initially at week 0 followed by 100 mg at week 2 and every 4 weeks thereafter.
# Chunk 8049
2.

Pharmacokinetics: Infliximab is given as an intravenous infusion with “induction” at 0, 2, and 6 weeks and maintenance every 8 weeks thereafter. Dosing is 3–10 mg/kg, and the usual dose is 3–5 mg/kg every 8 weeks. There is a relationship between serum concentration and effect, although individual clearances vary markedly. The terminal half-life is 9–12 days without accumulation after repeated dosing at the recommended interval of 8 weeks. After intermittent therapy, infliximab elicits human antichimeric antibodies in up to 62% of patients. Concurrent therapy with methotrexate markedly decreases the prevalence of human antichimeric antibodies.
# Chunk 8050
A low incidence of newly formed dsDNA antibodies and antinuclear antibodies (ANAs) has been documented when using TNF-α–blocking agents, but clinical lupus is extremely rare and the presence of ANA and dsDNA antibodies per se does not contraindicate the use of TNF-α–blocking agents. In patients with borderline or overt heart failure (HF), TNF-α–blocking agents can exacerbate HF. TNF-α–blocking agents can induce the immune system to develop antidrug antibodies in about 17% of cases. These antibodies may interfere with drug efficacy and correlate with infusion site reactions. Injection site reactions occur in 20–40% of patients, although they rarely result in discontinuation of therapy. Cases of alopecia areata, hypertrichosis, and erosive lichen planus have been reported. Cutaneous pseudo-lymphomas are reported rarely with TNF-α–blocking agents, especially infliximab. TNF-α–blocking agents may increase the risk of gastrointestinal ulcers and large bowel perforation including diverticular and appendiceal perforation.
# Chunk 8051
2.

Pharmacokinetics: Ustekinumab is available as a 45and 90-mg SC injection for PsA and plaque psoriasis. Its bioavailability is 57% following SC injection; time to peak plasma concentration is 7–13.5 days and elimination half-life is 10–126 days. For adults with PsA, a loading dose at 0 and 4 weeks is followed by maintenance doses once every 12 weeks. IV infusion as a 130 mg dose is available for Crohn’s disease.
# Chunk 8052
4.

Adverse Effects: Upper respiratory tract infection is the most common side effect, but rare severe infection, malignancy, and reversible posterior leukoencephalopathy syndrome have been reported. Ustekinumab should be discontinued at least 15 weeks before live vaccines are administered and can be resumed at least 2 weeks after.
# Chunk 8053
2.

Pharmacokinetics: The recommended dose of tofacitinib in the treatment of RA is 5 mg twice daily; there is a clear trend to increased response (and increased toxicity) at double this dose. In 2016, the FDA approved extended-release (XR) tofacitinib citrate 11 mg tablets for once-daily treatment. Tofacitinib has an absolute oral bioavailability of 74%, high-fat meals do not affect the AUC, and the elimination half-life is about 3 hours. Metabolism (of 70%) occurs in the liver, mainly by CYP3A4 and to a lesser extent by CYP2C19. The remaining 30% is excreted unchanged by the kidneys. Patients taking CYP enzyme inhibitors and those with moderate hepatic or renal impairment require dose reduction to 5 mg once daily. It should not be given to patients with severe hepatic disease.
# Chunk 8054
2.

Pharmacokinetics: Canakinumab is given by subcutaneous injection. It reaches peak serum concentrations 7 days after a single subcutaneous injection. Canakinumab has an absolute bioavailability of 66% and a 26-day mean terminal half-life. The recommended dose for patients with SJIA who weigh more than 7.5 kg is 4 mg/kg every 4 weeks. There is a weight-adjusted algorithm for treating CAPS.
# Chunk 8055
Belimumab is an antibody that specifically inhibits B-lymphocyte stimulator (BLyS). It is administered as an intravenous infusion. The recommended dose is 10 mg/kg at weeks 0, 2, and 4, and every 4 weeks thereafter. Belimumab has a distribution half-life of 1.75 days and a terminal half-life of 19.4 days.
# Chunk 8056
Corticosteroids have been used in 60–70% of RA patients. Their effects are prompt and dramatic, and they are capable of slowing the appearance of new bone erosions. Corticosteroids may be administered for certain serious extra-articular manifestations of RA such as pericarditis or eye involvement or during periods of exacerbation. When prednisone is required for long-term therapy, the dosage should not exceed 7.5 mg daily, and gradual reduction of the dose should be encouraged. Alternate-day corticosteroid therapy is usually unsuccessful in RA.
# Chunk 8057
1.

Pharmacokinetics: Colchicine is absorbed readily after oral administration, reaches peak plasma levels within 2 hours, and is eliminated with a serum half-life of 9 hours. Metabolites are excreted in the intestinal tract and urine.
# Chunk 8058
5.

Dosage: In prophylaxis (the most common use), the dosage of colchicine is 0.6 mg one to three times daily. For terminating a gouty attack, a regimen of 1.2 mg followed by a single 0.6-mg oral dose was as effective as higher dose regimens, and adverse events were less frequent. In 2008, the FDA requested that intravenous preparations containing colchicine be discontinued in the United States because of their potential life-threatening adverse effects. Therefore, intravenous colchicine is no longer available.
# Chunk 8059
In addition to inhibiting prostaglandin synthase, NSAIDs inhibit urate crystal phagocytosis. Aspirin is not used because it causes renal retention of uric acid at low doses (≤2.6 g/d). It is uricosuric at doses greater than 3.6 g/d. Indomethacin is commonly used in the initial treatment of gout as a replacement for colchicine. For acute gout, 50 mg is given three times daily; when a response occurs, the dosage is reduced to 25 mg three times daily for 5–7 days.
# Chunk 8060
1. Chemistry and Pharmacokinetics: Uricosuric drugs are organic acids (Figure 36–6) and, as such, act at the anion transport sites of the renal tubule (see Chapter 15). Probenecid is completely reabsorbed by the renal tubules and is metabolized slowly with a terminal serum half-life of 5–8 hours. Sulfinpyrazone or its active hydroxylated derivative is excreted by the kidneys. Even so, the duration of its effect after oral administration is almost as long as that of probenecid, which is given once or twice daily.
# Chunk 8061
1. Chemistry and Pharmacokinetics: The structure of allopurinol, an isomer of hypoxanthine, is shown in Figure 36–7. Allopurinol is approximately 80% absorbed after oral administration and has a terminal serum half-life of 1–2 hours.
# Chunk 8062
3.

Indications: Allopurinol is often the first-line agent for the treatment of chronic gout in the period between attacks and it tends to prolong the intercritical period. As with uricosuric agents, the therapy is begun with the expectation that it will be continued for years if not for life. When initiating allopurinol, colchicine or NSAID should be used until steady-state serum uric acid is normalized or decreased to less than 6 mg/dL and they should be continued for 6 months or longer. Thereafter, colchicine or the NSAID can be cautiously stopped while continuing allopurinol therapy.
# Chunk 8063
Febuxostat is a non-purine xanthine oxidase inhibitor that was approved by the FDA in 2009.

1.

Pharmacokinetics: Febuxostat is more than 80% absorbed following oral administration. With maximum concentration achieved in approximately 1 hour and a half-life of 4–18 hours, once-daily dosing is effective. Febuxostat is extensively metabolized in the liver. All of the drug and its inactive metabolites appear in the urine, although less than 5% appears as unchanged drug.
# Chunk 8064
2.

Pharmacodynamics: Febuxostat is a potent and selective inhibitor of xanthine oxidase, thereby reducing the formation of xanthine and uric acid without affecting other enzymes in the purine or pyrimidine metabolic pathway. In clinical trials, Febuxostat at daily dosing of 80 mg or 120 mg was more effective in lowering serum urate levels than was allopurinol at a standard 300-mg daily dose. The urate-lowering effect was comparable regardless of the pathogenic cause of hyperuricemia— overproduction or underexcretion.
# Chunk 8065
5.

Dosage: The recommended starting dose of febuxostat is 40 mg daily. Because there was concern for cardiovascular events in the original phase 3 trials, the FDA approved only 40-mg and 80-mg dosing. No dose adjustment is necessary for patients with renal impairment since it is highly metabolized into an inactive metabolite by the liver.
# Chunk 8066
2.

Pharmacokinetics and Dosage: The recommended dose for pegloticase is 8 mg every 2 weeks administered as an intravenous infusion. It is a rapidly acting drug, achieving a peak decline in uric acid level within 24–72 hours. The serum half-life ranges from 6 to 14 days. Several studies have shown earlier clearance of PEG-uricase (mean of 11 days) due to antibody response when compared to PEG-uricase antibody-negative subjects (mean of 16.1 days).
# Chunk 8067
Roger K. Long, MD, & Hakan Cakmak, MD

A 4-year-old boy (height 90 cm, –3 standard deviations [SD]; weight 14.5 kg, approximately 15th percentile) presents with short stature. Review of the past history and growth chart demonstrates normal birth weight and birth length, but a progressive decrease in height per-centiles relative to age-matched normal ranges starting at 6 months of age, and orthostasis with febrile illnesses. Physical examination demonstrates short stature and mild generalized obesity. Genital examination reveals descended but small testes and a phallic length of –2 SD. Laboratory evaluations demonstrate growth hormone (GH) deficiency and a delayed bone age of 18 months. The patient is started on replacement with recombinant human GH at a dose of 40 mcg/kg per day subcutaneously. After 1 year of treatment, his height velocity has increased from 5 cm/y to 11 cm/y. How does GH stimulate growth in children? What other hormone deficiencies are sug-gested by the patient’s history and physical examination? What other hormone replacements is this patient likely to require?
# Chunk 8068
B. Absorption, Metabolism, and Excretion

Circulating endogenous GH has a half-life of approximately 20 minutes and is predominantly cleared by the liver. Recombinant human GH (rhGH) is administered subcutaneously 6–7 times per week. Peak levels occur in 2–4 hours, and active blood levels persist for approximately 36 hours.
# Chunk 8069
A small number of children with growth failure have severe IGF-I deficiency that is not responsive to exogenous GH. Causes include mutations in the GH receptor and in the GH receptor signaling pathway, neutralizing antibodies to GH, and IGF-I gene defects. In 2005, the FDA approved two forms of recombinant human IGF-I (rhIGF-I) for treatment of severe IGF-I deficiency that is not responsive to GH: mecasermin and mecasermin rinfabate. Mecasermin is rhIGF-I alone, while mecasermin rinfabate is a complex of rhIGF-I and recombinant human insulin-like growth factor–binding protein-3 (rhIGFBP-3). This binding protein significantly increases the circulating half-life of rhIGF-I. Normally, the great majority of the circulating IGF-I is bound to IGFBP-3, which is produced principally by the liver under the control of GH. Due to a patent settlement, mecasermin rinfabate is not available for short stature-related indications. Mecasermin is administered subcutaneously twice daily at a recommended starting dosage of 0.04–0.08 mg/kg per dose and increased weekly up to a maximum twice-daily dosage of 0.12 mg/kg per dose.
# Chunk 8070
Adverse effects of octreotide therapy include nausea, vomiting, abdominal cramps, flatulence, and steatorrhea with bulky bowel movements. Biliary sludge and gallstones may occur after 6 months of use in 20–30% of patients. However, the yearly incidence of symptomatic gallstones is about 1%. Cardiac effects include sinus bradycardia (25%) and conduction disturbances (10%). Pain at the site of injection is common, especially with the long-acting octreotide suspension. Vitamin B12 deficiency may occur with long-term use of octreotide.
# Chunk 8071
Pegvisomant is a GH receptor antagonist used to treat acromegaly. It is the polyethylene glycol (PEG) derivative of a mutant GH, B2036. Pegylation reduces its clearance and improves its overall clinical effectiveness. Like native GH, pegvisomant has two GH receptor binding sites. However, one of its GH receptor binding sites has increased affinity for the GH receptor, whereas its second GH receptor binding site has reduced affinity. This differential receptor affinity allows the initial step (GH receptor dimerization) but blocks the conformational changes required for signal transduction. In clinical trials, pegvisomant was administered subcutaneously to patients with acromegaly; daily treatment for 12 months or more reduced serum levels of IGF-I into the normal range in 97%. Pegvisomant does not inhibit GH secretion and may lead to increased GH levels and possible adenoma growth. No serious problems have been observed; however, increases in liver enzymes without liver failure have been reported.
# Chunk 8072
A. Menotropins

The first commercial gonadotropin product containing both FSH and LH was extracted from the urine of postmenopausal women. This purified extract of FSH and LH is known as menotropins, or human menopausal gonadotropins (hMG). From the early 1960s, these preparations were used for the stimulation of follicle development in women. The early extraction techniques were very crude, requiring around 30 L of urine to manufacture enough hMG needed for a single treatment cycle. These initial preparations were also contaminated with other proteins; less than 5% of the proteins present were bioactive. The FSH-to-LH bioactivity ratio of these early preparations was 1:1. As purity improved, it was necessary to add hCG in order to maintain this ratio of bioactivity.
# Chunk 8073
Although the details differ, all of these protocols are based on the complex physiology that underlies a normal menstrual cycle. Like a menstrual cycle, controlled ovulation stimulation is discussed in relation to a cycle that begins on the first day of a menstrual bleed (Figure 37–3). Shortly after the first day (usually on day 2), daily injections with one of the FSH preparations (hMG, urofollitropin, or rFSH) are begun and continued for approximately 8–12 days. In women with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, follicle development requires treatment with a combination of FSH and LH because these women do not produce the basal level of LH that is required for normal follicle development. The dose and duration of gonadotropin treatment are based on the response as measured by the serum estradiol concentration and by ultrasound evaluation of ovarian follicle
# Chunk 8074
B. Male Infertility

Most of the signs and symptoms of hypogonadism in males (eg, delayed puberty, retention of prepubertal secondary sex characteristics after puberty) can be adequately treated with exogenous androgen; however, treatment of infertility in hypogonadal men requires the activity of both LH and FSH. For many years, conventional therapy has consisted of initial treatment for 8–12 weeks with injections of 1000–2500 IU hCG several times per week. After the initial phase, hMG is injected at a dose of 75–150 units three times per week. In men with hypogonadal hypogonadism, it takes an average of 4–6 months of such treatment for sperm to appear in the ejaculate in up to 90% of patients, but often not at normal levels. Even if pregnancy does not occur spontaneously, the number of sperm is often sufficient that pregnancy can be achieved by insemination with the patient’s semen (intrauterine insemination) or with the help of an assisted reproductive technique such as in vitro fertilization with or without intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI), in which a single sperm is injected directly into a mature oocyte that has been retrieved after controlled ovarian stimulation of a female partner. With the advent of ICSI, the minimum threshold of spermatogenesis required for pregnancy is greatly lowered.
# Chunk 8075
The physiologic actions of GnRH exhibit complex dose-response relationships that change dramatically from the fetal period through the end of puberty. This is not surprising in view of the complex role that GnRH plays in normal reproduction, particularly in female reproduction. Pulsatile GnRH release occurs and is responsible for stimulating LH and FSH production during the fetal and neonatal period. Subsequently, from the age of 2 years until the onset of puberty, GnRH secretion falls off and the pituitary simultaneously exhibits very low sensitivity to GnRH. Just before puberty, an increase in the frequency and amplitude of GnRH release occurs and then, in early puberty, pituitary sensitivity to GnRH increases, which is due in part to the effect of increasing concentrations of gonadal steroids. In females, it usually takes several months to a year after the onset of puberty for the hypothalamic-pituitary system to produce an LH surge and ovulation. By the end of puberty, the system is well established so that menstrual cycles proceed at relatively constant intervals. The amplitude and frequency of GnRH pulses vary in a regular pattern through the menstrual cycle with the highest amplitudes occurring during the luteal phase and the highest frequency occurring late in the follicular phase. Lower pulse frequencies favor FSH secretion, whereas higher pulse frequencies favor LH secretion. Gonadal steroids as well as the peptide hormones activin, inhibin, and follistatin have complex modulatory effects on the gonadotropin response to GnRH.
# Chunk 8076
2.

Male infertility—It is possible to use pulsatile gonadorelin for infertility in men with hypothalamic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. A portable pump infuses gonadorelin intravenously every 90 minutes. Serum testosterone levels and semen analyses must be done regularly. At least 3–6 months of pulsatile infusions are required before significant numbers of sperm are seen. As described above, treatment of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism is more commonly done with hCG and hMG or their recombinant equivalents.
# Chunk 8077
2.

Endometriosis—Endometriosis is defined as the presence of estrogen-sensitive endometrium outside the uterus that results in cyclical abdominal pain in premenopausal women. The pain of endometriosis is often reduced by abolishing exposure to the cyclical changes in the concentrations of estrogen and progesterone that are a normal part of the menstrual cycle. The ovarian suppression induced by continuous treatment with a GnRH agonist greatly reduces estrogen and progesterone concentrations and prevents cyclical changes. The preferred duration of treatment with a GnRH agonist is limited to 6 months because ovarian suppression beyond this period can result in decreased bone mineral density. When relief of pain from treatment with a GnRH agonist supports continued therapy for more than 6 months, the addition of add-back therapy (estrogen or progestins) reduces or eliminates GnRH agonistinduced bone mineral loss and provides symptomatic relief without reducing the efficacy of pain relief. Leuprolide and goserelin are administered as depot preparations that provide 1 or 3 months of continuous GnRH agonist activity. Nafarelin is administered twice daily as a nasal spray at a dose of 0.2 mg per spray.
# Chunk 8078
3.

Uterine leiomyomata (uterine fibroids)—Uterine leiomyomata are benign, estrogen-sensitive, smooth muscle tumors in the uterus that can cause menorrhagia, with associated anemia and pelvic pain. Treatment for 3–6 months with a GnRH agonist reduces fibroid size and, when combined with supplemental iron, improves anemia. The effects of GnRH agonists are temporary, with gradual recurrent growth of leiomyomas to previous size within several months after cessation of treatment. GnRH agonists have been used widely for preoperative treatment of uterine leiomyomas, both for myomectomy and hysterectomy. GnRH agonists have been shown to improve hematologic parameters, shorten hospital stay, and decrease blood loss, operating time, and postoperative pain when given for 3 months preoperatively.
# Chunk 8079
4.

Prostate cancer—Androgen deprivation therapy is the primary medical therapy for prostate cancer. Combined antiandrogen therapy with continuous GnRH agonist and an androgen receptor antagonist is as effective as surgical castration in reducing serum testosterone concentrations and effects. Leuprolide, goserelin, histrelin, buserelin, and triptorelin are approved for this indication. The preferred formulation is one of the long-acting depot forms that provide 1, 3, 4, 6, or 12 months of active drug therapy. During the first 7–10 days of GnRH analog therapy, serum testosterone levels increase because of the agonist action of the drug; this can precipitate pain in patients with bone metastases, and tumor growth and neurologic symptoms in patients with vertebral metastases. It can also temporarily worsen symptoms of urinary obstruction. Such tumor flares can usually be avoided with the concomitant administration of an androgen receptor antagonist (flutamide, bicalutamide, or nilutamide) (see Chapter 40). Within about 2 weeks, serum testosterone levels fall to the hypogonadal range.
# Chunk 8080
Ganirelix and cetrorelix are absorbed rapidly after subcutaneous injection. Administration of 0.25 mg daily maintains GnRH antagonism. Alternatively, a single 3.0-mg dose of cetrorelix suppresses LH secretion for 96 hours. Degarelix therapy is initiated with 240 mg administered as two subcutaneous injections. Maintenance dosing is with an 80-mg subcutaneous injection every 28 days.
# Chunk 8081
A. Hyperprolactinemia

A dopamine agonist is the standard first-line treatment for hyperprolactinemia. These drugs shrink pituitary prolactin-secreting tumors, lower circulating prolactin levels, and restore ovulation in approximately 70% of women with microadenomas and 30% of women with macroadenomas (Figure 37–4). Cabergoline is initiated at 0.25 mg twice weekly orally or vaginally. It can be increased gradually, according to serum prolactin determinations, up to a maximum of 1 mg twice weekly. Bromocriptine is generally taken daily after the evening meal at the initial dose of 1.25 mg; the dose is then increased as tolerated. Most patients require 2.5–7.5 mg daily. Long-acting oral bromocriptine formulations (Parlodel SRO) and intramuscular formulations (Parlodel LAR) are available outside the United States.
# Chunk 8082
Vasopressin and desmopressin are treatments of choice for pituitary diabetes insipidus. The dosage of desmopressin is 10–40 mcg (0.1–0.4 mL) in two to three divided doses as a nasal spray or, as an oral tablet, 0.1–0.2 mg two to three times daily. The dosage by injection is 1–4 mcg (0.25–1 mL) every 12–24 hours as needed for polyuria, polydipsia, or hypernatremia. Bedtime desmopressin therapy, by intranasal or oral administration, ameliorates nocturnal enuresis by decreasing nocturnal urine production. Vasopressin infusion is effective in some cases of esophageal variceal bleeding and colonic diverticular bleeding. High-dose vasopressin as a 40-unit intravenous bolus injection may be given to replace epinephrine in the Advanced Cardiovascular Life Support (ACLS) resuscitation protocol for pulseless arrest.
# Chunk 8083
Betty J. Dong, PharmD, FASHP, FCCP, FAPHA

JP is a 33-year-old woman who presents with complaints of fatigue requiring daytime naps, weight gain, cold intoler-ance, and muscle weakness for the last few months. These complaints are new since she used to always feel “hot,” noted difficulty sleeping, and could eat anything that she wanted without gaining weight. She also would like to become preg-nant in the near future. Because of poor medication adherence to methimazole and propranolol, she received radioactive iodine (RAI) therapy, developed hypothyroidism, and was started on levothyroxine 100 mcg daily. Other medications include calcium carbonate three times daily to “protect her bones” and omeprazole for “heartburn.” On physical exami-nation, her blood pressure is 130/89 mm Hg with a pulse of 50 bpm. Her weight is 136 lb (61.8 kg), an increase of 10 lb (4.5 kg) in the last year. Her thyroid gland is not palpable and her reflexes are delayed. Laboratory findings include a thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level of 24.9 μIU/mL (normal 0.45–4.12 μIU/mL) and a free thyroxine level of 8 pmol/L (normal 10–18 pmol/L). Evaluate the management of her past history of hyperthyroidism and assess her current thyroid status. Identify your treatment recommendations to maximize control of her current thyroid status.
# Chunk 8084
Synthetic levothyroxine is the preparation of choice for thyroid replacement and suppression therapy because of its stability, content uniformity, low cost, lack of allergenic foreign protein, easy laboratory measurement of serum levels, and long half-life (7 days), which permits once-daily to weekly administration. In addition, T4 is converted to T3 intracellularly; thus, administration of T4 produces both hormones and T3 administration is unnecessary. Generic levothyroxine preparations provide comparable efficacy and are more cost-effective than branded preparations, It is preferable that patients remain on a consistent levothyroxine preparation between refills to avoid changes in bioavailability. A branded soft gel capsule (Tirosint) had faster, more complete dissolution and was less affected by gastric pH or coffee than a tablet formulation.
# Chunk 8085
FIGURE 38–4 Model of the interaction of T3 with the T3 receptor. A: Inactive phase—the unliganded T3 receptor dimer bound to the thyroid hormone response element (TRE) along with corepressors acts as a suppressor of gene transcription. B: Active phase—T3 and T4 circulate bound to thyroid-binding proteins (TBPs). The free hormones are transported into the cell by a specific transport system. Within the cytoplasm, T4 is converted to T3 by 5′-deiodinase (5′DI); T3 then moves into the nucleus. There it binds to the ligand-binding domain of the thyroid receptor (TR) monomer. This promotes disruption of the TR homodimer and heterodimerization with retinoid X receptor (RXR) on the TRE, displacement of corepressors, and binding of coactivators. The TR-coactivator complex activates gene transcription, which leads to alteration in protein synthesis and cellular phenotype. TR-LBD, T3 receptor ligand-binding domain; TR-DBD, T3 receptor DNA-binding domain; RXR-LBD, retinoid X receptor ligand-binding domain; RXR-DBD, retinoid X receptor DNA-binding domain; T3, triiodothyronine; T4, tetraiodothyronine, L-thyroxine. (Adapted, with permission, from Gardner DG, Shoback D [editors]: Greenspan’s Basic & Clinical Endocrinology, 8th ed. McGraw-Hill, 2007. Copyright © The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.) methimazole (other than agranulocytosis or hepatitis). The chemical structures of these compounds are shown in Figure 38–5. The The thioamides methimazole and propylthiouracil are major thiocarbamide group is essential for antithyroid activity. drugs for treatment of thyrotoxicosis. In the United Kingdom, carbimazole, which is converted to methimazole in vivo, is widely used. Methimazole is about ten times more potent than propylthiouracil and is the drug of choice in adults and children. Due Methimazole is completely absorbed but at variable rates. It is readily to a black box warning about severe hepatitis, propylthiouracil accumulated by the thyroid gland and has a volume of distribution should be reserved for use during the first trimester of pregnancy, similar to that of propylthiouracil. Excretion is slower than with pro-in thyroid storm, and in those experiencing adverse reactions to pylthiouracil; 65–70% of a dose is recovered in the urine in 48 hours.
# Chunk 8086
The short plasma half-life of these agents (1.5 hours for propylthiouracil and 6 hours for methimazole) has little influence on the duration of the antithyroid action or the dosing interval because both agents are accumulated by the thyroid gland. For propylthiouracil, giving the drug every 6–8 hours is reasonable since a single 100 mg dose can inhibit iodine organification by 60% for 7 hours. Since a single 30 mg dose of methimazole exerts an antithyroid effect for longer than 24 hours, a single daily dose is effective in the management of mild to severe hyperthyroidism.
# Chunk 8087
131I is the only isotope used for treatment of thyrotoxicosis. (Others are used in diagnosis.) Administered orally in solution as sodium 131I, it is rapidly absorbed, concentrated by the thyroid, and incorporated into storage follicles. Its therapeutic effect depends on emission of β rays with an effective half-life of 5 days and a penetration range of 400–2000 μm. Within a few weeks after administration, destruction of the thyroid parenchyma is evidenced by epithelial swelling and necrosis, follicular disruption, edema, and leukocyte infiltration. Advantages of radioiodine include easy administration, effectiveness, low expense, and absence of pain. Fears of radiation-induced genetic damage, leukemia, and neoplasia have not been realized after more than 50 years of clinical experience with radioiodine therapy for hyperthyroidism. Radioactive iodine should not be administered to pregnant women or nursing mothers, since it crosses the placenta to destroy the fetal thyroid gland and it is excreted in breast milk.
# Chunk 8088
There is some variability in the absorption of thyroxine; dosage will also vary depending on age and weight. Infants and children require more T4 per kilogram of body weight than adults. The average dosage for an infant 1–6 months of age is 10–15 mcg/kg per day, whereas the average dosage for an adult is about 1.7 mcg/kg per day (0.8 mcg/lb per day ) or 125 mcg/d. Older adults (>65 years of age) may require less thyroxine (1.6 mcg/kg per day or 0.7 mcg/lb per day ) for replacement as body mass declines. In patients requiring suppression therapy post-thyroidectomy for thyroid cancer, the average daily dosage of T4 is 2.2 mcg/kg or 1 mcg/lb. Higher thyroxine requirements have also been reported in patients with celiac disease and Helicobacter pylori gastritis; thyroxine doses may be lower following treatment.
# Chunk 8089
2See Table 38–3 for specific pathogenesis.

Since interactions with certain foods (eg, bran, soy, coffee) and drugs (Table 38–3) can impair its absorption, thyroxine should be administered on an empty stomach (eg, 60 minutes before meals, 4 hours after meals, or at bedtime) to maintain TSH within an optimal range of 0.5–2.5 mIU/L. Its long half-life of 7 days permits once-daily dosing. Children should be monitored for normal growth and development. Serum TSH and free thyroxine should always be measured before a change in dosage to avoid transient serum alterations. It takes 6–8 weeks after starting a given dose of thyroxine to reach steady-state levels in the bloodstream. Thus, dosage changes should be made slowly.
# Chunk 8090
Thyroxine toxicity is directly related to the hormone level. In children, restlessness, insomnia, and accelerated bone maturation and growth may be signs of thyroxine toxicity. In adults, increased nervousness, heat intolerance, episodes of palpitation and tachycardia, or unexplained weight loss may be the presenting symptoms. If these symptoms are present, it is important to monitor serum TSH and FT4 levels (Table 38–2), which will determine whether the symptoms are due to excess thyroxine blood levels. Chronic overtreatment with T4, particularly in elderly patients, can increase the risk of atrial fibrillation and accelerated osteoporosis.
# Chunk 8091
C. Hypothyroidism and Pregnancy

Hypothyroid women frequently have anovulatory cycles and are therefore relatively infertile until restoration of the euthyroid state. This has led to the widespread use of thyroid hormone for infertility, although there is no evidence for its usefulness in infertile euthyroid patients. In a pregnant hypothyroid patient receiving thyroxine, it is extremely important that the daily dose of thyroxine be adequate because early development of the fetal brain depends on maternal thyroxine. In many hypothyroid patients, an increase in the thyroxine dose (about 25–30%) is required to normalize the serum TSH level during pregnancy. It is reasonable to counsel women to take one extra dose of their current thyroxine tablet twice a week separated by several days as soon as they are pregnant. Thyroxine should also be administered apart from prenatal vitamins and calcium by at least 4 hours. Because of the elevated maternal TBG levels and, therefore, elevated total T4 levels, adequate maternal thyroxine dosages warrant maintenance of TSH between 0.1 and 3.0 mIU/L (eg, first trimester, 0.1–2.5 mIU/L; second trimester, 0.2–3.0 mIU/L; third trimester, 0.3–3.0 mIU/L) and the total T4 at or above the upper range of normal.
# Chunk 8092
Methimazole is preferable to propylthiouracil (except in pregnancy and thyroid storm) because it has a lower risk of serious liver injury and can be administered once daily, which may improve adherence. Antithyroid drug therapy is usually begun with divided doses, shifting to maintenance therapy with single daily doses when the patient becomes clinically euthyroid. However, mild to moderately severe thyrotoxicosis can often be controlled with methimazole given in a single morning dose of 20–40 mg initially for 4–8 weeks to normalize hormone levels. Maintenance therapy requires 5–15 mg once daily. Alternatively, therapy is started with propylthiouracil, 100–150 mg every 6 or 8 hours until the patient is euthyroid, followed by gradual reduction of the dose to the maintenance level of 50–150 mg once daily. In addition to inhibiting iodine organification, propylthiouracil also inhibits the conversion of T4 to T3, so it brings the level of activated thyroid hormone down more quickly than does methimazole. The best clinical guide to remission is reduction in the size of the goiter. Laboratory tests most useful in monitoring the course of therapy are serum FT3, FT4, and TSH levels.
# Chunk 8093
B. Thyroidectomy

A near-total thyroidectomy is the treatment of choice for patients with very large glands or multinodular goiters. Patients are treated with antithyroid drugs until euthyroid (about 6 weeks). In addition, for 10–14 days prior to surgery, they receive saturated solution of potassium iodide, 5 drops twice daily, to diminish vascularity of the gland and simplify surgery. About 80–90% of patients will require thyroid supplementation following near-total thyroidectomy.
# Chunk 8094
C. Radioactive Iodine

Radioiodine therapy (RAI) utilizing 131I is the preferred treatment for most patients over 21 years of age. In patients without heart disease, the therapeutic dose may be given immediately in a range of 80–120 μCi/g of estimated thyroid weight corrected for uptake. In patients with underlying heart disease or severe thyrotoxicosis and in elderly patients, it is desirable to treat with antithyroid drugs (preferably methimazole) until the patient is euthyroid. The medication is stopped for 2 to 3 days before RAI is administered so as not to interfere with RAI retention but can be restarted 3–5 days later, and then gradually tapered over 4–6 weeks as thyroid function normalizes. Iodides should be avoided to ensure maximal 131I uptake. Six to 12 weeks following the administration of RAI, the gland will shrink in size and the patient will usually become euthyroid or hypothyroid. A second dose may be required if there is minimal response 3 months post-RAI. Hypothyroidism occurs in about 80% of patients following RAI. Serum FT4 and TSH levels should be monitored regularly. When hypothyroidism develops, prompt replacement with oral levothyroxine, 50–150 mcg daily, should be instituted.
# Chunk 8095
D. Adjuncts to Antithyroid Therapy

During the acute phase of thyrotoxicosis, β-adrenoceptor–blocking agents without intrinsic sympathomimetic activity are appropriate in symptomatic patients aged 60 years or more, in those with heart rates greater than 90 beats/min, and in those with cardiovascular disease. Propranolol, 20–40 mg orally every 6 hours, or metoprolol, 25–50 mg orally every 6–8 hours, will control tachycardia, hypertension, and atrial fibrillation. Beta-adrenoceptor–blocking agents are gradually withdrawn as serum thyroxine levels return to normal. Diltiazem, 90–120 mg three or four times daily, can be used to control tachycardia in patients in whom β blockers are contraindicated, eg, those with asthma. Dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers may not be as effective as diltiazem or verapamil. Adequate nutrition and vitamin supplements are essential. Barbiturates accelerate T4 breakdown (by hepatic enzyme induction) and may be helpful both as sedatives and to lower T4 levels. Bile acid sequestrants (eg, cholestyramine) can also rapidly lower T4 levels by increasing the fecal excretion of T4.
# Chunk 8096
Thyroid storm, or thyrotoxic crisis, is sudden acute exacerbation of all of the symptoms of thyrotoxicosis, presenting as a life-threatening syndrome. Vigorous management is mandatory. Propranolol, 60–80 mg orally every 4 hours, or intravenous propranolol, 1–2 mg slowly every 5–10 minutes to a total of 10 mg, or esmolol, 50–100 mg/kg per min, is helpful to control the severe cardiovascular manifestations. If β blockers are contraindicated by the presence of severe heart failure or asthma, hypertension and tachycardia may be controlled with diltiazem, 90–120 mg orally three or four times daily or 5–10 mg/h by intravenous infusion (asthmatic patients only). Release of thyroid hormones from the gland is retarded by the administration of saturated solution of potassium iodide, 5 drops orally every 6 hours starting 1 hour after giving thioamides. Hormone synthesis is blocked by the administration of propylthiouracil, 500–1000 mg as a loading dose, followed by 250 mg orally every 4 hours. If the patient is unable to take propylthiouracil by mouth, a rectal formulation * can be prepared and administered in a dosage of 400 mg every 6 hours as a retention enema. Methimazole may also be prepared for rectal administration in a dose of 60–80 mg daily. Hydrocortisone, 50 mg intravenously every 6 hours, will protect the patient against shock and will block the conversion of T4 to T3, rapidly reducing the level of thyroactive material in the blood.
# Chunk 8097
Although severe ophthalmopathy is rare, it is difficult to treat. A 15–20% risk of aggravating severe eye disease may occur following RAI, especially in those who smoke. Management requires effective treatment of the thyroid disease, usually by total surgical excision or 131I ablation of the gland plus oral prednisone therapy (see below). In addition, local therapy may be necessary, eg, elevation of the head to diminish periorbital edema and artificial tears to relieve corneal drying due to exophthalmos. Smoking cessation should be advised to prevent progression of the ophthalmopathy. For the severe, acute inflammatory reaction, prednisone, 60–100 mg orally daily for about a week and then 60–100 mg every other day, tapering the dose over 6–12 weeks, may be effective. If steroid therapy fails or is contraindicated, irradiation of the posterior orbit, using well-collimated high-energy X-ray therapy, will frequently result in marked improvement of the acute process. Threatened loss of vision is an indication for surgical decompression of the orbit. Eyelid or eye muscle surgery may be necessary to correct residual problems after the acute process has subsided.
# Chunk 8098
Graves’ disease may occur in the newborn infant, due either to passage of maternal TSH-R Ab [stim] through the placenta, stimulating the thyroid gland of the neonate, or to genetic transmission of the trait to the fetus. Laboratory studies reveal an elevated free T4, a markedly elevated T3, and a low TSH—in contrast to the normal infant, in whom TSH is elevated at birth. TSH-R Ab [stim] is usually found in the serum of both the child and the mother.
# Chunk 8099
If caused by maternal TSH-R Ab [stim], the disease is usually self-limited and subsides over a period of 4–12 weeks, coinciding with the fall in the infant’s TSH-R Ab [stim] level. However, treatment is necessary because of the severe metabolic stress the infant experiences. Therapy includes propylthiouracil at a dosage of 5–10 mg/kg daily in divided doses at 8-hour intervals; Lugol’s solution (8 mg of iodide per drop), 1 drop every 8 hours; and propranolol, 2 mg/kg daily in divided doses. Careful supportive therapy is essential. If the infant is very ill, oral prednisone, 2 mg/ kg daily in divided doses, will help block conversion of T4 to T3. These medications are gradually reduced as the clinical picture improves and can be discontinued by 6–12 weeks.
# Chunk 8100
Neoplasms of the thyroid gland may be benign (adenomas) or malignant. The primary diagnostic test is a fine needle aspiration biopsy and cytologic examination. Benign lesions may be monitored for growth or symptoms of local obstruction, which would mandate surgical excision. Levothyroxine therapy is not recommended for the suppression of benign nodules, especially in iodine sufficient areas. Management of thyroid carcinoma requires a total thyroidectomy, postoperative radioiodine therapy in selected instances, and lifetime replacement with levothyroxine. The evaluation for recurrence of some thyroid malignancies often involves withdrawal of thyroxine replacement for 4–6 weeks— accompanied by the development of hypothyroidism. Tumor recurrence is likely if there is a rise in serum thyroglobulin (ie, a tumor marker) or a positive 131I scan when TSH is elevated. Alternatively, administration of recombinant human TSH (Thyrogen) can produce comparable TSH elevations without discontinuing thyroxine and avoiding hypothyroidism. Recombinant human TSH is administered intramuscularly once daily for 2 days. A rise in serum thyroglobulin or a positive 131I scan will indicate a recurrence of the thyroid cancer.
# Chunk 8101
The initial methimazole treatment was appropriate and preferable to propylthiouracil because of its longer duration of action allowing once daily dosing and its improved safety profile. JP presents with the typical signs and symptoms of hypothyroidism following RAI despite levothyroxine replacement. Either radioactive iodine or thyroidectomy are reasonable and effective strategies for definitive treat-ment of her hyperthyroidism, especially before becoming pregnant to avoid an acute hyperthyroid exacerbation during pregnancy or following delivery. Her hypothy-roid symptoms should have been easily corrected by the addition of levothyroxine dosed correctly at 1.7 mcg/kg/ day or 100 mcg daily. Because she is young and has no cardiac disease, full replacement doses were appropriate to start. However, her elevated TSH level indicates inad-equate levothyroxine replacement which may be related to nonadherence, or concomitant calcium and omeprazole co-administration. For optimal absorption, levothyroxine should be taken orally 60 minutes before meals on an empty stomach or at bedtime, and separated by 4 hours from her calcium administration. Lower thyroxine doses may also be sufficient if her omeprazole is stopped. Once weekly thyroxine injections may be effective in those with ongoing nonadherence. Thyroid function tests should be monitored after 6–8 weeks of therapy, obtained before thyroxine administration to avoid transient hormone alter-ations, and the dosage adjusted to achieve a normal TSH level and resolution of hypothyroid symptoms.
# Chunk 8102
FIGURE 39–2 Circadian variation in plasma cortisol throughout the 24-hour day (upper panel). The sensitivity of tissues to glucocorticoids is also circadian but inverse to that of cortisol, with low sensitivity in the late morning and high sensitivity in the evening and early night (lower panel). The sensitivity of tissues to glucocorticoids is inversely related to that of glucocorticoid receptor (GR) acetylation by the transcription factor CLOCK; the acetylated receptor has decreased transcriptional activity. (Adapted, with permission, from Nader N, Chrousos GP, Kino T: Interactions of the circadian CLOCK system and the HPA axis. Trends Endocrinol Metab 2010;21:277. Copyright Elsevier.) 5–10%) or loosely bound to albumin (about 5%) and is available to exert its effect on target cells. When plasma cortisol levels exceed 20–30 mcg/dL, CBG is saturated, and the concentration of free cortisol rises rapidly. CBG is increased in pregnancy, with estrogen administration, and in hyperthyroidism. It is decreased by hypothyroidism, genetic defects in synthesis, and protein deficiency states. Albumin has a large capacity but low affinity for cortisol, and for practical purposes albumin-bound cortisol should be considered free. Synthetic corticosteroids such as dexamethasone are largely bound to albumin rather than CBG.
# Chunk 8103
The half-life of cortisol in the circulation is normally about 60–90 minutes; it may be increased when hydrocortisone (the pharmaceutical preparation of cortisol) is administered in large amounts or when stress, hypothyroidism, or liver disease is present. Only 1% of cortisol is excreted unchanged in the urine as free cortisol; about 20% of cortisol is converted to cortisone by 11-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase in the kidney and other tissues with mineralocorticoid receptors (see below) before reaching the liver. Most cortisol is metabolized in the liver. About one-third of the cortisol produced daily is excreted in the urine as dihydroxy ketone metabolites and is measured as 17-hydroxysteroids (see Figure 39–3 for carbon numbering). Many cortisol metabolites are conjugated with glucuronic acid or sulfate at the C3 and C21 hydroxyls, respectively, in the liver; they are then excreted in the urine.
# Chunk 8104
Hydrocortisone sodium succinate or phosphate in doses of 100 mg intravenously is given every 8 hours until the patient is stable. The dose is then gradually reduced, achieving maintenance dosage within 5 days.
# Chunk 8105
d.

Aldosteronism—Primary aldosteronism usually results from the excessive production of aldosterone by an adrenal adenoma. However, it may also result from abnormal secretion by hyper-plastic glands or from a malignant tumor. The clinical findings of hypertension, weakness, and tetany are related to the continued renal loss of potassium, which leads to hypokalemia, alkalosis, and elevation of serum sodium concentrations. This syndrome can also be produced in disorders of adrenal steroid biosynthesis by excessive secretion of deoxycorticosterone, corticosterone, or 18-hydroxycorticosterone—all compounds with inherent mineralocorticoid activity.
# Chunk 8106
In contrast to patients with secondary aldosteronism (see text that follows), these patients have low (suppressed) levels of plasma renin activity and angiotensin II. When treated with fludrocortisone (0.2 mg twice daily orally for 3 days) or deoxycorticosterone acetate (20 mg/d intramuscularly for 3 days—but not available in the United States), patients fail to retain sodium and the secretion of aldosterone is not significantly reduced. When the disorder is mild, it may escape detection if serum potassium levels are used for screening. However, it may be detected by an increased ratio of plasma aldosterone to renin. Patients generally improve when treated with spironolactone, an aldosterone receptor-blocking agent, and the response to this agent is of diagnostic and therapeutic value.
# Chunk 8107
The dexamethasone suppression test is used for the diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome and has also been used in the differential diagnosis of depressive psychiatric states. As a screening test, 1 mg dexamethasone is given orally at 11 pm, and a plasma sample is obtained the following morning. In normal individuals, the morning cortisol concentration is usually <3 mcg/dL, whereas in Cushing’s syndrome the level is usually >5 mcg/dL. The results are not reliable in the patient with depression, anxiety, concurrent illness, and other stressful conditions or in the patient who is receiving a medication that enhances the catabolism of dexamethasone in the liver. To distinguish between hypercortisolism due to anxiety, depression, and alcoholism (pseudo-Cushing syndrome) and bona fide Cushing’s syndrome, a combined test is carried out, consisting of dexamethasone (0.5 mg orally every 6 hours for 2 days) followed by a standard corticotropinreleasing hormone (CRH) test (1 mg/kg given as a bolus intravenous infusion 2 hours after the last dose of dexamethasone).
# Chunk 8108
In patients in whom the diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome has been established clinically and confirmed by a finding of elevated free cortisol in the urine, suppression with large doses of dexamethasone will help to distinguish patients with Cushing’s disease from those with steroid-producing tumors of the adrenal cortex or with the ectopic ACTH syndrome. Dexamethasone is given in a dosage of 0.5 mg orally every 6 hours for 2 days, followed by 2 mg orally every 6 hours for 2 days, and the urine is then assayed for cortisol or its metabolites (Liddle’s test); or dexamethasone is given as a single dose of 8 mg at 11 pm, and the plasma cortisol is measured at 8 am the following day. In patients with Cushing’s disease, the suppressant effect of dexamethasone usually produces a 50% reduction in hormone levels. In patients in whom suppression does not occur, the ACTH level will be low in the presence of a cortisol-producing adrenal tumor and elevated in patients with an ectopic ACTH-producing tumor.
# Chunk 8109
A. Metabolic Effects

Most patients who are given daily doses of 100 mg of hydrocortisone or more (or the equivalent amount of synthetic steroid) for longer than 2 weeks undergo a series of changes that have been termed iatrogenic Cushing’s syndrome. The rate of development is a function of the dosage and the genetic background of the patient. In the face, rounding, puffiness, fat deposition, and plethora usually appear (moon facies). Similarly, fat tends to be redistributed from the extremities to the trunk, the back of the neck, and the supraclavicular fossae. There is an increased growth of fine hair over the face, thighs and trunk. Steroid-induced punctate acne may appear, and insomnia and increased appetite are noted. In the treatment of dangerous or disabling disorders, these changes may not require cessation of therapy. However, the underlying metabolic changes accompanying them can be very serious by the time they become obvious. The continuing breakdown of protein and diversion of amino acids to glucose production increase the need for insulin and over time result in weight gain; visceral fat deposition; myopathy and muscle wasting; thinning of the skin, with striae and bruising; hyperglycemia; and eventually osteoporosis, diabetes, and aseptic necrosis of the hip. Wound healing is also impaired under these circumstances. When diabetes occurs, it is treated with diet and insulin. These patients are often resistant to insulin but rarely develop ketoacidosis. In general, patients treated with corticosteroids should be on high-protein and potassium-enriched diets.
# Chunk 8110
C. Adrenal Suppression

When corticosteroids are administered for more than 2 weeks, adrenal suppression may occur. If treatment extends over weeks to months, the patient should be given appropriate supplementary therapy at times of minor stress (twofold dosage increases for 24–48 hours) or severe stress (up to tenfold dosage increases for 48–72 hours) such as accidental trauma or major surgery. If corticosteroid dosage is to be reduced, it should be tapered slowly. If therapy is to be stopped, the reduction process should be quite slow when the dose reaches replacement levels. It may take 2–12 months for the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis to function acceptably, and cortisol levels may not return to normal for another 6–9 months. The glucocorticoid-induced suppression is not a pituitary problem, and treatment with ACTH does not reduce the time required for the return of normal function.
# Chunk 8111
B. Metabolism

Aldosterone is secreted at the rate of 100–200 mcg/d in normal individuals with a moderate dietary salt intake. The plasma level in men (resting supine) is about 0.007 mcg/dL. The half-life of aldosterone injected in tracer quantities is 15–20 minutes, and it does not appear to be firmly bound to serum proteins.
# Chunk 8112
Metyrapone is commonly used in tests of adrenal function. The blood levels of 11-deoxycortisol and the urinary excretion of 17-hydroxycorticoids are measured before and after administration of the compound. Normally, there is a twofold or greater increase in the urinary 17-hydroxycorticoid excretion. A dosage of 300–500 mg every 4 hours for six doses is often used, and urine collections are made on the day before and the day after treatment.
# Chunk 8113
The mean half-life of mifepristone is 20 hours. This is longer than that of many natural and synthetic glucocorticoid agonists (dexamethasone has a half-life of 4–5 hours). Less than 1% of the daily dose is excreted in the urine, suggesting a minor role of kidneys in the clearance of the compound. The long plasma half-life of mifepristone results from extensive and strong binding to plasma proteins. Less than 5% of the compound is found in the free form when plasma is analyzed by equilibrium dialysis. Mifepristone can bind to albumin and α1-acid glycoprotein, but it has no affinity for corticosteroid-binding globulin.
# Chunk 8114
Spironolactone is a 7α-acetylthiospirolactone. Its onset of action is slow, and the effects last for 2–3 days after the drug is discontinued. It is used in the treatment of primary aldosteronism in dosages of 50–100 mg/d. This agent reverses many of the manifestations of aldosteronism. It has been useful in establishing the diagnosis in some patients and in ameliorating the signs and symptoms when surgical removal of an adenoma is delayed. When used diagnostically for the detection of aldosteronism in hypokalemic patients with hypertension, dosages of 400–500 mg/d for 4–8 days—with an adequate intake of sodium and potassium—restore potassium levels to or toward normal. Spironolactone is also useful in preparing these patients for surgery. Dosages of 300–400 mg/d for 2 weeks are used for this purpose and may reduce the incidence of cardiac arrhythmias.
# Chunk 8115
The Gonadal Hormones & Inhibitors

George P. Chrousos, MD

A 25-year-old woman with menarche at 13 years and menstrual periods until about 1 year ago complains of hot flushes, skin and vaginal dryness, weakness, poor sleep, and scanty and infrequent menstrual periods of a year’s dura-tion. She visits her gynecologist, who obtains plasma levels of follicle-stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormone, both of which are moderately elevated. She is diagnosed with premature ovarian failure, and estrogen and pro-gesterone replacement therapy is recommended. A dual-energy absorptiometry scan (DEXA) reveals a bone density t-score of <2.5 SD, ie, frank osteoporosis. How should the ovarian hormones she lacks be replaced? What extra mea-sures should she take for her osteoporosis while receiving treatment?
# Chunk 8116
A. Disturbances in Ovarian Function

Disturbances of cyclic function are common even during the peak years of reproduction. A minority of these result from inflammatory or neoplastic processes that influence the functions of the uterus, ovaries, or pituitary. Many of the minor disturbances leading to periods of amenorrhea or anovulatory cycles are night, and the limited quantities of ovarian estrogen secreted in response start to cause breast development. Subsequently, FSH and LH are secreted throughout the day and night, causing secretion of higher amounts of estrogen and leading to further breast enlargement, alterations in fat distribution, and a growth spurt that culminates in epiphyseal closure in the long bones. The change of ovarian function at puberty is called gonadarche.
# Chunk 8117
Estrogens should be used in the smallest dosage consistent with relief of symptoms. In women who have not undergone hysterectomy, it is most convenient to prescribe estrogen on the first 21–25 days of each month. The recommended dosages of estrogen are 0.3–1.25 mg/d of conjugated estrogen or 0.01–0.02 mg/d of ethinyl estradiol. Dosages in the middle of these ranges have been shown to be maximally effective in preventing the decrease in bone density occurring at menopause. From this point of view, it is important to begin therapy as soon as possible after the menopause for maximum effect. In these patients and others not taking estrogen, calcium supplements that bring the total daily calcium intake up to 1500 mg are useful.
# Chunk 8118
As noted below, the administration of estrogen is associated with an increased risk of endometrial carcinoma. The administration of a progestational agent with the estrogen prevents endometrial hyperplasia and markedly reduces the risk of this cancer. When estrogen is given for the first 25 days of the month and the progestin medroxyprogesterone (10 mg/d) is added during the last 10–14 days, the risk is only half of that in women not receiving hormone replacement therapy. On this regimen, some women will experience a return of symptoms during the period off estrogen administration. In these patients, the estrogen can be given continuously. If the progestin produces sedation or other undesirable effects, its dose can be reduced to 2.5–5 mg for the last 10 days of the cycle with a slight increase in the risk for endometrial hyperplasia. These regimens are usually accompanied by bleeding at the end of each cycle. Some women experience migraine headaches during the last few days of the cycle. The use of a continuous estrogen regimen will often prevent their occurrence. Women who object to the cyclic bleeding associated with sequential therapy can also consider continuous therapy. Daily therapy with 0.625 mg of conjugated equine estrogens and 2.5–5 mg of medroxyprogesterone will eliminate cyclic bleeding, control vasomotor symptoms, prevent genital atrophy, maintain bone density, and show a favorable lipid profile with a small decrease in LDL and an increase in HDL concentrations. These women have endometrial atrophy on biopsy. About half of these patients experience breakthrough bleeding during the first few months of therapy. About 70–80% become amenorrheic after the first 4 months, and most remain so. The main disadvantage of continuous therapy is the need for uterine biopsy if bleeding occurs after the first few months.
# Chunk 8119
Medroxyprogesterone acetate, 10–20 mg orally twice weekly— or intramuscularly in doses of 100 mg/m2 every 1–2 weeks—will prevent menstruation, but it will not arrest accelerated bone maturation in children with precocious puberty.
# Chunk 8120
A. Postcoital Contraceptives

Pregnancy can be prevented following coitus by the administration of estrogens alone, progestin alone, or in combination (“morning after” contraception). When treatment is begun within 72 hours, it is effective 99% of the time. Some effective schedules are shown in Table 40–4. The hormones are often administered with antiemetics, since 40% of patients have nausea or vomiting. Other adverse effects include headache, dizziness, breast tenderness, and abdominal and leg cramps. Considerable controversy has accompanied the proposal to make these agents available without a prescription in the United States.
# Chunk 8121
TABLE 40–4 Schedules for use of postcoital contraceptives.

Conjugated estrogens: 10 mg three times daily for 5 days
# Chunk 8122
Ethinyl estradiol: 2.5 mg twice daily for 5 days

Diethylstilbestrol: 50 mg daily for 5 days

Mifepristone: 600 mg once with misoprostol, 400 mcg once1
# Chunk 8123
Mifepristone’s major use thus far has been to terminate early pregnancies. Doses of 400–600 mg/d for 4 days or 800 mg/d for 2 days successfully terminated pregnancy in >85% of the women studied. The major adverse effect was prolonged bleeding that on most occasions did not require treatment. The combination of a single oral dose of 600 mg of mifepristone and a vaginal pessary containing 1 mg of prostaglandin E1 or oral misoprostol has been found to effectively terminate pregnancy in over 95% of patients treated during the first 7 weeks after conception. The adverse effects of the medications included vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal or pelvic pain. As many as 5% of patients have vaginal bleeding requiring intervention. Because of these adverse effects, mifepristone is administered only by physicians at family planning centers. Note: In a very small number of cases, use of a vaginal tablet for the prostaglandin dose has been associated with sepsis, so it is recommended that both drugs be given by mouth in all patients.
# Chunk 8124
Danazol is slowly metabolized in humans, having a half-life of >15 hours. This results in stable circulating levels when the drug is administered twice daily. It is highly concentrated in the liver, adrenals, and kidneys and is excreted in both feces and urine.
# Chunk 8125
Clomiphene citrate, a partial estrogen agonist, is closely related to the estrogen chlorotrianisene (Figure 40–3). This compound is well absorbed when taken orally. It has a half-life of 5–7 days and is excreted primarily in the urine. It exhibits significant protein binding and enterohepatic circulation and is distributed to adipose tissues.
# Chunk 8126
When clomiphene is administered in a dosage of 100 mg/d for 5 days, a rise in plasma LH and FSH is observed after several days. In patients who ovulate, the initial rise is followed by a second rise of gonadotropin levels just prior to ovulation.
# Chunk 8127
Although many studies have been conducted, an effective and nontoxic oral contraceptive for men has not yet been found. For example, various androgens, including testosterone and testosterone enanthate, in a dosage of 400 mg per month, produced azoospermia in less than half the men treated. Minor adverse reactions, including gynecomastia and acne, were encountered. Testosterone in combination with danazol was well tolerated but no more effective than testosterone alone. Androgens in combination with a progestin such as medroxyprogesterone acetate were no more effective. However, preliminary studies indicate that the intramuscular administration of 100 mg of testosterone enanthate weekly together with 500 mg of levonorgestrel daily orally can produce azoospermia in 94% of men. Retinoic acid is important in the maturation of sperm and the testis contains a unique isoform of the alcohol dehydrogenase enzyme that converts retinol to retinoic acid but no nontoxic inhibitor of this enzyme has been found to date.
# Chunk 8128
In Chinese studies, large numbers of men were treated with 20 mg/d of gossypol or gossypol acetic acid for 2 months, followed by a maintenance dosage of 60 mg/week. On this regimen, 99% of men developed sperm counts below 4 million/mL. Preliminary data indicate that recovery (return of normal sperm count) following discontinuance of gossypol administration is more apt to occur in men whose counts do not fall to extremely low levels and when administration is not continued for more than 2 years. Hypokalemia is the major adverse effect and may lead to transient paralysis. Because of low efficacy and significant toxicity, gossypol has been abandoned as a candidate male contraceptive.
# Chunk 8129
The patient should be advised to start daily transdermal estradiol therapy (100 mcg/d) along with oral natural pro-gesterone (200 mg/d) for the last 12 days of each 28-day cycle. On this regimen, her symptoms should disappear and normal monthly uterine bleeding resume. She should also be advised to get adequate exercise and increase her calcium and vitamin D intake as treatment for her osteoporosis.
# Chunk 8130
Martha S. Nolte Kennedy, MD, & Umesh Masharani, MBBS, MRCP (UK)

A 66-year-old obese Caucasian man presented to an academic Diabetes Center for advice regarding his diabetes treatment. His diabetes was diagnosed 10 years previously on routine testing. He was initially given metformin but when his control deteriorated, the metformin was stopped and insulin treatment initiated. The patient was taking 50 units of insulin glargine and an average of 25 units of insulin aspartate pre-meals. He had never seen a diabetes educator or a dietitian. He was checking his glucose levels 4 times a day. He was smoking half a pack of cigarettes a day. On examination, his weight was 132 kg (BMI 39.5); blood pressure 145/71; and signs of mild peripheral neuropathy were present. Laboratory tests noted an HbA1c value of 8.1%, urine albumin 3007 mg/g creatinine (normal <30), serum creatinine 0.86 mg/dL (0.61–1.24), total choles-terol 128 mg/dL, triglycerides 86 mg/dL, HDL cholesterol 38 mg/dL, and LDL cholesterol 73 mg/dL (on atorvastatin 40 mg daily). How would you treat this patient?
# Chunk 8131
B. Hemoglobin A1c Measurements

When plasma glucose levels are in the normal range, about 4–6% of hemoglobin A has one or both of the N terminal valines of their beta chains irreversibly glycated by glucose—referred to as hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c). The HbA1c fraction is abnormally elevated in people with diabetes with chronic hyperglycemia. Since red cells have a lifespan of up to 120 days, the HbA1c value reflects plasma glucose levels over the preceding 8–12 weeks. In patients who monitor their glucose levels, the HbA1c value provides a valuable check on the accuracy of their monitoring. In patients who do not monitor their glucose levels, HbA1c measurements are essential for adjusting treatment. HbA1c can be used to diagnose diabetes. An HbA1c of 6.5% or greater if confirmed by repeat testing is diagnostic of diabetes. Less than 5.7% is normal, and patients with levels of 5.7–6.4% are considered at high risk for developing diabetes (Table 41–4).
# Chunk 8132
D. Self-Monitoring of Blood Glucose

Capillary blood glucose measurements performed by patients themselves, as outpatients, are extremely useful. In type 1 patients in whom “tight” metabolic control is attempted, they are indispensable. Several paper strip methods and a large number of blood glucose meters are now available for measuring glucose on capillary blood samples. All are accurate, but they vary with regard to speed, convenience, size of blood samples required, reporting capability, and cost. Some meters are designed to communicate with an insulin pump. A number of continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) systems are also available for clinical use. The systems utilize a subcutaneous sensor that measures glucose concentrations in the interstitial fluid for 3–7 days. Studies show that adult type 1 patients who use continuous systems have improved glucose control without an increased incidence of hypoglycemia. There is great interest in using continuous glucose monitoring systems to automatically deliver insulin by continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion pump. The first artificial pancreas system has been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and will become available in 2017. With this system, the continuous glucose monitor readings are used to automatically adjust the basal insulin dosing by the insulin pump.
# Chunk 8133
1. Regular insulin—Regular insulin is a short-acting, soluble crystalline zinc insulin whose hypoglycemic effect appears within 30 minutes after subcutaneous injection, peaks at about 2 hours, and lasts for 5–7 hours when usual quantities (ie, 5–15 U) are administered. For very insulin-resistant subjects who would otherwise require large volumes of insulin solution, a U500 preparation of human regular insulin is available both in a vial form and a disposable pen. If the vial form is used, it is necessary to use a U100-insulin syringe or tuberculin syringe to measure doses.
# Chunk 8134
B. Long-Acting Insulin Preparations (Tables 41–5, 41–6) 1.

NPH (neutral protamine Hagedorn, or isophane) insulin—NPH insulin is an intermediate-acting insulin whose absorption and onset of action are delayed by combining appropriate amounts of insulin and protamine so that neither is present in an uncomplexed form (“isophane”). After subcutaneous injection, proteolytic tissue enzymes degrade the protamine to permit absorption of insulin. NPH insulin has an onset of approximately 2–5 hours and duration of 4–12 hours (Figure 41–5); it is usually mixed with regular, lispro, aspart, or glulisine insulin and given two to four times daily for insulin replacement. The dose regulates the action profile; specifically, small doses have lower, earlier peaks and a short duration of action with the converse true for large doses.
# Chunk 8135
2.

Insulin glargine—Insulin glargine is a soluble, “peakless” (ie, having a broad plasma concentration plateau), long-acting insulin analog. The attachment of two arginine molecules to the B-chain carboxyl terminal and substitution of a glycine for asparagine at the A21 position created an analog that is soluble in an acidic solution but precipitates in the more neutral body pH after subcutaneous injection. Individual insulin molecules slowly dissolve away from the crystalline depot and provide a low, continuous level of circulating insulin. Insulin glargine has a slow onset of action (1–1.5 hours) and achieves a maximum effect after 4–6 hours. This maximum activity is maintained for 11–24 hours or longer. Glargine is usually given once daily, although some very insulin-sensitive or insulin-resistant individuals benefit from split (twice a day) dosing. To maintain solubility, the formulation is unusually acidic (pH 4.0), and insulin glargine should not be mixed with other insulins. Separate syringes must be used to minimize the risk of contamination and subsequent loss of efficacy. The absorption pattern of insulin glargine appears to be independent of the anatomic site of injection, and this drug is associated 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9101112131415161718192021222324 Time (h) Insulin lispro, aspart, glulisine with less immunogenicity than human insulin in animal studies. Glargine’s interaction with the insulin receptor is similar to that of native insulin and shows no increase in mitogenic activity in vitro. It has sixfold to sevenfold greater binding than native insulin to the insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) receptor, but the clinical significance of this is unclear.
# Chunk 8136
Stable premixed insulins (70% NPH and 30% regular) are available as a convenience to patients who have difficulty mixing insulin because of visual problems or insufficient manual dexterity. Premixed preparations of rapidly acting insulin analogs (lispro, aspart) and NPH are not stable because of exchange of the rapidly acting insulin analog for the human regular insulin in the protamine complex. Consequently, over time, the soluble component becomes a mixture of regular and rapidly acting insulin analog at varying ratios. To remedy this problem, intermediate insulins composed of isophane complexes of protamine with the rapidly acting insulin analogs were developed (neutral protamine lispro [NPL]; aspart protamine). Premixed combinations of NPL and insulin lispro are now available for clinical use (Humalog Mix 75/25 and Humalog Mix 50/50). These mixtures have a more rapid onset of glucose-lowering activity compared with 70% NPH/30% regular human insulin mixture and can be given within 15 minutes before or after starting a meal. A similar 70% insulin aspart protamine/30% insulin aspart (NovoLog Mix 70/30) is now available. The main advantages of these new mixtures are that (1) they can be given within 15 minutes of starting a meal and (2) they are superior in controlling the postprandial glucose rise after a carbohydrate-rich meal.
# Chunk 8137
Insulin glargine or insulin detemir cannot be acutely mixed with either regular insulin or the rapid-acting insulin analogs. Insulin degludec, however, can be mixed and is available as 70% insulin degludec/30% insulin aspart and is injected once or twice a day.
# Chunk 8138
B. Insulin Pens

The pens eliminate the need for carrying insulin vials and syringes. Cartridges of insulin lispro, insulin aspart, and insulin glargine are available for reusable pens (Lilly, Novo Nordisk, and Owen Mumford). Disposable prefilled pens are also available for regular insulin (U100, U500), insulin lispro, insulin aspart, insulin glulisine, insulin detemir, insulin glargine, insulin degludec, NPH, 70% NPH/30% regular, 75% NPL/25% insulin lispro, 50% NPL/50% insulin lispro, 70% insulin aspart protamine/30% insulin aspart, and 70% insulin degludec/30% insulin aspart (Table 41–6).
# Chunk 8139
D. Inhaled Insulin

A dry powder formulation of recombinant regular insulin (technosphere insulin, Afrezza) is now approved for use in adults with diabetes. It consists of 2to 2.5-μm crystals of the excipient, fumaryl diketopiperazine, that provide a large surface area for adsorption of proteins like insulin. After inhalation from the small, single-use device, pharmacokinetic studies show that peak levels are reached in 12–15 minutes and decline to baseline in 3 hours, significantly faster in onset and shorter in duration than subcutaneous insulin. Pharmacodynamic studies show that median time to maximum effect with inhaled insulin is approximately 1 hour and declines to baseline by about 3 hours. In contrast, the median time to maximum effect with subcutaneous insulin lispro is about 2 hours and declines to baseline by 4 hours. In trials, inhaled insulin combined with injected basal insulin was as effective in lowering glucose as injected rapid-acting insulin combined with basal insulin. It is formulated as a single-use color coded cartridge delivering 4, 8 or 12 units immediately before the meal. The manufacturer provides a dose conversion table; patients injecting up to 4 units of rapid-acting insulin analog should use the 4-unit cartridge. Those injecting 5–8 units should use the 8-unit cartridge. If the dose is 9–12 units of rapid-acting insulin pre-meal then one 4-unit cartridge and one 8-unit cartridge or one 12-unit cartridge should be used. The inhaler is about the size of a referee’s whistle. The most common adverse effect of inhaled insulin was cough, affecting 27% of trial patients. A small decrease in pulmonary function (forced expiratory volume in 1 second [FEV1]) was seen in the first 3 months of use, which persisted over 2 years of follow-up. Inhaled insulin is contraindicated in smokers and patients with chronic lung disease, such as asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Spirometry should be performed to identify potential lung disease prior to initiating therapy. During the clinical trials, there were two cases of lung cancer in patients who were taking inhaled insulin and none in the comparator-treated patients.
# Chunk 8140
Chlorpropamide has a half-life of 32 hours and is slowly metabolized in the liver to products that retain some biologic activity; approximately 20–30% is excreted unchanged in the urine. The average maintenance dosage is 250 mg daily, given as a single dose in the morning. Prolonged hypoglycemic reactions are more common in elderly patients, and the drug is contraindicated in this group. Other adverse effects include a hyperemic flush after alcohol ingestion in genetically predisposed patients and hyponatremia due to its effect on vasopressin secretion and action.
# Chunk 8141
Glipizide has the shortest half-life (2–4 hours) of the more potent agents. For maximum effect in reducing postprandial hyperglycemia, this agent should be ingested 30 minutes before breakfast because absorption is delayed when the drug is taken with food. The recommended starting dosage is 5 mg/d, with up to 15 mg/d given as a single dose. When higher daily dosages are required, they should be divided and given before meals.
# Chunk 8142
The maximum total daily dosage recommended by the manufacturer is 40 mg/d, although some studies indicate that the maximum therapeutic effect is achieved by 15–20 mg of the drug. An extended-release preparation (Glucotrol XL) provides 24-hour action after a once-daily morning dose (maximum of 20 mg/d). However, this formulation appears to have sacrificed its lower propensity for severe hypoglycemia compared with longer-acting glyburide without showing any demonstrable therapeutic advantages over the latter (which can be obtained as a generic drug). At least 90% of glipizide is metabolized in the liver to inactive products, and the remainder is excreted unchanged in the urine. Glipizide therapy is therefore contraindicated in patients with significant hepatic impairment. Because of its lower potency and shorter duration for action, it is preferable to glyburide in the elderly and for those patients with renal impairment.
# Chunk 8143
Pioglitazone has some PPAR-α as well as PPAR-γ activity. It is absorbed within 2 hours of ingestion; although food may delay uptake, total bioavailability is not affected. Absorption is decreased with concomitant use of bile acid sequestrants. Pioglitazone is metabolized by CYP2C8 and CYP3A4 to active metabolites. The bioavailability of numerous other drugs also degraded by these enzymes may be affected by pioglitazone therapy, including estrogen-containing oral contraceptives; additional methods of contraception are advised. Pioglitazone may be taken once daily; the usual starting dosage is 15–30 mg/d, and the maximum is 45 mg/d. Pioglitazone is approved as a monotherapy and in combination with metformin, sulfonylureas, and insulin for the treatment of type 2 diabetes.
# Chunk 8144
Acarbose treatment is initiated at a dosage of 50 mg twice daily with gradual increase to 100 mg three times a day. It lowers post prandial glucose levels by 30–50%. Miglitol therapy is initiated at a dosage of 25 mg three times a day. The usual maintenance dosage is 50 mg three times a day, but some patients may need 100 mg three times a day. The drug is not metabolized and is cleared by the kidney. It should not be used in renal failure.
# Chunk 8145
Exenatide is dispensed as fixed-dose pens (5 mcg and 10 mcg). It is injected subcutaneously within 60 minutes before breakfast and dinner. It reaches a peak concentration in approximately 2 hours with a duration of action of up to 10 hours. Therapy is initiated at 5 mcg twice daily for the first month and if tolerated can be increased to 10 mcg twice daily. Exenatide LAR is a once-weekly preparation that is dispensed as a powder (2 mg). It is suspended in the provided diluent just prior to injection. When exenatide is added to preexisting sulfonylurea therapy, the oral hypoglycemic dosage may need to be decreased to prevent hypoglycemia. The major adverse effect is nausea (about 44% of users), which is dose dependent and declines with time. Exenatide mono-therapy and combination therapy results in HbA1c reductions of 0.2–1.2%. Weight loss in the range of 2–3 kg occurs and contributes to the improvement of glucose control. In comparative trials the long-acting (LAR) preparation lowers the HbA1c level a little more than the twice-daily preparation. Exenatide undergoes glomerular filtration, and the drug is not approved for use in patients with estimated GFR of less than 30 mL/min.
# Chunk 8146
Liraglutide is a soluble fatty acid-acylated GLP-1 analog. The half-life is approximately 12 hours, permitting once-daily dosing. It is approved in patients with type 2 diabetes who achieve inadequate control with diet and exercise and are receiving concurrent treatment with metformin, sulfonylureas, or thiazolidinediones. Treatment is initiated at 0.6 mg and increased after 1 week to 1.2 mg daily. If needed the dosage can be increased to 1.8 mg daily. In clinical trials liraglutide results in a reduction of HbA1c of 0.8–1.5%; weight loss ranges from none to 3.2 kg. The most frequent adverse effects are nausea (28%) and vomiting (10%).
# Chunk 8147
Liraglutide at a dose of 3 mg daily has been approved for weight loss.

Albiglutide is a human GLP-1 dimer fused to human albumin. The half-life of albiglutide is about 5 days and a steady state is reached after 4–5 weeks of once weekly administration. The usual dose is 30 mg weekly by subcutaneous injection. The drug is supplied in a self-injection pen containing a powder that is reconstituted just prior to administration. Weight loss is much less common than with exenatide and liraglutide. The most frequent adverse effects were nausea and injection-site erythema.
# Chunk 8148
Dulaglutide consists of two GLP-1 analog molecules covalently linked to an Fc fragment of human IgG4. The GLP-1 molecule has amino acid substitutions that resist DPP-4 action. The half-life of dulaglutide is about 5 days. The usual dose is 0.75 mg weekly by subcutaneous injection. The maximum recommended dose is 1.5 mg weekly. The most frequent adverse reactions were nausea, diarrhea, and vomiting.
# Chunk 8149
Sitagliptin is given orally as 100 mg once daily, has an oral bioavailability of over 85%, achieves peak concentrations within 1–4 hours, and has a half-life of approximately 12 hours. It is primarily excreted in the urine, in part by active tubular secretion of the drug. Hepatic metabolism is limited and mediated largely by the cytochrome CYP3A4 isoform and, to a lesser degree, by CYP2C8. The metabolites have insignificant activity. Dosage should be reduced in patients with impaired renal function (50 mg if estimated GFR is 30–50 mL/min and 25 mg if <30 mL/min. Sitagliptin has been studied as monotherapy and in combination with metformin, sulfonylureas, and thiazolidinediones. Therapy with sitagliptin has resulted in HbA1c reductions of 0.5–1.0%.
# Chunk 8150
Saxagliptin is given orally as 2.5–5 mg daily. The drug reaches maximal concentrations within 2 hours (4 hours for its active metabolite). It is minimally protein bound and undergoes hepatic metabolism by CYP3A4/5. The major metabolite is active, and excretion is by both renal and hepatic pathways. The terminal plasma half-life is 2.5 hours for saxagliptin and 3.1 hours for its active metabolite. Dosage adjustment is recommended for individuals with renal impairment and concurrent use of strong CYP3A4/5 inhibitors such as antiviral, antifungal, and certain antibacterial agents. It is approved as monotherapy and in combination with biguanides, sulfonylureas, and thiazolidinediones. During clinical trials, monoand combination therapy with saxagliptin resulted in an HbA1c reduction of 0.4–0.9%.
# Chunk 8151
Alogliptin lowers HbA1c by about 0.5–0.6% when added to metformin, sulfonylurea, or pioglitazone. The usual dose is 25 mg orally daily. The 12.5-mg dose is used in patients with calculated creatinine clearance of 30 to 60 mL/min; the dose is 6.25 mg for clearance <30 mL/min. In clinical trials, pancreatitis occurred in 11 of 5902 patients on alogliptin (0.2%) and in 5 of 5183 patients receiving all comparators (<0.1%). There have been reports of hypersensitivity reactions (anaphylaxis, angioedema, Stevens-Johnson syndrome). Cases of hepatic failure have been reported, but it is unclear if alogliptin was the cause. The medication, however, should be discontinued in the event of liver failure.
# Chunk 8152
Glucose is freely filtered by the renal glomeruli and is reabsorbed in the proximal tubules by the action of sodium-glucose transporters (SGLTs). Sodium-glucose transporter 2 (SGLT2) accounts for 90% of glucose reabsorption, and its inhibition causes glycosuria and lowers glucose levels in patients with type 2 diabetes. SGLT2 inhibitors lower glucose levels by changing the renal threshold and not by insulin action. The SGLT2 inhibitors canagliflozin, dapagliflozin, and empagliflozin, all oral medications, are approved for clinical use.
# Chunk 8153
As might be expected, the efficacy of the SGLT2 inhibitors is reduced in chronic kidney disease. Canagliflozin and empagliflozin are contraindicated in patients with estimated GFR less than 45 mL/min per 1.73 m2. Dapagliflozin is not recommended for use in patients with estimated GFR less than 60 mL/min per 1.73 m2. The main adverse effects are increased incidence of genital infections and urinary tract infections affecting about 8–9% of patients. The osmotic diuresis can also cause intravascular volume contraction and hypotension. Canagliflozin and empagliflozin caused a modest increase in LDL cholesterol levels (4–8%). In clinical trials patients taking dapagliflozin had higher rates of breast cancer (nine cases versus none in comparator arms) and bladder cancer (nine cases versus one in placebo arm). These cancer rates exceeded the expected rates in an age-matched reference diabetes population. Canagliflozin has been reported to cause a decrease in bone mineral density at the lumbar spine and the hip. In a pooled analysis of 8 clinical trial (mean duration 68 weeks), an increase in fractures by about 30% was observed in patients on canagliflozin. It is likely that the effect on the bones is a class effect and not restricted to canagliflozin. A modest increase in upper limb fractures was observed with canagliflozin therapy. It is not known if this is due to an effect on bone strength or related to falls due to hypotension. Interim analysis of the Canagliflozin Cardiovascular Assessment Study clinical trial reported an approximately doubled risk of leg and foot amputations in the trial group assigned to Canagliflozin; in 2017 the FDA issued a drug safety communication regarding the association. Cases of diabetic ketoacidosis have been reported with off-label use of SGLT2 inhibitors in patients with type 1 diabetes. Type 1 patients are taught to give less insulin if their glucose levels are not elevated. Because type 1 patients on an SGLT2 inhibitor may have normal glucose levels, they may either withhold or reduce their insulin doses to such a degree as to induce ketoacidosis. Therefore, SGLT2 inhibitors should not be used in patients with type 1 diabetes and in those patients labelled as having type 2 diabetes but who are very insulin deficient and prone to ketosis.
# Chunk 8154
A long-term randomized prospective study involving 1441 type 1 patients in 29 medical centers reported in 1993 that “near normalization” of blood glucose resulted in a delay in onset and a major slowing of progression of microvascular and neu-ropathic complications of diabetes during follow-up periods of up to 10 years (Diabetes Control and Complications Trial [DCCT] Research Group, 1993). In the intensively treated group, mean glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) of 7.2% (normal <6%) and mean blood glucose of 155 mg/dL were achieved, whereas in the conventionally treated group, HbA1c averaged 8.9% with mean blood glucose of 225 mg/dL. Over the study period, which aver-aged 7 years, a reduction of approximately 60% in risk of diabetic retinopathy, nephropathy, and neuropathy was noted in the tight control group compared with the standard control group. The DCCT study, in addition, introduced the concept of glycemic memory, which comprises the long-term benefits of any significant period of glycemic control. During a 6-year follow-up period, both the intensively and conventionally treated groups had similar levels of glycemic control, and both had progression of carotid intimal-medial thickness. However, the intensively treated cohort had significantly less progression of intimal thickness. The United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) was a very large randomized prospective study carried out to study the effects of intensive glycemic control with several types of therapies and the effects of blood pressure control in type 2 diabetic patients. A total of 3867 newly diagnosed type 2 diabetic patients were studied over 10 years. A significant frac-tion of these were overweight and hypertensive. Patients were given dietary treatment alone or intensive therapy with insulin, chlorpropamide, glyburide, or glipizide. Metformin was an option for patients with inadequate response to other therapies. Tight control of blood pressure was added as a variable, with an angio-tensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, a β blocker, or in some cases, a calcium channel blocker available for this purpose. Tight control of diabetes, with reduction of HbA1c from 9.1% to 7%, was shown to reduce the risk of microvascular complica-tions overall compared with that achieved with conventional therapy (mostly diet alone, which decreased HbA1c to 7.9%). Cardiovascular complications were not noted for any particular therapy; metformin treatment alone reduced the risk of macro-vascular disease (myocardial infarction, stroke). Epidemiologic analysis of the study suggested that every 1% decrease in the HbA1c achieved an estimated risk reduction of 37% for micro-vascular complications, 21% for any diabetes-related end point and death related to diabetes, and 14% for myocardial infarction. Tight control of hypertension also had a surprisingly sig-nificant effect on microvascular disease (as well as more conven-tional hypertension-related sequelae) in these diabetic patients. Epidemiologic analysis of the results suggested that every 10-mmHg decrease in the systolic pressure achieved an esti-mated risk reduction of 13% for diabetic microvascular complica-tions, 12% for any diabetes-related complication, 15% for death related to diabetes, and 11% for myocardial infarction. Post-study monitoring showed that 5 years after the closure of the UKPDS, the benefits of intensive management on diabetic end points were maintained and the risk reduction for a myo-cardial infarction became significant. The benefits of metformin therapy were maintained. These studies show that tight glycemic control benefits both type 1 and type 2 patients.
# Chunk 8155
All the manifestations of hypoglycemia are relieved by glu cose administration. To expedite absorption, simple sugar or glucose should be given, preferably in liquid form. To treat mild hypoglycemia in a patient who is conscious and able to swallow, dextrose tablets, glucose gel, or any sugar-containing beverage or food may be given. If more severe hypoglycemia has produced unconsciousness or stupor, the treatment of choice is 1 mg of glucagon injected either subcutaneously or intramuscularly. This may restore consciousness within 15 minutes to permit ingestion of sugar. Emergency medical services should be called in the event of loss of consciousness. The emergency personnel can restore consciousness by giving 20–50 mL of 50% glucose solution by intravenous bolus over a period of 2–3 minutes.
# Chunk 8156
This patient had significant insulin resistance, taking about 125 units of insulin daily (approximately 1 unit per kilogram). He had had limited instruction on how to manage his dia-betes. He had peripheral neuropathy, proteinuria, low HDL cholesterol levels, and hypertension. The patient underwent multifactorial intervention targeting his weight, glucose levels, and blood pressure. He was advised to stop smoking. He attended structured diabetes classes and received indi-vidualized instruction from a diabetes educator and a dieti-tian. Metformin therapy was reinitiated and his insulin doses were reduced. The patient was then given the GLP1 receptor agonist, exenatide. The patient lost about 8 kg in weight over the next 3 years and was able to stop his insulin. He had excellent control with an HbA1c of 6.5 % on a combination of metformin, exenatide, and glimepiride. His antihyperten-sive therapy was optimized and his urine albumin excretion declined to 1569 mg/g creatinine. This case illustrates the importance of weight loss in controlling glucose levels in the obese patient with type 2 diabetes. It also shows that simply increasing the insulin dose is not always effective. Combin-ing metformin with other oral agents and non-insulin inject-ables may be a better option.
# Chunk 8157
Daniel D. Bikle, MD, PhD

A 65-year-old man is referred to you from his primary care physician (PCP) for evaluation and management of pos-sible osteoporosis. He saw his PCP for evaluation of low back pain. X-rays of the spine showed some degenerative changes in the lumbar spine plus several wedge deformities in the thoracic spine. The patient is a long-time smoker (up to two packs per day) and has two to four glasses of wine with dinner, more on the weekends. He has chronic bronchitis, presumably from smoking, and has been treated on numerous occasions with oral prednisone for exacerba-tions of bronchitis. He is currently on 10 mg/d prednisone. Examination shows kyphosis of the thoracic spine, with some tenderness to fist percussion over the thoracic spine. The dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) measure-ment of the lumbar spine is “within the normal limits,” but the radiologist noted that the reading may be misleading because of degenerative changes. The hip measurement shows a T score (number of standard deviations by which the patient’s measured bone density differs from that of a normal young adult) in the femoral neck of –2.2. What further workup should be considered, and what therapy should be initiated?
# Chunk 8158
Calcium and phosphate enter the body from the intestine. The average American diet provides 600–1000 mg of calcium per day, of which approximately 100–250 mg is absorbed. This amount represents net absorption, because both absorption (principally in the duodenum and upper jejunum) and secretion (principally in the ileum) occur. The quantity of phosphorus in the American diet is about the same as that of calcium. However, the efficiency of absorption (principally in the jejunum) is greater, ranging from 70% to 90%, depending on intake. In the steady state, renal excretion of calcium and phosphate balances intestinal absorption. In general, more than 98% of filtered calcium and 85% of
# Chunk 8159
PTH regulates calcium and phosphate flux across cellular membranes in bone and kidney, resulting in increased serum calcium and decreased serum phosphate (Figure 42–1). In bone, PTH increases the activity and number of osteoclasts, the cells responsible for bone resorption (Figure 42–2). However, this stimulation of osteoclasts is not a direct effect. Rather, PTH acts on the osteoblast (the bone-forming cell) to induce membrane-bound and secreted soluble forms of a protein called RANK ligand (RANKL). RANKL acts on osteoclasts and osteoclast precursors to increase both the numbers and activity of osteoclasts. This action increases bone remodeling, a specific sequence of cellular events initiated by osteoclastic bone resorption and followed by osteoblastic bone formation. Denosumab, an antibody that inhibits the action of RANKL, has been developed for the treatment of excess bone resorption in patients with osteoporosis and certain cancers. PTH also inhibits the production and secretion of sclerostin from osteocytes. Sclerostin is one of several proteins that blocks osteoblast proliferation by inhibiting the wnt pathway. Antibodies against sclerostin (eg, romosozumab) are in clinical trials for the treatment of osteoporosis. Thus, PTH directly and indirectly increases proliferation of osteoblasts, the cells responsible for bone formation. Although both bone resorption and bone formation are enhanced by PTH, the net effect of excess endogenous PTH is to increase bone resorption. However, administration of exogenous PTH in low and intermittent doses increases bone formation without first stimulating bone resorption. This net anabolic action may be indirect, involving other growth factors such as insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1) as well as inhibition of sclerostin as noted above. These anabolic actions have led to the approval of recombinant PTH 1-34 (teriparatide and abaloparatide) for the treatment of osteoporosis. In the kidney, PTH stimulates 1,25(OH)2D production, and increases tubular reabsorption of calcium and magnesium, but reduces reabsorption of phosphate, amino acids, bicarbonate, sodium, chloride, and sulfate. As mentioned earlier, full-length PTH (rhPTH 1-84) has been approved in part for these renal effects, which otherwise limit standard calcium and calcitriol treatment of hypoparathyroidism.
# Chunk 8160
The principal effects of calcitonin are to lower serum calcium and phosphate by actions on bone and kidney. Calcitonin inhibits osteoclastic bone resorption. Although bone formation is not impaired at first after calcitonin administration, with time both formation and resorption of bone are reduced. In the kidney, calcitonin reduces both calcium and phosphate reabsorption as well as reabsorption of other ions, including sodium, potassium, and magnesium. Tissues other than bone and kidney are also affected by calcitonin. Calcitonin in pharmacologic amounts decreases gastrin secretion and reduces gastric acid output while increasing secretion of sodium, potassium, chloride, and water in the gut. Pentagastrin is a potent stimulator of calcitonin secretion (as is hypercalcemia), suggesting a possible physiologic relationship between gastrin and calcitonin. In the adult human, no readily demonstrable problem develops in cases of calcitonin deficiency (thyroidectomy) or excess (medullary carcinoma of the thyroid). However, the ability of calcitonin to block bone resorption and lower serum calcium makes it a useful drug for the treatment of Paget’s disease, hypercalcemia, and osteoporosis, albeit a less efficacious drug than other available agents.
# Chunk 8161
Bone undergoes a continuous remodeling process involving resorption and formation. Any process that disrupts this bal-ance by increasing bone resorption relative to formation results in osteoporosis. Inadequate gonadal hormone production is a major cause of osteoporosis in men and women. Estrogen replacement therapy at menopause is a well-established means of preventing osteoporosis in the female, but many women fear its adverse effects, particularly the increased risk of breast cancer from continued estrogen use (the well-demonstrated increased risk of endometrial cancer is prevented by combining the estrogen with a progestin) and do not like the persistence of menstrual bleeding that often accompanies this form of therapy. Medical enthusiasm for this treatment has waned with the demonstration that it does not protect against and may increase the risk of heart disease. Raloxifene was the first of the selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs; see Chapter 40) to be approved for the prevention of osteoporosis. Raloxifene shares some of the beneficial effects of estrogen on bone with-out increasing the risk of breast or endometrial cancer (it may actually reduce the risk of breast cancer). Although not as effec-tive as estrogen in increasing bone density, raloxifene has been shown to reduce vertebral fractures. Nonhormonal forms of therapy for osteoporosis have been developed with proven efficacy in reducing fracture risk. Bisphosphonates such as alendronate, risedronate, ibandronate, and zoledronate have been conclusively shown to increase bone density and reduce fractures over at least 5 years when used continuously at a dosage of 10 mg/d or 70 mg/week for alendronate; 5 mg/d or 35 mg/week for risedronate; 2.5 mg/d or 150 mg/month for ibandronate; and 5 mg annually for intrave-nous zoledronate. Side-by-side trials between alendronate and calcitonin (another approved nonestrogen drug for osteoporo-sis) indicated a greater efficacy of alendronate. Bisphosphonates are poorly absorbed and must be given on an empty stomach or infused intravenously. At the higher oral doses used in the treatment of Paget’s disease, alendronate causes gastric irrita-tion, but this is not a significant problem at the doses recom-mended for osteoporosis when patients are instructed to take the drug with a glass of water and remain upright. Denosumab is a human monoclonal antibody directed against RANKL, and it is very effective in inhibiting osteoclastogenesis and activity. Denosumab is given in 60-mg doses subcutaneously every 6 months. All of these drugs inhibit bone resorption with second-ary effects to inhibit bone formation. On the other hand, teripa-ratide, the recombinant form of PTH 1-34 and abaloparatide, an analog of PTHrP, directly stimulate bone formation as well as bone resorption. However, teriparatide and abaloparatide are given daily by subcutaneous injection. Their efficacy in prevent-ing fractures is at least as great as that of the bisphosphonates. In all cases, adequate intake of calcium and vitamin D needs to be maintained. Furthermore, there are several other forms of therapy in devel-opment. In Europe, strontium ranelate, a drug that appears to stimulate bone formation and inhibit bone resorption, has been used for several years with favorable results in large clinical tri-als; approval for use in the United States is expected. Additional promising new treatments undergoing clinical trials include antibodies against sclerostin. Romosozumab, for example, is showing promising results in phase 3 trials by stimulating bone formation and at least initially inhibiting bone resorption. Phase 3 trials with odanacatib, an inhibitor of cathepsin K, an enzyme in osteoclasts that facilitates bone resorption, showed efficacy with respect to fracture reduction. However, this drug also showed an unexpected increase in strokes, and it will not be further developed. In Japan, eldecalcitol, an analog of 1,25(OH)2D, has been approved for the treatment of osteoporo-sis with minimal effects on serum calcium. It is not yet available in the United States.
# Chunk 8162
With the exception of the induction of a mineralization defect by higher than approved doses of etidronate and gastric and esophageal irritation by the oral bisphosphonates, these drugs have proved to be remarkably free of adverse effects when used at the doses recommended for the treatment of osteoporosis. Esophageal irritation can be minimized by taking the drug with a full glass of water and remaining upright for 30 minutes or by using the intravenous forms of these compounds. The initial infusion of zoledronate is commonly associated with several days of a flu-like syndrome that generally does not recur with subsequent infusions. Of other complications, osteonecrosis of the jaw has received considerable attention but is rare in patients receiving usual doses of bisphosphonates (perhaps 1/100,000 patient-years). This complication is more frequent when high intravenous doses of zoledronate are used to control bone metastases and cancer-induced hypercalcemia. More recently, concern has been raised about over-suppressing bone turnover. This may underlie the occurrence of subtrochanteric femur fractures in patients on longterm bisphosphonate treatment. This complication appears to be rare, comparable to that of osteonecrosis of the jaw, but has led some authorities to recommend a “drug holiday” after 5 years of treatment if the clinical condition warrants it (ie, if the fracture risk of discontinuing the bisphosphonate is not deemed high).
# Chunk 8163
The chemistry and pharmacology of the thiazide family of drugs are discussed in Chapter 15. The principal application of thiazides in the treatment of bone mineral disorders is in reducing renal calcium excretion. Thiazides may increase the effectiveness of PTH in stimulating reabsorption of calcium by the renal tubules or may act on calcium reabsorption secondarily by increasing sodium reabsorption in the proximal tubule. In the distal tubule, thiazides block sodium reabsorption at the luminal surface, increasing the calcium-sodium exchange at the basolateral membrane and thus enhancing calcium reabsorption into the blood at this site (see Figure 15–4). Thiazides have proved to be useful in reducing the hypercalciuria and incidence of urinary stone formation in subjects with idiopathic hypercalciuria. Part of their efficacy in reducing stone formation may lie in their ability to decrease urine oxalate excretion and increase urine magnesium and zinc levels, both of which inhibit calcium oxalate stone formation.
# Chunk 8164
Individuals with disorders of bone mineral homeostasis usually present with abnormalities in serum or urine calcium levels (or both), often accompanied by abnormal serum phosphate levels. These abnormal mineral concentrations may themselves cause symptoms requiring immediate treatment (eg, coma in malignant hypercalcemia, tetany in hypocalcemia). More commonly, they serve as clues to an underlying disorder in hormonal regulators (eg, primary hyperparathyroidism), target tissue response (eg, chronic kidney disease), or drug misuse (eg, vitamin D intoxication). In such cases, treatment of the underlying disorder is of prime importance.
# Chunk 8165
Since bone and kidney play central roles in bone mineral homeostasis, conditions that alter bone mineral homeostasis usually affect one or both of these tissues secondarily. Effects on bone can result in osteoporosis (abnormal loss of bone; remaining bone histologically normal), osteomalacia (abnormal bone formation due to inadequate mineralization), or osteitis fibrosa (excessive bone resorption with fibrotic replacement of resorption cavities and marrow). Biochemical markers of skeletal involvement include changes in serum levels of the skeletal isoenzyme of alkaline phosphatase, osteocalcin, and Nand C-terminal propeptides of type I collagen (reflecting osteoblastic activity), and serum and urine levels of tartrateresistant acid phosphatase and collagen breakdown products (reflecting osteoclastic activity). The kidney becomes involved when the calcium × phosphate product in serum rises above the point at which ectopic calcification occurs (nephrocalcinosis) or when the calcium × oxalate (or phosphate) product in urine exceeds saturation, leading to nephrolithiasis. Subtle early indicators of such renal involvement include polyuria, nocturia, and hyposthenuria. Radiologic evidence of nephrocalcinosis and stones is not generally observed until later. The degree of the ensuing renal failure is best followed by monitoring the decline in creatinine clearance. On the other hand, chronic kidney disease can be a primary cause of bone disease because of altered handling of calcium and phosphate, decreased 1,25(OH)2D production, increased FGF23 levels, and secondary hyperparathyroidism.
# Chunk 8166
In hypercalcemia of sufficient severity to produce symptoms, rapid reduction of serum calcium is required. The first steps include rehydration with saline and diuresis with furosemide, although the efficacy of furosemide in this setting has not been proved. Most patients presenting with severe hypercalcemia have a substantial component of prerenal azotemia owing to dehydration, which prevents the kidney from compensating for the rise in serum calcium by excreting more calcium in the urine. Therefore, the initial infusion of 500–1000 mL/h of saline to reverse the dehydration and restore urine flow can by itself substantially lower serum calcium. The addition of a loop diuretic such as furosemide following rehydration enhances urine flow and also inhibits calcium reabsorption in the ascending limb of the loop of Henle (see Chapter 15). Monitoring of central venous pressure is important to forestall the development of heart failure and pulmonary edema in predisposed subjects. In many subjects, saline diuresis suffices to reduce serum calcium to a point at which more definitive diagnosis and treatment of the underlying condition can be achieved. If this is not the case or if more prolonged medical treatment of hypercalcemia is required, the following agents are available (discussed in order of preference).
# Chunk 8167
Calcitonin has proved useful as ancillary treatment in some patients. Calcitonin by itself seldom restores serum calcium to normal, and refractoriness frequently develops. However, its lack of toxicity permits frequent administration at high doses (200 MRC units or more). An effect on serum calcium is observed within 4–6 hours and lasts for 6–10 hours. Calcimar (salmon calcitonin) is available for parenteral and nasal administration.
# Chunk 8168
Gallium nitrate is approved by the FDA for the management of hypercalcemia of malignancy. This drug inhibits bone resorption. At a dosage of 200 mg/m2 body surface area per day given as a continuous intravenous infusion in 5% dextrose for 5 days, gallium nitrate proved superior to calcitonin in reducing serum calcium in cancer patients. Because of potential nephrotoxicity, patients should be well hydrated and have good renal output before starting the infusion.
# Chunk 8169
Intravenous phosphate administration is probably the fastest and surest way to reduce serum calcium, but it is a hazardous procedure if not done properly. Intravenous phosphate should be used only after other methods of treatment (bisphosphonates, calcitonin, and saline diuresis) have failed to control symptomatic hypercalcemia. Phosphate must be given slowly (50 mmol or 1.5 g elemental phosphorus over 6–8 hours) and the patient switched to oral phosphate (1–2 g/d elemental phosphorus, as one of the salts indicated below) as soon as symptoms of hypercalcemia have cleared. The risks of intravenous phosphate therapy include sudden hypocalcemia, ectopic calcification, acute renal failure, and hypotension. Oral phosphate can also lead to ectopic calcification and renal failure if serum calcium and phosphate levels are not carefully monitored, but the risk is less and the time of onset much longer. Phosphate is available in oral and intravenous forms as sodium or potassium salts. Amounts required to provide 1 g of elemental phosphorus are as follows:
# Chunk 8170
Glucocorticoids have no clear role in the immediate treatment of hypercalcemia. However, the chronic hypercalcemia of sarcoidosis, vitamin D intoxication, and certain cancers may respond within several days to glucocorticoid therapy. Prednisone in oral doses of 30–60 mg daily is generally used, although equivalent doses of other glucocorticoids are effective. The rationale for the use of glucocorticoids in these diseases differs, however. The hypercalcemia of sarcoidosis is secondary to increased production of 1,25(OH)2D by the sarcoid tissue itself. Glucocorticoid therapy directed at the reduction of sarcoid tissue results in restoration of normal serum calcium and 1,25(OH)2D levels. The treatment of hypervitaminosis D with glucocorticoids probably does not alter vitamin D metabolism significantly but is thought to reduce vitamin D–mediated intestinal calcium transport and increase renal excretion of calcium. An action of glucocorticoids to reduce vitamin D–mediated bone resorption has not been excluded, however. The effect of glucocorticoids on the hypercalcemia of cancer is probably twofold. The malignancies responding best to glucocorticoids (ie, multiple myeloma and related lymphoproliferative diseases) are sensitive to the lytic action of glucocorticoids. Therefore part of the effect may be related to decreased tumor mass and activity. Glucocorticoids have also been shown to inhibit the secretion or effectiveness of cytokines elaborated by multiple myeloma and related cancers that stimulate osteoclastic bone resorption. Other causes of hypercalcemia—particularly primary hyperparathyroidism—do not respond to glucocorticoid therapy.
# Chunk 8171
When rapidity of action is required, 1,25(OH)2D3 (calcitriol), 0.25–1 mcg daily, is the vitamin D metabolite of choice because it is capable of raising serum calcium within 24–48 hours. Calcitriol also raises serum phosphate, although this action is usually not observed early in treatment. The combined effects of calcitriol and all other vitamin D metabolites and analogs on both calcium and phosphate make careful monitoring of these mineral levels especially important to prevent ectopic calcification secondary to an abnormally high serum calcium × phosphate product. Since the choice of the appropriate vitamin D metabolite or analog for long-term treatment of hypocalcemia depends on the nature of the underlying disease, further discussion of vitamin D treatment is found under the headings of the specific diseases.
# Chunk 8172
This rather common disease, if associated with symptoms, significant hypercalcemia, and hypercalciuria, osteoporosis, and kidney disease is best treated surgically. Oral phosphate and bisphosphonates have been tried but cannot be recommended. A substantial proportion of asymptomatic patients with mild disease do not get worse and may be followed without treatment, although a number of such patients do end up requiring surgery. The calcimimetic agent cinacalcet, discussed previously, has been approved for secondary hyperparathyroidism and is in clinical trials for the treatment of primary hyperparathyroidism. If such drugs prove efficacious and cost effective, medical management of this disease will need to be reconsidered. Primary hyperparathyroidism is often associated with low levels of 25(OH)D, suggesting that mild vitamin D deficiency may be contributing to the elevated PTH levels, although this could also be due to the stimulation by PTH of 1,25(OH)2D production that in turn induces CYP24A1, which will increase 25(OH) D (and 1,25(OH)2D) catabolism. Vitamin D supplementation in such situations has proved safe with respect to further elevations of serum and urine calcium levels, but calcium should be monitored nevertheless when vitamin D supplementation is provided.
# Chunk 8173
The level of vitamin D thought to be necessary for good health is being reexamined with the appreciation that vitamin D acts on a large number of cell types beyond those responsible for bone and mineral metabolism. A level of 25(OH)D above 10 ng/mL is necessary for preventing rickets or osteomalacia. However, substantial epidemiologic and some prospective trial data indicate that a higher level, such as 20–30 ng/mL, is required to optimize intestinal calcium absorption, optimize the accrual and maintenance of bone mass, reduce falls and fractures, and prevent a wide variety of diseases including diabetes mellitus, hyperparathyroidism, autoimmune diseases, and cancer. An expert panel for the Institute of Medicine (IOM) has recommended that a level of 20 ng/mL (50 nM) was sufficient, although up to 50 ng/mL (125 nM) was considered safe. For individuals between the ages of 1 and 70 years, 600 IU/d vitamin D was thought to be sufficient to meet these goals, although up to 4000 IU was considered safe. These recommendations are based primarily on data from randomized placebo-controlled clinical trials (RCTs) that evaluated falls and fractures; data supporting the nonskeletal effects of vitamin D were considered too preliminary to be used in their recommendations because of lack of RCTs for these other actions. The lower end of these recommendations has been considered too low and the upper end too restrictive by a number of vitamin D experts, and the Endocrine Society has published a different set of recommendations suggesting that 30 ng/mL was a more appropriate lower limit. Nevertheless, the call for better clinical data from RCTs, especially for the nonskeletal actions, is appropriate. The IOM guidelines—at least with respect to the lower recommended levels of vitamin D supplementation—are unlikely to correct vitamin D deficiency in individuals with obesity, dark complexions, limited capacity for sunlight exposure, or malabsorption. Vitamin D deficiency or insufficiency can be treated by higher dosages (either D2 or D3, 1000–4000 IU/d or 50,000 IU/week for several weeks). No other vitamin D metabolite is indicated. Because the half-life of vitamin D3 metabolites in blood is greater than that of vitamin D2, there are advantages to using vitamin D3 rather than vitamin D2 supplements, although when administered on a daily or weekly schedule these differences may be moot. The diet should also contain adequate amounts of calcium as several studies indicate a synergism between calcium and vitamin D with respect to a number of their actions.
# Chunk 8174
In contrast to the hypocalcemia that is more often associated with chronic kidney disease, some patients may become hypercalcemic from overzealous treatment with calcium. However, the most common cause of hypercalcemia is the development of severe secondary (sometimes referred to as tertiary) hyperparathyroidism. In such cases, the PTH level in blood is very high. Serum alkaline phosphatase levels also tend to be high. Treatment often requires parathyroidectomy. A less common circumstance leading to hypercalcemia is development of a form of bone disease characterized by a profound decrease in bone cell activity and loss of the calcium buffering action of bone (adynamic bone disease). In the absence of kidney function, any calcium absorbed from the intestine accumulates in the blood. Such patients are very sensitive to the hypercalcemic action of 1,25(OH)2D. These individuals generally have a high serum calcium but nearly normal alkaline phosphatase and PTH levels. The bone in such patients may have a high aluminum content, especially in the mineralization front, which blocks normal bone mineralization. These patients do not respond favorably to parathyroidectomy. Deferoxamine, an agent used to chelate iron (see Chapter 57), also binds aluminum and is being used to treat this disorder. However, with the reduction in use of aluminum-containing phosphate binders, most cases of adynamic bone disease are not associated with aluminum deposition but are attributed in some cases to overzealous suppression of PTH secretion.
# Chunk 8175
Regardless of the drug used, careful attention to serum calcium and phosphate levels is required. A calcium × phosphate product (in mg/dL units) less than 55 is desired with both calcium and phosphate in the normal range. Calcium adjustments in the diet and dialysis bath and phosphate restriction (dietary and with oral ingestion of phosphate binders) should be used along with vitamin D metabolites. Monitoring of serum PTH and alkaline phosphatase levels is useful in determining whether therapy is correcting or preventing secondary hyperparathyroidism. In patients on dialysis, a PTH value of approximately twice the upper limits of normal is considered desirable to prevent adynamic bone disease. Although not generally available, percutaneous bone biopsies for quantitative histomorphometry may help in choosing appropriate therapy and following the effectiveness of such therapy, especially in cases suspected of adynamic bone disease. Unlike the rapid changes in serum values, changes in bone morphology require months to years. Monitoring of serum vitamin D metabolite levels is useful for determining adherence, absorption, and metabolism.
# Chunk 8176
In mild forms of malabsorption, high doses of vitamin D (25,000–50,000 IU one to three times per week) should suffice to raise serum levels of 25(OH)D into the normal range. Many patients with severe disease do not respond to vitamin D. Clinical experience with the other metabolites is limited, but both calcitriol and calcifediol have been used successfully in doses similar to those recommended for treatment of renal osteodystrophy. Theoretically, calcifediol should be the drug of choice under these conditions, because no impairment of the renal metabolism of 25(OH)D to 1,25(OH)2D and 24,25(OH)2D exists in these patients. However, calcifediol is only approved in the United States for use in chronic kidney disease and secondary hyperparathyroidism. Both calcitriol and 24,25(OH)2D may be of importance in reversing the bone disease. Intramuscular injections of vitamin D would be an alternative form of therapy, but there are currently no FDA-approved intramuscular preparations available in the United States. The skin remains a good source of vitamin D production, although care is needed to prevent UVB overexposure (ie, by avoiding sunburn) to reduce the risk of photoaging and skin cancer.
# Chunk 8177
Bisphosphonates are potent inhibitors of bone resorption. They increase bone density and reduce the risk of fractures in the hip, spine, and other locations. Alendronate, risedronate, ibandronate, and zoledronate are approved for the treatment of osteoporosis, using daily dosing schedules of alendronate, 10 mg/d, risedronate, 5 mg/d, or ibandronate, 2.5 mg/d; or weekly schedules of alendronate, 70 mg/week, or risedronate, 35 mg/week; or monthly schedules of ibandronate, 150 mg/month; or quarterly (every 3 months) injections of ibandronate, 3 mg; or annual infusions of zoledronate, 5 mg. These drugs are effective in men as well as women and for various causes of osteoporosis.
# Chunk 8178
Teriparatide, the recombinant form of PTH 1-34, is approved for treatment of osteoporosis. It is given in a dosage of 20 mcg subcutaneously daily. Teriparatide stimulates new bone formation, but unlike fluoride, this new bone appears structurally normal and is associated with a substantial reduction in the incidence of fractures. The drug is approved for only 2 years of use. Trials examining the sequential use of teriparatide followed by a bisphosphonate after 1 or 2 years are in progress and look promising. Use of the drug with a bisphosphonate has not shown greater efficacy than the bisphosphonate alone, although recent trials with the concomitant use of teriparatide and denosumab show promise.
# Chunk 8179
These disorders usually manifest in childhood as rickets and hypophosphatemia, although they may first present in adults. In both X-linked and autosomal dominant hypophosphatemia, biologically active FGF23 accumulates, leading to phosphate wasting in the urine and hypophosphatemia. In autosomal dominant hypophosphatemia, mutations in the FGF23 gene replace an arginine required for proteolysis and result in increased FGF23 stability. X-linked hypophosphatemia is caused by mutations in the gene encoding the PHEX protein, an endopeptidase. Initially, it was thought that FGF23 was a direct substrate for PHEX, but this no longer appears to be the case. Tumor-induced osteomalacia is a phenotypically similar but acquired syndrome in adults that results from overexpression of FGF23 in tumor cells. The current concept for all of these diseases is that FGF23 blocks the renal uptake of phosphate and blocks 1,25(OH)2D production leading to rickets in children and osteomalacia in adults. Phosphate is critical to normal bone mineralization; when phosphate stores are deficient, a clinical and pathologic picture resembling vitamin D–dependent rickets develops. However, affected children fail to respond to the standard doses of vitamin D used in the treatment of nutritional rickets. A defect in 1,25(OH)2D production by the kidney contributes to the phenotype as 1,25(OH)2D levels are low relative to the degree of hypophosphatemia observed. This combination of low serum phosphate and low or low-normal serum 1,25(OH)2D provides the rationale for treating these patients with oral phosphate (1–3 g daily) and calcitriol (0.25–2 mcg daily). Reports of such combination therapy are encouraging in this otherwise debilitating disease, although prolonged treatment often leads to secondary hyperparathyroidism. More recently the use of FGF23 antibodies for children with X-linked hypophosphatemic (XLH) rickets has shown promise and may become the treatment of choice for these conditions.
# Chunk 8180
These distinctly different autosomal recessive diseases present as childhood rickets that do not respond to conventional doses of vitamin D. Pseudovitamin D–deficiency rickets is due to an isolated deficiency of 1,25(OH)2D production caused by mutations in 25(OH)-D1α-hydroxylase (CYP27B1). This condition is treated with calcitriol (0.25–0.5 mcg daily). Hereditary vitamin D–resistant rickets (HVDRR) is caused by mutations in the gene for the vitamin D receptor. The serum levels of 1,25(OH)2D are very high in HVDRR but inappropriately low for the level of calcium in pseudovitamin D–deficient rickets. Treatment with large doses of calcitriol has been claimed to be effective in restoring normocalcemia in some HVDRR patients, presumably those with a partially functional vitamin D receptor, although many patients are completely resistant to all forms of vitamin D. Calcium and phosphate infusions have been shown to correct the rickets in some children, similar to studies in mice in which the VDR gene has been deleted. These diseases are rare.
# Chunk 8181
Individuals with idiopathic hypercalciuria, characterized by hypercalciuria and nephrolithiasis with normal serum calcium and PTH levels, have been divided into three groups: (1) hyperabsorbers, patients with increased intestinal absorption of calcium, resulting in high-normal serum calcium, low-normal PTH, and a secondary increase in urine calcium; (2) renal calcium leakers, patients with a primary decrease in renal reabsorption of filtered calcium, leading to low-normal serum calcium and high-normal serum PTH; and (3) renal phosphate leakers, patients with a primary decrease in renal reabsorption of phosphate, leading to increased 1,25(OH)2D production, increased intestinal calcium absorption, increased ionized serum calcium, low-normal PTH levels, and a secondary increase in urine calcium. There is some disagreement about this classification, and many patients are not readily categorized. Many such patients present with mild hypophosphatemia, and oral phosphate has been used with some success in reducing stone formation. However, a clear role for phosphate in the treatment of this disorder has not been established and is not recommended.
# Chunk 8182
Therapy with hydrochlorothiazide, up to 50 mg twice daily, or chlorthalidone, 50–100 mg daily, is recommended. Loop diuretics such as furosemide and ethacrynic acid should not be used because they increase urinary calcium excretion. The major toxicity of thiazide diuretics, besides hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, and hyperglycemia, is hypercalcemia. This is seldom more than a biochemical observation unless the patient has a disease such as hyperparathyroidism in which bone turnover is accelerated. Accordingly, one should screen patients for such disorders before starting thiazide therapy and monitor serum and urine calcium when therapy has begun.
# Chunk 8183
Paget’s disease is a localized bone disorder characterized by uncontrolled osteoclastic bone resorption with secondary increases in poorly organized bone formation. The cause of Paget’s disease is obscure, although some studies suggest that a measles-related virus may be involved. The disease is fairly common, although symptomatic bone disease is less common. Recent studies indicate that this infection may produce a factor that increases the stimulation of bone resorption by 1,25(OH)2D. The biochemical parameters of elevated serum alkaline phosphatase and urinary hydroxyproline are useful for diagnosis. Along with the characteristic radiologic and bone scan findings, these biochemical determinations provide good markers by which to follow therapy.
# Chunk 8184
The goal of treatment is to reduce bone pain and stabilize or prevent other problems such as progressive deformity, fractures, hearing loss, high-output cardiac failure, and immobilization hypercalcemia. Calcitonin and bisphosphonates are the first-line agents for this disease. Calcitonin is administered subcutaneously or intramuscularly in doses of 50–100 MRC (Medical Research Council) units every day or every other day. Nasal inhalation at 200–400 units/d is also effective. Higher or more frequent doses have been advocated when this initial regimen is ineffective. Improvement in bone pain and reduction in serum alkaline phosphatase and urine hydroxyproline levels require weeks to months. Often a patient who responds well initially loses the response to calcitonin. This refractoriness is not correlated with the development of antibodies.
# Chunk 8185
Sodium etidronate, alendronate, risedronate, and tiludronate are the bisphosphonates currently approved for clinical use in Paget’s disease of bone in the United States. Other bisphosphonates, including pamidronate, are being used in other countries. The recommended doses of bisphosphonates are etidronate, 5 mg/kg per day; alendronate, 40 mg/d; risedronate, 30 mg/d; and tiludronate, 400 mg/d. Long-term remission (months to years) may be expected in patients who respond to a bisphosphonate. Treatment should not exceed 6 months per course but can be repeated after
# Chunk 8186
Patients with short bowel syndromes and associated fat malabsorption can present with renal stones composed of calcium and oxalate. Such patients characteristically have normal or low urine calcium levels but elevated urine oxalate levels. The reasons for the development of oxaluria in such patients are thought to be twofold: first, in the intestinal lumen, calcium (which is now bound to fat) fails to bind oxalate and no longer prevents its absorption; second, enteric flora, acting on the increased supply of nutrients reaching the colon, produce larger amounts of oxalate. Although one would ordinarily avoid treating a patient with calcium oxalate stones with calcium supplementation, this is precisely what is done in patients with enteric oxaluria. The increased intestinal calcium binds the excess oxalate and prevents its absorption. Calcium carbonate (1–2 g) can be given daily in divided doses, with careful monitoring of urinary calcium and oxalate to be certain that urinary oxalate falls without a dangerous increase in urinary calcium.
# Chunk 8187
There are multiple reasons for this patient’s osteoporo-sis, including a heavy smoking history, possible alco-holism, and chronic inflammatory disease treated with glucocorticoids. High levels of cytokines from the chronic inflammation activate osteoclasts. Glucocorticoids increase urinary losses of calcium, suppress bone formation, and inhibit intestinal calcium absorption as well as decreasing gonadotropin production, leading to hypogonadism. Man-agement should include measurement of serum testoster-one, calcium, 25(OH)D, and the 24-hour urine calcium and creatinine levels (to verify completeness of collection), with treatment as appropriate for these secondary causes, plus initiation of bisphosphonate or denosumab therapy as primary treatment.
# Chunk 8188
Much attention has been focused on eliminating the misuse of antibiotics to slow the tide of resistance. Antibiotics are misused in a variety of ways, including use in patients who are unlikely to have bacterial infections, use over unnecessarily prolonged periods, and use of multiple agents or broad-spectrum agents when not needed. Large quantities of antibiotics have been used in agriculture to stimulate growth and prevent infection in livestock, and this has added to the selection pressure that results in resistant organisms. In December 2013, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) announced a program to phase out the nontherapeutic use of antibiotics in livestock. In 2015, President Obama announced a 5-year National Action Plan with the goals of improving antimicrobial stewardship efforts, tools for diagnosing infectious diseases, and surveillance for resistant organisms. However, even if these programs are successful, it will take years before the benefits are apparent.
# Chunk 8189
Unfortunately, as the need has grown in recent years, development of novel antibiotics has slowed. Several of the largest pharmaceutical companies have abandoned research and development in this area because of diminished success and profits; the resulting reduction in new drug introductions is shown in the figure below, which shows new systemic antibacterial agents approved by the FDA per 5-year period through 2012. Several new antimicrobial agents have been approved between 2013 and 2015; however, most are slight modifications of existing drugs. Some novel targets are under investigation. For example, tarocin was found to successfully inhibit teichoic acid, a structure essential for bacterial cell wall synthesis. When combined with a β-lactam antibiotic in a mouse model, tarocin effectively killed methicillin-resistant strains of Staphylococcus aureus that were resistant to either agent alone.
# Chunk 8190
Camille E. Beauduy, PharmD, & Lisa G. Winston, MD*

A 45-year-old man is brought to the local hospital emer-gency department by ambulance. His wife reports that he had been in his normal state of health until 3 days ago when he developed a fever and a productive cough. Dur-ing the last 24 hours he has complained of a headache and is increasingly confused. His wife reports that his medical history is significant only for hypertension, for which he takes hydrochlorothiazide and lisinopril, and that he is allergic to amoxicillin. She says that he developed a rash many years ago when prescribed amoxicillin for bron-chitis. In the emergency department, the man is febrile (38.7°C [101.7°F]), hypotensive (90/54 mmHg), tachypneic (36/min), and tachycardic (110/min). He has no signs of meningismus but is oriented only to person. A stat chest x-ray shows a left lower lung consolidation consistent with pneumonia. A CT scan is not concerning for lesions or elevated intracranial pressure. The plan is to start empiric antibiotics and perform a lumbar puncture to rule out bacterial meningitis. What antibiotic regimen should be prescribed to treat both pneumonia and meningitis? Does the history of amoxicillin rash affect the antibiotic choice? Why or why not?
# Chunk 8191
those produced by Staphylococcus aureus, Haemophilus influenzae, and Escherichia coli, are relatively narrow in substrate specificity, preferring penicillins to cephalosporins. Other β-lactamases, eg, AmpC β-lactamase produced by Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Enterobacter sp and extended-spectrum β-lactamases (ESBLs) in Enterobacteriaceae, hydrolyze both cephalosporins and penicillins. Carbapenems are highly resistant to hydrolysis by penicillinases and cephalosporinases, but they are hydrolyzed by metallo-β-lactamases and carbapenemases.
# Chunk 8192
Absorption of orally administered drug differs greatly for individual penicillins, depending in part on their acid stability and protein binding. Gastrointestinal absorption of nafcillin is erratic, so it is not suitable for oral administration. Dicloxacillin, ampicillin, and amoxicillin are acid-stable and relatively well absorbed, producing serum concentrations in the range of 4–8 mcg/mL after a 500-mg oral dose. Absorption of most oral penicillins (amoxicillin being an exception) is impaired by food, and the drugs should be administered at least 1–2 hours before or after a meal.
# Chunk 8193
Intravenous administration of penicillin G is preferred to the intramuscular route because of irritation and local pain from intramuscular injection of large doses. Serum concentrations 30 minutes after an intravenous injection of 1 g of penicillin G (equivalent to approximately 1.6 million units) are 20–50 mcg/mL. Only a fraction of the total drug in serum is present as free drug, the concentration of which is determined by protein binding. Highly protein-bound penicillins (eg, nafcillin) generally achieve lower free-drug concentrations in serum than less protein-bound penicillins (eg, penicillin G or ampicillin). Penicillins are widely distributed in body fluids and tissues with a few exceptions. They are polar molecules, so intracellular concentrations are well below those found in extracellular fluids.
# Chunk 8194
Penicillin concentrations in most tissues are equal to those in serum. Penicillin is also excreted into sputum and breast milk to levels 3–15% of those in the serum. Penetration into the eye, the prostate, and the central nervous system is poor. However, with active inflammation of the meninges, as in bacterial meningitis, penicillin concentrations of 1–5 mcg/mL can be achieved with a daily parenteral dose of 18–24 million units. These concentrations are sufficient to kill susceptible strains of pneumococci and meningococci.
# Chunk 8195
Penicillin is rapidly excreted by the kidneys; small amounts are excreted by other routes. Tubular secretion accounts for about 90% of renal excretion, and glomerular filtration accounts for the remainder. The normal half-life of penicillin G is approximately 30 minutes but, in renal failure, may be as long as 10 hours. Ampicillin and the extended-spectrum penicillins are secreted more slowly than penicillin G and have half-lives of 1 hour. For penicillins that are cleared by the kidney, the dose must be adjusted according to renal function, with approximately one-fourth to one-third the normal dose being administered if creatinine clearance is 10 mL/min or less (Table 43–1).
# Chunk 8196
2The dose shown is during the first week of life. The daily dose should be increased by approximately 33–50% after the first week of life. The lower dosage range should be used for neonates weighing less than 2 kg. After the first month of life, pediatric doses may be used. 3Dose is based on piperacillin component.
# Chunk 8197
Except for amoxicillin, oral penicillins should be given 1–2 hours before or after a meal; they should not be given with food to minimize binding to food proteins and acid inactivation. Amoxicillin may be given without regard to meals. Blood levels of all penicillins can be raised by simultaneous administration of probenecid, 0.5 g (10 mg/kg in children) every 6 hours orally, which impairs renal tubular secretion of weak acids such as β-lactam compounds. Penicillins, like all antibacterial antibiotics, should never be used for viral infections and should be prescribed only when there is reasonable suspicion of, or documented infection with, susceptible organisms.
# Chunk 8198
Allergic reactions include anaphylactic shock (very rare—0.05% of recipients); serum sickness–type reactions (now rare—urticaria, fever, joint swelling, angioedema, pruritus, and respiratory compromise occurring 7–12 days after exposure); and a variety of skin rashes. Oral lesions, fever, interstitial nephritis (an autoimmune reaction to a penicillin-protein complex), eosinophilia, hemolytic anemia and other hematologic disturbances, and vasculitis may also occur. Most patients allergic to penicillins can be treated with alternative drugs. However, if necessary (eg, treatment of enterococcal endocarditis or neurosyphilis in a patient with serious penicillin allergy), desensitization can be accomplished with gradually increasing doses of penicillin.
# Chunk 8199
A. Oral

Cephalexin is the oral first generation agent widely used in the USA. After oral doses of 500 mg, peak serum levels are 15–20 mcg/mL. Urine concentration is usually very high, but in most tissues levels are variable and generally lower than in serum. Cephalexin is typically given in oral dosages of 0.25–0.5 g four times daily (15–30 mg/kg/d). Excretion is mainly by glomerular filtration and tubular secretion into the urine. Drugs that block tubular secretion, eg, probenecid, may increase serum levels substantially. In patients with impaired renal function, dosage must be reduced (Table 43–2).
# Chunk 8200
1The total dose should not exceed the adult dose.

2The dose shown is during the first week of life. The daily dose should be increased by approximately 33–50% after the first week of life. The lower dosage range should be used for neonates weighing less than 2 kg. After the first month of life, pediatric doses may be used. 350% of dose for Clcr <30 mL/min.
# Chunk 8201
The half-lives of these drugs and the necessary dosing intervals vary greatly: ceftriaxone (half-life 7–8 hours) can be injected once every 24 hours at a dosage of 15–50 mg/kg/d. A single daily 1-g dose is sufficient for most serious infections, with 2 g every 12 hours recommended for treatment of meningitis and 2 g every 24 hours recommended for endocarditis. The remaining drugs in the group (half-life 1–1.7 hours) can be infused every 6–8 hours in dosages between 2 and 12 g/d, depending on the severity of infection. Cefixime can be given orally (200 mg twice daily or 400 mg once daily) for urinary tract infections. Due to increasing resistance, cefixime is no longer recommended for the treatment of uncomplicated gonococcal urethritis and cervicitis. Intramuscular ceftriaxone in combination with azithromycin is the regimen of choice for treating most gonococcal infections. The adult dose for cefpodoxime proxetil or cefditoren pivoxil is 200–400 mg twice daily; for ceftibuten, 400 mg once daily; and for cefdinir, 300 mg/12 h. Ceftriaxone excretion is mainly through the biliary tract, and no dosage adjustment is required in renal insufficiency. The other third-generation cephalosporins are excreted by the kidney and therefore require dosage adjustment in renal insufficiency.
# Chunk 8202
Cephalosporins Combined with a-lactamase Inhibitors

Novel cephalosporin-β-lactamase inhibitor combinations have been developed to combat resistant Gram-negative infections; see the subsequent section for more information on β-lactamase inhibitors. Ceftolozane-tazobactam and ceftazidime-avibactam were both FDA-approved for the treatment of complicated intra-abdominal infections and urinary tract infections. Both agents have potent in vitro activity against Gram-negative organisms, including P aeruginosa and AmpC and extended-spectrum β-lactamase producing Enterobacteriaceae. While neither agent is active against organisms producing metallo-β-lactamases, ceftazidime-avibactam may be an option for carbapenemase-producing organisms. Due to limited activity against anaerobic pathogens, both should be combined with metronidazole when treating complicated intra-abdominal infections. Both agents have short half-lives of 2–3 hours and are dosed every 8 hours. Both are primarily renally excreted and require dose adjustment in patients with impaired renal clearance.
# Chunk 8203
Monobactams are drugs with a monocyclic β-lactam ring (Figure 43–1). Their spectrum of activity is limited to aerobic Gram-negative organisms (including P aeruginosa). Unlike other β-lactam antibiotics, they have no activity against Gram-positive bacteria or anaerobes. Aztreonam is the only monobactam available in the USA. It has structural similarities to ceftazidime, and its Gram-negative spectrum is similar to that of the third-generation cephalosporins. It is stable to many β-lactamases with notable exceptions being AmpC β-lactamases and extended-spectrum β-lactamases. It penetrates well into the cerebrospinal fluid. Aztreonam is given intravenously every 8 hours in a dose of 1–2 g, providing peak serum levels of 100 mcg/mL. The half-life is 1–2 hours and is greatly prolonged in renal failure.
# Chunk 8204
Vancomycin is poorly absorbed from the intestinal tract and is administered orally only for the treatment of colitis caused by C difficile. Parenteral doses must be administered intravenously. A 1-hour intravenous infusion of 1 g produces blood levels of 15–30 mcg/mL for 1–2 hours. The drug is widely distributed in the body including adipose tissue. Cerebrospinal fluid levels 7–30% of simultaneous serum concentrations are achieved if there is meningeal inflammation. Ninety percent of the drug is excreted by glomerular filtration. In the presence of renal insufficiency, striking accumulation may occur (Table 43–2). In functionally anephric patients, the half-life of vancomycin is 6–10 days. A significant amount of vancomycin is removed during a standard hemodialysis run using a high-flux membrane.
# Chunk 8205
Important indications for parenteral vancomycin are bloodstream infections and endocarditis caused by methicillin-resistant staphylococci. However, vancomycin is not as effective as an antistaphylococcal penicillin for treatment of serious infections such as endocarditis caused by methicillin-susceptible strains. Vancomycin in combination with gentamicin is an alternative regimen for treatment of enterococcal endocarditis in a patient with serious penicillin allergy. Vancomycin (in combination with cefotaxime, ceftriaxone, or rifampin) is also recommended for treatment of meningitis suspected or known to be caused by a penicillin-resistant strain of pneumococcus. The recommended dosage in a patient with normal renal function is 30–60 mg/kg/d in two or three divided doses. The traditional dosing regimen in adults with normal renal function is 1 g every 12 hours (~30 mg/kg/d); however, this dose will not typically achieve the trough concentrations (15–20 mcg/mL) recommended for serious infections. For serious infections (see below), a starting dose of 45–60 mg/kg/d should be given with titration of the dose to achieve trough levels of 15–20 mcg/mL. The dosage in children is 40 mg/kg/d in three or four divided doses. Clearance of vancomycin is directly proportional to creatinine clearance, and the dosage is reduced accordingly in patients with renal insufficiency. For patients receiving hemodialysis, a common dosing regimen is a 1-g loading dose followed by 500 mg after each dialysis session. Patients receiving a prolonged course of therapy should have serum trough concentrations checked. For S aureus infections, recommended trough concentrations are 10–15 mcg/mL for mild to moderate infections and 15–20 mcg/mL for more serious infections such as endocarditis, meningitis, and necrotizing pneumonia.
# Chunk 8206
Administration with another ototoxic or nephrotoxic drug, such as an aminoglycoside, increases the risk of these toxicities. Ototoxicity can be minimized by maintaining peak serum concentrations below 60 mcg/mL. Among the more common reactions is the so-called “red man” syndrome. This infusion-related flushing is caused by release of histamine. It can be largely prevented by prolonging the infusion period to 1–2 hours (preferred) or pretreatment with an antihistamine such as diphenhydramine.
# Chunk 8207
Telavancin is a semisynthetic lipoglycopeptide derived from vancomycin. Telavancin is active versus Gram-positive bacteria and has in vitro activity against many strains with reduced susceptibility to vancomycin. Telavancin has two mechanisms of action. Like vancomycin, telavancin inhibits cell wall synthesis by binding to the d-Ala-d-Ala terminus of peptidoglycan in the growing cell wall. In addition, it disrupts the bacterial cell membrane potential and increases membrane permeability. The half-life of telavancin is approximately 8 hours, which supports once-daily intravenous dosing. The drug is approved for treatment of complicated skin and soft tissue infections and hospital-acquired pneumonia at a dose of 10 mg/kg IV daily. Unlike vancomycin therapy, monitoring of serum telavancin levels is not required. Telavancin was associated with substantial nephrotoxicity and concern for increased mortality associated with renal impairment in clinical trials, leading to boxed warnings. It is potentially teratogenic, so administration to pregnant women must be avoided.
# Chunk 8208
Dalbavancin and oritavancin are semisynthetic lipoglycopeptides derived from teicoplanin. Dalbavancin and oritavancin inhibit cell wall synthesis via the same mechanism of action as vancomycin and teicoplanin; oritavancin works by additional mechanisms, including disruption of cell membrane permeability and inhibition of RNA synthesis. Compared with vancomycin, both agents have lower MICs against many Gram-positive bacteria including methicillin-resistant and vancomycin-intermediate S aureus. Dalbavancin is not active against most strains of vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE). Oritavancin has in vitro activity against VRE, but its clinical utility in treating VRE infections remains unclear. Both agents have extremely long half-lives of greater than 10 days, which allows for once-weekly intravenous administration. Dalbavancin and oritavancin have been approved for the treatment of skin and soft tissue infections. There are limited clinical data supporting the use of dalbavancin for uncomplicated catheter-associated bloodstream infections, though it is not approved for use in this setting. Dalbavancin was originally approved as a two-dose, once-weekly intravenous regimen (1000 mg infused on day 1 and 500 mg infused on day 8), but a subsequent phase 3 study comparing the two-dose regimen with a single, 1500-mg intravenous dose showed that the single-dose regimen is noninferior. The results of this study allowed for updated labelling, making both dalbavancin and oritavancin appropriate for single-dose treatments for complicated skin and soft tissue infections. A practical difference between the two is the infusion time: dalbavancin can be administered over 30 minutes, while oritavancin must be infused over 3 hours. Neither requires dose adjustment in mild to moderate renal or hepatic impairment, and neither is removed by dialysis.
# Chunk 8209
Daptomycin is a novel cyclic lipopeptide fermentation product of Streptomyces roseosporus (Figure 43–9). Its spectrum of activity is similar to that of vancomycin except that it may be active against vancomycin-resistant strains of enterococci and S aureus. In vitro, it has more rapid bactericidal activity than vancomycin. The precise mechanism of action is not fully understood, but it is known to bind to the cell membrane via calcium-dependent insertion of its lipid tail. This results in depolarization of the cell membrane with potassium efflux and rapid cell death (Figure 43–10). Daptomycin is cleared renally. The approved doses are 4 mg/kg/dose for treatment of skin and soft tissue infections and 6 mg/kg/dose for treatment of bacteremia and endocarditis once daily in patients with normal renal function and every other day in patients with creatinine clearance of less than 30 mL/min. For serious infections, many experts recommend using 8–10 mg/kg/dose. These higher doses appear to be safe and well tolerated, although evidence supporting increased efficacy is lacking. In clinical trials, daptomycin was noninferior in efficacy to vancomycin. It can cause myopathy, and creatine phosphokinase levels should be monitored weekly. Pulmonary surfactant antagonizes daptomycin, and it should not be used to treat pneumonia. Daptomycin can also cause an allergic pneumonitis in patients receiving prolonged therapy (>2 weeks). Treatment failures have been reported in association with an increase in daptomycin MIC during therapy. Daptomycin is an effective alternative to vancomycin, and its role continues to unfold.
# Chunk 8210
Cefotetan, cefoxitin: Intravenous, second-generation drugs, activity versus Bacteroides fragilis allows for use in abdominal/pelvic infections
# Chunk 8211
Ertapenem: Intravenous, longer half-life allows for once-daily dosing, lacks activity versus Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Acinetobacter •VancomycinInhibits cell wall synthesis by binding to the D-Ala-D-Ala terminus of nascent peptidoglycan Bactericidal activity against susceptible bacteria, slower kill than β-lactam antibiotics Infections caused by Gram-positive bacteria including sepsis, endocarditis, andmeningitis•C difficile colitis (oral formulation)
# Chunk 8212
Boucher HW et al: Once-weekly dalbavancin versus daily conventional therapy for skin infection. N Engl J Med 2014;370:2169.
# Chunk 8213
Tetracyclines, Macrolides, Clindamycin, Chloramphenicol, Streptogramins, & Oxazolidinones

Camille E. Beauduy, PharmD, & Lisa G. Winston, MD motion tenderness is present. A first-catch urine specimen is obtained for chlamydia and gonorrhea nucleic acid amplifi-cation testing. A urine pregnancy test is also ordered as the patient reports she “missed her last period.” Pending these results, the decision is made to treat her presumptively for chlamydial cervicitis. What are two potential treatment options for her possible chlamydial infection? How does her potential pregnancy affect the treatment decision? A 22-year-old woman presents to her college medical clinic complaining of a 2-week history of vaginal discharge. She denies any fever or abdominal pain but does report vaginal bleeding after sexual intercourse. When questioned about her sexual activity, she reports having vaginal intercourse, at times unprotected, with two men in the last 6 months. A pelvic examination is performed and is positive for muco-purulent discharge from the endocervical canal. No cervical
# Chunk 8214
Tetracyclines differ in their absorption after oral administration and in their elimination. Absorption after oral administration is approximately 60–70% for tetracycline and demeclocycline (not typically used as an antibiotic; see below); and 95–100% for doxycycline and minocycline. Tigecycline is poorly absorbed orally and must be administered intravenously. A portion of an orally administered dose of tetracycline remains in the gut lumen, alters intestinal flora, and is excreted in the feces. Absorption occurs mainly in the upper small intestine and is impaired by multivalent cations (Ca2+, Mg2+, Fe2+, Al3+); by dairy products and antacids, which contain multivalent cations; and by alkaline pH. Tetracycline and demeclocycline should be administered on an empty stomach, while doxycycline and minocycline absorption is not impaired by food. Specially buffered doxycycline and minocycline solutions are formulated for intravenous administration.
# Chunk 8215
Tetracyclines are 40–80% bound by serum proteins. Oral dosages of 500 mg every 6 hours of tetracycline hydrochloride produce peak blood levels of 4–6 mcg/mL. Peak levels of 2–4 mcg/mL are achieved with a 200-mg dose of doxycycline or minocycline. Steady-state peak serum concentrations of tigecycline are 0.6 mcg/mL at the standard dosage. Tetracyclines are distributed widely to tissues and body fluids except for cerebrospinal fluid, where concentrations are 10–25% of those in serum. Tetracyclines cross the placenta and are also excreted in breast milk. As a result of chelation with calcium, tetracyclines bind to—and damage—growing bones and teeth. Carbamazepine, phenytoin, barbiturates, and chronic alcohol ingestion may shorten the half-life of tetracycline and doxycycline by 50% due to induction of hepatic enzymes that metabolize the drugs.
# Chunk 8216
Tetracyclines are excreted mainly in bile and urine. Concentrations in bile exceed those in serum tenfold. Some of the drug excreted in bile is reabsorbed from the intestine (enterohepatic circulation) and may contribute to maintenance of serum levels. Ten to fifty percent of various tetracyclines is excreted into the urine, mainly by glomerular filtration. Ten to forty percent of the drug is excreted in feces. Doxycycline and tigecycline, in contrast to other tetracyclines, are eliminated by nonrenal mechanisms and do not accumulate significantly in renal failure, requiring no dosage adjustment.
# Chunk 8217
Tetracyclines are classified as short-acting (tetracycline, as well as the agricultural agents chlortetracycline and oxytetracycline), intermediate-acting (demeclocycline), or long-acting (doxycycline and minocycline) based on serum half-lives of 6–8 hours, 12 hours, and 16–18 hours, respectively. Tigecycline has a half-life of 36 hours. The almost complete absorption and slow excretion of doxycycline and minocycline allow for once-daily dosing for certain indications, but, by convention, these two drugs are usually dosed twice daily.
# Chunk 8218
Minocycline, 100 mg orally twice daily for 5 days, can eradicate the meningococcal carrier state, but because of side effects and resistance of many meningococcal strains, ciprofloxacin or rifampin is preferred. Demeclocycline is rarely used as an antibacterial, but it has been used off-label in the treatment of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone because of its inhibition of antidiuretic hormone in the renal tubule (see Chapter 15).
# Chunk 8219
Tigecycline, formulated for intravenous administration only, is given as a 100-mg loading dose, then 50 mg every 12 hours. As with all tetracyclines, tissue and intracellular penetration is excellent; consequently, the volume of distribution is quite large and peak serum concentrations are low. Elimination is primarily biliary, and no dosage adjustment is needed for patients with renal insufficiency. In addition to the tetracycline class effects, the chief adverse effect of tigecycline is nausea, which occurs in up to one third of patients, and occasionally vomiting. Neither nausea nor vomiting usually requires discontinuation of the drug.
# Chunk 8220
Tigecycline is approved for treatment of skin and skin-structure infection, intra-abdominal infections, and community-acquired pneumonia. However, in a meta-analysis of clinical trials, tigecycline was associated with a small but significant increase in the risk of death compared with other antibiotics used to treat these infections. The increased risk was most apparent in hospital-acquired and ventilator-associated pneumonia but was also seen in other infections. This has led the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to issue a black box warning that tigecycline should be reserved for situations where alternative treatments are not suitable. Because active drug concentrations in the urine and serum are relatively low, tigecycline may not be effective for urinary tract infections or primary bacteremia. Tigecycline has in vitro activity against a wide variety of multidrug-resistant pathogens (eg, methicillin-resistant S aureus, extended-spectrum β-lactamaseproducing Gram-negatives, and Acinetobacter sp); however, its clinical efficacy in infections with multidrug-resistant organisms, compared with other agents, is unproven.
# Chunk 8221
Erythromycin base is destroyed by stomach acid and must be administered with enteric coating. Food interferes with absorption. The stearate and ethylsuccinate formulations are fairly acid-resistant and somewhat better absorbed. A 500-mg intravenous dose of erythromycin lactobionate produces serum concentrations of 10 mcg/mL 1 hour after dosing. The serum half-life is approximately 1.5 hours normally and 5 hours in patients with anuria. Adjustment for renal failure is not necessary. Erythromycin is not removed by dialysis. Large amounts of an administered dose are excreted in the bile, and only 5% is excreted in the urine. Absorbed drug is distributed widely except to the brain and cerebrospinal fluid. Erythromycin is taken up by polymorphonuclear leukocytes and macrophages. It traverses the placenta and reaches the fetus.
# Chunk 8222
A 500-mg dose of clarithromycin produces serum concentrations of 2–3 mcg/mL. The longer half-life of clarithromycin (6 hours) compared with erythromycin permits twice-daily dosing. The recommended dosage is 250–500 mg twice daily or 1000 mg of the extended-release formulation once daily. Clarithromycin penetrates most tissues well, with concentrations equal to or exceeding serum concentrations.
# Chunk 8223
Clarithromycin is metabolized in the liver and is partially eliminated in the urine. The major metabolite, 14-hydroxyclarithromycin, also has antibacterial activity and is eliminated in the urine. Dosage reduction (eg, a 500-mg loading dose, then 250 mg once or twice daily) is recommended for patients with creatinine clearances less than 30 mL/min. Clarithromycin has drug interactions similar to those described for erythromycin.
# Chunk 8224
Azithromycin differs from erythromycin and clarithromycin mainly in pharmacokinetic properties. A 500-mg dose of azithromycin produces relatively low serum concentrations of approximately 0.4 mcg/mL. However, azithromycin penetrates into most tissues (except cerebrospinal fluid) and phagocytic cells extremely well, with tissue concentrations exceeding serum concentrations by 10to 100-fold. The drug is slowly released from tissues (tissue half-life of 2–4 days) to produce an elimination half-life approaching 3 days. These unique properties permit once-daily dosing and shortening of the duration of treatment in many cases. For example, a single 1-g dose of azithromycin is as effective as a 7-day course of doxycycline for chlamydial cervicitis and urethritis. Azithromycin, as a 500-mg loading dose, followed by a 250-mg single daily dose for the next 4 days, is commonly used alone or in combination with a beta-lactam antibiotic to treat community-acquired pneumonia.
# Chunk 8225
Oral bioavailability of telithromycin is 57%, and tissue and intracellular penetration is generally good. Telithromycin is metabolized in the liver and eliminated by a combination of biliary and urinary routes of excretion. It is administered as a once-daily dose of 800 mg, which results in peak serum concentrations of approximately 2 mcg/mL. It is a reversible inhibitor of the CYP3A4 enzyme system and may slightly prolong the QTc interval. In the USA, telithromycin is now indicated only for treatment of community-acquired bacterial pneumonia. Other respiratory tract infections were removed as indications when it was recognized that use of telithromycin can result in hepatitis and liver failure. Telithromycin is also contraindicated in patients with myasthenia gravis because it may exacerbate this condition. Due to its potential for serious toxicity, an FDA-approved patient medication guide detailing these risks must be dispensed to any patient receiving the medication.
# Chunk 8226
Solithromycin is a novel fluoroketolide that is pending FDA approval after two phase 3 clinical trials showed noninferiority when compared with moxifloxacin in the treatment of community-acquired pneumonia. Although not yet marketed, the dose used in clinical trials was a loading dose of 800 mg orally or intravenously, followed by 400 mg daily for a total of 5 days. The intravenous formulation was associated with higher rates of infusion-related reactions compared with moxifloxacin. Similar to telithromycin, solithromycin maintains in vitro activity against macrolide-resistant bacteria, including S pneumoniae, staphylococci, enterococci, Chlamydia trachomatis, and Neisseria gonorrhoeae. Its chemical structure lacks the pyridine-imidazole side chain group, which is thought to contribute to telithromycin’s hepatotoxicity; severe toxicity has not been demonstrated in Phase II or III clinical trials.
# Chunk 8227
Oral dosages of clindamycin, 0.15–0.3 g every 8 hours (10–20 mg/kg/d for children), yield serum levels of 2–3 mcg/mL. When administered intravenously, 600 mg of clindamycin every 8 hours gives levels of 5–15 mcg/mL. The drug is about 90% protein-bound. Clindamycin penetrates well into most tissues, with brain and cerebrospinal fluid being important exceptions. It penetrates well into abscesses and is actively taken up and concentrated by phagocytic cells. Clindamycin is metabolized by the liver, and both active drug and active metabolites are excreted in bile and urine. The half-life is about 2.5 hours in normal individuals, increasing to 6 hours in patients with anuria. No dosage adjustment is required for renal failure.
# Chunk 8228
Clindamycin is indicated for the treatment of skin and soft-tissue infections caused by streptococci and staphylococci. It may be active against community-acquired strains of methicillin-resistant S aureus, though resistance has been increasing. It is commonly used in conjunction with penicillin G to treat toxic shock syndrome or necrotizing fasciitis caused by Group A Streptococcus. In this setting, its use is typically limited to the initial 48 to 72 hours of treatment with the goal of inhibiting toxin production. Clindamycin is also indicated for treatment of infections caused by susceptible Bacteroides sp and other anaerobes. Clindamycin, sometimes in combination with an aminoglycoside or cephalosporin, is used to treat penetrating wounds of the abdomen and the gut; infections originating in the female genital tract, eg, septic abortion, pelvic abscesses, or pelvic inflammatory disease; and lung and periodontal abscesses. Clindamycin is recommended for prophylaxis of endocarditis in patients with specific valvular heart disease who are undergoing certain dental procedures and have significant penicillin allergies. Clindamycin plus primaquine is an effective alternative to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole for moderate to moderately severe Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia in AIDS patients. It is also used in combination with pyrimethamine for AIDS-related toxoplasmosis of the brain.
# Chunk 8229
Quinupristin-dalfopristin is administered intravenously at a dosage of 7.5 mg/kg every 8–12 hours. Peak serum concentrations following an infusion of 7.5 mg/kg over 60 minutes are 3 mcg/mL for quinupristin and 7 mcg/mL for dalfopristin. Quinupristin and dalfopristin are rapidly metabolized, with half-lives of 0.85 and 0.7 hours, respectively. Elimination is principally by the fecal route. Dose adjustment is not necessary for renal failure, peritoneal dialysis, or hemodialysis. Patients with hepatic insufficiency may not tolerate the drug at usual doses, however, because of increased area under the concentration curve of both parent drugs and metabolites. This may necessitate a dose reduction to 7.5 mg/kg every 12 hours or 5 mg/kg every 8 hours. Quinupristin and dalfopristin significantly inhibit CYP3A4, which metabolizes warfarin, diazepam, quetiapine, simvastatin, and cyclosporine, among many others. Dosage reduction of cyclosporine may be necessary.
# Chunk 8230
The usual dosage of chloramphenicol is 50–100 mg/kg/d divided every 6 hours. It is no longer available in the USA as an oral formulation. The parenteral formulation is a prodrug, chloramphenicol succinate, which is hydrolyzed to yield free chloramphenicol, giving blood levels somewhat lower than those achieved with orally administered drug. Chloramphenicol is widely distributed to virtually all tissues and body fluids, including the central nervous system and cerebrospinal fluid, such that the concentration of chloramphenicol in brain tissue may be equal to that in serum. The drug penetrates cell membranes readily.
# Chunk 8231
Linezolid is 100% bioavailable after oral administration and has a half-life of 4–6 hours. It is metabolized by oxidative metabolism, yielding two inactive metabolites. It is neither an inducer nor an inhibitor of cytochrome P450 enzymes. Peak serum concentrations average 18 mcg/mL following a 600-mg oral dose; cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) concentrations reach approximately 60–70% of the serum level. The recommended dosage for most indications is 600 mg twice daily, either orally or intravenously.
# Chunk 8232
The principal toxicity of linezolid is hematologic; the effects are reversible and generally mild. Thrombocytopenia is the most common manifestation (seen in approximately 3% of treatment courses), particularly when the drug is administered for longer than 2 weeks. Anemia and neutropenia may also occur, most commonly in patients with a predisposition to or underlying bone marrow suppression. Cases of optic and peripheral neuropathy and lactic acidosis have been reported with prolonged courses of linezolid. These side effects are thought to be related to linezolidinduced inhibition of mitochondrial protein synthesis. There are case reports of serotonin syndrome (see Chapter 16) occurring when linezolid is co-administered with serotonergic drugs, most frequently selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor antidepressants. The FDA has issued a warning regarding the use of the drug with serotonergic agents.
# Chunk 8233
Tedizolid is the active moiety of the prodrug tedizolid phosphate, a next-generation oxazolidinone, with high potency against Gram-positive bacteria, including methicillin-resistant S aureus. It is FDA-approved at a dose of 200 mg orally or intravenously once daily for 6 days for the treatment of skin and soft tissue infection. Potential advantages over linezolid include increased potency against staphylococci and a longer half-life of 12 hours, allowing once-daily dosing. It may be associated with a decreased risk of marrow suppression; however, it has not been studied over a prolonged duration of therapy. It is thought to have a lower risk of serotonergic toxicity, but concomitant use with serotonin reuptake inhibitors has not been formally evaluated. Tedizolid is more highly protein-bound (70–90%) than linezolid (31%); there are no data on CSF penetration of tedizolid.
# Chunk 8234
Camille E. Beauduy, PharmD, & Lisa G. Winston, MD*

A 45-year-old man with no significant medical history was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) 10 days ago after suffering third-degree burns over 40% of his body. He had been relatively stable until the last 24 hours. Now, he is febrile (39.5°C [103.1°F]), and his white blood cell count has risen from 8500 to 20,000/mm3. He has also had an episode of hypo-tension (86/50 mmHg) that responded to a fluid bolus. Blood cultures were obtained at the time of his fever and results are pending. The ICU attending physician is concerned about a bloodstream infection and decides to treat with empiric com-bination therapy directed against Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The combination therapy includes tobramycin. The patient weighs 70 kg (154 lb) and has an estimated creatinine clear-ance of 90 mL/min. How should tobramycin be dosed using once-daily and conventional dosing strategies? How should each regimen be monitored for efficacy and toxicity?
# Chunk 8235
D. Pharmacokinetics and Once-Daily Dosing

Aminoglycosides are absorbed very poorly from the intact gastrointestinal tract, and almost the entire oral dose is excreted in feces after oral administration. However, the drugs may be absorbed if ulcerations are present. Aminoglycosides are usually administered intravenously as a 30–60 minute infusion. After intramuscular injection, aminoglycosides are well absorbed, giving peak concentrations in blood within 30–90 minutes. After a brief distribution phase, peak serum concentrations are identical to those following intravenous injection. The normal half-life of aminoglycosides in serum is 2–3 hours, increasing to 24–48 hours in patients with significant impairment of renal function. Aminoglycosides are only partially and irregularly removed by hemodialysis—eg, 40–60% for gentamicin—and even less effectively by peritoneal dialysis. Aminoglycosides are highly polar compounds that do not enter cells readily. They are largely excluded from the central nervous system and the eye. In the presence of active inflammation, however, cerebrospinal fluid levels reach 20% of plasma levels, and, in neonatal meningitis, the levels may be higher. Intrathecal or intraventricular injection is required for high levels in cerebrospinal fluid. Even after parenteral administration, concentrations of aminoglycosides are not high in most tissues except the renal cortex. Concentration in most secretions is also modest; in the bile, the level may reach 30% of that in blood. With prolonged therapy, diffusion into pleural or synovial fluid may result in concentrations 50–90% of that of plasma.
# Chunk 8236
Once-daily dosing has potential practical advantages. For example, repeated determinations of serum concentrations are unnecessary unless an aminoglycoside is given for more than 3 days. A drug administered once a day rather than three times a day is less labor intensive. And once-a-day dosing is more feasible for outpatient therapy.
# Chunk 8237
Aminoglycosides are cleared by the kidney, and excretion is directly proportional to creatinine clearance. To avoid accumulation and toxic levels, once-daily dosing of aminoglycosides is generally avoided if renal function is impaired. Rapidly changing renal function, which may occur with acute kidney injury, must also be monitored to avoid overdosing or underdosing. Provided these pitfalls are avoided, once-daily aminoglycoside dosing is safe and effective. If the creatinine clearance is >60 mL/min, then a single daily dose of 5–7 mg/kg of gentamicin or tobramycin is recommended (15 mg/kg for amikacin). For patients with creatinine clearance <60 mL/min, traditional dosing as described below is recommended. With once-daily dosing, serum concentrations need not be routinely checked until the second or third day of therapy, depending on the stability of renal function and the anticipated duration of therapy. In most circumstances, it is unnecessary to check peak concentrations; an exception may be when ensuring adequately high peak concentrations for treating infections caused by drug-resistant pathogens. The goal is to administer drug so that concentrations of <1 mcg/mL are present between 18 and 24 hours after dosing. This provides sufficient time for washout of drug to occur before the next dose is given. Several nomograms have been developed and validated to assist clinicians with once-daily dosing (eg, Freeman reference).
# Chunk 8238
With traditional dosing, adjustments must be made to prevent accumulation of drug and toxicity in patients with renal insufficiency. Either the dose of drug is kept constant and the interval between doses is increased, or the interval is kept constant and the dose is reduced. Nomograms and formulas have been constructed relating serum creatinine levels to adjustments in traditional treatment regimens. Because aminoglycoside clearance is directly proportional to the creatinine clearance, a method for determining the aminoglycoside dose is to estimate creatinine clearance using the Cockcroft-Gault formula described in Chapter 60. For a traditional twiceor thrice-daily dosing regimen, peak serum concentrations should be determined from a blood sample obtained 30–60 minutes after a dose, and trough concentrations from a sample obtained just before the next dose. Doses of gentamicin and tobramycin should be adjusted to maintain peak levels between 5 and 10 mcg/mL (typically between 8 and 10 mcg/mL in more serious infections) and trough levels <2 mcg/mL (<1 mcg/mL is optimal).
# Chunk 8239
E. Adverse Effects

All aminoglycosides are ototoxic and nephrotoxic. Ototoxicity and nephrotoxicity are more likely to be encountered when therapy is continued for more than 5 days, at higher doses, in the elderly, and in the setting of renal insufficiency. Concurrent use with loop diuretics (eg, furosemide, ethacrynic acid) or other nephrotoxic antimicrobial agents (eg, vancomycin or amphotericin) can potentiate nephrotoxicity and should be avoided if possible. Ototoxicity can manifest either as auditory damage, resulting in tinnitus and high-frequency hearing loss initially, or as vestibular damage with vertigo, ataxia, and loss of balance. Nephrotoxicity results in rising serum creatinine levels or reduced creatinine clearance, although the earliest indication often is an increase in trough serum aminoglycoside concentrations. Neomycin, kanamycin, and amikacin are the agents most likely to cause auditory damage. Streptomycin and gentamicin are the most vestibulotoxic. Neomycin, tobramycin, and gentamicin are the most nephrotoxic.
# Chunk 8240
Nephrotoxicity is usually reversible upon drug discontinuation. It occurs in 5–25% of patients receiving gentamicin for longer than 3–5 days. Such toxicity requires, at the very least, adjustment of the dosing regimen and should prompt reconsideration of the need for the drug, particularly if there is a less toxic alternative agent. Measurement of gentamicin serum levels is essential. Ototoxicity, which tends to be irreversible, manifests itself mainly as vestibular dysfunction. Loss of hearing can also occur. Ototoxicity is in part genetically determined, having been linked to point mutations in mitochondrial DNA, and occurs in 1–5% for patients receiving gentamicin for more than 5 days. Hypersensitivity reactions to gentamicin are uncommon.
# Chunk 8241
B. Inhaled and Ophthalmic Administration

Tobramycin is formulated in solution (300 mg in 5 mL) for inhalation for treatment of P aeruginosa lower respiratory tract infections complicating cystic fibrosis. The drug is recommended as a 300-mg dose regardless of the patient’s age or weight for administration twice daily in repeated cycles of 28 days on therapy, followed by 28 days off therapy. Serum concentrations 1 hour after inhalation average 1 mcg/mL; consequently, nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity rarely occur. Caution should be used when administering tobramycin to patients with preexisting renal, vestibular, or hearing disorders. Tobramycin is also available as 0.3% ophthalmic ointment and drops for the treatment of superficial eye infections. These formulations result in minimal systemic absorption and are unlikely to cause systemic adverse effects.
# Chunk 8242
Amikacin is a semisynthetic derivative of kanamycin; it is less toxic than the parent molecule (Figure 45–2). It is resistant to many enzymes that inactivate gentamicin and tobramycin, and, therefore, can be used against some microorganisms resistant to the latter drugs. Many Gram-negative bacteria, including many strains of Proteus, Pseudomonas, Enterobacter, and Serratia, are inhibited by 1–20 mcg/mL amikacin in vitro. After injection of 500 mg of amikacin every 12 hours (15 mg/kg/d) intramuscularly, peak levels in serum are 10–30 mcg/mL.
# Chunk 8243
Strains of multidrug-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis, including streptomycin-resistant strains, are usually susceptible to amikacin. Kanamycin-resistant strains may be cross-resistant to amikacin. The dosage of amikacin for tuberculosis is 10–15 mg/kg/d as a once-daily or two to three times weekly injection and always in combination with other drugs to which the isolate is susceptible.
# Chunk 8244
B. Oral Administration

In preparation for elective bowel surgery, 1 g of neomycin may be given orally every 6–8 hours for 1–2 days, often combined with 1 g of erythromycin base. This reduces the aerobic bowel flora with little effect on anaerobes. In hepatic encephalopathy, coliform flora can be suppressed by giving 1 g every 6–8 hours together with reduced protein intake, thus reducing ammonia production. Use of neomycin for hepatic encephalopathy has been largely supplanted by lactulose and other medications that are less toxic. Use of paromomycin in the treatment of protozoal infections is discussed in Chapter 52.
# Chunk 8245
The patient has normal renal function and thus qualifies for once-daily dosing. Tobramycin could be administered as a single once-daily injection at a dose of 350–490 mg (5–7 mg/kg). A serum level between 1.5 and 6 mcg/mL mea-sured 8 hours after infusion correlates with an appropriate trough level. Alternatively, the same total daily dose could be divided and administered every 8 hours, as a conventional dosing strategy. With conventional dosing, peak and trough concentrations should be monitored with the target peak concentration of 5–10 mcg/mL and the target trough con-centration of <2 mcg/mL.
# Chunk 8246
A 59-year-old woman presents to an urgent care clinic with a 4-day history of frequent and painful urination. She has had fevers, chills, and flank pain for the past 2 days. Her physician advised her to come immediately to the clinic for evaluation. In the clinic she is febrile (38.5°C [101.3°F]) but otherwise stable and states she is not experiencing any nausea or vomiting. Her urine dipstick test is positive for leukocyte esterase. Urinalysis and urine culture are ordered. Her past medical history is significant for three urinary tract infections in the past year. Each episode was uncom-plicated, treated with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and promptly resolved. She also has osteoporosis for which she takes a daily calcium supplement. The decision is made to treat her with oral antibiotics for a complicated urinary tract infection with close follow-up. Given her history, what would be a reasonable empiric antibiotic choice? Depending on the antibiotic choice are there potential drug interactions?
# Chunk 8247
The basic formulas of the sulfonamides and their structural similarity to p-aminobenzoic acid (PABA) are shown in Figure 46–1. Sulfonamides with varying physical, chemical, pharmacologic, and antibacterial properties are produced by attaching substituents to the amido group ( ⎯ SO2 ⎯ NH ⎯ R) or the amino group ( ⎯ NH2) of the sulfanilamide nucleus. Sulfonamides tend to be much more soluble at alkaline than at acid pH. Most can be prepared as sodium salts, which are used for intravenous administration.
# Chunk 8248
Mechanism of Action & Antimicrobial Activity

Sulfonamide-susceptible organisms, unlike mammals, cannot use exogenous folate but must synthesize it from PABA. This pathway (Figure 46–2) is thus essential for production of purines and nucleic acid synthesis. As structural analogs of PABA, sulfonamides inhibit dihydropteroate synthase and folate production. Sulfonamides inhibit both Gram-positive bacteria, such as Staphylococcus sp and Gram-negative enteric bacteria such as Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Salmonella, Shigella, and Enterobacter sp, as well as Nocardia sp, Chlamydia trachomatis, and some protozoa. Rickettsiae are not inhibited by sulfonamides but are instead stimulated in their growth. Activity is poor against anaerobes. Pseudomonas aeruginosa is intrinsically resistant to sulfonamide antibiotics.
# Chunk 8249
Sulfonamides can be divided into three major groups: (1) oral, absorbable; (2) oral, nonabsorbable; and (3) topical. Oral absorbable sulfonamides are absorbed from the stomach and small intestine and distributed widely to tissues and body fluids (including the central nervous system and cerebrospinal fluid), placenta, and fetus. Protein binding varies from 20% to over 90%. Therapeutic concentrations are in the range of 40–100 mcg/mL of blood. Blood levels generally peak 2–6 hours after oral administration.
# Chunk 8250
A. Urinary Tract Disturbances

Sulfonamides may precipitate in urine, especially at neutral or acid pH, producing crystalluria, hematuria, or even obstruction. This is rarely a problem with the more soluble sulfonamides (eg, sulfisoxazole). Sulfadiazine and sulfamethoxazole are relatively insoluble in acidic urine and can cause crystalluria, particularly when given in large doses or if fluid intake is poor. Crystalluria is treated by administration of sodium bicarbonate to alkalinize the urine and fluids to increase urine flow. Sulfonamides have also been implicated in various types of nephrosis and in allergic nephritis.
# Chunk 8251
Because trimethoprim is more lipid-soluble than sulfamethoxazole, it has a larger volume of distribution than the latter drug. Therefore, when 1 part of trimethoprim is given with 5 parts of sulfamethoxazole (the ratio in the formulation), the peak plasma concentrations are in the ratio of 1:20, which is optimal for the combined effects of these drugs in vitro. About 30–50% of the sulfonamide and 50–60% of the trimethoprim (or their respective metabolites) are excreted in the urine within 24 hours. The dose should be reduced by half for patients with creatinine clearances of 15–30 mL/min.
# Chunk 8252
A. Oral Trimethoprim

Trimethoprim can be given alone (100 mg twice daily) in acute urinary tract infections. Many community-acquired organisms are susceptible to the high concentrations that are found in the urine (200–600 mcg/mL).
# Chunk 8253
B. Oral Trimethoprim-Sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMZ)

A combination of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole is effective treatment for a wide variety of infections including P jiroveci pneumonia, urinary tract infections, prostatitis, and some infections caused by susceptible strains of Shigella, Salmonella, and nontuberculous mycobacteria. It is active against most Staphylococcus aureus strains, both methicillin-susceptible and methicillin-resistant, and against respiratory tract pathogens such as Haemophilus sp, Moraxella catarrhalis, and K pneumoniae (but not Mycoplasma pneumoniae). However, the increasing prevalence of strains of E coli (up to 30% or more) and pneumococci that are resistant to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole must be considered before using this combination for empiric therapy of upper urinary tract infections or pneumonia. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole is commonly used for the treatment of uncomplicated skin and soft tissue infections.
# Chunk 8254
One double-strength tablet (each tablet contains trimethoprim 160 mg plus sulfamethoxazole 800 mg) given every 12 hours is effective treatment for urinary tract infections, prostatitis, uncomplicated skin and soft tissue infections, and infections caused by susceptible strains of Shigella and Salmonella. Bone and joint infections caused by S. aureus can be effectively treated, typically at doses of 8–10 mg/kg per day of the trimethoprim component. One single-strength tablet (containing trimethoprim 80 mg plus sulfamethoxazole 400 mg) given three times weekly may serve as prophylaxis in recurrent urinary tract infections of some women. The dosage for children treated for shigellosis, urinary tract infection, or otitis media is trimethoprim 8 mg/kg per day and sulfamethoxazole 40 mg/kg per day divided every 12 hours.
# Chunk 8255
Infections with P jiroveci and some other pathogens, such as Nocardia or Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, can be treated with high doses of the either the oral or intravenous combination (dosed on the basis of the trimethoprim component at 15–20 mg/kg/d). P jiroveci can be prevented in immunosuppressed patients by a number of low dose regimens such as one double-strength tablet daily or three times weekly.
# Chunk 8256
After oral administration, the fluoroquinolones are well absorbed (bioavailability of 80–95%) and distributed widely in body fluids and tissues (Table 46–1). Serum half-lives range from 3 to 10 hours. The relatively long half-lives of levofloxacin, gemifloxacin, and moxifloxacin permit once-daily dosing. Oral absorption is impaired by divalent and trivalent cations, including those in antacids. Therefore, oral fluoroquinolones should be taken 2 hours before or 4 hours after any products containing these cations. Serum concentrations of intravenously administered drug are similar to those of orally administered drug. Most fluoroquinolones, moxifloxacin being an important exception, are eliminated by renal mechanisms, either tubular secretion or glomerular filtration (Table 46–1). Dosage adjustment is required for patients with creatinine clearances less than 50 mL/min, the exact adjustment depending on the degree of renal impairment and the specific fluoroquinolone being used. Dosage adjustment for renal failure is not necessary for moxifloxacin since it is metabolized in the liver; it should be used with caution in patients with hepatic failure.
# Chunk 8257
CHAPTER 46 Sulfonamides, Trimethoprim, & Quinolones 839 agents are also effective for bacterial diarrhea caused by Shigella, Salmonella, toxigenic E coli, and Campylobacter. Fluoroquinolones (except norfloxacin, which does not achieve adequate systemic concentrations) are used in infections of soft tissues, bones, and joints and in intra-abdominal and respiratory tract infections, including those caused by multidrug-resistant organisms such as Pseudomonas and Enterobacter. Ciprofloxacin is a drug of choice for prophylaxis and treatment of anthrax; the newer fluoroquinolones are active in vitro, and levofloxacin is also approved by the
# Chunk 8258
Camille E. Beauduy, PharmD, & Lisa G. Winston, MD*

A 60-year-old man presents to the emergency department with a 2-month history of fatigue, weight loss (10 kg), fevers, night sweats, and a productive cough. He is currently living with friends and has been intermittently homeless, spending time in shelters. He reports drinking about 6 beers per day. In the emergency department, a chest x-ray shows a right apical infiltrate. Given the high suspicion for pulmonary tuberculosis, the patient is placed in respiratory isolation. His first sputum smear shows many acid-fast bacilli, and an HIV test returns with a positive result. What drugs should be started for treatment of presumptive pulmonary tubercu-losis? Does the patient have a heightened risk of developing medication toxicity? If so, which medication(s) would be likely to cause toxicity?
# Chunk 8259
active drugs. An isoniazid-rifampin combination administered for 9 months will cure 95–98% of cases of tuberculosis caused by susceptible strains. An initial intensive phase of treatment is recommended for the first 2 months due to the prevalence of resistant strains. The addition of pyrazinamide during this intensive phase allows the total duration of therapy to be reduced to 6 months without loss of efficacy. In practice, therapy is usually initiated with a four-drug regimen of isoniazid, rifampin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol until susceptibility of the clinical isolate has been determined. In susceptible isolates, the continuation phase consists of an additional 4 months with isoniazid and rifampin (Table 47–2). Neither ethambutol nor other drugs such as streptomycin adds substantially to the overall activity of the regimen (ie, the duration of treatment cannot be further reduced if another drug is used), but the fourth drug provides additional coverage if the isolate proves to be resistant to isoniazid, rifampin, or both. If therapy is initiated after the isolate is known to be susceptible to isoniazid and rifampin, ethambutol does not need to be added. The prevalence of isoniazid resistance among clinical isolates in the USA is approximately 10%. Prevalence of resistance to both isoniazid and rifampin (which is termed multidrug resistance) ranged from 1 to 1.6% from the years 2000 to 2013 in the USA. Multidrug resistance is much more prevalent in many other parts of the world. Resistance to rifampin alone is rare.
# Chunk 8260
Isoniazid is readily absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract, optimally on an empty stomach; peak concentrations may be decreased by up to 50% when taken with a fatty meal. A 300 mg oral dose (5 mg/kg in children) achieves peak plasma concentrations of 3–5 mcg/mL within 1–2 hours. Isoniazid diffuses readily into all body fluids and tissues. The concentration in the central nervous system and cerebrospinal fluid ranges between 20% and 100% of simultaneous serum concentrations.
# Chunk 8261
Metabolism of isoniazid, especially acetylation by liver N-acetyltransferase, is genetically determined (see Chapter 4). The average plasma concentration of isoniazid in rapid acetylators is about one third to one half of that in slow acetylators, and average half-lives are less than 1 hour and 3 hours, respectively. More rapid clearance of isoniazid by rapid acetylators is usually of no therapeutic consequence when appropriate doses are administered daily, but subtherapeutic concentrations may occur if drug is administered as a once-weekly dose or if there is malabsorption.
# Chunk 8262
The typical dosage of isoniazid is 5 mg/kg/d; a typical adult dose is 300 mg given once daily. Up to 10 mg/kg/d may be used for serious infections or if malabsorption is a problem. A 15-mg/kg dose, or 900 mg, may be used in a twice to three times-weekly dosing regimen in combination with a second antituberculous agent (eg, rifampin, 600 mg). Pyridoxine, 25–50 mg/d, is recommended for those with conditions predisposing to neuropathy, an adverse effect of isoniazid. Isoniazid is usually given by mouth but can be given parenterally in the same dosage.
# Chunk 8263
Rifampin is well absorbed after oral administration and excreted mainly through the liver into bile. It then undergoes enterohepatic recirculation, with the bulk excreted as a deacylated metabolite in feces and a small amount excreted in the urine. Dosage adjustment for renal or hepatic insufficiency is not necessary. Usual doses result in serum levels of 5–7 mcg/mL. Rifampin is distributed widely in body fluids and tissues. The drug is relatively highly protein-bound, and adequate cerebrospinal fluid concentrations are achieved only in the presence of meningeal inflammation.
# Chunk 8264
A. Mycobacterial Infections

Rifampin, usually 600 mg/d (10 mg/kg/d) orally, must be administered with isoniazid or other antituberculous drugs to patients with active tuberculosis to prevent emergence of drug-resistant mycobacteria. In some short-course therapies, 600 mg of rifampin is given twice weekly. Rifampin, 600 mg daily or twice weekly for 6 months, also is effective in combination with other agents in some atypical mycobacterial infections and in leprosy. Rifampin, 600 mg daily for 4 months as a single drug, is an alternative to isoniazid for patients with latent tuberculosis who are unable to take isoniazid or who have had exposure to a case of active tuberculosis caused by an isoniazid-resistant, rifampin-susceptible strain.
# Chunk 8265
B. Other Indications

Rifampin has other uses in bacterial infections. An oral dosage of 600 mg twice daily for 2 days can eliminate meningococcal carriage. Rifampin, 20 mg/kg (maximum 600 mg) once daily for 4 days, is used as prophylaxis in contacts of children with Haemophilus influenzae type b disease. Rifampin combined with a second agent is sometimes used to eradicate staphylococcal carriage. Rifampin combination therapy is also used for treatment of serious staphylococcal infections such as osteomyelitis, prosthetic joint infections, and prosthetic valve endocarditis.
# Chunk 8266
Rifampin imparts a harmless orange color to urine, sweat, and tears (soft contact lenses may be permanently stained). Occasional adverse effects include rashes, thrombocytopenia, and nephritis. Rifampin may cause cholestatic jaundice and occasionally hepatitis, and it commonly causes light-chain proteinuria. If administered less often than twice weekly, rifampin may cause a flu-like syndrome characterized by fever, chills, myalgias, anemia, and thrombocytopenia. Its use has been associated with acute tubular necrosis.
# Chunk 8267
Ethambutol is well absorbed from the gut. After ingestion of 25 mg/kg, a blood level peak of 2–5 mcg/mL is reached in 2–4 hours. About 20% of the drug is excreted in feces and 50% in urine in unchanged form. Ethambutol accumulates in renal failure, and the dose should be reduced to three times weekly if creatinine clearance is less than 30 mL/min. Ethambutol crosses the blood-brain barrier only when the meninges are inflamed. Concentrations in cerebrospinal fluid are highly variable, ranging from 4% to 64% of serum levels in the setting of meningeal inflammation.
# Chunk 8268
As with all antituberculous drugs, resistance to ethambutol emerges rapidly when the drug is used alone. Therefore, ethambutol is always given in combination with other antituberculous drugs. Ethambutol hydrochloride, 15–25 mg/kg, is usually given as a single daily dose in combination with isoniazid, rifampin, and pyrazinamide during the initial intensive phase of active tuberculosis treatment. The higher dose may be used for treatment of tuberculous meningitis. Higher doses have been used with intermittent dosing regimens for directly observed therapy; for example, 25–30 mg/kg three times weekly or 50 mg/kg administered twice weekly. Ethambutol is also used in combination with other agents for the treatment of nontuberculous mycobacterial infections, such as Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC) or M. kansasii; the typical dose for these infections is 15 mg/kg once daily.
# Chunk 8269
Serum concentrations of 30–50 mcg/mL at 1–2 hours after oral administration are achieved with dosages of 25 mg/kg/d. Pyrazinamide is well absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and widely distributed in body tissues, including inflamed meninges. The half-life is 8–11 hours. The parent compound is metabolized by the liver, but metabolites are renally cleared; therefore, PZA should be administered at 25–35 mg/kg three times weekly (not daily) in hemodialysis patients and those in whom the creatinine clearance is less than 30 mL/min. In patients with normal renal function, a dose of 30–50 mg/kg is used for thrice-weekly or twice-weekly treatment regimens.
# Chunk 8270
Streptomycin sulfate is used when an injectable drug is needed or desirable and in the treatment of infections resistant to other drugs. The usual dosage is 15 mg/kg/d intramuscularly or intravenously daily for adults (20–40 mg/kg/d for children, not to exceed 1 g) for several weeks, followed by 15 mg/kg two or three times weekly for several months. Serum concentrations of approximately 40 mcg/mL are achieved 30–60 minutes after intramuscular injection of a 15 mg/kg dose. Other drugs are always given in combination to prevent emergence of resistance.
# Chunk 8271
Capreomycin is a peptide protein synthesis inhibitor antibiotic obtained from Streptomyces capreolus. Daily injection of 15 mg/kg intramuscularly results in peak serum levels of 35–45 mcg/mL 2 hours after a dose. Such concentrations in vitro are inhibitory for many mycobacteria, including multidrug-resistant strains of M tuberculosis.
# Chunk 8272
Typical dosing of capreomycin is 15 mg/kg/day initially, which is then reduced to two or three times weekly after an initial response has been achieved with a daily dosing schedule. The intermittent dosing regimen may minimize risk of toxicity.
# Chunk 8273
The most serious toxic effects are peripheral neuropathy and central nervous system dysfunction, including depression and psychoses. Pyridoxine, 100 mg or more per day, should be given with cycloserine because this ameliorates neurologic toxicity. Adverse effects, which are most common during the first 2 weeks of therapy, occur in 25% or more of patients, especially at higher doses leading to peak concentrations greater than 35 mcg/mL. Adverse effects can be minimized by monitoring peak serum concentrations. The peak concentration is reached 2–4 hours after dosing. The recommended range of peak concentrations is 20–35 mcg/mL.
# Chunk 8274
Tubercle bacilli are usually inhibited in vitro by aminosalicylic acid, 1–5 mcg/mL. The granule formulation of aminosalicylic acid results in improved absorption from the gastrointestinal tract. Peak serum levels are expected to be 20–60 mcg/mL 6 hours after a 4 g oral dose. The dosage is 8–12 g/d orally for adults and 300 mg/kg/d for children, administered in two or three divided doses. The drug is widely distributed in tissues and body fluids except the cerebrospinal fluid. Aminosalicylic acid is rapidly excreted in the urine, in part as active PAS and in part as the acetylated compound and other metabolic products. To avoid accumulation in renal impairment, the maximum dose is 4 g twice daily when creatinine clearance is less than 30 mL/min. Very high concentrations of aminosalicylic acid are reached in the urine, which can result in crystalluria.
# Chunk 8275
Amikacin is playing a greater role in the treatment of tuberculosis due to the prevalence of multidrug-resistant strains. Prevalence of amikacin-resistant strains is low (<5%), and most multidrugresistant strains remain amikacin-susceptible. M tuberculosis is inhibited at concentrations of 1 mcg/mL or less. Amikacin is also active against atypical mycobacteria. There is no cross-resistance between streptomycin and amikacin, but kanamycin resistance often indicates resistance to amikacin as well. Peak serum concentrations of 30–45 mcg/mL are achieved 30–60 minutes after a 15-mg/kg intravenous infusion or intramuscular injection. Amikacin is indicated for treatment of tuberculosis suspected or known to be caused by streptomycin-resistant or multidrugresistant strains. This drug must be used in combination with at least one and preferably two or three other drugs to which the isolate is susceptible for treatment of drug-resistant cases. The recommended dosage is 15 mg/kg once daily initially, followed by intermittent dosing two or three times per week.
# Chunk 8276
Fluoroquinolones are an important addition to the drugs available for tuberculosis, especially for strains that are resistant to first-line agents. The World Health Organization recommends using a later generation fluoroquinolone such as moxifloxacin or levofloxacin. Resistance, which may result from one of several single point mutations in the gyrase A subunit, develops rapidly if a fluoroquinolone is used as a single agent; thus, the drug must be used in combination with two or more additional active agents. Typically, resistance to one fluoroquinolone indicates class resistance. However, moxifloxacin may retain some activity in strains resistant to ofloxacin. The dosage of levofloxacin is 500–750 mg once a day, and some clinicians increase to 1000 mg daily if tolerated. The dosage of moxifloxacin is 400 mg once a day. Some experts recommend checking peak serum concentrations. Expected levels at about two hours post-dose are 8–12 mcg/mL for levofloxacin and 3–5 mcg/mL for moxifloxacin.
# Chunk 8277
Current recommendations state that bedaquiline, in combination with at least three other active medications, may be used for 24 weeks of treatment in adults with laboratory-confirmed pulmonary tuberculosis if the isolate is resistant to both isoniazid and rifampin. The recommended dosage for bedaquiline is 400 mg once daily orally for 2 weeks, followed by 200 mg three times a week for 22 weeks taken orally with food in order to maximize absorption. The most common adverse effects, occurring at rates of 25% or more, are nausea, arthralgia, and headache. Bedaquiline has been associated with both hepatotoxicity and cardiac toxicity. The FDA has issued a black-box warning related to the risk of QTc prolongation and associated mortality. It should be reserved for patients who do not have other treatment options and used with caution in patients with other risk factors for cardiac conduction abnormalities.
# Chunk 8278
Sulfones are well absorbed from the gut and widely distributed throughout body fluids and tissues. Dapsone’s half-life is 1–2 days, and drug tends to be retained in skin, muscle, liver, and kidney. Skin heavily infected with M leprae may contain several times more drug than normal skin. Sulfones are excreted into bile and reabsorbed in the intestine. Excretion into urine is variable, and most excreted drug is acetylated. In renal failure, the dose may have to be adjusted. The usual adult dosage in leprosy is 100 mg daily. For children, the dose is proportionately less, depending on weight.
# Chunk 8279
Harry W. Lampiris, MD, & Daniel S. Maddix, Pharm D

The patient is a 37-year-old African-American man who lives in San Jose, California. He was recently incarcerated near Bakersfield, California and returned to Oakland about 3 months ago. He is currently experiencing one month of severe headache and double vision. He has a temperature of 38.6°C (101.5°F) and the physical exam reveals nuchal rigidity and right-sided sixth cranial nerve palsy. MRI of his brain is normal, and lumbar puncture reveals 330 WBC with 20% eosinophils, protein 75, and glucose 20. HIV test is negative, TB skin test is negative, CSF cryptococcal antigen is negative, and CSF gram stain is negative. Patient receives empiric therapy for bacterial meningitis with van-comycin and ceftriaxone, and is unimproved after 72 hours of treatment. After 3 days a white mold is identified growing from his CSF culture. What medical therapy would be most appropriate now?
# Chunk 8280
Amphotericin B is poorly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. Oral amphotericin B is thus effective only on fungi within the lumen of the tract and cannot be used for treatment of systemic disease. The intravenous injection of 0.6 mg/kg/d of amphotericin B results in average blood levels of 0.3–1 mcg/mL; the drug is more than 90% bound by serum proteins. Although it is mostly metabolized, some amphotericin B is excreted slowly in the urine over a period of several days. The serum half-life is approximately 15 days. Hepatic impairment, renal impairment, and dialysis have little impact on drug concentrations, and therefore no dose adjustment is required. The drug is widely distributed in most tissues, but only 2–3% of the blood level is reached in cerebrospinal fluid, thus occasionally necessitating intrathecal therapy for certain types of fungal meningitis.
# Chunk 8281
B. Cumulative Toxicity

Renal damage is the most significant toxic reaction. Renal impairment occurs in nearly all patients treated with clinically significant doses of amphotericin. The degree of azotemia is variable and often stabilizes during therapy, but it can be serious enough to necessitate dialysis. A reversible component is associated with decreased renal perfusion and represents a form of prerenal renal failure. An irreversible component results from renal tubular injury and subsequent dysfunction. The irreversible form of amphotericin nephrotoxicity usually occurs in the setting of prolonged administration (>4 g cumulative dose). Renal toxicity commonly manifests as renal tubular acidosis and severe potassium and magnesium wasting. There is some evidence that the prerenal component can be attenuated with sodium loading, and it is common practice to administer normal saline infusions with the daily doses of amphotericin B.
# Chunk 8282
Flucytosine is currently available in North America only in an oral formulation. The dosage is 100 mg/kg/d in divided doses in patients with normal renal function. It is well absorbed (>90%), with serum concentrations peaking 1–2 hours after an oral dose. It is poorly protein-bound and penetrates well into all body fluid compartments, including the cerebrospinal fluid. It is eliminated by glomerular filtration with a half-life of 3–4 hours and is removed by hemodialysis. Levels rise rapidly with renal impairment and can lead to toxicity. Toxicity is more likely to occur in AIDS patients and those with renal insufficiency. Peak serum concentrations should be measured periodically in patients with renal insufficiency and maintained between 50 and 100 mcg/mL.
# Chunk 8283
Fluconazole is the azole of choice in the treatment and secondary prophylaxis of cryptococcal meningitis. Intravenous fluconazole has been shown to be equivalent to amphotericin B in treatment of candidemia in ICU patients with normal white blood cell counts, although echinocandins may have superior activity for this indication. Fluconazole is the agent most commonly used for the treatment of mucocutaneous candidiasis. Activity against the dimorphic fungi is mainly limited to coccidioidal disease, and in particular for meningitis, where high doses of fluconazole often obviate the need for intrathecal amphotericin B. Fluconazole displays no activity against Aspergillus or other filamentous fungi.
# Chunk 8284
Observed toxicities include rash and elevated hepatic enzymes. Visual disturbances are common, occurring in up to 30% of patients receiving intravenous voriconazole, and include blurring and changes in color vision or brightness. These visual changes usually occur immediately after a dose of voriconazole and resolve within 30 minutes. Photosensitivity dermatitis is commonly observed in patients receiving chronic oral therapy.
# Chunk 8285
Isavuconazonium sulfate is a prodrug of the newest triazole, isavuconazole; 186 mg of the water-soluble prodrug is equivalent to 100 mg of isavuconazole. It is available as highly bioavailable oral capsules and an intravenous formulation. Following a 2-day loading dose of 372 mg administered every 8 hours, isavuconazonium sulfate is given as a single 372-mg daily dose. Food does not significantly impact the oral absorption of isavuconazonium sulfate. Measurement of isavuconazole levels has not been demonstrated to be of benefit. Coadministration with strong 3A4 inhibitors (eg, ritonavir) or inducers (eg, rifampin) is not recommended.
# Chunk 8286
Terbinafine is a synthetic allylamine that is available in an oral formulation and is used at a dosage of 250 mg/d. It is used in the treatment of dermatophytoses, especially onychomycosis (see Chapter 61). Like griseofulvin, terbinafine is a keratophilic medication, but unlike griseofulvin, it is fungicidal. Like the azole drugs, it interferes with ergosterol biosynthesis, but rather than interacting with the P450 system, terbinafine inhibits the fungal enzyme squalene epoxidase (Figure 48–1). This leads to the accumulation of the sterol squalene, which is toxic to the organism. One 250-mg tablet given daily for 12 weeks achieves a cure rate of up to 90% for onychomycosis and is more effective than griseofulvin or itraconazole. Adverse effects are rare, consisting primarily of gastrointestinal upset and headache, but serious hepatotoxicity has been reported. Terbinafine does not seem to affect the P450 system and has demonstrated no significant drug interactions to date.
# Chunk 8287
Voriconazole Generic, Vfend

The mold subsequently isolated from the patient’s CSF was identified as Coccidioides immitis. Patients of African-American and Southeast Asian descent as well as immuno-compromised patients are at an increased risk for developing chronic forms of coccidioidomycosis such as meningitis. C. immitis is a dimorphic fungus that grows in the soil of the San Joaquin Valley in California, while closely related C posadasii is found elsewhere in desert regions of the southwest USA, parts of Mexico, and Central and South America. Oral therapy with fluconazole was initiated at a dose of 800 mg/day and patient’s headache, fever, and double vision resolved within 7 days. Patients experiencing treatment failure with fluconazole may require treatment with intrathecal amphotericin B. Generally, coccidioidal meningitis requires lifelong therapy because of a high incidence of disease relapse with treatment discontinua-tion and is 100% fatal without antifungal treatment.
# Chunk 8288
Sharon Safrin, MD

A 35-year-old white woman who recently tested seropositive for both HIV and hepatitis B virus surface antigen is referred for evaluation. She is feeling well overall but reports a 25-pack-year smoking history. She drinks 3–4 beers per week and has no known medication allergies. She has a history of heroin use and is currently receiving methadone. Physical examination reveals normal vital signs and no abnormalities. White blood cell count is 5800 cells/mm3 with a normal differential, hemoglobin is 11.8 g/dL, all liver tests are within normal limits, CD4 cell count is 278 cells/mm3, and viral load (HIV RNA) is 110,000 copies/mL. What other laboratory tests should be ordered? Which antiretroviral medica-tions would you begin?
# Chunk 8289
Comparative trials have demonstrated similar efficacies of these three agents for the treatment of HSV, with shortening of the duration of symptoms by approximately 2 days, the time to lesion healing by 4 days, and the duration of viral shedding by 7 days in first episodes of genital herpes and shortening of the overall time course by 1–2 days in recurrent genital herpes. Treatment of first-episode genital herpes does not alter the frequency or severity of recurrent outbreaks. Long-term suppression with antiherpes agents in patients with frequent recurrences of genital herpes decreases the frequency of symptomatic recurrences and of asymptomatic viral shedding, thus decreasing the rate of sexual transmission. However, outbreaks may resume upon discontinuation of suppression. The efficacy of the anti-herpes agents in orolabial herpes is generally less than that in anogenital herpes.
# Chunk 8290
FIGURE 49–2 Mechanism of action of antiherpes agents.

diffuses readily into most tissues and body fluids. Cerebrospinal fluid concentrations are 20–50% of serum values.
# Chunk 8291
Valacyclovir is the l-valyl ester of acyclovir. It is rapidly converted to acyclovir after oral administration via first-pass enzymatic hydrolysis in the liver and intestine, resulting in serum levels that are three to five times greater than those achieved with oral acyclovir and approximate those achieved with intravenous acyclovir. Oral bioavailability is 54–70%, and cerebrospinal fluid levels are about 50% of those in serum. Elimination half-life is 2.5–3.3 hours.
# Chunk 8292
The bioavailability of penciclovir from orally administered famciclovir is 70%. The intracellular half-life of penciclovir triphosphate is prolonged, at 7–20 hours. Penciclovir is excreted primarily in the urine.
# Chunk 8293
Oral famciclovir is generally well tolerated, although headache, nausea, or diarrhea may occur. As with acyclovir, testicular toxicity has been demonstrated in animals receiving repeated doses. However, men receiving daily famciclovir (250 mg every 12 hours) for 18 weeks had no changes in sperm morphology or motility. In one study, there was no evidence of increased birth defects in infants exposed to famciclovir during the first trimester. The incidence of mammary adenocarcinoma was increased in female rats receiving famciclovir for 2 years.
# Chunk 8294
The guanosine analog penciclovir, the active metabolite of famciclovir, is available for topical use. Penciclovir cream (1%) shortened the median duration of recurrent herpes labialis by ~17 hours compared to placebo when applied within 1 hour of the onset of prodromal symptoms and continued every 2 hours during waking hours for 4 days. Adverse effects are uncommon, other than application site reactions in ~1%.
# Chunk 8295
Docosanol is a saturated 22-carbon aliphatic alcohol that inhibits fusion between the host cell plasma membrane and the HSV envelope, thereby preventing viral entry into cells and subsequent viral replication. Topical docosanol 10% cream is available without a prescription. When applied within 12 hours of the onset of prodromal symptoms, five times daily, median healing time was shortened by 18 hours compared with placebo in recurrent orolabial herpes. Application site reactions occur in ~2%.
# Chunk 8296
Ganciclovir is administered intravenously; the bioavailability of oral ganciclovir is poor, and it is no longer available in the USA. Ganciclovir gel is available for the treatment of acute herpetic keratitis. Cerebrospinal fluid concentrations are approximately 50% of serum concentrations. The elimination half-life is 4 hours, and the intracellular half-life is prolonged at 16–24 hours. Clearance of the drug is linearly related to creatinine clearance. Ganciclovir is readily cleared by hemodialysis.
# Chunk 8297
Valganciclovir has a bioavailability of 60% and should be taken with food. The AUC0–24h resulting from oral valganciclovir (900 mg once daily) is similar to that after 5 mg/kg once daily of intravenous ganciclovir and approximately 1.65 times that of oral ganciclovir. The major route of elimination is renal, through glomerular filtration and active tubular secretion. Plasma concentrations of valganciclovir are reduced ~50% by hemodialysis.
# Chunk 8298
Foscarnet is available in an intravenous formulation only; poor oral bioavailability and gastrointestinal intolerance preclude oral use. Cerebrospinal fluid concentrations are 43–67% of steady-state serum concentrations. Although the mean plasma half-life is 3–7 hours, up to 30% of foscarnet may be deposited in bone, with a half-life of several months. The clinical repercussions of this are unknown. Clearance of foscarnet is primarily renal and is directly proportional to creatinine clearance. Serum drug concentrations are reduced ~50% by hemodialysis.
# Chunk 8299
Although the terminal half-life of cidofovir is approximately 2.6 hours, the active metabolite cidofovir diphosphate has a prolonged intracellular half-life of 17–65 hours, thus allowing infrequent dosing. A separate metabolite, cidofovir phosphocholine, has a half-life of at least 87 hours and may serve as an intracellular reservoir of active drug. Cerebrospinal fluid penetration is poor. Elimination is by active renal tubular secretion. High-flux hemodialysis reduces serum levels of cidofovir by approximately 75%.
# Chunk 8300
Hypersensitivity reactions, occasionally fatal, have been reported in up to 8% of patients receiving abacavir and may be more severe in association with once-daily dosing. Symptoms, which generally occur within the first 6 weeks of therapy, include fever, fatigue, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal pain. Dyspnea, pharyngitis, and cough, and elevations in serum aminotransferase or creatine kinase levels may also be present, with skin rash in ~50% of patients. Rechallenge is contraindicated. Screening for HLA-B*5701 before initiation of abacavir therapy is important to identify patients with an increased risk for abacavirassociated hypersensitivity reaction (see Table 5–4). Although the positive predictive value of this test is only about 50%, it has a negative predictive value approaching 100%.
# Chunk 8301
Emtricitabine (FTC) is a fluorinated analog of lamivudine with a long intracellular half-life (>24 hours), allowing for once-daily dosing. Oral bioavailability of the capsules is 93% and is unaffected by food, but penetration into the cerebrospinal fluid is low. Elimination is by both glomerular filtration and active tubular secretion. The serum half-life is about 10 hours.
# Chunk 8302
Lamivudine (3TC) is a cytosine analog with in vitro activity against both HIV-1 and HBV.

Oral bioavailability exceeds 80% and is not food-dependent. The mean cerebrospinal fluid:plasma ratio of lamivudine is 0.1–0.2. Serum half-life is 2.5 hours, whereas the intracellular half-life of the triphosphorylated compound is 11–14 hours. Lamivudine is predominantly eliminated in the urine by active organic cation secretion.
# Chunk 8303
Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate is a water-soluble prodrug of active tenofovir. The oral bioavailability increases from 25% in the fasted state to 39% after a high-fat meal. The prolonged serum (12–17 hours) and intracellular half-lives allow once-daily dosing. Elimination occurs by both glomerular filtration and active tubular secretion, and dosage adjustment in patients with renal insufficiency is recommended.
# Chunk 8304
Zidovudine (azidothymidine; AZT) is a deoxythymidine analog that is well absorbed (63%) and distributed to most body tissues and fluids, including the cerebrospinal fluid, where drug levels are 60–65% of those in serum. Although the serum half-life averages 1 hour, the intracellular half-life of the phosphorylated compound is 3–4 hours, allowing twice-daily dosing. Zidovudine is eliminated primarily by renal excretion following glucuronidation in the liver.
# Chunk 8305
Delavirdine has an oral bioavailability of about 85%, but this is reduced by antacids or H2-blockers. It is extensively bound (~98%) to plasma proteins and has correspondingly low cerebrospinal fluid levels. Serum half-life is approximately 6 hours.
# Chunk 8306
Efavirenz can be given once daily because of its long half-life (40–55 hours). It is moderately well absorbed following oral administration (45%). Since toxicity may increase owing to increased bioavailability after a high-fat meal, efavirenz should be taken on an empty stomach. Efavirenz is principally metabolized by CYP3A4 and CYP2B6 to inactive hydroxylated metabolites; the remainder is eliminated in the feces as unchanged drug. It is highly bound to albumin (~ 99%), and cerebrospinal fluid levels range from 0.3% to 1.2% of plasma levels.
# Chunk 8307
The most common adverse effects of etravirine are rash, nausea, and diarrhea. The rash is typically mild and usually resolves after 1–2 weeks without discontinuation of therapy. Rarely, rash has been severe or life-threatening. Laboratory abnormalities include elevations in serum cholesterol, triglyceride, glucose, and hepatic aminotransferase levels. Aminotransferase elevations are more common in patients with HBV or HCV co-infection.
# Chunk 8308
The oral bioavailability of nevirapine is excellent (>90%) and is not food-dependent. The drug is highly lipophilic and achieves cerebrospinal fluid levels that are 45% of those in plasma. Serum half-life is 25–30 hours. It is extensively metabolized by the CYP3A isoform to hydroxylated metabolites and then excreted, primarily in the urine.
# Chunk 8309
Atazanavir is an azapeptide PI with a pharmacokinetic profile that allows once-daily dosing. Atazanavir requires an acidic medium for absorption and exhibits pH-dependent aqueous solubility; therefore, it should be taken with meals. Separation of ingestion from acid-reducing agents by at least 12 hours is recommended and concurrent proton pump inhibitors are contraindicated. Atazanavir is able to penetrate both the cerebrospinal and seminal fluids. The plasma half-life is 6–7 hours, which increases to approximately 11 hours when co-administered with ritonavir. The primary route of elimination is biliary; atazanavir should not be given to patients with severe hepatic insufficiency.
# Chunk 8310
Boosted atazanavir is one of the recommended PI agents for use in pregnant women (Table 49–5).

The most common adverse effects in patients receiving atazanavir are diarrhea and nausea; vomiting, abdominal pain, headache, and peripheral neuropathy may also occur. Skin rash, reported in ~20% of patients, is generally mild; however severe rash and Stevens Johnson syndrome have been reported. As with indinavir, indirect hyperbilirubinemia with overt jaundice may occur in approximately 10% of patients, owing to inhibition of the UGT1A1 glucuronidation enzyme. Elevation of serum aminotransferases has separately been observed, usually in patients with underlying HBV or HCV co-infection. Kidney stones, gallstones, PR prolongation, and decreased bone mineral density have also been reported. In contrast to the other PIs, atazanavir does not appear to be associated with dyslipidemia or hyperglycemia. The oral powder contains phenylalanine, which can be harmful to patients with phenylketonuria.
# Chunk 8311
Indinavir requires an acidic environment for optimum solubility and therefore must be consumed on an empty stomach or with a small, low-fat, low-protein meal for maximal absorption (60–65%). The serum half-life is 1.5–2 hours, protein binding is ~60%, and the drug has a high level of cerebrospinal fluid penetration (up to 76% of serum levels). Excretion is primarily fecal. An increase in AUC by 60% and in half-life to 2.8 hours in the setting of hepatic insufficiency necessitates dose reduction.
# Chunk 8312
The most common adverse effects of indinavir are unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia and nephrolithiasis due to urinary crystallization of the drug. Nephrolithiasis can occur within days after initiating therapy, with an estimated incidence of approximately 10%. Acute renal failure and interstitial fibrosis have also been reported. Consumption of at least 48 ounces of water daily is important to maintain adequate hydration, and serum creatinine levels should be monitored. Nausea, diarrhea, sicca syndrome, headache, blurred vision, and elevations of serum aminotransferase levels have also been reported. Insulin resistance may be more common with indinavir than with the other PIs, occurring in 3–5% of patients. In some studies but not in others, indinavir has been associated with a higher risk of myocardial infarction. There have also been rare cases of acute hemolytic anemia.
# Chunk 8313
Lopinavir is highly protein bound (98–99%), and its half-life is 5–6 hours. It is extensively metabolized by CYP3A, which is inhibited by ritonavir. Lopinavir/ritonavir is one of the recommended antiretroviral agents for use in pregnant women (Table 49–5).
# Chunk 8314
Ritonavir has a high bioavailability (~75%) that increases with food. It is 98% protein-bound and has a serum half-life of 3–5 hours. Metabolism to an active metabolite occurs via the CYP3A and CYP2D6 isoforms; excretion is primarily in the feces. Ritonavir as a pharmacologic “booster” is one of the recommended antiretroviral agents for use in pregnant women (Table 49–5).
# Chunk 8315
Adverse effects of full-dose ritonavir include asthenia, gastrointestinal disturbances, and hepatitis; these are greatly reduced with the lower doses used for boosting. Dose escalation over 1–2 weeks decreases these side effects. Other potential adverse effects include altered taste, paresthesias (circumoral or peripheral), elevated serum aminotransferase and lipid levels, headache, elevations in serum creatine kinase, and pancreatitis. Inhibition of renal tubular secretion of creatinine causes a reversible elevation in serum creatinine, but glomerular filtration rate is not affected.
# Chunk 8316
Saquinavir should be taken within 2 hours after a fatty meal for enhanced absorption. Saquinavir is 97% protein-bound, and serum half-life is approximately 2 hours. Saquinavir has a large volume of distribution, but penetration into the cerebrospinal fluid is negligible. Excretion is primarily in the feces. Gastrointestinal discomfort (nausea, diarrhea, abdominal discomfort, dyspepsia) may occur. When administered in combination with low-dose ritonavir, there appears to be less dyslipidemia or gastrointestinal toxicity than with some of the other boosted PI regimens. Since prolongation of the QT interval and torsades de pointes have rarely been reported, saquinavir should not be used in patients with congenital long QT syndrome, AV block, refractory hypokalemia or hypomagnesemia, or in combination with drugs that both increase saquinavir plasma concentrations and prolong the QT interval. The concurrent use of saquinavir and ritonavir may confer an increased risk of QT or PR prolongation.
# Chunk 8317
The most common adverse effects of tipranavir are diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain. An urticarial or maculopapular rash occurs in 10–14%, and may be more common with co-administered ethinyl estradiol. Liver toxicity, including life-threatening hepatic decompensation, has been observed and may be more common than with other PIs, particularly in patients with chronic HBV or HCV infection. Because of an increased risk for intracranial hemorrhage in patients receiving tipranavir/ritonavir, the drug should be avoided in patients with head trauma or bleeding diathesis. Other potential adverse effects include depression, elevation in serum amylase, increased serum lipids, and decreased white blood cell count.
# Chunk 8318
The frequency of dosing of dolutegravir depends on the presence or absence of integrase inhibitor-associated resistance mutations and the concurrent use of efavirenz, fosamprenavir/ritonavir, tipranavir/ritonavir, or rifampin. Dolutegravir should be taken 2 hours before or 6 hours after cation-containing antacids or laxatives, sucralfate, oral iron supplements, oral calcium supplements, or buffered medications. Peak plasma concentrations occur within 2–3 hours of ingestion. Dolutegravir is highly protein bound (99%). The terminal half-life is ~14 hours. Serum levels may be reduced in patients with severe renal insufficiency.
# Chunk 8319
Elvitegravir should be taken with food, and it should be taken 2 hours before or 6 hours after cation-containing antacids or laxatives, sucralfate, oral iron supplements, oral calcium supplements, or buffered medications. Peak levels occur within 4 hours of ingestion; elvitegravir is highly protein bound (>98%).
# Chunk 8320
TABLE 49–6 Drugs used to treat chronic hepatitis B virus infection.

TABLE 49–7 Direct-acting antiviral combination regimens for the treatment of chronic hepatitis C infection in adult patients without cirrhosis.1 1 Regimens may differ in the presence of cirrhosis. 2 As an alternative regimen, elbasvir 50 mg/grazoprevir 100 mg once daily may be given in combination with weight-based ribavirin for 16 weeks. 3 Dose adjustment may be required if co-administered with a CYP 3A substrate.
# Chunk 8321
the immunogenicity of the protein, resulting in a longer half-life and steadier plasma concentrations. Renal elimination of pegylated interferon alfa-2a and pegylated interferon alfa-2b accounts for about 30% of clearance; dose must be adjusted in renal insufficiency due to impaired clearance. The polyethylene glycol moiety is a nontoxic polymer that is readily excreted in the urine.
# Chunk 8322
The adverse effects of interferon alfa include a flu-like syndrome (ie, headache, fevers, chills, myalgias, and malaise) that occurs within 6 hours after dosing in more than 30% of patients; it tends to resolve upon continued administration. Transient hepatic enzyme elevations may occur in the first 8–12 weeks of therapy and appear to be more common in responders. Potential adverse effects during chronic therapy include neurotoxicities (mood disorders, depression, somnolence, confusion, seizures), myelosuppression, profound fatigue, weight loss, rash, cough, myalgia, alopecia, tinnitus, reversible hearing loss, retinopathy, pneumonitis, and possibly cardiotoxicity. Induction of autoantibodies may occur, causing exacerbation or unmasking of autoimmune disease (particularly thyroiditis).
# Chunk 8323
As of 2017 eight drugs were approved for treatment of chronic HBV infection in the United States: five oral nucleoside/nucleotide analogs (lamivudine, adefovir dipivoxil, tenofovir disoproxil, tenofovir alafenamide, entecavir, telbivudine) and two injectable interferon drugs (interferon alfa-2b, pegylated interferon alfa-2a) (Table 49–6). The use of standard interferon has been supplanted by long-acting pegylated interferon, allowing once-weekly rather than daily or thrice-weekly dosing. The advantages of interferon are its finite duration of treatment, the absence of selection of resistant variants, and a more durable response. However, adverse effects from interferon are more frequent, and may be severe. Furthermore, interferon cannot be used in patients with decompensated disease. In general, nucleoside/nucleotide analog therapies have better tolerability and produce a higher response rate than the interferons, and are now considered the first line of therapy.
# Chunk 8324
Adefovir is well tolerated at doses used to treat HBV infection. A reversible increase in serum creatinine has been reported in 3–9% of patients after 4–5 years of treatment. Other potential adverse effects are headache, diarrhea, asthenia, and abdominal pain. As with other NRTI agents, lactic acidosis and hepatic steatosis are a risk owing to mitochondrial dysfunction. Pivalic acid, a by-product of adefovir metabolism, can esterify free carnitine and result in decreased carnitine levels. However, it is not necessary to administer carnitine supplementation with the low doses used to treat patients with HBV (10 mg/d). Adefovir is embryo-toxic in rats at high doses and is genotoxic in preclinical studies.
# Chunk 8325
Suppression of HBV DNA levels was greater with entecavir than with lamivudine or adefovir in comparative trials. Entecavir appears to have a higher barrier to the emergence of resistance than lamivudine. Although selection of resistant isolates with the S202G mutation has been documented during therapy, clinical resistance is rare (<1% at 5 years). However, resistance is more frequent in lamivudine-refractory patients (~ 50% at 5 years). Entecavir has weak anti-HIV activity and can induce development of the M184V variant in HBV/HIV co-infected patients, resulting in resistance to emtricitabine and lamivudine.
# Chunk 8326
Entecavir is well tolerated. Potential adverse events are headache, fatigue, dizziness, nausea, and upper abdominal pain. Co-administration of entecavir with drugs that reduce renal function or compete for active tubular secretion may increase serum concentrations of either entecavir or the co-administered drug. Severe lactic acidosis was reported in a case series of entecavir; thus caution is advised for administration in the setting of severe hepatic decompensation. Lung adenomas and carcinomas in mice, hepatic adenomas and carcinomas in rats and mice, vascular tumors in mice, and brain gliomas and skin fibromas in rats have been observed at varying exposures, although clinical relevance is unknown.
# Chunk 8327
Lamivudine inhibits HBV DNA polymerase and HIV reverse transcriptase by competing with deoxycytidine triphosphate for incorporation into the viral DNA, resulting in chain termination. Although lamivudine results in rapid and potent virus suppression, chronic therapy is limited by the emergence of lamivudineresistant HBV isolates (eg, L180M or M204I/V), estimated to occur in 15–30% of patients at 1 year and in up to 65% after 5 years of therapy. Resistance has been associated with flares of hepatitis and progressive liver disease. Cross-resistance between lamivudine and emtricitabine or entecavir may occur; however, adefovir and tenofovir maintain activity against lamivudineresistant strains of HBV.
# Chunk 8328
The advent of the first-generation direct-acting antiviral agents (DAAs) boceprevir and telaprevir dramatically altered the landscape for the optimal treatment of chronic HCV infection, which was previously treated with the combination of interferonalfa (replaced by pegylated interferon-alfa) and ribavirin. Since interferon-containing regimens tend to be associated with higher rates of serious adverse events (including anemia and rash), longer treatment durations, more frequent dosing, and clinically significant drug-drug interactions, they are gradually being replaced by combination regimens of DAAs (see Table 49–7). Moreover, while the first-generation HCV protease inhibitors (ie, boceprevir, telaprevir) markedly improved the effectiveness of pegylated interferon plus ribavirin, they have been replaced by newer DAAs over the past 2 years, which can be administered in all-oral, interferon-free combinations—with or without ribavirin—with improved efficacy and tolerability, improved dosing schedules, lesser genotype specificity, and fewer potential drug-drug interactions. However, the DAA regimens are expensive.
# Chunk 8329
Simeprevir was one of the earliest protease inhibitors available; however, it is considered a second-generation HCV protease inhibitor because of the enhanced binding affinity and specificity for NS3/4A. It is used in combination with sofosbuvir, with or without ribavirin, for treatment of HCV genotype 1, or it may be administered in combination with peg interferon-alfa and ribavirin. Simeprevir must be taken with food to maximize absorption. Mean absolute bioavailability is 62%. Peak plasma concentrations are reached 4–6 hours post-ingestion. It is extensively bound to plasma proteins (>99%), metabolized in the liver by CYP3A pathways, and undergoes biliary excretion. Simeprevir is not recommended in patients with moderate or severe hepatic impairment because of 2to 5-fold increases in exposure. In addition, mean simeprevir exposures are more than threefold higher in patients of East Asian ancestry compared with Caucasians, leading to potentially higher frequencies of adverse events.
# Chunk 8330
The absolute oral bioavailability of ribavirin is 45–64%, increases with high-fat meals, and decreases with co-administration of antacids. Plasma protein binding is negligible, volume of distribution is large, and cerebrospinal fluid levels are about 70% of those in plasma. Ribavirin elimination is primarily through the urine; therefore, clearance is decreased in patients with creatinine clearances <30 mL/min.
# Chunk 8331
The neuraminidase inhibitors oseltamivir and zanamivir, analogs of sialic acid, interfere with release of progeny influenza A and B virus from infected host cells, thus halting the spread of infection within the respiratory tract. These agents competitively and reversibly interact with the active enzyme site to inhibit viral neuraminidase activity at low nanomolar concentrations, resulting in clumping of newly released influenza virions to each other and to the membrane of the infected cell. Early administration is crucial because replication of influenza virus peaks at 24–72 hours after the onset of illness. Initiation of a 5-day course of therapy within 48 hours after the onset of illness (75 mg twice daily) modestly decreases the duration of symptoms, as well as duration of viral shedding and viral titer; some studies have also shown a decrease in the incidence of complications. Once-daily prophylaxis (75 mg once daily) is 70–90% effective in preventing disease after exposure.
# Chunk 8332
Oseltamivir is an orally administered prodrug that is activated by hepatic esterases and widely distributed throughout the body. Oral bioavailability is ~ 80%, plasma protein binding is low, and concentrations in the middle ear and sinus fluid are similar to those in plasma. The half-life of oseltamivir is 6–10 hours, and excretion is by glomerular filtration and tubular secretion. Probenecid reduces renal clearance by 50%. Serum concentrations of oseltamivir carboxylate, the active metabolite of oseltamivir, increase with declining renal function; therefore, dosage should be adjusted in patients with renal insufficiency. Potential adverse effects include nausea, vomiting, and headache. Taking oseltamivir with food does not interfere with absorption and may decrease nausea and vomiting. Fatigue and diarrhea have also been reported and appear to be more common with prophylactic use. Rash is rare. Neuropsychiatric events (self-injury or delirium) have been reported, particularly in adolescents and adults living in Japan.
# Chunk 8333
Zanamivir is administered directly to the respiratory tract via inhalation. Of the active compound, 10–20% reaches the lungs; the remainder is deposited in the oropharynx. The concentration of the drug in the respiratory tract is estimated to be more than 1000 times the 50% inhibitory concentration for neuraminidase, and the pulmonary half-life is 2.8 hours. Of the total dose (10 mg twice daily for 5 days for treatment or 10 mg once daily for prevention), 5–15% is absorbed and excreted in the urine with minimal metabolism. Potential adverse effects include cough, bronchospasm (occasionally severe), reversible decrease in pulmonary function, and transient nasal and throat discomfort. Zanamivir administration is not recommended for patients with underlying airway disease.
# Chunk 8334
Amantadine (1-aminoadamantane hydrochloride) and its α-methyl derivative, rimantadine, are tricyclic amines of the adamantane family that block the M2 proton ion channel of the virus particle and inhibit uncoating of the viral RNA within infected host cells, thus preventing its replication. They are active against influenza A only. Rimantadine is four to ten times more active than amantadine in vitro. Amantadine is well absorbed and 67% protein-bound, with a plasma half-life of 12–18 hours that varies by creatinine clearance. Rimantadine is about 40% protein-bound and has a half-life of 24–36 hours. Nasal mucus concentrations of rimantadine average 50% higher than those in plasma, and cerebrospinal fluid levels are 52–96% of those in the serum. Amantadine is excreted unchanged in the urine, whereas rimantadine undergoes extensive metabolism by hydroxylation, conjugation, and glucuronidation before urinary excretion. Dose reductions are required for both agents in the elderly and in patients with renal insufficiency, and for rimantadine in patients with severe hepatic insufficiency.
# Chunk 8335
In the absence of resistance, both amantadine and rimantadine are 70–90% protective in the prevention of clinical illness when initiated before exposure and limit the duration of clinical illness by 1–2 days when administered as treatment. However, due to high rates of resistance in both H1N1 and H3N2 viruses, these agents are no longer recommended for the prevention or treatment of influenza.
# Chunk 8336
Palivizumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody directed against an epitope in the A antigen site on the F surface protein of RSV. It is licensed for the prevention of RSV infection in high-risk infants and children, such as premature infants and those with bronchopulmonary dysplasia or congenital heart disease. A placebo-controlled trial using once-monthly intramuscular injections (15 mg/kg) for 5 months beginning at the start of the RSV season demonstrated a 55% reduction in the risk of hospitalization for RSV in treated patients, as well as decreases in the need for supplemental oxygen, the illness severity score, and need for intensive care. Although resistant strains have been isolated in the laboratory, no resistant clinical isolates have yet been identified. Potential adverse effects include upper respiratory tract infection, fever, rhinitis, rash, diarrhea, vomiting, cough, otitis media, and elevation in serum aminotransferase levels.
# Chunk 8337
A 56-year-old man is admitted to the intensive care unit of a hospital for treatment of community-acquired pneumonia. He receives ceftriaxone and azithromycin upon admission, rapidly improves, and is transferred to a semiprivate ward room. On day 7 of his hospitalization, he develops copi-ous diarrhea with eight bowel movements but is otherwise clinically stable. Clostridium difficile infection is confirmed by stool testing. What is an acceptable treatment for the patient’s diarrhea? The patient is transferred to a single-bed room. The housekeeping staff asks what product should be used to clean the patient’s old room.
# Chunk 8338
Metronidazole is indicated for treatment of anaerobic or mixed intra-abdominal infections (in combination with other agents with activity against aerobic organisms), vaginitis (trichomonas infection, bacterial vaginosis), Clostridium difficile infection, and brain abscess. The typical dosage is 500 mg three times daily orally or intravenously (30 mg/kg/d). Vaginitis may respond to a single 2-g dose. A vaginal gel is available for topical use.
# Chunk 8339
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment for C difficile infection in adults. It is as effective as oral vancomycin and may be associated with lower rates of relapsing disease. Fidaxomicin is administered orally as a 200 mg tablet twice daily for 10 days.
# Chunk 8340
Rifaximin is a derivative of rifampin. It is active against Gram-positive and Gram-negative aerobes and anaerobes. Rifaximin inhibits bacterial protein synthesis by binding to the beta subunit of DNA-dependent RNA polymerase. When administered orally, systemic absorption is <0.5%, but fecal concentrations are high; following a three day course for travelers’ diarrhea, the fecal concentrations were 8000 mcg/g. Rifaximin was originally approved by the FDA for the treatment of travelers’ diarrhea, and it is now used in the management of hepatic encephalopathy, irritable bowel syndrome with diarrhea, and, occasionally, as an adjunct in cases of recurrent or refractory C difficile infection in adults. Typical doses of rifaximin range from 200 mg to 550 mg administered orally twice to three times daily depending on the indication. Unlike other rifamycins, rifaximin is not thought to be associated with cytochrome-P450-mediated drug interactions due to its limited absorption.
# Chunk 8341
Nitrofurantoin is well absorbed after ingestion. It is metabolized and excreted so rapidly that no systemic antibacterial action is achieved. The drug is excreted into the urine by both glomerular filtration and tubular secretion. With average daily doses, concentrations of 200 mcg/mL are reached in urine. In renal failure, urine levels are insufficient for antibacterial action, but high blood levels may cause toxicity. Nitrofurantoin is contraindicated in patients with significant renal insufficiency. Traditional recommendations are to avoid use in patients with creatinine clearance <60 mL/min; however, some data suggest short-term nitrofurantoin treatment is acceptable in patients with creatinine clearance >30 mL/min.
# Chunk 8342
Methenamine mandelate, 1 g four times daily, or methenamine hippurate, 1 g twice daily by mouth (in children age 6 to 12 years, 500 mg four times daily or twice daily, respectively), is used only as a urinary antiseptic to prevent, not treat, symptomatic urinary tract infection. Acidifying agents (eg, ascorbic acid, 4–12 g/d) may be given to lower urinary pH below 5.5. Sulfonamides should not be given at the same time because they may form an insoluble compound with the formaldehyde released by methenamine. Persons taking methenamine mandelate may exhibit falsely elevated tests for catecholamine metabolites.
# Chunk 8343
Iodine in a 1:20,000 solution is bactericidal in 1 minute and kills spores in 15 minutes. Tincture of iodine USP contains 2% iodine and 2.4% sodium iodide in alcohol. It is the most active antiseptic for intact skin. It is not commonly used due to serious hypersensitivity reactions and staining of clothing and dressings.
# Chunk 8344
Because chlorine is inactivated by blood, serum, feces, and protein-containing materials, surfaces should be cleaned before chlorine disinfectant is applied. Undissociated hypochlorous acid (HOCl) is the active biocidal agent. When pH is increased, the less active hypochlorite ion, OCl –, is formed. When hypochlorite solutions contact formaldehyde, the carcinogen bischloromethyl is formed. Rapid evolution of irritating chlorine gas occurs when hypochlorite solutions are mixed with acid and urine. Solutions are corrosive to aluminum, silver, and stainless steel.
# Chunk 8345
• Tinidazole: Oral; similar to metronidazole but dosed once daily; approved for trichomonas, giardiasis, and amebiasis • Methenamine hippurate and methenamine mandelate: Oral; release formaldehyde at acidic pH in the urine; used only for prophylaxis, not treatment, of urinary tract infections
# Chunk 8346
Clinical Use of Antimicrobial Agents

Harry W. Lampiris, MD, & Daniel S. Maddix, PharmD

A 65-year-old man undergoes cystoscopy because of the presence of microscopic hematuria in order to rule out urologic malignancy. The patient has mild dysuria and pyuria and empirically receives oral therapy with cip-rofloxacin for presumed urinary tract infection prior to the procedure and tolerates the procedure well. Approxi-mately 48 hours after the procedure, the patient presents to the emergency department with confusion, dysuria and chills. Physical exam reveals a blood pressure of 90/50, pulse of 120, temperature of 38.5° C and respira-tory rate of 24. The patient is disoriented but the physical exam is otherwise unremarkable. Laboratory test shows WBC 24,000/mm3 and elevated serum lactate; urinalysis shows 300 WBC per high power field and 4+ bacteria. What possible organisms are likely to be responsible for the patient’s symptoms? At this point, what antibiotic(s) would you choose for initial therapy of this potentially life-threatening infection?
# Chunk 8347
TABLE 51–3 Bactericidal and bacteriostatic antibacterial agents.

(eg, β-lactams and vancomycin). For drugs whose killing action is concentration-dependent, the rate and extent of killing increase with increasing drug concentrations. Concentration-dependent killing is one of the pharmacodynamic factors responsible for the efficacy of once-daily dosing of aminoglycosides. For drugs whose killing action is time-dependent, bactericidal activity continues as long as serum concentrations are greater than the MBC.
# Chunk 8348
In vivo PAEs are usually much longer than in vitro PAEs. This is thought to be due to postantibiotic leukocyte enhancement (PALE) and exposure of bacteria to subinhibitory antibiotic concentrations. The efficacy of once-daily dosing regimens is in part due to the PAE. Aminoglycosides and quinolones possess concentration-dependent PAEs; thus, high doses of aminoglycosides given once daily result in enhanced bactericidal activity and extended PAEs. This combination of pharmacodynamic effects allows aminoglycoside serum concentrations that are below the MICs of target organisms to remain effective for extended periods of time.
# Chunk 8349
This patient is experiencing a post-procedure urinary tract infection which may have been introduced into his bloodstream at the time of his cystoscopy. It is likely that the patient is experiencing a sepsis-like syndrome and has a systemic infection with a uropathogen that is resistant to the antibiotic that he has received. Pos-sible bacteria that may be responsible for the patient’s symptoms are methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, Enterococcus sp., and enteric Gram-negative rods that are resistant to ciprofloxacin such as ESBL-positive E coli or Klebsiella pneumoniae, or other hospital-acquired Gram negative organisms such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The patient was treated with vancomycin and meropenem, and blood and urine cultures were both positive for ESBL-positive E coli that was resistant to ciprofloxacin. The patient defervesced and hemodynamically stabilized over the subsequent 48 hours. ESBL-positive E coli is an emerging urinary tract pathogen that may be acquired in the outpatient setting, and oral antibiotic therapy may not reliably be effective; empiric therapy with a carbapenem (ertapenem, doripenem, meropenem, imipenem) is recom-mended for serious infections due to this organism.
# Chunk 8350
Philip J. Rosenthal, MD

A 5-year-old American girl presents with a 1-week history of intermittent chills, fever, and sweats. She had returned home 2 weeks earlier after leaving the USA for the first time to spend 3 weeks with her grandparents in Nigeria. She received all standard childhood immunizations, but no additional treat-ment before travel, since her parents have returned to their native Nigeria frequently without medical consequences. Three days ago, the child was seen in an outpatient clinic and diagnosed with a viral syndrome. Examination reveals a lethargic child, with a temperature of 39.8°C (103.6°F) and splenomegaly. She has no skin rash or lymphadenopathy. Ini-tial laboratory studies are remarkable for hematocrit 29.8%, platelets 45,000/mm3, creatinine 2.5 mg/dL (220 μmol/L), and mildly elevated bilirubin and transaminases. A blood smear shows ring forms of Plasmodium falciparum at 1.5% parasit-emia. What treatment should be started?
# Chunk 8351
Chloroquine is a synthetic 4-aminoquinoline (Figure 52–2) formulated as the phosphate salt for oral use. It is rapidly and almost completely absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract, reaches maximum plasma concentrations in about 3 hours, and is rapidly distributed to the tissues. It has a very large apparent volume of distribution of 100–1000 L/kg and is slowly released from tissues and metabolized. Chloroquine is principally excreted in the urine with an initial half-life of 3–5 days but a much longer terminal elimination half-life of 1–2 months.
# Chunk 8352
Chloroquine is usually very well tolerated, even with prolonged use. Pruritus is common, primarily in Africans. Nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, headache, anorexia, malaise, blurring of vision, and urticaria are uncommon. Dosing after meals may reduce some adverse effects. Rare reactions include hemolysis in glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD)-deficient persons, impaired hearing, confusion, psychosis, seizures, agranulocytosis, exfoliative dermatitis, alopecia, bleaching of hair, hypotension, and electrocardiographic changes. The long-term administration of high doses of chloroquine for rheumatologic diseases (see Chapter 36) can result in irreversible ototoxicity, retinopathy, myopathy, and peripheral neuropathy, but these are rarely seen with standard-dose weekly
# Chunk 8353
3For drugs other than primaquine, begin 1–2 weeks before departure (except 2 days before for doxycycline and Malarone) and continue for 4 weeks after leaving the endemic area (except 1 week for Malarone). All dosages refer to salts.
# Chunk 8354
Artesunate,2 2.4 mg/kg IV, every 12 hours for 1 day, then daily for 2 additional days; follow with 7-day oral course of doxycycline or clindamycin or full treatment course of Coartem, Malarone, or mefloquine
# Chunk 8355
Quinidine gluconate,4,5 10 mg/kg IV over 1–2 hours, then 0.02 mg/kg IV/min

Quinidine gluconate4,5 15 mg/kg IV over 4 hours, then 7.5 mg/kg IV over 4 hours every 8 hours Malarone, four tablets (total of 1 g atovaquone, 400 mg proguanil) daily for 3 days
# Chunk 8356
Mefloquine, 15 mg/kg once or 750 mg, then 500 mg in 6–8 hours

Quinine sulfate, 650 mg 3 times daily for 3 days, plus doxycycline, 100 mg twice daily for 7 days, or clindamycin, 600 mg twice daily for 7 days
# Chunk 8357
Piperaquine is a bisquinoline that was used widely to treat chloroquine-resistant falciparum malaria in China in the 1970s–1980s, but its use waned after resistance became widespread. More recently, piperaquine combined with dihydroartemisinin (Artekin, Duocotecxin) showed excellent efficacy and safety for the treatment of falciparum malaria, although very recently decreased efficacy has been seen in southeast Asia, linked to decreased activity of both components of the combination. Piperaquine has a longer half-life (~28 days) than amodiaquine (~14 days), mefloquine (~14 days), or lumefantrine (~4 days), leading to a longer period of post-treatment prophylaxis with dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine than with the other leading artemisinin-based combinations; this feature should be particularly advantageous in high-transmission areas. Dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine is now the first-line therapy for the treatment of uncomplicated falciparum malaria in some countries in Asia. As dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine offers extended protection against malaria, there is interest in chemoprevention with monthly dosing of the drug, which has shown excellent efficacy in children and pregnant women in Africa.
# Chunk 8358
Weekly dosing with mefloquine for chemoprophylaxis may cause nausea, vomiting, dizziness, sleep and behavioral disturbances, epigastric pain, diarrhea, abdominal pain, headache, rash, and dizziness. Neuropsychiatric toxicities have received a good deal of publicity, but despite frequent anecdotal reports of seizures and psychosis, a number of controlled studies have found the frequency of serious adverse effects from mefloquine to be similar to that with other common antimalarial chemoprophylactic regimens. However, concern about reported long-term effects of short-term use of mefloquine led in 2013 to the FDA adding a black box warning regarding potential neurologic and psychiatric toxicities. Leukocytosis, thrombocytopenia, and aminotransferase elevations have also been reported.
# Chunk 8359
Primaquine phosphate is a synthetic 8-aminoquinoline (Figure 52–2). The drug is well absorbed orally, reaching peak plasma levels in 1–2 hours. The plasma half-life is 3–8 hours. Primaquine is widely distributed to the tissues, but only a small amount is bound there. It is rapidly metabolized and excreted in the urine.
# Chunk 8360
Malarone is generally well tolerated. Adverse effects include abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, headache, insomnia, and rash, and these are more common with the higher dosage required for treatment. Reversible elevations in liver enzymes have been reported. The safety of atovaquone in pregnancy is unknown, and its use is not advised in pregnant women. It is considered safe for use in children with body weight above 5 kg. Plasma concentrations of atovaquone are decreased about 50% by co-administration of tetracycline or rifampin.
# Chunk 8361
Pyrimethamine is a 2,4-diaminopyrimidine related to trimethoprim (see Chapter 46). Proguanil is a biguanide derivative (Figure 52–2). Both drugs are slowly but adequately absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. Pyrimethamine reaches peak plasma levels 2–6 hours after an oral dose, is bound to plasma proteins, and has an elimination half-life of about 3.5 days. Proguanil reaches peak plasma levels about 5 hours after an oral dose and has an elimination half-life of about 16 hours. Therefore, proguanil must be administered daily for chemoprophylaxis, whereas pyrimethamine can be given once a week. Pyrimethamine is extensively metabolized before excretion. Proguanil is a prodrug; its triazine metabolite, cycloguanil, is active. Fansidar, a fixed combination of the sulfonamide sulfadoxine (500 mg per tablet) and pyrimethamine (25 mg per tablet), is well absorbed. Its components display peak plasma levels within 2–8 hours and are excreted mainly by the kidneys. The average half-life of sulfadoxine is about 170 hours.
# Chunk 8362
1.

Chemoprophylaxis—Chemoprophylaxis with single folate antagonists is no longer recommended because of frequent resistance and toxicity. However, the antifolate combination trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole is commonly used as a daily prophylactic therapy for HIV-infected patients in developing countries, and this regimen offers partial preventive efficacy against malaria in Africa.
# Chunk 8363
HALOFANTRINE, LUMEFANTRINE, & PYRONARIDINE

Halofantrine hydrochloride, a phenanthrene-methanol, is effective against erythrocytic (but not other) stages of all four human malaria species. Oral absorption is variable and enhanced by food. Because of toxicity concerns, it should not be taken with meals. The half-life is about 4 days and excretion is mainly in the feces. Halofantrine is not available in the USA (although it has been approved by the FDA), but it is available in malaria-endemic countries.
# Chunk 8364
Lumefantrine, an aryl alcohol, is available only as a fixed-dose combination with artemether (Coartem, Riamet), which is now the first-line therapy for uncomplicated falciparum malaria in many countries. In addition, Coartem is approved in many nonendemic countries, including the USA. The half-life of lumefantrine, when used in combination, is 3–4 days. Drug levels may be altered by interactions with other drugs, including those that affect CYP3A4 metabolism. Oral absorption is variable and improved when the drug is taken with food. Since lumefantrine is not associated with the toxicity concerns of halofantrine, Coartem should be administered with fatty food to maximize antimalarial efficacy. Coartem is highly effective in the treatment of falciparum malaria when administered twice daily for 3 days. Coartem can cause minor prolongation of the QT interval, but this appears to be clinically insignificant, and the drug does not carry the risk of dangerous arrhythmias seen with halofantrine and quinidine. Coartem is very well tolerated. The most commonly reported adverse events have been gastrointestinal disturbances, headache, dizziness, rash, and pruritus, and in many cases these toxicities may have been due to underlying malaria or concomitant medications rather than to Coartem.
# Chunk 8365
Iodoquinol, 650 mg 3 times daily for 21 days

Paromomycin, 10 mg/kg 3 times daily for 7 days

Metronidazole, 750 mg 3 times daily (or 500 mg IV every 6 hours) for 10 days
# Chunk 8366
Tinidazole, 2 g daily for 3 days

Metronidazole, 750 mg 3 times daily (or 500 mg IV every 6 hours) for 10 days
# Chunk 8367
Tinidazole, 2 g daily for 5 days

Tetracycline, 250 mg 3 times daily for 10 days

Erythromycin, 500 mg 4 times daily for 10 days
# Chunk 8368
Tetracycline, 250 mg 3 times daily for 10 days

Dehydroemetine2 or emetine,2 1 mg/kg SC or IM for 3–5 days
# Chunk 8369
Dehydroemetine2 or emetine,2 1 mg/kg SC or IM for 8–10 days, followed by (liver abscess only) chloroquine, 500 mg twice daily for 2 days, then 500 mg daily for 21 days 1Route is oral unless otherwise indicated. See text for additional details and cautions. 2Not available in the USA.
# Chunk 8370
Iodoquinol (diiodohydroxyquin), a halogenated hydroxyquinoline, is an effective luminal amebicide. Pharmacokinetic data are incomplete but 90% of the drug is retained in the intestine and excreted in the feces. The remainder enters the circulation, has a half-life of 11–14 hours, and is excreted in the urine as glucuronides. Iodoquinol is effective against organisms in the bowel lumen but not against trophozoites.
# Chunk 8371
Infrequent adverse effects include diarrhea—which usually stops after several days—anorexia, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, headache, rash, and pruritus. Some halogenated hydroxyquinolines can produce severe neurotoxicity with prolonged use. Iodoquinol is not known to produce these effects at its recommended dosage, and this dosage (Table 52-5) should never be exceeded. Iodoquinol should be taken with meals to limit gastrointestinal toxicity. It should be used with caution in patients with optic neuropathy, renal or thyroid disease, or nonamebic hepatic disease. The drug should be discontinued if it produces persistent diarrhea or signs of iodine toxicity (dermatitis, urticaria, pruritus, fever). It is contraindicated in patients with intolerance to iodine.
# Chunk 8372
Diloxanide furoate is a dichloroacetamide derivative. It is an effective luminal amebicide but is not active against trophozoites. In the gut, diloxanide furoate is split into diloxanide and furoic acid; about 90% of the diloxanide is rapidly absorbed and then conjugated to form the glucuronide, which is promptly excreted in the urine. The unabsorbed diloxanide is the active antiamebic substance. Diloxanide furoate is not available commercially in the USA but can be obtained from some compounding pharmacies. It does not produce serious adverse effects. Flatulence is common, but nausea and abdominal cramps are infrequent and rashes are rare. The drug is not recommended in pregnancy.
# Chunk 8373
Pentamidine is an aromatic diamidine (Figure 52–3) formulated as an isethionate salt. The drug is only administered parenterally. It leaves the circulation rapidly, with an initial half-life of about 6 hours, but is bound avidly by tissues. Pentamidine thus accumulates and is eliminated very slowly, with a terminal elimination half-life of about 12 days. Only trace amounts of pentamidine appear in the central nervous system, so it is not effective against CNS African trypanosomiasis. Pentamidine can also be inhaled as a nebulized powder for the prevention of pneumocystosis. Absorption into the systemic circulation after inhalation appears to be minimal. The mechanism of action of pentamidine is unknown.
# Chunk 8374
2.

African trypanosomiasis (sleeping sickness)—Pentamidine has been used since 1940 and is the drug of choice to treat the early hemolymphatic stage of disease caused by Trypanosoma brucei gambiense (West African sleeping sickness). The drug is inferior to suramin for the treatment of early East African sleeping sickness. Pentamidine should not be used to treat late trypanosomiasis with central nervous system involvement. A number of dosing regimens have been described, generally providing 2–4 mg/kg daily or on alternate days for a total of 10–15 doses. Pentamidine has also been used for chemoprophylaxis against African trypanosomiasis, with dosing of 4 mg/kg every 3–6 months.
# Chunk 8375
3.

Leishmaniasis—Pentamidine is an alternative to sodium stibogluconate and newer agents for the treatment of visceral leishmaniasis. The drug has been successful in some cases that have failed therapy with antimonials. The dosage is 2–4 mg/kg intramuscularly daily or every other day for up to 15 doses, and a second course may be necessary. Pentamidine has also shown success against cutaneous leishmaniasis, but it is not routinely used for this purpose.
# Chunk 8376
Pentamidine is a highly toxic drug, with adverse effects noted in about 50% of patients receiving 4 mg/kg/d. Rapid intravenous administration can lead to severe hypotension, tachycardia, dizziness, and dyspnea, so the drug should be administered slowly (over 2 hours), and patients should be recumbent and monitored closely during treatment. With intramuscular administration, pain at the injection site is common, and sterile abscesses may develop.
# Chunk 8377
Pancreatic toxicity is common. Hypoglycemia due to inappropriate insulin release often appears 5–7 days after onset of treatment, can persist for days to several weeks, and may be followed by hyperglycemia. Reversible renal insufficiency is also common. Other adverse effects include rash, metallic taste, fever, gastrointestinal symptoms, abnormal liver function tests, acute pancreatitis, hypocalcemia, thrombocytopenia, hallucinations, and cardiac arrhythmias. Inhaled pentamidine is generally well tolerated but may cause cough, dyspnea, and bronchospasm.
# Chunk 8378
Pentavalent antimonials, including sodium stibogluconate (pentostam; Figure 52–3) and meglumine antimoniate, are first-line agents for cutaneous and visceral leishmaniasis except in parts of India, where the efficacy of these drugs has diminished greatly. The drugs are rapidly absorbed and distributed after intravenous (preferred) or intramuscular administration and eliminated in two phases, with a short initial (about 2-hour) half-life and a much longer terminal (>24-hour) half-life. Treatment is given at a dosage of 20 mg/kg once daily intravenously or intramuscularly for 20 days in cutaneous leishmaniasis and 28 days in visceral and mucocutaneous disease.
# Chunk 8379
Nitazoxanide is a nitrothiazolyl-salicylamide prodrug. It is approved in the USA for use against Giardia lamblia and Cryptosporidium parvum. It is rapidly absorbed and converted to tizoxanide and tizoxanide conjugates, which are subsequently excreted in both urine and feces. The active metabolite, tizoxanide, inhibits the pyruvate-ferredoxin oxidoreductase pathway. Nitazoxanide appears to have activity against metronidazole-resistant protozoal strains and is well tolerated. Unlike metronidazole, nitazoxanide and its metabolites appear to be free of mutagenic effects. Other organisms that may be susceptible to nitazoxanide include E histolytica, Helicobacter pylori, Ascaris lumbricoides, several tapeworms, and Fasciola hepatica. The recommended adult dosage is 500 mg twice daily for 3 days.
# Chunk 8380
Melarsoprol is a trivalent arsenical that has been available since 1949 and is first-line therapy for advanced central nervous system East African trypanosomiasis, and second-line therapy (after eflornithine) for advanced West African trypanosomiasis. After intravenous administration it is excreted rapidly, but clinically relevant concentrations accumulate in the central nervous system within 4 days. Melarsoprol is administered in propylene glycol by slow intravenous infusion at a dosage of 3.6 mg/kg/d for 3–4 days, with repeated courses at weekly intervals, if needed. A new regimen of 2.2 mg/kg daily for 10 days had efficacy and toxicity similar to what was observed with three courses over 26 days. Melarsoprol is extremely toxic. The use of such a toxic drug is justified only by the severity of advanced trypanosomiasis and the lack of available alternatives. Immediate adverse effects include fever, vomiting, abdominal pain, and arthralgias. The most important toxicity is a reactive encephalopathy that generally appears within the first week of therapy (in 5–10% of patients) and is probably due to disruption of trypanosomes in the central nervous system. Coadministration of corticosteroids may decrease the likelihood of encephalopathy. Common consequences of the encephalopathy include cerebral edema, seizures, coma, and death. Other serious toxicities include renal and cardiac disease and hypersensitivity reactions. Failure rates with melarsoprol appear to have increased recently in parts of Africa, suggesting drug resistance.
# Chunk 8381
Eflornithine (difluoromethylornithine), an inhibitor of ornithine decarboxylase, is the only new drug registered to treat African trypanosomiasis in the last half-century. It is now the first-line drug for advanced West African trypanosomiasis, but is not effective for East African disease. Eflornithine is administered intravenously, and good central nervous system drug levels are achieved. The elimination half-life is about 3 hours. The usual regimen is 100 mg/kg intravenously every 6 hours for 7–14 days (14 days was superior for a newly diagnosed infection). Eflornithine appears to be as effective as melarsoprol against advanced T brucei gambiense infection, but its efficacy against T brucei rhodesiense is limited by drug resistance. Combining eflornithine with a 10-day course of nifurtimox afforded efficacy against West African trypanosomiasis similar to a 14-day regimen of eflornithine alone, with simpler and shorter treatment (injections every 12 hours for 7 days). Toxicity from eflornithine is significant, but considerably less than that from melarsoprol. Adverse effects include diarrhea, vomiting, anemia, thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, and seizures. These effects are generally reversible. Increased experience with eflornithine and increased availability of the compound in endemic areas may lead to its replacement of suramin, pentamidine, and melarsoprol in the treatment of T brucei gambiense infection.
# Chunk 8382
This important antifungal drug (see Chapter 48) is an alternative therapy for visceral leishmaniasis, especially in parts of India with high-level resistance to sodium stibogluconate. Liposomal amphotericin has shown excellent efficacy at a dosage of 3 mg/kg/d intravenously on days 1–5, 14, and 21. Other regimens that have shown good efficacy in India include 4 doses of 5 mg/kg over 4–10 days and a single dose of 15 mg/kg. With single-dose therapy, an amphotericin lipid emulsion had similar efficacy to that of the liposomal formulation. Efficacy of amphotericin appears to be lower in Africa. Nonliposomal amphotericin (1 mg/kg intravenously every other day for 30 days) is more toxic, less expensive, also efficacious, and widely used in India. However, in an Indian trial a single infusion of liposomal amphotericin showed noninferior efficacy and decreased cost compared to a standard 30-day course of amphotericin. Amphotericin is also used for cutaneous leishmaniasis in some areas. The use of amphotericin, and especially liposomal preparations, is limited in developing countries by difficulty of administration, cost, and toxicity.
# Chunk 8383
Miltefosine is an alkylphosphocholine analog that is the first effective oral drug for visceral leishmaniasis. It has recently shown excellent efficacy in the treatment of visceral leishmaniasis in India, where it is administered orally (2.5 mg/kg/d with varied dosing schedules) for 28 days. It was also recently shown to be effective in regimens including a single dose of liposomal amphotericin followed by 7–14 days of miltefosine. A 28-day course of miltefosine (2.5 mg/kg/d) was also effective for the treatment of New World cutaneous leishmaniasis. Vomiting and diarrhea are common but generally short-lived toxicities. Transient elevations in liver enzymes and nephrotoxicity are also seen. The drug should be avoided in pregnancy (or in women who may become pregnant within 2 months of treatment) because of its teratogenic effects. Miltefosine is registered for the treatment of visceral leishmaniasis in India and some other countries, and—considering the serious limitations of other drugs, including parenteral administration, toxicity, and resistance—it may become the treatment of choice for that disease. Miltefosine may also have a role in the treatment of cutaneous leishmaniasis; the drug was noninferior to meglumine antimoniate for this indication in South American children. Resistance to miltefosine develops readily in vitro.
# Chunk 8384
Paromomycin sulfate is an aminoglycoside antibiotic that until recently was used in parasitology only for oral therapy of intestinal parasitic infections (see previous text). It has recently been developed for the treatment of visceral leishmaniasis. It is much less expensive than amphotericin or miltefosine. A trial in India showed excellent efficacy, with a daily intramuscular dosage of 11 mg/kg for 21 days yielding a 95% cure rate, and noninferiority compared with amphotericin. However, a recent trial showed poorer efficacy in Africa, with the cure rate for paromomycin significantly inferior to that with sodium stibogluconate. In initial studies, paromomycin was well tolerated, with common mild injection pain, uncommon ototoxicity and reversible liver enzyme elevations, and no nephrotoxicity. Paromomycin has also shown good efficacy when topically applied, alone or with gentamicin, for the treatment of cutaneous leishmaniasis.
# Chunk 8385
Drug Combinations Used in the Treatment of Visceral Leishmaniasis

The use of drug combinations to improve treatment efficacy, shorten treatment courses, and reduce the selection of resistant parasites has been an active area of research. In a recent trial in India, compared to a standard 30-day (treatment on alternate days) course of amphotericin, noninferior efficacy and decreased adverse events were seen with a single dose of liposomal amphotericin plus a 7-day course of miltefosine, a single dose of liposomal amphotericin plus a 10-day course of paromomycin, or a 10-day course of miltefosine plus paromomycin. In a trial in East Africa, compared to a standard 30-day course of sodium stibogluconate, similar efficacy was seen with a 17-day course of sodium stibogluconate plus paromomycin.
# Chunk 8386
Musa A et al: Sodium stibogluconate (SSG) & paromomycin combination compared to SSG for visceral leishmaniasis in East Africa: A randomised controlled trial. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 2012;6:e1674.
# Chunk 8387
Clinical Pharmacology of the Antihelminthic Drugs

Philip J. Rosenthal, MD

A 29-year-old Peruvian man presents with the incidental finding of a 10 × 8 × 8-cm liver cyst on an abdominal com-puted tomography (CT) scan. The patient had noted 2 days of abdominal pain and fever, and his clinical evaluation and CT scan were consistent with appendicitis. His clinical find-ings resolved after laparoscopic appendectomy. The patient immigrated to the USA 10 years ago from a rural area of Peru where his family trades in sheepskins. His father and sister have undergone resection of abdominal masses, but details of their diagnoses are unavailable. What is your differential diagnosis? What are your diagnostic and therapeutic plans?
# Chunk 8388
Albendazole is a benzimidazole carbamate. After oral administration, it is erratically absorbed (increased with a fatty meal) and then rapidly undergoes first-pass metabolism in the liver to the active metabolite albendazole sulfoxide. It reaches variable maximum plasma concentrations about 3 hours after a 400-mg oral dose, and its plasma half-life is 8–12 hours. The sulfoxide is mostly protein-bound, distributes well to tissues, and enters bile, cerebrospinal fluid, and hydatid cysts. Albendazole metabolites are excreted in the urine.
# Chunk 8389
is a single dose of 400 mg orally (repeated daily for 2–3 days for heavy infections and in 2 weeks for pinworm infections).
# Chunk 8390
infections and trichuriasis, albendazole at 400 mg orally once 1. Ascariasis, trichuriasis, and hookworm and pinworm daily for 3 days is now recommended, with albendazole showing infections—For adults and children older than 2 years with improved efficacy over mebendazole. For trichuriasis, combinaascariasis and pinworm infections, the treatment for ascariasis tion of either mebendazole or albendazole with ivermectin and combination of albendazole with oxantel pamoate markedly improved treatment outcomes.
# Chunk 8391
2.

Hydatid disease—Albendazole is the treatment of choice for medical therapy and is a useful adjunct to surgical removal or aspiration of cysts. It is more active against Echinococcus granulosus than against Echinococcus multilocularis. Dosing is 400 mg twice daily with meals for 1 month or longer. Daily therapy for up to 6 months has been well tolerated. One reported therapeutic strategy is to treat with albendazole and praziquantel, to assess response after 1 month or more, and, depending on the response, to then manage the patient with continued chemotherapy or combined surgical and drug therapy.
# Chunk 8392
4.

Other infections—Albendazole is the drug of choice in the treatment of cutaneous larva migrans (400 mg daily for 3 days), visceral larva migrans (400 mg twice daily for 5 days), intestinal capillariasis (400 mg daily for 10 days), microsporidial infections (400 mg twice daily for 2 weeks or longer), and gnathostomiasis (400 mg twice daily for 3 weeks). It also has activity against taeniasis (400 mg daily for 3 days), trichinosis (400 mg twice daily for 1–2 weeks), and clonorchiasis (400 mg twice daily for 1 week). There have been reports of effectiveness in treatment of opisthorchiasis, toxocariasis, and loiasis. Albendazole is included in programs to control lymphatic filariasis. It appears to be less active than diethylcarbamazine or ivermectin for this purpose, but it is included in combination with either of those drugs in control programs. Albendazole has been recommended as empiric therapy to treat those who return from the tropics with persistent unexplained eosinophilia. Albendazole has activity against giardiasis, but with decreased efficacy compared to tinidazole.
# Chunk 8393
Adverse Reactions, Contraindications, & Cautions

Adverse effects, which occur in up to 40% of patients, are generally mild and transient, but occasionally their severity requires interruption of therapy. These problems include diarrhea, abdominal cramps, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, dizziness, and headache. Skin rashes may occur after a week or more of therapy, suggesting a reaction to antigens released from dying worms. Bithionol should be used with caution in children younger than 8 years because there has been limited experience in this age group.
# Chunk 8394
Diethylcarbamazine, a synthetic piperazine derivative, is rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract; after a dose of 0.5 mg/kg, peak plasma levels are reached within 1–2 hours. The plasma half-life is 2–3 hours in the presence of acidic urine but about 10 hours if the urine is alkaline, a Henderson-Hasselbalch trapping effect (see Chapter 1). The drug rapidly equilibrates with all tissues except fat. It is excreted, principally in the urine, as unchanged drug and the N-oxide metabolite. Dosage should be reduced in patients with renal impairment.
# Chunk 8395
The drug should be taken after meals.

1.

Wuchereria bancrofti, Brugia malayi, Brugia timori, and Loa loa—Diethylcarbamazine is the drug of choice for treatment of infections with these parasites because of its efficacy and lack of serious toxicity. Microfilariae of all species are rapidly killed; adult parasites are killed more slowly, often requiring several courses of treatment. The drug is highly effective against adult L loa. The extent to which W bancrofti and B malayi adults are killed is not known, but after appropriate therapy microfilariae do not reappear in the majority of patients. Lymphatic filariasis is treated with 2 mg/kg three times a day for 12 days, and loiasis is treated with the same regimen for 2–3 weeks. Antihistamines may be given for the first few days of therapy to limit allergic reactions, and corticosteroids should be started and doses of diethylcarbamazine lowered or interrupted if severe reactions occur. Cures may require several courses of treatment. For patients with high L loa worm burdens (more than 2500 circulating parasites/mL), strategies to decrease risks of severe toxicity include (a) apheresis, if available, to remove microfilariae before treatment with diethylcarbamazine, or (b) therapy with albendazole, which is slower acting and better tolerated, followed by therapy with diethylcarbamazine or ivermectin. Diethylcarbamazine may also be used for chemoprophylaxis against filarial infections (300 mg weekly or 300 mg on 3 successive days each month for loiasis; 50 mg monthly for bancroftian and Malayan filariasis).
# Chunk 8396
2.

Strongyloidiasis—Treatment consists of 200 mcg/kg once daily for 2 days. In immunosuppressed patients with disseminated infection, repeated treatment is often needed, and cure may not be possible. In this case, suppressive therapy—ie, once monthly—may be helpful.
# Chunk 8397
Adverse Reactions, Contraindications, & Cautions

In strongyloidiasis treatment, infrequent adverse effects of ivermectin include fatigue, dizziness, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and rashes. In onchocerciasis treatment, adverse effects are principally from the killing of microfilariae and can include fever, headache, dizziness, somnolence, weakness, rash, increased pruritus, diarrhea, joint and muscle pains, hypotension, tachycardia, lymphadenitis, lymphangitis, and peripheral edema. This reaction starts on the first day and peaks on the second day after treatment. It occurs in 5–30% of persons and is generally mild, but it may be more frequent and more severe in individuals who are not long-term residents of onchocerciasis-endemic areas. A more intense reaction occurs in 1–3% of persons and a severe reaction in 0.1%, including high fever, hypotension, and bronchospasm. Corticosteroids are indicated in these cases, at times for several days. Toxicity diminishes with repeated dosing. Swellings and abscesses occasionally occur at 1–3 weeks, presumably at sites of adult worms. Some patients develop corneal opacities and other eye lesions several days after treatment. These are rarely severe and generally resolve without corticosteroid treatment. It is best to avoid concomitant use of ivermectin with other drugs that enhance GABA activity, eg, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, and valproic acid. Ivermectin should not be used during pregnancy. Safety in children younger than 5 years has not been established.
# Chunk 8398
Less than 10% of orally administered mebendazole is absorbed. The absorbed drug is protein-bound (>90%), is rapidly converted to inactive metabolites (primarily during its first pass in the liver), and has a half-life of 2–6 hours. It is excreted mostly in the urine, principally as decarboxylated derivatives, as well as in the bile. Absorption is increased if the drug is ingested with a fatty meal.
# Chunk 8399
Mebendazole is indicated for use in ascariasis, trichuriasis, hookworm and pinworm infections, and certain other helminthic infections. It can be taken before or after meals; the tablets should be chewed before swallowing. For pinworm infection, the dose is 100 mg once, repeated at 2 weeks. For ascariasis, trichuriasis, hookworm, and Trichostrongylus infections, a dosage of 100 mg twice daily for 3 days is used for adults and for children older than 2 years. Cure rates are good for pinworm infections and ascariasis but have been disappointing in recent studies of trichuriasis, although efficacy for trichuriasis is better than that of albendazole. Cure rates are also low for hookworm infections, but a marked reduction in the worm burden occurs in those not cured. For intestinal capillariasis, mebendazole is used at a dosage of 200 mg twice daily for 21 or more days. In trichinosis, limited reports suggest efficacy against adult worms in the intestinal tract and tissue larvae. Treatment is three times daily, with fatty foods, at 200–400 mg per dose for 3 days and then 400–500 mg per dose for 10 days; corticosteroids should be co-administered for severe infections.
# Chunk 8400
The mode of action is thought to be cholinesterase inhibition, temporarily paralyzing adult worms, resulting in their transit from bladder vasculature to small arterioles in the lungs, where they are killed. The drug is not effective against S haematobium eggs; live eggs continue to pass in the urine for several months after all adult worms have been killed.
# Chunk 8401
Adverse Reactions, Contraindications, & Cautions

Infrequent, mild, and transitory adverse events include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal discomfort. Alcohol should not be consumed during or for 1 day after treatment. Safety has not been established in pregnancy or for children younger than 2 years.
# Chunk 8402
Oxamniquine, a semisynthetic tetrahydroquinoline, is readily absorbed orally; it should be taken with food. Its plasma half-life is about 2.5 hours. The drug is extensively metabolized to inactive metabolites and excreted in the urine—up to 75% in the first 24 hours. Intersubject variations in serum concentration have been noted, which may explain some treatment failures.
# Chunk 8403
Optimal dosage schedules vary for different regions of the world. In the western hemisphere and western Africa, the adult oxamniquine dosage is 12–15 mg/kg given once. In northern and southern Africa, standard schedules are 15 mg/kg twice daily for 2 days. In eastern Africa and the Arabian peninsula, standard dosage is 15–20 mg/kg twice in 1 day. Cure rates are 70–95%, with marked reduction in egg excretion in those not cured. In mixed schistosome infections, oxamniquine has been successfully used in combination with metrifonate.
# Chunk 8404
Piperazine is an alternative for the treatment of ascariasis, with cure rates over 90% when taken for 2 days, but it is not recommended for other helminth infections. Piperazine is available as the hexahydrate and as a variety of salts. It is readily absorbed, and maximum plasma levels are reached in 2–4 hours. Most of the drug is excreted unchanged in the urine in 2–6 hours, and excretion is complete within 24 hours. Piperazine causes paralysis of ascaris by blocking acetylcholine at the myoneural junction; live worms are expelled by peristalsis.
# Chunk 8405
For ascariasis, the dosage of piperazine (as the hexahydrate) is 75 mg/kg (maximum dose, 3.5 g) orally once daily for 2 days. For heavy infections, treatment should be continued for 3–4 days or repeated after 1 week.
# Chunk 8406
1.

Schistosomiasis—Praziquantel is the drug of choice for all forms of schistosomiasis. The dosage is 20 mg/kg per dose for two (S mansoni and S haematobium) or three (S japonicum and S mekongi) doses at intervals of 4–6 hours. High cure rates (75–95%) are achieved when patients are evaluated at 3–6 months; there is marked reduction in egg counts in those not cured. The drug is effective in adults and children and is generally well tolerated by patients in the hepatosplenic stage of advanced disease. There is no standard regimen for acute schistosomiasis (Katayama syndrome), but standard doses as described above, often with corticosteroids to limit inflammation from the acute immune response and dying worms, are recommended. Increasing evidence indicates rare S mansoni drug resistance, which may be countered with extended courses of therapy (eg, 3–6 days at standard dosing) or treatment with oxamniquine. Effectiveness of praziquantel for chemoprophylaxis has not been established.
# Chunk 8407
2.

Clonorchiasis, opisthorchiasis, and paragonimiasis—

Standard dosing is 25 mg/kg three times daily for 2 days for each of these fluke infections.
# Chunk 8408
7.

Other parasites—Limited trials showed effectiveness of praziquantel at a dosage of 25 mg/kg three times daily for 1–2 days against fasciolopsiasis, metagonimiasis, and other forms of heterophyiasis. Praziquantel was not effective for fascioliasis, however, even at dosages as high as 25 mg/kg three times daily for 3–7 days.
# Chunk 8409
Adverse Reactions, Contraindications, & Cautions

Mild and transient adverse effects are common. They begin within hours after ingestion of praziquantel and may persist for about 1 day. Most common are headache, dizziness, drowsiness, and lassitude; others include nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, loose stools, pruritus, urticaria, arthralgia, myalgia, and low-grade fever. Mild and transient elevations of liver enzymes have been reported. Several days after starting praziquantel, low-grade fever, pruritus, and skin rashes (macular and urticarial), sometimes associated with worsened eosinophilia, may occur, probably due to the release of proteins from dying worms rather than direct drug toxicity. The intensity and frequency of adverse effects increase with dosage such that they occur in up to 50% of patients who receive 25 mg/kg three times daily.
# Chunk 8410
For ascariasis, a single dose yields cure rates of 85–100%. Treatment should be repeated if eggs are found 2 weeks after treatment. For hookworm infections, a single dose is effective against light infections; but for heavy infections, especially with Necator americanus, a 3-day course is necessary to achieve 90% cure rates. A course of treatment can be repeated in 2 weeks.
# Chunk 8411
Adverse Reactions, Contraindications, & Cautions

Pyrantel’s adverse effects are infrequent, mild, and transient. They may include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal cramps, dizziness, drowsiness, headache, insomnia, rash, fever, and weakness. Pyrantel should be used with caution in patients with liver dysfunction, as transient aminotransferase elevations have been noted. Experience with the drug in pregnant women and children younger than 2 years is limited.
# Chunk 8412
Thiabendazole is a benzimidazole compound. Although it is a chelating agent that forms stable complexes with a number of metals, including iron, it does not bind calcium. Thiabendazole is rapidly absorbed after ingestion. With a standard dose, drug concentrations in plasma peak within 1–2 hours; the half-life is 1.2 hours. The drug is almost completely metabolized in the liver to the 5-hydroxy form; 90% is excreted in the urine in 48 hours, largely as the glucuronide or sulfonate conjugate. Thiabendazole can also be absorbed from the skin. The mechanism of action of thiabendazole is probably the same as that of other benzimidazoles (inhibition of microtubule synthesis). The drug has ovicidal effects against some parasites.
# Chunk 8413
The standard dosage, 25 mg/kg (maximum 1.5 g) twice daily, should be given after meals. Tablets should be chewed. For Strongyloides infection, treatment is for 2 days. Cure rates are reportedly 93%. A course can be repeated in 1 week if indicated. In patients with hyperinfection syndrome, the standard dose is continued twice daily for 5–7 days. For cutaneous larva migrans, thiabendazole cream can be applied topically, or the oral drug can be given for 2 days (although albendazole is less toxic and therefore preferred).
# Chunk 8414
Edward Chu, MD are the possible benefits of adjuvant chemotherapy? The patient receives a combination of 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), leucovorin, and oxaliplatin (FOLFOX) as adjuvant therapy. One week after receiving the first cycle of therapy, he experiences significant toxicity in the form of myelosup-pression, diarrhea, and altered mental status. What is the most likely explanation for this increased toxicity? Is there any role for genetic testing to determine the etiology of the increased toxicity? A 55-year-old man presents with increasing fatigue, 15-pound weight loss, and a microcytic anemia. Colonoscopy identifies a mass in the ascending colon, and biopsy specimens reveal well-differentiated colorectal cancer (CRC). He undergoes surgical resection and is found to have high-risk stage III CRC with five positive lymph nodes. After surgery, he feels entirely well with no symptoms. Of note, he has no other illnesses. What is this patient’s overall prognosis? Based on his prognosis, what
# Chunk 8415
In contrast to cytarabine, which has no activity in solid tumors, gemcitabine has broad-spectrum activity against both solid tumors and hematologic malignancies. In fact, this nucleoside analog was initially approved for use in advanced pancreatic cancer and is now widely used to treat a broad range of malignancies, including NSCLC, bladder cancer, ovarian cancer, soft tissue sarcoma, and non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. Myelosuppression in the form of neutropenia is the principal dose-limiting toxicity. Nausea and vomiting occur in 70% of patients, and a flu-like syndrome has also been observed. In rare cases, renal microangiopathy syndromes, including hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS) and thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP), have been reported.
# Chunk 8416
Fludarabine phosphate is rapidly dephosphorylated to 2-fluoroarabinofuranosyladenosine and then phosphorylated intra-cellularly by deoxycytidine kinase to the monophosphate, which is eventually converted to the triphosphate. Fludarabine triphosphate interferes with the processes of DNA synthesis and DNA repair through inhibition of DNA polymerase-α and DNA polymerase-β. The triphosphate form can also be directly incorporated into DNA, resulting in inhibition of DNA synthesis and function. The diphosphate metabolite of fludarabine inhibits ribonucleotide reductase, leading to inhibition of essential deoxyribonucleotide triphosphates. Finally, fludarabine induces apoptosis in susceptible cells through as yet undetermined mechanisms. This purine nucleotide analog is used mainly in the treatment of low-grade non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma and chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). It is given parenterally, and up to 25–30% of parent drug is excreted in the urine. The main dose-limiting toxicity is myelosuppression. This agent is a potent immunosuppressant with inhibitory effects on CD4 and CD8 T cells. Patients are at increased risk for opportunistic infections, including fungi, herpes, and Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia (PCP). Patients should receive PCP prophylaxis with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (double strength) at least three times a week, and this should continue for up to 1 year after stopping fludarabine therapy.
# Chunk 8417
Etoposide is a semisynthetic derivative of podophyllotoxin, which is extracted from the mayapple root (Podophyllum peltatum). Intravenous and oral formulations of etoposide are approved for clinical use in the USA. Oral bioavailability is about 50%, requiring oral dosage to be twice that of intravenous dosage. Up to 30–50% of an administered dose of drug is excreted in the urine, and dose reduction is required in patients with renal dysfunction. Etoposide forms a complex with topoisomerase II, the enzyme responsible for cutting and religating double stranded DNA, and DNA, leading to inhibition of the functional activity of topoisomerase II with inhibition of DNA synthesis and function. Etoposide has clinical activity in germ cell cancer, small cell and NSCLC, Hodgkin’s and non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas, and gastric cancer. Major toxicities are listed in Table 54–4.
# Chunk 8418
R:

Anthracyclines are administered via the intravenous route. They are metabolized extensively in the liver, with reduction and hydrolysis of the ring substituents. The hydroxylated metabolite is an active species, whereas the aglycone is inactive. Up to 50% of drug is eliminated in the feces via biliary excretion, and dose reduction is required in patients with liver dysfunction. Although anthracyclines are usually administered on an every-3-week schedule, alternative schedules such as low-dose weekly or 72to 96-hour continuous infusions have been shown to yield equivalent clinical efficacy with reduced toxicity.
# Chunk 8419
Mitoxantrone (dihydroxyanthracenedione) is an anthracene compound whose structure resembles the anthracycline ring. It binds to DNA to produce strand breakage and inhibits both DNA and RNA synthesis. It is currently used in the treatment of advanced, hormone-refractory prostate cancer and low-grade non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. It is also indicated in breast cancer and in pediatric and adult acute myeloid leukemias. Myelosuppression with leukopenia is the dose-limiting toxicity, and mild nausea and vomiting, mucositis, and alopecia also occur. Although the drug is thought to be less cardiotoxic than doxorubicin, both acute and chronic cardiac toxicities are observed. A blue discoloration of the fingernails, sclera, and urine is observed 1–2 days after drug administration.
# Chunk 8420
Cetuximab is a chimeric monoclonal antibody directed against the extracellular domain of the EGFR, and it is presently approved for use in combination with irinotecan for metastatic colon cancer in the refractory setting or as monotherapy in patients who are deemed to be irinotecan-refractory. Because cetuximab is of the G1 isotype, its antitumor activity may also be mediated, in part, by immunologic-mediated mechanisms. There is growing evidence that cetuximab can be effectively and safely combined with irinotecanand oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy in the first-line treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer as well. Of note, the efficacy of cetuximab is restricted to only those patients whose tumors express the wild-type RAS gene, which includes both KRAS and NRAS. Combination regimens of cetuximab with cytotoxic chemotherapy may be of particular benefit in the neoadjuvant therapy of patients with liver-limited disease. Although this antibody was initially approved to be administered on a weekly schedule, pharmacokinetic studies have shown that an every-2-week schedule provides the same level of clinical activity as the weekly schedule. This agent is also approved for use in combination with radiation therapy in patients with locally advanced head and neck cancer. Cetuximab is well tolerated, with the main adverse effects being an acneiform skin rash, hypersensitivity infusion reaction, and hypomagnesemia. However, when cetuximab is combined with radiation therapy for head and neck cancer, there is a very low but real increased risk (1%) of sudden death, which has resulted in a black-box warning for the drug.
# Chunk 8421
Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) arises from a chromosomally abnormal hematopoietic stem cell in which a balanced translocation between the long arms of chromosomes 9 and 22, t(9:22), is observed in 90–95% of cases. This translocation results in constitutive expression of the Bcr-Abl fusion oncoprotein with a molecular weight of 210 kDa. The clinical symptoms and course are related to the white blood cell count and its rate of increase. Most patients with white cell counts greater than 50,000/μL should be treated. The goals of treatment are to reduce the granulocytes to normal levels, to raise the hemoglobin concentration to normal, and to relieve disease-related symptoms. The tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib is considered as standard first-line therapy in previously untreated patients with chronic phase CML. Nearly all patients treated with imatinib exhibit a complete hematologic response, and up to 40–50% of patients show a complete cytogenetic response. As described previously, this drug is generally well tolerated and is associated with relatively minor adverse effects. Initially, dasatinib and nilotinib were approved for patients who were intolerant or resistant to imatinib; each shows clinical activity, and both are now also indicated as first-line treatment of chronic phase CML. In addition to these tyrosine kinase inhibitors, other treatment options include IFN-α, busulfan, other oral alkylating agents, and hydroxyurea.
# Chunk 8422
Complete staging evaluation is required before a definitive treatment plan can be made. For patients with stage I and stage IIA disease, there has been a significant change in the treatment approach. Initially, these patients were treated with extended-field radiation therapy. However, given the well-documented late effects of radiation therapy, which include hypothyroidism, an increased risk of secondary cancers, and coronary artery disease, combined-modality therapy with a brief course of combination chemotherapy and involved field radiation therapy is now the recommended approach. The main advance for patients with advanced stage III and IV Hodgkin’s lymphoma came with the development of MOPP (mechlorethamine, vincristine, procarbazine, and prednisone) chemotherapy in the 1960s. This regimen resulted initially in high complete response rates, on the order of 80–90%, with cures in up to 60% of patients. More recently, the anthracycline-containing regimen termed ABVD (doxorubicin, bleomycin, vinblastine, and dacarbazine) has been shown to be more effective and less toxic than MOPP, especially with regard to the incidence of infertility and secondary malignancies. In general, four cycles of ABVD are given to patients. An alternative regimen, termed Stanford V, utilizes a 12-week course of combination chemotherapy (doxorubicin, vinblastine, mechlorethamine, vincristine, bleomycin, etoposide, and prednisone), followed by involved radiation therapy.
# Chunk 8423
Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma is a heterogeneous disease, and the clinical characteristics of non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma subsets are related to the underlying histopathologic features and the extent of disease involvement. In general, the nodular (or follicular) lymphomas have a far better prognosis, with a median survival up to 7 years, compared with the diffuse lymphomas, which have a median survival of about 1–2 years.
# Chunk 8424
Thalidomide is a well-established agent for treating refractory or relapsed disease, and about 30% of patients will achieve a response to this therapy. More recently, thalidomide has been used in combination with dexamethasone, and response rates approaching 65% have been observed. Studies are now under way to directly compare the combination of vincristine, doxorubicin, and dexamethasone (VAD protocol) with the combination of thalidomide and dexamethasone. In some patients, especially those with poor performance status, single-agent pulse dexamethasone administered on a weekly basis can be effective in palliating symptoms. Lenalidomide and pomalidomide are two immunomodulatory analogs (IMiDs) of thalidomide. Lenalidomide is approved in combination with dexamethasone for multiple myeloma patients who have received at least one prior therapy, and clinical data show that this combination is effective as first-line therapy. Pomalidomide is the most recent IMiD to receive approval, and this drug may be able to overcome resistance to thalidomide and lenalidomide. The side-effect profiles of these IMiDs appear to be similar, although neurotoxicity is observed more commonly with thalidomide, somewhat less often with pomalidomide, and rarely with lenalidomide.
# Chunk 8425
Breast cancer was the first neoplasm shown to be responsive to hormonal manipulation. Tamoxifen is beneficial in postmenopausal women when used alone or in combination with cytotoxic chemotherapy. The present recommendation is to administer tamoxifen for 5 years of continuous therapy after surgical resection. Longer durations of tamoxifen therapy do not appear to offer additional clinical benefit. Postmenopausal women who complete 5 years of tamoxifen therapy should be placed on an aromatase inhibitor such as anastrozole for at least 2.5 years, although the optimal duration is unknown. In women who have completed 2–3 years of tamoxifen therapy, treatment with an aromatase inhibitor for a total of 5 years of hormonal therapy is now recommended (see Chapter 40).
# Chunk 8426
Results from several randomized trials for breast cancer have established that adjuvant chemotherapy for premenopausal women and adjuvant tamoxifen for postmenopausal women are of benefit to women with stage I (node-negative) breast cancer. While this group of patients has the lowest overall risk of recurrence after surgery alone (about 35–50% over 15 years), this risk can be further reduced with adjuvant therapy.
# Chunk 8427
Significant advances have been made over the past 10 years with respect to treatment of metastatic CRC. Five active cytotoxic agents have been approved during this time period—5-FU, the oral fluoropyrimidine analogs capecitabine and TAS-102, oxaliplatin, and irinotecan. In addition, 5 novel biologic agents and one small molecule inhibitor have been approved, including the anti-VEGF antibody bevacizumab; the recombinant fusion protein ziv-aflibercept, which targets VEGF-A, VEGF-B, and PlGF; the anti-VEGF-R2 antibody ramucirumab, which inhibits binding of the VEGF ligands VEGF-A, VEGF-C, and VEGF-D; the two anti-EGFR antibodies cetuximab and panitumumab; and the small molecule TKI inhibitor regorafenib. In general, a fluoropyrimidine—either intravenous 5-FU or oral capecitabine—serves as the main foundation of cytotoxic chemotherapy regimens. Recent clinical studies have shown that in tumors with wild-type KRAS and NRAS, FOLFOX/FOLFIRI regimens in combination with the anti-VEGF antibody bevacizumab or with the anti-EGFR antibody cetuximab or panitumumab result in significantly improved clinical efficacy with no worsening of the toxicities normally observed with chemotherapy. In order for patients to derive maximal benefit, they should be treated with each of these active agents in a continuum of care approach. Regorafenib and TAS102 are approved for the chemo-refractory disease setting, but unfortunately, each drug is associated with significant toxicities and only limited clinical efficacy with very low overall response rates; median progression-free survival is about 2-months. Given all of the available treatment regimens, median overall survival for metastatic CRC is now in the 28to 30-month range and, in some cases, approaches or even exceeds 3 years.
# Chunk 8428
The introduction of platinum-based combination chemotherapy has made an impressive change in the treatment of patients with advanced testicular cancer. Presently, chemotherapy is recommended for patients with stage IIC or stage III seminomas and nonseminomatous disease. Over 90% of patients respond to chemotherapy and, depending upon the extent and severity of disease, complete remissions are observed in 70–80% of patients. More than 50% of patients achieving complete remission are cured with chemotherapy. In patients with good risk features, three cycles of cisplatin, etoposide, and bleomycin (PEB protocol) or four cycles of cisplatin and etoposide yield virtually identical results. In patients with high-risk disease, the combination of cisplatin, etoposide, and ifosfamide can be used as well as etoposide and bleomycin with high-dose cisplatin.
# Chunk 8429
Redmond KM et al: Resistance mechanisms to cancer chemotherapy. Front Biosci 2008;13:5138.

The 5-year survival rate for patients with high-risk stage III CRC is on the order of 25–30%. Because the patient has no symptoms after surgery and has no comorbid illnesses, he would be an appropriate candidate to receive aggressive adjuvant chemotherapy. Adjuvant chemotherapy is usually begun 4–6 weeks after surgery to allow sufficient time for the surgical wound to heal. The usual recommendation would be to administer 6 months of oxaliplatin-based chemo-therapy using either intravenous 5-FU or oral capecitabine as the fluoropyrimidine base in combination with oxaliplatin. Patients with partial or complete deficiency in the enzyme dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD) experi-ence an increased incidence of severe toxicity to fluoropy-rimidines in the form of myelosuppression, gastrointestinal toxicity in the form of mucositis and diarrhea, and neu-rotoxicity. This is an autosomal recessive pharmacoge-netic syndrome that is present in up to 10% of the North American population (see Chapter 5). Although mutations in DPD can be identified in peripheral blood mononuclear cells, nearly 50% of patients who exhibit severe 5-FU toxicity do not have a defined mutation in the DPD gene. In addition, such mutations may not result in reduced expres-sion of the DPD protein or in altered enzymatic activity. For this reason, genetic testing is not recommended at this time as part of routine clinical practice. There is now an immu-noassay that can measure 5-FU drug levels in the peripheral blood that can help guide 5-FU dosing even in patients with DPD deficiency.
# Chunk 8430
Douglas F. Lake, PhD & Adrienne D. Briggs, MD

A 45-year-old man with high-risk acute myelogenous leu-kemia undergoes high-dose chemotherapy followed by an allogeneic stem cell transplant from an unrelated donor. He receives tacrolimus and low-dose methotrexate as prophy-laxis for graft-vs-host disease. One month after blood count recovery, he develops a skin rash despite ongoing tacrolimus therapy. A skin biopsy confirms grade II acute graft-vs-host disease. How should this case be pharmacologically man-aged at this point?
# Chunk 8431
Another subset of CD4 T cells that secrete IL-17 (Th17) is important in leukocyte recruitment to sites of bacterial and fungal pathogens. Th17 cells also contribute to the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases such as psoriasis, inflammatory bowel disease, rheumatoid arthritis, and multiple sclerosis. In fact, new Mabs for some of these diseases that neutralize IL-17 by binding to the cytokine itself or to its receptor (see Mab section below) have recently been FDA-approved.
# Chunk 8432
Thalidomide is currently used in the treatment of multiple myeloma at initial diagnosis and for relapsed-refractory disease. Patients generally show signs of response within 2–3 months of starting the drug, with response rates of 20–70%. When combined with dexamethasone, the response rates in myeloma are 90% or more in some studies. Many patients have durable responses—up to 12–18 months in refractory disease and even longer in some patients treated at diagnosis. The success of thalidomide in myeloma has led to numerous clinical trials in other diseases such as myelodysplastic syndrome, acute myelogenous leukemia, and GVH disease, as well as in solid tumors like colon cancer, renal cell carcinoma, melanoma, and prostate cancer, with variable results to date. Thalidomide has been used for many years in the treatment of some manifestations of leprosy and has been reintroduced in the USA for erythema nodosum leprosum; it is also useful in management of the skin manifestations of lupus erythematosus.
# Chunk 8433
The chief toxic effect of azathioprine and mercaptopurine is bone marrow suppression, usually manifested as leukopenia, although anemia and thrombocytopenia may occur. Skin rashes, fever, nausea and vomiting, and sometimes diarrhea occur, with the gastrointestinal symptoms seen mainly at higher dosages. Hepatic dysfunction, manifested by very high serum alkaline phosphatase levels and mild jaundice, occurs occasionally, particularly in patients with preexisting hepatic dysfunction.
# Chunk 8434
Leflunomide is orally active, and the active metabolite has a long half-life of several weeks. Thus, the drug should be started with a loading dose, but it can be taken once daily after reaching steady state. It is approved only for rheumatoid arthritis at present, though studies are underway combining leflunomide with mycophenolate mofetil for a variety of autoimmune and inflammatory skin disorders, as well as preservation of allografts in solid organ transplantation. Leflunomide also appears (from murine data) to have antiviral activity. Toxicities include elevation of liver enzymes with some risk of liver damage and renal impairment. Patients with severe liver disease should not receive leflunomide. This drug is teratogenic and contraindicated in pregnancy. A low frequency of cardiovascular effects (angina, tachycardia) has been reported.
# Chunk 8435
Teriflunomide is FDA-approved for the treatment of relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis. Although immunomodulatory, its exact mechanism of action in the treatment of multiple sclerosis is unclear. It is hypothesized to decrease the number of activated lymphocytes in the central nervous system. It is a once-daily oral drug that, unlike leflunomide, does not require a loading dose. Teriflunomide’s side effect profile is similar to that of leflunomide, and it is contraindicated in pregnancy and severe liver disease. The incidence of neutropenia in patients taking the drug is 15%, and 10% of patients have a decrease in platelet counts.
# Chunk 8436
Palivizumab is a humanized IgG1 monoclonal antibody that binds to the fusion protein of respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), preventing serious lower respiratory tract disease. It is used in neonates at risk for this viral infection and reduces the frequency of infection and hospitalization by about 50% (see Chapter 49).
# Chunk 8437
Immunologic reactions to drugs resulting in serum sickness are more common than immediate anaphylactic responses, but type II and type III hypersensitivities often overlap. The clinical features of serum sickness include urticarial and erythematous skin eruptions, arthralgia or arthritis, lymphadenopathy, glomerulonephritis, peripheral edema, and fever. The reactions generally last 6–12 days and usually subside once the offending drug is eliminated. Antibodies of the IgM or IgG class are usually involved. The mechanism of tissue injury is immune complex formation and deposition on basement membranes (eg, lung, kidney), followed by complement activation and infiltration of leukocytes, causing tissue destruction. Glucocorticoids are useful in attenuating severe serum sickness reactions to drugs. In severe cases plasmapheresis can be used to remove the offending drug and immune complexes from circulation.
# Chunk 8438
Introduction to Toxicology: Occupational & Environmental

Daniel T. Teitelbaum, MD*

A 6-year-old girl is brought to the emergency department by her parents. She is comatose, tachypneic (25 breaths per minute), and tachycardic (150 bpm), but she appears flushed, and fingertip pulse oximetry is normal (97%) breathing room air. Questioning of her parents reveals that they are homeless and have been living in their car (a small van). The nights have been cold, and they have used a small char-coal burner to keep warm inside the vehicle. What is the most likely diagnosis? What treatment should be instituted immediately? If her mother is pregnant, what additional measures should be taken?
# Chunk 8439
The United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization and the World Health Organization (FAO/WHO) Joint Expert Commission on Food Additives adopted the term acceptable daily intake (ADI) to denote the daily intake of a chemical from food that, during an entire lifetime, appears to be without appreciable risk. These guidelines are reevaluated as new information becomes available. In the United States, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the Department of Agriculture are responsible for the regulation of contaminants such as pesticides, drugs, and chemicals in foods. Major international problems have occurred because of traffic among nations in contaminated or adulterated foods from countries whose regulations and enforcement of pure food and drug laws are lax or nonexistent. Recently, for example, both human and animal illnesses have resulted from ingestion of products imported from China that contained melamine.
# Chunk 8440
1.

Mechanism of action—CO combines tightly but reversibly with the oxygen-binding sites of hemoglobin and has an affinity for hemoglobin that is about 220 times that of oxygen. The product formed—carboxyhemoglobin—cannot transport oxygen. Furthermore, the presence of carboxyhemoglobin interferes with the dissociation of oxygen from the remaining oxyhemoglobin as a result of the Bohr effect. This reduces the transfer of oxygen to tissues. Organs with the highest oxygen demand (the brain, heart, and kidneys) are most seriously affected. Normal nonsmoking adults have carboxyhemoglobin levels of less than 1% saturation (1% of total hemoglobin is in the form of carboxyhemoglobin); this has been attributed to the endogenous formation of CO from heme catabolism. Smokers may exhibit 5–10% CO saturation. The level depends on their smoking habits. A person who breathes air that contains 0.1% CO (1000 ppm) would have a carboxyhemoglobin level of about 50% in a short period of time.
# Chunk 8441
3. Treatment—Patients who have been exposed to CO must be removed from the exposure source immediately. Respiration must be maintained and high flow and concentration of oxygen—the specific antagonist to CO—should be administered promptly. If respiratory failure is present, mechanical ventilation is required, High concentrations of oxygen may be toxic and may contribute to the development of acute respiratory distress syndrome. Therefore, patients should be treated with high concentrations only for a short period. With room air at 1 atm, the elimination half-time of CO is about 320 minutes; with 100% oxygen, the half-time is about 80 minutes; and with hyperbaric oxygen (2–3 atm), the half-time can be reduced to about 20 minutes. Although some controversy exists about hyperbaric oxygen for CO poisoning, it may be used if it is readily available. It is particularly recommended for the management of pregnant women exposed to CO. Hypothermic therapy to reduce metabolic demand of the brain has also been useful. Cerebral edema that results from CO poisoning does not seem to respond to either mannitol or steroid therapy and may be persistent. Progressive recovery from treated CO poisoning, even of a severe degree can be complete but some patients manifest neuropsychological and motor dysfunction for a long time after recovery from acute CO poisoning.
# Chunk 8442
Nitrogen dioxide (NO2) is a brownish irritant gas sometimes associated with fires. It is formed also from fresh silage; exposure of farmers to NO2 in the confines of a silo can lead to silo-filler’s disease, a severe and potentially lethal form of acute respiratory distress syndrome. The disorder is uncommon today. Miners who are regularly exposed to diesel equipment exhaust have been particularly affected by nitrogen oxide emissions with serious respiratory effects. Today, the most common source of human exposure to oxides of nitrogen, including NO2, is automobile and truck traffic emissions. Recent air pollution inventories in cities with high traffic congestion have demonstrated the important role that internal combustion engines have in the increasing NO2 urban air pollution. A variety of disorders of the respiratory system, cardiovascular system, and other problems have been linked to NO2 exposure.
# Chunk 8443
2.

Clinical effects—The signs and symptoms of acute exposure to NO2 include irritation of the eyes and nose, cough, mucoid or frothy sputum production, dyspnea, and chest pain. Pulmonary edema may appear within 1–2 hours. In some individuals, the clinical signs may subside in about 2 weeks; the patient may then pass into a second stage of abruptly increasing severity, including recurring pulmonary edema and fibrotic destruction of terminal bronchioles (bronchiolitis obliterans). Chronic exposure of laboratory animals to 10–25 ppm NO2 has resulted in emphysematous changes; thus, chronic effects in humans are of concern.
# Chunk 8444
1. Mechanism of action and clinical effects—Ozone is an irritant of mucous membranes. Mild exposure produces upper respiratory tract irritation. Severe exposure can cause deep lung irritation, with pulmonary edema when inhaled at sufficient concentrations. Ozone penetration in the lung depends on tidal volume; consequently, exercise can increase the amount of ozone reaching the distal lung. Some of the effects of O3 resemble those seen with radiation, suggesting that O3 toxicity may result from the formation of reactive free radicals. The gas causes shallow, rapid breathing and a decrease in pulmonary compliance. Enhanced sensitivity of the lung to bronchoconstrictors is also observed. Exposure around 0.1 ppm O3 for 10–30 minutes causes irritation and dryness of the throat; above 0.1 ppm, one finds changes in visual acuity, substernal pain, and dyspnea. Pulmonary function is impaired at concentrations exceeding 0.8 ppm.
# Chunk 8445
chronic administration to laboratory animals over long periods results in enhanced carcinogenesis. Endocrine pathway disruption is the postulated mechanism. Numerous mechanisms for xenoestrogen (estrogen-like) carcinogenesis have been postulated. To date, however, several large epidemiologic studies in humans have not found a significant association between the risk of cancer and specific compounds or serum levels of organochlorine pesticide metabolites. The results of a case-control study conducted to investigate the relation between dichlorodiphenyldichloroethylene (DDE, the primary metabolite of DDT) and DDT breast adipose tissue levels and breast cancer risk did not confirm a positive association. In contrast, recent work supports an association between prepubertal exposure to DDT and brain cancer. Recent studies also suggest that the risk of testicular cancer and non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma is increased in persons with elevated organochlorine levels. Noncancer end points are also of concern. Recent work associates cryptorchidism and hypospadias in newborns with maternal adipose levels of chlordane metabolites. These residues are also linked to testicular cancer.
# Chunk 8446
In humans, 2,4-D in large doses can cause coma and generalized muscle hypotonia. Rarely, muscle weakness and marked hypotonia may persist for several weeks. In laboratory animals, signs of liver and kidney dysfunction have also been reported with chlorphenoxy herbicides. Several epidemiologic studies performed by the U.S. National Cancer Institute confirmed the causal link between 2,4-D and non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. Evidence for a causal link to soft tissue sarcoma, however, is considered equivocal.
# Chunk 8447
In humans, the first signs and symptoms after oral exposure are hematemesis and bloody stools. Within a few days, however, delayed toxicity occurs, with respiratory distress and the development of congestive hemorrhagic pulmonary edema accompanied by widespread cellular proliferation. During the acute period, oxygen should be used cautiously to combat dyspnea or cyanosis, because it may aggravate the pulmonary lesions. Hepatic, renal, or myocardial involvement may develop. The interval between ingestion and death may be several weeks.
# Chunk 8448
Because of the delayed pulmonary toxicity, prompt immobilization of the paraquat to prevent absorption is important. Adsorbents (eg, activated charcoal, Fuller’s earth) are routinely given to bind the paraquat and minimize its absorption. Gastric lavage is not recommended as it may promote aspiration from the stomach into the lungs. Once the paraquat is absorbed, treatment is successful in less than 50% of cases. Monitoring of plasma and urine paraquat concentrations is useful for prognostic assessment. Computed tomography scanning has also been used to follow the pulmonary lesions as they develop and to help with prognosis. The pulmonary proliferative phase begins 1–2 weeks after paraquat ingestion. Although a few reports indicate some success with dialysis, hemodialysis and hemoperfusion rarely change the clinical course. Many approaches have been used to slow or stop the progressive pulmonary fibrosis. Immunosuppression using corticosteroids and cyclophosphamide is widely practiced, but evidence for efficacy is weak. Antioxidants such as acetylcysteine and salicylate might be beneficial through free radical-scavenging, anti-inflammatory, and nuclear factor kappa-B inhibitory actions. However, there are no published human trials. The case fatality rate is high in all centers despite large variations in treatment. Patients require prolonged observation and treatment for respiratory and renal insufficiency if they survive the acute stage of poisoning.
# Chunk 8449
1. Human toxicology—Concerns about the toxicology of PFCs have centered on their estrogenic properties and accumulation and persistence in humans. Human exposure to perfluoro compounds takes place through ingestion and inhalation. Since these compounds enter the food chain and water sources and are persistent, ingestion of contaminated food and water products is a major source of human accumulation. The human half-life of PFOA is estimated to be about 3 years. As a persistent chemical and an endocrine disrupter, it is likely that it has some long-term adverse impact on reproductive function, cellular proliferation, and other cellular homeostatic mechanisms. Several PFCs (but not perfluoro compounds derived from PFOA) have been found to act as proliferators of breast cancer cells. However, a large epidemiologic study recently demonstrated a statistically significant association between high and very high serum PFOA levels in workers and kidney cancer, and possibly prostate cancer, ovarian cancer, and non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. There also may be modest associations with cholesterol elevation and uric acid abnormalities. Finally, an acute pulmonary disorder, polymer fume fever, is caused by the pyrolysis of PFOA. Like metal fume fever, seen in welders as a result of cadmium vaporization, polymer fume fever has an acute onset several hours after exposure to the vaporized PFOA and may cause severe respiratory distress. The onset of constitutional symptoms, malaise, chills and fever, and respiratory distress is characteristic of fume fevers. While polymer fume fever is usually mild and self-limited, noncardiogenic pulmonary edema has occurred. Whenever PFOA is heated above 350–400°C, toxic fumes capable of causing polymer fume fever are emitted. Overheated household cookware or burning of coated fabrics present this risk.
# Chunk 8450
Michael J. Kosnett, MD, MPH

Following Sunday morning services, 27 people attended a church social where coffee, baked goods, and sandwiches were served. Within 15–60 minutes, 13 people developed vomiting and abdominal discomfort, accompanied over the next several hours by nonbloody diarrhea. Within 12 hours, seven of these individuals were hospitalized with ongoing gastrointestinal symptoms, hypotension, and anion gap metabolic acidosis. Fluid resuscitation and pressors were accompanied by adequate urine output. What diagnoses should be considered? What tests should be conducted, and what therapy should be considered?
# Chunk 8451
Once absorbed from the respiratory or gastrointestinal tract, lead enters the bloodstream, where approximately 99% is bound to erythrocytes and 1% is present in the plasma. Lead is subsequently distributed to soft tissues such as the bone marrow, brain, kidney, liver, muscle, and gonads; then to the subperiosteal surface of bone; and later to bone matrix. Lead also crosses the placenta and poses a potential hazard to the fetus. The kinetics of lead clearance from the body follows a multicompartment model, composed predominantly of the blood and soft tissues, with a half-life of 1–2 months; and the skeleton, with a half-life of years to decades. Approximately 70% of the lead that is eliminated appears in the urine, with lesser amounts excreted through the bile, skin, hair, nails, sweat, and breast milk. The fraction not undergoing prompt excretion, approximately half of the absorbed lead, may be incorporated into the skeleton, the repository of more than 90% of the body lead burden in most adults. In patients with high bone lead burdens, slow release from the skeleton may elevate blood lead concentrations for years after exposure ceases, and pathologic high bone turnover states such as hyperthyroidism or prolonged immobilization may result in frank lead intoxication. Migration of retained lead bullet fragments into a joint space or adjacent to bone has been associated with the development of lead poisoning signs and symptoms years or decades after an initial gunshot injury.
# Chunk 8452
Major Forms of Lead Intoxication

A. Inorganic Lead Poisoning (Table 57–1) 1.

Acute—Acute inorganic lead poisoning is uncommon today. It usually results from industrial inhalation of large quantities of lead oxide fumes or, in small children, from ingestion of a large oral dose of lead in the form of lead-based paint chips; small objects, eg, toys coated or fabricated from lead; or contaminated food or drink. The onset of severe symptoms usually requires several days or weeks of recurrent exposure and manifests as signs and symptoms of encephalopathy or colic. Evidence of hemolytic anemia (or anemia with basophilic stippling if exposure has been subacute) and elevated hepatic aminotransferases may be present.
# Chunk 8453
The diagnosis of lead intoxication is best confirmed by measuring lead in whole blood. Although this test reflects lead currently circulating in blood and soft tissues and is not a reliable marker of either recent or cumulative lead exposure, most patients with lead-related disease have blood lead concentrations higher than the normal range. Average background blood lead concentrations in North America and Europe have declined by 90% in recent decades, and the geometric mean blood lead concentration in the United States in 2011–2012 was estimated to be 0.973 mcg/dL. Though predominantly a research tool, the concentration of lead in bone assessed by noninvasive K X-ray fluorescence measurement of lead has been correlated with long-term cumulative lead exposure, and its relationship to numerous lead-related disorders is the subject of ongoing investigation. Measurement of lead excretion in the urine after a single dose of a chelating agent (sometimes called a “chelation challenge test”) primarily reflects the lead content of soft tissues and may not be a reliable marker of long-term lead exposure, remote past exposure, or skeletal lead burden. Accordingly, this test is rarely indicated in clinical practice. Because of the lag time associated with lead-induced elevations in circulating heme precursors, the finding of a blood lead concentration of 30 mcg/dL or more with no concurrent increase in zinc protoporphyrin suggests that the lead exposure was of recent onset.
# Chunk 8454
A. Inorganic Lead Poisoning

Treatment of inorganic lead poisoning involves immediate termination of exposure, supportive care, and the judicious use of chelation therapy. (Chelation is discussed later in this chapter.) Lead encephalopathy is a medical emergency that requires intensive supportive care. Cerebral edema may improve with corticosteroids and mannitol or hypertonic saline, and anticonvulsants may be required to treat seizures. Radiopacities on abdominal radiographs may suggest the presence of retained lead objects requiring gastrointestinal decontamination. Adequate urine flow should be maintained, but overhydration should be avoided. Intravenous edetate calcium disodium (CaNa2EDTA) is administered at a dosage of 1000–1500 mg/m2/d (approximately 30–50 mg/kg/d) by continuous infusion for up to 5 days. Some clinicians advocate
# Chunk 8455
Soluble arsenic compounds are well absorbed through the respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts (Table 57–1). Percutaneous absorption is limited but may be clinically significant after heavy exposure to concentrated arsenic reagents. Most of the absorbed inorganic arsenic undergoes methylation, mainly in the liver, to monomethylarsonic acid and dimethylarsinic acid, which are excreted, along with residual inorganic arsenic, in the urine. When chronic daily absorption is <1000 mcg of soluble inorganic arsenic, approximately two thirds of the absorbed dose is excreted in the urine within 2–3 days. After massive ingestions, the elimination half-life is prolonged. Inhalation of arsenic compounds of low solubility may result in prolonged retention in the lung and may not be reflected by urinary arsenic excretion. Arsenic binds to sulfhydryl groups present in keratinized tissue, and following cessation of exposure, hair, nails, and skin may contain elevated levels after urine values have returned to normal. However, arsenic in hair and nails as a result of external deposition may be indistinguishable from that incorporated after internal absorption.
# Chunk 8456
Arsine gas is oxidized in vivo and exerts a potent hemolytic effect associated with alteration of ion flux across the erythrocyte membrane; it also disrupts cellular respiration in other tissues. Arsenic is a recognized human carcinogen and has been associated with cancer of the lung, skin, and bladder. Marine organisms may contain large amounts of a well-absorbed trimethylated organoarsenic, arsenobetaine, as well as a variety of arsenosugars and arsenolipids. Arsenobetaine exerts no known toxic effects when ingested by mammals and is excreted in the urine unchanged; arsenosugars are partially metabolized to dimethylarsinic acid. Thioarsenite compounds that occur as minor metabolites of inorganic arsenic and methylated arsenic compounds in vivo may contribute to toxicity.
# Chunk 8457
Major Forms of Arsenic Intoxication

A. Acute Inorganic Arsenic Poisoning

Within minutes to hours after exposure to high doses (tens to hundreds of milligrams) of soluble inorganic arsenic compounds, many systems are affected. Initial gastrointestinal signs and symptoms include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal pain. Diffuse capillary leak, combined with gastrointestinal fluid loss, may result in hypotension, shock, and death. Cardiopulmonary toxicity, including congestive cardiomyopathy, cardiogenic or noncardiogenic pulmonary edema, and ventricular arrhythmias (particularly in association with QTc prolongation on the electrocardiogram) may occur promptly or after a delay of several days. Pancytopenia usually develops within 1 week, and basophilic stippling of erythrocytes may be present soon after. Central nervous system effects, including delirium, encephalopathy, and coma, may occur within the first few days of intoxication. An ascending sensorimotor peripheral neuropathy may begin to develop after a delay of 2–6 weeks. This neuropathy may ultimately involve the proximal musculature and result in neuromuscular respiratory failure. Months after an acute poisoning, transverse white striae (Aldrich-Mees lines) may be visible in the nails.
# Chunk 8458
Acute inorganic arsenic poisoning should be considered in an individual presenting with abrupt onset of gastroenteritis in combination with hypotension and metabolic acidosis. Suspicion should be further heightened when these initial findings are followed by cardiac dysfunction, pancytopenia, and peripheral neuropathy. The diagnosis may be confirmed by demonstration of elevated amounts of inorganic arsenic and its metabolites in the urine (typically in the range of several thousand micrograms in the first 2–3 days after acute symptomatic poisoning). Arsenic disappears rapidly from the blood, and except in anuric patients, blood arsenic levels should not be used for diagnostic purposes. Treatment is based on appropriate gut decontamination, intensive supportive care, and prompt chelation with unithiol, 3–5 mg/kg intravenously every 4–6 hours, or dimercaprol, 3–5 mg/kg intramuscularly every 4–6 hours. In animal studies, the efficacy of chelation has been highest when it is administered within minutes to hours after arsenic exposure; therefore, if diagnostic suspicion is high, treatment should not be withheld for the several days to weeks often required to obtain laboratory confirmation.
# Chunk 8459
C. Arsine Gas Poisoning

Arsine gas poisoning produces a distinctive pattern of intoxication dominated by profound hemolytic effects. After a latent period that may range from 2 to 24 hours postinhalation (depending on the magnitude of exposure), massive intravascular hemolysis may occur. Initial symptoms may include malaise, headache, dyspnea, weakness, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, jaundice, and hemoglobinuria. Oliguric renal failure, a consequence of hemoglobin deposition in the renal tubules, often appears within 1–3 days. In massive exposures, lethal effects on cellular respiration may occur before renal failure develops. Urinary arsenic levels are elevated but are seldom available to confirm the diagnosis during the critical period of illness. Intensive supportive care—including exchange transfusion, vigorous hydration, and, in the case of acute renal failure, hemodialysis—is the mainstay of therapy. Currently available chelating agents have not been demonstrated to be of clinical value in arsine poisoning.
# Chunk 8460
The absorption of mercury varies considerably depending on the chemical form of the metal. Elemental mercury is quite volatile and can be absorbed from the lungs (Table 57–1). It is poorly absorbed from the intact gastrointestinal tract. Inhaled mercury is the primary source of occupational exposure. Organic short-chain alkylmercury compounds are volatile and potentially harmful by inhalation as well as by ingestion. Percutaneous absorption of metallic mercury and inorganic mercury can be of clinical concern following massive acute or long-term chronic exposure. Alkylmercury compounds appear to be well absorbed through the skin, and acute contact with a few drops of dimethylmercury has resulted in severe, delayed toxicity. After absorption, mercury is distributed to the tissues within a few hours, with the highest concentration occurring in the kidney. Inorganic mercury is excreted through the urine and feces. Excretion of inorganic mercury follows a multi-compartment model: most is excreted within weeks to months, but a fraction may be retained in the kidneys and brain for years. After inhalation of elemental mercury vapor, urinary mercury levels decline with a half-life of approximately 1–3 months. Urine mercury concentration is <3 mcg/L in most individuals without occupational exposure, and the median general population urine mercury concentration in the 2011–2012 NHANES was 0.324 mcg/L. Methylmercury, which has a blood and whole-body half-life of approximately 50 days, undergoes biliary excretion and enterohepatic circulation, with more than two thirds eventually excreted in the feces. The geometric mean total blood mercury concentration in the US population in the 2011–2012 NHANES was 0.703 mcg/L; the 95th percentile was 4.40 mcg/L (~90% present as methylmercury). Mercury binds to sulfhydryl groups in keratinized tissue, and as with lead and arsenic, traces appear in the hair and nails. Mercury in hair has served as a valid biomarker of methylmercury exposure over an interval of weeks to months in epidemiologic studies.
# Chunk 8461
The diagnosis of mercury intoxication involves integration of the history and physical findings with confirmatory laboratory testing or other evidence of exposure. In the absence of occupational exposure, the urine mercury concentration is usually <5 mcg/L, and whole blood mercury is <5 mcg/L. In 1990, the Biological Exposure Index (BEI) Committee of the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH) recommended that workplace exposures should result in urinary mercury concentrations <35 mcg per gram of creatinine and end-of-work-week whole blood mercury concentrations <15 mcg/L. To minimize the risk of developmental neurotoxicity from methylmercury, the EPA and the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) have advised A pregnant women, women who might become pregnant, nursing mothers, and young children to avoid consumption of fish with high mercury levels (eg, swordfish) and to limit consumption of albacore tuna to 6 ounces a week, but to otherwise consume 8–12 ounces of fish per week (see http://www.fda.gov/Food/FoodborneIllnessContaminants/Metals/ucm393070.htm).
# Chunk 8462
When used in therapeutic doses, dimercaprol is associated with a high incidence of adverse effects, including hypertension, tachycardia, nausea, vomiting, lacrimation, salivation, fever (particularly in children), and pain at the injection site. Its use has also been associated with thrombocytopenia and increased prothrombin time—factors that may limit intramuscular injection because of the risk of hematoma formation at the injection site. Despite its protective effects in acutely intoxicated animals, dimercaprol may redistribute arsenic and mercury to the central nervous system, and it is not advocated for treatment of chronic poisoning. Water-soluble analogs of dimercaprol—unithiol and succimer—have higher therapeutic indices and have replaced dimercaprol in many settings.
# Chunk 8463
The highly polar ionic character of EDTA limits its oral absorption. Moreover, oral administration may increase lead absorption from the gut. Consequently, EDTA should be administered by intravenous infusion. In patients with normal renal function, EDTA is rapidly excreted by glomerular filtration, with 50% of an injected dose appearing in the urine within 1 hour. EDTA mobilizes lead from soft tissues, causing a marked increase in urinary lead excretion and a corresponding decline in blood lead concentration. In patients with renal insufficiency, excretion of the drug—and its metal-mobilizing effects—may be delayed.
# Chunk 8464
Because the drug and the mobilized metals are excreted via the urine, the drug is relatively contraindicated in anuric patients. In such instances, the use of low doses of EDTA in combination with high-flux hemodialysis or hemofiltration has been described. Nephrotoxicity from EDTA has been reported, but in most cases can be prevented by maintenance of adequate urine flow, avoidance of excessive doses, and limitation of a treatment course to 5 or fewer consecutive days. EDTA may result in temporary zinc depletion that is of uncertain clinical significance. Analogs of EDTA, the calcium and zinc disodium salts of DTPA, pentetate, have been used for removal (“decorporation”) of certain transuranic, rare earth, and transition metal radioisotopes, and in 2004 were approved by the FDA for treatment of contamination with plutonium, americium, and curium.
# Chunk 8465
UNITHIOL (DIMERCAPTOPROPANESULFONIC ACID, DMPS)

Unithiol, a dimercapto chelating agent that is a water-soluble analog of dimercaprol, has been available in the official formularies of Russia and other former Soviet countries since 1958 and in Germany since 1976. It has been legally available from compounding pharmacies in the USA since 1999. Unithiol can be administered orally and intravenously. Bioavailability by the oral route is approximately 50%, with peak blood levels occurring in approximately 4 hours. Over 80% of an intravenous dose is excreted in the urine, mainly as cyclic DMPS sulfides. The elimination half-time of total unithiol (parent drug and its transformation products) is approximately 20 hours. Unithiol exhibits protective effects against the toxic action of mercury and arsenic in animal models, and it increases the excretion of mercury, arsenic, and lead in humans. Animal studies and a few case reports suggest that unithiol may also have usefulness in the treatment of poisoning by bismuth compounds.
# Chunk 8466
Unithiol has no FDA-approved indications, but experimental studies and its pharmacologic and pharmacodynamic profile suggest that intravenous unithiol offers advantages over intramuscular dimercaprol or oral succimer in the initial treatment of severe acute poisoning by inorganic mercury or arsenic. Aqueous preparations of unithiol (usually 50 mg/mL in sterile water) can be administered at a dosage of 3–5 mg/kg every 4 hours by slow intravenous infusion over 20 minutes. If a few days of treatment are accompanied by stabilization of the patient’s cardiovascular and gastrointestinal status, it may be possible to change to oral administration of 4–8 mg/kg every 6–8 hours. Oral unithiol may also be considered as an alternative to oral succimer in the treatment of lead intoxication. Intravenous unithiol in conjunction with high flux hemodialysis or hemodiafiltration may be useful in the treatment of patients with anuric renal failure caused by mercury salts and bismuth.
# Chunk 8467
Rapid intravenous administration may result in hypotension. Adverse idiosyncratic responses such as flushing, abdominal discomfort, and rash have also been observed. Pulmonary complications (eg, acute respiratory distress syndrome) have been reported in some patients undergoing deferoxamine infusions lasting longer than 24 hours, and neurotoxicity and increased susceptibility to certain infections (eg, with Yersinia enterocolitica) have been described after long-term therapy of iron overload conditions (eg, thalassemia major).
# Chunk 8468
Deferasirox is a tridentate chelator with a high affinity for iron and low affinity for other metals, eg, zinc and copper. It is orally active and well absorbed. In the circulation, it binds iron, and the complex is excreted in the bile. Deferasirox was approved by the FDA in 2005 for the oral treatment of iron overload caused by blood transfusions, a problem in the treatment of thalassemia and myelodysplastic syndrome. More than 5 years of clinical experience suggest that daily long-term usage is generally well tolerated, with the most common adverse effects consisting of mild to moderate gastrointestinal disturbances and skin rash. Monitoring of liver and renal function has been advised because renal and liver impairment and failure associated with deferasirox have been reported during treatment of older adults with myelodysplastic syndromes.
# Chunk 8469
After exposure to 137Cs or thallium salts, the approved adult dosage of Prussian blue is 3 g orally three times a day; the corresponding pediatric dosage (2–12 years of age) is 1 g orally three times a day. Serial monitoring of urine and fecal radioactivity (137Cs) and urinary thallium concentrations can guide the recommended duration of therapy. Adjunctive supportive care for possible acute radiation illness (137Cs) or systemic thallium toxicity should be instituted as needed.
# Chunk 8470
Bacterial food poisoning is the most common cause of gas-trointestinal signs and symptom appearing in a group of indi-viduals within several hours of a common meal. Consumption of food contaminated with preformed bacterial toxins such as Staphylococcus or Bacillus cereus toxins can result in vomiting after an incubation interval as short as 1–2 hours. However, the onset of vomiting in some individuals within 15 minutes and the progression to hypotension and metabolic acidosis in several individuals are not typical for bacterial food poisoning and are more suggestive of intoxication by certain toxic chemi-cals or drugs, including inorganic arsenic and mercury salts (eg, sodium arsenite or mercuric chloride). The absence of hematemesis, bloody diarrhea, or renal insufficiency lowered the likelihood that inorganic mercury was responsible. An epidemiologic investigation subsequently revealed that all affected individuals had consumed the deliberately adulter-ated coffee, which contained 6300 ppm of inorganic arsenic. Analysis of urine for arsenic and mercury and stool and emesis for bacterial pathogens would be reasonable initial diagnostic tests. Pending test results, prompt empiric treat-ment of this constellation of findings with the chelating agents unithiol, succimer, or dimercaprol would be appropriate. [Based on an actual incident, see: Gensheimer KF et al: Arse-nic poisoning caused by intentional contamination of coffee at a church gathering: An epidemiological approach to a forensic investigation. J Forensic Sci 2010;55:1116].
# Chunk 8471
Management of the Poisoned Patient

Kent R. Olson, MD

A 62-year-old woman with a history of depression is found in her apartment in a lethargic state. An empty bottle of bupro-pion is on the bedside table. In the emergency department, she is unresponsive to verbal and painful stimuli. She has a brief generalized seizure, followed by a respiratory arrest. The emergency physician performs endotracheal intubation and administers a drug intravenously, followed by another sub-stance via a nasogastric tube. The patient is admitted to the intensive care unit for continued supportive care and recovers the next morning. What drug might be used intravenously to prevent further seizures? What substance is commonly used to adsorb drugs still present in the gastrointestinal tract?
# Chunk 8472
Other organ system damage may occur after poisoning and is sometimes delayed in onset. Paraquat attacks lung tissue, resulting in pulmonary fibrosis, beginning several days after ingestion. Massive hepatic necrosis due to poisoning by acetaminophen or certain mushrooms results in hepatic encephalopathy and death 48–72 hours or longer after ingestion.
# Chunk 8473
5.

Abdomen—Abdominal examination may reveal ileus, which is typical of poisoning with antimuscarinic, opioid, and sedative drugs. Hyperactive bowel sounds, abdominal cramping, and diarrhea are common in poisoning with organophosphates, iron, arsenic, theophylline, A phalloides, and A muscaria.
# Chunk 8474
C. Renal Function Tests

Some toxins have direct nephrotoxic effects; in other cases, renal failure is due to shock or myoglobinuria. Blood urea nitrogen and creatinine levels should be measured and urinalysis performed. Elevated serum creatine kinase (CK) and myoglobin in the urine suggest muscle necrosis due to seizures or muscular rigidity. Oxalate crystals in large numbers in the urine suggest ethylene glycol poisoning.
# Chunk 8475
D. Serum Osmolality

The calculated serum osmolality is dependent mainly on the serum sodium and glucose and the blood urea nitrogen and can be estimated from the following formula:
# Chunk 8476
Initially, the patient is asymptomatic or has mild gastrointestinal upset (nausea, vomiting). After 24–36 hours, evidence of liver injury appears, with elevated aminotransferase levels and hypoprothrombinemia. Fulminant liver failure may ensue, leading to metabolic acidosis, hypoglycemia, encephalopathy, and death. Renal failure may also occur. With acute massive ingestion and very high serum levels, metabolic acidosis can occur in the absence of liver failure. Rarely, acetaminophen ingestion can cause 5-oxoprolinuria due to glutathione depletion.
# Chunk 8477
Tricyclic antidepressants are competitive antagonists at muscarinic cholinergic receptors, and anticholinergic findings (tachycardia, dilated pupils, dry mouth) are common even at moderate doses. Some tricyclics are also strong α blockers, which can lead to vasodilation. Centrally mediated agitation and seizures may be followed by depression and hypotension. Most important is the fact that tricyclics inhibit the cardiac sodium channel, causing slowed conduction with a wide QRS interval and depressed cardiac contractility. This cardiac toxicity may result in serious arrhythmias (Figure 58–1), including ventricular conduction block and ventricular tachycardia.
# Chunk 8478
General supportive care is essential. After massive aspirin ingestions (eg, more than 100 tablets), aggressive gut decontamination is advisable, including gastric lavage, repeated doses of activated charcoal, and consideration of whole bowel irrigation. Intravenous fluids are used to replace fluid losses caused by tachypnea, vomiting, and fever. For moderate intoxications, intravenous sodium bicarbonate is given to alkalinize the urine and promote salicylate excretion by trapping the salicylate in its ionized, polar form. For severe poisoning (eg, patients with severe acidosis, coma, and serum salicylate level >90–100 mg/dL), emergency hemodialysis is performed to remove the salicylate more quickly and restore acid-base balance and fluid status.
# Chunk 8479
Stimulation of muscarinic receptors causes abdominal cramps, diarrhea, excessive salivation, sweating, urinary frequency, and increased bronchial secretions (see Chapters 6 and 7). Stimulation of nicotinic receptors causes generalized ganglionic activation, which can lead to hypertension and either tachycardia or bradycardia. Muscle twitching and fasciculations may progress to weakness and respiratory muscle paralysis. CNS effects include agitation, confusion, and seizures. The mnemonic DUMBELS (diarrhea, urination, miosis and muscle weakness, bronchospasm, excitation, lacrimation, and seizures, sweating, and salivation) helps recall the common findings. Blood testing may be used to document depressed activity of red blood cell (acetylcholinesterase) and
# Chunk 8480
Treatment of cyanide poisoning includes rapid administration of activated charcoal (although charcoal binds cyanide poorly, it can reduce absorption) and general supportive care. The conventional antidote kit available in the USA includes two forms of nitrite (amyl nitrite and sodium nitrite) and sodium thiosulfate. The nitrites induce methemoglobinemia, which binds CN–, creating the less toxic cyanomethemoglobin; thiosulfate is a cofactor in the enzymatic conversion of CN – to the much less toxic thiocyanate (SCN–).
# Chunk 8481
The cause of this activation is not fully understood, but the effects can be ameliorated by β blockers (see below). Cardiac arrhythmias include atrial tachycardias, premature ventricular contractions, and ventricular tachycardia. In severe poisoning (eg, acute overdose with serum level >100 mg/L), seizures often occur and are usually resistant to common anticonvulsants. Toxicity may be delayed in onset for many hours after ingestion of sustained-release tablet formulations.
# Chunk 8482
General supportive care should be provided. Aggressive gut decontamination should be carried out using repeated doses of activated charcoal and whole bowel irrigation. Propranolol or other β blockers (eg, esmolol) are useful antidotes for β-mediated hypotension and tachycardia. Phenobarbital is preferred over phenytoin for convulsions; most anticonvulsants are ineffective. Hemodialysis is indicated for serum concentrations >100 mg/L and for intractable seizures in patients with lower levels.
# Chunk 8483
Another major factor determining drug distribution is drug binding to plasma proteins. Albumin is the plasma protein with the greatest binding capacity. In general, protein binding of drugs is reduced in the neonate, as seen with local anesthetic drugs, diazepam, phenytoin, ampicillin, and phenobarbital. Therefore, the concentration of free (unbound) drug in plasma is increased initially. Because the free drug exerts the pharmacologic effect, this can result in greater drug effect or toxicity despite a normal or even low plasma concentration of total drug (bound plus unbound). As an example, consider a therapeutic dose of a drug (eg, diazepam) given to a patient. The concentration of total drug in the plasma is 300 mcg/L. If the drug is 98% protein-bound in an older child or adult, then 6 mcg/L is the concentration of free drug. Assume that this concentration of free drug produces the desired effect in the patient without producing toxicity. However, if this drug is given to a preterm infant in a dosage adjusted for body weight and it produces a total drug concentration of 300 mcg/L—and protein binding is only 90%—then the free drug concentration will be 30 mcg/L, or five times higher. Although the higher free concentration may result in faster elimination (see Chapter 3), this concentration may be quite toxic initially.
# Chunk 8484
Penicillins, for example, are cleared by preterm infants at 17% of the adult rate based on comparable surface area and 34% of the adult rate when adjusted for body weight. The dosage of ampicillin for a neonate less than 7 days old is 50–100 mg/kg/d in two doses at 12-hour intervals. The dosage for a neonate over 7 days old is 100–200 mg/kg/d in three doses at 8-hour intervals. A decreased rate of renal elimination in the neonate has also been observed with aminoglycoside antibiotics (kanamycin, gentamicin, neomycin, and streptomycin). The dosage of gentamicin for a neonate less than 7 days old is 5 mg/kg/d in two doses at 12-hour intervals. The dosage for a neonate over 7 days old is 7.5 mg/ kg/d in three doses at 8-hour intervals. Total body clearance of digoxin is directly dependent upon adequate renal function, and accumulation of digoxin can occur when glomerular filtration is decreased. Since renal function in a sick infant may not improve at the predicted rate during the first weeks and months of life, appropriate adjustments in dosage and dosing schedules may be very difficult. In this situation, adjustments are best made on the basis of plasma drug concentrations determined at intervals throughout the course of therapy.
# Chunk 8485
When evaluating adherence, it is often helpful to ask if an attempt has been made to give a further dose after the child has spilled half of what was offered. The parents may not always be able to say with confidence how much of a dose the child actually received. The parents must be told whether or not to wake the infant for its every-6-hour dose day or night. These matters should be discussed and made clear, and no assumptions should be made about what the parents may or may not do. Nonadherence frequently occurs when antibiotics are prescribed to treat otitis media or urinary tract infections and the child feels well after 4 or 5 days of therapy. The parents may not feel there is any reason to continue giving the medicine even though it was prescribed for 10 or 14 days. This common situation should be anticipated so the parents can be told why it is important to continue giving the medicine for the prescribed period even if the child seems to be “cured.”
# Chunk 8486
TABLE 59–5 Drugs often used during lactation and possible effects on the nursing infant.

would be considered a “therapeutic dose.” If the nursing mother must take medications and the drug is a relatively safe one, she should optimally take it 30–60 minutes after nursing and 3–4 hours before the next feeding. In some cases this may allow time for drugs to be partially cleared from the mother’s blood, and the concentrations in breast milk will be relatively low. Most antibiotics taken by nursing mothers can be detected in breast milk. Tetracycline concentrations in breast milk are approximately 70% of maternal serum concentrations and present a risk of permanent tooth staining in the infant. Isoniazid rapidly reaches equilibrium between breast milk and maternal blood. The concentrations achieved in breast milk are high enough so that signs of pyridoxine deficiency may occur in the infant if the mother is not given pyridoxine supplements.
# Chunk 8487
Special Aspects of Geriatric Pharmacology

Bertram G. Katzung, MD, PhD

A 77-year-old man comes to your office at his wife’s insistence. He has had documented moderate hypertension for 18 years but does not like to take his medications. He says he has no real complaints, but his wife remarks that he has become much more forgetful lately and has almost stopped reading the newspaper and watching television. A Mini-Mental State Examination reveals that he is oriented as to name and place but is unable to give the month or year.
# Chunk 8488
Nonadherence may result from forgetfulness or confusion, especially if the patient has several prescriptions and different dosing intervals. A survey carried out in 1986 showed that the population over 65 years of age accounted for 32% of drugs prescribed in the USA, although these patients represented only 11–12% of the population at that time. Since the prescriptions are often written by several different practitioners, there is usually no attempt to design “integrated” regimens that use drugs with similar dosing intervals for the several conditions being treated. Patients may forget instructions regarding the need to complete a fixed duration of therapy when a course of anti-infective drug is being given.
# Chunk 8489
Dirk B. Robertson, MD & Howard I. Maibach, MD

A 43-year-old woman presents with a complaint of worsen-ing rosacea. She initially responded to once-daily topical metronidazole 0.75% gel with excellent clearing of the papulopustular component of her acne rosacea. Recently, she has noted increasing persistent facial erythema. What therapeutic options are available?
# Chunk 8490
Retapamulin (Altabax) is a semisynthetic pleromutilin derivative effective in the treatment of uncomplicated superficial skin infection caused by group A β-hemolytic streptococci and S aureus, excluding MRSA. Topical retapamulin 1% ointment is indicated for use in adult and pediatric patients, 9 months or older, for the treatment of impetigo. Recommended treatment regimen is twice-daily application for 5 days. Retapamulin is well tolerated with only occasional local irritation of the treatment site. Although uncommon, allergic contact dermatitis has been reported.
# Chunk 8491
Polymyxin B is a peptide antibiotic effective against Gram-negative organisms, including Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Escherichia coli, Enterobacter, and Klebsiella. Most strains of Proteus and Serratia are resistant, as are all Gram-positive organisms. Topical preparations may be compounded in either a solution or ointment base. Numerous prepackaged antibiotic combinations contain polymyxin B. Detectable serum concentrations are difficult to achieve from topical application, but the total daily dose applied to denuded skin or open wounds should not exceed 200 mg in order to reduce the likelihood of neurotoxicity and nephrotoxicity. Allergic contact dermatitis to topically applied polymyxin B sulfate is uncommon.
# Chunk 8492
Topical application of neomycin rarely results in detectable serum concentrations. However, in the case of gentamicin, serum concentrations of 1–18 mcg/mL are possible if the drug is applied in a water-miscible preparation to large areas of denuded skin, as in burned patients. Both drugs are water-soluble and are excreted primarily in the urine. Renal failure may permit the accumulation of these antibiotics, with possible nephrotoxicity, neurotoxicity, and ototoxicity.
# Chunk 8493
They are available as 1% creams and other forms for the topical treatment of dermatophytosis, to be applied on a twice-daily dosing schedule for 1–2 weeks. Adverse reactions include local irritation, burning sensation, and erythema. Contact with mucous membranes should be avoided.
# Chunk 8494
An alternative therapy for thrush is to retain a vaginal tablet in the mouth until dissolved four times daily. Recurrent or recalcitrant perianal, vaginal, vulvar, and diaper area candidiasis may respond to oral nystatin, 0.5–1 million units in adults (100,000 units in children) four times daily, in addition to local therapy. Vulvovaginal candidiasis may be treated by insertion of 1 vaginal tablet twice daily for 14 days, then nightly for an additional 14–21 days.
# Chunk 8495
Terbinafine (described above) is effective given orally for the treatment of onychomycosis. Recommended oral dosage is 250 mg daily for 6 weeks for fingernail infections and 12 weeks for toenail infections. Patients receiving terbinafine for onychomycosis should be monitored closely with periodic laboratory evaluations for possible hepatic dysfunction. Rare cases of liver failure have occurred with the use of oral terbinafine; therefore, its use is not recommended in patients with chronic or active liver disease.
# Chunk 8496
Imiquimod should be applied to the wart tissue three times per week and left on the skin for 6–10 hours prior to washing off with mild soap and water. Treatment should be continued until eradication of the warts is accomplished, but not for more than a total of 16 weeks. Recommended treatment of actinic keratoses consists of twice-weekly applications of the 5% cream on the contiguous area of involvement or nightly applications of the 2.5% or 3.75% cream. The cream is removed after approximately 8 hours with mild soap and water. Treatment of superficial basal cell carcinoma consists of five-times-per-week application of 5% cream to the tumor, including a 1 cm margin of surrounding skin, for a 6-week course of therapy.
# Chunk 8497
Tacrolimus (Protopic) and pimecrolimus (Elidel) are macrolide immunosuppressants that have been shown to be of significant benefit in the treatment of atopic dermatitis. Both agents inhibit T-lymphocyte activation and prevent the release of inflammatory cytokines and mediators from mast cells in vitro after stimulation by antigen-IgE complexes. Tacrolimus is available as 0.03% and 0.1% ointments, and pimecrolimus is available as a 1% cream. Both are indicated for short-term and intermittent longterm therapy for mild to moderate atopic dermatitis. Tacrolimus 0.03% ointment and pimecrolimus 1% cream are approved for use in children older than 2 years of age, although all strengths are approved for adult use. Recommended dosing of both agents is twice-daily application to affected skin until clearing is noted. Neither medication should be used with occlusive dressings. The most common side effect of both drugs is a burning sensation in the applied area that improves with continued use. The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) mandates a black box warning regarding the long-term safety of topical tacrolimus and pimecrolimus because of animal tumorigenicity data.
# Chunk 8498
Benzyl alcohol (Ulesfia) is available as a 5% lotion for the treatment of head lice in patients older than 6 months. The lotion is applied to dry hair and left on for 10 minutes prior to rinsing off with water. Because the drug is not ovicidal, the treatment must be repeated after 7 days. Eye irritation and allergic contact dermatitis have been reported.
# Chunk 8499
Adapalene (Differin) is a derivative of naphthoic acid that resembles retinoic acid in structure and effects. It is available for daily application as a 0.1% gel, cream, or lotion and a 0.3% gel. The 0.1% gel has recently been approved by the FDA for overthe-counter sale. Unlike tretinoin, adapalene is photochemically stable and shows little decrease in efficacy when used in combination with benzoyl peroxide. Adapalene is less irritating than tretinoin and is most effective in patients with mild to moderate acne vulgaris. Adapalene is also available in a fixed-dose combination gel with benzoyl peroxide (Epiduo, Epiduo Forte).
# Chunk 8500
Most patients with cystic acne respond to 1–2 mg/kg, given in two divided doses daily for 4–5 months. If severe cystic acne persists following this initial treatment, after a period of 2 months, a second course of therapy may be initiated. Common adverse effects resemble hypervitaminosis A and include dryness and itching of the skin and mucous membranes. Less common side effects are headache, corneal opacities, pseudotumor cerebri, inflammatory bowel disease, anorexia, alopecia, and muscle and joint pains. These effects are all reversible on discontinuance of therapy. Skeletal hyperostosis has been observed in patients receiving isotretinoin with premature closure of epiphyses noted in children treated with this medication. Lipid abnormalities (triglycerides, high-density lipoproteins) are frequent; their clinical relevance is unknown at present.
# Chunk 8501
Teratogenicity is a significant risk in patients taking isotretinoin; therefore, the FDA mandates that women of childbearing potential must use an effective form of contraception for at least 1 month before, throughout isotretinoin therapy, and for one or more menstrual cycles following discontinuance of treatment.
# Chunk 8502
A negative serum pregnancy test must be obtained within 2 weeks before starting therapy in these patients, and therapy should be initiated only on the second or third day of the next normal menstrual period. In the USA, health care professionals, pharmacists, and patients must utilize the mandatory iPLEDGE registration and follow-up system.
# Chunk 8503
Brimonidine (Mirvaso) is an α2-adrenergic agonist indicated for the topical treatment of persistent facial erythema of rosacea in adults 18 years of age or older. Daily topical application of brimonidine 0.33% gel may reduce erythema through direct vasoconstriction. Exacerbation of facial erythema and flushing may occur, ranging from 30 minutes to several hours after application.
# Chunk 8504
TABLE 61–2 Biologic agents for psoriasis.

moderate severity. Improvement of psoriasis is generally noted following 2 weeks of therapy, with continued improvement for up to 8 weeks of treatment. However, fewer than 10% of patients demonstrate total clearing while on calcipotriene as single-agent therapy. Adverse effects include burning, itching, and mild irritation, with dryness and erythema of the treatment area. Care should be taken to avoid facial contact, which may cause ocular irritation. A once-daily two-compound ointment (Taclonex) or foam (Enstilar) containing calcipotriene and betamethasone dipropionate are available. This combination is more effective than its individual ingredients and is well tolerated, with a safety profile similar to betamethasone dipropionate.
# Chunk 8505
Urea is absorbed percutaneously, although the amount absorbed is minimal. It is distributed predominantly in the extracellular space and excreted in urine. Urea is a natural product of metabolism, and systemic toxicities with topical application do not occur.
# Chunk 8506
As a humectant, urea is used in concentrations of 2–20% in creams and lotions. As a keratolytic agent, it is used in 20% concentration in diseases such as ichthyosis vulgaris, hyperkeratosis of palms and soles, xerosis, and keratosis pilaris. Concentrations of 30–50% applied to the nail plate have been useful in softening the nail prior to avulsion.
# Chunk 8507
Pure podophyllotoxin (podofilox) is approved for use as either a 0.5% solution or gel (Condylox) for application by the patient in the treatment of genital condylomas. The low concentration of podofilox significantly reduces the potential for systemic toxicity. Most men with penile warts may be treated with less than 70 μL per application. At this dose, podofilox is not routinely detected in the serum. Treatment is self-administered in treatment cycles of twice-daily application for 3 consecutive days followed by a 4-day drug-free period. Local adverse effects include inflammation, erosions, burning pain, and itching.
# Chunk 8508
Sinecatechins 15% ointment (Veregen) is a prescription botanical drug product of a partially purified fraction of the water extract of green tea leaves from Camellia sinensis containing a mixture of catechins. Sinecatechins ointment is indicated for the topical treatment of external genital and perianal warts in immunocompetent patients 18 years and older. The mechanism of action is unknown. Sinecatechins ointment should be applied three times daily to the warts until complete clearance, not to exceed 16 weeks of therapy.
# Chunk 8509
Approximately 6% of a topically applied dose is absorbed—an amount insufficient to produce adverse systemic effects. Most of the absorbed drug is metabolized and excreted as carbon dioxide, urea, and α-fluoro-β-alanine. A small percentage is eliminated unchanged in the urine. Fluorouracil inhibits thymidylate synthetase activity, interfering with the synthesis of DNA and, to a lesser extent, RNA. These effects are most marked in atypical, rapidly proliferating cells.
# Chunk 8510
Plasma levels of doxepin similar to those achieved during oral therapy may be obtained with topical application; the usual drug interactions associated with tricyclic antidepressants may occur. Therefore, monoamine oxidase inhibitors must be discontinued at least 2 weeks prior to the initiation of doxepin cream. Topical application of the cream should be performed four times daily for up to 8 days of therapy. The safety and efficacy of chronic dosing have not been established. Adverse local effects include marked burning and stinging of the treatment site, which may necessitate discontinuation of the cream in some patients. Allergic contact dermatitis appears to be frequent, and patients should be monitored for symptoms of hypersensitivity.
# Chunk 8511
Eflornithine (Vaniqa) is an irreversible inhibitor of ornithine decarboxylase, which catalyzes the rate-limiting step in the biosynthesis of polyamines. Polyamines are required for cell division and differentiation, and inhibition of ornithine decarboxylase affects the rate of hair growth. Topical eflornithine has been shown effective in reducing facial hair growth in approximately 30% of women when applied twice daily for 6 months of therapy. Hair growth was observed to return to pretreatment levels 8 weeks after discontinuation. Local adverse effects include stinging, burning, and folliculitis.
# Chunk 8512
Drugs Used in the Treatment of Gastrointestinal Diseases

Kenneth R. McQuaid, MD

A 21-year-old woman comes with her parents to discuss therapeutic options for her Crohn’s disease. She was diag-nosed with Crohn’s disease 2 years ago, and it involves her terminal ileum and proximal colon, as confirmed by colonoscopy and small bowel radiography. She was initially treated with mesalamine and budesonide with good response, but over the last 2 months, she has had a relapse of her symptoms. She is experiencing fatigue, cramping, abdominal pains, and nonbloody diarrhea up to 10 times daily, and she has had a 15-lb weight loss. She has no other significant medical or surgical his-tory. Her current medications are mesalamine 2.4 g/d and budesonide 9 mg/d. She appears thin and tired. Abdominal examination reveals tenderness without guarding in the right lower quadrant; no masses are palpable. On perianal examination, there is no tenderness, fissure, or fistula. Her laboratory data are notable for anemia and elevated C-reactive protein. What are the options for immediate con-trol of her symptoms and disease? What are the long-term management options?
# Chunk 8513
Four H2 antagonists are in clinical use: cimetidine, ranitidine, famotidine, and nizatidine. All four agents are rapidly absorbed from the intestine. Cimetidine, ranitidine, and famotidine undergo first-pass hepatic metabolism resulting in a bioavailability of approximately 50%. Nizatidine has little first-pass metabolism. The serum half-lives of the four agents range from 1.1 to 4 hours; however, duration of action depends on the dose given (Table 62–1). H2 antagonists are cleared by a combination of hepatic metabolism, glomerular filtration, and renal tubular secretion. Dose reduction is required in patients with moderate to severe renal (and possibly severe hepatic) insufficiency. In the elderly, there is a decline of up to 50% in drug clearance as well as a significant reduction in volume of distribution.
# Chunk 8514
The potencies of the four H2-receptor antagonists vary over a 50-fold range (Table 62–1). When given in usual prescription doses, however, all inhibit 60–70% of total 24-hour acid secretion. H2 antagonists are especially effective at inhibiting nocturnal acid secretion (which depends largely on histamine), but they have a modest impact on meal-stimulated acid secretion (which is stimulated by gastrin and acetylcholine as well as histamine). Therefore, nocturnal and fasting intragastric pH is raised to 4–5, but the impact on the daytime, meal-stimulated pH profile is less. Recommended prescription doses maintain greater than 50% acid inhibition for 10 hours; hence, these drugs are commonly given twice daily. At doses available in over-the-counter formulations, the duration of acid inhibition is 6–10 hours.
# Chunk 8515
1.

Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)—Patients with infrequent heartburn or dyspepsia (fewer than three times per week) may take either antacids or intermittent H2 antagonists. Because antacids provide rapid acid neutralization, they afford faster symptom relief than H2 antagonists. However, the effect of antacids is short-lived (1–2 hours) compared with H2 antagonists (6–10 hours). H2 antagonists may be taken prophylactically before meals in an effort to reduce the likelihood of heartburn. Frequent heartburn is better treated with twice-daily H2 antagonists (Table 62–1) or PPIs. In patients with erosive esophagitis (approximately 50% of patients with GERD), H2 antagonists afford healing in less than 50% of patients; hence PPIs are preferred because of their superior acid inhibition.
# Chunk 8516
2.

Peptic ulcer disease—PPIs have largely replaced H2 antagonists in the treatment of acute peptic ulcer disease. Nevertheless, H2 antagonists are still sometimes used. Nocturnal acid suppression by H2 antagonists affords effective ulcer healing in most patients with uncomplicated gastric and duodenal ulcers. Hence, all the agents may be administered once daily at bedtime, resulting in ulcer healing rates >80–90% after 6–8 weeks of therapy.
# Chunk 8517
0 0900 1200 1500 1800 2100 0600 0800 hours Time of day

FIGURE 62–2 Twenty-four-hour median intragastric acidity pretreatment (red) and after 1 month of treatment with either ranitidine, 150 mg twice daily (blue, H2 block), or omeprazole, 20 mg once daily (green, PPI). Note that H2-receptor antagonists have a marked effect on nocturnal acid secretion but only a modest effect on meal-stimulated secretion. Proton-pump inhibitors (PPIs) markedly suppress meal-stimulated and nocturnal acid secretion. (Data from Lanzon-Miller S et al: Twenty-four-hour intragastric acidity and plasma gastrin concentration before and during treatment with either ranitidine or omeprazole. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 1987;1:239.)
# Chunk 8518
PPIs are administered as inactive prodrugs. To protect the acid-labile prodrug from rapid destruction within the gastric lumen, oral products are formulated for delayed release as acid-resistant, enteric-coated capsules or tablets. After passing through the stomach into the alkaline intestinal lumen, the enteric coatings dissolve and the prodrug is absorbed. For children or patients with dysphagia or enteral feeding tubes, capsule formulations (but not tablets) may be opened and the microgranules mixed with apple or orange juice or mixed with soft foods (eg, applesauce). Esomeprazole, omeprazole, and pantoprazole are also available as oral suspensions. Lansoprazole is available as a tablet formulation that disintegrates in the mouth, and rabeprazole is available in a formulation that may be sprinkled on food. Omeprazole is also available as a powder formulation (capsule or packet) that contains sodium bicarbonate (1100–1680 mg NaHCO3; 304–460 mg of sodium) to protect the naked (non-enteric-coated) drug from acid degradation. When administered on an empty stomach by
# Chunk 8519
The bioavailability of all agents is decreased approximately 50% by food; hence, the drugs should be administered on an empty stomach. In a fasting state, only 10% of proton pumps are actively secreting acid and susceptible to inhibition. PPIs should be administered approximately 1 hour before a meal (usually breakfast), so that the peak serum concentration coincides with the maximal activity of proton-pump secretion. The drugs have a short serum half-life of about 1.5 hours, but acid inhibition lasts up to 24 hours owing to the irreversible inactivation of the proton pump. At least 18 hours are required for synthesis of new H+/K+-ATPase pump molecules. Because not all proton pumps are inactivated with the first dose of medication, up to 3–4 days of daily medication are required before the full acid-inhibiting potential is reached. Similarly, after stopping the drug, it takes 3–4 days for full acid secretion to return.
# Chunk 8520
1. Gastroesophageal reflux disease—PPIs are the most effective agents for the treatment of erosive reflux disease, esophageal complications of reflux disease (peptic stricture or Barrett’s esophagus), and extraesophageal manifestations of reflux disease. Once-daily dosing provides effective symptom relief and tissue healing in 85–90% of patients; up to 15% of patients require twice-daily dosing.
# Chunk 8521
GERD symptoms recur in over 80% of patients within 6 months after discontinuation of a PPI. For patients with erosive esophagitis or esophageal complications, long-term daily maintenance therapy with a full-dose or half-dose PPI is usually needed. Many patients with nonerosive GERD may be treated successfully with intermittent courses of PPIs or H2 antagonists taken as needed (“on demand”) for recurrent symptoms.
# Chunk 8522
c. Prevention of rebleeding from peptic ulcers—In patients with acute gastrointestinal bleeding due to peptic ulcers, the risk of rebleeding from ulcers that have a visible vessel or adherent clot is increased. Rebleeding of this subset of high-risk ulcers is reduced significantly with PPIs administered for 3–5 days either as high-dose oral therapy (eg, omeprazole, 40 mg orally twice daily) or as a continuous intravenous infusion. It is believed that an intragastric pH higher than 6 may enhance coagulation and platelet aggregation. The optimal dose of intravenous PPI needed to achieve and maintain this level of near-complete acid inhibition is unknown; however, initial bolus administration of esomeprazole or pantoprazole (80 mg) followed by constant infusion (8 mg/h) is commonly recommended.
# Chunk 8523
4.

Prevention of stress-related mucosal bleeding—As discussed previously (see H2-Receptor Antagonists), PPIs (given orally, by nasogastric tube, or by intravenous infusions) may be administered to reduce the risk of clinically significant stress-related mucosal bleeding in critically ill patients. The only PPI approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for this indication is an oral immediate-release omeprazole formulation, which is administered by nasogastric tube twice daily on the first day, then once daily. Although not FDA approved for this indication, other PPI suspension formulations (esomeprazole, omeprazole, pantoprazole) may also be used. For patients with nasoenteric tubes, PPI suspensions may be preferred to intravenous H2 antagonists or PPIs because of comparable efficacy, lower cost, and ease of administration.
# Chunk 8524
Sucralfate may bind to other medications, impairing their absorption.

The human gastrointestinal mucosa synthesizes a number of prostaglandins (see Chapter 18); the primary ones are prostaglandins E and F. Misoprostol, a methyl analog of PGE1, has been approved for gastrointestinal conditions. After oral administration, it is rapidly absorbed and metabolized to a metabolically active free acid. The serum half-life is less than 30 minutes; hence, it must be administered 3–4 times daily. It is excreted in the urine; however, dose reduction is not needed in patients with renal insufficiency.
# Chunk 8525
Misoprostol has both acid inhibitory and mucosal protective properties. It is believed to stimulate mucus and bicarbonate secretion and enhance mucosal blood flow. Misoprostol can reduce the incidence of NSAID-induced ulcers to less than 3% and the incidence of ulcer complications by 50%. It is approved for prevention of NSAID-induced ulcers in high-risk patients; however, misoprostol has never achieved widespread use owing to its high adverse-effect profile and need for multiple daily dosing.
# Chunk 8526
Two bismuth compounds are available: bismuth subsalicylate, a nonprescription formulation containing bismuth and salicylate, and bismuth subcitrate potassium. In the USA, bismuth subcitrate is available only as a combination prescription product that also contains metronidazole and tetracycline for the treatment of H pylori. Bismuth subsalicylate undergoes rapid dissociation within the stomach, allowing absorption of salicylate. Over 99% of the bismuth appears in the stool. Although minimal (<1%), bismuth is absorbed; it is stored in many tissues and has slow renal excretion. Salicylate (like aspirin) is readily absorbed and excreted in the urine.
# Chunk 8527
Bismuth compounds are used in four-drug regimens for the eradication of H pylori infection (see earlier discussion of H pylori-associated ulcers). One regimen consists of a PPI twice daily combined with bismuth subsalicylate (two tablets; 262 mg each), tetracycline (250–500 mg), and metronidazole (500 mg) four times daily for 10–14 days. Another regimen consists of a PPI twice daily combined with three capsules of a combination prescription formulation (each capsule containing bismuth subcitrate 140 mg, metronidazole 125 mg, and tetracycline 125 mg) taken four times daily for 10–14 days.
# Chunk 8528
FIGURE 62–4 Release of serotonin (5-HT) by enterochromaffin (EC) cells from gut distention stimulates submucosal intrinsic primary afferent neurons (IPANs) via 5-HT1P receptors and extrinsic primary afferent neurons via 5-HT3 receptors (5-HT1PR, 5-HT3R). Submucosal IPANs activate the enteric neurons responsible for peristaltic and secretory reflex activity. Stimulation of 5-HT4 receptors (5-HT4R) on presynaptic terminals of IPANs enhances release of acetylcholine (ACh) and calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), promoting reflex activity. CNS, central nervous system; ENS, enteric nervous system. (Data from Gershon MD: Serotonin and its implication for the management of irritable bowel syndrome. Rev Gastroenterol Dis 2003;3[Suppl 2]:S25.) abdominal pain. Serotonin also stimulates submucosal 5-HT1P receptors of the intrinsic primary afferent nerves (IPANs), which contain calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) and acetylcholine and project to myenteric plexus interneurons. 5-HT4 receptors on the presynaptic terminals of the IPANs appear to enhance release of CGRP or acetylcholine. The myenteric interneurons are important in controlling the peristaltic reflex, promoting release of excitatory mediators proximally and inhibitory mediators distally. Motilin may stimulate excitatory neurons or muscle cells directly. Dopamine acts as an inhibitory neurotransmitter in the gastrointestinal tract, decreasing the intensity of esophageal and gastric contractions.
# Chunk 8529
High doses of osmotically active agents produce prompt bowel evacuation (purgation) within 1–3 hours. The rapid movement of water into the distal small bowel and colon leads to a high volume of liquid stool followed by bowel evacuation. Several purgatives are available, which may be used for the treatment of acute constipation or to cleanse the bowel prior to medical procedures (eg, colonoscopy). These include magnesium citrate, sulfate solution, and a proprietary combination of magnesium oxide, sodium picosulfate, and citrate (Prepopik). When taking these purgatives, it is very important that patients maintain adequate hydration by taking increased oral liquids to compensate for fecal fluid loss. Sodium phosphate also is available—by prescription—as a tablet formulation but is infrequently used due to the risk of hyperphosphatemia, hypocalcemia, hypernatremia, and hypokalemia. Although these electrolyte abnormalities are clinically insignificant in most patients, they may lead to cardiac arrhythmias or acute renal failure due to tubular deposition of calcium phosphate (nephrocalcinosis). Sodium phosphate preparations should not be used in patients who are frail or elderly, have renal insufficiency, have significant cardiac disease, or are unable to maintain adequate hydration during bowel preparation.
# Chunk 8530
Lavage solutions containing polyethylene glycol (PEG) are commonly used for complete colonic cleansing before gastrointestinal endoscopic procedures. These balanced, isotonic solutions contain an inert, nonabsorbable, osmotically active sugar (PEG) with sodium sulfate, sodium chloride, sodium bicarbonate, and potassium chloride. The solution is designed so that no significant intravascular fluid or electrolyte shifts occur. Therefore, they are safe for all patients. For optimal bowel cleansing, 1–2 L of solution should be ingested rapidly (over 1–2 hours) on the evening before the procedure and again 4–6 hours before the procedure. For treatment or prevention of chronic constipation, smaller doses of PEG powder may be mixed with water or juices (17 g/8 oz) and ingested daily. In contrast to sorbitol or lactulose, PEG does not produce significant cramps or flatus.
# Chunk 8531
Aloe, senna, and cascara occur naturally in plants. These laxatives are poorly absorbed and after hydrolysis in the colon, produce a bowel movement in 6–12 hours when given orally and within 2 hours when given rectally. Chronic use leads to a characteristic brown pigmentation of the colon known as “melanosis coli.” There has been some concern that these agents may be carcinogenic, but epidemiologic studies do not suggest a relation to colorectal cancer.
# Chunk 8532
Lubiprostone is a prostanoic acid derivative labeled for use in chronic constipation and irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) with predominant constipation. It acts by stimulating the type 2 chloride channel (ClC-2) in the small intestine. This increases chloride-rich fluid secretion into the intestine, which stimulates intestinal motility and shortens intestinal transit time. Over 50% of patients experience a bowel movement within 24 hours of taking one dose. A dose of 24 mcg orally twice daily is the recommended dose for treatment of chronic constipation. There appears to be no loss of efficacy with long-term therapy. After discontinuation of the drug, constipation may return to its pretreatment severity. Lubiprostone has minimal systemic absorption but is designated category C for pregnancy because of increased fetal loss in guinea pigs. Lubiprostone may cause nausea in up to 30% of patients due to delayed gastric emptying.
# Chunk 8533
Linaclotide and plecanatide are minimally absorbed, short amino acid peptides that stimulate intestinal chloride secretion through a different mechanism by binding to and activating guanylate cyclase-C on the luminal surface. This leads to increased intracellular and extracellular cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) with activation of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), followed by chloride-rich secretion and acceleration of intestinal transit. Both agents are approved for the treatment of chronic constipation (linaclotide 145 mcg orally once daily; plecanatide 3 mg orally once daily); linaclotide is also approved for the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome with constipation (290 mcg orally once daily). These agents result in an average increase of 1–2 bowel movements per week that usually occurs within the first week of treatment. Upon discontinuation of the drug, bowel movement frequency returns to normal within 1 week. The most common side effect is diarrhea, which occurs in up to 20% of patients, with severe diarrhea in 2%. These drugs have negligible absorption at standard doses. Both drugs are contraindicated in pediatric patients because of reports of increased mortality in juvenile mice from dehydration. (Crofelemer is a small molecule with the opposite effect: it is an inhibitor of the CFTR channel and has recently been approved for the treatment of HIV-drug-induced diarrhea.)
# Chunk 8534
Acute and chronic therapy with opioids may cause constipation by decreasing intestinal motility, which results in prolonged transit time and increased absorption of fecal water (see Chapter 31). Use of opioids after surgery for treatment of pain as well as endogenous opioids also may prolong the duration of postoperative ileus. These effects are mainly mediated through intestinal mu (μ)-opioid receptors. Two selective antagonists of the μ-opioid receptor are commercially available: methylnaltrexone bromide and alvimopan. Because these agents do not readily cross the blood-brain barrier, they inhibit peripheral μ-opioid receptors without impacting analgesic effects within the central nervous system. Methylnaltrexone is approved for the treatment of opioid-induced constipation in patients receiving palliative care for advanced illness who have had inadequate response to other agents. It is administered as a subcutaneous injection (0.15 mg/ kg) every 2 days. Alvimopan is approved for short-term use to shorten the period of postoperative ileus in hospitalized patients who have undergone small or large bowel resection. Alvimopan (12 mg capsule) is administered orally within 5 hours before surgery and twice daily after surgery until bowel function has recovered, but for no more than 7 days. Because of possible cardiovascular toxicity, alvimopan currently is restricted to short-term use in hospitalized patients only.
# Chunk 8535
Eluxadoline is a prescription opioid agonist with high affinity for the mu receptor (as well as low affinity for the delta receptor). When taken orally, eluxadoline binds to gut opioid receptors, resulting in slower colonic transit and increased fecal fluid absorption. Eluxadoline is approved for the treatment of patients with diarrhea-predominant IBS at a dose of 75–100 mg twice daily. In two randomized placebo-controlled trials, eluxadoline 100 mg twice daily led to significant improvement in abdominal pain and diarrhea in 30% of patients compared with 16% with placebo. Constipation may occur in 8% of patients. Approximately 1% of patients may experience sphincter of Oddi spasm (usually within the first week of therapy) resulting in abdominal pain, pancreatitis, and/or elevated pancreatic or liver enzymes. Eluxadoline should not be used in patients with a history of pancreatitis, alcoholism, or known sphincter of Oddi disease. Caution is advised in patients with prior cholecystectomy, in whom there is up to a 5% risk of complications due to sphincter of Oddi spasm. Eluxadoline 75 mg twice daily is recommended for patients with prior cholecystectomy, mild to moderate liver disease, or side effects at the higher dose.
# Chunk 8536
See the section under Mucosal Protective Agents in earlier text.

Conjugated bile salts are normally absorbed in the terminal ileum. Disease of the terminal ileum (eg, Crohn’s disease) or surgical resection leads to malabsorption of bile salts, which may cause colonic secretory diarrhea. The bile salt-binding resins cholestyramine, colestipol, or colesevelam, may decrease diarrhea caused by excess fecal bile acids (see Chapter 35). These products come in a variety of powder and pill formulations that may be taken one to three times daily before meals. Adverse effects include bloating, flatulence, constipation, and fecal impaction. In patients with diminished circulating bile acid pools, further removal of bile acids may lead to an exacerbation of fat malabsorption. Cholestyramine and colestipol bind a number of drugs and reduce their absorption; hence, they should not be given within 2 hours of other drugs. Colesevelam does not appear to have significant effects on absorption of other drugs.
# Chunk 8537
Impaired pancreatic secretion may cause steatorrhea, which can lead to fat-soluble vitamin deficiency. Alterations in gastrointestinal motility cause nausea, abdominal pain, flatulence, and diarrhea. Because of inhibition of gallbladder contractility and alterations in fat absorption, long-term use of octreotide can cause formation of sludge or gallstones in over 50% of patients, which rarely results in the development of acute cholecystitis. Because octreotide alters the balance among insulin, glucagon, and growth hormone, hyperglycemia or, less frequently, hypoglycemia (usually mild) can occur. Prolonged treatment with octreotide may result in hypothyroidism. Octreotide also can cause bradycardia.
# Chunk 8538
IBS is an idiopathic chronic, relapsing disorder characterized by abdominal discomfort (pain, bloating, distention, or cramps) in association with alterations in bowel habits (diarrhea, constipation, or both). With episodes of abdominal pain or discomfort, patients note a change in the frequency or consistency of their bowel movements.
# Chunk 8539
Pharmacologic therapies for IBS are directed at relieving abdominal pain and discomfort and improving bowel function. For patients with predominant diarrhea, antidiarrheal agents, especially loperamide, are helpful in reducing stool frequency and fecal urgency. For patients with predominant constipation, fiber supplements may lead to softening of stools and reduced straining; however, increased gas production may exacerbate bloating and abdominal discomfort. Consequently, osmotic laxatives, especially milk of magnesia, are commonly used to soften stools and promote increased stool frequency.
# Chunk 8540
Several other agents are available that are specifically intended for the treatment of IBS.

Some agents are promoted as providing relief of abdominal pain or discomfort through antispasmodic actions. However, small or large bowel spasm has not been found to be an important cause of symptoms in patients with IBS. Antispasmodics work primarily through anticholinergic activities. Commonly used medications in this class include dicyclomine and hyoscyamine (see Chapter 8). These drugs inhibit muscarinic cholinergic receptors in the enteric plexus and on smooth muscle. The efficacy of antispasmodics for relief of abdominal symptoms has never been convincingly demonstrated. At low doses, they have minimal autonomic effects.
# Chunk 8541
(“diarrhea-predominant IBS”). Its efficacy in men has not been established. In a dosage of 1 mg once or twice daily, it reduces IBS-related lower abdominal pain, cramps, urgency, and diarrhea. Approximately 50–60% of patients report adequate relief of pain and discomfort with alosetron compared with 30–40% of patients treated with placebo. It also leads to a reduction in the mean number of bowel movements per day and improvement in stool consistency. Alosetron has not been evaluated for the treatment of other causes of diarrhea.
# Chunk 8542
Four agents are available in the USA: ondansetron, granisetron, dolasetron, and palonosetron. (Tropisetron is available outside the USA.) The first three agents (ondansetron, granisetron, and dolasetron, Figure 62–5) have a serum half-life of 4–9 hours and may be administered once daily by oral or intravenous routes. All three drugs have comparable efficacy and tolerability when administered at equipotent doses. Palonosetron is a newer intravenous agent that has greater affinity for the 5-HT3 receptor and a long serum half-life of 40 hours. All four drugs undergo extensive hepatic metabolism and are eliminated by renal and hepatic excretion. However, dose reduction is not required in geriatric patients or patients with renal insufficiency. For patients with hepatic insufficiency, dose reduction may be required with ondansetron.
# Chunk 8543
1.

Chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting—5-HT3receptor antagonists are the primary agents for the prevention of acute chemotherapy-induced nausea and emesis. When used alone, these drugs have little or no efficacy for the prevention of delayed nausea and vomiting (ie, occurring >24 hours after chemotherapy). The drugs are most effective when given as a single dose by intravenous injection 30 minutes prior to administration of chemotherapy in the following doses: ondansetron, 8 mg; granisetron, 1 mg; dolasetron, 100 mg; or palonosetron, 0.25 mg. A single oral dose given 1 hour before chemotherapy may be equally effective in the following regimens: ondansetron 8 mg twice daily or 24 mg once; granisetron, 2 mg; dolasetron, 100 mg. Although 5-HT3-receptor antagonists are effective as single agents for the prevention of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting, their efficacy is enhanced by combination therapy with a corticosteroid (dexamethasone), NK1-receptor antagonist, and a dopamine D2 antagonist (antipsychotics; see below).
# Chunk 8544
The oral bioavailability of aprepitant is 65%, and the serum half-life is 12 hours. Netupitant and rolapitant have longer half-lives (90 and 180 hours, respectively), allowing single-dose administration. All three agents are metabolized by the liver, primarily by the CYP3A4 pathway.
# Chunk 8545
NK1-receptor antagonists are used in combination with 5-HT3receptor antagonists and corticosteroids for the prevention of acute and delayed nausea and vomiting from highly emetogenic chemotherapeutic regimens. Combined therapy with an NK1-receptor antagonist, a 5-HT3-receptor antagonist, and dexamethasone prevents acute emesis in 80–90% of patients compared with less than 70% of patients treated without an NK1 antagonist. Prevention of delayed emesis occurs in more than 70% of patients receiving combined therapy versus 30–50% treated without an NK1 antagonist. Oral NK1-receptor antagonists may be administered as follows: aprepitant 125 mg given 1 hour before chemotherapy, followed by oral aprepitant 80 mg/d for 2 days after chemotherapy; rolapitant 180 mg; or netupitant 300 mg/palonosetron 0.5 mg given as a single dose 1–2 hours before chemotherapy. For patients unable to tolerate oral therapy, intravenous fosaprepitant 115 mg may be given as a single intravenous dose 1 hour before chemotherapy. The addition of the antipsychotic agent olanzapine 10 mg on days 1–4 further decreases the incidence of acute and delayed nausea and vomiting with highly emetogenic chemotherapeutic regimens by 15–30%.
# Chunk 8546
Dronabinol is Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the major psychoactive chemical in marijuana (see Chapter 32). After oral ingestion, the drug is almost completely absorbed but undergoes significant first-pass hepatic metabolism. Its metabolites are excreted slowly over days to weeks in the feces and urine. Like crude marijuana, dronabinol is a psychoactive agent that is used medically as an appetite stimulant and as an antiemetic, but the mechanisms for these effects are not understood. Because of the availability of more effective agents, dronabinol now is uncommonly used for the prevention of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting. Combination therapy with phenothiazines provides synergistic antiemetic action and appears to attenuate the adverse effects of both agents. Dronabinol is usually administered in a dosage of 5 mg/m2 just prior to chemotherapy and every 2–4 hours as needed. Adverse effects include euphoria, dysphoria, sedation, hallucinations, dry mouth, and increased appetite. It has some autonomic effects that may result in tachycardia, conjunctival injection, and orthostatic hypotension. Dronabinol has no significant drug-drug interactions but may potentiate the clinical effects of other psychoactive agents.
# Chunk 8547
The bioavailability of azathioprine (80%) is superior to 6-MP (50%). After absorption, azathioprine is rapidly converted by a nonenzymatic process to 6-MP. 6-Mercaptopurine subsequently undergoes a complex biotransformation via competing catabolic enzymes (xanthine oxidase and thiopurine methyltransferase) that produce inactive metabolites and anabolic pathways that produce active thioguanine nucleotides. Azathioprine and 6-MP have a serum half-life of less than 2 hours; however, the active 6-thioguanine nucleotides are concentrated in cells resulting in a prolonged half-life of days. The prolonged kinetics of 6-thioguanine nucleotide results in a median delay of 17 weeks before onset of therapeutic benefit from oral azathioprine or 6-MP is observed in patients with IBD.
# Chunk 8548
Methotrexate is used to induce and maintain remission in patients with Crohn’s disease. Its efficacy in ulcerative colitis is uncertain. To induce remission, patients are treated with 15–25 mg of methotrexate once weekly by subcutaneous injection. If a satisfactory response is achieved within 8–12 weeks, the dose is reduced to 15 mg/wk.
# Chunk 8549
TABLE 62–3 Anti-TNF antibodies used in inflammatory bowel disease.

TNF, tumor necrosis factor.

Infliximab, adalimumab, and certolizumab are approved for the acute and chronic treatment of patients with moderate to severe Crohn’s disease who have had an inadequate response to conventional therapies. Infliximab, adalimumab, and golimumab are approved for the acute and chronic treatment of moderate to severe ulcerative colitis. With induction therapy, these approved agents lead to symptomatic improvement in 60% and disease remission in 30% of patients with moderate to severe Crohn’s disease, including patients who have been dependent on glucocorticoids or who have not responded to 6-MP or methotrexate. The median time to clinical response is 2 weeks. Induction therapy is generally given as follows: infliximab 5 mg/kg intravenous infusion at 0, 2, and 6 weeks; adalimumab 160 mg (in divided doses) initially and 80 mg subcutaneous injection at 2 weeks; and certolizumab 400 mg subcutaneous injection at 0, 2, and 4 weeks. Patients who respond may be treated with chronic maintenance therapy, as follows: infliximab 5 mg/kg intravenous infusion every 8 weeks; adalimumab 40 mg subcutaneous injection every 2 weeks; certolizumab 400 mg subcutaneous injection every 4 weeks. With chronic, regularly scheduled therapy, clinical response is maintained in more than 60% of patients and disease remission in 40%. However, one-third of patients eventually lose response despite higher doses or more frequent injections. Loss of response in many patients may be due to the development of antibodies to the TNF antibody or to other mechanisms.
# Chunk 8550
Infliximab is approved for the treatment of patients with moderate to severe ulcerative colitis who have had inadequate response to mesalamine or corticosteroids. After induction therapy of 5–10 mg/wk at 0, 2, and 6 weeks, 70% of patients have a clinical response and one third achieve a clinical remission. With continued maintenance infusions every 8 weeks, approximately 50% of patients have continued clinical response. Adalimumab and golimumab also are approved for the treatment of moderate to severe ulcerative colitis but appear to be less effective than intravenous infliximab. After induction therapy, less than 55% of patients have a clinical response and less than 20% achieve remission. The reason why subcutaneous anti-TNF formulations are less effective than intravenous infliximab is uncertain.
# Chunk 8551
A delayed serum sickness-like reaction may occur 1–2 weeks after anti-TNF therapy in 1% of patients. These reactions consist of myalgia, arthralgia, jaw tightness, fever, rash, urticaria, and edema and usually require discontinuation of that agent. Positive antinuclear antibodies and anti-double-stranded DNA develop in a small number of patients. Development of a lupus-like syndrome is rare and resolves after discontinuation of the drug.
# Chunk 8552
Extensive surgical resection or disease of the small intestine may result in short-bowel syndrome with malabsorption of nutrients and fluids. Patients with less than 200 cm of small intestine (with or without colon resection) usually are dependent on partial or complete parenteral nutritional support to maintain hydration and nutrition. Teduglutide is a glucagon-like peptide 2 analog that binds to enteric neurons and endocrine cells, stimulating release of a number of trophic hormones (including insulin-like growth factor) that stimulate mucosal epithelial growth and enhance fluid absorption. In clinical trials, 54% of patients treated with teduglutide (0.05 mg/kg once daily by subcutaneous injection) reduced their need for parenteral support by at least 1 day/ wk compared with 23% treated with placebo. Teduglutide may be associated with an increased risk of neoplasia, including colorectal polyps.
# Chunk 8553
Drugs Used in the Treatment of Gastrointestinal Diseases 1113 or taurine, and excreted in the bile. Conjugated ursodiol undergoes extensive enterohepatic recirculation. The serum half-life is approximately 100 hours. With long-term daily administration, ursodiol constitutes 30–50% of the circulating bile acid pool. A small amount of unabsorbed conjugated or unconjugated ursodiol passes into the colon, where it is either excreted or undergoes dehydroxylation by colonic bacteria to lithocholic acid, a substance with potential hepatic toxicity.
# Chunk 8554
Obeticholic acid is a synthetic derivative of the naturally occurring bile acid chenodeoxycholate. Like ursodiol, it is a nontoxic bile acid and is believed to reduce liver injury by decreasing hepatic concentrations of more toxic endogenous bile acids. It also is a ligand for the nuclear farnesoid X receptor, which modulates hepatic inflammation, fibrosis, gluconeogenesis, lipid synthesis, and insulin sensitivity. Obeticholic acid was recently approved for the treatment of PBC at a dose of 5–10 mg/d orally in combination with ursodiol in patients who have had an inadequate response to ursodiol monotherapy. In a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, 12-month trial, almost 50% of patients treated with combination therapy had a clinical response compared with 10% treated with ursodiol alone. Obeticholic acid causes severe pruritus in up to 25% of patients (especially at the 10 mg dose), leading to discontinuation in up to 10% of patients.
# Chunk 8555
Vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone) is a polypeptide hormone secreted by the hypothalamus and stored in the posterior pituitary. Its pharmacology is discussed in Chapters 17 and 37. Although its primary physiologic role is to maintain serum osmolality, it is also a potent arterial vasoconstrictor. When administered intravenously by continuous infusion, vasopressin causes splanchnic arterial vasoconstriction that leads to reduced splanchnic perfusion and lowered portal venous pressures. Before the advent of octreotide, vasopressin was commonly used to treat acute variceal hemorrhage. However, because of its high adverse-effect profile, it is no longer used for this purpose. In contrast, for patients with acute gastrointestinal bleeding from small bowel or large bowel vascular ectasias or diverticulosis, vasopressin may be infused—to promote vasospasm—into one of the branches of the superior or inferior mesenteric artery through an angiographically placed catheter. Adverse effects with systemic vasopressin are common. Systemic and peripheral vasoconstriction can lead to hypertension, myocardial ischemia or infarction, or mesenteric infarction. These effects may be reduced by coadministration of nitroglycerin, which may further reduce portal venous pressures (by reducing portohepatic vascular resistance) and may also reduce the coronary and peripheral vascular vasospasm caused by vasopressin. Other common adverse effects are nausea, abdominal cramps, and diarrhea (due to intestinal hyperactivity). Furthermore, the antidiuretic effects of vasopressin promote retention of free water, which can lead to hyponatremia, fluid retention, and pulmonary edema.
# Chunk 8556
Chey WD et al: Linaclotide for irritable bowel syndrome with constipation: A 26-week randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial to evaluate efficacy and safety. Am J Gastroenterol 2012;107:1702.
# Chunk 8557
Buchman AL: Teduglutide and short bowel syndrome: Every night without parenteral fluids is a good night. Gastroenterology 2012;143:1416.
# Chunk 8558
The immediate goals of therapy are to improve this young woman’s symptoms of abdominal pain, diarrhea, weight loss, and fatigue. Equally important goals are to reduce the intestinal inflammation in hopes of preventing progression to intestinal stenosis, fistulization, and need for surgery. One option now is to step up her therapy by giving her a slow, tapering course of systemic corticosteroids (eg, prednisone) for 8–12 weeks in order to quickly bring her symptoms and inflammation under control while also initiating therapy with an immunomodulator (eg, azathioprine or mercap-topurine) in hopes of achieving long-term disease remis-sion. If satisfactory disease control is not achieved within 3–6 months, therapy with an anti-TNF agent would then be recommended. Alternatively, patients with moderate-to-severe Crohn’s disease who have failed mesalamine may be treated upfront with both an anti-TNF agent and immu-nomodulators, which achieves higher remission rates than either agent alone and may improve long-term outcomes.
# Chunk 8559
Her social history is significant for alcohol use (three to four glasses of wine/night). Her vital signs include the following: temperature 99.8°F, blood pressure 132/64 mm Hg, pulse 78 bpm, and respiratory rate 15/min. On physical examination, she had left upper abdominal tenderness with evidence of hepatomegaly and mild scleral icterus. Laboratory data revealed the following: alanine aminotransferase, 527 IU/L (normal 10–35 IU/L); aspartate aminotransferase, 425 IU/L (normal < 35 IU/L); and bilirubin, 2.9 mg/dL (normal 0.1–0.3 mg/dL). What medications do OTC cold and flu preparations typically contain? Which of the OTC medications might have contrib-uted to the patient’s current symptoms? KH, a 55-year-old woman, presents to the emergency department with nausea, vomiting, and complaints of new-onset flu symptoms over the past several days. Her past medical history is significant for allergic rhinitis and chronic lower back pain secondary to a work-related fall 2 years ago. Her current medications include Norco 5/325 (hydrocodone 5 mg/ acetaminophen 325 mg per tablet; two tablets four times daily for pain) and loratadine (10 mg daily). The patient also reported recent use of several over-the-counter (OTC) medications over the past 3 days to treat the new-onset flu symptoms, including Alka-Seltzer Plus Severe Cold + Flu (two tablets every 4 hours during the day) and Tylenol PM (two tablets at bedtime).
# Chunk 8560
Since 1972, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has been engaged in a methodical review of OTC ingredients for both safety and efficacy. There have been two major outcomes of this review: (1) Ingredients designated as ineffective or unsafe for their claimed therapeutic use are being eliminated from OTC product formulations (eg, antimuscarinic agents have been eliminated from OTC sleep aids; attapulgite and polycarbophil can no longer be marketed as OTC antidiarrheal products); and (2) agents previously available by prescription only have been made available for OTC use because they were judged by the review panel to be generally safe and effective for consumer use without medical supervision (Table 63–1). The prescription-to-OTC switch process has significantly enhanced and expanded self-care options for US consumers. More than 100 OTC active ingredients or dosages are on the market today that were previously available only by prescription. Other OTC ingredients previously available in low doses only are now available in original prescription strength formulations (eg, ranitidine 150 mg, famotidine 20 mg). Examples of other prescription medications with the potential for future OTC reclassification include oral contraceptives, nicotine replacement therapy (oral inhaler, nasal spray) for smoking cessation, proton-pump inhibitors (pantoprazole) for heartburn, and second-generation nonsedating antihistamines (desloratadine) for relief of allergy and cold symptoms. The prescription-to-OTC reclassification process is both costly and rigorous, and only select prescription medications are appropriate candidates for a switch (eg, a consumer can self-diagnose and safely treat the condition). For example, the cholesterol-lowering agents lovastatin and pravastatin were denied OTC status on the basis that these agents could not be used safely and effectively in an OTC setting. The nonprescription drug advisory committee believed that diagnosis and ongoing management by a health care professional was necessary for the management of hyperlipidemia, a chronic, asymptomatic condition with potentially life-threatening consequences. In a similar recommendation, oral acyclovir for OTC use in the treatment of recurrent genital herpes was not approved because of concerns about misdiagnosis and inappropriate use leading to increased viral resistance.
# Chunk 8561
Avoid use: in children <12 years of age; if patient has trouble or pain swallowing food, vomiting with blood, or bloody or black stools; with other acid reducers; if symptoms include heartburn with lightheadedness, sweating, dizziness, or chest pain; for treatment durations >14 days.
# Chunk 8562
Adverse effects include: headache, abdominal pain, nausea, diarrhea, and flatulence.

Avoid use: in children <2 years of age; in combination with other sedatives and alcohol as sedative effects may be potentiated. Use caution when driving or operating machinery.
# Chunk 8563
Adverse effects include: erythema, irritation, itching, and burning.

For vaginal use only. Avoid use: in children <12 years of age; if patient has lower abdominal, back, or shoulder pain, or fever, chills, nausea, vomiting, or foul-smelling vaginal discharge; in combination with tampons, douches, spermicides, or other vaginal products.
# Chunk 8564
Overuse or misuse of OTC products may cause significant medical problems. A prime example is rhinitis medicamentosa or “rebound rhinitis,” a condition that manifests as nasal congestion without rhinorrhea, associated with the regular use of topical decongestant nasal sprays for more than 3 days. The improper and long-term use of some antacids (eg, aluminum hydroxide) may cause constipation and even impaction in the elderly, as well as hypophosphatemia. Long-term laxative use can result in abdominal cramping and fluid and electrolyte disturbances. A condition known as laxative abuse syndrome is often observed in women with anorexia nervosa. Insomnia, nervousness, and restlessness can result from the use of sympathomimetics or caffeine present in many OTC products (Table 63–3). The long-term use of analgesics containing caffeine may trigger rebound headaches upon discontinuation. OTC products containing aspirin, other salicylates, acetaminophen, ibuprofen, or naproxen may increase the risk of hepatotoxicity and gastrointestinal hemorrhage in individuals who consume three or more alcoholic drinks daily, and long-term use of these products has been associated with interstitial nephritis. Acute ingestion of large amounts of
# Chunk 8565
Finally, use of OTC cough and cold preparations in the pediatric population has been under scrutiny by the FDA based on a lack of efficacy data in children less than 12 years of age and reports of serious toxicity in children. Following a thorough review, the FDA recommends that OTC cough and cold agents (eg, products containing antitussives, expectorants, decongestants, and antihistamines) not be used in infants and children younger than 2 years old due to serious and potentially life-threatening adverse events associated with accidental overdose including arrhythmias, hallucinations, and encephalopathy. Drug information sources for OTC products include the Handbook of Nonprescription Drugs, the most comprehensive resource for OTC medications. It evaluates ingredients contained in major OTC drug classes and lists the ingredients included in many OTC products. Facts and Comparisons eAnswers is an online reference that is updated monthly; it provides detailed OTC product information and patient counseling instructions. Any health care provider who seeks more specific information regarding OTC products may find useful the references listed below.
# Chunk 8566
Combination OTC “cold and flu” medications typically contain analgesics (eg, acetaminophen, aspirin), antihistamines (eg, chlorpheniramine, diphenhydramine), antitussives (eg, dextromethorphan), expectorants (eg, guaifenesin), and nasal decongestants (eg, phenylephrine, pseudoephedrine). KH’s chronic prescription medications include a narcotic analgesic combination product that provides 2600 mg of acetamino-phen and 40 mg of hydrocodone. Over the past few days, KH has added two different OTC acetaminophen-containing products including Alka-Seltzer Plus Severe Cold + Flu (650 mg acetaminophen/2 tablets) every 4 hours and Tylenol PM (1000 mg acetaminophen/2 tablets) at bedtime. The clini-cian should obtain a detailed medication history to determine the actual total dose of acetaminophen consumed, but it is likely that KH has ingested more than 6 g of acetaminophen daily over the past 72 hours. This cumulative dosage, coupled with KH’s chronic ethanol consumption (three to four glasses of wine daily), significantly potentiates the risk for acet-aminophen hepatotoxicity. In the USA, unintentional acet-aminophen overdose is a leading cause of acute liver failure. The warnings section on all OTC acetaminophen-containing products clearly state that severe liver damage may occur when consumers: (1) take dosages >4000 mg in 24 hours; (2) use acetaminophen in combination with other drugs containing acetaminophen; or (3) take acetaminophen and drink three or more alcoholic beverages daily. Unfortunately, many consum-ers do not carefully read OTC medication labels, and many do not appreciate the amount of acetaminophen “hidden” in combination prescription and OTC products.
# Chunk 8567
Cathi E. Dennehy, PharmD, & Candy Tsourounis, PharmD

A 53-year-old woman with a history of knee osteoarthritis, high cholesterol, type 2 diabetes, and hypertension presents with new onset of hot flashes and a question about a dietary supplement. She is obese (body mass index [BMI] 33), does not exercise, and spends a good portion of her work day in a seated position. She eats a low-sugar diet and regularly eats packaged frozen meals for dinner because she doesn’t have time to cook regularly. Her most recent laboratory values include a low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol that is above goal at 160 mg/dL (goal < 100 mg/dL) and a hemo-globin A1c that is well controlled at 6%. Her blood pressure is high at 160/100 mm Hg. Her prescription medications include simvastatin, metformin, and benazepril. She also takes over-the-counter ibuprofen for occasional knee pain and a multivitamin supplement once daily. She has heard good things about natural products and asks you if taking a garlic supplement daily could help to bring her blood pres-sure and cholesterol under control. She’s also very interested in St. John’s wort after a friend told her that it helped allevi-ate her hot flashes and could also help improve mood. How should you advise her? Are there any supplements that could increase bleeding risk if taken with ibuprofen?
# Chunk 8568
The medical use of plants in their natural and unprocessed form undoubtedly began when the first intelligent animals noticed that certain food plants altered particular body functions. While there is a great deal of historical information about the use of plant-based supplements, there is also much unreliable information as a result of unknown or poor-quality natural product formulations, poorly designed clinical studies that do not account for randomization errors, confounders, and—most importantly—a placebo effect that can contribute 30–50% of the observed response. Since the literature surrounding dietary supplements is evolving, reputable evidence-based resources should be used to evaluate claims and guide treatment decisions. An unbiased and regularly updated compendium of basic and clinical information regarding botanicals is Natural Medicines by Therapeutic Research Center (see References), which includes content review by an international, * The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recognizes “herbal medication” and “botanical medication” as “dietary supplements.” For the purposes of this chapter, they are identical.
# Chunk 8569
In 1994, the US Congress, influenced by growing “consumerism” as well as strong manufacturer lobbying efforts, passed the DSHEA. The DSHEA required the establishment of Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) standards for the supplement industry; however, it was not until 2007 that the FDA issued a final rule on the proposed GMP standards. This 13-year delay allowed supplement manufacturers to self-regulate the manufacturing process and resulted in many instances of adulteration, misbranding, and contamination. For example, a study using DNA barcoding to confirm botanical content evaluated 44 botanicals containing 30 plant species and found product substitutions in 32% of samples (see Newmaster reference). Therefore, much of the criticism regarding the dietary supplement industry involves problems with botanical misidentification, a lack of product purity, and variations in potency and purification, which continue to be problematic even with GMP standards in place. When the new GMP standards are met, dietary supplement manufacturers should be in compliance with this legislation. However, the FDA has limited resources to investigate and oversee compliance with manufacturing standards, particularly since many ingredient suppliers are based overseas. Furthermore, the dietary supplement ingredient supply chain is complex, and federal regulators are not able to inspect all manufacturing facilities in a timely and efficient manner. Finally, the financial incentive to maximize sales ($32 billion in supplement sales in the USA in 2012) is very great, regardless of lack of evidence of product safety or efficacy.
# Chunk 8570
A separate meta-analysis involving 14 randomized, placebo-controlled trials of echinacea for cold treatment or prevention was published in Lancet. In this review, echinacea decreased the risk of developing clear signs and symptoms of a cold by 58% and decreased symptom duration by 1.25 days. This review, however, was confounded by the inclusion of four clinical trials involving multi-ingredient echinacea preparations, as well as three studies using rhinovirus inoculation versus natural cold development.
# Chunk 8571
3.

Antimicrobial effects—The antimicrobial effect of garlic has not been extensively studied in clinical trials. Allicin has been reported to have in vitro activity against some gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria as well as fungi (Candida albicans), protozoa (Entamoeba histolytica), and certain viruses. The primary mechanism involves the inhibition of thiol-containing enzymes needed by these microbes. A Cochrane review studying the effect of garlic on cold prevention and treatment found a significant reduction in total number of colds using a garlic supplement (with 180 mg allicin content) once daily for 12 weeks. Limited conclusions can be drawn regarding the effects observed, however, because only one trial met inclusion criteria. Given the availability of safe and effective prescription antimicrobials, the usefulness of garlic in this area appears limited.
# Chunk 8572
Dried, powdered garlic products should be standardized to contain 1.3% alliin (the allicin precursor) or have an allicingenerating potential of 0.6%. Enteric-coated formulations are recommended to minimize degradation of the active substances. A daily dose of 600–900 mg/d of powdered garlic is most common. This is equivalent to one clove of raw garlic (2–4 g) per day. A garlic bulb can contain up to 1.8% alliin. Doses of AGE most often range from 600 to 1800 mg/d, but doses up to 7200 mg daily have been safely used in clinical trials for up to 6 months.
# Chunk 8573
Ginkgo has been used to treat cerebral insufficiency and dementia of the Alzheimer type. The term cerebral insufficiency, however, includes a variety of manifestations ranging from poor concentration and confusion to anxiety and depression as well as physical complaints such as hearing loss and headache. For this reason, studies evaluating cerebral insufficiency tend to be more inclusive and difficult to assess than trials evaluating dementia. A meta-analysis of ginkgo for cognitive impairment or dementia was performed by the Cochrane Collaboration. They reviewed 36 randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials ranging in length from 3 to 52 weeks. Significant improvements in cognition and activities of daily living were observed at 12 but not 24 weeks. Significant improvements in clinical global assessment however, were observed at 24 but not 12 weeks. The authors concluded that the effects of ginkgo in the treatment of cognitive impairment and dementia were unpredictable and unlikely to be clinically relevant. However, recent meta-analyses of randomized controlled trials, 22–26 weeks in duration, using EGb761 that limited inclusion criteria to patients with dementia of the Alzheimer type (in eight studies), vascular or mixed dementia type (in six studies), or dementia with neuropsychiatric features (in four studies) showed favorable results. Significant improvements in cognition and activities of daily living were observed for ginkgo compared to placebo. Clinical global assessment of improvement also was significantly improved when EGb761 doses of 240 mg/d were used, but not doses of 120 mg/d. Because of the stricter inclusion criteria used, the overall methodologic quality of the studies was higher than that of the Cochrane review, when determining a benefit in patients with dementia. This suggests that patients with a diagnosis of dementia are more likely to benefit than patients with more mild cognitive impairment. In the GEM and GuidAge studies that included persons with normal or mild cognitive impairment, the effects of ginkgo as a prophylactic agent to prevent progression to dementia were assessed. No benefit was observed with 5–6 years of ginkgo treatment.
# Chunk 8574
Ginseng is most often claimed to help improve physical and mental performance or to function as an “adaptogen,” an agent that helps the body to return to normal when exposed to stressful or noxious stimuli. However, the clinical trials evaluating ginseng for these indications have shown few, if any, benefits. Some randomized controlled trials evaluating “quality of life” and “cognition” have claimed significant benefits in some subscale measures of behavior, cognitive function, or quality of life but rarely in overall composite scores using P ginseng. Better results have been observed with P quinquefolium and P ginseng in lowering postprandial glucose indices in subjects with and without diabetes. This was the subject of a systematic review in which 15 studies (13 randomized and 2 nonrandomized) were evaluated. Nine of the studies reported significant reductions in blood glucose. Some randomized, placebo-controlled trials have reported immunomodulating benefits of P quinquefolium and P ginseng in preventing upper respiratory tract infections. Use of ginseng for 2–4 months in healthy seniors may reduce the risk of acquiring the common cold as well as the duration of symptoms. Because of heterogeneity in these trials, however, the findings are insufficient to warrant a recommendation of ginseng for cold prevention. To assess effects on cardiovascular health, a systematic review and meta-analysis of 17 randomized controlled trials involving predominantly P ginseng (12 studies) and P quinquefolium (5 studies) species in persons with and without hypertension was performed. Over a mean time period of 9 weeks, no significant effect was observed of ginseng on SBP, DBP, and mean arterial pressure compared with controls. Finally, two case-control studies and a cohort study suggest a non-organ-specific cancer-preventive effect with longterm administration of P ginseng. Significant benefits in some cancer-related fatigue symptoms have been observed in both a dose-finding study and a multisite, double-blind, randomized trial using P quinquefolium, 2 g daily, versus placebo over a 2-month period. In summary, the strongest support for use of P ginseng or P quinquefolium currently relates to its effects in cold prevention, lowering postprandial glucose, nonspecific cancer prevention, and alleviating cancer-related fatigue.
# Chunk 8575
Oral milk thistle has been used to treat acute and chronic viral hepatitis, alcoholic liver disease, and toxin-induced liver injury in human patients. A systematic review of 13 randomized trials involving 915 patients with alcoholic liver disease or hepatitis B or C found no significant reductions in all-cause mortality, liver histopathology, or complications of liver disease with 6 months of use. A significant reduction in liver-related mortality was claimed using the data from all the surveyed trials, but not when the data were limited to trials of better design and controls. It was concluded that the effects of oral milk thistle in improving liver function or mortality from liver disease are currently poorly substantiated. A recent multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial in patients with hepatitis C refractory to interferon treatment failed to show a benefit with 24 weeks of milk thistle, 420 mg/d and 700 mg/d, on reduction of serum alanine aminotransferase levels. Milk thistle also had no effect on mean serum hepatitis C virus (HCV) RNA levels at 24 weeks. In contrast, the intravenous use of silybinin succinate has shown some benefit in reducing HCV RNA levels and alanine aminotransferase levels in patients with treatment-resistant hepatitis C infection. Prospective pilot studies have also shown benefits with intravenous silybinin before and after liver transplantation treatment in patients with HCV cirrhosis. Potent antiviral activity was demonstrated with significant reductions in HCV-RNA levels during treatment compared to placebo or nontreated controls when given for at least 14 days before transplantation and 7 days after liver transplantation. HCV-RNA relapsed, however, after silibinin withdrawal. This suggests that formulation and poor oral bioavailability may influence treatment outcomes.
# Chunk 8576
The clinical pharmacology of saw palmetto in humans is not well defined. One week of treatment in healthy volunteers failed to influence 5α-reductase activity, DHT concentration, or testosterone concentration. Six months of treatment in patients with BPH also failed to affect prostate-specific antigen (PSA) levels, a marker that is typically reduced by enzymatic inhibition of 5α-reductase. In contrast, other researchers have reported a reduction in epidermal growth factor, DHT levels, and antagonist activity at the nuclear estrogen receptor in the prostate after 3 months of treatment with saw palmetto in patients with BPH. Recent reports suggest that daily saw palmetto, as compared to daily tamsulosin (see Chapter 10), has greater anti-inflammatory activity on infiltrating prostatic cells in men with BPH-related lower urinary tract symptoms at 3 months. The anti-inflammatory effects on infiltrating prostatic cells may serve as a link between hormonal changes and the remodeling process promoted by growth factors. The anti-inflammatory effects of saw palmetto also raise questions as to the value of early initiation of BPH therapy as well as the value of early combination therapy with 5α-reductase inhibitors (see Chapter 40).
# Chunk 8577
Melatonin drug interactions have not been formally studied. Various studies, however, suggest that melatonin concentrations are altered by a variety of drugs, including nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, antidepressants, β-adrenoceptor agonists and antagonists, scopolamine, and sodium valproate. The relevance of these effects is unknown. Melatonin is metabolized by CYP450 1A2 and may interact with other drugs that either inhibit or induce the 1A2 isoenzyme, including fluvoxamine. Melatonin may decrease prothrombin time and may theoretically decrease the effects of warfarin therapy. A dose-response relationship between the plasma concentration of melatonin and coagulation activity has been suggested according to one in vitro analysis. If combination therapy is desired, careful monitoring is recommended especially if melatonin is being used on a short-term basis. Melatonin may interact with nifedipine, possibly leading to increased blood pressure and heart rate. The exact mechanism is unknown.
# Chunk 8578
Garlic has shown significant benefits in lowering total choles-terol, LDL, and systolic and diastolic blood pressure, but the effects are moderate and unlikely to be large enough to lower this patient’s values into the normal range. While this patient’s diabetes is under control, her hypertension places her at risk for microvascular complications of diabetes, thus making it necessary to reevaluate her current medication adherence, doses of benazepril for hypertension and simvastatin for hyper-lipidemia, and duration of therapy. She would benefit from meeting with a nutritionist because packaged frozen dinners can be high in sodium, and this may be elevating her blood pressure. Adding exercise to her weekly routine could also help with weight control and overall cardiovascular health. The data supporting benefits of St. John’s wort in patients with hot flashes are preliminary but show promise. Good data support use of the herb to alleviate symptoms of mild to moderate depression when used for up to 1 year. However, this patient is not a good candidate for St. John’s wort (a cytochrome P450 1A2, 2C9, 3A4 inducer) because of her prescription drug use and the potential for herb-drug interactions. Several dietary supplements reviewed in this chapter (garlic, ginkgo, and gin-seng) may have antiplatelet effects that could be additive with ibuprofen. If this patient were also taking warfarin, additional interactions could occur with coenzyme Q10 (vitamin K-like structure), St. John’s wort, and melatonin (in vitro decreased prothrombin time), leading to a decreased warfarin effect, or with glucosamine (increased international normalized ratio), leading to an increased warfarin effect.
# Chunk 8579
5.

Determine the appropriate dosing regimen: The dosing regimen is determined primarily by the pharmacokinetics of the drug in that patient. If the patient is known to have disease of the organs required for elimination of the drug selected, adjustment of the average regimen is needed. For a drug such as ibuprofen, which is eliminated mainly by the kidneys, renal function should be assessed. If renal function is normal, the half-life of ibuprofen (about 2 hours) requires administration three or four times daily. The dose suggested in this book, drug handbooks, and the manufacturer’s literature is 400–800 mg four times daily.
# Chunk 8580
Generic drug dispensing represents 10% of the total US drug expense but 90% of the drugs dispensed. Prescribing by generic name offers the pharmacist flexibility in selecting the particular drug product to fill the order and offers the patient a potential savings when there is price competition. For example, the brand name of a popular sedative is Valium. The generic (public non-proprietary) name of the same chemical substance adopted by United States Adopted Names (USAN) and approved by the FDA is diazepam. All diazepam drug products in the USA meet the pharmaceutical standards expressed in the United States Pharmacopeia (USP). However, there are several manufacturers, and prices vary. For drugs in common use, the difference in cost between the trade-named product and generic products varies from less than twofold to more than 100-fold. For drugs with a limited market (eg, pyrimethamine, Epi-Pen), the incentive for generic manufacturing and marketing is very low, so only one or two generics (or none) may be available, and price competition is low or absent.
# Chunk 8581
In an effort to codify bioequivalence information, the FDA publishes Approved Drug Products with Therapeutic Equivalence Evaluations, with monthly supplements, commonly called “the Orange Book.” The book contains listings of multisource products in one of two categories: Products given a code beginning with the letter “A” are considered bioequivalent to a reference standard formulation of the same drug and to all other versions of that product with a similar “A” coding. Products not considered bioequivalent are coded “B.” Of the approximately 8000 products currently listed, 90% are coded “A.” Additional code letters and numerals are appended to the initial “A” or “B” and indicate the approved route of administration and other variables.
# Chunk 8582
Pralatrexate: [P] Decreased renal pralatrexate excretion; possible pralatrexate toxicity. Penicillin: [P] Decreased renal penicillin excretion. Salicylates: [P] Decreased uricosuric effect of probenecid (interaction unlikely with less than 1.5 g of salicylate daily). Acetazolamide: [P] Decreased renal quinidine excretion due to increased urinary pH; elevated serum quinidine. Amiodarone: [NP] Increased serum quinidine levels; additive prolongation of QTc interval. Antivirals: [P] Amprenavir, atazanavir, boceprevir, darunavir, delavirdine, fosamprenavir, indinavir, nelfinavir, ritonavir, saquinavir, simeprevir, and telaprevir inhibit the metabolism of quinidine. Boceprevir: [P] Decreased metabolism of quinidine. Cobicistat: [P] Decreased metabolism of quinidine. Conivaptan: [P] Decreased metabolism of quinidine. Kaolin-pectin: [NE] Decreased gastrointestinal absorption of quinidine. Kinase inhibitors: [P] Decreased metabolism of quinidine with ceritinib, dasatinib, imatinib, idelalisib, and lapatinib. Rifampin: [P] Increased quinidine metabolism. Thioridazine: [NE] Decreased thioridazine metabolism; additive prolongation of QTc interval.
# Chunk 8583
The metabolism of drugs can be induced or inhibited by concurrent therapy, and the importance of the effect varies from negligible to dramatic. Drug metabolism primarily occurs in the liver and the wall of the small intestine, but other sites include plasma, lung, and kidney. Induction of cytochrome P450 isozymes in the liver and small intestine can be caused by drugs such as barbiturates, bosentan, carbamazepine, efavirenz, nevirapine, phenytoin, primidone, rifampin, rifabutin, and St. John’s wort. Enzyme inducers can also increase the activity of phase II metabolism such as glucuronidation. Enzyme induction does not take place quickly; maximal effects usually occur after 7–14 days and require an equal or longer time to dissipate after the enzyme inducer is stopped. Inhibition of metabolism generally takes place more quickly than enzyme induction and may begin as soon as the tissue concentration of the inhibitor is sufficient to cause reduced enzyme activity. However, if the half-life of the affected (object) drug is long, it may take a week or more (3–4 half-lives) to reach a new steady-state serum concentration. Drugs that may inhibit the cytochrome P450 metabolism of other drugs include amiodarone, androgens, atazanavir, chloramphenicol, cimetidine, ciprofloxacin, clarithromycin, cyclosporine, delavirdine, diltiazem, diphenhydramine, disulfiram, enoxacin, erythromycin, fluconazole, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, furanocoumarins (substances in grapefruit juice), indinavir, isoniazid, itraconazole, ketoconazole, metronidazole, mexiletine, miconazole, omeprazole, paroxetine, quinidine, ritonavir, sulfamethizole, sulfamethoxazole, verapamil, voriconazole, zafirlukast, and zileuton.
# Chunk 8584
3.

Yearly with 1. All adults >18 years current vaccine 2. All children aged 6 months to 18 years Influenza, live Live virus Intranasal Split dose in each nostril. Children Yearly with Healthy persons aged 19–49 years who desire protection against attenuated age 5–8 who are receiving influ-current vaccine influenza. May be substituted for inactivated vaccine in healthy enza vaccine for the first time children 2–18 years except (1) asthmatics, and (2) those aged should receive two doses 2–4 years with wheezing in the past year administered 6–10 weeks apart
# Chunk 8585
Meningococcal Bacterial Intramuscular One dose Every 5 years if 1. All adolescents conjugate polysaccharides there is continu-2. Preferred over polysaccharide vaccine in persons aged 11–55 years vaccine conjugated to ing high risk of 3. College freshman aged <22 years who live in dormitories 4.
# Chunk 8586
Rabies Inactivated virus Intramuscular Preexposure: Three doses at days Serologic testing 0, 7, and 21 or 28 every 6 months to 2 years in per-
# Chunk 8587
TABLE A–2 Recommended routine childhood immunization schedule.

1Three Hib conjugate vaccines are available for use: (1) oligosaccharide conjugate Hib vaccine (HbOC), (2) polyribosylribitol phosphate-tetanus toxoid conjugate (PRP-T), and (3) Haemophilus influenzae type b conjugate vaccine (meningococcal protein conjugate) (PRP-OMP). Children immunized with PRP-OMP at 2 and 4 months of age do not require a dose at 6 months of age. PRP-T should only be used for the booster dose in children aged 12–15 months.
# Chunk 8588
Antibodies derived from human serum not only avoid the risk of hypersensitivity reactions but also have a much longer half-life in humans (about 23 days for IgG antibodies) than those from animal sources (5–7 days or less). Consequently, much smaller doses of human antibody can be administered to provide therapeutic concentrations for several weeks. These advantages point to the desirability of using human antibodies for passive protection
# Chunk 8589
Postexposure: 0.02 mL/kg IM as soon as possible after exposure up to 2 weeks.

Hepatitis B Hepatitis B immune 0.06 mL/kg IM as soon as possible after globulin (HBIG) exposure up to 1 week for percutaneous exposure or 2 weeks for sexual exposure. 0.5 mL IM within 12 hours after birth for perinatal exposure.
# Chunk 8590
Kawasaki Immune globulin (IV)2 400 mg/kg IV daily for 4 consecutive Effective in the prevention of coronary aneurysms. disease days within 4 days after the onset of For use in patients who meet strict criteria for illness. A single dose of 2 g/kg IV over Kawasaki disease. 10 hours is also effective.
# Chunk 8591
As described later, Na+ is a major constituent of the ECF. Because of its high concentration in comparison with other molecules and ions, Na+ (and its attendant anions, primarily Cl− and HCO3 −) is the major determinant of the osmolality of this compartment. Accordingly, it is possible to obtain an approximate estimate of the ECF osmolality by simply doubling the sodium concentration [Na+]. For example, if a blood sample is obtained from an individual, and the [Na+] of the serum is 145 mEq/L, its osmolality can be estimated as follows:
# Chunk 8592
Example 1: Addition of Isotonic Sodium Chloride to the Extracellular Fluid

Addition of an isotonic NaCl solution (e.g., intravenous infusion of 0.9% NaCl: osmolality ≈ 290 mOsm/kg H2O) bSome exceptions do exist. The cerebrospinal fluid is part of the ECF, but its osmolality is slightly higher than that of the ECF elsewhere in the body. Also, regions within the kidney can have osmolalities that are either less than or greater than that of the ECF. However, these volumes are small (≈150 mL) in comparison with the total volume of the ECF (≥12 L). cSerum is derived from clotted blood. Thus serum differs from plasma by the absence of clotting factors. With regard to osmolality and the concentrations of other molecules and ions, the osmolality and concentrations in plasma and serum are virtually identical. dFluids are usually administered intravenously. When electrolyte solutions are infused by this route, equilibration between plasma and interstitial fluid is rapid (i.e., minutes) because of the high permeability of many capillary walls for water and electrolytes. Thus these fluids are essentially added to the entire ECF. eA 0.9% NaCl solution (0.9 g NaCl/100 mL) contains 154 mmol/L of NaCl. Because NaCl does not dissociate completely in solution (i.e., 1.88 Osm/mol), the osmolality of this solution is 290 mOsm/kg H2O, which is very similar to that of normal ECF.
# Chunk 8593
Several types of axonal transport exist. Membrane-bound organelles and mitochondria are transported relatively rapidly by fast axonal transport. Substances that are dissolved in cytoplasm (e.g., proteins) are moved by slow axonal transport. In mammals, fast axonal transport proceeds as rapidly as 400 mm/day, whereas slow axonal transport occurs at about 1 mm/day. Synaptic vesicles, which travel by fast axonal transport, can travel from the soma of a motor neuron in the spinal cord to a neuromuscular junction in a person’s foot in about 2.5 days. In comparison the movement of some soluble proteins over the same distance can take nearly 3 years.
# Chunk 8594
Motor Deficits Caused by Lesions of Descending Motor Pathways

A common cause of motor impairment in humans is interruption of the cerebral cortical efferent fibers in the internal capsule; such interruptions occur in capsular strokes. The resulting disorder is often termed a pyramidal tract syndrome, or upper motor neuron disease, although these names are misnomers. Motor changes characteristic of this disorder include (1) increased phasic and tonic stretch reflexes (spasticity); (2) weakness, usually of the distal muscles, especially the finger muscles; (3) pathological reflexes, including the sign of Babinski (dorsiflexion of the big toe and fanning of the other toes when the sole of the foot is stroked); and (4) a reduction in superficial reflexes, such as the abdominal and cremasteric reflexes. Of importance is that if only the corticospinal tract is interrupted, as can occur with a lesion of the medullary pyramid, most of these signs are much reduced or absent. In this situation, the most prominent deficits are weakness of the distal muscles, especially those of the fingers, and a Babinski sign. Spasticity does not occur; instead, muscle tone may actually decrease. Evidently, the presence of spasticity requires the disordered function of other pathways, such as the reticulospinal tracts, as would occur after loss of the descending cortical influence to the brainstem nuclei of origin of these tracts.
# Chunk 8595
Fig.

10.5 , bottom trace). Because of the similarity of the EEG to that of an awake individual and the difficulty awaking the person, the term paradoxical sleep characterizes this type of sleep. Muscle tone is completely lost, but phasic contractions occur in a number of muscles, most notably the eye muscles. The resulting rapid eye movements are basis of the name for this type of sleep. Many autonomic changes also take place. Temperature regulation is lost, and meiosis occurs. Penile erection may occur during this type of sleep. Heart rate, blood pressure, and respiration change intermittently. Several episodes of REM sleep occur each night. Although it is difficult to arouse a person from REM sleep, internal arousal is common. Most dreaming occurs during REM sleep.
# Chunk 8596
However, under most conditions, the two parts of the autonomic control system work in a coordinated manner—sometimes acting reciprocally and sometimes synergistically—to regulate visceral function. Furthermore, not all visceral structures are innervated by both systems. For example, the smooth muscles and glands in the skin and most of the blood vessels in the body receive sympathetic innervation exclusively; only a small fraction of the blood vessels have parasympathetic innervation. Indeed, the parasympathetic nervous system innervates not the body wall but only structures in the head and in the thoracic, abdominal, and pelvic cavities.
# Chunk 8597
Other parasympathetic postganglionic neurons are located near or in the walls of visceral organs in the thoracic, abdominal, and pelvic cavities. Neurons of the enteric plexus include cells that can also be considered parasympathetic postganglionic neurons. All of these cells receive input from the vagus or pelvic nerves. The vagus nerves innervate the heart, lungs, bronchi, liver, pancreas, and gastrointestinal tract from the esophagus to the splenic flexure of the colon. The remainder of the colon and rectum, as well as the urinary bladder and reproductive organs, is supplied by sacral parasympathetic preganglionic neurons that travel through the pelvic nerves to postganglionic neurons in the pelvic ganglia.
# Chunk 8598
The conversion of chemical energy (i.e., ATP) to mechanical energy by muscle is highly efficient. In isolated muscle preparations, maximum mechanical efficiency (≈65% efficiency) is obtained at a submaximal force of 30% maximal tension. In humans performing steady-state ergometer exercise, mechanical efficiencies range from 40% to 57%.
# Chunk 8599
Testosterone is a major factor responsible for the greater Denervation, Reinnervation,  muscle mass in men because it has both myotrophic action ). A variety of synthetic molecules, called anabolic steroids, As already noted, innervation is crucial for the skeletal have been designed to enhance muscle growth while mini-muscle phenotype. If the motor nerve is cut, muscle fasmizing their androgenic action. These drugs are widely used ciculation occurs. Fasciculation is characterized by small, by bodybuilders and athletes in sports in which strength is irregular contractions caused by release of acetylcholine from important. The doses are typically 10-to 50-fold greater the terminals of the degenerating distal portion of the axon. than might be prescribed therapeutically for individuals Several days after denervation, muscle fibrillation begins. with impaired hormone production. Unfortunately, none Fibrillation is characterized by spontaneous, repetitive of these compounds lack androgenic effects. Hence, at the contractions. At this time, the cholinergic receptors have doses used, they induce serious hormone disturbances, spread out over the entire cell membrane, in effect reverting including depression of testosterone production. A major to their preinnervation embryonic arrangement. The muscle issue is whether these drugs do in fact increase muscle and fibrillations reflect supersensitivity to acetylcholine. Affected athletic performance in individuals with normal circulating muscles also atrophy, with a decrease in the size of the levels of testosterone. Although they have been used since muscle and its cells. Atrophy is progressive in humans, with the 1950s, the scientific facts remain uncertain, and most degeneration of some cells 3 or 4 months after denervation. experimental studies in animals have not demonstrated Most of the muscle fibers are replaced by fat and connective any significant effects on muscle development. Reports of tissue after 1 to 2 years. These changes can be reversed if studies in humans remain controversial. Proponents claim reinnervation occurs within a few months. Reinnervation increases in strength that provide advantages in world-class is normally achieved by growth of the peripheral stump of performance. Critics argue that these increases are largely motor nerve axons along the old nerve sheath. placebo effects associated with expectations and motivational Reinnervation of formerly fast (type II) fibers by a small factors. The public debate on abuse of anabolic steroids has motor axon causes that cell to redifferentiate into a slow led to their designation as controlled substances, along with (type I) fiber, and vice versa. This suggests that large and opiates, amphetamines, and barbiturates. small motor nerves differ qualitatively and that the nerves have a specific “trophic” effect on the muscle fibers. This “trophic” effect reflects the rate of fiber stimulation. For example, stimulation via electrodes implanted in the muscle can lessen denervation atrophy. More strikingly, chronic low-frequency stimulation of fast motor units causes these units to be converted to slow units. Some conversion toward a typical fast-fiber phenotype can occur when the frequency of contraction in slow units is greatly decreased by reducing the excitatory input. Excitatory input can be reduced by sectioning the appropriate spinal or dorsal root or by severing the tendon, which functionally inactivates peripheral mechanoreceptors.
# Chunk 8600
Blood and extracellular fluids typically contain 1 to 2 mmol/L of free Ca++ , and it has been known since the days of the physiologist Sidney Ringer (ca. 1882) that the heart requires extracellular Ca++ to contract. Thus an isolated heart typically continues to beat when perfused with a warm (37°C), oxygenated, physiological salt solution that contains approximately 2 mmol/L Ca++ (e.g., Tyrode’s solution), but it stops beating in the absence of extracellular . This cessation of contractions in Ca++-deficient media is also observed in hearts that are electrically stimulated, which further demonstrates the importance of extracellular Ca++ for contraction of cardiac muscle. This situation is quite different from that of skeletal muscle, which can contract in the total absence of extracellular Ca++ .
# Chunk 8601
Although the interaction of actin and myosin requires a relatively small increase in free intracellular [Ca++], the abundance of Ca++-binding proteins in the myoplasm necessitates a much larger increase in total intracellular [Ca++]. The resting intracellular [Ca++] is approximately 50 to 100 nmol/L; half-maximal force of contraction requires approximately 600 nmol/L of free Ca++ . However, because of Ca++-binding proteins such as parvalbumin and troponin C, the total myoplasmic concentration must increase by 70 µmol/L. As already noted, much of this increase in total myoplasmic [Ca++] occurs through release of Ca++ from the SR. In a number of species, including rabbits, dogs, cats, guinea pigs, and humans, uptake and release of Ca++ by the SR account for approximately 70% of the intracellular Ca++ transient. Thus up to 30% of the rise in intracellular [Ca++] may be attributable to influx of Ca++ through voltage-gated calcium channels in the sarcolemma, and the 3Na+-Ca++ antiporter contributes significantly to Ca++ extrusion during relaxation.
# Chunk 8602
•Fig. 16.11 Effect of Tetrodotoxin, Which Blocks Fast Sodium Channels, on the Action Potentials (Tracings A to E) Recorded in a Purkinje Fiber. Theconcentrationsoftetrodotoxinwere0mol/LintracingA,3×10−8mol/LintracingB,3×10−7mol/LintracingC,and3×10−6mol/LintracingsDandE;EwasrecordedlaterthanD.(RedrawnfromCarmelietE,VereeckeJ.Pflügers Arch. 1969;313:300.)100 mV 1 sec A B C D E
# Chunk 8603
•Fig. 17.9 Decreaseintheviscosityofblood(cp,centipoise)atincreasingratesofshear(sec−1).Theshearrateisthevelocityofonelayeroffluidinrelationtothatoftheadjacentlayersandisdirectionallyrelatedtotherateofflow.(RedrawnfromAminTM,SirsJA.Q J Exp Physiol. 1985;70:37.)2400 7 6 5 4 3 18060 120 Shear rate/sec–1 Viscosity (cp) •Fig. 17.10 Effectoftheplasmafibrinogenconcentrationontheflexibilityofhumanerythrocytes.(RedrawnfromAminTM,SirsJA.Q J Exp Physiol. 1985;70:37.)40 8 6 4 2 0 31 2 Fibrinogen concentration (mg/mL) Erythrocyte flexibility (% min–1)
# Chunk 8604
Fig.

17.20B ). When the inflation pressure falls just below the systolic level (120 mm Hg in

Fig. 17.20A ), a small spurt of blood escapes the occluding pressure of the cuff, and slight tapping sounds (called Korotkoff sounds) are heard with each heartbeat. The pressure at which the first sound is detected •Fig. 17.19 Pulse Pressure Curves Recorded From Various Sites in the Arterial Trees of Humans at Different Ages. Inthe24-yearold,thearterialpulsedisplaysstrikingchangesinthepulsepressureamplitudeandcontourasitpassesdownthearterialtree.Thepulsepressurewaveinthe68-year-oldshowslittleamplificationandisrelativelyunchangedasthepulsetravelsbecausethereislesswavereflection.(ReproducedbypermissionofHodderEducationfromNicholsWW,O’RourkeM,eds.McDonald’s Blood Flow in Arteries: Theoretical, Experimental and Clinical Principles. 5thed.London:Arnold;2005.) represents systolic pressure. It usually corresponds closely to the directly measured systolic pressure. As the inflation pressure of the cuff continues to fall, more blood escapes under the cuff per beat and the sounds become louder. When the inflation pressure approaches the diastolic level, the Korotkoff sounds become muffled. When the inflation pressure falls just below the diastolic level (80 mm Hg in
# Chunk 8605
Functional Anatomy of Coronary Vessels

The right and left coronary arteries arise at the root of the aorta behind the right and left cusps of the aortic valve, respectively. These arteries provide the entire blood supply to the myocardium. The right coronary artery supplies mainly the right ventricle and atrium. The left coronary artery, which divides near its origin into the anterior descending and the circumflex branches, supplies mainly the left ventricle and atrium. There is some overlap between the regions supplied by the left and right arteries. In humans, the right coronary artery is dominant (supplying most of the myocardium) in approximately 50% of individuals. The left coronary artery is dominant in another 20%, and the flow delivered by each main artery is approximately equal in the remaining 30%. The epicardial distribution of the coronary arteries and veins is illustrated in
# Chunk 8606
Thus intrauterine events that occur before 16 weeks of gestation will affect the number of airways. A condition known as congenital diaphragmatic hernia is an example of a congenital lung disease. It occurs at 6 to 8 weeks of gestation and is due to failure of the pleuroperitoneal canal to close and thereby separate the chest and abdominal cavities; the presence of the abdominal contents in the lung hemithorax results in abnormal lung growth with a decrease in the number of airways and alveoli. Before the birth of an affected infant, the alveolar epithelium is composed solely of type II epithelial cells, and it is not until birth that these cells differentiate into type I epithelial cells.
# Chunk 8607
Abnormalities of the Hgb molecule occur with mutations in the amino acid sequence (i.e., sickle cell disease) or in the spatial arrangement of the globin polypeptide chains and result in abnormal function. Compounds such as CO, nitrites (nitric oxide), and cyanides can oxidize the •Fig. 24.4 Oxyhemoglobin Dissociation Curve Showing the Relationship Between the Partial Pressure of Oxygen (Po2) in Blood and the Percentage of Hemoglobin (Hgb) Binding Sites That Are Occupied by Oxygen Molecules (Percentage Saturation). Adulthemoglobin(HgbA)isabout50%saturatedwithoxygenataPO2of27mmHg,90%saturatedat60mmHg,andabout98%saturatedat100mmHg.TheP50isthepartialpressureatwhichHgbis50%saturatedwithO2.WhentheO2dissociationcurveshiftstotheright,P50increases.Whenthecurveshiftstotheleft,P50decreases.
# Chunk 8608
Hgb (Fig. 24.4 ). The S shape of the curve demonstrates the dependence of Hgb saturation on PO2, especially at partial pressures lower than 60 mm Hg. The clinical significance of the flat portion of the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve (>60 mm Hg) is that a drop in PO2 over a wide range of partial pressures (100 to 60 mm Hg) has a minimal effect on Hgb saturation, which remains at 90% to 100%, a level sufficient for normal O2 transport and delivery. The clinical significance of the steep portion (<60 mm Hg) of the curve is that a large amount of O2 is released from Hgb with only a small change in PO2, which facilitates the release and diffusion of O2 into tissue. The point on the curve at which Hgb is 50% saturated with O2 is called the P50, and it is 27 mm Hg in normal adults.
# Chunk 8609
The human microbiome, especially the gut, has received a lot of attention, and exploration into the role of these commensal microorganisms in health and disease is rapidly developing. Although much is known about the gut microbiome, the lung microbiome has been difficult to explore. Once thought to be a sterile environment, the lung remains a difficult site to sample for a variety of reasons, including subject safety during sampling (invasive procedures), complexity and variety of epithelial surfaces throughout the respiratory tract, and the simple fact that far fewer bacteria are available to sample. Furthermore, the lumen ecosystem and epithelium of the respiratory tract differ considerably along the respiratory tract, from the upper airways to the alveoli; it is likely that the density and types of bacteria residing in these various regions also differ. It is clear, however, that the lung does have a microbiome, and three primary phyla appear to be represented: Bacteroidetes (Prevotella, Bacteroides), Firmicutes (Veillonella, Streptococcus, Staphylococcus), and Proteobacteria (Pseudomonas, Haemophilus, Moraxella, Neisseria, Acinetobacter).
# Chunk 8610
Fig. 30.12 ). Enterokinase cleaves trypsinogen to yield active trypsin. Trypsin in turn cleaves all the other protease precursors secreted by the pancreas, thereby resulting in a mixture of enzymes that can almost completely digest the vast majority of dietary proteins. Trypsin is an endopeptidase that cleaves proteins only at internal bonds within the peptide chain rather than releasing individual amino acids from the end of the chain. Trypsin is specific for cleavage at basic amino acids, and such cleavage results in a set of shorter peptides with a basic amino acid at their C-terminus. The two other pancreatic endopeptidases, chymotrypsin and elastase, have a similar mechanism of action but cleave at sites of neutral •Fig. 30.11 Hierarchyofproteasesandpeptidasesthatfunctioninthestomachandsmallintestinetodigestdietaryprotein.Proteinsareabsorbedaseithersingleaminoacids(70%)orshortpeptides(30%).(AdaptedfromVanDykeRW.In:SleisengerMH,FordtranJS[eds].Gastrointestinal Disease. 4thed.
# Chunk 8611
31.3 ). The rectum lacks circular muscle and is surrounded only by longitudinal muscle fibers. It is a reservoir wherein feces can be stored before defecation. Muscular contractions also form functional “valves” in the rectum that retard movement of feces and are important in delaying the loss of feces until it is convenient, at least in adults. The rectum in turn joins the anal canal, distinguished by the fact that it is surrounded not only by smooth muscle but also by striated (skeletal) muscle. The combination of these muscle layers functionally accounts for two key sphincters that control evacuation of solid waste and flatus from the body. The internal anal sphincter is composed of a thickened band of circular muscle, whereas the external anal sphincter is made up of three different striated muscle structures in the pelvic cavity that wrap around the anal canal. These latter muscles are distinctive because they maintain a significant level of basal tone and can be contracted further either voluntarily or reflexively when abdominal pressure increases abruptly (e.g., when lifting a heavy object).
# Chunk 8612
The process of defecation requires coordinated action of the smooth and striated muscle layers in the rectum and anus, as well as surrounding structures such as the pelvic floor muscles. During the mass movement of feces produced by high-amplitude propagating contractions, the rectum fills with fecal material. Expulsion of this material from the body is controlled by the internal and external anal sphincters, which contribute approximately 70% to 80% and 20% to 30% of anal tone at rest, respectively. Filling of the rectum causes relaxation of the internal anal sphincter via release of vasoactive intestinal polypeptide and generation of nitric oxide. Relaxation of the inner sphincter permits the anal sampling mechanism, which can distinguish whether the rectal contents are solid, liquid, or gaseous in nature. After toilet training, sensory nerve endings in the anal mucosa then generate reflexes that initiate appropriate activity of the external sphincter to either retain the rectal contents or permit voluntary expulsion (e.g., of flatus). If defecation is not convenient, the external sphincter contracts to prevent the loss of stool. Then with time the rectum accommodates to its new volume, the internal anal sphincter contracts again, and the external anal sphincter relaxes (
# Chunk 8613
Fig. 32.2 ). The liver receives a high blood flow that is disproportionate to its mass, which ensures that hepatocytes receive high quantities of both O2 and nutrients. Hepatocytes receive more than 70% of their •Fig. 32.2 Diagrammaticrepresentationofahepaticlobule.Platesofhepatocytesarearrayedradiallyaroundacentralvein.Branchesoftheportalveinandhepaticarteryarelocatedontheperipheryofthelobuleandformthe“portaltriad”togetherwiththebileduct.Bloodfromtheportalveinandhepaticarterypercolatesaroundthehepatocytesviathesinusoidsbeforedrainingintothecentralvein.(ModifiedfromBloomW,FawcettDW.A Textbook of Histology. 10thed.Philadelphia:Saunders;1975.) blood supply at rest via the portal vein (rising to more than 90% in the postprandial period).
# Chunk 8614
Fig. 32.14 ) and is subsequently transported back into the systemic circulation. Urea is a small neutral molecule that is readily filtered at the glomerulus, and it is reabsorbed by the kidney tubules such that approximately 50% of the filtered urea is excreted in urine (see ). Urea that enters the colon is either excreted or metabolized to ammonia via colonic bacteria, with the resulting ammonia being reabsorbed or excreted.
# Chunk 8615
Tests for hepatocyte injury rely on markers that are specific for this cell type. When hepatocytes are killed by necrotic responses to inflammation or infection, for example, they release enzymes that include alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST). These enzymes, which are essential to interconvert amino acids, are easily measured in serum and indicate hepatocyte injury, although AST may also be released after injury to other tissues, including the heart. Two other tests are markers of injury to the biliary system. Alkaline phosphatase is expressed in the canalicular membrane, and elevations of this enzyme in plasma suggest localized obstruction to bile flow. Similarly, increased levels of GGT are seen when there is damage to cholangiocytes.
# Chunk 8616
Measurement of bilirubin in the circulation or in urine also provides insight into liver function. In addition, measurement of any of the other characteristic secreted products of the liver can be used to diagnose liver disease. Clinically the most common tests are measurements of serum albumin and a blood clotting parameter, the prothrombin time. If results of these tests are abnormal, when considered together with other aspects of the clinical picture, a diagnosis of liver
# Chunk 8617
The kidneys excrete a number of the end products of metabolism. These waste products include urea (from amino acids), uric acid (from nucleic acids), creatinine (from muscle creatine), end products of hemoglobin metabolism, and metabolites of hormones. The kidneys eliminate these substances from the body at a rate that matches their production. Thus the kidneys regulate hormone concentrations within body fluids. The kidneys also represent an important route for elimination of foreign substances such as drugs, toxins (e.g., pesticides), and other chemicals from the body.
# Chunk 8618
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is the most common inherited kidney disease, occurring in about 1 in 1000 people. Approximately 12.5 million people worldwide have ADPKD, which is caused primarily by mutations in PKD1 (85%–90% of cases) or PKD2 (≈15% of cases). The major phenotype of ADPKD is enlargement of the kidneys due to the presence of hundreds or thousands of space-occupying renal cysts that can be as large as 20 cm in diameter. Cysts are also seen in the liver and other organs in this condition. About 50% of patients with ADPKD progress to renal failure by the age of 60. Although it is not clear how mutations in PKD1 and PKD2 cause ADPKD, renal cyst formation may result from defects in Ca++ uptake that alter Ca++-dependent signaling pathways, including those controlling kidney cell proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis.
# Chunk 8619
Amount filtered PCr x GFR = Amount excreted UCr x V .

• Fig. 33.13 Renal handling of creatinine. Creatinine is freely filtered across the glomerulus and is, to a first approximation, not reabsorbed, secreted, or metabolized by the nephron. Note that all the creatinine coming to the kidney in the renal artery does not get filtered at the glomerulus (normally, 15%–20% of plasma creatinine is filtered). The portion that is not filtered is returned to the systemic circulation in the renal vein. PCr, plasma creatinine concentration; RPF, renal plasma flow; Ucr, urinary concentration of creatinine; V., urine flow rate.
# Chunk 8620
Equation 33.7 where PCr = plasma concentration of creatinine UCr = urine concentration of creatinine V̇ = urine flow
# Chunk 8621
Creatinine clearance (CrCl) is used to estimate GFR in clinical practice. It is synthesized at a relatively constant rate, and the amount produced is proportional to the total muscle mass. However, creatinine is not a perfect substance for measuring GFR because it is secreted to a small extent by the organic cation secretory system in the proximal tubule (see ). The error introduced by this secretory component is approximately 10%. Thus the amount of creatinine excreted in urine exceeds the amount expected from filtration alone by 10%. However, the method used to measure the plasma creatinine concentration (PCr) overestimates the true value by 10%. Consequently the two errors cancel each other, and in most clinical situations, CrCl provides a reasonably accurate measure of GFR.
# Chunk 8622
A fall in GFR may be the first and only clinical sign of kidney disease. Thus measuring GFR is important when kidney disease is suspected. A 50% loss of functioning nephrons reduces GFR only by about 25%. The decline in GFR is not 50% because the remaining nephrons compensate. Because measurements of GFR are cumbersome, kidney function is usually assessed in the clinical setting by measuring the plasma concentration of creatinine (PCr),which is inversely related to GFR (
# Chunk 8623
Fig. 33.15 shows how electric charge affects filtration of macromolecules (e.g., dextrans) by the glomerulus. Dextrans are a family of exogenous polysaccharides manufactured in various molecular weights. They can be electrically neutral or have either negative (polyanionic) or positive (polycationic) charges. As the size (i.e., effective molecular radius) of a dextran molecule increases, the rate at which it is filtered decreases. For any given molecular radius, cationic molecules are more readily filtered than anionic molecules. The reduced filtration rate for anionic molecules is explained by the presence of negatively charged glycoproteins on the surface of all components of the glomerular filtration barrier. These charged glycoproteins repel similarly charged molecules. Because most plasma proteins are negatively charged, the negative charge on the filtration barrier restricts filtration of anionic proteins more than the filtration of neutral and polyanionic proteins with a molecular radius between approximately 18 to 42 Å. For example, serum albumin, an anionic protein that has an effective molecular radius of 35.5 Å, is poorly filtered. Because the small amount of filtered albumin is normally reabsorbed avidly by the proximal tubule, almost no albumin appears in urine.
# Chunk 8624
Fig. 33.17 ). The hydraulic pressure inside the glomerular capillary (PGC) is oriented to promote movement of fluid from the glomerular capillary into Bowman’s space. Because the glomerular ultrafiltrate is essentially protein free under normal conditions, owing in large part to the paucity of proteins in serum smaller than 18 Å in radius 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0 • Fig. 33.16 Reduction of the negative charges on the glomerular wall results in filtration of proteins on the basis of size only. In this situation the relative filterability of proteins depends only on the molecular radius. Accordingly, excretion of polyanionic proteins (18–42 Å) in urine increases because more proteins of this size are filtered.
# Chunk 8625
9.

What is the aldosterone paradox?

he formation of urine involves three basic processes: (1) ultrafiltration of plasma by the glomerulus, (2) reabsorption of water and solutes from the ultra-filtrate, and (3) secretion of selected solutes into tubular fluid. Although an average of 115 to 180 L/day in women and 130 to 200 L/day in men of essentially protein-free fluid is filtered by the human glomeruli each day, less than 1% of the filtered water and sodium chloride (NaCl) and variable amounts of other solutes are typically excreted in urine (
# Chunk 8626
Aldosterone is synthesized by the glomerulosa cells of the adrenal cortex and stimulates reabsorption of NaCl by the thick ascending limb of Henle’s loop, the late distal tubule, and the collecting duct. Most of aldosterone’s effect on NaCl reabsorption reflects its action on the late distal tubule and collecting duct. Aldosterone enhances reabsorption of NaCl across principal cells in these segments by four mechanisms: (1) increasing the amount of Na+,K+-ATPase in the basolateral membrane; (2) increasing expression of the sodium channel (ENaC) in the apical cell membrane; (3) elevating Sgk1 (serum glucocorticoid-stimulated kinase; see the molecular box) levels, which also increases the expression of ENaC in the apical cell membrane; and (4) stimulating •Fig. 34.9 Transport pathways in principal cells, α-intercalated cells, and β-intercalated cells of the late segment of the distal tubule and collecting duct. CA, carbonic anhydrase. Principal cells reabsorb Na+and secrete K+. K+is secreted by two types of K+channels (ROMK and BK) and by a K+/Cl−symporter (KCC1). α-Intercalated cells secrete H+and reabsorb HCO3−and K+, and β-intercalated cells secrete HCO3−and reabsorb H+and Cl−. CO2 + H2O HCO− 3 CA Cl− Cl− H+ ˙-Intercalated cell Pendrin V-ATPase Blood
# Chunk 8627
Sands JM, Layton H. The urine concentrating mechanism and urea transporters. In: Alpern RJ, et al., eds. Seldin and Giebisch’s The Kidney: Physiology and Pathophysiology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Academic Press; 2012.
# Chunk 8628
AVP also increases the permeability of the terminal portion of the inner medullary collecting duct to urea. This results in an increase in urea reabsorption and an increase in the osmolality of the medullary interstitial fluid, which as described below is needed for maximal urine concentration. The cells of the collecting duct express two types of urea transporters, UT-A1 and UT-A3. UT-A1 is localized to the apical membrane, and UT-A3 is localized primarily to the basolateral membrane. AVP, acting through the cAMP/PKA cascade, increases expression of both UT-A1 and UT-A3. Increasing the osmolality of the interstitial fluid of the renal medulla also increases the permeability of the inner medullary collecting duct to urea. This effect is mediated by the phospholipase C/protein kinase C (PKC) pathway, which increases UT-A1 and UT-A3 expression.
# Chunk 8629
The collecting ducts of some individuals do not respond normally to AVP. These individuals cannot maximally concentrate their urine and consequently have polyuria and polydipsia. This clinical entity is termed nephrogenic diabetes insipidus to distinguish it from central diabetes insipidus. Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus can result from a number of systemic disorders and more rarely occurs as a result of inherited disorders. Many of the acquired forms of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus are the result of decreased expression of AQP2 in the collecting duct. Decreased expression of AQP2 has been documented in the urine concentrating defects associated with hypokalemia, lithium ingestion (35% of individuals who take lithium for bipolar disorder develop some degree of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus), ureteral obstruction, low-protein diet, and hypercalcemia. The inherited forms of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus reflect mutations in the AVP receptor (V2 receptor) gene or the AQP2 gene. Approximately 90% of hereditary forms of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus are the result of mutations in the V2 receptor gene, with the other 10% the result of mutations in the AQP2 gene. Since the gene for the V2 receptor is located on the X chromosome, these inherited forms of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus are X-linked. The gene coding for AQP2 is located on chromosome 12 and is inherited as both an autosomal recessive as well as an autosomal dominant defect. As noted in , aquaporins exist as homotetramers. This homotetramer formation explains the difference between the two forms of AQP2-related nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. In the recessive form, heterozygotes produce both normal AQP2 and defective AQP2 molecules. The defective AQP2 monomer is retained in the endoplasmic reticulum of the cell, and thus the homotetramers that do form only contain normal molecules. Thus mutations in both alleles are required to produce nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. In the autosomal dominant form, the defective monomers can form tetramers with normal monomers as well as defective monomers. However, tetramers containing defective monomers are unable to traffic to the apical membrane.
# Chunk 8630
3.

Urea accumulates in the medullary interstitium (up to 600 mmol/L), which allows the kidneys to excrete urine with the same high urea concentration. This allows large amounts of urea to be excreted with relatively little water. First, how the kidneys excrete dilute urine (water diure sis) when AVP levels are low or zero is considered. The following numbers refer to those encircled in
# Chunk 8631
• Fig. 35.7 Schematic of nephron segments involved in urine dilution and concentration. Henle’s loops of juxtamedullary nephrons are shown. A, Mechanism for excretion of dilute urine (water diuresis). AVP) is absent and the collecting duct is essentially impermeable to water. Note also that during a water diuresis the osmolality of the medullary interstitium is reduced as a result of increased vasa recta blood flow and entry of some urea into the medullary collecting duct. B, Mechanism for excretion of a concentrated urine (antidiuresis). Plasma AVP levels are maximal and the collecting duct is highly permeable to water. Under this condition the medullary interstitial gradient is maximal. See text for details.
# Chunk 8632
7.

The urine produced when AVP levels are elevated has an osmolality of 1200 mOsm/kg H2O and contains high concentrations of urea and other nonreabsorbed solutes. Urine volume under this condition can be as low as 0.5 L/day.
# Chunk 8633
• Fig. 35.8 The medullary interstitial gradient comprises primarily NaCl and urea. The concentrations for NaCl and urea depicted reflect those found in the antidiuretic state (i.e., excretion of hyperosmotic urine). See text for details. (Adapted from Sands JM et al. Urine concentration and dilution. In: Brenner and Rector’s The Kidney. 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2012.) 100200300400500600Concentration(mmol/L)CortexO termed llaInnerMed llaUreaNacl
# Chunk 8634
As noted earlier, the interstitial fluid of the renal medulla is critically important in concentrating urine. The osmotic pressure of the interstitial fluid provides the driving force for reabsorbing water from both the descending thin limb of the loop of Henle and the collecting duct. The principal solutes of the medullary interstitial fluid are NaCl and urea, but the concentration of these solutes is not uniform throughout the medulla (i.e., a gradient exists from cortex to papilla). Other solutes also accumulate in the medullary interstitium (e.g., NH4 + and K+), but the most abundant solutes are NaCl and urea. For simplicity, this discussion assumes that NaCl and urea are the only solutes.
# Chunk 8635
The medullary gradient for NaCl results from accumulation of NaCl reabsorbed by the nephron segments in the medulla during countercurrent multiplication. The most important segment in this regard is the ascending limb of the loop of Henle. Urea accumulation within the medullary interstitium is more complex and occurs most effectively when hyperosmotic urine is excreted (i.e., antidiuresis). When dilute urine is produced, especially over extended periods, the osmolality of the medullary interstitium declines (see
# Chunk 8636
As described, the hyperosmotic medulla is essential for concentrating the tubular fluid within the collecting duct. Because water reabsorption from the collecting duct is driven by the osmotic gradient established in the medullary interstitium, urine can never be more concentrated than that of the interstitial fluid in the papilla. Thus any condition that reduces the medullary interstitial osmolality impairs the ability of the kidneys to maximally concentrate urine. Urea within the medullary interstitium contributes to the total osmolality of the urine. However, because the inner medullary collecting duct is highly permeable to urea, especially in the presence of AVP, urea cannot drive water reabsorption across this nephron segment. Instead, urea in the tubular fluid and medullary interstitium equilibrate, and a small volume of urine with a high concentration of urea is excreted.
# Chunk 8637
The vasa recta, the capillary networks that supply blood to the medulla, are highly permeable to solute and water. As with the loop of Henle, the vasa recta form a parallel set of hairpin loops within the medulla (see ). Not only do the vasa recta bring nutrients and oxygen to the medullary nephron segments, but more importantly they also remove the excess water and solute that is continuously added to the medullary interstitium by these nephron seg eOn a typical diet the kidneys must excrete 450 mmol/day of urea. At a maximal urine [urea] of 600 mmol/L this amount of urea can be excreted in less than 1 L of urine. However, if the maximal urine [urea] is reduced because of a decrease in the medullary interstitial fluid [urea], a larger urine volume would be needed to excrete the 450 mmol/day of urea (e.g., 2.25 L of urine would be required if the maximal urine [urea] was only 200 mM).
# Chunk 8638
The typical diet contains approximately 140 mEq/day of Na+ (8 g of NaCl), and thus daily Na+ excretion in urine is also about 140 mEq/day. However, the kidneys can vary excretion of Na+ over a wide range. Excretion rates as low as 10 mEq/day can be attained when individuals are placed on a low-salt diet. Conversely, the kidneys can increase their excretion rate to more than 1000 mEq/day when challenged by ingestion of a high-salt diet. These changes in Na+ excretion can occur with only modest changes in the ECFV and Na+ content of the body.
# Chunk 8639
Control of NaCl Excretion During Euvolemia

Maintenance of Na+ balance and therefore euvolemia requires precise matching of the amount of NaCl ingested with the amount excreted from the body. As already noted the kidneys are the major route for NaCl excretion. Accordingly, in a euvolemic individual we can equate daily urine NaCl excretion with daily NaCl intake.
# Chunk 8640
Sands JM, Layton HE. The urine concentrating mechanism and urea transporters. In: Alpern RJ, et al., eds. Seldin and Giebisch’s The Kidney: Physiology and Pathophysiology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Academic Press; 2013.
# Chunk 8641
Mount DB. Transport of sodium, chloride, and potassium. In: Taal MW, et al., eds. Brenner and Rector’s The Kidney. 9th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2012.
# Chunk 8642
Fig. 36.4

CHAPTER 36 Potassium, Calcium, and Phosphate Homeostasis 3% 10% to 50% 9% 5% to 30% • Fig. 36.4 K+ transport along the nephron. Excretion of K+ depends on the rate and direction of K+ transport by the late segment of the distal tubule and collecting duct. Percentages refer to the amount of filtered K+ reabsorbed or secreted by each nephron segment. Arrows indicate direction of transport. Left, Dietary K+ depletion. An amount of K+ equal to 1% of the filtered load of K+ is excreted. Right, Normal and increased dietary K+ intake. An amount of K+ equal to 15% to 80% of the filtered load is excreted. CCD, cortical collecting duct; DT, distal tubule; IMCD, inner medullary collecting duct; PT, proximal tubule;
# Chunk 8643
Chronically elevated (i.e., ≥24 hours) plasma aldosterone levels enhance secretion of K+ across principal cells in the late segment of the distal tubule and collecting duct (i.e., aldosterone-sensitive distal nephron [ASDN]) via five mechanisms (Fig. 36.7 ): (1) by increasing the amount of Na+,K+-ATPase in the basolateral membrane; (2) by increasing expression of the epithelial sodium channel (ENaC) in the apical cell membrane; (3) by elevating SGK1 (serum glucocorticoid-stimulated kinase) levels, which also increases expression of ENaC in the apical membrane and activates K+ channels; (4) by stimulating CAP1 (channelactivating protease, also called prostatin), which directly activates ENaC; and (5) by stimulating the permeability of the apical membrane to K+ . Aldosterone increases the permeability of the apical membrane to K+ by increasing the number of K+ channels in the membrane. However, the cellular mechanisms involved in this response are not completely known. Increased expression of Na+,K+-ATPase facilitates uptake of K+ across the basolateral membrane into cells and thereby elevates intracellular [K+]. The increase in the number and activity of Na+ channels enhances entry of Na+ into the cell from tubular fluid, an effect that depolarizes the apical membrane voltage. Depolarization of the apical membrane and increased intracellular [K+] enhance the electrochemical driving force for secretion of K+ from the cell into the tubule fluid. Taken together, these actions increase uptake of K+ into the cell across the basolateral membrane and enhance exit of K+ from the cell across the apical membrane. Secretion of aldosterone is increased by hyperkalemia and by angiotensin II (after activation of the renin-angiotensin system). Secretion of aldosterone is decreased by hypokalemia and natriuretic peptides released from the heart.
# Chunk 8644
Cellular processes in which Ca++ plays an important role include bone formation, cell division and growth, blood coagulation, hormone-response coupling, and electrical stimulus-response coupling (e.g., muscle contraction, neurotransmitter release). Nearly 99% of Ca++ is stored in bone and teeth, approximately 1% is found in ICF, and 0.1% in ECF. The total Ca++ concentration ([Ca++]) in plasma is 10 mg/dL (2.5 mM or 5 mEq/L), and its concentration is normally maintained within very narrow limits. Approximately 50% of the Ca++ in plasma is ionized, 40% is bound to plasma proteins (mainly albumin), and 10% is complexed to several anions, including Pi, HCO3 − , citrate, and SO42− (Fig. 36.11 ). The pH of plasma influences this distribution (
# Chunk 8645
Calcium Transport Along the Nephron

The Ca++ available for glomerular filtration consists of the ionized fraction and the amount complexed with anions. Thus about 60% of the Ca++ in plasma is available for glomerular filtration. Normally 99% of filtered Ca++ is reabsorbed by the nephron (Fig. 36.15 ). The proximal tubule reabsorbs about 50% to 60% of the filtered Ca++ . Another 15% is reabsorbed in the loop of Henle (mainly the cortical • Fig. 36.15 Overview of Ca++ transport along the nephron. Percentages refer to amount of filtered Ca++ reabsorbed by each segment. CCD, cortical collecting duct; DT, distal tubule; IMCD, inner medullary collecting duct; PT, proximal tubule; TAL, thick ascending limb.
# Chunk 8646
CHAPTER 36 Potassium, Calcium, and Phosphate Homeostasis portion of the TAL), about 10% to 15% is reabsorbed by the distal tubule, and less than 1% is reabsorbed by the collecting duct. About 1% (200 mg/day) is excreted in urine. This fraction is equal to the net amount absorbed daily by the intestinal tract.
# Chunk 8647
Equation 37.5

Equation 37.6

This neutralization process yields the Na+ salts of the strong acids and removes HCO3 − from the ECF. Thus HCO3 − minimizes the effect of these strong acids on the pH of ECF. As noted previously, ECF contains approximately 350 mEq of HCO3 − . If this HCO3 − were not replenished, the daily production of nonvolatile acids (≈70 mEq/day) would deplete the ECF of HCO3 − within 5 days. To maintain acid-base balance the kidneys must replenish the HCO3 − lost by neutralization of the nonvolatile acids, a process termed renal net acid excretion (RNAE).
# Chunk 8648
NH4 + is produced in the kidneys via metabolism of glutamine. Essentially the kidneys metabolize glutamine, excrete NH4 + , and add HCO3 − to the body. However, formation of new HCO3 − via this process depends on the kidneys’ ability to excrete NH4 + in urine. If NH4 + is not excreted in urine but instead enters the systemic circulation, it is converted into urea by the liver. This conversion process generates H+ , which is then buffered by HCO3 − . Thus production of urea from renal-generated NH4 + consumes HCO3 − and negates formation of HCO3 − through synthesis and excretion of NH4 + by the kidneys. However, normally the kidneys excrete NH4 + in urine and thereby produce new HCO3 − .
# Chunk 8649
H+ secretion by the collecting duct is critical for excretion of NH4 + . If collecting duct H+ secretion is inhibited, the NH4 + reabsorbed by the TAL of Henle’s loop will not be excreted in the urine. Instead it will be returned to the systemic circulation, where as described previously, it will be converted to urea by the liver and consume HCO3 − in the process. Thus new HCO3 − is produced during the metabolism of glutamine by cells of the proximal tubule. However, the overall process is not complete until the NH4 + is excreted (i.e., production of urea from NH4 + by the liver is prevented). Thus NH4 + excretion in urine can be used as a marker of glutamine metabolism in the proximal tubule.
# Chunk 8650
Although the HCO3 − buffer system is the principal ECF buffer, Pi and plasma proteins provide additional extracellular buffering. The combined action of the buffering processes for HCO3 − , Pi, and plasma protein accounts for approximately 50% of the buffering of a nonvolatile acid load and 70% of a nonvolatile alkali load. The remainder of the buffering under these two conditions occurs intracellularly. Intracellular buffering involves movement of H+ into cells (during buffering of nonvolatile acid) or movement of H+ out of cells (during buffering of nonvolatile alkali). H+ is titrated inside the cell by HCO3 − , Pi, and the histidine groups on proteins.
# Chunk 8651
transport systems. They are stored extracellularly in the thyroid as an integral part of the glycoprotein molecule thyroglobulin. Thyroid hormones are sparingly soluble in blood and aqueous fluids and are transported in blood that is bound (>99%) to serum-binding proteins. A major transport protein is thyroid hormone–binding globulin. Thyroid hormones have long half-lives (7 days for thyroxine; 18 hours for triiodothyronine). Thyroid hormones are similar to steroid hormones in that the thyroid hormone receptor is intracellular and acts as a transcription factor. In fact, the thyroid hormone receptor belongs to the same gene family that includes steroid hormone receptors and vitamin D receptor. Thyroid hormones can be administered orally; the amount absorbed intact is sufficient for this to be an effective mode of therapy.
# Chunk 8652
ATP constant amount universal not stored Structural integrity Differentiated function Growth and division Response to stimuli and stress Output 60%–70% = Resting metabolic rate 25%–30% = Movement Glucose, FFAs, AAs, ketone bodies EnergyOxidation of fuels 60% Heat 40% •Fig. 39.1 Overviewofenergymetabolism.
# Chunk 8653
Men tend to gain fat in the intraabdominal depot (android [apple-shaped] adiposity), whereas women tend to gain fat in the subcutaneous depot, particularly in the thighs and buttocks (gynecoid [pear-shaped] adiposity). Clearly an excess of abdominal fat poses a greater risk factor for the pathologies mentioned earlier. Thus another indicator of body composition is circumference of the waist (measured in inches around the narrowest point between the ribs and hips when viewed from the front after exhaling) divided by the circumference of the hips (measured at the point where the buttocks are largest when viewed from the side). This waist-hip ratio may be a better indicator of body fat than BMI, especially as it relates to risk for development of diseases. A waist-hip ratio of greater than 0.95 in men or 0.85 in women is linked to a significantly higher risk for development of diabetes and cardiovascular disease.
# Chunk 8654
Table 40.1): free ionized Ca++ , protein-bound Ca, and Ca complexed with anions (e.g., phosphates, HCO3 − , citrate). The ionized form represents about 50% of circulating Ca. Since it is critical to so many cellular functions, [Ca++] in both the extracellular and intracellular compartments is tightly controlled. Circulating Ca++ is under direct hormonal control and normally maintained within a relatively narrow range. Either too little calcium (hypocalcemia; total serum calcium < 8.7 mg/dL [2.2 mM]) or too much Ca (hypercalcemia; total serum Ca > 10.4 mg/dL [2.6 mM]) in blood can lead to a broad range of pathophysiological changes, including neuromuscular dysfunction, central nervous system dysfunction, renal insufficiency, calcification of soft tissue, and skeletal pathology.
# Chunk 8655
Fig. 41.16 Frequency-encodedregulationofFSHandLHsecretionfromgonadotropes.AhighfrequencyofGnRH(1pulse/hr)preferentiallystimulatesLHsecretion,whereasaslowerfrequencyofGnRHpromotesFSHsecretion.(FromLarsenPRetal[eds].Williams Textbook of Endocrinology. 10th ed.Philadelphia:Saunders;2003.) are present in serum, with the 191–amino acid (22-kDa) form representing approximately 75% of circulating GH. The GH receptor is a member of the cytokine/GH/PRL/ erythropoietin receptor family and as such is linked to the JAK/STAT signaling pathway (see ). Human GH can also act as an agonist of the PRL receptor. About 50% of the 22-kDa form of GH in serum is bound to GH-binding protein (GHBP), which is derived from the N-terminal portion (the extracellular domain) of the GH receptor. Individuals with Laron syndrome, who lack normal GH receptors but have normal GH secretion, do not have detectable GHBP in their serum. GHBP reduces renal clearance and thus increases the biological half-life of GH, which is about 20 minutes. The liver and kidney are major sites of GH degradation.
# Chunk 8656
GH secretion, like ACTH, shows prominent diurnal rhythms, with peak secretion occurring in the early morning just before awakening. Its secretion is stimulated during deep slow-wave sleep (stages III and IV). GH secretion is lowest during the day. This rhythm is entrained to sleep-wakefulness patterns rather than light-dark patterns, so a phase shift occurs in people who work night shifts. As is typical of anterior pituitary hormones, GH secretion is pulsatile. Levels of GH in serum vary widely (0–30 ng/ mL, with most values usually falling between 0 and 3). Because of this marked variation and the heterogeneity of circulating GH, measurement of serum GH levels is of limited clinical utility. Since IGF-I secretion is regulated by GH and possesses a longer half-life that buffers pulsatile and diurnal changes in GH secretion, it may be used to assess the status of the GH axis, especially in young patients.
# Chunk 8657
2.

Production and secretion of PRL are predominantly under inhibitory control by the hypothalamus. Thus disruption of the pituitary stalk and the hypothalamohypophyseal portal vessels (e.g., secondary to surgery or physical trauma) results in an increase in PRL levels but a decrease in ACTH, TSH, FSH, LH, and GH. PRL circulates unbound to serum proteins and thus has a relatively short half-life of about 20 minutes. Normal basal serum concentrations are similar in men and women. Release of PRL is normally under tonic inhibition by the hypothalamus. This is exerted by dopaminergic tracts that secrete dopamine in the median eminence. There is also evidence for existence of a prolactin-releasing factor (PRF). The exact nature of this compound is not known, although many factors, including TRH and hormones in the glucagon family (secretin, glucagon, VIP, and gastric inhibitory polypeptide [GIP]) can stimulate release of PRL.
# Chunk 8658
Fig. 42.4 ). An average of 400 µg of iodide per person is ingested daily in the United States, versus a minimum daily requirement of 150 µg for adults, 90 to 120 µg for children, and 200 µg for pregnant women. In the steady state, the same amount, 400 µg, is excreted in urine. Iodide is actively concentrated in the thyroid gland, salivary glands, gastric glands, lacrimal glands, mammary glands, and choroid plexus. About 70 to 80 µg of iodide is taken up daily by the thyroid gland from a circulating pool that contains approximately 250 to 750 µg of iodide. The total iodide content of the thyroid gland averages 7500 µg, virtually all of which is in the form of stored iodothyronine in colloid thyroglobulin. In the steady state, 70 to 80 µg of iodide, or about 1% of the total, is released from the gland daily. Of this amount, 75% is secreted as thyroid hormone and the remainder as free iodide. The large ratio (100:1) of iodide stored in the form of hormone to the amount turned over daily protects against iodide deficiency for about 2 months. Iodide is also conserved by a marked reduction in renal excretion of iodide as its concentration in serum falls.
# Chunk 8659
Fig. 42.5 ). NIS is highly expressed in the thyroid gland, but it is also expressed at lower levels in the placenta, salivary glands, and actively lactating breast. One iodide ion is transported uphill against an iodide gradient while two sodium ions move down their electrochemical gradient from extracellular fluid into the thyroid cell. The driving force for this secondary active transporter is provided by plasma membrane Na+,K+-ATPase. Expression of the NIS gene is inhibited by iodide and stimulated by TSH. A reduction in dietary iodide intake depletes the circulating iodide pool and greatly enhances the activity of the iodide trap. When dietary iodide intake is low, the percentage of thyroid uptake of iodide can reach 80% to 90%.
# Chunk 8660
Fig.42.12 ]).Affectedindividualshavesevereintellectualdisability,shortstaturewithincompleteskeletaldevelopment,coarsefacialfeatures,andaprotrudingtongue.Themostcommoncauseofhypothyroidisminchildrenworldwideisiodidedeficiency.Historically,iodidedeficiencywasviewedasamajorcauseofhypothyroidismincertainmountainousregionsofSouthAmerica,Africa,andAsia,butrecentevidencesuggeststhattheproblemisevenmorewidespread.Thistragicformofendemic hypothyroidism canbepreventedbypublichealthprogramsthataddiodidetotablesaltorprovideyearlyinjectionsofaslowlyabsorbediodidepreparation.Congenital defects arealesscommoncauseofneonatal/childhypothyroidism.Inmostcasesthethyroidglandsimplydoesnotdevelop(thyroid gland dysgenesis). Lessfrequentcausesofchildhood •Fig. 42.12 A,Normal6-year-oldchild(left) andacongenitallyhypothyroid17-year-old(right) fromthesamevillageinanareaofendemichypothyroidism.Notetheshortstature,obesity,malformedlegs,anddullexpressionoftheintellectuallydisabledhypothyroidchild.Otherfeaturesareaprominentabdomen,aflatbroadnose,ahypoplasticmandible,dryscalyskin,delayedpuberty,andmuscleweakness.Radiographsofthehandcomparinganormal13-year-old(B)tothatofa13-year-oldsufferingfromhypothyroidism(C).Notethatthepatientwithhypothyroidismhasamarkeddelayindevelopmentofthesmallbonesofthehands,ingrowthplatesateitherendofthefingers,andinthegrowthplateofthedistalradius.(A,FromDelangeFM.In:BravermanLE,UtigerRD[eds].Werner and Ingbar’s The Thyroid. 7thed.Philadelphia:Lippincott-Raven;1996.B,FromTannerJMetal.
# Chunk 8661
Instead of being secreted near a target organ and acting as neurotransmitters, adrenomedullary catecholamines are secreted into blood and act as hormones. About 80% of the cells of the adrenal medulla secrete epinephrine, and the remaining 20% secrete norepinephrine. Although circulating epinephrine is derived entirely from the adrenal medulla, only about 30% of the circulating norepinephrine comes from the medulla. The remaining 70% is released from postganglionic sympathetic nerve terminals and diffuses into the vascular system. Because the adrenal medulla is not the sole source of catecholamine production, this tissue is not essential for life.
# Chunk 8662
Regulation of Cortisol Production

Cortisol production by the zona fasciculata is regulated by a standard hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis involving corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), ACTH, and cortisol (see ). The hypothalamus and pituitary stimulate cortisol production, and cortisol negatively feeds back on the hypothalamus and pituitary to maintain its set point. Both neurogenic (e.g., fear) and systemic (e.g., hypoglycemia, hemorrhage, cytokines) forms of stress stimulate release of CRH. CRH is also under strong diurnal rhythmic regulation emerging from the suprachiasmatic nucleus, such that cortisol levels surge during the early predawn and morning hours and then continually decline throughout the day and evening. CRH acutely stimulates release of ACTH and chronically increases proopiomelanocortin (POMC) gene expression and corticotrope hypertrophy and proliferation. Some parvicellular neurons coexpress CRH and ADH, which potentiates the actions of CRH.
# Chunk 8663
Transport and Metabolism of Androgens

As testosterone enters the peripheral circulation, it binds to and quickly reaches equilibrium with serum proteins. About 60% of circulating testosterone is bound to sex hormone–binding globulin (SHBG), 38% is bound to albumin, and about 2% remains as “free” hormone. Testosterone and its metabolites are primarily excreted in urine. Approximately 50% of excreted androgens are found as urinary 17-ketosteroids, with most of the remainder being conjugated androgens or diol or triol derivatives. Only about 30% of the 17-ketosteroids in urine are from the testis; the rest are produced from adrenal androgens. Androgens are conjugated with glucuronate or sulfate in the liver, and these conjugated steroids are excreted in urine.
# Chunk 8664
3.

Production and mixing of sperm with seminal contents. During emission, contraction of the vas deferens coincides with contraction of the muscular coats of the two accessory sex glands, the seminal vesicles (right and left) and the prostate gland (which surrounds the prostatic urethra). At this point, sperm become mixed with all the components of semen. The seminal vesicles secrete approximately 60% of the volume. These glands are the primary source of fructose, a critical nutrient for sperm. The seminal vesicles also secrete semenogelins, which induce coagulation of semen immediately after ejaculation. The alkaline secretions of the prostate, which make up about 30% of the volume, are high in citrate, zinc, spermine, and acid phosphatase. Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) is a serine protease that liquefies coagulated semen after a few minutes. PSA can be detected in blood under conditions of prostatic infection, benign prostatic hypertrophy, and prostatic carcinoma and is currently used as one indicator of prostatic health. The predominant buffers in semen are phosphate and bicarbonate. A third accessory gland, the bulbourethral glands (also called Cowper’s glands), empty into the penile urethra in response to sexual excitement before emission and ejaculation. This secretion is high in mucus, which lubricates, cleanses, and buffers the urethra. Average sperm counts are between 60 and 100 million/mL semen. Men with sperm counts below 20 million/mL, less than 50% motile sperm, or less than 60% normally conformed sperm are usually infertile.
# Chunk 8665
Fig. 44.17 ) over a period of about 25 days, during which they grow from a diameter of about 0.1 mm to a diameter of 0.2 mm. Once the granulosa epithelium increases to six to seven layers, fluid-filled spaces appear between cells and coalesce into the antrum. Over a period of about 45 days, this wave of small antral follicles will continue to grow to large recruitable antral follicles that are 2 to 5mm in diameter. This period of growth is characterized by about a 100-fold increase in granulosa cells (from about 10,000 to 1,000,000 cells). It is also characterized by swelling of the antral cavity, which increasingly divides the granulosa cells into two discrete populations: mural granulosa cells and cumulus cells (see
# Chunk 8666
Fig.

44.17 ) are recruited by a rise in FSH to begin rapid gonadotropin-dependent development. The total number of recruited follicles in both ovaries can be as high as 20 in a younger woman (<33 years old) but rapidly declines at older ages. The number of recruited follicles is reduced to the ovulation quota (one in humans) by the process of selection. As FSH levels decline the rapidly growing follicles progressively undergo atresia until one follicle is left. Generally the largest follicle with the most FSH receptors of the recruited crop becomes the dominant follicle. Selection occurs during the early follicular phase. By midcycle the dominant follicle becomes a large preovulatory follicle that is 20 mm in diameter and contains about 50 million granulosa cells by the midcycle gonadotropin surge.
# Chunk 8667
The human corpus luteum is programmed to live for 14 days, plus or minus 2 days (corpus luteum of menstruation), unless “rescued” by the LH-like hormone human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), which originates from an implanting embryo. If rescued, the corpus luteum of pregnancy will remain viable during the pregnancy (usually ≈ 9 months). The mechanism by which the corpus luteum of menstruation regresses in 14 days is not fully understood. The corpus luteum appears to become progressively less sensitive to basal levels of LH, so that hCG binding to the LH receptor is needed for continued health and function of the corpus luteum. Regression appears to involve release of the prostaglandin PGF2α from both granulosa lutein cells and the uterus in response to declining levels of progesterone during the second week of the luteal phase. Several paracrine factors (endothelin, monocyte chemotactic protein-1) from immune and vascular cells are likely to play a role in the demise and removal of granulosa lutein cells. The corpus luteum is ultimately turned into a scarlike body called the corpus albicans, which sinks into the medulla of the ovary and is slowly absorbed.
# Chunk 8668
The first hormone produced by syncytiotrophoblasts is hCG, which is structurally related to the pituitary glycoprotein hormones (see ). As such, hCG is composed of a common α-glycoprotein subunit (α-GSU) and a hormone-specific β subunit (β-hCG). Antibodies used to detect hCG (i.e., in laboratory assays and over-the-counter pregnancy tests) are designed to specifically detect the β subunit. hCG is most similar to LH and binds with high affinity to the LH receptor. The β subunit of hCG is longer than that of LH and contains more sites for glycosylation, which greatly increases the half-life of hCG to 24 to 30 hours. The stability of hCG allows it to rapidly accumulate in the maternal circulation such that hCG is detectable within maternal serum within 24 hours of implantation. Serum hCG levels double every 2 days for the first 6 weeks and peak at about 10 weeks. Serum hCG then declines to a constant level at about 50% of the peak value (Fig. 44.34A •Fig. 44.34 CirculatinglevelsofhCGandhPLinmaternalbloodduringpregnancy.(ModifiedfromWhiteBA,PorterfieldSP.Endocrine Physiology. 4thed.Philadelphia:Mosby;2013.)100 80 60Human chorionic gonadotropin(mIU/mL)40 20 10 0 10 20 30 40 Weeks of gestationA B 10 8Human placental lactogen(µg/mL)6 4 2 0 10 20 30 40 Weeks of gestation
# Chunk 8669
Therearemultiplebehavioralmethodsofcontraception. Totalabstinenceisthebestwaytoavoidgettingpregnant.Othermethodsincludetherhythmmethod,whichreliesonabstinencefromsexualintercourseduringfertileperiodsaroundthetimeofovulation.Thefertileperiodextendsfrom3to4daysbeforethetimeofovulationuntil3to4daysafterward.Asecondmethodiswithdrawalbeforeejaculation,coitus interruptus. Boththesemethodshavehigherfailurerates(20%–30%)thanbarrier methods (2%–12%),intrauterine devices (IUDs) (<2%),andoral contraceptives (<1%)do.Barrierssuchascondoms ordiaphragms aremoreeffectivewhenusedwithspermicidal jellies. Ofallmethods,onlycondomsprovideeffectiveprotectionfromsexuallytransmitteddiseasesinsexuallyactiveindividuals.IUDsarerelativelyeffective.Theypreventimplantationbylocallyproducinganinflammatoryresponseintheendometrium.SomeformsofIUDscontaincopper,zinc,orprogestins,whichinhibitspermtransportorviabilityinthefemalereproductivetract.
# Chunk 8670
Menopause typically occurs between 45 and 55 years of age. It extends over a period of several years. Initially the cycles become irregular and are periodically anovulatory. The cycles tend to shorten, primarily in the follicular phase. Eventually the woman ceases to cycle altogether. Serum estradiol levels drop to about a sixth the mean levels for younger cycling women, and progesterone levels drop to about a third those in the follicular phase of younger women. Production of these hormones does not cease entirely, but the primary source of these hormones in postmenopausal women becomes the adrenal, although interstitial cells of the ovarian stroma continue to produce some steroids. Most circulating estrogens are now produced peripherally from androgens. Because estrone is the primary estrogen produced in adipose tissue, it becomes the predominant estrogen in postmenopausal women.
# Chunk 8671
0 Enhanced specificity for major and mild neurocognitive disorders. Given the explo- sion in neuroscience, neuropsychology, and brain imaging over the past 20 years, it was critical to convey the current state-of-the-art in the diagnosis of specific types of disor- ders that were previously referred to as the "dementias” or organic brain diseases. Bi- specific molecular genetic findings for rare variants of Alzheimer’s disease and Hun- tington’s disease have greatly advanced clinical diagnoses, and these disorders and others have now been separated into specific subtypes.
# Chunk 8672
The specifier ”provisional" can be used when there is a strong presumption that the full criteria will ultimately be met for a disorder but not enough information is available to make a firm diagnosis. The clinician can indicate the diagnostic uncertainty by recording "(provisional)” following the diagnosis. For example, this diagnosis might be used when an individual who appears to have a major depressive disorder is unable to give an ade- quate history, and thus it cannot be established that the full criteria are met. Another use of the term provisional is for those situations in which differential diagnosis depends exclu- sively on the duration of illness. For example, a diagnosis of schizophreniform disorder re- quires a duration of less than 6 months but of at least 1 month and can only be given provisionally if assigned before remission has occurred.
# Chunk 8673
Speech sound disorder is thus heterogeneous in its underlying mechanisms and includes pho- nological disorder and articulation disorder. A speech sound disorder is diagnosed when speech sound production is not what would be expected based on the child’s age and devel- opmental stage and when the deficits are not the result of a physical, structural, neurological, or hearing impairment. Among typically developing children at age 4 years, overall speech should be intelligible, whereas at age 2 years, only 50% may be understandable.
# Chunk 8674
Childhood-onset ﬂuency disorder, or developmental stuttering, occurs by age 6 for 80%— 90% of affected individuals, with age at onset ranging from 2 to 7 years. The onset can be insidious or more sudden. Typically, dysﬂuencies start gradually, with repetition of initial consonants, first words of a phrase, or long words. The child may not be aware of dysﬂu- encies. As the disorder progresses, the dysﬂuencies become more frequent and interfering, occurring on the most meaningful words or phrases in the utterance. As the child becomes aware of the speech difficulty, he or she may develop mechanisms for avoiding the dys- ﬂuencies and emotional responses, including avoidance of public speaking and use of short and simple utterances. Longitudinal research shows that 65%—85% of children re- cover from the dysﬂuency, with severity of ﬂuency disorder at age 8 years predicting re- covery or persistence into adolescence and beyond.
# Chunk 8675
The age and pattern of onset also should be noted for autism spectrum disorder. Symptoms are typically recognized during the second year of life (12—24 months of age) but may be seen earlier than 12 months if developmental delays are severe, or noted later than 24 months if symptoms are more subtle. The pattern of onset description might include information about early developmental delays or any losses of social or language skills. In cases where skills have been lost, parents or caregivers may give a history of a gradual or relatively rapid deterioration in social behaviors or language skills. Typically, this would occur be- tween 12 and 24 months of age and is distinguished from the rare instances of developmen- tal regression occurring after at least 2 years of normal development (previously described as childhood disintegrative disorder).
# Chunk 8676
The course of developmental coordination disorder is variable but stable at least to 1 year follow-up. Although there may be improvement in the longer term, problems with coor— dinated movements continue through adolescence in an estimated 50%—70% of children.
# Chunk 8677
Stereotypic movements may occur many times during a day, lasting a few seconds to several minutes or longer. Frequency can vary from many occurrences in a single day to several weeks elapsing between episodes. The behaviors vary in context, occurring when the individual is engrossed in other activities, when excited, stressed, fatigued, or bored.
# Chunk 8678
Stereotypic movements typically begin within the first 3 years of life. Simple stereotypic move- ments are common in infancy and may be involved in acquisition of motor mastery. In chil- dren who develop complex motor stereotypies, approximately 80% exhibit symptoms before 24 months of age, 12% between 24 and 35 months, and 8% at 36 months or older. In most typ- ically developing children, these movements resolve over time or can be suppressed. Onset of complex motor stereotypies may be in infancy or later in the developmental period. Among individuals with intellectual disability, the stereotyped, self—injurious behaviors may persist for years, even though the typography or pattern of self-injury may change.
# Chunk 8679
Brief psychotic disorder lasts more than 1 day and remits by 1 month. Schizophreni- form disorder is characterized by a symptomatic presentation equivalent to that of schizo- phrenia except for its duration (less than 6 months) and the absence of a requirement for a decline in functioning.
# Chunk 8680
Schizophrenia lasts for at least 6 months and includes at least 1 month of active-phase symptoms. In schizoaffective disorder, a mood episode and the active-phase symptoms of schizophrenia occur together and were preceded or are followed by at least 2 weeks of de- lusions or hallucinations without prominent mood symptoms.
# Chunk 8681
The essential feature of brief psychotic disorder is a disturbance that involves the sudden onset of at least one of the following positive psychotic symptoms: delusions, hallucina- tions, disorganized speech (e.g., frequent derailment or incoherence), or grossly abnormal psychomotor behavior, including catatonia (Criterion A). Sudden onset is defined as change from a nonpsychotic state to a clearly psychotic state within 2 weeks, usually with- out a prodrome. An episode of the disturbance lasts at least 1 day but less than 1 month, and the individual eventually has a full return to the premorbid level of functioning (Cri- terion B). The disturbance is not better explained by a depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features, by schizoaffective disorder, or by schizophrenia and is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a hallucinogen) or another medical condi- tion (e.g., subdural hematoma) (Criterion C).
# Chunk 8682
In the United States, brief psychotic disorder may account for 9% of cases of first-onset psychosis. Psychotic disturbances that meet Criteria A and C, but not Criterion B, for brief psychotic disorder (i.e., duration of active symptoms is 1—6 months as opposed to remis- sion within 1 month) are more common in developing countries than in developed coun- tries. Brief psychotic disorder is twofold more common in females than in males.
# Chunk 8683
5. Negative symptoms (i.e., diminished emotional expression or avolition).

B. An episode of the disorder lasts at least 1 month but less than 6 months. When the diagnosis must be made without waiting for recovery, it should be qualified as “provi- sional."
# Chunk 8684
The characteristic symptoms of schizophreniform disorder are identical to those of schizo- phrenia (Criterion A). Schizophreniform disorder is distinguished by its difference in du- ration: the total duration of the illness, including prodromal, active, and residual phases, is at least 1 month but less than 6 months (Criterion B). The duration requirement for schizo- phreniform disorder is intermediate between that for brief psychotic disorder, which lasts more than 1 day and remits by 1 month, and schizophrenia, which lasts for at least 6 months.
# Chunk 8685
The diagnosis of schizophreniform disorder is made under two conditions. 1) when an ep- isode of illness lasts between 1 and 6 months and the individual has already recovered, and 2) when an individual is symptomatic for less than the 6 months’ duration required for the diagnosis of schizophrenia but has not yet recovered. In this case, the diagnosis should be noted as ”schizophreniform disorder (provisiona1)” because it is uncertain if the indi- vidual will recover from the disturbance within the 6-month period. If the disturbance per- sists beyond 6 months, the diagnosis should be changed to schizophrenia.
# Chunk 8686
C. Continuous signs of the disturbance persist for at least 6 months. This 6-month period must include at least 1 month of symptoms (or less it successfully treated) that meet Cri- terion A (i.e., active-phase symptoms) and may include periods of prodromal or residual symptoms. During these prodromal or residual periods, the signs of the disturbance may
# Chunk 8687
Schizophreniform disorder and brief psychotic disorder. These disorders are of shorter duration than schizophrenia as specified in Criterion C, which requires 6 months of symp- toms. In schizophreniform disorder, the disturbance is present less than 6 months, and in brief psychotic disorder, symptoms are present at least 1 day but less than 1 month.
# Chunk 8688
C is designed to separate schizoaffective disorder from schizophrenia, and Criterion B is designed to distinguish schizoaffective disorder from a depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features. More specifically, schizoaffective disorder can be distinguished from a depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features due to the presence of prom- inent delusions and / or hallucinations for at least 2 weeks in the absence of a major mood episode. In contrast, in depressive or bipolar disorders with psychotic features, the psy- chotic features primarily occur during the mood episode(s). Because the relative propor- tion of mood to psychotic symptoms may change over time, the appropriate diagnosis may change from and to schizoaffective disorder (e.g., a diagnosis of schizoaffective dis- first 6 months of a persistent psychotic illness would be changed to schizophrenia if active of another mood episode).
# Chunk 8689
Schizophrenia, bipolar, and depressive disorders. Distinguishing schizoaffective dis- order from schizophrenia and from depressive and bipolar disorders with psychotic fea- tures is often difficult. Criterion C is designed to separate schizoaffective disorder from schizophrenia, and Criterion B is designed to distinguish schizoaffective disorder from a depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features. More specifically, schizoaffective disorder can be distinguished from a depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features based on the presence of prominent delusions and / or hallucinations for at least 2 weeks in the absence of a major mood episode. In contrast, in depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features, the psychotic features primarily occur during the mood episode(s). Be- cause the relative proportion of mood to psychotic symptoms may change over time, the appropriate diagnosis may change from and to schizoaffective disorder. (For example, a diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder for a severe and prominent major depressive episode lasting 3 months during the first 6 months of a chronic psychotic illness would be changed years without a recurrence of another mood episode.)
# Chunk 8690
Psychotic Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition 117 been estimated to range from 0.21% to 0.54%. When the prevalence findings are stratified by age group, individuals older than 65 years have a significantly greater prevalence of 0.74% compared with those in younger age groups. Rates of psychosis also vary according to the underlying medical condition; conditions most commonly associated with psy- chosis include untreated endocrine and metabolic disorders, autoimmune disorders (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus, N—methyl—D—aspartate (NMDA) receptor autoimmune en- cephalitis), or temporal lobe epilepsy. Psychosis due to epilepsy has been further differ— entiated into ictal, postictal, and interictal psychosis. The most common of these is postictal psychosis, observed in 2%—7.8% of epilepsy patients. Among older individuals, there may be a higher prevalence of the disorder in females, although additional gender-related fea- tures are not clear and vary considerably with the gender distributions of the underlying medical conditions.
# Chunk 8691
Mild (p. 154)

Moderate (p. 154)

Severe (p. 154)

Bipolar II disorder is characterized by a clinical course of recurring mood episodes con- sisting of one or more major depressive episodes (Criteria A—C under “Major Depressive sode”). The major depressive episode must last at least 2 weeks, and the hypomanic epi- sode must last at least 4 days, to meet the diagnostic criteria. During the mood episode(s), the requisite number of symptoms must be present most of the day, nearly every day, and represent a noticeable change from usual behavior and functioning. The presence of a manic episode during the course of illness precludes the diagnosis of bipolar II disorder (Criterion B under ”Bipolar II Disorder"). Episodes of substance/medication-induced de- senting the physiological effects of a medication, other somatic treatments for depression, drugs of abuse, or toxin exposure) or of depressive and related disorder due to another medical condition or bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition do not count toward a diagnosis of bipolar II disorder unless they persist beyond the physiolog- ical effects of the treatment or substance and then meet duration criteria for an episode. In addition, the episodes must not be better accounted for by schizoaffective disorder and are not superimposed on schizophrenia, schizophreniform disorder, delusional disorder, or terion C under ”Bipolar II Disorder”). The depressive episodes or hypomanic ﬂuctuations must cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion D under ”Bipolar II Disorder”); however, for hy- pomanic episodes, this requirement does not have to be met. A hypomanic episode that causes significant impairment would likely qualify for the diagnosis of manic episode and, therefore, for a lifetime diagnosis of bipolar I disorder. The recurrent major depressive ep- isodes are often more frequent and lengthier than those occurring in bipolar I disorder.
# Chunk 8692
The 12-month prevalence of bipolar II disorder, internationally, is 0.3%. In the United

States, 12-month prevalence is 0.8%. The prevalence rate of pediatric bipolar II disorder is difficult to establish. DSM-IV bipolar I, bipolar II, and bipolar disorder not otherwise spec- ified yield a combined prevalence rate of 1.8% in US. and non-U.S. community samples, with higher rates (2.7% inclusive) in youths age 12 years or older.
# Chunk 8693
Cyclothymic disorder usually has an insidious onset and a persistent course. There is a 15%—50% risk that an individual with cyclothymic disorder will subsequently develop bi- polar I disorder or bipolar II disorder. Onset of persistent, ﬂuctuating hypomanic and de- pressive symptoms late in adult life needs to be clearly differentiated from bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition and depressive disorder due to another medical condition (e. g., multiple sclerosis) before the cyclothymic disorder diagnosis IS as- signed Among children with cyclothymic disorder, the mean age at onset of symptoms 15 6. 5 years of age.
# Chunk 8694
Bipolar and Related Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition 145

This condition follows the ingestion or inhalation quickly, usually within hours or, at the most, a few days. In stimulant-induced manic or hypomanic states, the response is in min- utes to 1 hour after one or several ingestions or injections. The episode is very brief and typically resolves over 1—2 days. With corticosteroids and some immunosuppressant medications, the mania (or mixed or depressed state) usually follows several days of in- gestion, and the higher doses appear to have a much greater likelihood of producing bi- polar symptoms.
# Chunk 8695
Once a woman has had a postpartum episode with psychotic features, the risk of recurrence with each subsequent delivery is between 30% and 50%. Postpartum episodes must be differentiated from delirium occurring in the postpartum period, which is distinguished by a fluctuating level of awareness or attention. The postpar- tum period is unique with respect to the degree of neuroendocrine alterations and psychosocial adjustments, the potential impact of breast-feeding on treatment plan- ning, and the Iong-term implications of a history of postpartum mood disorder on sub- sequent family planning.
# Chunk 8696
Sleep disturbance may take the form of either difficulty sleeping or sleeping exces- sively (Criterion A4). When insomnia is present, it typically takes the form of middle in- somnia (i.e., waking up during the night and then having difficulty returning to sleep) or terminal insomnia (i.e., waking too early and being unable to return to sleep). Initial in- somnia (i.e., difficulty falling asleep) may also occur. Individuals who present with over- daytime sleep. Sometimes the reason that the individual seeks treatment is for the dis- turbed sleep.
# Chunk 8697
Sadness. Finally, periods of sadness are inherent aspects of the human experience.

These periods should not be diagnosed as a major depressive episode unless criteria are met for severity (i.e., five out of nine symptoms), duration (i.e., most of the day, nearly ev- ery day for at least 2 weeks), and clinically significant distress or impairment. The diagno- sis other specified depressive disorder may be appropriate for presentations of depressed mood with clinically significant impairment that do not meet criteria for duration or se- verity.
# Chunk 8698
A. Depressed mood for most of the day, for more days than not, as indicated by either subjective account or observation by others, for at least 2 years.
# Chunk 8699
Specify current severity:

Mild (p. 188)

Moderate (p. 188)

Severe (p. 188)

The essential feature of persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia) is a depressed mood that occurs for most of the day, for more days than not, for at least 2 years, or at least 1 year for children and adolescents (Criterion A). This disorder represents a consolidation of
# Chunk 8700
Genetic and physiological. Heritability of premenstrual dysphoric disorder is unknown.

However, for premenstrual symptoms, estimates for heritability range between 30% and 80%, with the most stable component of premenstrual symptoms estimated to be about 50% heritable.
# Chunk 8701
A depressive disorder associated with the use of substance (i.e., alcohol, illicit drugs, or a set while the individual is using the substance or during withdrawal, if there is a with— drawal syndrome associated with the substance. Most often, the depressive disorder has its onset within the first few weeks or 1 month of use of the substance. Once the substance is discontinued, the depressive symptoms usually remit within days to several weeks, de- pending on the half—life of the substance/medication and the presence of a withdrawal syndrome. If symptoms persist 4 weeks beyond the expected time course of withdrawal of a particular substance/medication, other causes for the depressive mood symptoms should be considered.
# Chunk 8702
The risk of acute onset of a major depressive disorder following a CVA (within 1 day to a week of the event) appears to be strongly correlated with lesion location, with greatest risk associated with left frontal strokes and least risk apparently associated with right frontal lesions in those individuals who present within days of the stroke. The association with frontal regions and laterality is not observed in depressive states that occur in the 2—6 months following stroke.
# Chunk 8703
Once a woman has had a postpartum episode with psychotic features, the risk of recurrence with each subsequent delivery is between 30% and 50%. Postpartum episodes must be differentiated from delirium occurring in the postpartum period, which is distinguished by a fluctuating level of awareness or attention. The postpar- tum period is unique with respect to the degree of neuroendocrine alterations and psychosocial adjustments, the potential impact of breast—feeding on treatment planning, and the Iong-term implications of a history of postpartum mood disorder on subsequent family planning.
# Chunk 8704
The essential feature of separation anxiety disorder is excessive fear or anxiety concerning separation from home or attachment figures. The anxiety exceeds what may be expected given the person’s developmental level (Criterion A). Individuals with separation anxiety disorder have symptoms that meet at least three of the following criteria: They experience recurrent excessive distress when separation from home or major attachment figures is an— ticipated or occurs (Criterion A1). They worry about the well-being or death of attachment figures, particularly when separated from them, and they need to know the whereabouts of their attachment figures and want to stay in touch with them (Criterion A2). They also worry about untoward events to themselves, such as getting lost, being kidnapped, or having an accident, that would keep them from ever being reunited with their major at- tachment figure (Criterion A3). Individuals with separation anxiety disorder are reluctant or refuse to go out by themselves because of separation fears (Criterion A4). They have figures at home or in other settings. Children with separation anxiety disorder may be un- able to stay or go in a room by themselves and may display "clinging” behavior, staying close to or ”shadowing" the parent around the house, or requiring someone to be with them when going to another room in the house (Criterion A5). They have persistent reluc- tance or refusal to go to sleep without being near a major attachment figure or to sleep away from home (Criterion A6). Children with this disorder often have difficulty at bed- time and may insist that someone stay with them until they fall asleep. During the night, they may make their way to their parents’ bed (or that of a significant other, such as a sib- ling). Children may be reluctant or refuse to attend camp, to sleep at friends’ homes, or to go on errands. Adults may be uncomfortable when traveling independently (e.g., sleeping in a hotel room). There may be repeated nightmares in which the content expresses the in- dividual’s separation anxiety (e.g., destruction of the family through fire, murder, or other catastrophe) (Criterion A7). Physical symptoms (e.g., headaches, abdominal complaints, nausea, vomiting) are common in children when separation from major attachment fig- ures occurs or is anticipated (Criterion A8). Cardiovascular symptoms such as palpitations, dizziness, and feeling faint are rare in younger children but may occur in adolescents and adults.
# Chunk 8705
The 12-month prevalence of separation anxiety disorder among adults in the United States is 0.9%—1.9%. In children, 6- to 12-month prevalence is estimated to be approximately 4%.
# Chunk 8706
In adolescents in the United States, the 12-month prevalence is 1.6%. Separation anxiety is the most prevalent anxiety disorder in children younger than 12 years. In clinical sam- ples of children, the disorder is equally common in males and females. In the community, the disorder is more frequent in females.
# Chunk 8707
Latin American countries (2%—4%). Prevalence rates are approximately 5% in children and are approximately 16% in 13— to 17-year-olds. Prevalence rates are lower in older individ- uals (about 3%—5%), possibly reﬂecting diminishing severity to subclinical levels. Females are more frequently affected than males, at a rate of approximately 2:1, although rates vary across different phobic stimuli. That is, animal, natural environment, and situational spe- cific phobias are predominantly experienced by females, whereas blood-injection-injury phobia is experienced nearly equally by both genders.
# Chunk 8708
Median age at Onset of social anxiety disorder in the United States is 13 years, and 75% of individuals have an age at onset between 8 and 15 years. The disorder sometimes emerges out of a childhood history of social inhibition or shyness in US. and European studies. On- set can also occur in early childhood. Onset of social anxiety disorder may follow a stress- ful or humiliating experience (e.g., being bullied, vomiting during a public speech), or it may be insidious, developing slowly. First onset in adulthood is relatively rare and is more likely to occur after a stressful or humiliating event or after life changes that require new social roles (e.g., marrying someone from a different social class, receiving a job promo- tion). Social anxiety disorder may diminish after an individual with fear of dating marries and may reemerge after divorce. Among individuals presenting to clinical care, the disor— der tends to be particularly persistent.
# Chunk 8709
Adolescents endorse a broader pattern of fear and avoidance, including of dating, compared with younger children. Older adults express social anxiety at lower levels but across a broader range of situations, whereas younger adults express higher levels of so- cial anxiety for specific situations. In older adults, social anxiety may concern disability due to declining sensory functioning (hearing, vision) or embarrassment about one’s ap- pearance (e.g., tremor as a symptom of Parkinson’s disease) or functioning due to medical conditions, incontinence, or cognitive impairment (e.g., forgetting people’s names). In the community approximately 30% of individuals with social anxiety disorder experience re- mission of symptoms within 1 year, and about 50% experience remission within a few years. For approximately 60% of individuals without a specific treatment for social anxiety disorder, the course takes several years or longer.
# Chunk 8710
Anxiety disorder due to another medical condition. Panic disorder is not diagnosed if the panic attacks are judged to be a direct physiological consequence of another medical condition. Examples of medical conditions that can cause panic attacks include hyperthy- roidism, hyperparathyroidism, pheochromocytoma, vestibular dysfunctions, seizure dis- orders, and cardiopulmonary conditions (e.g., arrhythmias, supraventricular tachycardia, asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [COPD]). Appropriate laboratory tests (e.g., serum calcium levels for hyperparathyroidism; Holter monitor for arrhythmias) or physical examinations (e.g., for cardiac conditions) may be helpful in determining the eti- ological role of another medical condition.
# Chunk 8711
Substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder. Panic disorder is not diagnosed if the panic attacks are judged to be a direct physiological consequence of a substance. In- toxication with central nervous system stimulants (e.g., cocaine, amphetamines, caffeine) or cannabis and withdrawal from central nervous system depressants (e.g., alcohol, bar- biturates) can precipitate a panic attack. However, if panic attacks continue to occur out- side of the context of substance use (e.g., long after the effects of intoxication or withdrawal have ended), a diagnosis of panic disorder should be considered. In addition, because with increased substance use, especially for purposes of self—medication, a detailed history should be taken to determine if the individual had panic attacks prior to excessive sub- stance use. If this is the case, a diagnosis of panic disorder should be considered in addition to a diagnosis of substance use disorder. Features such as onset after age 45 years or the presence of atypical symptoms during a panic attack (e.g., vertigo, loss of consciousness, loss of bladder or bowel control, slurred speech, amnesia) suggest the possibility that an- other medical condition or a substance may be causing the panic attack symptoms.
# Chunk 8712
Anxiety disorder due to another medical condition. Medical conditions that can cause or be misdiagnosed as panic attacks include hyperthyroidism, hyperparathyroidism, pheo- chromocytoma, vestibular dysfunctions, seizure disorders, and cardiopulmonary con- ditions (e.g., arrhythmias, supraventricular tachycardia, asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease). Appropriate laboratory tests (e.g., serum calcium levels for hyperpara- thyroidism; Holter monitor for arrhythmias) or physical examinations (e.g., for cardiac con- ditions) may be helpful in determining the etiological role of another medical condition.
# Chunk 8713
Substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder. Intoxication with central nervous system stimulants (e.g., cocaine, amphetamines, caffeine) or cannabis and withdrawal from central nervous system depressants (e.g., alcohol, barbiturates) can precipitate a panic attack. A detailed history should be taken to determine if the individual had panic attacks prior to excessive substance use. Features such as onset after age 45 years or the presence of atypical symptoms during a panic attack (e.g., vertigo, loss of consciousness, loss of bladder or bowel control, slurred speech, or amnesia) suggest the possibility that a medical condition or a substance may be causing the panic attack symptoms.
# Chunk 8714
The percentage of individuals with agoraphobia reporting panic attacks or panic disorder preceding the onset of agoraphobia ranges from 30% in community samples to more than 50% in clinic samples. The majority of individuals with panic disorder show signs of anx- iety and agoraphobia before the onset of panic disorder.
# Chunk 8715
The 12-month prevalence of generalized anxiety disorder is 0.9% among adolescents and 2.9% among adults in the general community of the United States. The 12-month preva- lence for the disorder in other countries ranges from 0.4% to 3.6%. The lifetime morbid risk is 9.0%. Females are twice as likely as males to experience generalized anxiety disorder. The prevalence of the diagnosis peaks in middle age and declines across the later years of life.
# Chunk 8716
The essential features of substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder are prominent symptoms of panic or anxiety (Criterion A) that are judged to be due to the effects of a sub- stance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, or a toxin exposure). The panic or anxiety symp- after exposure to a medication, and the substances or medications must be capable of pro— ducing the symptoms (Criterion B2). Substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder due to a prescribed treatment for a mental disorder or another medical condition must have its onset while the individual is receiving the medication (or during withdrawal, if a withdrawal is associated with the medication). Once the treatment is discontinued, the panic or anxiety symptoms will usually improve or remit within days to several weeks to a month (depending on the half-life of the substance/ medication and the presence of with- drawal). The diagnosis of substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder should not be given if the onset of the panic or anxiety symptoms precedes the substance/ medication in- toxication or withdrawal, or if the symptoms persist for a substantial period of time (i.e., usually longer than 1 month) from the time of severe intoxication or withdrawal. If the panic or anxiety symptoms persist for substantial periods of time, other causes for the symptoms should be considered.
# Chunk 8717
Substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder is distinguished from a primary anxiety disorder based on the onset, course, and other factors with respect to substances/medica- tions. For drugs of abuse, there must be evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings for use, intoxication, or withdrawal. Substance/medication-induced anxiety disorders arise only in association with intoxication or withdrawal states, whereas primary anxiety disorders may precede the onset of substance/medication use. The pres- ence of features that are atypical of a primary anxiety disorder, such as atypical age at onset (e.g., onset of panic disorder after age 45 years) or symptoms (e.g., atypical panic attack symptoms such as true vertigo, loss of balance, loss of consciousness, loss of bladder con- trol, headaches, slurred speech) may suggest a substance/medication-induced etiology. A primary anxiety disorder diagnosis is warranted if the panic or anxiety symptoms persist for a substantial period of time (about 1 month or longer) after the end of the substance in- toxication or acute withdrawal or there is a history of an anxiety disorder.
# Chunk 8718
Symptoms that occur during or shortly after (i.e., within 4 weeks of) substance intoxication or withdrawal or after medication use may be especially indicative of a substance/ medi- cation-induced anxiety disorder, depending on the type, duration, or amount of the sub- stance used. If the disturbance is associated with both another medical condition and substance use, both diagnoses (i.e., anxiety disorder due to another medical condition and substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder) can be given. Features such as onset af- ter age 45 years or the presence of atypical symptoms during a panic attack (e.g., vertigo, loss of consciousness, loss of bladder or bowel control, slurred speech, amnesia) suggest the possibility that another medical condition or a substance may be causing the panic at- tack symptoms.
# Chunk 8719
The mean age at disorder onset is 16—17 years, the median age at onset is 15 years, and the most common age at onset is 12—13 years. Two-thirds of individuals have disorder onset before age 18. Subclinical body dysmorphic disorder symptoms begin, on average, at age 12 or 13 years. Subclinical concerns usually evolve gradually to the full disorder, although some individuals experience abrupt onset of body dysmorphic disorder. The disorder appears to usually be chronic, although improvement is likely when evidence-based treatment is received. The disorder’s clinical features appear largely similar in children/ adolescents and adults. Body dysmorphic disorder occurs in the elderly, but little is known about the disorder in this age group. Individuals with disorder onset before age 18 years are more likely to attempt suicide, have more comorbidity, and have gradual (rather than acute) disorder onset than those with adult-onset body dysmorphic disorder.
# Chunk 8720
Trichotillomania is associated with distress as well as with social and occupational impair- ment. There may be irreversible damage to hair growth and hair quality. Infrequent med- ical consequences of trichotillomania include digit purpura, musculoskeletal injury (e.g., carpal tunnel syndrome; back, shoulder and neck pain), blepharitis, and dental damage (e.g., worn or broken teeth due to hair biting). Swallowing of hair (trichophagia) may lead to trichobezoars, with subsequent anemia, abdominal pain, hematemesis, nausea and vomiting, bowel obstruction, and even perforation.
# Chunk 8721
Excoriation disorder is associated with distress as well as with social and occupational im- pairment. The majority of individuals with this condition spend at least 1 hour per day picking, thinking about picking, and resisting urges to pick. Many individuals report avoiding social or entertainment events as well as going out in public. A majority of indi- viduals with the disorder also report experiencing work interference from skin picking on at least a daily or weekly basis. A significant proportion of students with excoriation disor- der report having missed school, having experienced difficulties managing responsibilities at school, or having had difficulties studying because of skin picking. Medical complica- tions of skin picking include tissue damage, scarring, and infection and can be life-threaten- ing. Rarely, synovitis of the wrists due to chronic picking has been reported. Skin picking often results in significant tissue damage and scarring. It frequently requires antibiotic treat- ment for infection, and on occasion it may require surgery.
# Chunk 8722
A) that are judged to be attributable to the effects of a substance (e.g., drug of abuse, medica- tion). The obsessive-compulsive and related disorder symptoms must have developed during or soon after substance intoxication or withdrawal or after exposure to a medication or toxin, and the substance/medication must be capable of producing the symptoms (Criterion B). Sub- stance/medication—induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to a prescribed treatment for a mental disorder or general medical condition must have its onset while the in- dividual is receiving the medication. Once the treatment is discontinued, the obsessive-com- pulsive and related disorder symptoms will usually improve or remit within days to several weeks to 1 month (depending on the half-life of the substance/medication). The diagnosis of given if onset of the obsessive-compulsive and related disorder symptoms precedes the sub- stance intoxication or medication use, or if the symptoms persist for a substantial period of time, usually longer than 1 month, from the time of severe intoxication or withdrawal. If the obsessive—compulsive and related disorder symptoms persist for a substantial period of time, other causes for the symptoms should be considered. The substance/ medication-induced ob- sessive-compulsive and related disorder diagnosis should be made in addition to a diagnosis of substance intoxication only when the symptoms in Criterion A predominate in the clinical picture and are sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention
# Chunk 8723
The prevalence of acute stress disorder in recently trauma-exposed populations (i.e., within 1 month of trauma exposure) varies according to the nature of the event and the context in which it is assessed. In both US. and non-U.S. populations, acute stress disorder tends to be identified in less than 20% of cases following traumatic events that do not in- volve interpersonal assault; 13%—21% of motor vehicle accidents, 14% of mild traumatic brain injury, 19% of assault, 10% of severe burns, and 6%—12% of industrial accidents.
# Chunk 8724
Posttraumatic stress disorder. Acute stress disorder is distinguished from PTSD because the symptom pattern in acute stress disorder must occur within 1 month of the traumatic event and resolve within that 1-month period. If the symptoms persist for more than 1 month and meet criteria for PTSD, the diagnosis is changed from acute stress disorder to PTSD.
# Chunk 8725
Posttraumatic stress disorder and acute stress disorder. In adjustment disorders, the stressor can be of any severity rather than of the severity and type required by Criterion A of acute stress disorder and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). In distinguishing ad- justment disorders from these two posttraumatic diagnoses, there are both timing and symptom profile considerations. Adjustment disorders can be diagnosed immediately and persist up to 6 months after exposure to the traumatic event, whereas acute stress dis- order can only occur between 3 days and 1 month of exposure to the stressor, and PTSD cannot be diagnosed until at least 1 month has passed since the occurrence of the traumatic stressor. The required symptom profile for PTSD and acute stress disorder differentiates them from the adjustment disorders. With regard to symptom profiles, an adjustment dis- of either acute stress disorder or PTSD that do not meet or exceed the diagnostic threshold for either disorder. An adjustment disorder should also be diagnosed for individuals who have not been exposed to a traumatic event but who otherwise exhibit the full symptom pro- file of either acute stress disorder or PTSD.
# Chunk 8726
The dissociative amnesia of individuals with dissociative identity disorder manifests in three primary ways: as 1) gaps in remote memory of personal life events (e.g., periods of childhood or adolescence; some important life events, such as the death of a grandparent, getting married, giving birth); 2) lapses in dependable memory (e.g., of what happened today, of well-leamed skills such as how to do their job, use a computer, read, drive); and 3) discovery of evidence of their everyday actions and tasks that they do not recollect do- ing (e.g., finding unexplained objects in their shopping bags or among their possessions; ”coming to” in the midst of doing something). Dissociative fugues, wherein the person discovers dissociated travel, are common. Thus, individuals with dissociative identity dis- order may report that they have suddenly found themselves at the beach, at work, in a night- club, or somewhere at home (e.g., in the closet, on a bed or sofa, in the corner) with no memory of how they came to be there. Amnesia in individuals with dissociative identity dis- order is not limited to stressful or traumatic events; these individuals often cannot recall everyday events as well.
# Chunk 8727
The mean age at onset of depersonalization/ derealization disorder is 16 years, although the the symptoms. Less than 20% of individuals experience onset after age 20 years and only 5% after age 25 years. Onset in the fourth decade of life or later is highly unusual. Onset can range from extremely sudden to gradual. Duration of depersonalization/derealization disorder episodes can vary greatly, from brief (hours or days) to prolonged (weeks, months, or years). Given the rarity of disorder onset after age 40 years, in such cases the in- dividual should be examined more closely for underlying medical conditions (e.g., brain lesions, seizure disorders, sleep apnea). The course of the disorder is often persistent.
# Chunk 8728
The essential feature of pica is the eating of one or more nonnutritive, nonfood substances on a persistent basis over a period of at least 1 month (Criterion A) that is severe enough to warrant clinical attention. Typical substances ingested tend to vary with age and availability and might include paper, soap, cloth, hair, string, wool, soil, chalk, talcum powder, paint, gum, metal, pebbles, charcoal or coal, ash, clay, starch, or ice. The term nonfood is included because the di- agnosis of pica does not apply to ingestion of diet products that have minimal nutritional con- tent. There is typically no aversion to food in general. The eating of nonnutritive, nonfood substances must be developmentally inappropriate (Criterion B) and not part of a culturally supported or socially normative practice (Criterion C). A minimum age of 2 years is suggested for a pica diagnosis to exclude developmentally normal mouthing of objects by infants that re- sults in ingestion. The eating of nonnutritive, nonfood substances can be an associated feature of other mental disorders (e.g., intellectual disability [intellectual developmental disorder], autism spectrum disorder, schizophrenia). If the eating behavior occurs exclusively in the con- text of another mental disorder, a separate diagnosis of pica should be made only if the eating behavior is sufficiently severe to warrant additional clinical attention (Criterion D).
# Chunk 8729
The essential feature of rumination disorder is the repeated regurgitation of food occur- ring after feeding or eating over a period of at least 1 month (Criterion A). Previously swal- lowed food that may be partially digested is brought up into the mouth without apparent nausea, involuntary retching, or disgust. The food may be re-chewed and then ejected from the mouth or re—swallowed. Regurgitation in rumination disorder should be fre- quent, occurring at least several times per week, typically daily. The behavior is not better explained by an associated gastrointestinal or other medical condition (e.g., gastroesoph- ageal reflux, pyloric stenosis) (Criterion B) and does not occur exclusively during the course of anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, binge-eating disorder, or avoidant/restric- tive food intake disorder (Criterion C). If the symptoms occur in the context of another mental disorder (e.g., intellectual disability [intellectual developmental disorder], neuro- developmental disorder), they must be sufficiently severe to warrant additional clinical attention (Criterion D) and should represent a primary aspect of the individual’s presen- tation requiring intervention. The disorder may be diagnosed across the life span, par- ticularly in individuals who also have intellectual disability. Many individuals with rumination disorder can be directly observed engaging in the behavior by the clinician. In other instances diagnosis can be made on the basis of self—report or corroborative informa- tion from parents or caregivers. Individuals may describe the behavior as habitual or out- side of their control.
# Chunk 8730
Serum chemistry. Dehydration may be reﬂected by an elevated blood urea nitrogen level. Hypercholesterolemia is common. Hepatic enzyme levels may be elevated. Hypo- magnesemia, hypozincemia, hypophosphatemia, and hyperamylasemia are occasionally observed. Self-induced vomiting may lead to metabolic alkalosis (elevated serum bicarbon- ate), hypochloremia, and hypokalernia; laxative abuse may cause a mild metabolic acidosis.
# Chunk 8731
An ”episode of binge eating” is defined as eating, in a discrete period of time, an amount of food that is definitely larger than most individuals would eat in a similar period of time under similar circumstances (Criterion A1). The context in which the eating occurs may affect the clinician’s estimation of whether the intake is excessive. For example, a quantity of food that might be regarded as excessive for a typical meal might be consid- ered normal during a celebration or holiday meal. A ”discrete period of time” refers to a limited period, usually less than 2 hours. A single episode of binge eating need not be re- stricted to one setting. For example, an individual may begin a binge in a restaurant and then continue to eat on returning home. Continual snacking on small amounts of food throughout the day would not be considered an eating binge.
# Chunk 8732
Extreme: 14 or more binge-eating episodes per week.

The essential feature of binge-eating disorder is recurrent episodes binge eating that must occur, on average, at least once per week for 3 months (Criterion D). An ”episode of binge eating" is defined as eating, in a discrete period of time, an amount of food that is defi- nitely larger than most people would eat in a similar period of time under similar circum- stances (Criterion A1). The context in which the eating occurs may affect the clinician’s estimation of whether the intake is excessive. For example, a quantity of food that might be regarded as excessive for a typical meal might be considered normal during a celebration or holiday meal. A ”discrete period of time” refers to a limited period, usually less than 2 hours. A single episode of binge eating need not be restricted to one setting. For example, an individual may begin a binge in a restaurant and then continue to eat on returning home. Continual snacking on small amounts of food throughout the day would not be con- sidered an eating binge.
# Chunk 8733
5. Night eating syndrome: Recurrent episodes of night eating, as manifested by eating after awakening from sleep or by excessive food consumption after the evening meal.
# Chunk 8734
There is awareness and recall of the eating. The night eating is not better explained by external influences such as changes in the individual’s sleep-wake cycle or by local so- cial norms. The night eating causes significant distress andlor impairment in function- ing. The disordered pattern of eating is not better explained by binge-eating disorder or another mental disorder, including substance use, and is not attributable to another medical disorder or to an effect of medication.
# Chunk 8735
A. Repeated voiding of urine into bed or clothes, whether involuntary or intentional.

B. The behavior is clinically significant as manifested by either a frequency of at least twice a week for at least 3 consecutive months or the presence of clinically significant distress or impairment in social, academic (occupational), or other important areas of functioning.
# Chunk 8736
Nocturnal and diurnal: A combination of the two subtypes above.

The nocturnal—only subtype of enuresis, sometimes referred to as monosymptomutic enu re- sis, is the most common subtype and involves incontinence only during nighttime sleep, typically during the first one—third of the night. The diurnal-only subtype occurs in the absence of noctumal enuresis and may be referred to simply as urinary incontinence. Indi- viduals with this subtype can be divided into two groups. Individuals with ”urge incon- tinence” have sudden urge symptoms and detrusor instability, whereas individuals with ”voiding postponement” consciously defer micturition urges until incontinence results.
# Chunk 8737
The nocturnal-and-diumal subtype is also known as nonmonosymptomutz'c enuresis.

The essential feature of enuresis is repeated voiding of urine during the day or at night into bed or clothes (Criterion A). Most often the voiding is involuntary, but occasionally it may be intentional. To qualify for a diagnosis of enuresis, the voiding of urine must occur at tress or impairment in social, academic (occupational), or other important areas of func- tioning (Criterion B). The individual must have reached an age at which continence is expected (i.e., a chronological age of at least 5 years or, for children with developmental delays, a mental age of at least 5 years) (Criterion C). The urinary incontinence is not at- tributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a diuretic, an antipsychotic med- ication) or another medical condition (e.g., diabetes, spina bifida, a seizure disorder) (Criterion D).
# Chunk 8738
The prevalence of enuresis is 5%—10% among 5-year-olds, 3%—5% among 10-year-olds, and around 1% among individuals 15 years or older.
# Chunk 8739
It is estimated that approximately 1% of 5-year-olds have encopresis, and the disorder is more common in males than in females.
# Chunk 8740
Different manifestations of insomnia can occur at different times of the sleep period. Sleep— onset insomnia (or initial insomnia) involves difficulty initiating sleep at bedtime. Sleep mainte- the night. late insomnia involves early-morning awakening with an inability to return to sleep.
# Chunk 8741
Aside from the frequency and duration criteria required to make the diagnosis, addi- tional criteria are useful to quantify insomnia severity. These quantitative criteria, while arbitrary, are provided for illustrative purpose only. For instance, difficulty initiating sleep is defined by a subjective sleep latency greater than 20—30 minutes, and difficulty maintain~ ing sleep is defined by a subjective time awake after sleep onset greater than 20—30 min- utes. Although there is no standard definition of early-morning awakening, this symptom involves awakening at least 30 minutes before the scheduled time and before total sleep time reaches 61/2 hours. It is essential to take into account not only the final awakening time but also the bedtime on the previous evening. Awakening at 4:00 A.M. does not have the same clinical significance in those who go to bed at 9:00 PM. as in those who go to bed at 1 1:00 PM. Such a symptom may also reﬂect an age-dependent decrease in the ability to sus- tain sleep or an age-dependent shift in the timing of the main sleep period.
# Chunk 8742
Mild: Difficulty maintaining daytime alertness 1—2 days/week.

Moderate: Difficulty maintaining daytime alertness 3—4 days/week.
# Chunk 8743
Severe: Difficulty maintaining daytime alertness 5—7 days/week.

Hypersomnolence is a broad diagnostic term and includes symptoms of excessive quantity of sleep (e.g., extended nocturnal sleep or involuntary daytime sleep), deteriorated quality of wakefulness (i.e., sleep propensity during wakefulness as shown by difficulty awaken- ing or inability to remain awake when required), and sleep inertia (i.e., a period of im- paired performance and reduced vigilance following awakening from the regular sleep episode or from a nap) (Criterion A). Individuals with this disorder fall asleep quickly and have a good sleep efficiency (>90%). They may have difficulty waking up in the morning, sometimes appearing confused, combative, or ataxic. This prolonged impairment of alert- ness at the sleep—wake transition is often referred to as sleep inertia (i.e., sleep drunkenness).
# Chunk 8744
Nonrestorative sleep, automatic behavior, difficulties awakening in the morning, and sleep inertia, although common in hypersomnolence disorder, may also be seen in a variety of conditions, including narcolepsy. Approximately 80% of individuals with hyper- somnolence report that their sleep is nonrestorative, and as many have difficulties awak- ening in the morning. Sleep inertia, though less common (i.e., observed in 36%—50% of individuals with hypersomnolence disorder), is highly specific to hypersomnolence. Short naps (i.e., duration of less than 30 minutes) are often unrefreshing. Individuals with hy- persomnolence often appear sleepy and may even fall asleep in the clinician’s waiting area.
# Chunk 8745
In hypersomnolence disorder, by contrast, symptoms of excessive sleepiness occur regard- less of nocturnal sleep duration. An inadequate amount of nocturnal sleep, or behaviorally induced insuﬂicient sleep syndrome, can produce symptoms of daytime sleepiness very similar to those of hypersomnolence. An average sleep duration of fewer than 7 hours per night strongly suggests inadequate nocturnal sleep, and an average of more than 9—10 hours of sleep per 24—hour period suggests hypersomnolence. Individuals with inadequate noctur- nal sleep typically ”catch up” with longer sleep durations on days when they are free from social or occupational demands or on vacations. Unlike hypersomnolence, insufficient nocturnal sleep is unlikely to persist unabated for decades. A diagnosis of hypersomno- lence disorder should not be made if there is a question regarding the adequacy of noctur- nal sleep duration. A diagnostic and therapeutic trial of sleep extension for 10—14 days can often clarify the diagnosis.
# Chunk 8746
CSF hypocretin-l levels without hypocretin cell loss, complicating the diagnosis.

The essential features of sleepiness in narcolepsy are recurrent daytime naps or lapses into sleep. Sleepiness typically occurs daily but must occur at a minimum three times a week for at least 3 months (Criterion A). Narcolepsy generally produces cataplexy, which most commonly presents as brief episodes (seconds to minutes) of sudden, bilateral loss of mus- cle tone precipitated by emotions, typically laughing and joking. Muscles affected may include those of the neck, jaw, arms, legs, or whole body, resulting in head bobbing, jaw dropping, or complete falls. Individuals are awake and aware during cataplexy. To meet
# Chunk 8747
Narcolepsy-cataplexy nearly always results from the loss of hypothalamic hypocretin (orexin)—producing cells, causing hypocretin deficiency (less than or equal to one-third of control values, or 110 pg/mL in most laboratories). Cell loss is likely autoimmune, and ap- proximately 99% of affected individuals carry HLA-DQB1*06:02 (vs. 12%—38% of control subjects). Thus, checking for the presence of DQB1*06:02 prior to a lumbar puncture for eval- uation of CSF hypocretin-l immunoreactivity may be useful. Rarely, low CSF levels of hypo- cretin-I occur without cataplexy, notably in youths who may develop cataplexy later. CSF hypocretin-l measurement represents the gold standard, excepting associated severe con- ditions (neurological, inﬂammatory, infectious, trauma) that can interfere with the assay.
# Chunk 8748
confirm the diagnosis (Criterion B3). These tests must be performed after the individual has stopped all psychotropic medications, following 2 weeks of adequate sleep time (as documented with sleep diaries, actigraphy). Short rapid eye movement (REM) latency (sleep-onset REM period, REM latency less than or equal to 15 minutes) during polysom- nography is sufficient to confirm the diagnosis and meets Criterion B3. Alternatively, the
# Chunk 8749
In 90% of cases, the first symptom to manifest is sleepiness or increased sleep, followed by cataplexy (within 1 year in 50% of cases, within 3 years in 85%). Sleepiness, hypnagogic hallucinations, vivid dreaming, and REM sleep behavior disorder (excessive movements during REM sleep) are early symptoms. Excessive sleep rapidly progresses to an inability to stay awake during the day, and to maintain good sleep at night, without a clear increase in total 24—hour sleep needs. In the first months, cataplexy may be atypical, especially in children. Sleep paralysis usually develops around puberty in children with prepubertal onset. Exacerbations of symptoms suggest lack of compliance with medications or devel- opment of a concurrent sleep disorder, notably sleep apnea.
# Chunk 8750
Genetic and physiological. Monozygotic twins are 25%—32% concordant for narcolepsy.

The prevalence of narcolepsy is 1%—2% in first-degree relatives (a 10- to 40-fold increase overall). Narcolepsy is strongly associated with DQBI‘06202 (99% vs. 12%—38% in control subjects of various ethnic groups; 25% in the general US. population). DQB1*03:01 in- creases, while DQB1‘O5:01, DQBI‘06:01, and DQB1*06:03 reduce risk in the presence of
# Chunk 8751
A sleep-onset REM period during the polysomnography (REM sleep latency less than or equal to 15 minutes) is highly specific (approximately 1% positive in control subjects) but moderately sensitive (approximately 50%). A positive MSLT result displays an aver- age sleep latency of less than or equal to 8 minutes, and sleep-onset REM periods in two or more naps on a four- or five-nap test. The MSLT result is positive in 90%—95% of individ- uals with narcolepsy versus 2%—4% of control subjects or individuals with other sleep dis- orders. Additional polysomnographic findings often include frequent arousals, decreased sleep efficiency, and increased stage 1 sleep. Periodic limb movements (found in about 40% of individuals with narcolepsy) and sleep apnea are often noted.
# Chunk 8752
Overall severity is also informed by levels of nocturnal desaturation and sleep fragmen- tation (measured by brain cortical arousal frequency and sleep stages) and degree of as- sociated symptoms and daytime impairment. However, the exact number and thresholds may vary according to the specific measurement techniques used, and these numbers may change over time. Regardless of the apnea hypopnea index (count) per se, the disorder is considered to be more severe when apneas and hypopneas are accompanied by significant oxygen hemoglobin desaturation (e.g., when more than 10% of the sleep time is spent at desaturation levels of less than 90%) or when sleep is severely fragmented as shown by an elevated arousal index (arousal index greater than 30) or reduced stages in deep sleep (e.g., percentage stage N3 [slow-wave sleep] less than 5%).
# Chunk 8753
Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea usually has an insidious onset, gradual progression, and persistent course. Typically the loud snoring has been present for many years, often since childhood, but an increase in its severity may lead the individual to seek evaluation. Weight gain may precipitate an increase in symptoms. Although obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea can occur at any age, it most commonly manifests among individuals ages 40—60 years. Over 4—5 years, the average apnea hypopnea index increases in adults and older individuals by ap— proximately two apneas/hypopneas per hour. The apnea hypopnea index is increased and in- cident obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea is greater among individuals who are older, who are male, or who have a higher baseline body mass index (BMI) or increase their BMI over time.
# Chunk 8754
In young children, the signs and symptoms of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea may be more subtle than in adults, making diagnosis more difficult to establish. Polysomnography is useful in confirming diagnosis. Evidence of fragmentation of sleep on the polysomnogram may not be as apparent as in studies of older individuals, possibly because of the high homeo- static drive in young individuals. Symptoms such as snoring are usually parent—reported and thus have reduced sensitivity. Agitated arousals and unusual sleep postures, such as sleeping on the hands and knees, may occur. Nocturnal enuresis also may occur and should raise the suspicion of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea if it recurs in a child who was previously dry at night. Children may also manifest excessive daytime sleepiness, although this is not as com- mon or pronounced as in adults. Daytime mouth breathing, difficulty in swallowing, and poor speech articulation are also common features in children. Children younger than 5 years more often present with nighttime symptoms, such as observed apneas or labored breathing, than with behavioral symptoms (i.e., the nighttime symptoms are more noticeable and more often bring the child to clinical attention). In children older than 5 years, daytime symptoms such as sleepiness and behavioral problems (e.g., impulsivity and hyperactivity), attention-deficit/ hyperactivity disorder, learning difficulties, and morning headaches are more often the focus of concern. Children with obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea also may present with failure to thrive and developmental delays. In young children, obesity is a less common risk factor, while delayed growth and "failure to thrive" may be present.
# Chunk 8755
Sleep-related hypoventilation is diagnosed using polysomnography showing sleep-related hypoxemia and hypercapnia that is not better explained by another breathing-related sleep disorder. The documentation of increased arterial pCOz levels to greater than 55 mmHg 50 mmHg) during sleep in comparison to awake supine values, for 10 minutes or longer, is the gold standard for diagnosis. However, obtaining arterial blood gas determinations dur- ing sleep is impractical, and non-invasive measures of pC02 have not been adequately val- idated during sleep and are not widely used during polysomnography in adults. Prolonged and sustained decreases in oxygen saturation (oxygen saturation of less than 90% for more than 5 minutes with a nadir of at least 85%, or oxygen saturation of less than 90% for at least 30% of sleep time) in the absence of evidence of upper airway obstruction are often used as an indication of sleep-related hypoventilation; however, this finding is not specific, as there are other potential causes of hypoxemia, such as that due to lung disease.
# Chunk 8756
The diagnosis of irregular sleep-wake type is based primarily on a history of symptoms of insomnia at night (during the usual sleep period) and excessive sleepiness (napping) dur- ing the day. Irregular sleep-wake type is characterized by a lack of discernable sleep-wake circadian rhythm. There is no major sleep period, and sleep is fragmented into at least three periods during the 24—hour day.
# Chunk 8757
The prevalence of shift work type is unclear, but the disorder is estimated to affect 5%—10% of the night worker population (16%—20% of the workforce). Prevalence rises with advance- ment into middle-age and beyond (Drake et a1. 2004).
# Chunk 8758
The essential feature of Sleepwalking is repeated episodes of complex motor behavior initiated during sleep, including rising from bed and walking about (Criterion A1). Sleep- walking episodes begin during any stage of NREM sleep, most commonly during slow- wave sleep and therefore most often occurring during the first third of the night. During episodes, the individual has reduced alertness and responsiveness, a blank stare, and rel- ative unresponsiveness to communication with others or efforts by others to awaken the individual. If awakened during the episode (or on awakening the following morning), the individual has limited recall for the episode. After the episode, there may initially be a brief period of confusion or difficulty orienting, followed by full recovery of cognitive function and appropriate behavior.
# Chunk 8759
During an episode, the individual is difficult to awaken or comfort. If the individual awak- ens after the sleep terror, little or none of the dream, or only fragmentary, single images, are recalled. During a typical episode of sleep terrors, the individual abruptly sits up in bed screaming or crying, with a frightened expression and autonomic signs of intense anx- iety (e.g., tachycardia, rapid breathing, sweating, dilation of the pupils). The individual may be inconsolable and is usually unresponsive to the efforts of others to awaken or com- fort him or her. Sleep terrors are also called “night terrors” or “pavor nocturnus.”
# Chunk 8760
During a typical episode of sleep terrors, there is often a sense of overwhelming dread, with a compulsion to escape. Although fragmentary vivid dream images may occur, a story- like dream sequence (as in nightmares) is not reported. Most commonly, the individual does not awaken fully, but returns to sleep and has amnesia for the episode on awakening the next morning. Usually only one episode will occur on any one night. Occasionally several episodes may occur at intervals throughout the night. These events rarely arise during daytime naps.
# Chunk 8761
Isolated or infrequent NREM sleep arousal disorders are very common in the general pop- ulation. From 10% to 30% of children have had at least one episode of sleepwalking, and 2%—3% sleepwalk often. The prevalence of sleepwalking disorder, marked by repeated ep- isodes and impairment or distress, is much lower, probably in the range of 1%—5%. The prevalence of sleepwalking episodes (not sleepwalking disorder) is 10%—7.0% among adults, with weekly to monthly episodes occurring in 0.5%—0.7%. The lifetime prevalence of sleepwalking in adults is 29.2%, with a past-year prevalence of sleepwalking of 3.6%.
# Chunk 8762
NREM sleep arousal disorders arise from any stage of NREM sleep but most commonly from deep NREM sleep (slow-wave sleep). They are most likely to appear in the first third of the night and do not commonly occur during daytime naps. During the episode, the polysomnogram may be obscured with movement artifact. In the absence of such artifact, the electroencephalogram typically shows theta or alpha frequency activity during the ep- isode, indicating partial or incomplete arousal.
# Chunk 8763
Nightmare disorder. In contrast to individuals with NREM sleep arousal disorders, in- dividuals with nightmare disorder typically awaken easily and completely, report vivid storylike dreams accompanying the episodes, and tend to have episodes later in the night.
# Chunk 8764
Specify if:

Acute: Duration of period of nightmares is 1 month or less.

Subacute: Duration of period of nightmares is greater than 1 month but less than 6 months.
# Chunk 8765
Persistent: Duration of period of nightmares is 6 months or greater.

Specify current severity:

Severity can be rated by the frequency with which the nightmares occur:
# Chunk 8766
On awakening, nightmares are well remembered and can be described in detail. They arise out sleep but are more likely in the second half of the major sleep episode when dreaming is longer and mdre intense. Factors that increase early-night REM intensity, such as sleep fragmentation or deprivation, jet lag, and REM-sensitive medications, might facilitate nightmares earlier in the night, including at sleep onset.
# Chunk 8767
Polysomnographic studies demonstrate abrupt awakenings from REM sleep, usually during the second half of the night, prior to report of a nightmare. Heart, respiratory, and eye move- ment rates may quicken or increase in variability before awakening. N ightmares following traumatic events may also arise during non-REM (NREM), particularly stage 2, sleep. The typ- ical sleep of individuals with nightmares is mildly impaired (e.g., reduced efficiency, less slow- wave sleep, more awakenings), with more frequent periodic leg movements in sleep and rel- ative sympathetic nervous system activation after REM sleep deprivation.
# Chunk 8768
Sleep terror disorder. Both nightmare disorder and sleep terror disorder include awak- enings or partial awakenings with fearfulness and autonomic activation, but the two dis- orders are differentiable. Nightmares typically occur later in the night, during REM sleep, and produce vivid, storylike, and clearly recalled dreams; mild autonomic arousal; and complete awakenings. Sleep terrors typically arise in the first third of the night during rate storylike quality. The terrors lead to partial awakenings that leave the individual con— fused, disoriented, and only partially responsive and with substantial autonomic arousal.
# Chunk 8769
REM sleep behavior disorder is present concurrently in approximately 30% of patients with narcolepsy. When it occurs in narcolepsy, the demographics reﬂect the younger age range of narcolepsy, with equal frequency in males and females. Based on findings from individuals presenting to sleep clinics, most individuals (>50%) with initially ”idiopathic” notably, one of the synucleinopathies (Parkinson's disease, multiple system atrophy, or major or mild neurocognitive disorder with Lewy bodies). REM sleep behavior disorder often predates any other sign of these disorders by many years (often more than a decade).
# Chunk 8770
2. The urge to move the legs is partially or totally relieved by movement.

3. The urge to move the legs is worse in the evening or at night than during the day, or occurs only in the evening or at night.
# Chunk 8771
Restless legs syndrome (RLS) is a sensorimotor, neurological sleep disorder characterized by a desire to move the legs or arms, usually associated with uncomfortable sensations typically described as creeping, crawling, tingling, burning, or itching (Criterion A). The diagnosis of RLS is based primarily on patient self—report and history. Symptoms are worse when the individual is at rest, and frequent movements of the legs occur in an effort to relieve the uncomfortable sensations. Symptoms are worse in the evening or night, and in some individuals they occur only in the evening or night. Evening worsening occurs in— dependently of any differences in activity. It is important to differentiate RLS from other conditions such as positional discomfort and leg cramps (Criterion D).
# Chunk 8772
Diagnosis of RLS in children can be difficult because of the self—report component.

While Criterion A for adults assumes that the description of ”urge to move" is by the pa- tient, pediatric diagnosis requires a description in the child’s own words rather than by a parent or caretaker. Typically children age 6 years or older are able to provide detailed, ad— equate descriptors of RLS. However, children rarely use or understand the word "urge," reporting instead that their legs ”have to” or ”got to" move. Also, potentially related to prolonged periods of sitting during class, two-thirds of children and adolescents report daytime leg sensations. Thus, for diagnostic Criterion A3, it is important to compare equal duration of sitting or lying down in the day to sitting or lying down in the evening or night.
# Chunk 8773
Although the impact of milder symptoms is less well characterized, individuals with

RLS complain of disruption in at least one activity of daily living, with up to 50% reporting a negative impact on mood, and 476% reporting a lack of energy. The most common conse- quences of RLS are sleep disturbance, including reduced sleep time, sleep fragmentation, and overall distuibance; depression, generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, and post- traumatic stress disorder; and quality-of-life impairments. RLS can result in daytime sleep- iness or fatigue and is frequently accompanied by significant distress or impairment in affective, social, occupational, educational, academic, behavioral, or cognitive functioning.
# Chunk 8774
Alcohol. Alcohol-induced sleep disorder typically occurs as insomnia type. During acute intoxication, alcohol produces an immediate sedative effect depending on close, ac- duced rapid eye movement (REM) sleep. Following these initial effects, there may be increased wakefulness, restless sleep, and vivid and anxiety-laden dreams for the remain- ing sleep period. In parallel, stages 3 and 4 sleep are reduced, and wakefulness and REM sleep are increased. Alcohol can aggravate breathing-related sleep disorder. With habitual use, alcohol continues to show a short—lived sedative effect in the first half of the night, fol- lowed by sleep continuity disruption in the second half. During alcohol withdrawal, there is extremely disrupted sleep continuity, and an increased amount and intensity of REM sleep, associated frequently with vivid dreaming, which in extreme form, constitutes part of alcohol withdrawal delirium. After acute withdrawal, chronic alcohol users may con- tinue to complain of light, fragmented sleep for weeks to years associated with a persistent deficit in slow-wave sleep.
# Chunk 8775
Each of the substance/medication-induced sleep disorders produces electroencephalo- graphic sleep patterns that are associated with, but cannot be considered diagnostic of, other disorders. The electroencephalographic sleep profile for each substance is related to the stage of use, whether intake/ intoxication, chronic use, or withdrawal following discontinu- ation of the substance. All—night polysomnography can help define the severity of insomnia complaints, while the multiple sleep latency test provides information about the severity of daytime sleepiness. Monitoring of nocturnal respiration and periodic limb movements with havior. Sleep diaries for 2 weeks and actigraphy are considered helpful in confirming the presence of substance/medication-induced sleep disorder. Drug screening can be of use when the individual is not aware or unwilling to relate information about substance intake.
# Chunk 8776
4. Marked tensing or tightening of the pelvic floor muscles during attempted vaginal penetration.

B. The symptoms in Criterion A have persisted for a minimum duration of approximately 6 months.
# Chunk 8777
Difficulties with vaginal penetration (inability or fear or pain) may not be obvious until sex- ual intercourse is attempted. Even once intercourse is attempted, the frequency of attempts may not be significant or regular. In cases where it is difficult to establish whether symptom- atology is lifelong or acquired, it is useful to determine the presence of any consistent period of successful pain-, fear-, and tension—free intercourse. If the experience of such a period can be established, then genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder can be characterized as ac- quired. Once symptomatology is well established for a period of approximately 6 months, the probability of spontaneous and significant symptomatic remission appears to diminish.
# Chunk 8778
ties appears to be common. Comorbidity with relationship distress is also common. This is not surprising, since in Western cultures the inability to have (pain-free) intercourse with a desired partner and the avoidance of sexual opportunities may be either a contributing factor to or the result of other sexual or relationship problems. Because pelvic ﬂoor symp- toms are implicated in the diagnosis of genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder, there is likely to be a higher prevalence of other disorders related to the pelvic ﬂoor or reproduc- tive organs (e.g., interstitial cystitis, constipation, vaginal infection, endometriosis, irrita- ble bowel syndrome).
# Chunk 8779
The onset of antidepressant-induced sexual dysfunction may be as early as 8 days after the agent is first taken. Approximately 30% of individuals with mild to moderate orgasm de- lay will experience spontaneous remission of the dysfunction within 6 months. In some cases, serotonin reuptake inhibitor-induced sexual dysfunction may persist after the agent is discontinued. The time to onset of sexual dysfunction after initiation of antipsy- chotic drugs or drugs of abuse is unknown. It is probable that the adverse effects of nico- tine and alcohol may not appear until after years of use. Premature (early) ejaculation can sometimes occur after cessation of opioid use. There is some evidence that disturbances in sexual function related to substance/medication use increase with age.
# Chunk 8780
Rates of persistence of gender dysphoria from childhood into adolescence or adulthood vary. In natal males, persistence has ranged from 2.2% to 30%. In natal females, persistence has ranged from 12% to 50%. Persistence of gender dysphoria is modestly correlated with dimensional measures of severity ascertained at the time of a childhood baseline assess- ment. In one sample of natal males, lower socioeconomic background was also modestly correlated with persistence. It is unclear if particular therapeutic approaches to gender dysphoria in children are related to rates of long-term persistence. Extant follow-up sam- ples consisted of children receiving no formal therapeutic intervention or receiving ther- apeutic interventions of various types, ranging from active efforts to reduce gender dysphoria to a more neutral, “watchful waiting” approach. It is unclear if children ”en- couraged" or supported to live socially in the desired gender will show higher rates of per- sistence, since such children have not yet been followed longitudinally in a systematic manner. For both natal male and female children showing persistence, almost all are sexually attracted to individuals of their natal sex. For natal male children whose gender dysphoria does not persist, the majority are androphilic (sexually attracted to males) and of- ten self—identify as gay or homosexual (ranging from 63% to 100%). In natal female chil- dren whose gender dysphoria does not persist, the percentage who are gynephilic (sexually attracted to females) and self—identify as lesbian is lower (ranging from 32% to 50%).
# Chunk 8781
Functional Consequences of Gender Dysphoria

Preoccupation with cross-gender wishes may develop at all ages after the first 2—3 years of childhood and often interfere with daily activities. In older children, failure to develop age-typical same-sex peer relationships and skills may lead to isolation from peer groups and to distress. Some children may refuse to attend school because of teasing and harass- ment or pressure to dress in attire associated with their assigned sex. Also in adolescents and adults, preoccupation with cross-gender wishes often interferes with daily activities.
# Chunk 8782
Note: The persistence and frequency of these behaviors should be used to distinguish a behavior that is within normal limits from a behavior that is symptomatic. For children younger than 5 years, the behavior should occur on most days for a period of at least 6 months unless otherwise noted (Criterion A8). For individuals 5 years or older, the behavior should occur at least once per week for at least 6 months, unless otherwise noted (Criterion A8). While these frequency criteria provide guidance on a minimal lev- el of frequency to define symptoms, other factors should also be considered, such as whether the frequency and intensity of the behaviors are outside a range that is nor- mative for the individual’s developmental level, gender, and culture.
# Chunk 8783
The symptoms of oppositional defiant disorder can occur to some degree in individu- als without this disorder. There are several key considerations for determining if the be- haviors are symptomatic of oppositional defiant disorder. First, the diagnostic threshold of four or more symptoms within the preceding 6 months must be met. Second, the per- sistence and frequency of the symptoms should exceed what is normative for an individ- ual’s age, gender, and culture. For example, it is not unusual for preschool children to show temper tantrums on a weekly basis. Temper outbursts for a preschool child would be considered a symptom of oppositional defiant disorder only if they occurred on most days for the preceding 6 months, if they occurred with at least three other symptoms of the dis- order, and if the temper outbursts contributed to the significant impairment associated with the disorder (e.g., led to destruction of property during outbursts, resulted in the child being asked to leave a preschool).
# Chunk 8784
Serious Violations of Rules 13. Often stays out at night despite parental prohibitions. beginning before age 13 years.
# Chunk 8785
Individuals with conduct disorder may also frequently commit serious violations of rules (e.g., school, parental, workplace). Children with conduct disorder often have a pat- tern, beginning before age 13 years, of staying out late at night despite parental prohi- bitions (Criterion A13). Children may also show a pattern of running away from home overnight (Criterion A14). To be considered a symptom of conduct disorder, the running away must have occurred at least twice (or only once if the individual did not return for a lengthy period). Runaway episodes that occur as a direct consequence of physical or sex- ual abuse do not typically qualify for this criterion. Children with conduct disorder may often be truant from school, beginning prior to age 13 years (Criterion A15).
# Chunk 8786
Alcohol use disorder is a common disorder. In the United States, the 12-month prevalence of alcohol use disorder is estimated to be 4.6% among 12- to 17-year-olds and 8.5% among adults age 18 years and older in the United States. Rates of the disorder are greater among adult men (12.4%) than among adult women (4.9%). Twelve-month prevalence of alcohol use disorder among adults decreases in middle age, being greatest among individuals 18- to 29-years-old (16.2%) and lowest among individuals age 65 years and older (1.5%).
# Chunk 8787
Twelve-month prevalence varies markedly across race/ethnic subgroups of the US.

population. For 12- to 17-year-olds, rates are greatest among Hispanics (6.0%) and Native
# Chunk 8788
In most cultures, alcohol is the most frequently used intoxicating substance and contrib- utes to considerable morbidity and mortality. An estimated 3.8% of all global deaths and 4.6% of global disability—adjusted life-years are attributable to alcohol. In the United States, 80% of adults (age 18 years and older) have consumed alcohol at some time in their lives, and 65% are current drinkers (last 12 months). An estimated 3.6% of the world population (15—64 years old) has a current (12-month) alcohol use disorder, with a lower prevalence (1.1%) found in the African region, a higher rate (5.2%) found in the American region (North,
# Chunk 8789
This may be the only laboratory finding. At least 70% of individuals with a high GGT level are persistent heavy drinkers (i.e., consuming eight or more drinks daily on a regular basis).
# Chunk 8790
A second test with comparable or even higher levels of sensitivity and specificity is carbo- hydrate—deficient transferrin (CDT), with levels of 20 units or higher useful in identifying in- dividuals who regularly consume eight or more drinks daily. Since both GGT and CDT levels return toward normal within days to weeks of stopping drinking, both state markers may be useful in monitoring abstinence, especially when the clinician observes increases, rather than decreases, in these values over time—a finding indicating that the person is likely to have returned to heavy drinking. The combination of tests for CDT and GGT may have even higher levels of sensitivity and specificity than either test used alone. Additional useful tests include the mean corpuscular volume (MCV), which may be elevated to high- normal values in individuals who drink heavily—a change that is due to the direct toxic ef— fects of alcohol on erythropoiesis. Although the MCV can be used to help identify those who drink heavily, it is a poor method of monitoring abstinence because of the long half-life of red blood cells. Liver function tests (e.g., alanine aminotransferase [ALT] and alkaline phos- phatase) can reveal liver injury that is a consequence of heavy drinking. Other potential markers of heavy drinking that are more nonspecific for alcohol but can help the clinician think of the possible effects of alcohol include elevations in blood levels or lipids (e.g., tri- glycerides and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol) and high-normal levels of uric acid.
# Chunk 8791
The large majority of alcohol consumers are likely to have been intoxicated to some degree at some point in their lives. For example, in 2010, 44% of 12th—grade students admitted to having been ”drunk in the past year,” with more than 70% of college students reporting the same.
# Chunk 8792
Symptoms can be relieved by administering alcohol or benzodiazepines (e.g., diazepam).

The withdrawal symptoms typically begin when blood concentrations of alcohol decline sharply (i.e., within 4—12 hours) after alcohol use has been stopped or reduced. Reﬂecting the relatively fast metabolism of alcohol, symptoms of alcohol withdrawal usually peak in inten- sity during the second day of abstinence and are likely to improve markedly by the fourth or fifth day. Following acute withdrawal, however, symptoms of anxiety, insomnia, and auto- nomic dysfunction may persist for up to 3—6 months at lower levels of intensity.
# Chunk 8793
The alcohol-induced disorders are an important part of the differential diagnoses for the independent mental conditions. Independent schizophrenia, major depressive disor- der, bipolar disorder, and anxiety disorders, such as panic disorder, are likely to be asso- ciated with much longer-lasting periods of symptoms and often require longer-term medications to optimize the probability of improvement or recovery. The alcohol-induced conditions, on the other hand, are likely to be much shorter in duration and disappear within several days to 1 month after cessation of severe intoxication and / or withdrawal, even without psychotropic medications.
# Chunk 8794
Mild sensory disturbances (e.g., ringing in the ears and ﬂashes of light) may occur with high doses of caffeine. Although large doses of caffeine can increase heart rate, smaller doses can slow heart rate. Whether excess caffeine intake can cause headaches is unclear. On physical examination, agitation, restlessness, sweating, tachycardia, flushed face, and increased bowel motility may be seen. Caffeine blood levels may provide important information for diagnosis, particularly when the individual is a poor historian, although these levels are not diagnostic by themselves in view of the individual variation in response to caffeine.
# Chunk 8795
More than 85% of adults and children in the United States regularly consume caffeine, with adult caffeine consumers ingesting about 280 mg/day on average. The incidence and prevalence of the caffeine withdrawal syndrome in the general population are unclear. In the United States, headache may occur in approximately 50% of cases of caffeine absti- nence. In attempts to permanently stop caffeine use, more than 7 0% of individuals may ex- perience at least one caffeine withdrawal symptom (47% may experience headache), and 24% may experience headache plus one or more other symptoms as well as functional impairment due to withdrawal. Among individuals who abstain from caffeine for at least 24 hours but are not trying to permanently stop caffeine use, 11% may experience head- ache plus one or more other symptoms as well as functional impairment. Caffeine con- sumers can decrease the incidence of caffeine withdrawal by using caffeine daily or only infrequently (e.g., no more than 2 consecutive days). Gradual reduction in caffeine over a period of days or weeks may decrease the incidence and severity of caffeine withdrawal.
# Chunk 8796
Because some cannabis users are motivated to minimize their amount or frequency of use, it is important to be aware of common signs and symptoms of cannabis use and intox- ication so as to better assess the extent of use. As with other substances, experienced users to detect when they are under the inﬂuence. Signs of acute and chronic use include red eyes (conjunctival injection), cannabis odor on clothing, yellowing of finger tips (from smoking joints), chronic cough, burning of incense (to hide the odor), and exaggerated craving and impulse for specific foods, sometimes at unusual times of the day or night.
# Chunk 8797
Cannabinoids, especially cannabis, are the most widely used illicit psychoactive sub- stances in the United States. The 12-month prevalence of cannabis use disorder (DSM-IV abuse and dependence rates combined) is approximately 3.4% among 12- to 17—year-olds and 1.5% among adults age 18 years and older. Rates of cannabis use disorder are greater among adult males (2.2%) than among adult females (0.8%) and among 12- to 17-year-old males (3.8%) than among 12- to 17—year-old females (3.0%). Twelve-month prevalence rates of cannabis use disorder among adults decrease with age, with rates highest among 18- to 29-year—olds (4.4%) and lowest among individuals age 65 years and older (0.01%).
# Chunk 8798
States. For 12- to 17-year-olds, rates are highest among Native American and Alaska Na- tives (7.1%) compared with Hispanics (4.1%), whites (3.4%), African Americans (2.7%), and Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders (0.9%). Among adults, the prevalence of can- nabis use disorder is also highest among Native Americans and Alaska Natives (3.4%) rel- ative to rates among African Americans (1.8%), whites (1.4%), Hispanics (1.2%), and Asian and Pacific Islanders (1.2%). During the past decade the prevalence of cannabis use disor- der has increased among adults and adolescents. Gender differences in cannabis use dis- order generally are concordant with those in other substance use disorders. Cannabis use disorder is more commonly observed in males, although the magnitude of this difference is less among adolescents.
# Chunk 8799
Cannabis use disorder among preteens, adolescents, and young adults is typically ex- pressed as excessive use with peers that is a component of a pattern of other delinquent behaviors usually associated with conduct problems. Milder cases primarily reﬂect con- tinued use despite clear problems related to disapproval of use by other peers, school ad- ministration, or family, which also places the youth at risk for physical or behavioral consequences. In more severe cases, there is a progression to using alone or using through— out the day such that use interferes with daily functioning and takes the place of previ- ously established, prosocial activities.
# Chunk 8800
Cannabis use disorder among adults typically involves well-established patterns of daily cannabis use that continue despite clear psychosocial or medical problems. Many adults have experienced repeated desire to stop or have failed at repeated cessation attempts. Milder adult cases may resemble the more common adolescent cases in that cannabis use is not as frequent or heavy but continues despite potential significant consequences of sustained use. The rate of use among middle-age and older adults appears to be increasing, likely because of a cohort ef— fect resulting from high prevalence of use in the late 1960s and the 19705.
# Chunk 8801
Cannabis has been commonly thought of as a ”gateway” drug because individuals who frequently use cannabis have a much greater lifetime probability than nonusers of using what are commonly considered more dangerous substances, like opioids or cocaine. Can- nabis use and cannabis use disorder are highly comorbid with other substance use disor- ders. Co-occurring mental conditions are common in cannabis use disorder. Cannabis use has been associated with poorer life satisfaction; increased mental health treatment and hospitalization; and higher rates of depression, anxiety disorders, suicide attempts, and conduct disorder. Individuals with past-year or lifetime cannabis use disorder have high rates of alcohol use disorder (greater than 50%) and tobacco use disorder (53%). Rates of other substance use disorders are also likely to be high among individuals with cannabis use disorder. Among those seeking treatment for a cannabis use disorder, 74% report problematic use of a secondary or tertiary substance: alcohol (40%), cocaine (12%), meth- amphetamine (6%), and heroin or other opiates (2%). Among those younger than 18 years, 61% reported problematic use of a secondary substance: alcohol (48%), cocaine (4%), meth- amphetamine (2%), and heroin or other opiates (2%). Cannabis use disorder is also often observed as a secondary problem among those with a primary diagnosis of other substance use disorders, with approximately 25%—80% of those in treatment for another substance use disorder reporting use of cannabis.
# Chunk 8802
Individuals with past-year or lifetime diagnoses of cannabis use disorder also have high rates of concurrent mental disorders other than substance use disorders. Major de- pressive disorder (11%), any anxiety disorder (24%), and bipolar I disorder (13%) are quite common among individuals with a past-year diagnosis of a cannabis use disorder, as are antisocial (30%), obsessive-compulsive, (19%), and paranoid (18%) personality disorders.
# Chunk 8803
The essential feature of cannabis intoxication is the presence of clinically significant prob- lematic behavioral or psychological changes that develop during, or shortly after, canna- bis use (Criterion B). Intoxication typically begins with a ”high" feeling followed by symptoms that include euphoria with inappropriate laughter and grandiosity, sedation, lethargy, impairment in short-term memory, difficulty carrying out complex mental pro- cesses, impaired judgment, distorted sensory perceptions, impaired motor performance, and the sensation that time is passing slowly. Occasionally, anxiety (which can be severe), dysphoria, or social withdrawal occurs. These psychoactive effects are accompanied by two or more of the following signs, developing within 2 hours of cannabis use: conjuncti- val injection, increased appetite, dry mouth, and tachycardia (Criterion C).
# Chunk 8804
The amount, duration, and frequency of cannabis smoking that is required to produce an associated withdrawal disorder during a quit attempt are unknown. Most symptoms have their onset within the first 24—72 hours of cessation, peak within the first week, and last approximately 1—2 weeks. Sleep difficulties may last more than 30 days. Cannabis with- drawal has been documented among adolescents and adults. Withdrawal tends to be more common and severe among adults, most likely related to the more persistent and greater frequency and quantity of use among adults.
# Chunk 8805
The prevalence of phencyclidine use disorder is unknown. Approximately 2.5% of the pop- ulation reports having ever used phencyclidine. The proportion of users increases with age, from 0.3% of 12- to 17-year-olds, to 1.3% of 18- to 25-year-olds, to 2.9% of those age 26 years and older reporting ever using phencyclidine. There appears to have been an in— crease among 12th graders in both ever used (to 2.3% from 1.8%) and past-year use (to 1.3% from 1.0%) of phencyclidine. Past-year use of ketamine appears relatively stable among 12th graders (1.6%—1.7% over the past 3 years).
# Chunk 8806
MDMA /ecstasy as a hallucinogen may have distinctive effects attributable to both its hal— lucinogenic and its stimulant properties. Among heavy ecstasy users, continued use despite physical or psychological problems, tolerance, hazardous use, and spending a great deal of time obtaining the substance are the most commonly reported criteria—over 50% in adults and over 30% in a younger sample, while legal problems related to substance use and persis- tent desire/inability to quit are rarely reported. As found for other substances, diagnostic cri- teria for other hallucinogen use disorder are arrayed along a single continuum of severity.
# Chunk 8807
Of all substance use disorders, other hallucinogen use disorder is one of the rarest. The 12-month prevalence is estimated to be 0.5% among 12- to 17-year-olds and 0.1% among adults age 18 and older in the United States. Rates are higher in adult males (0.2%) compared with females (0.1%), but the opposite is observed in adolescent samples ages 12—17, in which the 12-month rate is slightly higher in females (0.6%) than in males (0.4%). Rates are highest in individuals younger than 30 years, with the peak occurring in individuals ages 18—29 years (0.6%) and decreasing to virtually 00% among individuals age 45 and older.
# Chunk 8808
Americans and Alaska Natives (1.2%) than among Hispanics (0.6%), whites (0.6%), Afri- can Americans (0.2%), and Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders (0.2%). Among adults, 12-month prevalence of other hallucinogen use disorder is similar for Native Americans and Alaska Natives, whites, and Hispanics (all 0.2%) but somewhat lower for Asian Amer- icans and Pacific Islanders (0.07%) and African Americans (0.03%). Past-year prevalence is higher in clinical samples (e.g., 19% in adolescents in treatment). Among individuals cur- rently using hallucinogens in the general population, 7.8% (adult) to 17% (adolescent) had a problematic pattern of use that met criteria for past-year other hallucinogen use disorder.
# Chunk 8809
The prevalence of other hallucinogen intoxication may be estimated by use of those sub— stances. In the United States, 1.8% of individuals age 12 years or older report using hallu- cinogens in the past year. Use is more prevalent among younger individuals, with 3.1% of 12- to 17-year-olds and 7.1% of 18- to 25-year-olds using hallucinogens in the past year, compared with only 0.7% of individuals age 26 years or older. Twelve-month prevalence for hallucinogen use is more common in males (2.4%) than in females (1.2%), and even more so among 18- to 25-year-olds (9.2% for males vs. 5.0% for females). In contrast, among individuals ages 12—17 years, there are no gender differences (3.1% for both gen- ders). These figures may be used as proxy estimates for gender-related differences in the prevalence of other hallucinogen intoxication.
# Chunk 8810
About 10% of 13-year-old American children report having used inhalants at least once; that percentage remains stable through age 17 years. Among those 12- to 17-year-olds who use inhalants, the more-used substances include glue, shoe polish, or toluene; gasoline or lighter ﬂuid; or spray paints.
# Chunk 8811
Only 0.4% of 12- to 17-year-olds progress to inhalant use disorder; those youths tend to exhibit multiple other problems. The declining prevalence of inhalant use disorder after adolescence indicates that this disorder usually remits in early adulthood.
# Chunk 8812
The prevalence of actual episodes of inhalant intoxication in the general population is un- known, but it is probable that most inhalant users would at some time exhibit use that would meet criteria for inhalant intoxication disorder. Therefore, the prevalence of inhal- ant use and the prevalence of inhalant intoxication disorder are likely similar. In 2009 and 2010, inhalant use in the past year was reported by 0.8% of all Americans older than 12 years; the prevalence was highest in younger age groups (3.6% for individuals 12 to 17 years old, and 1.7% for individuals 18 to 25 years old).
# Chunk 8813
Gender differences in the prevalence of inhalant intoxication in the general population are unknown. However, if it is assumed that most inhalant users eventually experience inhal- ant intoxication, gender differences in the prevalence of inhalant users likely approximate those in the proportions of males and females experiencing inhalant intoxication. Regard- ing gender differences in the prevalence of inhalant users in the United States, 1% of males older than 12 years and 0.7% of females older than 12 years have used inhalants in the pre- vious year, but in the younger age groups more females than males have used inhalants (e.g., among 12- to 17-year-olds, 3.6% of males and 4.2% of females).
# Chunk 8814
The 12-month prevalence of opioid use disorder is approximately 0.37% among adults age 18 years and older in the community population. This may be an underestimate because of the large number of incarcerated individuals with opioid use disorders. Rates are higher in males than in females (0.49% vs. 0.26%), with the male-to-female ratio typically being 1.521 for opioids other than heroin (i.e., available by prescription) and 3:1 for heroin. Female ad- olescents may have a higher likelihood of developing opioid use disorders. The preva- lence decreases with age, with the prevalence highest (0.82%) among adults age 29 years or younger, and decreasing to 0.09% among adults age 65 years and older. Among adults, the prevalence of opioid use disorder is lower among African Americans at 0.18% and over- represented among Native Americans at 1.25%. It is close to average among whites (0.38%),
# Chunk 8815
Even though relapses do occur, and while some long—term mortality rates may be as high as 2% per year, about 20%—30% of individuals with opioid use disorder achieve long-term abstinence. An exception concerns that of military service personnel who became depen- dent on opioids in Vietnam; over 90% of this population who had been dependent on opi- oids during deployment in Vietnam achieved abstinence after they returned, but they experienced increased rates of alcohol or amphetamine use disorder as well as increased suicidality.
# Chunk 8816
Routine urine toxicology test results are often positive for opioid drugs in individuals with- opioid use disorder. Urine test results remain positive for most opioids (e.g., heroin, mor- phine, codeine, oxycodone, propoxyphene) for 12—36 hours after administration. Fentanyl dures for several days. Methadone, buprenorphine (or buprenorphine/naloxone combi- nation), and LAAM (L-alpha-acetylmethadol) have to be specifically tested for and will not cause a positive result on routine tests for opiates. They can be detected for several days up to more than 1 week. Laboratory evidence of the presence of other substances (e.g., co- caine, marijuana, alcohol, amphetamines, benzodiazepines) is common. Screening test re- sults for hepatitis A, B, and C virus are positive in as many as 80%—90% of injection opioid users, either for hepatitis antigen (signifying active infection) or for hepatitis antibody (sig- nifying past infection). HIV is prevalent in injection opioid users as well. Mildly elevated liver function test results are common, either as a result of resolving hepatitis or from toxic injury to the liver due to contaminants that have been mixed with the injected opioid. Sub- served for up to 6 months following opioid detoxification.
# Chunk 8817
Symptoms may take 2—4 days to emerge in the case of longer-acting drugs such as metha- done, LAAM (L—alpha-acetylmethadol), or buprenorphine. Acute withdrawal symptoms for a short—acting opioid such as heroin usually peak within 1—3 days and gradually subside over a period of 5—7 days. Less acute withdrawal symptoms can last for weeks to months.
# Chunk 8818
The 12-month prevalences of DSM-IV sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder are es- timated to be 0.3% among 12- to 17-year-olds and 0.2% among adults age 18 years and older. Rates of DSM-IV sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder are slightly greater among adult males (0.3%) than among adult females, but for 12- to 17-year-olds, the rate for females (0.4%) exceeds that for males (0.2%). The 12-month prevalence of DSM-IV sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder decreases as a function of age and is great- est among 18- to 29-year-olds (0.5%) and lowest among individuals 65 years and older (0.04%).
# Chunk 8819
Twelve-month prevalence of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder varies across racial/ethnic subgroups of the US. population. For 12- to 17-year-olds, rates are greatest among whites (0.3%) relative to African Americans (0.2%), Hispanics (0.2%), Native Amer- icans (0.1%), and Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders (0.1%). Among adults, 12—month prevalence is greatest among Native Americans and Alaska Natives (0.8%), with rates of approximately 0.2% among African Americans, whites, and Hispanics and 0.1% among
# Chunk 8820
The essential feature of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal is the presence of a char- acteristic syndrome that develops after a marked decrease in or cessation of intake after several weeks or more of regular use (Criteria A and B). This withdrawal syndrome is characterized by two or more symptoms (similar to alcohol withdrawal) that include autonomic hyperactivity (e.g., increases in heart rate, respiratory rate, blood pressure, or body temperature, along with sweating); a tremor of the hands; insomnia; nausea, sometimes accompanied by vomiting; anxiety; and psychomotor agitation. A grand mal seizure may occur in perhaps as many as 20%—30% of individuals undergoing untreated withdrawal from these substances. In severe withdrawal, visual, tactile, or auditory hallucinations or illusions can occur but are usually in the context of a delirium. If the individual’s reality testing is intact (i.e., he or she knows the substance is causing the hallucinations) and the illusions occur in a clear sensorium, the spec- ifier “with perceptual disturbances” can be noted. When hallucinations occur in the absence of intact reality testing, a diagnosis of substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder should be considered. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, oc- cupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion C). The symptoms must not be attributable to another medical condition and are not better explained by another mental dis- order (e.g., alcohol withdrawal or generalized anxiety disorder) (Criterion D). Relief of with- drawal symptoms with administration of any sedative-hypnotic agent would support a diagnosis of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal.
# Chunk 8821
The longer the substance has been taken and the higher the dosages used, the more likely it is that there will be severe withdrawal. However, withdrawal has been reported with as little as 15 mg of diazepam (or its equivalent in other benzodiazepines) when taken daily for several months. Doses of approximately 40 mg of diazepam (or its equivalent) daily are more likely to produce clinically relevant withdrawal symptoms, and even higher doses (e.g., 100 mg of di- azepam) are more likely to be followed by withdrawal seizures or delirium. Sedative, hyp- notic, or anxiolytic withdrawal delirium is characterized by disturbances in consciousness and cognition, with visual, tactile, or auditory hallucinations. When present, sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal delirium should be diagnosed instead of withdrawal.
# Chunk 8822
Stimulant use disorder: amphetamine—type stimulants. Estimated 12-month prevalence of amphetamine—type stimulant use disorder in the United States is 0.2% among 12- to 17- year-olds and 0.2% among individuals 18 years and older. Rates are similar among adult males and females (0.2%), but among 12- to 17-year-olds, the rate for females (0.3%) is greater than that for males (0.1%). Intravenous stimulant use has a male-to-female ratio of 3:1 or 4:1, but rates are more balanced among non-injecting users, with males representing 54% of primary treatment admissions. Twelve-month prevalence is greater among 18- to 29-year-olds (0.4%) compared with 45— to 64-year-olds (0.1%). For 12- to 17-year-olds, rates are highest among whites and African Americans (0.3%) compared with Hispanics (0.1%) and Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders (0.01%), with amphetamine-type stimulant use disorder virtually absent among Native Americans. Among adults, rates are highest among
# Chunk 8823
Stimulant use disorder: cocaine. Estimated 12-month prevalence of cocaine use disorder in the United States is 0.2% among 12- to 17—year-olds and 0.3% among individuals 18 years and older. Rates are higher among males (0.4%) than among females (0.1%). Rates are highest among 18- to 29-year-olds (0.6%) and lowest among 45- to 64-year-olds (0.1%). Among adults, rates are greater among Native Americans (0.8%) compared with African Ameri- cans (0.4%), Hispanics (0.3%), whites (0.2%), and Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders (0.1%). In contrast, for 12- to 17-year-olds, rates are similar among Hispanics (0.2%), whites (0.2%), and Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders (0.2%); and lower among African Amer- icans (0.02%); with cocaine use disorder virtually absent among Native Americans and
# Chunk 8824
Alaska Natives.

Stimulant use disorders occur throughout all levels of society and are more common among individuals ages 12—25 years compared with individuals 26 years and older. First regular use among individuals in treatment occurs, on average, at approximately age 23 years. For pri- mary methamphetamine—primary treatment admissions, the average age is 31 years.
# Chunk 8825
Patterns of stimulant administration include episodic or daily (or almost daily) use.

Episodic use tends to be separated by 2 or more days of non—use (e.g., intense use over a weekend or on one or more weekdays). "Binges" involve continuous high-dose use over hours or days and are often associated with physical dependence. Binges usually termi- nate only when stimulant supplies are depleted or exhaustion ensues. Chronic daily use may involve high or low doses, often with an increase in dose over time.
# Chunk 8826
Asian and Pacific Islander, and 3% non-Hispanic black.

Benzoylecgonine, a metabolite of cocaine, typically remains in the urine for 1—3 days after a single dose and may be present for 7—12 days in individuals using repeated high doses.
# Chunk 8827
Tobacco use disorder is common among individuals who use cigarettes and smokeless to- bacco daily and is uncommon among individuals who do not use tobacco daily or who use nicotine medications. Tolerance to tobacco is exemplified by the disappearance of nausea and dizziness after repeated intake and with a more intense effect of tobacco the first time it is used during the day. Cessation of tobacco use can produce a well-defined withdrawal syndrome. Many individuals with tobacco use disorder use tobacco to relieve or to avoid withdrawal symptoms (e.g., after being in a situation where use is restricted). Many indi- tinue to smoke. The large majority report craving when they do not smoke for several hours.
# Chunk 8828
Smoking within 30 minutes of waking, smoking daily, smoking more cigarettes per day, and waking at night to smoke are associated with tobacco use disorder. Environmental cues can evoke craving and withdrawal. Serious medical conditions, such as lung and other cancers, cardiac and pulmonary disease, perinatal problems, cough, shortness of breath, and accelerated skin aging, often occur.
# Chunk 8829
DSM-IV nicotine dependence criteria can be used to estimate the prevalence of tobacco use disorder, but since they are a subset of tobacco use disorder criteria, the prevalence of tobacco use disorder will be somewhat greater. The 12-month prevalence of DSM-IV nic- otine dependence in the United States is 13% among adults age 18 years and older. Rates among 18— to 29-year-olds to 4% among individuals age 65 years and older. The prevalence of current nicotine dependence is greater among Native American and Alaska Natives (23%) than among whites (14%) but is less among African Americans (10%), Asian Amer- icans and Pacific Islanders (6%), and Hispanics (6%). The prevalence among current daily smokers is approximately 50%.
# Chunk 8830
. Tobacco Withdrawal

Diagnostic Criteria 292.0 (F17.203)

A. Daily use of tobacco for at least several weeks.
# Chunk 8831
Tobacco withdrawal usually begins within 24 hours of stopping or cutting down on to- bacco use, peaks at 2—3 days after abstinence, and lasts 2—3 weeks. Tobacco withdrawal symptoms can occur among adolescent tobacco users, even prior to daily tobacco use. Pro- longed symptoms beyond 1 month are uncommon.
# Chunk 8832
The past-year prevalence rate of gambling disorder is about 0.2%—0.3% in the general pop- ulation. In the general population, the lifetime prevalence rate is about 0.4%—1.0%. For fe- males, the lifetime prevalence rate of gambling disorder is about 0.2%, and for males it is about 0.6%. The lifetime prevalence of pathological gambling among African Americans is about 0.9%, among whites about 0.4%, and among Hispanics about 0.3%.
# Chunk 8833
The onset of gambling disorder can occur during adolescence or young adulthood, but in other individuals it manifests during middle or even older adulthood. Generally, gam- bling disorder develops over the course of years, although the progression appears to be more rapid in females than in males. Most individuals who develop a gambling disorder evidence a pattern of gambling that gradually increases in both frequency and amount of wagering. Certainly, milder forms can develop into more severe cases. Most individuals with gambling disorder report that one or two types of gambling are most problematic for them, although some individuals participate in many forms of gambling. Individuals are likely to engage in certain types of gambling (e.g., buying scratch tickets daily) more fre- quently than others (e.g., playing slot machines or blackjack at the casino weekly). Fre- quency of gambling can be related more to the type of gambling than to the severity of the overall gambling disorder. For example, purchasing a single scratch ticket each day may not be problematic, while less frequent casino, sports, or card gambling may be part of a gambling disorder. Similarly, amounts of money spent wagering are not in themselves in- dicative of gambling disorder. Some individuals can wager thousands of dollars per month and not have a problem with gambling, while others may wager much smaller amounts but experience substantial gambling-related difficulties.
# Chunk 8834
FM: :53 w5t£m 8:03 rwd: 55.50:: 8 7855a ..m.8_ 55:58 a 5 2580: mm. 858: .55.: 8 85m: $3 8:85: A8585 :0 £8.30 8 :0:8:58:0c w55m: _m:0:5:0:80U $m§m=5 858853: .08 .m:8> 55:58 6:058:85 .88:8 8 8: 88:85 8 :03858 8:38 830>5 5581585550 88535588 8 85m: 058% 8 8: :88 >5): .858: 0:388 .8“: 888m $3.533 .32 3:386 8505:-an 5826: 8: .35 .5555 8588:: 3:85.: 88% 585058 :0:—w 5:20:08 8580 88mm 8 8:308:88 .580 8088:: 8 350:08 _u:m 59:0 8 388508 :8 88:8 8059555» 885 :83 0:50:85“: 4555 :8 58:: 880:0 8 85m: :88: :88 8: .85 .585535: 88.8w 5:5 .855 :55 85a: 8:30:05 885% 888:: 5:8 ...:85 H 8:3 30:: 30%.. :5...
# Chunk 8835
The disturbance develops over a short period of time, usually hours to a few days, and tends to ﬂuctuate during the course of the day, often with worsening in the evening and night when external orienting stimuli decrease (Criterion B). There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the disturbance is a physiologi- cal consequence of an underlying medical condition, substance intoxication or with- drawal, use of a medication, or a toxin exposure, or a combination of these factors (Criterion E). The etiology should be coded according to the etiologically appropriate sub- type (i.e., substance or medication intoxication, substance withdrawal, another medical condition, or multiple etiologies). Delirium often occurs in the context of an underlying
# Chunk 8836
Delirium is often associated with a disturbance in the sleep-wake cycle. This disturbance can include daytime sleepiness, nighttime agitation, difficulty falling asleep, excessive sleepiness throughout the day, or wakefulness throughout the night. In some cases, com- plete reversal of the night-day sleep-wake cycle can occur. Sleep—wake cycle disturbances are very common in delirium and have been proposed as a core criterion for the diagnosis.
# Chunk 8837
The prevalence of delirium is highest among hospitalized older individuals and varies depending on the individuals’ characteristics, setting of care, and sensitivity of the detec- tion method. The prevalence of delirium in the community overall is low (1%—2%) but in- creases with age, rising to 14% among individuals older than 85 years. The prevalence is 10%—30% in older individuals presenting to emergency departments, where the delirium often indicates a medical illness.
# Chunk 8838
The prevalence of delirium when individuals are admitted to the hospital ranges from 14% to 24%, and estimates of the incidence of delirium arising during hospitalization range from 6% to 56% in general hospital populations. Delirium occurs in 15%—53% of older individuals postoperatively and in 70%—87% of those in intensive care. Delirium oc- curs in up to 60% of individuals in nursing homes or post—acute care settings and in up to 83% of all individuals at the end of life.
# Chunk 8839
Overall prevalence estimates for dementia (which is largely congruent with major

NCD) are approximately 1%—2% at age 65 years and as high as 30% by age 85 years. The prevalence of mild NCD is very sensitive to the definition of the disorder, particularly in community settings, where evaluations are less detailed. In addition, in contrast with clin- ical settings, where cognitive concern must be high to seek and locate care, there may be a less clear decline from baseline functioning. Estimates of the prevalence of mild cognitive impairment (which is substantially congruent with mild NCD) among older individuals are fairly variable, ranging from 2% to 10% at age 65 and 5% to 25% by age 85.
# Chunk 8840
census data estimates suggest that approximately 7% of individuals diagnosed with Alz- heimer’s disease are between ages 65 and 74 years, 53% are between ages 75 and 84 years, and 40% are 85 years and older. The percentage of dementias attributable to Alzheimer’s disease ranges from about 60% to over 90%, depending on the setting and diagnostic cri- teria. Mild NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease is likely to represent a substantial fraction of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) as well.
# Chunk 8841
Major or mild vascular NCD is the second most common cause of NCD after Alzheimer’s disease. In the United States, population prevalence estimates for vascular dementia range from 0.2% in the 65—70 years age group to 16% in individuals 80 years and older. Within 3 months following stroke, 20%—30% of individuals are diagnosed with dementia. In neu- ropathology series, the prevalence of vascular dementia increases from 13% at age 70 years to 44.6% at age 90 years or older, in comparison with Alzheimer’s disease (23.6%—51%) and combined vascular dementia and Alzheimer’s disease (2%—46.4%). Higher prevalence has been reported in African Americans compared with Caucasians, and in East Asian countries (e.g., Japan, China). Prevalence is higher in males than in females.
# Chunk 8842
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CID). Variant CID is much rarer and is associated with trans- mission of bovine spongiform encephalopathy, also called "mad cow disease." Typically, individuals with CID present with neurocognitive deficits, ataxia, and abnormal move- ments such as myoclonus, chorea, or dystonia; a startle reﬂex is also common. Typically, the history reveals rapid progression to major NCD over as little as 6 months, and thus the disorder is typically seen only at the major level. However, many individuals with the dis- order may have atypical presentations, and the disease can be confirmed only by biopsy or at autopsy. Individuals with variant CID may present with a greater preponderance of psychiatric symptoms, characterized a by low mood, withdrawal, and anxiety. Prion dis- ease is typically not diagnosed without at least one of the characteristic biomarker fea- tures: recognized lesions on magnetic resonance imaging with DWI (diffusion-weighted imaging) or FLAIR (ﬂuid-attenuated inversion recovery), tau or 14-3-3 protein in cerebro- spinal ﬂuid, characteristic triphasic waves on electroencephalogram, or, for rare familial forms, family history or genetic testing.
# Chunk 8843
Prion disease may develop at any age in adults—the peak age for the sporadic CID is ap- proximately 67 years—although it has been reported to occur in individuals spanning the teenage years to late life. Prodromal symptoms of prion disease may include fatigue, anx- iety, problems with appetite or sleeping, or difficulties with concentration. After several weeks, these symptoms may be followed by incoordination, altered vision, or abnormal gait or other movements that may be myoclonic, choreoathetoid, or ballistic, along with a rapidly progressive dementia. The disease typically progresses very rapidly to the major level of impairment over several months. More rarely, it can progress over 2 years and ap- pear similar in its course to other NCDs.
# Chunk 8844
From 30% to 50% of individuals diagnosed with this disorder have a concurrent diagnosis of major depressive disorder when admitted to a clinical setting. There is considerable co- occurrence with schizoid, paranoid, avoidant, and borderline personality disorders.
# Chunk 8845
Twelve-month prevalence rates of antisocial personality disorder, using criteria from pre— vious DSMs, are between 0.2% and 3.3%. The highest prevalence of antisocial personality disorder (greater than 70%) is among most severe samples of males with alcohol use dis- order and from substance abuse clinics, prisons, or other forensic settings. Prevalence is higher in samples affected by adverse socioeconomic (i.e., poverty) or sociocultural (i.e., migration) factors.
# Chunk 8846
This behavior is not accounted for by economic necessity. They often feel that they do not have time to take an evening or a weekend day off to go on an outing or to just relax. They may keep postponing a pleasurable activity, such as a vacation, so that it may never occur.
# Chunk 8847
Diagnostic Criteria 302.2 (F65.4)

A. Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent, intense sexually arousing fantasies, sex- ual urges, or behaviors involving sexual activity with a prepubescent child or children (generally age 13 years or younger).
# Chunk 8848
The Criterion A clause, indicating that the signs or symptoms of pedophilia have per- sisted for 6 months or longer, is intended to ensure that the sexual attraction to children is not merely transient. However, the diagnosis may be made if there is clinical evidence of sustained persistence of the sexual attraction to children even if the 6-month duration can- not be precisely determined.
# Chunk 8849
Examples of presentations that can be specified using the "other specified" designation include, but are not limited to, recurrent and intense sexual arousal involving telephone scatologia (obscene phone calls), necrophilia (corpses), zoophilia (animals), coprophilia (feces), klismaphilia (enemas), or urophilia (urine) that has been present for at least 6 months and causes marked distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important ar- eas of functioning. Other specified paraphilic disorder can be specified as in remission and/or as occurring in a controlled environment.
# Chunk 8850
Patients have generally been exposed to a dopamine antagonist within 72 hours prior to symptom development. Hyperthermia (>100.4°F or >38.0°C on at least two occasions, measured orally), associated with profuse diaphoresis, is a distinguishing feature of neu- roleptic malignant syndrome, setting it apart from other neurological side effects of anti- psychotic medications. Extreme elevations in temperature, reflecting a breakdown in central thermoregulation, are more likely to support the diagnosis of neuroleptic malig- nant syndrome. Generalized rigidity, described as ”lead pipe” in its most severe form and usually unresponsive to antiparkinsonian agents, is a cardinal feature of the disorder and may be associated with other neurological symptoms (e.g., tremor, sialorrhea, akinesia, dystonia, trismus, myoclonus, dysarthria, dysphagia, rhabdomyolysis). Creatine kinase elevation of at least four times the upper limit of normal is commonly seen. Changes in mental status, characterized by delirium or altered consciousness ranging from stupor to coma, are often an early sign. Affected individuals may appear alert but dazed and unre- sponsive, consistent with catatonic stupor. Autonomic activation and instability—mani- fested by tachycardia (rate>25% above baseline), diaphoresis, blood pressure elevation 225 mmHg systolic change within 24 hours), urinary incontinence, and pallor—may be seen at any time but provide an early clue to the diagnosis. Tachypnea (rate >50°/o above baseline) is common, and respiratory distress—resulting from metabolic acidosis, hyper- metabolism, chest wall restriction, aspiration pneumonia, or pulmonary emboli—can oc- cur and lead to sudden respiratory arrest.
# Chunk 8851
Antidepressant discontinuation syndrome is a set of symptoms that can occur after an abrupt cessation (or marked reduction in dose) of an antidepressant medication that was taken continuously for at least 1 month. Symptoms generally begin within 2—4 days and typically include specific sensory, somatic, and cognitive-emotional manifestations. Fre- quently reported sensory and somatic symptoms include ﬂashes of lights, ”electric shock” sensations, nausea, and hyperresponsivity to noises or lights. Nonspecific anxiety and feelings of dread may also be reported. Symptoms are alleviated by restarting the same medication or starting a different medication that has a similar mechanism of action— for example, discontinuation symptoms after withdrawal from a serotonin-norepineph- rine reuptake inhibitor may be alleviated by starting a tricyclic antidepressant. To qualify as antidepressant discontinuation syndrome, the symptoms should not have been present before the antidepressant dosage was reduced and are not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., manic or hypomanic episode, substance intoxication, substance withdrawal, somatic symptom disorder).
# Chunk 8852
Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention 721

Partner neglect is any egregious act or omission in the past year by one partner that de- prives a dependent partner of basic needs and thereby results, or has reasonable potential to result, in physical or psychological harm to the dependent partner. This category is used in the context of relationships in which one partner is extremely dependent on the other partner for care or for assistance in navigating ordinary daily activities—for example, a partner who is incapable of self—care owing to substantial physical, psychological/intel- lectual, or cultural limitations (e.g., inability to communicate with others and manage ev- eryday activities due to living in a foreign culture).
# Chunk 8853
The adult version of the measure consists of 23 questions that assess 13 psychiatric do- mains, including depression, anger, mania, anxiety, somatic symptoms, suicidal ideation, psychosis, sleep problems, memory, repetitive thoughts and behaviors, dissociation, per— sonality functioning, and substance use (Table 1). Each domain consists of one to three questions. Each item inquires about how much (or how often) the individual has been bothered by the specific symptom during the past 2 weeks. If the individual is of impaired capacity and unable to complete the form (e.g., an individual with dementia), a know]- edgeable adult informant may complete this measure. The measure was found to be clin- ically useful and to have good reliability in the DSM-5 field trials that were conducted in adult clinical samples across the United States and in Canada.
# Chunk 8854
The parent/guardian-rated version of the measure (for children ages 6—17) consists of 25 questions that assess 12 psychiatric domains, including depression, anger, irritability, mania, anxiety, somatic symptoms, inattention, suicidal ideation/attempt, psychosis, sleep disturbance, repetitive thoughts and behaviors, and substance use (Table 2). Each item asks the parent or guardian to rate how much (or how often) his or her child has been bothered by the specific psychiatric symptom during the past 2 weeks. The measure was also found to be clinically useful and to have good reliability in the DSM-5 field trials that were conducted in pediatric clinical samples across the United States. For children ages 11—17, along with the parent/guardian rating of the child’s symptoms, the clinician may consider having the child complete the child-rated version of the measure. The child—rated version of the measure can be found online at www.psychiatry.org/dsm5.
# Chunk 8855
Scoring and interpretation. On the adult self—rated version of the measure, each item is rated on a 5-point scale (0=none or not at all; 1=slight or rare, less than a day or two; 2=mild or several days; 3=moderate or more than half the days; and 4=severe or nearly every day).
# Chunk 8856
Table 1 outlines threshold scores that may guide further inquiry for the remaining domains.

On the parent/guardian—rated version of the measure (for children ages 6—17), 19 of the 25 items are each rated on a 5—point scale (0=none or not at all; 1=slight or rare, less than a day or two; =mild or several days; 3=moderate or more than half the days; and 4=severe or nearly every day). The suicide ideation, suicide attempt, and substance abuse items are each rated on a ”Yes, No, or Don’t Know” scale. The score on each item within a domain should be re- viewed. However, with the exception of inattention and psychosis, a rating of mild (i.e., 2) or greater on any item within a domain that is scored on the 5-point scale may serve as a guide for additional inquiry and follow-up to determine if a more detailed assessment is necessary, which may include the Level 2 cross-cutting symptom assessment for the domain (see
# Chunk 8857
Onset of attenuated psychosis syndrome is usually in mid-to-late adolescence or early adulthood. It may be preceded by normal development or evidence for impaired cogni- tion, negative symptoms, and/ or impaired social development. In help-seeking cohorts, criteria for a psychotic disorder. In some cases, the syndrome may transition to a depres- sive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features, but development to a schizophrenia spec- trum disorder is more frequent. It appears that the diagnosis is best applied to individuals ages 15—35 years. Long—term course is not yet described beyond 7—12 years.
# Chunk 8858
The prevalence of caffeine use disorder in the general population is unclear. Based on all seven generic DSM-IV-TR criteria for dependence, 30% of current caffeine users may have met DSM-IV criteria for a diagnosis of caffeine dependence, with endorsement of three or more dependence criteria, during the past year. When only four of the seven criteria (the three primary criteria proposed above plus tolerance) are used, the prevalence appears to drop to 9%. Thus, the expected prevalence of caffeine use disorder among regular caffeine users is likely less than 9%. Given that approximately 75%—80% of the general population uses caffeine regularly, the estimated prevalence would be less than 7%. Among regular caffeine drinkers at higher risk for caffeine use problems (e.g., high school and college stu- dents, individuals in drug treatment, and individuals at pain clinics who have recent his- tories of alcohol or illicit drug misuse), approximately 20% may have a pattern of use that meets all three of the proposed criteria in Criterion A.
# Chunk 8859
Persistent and recurrent use of the Internet to engage in games, often with other players, leading to clinically significant impairment or distress as indicated by five (or more) of the following in a 12-month period: 1. Preoccupation with Internet games. (The individual thinks about previous gaming activity or anticipates playing the next game; Internet gaming becomes the dominant activity in daily life).
# Chunk 8860
Symptoms of ND-PAE include marked impairment in global intellectual performance (IQ) 0r neurocognitive impairments in any of the following areas: executive functioning, learning, memory, and / or visual-spatial reasoning. Impairments in self-regulation are pres- ent and may include impairment in mood or behavioral regulation, attention deficit, or impairment in impulse control. Finally, impairments in adaptive functioning include com- munication deficits and impairment in social communication and interaction. Impairment in daily living (self-help) skills and impairment in motor skills may be present. As it may be difficult to obtain an accurate assessment of the neurocognitive abilities of very young chil- dren, it is appropriate to defer a diagnosis for children 3 years of age and younger.
# Chunk 8861
Because of the elimination of the DSM-IV-TR chapter ”Disorders Usually First Diagnosed

During Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence,” this chapter describes several disorders found in the DSM-IV section ”Feeding and Eating Disorders of Infancy or Early Childhood,” such as pica and rumination disorder. The DSM-IV category feeding disorder of infancy or early childhood has been renamed avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder, and the criteria are significantly expanded. The core diagnostic criteria for anorexia nervosa are conceptually un- changed from DSM-IV with one exception: the requirement for amenorrhea is eliminated. As in DSM—IV, individuals with this disorder are required by Criterion A to be at a significantly low body weight for their developmental stage. The wording of the criterion is changed for clarification, and guidance regarding how to judge whether an individual is at or below a sig- nificantly low weight is provided in the text. In DSM-S, Criterion B is expanded to include not only overtly expressed fear of weight gain but also persistent behavior that interferes with weight gain. The only change in the DSM-IV criteria for bulimia nervosa is a reduction in the required minimum average frequency of binge eating and inappropriate compensatory be- havior frequency from twice to once weekly. The extensive research that followed the prom- ulgation of preliminary criteria for binge-eating disorder in Appendix B of DSM-IV documented the clinical utility and validity of binge—eating disorder. The only significant dif- ference from the preliminary criteria is that the minimum average frequency of binge eating re- quired for diagnosis is once weekly over the last 3 months, identical to the frequency criterion for bulimia nervosa (rather than at least 2 days a week for 6 months in DSM-IV).
# Chunk 8862
In DSM-5, some gender-specific sexual dysfunctions have been added, and, for females, sexual desire and arousal disorders have been combined into one disorder: female sexual interestlarousal disorder. All of the sexual dysfunctions (except substance/medication-in- duced sexual dysfunction) now require a minimum duration of approximately 6 months and more precise severity criteria. Genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder has been added to
# Chunk 8863
night eating syndrome Recurrent episodes of night eating, as manifested by eating after awakening from sleep or excessive food consumption after the evening meal. There is awareness and recall of the eating. The night eating is not better accounted for by ex- ternal inﬂuences such as changes in the individual’s sleep-wake cycle or by local social norms.
# Chunk 8864
pica Persistent eating of nonnutritive nonfood substances over a period of at least 1 month.

The eating of nonnutritive nonfood substances is inappropriate to the developmental level of the individual (a minimum age of 2 years is suggested for diagnosis). The eat- ing behavior is not part of a culturally supported or socially normative practice.
# Chunk 8865
restless legs syndrome An urge to move the legs, usually accompanied or caused by uncomfortable and unpleasant sensations in the legs (for pediatric restless legs syn- drome, the description of these symptoms should be in the child’s own words). The symptoms begin or worsen during periods of rest or inactivity. Symptoms are partially or totally relieved by movement. Symptoms are worse in the evening or at night than during the day or occur only in the night/evening.
# Chunk 8866
Leadership in SurgeryStephen Markowiak, Hollis Merrick, Shiela Beroukhim, Jeremy J. Laukka, Amy Lightner, Munier Nazzal,  Lee Hammerling, James R. Macho, and F. Charles Brunicardi 1chapterINTRODUCTIONThe field of surgery has evolved greatly from its roots, and sur-gical practice now requires the mastery of modern leadership principles and skills as much as the acquisition of medical knowledge and surgical technique. Historically, surgeons took sole responsibility for their patients and directed proceedings in the operating room with absolute authority, using a command-and-control style of leadership. Modern surgical practice has now evolved from single provider–based care toward a team-based approach, which requires collaborative leadership skills. Surgical care benefits from the collaboration of surgeons, anes-thesiologists, internists, radiologists, pathologists, radiation oncologists, nurses, pharmacists, social workers, therapists, hospital staff, and administrators. Occupying a central role on the healthcare team, surgeons1 have the potential to improve patient outcomes, reduce medical errors, and improve patient satisfaction through their leadership of the multidisciplinary team. Thus, in the landscape of modern healthcare systems, it is imperative that surgical training programs include formal instruction on leadership principles and skills to cultivate their trainees’ leadership capabilities.Many medical and surgical communities, including residency training programs, acknowledge the need for improved physician leadership. Specifically, surveyed surgical residents felt a lack of confidence in multiple areas of leadership, particularly in conflict resolution.2 Surgical trainees identify leadership skills as important, but they report themselves as “not competent” or “minimally competent” in this regard.2,3 While a small number of surgical training programs have implemented 1formal curricula focused on teaching leadership principles, it is now imperative that all surgical training programs teach these important skills to their trainees.4,5 Interviews of academic chairpersons identified several critical leadership success factors,6 including mastery of visioning, communication, change management, emotional intelligence, team building, business skills, personnel management, and systems thinking. These chairpersons stated that the ability of emotional intelligence was “fundamental to their success and its absence the cause of their failures,” regardless of medical knowledge.6 Thus, residency programs need to include leadership training to prepare future surgeons for success in modern healthcare delivery.In the United States, the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) has established six core competencies—patient care, medical knowledge, prac-tice-based learning and improvement, interpersonal and com-munication skills, professionalism, and systems-based practice (Table 1-1)4—that each contain principles of leadership. The ACGME has mandated the teaching of these core competencies but has not established a formal guide on how to teach the lead-ership skills described within the core competencies. Therefore, this chapter offers a review of fundamental principles of leader-ship and an introduction of the concept of a leadership training program for future surgeons.DEFINITIONS OF LEADERSHIPMany different definitions of leadership have been described. Former First Lady Rosalynn Carter once observed that “A leader takes people where they want to go. A great leader takes people Introduction	3Definitions of Leadership	3Levels of Leadership / 4Fundamental Principles of   Leadership	4Vision / 5Generating Belief in Your Vision / 6Willingness / 7Time Management / 10Self-Care and Wellness / 11Recruitment / 11Creating a Culture of Empathy,  Patient-Family-Centered Care, and Personalized Surgery / 11Why We Lead	11Choosing to Become a Leader / 11Leadership’s Effect on Healthcare Cost and Clinical Outcomes / 11The Importance of Diversity and Leadership	12Leadership Styles	12Formal Leadership Training   Programs in Surgery	13History of Leadership Training and  the Multifactor Leadership Questionnaire / 13Designing the Program / 14Practicing Leadership Skills and Assessing Leadership Formally With Objective Structured Clinical Examination (OSCE) and Simulation / 14Evaluation of Surgeon Performance / 16Mentoring and Development	18Mentoring / 18Modeling Leadership for Medical Students and the “Hidden Curriculum” / 18Tools to Measure Leadership Outcomes in Healthcare / 19Leadership Training for the   Prospective Surgeon / 20Early Career Development and   Establishing Oneself	20Senior Faculty Development:   Transitioning to Departmental   Leadership and Legacy Building	21Conclusion	21Brunicardi_Ch01_p0001-p0026.indd   329/01/19   10:58 AM 4Table 1-1Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education core competenciesCORE COMPETENCYDESCRIPTIONPatient careTo be able to provide compassionate and effective healthcare in the modern-day healthcare environmentMedical knowledgeTo effectively apply current medical knowledge in patient care and to be able to use medical tools (i.e., PubMed) to stay current in medical educationPractice-based learning and improvementTo critically assimilate and evaluate information in a systematic manner to improve patient care practicesInterpersonal and communication skillsTo demonstrate sufficient communication skills that allow for efficient information exchange in physician-patient interactions and as a member of a healthcare teamProfessionalismTo demonstrate the principles of ethical behavior (i.e., informed consent, patient confidentiality) and integrity that promote the highest level of medical careSystems-based practiceTo acknowledge and understand that each individual practice is part of a larger healthcare delivery system and to be able to use the system to support patient careKey Points1	Effective surgical leadership improves patient care, safety, and clinical outcomes.2	A fundamental principle of leadership is to provide a vision that people can live up to, thereby providing direction and purpose to the constituency.3	Surgical leaders have the willingness to lead through an active and passionate commitment to the vision.4	Surgical leaders have the willingness to commit to lifelong learning.5	Surgical leaders have the willingness to communicate effec-tively and resolve conflict.6	Surgical leaders must practice effective time management.7	Different leadership styles are tools to use based on the team dynamic.8	Surgical trainees can be taught leadership principles in formal leadership training programs to enhance their ability to lead.9	Mentorship provides wisdom, guidance, and insight essen-tial for the successful development of a surgical leader.of business. In business, the processes of customer satisfaction, product development, and organization efficiency are the equiva-lent of patient satisfaction, medical advancement, and efficient delivery of care. Jim Collins, author of Good to Great, studied the success and leadership styles of Fortune 500 companies over a 30-year period. He found that leadership is strongly correlated with corporate success, and most importantly for our study, that leadership strength can be broken down by level and characteristic  (See figure 1-1).8Of 11 particularly outstanding organizations identified, great leadership was the single major defining characteristic that distinguished them from their peers. These organizations were led by what Collins called the “Level 5 Leader,” one whose per-sonal humility and professional will drove team success. Under this system of leadership study, surgeon-leaders begin at the bottom level and, through study, hard work, and professional development, advance to the ultimate level of leadership.8FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF LEADERSHIPLeadership is a complex concept. Surgeons should strive to adopt leadership qualities that provide the best outcomes for their patients, based on the following fundamental principles: vision, willingness, time management, conflict resolution, where they don’t necessarily want to go, but where they ought to be.” Leadership does not always have to come from a position of authority. Former American president John Quincy Adams stated, “If your actions inspire others to dream more, learn more, do more, and become more, you are a leader.” Another defini-tion is that leadership is the process of using social influence to enlist the aid and support of others in a common task.7Levels of LeadershipWhen working toward organizational success, strong leader-ship is a critical component. The best study of the relationship between leadership skill and organizational success is in the field LEVEL 5 EXECUTIVEBuilds enduring greatnessthrough a paradoxical combinationof personal humility plus professional will.LEVEL 4 EFFECTIVE LEADERCatalyzes commitment to and vigorous pursuitof a clear and compelling vision; stimulatesthe group to high performance standards.LEVEL 3 COMPETENT MANAGEROrganizes people and resources toward the effectiveand efficient pursuit of predetermined objectives.LEVEL 2 CONTRIBUTING TEAM MEMBERContributes to the achievement of groupobjectives; works effectively with others in a group setting.LEVEL 1 HIGHLY CAPABLE INDIVIDUALMakes productive contributions through talent, knowledge,skills, and good work habits.Figure 1-1. Levels of leadership as defined by Jim Collins in Good to Great. (Reproduced with permission from Collins J: Good to Great. Boston, MA: Harper Collins; 2011.)Brunicardi_Ch01_p0001-p0026.indd   429/01/19   10:58 AM 5LEADERSHIP IN SURGERYCHAPTER 1recruitment, and culture (See Table 1-2). Surgeon-leaders will develop a team of faculty, residents, and other healthcare per-sonnel who are aligned on mission, vision, and values. The team and leader must be willing to address complex problems with honest communication and well-developed conflict resolution skills. A culture must be established where faculty and staff will work towards the advancement of the medical arts and the greater good of society.9VisionThe first and most fundamental principle of leadership is to establish a vision that people can live up to, thus providing direction and purpose to the constituency. Creating a vision is a declaration of the near future that inspires and conjures motivation.10 A classic example of a powerful vision that held effective impact is President Kennedy’s declaration in 1961 that “. . . this nation should commit itself to achieving the goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man on the moon and returning him safely to the earth.” Following his declaration of this vision with a timeline to achieve it, the United Sates mounted a remarkable unified effort, and by the end of the decade, Neil Armstrong took his famous walk and the vision had been accomplished (Fig. 1-2).On a daily basis, surgeons are driven by a powerful vision: the vision that our surgical care will improve patients’ lives. The great surgical pioneers, such as Hunter, Lister (Fig. 1-3), Halsted, von Langenbeck, Billroth, Kocher (Fig. 1-4), Carrel, Gibbon, Blalock, Wangensteen, Moore, Rhoads, Huggins, Murray, Kountz, Longmire, Starzl, and DeBakey (Fig. 1-5), each possessed a vision that revolutionized the field of surgery. In the 19th century, Joseph Lister changed the practice of surgery with his application of Pasteur’s germ theory. He set a young boy’s open compound leg fracture, a condition with a 90% mortality 2Figure 1-2. Apollo 11 Lunar Module moon walk. Astronaut Edwin “Buzz” Aldrin walks by the footpad of the Apollo 11 Lunar Module, July 1969. (Reproduced with permission from AP Photo/NASA. © 2018 The Associated Press.)Figure 1-3. Joseph Lister directing use of carbolic acid spray in one of his earliest antiseptic surgical operations, circa 1865.  (Used with permission from Getty Images.)rate at that time, using carbolic acid dressings and aseptic surgical technique. The boy recovered, and Lister gathered nine more patients. His famous publication on the use of aseptic technique introduced the modern era of sterile technique. Emil Theodor Kocher was the first to master the thyroidectomy, thought to be an impossible operation at the time, and went on to perform thousands of thyroidectomies with a mortality of less than 1%. He was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1909 for describing the thyroid’s physiologic role in metabolism. Michael E. DeBakey’s powerful vision led to the development of numerous groundbreaking procedures that helped pioneer the field of cardiovascular surgery. For example, envisioning an artificial artery for arterial bypass operations, Dr. DeBakey invented the Dacron graft, which has helped millions of patients suffering from vascular disease and enabled the development of endovascular surgery. Dr. Frederick Banting, the youngest recipient of the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, had a vision to discover the biochemical link between diabetes and glucose homeostasis. His vision and perseverance led to the discovery of insulin.11 In retrospect, the power and clarity of their visions were remarkable, and their willingness and dedication were inspiring. By studying their careers and accomplishments, surgical trainees can be inspired by the potential impact of a well-developed vision.Table 1-2The fundamental principles of leadershipLEADERSHIP SKILLDESCRIPTION AND APPLICATION IN THE FIELD OF MEDICINEVisionThe act of establishing tangible goals of care for patients on both a daily basis as well as for long-term purposes.Effective communicationEstablishing an open, respectful, and nonjudgmental forum for communication among different members of the healthcare team and with the patient.Willingness to leadTaking on full responsibility for the care of patients and remaining ethical, professional, and committed despite the especially challenging rigors of joining the field of surgery.Willingness to learnA commitment to lifelong learning of the latest scientific, medical, and surgical updates to deliver optimized patient care.Conflict resolutionThe art of resolving conflicts in a peaceful and ethical manner in team settings.Brunicardi_Ch01_p0001-p0026.indd   529/01/19   10:58 AM 6BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IFigure 1-5. Michael E. DeBakey. (Reproduced with permission from AP Photo/David J. Phillip. © 2018 The Associated Press.)Generating Belief in Your VisionSurgical leaders with great visions will inevitably require help from colleagues, other healthcare professionals, scientists, administrators, patients, and nonmedical personnel. To get this help, surgical leaders must inspire their team and understand motivation. For the surgeon-leader, it is critical to know that people do not follow leaders because of what they do; people follow leaders because of why they do what they do. The people who help the leader execute the vision are motivated by the leader’s beliefs and attitudes more than the leader’s policy or agenda. This concept, based on Simon Sinek’s Start With Why, is rooted in understanding of the anatomy and function of the human brain.13 See figure 1-6.For example, take a surgeon-leader who wants to imple-ment a new perioperative checklist to reduce surgical errors. The “what” is very simple: a checklist to reduce errors. The operating room team may make a rational decision to adapt the checklist; however, it is also possible that the checklist may be perceived as “another piece of paperwork” and rejected, or that the checklist may have its implementation fought, undermined, delayed, or ignored. A surgeon-leader who does not understand how people are motivated might argue rationally, telling the team that the checklist was created with great care, that all of the best evidence was incorporated in its creation, and that the checklist is short and efficient. This is the “how,” and once again it appeals to the rational and analytical side of the team. With these arguments, the surgeon-leader’s vision remains susceptible to rejection for many of the same reasons. A leader who understands how to motivate a team towards a vision will start with “why.” Before ever discussing the checklist in detail with the team, the leader will speak of their shared mission to offer the best patient care possible, ask the team to imagine how they might want a family member treated, and emphasize that a careless error could lead to patient harm and embarrassment for the team. With these argu-ments, which constitute an emotional appeal to the team’s belief system, the leader can expect this vision for better patient care via a new surgical checklist to be adapted by the team. The team will be receptive to implementing a new checklist, not because they believe in the checklist as a tool, but because they believe in the surgeon-leader’s vision for optimizing patient care.There is a biological reason why this concept works. “Why,” “how,” and “what” are correlated to the functions Figure 1-4. Emil Theodor Kocher. (Reproduced with permission from the National Library of Medicine.)Leaders must learn to develop a vision to provide direction for their team. The vision can be as straightforward as provid-ing quality of care or as lofty as defining a new field of sur-gery, such as atomic surgery and personalized medicine. One can start developing such vision by brainstorming the answers to two simple questions: “Which disease needs to be cured?” and “How can it be cured?”12 The answers represent a vision and should be recorded succinctly in a laboratory notebook or journal. Committing pen to paper enables the surgical trainee to define his or her vision in a manner that can be shared with others.WhatHowWhyNeocortexLimbic BrainWhen a leader's vision appeals to “why,” it triggers an emotional response in the limbic brain and increases the likelihood that a vision will be embraced. Persuasion using “what” and “how” appeals to the neocortex and is more easily rejected.Figure 1-6. When leaders seek to generate belief in their vision, it is best to appeal to the team with “why” statements. (Data from Sinek S. Start with why: how great leaders inspire everyone to take action. London: Portfolio/Penguin; 2013.)Brunicardi_Ch01_p0001-p0026.indd   629/01/19   10:58 AM 7LEADERSHIP IN SURGERYCHAPTER 1of separate anatomical levels in the human brain. The neo-cortex is, evolutionarily, the newest area of our brains, and it is responsible for the analytical and rational thoughts and decisions that we make. It corresponds to the “what” and the “how.” When the surgeon-leader in the previous example started with the checklist and its rational arguments, the leader was appealing to their team’s neocortex, and the vision was rejected. However, when the surgeon started with the “why,” the vision for better patient care was emotionally accepted by the team, who became receptive to the checklist as a tool for achieving the vision.13Surgery is a field that requires extraordinary dedication and great personal sacrifice. The very nature of vision—steps forward into a better future—implies that change and difficult work will be required of the leader. See figure 1-7. For this reason, surgeon-leaders should establish visions about which they are deeply pas-sionate and committed so that when obstacles are encountered the leader has the strength of will to progress forward. Leaders should be selective about which options they pursue. Each oppor-tunity and idea requires great effort to execute; ultimately only a few can be brought to completion. Therefore, leaders should understand what drives their organization’s economic engine: the ideas and opportunities that will bring patients better care, bring the organization more patients, and create new treatments, etc. Thousands of hospitals, companies, innovators, and physicians are addressing many of the same problems in healthcare, such as growing burdens of chronic disease, an aging population, and ris-ing health costs. The best opportunities lie where talent and ability align, so leaders and organizations should be cognizant of choos-ing projects for which they have the potential to be the “best in the world” at doing. Once the vision is set and the project is chosen, it is up to the leader to generate momentum.Momentum is either a cumulative effect of continuous steps towards improvement or, alternatively, in the negative sense, movements towards failure or stagnation. The “flywheel effect,” depicted in Fig. 1-8, demonstrates the building of momentum with (a) initial steps forward, (b) an accumulation of visible results, (c) realignment of the team in the new direc-tion (accounting for new information and data), and then (d) an accumulation of momentum followed by more steps forward. Careful attention to the aforementioned principles is essential in building a successful surgical career, department, or division.8The Flywheel Effect of Building and SustainingMomentumStepsforwardVisibleresultsMomentumbuildsThe Teamaligns andadjustsFigure 1-8. The “flywheel effect.” (Data from Collins J: Good to Great. Boston, MA: Harper Collins; 2011.)WHAT YOU ARE DEEPLYPASSIONATE ABOUTWHAT DRIVESYOURECONOMICENGINEWHAT YOU CANBE THE BEST INTHE WORLD ATFigure 1-7. Leaders should be selective about where they expend their efforts, as demonstrated by Jim Collins in “Good to Great.” (Reproduced with permission from Collins J: Good to Great. Boston, MA: Harper Collins; 2011.)WillingnessThe Willingness Principle represents the active commitment of the leader toward his or her vision. To do so, a surgical leader must be willing to lead, commit to lifelong learning, communi-cate effectively, and resolve conflict.To Lead. A key characteristic of all great leaders is the will-ingness to serve as the leader. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr, who championed the civil rights movement with a powerful vision of equality for all based on a commitment to nonviolent methods,14 did so at a time when his vocalization of this vision ensured harassment, imprisonment, and threats of violence against him-self, his colleagues, and his family and friends (Fig. 1-9). King, a young, highly educated pastor, had the security of employ-ment and family, yet was willing to accept enormous respon-sibility and personal risk and did so in order to lead a nation toward his vision of civil rights, for which he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1964.Willingness to lead is a necessity in any individual who desires to become a surgeon. By entering into the surgical the-ater, a surgeon accepts the responsibility to care for and operate on patients, despite the risks and burdens involved. They do so, believing fully in the improved quality of life that can be achieved. Surgeons must embrace the responsibility of leading surgical teams that care for their patients, as well as leading sur-gical trainees to become future surgeons. A tremendous sacrifice is required for the opportunity to learn patient care. Surgical trainees accept the hardships of residency with its accompanying steep learning curve, anxiety, long work hours, and time spent away from family and friends. The active, passionate commit-ment to excellent patient care reflects a natural willingness to lead based on altruism and a sense of duty toward those receiving care. Thus, to ensure delivery of the utmost level of care, surgical trainees should commit to developing and refining leadership skills. These skills include a commitment to lifelong learn-ing, effective communication, and conflict resolution.To Learn. Surgeons and surgical trainees, as leaders, must possess willingness to commit to continuous learning. Modern surgery is an ever-changing field with dynamic and evolving healthcare systems and constant scientific discovery and inno-vation. Basic and translational science relating to surgical care is growing at an exponential rate. The sequencing of the human 3Brunicardi_Ch01_p0001-p0026.indd   729/01/19   10:58 AM 8BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Igenome and the enormous advances in molecular biology and signaling pathways are leading to the transformation of pre-cision medicine and personalized surgery in the 21st century (see Chapter 15).15 Performing prophylactic mastectomies with immediate reconstruction for BRCA1 mutations and thyroidecto-mies with thyroid hormone replacement for RET proto-oncogene mutations are two of many examples of genomic information guiding surgical care. Technologic advances in minimally inva-sive surgery and robotic surgery as well as electronic records and other information technologies are revolutionizing the craft of surgery. The expansion of minimally invasive and endovas-cular surgery over the past three decades required surgeons to retrain in new techniques using new skills and equipment. In this short time span, laparoscopy and endovascular operations are now recognized as the standard of care for many surgical diseases, resulting in shorter hospital stay, quicker recovery, and a kinder and gentler manner of practicing surgery. Remarkably, during the last century, the field of surgery has progressed at an exponential pace and will continue to do so with the advent of using genomic analyses to engineer cancer cells with molecular imaging agents that will guide personalized surgery, which will transform the field of surgery during this century. Therefore, surgical leadership training should emphasize and facilitate the continual pursuit of knowledge.Willingness to learn encompasses the surgeon’s commit-ment to lifelong learning. This has been exemplified by the surgeons of the past several decades who have dedicated their peak practicing years to perfecting minimally invasive surgical Figure 1-9. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr acknowledges the crowd at the Lincoln Memorial for his “I Have a Dream” speech during the March on Washington, D.C., August 28, 1963. (Reproduced with permission from AP Photo. © 2018 The Associated Press.)techniques, including the use of robotic surgery. The field con-tinues to advance, offering many advantages to patients includ-ing faster recovery, sometimes decreased pain depending on procedure type, and shorter hospital stays.16-18Fortunately, surgical organizations and societies provide surgeons and surgical trainees a means to acquire new knowl-edge on a continuous basis. There are numerous local, regional, national, and international meetings of surgical organizations that provide ongoing continuing medical education credits, also required for the renewal of most medical licenses. The American Board of Surgery requires all surgeons to complete meaningful continuing medical education to maintain certification.19 These societies and regulatory bodies enable surgeons and surgical trainees to commit to continual learning and ensure their competence in a dynamic and rapidly growing field.Surgeons and trainees now benefit from the rapid expan-sion of web-based education as well as mobile handheld tech-nology. These are powerful tools to minimize nonproductive time in the hospital and make learning and reinforcement of medical knowledge accessible. Currently web-based resources provide quick access to a vast collection of surgical texts, lit-erature, and surgical videos. Surgeons and trainees dedicated to continual learning should be well versed in the utilization of these information technologies to maximize their education. The next evolution of electronic surgical educational materials will likely include simulation training similar to laparoscopic and Da Vinci device training modules. The ACGME, acknowl-edging the importance of lifelong learning skills and moderniza-tion of information delivery and access methods, has included them as program requirements for residency accreditation.To Communicate Effectively. The complexity of modern healthcare delivery systems requires a higher level and collab-orative style of communication. Effective communication directly impacts patient care. In 2000, the U.S. Institute of Medi-cine published To Err Is Human: Building a Safer Health System, which raised awareness concerning the magnitude of medical errors. This work showcased medical errors as the eighth leading cause of death in the United States with an estimated 100,000 deaths annually.20 Subsequent studies examining medical errors have identified communication errors as one of the most com-mon causes of medical error.21-23 In fact, the Joint Commission identifies miscommunication as the leading cause of sentinel events. Information transfer and communication errors cause delays in patient care, waste surgeon and staff time, and cause serious adverse patient events.23 Effective communication among surgeons, nurses, ancillary staff, and patients is not only a crucial element to improved patient outcomes, but it also leads to less medical litigation.24-26 A strong correlation exists between communication and patient outcomes.Establishing a collaborative atmosphere is important since communication errors leading to medical mishaps are not simply failures to transmit information. Communication errors “are far more complex and relate to hierarchical differences, concerns with upward influence, conflicting roles and role ambiguity, and interpersonal power and conflict.”22,27-29 Errors frequently originate from perceived limited channels of com-munication and hostile, critical environments. To overcome these barriers, surgeons and surgical trainees should learn to communicate in an open, universally understood manner and remain receptive to any team member’s concerns. A survey of physicians, nurses, and ancillary staff identified effective communication as a key element of a successful leader.30 As 45Brunicardi_Ch01_p0001-p0026.indd   829/01/19   10:58 AM 9LEADERSHIP IN SURGERYCHAPTER 1leaders, surgeons, and surgical trainees who facilitate an open, effective, and collaborative style of communication can reduce errors and enhance patient care. A prime example is that suc-cessful communication of daily goals of patient care from the team leader improves patient outcomes. In one recent study, the modest act of explicitly stating daily goals in a standard-ized fashion significantly reduced patient length of intensive care unit stay and increased resident and nurse understanding of goals of care.31 Implementing standardized daily team briefings in the wards and preoperative units led to improvements in staff turnover rates, employee satisfaction, and prevention of wrong-site surgery.27 In cardiac surgery, improving communication in the operating room and transition to the postanesthesia care unit was an area identified to decrease risk for adverse outcomes.32 Behaviors associated with ineffective communication, including absence from the operating room when needed, playing loud music, making inappropriate comments, and talking to others in a raised voice or a condescending tone, were identified as patient hazards; conversely, behaviors associated with effec-tive collaborative communication, such as leading the time-out process and closed-loop communication technique, resulted in improved patient outcomes.One model to ensure open communication is through standardization of established protocols. A commonly accepted protocol is the “time out” that is now required in the modern operating room. During the time-out protocol, all team mem-bers introduce themselves and state a body of critical informa-tion needed to safely complete the intended operation. This same standardization can be taught outside the operating room. Within the Kaiser system, certain phrases have been given a uni-versal meaning: “I need you now” by members of the team is an understood level of urgency and generates a prompt physician response 100% of the time.27 As mentioned earlier, standardized forms can be useful tools in ensuring universally understood communication during sign-out. The beneficial effect of stan-dardized team communication further demonstrates how effec-tive communication can improve patient care and is considered a vital leadership skill.Effective communication with patients in the mod-ern era, necessitates understanding that many patients access health information via the internet and that patients are often ill equipped to evaluate the individual source.33,34 Discrepancies exist between surgeon’s self-perceived ability to communicate and patient’s actual satisfaction. A patient’s perceived interac-tion with their physician has an enormous impact on patient health outcomes, malpractice, and financial reimbursement;35-40 specifically, the association between poor doctor–patient com-munication and a patient’s perception that their doctor does not care about them. Good bedside manner has been shown to decrease litigation even in situations of error or undesirable out-come.39-40 Physicians who demonstrate concern, actively know their patients, and share responsibility for decision-making are more likely to be trusted by their patients.26,41,42 Strong doctor–patient relationships and effective communication skills have been incentivized by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality and the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services through their Hospital Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers and Systems (HCAHPS) and Clinical and Group Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers and Systems (CGCAHPS) programs, which measure patient satisfaction.43To Resolve Conflict. Great leaders are able to achieve their vision through their ability to resolve conflict. Delivery of modern surgical care is complex; numerous conflicts arise on a daily basis when surgeons and surgical trainees provide high-quality care. Therefore, the techniques for conflict resolution are essential for surgical leaders.To properly use conflict resolution techniques, it is impor-tant for the surgeon and surgical trainee to always remain objec-tive and seek personal flexibility and self-awareness. The gulf between self-perception and the perception of others can be profound; in a study of cooperation and collaboration among operating room staff, the quality of their own collaboration was rated at 80% by surgeons, yet was rated at only 48% by oper-ating room nurses.44 Systematic inclusion of modern conflict resolution methods that incorporate the views of all members of a multidisciplinary team help maintain objectivity. Reflection is often overlooked in surgical residency training, but it is a critical component of learning conflict resolution skills. Introspection allows the surgeon to understand the impact of his or her actions and biases. Objectivity is the basis of effective conflict resolu-tion, which can improve satisfaction among team members and help deliver optimal patient care.Modern conflict resolution techniques are based on objec-tivity, willingness to listen, and pursuit of principle-based solu-tions.45 For example, an effective style of conflict resolution is the utilization of the “abundance mentality” model, which attempts to achieve a solution that benefits all involved and is based on core values of the organization, as opposed to the uti-lization of the traditional fault-finding model, which identifies sides as right or wrong.46 Application of the abundance mental-ity in surgery elevates the conflict above the affected parties and focuses on the higher unifying goal of improved patient care. “Quality Improvement” (previously or alternatively “Morbidity and Mortality”) conferences are managed in this style and have the purpose of practice improvement and improving overall quality of care within the system, as opposed to placing guilt or blame on the surgeon or surgical trainees for the complication being reviewed. The traditional style of command-and-control technique based on fear and intimidation is no longer welcome in any healthcare system and can lead to sanctions, lawsuits, and removal of hospital privileges or position of leadership.Another intuitive method that can help surgical trainees learn to resolve conflict is the “history and physical” model of conflict resolution. This model is based on the seven steps of caring for a surgical patient that are well known to the surgical trainee47: (a) the “history” is the equivalent of gathering subjec-tive information from involved parties with appropriate empa-thy and listening; (b) the “laboratory/studies” are the equivalent of collecting objective data to validate the subjective informa-tion; (c) a “differential diagnosis” is formed out of possible root causes of the conflict; (d) the “assessment/plan” is developed in the best interest of all involved parties; the plan, including risks and benefits, is openly discussed in a compassionate style of com-munication; (e) “preoperative preparation” includes the acquisi-tion of appropriate consultations for clearances, consideration of equipment and supplies needed for implementation, and the “informed consent” from the involved parties; (f) the “operation” is the actual implementation of the agreed-upon plan, including a time-out; (g) and “postoperative care” involves communicat-ing the operative outcome, regular postoperative follow-up, and the correction of any complications that arise. This seven-step method is an example of an objective, respectful method of con-flict resolution.47 Practicing different styles of conflict resolu-tion and effective communication in front of the entire group of Brunicardi_Ch01_p0001-p0026.indd   929/01/19   10:58 AM 10BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Isurgical trainees attending the leadership training program is an effective means of teaching conflict resolution techniques.Time ManagementIt is important for leaders to practice effective time management. Time is the most precious resource, as it cannot be bought, saved, or stored. Thus, management of time is essential for a productive and balanced life for those in the organization. The effective use of one’s time is best done through a formal time management program to improve one’s ability to lead by setting priorities and making choices to achieve goals. The efficient use of one’s time helps to improve both productivity and quality of life.48-50It is important for surgeons and surgical trainees to learn and use a formal time-management program. There are ever-increasing demands placed on surgeons and surgical trainees to deliver the highest quality care in highly regu-lated environments. Furthermore, strict regulations on limita-tion of work hours demand surgical trainees learn patient care in a limited amount of time.48-50 All told, these demands are enormously stressful and can lead to burnout, drug and/or alcohol abuse, and poor performance.48-50 A time-motion study of general surgery trainees analyzed residents’ self-reported time logs to determine resident time expenditure on educa-tional/service-related activities (Fig. 1-10).50 Surprisingly, senior residents were noted to spend 13.5% of their time on low-service, low-educational value activities. This time, prop-erly managed, could be used to either reduce work hours or improve educational efficiency in the context of new work hour restrictions. It is therefore critical that time be used wisely on effectively achieving one’s goals.Parkinson’s law, proposed in 1955 by the U.K. politi-cal analyst and historian Cyril Northcote Parkinson, states that work expands to fill the time available for its completion, thus leading individuals to spend the majority of their time on insignificant tasks.51 Pareto’s 80/20 principle states that 80% of goals are achieved by 20% of effort and that achieving the final 20% requires 80% of their effort. Therefore, proper planning for undertaking any goal needs to include an analysis of how much effort will be needed to complete the task.49 Formal time management programs help surgeons and surgical trainees bet-ter understand how their time is spent, enabling them to increase productivity and achieve a better-balanced lifestyle.Various time allocation techniques have been described.49 A frequently used basic technique is the “prioritized list,” also known as the ABC technique. Individuals list and assign relative 6Low educationLow serviceHigh serviceHigh educationTime Motion StudyLow education, lowservice value (Ex: Waiting duringmandatory in-house call)High education, lowservice value (Ex: Teaching conferences)High education, highservice value (Ex: Operating with a mentor)Low education,high service value (Ex: Repeatedly performing History & Physicals)values to their tasks. The use of the lists and categories serves solely as a reminder, thus falling short of aiding the user in allo-cating time wisely. Another technique is the “time management matrix technique.”49 This technique plots activities on two axes: importance and urgency, yielding four quadrants (Fig. 1-11). Congruous with the Pareto’s 80/20 principle and Parkinson’s law, the time management matrix technique channels efforts into quadrant II (important but nonurgent) activities. The activi-ties in this quadrant are high yield and include planning, creative activity, building relationships, and maintaining productivity. Too often, surgeons spend a majority of their time attending to quadrant I (important and urgent) tasks. Quadrant I tasks include emergencies and unplanned or disorganized situations that require intensive and often inefficient effort. While most surgeons and surgical trainees have to deal with emergencies, they often develop the habit of inappropriately assigning activi-ties into quadrant I; excess time spent on quadrant I tasks leads to stress or burnout for the surgeon and distracts from long-term goals. Efficient time management allows surgeons and surgical trainees to be proactive about shifting energy from quadrant I tasks to quadrant II, emphasizing preplanning and creativity over always attending to the most salient issue at hand, depend-ing on the importance and not the urgency.Finally, “the six areas of interest” is an alternative effec-tive time management model that can help surgeons and surgi-cal trainees achieve their goals, live a better-balanced lifestyle, and improve the quality of their lives.49 The process begins by performing a time-motion study in which the activities of 6-hour increments of time over a routine week are chronicled. At the end of the week, the list of activities is analyzed to determine how the 168 hours in 1 week have been spent. The surgical trainee then selects six broad categories of areas of interest  ImportantUrgentQuadrant IQuadrant IIIQuadrant IIQuadrant IVNonurgentTime Management MatrixNonimportantFigure 1-11. Time management. (Data from Covey S. The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People. New York, NY: Simon &  Schuster; 1989.)Figure 1-10. Surgery resident time-motion study.Brunicardi_Ch01_p0001-p0026.indd   1029/01/19   10:58 AM 11LEADERSHIP IN SURGERYCHAPTER 1(i.e., family, clinical care, education, health, community service, hobbies) and sets a single activity goal in each category every day and monitors whether those goals are achieved. This tech-nique is straightforward and improves one’s quality of life by setting and achieving a balanced set of goals of personal inter-est, while eliminating time-wasting activities.A formal time management program is essential for modern leadership. The practice and use of time management strategies can help surgeons and surgical trainees achieve and maintain their goals of excellent clinical care for their patients, while maintaining a more balanced lifestyle.Self-Care and WellnessThe challenges of practicing medicine place unique stresses on surgeons. A departmental program for improving wellness and teaching self-care can help alleviate these stresses. Acknowl-edging these stresses is an important step for any leader to help peers at risk. Quality of life surveys have identified individual protective factors that can be implemented prophylactically. These factors for improving self-care and wellness include regu-lar exercise programs, maintenance of routine medical care, and health screening. The following may not apply to all physicians; however, religious practices, reflective writing, and maximizing work-life balance have also been demonstrated to be protective.52Surgeons and physicians overall experience increased rates of suicide, depression, substance abuse, marital and family prob-lems, and other stress-related health effects as compared to the general population. Suicide rates in physicians are higher among those who are divorced, widowed, or never married. Depression is a common challenge, with rates as high as 30% among trainees, and higher when lifetime risk is considered. Drug and alcohol abuse among physicians mirrors the general population; however, physicians have higher rates of prescription drug abuse. The abil-ity to self-medicate likely contributes to prescription drug abuse by physicians. Divorce and marriage unhappiness among physi-cians has been attributed to the “psychology of postponement,” compulsive personality traits that are reinforced and selected for during medical training, and lack of work-life balance. Residents, due to their inexperience, may be at higher risk than practicing physicians. For physicians who do not seek professional help, fear of losing their medical license is the most commonly provided reason. Departmental wellness programs may provide an alterna-tive source of support for these surgeons.52-54The past 10 years have seen a significant increase in atten-tion to the issue of physician wellness. Physician wellness has become an issue transcending specialties and resulting in signif-icant research. The creation of wellness and self-care programs within departments represents an opportunity for surgeons to demonstrate leadership qualities.52-54RecruitmentThe challenges of modern medicine and ever-larger medical centers have created a reality where no single surgeon-leader can exercise complete control—it takes a team of leaders with shared vision, mission, and goals. To this end, the previously discussed “level 5 leader” who embodies personal humility and professional will is essential.8 Previous generations whose lead-ers and departments were composed of self-proclaimed giants dominated and suppressed alternative points of view, com-munication, and innovation. In recent years, there has been a change to building teams with authentic leaders who have high ethical standards and well-developed nontechnical skills, who lead by example, and who never compromise excellence. The surgeon-leader must build a team where talented individuals are placed in the right job for their skills. The essence of a leader is one who enables others to succeed. Team work is imperative to change, and trust is the make-or-break component. Simply put, teams that trust each other work well, and teams that do not trust each other do not work well.9Creating a Culture of Empathy, Patient-Family-Centered Care, and Personalized SurgeryCreating the right culture is the most challenging of all the sur-geon-leader’s tasks. Modern surgical departments should focus on creating a culture of empathy, patient–family-centered care, and personalized surgery. Instilling a positive culture requires both discipline and consistency because it may take consider-able time to change how people think, feel, and behave.9,55,56 Organizational culture is built around the leader’s vision and values. Coming up with strong values requires genuine com-mitment. A leader should realize that staying true to his or her values can be challenging when conflicts arise.57WHY WE LEADChoosing to Become a LeaderThere are many benefits to becoming a leader. Humankind has pondered the question of whether leaders are born or made for millennia. The best evidence to date indicates that leaders are both born and made. Leadership potential is a skill that all per-sons are born with, to some degree, and that can be formally trained, learned through observation, and honed with practice.13 The positive effects of a leader on others are innumerable, including a leader’s positive influence on innovation, diversity, culture, and quality. For modern surgeons, leadership skills are essential for the delivery of quality patient care; therefore, it is the duty of the surgeon to study leadership.For the surgeon studying to be a better leader, effective leadership also has many individual benefits, including rec-ognition from one’s peers, promotion, and autonomy. Mod-ern leaders are increasingly required to be humble about their accomplishments in order to be successful and effective.8 Beyond recognition, promotion, and autonomy there are more selfless reasons for surgeons to desire leadership. Leadership is a tool to help make a difference. Leadership is a good path towards a career as an educator, which offers the leader a sense of accomplishment and satisfaction in seeing others succeed. Some choose to become leaders out of a sense of selfless ser-vice, taking on leadership for the benefit of others, or out of a desire to solve problems. Leadership may come with material rewards, including wealth and power, which motivate some.Whatever the motivation, surgeons, in their role as lead-ers of patient care teams, have a duty to develop some skill in leadership. It would be best for individuals, departments, and patients if all surgeons sought to develop leadership skills and experience in some area of administration, patient care, educa-tion, or research. The benefits to the individual are numerous.Leadership’s Effect on Healthcare Cost and Clinical OutcomesMuch attention has rightly been paid to historical leaders’ impact on humanity. Surgical leaders of the past have made great contributions on which we may build. All surgeons have a responsibility to be leaders, whether at the team level or in Brunicardi_Ch01_p0001-p0026.indd   1129/01/19   10:58 AM 12BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ian administrative or organizational capacity. To that end, it is worth noting the benefits of formal leadership education.Large observational studies using trained observers assessed the effects of different surgical leadership styles on operative cases. Team cohesion and collective efficiency were reduced when leaders utilized abusive supervision or over-controlling methods. Abusive supervision alone was associated with decreased “psychological safety.”58 Surgeons perceived as having positive leadership characteristics by their staff have lower 30-day all-cause mortality.59 This is likely due to creating a culture of safety where the staff can speak up if they notice an error and feel they have the latitude to do what is best for the patient quickly and autonomously.59,60With increased recognition and attention on human error, nontechnical skills, including leadership, play a role in patient safety. The landmark study, “To Err Is Human,” estimated that almost 100,000 people die each year due to medical errors.20 In the surgical setting, 40% to 50% of errors may be attributed to communication breakdown. The Multifactor Leadership Ques-tionnaire scores subjects on their demonstration of transforma-tional leadership behaviors. Transformational leaders exhibit the qualities of charisma, inspired motivation, intellectual stimulation, and individualized consideration. In video analysis of complex surgical operations, surgeons scoring even a single point higher on the transformational leadership score exhibited 3 times more information sharing behaviors, 5 times more posi-tive voice behaviors, and 10 times more supportive behaviors, all while displaying poor behaviors 12.5 times less frequently than their peers.60 Exhibiting the characteristics of transforma-tional leadership clearly has much to offer the surgeon-leader in preventing serious errors.58-60The field of trauma contains the largest body of formal study demonstrating the positive effects of leadership on clini-cal results. Strong leadership skills improve both the speed of resuscitation and completion of the initial trauma evaluation.61-63 There is no one optimal style of leadership covering all situa-tions; some call for a more empowering leadership style while others call for a more directive style. The optimal style of lead-ership varies based on team composition, with less experienced teams better responding to the directive style, while more expe-rienced teams work faster with trust and an empowering style. The formally educated surgical leader should be able to switch easily between styles based on the situation at hand.56,58,60-64Leadership styles affect responses to patient safety con-cerns and protect the organization as a whole. The surgical leader adopts a supervisory capacity while creating a culture of safety. In detail, frontline staff must be encouraged to partici-pate in safety improvement. Staff ownership of safety must be established and upheld. In order to assure this outcome, whistle-blowers must be protected. A culture of psychological safety, organizational fairness, and continuous learning is required. Subordinates require appropriate authority, autonomy, and lati-tude to do their jobs and care for patients.60Formal leadership training has been well studied within the Veteran’s Health Administration system using the Surgical Care Improvement Program. The Medical Team Training Pro-gram, for instance, has been shown to result in a 18% decrease in 30-day mortality65 and a 17% decrease in 30-day morbidity.66Also at the organizational level, leaders using an empowering style may improve process of care protocols and increase efficiency. Operating room turnover times specifically have been shown to be reducible.67 Value-based purchasing benchmarks, such as hospital-acquired infections, which affect reimbursement, can be reduced or eliminated depending on the measure.68,69 Medical errors may be reduced, and significant medical errors may have their effects mitigated. Patient satis-faction may be improved. The overall financial performance of the institution can be affected in a positive manner.69,70There are positive correlations between mutual respect, clinical leadership, and surgical safety. Traditional command and control style leadership negatively impacts psychological safety resulting in the development of more modern leadership styles. The best clinical processes have the potential to break down when there is a toxic work environment and lack of psy-chological safety within the team.The Importance of Diversity and LeadershipThe past quarter century has seen a steady increase in diversity within the field of surgery. Women, as of 2015, represent 38% of surgical trainees and 10% of academic professors currently, but have doubled their representation in the past 20 years.71 Some fields, such as head and neck surgery and plastic surgery72 have studied their own subspecialty groups with similar find-ings. African Americans comprise both 6% of medical school graduates, 6% surgical trainees, and 2% to 4% of professors of surgery nationwide.73 Hispanics represent 5% of graduat-ing medical students, 9% of general surgery trainees, and 4% to 5% of persons at all levels of academic surgery.73 Physician diversity is crucial and may help to address disparities in social determinants of health.74Studies indicate that the bottleneck in diversity occurs at the level of the medical school application pool, which in turn is caused by educational deficiencies at the primary, secondary, and collegiate level.73,75-78 As an attempted solution, the University of Michigan developed a “pipeline” program that pairs grade-school and high-school students with physicians for experiential learn-ing and the development of mentoring, presentation skills, and networking.75 It is important for departments of surgery to develop a diversity program for recruitment of residents and faculty. Multi-institutional blinded studies indicate that the implementa-tion of formal leadership and diversity training improves diversity leadership and strategic human resource management.74,78LEADERSHIP STYLESThe principles of leadership can be practiced in a variety of styles. Just as there are many definitions of leadership, many classifications of styles exist as well. A landmark study by Daniel Goleman in Harvard Business Review identified six distinct leadership styles, based on different components of emotional intelligence.79 Emotional intelligence is the ability to recognize, understand, and control the emotions in others and ourselves. By learning different styles, surgeons and trainees can recognize their own leadership style and the effect on the team dynamic. Furthermore, it teaches when the situation may demand change in style for the best outcome. The six leadership styles identified are coercive, authoritative, affiliative, demo-cratic, pacesetting, and coaching.The coercive leader demands immediate compliance. This style reflects the command and control style that has histori-cally dominated surgery. Excessive coercive leadership erodes team members’ sense of responsibility, motivation, sense of participation in a shared vision, and ultimately, performance. The phrase, “Do what I tell you!” brings to mind the coercive leader. However, it is effective in times of crisis to deliver clear, Brunicardi_Ch01_p0001-p0026.indd   1229/01/19   10:58 AM 13LEADERSHIP IN SURGERYCHAPTER 1concise instruction. This style should be used sparingly and is best suited for emergencies.The authoritative leader embodies the phrase “Come with me,” focusing on mobilizing the team toward a common, grand vision. This type of leader allows the team freedom to innovate, experiment, and devise its own means. Goleman’s research indicates this style is often the most effective. These leaders display self-confidence, empathy, and proficiency in initiating new ideas and leading people in a new direction. This is best used when a shift in paradigm is needed.The affiliative leader creates harmony and builds emo-tional bonds. This requires employment of empathy, building relationships, and emphasis on communication. An affiliative leader frequently gives positive feedback. This style can allow poor performance to go uncorrected if too little constructive/critical advice is given. Affiliative leadership is most useful when motivating people during stressful circumstances or heal-ing rifts in a team.The coaching style of leadership focuses on developing people for the future. Coaching is leadership through mentor-ship. The coach gives team members challenging tasks, coun-sels, encourages, and delegates. Unlike the affiliative leader who focuses on positive feedback, the coach helps people iden-tify their weaknesses and improve their performance, and ties their work into their long-term career aspirations. This leader-ship style builds team capabilities by helping motivated learners improve. However, this style does not work well when team members are defiant and unwilling to change or learn, or if the leader lacks proficiency.The democratic leader forges consensus through participa-tion. This leadership style listens to and values each member’s input. It is not the best choice in an emergency situation, when time is limited, or when teammates cannot contribute informed guidance to the leader. It can also be exasperating if a clear vision does not arise from the collaborative process. This style is most appropriate when it is important to obtain team consensus, quell conflict, or create harmony.The pacesetter leader sets high standards for performance and exemplifies them. These leaders identify poor performers and demand more from them. However, unlike the coach, the pacesetter does not build the skills of those who are not keep-ing up. Rather, a pacesetter will either take over the task him-self or delegate the task to another team member. This style can be summed up best by the phrase, “Do as I do, now.” This leadership style works well when it is important to obtain high-quality results and there is a motivated, capable team. However, pacesetters can easily become micromanagers who have diffi-culty delegating tasks to team members, which leads to burn out on the part of the leader. Additionally, team members can feel overwhelmed and demoralized by the demands for excellence without an empathic counter balance.Each of the above styles of leadership has strengths and weakness. Importantly, leaders who are the most successful do not rely only on one leadership style alone. They use sev-eral of them seamlessly depending on the situation and the team members at hand. Therefore, the more styles a leader has mastered, the better, with particular emphasis on the authorita-tive, affiliative, democratic, and coaching styles. Each leader-ship style is a tool that is ultimately employed to guide a team to realizing a vision or goal. Thus, leadership training programs should teach the proper use of all leadership styles while adher-ing to the principles of leadership.7FORMAL LEADERSHIP TRAINING  PROGRAMS IN SURGERYHistory of Leadership Training and the Multifactor Leadership QuestionnaireSince it has been shown that effective leadership can improve patient outcomes, leadership principles and skills should be taught to surgical trainees using formal leadership training programs. The importance of teaching leadership skills is reflected by the ACGME mandated core competencies (see Table 1-1). However, surgical trainees, most notably chief residents, find themselves in various leadership roles without ever having experienced formal-ized leadership training, which has been shown to result in a self-perceived lack of leadership ability.2 When surveyed on 18 core leadership skills (Table 1-3), 92% of residents rated all 18 skills as important, but over half rated themselves as “minimally” or “not competent” in 10 out of 18 skills.2 Increasingly, residents and junior faculty are requesting leadership training and wish to close the gap between perceived need for training and the implementa-tion of formal leadership training programs.80-86A number of leadership workshops have been created. Extracurricular leadership programs have been designed mostly Table 1-3Eighteen leadership training modulesSKILLSIMPORTANCE MEAN SCORECOMPETENCE MEAN SCORE*Academic program development3.22.4*Leadership training3.82.3*Leadership theory3.22.1*Effective communication3.72.7*Conflict resolution3.83*Management principles3.72.7*Negotiation3.72.8*Time management42.8*Private or academic practice, managed care3.62*Investment principles3.52.2*Ethics3.63.2Billing, coding, and compliance3.51.7*Program improvement32*Writing proposals3.32.2*Writing reports3.42.4*Public speaking3.72.7*Effective presentations3.72.7*Risk management3.52.1*Total3.62.5**P <0.001 by Student t-test between mean importance and mean competence scores.Reproduced with permission from Itani KMF, Liscum K, Brunicardi FC: Physician leadership is a new mandate in surgical training, Am J Surg. 2004 Mar;187(3):328-331.Brunicardi_Ch01_p0001-p0026.indd   1329/01/19   10:58 AM 14BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ifor physicians with an MBA or management background but have not been incorporated into the core residency training program.80 Also, there are many institutions that have published experiences with leadership retreats or seminars for residents or young physicians.81-84 The ACGME hosts multiple leader-ship skills workshops for chief residents, mostly targeted toward pediatricians, family practitioners, and psychiatrists.85 Similarly, the American College of Surgeons leads an annual 3-day lead-ership conference focusing on leadership attributes, consensus development, team building, conflict resolution, and translation of leadership principles into clinical practice.86-87 These pro-grams were all received well by participants and represent a call for a formal leadership program for all surgical trainees.An innovative leadership curriculum first implemented in 2000, prior to work-hour restrictions, taught general surgery trainees’ collaborative leadership skills at a time when the tradi-tional command-and-control leadership style predominated.2,89,90 Surgical residents participated in 18-hour-long modules based on the leadership principles and skills listed in Table 1-2, taught by the surgical faculty. A number of leadership techniques, including time management techniques and applied conflict resolution techniques described earlier, were designed and implemented as part of this leadership training program. Within 6 months of implementation, residents’ self-perceived total commitment to the highest personal and professional standards, communication skills, visualization of clear missions of patient care, and leadership of others toward that mission increased sig-nificantly.2,89,90 Remarkably, the positive impact of this leader-ship curriculum was significant when measured using tools, such as the Multifactor Leadership Questionnaire (MLQ), social skills inventory, personality inventory, and internal strength scorecard.2,89,90 The MLQ is a well-validated instrument that objectively quantifies leadership beliefs and self-perceived out-comes across medical and nonmedical disciplines. Based on the MLQ, surgical residents more often use a passive-avoidance style of leadership that emphasizes taking corrective action only after a problem is “significant and obvious.” This tool can also be used to track progress toward more effective, collaborative styles of leadership. These studies demonstrated the ability to measure leadership behavior of surgical trainees in a standard-ized, quantifiable format.2,89,90 Taken together, these studies sup-port the concept that leadership skills can and should be taught to surgical trainees, and there are validated tools to measure outcomes.Designing the ProgramSuccess in designing a formal leadership development program can be achieved through the following method. First, select the right participants at the right time in their career. Junior sur-geons new to practice are ideal; however, they should be given a chance to get their clinical and research interests off the ground before they are asked to lead others. Candidates, should be open to taking on leadership roles and have the right combination of introspection and humility that lends to professional develop-ment. High-quality speakers from the business, legal, creative, and medical worlds should be brought as guest speakers. Topics could include leadership overall, strategy, finance, management skills, feedback, and coaching. Constructive criticism is essential because prospective leaders will need guidance and mentoring. Surgeons who have been through a formal leadership training program will become proficient at team-building skills and man-agement and will become self-empowered individuals.918Formal leadership training is not restricted to faculty alone. Leadership training should begin early and continue throughout residency. Surgical residents’ leadership styles have been studied in environments where they are given an assistant to supervise, as if they were an attending. Most residents were able to adapt to difficult operative challenges, in this setting, by providing a more directed style of leadership to their assistants. When faced with a less challenging task, or when the surgery resident’s confidence was particularly high, their leadership score was also high. For the surgical resident preparing to move on to the attending level, such skills are necessary to develop.92Nontechnical surgical skills, such as leadership, demon-strate a number of desired effects for the operative team. Patient safety, including all cause 30-day mortality, is improved by stronger nontechnical skills.59 Development of clear and effec-tive communication, situational awareness, team skills, and decision-making all are correlated with reduced surgical errors. Interruptions, such as needing to answer a page during an opera-tion, are the only nontechnical factors in surgical error that are not directly attributable to leadership style.93Surgical leaders have a responsibility to make ethical deci-sions. At this time, there is no standard curriculum to formally train surgical residents in ethics, despite interest from a majority of residency program directors.94-97 Several solutions have been proposed. A case-based approach to ethics training appears to have some merit, where monthly hour long ethical dilemmas are discussed in an informal, nonhierarchical setting.98 In another study, an ICU-based simulation model demonstrated promise for teaching compassion and end-of-life ethics to surgical resi-dents. In this model, surgery residents have their first end-of-life conversations with standardized patients simulating the surgical ICU environment.99,100Practicing Leadership Skills and Assessing Leadership Formally With Objective Structured Clinical Examination (OSCE) and SimulationThe past decade has seen a demonstrable increase in our knowl-edge of how to develop leadership skills, particularly through simulation, as well as leadership evaluation through OSCE and other tools. Multiple groups have assessed multidisciplinary teams, typically composed of nurses, anesthesia groups, and surgeons for the leadership associated nontechnical skills of communication, teamwork, and situational awareness. Through increasingly validated instruments and assessment tools, these nontechnical skills have been found to be trainable.101 The OSCE has been established as the gold standard102 for the train-ing and assessment of a wide range of clinical and nontechnical skills with high reliability and validity.103-106The OSCE was developed by Harden, at the Ninewells Hospital in Dundee, Scotland, and first published in 1975.107 He subsequently coined the term “OSCE” in his 1979 publica-tion “Assessment of Clinical Competence Using an Objective Structured Clinical Examination (OSCE).”108 The purpose of  the OSCE was to address the lack of a reliable method to evalu-ate the clinical abilities of physicians and featured a compre-hensive assessment of history-taking and physical examination skills. Early versions also assessed nontechnical skills, patient interaction, and professionalism. Since its inception, the OSCE has matured, been subjected to rigorous tests of reliability and validity, and has seen widespread adoption.109-111OSCEs remain a critical portion of resident evaluation. They have been well validated for teaching leadership skills in Brunicardi_Ch01_p0001-p0026.indd   1429/01/19   10:58 AM 15LEADERSHIP IN SURGERYCHAPTER 1trauma and interacting with simulated patients in difficult sce-narios. OSCEs can be tailored to a variety of circumstances, including practicing breaking bad news or discussing end of life care, dealing with angry or aggressive patients, and simulating disagreements with other providers or family members.109-112 The potential for OSCEs to train, test, and perfect nontechnical skills, such as leadership, is extraordinary.A pilot project for the Medical Council of Canada was conducted by the University of Toronto and published in 1988 describing the use of an OSCE for evaluating the clinical skills of international medical graduates applying to Canadian resi-dency.113 Effective communication and language proficiency have been key components since the beginning. A compre-hensive review of this program 2 years later confirmed the reliability and validity of using an OSCE for this purpose.114 The Medical Council of Canada has subsequently mandated a requirement for an OSCE evaluation of all international gradu-ates applying for positions in Canada. In place for the past two decades, the program has ensured a baseline proficiency of skill, attitude, knowledge, and other nontechnical skills.115OSCEs quickly gained acceptance as an established tool to assess learners in a comprehensive manner and became the inspiration for the creation of the USMLE Step 2 Clinical Skills (CS) examination, required for all U.S. medical students prior to licensure.116 Indeed, medical students whose schools use OSCE as practice do better on USMLE Step 2.117 The USMLE Step 2 CS examination meets the criteria, discussed in the following section, for a thorough and well-designed OSCE examination, due to its 12-station design which takes 8 hours to complete. It has been found to be a valid and comprehensive evaluation of a student’s clinical abilities, admittedly at massive expense to medical students.118 In the United States, osteopathic medical students take the OSCE-style Level 2 Performance Evaluation.119Although station number and total duration are not com-pletely agreed upon, data indicate that the OSCE examination should be between 3 and 6 hours and 8 to 10 stations in length in order to obtain reliable (r = ≥0.7) communication, history, and physical examination skills. A guideline was that at least seven cases are needed in any domain to achieve reliability. The testing period may be spread over several sessions making up an aggregate score in order to maintain validity. Many medical schools prepare their students for clinical practice with OSCE-style examinations throughout the year, which, taken together, are summative of a high-quality, multistation, valid OSCE. Checklists are typically the standard scoring tools; however, checklists alone may not be as reliable as a more comprehen-sive review by more experienced clinicians—particularly when assessing more advanced students and residents.120 All of the licensure examinations, discussed previously, meet the criteria for a well-designed OSCE based on number of stations and time duration.Beginning in 2003, the ACGME mandated the use of OSCEs within residency programs. At the time, residents were wary of its adoption, particularly fearing its use as a tool for determining promotion. Residents’ perceptions of the examina-tion, over time, did change to reflect an acceptance of its use for grading both technical and nontechnical skills.121-123In the United States, the OSCE assesses technical and nontechnical skills in an accurate and valid fashion. The OSCE demonstrates a rapid progression of technical skills highly cor-related to a postgraduate year, whereas clinical skills improve at a more moderate rate121 (Fig. 1-12).10.5123PGY Level45z score0–0.5–1Technical stationsClinical stationsFigure 1-12. Resident assessment by year of training by OSCE. Technical skills assessment demonstrates a rapid and continual pro-gression through 5 years of training, whereas clinical evaluations show only modest improvement over the same time period. (Data from Turner JL, Dankoski ME. Objective structured clinical exams: a critical review, Fam Med. 2008 Sep;40(8):574-578.)The past 2 to 3 years has seen an explosion in simula-tion technology and research. In one particularly strong study, multiple teams were assessed for hemorrhage and airway emer-gencies. The Non-Technical Skills for Surgeons (NOTSS) tool was used to assess teams prior to and during simulation. For surgeons, higher NOTSS scores were associated with a quicker resolution of the simulation crisis.125 Advances are being made in using simulation to solve difficult to teach physical examina-tion skills such as breast lump detection and prostate or rectal cancers.126,127 Studies assessing these new simulation tools have also indicated that many attending level surgeons would benefit from continued simulation practice both for keeping operative skills fresh and preventing the decline of physical exam skills, for instance during dedicated research time.126-128The Objective Structured Assessment of Technical Skills (OSATS) was initially developed as a bench station examination. It was later applied to intraoperative skill assessment, and appears to be an additional option for programs seeking a validated and reliable method for mixing technical skills assessment into simu-lations of nontechnical exercises to create a more “real world” simulation.129-133 With recent focus on milestones and proficiency-based promotion, as compared to time-based promotion of resi-dents, there is a need to reliably assess intraoperative skill.134 Digitization and modern computing have created new opportu-nities for simulation and education. One proposed method is a real-time, mobile web system featuring consistent and accurate assessment of the residents’ performance. The platform enabled timely recording of data, was efficient in terms of how much fac-ulty time it took to complete an assessment (average 2 minutes), and from a validity standpoint did trend well overall with resident postgraduate year. The system itself fulfilled the ACGME and American Board of Surgery mandate for program assessment of resident performance in the operating room.134Nontechnical skills often erode during stressful events, particularly in surgery where bleeding, complexity of the opera-tion, time-constraints, and equipment problems can have a nega-tive effect. Additionally, roadblocks with insurance and other third parties, critical illness, and delivering bad news add differ-ent kinds of stress.135 Indeed, video analysis of real operations indicates that attending surgeons typically take over, change their style of leadership, and decrease their teaching in the oper-ating room once unintended events occur.136Brunicardi_Ch01_p0001-p0026.indd   1529/01/19   10:58 AM 16BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IBy using simulated patients, patient-centered models, and intensive and immersive training, nontechnical skills including communication can improve interview techniques.137,138 Post com-munication skills training at the 12-month follow-up demonstrated that the training was effective, and with real clinical practice after the training communication skills had improved even more.139Lastly, there appears to be a positive feedback loop tying nontechnical leadership skills with self-perceived operating room prowess. Those surgeons who rate their own technical skills highly are also more likely to engage in positive leader-ship skills, including teaching in the operating room, handle difficult situations, and provide more clear instructions.140 Simulation may be particularly critical for preventing techni-cal skill decline in residents on dedicated research time or for attending surgeons whose research, clinic, or administrative duties decrease the amount of time they can spend in the operating room. Simulation represents the future of medicine and an excellent opportunity for research and development. Medicine, including surgery, has much ground to make up in regards to simulation training compared to other high-risk fields, such as the military, space, and aeronautics. Modern surgical leaders should recognize surgical simulation as criti-cal to their organization’s success.Evaluation of Surgeon PerformanceMultiple organizations are evaluating the technical and nontechnical skills of surgeons in a real-time basis. We have included this com-prehensive list of organizations (Table 1-4) with a brief description of their purpose and mechanisms of evaluation. Several of these involve technical skills evaluations and most involve nontechnical Table 1-4Multiple organizations have been created to evaluate both the technical and nontechnical skills of surgeons141ORGANIZATION NAMEDESCRIPTIONMAIN SKILLS, CONDITIONS, OR QUALITIES EVALUATEDEVALUATION OF TECHNICAL SKILLS?EVALUATION OF NONTECHNICAL SKILLS?Hospital Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers and Systems (HCAHPS)A public reporting initiative that measures patient perspectives on and satisfaction with hospital care based on qualities of healthcare that patients view as important.Communication with nurses, communication with doctors, responsiveness of hospital staff, pain management, communication about medicines, discharge information, care transitionNoYesClinical and Group Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers and Systems (CGCAHPS)A public reporting initiative that measures patient perspectives on and satisfaction with care provided in an office setting based on qualities of healthcare that patients view as important.Access to care, provider communication, test results, office staff, overall provider ratingNoYesDatix, Incident ReportingA database of incidents that improves reliability of physicians by improving rates of reporting, promoting ownership of mistakes, and improving patient safety.System issues, patient safety and quality issues, provider behavior, leadership styleYesYesPatient Advocacy Reporting System (PARS)A system that compiles patient complaints into a complaint index for each physician for comparison with other medical group members and to help identify high-malpractice-risk physicians who may benefit from peer intervention.Unprofessional behavior deemed as disrespectful and rudeNoYesCo-worker Observation Reporting SystemA system in which physicians document coworker unprofessional conduct in order to provide nonjudgmental and timely feedback and to encourage self-reflection and change.Unprofessional behavior deemed as disrespectful and unsafeYesYes(Continued)Brunicardi_Ch01_p0001-p0026.indd   1629/01/19   10:58 AM 17LEADERSHIP IN SURGERYCHAPTER 1Table 1-4Multiple organizations have been created to evaluate both the technical and nontechnical skills of surgeons141ORGANIZATION NAMEDESCRIPTIONMAIN SKILLS, CONDITIONS, OR QUALITIES EVALUATEDEVALUATION OF TECHNICAL SKILLS?EVALUATION OF NONTECHNICAL SKILLS?American Board of Surgery (ABS) Maintenance of Certification (MOC) ProgramA program that documents a surgeon’s ongoing commitment to professionalism, lifelong learning, and practice improvement through self-report.Restrictions on medical license, restrictions on hospital privileges, continuing medical education, self-assessment of continuing medical education, cognitive expertise, ongoing participation in quality assessment program relevant to the surgeon’s practiceYesYesHospital CompareA database that is part of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) Hospital Quality Initiative and provides information on hospital performance and quality of care based on consumer perspectives so that patients can assess and compare hospitals.Hospital Compare is based on data from HCAHPS and evaluates hospitals by the same guidelines as HCAHPSNoYesFederation of State Medical Boards (FSMB)An organization representing all state medial and osteopathic boards in the United States that license physicians and sponsors the United States Medical Licensing Examination.Medical knowledge, patient complaints, violations of the lawYesYesInternet clinical scoresA database of direct patient opinions of physicians, provided through various sources, including Healthgrades.com, RateMDs.com, and Yelp.Professionalism, communication, timelinessNoYesHospital-Acquired Condition Reduction ProgramA government program that provides incentives for hospitals to reduce the number of undesirable patient conditions resulting from their stay in the hospital and that could have been avoided by adjusting hospital reimbursement rates accordingly.Foreign objects retained after surgery, air embolism, blood incompatibility, pressure ulcers, falls, poor glycemic control, catheter-associate infections, surgical site infections, deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, pneumothoraxYesNoAmerican College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement Program (ACS NSQIP)A program that collects information on and provides a risk-adjusted ranking of preventable surgical complication rates to encourage providers to improve care.Surgical complications rates, surgical site infections, urinary tract infections, readmission rates, surgical outcomesYesNoCenters for Medicare & Medicaid Services Surgical Care Improvement Project (CMS SCIP)A collaborative healthcare organization that collects data on surgical complication rates based on established guidelines.Rates of infection, cardiac, venous thromboembolism, vascular, and respiratory, complications of surgeryYesNo(Continued)Brunicardi_Ch01_p0001-p0026.indd   1729/01/19   10:58 AM 18BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iskills. Additionally, most have been tied to performance evalua-tions and even salary and discipline up to and including loss of licensure. To our knowledge, this is the first comprehensive listing of the various agencies that evaluate surgeon performance.141MENTORING AND DEVELOPMENTMentoringA formal leadership training program for surgical trainees should include mentoring. Mentoring is the active process by which an experienced, empathetic person guides another indi-vidual in the development and self-recognition of their own vision, learning, core competencies, and professional develop-ment. Halstead established the concept of a surgical mentor who directly provided the trainees with professional and technical guidance. Halstead’s concept went beyond a simple preceptor-ship by emphasizing clinical decision making based on scien-tific evidence. His goal was to develop surgeons who would go on to become outstanding leaders and innovators in the field. Although surgery has changed dramatically since Halstead’s era, mentorship remains crucial in surgical training. In addition to teaching technical skills, clinical judgment, and scientific inquiry, modern-day mentors must also model effective com-munication, empathy, humanism, and the prioritization of com-peting professional and personal activities.The mentor must also be an experienced and trusted advi-sor committed to the success of the mentee. A greater level of trust and commitment distinguishes the mentor from the teacher. More than a teacher, a mentor is a coach. The goal of a teacher is to pass on a defined level of knowledge for each stage of a student’s education. The underlying premise is a limited level of advancement for the student. The coach, on the other hand, has the sole purpose to make his or her student the best at their game, with an unlimited level of advancement. Modern men-torship implies a partnership between the mentor and the men-tee. Surgical residency program chairs and program directors must recruit and develop faculty “coaches” to mentor residents to optimize their potential. Emeritus Chair of the University of California, Los Angeles Head and Neck Surgery, Dr. Paul Ward, said it best: “We strive to produce graduates of our resi-dency program who are among those who change the way we think and practice.”142 Having more than 25 former residents become chairs of academic head and neck surgical programs, Dr. Ward embodied the role as a surgeon’s coach. The respon-sibilities of an effective mentor are summarized by Barondess: “Mentoring, to be effective, requires of the mentor empathy, maturity, self-confidence, resourcefulness, and willingness to commit time and energy to another. The mentor must be able to offer guidance for a new and evolving professional life, to stimulate and challenge, to encourage self-realization, to fos-ter growth, and to make more comprehensible the landscape in which the protégé stands.”143One of the major goals of mentors is to assess the aptitudes and abilities of mentees with regard to the appropriateness of their vision for their surgical career. Proper selection of the appropriate mentor can bring to the mentee much needed wisdom, guidance, and resources and can expand the scope of his or her vision. In addition, the mentor can refine the leadership skills taught to mentees in formal training programs. Highly successful surgeons most often have had excellent surgical mentors. It is impressive to note that more than 50% of United States’ Nobel laureates have served under other Nobel laureates in the capacity of student, postdoctoral fellow, or junior collaborator.144 In academic medicine, evidence-based studies have shown benefits to the mentees that include enhanced research productivity, higher likelihood of obtaining research grants, and greater success  in obtaining desired positions in practice or at academic institutions.145 Mentoring provides benefits to the mentors themselves, including refinement of their own personal leadership skills and a strong sense of satisfaction and accomplishment.Mentorship is essential to accomplish the successful development of surgical trainees and to help cultivate their vision. Therefore, formal leadership training programs that have a goal of training the future leaders in surgery should include mentoring.Modeling Leadership for Medical Students and the “Hidden Curriculum”Medical students enter school with great empathy, excitement, optimism, and an idealistic vision. They have self-selected to enter a profession of healing and achieved entry into a highly coveted graduate training program with centuries of tradition. Yet, these medical students are naive to the actual practice of medicine and its professional norms. Along the way to becoming a doctor, many medical students lose some of the optimism, empathy, and excite-ment, particularly during their first and third years of school. Some students come to see the patient-physician relationship as an after-thought to providing care.145,146 Through the “hidden curriculum,” formal leadership training, and modeling of professional behavior, surgical residents, and attendings can help medical students to real-ize their vision of becoming empathic physicians.Traditionally, medical schools and professors have unknowingly relied on a hidden curriculum to mold these ide-alistic students into capable professionals. The hidden curricu-lum is the informal social norms learned by students implicitly, based on their observations of resident and attending behavior. The hidden curriculum has always been present in education, for better or worse, and may be unmasked and studied, but cannot be eliminated. Medical students actively engage in seeking out mentors, and naturally and subconsciously look to their men-tors for cues on how to conduct themselves as physicians, the same way in which a child learns how to behave from a parent or older sibling. Whether or not the witnessed behavior is a positive example of professionalism, the student will begin to perceive that behavior as normal and acceptable. For better or worse, the professional norms of medicine (the Hippocratic oath, respect to patients and colleagues, ethical conduct, personal accountability, empathy, and altruism) are modeled in every personal encounter. It is imperative that all resident and attending surgeons under-stand that the medical students are observing them closely. When resident and attending surgeons model professional behavior, the hidden curriculum becomes a useful tool for professional devel-opment.147-150 This consistent modeling of professional behavior is one necessary component of leadership.During their clinical years, medical students experience both an exponential growth in knowledge and a measurable decline in empathy towards their patients. Initially, medical stu-dents are filled with excitement and wonder during their first patient encounters. The rapid pace of clinical work, acquisition of knowledge, and intense experiences create stress for the stu-dent, both positively and negatively. Scrubbing into the operat-ing room, witnessing the passing of a patient, helping deliver a baby, and studying for boards are impactful milestones that each student experiences in a matter of months. Due to the 9Brunicardi_Ch01_p0001-p0026.indd   1829/01/19   10:58 AM 19LEADERSHIP IN SURGERYCHAPTER 1challenges of their work, students naturally have doubts about their own career choices and abilities, even as they experience growth and success. However, as students gain knowledge and abilities, they also come to see commonly encountered clinical problems as routine work. As familiarity and comfort with clini-cal problems increases, the excitement and wonder experienced by the student decreases. It is during this time that a decline in student empathy occurs, typically in their third year of medical school.151 In medicine, even routine clinical work still requires extraordinary attention to detail, and compassionate care must be delivered to every patient, every time. This attention to detail and compassionate delivery of care are the hallmark of the true professional. It is important that surgical residents and attend-ings always model positive behavior.Previously, medical schools instructed students in anat-omy, physiology, pathology, and clinical medicine, but left the acquisition of professionalism to the informal hidden curricu-lum. The Carnegie Report, published in 2010 at the 100-year anniversary of the Flexner Report, called for medical education to promote “the progressive formation of the physician’s profes-sional identity.”152 To this end, many medical schools nation-wide emphasize early professional education and an integrated curriculum. The Liaison Committee on Medical Education (LCME) sets standards for administrative and faculty leader-ship that manage the curricular model and educational affairs of students; however, formal leadership education is not explicitly required at this time. However, career exploration, mentoring, and advising are instrumental responsibilities of each medical school and a requirement of the LCME. Establishing a leader-ship program that is perpetual and coexists within an integrated curriculum will support this endeavor.153 A longitudinal lead-ership program beginning at the onset of medical school can establish a pattern of ethical behavior, professionalism, balance, Table 1-5Leadership assessment toolboxMETHOD OF LEADERSHIP MEASUREMENTDESCRIPTIONMultifactor Leadership Questionnaire (MLQ)The MLQ is a questionnaire based on the differences between transformation and transactional approaches of leadership. It identifies leadership qualities through the rater’s beliefs about effective leadership.NEO Five-Factor Personality Inventory (NEO)NEO explores different facets of five different personality traits—neuroticism, extraversion, openness to experience, agreeableness, and conscientiousness—through a questionnaire.Surgeon’s Leadership Inventory (SLI)The SLI is a questionnaire based on literature on leadership in surgery and surgeon’s leadership behaviors observed in the operating room. It includes eight elements of surgeon’s leadership in the operating room, which are maintaining standards, managing resources, making decisions, directing, training, supporting others, communicating, and coping with pressure.Patient feedbackPatient complaints are inversely related to leadership effectiveness and can thus be used as opportunities to improve and as a measure of leadership.Objective Structured Clinical Examination (OSCE)The OSCE can be administered in a controlled environment with attending feedback on various aspects of leadership tackled in the practice cases. Videotaped sessions provide further opportunities for improvement as residents will be able to later observe their own behaviors and reflect on ways to improve their approach to the case presented.Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers and Systems (CAHPS)CAHPS surveys are based on aspects of healthcare that matter most to patients, such as physician communication. The results are made public and can be used to shed light on areas of leadership physicians can improve on to work towards a patient-centered approach to care.Reproduced with permission from Jacobs LA: Practical Ethics for the Surgeon. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2018.wellness, and strong character. Indeed, many medical schools are shifting to a new, integrated style curriculum with early pro-fessional development as the standard.154This chapter has emphasized, in an intentional way, the importance of establishing a vision and goals. Throughout the process of becoming a physician, medical students will trade some of their idealism and optimism for a refined vision and a set of goals that become a part of their professional identity. This newly matured vision will guide the future these students create. The future leaders of medicine and surgery are current medical students. To foster a climate of professionalism and empathy, medical students should be taught in an environment of formal leadership training, from the first day of medical school through graduation. In addition to leadership training, medical students will inevitably acquire some of the traits and habits of their resi-dent and attending mentors through the hidden curriculum. In this way, the modeling of professional behaviors by surgical residents and attendings can serve to reinforce professionalism and may help to ward off the empathy decline experienced by medical students in their clinical years.Tools to Measure Leadership Outcomes in HealthcareThere is evidence that leadership training improves healthcare quality. The ACGME, via its core competencies, has recognized technical skills, surgical judgement, and nontechnical skills as qualities essential to develop in residents.155,156 The objec-tive measurement of nontechnical skills is difficult. Table 1-5 includes a list of methods for assessing nontechnical skills cur-rently in use by some residency programs. The Consumer Assess-ment of Healthcare Providers and Systems (CAHPS) survey is in the early phases of being applied to individual physicians, but it has been applied to hospitals as a whole for several years.Brunicardi_Ch01_p0001-p0026.indd   1929/01/19   10:58 AM 20BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART ILeadership can be evaluated through instruments such as the Multifactor Leadership Questionnaire, the NEO Five–Factor Inventory, and the Surgeon’s Leadership Inventory. The Mul-tifactor Leadership Questionnaire (MLQ) analyzes leadership aptitude as either a transactional or a transformational style.157 Leadership based on transaction focuses on completing and rewarding the tasks, whereas leadership based on transforma-tion focuses more on the motivation for completing the tasks and emphasizes a positive and encouraging working environ-ment for the team.158,159 In a study applying the questionnaire to five surgeons in a single hospital, surgeons who scored higher on the transformational section were more focused on promot-ing an open environment for all the attendings, residents, nurses and other staff in the operating room. This transformational style correlated with greater communication. These findings are important in showing that lack of communication is often a leading factor in surgical errors.The use of an MLQ in 2008 studying surgical residents showed a significant association between transformational lead-ership and overall perceived team effectiveness and resident sat-isfaction.158-159 The questionnaire also found that the residents, as leaders, placed less value on the individual needs of their colleagues, possibly reflecting a high sense of independence and frequent changes in teams due to rotations among services. This finding helped identify an area of leadership training on which the program can focus to help further develop a more supportive team atmosphere amongst the residents. In 2011, a study administered the NEO Five-Factor Personality Inventory (NEO) to a group of surgical residents. NEO, which assesses personality on five broad strokes, including neuroticism, open-ness, agreeableness, extroversion, and conscientiousness, found that the surgeons scored above the national average on most of  the factors tested but below average on agreeableness. This is a measure of altruism and tolerance, among other related factors. This result corresponded with the MLQ administered to the same group of residents and therefore highlighted areas of lead-ership that required modification.158,159The Surgeon’s Leadership Inventory (SLI) is a helpful guide for residency programs.160 The SLI grades surgeons on eight different elements of leadership, as listed in Table 1-6. As with the MLQ and NEO questionnaires, the SLI can be used to assess the growth of leadership ability in surgery residents. Table 6 provides a list and description of the different elements assessed by the SLI.141LEADERSHIP TRAINING FOR THE  PROSPECTIVE SURGEONProspective surgeons such as medical students and premedical students may have no better source for developing the personal attributes necessary for a successful career than current surgical attending surgeons and current residents. When surveyed, these doctors emphasized accountability, resilience, and high personal standards for oneself as critical tools. Prospective surgeons are advised to pursue perfectionism and be self-critical, cautioning against taking these traits to far towards neurotic behavior. Criti-cal leadership skills of teamwork and learning to take initiative are mandatory in modern medicine and must be learned early. Innovation is highly desirable.162Residents, on the other hand, are closer to becoming inde-pendent. To some extent, they have already been selected for their leadership, innovation, and resiliency through the process Table 1-6Surgeons Leadership Inventory (SLI)ELEMENTDESCRIPTIONMaintaining standardsPracticing safe and quality patient care by following established protocols and asking for help when neededMaking decisionsMaking informed judgments and communicating decisions with relevant personnelManaging resourcesAppropriately assigning resources and tasks to team membersDirectingClearly communicating expectations and instructions and demonstrating confidence in leadership abilityTrainingEducating and training team members when the opportunity arisesSupporting othersOffering assistance where appropriate and encouraging open communicationCommunicatingSharing information in a timely manner and encouraging input from othersCoping with pressureShowing flexibility when required to meet goalsData correlating patient complaints in a large number of hospitals show that improved leadership is associated with better hospital climate, improved performance, and a lower number of complaints.161Reproduced with permission from Jacobs LA: Practical Ethics for the Surgeon. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2018.of the match. During training their progression from novice to expert is necessarily rapid. A graded tool for all procedure based specialties including surgery – OpTrust – has been recently vali-dated to facilitate the resident’s transition to leadership across five domains including questioning, planning, instruction, prob-lem solving, and leadership.163As emphasized throughout this chapter, the concept of training leadership skills early applies particularly to junior fac-ulty and residents. The resident-surgeon-manager conference is one model for integrating department members of various experience levels into a results-based leadership conference. In this conference, various stakeholders including attorneys, per-sons with business experience, and risk management experts are brought in as guest participants. Exercises were immersive and included case-based discussions, role-playing, simulation, and interactive lecture. Topics included teamwork, learning negoti-ating techniques, time management, risk management, balance, giving feedback, and creating immediate, goal-oriented action plans.86EARLY CAREER DEVELOPMENT AND ESTABLISHING ONESELFA variety of methods have been proposed for the professional development of new attending surgeons. “Speed Mentoring”— 10-minute pairings of senior and junior surgeons answering pre-set questions—have been studied at national conferences with promising results. These sessions could be spread out over several days and integrated into a busy surgeon’s schedule.164Brunicardi_Ch01_p0001-p0026.indd   2029/01/19   10:58 AM 21LEADERSHIP IN SURGERYCHAPTER 1A study of department chairs and award-winning surgeon-scientists identified perseverance and team leadership skills as critical factors for development in the young attending surgeon. Chairs advocated protected time for research, financial support, and mentorship as departmental level support that the surgeon scientist should actively seek out in their first position. The sur-geon-scientist compared to the pure clinician faces a different set of challenges, particularly the financial challenge of funding research and clinical duties competing for time and attention with research interests.165One study addressed surgeon behavior in the operating room to assess the leadership style most associated with strong leadership. Based off of this study, surgeons who are trained to collaborate, consult others appropriately, be polite (simple “please” and “thank you”), and create a safe space for their operating room staff to voice concerns will demonstrate good leadership. However, surgeons who demonstrate nonconstruc-tive criticism, destructive humor, steer conversation away from the current case, and express frustration will be perceived as demonstrating poor leadership. Under this system, surgeon behavior can be categorized—conductor, elucidator, delegator, engagement facilitator, tone setter, being human, and safe space maker—in order to provide individual feedback for professional development.166SENIOR FACULTY DEVELOPMENT: TRANSITIONING TO DEPARTMENTAL LEADERSHIP AND LEGACY BUILDINGThe presence of experienced, senior academic surgeons within a department represents an opportunity. The formal develop-ment of a plan for late career transitioning through departmental leadership roles all the way to emeritus status naturally initi-ates a constructive process when thought out years in advance. The plan should be agreeable to the senior faculty member in question as well as departmental leadership and hospital stakeholders. Once in place, the senior academic surgeon and department will both thrive thanks to a shared vision, mutual understanding, and clear goals and transition points. Depart-mental leadership can use the transition plan to look ahead at the future of their department years down the line.167Recognition of senior academic surgeons with departmen-tal leadership, promotions, and emeritus status is a privilege earned by the academician over a lifetime of work; however, for the department it represents an opportunity to shape the values and culture of the faculty body as a whole. The continued vis-ibility, model, and influence of such leaders will have a trickle-down effect on the rest of the department. Surgical leaders are part of a large and extraordinary network facilitated by men-torship and decades of professional collaboration. Exceptional senior academic surgeons may often experience the “multiplier-effect” whereby one excellent leader trains several, who go on to train several more until the culture of surgery nationwide is influenced.168Although there are no mandatory ages for which surgeons must retire as in other professions, such as airline pilots, the issue of aging and when to cease practice has been controver-sial. There are some, however few, reports of physicians prac-ticing after the decline of their skill and becoming dangerous. As a whole, the profession has been unable to prevent this. Nationwide, from 1975 to 2015, the number of physicians prac-ticing after age 65 has increased by 374%. Some hospitals and healthcare organizations have implemented mandatory cognitive and physical evaluations as a condition of continued practice. In the absence of more robust professional initiatives our field may see legislative oversight in the future.169 The authors believe that a formally planned transition emphasizing the values of leader-ship and legacy-building offers a more palatable alternative.CONCLUSIONAlthough there are several definitions of leadership and a vari-ety of leadership styles, all share the common goal of improving patient care in the modern era. All forms of leadership require a vision and willingness—the willingness to assume the respon-sibility to lead, continue learning, practice effective commu-nication styles, and resolve conflict. Effective leadership can change surgical departments and improve patient care through innovation. A growing body of evidence suggests the mastery of leadership requires practice through intentional curricula and reinforcement through mentorship.Surgical leadership is bred through its training programs. Thus, innovation in surgical training programs is needed to enhance the development of leadership skills of surgical train-ees, to prepare them for practice in modern healthcare systems, and to optimize patient care, as well as compliance with require-ments set forth by regulatory institutions governing surgery and surgical education. A growing body of literature supports the value of effective leadership in improving patient care, produc-tivity, and the work environment while it validates the ability to measure the impact of leadership training. Therefore, it is of paramount importance to teach modern leadership principles and skills to surgical trainees in order to create a new generation of surgeon leaders who will shape the modern era of surgery in the context of rapidly evolving science, technology, and systems of healthcare delivery.REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Levinson W, Chaumeton N. Communication between surgeons and patients in routine office visits. Surgery. 1999;125(2):127-134.	2.	Itani KM, Liscum K, Brunicardi FC. Physician leader-ship is a new mandate in surgical training. Am J Surg. 2004;187(3):328-331.	3.	Jensen AR, Wright A, Lance A, et al. The emotional intel-ligence of surgical residents: a descriptive study. Am J Surg. 2008;195(1):5-10.	4.	Lee L, Brunicardi FC, Scott BG, et al. Impact of a novel education curriculum on surgical training within an aca-demic training program. J Surg Res. 2008;145(2):308-312.	5.	Larkin AC, Cahan MA, Whalen G, et al. Human Emotion and Response in Surgery (HEARS): a simulation-based curriculum for communication skills, systems-based prac-tice, and professionalism in surgical residency training.  J Am Coll Surg. 2010;211(2):285-292.	6.	Lobas JG. Leadership in academic medicine: capabili-ties and conditions for organizational success. Am J Med. 2006;119(7):617-621.	7.	Chemers MM. An Integrative Theory of Leadership. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates; 1997:200.	8.	Collins J. Good to Great: Why Some Companies Make the Leap . . . and Others Don’t. London: Random House; 2001.	9.	Souba WW. The 3 essential responsibilities: a leadership story. Arch Surg. 2010;145(6):540-543.Brunicardi_Ch01_p0001-p0026.indd   2129/01/19   10:58 AM 22BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART I	10.	Slap S. Bury My Heart at Conference Room B: The Unbeat-able Impact of Truly Committed Managers. New York: Portfo-lio Penguin; 2010:234.	11.	NobelPrize.org. Frederick G. Banting: Biography. Available at: https://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/medicine/laure-ates/1923/banting-bio.html Accessed June 15, 2018.	12.	Brunicardi FC. Presidential Address. Academic program development. J Surg Res. 1999;83(1):1-6.	13.	Sinek S. Start With Why: How Great Leaders Inspire Everyone to Take Action. London: Portfolio/Penguin; 2013.	14.	Brunicardi FC, Cotton R, Cole G, Martinez G. The lead-ership principles of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. and their relevance to surgery. J Natl Med Assoc. 2007;99(1):7-14.	15.	Brunicardi FC, Gibbs R, Wheeler D, et al. Overview of the development of personalized genomic medicine and sur-gery. World J Surg. 2011;35(8):1693-1699.	16.	Buia A, Stockhausen F, Hanisch E. Laparoscopic sur-gery: a qualified systematic review. World J Methodol. 2015;5(4):238-254.	17.	Van Bree SH, Vlug MS, Bemelman WA, et al. Faster recov-ery of gastrointestinal transit after laparoscopy and fast-track care in patients undergoing colonic surgery. Gastroenterology. 2011;141(3):872-880.e1-e4.	18.	Mentula P, Sammalkorpi H, Leppäniemi A. Laparo-scopic surgery or conservative treatment for appendiceal abscess in adults? A randomized controlled trial. Ann Surg. 2015;262(2):237-242.	19.	The American Board of Surgery. American Board of Surgery CME requirements for recertification. Available at: http://www.absurgery.org/default.jsp? Accessed June 15, 2018.	20.	Kohn LT, Corrigan J, Donaldson MS. To Err Is Human: Building a Safer Health System. Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 2000.	21.	Gawande AA, Zinner MJ, Studdert DM, Brennan TA. Analysis of errors reported by surgeons at three teaching hospitals. Surgery. 2003;133(6):614-621.	22.	Sutcliffe KM, Lewton E, Rosenthal MM. Communication fail-ures: an insidious contributor to medical mishaps. Acad Med. 2004;79:186-194.	23.	Williams RG, Silverman R, Schwind C, et al. Surgeon information transfer and communication: factors affect-ing quality and efficiency of inpatient care. Ann Surg. 2007;245(2):159-169.	24.	Ambady N, Laplante D, Nguyen T, et al. Surgeons’ tone of voice: a clue to malpractice history. Surgery. 2002; 132(1):5-9.	25.	Nolin CE. Malpractice claims, patient communication, and critical paths: a lawyer’s perspective. Qual Manag Health Care. 1995;3:65-70.	26.	Stewart MA. Effective physician-patient communication and health outcomes: a review. CMAJ. 1995;152:1423-1433.	27.	Leonard M. The human factor: the critical importance of effec-tive teamwork and communication in providing safe care. Qual Safe Health Care. 2004;13(suppl 1):i85-i90.	28.	Arriaga AF, Elbardissi AW, Regenbogen SE, et al. A policybased intervention for the reduction of communication breakdowns in inpatient surgical care: results from a Harvard surgical safety collaborative. Ann Surg. 2011;253(5): 849-854.	29.	Davenport DL, Henderson WG, Mosca CL, Khuri SF, Mentzer RM Jr. Risk-adjusted morbidity in teaching hospitals corre-lates with reported levels of communication and collaboration on surgical teams but not with scale measures of teamwork climate, safety climate, or working conditions. J Am Coll Surg. 2007;205(6):778-784.	30.	Dine CJ, Kahn JM, Abella BS, Asch DA, Shea JA. Key elements of clinical physician leadership at an academic medical center. J Grad Med Educ. 2011;3(1):31-36.	31.	Pronovost P, Berenholtz S, Dorman T, Lipsett PA,  Simmonds T, Haraden C. Improving communication in the ICU using daily goals. J Crit Care. 2003;18(2):71-75.	32.	Gurses AP, Kim G, Martinez E, et al. Identifying and cat-egorizing patient safety hazards in cardiovascular operat-ing rooms using an interdisciplinary approach: a multisite study. BMJ Qual Saf. 2012;21(10):810-818.	33.	Diaz JA, Griffith RA, Ng JJ, Reinert SE, Friedmann PD, Moulton AW. Patients’ use of the Internet for medical infor-mation. J Gen Intern Med. 2002;17(3):180-185.	34.	Powell JA, Darvell M, Gray JA. The doctor, the patient and the world-wide web: how the internet is changing healthcare.  J R Soc Med. 2003;96(2):74-76. Review.	35.	Ha JF, Longnecker N. Doctor-patient communication: a review. Ochsner J. 2010 Spring;10(1):38-43.	36.	Smith DD, Kellar J, Walters EL, Reibling ET, Phan T, Green SM. Does emergency physician empathy reduce thoughts of litigation? A randomised trial. Emerg Med J. 2016;33(8):548-552.	37.	Robbennolt JK. Apologies and medical error. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2009;467(2):376-382.	38.	Levinson W, Roter DL, Mullooly JP, Dull VT, Frankel RM. Physician-patient communication. The relationship with mal-practice claims among primary care physicians and surgeons. JAMA. 1997;277(7):553-559.	39.	Beckman HB, Markakis KM, Suchman AL, Frankel RM. The doctor-patient relationship and malpractice. Lessons from plaintiff depositions. Arch Intern Med. 1994;154(12):1365-1370.	40.	Moore PJ, Adler NE, Robertson PA. Medical malpractice: the effect of doctor-patient relations on medical patient perceptions and malpractice intentions. West J Med. 2000; 173(4):244-250.	41.	Dorr Goold S, Lipkin M Jr. The doctor-patient relationship: challenges, opportunities, and strategies. J Gen Intern Med. 1999;14(suppl 1):S26-S33. Review.	42.	Kerse N, Buetow S, Mainous AG 3rd, Young G, Coster G, Arroll B. Physician-patient relationship and medication compliance: a primary care investigation. Ann Fam Med. 2004;2(5):455-461.	43.	Anhang Price R, Elliott MN, Zaslavsky AM. Valuing patient experience as a unique and intrinsically important aspect of health care quality. JAMA Surg. 2013;148(10):985-986.	44.	Makary MA, Sexton JB, Freischlag JA, et al. Operating room teamwork among physicians and nurses: teamwork in the eye of the beholder. J Am Coll Surg. 2006;202:746-752.	45.	Weeks D. The Eight Essential Steps to Conflict Resolution: Preserving Relationships at Work, at Home, and in the Com-munity. New York, NY: J.P. Tarcher/Perigee; 1994:290.	46.	Covey SR. The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People: Restoring the Character Ethic. New York, NY: Free Press; 2004.	47.	Lee L, Berger DH, Awad SS, Brandt ML, Martinez G, Brunicardi FC. Conflict resolution: practical principles for surgeons. World J Surg. 2008;32:2331-2335.	48.	Antiel RM, Reed DA, Van Arendonk KJ, et al. Effects of duty hour restrictions on core competencies, education, quality of life, and burnout among general surgery interns. JAMA Surg. 2013;148:448-455.	49.	Brunicardi FC, Hobson FL. Time management: a review for physicians. J Natl Med Assoc. 1996;88:581-587.	50.	Ochoa LN, Brunicardi FC, Brandt ML, Awad SS. Evalua-tion of resident training activities using a novel time-motion study prior to the implementation of the 80-hour work week.  Chicago, IL: American College of Surgeons Annual Confer-ence, 2006.	51.	Parkinson CN. Parkinson’s Law. New York: Houghton Mifflin; 1957.Brunicardi_Ch01_p0001-p0026.indd   2229/01/19   10:58 AM 23LEADERSHIP IN SURGERYCHAPTER 1	52.	Miller NM, McGowen RK. The painful truth: physicians are not invincible. South Med J. 2000;93(10):966-973. Review.	53.	Shanafelt TD, Balch CM, Dyrbye L, et al. Special report: suicidal ideation among American surgeons. Arch Surg. 2011;146(1):54-62.	54.	Shanafelt TD, Oreskovich MR, Dyrbye LN, et al. Avoiding burnout: the personal health habits and wellness practices of surgeons. Ann Surg. 2012;255(4):625-633.	55.	Katzenbach JR, Steffen I, Kronley C. Cultural change that sticks. Available at: https://hbr.org/2012/07/cultural-change-that-sticks. Accessed June 15, 2018.	56.	Judge TA, Piccolo RF. Transformational and transactional leadership: a meta-analytic test of their relative validity. J Appl Psychol. 2014;89(5):755-768.	57.	Lencioni PM. Make your values mean something. Harv Bus Rev. 2002;80(7):113-117.	58.	Barling J, Akers A, Beiko D. The impact of positive and nega-tive intraoperative surgeons’ leadership behaviors on surgical team performance. Am J Surg. 2017;215(1):14-18.	59.	Molina G, Berry WR, Lipsitz SR, et al. Perception of safety of surgical practice among operating room person-nel from survey data is associated with all-cause 30-day postoperative death rate in South Carolina. Ann Surg. 2017;266(4):658-666.	60.	Hu YY, Parker SH, Lipsitz SR, et al. Surgeons’ leadership styles and team behavior in the operating room. J Am Coll Surg. 2016;222(1):41-51.	61.	Ford K, Menchine M, Burner E. Leadership and team-work in trauma and resuscitation. West J Emerg Med. 2016;17(5):549-556.	62.	Hajibandeh S, Hajibandeh S. The Time is now to use clini-cal outcomes as quality indicators for effective leadership in trauma. West J Emerg Med. 2017;18(3):331-332.	63.	Hajibandeh S, Hajibandeh S. Who should lead a trauma team: surgeon or non-surgeon? A systematic review and meta-anal-ysis. J Inj Violence Res. 2017;9(2):106-116.	64.	Gibson R, Armstrong A, Till A, McKimm J. Learning from error: leading a culture of safety. Br J Hosp Med (Lond). 2017;78(7):402-406.	65.	Neily J, Mills PD, Young-Xu Y, et al. Association between implementation of a medical team training program and sur-gical mortality. JAMA. 2010;304(15):1693-1700.	66.	Young-Xu Y, Neily J, Mills PD, et al. Association between implementation of a medical team training program and surgi-cal morbidity. Arch Surg. 2011;146(12):1368-1373.	67.	Ninan D, Zhu J, Kore A, Wasson E, Fullerton T, Ninan B. The role of organizational culture in operating room turnaround time. Cureus. 2017;9(5):e1257.	68.	Purvis S, Kennedy GD, Knobloch MJ, et al. Incorporation of leadership rounds in CAUTI prevention efforts. J Nurs Care Qual. 2016;32(4):318-323.	69.	Tasi MC, Keswani A, Bozic KJ. Does physician leader-ship affect hospital quality, operational efficiency, and financial performance? [Published online ahead of print July 11, 2017.] Health Care Manage Rev. doi: 10.1097/HMR.0000000000000173	70.	Kennedy GD, Tevis SE, Kent KC. Is there a relationship between patient satisfaction and favorable outcomes? Ann Surg. 2014;260(4):592-598; discussion 598-600.	71.	Abelson JS, Chartrand G, Moo TA, Moore M, Yeo H. The climb to break the glass ceiling in surgery: trends in women progressing from medical school to surgical train-ing and academic leadership from 1994 to 2015. Am J Surg. 2016;212(4):566-572 e561.	72.	Silver JK, Slocum CS, Bank AM, et al. Where are the women? The underrepresentation of women physicians among recogni-tion award recipients from medical specialty societies. PM R. 2017;9(8);804-815.	73.	Derck J, Zahn K, Finks JF, Mand S, Sandhu G. Doctors of tomorrow: an innovative curriculum connecting underrep-resented minority high school students to medical school. Educ Health (Abingdon). 2016;29(3):259-265.	74.	Marrast LM, Zallman L, Woolhandler S, Bor DH, McCormick D. Minority physicians’ role in the care of underserved patients: diversifying the physician workforce may be key in addressing health disparities. JAMA Intern Med. 2014;174:289-291.	75.	Silva AK, Preminger A, Slezak S, Phillips LG, Johnson DJ. Melting the plastic ceiling: overcoming obstacles to foster leadership in women plastic surgeons. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2016;138(3):721-729.	76.	Abelson JS, Symer MM, Yeo HL. Surgical time out: our counts are still short on racial diversity in academic surgery. Am J Surg. 2018;215(4):542-548.	77.	Fernald A, Marchman VA, Weisleder A. SES differences in language processing skill and vocabulary are evident at 18 months. Dev Sci. 2013;16(2):234-248.	78.	Weech-Maldonado R, Dreachslin JL, Epane JP, Gail J, Gupta S, Wainio JA. Hospital cultural competency as a systematic organizational intervention: key findings from the national center for healthcare leadership diversity demonstration project. Health Care Manage Rev. 2018;43(1):30-41.	79.	Goleman D. Leadership that gets results. Harv Bus Rev. 2000;78:78-93.	80.	Xirasagar S, Samuels ME, Stoskopf CH. Physician leadership styles and effectiveness: an empirical study. Med Care Res Rev. 2005;62:720-740.	81.	Baird DS, Soldanska M, Anderson B, et al. Current leadership training in dermatology residency programs: a survey. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2012;66:622-625.	82.	Kiesau CD, Heim KA, Parekh SG. Leadership and business education in orthopaedic residency training programs. J Surg Orthop Adv. 2011;20:117-121.	83.	Horwitz IB, Horwitz S, Daram P, et al. Transformational, transactional, and passive-avoidant leadership charac-teristics of a surgical resident cohort: analysis using the multifactor leadership questionnaire and implications for improving surgical education curriculums. J Surg Res. 2008;148:49-59.	84.	Ackerly DC, Sangvai DG, Udayakumar K, et al. Training the next generation of physician-executives: an innovative residency pathway in management and leadership. Acad Med. 2011;86:575-579.	85.	Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education. Leadership skills for chief residents. Available at: http://www .acgme.org/acgmeweb/. Accessed June 15, 2018.	86.	Hanna WC, Mulder D, Fried G, et al. Training future surgeons for management roles: the resident-surgeon-manager confer-ence. Arch Surg. 2012;147:940-944.	87.	American College of Surgeons. Surgeons as leaders: from operating room to boardroom. Available at: http://www.facs.org/education/surgeonsasleaders.html. Accessed June 15, 2018.	88.	Awad SS, Hayley B, Fagan SP, Berger DH, Brunicardi FC. The impact of a novel resident leadership training curriculum. Am J Surg. 2004;188:481-484.	89.	Horwitz IB, Horwitz S, Brandt ML, Brunicardi FC, Awad SS. Assessment of communication skills of surgical residents using the Social Skills Inventory. Am J Surg. 2007;194:401-405.	90.	Horwitz IB, Horwitz S, Brunicardi FC, Awad SS. Improving comprehensive surgical resident training through use of the NEO Five-Factor Personality Inventory: results from a cohort-based trial. Am J Surg. 2011;201:828-834.	91.	Dimick JB, Mulholland MW. Design principles for build-ing a leadership development program in a department of surgery. Ann Surg. 2018;267(1):39-41.Brunicardi_Ch01_p0001-p0026.indd   2329/01/19   10:58 AM 24BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART I	92.	Gannon SJ, Law, KE, Ray RD, et al. Do resident’s leader-ship skills relate to ratings of technical skill? J Surg Res. 2016;206(2):466-471.	93.	Gillespie BM, Harbeck E, Kang E, Steel C, Fairweather N, Chaboyer W. Correlates of non-technical skills in surgery: a prospective study. BMJ Open. 2017;7(1):e014480.	94.	Downing MT, Way DP, Caniano DA. Results of a national sur-vey on ethics education in general surgery residency programs. Am J Surg. 1997;174(3):364-368.	95.	Helft PR, Eckles RE, Torbeck L. Ethics education in surgical residency programs: a review of the literature. J Surg Educ. 2009;66(1):35-42.	96.	Kavarana MN, Sade RM. Ethical issues in cardiac surgery. Future Cardiol. 2012;8(3):451-465.	97.	Reitsma AM, Moreno JD. Ethics of innovative surgery: US surgeons’ definitions, knowledge, and attitudes. J Am Coll Surg. 2005;200(1):103-110.	98.	Klingensmith ME. Teaching ethics in surgical train-ing programs using a case-based format. J Surg Educ. 2008;65(2):126-128.	99.	Holloran SD, Starkey GW, Burke PA, Steele G Jr, Forse RA. An educational intervention in the surgical intensive care unit to improve ethical decisions. Surgery. 1995;118(2):294-298; discussion 298-299.	100.	Chipman JG, Beilman GJ, Schmitz CC, Seatter SC. Devel-opment and pilot testing of an OSCE for difficult con-versations in surgical intensive care. J Surg Educ. 2007; 64(2):79-87.	101.	Robertson JM, Dias RD, Yule S, Smink DS. Operating room team training with simulation: a systematic review. J Laparo-endosc Adv Surg Tech A. 2017;27(5):475-480.	102.	Sloan DA, Donnelly MB, Schwartz RW, Strodel WE. The objective structured clinical examination; the new gold stan-dard for evaluating postgraduate clinical performance. Ann Surg. 1995;222(6):735-742.	103.	Rothman AI, Cohen R. Understanding the objective structured clinical examination: issues and options. Ann R Coll Phys Surg Can. 1995;28(5):283-287.	104.	Sudan R, Lynch TG, Risucci DA, Blair PG, Sachdeva AK. American College of Surgeons Resident Objective Structured Clinical Examination: a national program to assess clinical readiness of entering postgraduate year 1 surgery residents. Ann Surg. 2014;260(1):65-71.	105.	Sloan DA, Donnelly MB, Schwartz RW, Strodel WE. The objective structured clinical examination; the new gold stan-dard for evaluating postgraduate clinical performance. Ann Surg. 1995;222(6):735-742.	106.	Cohen R, Reznick RK, Taylor BR, Provan J, Rothman A. Reliability and validity of an objective structured clini-cal examination in assessing surgical residents. Am J Surg. 1990;160(3):302-305.	107.	Harden RM, Stevenson M, Downie WW, Wilson GM. Assessment of clinical competence using objective struc-tured examinations. Br Med J. 1975;1(5955):447.	108.	Harden RM, Gleeson FA. Assessment of clinical compe-tence using an objective structured clinical examination (OSCE). Med Educ. 1979;13(1):41-54.	109.	Hochberg MS, Berman RS, Kalet AL, Zabar S, Gillespie C, Pachter HL. Professionalism training for surgical residents: documenting the advantages of a professionalism curriculum. Ann Surg. 2016;264(3):501-507.	110.	Merrick HW, Nowacek GA, Boyer J, et al. Ability of the objective structured clinical examination to differentiate surgical residents, medical students, and physician assis-tant students. J Surg Res. 2002;106(2):319-322.	111.	Sudan R, Lynch TG, Risucci DA, Blair PG, Sachdeva AK. American College of Surgeons Resident Objective Structured Clinical Examination: a national program to assess clinical readiness of entering postgraduate year 1 surgery residents. Ann Surg. 2014;260(1):65-71.	112.	Yudkowsky R, Alseidi A, Cintron J. Beyond fulfilling the core competencies: an objective structured clinical examination to assess communication and interpersonal skills in a surgical residency. Curr Surg. 2004;61(5):499-503.	113.	Cohen R, Rothman AI, Ross J. A comprehensive assessment of graduates of foreign medical schools. Ann R Coll Phys Surg Can. 1988;21(7):505-509.	114.	Reznick R, Smee S, Rothman A, et al. An objective struc-tured clinical examination for the licentiate: a report of the pilot project of the Medical Council of Canada. Acad Med. 1992;67(8):487-494.	115.	Medical Council of Canada. NAC Overview. Available at: http://mcc.ca/examinations/nac-overview/. Accessed June 16, 2018.	116.	McGaghie WC, Cohen ER, Wayne DB. Are United States Medical Licensing Exam Step 1 and 2 scores valid measures for postgraduate medical residency selection decisions? Acad Med. 2011;86(1):48-52.	117.	Simon SR, Bui A, Day S, Berti D, Volkan K. The relation-ship between second-year medical students’ OSCE scores and USMLE Step 2 scores. J Eval Clin Pract. 2007;13(6):901-905.	118.	Lehman EP 4th, Guercio JR. The Step 2 Clinical Skills exam—a poor value proposition. N Engl J Med. 2013;368(10):889-891.	119.	National Board of Osteopathic Medical Examiners. COM-LEX-USA Level 2-PE. Available at: https://www.nbome.org/exams-assessments/comlex-usa/comlex-usa-level-2-pe/. Accessed June 16, 2018.	120.	Cerilli GJ, Merrick HW, Staren ED. Objective Structured Clin-ical Examination technical skill stations correlate more closely with postgraduate year level than do clinical skill stations. Am Surg. 2001;67(4):323-326; discussion 326-327.	121.	Turner JL, Dankoski ME. Objective structured clinical exams: a critical review. Fam Med. 2008;40(8):574-578.	122.	Zyromski NJ, Staren ED, Merrick HW. Surgery residents’ perception of the Objective Structured Clinical Examination (OSCE). Curr Surg. 2003;60(5):533-537.	123.	Schwartz RW, Witzke DB, Donnelly MB, Stratton T, Blue AV, Sloan DA. Assessing residents’ clinical performance: cumula-tive results of a four-year study with the Objective Structured Clinical Examination. Surgery. 1998;124(2):307-312.	124.	Doumouras AG, Hamidi M, Lung K, Tarola CL, Tsao MW, Scott JW, Yule S. Non-technical skills of surgeons and anaes-thetists in simulated operating theatre crises. Br J Surg. 2017;104(8):1028-1036.	125.	Nicksa GA, Anderson C, Fidler R, Stewart L. Innovative approach using interprofessional simulation to educate sur-gical residents in technical and nontechnical skills in high-risk clinical scenarios. JAMA Surg. 2015;150(3):201-207.	126.	Laufer S, Ray RD, D’Angelo AL, Jones GF, Pugh CM. Use of simulators to explore specialty recommendation for a palpable breast mass. Am J Surg. 2015;210(4):618-623.	127.	Laufer S, Cohen ER, Kwan C, et al. Sensor technology in assess-ments of clinical skill. N Engl J Med. 2015;372(8):784-786.	128.	D’Angelo AL, Ray RD, Jenewein CG, Jones GF, Pugh CM. Residents’ perception of skill decay during dedicated research time. J Surg Res. 2015;199(1):23-31.	129.	Martin JA, Regehr G, Reznick R, et al. Objective Structured Assessment of Technical Skill (OSATS) for surgical residents. Br J Surg. 1997;84(2):273-278.	130.	Hatala R, Cook DA, Brydges R, Hawkins R. Constructing a validity argument for the Objective Structured Assess-ment of Technical Skills (OSATS): a systematic review of validity evidence. Adv Health Sci Educ Theory Pract. 2015;20(5):1149-1175.	131.	Reznick R, Regehr G, MacRae H, Martin J, McCulloch W. Testing technical skill via an innovative “bench station” exam-ination. Am J Surg. 1997;173(3):226-230.Brunicardi_Ch01_p0001-p0026.indd   2429/01/19   10:58 AM 25LEADERSHIP IN SURGERYCHAPTER 1	132.	Hopmans CJ, den Hoed PT, van der Laan L, et al. Assessment of surgery residents’ operative skills in the operating theater using a modified Objective Structured Assessment of Techni-cal Skills (OSATS): a prospective multicenter study. Surgery. 2014;156(5):1078-1088.	133.	Glarner CE, McDonald RJ, Smith AB, et al. Utilizing a novel tool for the comprehensive assessment of resident operative performance. J Surg Educ. 2013;70(6):813-820.	134.	Wagner JP, Chen DC, Donahue TR, et al. Assessment of resident operative performance using a real-time mobile Web system: preparing for the milestone age. J Surg Educ. 2014;71(6):e41-e46.	135.	Arora S, Sevdalis N, Nestel D, Woloshynowych M, Darzi A, Kneebone R. The impact of stress on surgical performance: a systematic review of the literature. Surgery. 2010;147(3): 318-330, 330.e1-e6.	136.	Parker SH, Flin R, McKinley A, Yule S. Factors influenc-ing surgeons’ intraoperative leadership: video analysis of unanticipated events in the operating room. World J Surg. 2014;38(1):4-10.	137.	Smith RC, Lyles JS, Mettler J, et al. The effectiveness of inten-sive training for residents in interviewing. A randomized, con-trolled study. Ann Intern Med. 1998;128(2):118-126.	138.	Lewin SA, Skea ZC, Entwistle V, Zwarenstein M, Dick J. Interventions for providers to promote a patient-centred approach in clinical consultations. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2001;(4):CD003267. Review.	139.	Fallowfield L, Jenkins V, Farewell V, Solis-Trapala I. Enduring impact of communication skills training: results of a 12-month follow-up. Br J Cancer. 2003;89(8):1445-1449.	140.	Gannon SJ, Law KE, Ray RD, et al. Do resident’s leader-ship skills relate to ratings of technical skill? J Surg Res. 2016;206(2):466-471.141.	Baroukim S, Merrick HW, Brunicardi FC, Hammerling L: Fundamental Principles of Leadership Training in Surgery and the Moral Imperative IN Jacobs LA: Practical Ethics for the Surgeon. Pennsylvania, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2018.	142.	UCLA Health. Residency program—CLA head and neck sur-gery. Available at: www.uclahealth.org/head-neck-surgery/residency-program. Accessed on June 16, 2018.	143.	Barondess JA. On mentoring. J R Soc Med. 1997;90:347-349.	144.	Zuckerman H. Scientific Elite: Nobel Laureates in the  United States. New York: Free Press; 1977:335.	145.	Bennett N, Lockyer J, Mann K, et al. Hidden curriculum in continuing medical education. J Contin Educ Health Prof. 2004;24(3):145-152.	146.	Holmes Cheryl L, Miller H, Regehr G. (Almost) forgetting to care: an unanticipated source of empathy loss in clerkship. Med Educ. 2017;51(7):732-739.	147.	Martimianakis MA, Michalec B, Lam J, Cartmill C, Taylor JS, Hafferty FW. Humanism, the hidden curriculum, and edu-cational reform: a scoping review and thematic analysis. Acad Med. 2015;90(11 suppl):S5-S13.	148.	Hafferty FW, Gaufberg EH. The hidden curriculum. In: Dent JA, Harden RM, Hunt D, eds. A Practical Guide for Medical Teachers, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017.	149.	Hafferty FW. Beyond curriculum reform: confronting medi-cine’s hidden curriculum. Acad Med. 1998;73:403-407.	150.	Hafferty FW, Hafler JP. The hidden curriculum, structural disconnects, and the socialization of new professionals. In: Hafler JP, ed. Extraordinary Learning in the Workplace. Innovation and Change in Professional Education. Vol. 6.   New York: Springer; 2011:17-35.	151.	Holmes C, Harris IB, Schwartz AJ, Regehr G. Harnessing  the hidden curriculum: a four-step approach to developing  and reinforcing reflective competencies in medical clinical clerkship. Adv Health Sci Educ Theory Pract. 2015;20:1355-1370.	152.	Irby DM, Cook M, O’Brien BC. Calls for reform of medical education by the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching: 1910 and 2010. Acad Med. 2010;85(2):220-227.	153.	Liason Committee on Medical Education. Functions and struc-ture of a medical school: standards for accreditation of medical education programs leading to the MD degree. Association of American Medical Colleges and the American Medical  Association. March 2018. Available at: http://lcme.org/ publications/. Accessed June 16, 2018.	154.	Heiman HL, O’Brien CL, Curry RH, et al. Description and early outcomes of a comprehensive curriculum redesign at the Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine [pub-lished online ahead of print September 26, 2017]. Acad Med. doi: 10.1097/ACM.0000000000001933.	155.	Combes JR, Arespacochaga E. Physician competencies for a 21st century health care system. J Grad Med Educ. 2012;4(3):401-405.	156.	Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education. Common program requirements: general competencies. Available at: http://www.acgme.org/What-We-Do/Accreditation/ Common-Program-Requirements. Accessed June 16, 2018.	157.	Rowald J. Multifactor leadership questionnaire. Psychomet-ric properties of the German translation. Available at: https://www.mindgarden.com/documents/MLQGermanPsychomet-ric.pdf. Accessed June 16, 2018.	158.	Horwitz IB, Horwitz SK, Brunicardi FC, Awad SS. Improv-ing comprehensive surgical resident training though use of the NEO-Five Factor Personality Inventory: results from a cohort-based trial. Am J Surg. 2011;201(6);828-834.	159.	Horwitz IB, Horwitz SK, Daram P, Brandt ML, Brunicardi FC, Awad SS. Transformational, transactional, and passive-avoid-ant leadership characteristics of a surgical resident cohort: analysis using the multifactor leadership questionnaire and implications for improving surgical education curriculums.  J Surg Res. 2008;148(1):49-59.	160.	Henrickson PS, Flin R, McKinley A, Yule S. The Surgeons’ Leadership Inventory (SLI): a taxonomy and rating system for surgeons’ intraoperative leadership skills. Am J Surg. 2013;205(6):745-751.	161.	Shipton H, Armstrong C, West M, Dawson J. The impact of leadership and quality climate on hospital performance. Int Qual Health Care. 2008;20(6):439-445.	162.	Cope A, Bezemer J, Mavroveli S, Kneebone R. What attitudes and values are incorporated into self as part of professional identity construction when becoming a surgeon? Acad Med. 2017;92(4):544-549.	163.	Sandhu G, Nikolian VC, Magas CP, et al. OpTrust: validity of a tool assessing intraoperative entrustment behaviors. Ann Surg. 2018;267(4):670-676.	164.	Britt RC, Hildreth AN, Acker SN, Mouawad NJ, Mammen J, Moalem J. Speed mentoring: an innovative method to meet the needs of the young surgeon. J Surg Educ. 2017;74(6):1007-1011.	165.	Kodadek LM, Kapadia MR, Changoor NR, et al. Educating the surgeon-scientist: a qualitative study evaluating challenges and barriers toward becoming an academically successful surgeon. Surgery. 2016;160(6):1456-1465.	166.	Stone JL, Aveling EL, Frean M, et al. Effective leadership of surgical teams: a mixed methods study of surgeon behaviors and functions. Ann Thorac Surg. 2017;104(2):530-537.	167.	Richards R, McLeod R, Latter D, et al. Toward late career transitioning: a proposal for academic surgeons. Can J Surg. 2017;60(5):355-358.	168.	Klingensmith ME. Leadership and followership in surgical education. Am J Surg. 2017;213(2): 207-211.	169.	Delinger EP, Pellegrini CA, Gallagher TH. The aging phy-sician and the medical profession: a review. JAMA Surg. 2017;152(10):967-971.Brunicardi_Ch01_p0001-p0026.indd   2529/01/19   10:58 AM
# Chunk 8867
Brunicardi_Ch01_p0001-p0026.indd   2629/01/19   10:58 AMThis page intentionally left blank

Systemic Response to Injury  and Metabolic SupportSiobhan A. Corbett This chapter is dedicated to Dr. Stephen Lowry,  my mentor and friend.2chapterOVERVIEW: INJURY-ASSOCIATED SYSTEMIC INFLAMMATORY RESPONSEThe inflammatory response to injury occurs as a consequence of the local or systemic release of “damage-associated” molecules to mobilize the necessary resources required for the restoration of homeostasis. Minor host insults result in a localized inflam-matory response that is transient and, in most cases, benefi-cial. Major host insults follow a different trajectory. A subset of these patients will die within 24 hours of hospital admis-sion, succumbing to overwhelming tissue injury and immediate organ damage. With advances in prehospital care and improved trauma management, these numbers have diminished. A second subgroup of patients who suffer a major host insult succumb to secondary organ damage remote from the injury site and die later (weeks) in their hospital course. They form an increasing percentage of the in hospital trauma-related deaths. A dysreg-ulated, overwhelming systemic inflammatory response to the injury/hemorrhage and associated ischemia/reperfusion events has been implicated as the cause of multiple organ failure in these patients. Moreover, it has been linked to immune suppres-sion that increases the risk of infectious complications and poor outcome. Finally, a third subgroup, characterized by extended length of stay in the ICU, complicated postdischarge courses, and failure to regain/recover to their preinjury status, has been described and also linked to persistent inflammation and sup-pressed host protective immunity. The term persistent inflamma-tion, immunosuppression, and catabolism syndrome (PICS) has Overview: Injury-Associated Systemic   Inflammatory Response	27The Detection of Cellular Injury	28The Detection of Injury is Mediated by Members of the Damage-Associated Molecular Pattern Family / 28DAMPs Are Ligands for Pattern Recognition Receptors / 32Central Nervous System Regulation   of Inflammation in Response to   Injury	34Neuroendocrine Response to Injury / 35The Cellular Stress Responses	39Reactive Oxygen Species and  the Oxidative Stress Response / 39The Unfolded Protein Response / 39Autophagy / 40Apoptosis / 40Necroptosis / 40Pyroptosis / 41Mediators of Inflammation	42Cytokines / 42Eicosanoids / 47Plasma Contact System / 48Serotonin / 50Histamine / 50Cellular Response to Injury	50Cytokine Receptor Families and  Their Signaling Pathways / 50JAK-STAT Signaling / 50Suppressors of Cytokine Signaling / 50Tumor Necrosis Factor Superfamily / 51Transforming Growth Factor-β  Family of Receptors / 51Transcriptional and Translational   Regulation of The Injury   Response	52Transcriptional Events Following  Blunt Trauma / 52Transcriptional Regulation of  Gene Expression / 52Epigenetic Regulation of  Transcription / 53Translation Regulation of  Inflammatory Gene Expression / 53Cell-Mediated Inflammatory  Response	54Neutrophils / 54Monocyte/Macrophages / 54Lymphocytes and T-Cell Immunity / 55Dendritic Cells / 55Platelets / 56Mast Cells / 56Endothelium-Mediated Injury	56Vascular Endothelium / 56Neutrophil-Endothelium Interaction / 56Chemokines / 57Nitric Oxide / 58Prostacyclin / 58Endothelins / 59Platelet Activating Factor / 59Natriuretic Peptides / 60Surgical Metabolism	60Metabolism During Fasting / 60Metabolism After Injury / 62Lipid Metabolism After Injury / 63Ketogenesis / 64Carbohydrate Metabolism / 65Protein and Amino Acid Metabolism / 66Nutrition in The Surgical Patient	66Estimation of Energy Requirements / 66Vitamins and Minerals / 68Overfeeding / 68Enteral Nutrition	68Rationale for Enteral Nutrition / 68Early vs. Late Feeding / 68Intermittent vs. Continuous Enteral Feeding / 69Enteral Formulas / 69Access for Enteral  Nutritional Support / 71Parenteral Nutrition	72Rationale for Parenteral Nutrition / 73Total Parenteral Nutrition / 73Peripheral Parenteral Nutrition / 73Initiation of Parenteral Nutrition / 73Complications of Parenteral Nutrition / 74Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   2701/03/19   6:49 PM 28been applied to this group.1 Recent data suggest that severely injured patients who are destined to die from their injuries, whether late in their hospital course or after discharge, differ from survivors only in the degree and duration of their dysregu-lated acute inflammatory response.1-3As trauma is the leading cause of mortality and morbidity for individuals under age 45, understanding the complex path-ways that regulate the local and systemic inflammatory response following severe traumatic injury is necessary to develop appro-priate and targeted therapeutic strategies that will improve out-comes for these patients.In this chapter, we will review what is known about the soluble and cellular effectors of the injury-induced inflamma-tory response, how the signals are sensed, transduced, and mod-ulated, and how their dysregulation is associated with alterations in the immune system. We will also discuss how these events are monitored regulated by the central nervous system. Finally, we will review how injury reprograms cellular metabolism, in an attempt to mobilize energy and structural stores to meet the challenge of restoring homeostasis.THE DETECTION OF CELLULAR INJURYThe Detection of Injury is Mediated by Members of the Damage-Associated  Molecular Pattern FamilyTraumatic injury activates the innate immune system to pro-duce a systemic inflammatory response (SIR) in an attempt to limit damage and to restore homeostasis. It includes two general responses: (a) an acute proinflammatory response resulting from innate immune system recognition of ligands, and (b) an anti-inflammatory response that may serve to modulate the proin-flammatory phase and direct a return to homeostasis (Fig. 2-1). This is accompanied by a suppression of adaptive immunity.4 Rather than occurring sequentially, recent data indicate that all three responses are simultaneously and rapidly induced follow-ing severe traumatic injury.3The degree of the systemic inflammatory response follow-ing trauma is proportional to injury severity and is an inde-pendent predictor of subsequent organ dysfunction and resultant 1mortality. Recent work has provided insight into the mecha-nisms by which immune activation in this setting is triggered. The clinical features of the injury-mediated systemic inflamma-tory response, characterized by increased body temperature, heart rate, respirations, and white blood cell count, are similar to those observed with infection (Table 2-1). However, it is widely accepted that systemic inflammation following trauma is sterile, resulting from endogenous molecules that are produced as a consequence of tissue damage or cellular stress.5 Termed  damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) or alarmins, DAMPs interact with specific cell receptors that are located both on the cell surface and intracellularly.6Trauma DAMPs are structurally diverse endogenous mol-ecules that are immunologically active. Table 2-2 includes a par-tial list of DAMPs that are released either passively from necrotic/damaged cells or actively from physiologically “stressed” cells by upregulation or overexpression. Once they are outside the cell, DAMPs promote the activation of innate immune cells, as well as the recruitment and activation of antigen-presenting cells, which are engaged in host defense.7 The best-characterized DAMP with significant preclinical evidence for posttrauma release, as well as a direct link to the systemic inflammatory response, is high-mobility group protein B1 (HMGB1). Additional evidence for other important DAMP molecules that participate in postin-jury inflammation is also presented.High-Mobility Group Protein B1. The best-characterized DAMP in the context of the injury-associated inflamma-tory response is high-mobility group B1 (HMGB1) protein. HMGB1 is highly conserved across species. It is a constitutively expressed, nonhistone chromosomal protein that participates in a variety of nuclear events, including DNA repair and transcrip-tion. Inflammatory signaling can redirect HMGB1 to the cytosol in both monocytes and macrophages, as a result of posttransla-tional modification. HMGB1 is released passively from dam-aged or necrotic cells and is detected rapidly in the circulation within 30 minutes post injury. It can also be actively secreted from immune-competent cells stimulated by bacterial-derived lipoproteins (e.g., endotoxin) or by inflammatory cytokines (e.g., tumor necrosis factor). For example, macrophages release HMGB1 following the activation of the inflammasomes.8,9 Key Points1	Endogenous damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) are produced following tissue and cellular injury. These molecules interact with immune and nonimmune cell receptors to initiate a “sterile” systemic inflammatory response following severe traumatic injury.2	In many cases, DAMP molecules are sensed by pattern rec-ognition receptors (PRRs), which are the same receptors that cells use to sense invading pathogens. This explains in part, the similar clinical picture of systemic inflammation observed in injured and/or septic patients.3	The central nervous system receives information with regard to injury-induced inflammation via soluble mediators as well as direct neural projections that transmit informa-tion to regulatory areas in the brain. The resulting neuro-endocrine reflex plays an important modulatory role in the immune response.4	Inflammatory signals activate key cellular stress responses (the oxidative stress response; the heat shock protein response; the unfolded protein response; autophagy; pyroptosis), which serve to mobilize cellular defenses and resources in an attempt to restore homeostasis.5	The cells, mediators, signaling mechanisms, and pathways that comprise and regulate the systemic inflammatory response are closely networked and tightly regulated by tran-scriptional events as well as by epigenetic mechanisms, post-translational modification, and microRNA synthesis.6	Management of critically ill and injured patients is optimized with the use of evidence-based and algorithm-driven therapy.7	Nutritional assessments, whether clinical or laboratory guided, and intervention should be considered at an early juncture in all surgical and critically ill patients.Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   2801/03/19   6:49 PM 29SYSTEMIC RESPONSE TO INJURY AND METABOLIC SUPPORTCHAPTER 2MOFPICSInjuryImmunehomeostasisEarly deathDischarge to LTACPoor quality of lifeIndolent deathCatabolic statePersistence inflammationProgressive immunosuppressionAnti-inflammatoryPro-inflammatoryRapid recoveryChronic critical illnessTimeUncomplicatedclinical courseFigure 2-1. Postinjury systemic response can follow multiple trajectories. MOF = multiple organ failure; PICS = persistent inflammation, immunosuppression, and catabolism syndrome; LTAC = long-term acute care facility. (Reproduced with permission from Loftus TJ, Mira JC, Ozrazgat-Baslanti T, et al: Sepsis and Critical Illness Research Center investigators: protocols and standard operating procedures for a prospec-tive cohort study of sepsis in critically ill surgical patients, BMJ Open. 2017 Aug 1;7(7):e015136.)Table 2-1Clinical spectrum of infection and systemic  inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS)TERMDEFINITIONInfectionIdentifiable source of microbial insultSIRSTwo or more of following criteria are met: Temperature ≥38°C (100.4°F) or  ≤36°C (96.8°F) Heart rate ≥90 beats per minute Respiratory rate ≥20 breaths per minute or Paco2 ≤ 32 mmHg or mechanical ventilation Abnormal white blood cell count (≥12,000/μL or ≤4000/μL or ≥10% immature band forms)SepsisIdentifiable source of infection + SIRSSevere sepsisSepsis + organ dysfunctionSeptic shockSepsis + cardiovascular collapse (requiring vasopressor support)Paco2 = partial pressure of arterial carbon dioxide.Table 2-2Damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) and their receptorsDAMP MOLECULEPUTATIVE RECEPTOR(S)HMGB-1TLRs (2,4,9), RAGEHeat shock proteinsTLR2, TLR4, CD40, CD14,SiglecsS100 proteinTLR4, RAGEMitochondrial DNATLR9HyaluranTLR2, TLR4, CD44BiglycanTLR2 and TLR4Formyl peptides (mitochondrial)Formyl peptide receptor 1IL-1αIL-1 receptorOnce outside the cell, HMGB1 has been shown to signal via the Toll-like receptors (TLR2, TLR4, TLR9), the receptor for advanced glycosylation end products (RAGE), CD24, and others. The activation of TLRs by HMGB1 occurs mainly in myeloid cells, whereas RAGE is thought to be the receptor tar-get for HMGB1 in endothelial cells.The diverse proinflammatory biological responses that result from HMGB1 signaling include: (a) the release of cytokines and chemokines from macrophage/monocytes and dendritic cells; (b) neutrophil activation and chemotaxis;  (c) alterations in epithelial barrier function, including increased permeability; and (d) increased procoagulant activity on plate-let surfaces; among others.10 In addition, HMGB1 binding to TLR4 triggers the proinflammatory cytokine release that medi-ates “sickness behavior.”11The biologic function of HMGB1 is regulated by its redox state. For example, a thiol at C106 is required for HMGB1 to promote macrophage TNF release, while a disulfide bond between C23 and C45 confers proinflammatory properties. With all three cysteines in the thiol (reduced) state, HMGB1 loses its DAMP function, but gains the capacity to serve as a chemotactic mediator. Importantly, shifts between the redox states have been demonstrated and indicate that redox state dynamics are impor-tant regulators of HMGB1.12Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   2901/03/19   6:49 PM 30BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IHMGB1 levels in human subjects following injury corre-late with the Injury Severity Score and complement activation, as well as with increases in circulating inflammatory mediators such as tumor necrosis factor.13 Exogenous administration of HMGB1 to normal animals produces fever, weight loss, epithe-lial barrier dysfunction, and, possibly, death. Further supporting the HMGB1 role in sterile inflammation, traumatic brain injury (TBI) induced by a cortical injury model has been shown to result in acute lung injury with increased alveolar hemorrhage, neutrophil infiltration, and poor oxygenation. This acute lung injury (ALI) was accompanied by a doubling in serum HMGB1 concentrations along with evidence that neocortical brain cells were a source of HMGB1 following TBI.14 More recently, in an animal model of hemorrhagic shock, HMGB1 release from intestinal epithelium was linked to acute lung injury.15 Finally, increased plasma levels of HMGB1 have been shown to cor-relate with immune suppression and increased infection risk in patients undergoing major surgical procedures.16 The identifica-tion of the receptor for advanced glycation end products as the receptor for HMGB1 in this setting has identified new therapeu-tic strategy to ameliorate ALI following TBI.17A Role for Mitochondrial DAMPs in the Injury-Mediated Inflammatory Response. Mitochondrial proteins and/or DNA can act as DAMPs by triggering an inflammatory response to cellular necrosis and stress. Specifically, mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) released from damaged or dysfunctional mitochon-dria leads both to inflammasome activation and activation of the stimulator of interferon gene pathway (STING).18Cell-free mtDNA (cf-mtDNA) has been shown to be thousands of times higher in trauma patients when compared to normal volunteers. In addition, direct injection of mitochon-dria lysates in an animal model causes remote organ damage, including liver, and lung inflammation.19 These data suggest that with cellular stress or tissue injury, cf-mtDNA released from damaged/stressed mitochondria contribute to the sterile inflammatory response in injured patients. From an evolution-ary perspective, given that eukaryotic mitochondria derive from bacterial origin, it would make sense that they retain bacterial features capable of eliciting a strong response that is typically associated with a pathogen trigger. In addition, the mitochon-drial transcription factor A (TFAM), a highly abundant mito-chondrial protein, is functionally and structurally homologous to HMGB1. It has also been shown be released in high amounts from damaged cells where it acts in conjunction with mtDNA to activate TLR9 signaling.20Following trauma, cf-mtDNA levels appear to be higher in nonsurvivors when compared to survivors and correlate with the development of both SIRS and sepsis post injury.21,22 Cf-mtDNA has also been linked both ex vivo and in vivo to the formation of neutrophil extracellular traps, which are also associated with sterile inflammation and are a possible cause of secondary tissue injury.23,24 Reducing cf-mtDNA, perhaps by targeting enzymes capable of digesting circulating mtDNA is an attractive therapeutic option to prevent development of inflam-matory complications of trauma.25Heat-Shock Proteins as DAMPs. Heat shock proteins (HSPs) are a large and diverse family of intracellular proteins that are expressed during times of inflammation and oxidative stress or following tissue injury.26 Very highly conserved across species, HSPs function as molecular chaperones to monitor and maintain appropriate protein folding.27 They accomplish this task through the promotion of protein refolding, the targeting of misfolded proteins for degradation, or the sequestering of partially folded proteins for movement to appropriate membrane compartments. HSPs are also capable of binding foreign proteins and thereby function as intracellular chaperones for ligands such as bacterial DNA and endotoxin.HSPs are presumed to protect cells from the effects of traumatic stress and, when released by damaged cells, alert the immune system of the tissue damage by activating both innate and acquired immunity.28 HSPs are also released from intact cells via a nonclassical secretory pathway, both via “secretory lysosomes” as well as the exosomal pathway. For example, HSP70-containing exosomes have been implicated in postshock inflammation.29 Once outside the cell, free HSPs can bind to pattern-recognition receptors (PRR) as well as other cell surface receptors to modu-late the inflammatory response. Recently, the role of free HSP-mediated proinflammatory properties via TLR2 and TLR4 has been questioned, as it has been suggested that the presence of con-taminating endotoxin in bacterially-produced HSP preparations may explain at least some of these inflammatory effect results.30 However, the additional evidence suggests that the immunos-timulatory properties may be dependent on how HSPs arrive outside the cell. In the context of massive cell damage or large exosome release, HSPs may serve as proinflammatory DAMPs. In contrast, HSPs released by active secretion may exert anti-inflammatory immune dampening signals (Table 2-3).31,32 New receptors for HSP have been identified that are members of the sialic acid-binding immunoglobulin-like lectins (siglecs), which may explain these effects. Two members of the family, Siglec-5 and Siglec-14, with similar binding sites for HSP70, exhibit oppo-site intracellular events in response to HSP binding, being either pro-(Siglec-14) or anti-(Siglec-5) inflammatory.33,34From a clinical perspective, extracellular HSPs have been demonstrated to be elevated almost immediately post injury in polytraumatized patients (up to 10 times normal) with the degree of elevation being correlated with the severity of  illness.35 Moreover, in the setting of polytrauma, plasma HSP70 levels have been shown to correlate inversely with HLA-DRA expression, a marker of immunosuppression.36Extracellular Matrix Molecules Act as DAMPs. Recent work has explored the role of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins in the TLR-mediated inflammatory response that follows tissue injury. These molecules, which are sequestered under normal conditions, can be released in a soluble form with proteolytic digestion of the ECM. Proteoglycans, glycosaminoglycans, and glycoproteins such as fibronectin have all been implicated as key players in the DAMP/TLR interaction. Proteoglycans, in particu-lar, have also been shown to activate the intracellular inflamma-somes that trigger sterile inflammation. These molecules, which consist of a protein core with one or more covalently attached glycosaminoglycan chains, can be membrane-bound, secreted, or proteolytically cleaved and shed from the cell surface.Biglycan is one of the first proteoglycans to be described as a TLR ligand.37 It consists of a protein core containing leucine-rich repeat regions, with two glycosaminoglycan (GAG) side-chains (chondroitin sulfate or dermatan sulfate). While biglycan typically exists in a matrix bound form, with tissue injury it is released from the ECM in a soluble form where it interacts with TLR2 or TLR4 to generate an immediate inflammatory response.Various proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines includ-ing tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α and interleukin (IL)-1β are Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   3001/03/19   6:49 PM 31SYSTEMIC RESPONSE TO INJURY AND METABOLIC SUPPORTCHAPTER 2downstream effector molecules of biglycan/TLR2/4 signaling. Among these, the mechanism of biglycan-mediated autonomous synthesis and secretion of mature IL-1β is unique. Usually, release of mature IL-1β from the cell requires two signals: one that is needed to initiate synthesis (TLR2/4-mediated), and the other to process pro-IL-1β to its mature form (inflammasome-mediated). How is it possible for biglycan to provide both signals? Current evidence indicates that when soluble biglycan binds to the TLR, it simultaneously serves as a ligand for a purinergic receptor, which facilitates the inflammasome activation required for IL-1β processing.38 These data support the idea that DAMP-mediated signals can initiate a robust inflammatory response.S100 Proteins as DAMPs. S100 proteins are a group of cal-cium-binding proteins that participate in the regulation of intra-cellular calcium. There are at least 25 members identified to date, with diverse functions that are cell-type dependent. While regulation and management of calcium storage is a primary function of S100 proteins, additional specialized roles include cytoskeletal organization, protein trafficking and transcriptional regulation. They are loosely grouped according to their func-tional capability: those that work exclusively inside the cell, outside the cell, or in both locations.8,39Similar to both HMGB1 and HSP, S100 proteins are released passively from damaged cells as well as actively via nonclassical protein secretion mechanisms. For example, S100A8/A9 (also called calprotectin) is released by activated neutrophils and macrophages, although the exact mechanisms that regulate the active release of S100 proteins remain unclear.40 In addition, S100A8/A9 secretion is linked to the release of neu-trophil extracellular traps (NETs), a fibrillar matrix of DNA and granule proteins that are extruded from activated neutrophils and that serve an antimicrobial function.41 Similar to HMGB1, S100 protein functions can be modulated by their redox state.Extracellular S100A8/A9 functions as an endogenous agonist to bind TLR4 and RAGE, serving as a strong proin-flammatory mediator. It can induce both inflammatory cytokine production and activation of leukocyte migration, as well as pro-mote apoptosis and autophagy in distinct cell types. S100A8/A9 is increased following polytrauma, and in some studies, higher levels of S100A8/A9 have been correlated with patient survival.9 More recent work in a second severely injured patient cohort (median ISS of 39) showed that the most seriously injured patients demonstrated a significantly smaller overall increase in S100A8/A9 when compared to the other patients, and that lower S100A8/A9 levels were associated with infectious risk.42A second S100 family protein, S100B, is highly expressed in astrocytes and is an important biomarker for traumatic brain injury. When assessed within 3 hours of injury, it is a highly sensitive marker that is helpful in identifying those patients with mild TBI who do not require imaging.43 In a recent cohort of 100 patients with severe traumatic brain injury, serum S100B levels were significantly higher in those patients who had an unfavorable outcome 3 months post injury compared with those who had made a good recovery. The patients who died also had significantly higher S100B levels than the survivors.8,44Heme as DAMP. Heme is the oxygen-binding moiety found in hemoglobin and other hemoproteins in the muscle and mito-chondria. It is a very highly conserved molecule composed of a tetrapyrrole ring surrounding a single iron. When red blood cells are damaged, hemoglobin is released, where it is bound by plasma proteins such as haptoglobin. In turn, the hemoglobin-haptoglobin complexes are scavenged by the reticuloendothelial system in the liver and spleen to form bilirubin as the ultimate end product. When the amount of free hemoglobin exceeds the binding capacity of haptoglobin and other specialized binding proteins, it is loosely bound to other plasma proteins where it can be readily oxidized. Ultimately, this can result in the release of the prosthetic heme group from hemoglobin, generating labile heme, which is a pro-oxidant.45In vitro experiments demonstrate that labile heme induces cell activation, via both TLR4-dependent processes and the inflammasome, resulting in cytokine release.46,47 Moreover, Table 2-3The immunomodulatory functions of heat shock proteins (HSPs)CELL LOCATIONRECOGNIZED AS DAMPIMMUNOMODULATORY FUNCTIONHSP90Cytoplasm, endoplasmic reticulumCan function both inside and outside the cellMay act as DAMP chaperone to activate innate immune responseBinds and optimizes RNA polymerase II action to regulate gene transcriptionStabilizes glucocorticoid receptor in the cytoplasmImportant for processing and membrane expression of TLRChaperones include IKKFacilitates antigen presentation to dendritic cellsHSP70Can function both inside and outside the cellEndoplasmic reticulum homolog is BiPExogenous HSP70 elicits cellular calcium flux, NF-κB activation, cytokine productionCan have anti-inflammatory actions when expression is increasedInhibits TLR-mediated cytokine production via NF-κBReduces dendritic cell capacity for T-cell stimulationBiP sequesters proteins important to the unfolded protein responseHSP60MitochondriaExogenous HSP60 inhibits NF-κB activationPlays a role in intracellular protein traffickingModulates cytokine synthesisBiP = binding immunoglobulin protein; DAMP = damage-associated molecular pattern; IKK = IκB kinase; NF-κB, nuclear factor-κB;  TLR = Toll-like receptorBrunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   3101/03/19   6:49 PM 32BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iheme-induced neutrophils activation leads to extracellular traps (NETs) release through a mechanism dependent on reactive oxygen species.48 However, unlike the other DAMPs discussed, labile heme can also have direct cytotoxic effects on cells by a direct interaction with membrane phospholipids and the catal-ysis of membrane lipid peroxidation, leading to programmed cell death. In macrophages, labile heme can induce necroptosis, rather than apoptosis.45DAMPs Are Ligands for Pattern  Recognition ReceptorsThe inflammatory response that occurs following traumatic injury is similar to that observed with pathogen exposure. Not surprisingly, surface and cytoplasmic receptors that medi-ate the innate immune response to microbial infection have also been implicated in the activation of sterile inflamma-tion. In support of this idea, genes have been identified that are dysregulated acutely both in response to a microbial ligand administered to human volunteers and in response to traumatic injury in a large patient population.49 The classes of receptors that are important for sensing damaged cells and cell debris are part of the larger group of germ-line encoded pattern recogni-tion receptors (PRRs). The best described ligands for these receptors are microbial components, the pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs). The PRRs of the innate immune system are varied and include Toll-like receptors (TLRs),  calcium-dependent (C-type) lectin receptors (CLRs), the nucleotide-binding domain, leucine-rich repeat–containing (NBD-LRR) proteins (NLRs; also nucleotide-binding and oligomerization domain [NOD]-like receptors), receptors for advanced glycation end-products (RAGE), and retinoic acid–inducible gene (RIG)-I-like receptors (RLRs). Following receptor ligation, intracel-lular signaling modulates transcriptional and posttranslational events necessary for host defense by coordinating the synthesis and release of cytokines and chemokines to either initiate or suppress the inflammatory response. The best described of these receptors, the TLRs, NLRs, CLRs and RAGE, are dis-cussed in the following section.Toll-Like Receptors. The Toll-like receptors are evolutionarily conserved type 1 transmembrane proteins that are the best-char-acterized PRRs in mammalian cells. They were first identified in Drosophila, where a mutation in the Toll gene led to its iden-tification as a key component in their immune defense against fungal infection. The first human TLR, TLR4, was identified shortly thereafter. Now, more than 10 human TLR family mem-bers have been identified, with distinct ligands that include lipid, carbohydrate, peptide, and nucleic-acid components of various pathogens. TLRs are expressed by both immune and nonimmune cells. At first, the expression of TLR was thought to be isolated to professional antigen-presenting cells such as dendritic cells and macrophages. However, mRNA for TLR family members have been detected in most cells of myeloid lineage, as well as NK cells.50 In addition, activation of T cells increases their TLR expression and induces their survival and clonal expan-sion. Direct engagement of TLR in Treg cells promotes their expansion and reprograms them to differentiate into T helper cells, which in turn provides help to effector cells. In addition,  B cells express a distinct subset of the TLR family that deter-mines their ability to respond to DAMPs; however, the signifi-cance of restricted TLR expression in these cells is not yet clear.All TLRs consist of a ligand-binding domain, char-acterized by multiple leucine-rich repeats (LRRs), and a carboxy-terminal, intracellular Toll/interleukin (IL) 1 recep-tor (TIR) domain. The LRR domains recognize bacterial and viral PAMPs in the extracellular environment (TLR1, TLR2, TLR4, TLR5, TLR6, and TLR11) or in the endolysosomes (TLR3, TLR7, TLR8, TLR9, and TLR10). While the role of TLRs in sepsis has been well described, more recent data indi-cate that a subset of the TLRs—TLR4 in particular—also rec-ognize DAMPs released from injured cells and tissues.51 Among the DAMP ligands for surface TLR are HMGB1, HSPs, S100 proteins, and several others. Endosomal TLR ligands include mtDNA and other mitochondrial proteins.What we know about TLR signaling events has largely been derived from the TLR-mediated response to bacterial pathogens. However, it is largely accepted that the intracellu-lar adaptors required for signal transmission by TLRs are con-served and utilized for “damage” sensing of endogenous (“self”) ligands as well.52,53 The intracellular domain structure of TLRs is highly conserved and is characterized by a cytoplasmic Toll/IL-1R homology (TIR) domain. Binding of ligand to the recep-tor results in a receptor dimer, either a homodimer (e.g., TLR4/TLR4) or heterodimer (e.g., TLR2/TLR1), which recruits a number of adaptor proteins to the TIR domains through TIR-TIR interaction.54 With one exception (TLR3), the universal adaptor protein central to the TLR signaling complex is myeloid dif-ferentiation factor 88 (MyD88), a member of the interleukin-1 receptor subfamily. MyD88 works through the recruitment of a second TIR-containing adaptor, MyD88 adaptor-like protein (Mal, also termed Toll/interleukin-1 receptor-containing adaptor protein, or TIRAP) in the context of TLR4 and TLR2 signaling, which serves as a bridge between MyD88 and activated TLRs to initiate signal transduction. It is interesting that Mal’s adaptor function requires cleavage of the carboxy-terminal portion of the protein by caspase-1, a key effector of the inflammasome.55 This finding suggests an important synergy between TLRs and the inflammasome that may potentiate TLR-mediated signaling.Signaling through the MyD88-dependent pathway occurs once the receptor is ligated at the cell surface.54 Receptor liga-tion, dimerization, and recruitment of the MyD88/Mal com-plex results in the activation of numerous cytoplasmic protein kinases, including IL-1 receptor–associated kinases, resulting in an interaction with tumor necrosis factor receptor–associated factor 6 (TRAF6). TRAF6, an E3 ubiquitin ligase, forms a com-plex with two other proteins, which together activate the com-plex that subsequently phosphorylates IκB kinase (IKK)-β and the MAP kinases (MAPKs). Ultimately, the phosphorylation of IκB leads to its degradation, which frees NF-κB and allows its translocation to the nucleus and the transcription of NF-κB tar-get genes. Simultaneously, MAP kinase activation is critical for activation of the activator protein-1 (AP-1) transcription factor, and thus production of inflammatory cytokines.Two other TIR domain-containing adaptor proteins, TIR-domain-containing adapter-inducing interferon-β (TRIF) and TRIF-related adaptor molecule (TRAM), are important to TLR-signaling events that are involved in the MyD88-independent sig-naling pathways, activated by TLR3 and TLR4. One distinction of MyD88-dependent and -independent TLR signaling is that TLR4/TRIF transduction begins after the signaling complex is internalized into endosomes. The MyD88-independent pathway acts through TRIF to activate NF-κB, similar to the MyD88-dependent pathway. However, TRIF can also recruit other sig-naling molecules to phosphorylate interferon-regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), which induces expression of type I IFN genes.5422Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   3201/03/19   6:49 PM 33SYSTEMIC RESPONSE TO INJURY AND METABOLIC SUPPORTCHAPTER 2The initiation of transcription by TLR activation leads to the upregulation of a large cohort of target genes that include interferons α and β (IFNα/β), nitric oxide synthase 2 (NOS2A), and tumor necrosis factor (TNF), which play critical roles in initiating innate immune responses to cellular injury and stress. Given the importance of TLR triggering of the innate immune response to immune homeostasis, it is no surprise that the pro-cess is tightly regulated. TLR signaling is controlled at multiple levels, both posttranscriptionally via ubiquitination, phosphory-lation, and micro RNA actions that affect mRNA stability, and by the localization of the TLRs and their signaling complexes within the cell.TLR expression is significantly increased following blunt traumatic injury.50,51 A recent study of patients undergoing “high-risk” surgical procedures examined immune parameters, includ-ing TLR expression, that were associated with the development of SIRS. The investigators demonstrated that patients who developed postoperative SIRS exhibited increased TLR4 and TLR5 expres-sion on a subgroup of CD14+ monocytes when compared to those patients with an uneventful recovery.56 Moreover, the upregulation of TLR in these patients was associated with increased expression of IL-6. Interestingly, the authors hypothesize that preoperatively, a subset of monocytes may already be primed to act in this way and thus may identify a vulnerable patient group.Nucleotide-Binding Oligomerization Domain (NOD)-like Receptor (NLR) Family. The nucleotide-binding oligo-merization domain-like receptors (NLR) are a large family of proteins composed of intracellular PRRs that sense both endog-enous (DAMPs) and exogenous (PAMPs) molecules to trigger innate immune activation. The best characterized of the NLRs is the NLR family pyrin domain-containing 3 (NLRP3), which is highly expressed in peripheral blood leukocytes. It forms the key “sensing” component of the larger, multiprotein inflamma-some complex, which is composed of NLRP3; the adapter pro-tein apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing a CARD (ASC); and the effector protein, caspase 1.57 Activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome is tightly regulated, both transcription-ally and at the posttranslational level. An initial priming event (typically via TLR/nuclear factor [NF]-κB signals) upregulates NLRP3 expression. The receptor then resides in the cytoplasm in an inactive form due to an internal interaction between two adjacent domains. When phagocytosed DAMPs are sensed by NLRP3, this second event releases the self-repression. The pro-tein can then oligomerize and recruit other complex members. The net result is the auto-activation of pro-caspase 1 to caspase 1. This event is pivotal to all known inflammasome signaling pathways.57,58 The caspase-1 products assemble to form the IL-1 converting enzyme (ICE), which cleaves the proforms of IL-1β, IL-18, and IL-33 to form their active, mature forms required for secretion from the cell.59The inflammasome-activated cytokines, IL-1β and IL-18, are potent proinflammatory molecules that promote key immune responses essential to host defense. Both IL-1β and IL-18 lack a signal sequence, which is usually necessary for the secretion of cellular proteins. More than 20 proteins in addition to IL-1β and IL-18 undergo unconventional protein secretion independent of the ER and Golgi, including a number of the DAMP molecules.60 Currently, the mechanisms responsible for unconventional protein secretion are not understood; however, the process is also evident in yeast under conditions of cellular stress. It makes evolutionary sense that a mechanism for rapid secretion of stored proteins essential to the stress response is highly conserved.Evidence suggests that genetic variations in the NLRP3 gene might affect the magnitude of immune inflammatory responses following trauma. Single nucleotide polymor-phisms within the NLRP3 gene were found to be associated with increased risk of sepsis and MODS in patients with major trauma.61 In an animal model of burn injury, early inflamma-some activation has been detected in a variety of immune cells (NK cells, CD4/ CD8 T cells, and B cells), as determined by the assessment of caspase 1 cleavage by flow cytometry.62 Further, inhibition of caspase 1 activity in vivo results in increased burn mortality, suggesting that inflammasome activation may play an unanticipated protective role in the host response to injury that may be linked to increased production of specific cytokines.CNS trauma induces inflammasome activation in the ner-vous system. Moreover, exosomes containing inflammasome protein cargo are secreted into cerebral spinal fluid and can be detected in patients with TBI.63 In an animal model of TBI, controlled cortical impact, exosomes containing inflammasome proteins are detected in the serum and appear to be linked to TBI-related acute lung injury.64C-Type Lectin and Lectin-Like Receptors. Macrophages and dendritic cells possess receptors that detect molecules released from damaged or dying cells in order to retrieve and process antigens for T cell presentation. A key family of receptors that directs this process is the C-type lectin (CLR) and C-type lec-tin-like (CTLR) receptor family that includes the selectin and the mannose receptor families. CLR and CTLR bind carbohy-drates in both a calcium-dependent (CLR) and -independent (CTLR) fashion. Best described for their sensing of PAMPs, the CLRs can also act to promote the endocytosis and clear-ance of cell debris, which can be processed and presented to T cells.65,66 CTLR receptor recognition of DAMPs of intracellular origin, such as F-actin and the ribonucleoprotein SAP-130, can trigger multiple signaling pathways leading to NF-κB, type I interferon (IFN), and/or inflammasome activation. Expression of the CTLR, MINCLE (macrophage-inducible C-type lectin), is increased after exposure to proinflammatory stimuli or cell stress. When MINCLE senses self-damage in association with ischemia-reperfusion injury, it promotes proinflammatory cyto-kine, chemokine, and nitric oxide production.67Receptor for Advanced Glycation End Products (RAGE).  Another key player in the sterile inflammatory response to injury is the transmembrane receptor, the receptor for advanced glycation endproducts, or RAGE. Highly conserved across spe-cies, RAGE is a member of the immunoglobulin superfamily that is constitutively expressed at high levels in the lung, with low/absent expression in other adult cell types. However, pro-inflammatory stimuli and the presence of RAGE ligands can increase RAGE expression on immune cells such as neutrophils, macrophages, and lymphocytes.68 RAGE also exists as a solu-ble form (sRAGE) composed only of the extracellular domain, which can bind to and sequester RAGE ligands, without conse-quent signaling events.RAGE binds diverse ligands, including HMGB1 and S100, as well as components of the extracellular matrix such as collagen. As a receptor, RAGE recognizes the three-dimensional structure of its ligands that allow it to bind a diverse reper-toire of molecules, independent of their amino acid sequence. Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   3301/03/19   6:49 PM 34BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART ISignaling via RAGE is mediated via multiple pathways lead-ing to transcriptional activation and release of proinflammatory mediators.69 Animal models have linked RAGE to acute lung injury in ischemia-reperfusion models.70 In clinical studies, high sRAGE levels have be linked to prolonged mechanical ventila-tion post lung transplant as well as worse outcomes following TBI-associated acute lung injury.42 These events likely represent a role for an HMGB1-RAGE axis in these pathologic processes.Soluble Pattern Recognition Molecules: The Pentraxins.68  Soluble pattern recognition molecules (PRMs) are a molecu-larly diverse group of molecules that share a conserved mode of action defined by complement activation, agglutination and neutralization, and opsonization. The best described of the PRMs are the pentraxins. PRMs can be synthesized at sites of injury and inflammation by macrophages and dendritic cells, while neutrophils can store PRMs and release them rapidly fol-lowing activation. In addition, epithelial tissues (the liver in par-ticular) serve as a reservoir source for systemic mass release. The short pentraxin, C-reactive protein (CRP), was the first PRM to be identified. Serum amyloid protein (SAP), which has 51% sequence similarity to human CRP, also contains the pentraxin molecular signature. CRP and SAP plasma levels are low (≤3 mg/L) under normal circumstances. However, CRP is synthesized by the liver in response to interleukin-6, increasing serum levels more than a 1000-fold. Thus, CRP is considered part of the acute-phase protein response in humans. For this reason, C-reactive protein has been studied as a marker of the proinflammatory response in many clinical settings, includ-ing appendicitis, vasculitis, and ulcerative colitis. CRP and SAP are ancient immune molecules that share many functional properties with antibodies: they bind bacterial polysaccharides, ECM components, apoptotic cells, and nuclear materials, as well as all three classes of Fcγ receptors (FcγR). Both molecules also participate in the activation and regulation of complement pathways. In this way, short pentraxins can link immune cells to the complement system.71Finally, there is significant data to support a role for pen-traxin 3 (PTX3), a long pentraxin family member, in the “sterile” inflammatory response associated with cellular stress. While CRP is produced solely in the liver, PTX3 is produced by vari-ous cells in peripheral tissues, including immune cells. PTX3 plasma concentrations increase rapidly in various inflammatory conditions, including sepsis. Further, in a recent prospective study of polytraumatized patients, serum PTX3 concentrations were highly elevated, peaking at 24 hours. Further, PTX3 con-centrations at admission were associated with injury severity, while higher PTX3 serum concentrations 24 hours after admis-sion correlated with lower probability for survival.72CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM REGULATION OF INFLAMMATION IN RESPONSE TO INJURYThe central nervous system (CNS) communicates with the body through ordered systems of sensory and motor neurons, which receive and integrate information to generate a coordinated response. Rather than being an immune-privileged organ, recent work indicates that the CNS receives information with regard to injury-induced inflammation both via soluble media-tors as well as direct neural projections that transmit informa-tion to regulatory areas in the brain (Fig. 2-2). How does the TNFIL-1Central nervous systemACTHglucocorticoidsSensory vagusSympatheticParasympathetic(Motor vagus)AcetylcholineInjuryinflammationInflammatorycascadeInjury siteEPI, NOREPIFigure 2-2. Neural circuit relaying messages of localized injury to the brain (nucleus tractus solitarius). The brain follows with a hor-mone release (adrenocorticotropic hormone [ACTH], glucocorticoids) into the systemic circulation and by sympathetic response. The vagal response rapidly induces acetylcholine release directed at the site of injury to curtail the inflammatory response elicited by the activated immunocytes. This vagal response occurs in real time and is site specific. EPI = epinephrine; IL-1 = interleukin-1; NOREPI = norepinephrine;  TNF = tumor necrosis factor. (Adapted with permission from Tracey KJ: The inflammatory reflex, Nature. 2002 Dec 19-26;420(6917):853-859.)Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   3401/03/19   6:49 PM 35SYSTEMIC RESPONSE TO INJURY AND METABOLIC SUPPORTCHAPTER 2CNS sense inflammation? DAMPs and inflammatory molecules convey stimulatory signals to the CNS via multiples routes. For example, soluble inflammatory signaling mol-ecules from the periphery can reach neurons and glial cells directly through the fenestrated endothelium of the circumven-tricular organs (CVO) or via a leaky blood-brain barrier in path-ological settings following a traumatic brain injury.73 In addition, inflammatory stimuli can interact with receptors located on the brain endothelial cells to generate a variety of proinflammatory mediators (cytokines, chemokines, adhesion molecules, proteins of the complement system, and immune receptors) that directly impact the brain parenchyma. Not surprising, this response is countered by potent anti-inflammatory signaling, a portion of which is provided by the HPA axis and the release of systemic glucocorticoids. Inflammatory stimuli in the CNS result in behavioral changes, such as increased sleep, lethargy, reduced appetite, and the most common feature of infection, fever.Information regarding peripheral inflammation and tis-sue damage can also be signaled to the brain via afferent neu-ral fibers, particularly those of the vagus nerve.74 These afferent fibers can interconnect with neurons that project to the hypo-thalamus to modulate the HPA axis. In addition, afferent vagal nerve impulses modulate cells in the brain stem, at the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus, from which efferent pregangli-onic parasympathetic originate. Axons from these cells, which comprise the visceromotor component of the vagus nerve, form an “inflammatory reflex” that feeds back to the periphery to regulate inflammatory signaling events.75 Mechanistic insight into the “inflammatory reflex” was provided by the observa-tion in several experimental model systems, that vagal stimu-lation reduced proinflammatory cytokine production from the spleen.75,76 This effect was dependent on both vagal efferent signals and on splenic catecholaminergic nerve fibers that origi-nated in the celiac plexus and terminated in the T cell–rich area of the spleen. The vagal efferent fibers that terminated within the celiac ganglion were found to synapse on the cell bodies of the catecholaminergic splenic nerves. Vagal stimulation resulted in the firing of these adrenergic nerves, resulting in the activation of β2-adrenergic receptors on a subset of acetylcholine (ACh)-producing T cells. The ACh released from this T cell popula-tion targets α-7 nicotinic ACh receptors (a7nAChR) expressed by splenic macrophages.77 Macrophage ACh receptor ligation blocks cell activation, inhibiting cytokine production and shifting the macrophages towards an M2 anti-inflammatory phenotype. Moreover, ACh-receptor binding inhibits intracellular signaling including the nuclear translocation of NF-κB and the activation of the inflammasome. In a rat model of hemorrhagic shock with reperfusion, vagal nerve stimulation post injury resulted in a decrease in the inflammatory response to hemorrhage.78Neuroendocrine Response to InjuryTraumatic injury results in complex neuroendocrine signaling from the brain that serves to enhance immune defense and rap-idly mobilize substrates necessary to meet essential energy and structural needs. The two principle neuroendocrine pathways that orchestrate the host response are the hypothalamic-pitu-itary-adrenal (HPA) axis, which results in the release of gluco-corticoid hormones, and the sympathetic nervous system, which results in release of the catecholamines, epinephrine (EPI), and norepinephrine (EPI). Virtually every hormone of the HPA axis influences the physiologic response to injury and stress (Table 2-4), but some with direct influence on the inflammatory 3Table 2-4Hormones regulated by the hypothalamus, pituitary, and autonomic systemHypothalamic RegulationCorticotropin-releasing hormoneThyrotropin-releasing hormoneGrowth hormone–releasing hormoneLuteinizing hormone–releasing hormoneAnterior Pituitary RegulationAdrenocorticotropic hormoneCortisolThyroid-stimulating hormoneThyroxineTriiodothyronineGrowth hormoneGonadotrophinsSex hormonesInsulin-like growth factorSomatostatinProlactinEndorphinsPosterior Pituitary RegulationVasopressinOxytocinAutonomic SystemNorepinephrineEpinephrineAldosteroneRenin-Angiotensin SystemInsulinGlucagonEnkephalinsresponse or immediate clinical impact are highlighted here, including growth hormone (GH), macrophage inhibitory factor (MIF), aldosterone, and insulin.The Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenal Axis. One of the main mechanisms by which the brain responds to injury-associated stress is through activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis. Following injury, corticotrophin-releasing hormone (CRH) is secreted from the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) of the hypothalamus. This action is mediated in part by circulating cytokines produced as a result of the innate immune response to injury. These include tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) IL-1β, IL-6, and the type I interferons (IFN-α/β). Cytokines that are produced as a result of the adaptive immune response (IL-2 and IFN-γ) are also capable of increasing cortisol release. Direct neu-ral input via afferent vagal fibers that interconnect with neurons projecting to the hypothalamus can also trigger CRH release. CRH acts on the anterior pituitary to stimulate the secretion of adrenocorticotropin hormone (ACTH) into the systemic circula-tion. Interestingly, the cytokines that act on the hypothalamus are also capable of stimulating ACTH release from the anterior pituitary so that marked elevations in ACTH and in cortisol can occur that are proportional in magnitude to the injury severity. Additionally, pain, anxiety, vasopressin, angiotensin II, chole-cystokinin, vasoactive intestinal peptide, and catecholamines all contribute to ACTH release in the injured patient.Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   3501/03/19   6:49 PM 36BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IACTH acts on the zona fasciculate of the adrenal glands to synthesize and secrete glucocorticoids (Fig. 2-3). Cortisol is the major glucocorticoid in humans and is essential for survival during significant physiologic stress. The resulting increase in cortisol levels following trauma have several important anti-inflammatory actions.Cortisol elicits its many actions through a cytosolic recep-tor, the glucocorticoid receptor (GR). Because it is lipid soluble, cortisol can diffuse through the plasma membrane to interact with its receptor, which is sequestered in the cytoplasm in a com-plex with heat shock proteins (Fig. 2-4). Upon ligand binding, the GR is activated and can employ a number of mechanisms to modulate proinflammatory gene transcription and signaling events, with a “net” anti-inflammatory effect.79 For example, the activated GR complex can interact with transcription factors to sequester them in the cytoplasm, promote their degradation, or inhibit them through other mechanisms. Affected target genes include proinflammatory cytokines, growth factors, adhesion molecules, and nitric oxide. In addition, glucocorticoids can negatively affect the access of the transcription factor, nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB), to the promoter regions of its target genes via a mechanism that involves histone deacetylase 2. In this way, glucocorticoids can inhibit a major mechanism by which TLR ligation induces proinflammatory gene expression.80 The GR complex can also bind to specific nucleotide sequences (termed glucocorticoid response elements) to promote the 17-˜-OH-progesterone11-DeoxycortisolCortisolCholesterolACTHPregnenolone17-˜-OH-PregnenoloneDehydroepiandrosteroneAndrostenedioneTestosteroneEstradiolSex steroidsGlucocorticoid11-DeoxycorticosteroneCorticosteroneAldosteroneMineralocorticoidProgesteroneFigure 2-3. Steroid synthesis from cholesterol. Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) is a principal regulator of steroid synthesis. The end products are mineralocorticoids, glucocorticoids, and sex steroids.HSPRProtein synthesisCytoplasmic membraneDNAmRNASRSSSSSSHSPRSNucleusFigure 2-4. Simplified schematic of steroid transport into the nucleus. Steroid molecules (S) diffuse readily across cytoplasmic membranes. Intracellularly, the receptors (R) are rendered inactive by being coupled to heat shock protein (HSP). When S and R bind, HSP dissoci-ates, and the S-R complex enters the nucleus, where the S-R complex induces DNA transcription, resulting in protein synthesis. mRNA =  messenger RNA.Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   3601/03/19   6:49 PM 37SYSTEMIC RESPONSE TO INJURY AND METABOLIC SUPPORTCHAPTER 2transcription of genes, which have anti-inflammatory functions. These include interleukin-10 and interleukin-1-receptor antago-nists. Further, GR complex activation can indirectly influence TLR activity via an interaction with signaling pathways such as the mitogen-activated protein kinase and transforming growth factor–activated kinase-1 (TAK1) pathways. Finally, a recent report demonstrated that GCs target suppressor of cytokine signaling 1 (SOCS1) and type 1 interferons to regulate TLR-induced signaling events.81Adrenal insufficiency represents a clinical syndrome high-lighted largely by inadequate amounts of circulating cortisol and aldosterone. Classically, adrenal insufficiency is described in patients with atrophic adrenal glands caused by exogenous steroid administration who undergo a stressor such as surgery. These patients subsequently manifest signs and symptoms such as tachycardia, hypotension, weakness, nausea, vomiting, and fever. However, it is now apparent that severe traumatic injury associated with an extended proinflammatory response can increase the risk of critical illness–related corticosteroid insuf-ficiency, or CIRCI.In the postinjury setting, CIRCI describes a phenomenon in which an exaggerated proinflammatory response is associated with a blunted adrenocortical response.82 Factors that have been linked to CIRCI include dysregulation of the HPA axis with altered adrenal synthesis of cortisol, altered cortisol metabo-lism, and tissue resistance to corticosteroids with inadequate glucocorticoid receptor activity. As a consequence, cortisol levels prove insufficient for the severity of stress. Investigators have determined that CIRCI in trauma patients occurs more fre-quently than previously thought.83 In one recent study, CIRCI occurred in 38 of 70 patients with multiple injuries. In most cases, the diagnosis was made within the first 48 hours follow-ing injury.84 Laboratory findings in adrenal insufficiency include hypoglycemia from decreased gluconeogenesis, hyponatremia from impaired renal tubular sodium resorption, and hyperka-lemia from diminished kaliuresis. Recommended guidelines to diagnose CIRCI include measuring delta cortisol (change in baseline cortisol at 60 min of <9 µg/dL) after cosyntropin  (250 µg) administration and a random plasma cortisol of  <10 µg/dL. Treatment strategies remain controversial in the set-ting of trauma.85,86Macrophage Migration Inhibitory Factor Modulates Cortisol Function. Macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) is a proinflammatory cytokine expressed by a variety of cells and tissues, including the anterior pituitary, macrophages and T lymphocytes. MIF is also classified as an atypical chemo-kine that binds to the CXC4 receptor.87 Several important func-tions of MIF in innate and adaptive immune responses and in inflammation have been described supporting the idea that MIF may function to counteract the anti-inflammatory activity of  glucocorticoids.88 For example, MIF has been reported to play a central role in the exacerbation of inflammation associated with acute lung injury, where it has been detected in the affected lungs and in alveolar macrophages. MIF has also been reported to upregulate the expression of Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) in macrophages,89 and an early increase in plasma MIF has been detected in severely injured patients and was found to corre-late with NF-κB translocation and respiratory burst in PMNs derived from severely injured patients. Further, nonsurvivors were shown to have higher serum MIF concentrations early after injury than survivors.90 These data suggest that targeting MIF with available small molecule inhibitors may be a novel therapeutic strategy for preventing early PMN activation and subsequent organ failure in severely injured patients.Growth Hormone, Insulin-Like Growth Factor, and  Ghrelin. Growth hormone (GH) is a neurohormone expressed primarily by the pituitary gland that has both metabolic and immunomodulatory effects. GH promotes both protein synthe-sis and insulin resistance while enhancing the mobilization of fat stores. GH secretion is upregulated by hypothalamic GH–releasing hormone and downregulated by somatostatin. GH pri-marily exerts its downstream effects through direct interaction with GH receptors and through the enhanced hepatic synthesis of insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1), an anabolic growth fac-tor that is known to improve the metabolic rate, gut mucosal function, and protein loss after traumatic injury. Less than 5% of IGF-1 circulates free in the plasma, with the remainder bound principally to one of six IGF-binding proteins (IGFBPs), the majority to IGFBP-3. In the liver, IGF-1 stimulates protein syn-thesis and glycogenesis; in adipose tissue, it increases glucose uptake and lipid utilization; and in skeletal muscles, it mediates glucose uptake and protein synthesis. In addition to its effects on cellular metabolism, GH enhances phagocytic activity of immu-nocytes through increased lysosomal superoxide production.  It also increases the proliferation of T-cell populations.91The catabolic state that follows severe injury has been linked to the suppression of the growth hormone-IGF-IGFBP axis, as critical illness is associated with decreased circulat-ing IGF-1 levels. Not surprising, the administration of exog-enous recombinant human GH (rhGH) has been studied in a prospective, randomized trial of critically ill patients where it was associated with increased mortality, prolonged ventilator dependence, and increased susceptibility to infection.92 More recently, circulating GH levels were examined on admission in 103 consecutive critically ill adult patients. In this study, cir-culating GH levels were increased by about sevenfold in the 24 nonsurvivors when compared with survivors, and they were an independent predictor of mortality, along with APACHE II/SAPS II scores. In distinct contrast, the effect of rhGH adminis-tration in severely burned children, both acutely and following prolonged treatment, has been proven to be beneficial. Pediatric burn patients receiving rhGH demonstrated markedly improved growth and lean body mass, while hypermetabolism was signifi-cantly attenuated.93 This finding was associated with significant increases in serum GH, IGF-I, and IGFBP-3.Ghrelin, a natural ligand for the GH-secretagogue receptor 1a (GHS-R1a), is an appetite stimulant that is secreted by the stomach. GHS-R1a is expressed in a variety of tissues in differ-ent concentrations including the immune cells, Band T-cells, and neutrophils. Ghrelin seems to play a role in promoting GH secretion, and in glucose homeostasis, lipid metabolism, and immune function. In a rodent gut ischemia/reperfusion model, ghrelin administration inhibits proinflammatory cytokine release, reduces neutrophil infiltration, ameliorates intestinal barrier dysfunction, attenuates organ injury, and improves sur-vival. It is interesting that this effect was dependent on an intact vagus nerve, and that intracerebroventricular injection of ghre-lin was also protective.94 These data suggest that the effect of ghrelin is mediated via the central nervous system, most likely through the “cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway.” High ghrelin levels were demonstrated in critically ill patients as compared to healthy controls, independent of the presence of Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   3701/03/19   6:49 PM 38BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iinflammatory markers. Moreover, the high ghrelin levels were a positive predictor of ICU-survival in septic patients, match-ing previous results from animal models. Based on these data, ghrelin seems to exert anti-inflammatory effects that are medi-ated by diverse pathways. Recent work has linked ghrelin to a novel pathway mediated by upregulation of uncoupling protein 2 (UCP2) particularly in the setting of traumatic brain injury.95The Role of Catecholamines in Postinjury Inflammation.  Injury-induced activation of the sympathetic nervous system results in secretion of acetylcholine from the preganglionic sympathetic fibers innervating the adrenal medulla. The adre-nal medulla is a special case of autonomic innervation and is considered a modified postganglionic neuron. Thus, acetyl-choline signaling to the resident chromaffin cells ensures that a surge of epinephrine (EPI) and norepinephrine (NE) release into the circulation takes place in a ratio that is tightly regulated by both central and peripheral mechanisms. Circulating levels of EPI and NE are threeto fourfold elevated, an effect that per-sists for an extended time. The release of EPI can be modulated by transcriptional regulation of phenylethanolamine N-methyl-transferase (PNMT), which catalyzes the last step of the cat-echolamine biosynthesis pathway methylating NE to form EPI. PNMT transcription, a key step in the regulation of epinephrine production, is activated in response to stress and tissue hypoxia by hypoxia-inducible factor 1α (HIF1A).Catecholamine release almost immediately prepares the body for the “fight or flight” response with well-described effects on the cardiovascular and pulmonary systems, and on metabolism. These include increased heart rate, myocardial contractility, conduction velocity, and blood pressure; the redi-rection of blood flow to skeletal muscle; increased cellular metabolism throughout the body; and mobilization of glucose from the liver via glycogenolysis, gluconeogenesis, lipolysis, and ketogenesis. To compound the resulting hyperglycemia, insulin release is decreased mainly through the stimulation of α-adrenergic pancreatic receptors. Hyperglycemia, as will be discussed, contributes to the proinflammatory response and to further mitochondrial dysfunction.The goal of this well-orchestrated catecholamine response is to reestablish and maintain the systems’ homeostasis, includ-ing the innate immune system. Circulating catecholamines can directly influence inflammatory cytokine production.96 Data indicate that basal EPI levels condition the activity and respon-siveness of cytokine-secreting cells, which may explain large inter-individual variability in innate cytokine profiles observed following injury. Epinephrine infusion at higher doses has been found to inhibit production of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha in vivo and to enhance the production of the anti-inflammatory cytokine interleukin IL-10.97 Additionally, in vitro studies indi-cate that stress levels of glucocorticoids and epinephrine, acting in concert, can inhibit production of IL-12, a potent stimulator of Th1 responses. Further, they have been shown in vitro to decrease Th1 cytokine production and increase Th2 cytokine production to a significantly greater degree compared to either adrenal hormone alone. Thus, catecholamines secreted from the adrenal, specifically epinephrine, play a role in both innate proinflammatory cytokine regulation, as well as adaptive Th responses, and may act in concert with cortisol during the injury response to modulate cytokine activity.98How are these effects explained? It is well established that a variety of human immune cells (e.g., mononuclear cells, macrophages, and granulocytes) express adrenergic receptors that are members of the family of G-protein coupled recep-tors that act through the activation of intracellular second mes-sengers such as cAMP and calcium ions influx (discussed in more detail in the following section). These second messengers can regulate a variety of immune cell functions, including the release of inflammatory cytokines and chemokines.The sympathetic nervous system also has direct immune-modulatory properties via its innervation of lymphoid tissues that contain resting and activated immune cells. The close prox-imity of sympathetic nerve terminals to immune cells responding to antigens (e.g., in the spleen) allows for a high concentration of norepinephrine to be localized within the microenvironment of antigen-activated immune cells. Norepinephrine can then interact with b2-adrenergic receptors expressed by CD4+ T and B lymphocytes, many of which also express α2-adrenergic receptors. Additionally, endogenous catecholamine expression has been detected in these cells (both CD4+ CD25+ T cells and phagocytes) as has the machinery for catecholamine synthesis. For example, monocytes contain inducible mRNA for the catecholamine-generating enzymes, tyrosine-hydroxylase, and dopamine-b-hydroxylase, and there is data to suggest that cells can regulate their own catecholamine synthesis in response to extracellular cues. Immune cell release of NE provides a way in which cells may exert additional regulation of inflammatory cell activation. For example, mature dendritic cells express both functional αand b-adrenergic receptor (AR) types, as do monocytes and monocyte-derived macrophages, whereas B cells and Th1 cells express b2-AR exclusively.99 Exposure of PBMCs to NE triggers a distinct genetic profile that indicates a modulation of Th cell function. Thus, stimulation of AR results in varied signaling events to regulate both immune cell pheno-type as well as mature cell function.100Aldosterone. Aldosterone is a mineralocorticoid released by the zona glomerulosa of the adrenal cortex. It binds to the mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) of principal cells in the col-lecting duct of the kidney where it can stimulate expression of genes involved in sodium reabsorption and potassium excretion to regulate extracellular volume and blood pressure. Mineralo-corticoid receptors (MR) have also been shown to have effects on cell metabolism and immunity. For example, recent studies show aldosterone interferes with insulin signaling pathways and reduces expression of the insulin-sensitizing factors, adiponec-tin and peroxisome proliferator activated receptor−γ (PPAR-γ), which contribute to insulin resistance. In the immune system, monocytes, lymphocytes, dendritic cells, and neutrophils have all been shown to possess a MR that binds aldosterone with high specificity, regulating sodium and potassium flux, as well as plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 and p22 phox expression in these cells.101 In dendritic cells, MR activation by aldoste-rone induces the secretion of proinflammatory cytokines. Fur-ther, aldosterone inhibits cytokine-mediated NF-κB activation in neutrophils, which also possess a functional MR.Insulin. Hyperglycemia and insulin resistance are hallmarks of injury and critical illness due to the catabolic effects of circu-lating mediators, including catecholamines, cortisol, glucagon, and growth hormone. The increase in these circulating progly-cemic factors, particularly epinephrine, induces glycogenoly-sis, lipolysis, and increased lactate production independent of available oxygen in a process that is termed “aerobic glycoly-sis.” Although there is an increase in insulin production at the Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   3801/03/19   6:49 PM 39SYSTEMIC RESPONSE TO INJURY AND METABOLIC SUPPORTCHAPTER 2same time, severe stress is frequently associated with insulin resistance, leading to decreased glucose uptake in the liver and the periphery contributing to acute hyperglycemia. Insulin is a hormone secreted by the pancreas, which mediates an overall host anabolic state through hepatic glycogenesis and glycolysis, peripheral glucose uptake, lipogenesis, and protein synthesis.102The insulin receptor (IR) is widely expressed and con-sists of two isoforms, which can form homoor hetero-dimers with insulin binding. Dimerization leads to receptor autophos-phorylation and activation of intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity. Downstream signaling events are dependent on the recruitment of the adaptor proteins, insulin receptor substrate (IRS-1), and Shc to the IR. Systemic insulin resistance likely results from proinflammatory signals, which modulate the phosphorylation of IRS-1 to affect its function.Hyperglycemia during critical illness is predictive of increased mortality in critically ill trauma patients.103 It can modulate the inflammatory response by altering leukocyte func-tions and the resulting decreases in phagocytosis, chemotaxis, adhesion, and respiratory burst activities are associated with an increased risk for infection. In addition, glucose administration results in a rapid increase in NF-κB activation and proinflamma-tory cytokine production. Insulin therapy to manage hypergly-cemia has grown in favor and has been shown to be associated with both decreased mortality and a reduction in infectious complications in select patient populations. However, the trend towards tight glycemic control in the intensive care unit failed to show benefit when examined in several reviews.104 Thus, the ideal blood glucose range within which to maintain critically ill patients and to avoid hypoglycemia has yet to be determined.THE CELLULAR STRESS RESPONSESReactive Oxygen Species and the Oxidative Stress ResponseReactive oxygen and nitrogen species (ROS, RNS, respectively) are small molecules that are highly reactive due to the presence of unpaired outer orbit electrons. They can cause cellular injury to host cells and invading pathogens through the oxidation of cell membrane substrates, cellular proteins, and DNA. ROS has also been shown to have important roles as signaling messengers, particularly in the immune system.105,106Oxygen radicals (superoxide anion, hydroxyl radical, hydrogen peroxide) are produced as a by-product of oxygen metabolism. The main areas of ROS production are oxida-tive processes involving the mitochondrial electron transport chain as well as those mediated by NADPH oxidases (NOX), a large class of ROS producing enzymes. Additional metabolic enzymes such as lipoxygenases, cytochrome P-450 and b5, and cyclooxygenases also produce ROS as by-products of their reactions.107 The synthesis of ROS is regulated at several check-points and via complex signaling mechanisms, including Ca2+ signaling, phosphorylation, and small G protein activation, which influence both the recruitment of the molecules required for NOX function and the synthesis of ROS in the mitochondria. Not surprisingly, NOX activation is triggered by a number of inflammatory mediators (e.g., TNF, chemokines, lysophospho-lipids, complement, and leukotrienes).Host cells are protected from the damaging effects of ROS through a number of mechanisms. The best described of these is via the upregulation and/or activation of endogenous antioxidant enzymes such as superoxide dismutases, catalases, and glutaredoxins. Pyruvate kinase also provides negative feed-back for ROS synthesis as do molecules that react nonenzy-matically with ROS. Under normal physiologic conditions, ROS production is balanced effectively by these antioxidative strate-gies. As a consequence, ROS can act as signaling molecules through their ability to modulate cysteine residues by oxidation, and thus influence the functionality of target proteins.108 ROS can also contribute to transcriptional activity both indirectly through its effects on transcription factor lifespan, and directly through the oxidation of DNA.The role for ROS has been well described in phagocytes, which utilize these small molecules for pathogen killing. A sec-ond important role for ROS is in the regulation of the inflamma-some. As discussed previously, the inflammasome mediates the activation of inflammatory capsases leading to the production and secretion of mature cytokines in macrophages.109 Impor-tantly, the best described inflammasome, NLRP3, is redox sen-sitive. Increased intracellular ROS enables the assembly of the protein complex.110 ROS also appears to be involved in adap-tive immunity by influencing immune cell response.106 ROS can alter thiol group oxidative states on the cell surface and, in turn, affect cell signaling. Moreover, intracellular ROS can inhibit DNA transcription. ROS has been described as a prime source of phosphatase activation in both B and T lymphocytes, which can regulate the function of key receptors and intracellu-lar signaling molecules in these cells by affecting phosphoryla-tion events. Finally, large amounts of ROS cannot only suppress cell function, but also can result in cell death.111The Unfolded Protein ResponseSecreted, membrane-bound, and organelle-specific proteins fold in the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) where they also receive their posttranslational modifications. Cellular stress dis-rupts the quality control required for this process leading to the accumulation of misfolded or unfolded proteins. These occur-rences are sensed by a highly conserved array of signaling pro-teins in the ER that try to reestablish appropriate folding, while at the same time decreasing protein synthesis.112 The important proteins involved in this process include inositol requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1), protein kinase RNA (PKR)–like ER kinase (PERK), and activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6). Together, these proteins form a complex that generates the unfolded pro-tein response (UPR). The UPR is a mechanism by which ER distress signals are sent to the nucleus to modulate transcription in an attempt to restore homeostasis. While obviously important to secretory epithelial cells, the UPR is also important to cells of the immune system.113Significant protein misfolding results in an alarm signal that, if not addressed, can result in cell death. Genes activated in the UPR result not only in the inhibition of translation, but also other potentially immunomodulatory events including induction of the acute phase response, activation of NF-κB, and the generation of antibody-producing B cells.114 Activation of the UPR is also an alternative mechanism for activation of the inflammasome115 and can increase proinflammatory cytokine production.116Markers of ER stress during critical illness have been demonstrated conclusively in burn patients,114,117 and in animal models they have been detected following hemorrhagic shock, correlating with the degree of organ dysfunction. Burn injury in particular leads to the marked reduction in ER calcium levels 4Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   3901/03/19   6:49 PM 40BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iand activation of UPR sensing proteins. Moreover, recent data in a series of burn patients strongly links the UPR to insulin resistance and hyperglycemia in these patients.117 Thus, a better understanding of the UPR, which is triggered by severe inflam-mation, may allow the identification of novel therapeutic targets for injury-associated insulin resistance.118Fibroblast growth factor-21 (FGF21), a recently identi-fied hormone that regulates systemic metabolic homeostasis, is upregulated following mitochondrial damage and may be part of an integrated stress response that includes ER stress and the UPR.119 In animal models, induction of ER stress with chemical ER stressors results in increased FGF21 expression. A recent study examining FGF21 in critically ill patients demonstrated that serum FGF21 concentrations were eight-fold higher in the critically ill patients as compared with the matched controls, regardless of the presence of sepsis. While FGF21 concentrations gradually decreased over time, they remained highly elevated at all studied time points and cor-related with patient mortality.120 These data support the idea that the UPR may play an important role in the response to severe injury.AutophagyUnder normal circumstances, cells need to have a way of dis-posing of damaged organelles and debris aggregates that are too large to be managed by proteosomal degradation. In order to accomplish this housekeeping task, cells utilize a process referred to as “macroautophagy” (autophagy), which is thought to have originated as a stress response.121 The steps of autoph-agy include the engulfment of cytoplasm/organelle by an “isola-tion membrane,” which is also called a phagophore. The edges of the phagophore then fuse to form the autophagosome, a dou-ble-membraned vesicle that sequesters the cytoplasmic material and is a characteristic feature of autophagy. The autophagosome then fuses with a lysosome to form an autolysosome, where the contents, together with the inner membrane, are degraded. This process is controlled by numerous autophagy-specific genes and by the specific kinase, mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR).As noted previously, autophagy is a normal cellular pro-cess that occurs in quiescent cells for cellular maintenance. However, under conditions of hypoxia and low cellular energy, autophagy is induced in an attempt to provide additional nutri-ents for energy production. The induction of autophagy pro-motes a shift from aerobic respiration to glycolysis and allows cellular components of the autophagosome to be hydrolyzed to energy substrates. Increased levels of autophagy are typical in activated immune cells and are a mechanism for the disposal of ROS and phagocytosed debris.Recent data support the idea that autophagy plays an important role in the immune response.122 Autophagy is stimu-lated by Th1 cytokines and with activation of TLR in macro-phages but is inhibited by Th2 cytokines. It is also recognized as an important regulator of cytokine secretion, particularly those cytokines of the IL-1 family that are dependent on inflamma-some processing for activation. For example, autophagosomes can sequester and degrade pro-IL-1β and inflammasome com-ponents. In animal models of sepsis, inhibition of autophagy results in increased proinflammatory cytokine levels that corre-late with increased mortality.123 These data suggest that autoph-agy is a protective mechanism whereby the cell can regulate the levels of cytokine production.ApoptosisApoptosis (regulated cell death) is an energy-dependent, orga-nized mechanism for clearing senescent or dysfunctional cells, including macrophages, neutrophils, and lymphocytes, without promoting an inflammatory response. This contrasts with cel-lular necrosis, which results in a disorganized sequence of intra-cellular molecular releases with subsequent immune activation and inflammatory response. Systemic inflammation modulates apoptotic signaling in active immunocytes, which subsequently influences the inflammatory response through the loss of effec-tor cells.Apoptosis proceeds primarily through two pathways: the extrinsic pathway and the intrinsic pathway. The extrinsic path-way is activated through the binding of death receptors (e.g., Fas, TNFR), which leads to the recruitment of Fas-associated death domain protein and subsequent activation of caspase 3 (Fig. 2-5). On activation, caspases are the effectors of apoptotic signaling because they mediate the organized breakdown of nuclear DNA. The intrinsic pathway proceeds through protein mediators (e.g., Bcl-2, Bcl-2-associated death promoter, Bcl-2–associated X protein, Bim) that influence mitochondrial mem-brane permeability. Increased membrane permeability leads to the release of mitochondrial cytochrome C, which ultimately activates caspase 3 and thus induces apoptosis. These pathways do not function in a completely autonomous manner because there is significant interaction and crosstalk between mediators of both extrinsic and intrinsic pathways. Apoptosis is modulated by several regulatory factors, including inhibitor of apoptosis proteins and regulatory caspases (e.g., caspases 1, 8, 10).Apoptosis during sepsis may influence the ultimate com-petency of the acquired immune response. In a murine model of peritoneal sepsis, increased lymphocyte apoptosis was associ-ated with mortality, which may be due to a resultant decrease in IFN-γ release. In postmortem analysis of patients who expired from overwhelming sepsis, there was an increase in lymphocyte apoptosis, whereas macrophage apoptosis did not appear to be affected. Clinical trials have observed an association between the degree of lymphopenia and disease severity in sepsis. In addition, after the phagocytosis of apoptotic cells by macro-phages, anti-inflammatory mediators such as IL-10 are released that may exacerbate immune suppression during sepsis. Neutro-phil apoptosis is inhibited by inflammatory products, including TNF, IL-1, IL-3, IL-6, GM-CSF, and IFN-γ. This retardation in regulated cell death may prolong and exacerbate secondary injury through neutrophil free radical release as the clearance of senescent cells is delayed.124NecroptosisCellular necrosis refers to the premature uncontrolled death of cells in living tissue typically caused by accidental exposure to external factors, such as ischemia, inflammation or trauma, which result in extreme cellular stress. Necrosis is character-ized by the loss of plasma membrane integrity and cellular col-lapse with extrusion of cytoplasmic contents, but the cell nuclei typically remain intact. Recent data have defined a process by which necrosis occurs through a series of well-described steps that are dependent on a signaling pathway that involves the receptor-interacting protein kinase (RIPK) complex. Termed “necroptosis,” it occurs in response to specific stimuli, such as TNFand TLR-mediated signals.125 For example, ligation of the tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 (TNFR1) under conditions in which caspase-8 is inactivated (e.g., by pharmacological Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   4001/03/19   6:49 PM 41SYSTEMIC RESPONSE TO INJURY AND METABOLIC SUPPORTCHAPTER 2agents) results in the over-generation of ROS and a metabolic collapse. The net result is programmed necrosis (necroptosis). The effect of cell death by necroptosis on the immune response is not yet known. However, it is likely that the “DAMP” sig-nature that occurs in response to necroptotic cell death is an important contributor to the systemic inflammatory response. Evidence to support this concept was provided by investiga-tors who examined the role of necroptosis in murine model of sepsis. They demonstrated that Ripk3−/− mice were capable of recovering body temperature better, exhibited lower circu-lating DAMP levels, and survived at higher rates than their WT littermates.126 These data suggest that the cellular damage that occurs with programmed necrosis exacerbates the sepsis-associated systemic inflammatory response.PyroptosisPyroptosis is a form of regulated cell death that is dependent on the activity of the proinflammatory caspase enzymes associ-ated with the inflammasome and is thus an inflammatory form of cell death.127 Pyropotosis shares some features with apopo-tosis, including DNA fragmentation and positive annexin V staining, among others. However, it is associated with the acti-vation of caspase-1 and the formation of caspase-1–dependent pores that allow early permeabilization of the cell membrane, electrolyte movement into the cells, and, finally, osmotic lysis of the cell.128 As a form of cell death, pyroptosis seems to be largely observed in macrophages, dendritic cells, and neutro-phils, although it has been documented in other cells as well, especially if they express high levels of caspase-1. As noted, pyroptosis is linked to activation of the inflammasome, which can occur in response to diverse cell alarm signals, including DAMPs. Not surprising, the mechanism of cell death leads to the release of additional intracellular DAMPs, including HMGB1 and S100 proteins.A recent study examined pyroptosis in peripheral blood mononuclear cells in a cohort of 60 trauma patients.129 The investigators found that the percentages of pyroptotic PBMCs were significantly higher in trauma patients than those in healthy CD95TNFR-1(p55)TNFR-2(p75)FADDDDDDDDDEDDDDEDDDDEDDEDFADDCaspase 8Caspase 2CaspaseCascadeApoptosisNIKI-˜B/NF-˜BNF-˜BMEKK1JNKc-JunRIPRAIDDTRAF2IAPTRADDDDDDDDTRADDDEDDDDDFADDRecruitedTRAF1TRAF2IAPFigure 2-5. Signaling pathway for tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 (TNFR-1) (55 kDa) and TNFR-2 (75 kDa) occurs by the recruitment of several adapter proteins to the intracellular receptor complex. Optimal signaling activity requires receptor trimerization. TNFR-1 initially recruits TNFR-associated death domain (TRADD) and induces apoptosis through the actions of proteolytic enzymes known as caspases, a pathway shared by another receptor known as CD95 (Fas). CD95 and TNFR-1 possess similar intracellular sequences known as death domains (DDs), and both recruit the same adapter proteins known as Fas-associated death domains (FADDs) before activating caspase 8. TNFR-1 also induces apoptosis by activating caspase 2 through the recruitment of receptor-interacting protein (RIP). RIP also has a func-tional component that can initiate nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) and c-Jun activation, both favoring cell survival and proinflammatory functions. TNFR-2 lacks a DD component but recruits adapter proteins known as TNFR-associated factors 1 and 2 (TRAF1, TRAF2) that interact with RIP to mediate NF-κB and c-Jun activation. TRAF2 also recruits additional proteins that are antiapoptotic, known as inhibitor of apoptosis proteins (IAPs). DED = death effector domain; I-κB = inhibitor of κB; I-κB/NF-κB = inactive complex of NF-κB that becomes activated when the I-κB portion is cleaved; JNK = c-Jun N-terminal kinase; MEKK1 = mitogen-activated protein/extracellular regulatory protein kinase kinase kinase-1; NIK = NF-κB–inducing kinase; RAIDD = RIP-associated interleukin-1b-converting enzyme and ced-homologue-1–like protein with death domain, which activates proapoptotic caspases. (Adapted with permission from Vincent JL: Marshall JC, Cohen J: Update in Intensive Care and Emergency Medicine: Vol. 31: Immune Response in Critical Illness. Berlin: Springer-Verlag; 2002.)Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   4101/03/19   6:49 PM 42BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Icontrols and correlated with injury severity. Moreover, increase in pyroptotic PBMCs significantly correlated with elevated cytokine levels (IL-10, IL-18, and MCP-1) and was a strong predictor for the development of sepsis.MEDIATORS OF INFLAMMATIONCytokinesCytokines are a class of protein signaling compounds that are essential for both innate and adaptive immune responses. Cytokines mediate a broad sequence of cellular responses, including cell migration, DNA replication, cell turnover, and immunocyte proliferation (Table 2-5). When function-ing locally at the site of injury and infection, cytokines mediate the eradication of invading microorganisms and also promote wound healing. However, an exaggerated proinflammatory cyto-kine response to inflammatory stimuli may result in hemody-namic instability (i.e., septic shock) and metabolic derangements (i.e., muscle wasting). Anti-inflammatory cytokines also are released, at least in part, as an opposing influence on the proin-flammatory cascade. These anti-inflammatory mediators may also result in immunocyte dysfunction and host immunosuppres-sion. Cytokine signaling after an inflammatory stimulus can best be represented as a finely tuned balance of opposing influences and should not be oversimplified as a “black and white” proin-flammatory/anti-inflammatory response. A brief discussion of the important cytokine molecules is included below.Tumor Necrosis Factor-α. Tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) is a potent inflammatory mediator that is rapidly mobilized in response to stressors such as injury and infection. It is primar-ily synthesized by immune cells, such as macrophages, den-dritic cells, and T lymphocytes, and is generated in a precursor form that is expressed as a trimer on the surface of activated cells. After being processed by the metalloproteinase, TNF-α-converting enzyme (TACE, also known as ADAMS 17), a smaller, soluble form of TNF is released, which mediates its bio-logical activities through types 1 and 2 TNF receptors (TNFR-1;  TNFR-2).130 Transmembrane TNF-α also binds to TNFR-1 and -2, but its biological activities are likely mediated through TNFR-2. While the two receptors share homology in their ligand-binding regions, there are distinct differences that regu-late their biologic function. For example, TNFR-1 is expressed by a wide variety of cells, but it is typically sequestered in the Golgi. Following appropriate cell signaling, TNFR-1 is mobi-lized to the cell surface, where it sensitizes cells to TNF or it can be cleaved from the surface in the form of a soluble recep-tor that can neutralize TNF.131 In contrast, TNFR-2 expression is confined principally to immune cells where it resides in the plasma membrane. Both TNF receptors are capable of binding intracellular adaptor proteins that lead to activation of complex signaling processes and mediate the effects of TNF.Although the circulating half-life of soluble TNF is brief, it acts upon almost every differentiated cell type, eliciting a wide range of important cellular responses. Moreover, it is one of the first cytokines to be released following trauma. In particular, TNF elicits many metabolic and immunomodulatory activities. It stimulates muscle breakdown and cachexia through increased catabolism, insulin resistance, and redistribution of amino acids to hepatic circulation as fuel substrates. TNF also mediates coagulation activation, cell migration, and macrophage phago-cytosis and enhances the expression of adhesion molecules, prostaglandin E2, platelet-activating factor, glucocorticoids, and eicosanoids. TNF-α increases endothelial cell permeability and activates macrophages, NK cells and lymphocytes to induce the secretion of various cytokines. While TNF is clearly play-ing a role in injury-induced inflammation, reports are conflict-ing whether postinjury TNF concentrations correlated with the development of multiple organ dysfunction syndrome.132Interleukin-1 Family. The IL-1 family of proteins contains 11 members. The best-studied of these are IL-1α and IL-1β and IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1Ra), but member cytokines also include IL-18, IL-33, IL-36, IL-3,7 and IL-38. IL-1α and IL-1β, which are encoded by two distinct IL-1 genes, share similar bio-logic functions despite limited sequence homology. They uti-lize the same cell surface receptor, termed IL-1 receptor type 1  (IL-1RI), which is present on nearly all cells. Once bound to its receptor, IL-1 initiates signaling events that result in the synthe-sis and release of a variety of inflammatory mediators. Members of the IL-1 family are expressed as proforms (pIL-1) that are matured through enzymatic cleavage. The IL-1α precursor is constitutively expressed and stored in a variety of healthy cells, including epithelium and endothelium, and its expression can be increased in response to proinflammatory or stress-associated stimuli.133Both the precursor and mature forms of IL-α have nearly identical biologic activities as measured by their ability to trig-ger IL-6 and TNF release. With appropriate signals, IL-1α can move both to the cell membrane, where it can act on adjacent cells bearing the IL-1R and to the nucleus where it can stim-ulate gene transcription. Pro-IL-1α can also be released pas-sively from damaged injured cells in its active form. In this way, IL-1α is believed to function as a DAMP, which promotes the synthesis of inflammatory mediators, such as chemokines and eicosanoids. These mediators attract neutrophils to the injured site, facilitate their exit from the vasculature, and promote their activation. Once they have reached their target, neutrophil lifes-pan is extended by the presence of IL-1α.8,134IL-1β is a multifunctional proinflammatory cytokine whose expression and synthesis is tightly regulated and con-fined to activated cells, such as monocytes, tissue macrophages, and dendritic cells.134 In contrast to IL-1α, IL-1β is synthesized as an inactive precursor, pro-IL-1β, which is processed by the inflammasome in response to various stimuli, including cyto-kines and foreign pathogens, via pattern recognition receptors such as TLR4 as well as ROS. Mature IL-1β is then released from the cell via an unconventional secretory pathway.135 IL-1β has a spectrum of proinflammatory effects that are largely simi-lar to those induced by TNF, and injection of IL-1β alone is sufficient to induce an acute inflammatory response. High doses of either IL-1β or TNF are associated with profound hemody-namic compromise. Interestingly, low doses of both IL-1β and TNF administered together elicit hemodynamic events similar to those elicited by high doses of either mediator, which sug-gests a synergistic effect.There are two primary receptor types for IL-1: IL-1R1 and IL-1R2. IL-1R1 is widely expressed and mediates inflammatory signaling on ligand binding. IL-1R2 is proteolytically cleaved from the membrane surface to soluble form on activation and thus serves as another mechanism for competition and regula-tion of IL-1 activity. IL-1α or IL-1β bind first to the IL-1R1, which is considered the ligand-binding chain. This is followed by recruitment of a transmembrane co-receptor, termed the 5Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   4201/03/19   6:49 PM 43SYSTEMIC RESPONSE TO INJURY AND METABOLIC SUPPORTCHAPTER 2Table 2-5Cytokines and their sourcesCYTOKINESOURCECOMMENTTNFMacrophages/monocytesKupffer cellsNeutrophilsNK cellsAstrocytesEndothelial cellsT lymphocytesAdrenal cortical cellsAdipocytesKeratinocytesOsteoblastsMast cellsDendritic cellsAmong earliest responders after injury; half-life <20 min; activates TNF  receptors 1 and 2; induces significant shock and catabolismIL-1Macrophages/monocytesB and T lymphocytesNK cellsEndothelial cellsEpithelial cellsKeratinocytesFibroblastsOsteoblastsDendritic cellsAstrocytesAdrenal cortical cellsMegakaryocytesPlateletsNeutrophilsNeuronal cellsTwo forms (IL-1 α and IL-1 β); similar physiologic effects as TNF; induces fevers through prostaglandin activity in anterior hypothalamus; promotes β-endorphin release from pituitary; half-life <6 minIL-2T lymphocytesPromotes lymphocyte proliferation, immunoglobulin production, gut barrier integrity; half-life <10 min; attenuated production after major blood loss leads to immunocompromise; regulates lymphocyte apoptosisIL-3T lymphocytesMacrophagesEosinophilsMast cellsIL-4T lymphocytesMast cellsBasophilsMacrophagesB lymphocytesEosinophilsStromal cellsInduces B-lymphocyte production of IgG4 and IgE, mediators of allergic and anthelmintic response; downregulates TNF, IL-1, IL-6, IL-8IL-5T lymphocytesEosinophilsMast cellsBasophilsPromotes eosinophil proliferation and airway inflammationIL-6MacrophagesB lymphocytesNeutrophilsBasophilsMast cellsFibroblastsEndothelial cellsElicited by virtually all immunogenic cells; long half-life; circulating levels proportional to injury severity; prolongs activated neutrophil survival(Continued)Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   4301/03/19   6:49 PM 44BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART ITable 2-5Cytokines and their sourcesCYTOKINESOURCECOMMENTAstrocytesSynovial cellsAdipocytesOsteoblastsMegakaryocytesChromaffin cellsKeratinocytesIL-8Macrophages/monocytesT lymphocytesBasophilsMast cellsEpithelial cellsPlateletsChemoattractant for neutrophils, basophils, eosinophils, lymphocytesIL-10T lymphocytesB lymphocytesMacrophagesBasophilsMast cellsKeratinocytesProminent anti-inflammatory cytokine; reduces mortality in animal sepsis and ARDS modelsIL-12Macrophages/monocytesNeutrophilsKeratinocytesDendritic cellsB lymphocytesPromotes Th1 differentiation; synergistic activity with IL-2IL-13T lymphocytesPromotes B-lymphocyte function; structurally similar to IL-4; inhibits nitric oxide and endothelial activationIL-15Macrophages/monocytesEpithelial cellsAnti-inflammatory effect; promotes lymphocyte activation; promotes neutrophil phagocytosis in fungal infectionsIL-18MacrophagesKupffer cellsKeratinocytesAdrenal cortical cellsOsteoblastsSimilar to IL-12 in function; levels elevated in sepsis, particularly gram-positive infections; high levels found in cardiac deathsIFN-γT lymphocytesNK cellsMacrophagesMediates IL-12 and IL-18 function; half-life of days; found in wounds 5–7 d after injury; promotes ARDSGM-CSFT lymphocytesFibroblastsEndothelial cellsStromal cellsPromotes wound healing and inflammation through activation of leukocytesIL-21T lymphocytesPreferentially secreted by Th2 cells; structurally similar to IL-2 and IL-15; activates NK cells, B and T lymphocytes; influences adaptive immunityHMGB1Monocytes/lymphocytesHigh mobility group box chromosomal protein; DNA transcription factor; late (downstream) mediator of inflammation (ARDS, gut barrier disruption); induces “sickness behavior”ARDS = acute respiratory distress syndrome; GM-CSF = granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor; IFN = interferon; Ig = immunoglobulin;  IL = interleukin; NK = natural killer; Th1 = helper T cell subtype 1; Th2 = helper T cell subtype 2; TNF = tumor necrosis factor.(Continued)accessory protein (IL-1RAcP). A complex is formed of IL-1RI plus IL-1 plus the coreceptor. The signal is initiated with recruit-ment of the adaptor protein MyD88 to the Toll-IL-1 receptor (TIR) domains of the receptor complex and signal transduction via intermediates, which are homologous to the signal cascade initiated by TLRs. These events culminate in the activation of NF-kB and its nuclear translocation.136Recent animal studies have implicated postinjury IL-1β in the exacerbation of traumatic brain injury.137 In a mouse model of polytrauma, which included both cortical brain injury and tibial fracture, mice that received both injuries demonstrated increased neuroinflammation, brain damage, and behavioral deficits compared to mice given an isolated-TBI. These changes correlated with increased IL-1β levels in the brain. Treatment Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   4401/03/19   6:49 PM 45SYSTEMIC RESPONSE TO INJURY AND METABOLIC SUPPORTCHAPTER 2with IL-1R antagonist post injury reduced volume loss in the injured cortex as well as markers of axonal injury, resulting in improved outcome in these animals.IL-18 is also a member of the IL-1 superfamily of cytokines.138  First noted as an IFN-γ-inducing factor produced by LPS-stim-ulated macrophages, IL-18 expression is found both in immune cells and nonimmune cells at low to intermediate levels. How-ever, activated macrophages and Kupffer cells produce large amounts of mature IL-18. Similar to IL-1β, IL-18 is synthe-sized and stored as an inactive precursor form (pro-IL-18), and activation requires activation of the inflammasome resulting the processing of pro-IL-18 by caspase-1.139 It then exits the cell through a nontraditional secretory pathway. The IL-18 receptor (IL-18R) is composed of two subunits, IL-18Rα and IL-18Rβ, and is a member of the IL-1R superfamily that is structurally similar in their cytoplasmic domains to the TLR. One unique biological property of IL-18 is the potential, in conjunction with IL-12, to promote the Th1 response.IL-18 induces IFNγ production by CD4+ T cells. IFNγ, in turn, activates macrophages to produce inflammatory cytokines. Independent of its ability to induce interferon, IL-18 can act similarly to other proinflammatory cytokines by acting directly to increase in cell adhesion molecule expression, nitric oxide synthesis, and chemokine production by macrophages.140In a cohort of critically ill patients with acute lung injury and ARDS, inflammasome-related mRNA transcripts (CASP1, IL1B, and IL18) were increased in peripheral blood. Moreover, plasma IL-18 were also elevated and served as a marker of mor-tality risk.141 Recent studies suggest that IL-18 therapy may hold promise as effective therapy in promoting immune recovery after severe surgical stress.142IL-33, a second important IL-1 family member, is mainly expressed in surface epithelium and endothelium, where it is normally bound via an N-terminal chromatin-binding motif.143 Nuclear localization is important for its function and perhaps its regulation. Expression in mice of an IL-33 that lacks the nuclear localization sequence, results lethal inflammation, suggesting that nuclear localization acts to prevent unregulated extracel-lular release.144 Similar to HMGB1 and other IL-1 family mem-bers, IL-33 lacks a signal sequence for active secretion so that its release is injury-dependent. Once released from damaged cells, full length IL-33 is biologically active, but it can be further pro-cessed by inflammatory proteases to a mature form that exhibits tento thirtyfold higher activity. Il-33 can binds to a member of the IL-1R family, ST2, leading to activation of NF-kB-mediated transcriptional events. ST2+ cells include macrophages, mast cells, Th2 cells, and tissue regulatory T cells (Tregs) which are important controllers of immune homeostasis.Interleukin-2 Family. Interleukin-2 (IL-2) is a multifunc-tional cytokine produced primarily by CD4+ T cells after antigen activation, which plays pivotal roles in the immune response. Other cellular sources for IL-2 include CD8+ and NK T cells, mast cells, and activated dendritic cells. Discovered as a T cell growth factor, IL-2 also promotes CD8+ T cell and natural killer cell cytolytic activity and modulates T cell differentiation pro-grams in response to antigen. Thus, IL-2 promotes naive CD4+ T cell differentiation into T helper 1 (Th1) and T helper 2 (Th2) cells while inhibiting T helper 17 (Th17) and T follicular helper (Tfh) cell differentiation. Moreover, IL-2 is essential for the development and maintenance of T regulatory (Treg) cells and for activation-induced cell death, thereby mediating tolerance and limiting inappropriate immune reactions. The upregulation of IL-2 requires calcium as well as protein kinase C signaling, which leads to the activation of transcription factors such as nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) and NF-κB. MicroRNAs also play a role in the regulation of IL-2 expression.145IL-2 binds to IL-2 receptors (IL-2R), which are expressed on leukocytes. IL-2Rs are formed from various combinations of three receptor subunits: IL-2Rα, IL-2Rβ, and IL-2Rγ. These subunits form in low, medium, and high affinity forms of the receptor depending on the subunit combination. IL-2Rγ has been renamed the common cytokine receptor γ chain (γc), which is now known to be shared by IL-2, IL-4, IL-7, IL-9, IL-15, and IL-21. Constitutive IL-2 receptor expression is low and is inducible by T cell receptor ligation and cytokine stimulation. Importantly, the transcription of each receptor subunit is indi-vidually regulated via a complex process to effect tight control of surface expression. Once the receptor is ligated, the major IL-2 signaling pathways that are engaged include Janus Kinase (JAK)-signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT), Shc-Ras-MAPK, and phosphoinositol-3-kinase (PI3-K)-AKT. Partly due to its short half-life of <10 minutes, IL-2 is not read-ily detectable after acute injury. IL-2 receptor blockade induces immunosuppressive effects and can be pharmacologically used for organ transplantation. Attenuated IL-2 expression observed during major injury or blood transfusion may contribute to the relatively immunosuppressed state of the surgical patient.146Interleukin-6 Family. Following burn or traumatic injury, damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) from dam-aged or dying cells stimulate TLRs to produce IL-6, a proin-flammatory cytokine that plays a central role in host defense. IL-6 levels in the circulation are detectable by 60 minutes post injury, peak between 4 and 6 hours, and can persist for as long as 10 days. Further, plasma levels of IL-6 are proportional to the degree of injury. In the liver, IL-6 strongly induces a broad spec-trum of acute-phase proteins such as C-reactive protein (CRP) and fibrinogen, among others, while it reduces expression of albumin, cytochrome P 450, and transferrin. In lymphocytes, IL-6 induces B cell maturation into immunoglobulin-producing cells and regulates Th17/Treg balance. IL-6 modulates T cell behavior by inducing the development of Th17 cells and inhib-iting Treg cell differentiation in conjunction with transforming growth factor-β. IL-6 also promotes angiogenesis and increased vascular permeability, which are associated with local inflam-matory responses. To date, ten IL-6 family cytokines have been identified, including IL-6, oncostatin M, neuropoietin, IL-11, IL-27, and IL-31.147The interleukin-6 receptor (IL-6R, gp80) is expressed on hepatocytes, monocytes, B cells, and neutrophils in humans. However, many other cells respond to IL-6 through a process known as trans-signaling.148 In this case, soluble IL-6Rs  (sIL-6R) exist in the serum and bind to IL-6, forming an IL-6/sIL-6R complex. The soluble receptor is produced by proteo-lytic cleavage from the surface of neutrophils in a process that is stimulated by C-reactive protein, complement factors, and leu-kotrienes. The IL6/sIL6R complex can then bind to the gp130 receptor, which is expressed ubiquitously on cells. Upon IL-6 stimulation, gp130 transduces two major signaling pathways: the JAK-STAT3 pathway and the SHP2-Gab-Ras-Erk-MAPK pathway, which is regulated by cytoplasmic suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS3). These signaling events can lead to increased expression of adhesion molecules as well as  proinflammatory chemokines and cytokines. High plasma IL-6  levels have been associated with mortality during Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   4501/03/19   6:49 PM 46BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iintra-abdominal sepsis.149 Moreover, prolonged (more than  3 days) elevation of IL-6 concentrations has been reported to correlate with the occurrence of complications and mortality following severe traumatic injury. More recently, a meta-analy-sis analyzed the predictive value of IL-6 for the development of complications and mortality after trauma and found that the con-centration of IL-6 in the first 24 hours after trauma was predic-tive for the development of multiple organ failure and death.150Interleukin-10 Family. We have talked almost exclusively about the factors that initiate the proinflammatory response fol-lowing cellular stress or injury. The reestablishment of immune homeostasis following these events requires the resolution of inflammation and the initiation of tissue repair processes.  Interleukin-10 (IL-10) plays a central role in this anti-inflammatory response by regulating the duration and magnitude of inflamma-tion in the host.151The IL-10 family currently has six members, includ-ing IL-10, IL-19, IL-20, IL-22, IL-24, and IL-26. IL-10 is produced by a variety of immune cells of both myeloid and lymphoid origin. Its synthesis is up-regulated during times of stress and systemic inflammation; however, each cell type that produces IL-10 does so in response to different stimuli, allow-ing for tight control of its expression. IL-10 exerts effects by binding to the IL-10 receptor (IL-10R), which is a tetramer formed from two distinct subunits, IL-10R1 and IL-10R2. Specifically, IL-10 binds first to the IL10R1 subunit, which then recruits IL-10R2, allowing the receptor complex to form. While IL-10R2 is widely expressed, IL-10R1 expression is confined to leukocytes so that the effects of IL-10 are confined to the immune system. Once receptor ligation occurs, signaling proceeds by the activation of JAK1 and STAT3. In particular, STAT3 in conjunction with IL-10 is absolutely required for the transcription of genes responsible for the anti-inflammatory response (AIR). IL-10 inhibits the secretion of proinflamma-tory cytokines, including TNF and IL-1, partly through the downregulation of NF-κB and thereby functions as a nega-tive feedback regulator of the inflammatory cascade.151 In macrophages, IL-10 suppresses the transcription of 20% of all LPS-induced genes. Further, experimental models of inflam-mation have shown that neutralization of IL-10 increases TNF production and mortality, whereas restitution of circulating IL-10 reduces TNF levels and subsequent deleterious effects. Increased plasma levels of IL-10 also have been associated with mortality and disease severity after traumatic injury.Interleukin-12 Family. Interleukin-12 (IL-12) is unique among the cytokines in being the only heterodimeric cytokine. This family, which includes IL-12, IL-23, IL-27, and IL-35, consists of an α-chain that is structurally similar to the IL-6 cytokine and a β-chain that is similar to the class I receptor for cytokines. The individual IL-12 family members are formed from various combinations of the α and β subunits. Despite the sharing of individual subunits, and the similarities of their receptors, the IL-12 cytokines have different biological func-tions. IL-12 and IL-23 are considered proinflammatory, stimu-latory cytokines with key roles in the development of Th1 and Th17 subsets of helper T cells. In contrast, both IL-27 and IL-35 appear to have immunoregulatory functions that are associated with cytokine inhibition in specific Treg cell populations, par-ticularly the Th17 cells.152 The effects of these cytokines require specific receptor chains that are also shared among the cyto-kines. The complexity of signaling is evidenced by the fact that these receptor chains can function both as dimers and as mono-mers. Ligation of the IL-12 receptors initiate signaling events via the JAK-STAT pathway.IL-12 synthesis and release is increased during endotox-emia and sepsis.153 Together with IL-18, it stimulates lympho-cytes to increase secretion of IFN-γ. IL-12 also stimulates NK cell cytotoxicity and helper T cell differentiation in this setting. IL-12 release is inhibited by IL-10, and its deficiency inhibits phagocytosis in neutrophils. In experimental models of inflam-matory stress, IL-12 neutralization conferred a mortality benefit in mice during endotoxemia.IL-23, an important IL-12 family member, is a heterodi-meric cytokine comprised of a unique p19 subunit linked to a p40 subunit that is common with IL-12. IL-23 appears to be an important survival signal for a specific subset of T helper (Th) cells, Th-17 cells, where it provides a secondary stimu-lus for Th-17 differentiation.152 The Th-17 population of cells has recently been demonstrated to expand following traumatic injury and may mark an early phenotypic shift in cell population that has prognostic significance.154,155Interleukin-17 Family. IL-17A (also called IL-17) is the major effector cytokine predominantly produced by a subset of helper T cells, the T helper (Th)-17 cells.156 It is the founding member of the IL-17 family of cytokines, which includes IL-17A through F. The original described activity for IL-17A was to promote the differentiation of bone marrow progenitor cells along the granulopoietic lineage. Subsequent studies have confirmed that IL-17A is required for increasing circulating neutrophil numbers following stress. In the setting of infection, it is now known that IL-17 acts in conjunction with IL-23 to upregulate  granulocyte-colony stimulating factor to promote granulopoi-esis. IL-17A has also been shown to regulate the production of specific chemokines in both gut and lung epithelial cells and thus can modulate both the emigration of neutrophils into these tissues and their activation at the site. IL-17 also induces the expression of matrix metalloproteinases, which can make the extracellular matrix more accessible for immune cell recruitment.156IL-17 has the ability to induce the expression of impor-tant proinflammatory cytokines, including IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF from macrophages and other cells, and in this way, cre-ates a self-sustaining loop that enhances its own production and strengthens its overall effects.157 Recent data supports a pivotal role for IL-17 in the posttrauma immune response and has iden-tified associations between increased IL-17 expression associ-ated with Th17immune response outcomes following blunt trauma.154Interferons. Interferons were first recognized as soluble mediators that inhibited viral replication through the activa-tion of specific antiviral genes in infected cells. Interferons are categorized into three types based on receptor specificity and sequence homology. The two major types, type I and type II are discussed in the following section.Type I interferon family is composed of twenty distinct proteins. These include IFN-α, IFN-β, and IFN-ω, which are structurally related and bind to a common receptor.158 They are likely produced by most cell types and tissues after the detec-tion of PAMPs/ DAMPs by cytosolic or membrane receptors, including TLR in macrophages and dendritic cells. Type 1 IFNs bind to a heterodimeric transmembrane receptor interferon (α and β) receptor 1, resulting in STAT activation and nuclear trans-location. In the nucleus, dimeric STATs recruit an additional Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   4601/03/19   6:49 PM 47SYSTEMIC RESPONSE TO INJURY AND METABOLIC SUPPORTCHAPTER 2transcriptional factor to form a complex capable of binding to interferon-stimulated response elements, inducing hundreds of IFN-stimulated genes.Type I interferons influence adaptive immune responses by inducing the maturation of dendritic cells and by stimulat-ing class I MHC expression. IFN-α and IFN-β also enhance immune responses by increasing the cytotoxicity of natural killer cells both in culture and in vivo. Further, they have been implicated in the enhancement of chemokine synthesis, particu-larly those that recruit myeloid cells and lymphoid cells. Thus, IFN/STAT signaling has important effects on the mobilization, tissue recruitment, and activation of immune cells that compose the inflammatory infiltrate. In contrast, type I IFNs appear to inhibit inflammasome activity, possibly via IL-10.159The single type II interferon, IFN-γ is secreted by various T cells, NK cells, and antigen-presenting cells in response to bacterial antigens and cytokines. It functions as a key regula-tor of macrophage activation toward the “M1” proinflammatory phenotype.160 In response to IFN-γ, macrophages produce high levels of proinflammatory cytokines such as Il-1β, IL-12, IL-23, and TNF-α as well as reactive nitrogen and oxygen species. As a consequence, macrophages demonstrate enhanced phagocyto-sis and killing. In addition, IFN-γ signaling generates additional cytokines and inflammatory factors to sustain inflammation and help to maintain Th1 responses.IFN-γ regulation of macrophage activity may contribute to acute lung injury after major surgery or trauma. A dimin-ished IFN-γ level, as seen in knockout mice, is associated with increased susceptibility to both viral and bacterial pathogens. In addition, IFN-γ promotes differentiation of T cells to the helper T cell subtype 1 and also enhances B-cell isotype switching to immunoglobulin G.158Receptors of all IFN subtypes belong to the class II of cytokine receptors and utilize JAK-STAT signaling pathway for nuclear signaling, although different STAT activation (e.g., STAT1 and STAT2) is favored by individual receptors.Granulocyte-Macrophage Colony-Stimulating Fac-tor/Interleukin-3/Interleukin-5 Family. Granulocytemacrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), IL-3, and IL-5 compose a small family of cytokines that regulates the growth and activation of immune cells. They are largely the products of activated T cells, which when released, stimulate the behavior of myeloid cells by inducing cytokine expression and antigen presentation. In this way, GM-CSF, IL-3, and IL-5 are able to link the innate and acquired immune responses. With the exception of eosinophils, GM-CSF/IL-3/IL-5 are not essential for constitutive hematopoietic cell function. Rather, they play an important role when the host is stressed by serving to increase the numbers of activated and sensitized cells required to bol-ster host defense.161 Currently, GM-CSF is in clinical trials for administration to children with an injury severity score >10 fol-lowing blunt or penetrating trauma. The goal of the study is to provide evidence of the effectiveness of GM-CSF as an agent that can ameliorate posttraumatic immune suppression.Receptors for the GM–CSF/IL-3/IL-5 family of cytokines are expressed at very low level on hematopoietic cells. Similar to the other cytokine receptors discussed, they are heterodimers composed of a cytokine-specific α subunit and a common β sub-unit (βc), which is shared by all three receptors and is required for high affinity signal transduction. The binding of cytokine to its receptor activates JAK2-STAT, MAPK, and PI3-K—mediated signaling events to regulate a variety of important cell behaviors, including effector function in mature cells.EicosanoidsOmega-6 Polyunsaturated Fat Metabolites: Arachidonic Acid. Eicosanoids are derived primarily by oxidation of the membrane phospholipid, arachidonic acid (AA), which is relatively abundant in the membrane lipids of inflammatory cells. The major precursor of arachidonic acid is the omega-6 (n-6) polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA) linolenic acid, a major source of which is soybean oil. Not surprising, an excess of linolenic acid is thought to promote inflammation via increased availability of AA, and in turn, eicosanoids.Eicosanoids generated from AA include prostaglandins, thromboxanes, and leukotrienes. When a cell senses the proper stimulus, AA is released from phospholipids or diacylglycerols by the enzymatic activation of phospholipase A2 (Fig. 2-6A). Prostanoids, which include all of the prostaglandins (PG) and the thromboxanes, result from the sequential action of the cyclooxy-genase (COX) enzyme and terminal synthetases on arachidonic acid. In contrast, arachidonic acid may be oxidized along the lipoxygenase pathway via the central enzyme 5-lipoxygenase, to produce several classes of leukotrienes and lipoxins, which have anti-inflammatory functions. In general, the effects of eico-sanoids are mediated via specific receptors, which are members of a superfamily of G protein-coupled receptors.Eicosanoids are not stored within cells but are instead generated rapidly in response to many proinflammatory stimuli, including hypoxic injury, direct tissue injury, endotoxin (lipo-polysaccharide), norepinephrine, vasopressin, angiotensin II, bradykinin, serotonin, acetylcholine, cytokines, and histamine. They have a broad range of physiologic roles, including neuro-transmission, and vasomotor regulation. Eicosanoids are also involved in immune cell regulation (Table 2-6), by modulating the intensity and duration of inflammatory responses.Glucocorticoids, NSAIDs, and leukotriene inhibitors can successfully block the end products of eicosanoid pathways to modulated inflammation.The production of eicosanoids is celland stimulus-specific. Therefore, the signaling events that are initiated will depend on the concentrations and types of eicosanoids gener-ated, as well as the unique complement of receptors expressed by their target cells. For example, prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) suppresses the effector function of macrophages (i.e., phago-cytosis and intracellular pathogen killing) via a mechanism that is dependent on increased cAMP levels. PGE2 also modulates chemokine production and enhances local accumulation of reg-ulatory T cells and myeloid-derived suppressor cells. Prostacy-clin (PGI2) has an inhibitory effect on Th1 and Th2-mediated immune responses, while enhancing Th17 differentiation and cytokine production. Leukotrienes are potent mediators of capil-lary leakage as well as leukocyte adherence, neutrophil activa-tion, bronchoconstriction, and vasoconstriction. Leukotriene B4 is synthesized from arachidonic acid in response to acute Ca2+ signaling induced by inflammatory mediators.162 High affinity leukotriene receptors (BLT1) are expressed primarily in leu-kocytes, including granulocytes, eosinophils, macrophages, and differentiated T cells, whereas the low affinity receptor is expressed in many cell types. Leukotrienes, most notably leu-kotriene B4 (LTB4), has been implicated in the development of both acute lung injury and acute kidney injury following hemor-rhagic shock in animal models.163,164Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   4701/03/19   6:49 PM 48BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IPhospholipidPhospholipase A2CorticosteroidsCyclooxygenaseLipoxygenaseProstaglandinsPGD2PGE2PGF2˜PGI2ThromboxaneTXA2Hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid(HETE)LeukotrienesLTA4LTB4LTC4LTD4LTE4Hydroperoxyeicosatetraenoic acid(HPETE)Cyclic endoperoxides(PGG2,PGH2)Arachidonic acidAFree eicosapentaenoic acidCyclooxygenaseLipoxygenase3-seriesprostaglandins5-seriesleukotrienesPGG3LTA5LTC5LTB5PGH35-HPEPEAnti-inflammatory andinflammation resolvingE-seriesresolvinsBFigure 2-6. Schematic diagram of (A) arachidonic acid and (B) eicosapentaenoic acid metabolism. LT = leukotriene; PG = prostaglandin; TXA2 = thromboxane A2; HPEPE = hydroperoxyeicosapentaenoic acid.Omega-3 Polyunsaturated Fat Metabolites: All-cis-5, 8, 11, 14, 17-Eicosapentaenoic Acid. The second major family of PUFAs is the omega-3 fatty acid, α-linolenic acid, which is found primarily in cold water fish. α-Linolenic acid is the metabolic precursor of eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA). Omega-3 PUFAs are also sub-strates for the cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase enzymes that produce eicosanoids, but the mediators produced have a differ-ent structure from the AA-derived mediators, and this influences their actions (Fig. 2-6B). For example, omega-3 fatty acids are reported to have specific anti-inflammatory effects, including inhibition of NF-κB activity, TNF release from hepatic Kupffer cells, and leukocyte adhesion and migration. Key derivatives of omega-3 PUFAs have also been identified and synthesized. These include resolvins, protectins, and maresins. In a vari-ety of model systems, resolvins have been shown to attenuate the inflammatory phenotypes of a number of immune cells by decreasing neutrophil recruitment, reducing synthesis of pro-inflammatory cytokines and regulating transcription factor activation.165,166The ratio of dietary omega-6 to omega-3 PUFA is reflected in the membrane composition of various cells, including cells of the immune system, which has potential implications for the inflammatory response. For example, a diet that is rich in omega-6 PUFA will result in cells whose membranes are “omega-6 PUFA rich.” When omega-6 PUFAs are the main plasma membrane lipid available for phospho-lipase activity, more proinflammatory PUFAs (i.e., 2-series prostaglandins) are generated. Many lipid preparations are soy-based and thus primarily composed of omega-6 fatty acids. These are thought to be “inflammation-enhancing.” Nutritional supplementation with omega-3 fatty acid has the potential to dampen inflammation by shifting the cell mem-brane composition in factor of omega 3-PUFAs. In a study of surgical patients, preoperative supplementation with omega-3 fatty acid was associated with reduced need for mechanical ventilation, decreased hospital length of stay, and decreased mortality with a good safety profile.167Plasma Contact SystemComplement. Following traumatic injury, there is almost immediate activation of the complement system, which is a major effector mechanism of the innate immune system. The complement system was thought to act initially as the required “first line of defense” for the host against pathogens, by bind-ing and clearing them from the circulation. Recent data indicate Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   4801/03/19   6:49 PM 49SYSTEMIC RESPONSE TO INJURY AND METABOLIC SUPPORTCHAPTER 2depicted as a linear process in which parallel pathways are activated, it actually functions more like a central node that is tightly networked with other systems. Then, depending on the activating signal, several initiation and regulatory events act in concert to heighten immune surveillance.Complement activation proceeds via distinct pathways. Pathway initiation occurs by the binding and activation of a specific recognition unit to its designated ligand. The classical pathway, which is often referred to as “antibody-dependent” is initiated by direct binding of C1q to its common ligands, which include IgM/IgG aggregates. Alternately, C1q can activate complement by binding to soluble pattern recognition molecules such as pentraxins (e.g., C-reactive protein [CRP]). In a series of subsequent activation and amplification steps, the pathway ulti-mately leads to the generation of C3a and C5a, which are potent anaphylotoxins, in addition to C3b, which acts as an opsonin. An additional product, C5b, initiates the formation of the mem-brane attack complex, which becomes inserted into cell mem-brane to form a lytic pore. The subsequent effect of complement signaling is neutrophil activation leading to ROS production, as well as protease and vasoactive mediator secretion.168 The complement cascade also results in the release of proinflamma-tory cytokines synergistically with TLR-signaling, which con-tributes to systemic inflammation and generalized capillary leak following severe injury.An additional means of complement activation via the lectin pathway is initiated by mannose-binding lectins (MBL) or ficolins, which bind specific carbohydrate structures. This pathway has been speculated to be a major mechanism for complement activation post injury by interactions with matrix fragments and mitochondrial DAMPs. In addition, both low pH and serine proteases of the coagulation cascade may contribute to complement activation. As a consequence, high levels of acti-vated complement components may help to continue to drive systemic inflammation post injury.169Kallikrein-Kinin System. The kallikrein-kinin system, also referred to as the “contact” system, is a group of proteins that contribute to both coagulation and inflammation. Prekalli-krein circulates in the plasma bound to high molecular weight kininogen (HK). A variety of stimuli lead to the binding of prekallikrein-HK complex to Hageman factor (factor XII) to initiate the intrinsic clotting cascade. This results in formation of the serine protease kallikrein, which is both proinflamma-tory and procoagulant. HK is cleaved by kallikrein to form bradykinin (BK).The kinins (e.g., BK) mediate several physiologic pro-cesses, including vasodilation, increased capillary perme-ability, tissue edema, and neutrophil chemotaxis.170 They also increase renal vasodilation and consequently reduce renal per-fusion pressure. Kinin receptors are members of the rhodopsin family of G-protein-coupled receptors and are located on vas-cular endothelium and smooth muscle cells. Kinin receptors are rapidly upregulated following TLR4 and cytokine signal-ing and appear to have important effects on both immune cell behavior and on immune mediators.171 For example, activation of the kinin receptor, B1, results in increased neutrophil che-motaxis, while increased B2 receptor expression causes activa-tion of arachidonic-prostaglandin pathways. Bradykinin and kallikrein levels are increased following hemorrhagic shock and tissue injury. The degree of elevation in the levels of these mediators has been associated with the magnitude of injury and mortality.Table 2-6Systemic stimulatory and inhibitory actions of eicosanoidsORGAN/FUNCTIONSTIMULATORINHIBITORPancreas Glucose-stimulated   insulin secretion Glucagon secretion12-HPETEPGD2, PGE2PGE2Liver Glucagon-stimulated   glucose production PGE2Fat Hormone-stimulated   lipolysis PGE2Bone ResorptionPGE2, PGE-m, 6-K-PGE1, PGF1α, PGI2 Pituitary Prolactin Luteinizing hormone Thyroid-stimulating   hormone Growth hormonePGE1PGE1, PGE2, 5-HETEPGA1, PGB1, PGE1, PGE1PGE1 Parathyroid   Parathyroid hormonePGE2PGF2Lung BronchoconstrictionPGF2α TXA2, LTC4, LTD4, LTE4PGE2Kidney Stimulation of renin   secretionPGE2, PGI2 Gastrointestinal system Cytoprotective effectPGE2 Immune response Suppression of   lymphocyte activityPGE2 Hematologic system Platelet aggregationTXA2PGI25-HETE = 5-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid; 12-HPETE = 12-hydroxyperoxyeicosatetraenoic acid; 6-K-PGE1 = 6-keto-prostaglandin E1; LT = leukotriene; PG = prostaglandin; PGE-m = 13,14-dihydro-15-keto-PGE2 (major urine metabolite of PGE2);  TXA2 = thromboxane A2.that complement is also participates in the elimination of immune complexes as well as damaged and dead cells. In addi-tion, complement is recognized as contributing to mobiliza-tion of hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells (HSPC) and lipid  metabolism.168 Although complement activation is typically Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   4901/03/19   6:49 PM 50BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART ISerotoninSerotonin is a monoamine neurotransmitter (5-hydroxytrypta-mine; 5-HT) derived from tryptophan. Serotonin is synthesized by neurons in the CNS as well as by intestinal enterochromaf-fin cells, which are the major source of plasma 5-HT. Once in the plasma, 5-HT is taken up rapidly into platelets via the serotonin transporter (SERT), where it is either stored in the dense granules in millimolar concentrations or targeted for deg-radation. It is interesting that the surface expression of SERT on platelets is sensitive to plasma 5-HT levels, which in turn modulates platelet 5-HT content. Receptors for serotonin are widely distributed in the periphery and are found in the GI tract, cardiovascular system, and some immune cells.172 Serotonin is a potent vasoconstrictor and also modulates cardiac inotropy and chronotropy through nonadrenergic cyclic adenosine mono-phosphate (cAMP) pathways. Serotonin is released at sites of injury, primarily by platelets. Recent work has demonstrated an important role for platelet 5-HT in the local inflammatory response to injury. Using mice that lack the nonneuronal iso-form of tryptophan hydroxylase (Tph1), the rate-limiting step for 5-HT synthesis in the periphery, investigators demonstrated fewer neutrophils rolling on mesenteric venules.173 Tph1-/mice, in response to an inflammatory stimulus, also showed decreased neutrophil extravasation. Together, these data indicate an impor-tant role for nonneuronal 5-HT in neutrophil recruitment to sites of inflammation and injury.HistamineHistamine is a short-acting endogenous amine that is widely distributed throughout the body. It is synthesized by histidine decarboxylase (HDC), which decarboxylates the amino acid his-tidine. Histamine is either rapidly released or stored in neurons, skin, gastric mucosa, mast cells, basophils, and platelets and plasma levels are increased with hemorrhagic shock, trauma, thermal injury, and sepsis.174 Not surprisingly, circulating cyto-kines can increase immune cell expression of HDC to further contribute to histamine synthesis. There are four histamine receptor (HR) subtypes with varying physiologic roles, but they are all members of the rhodopsin family of G-protein coupled receptors. H1R binding mediates vasodilation, bronchocon-striction, intestinal motility, and myocardial contractility. H1R knockout mice demonstrate significant immunologic defects, including impaired B and T cell responses.H2R binding is best described for its stimulation of gastric parietal cell acid secretion. However, H2R can also modulate a range of immune system activities, such as mast cell degranula-tion, antibody synthesis, Th1 cytokine production, and T-cell proliferation. H3R was initially classified as a presynaptic auto-receptor in the peripheral and central nervous system (CNS). However, data using H3R knockout mice demonstrates that it also participates in inflammation in the CNS. H3R knockout mice display increased severity of neuroinflammatory diseases, which correlates with dysregulation of blood-brain barrier per-meability and increased expression of macrophage inflammatory protein 2, IFN-inducible protein 10, and CXCR3 by peripheral T cells. H4R is expressed primarily in bone marrow, but it has also been detected in leukocytes, including neutrophils, eosino-phils, mast cells, dendritic cells, T cells, and basophils. H4R is emerging as an important modulator of chemoattraction and cytokine production in these cells. Thus, it is clear that cells of both the innate and adaptive immune response can be regulated by histamine, which is up-regulated following injury.175CELLULAR RESPONSE TO INJURYCytokine Receptor Families and Their Signaling PathwaysCytokines act on their target cells by binding to specific membrane receptors. These receptor families have been organized by struc-tural motifs and include type 1 cytokine receptors, type II cytokine receptors, chemokine receptors, tumor necrosis factor receptors (TNFR), and transforming growth factor receptors (TGFR). In addition, there are cytokine receptors that belong to the immuno-globulin receptor superfamilies. Several of these receptors have characteristic signaling pathways that are associated with them. These will be briefly reviewed in the following section.JAK-STAT SignalingA major subgroup of cytokines, comprising roughly 60 factors, bind to receptors termed type I/II cytokine receptors. Cytokines that bind these receptors include type I IFNs, IFN-γ, many inter-leukins (e.g., IL-6, IL-10, IL-12, and IL-13), and hematopoietic growth factors. These cytokines play essential rolls in the initia-tion, maintenance, and modulation of innate and adaptive immu-nity for host defense. All type I/II cytokine receptors selectively associate with the Janus kinases (JAK1, JAK2, JAK3, TYK2), which represent a family of tyrosine kinases that mediate the signal transduction for these receptors. As such, the JAK-STAT signaling pathway is considered a central communication hub for the immune system.176JAKs are constitutively bound to the cytokine receptors, and on ligand binding and receptor dimerization, activated JAKs phosphorylate the receptor to recruit signal transducer and acti-vator of transcription (STAT) molecules (Fig. 2-7). Activated STAT proteins further dimerize and translocate into the nucleus where they modulate the transcription of target genes. Rather than being a strictly linear pathway, it is likely that individual cytokines activate more than one JAK-STAT combination. The molecular implications for this in terms of cytokine signaling are still being unraveled, but the development of JAK-specific inhibitors (jakinibs) is moving the field forward quickly.177 Inter-estingly, STAT-DNA binding can be observed within minutes of cytokine binding. STATs have also been shown to modulate gene transcription via epigenetic mechanisms. Thus, JAKs and STATs are central players in the regulation of key immune cell function, by providing a signaling platform for proinflamma-tory cytokines (IL-6 via JAK1 and STAT3); anti-inflammatory cytokines (IL-10 via STAT3) and integrating signals required for helper and regulatory T cell development and differentiation. The JAK/STAT pathway is inhibited by the action of phospha-tase, the export of STATs from the nucleus, as well the interac-tion of antagonistic proteins.178 JAK/STAT signaling has also been implicated in the secondary muscle wasting that occurs with chronic, persistent inflammation.179Suppressors of Cytokine SignalingSuppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS) molecules are a fam-ily of proteins that function as a negative feedback loop for types I and II cytokine receptors by terminating JAK/STAT signaling. There are currently eight family members (SOCS1-7 and CIS [cytokine-inducible SH2-containing protein]) that are associated with cytokine receptor signaling. Pattern recognition receptors, including both TLR and C-type lectin receptors, also activate SOCS.180 Interestingly, induction of SOCS proteins is also achieved through activators of JAK/STAT signaling, creating an inhibitory feedback loop through which cytokines Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   5001/03/19   6:49 PM 51SYSTEMIC RESPONSE TO INJURY AND METABOLIC SUPPORTCHAPTER 2JAKJAKPPJAKJAKPSTATSTATPPPSTATPSTATSTATSTATSOCSPSTATNuclear translocationNucleusReceptordimerizationFigure 2-7. The Janus kinase/signal transducer and activator of transcription (JAK/STAT) signaling pathway also requires dimer-ization of monomeric units. STAT molecules possess “docking” sites that allow for STAT dimerization. The STAT complexes translocate into the nucleus and serve as gene transcription fac-tors. JAK/STAT activation occurs in response to cytokines (e.g.,  interleukin-6) and cell stressors, and has been found to induce cell proliferation and inflammatory function. Intracellular molecules that inhibit STAT function, known as suppressors of cytokine sig-naling (SOCSs), have been identified. P = phosphate.can effectively self-regulate by extinguishing their own signal. SOCS molecules can positively and negatively influence the activation of macrophages and dendritic cells and are crucial for T-cell development and differentiation.181 All SOCS proteins are able to regulate receptor signaling through the recruitment of proteasomal degradation components to their target proteins, whether the target is a specific receptor or an associated adaptor molecule. Once associated with the SOCS complex, target pro-teins are readily ubiquinated and targeted for proteasomal deg-radation. SOCS1 and SOCS3 can also exert an inhibitory effect on JAK-STAT signaling via their N-terminal kinase inhibitory region (KIR) domain, which acts as a pseudo-substrate for JAK.SOCS3 has been shown to be a positive regulator of TLR4 responses in macrophages via inhibition of IL-6 receptor-medi-ated STAT3 activation.181,182 A deficiency of SOCS activity may render a cell hypersensitive to certain stimuli, such as inflamma-tory cytokines and growth hormones. Interestingly, in a murine model, SOCS knockout resulted in a lethal phenotype in part because of unregulated interferon signaling.Chemokine Receptors Are Members of the G-ProteinCoupled Receptor Family All chemokine receptors are mem-bers of the G-protein-coupled seven transmembrane family of receptors (GPCR), which is one of the largest and most diverse of the membrane protein families. GPCRs function by detect-ing a wide spectrum of extracellular signals, including photons, ions, small organic molecules, and entire proteins. After ligand binding, GPCRs undergo conformational changes, causing the recruitment of heterotrimeric G proteins to the cytoplasmic sur-face (Fig. 2-8). Heterotrimeric G proteins are composed of three subunits, Gα, Gβ, and Gγ, each of which have numerous mem-bers, adding to the complexity of the signaling. When signaling, however, G proteins perform functionally as dimers because the signal is communicated either by the Gα subunit or the Gβγ complex. The GPCR family includes the receptors for catechol-amines, bradykinins, and leukotrienes, in addition to a variety of other ligands important to the inflammatory response.183 In gen-eral, GPCRs can be classified according to their pharmacological properties into four main families: class A rhodopsin-like, class B secretin-like, class C metabotropic glutamate/pheromone, and frizzled receptors. As noted above, GPCR activation by ligand binding results in an extracellular domain shift, which is then transmitted to cytoplasmic portion of the receptor to facilitate coupling to its principle effector molecules, the heterotrimeric G proteins. Although there are more than 20 known Gα subunits, they have been divided into four families based on sequence similarity, which has served to define both receptor and effec-tor coupling. These include Gαs and Gαi, which signal through the activation (Gαs) or inhibition (Gαi) of adenylate cyclase to increase or decrease cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) levels, respectively. Increased intracellular cAMP can activate gene transcription through the activity of intracellular signal transducers such as protein kinase A. The Ga subunits also include the Gq pathway, which stimulates phospholipase C-β to produce the intracellular messengers inositol triphosphate and diacylglycerol. Inositol triphosphate triggers the release of calcium from intracellular stores, while diacylglycerol recruits protein kinase C to the plasma membrane for activation. Finally, Gα12/13 appears to act through Rho and Ras-mediated signaling.Tumor Necrosis Factor SuperfamilySignaling pathway for tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 (TNFR-1) (55 kDa) and TNFR-2 (75 kDa) occurs by the recruitment of sev-eral adapter proteins to the intracellular receptor complex. Opti-mal signaling activity requires receptor trimerization. TNFR-1 initially recruits TNFR-associated death domain (TRADD) and induces apoptosis through the actions of proteolytic enzymes known as caspases, a pathway shared by another receptor, CD95 (Fas). CD95 and TNFR-1 possess similar intracellular sequences known as death domains (DDs), and both recruit the same adapter proteins (Fas-associated death domains [FADDs]) before activating caspase 8. TNFR-1 also induces apoptosis by activating caspase 2 through the recruitment of receptor-inter-acting protein (RIP). RIP also has a functional component that can initiate nuclear factor kB (NF-kB) and c-Jun activation, both favoring cell survival and proinflammatory functions. TNFR-2 lacks a DD component but recruits adapter proteins known as TNFR-associated factors 1 and 2 (TRAF1, TRAF2) that inter-act with RIP to mediate NF-kB and c-Jun activation. TRAF2 also recruits additional proteins that are antiapoptotic, known as inhibitors of apoptosis proteins (IAPs).Transforming Growth Factor-a  Family of ReceptorsTransforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1) is a pleiotropic cyto-kine expressed by immune cells that has potent immunoregula-tory activities. Specifically, recent data indicate that TGF-β is Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   5101/03/19   6:49 PM 52BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iessential for T cell homeostasis, as mice deficient in TGF-β1 develop a multiorgan autoimmune inflammatory disease and die a few weeks after birth, an effect that is dependent upon the presence of mature T cells. The receptors for TGF-β ligands are the TGF-β superfamily of receptors, which are type I transmem-brane proteins that contain intrinsic serine/threonine kinase activ-ity. These receptors comprise two subfamilies, the type I and the  type II receptors that are distinguished by the presence of a glycine/serine-rich membrane domain found in the type I receptors. Each TGF-β ligand binds a characteristic combination of type I and  type II receptors, both of which are required for signaling. Whether the type I or the type II receptor binds first is ligand-dependent, and the second type I or type II receptor is then recruited to form a het-eromeric signaling complex. When TGF-β binds to the TGF-βR, heterodimerization activates the receptor which then directly recruits and activates a receptor-associated Smad (Smad 2 or 3) through phosphorylation. An additional “common” Smad is then recruited. The activated Smad-complex translocates into the nucleus and, with other nuclear cofactors, regulates the transcrip-tion of target genes. TGF-β can also induce the rapid activation of the Ras-extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) signaling pathway in addition to other MAPK pathways (JNK, p38MAPK). How does TGF-β inhibit immune responses? One of the most important effects is the suppression of interleukin-2 production by T cells. It also inhibits T cell proliferation.184 More recently, it was noted that TGF-β can regulate the maturation of differenti-ated dendritic cells and dendritic cell-mediated T-cell responses. Importantly, TGF-β can induce “alternative activation” macro-phages, designated M2 macrophages, which express a wide array of anti-inflammatory molecules, including IL-10 and arginase1.TRANSCRIPTIONAL AND TRANSLATIONAL REGULATION OF THE INJURY RESPONSETranscriptional Events Following Blunt TraumaInvestigators have examined the transcriptional response in cir-culating leukocytes in a large series of patients who suffered severe blunt trauma. This work identified an overwhelming 5GRELigandProtein kinase CactivationCA2+ releaseRGESecond messengers(cAMP, IP3)LigandERCell membraneCytoplasmG-protein receptors(vasoactive polypeptides, mitogens, phospholipids, neurotransmitters, prostaglandins)Figure 2-8. G-protein–coupled receptors are transmembrane pro-teins. The G-protein receptors respond to ligands such as adrenaline and serotonin. On ligand binding to the receptor (R), the G protein (G) undergoes a conformational change through guanosine triphosphate–guanosine diphosphate conversion and in turn activates the effector (E) component. The E component subse-quently activates second messengers. The role of inositol triphosphate (IP3) is to induce release of calcium from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). cAMP = cyclic adenosine triphosphate.shift in the leukocyte transcriptome, with more than 80% of the cellular functions and pathways demonstrating some altera-tion in gene expression. In particular, changes in gene expres-sion for pathways involved in the systemic inflammatory, innate immune, compensatory anti-inflammatory, and adaptive immune responses were simultaneous and marked. Moreover, they occurred rapidly (within 4–12 hours), and were prolonged for days and weeks. When different injuries (i.e., blunt trauma, burn injury, human model of endotoxemia) were compared, the patterns of gene expression were surprisingly similar, sug-gesting that the stress response to both injury and inflammation is highly conserved and may follow a universal pathway that includes common denominators. Finally, delayed clinical recov-ery and organ injury were not associated with a distinct pattern of transcriptional response elements.3 These data describe a new paradigm based on the observation of a rapid and coordinated transcriptional response to severe traumatic injury that involves both the innate and adaptive immune systems. Further, the data support the idea that individuals who are destined to die from their injuries are characterized primarily by the degree and dura-tion of their dysregulated inflammatory response rather than a “unique signature” indicative of a “second hit.”Transcriptional Regulation of Gene ExpressionMany genes are regulated at the point of DNA transcription and thus influence whether messenger RNA (mRNA) and its subse-quent product are expressed (Fig. 2-9). Gene expression relies on the coordinated action of transcription factors and coactiva-tors (i.e., regulatory proteins), which are complexes that bind to highly specific DNA sequences upstream of the target gene known as the promoter region. Enhancer sequences of DNA mediate gene expression, whereas repressor sequences are non-coding regions that bind proteins to inhibit gene expression. For example, nuclear factor κB (NF-κB), one of the best-described transcription factors, has a central role in regulating the gene products expressed after inflammatory stimuli (Fig. 2-10). The NF-κB family of transcription factors is composed of five mem-bers that share a common domain. They form numerous homo or heterodimers that are normally retained in the cytosol through Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   5201/03/19   6:49 PM 53SYSTEMIC RESPONSE TO INJURY AND METABOLIC SUPPORTCHAPTER 2TranscriptionDNAmRNAmRNAProteinInactivemRNAInactiveproteinCytoplasmCell membraneNucleusFigure 2-9. Gene expression and protein synthesis can occur within a 24-hour period. The process can be regulated at various stages: transcription, messenger RNA (mRNA) processing, or pro-tein packaging. At each stage, it is possible to inactivate the mRNA or protein, rendering these molecules nonfunctional.Ligand(e.g.: TNF, IL-1)PI-˜B kinaseDegradation of I-˜BUbiquitinizationI-˜Bp65p50I-˜Bp65p50I-˜Bp65p50Pp65p50Nuclear      translocationNucleusNF-˜B activationFigure 2-10. Inhibitor of κB (I-κB) binding to the p50-p65 subunits of nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) inactivates the molecule. Ligand binding to the receptor activates a series of downstream signaling molecules, of which I-κB kinase is one. The phosphorylated NF-κB complex further undergoes ubiquitinization and proteosome degradation of I-κB, activating NF-κB, which translocates into the nucleus. Rapid resynthesis of I-κB is one method of inactivating the p50-p65 complex. IL-1 = interleukin-1; P = phosphate; TNF = tumor necrosis factor.the inhibitory binding of inhibitor of κB (I-κB). In response to an inflammatory stimulus (e.g., TNF, IL-1, or DAMP) a sequence of intracellular mediator phosphorylation reactions leads to the degradation of I-κB and subsequent release of NF-κB to allow nuclear translocation and the initiation of transcription.Epigenetic Regulation of TranscriptionThe DNA access of protein machineries involved in transcription processes is tightly regulated by histones, which are a family of basic proteins that associate with DNA in the nucleus. Histone proteins help to condense the DNA into tightly packed nucleo-somes that limit transcription. Emerging evidence indicates that transcriptional activation of many proinflammatory genes requires nucleosome remodeling, a process that is regulated by the histone modifying enzymes.185 There are at least seven identified chromatin modifications, including acetylation, meth-ylation, phosphorylation, ubiquitinylation, sumoylation, ADP ribosylation, deimination, and proline isomerization. Alteration of chromatin packing in this way makes the DNA more or less accessible for transcription. Recently, the development of chro-matin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) coupled to massively parallel DNA sequencing technology (ChIP-Seq) has enabled the map-ping of histone modifications in living cells. In this way, it has allowed the identification of the large number of posttranslational histone modifications that are “written” and “erased” by histone-modifying enzymes. The role of histone modifications in the reg-ulation of gene expression is referred to as “epigenetic” control.The addition of an acetyl group to lysine residues on his-tones is an epigenetic mark associated with gene activation. These acetyl groups are reversibly maintained by histone acet-yltransferases (HATs) and histone deacetylases (HDACs).186 Hemorrhagic shock has been shown to alter the acetylation of histone proteins via an imbalance of HDAC/HAT activity in the heart, lung, and liver in a tissue-specific pattern. In animal mod-els, postshock administration of the HDAC inhibitor valproic acid improved overall survival.187 Valproic acid is currently in Phase 2 clinical trials for the treatment of hemorrhaghic shock.188Translation Regulation of Inflammatory  Gene ExpressionOnce mRNA transcripts are generated, they can also be regu-lated by a variety of mechanisms, including (a) splicing, which can cleave mRNA and remove noncoding regions; (b) capping, which modifies the 5’ ends of the mRNA sequence to inhibit breakdown by exonucleases; (c) and the addition of a polyad-enylated tail, which adds a noncoding sequence to the mRNA, to regulated the half-life of the transcript. Recent data has identified microRNAs (miRNAs) as important translational regulators of gene expression via their binding to partially complementary sequences in the 3’-untranslated region (3’-UTR) of target mRNA transcripts.189 Binding of miRNA to the Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   5301/03/19   6:49 PM 54BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART ImRNA usually results in gene silencing. MicroRNAs are endog-enous, single-stranded RNAs of approximately 22 nucleotides in length that are highly conserved in eukaryotes. MicroRNAs are encoded either singly or can be transcribed in a “polycis-tronic” clusters and produced by an elaborate expression and processing mechanism. After a primary miRNA transcript is generated by RNA polymerase II or III, it is processed in the nucleus to produce a short hairpin precursor miRNA transcript. The precursor is then transported into the cytoplasm where the final mature miRNA is generated by a protein termed Dicer. The mature double-stranded miRNA is then incorporated into the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) in the cytoplasm. Once programmed with a small RNA, RISC can silence targeted genes by one of several distinct mechanisms, working at (a) the level of protein synthesis through translation inhibition, (b) the transcript level through mRNA degradation, or (c) the level of the genome itself through the formation of heterochromatin or by DNA elimination. MiRNAs are involved in TLR signaling in the innate immune system by targeting multiple molecules in the TLR signaling pathways.190 Traumatic brain injury alters serum miRNA profiles that may be useful both as biomarkers for severe TBI and as therapeutic targets.189CELL-MEDIATED INFLAMMATORY RESPONSENeutrophilsNeutrophils (PMNs) are among the first responders to sites of infection and injury and as such are potent mediators of acute inflammation.191 Mobilization of PMNs from the bone mar-row is facilitated by reduction in bone-marrow expression of stromal cell-derived factor-1 (SDF1, also CXCL12) and subse-quent expression of both SDF1 and its receptor CXCR4 in target tissues.192 This and other chemotactic mediators induce PMN adherence to the vascular endothelium and promote eventual cell migration into the injured tissue. Early signals for PMN recruitment include endogenous “self” molecules released from damaged tissues, like the DAMPs described previously and also include histone proteins as well as adenosine triphos-phate. DAMP molecules can also induce secretion of powerful chemokines such as IL-8 (CXCL8), which can bind to tissue glycosaminoglycans, creating a gradient for PMN migration. PMNs generally have short half-lives (4 to 10 hours). However, inflammatory signals may promote their longevity in target tis-sues, which can contribute to their potential detrimental effects and subsequent bystander injury. In addition, following sterile trauma, large numbers of immature PMNs are recruited from the bone marrow into the circulation.193Once primed and activated by inflammatory stimuli, includ-ing TNF, IL-1, and microbial pathogens, PMNs are capable of amplifying the inflammatory response as well as releasing toxic effectors such as ROS and proteolytic enzymes into the extracel-lular space.193 Neutrophils can also dump their granule contents into the extracellular space, and many of these proteins also have important effects on the innate and adaptive immune responses. When highly activated, neutrophils can extrude a meshwork of chromatin fibers, composed of DNA and histones that are deco-rated with granule contents. Termed neutrophils extracellular traps or NETs, they were first described as effective mechanism whereby neutrophils can immobilize bacteria to facilitate their killing. In the setting of tissue injury, NETS may allow continued presentation of auto-antigens to the host immune system, which can contribute to further tissue injury.194 NETS may also serve to prime T cells, making their threshold for activation lower.Neutrophils do facilitate the recruitment of monocytes into inflamed tissues. These recruited cells are capable of phagocy-tosing apoptotic neutrophils to contribute to resolution of the inflammatory response and to promote tissue repair.195 How-ever, at least some portion of the neutrophil population from the injury site is capable of reentering the blood stream and return-ing to the bone marrow in a process regulated by chemokine CXC receptor 4.196 Whether reverse migration of neutrophils is beneficial to the host or likely to cause distant organ injury needs further investigation.Monocyte/MacrophagesMonocytes and macrophages are mononuclear phagocytes that play a critical role in inflammation and the injury response.197 Monocytes are leukocytes derived from bone marrow pro-genitors that circulate in the bloodstream and given the right stimuli, exit the vasculature, and differentiate into monocyte-derived macrophages (e.g., alveolar macrophages or Kupffer cells) upon migrating into appropriate tissues. Macrophages represent the large number of phagocytes that are resident in tissues under resting conditions. Distinct from monocytes, they are derived from embryonic precursors and can repopulate their numbers either by self-renewal or from monocytes derived from the bone marrow.198 Together, monocytes/macrophages are the main effector cells that sense and respond to “danger signals,” primarily through mechanisms that include phagocytosis of cel-lular debris, release of inflammatory mediators, and recruitment of additional immune cells to injury sites. Moreover, these cells fulfill homeostatic roles beyond host defense by performing important functions in the remodeling of tissues, both during development and in the adult animal. SDF1 has also been impli-cated in the recruitment of monocytes to sites of tissue injury.199 Importantly, SDF1 forms a complex with HMGB1, a DAMP molecule, which potently increases its chemotactic function. In conjunction with CXCR4, the SDF1-HMGB1 complex induces early monocyte migration into injured tissues, where they play an important role coordinating between innate and adaptive immunity.In tissues, mononuclear phagocytes are quiescent. How-ever, they respond to external cues (e.g., PAMPs, DAMPs, acti-vated lymphocytes) by changing their phenotype.200 In response to various signals, macrophages may undergo classical M1 acti-vation (stimulated by TLR ligands and IFN-γ) or alternative M2 activation (stimulated by type II cytokines IL-4/IL-13); these states mirror the Th1–Th2 polarization of T cells described in the following section. The M1 phenotype is characterized by the expression of high levels of proinflammatory cytokines, like TNF-α, IL-1 and IL-6, in addition to the synthesis of ROS and RNS. Activated macrophages can also secrete HMGB1 and in this way, can recruit additional macrophages to form a self-activating loop.In contrast, M2 macrophages are considered to be involved in the promotion of wound repair and the restoration of immune homeostasis through their expression of arginase-1 and IL-10, in addition to a variety of PRR (e.g., scavenging molecules).201 In truth, this classification system is overly simplistic. In fact, macrophages are highly heterogeneous and possess specialized properties that are precisely adapted to individual tissues. Thus, they are likely to also possess individualized response to local tissue damage.197Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   5401/03/19   6:49 PM 55SYSTEMIC RESPONSE TO INJURY AND METABOLIC SUPPORTCHAPTER 2TH1Injury Severity:IL-12, IL-18, IFN-, TNF, IL-1, IL-21, TGF-˜IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-10, (Glucocorticoids)IL-2IL-3IL-6IL-12IFN-TNF-°GM-CSFTNF-˜IL-3IL-4IL-5IL-6IL-9IL-10IL-13TNF-°GM-CSFCell-mediatedImmunityAntibody-mediatedImmunityless severemore severeTH2Figure 2-11. Specific immunity mediated by helper T lympho-cytes subtype 1 (TH1) and subtype 2 (TH2) after injury. A TH1 response is favored in lesser injuries, with intact cell-mediated and opsonizing antibody immunity against microbial infections. This cell-mediated immunity includes activation of monocytes, B lym-phocytes, and cytotoxic T lymphocytes. A shift toward the TH2 response from naive helper T cells is associated with injuries of greater magnitude and is not as effective against microbial infec-tions. A TH2 response includes the activation of eosinophils, mast cells, and B-lymphocyte immunoglobulin 4 and immunoglobulin E production. (Primary stimulants and principal cytokine prod-ucts of such responses are in bold characters.) Interleukin-4 (IL-4) and IL-10 are known inhibitors of the TH1 response. Interferon-γ  (IFN-γ) is a known inhibitor of the TH2 response. Although not cytokines, glucocorticoids are potent stimulants of a TH2 response, which may partly contribute to the immunosuppressive effects of cortisol. GM-CSF = granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor; IL = interleukin; TGF = transforming growth factor; TNF = tumor necrosis factor. (Adapted with permission from Lin E,  Calvano SE, Lowry SF. Inflammatory cytokines and cell response in surgery, Surgery 2000 Feb;127(2):117-126.)In a mouse model of hemorrhagic shock/reperfusion, mac-rophages play a key role in the recruitment of hematopoietic stem cells from the bone marrow by secreting granulocyte-monocyte stimulating factor (GM-CSF) in response to circu-lating HMGB1.202 In the lung, alveolar macrophages sense DAMPs and extracellular matrix fragments via pattern recog-nition receptors. In response, they upregulate their expression of TLR4, which primes the cell for response against potential infection.203 At the same time, they release proinflammatory cytokines and ROS, which contribute injury to the alveolar epithelial cells. More recently, data indicate that an imbalance of M1/M2 macrophage populations in the lung contribute to acute lung injury following hemorrhagic shock (HS).204 In this study, investigators demonstrated that HS/resuscitation resulted in a significant decrease in M2 phenotype macrophages, with a delayed increase in M1. Augmenting the M2 population prior to injury lessened the degree of lung injury as assessed histologically.Lymphocytes and T-Cell ImmunityThe expression of genes associated with the adaptive immune response is rapidly altered following severe blunt trauma.3 In fact, significant injury is associated with adaptive immune sup-pression that is characterized by altered cell–mediated immu-nity. This correlates with both a decrease in the overall number of lymphocytes as well as the balance between the NK and T cell populations.205CD4+ T cells (helper) play central roles in the function of the immune system through their effects on B cell anti-body production, their enhancement of specific TReg cell func-tions, and their assistance with macrophage activation. CD4+  Th cells are functionally divided into subsets, which include Th1, Th2, and Th17 cells. Each of these groups produces spe-cific effector cytokines that are under unique transcriptional control. The specific functions of these cells include the rec-ognition and killing of intracellular pathogens (cellular immu-nity, Th1 cells); regulation of antibody production (humoral immunity, TH2 cells); and maintenance of mucosal immu-nity and barrier integrity (Th17 cells). Historically, activi-ties have been characterized as proinflammatory (Th1) and anti-inflammatory (Th2) respectively, as determined by their distinct cytokine signatures (Fig. 2-11). Given the proinflam-matory action of IL-17A produced by Th17 cells, they could also be placed in this category. However, it is clear that the Th17 differentiation is more complex and may involve the two distinct phenotypes, a pathogenic phenotype characterized by increased IL-17 production and a more regulatory phenotype in which IL-10 expression is increased.206Recent evidence suggests that the population of Th17 cells is altered following severe traumatic injury. Mass cytometry by time-of-flight (CyTOF) was used to collect single cell phenotyp-ing data on circulating peripheral blood mononuclear cells from a cohort of severely injured trauma patients.155 The investigators identified an expansion of Th17 cells at all time points follow-ing injury and was associated with an increase in the cytokine profile associated with a Th17 phenotype. This supports prior work also demonstrating a robust type 17 immune response early (within the first 24 hours) among nonsurvivors, which also identified a Th17 profile more consistent with “pathogenic” Th17 cells.154Successful recovery from injury also depends upon a bal-anced Th1/Th2 response. Following injury, however, there is a reduction in Th1 cell differentiation and cytokine production in favor of an increased population of Th2 lymphocytes and their signaling products. As a consequence, both macrophage activation and proinflammatory cytokine synthesis are inhib-ited. This imbalance, which may be associated with decreased IL-12 production by activated monocytes/macrophages, has been associated with increased risk of infectious complications following surgery and trauma. What are the systemic mecha-nisms responsible for this shift? Several events have been impli-cated, including the direct effect of glucocorticoids on monocyte IL-12 production and T cell IL-12 receptor expression. In addi-tion, sympathoadrenal catecholamine production has also been demonstrated to reduce IL-12 production and proinflammatory cytokine synthesis. Finally, more recent work has implicated circulating immature myeloid cells, termed myeloid-derived suppressor cells, that have immune suppressive activity par-ticularly through their increased expression of arginase.208 These cells have the potential to deplete the microenvironment of argi-nine, leading to further T cell dysfunction.Dendritic CellsRecent studies have focused on the cellular components of the immune system in the context of polytrauma. While the Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   5501/03/19   6:49 PM 56BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iactivation of granulocytes and monocyte/macrophages follow-ing trauma has been well described, more recent work has dem-onstrated that dendritic cells (DC) are also activated in response to damage signals, to stimulate both the innate and the adaptive immune responses.Dendritic cells are the most important antigen-presenting cells (APCs) for initiating T-cell responses against protein antigens. Primary “danger signals” that are recognized and activated by DC include debris from damaged or dying cells (e.g., HMGB1, nucleic acids including single nucleotides, and degradation products of the extracellular matrix). DC are fre-quently referred to as “professional APCs” since their principal function is to capture, process, and present both endogenous and exogenous antigens, which, along with their co-stimulatory molecules, are capable of inducing a primary immune response in resting naive T lymphocytes. In addition, they have the capac-ity to further regulate the immune response, both positively and negatively, through the upregulation and release of immuno-modulatory molecules such as the chemokine CCL5 (RANTES) and the CXC chemokine CXCL5. Finally, they have been impli-cated both in the induction and maintenance of immune toler-ance as well as in the acquisition of immune memory.209 There are distinct classes and subsets of DC, which are functionally heterogeneous. Different levels of damage-sensing receptors (e.g., TLR) that dictate a preferential response to DAMPs at that site. While relatively small in number relative to the total leukocyte population, the diverse distribution of DC in virtually all body tissues underlines their potential for a collaborative role in the initiation of the trauma-induced sterile systemic inflam-matory response. Data support a phenotypic alteration in these cells following traumatic injury.210PlateletsPlatelets are small (2 µm), circulating fragments of a larger cell precursor, the megakaryocyte that is located chiefly within the bone marrow. Although platelets lack a nucleus, they contain both mRNA and a large number of cytoplasmic and surface pro-teins that equip them for diverse functionality. While their role in hemostasis is well described, more recent work suggest that platelets play a role in both local and systemic inflammatory responses, particularly following ischemia reperfusion. Plate-lets express functional scavenger and Toll-like receptors (TLR) that are important detectors of both pathogens and “damage”-associated molecules.211 At the site of tissue injury, complex interactions between platelets, endothelial cells, and circulating leukocytes facilitate cellular activation by the numerous local alarmins and immune mediators. For example, platelet-specific TLR4 activation can cause thrombocytes to bind to and activate neutrophils to extrude their DNA to form neutrophil extracel-lular traps or NETs, an action that facilitates the capacity of the innate immune system to trap bacteria but also leads to local endothelial cell damage.212Once activated, platelets adopt an initial proinflamma-tory phenotype by expressing and releasing a variety of adhe-sion molecules, cytokines, and other immune modulators, including high mobility group 1 protein (HMGB1), interleukin (IL)-1β, and CD40 ligand (CD40L, CD154). However, acti-vated platelets also express large amounts of the immunosup-pressive factor, transforming growth factor-β (TGFβ), that has been implicated in Treg cell homeostasis. Recently, in a large animal model of hemorrhage, TGF-b levels were shown to be significantly increased 2 hours post injury, suggesting a pos-sible mechanism for injury-related immune dysfunction.213 And, while soluble CD154 was not increased following hemorrhage and traumatic brain injury in that study, in a murine model of mesenteric ischemia-reperfusion injury, platelet expression of CD40 and CD154 was linked to remote organ damage.Mast CellsMast cells are important in the primary response to injury because they are located in tissues. TNF release from mast cells has been found to be crucial for neutrophil recruitment and pathogen clearance. Mast cells are also known to play an impor-tant role in the anaphylactic response to allergens. On activation from stimuli including allergen binding, infection, and trauma, mast cells produce histamine, cytokines, eicosanoids, proteases, and chemokines, which leads to vasodilatation, capillary leak-age, and immunocyte recruitment. Mast cells are thought to be important cosignaling effector cells of the immune system via the release of IL-3, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-10, IL-13, and IL-14, as well as macrophage migration–inhibiting factor.214ENDOTHELIUM-MEDIATED INJURYVascular EndotheliumUnder physiologic conditions, the vascular endothelium has important anticoagulant properties and forms a critical barrier to regulate the tissue migration of circulating cells. Following injury, endothelial cells are differentially modulated, resulting in a procoagulant shift that may lead to microthrombosis and organ injury. Recent work has associated postinjury vascular dysfunc-tion (traumatic endotheliopathy) with circulating levels of syn-decan-1, a surrogate marker for disruption of the endothelial cell glycocalyx.215 In a cohort of over 400 severely injured patients, higher syndecan-1 measurements correlated with ISS and plasma catecholamine levels and, ultimately, with mortality in this group. The authors’ hypothesize that the increased disruption of the endothelial glycocalyx results in endothelial cell injury and an altered phenotype resulting in a prothrombotic state that leads to microvascular thrombosis and ensuing organ dysfunction.Neutrophil-Endothelium InteractionThe regulated inflammatory response to infection facilitates neutrophil and other immunocyte migration to compromised regions through the actions of increased vascular permeabil-ity, chemoattractants, and increased endothelial adhesion fac-tors referred to as selectins that are elaborated on cell surfaces (Table 2-7). In response to inflammatory stimuli released from sentinel leukocytes in the tissues, including chemokines, throm-bin, leukotrienes, histamine, and TNF, vascular endothelium are activated and their surface protein expression is altered. Within 10 to 20 minutes, prestored reservoirs of the adhesion molecule P-selectin are mobilized to the cell surface where it can mediate neutrophil recruitment (Fig. 2-12). After 2 hours, endothelial cell transcriptional processes provide additional surface expression of E-selectin. E-selectin and P-selectin bind P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 (PSGL-1) on the neutrophils to orchestrate the capture and rolling of these leukocytes and allow targeted immunocyte extravasation. Immobilized chemo-kines on the endothelial surface create a chemotactic gradient to further enhance immune cell recruitment.216 Also important are secondary leukocyte-leukocyte interactions in which PGSL-1 and L-selectin binding facilitates further leukocyte tethering. Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   5601/03/19   6:49 PM 57SYSTEMIC RESPONSE TO INJURY AND METABOLIC SUPPORTCHAPTER 2Table 2-7Molecules that mediate leukocyte-endothelial adhesion, categorized by familyADHESION MOLECULEACTIONORIGININDUCERS OF EXPRESSIONTARGET CELLSSelectins L-selectin P-selectin E-selectinFast rollingSlow rollingVery slow rollingLeukocytesPlatelets and endotheliumEndotheliumNativeThrombin, histamineCytokinesEndothelium, platelets, eosinophilsNeutrophils, monocytesNeutrophils, monocytes, lymphocytesImmunoglobulins ICAM-1 ICAM-2 VCAM-1 PECAM-1Firm adhesion/transmigrationFirm adhesionFirm adhesion/transmigrationAdhesion/ transmigrationEndothelium, leukocytes, fibroblasts, epitheliumEndothelium, plateletsEndotheliumEndothelium, platelets, leukocytesCytokinesNativeCytokinesNativeLeukocytesLeukocytesMonocytes, lymphocytesEndothelium, platelets, leukocytesβ2-(CD18) Integrins CD18/11a CD18/11b (Mac-1) CD18/11cFirm adhesion/transmigrationFirm adhesion/transmigrationAdhesionLeukocytesNeutrophils, monocytes, natural killer cellsNeutrophils, monocytes, natural killer cellsLeukocyte activationLeukocyte activationLeukocyte activationEndotheliumEndotheliumEndotheliumβ1-(CD29) Integrins VLA-4Firm adhesion/transmigrationLymphocytes, monocytesLeukocyte activationMonocytes, endothelium, epitheliumICAM-1 = intercellular adhesion molecule-1; ICAM-2 = intercellular adhesion molecule-2; Mac-1 = macrophage antigen 1; PECAM-1 =  platelet-endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1; VCAM-1 = vascular cell adhesion molecule-1; VLA-4 = very late antigen-4.Although there are distinguishable properties among individ-ual selectins in leukocyte rolling, effective rolling most likely involves a significant degree of functional overlap.217ChemokinesChemokines are a family of small proteins (8–13 kDa) that were first identified through their chemotactic and activating effects on inflammatory cells. They are produced at high levels follow-ing nearly all forms of injury in all tissues, where they are key attractants for immune cell extravasation. There are more than 50 different chemokines and 20 chemokine receptors that have been identified. Chemokines are released from endothelial cells, mast cells, platelets, macrophages, and lymphocytes. They are soluble proteins, which when secreted, bind to glycosamino-glycans on the cell surface or in the extracellular matrix. In this way, the chemokines can form a fixed chemical gradient that promotes immune cell exit to target areas. Supporting the idea of their importance in leukocyte recruitment post injury, a sub-set of chemokines are elevated early following traumatic injury in both survivors and nonsurvivors.218Chemokines are distinguished (in general) from cyto-kines by virtue of their receptors, which are members of the  G-protein–coupled receptor superfamily. Most chemokine receptors recognize more than one chemokine ligand leading to redundancy in chemokine signaling.The chemokines are subdivided into families based on their amino acid sequences at their N-terminus. For example, CC chemokines contain two N-terminus cysteine residues that are immediately adjacent (hence the “C-C” designation) while the N-terminal cysteines in CXC chemokines are separated by a single amino acid. The CXC chemokines are particularly impor-tant for neutrophil (PMN) proinflammatory function. Members of the CXC chemokine family, which include IL-8 (CXCL8), induce neutrophil migration and secretion of cytotoxic granu-lar contents and metabolites. Additional chemokine families include the Cand CX3C-chemokines.216Recent studies support the idea that a subset of chemo-kines, monokine induced by γ-interferon (MIG), monocyte chemotactic protein 1 (MCP-1), and interferon γ-induced pro-teins 10 (IP-10) may work in concert to regulate the inflam-matory response post injury and may serve as biomarkers for clinical outcome in trauma patients.218,219 These investigators propose that MIG, MCP-1, and IP-10 function as a “chemo-kine switch” in which the relative levels of each chemokine may promote its own expression, which suppresses the expres-sion of the other two according to the severity and type of injury.220 In this way, the authors propose that the balance between these three chemokines, by regulating inflammatory mediator production (e.g., IL-6) may help to correlate with long-term outcomes.Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   5701/03/19   6:49 PM 58BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART ICaptureFastrollingSlowrollingArrest50–150 µm/sec20–50 µm/sec10–20 µm/sec0–10 µm/secVelocity:LeukocyteSeconds0Velocity (µm/second)1501000501234EndotheliumFigure 2-12. Simplified sequence of selectin-mediated neutrophil-endothelium interaction after an inflammatory stimulus. CAPTURE (tethering), predominantly mediated by cell L-selectin with contri-bution from endothelial P-selectin, describes the initial recognition between leukocyte and endothelium, in which circulating leuko-cytes marginate toward the endothelial surface. FAST ROLLING (20 to 50 μm/s) is a consequence of rapid L-selectin shedding from cell surfaces and formation of new downstream L-selectin to endo-thelium bonds, which occur in tandem. SLOW ROLLING (10 to 20 μm/s) is predominantly mediated by P-selectins. The slowest rolling (3 to 10 μm/s) before arrest is predominantly mediated by E-selec-tins, with contribution from P-selectins. ARREST (firm adhesion) leading to transmigration is mediated by β-integrins and the immu-noglobulin family of adhesion molecules. In addition to interact-ing with the endothelium, activated leukocytes also recruit other leukocytes to the inflammatory site by direct interactions, which are mediated in part by selectins. (Adapted with permission from Lin E, Calvano SE, Lowry SF. Selectin neutralization: does it make biological sense? Crit Care Med. 1999 Sep;27(9):2050-2053.)Nitric OxideNitric oxide (NO) was initially known as endothelium-derived relaxing factor due to its effect on vascular smooth muscle. Normal vascular smooth muscle cell relaxation is maintained by a constant output of NO that is regulated in the endothe-lium by both flowand receptor-mediated events. NO can also reduce microthrombosis by reducing platelet adhesion and aggregation (Fig. 2-13) and interfering with leukocyte adhe-sion to the endothelium. NO easily traverses cell membranes and has a short half-life of a few seconds. Endogenous NO formation is derived largely from the action of NO synthase (NOS), which is constitutively expressed in endothelial cells (NOS3, eNOS). Nitric oxide synthase generates NO by cata-lyzing the degradation of L-arginine to L-citrulline and NO, in the presence of oxygen and NADPH. There are two addi-tional isoforms of NOS: neuronal NOS (NOS1, nNOS) and inducible NOS (iNOS/NOS2), which is expressed in response to cytokines and bacterial products. The vasodilatory effects of NO are mediated by guanylyl cyclase, an enzyme that is found in vascular smooth muscle cells and most other cells of the body. When NO is formed by endothelium, it rapidly diffuses into adjacent cells where it binds to and activates gua-nylyl cyclase. This enzyme catalyzes the dephosphorylation of GTP to cGMP, which serves as a second messenger for many important cellular functions, particularly for signaling smooth muscle relaxation.NO synthesis is increased due to the upregulation of iNOS expression in response to proinflammatory media-tors such as TNF-α, and IL-1β, as well as microbial  products.221,222 In fact, studies in both animal models and humans have shown that severe systemic injury and asso-ciated hemorrhage produce an early upregulation of iNOS in the liver, lung, spleen, and vascular system. In these cir-cumstances, NO is reported to function as an immunoregu-lator, which is capable of modulating cytokine production and immune cell development.223 In particular, recent data supports a role for iNOS/eNOS in the regulation of T-cell dysfunction in the setting of trauma as evidenced by sup-pressed proliferative and TH1 cytokine release. In particular, the formation of S-nitrosothiols, which can serve as a molec-ular switch to regulate protein functions, may explain many signaling effects of both iNOSand eNOS-derived NO in the immune system with regard to T-cell activation and signaling through the T cell receptor. In T cells, NO effects have been implicated in the regulation of the immune synapse as well as the regulation of mitochondrial bioenergetics indicating that NO may play an important role as a link between innate and adaptive immunity.224Inhibition of NO production seemed initially to be a promising strategy in patients with severe sepsis. However, a randomized clinical trial in patients with septic shock determined that treatment with a nonselective NOS inhibitor was associated with an increase in mortality compared with  placebo.225 More recent data utilizing an ovine model of perito-nitis demonstrated that selective iNOS inhibition reduced pul-monary artery hypertension and gas exchange impairment and promoted higher visceral organ blood flow, coinciding with lower plasma cytokine concentrations.226 These data suggest that specific targeting of iNOS in the setting of sepsis may remain a viable therapeutic option.Recent work using an animal model of traumatic brain injury (TBI) showed that acute TBI results in endothelial dys-function in a remote vascular bed.227 The investigators linked the effect of TBI with impaired nitric oxide (NO) production and also with an increase in arterial arginase activity, implicat-ing the depletion of L-arginine by arginase with the decreased NO production.ProstacyclinThe immune effects of prostacyclin (PGI2) have been discussed previously. The best-described effects of PGI2 are in the car-diovascular system, however, where it is produced by vascular endothelial cells. Prostacyclin is a potent vasodilator that also inhibits platelet aggregation. In the pulmonary system, PGI2 reduces pulmonary blood pressure as well as bronchial hyper-responsiveness. In the kidneys, PGI2 modulates renal blood flow and glomerular filtration rate. Prostacyclin acts through its receptor (a G-protein–coupled receptor of the rhodopsin family) to stimulate the enzyme, adenylate cyclase, allowing the syn-thesis of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) from ATP.  Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   5801/03/19   6:49 PM 59SYSTEMIC RESPONSE TO INJURY AND METABOLIC SUPPORTCHAPTER 2cAMPcAMPcGMPcGMPNONOPGI2AAPlateletETETPGI2Big ETL-arginineEndotheliumSmooth muscleRelaxationFigure 2-13. Endothelial interac-tion with smooth muscle cells and with intraluminal platelets. Prosta-cyclin (prostaglandin I2, or PGI2) is derived from arachidonic acid (AA), and nitric oxide (NO) is derived from L-arginine. The increase in cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and cyclic guanosine mono-phosphate (cGMP) results in smooth muscle relaxation and inhibition of platelet thrombus formation. Endo-thelins (ETs) are derived from “big ET,” and they counter the effects of prostacyclin and NO.This leads to a cAMP-mediated decrease in intracellular cal-cium and subsequent smooth muscle relaxation.During systemic inflammation, endothelial prostacyclin expression is impaired, and thus the endothelium favors a more procoagulant profile. Exogenous prostacyclin analogues, both intravenous and inhaled, have been utilized to improve oxygen-ation in patients with acute lung injury. Early clinical studies with prostacyclin have delivered some encouraging results.228 However, a recent study examining the administration of epo-prostenol in the setting of severe injury and TBI demonstrated and attenuation of the inflammatory response as measured by serologic markers had no effect on long-term outcome.229EndothelinsEndothelins (ETs) are potent mediators of vasoconstriction ET-1, synthesized primarily by endothelial cells, is the most potent endogenous vasoconstrictor, and is estimated to be  10 times more potent than angiotensin II. ET release is upregu-lated in response to hypotension, LPS, injury, thrombin, TGF-b, IL-1, angiotensin II, vasopressin, catecholamines, and anoxia. ETs release is transcriptionally regulated and occurs at the ablu-minal side of endothelial cells. Very little is stored in cells; thus, a plasma increase in ET is associated with a marked increase in production. Three endothelin receptors have been identified and function via the G-protein–coupled receptor mechanism. ETB receptors are associated with increased NO and prostacyclin production, which may serve as a feedback mechanism. Atrial ETA receptor activation has been associated with increased inotropy and chronotropy. ET-1 infusion is associated with increased pulmonary vascular resistance and pulmonary edema and may contribute to pulmonary abnormalities during sepsis. At low levels, in conjunction with NO, ETs regulate vascular tone. However, at increased concentrations, ETs can disrupt the normal blood flow and distribution and may compromise oxy-gen delivery to the tissue. Recent data links endothelin expres-sion in pulmonary vasculature with persistent inflammation associated with the development of pulmonary hypertension.230  Endothelin expression is linked to posttranslational and tran-scriptional initiation of the unfolded protein response in the affected cells, which results in the production of inflammatory cytokines.231 Persistent endothelin-1 stimulation may play a role in decreased vascular reactivity that is evident following hemor-rhagic shock.232Platelet Activating FactorPhosphotidylcholine is a major lipid constituent of the plasma membrane. Its enzymatic processing by cytosolic phospho-lipase A2 (cPLA2) or calcium-independent phospholipase A2 (iPLA2) generates powerful small lipid molecules, which func-tion as intracellular second messengers. One of these is arachi-donic acid, the precursor molecule for eicosanoids. Another is platelet-activating factor (PAF). During acute inflammation, PAF is released by immune cells following the activation of PLA2. The receptor for PAF (PAFR), which is constitutively expressed by platelets, leukocytes, and endothelial cells, is a G-protein–coupled receptor of the rhodopsin family. Ligand binding to the PAFR promotes the activation and aggregation of platelets and leukocytes, leukocyte adherence, motility, chemotaxis, and invasion, as well as ROS generation.233 Addi-tionally, PAF activation of human PMNs induces extrusion of neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs), while platelet activa-tion induces IL-1 via a novel posttranscriptional mechanism. Finally, PAFR ligation results not only in the upregulation of numerous proinflammatory genes, including COX-2, iNOS, and IL-6, but also in the generation of lipid intermediates such as arachidonic acid and lysophospholipids through the Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   5901/03/19   6:49 PM 60BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IBrainRBCWBCNerveKidneyMuscleHeartKidneyMuscleAminoacidsGlycerol16gFattyacid160g40gFatty acid120gKetone60gGlucose180g36g144g36gLactate + PyruvateLIVERGlycogen75gGluconeogenesisOxidationFuel utilization in short-term fasting man (70 kg)Muscleprotein75gFat storestriglycerides160gFigure 2-14. Fuel utilization in a 70-kg man during short-term fasting with an approximate basal energy expenditure of 1800 kcal. During starvation, muscle proteins and fat stores provide fuel for the host, with the latter being most abundant. RBC = red blood cell; WBC = white blood cell. activation of Phospholipase A2. Antagonists to PAF recep-tors have been experimentally shown to mitigate the effects of ischemia and reperfusion injury. Of note, human sepsis is associated with a reduction in the levels of PAF-acetylhydro-lase, which inactivates PAF by removing an acetyl group. Indeed, PAF-acetylhydrolase administration in patients with severe sepsis has yielded some reduction in multiple organ dysfunction and mortality234; however, larger phase III clinical trials failed to show benefit.Natriuretic PeptidesThe natriuretic peptides, atrial natriuretic factor (ANP) and brain natriuretic peptide (BNP), are a family of peptides that are released primarily by atrial and ventricular tissue respectively, but are also synthesized by the gut, kidney, brain, adrenal glands, and endothelium. The functionally active forms of the peptides are C-terminal fragments of a larger pro-hormone, and both  Nand C-terminal fragments are detectable in the blood (referred to a N-terminal pro-BNP and pro-ANF, respectively). ANF and BNP share most biological properties, including diuretic, natri-uretic, vasorelaxant, and cardiac remodeling properties that are affected by signaling through a common receptor: the guanylyl cyclase(GC-) A receptor. They are both increased in the setting of cardiac disorders; however, evidence indicates some distinctions in the setting of inflammation. For example, elevated proBNP has been detected in septic patients in the absence of myocardial dysfunction and appears to have prognostic significance.235 More recently, investigators examined changes in N-terminal pro-BNP (NT-proBNP) in a cohort of severely injured patients and deter-mined that persistently high level of NT-proBNP in major trauma patients is indicative of poor outcome.236SURGICAL METABOLISMThe initial hours after surgical or traumatic injury are metaboli-cally associated with a reduced total body energy expenditure and urinary nitrogen wasting. With adequate resuscitation and stabilization of the injured patient, a reprioritization of substrate use ensues to preserve vital organ function and to support repair of injured tissue. This phase of recovery also is characterized by functions that participate in the restoration of homeostasis, such as augmented metabolic rates and oxygen consumption, enzymatic preference for readily oxidizable substrates such as glucose, and stimulation of the immune system. Understanding of the collective alterations in amino acid (protein), carbohy-drate, and lipid metabolism characteristic of the surgical patient lays the foundation upon which metabolic and nutritional sup-port can be implemented.Metabolism During FastingFuel metabolism during unstressed fasting states has historically served as the standard to which metabolic alterations after acute injury and critical illness are compared (Fig. 2-14). To maintain basal metabolic needs (i.e., at rest and fasting), a normal healthy adult requires approximately 22 to 25 kcal/kg per day drawn from carbohydrate, lipid, and protein sources. This requirement can substantially increase during severe stress states, such as those seen in patients with burn injuries.In the healthy adult, principal sources of fuel during short-term fasting (<5 days) are derived from muscle protein and body fat, with fat being the most abundant source of energy (Table 2-8). The normal adult body contains 300 to 400 g of carbohydrates in the form of glycogen, of which 75 to 100 g are stored in the liver. Approximately 200 to 250 g of glycogen are stored within skeletal, cardiac, and smooth muscle cells. The greater glycogen stores within the muscle are not read-ily available for systemic use due to a deficiency in glucose-6-phosphatase but are available for the energy needs of muscle cells. Therefore, in the fasting state, hepatic glycogen stores are rapidly and preferentially depleted, which results in a fall of serum glucose concentration within hours (<16 hours).During fasting, a healthy 70-kg adult will utilize 180 g of glucose per day to support the metabolism of obligate glycolytic cells such as neurons, leukocytes, erythrocytes, and the renal medullae. Other tissues that use glucose for fuel are skeletal muscle, intestinal mucosa, fetal tissues, and solid tumors.Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   6001/03/19   6:49 PM 61SYSTEMIC RESPONSE TO INJURY AND METABOLIC SUPPORTCHAPTER 2RBCWBCNerveKidneyMuscleMuscleProteinpyruvateKetoneLactate + PyruvateFattyacidGlucoseKetoneGlucoseAlanineGlucose-alanine cycleCori cycleLIVERGluconeogenesisFigure 2-15. The recycling of peripheral lactate and pyruvate for hepatic gluconeogenesis is accomplished by the Cori cycle. Alanine within skeletal muscles can also be used as a precursor for hepatic gluconeogenesis. During starvation, such fatty acid provides fuel sources for basal hepatic enzymatic function. RBC = red blood cell; WBC = white blood cell.Glucagon, norepinephrine, vasopressin, and angiotensin II can promote the utilization of glycogen stores (glycogenolysis) during fasting. Although glucagon, epinephrine, and cortisol directly promote gluconeogenesis, epinephrine and cortisol also promote pyruvate shuttling to the liver for gluconeogen-esis. Precursors for hepatic gluconeogenesis include lactate, glycerol, and amino acids such as alanine and glutamine. Lac-tate is released by glycolysis within skeletal muscles, as well as by erythrocytes and leukocytes. The recycling of lactate and pyruvate for gluconeogenesis is commonly referred to as the Cori cycle, which can provide up to 40% of plasma glucose during starvation (Fig. 2-15).Lactate production from skeletal muscle is insufficient to maintain systemic glucose needs during short-term fasting (simple starvation). Therefore, significant amounts of protein must be degraded daily (75 g/d for a 70-kg adult) to provide the amino acid substrate for hepatic gluconeogenesis. Proteolysis during starvation, which results primarily from decreased insu-lin and increased cortisol release, is associated with elevated urinary nitrogen excretion from the normal 7 to 10 g/d up to 30 g or more per day.237 Although proteolysis during starvation occurs mainly within skeletal muscles, protein degradation in solid organs also occurs.In prolonged starvation, systemic proteolysis is reduced to approximately 20 g/d and urinary nitrogen excretion stabilizes at 2 to 5 g/d (Fig. 2-16). This reduction in proteolysis reflects the adaptation by vital organs (e.g., myocardium, brain, renal cortex, and skeletal muscle) to using ketone bodies as their prin-cipal fuel source. In extended fasting, ketone bodies become an important fuel source for the brain after 2 days and gradually become the principal fuel source by 24 days.Enhanced deamination of amino acids for gluconeogen-esis during starvation consequently increases renal excretion of ammonium ions. The kidneys also participate in gluconeo-genesis by the use of glutamine and glutamate and can become the primary source of gluconeogenesis during prolonged star-vation, accounting for up to one-half of systemic glucose production.Table 2-8A. Body fuel reserves in a 70-kg man and B. Energy equivalent of substrate oxidationA. COMPONENTMASS (kg)ENERGY (kcal)DAYS AVAILABLEWater and minerals4900Protein6.024,00013.0Glycogen0.28000.4Fat15.0140,00078.0Total70.2164,80091.4B. SUBSTRATEO2 CONSUMED (L/g)CO2 PRODUCED (L/g)RESPIRATORY QUOTIENTkcal/gRECOMMENDED DAILY REQUIREMENTGlucose0.750.751.04.07.2 g/kg per dayDextrose———3.4—Lipid2.01.40.79.01.0 g/kg per dayProtein1.00.80.84.00.8 g/kg per dayBrunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   6101/03/19   6:50 PM 62BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IWOUNDRBCWBCNerveKidneyMuscleHeartKidneyMuscleAminoacidsGlycerol17gFattyacid170g40gFatty acid130gKetone60gGlucose360g180g180gLactate+PyruvateKIDNEYGluconeogenesisGluconeogenesisLIVEROxidationFuel utilization following traumaMuscleProtein250gFat storesTriglycerides170gFigure 2-17. Acute injury is associated with significant alterations in substrate utilization. There is enhanced nitrogen loss, indicative of catabolism. Fat remains the primary fuel source under these circumstances. RBC = red blood cell; WBC = white blood cell.Fuel utilization in long-term fasting man (70 kg)HeartKidneyMuscleAminoacidsGlycerol18gFattyacid180g45gFatty acid135gKetone68gGlucose80g44g36gLactate + PyruvateKIDNEYGluconeogenesis15g5g40g40g10g (100 mEq) in urine44g36g58gMuscleProtein20gFat storesTriglycerides180gBrainRBCWBCNerveKidneyMuscleLIVERGlycogenGluconeogenesisOxidationFigure 2-16. Fuel utilization in extended starvation. Liver glycogen stores are depleted, and there is adaptive reduction in proteolysis as a source of fuel. The brain uses ketones for fuel. The kidneys become important participants in gluconeogenesis. RBC = red blood cell;  WBC = white blood cell. Lipid stores within adipose tissue provide 40% or more of caloric expenditure during starvation. Energy requirements for basal enzymatic and muscular functions (e.g., gluconeogenesis, neural transmission, and cardiac contraction) are met by the mobilization of triglycerides from adipose tissue. In a resting, fasting, 70-kg person, approximately 160 g of free fatty acids and glycerol can be mobilized from adipose tissue per day. Free fatty acid release is stimulated in part by a reduction in serum insulin levels and in part by the increase in circulating glucagon and catecholamine. Such free fatty acids, like ketone bodies, are used as fuel by tissues such as the heart, kidney (renal cortex), muscle, and liver. The mobilization of lipid stores for energy importantly decreases the rate of glycolysis, gluconeogenesis, and proteolysis, as well as the overall glucose requirement to sustain the host. Furthermore, ketone bodies spare glucose utili-zation by inhibiting the enzyme pyruvate dehydrogenase.Metabolism After InjuryInjuries or infections induce unique neuroendocrine and immu-nologic responses that differentiate injury metabolism from that of unstressed fasting (Fig. 2-17). The magnitude of metabolic expenditure over time appears to be directly proportional to the severity of insult, with thermal injuries and severe infections having the highest energy demands (Fig. 2-18). Of note, the first few days following both sepsis and trauma are not hyper-metabolic states, with the more severe insults associated with increased “metabolic hibernation.” However, by week 2, the total energy expenditure increases dramatically.238 The increase Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   6201/03/19   6:50 PM 63SYSTEMIC RESPONSE TO INJURY AND METABOLIC SUPPORTCHAPTER 201020304050% REE100752550125150175200225Days after injuryMajor burnsSepsis/peritonitisSkeletal traumaNormalrangeElective surgeryStarvationFigure 2-18. Influence of injury severity on resting metabolism (resting energy expenditure, or REE). The shaded area indicates normal REE. (Reproduced with permission from Long CL, Schaffel N, Geiger JW, et al: Metabolic response to injury and illness: estimation of energy and protein needs from indirect calorim-etry and nitrogen balance, JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 1979 Nov-Dec;3(6):452-456.)DietarytriglyceridesIntestinal lumenLymphatic ductPancreaticlipaseGutenterocyteMonoglyceridesTriglyceridesMonoglyceride + 2 Fatty acyI-CoAFatty acidsChylomicron+ ProteinFigure 2-19. Pancreatic lipase within the small intestinal brush borders hydrolyzes triglycerides into monoglycerides and fatty acids. These components readily diffuse into the gut enterocytes, where they are re-esterified into triglycerides. The resynthesized triglycerides bind car-rier proteins to form chylomicrons, which are transported by the lymphatic system. Shorter triglycerides (those with <10 carbon atoms) can bypass this process and directly enter the portal circulation for transport to the liver. CoA = coenzyme A.in energy expenditure is mediated in part by sympathetic acti-vation and catecholamine release, which has been replicated by the administration of catecholamines to healthy human sub-jects. Lipid metabolism after injury is intentionally discussed first because this macronutrient becomes the primary source of energy during stressed states.239Lipid Metabolism After InjuryLipids are not merely nonprotein, noncarbohydrate fuel sources that minimize protein catabolism in the injured patient. Lipid metabolism potentially influences the structural integrity of cell membranes as well as the immune response during systemic inflammation. Adipose stores within the body (triglycerides) are the predominant energy source (50% to 80%) during critical ill-ness and after injury. Fat mobilization (lipolysis) occurs mainly in response to catecholamine stimulus of the hormone-sensitive triglyceride lipase. Other hormonal influences that potentiate lipolysis include adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), cat-echolamines, thyroid hormone, cortisol, glucagon, growth hor-mone release, and reduction in insulin levels.240Lipid Absorption. Although the process is poorly understood, adipose tissue provides fuel for the host in the form of free fatty acids and glycerol during critical illness and injury. Oxidation of 1 g of fat yields approximately 9 kcal of energy. Although the liver is capable of synthesizing triglycerides from carbohy-drates and amino acids, dietary and exogenous sources provide the major source of triglycerides. Dietary lipids are not readily absorbable in the gut but require pancreatic lipase and phospho-lipase within the duodenum to hydrolyze the triglycerides into free fatty acids and monoglycerides. The free fatty acids and monoglycerides are then readily absorbed by gut enterocytes, which resynthesize triglycerides by esterification of the mono-glycerides with fatty acyl coenzyme A (acyl-CoA) (Fig. 2-19). Long-chain triglycerides (LCTs), defined as those with 12 car-bons or more, generally undergo this process of esterification Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   6301/03/19   6:50 PM 64BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iand enter the circulation through the lymphatic system as chy-lomicrons. Shorter fatty acid chains directly enter the portal circulation and are transported to the liver by albumin carriers. Hepatocytes use free fatty acids as a fuel source during stress states but also can synthesize phospholipids or triglycerides (i.e., very-low-density lipoproteins) during fed states. Systemic tissue (e.g., muscle and the heart) can use chylomicrons and triglycerides as fuel by hydrolysis with lipoprotein lipase at the luminal surface of capillary endothelium.241 Trauma or sepsis suppresses lipoprotein lipase activity in both adipose tissue and muscle, presumably mediated by TNF.Lipolysis and Fatty Acid Oxidation. Periods of energy demand are accompanied by free fatty acid mobilization from adipose stores. This is mediated by hormonal influences (e.g., catecholamines, ACTH, thyroid hormones, growth hormone, and glucagon) on triglyceride lipase through a cAMP pathway (Fig. 2-20). In adipose tissues, triglyceride lipase hydrolyzes triglycerides into free fatty acids and glycerol. Free fatty acids enter the capillary circulation and are transported by albumin to tissues requiring this fuel source (e.g., heart and skeletal mus-cle). Insulin inhibits lipolysis and favors triglyceride synthesis by augmenting lipoprotein lipase activity as well as intracellu-lar levels of glycerol-3-phosphate. The use of glycerol for fuel depends on the availability of tissue glycerokinase, which is abundant in the liver and kidneys.Free fatty acids absorbed by cells conjugate with acyl-CoA within the cytoplasm. The transport of fatty acyl-CoA from the outer mitochondrial membrane across the inner mito-chondrial membrane occurs via the carnitine shuttle (Fig. 2-21). Medium-chain triglycerides (MCTs), defined as those 6 to  12 carbons in length, bypass the carnitine shuttle and readily cross the mitochondrial membranes. This accounts in part for the fact that MCTs are more efficiently oxidized than LCTs. Ideally, the rapid oxidation of MCTs makes them less prone to fat deposition, particularly within immune cells and the reticu-loendothelial system—a common finding with lipid infusion in parenteral nutrition.242 However, exclusive use of MCTs as fuel in animal studies has been associated with higher metabolic demands and toxicity, as well as essential fatty acid deficiency.Within the mitochondria, fatty acyl-CoA undergoes b-oxidation, which produces acetyl-CoA with each pass through the cycle. Each acetyl-CoA molecule subsequently enters the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle for further oxidation to yield 12 adenosine triphosphate (ATP) molecules, carbon dioxide, and water. Excess acetyl-CoA molecules serve as precursors for ketogenesis. Unlike glucose metabolism, oxidation of fatty acids requires proportionally less oxygen and produces less car-bon dioxide. This is frequently quantified as the ratio of carbon dioxide produced to oxygen consumed for the reaction and is known as the respiratory quotient (RQ). An RQ of 0.7 would imply greater fatty acid oxidation for fuel, whereas an RQ of  1 indicates greater carbohydrate oxidation (overfeeding). An RQ of 0.85 suggests the oxidation of equal amounts of fatty acids and glucose.KetogenesisCarbohydrate depletion slows the entry of acetyl-CoA into the TCA cycle secondary to depleted TCA intermediates and enzyme activity. Increased lipolysis and reduced systemic carbo-hydrate availability during starvation diverts excess acetyl-CoA Hormone-receptoractivationCapillaryAdiposecellFFAcAMPProtein kinaseTriglyceride lipaseTriglycerideDiglycerideMonoglycerideGlycerolFFAFFAFFAFigure 2-20. Fat mobilization in adipose tissue. Triglyceride lipase activation by hormonal stimulation of adipose cells occurs through the cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) pathway. Triglycerides are serially hydrolyzed with resultant free fatty acid (FFA) release at every step. The FFAs diffuse readily into the capillary bed for transport. Tissues with glycerokinase can use glycerol for fuel by forming glycerol-3-phosphate. Glycerol-3-phosphate can esterify with FFAs to form triglycerides or can be used as a precursor for renal and hepatic gluconeogenesis. Skeletal muscle and adipose cells have little glycerokinase and thus do not use glycerol for fuel.Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   6401/03/19   6:50 PM 65SYSTEMIC RESPONSE TO INJURY AND METABOLIC SUPPORTCHAPTER 2Carnitineacyltransferase ITransportproteinCytosolMitochondriaFFAAcetyl-CoABeta OxidationCarnitineCarnitineacyltransferase IICoACarnitineMitochondrialmembraneORCCarnitineORCCoAROCCoAORCCarnitineCoAFigure 2-21. Free fatty acids (FFAs) in the cells form fatty acyl-coenzyme A (CoA) with CoA. Fatty acyl-CoA cannot enter the inner mitochondrial membrane and requires carnitine as a carrier protein (carnitine shuttle). Once inside the mitochondria, carnitine dissociates, and fatty acyl-CoA is reformed. The carnitine molecule is transported back into the cytosol for reuse. The fatty acyl-CoA undergoes β-oxidation to form acetyl-CoA for entry into the tri-carboxylic acid cycle. “R” represents a part of the acyl group of acyl-CoA.toward hepatic ketogenesis. A number of extrahepatic tissues, but not the liver itself, are capable of using ketones for fuel. Ketosis represents a state in which hepatic ketone production exceeds extrahepatic ketone utilization.The rate of ketogenesis appears to be inversely related to the severity of injury. Major trauma, severe shock, and sepsis attenuate ketogenesis by increasing insulin levels and by caus-ing rapid tissue oxidation of free fatty acids. Minor injuries and infections are associated with modest elevations in plasma free fatty acid concentrations and ketogenesis. However, in minor stress states ketogenesis does not exceed that in nonstressed starvation.Carbohydrate MetabolismIngested and enteral carbohydrates are primarily digested in the small intestine, where pancreatic and intestinal enzymes reduce the complex carbohydrates to dimeric units. Disaccharidases (e.g., sucrase, lactase, and maltase) within intestinal brush bor-ders dismantle the complex carbohydrates into simple hexose units, which are transported into the intestinal mucosa. Glu-cose and galactose are primarily absorbed by energy-dependent active transport coupled to the sodium pump. Fructose absorp-tion, however, occurs by concentration-dependent facilitated diffusion. Neither fructose and galactose within the circulation nor exogenous mannitol (for neurologic injury) evokes an insu-lin response. Intravenous administration of low-dose fructose in fasting humans has been associated with nitrogen conservation, but the clinical utility of fructose administration in human injury remains to be demonstrated.Discussion of carbohydrate metabolism primarily refers to the utilization of glucose. The oxidation of 1 g of carbohy-drate yields 4 kcal, but sugar solutions such as those found in intravenous fluids or parenteral nutrition provide only  3.4 kcal/g of dextrose. In starvation, glucose production occurs at the expense of protein stores (i.e., skeletal muscle). Hence, the primary goal for maintenance glucose administration in surgical patients is to minimize muscle wasting. The exog-enous administration of small amounts of glucose (approxi-mately 50 g/d) facilitates fat entry into the TCA cycle and reduces ketosis. Unlike in starvation in healthy subjects, in septic and trauma patients provision of exogenous glucose never has been shown to fully suppress amino acid degrada-tion for gluconeogenesis. This suggests that during periods of stress, other hormonal and proinflammatory mediators have a profound influence on the rate of protein degradation and that some degree of muscle wasting is inevitable. The administra-tion of insulin, however, has been shown to reverse protein catabolism during severe stress by stimulating protein synthe-sis in skeletal muscles and by inhibiting hepatocyte protein degradation. Insulin also stimulates the incorporation of ele-mental precursors into nucleic acids in association with RNA synthesis in muscle cells.In cells, glucose is phosphorylated to form glucose-6-phosphate. Glucose-6-phosphate can be polymerized during glycogenesis or catabolized in glycogenolysis. Glucose catabolism occurs by cleavage to pyruvate or lactate (pyruvic acid pathway) or by decarboxylation to pentoses (pentose shunt) (Fig. 2-22).Excess glucose from overfeeding, as reflected by RQs >1.0, can result in conditions such as glucosuria, thermogenesis, and conversion to fat (lipogenesis). Excessive glucose adminis-tration results in elevated carbon dioxide production, which may be deleterious in patients with suboptimal pulmonary function, as well as hyperglycemia, which may contribute to infectious risk and immune suppression.Injury and severe infections acutely induce a state of peripheral glucose intolerance, despite ample insulin produc-tion at levels several-fold above baseline. This may occur in part due to reduced skeletal muscle pyruvate dehydrogenase activity after injury, which diminishes the conversion of pyru-vate to acetyl-CoA and subsequent entry into the TCA cycle. The three-carbon structures (e.g., pyruvate and lactate) that consequently accumulate are shunted to the liver as substrate for gluconeogenesis. Furthermore, regional tissue catheteriza-tion and isotope dilution studies have shown an increase in net splanchnic glucose production by 50% to 60% in septic patients and a 50% to 100% increase in burn patients.242 The increase in plasma glucose levels is proportional to the severity of injury, and this net hepatic gluconeogenic response is believed to be under the influence of glucagon. Unlike in the nonstressed sub-ject, in the hypermetabolic, critically ill patient the hepatic glu-coneogenic response to injury or sepsis cannot be suppressed by exogenous or excess glucose administration but rather persists. Hepatic gluconeogenesis, arising primarily from alanine and glutamine catabolism, provides a ready fuel source for tissues such as those of the nervous system, wounds, and erythrocytes, which do not require insulin for glucose transport. The elevated glucose concentrations also provide a necessary energy source for leukocytes in inflamed tissues and in sites of microbial invasions.Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   6501/03/19   6:50 PM 66BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IThe shunting of glucose away from nonessential organs such as skeletal muscle and adipose tissues is mediated by cat-echolamines. Experiments with infusing catecholamines and glucagon in animals have demonstrated elevated plasma glu-cose levels as a result of increased hepatic gluconeogenesis and peripheral insulin resistance. Interestingly, although glucocorti-coid infusion alone does not increase glucose levels, it does pro-long and augment the hyperglycemic effects of catecholamines and glucagon when glucocorticoid is administered concurrently with the latter.Glycogen stores within skeletal muscles can be mobilized by epinephrine activation of b-adrenergic receptors, GTP-binding proteins (G-proteins), which subsequently activates the second messenger, cAMP. The cAMP activates phosphorylase kinase, which in turn leads to conversion of glycogen to glucose-1-phosphate. Phosphorylase kinase also can be activated by the second messenger, calcium, through the breakdown of phos-phatidylinositol phosphate, which is the case in vasopressin-mediated hepatic glycogenolysis.243Protein and Amino Acid MetabolismThe average protein intake in healthy young adults ranges from 80 to 120 g/d, and every 6 g of protein yields approximately  1 g of nitrogen. The degradation of 1 g of protein yields approxi-mately 4 kcal of energy, similar to the yield in carbohydrate metabolism. After injury, the initial systemic proteolysis, medi-ated primarily by glucocorticoids, increases urinary nitrogen excretion to levels in excess of 30 g/d, which roughly corre-sponds to a loss in lean body mass of 1.5% per day. An injured individual who does not receive nutrition for 10 days can theo-retically lose 15% lean body mass. Therefore, amino acids can-not be considered a long-term fuel reserve, and indeed excessive protein depletion (i.e., 25% to 30% of lean body weight) is not compatible with sustaining life.244Protein catabolism after injury provides substrates for gluconeogenesis and for the synthesis of acute phase proteins. Radiolabeled amino acid incorporation studies and protein anal-yses confirm that skeletal muscles are preferentially depleted acutely after injury, whereas visceral tissues (e.g., the liver and kidney) remain relatively preserved. The accelerated urea excretion after injury also is associated with the excretion of intracellular elements such as sulfur, phosphorus, potassium, magnesium, and creatinine. Conversely, the rapid utilization of elements such as potassium and magnesium during recovery from major injury may indicate a period of tissue healing.The net changes in protein catabolism and synthesis corre-spond to the severity and duration of injury (Fig. 2-23). Elective operations and minor injuries result in lower protein synthesis and moderate protein breakdown. Severe trauma, burns, and sepsis are associated with increased protein catabolism. The rise in urinary nitrogen and negative nitrogen balance can be detected early after injury and peak by 7 days. This state of pro-tein catabolism may persist for as long as 3 to 7 weeks. The patient’s prior physical status and age appear to influence the degree of proteolysis after injury or sepsis. Activation of the ubiquitin-proteosome system in muscle cells is one of the major path-ways for protein degradation during acute injury. This response is accentuated by tissue hypoxia, acidosis, insulin resistance, and elevated glucocorticoid levels.NUTRITION IN THE SURGICAL PATIENTThe goal of nutritional support in the surgical patient is to prevent or reverse the catabolic effects of disease or injury. Although several important biologic parameters have been used to measure the efficacy of nutritional regimens, the ultimate validation for nutritional support in surgical patients should be improvement in clinical outcome and restoration of function.Estimation of Energy RequirementsAll patients admitted to the hospital should have their nutritional status assessed. Overall nutritional assessment is undertaken to 7GlycogenGlucoseGlucose-6-Phosphate6-PhosphogluconatePyruvicacidLacticacidPentosemonophosphateshuntTricarboxylic acidFigure 2-22. Simplified schema of glucose catabolism through the pen-tose monophosphate pathway or by breakdown into pyruvate. Glucose-6-phosphate becomes an important “crossroad” for glucose metabolism.Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   6601/03/19   6:50 PM 67SYSTEMIC RESPONSE TO INJURY AND METABOLIC SUPPORTCHAPTER 2Nitrogen excretion (g/d)128041620242832DaysMajor burnsSevere sepsisSkeletal traumaInfection010203040Elective surgeryPartial starvationTotal starvationFigure 2-23. The effect of injury sever-ity on nitrogen wasting. (Reproduced with permission from Long CL, Schaffel N,  Geiger JW, et al: Metabolic response to injury and illness: estimation of energy and protein needs from indirect calorimetry and nitrogen balance, JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 1979 Nov-Dec;3(6):452-456.)determine the severity of nutrient deficiencies or excess and to aid in predicting nutritional requirements. Pertinent information is obtained by determining the presence of weight loss, chronic illnesses, or dietary habits that influence the quantity and quality of food intake. Social habits predisposing to malnutrition and the use of medications that may influence food intake or urina-tion should also be investigated. Physical examination seeks to assess loss of muscle and adipose tissues, organ dysfunction, and subtle changes in skin, hair, or neuromuscular function reflecting frank or impending nutritional deficiency. Anthropo-metric data (i.e., weight change, skinfold thickness, and arm cir-cumference muscle area) and biochemical determinations (i.e., creatinine excretion, albumin level, prealbumin level, total lym-phocyte count, and transferrin level) may be used to substantiate the patient’s history and physical findings. This information, in conjunction with nutritional risk assessment scoring, can iden-tify patients who may benefit from early nutritional support.For critically ill and injured patients, validated scoring systems such as the Nutritional Risk Screening (NRS)245 or the Nutrition Risk in the Critically Ill (NUTRIC)246 score should be employed to make this determination and should be performed in conjunction with assessment of GI tract function and risk of aspiration. Appreciation for the stresses and natural history of the disease process, in combination with nutritional assess-ment, remains the basis for identifying patients in acute or anticipated need of nutritional support. Currently, specialized enteral nutrition can be avoided in patients who are deemed to be a low nutritional risk with low disease severity for up to one week. However, their nutritional status should be reassessed regularly.247A fundamental goal of nutritional support is to meet the energy requirements for essential metabolic processes and tissue repair. Failure to provide adequate nonprotein energy sources will lead to consumption of lean tissue stores. The requirement for energy may be measured by indirect calorimetry, which is the gold standard in hospitalized patients and is recommended for the critically ill.243 However, the use of indirect calorimetry, particularly in the critically ill patient, may not be available or feasible in this setting. Moreover, it may lead to an overestima-tion of caloric requirements, which has been associated with increased risk of infectious complications.248In the absence of indirect calorimetry, resting energy expenditure may also be estimated using a published predictive equation. Adjusted for the type of surgical stress, such equations are suitable for estimating energy requirements in the major-ity of hospitalized patients. Alternately, a simple weight-based equation of 25 to 30 kcal/kg (using dry or usual body weight) per day is appropriate with a low risk of overfeeding and is con-sistent with current recommendations from ASPEN (American Society of Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition) in the ICU setting.247 After trauma or sepsis, energy substrate demands are increased during the recovery phase and may necessitate greater nonpro-tein calories beyond calculated energy expenditure (Table 2-9). These additional nonprotein calories provided after injury are usually 1.2 to 2.0 times greater than calculated resting energy expenditure, depending on the type of injury. It is seldom appro-priate to exceed this level of nonprotein energy intake during the height of the catabolic phase. Currently, standard enteral nutri-tion delivers 49% to 53% of calories as carbohydrate and 29% to 30% of calories as fat, which is consistent with current recom-mendations. For parenteral nutrition, dextrose-containing stock solutions are prepared and available in different concentrations. The percentage of calories that is contributed by dextrose should be determined on a per-patient basis according to the severity of injury/illness and the estimated caloric needs. Lipid emul-sions can be included in the total mixture or be administered separately in 10% or 20% solutions with 1.1 kcal/ml and  2 kcal/ml, respectively.The second objective of nutritional support is to meet the substrate requirements for protein synthesis. Protein nutritional support is especially important for maintaining immune func-tion and lean body mass and is more closely linked to positive outcomes than total caloric intake. Although the mean protein requirement of healthy individuals is defined as 0.8 g/kg per day by the Food and Nutrition Board of the U.S. National Research Council, current recommendations for protein dosing exceed this Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   6701/03/19   6:50 PM 68BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iamount (1.2–2 gm protein/kg per day), especially for the critically ill and injured. Higher protein intake seems to support improved nitrogen balance and high-protein nutritional support is currently recommended for patients with body mass index >30.247Vitamins and MineralsThe requirements for vitamins and essential trace minerals usu-ally can be met easily in the average patient with an uncom-plicated postoperative course. Therefore, vitamins usually are not given in the absence of preoperative deficiencies. Patients maintained on elemental diets or parenteral hyperalimenta-tion require complete vitamin and mineral supplementation. Commercial enteral diets contain varying amounts of essential minerals and vitamins. It is necessary to ensure that adequate replacement is available in the diet or by supplementation. Numerous commercial vitamin preparations are available for intravenous or intramuscular use, although most do not contain vitamin K and some do not contain vitamin B12 or folic acid. Supplemental trace minerals may be given intravenously via commercial preparations. Essential fatty acid supplementation also may be necessary, especially in patients with depletion of adipose stores.OverfeedingOverfeeding usually results from overestimation of caloric needs, as occurs when actual body weight is used to calculate the BEE in patient populations such as the critically ill with sig-nificant fluid overload and the obese. Indirect calorimetry can be used to quantify energy requirements but frequently overes-timates BEE by 10% to 15% in stressed patients, particularly if they are receiving ventilatory support. In these instances, esti-mated dry weight should be obtained from preinjury records or family members. Adjusted lean body weight also can be cal-culated. Overfeeding may contribute to clinical deterioration via increased oxygen consumption, increased carbon dioxide production and prolonged need for ventilatory support, fatty liver, suppression of leukocyte function, hyperglycemia, and increased risk of infection.ENTERAL NUTRITIONRationale for Enteral NutritionEnteral nutrition (EN) is preferred over parenteral nutrition (PN) based on the lower cost of enteral feeding and the associ-ated risks of the intravenous route, including vascular access  complications.249 Of further consideration are the consequences of gastrointestinal tract disuse, which include diminished solu-ble IgA production and cytokine production as well as bacterial overgrowth and altered mucosal barrier function and immune defenses. In support of this idea, recent meta-analysis demon-strated a significant reduction in infectious complications in criti-cally ill or injured patients receiving EN when compared to PN as well as ICU length of stay.250 However, no increase in overall survival was noted. While EN is recommended as the first choice for nutritional support in patients who can tolerate it, a recent large trial from Europe comparing early isocaloric EN vs. PN in adult critically ill patients with shock did not reduce mortality or the risk of secondary infections but was associated with a greater risk of digestive complications including intestinal ischemia.251The benefits of enteral feeding in patients undergoing elective surgery appear to be linked to their preoperative nutri-tional status. Historical studies comparing postoperative enteral and parenteral nutrition in patients undergoing gastrointestinal surgery have demonstrated reduced infectious complications and acute phase protein production in those fed by the enteral route. Yet prospectively randomized studies of patients with adequate nutritional status (albumin ≥4 g/dL) undergoing gas-trointestinal surgery demonstrate no differences in outcome and complications between those administered enteral nutrition and those given maintenance intravenous fluids alone in the initial days after surgery.252Early vs. Late FeedingCurrent recommendations support early enteral nutrition (within 48 hours) in critically ill patients, but with a caveat.253 Early “full nutrition” is likely to be harmful and is associated with a higher infection rate. The aim therefore is a caloric target below the actual energy expenditure, with the goal of providing >80% of estimated total energy goals gradually by 3 to 4 days. Early EN may be protective of the enteral epithelial barrier func-tion and help to maintain the diversity of the microbiome. While early caloric limitation seems to benefit the critically ill patient when compared to overfeeding, the restriction likely creates a significant shortfall in protein provision considering the low protein-to-calorie ratio of most enteral products.254In this regard, it is important to distinguish “permissive underfeeding” in which the total calories provided average 1500 kcal/d with 40 gm/d of protein from hypocaloric nutri-tion which has the same total calories with 140 gm/d protein. Hypocaloric nutrition is currently recommended for critically ill obese patients, but some investigators argue that this nutritional strategy may also benefit nonobese patients especially during Table 2-9Caloric adjustments above basal energy expenditure (BEE) in hypermetabolic conditionsCONDITIONkcal/kg PER DAYADJUSTMENT ABOVE BEEGRAMS OF PROTEIN/ kg PER DAYNONPROTEIN CALORIES: NITROGENNormal/moderate malnutrition25–301.11.0150:1Mild stress25–301.21.2150:1Moderate stress301.41.5120:1Severe stress30–351.62.090–120:1Burns35–402.02.590–100:1Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   6801/03/19   6:50 PM 69SYSTEMIC RESPONSE TO INJURY AND METABOLIC SUPPORTCHAPTER 2the early acute period of critical illness.255 This recommendation excludes those patients whose pre-ICU weight loss indicate that they are malnourished.As the patient enters the recovery period of their illness, total protein and caloric requirements are likely to significantly increase. Based on our understanding of starvation, increased extrinsic delivery of both calories and protein are likely to be required during this period.For patients undergoing elective surgery, healthy patients without malnutrition who are undergoing uncomplicated sur-gery can tolerate 10 days of partial starvation (i.e., maintenance intravenous fluids only) before any clinically significant protein catabolism occurs. Earlier intervention is likely indicated for patients in whom preoperative protein-calorie malnutrition has been identified. Other clinical scenarios for which the benefits of enteral nutritional support have been substantiated include permanent neurologic impairment, oropharyngeal dysfunction, short-bowel syndrome, and bone marrow transplantation.Initiation of enteral nutrition should occur as soon as fea-sible after adequate resuscitation, most readily determined by adequate urine output. The presence of bowel sounds and the passage of flatus or stool are not absolute prerequisites for ini-tiation of enteral nutrition, but in the setting of gastroparesis feedings should be administered distal to the pylorus. Gastric residuals of 200 mL or more in a 4to 6-hour period or abdomi-nal distention requires cessation of feeding and adjustment of the infusion rate. Concomitant gastric decompression with dis-tal small-bowel feedings may be appropriate in certain patients such as closed-head injury patients with gastroparesis. There is no evidence to support withholding enteric feedings for patients after bowel resection or for those with low-output enterocutane-ous fistulas of <500 mL/d. In fact, a recent systematic review of studies of early enteral feeding (within 24 hours of gastro-intestinal surgery) showed no effect on anastomotic leak and a reduction in mortality. Early enteral feeding is also associated in reduced incidence of fistula formation in patients with open abdomen. Enteral feeding should also be offered to patients with short-bowel syndrome or clinical malabsorption, but necessary calories, essential minerals, and vitamins should be supple-mented using parenteral modalities.Intermittent vs. Continuous Enteral FeedingEnteral nutrition can be administered either continuously or intermittently; however, the standard choice for critically injured adults is continuous enteral feeding (CEF) due to the lower complication rates.247 Data also suggest that CEF may promote protein anabolism by inhibiting protein breakdown.256Enteral FormulasFor most critically ill patients, the choice of enteral formula will be determined by a number of factors and will include a clinical judgment as to the “best fit” for the patients’ needs. In general, feeding formulas to consider are GI tolerance-promot-ing, anti-inflammatory, immune-modulating, organ support-ive, and standard enteral nutrition. In addition, guidelines from professional nutrition societies identify certain populations of patients who can benefit from formulations with specific pharmaconutrients.257 For many others, each physician must use his or her own clinical judgment about what formula will best meet the patient’s needs.The functional status of the gastrointestinal tract deter-mines the type of enteral solutions to be used. Patients with an intact gastrointestinal tract will tolerate complex solutions, but patients who have not been fed via the gastrointestinal tract for prolonged periods are less likely to tolerate complex carbohy-drates. In those patients who are having difficulty tolerating standard enteral formulas, peptideand medium-chain triglyc-eride-based formulas with prebiotics can lessen GI tolerance problems. Additionally, in patients with demonstrated malab-sorption issues, such as with inflammatory bowel diseases or short bowel syndrome, current guidelines endorse the provision of hydrolyzed protein formulas to improve absorption. Guide-lines have not yet been made with regard to the fiber content of enteral formulas. However, recent evidence indicates that supplementation of enteral formulas with soluble dietary fiber may be beneficial for improving stool consistency in patients suffering from diarrhea.Factors that influence the choice of enteral formula also include the extent of organ dysfunction (e.g., renal, pulmonary, hepatic, or gastrointestinal), the nutrients needed to restore optimal function and healing, and the cost of specific products. There are still no conclusive data to recommend one category of product over another, and nutritional support committees typically develop the most cost-efficient enteral formulary for the most commonly encountered disease categories within the institution.As discussed extensively in the first sections of this chap-ter, surgery and trauma result in a significant “sterile” inflamma-tory response that impacts for the innate and adaptive immune systems. The provision of immune-modulating nutrients, termed “immunonutrition,” is one mechanism by which the immune response can be supported and an attempt made to lower infec-tious risk. At present, the best studied of immune-nutrients are glutamine, arginine, and omega-3 PUFAs.“Immunonutrients.” As discussed extensively in the first sections of this chapter, surgery and trauma result in a sig-nificant “sterile” inflammatory response that impacts both the innate and adaptive immune systems. The provision of immune-modulating nutrients, termed “immunonutrition,” is one mecha-nism by which the immune response can be supported and an attempt made to lower infectious risk. Studies have shown that a variety of nutrients, including amino acids (glutamine and arginine); lipids (omega-3 PUFAs); and micronutrients (e.g., vitamin C and selenium) can provide support to the immune system. While current evidence does not support their use uni-versally, benefit may exist for individual patients.258 At present, the best studied of immune-nutrients are glutamine, arginine, and omega-3 PUFAs.Glutamine is the most abundant amino acid in the human body, comprising nearly two thirds of the free intracel-lular amino acid pool. Considered a nonessential amino acid, glutamine is a necessary substrate for nucleotide synthesis in most dividing cells and hence provides a major fuel source for enterocytes. It also serves as an important fuel source for immu-nocytes. During stress states, peripheral glutamine stores are rapidly depleted, and the amino acid is preferentially shunted as a fuel source toward the visceral organs and tumors, respectively.259 These situations create, at least experimentally, a glutamine-depleted environment with potential immune consequences, thus generating interest in both enteral and parenteral glutamine supplementation. However, recently reported data from two large randomized controlled clinical trials in which critically ill patients received glutamine supplementation demonstrated Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   6901/03/19   6:50 PM 70BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iincreased 6-month mortality in the patients who received glutamine.260 Therefore, glutamine supplementation in the criti-cally ill patient is not currently recommended.247Arginine, also a nonessential amino acid in healthy sub-jects, first attracted attention for its immunoenhancing proper-ties, wound-healing benefits, and association with improved survival in animal models of sepsis and injury.261 However, arginine can be metabolized to nitric oxide, via nitric oxide synthase (NOS). If NOS is upregulated, with arginine as avail-able substrate, NO production can also increase, which can have a negative impact on the critically ill patient. As with glutamine, the benefits of experimental arginine supplementa-tion during stress states are diverse. In clinical studies involv-ing critically ill and injured patients and patients who have undergone surgery for certain malignancies, enteral adminis-tration of arginine has led to net nitrogen retention and pro-tein synthesis, whereas isonitrogenous diets have not. Some of these studies also provide in vitro evidence of enhanced immunocyte function. The clinical utility of arginine supple-mentation in improving overall patient outcome remains an area of investigation.262As previously discussed, omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs, canola oil, or fish oil) displaces omega-6 fatty acids in cell membranes, which theoretically reduces the pro-inflammatory response from prostaglandin production. Hence, there has been significant interest in reducing the ratio of omega-6 to omega-3. The data regarding supplementation of enteral feedings with fish oil as a source for omega-3 PUFAs has been mixed, however, with no demonstrated improvement in respiratory complications in severe trauma patients and pos-sible benefits in patients with mild sepsis.166Standard Polymeric Formulas. Most polymeric formulas provide a caloric density from 1 to 2 kcal/mL, and approxi-mately 1500 to 1800 mL are required to meet daily require-ments. These compositions provide baseline carbohydrates, protein, electrolytes, water, fat, and fat-soluble vitamins (some do not have vitamin K). These contain no fiber bulk and there-fore leave minimum residue. These solutions usually are consid-ered to be the standard or first-line formulas for stable patients with an intact gastrointestinal tract. Normal digestive function is required for this formula.Fiber-Containing Formulas. Isotonic formulas with fiber contain soluble and insoluble fiber, which is most often soy based. Physiologically, fiber-based solutions delay intestinal transit time and may reduce the incidence of diarrhea compared with nonfiber solutions. It is most beneficial in this regard in patients who have a high number of loose stools.263 Fiber stimu-lates pancreatic lipase activity and is degraded by gut bacteria into short-chain fatty acids (SCFA), an important fuel for colo-nocytes. Recent data have also demonstrated the expression of SCFA receptors on leukocytes, suggesting that fiber fermenta-tion by the colonic microbiome may indirectly regulate immune cell function. Another potential plus of fiber-containing formu-las is the inclusion of prebiotic fibers with the goal of positively impacting bacterial targets in the gut as well as gut barrier func-tion. While there has been limited research in this area to deter-mine the possible impact on clinical outcomes, addition of these fermentable soluble fiber additives is something that should be considered in the ICU patient as a measure that can aid in the maintenance or restoration of a healthy balance of commensal gut bacteria.Immune-Enhancing Formulas. Immune-enhancing formulas are fortified with special nutrients that are purported to enhance various aspects of immune or solid organ function as previously discussed. Such additives include glutamine, arginine, omega-3 fatty acids, and nucleotides.264 Although several trials have pro-posed that one or more of these additives reduce surgical com-plications and improve outcome, these results have not been uniformly corroborated by other trials. The Canadian Clinical Practice Guidelines currently do not recommend the addition of arginine supplements for critically ill patients due to the poten-tial for harm when used in septic patients.265 Omega-3 PUFAs results from the EDEN-Omega study demonstrated that twice-daily enteral supplementation of n-3 fatty acids, γ-linolenic acid, and antioxidants did not improve the primary end point of ventilator-free days or other clinical outcomes in patients with acute lung injury and may be harmful.266 Glutamine supplemen-tation should be strictly guided by the individual patient condi-tion for the reasons discussed previously.Calorie-Dense Formulas. The primary distinction of calorie-dense formulas is a greater caloric value for the same volume. Most commercial products of this variety provide 1.5 to 2 kcal/mL and therefore are suitable for patients requiring fluid restriction or those unable to tolerate large-volume infusions. As expected, these solutions have higher osmolality than standard formulas and are suitable for intragastric feedings.High-Protein Formulas/Bariatric Formulas. High-protein formulas are available in isotonic and nonisotonic mixtures and are proposed for critically ill or trauma patients with high protein requirements. These formulas have nonprotein-calorie to nitrogen ratios between 80:1 and 120:1. While some obser-vational studies show improved outcomes with higher protein intakes in critically ill patients, there is limited data from ran-domized trials that prevents making strong conclusions about the dose of protein in critically ill patients.As discussed previously, there has been support for high-protein, hypocaloric feeding in obese patients. As such, enteral formulas termed “bariatric formulas” have been developed. As an example, one product has 1 kcal/mL of formula, with 37% of the calories coming from protein. As the evidence for high-protein, hypocaloric feeding is low grade, it is unclear whether clinical outcomes with respect to survival and infectious com-plications is improved, and more data is required for definitive recommendation.267Elemental Formulas. Elemental formulas contain predigested nutrients and provide proteins in the form of small peptides. Complex carbohydrates are limited, and fat content, in the form of MCTs and LCTs, is minimal. The primary advantage of such a formula is ease of absorption, but the inherent scarcity of fat, associated vitamins, and trace elements limits its long-term use as a primary source of nutrients. Due to its high osmolarity, dilution, or slow infusion rates usually are necessary, particu-larly in critically ill patients. These formulas have been used frequently in patients with malabsorption, gut impairment, and pancreatitis, but their cost is significantly higher than that of standard formulas. To date, there has been no evidence of their benefit in routine use.Renal-Failure Formulas. The primary benefits of renal for-mulas are the lower fluid volume and concentrations of potas-sium, phosphorus, and magnesium needed to meet daily calorie requirements. This type of formulation almost exclusively Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   7001/03/19   6:50 PM 71SYSTEMIC RESPONSE TO INJURY AND METABOLIC SUPPORTCHAPTER 2contains essential amino acids and has a high nonprotein-calorie to nitrogen ratio; however, it does not contain trace elements or vitamins. Current guidelines suggest that patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) who require enteral feeding should be placed on “standard enteral formulations.” Moreover, standard recommendations for both protein and calories support are also recommended.263Hepatic-Failure Formulas. Close to 50% of the proteins in hepatic-failure formulas are branched-chain amino acids (e.g., leucine, isoleucine, and valine). The goal of such a formula is to reduce aromatic amino acid levels and increase the levels of branched-chain amino acids, which can potentially reverse encephalopathy in patients with hepatic failure.268 The use of these formulas is controversial, however, because no clear bene-fits have been proven by clinical trials. Protein restriction should be avoided in patients with end-stage liver disease because such patients have significant protein energy malnutrition that pre-disposes them to additional morbidity and mortality.269 Similar to patients with CKD, standard formulations are recommended initially unless the patient develops hepatic encephalopathy that is refractory to standard treatment. With regard to protein sup-plementation, data indicate that providing 1.5 gm protein/kg per day improves clinical outcomes in these patients.270Access for Enteral Nutritional SupportThe available techniques and repertoire for enteral access have provided multiple options for feeding the gut. Presently used methods and preferred indications are summarized in Table 2-10.271Nasoenteric Tubes. Nasogastric feeding should be reserved for those with intact mentation and protective laryngeal reflexes to minimize risks of aspiration. Even in intubated patients, naso-gastric feedings often can be recovered from tracheal suction. Nasojejunal feedings are associated with fewer pulmonary complications including risk of pneumonia, but access past the pylorus requires greater effort to accomplish. Therefore, routine use of small bowel feedings is preferred in units where small bowel access is readily feasible. Where there may be difficul-ties obtaining access, small bowel feedings may be considered a priority for those patients at high risk for intolerance to enteral nutrition (e.g., high gastric residuals).Blind insertion of nasogastric feeding tubes is fraught with misplacement, and air instillation with auscultation is inaccurate for ascertaining proper positioning. Radiographic confirmation is usually required to verify the position of the nasogastric feed-ing tube.Several methods have been recommended for the passage of nasoenteric feeding tubes into the small bowel, including use of prokinetic agents, right lateral decubitus positioning, gastric insufflation, tube angulation, and application of clock-wise torque. However, the successful placement of feeding tubes by these methods is highly variable and operator depen-dent. Furthermore, it is time consuming, and success rates for intubation past the duodenum into the jejunum by these methods are <20%. Fluoroscopy-guided intubation past the pylorus has a >90% success rate, and more than half of these intubations result in jejunal placement. Similarly, endoscopy-guided placement past the pylorus has high success rates, but attempts to advance the tube beyond the second portion of the duodenum using a standard gastroduodenoscope is unlikely to be successful.Table 2-10Options for enteral feeding accessACCESS OPTIONCOMMENTSNasogastric tubeShort-term use only; aspiration risks; nasopharyngeal trauma; frequent dislodgmentNasoduodenal/nasojejunal tubeShort-term use; lower aspiration risks in jejunum; placement challenges (radiographic assistance often necessary)Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG)Endoscopy skills required; may be used for gastric decompression or bolus feeds; aspiration risks; can last  12–24 mo; slightly higher complication rates with placement and site leaksSurgical gastrostomyRequires general anesthesia and small laparotomy; procedure may allow placement of extended duodenal/jejunal feeding ports; laparoscopic placement possibleFluoroscopic gastrostomyBlind placement using needle and T-prongs to anchor to stomach; can thread smaller catheter through gastrostomy into duodenum/jejunum under fluoroscopyPEG-jejunal tubeJejunal placement with regular endoscope is operator dependent; jejunal tube often dislodges retrograde; two-stage procedure with PEG placement, followed by fluoroscopic conversion with jejunal feeding tube through PEGDirect percutaneous endoscopic jejunostomy (DPEJ)Direct endoscopic tube placement with enteroscope; placement challenges; greater injury risksSurgical jejunostomyCommonly carried out during laparotomy; general anesthesia; laparoscopic placement usually requires assistant to thread catheter; laparoscopy offers direct visualization of catheter placementFluoroscopic jejunostomyDifficult approach with injury risks; not commonly doneSmall-bowel feeding is more reliable for delivering nutri-tion than nasogastric feeding. Furthermore, the risks of aspi-ration pneumonia can be reduced by 25% with small-bowel feeding compared with nasogastric feeding. The disadvantages of the use of nasoenteric feeding tubes are clogging, kinking, and inadvertent displacement or removal of the tube as well as nasopharyngeal complications. If nasoenteric feeding will be required for longer than 30 days, access should be converted to a percutaneous one.272Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   7101/03/19   6:50 PM 72BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IPercutaneous Endoscopic Gastrostomy. The most common indications for percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) include impaired swallowing mechanisms, oropharyngeal or esophageal obstruction, and major facial trauma. It is frequently used for debilitated patients requiring caloric supplementation, hydration, or frequent medication dosing. It is also appropriate for patients requiring passive gastric decompression. Relative contraindications for PEG placement include ascites, coagu-lopathy, gastric varices, gastric neoplasm, and lack of a suitable abdominal site. Most tubes are 18F to 28F in size and may be used for 12 to 24 months.Identification of the PEG site requires endoscopic transil-lumination of the anterior stomach against the abdominal wall. A 14-gauge angiocatheter is passed through the abdominal wall into the fully insufflated stomach. A guidewire is threaded through the angiocatheter, grasped by snares or forceps, and pulled out through the mouth. The tapered end of the PEG tube is secured to the guidewire and is pulled into position out of the abdominal wall. The PEG tube is secured without tension against the abdominal wall, and many have reported using the tube within hours of placement. It has been the practice of some to connect the PEG tube to a drainage bag for passive decom-pression for 24 hours before use, allowing more time for the stomach to seal against the peritoneum.If endoscopy is not available or technical obstacles pre-clude PEG placement, the interventional radiologist can attempt the procedure percutaneously under fluoroscopic guidance by first insufflating the stomach against the abdominal wall with a nasogastric tube. If this also is unsuccessful, surgical gas-trostomy tube placement can be considered, particularly with minimally invasive methods. When surgery is contemplated, it may be wise to consider directly accessing the small bowel for nutrition delivery.Although PEG tubes enhance nutritional delivery, facili-tate nursing care, and are superior to nasogastric tubes, serious complications occur in approximately 3% of patients. These complications include wound infection, necrotizing fasciitis, peritonitis, aspiration, leaks, dislodgment, bowel perforation, enteric fistulas, bleeding, and aspiration pneumonia.273 For patients with significant gastroparesis or gastric outlet obstruc-tion, feedings through PEG tubes are hazardous. In such cases, the PEG tube can be used for decompression and allow access for converting the PEG tube to a transpyloric feeding tube.Percutaneous Endoscopic Gastrostomy-Jejunostomy and Direct Percutaneous Endoscopic Jejunostomy. Although gastric bolus feedings are more physiologic, patients who can-not tolerate gastric feedings or who have significant aspiration risks should be fed directly past the pylorus. In the percutane-ous endoscopic gastrostomy-jejunostomy (PEG-J) method, a 9F to 12F tube is passed through an existing PEG tube, past the pylorus, and into the duodenum. This can be achieved by endoscopic or fluoroscopic guidance. With weighted catheter tips and guidewires, the tube can be further advanced past the ligament of Treitz. However, the incidence of long-term PEG-J tube malfunction has been reported to be >50% as a result of ret-rograde tube migration into the stomach, kinking, or clogging.Direct percutaneous endoscopic jejunostomy (DPEJ) tube placement uses the same techniques as PEG tube placement but requires an enteroscope or colonoscope to reach the jejunum. DPEJ tube malfunctions are probably less frequent than PEG-J tube malfunctions, and kinking or clogging is usually averted by placement of larger-caliber catheters. The success rate of DPEJ tube placement is variable because of the complexity of endo-scopic skills required to locate a suitable jejunal site. In such cases where endoscopic means are not feasible, surgical jeju-nostomy tube placement is more appropriate, especially when minimally invasive techniques are available.Surgical Gastrostomy and Jejunostomy. For a patient undergoing complex abdominal or trauma surgery, thought should be given during surgery to the possible routes for sub-sequent nutritional support because laparotomy affords direct access to the stomach or small bowel. The only absolute contra-indication to feeding jejunostomy is distal intestinal obstruction. Relative contraindications include severe edema of the intestinal wall, radiation enteritis, inflammatory bowel disease, ascites, severe immunodeficiency, and bowel ischemia. Needle-catheter jejunostomies also can be done with a minimal learning curve. The biggest drawback usually is possible clogging and knotting of the 6F catheter.274Abdominal distention and cramps are common adverse effects of early enteral nutrition. Some have also reported impaired respiratory mechanics as a result of intolerance to enteral feedings. These are mostly correctable by temporarily discontinuing feedings and resuming at a lower infusion rate.Pneumatosis intestinalis and small-bowel necrosis are infrequent but significant problems in patients receiving jejunal tube feedings. Several contributing factors have been proposed, including the hyperosmolarity of enteral solutions, bacte-rial overgrowth, fermentation, and accumulation of metabolic breakdown products. The common pathophysiology is believed to be bowel distention and consequent reduction in bowel wall perfusion. Risk factors for these complications include cardio-genic and circulatory shock, vasopressor use, diabetes mellitus, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Therefore, enteral feedings in the critically ill patient should be delayed until adequate resuscitation has been achieved. As alternatives, dilut-ing standard enteral formula, delaying the progression to goal infusion rates, or using monomeric solutions with low osmolal-ity requiring less digestion by the gastrointestinal tract all have been successfully used.PARENTERAL NUTRITIONParenteral nutrition is the continuous infusion of a hyperosmo-lar solution containing carbohydrates, proteins, fat, and other necessary nutrients through an indwelling catheter inserted into the superior vena cava. To obtain the maximum benefit, the calorie to protein ratio must be adequate (at least 100 to  150 kcal/g nitrogen), and both carbohydrates and proteins must be infused simultaneously. When the sources of calories and nitrogen are given at different times, there is a significant decrease in nitrogen utilization. These nutrients can be given in quantities considerably greater than the basic caloric and nitro-gen requirements, and this method has proved to be highly suc-cessful in achieving growth and development, positive nitrogen balance, and weight gain in a variety of clinical situations. Clini-cal trials and meta-analysis of studies of parenteral feeding in the perioperative period have suggested that preoperative nutri-tional support may benefit some surgical patients, particularly those with extensive malnutrition.Historically, short-term use of parenteral nutrition (PN) in critically ill patients (i.e., duration of <7 days) when enteral Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   7201/03/19   6:50 PM 73SYSTEMIC RESPONSE TO INJURY AND METABOLIC SUPPORTCHAPTER 2nutrition (EN) may have been instituted was associated with higher rates of infectious complications. It appears, however, that the increased mortality associated with PN may have been associated with excessive caloric delivery. More recent data have shown no mortality difference between EN and PN when caloric delivery was reduced and matched. A recent meta-analysis confirmed this result and noted no increase in infectious complications.250 That being said, the risk/benefit for PN in the ICU is much smaller and in a patient with low nutritional risk provides little benefit over the first week of hospitalization in the ICU.Rationale for Parenteral NutritionThe principal indications for parenteral nutrition are malnu-trition, sepsis, or surgical or traumatic injury in seriously ill patients for whom use of the gastrointestinal tract for feedings is not possible.247 Parenteral nutrition should not be used based solely on the medical diagnosis or disease state. Rather, PN use is recommended for those critically ill or injured patients who are at high nutritional risk, when EN is not possible. Alter-nately, PN can also be used to supplement EN after 1 week of use if use of EN is unable to meet >60% of energy and protein requirements.247The safe and successful use of parenteral nutrition requires proper selection of patients with specific nutritional needs, expe-rience with the technique, and an awareness of the associated complications. In patients with significant malnutrition, paren-teral nutrition can rapidly improve nitrogen balance, which may enhance immune function. Routine postoperative use of paren-teral nutrition is not shown to have clinical benefit and may be associated with a significant increase in complication rate. As with enteral nutrition, the fundamental goals are to provide suf-ficient calories and nitrogen substrate to promote tissue repair and to maintain the integrity or growth of lean tissue mass.Total Parenteral NutritionTotal parenteral nutrition (TPN), also referred to as central parenteral nutrition, requires access to a large-diameter vein to deliver the entire nutritional requirements of the individual. Dextrose content of the solution is high (15%–25%), and all other macronutrients and micronutrients are deliverable by this route.Peripheral Parenteral NutritionThe lower osmolarity of the solution used for peripheral par-enteral nutrition (PPN), secondary to reduced levels of dex-trose (5% to 10%) and protein (3%), allows its administration via peripheral veins. Some nutrients cannot be supplemented because they cannot be concentrated into small volumes. There-fore, PPN is not appropriate for repleting patients with severe malnutrition. It can be considered if central routes are not avail-able or if supplemental nutritional support is required. Typi-cally, PPN is used for short periods (<2 weeks). Beyond this time, TPN should be instituted.Initiation of Parenteral NutritionThe basic solution for parenteral nutrition contains a final con-centration of 15% to 25% dextrose and 3% to 5% crystalline amino acids. The solutions usually are prepared in sterile condi-tions in the pharmacy from commercially available kits contain-ing the component solutions and transfer apparatus. Preparation in the pharmacy under laminar flow hoods reduces the incidence of bacterial contamination of the solution. Proper preparation with suitable quality control is absolutely essential to avoid sep-tic complications.The proper provision of electrolytes and amino acids must take into account routes of fluid and electrolyte loss, renal function, metabolic rate, cardiac function, and the under-lying disease state.Intravenous vitamin preparations also should be added to parenteral formulas. Vitamin deficiencies are rare occurrences if such preparations are used. In addition, because vitamin K is not part of any commercially prepared vitamin solution, it should be supplemented on a weekly basis. During prolonged parenteral nutrition with fat-free solutions, essential fatty acid deficiency may become clinically apparent and manifests as dry, scaly der-matitis and loss of hair. The syndrome may be prevented by periodic infusion of a fat emulsion at a rate equivalent to 10% to 15% of total calories. Essential trace minerals may be required after prolonged TPN and may be supplied by direct addition of commercial preparations. The most frequent presentation of trace mineral deficiencies is the eczematoid rash develop-ing both diffusely and at intertriginous areas in zinc-deficient patients. Other rare trace mineral deficiencies include a micro-cytic anemia associated with copper deficiency, and glucose intolerance presumably related to chromium deficiency. The latter complications are seldom seen except in patients receiving parenteral nutrition for extended periods. The daily administra-tion of commercially available trace mineral supplements will obviate most such problems.Depending on fluid and nitrogen tolerance, parenteral nutrition solutions generally can be increased over 2 to 3 days toward the desired infusion rate. Current recommendations sug-gest that hypocaloric nutrition (high protein with lower caloric dosing) be considered in the critically ill or injured over the first week in the ICU. The suggested target dose is <20 kcal/kg per day or <80% of estimated caloric needs with adequate pro-tein (>1.2 g/kg per day). This strategy is suggested to minimize risk of both hyperglycemia and insulin resistance, which may reduce infectious complications. Insulin may be supplemented as necessary to ensure glucose tolerance, with a targeted blood glucose range of 140 or 150 to 180 mg/dL for the general ICU population.247 Administration of additional intravenous fluids and electrolytes may occasionally be necessary in patients with persistently high fluid losses.The patient should be carefully monitored for development of electrolyte, volume, acid-base, and septic complications. Vital signs and urinary output should be measured regularly, and the patient should be weighed regularly. Frequent adjust-ments of the volume and composition of the solutions are neces-sary during the course of therapy. Samples for measurement of electrolytes are drawn daily until levels are stable and every 2 or 3 days thereafter. Blood counts, blood urea nitrogen level, lev-els of liver function indicators, and phosphate and magnesium levels are determined at least weekly.The urine or capillary blood glucose level is checked every 6 hours, and serum glucose concentration is checked at least once daily during the first few days of the infusion and at fre-quent intervals thereafter. Relative glucose intolerance, which often manifests as glycosuria, may occur after initiation of par-enteral nutrition. If blood glucose levels remain elevated or gly-cosuria persists, the dextrose concentration may be decreased, the infusion rate slowed, or regular insulin added to each bottle. The rise in blood glucose concentration observed after initiating parenteral nutrition may be temporary, as the normal pancreas Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   7301/03/19   6:50 PM 74BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iincreases its output of insulin in response to the continuous car-bohydrate infusion. In patients with diabetes mellitus, additional insulin may be required.Potassium is essential to achieve positive nitrogen bal-ance and replace depleted intracellular stores. In addition, a significant shift of potassium ion from the extracellular to the intracellular space may take place because of the large glucose infusion, with resultant hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, and poor glucose utilization. In some cases, as much as 240 mEq of potassium ion daily may be required. Hypokalemia may cause glycosuria, which would be treated with potassium, not insulin. Thus, before giving insulin, the serum potassium level must be checked to avoid exacerbating the hypokalemia.Patients with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus may exhibit wide fluctuations in blood glucose levels while receiving parenteral nutrition. This may require protocol-driven intrave-nous insulin therapy. In addition, partial replacement of dex-trose calories with lipid emulsions may alleviate these problems in selected patients.Lipid emulsions derived from soybean or safflower oils are widely used as an adjunctive nutrient to prevent the development of essential fatty acid deficiency, although recent data support reducing the overall omega-6 PUFA load in favor of omega-3 PUFA or MCT. Current recommendations are to limit intrave-nous fat emulsion infusion over the first week of hospitalization to a maximum of 100 g per week delivered in two divided doses. This is based on standard emulsions that are soy-based. As data is acquired for omega-3 PUFAs, including fish-oil or olive-oil based emulsions, these recommendations may alter.The delivery of parenteral nutrition requires central intra-venous access. Temporary or short-term access can be achieved with a 16-gauge percutaneous catheter inserted into a subclavian or internal jugular vein and threaded into the superior vena cava. More permanent access with the intention of providing long-term or home parenteral nutrition can be achieved by placement of a catheter with a subcutaneous port for access by tunneling a catheter with a substantial subcutaneous length or threading a long catheter through the basilic or cephalic vein into the supe-rior vena cava.Complications of Parenteral NutritionTechnical Complications. One of the more common and seri-ous complications associated with long-term parenteral feed-ing is sepsis secondary to contamination of the central venous catheter. Contamination of solutions should also be considered, but it is rare when proper pharmacy protocols have been fol-lowed. Central line-associated blood stream infections (CLA-BSI) occur as a consequence of hematogenous seeding of the cath-eter with bacteria. One of the earliest signs of systemic sepsis from CVA-BSI may be the sudden development of glucose intolerance (with or without temperature increase) in a patient who previously has been maintained on parenteral alimen-tation without difficulty. When this occurs, or if high fever  (> 38.5°C [101.3°F]) develops without obvious cause, a dili-gent search for a potential septic focus is indicated. Other causes of fever should also be investigated. If fever persists, the infu-sion catheter should be removed and submitted for culture. If the catheter is the cause of the fever, removal of the infectious source is usually followed by rapid defervescence. Some centers are now replacing catheters considered at low risk for infec-tion over a guidewire. However, if blood cultures are positive and the catheter tip is also positive, then the catheter should be removed and placed in a new site. Should evidence of infec-tion persist over 24 to 48 hours without a definable source, the catheter should be replaced into the opposite subclavian vein or into one of the internal jugular veins, and the infusion should be restarted.275The use of multilumen catheters may be associated with a slightly increased risk of infection. This is most likely asso-ciated with greater catheter manipulation and intensive use. The rate of catheter infection is highest for those placed in the femoral vein, lower for those in the jugular vein, and lowest for  those in the subclavian vein. When catheters are indwelling for <3 days, infection risks are negligible. If indwelling time is  3 to 7 days, the infection risk is 3% to 5%. Indwelling times of  >7 days are associated with a catheter infection risk of 5% to 10%. Strict adherence to barrier precautions also reduces the rate of infection as can the implementation of procedure checklists to ensure compliance with evidence-based guidelines shown to reduce infectious risk.276Other complications related to catheter placement include the development of pneumothorax, hemothorax, hydrothorax, subclavian artery injury, thoracic duct injury, cardiac arrhyth-mia, air embolism, catheter embolism, and cardiac perforation with tamponade. All of these complications may be avoided by strict adherence to proper techniques. Further, the use of ultra-sonographic guidance during CV line placement has been dem-onstrated to significantly decrease the failure rate, complication rate, and number of attempts required for successful access.277Metabolic Complications. Hyperglycemia may develop with normal rates of infusion in patients with impaired glucose toler-ance or in any patient if the hypertonic solutions are adminis-tered too rapidly. This is a particularly common complication in patients with latent diabetes and in patients subjected to severe surgical stress or trauma. Treatment of the condition consists of volume replacement with correction of electrolyte abnormali-ties and the administration of insulin. This complication can be avoided with careful attention to daily fluid balance and frequent monitoring of blood glucose levels and serum electrolytes.Increasing experience has emphasized the importance of not overfeeding the parenterally nourished patient. This is particularly true for the depleted patient in whom excess calo-rie infusion may result in carbon dioxide retention and respi-ratory insufficiency. In addition, excess feeding also has been related to the development of hepatic steatosis or marked gly-cogen deposition in selected patients. Cholestasis and forma-tion of gallstones are common in patients receiving long-term parenteral nutrition. Mild but transient abnormalities of serum transaminase, alkaline phosphatase, and bilirubin levels occur in many parenterally nourished patients. Failure of the liver enzymes to plateau or return to normal over 7 to 14 days should suggest another etiology.Intestinal Atrophy. Lack of intestinal stimulation is associ-ated with intestinal mucosal atrophy, diminished villous height, bacterial overgrowth, reduced lymphoid tissue size, reduced immunoglobulin A production, and impaired gut immunity. The full clinical implications of these changes are not well real-ized, although bacterial translocation has been demonstrated in animal models. The most efficacious method to prevent these changes is to provide at least some nutrients enterally. In patients requiring TPN, it may be feasible to infuse small amounts of feedings via the gastrointestinal tract.Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   7401/03/19   6:50 PM 75SYSTEMIC RESPONSE TO INJURY AND METABOLIC SUPPORTCHAPTER 2REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Horiguchi H, Loftus TJ, Hawkins RB, et al. Innate immu-nity in the persistent inflammation, immunosuppression, and catabolism syndrome and its implications for therapy. Front Immunol. 2018;9:595. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.00595	2.	Minei JP, Cuschieri J, Sperry J, et al. The changing pattern and implications of multiple organ failure after blunt injury with hemorrhagic shock. Crit Care Med. 2012;40(4):1129-1135. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0b013e3182376e9f	3.	Xiao W, Mindrinos MN, Seok J, et al. A genomic storm in critically injured humans. J Exp Med. 2011;208(13): 2581-2590. doi: 10.1084/jem.20111354	4.	Lowry SF. Human endotoxemia: a model for mechanistic insight and therapeutic targeting. Shock. 2005;24(suppl 1):94-100.	5.	Pugin J. How tissue injury alarms the immune system and causes a systemic inflammatory response syndrome. Ann Intensive Care. 2012;2(1):27. doi: 10.1186/2110-5820-2-27	6.	Manson J, Thiemermann C, Brohi K. Trauma alarmins as activators of damage-induced inflammation. Br J Surg. 2012;99(suppl 1):12-20. doi: 10.1002/bjs.7717	7.	Chan JK, Roth J, Oppenheim JJ, et al. Alarmins: awaiting a clinical response. J Clin Invest. 2012;122(8):2711-2719. doi: 10.1172/JCI62423	8.	Bertheloot D, Latz E. HMGB1, IL-1alpha, IL-33 and S100 proteins: dual-function alarmins. Cell Mol Immunol. 2017;14(1):43-64. doi: 10.1038/cmi.2016.34	9.	Fontaine M, Lepape A, Piriou V, Venet F, Friggeri A. Innate danger signals in acute injury: From bench to bedside. Anaesth Crit Care Pain Med. 2016;35(4):283-292. doi: 10.1016/j.accpm.2015.10.009	10.	Andersson U, Tracey KJ. HMGB1 is a therapeutic target for  sterile inflammation and infection. Ann Rev Immunol. 2011;29: 139-162. doi: 10.1146/annurev-immunol-030409-101323	11.	Yang H, Hreggvidsdottir HS, Palmblad K, et al. A critical cysteine is required for HMGB1 binding to Toll-like receptor 4 and activation of macrophage cytokine release. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010;107(26):11942-11947. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1003893107	12.	Yang H, Antoine DJ, Andersson U, Tracey KJ. The many faces of HMGB1: molecular structure-functional activity in inflammation, apoptosis, and chemotaxis. J Leukoc Biol. 2013;93(6):865-873. doi: 10.1189/jlb.1212662	13.	Peltz ED, Moore EE, Eckels PC, et al. HMGB1 is markedly elevated within 6 hours of mechanical trauma in humans. Shock. 2009;32(1):17-22.	14.	Weber DJ, Gracon AS, Ripsch MS, et al. The HMGB1-RAGE axis mediates traumatic brain injury-induced pulmo-nary dysfunction in lung transplantation. Sci Transl Med. 2014;6(252):252ra124. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3009443	15.	Horst K, Andruszkow H, Weber CD, et al. Thoracic trauma now and then: a 10 year experience from 16,773 severely injured patients. PLoS One. 2017;12(10):e0186712. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0186712	16.	Leijte GP, Custers H, Gerretsen J, et al. Increased plasma levels of danger-associated molecular patterns are associ-ated with immune suppression and postoperative infec-tions in patients undergoing cytoreductive surgery and hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy. Front Immu-nol. 2018;9:663. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.00663	17.	Lee S, Piao C, Kim G, Kim JY, Choi E, Lee M. Production and application of HMGB1 derived recombinant RAGE-antagonist peptide for anti-inflammatory therapy in acute lung injury. Eur J Pharm Sci. 2018;114:275-284. doi: 10.1016/j.ejps.2017.12.019	18.	Wang L, Liebmen MN, Wang X. Roles of mitochondrial DNA signaling in immune responses. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2017;1038:39-53. doi: 10.1007/978-981-10-6674-0_4	19.	Zhang Q, Raoof M, Chen Y, et al. Circulating mitochondrial DAMPs cause inflammatory responses to injury. Nature. 2010;464(7285):104-107. doi: 10.1038/nature08780	20.	West AP, Shadel GS, Ghosh S. Mitochondria in innate immune responses. Nat Rev Immunol. 2011;11(6):389-402. doi: 10.1038/nri2975	21.	Hu Q, Ren J, Wu J, et al. Elevated levels of plasma mitochon-drial dna are associated with clinical outcome in intra-abdominal infections caused by severe trauma. Surg Infect (Larchmt). 2017;18(5):610-618. doi: 10.1089/sur.2016.276	22.	Simmons JD, Lee YL, Mulekar S, et al. Elevated levels of plasma mitochondrial DNA DAMPs are linked to clinical outcome in severely injured human subjects. Ann Surg. 2013;258(4):591-596; discussion 96-98. doi: 10.1097/SLA.0b013e3182a4ea46	23.	McIlroy DJ, Jarnicki AG, Au GG, et al. Mitochondrial DNA neutrophil extracellular traps are formed after trauma and subsequent surgery. J Crit Care. 2014;29(6):1133 e1-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jcrc.2014.07.013	24.	McIlroy DJ, Bigland M, White AE, et al. Cell necrosis-independent sustained mitochondrial and nuclear DNA release following trauma surgery. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2015;78(2):282-288. doi: 10.1097/TA.0000000000000519	25.	Thurairajah K, Briggs GD, Balogh ZJ. The source of cell-free mitochondrial DNA in trauma and potential therapeutic strat-egies. Eur J Trauma Emerg Surg. 2018;44(3):325-334. doi: 10.1007/s00068-018-0954-3	26.	Timmermans K, Kox M, Scheffer GJ, Pickkers P. Danger in the intensive care unit: DAMPs in critically ill patients. Shock. 2016;45(2):108-116. doi: 10.1097/SHK.0000000000000506	27.	Quintana FJ, Cohen IR. Heat shock proteins as endogenous adjuvants in sterile and septic inflammation. J Immunol. 2005;175(5):2777-2782.	28.	Guisasola MC, Alonso B, Bravo B, Vaquero J, Chana F. An overview of cytokines and heat shock response in poly-traumatized patients. [Published online ahead of print November 3, 2017.] Cell Stress Chaperones. doi: 10.1007/s12192-017-0859-9	29.	Kojima M, Gimenes-Junior JA, Langness S, et al. Exo-somes, not protein or lipids, in mesenteric lymph activate inflammation: unlocking the mystery of post-shock mul-tiple organ failure. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2017;82(1): 42-50. doi: 10.1097/TA.0000000000001296	30.	Bausinger H, Lipsker D, Ziylan U, et al. Endotoxin-free heat-shock protein 70 fails to induce APC activation.  Eur J Immunol. 2002;32(12):3708-3713. doi: 10.1002/ 1521-4141(200212)32:12<3708::AID-IMMU3708>3.0.CO;2-C	31.	Stocki P, Dickinson AM. The immunosuppressive activity of heat shock protein 70. Autoimmune Dis. 2012;2012:617213. doi: 10.1155/2012/617213	32.	Muralidharan S, Mandrekar P. Cellular stress response and innate immune signaling: integrating pathways in host defense and inflammation. J Leukoc Biol. 2013;94(6):1167-1184. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0313153	33.	Calderwood SK, Murshid A. Siglecs take a TOLL on inflammation: deciphering the Hsp70 riddle. EMBO J. 2015;34(22):2733-2734. doi: 10.15252/embj.201593172	34.	Fong JJ, Sreedhara K, Deng L, et al. Immunomodulatory activity of extracellular Hsp70 mediated via paired receptors Siglec-5 and Siglec-14. EMBO J. 2015;34(22):2775-2788. doi: 10.15252/embj.201591407	35.	Ren B, Zou G, Huang Y, et al. Serum levels of HSP70 and other DAMP proteins can aid in patient diagnosis after trau-matic injury. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2016;21(4):677-686. doi: 10.1007/s12192-016-0694-4	36.	Timmermans K, Kox M, Vaneker M, et al. Plasma levels of danger-associated molecular patterns are associated with immune suppression in trauma patients. Intensive Care Med. 2016;42(4):551-561. doi: 10.1007/s00134-015-4205-3Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   7501/03/19   6:50 PM 76BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART I	37.	Moreth K, Iozzo RV, Schaefer L. Small leucine-rich proteogly-cans orchestrate receptor crosstalk during inflammation. Cell Cycle. 2012;11(11):2084-2091. doi: 10.4161/cc.20316	38.	Babelova A, Moreth K, Tsalastra-Greul W, et al. Biglycan, a danger signal that activates the NLRP3 inflammasome via toll-like and P2X receptors. J Biol Chem. 2009;284(36): 24035-24048. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.014266	39.	Donato R, Cannon BR, Sorci G, et al. Functions of S100  proteins. Curr Mol Med. 2013;13(1):24-57.	40.	Xia C, Braunstein Z, Toomey AC, Zhong J, Rao X. S100  Proteins as an important regulator of macrophage inflammation. Front Immunol. 2017;8:1908. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01908	41.	Schenten V, Plancon S, Jung N, et al. Secretion of the phos-phorylated form of S100A9 from neutrophils is essential for the proinflammatory functions of extracellular S100A8/A9. Front Immunol. 2018;9:447. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.00447	42.	Joly P, Marshall JC, Tessier PA, et al. S100A8/A9 and sRAGE kinetic after polytrauma; an explorative observational study. Scand J Trauma Resusc Emerg Med. 2017;25(1):114. doi: 10.1186/s13049-017-0455-0	43.	Oris C, Pereira B, Durif J, et al. The biomarker S100B and mild traumatic brain injury: a meta-analysis. Pediatrics. 2018;141(6). pii: e20180037. doi: 10.1542/peds.2018-0037	44.	Rainey T, Lesko M, Sacho R, Lecky F, Childs C. Predict-ing outcome after severe traumatic brain injury using the serum S100B biomarker: results using a single (24h) time-point. Resuscitation. 2009;80(3):341-345. doi: 10.1016/j.resuscitation.2008.11.021	45.	Soares MP, Bozza MT. Red alert: labile heme is an alar-min. Curr Opin Immunol. 2016;38:94-100. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2015.11.006	46.	Figueiredo RT, Fernandez PL, Mourao-Sa DS, et al. Char-acterization of heme as activator of Toll-like receptor 4.  J Biol Chem. 2007;282(28):20221-20229. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M610737200	47.	Dutra FF, Alves LS, Rodrigues D, et al. Hemolysis-induced lethality involves inflammasome activation by heme. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014;111(39):E4110-E4118. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1405023111	48.	Chen G, Zhang D, Fuchs TA, Manwani D, Wagner DD, Frenette PS. Heme-induced neutrophil extracellular traps contribute to the pathogenesis of sickle cell disease. Blood. 2014;123(24):3818-3827. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-10-529982	49.	Haimovich B, Reddell MT, Calvano JE, et al. A novel model of common Toll-like receptor 4and injury-induced transcriptional themes in human leukocytes. Crit Care. 2010;14(5):R177. doi: 10.1186/cc9283	50.	McGhan LJ, Jaroszewski DE. The role of toll-like receptor-4 in the development of multi-organ failure following traumatic haemorrhagic shock and resuscitation. Injury. 2012;43(2): 129-136. doi: 10.1016/j.injury.2011.05.032	51.	Mollen KP, Levy RM, Prince JM, et al. Systemic inflammation and end organ damage following trauma involves functional TLR4 signaling in both bone marrow-derived cells and paren-chymal cells. J Leukoc Biol. 2008;83(1):80-88. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0407201	52.	Zettel K, Korff S, Zamora R, et al. Toll-like receptor 4 on both myeloid cells and dendritic cells is required for systemic inflammation and organ damage after hemorrhagic shock with tissue trauma in mice. Front Immunol. 2017;8:1672. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01672	53.	Huber-Lang M, Lambris JD, Ward PA. Innate immune responses to trauma. Nat Immunol. 2018;19(4):327-341. doi: 10.1038/s41590-018-0064-8	54.	Qian C, Cao X. Regulation of Toll-like receptor signaling pathways in innate immune responses. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2013;1283:67-74. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2012.06786.x	55.	Ulrichts P, Bovijn C, Lievens S, Beyaert R, Tavernier J,  Peelman F. Caspase-1 targets the TLR adaptor Mal at a cru-cial TIR-domain interaction site. J Cell Sci. 2010;123(pt 2): 256-265. doi: 10.1242/jcs.056002	56.	Lahiri R, Derwa Y, Bashir Z, et al. Systemic inflam-matory response syndrome after major abdominal sur-gery predicted by early upregulation of TLR4 and TLR5. Ann Surg. 2016;263(5):1028-1037. doi: 10.1097/SLA.0000000000001248	57.	Latz E, Xiao TS, Stutz A. Activation and regulation of the inflammasomes. Nat Rev Immunol. 2013;13(6):397-411. doi: 10.1038/nri3452	58.	Jo EK, Kim JK, Shin DM, Sasakawa C. Molecular mecha-nisms regulating NLRP3 inflammasome activation. Cell Mol Immunol. 2016;13(2):148-159. doi: 10.1038/cmi.2015.95	59.	Kesavardhana S, Kanneganti TD. Mechanisms governing inflammasome activation, assembly and pyroptosis induc-tion. Int Immunol. 2017;29(5):201-210. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxx018	60.	Stow JL, Murray RZ. Intracellular trafficking and secretion of inflammatory cytokines. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 2013;24(3):227-239. doi: 10.1016/j.cytogfr.2013.04.001	61.	Zhang AQ, Zeng L, Gu W, et al. Clinical relevance of single nucleotide polymorphisms within the entire NLRP3 gene in patients with major blunt trauma. Crit Care. 2011;15(6):R280. doi: 10.1186/cc10564	62.	Osuka A, Hanschen M, Stoecklein V, Lederer JA. A protec-tive role for inflammasome activation following injury. Shock. 2012;37(1):47-55. doi: 10.1097/SHK.0b013e318234f7ff	63.	Adamczak S, Dale G, de Rivero Vaccari JP, Bullock MR,  Dietrich WD, Keane RW. Inflammasome proteins in cerebrospinal fluid of brain-injured patients as biomark-ers of functional outcome: clinical article. J Neurosurg. 2012;117(6):1119-1125. doi: 10.3171/2012.9.JNS12815	64.	Kerr N, de Rivero Vaccari JP, Abbassi S, et al. Traumatic brain injury-induced acute lung injury: evidence for activa-tion and inhibition of a neural-respiratory-inflammasome axis. [Published online ahead of print June 8, 2018.] J Neu-rotrauma. doi: 10.1089/neu.2017.5430	65.	Chiffoleau E. C-Type Lectin-like receptors as emerging orchestrators of sterile inflammation represent potential thera-peutic targets. Front Immunol. 2018;9:227. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.00227	66.	Richardson MB, Williams SJ. MCL and Mincle: C-type lec-tin receptors that sense damaged self and pathogen-associated molecular patterns. Front Immunol. 2014;5:288. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2014.00288	67.	Hupfer T, Schick J, Jozefowski K, Voehringer D, Ostrop J, Lang R. Stat6-dependent inhibition of Mincle expression in mouse and human antigen-presenting cells by the Th2 Cytokine IL-4. Front Immunol. 2016;7:423. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2016.00423	68.	Brown GK. Glucose transporters: structure, function and consequences of deficiency. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2000;23(3): 237-246.	69.	Nicolls MR, Laubach VE. Traumatic brain injury: lungs in a RAGE. Sci Transl Med. 2014;6(252):252fs34. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3010259	70.	Oczypok EA, Perkins TN, Oury TD. All the “RAGE” in lung disease: the receptor for advanced glycation endproducts (RAGE) is a major mediator of pulmonary inflammatory responses. Paediatr Respir Rev. 2017;23:40-49. doi: 10.1016/j.prrv.2017.03.012	71.	Kunes P, Holubcova Z, Kolackova M, Krejsek J. Pentraxin 3(PTX 3): an endogenous modulator of the inflamma-tory response. Mediators Inflamm. 2012;2012:920517. doi: 10.1155/2012/920517Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   7601/03/19   6:50 PM 77SYSTEMIC RESPONSE TO INJURY AND METABOLIC SUPPORTCHAPTER 2	72.	Kleber C, Becker CA, Schmidt-Bleek K, Schaser KD, Haas NP. Are pentraxin 3 and transsignaling early markers for immunologic injury severity in polytrauma? A pilot study. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2013;471(9):2822-2830. doi: 10.1007/s11999-013-2922-x	73.	Fung A, Vizcaychipi M, Lloyd D, Wan Y, Ma D. Central nervous system inflammation in disease related conditions: mechanistic prospects. Brain Res. 2012;1446:144-155. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2012.01.061	74.	Czura CJ, Tracey KJ. Autonomic neural regulation of immunity. J Intern Med. 2005;257(2):156-166. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2796.2004.01442.x	75.	Pavlov VA, Tracey KJ. Neural regulation of immunity: molecular mechanisms and clinical translation. Nat Neuro-sci. 2017;20(2):156-166 doi: 10.1038/nn.4477	76.	Borovikova LV, Ivanova S, Zhang M, et al. Vagus nerve stimulation attenuates the systemic inflammatory response to endotoxin. Nature. 2000;405(6785):458-462. doi: 10.1038/35013070	77.	Wang H, Yu M, Ochani M, et al. Nicotinic acetylcholine recep-tor alpha 7 subunit is an essential regulator of inflammation. Nature. 2003;421(6921):384-388. doi: 10.1038/nature01339	78.	Rezende-Neto JB, Alves RL, Carvalho M, Jr., et al. Vagus nerve stimulation improves coagulopathy in hemorrhagic shock: a thromboelastometric animal model study. J Trauma Manag Outcomes. 2014;8:15. doi: 10.1186/1752-2897-8-15	79.	Heitzer MD, Wolf IM, Sanchez ER, Witchel SF, DeFranco DB. Glucocorticoid receptor physiology. Rev Endocr Metab Dis. 2007;8(4):321-330. doi: 10.1007/s11154-007-9059-8	80.	Silverman MN, Sternberg EM. Glucocorticoid regulation of inflammation and its functional correlates: from HPA axis to glucocorticoid receptor dysfunction. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2012;1261:55-63. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2012.06633.x	81.	Hardy RS, Raza K, Cooper MS. Endogenous glucocorti-coids in inflammation: contributions of systemic and local responses. Swiss Med Wkly. 2012;142:w13650. doi: 10.4414/smw.2012.13650	82.	Annane D, Pastores SM, Arlt W, et al. Critical illness-related corticosteroid insufficiency (CIRCI): a narrative review from a Multispecialty Task Force of the Society of Critical Care Medicine (SCCM) and the European Society of Intensive Care Medicine (ESICM). Intensive Care Med. 2017;43(12): 1781-1792. doi: 10.1007/s00134-017-4914-x	83.	Walker ML. Critical illness related corticosteroid insufficiency in trauma—a review. J Trauma Treat. 2012;1(6):139-144.	84.	Yang Y, Liu L, Jiang D, et al. Critical illness-related cor-ticosteroid insufficiency after multiple traumas: a multi-center, prospective cohort study. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2014;76(6):1390-1396. doi: 10.1097/TA.0000000000000221	85.	Dellinger RP, Levy MM, Carlet JM, et al. Surviving Sepsis Campaign: international guidelines for management of severe sepsis and septic shock: 2008. Crit Care Med. 2008;36(1): 296-327. doi: 10.1097/01.CCM.0000298158.12101.41	86.	Annane D, Pastores SM, Rochwerg B, et al. Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of critical illness-related corticosteroid insufficiency (CIRCI) in critically ill patients (Part I): Society of Critical Care Medicine (SCCM) and European Society of Intensive Care Medicine (ESICM) 2017. Intensive Care Med. 2017;43(12):1751-1763. doi: 10.1007/s00134-017-4919-5	87.	Pawig L, Klasen C, Weber C, Bernhagen J, Noels H. Diver-sity and inter-connections in the CXCR4 chemokine recep-tor/ligand family: molecular perspectives. Front Immunol. 2015;6:429. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2015.00429	88.	Flaster H, Bernhagen J, Calandra T, Bucala R. The mac-rophage migration inhibitory factor-glucocorticoid dyad: regulation of inflammation and immunity. Mol Endocrinol. 2007;21(6):1267-1280. doi: 10.1210/me.2007-0065	89.	Roger T, David J, Glauser MP, Calandra T. MIF regulates innate immune responses through modulation of Toll-like receptor 4. Nature. 2001;414(6866):920-924. doi: 10.1038/414920a	90.	Hayakawa M, Katabami K, Wada T, et al. Imbalance between macrophage migration inhibitory factor and corti-sol induces multiple organ dysfunction in patients with blunt trauma. Inflammation. 2011;34(3):193-197. doi: 10.1007/s10753-010-9223-2	91.	Agnese DM, Calvano JE, Hahm SJ, Calvano SE, Lowry SF. Insulin-like growth factor binding protein-3 is upregulated in LPS-treated THP-1 cells. Surg Infect (Larchmt). 2002;3(2): 119-125; discussion 25-26. doi: 10.1089/109629602760105781	92.	Takala J, Ruokonen E, Webster NR, et al. Increased mortal-ity associated with growth hormone treatment in critically ill adults. N Engl J Med. 1999;341(11):785-792. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199909093411102	93.	Jeschke MG, Finnerty CC, Kulp GA, Przkora R, Mlcak RP, Herndon DN. Combination of recombinant human growth hor-mone and propranolol decreases hypermetabolism and inflam-mation in severely burned children. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2008;9(2):209-216. doi: 10.1097/PCC.0b013e318166d414	94.	Cheyuo C, Jacob A, Wang P. Ghrelin-mediated sympathoinhi-bition and suppression of inflammation in sepsis. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2012;302(3):E265-E272. doi: 10.1152/ajpendo.00508.2011	95.	Qi L, Cui X, Dong W, et al. Ghrelin protects rats against trau-matic brain injury and hemorrhagic shock through upregula-tion of UCP2. Ann Surg. 2014;260(1):169-178. doi: 10.1097/SLA.0000000000000328	96.	Wong DL, Tai TC, Wong-Faull DC, et al. Epinephrine: a shortand long-term regulator of stress and development of illness: a potential new role for epinephrine in stress. Cell Mol Neuro-biol. 2012;32(5):737-748. doi: 10.1007/s10571-011-9768-0	97.	van der Poll T, Coyle SM, Barbosa K, Braxton CC, Lowry SF. Epinephrine inhibits tumor necrosis factor-alpha and poten-tiates interleukin 10 production during human endotoxemia.  J Clin Invest. 1996;97(3):713-719. doi: 10.1172/JCI118469	98.	Flierl MA, Rittirsch D, Huber-Lang M, Sarma JV, Ward PA. Catecholamines-crafty weapons in the inflammatory arsenal of immune/inflammatory cells or opening pandora’s box? Mol Med. 2008;14(3-4):195-204. doi: 10.2119/2007-00105.Flierl	99.	Kolmus K, Tavernier J, Gerlo S. beta2-Adrenergic recep-tors in immunity and inflammation: stressing NF-kappaB. Brain Behav Immun. 2015;45:297-310. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2014.10.007	100.	Padro CJ, Sanders VM. Neuroendocrine regulation of inflammation. Semin Immunol. 2014;26(5):357-368. doi: 10.1016/j.smim.2014.01.003	101.	Gilbert KC, Brown NJ. Aldosterone and inflammation. Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2010;17(3):199-204.	102.	Van den Berghe G. How does blood glucose control with insu-lin save lives in intensive care? J Clin Invest. 2004;114(9): 1187-1195. doi: 10.1172/JCI23506	103.	Sung J, Bochicchio GV, Joshi M, Bochicchio K, Tracy K,  Scalea TM. Admission hyperglycemia is predictive of outcome in critically ill trauma patients. J Trauma. 2005;59(1):80-83.	104.	Kansagara D, Fu R, Freeman M, Wolf F, Helfand M. Inten-sive insulin therapy in hospitalized patients: a system-atic review. Ann Intern Med. 2011;154(4):268-282. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-154-4-201102150-00008	105.	Alazawi W, Pirmadjid N, Lahiri R, Bhattacharya S. Inflammatory and immune responses to surgery and their clinical impact. Ann Surg. 2016;264(1):73-80. doi: 10.1097/SLA.0000000000001691Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   7701/03/19   6:50 PM 78BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART I	106.	Yang Y, Bazhin AV, Werner J, Karakhanova S. Reactive oxygen species in the immune system. Int Rev Immunol. 2013;32(3):249-270. doi: 10.3109/08830185.2012.755176	107.	Preiser JC. Oxidative stress. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 2012;36(2):147-154. doi: 10.1177/0148607111434963	108.	C. N, Cunningham-Bussell A. Beyond oxidative stress: an immunologist’s guide to reactive oxygen species. Nat Rev Immunol. 2013;13:349-361.	109.	Tschopp J, Schroder K. NLRP3 inflammasome activation: the convergence of multiple signalling pathways on ROS production? Nat Rev Immunol. 2010;10(3):210-215. doi: 10.1038/nri2725	110.	Mittal M, Siddiqui MR, Tran K, Reddy SP, Malik AB. Reac-tive oxygen species in inflammation and tissue injury. Anti-oxid Redox Signal. 2014;20(7):1126-1167. doi: 10.1089/ars.2012.5149	111.	Belikov AV, Schraven B, Simeoni L. T cells and reactive oxygen species. J Biomed Sci. 2015;22:85. doi: 10.1186/s12929-015-0194-3	112.	Schroder M, Kaufman RJ. The mammalian unfolded protein response. Annu Rev Biochem. 2005;74:739-789. doi: 10.1146/annurev.biochem.73.011303.074134	113.	Grootjans J, Kaser A, Kaufman RJ, Blumberg RS. The unfolded protein response in immunity and inflammation. Nat Rev Immunol. 2016;16(8):469-484. doi: 10.1038/nri.2016.62	114.	Jeschke MG, Boehning D. Endoplasmic reticulum stress and insulin resistance post-trauma: similarities to type 2 diabetes. J Cell Mol Med. 2012;16(3):437-444. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2011.01405.x	115.	D’Osualdo A, Anania VG, Yu K, et al. Transcription factor ATF4 induces NLRP1 inflammasome expression during endo-plasmic reticulum stress. PLoS One. 2015;10(6):e0130635. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0130635	116.	Smith JA. Regulation of cytokine production by the unfolded protein response; implications for infection and autoimmunity. Front Immunol. 2018;9:422. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.00422	117.	Jeschke MG, Finnerty CC, Herndon DN, et al. Severe injury is associated with insulin resistance, endoplasmic reticulum stress response, and unfolded protein response. Ann Surg. 2012;255(2):370-378. doi: 10.1097/SLA.0b013e31823e76e7	118.	Thiessen SE, Van den Berghe G, Vanhorebeek I. Mitochondrial and endoplasmic reticulum dysfunction and related defense mechanisms in critical illness-induced multiple organ failure. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2017;1863(10 pt B):2534-2545. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2017.02.015	119.	Salminen A, Kaarniranta K, Kauppinen A. Integrated stress response stimulates FGF21 expression: systemic enhancer of longevity. Cell Signal. 2017;40:10-21. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2017.08.009	120.	Thiessen SE, Vanhorebeek I, Derese I, Gunst J, Van den  Berghe G. FGF21 response to critical illness: effect of blood glucose control and relation with cellular stress and survival. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015;100(10):E1319-E1327. doi: 10.1210/jc.2015-2700	121.	Jones SA, Mills KH, Harris J. Autophagy and inflamma-tory diseases. Immunol Cell Biol. 2013;91(3):250-258. doi: 10.1038/icb.2012.82	122.	Levine B, Mizushima N, Virgin HW. Autophagy in immunity and inflammation. Nature. 2011;469(7330):323-335. doi: 10.1038/nature09782	123.	Yen YT, Yang HR, Lo HC, et al. Enhancing autophagy with activated protein C and rapamycin protects against sepsis-induced acute lung injury. Surgery. 2013;153(5):689-698. doi: 10.1016/j.surg.2012.11.021	124.	Jean-Baptiste E. Cellular mechanisms in sepsis. J Intensive Care Med. 2007;22(2):63-72. doi: 10.1177/0885066606297123	125.	Kaczmarek A, Vandenabeele P, Krysko DV. Necroptosis: the release of damage-associated molecular patterns and its physiological relevance. Immunity. 2013;38(2):209-223. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2013.02.003	126.	Duprez L, Takahashi N, Van Hauwermeiren F, et al. RIP kinase-dependent necrosis drives lethal systemic inflamma-tory response syndrome. Immunity. 2011;35(6):908-918. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2011.09.020	127.	Vande Walle L, Lamkanfi M. Pyroptosis. Curr Biol. 2016;26(13):R568-R572. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2016.02.019	128.	Man SM, Karki R, Kanneganti TD. Molecular mecha-nisms and functions of pyroptosis, inflammatory caspases and inflammasomes in infectious diseases. Immunol Rev. 2017;277(1):61-75. doi: 10.1111/imr.12534	129.	Wang YC, Liu QX, Liu T, et al. Caspase-1-dependent pyrop-tosis of peripheral blood mononuclear cells predicts the devel-opment of sepsis in severe trauma patients: a prospective observational study. Medicine (Baltimore). 2018;97(8):e9859. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000009859	130.	Waters JP, Pober JS, Bradley JR. Tumour necrosis factor in infectious disease. J Pathol. 2013;230(2):132-147. doi: 10.1002/path.4187	131.	Khalil AA, Hall JC, Aziz FA, Price P. Tumour necrosis factor: implications for surgical patients. ANZ J Surg. 2006;76(11): 1010-1016. doi: 10.1111/j.1445-2197.2006.03921.x	132.	Dekker AB, Krijnen P, Schipper IB. Predictive value of cyto-kines for developing complications after polytrauma. World J Crit Care Med. 2016;5(3):187-200. doi: 10.5492/wjccm.v5.i3.187	133.	Di Paolo NC, Shayakhmetov DM. Interleukin 1alpha and the inflammatory process. Nat Immunol. 2016;17(8):906-913. doi: 10.1038/ni.3503	134.	Dinarello CA. Interleukin-1 in the pathogenesis and treatment of inflammatory diseases. Blood. 2011;117(14):3720-3732. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-07-273417	135.	Sitia R, Rubartelli A. The unconventional secretion of IL-1beta: handling a dangerous weapon to optimize inflamma-tory responses. [Published online ahead of print April 4, 2018.] Semin Cell Dev Biol. doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2018.03.011	136.	Stylianou E, Saklatvala J. Interleukin-1. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 1998;30(10):1075-1079.	137.	Sun M, Brady RD, Wright DK, et al. Treatment with an interleukin-1 receptor antagonist mitigates neuroinflamma-tion and brain damage after polytrauma. Brain Behav Immun. 2017;66:359-371. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2017.08.005	138.	Dinarello CA, Fantuzzi G. Interleukin-18 and host defense against infection. J Infect Dis. 2003;187(suppl 2):S370-S384. doi: 10.1086/374751	139.	Kaplanski G. Interleukin-18: Biological properties and role in disease pathogenesis. Immunol Rev. 2018;281(1):138-153. doi: 10.1111/imr.12616	140.	Novick D, Kim S, Kaplanski G, Dinarello CA. Interleukin-18, more than a Th1 cytokine. Semin Immunol. 2013;25(6): 439-448. doi: 10.1016/j.smim.2013.10.014	141.	Dolinay T, Kim YS, Howrylak J, et al. Inflammasome-regu-lated cytokines are critical mediators of acute lung injury. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2012;185(11):1225-1234. doi: 10.1164/rccm.201201-0003OC	142.	Kinoshita M, Miyazaki H, Ono S, Seki S. Immunoenhanc-ing therapy with interleukin-18 against bacterial infection in immunocompromised hosts after severe surgical stress. J Leukoc Biol. 2013;93(5):689-698. doi: 10.1189/jlb.1012502	143.	Molofsky AB, Savage AK, Locksley RM. Interleukin-33 in tissue homeostasis, injury, and inflammation. Immunity. 2015;42(6):1005-1019. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2015.06.006	144.	Bessa J, Meyer CA, de Vera Mudry MC, et al. Altered sub-cellular localization of IL-33 leads to non-resolving lethal inflammation. J Autoimmun. 2014;55:33-41. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2014.02.012Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   7801/03/19   6:50 PM 79SYSTEMIC RESPONSE TO INJURY AND METABOLIC SUPPORTCHAPTER 2	145.	Liao W, Lin JX, Leonard WJ. Interleukin-2 at the crossroads of effector responses, tolerance, and immunotherapy. Immunity. 2013;38(1):13-25. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2013.01.004	146.	Bachmann MF, Oxenius A. Interleukin 2: from immunos-timulation to immunoregulation and back again. EMBO Rep. 2007;8(12):1142-1148. doi: 10.1038/sj.embor.7401099	147.	Jawa RS, Anillo S, Huntoon K, Baumann H, Kulaylat M. Interleukin-6 in surgery, trauma, and critical care part II: clini-cal implications. J Intensive Care Med. 2011;26(2):73-87. doi: 10.1177/0885066610395679	148.	Rose-John S. IL-6 trans-signaling via the soluble IL-6 recep-tor: importance for the proinflammatory activities of IL-6. Int J Biol Sci. 2012;8(9):1237-1247. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.4989	149.	Song M, Kellum JA. Interleukin-6. Crit Care Med. 2005;33(12 suppl):S463-S465.	150.	Qiao Z, Wang W, Yin L, et al. Using IL-6 concentrations in the first 24 h following trauma to predict immunological com-plications and mortality in trauma patients: a meta-analysis. [Published online ahead of print November 14, 2017.] Eur J Trauma Emerg Surg. 2017. doi: 10.1007/s00068-017-0880-9	151.	Hutchins AP, Diez D, Miranda-Saavedra D. The IL-10/STAT3-mediated anti-inflammatory response: recent devel-opments and future challenges. Brief Funct Genomics. 2013; 12(6):489-498. doi: 10.1093/bfgp/elt028	152.	Vignali DA, Kuchroo VK. IL-12 family cytokines: immuno-logical playmakers. Nat Immunol. 2012;13(8):722-728. doi: 10.1038/ni.2366	153.	Weijer S, Florquin S, van der Poll T. Endogenous interleu-kin-12 improves the early antimicrobial host response to murine Escherichia coli peritonitis. Shock. 2005;23(1): 54-58.	154.	Abboud A, Namas RA, Ramadan M, et al. Computa-tional analysis supports an early, type 17 cell-associated divergence of blunt trauma survival and mortality. Crit Care Med. 2016;44(11):e1074-e1081. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000001951	155.	Seshadri A, Brat GA, Yorkgitis BK, et al. Phenotyping the immune response to trauma: a multiparametric sys-tems immunology approach. Crit Care Med. 2017;45(9): 1523-1530. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000002577	156.	Korn T, Bettelli E, Oukka M, Kuchroo VK. IL-17 and Th17 Cells. Ann Rev Immunol. 2009;27:485-517. doi: 10.1146/annurev.immunol.021908.132710	157.	Veldhoen M. Interleukin 17 is a chief orchestrator of immu-nity. Nat Immunol. 2017;18(6):612-621. doi: 10.1038/ni.3742	158.	Rauch I, Muller M, Decker T. The regulation of inflamma-tion by interferons and their STATs. JAK-STAT. 2013;2(1): e23820-1-13.	159.	Kernbauer E, Maier V, Rauch I, Muller M, Decker T. Route of infection determines the impact of type I interferons on innate immunity to Listeria monocytogenes. PLoS One. 2013;8(6):e65007. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065007	160.	Schroder K, Hertzog PJ, Ravasi T, Hume DA. Interferon-gamma: an overview of signals, mechanisms and functions. J Leukoc Biol. 2004;75(2):163-189. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0603252	161.	Kamp VM, Leentjens J, Pillay J, et al. Modulation of granu-locyte kinetics by GM-CSF/IFN-gamma in a human LPS rechallenge model. J Leukoc Biol. 2013;94(3):513-520. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0213066	162.	Ott J, Hiesgen C, Mayer K. Lipids in critical care medi-cine. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids. 2011;85(5): 267-273. doi: 10.1016/j.plefa.2011.04.011	163.	Stringham JR, Moore EE, Gamboni F, et al. Mesenteric lymph diversion abrogates 5-lipoxygenase activation in the kidney following trauma and hemorrhagic shock. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2014;76(5):1214-1221. doi: 10.1097/TA.0000000000000231	164.	Stormann P, Auner B, Schimunek L, et al. Leukotriene B4 indicates lung injury and on-going inflammatory changes after severe trauma in a porcine long-term model. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids. 2017;127:25-31. doi: 10.1016/j.plefa.2017.09.014	165.	Zhang MJ, Spite M. Resolvins: anti-inflammatory and pro-resolving mediators derived from omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids. Ann Rev Nutr. 2012;32:203-227. doi: 10.1146/annurev-nutr-071811-150726	166.	Calder PC, Adolph M, Deutz NE, et al. Lipids in the intensive care unit: recommendations from the ESPEN Expert Group. Clin Nutr. 2018;37(1):1-18. doi: 10.1016/j.clnu.2017.08.032	167.	Calder PC. n-3 fatty acids, inflammation, and immunity—relevance to postsurgical and critically ill patients. Lipids. 2004;39(12):1147-1161.	168.	Ricklin D, Hajishengallis G, Yang K, Lambris JD. Comple-ment: a key system for immune surveillance and homeostasis. Nat Immunol. 2010;11(9):785-797. doi: 10.1038/ni.1923	169.	Huber-Lang M, Gebhard F, Schmidt CQ, Palmer A, Denk S, Wiegner R. Complement therapeutic strategies in trauma, hemorrhagic shock and systemic inflammation—closing Pandora’s box? Semin Immunol. 2016;28(3):278-284. doi: 10.1016/j.smim.2016.04.005	170.	Ekdahl KN, Teramura Y, Hamad OA, et al. Dangerous liaisons: complement, coagulation, and kallikrein/kinin cross-talk act as a linchpin in the events leading to thromboinflammation. Immunol Rev. 2016;274(1):245-269. doi: 10.1111/imr.12471	171.	Saxena P, Thompson P, d’Udekem Y, Konstantinov IE.  Kallikrein-kinin system: a surgical perspective in post-aprotinin era. J Surg Res. 2011;167(1):70-77. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2009.12.020.	172.	Faerber L, Drechsler S, Ladenburger S, Gschaidmeier H, Fischer W. The neuronal 5-HT3 receptor network after 20 years of research—evolving concepts in management of pain and inflammation. Eur J Pharmacol. 2007;560(1):1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2007.01.028	173.	Duerschmied D, Suidan GL, Demers M, et al. Platelet sero-tonin promotes the recruitment of neutrophils to sites of acute inflammation in mice. Blood. 2013;121(6):1008-1015. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-06-437392	174.	de Esch IJ, Thurmond RL, Jongejan A, Leurs R. The hista-mine H4 receptor as a new therapeutic target for inflammation. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2005;26(9):462-469. doi: 10.1016/j.tips.2005.07.002	175.	O’Mahony L, Akdis M, Akdis CA. Regulation of the immune response and inflammation by histamine and histamine recep-tors. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2011;128(6):1153-1162. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2011.06.051	176.	Villarino AV, Kanno Y, O’Shea JJ. Mechanisms and conse-quences of Jak-STAT signaling in the immune system. Nat Immunol. 2017;18(4):374-384. doi: 10.1038/ni.3691	177.	Moodley D, Yoshida H, Mostafavi S, et al. Network phar-macology of JAK inhibitors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016;113(35):9852-9857. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1610253113	178.	Leonard WJ, O’Shea JJ. Jaks and STATs: biological impli-cations. Ann Rev Immunol. 1998;16:293-322 doi: 10.1146/annurev.immunol.16.1.293	179.	Perez-Baos S, Prieto-Potin I, Roman-Blas JA, Sanchez-Pernaute O, Largo R, Herrero-Beaumont G. Mediators and patterns of muscle loss in chronic systemic inflammation. Front Physiol. 2018;9:409. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2018.00409	180.	Duncan SA, Baganizi DR, Sahu R, Singh SR, Dennis VA. SOCS proteins as regulators of inflammatory responses induced by bacterial infections: a review. Front Microbiol. 2017;8:2431. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.02431	181.	Zhou D, Chen L, Yang K, Jiang H, Xu W, Luan J. SOCS molecules: the growing players in macrophage polarization Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   7901/03/19   6:50 PM 80BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iand function. Oncotarget. 2017;8(36):60710-60722. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.19940	182.	Trengove MC, Ward AC. SOCS proteins in development and disease. Am J Clin Exp Immunol. 2013;2(1):1-29.	183.	Sun L, Ye RD. Role of G protein-coupled receptors in inflam-mation. Acta Pharmacologica Sinica. 2012;33(3):342-350. doi: 10.1038/aps.2011.200	184.	Yoshimura A, Wakabayashi Y, Mori T. Cellular and molecular basis for the regulation of inflammation by TGF-beta. J Biochem. 2010;147(6):781-792. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvq043	185.	Licciardi PV, Karagiannis TC. Regulation of immune responses by histone deacetylase inhibitors. ISRN Hematol. 2012;2012:690901. doi: 10.5402/2012/690901	186.	Halaweish I, Nikolian V, Georgoff P, Li Y, Alam HB. Creat-ing a “prosurvival phenotype” through histone deacetylase inhibition: past, present, and future. Shock. 2015;44(suppl 1):6-16. doi: 10.1097/SHK.0000000000000319	187.	Chang P, Weykamp M, Dennahy IS, et al. Histone deacety-lase inhibitors: isoform selectivity improves survival in a hemorrhagic shock model. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2018;84(5):795-801. doi: 10.1097/TA.0000000000001824	188.	Georgoff PE, Nikolian VC, Bonham T, et al. Safety and tol-erability of intravenous valproic acid in healthy subjects: a phase I dose-escalation trial. Clin Pharmacokinet. 2018;57(2): 209-219. doi: 10.1007/s40262-017-0553-1	189.	Ameres SL, Zamore PD. Diversifying microRNA sequence and function. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2013;14(8):475-488. doi: 10.1038/nrm3611	190.	O’Neill LA, Sheedy FJ, McCoy CE. MicroRNAs: the fine-tuners of Toll-like receptor signalling. Nat Rev Immunol. 2011;11(3):163-175. doi: 10.1038/nri2957	191.	Wang J. Neutrophils in tissue injury and repair. Cell Tissue Res. 2018;371(3):531-539. doi: 10.1007/s00441-017-2785-7	192.	Day RB, Link DC. Regulation of neutrophil trafficking from the bone marrow. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2012;69(9):1415-1423. doi: 10.1007/s00018-011-0870-8	193.	Hazeldine J, Hampson P, Lord JM. The impact of trauma on neutrophil function. Injury. 2014;45(12):1824-1833. doi: 10.1016/j.injury.2014.06.021	194.	Kaplan MJ, Radic M. Neutrophil extracellular traps: double-edged swords of innate immunity. J Immunol. 2012;189(6):2689-2695. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1201719	195.	Alves-Filho JC, Tavares-Murta BM, Barja-Fidalgo C, et al. Neutrophil function in severe sepsis. Endocr Metab Immune Dis Drug Targets. 2006;6(2):151-158.	196.	Wang J, Hossain M, Thanabalasuriar A, Gunzer M, Meininger C, Kubes P. Visualizing the function and fate of neutro-phils in sterile injury and repair. Science. 2017;358(6359): 111-116. doi: 10.1126/science.aam9690	197.	Peiseler M, Kubes P. Macrophages play an essential role in trauma-induced sterile inflammation and tissue repair. Eur J Trauma Emerg Surg. 2018;44(3):335-349. doi: 10.1007/s00068-018-0956-1	198.	Rosas M, Davies LC, Giles PJ, et al. The transcription fac-tor Gata6 links tissue macrophage phenotype and prolifera-tive renewal. Science. 2014;344(6184):645-648. doi: 10.1126/science.1251414	199.	Venereau E, Schiraldi M, Uguccioni M, Bianchi ME. HMGB1 and leukocyte migration during trauma and sterile inflam-mation. Mol Immunol. 2013;55(1):76-82. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2012.10.037	200.	Murray PJ, Wynn TA. Protective and pathogenic functions of macrophage subsets. Nat Rev Immunol. 2011;11(11):723-737. doi: 10.1038/nri3073	201.	Wynn TA, Chawla A, Pollard JW. Macrophage biol-ogy in development, homeostasis and disease. Nature. 2013;496(7446):445-455. doi: 10.1038/nature12034	202.	Xiang M, Yuan Y, Fan L, et al. Role of macrophages in mobi-lization of hematopoietic progenitor cells from bone marrow after hemorrhagic shock. Shock. 2012;37(5):518-523. doi: 10.1097/SHK.0b013e318249b81d	203.	Niesler U, Palmer A, Radermacher P, Huber-Lang MS. Role of alveolar macrophages in the inflammatory response after trauma. Shock. 2014;42(1):3-10. doi: 10.1097/SHK.0000000000000167	204.	Safavian D, Leung CH, Kapus A, et al. Hemorrhagic shock/resuscitation reduces the M2 phenotype of alveolar macro-phages: a potential mechanism contributing to increased LPS-induced lung injury. [Published online ahead of print February 27, 2018.] Shock. doi: 10.1097/SHK.0000000000001135	205.	Manson J, Cole E, De’Ath HD, et al. Early changes within the lymphocyte population are associated with the development of multiple organ dysfunction syndrome in trauma patients. Crit Care. 2016;20(1):176. doi: 10.1186/s13054-016-1341-2	206.	Rendon JL, Choudhry MA. Th17 cells: critical mediators of host responses to burn injury and sepsis. J Leukoc Biol. 2012;92(3):529-538. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0212083	207.	Kimura F, Shimizu H, Yoshidome H, Ohtsuka M, Miyazaki M. Immunosuppression following surgical and traumatic injury. Surg Today. 2010;40(9):793-808. doi: 10.1007/s00595-010-4323-z	208.	Pillay J, Tak T, Kamp VM, Koenderman L. Immune suppres-sion by neutrophils and granulocytic myeloid-derived sup-pressor cells: similarities and differences. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2013;70(20):3813-3827. doi: 10.1007/s00018-013-1286-4	209.	Gallo PM, Gallucci S. The dendritic cell response to clas-sic, emerging, and homeostatic danger signals. Implications for autoimmunity. Front Immunol. 2013;4:138. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2013.00138	210.	Islam MN, Bradley BA, Ceredig R. Sterile post-traumatic immunosuppression. Clin Transl Immunology. 2016;5(4):e77. doi: 10.1038/cti.2016.13	211.	Andonegui G, Kerfoot SM, McNagny K, Ebbert KV, Patel KD, Kubes P. Platelets express functional Toll-like receptor-4. Blood. 2005;106(7):2417-2423. doi: 10.1182/blood-2005-03-0916	212.	Clark SR, Ma AC, Tavener SA, et al. Platelet TLR4 activates neutrophil extracellular traps to ensnare bacteria in septic blood. Nat Med. 2007;13(4):463-469. doi: 10.1038/nm1565	213.	Sillesen M, Johansson PI, Rasmussen LS, et al. Platelet acti-vation and dysfunction in a large-animal model of traumatic brain injury and hemorrhage. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2013;74(5):1252-1259. doi: 10.1097/TA.0b013e31828c7a6b	214.	Bachelet I, Levi-Schaffer F. Mast cells as effector cells: a co-stimulating question. Trends Immunol. 2007;28(8):360-365 doi: 10.1016/j.it.2007.06.007	215.	Johansson PI, Henriksen HH, Stensballe J, et al. Traumatic endotheliopathy: a prospective observational study of 424 severely injured patients. Ann Surg. 2017;265(3):597-603. doi: 10.1097/SLA.0000000000001751	216.	Kolaczkowska E, Kubes P. Neutrophil recruitment and function in health and inflammation. Nat Rev Immunol. 2013;13(3):159-175. doi: 10.1038/nri3399	217.	Ley K, Laudanna C, Cybulsky MI, Nourshargh S. Getting to the site of inflammation: the leukocyte adhesion cascade updated. Nat Rev Immunol. 2007;7(9):678-689. doi: 10.1038/nri2156	218.	Almahmoud K, Namas RA, Zaaqoq AM, et al. Prehospital hypotension is associated with altered inflammation dynam-ics and worse outcomes following blunt trauma in humans. Crit Care Med. 2015;43(7):1395-1404. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000000964	219.	Zaaqoq AM, Namas R, Almahmoud K, et al. Induc-ible protein-10, a potential driver of neurally controlled Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   8001/03/19   6:50 PM 81SYSTEMIC RESPONSE TO INJURY AND METABOLIC SUPPORTCHAPTER 2interleukin-10 and morbidity in human blunt trauma. Crit Care Med. 2014;42(6):1487-1497. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000000248	220.	Namas RA, Mi Q, Namas R, et al. Insights into the role of chemokines, damage-associated molecular patterns, and lymphocyte-derived mediators from computational models of trauma-induced inflammation. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2015;23(17):1370-1387. doi: 10.1089/ars.2015.6398	221.	Fortin CF, McDonald PP, Fulop T, Lesur O. Sepsis, leu-kocytes, and nitric oxide (NO): an intricate affair. Shock. 2010;33(4):344-352. doi: 10.1097/SHK.0b013e3181c0f068	222.	Bogdan C. Nitric oxide synthase in innate and adaptive immu-nity: an update. Trends Immunol. 2015;36(3):161-178. doi: 10.1016/j.it.2015.01.003	223.	Darwiche SS, Pfeifer R, Menzel C, et al. Inducible nitric oxide synthase contributes to immune dysfunction fol-lowing trauma. Shock. 2012;38(5):499-507. doi: 10.1097/SHK.0b013e31826c5afe	224.	Garcia-Ortiz A, Serrador JM. Nitric oxide signaling in T cell-mediated immunity. Trends Mol Med. 2018;24(4):412-427. doi: 10.1016/j.molmed.2018.02.002	225.	Cauwels A. Nitric oxide in shock. Kidney Int. 2007;72(5): 557-565. doi: 10.1038/sj.ki.5002340	226.	Su F, Huang H, Akieda K, et al. Effects of a selective iNOS inhibitor versus norepinephrine in the treatment of septic shock. Shock. 2010;34(3):243-249. doi: 10.1097/SHK.0b013e3181d75967	227.	Villalba N, Sackheim AM, Nunez IA, et al. Traumatic brain injury causes endothelial dysfunction in the systemic microcir-culation through arginase-1-dependent uncoupling of endothe-lial nitric oxide synthase. J Neurotrauma. 2017;34(1):192-203. doi: 10.1089/neu.2015.4340	228.	Zardi EM, Zardi DM, Dobrina A, Afeltra A. Prostacyclin in sep-sis: a systematic review. Prostaglandins Other Lipid Mediat. 2007;83(1-2):1-24. doi: 10.1016/j.prostaglandins.2006.12.004	229.	Wahlstrom MR, Olivecrona M, Ahlm C, et al. Effects of pros-tacyclin on the early inflammatory response in patients with traumatic brain injury-a randomised clinical study. Springer-plus. 2014;3:98. doi: 10.1186/2193-1801-3-98	230.	Yeager ME, Belchenko DD, Nguyen CM, Colvin KL, Ivy DD, Stenmark KR. Endothelin-1, the unfolded protein response, and persistent inflammation: role of pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2012;46(1):14-22. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2010-0506OC	231.	Piechota M, Banach M, Irzmanski R, et al. Plasma endothelin-1 lev-els in septic patients. J Intensive Care Med. 2007;22(4):232-239.	232.	Duan C, Yang G, Li T, Liu L. Advances in vascular hyporeac-tivity after shock: the mechanisms and managements. Shock. 2015;44(6):524-534. doi: 10.1097/SHK.0000000000000457	233.	Rondina MT, Weyrich AS, Zimmerman GA. Platelets as cellular effectors of inflammation in vascular dis-eases. Circ Res. 2013;112(11):1506-1519. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.113.300512	234.	Zimmerman GA, McIntyre TM, Prescott SM, Stafforini DM. The platelet-activating factor signaling system and its regula-tors in syndromes of inflammation and thrombosis. Crit Care Med. 2002;30(5 suppl):S294-S301.	235.	Varpula M, Pulkki K, Karlsson S, Ruokonen E, Pettila V. Pre-dictive value of N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide in severe sepsis and septic shock. Crit Care Med. 2007;35(5): 1277-1283. doi: 10.1097/01.CCM.0000261893.72811.0F	236.	Qian A, Zhang M, Zhao G. Dynamic detection of N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide helps to predict the outcome of patients with major trauma. Eur J Trauma Emerg Surg. 2015;41(1):57-64. doi: 10.1007/s00068-014-0406-7	237.	Mitch WE, Price SR. Mechanisms activating proteolysis to cause muscle atrophy in catabolic conditions. J Ren Nutr. 2003;13(2):149-152. doi: 10.1053/jren.2003.50019	238.	Uehara M, Plank LD, Hill GL. Components of energy expen-diture in patients with severe sepsis and major trauma: a basis for clinical care. Crit Care Med. 1999;27(7):1295-1302.	239.	Guirao X. Impact of the inflammatory reaction on intermediary metab-olism and nutrition status. Nutrition. 2002;18(11-12):949-952.	240.	Souba WW. Nutritional support. N Engl J Med. 1997;336(1): 41-48. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199701023360107	241.	Bistrian BR. Clinical aspects of essential fatty acid metabo-lism: Jonathan Rhoads Lecture. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 2003;27(3):168-175.	242.	Dahn MS, Mitchell RA, Lange MP, Smith S, Jacobs LA. Hepatic metabolic response to injury and sepsis. Surgery. 1995;117(5):520-530.	243.	Vidal-Puig A, O’Rahilly S. Metabolism. Controlling the glucose factory. Nature. 2001;413(6852):125-126. doi: 10.1038/35093198	244.	Volpi E, Sheffield-Moore M, Rasmussen BB, Wolfe RR. Basal muscle amino acid kinetics and protein synthesis in healthy young and older men. JAMA. 2001;286(10):1206-1212.	245.	Kondrup J, Rasmussen HH, Hamberg O, Stanga Z, Ad Hoc EWG. Nutritional risk screening (NRS 2002): a new method based on an analysis of controlled clinical trials. Clin Nutr. 2003;22(3):321-336.	246.	Heyland DK, Dhaliwal R, Jiang X, Day AG. Identifying critically ill patients who benefit the most from nutrition therapy: the development and initial validation of a novel risk assessment tool. Crit Care. 2011;15(6):R268. doi: 10.1186/cc10546	247.	Taylor BE, McClave SA, Martindale RG, et al. Guide-lines for the provision and assessment of nutrition support therapy in the adult critically ill patient: Society of Critical Care Medicine (SCCM) and American Society for Paren-teral and Enteral Nutrition (A.S.P.E.N.). Crit Care Med. 2016;44(2):390-438. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000001525	248.	Singer P, Anbar R, Cohen J, et al. The tight calorie control study (TICACOS): a prospective, randomized, controlled pilot study of nutritional support in critically ill patients. Intensive Care Med. 2011;37(4):601-609. doi: 10.1007/s00134-011-2146-z	249.	Heslin MJ, Brennan MF. Advances in perioperative nutrition: cancer. World J Surg. 2000;24(12):1477-1485.	250.	Elke G, van Zanten AR, Lemieux M, et al. Enteral versus parenteral nutrition in critically ill patients: an updated systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized con-trolled trials. Crit Care. 2016;20(1):117. doi: 10.1186/s13054-016-1298-1	251.	Reignier J, Boisrame-Helms J, Brisard L, et al. Enteral ver-sus parenteral early nutrition in ventilated adults with shock: a randomised, controlled, multicentre, open-label, parallel-group study (NUTRIREA-2). Lancet. 2018;391(10116):133-143. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)32146-3	252.	Heslin MJ, Latkany L, Leung D, et al. A prospective, ran-domized trial of early enteral feeding after resection of upper gastrointestinal malignancy. Ann Surg. 1997;226(4):567-577; discussion 77-80.	253.	Reintam Blaser A, Berger MM. Early or late feeding after ICU admission? Nutrients. 2017;9(12):E1278. doi: 10.3390/nu9121278	254.	Oshima T, Deutz NE, Doig G, Wischmeyer PE, Pichard C. Protein-energy nutrition in the ICU is the power couple: a hypothesis forming analysis. Clin Nutr. 2016;35(4):968-974. doi: 10.1016/j.clnu.2015.10.016	255.	Hoffer LJ. High-protein hypocaloric nutrition for non-obese critically ill patients. Nutr Clin Pract. 2018;33(3):325-332. doi: 10.1002/ncp.10091	256.	Di Girolamo FG, Situlin R, Fiotti N, Biolo G. Intermittent vs. continuous enteral feeding to prevent catabolism in acutely ill adult and pediatric patients. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care. 2017;20(5):390-395. doi: 10.1097/MCO.0000000000000397Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   8101/03/19   6:50 PM 82BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART I	257.	Bankhead R, Boullata J, Brantley S, et al. Enteral nutrition practice recommendations. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 2009;33(2):122-167. doi: 10.1177/0148607108330314	258.	Heyland DK, Murch L, Cahill N, et al. Enhanced protein-energy provision via the enteral route feeding protocol in critically ill patients: results of a cluster randomized trial. Crit Care Med. 2013;41(12):2743-2753. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0b013e31829efef5	259.	Exner R, Tamandl D, Goetzinger P, et al. Perioperative GLY-GLN infusion diminishes the surgery-induced period of immunosuppression: accelerated restoration of the lipo-polysaccharide-stimulated tumor necrosis factor-alpha response. Ann Surg. 2003;237(1):110-115. doi: 10.1097/01.SLA.0000041040.98684.CB	260.	van Zanten AR, Hofman Z, Heyland DK. Consequences of the REDOXS and METAPLUS trials: the end of an era of glutamine and antioxidant supplementation for critically ill patients? JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 2015;39(8):890-892. doi: 10.1177/0148607114567201	261.	Luiking YC, Ten Have GA, Wolfe RR, Deutz NE. Arginine de novo and nitric oxide production in disease states. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2012;303(10):E1177-E1189. doi: 10.1152/ajpendo.00284.2012	262.	Drover JW, Dhaliwal R, Weitzel L, Wischmeyer PE,  Ochoa JB, Heyland DK. Perioperative use of arginine-supplemented diets: a systematic review of the evidence.  J Am Coll Surg. 2011;212(3):385-399, 99 e1. doi: 10.1016/j.jamcollsurg.2010.10.016	263.	Brown B, Roehl K, Betz M. Enteral nutrition for-mula selection: current evidence and implications for practice. Nutr Clin Pract. 2015;30(1):72-85. doi: 10.1177/0884533614561791	264.	Marik PE, Flemmer M. Immunonutrition in the surgical patient. Minerva Anestesiol. 2012;78(3):336-342.	265.	Guidelines CCP. Enteral Feeding Guidelines. 2013.	266.	Pontes-Arruda A, Martins LF, de Lima SM, et al. Enteral nutri-tion with eicosapentaenoic acid, gamma-linolenic acid and antioxidants in the early treatment of sepsis: results from a mul-ticenter, prospective, randomized, double-blinded, controlled study: the INTERSEPT study. Crit Care. 2011;15(3):R144. doi: 10.1186/cc10267	267.	Choban P, Dickerson R, Malone A, et al. A.S.P.E.N. Clinical guidelines: nutrition support of hospitalized adult patients with obesity. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 2013;37(6):714-744. doi: 10.1177/0148607113499374	268.	Btaiche IF. Branched-chain amino acids in patients with hepatic encephalopathy. 1982. Nutr Clin Pract. 2003;18(1):97-100.	269.	Patton KM, Aranda-Michel J. Nutritional aspects in liver dis-ease and liver transplantation. Nutr Clin Pract. 2002;17(6): 332-340.	270.	Koretz RL, Avenell A, Lipman TO. Nutritional support for liver disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012(5):CD008344. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD008344.pub2	271.	DiSario JA, Baskin WN, Brown RD, et al. Endoscopic approaches to enteral nutritional support. Gastrointest Endosc. 2002;55(7):901-908.	272.	Heyland DK, Drover JW, Dhaliwal R, Greenwood J. Optimiz-ing the benefits and minimizing the risks of enteral nutrition in the critically ill: role of small bowel feeding. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 2002;26(6 suppl):S51-S55; discussion S56S57.	273.	Scolapio JS. Methods for decreasing risk of aspiration pneu-monia in critically ill patients. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 2002;26(6 suppl):S58-S61; discussion S61.	274.	Vanek VW. Ins and outs of enteral access: part 2—long term access—esophagostomy and gastrostomy. Nutr Clin Pract. 2003;18(1):50-74.	275.	Mermel LA, Allon M, Bouza E, et al. Clinical practice guide-lines for the diagnosis and management of intravascular catheter-related infection: 2009 Update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis. 2009;49(1):1-45. doi: 10.1086/599376	276.	Quality AfHRa. Tools for reducing central line-associated blood stream infections. Available at: http://www.ahrq.gov/legacy/qual/clabsitools/clabsitools.htm#purpose	277.	Maecken T, Grau T. Ultrasound imaging in vascular access. Crit Care Med. 2007;35(5 suppl):S178-S185. doi: 10.1097/01.CCM.0000260629.86351.A5Brunicardi_Ch02_p0027-p0082.indd   8201/03/19   6:50 PM
# Chunk 8868
Introduction	83Body Fluids	83Total Body Water / 83Fluid Compartments / 83Composition of Fluid Compartments / 83Osmotic Pressure / 84Body Fluid Changes	85Normal Exchange of Fluid and  Electrolytes / 85Classification of Body Fluid Changes / 85Disturbances in Fluid Balance / 85Volume Control / 86Concentration Changes / 86Composition Changes: Etiology and Diagnosis / 88Acid-Base Balance / 91Metabolic Derangements / 91Fluid and Electrolyte Therapy	93Parenteral Solutions / 93Alternative Resuscitative Fluids / 94Correction of Life-Threatening  Electrolyte Abnormalities / 94Preoperative Fluid Therapy / 96Intraoperative Fluid Therapy / 97Postoperative Fluid Therapy / 97Fluid Management in Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) Pathways / 97Special Considerations for the Postoperative Patient / 98Electrolyte Abnormalities in Specific   Surgical Patients	98Neurologic Patients / 98Malnourished Patients: Refeeding Syndrome / 98Acute Renal Failure Patients / 99Cancer Patients / 99Fluid and Electrolyte Management of the Surgical PatientMatthew D. Neal 3chapterINTRODUCTIONFluid and electrolyte management is paramount to the care of the surgical patient. Changes in both fluid volume and electro-lyte composition occur preoperatively, intraoperatively, and postoperatively, as well as in response to trauma and sepsis. The sections that follow review the normal anatomy of body fluids, electrolyte composition and concentration abnormalities and treatments, common metabolic derangements, and alternative resuscitative fluids. These concepts are then discussed in relationship to management of specific surgical patients and their commonly encountered fluid and electrolyte abnormalities.BODY FLUIDSTotal Body WaterWater constitutes approximately 50% to 60% of total body weight. The relationship between total body weight and total body water (TBW) is relatively constant for an individual and is primarily a reflection of body fat. Lean tissues such as muscle and solid organs have higher water content than fat and bone. As a result, young, lean males have a higher proportion of body weight as water than elderly or obese individuals. In an average young adult male, TBW accounts for 60% of total body weight, whereas in an average young adult female, it is 50%.1 The lower percent-age of TBW in females correlates with a higher percentage of adipose tissue and lower percentage of muscle mass in most. Estimates of percentage of TBW should be adjusted downward approximately 10% to 20% for obese individuals and upward by 10% for malnourished individuals. The highest percentage of TBW is found in newborns, with approximately 80% of their total body weight comprised of water. This decreases to approximately 65% by 1 year of age and thereafter remains fairly constant.1Fluid CompartmentsTBW is divided into three functional fluid compartments: plasma, extravascular interstitial fluid, and intracellular fluid (Fig. 3-1). The extracellular fluids (ECF), plasma, and intersti-tial fluid together compose about one-third of the TBW, and the intracellular compartment composes the remaining two thirds. The extracellular water composes 20% of the total body weight and is divided between plasma (5% of body weight) and inter-stitial fluid (15% of body weight). Intracellular water makes up approximately 40% of an individual’s total body weight, with the largest proportion in the skeletal muscle mass.Composition of Fluid CompartmentsThe normal chemical composition of the body fluid compart-ments is shown in Fig. 3-2. The ECF compartment is bal-anced between sodium, the principal cation, and chloride and bicarbonate, the principal anions. The intracellular fluid compartment is composed primarily of the cations potassium and magnesium, the anions phosphate and sulfate, and proteins. The concentration gradient between compartments is maintained by adenosine triphosphate–driven sodium-potassium pumps located within the cell membranes. The composition of the plasma and interstitial fluid differs only slightly in ionic compo-sition. The slightly higher protein content (organic anions) in plasma results in a higher plasma cation composition relative to the interstitial fluid, as explained by the Gibbs-Donnan equilib-rium equation. Proteins add to the osmolality of the plasma and contribute to the balance of forces that determine fluid balance across the capillary endothelium. Although the movement of ions and proteins between the various fluid compartments is restricted, water is freely diffusible. Water is distributed evenly throughout all fluid compartments of the body so that a given volume of water increases the volume of any one compartment 2Brunicardi_Ch03_p0083-p0102.indd   8308/12/18   10:07 AM 84Figure 3-1. Functional body fluid compartments. TBW = total body water.Key Points1	Proper management of fluid and electrolytes facilitates cru-cial homeostasis that allows cardiovascular perfusion, organ system function, and cellular mechanisms to respond to sur-gical illness.2	Knowledge of the compartmentalization of body fluids forms the basis for understanding pathologic shifts in these fluid spaces in disease states. Although difficult to quantify, a deficiency in the functional extracellular fluid compart-ment often requires resuscitation with isotonic fluids in sur-gical and trauma patients.3	Alterations in the concentration of serum sodium have pro-found effects on cellular function due to water shifts between the intracellular and extracellular spaces.4	Different rates of compensation between respiratory and metabolic components of acid-base homeostasis require fre-quent laboratory reassessment during therapy.5	Although active investigation continues, alternative resusci-tation fluids have limited clinical utility, other than the cor-rection of specific electrolyte abnormalities.6	Enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) protocols have markedly changed perioperative fluid management and are being used more frequently. ERAS minimizes perioperative fluid administration and focuses on early enteral intake to reduce morbidity associated with IV fluid administration.7	Most acute surgical illnesses are accompanied by some degree of volume loss or redistribution. Consequently, iso-tonic fluid administration is the most common initial intra-venous fluid strategy, while attention is being given to alterations in concentration and composition.8	Some surgical patients with neurologic illness, malnutrition, acute renal failure, or cancer require special attention to well-defined, disease-specific abnormalities in fluid and electrolyte status.% of Total body weightPlasma 5%Interstitialfluid 15%Intracellularvolume 40%Volume of TBWExtracellular volumePlasmaInterstitialIntracellular volume14,000 mL3500 mL10,500 mL28,000 mL42,000 mLMale (70 kg)10,000 mL2500 mL7500 mL20,000 mL30,000 mLFemale (60 kg)relatively little. Sodium, however, is confined to the ECF com-partment, and because of its osmotic and electrical properties, it remains associated with water. Therefore, sodium-containing fluids are distributed throughout the ECF and add to the volume of both the intravascular and interstitial spaces. Although the administration of sodium-containing fluids expands the intra-vascular volume, it also expands the interstitial space by approx-imately three times as much as the plasma.Osmotic PressureThe physiologic activity of electrolytes in solution depends on the number of particles per unit volume (millimoles per liter, or mmol/L), the number of electric charges per unit volume (milli-equivalents per liter, or mEq/L), and the number of osmotically active ions per unit volume (milliosmoles per liter, or mOsm/L). The concentration of electrolytes usually is expressed in terms of the chemical combining activity, or equivalents. An equiva-lent of an ion is its atomic weight expressed in grams divided by the valence:Equivalent = atomic weight (g)/valenceFor univalent ions such as sodium, 1 mEq is same as  1 mmol. For divalent ions such as magnesium, 1 mmol equals 2 mEq. The number of milliequivalents of cations must be bal-anced by the same number of milliequivalents of anions. How-ever, the expression of molar equivalents alone does not allow a physiologic comparison of solutes in a solution.The movement of water across a cell membrane depends primarily on osmosis. To achieve osmotic equilibrium, water moves across a semipermeable membrane to equalize the con-centration on both sides. This movement is determined by the concentration of the solutes on each side of the membrane. Osmotic pressure is measured in units of osmoles (osm) or milliosmoles (mOsm) that refer to the actual number of osmotically active particles. For example, 1 mmol of sodium chloride contributes to 2 mOsm (one from sodium and one from chloride). The principal determinants of osmolality are the concentrations of sodium, glucose, and urea (blood urea nitrogen, or BUN):Calculated serum osmolality = 2 sodium + (glucose/18)  + (BUN/2.8)The osmolality of the intracellular and extracellular fluids is maintained between 290 and 310 mOsm in each compart-ment. Because cell membranes are permeable to water, any Brunicardi_Ch03_p0083-p0102.indd   8408/12/18   10:07 AM 85FLUID AND ELECTROLYTE MANAGEMENT OF THE SURGICAL PATIENTCHAPTER 3change in osmotic pressure in one compartment is accompanied by a redistribution of water until the effective osmotic pressure between compartments is equal. For practical clinical purposes, most significant gains and losses of body fluid are directly from the extracellular compartment.BODY FLUID CHANGESNormal Exchange of Fluid and ElectrolytesThe healthy person consumes an average of 2000 mL of water per day, approximately 75% from oral intake and the rest extracted from solid foods. Daily water losses include 800 to 1200 mL in urine, 250 mL in stool, and 600 mL in insensible losses. Insensible losses of water occur through both the skin (75%) and lungs (25%) and can be increased by such factors as fever, hypermetabolism, and hyperventilation. Sensible water losses such as sweating or pathologic loss of gastrointestinal (GI) fluids vary widely, but these include the loss of electrolytes as well as water (Table 3-1). To clear the products of metabo-lism, the kidneys must excrete a minimum of 500 to 800 mL of urine per day, regardless of the amount of oral intake.The typical individual consumes 3 to 5 g of dietary salt per day, with the balance maintained by the kidneys. With hypo-natremia or hypovolemia, sodium excretion can be reduced to as little as 1 mEq/d or maximized to as much as 5000 mEq/d to achieve balance except in people with salt-wasting kidneys. Sweat is hypotonic, and sweating usually results in only a small sodium loss. GI losses are isotonic to slightly hypotonic and contribute little to net gain or loss of free water when measured and appropriately replaced by isotonic salt solutions.Classification of Body Fluid ChangesDisorders in fluid balance may be classified into three general categories: disturbances in (a) volume, (b) concentration, and (c) composition. Although each of these may occur simultaneously, each is a separate entity with unique mechanisms demanding individual correction. Isotonic gain or loss of salt solution results in extracellular volume changes, with little impact on intracellular fluid volume. If free water is added or lost from the ECF, water will pass between the ECF and intracellular fluid until solute concentration or osmolarity is equalized between the compartments. Unlike with sodium, the concentration of most other ions in the ECF can be altered without significant change in the total number of osmotically active particles, producing only a compositional change.Disturbances in Fluid BalanceExtracellular volume deficit is the most common fluid disorder in surgical patients and can be either acute or chronic. Acute volume deficit is associated with cardiovascular and central ner-vous system signs, whereas chronic deficits display tissue signs, such as a decrease in skin turgor and sunken eyes, in addition to cardiovascular and central nervous system signs (Table 3-2). Laboratory examination may reveal an elevated BUN level if the deficit is severe enough to reduce glomerular filtration and hemoconcentration. Urine osmolality usually will be higher than serum osmolality, and urine sodium will be low, typically <20 mEq/L. Serum sodium concentration does not necessar-ily reflect volume status and therefore may be high, normal, or low when a volume deficit is present. The most common cause of volume deficit in surgical patients is a loss of GI flu-ids (Table 3-3) from nasogastric suction, vomiting, diarrhea, or Figure 3-2. Chemical composition of body fluid compartments.PlasmaCATIONS154 mEq/L154 mEq/LCI−SO42–PO43–ProteinOrganicacids103HCO3−273516Na+142K+4Ca2+5Mg2+3ANIONSInterstitialfluidCATIONS153 mEq/L153 mEq/LCI−PO43–SO42–ProteinOrganicacids114HCO3−30531Na+144K+4Ca2+3Mg2+2ANIONSIntracellularfluidCATIONS200 mEq/L200 mEq/LK+150ProteinHCO3−SO42–HPO43–1015040Mg2+40Na+10ANIONSBrunicardi_Ch03_p0083-p0102.indd   8508/12/18   10:07 AM 86BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ienterocutaneous fistula. In addition, sequestration secondary to soft tissue injuries, burns, and intra-abdominal processes such as peritonitis, obstruction, or prolonged surgery can also lead to massive volume deficits.Extracellular volume excess may be iatrogenic or second-ary to renal dysfunction, congestive heart failure, or cirrhosis. Both plasma and interstitial volumes usually are increased. Symptoms are primarily pulmonary and cardiovascular (see Table 3-2). In fit patients, edema and hyperdynamic circula-tion are common and well tolerated. However, the elderly and patients with cardiac disease may quickly develop congestive heart failure and pulmonary edema in response to only a moder-ate volume excess.Volume ControlVolume changes are sensed by both osmoreceptors and baro-receptors. Osmoreceptors are specialized sensors that detect even small changes in fluid osmolality and drive changes in thirst and diuresis through the kidneys.2 For example, when plasma osmolality is increased, thirst is stimulated and water consumption increases, although the exact cell mechanism is not known.3 Additionally, the hypothalamus is stimulated to secrete vasopressin, which increases water reabsorption in the kidneys. Together, these two mechanisms return the plasma osmolality to normal. Baroreceptors also modulate volume in response to changes in pressure and circulating volume through specialized pressure sensors located in the aortic arch and carotid sinuses.4 Baroreceptor responses are both neural, through sympathetic and parasympathetic pathways, and hormonal, through substances including renin-angiotensin, aldosterone, atrial natriuretic pep-tide, and renal prostaglandins. The net result of alterations in renal sodium excretion and free water reabsorption is restoration of volume to the normal state.Concentration ChangesChanges in serum sodium concentration are inversely propor-tional to TBW. Therefore, abnormalities in TBW are reflected by abnormalities in serum sodium levels.Hyponatremia. A low serum sodium level occurs when there is an excess of extracellular water relative to sodium. Extracel-lular volume can be high, normal, or low (Fig. 3-3). In most cases of hyponatremia, sodium concentration is decreased as a consequence of either sodium depletion or dilution.5 Dilutional hyponatremia frequently results from excess extracellular water and therefore is associated with a high extracellular volume  status. Excessive oral water intake or iatrogenic intravenous (IV) excess free water administration can cause hyponatremia. Post-operative patients are particularly prone to increased secretion of antidiuretic hormone (ADH), which increases reabsorption 3Table 3-2Signs and symptoms of volume disturbancesSYSTEMVOLUME DEFICITVOLUME EXCESSGeneralizedWeight lossWeight gain Decreased skin turgorPeripheral edemaCardiacTachycardiaIncreased cardiac output Orthostasis/hypotensionIncreased central venous pressure Collapsed neck veinsDistended neck veins  MurmurRenalOliguria— Azotemia GIIleusBowel edemaPulmonary—Pulmonary edemaTable 3-1Water exchange (60to 80-kg man)ROUTESAVERAGE DAILY VOLUME (mL)MINIMAL (mL)MAXIMAL (mL)H2O gain:    Sensible:     Oral fluids800–150001500/h  Solid foods500–70001500 Insensible:     Water of oxidation250125800  Water of solution00500H2O loss:    Sensible:     Urine800–15003001400/h  Intestinal0–25002500/h  Sweat004000/h Insensible:     Lungs and skin6006001500Brunicardi_Ch03_p0083-p0102.indd   8608/12/18   10:07 AM 87FLUID AND ELECTROLYTE MANAGEMENT OF THE SURGICAL PATIENTCHAPTER 3of free water from the kidneys with subsequent volume expan-sion and hyponatremia. This is usually self-limiting in that both hyponatremia and volume expansion decrease ADH secretion. Additionally, a number of drugs can cause water retention and subsequent hyponatremia, such as antipsychotics and tricyclic antidepressants as well as angiotensin-converting enzyme inhib-itors. The elderly are particularly susceptible to drug-induced hyponatremia. Physical signs of volume overload usually are absent, and laboratory evaluation reveals hemodilution. Deple-tional causes of hyponatremia are associated with either a decreased intake or increased loss of sodium-containing fluids. A concomitant ECF volume deficit is common. Causes include decreased sodium intake, such as consumption of a low-sodium diet or use of enteral feeds, which are typically low in sodium; Table 3-3Composition of GI secretionsTYPE OF SECRETIONVOLUME (mL/24 h)NA (mEq/L)K (mEq/L)CL (mEq/L)HCO3− (mEq/L)Stomach1000–200060–9010–30100–1300Small intestine2000–3000120–1405–1090–12030–40Colon—6030400Pancreas600–800135–1455–1070–9095–115Bile300–800135–1455–1090–11030–40Figure 3-3. Evaluation of sodium abnormalities. ADH = antidiuretic hormone; SIADH = syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidi-uretic hormone.HighIncreased intakePostoperative ADH secretionDrugsHighIatrogenic sodium administrationMineralocorticoid excessAldosteronismCushing’s diseaseCongenital adrenal hyperplasiaHyponatremiaVolume statusNormalHyperglycemia˜Plasma lipids/proteinsSIADHWater intoxicationDiureticsHypernatremiaVolume statusNormalNonrenal water lossSkinGIRenal water lossRenal diseaseDiureticsDiabetes insipidusLowDecreased sodium intakeGI lossesRenal lossesDiureticsPrimary renal diseaseLowNonrenal water lossSkinGI Renal water lossRenal (tubular) diseaseOsmotic diureticsDiabetes insipidusAdrenal failureBrunicardi_Ch03_p0083-p0102.indd   8708/12/18   10:07 AM 88BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IGI losses from vomiting, prolonged nasogastric suctioning, or diarrhea; and renal losses due to diuretic use or primary renal disease.Hyponatremia also can be seen with an excess of solute relative to free water, such as with untreated hyperglycemia or mannitol administration. When hyponatremia in the presence of hyperglycemia is being evaluated, the corrected sodium concen-tration should be calculated as follows:For every 100-mg/dL increment in plasma glucose  above normal, the plasma sodium should  decrease by 1.6 mEq/LLastly, extreme elevations in plasma lipids and proteins can cause pseudohyponatremia because there is no true decrease in extracellular sodium relative to water.Signs and symptoms of hyponatremia (Table 3-4) are dependent on the degree of hyponatremia and the rapidity with which it occurred. Clinical manifestations primarily have a central nervous system origin and are related to cellular water intoxication and associated increases in intracranial pressure. Oliguric renal failure also can be a rapid complication in the setting of severe hyponatremia.A systematic review of the etiology of hyponatremia should reveal its cause in a given instance. Hyperosmolar causes, including hyperglycemia or mannitol infusion and pseu-dohyponatremia, should be easily excluded. Next, depletional versus dilutional causes of hyponatremia are evaluated. In the absence of renal disease, depletion is associated with low urine sodium levels (<20 mEq/L), whereas renal sodium wasting shows high urine sodium levels (>20 mEq/L). Dilutional causes of hyponatremia usually are associated with hypervolemic cir-culation. A normal volume status in the setting of hyponatremia should prompt an evaluation for a syndrome of inappropriate secretion of ADH.Hypernatremia. Hypernatremia results from either a loss of free water or a gain of sodium in excess of water. Like hypo-natremia, it can be associated with an increased, normal, or decreased extracellular volume (see Fig. 3-3). Hypervolemic hypernatremia usually is caused either by iatrogenic adminis-tration of sodium-containing fluids, including excess sodium bicarbonate, or mineralocorticoid as seen in hyperaldosteronism, Cushing’s syndrome, and congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Urine sodium concentration is typically >20 mEq/L, and urine osmo-larity is >300 mOsm/L. Normovolemic hypernatremia can result from renal causes, including diabetes insipidus, diuretic use, and renal disease, or from nonrenal water loss from the GI tract or skin, although the same conditions can result in hypovolemic hypernatremia. When hypovolemia is present, the urine sodium concentration is <20 mEq/L and urine osmolarity is <300 to  400 mOsm/L. Nonrenal water loss can occur secondary to rela-tively isotonic GI fluid losses such as that caused by diarrhea, to hypotonic skin fluid losses such as loss due to fever, or to losses via tracheotomies during hyperventilation. Additionally, thyrotoxicosis can cause water loss, as can the use of hyper-tonic glucose solutions for peritoneal dialysis. With nonrenal water loss, the urine sodium concentration is <15 mEq/L, and the urine osmolarity is >400 mOsm/L.Symptomatic hypernatremia usually occurs only in patients with impaired thirst or restricted access to fluid because thirst will result in increased water intake. Symptoms are rare until the serum sodium concentration exceeds 160 mEq/L but, once present, are associated with significant morbidity and mortality. Because symptoms are related to hyperosmolarity, central nervous system effects predominate (see Table 3-4). Water shifts from the intracellular to the extracellular space in response to a hyperosmolar extracellular space, which results in cellular dehydration. This can put traction on the cerebral vessels and lead to subarachnoid hemorrhage. Central nervous system symptoms can range from restlessness and irritability to seizures, coma, and death. The classic signs of hypovolemic hypernatremia (tachycardia, orthostasis, and hypotension) may be present, as well as the unique findings of dry, sticky mucous membranes.Composition Changes: Etiology and DiagnosisPotassium Abnormalities. The average dietary intake of potassium is approximately 50 to 100 mEq/d, which in the absence of hypokalemia is excreted primarily in the urine. Extra-cellular potassium is maintained within a narrow range, princi-pally by renal excretion of potassium, which can range from 10 to 700 mEq/d. Although only 2% of the total body potassium (4.5 mEq/L × 14 L = 63 mEq) is located within the extracellular compartment, this small amount is critical to cardiac and neu-romuscular function; thus, even minor changes can have major effects on cardiac activity. The intracellular and extracellular distribution of potassium is influenced by a number of factors, including surgical stress, injury, acidosis, and tissue catabolism.Table 3-4Clinical manifestations of abnormalities in serum sodium levelBODY SYSTEMHYPONATREMIACentral nervous systemHeadache, confusion, hyperactive or hypoactive deep tendon reflexes, seizures, coma, increased intracranial pressureMusculoskeletalWeakness, fatigue, muscle cramps/twitchingGIAnorexia, nausea, vomiting, watery diarrheaCardiovascularHypertension and bradycardia if intracranial pressure increases significantlyTissueLacrimation, salivationRenalOliguriaBODY SYSTEMHYPERNATREMIACentral nervous systemRestlessness, lethargy, ataxia, irritability, tonic spasms, delirium, seizures, comaMusculoskeletalWeaknessCardiovascularTachycardia, hypotension, syncopeTissueDry sticky mucous membranes, red swollen tongue, decreased saliva and tearsRenalOliguriaMetabolicFeverBrunicardi_Ch03_p0083-p0102.indd   8808/12/18   10:07 AM 89FLUID AND ELECTROLYTE MANAGEMENT OF THE SURGICAL PATIENTCHAPTER 3Hyperkalemia Hyperkalemia is defined as a serum potassium concentration above the normal range of 3.5 to 5.0 mEq/L. It is caused by excessive potassium intake, increased release of potassium from cells, or impaired potassium excretion by the kidneys (Table 3-5).6 Increased intake can be either from oral or IV supplementation, or from red cell lysis after transfu-sion. Hemolysis, rhabdomyolysis, and crush injuries can dis-rupt cell membranes and release intracellular potassium into the ECF. Acidosis and a rapid rise in extracellular osmolality from hyperglycemia or IV mannitol can raise serum potassium levels by causing a shift of potassium ions to the extracellular compartment.7 Because 98% of total body potassium is in the intracellular fluid compartment, even small shifts of intracel-lular potassium out of the intracellular fluid compartment can lead to a significant rise in extracellular potassium. A number of medications can contribute to hyperkalemia, particularly in the presence of renal insufficiency, including potassium-sparing diuretics, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Spironolactone and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors interfere with aldosterone activity, inhibiting the normal renal mechanism of potassium excretion. Acute and chronic renal insufficiency also impairs potassium excretion.Symptoms of hyperkalemia are primarily GI, neuromus-cular, and cardiovascular (Table 3-6). GI symptoms include nausea, vomiting, intestinal colic, and diarrhea. Neuromuscu-lar symptoms range from weakness to ascending paralysis to respiratory failure. Early cardiovascular signs may be appar-ent from electrocardiogram (ECG) changes and eventually lead to hemodynamic symptoms of arrhythmia and cardiac arrest. ECG changes that may be seen with hyperkalemia include high peaked T waves (early), widened QRS complex, flattened  P wave, prolonged PR interval (first-degree block), sine wave formation, and ventricular fibrillation.Hypokalemia Hypokalemia is much more common than hyper-kalemia in the surgical patient. It may be caused by inadequate potassium intake; excessive renal potassium excretion; potas-sium loss in pathologic GI secretions, such as with diarrhea, fis-tulas, vomiting, or high nasogastric output; or intracellular shifts from metabolic alkalosis or insulin therapy (see Table 3-5).  Table 3-5 Etiology of potassium abnormalitiesHyperkalemiaIncreased intake Potassium supplementation Blood transfusions Endogenous load/destruction: hemolysis, rhabdomyolysis,   crush injury, gastrointestinal hemorrhageIncreased release Acidosis Rapid rise of extracellular osmolality (hyperglycemia or   mannitol)Impaired excretion Potassium-sparing diuretics Renal insufficiency/failureHypokalemiaInadequate intake Dietary, potassium-free intravenous fluids, potassium deficient TPNExcessive potassium excretion Hyperaldosteronism MedicationsGI losses Direct loss of potassium from GI fluid (diarrhea) Renal loss of potassium (to conserve sodium in response   to gastric losses)Table 3-6Clinical manifestations of abnormalities in potassium, magnesium, and calcium levelsINCREASED SERUM LEVELSSYSTEMPOTASSIUMMAGNESIUMCALCIUMGINausea/vomiting, colic,  diarrheaNausea/vomitingAnorexia, nausea/vomiting, abdominal painNeuromuscularWeakness, paralysis,  respiratory failureWeakness, lethargy, decreased reflexesWeakness, confusion, coma,  bone painCardiovascularArrhythmia, arrestHypotension, arrestHypertension, arrhythmia, polyuriaRenal——PolydipsiaDECREASED SERUM LEVELSSYSTEMPOTASSIUMMAGNESIUMCALCIUMGIIleus, constipation——NeuromuscularDecreased reflexes, fatigue, weakness, paralysisHyperactive reflexes, muscle tremors, tetany, seizuresHyperactive reflexes,  paresthesias, carpopedal  spasm, seizuresCardiovascularArrestArrhythmiaHeart failureBrunicardi_Ch03_p0083-p0102.indd   8908/12/18   10:07 AM 90BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IThe change in potassium associated with alkalosis can be calcu-lated by the following formula:Potassium decreases by 0.3 mEq/L for  every 0.1 increase in pH above normal.Additionally, drugs such as amphotericin, aminoglyco-sides, cisplatin, and ifosfamide that induce magnesium depletion cause renal potassium wastage.8,9 In cases in which potassium deficiency is due to magnesium depletion,10 potassium repletion is difficult unless hypomagnesemia is first corrected.The symptoms of hypokalemia (see Table 3-6), like those of hyperkalemia, are primarily related to failure of normal con-tractility of GI smooth muscle, skeletal muscle, and cardiac mus-cle. Findings may include ileus, constipation, weakness, fatigue, diminished tendon reflexes, paralysis, and cardiac arrest. In the setting of ECF depletion, symptoms may be masked initially and then worsened by further dilution during volume repletion. ECG changes suggestive of hypokalemia include U waves, T-wave flattening, ST-segment changes, and arrhythmias (with digitalis therapy).Calcium Abnormalities. The vast majority of the body’s  calcium is contained within the bone matrix, with <1% found in the ECF. Serum calcium is distributed among three forms: protein found (40%), complexed to phosphate and other anions (10%), and ionized (50%). It is the ionized fraction that is responsible for neuromuscular stability and can be measured directly. When total serum calcium levels are measured, the albumin concentration must be taken into consideration:Adjust total serum calcium down by 0.8 mg/dL for  every 1 g/dL decrease in albumin.Unlike changes in albumin, changes in pH will affect the ionized calcium concentration. Acidosis decreases protein bind-ing, thereby increasing the ionized fraction of calcium.Daily calcium intake is 1 to 3 g/d. Most of this is excreted via the bowel, with urinary excretion relatively low. Total body calcium balance is under complex hormonal control, but distur-bances in metabolism are relatively long term and less important in the acute surgical setting. However, attention to the critical role of ionized calcium in neuromuscular function often is required.Hypercalcemia Hypercalcemia is defined as a serum calcium level above the normal range of 8.5 to 10.5 mEq/L or an increase in the ionized calcium level above 4.2 to 4.8 mg/dL. Primary hyperparathyroidism in the outpatient setting and malignancy in hospitalized patients, from either bony metastasis or secre-tion of parathyroid hormone–related protein, account for most cases of symptomatic hypercalcemia.11 Symptoms of hypercal-cemia (see Table 3-6), which vary with the degree of sever-ity, include neurologic impairment, musculoskeletal weakness and pain, renal dysfunction, GI symptoms of nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain. Cardiac symptoms can be manifested as hypertension, cardiac arrhythmias, and a worsening of digitalis toxicity. ECG changes in hypercalcemia include shortened QT interval, prolonged PR and QRS intervals, increased QRS volt-age, T-wave flattening and widening, and atrioventricular block (which can progress to complete heart block and cardiac arrest).Hypocalcemia Hypocalcemia is defined as a serum calcium level below 8.5 mEq/L or a decrease in the ionized calcium level below 4.2 mg/dL. The causes of hypocalcemia include pancreatitis, massive soft tissue infections such as necrotizing fasciitis, renal failure, pancreatic and small bowel fistulas, hypo-parathyroidism, toxic shock syndrome, abnormalities in mag-nesium levels, and tumor lysis syndrome. In addition, transient hypocalcemia commonly occurs after removal of a parathyroid adenoma due to atrophy of the remaining glands and avid bone remineralization, and sometimes requires high-dose calcium supplementation.12 Additionally, malignancies associated with increased osteoblastic activity, such as breast and prostate can-cer, can lead to hypocalcemia from increased bone formation.13 Calcium precipitation with organic anions is also a cause of hypocalcemia and may occur during hyperphosphatemia from tumor lysis syndrome or rhabdomyolysis. Pancreatitis may sequester calcium via chelation with free fatty acids. Massive blood transfusion with citrate binding is another mechanism.14,15  Hypocalcemia rarely results solely from decreased intake because bone reabsorption can maintain normal levels for pro-longed periods.Asymptomatic hypocalcemia may occur when hypopro-teinemia results in a normal ionized calcium level. Conversely, symptoms can develop with a normal serum calcium level during alkalosis, which decreases ionized calcium. In general, neuromuscular and cardiac symptoms do not occur until the ion-ized fraction falls below 2.5 mg/dL (see Table 3-6). Clinical findings may include paresthesias of the face and extremities, muscle cramps, carpopedal spasm, stridor, tetany, and seizures. Patients will demonstrate hyperreflexia and may exhibit positive Chvostek’s sign (spasm resulting from tapping over the facial nerve) and Trousseau’s sign (spasm resulting from pressure applied to the nerves and vessels of the upper extremity with a blood pressure cuff). Hypocalcemia may lead to decreased cardiac contractility and heart failure. ECG changes of hypocal-cemia include prolonged QT interval, T-wave inversion, heart block, and ventricular fibrillation.Phosphorus Abnormalities. Phosphorus is the primary intra-cellular divalent anion and is abundant in metabolically active cells. Phosphorus is involved in energy production during gly-colysis and is found in high-energy phosphate products such as adenosine triphosphate. Serum phosphate levels are tightly controlled by renal excretion.Hyperphosphatemia Hyperphosphatemia can be due to decreased urinary excretion, increased intake, or endogenous mobilization of phosphorus. Most cases of hyperphosphatemia are seen in patients with impaired renal function. Hypoparathy-roidism or hyperthyroidism also can decrease urinary excretion of phosphorus and thus lead to hyperphosphatemia. Increased release of endogenous phosphorus can be seen in association with any clinical condition that results in cell destruction, includ-ing rhabdomyolysis, tumor lysis syndrome, hemolysis, sepsis, severe hypothermia, and malignant hyperthermia. Excessive phosphate administration from IV hyperalimentation solutions or phosphorus-containing laxatives may also lead to elevated phosphate levels. Most cases of hyperphosphatemia are asymp-tomatic, but significant prolonged hyperphosphatemia can lead to metastatic deposition of soft tissue calcium-phosphorus complexes.Hypophosphatemia Hypophosphatemia can be due to a decrease in phosphorus intake, an intracellular shift of phospho-rus, or an increase in phosphorus excretion. Decreased GI uptake due to malabsorption or administration of phosphate binders and decreased dietary intake from malnutrition are causes of chronic hypophosphatemia. Most acute cases are due to an intracellular Brunicardi_Ch03_p0083-p0102.indd   9008/12/18   10:07 AM 91FLUID AND ELECTROLYTE MANAGEMENT OF THE SURGICAL PATIENTCHAPTER 3shift of phosphorus in association with respiratory alkalosis, insulin therapy, refeeding syndrome, and hungry bone syn-drome. Clinical manifestations of hypophosphatemia usually are absent until levels fall significantly. In general, symptoms are related to adverse effects on the oxygen availability of tissue and to a decrease in high-energy phosphates, and can be mani-fested as cardiac dysfunction or muscle weakness.Magnesium Abnormalities. Magnesium is the fourth most common mineral in the body and, like potassium, is found pri-marily in the intracellular compartments. Approximately one-half of the total body content of 2000 mEq is incorporated in bone and is slowly exchangeable. Of the fraction found in the extracellular space, one-third is bound to serum albumin. There-fore, the plasma level of magnesium may be a poor indicator of total body stores in the presence of hypoalbuminemia. Mag-nesium should be replaced until levels are in the upper limit of normal. The normal dietary intake is approximately 20 mEq/d and is excreted in both the feces and urine. The kidneys have a remarkable ability to conserve magnesium, with renal excretion <1 mEq/d during magnesium deficiency.Hypermagnesemia Hypermagnesemia is rare but can be seen with severe renal insufficiency and parallel changes in potas-sium excretion. Magnesium-containing antacids and laxatives can produce toxic levels in patients with renal failure. Excess intake in conjunction with total parenteral nutrition (TPN), or, rarely, massive trauma, thermal injury, and severe acidosis, may be associated with symptomatic hypermagnesemia. Clini-cal examination (see Table 3-6) may find nausea and vomit-ing; neuromuscular dysfunction with weakness, lethargy, and hyporeflexia; and impaired cardiac conduction leading to hypo-tension and arrest. ECG changes are similar to those seen with hyperkalemia and include increased PR interval, widened QRS complex, and elevated T waves.Hypomagnesemia Magnesium depletion is a common prob-lem in hospitalized patients, particularly in the critically ill.16 The kidney is primarily responsible for magnesium homeostasis through regulation by calcium/magnesium receptors on the renal tubular cells that respond to serum magnesium concentrations.17 Hypomagnesemia may result from alterations of intake, renal excretion, and pathologic losses. Poor intake may occur in cases of starvation, alcoholism, prolonged IV fluid therapy, and TPN with inadequate supplementation of magnesium. Losses are seen in cases of increased renal excretion from alcohol abuse, diuretic use, administration of amphotericin B, and primary aldosteronism, as well as GI losses from diarrhea, malabsorp-tion, and acute pancreatitis. The magnesium ion is essential for proper function of many enzyme systems. Depletion is characterized by neuromuscular and central nervous system hyperactivity. Symptoms are similar to those of calcium defi-ciency, including hyperactive reflexes, muscle tremors, tetany, and positive Chvostek’s and Trousseau’s signs (see Table 3-6). Severe deficiencies can lead to delirium and seizures. A number of ECG changes also can occur and include prolonged QT and PR intervals, ST-segment depression, flattening or inversion of P waves, torsades de pointes, and arrhythmias. Hypomagnese-mia is important not only because of its direct effects on the nervous system but also because it can produce hypocalcemia and lead to persistent hypokalemia. When hypokalemia or hypo-calcemia coexists with hypomagnesemia, magnesium should be aggressively replaced to assist in restoring potassium or calcium homeostasis.Acid-Base BalanceAcid-Base Homeostasis. The pH of body fluids is maintained within a narrow range despite the ability of the kidneys to gen-erate large amounts of HCO3− and the normal large acid load produced as a by-product of metabolism. This endogenous acid load is efficiently neutralized by buffer systems and ultimately excreted by the lungs and kidneys.Important buffers include intracellular proteins and phos-phates and the extracellular bicarbonate–carbonic acid system. Compensation for acid-base derangements can be by respiratory mechanisms (for metabolic derangements) or metabolic mecha-nisms (for respiratory derangements). Changes in ventilation in response to metabolic abnormalities are mediated by hydrogen-sensitive chemoreceptors found in the carotid body and brain stem. Acidosis stimulates the chemoreceptors to increase venti-lation, whereas alkalosis decreases the activity of the chemore-ceptors and thus decreases ventilation. The kidneys provide compensation for respiratory abnormalities by either increasing or decreasing bicarbonate reabsorption in response to respira-tory acidosis or alkalosis, respectively. Unlike the prompt change in ventilation that occurs with metabolic abnormalities, the compensatory response in the kidneys to respiratory abnor-malities is delayed. Significant compensation may not begin for 6 hours and then may continue for several days. Because of this delayed compensatory response, respiratory acid-base derange-ments before renal compensation are classified as acute, whereas those persisting after renal compensation are categorized as chronic. The predicted compensatory changes in response to metabolic or respiratory derangements are listed in Table 3-7.18 If the predicted change in pH is exceeded, then a mixed acid-base abnormality may be present (Table 3-8).Metabolic DerangementsMetabolic Acidosis. Metabolic acidosis results from an increased intake of acids, an increased generation of acids, or an increased loss of bicarbonate (Table 3-9). The body responds by several mechanisms, including producing buffers (extracellular bicarbonate and intracellular buffers from bone and muscle), increasing ventilation (Kussmaul’s respirations), and increas-ing renal reabsorption and generation of bicarbonate. The kid-ney also will increase secretion of hydrogen and thus increase urinary excretion of NH4+ (H+ + NH3+ = NH4+). Evaluation of a patient with a low serum bicarbonate level and metabolic 4Table 3-7 Predicted changes in acid-base disordersDISORDERPREDICTED CHANGEMetabolic Metabolic acidosis Metabolic alkalosisRespiratory Acute respiratory acidosis Chronic respiratory   acidosis Acute respiratory alkalosis Chronic respiratory   alkalosisPco2 = 1.5 × HCO3− + 8Pco2 = 0.7 × HCO3− + 21Δ pH = (Pco2 – 40) × 0.008Δ pH = (Pco2 – 40) × 0.003 Δ pH = (40 – Pco2) × 0.008Δ pH = (40 – Pco2) × 0.017Pco2 = partial pressure of carbon dioxide.Brunicardi_Ch03_p0083-p0102.indd   9108/12/18   10:07 AM 92BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iacidosis includes determination of the anion gap (AG), an index of unmeasured anions.AG = (Na) – (Cl + HCO3)The normal AG is <12 mmol/L and is due primarily to the albumin effect, so that the estimated AG must be adjusted for albumin (hypoalbuminemia reduces the AG).19Corrected AG = actual AG – (2.5[4.5 – albumin])Metabolic acidosis with an increased AG occurs either from ingestion of exogenous acid such as from ethylene gly-col, salicylates, or methanol, or from increased endogenous acid production of the following:•	β-Hydroxybutyrate and acetoacetate in ketoacidosis•	Lactate in lactic acidosis•	Organic acids in renal insufficiencyA common cause of severe metabolic acidosis in surgi-cal patients is lactic acidosis. In circulatory shock, lactate is produced in the presence of hypoxia from inadequate tissue perfusion. The treatment is to restore perfusion with volume resuscitation rather than to attempt to correct the abnormality with exogenous bicarbonate. With adequate perfusion, the lactic acid is rapidly metabolized by the liver, and the pH level returns to normal. In clinical studies of lactic acidosis and ketoacidosis, the administration of bicarbonate has not reduced morbidity or mortality or improved cellular function.20 Administered bicar-bonate can combine with the excess hydrogen ions to form car-bonic acid; this is then converted to CO2 and water, which thus raises the partial pressure of CO2 (Pco2). This hypercarbia could compound ventilation abnormalities in patients with underlying acute respiratory distress syndrome. This CO2 can diffuse into cells, but bicarbonate remains extracellular, which thus worsens intracellular acidosis. Clinically, lactate levels may not be useful in directing resuscitation, although lactate levels may be higher in nonsurvivors of serious injury.21Metabolic acidosis with a normal AG results from exog-enous acid administration (HCl or NH4+), from loss of bicar-bonate due to GI disorders such as diarrhea and fistulas or ureterosigmoidostomy, or from renal losses. In these settings, the bicarbonate loss is accompanied by a gain of chloride; thus, the AG remains unchanged. To determine whether the loss of bicarbonate has a renal cause, the urinary (NH4+) can be mea-sured. A low urinary (NH4+) in the face of hyperchloremic acidosis would indicate that the kidney is the site of loss, and evaluation for renal tubular acidosis should be undertaken. Prox-imal renal tubular acidosis results from decreased tubular reab-sorption of HCO3−, whereas distal renal tubular acidosis results from decreased acid excretion. The carbonic anhydrase inhibitor acetazolamide also causes bicarbonate loss from the kidneys.Metabolic Alkalosis Normal acid-base homeostasis prevents metabolic alkalosis from developing unless both an increase in bicarbonate generation and impaired renal excretion of bicar-bonate occur (Table 3-10). Metabolic alkalosis results from the loss of fixed acids or the gain of bicarbonate and is worsened by potassium depletion. The majority of patients also will have hypokalemia because extracellular potassium ions exchange with intracellular hydrogen ions and allow the hydrogen ions to buffer excess HCO3–. Hypochloremic and hypokalemic meta-bolic alkalosis can occur from isolated loss of gastric contents in infants with pyloric stenosis or adults with duodenal ulcer disease. Unlike vomiting associated with an open pylorus, which involves a loss of gastric as well as pancreatic, biliary, Table 3-9 Etiology of metabolic acidosisIncreased Anion Gap Metabolic AcidosisExogenous acid ingestion Ethylene glycol Salicylate MethanolEndogenous acid production Ketoacidosis Lactic acidosis Renal insufficiencyNormal Anion GapAcid administration (HCl)Loss of bicarbonateGI losses (diarrhea, fistulas)UreterosigmoidostomyRenal tubular acidosisCarbonic anhydrase inhibitorTable 3-8 Respiratory and metabolic components of acid-base disorders ACUTE UNCOMPENSATEDCHRONIC (PARTIALLY COMPENSATED)TYPE OF ACID-BASE DISORDERpHPco2 (RESPIRATORY COMPONENT)PLASMA HCO3−a (METABOLIC COMPONENT)pHPco2 (RESPIRATORY COMPONENT)PLASMA HCO3−a (METABOLIC COMPONENT)Respiratory acidosis↓↓↑↑N↓↑↑↑Respiratory alkalosis↑↑↓↓N↑↓↓↓Metabolic acidosis↓↓N↓↓↓↓↓Metabolic alkalosis↑↑N↑↑↑↑↑aMeasured as standard bicarbonate, whole blood buffer base, CO2 content, or CO2 combining power. The base excess value is positive when the standard bicarbonate is above normal and negative when the standard bicarbonate is below normal.N = normal; Pco2 = partial pressure of carbon dioxide.Brunicardi_Ch03_p0083-p0102.indd   9208/12/18   10:07 AM 93FLUID AND ELECTROLYTE MANAGEMENT OF THE SURGICAL PATIENTCHAPTER 3and intestinal secretions, vomiting with an obstructed pylorus results only in the loss of gastric fluid, which is high in chloride and hydrogen, and therefore results in a hypochloremic alkalo-sis. Initially, the urinary bicarbonate level is high in compensa-tion for the alkalosis. Hydrogen ion reabsorption also ensues, with an accompanied potassium ion excretion. In response to the associated volume deficit, aldosterone-mediated sodium reabsorption increases potassium excretion. The resulting hypo-kalemia leads to the excretion of hydrogen ions in the face of alkalosis, a paradoxic aciduria. Treatment includes replacement of the volume deficit with isotonic saline and then potassium replacement once adequate urine output is achieved.Respiratory Derangements. Under normal circumstances, blood Pco2 is tightly maintained by alveolar ventilation, con-trolled by the respiratory centers in the pons and medulla oblongata.Respiratory Acidosis Respiratory acidosis is associated with the retention of CO2 secondary to decreased alveolar ventila-tion. The principal causes are listed in Table 3-11. Because compensation is primarily a renal mechanism, it is a delayed response. Treatment of acute respiratory acidosis is directed at the underlying cause. Measures to ensure adequate ventila-tion are also initiated. This may entail patient-initiated volume expansion using noninvasive bilevel positive airway pressure or may require endotracheal intubation to increase minute ven-tilation. In the chronic form of respiratory acidosis, the partial pressure of arterial CO2 remains elevated, and the bicarbonate concentration rises slowly as renal compensation occurs.Respiratory Alkalosis In the surgical patient, most cases of respiratory alkalosis are acute and secondary to alveolar hyper-ventilation. Causes include pain, anxiety, and neurologic dis-orders, including central nervous system injury and assisted ventilation. Drugs such as salicylates, fever, gram-negative bacteremia, thyrotoxicosis, and hypoxemia are other possibili-ties. Acute hypocapnia can cause an uptake of potassium and phosphate into cells and increased binding of calcium to albu-min, leading to symptomatic hypokalemia, hypophosphatemia, and hypocalcemia with subsequent arrhythmias, paresthesias, muscle cramps, and seizures. Treatment should be directed at the underlying cause, but direct treatment of the hyperventila-tion using controlled ventilation may also be required.FLUID AND ELECTROLYTE THERAPYParenteral SolutionsA number of commercially available electrolyte solutions are available for parenteral administration. The most commonly used solutions are listed in Table 3-12. The type of fluid admin-istered depends on the patient’s volume status and the type of concentration or compositional abnormality present. Plasma-Lyte, lactated Ringer’s solution, and normal saline are consid-ered isotonic and are useful in replacing GI losses and correcting extracellular volume deficits. Lactated Ringer’s is slightly hypotonic in that it contains 130 mEq of lactate. Lactate is used rather than bicarbonate because it is more stable in IV fluids during storage. It is converted into bicarbonate by the liver after infusion, even in the face of hemorrhagic shock.Sodium chloride is mildly hypertonic, containing 154 mEq of sodium that is balanced by 154 mEq of chloride. The high chloride concentration imposes a significant chloride load on the kidneys and may lead to a hyperchloremic metabolic acido-sis. Sodium chloride is an ideal solution, however, for correcting volume deficits associated with hyponatremia, hypochloremia, and metabolic alkalosis.Plasma-Lyte is the crystalloid preparation that most closely resembles the electrolyte composition of human plasma. In addi-tion to the favorable, isotonic electrolyte composition, Plasma-Lyte contains a number of additional buffers that create a favorable profile for addressing acidosis.22 These characteristics have resulted in Plasma-Lyte emerging as one of the most popular isotonic fluids for use in surgery. It should be noted that Plasma-Lyte contains small quantities of potassium; although the likeli-hood of inducing hyperkalemia is very low, care should be taken when using Plasma-Lyte in patients at risk for renal impairment. The less concentrated sodium solutions, such as 0.45% sodium chloride, are useful for replacement of ongoing GI losses as well as for maintenance fluid therapy in the post-operative period. This solution provides sufficient free water for insensible losses and enough sodium to aid the kidneys in adjustment of serum sodium levels. The addition of 5% dextrose Table 3-10 Etiology of metabolic alkalosisIncreased bicarbonate generation1. Chloride losing (urinary chloride >20 mEq/L)Mineralocorticoid excessProfound potassium depletion2. Chloride sparing (urinary chloride <20 mEq/L)Loss from gastric secretions (emesis or nasogastric suction)Diuretics3. Excess administration of alkaliAcetate in parenteral nutritionCitrate in blood transfusionsAntacidsBicarbonateMilk-alkali syndromeImpaired bicarbonate excretion1. Decreased glomerular filtration2. Increased bicarbonate reabsorption (hypercarbia or potassium depletion)Table 3-11Etiology of respiratory acidosis: hypoventilationNarcoticsCentral nervous system injuryPulmonary: significant Secretions Atelectasis Mucus plug Pneumonia Pleural effusionPain from abdominal or thoracic injuries or incisionsLimited diaphragmatic excursion from intra-abdominal pathology Abdominal distention Abdominal compartment syndrome AscitesBrunicardi_Ch03_p0083-p0102.indd   9308/12/18   10:07 AM 94BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART I(50 g of dextrose per liter) supplies 200 kcal/L, and dextrose is always added to solutions containing <0.45% sodium chloride to maintain osmolality and thus prevent the lysis of red blood cells that may occur with rapid infusion of hypotonic fluids. The addition of potassium is useful once adequate renal function and urine output are established.Alternative Resuscitative FluidsA number of alternative solutions for volume expansion and resuscitation are available (Table 3-13).23 Hypertonic saline solutions (3.5% and 5%) are used for correction of severe sodium deficits and are discussed elsewhere in this chap-ter. Hypertonic saline (7.5%) has been used as a treatment modality in patients with closed head injuries. It has been shown to increase cerebral perfusion and decrease intracranial pressure, thus decreasing brain edema.24 However, there have also been concerns about increased bleeding because hypertonic saline is an arteriolar vasodilator. A recent meta-analysis of hypertonic saline in severe traumatic brain injury revealed that, in a total of 11 eligible studies, there was no mortality benefit associated with hypertonic saline compared to other solutions.25 Colloids also are used in surgical patients, and their effectiveness as vol-ume expanders compared with isotonic crystalloids has long been debated. Due to their molecular weight, they are confined to the intravascular space, and their infusion results in more effi-cient transient plasma volume expansion. However, under con-ditions of severe hemorrhagic shock, capillary membrane permeability increases; this permeability permits colloids to enter the interstitial space, which can worsen edema and impair tissue oxygenation. Four major types of colloids are available—albumin, dextrans, hetastarch, and gelatins—and are described by their molecular weight and size in Table 3-13. In a large randomized trial of patients admitted to an intensive care unit with hypovolemic shock, administration of colloid showed no improvement in mortality at 30 days as compared to crystalloid resuscitation.26 Interestingly, there was a suggestion of improve-ment of 90-day mortality and more days alive without mechani-cal ventilation in patients receiving colloid; however, these were not trial primary endpoints and were considered exploratory. Furthermore, a Cochrane Database systematic review on the topic concluded that there is no available evidence from ran-domized trials to support colloid use over crystalloid to reduce the risk of death following trauma, burns, or surgery.27 Colloids are markedly more expensive than crystalloids, and certain col-loids, such as hydroxyethyl starch, have been associated with increased morbidity including the need for renal replacement therapy.28 Taken together, the use of colloid for resuscitation of critically ill and surgical patients has limited application.Correction of Life-Threatening Electrolyte AbnormalitiesSodium Hypernatremia Treatment of hypernatremia usually consists of treatment of the associated water deficit. In hypovolemic patients, volume should be restored with normal saline before the concentration abnormality is addressed. Once adequate volume has been achieved, the water deficit is replaced using a hypotonic fluid such as 5% dextrose, 5% dextrose in onequarter normal saline, or enterally administered water. The for-mula used to estimate the amount of water required to correct hypernatremia is as follows:Waterdeficit(L)serumsodium140=−×140TBWEstimate TBW as 50% of lean body mass  in men and 40% in women5Table 3-12 Electrolyte solutions for parenteral administration ELECTROLYTE COMPOSITION (mEq/L)SOLUTIONNaClKHCO3−CaMgmOsmExtracellular fluid14210342753280–310Lactated Ringer’s1301094283 2730.9% Sodium chloride154154    308D5 0.45% Sodium chloride7777    407D5W      2533% Sodium chloride513513    1026Plasma-Lyte14098527 3295D5 = 5% dextrose; D5W = 5% dextrose in water.Table 3-13 Alternative resuscitative fluidsSOLUTIONMOLECULAR WEIGHTOSMOLALITY (mOsm/L)SODIUM (mEq/L)Hypertonic  saline (7.5%)—25651283Albumin 5%70,000300130–160Albumin 25%70,0001500130–160Dextran 4040,000308154Dextran 7070,000308154Hetastarch450,000310154Hextend670,000307143Gelofusine30,000NA154NA = not available.Brunicardi_Ch03_p0083-p0102.indd   9408/12/18   10:07 AM 95FLUID AND ELECTROLYTE MANAGEMENT OF THE SURGICAL PATIENTCHAPTER 3The rate of fluid administration should be titrated to achieve a decrease in serum sodium concentration of no more than 1 mEq/h and 12 mEq/d for the treatment of acute symp-tomatic hypernatremia. Even slower correction should be under-taken for chronic hypernatremia (0.7 mEq/h) because overly rapid correction can lead to cerebral edema and herniation. The type of fluid used depends on the severity and ease of correc-tion. Oral or enteral replacement is acceptable in most cases, or IV replacement with halfor quarter-normal saline can be used. Caution also should be exercised when using 5% dextrose in water to avoid overly rapid correction. Frequent neurologic evaluation as well as frequent evaluation of serum sodium levels also should be performed. Hypernatremia is less common than hyponatremia, but has a worse prognosis, and is an independent predictor of mortality in critical illness.29Hyponatremia Most cases of hyponatremia can be treated by free water restriction and, if severe, the administration of sodium. In patients with normal renal function, symptomatic hyponatremia usually does not occur until the serum sodium level is ≤120 mEq/L. If neurologic symptoms are present, 3% normal saline should be used to increase the sodium by no more than 1 mEq/L per hour until the serum sodium level reaches 130 mEq/L or neurologic symptoms are improved. Correction of asymptomatic hyponatremia should increase the sodium level by no more than 0.5 mEq/L per hour to a maxi-mum increase of 12 mEq/L per day, and even more slowly in chronic hyponatremia. The rapid correction of hyponatremia can lead to pontine myelinolysis,30 with seizures, weakness, paresis, akinetic movements, and unresponsiveness, and may result in permanent brain damage and death. Serial magnetic resonance imaging may be necessary to confirm the diagnosis.31Potassium Hyperkalemia Treatment options for symptomatic hyperka-lemia are listed in Table 3-14. The goals of therapy include reducing the total body potassium, shifting potassium from the extracellular to the intracellular space, and protecting the cells from the effects of increased potassium. For all patients, exogenous sources of potassium should be removed, including potassium supplementation in IV fluids and enteral and paren-teral solutions. Potassium can be removed from the body using a cation-exchange resin such as Kayexalate that binds potas-sium in exchange for sodium. It can be administered either orally, in alert patients, or rectally. Immediate measures also should include attempts to shift potassium intracellularly with glucose and bicarbonate infusion. Nebulized albuterol (10 to 20 mg) may also be used. Use of glucose alone will cause a rise in insulin secretion, but in the acutely ill, this response may be blunted, and therefore both glucose and insulin may be necessary. Circulatory overload and hypernatremia may result from the administration of Kayexalate and bicarbonate, so care should be exercised when administering these agents to patients with fragile cardiac function. When ECG changes are present, calcium chloride or calcium gluconate (5 to 10 mL of 10% solution) should be administered immediately to counteract the myocardial effects of hyperkalemia. Calcium infusion should be used cautiously in patients receiving digitalis because digitalis toxicity may be precipitated. All of the aforementioned mea-sures are temporary, lasting from 1 to approximately 4 hours. Dialysis should be considered in severe hyperkalemia when conservative measures fail.Hypokalemia Treatment for hypokalemia consists of potas-sium repletion, the rate of which is determined by the symptoms (Table 3-15). Oral repletion is adequate for mild, asymptomatic hypokalemia. If IV repletion is required, usually no more than 10 mEq/h is advisable in an unmonitored setting. This amount can be increased to 40 mEq/h when accompanied by continu-ous ECG monitoring, and even more in the case of imminent cardiac arrest from a malignant arrhythmia-associated hypoka-lemia. Caution should be exercised when oliguria or impaired renal function is coexistent.Calcium Hypercalcemia Treatment is required when hypercalcemia is symptomatic, which usually occurs when the serum level exceeds 12 mg/dL. The critical level for serum calcium is 15 mg/dL, when symptoms noted earlier may rapidly progress to death. The initial treatment is aimed at repleting the associated volume deficit and then inducing a brisk diuresis with normal saline. Treatment of hypercalcemia associated with malignancies is discussed later in this chapter.Hypocalcemia Asymptomatic hypocalcemia can be treated with oral or IV calcium (see Table 3-15). Acute symptomatic hypocalcemia should be treated with IV 10% calcium gluconate to achieve a serum concentration of 7 to 9 mg/dL. Associated deficits in magnesium, potassium, and pH must also be cor-rected. Hypocalcemia will be refractory to treatment if coex-isting hypomagnesemia is not corrected first. Routine calcium supplementation is no longer recommended in association with massive blood transfusions.32Phosphorus Hyperphosphatemia Phosphate binders such as sucralfate or aluminum-containing antacids can be used to lower serum phosphorus levels. Calcium acetate tablets also are useful when hypocalcemia is simultaneously present. Dialysis usually is reserved for patients with renal failure.Hypophosphatemia Depending on the level of depletion and tolerance to oral supplementation, a number of enteral and par-enteral repletion strategies are effective for the treatment of hypophosphatemia (see Table 3-15).Magnesium Hypermagnesemia Treatment for hypermagnesemia consists of measures to eliminate exogenous sources of magnesium, Table 3-14Treatment of symptomatic hyperkalemiaPotassium removal Kayexalate  Oral administration is 15–30 g in 50–100 mL of 20%   sorbitol  Rectal administration is 50 g in 200 mL of 20% sorbitol DialysisShift potassium Glucose 1 ampule of D50 and regular insulin 5–10 units IV Bicarbonate 1 ampule IVCounteract cardiac effects Calcium gluconate 5–10 mL of 10% solutionD50 = 50% dextrose.Brunicardi_Ch03_p0083-p0102.indd   9508/12/18   10:07 AM 96BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART ITable 3-15Electrolyte replacement therapy protocolPotassiumSerum potassium level <4.0 mEq/L: Asymptomatic, tolerating enteral nutrition: KCl 40 mEq per enteral access × 1 dose Asymptomatic, not tolerating enteral nutrition: KCl 20 mEq IV q2h × 2 doses Symptomatic: KCl 20 mEq IV q1h × 4 doses Recheck potassium level 2 h after end of infusion; if <3.5 mEq/L and asymptomatic, replace as per above protocolMagnesiumMagnesium level 1.0–1.8 mEq/L: Magnesium sulfate 0.5 mEq/kg in normal saline 250 mL infused IV over 24 h × 3 d Recheck magnesium level in 3 dMagnesium level <1.0 mEq/L: Magnesium sulfate 1 mEq/kg in normal saline 250 mL infused IV over 24 h × 1 d, then 0.5 mEq/kg in normal saline 250 mL   infused IV over 24 h × 2 d Recheck magnesium level in 3 dIf patient has gastric access and needs a bowel regimen: Milk of magnesia 15 mL (approximately 49 mEq magnesium) q24h per gastric tube; hold for diarrheaCalciumIonized calcium level <4.0 mg/dL: With gastric access and tolerating enteral nutrition: Calcium carbonate suspension 1250 mg/5 mL q6h per gastric access;   recheck ionized calcium level in 3 d Without gastric access or not tolerating enteral nutrition: Calcium gluconate 2 g IV over 1 h × 1 dose; recheck ionized calcium   level in 3 dPhosphatePhosphate level 1.0–2.5 mg/dL: Tolerating enteral nutrition: Neutra-Phos 2 packets q6h per gastric tube or feeding tube No enteral nutrition: KPHO4 or NaPO4 0.15 mmol/kg IV over 6 h × 1 dose Recheck phosphate level in 3 dPhosphate level <1.0 mg/dL: Tolerating enteral nutrition: KPHO4 or NaPO4 0.25 mmol/kg over 6 h × 1 dose Recheck phosphate level 4 h after end of infusion; if <2.5 mg/dL, begin Neutra-Phos 2 packets q6h Not tolerating enteral nutrition: KPHO4 or NaPO4 0.25 mmol/kg (LBW) over 6 h × 1 dose; recheck phosphate level 4 h after   end of infusion; if <2.5 mg/dL, then KPHO4 or NaPO4 0.15 mmol/kg (LBW) IV over 6 h × 1 dose3 mmol KPHO4 = 3 mmol Phos and 4.4 mEq K+ = 1 mL3 mmol NaPO4 = 3 mmol Phos and 4 mEq Na+ = 1 mLNeutra-Phos 1 packet = 8 mmol Phos, 7 mEq K+, 7 mEq Na+Use patient’s lean body weight (LBW) in kilograms for all calculations.Disregard protocol if patient has renal failure, is on dialysis, or has a creatinine clearance <30 mL/min.correct concurrent volume deficits, and correct acidosis if  present. To manage acute symptoms, calcium chloride (5 to 10 mL) should be administered to immediately antagonize the cardiovascular effects. If elevated levels or symptoms persist, hemodialysis may be necessary.Hypomagnesemia Correction of magnesium depletion can be oral if asymptomatic and mild. Otherwise, IV repletion is indicated and depends on severity (see Table 3-15) and clini-cal symptoms. For those with severe deficits (<1.0 mEq/L) or those who are symptomatic, 1 to 2 g of magnesium sulfate may be administered IV over 15 minutes. Under ECG monitoring, it may be given over 2 minutes if necessary to correct torsades de pointes (irregular ventricular rhythm). Caution should be taken when giving large amounts of magnesium because magnesium toxicity may develop. The simultaneous administration of cal-cium gluconate will counteract the adverse side effects of a rap-idly rising magnesium level and correct hypocalcemia, which is frequently associated with hypomagnesemia.Preoperative Fluid TherapyThe administration of maintenance fluids should be all that is required in an otherwise healthy individual who may be under orders to receive nothing by mouth for some period before the time of surgery. This does not, however, include replenishment of a preexisting deficit or ongoing fluid losses. The following is a frequently used formula for calculating the volume of mainte-nance fluids in the absence of preexisting abnormalities:For the first 0–10 kgFor the next 10–20 kgFor weight >20 kgGive 100 mL/kg per dayGive an additional 50 mL/kg  per dayGive an additional 20 mL/kg  per dayFor example, a 60-kg female would receive a total of 2300 mL of fluid daily: 1000 mL for the first 10 kg of body Brunicardi_Ch03_p0083-p0102.indd   9608/12/18   10:07 AM 97FLUID AND ELECTROLYTE MANAGEMENT OF THE SURGICAL PATIENTCHAPTER 3weight (10 kg × 100 mL/kg per day), 500 mL for the next 20 kg  (10 kg × 50 mL/kg per day), and 800 mL for the last 40 kg (40 kg ×  20 mL/kg per day).An alternative approach is to replace the calculated daily water losses in urine, stool, and insensible loss with a hypotonic saline solution rather than water alone, which allows the kid-ney some sodium excess to adjust for concentration. Although there should be no “routine” maintenance fluid orders, both of these methods would yield an appropriate choice of 5% dex-trose in 0.45% sodium chloride at 100 mL/h as initial therapy, with potassium added for patients with normal renal function. However, many surgical patients have volume and/or electrolyte abnormalities associated with their surgical disease. Preopera-tive evaluation of a patient’s volume status and preexisting elec-trolyte abnormalities is an important part of overall preoperative assessment and care. Volume deficits should be considered in patients who have obvious GI losses, such as through emesis or diarrhea, as well as in patients with poor oral intake second-ary to their disease. Less obvious are those fluid losses known as third-space or nonfunctional ECF losses that occur with GI obstruction, peritoneal or bowel inflammation, ascites, crush injuries, burns, and severe soft tissue infections such as nec-rotizing fasciitis. The diagnosis of an acute volume deficit is primarily clinical (see Table 3-2), although the physical signs may vary with the duration of the deficit. Cardiovascular signs of tachycardia and orthostasis predominate with acute volume loss, usually accompanied by oliguria and hemoconcentration. Acute volume deficits should be corrected as much as possible before the time of operation.Once a volume deficit is diagnosed, prompt fluid replace-ment should be instituted, usually with an isotonic crystalloid, depending on the measured serum electrolyte values. Patients with cardiovascular signs of volume deficit should receive a bolus of 1 to 2 L of isotonic fluid followed by a continuous infu-sion. Close monitoring during this period is imperative. Resus-citation should be guided by the reversal of the signs of volume deficit, such as restoration of acceptable values for vital signs, maintenance of adequate urine output (0.5 to 1 mL/kg per hour in an adult), and correction of base deficit. Patients whose vol-ume deficit is not corrected after this initial volume challenge and those with impaired renal function and the elderly should be considered for more intensive monitoring in an intensive care unit setting. In these patients, early invasive monitoring of cen-tral venous pressure or cardiac output may be necessary.If symptomatic electrolyte abnormalities accompany vol-ume deficit, the abnormality should be corrected to the point that the acute symptom is relieved before surgical interven-tion. For correction of severe hypernatremia associated with a volume deficit, an unsafe rapid fall in extracellular osmolarity from 5% dextrose infusion is avoided by slowly correcting the hypernatremia with 0.45% saline or even lactated Ringer’s solu-tion rather than 5% dextrose alone. This will safely and slowly correct the hypernatremia while also correcting the associated volume deficit.Intraoperative Fluid TherapyWith the induction of anesthesia, compensatory mechanisms are lost, and hypotension will develop if volume deficits are not appropriately corrected before the time of surgery. Hemody-namic instability during anesthesia is best avoided by correct-ing known fluid losses, replacing ongoing losses, and providing adequate maintenance fluid therapy preoperatively. In addition to measured blood loss, major open abdominal surgeries are associated with continued extracellular losses in the form of bowel wall edema, peritoneal fluid, and the wound edema dur-ing surgery. Large soft tissue wounds, complex fractures with associated soft tissue injury, and burns are all associated with additional third-space losses that must be considered in the operating room. These represent distributional shifts, in that the functional volume of ECF is reduced but fluid is not externally lost from the body. These functional losses have been referred to as parasitic losses, sequestration, or third-space edema because the lost volume no longer participates in the normal functions of the ECF.Until the 1960s saline solutions were withheld during sur-gery. Administered saline was retained and was felt to be an inappropriate challenge to a physiologic response of intraopera-tive salt intolerance. Basic and clinical research began to change this concept,33,34 eventually leading to the current concept that saline administration is necessary to restore the obligate ECF losses noted earlier. Although no accurate formula can predict intraoperative fluid needs, replacement of ECF during surgery often requires 500 to 1000 mL/h of a balanced salt solution to support homeostasis. The addition of albumin or other colloidcontaining solutions to intraoperative fluid therapy is not neces-sary. Manipulation of colloid oncotic forces by albumin infusion during major vascular surgery showed no advantage in support-ing cardiac function or avoiding the accumulation of extravas-cular lung water.35Postoperative Fluid TherapyPostoperative fluid therapy should be based on the patient’s current estimated volume status and projected ongoing fluid losses. Any deficits from either preoperative or intraoperative losses should be corrected, and ongoing requirements should be included along with maintenance fluids. Third-space losses, although difficult to measure, should be included in fluid replacement strategies. In the initial postoperative period, an isotonic solution should be administered. The adequacy of resuscitation should be guided by the restoration of acceptable values for vital signs and urine output and, in more complicated cases, by the correction of base deficit or lactate. Adjuncts to assessing volume status in the postoperative patient include such tools as a straight leg raise, point-of-care ultrasound, and assessment of respiratory variation via use of an arterial cath-eter in a mechanically ventilated patient. After the initial 24 to  48 hours, fluids can be changed to 5% dextrose in 0.45% saline in patients unable to tolerate enteral nutrition. If normal renal function and adequate urine output are present, potassium may be added to the IV fluids. Daily fluid orders should begin with assessment of the patient’s volume status and assessment of electrolyte abnormalities. There is rarely a need to check elec-trolyte levels in the first few days of an uncomplicated post-operative course. However, postoperative diuresis may require attention to replacement of urinary potassium loss. All measured losses, including losses through vomiting, nasogastric suction-ing, drains, and urine output, as well as insensible losses, are replaced with the appropriate parenteral solutions as previously reviewed.Fluid Management in Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) PathwaysAs pioneered by the Danish surgeon Henrik Kehlet, ERAS path-ways have been designed to guide the perioperative management Brunicardi_Ch03_p0083-p0102.indd   9708/12/18   10:07 AM 98BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iof various types of surgical procedures. ERAS consists of a mul-timodal strategy to maximize and maintain preoperative organ function, and implementation of ERAS protocols has resulted in a decrease in length of stay, improved patient satisfaction, cost savings, and a reduction in complications. A full discussion of ERAS is outside the scope of this chapter; however, it is impor-tant to note that perioperative fluid management is a major tenet of ERAS protocols. The 2011 European Society of Anaesthesi-ology guidelines were among the first formal recommendations to alter standard recommendations for preoperative enteral intake. These recommendations include allowance of clear liq-uids up to 2 hours prior to surgery.36 Many ERAS protocols include the use of carbohydrate and electrolyte-rich fluids to enhance hydration and metabolic response to surgery. In addi-tion to preoperative enteral hydration, a major focus of ERAS protocols is the restriction of intraand postoperative sodium and intravenous fluids. Fluid overload has been associated with prolonged ileus and coagulation abnormalities.37 Goal-directed fluid therapy has been shown to reduce postoperative morbidity and length of stay independent of the other multimodal compo-nents of ERAS, making minimizing fluids a major target of intervention.38 Postoperatively, early enteral intake is advised, with prompt discontinuation of intravenous fluids. These strate-gies targeting euvolemia have been shown to be safe and improve outcomes, making ERAS a rapidly evolving strat-egy that will continue to influence the perioperative fluid and electrolyte management of surgical patients.39,40Special Considerations for the Postoperative PatientVolume excess is a common disorder in the postoperative period. The administration of isotonic fluids in excess of actual needs may result in excess volume expansion. This may be due to the overestimation of third-space losses or to ongoing GI losses that are difficult to measure accurately. The earliest sign of volume overload is weight gain. The average postopera-tive patient who is not receiving nutritional support should lose approximately 0.25 to 0.5 lb/d (0.11 to 0.23 kg/d) from catabo-lism. Additional signs of volume excess may also be present as listed in Table 3-2. Peripheral edema may not necessarily be associated with intravascular volume overload because overex-pansion of total ECF may exist in association with a deficit in the circulating plasma volume.Volume deficits also can be encountered in surgical patients if preoperative losses were not completely corrected, intraoperative losses were underestimated, or postoperative losses were greater than appreciated. The clinical manifestations are described in Table 3-2 and include tachycardia, orthostasis, and oliguria. Hemoconcentration also may be present. Treat-ment will depend on the amount and composition of fluid lost. In most cases of volume depletion, replacement with an isotonic fluid will be sufficient while alterations in concentration and composition are being evaluated.ELECTROLYTE ABNORMALITIES IN SPECIFIC SURGICAL PATIENTSNeurologic PatientsSyndrome of Inappropriate Secretion of Antidiuretic Hormone. The syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidi-uretic hormone (SIADH) can occur after head injury or surgery to the central nervous system, but it also is seen in association with administration of drugs such as morphine, nonsteroidals, and oxytocin, and in a number of pulmonary and endocrine dis-eases, including hypothyroidism and glucocorticoid deficiency. Additionally, it can be seen in association with a number of malignancies, most often small cell cancer of the lung but also pancreatic carcinoma, thymoma, and Hodgkin’s disease.41 SIADH should be considered in patients who are euvolemic and hyponatremic with elevated urine sodium levels and urine osmolality. ADH secretion is considered inap-propriate when it is not in response to osmotic or volume-related conditions. Correction of the underlying problem should be attempted when possible. In most cases, restriction of free water will improve the hyponatremia. The goal is to achieve net water balance while avoiding volume depletion that may compromise renal function. Furosemide also can be used to induce free water loss. If hyponatremia persists after fluid restriction, the addition of isotonic or hypertonic fluids may be effective. The adminis-tration of isotonic saline may sometimes worsen the problem if the urinary sodium concentration is higher than the infused sodium concentration. The use of loop diuretics may be helpful in this situation by preventing further urine concentration. In chronic SIADH, when long-term fluid restriction is difficult to maintain or is ineffective, demeclocycline and lithium can be used to induce free water loss.Diabetes Insipidus. Diabetes insipidus (DI) is a disorder of ADH stimulation and is manifested by dilute urine in the case of hypernatremia. Central DI results from a defect in ADH secre-tion, and nephrogenic DI results from a defect in end-organ responsiveness to ADH. Central DI is frequently seen in asso-ciation with pituitary surgery, closed head injury, and anoxic encephalopathy.42 Nephrogenic DI occurs in association with hypokalemia, administration of radiocontrast dye, and use of certain drugs such as aminoglycosides and amphotericin B. In patients tolerating oral intake, volume status usually is normal because thirst stimulates increased intake. However, volume depletion can occur rapidly in patients who are incapable of oral intake. The diagnosis can be confirmed by documenting a paradoxical increase in urine osmolality in response to a period of water deprivation. In mild cases, free water replacement may be adequate therapy. In more severe cases, vasopressin can be added. The usual dosage of vasopressin is 5 U subcutaneously every 6 to 8 hours. However, serum electrolytes and osmolality should be monitored to avoid excess vasopressin administration with resulting iatrogenic SIADH.Cerebral Salt Wasting. Cerebral salt wasting is a diagnosis of exclusion that occurs in patients with a cerebral lesion and renal wasting of sodium and chloride with no other identifiable cause.43 Natriuresis in a patient with a contracted extracellular volume should prompt the possible diagnosis of cerebral salt wasting. Hyponatremia is frequently observed but is nonspecific and occurs as a secondary event, which differentiates it from SIADH.Malnourished Patients: Refeeding SyndromeRefeeding syndrome is a potentially lethal condition that can occur with rapid and excessive feeding of patients with severe underlying malnutrition due to starvation, alcoholism, delayed nutritional support, anorexia nervosa, or massive weight loss in obese patients.44 With refeeding, a shift in metabolism from fat to carbohydrate substrate stimulates insulin release, which 678Brunicardi_Ch03_p0083-p0102.indd   9808/12/18   10:07 AM 99FLUID AND ELECTROLYTE MANAGEMENT OF THE SURGICAL PATIENTCHAPTER 3results in the cellular uptake of electrolytes, particularly phos-phate, magnesium, potassium, and calcium. However, severe hyperglycemia may result from blunted basal insulin secretion. The refeeding syndrome can be associated with enteral or par-enteral refeeding, and symptoms from electrolyte abnormalities include cardiac arrhythmias, confusion, respiratory failure, and even death. To prevent the development of refeeding syndrome, underlying electrolyte and volume deficits should be corrected. Additionally, thiamine should be administered before the initia-tion of feeding. Caloric repletion should be instituted slowly and should gradually increase over the first week.45 Vital signs, fluid balance, and electrolytes should be closely monitored and any deficits corrected as they evolve.Acute Renal Failure PatientsA number of fluid and electrolyte abnormalities are specific to patients with acute renal failure. With the onset of renal failure, an accurate assessment of volume status must be made. If prerenal azotemia is present, prompt correction of the underlying volume deficit is mandatory. Once acute tubular necrosis is established, measures should be taken to restrict daily fluid intake to match urine output and insensible and GI losses. Oliguric renal failure requires close monitoring of serum potassium levels. Measures to correct hyperkalemia as reviewed in Table 3-14 should be instituted early, including consideration of early hemodialysis. Hyponatremia is common in established renal failure as a result of the breakdown of proteins, carbohydrates, and fats, as well as the administration of free water. Dialysis may be required for severe hyponatremia. Hypocalcemia, hypermagnesemia, and hyperphosphatemia also are associated with acute renal failure. Hypocalcemia should be verified by measuring ionized calcium, because many patients also are hypoalbuminemic. Phosphate binders can be used to control hyperphosphatemia, but dialy-sis may be required in more severe cases. Metabolic acidosis is commonly seen with renal failure, as the kidneys lose their ability to clear acid by-products. Bicarbonate can be useful, but dialysis often is needed. Although dialysis may be either intermittent or continuous, renal recovery may be improved by continuous renal replacement.46Cancer PatientsFluid and electrolyte abnormalities are common in patients with cancer. The causes may be common to all patient populations or may be specific to cancer patients and their treatment.47 Hypo-natremia is frequently hypovolemic due to renal loss of sodium caused by diuretics or salt-wasting nephropathy as seen with some chemotherapeutic agents such as cisplatin. Cerebral salt wasting also can occur in patients with intracerebral lesions. Normovolemic hyponatremia may occur in association with SIADH from cervical cancer, lymphoma, and leukemia, or from certain chemotherapeutic agents. Hypernatremia in can-cer patients most often is due to poor oral intake or GI volume losses, which are common side effects of chemotherapy. Central DI also can lead to hypernatremia in patients with central ner-vous system lesions.Hypokalemia can develop from GI losses associated with diarrhea caused by radiation enteritis or chemotherapy, or from tumors such as villous adenomas of the colon. Tumor lysis syn-drome can precipitate severe hyperkalemia from massive tumor cell destruction.Hypocalcemia can be seen after removal of a thyroid or parathyroid tumor or after a central neck dissection, which can damage the parathyroid glands. Hungry bone syndrome produces acute and profound hypocalcemia after parathyroid surgery for secondary or tertiary hyperparathyroidism because calcium is rapidly taken up by bones. Prostate and breast cancer can result in increased osteoblastic activity, which decreases serum calcium by increasing bone formation. Acute hypocalce-mia also can occur with hyperphosphatemia because phospho-rus complexes with calcium. Hypomagnesemia is a side effect of ifosfamide and cisplatin therapy. Hypophosphatemia can be seen in hyperparathyroidism, due to decreased phosphorus reabsorption, and in oncogenic osteomalacia, which increases the urinary excretion of phosphorus. Other causes of hypophos-phatemia in cancer patients include renal tubular dysfunction from multiple myeloma, Bence Jones proteins, and certain che-motherapeutic agents. Acute hypophosphatemia can occur as rapidly proliferating malignant cells take up phosphorus in acute leukemia. Tumor lysis syndrome or the use of bisphosphonates to treat hypercalcemia also can result in hyperphosphatemia.Malignancy is the most common cause of hypercalcemia in hospitalized patients and is due to increased bone resorption or decreased renal excretion. Bone destruction occurs from bony metastasis as seen in breast or renal cell cancer but also can occur in multiple myeloma. With Hodgkin’s and non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, hypercalcemia results from increased calcitriol for-mation, which increases both absorption of calcium from the GI tract and mobilization from bone. Humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy is a common cause of hypercalcemia in cancer patients. As in primary hyperparathyroidism, a parathyroid-related protein is secreted that binds to parathyroid receptors, stimulating calcium resorption from bone and decreasing renal excretion of calcium. The treatment of hypercalcemia of malig-nancy should begin with saline volume expansion, which will decrease renal reabsorption of calcium as the associated volume deficit is corrected. Once an adequate volume status has been achieved, a loop diuretic may be added. Unfortunately, these measures are only temporary, and additional treatment is often necessary. A variety of drugs are available with varying times of onset, durations of action, and side effects.48 The bisphos-phonates etidronate and pamidronate inhibit bone resorption and osteoclastic activity. They have a slow onset of action, but effects can last for 2 weeks. Calcitonin also is effective, inhibit-ing bone resorption and increasing renal excretion of calcium. It acts quickly, within 2 to 4 hours, but its use is limited by the development of tachyphylaxis. Corticosteroids may decrease tachyphylaxis in response to calcitonin and can be used alone to treat hypercalcemia. Gallium nitrates are potent inhibitors of bone resorption. They display a long duration of action but can cause nephrotoxicity. Mithramycin is an antibiotic that blocks osteoclastic activity, but it can be associated with liver, renal, and hematologic abnormalities, which limits its use to the treatment of Paget’s disease of bone. For patients with severe, refractory hypercalcemia who are unable to tolerate volume expansion due to pulmonary edema or congestive heart failure, dialysis is an option.Tumor lysis syndrome results when the release of intracel-lular metabolites overwhelms the kidneys’ excretory capacity.  This rapid release of uric acid, potassium, and phosphorus can result in marked hyperuricemia, hyperkalemia, hyperphospha-temia, hypocalcemia, and acute renal failure. It is typically seen with poorly differentiated lymphomas and leukemias but also can occur with a number of solid tumor malignancies. Tumor lysis syndrome most commonly develops during treatment Brunicardi_Ch03_p0083-p0102.indd   9908/12/18   10:07 AM 100BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iwith chemotherapy or radiotherapy. Once it develops, volume expansion should be undertaken and any associated electrolyte abnormalities corrected. In this setting, hypocalcemia should not be treated unless it is symptomatic to avoid metastatic calci-fications. Dialysis may be required for management of impaired renal function or correction of electrolyte abnormalities.REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Aloia JF, Vaswani A, Flaster E, et al. Relationship of body water compartment to age, race and fat-free mass. J Lab Clin Med. 1998;132:483.	2.	Bourque CW, Oliet SHR. Osmoreceptors in the central nervous system. Annu Rev Physiol. 1997;59:601.	3.	Verbalis JG. How does the brain sense osmolality? J Am Soc Nephrol. 2007;18(12):3056.	4.	Stauss HM. Baroreceptor reflex function. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2002;283:R284.	5.	Miller M. Syndromes of excess antidiuretic hormone release. Crit Care Clin. 2001;17:11.	6.	Kapoor M, Chan G. Fluid and electrolyte abnormalities. Crit Care Clin. 2001;17:571.	7.	Adrogue HJ, Lederer ED, Suki WN, et al. Determinants of plasma potassium in diabetic ketoacidosis. Medicine. 1986;65:163.	8.	Zietse R, Zuotendijk R, Hoorn EJ. Fluid, electrolyte and acid-base disorders associated with antibiotic therapy. Nat Rev Nephrol. 2009;5(4):193.	9.	Cobos E, Hall RR. Effects of chemotherapy on the kidney. Semin Nephrol. 1993;13:297.	10.	Gennari FJ. Hypokalemia. N Engl J Med. 1998;339:451.	11.	French S, Subauste J, Geraci S. Calcium abnormalities in hos-pitalized patients. South Med J. 2012;105(4):231.	12.	Witteveen JE, van Theil S, Romijn JA. Therapy of endo-crine disease: hungry bone syndrome. Eur J Endocrinol. 2013;168(3):R45.	13.	Bushinsky DA, Monk RD. Calcium. Lancet. 1998;352:306.	14.	Dunlay RW, Camp MA, Allon M, et al. Calcitriol in prolonged hypocalcemia due to tumor lysis syndrome. Ann Intern Med. 1989;110:162.	15.	Reber PM, Heath H. Hypocalcemic emergencies. Med Clin North Am. 1995;19:93.	16.	Tong GM, Rude RK. Magnesium deficiency in critical illness. J Intensive Care Med. 2005;20(1):3.	17.	Quamme GA. Renal magnesium handling: new insights in understanding old problems. Kidney Int. 1997;52:1180.	18.	Marino PL. Acid-base interpretations. In: Marino PL, ed. The ICU Book. 2nd ed. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; 1998:581.	19.	Gluck SL. Acid-base. Lancet. 1998;352:474.	20.	Kraut JA, Madias NE. Treatment of acute metabolic acidosis: a pathophysiologic approach. Nat Rev Nephrol. 2012;8(10):589.	21.	Pal JD, Victorino GP, Twomey P, et al. Admission serum lactate levels do not predict mortality in the acutely injured patient.  J Trauma. 2006;60:583.	22.	Rizoli S. PlasmaLyte. J Trauma. 2011 May;70(5 Suppl):S17-8. 	23.	Roberts JS, Bratton SL. Colloid volume expanders: problems, pitfalls, and possibilities. Drugs. 1998;55:621.	24.	Cottenceau V, Masson F, Mahamid E, et al. Comparison effects of equiosmolar doses of mannitol and hypertonic saline on cerebral blood flow and metabolism in traumatic brain injury.  J Neurotrauma. 2011;28(10):2003.	25.	Berger-Pelleiter E, Emond M, Lauzier F, et al. Hypertonic saline in severe traumatic brain injury: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. CJEM. 2016 Mar;18(2):112-120. 		This meta-analysis demonstrated no mortality benefit or effect on intracranial pressure control utilizing hypertonic saline and was a key summary of eleven major trials in the field.	26.	Annane D, Siami S, Jaber S, et al. Effects of fluid resuscita-tion with colloids vs crystalloids on mortality in critically ill patients presenting with hypovolemic shock: the CRISTAL randomized trial. JAMA. 2013 Nov 6;310(17):1809-1817. 		This multi-center randomized trial found no difference in mor-tality at 28 days in a mixed ICU population of patients with hypovolemia when comparing colloid to crystalloid resuscita-tion. The authors observed a reduction in 90-day mortality in the group receiving colloids; however, they cautioned that this observation was exploratory and required further analysis.	27.	Perel P, Roberts I, Ker K. Colloids versus crystalloids for fluid resuscitation in critically ill patients. Cochrane Data-base Syst Rev. 2013 Feb 28;(2):CD000567. 		This Cochrane review of 70 trials including mortality data found no benefit to colloid resuscitation for reduction of risk of mor-tality, while the use of hydroxyethyl starch (HES) was found to have a possible association with increased mortality. The recom-mendation of the review was that colloid use in the ICU could not be supported due to increased cost and no mortality benefit.	28.	Myburgh JA, Finfer S, Bellomo R, et al. Hydroxyethyl starch or saline for fluid resuscitation in intensive care. N Engl J Med. 2012 Nov 15;367(20):1901-1911. 		In a randomized trial designed to address a primary outcome of 90-day mortality, the use of HES revealed no mortality benefit over saline with a statistically significant increase in the rate of renal replacement therapy after HES use.	29.	Overgaard-Steensen C, Ring T. Clinical review: practical approach to hyponatremia and hypernatremia in critically ill patients. Crit Care. 2013;17(1):206.	30.	Norenberg MD. Central pontine myelinolysis: historical and mechanistic considerations. Metab Brain Dis. 2010;25(1):97.	31.	Graff-Radford J, Fugate JE, Kauffmann TJ. Clinical and radio-logic correlations of central pontine myelinolysis syndrome. Mayo Clin Proc. 2011;86(11):1063.	32.	American College of Surgeons. Shock. In: American College of Surgeons Advanced Trauma Life Support Manual. 9th ed. Chicago: American College of Surgeons; 2012.	33.	Shires GT, Williams J, Brown F. Acute changes in extracel-lular fluids associated with major surgical procedures. Ann Surg. 1961;154:803. 		This early paper by Shires and colleagues produced important early observations of fluid shifts and resuscitation strategies fol-lowing surgery and shaped some of the early questions in the field of resuscitation science after surgery.	34.	Shires GT, Jackson DE. Postoperative salt tolerance. Arch Surg. 1962;84:703.	35.	Shires GT III, Peitzman AB, Albert SA, et al. Response of extravascular lung water to intraoperative fluids. Ann Surg. 1983;197:515.	36.	Smith I, Kranke P, Murat I, et al. Perioperative fasting in adults and children: guidelines from the European Society of Anaesthesiology. Eur J Anaesthesiol. 2011;28:556-569. 		Index guidelines published by the European Society of Anaes-thesiology were among the first to support the use of ERAS principles and provided a template for the design of the rapidly evolving practice of ERAS worldwide.	37.	Horosz B, Nawrocka K, Malec-Milewska M. Anaesthetic peri-operative management according to the ERAS protocol. Anaes-thesiol Intensive Ther. 2016;48(1):49-54.	38.	Rollins KE, Lobo DN. Intraoperative goal-directed fluid therapy in elective major abdominal surgery: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Ann Surg. 2016 Mar;263(3):465-476. 		Meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials demonstrated a marked reduction in morbidity, hospital length of stay (LOS), Brunicardi_Ch03_p0083-p0102.indd   10008/12/18   10:07 AM 101FLUID AND ELECTROLYTE MANAGEMENT OF THE SURGICAL PATIENTCHAPTER 3ICU LOS, and time to passage of feces utilizing goal-directed fluid therapy (GDFT) for intraoperative fluid management. Of note, in those studies where a multimodal ERAS pathway was utilized, the benefits of GDFT were reduced, although reduc-tion in major morbidities remained. These data suggest that the multimodal benefits of ERAS may extend beyond just fluid management.	39.	Miller TE, Roche AM, Mythen M. Fluid management and goal-directed therapy as an adjunct to enhanced recovery after sur-gery (ERAS). Can J Anaesth. 2015 Feb;62(2):158-168. 	40.	Liu VX, Rosas E, Hwang J, et al. Enhanced recovery after surgery program implementation in 2 surgical populations in an integrated health care delivery system. JAMA Surg. 2017  Jul 19;152(7):e171032.	41.	Ellison DH, Burl T. Clinical practice. The syndrome of inap-propriate antidiuresis. N Engl J Med. 2007;356(20):2064.	42.	Tisdall M, Crocker M, Watkiss J, et al. Disturbances of sodium in critically ill adult neurologic patients: a clinical review.  J Neurosurg Anesthesiol. 2006;18(1):57.	43.	Yee AH, Burns JD, Wijdicks EF. Cerebral salt wasting: patho-physiology, diagnosis, and treatment. Neurosurg Clin N Am. 2010;21(2):339.	44.	Kozar RA, McQuiggan MM, Moore FA. Nutritional support in trauma patients. In: Shikora SA, Martindale RG, Schwaitzberg SD, eds. Nutritional Considerations in the Intensive Care Unit. 1st ed. Dubuque, IA: Kendall/Hunt Publishing; 2002:229.	45.	Boateng AA, Sriram K, Mequid MM, et al. Refeeding syn-drome: treatment considerations based on collective analysis of literature case reports. Nutrition. 2010;26(2):156.	46.	Glassford NJ, Bellomo R. Acute kidney injury: how can we facilitate recovery? Curr Opin Crit Care. 2011;17(6):562.	47.	Kapoor M, Chan GZ. Fluid and electrolyte abnormalities. Crit Care Clin. 2002;17:503.	48.	Clines GA. Mechanisms and treatment of hypercalce-mia of malignancy. Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2011;18(6):339.Brunicardi_Ch03_p0083-p0102.indd   10108/12/18   10:07 AM
# Chunk 8869
Brunicardi_Ch03_p0083-p0102.indd   10208/12/18   10:07 AMThis page intentionally left blank

Hemostasis, Surgical Bleeding,  and TransfusionRonald Chang, John B. Holcomb, Evan Leibner,  Matthew Pommerening, and Rosemary A. Kozar 4chapterBIOLOGY OF HEMOSTASISHemostasis is a complex process whose function is to limit blood loss from an injured vessel. Four major physiologic events participate in the hemostatic process: vascular constric-tion, platelet plug formation, fibrin formation, and fibrinolysis. Although each tends to be activated in order, the four processes are interrelated so that there is a continuum and multiple rein-forcements. The process is shown schematically in Fig. 4-1.Vascular ConstrictionVascular constriction is the initial response to vessel injury. It is more pronounced in vessels with medial smooth muscles and is dependent on local contraction of smooth muscle. Vasoconstric-tion is subsequently linked to platelet plug formation. Throm-boxane A2 (TXA2) is produced locally at the site if injury via the release of arachidonic acid from platelet membranes and is a potent constrictor of smooth muscle. Similarly, endothelin synthesized by injured endothelium and serotonin (5-hydroxy-tryptamine [5-HT]) released during platelet aggregation are potent vasoconstrictors. Lastly, bradykinin and fibrinopeptides, which are involved in the coagulation schema, are also capable of contracting vascular smooth muscle.The extent of vasoconstriction varies with the degree of vessel injury. A small artery with a lateral incision may remain open due to physical forces, whereas a similarly sized vessel that is completely transected may contract to the extent that bleeding ceases spontaneously.Platelet FunctionPlatelets are anucleate fragments of megakaryocytes. The nor-mal circulating number of platelets ranges between 150,000 and 400,000/μL. Up to 30% of circulating platelets may be sequestered in the spleen. If not consumed in a clotting reaction, platelets are normally removed by the spleen and have an aver-age life span of 7 to 10 days.Platelets play an integral role in hemostasis by forming a hemostatic plug and by contributing to thrombin formation (Fig. 4-2). Platelets do not normally adhere to each other or to the vessel wall but can form a plug that aids in cessation of bleeding when vascular disruption occurs. Injury to the intimal layer in the vascular wall exposes subendothelial collagen to which platelets adhere. This process requires von Willebrand factor (vWF), a protein in the subendothelium that is lacking in patients with von Willebrand’s disease. vWF binds to glycopro-tein (GP) I/IX/V on the platelet membrane. Following adhesion, platelets initiate a release reaction that recruits other platelets from the circulating blood to seal the disrupted vessel. Up to this point, this process is known as primary hemostasis. Platelet aggregation is reversible and is not associated with secretion. Additionally, heparin does not interfere with this reaction, and thus, hemostasis can occur in the heparinized patient. Adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and serotonin are the principal mediators in platelet aggregation.Arachidonic acid released from the platelet membranes is converted by cyclooxygenase to prostaglandin G2 (PGG2) and then to prostaglandin H2 (PGH2), which, in turn, is converted to TXA2. TXA2 has potent vasoconstriction and platelet aggrega-tion effects. Arachidonic acid may also be shuttled to adjacent endothelial cells and converted to prostacyclin (PGI2), which is a vasodilator and acts to inhibit platelet aggregation. Platelet cyclooxygenase is irreversibly inhibited by aspirin and revers-ibly blocked by nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents but is not affected by cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors.In the second wave of platelet aggregation, a release reaction occurs in which several substances including ADP, Ca2+, serotonin, TXA2, and α-granule proteins are discharged. Biology of Hemostasis	103Vascular Constriction / 103Platelet Function / 103Coagulation / 104Fibrinolysis / 106Congenital Factor Deficiencies	106Coagulation Factor Deficiencies / 106Platelet Functional Defects / 107Acquired Hemostatic Defects	108Platelet Abnormalities / 108Acquired Hypofibrinogenemia / 110Myeloproliferative Diseases / 110Coagulopathy of Liver Disease / 110Coagulopathy of Trauma / 111Acquired Coagulation Inhibitors / 112Anticoagulation and Bleeding / 112Topical Hemostatic Agents / 115Transfusion	115Background / 115Replacement Therapy/ 115Indications for Replacement of Blood and Its Elements / 117Volume Replacement / 117New Concepts in Resuscitation / 117Prehospital Transfusion / 119Whole Blood Resuscitation / 121Fibrinogen Replacement / 121Complications of Transfusion  (Table 4-9) / 121Tests of Hemostasis and Blood   Coagulation	123Evaluation of Excessive  Intraoperative or Postoperative   Bleeding	124Brunicardi_Ch04_p0103-p0130.indd   10329/01/19   11:05 AM 104Figure 4-1. Biology of hemostasis. The four phys-iologic processes that interrelate to limit blood loss from an injured vessel are illustrated and include vascular constriction, platelet plug formation, fibrin clot formation, and fibrinolysis.Key Points1	The life span of platelets ranges from 7 to 10 days. Drugs that interfere with platelet function include aspirin, clopido-grel, prasugrel, dipyridamole, and the glycoprotein IIb/IIIa (GP IIb/IIIa) inhibitors. Approximately 5 to 7 days should pass from the time the drug is stopped until an elective pro-cedure is performed.2	Laboratory evidence of trauma-induced coagulopathy is found in up to one-third of severely injured patients at admission. It is distinct from disseminated intravascular coagulopathy and iatrogenic causes of coagulopathy such as hemodilution. Several non–mutually exclusive mechanisms have been proposed. However, the relationship between laboratory coagulation abnormalities and clinically evident coagulopathic bleeding is unclear.3	Direct oral anticoagulants have no readily available method for monitoring anticoagulation. A new monoclonal antibody has been approved to reverse coagulopathy due to dabiga-tran, and agents are currently in clinical trials for the reversal of direct factor Xa oral anticoagulants.4	When determining the need for bridging of therapeutic anti-coagulation in the preoperative and postoperative setting, the patient’s risk of bleeding should be carefully considered against the risk of thromboembolism and used to guide the need for reversal of anticoagulation therapy preoperatively and the timing of its reinstatement postoperatively.5	Damage control resuscitation has three basic components: permissive hypotension, minimizing crystalloid-based resus-citation, and the administration of balanced ratios of blood products.6	The need for massive transfusion should be anticipated, and guidelines should be in place to provide early and balanced amounts of red blood cells, plasma, and platelets.Fibrinogen is a required cofactor for this process, acting as a bridge for the GP IIb/IIIa receptor on the activated platelets. The release reaction results in compaction of the platelets into a plug, a process that is no longer reversible. Thrombospondin, another protein secreted by the α-granule, stabilizes fibrino-gen binding to the activated platelet surface and strengthens the platelet-platelet interactions. Platelet factor 4 (PF4) and α-thromboglobulin are also secreted during the release reac-tion. PF4 is a potent heparin antagonist. The second wave of platelet aggregation is inhibited by aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, by cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), and by nitric oxide. As a consequence of the release reaction, alterations occur in the phospholipids of the platelet membrane that allow calcium and clotting factors to bind to the platelet surface, forming enzymatically active complexes. The altered lipoprotein surface (sometimes referred to as platelet factor 3) catalyzes reactions that are involved in the conversion of prothrombin (factor II) to thrombin (factor IIa) by activated factor X (Xa) in the presence of factor V and calcium, and it is involved in the reaction by which activated factor IX (IXa), fac-tor VIII, and calcium activated factor X. Platelets may also play a role in the initial activation of factors XI and XII.CoagulationHemostasis involves a complex interplay and combination of interactions between platelets, the endothelium, and multiple circulating or membrane-bound coagulation factors. While overly simplistic and not reflective of the depth or complexity of these interactions, the coagulation cascade has traditionally been depicted as two possible pathways converging into a single Common pathwayIntrinsic pathwayClotting factorsVIII, IX, X, XI, XIIFibrin1. Vascular phase(Vasoconstriction)2. Platelet phase(Platelets aggregate)3. Coagulation phase (Clot formation)(Clot retraction)4. Fibrinolysis(Clot destruction)Extrinsic pathwayClotting factorsVIIProthrombinThrombinCA2+vCA2+Brunicardi_Ch04_p0103-p0130.indd   10429/01/19   11:05 AM 105HEMOSTASIS, SURGICAL BLEEDING, AND TRANSFUSIONCHAPTER 4common pathway (Fig. 4-3). While this pathway reflects the basic process and sequences that lead to the formation of a clot, the numerous feedback loops, endothelial interplay, and platelet functions are not included. The intrinsic pathway begins with the activation of factor XII that subsequently activates factors XI, IX, and VIII. In this pathway, each of the primary factors is “intrinsic”  to the circulating plasma, whereby no surface is required to initi-ate the process. In the extrinsic pathway, tissue factor (TF) is released or exposed on the surface of the endothelium, binding to circulating factor VII, facilitating its activation to VIIa. Each of these pathways continues on to a common sequence that begins with the activation of factor X to Xa (in the presence of VIIIa). Subsequently, Xa (with the help of factor Va) converts factor II (prothrombin) to thrombin and then factor I (fibrinogen) to fibrin. Clot formation occurs after fibrin monomers are cross-linked to polymers with the assistance of factor XIII.One convenient feature of depicting the coagulation cas-cade with two merging arms is that commonly used laboratory tests segregate abnormalities of clotting to one of the two arms. An elevated activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) is associated with abnormal function of the intrinsic arm of the cascade (II, IX, X, XI, XII), while the prothrombin time (PT) is associated with the extrinsic arm (II, VII, X). Vitamin K defi-ciency or warfarin use affects factors II, VII, IX, and X.Expanding from the basic concept of Fig. 4-3, the cell-based model of hemostasis, divided into the initiation, ampli-fication, and propagation phases, provides a more complete picture of clot formation. During initiation, the primary pathway for coagulation is initiated by TF exposure following suben-dothelial injury. TF binds to VIIa, and this complex catalyzes the activation of factor X to Xa and IX to IXa, which in turn activates factor V to Va. This “prothrombinase” complex gener-ates small amounts of thrombin from prothrombin in a calcium-dependent process. During amplification, platelets adhere to extracellular matrix components at the site of injury and become activated upon exposure to thrombin and other stimuli. Finally, during the propagation phase, “tenase” (factor VIIIa/IXa) and prothrombinase (factor Va/Xa) complexes are assembled on the surfaces of activated platelets. This results in large-scale genera-tion of thrombin (“thrombin burst”) and fibrin.In building on the redundancy inherent in the coagulation system, factor VIIIa combines with IXa to form the intrinsic factor complex. Factor IXa is responsible for the bulk of the conversion of factor X to Xa. This complex (VIIIa-IXa) is  50 times more effective at catalyzing factor X activation than is the extrinsic (TF-VIIa) complex and five to six orders of mag-nitude more effective than factor IXa alone.Once formed, thrombin leaves the membrane surface and converts fibrinogen by two cleavage steps into fibrin and two small peptides termed fibrinopeptides A and B. Removal of fibrinopeptide A permits end-to-end polymerization of the fibrin molecules, whereas cleavage of fibrinopeptide B allows side-to-side polymerization of the fibrin clot. This latter step is Platelet hemostaticfunctionVasoconstrictionADP, serotonin,Ca2+, fibrinogenADP, serotonin,Ca2+, fibrinogenSubendothelial collagenPlatelet adhesion secretionPlatelet aggregation secretionPlatelet aggregationPlatelet-fibrinthrombus(Reversible)(Irreversible)Coagulation activationvia tissue factor-factor VIIaIXa, XaComplexes onactivated plateletsThrombin+FibrinogenVascular endothelialinjuryFigure 4-2. Schematic of platelet activation and thrombus function.Figure 4-3. Schematic of the coagulation system. HMW = high molecular weight.Tissue factor-Factor VIIaInflammationComplement activationFibrinolysisPhysiologicFactor VFactor VaCa2+PhospholipidCa2+Ca2+Prothrombin(factor II) Thrombin(factor IIa)IntrinsicSurfaceFactor XIIFactor XIIa KallikreinPrekallikreinHMW kininogenSurfaceFactor XIaFactor IXaFactor XIFactor IXExtrinsicVascular injuryTissue factor +factor VIIFactor XaFactor XCa2+FibrinFactor XIIIFibrinFactor XIIIaX-Linked fibrinFibrinogenFactor VIIIaCa2+PhospholipidFactor VIIIBrunicardi_Ch04_p0103-p0130.indd   10529/01/19   11:05 AM 106BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ifacilitated by thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor (TAFI), which acts to stabilize the resultant clot.In seeking to balance profound bleeding with overwhelm-ing clot burden, several related processes exist to prevent prop-agation of the clot beyond the site of injury.1 First, feedback inhibition on the coagulation cascade deactivates the enzyme complexes leading to thrombin formation. Thrombomodulin (TM) presented by the endothelium serves as a “thrombin sink” by forming a complex with thrombin, rendering it no longer available to cleave fibrinogen. This then activates protein C (APC) and reduces further thrombin generation by inhibiting factors V and VIII. Second, tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) is released from the endothelium following injury, cleaving plasminogen to initiate fibrinolysis. APC then consumes plas-minogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1), leading to increased tPA activity and fibrinolysis. Building on the anticoagulant response to inhibit thrombin formation, tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI) is released, blocking the TF-VIIa complex and reducing the production of factors Xa and IXa. Antithrombin III (AT-III) then neutralizes all of the procoagulant serine proteases and also inhibits the TF-VIIa complex. The most potent mechanism of thrombin inhibition involves the APC system. APC forms a complex with its cofactor, protein S, on a phospholipid surface. This complex then cleaves factors Va and VIIIa so that they are no longer able to participate in the formation of TF-VIIa or pro-thrombinase complexes. This is of interest clinically in the form of a genetic mutation, called factor V Leiden. In this setting,  factor V is resistant to cleavage by APC, thereby remaining active as a procoagulant. Patients with factor V Leiden are pre-disposed to venous thromboembolic events.Degradation of fibrin clot is accomplished by plasmin, a serine protease derived from the proenzyme plasminogen. Plas-min formation occurs as a result of one of several plasminogen activators. tPA is made by the endothelium and other cells of the vascular wall and is the main circulating form of this family of enzymes. tPA is selective for fibrin-bound plasminogen so that endogenous fibrinolytic activity occurs predominately at the site of clot formation. The other major plasminogen activa-tor, urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA), also produced by endothelial cells as well as by urothelium, is not selective for fibrin-bound plasminogen. Of note, the thrombin-TM complex activates TAFI, leading to a mixed effect on clot stability. In addition to inhibiting fibrinolysis directly, removal of the termi-nal lysine on the fibrin molecule by TAFI renders the clot more susceptible to lysis by plasmin.FibrinolysisFibrin clot breakdown (lysis) allows restoration of blood flow during the healing process following injury and begins at the same time clot formation is initiated. Fibrin polymers are degraded by plasmin, a serine protease derived from the pro-enzyme plasminogen. Plasminogen is converted to plasmin by one of several plasminogen activators, including tPA. Plasmin then degrades the fibrin mesh at various places, leading to the production of circulating fragments, termed fibrin degradation products (FDPs), cleared by other proteases or by the kidney and liver (Fig. 4-4). Fibrinolysis is directed by circulating kinases, tissue activators, and kallikrein present in vascular endothelium. tPA is synthesized by endothelial cells and released by the cells on thrombin stimulation. Bradykinin, a potent endothelial-dependent vasodilator, is cleaved from high molecular weight kininogen by kallikrein and enhances the release of tPA. Both tPA and plasminogen bind to fibrin as it forms, and this trimo-lecular complex cleaves fibrin very efficiently. After plasmin is generated, however, it cleaves fibrin somewhat less efficiently.As with clot formation, fibrinolysis is also kept in check through several robust mechanisms. tPA activates plasmino-gen more efficiently when it is bound to fibrin, so that plasmin is formed selectively on the clot. Plasmin is inhibited by α2-antiplasmin, a protein that is cross-linked to fibrin by factor XIII, which helps to ensure that clot lysis does not occur too quickly. Any circulating plasmin is also inhibited by α2-antiplasmin and circulating tPA or urokinase. Clot lysis yields FDPs including E-nodules and D-dimers. These smaller fragments interfere with normal platelet aggregation, and the larger fragments may be incorporated into the clot in lieu of normal fibrin monomers. This may result in an unstable clot as seen in cases of severe coagu-lopathy such as hyperfibrinolysis associated with trauma-induced coagulopathy or disseminated intravascular coagulopathy. The presence of D-dimers in the circulation may serve as a marker of thrombosis or other conditions in which a significant activa-tion of the fibrinolytic system is present. Another inhibitor of the fibrinolytic system is TAFI, which removes lysine residues from fibrin that are essential for binding plasminogen.CONGENITAL FACTOR DEFICIENCIESCoagulation Factor DeficienciesInherited deficiencies of all of the coagulation factors are seen. However, the three most frequent are factor VIII deficiency (hemophilia A or von Willebrand’s disease), factor IX defi-ciency (hemophilia B or Christmas disease), and factor XI deficiency. Hemophilia A and hemophilia B are inherited as sex-linked recessive disorders with males being affected almost exclusively. The clinical severity of hemophilia A and hemo-philia B depends on the measurable level of factor VIII or factor IX in the patient’s plasma. Plasma factor levels less than 1% of normal are considered severe disease, factor levels between 1% and 5% moderately severe disease, and levels between 5% and 30% mild disease. Patients with severe hemophilia have spontaneous bleeds, frequently into joints, leading to crippling arthropathies. Intracranial bleeding, intramuscular hematomas, retroperitoneal hematomas, and gastrointestinal, genitourinary, and retropharyngeal bleeding are added clinical sequelae seen with severe disease. Patients with moderately severe hemophilia have less spontaneous bleeding but are likely to bleed severely EndotheliumPlateletThrombinPlasminogentPAPlasminFibrinFDPFigure 4-4. Formation of fibrin degradation products (FDPs).  tPA = tissue plasminogen activator.Brunicardi_Ch04_p0103-p0130.indd   10629/01/19   11:05 AM 107HEMOSTASIS, SURGICAL BLEEDING, AND TRANSFUSIONCHAPTER 4after trauma or surgery. Mild hemophiliacs do not bleed sponta-neously and have only minor bleeding after major trauma or sur-gery. Since platelet function is normal in hemophiliacs, patients may not bleed immediately after an injury or minor surgery as they have a normal response with platelet activation and forma-tion of a platelet plug. At times, the diagnosis of hemophilia is not made in these patients until after their first minor procedure (e.g., tooth extraction or tonsillectomy).Patients with hemophilia A or B are treated with factor VIII or factor IX concentrate, respectively. Recombinant factor VIII is strongly recommended for patients not treated previously and is generally recommended for patients who are both human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and hepatitis C virus (HCV) seronegative. For factor IX replacement, the preferred products are recombinant or high-purity factor IX. In general, activity levels should be restored to 30% to 40% for mild hemorrhage, 50% for severe bleeding, and 80% to 100% for life-threatening bleeding. Up to 20% of hemophiliacs with factor VIII defi-ciency develop inhibitors that can neutralize FVIII. For patients with low titers, inhibitors can be overcome with higher doses of factor VIII. For patients with high titer inhibitors, alternate treat-ments should be used and may include porcine factor VIII, pro-thrombin complex concentrates, activated prothrombin complex concentrates, or recombinant factor VIIa. For patients undergo-ing elective surgical procedures, a multidisciplinary approach with preoperative planning and replacement is recommended.2von Willebrand’s Disease. von Willebrand’s disease (vWD), the most common congenital bleeding disorder, is characterized by a quantitative or qualitative defect in vWF, a large glycopro-tein responsible for carrying factor VIII and platelet adhesion. The latter is important for normal platelet adhesion to exposed subendothelium and for aggregation under high shear condi-tions. Patients with vWD have bleeding that is characteristic of platelet disorders such as easy bruising and mucosal bleed-ing. Menorrhagia is common in women. vWD is classified into three types. Type I is a partial quantitative deficiency; type II is a qualitative defect; type III is total deficiency. For bleeding,  type I patients usually respond well to desmopressin (DDAVP). Type II patients may respond, depending on the particular defect. Type III patients are usually unresponsive. These patients may require vWF concentrates.3Factor XI Deficiency. Factor XI deficiency, an autosomal recessive inherited condition sometimes referred to as hemo-philia C, is more prevalent in the Ashkenazi Jewish population but found in all races. Spontaneous bleeding is rare, but bleeding may occur after surgery, trauma, or invasive procedures. Treat-ment of patients with factor XI deficiency who present with bleeding or in whom surgery is planned and who are known to have bled previously is with fresh frozen plasma (FFP). Each milliliter of plasma contains 1 unit of factor XI activity, so the volume needed depends on the patient’s baseline level, the desired level, and the plasma volume. Antifibrinolytics may be useful in patients with menorrhagia. Factor VIIa is recom-mended for patients with anti-factor XI antibodies, although thrombosis has been reported.4 There has been renewed interest in factor XI inhibitors as antithrombotic agents because patients with factor XI deficiency generally have only minimal bleeding risk unless a severe deficiency is present and seem to be pro-tected from thrombosis.5Deficiency of Factors II (Prothrombin), V, and X. Inher-ited deficiencies of factors II, V, and X are rare. These deficiencies are inherited as autosomal recessive. Significant bleeding in homozygotes with less than 1% of normal activ-ity is encountered. Bleeding with any of these deficiencies is treated with FFP. Similar to factor XI, FFP contains one unit of activity of each per milliliter. However, factor V activity is decreased because of its inherent instability. The half-life of prothrombin (factor II) is long (approximately 72 hours), and only about 25% of a normal level is needed for hemostasis. Prothrombin complex concentrates can be used to treat defi-ciencies of prothrombin or factor X. Daily infusions of FFP are used to treat bleeding in factor V deficiency, with a goal of 20% to 25% activity. Factor V deficiency may be coinherited with  factor VIII deficiency. Treatment of bleeding in individuals with the combined deficiency requires factor VIII concentrate and FFP. Some patients with factor V deficiency are also lacking the factor V normally present in platelets and may need platelet transfusions as well as FFP.Factor VII Deficiency. Inherited factor VII deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive disorder. Clinical bleeding can vary widely and does not always correlate with the level of FVII coagulant activity in plasma. Bleeding is uncommon unless the level is less than 3%. The most common bleeding manifesta-tions involve easy bruising and mucosal bleeding, particularly epistaxis or oral mucosal bleeding. Postoperative bleeding is also common, reported in 30% of surgical procedures.6 Treat-ment is with FFP or recombinant factor VIIa. The half-life of recombinant factor VIIa is only approximately 2 hours, but excellent hemostasis can be achieved with frequent infusions. The half-life of factor VII in FFP is up to 4 hours.Factor XIII Deficiency. Congenital factor XIII (FXIII) defi-ciency, originally recognized by Duckert in 1960, is a rare autosomal recessive disease usually associated with a severe bleeding diathesis.7 The male-to-female ratio is 1:1. Although acquired FXIII deficiency has been described in association with hepatic failure, inflammatory bowel disease, and myeloid leukemia, the only significant association with bleeding in chil-dren is the inherited deficiency.8 Bleeding is typically delayed because clots form normally but are susceptible to fibrinolysis. Umbilical stump bleeding is characteristic, and there is a high risk of intracranial bleeding. Spontaneous abortion is usual in women with factor XIII deficiency unless they receive replace-ment therapy. Replacement can be accomplished with FFP, cryoprecipitate, or a factor XIII concentrate. Levels of 1% to 2% are usually adequate for hemostasis.Platelet Functional DefectsInherited platelet functional defects include abnormalities of platelet surface proteins, abnormalities of platelet granules, and enzyme defects. The major surface protein abnormalities are thrombasthenia and Bernard-Soulier syndrome. Thrombasthe-nia, or Glanzmann thrombasthenia, is a rare genetic platelet disorder, inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, in which the platelet glycoprotein IIb/IIIa (GP IIb/IIIa) complex is either lacking or present but dysfunctional. This defect leads to faulty platelet aggregation and subsequent bleeding. The disorder was first described by Dr. Eduard Glanzmann in 1918.9 Bleeding in thrombasthenic patients must be treated with platelet transfu-sions. Bernard-Soulier syndrome is caused by a defect in the GP Ib/IX/V receptor for vWF, which is necessary for platelet adhesion to the subendothelium. Transfusion of normal platelets is required for bleeding in these patients.Brunicardi_Ch04_p0103-p0130.indd   10729/01/19   11:05 AM 108BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IThe most common intrinsic platelet defect is storage pool disease. It involves loss of dense granules (storage sites for ADP, adenosine triphosphate [ATP], Ca2+, and inorganic phosphate) and α-granules. Dense granule deficiency is the most prevalent of these. It may be an isolated defect or occur with partial albinism in Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome. Bleed-ing is variable, depending on the severity of the granule defect. Bleeding is caused by the decreased release of ADP from these platelets. A few patients have been reported who have decreased numbers of both dense and α-granules. They have a more severe bleeding disorder. Patients with mild bleeding as a consequence of a form of storage pool disease can be treated with DDAVP. It is likely that the high levels of vWF in the plasma after DDAVP somehow compensate for the intrinsic platelet defect. With more severe bleeding, platelet transfusion is required.ACQUIRED HEMOSTATIC DEFECTSPlatelet AbnormalitiesAcquired congenital abnormalities of platelets are much more common than acquired defects and may be quantitative or quali-tative, although some patients have both types of defects. Quan-titative defects may be a result of failure of production, shortened survival, or sequestration. Failure of production is generally a result of bone marrow disorders such as leukemia, myelodys-plastic syndrome, severe vitamin B12 or folate deficiency, che-motherapeutic drugs, radiation, acute ethanol intoxication, or viral infection. If a quantitative abnormality exists and treatment is indicated either due to symptoms or the need for an invasive procedure, platelet transfusion is utilized. The etiologies of both qualitative and quantitative defects are reviewed in Table 4-1.Quantitative Defects. Shortened platelet survival is seen in immune thrombocytopenia, disseminated intravascular coagu-lation, or disorders characterized by platelet thrombi such as thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura and hemolytic uremic syndrome. Immune thrombocytopenia may be idiopathic or associated with other autoimmune disorders or low-grade B-cell malignancies, and it may also be secondary to viral infections (including HIV) or drugs. Secondary immune thrombocytopenia often presents with a very low platelet count, petechiae and pur-pura, and epistaxis. Large platelets are seen on peripheral smear. Initial treatment consists of corticosteroids, intravenous gamma globulin, or anti-D immunoglobulin in patients who are Rh posi-tive. Both gamma globulin and anti-D immunoglobulin are rapid in onset. Platelet transfusions are not usually needed unless cen-tral nervous system bleeding or active bleeding from other sites occurs. Survival of the transfused platelets is usually short.Primary immune thrombocytopenia is also known as idio-pathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP). In children, it is usually acute in onset, short lived, and typically follows a viral illness. In contrast, ITP in adults is gradual in onset, chronic in nature, and has no identifiable cause. Because the circulating platelets in ITP are young and functional, bleeding is less for a given platelet count than when there is failure of platelet production. The patho-physiology of ITP is believed to involve both impaired platelet production and T cell–mediated platelet destruction.10 Manage-ment options are summarized in Table 4-2.11 Treatment of drug-induced immune thrombocytopenia may simply entail withdrawal of the offending drug, but corticosteroids, gamma globulin, and anti-D immunoglobulin may hasten recovery of the count.12,13Table 4-1Etiology of acquired platelet disordersA. Quantitative Disorders1. Failure of production: related to impairment in bone marrow functiona. Leukemiab. Myeloproliferative disordersc. B12 or folate deficienciesd. Chemotherapy or radiation therapye. Acute alcohol intoxicationf. Viral infections2. Decreased survivala. Immune-mediated1) Idiopathic thrombocytopenia (ITP)2) Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia3) Autoimmune disorders or B-cell malignancies4) Secondary thrombocytopeniab. Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)c. Related to platelet thrombi1) Thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP)2) Hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS)3. Sequestrationa. Portal hypertensionb. Sarcoidc. Lymphomad. Gaucher’s DiseaseB. Qualitative Disorders1. Massive transfusion2. Therapeutic platelet inhibitors3. Disease statesa. Myeloproliferative disordersb. Monoclonal gammopathiesc. Liver diseaseTable 4-2Management of idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) in adultsFirst line: a. Corticosteroids: Longer courses of corticosteroids are preferred over shorter courses of corticosteroids b. Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) or anti-D immunoglobulin: the dose should initially be 1 g/kg as a one-time dose. This dosage may be repeated if necessarySecond line: a. Splenectomy b. Rituximab, an anti-CD 20 monoclonal antibody c. Thrombopoietin (TPO) receptor agonists d. Immunosuppressive agentsThird line: (failing first and second line therapy) a. Thrombopoietin (TPO) receptor agonists b. Combination of first and second line therapies c. Combination chemotherapyBrunicardi_Ch04_p0103-p0130.indd   10829/01/19   11:05 AM 109HEMOSTASIS, SURGICAL BLEEDING, AND TRANSFUSIONCHAPTER 4Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) is a form of drug-induced immune thrombocytopenia. It is an immunologic event during which antibodies against platelet factor 4 (PF4) formed during exposure to heparin affect platelet activation and endothelial function with resultant thrombocytopenia and intravascular thrombosis.14 The platelet count typically begins to fall 5 to 7 days after heparin has been started, but if it is a reexposure, the decrease in count may occur within 1 to 2 days. HIT should be suspected if the platelet count falls to less than 100,000 or if it drops by 50% from baseline in a patient receiv-ing heparin. While HIT is more common with full-dose unfrac-tionated heparin (1% to 3%), it can also occur with prophylactic doses or with low molecular weight heparins. Interestingly, approximately 17% of patients receiving unfractionated hepa-rin and 8% receiving low molecular weight heparin develop antibodies against PF4, yet a much smaller percentage develop thrombocytopenia, and even fewer develop clinical HIT.15 In addition to mild to moderate thrombocytopenia, this disorder is characterized by a high incidence of thrombosis that may be arterial or venous. Importantly, the absence of thrombo-cytopenia in these patients does not preclude the diagnosis of HIT. The 4Ts scoring system by Lo et al can be used to assess the pretest probability of HIT and incorporates the timing and magnitude of the platelet count fall, new thrombosis, and the likelihood of other reasons for thrombocytopenia.16 A low probability 4Ts score is quite accurate in excluding HIT, but patients with intermediate or high probability scores require further evaluation.Laboratory testing should include an anti–platelet fac-tor 4–heparin enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Unfortunately, this test, like the 4Ts, has a high negative predic-tive value but a low positive predictive value. While a negative ELISA essentially rules out HIT, a positive ELISA does not confirm HIT. To increase the specificity of this assay, it can be restricted to IgG antibodies or obtained in conjunction with a functional assay such as the serotonin release assay and the heparin-induced platelet activation test. Both of these are avail-able only at specialized laboratories and should only be used as second-line diagnostic assays.l7The initial treatment of suspected HIT is to stop heparin and begin an alternative anticoagulant. Stopping heparin with-out addition of another anticoagulant is not adequate to prevent thrombosis in this setting. Alternative anticoagulants are pri-marily thrombin inhibitors. The most recent guideline by the American College of Chest Physicians recommends lepiru-din, argatroban, or danaparoid for patients with normal renal function and argatroban for patients with renal insufficiency.18 Because of warfarin’s early induction of a hypercoagulable state, warfarin should be instituted only once full anticoagula-tion with an alternative agent has been accomplished and the platelet count has begun to recover.These are also disorders in which thrombocytopenia is a result of platelet activation and formation of platelet thrombi. In thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP), large vWF mol-ecules interact with platelets, leading to activation. These large molecules result from inhibition of a metalloproteinase enzyme, ADAM-S13, which cleaves the large vWF molecules.19 TTP is classically characterized by thrombocytopenia, microangio-pathic hemolytic anemia, fever, and renal and neurologic signs or symptoms. The finding of schistocytes on a peripheral blood smear aids in the diagnosis. Plasma exchange with replacement of FFP is the treatment for acute TTP.20 Additionally, rituximab, a monoclonal antibody against the CD20 protein on B lympho-cytes, is indicated in relapsing and/or refractory TTP.21Hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) often occurs second-ary to infection by Escherichia coli 0157:H7 or other Shiga toxin-producing bacteria. The metalloproteinase is normal in these cases. HUS is usually associated with some degree of renal failure, with many patients requiring renal replacement therapy. Neurologic symptoms are less frequent. A number of patients develop features of both TTP and HUS. This may occur with autoimmune diseases, especially systemic lupus erythematosus and HIV infection, or in association with certain drugs (such as ticlopidine, mitomycin C, gemcitabine) or immunosuppressive agents (such as cyclosporine and tacrolimus). Discontinuation of the involved drug is the mainstay of therapy. Plasmapheresis is frequently used, but it is not clear what etiologic factor is being removed by the pheresis.Sequestration is another important cause of thrombocyto-penia and usually involves trapping of platelets in an enlarged spleen typically related to portal hypertension, sarcoid, lym-phoma, or Gaucher’s disease. The total body platelet mass is essentially normal in patients with hypersplenism, but a much larger fraction of the platelets are in the enlarged spleen. Platelet survival is mildly decreased. Bleeding is less than anticipated from the count because sequestered platelets can be mobilized to some extent and enter the circulation. Platelet transfusion does not increase the platelet count as much as it would in a normal person because the transfused platelets are similarly sequestered in the spleen. Splenectomy is not indicated to correct the throm-bocytopenia of hypersplenism caused by portal hypertension.Thrombocytopenia and platelet dysfunction are the most common abnormalities of hemostasis that result in bleeding in the surgical patient. The patient may have a reduced platelet count as a result of a variety of disease processes, as discussed earlier. In these circumstances, the marrow usually demon-strates a normal or increased number of megakaryocytes. By contrast, when thrombocytopenia occurs in patients with leu-kemia or uremia and in patients on cytotoxic therapy, there are generally a reduced number of megakaryocytes in the marrow. Thrombocytopenia also occurs in surgical patients as a result of massive blood loss with product replacement deficient in platelets. Thrombocytopenia may also be induced by heparin administration during cardiac and vascular cases, as in the case of HIT, or may be associated with thrombotic and hemorrhagic complications. When thrombocytopenia is present in a patient for whom an elective operation is being considered, manage-ment is contingent upon the extent and cause of platelet reduc-tion and extent of platelet dysfunction.Early platelet administration has now become part of mas-sive transfusion protocols.22,23 Platelets are also administered preoperatively to rapidly increase the platelet count in surgical patients with underlying thrombocytopenia or platelet dysfunc-tion. One unit of platelet concentrate contains approximately 5.5 × 1010 platelets and would be expected to increase the cir-culating platelet count by about 10,000/μL in the average 70-kg person. Fever, infection, hepatosplenomegaly, and the pres-ence of antiplatelet alloantibodies decrease the effectiveness of platelet transfusions. In patients who are refractory to standard platelet transfusion, the use of human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-compatible platelets coupled with special processors has proved effective.Brunicardi_Ch04_p0103-p0130.indd   10929/01/19   11:05 AM 110BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IQualitative Platelet Defects. Impaired platelet function often accompanies thrombocytopenia but may also occur in the presence of a normal platelet count. The importance of this is obvious when one considers that 80% of overall clot strength is related to platelet function. The life span of platelets ranges from 7 to 10 days, placing them at increased risk for impairment by medical disorders and prescription and over-the-counter medications. Impairment of ADP-stimulated aggregation occurs with massive transfusion of blood products. Ure-mia may be associated with increased bleeding time and impaired aggregation. Defective aggregation and platelet dys-function are also seen in patients with severe trauma, thrombo-cythemia, polycythemia vera, and myelofibrosis.Drugs that interfere with platelet function include aspirin, clopidogrel, prasugrel, dipyridamole, and GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors. Aspirin, clopidogrel, and prasugrel all irreversibly inhibit plate-let function. Clopidogrel and prasugrel do so through selective irreversible inhibition of ADP-induced platelet aggregation.24 Aspirin works through irreversible acetylation of platelet pros-taglandin synthase.There are no prospective randomized trials in general sur-gical patients to guide the timing of surgery in patients on aspi-rin, clopidogrel, or prasugrel.25 The general recommendation is that approximately 5 to 7 days should pass from the time the drug is stopped until an elective procedure is performed.26 Tim-ing of urgent and emergent surgeries is even more unclear. Pre-operative platelet transfusions may be beneficial, but there are no good data to guide their administration. However, functional tests such as thromboelastography (TEG) with platelet mapping are becoming available that may better demonstrate defects in platelet function and may serve to guide the timing of operation or when platelet transfusions might be indicated.Other disorders associated with abnormal platelet func-tion include uremia, myeloproliferative disorders, monoclonal gammopathies, and liver disease. In the surgical patient, plate-let dysfunction of uremia can often be corrected by dialysis or the administration of DDAVP. Platelet transfusion may not be helpful if the patient is uremic when the platelets are given and only serve to increase antibodies. Platelet dysfunction in myelo-proliferative disorders is intrinsic to the platelets and usually improves if the platelet count can be reduced to normal with chemotherapy. If possible, surgery should be delayed until the count has been decreased. These patients are at risk for both bleeding and thrombosis. Platelet dysfunction in patients with monoclonal gammopathies is a result of interaction of the mono-clonal protein with platelets. Treatment with chemotherapy or, occasionally, plasmapheresis to lower the amount of monoclo-nal protein improves hemostasis.Acquired HypofibrinogenemiaDisseminated Intravascular Coagulation (DIC). DIC is an acquired syndrome characterized by systemic activation of coagulation pathways that result in excessive thrombin genera-tion and the diffuse formation of microthrombi. This distur-bance ultimately leads to consumption and depletion of platelets and coagulation factors with the resultant classic picture of dif-fuse bleeding. Fibrin thrombi developing in the microcirculation may cause microvascular ischemia and subsequent end-organ failure if severe. There are many different conditions that pre-dispose a patient to DIC, and the presence of an underlying condition is required for the diagnosis. For example, injuries resulting in embolization of materials such as brain matter, bone marrow, or amniotic fluid can act as potent thromboplastins that activate the DIC cascade.27 Additional etiologies include malig-nancy, organ injury (such as severe pancreatitis), liver failure, certain vascular abnormalities (such as large aneurysms), snake bites, illicit drugs, transfusion reactions, transplant rejection, and sepsis.28 In fact, DIC frequently accompanies sepsis and may be associated with multiple organ failure. The important interplay between sepsis and coagulation abnormalities was demonstrated by Dhainaut et al who showed that activated  protein C was effective in septic patients with DIC, though this has subsequently been disproven.29 The diagnosis of DIC is made based on an inciting etiology with associated thrombo-cytopenia, prolongation of the prothrombin time, a low fibrino-gen level, and elevated fibrin markers (FDPs, D-dimer, soluble fibrin monomers). A scoring system developed by the Interna-tional Society for Thrombosis and Hemostasis has been shown to have high sensitivity and specificity for diagnosing DIC as well as a strong correlation between an increasing DIC score and mortality, especially in patients with infections.30The most important facets of treatment are relieving the patient’s causative primary medical or surgical problem and maintaining adequate perfusion. If there is active bleeding, hemostatic factors should be replaced with FFP, which is usually sufficient to correct the hypofibrinogenemia, although cryopre-cipitate, fibrinogen concentrates, or platelet concentrates may also be needed. Given the formation of microthrombi in DIC, heparin therapy has also been proposed. Heparin may be indi-cated in cases where thrombosis predominates, such as arterial or venous thromboembolism and severe purpura fulminans.31Primary Fibrinolysis. Other than due to trauma, an acquired hypofibrinogenic state in the surgical patient can be a result of pathologic fibrinolysis. This may occur in patients following prostate resection when urokinase is released during surgical manipulation of the prostate or in patients undergoing extracor-poreal bypass. The severity of fibrinolytic bleeding is dependent on the concentration of breakdown products in the circula-tion. Antifibrinolytic agents, such as ε-aminocaproic acid and tranexamic acid, interfere with fibrinolysis by inhibiting plas-minogen activation.Myeloproliferative DiseasesPolycythemia, or an excess of red blood cells, places surgical patients at risk. Spontaneous thrombosis is a complication of polycythemia vera, a myeloproliferative neoplasm, and can be explained in part by increased blood viscosity, increased plate-let count, and an increased tendency toward stasis. Paradoxi-cally, a significant tendency toward spontaneous hemorrhage also is noted in these patients. Thrombocytosis can be reduced by the administration of low-dose aspirin, phlebotomy, and hydroxyurea.32Coagulopathy of Liver DiseaseThe liver plays a key role in hemostasis because it is responsible for the synthesis of many of the coagulation factors (Table 4-3). Patients with liver disease, therefore, have decreased production of several key nonendothelial cell-derived coagulation factors as well as natural anticoagulant proteins, causing a disturbance in the balance between procoagulant and anticoagulant path-ways. This disturbance in coagulation mechanisms causes a complex paradigm of both increased bleeding risk and increased 1Brunicardi_Ch04_p0103-p0130.indd   11029/01/19   11:05 AM 111HEMOSTASIS, SURGICAL BLEEDING, AND TRANSFUSIONCHAPTER 4thrombotic risk. The most common coagulation abnormalities associated with liver dysfunction are thrombocytopenia and impaired humoral coagulation function manifested as prolonga-tion of the prothrombin time and international normalized ratio (INR). The etiology of thrombocytopenia in patients with liver disease is typically related to hypersplenism, reduced produc-tion of thrombopoietin, and immune-mediated destruction of platelets. The total body platelet mass is often normal in patients with hypersplenism, but a much larger fraction of the platelets is sequestered in the enlarged spleen. Bleeding may be less than anticipated because sequestered platelets can be mobilized to some extent and enter the circulation. Thrombopoietin, the pri-mary stimulus for thrombopoiesis, may be responsible for some cases of thrombocytopenia in cirrhotic patients, although its role is not well delineated. Finally, immune-mediated thrombocyto-penia may also occur in cirrhotics, especially those with hepatitis C and primary biliary cirrhosis.33 In addition to thrombocytope-nia, these patients also exhibit platelet dysfunction via defective interactions between platelets and the endothelium, and possibly due to uremia and changes in endothelial function in the setting of concomitant renal insufficiency. Hypocoagulopathy is fur-ther exacerbated with low platelet counts because platelets help facilitate thrombin generation by assembling coagulation factors on their surfaces. In conditions mimicking intravascular flow, low hematocrit and low platelet counts contributed to decreased adhesion of platelets to endothelial cells, although increased vWF, a common finding in cirrhotic patients, may offset this change in patients with cirrhosis.34 Hypercoagulability of liver disease has recently gained increased attention, with more evi-dence demonstrating the increased incidence of thromboem-bolism despite thrombocytopenia and a hypocoagulable state on conventional blood tests.35,36 This is attributed to decreased production of liver-synthesized proteins C and S, antithrombin, and plasminogen levels, as well as elevated levels of endothe-lial-derived vWF and factor VIII, a potent driver of thrombin generation.37,38 Given the concomitant hypoand hypercoagu-lable features seen in patients with liver disease, conventional coagulation tests may be difficult to interpret, and whole blood functional tests such as thromboelastography (TEG) or ROTEM may be more informative of the status of clot formation and stability in cirrhotic patients. Small studies have indicated that TEG provides a better assessment of bleeding risk than standard tests of hemostasis in patients with liver disease; however, no large studies have directly tested this, and future larger trials are needed.39Before instituting any therapy to ameliorate thrombocy-topenia, the actual need for correction should be strongly con-sidered. In general, correction based solely on a low platelet count should be discouraged. Most often, treatment should be withheld for invasive procedures and surgery. When required, platelet transfusions are the mainstay of therapy; however, the effect typically lasts only several hours. Risks associated with transfusions in general and the development of antiplate-let antibodies in a patient population likely to need recurrent correction should be considered. A less well-accepted option is splenectomy or splenic embolization to reduce hypersplenism. In addition to the risks associated with these techniques, reduced splenic blood flow can reduce portal vein flow with subsequent portal vein thrombosis. Results are mixed following insertion of a transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS). There-fore, treatment of thrombocytopenia should not be the primary indication for a TIPS procedure.Decreased production or increased destruction of coagula-tion factors as well as vitamin K deficiency can all contribute to a prolonged PT and INR in patients with liver disease. As liver dysfunction worsens, so does the liver’s synthetic func-tion, which results in decreased production of coagulation fac-tors. Additionally, laboratory abnormalities may mimic those of DIC. Elevated D-dimers have been reported to increase the risk of variceal bleeding. The absorption of vitamin K is dependent on bile production. Therefore, liver patients with impaired bile production and cholestatic disease may be at risk for vitamin K deficiency.Similar to thrombocytopenia, correction of coagulopathy should be reserved for treatment of active bleeding and prophy-laxis for invasive procedures and surgery. Treatment of coagu-lopathy caused by liver disease is usually done with FFP, but because the coagulopathy is usually not a result of decreased levels of factor V, complete correction is not usually possible. If the fibrinogen is less than 200 mg/dL, administration of cryo-precipitate may be helpful. Cryoprecipitate is also a source of factor VIII for the rare patient with a low factor VIII level.Coagulopathy of TraumaTraditional teaching regarding trauma-related coagulopathy attributed its development to acidosis, hypothermia, and dilution of coagulation factors. Recent data, however, have shown that over one-third of severely injured patients have laboratory-based evidence of coagulopathy at the time of admission,40 a phenotype called trauma-induced coagulopathy (TIC). TIC is independent of traditional (iatrogenic) causes of posttraumatic coagulopathy such as hemodilution, is precipitated by tissue injury and/or hemorrhagic shock, and is associated with signifi-cantly higher risk of mortality, especially in the first  24 hours after injury. Furthermore, TIC is a separate and distinct process from disseminated intravascular coagulopathy with its own specific components of hemostatic failure.As shown in Fig. 4-5, several non–mutually exclusive mechanisms have been proposed as the etiology of TIC,41 includ-ing activated protein C-mediated clotting factor deactivation,42 endothelial injury and “auto-heparinization” due to shedding of endothelial heparin sulfate and chondroitin sulfate into the circulation,43 platelet dysfunction,44 and hyperfibrinolysis.45 Hemorrhagic shock was previously thought to be an essential component of TIC, but isolated traumatic brain injury46 and pulmonary contusions47 have been shown to induce laboratory-defined TIC in the absence of shock, possibly due to a high pro-portion of endothelium in these organs. Traumatic brain injury may also induce TIC via a consumptive mechanism by the release of large amounts of tissue factor into the circulation.48 2Table 4-3Coagulation factors synthesized by the liverVitamin K–dependent factors: II (prothrombin factor),  VII, IX, XFibrinogenFactor VFactor VIIIFactors XI, XII, XIIIAntithrombin IIIPlasminogenProtein C and protein SBrunicardi_Ch04_p0103-p0130.indd   11129/01/19   11:05 AM 112BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IHowever, the relationship between laboratory-based coagula-tion abnormalities and true clinically evident coagulopathic bleeding is unclear. With the widespread application of damage control resuscitation, the frequency of clinical coagulopathy has decreased.Interestingly, the converse of hyperfibrinolysis, known as fibrinolytic shutdown, has also been associated with increased mortality after trauma.49 In a multicenter study of 2540 trauma patients, those with intermediate fibrinolytic activity  (“physiologic,” 0.8% to 2.9% lysis) on admission had the lowest mortality (14%). Shutdown (<0.8% lysis) patients had increased mortality (22%), often due to late causes such as mul-tiple organ failure, while patients with hyperfibrinolysis (≥3% lysis) had the greatest mortality (34%) and most often died due to hemorrhage.50Acquired Coagulation InhibitorsAmong the most common acquired coagulation inhibitors is the antiphospholipid syndrome (APLS), which includes the lupus anticoagulant and anticardiolipin antibodies. These antibodies may be associated with either venous or arterial thrombosis, or both. In fact, patients presenting with recurrent thrombosis should be evaluated for APLS. Antiphospholipid antibodies are very common in patients with systemic lupus but may also be seen in association with rheumatoid arthritis and Sjögren’s syndrome. There are also individuals who will have no autoimmune disor-ders but develop transient antibodies in response to infections or those who develop drug-induced APLS. The hallmark of APLS is a prolonged aPTT in vitro but an increased risk of thrombosis in vivo.Anticoagulation and BleedingSpontaneous bleeding can be a complication of any antico-agulant therapy whether it is heparin, low molecular weight heparins, warfarin, factor Xa inhibitors, or new direct thrombin inhibitors. The risk of spontaneous bleeding related to heparin is reduced with a continuous infusion technique. Therapeutic anticoagulation is more reliably achieved with a low molecu-lar weight heparin. However, laboratory testing is more chal-lenging with these medications, as they are not detected with conventional coagulation testing. However, their more reli-able therapeutic levels (compared to heparin) make them an attractive option for outpatient anticoagulation and more costeffective for the inpatient setting. If monitoring is required (e.g., in the presence of renal insufficiency or severe obesity), the drug effect should be determined with an assay for anti-Xa activity.Warfarin is used for long-term anticoagulation in various clinical conditions, including deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, valvular heart disease, atrial fibrillation, recurrent systemic emboli, recurrent myocardial infarction, prosthetic heart valves, and prosthetic implants. Due to the interaction of the P450 system, the anticoagulant effect of the warfarin is reduced (e.g., increased dose required) in patients receiving barbiturates as well as in patients with diets low in vitamin K. Increased warfarin requirements may also be needed in patients taking contraceptives or estrogen-containing compounds, corti-costeroids, and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). Medica-tions that can alter warfarin requirements are shown in Table 4-4.Although warfarin use is often associated with a signifi-cant increase in morbidity and mortality in acutely injured and emergency surgery patients, with rapid reversal, these com-plications can be reduced. There are several reversal options that include vitamin K administration, plasma, cryoprecipi-tate, recombinant factor VIIa, and factor concentrates. The 2012 CHEST guidelines for the Management of Anticoagulant Therapy Antithrombotic Therapy and Prevention of Thrombo-sis recommends patients with major life-threatening bleeding TRAUMATICCLINICALCOAGULOPATHICBLEEDING?PlateletactivationEGLsheddingEndothelial activationAcidosisHypothermiaHemorrhageShock˜˜˜tPA &°PAI-1Hypo-perfusionClotting factorconsumptionPre-injuryanticoagulantmedicationIatrogenicresuscitationinjuryHemodilution˜Acidosis˜HypothermiaAuto-heparinization°Clotting factoractivityPlatelet dysfunctionHyperfibrinolysis˜Catecholamines˜APCFigure 4-5. Illustration of the pathophysiologic mechanism responsible for the acute coagulopathy of trauma. APC = activated protein C; EGL = endothelial glycocalyx; PAI-1 = plasminogen activator inhibitor 1; tPA = tissue plasminogen activator; TIC = trauma-induced coagulopathy. (Reproduced with permission from Chang R, Cardenas JC, Wade CE, et al: Advances in the understanding of trauma-induced coagulopathy. Blood. 2016 Aug 25;128(8):1043-1049.)Table 4-4Medications that can alter warfarin dosing↓ warfarin effect↑ warfarin requirementsBarbiturates, oral contraceptives, estrogen-containing compounds, corticosteroids, adrenocorticotropic hormone↑ warfarin effect↓ warfarin requirementsPhenylbutazone, clofibrate, anabolic steroids, L-thyroxine, glucagons, amiodarone, quinidine, cephalosporinsBrunicardi_Ch04_p0103-p0130.indd   11229/01/19   11:05 AM 113HEMOSTASIS, SURGICAL BLEEDING, AND TRANSFUSIONCHAPTER 4due to warfarin receive reversal with vitamin K and a rapid reversal agent such as plasma or prothrombin complex concen-trate (PCC).51 Vitamin K is given to sustain the effects of the plasma or PCC due to their short half-lives. In major bleeds,  Vitamin K 10 mg given as a slow IV infusion is utilized for more rapid onset compared to the oral form. Studies have shown that PCC is superior to plasma for speed of reversal and has decreased risk of fluid overload, but it is equivalent in adverse and thromboembolic events and costlier.52,53 Prothrombin com-plex concentrate is available in two forms: three-factor PCC (factors II, IX, and X) and four-factor PCC (factors II, VII, IX, and X). Four-factor PCCs have been shown to have a more reli-able correction of INR compared to three-factor PCCs.54,55Direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) include direct throm-bin inhibitors and factor Xa inhibitors and have no readily available method of detection of the degree of anticoagula-tion. More concerning is the difficulty in the reversal of these new anticoagulants. Recently, idarucizumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody fragment that binds dabigatran, has been approved for use for reversal of the thrombin inhibitor, dabiga-tran, and dabigatran-related coagulopathy. Clinical studies have demonstrated normalization of laboratory tests.56,57Factor Xa inhibitors such as rivaroxaban, apixaban, and edoxaban currently lack a specific antidote. Two novel anti-dotes, andexanet alfa and ciraparantag (PER977), are currently undergoing clinical trials. Andexanet alfa is a recombinant human FXa variant,58,59 and ciraparantag is a cationic small molecule.60 These are both being evaluated for reversal of the factor Xa inhibitors. Until these agents are approved, attempts to reverse Factor Xa inhibitors should include four factor PCCs.61 In less urgent states, these drugs can be held for 36 to 48 hours prior to surgery without increased risk of bleeding in those with normal renal function. Alternatively, activated clotting time (stand alone or with rapid TEG) or ecarin clotting time can be obtained in those on dabigatran, and anti-factor Xa assays can be obtained in those taking rivaroxaban.Bleeding complications in patients on anticoagulants include hematuria, soft tissue bleeding, intracerebral bleeding, skin necrosis, and abdominal bleeding. Bleeding secondary to anticoagulation therapy is also a common cause of rectus sheath hematomas.Surgical intervention may prove necessary in patients receiving anticoagulation therapy. Increasing experience suggests that surgical treatment can be undertaken without full reversal of the anticoagulant, depending on the procedure being performed.62 When the aPTT is less than 1.3 times control in a heparinized patient, or when the INR is less than 1.5 in a patient on warfarin, reversal of anticoagulation therapy may not be necessary. How-ever, meticulous surgical technique is mandatory, and the patient must be observed closely throughout the postoperative period.Certain surgical procedures should not be performed in concert with anticoagulation. In particular, cases where even minor bleeding can cause great morbidity, such as the central nervous system and the eye, surgery should be avoided. Emer-gency operations are occasionally necessary in patients who have been heparinized. The first step in these patients is to dis-continue heparin. For more rapid reversal, protamine sulfate is effective. However, significant adverse reactions, especially in patients with severe fish allergies, may be encountered when administering protamine.63 Symptoms include hypotension, flushing, bradycardia, nausea, and vomiting. Prolongation of the aPTT after heparin neutralization with protamine may also be a result of the anticoagulant effect of protamine. In the elective surgical patient who is receiving warfarin-derivative therapy sufficient to effect anticoagulation, the drug can be discontinued several days before operation and the prothrombin concentration then checked.64 Rapid reversal of anticoagulation can be accom-plished with plasma or prothrombin complex concentrates in the emergent situation. An example of a warfarin reversal guideline using four-factor prothrombin complex concentrate for patients with major or life-threatening bleeding or intracranial bleeding is shown in Fig. 4-6. Parenteral administration of vitamin K also is indicated in elective surgical treatment of patients with biliary obstruction or malabsorption who may be vitamin K deficient. However, if low levels of factors II, VII, IX, and X (vitamin K–dependent factors) exist as a result of hepatocellular dysfunc-tion, vitamin K administration is ineffective.The perioperative management of patients receiving long-term oral anticoagulation therapy is an increasingly common problem. The American College of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines from 2012 suggests periopera-tive “bridging” of anticoagulation.65 However, recent studies have found an increased risk of major bleeding without a change in thromboembolism rate when comparing bridging to no-bridg-ing for elective operations or procedures.66 Additional clinical trials are currently underway, but at the current time, physicians should carefully balance risks of bleeding vs. venous thromboembolism risks for individual patients when deciding on bridging of anticoagulation for procedures.67 For patients in whom the risk of venous thromboembolism out-weighs the risk of bleeding, a heparin infusion should be held for 4 to 6 hours before the procedure and restarted within 12 to 24 hours of the end of its completion. High-risk indications include mechanical heart valves, recent (within 30 days) myo-cardial infarction, stroke, or pulmonary embolism. Lower risk indications, such as thromboembolic events greater than 30 days prior, hypercoagulable history, and atrial fibrillation, do not require such stringent restarting strategies.Cardiopulmonary Bypass. Under normal conditions, homeo-stasis of the coagulation system is maintained by complex inter-actions between the endothelium, platelets, and coagulation factors. In patients undergoing cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB), contact with circuit tubing and membranes results in abnormal platelet and clotting factor activation, as well as activation of inflammatory cascades, that ultimately results in excessive fibri-nolysis and a combination of both quantitative and qualitative platelet defects. Platelets undergo reversible alterations in mor-phology and their ability to aggregate, which causes sequestra-tion in the filter, partially degranulated platelets, and platelet fragments. This multifactorial coagulopathy is compounded by the effects of shear stress in the system, induced hypothermia, hemodilution, and anticoagulation.68While on pump, activated clotting time measurements are obtained along with blood gas measurements; however, con-ventional coagulation assays and platelet counts are not nor-mally performed until rewarming and after a standard dose of protamine has been given. TEG may give a better estimate of the extent of coagulopathy and may also be used to anticipate transfusion requirements if bleeding is present.68Empiric treatment with FFP and cryoprecipitate is often used for bleeding patients; however, there are no universally accepted transfusion thresholds. Platelet concentrates are given for bleeding patients in the immediate postoperative period; however, studies have shown that indiscriminate plate-let therapy conferred no therapeutic advantage.69 It is in these 34Brunicardi_Ch04_p0103-p0130.indd   11329/01/19   11:05 AM 114BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ipatients where rapid coagulation testing is required to assist with directed transfusion therapy.70 Many institutions now use antifibrinolytics, such as ε-aminocaproic acid and tranexamic acid, at the time of anesthesia induction after several studies have shown that such treatment reduced postoperative bleed-ing and reoperation. Aprotinin, a protease inhibitor that acts as an antifibrinolytic agent, has been shown to reduce transfusion requirements associated with cardiac surgery.71 Desmopressin acetate stimulates release of factor VIII from endothelial cells and may also be effective in reducing blood loss during cardiac surgery.Local Hemostasis. Significant surgical bleeding is usually caused by ineffective local hemostasis. The goal is therefore to prevent further blood loss from a disrupted vessel that has been incised or transected. Hemostasis may be accomplished by interrupting the flow of blood to the involved area or by direct closure of the blood vessel wall defect.Mechanical Procedures. The oldest mechanical method of bleeding cessation is application of direct digital pressure, either at the site of bleeding or proximally to permit more definitive action. An extremity tourniquet that occludes a major vessel proximal to the bleeding site or the Pringle maneuver for liver bleeding are good examples. Direct digital pressure is very effective and has the advantage of being less traumatic than hemostatic or even “atraumatic” clamps.When a small vessel is transected, a simple ligature is usu-ally sufficient. However, for larger pulsating arteries, a transfix-ion suture to prevent slipping is indicated. All sutures represent foreign material, and selection should be based on their intrinsic characteristics and the state of the wound. Direct pressure applied by “packing” a wound with gauze or laparotomy pads affords the best method of controlling diffuse bleeding from large areas, such as in the trauma situation. Packing bone wax on the raw surface to effect pressure can control bleeding from cut bone.Thermal Agents. Heat achieves hemostasis by denaturation of protein that results in coagulation of large areas of tissue. Elec-trocautery generates heat by induction from an alternating cur-rent source, which is then transmitted via conduction from the instrument directly to the tissue. The amplitude setting should be high enough to produce prompt coagulation, but not so high as to set up an arc between the tissue and the cautery tip. This avoids thermal injury outside of the operative field and also prevents exit of current through electrocardiographic leads, other moni-toring devices, or permanent pacemakers or defibrillators. A negative grounding plate should be placed beneath the patient to avoid severe skin burns, and caution should be used with certain Major bleeding/life-threatening bleeding orintracranial hemorrhage (lCH)Administer phytonadione 10 mg IV immediatelyCheck PT/INR, PTT, fibrinogen, platelets, Hgb/HctEvaluate for relative contraindications to PCC4 (Kcentra®)• Thrombotic event in the past 3 months – myocardial infarction,stroke, pulmonary embolism, deep vein thrombosis• Very high risk of thrombosis, such as patients with clinical orlaboratory evidence of overt disseminated intravascularcoagulopathy, heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT), high-riskthrombophilia, or antiphospholipid syndromeCheck PT/INR 1 hr, 6 hrs, and 24 hrs after completion of Kcentra®• If INR >1.5 at 1 hr, consider switching to FFP therapy• If INR >1.5 at 6 hrs, repeat phytonadione 10 mg IV over 30 min• If INR >1.5 at 24 hrs, repeat phytonadione 10 mg IV over 30 minINR 1.5–3.9Kcentra®25 units/kg(maximum 2500 units)INR 4–6Kcentra®35 units/kg(maximum 3500 units)INR >6Kcentra®50 units/kg(maximum 5000 units)Administer FFPYesNoContraindication toKcentra®Figure 4-6. Example of a warfarin reversal guideline using four-factor prothrombin complex concentrate for patients with major or  life-threatening bleeding or intracranial bleeding.Brunicardi_Ch04_p0103-p0130.indd   11429/01/19   11:05 AM 115HEMOSTASIS, SURGICAL BLEEDING, AND TRANSFUSIONCHAPTER 4anesthetic agents (diethyl ether, divinyl ether, ethyl chloride, ethylene, and cyclopropane) because of the hazard of explosion.A direct current also can result in hemostasis. Because the protein moieties and cellular elements of blood have a nega-tive surface charge, they are attracted to a positive pole where a thrombus is formed. Direct currents in the 20to 100-mA range have successfully controlled diffuse bleeding from raw surfaces, as has argon gas.Topical Hemostatic AgentsTopical hemostatic agents can play an important role in help-ing to facilitate surgical hemostasis. These agents are classified based on their mechanism of action, and many act at specific stages in the coagulation cascade and take advantage of natural physiologic responses to bleeding.72 The ideal topical hemo-static agent has significant hemostatic action, minimal tissue reactivity, nonantigenicity, in vivo biodegradability, ease of sterilization, low cost, and can be tailored to specific needs.73Achneck et al have published a comprehensive overview of absorbable, biologic, and synthetic agents.74 Absorbable agents include gelatin foams (Gelfoam), oxidized cellulose (Surgicel), and microfibrillar collagens (Avitene). Both gelatin foam and oxidized cellulose provide a physical matrix for clotting initia-tion, while microfibrillar collagens facilitate platelet adherence and activation. Biologic agents include topical thrombin, fibrin sealants (FloSeal), and platelet sealants (Vitagel). Human or recombinant thrombin derivatives, which facilitate the forma-tion of fibrin clots and subsequent activation of several clotting factors, take advantage of natural physiologic processes, thereby avoiding foreign body or inflammatory reactions.73 Caution must be taken in judging vessel caliber in the wound because thrombin entry into larger caliber vessels can result in systemic exposure to thrombin with a risk of disseminated intravascular clotting or death. They are particularly effective in controlling capillary bed bleeding when pressure or ligation is insufficient; however, the bovine derivatives should be used with caution due to the potential immunologic response and worsened coagulopathy.  Fibrin sealants are prepared from cryoprecipitate (homologous or synthetic) and have the advantage of not promoting inflam-mation or tissue necrosis.75 A recent study by Koea et al dem-onstrated in a prospective multicenter randomized trial that a fibrin sealant patch was safe and highly effective in controlling parenchymal bleeding following hepatectomy regardless of the type of resection.76 Platelet sealants are a mixture of collagen and thrombin combined with plasma-derived fibrinogen and platelets from the patient, which requires the additional need for centrifugation and processing.Topical agents are not a substitute for meticulous surgical technique and only function as adjuncts to help facilitate surgi-cal hemostasis. The advantages and disadvantages of each agent must be considered, and use should be limited to the minimum amount necessary to minimize toxicity, adverse reactions, inter-ference with wound healing, and procedural costs.TRANSFUSIONBackgroundHuman blood replacement therapy was accepted in the late nine-teenth century. This was followed by the introduction of blood grouping by Landsteiner who identified the major A, B, and O groups in 1900, resulting in widespread use of blood products in World War I. Levine and Stetson in 1939 followed with the concept of Rh grouping. These and other breakthroughs in blood product preservation, storage, and infectious disease screening established the foundation from which the field of transfusion medicine has grown. Whole blood was considered the standard in transfusion until the late 1970s when component therapy began to take prominence. This change in practice was driven in part by blood bank economics, increasing the availability of specific blood products for patients with isolated deficien-cies (anemia, thrombocytopenia, clotting factor deficiencies), especially those associated with chemotherapy.77 However, this change occurred for all patients simultaneously without studies to identify the clinical ramifications in different patient popu-lations requiring blood product therapy. Interestingly, whole blood transfusion (the ultimate balanced transfusion product) is making a resurgence in both military and civilian practice for resuscitation of acute hemorrhage.Replacement TherapyTyping and Crossmatching. Serologic compatibility for A, B, O, and Rh groups is established routinely. Crossmatching between the donors’ red blood cells and the recipients’ sera (the major crossmatch) is performed. Rh-negative recipients should be transfused only with Rh-negative red blood cells. However, this group represents only 15% of the population. Therefore, the administration of Rh-positive red blood cells is acceptable if Rh-negative red blood cells blood is not available. However, Rh-positive red blood cells should not be transfused to Rhnegative females who are of childbearing age.In emergency situations, universal donor type O-negative red blood cells and type AB plasma may be transfused to all recip-ients. Platelets do not require crossmatching. Due to a shortage of type AB plasma, low anti-B titer type A plasma has become widely adopted for emergency (uncrossmatched) transfusion.78 In the United States, 85% of individuals are type A or type O, mak-ing type A plasma compatible with the vast majority of poten-tial recipients. Uncrossmatched plasma is routinely transfused as part of platelet transfusions, with major transfusion reactions reported rarely,79 and type AB plasma currently carries a higher risk of TRALI compared to other plasma types.80 Many cen-ters have transitioned to low titer type A plasma for emergency transfusions, with no increase in adverse events.81 O negative and type-specific red blood cells are equally safe for emergency transfusion. In patients known to have clinically significant cold agglutinins, blood should be administered through a blood warmer. If these antibodies are present in high titer, hypother-mia is contraindicated.In patients who have been multiply transfused and who have developed alloantibodies or who have autoimmune hemo-lytic anemia with pan-red blood cell antibodies, typing and crossmatching is often difficult, and sufficient time should be allotted preoperatively to accumulate blood that might be required during the operation. Crossmatching should always be performed before the administration of dextran because it inter-feres with the typing procedure.81aBanked Whole Blood. Interest in whole blood as an ideal therapy for acute traumatic hemorrhagic shock has increased in the last several years with multiple reports of successful use in military and civilian trauma patients. However, there is still limited access in most civilian centers.Red Blood Cells and Frozen Red Blood Cells. Red blood cells are the traditional product of choice for most clinical Brunicardi_Ch04_p0103-p0130.indd   11529/01/19   11:05 AM 116BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Isituations requiring resuscitation, although deficits in oxygen delivery are rarely related to inadequate red cells. Concentrated suspensions of red blood cells can be prepared by removing most of the supernatant plasma after centrifugation. The prepa-ration reduces but does not eliminate reactions caused by plasma components. With sequential changes in storage solutions, the shelf life of red blood cells is now 42 days. However, recent evidence has demonstrated that the age of red cells may play a significant role in the inflammatory response and incidence of multiple organ failure.82 The changes in the red blood cells that occur during storage include reduction of intracellular ADP and 2,3-diphosphoglycerate (2,3-DPG), which alters the oxygen dissociation curve of hemoglobin, resulting in a decrease in oxy-gen transport. Stored RBCs progressively become acidotic with elevated levels of lactate, potassium, and ammonia. Addition-ally, the in vitro hemostatic potential of plasma83 and platelet84 products also decrease with storage.The morphologic and biochemical changes that occur over time in red cells may contribute to worsened outcomes. This limits the ability to bank large amounts of blood, particu-larly rarer blood types, for use in times of high demand and blood supply shortage, such as on the battlefield and after mass casualty events. Storage solutions, however, do not fully sup-press the metabolic and physical changes associated with aging RBCs. Newer evidence suggests that cryopreservation of red blood cells may provide a safe alternative means of storage. Cryopreservation uses the beneficial effects of ultra-low tem-peratures to suppress molecular motion and arrest metabolic and biochemical reactions. Frozen (cryopreserved) red blood cells have a shelf life of ten years at -80°C with improved cel-lular viability and maintenance of ATP and 2,3 DPG concen-trations.85 A trial of stable trauma patients randomized to old (>14 storage days) red blood cells, young (≤14 storage days) red blood cells, and cryopreserved red blood cells found that cryopreserved red blood cells were as safe and effective as stan-dard red blood cells.85 Cryopreserved red blood cells required a thawing and preparation period of about 90 minutes, limiting immediate availability for emergency use. A recent study sug-gests that the post-thaw characteristics of cryopreserved units may not, however, be comparable to fresh red cells.86 Additional research needs to be done to optimize the process, but frozen cells likely represent a viable option for storage in the future.Leukocyte-Reduced and Leukocyte-Reduced/Washed Red Blood Cells. These products are prepared by filtration that removes about 99.9% of the white blood cells and most of the platelets (leukocyte-reduced red blood cells) and, if necessary, by additional saline washing (leukocyte-reduced/washed red blood cells). Leukocyte reduction prevents almost all febrile, nonhemolytic transfusion reactions (fever and/or rigors), allo-immunization to HLA class I antigens, and platelet transfu-sion refractoriness and cytomegalovirus transmission. In most  Western nations, it is the standard red blood cell transfusion product. Supporters of universal leukocyte reduction argue that allogenic transfusion of white cells predisposes to postoperative bacterial infection and multiorgan failure. Reviews of random-ized trials and meta-analyses have not provided convincing evi-dence either way,87,88 although a large Canadian retrospective study suggests a decrease in mortality and infections.89Platelet Concentrates. The indications for platelet transfu-sion include thrombocytopenia caused by massive blood loss and replacement with platelet-poor products, thrombocytopenia caused by inadequate production, and qualitative platelet dis-orders. Platelets are stored at room temperature under constant agitation to prevent clumping and have a shelf life of 5 days from time of donation due to risk of bacterial overgrowth. One unit of platelet concentrate has a volume of approximately  50 mL. Platelet preparations are capable of transmitting infec-tious diseases and can account for allergic reactions similar to those caused by red blood cell transfusion. A therapeutic level of platelets is in the range of 50,000 to 100,000/μL, but is very dependent on the clinical situation. Recent evidence suggests that earlier use of platelets may improve outcomes in bleeding patients.90In rare cases, in patients who become alloimmunized through previous transfusion or patients who are refractory from sensitization through prior pregnancies, HLA-matched platelets can be used.Plasma. Plasma is the usual source of the vitamin K–dependent factors, the only source of factor V, and carries similar infectious risks as other component therapies. Several plasma products are available. Fresh frozen plasma (FFP) is frozen within hours of donation and can be stored for up to two years at -18°C, but requires 20 to 30 minutes to thaw prior to use, limiting immedi-ate availability. Thawed FFP can be relabeled as thawed plasma, which is immediately transfusable and can be stored for up to 5 days at 2° to 4°C. Liquid plasma is never frozen and can be stored for up to 26 days at 2° to 4°C. In vitro studies demonstrate that liquid plasma has a better hemostatic profile than thawed plasma.91 Freeze-dried (lyophilized) plasma (FDP) has been recently “rediscovered” as an ideal resuscitation product for patients in remote and austere environments. FDP is distributed as a powder that is shelf-stable for up to 2 years at room tem-perature and relatively stable at temperature extremes.92 It was used extensively as a primary resuscitation fluid during World War II, but production was stopped due to risk of disease trans-mission. FDP is currently manufactured by updated processes in France, Germany, and South Africa. Several noncomparative studies in the literature have documented its ease of use, rapid reconstitution within minutes, clinical efficacy similar to other plasma products, and lack of apparent adverse events.93,94 The Israeli Defense Force has reported successful use of FDP at the point of injury,95 just as it was used in World War II. Beside limited use by U.S. Special Forces under the U.S. Federal Drug Administration’s (FDA) Investigational New Drug (IND) pro-gram, no FDP product is currently approved for general use in the United States. These products have the advantage of being pathogen reduced, have expanded storage capabilities, and can be quickly reconstituted.96Tranexamic Acid. Tranexamic acid (TXA; trade name: Cyk-lokapron) is an antifibrinolytic that inhibits both plasminogen activation and plasmin activity, thus preventing clot breakdown rather than promoting new clot formation. It occupies the lysine-binding sites on plasminogen, thus preventing its binding to lysine residues on fibrin. This reduces plasminogen activation to plasmin. Similarly, blockade of lysine-binding sites on circu-lating plasmin prevents binding to fibrin and thus prevents clot breakdown. TXA is 10 times more potent in vitro than aminoca-proic acid. At therapeutically relevant concentrations, TXA does not affect platelet count or aggregation or coagulation param-eters. It is excreted largely unchanged in urine and has a half-life of about 2 hours in circulation. It has been used to decrease bleeding and the need for blood transfusions in coronary artery Brunicardi_Ch04_p0103-p0130.indd   11629/01/19   11:05 AM 117HEMOSTASIS, SURGICAL BLEEDING, AND TRANSFUSIONCHAPTER 4bypass grafting (CABG), orthotopic liver transplantation, hip and knee arthroplasty, and other surgical settings. TXA has been used to treat injured patients in both civilian and military  settings.97,98 A recent practice guideline by the Eastern Associa-tion for the Surgery of Trauma (EAST) conditionally recom-mended the use of tranexamic acid as a hemostatic adjunct in severely injured patients when used early after injury.99 There is some controversy if its use should be empiric in patients with hemorrhage or based on documented hyperfibrinolysis. Results of prehospital studies with TXA are not yet available, but there are five ongoing trials. The true risk of venous thrombotic events is also not well established. Therefore, tranexamic acid should not be used with active intravascular clotting and should not be given with activated prothrombin complex concentrate or factor IX complex concentrates.Indications for Replacement of Blood and  Its ElementsImprovement in Oxygen-Carrying Capacity. Oxygencarrying capacity is primarily a function of the red blood cells. Thus, transfusion of red blood cells should augment oxygen-carrying capacity. Additionally, hemoglobin is fundamental to arterial oxygen content and thus oxygen delivery. Despite this obvious association, there is little evidence that actually sup-ports the premise that transfusion of red blood cells equates with enhanced cellular delivery and utilization. The reasons for this apparent discrepancy are related to changes that occur with stor-age of blood. The decrease in 2,3-DPG and P50 impair oxygen offloading, and deformation of the red cells impairs microcir-culatory perfusion.100Treatment of Anemia: Transfusion Triggers. The concept of transfusion triggers refers primarily to the nonactively bleed-ing ICU patient. A 1988 National Institutes of Health Consensus Report challenged the dictum that a hemoglobin value of less than 10 g/dL or a hematocrit level less than 30% indicates a need for preoperative red blood cell transfusion. This was veri-fied in a prospective randomized controlled trial in critically ill patients that compared a restrictive transfusion threshold to a more liberal strategy and demonstrated that maintaining hemo-globin levels between 7 and 9 g/dL had no adverse effect on mortality. In fact, patients with APACHE II scores of ≤20 or patients age <55 years actually had a lower mortality.101One unresolved issue related to transfusion triggers is the safety of maintaining a hemoglobin of 7 g/dL in a patient with ischemic heart disease. Data on this subject are mixed, and many studies have significant design flaws, including their ret-rospective nature. However, the majority of the published data favors a restrictive transfusion trigger for patients with non–ST-elevation acute coronary syndrome, with many reporting worse outcomes in those patients receiving transfusions.102,103 Recent guidelines from the American Association of Blood Banks (AABB) recommend a minimum threshold of 7 g/dL for hemodynamically stable patients and 8 g/dL for patients under-going cardiac surgery, orthopedic surgery, and those with pre-existing cardiovascular disease.104 However, both the SCCM/EAST and AABB guidelines recommend taking into account patient-specific characteristics and the overall clinical context when considering RBC transfusions in non-acutely hemorrhag-ing patients. Patients with symptomatic anemia should be trans-fused one RBC unit at a time, and isolated asymptomatic anemia in and of itself is rarely an indication for RBC transfusion.Volume ReplacementThe most common indication for blood transfusion in surgical patients is the replenishment of the blood volume; however, the quantification of actual intravascular volume deficit is often difficult to accurately and quickly determine. Measure-ments of hemoglobin or hematocrit levels are frequently used to assess blood loss, but can be occasionally misleading in the face of acute loss.105 Both the amount and the rate of bleeding are factors in the development of signs and symptoms of blood loss.Loss of blood in the operating room can be roughly evalu-ated by estimating the amount of blood in the wound and on the drapes, weighing the sponges, and quantifying blood suctioned from the operative field. Significant blood loss will require a balanced resuscitation including red blood cells, FFP, and plate-lets (detailed later in this chapter) (Table 4-5).New Concepts in ResuscitationTraditional resuscitation algorithms were sequentially based on crystalloid followed by red blood cells and then plasma and platelet transfusions, and they have been in widespread use since the 1970s. No quality clinical data supported this concept. Recently the damage control resuscitation (DCR)105a strategy, with simultaneous measures to acquire mechanical hemorrhage control, has become the standard for treatment of substantial traumatic hemorrhage. DCR emphasizes rapid maneuvers that promote hemostasis (balanced resuscitation with early delivery of plasma and platelets) while limiting iatrogenic insults that exacerbate bleeding (i.e., minimization of crystalloid and artifi-cial colloid, permissive hypotension), combined with multiple adjuncts for hemorrhage control.Rationale. In urban civilian trauma systems, nearly half of all deaths happen before a patient reaches the hospital.106 Patients who survive to an emergency center have a high incidence of truncal hemorrhage, and deaths in this group of patients may be potentially preventable. Truncal hemorrhage patients in shock often present with the early coagulopathy of trauma in the emer-gency department and are at significant risk of dying.107-109Many of these patients have suffered substantial bleeding, generally defined as requiring the administration of ≥3 units of red blood cells within any hour of admission, and may have received a massive transfusion (MT), traditionally defined as ≥10 units of red blood cells in 24 hours.110 The traditional defi-nition is admittedly arbitrary and fails to identify many patients who truly receive large volume transfusions in a short period of time, further promoting survival bas. Newer definitions evaluating massive transfusion do so by taking into account both volume transfused as well as the rate at which transfu-sions are given. The critical administration threshold (CAT) has been prospectively validated and shown to be a superior predictor of mortality when compared to the conventional defi-nition of MT.110 By this measure, CAT-positive status is defined by transfusion of 3 units of red blood cells within a 60-minute period, and this is additive for each additional time this measure is reached. CAT-positive status is associated with a two-fold increase in risk of mortality. CAT is more sensitive than tra-ditional definitions of bleeding and allows for both earlier and more accurate identification of injured patients at greatest risk of death.Although 25% of all severely injured trauma admissions receive a unit of blood early after admission, only a small Brunicardi_Ch04_p0103-p0130.indd   11729/01/19   11:05 AM 118BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART ITable 4-5Replacement of clotting factorsFACTORNORMAL LEVELLIFE SPAN IN VIVO (HALF-LIFE)FATE DURING COAGULATIONLEVEL REQUIRED FOR SAFE HEMOSTASISIDEAL AGENT ACD BANK BLOOD (4°C [39.2°F])IDEAL AGENT FOR REPLACING DEFICITI (fibrinogen)200–400 mg/100 mL72 hConsumed60–100 mg/100 mLVery stableBank blood; concentrated fibrinogenII (prothrombin)20 mg/100 mL (100% of normal level)72 hConsumed15%–20%StableBank blood; concentrated preparationV (proaccelerin, accelerator globulin, labile factor)100% of normal level36 hConsumed5%–20%Labile (40% of normal level at 1 wk)Fresh frozen plasma; blood under 7 dVII (proconvertin, serum prothrombin conversion accelerator, stable factor)100% of normal level5 hSurvives5%–30%StableBank blood; concentrated preparationVIII (antihemophilic factor, antihemophilic globulin)100% of normal level (50%–150% of normal level)6–12 hConsumed30%Labile (20%–40% of normal level at 1 wk)Fresh frozen plasma; concentrated antihemophilic factor; cryoprecipitateIX (Christmas factor, plasma thromboplastin component)100% of normal level24 hSurvives20%–30%StableFresh-frozen plasma; bank blood; concentrated preparationX (Stuart-Prower factor)100% of normal level40 hSurvives15%–20%StableBank blood; concentrated preparationXI (plasma thromboplastin antecedent)100% of normal levelProbably 40–80 hSurvives10%Probably stableBank bloodXII (Hageman factor)100% of normal levelUnknownSurvivesDeficit produces no bleeding tendencyStableReplacement not requiredXIII (fibrinase, fibrin-stabilizing factor)100% of normal level4–7 dSurvivesProbably <1%StableBank bloodPlatelets150,000–400,000/μL8–11 dConsumed60,000–100,000/μLVery labile (40% of normal level at 20 h; 0 at 48 h)Fresh blood or plasma; fresh platelet concentrate (not frozen plasma)ACD = acid-citrate-dextrose.Reproduced with permission from Kinney JM, Egdahl RH, Zuidema GD: Manual of Preoperative and Postoperative Care, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders/Elsevier; 1971.Brunicardi_Ch04_p0103-p0130.indd   11829/01/19   11:05 AM 119HEMOSTASIS, SURGICAL BLEEDING, AND TRANSFUSIONCHAPTER 4percentage of patients receive a massive transfusion. In the military setting, the percentage of massive transfusion patients almost doubles.111Damage Control Resuscitation. Prior to DCR, resuscitation guidelines advocated volume replacement with crystalloid, fol-lowed by packed red blood cell and only later plasma or  platelets.112 This conventional massive transfusion practice was based on a several small uncontrolled retrospective studies that used blood products containing increased amounts of plasma, which are no longer available.113 Because of the known early coagulopathy of trauma, the current approach to managing the exsanguinating patient involves early implementation of DCR. Although most of the attention to hemorrhagic shock resuscitation has centered on higher ratios of plasma and platelets, DCR is actually composed of four basic components: permissive hypotension, minimizing crystalloid-based resusci-tation, the immediate release and administration of predefined balanced blood products (red blood cells, plasma, and platelets) in ratios similar to those of whole blood, and the use of hemo-static adjuncts.The shift to DCR began in earnest in 2007 when a retro-spective study of 246 military casualties reported that patients with high plasma:RBC ratio (median 1:1.4) had substantially reduced mortality (19% vs. 65%) compared to patients with low plasma:RBC ratio (median 1:8).114 Subsequent observational studies among civilian and military trauma patients corrobo-rated these findings.115-118 In particular, the prospective, obser-vational, multicenter, major trauma transfusion (PROMMTT) study119 found that hemorrhagic death occurred rapidly (median of 2 to 3 hours after hospital arrival) and that plasma:RBC and platelet:RBC ratios significantly varied during massive trans-fusion. Increased plasma:RBC (adjusted hazard ratio [HR] 0.31, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.16-0.58) and increased platelet:RBC (adjusted HR 0.55, 95% CI 0.31-0.98) were associated with reduced 6-hour mortality, when risk of hemor-rhagic death was highest. After 6 hours, however, increasing plasma:RBC and platelet:RBC were no longer associated with reduced mortality due to increasing competing risk for non-hemorrhagic death (e.g., traumatic brain injury). The Pragmatic Randomized Optimal Platelet and Plasma Ratios (PROPPR) trial120 randomized 680 bleeding trauma patients across 12 highest-level trauma centers to resuscitation with 1:1:1 vs. 1:1:2 plasma to platelets to RBCs. Although there was no significant difference in mortality at 24 hours (13% vs. 17%) or 30 days (22% vs. 26%), the 1:1:1 group had significantly decreased mortality due to hemorrhage at 24 hours (9% vs. 15%) and more patients achieving hemostasis (86% vs. 78%). Despite fears that resuscitation with increased plasma volumes would lead to more inflammatory complications, there were no between-group differences in 23 prespecified secondary outcomes, including acute respiratory distress syndrome, sepsis, multiple organ failure, and venous thromboembolism. A recent system-atic review/meta-analysis and practice management guideline from EAST reported reduced mortality (31% vs. 38%) in 5292 patients receiving high (≥1:1) versus low (<1:2) plasma to RBC, and reduced mortality (28% vs. 43%) in 1607 patients receiving high versus low platelet to RBC.99 The authors therefore recom-mend high and balanced ratio (≥1:1) of plasma and platelet to RBC for resuscitation of severely injured trauma patients.The mechanism for these benefits are unclear. While cor-rection of hypovolemia as well as augmention of the patient’s hemostatic potential with clotting factors and platelets are impor-tant, other plasma proteins likely play key roles as well. Recently, plasma resuscitation has been shown to reverse endothelial injury in animal models of hemorrhagic shock, particularly by repair of the endothelial glycocalyx layer (EGL).121,122 The EGL is the primary determinant of vascular permeability.123 Hemorrhage results in shedding of EGL components and vascular perme-ability. Crystalloid and artificial colloid-based resuscitation increases the hydrostatic pressure without repairing the EGL, which likely contributes to the myriad of edema-related com-plications seen in the pre-DCR era. Plasma, on the other hand, repairs the EGL, limiting extravascular leakage and edema. However, the exact protein moieties that mediate these benefits have yet to be identified and remain an area of investigation. Nevertheless, several studies have reported decreased inflam-matory and edema-related complications with increased plasma and decreased crystalloid utilization. In trauma patients, there are strong correlations between increasing circulating levels of glycocalyx components such as syndecan-1 and trauma severity, coagulopathy, and mortality,124-126 although it remains unclear if these relationships are causative or merely associative. Finally, the use of DCR principles to guide transfusion of substantial nontraumatic hemorrhage is intuitive, although there is little evidence in the literature to support this practice.It is essential that the trauma center has an established mechanism to deliver these products quickly and in the correct amounts to these critically injured patients.99 An example of an adult massive transfusion clinical guideline specifying the early use of component therapy is shown in Table 4-6. Specific rec-ommendations for the administration of component ther-apy during a massive transfusion are shown in Table 4-7.Because only a small percentage of trauma patients require a massive transfusion and because blood products in general are in short supply, there is a need for early prediction models.127 A comparison of results from existing models in both civilian and military studies is shown in Table 4-8.128-132 While compel-ling, many of these models require laboratory data, complicated injury severity scores, or calculated values that are not readily available or feasible to obtain in the urgent setting of bleeding. The Assessment of Blood Consumption (ABC) score is a sim-plified score to predict massive transfusion after trauma using immediately available data (heart rate, blood pressure, FAST exam, mechanism of injury).132 The ABC score has been vali-dated across multiple trauma centers; however, it may be limited in some centers by the variable use of and operator-dependent FAST examination. In using the ABC score as it was intended, less than 5% of patients who will require massive transfusion will be missed; and 85% of all major trauma patients will be correctly identified.Prehospital TransfusionIn bleeding patients, earlier initiation of appropriate therapy improves outcomes. For example, decreased overall blood product use and increased 30-day survival was observed after moving four units of universal donor, ready-to-transfuse plasma from the blood bank to the emergency department and using the plasma as a primary resuscitation fluid.133 A prehospital retrospective study that analyzed 1677 severely injured trauma patients who were transported by helicopter found that in-flight plasma transfusion was associated with less deranged physiol-ogy on admission and reduced early mortality in the most criti-cally ill patients.134 Prehospital RBC transfusion has also been 56Brunicardi_Ch04_p0103-p0130.indd   11929/01/19   11:05 AM 120BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART ITable 4-6Adult transfusion clinical practice guidelineA. Initial Transfusion of Red Blood Cells (RBCs):1. Notify blood bank immediately of urgent need for RBCs.O negative uncrossmatched (available immediately).As soon as possible, switch to O negative for females and O positive for males.Type-specific uncrossmatched (available in approximately 5–10 min).Completely crossmatched (available in approximately 40 min).2. A blood sample must be sent to blood bank for a type and cross.3. The Emergency Release of Blood form must be completed. If the blood type is not known and blood is needed immediately, O-negative RBCs should be issued.4. RBCs will be transfused in the standard fashion. All patients must be identified (name and number) prior to transfusion.5. Patients who are unstable or receive 1–2 RBCs and do not rapidly respond should be considered candidates for the massive transfusion (MT) guideline.B. Adult Massive Transfusion Guideline:1. The Massive Transfusion Guideline (MTG) should be initiated as soon as it is anticipated that a patient will require massive transfusion. The blood bank should strive to deliver plasma, platelets, and RBCs in a 1:1:1 ratio. To be effective and minimize further dilutional coagulopathy, the 1:1:1 ratio must be initiated early, ideally with the first 2 units of transfused RBCs. Crystalloid infusion should be minimized.2. Once the MTG is activated, the blood bank will have 6 RBCs, 6 FFP, and a 6-pack of platelets packed in a cooler available for rapid transport. If 6 units of thawed FFP are not immediately available, the blood bank will issue units that are ready and notify appropriate personnel when the remainder is thawed. Every attempt should be made to obtain a 1:1:1 ratio of plasma:platelets:RBCs.3. Once initiated, the MT will continue until stopped by the attending physician. MT should be terminated once the patient is no longer actively bleeding.4. No blood components will be issued without a pickup slip with the recipient’s medical record number and name.5. Basic laboratory tests should be drawn immediately on ED arrival and optimally performed on point-of-care devices, facilitating timely delivery of relevant information to the attending clinicians. These tests should be repeated as clinically indicated (e.g., after each cooler of products has been transfused). Suggested laboratory values are:• CBC• INR, fibrinogen• pH and/or base deficit• TEG, where availableCBC = complete blood count; ED = emergency department; FFP = fresh frozen plasma; INR = international normalized ratio; TEG = thromboelastography.Table 4-7Component therapy administration during massive transfusionFresh frozen plasma (FFP)As soon as the need for massive transfusion is recognized.For every 6 red blood cells (RBCs), give 6 FFP (1:1 ratio).PlateletsFor every 6 RBCs and plasma, give one 6-pack of platelets. 6 random-donor platelet packs = 1 apheresis platelet unit.Platelets are in every cooler.Keep platelet counts >100,000.CryoprecipitateAfter first 6 RBCs, check fibrinogen level. If ≤200 mg/dL, give 20 units cryoprecipitate (2 g fibrinogen). Repeat as needed, depending on fibrinogen level, and request appropriate amount of cryoprecipitate.Table 4-8Comparison of massive transfusion prediction studiesAUTHORVARIABLESROC AUC VALUEMcLaughlin et al128SBP, HR, pH, Hct0.839Yücel et al129SBP, HR, BD, Hgb, male, + FAST, long bone/pelvic fracture0.892Moore et al130SBP, pH, ISS >250.804Schreiber et al131Hgb ≤11, INR >1.5, penetrating injury0.80Cotton et al132HR, SBP, FAST, penetrating injury0.83–0.90AUC = area under the curve; BD = base deficit; FAST = focused assessment with sonography for trauma; Hct = hematocrit; Hgb = hemoglobin; HR = heart rate; INR = international normalized ratio;  ISS = injury severity score; ROC = receiver operating characteristic; SBP = systolic blood pressure.Brunicardi_Ch04_p0103-p0130.indd   12029/01/19   11:05 AM 121HEMOSTASIS, SURGICAL BLEEDING, AND TRANSFUSIONCHAPTER 4Nonhemolytic Reactions. Febrile, nonhemolytic reactions are defined as an increase in temperature (>1°C) associated with a transfusion and are fairly common (approximately 1% of all transfusions). Preformed cytokines in donated blood and recipi-ent antibodies reacting with donated antibodies are postulated eti-ologies. The incidence of febrile reactions can be greatly reduced by the use of leukocyte-reduced blood products. Pretreatment with acetaminophen reduces the severity of the reaction.Bacterial contamination of infused blood is rare. Gram-negative organisms, which are capable of growth at 4°C, are the most common cause. Most cases, however, are associated with the administration of platelets that are stored at 20°C or, even more commonly, with apheresis platelets stored at room tem-perature. Cases from FFP thawed in contaminated water baths have also been reported.150 Bacterial contamination can result in sepsis and death in up 25% of patients.151 Clinical manifesta-tions includes systemic signs such as fever and chills, tachycar-dia and hypotension, and gastrointestinal symptoms (abdominal cramps, vomiting, and diarrhea). If the diagnosis is suspected, the transfusion should be discontinued and the blood cultured. Emergency treatment includes oxygen, adrenergic blocking agents, and antibiotics.Allergic Reactions. Allergic reactions are relatively frequent, occurring in about 1% of all transfusions. Reactions are usually mild and consist of rash, urticaria, and flushing. In rare instances, anaphylactic shock develops. Allergic reactions are caused by the transfusion of antibodies from hypersensitive donors or the trans-fusion of antigens to which the recipient is hypersensitive. Allergic reactions can occur after the administration of any blood product but are commonly associated with FFP and platelets. Treatment and prophylaxis consist of the administration of antihistamines. In more serious cases, epinephrine or steroids may be indicated.Respiratory Complications. Respiratory compromise may be associated with transfusion-associated circulatory overload (TACO), which is an avoidable complication. It can occur with rapid infusion of blood, plasma expanders, and crystalloids, par-ticularly in older patients with underlying heart disease. Central venous pressure monitoring should be considered whenever large amounts of fluid are administered. Overload is manifested by a rise in venous pressure, dyspnea, and cough. Rales can gen-erally be heard at the lung bases. Treatment consists of diuresis, slowing the rate of blood administration, and minimizing fluids while blood products are being transfused.The syndrome of TRALI is defined as noncardiogenic pulmonary edema related to transfusion.152 It can occur with the administration of any plasma-containing blood product. Symptoms are similar to circulatory overload with dyspnea and associated hypoxemia. However, TRALI is characterized as noncardiogenic and is often accompanied by fever, rigors, and bilateral pulmonary infiltrates on chest X-ray. It most com-monly occurs within 1 to 2 hours after the onset of transfusion but virtually always before 6 hours. Toy et al reported a decrease in the incidence of TRALI with the reduction transfusion of plasma from female donors, due to a combination of reduced transfusion of strong cognate HLA class II antibodies and HNA antibodies in patients with risk factors for acute lung injury.153 TRALI now occurs less than 1 in 10,000 units transfused and is usually self-limited with supportive therapy. Treatment of TRALI entails discontinuation of any transfusion, notification of the transfusion service, and pulmonary support, which may vary from supplemental oxygen to mechanical ventilation.associated with similar findings.135 In the military setting, imple-mentation of prehospital transfusion protocols in conjunction with other measures, including more rapid transport times, was also associated with reduced mortality.136Whole Blood ResuscitationMilitary experience with whole blood for the resuscitation of traumatic hemorrhage is extensive, going back to the American Civil War. In the modern era, more than 10,000 whole blood units were transfused during Operations Enduring Freedom and Iraqi Freedom. One key advantage of whole blood ver-sus component therapy is that platelets are often unavailable in the remote and austere settings. Two retrospective studies of military casualties treated at a combat support hospital and forward surgical teams found that whole blood was associated with improved survival compared to component (plasma and RBC) therapy.137,138 Whole blood has higher hematocrit, clotting factor activity, and platelet count compared to 1:1:1 component therapy due to relatively less diluent volume in whole blood. During the Vietnam War, low anti-A and anti-B titer whole blood was transfused universally with a low incidence of hemo-lytic reactions (1 per 9600 units).139 An in vitro study found that the hemostatic potential of whole blood was preserved for up to  14 days with cold storage.140 Pilot trials have reported success-ful use of crossmatched modified whole blood (leukoreduced and platelet-poor)141 and uncrossmatched low-titer whole blood  (leukoreduced, containing platelets)142 in the initial resuscita-tion of civilian trauma patients. In the future, whole blood may return as the therapy of choice for the initial resuscitation of substantial hemorrhage.143Fibrinogen ReplacementFibrinogen is the first coagulation factor to fall to critically low levels during major hemorrhage, and low systemic concentra-tions of fibrinogen are associated with increased severity of injury and coagulopathy and are independently predictive of mortality.144,145 Additionally, fibrinogen levels drop in the pre-hospital phase of injury, suggesting early administration by fibrinogen concentrate (not FDA-approved) or cryoprecipitate is needed.146 Fibrinogen concentrate is stored as a lyophilized powder at room temperature and can be reconstituted quickly allowing for rapid administration without delays for thawing or crossmatching.147 In contrast to plasma, viral inactivation steps are routinely included in the manufacturing process for fibrino-gen concentrate, thus minimizing the risk of viral transmission. A pilot trial of massively transfused trauma patients randomized to a massive transfusion protocol or a massive transfusion pro-tocol with early cryoprecipitate found that early cryoprecipitate delivery was feasible and that these patients had higher fibrino-gen levels at all time points during resuscitation, although there was no mortality difference.148 A randomized control trial in Austria of prehospital fibrinogen concentrate versus placebo has been completed with publication of results pending.149Complications of Transfusion (Table 4-9)Transfusion-related complications are primarily related to blood-induced proinflammatory responses. Transfusion-related149a events are estimated to occur in approximately 10% of all trans-fusions, but less than 0.5% are serious in nature. Transfusionrelated deaths, although exceedingly rare, do occur and are related primarily to transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI), ABO hemolytic transfusion reactions, and bacterial contamination of platelets.Brunicardi_Ch04_p0103-p0130.indd   12129/01/19   11:05 AM 122BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IHemolytic Reactions. Hemolytic reactions can be classified as either acute or delayed. Acute hemolytic reactions occur with the administration of ABO-incompatible blood and can be fatal in up to 6% of cases. Contributing factors include errors in the laboratory of a technical or clerical nature or the administra-tion of the wrong blood type. Immediate hemolytic reactions are characterized by intravascular destruction of red blood cells and consequent hemoglobinemia and hemoglobinuria. DIC can be initiated by antibody-antigen complexes activating factor XII and complement, leading to activation of the coagulation cas-cade. Finally, acute renal insufficiency results from the toxicity associated with free hemoglobin in the plasma, resulting in tubu-lar necrosis and precipitation of hemoglobin within the tubules.Delayed hemolytic transfusion reactions occur 2 to  10 days after transfusion and are characterized by extravascular hemolysis, mild anemia, and indirect (unconjugated) hyperbili-rubinemia. They occur when an individual has a low antibody titer at the time of transfusion, but the titer increases after trans-fusion as a result of an anamnestic response. Reactions to non-ABO antigens involve immunoglobulin G-mediated clearance by the reticuloendothelial system.If the patient is awake, the most common symptoms of acute transfusion reactions are pain at the site of transfusion, facial flushing, and back and chest pain. Associated symptoms include fever, respiratory distress, hypotension, and tachycardia. In anesthetized patients, diffuse bleeding and hypotension are the hallmarks. A high index of suspicion is needed to make the diag-nosis. The laboratory criteria for a transfusion reaction are hemo-globinuria and serologic criteria that show incompatibility of the donor and recipient blood. A positive Coombs’ test indicates Table 4-9Transfusion-related complicationsABBREVIATIONCOMPLICATIONSIGNS AND SYMPTOMSFREQUENCYMECHANISMPREVENTIONNHTRFebrile, nonhemolytic transfusion reactionFever0.5%–1.5% of transfusionsPreformed cytokinesHost Ab to donor lymphocytesUse leukocyte-reduced bloodStore platelets <5 d Bacterial contaminationHigh fever, chillsHemodynamic changesDICEmesis, diarrheaHemoglobinuria<0.01% of blood<0.05% of plateletsInfusion of contaminated blood  Allergic reactionsRash, hivesItching0.1%–0.3% of unitsSoluble transfusion constituentsProvide antihistamine prophylaxisTACOTransfusion-associated circulatory overloadPulmonary edema1:200–1:10,00 of transfused patientsLarge volume of blood transfused into an older patient with CHFIncrease transfusion timeAdminister diureticsMinimize associated fluidsTRALITransfusion-related acute lung injuryAcute (<6 h) hypoxemiaBilateral infiltrates ± Tachycardia, hypotension Anti-HLA or anti-HNA Ab in transfused blood attacks circulatory and pulmonary leukocytesLimit female donors Hemolytic reaction, acuteFeverHypotensionDICHemoglobinuriaHemoglobinemiaRenal insufficiency1:33,000–1:1,500,000 unitsTransfusion of ABO-incompatible bloodPreformed IgM Ab to ABO AgTransfuse appropriately matched blood Hemolytic reaction, delayed  (2–10 d)AnemiaIndirect hyperbilirubinemiaDecreased haptoglobin levelPositive result on direct Coombs’ test IgG mediatedIdentify patient’s Ag to prevent recurrenceAb = antibody; Ag = antigen; CHF = congestive heart failure; DIC = disseminated intravascular coagulation; HLA = human leukocyte antigen;  HNA = anti-human neutrophil antigen; IgG = immunoglobulin G; IgM = immunoglobulin M.Brunicardi_Ch04_p0103-p0130.indd   12229/01/19   11:05 AM 123HEMOSTASIS, SURGICAL BLEEDING, AND TRANSFUSIONCHAPTER 4transfused cells coated with patient antibody and is diagnostic. Delayed hemolytic transfusions may also be manifested by fever and recurrent anemia. Jaundice and decreased haptoglobin usu-ally occur, and low-grade hemoglobinemia and hemoglobinuria may be seen. The Coombs’ test is usually positive, and the blood bank must identify the antigen to prevent subsequent reactions.If an immediate hemolytic transfusion reaction is sus-pected, the transfusion should be stopped immediately, and a sample of the recipient’s blood drawn and sent along with the suspected unit to the blood bank for comparison with the pretransfusion samples. Urine output should be monitored and adequate hydration maintained to prevent precipitation of hemo-globin within the tubules. Delayed hemolytic transfusion reac-tions do not usually require specific intervention.Transmission of Disease. Malaria, Chagas’ disease, brucel-losis, and, very rarely, syphilis are among the diseases that have been transmitted by transfusion. Malaria can be transmitted by all blood components. The species most commonly implicated is Plasmodium malariae. The incubation period ranges from  8 to 100 days; the initial manifestations are shaking chills and spiking fever. Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection resembling infectious mononucleosis also has occurred.Transmission of hepatitis C and HIV-1 has been dra-matically minimized by the introduction of better antibody and nucleic acid screening for these pathogens. The residual risk among allogeneic donations is now estimated to be less than 1 per 1,000,000 donations. The residual risk of hepatitis B is approximately 1 per 300,000 donations.154 Hepatitis A is very rarely transmitted because there is no asymptomatic carrier state. Improved donor selection and testing are responsible for the decreased rates of transmission. Recent concerns about the rare transmission of these and other pathogens, such as West Nile virus, are being addressed by current trials of “pathogen inactivation systems” that reduce infectious levels of all viruses and bacteria known to be transmittable by transfusion. Prion dis-orders (e.g., Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease) also are transmissible by transfusion, but there is currently no information on inactivation of prions in blood products for transfusion.Recently, there is heightened concern of transmission of Zika virus by blood product transfusion. Studies in endemic areas have shown rates of Zika infection detected in donor blood as high as 2.8%.155 Although no such cases have been reported in the United States, transmission of Zika virus via platelet products have been reported in Brazil.156 Zika virus may result in serious birth defects including microcephaly when infection occurs in pregnant women. Because the majority of cases in adults produce nonspecific or no symptoms, Zika screening cannot be accomplished by questionnaires.157 The Centers for  Disease Control and Prevention has issued guidelines for screen-ing of Zika virus in donated blood. Although no tests have been FDA-approved, laboratory testing is currently being performed under the FDA’s IND program.TESTS OF HEMOSTASIS AND BLOOD COAGULATIONThe initial approach to assessing hemostatic function is a careful review of the patient’s clinical history (including previous abnor-mal bleeding or bruising), drug use, and basic laboratory testing.Conventional Coagulation Tests. Common screening labo-ratory testing includes platelet count, PT or INR, and aPTT. Platelet dysfunction can occur at either extreme of platelet count. The normal platelet count ranges from 150,000 to 400,000/μL. Whereas a platelet count greater than 1,000,000/μL may be associated with bleeding or thrombotic complications, increased bleeding complications may be observed with major surgical procedures when the platelets are below 50,000/μL and with minor surgical procedures when counts are below 30,000/μL, and spontaneous hemorrhage can occur when the counts fall below 20,000/μL. Despite a lack of evidence supporting their use, platelet transfusions are still recommended in ophthalmo-logic and neurosurgical procedures when the platelet count is less than 100,000/μL.The PT and aPTT are variations of plasma recalcifica-tion times initiated by the addition of a thromboplastic agent. The PT reagent contains thromboplastin and calcium that, when added to plasma, leads to the formation of a fibrin clot. The PT test measures the function of factors I, II, V, VII, and X. Factor VII is part of the extrinsic pathway, and the remaining factors are part of the common pathway. Factor VII has the shortest half-life of the coagulation factors, and its synthesis is vitamin K dependent. The PT test is best suited to detect abnor-mal coagulation caused by vitamin K deficiencies and warfarin  therapy.Due to variations in thromboplastin activity, it can be dif-ficult to accurately assess the degree of anticoagulation on the basis of PT alone. To account for these variations, the INR is now the method of choice for reporting PT values. The Interna-tional Sensitivity Index (ISI) is unique to each batch of thrombo-plastin and is furnished by the manufacturer to the hematology laboratory. Human brain thromboplastin has an ISI of 1, and the optimal reagent has an ISI between 1.3 and 1.5.The INR is a calculated number derived from the follow-ing equation:INR = (measured PT/normal PT)ISIThe aPTT reagent contains a phospholipid substitute, acti-vator, and calcium, which in the presence of plasma leads to fibrin clot formation. The aPTT measures function of factors I, II, and V of the common pathway and factors VIII, IX, X, and XII of the intrinsic pathway. Heparin therapy is often monitored by following aPTT values with a therapeutic target range of 1.5 to 2.5 times the control value (approximately 50 to 80 seconds). Low molecular weight heparins are selective Xa inhibitors that may mildly elevate the aPTT, but therapeutic monitoring is not routinely recommended.Additional medications may significantly impair hemo-static function, such as antiplatelet agents (clopidogrel and GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors), anticoagulant agents (hirudin, chondroitin sul-fate, dermatan sulfate), and thrombolytic agents (streptokinase, tPA). If abnormalities in any of the coagulation studies cannot be explained by known medications, congenital abnormalities of coagulation or comorbid disease should be considered.Unfortunately, while conventional coagulation tests (PT, aPTT) capture the classic intrinsic and extrinsic coagulation cas-cade, they do not reflect the complexity of in vivo coagulation.158 Although they are useful to follow warfarin and heparin thera-pies, they poorly reflect the status of actively bleeding patients. This is not surprising given that these tests use only plasma and not whole blood to provide their assessment of the patient’s clot-ting status. To better assess the complex and rapidly changing hemostatic function of an actively bleeding patient, many cen-ters have moved to whole blood viscoelastic testing.Brunicardi_Ch04_p0103-p0130.indd   12329/01/19   11:05 AM 124BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IViscoelastic Assays. Viscoelastic assays, such as TEG or rotational thromboelastometry (ROTEM), monitor hemostasis as a dynamic process rather than revealing information from isolated conventional coagulation screens.159 Both tests measure the viscoelastic properties of blood as clotting is induced under a low-shear environment. The patterns of change in shear elas-ticity enable determination of the kinetics of clot formation and growth as well as the strength and stability of the formed clot. The strength and stability provide information about the ability of the clot to perform the work of hemostasis, while the kinet-ics determines the adequacy of quantitative factors available for clot formation.Continuous improvements in this technique have made this test a valuable tool for medical personnel interested in coagulation. A sample of celite-activated whole blood is placed into a prewarmed cuvette, and the clotting process is activated with reagents, such as kaolin for standard TEG, and kaolin plus tissue factor for rapid TEG. Both TEG and ROTEM employ a vertical pin which is lowered into the activated blood sample. In TEG, the cuvette oscillates in an arc around the stationary pin. As the blood clots, fibrin strands and platelet aggregates form between the pin and inner walls of the cuvette. The resulting torque on the pin is measured and converted to an electrical signal. In ROTEM, the cuvette is stationary while the pin oscil-lates within the sample. The extent to which the pin can oscillate is reduced as the blood clots, and this is measured by the angle of deflection of a beam of light directed at the pin.160 In TEGs, the strength of a clot is graphically represented over time as a characteristic cigar-shaped figure (Fig. 4-7).Several parameters are generated from the TEG tracing. The r-value (reaction time) represents the time between the start of the assay and initial clot formation. This reflects clotting fac-tor activity and initial fibrin formation and is increased with fac-tor deficiency or severe hemodilution. The k-time (clot kinetics) is the time needed to reach specified clot strength and repre-sents the interactions of clotting factors and platelets. As such, the k-time is prolonged with hypofibrinogenemia and signifi-cant factor deficiency. Prolonged r-value and k-time are com-monly addressed with plasma transfusions. The alpha or angle (∝) is the slope of the tracing and reflects clot acceleration. The angle reflects the interactions of clotting factors and platelets. The slope is decreased with hypofibrinogenemia and platelet dysfunction. Decreased angles are treated with cryoprecipitate transfusion or fibrinogen administration. The maximal ampli-tude (mA) is the greatest height of the tracing and represents clot strength. Its height is reduced with dysfunction or deficiencies in platelets or fibrinogen. Decreased mA is addressed with platelet transfusion and, in cases where the angle is also decreased, with cryoprecipitate (or fibrinogen) as well. The G-value is a para-metric measure derived from the mA value and reflects overall clot strength or firmness. An increased G-value is associated with hypercoagulability, whereas a decrease is seen with hypo-coagulable states. Finally, the LY30 is the amount of lysis occur-ring in the clot, and the value is the percentage of amplitude reduction at 30 minutes after mA is achieved. The LY30 rep-resents clot stability and when increased fibrinolysis is present.TEG and ROTEM are the only tests measuring all dynamic steps of clot formation until eventual clot lysis or retraction. TEG has also been shown to identify on admission those patients likely to develop thromboembolic complications after injury and postoperatively.161Recent trauma data have shown TEG to be useful in pre-dicting early transfusion of red blood cells, plasma, platelets, and cryoprecipitate.162 TEG can also predict the need for life-saving interventions shortly after arrival, 24-hour and 30-day mortality, and can be used to guide administration of TXA to injured patients with hyperfibrinolysis.163,164 Lastly, some cen-ters have demonstrated that the graphic display options allow for more rapid return of results and may be less expensive than standard coagulation panels. Given the strong association of viscoelastic tests with clinical outcomes, some centers now use TEG rather than conventional coagulation tests to evaluate injured patients in the emergency department.165EVALUATION OF EXCESSIVE INTRAOPERATIVE OR POSTOPERATIVE BLEEDINGExcessive bleeding during or after a surgical procedure may be the result of ineffective hemostasis, blood transfusion, unde-tected hemostatic defect, consumptive coagulopathy, and/or fibrinolysis. Excessive bleeding from the operative field unas-sociated with bleeding from other sites usually suggests inad-equate mechanical hemostasis.Massive blood transfusion is a well-known cause of throm-bocytopenia. Bleeding following massive transfusion can occur because of hypothermia, dilutional coagulopathy, platelet dys-function, fibrinolysis, or hypofibrinogenemia. Another cause of hemostatic failure related to the administration of blood is a hemolytic transfusion reaction. The first sign of a transfusion reaction may be diffuse bleeding. The pathogenesis of this bleed-ing is thought to be related to the release of ADP from hemolyzed red blood cells, resulting in diffuse platelet aggregation, after which the platelet clumps are removed out of the circulation.Transfusion purpura occurs when the donor platelets are of the uncommon HPA-1 group. This is an uncommon cause of thrombocytopenia and associated bleeding after transfusion. The platelets sensitize the recipient, who makes antibody to the foreign platelet antigen. The foreign platelet antigen does not completely disappear from the recipient circulation but attaches to the recipient’s own platelets. The antibody then destroys the recipient’s own platelets. The resultant thrombocytopenia and bleeding may continue for several weeks. This uncommon cause of thrombocytopenia should be considered if bleeding follows transfusion by 5 or 6 days. Platelet transfusions are of little help in the management of this syndrome because the new donor platelets usually are subject to the binding of antigen and dam-age from the antibody. Corticosteroids may be of some help in reducing the bleeding tendency. Posttransfusion purpura is self-limited, and the passage of several weeks inevitably leads to subsidence of the problem.DIC is characterized by systemic activation of the coagu-lation system, which results in the deposition of fibrin clots and microvascular ischemia and may contribute to the development CoagulationLYFibrinolysisRMAKAngleFigure 4-7. Illustration of a thromboelastogram (TEG) tracing.  K = clot kinetics; LY = lysis.Brunicardi_Ch04_p0103-p0130.indd   12429/01/19   11:05 AM 125HEMOSTASIS, SURGICAL BLEEDING, AND TRANSFUSIONCHAPTER 4of multiorgan failure. Consumption and subsequent exhaustion of coagulation proteins and platelets due to the ongoing acti-vation of the coagulation system may induce severe bleeding complications.Lastly, severe hemorrhagic disorders due to thrombo-cytopenia have occurred as a result of gram-negative sepsis. Defibrination and hemostatic failure also may occur with meningococcemia, Clostridium perfringens sepsis, and staph-ylococcal sepsis. Hemolysis appears to be one mechanism in sepsis leading to defibrination.REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Brohi K, Cohen MJ, Davenport RA. Acute coagulopathy of trauma: mechanism, identification and effect. Curr Opin Crit Care. 2007;13:680-685.	2.	Kulkarani R. Comprehensive care of the patient with haemo-philia and inhibitors undergoing surgery: practical aspects. Hemophilia. 2013;19(1):2-10.	3.	Federicini AB, Mannucci PM. Management of inherited von Willebrand disease in 2007. Ann Med. 2007;39:(5):346-358.	4.	Girolami A, de Marinis GB, Bonamigo E, Lombardi AM. Recombinant FVIIa concentrate-associated thrombotic events in congenital bleeding disorders other than hemophil-ias. Hematology. 2012;17(6):346-349.	5.	Peyvandi F, Bolton-Maggs PHB, Batorova A, De Moerloose P. Rare bleeding disorders. Haemophilia. 2012;18(Suppl 4): 148-153.	6.	Peyvandi F, Mannucci PM. Rare coagulation disorders. Thromb Haemost. 1999;82(4):1207-1214.	7.	Anwar R, Miloszewski KJ. Factor XIII deficiency. Br J Hae-matol. 1999;107(3):468-484.	8.	Anwar R, Minford A, Gallivan L, Trinh CH, Markham AF. Delayed umbilical bleeding—a presenting feature for factor XIII deficiency: clinical features, genetics, and management. Pediatrics. 2002;109(2):E32.	9.	George JN, Caen JP, Nurden AT. Glanzmann’s throm-basthenia: the spectrum of clinical disease. Blood. 1990;75(7):1383-1395.	10.	Stasi R, Evangelista ML, Stipa E, et al. Idiopathic thrombo-cytopenic purpura: current concepts in pathophysiology and management. Thromb Haemost. 2008;99:4-13.	11.	George JN. Sequence of treatments for adults with primary immune thrombocytopenia. Am J Hematol. 2012;87:S12-S15.	12.	Neunert C, Lim W, Crowther M, Cohen A, Solberg L Jr, Crowther MA; American Society of Hematology. The American Society of Hematology 2011 evidence-based practice guideline for immune thrombocytopenia. Blood. 2011;117(16):4190-4207.	13.	Provan D, Stasi R, Newland AC, et al. International consen-sus report on the investigation and management of primary immune thrombocytopenia. Blood. 2010;115(2):168-186.	14.	Baldwin ZK, Spitzer AL, Ng VL, Harkin AH. Contemporary standards for the diagnosis and treatment of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT). Surgery. 2008;143:305-312.	15.	Amiral J, Peynaud-Debayle E, Wolf M, et al. Generation of antibodies to heparin-PF4 complexes without thrombocyto-penia in patients treated with unfractionated or low-molecular weight heparin. Am J Hematol. 1996;52:90-95.	16.	Lo GK, Juhl D, Warkentin T, et al. Evaluation of pretest clini-cal score (4 Ts) for the diagnosis of heparin-induced throm-bocytopenia in two clinical settings. J Thromb Haemost. 2006;4(4):759-765.	17.	Greinacher A. Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia.  N Engl J Med. 2015;373(3):252-261. This is an excellent review of the diagnosis and treatment of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia.	18.	Linkins LA, Dans AL, Moores LK, et al; American College of Chest Physicians. Treatment and prevention of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia: antithrombotic therapy and pre-vention of thrombosis, 9th ed: American College of Chest Physicians evidence-based clinical practice guidelines. Chest. 2012;141(2 Suppl):e495S-e530S.	19.	Zimrin AB, Hess JR. Thrombocytopenic purpura: going against the evidence. Crit Care Med. 2006;34:2247-2248.	20.	Kremer Hovinga JA, Meyer SC. Current management of thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. Curr Opin Hematol. 2008;15(5):445-450.	21.	Mariotte E, Veyradier A. Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura: from diagnosis to therapy. Curr Opin Crit Care. 2015;21(6):593-601.	22.	Brown LM, Call MS, Knudson M, et al. A normal platelet count may not be enough: the impact of admission platelet count on mortality and transfusion in severely injured trauma patients. J Trauma. 2011;71(2 Suppl 3):S337-S342.	23.	Holcomb JB, Zarzabal LA, Michalek JE, et al. Increased platelet: RBC ratios are associated with improved survival after massive transfusion. J Trauma. 2011;71(2 Suppl 3): S318-S328.	24.	Eikelboom JW, Hirsh J, Spencer FA, Baglin TP, Weitz JI. Antiplatelet drugs: antithrombotic therapy and prevention of thrombosis, 9th ed: American College of Chest Physicians evidence-based clinical practice guidelines. Chest. 2012;141 (2 Suppl):e89S-e119S.	25.	Sarode R. How do I transfuse platelets (PLTs) to reverse anti-PLT drug effect? Transfusion. 2012;52:695-701.	26.	Lavelle WF, Lavell EA, Uhl R. Operative delay for orthope-dic patients on clopidogrel (Plavix): a complete lack of con-sensus. J Trauma. 2008;64:996.	27.	Hess JR, Lawson JH. The coagulopathy of trauma ver-sus disseminated intravascular coagulation. J Trauma. 2006;60:S12-S19.	28.	Taylor FB, Toh CH, Hoots WK, Wada H, Levi M. Towards definition, clinical and laboratory criteria, and a scoring system for disseminated intravascular coagulation. Thromb  Haemost. 2001;86:1327-1330.	29.	Dhainaut JF, Yan SB, Joyce DE, et al. Treatment effects of drotrecogin alfa (activated) in patients with or without overt disseminated intravascular coagulation. J Thromb Haemost. 2004;2:1924-1933.	30.	Angstwurm MW, Dempfle CE, Spannagl M. New dissemi-nated intravascular coagulation score: a useful tool to predict mortality in comparison with Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation II and Logistic Organ Dysfunction scores. Crit Care Med. 2006;34:314-320.	31.	Wada H, Thachil J, Di Nisio M, et al. Guidance for diag-nosis and treatment of DIC from harmonization of the rec-ommendations from three guidelines. J Thromb Haemost. 2013;11:761-767.	32.	Tefferi A. Polycythemia vera and essential thrombocythemia: 2012 update on diagnosis, risk stratification, and manage-ment. Am J Hematol. 2012;87(3):285-293.	33.	Feistauer SM, Penner E, Mayr WR, et al. Target platelet anti-gen of autoantibodies in patients with primary biliary cirrho-sis. Hepatology. 1997;25:1343.	34.	Lisman T, Bongers TN, Adelmeijer J, et al. Elevated lev-els of von Willebrand factor in cirrhosis support platelet adhesion despite reduced functional capacity. Hepatology. 2006;44:53-61.	35.	Northup PG, McMahon MM, Ruhl AP, et al. Coagulopathy does not fully protect hospitalized cirrhosis patients from peripheral venous thromboembolism. Am J Gastroenterol. 2006;101:1524.Brunicardi_Ch04_p0103-p0130.indd   12529/01/19   11:05 AM 126BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART I	36.	Gatt A, Riddell A, Calvaruso V, et al. Enhanced thrombin generation in patients with cirrhosis-induced coagulopathy.  J Thromb Haemost. 2010;8:1994.	37.	Tripodi A, Mannucci PM. The coagulopathy of chronic liver disease. N Engl J Med. 2011;365:147. This is a review of the pathophysiologic abnormalities in coagulation associated with chronic liver disease. It challenges the traditional teach-ing that these patients are coagulopathic and presents evi-dence and rational for why they are actually hypercoaguable.	38.	Tripodi A, Primignani M, Lemma L, et al. Detection of the imbalance of procoagulant versus anticoagulant factors in cirrhosis by a simple laboratory method. Hepatology. 2010;52:249-255.	39.	De Pietri L, Bianchini M, Montalti R, et al. Thromboelastog-raphy-guided blood product use before invasive procedures in cirrhosis with severe coagulopathy: a randomized, controlled trial. Hepatology. 2016;63(2):566-573.	40.	Brohi K, Singh J, Heron M, Coats T. Acute traumatic coagu-lopathy. J Trauma. 2003;54(6):1127-1130.	41.	Chang R, Cardenas JC, Wade CE, Holcomb JB. Advances in the understanding of trauma-induced coagulopathy. Blood. 2016;128(8):1043-1049. This an up-to-date review of coagu-lation biology as it relates to trauma, emphasizing both the complexity and opportunities for research.	42.	Brohi K, Cohen MJ, Ganter MT, et al. Acute coagulopathy of trauma: hypoperfusion induces systemic anticoagulation and hyperfibrinolysis. J Trauma. 2008;64:1211-1217.	43.	Ostrowski SR, Johansson PI. Endothelial glycocalyx degra-dation induces endogenous heparinization in patients with severe injury and early traumatic coagulopathy. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012;73(1):60-66.	44.	Kutcher ME, Redick BJ, McCreery RC, et al. Characteriza-tion of platelet dysfunction after trauma. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012;73(1):13-19.	45.	Chapman MP, Moore EE, Moore HB, et al. Overwhelming tPA release, not PAI-1 degradation, is responsible for hyper-fibrinolysis in severely injured trauma patients. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2015;80(1):16-23.	46.	Castellino FJ, Chapman MP, Donahue DL, et al. Traumatic brain injury causes platelet adenosine diphosphate and ara-chidonic acid receptor inhibition independent of hemor-rhagic shock in humans and rats. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2014;76(5):1169-1176.	47.	Wright AP, Wade CE, Camp E, et al. Pulmonary contusion on admission chest x-ray is associated with coagulopathy and mortality in trauma patients. J Emerg Med Trauma Surg Care. 2015;2:011.	48.	Tian Y, Salsbery B, Wang M, et al. Brain-derived micropar-ticles induce systemic coagulation in a murine model of trau-matic brain injury. Blood. 2015;125(13):2151-2159.	49.	Moore HB, Moore EE, Gonzalez E, et al. Hyperfibrinolysis, physiologic fibrinolysis, and fibrinolysis shutdown: the spec-trum of postinjury fibrinolysis and relevance to antifibrinol-ytic therapy. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2014;77(6):811-817.	50.	Moore HB, Moore EE, Liras IN, et al. Acute fibrinolysis shutdown following injury occurs frequently and increases mortality: a multicenter evaluation of 2540 severely injured patients. J Am Coll Surg. 2016;222(4):347-355. This large clinical study examined the incidence and outcomes after acute fibrinolysis shutdown, an acute impairment of fibrino-lysis, and demonstrated that it occurs frequently after severe injury and is associated with increased mortality.	51.	Holbrook A, Schulman S, Witt DM, et al. Evidence-based management of anticoagulant therapy: antithrombotic ther-apy and prevention of thrombosis, 9th ed: American College of Chest Physicians evidence-based clinical practice guide-lines. Chest. 2012;141(2 Suppl):e152S-184S.	52.	Goldstein JN, Refaai MA, Milling TJ Jr, et al. Fourfactor prothrombin complex concentrate versus plasma for rapid vitamin K antagonist reversal in patients needing urgent surgical or invasive interventions: a phase 3b, open-label, non-inferiority, randomised trial. Lancet. 2015;385(9982):2077-2087. This is a multicenter phase 3b noninferiority study of patients requiring rapid reversal of vitamin K antagonist-induced anticoagulation for urgent surgical procedures. Four-factor PCC was not just noninferior but in fact superior to plasma for rapid reversal and hemostasis.	53.	Milling TJ Jr, Refaai MA, Sarode R, et al. Safety of a four-factor prothrombin complex concentrate versus plasma for vitamin K antagonist reversal: an integrated analysis of two phase IIIb clinical trials. Acad Emerg Med. 2016;23(4): 466-475.	54.	Al-Majzoub O, Rybak E, Reardon DP, Krause P, Connors JM: Evaluation of warfarin reversal with 4-factor prothrom-bin complex concentrate compared to 3-factor prothrombin complex concentrate at a tertiary academic medical center.  J Emerg Med. 2016;50(1):7-13.	55.	Voils SA, Baird B. Systematic review: 3-factor versus 4-fac-tor prothrombin complex concentrate for warfarin reversal: does it matter? Thromb Res. 2012;130(6):833-840.	56.	Pollack CV Jr, Reilly PA, Bernstein R, et al. Design and ratio-nale for RE-VERSE AD: A phase 3 study of idarucizumab, a specific reversal agent for dabigatran. Thromb Haemost. 2015;114(1):198-205.	57.	Pollack CV Jr, Reilly PA, Eikelboom J, et al. Idarucizumab for dabigatran reversal. N Engl J Med. 2015;373(6):511-520.	58.	Ghadimi K, Dombrowski KE, Levy JH, Welsby IJ. Andex-anet alfa for the reversal of factor Xa inhibitor related antico-agulation. Expert Rev Hematol. 2016;9(2):115-122.	59.	Milling TJ Jr, Kaatz S. Preclinical and clinical data for factor Xa and “universal” reversal agents. Am J Med. 2016;129(11S):S80-S88.	60.	Sullivan DW Jr, Gad SC, Laulicht B, Bakhru S, Steiner S. Nonclinical safety assessment of PER977: a small molecule reversal agent for new oral anticoagulants and heparins. Int J Toxicol. 2015;34(4):308-317.	61.	Eerenberg ES, Kamphuisen PW, Sijpkens MK, et al. Reversal of rivaroxaban and dabigatran by prothrombin complex con-centrate. A randomized, placebo-controlled, crossover study in healthy subjects. Circulation. 2011;124:1573-1579.	62.	Kearon C, Hirsh J. Management of anticoagulation before and after elective surgery. N Engl J Med. 1997;336:1506.	63.	Lindblad B. Protamine sulfate: a review of its effects— hypersensitivity and toxicity. Eur J Vasc Surg. 1989;3:195.	64.	Dentali F, Ageno W, Crowther M. Treatment of coumarin-associated coagulopathy: a systematic review and proposed treatment algorithms. J Thromb Haemost. 2006;4:1853.	65.	Douketis JD, Spyropoulos AC, Spencer FA, et al. Periopera-tive management of antithrombotic therapy antithrombotic therapy and prevention of thrombosis, 9th ed: American Col-lege of Chest Physicians evidence-based clinical practice guidelines. Chest. 2012;141(2 Suppl):e326S-e350S.	66.	Douketis JD, Spyropoulos AC, Kaatz S, et al. Perioperative bridging anticoagulation in patients with atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2015;373(9):823-833. This is an important trial that demonstrated forgoing bridging anticoagulation was noninferior to perioperative bridging with low-molecular-weight heparin for the prevention of arterial thromboembo-lism and decreased the risk of major bleeding. It has changed management of these patients.	67.	Rechenmacher SJ, Fang JC. Bridging anticoagulation: pri-mum non nocere. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;66(12):1392-1403.	68.	Besser MW, Klein AA. The coagulopathy of cardiopulmo-nary bypass. Crit Rev Clin Lab Sci. 2011;47(5-6):197-212.Brunicardi_Ch04_p0103-p0130.indd   12629/01/19   11:05 AM 127HEMOSTASIS, SURGICAL BLEEDING, AND TRANSFUSIONCHAPTER 4	69.	Simon TL, Akl BF, Murphy W. Controlled trial of routine administration of platelet concentrates in cardiopulmonary bypass surgery. Ann Thorac Surg. 1984;37:359-364.	70.	Taneja R, Fernandes P, Marwaha G, Cheng D, Bainbridge D. Perioperative coagulation management and blood conserva-tion in cardiac surgery: a Canadian survey. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2008;22:662-669.	71.	Murkin JM, Lux J, Shannon NA, et al: Aprotinin significantly decreases bleeding and transfusion requirements in patients receiving aspirin and undergoing cardiac operations. J Tho-rac Cardiovasc Surg. 1994;107:554.	72.	Palm M, Altman J. Topical hemostatic agents: a review.  Dermatol Surg. 2008;34:431-445.	73.	Larson PO. Topical hemostatic agents for dermatologic sur-gery. J Dermatol Surg Oncol. 1988;14:623-632.	74.	Achneck HE, Sileshi B, Jamiolkowski RM, et al. A compre-hensive review of topical hemostatic agents: efficacy and rec-ommendations for use. Ann Surg. 2010;25:217-228.	75.	Martinowitz U, Schulman S. Fibrin sealant in surgery of patients with a hemorrhagic diathesis. Thromb Haemost. 1995;74:486-492.	76.	Koea JB, Batiller J, Aguirre N, et al. A multicentre, prospec-tive, randomized, controlled trial comparing EVARREST™ fibrin sealant patch to standard of care in controlling bleed-ing following elective hepatectomy: anatomic versus nonanatomic resection. HPB (Oxford). 2016;18(3):221-228.	77.	Spinella PC, Reddy HL, Jaffe JS, et al. Fresh whole blood use for hemorrhagic shock: preserving benefit while avoiding complications. Anesth Analg. 2012;115(4):751-758.	78.	Zielinski MD, Johnson PM, Jenkins D, et al. Emergency use of prethawed group A plasma in trauma patients. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2013;74(1):69-74.	79.	Mair B, Benson K. Evaluation of changes in hemoglobin lev-els associated with ABO-incompatible plasma in apheresis platelets. Transfusion. 1998;38:51-55.	80.	Eder AF, Dy BA, Perez JM, et al. The residual risk of transfusion-related acute lung injury at the American Red Cross (2008-2011): limitations of a predominantly male-donor plasma mitigation strategy. Transfusion. 2013;53(7):1442-1449.	81.	Zielinski MD, Schrager JJ, Johnson P, et al. Multicenter comparison of emergency release group A versus AB plasma in blunt-injured trauma patients. Clin Transl Sci. 2015;8(1):43-47.	81a.	McGinity AC, Zhu CS, Greebon L, et al. Prehospital low-titer cold-stored whole blood: Philosophy for ubiquitous utilization of O-positive product for emergency use in hemorrhage due to injury. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2018;84(6S Suppl 1): S115-S119. 	82.	Kiraly LN, Underwood S, Differding JA, Schreiber MA. Transfusion of aged packed red blood cells results in decreased tissue oxygenation in critically injured trauma patients.  J Trauma. 2009;67(1):29-32.	83.	Matijevic N, Wang YW, Cotton BA, et al. Better hemostatic pro-files of never-frozen liquid plasma compared with thawed fresh frozen plasma. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2013;74(1):84-90.	84.	Caram-Deelder C, Kreuger AL, Jacobse J, et al. Effect of platelet storage time on platelet measurements: a systematic review and meta-analyses. Vox Sang. 2016;111(4):374-382.	85.	Schreiber MA, McCully BH, Holcomb JB, et al. Transfusion of cryopreserved packed red blood cells is safe and effective after trauma. Ann Surg. 2015;262:426-433.	86.	Chang AL, Hoehn RS, Jernigan P, et al. Previous cryopreser-vation alter the natural history of the red blood cell storage lesion. Shock. 2016;46(S1):89-95.	87.	McAlister FA, Clark HD, Wells PS, Laupacis A. Periop-erative allogeneic blood transfusion does not cause adverse sequelae in patients with cancer: a meta-analysis of uncon-founded studies. Br J Surg. 1998;85:171-178.	88.	Vamvakas EC, Blajchman MA. Universal WBC reduction: the case for and against. Transfusion. 2001;41:691-712.	89.	Hebert PC, Fergusson D, Blajchman MA; Leukoreduction Study Investigators. Clinical outcomes following institution of the Canadian universal leukoreduction program for red blood cell transfusions. JAMA. 2003;289(15):1941-1949.	90.	Inaba K, Lustenberger T, Rhee P, et al. The impact of plate-let transfusion in massively transfused trauma patients. J Am Coll Surg. 2010;211(5):573-579.	91.	Matijevic N, Wang YW, Cotton BA, et al. Better hemo-static profiles of never-frozen liquid plasma compared with thawed fresh frozen plasma. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2013;74(1):84-90.	92.	Martinaud C, Civadier C, Ausset S, Verret C, Deshayes AV, Sailliol A. In vitro hemostatic properties of French lyophi-lized plasma. Anesthesiology. 2012;117(2):339-346.	93.	Sunde GA, Vikenes B, Strandenes G, et al. Freeze dried plasma and fresh red blood cells for civilian prehospital hemorrhagic shock resuscitation. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2015;78 (6 Suppl 1):S26-S30.	94.	Martinaud C, Ausset S, Deshayes AV, Cauet A, Demazeau N, Sailliol A. Use of freeze-dried plasma in French intensive care unit in Afghanistan. J Trauma. 2011 Dec;71(6):1761-1764.	95.	Glassberg E, Nadler R, Gendler S, et al. Freeze-dried plasma at the point of injury: from concept to doctrine. Shock. 2013;40(6):444-450.	96.	Pusateri AE, Given MB, Schreiber MA, et al. Dried plasma: state of the science and recent developments. Transfusion. 2016 Apr;56 Suppl 2:S128-139. Due to challenges in using fresh frozen plasma in emergent and austere conditions, a variety of dried plasma products have been and are being developed. The history, state of the science, use of dried products in other coun-tries, and recent developments are reviewed.	97.	CRASH-2 Collaborators, Shakur H, Roberts I, et al. Effects of tranexamic acid on death, vascular occlusive events, and blood transfusion in trauma patients with significant haem-orrhage (CRASH-2): a randomised, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2010 Jul 3;376(9734):23-32.	98.	Morrison JJ, Ross JD, Dubose JJ, et al. Association of cryo-precipitate and tranexamic acid with improved survival fol-lowing wartime injury: findings from the MATTERs II study. JAMA Surg. 2013;148(3):218-225.	99.	Cannon JW, Khan MA, Raja AS, et al. Damage control resuscitation in patients with severe traumatic hemorrhage: a practice management guideline from the Eastern Associa-tion for the Surgery of Trauma. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2017;82(3):605-617. This is a structured analysis of existing trauma transfusion data with practical recommendations for bleeding patients.	100.	Gerber DR. Transfusion of packed red blood cells in patients with ischemic heart disease. Crit Care Med. 2008;36:1068-1074.	101.	Herbert PC, Wells GW, Blajchman MA, et al. A multi-center, randomized, controlled clinical trial of transfu-sion requirement in critical care. N Engl J Med. 1999;340: 409-417.	102.	Carson JL, Terrin ML, Noveck H, et al. Liberal or restrictive transfusion in high-risk patients after hip surgery. N Engl J Med. 2011;365(26):2453-2462.	103.	Carson JL, Carless PA, Hebert PC. Transfusion thresholds and other strategies for guiding allogeneic red blood cell transfu-sion. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;4:CD002042.	104.	Carson JL, Guyatt G, Heddle NM, et al. Clinical practice guidelines from the AABB: red blood cell transfusion thresh-olds and storage. JAMA. 2016;316(19):2025-2035.Brunicardi_Ch04_p0103-p0130.indd   12729/01/19   11:05 AM 128BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART I	105.	Thorson CM, Van Haren RM, Ryan ML. Admission hema-tocrit and transfusion requirements after trauma. J Am Coll Surg. 2013;216(1):65-73.105a.	Holcomb JB, Jenkins D, Rhee P, et al. Damage control resuscitation: directly addressing the early coagulopathy of trauma. J Trauma. 2007;62(2):307-310.	106.	Kauvar DS, Lefering R, Wade CE. Impact of hemorrhage on trauma outcome: an overview of epidemiology, clinical presentations, and therapeutic considerations. J Trauma. 2006;60(6 Suppl):S3.	107.	Niles SE, McLaughlin DF, Perkins J, et al. Increased mortal-ity associated with early coagulopathy after trauma in combat casualties. J Trauma. 2008;64:1459-1463.	108.	Macleod J, Lynn M, McKenney MG, Jeroukhimov I, Cohn SM. Predictors of mortality in trauma patients. Am Surg. 2004;70:805-810.	109.	Moore LJ, Brenner M, Kozar RA, et al. Implementation of resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta as an alternative to resuscitative thoracotomy for noncom-pressible truncal hemorrhage. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2015;79(4):523-532.	110.	Savage SA, Sumislawski JJ, Zarzaur BL, Dutton WP, Croce MA, Fabian TC. The new metric to define large-volume hemorrhage: results of a prospective study of the critical administration threshold. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2015;78(2):224-229.	111.	Cap AP, Spinella PC, Borgman MA, Blackbourne LH, Perkins JG. Timing and location of blood product transfu-sion and outcomes in massively transfused combat casu-alties. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012;73(2 Suppl 1): S89-S94.	112.	Carrico CJ, Canizaro PC, Shires GT. Fluid resuscitation fol-lowing injury: rationale for the use of balanced salt solutions. Crit Care Med. 1976;4:46.	113.	Harrigan C, Lucas CE, Ledgerwood AM, et al. Serial changes in primary hemostasis after massive transfusion. Surgery. 1985;98:836.	114.	Borgman MA, Spinella PC, Perkins JG, et al. The ratio of blood products transfused affects mortality in patients receiving massive transfusions at a combat support hospital.  J Trauma. 2007;63(4):805-813.	115.	Holcomb JB, Wade CE, Michalek JE, et al. Increased plasma and platelet to red blood cell ratios improves outcome in 466 massively transfused civilian trauma patients. Ann Surg. 2008;248(3):447-458.	116.	Mitra B, Mori A, Cameron PA, et al. Fresh frozen plasma (FFP) use during massive blood transfusion in trauma resus-citation. Injury. 2010;41(1):35-39.	117.	Peiniger S, Nienaber U, Lefering R, et al. Balanced massive transfusion ratios in multiple injury patients with traumatic brain injury. Crit Care. 2011;15(1):R68.	118.	Cotton BA, Reddy N, Hatch QM, et al. Damage control resuscitation is associated with a reduction in resuscitation volumes and improvement in survival in 390 damage control laparotomy patients. Ann Surg. 2011;254(4):598-605.	119.	Holcomb JB, del Junco DJ, Fox EE, et al. The prospective, obser-vational, multicenter, major trauma transfusion (PROMMTT) study: comparative effectiveness of a time-varying treatment with competing risks. JAMA Surg. 2013;148:127-136.	120.	Holcomb JB, Tilley BC, Baraniuk S, et al. Transfusion of plasma, platelets, and red blood cells in a 1:1:1 vs a 1:1:2 ratio and mortality in patients with severe trauma: the PROPPR randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2015;313:471-482. This is a prospective randomized study at 12 level 1 trauma centers of massively bleeding trauma patients, com-paring two balanced transfusion groups. Fewer patients bled to death in the 1:1:1 group.	121.	Kozar RA, Peng Z, Zhang R, et al. Plasma restoration of endothelial glycocalyx in a rodent model of hemorrhagic shock. Anesth Analg. 2011;112(6):1289-1295.	122.	Potter DR, Baimukanova G, Keating SM, et al. Fresh frozen plasma and spray-dried plasma mitigate pulmonary vascu-lar permeability and inflammation in hemorrhagic shock.  J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2015;78(6 Suppl 1):S7-S17.	123.	Woodcock TE, Woodcock TM. Revised Starling equation and the glycocalyx model of transvascular fluid exchange: an improved paradigm for prescribing intravenous fluid therapy. Br J Anaesth. 2012;108(3):384-394.	124.	Johansson PI, Stensballe J, Rasmussen LS, Ostrowski SR. A high admission syndecan-1 level, a marker of endothelial gly-cocalyx degradation, is associated with inflammation, protein C depletion, fibrinolysis, and increased mortality in trauma patients. Ann Surg. 2011;254(2):194-200.	125.	Ostrowski SR, Johansson PI. Endothelial glycocalyx degra-dation induces endogenous heparinization in patients with severe injury and early traumatic coagulopathy. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012;73(1):60-66.	126.	Rahbar E, Cardenas JC, Baimukanova G, et al. Endothelial glycocalyx shedding and vascular permeability in severely injured trauma patients. J Transl Med. 2015;13:117.	127.	Johansson PI, Stensballe J, Oliveri R, Wade CE, Ostrowski SR, Holcomb JB. How I treat patients with massive hemor-rhage. Blood. 2014;124(20):3052-3058.	128.	McLaughlin DF, Niles SE, Salinas J, et al. A predictive model for massive transfusion in combat casualty patients. J Trauma. 2008;64(2 Suppl):S57.	129.	Yücel N, Lefering R, Maegele M, et al. Trauma-Associated Severe Hemorrhage (TASH) score: probability of mass trans-fusion as surrogate for life threatening hemorrhage after mul-tiple trauma. J Trauma. 2006;60:1228.	130.	Moore FA, Nelson T, McKinley BA, et al. Massive transfu-sion in trauma patients: tissue hemoglobin oxygen saturation predicts poor outcome. J Trauma. 2008;64:1010.	131.	Schreiber MA, Perkins J, Kiraly L, et al. Early predictors of massive transfusion in combat casualties. J Am Coll Surg. 2007;205:541.	132.	Cotton BA, Dossett LA, Haut ER, et al. Multicenter valida-tion of a simplified score to predict massive transfusion in trauma. J Trauma. 2010;69(Suppl 1):S33-S39.	133.	Radwan ZA, Bai Y, Matijevic N, et al. An emergency depart-ment thawed plasma protocol for severely injured patients. JAMA Surg. 2013;148(2):170-175.	134.	Holcomb JB, Donathan DP, Cotton BA, et al. Prehospital transfusion of plasma and red blood cells in trauma patients. Prehosp Emerg Care. 2015;19(1):1-9.	135.	Brown JB, Sperry JL, Fombona A, Billiar TR, Peitzman AB, Guyette FX. Pre-trauma center red blood cell transfusion is associated with improved early outcomes in air medical trauma patients. J Am Coll Surg. 2015;220(5):797-808.	136.	O’Reilly DJ, Morrison JJ, Jansen JO, Apodaca AN, Rasmus-sen TE, Midwinter MJ. Prehospital blood transfusion in the en route management of severe combat trauma: a matched cohort study. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2014;77(3 Suppl 2):S114-S120.	137.	Spinella PC, Perkins JG, Grathwohl KW, Beekley AC,  Holcomb JB. Warm fresh whole blood is independently asso-ciated with improved survival for patients with combat-related traumatic injuries. J Trauma. 2009;66(4 Suppl):S69-S76.	138.	Nessen SC, Eastridge BJ, Cronk D, et al. Fresh whole blood use by forward surgical teams in Afghanistan is associated with improved survival compared to component therapy without platelets. Transfusion 2013;53 Suppl 1:107S-113S.	139.	Neel S. Chapter 9: The military blood program. In: Medical Support of the U.S. Army in Vietnam. Washington D.C.: Office Brunicardi_Ch04_p0103-p0130.indd   12829/01/19   11:05 AM 129HEMOSTASIS, SURGICAL BLEEDING, AND TRANSFUSIONCHAPTER 4of the Surgeon General, Department of the Army; 1991;  114-126. Available at: http://history.amedd.army.mil/books-docs/vietnam/medicalsupport/chapter9.html. Accessed June 28, 2016.	140.	Strandenes G, Austlid I, Apelseth TO, et al. Coagulation function of stored whole blood is preserved for 14 days in austere conditions: A ROTEM feasibility study during a Norwegian antipiracy mission and comparison to equal ratio reconstituted blood. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2015;78(6 Suppl 1):S31-38.	141.	Cotton BA, Podbielski J, Camp E, et al. A randomized con-trolled pilot trial of modified whole blood versus component therapy in severely injured patients requiring large volume transfusions. Ann Surg. 2013;258(4):527-532. This is the first randomized study of whole blood in trauma patients. This small pilot study showed feasibility and suggested benefit.	142.	Yazer MH, Jackson B, Sperry JL, et al. Initial safety and fea-sibility of cold-stored uncrossmatched whole blood transfu-sion in civilian trauma patients. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2016;81(1):21-26.	143.	Stubbs JR, Zielinski MD, Jenkins D. The state of the science of whole blood: lessons learned at Mayo Clinic. Transfusion. 2016;56(Suppl 2):S173-181.	144.	Rourke C, Curry N, Khan S, et al. Fibrinogen levels dur-ing trauma hemorrhage response to replacement therapy, and association with patient outcomes. J Thromb Haemost. 2012;10(7):1342-1351.	145.	Inaba K, Karamanos E, Lustenberger T, et al. Impact of fibrin-ogen levels on outcomes after injury in patients requiring a massive transfusion. J Am Coll Surg. 2013;216(2):290-297.	146.	Floccard B, Rugeri L, Faure A, et al. Early coagulopathy in trauma patients: an on-scene and hospital admission study. Injury. 2012;43(1):26-32.	147.	Levy JH, Welsby I, Goodnough LT. Fibrinogen as a therapeu-tic target for bleeding: a review of critical levels and replace-ment therapy. Transfusion. 2014 May;54(5):1389-1405.	148.	Curry N, Rourke C, Davenport R, et al. Early cryoprecipitate for major haemorrhage in trauma: a randomised controlled feasibility trial. Br J Anaesth. 2015;115(1):76-83.	149.	www.clinical trials.gov. Fibrinogen concentrate in trauma patients presumed to bleed; NCT01475344. Accessed  December 28, 2016.149a.	Meyer DE, Reynolds JW, Hobbs R, et al. The Incidence of Transfusion-Related Acute Lung Injury at a Large, Urban Tertiary Medical Center: A Decade’s Experience. Anesth Analg. 2018;127(2):444-449.	150.	Pandey S, Vyas GN. Adverse-effects of plasma transfusion. Transfusion. 2012;52:65S-79S.	151.	Goodnough LT, Brecher ME, Kanter MH. Transfusion medi-cine: blood transfusion. N Engl J Med. 1999;340:438.	152.	Looney MR, Gropper MA, Matthay MA. Transfusion-related acute lung injury. Chest. 2004;126:249.	153.	Toy P, Gajic O, Bacchetti P, et al. Transfusion-related acute lung injury: incidence and risk factors. Blood. 2012;119(7):1757-1767.	154.	Zou S, Stramer SL, Dodd RY. Donor testing and risk: cur-rent prevalence, incidence, and residual risk of transfusion-transmissible agents in US allogeneic donations. Transfusion Med Rev. 2012;26(2):119-128.	155.	Musso D, Nhan T, Robin E, et al. Potential for Zika virus transmission through blood transfusion demonstrated during an outbreak in French Polynesia, November 2013 to February 2014. Euro Surveill. 2014;19(14).	156.	Jimenez A, Shaz BH, Bloch EM. Zika Virus and the blood sup-ply: what do we know? Transfus Med Rev. 2017;31(1):1-10.	157.	Bierlaire D, Mauguin S, Broult J, Musso D. Zika virus and blood transfusion: the experience of French Polynesia. Trans-fusion. 2017;57(3pt2):729-733.	158.	Hoffman M, Monroe DM. Coagulation 2006: a modern view of hemostasis. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 2007;21:1-11.	159.	Mallet SV, Cox DJA. Thromboelastography: a review article. Br J Anaesth. 1992;69:307.	160.	Jackson GN, Ashpole KJ, Yentis SM. The TEG vs the ROTEM thromboelastography/ thromboelastometry systems. Anaesthe-sia. 2009;64(2):212-215.	161.	Cotton BA, Radwan ZA, Matijevic N, et al. Admission rapid thromboelastography (rTEG) predicts development of pulmonary embolism in trauma patients. J Trauma. 2012;72(6):1470-1477.	162.	Cotton BA, Faz G, Hatch Q, et al. Rapid thromboelastogra-phy (r-TEG) delivers real-time results that predict transfusion within one hour of admission. J Trauma. 2011;71(2):407-417.	163.	Schöchl H, Cotton BA, Inaba K, et al. FIBTEM provides early prediction of massive transfusion in trauma. Crit Care. 2011;15:R265-R271.	164.	Cotton BA, Harvin JA, Kostousouv V, et al. Hyperfibrinoly-sis on admission is an uncommon but highly lethal event associated with shock and pre-hospital fluid administration.  J Trauma. 2012;72(2):365-370.	165.	Holcomb JB, Minei KM, Scerbo ML, et al. Admission rapid thromboelastography (r-TEG) can replace conventional coag-ulation tests in the emergency department: experience with 1974 consecutive trauma patients. Ann Surg. 2012;256(3): 476-486.Brunicardi_Ch04_p0103-p0130.indd   12929/01/19   11:05 AM
# Chunk 8870
Brunicardi_Ch04_p0103-p0130.indd   13029/01/19   11:05 AMThis page intentionally left blank

ShockBrian S. Zuckerbraun, Andrew B. Peitzman,  and Timothy R. Billiar 5chapter“Shock is the manifestation of the rude unhinging of the machinery of life.”1—Samuel V. Gross, 1872EVOLUTION IN UNDERSTANDING SHOCKOverviewShock, at its most rudimentary definition and regardless of its etiology, is the failure to meet the metabolic needs of the cell and the consequences that ensue. The  initial cellular injury that occurs is reversible; however, the injury will become irre-versible if tissue perfusion is prolonged or severe enough such that, at the cellular level, compensation is no longer pos-sible. Our understanding of shock and the disease processes that result in shock made its most significant advances throughout the 20th century as our appreciation for the physiology and pathophysiology of shock matured. Most notably, our compre-hension of the sympathetic and neuroendocrine stress responses on the cardiovascular system has flourished. The clinical mani-festations of these physiologic responses are most often what lead practitioners to the diagnosis of shock as well as guide the management of patients in shock. However, hemodynamic parameters such as blood pressure and heart rate are relatively insensitive measures of shock, and additional considerations must be used to help aid in early diagnosis and treatment of patients in shock. The general approach to the management of patients in shock has been empiric: assuring a secure airway with adequate ventilation, control of hemorrhage in the bleeding patient, and restoration of vascular volume and tissue perfusion.Historical BackgroundIntegral to our understanding of shock is the appreciation that our bodies attempt to maintain a state of homeostasis. Claude Bernard suggested in the mid-19th century that the organism attempts to maintain constancy in the internal environment against external 1forces that attempt to disrupt the milieu interieur.2 Walter B. Cannon carried Bernard’s observations further and introduced the term homeostasis, emphasizing that an organism’s ability to survive was related to maintenance of homeostasis.3 The failure of physiologic systems to buffer the organism against external forces results in organ and cellular dysfunction, what is clini-cally recognized as shock. He first described the “fight or flight response,” generated by elevated levels of catecholamines in the bloodstream. Cannon’s observations on the battlefields of World War I led him to propose that the initiation of shock was due to a disturbance of the nervous system that resulted in vasodilation and hypotension. He proposed that secondary shock, with its attendant capillary permeability leak, was caused by a “toxic factor” released from the tissues.In a series of critical experiments, Alfred Blalock docu-mented that the shock state in hemorrhage was associated with reduced cardiac output due to volume loss, not a “toxic factor.”4 In 1934, Blalock proposed four categories of shock: hypovole-mic, vasogenic, cardiogenic, and neurogenic. Hypovolemic shock, the most common type, results from loss of circulating blood volume. This may result from loss of whole blood (hemorrhagic shock), plasma, interstitial fluid (bowel obstruction), or a combi-nation. Vasogenic shock results from decreased resistance within capacitance vessels, usually seen in sepsis. Neurogenic shock is a form of vasogenic shock in which spinal cord injury or spinal anesthesia causes vasodilation due to acute loss of sympathetic vascular tone. Cardiogenic shock results from failure of the heart as a pump, as in arrhythmias or acute myocardial infarction (MI).This categorization of shock based on etiology persists today (Table 5-1). In recent clinical practice, further classifi-cation has described six types of shock: hypovolemic, septic (vasodilatory), neurogenic, cardiogenic, obstructive, and trau-matic shock. Obstructive shock is a form of cardiogenic shock that results from mechanical impediment to circulation leading to depressed cardiac output rather than primary cardiac failure. Evolution in Understanding  Shock	131Overview / 131Historical Background / 131Current Definitions and Challenges/ 133Pathophysiology of Shock	133Neuroendocrine and Organ-Specific Responses to Hemorrhage/ 134Afferent Signals / 134Efferent Signals / 135Circulatory Homeostasis / 136Metabolic Effects	136Cellular Hypoperfusion / 137Immune and Inflammatory  Responses	137Cytokines/Chemokines / 138Complement / 140Neutrophils / 140Cell Signaling / 140Forms of Shock	141Hypovolemic/Hemorrhagic / 141Traumatic Shock / 145Septic Shock (Vasodilatory Shock) / 145Cardiogenic Shock / 148Obstructive Shock / 150Neurogenic Shock / 151Endpoints in Resuscitation	152Assessment of Endpoints in  Resuscitation / 152Brunicardi_Ch05_p0131-p0156.indd   13129/01/19   11:06 AM 132Table 5-1Classification of shockHypovolemicCardiogenicSeptic (vasogenic)NeurogenicTraumaticObstructiveKey Points1	Shock is defined as a failure to meet the metabolic demands of cells and tissues and the consequences that ensue.2	A central component of shock is decreased tissue perfusion. This may be a direct consequence of the etiology of shock, such as in hypovolemic/hemorrhagic, cardiogenic, or neuro-genic etiologies, or may be secondary to elaborated or released molecules or cellular products that result in endothelial/ cellular activation, such as in septic shock or traumatic shock.3	Physiologic responses to shock are based upon a series of affer-ent (sensing) signals and efferent responses that include neu-roendocrine, metabolic, and immune/inflammatory signaling.4	The mainstay of treatment of hemorrhagic/hypovolemic shock includes volume resuscitation with blood products. In the case of hemorrhagic shock, timely control of bleeding is essential and influences outcome.5	Prevention of hypothermia, acidemia, and coagulopathy are essential in the management of patients in hemorrhagic shock.6	The mainstay of treatment of septic shock is fluid resuscita-tion, initiation of appropriate antibiotic therapy, and control of the source of infection. This includes drainage of infected fluid collections, removal of infected foreign bodies, and debridement of devitalized tissues.7	A combination of physiologic parameters and markers of organ perfusion/tissue oxygenation are used to determine if patients are in shock and to follow the efficacy of resuscitation.This includes etiologies such as pulmonary embolism or tension pneumothorax. In traumatic shock, soft tissue and bony injury lead to the activation of inflammatory cells and the release of circulating factors, such as cytokines and intracellular molecules that modulate the immune response. Recent investigations have revealed that the inflammatory mediators released in response to tissue injury (damage-associated molecular patterns [DAMPs]) are recognized by many of the same cellular receptors (pattern recognition receptors [PRRs]) and activate similar signaling pathways as do bacterial products elaborated in sepsis (pathogen-associated molecular patterns), such as lipopolysaccharide.5 These effects of tissue injury are combined with the effects of hemorrhage, creating a more complex and amplified deviation from homeostasis.In the midto later 20th century, further development of experimental models contributed significantly to the under-standing of the pathophysiology of shock. In 1947, Wiggers developed a sustainable, irreversible model of hemorrhagic shock based on uptake of shed blood into a reservoir to maintain a set level of hypotension.6 G. Tom Shires added further under-standing of hemorrhagic shock with a series of clinical stud-ies demonstrating that a large extracellular fluid deficit, greater than could be attributed to vascular refilling alone, occurred in severe hemorrhagic shock.7,8 The phenomenon of fluid redistri-bution after major trauma involving blood loss was termed third spacing and described the translocation of intravascular volume into the peritoneum, bowel, burned tissues, or crush injury sites. These seminal studies form the scientific basis for the current treatment of hemorrhagic shock with red blood cells and lac-tated Ringer’s solution or isotonic saline.As resuscitation strategies evolved and patients survived the initial consequences of hemorrhage, new challenges of sustained shock became apparent. During the Vietnam War, aggressive fluid resuscitation with red blood cells and crystal-loid solution or plasma resulted in survival of patients who pre-viously would have succumbed to hemorrhagic shock. Renal failure became a less frequent clinical problem; however, a new disease process, acute fulminant pulmonary failure, appeared as an early cause of death after seemingly successful surgery to control hemorrhage. Initially called DaNang lung or shock lung, the clinical problem became recognized as acute respiratory dis-tress syndrome (ARDS). This led to new methods of prolonged mechanical ventilation. Our current concept of ARDS is a com-ponent in the spectrum of multiple organ system failure.Studies and clinical observations over the past two decades have extended the early observations of Canon, that “restoration of blood pressure prior to control of active bleeding may result in loss of blood that is sorely needed,” and challenged the appro-priate endpoints in resuscitation of uncontrolled hemorrhage.9  Core principles in the management of patients in hemorrhagic shock include: (a) control of active hemorrhage must occur promptly (delay in control of bleeding increases mortality and recent battlefield data would suggest that in the young and otherwise healthy population commonly injured in combat, that control of bleeding is the paramount priority); (b) volume resuscitation with blood products (red blood cells, plasma, and platelets) with limited volume of crystalloid must occur while operative control of bleeding is achieved; (c) unrecognized or inadequately corrected hypoperfusion increases morbidity and mortality (i.e., inadequate resuscitation results in avoidable early deaths from shock); and (d) excessive fluid resuscitation may exacerbate bleeding (i.e., uncontrolled resuscitation is harmful). Thus, both inadequate or unrestrained volume resus-citation are harmful.Likewise, observations in the management of septic shock have led to consensus statements and evolving guideline based management.10 Core principles in the management of patients in septic shock include: (a) septic shock is an emergency, and  treatment/resuscitation should begin as early as possible; (b) specific anatomic diagnosis of infection requiring emergent source control be identified or excluded as rapidly as possible and that any required source control intervention be imple-mented as soon as medically and logistically practical; (c) ini-tiation of broad spectrum antibiotics within 1 hour of diagnosis; (d) in the resuscitation from sepsis-induced hypoperfusion, at Brunicardi_Ch05_p0131-p0156.indd   13229/01/19   11:06 AM 133SHOCKCHAPTER 5least 30 mL/kg of intravenous crystalloid fluid be given within the first 3 hours, and additional fluids be guided by frequent reassessment of hemodynamic status; (e) vasopressors (norepi-nephrine) should be added to achieve a mean arterial pressure of 65 mmHg if fluid resuscitation is inadequate.Current Definitions and ChallengesA modern definition and approach to shock acknowledges that shock consists of inadequate tissue perfusion marked by decreased delivery of required metabolic substrates and inade-quate removal of cellular waste products. This involves failure of  oxidative metabolism that can involve defects of oxygen (O2) delivery, transport, and/or utilization. Current challenges include moving beyond fluid resuscitation based upon endpoints of tissue oxygenation and using therapeutic strategies at the cellular and molecular level. This approach will help to identify compensated patients or patients early in the course of their disease, initiate appropriate treatment, and allow for con-tinued evaluation for the efficacy of resuscitation and adjuncts.Current investigations focus on determining the cellular events that often occur in parallel to result in organ dysfunc-tion, shock irreversibility, and death. This chapter will review our current understanding of the pathophysiology and cellular responses of shock states. Current and experimental diagnostic and therapeutic modalities for the different categories of shock are reviewed, with a focus on hemorrhagic/hypovolemic shock and septic shock.PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF SHOCKRegardless of etiology, the initial physiologic responses in shock are driven by tissue hypoperfusion and the developing cellular energy deficit.  This imbalance between cellular supply and demand leads to neuroendocrine and inflammatory responses, the magnitude of which is usually proportional to the degree and duration of shock. The specific responses will differ based on the etiology of shock, as certain physiologic responses may be limited by the inciting pathology. For exam-ple, the cardiovascular response driven by the sympathetic ner-vous system is markedly blunted in neurogenic or septic shock. Additionally, decreased perfusion may occur as a consequence of cellular activation and dysfunction, such as in septic shock and to a lesser extent traumatic shock (Fig. 5-1). Many of the organ-specific responses are aimed at maintaining perfusion in the cerebral and coronary circulation. These are regulated at multiple levels including (a) stretch receptors and baroreceptors in the heart and vasculature (carotid sinus and aortic arch), (b) chemoreceptors, (c) cerebral ischemia responses, (d) release of endogenous vasoconstrictors, (e) shifting of fluid into the intra-vascular space, and (f) renal reabsorption and conservation of salt and water.Furthermore, the pathophysiologic responses vary with time and in response to resuscitation. In hemorrhagic shock, the body can compensate for the initial loss of blood volume primar-ily through the neuroendocrine response to maintain hemody-namics. This represents the compensated phase of shock. With continued hypoperfusion, which may be unrecognized, cellular death and injury are ongoing, and the decompensation phase of shock ensues. Microcirculatory dysfunction, parenchymal tissue damage, and inflammatory cell activation can perpetuate hypo-perfusion. Ischemia/reperfusion injury will often exacerbate the initial insult. These effects at the cellular level, if untreated, will lead to compromise of function at the organ system level, thus leading to the “vicious cycle” of shock (Fig. 5-2). Persis-tent hypoperfusion results in further hemodynamic derange-ments and cardiovascular collapse. This has been termed the  irreversible phase of shock and can develop quite insidiously and may only be obvious in retrospect. At this point, there has occurred extensive enough parenchymal and microvascular injury such that volume resuscitation fails to reverse the pro-cess, leading to death of the patient. In experimental animal models of hemorrhagic shock (modified Wiggers model), this is 23Figure 5-1. Pathways leading to decreased tissue perfusion and shock. Decreased tissue perfusion can result directly from hemorrhage/hypovolemia, cardiac failure, or neurologic injury. Decreased tissue perfusion and cellu-lar injury can then result in immune and inflammatory responses. Alternatively, elaboration of microbial products during infection or release of endogenous cellular products from tissue injury can result in cellular activation to subsequently influ-ence tissue perfusion and the develop-ment of shock. HMGB1 = high mobility group box 1; LPS = lipopolysaccharide;  RAGE = receptor for advanced glycation end products.Bacterial products(i.e., LPS)Direct effectPattern recognition receptor activation(Toll-like receptors, RAGE)TissueinjuryDamage associatedmolecular patterns(i.e., HMGB1, heparan sulfate)Released/elaboratedmediators ofinflammationCellular activationDecreased tissue perfusionCellular hypoxia/ischemiaShockDisruptionhost-microbeequilibriumAcute heart failureNeurogenicHemorrhageTraumaCellular effectBrunicardi_Ch05_p0131-p0156.indd   13329/01/19   11:06 AM 134BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Irepresented by the “uptake phase” or “compensation endpoint” when shed blood must be returned to the animal to sustain the hypotension at the set level to prevent further hypotension and death.11 If shed blood volume is slowly returned to maintain the set level of hypotension, eventually the injury progresses to irreversible shock, where further volume will not reverse the process and the animal dies (Fig. 5-3).Neuroendocrine and Organ-Specific Responses to HemorrhageThe goal of the neuroendocrine response to hemorrhage is to maintain perfusion to the heart and the brain, even at the expense of other organ systems. Peripheral vasoconstriction occurs, and fluid excretion is inhibited. The mechanisms include autonomic control of peripheral vascular tone and cardiac contractility, hormonal response to stress and volume depletion, and local microcirculatory mechanisms that are organ specific and regu-late regional blood flow. The initial stimulus is loss of circulat-ing blood volume in hemorrhagic shock. The magnitude of the neuroendocrine response is based on both the volume of blood lost and the rate at which it is lost.Afferent SignalsAfferent impulses transmitted from the periphery are processed within the central nervous system (CNS) and activate the reflexive effector responses or efferent impulses. These effec-tor responses are designed to expand plasma volume, maintain peripheral perfusion and tissue O2 delivery, and restore homeo-stasis. The afferent impulses that initiate the body’s intrinsic adaptive responses and converge in the CNS originate from a variety of sources. The initial inciting event usually is loss of circulating blood volume. Other stimuli that can produce the neuroendocrine response include pain, hypoxemia, hypercarbia, acidosis, infection, change in temperature, emotional arousal, or hypoglycemia. The sensation of pain from injured tissue is trans-mitted via the spinothalamic tracts, resulting in activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, as well as activation of the autonomic nervous system (ANS) to induce direct sympathetic stimulation of the adrenal medulla to release catecholamines.Baroreceptors also are an important afferent pathway in initiation of adaptive responses to shock. Volume receptors, sensitive to changes in both chamber pressure and wall stretch, are present within the atria of the heart. They become activated with low volume hemorrhage or mild reductions in right atrial pressure. Receptors in the aortic arch and carotid bodies respond to alterations in pressure or stretch of the arterial wall, respond-ing to larger reductions in intravascular volume or pressure. These receptors normally inhibit induction of the ANS. When activated, these baroreceptors diminish their output, thus dis-inhibiting the effect of the ANS. The ANS then increases its output, principally via sympathetic activation at the vasomotor centers of the brain stem, producing centrally mediated constric-tion of peripheral vessels.Chemoreceptors in the aorta and carotid bodies are sensi-tive to changes in O2 tension, H+ ion concentration, and car-bon dioxide (CO2) levels. Stimulation of the chemoreceptors results in vasodilation of the coronary arteries, slowing of the heart rate, and vasoconstriction of the splanchnic and skeletal circulation. In addition, a variety of protein and nonprotein mediators are produced at the site of injury as part of the inflam-matory response, and they act as afferent impulses to induce a host response. These mediators include histamine, cytokines, Decreased cardiac outputDecreased tissue perfusion˜ Venousreturn˜ CoronaryperfusionMetabolicacidosisCellularhypoxiaParenchymal cell injuryEndothelial activation/microcirculatory damageCellularaggregationIntracellularfluid lossFigure 5-2. The “vicious cycle of shock.” Regardless of the etiol-ogy, decreased tissue perfusion and shock results in a feed-forward loop that can exacerbate cellular injury and tissue dysfunction.Figure 5-3. Rat model of hemorrhagic shock through the phases of compensa-tion, decompensation, and irreversibility. The percentages shown above the curve represent survival rates. (Reproduced with permission from Shah NS, Kelly E, Billiar TR, et al. Utility of clinical param-eters of tissue oxygenation in a quantita-tive model of irreversible hemorrhagic shock, Shock. 1998 Nov;10(5):343-346.)Rat hemorrhagic shock model24-hour survival following resuscitationMean arterial pressureCompensatedDecompensatedIrreversible% Shedblood returnTransition to acute irreversible shockTransition to subacute lethal shockABDeath100%90%50%30%10%0%10%20%30%40%50%0%Compensation endpoint8040ABBrunicardi_Ch05_p0131-p0156.indd   13429/01/19   11:06 AM 135SHOCKCHAPTER 5eicosanoids, and endothelins, among others that are discussed in greater detail later in this chapter in the “Immune and Inflam-matory Responses” section.Efferent SignalsCardiovascular Response. Changes in cardiovascular func-tion are a result of the neuroendocrine response and ANS response to shock, and they constitute a prominent feature of both the body’s adaptive response mechanism and the clinical signs and symptoms of the patient in shock. Hemorrhage results in diminished venous return to the heart and decreased cardiac output. This is compensated by increased cardiac heart rate and contractility, as well as venous and arterial vasoconstriction. Stimulation of sympathetic fibers innervating the heart leads to activation of β1-adrenergic receptors that increase heart rate  and contractility in this attempt to increase cardiac output. Increased myocardial O2 consumption occurs as a result of the increased workload; thus, myocardial O2 supply must be maintained, or myocardial dysfunction will develop. The car-diovascular response in hemorrhage/hypovolemia differs from the responses elicited with the other etiologies of shock. These are compared in Table 5-2.Direct sympathetic stimulation of the peripheral circula-tion via the activation of α1-adrenergic receptors on arterioles induces vasoconstriction and causes a compensatory increase in systemic vascular resistance and blood pressure. The arte-rial vasoconstriction is not uniform; marked redistribution of blood flow results. Selective perfusion to tissues occurs due to regional variations in arteriolar resistance, with blood shunted away from less essential organ beds such as the intestine,  kidney, and skin. In contrast, the brain and heart have autoreg-ulatory mechanisms that attempt to preserve their blood flow despite a global decrease in cardiac output. Direct sympathetic stimulation also induces constriction of venous vessels, decreas-ing the capacitance of the circulatory system and accelerating blood return to the central circulation.Increased sympathetic output induces catecholamine release from the adrenal medulla. Catecholamine levels peak within 24 to 48 hours of injury and then return to baseline. Persis-tent elevation of catecholamine levels beyond this time suggests ongoing noxious afferent stimuli. The majority of the circulating epinephrine is produced by the adrenal medulla, while norepi-nephrine is derived from synapses of the sympathetic nervous system. Catecholamine effects on peripheral tissues include stimulation of hepatic glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis to increase circulating glucose availability to peripheral tissues, an increase in skeletal muscle glycogenolysis, suppression of insulin release, and increased glucagon release.Hormonal Response. The stress response includes activation of the ANS as discussed previously in the “Afferent Signals” section, as well as activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. Shock stimulates the hypothalamus to release corticotropin-releasing hormone, which results in the release of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) by the pituitary. ACTH subsequently stimulates the adrenal cortex to release cortisol. Cortisol acts synergistically with epinephrine and glucagon to induce a catabolic state. Cortisol stimulates gluconeogenesis and insulin resistance, resulting in hyperglycemia as well as muscle cell protein breakdown and lipolysis to provide sub-strates for hepatic gluconeogenesis. Cortisol causes retention of sodium and water by the nephrons of the kidney. In the setting of severe hypovolemia, ACTH secretion occurs independently of cortisol negative feedback inhibition.The renin-angiotensin system is activated in shock. Decreased renal artery perfusion, β-adrenergic stimulation, and increased renal tubular sodium concentration cause the release of renin from the juxtaglomerular cells. Renin catalyzes the conversion of angiotensinogen (produced by the liver) to  angiotensin I, which is then converted to angiotensin II by  angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) produced in the lung. While angiotensin I has no significant functional activity, angiotensin II is a potent vasoconstrictor of both splanchnic and peripheral vascular beds, and also stimulates the secretion of aldosterone, ACTH, and antidiuretic hormone (ADH). Aldo-sterone, a mineralocorticoid, acts on the nephron to promote reabsorption of sodium, and as a consequence, water. Potassium and hydrogen ions are lost in the urine in exchange for sodium.The pituitary also releases vasopressin or ADH in response to hypovolemia, changes in circulating blood volume sensed by baroreceptors and left atrial stretch receptors, and increased plasma osmolality detected by hypothalamic osmo-receptors. Epinephrine, angiotensin II, pain, and hyperglycemia increase production of ADH. ADH levels remain elevated for about 1 week after the initial insult, depending on the sever-ity and persistence of the hemodynamic abnormalities. ADH acts on the distal tubule and collecting duct of the nephron to increase water permeability, decrease water and sodium losses, and preserve intravascular volume. Also known as arginine  vasopressin, ADH acts as a potent mesenteric vasoconstrictor, shunting circulating blood away from the splanchnic organs during hypovolemia.12 This may contribute to intestinal isch-emia and predispose to intestinal mucosal barrier dysfunction in Table 5-2Hemodynamic responses to different types of shockTYPE OF SHOCKCARDIAC INDEXSVRVENOUS CAPACITANCECVP/PCWPSvo2CELLULAR/METABOLIC EFFECTSHypovolemic↓↑↓↓↓EffectSeptic↑↑↓↑↑↓↑↓CauseCardiogenic↓↓↑↑→↑↓EffectNeurogenic↑↓→↓↓EffectThe hemodynamic responses are indicated by arrows to show an increase (↑), severe increase (↑↑), decrease (↓), severe decrease (↓↓), varied response (↑↓), or little effect →). CVP = central venous pressure; PCWP = pulmonary capillary wedge pressure; Svo2 = mixed venous oxygen saturation;  SVR = systemic vascular resistance.Brunicardi_Ch05_p0131-p0156.indd   13529/01/19   11:06 AM 136BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ishock states. Vasopressin also increases hepatic gluconeogen-esis and increases hepatic glycolysis.In septic states, endotoxin directly stimulates arginine vasopressin secretion independently of blood pressure, osmotic, or intravascular volume changes. Proinflammatory cytokines also contribute to arginine vasopressin release. Interestingly, patients on chronic therapy with ACE inhibitors are more at risk of developing hypotension and vasodilatory shock with open heart surgery. Low plasma levels of arginine vasopressin were confirmed in these patients.13Circulatory HomeostasisPreload. At rest, the majority of the blood volume is within the venous system. Venous return to the heart generates ventricular end-diastolic wall tension, a major determinant of cardiac out-put. Gravitational shifts in blood volume distribution are quickly corrected by alterations in venous capacity. With decreased arte-riolar inflow, there is active contraction of the venous smooth muscle and passive elastic recoil in the thin-walled systemic veins. This increases venous return to the heart, thus maintain-ing ventricular filling.Most alterations in cardiac output in the normal heart are related to changes in preload. Increases in sympathetic tone have a minor effect on skeletal muscle beds but produce a dra-matic reduction in splanchnic blood volume, which normally holds 20% of the blood volume.The normal circulating blood volume is maintained within narrow limits by the kidney’s ability to manage salt and water balance with external losses via systemic and local hemody-namic changes and hormonal effects of renin, angiotensin, and ADH. These relatively slow responses maintain preload by altering circulating blood volume. Acute responses to intravas-cular volume include changes in venous tone, systemic vascular resistance, and intrathoracic pressure, with the slower hormonal changes less important in the early response to volume loss. Furthermore, the net effect of preload on cardiac output is influ-enced by cardiac determinants of ventricular function, which include coordinated atrial activity and tachycardia.Ventricular Contraction. The Frank-Starling curve describes the force of ventricular contraction as a function of its preload. This relationship is based on force of contraction being deter-mined by initial muscle length. Intrinsic cardiac disease will shift the Frank-Starling curve and alter mechanical performance of the heart. In addition, cardiac dysfunction has been demon-strated experimentally in burns and in hemorrhagic, traumatic, and septic shock.Afterload. Afterload is the force that resists myocardial work during contraction. Arterial pressure is the major component of afterload influencing the ejection fraction. This vascular resistance is determined by precapillary smooth muscle sphinc-ters. Blood viscosity also will increase vascular resistance. As afterload increases in the normal heart, stroke volume can be maintained by increases in preload. In shock, with decreased circulating volume and therefore diminished preload, this com-pensatory mechanism to sustain cardiac output is impeded. The stress response with acute release of catecholamines and sym-pathetic nerve activity in the heart increases contractility and heart rate.Microcirculation. The microvascular circulation plays an integral role in regulating cellular perfusion and is significantly influenced in response to shock. The microvascular bed is innervated by the sympathetic nervous system and has a pro-found effect on the larger arterioles. Following hemorrhage, larger arterioles vasoconstrict; however, in the setting of sep-sis or neurogenic shock, these vessels vasodilate. Addition-ally, a host of other vasoactive proteins, including vasopressin, angiotensin II, and endothelin-1, also lead to vasoconstriction to limit organ perfusion to organs such as skin, skeletal muscle, kidneys, and the GI tract to preserve perfusion of the myocar-dium and CNS.Flow in the capillary bed is heterogeneous in shock states, which likely is secondary to multiple local mechanisms, including endothelial cell swelling, dysfunction, and activa-tion marked by the recruitment of leukocytes and platelets.14 Together, these mechanisms lead to diminished capillary perfu-sion that may persist after resuscitation. In hemorrhagic shock, correction of hemodynamic parameters and restoration of O2 delivery generally leads to restoration of tissue O2 consumption and tissue O2 levels. In contrast, regional tissue dysoxia often persists in sepsis, despite similar restoration of hemodynamics and O2 delivery. Whether this defect in O2 extraction in sepsis is the result of heterogeneous impairment of the microcirculation (intraparenchymal shunting) or impaired tissue parenchymal cell oxidative phosphorylation and O2 consumption by the mito-chondria is not resolved.15 Interesting data suggest that in sepsis the response to limit O2 consumption by the tissue parenchymal cells is an adaptive response to the inflammatory signaling and decreased perfusion.16An additional pathophysiologic response of the microcir-culation to shock is failure of the integrity of the endothelium of the microcirculation and development of capillary leak, intracellular swelling, and the development of an extracellu-lar fluid deficit. Seminal work by Shires helped to define this phenomenon.8,17 There is decreased capillary hydrostatic pres-sure secondary to changes in blood flow and increased cellular uptake of fluid. The result is a loss of extracellular fluid vol-ume. The cause of intracellular swelling is multifactorial, but dysfunction of energy-dependent mechanisms, such as active transport by the sodium-potassium pump contributes to loss of membrane integrity.Capillary dysfunction also occurs secondary to activation of endothelial cells by circulating inflammatory mediators gen-erated in septic or traumatic shock. This exacerbates endothelial cell swelling and capillary leak, as well as increases leukocyte adherence. This results in capillary occlusion, which may persist after resuscitation, and is termed no-reflow. Further ischemic injury ensues as well as release of inflammatory cytokines to compound tissue injury. Experimental models have shown that neutrophil depletion in animals subjected to hemorrhagic shock produces fewer capillaries with no-reflow and lower mortality.14METABOLIC EFFECTSCellular metabolism is based primarily on the hydrolysis of adenosine triphosphate (ATP). The splitting of the phosphoan-hydride bond of the terminal or g-phosphate from ATP is the source of energy for most processes within the cell under nor-mal conditions. The majority of ATP is generated in our bodies through aerobic metabolism in the process of oxidative phos-phorylation in the mitochondria. This process is dependent on the availability of O2 as a final electron acceptor in the electron transport chain. As O2 tension within a cell decreases, there is a decrease in oxidative phosphorylation, and the generation Brunicardi_Ch05_p0131-p0156.indd   13629/01/19   11:06 AM 137SHOCKCHAPTER 5of ATP slows. When O2 delivery is so severely impaired such that oxidative phosphorylation cannot be sustained, the state is termed dysoxia.18 When oxidative phosphorylation is insuffi-cient, the cells shift to anaerobic metabolism and glycolysis to generate ATP. This occurs via the breakdown of cellular glyco-gen stores to pyruvate. Although glycolysis is a rapid process, it is not efficient, allowing for the production of only 2 mol of ATP from 1 mol of glucose. This is compared to complete oxidation of 1 mol of glucose that produces 38 mol of ATP. Additionally, under hypoxic conditions in anaerobic metabo-lism, pyruvate is converted into lactate, leading to an intracel-lular metabolic acidosis.There are numerous consequences secondary to these met-abolic changes. The depletion of ATP potentially influences all ATP-dependent cellular processes. This includes maintenance of cellular membrane potential, synthesis of enzymes and pro-teins, cell signaling, and DNA repair mechanisms. Decreased intracellular pH also influences vital cellular functions such as normal enzyme activity, cell membrane ion exchange, and cellular metabolic signaling.19 These changes also will lead to changes in gene expression within the cell. Furthermore, acido-sis leads to changes in calcium metabolism and calcium signal-ing. Compounded, these changes may lead to irreversible cell injury and death.Epinephrine and norepinephrine have a profound impact on cellular metabolism. Hepatic glycogenolysis, gluconeogen-esis, ketogenesis, skeletal muscle protein breakdown, and adi-pose tissue lipolysis are increased by catecholamines. Cortisol, glucagon, and ADH also contribute to the catabolism during shock. Epinephrine induces further release of glucagon, while inhibiting the pancreatic β-cell release of insulin. The result is a catabolic state with glucose mobilization, hyperglycemia, pro-tein breakdown, negative nitrogen balance, lipolysis, and insulin resistance during shock and injury. The relative underuse of glu-cose by peripheral tissues preserves it for the glucose-dependent organs such as the heart and brain.Cellular HypoperfusionHypoperfused cells and tissues experience what has been termed oxygen debt, a concept first proposed by Crowell in 1961.20 The O2 debt is the deficit in tissue oxygenation over time that occurs during shock. When O2 delivery is limited, O2 consumption can be inadequate to match the metabolic needs of cellular respira-tion, creating a deficit in O2 requirements at the cellular level. The measurement of O2 deficit uses calculation of the difference between the estimated O2 demand and the actual value obtained for O2 consumption. Under normal circumstances, cells can “repay” the O2 debt during reperfusion. The magnitude of the O2 debt correlates with the severity and duration of hypoperfusion. Surrogate values for measuring O2 debt include base deficit and lactate levels and are discussed later in the “Hypovolemic/ Hemorrhagic” section.In addition to induction of changes in cellular metabolic pathways, shock also induces changes in cellular gene expres-sion. The DNA binding activity of a number of nuclear tran-scription factors is altered by hypoxia and the production of O2 radicals or nitrogen radicals that are produced at the cellular level by shock. Expression of other gene products such as heat shock proteins, vascular endothelial growth factor, inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), heme oxygenase-1, and cytokines also are clearly increased by shock.21 Many of these shock-induced gene products, such as cytokines, have the ability to subsequently alter gene expression in specific target cells and tissues. The involvement of multiple pathways emphasizes the complex, integrated, and overlapping nature of the response to shock.IMMUNE AND INFLAMMATORY RESPONSESThe inflammatory and immune responses are a complex set of interactions between circulating soluble factors and cells that can arise in response to trauma, infection, ischemia, toxic, or autoimmune stimuli.21 The processes are well regulated and can be conceptualized as an ongoing surveillance and response sys-tem that undergoes a coordinated escalation following injury to heal disrupted tissue or restore host-microbe equilibrium, as well as active suppression back to baseline levels. Failure to adequately control the activation, escalation, or suppression of the inflammatory response can lead to systemic inflammatory response syndrome and potentiate multiple organ failure.Both the innate and adaptive branches of the immune system work in concert to rapidly respond in a specific and effective manner to challenges that threaten an organism’s well-being. Each arm of the immune system has its own set of func-tions, defined primarily by distinct classes of effector cells and their unique cell membrane receptor families. Alterations in the activity of the innate host immune system can be responsible for both the development of shock (i.e., septic shock follow-ing severe infection and traumatic shock following tissue injury with hemorrhage) and the pathophysiologic sequelae of shock such as the proinflammatory changes seen following hypoperfu-sion (see Fig. 5-1). When the predominantly paracrine mediators gain access to the systemic circulation, they can induce a variety of metabolic changes that are collectively referred to as the host inflammatory response. Understanding of the intricate, redun-dant, and interrelated pathways that comprise the inflammatory response to shock continues to expand. Despite limited under-standing of how our current therapeutic interventions impact the host response to illness, inappropriate or excessive inflam-mation appears to be an essential event in the development of ARDS, multiple organ dysfunction syndrome (MODS), and posttraumatic immunosuppression that can prolong recovery.22Following direct tissue injury or infection, there are several mechanisms that lead to the activation of the active inflamma-tory and immune responses. These include release of bioactive peptides by neurons in response to pain and the release of intra-cellular molecules by broken cells, such as heat shock proteins, mitochondrial products, heparan sulfate, high mobility group box 1, and RNA. Only recently has it been realized that the release of intracellular products from damaged and injured cells can have paracrine and endocrine-like effects on distant tissues to activate the inflammatory and immune responses.23 This hypothesis, which was first proposed by Matzinger, is known as danger signaling. Under this novel paradigm of immune function, endogenous molecules are capable of signaling the presence of danger to surrounding cells and tissues. These molecules that are released from cells are known as damage associated molecular patterns (DAMPs, Table 5-3). DAMPs are recognized by cell surface receptors to effect intracellular signaling that primes and amplifies the immune response. These receptors are known as pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) and include the Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and the receptor for advanced glycation end products. Interestingly, TLRs and PRRs were first recognized for their role in signaling as part of the immune response to the Brunicardi_Ch05_p0131-p0156.indd   13729/01/19   11:06 AM 138BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ientry of microbes and their secreted products into a normally sterile environment. These bacterial products, including lipo-polysaccharide, are known as pathogen-associated molecular patterns. The salutary consequences of PRR activation most likely relate to the initiation of the repair process and the mobi-lization of antimicrobial defenses at the site of tissue disruption. However, in the setting of excessive tissue damage, the inflam-mation itself may lead to further tissue damage, amplifying the response both at the local and systemic level.21 PRR activation leads to intracellular signaling and release of cellular products, including cytokines (Fig. 5-4).Before the recruitment of leukocytes into sites of injury, tissue-based macrophages or mast cells act as sentinel respond-ers, releasing histamines, eicosanoids, tryptases, and cytokines (Fig. 5-5). Together these signals amplify the immune response by further activation of neurons and mast cells, as well as increasing the expression of adhesion molecules on the endothe-lium. Furthermore, these mediators cause leukocytes to release platelet-activating factor, further increasing the stickiness of the endothelium. Additionally, the coagulation and kinin cascades impact the interaction of endothelium and leukocytes.Cytokines/ChemokinesThe immune response to shock encompasses the elaboration of mediators with both proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory properties (Table 5-4). Furthermore, new mediators, new rela-tionships between mediators, and new functions of known mediators are continually being identified. As new pathways are uncovered, understanding of the immune response to injury and the potential for therapeutic intervention by manipulating the immune response following shock will expand. What seems clear at present, however, is that the innate immune response can help restore homeostasis, or if it is excessive, promote cel-lular and organ dysfunction.Multiple mediators have been implicated in the host immune response to shock. It is likely that some of the most important mediators have yet to be discovered and the roles of many known mediators have not been defined. A compre-hensive description of all of the mediators and their complex interactions is beyond the scope of this chapter. For a general overview, a brief description of the more extensively studied mediators, as well as some of the known effects of these sub-stances, see the following discussion. A more comprehensive review can be found in Chapter 2, “Systemic Response to Injury and Metabolic Support.”Tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-a) was one of the first cytokines to be described, and it is one of the earliest cytokines released in response to injurious stimuli. Monocytes, macro-phages, and T cells release this potent proinflammatory cyto-kine. TNF-a levels peak within 90 minutes of stimulation and return frequently to baseline levels within 4 hours. Release of TNF-a may be induced by bacteria or endotoxin and leads to the development of shock and hypoperfusion, most commonly observed in septic shock. Production of TNF-a also may be induced following other insults, such as hemorrhage and isch-emia. TNF-a levels correlate with mortality in animal models of hemorrhage.24 In contrast, the increase in serum TNF-a levels reported in trauma patients is far less than that seen in septic patients.25 Once released, TNF-a can produce peripheral vaso-dilation, activate the release of other cytokines, induce proco-agulant activity, and stimulate a wide array of cellular metabolic changes. During the stress response, TNF-a contributes to the muscle protein breakdown and cachexia.Interleukin-1 (IL-1) has actions similar to those of TNF-a. IL-1 has a very short half-life (6 minutes) and primarily acts in a paracrine fashion to modulate local cellular responses. Sys-temically, IL-1 produces a febrile response to injury by activat-ing prostaglandins in the posterior hypothalamus, and causes anorexia by activating the satiety center. This cytokine also aug-ments the secretion of ACTH, glucorticoids, and β-endorphins. In conjunction with TNF-a, IL-1 can stimulate the release of other cytokines such as IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-8, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, and interferon-g.IL-2 is produced by activated T cells in response to a vari-ety of stimuli and activates other lymphocyte subpopulations and natural killer cells. The lack of clarity regarding the role of IL-2 in the response to shock is intimately associated with that of understanding immune function after injury. Some investigators have postulated that increased IL-2 secretion promotes shock-induced tissue injury and the development of shock. Others have demonstrated that depressed IL-2 production is associated with, Table 5-3Endogenous damage-associated molecular pattern moleculesMitochondrial DNAHyaluronan oligomersHeparan sulfateExtra domain A of fibronectinHeat shock proteins 60, 70, Gp96Surfactant Protein Aβ-Defensin 2FibrinogenBiglycanHigh mobility group box 1Uric acidInterleukin-1αS-100sNucleolinNeuropeptidesTissue-based macrophages/mast cells Histamines,leukotrienes,chemokines,TNF TraumaDAMPs (HMGB1,heparan sulfate,uric acid)Macrophages       Bacteria andbacterialproductsComplementNeutrophilsDegranulationChemokines,TNFDefensinsTNF,Interferon-LymphocytesAntigenStimulation/activationProductionFigure 5-4. A schema of information flow between immune cells in early inflammation following tissue injury and infection. Cells require multiple inputs and stimuli before activation of a full response. DAMPs = damage associated molecular patterns; HMGB1 = high mobility group box 1; TNF = tumor necrosis factor.Brunicardi_Ch05_p0131-p0156.indd   13829/01/19   11:06 AM 139SHOCKCHAPTER 5and perhaps contributes to, the depression in immune func-tion after hemorrhage that may increase the susceptibility of patients who develop shock to suffer infections.26,27 It has been postulated that overly exuberant proinflammatory activation promotes tissue injury, organ dysfunction, and the subsequent immune dysfunction/suppression that may be evident later.22 Emphasizing the importance of temporal changes in the produc-tion of mediators, both the initial excessive production of IL-2 and later depressed IL-2 production are probably important in the progression of shock.MKK3p 38MKK 7JNKDAMPLPS signalingHemorrhagic shockIschemia/reperfusionTissue traumaToxic exposureDanger signalingInjuryNecrosisCD14HMGB-1HMGB-1LPSActivatedTLR4TRAMTRIFIRF 3MyD88-dependentpathwayMyD88-independentpathwayNuclear membraneOtherco-receptorsSecretion fromstressed cellsBreakdownof matrixMyD88MALIRAK 4IRAK 1TRAF 6TAK 1IKK 1IKK 2IRF 3MD-2NEMOI˜Bp 50p 65NF-˜Bp 50p 65TBK 1Cell membraneCell membraneTLR4TLR4TLR4MD-2LBPFigure 5-5. Signaling via the pattern recognition receptor TLR4. LPS signaling via TLR4 requires the cofactors LPS binding protein (LBP), MD-2, and CD14. Endogenous danger signals released from a variety of sources also signal in a TLR4-dependent fashion, although it is as yet unknown what cofactors may be required for this activity. Once TLR4 is activated, an intracellular signaling cascade is initiated that involves both a MyD88-dependent and independent pathway. DAMP = damage associated molecular pattern; LPS = lipopolysaccharide; MD-2 = myeloid differentiation factor-2; MyD88 = myeloid differentiation primary response gene 88; NF-kB = nuclear factor kB; TLR4 = Toll-like receptor-4. (Reproduced with permission from Mollen KP, Levy RM, Prince JM, et al. Systemic inflammation and end organ damage following trauma involves functional TLR4 signaling in both bone marrow-derived cells and parenchymal cells, J Leukoc Biol. 2008 Jan;83(1):80-88.)Brunicardi_Ch05_p0131-p0156.indd   13929/01/19   11:06 AM 140BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIL-6 is elevated in response to hemorrhagic shock, major operative procedures, or trauma. Elevated IL-6 levels correlate with mortality in shock states. IL-6 contributes to lung, liver, and gut injury after hemorrhagic shock.28 Thus, IL-6 may play a role in the development of diffuse alveolar damage and ARDS. IL-6 and IL-1 are mediators of the hepatic acute phase response to injury, and enhance the expression and activity of comple-ment, C-reactive protein, fibrinogen, haptoglobin, amyloid A, and alpha1-antitrypsin, and promote neutrophil activation.29IL-10 is considered an anti-inflammatory cytokine that may have immunosuppressive properties. Its production is increased after shock and trauma, and it has been associated with depressed immune function clinically, as well as an increased susceptibility to infection.30 IL-10 is secreted by T cells, mono-cytes, and macrophages, and inhibits proinflammatory cytokine secretion, O2 radical production by phagocytes, adhesion mol-ecule expression, and lymphocyte activation.30,31 Administra-tion of IL-10 depresses cytokine production and improves some aspects of immune function in experimental models of shock and sepsis.32,33Recent studies point to the importance of chemokines, a specific set of cytokines, that have the ability to induce che-motaxis of leukocytes. Chemokines bind to specific chemokine receptors and transduce chemotactic signals to leukocytes. The significance of this large family of chemoattractant cytokines in immunology is difficult to understate, as almost every facet of the immune system is influenced by chemokines, including immune system development, immune surveillance, immune priming, effector responses, and immune regulation.34ComplementThe complement cascade can be activated by injury, shock, and severe infection, and contributes to host defense and pro-inflammatory activation. Significant complement consumption occurs after hemorrhagic shock.35 In trauma patients, the degree of complement activation is proportional to the magnitude of injury and may serve as a marker for severity of injury. Patients in septic shock also demonstrate activation of the complement pathway, with elevations of the activated complement proteins C3a and C5a. Activation of the complement cascade can con-tribute to the development of organ dysfunction. Activated complement factors C3a, C4a, and C5a are potent mediators of increased vascular permeability, smooth muscle cell contraction, histamine and arachidonic acid by-product release, and adher-ence of neutrophils to vascular endothelium. Activated comple-ment acts synergistically with endotoxin to induce the release of TNF-a and IL-1. The development of ARDS and MODS in trauma patients correlates with the intensity of complement  activation.36 Complement and neutrophil activation may corre-late with mortality in multiply injured patients.NeutrophilsNeutrophil activation is an early event in the upregulation of the inflammatory response; neutrophils are the first cells to be recruited to the site of injury. Polymorphonuclear leuko-cytes (PMNs) remove infectious agents, foreign substances that have penetrated host barrier defenses, and nonviable tis-sue through phagocytosis. However, activated PMNs and their products may also produce cell injury and organ dysfunction. Activated PMNs generate and release a number of substances that may induce cell or tissue injury, such as reactive O2 spe-cies, lipid-peroxidation products, proteolytic enzymes (elastase,  cathepsin G), and vasoactive mediators (leukotrienes, eico-sanoids, and platelet-activating factor). Oxygen-free radicals, such as superoxide anion, hydrogen peroxide, and hydroxyl radical, are released and induce lipid peroxidation, inactivate enzymes, and consume antioxidants (such as glutathione and tocopherol). Ischemia-reperfusion activates PMNs and causes PMN-induced organ injury. In animal models of hemorrhagic shock, activation of PMNs correlates with irreversibility of shock and mortality, and neutrophil depletion prevents the pathophysiologic sequelae of hemorrhagic and septic shock. Human data corroborate the activation of neutrophils in trauma and shock and suggest a role in the development of MODS.37 Plasma markers of PMN activation, such as elastase, correlate with severity of injury in humans.Interactions between endothelial cells and leukocytes are important in the inflammatory process. The vascular endothe-lium contributes to regulation of blood flow, leukocyte adher-ence, and the coagulation cascade. Extracellular ligands such as intercellular adhesion molecules, vascular cell adhesion mol-ecules, and the selectins (E-selectin, P-selectin) are expressed on the surface of endothelial cells, and are responsible for leuko-cyte adhesion to the endothelium. This interaction allows acti-vated neutrophils to migrate into the tissues to combat infection, but also can lead to PMN-mediated cytotoxicity and microvas-cular and tissue injury.Cell SignalingA host of cellular changes occur following shock. Although many of the intracellular and intercellular pathways that are important in shock are being elucidated, undoubtedly there are many more that have yet to be identified. Many of the media-tors produced during shock interact with cell surface receptors on target cells to alter target cell metabolism. These signaling pathways may be altered by changes in cellular oxygenation, redox state, high-energy phosphate concentration, gene expres-sion, or intracellular electrolyte concentration induced by shock. Cells communicate with their external environment through the use of cell surface membrane receptors, which, once bound by a ligand, transmit their information to the interior of the cell through a variety of signaling cascades. These signaling path-ways may subsequently alter the activity of specific enzymes, the expression or breakdown of important proteins, or affect intracellular energy metabolism. Intracellular calcium (Ca2+) homeostasis and regulation represents one such pathway. Intra-cellular Ca2+ concentrations regulate many aspects of cellular metabolism; many important enzyme systems require Ca2+ for Table 5-4Inflammatory mediators of shockPROINFLAMMATORYANTI-INFLAMMATORYInterleukin-1α/βInterleukin-4Interleukin-2Interleukin-10Interleukin-6Interleukin-13Interleukin-8Prostaglandin E2InterferonTGFβTNF PAF PAF = platelet activating factor; TGFβ = transforming growth factor β; TNF = tumor necrosis factor.Brunicardi_Ch05_p0131-p0156.indd   14029/01/19   11:06 AM 141SHOCKCHAPTER 5full activity. Profound changes in intracellular Ca2+ levels and Ca2+ transport are seen in models of shock.38 Alterations in Ca2+ regulation may lead to direct cell injury, changes in transcription factor activation, alterations in the expression of genes impor-tant in homeostasis, and the modulation of the activation of cells by other shock-induced hormones or mediators.39,40A proximal portion of the intracellular signaling cascade consists of a series of kinases that transmit and amplify the sig-nal through the phosphorylation of target proteins. The O2 radi-cals produced during shock and the intracellular redox state are known to influence the activity of components of this cascade, such as protein tyrosine kinases, mitogen activated kinases, and protein kinase C.41-43 Either through changes in these sig-naling pathways, changes in the activation of enzyme systems through Ca2+-mediated events, or direct conformational changes to oxygen-sensitive proteins, O2 radicals also regulate the activ-ity of a number of transcription factors that are important in gene expression, such as nuclear factor kB, APETALA1, and hypoxia-inducible factor 1.44,45 It is therefore becoming increas-ingly clear that oxidant-mediated direct cell injury is merely one consequence of the production of O2 radicals during shock.The study of the effects of shock on the regulation of gene expression as an important biologic effect was stimulated by the work of Buchman and colleagues.46 The effects of shock on the expression and regulation of numerous genes and gene products has been studied in both experimental animal models and human patients. These studies include investigations into single genes of interest as well as large-scale genomic and proteomic analysis.47-49 Changes in gene expression are critical for adaptive and survival cell signaling. Polymorphisms in gene promoters that lead to a differential level of expression of gene products are also likely to contribute significantly to varied responses to similar insults.50,51 In a recent study, the genetic responses to traumatic injury in humans or endotoxin delivery to healthy human volunteers demonstrated that severe stresses produce a global reprioritiza-tion affecting >80% of the cellular functions and pathways.52 The similarities in genomic responses among different injuries revealed a fundamental human response to stressors involving dysregulated immune responses (Fig. 5-6). Furthermore, in trau-matic injury patients, complications like nosocomial infections and organ failure were not associated with any genomic evi-dence of a second hit and differed only in the magnitude and duration of this genomic reprioritization.FORMS OF SHOCKHypovolemic/HemorrhagicThe most common cause of shock in the surgical or trauma patient is loss of circulating volume from hemorrhage. Acute blood loss results in reflexive decreased baroreceptor stimu-lation from stretch receptors in the large arteries, resulting in decreased inhibition of vasoconstrictor centers in the brain stem, increased chemoreceptor stimulation of vasomotor centers, and diminished output from atrial stretch receptors. These changes increase vasoconstriction and peripheral arterial resistance. Hypovolemia also induces sympathetic stimulation, leading to epinephrine and norepinephrine release, activation of the renin-angiotensin cascade, and increased vasopressin release. Periph-eral vasoconstriction is prominent, while lack of sympathetic effects on cerebral and coronary vessels and local autoregula-tion promote maintenance of cardiac and CNS blood flow.Diagnosis. Treatment of shock is initially empiric. A secure airway must be confirmed or established in obtunded patients. The priority is the initiation of volume infusion while the search for the cause of the hypotension is pursued. Shock in a trauma patient or postoperative patient should be presumed to be due to hemorrhage until proven otherwise. The clinical signs of shock may be evidenced by agitation, cool clammy extremities, tachy-cardia, weak or absent peripheral pulses, and hypotension. Such apparent clinical shock results from at least 25% to 30% loss of the blood volume. However, substantial volumes of blood may be lost before the classic clinical manifestations of shock are evident. Thus, when a patient is significantly tachycardic or hypotensive, this represents both significant blood loss and physiologic decompensation. The clinical and physiologic response to hemorrhage has been classified according to the magnitude of volume loss. Loss of up to 15% of the circulat-ing volume (700 to 750 mL for a 70-kg patient) may produce little in terms of obvious symptoms, while loss of up to 30% of the circulating volume (1.5 L) may result in mild tachycar-dia, tachypnea, and anxiety. Hypotension, marked tachycardia (i.e., pulse greater than 110 to 120 bpm), and confusion may not be evident until more than 30% of the blood volume has been lost; loss of 40% of circulating volume (2 L) is immedi-ately life threatening and generally requires operative control of bleeding (Table 5-5). Young healthy patients with vigor-ous compensatory mechanisms may tolerate larger volumes of blood loss while manifesting fewer clinical signs despite the presence of significant peripheral hypoperfusion. These patients may maintain a near-normal blood pressure until a precipitous cardiovascular collapse occurs. Elderly patients may be tak-ing medications that either promote bleeding (e.g., warfarin or aspirin), or mask the compensatory responses to bleeding (e.g., β-blockers). In addition, atherosclerotic vascular disease, diminishing cardiac compliance with age, inability to elevate heart rate or cardiac contractility in response to hemorrhage, and overall decline in physiologic reserve decrease the elderly Dysregulated adaptive immune responseMagnitude of responseMagnitude of responseUncomplicated outcomeComplicated outcomeDysregulated innate immune responseFigure 5-6. The concurrent dysregulated innate immune responses that promote inflammation and dysregulated adaptive immune responses that result in immunosuppression occur in patients follow-ing traumatic injury. However, these genetic responses can result in complicated outcomes in trauma patients if the magnitude or dura-tion of these responses are pronounced. (Reproduced with permission from Xiao W, Mindrinos MN, Seok J, et al. A genomic storm in criti-cally injured humans, J Exp Med. 2011 Dec 19;208(13):2581-2590.)Brunicardi_Ch05_p0131-p0156.indd   14129/01/19   11:06 AM 142BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ipatient’s ability to tolerate hemorrhage. Recent data in trauma patients suggest that a systolic blood pressure (SBP) of less than 110 mmHg is a clinically relevant definition of hypotension and hypoperfusion based upon an increasing rate of mortality below this pressure (Fig. 5-7).53In addressing the sensitivity of vital signs and identifying major thoracoabdominal hemorrhage, a study retrospectively identified patients with injury to the trunk and an abbreviated injury score of 3 or greater who required immediate surgical intervention and transfusion of at least 5 units of blood within the first 24 hours. Ninety-five percent of patients had a heart rate greater than 80 bpm at some point during their postinjury course. However, only 59% of patients achieved a heart rate greater than 120 bpm. Ninety-nine percent of all patients had a recorded blood pressure of less than 120 mmHg at some point. Ninety-three percent of all patients had a recorded SBP of less than 100 mmHg.54 A more recent study corroborated that tachy-cardia was not a reliable sign of hemorrhage following trauma and was present in only 65% of hypotensive patients.55Serum lactate and base deficit are measurements that are helpful to both estimate and monitor the extent of bleeding and shock. The amount of lactate that is produced by anaerobic res-piration is an indirect marker of tissue hypoperfusion, cellular O2 debt, and the severity of hemorrhagic shock. Several stud-ies have demonstrated that the initial serum lactate and serial lactate levels are reliable predictors of morbidity and mortality with hemorrhage following trauma (Fig. 5-8).56 Similarly, base deficit values derived from arterial blood gas analysis provide clinicians with an indirect estimation of tissue acidosis from hypoperfusion. Davis and colleagues stratified the extent of base deficit into mild (–3 to –5 mmol/L), moderate (–6 to –9 mmol/L), and severe (less than –10 mmol/L), and from this established a correlation between base deficit upon admission with transfu-sion requirements, the development of multiple organ failure, and death (Fig. 5-9).57 Both base deficit and lactate correlate with the extent of shock and patient outcome, but interestingly do not firmly correlate with each other.58-60 Evaluation of both values may be useful in trauma patients with hemorrhage.Although hematocrit changes may not rapidly reflect the total volume of blood loss, admission hematocrit has been shown to be associated with 24 hour fluid and transfusion requirements and more strongly associated with PRBC transfu-sion than either tachycardia, hypotension, or acidosis.61 It must be noted that lack of a depression in the initial hematocrit does not rule out substantial blood loss or ongoing bleeding.In management of trauma patients, understanding the pat-terns of injury of the patient in shock will help direct the evalu-ation and management. Identifying the sources of blood loss in patients with penetrating wounds is relatively simple because potential bleeding sources will be located along the known or suspected path of the wounding object. Patients with penetrating injuries who are in shock usually require operative intervention. Patients who suffer multisystem injuries from blunt trauma have multiple sources of potential hemorrhage. Blood loss sufficient to cause shock is generally of a large volume, and there are a limited number of sites that can harbor sufficient extravascular blood volume to induce hypotension (e.g., external, intratho-racic, intra-abdominal, retroperitoneal, and long bone fractures). In the nontrauma patient, the GI tract must always be considered as a site for blood loss. Substantial blood loss externally may be suspected from prehospital medical reports documenting a sub-stantial blood loss at the scene of an accident, history of massive Table 5-5Classification of hemorrhage CLASSPARAMETERIIIIIIIVBlood loss (mL)<750750–15001500–2000>2000Blood loss (%)<1515–3030–40>40Heart rate (bpm)<100>100>120>140Blood pressureNormalOrthostaticHypotensionSevere hypotensionCNS symptomsNormalAnxiousConfusedObtundedbpm = beats per minute; CNS = central nervous system.3025201510506065707580859095100105Systolic BP in the ED110115120125130135140145150155160121086420% MortalityBase deficit% MortalityBDFigure 5-7. The relationship between systolic blood pressure and mortality in trauma patients with hemorrhage. These data suggest that a systolic blood pressure of less than 110 mmHg is a clinically relevant definition of hypotension and hypoperfusion based upon an increasing rate of mortal-ity below this pressure. Base deficit (BD) is also shown on this graph. ED = emergency department. (Reproduced with permission from Eastridge BJ, Salinas J, McManus JG, et al. Hypotension begins at 110 mm Hg: redefining “hypotension” with data, J Trauma. 2007 Aug;63(2):291-297.)Brunicardi_Ch05_p0131-p0156.indd   14229/01/19   11:06 AM 143SHOCKCHAPTER 5blood loss from wounds, visible brisk bleeding, or presence of a large hematoma adjacent to an open wound. Injuries to major arteries or veins with associated open wounds may cause massive blood loss rapidly. Direct pressure must be applied and sustained to minimize ongoing blood loss. Tourniquets should be used for extremity bleeding stopped by direct pressure and applied in the prehospital setting as needed.62,63 Persistent bleeding from uncontrolled smaller vessels can, over time, precipitate shock if inadequately treated.When major blood loss is not immediately visible in the setting of trauma, internal (intracavitary) blood loss should be suspected. Each pleural cavity can hold 2 to 3 L of blood and can therefore be a site of significant blood loss. Diagnostic and therapeutic tube thoracostomy may be indicated in unstable patients based on clinical findings and clinical suspicion. In a more stable patient, a chest radiograph may be obtained to look for evidence of hemothorax. Major retroperitoneal hem-orrhage typically occurs in association with pelvic fractures, which is confirmed by pelvic radiography in the resuscitation bay. Intraperitoneal hemorrhage is probably the most common source of blood loss that induces shock. The physical exam for detection of substantial blood loss or injury is insensitive and unreliable; large volumes of intraperitoneal blood may be present before physical examination findings are apparent. Findings with intra-abdominal hemorrhage include abdominal distension, abdominal tenderness, or visible abdominal wounds. Hemodynamic abnormalities generally stimulate a search for blood loss before the appearance of obvious abdominal findings. Adjunctive tests are essential in the diagnosis of intraperitoneal bleeding; intraperitoneal blood may be rapidly identified by diagnostic ultrasound or diagnostic peritoneal lavage. Further-more, patients that have sustained high-energy blunt trauma that are hemodynamically stable or that have normalized their vital signs in response to initial volume resuscitation should undergo computed tomography scans to assess for head, chest, and/or abdominal bleeding.Treatment. Control of ongoing hemorrhage is an essential component of the resuscitation of the patient in shock. As mentioned in the previous “Diagnosis” section, treatment of hemorrhagic shock is instituted concurrently with diagnostic evaluation to identify a source. Patients who fail to respond to initial resuscitative efforts should be assumed to have ongo-ing active hemorrhage from large vessels and require prompt operative intervention. Based on trauma literature, patients with ongoing hemorrhage demonstrate increased survival if the elapsed time between the injury and control of bleeding is decreased. Although there are no randomized controlled trials, retrospective studies provide compelling evidence in this regard. To this end, Clarke and colleagues64 demonstrated that trauma Serum lactateMuscle lactateLiver lactateTime (hours)Serum lactate (mg/100 ml)Tissue lactate (M/gm tissue)012345510152025306090120150Figure 5-8. Progressive increases in serum lactate, muscle lactate, and liver lactate in a baboon model of hemorrhagic shock. (Repro-duced with permission from Peitzman AB, Corbett WA, Shires GT, et al: Cellular function in liver and muscle during hemorrhagic shock in primates, Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1985 Nov;161(5):419-424.)Extracellular BEA, mmol/L10059590858075706560555045403530252015100102–6–14–22–38% MortalityBase excess = –11.8LD50% Mortality = e˜1 + e˜x 10010090807060504030201001020% Predicted death on the basis of linear logistic model from BEAECF% Observed death0–0.19–0.17–4.5–7.4–9.7–11.8–14–16.4–19.2–23.530405060708090100Figure 5-9. The relationship between base deficit (negative base excess) and mortality in trauma patients. BEA = base excess arterial;  ECF = extracellular fluid. (Reproduced with permission from Siegel JH, Rivkind AI, Dalal S, et al: Early physiologic predictors of injury severity and death in blunt multiple trauma, Arch Surg. 1990 Apr;125(4):498-508.)Brunicardi_Ch05_p0131-p0156.indd   14329/01/19   11:06 AM 144BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ipatients with major injuries isolated to the abdomen requiring emergency laparotomy had an increased probability of death with increasing length of time in the emergency department for patients who were in the emergency department for 90 minutes or less. This probability increased approximately 1% for each  3 minutes in the emergency department.The appropriate priorities in these patients are as follows: (a) control the source of blood loss, (b) perform IV volume resuscitation with blood products in the hypotensive patient, and (c) secure the airway. In trauma, identifying the body cavity har-boring active hemorrhage will help focus operative efforts; how-ever, because time is of the essence, rapid treatment is essential, and diagnostic laparotomy or thoracotomy may be indicated. The actively bleeding patient cannot be resuscitated until control of ongoing hemorrhage is achieved. Our current understanding has led to the management strategy known as damage control resuscitation.65 This strategy begins in the emergency depart-ment, continues into the operating room, and into the intensive care unit (ICU). Initial resuscitation is limited to keep SBP around 80 to 90 mmHg. This prevents renewed bleeding from recently clotted vessels.  Resuscitation and intravascular volume resuscitation is accomplished with blood products and lim-ited crystalloids, which is addressed further later in this section. Too little volume allowing persistent severe hypoten-sion and hypoperfusion is dangerous, yet too vigorous of a vol-ume resuscitation may be just as deleterious. Control of hemorrhage is achieved in the operating room (or angiography suite once surgical causes of hemorrhage have been ruled out), and efforts to warm patients and to prevent coagulopathy using multiple blood products and pharmacologic agents are used in both the operating room and ICU.Cannon and colleagues first made the observation that attempts to increase blood pressure in soldiers with uncontrolled sources of hemorrhage is counterproductive, with increased bleeding and higher mortality.3 This work was the foundation for the “hypotensive resuscitation” strategies. Several laboratory studies confirmed the observation that attempts to restore normal blood pressure with fluid infusion or vasopressors was rarely achievable and resulted in more bleeding and higher mortality.66 A prospective, randomized clinical study compared delayed fluid resuscitation (upon arrival in the operating room) with standard fluid resuscitation (with arrival by the paramedics) in hypotensive patients with penetrating torso injury.67 The authors reported that delayed fluid resuscitation resulted in lower patient mortality. Further laboratory studies demonstrated that fluid restriction in the setting of profound hypotension resulted in early deaths from severe hypoperfusion. These studies also showed that aggressive crystalloid resuscitation attempting to normalize blood pressure resulted in marked hemodilution, with hematocrits of 5%.66 Reasonable conclusions in the setting of uncontrolled hemorrhage include (a) any delay in surgery for control of hemorrhage increases mortality; (b) with uncontrolled hemorrhage, attempting to achieve normal blood pressure may increase mortality, particularly with penetrating injuries and short transport times; (c) a goal of SBP of 80 to 90 mmHg may be adequate in the patient with penetrating injury; and (d) profound hemodilution should be avoided by early transfusion of red blood cells. For the patient with blunt injury, where the major cause of death is a closed head injury, the increase in mortality with hypotension in the setting of brain injury must be avoided. In this setting, a SBP of 110 mmHg would seem to be more appropriate.Patients who respond to initial resuscitative effort but then deteriorate hemodynamically frequently have injuries that require operative intervention. The magnitude and duration of their response will dictate whether diagnostic maneuvers can be performed to identify the site of bleeding. However, hemo-dynamic deterioration generally denotes ongoing bleeding for which some form of intervention (i.e., operation or interven-tional radiology) is required. Patients who have lost significant intravascular volume, but whose hemorrhage is controlled or has abated, often will respond to resuscitative efforts if the depth and duration of shock have been limited.A subset of patients exists who fail to respond to resuscita-tive efforts despite adequate control of ongoing hemorrhage. These patients have ongoing fluid requirements despite ade-quate control of hemorrhage, have persistent hypotension despite restoration of intravascular  volume necessitating  vasopressor support, and may exhibit a futile cycle of uncorrectable hypothermia, hypoperfusion, acidosis, and coagulopathy that cannot be interrupted despite maximum ther-apy. These patients have deteriorated to decompensated or irre-versible shock with peripheral vasodilation and resistance to vasopressor infusion. Mortality is almost inevitable once the patient manifests shock in its terminal stages. Unfortunately, this is often diagnosed in retrospect.Fluid resuscitation is a major adjunct to physically con-trolling hemorrhage in patients with shock. The ideal type of fluid to be used continues to be debated; however, crystalloids continue to be the mainstay fluid of choice. Several studies have demonstrated increased risk of death in bleeding trauma patients treated with colloid compared to patients treated with crystalloid.68 In patients with severe hemorrhage, restoration of intravascular volume should be achieved with blood products.69Ongoing studies continue to evaluate the use of hypertonic saline as a resuscitative adjunct in bleeding patients.70 The ben-efit of hypertonic saline solutions may be immunomodulatory. Specifically, these effects have been attributed to pharmacologic effects resulting in decreased reperfusion-mediated injury with decreased O2 radical formation, less impairment of immune function compared to standard crystalloid solution, and less brain swelling in the multi-injured patient. The reduction of total volume used for resuscitation makes this approach appealing as a resuscitation agent for combat injuries and may contribute to a decrease in the incidence of ARDS and multiple organ failure.Transfusion of packed red blood cells and other blood products is essential in the treatment of patients in hemorrhagic shock. Current recommendations in stable ICU patients aim for a target hemoglobin of 7 to 9 g/dL71,72; however, no prospective randomized trials have compared restrictive and liberal transfu-sion regimens in trauma patients with hemorrhagic shock. The current standard in severely injured patients is termed dam-age control resuscitation and consists of transfusion with red blood cells, fresh frozen plasma (FFP), and platelet units given in equal number.73 Civilian and military trauma data show that the development of coagulopathy of trauma is predictive of mortality.74 Data collected from a U.S. Army combat support hospital helped to propagate this practice, showing in patients that received massive transfusion of packed red blood cells (>10 units in 24 hours) that a high plasma to RBC ratio (1:1.4 units) was independently associated with improved survival.75 A number of civilian studies have demonstrated similar results.76 Similarly, platelet transfusion is important. The Pragmatic  Randomized Optimal Platelet and Plasma Ratios (PROPPR) 45Brunicardi_Ch05_p0131-p0156.indd   14429/01/19   11:06 AM 145SHOCKCHAPTER 5trial has demonstrated that damage-control resuscitation, a massive transfusion strategy targeting a balanced delivery of plasma-platelet-red blood cell in a ratio of 1:1:1, results in improved survival at 3 hours and a reduction in deaths caused by exsanguination in the first 24 hours.77 Studies have demon-strated that low platelet counts in trauma patients was associ-ated with increased mortality78 and that increased platelet use appears to improve outcome.79,80 The benefit of platelet trans-fusion may be most pronounced in trauma patients with brain injury.81 It has been suggested that platelets should be transfused in the bleeding patient to maintain counts above 50 × 109/L. In addition, transfusion of whole blood is gaining in popularity, and ongoing studies are evaluating the benefit of this approach.There is a potential role for other coagulation factor based products, such as fibrinogen concentrates and prothrombin complex concentrates. Use of these agents may be guided by a drop in fibrinogen levels to less than 1 g/L, or less specifically by thromboelastogram findings to suggest hyperfibrinolysis. Data also support the use of antifibrinolytic agents in bleeding trauma patients, specifically tranexamic acid (a synthetic lysine analogues that acts as a competitive inhibitor of plasmin and plasminogen). The multinational Clinical Randomization of an Antifibrinolytic in Significant Haemorrhage 2 (CRASH-2) trial suggested that early use of tranexamic acid limits rebleeding and reduces mortality82 (Fig 5-10). In the past, coagulopathy associated with the bleeding patient was presumed to be due solely to dilution and depletion of clotting factors and plate-lets. We now understand that an acute coagulopathy of trauma occurs as an immediate consequence of injury, with abnormal admission coagulation as a predictor of high mortality.83 Tradi-tional measurement of platelets, INR, and PTT may not reflect the coagulopathy of trauma or response to therapy effectively. Recently, viscoelastic functional testing such as thromboelas-tography (TEG) has been utilized as a quicker, more compre-hensive determination of coagulopathy and fibrinolysis in the injured patient. Holcomb et al recently reported that TEG pre-dicted patients with substantial bleeding and red cell transfusion better than conventional coagulopathy tests, and it also predicted the need for platelet transfusion better than platelet count and the need for plasma transfusion better than fibrinogen levels.84OR (95% CI) of tranexamic acidTime to treatment (h)0.58765432101.01.52.02.53.0Figure 5-10. Early treatment (within 3 hours) of trauma patients with tranexamic acid reduces mortality. However, later treatment exacerbated outcome. (Reproduced with permission from Roberts I, Shakur H, Afolabi A, et al. The importance of early treatment with tranexamic acid in bleeding trauma patients: an exploratory analysis of the CRASH-2 randomised controlled trial, Lancet. 2011  Mar 26;377(9771):1096-1101.)Additional resuscitative adjuncts in patients with hemor-rhagic shock include minimization of heat loss and maintaining normothermia. The development of hypothermia in the bleeding patient is associated with acidosis, hypotension, and coagulopa-thy. Hypothermia in bleeding trauma patients is an independent risk factor for bleeding and death. This likely is secondary to impaired platelet function and impairments in the coagulation cascade. Several studies have investigated the induction of con-trolled hypothermia in patients with severe shock based on the hypothesis of limiting metabolic activity and energy require-ments, creating a state of “suspended animation.” These studies are promising and continue to be evaluated in large trials.Traumatic ShockThe systemic response after trauma, combining the effects of soft tissue injury, long bone fractures, and blood loss, is clearly a different physiologic insult than simple hemorrhagic shock. Multiple organ failure, including acute respiratory distress syn-drome (ARDS), develops relatively often in the blunt trauma patient, but rarely after pure hemorrhagic shock (such as a GI bleed). The hypoperfusion deficit in traumatic shock is magnified by the proinflammatory activation that occurs following the induc-tion of shock. In addition to ischemia or ischemia-reperfusion, accumulating evidence demonstrates that even simple hemor-rhage induces proinflammatory activation that results in many of the cellular changes typically ascribed only to septic shock.85,86 At the cellular level, this may be attributable to the release of cellular products termed damage associated molecu-lar patterns (DAMPs, i.e., riboxynucleic acid, uric acid, and high mobility group box 1) that activate the same set of cell surface receptors as bacterial products, initiating similar cell signaling.5,87 These receptors are termed pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) and include the TLR family of proteins. Examples of traumatic shock include small volume hemorrhage accompanied by soft tissue injury (femur fracture, crush injury), or any combination of hypovolemic, neurogenic, cardiogenic, and obstructive shock that precipitate rapidly progressive proin-flammatory activation. In laboratory models of traumatic shock, the addition of a soft tissue or long bone injury to hemorrhage produces lethality with significantly less blood loss when the animals are stressed by hemorrhage. Treatment of traumatic shock is focused on correction of the individual elements to diminish the cascade of proinflammatory activation, and includes prompt control of hemorrhage, adequate volume resus-citation to correct O2 debt, debridement of nonviable tissue,   stabilization of bony injuries, and appropriate treatment of soft tissue injuries.Septic Shock (Vasodilatory Shock)In the peripheral circulation, profound vasoconstriction is the typical physiologic response to the decreased arterial pressure and tissue perfusion with hemorrhage, hypovolemia, or acute heart failure. This is not the characteristic response in vasodila-tory shock. Vasodilatory shock is the result of dysfunction of the endothelium and vasculature secondary to circulating inflam-matory mediators and cells or as a response to prolonged and severe hypoperfusion. Thus, in vasodilatory shock, hypotension results from failure of the vascular smooth muscle to constrict appropriately. Vasodilatory shock is characterized by peripheral vasodilation with resultant hypotension and resistance to treat-ment with vasopressors. Despite the hypotension, plasma cate-cholamine levels are elevated, and the renin-angiotensin system 6Brunicardi_Ch05_p0131-p0156.indd   14529/01/19   11:06 AM 146BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iis activated in vasodilatory shock. The most frequently encoun-tered form of vasodilatory shock is septic shock. Other causes of vasodilatory shock include hypoxic lactic acidosis, carbon monoxide poisoning, decompensated and irreversible hemor-rhagic shock, terminal cardiogenic shock, and postcardiotomy shock (Table 5-6). Thus, vasodilatory shock seems to represent the final common pathway for profound and prolonged shock of any etiology.88Despite advances in intensive care, the mortality rate for severe sepsis remains at 30% to 50%. In the United States, 750,000 cases of sepsis occur annually, one-third of which are fatal.89 Sepsis accounts for 9.3% of deaths in the United States, as many yearly as MI. Septic shock is a by-product of the body’s response to disruption of the host-microbe equilibrium, result-ing in invasive or severe localized infection.In the attempt to eradicate the pathogens, the immune and other cell types (e.g., endothelial cells) elaborate soluble medi-ators that enhance macrophage and neutrophil killing effec-tor mechanisms, increase procoagulant activity and fibroblast activity to localize the invaders, and increase microvascular blood flow to enhance delivery of killing forces to the area of invasion. When this response is overly exuberant or becomes systemic rather than localized, manifestations of sepsis may be evident. These findings include enhanced cardiac output, peripheral vasodilation, fever, leukocytosis, hyperglycemia, and tachycardia. In septic shock, the vasodilatory effects are due, in part, to the upregulation of the inducible isoform of nitric oxide synthase (iNOS or NOS 2) in the vessel wall. iNOS produces large quantities of nitric oxide for sustained periods of time. This potent vasodilator suppresses vascular tone and renders the vasculature resistant to the effects of vasoconstricting agents. Additionally, endothelial activation or injury likely contributes to some degree of vascular dysfunction.Diagnosis. Attempts to standardize terminology have led to the establishment of criteria for the diagnosis of sepsis in the hospitalized adult. These criteria include manifestations of the host response to infection in addition to identification of an offending organism. The terms sepsis and septic shock are used to quantify the magnitude of the systemic inflammatory reac-tion. Patients with sepsis have evidence of an infection, as well as systemic signs of inflammation (e.g., fever, leukocytosis, and tachycardia). Hypoperfusion with signs of organ dysfunction is termed severe sepsis. Septic shock requires the presence of the aforementioned signs, associated with more significant evidence of tissue hypoperfusion and systemic hypotension. Beyond the hypotension, maldistribution of blood flow and shunting in the microcirculation further compromise delivery of nutrients to the tissue beds.90,91 The Third International Consensus Definitions for Sepsis and Septic Shock (Sepsis-3) have refined the defi-nitions and utilize a Sequential (Sepsis-related) Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score to help determine signs of organ dys-function and to guide management.92Recognizing septic shock begins with defining the patient at risk. The clinical manifestations of septic shock will usually become evident and prompt the initiation of treatment before bacteriologic confirmation of an organism or the source of an organism is identified. In addition to fever, tachycardia, and tachypnea, signs of hypoperfusion such as confusion, malaise, oliguria, or hypotension may be present. These should prompt an aggressive search for infection, including a thorough physical examination, inspection of all wounds, evaluation of intravas-cular catheters or other foreign bodies, obtaining appropriate cultures, and adjunctive imaging studies, as needed.Treatment. Evaluation of the patient in septic shock begins with an assessment of the adequacy of their airway and ven-tilation. Severely obtunded patients and patients whose work of breathing is excessive require intubation and ventilation to prevent respiratory collapse. Because vasodilation and decrease in total peripheral resistance may produce hypotension, fluid resuscitation and restoration of circulatory volume with bal-anced salt solutions is essential. The Surviving Sepsis Campaign has updated treatment recommendations and care bundles with a most recent goal for care within the first hour93,94 (Table 5-7). Serum lactate should be measured as a marker of shock. Fluid resuscitation should begin within the first hour and should be at least 30 mL/kg for hypotensive patients. Incremental fluid boluses should be continued based upon endpoint of resuscita-tion, including clearance of lactate. Starch-based colloid solu-tions should be avoided as recent evidence suggests that these fluids may be deleterious in the setting of sepsis.90,95,96 Blood cultures should be obtained. Empiric antibiotics must be chosen carefully based on the most likely pathogens (gram-negative rods, gram-positive cocci, and anaerobes) because the portal of entry of the offending organism and its identity may not be evi-dent until culture data return or imaging studies are completed. Knowledge of the bacteriologic profile of infections in an indi-vidual unit can be obtained from most hospital infection control departments and will suggest potential responsible organisms. Antibiotics should be tailored to cover the responsible organ-isms once culture data are available, and if appropriate, the Table 5-6Causes of septic and vasodilatory shockSystemic response to infectionNoninfectious systemic inflammation Pancreatitis BurnsAnaphylaxisAcute adrenal insufficiencyProlonged, severe hypotension Hemorrhagic shock Cardiogenic shock Cardiopulmonary bypassMetabolic Hypoxic lactic acidosis Carbon monoxide poisoningTable 5-7Surviving Sepsis Campaign bundles of care to be initiated within the first hour after presentation in the patient with sepsis93,94Measure serum lactate level. Remeasure if the initial lactate is >2 mmol/LObtain blood culture prior to administration of antibioticsAdminister broad spectrum antibioticsRapid administration of 30 mL/kg crystalloid for hypotension or lactate ≥4 mmol/LUse vasopressors if the patient is hypotensive during or after fluid resuscitation to maintain a mean arterial pressure  ≥65 mmHgBrunicardi_Ch05_p0131-p0156.indd   14629/01/19   11:06 AM 147SHOCKCHAPTER 5spectrum of coverage narrowed. Long-term, empiric, broad-spectrum antibiotic use should be minimized to reduce the development of resistant organisms and to avoid the potential complications of fungal overgrowth and antibiotic-associated colitis from overgrowth of Clostridium difficile. IV antibiotics will be insufficient to adequately treat the infectious episode in the settings of infected fluid collections, infected foreign bodies, and devitalized tissue. These situations require source control and involve percutaneous drainage and operative management to target a focus of infection. These situations may require mul-tiple operations to ensure proper wound hygiene and healing.After first-line therapy of the septic patient with antibiot-ics, IV fluids, and intubation if necessary, vasopressors may be necessary to treat patients with septic shock. Catecholamines are the vasopressors used most often, with norepinephrine being the first-line agent followed by epinephrine. Occasionally, patients with septic shock will develop arterial resistance to catechol-amines. Arginine vasopressin, a potent vasoconstrictor, is often efficacious in this setting and is often added to norepinephrine.The majority of septic patients have hyperdynamic physi-ology with supranormal cardiac output and low systemic vas-cular resistance. On occasion, septic patients may have low cardiac output despite volume resuscitation and even vasopres-sor support. Dobutamine therapy is recommended for patients with cardiac dysfunction as evidenced by high filling pres-sures and low cardiac output or clinical signs of hypoperfusion after achievement of restoration of blood pressure following fluid resuscitation. Mortality in this group is high. Despite the increasing incidence of septic shock over the past several decades, the overall mortality rates have changed little. Stud-ies of interventions, including immunotherapy, resuscitation to pulmonary artery endpoints with hemodynamic optimization (cardiac output and O2 delivery, even to supranormal values), and optimization of mixed venous O2 measurements up to  72 hours after admission to the ICU, have not changed mortality.The advances made in the treatment of patients with sep-sis and septic shock and collaborative groups such as the Sur-viving Sepsis Campaign continue to evaluate, modify, and put forth recommendations based upon data. Negative results from previous studies have led to the suggestion that earlier inter-ventions directed at improving global tissue oxygenation may be of benefit. To this end, Rivers and colleagues reported that goal-directed therapy of septic shock and severe sepsis initiated in the emergency department and continued for 6 hours signifi-cantly improved outcome.97 This approach involved adjustment of cardiac preload, afterload, and contractility to balance O2 delivery with O2 demand. They found that goal-directed therapy during the first 6 hours of hospital stay (initiated in the emer-gency department) had significant effects, such as higher mean venous O2 saturation, lower lactate levels, lower base deficit, higher pH, and decreased 28-day mortality (49.2% vs. 33.3%) compared to the standard therapy group. The frequency of sud-den cardiovascular collapse was also significantly less in the group managed with goal-directed therapy (21.0% vs. 10.3%). Interestingly, the goal-directed therapy group received more IV fluids during the initial 6 hours, but the standard therapy group required more IV fluids by 72 hours. The authors emphasize that continued cellular and tissue decompensation is subclinical and often irreversible when obvious clinically. Goal-directed therapy allowed identification and treatment of these patients with insidious illness (global tissue hypoxia in the setting of normal vital signs).Several multicenter trials have been performed to further refine these finding. In the Protocolized Care for Early Septic Shock (ProCESS) trial, a multicenter, randomized trial in which patients were identified early in the emergency department as having septic shock and received antibiotics and other nonre-suscitation aspects of care promptly, the investigators found no significant advantage, with respect to mortality or morbid-ity, of protocol-based resuscitation over bedside care that was provided according to the treating physician’s judgment. They also found no significant benefit of the mandated use of central venous catheterization and central hemodynamic monitoring in all patients. This last finding was recapitulated in the Pro-tocolised Management in Sepsis (ProMISe) trial.98,99 Failure of these more recent trials to show a benefit of early goal-directed protocols vs. standard of care may be secondary to the gener-alized improvement in early recognition of sepsis and institu-tion of protocolized care by efforts such as the Surviving Sepsis Campaign.Hyperglycemia and insulin resistance are typical in criti-cally ill and septic patients, including patients without underly-ing diabetes mellitus. A recent study reported significant positive impact of tight glucose management on outcome in critically ill patients.100 The two treatment groups in this randomized, pro-spective study were assigned to receive intensive insulin therapy (maintenance of blood glucose between 80 and 110 mg/dL) or conventional treatment (infusion of insulin only if the blood glu-cose level exceeded 215 mg/dL, with a goal between 180 and 200 mg/dL). The mean morning glucose level was significantly higher in the conventional treatment as compared to the inten-sive insulin therapy group (153 vs. 103 mg/dL). Mortality in the intensive insulin treatment group (4.6%) was significantly lower than in the conventional treatment group (8.0%), representing a 42% reduction in mortality. This reduction in mortality was most notable in the patients requiring longer than 5 days in the ICU. Furthermore, intensive insulin therapy reduced episodes of septicemia by 46%, reduced duration of antibiotic therapy, and decreased the need for prolonged ventilatory support and renal replacement therapy.Another treatment protocol that has been demonstrated to increase survival in patients with ARDS investigated the use of lower ventilatory tidal volumes compared to traditional tidal volumes.101 The majority of the patients enrolled in this multicenter, randomized trial developed ARDS secondary to pneumonia or sepsis. The trial compared traditional ventilation treatment, which involved an initial tidal volume of 12 mL/kg of predicted body weight, with ventilation with a lower tidal volume, which involved an initial tidal volume of 6 mL/kg of predicted body weight. The trial was stopped after the enroll-ment of 861 patients because mortality was lower in the group treated with lower tidal volumes than in the group treated with traditional tidal volumes (31.0% vs. 39.8%, P = .007), and the number of days without ventilator use during the first 28 days after randomization was greater in this group (mean ± SD, 12 ± 11 vs. 10 ± 11; P = .007). The investigators concluded that in patients with acute lung injury and ARDS, mechanical ventilation with a lower tidal volume than is traditionally used results in decreased mortality and increases the number of days without ventilator use. Additional strategies in ARDS manage-ment include higher levels of positive end expiratory pressure (PEEP), alveolar recruitment maneuvers, and prone position-ing. Prone positioning has become part of many standardized protocols. This is supported by several studies, including a Brunicardi_Ch05_p0131-p0156.indd   14729/01/19   11:06 AM 148BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Imeta-analysis demonstrating that prone positioning is associ-ated with significantly reduced mortality from ARDS in the low tidal volume era.102The use of corticosteroids in the treatment of sepsis and septic shock has been controversial for decades. The observa-tion that severe sepsis often is associated with adrenal insuf-ficiency or glucocorticoid receptor resistance has generated renewed interest in therapy for septic shock with corticosteroids. A single IV dose of 50 mg of hydrocortisone improved mean arterial blood pressure response relationships to norepinephrine and phenylephrine in patients with septic shock and was most notable in patients with relative adrenal insufficiency. A study evaluated therapy with hydrocortisone (50 mg IV every 6 hours) and fludrocortisone (50 µg orally once daily) vs. placebo for  1 week in patients with septic shock.103 As in earlier studies, the authors performed corticotropin tests on these patients to document and stratify patients by relative adrenal insufficiency. In this study, 7-day treatment with low doses of hydrocortisone and fludrocortisone significantly and safely lowered the risk of death in patients with septic shock and relative adrenal insuf-ficiency. In an international, multicenter, randomized trial of corticosteroids in sepsis (CORTICUS study; 499 analyzable patients), steroids showed no benefit in intent to treat mortality or shock reversal.104 This study suggested that hydrocortisone therapy cannot be recommended as routine adjuvant therapy for septic shock. However, if SBP remains less than 90 mmHg despite appropriate fluid and vasopressor therapy, hydrocorti-sone at 200 mg/day for 7 days in four divided doses or by con-tinuous infusion should be considered.Additional adjunctive immune modulation strategies have been developed for the treatment of septic shock. These include the use of antiendotoxin antibodies, anticytokine anti-bodies, cytokine receptor antagonists, immune enhancers, a non– isoform-specific nitric oxide synthase inhibitor, and O2 radical scavengers. These compounds are each designed to alter some aspect of the host immune response to shock that is hypothesized to play a key role in its pathophysiology. However, most of these strategies have failed to demonstrate efficacy in human patients despite utility in well-controlled animal experiments. It is unclear whether the failure of these compounds is due to poorly designed clinical trials, inadequate understanding of the interactions of the complex host immune response to injury and infection, or animal models of shock that poorly represent the human disease.Cardiogenic ShockCardiogenic shock is defined clinically as circulatory pump failure leading to diminished forward flow and subsequent tis-sue hypoxia, in the setting of adequate intravascular volume. Hemodynamic criteria include sustained hypotension (i.e., SBP <90 mmHg for at least 30 minutes), reduced cardiac index  (<2.2 L/min per square meter), and elevated pulmonary artery wedge pressure (>15 mmHg).105 Mortality rates for cardiogenic shock are 50% to 80%. Acute, extensive MI is the most common cause of cardiogenic shock; a smaller infarction in a patient with existing left ventricular dysfunction also may precipitate shock. Cardiogenic shock complicates 5% to 10% of acute MIs. Con-versely, cardiogenic shock is the most common cause of death in patients hospitalized with acute MI. Although shock may develop early after MI, it typically is not found on admission. Seventy-five percent of patients who have cardiogenic shock complicating acute MIs develop signs of cardiogenic shock within 24 hours after onset of infarction (average 7 hours).Recognition of the patient with occult hypoperfusion is critical to prevent progression to obvious cardiogenic shock with its high mortality rate; early initiation of therapy to maintain blood pressure and cardiac output is vital. Rapid assessment, adequate resuscitation, and reversal of the myocardial ischemia are essential in optimizing outcome in patients with acute MI. Prevention of infarct extension is a critical component. Large segments of nonfunctional but viable myocardium contribute to the development of cardiogenic shock after MI. In the setting of acute MI, expeditious restoration of cardiac output is mandatory to minimize mortality; the extent of myocardial salvage possible decreases exponentially with increased time to restoration of coronary blood flow. The degree of coronary flow after percuta-neous transluminal coronary angioplasty correlates with inhos-pital mortality (i.e., 33% mortality with complete reperfusion, 50% mortality with incomplete reperfusion, and 85% mortality with absent reperfusion).106 Inadequate cardiac function can be a direct result of cardiac injury, including profound myocardial contusion, blunt cardiac valvular injury, or direct myocardial damage (Table 5-8).105-108 The pathophysiology of cardiogenic shock involves a vicious cycle of myocardial ischemia that causes myocardial dysfunction, which results in more myocar-dial ischemia. When sufficient mass of the left ventricular wall is necrotic or ischemic and fails to pump, the stroke volume decreases. An autopsy series of patients dying from cardiogenic shock have found damage to 40% of the left ventricle.109 Isch-emia distant from the infarct zone may contribute to the systolic dysfunction in patients with cardiogenic shock. The majority of these patients have multivessel disease, with limited vasodila-tor reserve and pressure-dependent coronary flow in multiple areas of the heart. Myocardial diastolic function is impaired in cardiogenic shock as well. Decreased compliance results from myocardial ischemia, and compensatory increases in left ven-tricular filling pressures progressively occur.Diminished cardiac output or contractility in the face of adequate intravascular volume (preload) may lead to under-perfused vascular beds and reflexive sympathetic discharge. Table 5-8Causes of cardiogenic shockAcute myocardial infarctionPump failureMechanical complications Acute mitral regurgitation Acute ventricular septal defect Free wall rupture Pericardial tamponadeArrhythmiaEnd-stage cardiomyopathyMyocarditisSevere myocardial contusionLeft ventricular outflow obstruction Aortic stenosis Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathyObstruction to left ventricular filling Mitral stenosis Left atrial myxomaAcute mitral regurgitationAcute aortic insufficiencyMetabolicDrug reactionsBrunicardi_Ch05_p0131-p0156.indd   14829/01/19   11:06 AM 149SHOCKCHAPTER 5Increased sympathetic stimulation of the heart, either through direct neural input or from circulating catecholamines, increases heart rate, myocardial contraction, and myocardial O2 consump-tion, which may not be relieved by increases in coronary artery blood flow in patients with fixed stenoses of the coronary arter-ies. Diminished cardiac output may also decrease coronary artery blood flow, resulting in a scenario of increased myocar-dial O2 demand at a time when myocardial O2 supply may be limited. Acute heart failure may also result in fluid accumula-tion in the pulmonary microcirculatory bed, decreasing myocar-dial O2 delivery even further.Diagnosis. Rapid identification of the patient with pump failure and institution of corrective action are essential in pre-venting the ongoing spiral of decreased cardiac output from injury causing increased myocardial O2 needs that cannot be met, leading to progressive and unremitting cardiac dysfunc-tion. In evaluation of possible cardiogenic shock, other causes of hypotension must be excluded, including hemorrhage, sepsis, pulmonary embolism, and aortic dissection. Signs of circulatory shock include hypotension, cool and mottled skin, depressed mental status, tachycardia, and diminished pulses. Cardiac exam may include dysrhythmia, precordial heave, or distal heart tones. Confirmation of a cardiac source for the shock requires electrocardiogram and urgent echocardiography. Other useful diagnostic tests include chest radiograph, arterial blood gases, electrolytes, complete blood count, and cardiac enzymes. Inva-sive cardiac monitoring, which generally is not necessary, can be useful to exclude right ventricular infarction, hypovolemia, and possible mechanical complications.Making the diagnosis of cardiogenic shock involves the identification of cardiac dysfunction or acute heart failure in a susceptible patient. In the setting of blunt traumatic injury, hemorrhagic shock from intra-abdominal bleeding, intrathoracic bleeding, and bleeding from fractures must be excluded, before implicating cardiogenic shock from blunt cardiac injury. Rela-tively few patients with blunt cardiac injury will develop cardiac pump dysfunction. Those who do generally exhibit cardiogenic shock early in their evaluation. Therefore, establishing the diag-nosis of blunt cardiac injury is secondary to excluding other etiologies for shock and establishing that cardiac dysfunction is present. Invasive hemodynamic monitoring with a pulmonary artery catheter may uncover evidence of diminished cardiac out-put and elevated pulmonary artery pressure.Treatment. After ensuring that an adequate airway is present and ventilation is sufficient, attention should be focused on sup-port of the circulation. Intubation and mechanical ventilation often are required, if only to decrease work of breathing and facilitate sedation of the patient. Rapidly excluding hypovolemia and establishing the presence of cardiac dysfunction are essen-tial. Treatment of cardiac dysfunction includes maintenance of adequate oxygenation to ensure adequate myocardial O2 deliv-ery and judicious fluid administration to avoid fluid overload and development of cardiogenic pulmonary edema. Electrolyte abnormalities, commonly hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia, should be corrected. Pain is treated with IV morphine sulfate or fentanyl. Significant dysrhythmias and heart block must be treated with antiarrhythmic drugs, pacing, or cardioversion, if necessary. Early consultation with cardiology is essential in current management of cardiogenic shock, particularly in the setting of acute MI.105When profound cardiac dysfunction exists, inotropic support may be indicated to improve cardiac contractility and cardiac output. Dobutamine primarily stimulates cardiac β1-receptors to increase cardiac output but may also vasodilate peripheral vascular beds, lower total peripheral resistance, and lower systemic blood pressure through effects on β2-receptors. Ensuring adequate preload and intravascular volume is therefore essential prior to instituting therapy with dobutamine. Dopamine stimulates receptors (vasoconstriction), β1-receptors (cardiac stimulation), and β2-receptors (vasodilation), with its effects on β-receptors predominating at lower doses. Dopamine may be preferable to dobutamine in treatment of cardiac dysfunction in hypotensive patients. Tachycardia and increased peripheral resistance from dopamine infusion may worsen myocardial ischemia. Titration of both dopamine and dobutamine infusions may be required in some patients.Epinephrine stimulates αand β-receptors and may increase cardiac contractility and heart rate; however, it also may have intense peripheral vasoconstrictor effects that impair further cardiac performance. Catecholamine infusions must be carefully controlled to maximize coronary perfusion, while minimizing myocardial O2 demand. Balancing the beneficial effects of impaired cardiac performance with the potential side effects of excessive reflex tachycardia and peripheral vasocon-striction requires serial assessment of tissue perfusion using indices such as capillary refill, character of peripheral pulses, adequacy of urine output, or improvement in laboratory param-eters of resuscitation such as pH, base deficit, and lactate. Inva-sive monitoring generally is necessary in these unstable patients. The phosphodiesterase inhibitors amrinone and milrinone may be required on occasion in patients with resistant cardiogenic shock. These agents have long half-lives and induce thrombocy-topenia and hypotension, and use is reserved for patients unre-sponsive to other treatment.Patients whose cardiac dysfunction is refractory to car-diotonics may require mechanical circulatory support with an intra-aortic balloon pump.110 Intra-aortic balloon pumping increases cardiac output and improves coronary blood flow by reduction of systolic afterload and augmentation of diastolic perfusion pressure. Unlike vasopressor agents, these beneficial effects occur without an increase in myocardial O2 demand. An intra-aortic balloon pump can be inserted at the bedside in the ICU via the femoral artery through either a cutdown or using the percutaneous approach. Aggressive circulatory support of patients with cardiac dysfunction from intrinsic cardiac disease has led to more widespread application of these devices and more familiarity with their operation by both physicians and critical care nurses.Preservation of existing myocardium and preservation of cardiac function are priorities of therapy for patients who have suffered an acute MI. Ensuring adequate oxygenation and O2 delivery, maintaining adequate preload with judicious volume restoration, minimizing sympathetic discharge through adequate relief of pain, and correcting electrolyte imbalances are all straightforward nonspecific maneuvers that may improve exist-ing cardiac function or prevent future cardiac complications. Anticoagulation and aspirin are given for acute MI. Although thrombolytic therapy reduces mortality in patients with acute MI, its role in cardiogenic shock is less clear. Patients in car-diac failure from an acute MI may benefit from pharmaco-logic or mechanical circulatory support in a manner similar to that of patients with cardiac failure related to blunt cardiac Brunicardi_Ch05_p0131-p0156.indd   14929/01/19   11:06 AM 150BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iinjury. Additional pharmacologic tools may include the use of β-blockers to control heart rate and myocardial O2 consumption, nitrates to promote coronary blood flow through vasodilation, and ACE inhibitors to reduce ACE-mediated vasoconstrictive effects that increase myocardial workload and myocardial O2 consumption.Current guidelines of the American Heart Association recommend percutaneous transluminal coronary angiography for patients with cardiogenic shock, ST elevation, left bundle-branch block, and age less than 75 years.111,112 Early definition of coronary anatomy and revascularization is the pivotal step in treatment of patients with cardiogenic shock from acute MI.113 When feasible, percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (generally with stent placement) is the treatment of choice. Coronary artery bypass grafting seems to be more appropriate for patients with multiple vessel disease or left main coronary artery disease.Obstructive ShockAlthough obstructive shock can be caused by a number of dif-ferent etiologies that result in mechanical obstruction of venous return (Table 5-9), in trauma patients this is most commonly due to the presence of tension pneumothorax. Cardiac tamponade occurs when sufficient fluid has accumulated in the pericardial sac to obstruct blood flow to the ventricles. The hemodynamic abnormalities in pericardial tamponade are due to elevation of intracardiac pressures with limitation of ventricular filling in diastole with resultant decrease in cardiac output. Acutely, the pericardium does not distend; thus small volumes of blood may produce cardiac tamponade. If the effusion accumulates slowly (e.g., in the setting of uremia, heart failure, or malignant effusion), the quantity of fluid producing cardiac tamponade may reach 2000 mL. The major determinant of the degree of hypotension is the pericardial pressure. With either cardiac tamponade or tension pneumothorax, reduced filling of the right side of the heart from either increased intrapleural pressure secondary to air accumulation (tension pneumothorax) or increased intra-pericardial pressure precluding atrial filling secondary to blood accumulation (cardiac tamponade) results in decreased cardiac output associated with increased central venous pressure.Diagnosis and Treatment. The diagnosis of tension pneu-mothorax should be made on clinical examination. The classic findings include respiratory distress (in an awake patient), hypo-tension, diminished breath sounds over one hemithorax, hyper-resonance to percussion, jugular venous distention, and shift of mediastinal structures to the unaffected side with tracheal deviation. In most instances, empiric treatment with pleural decompression is indicated rather than delaying to wait for radiographic confirmation. When a chest tube cannot be imme-diately inserted, such as in the prehospital setting, the pleural space can be decompressed with a large caliber needle. Immedi-ate return of air should be encountered with rapid resolution of hypotension. Unfortunately, not all of the clinical manifestations of tension pneumothorax may be evident on physical examina-tion. Hyperresonance may be difficult to appreciate in a noisy resuscitation area. Jugular venous distention may be absent in a hypovolemic patient. Tracheal deviation is a late finding and often is not apparent on clinical examination. Practically, three findings are sufficient to make the diagnosis of tension pneu-mothorax: respiratory distress or hypotension, decreased lung sounds, and hypertympany to percussion. Chest X-ray findings that may be visualized include deviation of mediastinal struc-tures, depression of the hemidiaphragm, and hypo-opacification with absent lung markings. As discussed previously, definitive treatment of a tension pneumothorax is immediate tube thora-costomy. The chest tube should be inserted rapidly, but care-fully, and should be large enough to evacuate any blood that  may be present in the pleural space. Most recommend place-ment is in the fourth intercostal space (nipple level) at the ante-rior axillary line.Cardiac tamponade results from the accumulation of blood within the pericardial sac, usually from penetrating trauma or chronic medical conditions such as heart failure or uremia. Although precordial wounds are most likely to injure the heart and produce tamponade, any projectile or wounding agent that passes in proximity to the mediastinum can potentially produce tamponade. Blunt cardiac rupture, a rare event in trauma vic-tims who survive long enough to reach the hospital, can produce refractory shock and tamponade in the multiply-injured patient. The manifestations of cardiac tamponade, such as total circula-tory collapse and cardiac arrest, may be catastrophic, or they may be more subtle. A high index of suspicion is warranted to make a rapid diagnosis. Patients who present with circulatory arrest from cardiac tamponade require emergency pericardial decompression, usually through a left thoracotomy. The indi-cations for this maneuver are discussed in Chapter 7. Cardiac tamponade also may be associated with dyspnea, orthopnea, cough, peripheral edema, chest pain, tachycardia, muffled heart tones, jugular venous distention, and elevated central venous pressure. Beck’s triad consists of hypotension, muffled heart tones, and neck vein distention. Unfortunately, absence of these clinical findings may not be sufficient to exclude cardiac injury and cardiac tamponade. Muffled heart tones may be difficult to appreciate in a busy trauma center, and jugular venous disten-tion and central venous pressure may be diminished by coexis-tent bleeding. Therefore, patients at risk for cardiac tamponade whose hemodynamic status permits additional diagnostic tests frequently require additional diagnostic maneuvers to confirm cardiac injury or tamponade.Invasive hemodynamic monitoring may support the diag-nosis of cardiac tamponade if elevated central venous pressure, pulsus paradoxus (i.e., decreased systemic arterial pressure with inspiration), or elevated right atrial and right ventricular pres-sure by pulmonary artery catheter are present. These hemody-namic profiles suffer from lack of specificity, the duration of time required to obtain them in critically injured patients, and their inability to exclude cardiac injury in the absence of tam-ponade. Chest radiographs may provide information on the pos-sible trajectory of a projectile, but rarely are diagnostic because Table 5-9Causes of obstructive shockPericardial tamponadePulmonary embolusTension pneumothoraxIVC obstruction Deep venous thrombosis Gravid uterus on IVC NeoplasmIncreased intrathoracic pressure Excess positive end-expiratory pressure NeoplasmIVC = inferior vena cava.Brunicardi_Ch05_p0131-p0156.indd   15029/01/19   11:06 AM 151SHOCKCHAPTER 5the acutely filled pericardium distends poorly. Echocardiogra-phy has become the preferred test for the diagnosis of cardiac tamponade. Good results in detecting pericardial fluid have been reported, but the yield in detecting pericardial fluid depends on the skill and experience of the ultrasonographer, body habitus of the patient, and absence of wounds that preclude visualization of the pericardium. Standard two-dimensional or transesopha-geal echocardiography are sensitive techniques to evaluate the pericardium for fluid, and are typically performed by examiners skilled at evaluating ventricular function, valvular abnormali-ties, and integrity of the proximal thoracic aorta. Unfortunately, these skilled examiners are rarely immediately available at all hours of the night, when many trauma patients present; there-fore, waiting for this test may result in inordinate delays. In addition, although both ultrasound techniques may demonstrate the presence of fluid or characteristic findings of tamponade (large volume of fluid, right atrial collapse, poor distensibility of the right ventricle), they do not exclude cardiac injury per se. Pericardiocentesis to diagnose pericardial blood and potentially relieve tamponade may be used. Performing pericardiocentesis under ultrasound guidance has made the procedure safer and more reliable. An indwelling catheter may be placed for sev-eral days in patients with chronic pericardial effusions. Needle pericardiocentesis may not evacuate clotted blood and has the potential to produce cardiac injury, making it a poor alternative in busy trauma centers.Diagnostic pericardial window represents the most direct method to determine the presence of blood within the pericar-dium. The procedure is best performed in the operating room under general anesthesia. It can be performed through either the subxiphoid or transdiaphragmatic approach. Adequate equip-ment and personnel to rapidly decompress the pericardium, explore the injury, and repair the heart should be present. Once the pericardium is opened and tamponade relieved, hemody-namics usually improve dramatically and formal pericardial exploration can ensue. Exposure of the heart can be achieved by extending the incision to a median sternotomy, performing a left anterior thoracotomy, or performing bilateral anterior tho-racotomies (“clamshell”).Neurogenic ShockNeurogenic shock refers to diminished tissue perfusion as a result of loss of vasomotor tone to peripheral arterial beds. Loss of vasoconstrictor impulses results in increased vascular capacitance, decreased venous return, and decreased cardiac output. Neurogenic shock is usually secondary to spinal cord injuries from vertebral body fractures of the cervical or high thoracic region that disrupt sympathetic regulation of peripheral vascular tone (Table 5-10). Rarely, a spinal cord injury without bony fracture, such as an epidural hematoma impinging on the spinal cord, can produce neurogenic shock. Sympathetic input to the heart, which normally increases heart rate and cardiac contractility, and input to the adrenal medulla, which increases catecholamine release, may also be disrupted, preventing the typical reflex tachycardia that occurs with hypovolemia. Acute spinal cord injury results in activation of multiple secondary injury mechanisms: (a) vascular compromise to the spinal cord with loss of autoregulation, vasospasm, and thrombosis; (b) loss of cellular membrane integrity and impaired energy metabo-lism; and (c) neurotransmitter accumulation and release of free radicals. Importantly, hypotension contributes to the worsening of acute spinal cord injury as the result of further reduction in blood flow to the spinal cord. Management of acute spinal cord injury with attention to blood pressure control, oxygenation, and hemodynamics, essentially optimizing perfusion of an already ischemic spinal cord, seems to result in improved neurologic outcome. Patients with hypotension from spinal cord injury are best monitored in an ICU and carefully followed for evidence of cardiac or respiratory dysfunction.Diagnosis. Acute spinal cord injury may result in bradycardia, hypotension, cardiac dysrhythmias, reduced cardiac output, and decreased peripheral vascular resistance. The severity of the spi-nal cord injury seems to correlate with the magnitude of cardio-vascular dysfunction. Patients with complete motor injuries are over five times more likely to require vasopressors for neuro-genic shock compared to those with incomplete lesions.114 The classic description of neurogenic shock consists of decreased blood pressure associated with bradycardia (absence of reflex-ive tachycardia due to disrupted sympathetic discharge), warm extremities (loss of peripheral vasoconstriction), motor and sen-sory deficits indicative of a spinal cord injury, and radiographic evidence of a vertebral column fracture. Patients with multisys-tem trauma that includes spinal cord injuries often have head injuries that may make identification of motor and sensory defi-cits difficult in the initial evaluation. Furthermore, associated injuries may occur that result in hypovolemia, further compli-cating the clinical presentation. In a subset of patients with spi-nal cord injuries from penetrating wounds, most of the patients with hypotension had blood loss as the etiology (74%) rather than neurogenic causes, and few (7%) had the classic findings of neurogenic shock.115 In the multiply injured patient, other causes of hypotension including hemorrhage, tension pneumothorax, and cardiogenic shock, must be sought and excluded.Treatment. After the airway is secured and ventilation is ade-quate, fluid resuscitation and restoration of intravascular volume often will improve perfusion in neurogenic shock. Most patients with neurogenic shock will respond to restoration of intravas-cular volume alone, with satisfactory improvement in perfusion and resolution of hypotension. Administration of vasoconstric-tors will improve peripheral vascular tone, decrease vascular capacitance, and increase venous return, but should only be con-sidered once hypovolemia is excluded as the cause of the hypo-tension and the diagnosis of neurogenic shock is established. If the patient’s blood pressure has not responded to what is felt to be adequate volume resuscitation, dopamine may be used first. A pure α-agonist, such as phenylephrine, may be used primar-ily or in patients unresponsive to dopamine. Specific treatment for the hypotension is often of brief duration, as the need to administer vasoconstrictors typically lasts 24 to 48 hours. On the other hand, life-threatening cardiac dysrhythmias and hypo-tension may occur up to 14 days after spinal cord injury.The duration of the need for vasopressor support for neurogenic shock may correlate with the overall prognosis or chances of improvement in neurologic function. Appropriate rapid restoration of blood pressure and circulatory perfusion may improve perfusion to the spinal cord, prevent progressive Table 5-10Causes of neurogenic shockSpinal cord traumaSpinal cord neoplasmSpinal/epidural anestheticBrunicardi_Ch05_p0131-p0156.indd   15129/01/19   11:06 AM 152BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ispinal cord ischemia, and minimize secondary cord injury. Res-toration of normal blood pressure and adequate tissue perfusion should precede any operative attempts to stabilize the vertebral fracture.ENDPOINTS IN RESUSCITATIONShock is defined as inadequate perfusion to maintain normal organ function. With prolonged anaerobic metabolism, tissue acidosis and O2 debt accumulate. Thus, the goal in the treatment of shock is restoration of adequate organ perfusion and tissue  oxygenation. Resuscitation is complete when O2 debt is repaid, tissue acidosis is corrected, and aerobic metabo-lism restored. Clinical confirmation of this endpoint remains a challenge.Resuscitation of the patient in shock requires simultaneous evaluation and treatment; the etiology of the shock often is not initially apparent. Hemorrhagic shock, septic shock, and trau-matic shock are the most common types of shock encountered on surgical services. To optimize outcome in bleeding patients, early control of the hemorrhage and adequate volume resuscita-tion, including both red blood cells and crystalloid solutions, are necessary. Expedient operative resuscitation is mandatory to limit the magnitude of activation of multiple mediator sys-tems and to abort the microcirculatory changes, which may evolve insidiously into the cascade that ends in irreversible hemorrhagic shock. Attempts to stabilize an actively bleeding patient anywhere but in the operating room are inappropriate. Any intervention that delays the patient’s arrival in the operat-ing room for control of hemorrhage increases mortality, thus the important concept of operating room resuscitation of the critically injured patient.Recognition by care providers of the patient who is in the compensated phase of shock is equally important, but more dif-ficult based on clinical criteria. Compensated shock exists when inadequate tissue perfusion persists despite normalization of blood pressure and heart rate. Even with normalization of blood pressure, heart rate, and urine output, 80% to 85% of trauma patients have inadequate tissue perfusion, as evidenced by increased lactate or decreased mixed venous O2 saturation.56,116 Persistent, occult hypoperfusion is frequent in the ICU, with a resultant significant increase in infection rate and mortality in major trauma patients. Patients failing to reverse their lactic acidosis within 12 hours of admission (acidosis that was persis-tent despite normal heart rate, blood pressure, and urine output) developed an infection three times as often as those who normal-ized their lactate levels within 12 hours of admission. In addi-tion, mortality was fourfold higher in patients who developed infections. Both injury severity score and occult hypotension (lactic acidosis) longer than 12 hours were independent predic-tors of infection.117 Thus, recognition of subclinical hypoperfu-sion requires information beyond vital signs and urinary output.Endpoints in resuscitation can be divided into systemic or global parameters, tissue-specific parameters, and cellu-lar parameters. Global endpoints include vital signs, cardiac output, pulmonary artery wedge pressure, O2 delivery and con-sumption, lactate, and base deficit (Table 5-11).Assessment of Endpoints in ResuscitationInability to repay O2 debt is a predictor of mortality and organ failure; the probability of death has been directly cor-related to the calculated O2 debt in hemorrhagic shock. Direct measurement of the O2 debt in the resuscitation of patients is difficult. The easily obtainable parameters of arterial blood pressure, heart rate, urine output, central venous pressure, and pulmonary artery occlusion pressure are poor indicators of the adequacy of tissue perfusion. Therefore, surrogate parameters have been sought to estimate the O2 debt; serum lactate and base deficit have been shown to correlate with O2 debt.Lactate. Lactate is generated by conversion of pyruvate to lactate by lactate dehydrogenase in the setting of insufficient O2. Lactate is released into the circulation and is predominantly taken up and metabolized by the liver and kidneys. The liver accounts for approximately 50% and the kidney for about 30% of whole body lactate uptake. Elevated serum lactate is an indi-rect measure of the O2 debt, and therefore an approximation of the magnitude and duration of the severity of shock. The admission lactate level, highest lactate level, and time interval to normalize the serum lactate are important prognostic indi-cators for survival. For example, in a study of 76 consecutive patients, 100% survival was observed among the patients with normalization of lactate within 24 hours, 78% survival when lactate normalized between 24 and 48 hours, and only 14% sur-vivorship if it took longer than 48 hours to normalize the serum lactate.56 In contrast, individual variability of lactate may be too great to permit accurate prediction of outcome in any individual case. Base deficit and volume of blood transfusion required in the first 24 hours of resuscitation may be better predictors of mortality than the plasma lactate alone.Base Deficit. Base deficit is the amount of base in millimoles that is required to titrate 1 L of whole blood to a pH of 7.40 with the sample fully saturated with O2 at 37°C (98.6°F) and a partial pressure of CO2 of 40 mmHg. It usually is measured by arterial blood gas analysis in clinical practice as it is readily and quickly available. The mortality of trauma patients can be stratified according to the magnitude of base deficit measured in the first 24 hours after admission.60 In a retrospective study of over 3000 trauma admissions, patients with a base deficit worse than 15 mmol/L had a mortality of 70%. Base deficit can be stratified into mild (3 to 5 mmol/L), moderate (6 to 14 mmol/L), and severe (15 mmol/L) categories, with a trend toward higher mortality with worsening base deficit in patients with trauma. Both the magnitude of the perfusion deficit as indicated by the base deficit and the time required to correct it are major factors determining outcome in shock.Indeed, when elevated base deficit persists (or lactic acidosis) in the trauma patient, ongoing bleeding is often the 7Table 5-11Endpoints in resuscitationSystemic/global Lactate Base deficit Cardiac output Oxygen delivery and consumptionTissue specific Gastric tonometry Tissue pH, oxygen, carbon dioxide levels Near infrared spectroscopyCellular Membrane potential Adenosine triphosphateBrunicardi_Ch05_p0131-p0156.indd   15229/01/19   11:06 AM 153SHOCKCHAPTER 5etiology. Trauma patients admitted with a base deficit greater than 15 mmol/L required twice the volume of fluid infusion and six times more blood transfusion in the first 24 hours com-pared to patients with mild acidosis. Transfusion requirements increased as base deficit worsened and ICU and hospital lengths of stay increased. Mortality increased as base deficit worsened; the frequency of organ failure increased with greater base  deficit.57 The probability of trauma patients developing ARDS has been reported to correlate with severity of admission base deficit and lowest base deficit within the first 24 hours  postinjury.59 Persistently high base deficit is associated with abnormal O2 utilization and higher mortality. Monitoring base deficit in the resuscitation of trauma patients assists in assess-ment of O2 transport and efficacy of resuscitation.58Factors that may compromise the utility of the base defi-cit in estimating O2 debt are the administration of bicarbonate, hypothermia, hypocapnia (overventilation), heparin, ethanol, and ketoacidosis. However, the base deficit remains one of the most widely used estimates of O2 debt for its clinical relevance, accuracy, and availability.Near Infrared Spectroscopy. Near infrared (NIR) spectros-copy can measure tissue oxygenation and redox state of cyto-chrome a,a3 on a continuous, noninvasive basis. The NIR probe emits multiple wavelengths of light in the NIR spectrum (650 to 1100 nm). Photons are then either absorbed by the tissue or reflected back to the probe. Maximal exercise in laboratory stud-ies resulted in reduction of cytochrome a,a3; this correlated with tissue lactate elevation. NIR spectroscopy can be used to com-pare tissue oxyhemoglobin levels (indicating tissue O2 supply to cytochrome a,a3 with mitochondrial O2 consumption), thus demonstrating flow-independent mitochondrial oxidative dys-function and the need for further resuscitation. Trauma patients with decoupled oxyhemoglobin and cytochrome a,a3 have redox dysfunction and have been shown to have a higher incidence of organ failure (89 vs. 13%).121,122Tissue PH, Oxygen, and Carbon Dioxide Concentration.  Tissue probes with optical sensors have been used to measure tissue pH and partial pressure of O2 and CO2 in subcutaneous sites, muscle, and the bladder. These probes may use transcuta-neous methodology with Clark electrodes or direct percutaneous probes.123,124 The percutaneous probes can be inserted through an 18-gauge catheter and hold promise as continuous monitors of tissue perfusion.Right Ventricular End-Diastolic Volume Index. Right ven-tricular end-diastolic volume index (RVEDVI) seems to more accurately predict preload for cardiac index than does pulmonary artery wedge pressure.125 Chang and colleagues reported that 50% of trauma patients had persistent splanchnic ischemia that was reversed by increasing RVEDVI. RVEDVI is a parameter that seems to correlate with preload-related increases in cardiac output. More recently, these authors have described left ven-tricular power output as an endpoint (LVP >320 mmHg·L/min per square meter), which is associated with improved clearance of base deficit and a lower rate of organ dysfunction following injury.126REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Gross S. A System of Surgery: Pathologic, Diagnsotic, Thera-peutic and Operative. Philadelphia: Lea and Febiger; 1872.	2.	Bernard C. Lecons sur les Phenomenes de la Via Communs aux Animaux et aux Vegetaux. Paris: JB Ballieve; 1879.	3.	Cannon W. Traumatic Shock. New York: Appleton and Co.; 1923.	4.	Blalock A. Principles of Surgical Care, Shock and Other Prob-lems. St. Louis: CV Mosby; 1940.	5.	Mollen KP, Levy RM, Prince JM, et al. Systemic inflammation and end organ damage following trauma involves functional TLR4 signaling in both bone marrow-derived cells and paren-chymal cells. J Leukoc Biol. 2008;83(1):80-88.	6.	Wiggers C. Experimental Hemorrhagic Shock. Physiology of Shock. New York: Commonwealth; 1950.	7.	Peitzman AB, Corbett WA, Shires GT, 3rd, Illner H, Shires GT,  Inamdar R. Cellular function in liver and muscle dur-ing hemorrhagic shock in primates. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1985;161(5):419-424.	8.	Carrico CJ, Canizaro PC, Shires GT. Fluid resuscitation fol-lowing injury: rationale for the use of balanced salt solutions. Crit Care Med. 1976;4(2):46-54.	9.	Shaftan GW, Chiu CJ, Dennis C, Harris B. Fundamen-tals of physiologic control of arterial hemorrhage. Surgery. 1965;58(5):851-856.	10.	Rhodes A, Evans LE, Alhazzani W, et al. Surviving Sepsis Campaign: international guidelines for management of sepsis and septic shock: 2016. Crit Care Med. 2017;45(3):486-552.	11.	Shah NS, Kelly E, Billiar TR, et al. Utility of clinical param-eters of tissue oxygenation in a quantitative model of irrevers-ible hemorrhagic shock. Shock. 1998;10(5):343-346.	12.	Dunser MW, Wenzel V, Mayr AJ, Hasibeder WR. Management of vasodilatory shock: defining the role of arginine vasopres-sin. Drugs. 2003;63(3):237-256.	13.	Argenziano M, Chen JM, Choudhri AF, et al. Management of vasodilatory shock after cardiac surgery: identification of predisposing factors and use of a novel pressor agent. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1998;116(6):973-980.	14.	Barroso-Aranda J, Schmid-Schonbein GW, Zweifach BW, Engler RL. Granulocytes and no-reflow phenomenon in irre-versible hemorrhagic shock. Circ Res. 1988;63(2):437-447.	15.	Ince C, Sinaasappel M. Microcirculatory oxygenation and shunting in sepsis and shock. Crit Care Med. 1999; 27(7):1369-1377.	16.	Singer M, De Santis V, Vitale D, Jeffcoate W. Multiorgan failure is an adaptive, endocrine-mediated, metabolic response to overwhelming systemic inflammation. Lancet. 2004;364(9433):545-548.	17.	Shires T, Coln D, Carrico J, Lightfoot S. Fluid therapy in hem-orrhagic shock. Arch Surg. 1964;88:688-693.	18.	Robin ED. Of men and mitochondria: coping with hypoxic dysoxia. The 1980 J. Burns Amberson Lecture. Am Rev Respir Dis. 1980;122(4):517-531.	19.	Stacpoole PW. Lactic acidosis and other mitochondrial disor-ders. Metabolism. 1997;46(3):306-321.	20.	Crowell JW, Smith EE. Oxygen deficit and irreversible hemor-rhagic shock. Am J Physiol. 1964;206:313-316.	21.	Nathan C. Points of control in inflammation. Nature. 2002; 420(6917):846-852.	22.	Sauaia A, Moore FA, Moore EE, Haenel JB, Read RA,  Lezotte DC. Early predictors of postinjury multiple organ fail-ure. Arch Surg. 1994;129(1):39-45.	23.	Matzinger P. The danger model: a renewed sense of self.  Science. 2002;296(5566):301-305.	24.	Jiang J, Bahrami S, Leichtfried G, Redl H, Ohlinger W, Schlag G.  Kinetics of endotoxin and tumor necrosis factor appearance in portal and systemic circulation after hemorrhagic shock in rats. Ann Surg. 1995;221(1):100-106.	25.	Endo S, Inada K, Yamada Y, et al. Plasma endotoxin and cyto-kine concentrations in patients with hemorrhagic shock. Crit Care Med. 1994;22(6):949-955.Brunicardi_Ch05_p0131-p0156.indd   15329/01/19   11:06 AM 154BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART I	26.	Puyana JC, Pellegrini JD, De AK, Kodys K, Silva WE,  Miller CL. Both T-helper-1and T-helper-2-type lymphokines are depressed in posttrauma anergy. J Trauma. 1998;44(6): 1037-1045; discussion 1045-1036.	27.	Faist E, Schinkel C, Zimmer S, Kremer JP, Von Donnersmarck GH, Schildberg FW. Inadequate interleukin-2 synthesis and interleukin-2 messenger expression following thermal and mechanical trauma in humans is caused by defective trans-membrane signalling. J Trauma. 1993;34(6):846-853; discus-sion 853-844.	28.	Meng ZH, Dyer K, Billiar TR, Tweardy DJ. Essential role for IL-6 in postresuscitation inflammation in hemorrhagic shock. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2001;280(2):C343-351.	29.	Meng ZH, Dyer K, Billiar TR, Tweardy DJ. Distinct effects of systemic infusion of G-CSF vs. IL-6 on lung and liver inflammation and injury in hemorrhagic shock. Shock. 2000;14(1):41-48.	30.	Neidhardt R, Keel M, Steckholzer U, et al. Relationship of interleukin-10 plasma levels to severity of injury and clinical outcome in injured patients. J Trauma. 1997;42(5):863-870; discussion 870-861.	31.	Kasai T, Inada K, Takakuwa T, et al. Anti-inflammatory cyto-kine levels in patients with septic shock. Res Commun Mol Pathol Pharmacol. 1997;98(1):34-42.	32.	Kahlke V, Dohm C, Mees T, Brotzmann K, Schreiber S,  Schroder J. Early interleukin-10 treatment improves survival and enhances immune function only in males after hemor-rhage and subsequent sepsis. Shock. 2002;18(1):24-28.	33.	Karakozis S, Hinds M, Cook JW, Kim D, Provido H,  Kirkpatrick JR. The effects of interleukin-10 in hemorrhagic shock. J Surg Res. 2000;90(2):109-112.	34.	Comerford I, McColl SR. Mini-review series: focus on chemo-kines. Immunol Cell Biol. 2011;89(2):183-184.	35.	Younger JG, Sasaki N, Waite MD, et al. Detrimental effects of complement activation in hemorrhagic shock. J Appl Physiol. 2001;90(2):441-446.	36.	Moore EE, Moore FA, Franciose RJ, Kim FJ, Biffl WL, Banerjee A. The postischemic gut serves as a priming bed for circulating neutrophils that provoke multiple organ failure. J Trauma. 1994;37(6):881-887.	37.	Adams JM, Hauser CJ, Livingston DH, Lavery RF, Fekete Z,  Deitch EA. Early trauma polymorphonuclear neutrophil responses to chemokines are associated with development of sepsis, pneumonia, and organ failure. J Trauma. 2001;51(3): 452-456; discussion 456-457.	38.	Lau YT, Hwang TL, Chen MF, Liu MS. Calcium transport by rat liver plasma membranes during sepsis. Circ Shock. 1992;38(4):238-244.	39.	Somogyi R, Zhao M, Stucki JW. Modulation of cytosolic-[Ca2+] oscillations in hepatocytes results from cross-talk among second messengers. The synergism between the alpha 1adrenergic response, glucagon and cyclic AMP, and their antagonism by insulin and diacylglycerol manifest themselves in the control of the cytosolic-[Ca2+] oscillations. Biochem J. 1992;286 (Pt 3):869-877.	40.	Trump BF, Berezesky IK. Calcium-mediated cell injury and cell death. FASEB J. 1995;9(2):219-228.	41.	Powers KA, Szaszi K, Khadaroo RG, et al. Oxidative stress generated by hemorrhagic shock recruits Toll-like recep-tor 4 to the plasma membrane in macrophages. J Exp Med. 2006;203(8):1951-1961.	42.	Suzuki YJ, Forman HJ, Sevanian A. Oxidants as stimu-lators of signal transduction. Free Radic Biol Med. 1997;22(1-2):269-285.	43.	Mollen KP, McCloskey CA, Tanaka H, et al. Hypoxia activates c-Jun N-terminal kinase via Rac1-dependent reactive oxygen species production in hepatocytes. Shock. 2007;28(3):270-277.	44.	Bertges DJ, Fink MP, Delude RL. Hypoxic signal transduction in critical illness. Crit Care Med. 2000;28(4 Suppl):N78-86.	45.	Guillemin K, Krasnow MA. The hypoxic response: huffing and HIFing. Cell. 1997;89(1):9-12.	46.	Buchman TG, Cabin DE, Vickers S, et al. Molecular biology of circulatory shock. Part II. Expression of four groups of hepatic genes is enhanced after resuscitation from cardiogenic shock. Surgery. 1990;108(3):559-566.	47.	Cobb JP, O’Keefe GE. Injury research in the genomic era. Lancet. 2004;363(9426):2076-2083.	48.	Cobb JP, Laramie JM, Stormo GD, et al. Sepsis gene expres-sion profiling: murine splenic compared with hepatic responses determined by using complementary DNA microarrays. Crit Care Med. 2002;30(12):2711-2721.	49.	Wiegand G, Selleng K, Grundling M, Jack RS. Gene expres-sion pattern in human monocytes as a surrogate marker for systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS). Mol Med. 1999;5(3):192-202.	50.	Gray IC, Campbell DA, Spurr NK. Single nucleotide poly-morphisms as tools in human genetics. Hum Mol Genet. 2000;9(16):2403-2408.	51.	Mira JP, Cariou A, Grall F, et al. Association of TNF2, a TNF-alpha promoter polymorphism, with septic shock susceptibility and mortality: a multicenter study. JAMA. 1999;282(6):561-568.	52.	Xiao W, Mindrinos MN, Seok J, et al. A genomic storm in critically injured humans. J Exp Med. 2011;208(13): 2581-2590.	53.	Eastridge BJ, Salinas J, McManus JG, et al. Hypotension begins at 110 mmHg: redefining “hypotension” with data. J Trauma. 2007;63(2):291-297; discussion 297-299.	54.	Luna GK, Eddy AC, Copass M. The sensitivity of vital signs in identifying major thoracoabdominal hemorrhage. Am J Surg. 1989;157(5):512-515.	55.	Victorino GP, Battistella FD, Wisner DH. Does tachycardia correlate with hypotension after trauma? J Am Coll Surg. 2003;196(5):679-684.	56.	Abramson D, Scalea TM, Hitchcock R, Trooskin SZ, Henry SM, Greenspan J. Lactate clearance and survival following injury. J Trauma. 1993;35(4):584-588; discussion 588-589.	57.	Davis JW, Parks SN, Kaups KL, Gladen HE, O’Donnell-Nicol S. Admission base deficit predicts transfusion requirements and risk of complications. J Trauma. 1996;41(5):769-774.	58.	Kincaid EH, Miller PR, Meredith JW, Rahman N, Chang MC. Elevated arterial base deficit in trauma patients: a marker of impaired oxygen utilization. J Am Coll Surg. 1998;187(4): 384-392.	59.	Rixen D, Raum M, Bouillon B, Lefering R, Neugebauer E. Base deficit development and its prognostic significance in posttrauma critical illness: an analysis by the trauma regis-try of the Deutsche Gesellschaft fur unfallchirurgie. Shock. 2001;15(2):83-89.	60.	Rutherford EJ, Morris JA, Jr., Reed GW, Hall KS. Base defi-cit stratifies mortality and determines therapy. J Trauma. 1992;33(3):417-423.	61.	Thorson CM, Van Haren RM, Ryan ML, et al. Admission hematocrit and transfusion requirements after trauma. J Am Coll Surg. 2013;216(1):65-73.	62.	Jacobs LM, Burns KJ, Pons PT, Gestring ML. Initial steps in training the public about bleeding control: surgeon participa-tion and evaluation. J Am Coll Surg. 2017;224(6):1084-1090.	63.	Jacobs LM, Joint committee to create a national policy to enhance survivability from intentional mass C, active shooter E.  The Hartford Consensus IV: a call for increased national resil-ience. Bull Am Coll Surg. 2016;101(3):17-24.	64.	Clarke JR, Trooskin SZ, Doshi PJ, Greenwald L, Mode CJ. Time to laparotomy for intra-abdominal bleeding from trauma Brunicardi_Ch05_p0131-p0156.indd   15429/01/19   11:06 AM 155SHOCKCHAPTER 5does affect survival for delays up to 90 minutes. J Trauma. 2002;52(3):420-425.	65.	Holcomb JB, Jenkins D, Rhee P, et al. Damage control resuscitation: directly addressing the early coagulopathy of trauma. J Trauma. 2007;62(2):307-310.	66.	Marshall HP, Jr., Capone A, Courcoulas AP, et al. Effects of hemodilution on long-term survival in an uncontrolled hemor-rhagic shock model in rats. J Trauma. 1997;43(4):673-679.	67.	Bickell WH, Wall MJ, Jr., Pepe PE, et al. Immediate versus delayed fluid resuscitation for hypotensive patients with pene-trating torso injuries. N Engl J Med. 1994;331(17):1105-1109.	68.	Human albumin administration in critically ill patients: system-atic review of randomised controlled trials. Cochrane Injuries Group Albumin Reviewers. BMJ. 1998;317(7153):235-240.	69.	Mann DV, Robinson MK, Rounds JD, et al. Superiority of blood over saline resuscitation from hemorrhagic shock: a 31P magnetic resonance spectroscopy study. Ann Surg. 1997;226(5):653-661.	70.	Vassar MJ, Fischer RP, O’Brien PE, et al. A multicenter trial for resuscitation of injured patients with 7.5% sodium chlo-ride. The effect of added dextran 70. The Multicenter Group for the Study of Hypertonic Saline in Trauma Patients. Arch Surg. 1993;128(9):1003-1011; discussion 1011-1003.	71.	Hebert PC, Yetisir E, Martin C, et al. Is a low transfusion threshold safe in critically ill patients with cardiovascular dis-eases? Crit Care Med. 2001;29(2):227-234.	72.	Hebert PC, Wells G, Blajchman MA, et al. A multicenter, ran-domized, controlled clinical trial of transfusion requirements in critical care. Transfusion Requirements in Critical Care Investigators, Canadian Critical Care Trials Group. N Engl J Med. 1999;340(6):409-417.	73.	Holcomb JB, Del Junco DJ, Fox EE, et al. The Prospec-tive, Observational, Multicenter, Major Trauma Transfusion (PROMMTT) study: comparative effectiveness of a timevarying treatment with competing risks. Arch Surg. 2012:1-10.	74.	Gonzalez EA, Moore FA, Holcomb JB, et al. Fresh frozen plasma should be given earlier to patients requiring massive transfusion. J Trauma. 2007;62(1):112-119.	75.	Borgman MA, Spinella PC, Perkins JG, et al. The ratio of blood products transfused affects mortality in patients receiv-ing massive transfusions at a combat support hospital. J Trauma. 2007;63(4):805-813.	76.	Stansbury LG, Dutton RP, Stein DM, Bochicchio GV,  Scalea TM, Hess JR. Controversy in trauma resuscitation: do ratios of plasma to red blood cells matter? Transfus Med Rev. 2009;23(4):255-265.	77.	Holcomb JB, Tilley BC, Baraniuk S, et al. Transfusion of plasma, platelets, and red blood cells in a 1:1:1 vs a 1:1:2 ratio and mortality in patients with severe trauma: the PROPPR ran-domized clinical trial. JAMA. 2015;313(5):471-482.	78.	Hess JR, Lindell AL, Stansbury LG, Dutton RP, Scalea TM. The prevalence of abnormal results of conventional coagu-lation tests on admission to a trauma center. Transfusion. 2009;49(1):34-39.	79.	Cosgriff N, Moore EE, Sauaia A, Kenny-Moynihan M,  Burch JM, Galloway B. Predicting life-threatening coagulopa-thy in the massively transfused trauma patient: hypothermia and acidoses revisited. J Trauma. 1997;42(5):857-861; discus-sion 861-852.	80.	Holcomb JB, Wade CE, Michalek JE, et al. Increased plasma and platelet to red blood cell ratios improves outcome in 466 massively transfused civilian trauma patients. Ann Surg. 2008;248(3):447-458.	81.	Brasel KJ, Vercruysse G, Spinella PC, et al. The association of blood component use ratios with the survival of massively transfused trauma patients with and without severe brain injury. J Trauma. 2011;71(2 suppl 3):S343-352.	82.	Roberts I, Shakur H, Afolabi A, et al. The importance of early treatment with tranexamic acid in bleeding trauma patients: an exploratory analysis of the CRASH-2 randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2011;377(9771): 1096-1101, 1101 e1091-1092.	83.	Niles SE, McLaughlin DF, Perkins JG, et al. Increased mortal-ity associated with the early coagulopathy of trauma in com-bat casualties. J Trauma. 2008;64(6):1459-1463; discussion 1463-1455.	84.	Holcomb JB, Minei KM, Scerbo ML, et al. Admission rapid thrombelastography can replace conventional coagulation tests in the emergency department: experience with 1974 consecu-tive trauma patients. Ann Surg. 2012;256(3):476-486.	85.	Roumen RM, Redl H, Schlag G, et al. Inflammatory media-tors in relation to the development of multiple organ fail-ure in patients after severe blunt trauma. Crit Care Med. 1995;23(3):474-480.	86.	Leone M, Boutiere B, Camoin-Jau L, et al. Systemic endo-thelial activation is greater in septic than in traumatichemorrhagic shock but does not correlate with endothelial acti-vation in skin biopsies. Crit Care Med. 2002;30(4):808-814.	87.	Mollen KP, Anand RJ, Tsung A, Prince JM, Levy RM,  Billiar TR. Emerging paradigm: toll-like receptor 4-sentinel for the detection of tissue damage. Shock. 2006;26(5):430-437.	88.	Landry DW, Oliver JA. The pathogenesis of vasodilatory shock. N Engl J Med. 2001;345(8):588-595.	89.	Angus DC, Linde-Zwirble WT, Lidicker J, Clermont G,  Carcillo J, Pinsky MR. Epidemiology of severe sepsis in the United States: analysis of incidence, outcome, and associated costs of care. Crit Care Med. 2001;29(7):1303-1310.	90.	Dellinger RP, Levy MM, Rhodes A, et al. Surviving  Sepsis Campaign: international guidelines for management of severe sepsis and septic shock, 2012. Intensive Care Med. 2013;39(2):165-228.	91.	Dellinger RP, Levy MM, Carlet JM, et al. Surviving  Sepsis Campaign: international guidelines for management of severe sepsis and septic shock: 2008. Crit Care Med. 2008;36(1):296-327.	92.	Singer M, Deutschman CS, Seymour CW, et al. The Third International Consensus Definitions for Sepsis and Septic Shock (Sepsis-3). JAMA. 2016;315(8):801-810.	93.	Levy MM, Evans LE, Rhodes A. The Surviving Sepsis  Campaign Bundle: 2018 update. Intensive Care Med. 2018.	94.	Rhodes A, Evans LE, Alhazzani W, et al. Surviving Sepsis Campaign: international guidelines for management of sep-sis and septic shock: 2016. Intensive Care Med. 2017;43(3): 304-377.	95.	Myburgh JA, Finfer S, Billot L. Hydroxyethyl starch or saline in intensive care. N Engl J Med. 2013;368(8):775.	96.	Perner A, Haase N, Guttormsen AB, et al. Hydroxyethyl starch 130/0.42 versus Ringer’s acetate in severe sepsis. N Engl J Med. 2012;367(2):124-134.	97.	Rivers E, Nguyen B, Havstad S, et al. Early goal-directed therapy in the treatment of severe sepsis and septic shock. N Engl J Med. 2001;345(19):1368-1377.	98.	Mouncey PR, Osborn TM, Power GS, et al. Trial of early, goal-directed resuscitation for septic shock. N Engl J Med. 2015;372(14):1301-1311.	99.	Angus DC, Barnato AE, Bell D, et al. A systematic review and meta-analysis of early goal-directed therapy for septic shock: the ARISE, ProCESS and ProMISe Investigators. Intensive Care Med. 2015;41(9):1549-1560.	100.	van den Berghe G, Wouters P, Weekers F, et al. Inten-sive insulin therapy in critically ill patients. N Engl J Med. 2001;345(19):1359-1367.	101.	Ventilation with lower tidal volumes as compared with tra-ditional tidal volumes for acute lung injury and the acute Brunicardi_Ch05_p0131-p0156.indd   15529/01/19   11:06 AM 156BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Irespiratory distress syndrome. The Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome Network. N Engl J Med. 2000;342(18):1301-1308.	102.	Beitler JR, Shaefi S, Montesi SB, et al. Prone positioning reduces mortality from acute respiratory distress syndrome in the low tidal volume era: a meta-analysis. Intensive Care Med. 2014;40(3):332-341.	103.	Annane D, Sebille V, Charpentier C, et al. Effect of treat-ment with low doses of hydrocortisone and fludrocorti-sone on mortality in patients with septic shock. JAMA. 2002;288(7):862-871.	104.	Sprung CL, Annane D, Keh D, et al. Hydrocortisone therapy for patients with septic shock. N Engl J Med. 2008;358(2):111-124.	105.	Hollenberg SM, Kavinsky CJ, Parrillo JE. Cardiogenic shock. Ann Intern Med. 1999;131(1):47-59.	106.	Webb JG, Lowe AM, Sanborn TA, et al. Percutaneous coro-nary intervention for cardiogenic shock in the SHOCK trial.  J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003;42(8):1380-1386.	107.	Edens JW, Chung KK, Pamplin JC, et al. Predictors of early acute lung injury at a combat support hospital: a prospective observational study. J Trauma. 2010;69 Suppl 1:S81-86.	108.	Aji J, Hollenberg S. Cardiogenic shock: giving the heart a break. Crit Care Med. 2006;34(4):1248-1249.	109.	Alonso DR, Scheidt S, Post M, Killip T. Pathophysiology of cardiogenic shock. Quantification of myocardial necrosis, clinical, pathologic and electrocardiographic correlations. Circulation. 1973;48(3):588-596.	110.	Goldstein DJ, Oz MC. Mechanical support for postcardi-otomy cardiogenic shock. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2000;12(3):220-228.	111.	Thygesen K, Alpert JS, Jaffe AS, et al. Third universal definition of myocardial infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;60(16):1581-1598.	112.	Gibbons RJ, Smith SC, Jr., Antman E. American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association clinical practice guidelines: part II: evolutionary changes in a continuous quality improvement project. Circulation. 2003;107(24):3101-3107.	113.	Menon V, Hochman JS. Management of cardiogenic shock complicating acute myocardial infarction. Heart. 2002;88(5): 531-537.	114.	Levi L, Wolf A, Belzberg H. Hemodynamic parameters in patients with acute cervical cord trauma: description, intervention, and prediction of outcome. Neurosurgery. 1993;33(6):1007-1016; discussion 1016-1007.	115.	Zipnick RI, Scalea TM, Trooskin SZ, et al. Hemodynamic responses to penetrating spinal cord injuries. J Trauma. 1993;35(4):578-582; discussion 582-573.	116.	Abou-Khalil B, Scalea TM, Trooskin SZ, Henry SM,  Hitchcock R. Hemodynamic responses to shock in young trauma patients: need for invasive monitoring. Crit Care Med. 1994;22(4):633-639.	117.	Claridge JA, Crabtree TD, Pelletier SJ, Butler K, Sawyer RG, Young JS. Persistent occult hypoperfusion is associated with a significant increase in infection rate and mortality in major trauma patients. J Trauma. 2000;48(1):8-14; discussion 14-15.	118.	Ivatury RR, Simon RJ, Havriliak D, Garcia C, Greenbarg J,  Stahl WM. Gastric mucosal pH and oxygen delivery and  oxygen consumption indices in the assessment of adequacy of resuscitation after trauma: a prospective, randomized study.  J Trauma. 1995;39(1):128-134; discussion 134-136.	119.	Maynard N, Beale R, Smithies M, Bihari D. Gastric intramu-cosal pH in critically ill patients. Lancet. 1992;339(8792): 550-551.	120.	Gomersall CD, Joynt GM, Freebairn RC, Hung V, Buckley TA, Oh TE. Resuscitation of critically ill patients based on the results of gastric tonometry: a prospective, randomized, controlled trial. Crit Care Med. 2000;28(3):607-614.	121.	Cairns CB, Moore FA, Haenel JB, et al. Evidence for early supply independent mitochondrial dysfunction in patients developing multiple organ failure after trauma. J Trauma. 1997;42(3):532-536.	122.	Cohn SM, Crookes BA, Proctor KG. Near-infrared spectros-copy in resuscitation. J Trauma. 2003;54(5 Suppl):S199-202.	123.	Knudson MM, Bermudez KM, Doyle CA, Mackersie RC, Hopf HW, Morabito D. Use of tissue oxygen tension measure-ments during resuscitation from hemorrhagic shock. J Trauma. 1997;42(4):608-614; discussion 614-616.	124.	McKinley BA, Marvin RG, Cocanour CS, Moore FA. Tissue hemoglobin O2 saturation during resuscitation of traumatic shock monitored using near infrared spectrometry. J Trauma. 2000;48(4):637-642.	125.	Cheatham ML, Nelson LD, Chang MC, Safcsak K. Right ven-tricular end-diastolic volume index as a predictor of preload status in patients on positive end-expiratory pressure. Crit Care Med. 1998;26(11):1801-1806.	126.	Chang MC, Meredith JW, Kincaid EH, Miller PR. Maintain-ing survivors’ values of left ventricular power output dur-ing shock resuscitation: a prospective pilot study. J Trauma. 2000;49(1):26-33; discussion 34-37.Brunicardi_Ch05_p0131-p0156.indd   15629/01/19   11:06 AM
# Chunk 8871
Surgical InfectionsRobert E. Bulander, David L. Dunn,  and Greg J. Beilman 6chapterHISTORICAL BACKGROUNDAlthough treatment of infection has long been an integral part of the surgeon’s practice, the body of knowledge that led to the present field of surgical infectious disease was derived from the evolution of germ theory and antisepsis. Application of the latter to clinical practice, concurrent with the development of anesthe-sia, was pivotal in allowing surgeons to expand their repertoire to encompass complex procedures that previously were associ-ated with extremely high rates of morbidity and mortality due to postoperative infections. However, until recently the occurrence of infection related to the surgical wound was the rule rather than the exception. In fact, the development of modalities to effectively prevent and treat infection has occurred only within the last several decades.A number of observations by 19th century physicians and investigators were critical to our current understanding of the pathogenesis, prevention, and treatment of surgical infections. In 1846, Ignaz Semmelweis, a Magyar physician, took a post at the Allgemein Krankenhaus in Vienna. He noticed that the mortality rate from puerperal (“childbed”) fever was nearly three times higher in the teaching ward than in the ward where patients were delivered by midwives. He also made the observa-tion that women who delivered prior to arrival on the teaching ward had a negligible mortality rate. When a colleague died from overwhelming infection resulting from a knife scratch received during an autopsy of a woman who had died of puer-peral fever, Semmelweis observed that pathologic changes in his friend were identical to those of women dying from this postpartum disease. He hypothesized that puerperal fever was caused by putrid material carried on the examining fingers of medical students and physicians who cared for women dying of the disease, and who often went from the autopsy room to the wards. The low mortality rate in the midwives’ ward, Sem-melweis realized, was because midwives did not participate in autopsies. Fired with the zeal of his revelation, he posted a notice on the door to the ward requiring all caregivers to rinse their hands thoroughly in chlorine water prior to entering the area. This simple intervention reduced the mortality rate from puerperal fever on the teaching ward to 1.5%, surpassing the record of the midwives. In 1861, he published his classic work on childbed fever based on records from his practice. Unfor-tunately, Semmelweis’ ideas were not well accepted by the authorities of the time.1 Increasingly frustrated by the indiffer-ence of the medical profession, he began writing open letters to well-known obstetricians in Europe and was committed to an asylum due to concerns that he was losing his mind. He died shortly thereafter. His achievements were only recognized after Pasteur’s description of the germ theory of disease.Louis Pasteur performed a body of work during the lat-ter part of the 19th century that provided the underpinnings of modern microbiology, at the time known as germ theory. His work in humans followed experiments identifying infectious agents in silkworms. He was able to elucidate the principle that contagious diseases are caused by specific microbes and that these microbes are foreign to the infected organism. Using this principle, he developed techniques of sterilization criti-cal to oenology and identified several bacteria responsible for human illnesses, including Staphylococcus and Streptococcus  pneumoniae (pneumococcus).Joseph Lister, the son of a wine merchant, was appointed professor of surgery at the Glasgow Royal Infirmary in 1859. In his early practice, he noted that more than half of his patients undergoing amputation died because of postoperative infection. After hearing of Pasteur’s work, Lister experimented with the use of a solution of carbolic acid, which he knew was being used to treat sewage. He first reported his findings to the British Medical Association in 1867 using dressings saturated with car-bolic acid on 12 patients with compound fractures; 10 recovered Historical Background	157Pathogenesis of Infection	159Host Defenses / 159Definitions / 160Microbiology of Infectious Agents	161Bacteria / 161Fungi / 162Viruses / 162Prevention and Treatment of   Surgical Infections	163General Principles / 163Source Control / 163Appropriate Use of Antimicrobial  Agents / 164Infections of Significance in   Surgical Patients	169Surgical Site Infections / 169Intra-Abdominal Infections / 171Organ-Specific Infections / 172Infections of the Skin and Soft  Tissue / 173Postoperative Nosocomial  Infections / 174Sepsis / 175Resistant Organisms / 177Blood-Borne Pathogens / 177Biologic Warfare Agents	178Bacillus anthracis (Anthrax) / 178Yersinia pestis (Plague) / 178Smallpox / 178Francisella tularensis (Tularemia) / 179Brunicardi_Ch06_p0157-p0182.indd   15701/03/19   4:46 PM 158without amputation, one survived with amputation, and one died of causes unrelated to the wound. In spite of initial resistance, his methods were quickly adopted throughout much of Europe.From 1878 until 1880, Robert Koch was the district medi-cal officer for Wollstein, an area in Prussia where anthrax was endemic. Performing experiments in his home, without the ben-efit of scientific equipment and academic contact, Koch devel-oped techniques for culture of Bacillus anthracis and proved the ability of this organism to cause anthrax in healthy animals. He developed the following four postulates to identify the asso-ciation of organisms with specific diseases: (a) the suspected pathogenic organism should be present in all cases of the disease and absent from healthy animals, (b) the suspected pathogen should be isolated from a diseased host and grown in a pure culture in vitro, (c) cells from a pure culture of the suspected organism should cause disease in a healthy animal, and (d) the organism should be reisolated from the newly diseased animal and shown to be the same as the original. He used these same techniques to identify the organisms responsible for cholera and tuberculosis. During the next century, Koch’s postulates, as they came to be called, became critical to the understanding of surgi-cal infections.2The first intra-abdominal operation to treat infection via “source control” (i.e., surgical intervention to eliminate the source of infection) was appendectomy. This operation was pioneered by Charles McBurney at the New York College of Physicians and Surgeons, among others.3 McBurney’s classic report on early operative intervention for appendicitis was pre-sented before the New York Surgical Society in 1889. Appen-dectomy for the treatment of appendicitis, previously an often fatal disease, was popularized after the 1902 coronation of King Edward VII of England was delayed due to his falling ill with appendicitis. Edward insisted on carrying out his sched-ule, despite worsening abdominal pain. Sir Frederick Treves, a prominent London surgeon, was among the consultants in atten-dance upon Edward. As the prince’s condition deteriorated, and as he continued to insist that he would go to Westminster Abbey to be crowned, Treves told him, “Then Sire, you will go as a corpse.” Edward relented, Treves drained a large periappendi-ceal abscess, and the king lived.4During the 20th century the development of effective anti-microbials added a new dimension to modern surgical practice. Sir Alexander Fleming, after serving in the British Army Medical Corps during World War I, continued his work on the natural antibacterial action of the blood and antiseptics. In 1928, while studying influenza virus, he noted a zone of inhibition around a mold colony (Penicillium notatum) that serendipitously grew on a plate of Staphylococcus, and he named the active substance penicillin. Penicillin, along with the sulfonamide antibiotics, were among the first of hundreds of potent antimicrobials that became a critical component of the armamentarium to prevent and treat aggressive, lethal surgical infections.5Concurrent with the development of antimicrobial agents were advances in the field of clinical microbiology. Many new microbes were identified, including numerous anaerobes. The autochthonous microflora of the skin, gastrointestinal tract, and other parts of the body that the surgeon encountered in the pro-cess of an operation were characterized in great detail. However, it remained unclear whether these organisms were commensals or pathogens. Subsequently, the initial clinical observations of surgeons such as Frank Meleney, William Altemeier, and others provided the key when they observed that aerobic and anaerobic host flora could synergize to cause serious soft tissue and severe intra-abdominal infection.6,7 Thus, the concepts that resident Key Points1	Sepsis is a life-threatening syndrome reflecting both an infection and the systemic host response to it. It has a broad variety of presentations and manifestations that hold in com-mon some form of organ dysfunction. Outcomes in patients with sepsis are improved with an organized approach to therapy that addresses rapid resuscitation, antibiotics, and source control.2	Source control is a key concept in the treatment of most surgically relevant infections. Infected or necrotic material must be drained or removed as part of the treatment plan in this setting. Delays in adequate source control are associated with worsened outcomes.3	Principles relevant to appropriate antibiotic prophylaxis for surgery: (a) select an agent with activity against organisms commonly found at the site of surgery, (b) administer the ini-tial dose of the antibiotic within 30 minutes prior to incision, (c) redose the antibiotic during long operations based upon the half-life of the agent to ensure adequate tissue levels, and (d) limit the antibiotic regimen to no more than 24 hours after surgery for routine prophylaxis.4	When using antimicrobial agents for therapy of serious infection, several principles should be followed: (a) identify likely sources of infection, (b) select an agent (or agents) that will have efficacy against likely organisms for these sources, (c) begin therapy rapidly with broad coverage, as inadequate or delayed antibiotic therapy results in increased mortality, (d) when possible, obtain cultures early and use results to refine therapy, (e) if no infection is identified after 3 days, strongly consider discontinuation of antibiotics, based upon the patient’s clinical course, and (f) discontinue antibiotics after an appropriate course of therapy.5	The incidence of surgical site infections can be reduced by appropriate patient preparation, timely perioperative antibi-otic administration, maintenance of perioperative normo-thermia and normoglycemia, and appropriate wound management.6	The keys to good outcomes in patients with necrotizing soft tissue infection are early recognition and appropriate debridement of infected tissue with repeated debridement until no further signs of infection are present.7	Transmission of HIV and other infections spread by blood and body fluids from patient to healthcare worker can be minimized by practicing universal precautions, which include routine use of barriers when anticipating contact with blood or body fluids, washing of hands and other skin surfaces immediately after contact with blood or body fluids, and careful handling and disposal of sharp instruments dur-ing and after use.Brunicardi_Ch06_p0157-p0182.indd   15801/03/19   4:46 PM 159SURGICAL INFECTIONSCHAPTER 6microbes were nonpathogenic until they entered a sterile body cavity at the time of surgery, and that many, if not most, surgical infections were polymicrobial in nature, became critical ideas.8,9 These tenets became firmly established after microbiology lab-oratories demonstrated the invariable presence of aerobes and anaerobes in peritoneal cultures obtained at the time of surgery for intra-abdominal infection due to perforated viscus or gangre-nous appendicitis. Clinical trials provided ample evidence that optimal therapy for these infections required effective source control and the administration of antimicrobial agents directed against both types of pathogens.William Osler made an observation in 1904 in his treatise The Evolution of Modern Medicine that was to have profound implications for the future of treatment of infection: “Except on few occasions, the patient appears to die from the body’s response to infection rather than from it.”10 The discovery of cytokines began to allow insight into the human organism’s response to infection, and led to an explosion in our understand-ing of the host inflammatory response. Expanding knowledge of the multiple pathways activated during the response to invasion by infectious organisms has permitted the design of new thera-pies targeted at modifying the inflammatory response to infec-tion, which seems to cause much of the organ dysfunction and failure. Preventing and treating this process of multiple organ failure during infection is one of the major challenges of modern critical care and surgical infectious disease.PATHOGENESIS OF INFECTIONHost DefensesThe mammalian host possesses several layers of endogenous defense mechanisms that serve to prevent microbial invasion, limit proliferation of microbes within the host, and contain or eradicate invading microbes. These defenses are integrated and redundant so that the various components function as a com-plex, highly regulated system that is extremely effective in cop-ing with microbial invaders. They include site-specific defenses that function at the tissue level, as well as components that freely circulate throughout the body in both blood and lymph. Systemic host defenses invariably are recruited to a site of infec-tion, a process that begins immediately upon introduction of microbes into a sterile area of the body. Perturbation of one or more components of these defenses (e.g., via immunosuppres-sants, foreign body, chronic illness, or burns) may have substan-tial negative impact on resistance to infection.Entry of microbes into the mammalian host is precluded by a number of barriers that possess either an epithelial (integu-ment) or mucosal (respiratory, gut, and urogenital) surface. Barrier function, however, is not solely limited to physical characteristics. Host barrier cells may secrete substances that limit microbial proliferation or prevent invasion. Also, resident or commensal microbes adherent to the physical surface and to each other may preclude invasion, particularly of virulent organ-isms; this is termed colonization resistance.11The most extensive physical barrier is the integument or skin. In addition to the physical barrier posed by the epithelial surface, the skin harbors its own resident microflora that may block the attachment and invasion of noncommensal microbes. Microbes also are held in check by chemicals secreted by seba-ceous glands and by the constant shedding of epithelial cells. The endogenous microflora of the integument primarily com-prises gram-positive aerobic microbes belonging to the genera Staphylococcus and Streptococcus, as well as Corynebacterium and Propionibacterium species. These organisms plus Entero-coccus faecalis and faecium, Escherichia coli and other Entero-bacteriaceae, and yeast such as Candida albicans can be isolated from the infraumbilical regions of the body. Diseases of the skin (e.g., eczema and dermatitis) are associated with overgrowth of skin commensal organisms, and barrier breaches invariably lead to the introduction of these microbes.The respiratory tract possesses several host defense mech-anisms that facilitate the maintenance of sterility in the distal bronchi and alveoli. In the upper respiratory tract, respiratory mucus traps larger particles, including microbes. This mucus is then passed into the upper airways and oropharynx by cili-ated epithelial cells, where the mucus is cleared via coughing. Smaller particles arriving in the lower respiratory tract are cleared via phagocytosis by pulmonary alveolar macrophages. Any process that diminishes these host defenses can lead to development of bronchitis or pneumonia.The urogenital, biliary, pancreatic ductal, and distal respi-ratory tracts do not possess resident microflora in healthy indi-viduals, although microbes may be present if these barriers are affected by disease (e.g., malignancy, inflammation, calculi, or foreign body), or if microorganisms are introduced from an external source (e.g., urinary catheter or pulmonary aspiration). In contrast, significant numbers of microbes are encountered in many portions of the gastrointestinal tract, with vast numbers being found within the oropharynx and distal colon or rectum, although the specific organisms differ.One would suppose that the entire gastrointestinal tract would be populated via those microbes found in the oropharynx, but this is not the case.11 This is because after ingestion these organisms routinely are killed in the highly acidic, low-motility environment of the stomach during the initial phases of diges-tion. Thus, only small numbers of microbes populate the gas-tric mucosa (∼102 to 103 colony-forming units [CFU]/mL). This population expands in the presence of drugs or disease states that diminish gastric acidity. Microbes that are not destroyed within the stomach enter the small intestine, in which a certain amount of microbial proliferation takes place, such that approxi-mately 105 to 108 CFU/mL are present in the terminal ileum.The relatively low-oxygen, static environment of the colon is accompanied by the exponential growth of microbes that com-prise the most extensive host endogenous microflora. Anaerobic microbes outnumber aerobic species approximately 100:1 in the distal colon, and approximately 1011 to 1012 CFU/g are pres-ent in feces. Large numbers of facultative and strict anaerobes  (Bacteroides fragilis, distasonis, and thetaiotaomicron, Bifido-bacterium, Clostridium, Eubacterium, Fusobacterium, Lactoba-cillus, and Peptostreptococcus species) as well as several orders of magnitude fewer aerobic microbes (E coli and other Entero-bacteriaceae, E faecalis and faecium, C albicans and other Candida spp.) are present. Intriguingly, although colonization resistance on the part of this extensive, well-characterized host microflora effectively prevents invasion of enteric pathogens such as Salmonella, Shigella, Vibrio, and other enteropathogenic bacterial species, these same organisms provide the initial inoc-ulum for infection should perforation of the gastrointestinal tract occur. It is of great interest that only some of these microbial species predominate in established intra-abdominal infections.Once microbes enter a sterile body compartment (e.g., the pleural or peritoneal cavity) or tissue, additional host defenses act to limit and/or eliminate these pathogens. Initially, several Brunicardi_Ch06_p0157-p0182.indd   15901/03/19   4:46 PM 160BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iprimitive and relatively nonspecific host defenses act to con-tain the nidus of infection, which may include microbes as well as debris, devitalized tissue, and foreign bodies, depending on the nature of the injury. These defenses include the physi-cal barrier of the tissue itself, as well as the capacity of pro-teins such as lactoferrin and transferrin to sequester the critical microbial growth factor iron, thereby limiting microbial growth. In addition, fibrinogen within the inflammatory fluid has the ability to trap large numbers of microbes during the process in which it polymerizes into fibrin. Within the peritoneal cavity, unique host defenses exist, including a diaphragmatic pump-ing mechanism whereby particles—including microbes—within peritoneal fluid are expunged from the abdominal cavity via specialized structures (stomata) on the undersurface of the dia-phragm that lead to thoracic lymphatic channels. Concurrently, containment by the omentum and intestinal ileus serve to wall off infections. However, the latter processes and fibrin trapping have a high likelihood of contributing to the formation of an intra-abdominal abscess.Microbes also immediately encounter a series of host defense mechanisms that reside within the vast majority of tissues of the body. These include resident macrophages and low levels of complement (C) proteins and immunoglobulins (e.g., antibodies).12 The response in macrophages is initiated by genome-encoded pattern recognition receptors that respond to invading microbes. With exposure to a foreign organism, these receptors recognize microbial pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) and endogenous danger-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs). Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are a well-defined example of a PAMP that plays an important role in pathogen signaling.13 Resident macrophages secrete a wide array of sub-stances in response to the aforementioned processes, some of which appear to regulate the cellular components of the host defense response. This results in recruitment and proliferation of inflammatory cells. Macrophage cytokine synthesis is upreg-ulated. Secretion of tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), of interleukins (IL)-1β, 6, and 8; and of gamma interferon (IFN-γ) occurs within the tissue milieu, and depending on the magnitude of the host defense response, the systemic circulation.14 Concur-rently, a counterregulatory response is initiated consisting of binding protein (TNF-BP), cytokine receptor antagonists (e.g., IL-1ra), and anti-inflammatory cytokines (IL-4 and IL-10).The interaction of microbes with these first-line host defenses leads to microbial opsonization (C1q, C3bi, and IgFc), phagocytosis, and both extracellular (C5b6-9 membrane attack complex) and intracellular microbial destruction (via cellular ingestion into phagocytic vacuoles). Concurrently, the classical and alternate complement pathways are activated both via direct contact with and via IgM and IgG binding to microbes, leading to the release of a number of different biologically active com-plement protein fragments (C3a, C4a, C5a), acting to markedly enhance vascular permeability. Bacterial cell wall components and a variety of enzymes expelled from leukocyte phagocytic vacuoles during microbial phagocytosis and killing act in this capacity as well.Simultaneously, the release of substances to which poly-morphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs) in the bloodstream are attracted takes place. These consist of C5a, microbial cell wall peptides containing N-formyl-methionine, and macrophage secretion of cytokines such as IL-8. This process of host defense recruitment leads to further influx of inflammatory fluid into the area of incipient infection and is accompanied by diapedesis of large numbers of PMNs, a process that begins within several minutes and may peak within hours or days. The magnitude of the response and eventual outcome is generally related to several factors: (a) the initial number of microbes, (b) the rate of microbial proliferation in relation to containment and killing by host defenses, (c) microbial virulence, and (d) the potency of host defenses. In regard to the latter, drugs or disease states that diminish any or multiple components of host defenses are asso-ciated with higher rates and potentially more grave infections.DefinitionsSeveral possible outcomes can occur subsequent to microbial invasion and the interaction of microbes with resident and recruited host defenses: (a) eradication; (b) containment, often leading to the presence of purulence, the hallmark of chronic infections (e.g., a furuncle in the skin and soft tissue or abscess within the parenchyma of an organ or potential space); (c) locoregional infection (cellulitis, lymphangitis, and aggressive soft tissue infection) with or without distant spread of infec-tion (metastatic abscess); or (d) systemic infection (bactere-mia or fungemia). Obviously, the latter represents the failure of resident and recruited host defenses at the local level, and is associated with significant morbidity and mortality. Disease progression commonly occurs such that serious locoregional infection is associated with concurrent systemic infection. A chronic abscess also may intermittently drain and/or be associ-ated with bacteremia.Infection is defined by the presence of microorganisms in host tissue or the bloodstream. The classic findings of rubor, calor, and dolor in areas such as the skin or subcutaneous tis-sue are common at the site of infection. Most infections in nor-mal individuals with intact host defenses are associated with these local manifestations, plus systemic manifestations such as elevated temperature, elevated white blood cell (WBC) count, tachycardia, or tachypnea. The systemic manifestations noted previously comprise what has been termed the systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS). SIRS reflects a pro-inflammatory state in response to a variety of disease processes, including infection, pancreatitis, polytrauma, malignancy, and burns. There are a variety of systemic manifestations of infec-tion, with the classic factors of fever, tachycardia, and tachypnea broadened to include a variety of other variables (Table 6-1).15The definition of sepsis is evolving. Earlier models described sepsis as SIRS caused by infection. This was based upon the idea that sepsis is mediated by the production of a cascade of proinflammatory mediators produced in response to exposure to microbial products. These products include lipo-polysaccharide (endotoxin, LPS) derived from gram-negative organisms; peptidoglycans and teichoic acids from grampositive organisms; many different microbial cell wall compo-nents, such as mannan from yeast and fungi; and many others.There are several issues, however, with basing a sepsis diagnosis on the presence of SIRS. One problem is that it is insufficiently specific. Patients can exhibit SIRS criteria without the presence of the more whole-body dysregulation consistent with sepsis, and conversely can suffer from sepsis without meet-ing SIRS criteria. Patients with SIRS do not necessarily prog-ress to sepsis and do not necessarily have worsened outcomes because of the SIRS diagnosis; in other words, SIRS is not inher-ently life-threatening. Another issue is that the SIRS criteria can vary and are inconsistently applied. Numerous definitions exist, specifying differing physiologic and laboratory criteria for the Brunicardi_Ch06_p0157-p0182.indd   16001/03/19   4:46 PM 161SURGICAL INFECTIONSCHAPTER 6diagnosis. This creates difficulty in clinical, epidemiological, and research settings. Further, sepsis is not a purely inflamma-tory phenomenon, as both proand anti-inflammatory cascades have been shown to be activated in septic patients. Basing a diagnosis upon inflammatory markers alone disregards nonin-flammatory organ dysfunction, which may not manifest as SIRS but can contribute to mortality. A final concern is that defining sepsis using SIRS criteria implies that SIRS, sepsis, severe sep-sis, and septic shock exist upon a continuum, and while SIRS and sepsis have common features, the former does not necessar-ily lead to the latter. This being said, SIRS criteria have utility in that they point toward an organism experiencing physiological stress. The presence of SIRS warrants further investigation by the clinician.16An international consensus panel proposed new defini-tions of sepsis and septic shock in 2016. What is known as the Sepsis-3 model defines sepsis as life-threatening organ dysfunc-tion caused by a dysregulated host response to infection. Organ dysfunction is quantified by an increase of ≥2 points on the Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA). The SOFA score looks at PaO2/FiO2 ratio, bilirubin, platelet count, mean arterial pressure (MAP), Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score, creatinine level, and urine output (Table 6-2). An increase in SOFA score of 2 or more is correlated with a 10% in-hospital mortality risk, which is suggestive of the life-threatening nature of sepsis. An abbreviated version of the scoring system, the quick SOFA (qSOFA) is recommended as a screening and mon-itoring tool for patients with suspected sepsis. The qSOFA sug-gests potentially life-threatening sepsis when at least two of the following parameters are met: altered mental status, systolic blood pressure of 100 mmHg or less, and respiratory rate greater than 22 breaths/minute. The qSOFA can readily identify patients at risk of poor outcome from sepsis without reliance upon labo-ratory or imaging data.16Under the older nomenclature, severe sepsis was char-acterized as sepsis combined with the presence of new-onset organ failure. The Sepsis-3 definitions consider the term “severe sepsis” to be redundant, as by this definition all sepsis involves organ dysfunction. Under the Sepsis-3 guidelines, septic shock is a subset of sepsis in which circulatory and cellular metabolic derangements are profound enough to significantly increase the risk of death. Sepsis is the most common cause of death in non-coronary critical care units and the 11th most common cause of death overall in the United States, with a mortality rate of 10.3 cases per 100,000 population in 2010.17 Septic shock is the most severe manifestation of infection, with an attendant mortality rate in excess of 40%. It can be identified by persistent arterial hypo-tension requiring vasopressors to maintain mean arterial pressure (MAP) ≥65, and by serum lactate >2 mmol/L (18 mg/dL) despite adequate volume resuscitation.16,18,19MICROBIOLOGY OF INFECTIOUS AGENTSA partial list of common pathogens that cause infections in sur-gical patients is provided in Table 6-3.BacteriaBacteria are responsible for the majority of surgical infections. Specific species are identified using Gram stain and growth characteristics on specific media. The Gram stain is an important evaluation that allows rapid classification of bacteria by color. This color is related to the staining characteristics of the bacterial cell wall: gram-positive bacteria stain blue and gram-negative bacteria stain red. Bacteria are classified based upon a num-ber of additional characteristics, including morphology (cocci and bacilli), the pattern of division (single organisms, groups of organisms in pairs [diplococci], clusters [staphylococci], and chains [streptococci]), and the presence and location of spores.Gram-positive bacteria that frequently cause infections in surgical patients include aerobic skin commensals (Staphylo-coccus aureus and epidermidis and Streptococcus pyogenes) and enteric organisms such as E faecalis and faecium. Aerobic skin commensals cause a large percentage of surgical site infec-tions (SSIs), either alone or in conjunction with other patho-gens; enterococci can cause nosocomial infections (urinary tract infections [UTIs] and bacteremia) in immunocompromised or chronically ill patients, but are of relatively low virulence in healthy individuals.There are many pathogenic gram-negative bacterial spe-cies that are capable of causing infection in surgical patients. Most gram-negative organisms of interest to the surgeon are bacilli belonging to the family Enterobacteriaceae, including Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Serratia marcescens, and Enterobacter, Citrobacter, and Acinetobacter species. Other gram-negative bacilli of note include Pseudomonas, including P aeruginosa and fluorescens, and Stenotrophomonas species.1Table 6-1Criteria for systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS)General variables Fever (core temp >38.3°C) Hypothermia (core temp <36°C) Heart rate >90 bpm Tachypnea Altered mental status Significant edema or positive fluid balance (>20 mL/kg   over 24 hours) Hyperglycemia in the absence of diabetesInflammatory variables Leukocytosis (WBC >12,000) Leukopenia (WBC <4,000) Bandemia (>10% band forms) Plasma C-reactive protein >2 s.d. above normal value Plasma procalcitonin >2 s.d. above normal valueHemodynamic variables Arterial hypotension (SBP <90 mmHg, MAP <70, or SBP   decrease >40 mmHg)Organ dysfunction variables Arterial hypoxemia Acute oliguria Creatinine increase Coagulation abnormalities Ileus Thrombocytopenia HyperbilirubinemiaTissue perfusion variables Hyperlactatemia Decreased capillary fillingbpm = beats per minute; MAP = mean arterial pressure; SBP = systolic blood pressure; s.d. = standard deviations; SvO2 = venous oxygen saturation; WBC = white blood cell count.Brunicardi_Ch06_p0157-p0182.indd   16101/03/19   4:46 PM 162BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IAnaerobic organisms divide poorly or are unable to grow in air, as most do not possess the enzyme catalase, which allows for metabolism of reactive oxygen species. Anaerobes are the predominant indigenous flora in many areas of the human body, with the particular species being dependent on the site. For example, Propionibacterium acnes and other species are a major component of the skin microflora and cause the infectious mani-festation of acne. As noted previously, large numbers of anaer-obes contribute to the microflora of the oropharynx and colon.Infection due to Mycobacterium tuberculosis was once one of the most common causes of death in Europe, causing one in four deaths in the 17th and 18th centuries. In the 19th and 20th centuries, thoracic surgical intervention was often required for severe pulmonary disease, now an increasingly uncommon occur-rence in developed countries. This organism and other related organisms (M avium-intracellulare and M leprae) are known as acid-fast bacilli. Other acid-fast bacilli include Nocardia. These organisms typically are slow growing, sometimes necessitating observation in culture for weeks to months prior to final identi-fication, although deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)-based analysis is increasingly available to provide a means for preliminary, rapid detection.FungiFungi are typically identified by use of special stains (e.g., potas-sium hydroxide, India ink, methenamine silver, or Giemsa). Initial identification is assisted by observation of the form of branching and septation in stained specimens or in culture. Final identification is based on growth characteristics in special media, similar to bacteria, as well as on the capacity for growth at a different temperature (25°C vs. 37°C). Fungi of relevance to surgeons include those that cause nosocomial infections in surgical patients as part of polymicrobial infections or fungemia (e.g., C albicans and related species), rare causes of aggressive soft tissue infections (e.g., Mucor, Rhizopus, and Absidia spp.), and opportunistic pathogens that cause infection in the immuno-compromised host (e.g., Aspergillus fumigatus, niger, terreus, and other spp., Blastomyces dermatitidis, Coccidioides immitis, and Cryptococcus neoformans). Agents currently available for antifungal therapy are described in Table 6-4.VirusesDue to their small size and necessity for growth within cells, viruses are difficult to culture, requiring a longer time than is typically optimal for clinical decision making. Previously, viral infection was identified by indirect means (i.e., the host anti-body response); more modern techniques identify the presence of viral DNA or ribonucleic acid (RNA) using methods such as polymerase chain reaction. Similar to many fungal infections, most clinically relevant viral infections in surgical patients occur in the immunocompromised host, particularly those receiv-ing immunosuppression to prevent rejection of a solid organ allograft. Relevant viruses include adenoviruses, cytomegalo-virus, Epstein-Barr virus, herpes simplex virus, and varicella-zoster virus. Surgeons must be aware of the manifestations of  hepatitis B and C viruses, as well as human immunodeficiency Table 6-2Sequential Organ Failure Assessment scoreSYSTEMSCORE01234RespiratoryPaO2/FiO2, mmHg (kPa)≥400 (53.3)<400 (53.3)<300 (40)<200 (26.7) with respiratory support<100 (13.3) with respiratory supportCoagulationPlatelets, × 103/μL≥150<150<100<50<20HepaticBilirubin, mg/dL (μmol/L)<1.2 (20)1.2–1.9 (20–32)2–5.9 (33–101)6–11.9 (102–204)>12 (204)CardiovascularMAP ≥70 mmHgMAP <70 mmHgDopamine <5 or dobutamineDopamine 5.1–15 or epinephrine ≤0.1 or norepinephrine ≤0.1Dopamine >15 or epinephrine >0.1 or norepinephrine >0.1CNSGCS score1513–1410–126–9<6RenalCreatinine, mg/dL (μmol/L)<1.2 (110)1.2–1.9 (110–170)2–3.4 (171–299)3.5–4.9 (300–440)>5 (440)Urine output, mL/24 hours<500<200MAP = mean arterial pressure; PaO2 = partial pressure of oxygen; FiO2 = fraction of inspired oxygen; CNS = central nervous system; GCS = Glasgow Coma ScaleCatecholamine doses in μg/kg/minuteReproduced with permission from Vincent JL, Moreno R, Takala J, et al: The SOFA (Sepsis-related Organ Failure Assessment) score to describe organ dysfunction/failure. On behalf of the Working Group on Sepsis-Related Problems of the European Society of Intensive Care Medicine, Intensive Care Med. 1996 Jul;22(7):707-710.Brunicardi_Ch06_p0157-p0182.indd   16201/03/19   4:46 PM 163SURGICAL INFECTIONSCHAPTER 6virus infections, including their capacity to be transmitted to healthcare workers (see “General Principles”). Prophylactic and therapeutic use of antiviral agents is discussed elsewhere in this textbook.PREVENTION AND TREATMENT OF SURGICAL INFECTIONSGeneral PrinciplesManeuvers to diminish the presence of exogenous (surgeon and operating room environment) and endogenous (patient) microbes are termed prophylaxis and consist of a variety of mechanical and chemical modalities. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) publishes updated, evidence-based guidelines on best practices for prevention of surgical site infections. Important principles in prophylaxis can be grouped into factors pertaining to skin preparation, antimicrobial  therapy, and patient physiological management.Patient skin preparation should begin the night before a planned surgical procedure with a full body bath or shower using soap or an antiseptic agent. Hair removal from an opera-tive site should be performed in the operating room with clippers rather than with a razor, to avoid creating nicks in the skin that could foster bacterial growth. Prior to incision, the skin should be cleansed with an alcohol-based antiseptic agent. There is no clear evidence that use of antimicrobial-containing fluids for either irrigation or soaking prosthetic materials is beneficial in preventing infections. Preoperative antimicrobial therapy should be administered when appropriate, based on clinical guidelines, and occur within a time frame that allows bactericidal con-centration of the agent in tissues before the incision is made. Physiological management of the intraoperative patient includes maintenance of euglycemia (serum glucose <200 mg/dL) and normothermia, and optimization of tissue oxygenation.20Source ControlThe primary precept of surgical infectious disease therapy con-sists of drainage of all purulent material, debridement of all infected, devitalized tissue and debris, and/or removal of foreign bodies at the site of infection, plus remediation of the underlying cause of infection.21 This is termed source control. A dis-crete, walled-off purulent fluid collection (i.e., an abscess) 2Table 6-3Common pathogens in surgical patientsGram-positive aerobic cocci Staphylococcus aureus Staphylococcus epidermidis Streptococcus pyogenes Streptococcus pneumoniae Enterococcus faecium, E faecalisGram-negative aerobic bacilli Escherichia coli Haemophilus influenzae Klebsiella pneumoniae Proteus mirabilis Enterobacter cloacae, E aerogenes Serratia marcescens Acinetobacter calcoaceticus Citrobacter freundii Pseudomonas aeruginosa Stenotrophomonas maltophiliaAnaerobes Gram-positive  Clostridium difficile  Clostridium perfringens, C tetani, C septicum  Peptostreptococcus spp. Gram-negative  Bacteroides fragilis  Fusobacterium spp.Other bacteria Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare Mycobacterium tuberculosis Nocardia asteroids Legionella pneumophila Listeria monocytogenesFungi Aspergillus fumigatus, A niger, A terreus, A flavus Blastomyces dermatitidis Candida albicans Candida glabrata, C paropsilosis, C krusei Coccidiodes immitis Cryptococcus neoformans Histoplasma capsulatum Mucor/RhizopusViruses Cytomegalovirus Epstein-Barr virus Hepatitis A, B, C viruses Herpes simplex virus Human immunodeficiency virus Varicella zoster virusTable 6-4Antifungal agents and their characteristicsANTIFUNGALADVANTAGESDISADVANTAGESAmphotericin BBroad-spectrum, inexpensiveRenal toxicity, premeds, IV onlyLiposomal Amphotericin BBroad-spectrumExpensive, IV only, renal toxicityAzolesFluconazoleIV and PO availabilityNarrow-spectrum, drug interactionsItraconazoleIV and PO availabilityNarrow spectrum, no CSF penetrationDrug interactions, decreased cardiac contractilityPosaconazoleBroad-spectrum, zygomycete activityPO onlyVoriconazoleIV and PO availability, broad-spectrumIV diluent accumulates in renal failure, Visual disturbancesEchinocandinsAnidulofungin, Caspofungin, micafunginBroad-spectrumIV only, poor CNS penetrationBrunicardi_Ch06_p0157-p0182.indd   16301/03/19   4:46 PM 164BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Irequires drainage, either surgically or via percutaneous drain insertion. An ongoing source of contamination (e.g., bowel per-foration) or the presence of an aggressive, rapidly spreading infection (e.g., necrotizing soft tissue infection) invariably requires expedient, aggressive operative intervention, both to remove contaminated material and infected tissue (e.g., radical debridement or amputation) and to remove the initial cause of infection (e.g., bowel resection). Delay in operative interven-tion, whether due to misdiagnosis or the need for additional diagnostic studies, is associated with increased morbidity and occasional mortality. Other treatment modalities such as antimi-crobial agents, albeit critical, are of secondary importance to effective surgery with regard to treatment of surgical infections. Rarely, if ever, can an aggressive surgical infection be cured only by the administration of antibiotics, and never in the face of an ongoing source of contamination.22Appropriate Use of Antimicrobial AgentsA classification of antimicrobial agents, mechanisms of action, and spectrums of activity is shown in Table 6-5. As discussed previously, prophylaxis consists of the administration of an anti-microbial agent or agents prior to initiation of certain specific types of surgical procedures in order to reduce the number of microbes that enter the tissue or body cavity. Agents are selected according to their activity against microbes likely to be present at the surgical site, based on knowledge of host microflora. For example, patients undergoing elective colorectal surgery should receive antimicrobial prophylaxis directed against skin flora, gram-negative aerobes, and anaerobic bacteria. There are a wide variety of agents that meet these criteria with recently published guidelines.23By definition, prophylaxis is limited to the time prior to and during the operative procedure; in the vast majority of cases only a single dose of antibiotic is required, and only for certain types of procedures (see “Surgical Site Infections”). However, patients who undergo complex, prolonged procedures in which the duration of the operation exceeds the serum drug half-life should receive an additional dose or doses of the antimicrobial agent.23 There is no evidence that administration of postopera-tive doses of an antimicrobial agent provides additional benefit, and this practice should be discouraged, as it is costly and is associated with increased rates of microbial drug resistance. Guidelines for prophylaxis are provided in Table 6-6.Empiric therapy is the use of antimicrobial agents when the risk of a surgical infection is high, based on the underlying disease process (e.g., ruptured appendicitis), or when signifi-cant contamination during surgery has occurred (e.g., inad-equate bowel preparation or considerable spillage of colon contents). Obviously, prophylaxis merges into empiric therapy in situations in which the risk of infection increases markedly because of intraoperative findings. Empiric therapy also is often employed in critically ill patients in whom a potential site of infection has been identified and severe sepsis or septic shock occurs. Empiric therapy should be limited to a short course of treatment (3 to 5 days) and should be curtailed as soon as pos-sible based on microbiologic data (i.e., absence of positive cul-tures) coupled with improvements in the clinical course of the patient.Empiric therapy can merge into therapy of established infection in some patients. However, among surgical patients, the manner in which therapy is employed, particularly in rela-tion to the use of microbiologic data (culture and antibiotic sensitivity patterns), differs depending on whether the infection is monomicrobial or polymicrobial. Monomicrobial infections frequently are nosocomial infections occurring in postoperative patients, such as UTIs, pneumonia, or bacteremia. Evidence of systemic inflammatory response syndrome (fever, tachycardia, tachypnea, or elevated leukocyte count) in such individuals, coupled with evidence of local infection (e.g., an infiltrate on chest roentgenogram plus a positive Gram stain in bronchoal-veolar lavage samples) should lead the surgeon to initiate empiric antibiotic therapy. An appropriate approach to antimi-crobial treatment involves de-escalation therapy, where initial antimicrobial selection is broad, with a narrowing of agents based on patient response and culture results. Initial drug selec-tion must be based on initial evidence (gram-positive vs. gram-negative microbes, yeast), coupled with institutional and unit-specific drug sensitivity patterns. It is important to ensure that antimicrobial coverage chosen is adequate, since delay in appropriate antibiotic treatment has been shown to be associated with significant increases in mortality. A critical component of this approach is appropriate collection of culture specimens to allow for thorough analysis, since within 48 to 72 hours culture and sensitivity reports will allow  refinement of the antibiotic regimen to select the most efficacious agent.Although the primary therapeutic modality to treat polymicrobial surgical infections is source control, antimicro-bial agents play an important role. Culture results are of lesser importance in managing these types of infections, as it has been repeatedly demonstrated that only a limited cadre of microbes predominate in the established infection, selected from a large number present at the time of initial contamination. Invariably it is difficult to identify all microbes that comprise the initial polymicrobial inoculum. For this reason, the antibiotic regimen should not be modified solely on the basis of culture informa-tion, as it is less important than the clinical course of the patient. As long as appropriately broad-spectrum coverage for aerobic and anaerobic microbes is provided, a worsening of the patient’s clinical course should direct the surgeon to investigate whether effective source control has been achieved.24 Duration of anti-biotic administration should be decided at the time the drug regimen is prescribed. As mentioned previously, prophylaxis is limited to a single dose administered immediately prior to creating the incision. Empiric therapy should be limited to 3 to 5 days or less and should be curtailed if the presence of a local site or systemic infection is not revealed.25 In fact, prolonged use of empirical antibiotic therapy in culture-negative critically ill patients is associated with increased mortality, highlighting the need to discontinue therapy when there is no proven evidence of infection.26Therapy for monomicrobial infections follows standard guidelines: 3 to 5 days for UTIs, 7 to 8 days for pneumonia, and 7 to 14 days for bacteremia. Longer courses of therapy in this setting do not result in improved care and are associated with increased risk of superinfection by resistant organisms.27-29 There is some evidence that measuring and monitoring serum procalcitonin trends in the setting of infection allows earlier cessation of antibiotics without decrement in the rate of clini-cal cure.30 Antibiotic therapy for osteomyelitis, endocarditis, or prosthetic infections in which it is hazardous to remove the device consists of prolonged courses of treatment for 6 to  12 weeks. The specific agents are selected based on analysis of the degree to which the organism is killed in vitro using the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of a standard pure 34Brunicardi_Ch06_p0157-p0182.indd   16401/03/19   4:46 PM 165SURGICAL INFECTIONSCHAPTER 6Table 6-5Antimicrobial agentsANTIBIOTIC CLASS, GENERIC NAMETRADE NAMEMECHANISM OF ACTIONORGANISMS PyogenesMSSAMRSAS epidermidisEnterococcusVREE coliP aeruginosaANAEROBESPenicillinsCell wall synthesis inhibitors (bind penicillin-binding protein)Penicillin G1000+/–0001NafcillinNallpen, Unipen110+/–00000PiperacillinPipracil1000+/–011+/–Penicillin/a-lactamase inhibitor combinationsCell wall synthesis inhibitors/β-lactamase inhibitorsAmpicillin/sulbactamUnasyn110+/–1+/–101Ticarcillin/clavulanateTimentin110+/–+/–0111Piperacillin/tazobactamZosyn1101+/–0111First-generation cephalosporinsCell wall synthesis inhibitorsCefazolin, cephalexinAncef, Keflex110+/–00100Second-generation cephalosporinsCell wall synthesis inhibitorsCefoxitinMefoxin110+/–00101CefotetanCefotan110+/–00101CefuroximeCeftin110+/–00100Thirdand fourth-generation cephalosporinsCell wall synthesis inhibitorsCeftriaxoneRocephin110+/–00100CeftazidimeFortaz1+/–0+/–00110CefepimeMaxipime110+/–00110CefotaximeCefotaxime110+/–001+/–0CeftarolineTeflaro111100100(Continued)Brunicardi_Ch06_p0157-p0182.indd   16501/03/19   4:46 PM 166BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART ICarbapenemsCell wall synthesis inhibitorsImipenem-cilastatinPrimaxin1101+/–0111MeropenemMerrem110100111ErtapenemInvanz1101001+/–1AztreonamAzactam000000110AminoglycosidesAlteration of cell membrane, binding and inhibition of 30S ribosomal subunitGentamicin010+/–10110Tobramycin, amikacin010+/–00110FluoroquinolonesInhibit topo-isomerase II and IV (DNA synthesis inhibition)CiprofloxacinCipro+/–10100110LevofloxacinLevaquin1101001+/–0GlycopeptidesCell wall synthesis inhibition (peptidoglycan synthesis inhibition)VancomycinVancocin111110000Quinupristin-dalfopristinSynercidInhibits 2 sites on 50S ribosome (protein synthesis inhibition)11111100+/–Table 6-5Antimicrobial agentsANTIBIOTIC CLASS, GENERIC NAMETRADE NAMEMECHANISM OF ACTIONORGANISMS PyogenesMSSAMRSAS epidermidisEnterococcusVREE coliP aeruginosaANAEROBES(Continued)Brunicardi_Ch06_p0157-p0182.indd   16601/03/19   4:46 PM 167SURGICAL INFECTIONSCHAPTER 6LinezolidZyvoxInhibits 50S ribosomal activity11111100+/–DaptomycinCubicinBinds bacterial membrane, results in depolarization, lysis111111000RifampinInhibits DNA-dependent RNA polymerase1111+/–0000ClindamycinCleocinInhibits 50S ribosomal activity110000001MetronidazoleFlagylProduction of toxic intermediates (free radicals)000000001MacrolidesInhibit 50S ribosomal activity (protein synthesis inhibition)Erythromycin1+/–0+/–00000AzithromycinZithromax110000000ClarithromycinBiaxin110000000Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazoleBactrim, SeptraInhibits sequential steps of folate metabolism+/–10/–00100TetracyclinesBind 30S ribosomal unit (protein synthesis inhibition)MinocyclineMinocin11000000+/–DoxycyclineVibromycin1+/–000010+/–=TigacyclineTygacil111111101E coli = Escherichia coli; MRSA = methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus; MSSA = methicillin-sensitive S aureus; P aeruginosa = Pseudomonas aeruginosa; S epidermidis = Staphylococcus epidermidis;  S pyogenes = Streptococcus pyogenes; VRE = vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus1 = reliable activity; +/– = variable activity; 0 = no activity.The sensitivities printed here are generalizations. The clinician should confirm sensitivity patterns at the locale where the patient is being treated since these patterns may vary widely depending on location.Brunicardi_Ch06_p0157-p0182.indd   16701/03/19   4:46 PM 168BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART ITable 6-6Prophylactic use of antibioticsSITEANTIBIOTICALTERNATIVE (E.G., PENICILLIN ALLERGIC)Cardiovascular surgeryCefazolin, cefuroximeVancomycin, clindamycinGastroduodenal areaSmall intestine, nonobstructedCefazolinClindamycin or vancomycin + aminoglycoside or aztreonem or fluoroquinoloneBiliary tract: open procedure, laparoscopic high riskCefazolin, cefoxitin, cefotetan, ceftriaxone, ampicillin-sulbactamClindamycin or vancomycin + aminoglycoside or aztreonem or fluoroquinoloneMetronidazole + aminoglycoside or fluoroquinoloneBiliary tract: laparoscopic low riskNoneNoneAppendectomy, uncomplicatedCefoxitin, cefotetan, cefazolin + metronidazoleClindamycin + aminoglycoside or aztreonem or fluoroquinoloneMetronidazole + aminoglycoside or fluoroquinoloneColorectal surgery, obstructed small intestineCefazolin or ceftriaxone plus metronidazole, ertapenem, cefoxitin, cefotetan, ampicillin-sulbactamClindamycin + aminoglycoside or aztreonem or fluoroquinolone, metronidazole + aminoglycoside or fluoroquinoloneHead and neck; clean contaminatedCefazolin or cefuroxime + metronidazole, ampicillin-sulbactamClindamycinNeurosurgical proceduresCefazolinClindamycin, vancomycinOrthopedic surgeryCefazolin, ceftriaxoneClindamycin, vancomycinBreast, herniaCefazolinClindamycin, vancomycinData from Pieracci FM, Barie PS. Management of severe sepsis of abdominal origin, Scand J Surg. 2007;96(3):184-196.inoculum of 105 CFU/mL of the organism isolated from the site of infection or bloodstream. Sensitivities are reported in rela-tion to the achievable blood level of each antibiotic in a panel of agents. The least toxic, least expensive agent to which the organism is most sensitive should be selected. Serious or recru-descent infection may require therapy with two or more agents, particularly if a multidrug-resistant pathogen is causative, limit-ing therapeutic options to drugs to which the organism is only moderately sensitive. Commonly, an agent may be administered intravenously for 1 to 2 weeks, followed by treatment with an oral drug. However, this should only be undertaken in patients who demonstrate progressive clinical improvement, and the oral agent should be capable of achieving high serum levels as well (e.g., fluoroquinolones).The 2016 Surgical Infection Society guidelines on man-agement of intra-abdominal infection recommend antibiotic duration of no more than 24 hours in patients with traumatic bowel perforation who receive surgical treatment within 12 hours, gastroduodenal perforations operated upon within 24 hours, ischemic nonperforated bowel, and gangrenous acute appen-dicitis or cholecystitis without perforation. More extensive intraperitoneal infection (perforated appendicitis, for example) should have treatment limited to 4 days. Patients with a greater degree of contamination may require longer courses of therapy; as in all facets of clinical practice, the therapeutic plan must be individualized to the patient. In the later phases of postopera-tive antibiotic treatment of serious intra-abdominal infection, the absence of an elevated white blood cell (WBC) count, lack of band forms of PMNs on peripheral smear, and lack of fever (<38°C [100.5°F]) provide close to complete assurance that infection has been eradicated.31 There is also emerging data that suggest following a patient’s procalcitonin level may provide the clinician with useful information regarding whether an infection has resolved and allow more expedient cessation of therapy.32,33 Patients who do not improve with 5 to 7 days of antibiotic therapy should be reevaluated for inadequate source control or a new extra-abdominal source of infection.Allergy to antimicrobial agents must be considered prior to prescribing them. First, it is important to ascertain whether a patient has had any type of allergic reaction in association with administration of a particular antibiotic. However, one should take care to ensure that the purported reaction consists of true allergic symptoms and signs, such as urticaria, bron-chospasm, or other similar manifestations, rather than indiges-tion or nausea. Penicillin allergy is quite common, the reported incidence ranging from 0.7% to 10%. Although avoiding the use of any β-lactam drug is appropriate in patients who mani-fest significant allergic reactions to penicillins, the incidence of cross-reactivity appears low for all related agents, with 1% cross-reactivity for carbapenems, 5% to 7% cross-reactivity for cephalosporins, and extremely small or nonexistent cross-reactivity for monobactams.34Severe allergic manifestations, such as anaphylaxis, to a specific class of agents generally preclude the use of any agents in that class, except under circumstances in which use of a certain drug represents a lifesaving measure. In some centers, patients undergo intradermal testing using a dilute solution of a particular antibiotic to determine whether a severe allergic reac-tion would be elicited by parenteral administration. A pathway, including such intradermal testing, has been effective in reduc-tion of vancomycin use to 16% in surgical patients with reported allergy to penicillin.35 This type of testing rarely is employed because it is simpler to select an alternative class of agent. Should administration of a specific agent to which the patient is Brunicardi_Ch06_p0157-p0182.indd   16801/03/19   4:46 PM 169SURGICAL INFECTIONSCHAPTER 6allergic become necessary, desensitization using progressively higher doses of antibiotic can be undertaken, providing the ini-tial testing does not cause severe allergic manifestations.Misuse of antimicrobial agents is rampant in both the inpa-tient and outpatient settings, and is associated with an enormous financial impact on healthcare costs, adverse reactions due to drug toxicity and allergy, the occurrence of new infections such as Clostridium difficile colitis, and the development of multiagent drug resistance among nosocomial pathogens. Each of these factors has been directly correlated with overall drug administration. It has been estimated that in the United States in excess of $20 billion is spent on antibiotics each year.36 The responsible practitioner limits prophylaxis to the period dur-ing the operative procedure, does not convert prophylaxis into empiric therapy except under well-defined conditions, sets the duration of antibiotic therapy from the outset, curtails antibi-otic administration when clinical and microbiologic evidence does not support the presence of an infection, and limits therapy to a short course in every possible instance. Prolonged treat-ment associated with drains and tubes has not been shown to be beneficial.INFECTIONS OF SIGNIFICANCE IN SURGICAL PATIENTSSurgical Site InfectionsSurgical site infections (SSIs) are infections of the tissues, organs, or spaces exposed by surgeons  during performance of an invasive procedure. SSIs are classified into incisional and organ/space infections, and the former are further subclas-sified into superficial (limited to skin and subcutaneous tissue) and deep incisional categories.37,38 The development of SSIs is related to three factors: (a) the degree of microbial contamina-tion of the wound during surgery; (b) the duration of the proce-dure; and (c) host factors such as diabetes, malnutrition, obesity, immune suppression; and a number of other underlying disease states. Table 6-7 lists risk factors for development of SSIs. By definition, an incisional SSI has occurred if a surgical wound drains purulent material or if the surgeon judges it to be infected and opens it.Surgical wounds are classified based on the presumed mag-nitude of the bacterial load at the time of surgery (Table 6-8).39 Clean wounds (class I) include those in which no infection is present; only skin microflora potentially contaminate the wound, and no hollow viscus that contains microbes is entered. Class I D wounds are similar except that a prosthetic device (e.g., mesh or valve) is inserted. Clean/contaminated wounds (class II) include those in which a hollow viscus such as the respiratory, alimentary, or genitourinary tracts with indigenous bacterial flora is opened under controlled circumstances without significant spillage of contents.While elective colorectal cases have classically been included as class II cases, a number of studies in the last decade have documented higher SSI rates (9–25%). One study iden-tified two-thirds of infections presenting after discharge from hospital, highlighting the need for careful follow-up of these patients.40 Infection is also more common in cases involving entry into the rectal space.41 In a recent single-center quality improvement study using a multidisciplinary approach, one group of clinicians has demonstrated the ability to decrease SSI from 9.8% to 4.0%.425Table 6-7Risk factors for development of surgical site infectionsPatient factors Older age Immunosuppression Obesity Diabetes mellitus Chronic inflammatory process Malnutrition Smoking Renal failure Peripheral vascular disease Anemia Radiation Chronic skin disease Carrier state (e.g., chronic Staphylococcus carriage) Recent operationLocal factors Open compared to laparoscopic surgery Poor skin preparation Contamination of instruments Inadequate antibiotic prophylaxis Prolonged procedure Local tissue necrosis Blood transfusion Hypoxia, hypothermiaMicrobial factors Prolonged hospitalization (leading to nosocomial organisms) Toxin secretion Resistance to clearance (e.g., capsule formation)Table 6-8Wound class, representative procedures, and expected infection ratesWOUND CLASSEXAMPLES OF CASESEXPECTED INFECTION RATESClean (class I)Hernia repair, breast biopsy1–2%Clean/contaminated (class II)Cholecystectomy, elective GI surgery (not colon)2.1–9.5%Clean/contaminated (class II)Colorectal surgery4–14%Contaminated (class III)Penetrating abdominal trauma, large tissue injury, enterotomy during bowel obstruction3.4–13.2%Dirty (class IV)Perforated diverticulitis, necrotizing soft tissue infections3.1–12.8%Brunicardi_Ch06_p0157-p0182.indd   16901/03/19   4:46 PM 170BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IContaminated wounds (class III) include open acciden-tal wounds encountered early after injury, those with extensive introduction of bacteria into a normally sterile area of the body due to major breaks in sterile technique (e.g., open cardiac massage), gross spillage of viscus contents such as from the intestine, or incision through inflamed, albeit nonpurulent tis-sue. Dirty wounds (class IV) include traumatic wounds in which a significant delay in treatment has occurred and in which necrotic tissue is present, those created in the presence of overt infection as evidenced by the presence of purulent material, and those created to access a perforated viscus accompanied by a high degree of contamination. The microbiology of SSIs is reflective of the initial host microflora such that SSIs fol-lowing creation of a class I wound are invariably caused by skin microbes found on that portion of the body, while SSIs subsequent to a class II wound created for the purpose of elec-tive colon resection may be caused by either skin microbes or colonic microflora, or both.Surgical management of the wound is a critical determi-nant of the propensity to develop an SSI. In healthy individuals, classes I and II wounds may be closed primarily, while skin closure of class III and IV wounds is associated with high rates of incisional SSIs (∼25–50%). The superficial aspects of these latter types of wounds should be packed open and allowed to heal by secondary intention, although selective use of delayed primary closure has been associated with a reduction in inci-sional SSI rates.43 One clear example based on data from clini-cal trials is that class III wounds in healthy patients undergoing appendectomy for perforated or gangrenous appendicitis can be primarily closed as long as antibiotic therapy directed against aerobes and anaerobes is administered. This practice leads to SSI rates of approximately 3% to 4%.44Recent investigations have studied the effect of additional maneuvers in an attempt to further reduce the rate of SSIs. The adverse effects of hyperglycemia on WBC function have been well described.45 A number of studies in patients undergoing several different types of surgery describe increased risk of SSI in patients with hyperglycemia, and the 2017 CDC guidelines for prevention of surgical site infection recommend maintaining blood glucose <200 mg/dL (11.1 mmol/L) in all patients during the perioperative period.46-48The respective effects of body temperature and the level of inhaled oxygen during surgery on SSI rates also have been studied, and both hypothermia and hypoxia during surgery are associated with a higher rate of SSI. There is conflicting evi-dence regarding whether supplying higher levels of inhaled oxy-gen to perioperative patients reduces the rate of SSI. Although an initial study provided evidence that patients who received high levels of inhaled oxygen during colorectal surgery devel-oped fewer SSIs,49 a later meta-analysis suggested that the over-all benefit is small and may not warrant use.50 The 2017 CDC guidelines, however, support administration of increased FiO2 during surgery and after extubation in patients with normal pul-monary function receiving general anesthesia as there has been some evidence of benefit.20,51 Further evaluation via multicenter studies is needed prior to implementation of hyperoxia as stan-dard therapy, but it is clear that intraoperative hypothermia and hypoxia should be prevented.Effective therapy for incisional SSIs consists solely of incision and drainage without the additional use of antibiotics. Antibiotic therapy is reserved for patients in whom evidence of significant cellulitis is present, or who concurrently manifest a systemic inflammatory response syndrome. The open wound often is allowed to heal by secondary intention, with dressings being changed as the clinical team deems appropriate. The use of topical antibiotics and antiseptics to further wound healing remains unproven, although anecdotal studies indicate their potential utility in complex wounds that do not heal with routine measures.52 Despite a paucity of prospective studies, vacuum-assisted closure is increasingly used in management of large, complex open wounds and can be applied to wounds in loca-tions that are difficult to manage with dressings (Fig. 6-1).53,54 One also should consider obtaining wound cultures in patients who develop SSIs and who have been hospitalized or reside in long-term care facilities due to the increasing incidence of infec-tion caused by multidrug-resistant organisms.In the United States, hospitals are required to conduct sur-veillance for the development of SSIs for a period of 30 days ABFigure 6-1. Negative pressure wound therapy in a patient after amputation for wet gangrene (A) and in a patient with enterocutaneous fistula (B). It is possible to adapt these dressings to fit difficult anatomy and provide appropriate wound care while reducing frequency of dressing change. It is important to evaluate the wound under these dressings if the patient demonstrates signs of sepsis with an unidentified source, since typical clues of wound sepsis such as odor and drainage are hidden by the suction apparatus.Brunicardi_Ch06_p0157-p0182.indd   17001/03/19   4:46 PM 171SURGICAL INFECTIONSCHAPTER 6after the operative procedure.55 Such surveillance has been associated with greater awareness and a reduction in SSI rates, probably in large part based upon the impact of observation and promotion of adherence to appropriate care standards. Begin-ning in 2012, all hospitals receiving reimbursement from the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) are required to report SSIs.A recent refinement of risk indexes has been implemented through the National Healthcare Safety Network, a secure, web-based system of surveillance used by the CDC for surveillance of healthcare-associated infections. This refinement utilized data reported from 847 hospitals in nearly one million patients over a 2-year period to develop procedure-specific risk indices for SSIs.56SSIs are associated with considerable morbidity and occasional lethality, as well as substantial healthcare costs and patient inconvenience and dissatisfaction.57 A number of healthcare organizations within the United States are interested in evaluating performance of hospitals and physicians with respect to implementing processes that support delivery of stan-dard of care. One major process of interest is reduction in SSIs, since the morbidity (and subsequent cost) of this complication is high. Several of these organizations are noted in Table 6-9. Appropriate guidelines in this area incorporating the principles discussed previously have been developed and disseminated.58 However, observers have noted that adherence to these guide-lines has been poor.59 Most experts believe that better adherence to evidence-based practice recommendations and implementing systems of care with redundant safeguards will result in reduc-tion of surgical complications and better patient outcomes. More important, the CMS, the largest third-party insurance payer in the United States, has required reporting by hospitals of many processes related to reduction of surgical infections, including appropriate use of perioperative antibiotics. This information, which is reported publicly by hospitals, has led to significant improvement in reported rates of these process measures. How-ever, the effect of this approach on the incidence of SSIs is not known at this time.Intra-Abdominal InfectionsMicrobial contamination of the peritoneal cavity is termed peri-tonitis or intra-abdominal infection and is classified according to etiology. Primary microbial peritonitis occurs when microbes invade the normally sterile confines of the peritoneal cavity via hematogenous dissemination from a distant source of infec-tion or direct inoculation. This process is more common among patients who retain large amounts of peritoneal fluid due to ascites, and among those individuals who are being treated for renal failure via peritoneal dialysis. These infections invariably are monomicrobial and rarely require surgical intervention. The diagnosis is established based on identification of risk factors as noted previously, physical examination that reveals diffuse tenderness and guarding without localized findings, absence of a surgically treatable source of infection on an imaging study, and the presence of more than 250 neutrophils/mL in fluid obtained via paracentesis.60 Cultures typically will demonstrate the presence of gram-positive organisms in patients undergoing peritoneal dialysis. In patients without this risk factor, the most common etiologic organisms are E coli, K pneumoniae, and  S pneumoniae. Treatment consists of administration of an anti-biotic to which the organism is sensitive; often 14 to 21 days of therapy are required. Removal of indwelling devices, if present, may be required for effective therapy of recurrent infections.Secondary microbial peritonitis occurs subsequent to con-tamination of the peritoneal cavity due to perforation or severe inflammation and infection of an intra-abdominal organ. Exam-ples include appendicitis, perforation of any portion of the gas-trointestinal tract, or diverticulitis. As noted previously, effective therapy requires source control to resect or repair the diseased organ; debridement of necrotic, infected tissue and debris; and administration of antimicrobial agents directed against aerobes and anaerobes.61 This type of antibiotic regimen should be cho-sen because in most patients the precise diagnosis cannot be established until exploratory laparotomy is performed, and the most morbid form of this disease process is colonic perforation, due to the large number of microbes present. A combination of agents or single agents with a broad spectrum of activity can be used for this purpose; conversion of a parenteral to an oral regi-men when the patient’s ileus resolves provides results similar to those achieved with intravenous antibiotics. Effective source control and antibiotic therapy is associated with low failure rates and a mortality rate of approximately 5% to 6%; inability to control the source of infection is associated with mortality greater than 40%.62The response rate to effective source control and use of appropriate antibiotics has remained approximately 70% to 90% over the past several decades.63 Patients in whom stan-dard therapy fails typically develop one or more of the follow-ing: an intra-abdominal abscess, leakage from a gastrointestinal anastomosis leading to postoperative peritonitis, or tertiary (persistent) peritonitis. The latter is a poorly understood entity that is more common in immunosuppressed patients in whom peritoneal host defenses do not effectively clear or sequester Table 6-9Quality improvement organizations of interest to surgeons in the United StatesABBREVIATIONORGANIZATIONWEBSITENSQIPNational Surgical Quality Improvement Programacsnsqip.orgIHIInstitute for Healthcare Improvementwww.ihi.orgCMSCenters for Medicare & Medicaid Serviceswww.medicare.govwww.cms.gov/NCQANational Committee for Quality Assurancewww.ncqa.orgSISSurgical Infection Societywww.sisna.orgCDCCenters for Disease Control and Preventionwww.cdc.gov/HAI/ssi/ssi.htmlBrunicardi_Ch06_p0157-p0182.indd   17101/03/19   4:46 PM 172BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ithe initial secondary microbial peritoneal infection. Microbes such as E faecalis and faecium, S epidermidis, C albicans, and P aeruginosa commonly are identified, typically in combina-tion, and their presence may be due to their lack of responsive-ness to the initial antibiotic regimen, coupled with diminished activity of host defenses. Unfortunately, even with effective antimicrobial agent therapy, this disease process is associated with mortality rates in excess of 50%.64Formerly, the presence of an intra-abdominal abscess mandated surgical reexploration and drainage. Today, the vast majority of such abscesses can be effectively diagnosed via abdominal computed tomographic (CT) imaging techniques and drained percutaneously. Surgical intervention is reserved for those individuals who harbor multiple abscesses, those with abscesses in proximity to vital structures such that percutaneous drainage would be hazardous, and those in whom an ongoing source of contamination (e.g., enteric leak) is identified. The necessity of antimicrobial agent therapy and precise guidelines that dictate duration of catheter drainage have not been estab-lished. A short course (3 to 5 days) of antibiotics that possess aerobic and anaerobic activity seems reasonable so long as the patient has good clinical response to therapy, and most practi-tioners leave the drainage catheter in situ until it is clear that cavity collapse has occurred, output is less than 10 to 20 mL/d, no evidence of an ongoing source of contamination is present, and the patient’s clinical condition has improved.33Organ-Specific InfectionsHepatic abscesses are rare, currently accounting for approximately 15 per 100,000 hospital admissions in the United States. Pyogenic abscesses account for approximately 80% of cases, the remaining 20% being equally divided among parasitic and fungal forms.65 Formerly, pyogenic liver abscesses mainly were caused by pyle-phlebitis due to neglected appendicitis or diverticulitis. Today, manipulation of the biliary tract to treat a variety of diseases has become a more common cause, although in nearly 50% of patients no cause is identified. The most common aerobic bacteria iden-tified in recent series include E coli, K pneumoniae, and other enteric bacilli, enterococci, and Pseudomonas spp., while the most common anaerobic bacteria are Bacteroides spp., anaero-bic streptococci, and Fusobacterium spp. C albicans and other related yeast cause the majority of fungal hepatic abscesses. Small (<1 cm), multiple abscesses should be sampled and treated with a 4to 6-week course of antibiotics. Larger abscesses are generally amenable to percutaneous drainage, with parameters for antibiotic therapy and drain removal similar to those men-tioned previously. Splenic abscesses are extremely rare and are treated in a similar fashion. Recurrent hepatic or splenic abscesses may require operative intervention—unroofing and marsupialization or splenectomy, respectively.Secondary pancreatic infections (e.g., infected pancreatic necrosis or pancreatic abscess) occur in approximately 10% to 15% of patients who develop severe pancreatitis with necro-sis. The surgical treatment of this disorder was pioneered by Bradley and Allen, who noted significant improvements in out-come for patients undergoing repeated pancreatic debridement of infected pancreatic necrosis.66 Care of patients with severe acute pancreatitis includes staging with dynamic, contrast-enhanced helical CT scan to evaluate the extent of pancreatitis (unless significant renal dysfunction exists, in which case one should forego the use of contrast material) coupled with the use of one of several prognostic scoring systems. Patients who exhibit clinical signs of instability (e.g., oliguria, hypoxemia, large-volume fluid resuscitation) should be carefully monitored in the ICU and undergo follow-up contrast CT examination when renal function has stabilized to evaluate for development of local pancreatic complications (Fig. 6-2). Routine use of pro-phylactic antibiotics to prevent infected pancreatic necrosis is not indicated. Early enteral feeding using nasojejunal feeding tubes placed past the ligament of Treitz has been associated with decreased development of infected pancreatic necrosis, possibly due to a decrease in gut translocation of bacteria.67,68The presence of secondary pancreatic infection should be suspected in patients whose systemic inflammatory response (fever, elevated WBC count, or organ dysfunction) fails to resolve, or in those individuals who initially recuperate, only to develop sepsis syndrome 2 to 3 weeks later. CT-guided aspira-tion of fluid from the pancreatic bed for performance of Gram stain and culture analysis can be useful. A positive Gram stain or culture from CT-guided aspiration, or identification of gas within the pancreas on CT scan, mandate surgical intervention.The approach of open necrosectomy with repeated debridements, although life-saving, is associated with sig-nificant morbidity and prolonged hospitalization. Efforts to reduce the amount of surgical injury, while still preserving the improved outcomes associated with debridement of the infected sequestrum, have led to a variety of less invasive approaches, including endoscopic and laparoscopic techniques.69 There are a limited number of randomized trials reporting the use of these new techniques. An important concept common to all of these approaches, however, is the attempt to delay surgical interven-tion, since a number of trials have identified increased mortality when intervention occurs during the first 2 weeks of illness.Data supporting the use of endoscopic approaches to infected pancreatic necrosis include nearly a dozen case series and a randomized trial.70,71 The reported mortality rate was 5%, with a 30% complication rate. Most authors noted the common requirement for multiple endoscopic debridements (similar to the open approach), with a median of four sessions required. Fewer series report experience with the laparoscopic approach, either transgastric or transperitoneal, entering the necrosis through the transverse mesocolon or gastrocolic ligament. Lap-aroscopic intervention is limited by the difficulty in achieving Figure 6-2. Contrast-enhanced CT scan of pancreas 1.5 weeks after presentation showing large central peripancreatic fluid col-lection (arrow).Brunicardi_Ch06_p0157-p0182.indd   17201/03/19   4:46 PM 173SURGICAL INFECTIONSCHAPTER 6Figure 6-3. Infected pancreatic necrosis. (A) Open necrosectomy specimen with pancreatic stent in situ. It is important to gently debride only necrotic pancreatic tissue, relying on repeated opera-tion to ensure complete removal. (B) For video-assisted retroperito-neal debridement (VARD), retroperitoneal access is gained through radiologic placement of a drain, followed by dilation 2 to 3 days later. (C) Retroperitoneal cavity seen through endoscope during VARD.BCmultiple debridements and the technical expertise required to achieve an adequate debridement. In 9 case series, mortality in a total of 65 patients was 6%.72Debridement of necrosis through a lumbar approach has been advocated by a number of authors. This approach, devel-oped with experience in a large number of patients,73 has been subjected to a single-center, randomized, prospective trial.74 This approach includes delay of intervention when possible until 4 weeks after the onset of disease. Patients receive transgastric or preferably retroperitoneal drainage of the sequestrum. If patients do not improve over 72 hours, they are treated with video-assisted retroperitoneal drainage (VARD), consisting of dilation of the retroperitoneal drain tract and debridement of the pancreatic bed (Fig. 6-3). Repeat debridements are performed as clinically indi-cated, with most patients requiring multiple debridements. In the trial reported, patients randomized to VARD (n = 43) compared to those randomized to the standard open necrosectomy (n = 45) had a decreased incidence of the composite endpoint of compli-cations and death (40% vs. 69%), with comparable mortality rate,  hospital, and ICU lengths of stay. Patients randomized to VARD had fewer incisional hernias and occurrences of new-onset diabe-tes, as well as less need for pancreatic enzyme supplementation.It is apparent that patients with infected pancreatic necro-sis can safely undergo procedures that are more minimal than the gold-standard open necrosectomy with good outcomes. However, to obtain good outcomes these approaches require an experienced multidisciplinary team consisting of interventional radiologists, gastroenterologists, surgeons, and others. Impor-tant concepts for successful management include careful pre-operative planning, delay (if possible) to allow maturation of the fluid collection, and the willingness to repeat procedures as necessary until nonviable tissue has been removed.Infections of the Skin and Soft TissueThese infections can be classified according to whether sur-gical intervention is required. For example, superficial skin and skin structure infections such as cellulitis, erysipelas, and lymphangitis invariably are effectively treated with antibiotics alone, although a search for a local underlying source of infec-tion should be undertaken. Generally, drugs that possess activity against the causative gram-positive skin microflora are selected. Furuncles or boils may drain spontaneously or require surgical incision and drainage. Antibiotics are prescribed if significant cellulitis is present or if cellulitis does not rapidly resolve after surgical drainage. Community-acquired methicillin-resistant S aureus (MRSA) infection should be suspected if infection persists after treatment with adequate drainage and administra-tion of first-line antibiotics. These infections may require more aggressive drainage and altered antimicrobial therapy.75Aggressive soft tissue infections are rare, difficult to diag-nose, and require immediate surgical intervention plus adminis-tration of antimicrobial agents. Failure to rapidly  recognize and treat these infections results in an extremely high mortality rate (∼80–100%), and even with expedient therapy mortality rates are high (16–24%).76 Eponyms and differing classifications in the past has led to a hodgepodge of terminology—such as Meleney’s synergistic gangrene, Fournier’s gangrene, rapidly spreading cellulitis, gas gangrene, and necrotizing fasciitis—regarding these serious infections. Today it seems best to delin-eate them based on the soft tissue layer(s) of involvement  6Brunicardi_Ch06_p0157-p0182.indd   17301/03/19   4:46 PM 174BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART I(e.g., skin and superficial soft tissue, deep soft tissue, and mus-cle) and the pathogen(s) that cause them.Patients at risk for these types of infections include those who are elderly, immunosuppressed, or diabetic, and/or who suf-fer from peripheral vascular disease, though extremely aggressive necrotizing soft tissue infections (often caused by streptococci) have been described among healthy individuals as well. The com-mon thread among these host factors appears to be compromise of the fascial blood supply, and if this is coupled with the introduc-tion of exogenous microbes, the result can be devastating.Initially, the diagnosis is established solely upon a constel-lation of clinical findings, not all of which are present in every patient. Not surprisingly, patients often develop sepsis syndrome or septic shock without an obvious cause. The extremities, perineum, trunk, and torso are most commonly affected, in that order. Careful examination should be undertaken for an entry site such as a small break or sinus in the skin from which grayish, turbid semipurulent material (“dishwater pus”) can be expressed, as well as for the presence of skin changes (bronze hue or brawny induration), blebs, or crepitus. The patient often develops pain at the site of infection that appears to be out of proportion to any of the physical manifestations. Any of these findings man-dates immediate surgical intervention, which should consist of incision and direct visualization of potentially infected tissue (including deep soft tissue, fascia, and underlying muscle) and radical resection of affected areas. Radiologic studies should not be undertaken in patients in whom the diagnosis seriously is con-sidered, as they delay surgical intervention and frequently pro-vide confusing information. Unfortunately, surgical extirpation of infected tissue frequently entails amputation and/or disfigur-ing procedures; the surgeon must bear in mind that incomplete procedures are associated with higher rates of morbidity and mortality and debride all nonviable tissue (Fig. 6-4).During the procedure, a Gram stain should be performed on tissue fluid. Antimicrobial agents directed against gram-positive and gram-negative aerobes and anaerobes (e.g., van-comycin plus a carbapenem), as well as high-dose aqueous penicillin G (16,000,000 to 20,000,000 U/d), the latter to treat clostridial pathogens, should be administered. Approximately 50% of such infections are polymicrobial, the remainder being caused by a single organism such as S pyogenes, P aeruginosa, or C perfringens. The microbiology of these polymicrobial infections is similar to that of secondary microbial peritonitis, with the exception that gram-positive cocci are more commonly encountered. Most patients should be returned to the operat-ing room on a scheduled basis to determine if disease progres-sion has occurred. If so, additional resection of infected tissue and debridement should take place. Antibiotic therapy can be refined based on culture and sensitivity results, particularly in the case of monomicrobial soft tissue infections. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy may be of use in patients with infection caused by gas-forming organisms (e.g., C perfringens), although the evidence to support efficacy is limited to underpowered studies and case reports. In the absence of such infection, hyperbaric oxygen therapy has not been shown to be effective.77Postoperative Nosocomial InfectionsSurgical patients are prone to develop a wide variety of nosoco-mial infections during the postoperative period, which include SSIs, UTIs, pneumonia, and bacteremia. SSIs are discussed ear-lier, and the latter types of nosocomial infections are related to prolonged use of indwelling tubes and catheters for the purpose of urinary drainage, ventilation, and venous and arterial access, respectively.The presence of a postoperative UTI should be considered based on urinalysis demonstrating WBCs or bacteria, a positive test for leukocyte esterase, or a combination of these elements. The diagnosis is established after >104 CFU/mL of microbes are identified by culture techniques in symptomatic patients, or >105 CFU/mL in asymptomatic individuals. Treatment for 3 to 5 days with a single antibiotic directed against the most common organ-isms (e.g., E Coli, K pneumoniae) that achieves high levels in the urine is appropriate. Initial therapy is directed by Gram stain results and is refined as culture results become available. Postop-erative surgical patients should have indwelling urinary catheters removed as quickly as possible to avoid the development of a UTI.Prolonged mechanical ventilation is associated with nos-ocomial pneumonia. These patients present with more severe disease, are more likely to be infected with drug-resistant pathogens, and suffer increased mortality compared to patients who develop community-acquired pneumonia. The diagnosis of pneumonia is established by presence of purulent sputum, elevated leukocyte count, fever, and new chest X-ray abnor-malities, such as consolidation. The presence of two of the clini-cal findings, plus chest X-ray findings, significantly increases the likelihood of pneumonia.78 Consideration should be given to performing bronchoalveolar lavage to obtain samples for Gram stain and culture. Some authors advocate quantitative cultures as a means to identify a threshold for diagnosis.79 Surgical patients should be weaned from mechanical ventilation as soon as feasi-ble, based on oxygenation and inspiratory effort, as risk of pneu-monia increases with increased time on mechanical ventilation.Infection associated with indwelling intravascular cathe-ters is a common problem among hospitalized patients. Because of the complexity of many surgical procedures, these devices are increasingly used for physiologic monitoring, vascular access, drug delivery, and hyperalimentation. Among the sev-eral million catheters inserted each year in the United States, approximately 25% will become colonized, and approximately 5% will be associated with bacteremia. Duration of catheteriza-tion, insertion or manipulation under emergency or nonsterile conditions, use for hyperalimentation, and the use of multilu-men catheters increase the risk of infection. Use of a central line insertion protocol that includes full barrier precautions and chlorhexidine skin prep has been shown to decrease the inci-dence of infection.80 Although no randomized trials have been performed, peripherally inserted central venous catheters have a catheter-related infection rate similar to those inserted in the subclavian or jugular veins.81Many patients who develop intravascular catheter infec-tions are asymptomatic, often exhibiting solely an elevation in the blood WBC count. Blood cultures obtained from a peripheral site and drawn through the catheter that reveals the presence of the same organism increase the index of suspicion for the pres-ence of a catheter infection. Obvious purulence at the exit site of the skin tunnel, severe sepsis syndrome due to any type of organism when other potential causes have been excluded, or bacteremia due to gram-negative aerobes or fungi should lead to catheter removal. Selected catheter infections due to low-virulence microbes such as S epidermidis can be effectively treated in approximately 50% to 60% of patients with a 14to 21-day course of an antibiotic, which should be considered when no other vascular access site exists.82 The use of antibi-otic-bonded catheters and chlorhexidine sponges at the insertion Brunicardi_Ch06_p0157-p0182.indd   17401/03/19   4:46 PM 175SURGICAL INFECTIONSCHAPTER 6FIGURE 6-4. Necrotizing soft tissue infection. (A) This patient presented with hypotension due to severe late necrotizing fasci-itis and myositis due to β-hemolytic streptococcal infection. The patient succumbed to his disease after 16 hours despite aggressive debridement. (B) This patient presented with spreading cellulites and pain on motion of his right hip 2 weeks after total colectomy. Cellulitis on right anterior thigh is outlined. (C) Classic dishwater edema of tissues with necrotic fascia. (D) Right lower extremity after debridement of fascia to viable muscle.site has been associated with lower rates of colonization.83 Use of ethanol or antimicrobial catheter “locks” have shown prom-ise in reducing incidence of infection in dialysis catheters.84  The surgeon should carefully consider the need for any type of vascular access devices, rigorously attend to their maintenance to prevent infection, and remove them as quickly as possible. Use of systemic antibacterial or antifungal agents to prevent catheter infection is of no utility and is contraindicated.SepsisAs previously discussed, sepsis is increasing in incidence, with more than 1.1 million cases estimated per year in the  United States with an annual cost of $24 billion. This rate is expected to increase as the population of aged in the United States increases. One third of sepsis cases occur in surgical pop-ulations and sepsis is a major cause of morbidity and mortality.85 The treatment of sepsis has improved over the last decade, with mortality rates dropping to under 30%. Factors contributing to this improvement relate both to recent randomized prospective trials demonstrating improved outcomes with new therapies, and to improvements in the process of care delivery to the sepsis patient. The “Surviving Sepsis Campaign,” a multidisciplinary group that develops treatment recommendations, published guidelines incorporating evidence-based sepsis treatment strate-gies most recently in 2016.15,86 These guidelines are summarized in Table 6-10.ABCDBrunicardi_Ch06_p0157-p0182.indd   17501/03/19   4:46 PM 176BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IPatients presenting with sepsis should receive resuscitation fluids early in the course of therapy. While former guidelines advocated fluids until the patient’s central venous pressure was 8 to 12 mmHg, newer guidelines recommend using dynamic monitoring systems (such as ultrasound) as well as assessment of physiological response to fluids by evaluating variables such as heart rate, blood pressure, and urine output to determine ade-quate resuscitation volumes. Resuscitation endpoints include achieving a goal mean arterial pressure of ≥65 mmHg, urine output of ≥0.5 mL/kg per hour, and normalization of serum lac-tate. Delaying this resuscitative step for as little as 3 hours has been shown to result in worse outcomes.87 Resuscitation may necessitate placement of a central venous catheter.A number of studies have demonstrated the importance of early empiric antibiotic therapy in patients who develop sep-sis or nosocomial infection; the Surviving Sepsis guidelines advocate for initiation of treatment within the first hour of the patient’s care. This therapy should be initiated as soon as pos-sible with broad-spectrum antibiotics directed against the most likely organisms. Use of institutionand unit-specific sensitivity patterns are critical in selecting an appropriate agent for patients with nosocomial infection. Obtain appropriate cultures before Table 6-10Summary of Surviving Sepsis Campaign guidelinesInitial Evaluation and Infection IssuesInitial resuscitation: Begin resuscitation immediately in patients with hypotension or elevated serum lactate with resuscitation goal of at least 30 mL/kg IV crystalloid given in the first 3 hours.Ongoing fluid administration should be guided by physiologic response as measured by clinical variables (e.g., heart rate, blood pressure, urine output) and/or other invasive or noninvasive monitoring.Resuscitation goals include mean arterial pressure >65 mmHg, urine output >0.5 mL/kg per h, and mixed venous oxygen saturation >65%.Target resuscitation to normalize lactate in patients with elevated lactate levels.Diagnosis: Obtain appropriate cultures prior to antibiotics, but do not delay antibiotic therapy. Imaging studies should be performed promptly to confirm a source of infection.Antibiotic therapy: Begin IV antibiotic therapy as early as possible and within the first hour after recognition of severe sepsis/septic shock. Use broad spectrum antibiotic regimen with penetration into presumed source, reassess regimen daily with de-escalation as appropriate, discontinue antibiotics in 7 to 10 days for most infections, stop antibiotics for noninfectious issues. Consider the use of serial procalcitonin levels, which may allow earlier cessation of antibiotic therapy.Source control: Establish anatomic site of infection as rapidly as possible; implement source control measures as soon as possible after initial resuscitation. Remove intravascular access devices if potentially infected.Hemodynamic Support and Adjunctive TherapyFluid therapy: Fluid resuscitate using crystalloid, with continued fluid challenges so long as hemodynamic parameters continue to improve (i.e., for so long as the patient remains fluid-responsive). Albumin may be used as an adjunct if large volumes of crystalloid are required, but hydroxyethyl starch and gelatin-based fluids should not be used.Vasopressors/Inotropic Therapy: Maintain MAP of >65 mmHg. Centrally-administered norepinephrine is the first-line choice. Add vasopressin if needed to raise MAP or to reduce norepinephrine requirement. Epinephrine is an alternative to vasopressin but has greater risk of reduced splanchnic blood flow. Dopamine is an appropriate alternative only in select patients (bradycardia, low risk of arrhythmia), and there is no role for low-dose “renal protection” dopamine. Phenylephrine is not recommended. Insert arterial catheters for patients requiring vasopressors. Consider dobutamine infusion for persistent hypotension after appropriate resuscitation and use of vasopressor agents.Steroids: Consider intravenous hydrocortisone (dose <300 mg/day) for adult septic shock when hypotension responds poorly to fluids and vasopressors.Other Supportive TherapyBlood product administration: Transfuse red blood cells when hemoglobin decreases to <7.0 g/dL in the absence of extenuating circumstances (e.g., myocardial ischemia, hemorrhage). It is not necessary to use fresh frozen plasma to correct INR abnormalities in the absence of bleeding. Consider prophylactic transfusion of platelets when counts are less than 10,000/mL in the absence of bleeding, <20,000/mL if there is a risk of bleeding, and <50,000 in the setting of active bleeding or need for procedure.Mechanical ventilation: Target an initial tidal volume of 6 mL/kg body weight and plateau pressure of <30 cm H2O in patients with acute lung injury. Use PEEP to avoid lung collapse. Adopt a conservative fluid strategy. In the setting of sepsis-induced ARDS with PaO2/FiO2 ratio <150, use prone ventilation over continued supine position or high-frequency oscillatory ventilation. Use a weaning protocol to evaluate the potential for discontinuing mechanical ventilation. Pulmonary artery catheter placement is not indicated for routine monitoring.Sedation: Minimize sedation using specific titration endpoints.Glucose control: Use protocolized approach to blood glucose management targeting upper blood glucose target of 180 mg/dL.Prophylaxis: Use stress ulcer (proton pump inhibitor or H2 blocker) and deep venous thrombosis (low-dose unfractionated or fractionated heparin) prophylaxis.Limitation of support: Discuss advance care planning with patients and families and set realistic expectations.Data from Rhodes A, Evans LE, Alhazzani W, et al: Surviving Sepsis Campaign: International Guidelines for Management of Sepsis and Septic Shock: 2016, Intensive Care Med. 2017 Mar;43(3):304-377.Brunicardi_Ch06_p0157-p0182.indd   17601/03/19   4:46 PM 177SURGICAL INFECTIONSCHAPTER 6starting antibiotics so that appropriate de-escalation of therapy can take place when results return, but only if doing so does not delay the initiation of treatment.In patients who require vasopressor therapy, the first-line agent should be norepinephrine. This can be augmented with vasopressin, if needed, to achieve MAP ≥65 mmHg. It is impor-tant to titrate therapy based on other parameters such as mixed venous oxygen saturation and plasma lactate levels to reduce the risk of vasopressor-induced perfusion deficits. Patients who have persistently poor perfusion despite adequate fluid resus-citation may require addition of inotropic agents (epinephrine, dobutamine) or adjunctive therapy with low-dose corticoste-roids (hydrocortisone 200 mg/day).86Patients with acute lung injury associated with sepsis should receive mechanical ventilation with tidal volumes of 6 mL/kg and pulmonary airway plateau pressures of ≤30 cm H2O. Finally, red blood cell transfusion should be reserved for patients with hemoglobin of <7 g/dL, with a more liberal trans-fusion strategy reserved for those patients with severe coronary artery disease, ongoing blood loss, or severe hypoxemia.86Resistant OrganismsPenicillin was first available for widespread clinical use in the 1940s, and within a year resistant strains of S aureus had emerged. There are two major factors responsible for antibiotic resistance. First, there may be a genetic component innate to an organism that prevents the effect of a particular antibiotic. For instance, if an organism does not have a target receptor specific to the mechanism of action of a particular antibiotic, the antibi-otic will not be effective against this organism. A good example is penicillin and gram-negative organisms, as these microbes lack penicillin-binding proteins. The second component driv-ing resistance is inducible and related to natural selection. Over generations of exposure to a particular antibiotic, selection pres-sure will drive proliferation of more organisms resistant to that antibiotic. This acquired antibiotic resistance can be mutational, leading to changes in the chromosomal makeup of the microbe, or it can be extrachromosomal, induced by transfer of exog-enous genetic material in the form of a plasmid or transposon. In either case, cellular mechanisms of resistance that develop include target site modification, changes in bacterial permeabil-ity or antibiotic uptake, activation of drug efflux systems, and drug deactivation. Given that millions of kilograms of antibiot-ics are used annually in people, in agriculture, and for animal use, environmental selection pressures are high, and antibiotic resistance has now been described in all classes of antibiotics in common use. Antibiotic resistance comes at a high cost, with a significant increase in mortality associated with infection from resistant organisms, and an economic cost of billions of dollars per year.There are several drug-resistant organisms of interest to the surgeon. MRSA most commonly occurs as a hospitalassociated infection in chronically ill patients who have received multiple courses of antibiotics. However, strains of MRSA have emerged in the community among patients without preexisting risk factors for disease.75 These strains, which produce a toxin known as Panton-Valentine leukocidin, make up an increasingly high percentage of surgical site infections since they are resis-tant to commonly employed prophylactic antimicrobial agents.88 Extended spectrum β-lactamase (ESBL)-producing strains of enterobacteriaceae, originally geographically localized and infrequent, have become much more widespread and common in the last decade.89 These strains, typically Klebsiella species or E coli, produce a plasmid-mediated inducible β-lactamase. Commonly encountered plasmids also confer resistance to many other antibiotic classes. A common laboratory finding with ESBL is sensitivity to first-, second-, or third-generation cephalosporins, with resistance to other agents. Unfortunately, use of this seemingly active agent leads to rapid induction of resistance and failure of antibiotic therapy. The appropriate anti-biotic choice in this setting is a carbapenem.While Enterococcus was considered a low-virulence organ-ism in the past, infections caused by E faecium and faecalis have been found to be increasingly severe, especially in the immu-nocompromised host. The last decade has seen increased iso-lation of a vancomycin-resistant strain of Enterococcus. This resistance is transposon-mediated via the vanA gene and is typically seen in E faecium strains. A real infection control con-cern is potential for transfer of genetic material to S aureus in a host coinfected with both organisms. This is thought to be the mechanism behind emerging cases of vancomycin resistance in S aureus.90Blood-Borne PathogensThe risk of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) transmission from patient to surgeon is low. As of May 2011, there had been six cases of surgeons with HIV seroconversion from a possible occupational exposure, with no new cases reported since 1999. Of the numbers of healthcare workers with likely occupationally acquired HIV infection (n = 200), surgeons were one of the lower risk groups (compared to nurses at 60 cases and nonsur-geon physicians at 19 cases).91 The estimated risk of transmis-sion from a needlestick from a source with HIV-infected blood is estimated at 0.3%. Transmission of HIV (and other infections spread by blood and body fluid) from patient to healthcare worker can be minimized by observation of universal precau-tions,  including: (a) routine use of barriers (gloves, gown, mask, eye protection) when anticipating contact with blood or body fluids, (b) washing hands and other skin surfaces immediately after contact with blood or body fluids, and (c) careful handling and disposal of sharp instruments during and after use.Postexposure prophylaxis for HIV has significantly decreased the risk of seroconversion for healthcare workers with occupational exposure to HIV. Steps to initiate postexposure prophylaxis should be initiated within hours for the most effec-tive preventive therapy. Postexposure prophylaxis with a three-drug regimen should be initiated for healthcare workers with significant exposure to patients with an HIV-positive status. If a patient’s HIV status is unknown, it may be advisable to begin postexposure prophylaxis while testing is carried out, particu-larly if the patient is at high risk for infection due to HIV (e.g., has had a history of intravenous drug use). Generally, postexpo-sure prophylaxis is not warranted for exposure to sources with unknown status, such as deceased persons or needles from a sharps container.92The risks of acquiring HIV infection for surgeons are related to the prevalence of HIV infection in the patient popula-tion, the probability of transmission from a percutaneous injury suffered while caring for an infected patient, the number of such injuries sustained, and the use of postexposure prophylaxis. Average risk of HIV seroconversion is 0.3% from a percutane-ous exposure, and 0.09% from a mucous membrane exposure. The overall risk is influenced by the degree of viral inoculum 7Brunicardi_Ch06_p0157-p0182.indd   17701/03/19   4:46 PM 178BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Itransmitted from patient to surgeon, with greater risk of sero-conversion associated with hollow-bore needle injury, with larger-volume blood transmission, with direct introduction of infected blood into an artery or vein, and in exposure to blood with higher viral load. One study in Glasgow, Scotland, cal-culated annual risks and found a range in seroconversion rates from 1 in 200,000 for general surgeons not utilizing postexpo-sure prophylaxis to as low as 1 in 10,000,000 with use of routine postexposure prophylaxis after significant exposures.92,93Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a DNA virus that affects only humans. Primary infection with HBV generally is self-limited, but it can cause fulminant hepatitis or progress to a chronic car-rier state. Death from chronic liver disease or hepatocellular cancer occurs in roughly 30% of chronically infected persons. Surgeons and other healthcare workers are at high risk for this blood-borne infection and should receive the HBV vaccine; children are routinely vaccinated in the United States.94 This vaccine has contributed to a significant decline in the number of new cases of HBV per year in the United States, from approxi-mately 250,000 annually in the 1980s to 3350 in 2010.95,96Hepatitis C virus (HCV), previously known as non-A, non-B hepatitis, is a RNA flavivirus first identified in the late 1980s. This virus is confined to humans and chimpanzees. A chronic carrier state develops in 75% to 80% of patients with the infection, with chronic liver disease occurring in three-fourths of this subgroup. The number of new infections per year has declined since the 1980s due to routine testing of blood donors for the virus. Fortunately, HCV is not transmitted efficiently through occupational exposures to blood, with the seroconver-sion rate after accidental needlestick approximately 1.8%.97 To date, a vaccine to prevent HCV infection has not been devel-oped. Experimental studies in chimpanzees with HCV immu-noglobulin using a model of needlestick injury have failed to demonstrate a protective effect, and no effective antiviral agents for postexposure prophylaxis are available. Treatment of patients with HCV infection historically included ribavirin and pegylated gamma interferon; the development of novel direct-acting antiviral agents such as sofosbuvir, boceprevir, and tela-previr has led to changes in this strategy.98,99BIOLOGIC WARFARE AGENTSSeveral infectious organisms have been studied by the  United States and the former Soviet Union and presumably other entities for potential use as biologic weapons. Programs involving biologic agents in the United States were halted by presidential decree in 1971. However, concern remains that these agents could be used by rogue states or terrorist organi-zations as weapons of mass destruction, as they are relatively inexpensive to make in terms of infrastructure development. Given these concerns, physicians, including surgeons, should familiarize themselves with the manifestations of infection due to these pathogens. The typical agent is selected for the ability to be spread via the inhalational route, as this is the most efficient mode of mass exposure. Several potential agents are discussed in the following sections.Bacillus anthracis (Anthrax)Anthrax is a zoonotic disease occurring in domesticated and wild herbivores. The first identification of inhalational anthrax as a disease occurred among woolsorters in England in the late 1800s. The largest recent epidemic of inhalational anthrax occurred in 1979 in Sverdlovsk, Russia, after accidental release of anthrax spores from a military facility. Inhalational anthrax develops after a 1to 6-day incubation period, with nonspe-cific symptoms, including malaise, myalgia, and fever. Over a short period of time these symptoms worsen, with development of respiratory distress, chest pain, and diaphoresis. Character-istic chest roentgenographic findings include a widened medi-astinum and pleural effusions. Rapid antigen tests are under development for identification of this gram-positive rod, so a key element of establishing the diagnosis is eliciting an expo-sure history. Postexposure prophylaxis consists of administra-tion of either ciprofloxacin or doxycycline.100 If an isolate is demonstrated to be penicillin-sensitive, the patient should be switched to amoxicillin. Inhalational exposure followed by the development of symptoms is associated with a high mortality rate. Treatment options include combination therapy with cip-rofloxacin, clindamycin, and rifampin. Clindamycin is added to block toxin production, while rifampin penetrates into the central nervous system and intracellular locations.Yersinia pestis (Plague)Plague is caused by the gram-negative organism Y pestis. The naturally occurring disease in humans is transmitted via flea bites from rodents. It was the first biologic warfare agent, and was used in the Crimean city of Caffa by the Tartar army, whose soldiers catapulted bodies of plague victims at the  Genoese. When plague is used as a biologic warfare agent, clinical manifestations include epidemic pneumonia with blood-tinged sputum if aerosolized bacteria are used, or bubonic plague if fleas are used as carriers. Individuals who develop a painful enlarged lymph node lesion, termed a “bubo,” associ-ated with fever, severe malaise, and exposure to fleas should be suspected to have plague. Diagnosis is confirmed via aspirate of the bubo and a direct antibody stain to detect plague bacil-lus, whose morphology is a bipolar, safety-pin-shaped gram-negative rod. Postexposure prophylaxis for patients exposed to plague consists of doxycycline. Treatment of the pneumonic or bubonic/septicemic form includes administration of either strep-tomycin, an aminoglycoside, doxycycline, a fluoroquinolone, or chloramphenicol.101SmallpoxVariola, the causative agent of smallpox, was a major cause of infectious morbidity and mortality until its eradication in the late 1970s. Even in the absence of laboratory-preserved virus, the prolonged viability of variola virus has been dem-onstrated in scabs up to 13 years after collection. The potential for reverse genetic engineering using the known sequence of smallpox also makes it a potential biologic weapon. This has resulted in the United States undertaking a vaccination program for key healthcare workers.102 Variola virus is highly infectious in the aerosolized form; after an incubation period of 10 to  12 days, clinical manifestations of malaise, fever, vomiting, and headache appear, followed by development of a characteristic centripetal rash (which is found to predominate on the face and extremities). The fatality rate may reach 30%. Postexposure prophylaxis with smallpox vaccine has been noted to be effec-tive for up to 4 days postexposure. Cidofovir, an acyclic nucleo-side phosphonate analogue, has demonstrated activity in animal models of poxvirus infections and may offer promise for the treatment of smallpox.103Brunicardi_Ch06_p0157-p0182.indd   17801/03/19   4:46 PM 179SURGICAL INFECTIONSCHAPTER 6Francisella tularensis (Tularemia)The principal reservoir of this gram-negative aerobic organism is the tick. After inoculation, this organism proliferates within macrophages. Tularemia is considered a potential bioterrorist threat due to a very high infectivity rate after aerosolization. Patients with tularemia pneumonia develop a cough and dem-onstrate pneumonia on chest roentgenogram. Enlarged lymph nodes occur in approximately 85% of patients. The organism can be cultured from tissue samples, but this is difficult, and the diagnosis is based on acute-phase agglutination tests. Treat-ment of inhalational tularemia consists of administration of an aminoglycoside or second-line agents such as doxycycline and ciprofloxacin.REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Nuland SB. The Doctors’ Plague: Germs, Childbed Fever, and the Strange Story of Ignaz Semmelweis. New York:  WW Norton & Co.: 2003:1.	2.	Wangensteen OH, Wangensteen SD. Germ theory of infec-tion and disease. In: Wangensteen OH, Wangensteen SD: The Rise of Surgery: From Empiric Craft to Scientific Discipline.  Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press: 1978:387.	3.	Rutkow E. Appendicitis: the quintessential American surgical disease. Arch Surg. 1998;133:1024.	4.	Mirilas P, Skandalakis JE. Not just an appendix: Sir Frederick Treves. Arch Dis Child. 2003;88;549-553.	5.	Bynum WF, Hardy A, Jacyna S, Lawrence C, Tansey EM. The Western Medical Tradition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press: 2006.	6.	Meleney F. Bacterial synergism in disease processes with confirmation of synergistic bacterial etiology of certain types of progressive gangrene of the abdominal wall. Ann Surg. 1931;94:961-981.	7.	Altemeier WA. Manual of Control of Infection in Surgical Patients. Chicago: American College of Surgeons Press: 1976:1.	8.	Bartlett JG. Intra-abdominal sepsis. Med Clin North Am. 1995;79:599-617.	9.	Dunn DL, Simmons RL. The role of anaerobic bacteria in intra-abdominal infections. Rev Infect Dis. 1984;6:S139-S146.	10.	Osler W. The Evolution of Modern Medicine. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press: 1913:1.	11.	Dunn DL. Autochthonous microflora of the gastrointestinal tract. Perspect Colon Rectal Surg. 1990;2:105-119.	12.	van Till JW, van Veen SQ, van Ruler O, et al. The innate immune response to secondary peritonitis. Shock. 2007 Nov;28(5):504-517.	13.	Zeytun A, Chaudhary A, Pardington P, et al. Induction of cyto-kines and chemokines by Toll-like receptor signaling: strat-egies for control of inflammation. Crit Rev Immunol. 2010; 30(1):53-67.	14.	Aziz M, Jacob A, Yang WL, et al. Current trends in inflam-matory and immunomodulatory mediators in sepsis. J Leukoc Biol. 2013;(3):320-342.	15.	Dellinger RP, Levy MM, Rhodes A, et al. Surviving sepsis cam-paign: international guidelines for management of severe sep-sis and septic shock: 2012. Crit Care Med. 2013;41:580-637.	16.	Singer M, et al. The third international consensus defini-tions for sepsis and septic shock (Sepsis-3). JAMA 2016; 315(8):801-810. The most recently updated set of evidence-based guidelines and definitions for sepsis and septic shock.	17.	Murphy SL, Xu Jiaquan, Kochanek KD. Deaths: preliminary data for 2010. Natl Vital Stat Rep. 2012;60(4):1-52.	18.	Zahar JR, Timsit JF, Garrouste-Orgeas M, et al. Outcomes in severe sepsis and patients with septic shock: pathogen species and infection sites are not associated with mortality. Crit Care Med. 2011;39(8):1886-1895.	19.	Dreiher J, Almog Y, Sprung CL, et al. Temporal trends in patient characteristics and survival of intensive care admis-sions with sepsis: a multicenter analysis. Crit Care Med. 2012;40(3):855-860.	20.	Berrios-Torres S, et al., Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guideline for the prevention of surgical site infection, 2017. JAMA Surg. 2017 Aug 1;152(8):784-791. doi:10.1001/jamasurg.2017.0904. Specific evidence-based, graded recommendations for perioperative infection control.	21.	Dunn DL. The biological rationale. In: Schein M, Marshall JC (eds). Source Control: A Guide to the Management of Surgical Infections. New York: Springer-Verlag: 2003:9.	22.	Pieracci FM, Barie PS. Management of severe sepsis of abdominal origin. Scand J Surg. 2007;96(3):184-196.	23.	Bratzler DW, Dellinger EP, Olson KM, et al. Clinical prac-tice guidelines for antimicrobial prophylaxis in surgery. Am J Health Syst Pharm. 2013;70:195-283.	24.	Solomkin JS, Meakins JL, Jr, Allo MD, et al. Antibiotic tri-als in intra-abdominal infections: a critical evaluation of study design and outcome reporting. Ann Surg. 1984;200:29-39.	25.	Kumar A. Optimizing antimicrobial therapy in sepsis and septic shock. Crit Care Clin. 2009;25(4):733-751. Discussion and recommendations on rational and optimal clinical use of antimicrobials.	26.	Aarts MA, Brun-Buisson C, Cook DJ, et al. Antibiotic man-agement of suspected nosocomial ICU-acquired infection: does prolonged empiric therapy improve outcome? Intensive Care Med. 2007;33(8):1369-1378.	27.	Hillier S, Roberts Z, Dunstan F, et al. Prior antibiotics and risk of antibiotic-resistant community-acquired urinary tract infection: a case-control study. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2007;60:92-99.	28.	Smith BP, Fox N, Fakhro A, et al. “SCIP” ping antibiotic pro-phylaxis guidelines in trauma: the consequences of noncom-pliance. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012;73(2):452-456.	29.	Zilahi G, McMahon MA, Povoa P, et al. Duration of anti-biotic therapy in the intensive care unit, J Thorac Dis. 2016;8(12):3774-3780.	30.	Schuetz P, Müller B, Christ-Crain M, et al. Procalcitonin to initiate or discontinue antibiotics in acute respiratory tract infections. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012; 9:CD007498.	31.	Stone HH, Bourneuf AA, Stinson LD. Reliability of crite-ria for predicting persistent or recurrent sepsis. Arch Surg. 1985;120:17-20.	32.	Mazuski JE, Tessier JM, May AK, et al. The Surgical Infec-tion Society revised guidelines on the management of intra-abdominal infection. Surgical Infections. 2017;18(1):1-76. Evidence-based, graded recommendations covering diagno-sis, antibiotic selection, and source control of intra-abdominal infections.	33.	Sartelli M, Catena F, Ansaloni L, Coccolini F, Di Saverio S, Griffiths E. Duration of antimicrobial therapy in treating com-plicated intra-abdominal infections: a comprehensive review. Surgical Infections. 2016;17(1):9-12.	34.	Romano A, Viola M, Guéant-Rodriguez RM, et al. Imipenem in patients with immediate hypersensitivity to penicillins.  N Engl J Med. 2006;354(26):2835-2837.	35.	Park M, Markus P, Matesic D, Li JT. Safety and effective-ness of a preoperative allergy clinic in decreasing vancomycin use in patients with a history of penicillin allergy. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2006;97:681-687.	36.	Galán JC, González-Candelas F, Rolain JM, Cantón R. Anti-biotics as selectors and accelerators of diversity in the mecha-nisms of resistance: from the resistome to genetic plasticity in the β-lactamases world. Front Microbiol. 2013;4:9.Brunicardi_Ch06_p0157-p0182.indd   17901/03/19   4:46 PM 180BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART I	37.	Rosenberger LH, Politano AD, Sawyer RG. The surgical care improvement project and prevention of post-operative infec-tion, including surgical site infection. Surg Infect (Larchmt). 2011;12(3):163-168. doi: 10.1089/sur.2010.083.	38.	Alexander JW, Solomkin JS, Edwards MJ. Updated rec-ommendations for control of surgical site infections. Ann Surg. 2011;253(6):1082-1093. Evidence-based guidelines on SSI prevention.	39.	Martone WJ, Nichols RL. Recognition, prevention, surveil-lance, and management of surgical site infections: introduc-tion to the problem and symposium overview. Clin Infect Dis. 2001;33:S67-S68.	40.	Kobayashi M, Mohri Y, Inoue Y, Miki C, Kusunoki M. Con-tinuous follow-up of surgical site infections for 30 days after colorectal surgery. World J Surg. 2008;32:1142-1146.	41.	Konishi T, Watanabe T, Kishimoto J, Nagawa H. Elective colon and rectal surgery differ in risk factors for wound infection: results of prospective surveillance. Ann Surg. 2006;244:758-763.	42.	Cima R, Dankbar E, Lovely J, et al. Colorectal surgery surgical site infection reduction program: a national surgi-cal quality improvement program-driven multidisciplinary  single-institution experience. J Am Coll Surg. 2013;216(1): 23-33. Design and implementation of an SSI-prevention bun-dle, which demonstrated a reduction in colorectal surgical site infections.	43.	Duttaroy DD, Jitendra J, Duttaroy B, et al. Management strategy for dirty abdominal incisions: primary or delayed primary closure? A randomized trial. Surg Infect (Larchmt). 2009:10(2):129-136.	44.	Margenthaler JA, Longo WE, Virgo KS, et al. Risk factors for adverse outcomes after the surgical treatment of appendicitis in adults. Ann Surg. 2003;238:59-66.	45.	McManus LM, Bloodworth RC, Prihoda TJ, et al. Agonist-dependent failure of neutrophil function in diabetes correlates with extent of hyperglycemia. J Leukoc Biol. 2001;70:395-404.	46.	Richards JE, Kauffmann RM, Obremskey WT, May AK. Stress-induced hyperglycemia as a risk factor for surgical-site infection in nondiabetic orthopedic trauma patients admitted to the intensive care unit. J Orthop Trauma. 2013;27(1):16-21.	47.	Ata A, Lee J, Bestle SL, et al. Postoperative hyperglycemia and surgical site infection in general surgery patients. Arch Surg. 2010;145(9):858-864.	48.	Berríos-Torres SI, Umscheid CA, Bratzler DW, et al. Cen-ters for Disease Control and Prevention guideline for the prevention of surgical site infection, 2017. JAMA Surg. 2017 Aug 1;152(8):784-791. doi:10.1001/jamasurg.2017.0904. Specific evidence-based, graded recommendations for periop-erative infection control.	49.	Greif R, Akca O, Horn EP, et al. Supplemental perioperative oxygen to reduce the incidence of wound infection. N Engl J Med. 2000;342:161-167.	50.	Kao LS, Millas SG, Pedroza C, et al. Should periopera-tive supplemental oxygen be routinely recommended for surgery patients? A Bayesian meta-analysis. Ann Surg. 2012;256(6):894-901.	51.	Yang W, Liu Y, Zhang Y, et al. Effect of intra-operative high inspired oxygen fraction on surgical site infection: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Journal of Hospital Infection. 2016;93:329-338.	52.	Grubbs BC, Statz CL, Johnson EM, et al. Salvage therapy of open, infected surgical wounds: a retrospective review using Techni-Care. Surg Infect. 2000;1:109-114.	53.	Roberts DJ, Zygun DA, Grendar J, et al. Negative-pressure wound therapy for critically ill adults with open abdominal wounds: a systematic review. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012;73(3):629-639.	54.	Dumville JC, Owens GL, Crosbie EJ, Peinemann F, Liu Z. Negative pressure wound therapy for treating surgical wounds healing by secondary intention. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015 Jun 4;(6):CD011278. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD011278.pub2.	55.	Weiss CA III, Statz CL, Dahms RA, et al. Six years of surgical wound infection surveillance at a tertiary care center: review of the microbiologic and epidemiological aspects of 20,007 wounds. Arch Surg. 1999;134:1041-1048.	56.	Mu Y, Edwards JR, Horan TC, et al. Improving risk-adjusted measures of surgical site infection for the national health-care safety network. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 2011; 32(10):970-986.	57.	Scott RD II. The direct medical costs of healthcare-associated infections in U.S. hospitals and the benefits of prevention. 2009. Available at https://www.cdc.gov/HAI/pdfs/hai/Scott_CostPaper.pdf. Accessed August 8, 2017.	58.	Bratzler DW, Houck PM; Surgical Infection Prevention Guide-lines Writers Workgroup; American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons; American Association of Critical Care Nurses; American Association of Nurse Anesthetists, et al. Antimicro-bial prophylaxis for surgery: an advisory statement from the National Surgical Infection Prevention Project. Clin Infect Dis. 2004;38:1706-1715.	59.	Meeks DW, Lally KP, Carrick MM, et al. Compliance with guidelines to prevent surgical site infections: as simple as 1-2-3? Am J Surg. 2011;201(1):76-83.	60.	Runyon BA. Management of adult patients with ascites due to cirrhosis: update 2012, American Association for the Study of Liver Disease practice guideline. Available at https://www .aasld.org/sites/default/files/guideline_documents/AASLD-PracticeGuidelineAsciteDuetoCirrhosisUpdate2012Edition4_ .pdf. Accessed August 8, 2017.	61.	Solomkin JS, Mazuski JE, Baron EJ, et al. Infectious Diseases Society of America: guidelines for the selection of anti-infective agents for complicated intra-abdominal infections. Clin Infect Dis. 2003;37:997-1005.	62.	Solomkin JS, Dellinger EP, Christou NV, et al. Results of a multicenter trial comparing imipenem/cilastatin to tobramy-cin/clindamycin for intra-abdominal infections. Ann Surg. 1990;212:581-591.	63.	Solomkin JS, Yellin AE, Rotstein OD, et al; Protocol 017 Study Group. Ertapenem versus piperacillin/tazobactam in the treatment of complicated intraabdominal infections: results of a double-blind, randomized comparative phase III trial. Ann Surg. 2003;237:235-245.	64.	Chromik AM, Meiser A, Hölling J, et al. Identification of patients at risk for development of tertiary peritoni-tis on a surgical intensive care unit. J Gastrointest Surg. 2009;13(7):1358-1367.	65.	Pang TC, Fung T, Samra J, et al. Pyogenic liver abscess: an audit of 10 years’ experience. World J Gastroenterol. 2011;17(12):1622-1630.	66.	Bradley EL III, Allen K. A prospective longitudinal study of observation versus surgical intervention in the management of necrotizing pancreatitis. Am J Surg. 1991;161:19.	67.	Charbonney E, Nathens AB. Severe acute pancreatitis: a review. Surg Infect (Larchmt). 2008;9(6):573-578.	68.	Freeman ML, Werner J, van Santvoort HC, et al. Interven-tions for necrotizing pancreatitis: summary of a multidis-ciplinary consensus conference. Pancreas. 2012;41(8): 1176-1194.	69.	Wysocki AP, McKay CJ, Carter CR. Infected pancreatic necro-sis: minimizing the cut. ANZ J Surg. 2010;80(1-2):58-70.	70.	Haghshenasskashani A, Laurence JM, Kwan V, et al. Endo-scopic necrosectomy of pancreatic necrosis: a systematic review. Surg Endosc. 2011;25(12):3724-3730.Brunicardi_Ch06_p0157-p0182.indd   18001/03/19   4:46 PM 181SURGICAL INFECTIONSCHAPTER 6	71.	Bakker OJ, van Santvoort HC, van Brunschot S, et al. Endoscopic transgastric vs surgical necrosectomy for infected necrotizing pancreatitis: a randomized trial. JAMA. 2012;307(10):1053-1061.	72.	Fink D, Soares R, Matthews JB, Alverdy JC. History, goals, and technique of laparoscopic pancreatic necrosectomy.  J Gastrointest Surg. 2011;15(7):1092-1097.	73.	van Santvoort HC, Bakker OJ, Bollen TL, et al. A conservative and minimally invasive approach to necrotizing pancreatitis improves outcome. Gastroenterology. 2011;141(4):1254-1263.	74.	van Santvoort HC, Besselink MG, Bakker OJ, et al. A step-up approach or open necrosectomy for necrotizing pancreatitis. N Engl J Med. 2010;362(16):1491-1502. A study assessing a minimally invasive approach to pancreatic debridement.	75.	Beilman GJ, Sandifer G, Skarda D, et al. Emerging infections with community-associated methicillin-resistant Staphylococ-cus aureus in outpatients at an army community hospital. Surg Infect (Larchmt). 2005;6(1):87-92.	76.	Kao LS, Lew DF, Arab SN, et al. Local variations in the epidemiology, microbiology, and outcome of necrotizing soft-tissue infections: a multicenter study. Am J Surg. 2011; 202(2):139-145.	77.	George ME, Rueth NM, Skarda DE, et al. Hyperbaric oxygen does not improve outcome in patients with necrotizing soft tissue infection. Surg Infect (Larchmt). 2009;10(1):21-28.	78.	Klompas M. Does this patient have ventilator-associated pneu-monia? JAMA. 2007 11;297(14):1583-1593.	79.	Riaz OJ, Malhotra AK, Aboutanos MB, et al. Bronchoal-veolar lavage in the diagnosis of ventilator-associated pneu-monia: to quantitate or not, that is the question. Am Surg. 2011;77(3):297-303.	80.	O’Grady NP, Alexander M, Burns LA, et al. Guidelines for the prevention of intravascular catheter-related infections. Clin Infect Dis. 2011;52(9):e162-e193.	81.	Safdar N, Maki DG. Risk of catheter-related bloodstream infection with peripherally inserted central venous catheters used in hospitalized patients. Chest. 2005;128(2):489-495.	82.	Marr KA, Sexton DJ, Conlon PJ, et al. Catheter-related bac-teremia and outcome of attempted catheter salvage in patients undergoing hemodialysis. Ann Intern Med. 1997;127:275.	83.	O’Grady NP, Alexander M, Burns LA, et al. Guidelines for the prevention of intravascular catheter-related infections. Clin Infect Dis. 2011;52(9):e162-e193.	84.	Broom JK, Krishnasamy R, Hawley CM, et al. A randomised controlled trial of Heparin versus EthAnol Lock THerapY for the prevention of Catheter Associated infecTion in Haemo-dialysis patients—the HEALTHY-CATH trial. BMC Nephrol. 2012;13:146.	85.	Moore LJ, Moore FA. Epidemiology of sepsis in surgical patients. Surg Clin North Am. 2012;92(6):1425-1443.	86.	Rhodes A, Evans L, Alhazzani W, et al. Surviving Sepsis campaign: international guidelines for management of sepsis and septic shock: 2016. Intensive Care Med. 2017;43:304-377. Updated recommendations and best practice guidelines.	87.	Otero RM, Nguyen HB, Huang DT, et al. Early goal-directed therapy in severe sepsis and septic shock revisited: con-cepts, controversies, and contemporary findings. Chest. 2006;130(5):1579-1595.	88.	Miller LG, McKinnell JA, Vollmer ME, Spellberg B. Impact of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus prevalence among S aureus isolates on surgical site infection risk after coronary artery bypass surgery. Infect Control Hosp Epide-miol. 2011;32(4):342-350.	89.	Han JH, Nachamkin I, Zaoutis TE, et al. Risk factors for gastrointestinal tract colonization with extended-spectrum β-lactamase (ESBL)-producing Escherichia coli and Kleb-siella species in hospitalized patients. Infect Control Hosp  Epidemiol. 2012;33(12):1242-1245.	90.	Calfee DP. Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus and vancomycin-resistant enterococci, and other Gram-positives in healthcare. Curr Opin Infect Dis. 2012;25(4):385-394.	91.	Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Surveillance of occupationally acquired HIV/AIDS in healthcare personnel, as of December 2010. Available at https://www.cdc.gov/HAI/organisms/hiv/Surveillance-Occupationally-Acquired-HIV-AIDS.html. Accessed July 31, 2017.	92.	Updated U.S. Public Health Service guidelines for the manage-ment of occupational exposures to HIV and recommendations for postexposure prophylaxis. Downloaded from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Human Immunodeficiency Virus in Healthcare Settings, https://www.cdc.gov/hai/organ-isms/hiv/hiv.html. Accessed July 31, 2017.  	93.	Goldberg D, Johnston J, Cameron S, et al. Risk of HIV trans-mission from patients to surgeons in the era of post-exposure prophylaxis. J Hosp Infect. 2000;44:99-105.	94.	Recommended Adult Immunization Schedule-United States. Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/schedules/hcp/adult.html. Accessed July 31, 2017.	95.	Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Hepatitis B  vaccination–United States, 1982–2002. MMWR. 2002;51:549.	96.	Centers for Disease Control, Viral hepatitis statistics and surveillance. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/Statistics/2010Surveillance/Table3.1.htm. Accessed July 31, 2017.	97.	MacCannell T, Laramie AK, Gomaa A, Perz JF. Occupational exposure of health care personnel to hepatitis B and hepatitis C: prevention and surveillance strategies. Clin Liver Dis. 2010; 14(1):23-36.	98.	Katz LH, Goldvaser H, Gafter-Gvili A, Tur-Kaspa R. Extended peginterferon plus ribavirin treatment for 72 weeks versus standard peginterferon plus ribavirin treatment for 48 weeks in chronic hepatitis C genotype 1 infected slow-responder adult patients. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;9:CD008516.	99.	Cholongitas E, Papatheodoridis GV. Sofosbuvir: a novel oral agent for chronic hepatitis C. Ann Gastroenterol. 2014;27(4):331-337.	100.	Inglesby TV, O’Toole T, Henderson DA, et al. Anthrax as a biological weapon, 2002: updated recommendations for man-agement. JAMA. 2002;287:2236-2252.	101.	Inglesby TV, Dennis DT, Henderson DA, et al. Plague as a bio-logical weapon; medical and public health management. Work-ing group on civilian biodefense. JAMA. 2000;283:2281-2290.	102.	Russell PK, Gronvall GK. U.S. medical countermeasure devel-opment since 2001: a long way yet to go. Biosecur Bioterror. 2012;10(1):66-76.	103.	DeClercq E. Cidofovir in the treatment of poxvirus infections. Antiviral Res. 2002;55:1-13.Brunicardi_Ch06_p0157-p0182.indd   18101/03/19   4:46 PM
# Chunk 8872
Brunicardi_Ch06_p0157-p0182.indd   18201/03/19   4:46 PMThis page intentionally left blank

TraumaClay Cothren Burlew and Ernest E. Moore 7chapterINTRODUCTIONTrauma, or injury, is defined as cellular disruption caused by environmental energy that is beyond the body’s resilience, which is compounded by cell death due to ischemia/reperfu-sion. Trauma is the most common cause of death for all indi-viduals between the ages of 1 and 44 years, and is the third most common cause of death regardless of age.1 It is also the leading cause of years of productive life lost. Unin-tentional injuries account for over 135,000 deaths per year, with homicides, suicides, and other causes are responsible for another 60,000 deaths each year. However, death rate under-estimates the magnitude of the societal toll. For example, in 2014 there were almost 200,000 injury-related deaths, but 37.2 million injured patients treated in emergency depart-ments (EDs). Injury-related medical expenditures are esti-mated to be $117 billion each year in the United States.2 The aggregate lifetime cost for all injured patients is estimated to be in excess of $260 trillion. For these reasons, trauma must be considered a major public health issue. The American Col-lege of Surgeons Committee on Trauma addresses this issue by assisting in the development of trauma centers and sys-tems. The organization of trauma systems has had a signifi-cant favorable impact on patient outcomes, although system integration and maldistribution of trauma centers remain chal-lenges.3-5INITIAL EVALUATION AND RESUSCITATION OF THE INJURED PATIENTPrimary SurveyThe Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) course of the American College of Surgeons Committee on Trauma was developed in the late 1970s, based on the premise that appro-priate and timely care can improve the outcome for the injured 1patient.6 ATLS provides a structured approach to the trauma patient with standard algorithms of care; it emphasizes the “golden hour” concept that timely, prioritized interventions are necessary to prevent death and disability. The ATLS for-mat and basic tenets are followed throughout this chapter, with some modifications. The initial management of seriously injured patients consists of phases that include the primary survey/concurrent resuscitation, the secondary survey/diag-nostic evaluation, definitive care, and the tertiary survey. The first step in patient management is performing the primary survey, the goal of which is to identify and treat conditions that constitute an immediate threat to life. The ATLS course refers to the primary survey as assessment of the “ABCs” (Airway with cervical spine protection, Breathing, and Circulation). The timing of emergent intubation in the hypovolemic patient remains controversial because of the risk of further compro-mising cardiac function. Although the concepts  within the primary survey are presented in a sequential fashion, in reality they are pursued simultaneously in coordinated team resuscitation. Life-threatening injuries must be identified (Table 7-1) and treated before progressing to the secondary survey.Airway Management With Cervical Spine Protection.  Ensuring a patent airway is the first priority in the primary survey. This is essential because efforts to restore cardio-vascular integrity will be futile unless the oxygen content of the blood is adequate. Simultaneously, all patients with blunt trauma require cervical spine immobilization until injury is excluded. This is typically accomplished by applying a hard cervical collar or placing sandbags on both sides of the head with the patient’s forehead taped across the bags. Soft collars do not effectively immobilize the cervical spine. For penetrating neck wounds, however, cervical collars are not recommended because they provide no benefit and may interfere with assess-ment and treatment.7,82Introduction	183Initial Evaluation and   Resuscitation of the   Injured Patient	183Primary Survey / 183Secondary Survey / 195Mechanisms and Patterns of Injury / 195Regional Assessment and Special Diagnostic Tests / 196General Principles of Management	205Transfusion Practices / 206Prophylactic Measures / 208Operative Approaches and Exposure / 209Damage Control Surgery / 215Treatment of Specific Injuries	217Head Injuries / 217Cervical Injuries / 219Chest Injuries / 222Abdominal Injuries / 225Pelvic Fracture Hemorrhage Control / 234Extremity Vascular Injuries, Fractures, and Compartment Syndromes / 235Surgical Intensive Care   Management	237Postinjury Resuscitation / 237Abdominal Compartment Syndrome / 238Special Populations	240Pregnant Patients / 240Geriatric Patients / 243Pediatric Patients / 244Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   18310/12/18   6:16 PM 184Table 7-1Immediately life-threatening injuries to be identified during the primary surveyAirwayAirway obstructionAirway injuryBreathingTension pneumothoraxOpen pneumothoraxMassive air leak from tracheobronchial injuryFlail chest with underlying pulmonary contusionCirculationHemorrhagic shockMassive hemothoraxMassive hemoperitoneumMechanically unstable pelvis fracture with bleedingExtremity blood lossCardiogenic shockCardiac tamponadeNeurogenic shockDisabilityIntracranial hemorrhageCervical spine injuryPatients who are conscious, without tachypnea, and have a normal voice are unlikely to require early airway intervention. Exceptions are penetrating injuries to the neck with an expanding hematoma; evidence of chemical or thermal injury to the mouth, nares, or hypopharynx; extensive subcutaneous air in the neck; complex maxillofacial trauma; or airway bleeding. Although these patients may initially have an adequate airway, it may become compromised if soft tissue swelling, hematoma forma-tion, or edema progresses. In these cases, preemptive intubation should be performed before airway access becomes challenging.Patients who have an abnormal voice, abnormal breathing sounds, tachypnea, or altered mental status require further air-way evaluation. Blood, vomit, the tongue, teeth, foreign objects, and soft tissue swelling can cause airway obstruction; suction-ing affords immediate relief in many patients. In the comatose patient, the tongue may fall backward and obstruct the hypo-pharynx; this can be relieved by either a chin lift or jaw thrust. An oral airway or a nasal trumpet is also helpful in maintaining airway patency, although the former is usually not tolerated by an awake patient. Establishing a definitive airway (i.e., endotra-cheal intubation) is indicated in patients with apnea; inability to protect the airway due to altered mental status; impending airway compromise due to inhalation injury, hematoma, facial bleeding, soft tissue swelling, or aspiration; and inability to maintain oxygenation. Altered mental status is the most com-mon indication for intubation. Agitation or obtundation, often attributed to intoxication or drug use, may actually be due to hypoxia. But the timing of endotracheal intubation may be criti-cal in the hypovolemic patient because positive airway pres-sure may further compromise cardiac function and precipitate cardiac arrest; thus, Circulation may take priority over Airway.Options for endotracheal intubation include nasotracheal, orotracheal, or operative routes. Nasotracheal intubation can be accomplished only in patients who are breathing spontaneously. Although nasotracheal intubation is frequently used by prehospital providers, the technique is limited in the ED to those patients requiring emergent airway support in whom chemical paralysis Key Points1	Trauma is the most common cause of death for all indi-viduals between the ages of 1 and 44 years and is the third most common cause of death regardless of age.2	The initial management of seriously injured patients usu-ally follows the primary survey (the “ABCs”—Airway with cervical spine protection, Breathing, and Circulation), although at times restoring Circulatory volume may pro-ceed active Airway intervention; the goals of the primary survey are to identify and treat conditions that constitute an immediate threat to life.3	All patients with blunt injury should be assumed to have unstable cervical spine injuries until proven otherwise; one must maintain cervical spine precautions and in-line stabilization.4	Patients with ongoing hemodynamic instability, whether “nonresponders” or “transient responders,” require prompt intervention; one must consider the dominant causes of acute shock, i.e., hemorrhagic, cardiogenic, and neuro-genic shock.5	Patients with trauma-induced coagulopathy (TIC) are at risk for massive transfusion and need to be identified early.6	Indications for immediate operative intervention for pene-trating cervical injury include hemodynamic instability and significant external arterial hemorrhage; the management algorithm for hemodynamically stable patients is based on the presenting symptoms and anatomic location of injury, with the neck being divided into three distinct zones.7	The gold standard for determining if there is a blunt descending aortic injury is computed tomography angiog-raphy (CTA) scanning; indications are primarily based on injury mechanism.8	The abdomen is a diagnostic black box. Physical examina-tion and FAST ultrasound can identify patients requiring emergent laparotomy. Computed tomography (CT) scan-ning is the mainstay of evaluation in the remaining patients to more precisely identify the site and magnitude of injury.9	Manifestation of the “bloody vicious cycle” (the lethal combination of coagulopathy, hypothermia, and metabolic acidosis) is the most common indication for damage con-trol surgery. The primary objectives of damage control laparotomy are to control bleeding and limit gastrointesti-nal spillage.10	Blunt injuries to the carotid and vertebral arteries are usu-ally managed with systemic antithrombotic therapy.11	The abdominal compartment syndrome may be primary (i.e., due to the injury of abdominal organs, bleeding, and packing) or secondary (i.e., due to reperfusion visceral edema, retroperitoneal edema, and ascites).Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   18410/12/18   6:16 PM 185TRAUMACHAPTER 7AFigure 7-1. Cricothyroidotomy is recommended for emergent surgical establishment of a patent airway. A vertical skin incision avoids injury to the anterior jugular veins, which are located just lateral to the midline. Hemorrhage from these vessels obscures vision and prolongs the procedure. When a transverse incision is made in the cricothyroid membrane, the blade of the knife should be angled inferiorly to avoid injury to the vocal cords. A. Use of a tracheostomy hook stabilizes the thyroid cartilage and facilitates tube insertion. B. A 6.0 endotracheal tube is inserted after digital confirmation of airway access.Figure 7-2. A “clothesline” injury can partially or completely tran-sect the anterior neck structures, including the trachea. With com-plete tracheal transection, the endotracheal tube is placed directly into the distal aperture, with care taken not to push the trachea into the mediastinum.incision, with sharp division of the subcutaneous tissues. Visu-alization may be improved by having an assistant retract lat-erally on the neck incision using retractors. The cricothyroid membrane is verified by digital palpation and opened in a hori-zontal direction. The airway may be stabilized before incision of the membrane using a tracheostomy hook; the hook should be placed under the thyroid cartilage to elevate the airway. A 6.0 endotracheal tube (maximum diameter in adults) is then advanced through the cricothyroid opening and sutured into place. In patients under the age of 11, cricothyroidotomy is rela-tively contraindicated due to the risk of subglottic stenosis, and tracheostomy should be performed.Emergent tracheostomy is indicated in patients with laryn-gotracheal separation or laryngeal fractures, in whom cricothy-roidotomy may cause further damage or result in complete loss of the airway. This procedure is best performed in the operating room (OR) where there is optimal lighting and availability of advanced equipment (e.g., sternal saw). In these cases, often after a “clothesline” injury, direct visualization and instrumenta-tion of the trachea usually is done through the traumatic anterior neck defect or after a generous collar skin incision (Fig. 7-2). If the trachea is completely transected, a nonpenetrating clamp should be placed on the distal aspect to prevent tracheal retrac-tion into the mediastinum; this is particularly important before placement of the endotracheal tube.Breathing and Ventilation. Once a secure airway is obtained, adequate oxygenation and ventilation must be ensured. All injured patients should receive supplemental oxygen and be monitored by pulse oximetry. The following conditions con-stitute an immediate threat to life due to inadequate ventilation and should be recognized during the primary survey: tension pneumothorax, open pneumothorax, flail chest with underlying pulmonary contusion, massive hemothorax, and major air leak due to a tracheobronchial injury.Tension pneumothorax is presumed in any patient mani-festing respiratory distress and hypotension in combination with any of the following physical signs: tracheal deviation away from the affected side, lack of or decreased breath sounds on cannot be used. Orotracheal intubation is the preferred technique to establish a definitive airway. Because all patients are presumed to have cervical spine injuries,  manual in-line cervical immobilization is essential.6 Correct endotracheal placement is verified with direct laryngoscopy, capnography, audible bilateral breath sounds, and finally a chest film. The GlideScope®, a video laryngoscope that uses fiberoptics to visualize the vocal cords, is being employed more frequently.9 Advantages of orotracheal intubation include the direct visualization of the vocal cords, ability to use larger-diameter endotracheal tubes, and applicability to apneic patients. The disadvantage of orotracheal intubation is that conscious patients usually require neuromuscular blockade, which may result in the inability to intubate, aspiration, or medication complications. Those who attempt rapid-sequence induction must be thoroughly familiar with the procedure (see Chapter 13).Patients in whom attempts at intubation have failed or who are precluded from intubation due to extensive facial inju-ries require operative establishment of an airway. Cricothy-roidotomy (Fig. 7-1) is performed through a generous vertical 3Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   18510/12/18   6:16 PM 186BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ithe affected side, and subcutaneous emphysema on the affected side. Patients may have distended neck veins due to impedance of venous return, but the neck veins may be flat due to concur-rent systemic hypovolemia. Tension pneumothorax and simple pneumothorax have similar signs, symptoms, and examination findings, but hypotension qualifies the pneumothorax as a ten-sion pneumothorax. Although immediate needle thoracostomy decompression with a 14-gauge angiocatheter may be indicated in the field, tube thoracostomy in the midaxillary line should be performed immediately in the ED before a chest radiograph is obtained (Fig. 7-3). Recent studies suggest that preferred loca-tion for needle decompression may be the fifth intercostal space in the anterior axillary line due to body habitus.10 In cases of tension pneumothorax, the parenchymal tear in the lung acts as a one-way valve, with each inhalation allowing additional air to accumulate in the pleural space. The normally negative intra-pleural pressure becomes positive, which depresses the ipsilat-eral hemidiaphragm and shifts the mediastinal structures into the contralateral chest. Subsequently, the contralateral lung is compressed and the heart rotates about the superior and inferior vena cava; this decreases venous return and ultimately cardiac output, which culminates in cardiovascular collapse.An open pneumothorax or “sucking chest wound” occurs with full-thickness loss of the chest wall, permitting free com-munication between the pleural space and the atmosphere (Fig. 7-4). This compromises ventilation due to equilibration of atmospheric and pleural pressures, which prevents lung inflation Figure 7-3. A. Tube thoracostomy is performed in the midaxillary line at the fourth or fifth intercostal space (inframammary crease) to avoid iatrogenic injury to the liver or spleen. B. Heavy scissors are used to cut through the intercostal muscle into the pleural space. This is done on top of the rib to avoid injury to the intercostal bun-dle located just beneath the rib. C. The incision is digitally explored to confirm intrathoracic location and identify pleural adhesions. D. A 28Fr chest tube is directed superiorly and posteriorly with the aid of a large clamp.Figure 7-4. A. Full-thickness loss of the chest wall results in an open pneumothorax. B. The defect is temporarily managed with an occlusive dressing that is taped on three sides, which allows accumulated air to escape from the pleural space and thus prevents a tension pneumothorax. Repair of the chest wall defect and tube thoracostomy remote from the wound is definitive treatment.and alveolar ventilation, and results in hypoxia and hypercar-bia. Complete occlusion of the chest wall defect without a tube thoracostomy may convert an open pneumothorax to a tension pneumothorax. Temporary management of this injury includes covering the wound with an occlusive dressing that is taped on three sides. This acts as a flutter valve, permitting effective ven-tilation on inspiration while allowing accumulated air to escape from the pleural space on the untapped side, so that a tension pneumothorax is prevented. Definitive treatment is closure of the chest wall defect and tube thoracostomy remote from the wound.Flail chest occurs when three or more contiguous ribs are fractured in at least two locations. Paradoxical movement of this free-floating segment of chest wall is usually evident in patients with spontaneous ventilation, due to the negative intra-pleural pressure of inspiration. The additional work of breathing and chest wall pain caused by the flail segment is rarely suf-ficient to compromise ventilation. Instead, it is the decreased compliance and increased shunt fraction caused by the associ-ated pulmonary contusion that is the source of acute respiratory failure. Pulmonary contusions often progress during the first  12 hours. Resultant hypoventilation and hypoxemia may require intubation and mechanical ventilation. The patient’s initial chest Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   18610/12/18   6:17 PM 187TRAUMACHAPTER 7radiograph often underestimates the extent of the pulmonary parenchymal damage (Fig. 7-5); close monitoring and frequent clinical reevaluation are warranted.Major air leak occurs from tracheobronchial injuries. Type I injuries are those occurring within 2 cm of the carina.11,12 These may not be associated with a pneumothorax due to the envelopment in the mediastinal pleura. Type II injuries are more distal injuries within the tracheobronchial tree and hence mani-fest with a pneumothorax. Bronchoscopy confirms the extent of the injury and its location, and directs management.Circulation With Hemorrhage Control. With a secure airway and adequate ventilation established, circulatory status is the next focus. An initial approximation of the patient’s cardiovascular status can be obtained by palpating peripheral pulses. In gen-eral, systolic blood pressure (SBP) must be 60 mmHg for the carotid pulse to be palpable, 70 mmHg for the femoral pulse, and  80 mmHg for the radial pulse. Any episode of hypotension (defined as a SBP <90 mmHg) is assumed to be caused by hem-orrhage until proven otherwise. Patients with rapid massive blood loss may have paradoxical bradycardia.13 Blood pressure and pulse should be measured at least every 5 minutes in patients with significant blood loss until normal vital sign values are restored.Intravenous (IV) access for fluid resuscitation and medi-cation administration is obtained with two peripheral catheters, 16-gauge or larger in adults. For patients in whom peripheral angiocatheter access is difficult, intraosseous (IO) needles Figure 7-5. A. Admission chest film may not show the full extent of the patient’s pulmonary parenchymal injury. B. This patient’s left pulmonary contusion blossomed 12 hours later, and its associ-ated opacity is noted on repeat chest radiograph.should be rapidly placed in the proximal humerus or tibia (Fig. 7-6).14,15 All medications administered IV may be admin-istered in a similar dosage intraosseously. Although safe for emergent use, the needle should be removed once alternative access is established to prevent potential osteomyelitis. Blood should be drawn simultaneously for a bedside hemoglobin level and routine trauma laboratory tests. In the seriously injured patient arriving in shock, an arterial blood gas for base deficit (BD), cross-matching for possible blood component (RBC and plasma) transfusion, and a coagulation panel/viscoelastic hemo-statis assay (e.g., TEG, ROTEM) should be obtained. In these patients, secondary large bore (7 to 9 Fr) cannulae should be obtained via the femoral or subclavian veins; Cordis introducer catheters are preferred over triple-lumen catheters. In general, initial access in trauma patients is best secured in the groin so that placement of the catheter will not interfere with the perfor-mance of other diagnostic and therapeutic thoracic procedures. A rule of thumb to consider for secondary access is placement of femoral access for thoracic trauma and jugular or subclavian access for abdominal trauma. Internal jugular or subclavian catheters provide a more reliable measurement of central venous pressure (CVP), which may be helpful in determining the vol-ume status of the patient and in excluding cardiac tamponade.  Saphenous vein cutdowns at the ankle can also provide excel-lent access (Fig. 7-7). The saphenous vein is reliably found  1 cm anterior and 1 cm superior to the medial malleolus. Stan-dard 14-gauge catheters can be quickly placed, even in an exsanguinating patient with collapsed veins. In severely injured children younger than 6 years of age, the preferred venous access is peripheral intravenous catheters followed by an IO needle. Central venous catheter placement or saphenous vein cutdown may be considered as the third choice of access based upon provider experience. Inadvertent femoral artery cannula-tion, however, may result in limb-threatening arterial spasm.External control of any visible hemorrhage should be achieved promptly while circulating volume is restored. For Figure 7-6. Intraosseous infusions are indicated for patients in whom one or two attempts at IV access have failed. A. The proxi-mal tibia or humerus is the preferred location. Alternatively, the distal femur can be used if the tibia is fractured. B. The position is satisfactory if bone marrow can be aspirated and saline can be eas-ily infused without evidence of extravasation.Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   18710/12/18   6:17 PM 188BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iopen wounds with ongoing bleeding, manual compression should be done with a single 4 × 4 gauze and a gloved hand. Covering the wound with excessive dressings may permit ongoing unrecognized blood loss that is hidden underneath the dressing. Blind clamping of bleeding vessels should be avoided because of the risk to adjacent structures, including nerves. This is particularly true for penetrating injuries of the neck, thoracic outlet, and groin, where bleeding may be torrential and aris-ing deep within the wound. In these situations, a gloved finger placed through the wound directly onto the bleeding vessel can apply enough pressure to control active bleeding. The surgeon performing this maneuver must then walk with the patient to the OR for definitive treatment. For bleeding of the extremi-ties, it is tempting to apply tourniquets for hemorrhage control, Figure 7-7. Saphenous vein cutdowns are excellent sites for fluid resuscitation access. A. The vein is consistently found 1 cm ante-rior and 1 cm superior to the medial malleolus. B. Proximal and distal traction sutures are placed with the distal suture ligated.  C. A 14-gauge IV catheter is introduced and secured with sutures and tape to prevent dislodgment.Figure 7-8. More than 1500 mL of blood in the pleural space is considered a massive hemothorax. Chest film findings reflect the positioning of the patient. A. In the supine position, blood tracks along the entire posterior section of the chest and is most notable pushing the lung away from the chest wall. B. In the upright position, blood is visible dependently in the right pleural space.but digital occlusion will usually control the bleeding; complete vascular occlusion with a tourniquet risks permanent neuromus-cular impairment. Patients in shock have a lower tolerance to warm ischemia, and an occluded extremity is prone to small vessel thrombosis. For patients with open fractures, fracture reduction with stabilization via splints will limit bleeding both externally and into the subcutaneous tissues. Scalp lacerations through the galea aponeurotica tend to bleed profusely; these can be temporarily controlled with skin staples, Raney clips, or a full-thickness continuous running nylon stitch.During the circulation section of the primary survey, four life-threatening injuries must be identified promptly: (a) mas-sive hemothorax, (b) cardiac tamponade, (c) massive hemo-peritoneum, and (d) mechanically unstable pelvic fractures with bleeding. Massive hemoperitoneum and mechanically unstable pelvic fractures are discussed in “Emergent Abdomi-nal Exploration” and “Pelvic Fractures and Emergent Hemor-rhage Control,” respectively. Critical tools used to differentiate these in the multisystem trauma patient are the chest and pelvis radiographs, and extended focused abdominal sonography for trauma (eFAST) (see “Regional Assessment and Special Diag-nostic Tests”). A massive hemothorax (life-threatening injury number one) is defined as >1500 mL of blood or, in the pediatric population, >25% of the patient’s blood volume in the pleural space (Fig. 7-8). Although it may be estimated on chest radio-graph, tube thoracostomy is the only reliable means to quantify the amount of hemothorax. After blunt trauma, a hemothorax is usually due to multiple rib fractures with severed intercostal vessels, but occasionally bleeding is from lacerated lung paren-chyma, which is usually associated with an air leak. After pen-etrating trauma, a great vessel or pulmonary hilar vessel injury should be presumed. In either scenario, a massive hemothorax is an indication for operative intervention, but tube thoracostomy is critical to facilitate lung reexpansion, which may improve oxygenation and cardiac performance as well as tamponade venous bleeding. In patients arriving in shock with a high risk of pelvic fracture (e.g., autopedestrian accident), the pelvis should be presumptively stabilized with a sheet or binder.Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   18810/12/18   6:17 PM 189TRAUMACHAPTER 7Cardiac tamponade occurs most commonly after penetrat-ing thoracic wounds, although occasionally blunt rupture of the heart, particularly the atrial appendage, is seen. Acutely, <100 mL  of pericardial blood may cause pericardial tamponade.16 The classic Beck’s triad—dilated neck veins, muffled heart tones, and a decline in arterial pressure—is usually not appreciated in the trauma bay because of the noisy environment and associ-ated hypovolemia. Because the pericardium is not acutely dis-tensible, the pressure in the pericardial sac will rise to match that of the injured chamber. When this pressure exceeds that of the right atrium, right atrial filling is impaired and right ventricular preload is reduced. This ultimately leads to decreased right ven-tricular output. Additionally, increased intrapericardial pressure impedes myocardial blood flow, which leads to subendocardial ischemia and a further reduction in cardiac output.Diagnosis of hemopericardium is best achieved by ultra-sound of the pericardium (Fig. 7-9). Early in the course of tamponade, blood pressure and cardiac output will transiently improve with fluid administration due to increased central venous pressure. In patients with any hemodynamic distur-bance, a pericardial drain can be placed using ultrasound guid-ance (Fig. 7-10). Removing as little as 15 to 20 mL of blood will Figure 7-9. Subxiphoid pericardial ultrasound reveals a large peri-cardial fluid collection. LV = left ventricle; RV = right ventricle.Figure 7-10. Pericardiocentesis is indicated for patients with evidence of pericardial tamponade. A. Access to the pericardium is obtained through a subxiphoid approach, with the needle angled 45° up from the chest wall and toward the left shoulder. B. Seldinger technique is used to place a pigtail catheter. Blood can be repeatedly aspirated with a syringe, or the tubing may be attached to a gravity drain. Evacuation of unclotted pericardial blood prevents subendocardial ischemia and stabilizes the patient for transport to the operating room for sternotomy.often temporarily stabilize the patient’s hemodynamic status and alleviate the subendocardial ischemia that can be associ-ated with lethal arrhythmias; this allows safe transport to the OR for sternotomy. Pericardiocentesis is successful in decompress-ing tamponade in approximately 80% of cases17; the majority of failures are due to the presence of clotted blood within the pericardium. Patients with a persistent SBP <60 mmHg warrant resuscitative thoracotomy (RT) with opening of the pericardium for rapid decompression and control of bleeding.The utility of RT has been debated for decades. Current indi-cations are based on 40 years of prospective data (Table 7-2).18-20 RT is associated with the highest survival rate after isolated cardiac injury; 35% of patients presenting in shock and 20% without vital signs (i.e., no pulse or obtainable blood pressure) are salvaged after Table 7-2Current indications and contraindications for emergency department thoracotomyIndicationsSalvageable postinjury cardiac arrest:Patients sustaining witnessed penetrating trauma to the torso with <15 min of prehospital CPRPatients sustaining witnessed blunt trauma with <10 min  of prehospital CPRPatients sustaining witnessed penetrating trauma to the neck or extremities with <5 min of prehospital CPRPersistent severe postinjury hypotension (SBP  ≤60 mmHg) due to:Cardiac tamponadeHemorrhage—intrathoracic, intra-abdominal, extremity, cervicalAir embolismContraindicationsPenetrating trauma: CPR >15 min and no signs of life (pupillary response, respiratory effort, motor activity)Blunt trauma: CPR >10 min and no signs of life or asystole without associated tamponadeCPR = cardiopulmonary resuscitation; SBP = systolic blood pressure.Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   18910/12/18   6:17 PM 190BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iisolated penetrating injury to the heart. For all penetrating wounds, survival rate is 15%. Conversely, patient outcome is limited when RT is done for blunt trauma, with 2% survival among patients in shock and <1% survival among those with no vital signs. Thus, patients undergoing cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) upon arrival to the ED should undergo RT selectively based on injury and duration of CPR (Fig. 7-11). RT is best accomplished using a generous left anterolateral thoracotomy, with the skin incision started to the right of the sternum (Fig. 7-12). A longitudinal peri-cardiotomy anterior to the phrenic nerve is used to release cardiac tamponade and permits access to the heart for cardiac repair and open cardiac massage. The cardiac wound should be repaired prior to vigorous efforts of myocardial resuscitation (e.g., epinephrine, calcium). Cross-clamping of the aorta improves central circula-tion, augments cerebral and coronary blood flow, and limits further abdominal blood loss (Fig. 7-13). The patient must sustain a SBP of 70 mmHg after RT and associated interventions to be considered resuscitable, and hence transported to the OR.18,19Disability and Exposure. The Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score should be determined for all injured patients (Table 7-3). It is calculated by adding the scores of the best motor response, best verbal response, and the best eye response. Scores range from 3 (the lowest) to 15 (normal). Scores of 13 to 15 indicate mild head injury, 9 to 12 moderate injury, and ≤8 severe injury. The GCS is a quantifiable determination of neurologic function that is useful for triage, treatment, and prognosis.Neurologic evaluation, including spinal cord integrity, is critical before administration of neuromuscular blockade for intubation. Subtle changes in mental status can be caused by hypoxia, hypercarbia, or hypovolemia, or may be an early sign of increasing intracranial pressure. An abnormal mental status should prompt an immediate reevaluation of the patient’s ABCs and consideration of central nervous system injury. Deterioration in mental status may be subtle and may not progress in a predict-able fashion. For example, previously calm, cooperative patients may become anxious and combative as they become hypoxic. However, a patient who is agitated and combative from drugs or alcohol may become somnolent if hypovolemic shock develops. Patients with neurogenic shock are typified by hypotension with relative bradycardia, and are often first recognized due to paraly-sis, decreased rectal tone, or priapism. Patients with high spinal cord disruption are at greatest risk for neurogenic shock due to physiologic disruption of sympathetic fibers; treatment consists of volume loading and a dopamine infusion, which is both inotropic and chronotropic, as well as a vasoconstrictor.Seriously injured patients must have all of their clothing removed to avoid overlooking limbor life-threatening injuries, but warmed blankets should be placed immediately to avoid hypothermia.Shock Classification and Initial Fluid Resuscitation.  Classic signs and symptoms of shock are tachycardia, hypoten-sion, tachypnea, altered mental status, diaphoresis, and pallor PatientUndergoingCPR–No Signs ofLife*Blunt TraumaCPR <10 min----------Penetrating Torso TraumaCPR <15 min----------Penetrating Non-Torso TraumaCPR <5 minResuscitative ThoracotomyYesDeadCardiacActivity?NoTamponade?NoRepair HeartAssessViabilityYesORThoracicHemorrhageAir EmboliTamponadeExtrathoracicHemorrhageSBP <70,apply aorticX-clampHilar X-clampControlNoYes*no respiratory ormotor effort, electricalactivity, or pupillaryactivityProfoundRefractoryShockFigure 7-11. Algorithm directing the use of resuscitative thoracotomy (RT) in the injured patient undergoing cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR). OR = operating room; SBP = systolic blood pressure.Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   19010/12/18   6:17 PM 191TRAUMACHAPTER 7Figure 7-12. A. Resuscitative tho-racotomy (RT) is performed through the fifth intercostal space using the anterolateral approach. B and C.  The pericardium is opened anterior to the phrenic nerve, and the heart is rotated out for evaluation. D. Open cardiac massage should be performed with a hinged, clapping motion of the hands, with sequential closing from palms to fingers. The two-handed technique is strongly recommended because the one-handed massage technique poses the risk of myocar-dial perforation with the thumb.Figure 7-13. A. Aortic cross-clamp is applied with the left lung retracted superiorly, below the inferior pulmonary ligament, just above the diaphragm. B. The flaccid aorta is identified as the first structure encountered on top of the spine when approached from the left chest.(Table 7-4). In general, the quantity of acute blood loss cor-relates with physiologic abnormalities. For example, patients in class II shock are tachycardic, but they do not exhibit a reduction in blood pressure until over 1500 mL of blood loss, or class III shock. Physical findings should be used as an aid in the evaluation of the patient’s response to treatment. The goal of fluid resuscitation is to re-establish tissue perfusion. Fluid resuscitation usually begins with isotonic crystalloid, typically Ringer’s lactate. However, for patients arriving in shock (persistent SBP <90 mmHg in an adult), instead of crystalloid the current practice is to activate a massive trans-fusion protocol (MTP) in which red blood cells (RBC) and fresh frozen plasma (FFP) are administered. The details of a MTP are discussed later. Patients who have a good response to Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   19110/12/18   6:17 PM 192BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ifluid infusion (i.e., normalization of vital signs, clearing of the sensorium) and evidence of good peripheral perfusion (warm extremities with normal capillary refill) are presumed to have adequate overall perfusion. Urine output is a reliable indicator of organ perfusion but requires time to quantitate. Adequate urine output is 0.5 mL/kg per hour in an adult, 1 mL/kg per hour in a child, and 2 mL/kg per hour in an infant <1 year of age. Because measurement of this resuscitation-related vari-able is time dependent, it is generally more useful in the OR and intensive care unit (ICU) setting, than in initial evaluation in the trauma bay.There are several caveats to be considered when evaluat-ing the injured patient for shock. Tachycardia (HR >110 bpm) is often the earliest sign of ongoing blood loss, but the critical issue is change in HR over time. Individuals in good physical condition with a resting pulse rate in the 50s may manifest a relative tachycardia in the 90s; although clinically significant, this does not meet the standard definition of tachycardia. Con-versely, patients on cardiac medications such as β-blockers may not be capable of increasing their heart rate to compensate for hypovolemia. Bradycardia can occur with rapid severe blood loss13; this is an ominous sign, often heralding impending car-diovascular collapse. Other physiologic stresses, aside from hypovolemia, may produce tachycardia, such as hypoxia, pain, anxiety, and stimulant drugs (cocaine, amphetamines). As noted previously, decreased SBP is not a reliable early sign of hypo-volemia because blood loss must exceed 30% before hypoten-sion is evident. Additionally, younger patients may maintain their SBP due to sympathetic tone despite severe intravascular deficits until they are on the verge of cardiac arrest. Pregnant Table 7-3Glasgow Coma ScaleaADULTSINFANTS/CHILDRENEye opening4SpontaneousSpontaneous3To voiceTo voice2To painTo pain1NoneNoneVerbal5OrientedAlert, normal vocalization4ConfusedCries, but consolable3Inappropriate wordsPersistently irritable2Incomprehensible wordsRestless, agitated, moaning1NoneNoneMotor response6Obeys commandsSpontaneous, purposeful5Localizes painLocalizes pain4WithdrawsWithdraws3Abnormal flexionAbnormal flexion2Abnormal extensionAbnormal extension1NoneNoneaScore is calculated by adding the scores of the best motor response, best verbal response, and eye opening. Scores range from 3 (the lowest) to 15 (normal).Table 7-4Signs and symptoms of advancing stages of hemorrhagic shockCLASS ICLASS IICLASS IIICLASS IVBlood loss (mL)Up to 750750–15001500–2000>2000Blood loss (% BV)Up to 15%15%–30%30%–40%>40%Pulse rate<100>100>120>140Blood pressureNormalNormalDecreasedDecreasedPulse pressure (mmHg)Normal or increasedDecreasedDecreasedDecreasedRespiratory rate14–20>20–3030–40>35Urine output (mL/h)>30>20–305–15NegligibleCNS/mental statusSlightly anxiousMildly anxiousAnxious and confusedConfused and lethargicBV = blood volume; CNS = central nervous system.Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   19210/12/18   6:17 PM 193TRAUMACHAPTER 7patients have a progressive increase in circulating blood volume over gestation; therefore, they must lose a relatively larger vol-ume of blood before manifesting signs and symptoms of hypo-volemia (see “Special Populations”).Based on the initial response to fluid resuscitation, hypo-volemic injured patients can be separated into three broad cat-egories: responders, transient responders, and nonresponders. Individuals who are stable or have a good response to initial fluid therapy as evidenced by normalization of vital signs, men-tal status, and urine output are unlikely to have significant ongo-ing hemorrhage, and further diagnostic evaluation for occult injuries can proceed in an orderly fashion (see “Secondary Sur-vey”). At the other end of the spectrum are patients classified as “nonresponders” who have persistent hypotension despite aggressive resuscitation. These patients mandate immediate identification of the source of hypotension with appropriate intervention to prevent a fatal outcome. Transient responders are those who respond initially to volume loading with improve-ment in vital signs, but subsequently deteriorate hemodynami-cally. This group of patients can be challenging to triage for definitive management.Persistent Hypotension. Patients with ongoing hemodynamic instability, whether  “nonresponders” or “transient responders,” require systematic evaluation and prompt intervention. The spectrum of disease in patients with persistent hypotension ranges from easily reversible problems such as a tension pneu-mothorax to multisystem injury with a number of sites of ongo-ing active hemorrhage. One must first consider the dominant categories of postinjury shock that may be the underlying cause: hemorrhagic, cardiogenic, and neurogenic. In patients with per-sistent hypotension and tachycardia, cardiogenic or hemorrhagic shock are the likely causes. Ultrasound evaluation of the pericar-dium, pleural cavities, and abdomen in combination with plain radiographs of the chest and pelvis will usually identify the source of shock. In patients with persistent hypotension follow-ing blunt trauma, the pelvis should be wrapped with a sheet for stabilization until radiography can be done; external blood loss should be controlled, and extremity fractures should be splinted to minimize further blood loss. Evaluation of the CVP or ultra-sound of the IVC may further assist in distinguishing between cardiogenic and hypovolemic shock. Base deficit measurement is critical; a base deficit of >8 mmol/L implies ongoing cellular shock.21,22 Serum lactate also is used to monitor the patient’s physiologic response to resuscitation.23 Evolving technology, such as measurement of the critical reserve index, may provide noninvasive monitoring.24The differential diagnosis of cardiogenic shock in the trauma patient is: (a) tension pneumothorax, (b) pericardial tam-ponade, (c) blunt cardiac injury, (d) myocardial infarction, and (e) bronchovenous air embolism. Tension pneumothorax, the most frequent cause of cardiac failure, and pericardial tampon-ade have been discussed earlier. Although as many as one-third of patients sustaining significant blunt chest trauma experience some degree of blunt cardiac injury (BCI), few such injuries result in hemodynamic embarrassment. Patients with electro-cardiographic (ECG) abnormalities or dysrhythmias require continuous ECG monitoring and antidysrhythmic treatment as indicated. Unless myocardial infarction is suspected, there is no role for routine serial measurement of cardiac enzyme  levels—they lack specificity and do not predict significant dysrhythmias.25 In patients with no identified injuries who are being considered for discharge from the ED, the combination of a normal EKG and troponin level rules out significant BCI.26 The patient with hemodynamic instability from BCI requires appropriate resuscitation and may benefit from hemodynamic monitoring to optimize preload and guide inotropic support. Echocardiography (ECHO) is performed to exclude valvular or septal injuries; the most common ECHO finding in BCI is right ventricular dyskinesia due to the anterior orientation of the right ventricle. Transthoracic and transesophageal ECHO are now becoming routine in the trauma bay and surgical intensive care unit (SICU).27,28 Rarely, patients with refractory cardio-genic shock may require placement of an intra-aortic balloon pump to enhance coronary perfusion and decrease myocardial work. Acute myocardial infarction may be the cause of a motor vehicle collision or other trauma in older patients. Although optimal initial management includes treatment for the evolving infarction, such as thrombolytic therapy, anticoagulation, and emergent angioplasty, these decisions must be individualized in accordance with the patient’s other injuries.Bronchovenous air embolism is a frequently overlooked lethal complication of pulmonary injury. Air emboli can occur after blunt or penetrating trauma, when air from an injured bron-chus enters an adjacent injured pulmonary vein and returns air to the left heart. Air accumulation in the left ventricle impedes diastolic filling, and during systole air is pumped into the coro-nary arteries, disrupting coronary perfusion. The typical case is a patient with a penetrating thoracic injury who is hemody-namically stable but experiences sudden cardiac arrest after being intubated and placed on positive pressure ventilation. The patient should be placed immediately in Trendelenburg’s posi-tion to trap the air in the apex of the left ventricle. Emergency thoracotomy is followed by cross-clamping of the pulmonary hilum on the side of the injury to prevent further introduction of air (Fig. 7-14). Air is aspirated from the apex of the left ventricle and then the aortic root with an 18-gauge needle and 50-mL syringe. Vigorous massage is used to force the air bubbles through the coronary arteries; if this is unsuccessful, a tuber-culin syringe is used to aspirate air bubbles from the coronary artery (most common is the right). Once circulation is restored, the patient should be kept in Trendelenburg’s position with the pulmonary hilum clamped until the pulmonary venous injury is controlled operatively.Persistent hypotension due to uncontrolled hemorrhage is associated with high mortality. A rapid search for the source or sources of hemorrhage includes visual inspection with knowledge of the injury mechanism, eFAST, and chest and pelvic radiographs. During diagnostic evaluation, type O RBCs (O-negative for women of childbearing age) and thawed AB plasma should be administered at a ratio of 2:1. Type-specific RBCs should be administered as soon as available. The acute coagulopathy of trauma is now well recognized and underscores the importance of preemptive blood component administration.29 The resurgent interest in viscoelastic hemostatic assays (throm-belastography [TEG] and thrombelastometry [ROTEM]) has facilitated the appropriate and timely use of clotting adjuncts, including the prompt recognition of fibrinolysis.30 In patients with clear indications for operation, essential radiographs should be taken, and the patient should be transported to the OR imme-diately. Such patients include those with blunt trauma and mas-sive hemothorax, those with penetrating trauma and an initial chest tube output of >1 L, and those with abdominal trauma and ultrasound evidence of extensive hemoperitoneum. In patients with gunshot wounds to the chest or abdomen, a chest and 4Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   19310/12/18   6:17 PM 194BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iabdominal film, with radiopaque markers at the wound sites, should be obtained to determine the trajectory of the bullet or location of a retained fragment prior to transport to the OR. For example, a patient with a gunshot wound to the upper abdo-men should have a chest radiograph to ensure that the bullet did not traverse the diaphragm causing intrathoracic injury. Simi-larly, a chest radiograph is important in a patient with a gunshot wound to the right chest to evaluate the left hemithorax. If a patient arrives with a penetrating weapon remaining in place, the weapon should not be removed in the ED because it could be tamponading a lacerated blood vessel (Fig. 7-15). The sur-geon should extract the offending instrument in the controlled environment of the OR, ideally once an incision has been made with adequate exposure for vascular control. In situations where knives are embedded in the head or neck, preoperative imaging may be useful to anticipate arterial injuries.In patients with persistent hypotension and no clear operative indications, one should systematically evaluate the five potential sources of blood loss: scalp, chest, abdomen, pelvis, and extremities. Significant bleeding at the scene may be reported by paramedics, but its quantification is unreliable. Examination should exclude active bleeding from a scalp lac-eration that may be readily controlled with clips or staples. Thoracoabdominal trauma should be evaluated with a combi-nation of eFAST, chest radiograph, and pelvic radiograph. If the FAST results are negative and no other source of hypo-tension is obvious, diagnostic peritoneal aspiration should be entertained.31 Extremity examination and radiographs should be used to identify associated fractures. Fracture-related blood loss, when additive, may be a potential source of the patient’s hemodynamic instability. Each rib fracture can produce 100 to  200 mL of blood loss; for tibial fractures, 300 to 500 mL; for Figure 7-14. A. A Satinsky clamp is used to clamp the pulmonary hilum to prevent further bronchovenous air embolism. B. Sequential sites of aspiration include the left ventricle, the aortic root, and the right coronary artery.Figure 7-15. If a weapon is still in place, it should be removed in the operating room because it could be tamponading a lacerated blood vessel.Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   19410/12/18   6:17 PM 195TRAUMACHAPTER 7femur fractures, 800 to 1000 mL; and for pelvic fractures >2000 mL.  Although no single injury can account for the patient’s hemo-dynamic instability, the sum of the injuries may result in life-threatening blood loss. The diagnostic measures advocated earlier are those that can be easily performed in the trauma bay. Transport of a hypotensive patient out of the ED for CT scan-ning is hazardous; monitoring is compromised, and the envi-ronment is suboptimal for dealing with acute problems. Fast track CT scanning should be used in all patients manifesting evidence of shock. The surgeon must accompany the patient and be prepared to abort the CT scan with diversion to the OR. This dilemma is becoming less common in many trauma centers where CT scanning is available in the ED.The concept of hypotensive resuscitation remains contro-versial, and it is primarily relevant for patients with penetrating vascular injuries. Experimental work suggests that an endog-enous sealing clot of an injured artery may be disrupted at a SBP of >90 mmHg32; thus, many believe that this should be the preoperative blood pressure target for patients with potential noncompressible arterial injuries. On the other hand, optimal management of traumatic brain injury (TBI) includes maintain-ing the SBP >100 mmHg,33 and thus, hypotensive resuscitation is not appropriate for most blunt trauma patients.Secondary SurveyOnce the immediate threats to life have been addressed, a thor-ough history is obtained, and the patient is examined in a sys-tematic fashion. The patient and surrogates should be queried to obtain an AMPLE history (Allergies, Medications, Past illnesses or Pregnancy, Last meal, and Events related to the injury). The physical examination should be literally head to toe, with special attention to the patient’s back, axillae, and perineum, because injuries here are easily overlooked. All seriously injured patients should undergo digital rectal examination to evaluate for sphincter tone, presence of blood, rectal perforation, or a high-riding prostate; this is particularly critical in patients with suspected spinal cord injury, pelvic fracture, or transpelvic gun-shot wounds. Vaginal examination with a speculum should be performed in women with pelvic fractures to exclude an open fracture. Specific injuries, their associated signs and symptoms, diagnostic options, and treatments are discussed in detail later in this chapter.Adjuncts to the physical examination include vital sign and ECG monitoring, nasogastric tube placement, Foley cath-eter placement, radiographs, hemoglobin, base deficit measure-ments, urinalysis, and repeat FAST exam. A nasogastric tube should be inserted in all intubated patients to decrease the risk of gastric aspiration, but it may not be necessary in the awake patient. Nasogastric tube placement in patients with complex mid-facial fractures is contraindicated; rather, a tube should be placed orally if required. Nasogastric tube evaluation of stomach contents for blood may suggest occult gastroduodenal injury, or the errant path of the nasogastric tube on a chest film may indicate a left diaphragm injury. A Foley catheter should be inserted in patients unable to void to decompress the blad-der, obtain a urine specimen, and monitor urine output. Gross hematuria demands evaluation of the genitourinary system for injury. Foley catheter placement may be deferred until urologic evaluation in patients with signs of urethral injury: blood at the meatus, perineal or scrotal hematomas, or a high-riding prostate. Although policies vary at individual institutions, most agree that patients in extremis should undergo one attempt at Foley catheter placement; if the catheter does not pass easily, a supra-pubic cystostomy should be considered.Selective radiography and laboratory tests are done early in the evaluation after the primary survey. For patients with severe blunt trauma, chest and pelvic radiographs should be obtained. Historically, a lateral cervical spine radiograph was also obtained, hence the reference to the big three films, but currently patients preferentially undergo CT scanning of the spine rather than plain film radiography. For patients with truncal gunshot wounds, anteroposterior and at times lateral radiographs of the chest and abdomen are warranted. It is important to mark the entrance and exit sites of penetrating wounds with ECG pads, metallic clips, or staples so that the trajectory of the missile can be estimated. Limited one-shot extremity radiographs may also be appropriate to assist in application of a splint. In critically injured patients, blood samples for a routine trauma panel (type and crossmatch, complete blood count, blood chemistries, coagulation studies, and arterial blood gas analysis) should be sent to the laboratory. For less severely injured patients, only a complete blood count and urinalysis may be required. Because older patients may pres-ent in subclinical shock, even with minor injuries, routine analy-sis of an arterial blood gas in patients over the age of 55 should be considered. Repeat FAST is mandatory if there are any signs of abdominal injury or unexplained blood loss.Many trauma patients cannot provide specific information about the mechanism of their injury. Emergency medical ser-vice personnel and police are trained to evaluate an injury scene and should be questioned while they are present in the ED. For automobile collisions, the speed of the vehicles involved, angle of impact, location of the patient within the vehicle, use of restraints, airbag deployment, condition of the steer-ing wheel and windshield, amount of intrusion, ejection of the patient from the vehicle, and fate of other passengers should be ascertained. For other injury mechanisms, critical information includes such things as height of a fall, surface impact, helmet use, and weight of an object by which the patient was crushed. In patients sustaining gunshot wounds, bullet characteris-tics, distance, and presumed path of the bullet are important, if known. For patients with stab wounds, the length and type of object is helpful. Finally, some patients experience a com-bination of blunt and penetrating trauma. Do not assume that someone who was stabbed was not also assaulted; the patient may have a multitude of injuries and cannot be presumed to have only injuries associated with the more obvious penetrat-ing wound. In short, these details of information are critical to the clinician to determine overall mechanism of injury and anticipate associated injury patterns.Mechanisms and Patterns of InjuryIn general, more energy is transferred over a wider area during blunt trauma than from a penetrating wound. As a result, blunt trauma is associated with multiple widely distributed injuries, whereas in penetrating wounds the damage is localized to the path of the bullet or knife. In blunt trauma, organs that can-not yield to impact by elastic deformation are most likely to be injured, namely, the solid organs (liver, spleen, and kidneys). For penetrating trauma, organs with the largest surface area are most prone to injury (small bowel, liver, and colon). Addition-ally, because bullets and knives usually follow straight lines, adjacent structures are commonly injured.Patients who have sustained blunt trauma separate them into categories according to their risk for multiple injuries: those Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   19510/12/18   6:17 PM 196BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Isustaining high energy transfer injuries and those sustaining low energy transfer injuries. Injuries involving high energy transfer include auto-pedestrian accidents, motor vehicle collisions in which the car’s change of velocity (ΔV) exceeds 20 mph or in which the patient has been ejected, motorcycle collisions, and falls from heights >20 ft.34 In fact, for motor vehicle collisions the vari-ables strongly associated with life-threatening injuries, and hence reflective of the magnitude of the mechanism, are death of another occupant in the vehicle, extrication time of >20 minutes, ΔV >20 mph, lack of restraint use, and lateral impact.34 Low-energy trauma, such as being struck with a club or falling from a bicycle, usually does not result in widely distributed injuries. However, potentially lethal injuries of internal organs can occur because the net energy transfer to any given location may be substantial.In blunt trauma, particular constellations of injury or injury patterns are associated with specific injury mechanisms. For example, when an unrestrained driver sustains a frontal impact, the head strikes the windshield, the chest and upper abdomen hit the steering column, and the legs or knees contact the dashboard. The resultant injuries can include facial fractures, cervical spine fractures, injury of the descending thoracic aorta, myocardial contusion, injury to the spleen and liver, and fractures of the pel-vis and lower extremities. When such patients are evaluated, the discovery of one of these injuries should prompt a search for the others. Collisions with side impact also carry the risk of cervical spine and thoracic trauma, diaphragm rupture, and crush injuries of the pelvic ring, but solid organ injury usually is limited to either the liver or spleen based on the direction of impact. However, patients ejected from a vehicle or thrown a significant distance from a motorcycle have the risk of any injury pattern.Penetrating injuries are classified according to the wound-ing agent (i.e., stab wound, gunshot wound, or shotgun wound). Gunshot wounds are subdivided further into highand low-velocity injuries because the speed of the bullet is much more important than its weight in determining potential kinetic energy transfer. High-velocity gunshot wounds (bullet speed >2000 ft/s) are infrequent in the civilian setting. Shotgun injuries are divided into close-range (<20 feet) and long-range wounds. Close-range shotgun wounds are tantamount to high-velocity wounds because the entire energy of the load is delivered to a small area, often with devastating results. In contrast, long-range shotgun blasts result in a diffuse pellet pattern in which many pellets miss the victim, and those that do strike are dis-persed and are of comparatively low energy.Regional Assessment and Special  Diagnostic TestsBased on mechanism, location of injuries identified on physi-cal examination, screening radiographs, and the patient’s over-all condition, additional diagnostic studies often are indicated. However, the seriously injured patient is in constant jeopardy when undergoing special diagnostic testing; therefore, the sur-geon must be in attendance and must be prepared to alter plans as circumstances demand. Hemodynamic, respiratory, and men-tal status will determine the most appropriate course of action. With these issues in mind, additional diagnostic tests are dis-cussed on an anatomic basis.Head. Evaluation of the head includes examination for injuries to the scalp, eyes, ears, nose, mouth, facial bones, and intracra-nial structures. Palpation of the head is done to identify scalp lacerations, which should be evaluated for depth, and pres-ence of associated depressed or open skull fractures. The eye examination includes not only pupillary size and reactivity, but also examination for visual acuity and for hemorrhage within the globe. Ocular entrapment, caused by orbital fractures with impingement of the ocular muscles, is evident when the patient cannot move his or her eyes through an entire range of motion. It is important to perform the eye examination early because significant orbital swelling may prevent later evaluation. A lat-eral canthotomy may be needed to relieve periorbital pressure. The tympanic membrane is examined to identify hemotym-panum, otorrhea, or rupture, which may signal an underlying head injury. Otorrhea, rhinorrhea, raccoon eyes, and Battle’s sign (ecchymosis behind the ear) suggest a basilar skull fracture. Although such fractures may not require treatment, there is an association with blunt cerebrovascular injuries, cranial nerve injuries, and risk of meningitis.Anterior facial structures should be examined to rule out fractures. This entails palpating for bony step-off of the facial bones and instability of the midface (by grasping the upper pal-ate and seeing if this moves separately from the patient’s head). A good question to ask awake patients is whether their bite feels normal to them; abnormal dental closure suggests malalignment of facial bones and the possibility for a mandible or maxillary fracture. Nasal fractures, which may be evident on direct inspec-tion or palpation, typically bleed vigorously. This may result in the patient having airway compromise due to blood running down the posterior pharynx, or there may be vomiting provoked by swallowed blood. Nasal packing or balloon tamponade may be necessary to control bleeding. Examination of the oral cavity includes inspection for open fractures, loose or fractured teeth, and sublingual hematomas.All patients with a significant closed head injury (GCS score <14) should undergo CT scanning of the head. Addition-ally, elderly patients or those patients on antiplatelet agents or anticoagulation should be imaged despite a GCS of 15.35,36 For penetrating injuries, plain skull films may be helpful in the trauma bay to determine the trajectory of the bullet. The presence of later-alizing findings (e.g., a unilateral dilated pupil unreactive to light, asymmetric movement of the extremities either spontaneously or in response to noxious stimuli, or unilateral Babinski’s reflex) suggests an intracranial mass lesion or major structural damage.Such intracranial lesions following trauma include hemato-mas, contusions, hemorrhage into ventricular and subarachnoid spaces, and diffuse axonal injury (DAI). Epidural hematomas occur when blood accumulates between the skull and dura, and are caused by disruption of the middle meningeal artery or other small arteries in that potential space, typically after a skull frac-ture (Fig. 7-16). Subdural hematomas occur between the dura and cortex and are caused by venous disruption or laceration of the parenchyma of the brain. Due to associated parenchy-mal injury, subdural hematomas have a much worse prognosis than epidural collections. Hemorrhage into the subarachnoid space may cause vasospasm and further reduce cerebral blood flow. Intraparenchymal hematomas and contusions can occur anywhere within the brain. DAI results from high-speed decel-eration injury and represents direct axonal damage from shear effects. CT scan may demonstrate blurring of the gray and white matter interface and multiple small punctate hemorrhages, but magnetic resonance imaging is a more accurate test. Although prognosis for these injuries is extremely variable, early evidence of DAI is associated with a poor outcome. Stroke syndromes should prompt a search for carotid or vertebral artery injury using multislice CTA (Fig. 7-17).Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   19610/12/18   6:17 PM 197TRAUMACHAPTER 7Significant intracranial penetrating injuries usually are produced by bullets from handguns, but an array of other weap-ons or instruments can injure the cerebrum via the orbit or through the thinner temporal region of the skull. Although the diagnosis usually is obvious, in some instances wounds in the auditory canal, mouth, and nose can be elusive. Prognosis is variable, but virtually all supratentorial wounds that injure both hemispheres are fatal.Neck. All blunt trauma patients should be assumed to have cer-vical spine injuries until proven otherwise. During the physi-cal examination, one must maintain cervical spine precautions and in-line stabilization. Due to the devastating consequences of quadriplegia, a diligent evaluation for occult cervical spine injuries is mandatory. In the awake patient, the presence of posterior midline pain or tenderness should provoke a thor-ough radiologic evaluation. Additionally, intubated patients, patients with distracting injuries, significant mechanism, or another identified spine fracture should undergo CT imaging.37 A ligamentous injury may not be visible with standard imaging techniques. Flexion and extension views or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are obtained to further evaluate patients at risk or those with persistent symptoms.Spinal cord injuries can vary in severity. Complete injuries cause either quadriplegia or paraplegia, depending on the level of injury. These patients have a complete loss of motor func-tion and sensation two or more levels below the bony injury. Patients with high spinal cord disruption are at risk for shock due to physiologic disruption of sympathetic fibers. Significant neurologic recovery is rare. However, there are several partial or incomplete spinal cord injury syndromes where the prognosis is better. Central cord syndrome typically occurs in older persons who experience hyperextension injuries. Motor function, pain, and temperature sensation are preserved in the lower extremi-ties but diminished in the upper extremities. Some functional ABFigure 7-16. Epidural hematomas (A) have a distinctive convex shape on computed tomo-graphic scan, whereas subdural hematomas  (B) are concave along the surface of the brain.Figure 7-17. A. A right middle cerebral infarct noted on a computed tomographic scan of the head. Such a finding should prompt imaging to rule out an associated extracranial cerebrovascular injury. B. An inter-nal carotid artery pseudoaneurysm documented by angiography.Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   19710/12/18   6:17 PM 198BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Irecovery usually occurs, but is often not a return to normal. Anterior cord syndrome is characterized by diminished motor function, pain, and temperature sensation below the level of the injury, but position sensing, vibratory sensation, and crude touch are maintained. Prognosis for recovery is poor. Brown-Séquard syndrome is usually the result of a penetrating injury in which one-half of the spinal cord is transected. This lesion is characterized by the ipsilateral loss of motor function, proprio-ception, and vibratory sensation, whereas pain and temperature sensation are lost on the contralateral side.During the primary survey, identification of injuries to the neck with exsanguination, expanding hematomas, airway obstruc-tion, or aerodigestive injuries is a priority. A more subtle injury that may not be identified is a fracture of the larynx due to blunt trauma. Signs and symptoms include hoarseness, subcutaneous emphysema (Fig. 7-18), or a palpable fracture. Penetrating inju-ries of the anterior neck that violate the platysma are potentially life-threatening because of the density of critical structures in this region. Although operative exploration is appropriate for overt injuries, selective nonoperative management has been proven safe (Fig. 7-19).38 Indications for immediate operative intervention for penetrating cervical injury include hemodynamic instability, sig-nificant external hemorrhage, or evidence of aerodigestive injury. The management algorithm for hemodynamically stable patients is based on the presenting symptoms and anatomic location of injury, with the neck being divided into three distinct zones (Fig. 7-20). Zone I is inferior to the clavicles encompassing the thoracic outlet structures, zone II is between the thoracic outlet and the angle of the mandible, and zone III is above the angle of the mandible. Due to technical difficulties of injury expo-sure and varying operative approaches, a precise preoperative diagnosis is desirable for symptomatic zone I and III injuries. Therefore, these patients should ideally undergo diagnostic imag-ing before operation if they remain hemodynamically stable. Management of patients is further divided into those who are symptomatic and those who are not (see Fig 7-19). Specific symptoms or signs that should be identified include dysphagia, hoarseness, hematoma, venous bleeding, minor hemoptysis, and 5PenetratingNeck InjuryHemodynamically UnstableUncontrolled HemorrhageHard signs: massive hemoptysis, rapidly expanding hematomaOperativeExplorationObserveHemodynamically StableSoft signs: dysphagia, venous bleeding,subcutaneous emphysema, hematoma,hoarseness, stridor, odynophagiaAsymptomaticZone IZone IIZone IIIangioembolizationfor Zone III+Zone IZone IIZone IIITranscervical GSWAll OthersCTAneck/chest+angiographyesophagrambronchoscopyCTAneck/chest+ angiographyesophagrambronchoscopy+Figure 7-19. Algorithm for the management of penetrating neck injuries. CTA = computed tomographic angiography; GSW = gunshot wound.Figure 7-18. A laryngeal fracture results in air tracking around the trachea along the prevertebral space (arrows).Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   19810/12/18   6:17 PM 199TRAUMACHAPTER 7subcutaneous emphysema. Symptomatic patients, without overt injuries, should undergo CTA with further evaluation or operation based upon the imaging findings. Overall, less than 15% of pen-etrating cervical trauma requires neck exploration.39 Asymptom-atic patients are typically observed for 6 to 12 hours. The one caveat is asymptomatic patients with a transcervical gunshot wound; these patients should undergo CTA to determine the tra-jectory of the bullet; further studies are performed based on prox-imity to major structures.39 Such additional imaging includes angiography, soluble contrast esophagram followed by barium esophagram, esophagoscopy, or bronchoscopy. Angiographic diagnosis, particularly of zone III injuries, can then be managed by selective angioembolization.Chest. Blunt trauma to the chest may involve the chest wall, tho-racic spine, heart, lungs, thoracic aorta and great vessels, and rarely the esophagus. Most of these injuries can be evaluated by physi-cal examination and chest radiography, with supplemental CT scanning to exclude vascular injury. Any patient who undergoes an intervention in the ED—endotracheal intubation, central line placement, tube thoracostomy—needs a repeat chest radiograph to document the adequacy of the procedure. This is particularly true in patients undergoing tube thoracostomy for a pneumothorax or hemothorax. Patients with persistent pneumothorax, large air leaks after tube thoracostomy, or difficulty ventilating should undergo fiber-optic bronchoscopy to exclude a tracheobronchial injury or presence of a foreign body. Patients with hemothorax must have a chest radiograph documenting complete evacuation of the chest; a persistent hemothorax that is not drained by two chest tubes is termed a caked hemothorax and mandates immediate thoracotomy IIIIIIIIFigure 7-20. For the purpose of evaluating penetrating injuries, the neck is divided into three zones. Zone I is to the level of the clavicu-lar heads and is also known as the thoracic outlet. Zone II is located between the clavicles and the angle of the mandible. Zone III  is above the angle of the mandible.(Fig. 7-21). Pneumomediastinum following blunt trauma that is identified on CT imaging is a poor predictor of aerodigestive injury; selective workup is appropriate.40Occult thoracic vascular injury must be diligently sought due to the high mortality of a missed lesion. Widening of the mediastinum on initial anteroposterior chest radiograph, caused by a hematoma around an injured vessel that is contained by the mediastinal pleura, suggests an injury of the great vessels. The mediastinal abnormality may suggest the location of the arterial injury (i.e., left-sided hematomas are associated with descend-ing blunt aortic injuries [BAI], whereas right-sided hematomas are seen with innominate injuries) (Fig. 7-22). Posterior rib frac-tures, sternal fractures with laceration of small vessels, and mediastinal venous bleeding also can produce similar hemato-mas. Other chest radiographic findings suggestive of a BAI are summarized in Table 7-5 (Fig. 7-23). However, at least 7% of patients with a descending BAI have a normal chest radio-graph.41 Therefore, screening CTA is performed based on the mechanism of injury: high-energy deceleration motor vehicle collision with frontal or lateral impact (>30 mph frontal impact and >23 mph lateral impact), motor vehicle collision with ejection, falls of >25 ft, or direct impact (horse kick to chest, snowmobile, or ski collision with tree).42,43 In >95% of patients who survive to reach the ED, the BAI occurs just distal to the left subclavian artery, where it is tethered by the ligamen-tum arteriosum (Fig. 7-24). In 2% to 5% of patients the injury occurs in the ascending aorta, in the transverse arch, or at the diaphragm. Reconstructions with multislice CTA obviate the need for invasive arteriography.42For penetrating thoracic trauma, physical examination, plain posteroanterior and lateral chest radiographs with metallic markings of wounds, and pericardial ultrasound will identify the majority of injuries.44 Injuries of the esophagus and tra-chea are the exceptions. Bronchoscopy should be performed to evaluate the trachea in patients with a persistent air leak from the chest tube or mediastinal air. Patients at risk for an esopha-geal injury should undergo bedside esophagoscopy or soluble contrast esophagography followed by barium examination to look for extravasation of contrast.45 As with neck injuries, 6Figure 7-21. Persistence of a hemothorax despite two tube tho-racostomies is termed a caked hemothorax and is an indication for prompt thoracotomy.Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   19910/12/18   6:18 PM 200BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ihemodynamically stable patients with transmediastinal gunshot wounds should undergo CT scanning to determine the path of the bullet; trajectory in proximity to vascular or visceral struc-tures dictates the need for angiography, endoscopy, or opera-tive plan. If there is a suspicion of a subclavian artery injury,  brachial-brachial indices should be measured, but >60% of patients with an injury may not have a pulse deficit.46 Therefore, CTA should be performed based on injury proximity to intra-thoracic vasculature. Finally, with GSWs identified on the chest, penetrating trauma should not be presumed to be isolated to the thorax. Injury to contiguous body cavities (i.e., the abdomen and neck) must be excluded; plain radiographs are a rapid, effective screening modality to identify retained bullet fragments.Abdomen. The abdomen is a diagnostic black box. Fortunately, with few exceptions, it is not necessary to determine in the ED which intra-abdominal organs are injured, only whether an explor-atory laparotomy is necessary. However, physical examina-tion of the abdomen can be unreliable in making this determination, and drugs, alcohol, and head and spinal cord injuries can complicate the clinical evaluation. The presence of abdominal rigidity and hemodynamic compromise is an undisputed indication 7Figure 7-22. Location of the hematoma within the mediastinal silhouette suggests the type of great vessel injury. A predominant hematoma on the left suggests the far more common descending torn aorta (A; arrows), whereas a hematoma on the right indicates a relatively unusual but life-threatening innominate artery injury (B; arrows).Table 7-5Findings on chest radiograph suggestive of a descending thoracic aortic tear1. Widened mediastinum2. Abnormal aortic contour3. Tracheal shift4. Nasogastric tube shift5. Left apical cap6. Left or right paraspinal stripe thickening7. Depression of the left main bronchus8. Obliteration of the aorticopulmonary window9. Left pulmonary hilar hematomaFigure 7-23. Chest film findings associated with descending torn aorta include apical capping (A; arrows) and tracheal shift  (B; arrows).Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   20010/12/18   6:18 PM 201TRAUMACHAPTER 7Figure 7-24. Imaging to diagnose descending torn aorta includes computed tomographic angiography (A), with three-dimensional reconstructions (B, anterior; C, posterior) demonstrating the proxi-mal and distal extent of the injury (arrows).for prompt surgical exploration. For the remainder of patients, a variety of diagnostic adjuncts are used to identify abdominal injury.The diagnostic approach differs for penetrating trauma and blunt abdominal trauma. As a rule, laparotomy is warranted for gunshot or shotgun wounds that penetrate the peritoneal cavity because most have significant internal injuries. The standard has been that anterior truncal gunshot wounds between the fourth intercostal space and the pubic symphysis whose trajectory as determined by radiograph or wound location indicates perito-neal penetration should undergo laparotomy (Fig. 7-25). How-ever, there has been increased use of CT scanning to facilitate nonoperative management of abdominal GSWs.47 The exception is penetrating trauma isolated to the right upper quadrant; in hemodynamically stable patients with trajectory confined to the liver by CT scan, nonoperative observation may be reasonable.48 In obese patients, if the gunshot wound is thought to be tangen-tial through the subcutaneous tissues, CT scan can delineate the track and exclude peritoneal violation. Laparoscopy is another option to assess peritoneal penetration for tangential wounds it should not be done in unstable patients. In the scenario of tan-gential high energy GSWs, however, it is possible to sustain a transmitted intraperitoneal hollow visceral injury due to a blast insult. Gunshot wounds to the back or flank are more difficult to evaluate because of the retroperitoneal location of the injured abdominal organs. Triple-contrast CT scan can delineate the trajectory of the bullet and identify peritoneal violation or retro-peritoneal entry, and associated injuries.In contrast to gunshot wounds, stab wounds that penetrate the peritoneal cavity are less likely to injure intra-abdominal organs. Anterior abdominal stab wounds (from costal margin to inguinal ligament and bilateral midaxillary lines) should be explored under local anesthesia in the ED to determine if the fascia has been violated. Injuries that do not penetrate the peri-toneal cavity do not require further evaluation, and the patient Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   20110/12/18   6:18 PM 202BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Imay be discharged from the ED. Patients with fascial pen-etration must be further evaluated for intra-abdominal injury because there is up to a 50% chance of requiring laparotomy. Debate remains over whether the optimal diagnostic approach is serial examination, diagnostic peritoneal lavage (DPL), or CT scanning. The most recent evidence supports serial examination and laboratory evaluation.49,50 Patients with stab wounds to the right upper quadrant can undergo CT scanning to determine tra-jectory and confinement to the liver for potential nonoperative care.48 Those with stab wounds to the flank and back should undergo contrasted CT to assess for the potential risk of retro-peritoneal injuries of the colon, duodenum, and urinary tract.Penetrating thoracoabdominal wounds may cause occult injury to the diaphragm. Patients with gunshot or stab wounds to the left lower chest should be evaluated with diagnostic lapa-roscopy or DPL to exclude diaphragmatic injury. In general, penetrating right diaphragm injury is ignored unless there is a major underlying liver injury with a risk of biliopleural fistula. Diagnostic laparoscopy may be preferred in patients with a posi-tive chest radiograph (hemothorax or pneumothorax) or in those who would not tolerate a DPL. For patients undergoing DPL evaluation, laboratory value cutoffs to rule out diaphragm injury are different from traditional values formerly used for abdomi-nal stab wounds (Table 7-6). An RBC count of >10,000/μL is considered a positive finding and an indication for abdominal evaluation; patients with a DPL RBC count between 1000/μL and 10,000/μL should undergo laparoscopy or thoracoscopy.PenetratingAbdominalTraumaHemodynamicallyUnstableHemodynamicallyStableOperatingRoomGSWSWAnteriorAbdomenRUQTangential*,Back/FlankCTScan AASWwith+ LWE** Back/FlankSerialExams/Labs+*Tangential GSWs may also be evaluated with diagnostic laparoscopy.** A positive local wound exploration is defined as violation of the posterior fascia. CTScanLeft-sided thoracoabdominalDPL vs.laparoscopy++Evisceration/PeritonitisFigure 7-25. Algorithm for the evaluation of penetrating abdominal injuries. AASW = anterior abdominal stab wound; CT = computed tomography; DPL = diagnostic peritoneal lavage; GSW = gunshot wound; LWE = local wound exploration; RUQ = right upper quadrant; SW = stab wound.Table 7-6Criteria for “positive” finding on diagnostic peritoneal lavageABDOMINAL TRAUMATHORACOABDOMINAL STAB WOUNDSRed blood  cell count>100,000/mL>10,000/mLWhite blood  cell count>500/mL>500/mLAmylase level>19 IU/L>19 IU/LAlkaline  phosphatase level>2 IU/L>2 IU/LBilirubin level>0.01 mg/dL>0.01 mg/dLBlunt abdominal trauma is now evaluated initially by FAST examination, and this has supplanted DPL (Fig. 7-26). FAST is not 100% sensitive, however, so diagnostic peritoneal aspiration is warranted in hemodynamically unstable patients without a defined source of blood loss to rule out abdominal hemorrhage.31 FAST is used to identify free intraperitoneal fluid (Fig. 7-27) in Morrison’s pouch, the left upper quadrant, and the pelvis. Although this method is sensitive for detecting Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   20210/12/18   6:18 PM 203TRAUMACHAPTER 7HemodynamicallystableFAST +DPALaparotomyEquivocalPeritonitis?FAST +Candidate fornonoperativemanagementorpatient withcirrhosisIndications for CT:-Altered mental status-Confounding injury-Gross hematuria-Pelvic fracture-Abdominal tenderness-Unexplained Hct <35%Abdominal CTRepeat FASTin 30 minutesNoNoNoNoYesYesYesYesYesNoNoFigure 7-26. Algorithm for the initial evaluation of a patient with suspected blunt abdominal trauma. CT = computed tomography;  DPA = diagnostic peritoneal aspiration; FAST = focused abdominal sonography for trauma; Hct = hematocrit.Figure 7-27. Focused abdominal sonography for trauma imag-ing detects intra-abdominal hemorrhage. Hemorrhage is presumed when a fluid stripe is visible between the right kidney and liver  (A), between the left kidney and spleen (B), or in the pelvis (C).Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   20310/12/18   6:18 PM 204BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IFigure 7-28. Computed tomography images reveal critical infor-mation about solid organ injuries, such as associated contrast extravasation from a grade IV laceration of the spleen (A; arrow) and the amount of subcapsular hematoma in a grade III liver lacera-tion (B; arrows).intraperitoneal fluid of >250 mL, it does not reliably deter-mine the source of hemorrhage nor grade solid organ inju-ries.51 Patients with fluid on FAST examination, considered a “positive FAST,” who do not have immediate indications for laparotomy (hemodynamically stable, no evidence of perito-nitis) undergo CT scanning to quantify their injuries. Injury grading using the American Association for the Surgery of Trauma (AAST) grading scale (Table 7-7) is an important component of nonoperative management of solid organ inju-ries. Additional findings that should be noted on CT scan in patients with solid organ injury include contrast extravasa-tion (i.e., a “blush”), the amount of intra-abdominal hemor-rhage, and presence of pseudoaneurysms (Fig. 7-28). CT also is indicated for hemodynamically stable patients for whom the physical examination is unreliable. Despite the increasing diagnostic accuracy of multidetector CT scanners, identifica-tion of intestinal injuries remains a limitation. Bowel injury is suggested by findings of thickened bowel wall, “streak-ing” in the mesentery, free fluid without associated solid organ injury, or free intraperitoneal air.52,53 Patients with free intra-abdominal fluid without solid organ injury are closely monitored for evolving signs of peritonitis; if patients have a significant closed head injury or cannot be serially examined, DPL should be performed to exclude bowel injury. If DPL is pursued, an infraumbilical approach is used (Fig. 7-29). After placement of the catheter, a 10-mL syringe is connected and the abdominal contents aspirated (termed a diagnostic perito-neal aspiration). The aspirate is considered positive if >10 mL of blood is aspirated. If <10 mL is withdrawn, a liter of normal saline is instilled. The effluent is withdrawn via siphoning and sent to the laboratory for RBC count, white blood cell (WBC) count, and determination of amylase, bilirubin, and alkaline phosphatase levels. Values representing positive findings are summarized in Table 7-6.Table 7-7American Association for the Surgery of Trauma grading scales for solid organ injuriesSUBCAPSULAR HEMATOMALACERATIONLiver Injury GradeGrade I<10% of surface area<1 cm in depthGrade II10%–50% of surface area1–3 cmGrade III>50% of surface area or  >10 cm in depth>3 cmGrade IV25%–75% of a hepatic lobeGrade V>75% of a hepatic lobeGrade VIHepatic avulsionSplenic Injury GradeGrade I<10% of surface area<1 cm in depthGrade II10%–50% of surface area1–3 cmGrade III>50% of surface area or  >10 cm in depth>3 cmGrade IV>25% devascularizationHilumGrade VShattered spleenComplete devascularizationPelvis. Blunt injury to the pelvis may produce mechanically unstable fractures with major hemorrhage (Fig. 7-30). Plain radiographs will reveal gross abnormalities, but CT scanning is necessary to determine the precise geometry. Sharp spicules of bone can lacerate the bladder, rectum, or vagina. Alterna-tively, bladder rupture may result from a direct blow to the torso if the bladder is full. CT cystography is performed if the urinalysis demonstrates RBCs. Urethral injuries are suspected if examination reveals blood at the meatus, scrotal or perineal hematomas, or a high-riding prostate on rectal examination. Urethrograms should be obtained for stable patients before placing a Foley catheter to avoid false passage and subsequent stricture. Major vascular injuries of the external iliacs caus-ing bleeding are uncommon in blunt pelvic trauma; however, thrombosis of either the arteries or veins in the iliofemoral system may occur, and CTA should be performed for evalu-ation if there is a pulse differential. Life-threatening hemor-rhage can be associated with pelvic fractures and may initially Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   20410/12/18   6:18 PM 205TRAUMACHAPTER 7Figure 7-29. Diagnostic peritoneal lavage is performed through an infraumbilical incision unless the patient has a pelvic fracture or is preg-nant. A. The linea alba is sharply incised, and the catheter is directed into the pelvis. B. The abdominal contents should initially be aspirated using a 10-mL syringe.preclude definitive imaging. Treatment algorithms for patients with complex pelvic fractures and hemodynamic instability are presented later in the chapter.Extremities. Blunt or penetrating trauma to the extremities requires an evaluation for fractures, ligamentous disruption, and neurovascular injury. Plain radiographs are used to evaluate fractures, whereas ligamentous injuries, particularly those of the knee and shoulder, can be imaged with magnetic resonance imaging. Physical examination identifies the majority of arte-rial injuries, and findings are classified as either hard signs or soft signs of vascular injury (Table 7-8). In general, hard signs constitute indications for operative exploration, whereas soft signs are indications for further testing or observation. Bony fractures or knee dislocations should be realigned before defini-tive vascular examination. In management of vascular trauma, controversy exists regarding the treatment of patients with soft signs of injury, particularly those with injuries in proximity to major vessels. It is known that some of these patients will have arterial injuries that require repair. The most common approach has been to measure SBP using Doppler ultrasonography and compare the value for the injured side with that for the unin-jured side, termed the A-A index.54 If the pressures are within 10% of each other, a significant injury is unlikely, and no fur-ther evaluation is performed. If the difference is >10%, CTA or arteriography is indicated. Others argue that there are occult injuries, such as pseudoaneurysms or injuries of the profunda femoris or peroneal arteries, which may not be detected with this technique. If hemorrhage occurs from these injuries, com-partment syndrome and limb loss may occur. Although busy trauma centers continue to debate this issue, the surgeon who is obliged to treat the occasional injured patient may be better served by performing CTA in selected patients with soft signs. In patients with hard signs of vascular injury, on-table angi-ography may be useful to localize the arterial injury and thus, limit tissue dissection. For example, a patient with an absent popliteal pulse and femoral shaft fracture due to a bullet that entered the lateral hip and exited below the medial knee could have injured either the femoral or popliteal artery anywhere along its course (Fig. 7-31).GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF MANAGEMENTOver the past 25 years there has been a remarkable change in management practices and operative approach for the injured patient. With the advent of CT scanning, nonoperative man-agement of solid organ injuries has replaced routine operative exploration. Those patients who do require operation may be treated with less radical resection techniques, such as splen-orrhaphy or partial nephrectomy. Colonic injuries, previously mandating colostomy, are now repaired primarily in virtually all cases. Additionally, the type of anastomosis has shifted from a double-layer closure to a continuous running single-layer clo-sure; this method is technically equivalent to and faster than the interrupted multilayer techniques.55 Adoption of damage con-trol surgical techniques in physiologically deranged patients has resulted in limited initial operative time, with definitive injury repair delayed until after resuscitation in the surgical intensive care unit (SICU) with physiologic restoration.56 Abdominal drains, once considered mandatory for parenchymal injuries and some anastomoses, have disappeared; fluid collections are managed by percutaneous techniques. Newer endovascular Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   20510/12/18   6:18 PM 206BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART ITable 7-8Signs and symptoms of peripheral arterial injuryHARD SIGNS (OPERATION MANDATORY)SOFT SIGNS (FURTHER EVALUATION INDICATED)Pulsatile hemorrhageProximity to vasculatureAbsent pulsesSignificant hematomaAcute ischemiaAssociated nerve injuryA-A index of <0.9Thrill or bruitA-A index = systolic blood pressure on the injured side compared with that on the uninjured side.techniques such as stenting of arterial injuries and angioem-bolization are routine adjuncts. Blunt cerebrovascular injuries have been recognized as a significant, preventable source of neurologic morbidity and mortality. The use of preperitoneal pelvic packing for unstable pelvic fractures as well as early frac-ture immobilization with external fixators are paradigm shifts in management. Recently resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion (REBOA) has been added to the armamentarium for life-threatening pelvic fracture bleeding57,58 (Fig. 7-32). Finally, the institution of massive transfusion protocols balances the benefit of blood component therapy against immunologic risk. Viscoelastic hemostatic assays (TEG and ROTEM) have been shown to be superior to traditional laboratory tests and have been central to the evolving concept of goal-directed hemo-stasis.59 These many conceptual changes have significantly improved survival of critically injured patients; they have been promoted and critically reviewed by academic trauma centers via forums such as the American College of Surgeons Com-mittee on Trauma, the American Association for the Surgery of Trauma, the International Association of Trauma Surgery and Intensive Care, the Pan-American Trauma Congress, and other surgical organizations.Transfusion PracticesInjured patients with life-threatening hemorrhage develop acute coagulopathy of trauma (ACOT).60,61 The mechanism for inad-equate clot formation remains uncertain, but it is believed to involve activation of protein C, which impairs Va and VIIa, glycocalyx breakdown, which releases heparin sulfate, immune Figure 7-30. The three types of mechanically unstable pelvis fractures are lateral compression (A), anteroposterior compression (B), and vertical shear (C).Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   20610/12/18   6:18 PM 207TRAUMACHAPTER 7activation with the releases of DAMPs, DNA, histone, poly-phosphate, and PMN elastase, and complement activation. Fibrinolysis is an important component of the ACOT; hyper-fibrinolysis and fibrinolysis shutdown are both associated with increased mortality.62 Fresh whole blood, arguably the optimal replacement, has not been available in the United States since the early 1980s. Rather, its component parts, packed red blood cells (PRBCs), fresh frozen plasma, platelets, and cryoprecipi-tate, are administered. Specific transfusion triggers for indi-vidual blood components remain debated.63 Although current critical care guidelines indicate that PRBC transfusion should occur once the patient’s hemoglobin level is <7 g/dL,64 in the acute phase of resuscitation a hemoglobin of 10 g/dL is suggested to facilitate hemostasis via platelet margination.65 The traditional Figure 7-31. On-table angiography in the operating room isolates the area of vascular injury to the superficial femoral artery in a patient with a femoral fracture after a gunshot wound to the lower extremity.ABthresholds for blood component replacement in the patient mani-festing a coagulopathy have been INR >1.5, PTT >1.5 normal, platelet count >50,000/μL, and fibrinogen >100 mg/dl. However, these guidelines have been replaced by TEG and ROTEM cri-teria in many trauma centers. Such guidelines are designed to limit the transfusion of immunologically active blood compo-nents and decrease the risk of transfusion-associated lung injury and secondary multiple organ failure.66,67In the critically injured patient requiring large amounts of blood component therapy, a massive transfusion protocol should be followed (Fig. 7-33). This approach calls for administration of various components in a specific ratio during transfusion to achieve restoration of blood volume to reverse shock and cor-rect coagulopathy. Although the optimal ratio is unknown, cur-rent evidence suggests a presumptive 1:2 red cell:plasma ratio in patients at risk for massive transfusion (10 units of PRBCs in 6 hours).67-72 Because complete typing and cross-matching takes up to 45 minutes, patients requiring emergent transfusions are given type O-negative RBCs. Similarly, without time for blood typing, AB plasma is the universal donor, although A plasma appears to be a safe option. Blood typing, and to a lesser extent cross-matching, is essential to avoid life-threatening intravas-cular hemolytic transfusion reactions. Trauma centers and their associated blood banks must have the capability of transfusing tremendous quantities of blood components because it is not unusual to have >50 component units transfused during one procedure and have the patient survive. Massive transfusion protocols, established preemptively, permit coordination of the activities of surgeons, anesthesiologists, and blood bankers to facilitate transfusion of the appropriate blood products.Postinjury coagulopathy due to shock is aggravated by core hypothermia and metabolic acidosis, termed the bloody vicious cycle,56 and now commonly referred to as the lethal triad. The pathophysiology is multifactorial and includes inhibition of temperature-dependent enzyme-acti-vated coagulation cascades, platelet dysfunction, endothelial abnormalities, and fibrinolytic activity. Such coagulopathy may be insidious, so the surgeon must be cognizant of subtle signs such as excessive bleeding from the cut edges of skin. Point-of-care viscoelastic assays (TEG and ROTEM), which provide a comprehensive assessment of clot capacity and fibri-nolysis, can provide useful information within 15 minutes. In contrast, traditional laboratory tests of coagulation capability (i.e., INR, PTT, fibrinogen levels, and platelet count) requires at least 45 minutes. Using damage control techniques to limit operative time and provide physiologic restoration in the SICU can be lifesaving (see “Damage Control Surgery”).8Figure 7-32. A. Resuscitative endovascular balloon of the aorta (REBOA) is introduced through a 7Fr arterial sheath in the common femoral artery using ultrasound guidance. B. For patients with pelvic fractures and hemodynamic instabil-ity, the balloon is positioned in zone III just above the aortic bifurcation; a mixture of saline and contrast is used to inflate the balloon, which can be visualized on bedside plain radiography.Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   20710/12/18   6:18 PM 208BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IFigure 7-33. Denver Health Medical Center’s Massive Transfusion Protocol (MTP). ACT = activated clotting time; Cryo = cryoprecipitate; FFP = fresh frozen plasma; MA = maximum amplitude; PRBC = packed red blood cells; PTT = partial thromboplastin time; SBP = systolic blood pressure; TEG = thromboelastography.Prophylactic MeasuresAll injured patients undergoing an operation should receive preoperative antibiotics. The type of antibiotic is determined by the anticipated source of contamination in the abdomen or other operative region; additional doses should be adminis-tered during the procedure based on blood loss and the half-life of the antibiotic. Extended postoperative antibiotic therapy is administered only for contaminated open fractures. Tetanus prophylaxis is administered to all patients according to pub-lished guidelines.Trauma patients are at risk for venous thromboembolism and its associated morbidity and mortality. In fact, pulmo-nary embolus can occur much earlier in the patient’s hospital course than previously believed.73 Patients at higher risk for venous thromboembolism are those with multiple fractures of the pelvis and lower extremities, those with TBI or spinal cord injury, and those requiring ligation of large veins in the abdo-men and lower extremities. Morbidly obese patients and those over 55 years of age are at additional risk. Administration of low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) is initiated as soon MASSIVE TRANSFUSION PROTOCOL FOR TRAUMAAny of these in the ED:• Penetrating Torso Injury• Major Pelvic Fracture• FAST ˜ >1 Body Region• SBP 70          OR• SBP 71–90  AND HR š108 if ... your patient has these VS in the FIELD or EDACTIVATE MTPCaCl2 1 gr. i.v.Transfuse RBC 4 Unitsand FFP 2 UnitsOrder Citrated Rapid TEGContinue to component transfusion based on  TEG Resultsif patient is bleedingANDACT>128 sec Angle<65°MA<55 mmLY30 š10%FFP 2 UnitsCryo10 UnitsPlatelets1 UnitTXA1 gmReassess via Citrated Rapid TEGMassive Transfusion ProtocolTriggers: SBP <70 with penetrating torso injury, major pelvic injury, FAST +        SBP <71-90 mmHg and HR >108 with penetrating torso injury, major pelvic injury, FAST + ** order citrated rapid TEGContinued Treatment of ShockHemorrhage Control, Correct Hypothermia, Correct AcidosisNormalize Ca++Empiric Transfusion Until Lab Results AvailableShipmentPRBCsFFPPlateletsCryo142242110TEG Based Resuscitation*rapidTEG-ACT >128 sec ˜ 2 units thawed plasmarapidTEG-MA <55mm ˜ 1 unit of apheresis plateletsrapidTEG-angle <66 degrees ˜ 10 units pooled cryoprecipitaterapidTEG EPL >9% ˜ 1g tranexamic acid*Transfusion Triggers  if TEGis UnavailablePT, PTT > 1.5 control  ˜2 units thawed plasmaPlatelet count <50,000/mcL ˜1 unit of apheresis plateletsFibrinogen <100 mg/dL ˜10 units pooled cryoprecipitateBrunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   20810/12/18   6:18 PM 209TRAUMACHAPTER 7Figure 7-34. A. Unilateral neck exploration is performed through an incision along the anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle; exposure of the carotid artery requires early division of the facial vein. B. The distal internal carotid artery is exposed by dividing the ansa cervicalis, which permits mobilization of the hypoglossal nerve. C. Further exposure is facilitated by resection of the posterior belly of the digastric muscle.as bleeding has been controlled and there is stable intracranial pathology. In high-risk patients, antiplatelet therapy should be added.74 Removable inferior vena caval filters should be con-sidered if there are prolonged contraindications to administra-tion of LMWH. Additionally, pulsatile compression stockings (also termed sequential compression devices) are used routinely unless there is a fractured lower extremity or vascular injury.A final prophylactic measure that is usually not consid-ered is thermal protection. Hemorrhagic shock impairs perfu-sion and metabolic activity throughout the body, with resultant decrease in heat production and body temperature. Removing the patient’s clothes causes a second thermal insult, and infu-sion of cold PRBCs or room temperature crystalloid exacerbates the problem. As a result, injured patients can become hypother-mic, with temperatures below 34°C (93.2°F) upon arrival in the OR. Hypothermia aggravates coagulopathy and provokes myocardial irritability. Therefore, prevention must begin in the ED by maintaining a comfortable ambient temperature, cover-ing patients with warm blankets, and administering warmed IV fluids and blood products. Additionally, in the OR a Bair Hug-ger® warmer (the upper body or lower body blanket) and heated inhalation via the ventilatory circuit is instituted. For cases of severe hypothermia (temperature <30°C [86°F]), arteriovenous rewarming should be considered.Operative Approaches and ExposureCervical Exposure. Operative exposure for midline structures of the neck (e.g., trachea, thyroid, bilateral carotid sheaths) is obtained through a collar incision; this is typically performed two finger breadths above the sternal notch, but can be varied based on the level of anticipated injury. After subplatysmal flap elevation, the strap muscles are divided in the midline to gain access to the central neck compartment. More superior and lateral structures are accessed by extending the collar incision upward along the sternocleidomastoid muscle; this may be done bilaterally if neces-sary. For unilateral injuries, neck exploration is done through an incision extending from the mastoid down to the clavicle, along the anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle (Fig. 7-34). Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   20910/12/18   6:19 PM 210BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IBFigure 7-36. A. A “clamshell” thoracotomy provides exposure to bilateral thoracic cavities. B. Sternal transection requires individual ligation of both the proximal and distal internal mammary arteries on the undersurface of the sternum.123Figure 7-35. Options for thoracic exposure include the most versa-tile incision, the anterolateral thoracotomy (1), as well as a median sternotomy (2) and a “trap door” thoracotomy (3). Any thoracic incision may be extended into a supraclavicular or anterior neck incision for wider exposure.The carotid sheath, containing the carotid artery, jugular vein, and vagus nerve, is opened widely to examine these structures. The facial vein, which marks the carotid bifurcation, is usually ligated for exposure of the internal carotid artery and the hypoglossal nerve is the next structure encountered.Exposure of the distal carotid artery in zone III is difficult (see Fig. 7-34). The first step is division of the ansa cervicalis to facilitate mobilization of the hypoglossal nerve. Next, the poste-rior portion of the digastric muscle, which overlies the internal carotid, is transected. The glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves are also mobilized and retracted as necessary. If accessible, the styloid process and attached muscles are removed. In desperate situations, anterior displacement of the mandible (subluxation) may be helpful or the vertical ramus of the mandible may be divided. However, the latter maneuver often entails resection of the parotid gland, and the facial nerve is at risk of injury.Thoracic Incisions. An anterolateral thoracotomy, with the patient placed supine, is the most versatile incision for emer-gent thoracic exploration. The location of the incision is in the fifth interspace, in the inframammary line (Fig. 7-35). If access is needed to both pleural cavities, the original incision can be extended across the sternum with a Lebsche knife, into a “clam-shell” thoracotomy (Fig. 7-36). If the sternum is divided, the internal mammary arteries should be ligated to prevent blood loss. The heart, lungs, descending aorta, pulmonary hilum, and esophagus are accessible with this approach. For control of the great vessels, the superior portion of the sternum may be divided vertically with extension of the incision into the neck considered. A method advocated for access to the proximal left subclavian artery is through a fourth interspace anterolateral thoracotomy, superior sternal extension, and left supraclavicular incision (“trap door” thoracotomy). Although the trap door procedure is appro-priate after resuscitative thoracotomy, the proximal left subcla-vian artery can be accessed more easily via a sternotomy with a supraclavicular extension. If the left subclavian artery is injured outside the thoracic outlet, vascular control can be obtained via the sternotomy and definitive repair done through the supraclavicular incision. Emergent median sternotomy is optimal for anterior stab wounds to the heart. Typically, these patients have pericardial tamponade and may undergo placement of a pericardial drain before a semiurgent median sternotomy is performed. Patients in extremis, however, should undergo anterolateral thoracotomy.Median sternotomy with cervical extension is used for rapid exposure in patients with presumed proximal subclavian, innominate, or proximal carotid artery injuries. Care must be taken to avoid injury to the phrenic and vagus nerves that pass over the subclavian artery and to the recurrent laryngeal nerve passing posteriorly. Posterolateral thoracotomies are used for exposure of injuries to the trachea or main stem bronchi near the carina or the upper esophagus (right posterolateral thoracotomy) and tears of the descending thoracic aorta or lower esophagus (left posterolateral thoracotomy).Emergent Abdominal Exploration. Abdominal exploration in adults is performed using a midline incision because of its versatility. For children under the age of 6, a transverse inci-sion may be advantageous. Making the incision is faster with a scalpel than with an electrosurgical unit; incisional abdominal wall bleeding should be ignored until intra-abdominal sources of hemorrhage are controlled. Liquid and clotted blood are Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   21010/12/18   6:19 PM 211TRAUMACHAPTER 7Figure 7-37. A sagittal view of packs placed to control hepatic hemorrhage. LAP = laparotomy.Figure 7-38. The Pringle maneuver, performed with a vascular clamp, occludes the hepatic pedicle containing the portal vein, hepatic artery, and common bile duct.evacuated with multiple laparotomy pads to identify the major source(s) of active bleeding. After blunt trauma, the spleen and liver should be palpated first and packed if fractured, and the infracolic mesentery should be inspected for zone I vascular injury. In contrast, after a penetrating wound the search for bleeding should pursue the trajectory of the penetrating device. If the patient has an SBP of <70 mmHg when the abdomen is opened, digital pressure or a clamp should be placed on the aorta at the diaphragmatic hiatus. After the source of hemorrhage is localized, direct digital occlusion (vascular injury) or laparot-omy pad packing (solid organ injury) is used to control bleed-ing (Fig. 7-37). If the liver is the source in a hemodynamically Figure 7-39. To mobilize the spleen, an incision is made into the endoabdominal fascia 1 cm lateral to the reflection of the peritoneum onto the spleen  (A). While the spleen is gently rotated medially, a plane is developed between the pancreas and left kidney (B). With complete mobilization, the spleen can reach the level of the abdominal incision.unstable patient, additional control of bleeding is obtained by clamping the hepatic pedicle with a vascular clamp or Rummel tourniquet (termed the Pringle maneuver) (Fig. 7-38). Similarly, clamping the splenic hilum may be required for hilar bleeding. When the spleen is mobilized, it should be gently rotated medi-ally to expose the lateral peritoneum; this peritoneum and endo-abdominal fascia are incised, which allows blunt dissection of the spleen and pancreas as a composite from the retroperito-neum anterior to Gerota’s fascia (Fig. 7-39).Rapid exposure of the intra-abdominal vasculature can prove challenging in the face of exsanguinating hemorrhage. Proximal control of the aorta is obtained at the diaphragmatic hiatus; if an aortic injury is supraceliac, transecting the left crus of diaphragm or extending the laparotomy via a left thoracotomy may be necessary. Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   21110/12/18   6:19 PM 212BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IAn alternative for a contained hematoma is placement of a trans-femoral REBOA into zone I. The first decision is whether the patient has a supracolic or an infracolic vascular injury. Supracolic injuries (aorta, celiac axis, proximal superior mesenteric artery [SMA], and left renal arteries) are best approached via a left medial visceral rotation (Fig. 7-40). This is done by incising the lateral peritoneal reflection (white line of Toldt) beginning at the distal descending colon and extending the incision along the colonic splenic flexure, around the posterior aspect of the spleen, and behind the gastric fundus, ending at the esophagus. The left colon, spleen, pancreas, and stomach are then rotated toward the midline. The authors prefer to leave the kidney in situ when mobilizing the viscera because this exaggerates the separation of the renal vessels from the SMA. The operative approach for SMA injuries is based on the level of injury. Fullen zone I SMA injuries, located posterior to the pancreas, are best exposed by a left medial visceral rotation. Fullen zone II SMA injuries, extending from the pancreatic edge to the middle colic branch, on the other hand, are approached via the lesser sac along the inferior edge of the pancreas at the base of the transverse mesocolon; the pancreatic body may be divided to gain proximal vascular access. More distal SMA injuries, Fullen zones III and IV, are approached directly within the mesentery. A venous injury behind the pancreas, from the junction of the superior mesenteric, splenic, and portal veins, is accessed by dividing the neck of the pancreas. Inferior vena cava injuries are approached by a right medial visceral rotation (Fig. 7-41). Proximal control is Figure 7-41. A right medial visceral rotation is used to expose the infrahepatic vena cava.Figure 7-40. A left medial visceral rotation is used to expose the abdominal aorta.obtained just above the iliac bifurcation with direct pressure via a sponge stick; the injury is identified by cephalad dissection along the anterior surface of the inferior vena cava. A Satinsky clamp can be used to control anterior caval wounds.Injuries of the iliac vessels pose a unique problem for emergent vascular control due to the number of vessels, their close proximity, and cross circulation. Proximal control at the infrarenal aorta arrests the arterial bleeding and avoids splanch-nic and renal ischemia; however, venous injuries are not con-trolled with aortic clamping. Tamponade with digital pressure or with a folded laparotomy pad held directly over the bleeding site usually will establish hemostasis sufficient to prevent exsan-guination. If hemostasis is not adequate to expose the vessel proximal and distal to the injury, sponge sticks can be strategi-cally placed on either side of the injury and carefully adjusted to improve hemostasis. Alternatively, complete pelvic vascular isolation (Fig. 7-42) may be required to control hemorrhage for adequate visualization of the injuries. The right common iliac artery obscures the bifurcation of the vena cava and the right iliac vein; the iliac artery may require division to expose venous injuries in this area (Fig. 7-43). The artery must be repaired after the venous injury is treated, however, because of limb-threatening ischemia.Once overt hemorrhage is controlled, sources of enteric contamination are identified by serially running along the small and large bowel, looking at all surfaces. Associated hematomas should be unroofed to rule out adjacent bowel injury. The ante-rior and posterior aspects of the stomach should be inspected, which requires opening the lesser sac for complete visualiza-tion. Duodenal injuries should be evaluated with a wide Kocher maneuver. During exploration of the lesser sac, visualization and palpation of the pancreas is done to exclude injury. Palpat-ing the anterior surface is not sufficient because the investing Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   21210/12/18   6:19 PM 213TRAUMACHAPTER 7fascia may mask a pancreatic injury; mobilization, including evaluation of the posterior aspect, is critical. After injuries are identified, whether to use damage control techniques or per-form primary repair of injuries is based on the patient’s intraop-erative physiologic status (see “Damage Control Surgery” and “Treatment of Specific Injuries”). In a patient with multisys-tem trauma, enteral access via gastrostomy or jejunostomy tube should be considered. If abdominal closure is indicated after the patient’s injuries are addressed, the abdomen is irrigated with warm saline and the midline fascia is closed with a running heavy absorbable suture. The skin is closed selectively based on the amount of intra-abdominal contamination.Figure 7-42. Pelvic vascular isolation. A. Initially, clamps are placed on the aorta, inferior vena cava, and bilateral external iliac vessels. B. With continued dissection, the clamps can be moved progressively closer to the vascular injury to limit unwarranted ischemia.Figure 7-43. The right common iliac artery can be divided to expose the bifurcation of the inferior vena cava and the right common iliac vein.Table 7-9Options for the treatment of vascular injuriesObservationLigationLateral suture repairEnd-to-end primary anastomosisInterposition graftsAutogenous veinPolytetrafluoroethylene graftDacron graftTranspositionsExtra-anatomic bypassEndovascularStentsEmbolizationVascular Repair Techniques. Initial control of vascular inju-ries is accomplished digitally by applying enough direct pres-sure to stop the hemorrhage. Sharp dissection is used to define the injury and mobilize sufficient length for proximal and distal control. Fogarty thromboembolectomy should be done proxi-mally and distally to optimize collateral blood flow. Heparin-ized saline (50 units/mL) is then injected into the proximal and distal ends of the injured vessel to prevent small clot formation on the exposed intima and media. Ragged edges of the injury site should be debrided using sharp dissection. Intravascular shunts are used when there are multiple life-threatening injuries or the arterial injury is anticipated to require saphenous vein interposition reconstruction.Options for the treatment of vascular injuries are listed in Table 7-9. Arterial repair should always be done for the aorta, carotid, innominate, brachial, superior mesenteric, proper hepatic, renal, iliac, femoral, and popliteal arteries. Named arter-ies that usually tolerate ligation include the right or left hepatic artery and the celiac artery. In the lower extremities, at least one artery with distal runoff should be salvaged. Arterial injuries that may be treated nonoperatively include small pseudoaneurysms, intimal dissections, small intimal flaps, and small arteriovenous Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   21310/12/18   6:19 PM 214BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IFigure 7-45. The parachute technique is helpful for accurate placement of the posterior sutures of an anastomosis when the arte-rial end is fixed and an interposition graft is necessary. Traction must be maintained on both ends of the suture to prevent loosening and leakage of blood. Six stitches should be placed before the graft is pulled down to the artery.Figure 7-44. Small arteries repaired with an end-to-end anastomo-sis are prone to stricture. Enlarging the anastomosis by beveling the cut ends of the injured vessel can minimize this problem. A curved hemostat is a useful adjunct to create the curve.fistulas in the extremities. Follow-up imaging is performed 1 to 2 weeks after injury to confirm healing. Venous repair should be performed for injuries of the superior vena cava, the inferior vena cava proximal to the renal veins, and the portal vein, although the portal vein may be ligated in extreme cases. The SMV should be repaired optimally, but >80% of patients will survive follow-ing ligation. Similarly, the left renal vein can usually be ligated adjacent to the IVC due to collateral decompression.The type of operative repair for a vascular injury is based on the extent and location of injury. Lateral suture repair is preferred for arterial injuries with minimal loss of tissue. End-to-end primary anastomosis is performed if the vessel can be repaired without tension. Arterial defects of 1 to 2 cm often can be bridged by mobilizing the severed ends of the vessel after ligating small branches. The aorta, subclavian artery, brachial artery, and popliteal artery however, are difficult to mobilize for additional length. To avoid postoperative stenosis, particularly in smaller arteries, beveling or spatulation should be used so that the completed anastomosis is slightly larger in diameter than the native artery (Fig. 7-44). The authors emphasize the parachute technique to ensure precision placement of the posterior suture line (Fig. 7-45). If this technique is used, traction must be main-tained on both ends of the suture, or leakage from the posterior aspect of the suture line may occur.Interposition grafts are used when end-to-end anastomosis cannot be accomplished without tension despite mobilization. For vessels <6 mm in diameter (e.g., internal carotid, brachial, superficial femoral, and popliteal arteries), autogenous greater saphenous vein (GSV) from the contralateral groin should be used because polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) grafts of <6 mm have a prohibitive rate of thrombosis. When GSV is not avail-able, autologous options include the cephalic and basilic veins. Larger arteries (e.g., subclavian, innominate, aorta, common iliac) are bridged by PTFE grafts. PTFE is preferred over Dacron because of the reported decreased risk of infection.75 Aortic or iliac arterial injuries may be complicated by enteric contami-nation from colon or small bowel injuries. There is a natural reluctance to place artificial grafts in such circumstances, but graft infections are rare, and the time required to perform an axillofemoral bypass is excessive. Therefore, after the control of hemorrhage, bowel contamination is contained and the abdomen irrigated before placing PTFE grafts.76 After placement of the graft, it is covered with peritoneum or omentum before defini-tive treatment of the enteric injuries.Transposition procedures can be used when an artery has a bifurcation and one vessel can be ligated safely. Injuries of the proximal internal carotid can be treated by mobilizing the adja-cent external carotid, dividing it distal to the internal injury, and performing an end-to-end anastomosis between it and the distal internal carotid (Fig. 7-46). The proximal stump of the internal carotid is oversewn, with care taken to avoid a blind pocket where a clot may form. Injuries of the common and external iliac arteries can be handled in a similar fashion (Fig. 7-47), while maintaining flow in at least one internal iliac artery.Venous injuries should be repaired when technically fea-sible. Small injuries without loss of tissue can be treated with lateral suture repair. More complex repairs with interposition grafts may thrombose, but this typically occurs gradually over 1 to 2 weeks. During this time adequate collateral circulation develops, which is sufficient to avoid acute venous hyperten-sion. Therefore, it is reasonable to use ringed PTFE for venous interposition grafting and accept a gradual, but eventual, throm-bosis while allowing time for collateral circulation to develop. Such an approach is reasonable for venous injuries of the supe-rior vena cava, suprarenal vena cava, SMV, and popliteal vein because ligation of these is associated with significant morbid-ity. In the remainder of venous injuries, the vein may be ligated. In such patients, chronic venous hypertensive complications in the lower extremities often can be avoided by (a) temporary use of elastic bandages (Ace wraps) applied from the toes to the hips at the end of the procedure, and (b) judicious elevation of the lower extremities. These measures should be maintained for Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   21410/12/18   6:19 PM 215TRAUMACHAPTER 7Figure 7-46. Carotid transposition is an effective approach for treating injuries of the proximal internal carotid artery.ABCFigure 7-47. Transposition procedures can be used for iliac artery injuries to eliminate the dilemma of placing an interposition polytetra-fluoroethylene graft in the presence of enteric contamination. A. Right common iliac artery transposed to left common iliac artery. B. Left internal iliac artery transposed to the distal right common iliac artery. C. Right internal iliac artery transposed to the right external iliac artery.1 week; if the patient has no peripheral edema with ambulation, these maneuvers are no longer required.Damage Control SurgeryThe recognition of the bloody vicious cycle and the introduction of damage control surgery (DCS) have improved the survival of critically injured patients. Conceptually, the bloody vicious cycle, first described in 1981, is the lethal combination of coag-ulopathy, hypothermia, and metabolic acidosis (Fig. 7-48).56 Hypothermia from evaporative and conductive heat loss and diminished heat production occurs despite the use of warming blankets and blood warmers. The metabolic acidosis of shock is exacerbated by aortic clamping, administration of vasopres-sors, massive RBC transfusions, and impaired myocardial per-formance. The ACOT, described previously, is compounded by hemodilution, hypothermia, and acidosis. Once the cycle starts, each component magnifies the other, which leads to a down-ward spiral and ultimately a fatal arrhythmia. The purpose of DCS is to limit operative time so that the patient can be returned to the SICU for physiologic restoration and the cycle thereby broken. Indications to limit the initial operation and institute DCS techniques include a combination of refractory hypother-mia (temperature <35°C), profound acidosis (arterial pH <7.2, base deficit >15 mmol/L), and refractory coagulopathy.56,77 The decision to abbreviate a trauma laparotomy is made intraopera-tively as the patient’s clinical course becomes clearer and labo-ratory values become available.The goal of DCS is to control surgical bleeding and limit GI spillage. The operative techniques used are temporary mea-sures, with definitive repair of injuries delayed until the patient is physiologically replete. Controlling surgical bleeding while preventing ischemia is of utmost importance during DCS. Aortic injuries must be repaired using an interposition PTFE Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   21510/12/18   6:19 PM 216BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Igraft. Although celiac artery injuries may be ligated, the SMA must maintain flow, and the early insertion of an intravascu-lar shunt is advocated. Similarly, perfusion of the iliac system and infrainguinal vessels can be restored with a vascular shunt, with interposition graft placement delayed. Arterial reconstruc-tion following shunt placement should be done optimally within 6 hours.78 Venous injuries are preferentially treated with ligation in damage control situations, except for the suprarenal inferior vena cava and popliteal vein. For extensive solid organ injuries to the spleen or one kidney, excision is indicated rather than an attempt at operative repair. For hepatic injuries, perihe-patic packing of the liver will usually tamponade bleeding (see Fig. 7-37). Translobar gunshot wounds of the liver are best con-trolled with balloon catheter tamponade, whereas deep lacera-tions can be controlled with Foley catheter inflation deep within the injury track (Fig. 7-49). For thoracic injuries requiring DCS several options exist. For bleeding peripheral pulmonary inju-ries, wedge resection using a stapler is performed. In penetrating injuries, pulmonary tractotomy is used to divide the parenchyma (Fig. 7-50); individual vessels and bronchi are then ligated using a 3-0 polydioxanone suture (PDS), and the track is left open. Patients who sustain more proximal injuries may require formal pulmonary resection, but pneumonectomy is poorly tolerated. Recent experimental work suggests inhaled nitric oxide (NO) will reduce right heart failure following pneumonectomy.79 Car-diac injuries may be temporarily controlled using a running 3-0 nonabsorbable polypropylene suture or skin staples. Pledgeted repair should be performed for the relatively thin right ventricle.The second key component of DCS is limiting enteric content spillage. Small GI injuries (stomach, duodenum, small intestine, and colon) may be controlled using a rapid whipstitch of 3-0 PDS. Complete transection of the bowel or segmental damage is controlled using a GIA stapler, often with resection of the injured segment. Alternatively, open ends of the bowel may be ligated using umbilical tapes to limit spillage. Pancreatic injuries, regardless of location, are packed and the evaluation of ductal integrity postponed. Urologic injuries may require cath-eter diversion. Before the patient is returned to the SICU, the abdomen must be closed temporarily. Temporary closure of the abdomen is accomplished using an antimicrobial surgical incise drape (Ioban, 3M Health Care, St Paul, MN) (Fig. 7-51). In this technique, the bowel is covered with a fenestrated subfascial sterile drape (45 × 60 cm Steri-Drape 3M Health Care), and two Jackson-Pratt drains are placed along the fascial edges; this is Severe TraumaBlood LossTissue InjuryMassive RBCTransfusionIatrogenicFactorsCellularShockCoreHypothermiaMetabolic AcidosisHypocalcemiaImmuno-ActivationActivation/Consumptionof Complement SystemProgressiveSystemicCoagulopathyAcuteEndogenousCoagulopathyClotting FactorDeficienciesPreexistingDiseasesFFP resistantFFP sensitiveFigure 7-48. The bloody vicious cycle. FFP = fresh frozen plasma; RBC = red blood cell.Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   21610/12/18   6:19 PM 217TRAUMACHAPTER 7Figure 7-49. A. An intrahepatic balloon used to tamponade hemorrhage from transhepatic penetrating injuries is made by placing a red rubber catheter inside a 1-inch Penrose drain, with both ends of the Penrose drain ligated. B. Once placed inside the injury tract, the balloon is inflated with saline until hemorrhage stops. C. A Foley catheter with a 30-mL balloon can be used to halt hemorrhage from deep lacerations to the liver.Figure 7-50. Pulmonary tractotomy divides the pulmonary paren-chyma using a gastrointestinal anastomosis (GIA) stapler. The opened track permits direct access to injured vessels or bronchi for individual ligation.then covered using an Ioban drape, which allows closed suction to control reperfusion-related ascitic fluid egress while provid-ing adequate space for bowel expansion to prevent abdomi-nal compartment syndrome. During the initial DCS stage, the subfascial sterile drape is not covered by a blue towel so that the status of the bowel and hemorrhage control can be assessed. The use of direct peritoneal resuscitation following DCS should be considered; 18 Fr round Blake drains may be placed intraop-eratively for the instillation of the dialysate solution.80 Return to the OR within 24 hours is planned once the patient clini-cally improves, as evidenced by normothermia, normalization of coagulation test results, and correction of acidosis.TREATMENT OF SPECIFIC INJURIESHead InjuriesIntracranial Injuries. CT scanning, performed on all patients with a significant closed head injury (GCS score <14), identi-fies and quantitates intracranial lesions as well as intracranial hypertension. Patients with intracranial hemorrhage, including epidural hematoma, subdural hematoma, subarachnoid hemor-rhage, intracerebral hematoma or contusion, and diffuse axo-nal injury, are admitted to the SICU. In patients with abnormal findings on CT scans and GCS scores of ≤8, intracranial pres-sure (ICP) should be monitored using fiber-optic intraparenchy-mal devices or intraventricular catheters.33,81 Although an ICP of 10 mmHg is the upper limit of normal, therapy is targeted to maintain an ICP of <20 mmHg.33 The newest neurosurgery guidelines additionally recommend maintaining the cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP) at >60 mmHg. Indications for opera-tive intervention to remove space-occupying hematomas are based on the clot volume, amount of midline shift, location of the clot, GCS score, and ICP.29 A shift of >5 mm typically is considered an indication for evacuation, but this is not an abso-lute rule. Smaller hematomas that are in treacherous locations, such as the posterior fossa, may require drainage due to brain stem compression or impending herniation. Removal of small hematomas may also improve ICP and cerebral perfusion in patients with elevated ICP that is refractory to medical therapy. Patients with diffuse cerebral edema resulting in excessive ICP may require a decompressive craniectomy, although a recent AAST multicenter trial questioned the benefits.82,83 Patients with open or depressed skull fractures, with or without sinus involvement, may require operative intervention. Penetrating injuries to the head may require operative intervention for hem-orrhage control, evacuation of blood, skull fracture fixation, or debridement.General surgeons in communities without emergency neu-rosurgical coverage should have a working knowledge of burr hole placement in the event that emergent evacuation is required for a life-threatening epidural hematoma (Fig. 7-52).84 The typi-cal clinical course of an epidural hematoma is an initial loss of consciousness, a lucid interval, and recurrent loss of conscious-ness with an ipsilateral fixed and dilated pupil. While decom-pression of subdural hematomas may be delayed, epidural hematomas require evacuation within 70 minutes.83 The final stages of this sequence are caused by blood accumulation that forces the temporal lobe medially, with resultant compression of the third cranial nerve and eventually the brain stem. The burr hole is made on the side of the dilated pupil to decompress the intracranial space. After stabilization, the patient is transferred to a facility with neurosurgical capability for formal craniotomy.In addition to operative intervention, postinjury care directed at limiting secondary injury to the brain is critical. The goal of resuscitation and management in patients with head injuries is to avoid hypotension (SBP of <100 mmHg) and hypoxia (partial pressure of arterial oxygen of <60 or arterial oxygen saturation of <90%).33 Attention, therefore, is focused on maintaining cerebral perfusion rather than merely lowering Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   21710/12/18   6:20 PM 218BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IABCDFigure 7-51. Temporary closure of the abdomen entails covering the bowel with a fenestrated subfascial 45 × 60 cm sterile drape (A), placing Jackson-Pratt drains along the fascial edge (B), and then occluding with an Ioban drape (C, D).ICP. Resuscitation efforts aim for a euvolemic state and a SBP of >100 mmHg. Cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP) is equal to the mean arterial pressure minus the ICP, with a target range of >60 mmHg.33 CPP can be increased by either lowering ICP or raising mean arterial pressure. Sedation, osmotic diuresis, paralysis, ventricular drainage, and barbiturate coma are used in sequence, with coma induction being the last resort. The role of decompressive craniectomy for refractory ICH remains contro-versial.82 The partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PCO2) should be maintained in a normal range (35–40 mmHg), but for tem-porary management of acute intracranial hypertension, induc-ing cerebral vasoconstriction by hyperventilation to a PCO2 of Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   21810/12/18   6:20 PM 219TRAUMACHAPTER 7<30 mmHg is occasionally warranted. Moderate hypothermia (32°–33°C [89.6°–91.4°F]) has been shown experimentally to improve neurologic outcomes, but clinical studies have not vali-dated this concept.33,85,86 Patients with intracranial hemorrhage should be monitored for postinjury seizures, and prophylactic anticonvulsant therapy is indicated for 7 days after injury.33Maxillofacial Injuries. Maxillofacial injuries are common with multisystem trauma and require coordinated management by the trauma surgeon and the specialists in otolaryngology, plastic surgery, ophthalmology, and oral and maxillofacial surgery. Delay in addressing these systems that control vision, hearing, smelling, breathing, eating, and phonation may pro-duce dysfunction and disfigurement with serious psychological impact. The maxillofacial complex is divided into three regions; the upper face containing the frontal sinus and brain; the mid-face containing the orbits, nose, and zygomaticomaxillary com-plex; and the lower face containing the mandible. High-impact kinetic energy is required to fracture the frontal sinus, orbital rims, and mandible, whereas low-impact forces will injure the nasal bones and zygoma.The most common scenario, which at times may be life-threatening, is bleeding from facial fractures.87 Temporizing measures include nasal packing, Foley catheter tamponade of posterior nasal bleeding, and oropharyngeal packing. Prompt angioembolization will halt exsanguinating hemorrhage. Frac-tures of tooth-bearing bone are considered open fractures and require antibiotic therapy and semiurgent repair to preserve the Figure 7-52. A burr hole is made for decompression of an epidural hematoma as a life-saving maneuver. One or more branches of the external carotid artery usually must be ligated to gain access to the skull. No attempt should be made to control intracranial hemor-rhage through the burr hole. Rather, the patient’s head should be wrapped with a bulky absorbent dressing and the patient transferred to a neurosurgeon for definitive care.Figure 7-53. Three-dimensional computed tomography scan  illustrating Le Fort II maxillary (L) and alveolar (A) fractures, and fracture of the mandible (M) at the midline and at the weaker con-dyle (C). (Used with permission from Vincent D. Eusterman, MD, DDS.)airway as well as the functional integrity of the occlusion (bite) and the aesthetics of the face. Orbital fractures may compro-mise vision, produce muscle injury causing diplopia, or change orbital volume to produce a sunken appearance to the orbit. Nose and nasoethmoidal fractures should be assessed carefully to identify damage to the lacrimal drainage system or to the cribriform plate producing cerebrospinal fluid rhinorrhea. After initial stabilization, a systematic physical examination of the head and neck should be performed that also includes cranial nerve examination and three-dimensional CT scanning of the maxillofacial complex (Fig. 7-53).Cervical InjuriesSpine. Treatment of injuries to the cervical spine is based on the level of injury, the stability of the spine, the presence of subluxation, the extent of angulation, the level of neurologic deficit, and the overall condition of the patient. In general, phy-sician-supervised axial traction, via cervical tongs or the more commonly used halo vest, is used to reduce subluxations and stabilize the injury. Immobilization of injuries also is achieved with spinal orthoses (braces), particularly in those with asso-ciated thoracolumbar injuries. Surgical fusion typically is performed in patients with neurologic deficit, those with angu-lation of >11° or translation of >3.5 mm, and those who remain unstable after halo placement. Indications for immediate opera-tive intervention are deterioration in neurologic function and fractures or dislocations with incomplete deficit. Historically, methylprednisolone was administered to patients with acute spi-nal cord injury after blunt injury, with clinical data suggesting a small benefit to initiating a 24-hour infusion if started within 3 hours and a 48-hour infusion if started within 3 to 8 hours.88 Current guidelines, however, no longer recommend steroids for acute injuries.89 The role and timing of operative surgical decompression after acute spinal cord injury is debated, and Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   21910/12/18   6:20 PM 220BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ithe concept of damage control has been suggested. However, evidence supports urgent decompression of bilateral locked fac-ets in patients with incomplete tetraplegia or with neurologic deterioration. Performing surgery within 24 hours may decrease length of stay and complications.90 Complete injuries of the spi-nal cord remain essentially untreatable. Yet, approximately 3% of patients who present with flaccid quadriplegia have concus-sive injuries, and these patients represent the very few who seem to have miraculous recoveries.Vascular. Cervical vascular injuries due to either blunt or pen-etrating trauma can result in devastating neurologic sequelae or exsanguination. Penetrating injuries to the carotid artery and internal jugular vein usually are obvious on operative neck exploration. The principles of vascular repair techniques (dis-cussed previously) apply to carotid injuries, and options for repair include end-to-end primary repair (often possible with mobilization of the common carotid), graft interposition, and transposition procedures. All carotid injuries should be repaired except in patients who present in coma with a delay in transport. Prompt revascularization of the internal carotid artery, using a temporary Pruitt-Inahara shunt, should be considered in patients arriving in profound shock. Otherwise, carotid shunting should be done selectively as in elective carotid endarterectomy, but the patient should be systemically anticoagulated. Currently, we administer heparin with an ACT target of 250 sec. Tangential wounds of the internal jugular vein should be repaired by lateral venorrhaphy, but extensive wounds are efficiently addressed by ligation. However, it is not advisable to ligate both jugular veins due to potential intracranial hypertension. Vertebral artery inju-ries due to penetrating trauma are difficult to control operatively because of the artery’s protected location within the foramen transversarium. Although exposure from an anterior approach can be accomplished by removing the anterior elements of the bony canal and the tough fascia covering the artery between the elements, typically the most efficacious control of such inju-ries is angioembolization. Fogarty catheter balloon occlusion, however, is useful for controlling acute bleeding if encountered during neck exploration.Blunt injury to the carotid or vertebral arteries may cause dissection, thrombosis, or pseudoaneurysm, typically in the surgi-cally inaccessible distal internal carotid (Fig. 7-54).91 Early recog-nition and management of these injuries is paramount because patients treated with antithrombotics have a stroke rate of <1% compared with stroke rates of 20% in untreated  patients.92 Because treatment must be instituted during the latent period between injury and onset of neurologic sequelae, diagnostic imaging is performed based on identified risk factors (Fig. 7-55).92 After identification of an injury, antithrombotics are administered if the patient does not have contraindications (intra-cranial hemorrhage, falling hemoglobin level with solid organ injury or complex pelvic fractures). Heparin, started without a loading dose at 15 units/kg per hour, is titrated to achieve a PTT between 40 and 50 seconds or antiplatelet agents are initiated (aspirin 325 mg/d or clopidogrel 75 mg/d). The types of 9Figure 7-54. The Denver grading scale for blunt cerebrovascular injuries. Grade I: irregularity of the vessel wall, dissection/intramural hematoma with <25% luminal stenosis. Grade II: visualized intraluminal thrombus or raised intimal flap, or dissection/intramural hematoma with 25% or more luminal narrowing. Grade III: pseudoaneurysm. Grade IV: vessel occlusion. CAI = carotid artery injury; VAI = vertebral artery injury.Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   22010/12/18   6:20 PM 221TRAUMACHAPTER 7Yes Yes NoNoMulti-Slice CTA*Surgically Accessible?Grade I Injury Antithrombotic Therapy: Heparin (PTT 40–50 sec)or Antiplatelet Therapy**NoDiscontinue AntithromboticsRepeat CTA in 7–10 days***Injury Healed? Yes NoPositive Equivocal Finding or High Clinical Suspicion ArteriogramNoYes Negative Grade II–IV Injury Grade V Injury Operative Repair Endovascular Treatment Yes StopStop Surgically Accessible?Potential arterial hemorrhage from neck/nose/mouthCervical bruit in pt <50 yrs oldExpanding cervical hematomaFocal neurologic defect: TIA, hemiparesis, vertebrobasilar symptoms, Horner’s SyndromeNeurologic deÿcit inconsistent with head CTStroke on CT or MRISigns/Symptoms of BCVIThe Denver Health Medical Center BCVI screening guideline.High energy transfer mechanismDisplaced mid-face fracture (LeFort II or III)Mandible fractureComplex skull fracture/basilar skull fracture/occipital condyle fractureSevere Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) with GCS <6Cervical spine fracture, subluxation or ligamentous injury at any levelNear hanging with anoxic injury/     strangulations with LOCClothesline type injury or seat belt abrasion with signiÿcant swelling, pain, or altered MSTBI with thoracic injuriesScalp deglovingThoracic vascular injuriesBlunt cardiac ruptureUpper rib fractures (1–3)Risk Factors for BCVIAntithrombotics for 3–6 months and reimageConsider endovascular stenting for severe luminal narrowing, symptomatology, or markedly expanding pseudoaneurysm* CTA with multidetector-row CT, 64-channel optimal. If fewer than 16 channels, interpret CTA with caution; digital subtraction arteriogra-phy is the gold standard.** Antiplatelet therapy is typically ASA 325 mg.*** If CC fistula and symptomatic, consider angiography and endovascular therapy. If asymptomatic CC fistula, reimage with CTA at 3–4 weeks.Figure 7-55. Screening and treatment algorithm for blunt cerebrovascular injuries (BCVIs). ASA = acetylsalicylic acid; BRB = bright red blood; CHI = closed head injury; C-spine = cervical spine; CT = computed tomography; DAI = diffuse axonal injury; GCS = Glasgow Coma Scale score; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging; MS = mental status; Neg = negative; pt = patient; PTT = partial thromboplastin time;  TIA = transient ischemic attack.antithrombotic treatment appear equivalent in published studies to date, and the duration of treatment is empirically recommended to be 6 months.93,94 The role of carotid stenting for grade II or III internal carotid artery injuries remain controversial; current litera-ture suggests stenting be reserved for symptomatic patients or markedly enlarging pseudoaneurysms.95 Thrombosis of the internal jugular veins caused by blunt trauma can occur unilaterally or bilaterally and is often discovered incidentally because most patients are asymptomatic. Bilateral thrombosis can aggravate cerebral edema in patients with serious head injuries; stent placement should be considered in such patients if ICP remains elevated.Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   22110/12/18   6:20 PM 222BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IAerodigestive. Fractures of the larynx and trachea may mani-fest as cervical emphysema. Fractures documented by CT scan are usually repaired. Common injuries include thyroid carti-lage fractures, rupture of the thyroepiglottic ligament, disrup-tion of the arytenoids or vocal cord tears, and cricoid fractures. After debridement of devitalized tissue, tracheal injuries are repaired end-to-end using a single layer of interrupted absorb-able sutures. Associated injuries of the esophagus are common in penetrating injuries due to its close proximity. After debride-ment and repair, vascularized tissue is interposed between the repaired esophagus and trachea, and a closed suction drain is placed. The sternocleidomastoid muscle or strap muscles are useful for interposition and help prevent postoperative fistulas.Chest InjuriesThe most common injuries from both blunt and penetrating thoracic trauma are hemothorax and pneumothorax. More than 85% of patients can be definitively treated with a chest tube. The indications for thoracotomy include significant initial or ongoing hemorrhage from the tube thoracostomy and specific imaging-identified diagnoses (Table 7-10). One caveat concerns the patient who presents after a delay. Even when the initial chest tube output is 1.5 L, if the output ceases and the lung is reexpanded, the patient may be managed nonoperatively if hemodynamically stable.Great Vessels. Over 90% of thoracic great vessel injuries are due to penetrating trauma, although blunt injury to the innomi-nate, subclavian, or descending aorta may cause a pseudoaneu-rysm or frank rupture.46,96,97 Simple lacerations of the ascending or transverse aortic arch can be repaired with lateral aortor-rhaphy. Repair of posterior aortic injuries, complex ascending or transverse injuries, or those requiring interposition grafting of the arch, require full cardiopulmonary bypass. Innominate artery injuries are repaired using the bypass exclusion tech-nique,97 which avoids the need for cardiopulmonary bypass. Bypass grafting from the proximal aorta to the distal innominate with a prosthetic tube graft is performed before the postinjury hematoma is entered. The PTFE graft is anastomosed end-to-side from the proximal undamaged aorta and anastomosed end-to-end to the innominate artery (Fig. 7-56). The origin of the ABCFigure 7-56. A. Angiography reveals a 1-cm pseudoaneurysm of the innominate artery origin. B. In the first stage of the bypass exclusion technique, a 12-mm polytetrafluoroethylene graft is anastomosed end to side from the proximal undamaged aorta, tunneled under the vein, and anastomosed end to end to the innominate artery. C. The origin of the innominate is then oversewn at its base to exclude the pseudoaneurysm.Table 7-10Indications for operative treatment of thoracic injuries•	Initial tube thoracostomy drainage of >1000 mL (penetrating injury) or >1500 mL (blunt injury)•	Ongoing tube thoracostomy drainage of >200 mL/h for  3 consecutive hours in noncoagulopathic patients•	Caked hemothorax despite placement of two chest tubes•	Great vessel injury (endovascular techniques may be used in selected patients)•	Pericardial tamponade•	Cardiac herniation•	Massive air leak from the chest tube with inadequate ventilation•	Tracheal or main stem bronchial injury diagnosed by endoscopy or imaging•	Open pneumothorax•	Esophageal perforation•	Air embolisminnominate is then oversewn at its base to exclude the pseu-doaneurysm or other injury. Subclavian artery injuries can be repaired using lateral arteriorrhaphy or PTFE graft interposition; due to its multiple branches and tethering of the artery, end-to-end primary anastomosis is not advocated if there is a significant segmental loss.Descending BAI may require urgent intervention. How-ever, operative intervention for intracranial or intra-abdominal hemorrhage or unstable pelvic fractures takes precedence. To prevent aortic rupture, pharmacologic therapy with a selective β1-antagonist, esmolol, should be instituted in the trauma bay, with a target SBP of <100 mmHg and heart rate of <100/min.41,98 Endovascular stenting is now the mainstay of treatment.99,100 While endograft sizing has improved, the major question is long-term outcome in younger patients. Open repair of the descending aorta is accomplished using partial left heart bypass to prevent spinal cord and splanchnic ischemia and reduce left ventricular afterload (Fig. 7-57).101 Nonoperative management for grade I Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   22210/12/18   6:20 PM 223TRAUMACHAPTER 7LAFigure 7-57. When repairing a tear of the descending thoracic aorta, perfusion of the spinal cord while the aorta is clamped is achieved by using partial left heart bypass. The venous cannula is inserted into the left superior pulmonary vein because it is less prone to tearing than the left atrium (LA).Figure 7-58. A variety of techniques may be necessary to repair cardiac wounds. Generally, pledget support is used for the relatively thin-walled right ventricle.intimal aortic injuries is accomplished with antiplatelet agents and blood pressure control.102Heart. Blunt and penetrating cardiac injuries have widely dif-fering presentations and therefore disparate treatments. Survivable penetrating cardiac injuries consist of wounds that can be repaired operatively; most are stab wounds. Before repair of the injury is attempted, hemorrhage should be controlled; injuries to the atria can be clamped with a Satinsky vascular clamp, whereas digital pressure is used to occlude the majority of ventricular wounds. Foley catheter occlusion of larger stellate lesions is described, but even minimal traction may enlarge the original injury. Temporary control of hemorrhage, and at times definitive repair, may be accomplished with skin staples for left ventricular lacerations; the myocardial edges of the laceration must coapt in diastole for stapling to be technically feasible. Definitive repair of cardiac injuries is performed with either running 3-0 polypropylene suture or interrupted, pledgeted 2-0 polypropylene suture (Fig. 7-58).103 Use of pledgets may be particularly important in the right ventricle to prevent sutures from pulling through the thinner myocardium. Injuries adjacent to coronary arteries should be repaired using horizontal mattress sutures because use of running sutures results in coronary occlu-sion and distal infarction. Gunshot wounds may result in stellate lesions or contused, extremely friable myocardium adjacent to the wound. When the edges of such complex wounds cannot be fully approximated and hence the repair is not hemostatic, the authors have used surgical adhesive (BioGlue) to achieve hemo-stasis.104 Occasionally, interior structures of the heart may be damaged. Intraoperative auscultation or postoperative hemody-namic assessment usually identifies such injuries.105 ECHO can diagnose the injury and quantitate its effect on cardiac output. Immediate repair of valvular damage or septal defects rarely is necessary and would require cardiopulmonary bypass, but struc-tural intracardiac lesions may progress, and thus patients must have a follow-up ECHO.Patients with blunt cardiac injury typically present with persistent tachycardia or conduction disturbances, but occa-sionally present with tamponade due to atrial or right ventricu-lar rupture. There are no pathognomonic ECG findings, and cardiac enzyme levels do not correlate with the risk of cardiac complications.25 Therefore, patients for whom there is high clinical suspicion of cardiac contusion and who are hemody-namically stable should be monitored for dysrhythmias for 24 hours by telemetry. Patients with hemodynamic instability should undergo ECHO to evaluate for wall motion abnormali-ties (particularly hypokinesis of the right ventricle), pericardial fluid, valvular dysfunction, chordae rupture, or diminished ejection fraction. If such findings are noted or if vasoactive agents are required, cardiac function can be continuously moni-tored using a pulmonary artery catheter and serial SICU trans-thoracic or transesophageal ECHO.Trachea, Bronchi, and Lung Parenchyma. Less than 1% of all injured patients sustain intrathoracic tracheobronchial Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   22310/12/18   6:20 PM 224BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iinjuries, and only a small number require operative intervention. Although penetrating injuries may occur throughout the tracheo-bronchial system, blunt injuries most commonly occur within 2.5 cm of the carina. For patients with a massive air leak requir-ing emergent exploration, initial control of the injury to provide effective ventilation is obtained by passing an endotracheal tube either beyond the injury or into the contralateral mainstem bron-chus. Principles of repair are similar to those for repair of cervi-cal tracheal injuries. Devitalized tissue is debrided, and primary end-to-end anastomosis with 3-0 PDS suture is performed. Dis-section should be limited to the area of injury to prevent disrup-tion of surrounding bronchial vasculature and ensuing ischemia and stricture. Suture lines should be encircled with vascularized tissue, either pericardium, intercostal muscle, or pleura. Expect-ant management is employed for bronchial injuries that are less than one-third the circumference of the airway and have no evi-dence of a persistent major air leak.11,12 In patients with periph-eral bronchial injuries, indicated by persistent air leaks from the chest tube and documented by endoscopy, bronchoscopically directed fibrin glue sealing may be useful.The majority of pulmonary parenchymal injuries are sus-pected based upon identification of a pneumothorax; the vast majority can be managed with a tube thoracostomy. Identified parenchymal injuries encountered during thoracic exploration for a massive hemothorax are managed without resection as much as possible. Bronchovenous fistula is a constant threat and should be minimized by prompt control of a major air leak. Peripheral lacerations with persistent bleeding can be managed with stapled wedge resection. For central injuries, the current treatment is pulmonary tractotomy, which permits selective ligation of individual bronchioles and bleeders, pre-vents the development of an intraparenchymal hematoma or air embolism, and reduces the need for formal lobar resection (see Fig. 7-50).106,107 A stapling device, preferably the longest stapler available (e.g., GIA-100), is inserted directly into the injury track and positioned along the thinnest section of overly-ing parenchyma. The injury track is thus filleted open, which allows direct access to the bleeding vessels and leaking bronchi. The majority of injuries are definitively managed with selective ligation, and the defect is left open. Occasionally, tractotomy reveals a more proximal vascular on bronchial injury that must be treated with formal lobectomy. Injuries severe enough to mandate pneumonectomy usually are fatal because of right heart decompensation.108One parenchymal injury that may be discovered during thoracic imaging is a posttraumatic pulmonary pseudocyst, col-loquially termed a pneumatocele.109 Traumatic pneumatoceles typically follow a benign clinical course and are treated with aggressive pain management, pulmonary toilet, and serial chest radiography to monitor for resolution of the lesion. If the patient has persistent fever or leukocytosis, however, chest CT is done to evaluate for an evolving abscess because pneumatoceles may become infected. CT-guided catheter drainage may be required in such cases because 25% of patients do not respond to anti-biotic therapy alone. Surgery, ranging from partial resection to anatomic lobectomy, is indicated for unresolving complex pneumatoceles or infected lesions refractory to antibiotic ther-apy and drainage.The most common complication after thoracic injury is development of an empyema. Management is based on CT diagnostic criteria.110 Percutaneous drainage is indicated for a single loculation without appreciable rind. While fibrinolytics are often used for empyema, there is a paucity of data to support their use. Early decortication via video-assisted thoracic surgery should be done promptly in patients with multiple loculations or a pleural rind of >1 cm.111 Antibiotic treatment is based on definitive culture results, but presumptive antibiotics should cover MRSA in the SICU.Esophagus. Due to the proximity of the structures, esophageal injuries often occur with tracheobronchial injuries, particularly in cases of penetrating trauma. Operative options are based on the extent and location of esophageal injury. With sufficient mobilization, a primary single-layer end-to-end anastomosis may be performed after appropriate debridement. As with cer-vical repairs, if there are two suture lines in close approximation (trachea or bronchi and esophagus) interposition of a vascular-ized pedicle is warranted to prevent fistula formation. Perfora-tions at the gastroesophageal junction may be treated with repair and Nissan fundoplication or, for destructive injuries, segmen-tal resection and gastric pull-up. Small esophageal injuries can be managed with stenting. With large destructive injuries or delayed presentation of injuries, esophageal exclusion with wide drainage, diverting loop esophagostomy, and placement of a gastrostomy tube should be considered.Chest Wall and Diaphragm. Virtually all chest wall injuries, consisting of rib fractures and laceration of intercostal vessels, are treated nonoperatively with pain control, pulmonary toilet or venti-latory management, and drainage of the pleural space as indicated. Early institution of effective pain control is essential. The authors advocate preemptive rib blocks with 0.25% bupivacaine hydrochlo-ride (Marcaine) in the trauma bay, followed by thoracic wall pain catheters.112 Epidural anesthesia is reserved for multiple segmen-tal fractures. Persistent hemorrhage from a chest tube after blunt trauma most often is due to injured intercostal arteries; for unusual persistent bleeding (see Table 7-10), thoracotomy with direct liga-tion or angioembolization may be required to arrest hemorrhage. In cases of extensive flail chest segments, markedly displaced bicortical rib fractures, or loss of 20% of the thoracic volume, open reduction and internal fixation of the fracture with plates may be warranted. Chest wall defects, particularly those seen with open pneumothorax, are repaired using local approximation of tissues or tissue transfer for coverage. Scapular and sternal fractures rarely require operative intervention but are markers for significant tho-racoabdominal force during injury; significant displacement may benefit from sternal plating (Fig. 7-59). Careful examination and imaging should exclude associated injuries, including blunt cardiac injury and descending BAI. On the other hand, clavicle fractures are often isolated injuries and should be managed with pain control and immobilization. The exception is posterior dislocation of the clavicular head, which may injure the subclavian vessels.Blunt diaphragmatic injuries usually result in a linear tear, and most injuries are large, whereas penetrating injuries are variable in size and location depending on the agent of injury. Regardless of the etiology, acute injuries are usually repaired through an abdominal approach to manage potential associated visceral injury. After delineation of the injury, the chest should be evacuated of all blood and particulate matter, and a thora-costomy tube placed if not previously done. Allis clamps are used to approximate the diaphragmatic edges, and the defect is closed with a running No. 1 polypropylene suture. Occasionally, large avulsions or shotgun wounds with extensive tissue loss will require polypropylene or biologic mesh to bridge the defect. Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   22410/12/18   6:20 PM 225TRAUMACHAPTER 7Alternatively, transposition of the diaphragm cephalad one to two intercostal spaces may allow repair without undue tension.73Abdominal InjuriesLiver and Extrahepatic Biliary Tract. The liver’s large size makes it the organ most susceptible to blunt trauma, and it is frequently involved in upper torso penetrating wounds. Nonop-erative management of solid organ injuries is pursued in hemo-dynamically stable patients who do not have overt peritonitis or other indications for laparotomy. Patients with >grade II injuries should be admitted to the SICU with frequent hemodynamic monitoring, determination of hemoglobin, and abdominal exam-ination. The only absolute contraindication to nonoperative management is hemodynamic instability from intraperitoneal hemorrhage. Factors such as high injury grade, large hemo-peritoneum, contrast extravasation, or pseudoaneurysms may predict complications or failure of nonoperative management. Angioembolization and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopan-creatography (ERCP) are useful adjuncts that can improve the success rate of nonoperative management.113,114 The indication for angiography to control hepatic hemorrhage is transfusion of 4 units of RBCs in 6 hours or 6 units of RBCs in 24 hours attributable to the liver.In the 15% of patients for whom emergent laparotomy is mandated, the primary goal is to arrest hemorrhage. Initial control of hemorrhage is best accomplished using perihepatic packing and manual compression. The edges of the liver laceration should be opposed for local pressure control of bleeding. Hemorrhage from most major hepatic injuries can be controlled with effec-tive perihepatic packing. The right costal margin is elevated, and the pads are strategically placed over and around the bleeding site (see Fig. 7-37). Additional pads should be placed between the liver, diaphragm, and anterior chest wall until the bleeding has been controlled. Sometimes 10 to 15 pads may be required to control the hemorrhage from an extensive right lobar injury. Packing of injuries of the left lobe is not as effective because there is insufficient abdominal and thoracic wall anterior to the left lobe to provide adequate compression with the abdomen open. Fortunately, hemorrhage from the left lobe usually can be controlled by mobilizing the lobe and compressing it between the surgeon’s hands. With extensive injuries and major hemorrhage, a Pringle maneuver should be done immediately. Intermittent release of the Pringle is helpful to attenuate hepatic cellular loss. ABFigure 7-59. Significant sternal displacement (A; arrows) can be reduced and stabilized with sternal plating (B).If the patient has persistent bleeding despite packing, injuries to the hepatic artery, portal vein, and retrohepatic vasculature should be considered. A Pringle maneuver can help delineate the source of hemorrhage. Hemorrhage from hepatic artery and portal vein injuries will halt with the application of a vascular clamp across the portal triad, whereas bleeding from the hepatic veins and the retrohepatic vena cava will continue despite a Pringle maneuver.Injuries of the portal triad vasculature should be addressed immediately. In general, ligation from the celiac axis to the level of the common hepatic artery at the gastroduodenal arterial branch is tolerated due to extensive collaterals, but the proper hepatic artery should be repaired. The right or left hepatic artery, or in urgent situations the portal vein, may be selectively ligated; occasionally, lobar necrosis will necessitate delayed anatomic resection. If the right hepatic artery is ligated, cholecystectomy also should be performed. If the vascular injury is a stab wound with clean transection of the vessels, primary end-to-end repair is done. If the injury is destructive, temporary shunting should be performed followed by interposition reversed saphenous vein graft (RSVG). Blunt avulsions of the portal structures are par-ticularly problematic if located at the hepatic plate, flush with the liver; hemorrhage control at the liver can be attempted with directed packing or Fogarty catheters. If injury to the portal triad vasculature is more proximal, at the superior border of the pancreatic body or even retropancreatic, the pancreas must be transected to gain access for hemorrhage control and repair.If massive venous hemorrhage is seen from behind the liver despite use of the Pringle maneuver, the patient likely has a hepatic vein or retrohepatic vena cava injury. If bleeding can be controlled with perihepatic packing, the packing should be left undisturbed and the patient observed in the SICU. Placement of a hepatic vein stent by interventional radiology may be considered. If bleeding continues despite repeated attempts at packing, then direct repair, with or without hepatic vascular isolation, should be attempted. Three techniques have been used to accomplish hepatic vascular isolation: (a) direct repair with suprahepatic and infrahepatic clamping of the vena cava and stapled assisted parenchymal resection115; (b) temporary shunting of the retrohe-patic vena cava; and (c) venovenous bypass (Fig. 7-60).116A number of methods for the definitive control of hepatic parenchymal hemorrhage have been developed. Minor lac-erations may be controlled with manual compression applied directly to the injury site. Topical hemostatic techniques include Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   22510/12/18   6:20 PM 226BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ithe use of an electrocautery (with the device set at 100 watts), argon beam coagulator, microcrystalline collagen, thrombin-soaked gelatin foam sponge, fibrin glue, and BioGlue. Suturing of the hepatic parenchyma with a blunt tipped 0 chromic suture (e.g., a “liver suture”) can be an effective hemostatic technique. A running suture is used to approximate the edges of shal-low lacerations, whereas deeper lacerations are approximated using interrupted horizontal mattress sutures placed parallel to the edge of the laceration. When the suture is tied, tension is adequate when visible hemorrhage ceases or the liver blanches around the suture. Caution must be used to prevent hepatic necrosis. This technique of placing large liver sutures controls bleeding through reapproximation of the liver laceration rather than direct ligation of bleeding vessels. Aggressive finger frac-ture to identify bleeding vessels followed by individual clip or suture ligation was advocated previously but currently has a limited role in hemostasis. Hepatic lobar arterial ligation may be appropriate for patients with recalcitrant arterial hemorrhage from deep within the liver and is a reasonable alternative to a deep hepatotomy, particularly in unstable patients. Omen-tum can be used to fill large defects in the liver. The tongue of omentum not only obliterates potential dead space with viable tissue but also provides an excellent source of macrophages. Additionally, the omentum can provide buttressing support for parenchymal sutures.Translobar penetrating injuries are particularly challeng-ing because the extent of the injury cannot be fully visualized. As discussed in “Damage Control Surgery,” options include intraparenchymal tamponade with a Foley catheter or balloon occlusion (see Fig. 7-49).117 If tamponade is successful with either modality, the balloon is left inflated for 24 to 48 hours Figure 7-60. Venovenous bypass permits hepatic vascular isolation with continued venous return to the heart. IMV = inferior mesenteric vein; IVC = inferior vena cava; SMV = superior mesenteric vein.followed by sequential deflation and removal at a second lapa-rotomy. Hepatotomy with ligation of individual bleeders occa-sionally may be required; however, division of the overlying viable hepatic tissue may cause considerable blood loss in the coagulopathic patient. Finally, angioembolization is an effective adjunct in any of these scenarios and should be considered early in the course of treatment.Several centers have reported patients with devastat-ing hepatic injuries or necrosis of the entire liver who have undergone successful hepatic transplantation.118 Clearly this is dramatic therapy, and the patient must have all other injuries delineated, particularly those of the central nervous system, and have an excellent chance of survival excluding the hepatic injury. Because donor availability will limit such procedures, hepatic transplantation for trauma will continue to be performed only in extraordinary circumstances.Cholecystectomy is performed for injuries of the gallblad-der and after operative ligation of the right hepatic artery. Inju-ries of the extrahepatic bile ducts are a challenge due to their small size and thin walls. Because of the proximity of other portal structures and the vena cava, associated vascular inju-ries are common. These factors may preclude primary repair. Small lacerations with no accompanying loss or devitalization of adjacent tissue can be treated by the insertion of a T-tube through the wound or by lateral suturing using 6-0 monofila-ment absorbable suture. Virtually all transections and any injury associated with significant tissue loss will require a Roux-en-Y choledochojejunostomy. The anastomosis is performed using a single-layer interrupted technique with 5-0 monofilament absorbable suture. To reduce anastomotic tension, the jejunum should be sutured to the areolar tissue of the hepatic pedicle or porta hepatis. Injuries of the hepatic ducts are almost impos-sible to satisfactorily repair under emergent circumstances. One approach is to intubate the duct for external drainage and attempt a repair when the patient recovers or attempt stenting via ERC. Alternatively, the duct can be ligated if the opposite lobe is normal and uninjured.Patients undergoing perihepatic packing for extensive liver injuries typically are returned to the OR for pack removal 24 hours after initial injury. Earlier exploration may be indi-cated in patients with evidence of ongoing hemorrhage. Signs of rebleeding are usually conspicuous, and include a falling hemoglobin, accumulation of blood clots under the temporary abdominal closure device, and bloody output from drains; the magnitude of hemorrhage is reflected in ongoing hemodynamic instability and metabolic monitoring. Postoperative hemorrhage should be reevaluated in the OR once the patient’s coagulopa-thy is corrected. Alternatively, angioembolization is appropri-ate for complex injuries. Patients with hepatic ischemia due to prolonged intraoperative use of the Pringle maneuver have an expected elevation but subsequent resolution of transaminase levels, whereas patients requiring hepatic artery ligation may have frank hepatic necrosis. Although febrile patients should be evaluated for infectious complications, patients with complex hepatic injuries typically have intermittent “liver fever” for the first 5 days after injury.Aside from hemorrhage and hepatic necrosis, additional complications after significant hepatic trauma include bilomas, arterial pseudoaneurysms, and biliary fistulas (Fig. 7-61). Bilomas are loculated collections of bile, which may or may not be infected. If infected, they should be treated like an abscess via percutaneous drainage. Although small, sterile bilomas Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   22610/12/18   6:20 PM 227TRAUMACHAPTER 7Figure 7-61. Complications after hepatic trauma include bilomas (A; arrow), hepatic duct injuries (B), and hepatic necrosis after hepatic artery ligation or embolization (C).eventually will be reabsorbed, larger fluid collections should be drained. Biliary ascites, due to the disruption of a major bile duct, often requires reoperation and wide drainage. Primary repair of the injured intrahepatic duct is unlikely to be success-ful. Resectional debridement is indicated for the removal of peripheral portions of nonviable hepatic parenchyma.Pseudoaneurysms and biliary fistulas are rare complica-tions in patients with hepatic injuries. Because hemorrhage from hepatic injuries often is treated without isolating individ-ual bleeding vessels, arterial pseudoaneurysms may develop, with the potential for rupture. Rupture into a bile duct results in hemobilia, which is characterized by intermittent episodes of right upper quadrant pain, upper GI hemorrhage, and jaun-dice. If the aneurysm ruptures into a portal vein, portal venous hypertension with bleeding esophageal varices may occur. Either scenario is best managed with hepatic arteriography and embolization. Biliovenous fistulas, causing jaundice due to rapid increases in serum bilirubin levels, should be treated with ERCP and sphincterotomy. Rarely, a biliary fistulous commu-nication will form with intrathoracic structures in patients with associated diaphragm injuries, resulting in a bronchobiliary or pleurobiliary fistula. Due to the pressure differential between the biliary tract (positive) and the pleural cavity (negative), the majority require operative closure. Occasionally, endoscopic sphincterotomy with stent placement will be required to address the pressure differential, and the pleurobiliary fistula will close spontaneously.Spleen. Until the 1970s, splenectomy was considered manda-tory for all splenic injuries. Recognition of the immune function of the spleen refocused efforts on operative splenic salvage in the 1980s.119,120 After demonstrated success in pediatric patients, nonoperative management has become the preferred means of splenic salvage for all patients. The identification of contrast extravasation as a risk factor for failure of nonoperative man-agement led to liberal use of angioembolization. The role of selective angioembolization (SAE) continues to be defined, but appears warranted in high grade injuries, particularly those with contrast blush.121 It is clear, however, that up to 15% to 20% of patients with splenic trauma warrant early splenectomy and that failure of nonoperative management often represents inappro-priate patient selection.122,123 Indications for early intervention in adults include initiation of blood transfusion within the first 12 hours and hemodynamic instability. Unlike hepatic injuries, which usually rebleed within 48 hours, delayed hemorrhage or rupture of the spleen can occur up to weeks after injury.Splenic injuries are managed operatively by splenectomy, partial splenectomy, or splenic repair (splenorrhaphy), based on the extent of the injury and the physiologic condition of the patient. Splenectomy is indicated for significant hilar injuries, pulverized splenic parenchyma, or any >grade II injury in a patient with coagulopathy or multiple life-threatening inju-ries. The authors use autotransplantation of splenic implants (Fig. 7-62) to achieve partial immunocompetence in younger patients who do not have an associated enteric injury. Drains are not used. Partial splenectomy can be employed in patients in whom only the superior or inferior pole has been injured. Hem-orrhage from the raw splenic edge is controlled with horizontal mattress sutures, with gentle compression of the parenchyma (Fig. 7-63). During splenorrhaphy hemostasis is achieved by topical methods (electrocautery; argon beam coagulation; appli-cation of thrombin-soaked gelatin foam sponges, fibrin glue, or BioGlue), envelopment of the injured spleen in absorbable mesh, and pledgeted suture repair.After splenectomy or splenorrhaphy, postoperative hemor-rhage may be due to an improperly ligated or unrecognized short gastric artery, or recurrent bleeding from the splenic parenchyma if splenic repair was used. An immediate postsplenectomy Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   22710/12/18   6:20 PM 228BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iincrease in platelets and WBCs is normal; however, beyond postoperative day 5, a WBC count above 15,000/mm3 and a platelet/WBC ratio of <20 are associated with sepsis and should prompt a thorough search for underlying infection.124 A com-mon infectious complication after splenectomy is a subphrenic abscess, which should be managed with percutaneous drain-age. Additional sources of morbidity include a concurrent or unrecognized iatrogenic injury to the pancreatic tail during rapid splenectomy resulting in pancreatic ascites or fistula, or gastric perforation during short gastric vessel ligation. Enthusiasm for splenic salvage was driven by the rare, but often fatal, compli-cation of overwhelming postsplenectomy sepsis. Overwhelm-ing postsplenectomy sepsis is caused by encapsulated bacteria, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and Neis-seria meningitidis, which are resistant to antimicrobial treat-ment. In patients undergoing splenectomy, prophylaxis against these bacteria is provided via vaccines administered optimally at >14 days postinjury.125Stomach and Small Intestine. Little controversy exists regarding the repair of injuries to the stomach or small bowel because of a rich blood supply. Gastric wounds can be oversewn with a running single-layer suture line or closed with a stapler. If a single-layer closure is chosen, full-thickness bites should be taken to ensure hemostasis from the well-vascularized gastric Figure 7-63. Interrupted pledgeted sutures may effectively control hemorrhage from the cut edge of the spleen.Figure 7-62. Autologous splenic transplantation is performed by placing sections of splenic parenchyma, 40 × 40 × 3 mm in size, into pouches in the greater omentum.wall. The most commonly missed gastric injury is the posterior wound of a through and through penetrating injury. Injuries also can be overlooked if the wound is located within the mesen-tery of the lesser curvature or high in the fundus. To delineate a questionable injury, the stomach can be digitally occluded at the pylorus while methylene blue-colored saline is instilled via a nasogastric (NG) tube. Alternatively, air can be introduced via the NG tube with the abdomen filled with saline. Partial gastrectomy may be required for destructive injuries, with resec-tions of the distal antrum or pylorus reconstructed using a Bill-roth procedure. Patients with injuries that damage both Latarjet nerves or vagi should undergo a drainage procedure (see Chap-ter 26). Small intestine injuries can be repaired using a trans-verse running 3-0 PDS suture if the injury is less than one-third the circumference of the bowel. Destructive injuries or multiple penetrating injuries occurring close together are treated with segmental resection followed by end-to-end anastomosis using a continuous, single-layer 3-0 polypropylene suture.55 Mesenteric injuries may result in an ischemic segment of intestine, which mandates resection.Following repair of GI tract injuries, patients may develop a postoperative ileus. Return of bowel function is indicated by a decrease in gastrostomy or nasogastric tube output. The topic of nutrition is well covered in other chapters (see Chapter 2), but a few issues warrant mention. Multiple studies have con-firmed the importance of early total enteral nutrition (TEN) in the trauma population, particularly its impact in reducing septic complications.126 The route of enteral feedings (stomach vs. small bowel) tends to be less important because gut toler-ance appears equivalent unless there is upper GI tract pathol-ogy. Although early enteral nutrition is the goal, evidence of bowel function should be apparent before advancing to goal tube feedings. Overzealous jejunal feeding can lead to small bowel necrosis in the patient recovering from profound shock. Patients undergoing monitoring for nonoperative manage-ment of grade III or higher solid organ injuries should receive nothing by mouth for at least 48 hours in case they require an operation. Although there is general reluctance to initiate TEN in patients with an open abdomen, a recent multicenter trial demonstrates that TEN in the postinjury open abdomen is feasible.127 For those patients without a bowel injury, TEN was associated with higher fascial closure rates, decreased Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   22810/12/18   6:21 PM 229TRAUMACHAPTER 7complications, and decreased mortality. TEN in patients with bowel injuries does not appear to alter fascial closure rates, complications, or mortality; hence, EN appears to be neither advantageous nor detrimental in these patients. Once resuscita-tion is complete, initiation of TEN, even at trophic levels (20 mL/h), should be considered in all injured patients with an open abdomen.Duodenum and Pancreas. The spectrum of injuries to the duodenum includes hematomas, perforation (blunt blow-outs, lacerations from stab wounds, or blast injury from gunshot wounds), and combined pancreaticoduodenal injuries. The majority of duodenal hematomas are managed nonoperatively with nasogastric suction and parenteral nutrition. Patients with suspected associated perforation, suggested by clinical deterio-ration or imaging with retroperitoneal free air or contrast extrav-asation, should undergo operative exploration. A marked drop in nasogastric tube output heralds resolution of the hematoma, which typically occurs within 2 weeks; repeat imaging to con-firm these clinical findings is optional. If the patient shows no clinical or radiographic improvement within 3 weeks, operative evaluation is warranted.Small duodenal perforations or lacerations should be treated by primary repair using a running single-layer suture of 3-0 monofilament.128 The wound should be closed in a direc-tion that results in the largest residual lumen. Challenges arise when there is a substantial loss of duodenal tissue. Extensive injuries of the first portion of the duodenum (proximal to the duct of Santorini) can be repaired by debridement and end-to-end anastomosis because of the mobility and rich blood supply of the distal gastric atrium and pylorus. In contrast, the second portion is tethered to the head of the pancreas by its blood supply and the ducts of Wirsung and Santorini; therefore, no more than 1 cm of duodenum can be mobilized away from the pancreas. Moreover, suture repair using an end-to-end anastomosis in the second portion often results in an unacceptably narrow lumen. Therefore, defects in the second portion of the duodenum should be “patched” with a Roux-en-Y duodenojejunostomy. Duodenal injuries with tissue loss distal to the papilla of Vater and proximal to the superior mesenteric vessels are best treated by Roux-en-Y duodenojejunostomy with the distal portion of the duodenum oversewn (Fig. 7-64). In particular, injuries in the distal third and fourth portions of the duodenum (behind the mesenteric vessels) should be resected, and a duodenojejunostomy should be per-formed on the D3 side of the superior mesenteric vessels.Optimal management of pancreatic trauma is determined by where the parenchymal damage is located and whether the intra-pancreatic common bile duct and main pancreatic duct remain intact. Patients with pancreatic contusions (defined as injuries that leave the ductal system intact) can be treated nonoperatively or with closed suction drainage if undergoing laparotomy for other indications. Patients with proximal pancreatic injuries, defined as those that lie to the right of the superior mesenteric vessels, are also managed with closed suction drainage.129 In contrast, distal pancreatic injuries are managed based upon ductal integrity. Pan-creatic duct disruption can be identified through direct exploration of the parenchymal laceration, operative pancreatography, ERCP, or magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography. Patients with distal ductal disruption undergo distal pancreatectomy, preferably with splenic preservation.Injuries to the pancreatic head add substantial complex-ity because the intrapancreatic portion of the common bile duct Figure 7-64. Roux-en-Y duodenojejunostomy is used to treat duo-denal injuries between the papilla of Vater and superior mesenteric vessels when tissue loss precludes primary repair.traverses this area and often converges with the pancreatic duct. In contrast to diagnosis of pancreatic duct injuries, identifica-tion of intrapancreatic common bile duct disruption is relatively simple. The first method is to squeeze the gallbladder and look for bile leaking from the pancreatic wound. Otherwise, cholan-giography, optimally via the cystic duct, is diagnostic. Definitive treatment of this injury entails division of the common bile duct superior to the first portion of the duodenum, with ligation of the distal duct and reconstruction with a Roux-en-Y choledochojeju-nostomy. For injuries to the head of the pancreas that involve the main pancreatic duct but not the intrapancreatic bile duct, there are few options. Distal pancreatectomy alone is rarely indicated due to the extended resection of normal gland and the resultant risk of pancreatic insufficiency. Central pancreatectomy pre-serves the common bile duct, and mobilization of the pancreatic body permits drainage into a posterior wall pancreaticogas-trostomy or a Roux-en-Y pancreaticojejunostomy (Fig. 7-65). Although this approach avoids a pancreaticoduodenectomy (Whipple procedure), the complexity may make the pancre-aticoduodenectomy more appropriate in patients with multiple injuries and is usually done in a damage control scenario. Some injuries of the pancreatic head do not involve either the pancre-atic or common bile duct; if no clear ductal injury is present, drains are placed. Rarely, patients sustain destructive injuries to the head of the pancreas or combined pancreaticoduodenal inju-ries that require pancreaticoduodenectomy. Examples of such injuries include transection of both the intrapancreatic bile duct and the main pancreatic duct in the head of the pancreas, avul-sion of the papilla of Vater from the duodenum, and destruction Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   22910/12/18   6:21 PM 230BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iof the entire second portion of the duodenum. In these cases of extensive injuries, damage control principles are often employed.In contrast to proximal injuries, pancreatic resection con-tinues to be advocated for major ductal disruption in the more distal pancreas. Several options exist for treating injuries of the pancreatic body and tail. In stable patients, spleen-preserving distal pancreatectomy should be performed. An alternative, which preserves both the spleen and distal transected end of the pancreas, is either a Roux-en-Y pancreaticojejunostomy or pan-creaticogastrostomy. If the patient is physiologically compro-mised, distal pancreatectomy with splenectomy is the preferred approach. Regardless of the choice of definitive procedure, the pancreatic duct in the proximal edge of transected pancreas should be individually ligated or occluded with a TA stapler. Application of fibrin glue over the stump may be advantageous.Pyloric exclusion may be used to divert the GI stream after high-risk, complex duodenal repairs, particularly with adjacent pancreatic injuries (Fig. 7-66).130 If the duodenal repair breaks down, the resultant fistula is an end fistula, which is easier to manage and more likely to close than a lateral fistula. To per-form a pyloric exclusion, first a gastrostomy is made on the greater curvature near the pylorus. The pylorus is then grasped with a Babcock clamp, via the gastrostomy, and oversewn with an O polypropylene suture. A gastrojejunostomy restores GI tract continuity. Vagotomy is not necessary because a risk of marginal ulceration has not been documented. Perhaps surpris-ingly, the sutures maintain diversion for only 3 to 4 weeks. Alternatively, the most durable pyloric closure is a double exter-nal staple line across the pylorus using a TA stapler.Complications should be expected after major pancre-aticoduodenal injuries.131 Delayed hemorrhage is rare but may Figure 7-65. For injuries of the pancreatic head that involve the pancreatic duct but spare the common bile duct, central pancreatic resection with Roux-en-Y pancreaticojejunostomy prevents pancreatic insufficiency.occur with pancreatic necrosis or abdominal infection; this usu-ally can be managed by angioembolization. If closed suction drains have been inserted for major pancreatic trauma, these should remain in place until the patient is tolerating an oral diet or enteral nutrition. Pancreatic fistula is diagnosed after post-operative day 5 in patients with drain output of >30 mL/d and a drain amylase level three times the serum value. Pancreatic fistula develops in over 20% of patients with combined injuries and should be managed similar to fistulas after elective surgery (see Chapter 33). Similarly, a duodenal fistula, presumptively an end fistula if a pyloric exclusion has been done, will typi-cally heal in 6 to 8 weeks with adequate drainage and control of intra-abdominal sepsis. Pancreatic pseudocysts in patients man-aged nonoperatively suggest a missed injury, and ERCP should be done to evaluate the integrity of the pancreatic duct. Late pseudocysts may be a complication of operative management and are treated much like those in patients with pancreatitis (see Chapter 33). Intra-abdominal abscesses are common and rou-tinely managed with percutaneous drainage.Colon and Rectum. Currently, three methods for treating colonic injuries are used: primary repair, end colostomy, and primary repair with diverting loop ileostomy. Primary repairs include lateral suture repair or resection of the damaged seg-ment with reconstruction by ileocolostomy or colocolostomy. All suturing and anastomoses are performed using a running single-layer technique (Fig. 7-67).55 The advantage of defini-tive treatment must be balanced against the possibility of anas-tomotic leakage if suture lines are created under suboptimal conditions. Alternatively, although use of an end colostomy requires a second operation, an unprotected suture line with Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   23010/12/18   6:21 PM 231TRAUMACHAPTER 7Figure 7-66. A. Pyloric exclusion is used to treat combined injuries of the duodenum and the head of the pancreas as well as isolated duodenal injuries when the duodenal repair is less than optimal. B and C. The pylorus is oversewn through a gastrotomy, which is subsequently used to create a gastrojejunostomy. The authors frequently use operatively placed feeding jejunostomy tube feedings for these patients.Figure 7-67. Technique for bowel repair and anastomosis. A. The running, single-layer suture is started at the mesenteric border. B. Stitches are spaced 3 to 4 mm from the edge of the bowel and advanced 3 to 4 mm, including all layers except the mucosa. C. The continuous suture is tied near the antimesenteric border.Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   23110/12/18   6:21 PM 232BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IFigure 7-68. Loop colostomy will completely divert the fecal flow, allowing the low rectal injury to heal. For extensive wounds, presacral drains are inserted through a perianal incision (box) and advanced along Waldeyer’s fascia (dashed line).the potential for breakdown is avoided. Numerous large ret-rospective and several prospective studies have now clearly demonstrated that primary repair is safe and effective in virtu-ally all patients with penetrating wounds.132 Colostomy is still appropriate in a few patients, but the current dilemma is how to select which patients should undergo the procedure. Cur-rently, the overall physiologic status of the patient, rather than local factors, directs decision making. Patients with devastating left colon injuries requiring damage control have a leak rate of over 40%, and may be candidates for temporary colostomy.133 Diverting ileostomy with colocolostomy is another option for these high-risk patients.Rectal injuries are similar to colonic injuries with respect to the ecology of the luminal contents, overall structure, and blood supply of the wall, but access to extraperitoneal injuries is limited due to the surrounding bony pelvis. Therefore, indirect treatment with intestinal diversion usually is required. The current options are loop ileostomy and sigmoid loop colostomy. The latter is preferred because it is quick and easy to perform, and provides essentially total fecal diversion. For sigmoid colostomy, technical elements include: (a) adequate mobilization of the sigmoid colon so that the loop will rest on the abdominal wall without tension, (b) maintenance of the spur of the colostomy (the common wall of the proximal and distal limbs after maturation) above the level of the skin with a one-half-inch Penrose drain or similar device, (c) longitudinal incision in the tenia coli, and (d) immediate matu-ration in the OR (Fig. 7-68). If the injury is accessible (e.g., in the posterior intraperitoneal portion of the rectum), repair of the injury should also be attempted. However, it is not necessary to explore the extraperitoneal rectum to repair a distal perforation. If the rectal injury is extensive, another option is to divide the rectum at the level of the injury, oversew or staple the distal rec-tal pouch if possible, and create an end colostomy (Hartmann’s procedure). Extensive injuries may warrant presacral drainage with Penrose drains placed along Waldeyer’s fascia via a peri-anal incision (see Fig. 7-68), but routine presacral drainage and rectal washout is no longer practiced. In rare instances in which destructive injuries are present, an abdominoperineal resection may be necessary to avert lethal pelvic sepsis.Complications related to colorectal injuries include intra-abdominal abscess, fecal fistula, wound infection, and stomal complications. Intra-abdominal abscesses occur in approxi-mately 10% of patients, and most are managed with percu-taneous drainage. Fistulas occur in 1% to 3% of patients and usually present as an abscess or wound infection with subse-quent continuous drainage of fecal output; the majority will heal spontaneously with routine care (see Chapter 29). Stomal com-plications (necrosis, stenosis, obstruction, and prolapse) occur in 5% of patients and may require either immediate or delayed reoperation. Stomal necrosis should be carefully monitored because spread beyond the mucosa may result in septic compli-cations, including necrotizing fasciitis of the abdominal wall. Penetrating injuries that involve both the rectum and adjacent bony structures are prone to development of osteomyelitis. Bone biopsy is performed for diagnosis and bacteriologic analysis, and treatment entails long-term IV antibiotic therapy and occa-sionally debridement.Abdominal and Pelvic Vasculature. Injury to the major arter-ies and veins in the abdomen can be a technical challenge.132-137 Although penetrating trauma indiscriminately affects all blood vessels, blunt trauma most commonly involves renal vasculature and occasionally the abdominal aorta. Patients with a penetrat-ing aortic wound who survive to reach the OR frequently have a contained hematoma within the retroperitoneum. Due to lack of mobility of the abdominal aorta, few injuries are amenable to primary repair. Supraceliac aortic wounds are particularly challenging due to the need for proximal control. Small lateral perforations may be controlled with 4-0 polypropylene suture or a PTFE patch, but end-to-end interposition grafting with a PTFE tube graft is the most common repair. Blunt injuries are typi-cally extensive intimal tears of the infrarenal aorta with resultant thrombosis, and are exposed via a direct approach; most require an interposition graft. To avoid future vascular-enteric fistulas, the vascular suture lines should be covered with omentum.Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   23210/12/18   6:21 PM 233TRAUMACHAPTER 7Penetrating wounds to the superior mesenteric artery (SMA) are typically encountered after exploration for a gun-shot wound, with “black bowel” and associated supramesocolic hematoma being pathognomonic. Blunt avulsions of the SMA are rare but should be considered in patients with a seat belt sign who have midepigastric pain or tenderness and associated hypotension. For injuries of the SMA, temporary damage con-trol with a Pruitt-Inahara shunt can prevent extensive bowel necrosis. For definitive repair, end-to-end interposition RSVG from the proximal SMA to the SMA past the point of injury can be performed if there is no associated pancreatic injury. Alterna-tively, if the patient has an associated pancreatic injury, the graft should be tunneled from the distal aorta beneath the duodenum to the distal SMA. For proximal SMV injuries, digital compres-sion for hemorrhage control is followed by attempted venorrha-phy; ligation is an option in a life-threatening situation, but the resultant bowel edema requires aggressive fluid resuscitation. Temporary abdominal closure and a second-look operation to evaluate bowel viability should be done.Transpelvic gunshot wounds or blunt injuries with associ-ated pelvic fractures are the most common scenarios in patients with iliac artery injuries. As with abdominal vascular injuries, a Pruitt-Inahara shunt can be used for temporary shunting of the vessel for damage control. Definitive interposition graft-ing with excision of the injured segment is appropriate (see “Vascular Repair Techniques”). Careful monitoring for distal embolic events and reperfusion injury necessitating fasciotomy is imperative.In general, outcome after pelvic vascular injuries is related to (a) the technical success of the vascular reconstruction and (b) associated soft tissue and nerve injuries. Vascular repairs rarely fail after the first 12 hours, whereas soft tissue infection is a limb threat for several weeks. Following aortic interposition grafting, the patient’s SBP should not exceed 120 mmHg for at least the first 72 hours postoperatively. Patients requiring ligation of an inferior vena cava injury often develop marked bilateral lower extremity edema. To limit the associated morbidity, the patient’s legs should be wrapped with elastic bandages from the toes to the hips and elevated. For superior mesenteric vein injuries, either ligation or thrombosis after venorrhaphy results in marked bowel edema; fluid resuscitation should be aggressive and abdominal pressure monitoring routine in these patients. Prosthetic graft infections are rare complications, but prevention of bacteremia is imperative82; administration of antibiotics perioperatively and treatment of secondary infections is indicated. Long-term arte-rial graft complications such as stenosis or pseudoaneurysms are uncommon, and routine graft surveillance rarely is performed. Consequently, long-term administration of antiplatelet agents or antithrombotics is not routine.Genitourinary Tract. Historically, when undergoing lapa-rotomy for trauma, all penetrating wounds to the kidneys were explored; recently, routine exploration of Gerota’s fascia has been questioned.138,139 Parenchymal renal injuries are treated with hemostatic and reconstructive techniques similar to those used for injuries of the liver and spleen: topical methods (electrocautery; argon beam coagulation; application of thrombin-soaked gela-tin foam sponge, fibrin glue, or BioGlue) and pledgeted suture repair. However, two caveats are recognized: the collecting sys-tem should be closed separately, and the renal capsule should be preserved to close over the repair of the collecting system (Fig. 7-69). Renal vascular injuries are common after penetrat-ing trauma and may be deceptive due to tamponade by Gerota’s Figure 7-69. When renorrhaphy is undertaken, effective repair is assisted by attention to several key points: A. Vascular occlusion controls bleeding and permits adequate visualization. B. The renal capsule is carefully preserved. C. The collecting system is closed separately with absorbable suture. D. The preserved capsule is closed over the collecting system repair.Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   23310/12/18   6:21 PM 234BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ifascia, which results in delayed hemorrhage. Arterial reconstruc-tion using graft interposition should be attempted within 5 hours of injury for renal preservation. For destructive parenchymal or irreparable renovascular injuries, nephrectomy may be the only option; a normal contralateral kidney must be palpated because unilateral renal agenesis occurs in 0.1% of patients.Over 90% of blunt renal injuries are treated nonoperatively. Hematuria typically resolves within a few days with bed rest, although rarely bleeding is so persistent that bladder irrigation to dispel blood clots is warranted. Persistent gross hematuria may require embolization, whereas urinomas can be drained percutane-ously. Operative intervention after blunt trauma is limited to reno-vascular injuries and destructive parenchymal injuries that result in hypotension. The renal arteries and veins are uniquely susceptible to traction injury caused by blunt trauma. As the artery is stretched, the inelastic intima and media may rupture, which causes throm-bus formation and resultant stenosis or occlusion. The success rate for renal artery repair is limited, but an attempt is reasonable if the injury is <5 hours old or if the patient has a solitary kidney or bilat-eral injuries.140 Image-guided endoluminal stent placement is now employed for many of these injuries recognized by CT scanning. Reconstruction after blunt renal injuries may be difficult, however, because the injury is typically at the level of the aorta. If repair is not possible within this time frame, leaving the kidney in situ does not necessarily lead to the late sequelae of hypertension or abscess formation. The renal vein may be torn or completely avulsed from the vena cava due to blunt trauma. Typically, the large hematoma causes hypotension, which leads to operative intervention. During laparotomy for blunt trauma, expanding or pulsatile perinephric hematomas should be explored. If necessary, emergent vascular control can be obtained by placing a curved vascular clamp across the hilum from an inferior approach. Techniques of repair and hemostasis are similar to those described earlier.Injuries to the ureters are uncommon but may occur in patients with pelvic fractures and penetrating trauma. An injury may not be identified until a complication (i.e., a urinoma) becomes apparent. If an injury is suspected during operative exploration but is not clearly identified, methylene blue or indigo carmine is administered IV with observation for extrava-sation. Injuries are repaired using 5-0 absorbable monofilament, and mobilization of the kidney may reduce tension on the anas-tomosis. Distal ureteral injuries can be treated by reimplanta-tion facilitated with a psoas hitch and/or Boari flap. In damage control circumstances, the ureter can be ligated on both sides of the injury and a nephrostomy tube placed.Bladder injuries are subdivided into those with intraperito-neal extravasation and those with extraperitoneal extravasation. Ruptures or lacerations of the intraperitoneal bladder are opera-tively closed with a running, single-layer, 3-0 absorbable mono-filament suture. Laparoscopic repair is becoming common in patients not requiring laparotomy for other injuries. Extraperito-neal ruptures are treated nonoperatively with bladder decompres-sion for 2 weeks. Urethral injuries are managed by bridging the defect with a Foley catheter, with or without direct suture repair. Strictures are not uncommon but can be managed electively.Female Reproductive Tract. Gynecologic injuries are rare. Occasionally the vaginal wall will be lacerated by a bone frag-ment from a pelvic fracture. Although repair is not mandated, it should be performed if physiologically feasible. More impor-tant, however, is recognition of the open fracture, need for possible drainage, and potential for pelvic sepsis. Penetrating injuries to the vagina, uterus, fallopian tubes, and ovaries are also uncommon, and routine hemostatic techniques are used. Repair of a transected fallopian tube can be attempted but prob-ably is unjustified because a suboptimal repair will increase the risk of tubal pregnancy. Transection at the injury site with proximal ligation and distal salpingectomy is a more prudent approach.Pelvic Fracture Hemorrhage ControlPatients with pelvic fractures who are hemodynamically unsta-ble are a diagnostic and therapeutic challenge for the trauma team. These injuries often occur in conjunction with other life-threatening injuries, and there is no universal agreement among clinicians on management. Current management algorithms in the United States incorporate variable time frames for bony stabilization and fixation, as well as hemorrhage control by preperitoneal pelvic packing and/or angioembolization. Early institution of a multidisciplinary approach with the involvement of trauma surgeons, orthopedic surgeons, interventional radiolo-gists, the director of the blood bank, and anesthesiologists is imperative due to high associated mortality rates (Fig. 7-70).Evaluation in the ED focuses on identification of injuries mandating operative intervention (e.g., massive hemothorax or hemoperitoneum) and injuries related to the pelvic fracture that alter management (e.g., injuries to the iliac artery, rectum, ure-thra, or bladder). Immediate temporary stabilization with sheeting of the pelvis or application of commercially available compres-sion devices should be performed in hemodynamically unstable patients. In patients with profound shock who are at high risk based upon mechanism (e.g., autopedestrian accident), pelvic sta-bilization should be done before radiographic confirmation. If the patient’s primary source of bleeding is the fracture-related pelvic hematoma, several options exist for hemorrhage control. Because 85% of bleeding due to pelvic fractures is venous or bony in ori-gin, the authors advocate immediate external fixation and pre-peritoneal pelvic packing.141 Anterior external fixation decreases pelvic volume, which promotes tamponade of venous bleeding and prevents secondary hemorrhage from the shifting of bony ele-ments. Pelvic packing, in which six laparotomy pads (four in chil-dren) are placed directly into the paravesical space through a small anterior suprapubic incision, provides tamponade for the bleeding (Fig. 7-71). Pelvic packing also eliminates the often difficult deci-sion by the trauma surgeon: OR vs. interventional radiology? All patients can be rapidly transported to the OR, and packing can be accomplished in under 30 minutes. In the authors’ experience, this results in hemodynamic stability and abrupt cessation of the need for ongoing blood transfusion in the majority of cases.141 Patients also can undergo additional procedures such as laparotomy, tho-racotomy, external fixation of extremity fractures, fasciotomy, revascularization, or craniotomy. Following pelvic packing, angi-ography is reserved for patients with evidence of ongoing pelvic bleeding after admission to the SICU (>4 units of RBCs in the first 12 postoperative hours after the coagulopathy is corrected). Patients undergo standard posttrauma resuscitative SICU care, and the pelvic packs are removed within 48 hours; prior to unpacking, however, the patient’s coagulopathy should be corrected to pre-vent the need for repacking of the pelvic space. Repacking of the pelvic space is associated with an infection rate of 47% and should be avoided; directed hemostasis with topical agents, suture repair, or electrocautery at pelvic pack removal should be performed.Another clinical challenge is the open pelvic fracture. In many instances, the wounds are located in the perineum, and the risk of pelvic sepsis and osteomyelitis is high. To reduce Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   23410/12/18   6:21 PM 235TRAUMACHAPTER 7the risk of infection, performance of a diverting sigmoid colos-tomy is recommended. The pelvic wound is manually debrided and then irrigated daily with a high-pressure pulsatile irrigation system until granulation tissue covers the wound. The wound is then left to heal by secondary intention with a wound vacuum-assisted wound closure (VAC) device.Extremity Vascular Injuries, Fractures, and Compartment SyndromesPatients with injured extremities often require a multidisci-plinary approach with involvement of trauma, orthopedic, and plastic surgeons to address vascular injuries, fractures, soft tis-sue injuries, and compartment syndromes. Immediate stabili-zation of fractures or unstable joints is done in the ED using Hare traction, knee immobilizers, or plaster splints. In patients with open fractures, the wound should be covered with povido-neiodine (Betadine)-soaked gauze and antibiotics administered. Options for fracture fixation include external fixation or open reduction and internal fixation with plates or intramedullary nails. Vascular injuries, either isolated or in combination with fractures, require emergent repair. Common combined injuries include clavicle/first rib fractures and subclavian artery injuries, dislocated shoulder/proximal humeral fractures and axillary artery injuries, supracondylar fractures/elbow dislocations and brachial artery injuries, femur fracture and superficial femoral artery injuries, and knee dislocation and popliteal vessel inju-ries. On-table angiography in the OR facilitates rapid interven-tion and is warranted in patients with evidence of limb threat on arrival. Arterial access for on-table lower extremity angiography can be obtained percutaneously at the femoral vessels with a standard arterial catheter, via femoral vessel exposure and direct cannulation, or with superficial femoral artery (SFA) exposure just above the medial knee. Controversy exists regarding which should be done first, fracture fixation or arterial repair. The authors prefer placement of temporary intravascular shunts first to reestablish arterial flow and minimize ischemia during frac-ture treatment, with definitive vascular repair following. Rarely, immediate amputation may be considered due to the severity of orthopedic and neurovascular injuries. This is particularly true if primary nerve transection is present in addition to fracture and arterial injury.142 Collaborative decision making by the trauma, orthopedic, and plastic/reconstructive team is essential.FAST ExamPositiveNegative2 units RBCs/ED trauma bayHD StableHD StableHD StableHD UnstableHD UnstableResuscitate in the SICU + CT scansOperating Room:Exploratory LaparotomyIf Pelvic Hematoma Evident ˜Pelvic Fixation and Pelvic PackingHD UnstableOngoing Transfusion Requirements after Pelvic Packing?(>4 units RBCs from pelvic source with normal coags in 12 hours)NoAngiographySICUYesDenver Health Unstable Pelvic Fracture ManagementResuscitate with 2 L crystalloid – measure base deÿcit – rule out thoracic source – sheet the pelvis.Transfuse fresh frozen plasma (FFP) and RBC 1:2; 1 apheresis unit of platelets for each 5 units RBCs; perform thromboelastography.Immediate notiÿcation: Attending Trauma Surgeon, Attending Orthopedic Surgeon, Operating Room, Blood BankPlace 7Fr Terumo arterial sheath if SBP <90 mmHg; consider REBOA if SBP <80 mmHg Operating Room:Pelvic Fixation and Pelvic PackingReultrasound AbdomenFigure 7-70. Management algorithm for patients with pelvic fractures with hemodynamic instability. CT = computed tomography; ED = emergency department; FAST = focused abdominal sonography for trauma; HD = hemodynamic; PLT = platelets; PRBCs = packed red blood cells; SICU = surgical intensive care unit.Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   23510/12/18   6:21 PM 236BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IOperative intervention for vascular injuries should follow standard principles of repair (see “Vascular Repair Techniques”). For subclavian or axillary artery repairs, 6-mm PTFE graft or RSVG are used depending on the location. Because associated injuries of the brachial plexus are common, a thorough neuro-logic examination of the extremity is mandated before operative intervention. Operative approach for a brachial artery injury is via a medial upper extremity longitudinal incision; proximal control may be obtained at the axillary artery, and an S-shaped exten-sion through the antecubital fossa provides access to the distal brachial artery. The injured vessel segment is excised, and an end-to-end interposition RSVG graft is performed. Upper extremity fasciotomy is rarely required because of the rich collateral per-fusion via the profunda. For SFA injuries, external fixation of the femur typically is performed, followed by end-to-end RSVG of the injured SFA segment. Close monitoring for calf compart-ment syndrome is mandatory. Preferred access to the popliteal space for an acute injury is the medial, one-incision approach with detachment of the semitendinosus, semimembranosus, and gracilis muscles (Fig. 7-72). Another option is a medial approach Figure 7-71. A. Pelvic packing is performed through a 6to 8-cm midline incision made from the pubic symphysis cephalad, with division of the midline fascia. B. The pelvic hematoma often dissects the preperitoneal and paravesical space down to the presacral region, which facilitates packing; alternatively, blunt digital dissection opens the preperitoneal space for packing. C. Three standard surgical laparotomy pads are placed on each side of the bladder, deep within the preperitoneal space; the fascia is closed with an O polydioxanone monofilament suture and the skin with staples.Figure 7-72. A. The popliteal space is commonly accessed using a single medial incision (the detached semitendinosus, semimembranosus, and gracilis muscles are identified by different suture types). B. Alternatively, a medial approach with two incisions may be used. Insertion of a Pruitt-Inahara shunt (arrow) provides temporary restoration of blood flow, which prevents ischemia during fracture treatment.Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   23610/12/18   6:21 PM 237TRAUMACHAPTER 7Table 7-11Arterial vasospasm treatment guidelineStep 1: Intra-arterial alteplase (tissue plasminogen activator) 5 mg/20 mL bolusIf spasm continues, proceed to step 2.Step 2: Intra-arterial nitroglycerin 200 μg/20 mL bolusRepeat same dose once as needed.If spasm continues, proceed to step 3.Step 3: Interarterial verapamil 10 mg/10 mL bolusIf spasm continues, proceed to step 4.Step 4: Interarterial papaverine drip 60 mg/50 mL given over 15 minwith two incisions using a longer RSVG, but this requires interval ligation of the popliteal artery and geniculate branches. Rarely, with open wounds a straight posterior approach with an S-shaped incision can be used. If the patient has an associated popliteal vein injury, this should be repaired first with a PTFE interposition graft while the artery is shunted. For an isolated popliteal artery injury, RSVG is performed with an end-to-end anastomosis. Compart-ment syndrome is common, and presumptive four-compartment fasciotomies are warranted in patients with combined arterial and venous injury. Once the vessel is repaired and restoration of arte-rial flow documented, completion angiography should be done in the OR if there is no palpable distal pulse. Vasoparalysis with verapamil, nitroglycerin, and papaverine may be used to treat vasoconstriction (Table 7-11).Compartment syndromes, which can occur anywhere in the extremities, involve an acute increase in pressure inside a closed space, which impairs blood flow to the structures within. Causes of compartment syndrome include arterial hemorrhage into a compartment, venous ligation or thrombosis, crush inju-ries, and reperfusion injury. In conscious patients, pain is the prominent symptom, and active or passive motion of muscles in the involved compartment increases the pain. Paresthesias may also be described. In the lower extremity, numbness between the first and second toes is the hallmark of early compartment syndrome in the exquisitely sensitive anterior compartment and its enveloped deep peroneal nerve. Progression to paralysis can occur, and loss of pulses is a late sign. In comatose or obtunded patients, the diagnosis is more difficult to secure. In patients with a compatible history and a tense extremity, compartment pressures should be measured with a hand-held Stryker device. Fasciotomy is indicated in patients with a gradient of <30 mmHg (gradient = diastolic pressure − compartment pressure), an abso-lute compartment pressure >30 mmHg, ischemic periods of >6 hours, or combined arterial and venous injuries. The lower extremity is most frequently involved, and compartment release is performed using a two-incision, four-compartment fasciotomy (Fig. 7-73). Of note, the soleus muscle must be detached from the tibia to decompress the deep flexor compartment.SURGICAL INTENSIVE CARE MANAGEMENTPostinjury ResuscitationICU management of the trauma patient, either with direct admis-sion from the ED or after emergent operative intervention, is considered in distinct phases because there are differing goals and priorities. The period of acute resuscitation, typically last-ing for the first 12 to 24 hours after injury, combines several key principles: optimizing tissue perfusion, ensuring normother-mia, and restoring coagulation status.143 There are a multitude of management algorithms aimed at accomplishing these goals, the majority of which involve goal-directed resuscitation with initial volume loading to attain adequate preload, followed by judicious use of inotropic agents or vasopressors.144 Although the optimal hemoglobin level remains debated, during shock resuscitation a hemoglobin level of >10 g/dL is generally accepted to optimize hemostasis and ensure adequate oxygen delivery. After the first 24 hours of resuscitation, a more judicious transfusion trigger of a hemoglobin level of <7 g/dL in the euvolemic patient limits the adverse inflammatory effects of stored RBCs. Recent trends have focused on limiting crystalloid loading. In fact, optimiz-ing crystalloid administration is a challenging aspect of early care (i.e., balancing cardiac performance against generation of an abdominal compartment syndrome and generalized tissue edema). Although early colloid administration is appealing, evi-dence to date does not support this concept.Invasive monitoring with pulmonary artery catheters has been supplanted with specialized catheters that measure arte-rial pulse contour analysis; in mechanically ventilated patients, stroke volume (SV) and continuous cardiac output can be mea-sured. A patient’s volume status may be ascertained by measur-ing the SV following either 10 cc/kg volume bolus or following a passive leg raise, which augments preload by 250 to 500 mL. A change in SV of ≥10% suggests preload responsiveness, and additional resuscitation fluid should be given. Although norepi-nephrine is the agent of choice for patients with low systemic vascular resistance who are unable to maintain a mean arterial pressure of >60 mmHg, patients may have an element of myo-cardial dysfunction requiring inotropic support. The role of rela-tive adrenal insufficiency is another controversial area.Optimal early resuscitation is mandatory and determines when the patient can (a) undergo additional necessary imaging, and (b) be returned to the OR after initial damage control surgery for definitive repair of injuries. Specific goals of resuscitation before repeated “semi-elective” transport include a core tempera-ture of >35°C (95°F), base deficit of <6 mmol/L, and normal coagulation indices. Although correction of metabolic acidosis is desirable, how quickly this should be accomplished requires careful consideration. Adverse sequelae of excessive crystalloid resuscitation include increased intracranial pressure, worsening pulmonary edema, and intra-abdominal visceral and retroperi-toneal edema resulting in secondary abdominal compartment syndrome. Therefore, it should be the overall trend of the resus-citation rather than a rapid reduction of the base deficit that is the goal. The goal is to normalize lactate within 24 hours.145In general, wounds sustained from trauma should be examined daily for progression of healing and signs of infection. Complex soft tissue wounds of the abdomen, such as degloving injuries after blunt trauma (termed Morel-Lavallee lesions146), shotgun wounds, and other destructive blast injuries, are par-ticularly difficult to manage. Following initial debridement of devitalized tissue, wound care includes wet-to-dry dressing changes twice daily or application of a VAC device. Repeated operative debridement may be necessary, and early involvement of the reconstructive surgery service for possible flap cover-age is advised. Midline laparotomy wounds are inspected 48 hours postoperatively by removing the sterile surgical dressing. If an ileostomy or colostomy is required, one should inspect it Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   23710/12/18   6:21 PM 238BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IFigure 7-73. A. The anterior and lateral compartments are approached from a lateral incision, with identification of the fascial raphe between the two compartments. Care must be taken to avoid the superficial peroneal nerve running along the raphe. B. To decompress the deep flexor compartment, which contains the tibial nerve and two of the three arteries to the foot, the soleus muscle must be detached from the tibia.daily to ensure that it is viable. If the patient develops a high-grade fever, the wound should be inspected sooner to exclude an early necrotizing infection. If a wound infection is identified—as evidenced by erythema, pain along the wound, or purulent drainage—the wound should be widely opened by removing skin staples. After ensuring that the midline fascia is intact with digital palpation, the wound is initially managed with wet-to-dry dressing changes. The most common intra-abdominal complica-tions are anastomotic failure and abscess. The choice between percutaneous and operative therapy is based on the location, timing, and extent of the collection.Abdominal Compartment SyndromeThe abdominal compartment syndrome is classified as patho-logic intra-abdominal hypertension due to intra-abdominal injury (primary) or splanchnic reperfusion after massive resus-citation (secondary). Secondary abdominal compartment syn-drome may result from any condition requiring extensive crystalloid resuscitation, including extremity trauma, chest trauma, or even postinjury sepsis. The sources of increased intra-abdominal pressure include bowel edema, ascites, bleed-ing, and packs. A diagnosis of intra-abdominal hypertension cannot reliably be made by physical examination; therefore, it is obtained by measuring the intraperitoneal pressure. The most common technique is to measure the patient’s bladder pressure. Fifty milliliters of saline is instilled into the bladder via the aspi-ration port of the Foley catheter with the drainage tube clamped, and a three-way stopcock and water manometer is placed at the level of the pubic symphysis. Bladder pressure is then measured on the manometer in centimeters of water (Table 7-12) and 10Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   23810/12/18   6:21 PM 239TRAUMACHAPTER 7Table 7-12Abdominal compartment syndrome grading systemBLADDER PRESSUREGRADEmmHgcmH2OI10–1513–20II16–2521–35III26–3536–47IV    >35    >48˜ Renal blood flow˜ UOPHypoxemia ˛ Airway pressures ˜ Compliance ˛ PA pressures ˛ CVP readings˜ CO˜ VEDV˜ SV˛ SVR˛ ICPSplanchnicischemiaExtremityischemiaIncreased abdominal pressureIntrathoracic pressure˛Venous return˜Compression of kidneysFigure 7-74. Abdominal compartment syndrome is defined by the end organ sequelae of intra-abdominal hypertension. CO = cardiac output; CVP = central venous pressure; ICP = intracranial pressure; PA = pulmonary artery; SV = stroke volume; SVR = systemic vascular resistance; UOP = urine output; VEDV = ventricular end diastolic volume.correlated with the physiologic sequelae. Conditions in which the bladder pressure is unreliable include bladder rupture, exter-nal compression from pelvic packing, neurogenic bladder, and adhesive disease.Increased abdominal pressure affects multiple organ systems (Fig. 7-74). Abdominal compartment syndrome, as noted earlier, is defined as intra-abdominal hypertension suf-ficient to produce physiologic deterioration and manifests via such end-organ sequelae as decreased urine output, increased pulmonary inspiratory pressures, decreased cardiac preload, and decreased cardiac output. Because any of these clinical symptoms of abdominal compartment syndrome may be attributed to the primary injury, a heightened awareness of this syndrome must be maintained. Organ fail-ure can occur over a wide range of recorded bladder pres-sures. Generally, no specific bladder pressure prompts therapeutic intervention, except when the pressure is >35 mmHg. Rather, emergent decompression is carried out when intra-abdominal hypertension reaches a level at which end-organ dysfunction occurs. Mortality is directly affected by the timing of decompression, with 70% mortality in patients with a delay in decompression, and nearly uniform mortality in those not undergoing decompression. Decompression is usually performed operatively, either in the ICU if the patient 11is hemodynamically unstable or in the OR. ICU bedside lapa-rotomy is easily accomplished, avoids transport of hemody-namically compromised patients, and requires minimal equipment (e.g., scalpel, suction device, cautery, and dress-ings for temporary abdominal closure). In patients with sig-nificant intra-abdominal fluid as the primary component of abdominal compartment syndrome, rather than bowel or ret-roperitoneal edema, decompression can be accomplished effectively via a percutaneous drain. These patients are iden-tified by bedside ultrasound, and the morbidity of a laparot-omy is avoided. When operative decompression is required with egress of the abdominal contents, temporary coverage is obtained using a fenestrated subfascial 45 × 60 cm sterile drape and Ioban application (see Fig. 7-49).The performance of damage control surgery and recogni-tion of abdominal compartment syndrome have dramatically improved patient survival, but at the cost of an open abdomen. Several management points deserve attention. Despite having a widely open abdomen, patients can develop recurrent abdomi-nal compartment syndrome, which increases their morbidity and mortality; therefore, bladder pressure should be monitored every 4 hours, with significant increases in pressures alerting the clini-cian to the possible need for repeat operative decompression. Patients with an open abdomen lose between 500 and 2500 mL per day of abdominal effluent. Appropriate volume compensa-tion for this albumin-rich fluid remains controversial, with regard to both the amount administered (replacement based on clinical indices vs. routine 0.5 mL replacement for every milliliter lost) as well as the type of replacement (crystalloid vs. colloid).Following resuscitation and management of specific inju-ries, the goal of the operative team is to close the abdomen as quickly as possible. Multiple techniques have been introduced to obtain fascial closure of the open abdomen to minimize mor-bidity and cost of care. Historically, for patients who could not be closed at repeat operation, approximation of the fascia with mesh (prosthetic or biologic) was used, with planned reopera-tion. Another option was split-thickness skin grafts applied directly to the exposed bowel for coverage; removal of the skin Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   23910/12/18   6:21 PM 240BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Igrafts was planned 9 to 12 months after the initial surgery, with definitive repair of the hernia by component separation. How-ever, delayed abdominal wall reconstruction was resource inva-sive, with considerable patient morbidity. The advent of VAC technology has revolutionized fascial closure. The authors cur-rently use a sequential closure technique with the wound VAC device that is based on constant fascial tension and return to the OR every 48 hours until closure is complete (Fig. 7-75).147 The authors’ success rate with this approach exceeds 95%. This is important because among patients not attaining fascial closure, 20% suffer GI tract complications that prolong their hospital course. These include intra-abdominal abscess, enteric fistula, and bowel perforations (Fig. 7-76). Management requires fre-quent operative or percutaneous drainage of abscesses, control of fistulas, and prolonged nutritional support.SPECIAL POPULATIONSPregnant PatientsDuring pregnancy, 7% of women are injured. Motor vehicle col-lisions and falls are the leading causes of injury, accounting for 70% of cases. Fetal death after trauma most frequently occurs after motor vehicle collisions, but only 11% of fetal deaths are due to the death of the mother; therefore, early trauma resusci-tation and management is directed not only at the mother but also at the fetus. Domestic violence is also common, affecting between 10% and 30% of pregnant women and resulting in fetal mortality of 5%.Pregnancy results in physiologic changes that may impact postinjury evaluation (Table 7-13). Heart rate increases by 10 to 15 beats per minute during the first trimester and remains elevated until delivery. Blood pressure diminishes during the first two trimesters due to a decrease in systemic vascular resis-tance and rises again slightly during the third trimester (mean values: first = 105/60, second = 102/55, third = 108/67). Intra-vascular volume is increased by up to 8 L, which results in a relative anemia but also a relative hypervolemia. Consequently, a pregnant woman may lose 35% of her blood volume before exhibiting signs of shock. Pregnant patients have an increase in tidal volume and minute ventilation but a decreased functional residual capacity; this results in a diminished PCO2 and respi-ratory alkalosis. Also, pregnant patients may desaturate more rapidly, particularly in the supine position and during intuba-tion. Supplemental oxygen is always warranted in the trauma patient but is particularly critical in the injured pregnant patient because the oxygen dissociation curve is shifted to the left for the fetus compared to the mother (i.e., small changes in maternal oxygenation result in larger changes for the fetus because the fetus is operating in the steep portion of the dissociation curve). Anatomic changes contribute to these pulmonary functional alterations and are relevant in terms of procedures. With the gravid uterus enlarged, DPL should be performed in a supra-umbilical site with the catheter directed cephalad. In addition, the upward pressure on the diaphragm calls for caution when placing a thoracostomy tube; standard positioning may result in an intra-abdominal location or perforation of the diaphragm.Other physiologic changes during pregnancy affect the GI, renal, and hematologic systems. The lower esophageal sphincter has decreased competency, which increases the risk for aspira-tion. Liver function test values increase, with the alkaline phos-phatase level nearly doubling. The high levels of progesterone impair gallbladder contractions, which results in bile stasis and an increased incidence of gallstone formation; this may not affect the trauma bay evaluation but becomes important in a pro-longed ICU stay. Plasma albumin level decreases from a normal of around 4.3 g/dL to an average of 3.0 g/dL. Renal blood flow increases by 30% during pregnancy, which causes a decrease in serum level of blood urea nitrogen and creatinine. The uterus may also compress the ureters and bladder, causing hydronephro-sis and hydroureter. Finally, as noted earlier there is a relative anemia during pregnancy, but a hemoglobin level of <11 g/dL  is considered abnormal. Additional hematologic changes include a moderate leukocytosis (up to 20,000 mm3) and a rela-tive hypercoagulable state due to increased levels of factors VII, VIII, IX, X, and XII and decreased fibrinolytic activity.During evaluation in the ED, the primary and secondary surveys commence, with mindfulness that the mother always receives priority while conditions are still optimized for the fetus.148 This management includes provision of supplemental oxygen (to prevent maternal and fetal hypoxia), fluid resuscita-tion (the hypervolemia of pregnancy may mask signs of shock), and placement of the patient in the left lateral decubitus posi-tion (or tilting of the backboard to the left) to avoid caval com-pression. Assessment of the fetal heart rate is the most valuable information regarding fetal viability. Fetal monitoring should initially be assessed with bedside FAST ultrasound to document the heart rate of the fetus; subsequent monitoring should be per-formed with a cardiotocographic device that measures both con-tractions and fetal heart tones (FHTs). Because change in heart rate is the primary response of the fetus to hypoxia or hypo-tension, anything above an FHT of 160 is a concern, whereas bradycardia (FHT of <120) is considered fetal distress. Indica-tions for emergent cesarean section include: (a) severe mater-nal shock or impending death (if the fetus is delivered within 5 minutes, survival is estimated at 70%), (b) uterine injury or significant fetal distress (anticipated survival rates of >70% if FHTs are present and fetal gestational age is >28 weeks).149If possible, a member of the obstetrics team should be present during initial evaluation. Vaginal bleeding can signal early cervical dilation and labor, abruptio placentae, or placenta previa. Amniotic sac rupture can result in prolapse of the umbil-ical cord with fetal compromise. Strong contractions are associ-ated with true labor and should prompt consideration of delivery and resuscitation of the neonate. Focused prenatal history-taking should elicit a history of pregnancy-induced hypertension, ges-tational diabetes, congenital heart disease, preterm labor, or placental abnormalities. Asking the patient when the baby first moved and if she is currently experiencing movement of the fetus is important. Determining fetal age is key for consider-ations of viability. Gestational age may be estimated by noting fundal height, with the fundus approximating the umbilicus at 20 weeks and the costal margin at 40 weeks. Discrepancy in dates and size may be due to uterine rupture or hemorrhage.Initial evaluation for abdominopelvic trauma in pregnant patients should proceed in the standard manner. Ultrasound (FAST) of the abdomen should evaluate the four windows (pericardial, right and left upper quadrant, and bladder) and additionally assess FHTs, fetal movement, and sufficiency of amniotic fluid. DPL can be performed in pregnant women via a supraumbilical, open technique. Trauma radiography of pregnant patients presents a conundrum. Radiation damage has three distinct phases of damage and effect: preimplantation, dur-ing the period of organogenesis from 3 to 16 weeks, and after  16 weeks. Generally, it is accepted that “safe” doses of radiation Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   24010/12/18   6:21 PM 241TRAUMACHAPTER 7Figure 7-75. The authors’ sequential closure technique for the open abdomen. A. Multiple white sponges (solid arrow), stapled together, are placed on top of the bowel underneath the fascia. Interrupted No. 1 polydioxanone sutures are placed approximately 5 cm apart (dashed arrow), which puts the fascia under moderate tension over the white sponge. B. After the sticky clear plastic vacuum-assisted closure (VAC) dressing is placed over the white sponges and adjacent 5 cm of skin, the central portion is removed by cutting along the wound edges.  C and D. Black VAC sponges are placed on top of the white sponges and plastic-protected skin with standard occlusive dressing and suction.  E. On return to the operating room (OR) 48 hours later, fascial sutures are placed from both the superior and inferior directions until tension precludes further closure; skin is closed over the fascial closure with skin staples. F. White sponges (fewer in number) are again applied and fascial retention sutures are placed with planned return to the OR in 48 hours.Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   24110/12/18   6:22 PM 242BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IFigure 7-76. Complications after split-thickness skin graft closure of the abdomen include enterocutaneous fistulas (intubated here with a red rubber catheter) (A; arrow), rupture of the graft with exposure of the bowel mucosa (B), enteroatmospheric fistulas with a large ventral hernias and loss of abdominal domain (C).from radiography are <5 rad.150 A chest radiograph results in a dose of 0.07 mrad; CT scan of the chest, <1 rad; and CT scan of the abdomen, 3.5 rad. It is important, therefore, to limit radio-graphs to those that are essential and to shield the pelvis with a lead apron when possible. If clinically warranted, however, a radiograph should be obtained.The vast majority of injuries are treated similarly whether the patient is pregnant or not. Following standard protocols for nonoperative management of blunt trauma avoids the risks associated with general anesthesia. A particular challenge in the pregnant trauma patient is a major pelvic fracture. Because uter-ine and retroperitoneal veins may dilate to 60 times their origi-nal size, hemorrhage from these vessels may be torrential. Fetal loss may be related to both maternal shock and direct injury to the uterus or fetal head. Penetrating injuries in this patient population also carry a high risk. The gravid uterus is a large target, and any penetrating injury to the abdomen may result in fetal injury depending on trajectory and uterine size. Gunshot wounds to the abdomen are associated with a 70% injury rate to the uterus and 35% mortality rate of the fetus. If the bul-let traverses the uterus and the fetus is viable, cesarean section should be performed. On the other hand, stab wounds do not often penetrate the thick wall of the uterus.Any patient with a viable pregnancy should be monitored after trauma, with the length of monitoring determined by the injury mechanism and patient physiology. Patients who are Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   24210/12/18   6:22 PM 243TRAUMACHAPTER 7symptomatic, defined by the presence of uterine irritability or contractions, abdominal tenderness, vaginal bleeding, or blood pressure instability, should be monitored in the hospital for at least 24 hours. In addition, patients at high risk for fetal loss (those experiencing vehicle ejection or involved in motorcycle or pedestrian collisions and those with maternal tachycardia, Injury Severity Score of >9, gestational period of >35 weeks, or history of prior assault) also warrant careful monitoring.151 Patients without these risk factors who are asymptomatic can be monitored for 6 hours in the ED and sent home if no problems develop. They should be counseled regarding warning signs that mandate prompt return to the ED.Geriatric PatientsElderly trauma patients (>65 years of age) are hospitalized twice as often as those in any other age group, and this population accounts for one quarter of all trauma admissions. Although the physiology of aging separates older trauma patients from the younger generation (Table 7-14), treatment must remain indi-vidualized (some octogenarians look and physiologically act 50 years old, whereas others appear closer to 100 years). No chronologic age is associated with a higher morbidity or mor-tality, but a patient’s comorbidities do impact the individual’s postinjury course and outcome. For example, recognition that a patient is taking β-blockers affects the physician’s evaluation of vital signs in the ED and impacts treatment course in the ICU. Early monitoring of arterial blood gas values will identify occult shock. A base deficit of >6 mmol/L is associated with a twofold higher risk of mortality in patients over the age of 55 than in younger patients (67% vs. 30%).152Although the published literature on geriatric traumatic brain injury is relatively sparse and uncontrolled with regard to management, some interesting points are noted. First, as anticipated, outcomes are worse in this age group than in their younger counterparts. Based on data from the Traumatic Coma Databank, mortality in patients with severe head injury more than doubles after the age of 55. Moreover, 25% of patients with a normal GCS score of 15 had intracranial bleeding, with an associated mortality of 50%.140 Just as there is no absolute age that predicts outcome, admission GCS score is a poor predictor of individual outcome. Therefore, the majority of trauma centers advocate an initial aggressive approach with reevaluation at the 72-hour mark to determine subsequent care.One of the most common sequelae of blunt thoracic trauma is rib fractures. In the aging population, perhaps due to osteo-porosis, less force is required to cause a fracture. In fact, in one study, 50% of patients >65 years old sustained rib fractures from a fall of <6 ft, compared with only 1% of patients <65 years of age. Concurrent pulmonary contusion is noted in up to 35% of patients, and pneumonia complicates the injuries in 10% to 30% of patients with rib fractures, not surprisingly leading to longer ICU stays.153,154 Additionally, mortality increases linearly with the number of rib fractures. Patients who sustain more than six rib fractures have pulmonary morbidity rates of >50% and over-all mortality rates of >20%.Chronologic age is not the best predictor of outcome, but the presence of preexisting conditions, which affect a patient’s physiologic age, is associated with increased mortality rates. Injury Severity Score is probably the best overall predictor of patient outcome in the elderly; however, for any given individ-ual its sensitivity may not be precise, and there is a time delay in obtaining sufficient information to calculate the final score. In addition to preexisting conditions and severity of injury, the occurrence of complications compounds the risk for mortality.Table 7-13Physiologic effects of pregnancyCardiovascularIncrease in heart rate by 10–15 bpm(a)	Decreased systemic vascular resistance resulting in:(b)	Increased intravascular volumeDecreased blood pressure during the first two trimestersPulmonaryElevated diaphragmIncreased tidal volumeIncreased minute ventilationDecreased functional residual capacityHematopoieticRelative anemiaLeukocytosisHypercoagulability(a)	Increased levels of factors VII, VIII, IX, X, XII(b)	Decreased fibrinolytic activityOtherDecreased competency of lower esophageal sphincterIncreased enzyme levels on liver function testsImpaired gallbladder contractionsDecreased plasma albumin levelDecreased blood urea nitrogen and creatinine levelsHydronephrosis and hydroureterTable 7-14Physiologic effects of agingCardiovascularAtherosclerotic disease that limits cardiac response to stressProgressive stiffening and loss of elasticity of the myocardiumDiminished stroke volume, systolic contraction, and diastolic relaxationDecrease in cardiac output of 0.5% per yearThickening and calcification of the cardiac valves, which results in valvular incompetencePulmonaryLoss of complianceProgressive loss of alveolar size and surface areaAir trapping and atelectasisIntracranialLoss of cerebral volume, resulting in:(a)	Increased risk of tearing of bridging veins with smaller injuries(b)	Accumulation of a significant amount of blood before symptoms occur(c)	muscle lossSenescence of the sensesOtherDecline in creatinine clearance by 80%–90%Osteoporosis, which causes a greater susceptibility to fracturesBrunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   24310/12/18   6:22 PM 244BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IPediatric PatientsTwenty million children, or almost one in four children, are injured each year, with an associated cost of treating the injured child of $16 billion per year. Injury is the leading cause of death among children over the age of 1 year, with 15,000 to 25,000 pediatric deaths per year. Disability after traumatic injury is more devastating, with rates 3 to 10 times that of the death rate. Pediatric trauma involves different mechanisms, different constellations of injury, and the potential for long-term problems related to growth and development. As with adult trauma, over 85% of pediatric trauma has a blunt mecha-nism, with boys injured twice as often as girls.155 Falls are the most common cause of injury in infants and toddlers. In chil-dren, bicycle mishaps are the most common cause of severe injury, whereas motor vehicle-related injury predominates in adolescence. Although unintentional injuries are by far the most common type of injuries in childhood, the number of intentional injuries, such as firearm-related injury and child abuse, is increasing.ED preparation for the pediatric trauma patient includes assembling age-appropriate equipment (e.g., intubation equip-ment; IV catheters, including intraosseous needles and 4F single-lumen lines), laying out the Broselow Pediatric Emergency Tape (which allows effective approximation of the patient’s weight, medication doses, size of endotracheal tube, and chest tube size), and turning on heat lamps. Upon the pediatric patient’s arrival, the basic tenets of the ABCs apply, with some caveats. In children, the airway is smaller and more cephalad in position compared with that of adults, and in children younger than 10 years, the larynx is funnel shaped rather than cylindrical as in adults. Addi-tionally, the child’s tongue is much larger in relation to the oro-pharynx. Therefore, a small amount of edema or obstruction can significantly reduce the diameter of the airway (thus increasing the work of breathing), and the tongue may posteriorly obstruct the airway, causing intubation to be difficult. During intubation, a Miller (straight) blade rather than a Macintosh (curved) blade may be more effective due to the acute angle of the cephalad, funnel-shaped larynx. Administration of atropine before rapid-sequence intubation will prevent bradycardia. Adequate ventila-tion is critical because oxygen consumption in infants and young children is twice that in adults; onset of hypoxemia, followed by cardiac arrest, may be precipitous. Because gastric distension can inhibit adequate ventilation, placement of a nasogastric tube may facilitate effective gas exchange. Approximately one-third of pre-ventable deaths in children are related to airway management; therefore, if airway control cannot be obtained using a standard endotracheal method, surgical establishment of an airway should be considered. In children older than 11 years, standard crico-thyroidotomy is performed. Due to the increased incidence of subglottic stenosis in younger patients, needle cricothyroidotomy with either a 14or 16-gauge catheter is advocated, although it is rarely used. Alternatively, tracheostomy may be performed. In children, the standard physiologic response to hypovolemia is peripheral vasoconstriction and reflex tachycardia; this may mask significant hemorrhagic injury because children can compensate for up to a 25% loss of circulating blood volume with minimal external signs. “Normal” values for vital signs should not neces-sarily make one feel more secure about the child’s volume status. Volume restoration is based on the child’s weight; two to three boluses of 20 mL/kg of crystalloid is appropriate. Hypotension in children may be due to TBI rather than hypovolemia and should be considered in the appropriate clinic scenario.156After initial evaluation based on the trauma ABCs, iden-tification and management of specific injuries proceeds. Acute traumatic brain injury is the most common cause of death and disability in any pediatric age group. Although falls are the most common mechanism overall, severe brain injury most often is due to child abuse (in children <2 years) or motor vehicle col-lisions (in those >2 years). Head CT should be performed to determine intracranial pathology, followed by skull radiogra-phy to diagnose skull fractures. As in adults, CPP is monitored, and appropriate resuscitation is critical to prevent the second-ary insults of hypoxemia and hypovolemia. Although some data indicate that the pediatric brain recovers from traumatic injury better than the adult brain, this advantage may be eliminated if hypotension is allowed to occur.As is true in adults, the vast majority of thoracic trauma is also blunt. However, because a child’s skeleton is not completely calcified, it is more pliable. Significant internal organ damage may occur without overlying bony fractures. For example, adult patients with significant chest trauma have a 70% incidence of rib fractures, whereas only 40% of children with significant chest trauma do. Pneumothorax is treated similarly in the pediatric population; patients who are asymptomatic with a pneumothorax of <15% are admitted for observation, whereas those who have a pneumothorax of >15% or who require positive pressure ventilation undergo tube decompression. Presence of a hemothorax in this age group may be particularly problematic because the child’s chest may contain his or her entire blood volume. If the chest tube output is initially 20% of the patient’s blood volume (80 mL/kg) or is persistently >1 to 2 mL/kg per hour, thoracotomy should be considered. Aortic injuries are rare in children, and tracheobronchial injuries are more amenable to nonoperative management. Penetrating thoracic trauma, although uncom-mon, has 35% operative intervention rate, which is consid-erably higher than that of the adult population.157 Thoracic injuries are second only to brain injuries as the main cause of death according to the National Pediatric Trauma Registry; however, the overall mortality rate of 15% correlates with the levels in many adult studies.The evaluation for abdominal trauma in the pediatric patient is similar to that in the adult. FAST is valid in the pedi-atric age group to detect intra-abdominal fluid. The mecha-nism of injury often correlates with specific injury patterns. A child sustaining a blow to the epigastrium (e.g., hitting the handlebars during a bike accident) should be evaluated for a duodenal hematoma and/or a pancreatic transection. After a motor vehicle collision in which the patient was wearing a passenger restraint, injuries comprising the “lap belt com-plex” or “seat belt syndrome” (i.e., abdominal wall contusion, small bowel perforation, flexion-distraction injury of the lumbar spine, diaphragm rupture, and occasionally abdomi-nal aortic dissection) may exist. Nonoperative management of solid organ injuries, first used in children, is the current standard of care in the hemodynamically stable patient. If the patient shows clinical deterioration or hemodynamic lability, has a hollow viscus injury, or requires >40 mL/kg of packed RBCs, continued nonoperative management is not an option. Success rates of nonoperative management approach 95%,158 with an associated 10% to 23% transfusion rate. Findings of a hepatic or splenic blush on CT imaging does not uniformly require intervention; patient physiology should dictate embo-lization or operative intervention.159Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   24410/12/18   6:22 PM 245TRAUMACHAPTER 7REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Minino AM, Heron MP, Murphy SL, et al. Deaths: final data for 2004. Natl Vital Stat Rep. 2007 Aug 21;55(19):1-120. Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nvsr/nvsr65/nvsr65_04.pdf. Accessed June 8, 2017.	2.	National Center for Injury Prevention and Control. CDC Injury Fact Book. Atlanta: Centers for Disease Control and Preven-tion, November 2006. Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/ncipc/fact_book/InjuryBook2006.pdf. Accessed October 29, 2012.	3.	Brasel KJ. Epidemiology. In: Moore EE, Mattox KL, Feliciano DV, eds. Trauma. 8th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2017.	4.	Eastman AB. Wherever the dart lands: toward the ideal trauma system. J Am Coll Surg. 2010;211(2):153-168.	5.	MacKenzie EJ, Rivara FP, Jurkovich GJ, et al. A national eval-uation of the effect of trauma-center care on mortality. N Engl J Med. 2006;354(4):366-378.	6.	American College of Surgeons. Advanced Trauma Life Sup-port. 9th ed. Chicago: American College of Surgeons; 2012.	7.	Haut ER, Kalish BT, Efron DT, et al. Spine immobilization in penetrating trauma: more harm than good? J Trauma. 2010;68(1):115-120.	8.	Lustenberger T, Talving P, Lam L, et al. Unstable cervical spine fracture after penetrating neck injury: a rare entity in an analysis of 1,069 patients. J Trauma. 2011;70(4):870-872.	9.	Sakles JC, Mosier JM, Chiu S, Keim SM. Tracheal intubation in the emergency department: a comparison of GlideScope video laryngoscopy to direct laryngoscopy in 822 intubations. J Emerg Med. 2012;42(4):400-405.	10.	Inaba K, Ives C, McClure K, et al. Radiologic evaluation of alternative sites for needle decompression of tension pneumo-thorax. Arch Surg. 2012;147(9):813-818.	11.	Carretta A, Melloni G, Bandiera A, Negri G, Voci C, Zannini P. Conservative and surgical treatment of acute posttraumatic tra-cheobronchial injuries. World J Surg. 2011;35(11):2568-2574.	12.	Gómez-Caro A, Ausín P, Moradiellos FJ, et al. Role of con-servative medical management of tracheobronchial injuries. J Trauma. 2006;61(6):1426-1434.	13.	Demetriades D, Chan LS, Bhasin P, et al. Relative brady-cardia in patients with traumatic hypotension. J Trauma. 1998;45(3):534-539.	14.	Petitpas F, Guenezan J, Vendeuvre T, Scepi M, Oriot D, Mimoz O. Use of intra-osseous access in adults: a systematic review. Crit Care. 2016;20:102.	15.	Weiser G, Hoffmann Y, Galbraith R, Shavit I. Current advances in intraosseous infusion—a systematic review. Resuscitation. 2012;83(1):20-26.	16.	Callaham M. Pericardiocentesis in traumatic and nontraumatic cardiac tamponade. Ann Emerg Med. 1984;13(10):924-945.	17.	Jones TS, Burlew CC, Stovall RT, et al. Emergency department pericardial drainage for penetrating cardiac wounds is a viable option for stabilization. Am J Surg. 2014;207(6):931-934.	18.	Burlew CC, Moore EE, Moore FA, et al. Western trauma asso-ciation critical decisions in Trauma: resuscitative thoracotomy. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012 Dec;73(6):1359-1363.	19.	Moore EE, Knudson MM, Burlew CC, et al. WTA Study Group. Defining the limits of resuscitative emergency depart-ment thoracotomy: a contemporary Western Trauma Associa-tion perspective. J Trauma. 2011;70(2):334-339.	20.	Moore HB, Moore EE, Burlew CC, et al. Establishing bench-marks for resuscitation of traumatic circulatory arrest: suc-cess-to-rescue and survival among 1,708 patients. J Am Coll Surg. 2016;223(1):42-50.	21.	Ouellet JF, Roberts DJ, Tiruta C, et al. Admission base deficit and lactate levels in Canadian patients with blunt trauma: are they useful markers of mortality? J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012;72(6):1532-1535.	22.	Callaway DW, Shapiro NI, Donnino MW, Baker C, Rosen CL. Serum lactate and base deficit as predictors of mortal-ity in normotensive elderly blunt trauma patients. J Trauma. 2009;66(4):1040-1044.	23.	Johnson M, Alarhayem A, Convertino V, et al. Comparison of compensatory reserve and arterial lactate as markers of shock and resuscitation. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2017 Oct;83(4):603-608.	24.	Stewart CL, Mulligan J, Grudic GZ, Talley ME, Jurkovich GJ, Moulton SL. The compensatory reserve index follow-ing injury: results of a prospective clinical trial. Shock. 2016 Sep;46(3 Suppl 1):61-67.	25.	Clancy K, Velopulos C, Bilaniuk JW, et al. Screening for blunt cardiac injury: an Eastern Association for the Surgery of Trauma practice management guideline. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012;73:S301-S306.	26.	Velmahos GC, Karaiskakis M, Salim A, et al. Normal electro-cardiography and serum troponin I levels preclude the pres-ence of clinically significant blunt cardiac injury. J Trauma. 2003;54(1):45-50.	27.	Ferrada P, Murthi S, Anand RJ, Bochicchio GV, Scalea T. Transthoracic focused rapid echocardiographic examination: real-time evaluation of fluid status in critically ill trauma patients. J Trauma. 2011;70:56-62.	28.	Ferrada P, Evans D, Wolfe L, et al. Findings of a randomized con-trolled trial using limited transthoracic echocardiogram (LTTE) as a hemodynamic monitoring tool in the trauma bay. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2014;76(1):31-37; discussion 37-88.	29.	Kutcher ME, Howard BM, Sperry JL, et al. Evolving beyond the vicious triad: differential mediation of traumatic coagu-lopathy by injury, shock, and resuscitation. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2015;78(3):516-523.	30.	Gonzalez E, Moore EE, Moore HB. Management of trauma-induced coagulopathy with thrombelastography. Crit Care Clin. 2017;33(1):119-134. Review.	31.	Dolich MO, McKenney MG, Varela JE, et al. 2,576 ultrasounds for blunt abdominal trauma. J Trauma. 2001;50:108-112.	32.	Sondeen JL, Coppes VG, Holcomb JB. Blood pressure at which rebleeding occurs after resuscitation in swine with aor-tic injury. J Trauma. 2003;54(Suppl):S110-S117.	33.	Carney N, Totten AM, O’Reilly C, et al. Guidelines for the management of severe traumatic brain injury. 4th ed. 2016. Available at: https://braintrauma.org/uploads/03/12/Guidelines_for_Management_of_Severe_TBI_4th_Edi-tion.pdf. Accessed July 9, 2017.	34.	Ryb GE, Dischinger PC, Kufera JA, et al. Delta V, principal direction of force, and restraint use contributions to motor vehicle crash mortality. J Trauma. 2007;63:1000-1005.	35.	Ivascu FA, Howells GA, Junn FS, Bair HA, Bendick PJ, Janczyk RJ. Predictors of mortality in trauma patients with intracranial hemorrhage on preinjury aspirin or clopidogrel. J Trauma. 2008;65(4):785-788.	36.	Moore MM, Pasquale MD, Badellino M. Impact of age and anticoagulation: need for neurosurgical intervention in trauma patients with mild traumatic brain injury. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012;73(1):126-130.	37.	Inaba K, Byerly S, Bush LD, et al; WTA C-Spine Study Group. Cervical spinal clearance: a prospective Western Trauma Asso-ciation Multi-institutional Trial. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2016;81(6):1122-1130.	38.	Sekharan J, Dennis JW, Veldenz HC, et al. Continued experience with physical examination alone for evaluation and manage-ment of penetrating zone 2 neck injuries: results of 145 cases.  J Vasc Surg. 2000;32:483-489.	39.	Inaba K, Branco BC, Menaker J, et al. Evaluation of multi-detector computed tomography for penetrating neck injury: a prospective multicenter study. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012;72:576-583.Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   24510/12/18   6:22 PM 246BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART I	40.	Chouliaras K, Bench E, Talving P, et al. Pneumomediasti-num following blunt trauma: worth an exhaustive workup? J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2015;79(2):188-192; discussion 192-193.	41.	Fabian TC, Richardson JD, Croce MA, et al. Prospective study of blunt aortic injury: multicenter trial of the American Associ-ation for the Surgery of Trauma. J Trauma. 1997;42:374-380.	42.	Dyer DS, Moore EE, Ilke DN, et al. Thoracic aortic injury: how predictive is mechanism and is chest computed tomog-raphy a reliable screening tool? A prospective study of 1,561 patients. J Trauma. 2000;48:673-682.	43.	Siegel JH, Smith JA, Siddiqi SQ. Change in velocity and energy dissipation on impact in motor vehicle crashes as a function of the direction of crash: key factors in the production of thoracic aortic injuries, their pattern of associated injuries and patient survival. A Crash Injury Research Engineering Network (CIREN) study. J Trauma. 2004;57(4):760-777.	44.	Karmy-Jones R, Namias N, Coimbra R, et al. Western Trauma Association critical decisions in trauma: penetrating chest trauma. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2014;77(6):994-1002.	45.	Arantes V, Campolina C, Valerio SH, et al. Flexible esopha-goscopy as a diagnostic tool for traumatic esophageal injuries. J Trauma. 2009;66(6):1677-1682.	46.	Cox CS Jr, Allen GS, Fischer RP, et al. Blunt vs. penetrating subclavian artery injury: presentation, injury pattern, and out-come. J Trauma. 1999;46:445-449.	47.	Peponis T, Kasotakis G, Yu J, et al. Selective nonoperative management of abdominal gunshot wounds from heresy to adoption: a multicenter study of the Research Consortium of New England Centers for Trauma (ReCoNECT). J Am Coll Surg. 2017;224(6):1036-1045.	48.	Demetriades D, Hadjizacharia P, Constantinou C, et al. Selec-tive nonoperative management of penetrating abdominal solid organ injuries. Ann Surg. 2006;244:620-628.	49.	Biffl WL, Cothren CC, Brasel KJ, et al. A prospective observa-tional multicenter study of the optimal management of patients with anterior abdominal stab wounds. J Trauma. 2008;64:250.	50.	Biffl WL, Kaups KL, Pham TN, et al. Validating the West-ern Trauma Association algorithm for managing patients with anterior abdominal stab wounds: a Western Trauma Associa-tion multicenter trial. J Trauma. 2011;71(6):1494-1502.	51.	Ochsner MG, Knudson MM, Pachter HL, et al. Significance of minimal or no intraperitoneal fluid visible on CT scan associ-ated with blunt liver and splenic injuries: a multicenter analy-sis. J Trauma. 2000;49:505-510.	52.	Yu J, Fulcher AS, Turner MA, Cockrell C, Halvorsen RA. Blunt bowel and mesenteric injury: MDCT diagnosis. Abdom Imaging. 2011;36(1):50-61.	53.	LeBedis CA, Anderson SW, Soto JA. CT imaging of blunt traumatic bowel and mesenteric injuries. Radiol Clin North Am. 2012;50(1):123-136.	54.	Fox N, Rajani RR, Bokhari F, et al. Evaluation and manage-ment of penetrating lower extremity arterial trauma: an Eastern Association for the Surgery of Trauma practice management guideline. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012;73:S315-S320.	55.	Burch JM, Franciose RJ, Moore EE, et al. Single-layer con-tinuous vs. two-layer interrupted intestinal anastomosis—a prospective randomized study. Ann Surg. 2000;231:832-837.	56.	Moore EE. Thomas G. Orr Memorial Lecture. Staged lapa-rotomy for the hypothermia, acidosis, and coagulopathy syn-drome. Am J Surg. 1996;172:405-410.	57.	Morrison JJ, Galgon RE, Jansen JO, Cannon JW, Rasmussen TE, Eliason JL. A systematic review of the use of resuscita-tive endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta in the man-agement of hemorrhagic shock. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2016;80(2):324-334.	58.	Moore LJ, Brenner M, Kozar RA, et al. Implementation of resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta as an alternative to resuscitative thoracotomy for noncom-pressible truncal hemorrhage. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2015;79(4):523-530; discussion 530-532.	59.	Gonzalez E, Moore EE, Moore HB. Management of trauma-induced coagulopathy with thrombelastography. Crit Care Clin. 2017;33(1):119-134. Review.	60.	Cohen MJ, Call M, Nelson M, et al. Critical role of acti-vated protein C in early coagulopathy and later organ fail-ure, infection and death in trauma patients. Ann Surg. 2012;255(2):379-385.	61.	Gonzalez E, Moore EE, Moore HB, Chapman MP, Silliman CC, Banerjee A. Trauma-induced coagulopathy: an institu-tion’s 35-year perspective on practice and research. Scand J Surg. 2014;103(2):89-103.	62.	Moore HB, Moore EE, Liras IN, et al. Acute fibrinolysis shut-down after injury occurs frequently and increases mortality: a multicenter evaluation of 2,540 severely injured patients. J Am Coll Surg. 2016;222(4):347-355.	64.	Hebert PC, Wells G, Blajchman MA, et al. A multicenter, ran-domized, controlled clinical trial of transfusion requirements in critical care. New Engl J Med. 1999;340:409-417.	65.	West MA, Shapiro MB, Nathens AB, et al. Inflammation and the host response to injury, a large-scale collaborative project: patient-oriented research core-standard operating procedures for clinical care. IV. Guidelines for transfusion in the trauma patient. J Trauma. 2006;61:436-439.	66.	Tariket S, Sut C, Hamzeh-Cognasse H, et al. Transfusion-related acute lung injury: transfusion, platelets and biological response modifiers. Expert Rev Hematol. 2016;9(5):497-508.	67.	Moore FA, Moore EE, Sauaia A. Blood transfusion: an inde-pendent risk factor for postinjury multiple organ failure. Arch Surg. 1997;132:620-624.	68.	Kashuk JL, Moore EE, Sauaia A, et al. Postinjury life-threat-ening coagulopathy: is 1:1 fresh frozen plasma: packed red blood cells the answer? J Trauma. 2008;65:261-270.	69.	Davenport R, Curry N, Manson J, et al. Hemostatic effects of fresh frozen plasma may be maximal at red cell ratios of 1:2. J Trauma. 2011;70(1):90-95.	70.	Stanworth SJ, Morris TP, Gaarder C, et al. Reappraising the concept of massive transfusion in trauma. Crit Care. 2010;14(6):R239.	71.	Dzik WH, Blajchman MA, Fergusson D, et al. Clinical review: Canadian National Advisory Committee on Blood and Blood Products–Massive transfusion consensus conference 2011: report of the panel. Crit Care. 2011;15(6):242.	72.	Holcomb JB, Tilley BC, Baraniuk S, et al; PROPPR Study Group. Transfusion of plasma, platelets, and red blood cells in a 1:1:1 vs a 1:1:2 ratio and mortality in patients with severe trauma: the PROPPR randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2015;313(5):471-482.	73.	Menaker J, Stein DM, Scalea TM. Incidence of early pulmo-nary embolism after injury. J Trauma. 2007;63:620-624.	74.	Harr JN, Moore EE, Chin TL, et al. Platelets are dominant contributors to hypercoagulability after injury. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2013;74(3):756-762; discussion 762-765.	75.	Prager M, Polterauer P, Böhmig HJ, et al. Collagen vs. gelatin-coated Dacron vs. stretch polytetrafluoroethylene in abdominal aortic bifurcation graft surgery: results of a seven-year prospective, randomized multicenter trial. Surgery. 2001;130(3):408-414.	76.	Asensio JA, Feliciano DV. Abdominal vascular injury. In: Moore EE, Mattox KL, Feliciano DV, eds. Trauma. 8th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2017.	77.	Coleman JJ, Brewer BL, Feliciano DV. Trauma damage con-trol. In: Moore EE, Mattox KL, Feliciano DV, eds. Trauma. 8th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2017.	78.	Mathew S, Smith BP, Cannon JW, Reilly PM, Schwab CW, Seamon MJ. Temporary arterial shunts in damage Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   24610/12/18   6:22 PM 247TRAUMACHAPTER 7control: experience and outcomes. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2017;82(3):512-517.	79.	Lubitz AL, Sjoholm LO, Goldberg A, et al. Acute right heart failure after hemorrhagic shock and trauma pneumonectomy—a management approach: a blinded randomized controlled ani-mal trial using inhaled nitric oxide. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2017;82(2):243-251.	80.	Smith JW, Matheson PJ, Franklin GA, Harbrecht BG, Richardson JD, Garrison RN. Randomized controlled trial evaluating the efficacy of peritoneal resuscitation in the man-agement of trauma patients undergoing damage control sur-gery. J Am Coll Surg. 2017;224(4):396-404.	81.	Dawes AJ, Sacks GD, Cryer HG, et al; Los Angeles County Trauma Consortium. Intracranial pressure monitoring and inpatient mortality in severe traumatic brain injury: a pro-pensity score-matched analysis. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2015;78(3):492-501; discussion 501-502.	82.	Nirula R, Millar D, Greene T, et al. Decompressive craniectomy for medical management for refractory intracranial hyperten-sion: an AAST-MITC propensity score analysis. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2014;76(4):944-952; discussion 952-955.	83.	Cooper DJ, Rosenfeld JV, Murray L, et al; DECRA Trial Investigators; Australian and New Zealand Intensive Care Society Clinical Trials Group. Decompressive craniec-tomy in diffuse traumatic brain injury. N Engl J Med. 2011;364(16):1493-1502.	84.	Rinker C, McMurry F, Groeneweg V, et al. Emergency craniotomy in a rural level III trauma center. J Trauma. 1998;44:984-989.	85.	Hutchison JS, Ward RE, Lacroix J, et al; Hypothermia Pedi-atric Head Injury Trial Investigators and the Canadian Critical Care Trials Group. Hypothermia therapy after traumatic brain injury in children. N Engl J Med. 2008;358(23):2447-2456.	86.	Kramer C, Freeman WD, Hoffman-Snyder C, et al. Therapeu-tic hypothermia for severe traumatic brain injury: a critically appraised topic. Neurologist. 2012;18(3):173-177.	87.	Cogbill T, Cothren CC, Ahearn MK, et al. Management of severe hemorrhage associated with maxillofacial injuries: a multicenter perspective. J Trauma. 2008;64:250.	88.	Bracken MB, Shepard MJ, Holford TR, et al. Administration of methylprednisolone for 24 or 48 hours or tirilazad mesyl-ate for 48 hours in the treatment of acute spinal cord injury. Results of the Third National Acute Spinal Cord Injury Ran-domized Controlled Trial. National Acute Spinal Cord Injury Study. JAMA. 1997;277:1597-1604.	89.	Stahel PF, Vanderheiden T, Finn MA. Management strategies for acute spinal cord injury: current options and future per-spectives. Curr Opin Crit Care. 2012;18(6):651-660.	90.	Fehlings MG, Perrin RG: The timing of surgical intervention in the treatment of spinal cord injury: a systematic review of recent clinical evidence. Spine. 2006;31:S28-S35.	91.	Biffl WL, Moore EE, Offner PJ, et al. Blunt carotid arte-rial injuries: implications of a new grading scale. J Trauma. 1999;47:845-853.	92.	Burlew CC, Biffl WL, Moore EE, Barnett CC, Johnson JL, Bensard DD. Blunt cerebrovascular injuries: redefining screen-ing criteria in the era of noninvasive diagnosis. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012;72(2):330-335.	93.	Cothren CC, Moore EE, Biffl WL, et al. Anticoagulation is the gold standard therapy for blunt carotid injuries to reduce stroke rate. Arch Surg. 2004;139:540-545.	94.	Shahan CP, Croce MA, Fabian TC, Magnotti LJ. Impact of continuous evaluation of technology and therapy: 30 years of research reduces stroke and mortality from blunt cerebrovas-cular injury. J Am Coll Surg. 2017;224(4):595-599.	95.	Burlew CC, Biffl WL, Moore EE, et al. Endovascular stenting is rarely necessary for the management of blunt cerebrovascu-lar injuries. J Am Coll Surg. 2014;218(5):1012-1017.	96.	Weinberg JA, Moore AH, Magnotti LJ, et al. Contemporary management of civilian penetrating cervicothoracic arterial injuries. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2016;81(2):302-306.	97.	Johnston RH, Wall MJ, Mattox KL. Innominate artery trauma: a thirty-year experience. J Vasc Surg. 1993;17:134-139.	98.	Shalhub S, Starnes BW, Brenner ML, et al. Blunt abdominal aortic injury: a Western Trauma Association multicenter study. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2014;77(6):879-885; discussion 885.	99.	Harris DG, Rabin J, Starnes BW, et al. Evolution of lesion-specific management of blunt thoracic aortic injury. J Vasc Surg. 2016;64(2):500-505.	100.	Fox N, Schwartz D, Salazar JH, et al. Evaluation and man-agement of blunt traumatic aortic injury: a practice manage-ment guideline from the Eastern Association for the Surgery of Trauma. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2015;78(1):136-146.	101.	Moore EE, Burch JM, Moore JB. Repair of the torn descend-ing thoracic aorta using the centrifugal pump with partial left heart bypass. Ann Surg. 2004;240:38-43.	102.	Rabin J, DuBose J, Sliker CW, O’Connor JV, Scalea TM, Griffith BP. Parameters for successful nonoperative manage-ment of traumatic aortic injury. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2014;147(1):143-149.	103.	Wall MJ, Tsai PI, Mattox KL. Heart and thoracic vascular injury. In: Moore EE, Mattox KL, Feliciano DV, eds. Trauma. 8th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2017.	104.	Jones EL, Burlew CC, Moore EE. BioGlue hemostasis of penetrating cardiac wounds in proximity to the left ante-rior descending coronary artery. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012;72(3):796-798.	105.	Cothren CC, Moore EE. Traumatic ventricular septal defect. Surgery. 2007;142:776-777.	106.	Wall MJ Jr, Hirshberg A, Mattox KL. Pulmonary tractotomy with selective vascular ligation for penetrating injuries to the lung. Am J Surg. 1994;168:665-669.	107.	Cothren C, Moore EE, Biffl WL, et al. Lung-sparing tech-niques are associated with improved outcome compared with anatomic resection for severe lung injuries. J Trauma. 2002;53:483-487.	108.	Cryer HG, Mavroudis C, Yu J, et al. Shock, transfusion, and pneumonectomy. Death is due to right heart failure and increased pulmonary vascular resistance. Ann Surg. 1990;212:197-201.	109.	Luo L, Yin L, Liu Z, Xiang Z. Posttraumatic pulmonary pseudocyst: computed tomography findings and man-agement in 33 patients. J Trauma and Acute Care Surg. 2012;73(5):1225-1228.	110.	Moore HB, Moore EE, Burlew CC, et al. Western Trauma Association critical decisions in trauma: management of parapneumonic effusion. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012;73:1372-1379.	111.	de Souza A, Offner PJ, Moore EE, et al. Optimal management of complicated empyema. Am J Surg. 2000;180:507-511.	112.	Truitt MS, Murry J, Amos J, et al. Continuous intercostal nerve blockade for rib fractures: ready for primetime? J Trauma. 2011;71(6):1548-1552.	113.	Kozar RA, Moore FA, Cothren CC, et al. Risk factors for hepatic morbidity following nonoperative management: mul-ticenter study. Arch Surg. 2006;141:451-458.	114.	Malhotra AK, Fabian TC, Croce MA, et al. Blunt hepatic injury: a paradigm shift from operative to nonoperative man-agement in the 1990s. Ann Surg. 2000;231:804-813.	115.	Peitzman AB, Marsh JW. Advanced operative techniques in the management of complex liver injury. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012;73(3):765-770.	116.	Biffl WL, Moore EE, Franciose RJ. Venovenous bypass and hepatic vascular isolation as adjuncts in the repair of destruc-tive wounds to the retrohepatic inferior vena cava. J Trauma. 1998;45:400-403.Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   24710/12/18   6:22 PM 248BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART I	117.	Poggetti RS, Moore EE, Moore FA, et al. Balloon tampon-ade for bilobar transfixing hepatic gunshot wounds. J Trauma. 1992;33:694-697.	118.	Delis SG, Bakoyiannis A, Selvaggi G, et al. Liver transplanta-tion for severe hepatic trauma: experience from a single center. World J Gastroenterol. 2009;15(13):1641-1644.	119.	Pickhardt B, Moore EE, Moore FA, et al. Operative splenic salvage in adults: a decade perspective. J Trauma. 1989;29:1386-1391.	120.	Feliciano DV, Spjut-Patrinely V, Burch JM, et al. Splenorrha-phy: the alternative. Ann Surg. 1990;211:569-580.	121.	Bhullar IS, Tepas JJ 3rd, Siragusa D, Loper T, Kerwin A, Frykberg ER. To nearly come full circle: nonoperative man-agement of high-grade IV-V blunt splenic trauma is safe using a protocol with routine angioembolization. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2017;82(4):657-664.	122.	McIntyre LK, Schiff M, Jurkovich GJ. Failure of nonopera-tive management of splenic injuries: causes and consequences. Arch Surg. 2005;140:563-568.	123.	Lopez JM Jr, McGonagill PW, Gross JL, et al. Subcapsular hematoma in blunt splenic injury: a significant predictor of failure of nonoperative management. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2015;79(6):957-959; discussion 959-960.	124.	Toutouzas KG, Velmahos GC, Kaminski A, et al. Leukocytosis after posttraumatic splenectomy: a physiologic event or sign of sepsis? Arch Surg. 2002;137:924-928.	125.	Howdieshell TR, Heffernan D, Dipiro JT; Therapeutic Agents Committee of the Surgical Infection Society. Surgical infec-tion society guidelines for vaccination after traumatic injury. Surg Infect (Larchmt). 2006;7(3):275-303.	126.	Todd SR, Kozar RA, Moore FA. Nutrition support in adult trauma patients. Nutr Clin Pract. 2006;21:421-429.	127.	Burlew CC, Moore EE, Cuschieri J, et al; the WTA Study Group. Who should we feed? Western Trauma Asso-ciation multi-institutional study of enteral nutrition in the open abdomen after injury. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012;73:1380-1387.	128.	Schroeppel TJ, Saleem K, Sharpe JP, et al. Penetrating duode-nal trauma: a 19-year experience. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2016;80(3):461-465.	129.	Biffl WL, Moore EE, Croce M, et al. Western Trauma Asso-ciation critical decisions in trauma: management of pancreatic injuries. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2013;75(6):941-946.	130.	Vaughn GD, Frazier OH, Graham D, et al. The use of pyloric exclusion in the management of severe duodenal injuries. Am J Surg. 1977;134:785.	131.	Krige JE, Kotze UK, Setshedi M, Nicol AJ, Navsaria PH. Surgical management and outcomes of combined pancreati-coduodenal injuries: analysis of 75 consecutive cases. J Am Coll Surg. 2016;222(5):737-749.	132.	Nelson R, Singer M. Primary repair for penetrating colon inju-ries. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2003;(3):CD002247.	133.	Burlew CC, Moore EE, Cuschieri J, et al; WTA Study Group. Sew it up! A Western Trauma Association multi-institutional study of enteric injury management in the postinjury open abdomen. J Trauma. 2011;70(2):273-277.	134.	Asensio JA, Britt LD, Borzotta A, et al. Multi-institutional experience with the management of superior mesenteric artery injuries. J Am Coll Surg. 2001;193:354-356.	135.	Burch JM, Richardson RJ, Martin RR, et al. Penetrating iliac vascular injuries: experience with 233 consecutive patients. J Trauma. 1990;30:1450-1459.	136.	Mullins RJ, Lucas CE, Ledgerwood AM. The natural his-tory following venous ligation for civilian injuries. J Trauma. 1980;20:737-743.	137.	Jurkovich GJ, Hoyt DB, Moore FA, et al. Portal triad injuries. J Trauma. 1995;39:426-434.	138.	Voelzke BB, McAninch JW. Renal gunshot wounds: clinical management and outcome. J Trauma. 2009;66(3):593-600.	139.	Rostas J, Simmons JD, Frotan MA, Brevard SB, Gonzalez RP. Intraoperative management of renal gunshot injuries: is man-datory exploration of Gerota’s fascia necessary? Am J Surg. 2016;211(4):783-786.	140.	Knudson MM, Harrison PB, Hoyt DB, et al. Outcome after major renovascular injuries: a Western Trauma Association multicenter report. J Trauma. 2000;49:1116-1122.	141.	Burlew CC, Moore EE, Stahel PF, et al. Preperitoneal pelvic packing reduces mortality in patients with life-threatening hemorrhage due to unstable pelvic fractures. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2017;82(2):233-242.	142.	Bosse MJ, MacKenzie EJ, Kellam JF, et al. An analysis of outcomes of reconstruction or amputation of leg-threatening injuries. N Engl J Med. 2002;347:1924-1931.	143.	Einersen PM, Moore EE, Chapman MP, et al. Rapid throm-belastography thresholds for goal-directed resuscitation of patients at risk for massive transfusion. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2017;82(1):114-119.	144.	Moore FA, McKinley BA, Moore EE, et al. Inflammation and the host response to injury, a large-scale collaborative proj-ect: patient-oriented research core—standard operating proce-dures for clinical care. III. Guidelines for shock resuscitation. J Trauma, 2006;61:82-89.	145.	Dezman ZD, Comer AC, Smith GS, Narayan M, Scalea TM, Hirshon JM. Failure to clear elevated lactate predicts 24-hour mortality in trauma patients. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2015;79(4):580-585.	146.	Nickerson TP, Zielinski MD, Jenkins DH, Schiller HJ. The Mayo Clinic experience with Morel-Lavallée lesions: estab-lishment of a practice management guideline. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2014;76(2):493-497.	147.	Burlew CC, Moore EE, Biffl WL, Bensard DD, Johnson JL, Barnett CC. One hundred percent fascial approximation can be achieved in the postinjury open abdomen with a sequential clo-sure protocol. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012;72(1):235-241.	148.	Sela HY, Weiniger CF, Hersch M, Smueloff A, Laufer N, Einav S. The pregnant motor vehicle accident casualty: adher-ence to basic workup and admission guidelines. Ann Surg. 2011;254(2):346-352.	149.	Drukker L, Hants Y, Sharon E, Sela HY, Grisaru-Granovsky S. Perimortem cesarean section for maternal and fetal salvage: concise review and protocol. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2014;93(10):965-972.	150.	ACOG Committee on Obstetric Practice. ACOG Commit-tee Opinion. Number 299, September 2004. Guidelines for diagnostic imaging during pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol. 2004;104:647-651.	151.	Curet MJ, Schermer CR, Demarest GB, et al. Predictors of outcome in trauma during pregnancy: identification of patients who can be monitored for less than 6 hours. J Trauma. 2000;49:18-24.	152.	Bruijns SR, Guly HR, Bouamra O, Lecky F, Lee WA. The value of traditional vital signs, shock index, and age-based markers in predicting trauma mortality. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2013;74(6):1432-1437.	153.	Bulger EM, Arneson MA, Mock CN, et al. Rib fractures in the elderly. J Trauma. 2000;48:1040-1046.	154.	Pieracci FM, Lin Y, Rodil M, et al. A prospective, controlled clinical evaluation of surgical stabilization of severe rib frac-tures. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2016;80(2):187-194.	155.	Tepas JJ. The national pediatric trauma registry: a legacy of commitment to control childhood injury. Semin Pediatr Surg. 2004;13:126-132.	156.	Gardner AR, Diz DI, Tooze JA, Miller CD, Petty J. Injury pat-terns associated with hypotension in pediatric trauma patients: Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   24810/12/18   6:22 PM 249TRAUMACHAPTER 7a national trauma database review. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2015;78(6):1143-1148.	157.	Mollberg NM, Tabachnick D, Lin FJ, et al. Age-associated impact on presentation and outcome for penetrating thoracic trauma in the adult and pediatric patient populations. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2014;76(2):273-277; discussion 277-278.	158.	Linnaus ME, Langlais CS, Garcia NM, et al. Failure of non-operative management of pediatric blunt liver and spleen injuries: a prospective Arizona-Texas-Oklahoma-Memphis-Arkansas Consortium study. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2017;82(4):672-679.	159.	Ingram MC, Siddharthan RV, Morris AD, et al. Hepatic and splenic blush on computed tomography in children fol-lowing blunt abdominal trauma: is intervention necessary? J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2016;81(2):266-270.Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   24910/12/18   6:22 PM
# Chunk 8873
Brunicardi_Ch07_p0183-p0250.indd   25010/12/18   6:22 PMThis page intentionally left blank

BurnsJeffrey H. Anderson, Samuel P. Mandell,  and Nicole S. Gibran 8chapterSurgical care of the burned patient has evolved into a special-ized field incorporating the interdisciplinary skills of burn sur-geons, nurses, burn therapists, and other healthcare specialists. However, recent mass casualty events have been a reminder that healthcare systems may be rapidly pressed to care for large numbers of burn patients. Naturally, general surgeons may be at the forefront in these events, so it is crucial that they are com-fortable with the care of burned patients and well equipped to provide the standard of care.BACKGROUNDBurn injury historically carried a poor prognosis. With advances in fluid resuscitation1 and the advent of early excision of the burn wound,2 survival has become an expectation even for patients with severe burns.3 Continued improvements in critical care and progress in skin bioengineering herald a future in which func-tional and psychologic outcomes are equally important as sur-vival alone. With this shift in priority, the American Burn Association (ABA) has emphasized referral to specialized burn centers after early stabilization. Specific criteria should guide transfer of patients with more complex injuries or other medical needs to a burn  center (Table 8-1). The ABA has published stan-dards of care4 and created a verification process to ensure that burn centers meet those standards.5 Because of increased prehospital safety measures, burn patients are trans-ferred longer distances for definitive care at regional burn  centers6; data from one burn center with a particularly wide catch-ment area confirmed that even transport times averaging several hours did not affect the long-term outcomes of burn patients.7INITIAL EVALUATIONInitial evaluation of the burned patient should follow the same initial priorities of all trauma patients and involves four crucial assessments: airway management, evaluation of other injuries, 1estimation of burn size, and diagnosis of CO and cyanide poi-soning. With direct thermal injury to the upper airway or smoke inhalation, rapid and severe airway edema is potentially lethal. Anticipating the need for intubation and establishing an early airway are critical. Signs of impending respiratory compromise include a hoarse voice, wheezing, or stridor; subjective dyspnea is a particularly concerning symptom and should trigger prompt elective endotracheal intubation. Perioral burns and singed nasal hairs alone do not indicate an upper airway injury, but are signs that the oral cavity and pharynx should be further evaluated for mucosal injury. Orotracheal intubation is the preferred method for securing the airway. Nasotracheal intubation may be use-ful for patients with associated facial trauma when experienced providers are present, but it should be avoided if oral intubation is safe and easy.Burned patients are trauma patients and evaluated with a primary survey in accordance with Advanced Trauma Life Sup-port guidelines. Concurrently with the primary survey, large-bore peripheral intravenous (IV) catheters should be placed and fluid resuscitation should be initiated; for a burn larger than 40% total body surface area (TBSA), two large-bore IVs are ideal. IV place-ment through burned skin is safe and effective but requires atten-tion to securing the catheters. Central venous access and intraosseous (IO) access should be considered when peripheral access cannot be easily obtained. Rarely, IV resuscitation is indi-cated in patients with burns smaller than 15% who can usually hydrate orally. Pediatric patients with burns larger than 15% may require IO access in emergent situations if venous access cannot be attained. An early and comprehensive secondary survey must be performed on all burn patients, but especially those with a his-tory of associated mechanical trauma such as a motor vehicle collision. Also, patients from structural fires in which the manner of egress is not known should be carefully evaluated for injuries from a possible jump or fall. Urgent radiology studies, such as a chest X-ray, should be performed in the emergency department, but nonurgent skeletal evaluation (i.e., extremity X-rays) can be Background	251Initial Evaluation	251Burn Classification	252Burn Depth	253Prognosis	254Resuscitation	254Inhalation Injury and Ventilator  Management	255Treatment of The Burn Wound	257Nutrition	257Complications in Burn Care	258Surgery	259Wound Coverage	259Rehabilitation	260Late Complications: Hypertrophic  Scar, Contractures, and  Heterotopic Ossification	260Psychological Recovery	261Prevention	261Burn Disasters	261Future Areas of Study	262Brunicardi_Ch08_p0251-p0270.indd   25128/12/18   11:51 AM 252Table 8-1Guidelines for referral to a burn centerPartial-thickness burns greater than 10% TBSABurns involving the face, hands, feet, genitalia, perineum, or major jointsThird-degree burns in any age groupElectrical burns, including lightning injuryChemical burnsInhalation injuryBurn injury in patients with complicated preexisting medical disordersPatients with burns and concomitant trauma in which the burn is the greatest risk. If the trauma is the greater immediate risk, the patient may be stabilized in a trauma center before transfer to a burn center.Burned children in hospitals without qualified personnel for the care of childrenBurn injury in patients who will require special social, emotional, or rehabilitative interventionTBSA = total body surface area.done in the intensive care unit (ICU) to avoid hypothermia and delayed resuscitation. Hypothermia is a common prehospital complication that contributes to resuscitation failure. Patients should be wrapped with clean blankets in transport. Cooling should be avoided in patients with moderate or large (>20% TBSA) burns. Patients with acute burn injuries should never receive prophylactic antibiotics. This intervention has been clearly demonstrated to promote development of fungal infections and  resistant organisms and was abandoned in the mid-1980s.8 A tetanus booster should be administered in the emergency department depending on patient immunization status.The importance of pain management for these patients has been widely recognized over the past 25 years. While pain man-agement is a priority for burn patients, it is important to acknowl-edge the opioid crisis and the recent push toward decreasing opiate use in general.9 In order to limit opiate-related morbidity, we recommend responsible opiate use in conjunction with mul-timodal pain control and development of a weaning plan start-ing at opioid commencement. Clear expectations around pain medication use should be set with patients. Anxiety is another component of the psychological response of burn patients, seen with both wound care and general postinjury hospital course. Benzodiazepines are a staple in the treatment of acute anxiety; however, they can contribute significantly to hospital delirium.10 We recommend conservative benzodiazepine use to mitigate the effects of anxiety while minimizing deliriogenic effects of benzodiazepines.2Most burn resuscitation formulas estimate fluid require-ments based on burn size measured as a percentage of TBSA (%TBSA). The “rule of nines” is a crude but quick and effec-tive method of estimating burn size (Fig. 8-1). In adults, the anterior and posterior trunk each account for 18%, each lower extremity is 18%, each upper extremity is 9%, and the head is 9%. In children under 3 years old, the head accounts for a larger relative surface area and should be taken into account when esti-mating burn size. For smaller or odd-shaped burns, the “rule of the palm” where the palmar surface of the hand, including the digits, is 1% TBSA is useful. Diagrams such as the Lund and Browder chart give a more accurate accounting of the true burn size in children and adults. The importance of an accurate burn size assessment cannot be overemphasized. Superficial or first-degree burns should not be included when calculating burn size, and thorough cleaning of soot and debris is mandatory to avoid confusing soiled skin with burns. Examination of referral data suggests that physicians inexperienced with burns tend to overestimate the size of small burns and underestimate the size of large burns, with potentially detrimental effects on pretrans-fer resuscitation.11BURN CLASSIFICATIONBurns are commonly classified as thermal, electrical, or chemi-cal burns, with thermal burns consisting of flame, contact, or scald burns. Flame burns are the most common cause for hos-pital admission of burns, and have the highest mortality. This is primarily related to their association with structural fires and the accompanying inhalation injury and/or CO poisoning.12Electrical burns make up 3% of U.S. hospital admissions but have special concerns,12 including cardiac arrhythmia and compartment syndrome with concurrent rhabdomyolysis. A baseline ECG is recommended in all patients with an electrical injury, and a normal ECG in a low-voltage injury (<1000 V) may preclude hospital admission. Because compartment syn-drome and rhabdomyolysis are common in high-voltage elec-trical injuries, vigilance must be maintained for neurologic or vascular compromise, and fasciotomies should be performed even in cases of moderate clinical suspicion. Long-term neuro-logic symptoms13 and cataract development14 are not uncommon with high-voltage electrical injuries, and neurologic and oph-thalmologic consultation should be obtained to define baseline patient function.15Chemical burns also comprise 3% of admitted burn patients12 and result in potentially severe burns. Typically, acid chemical burns result in coagulation necrosis and alkali chemical burns cause liquefactive necrosis (with an exception of hydrofluoric acid, which also causes liquefactive necrosis).16,17 Key Points1	Follow American Burn Association criteria for referral of a patient to a regional burn center.2	Never administer prophylactic antibiotics other than tetanus vaccination.3	Early excision and grafting of full-thickness and deep  partial-thickness burns improve outcomes.4	Intravenous fluid resuscitation for patients with burns >20% of total body surface area (children with burns >15% of total body surface area) should be titrated to mean arterial pres-sure (MAP) >60 mmHg and appropriate urine output.Brunicardi_Ch08_p0251-p0270.indd   25228/12/18   11:51 AM 253BURNSCHAPTER 8The most important components of initial therapy are careful removal of the toxic substance from the patient and irrigation of the affected area with water for a minimum of 30 minutes. In cases of exposure to dry chemicals, such as concrete or pow-dered forms of lye, the substance should be swept from the patient to avoid a thermal reaction with water. The offending agents in chemical burns can be systemically absorbed and may cause specific metabolic derangements. Formic acid has been known to cause hemolysis and hemoglobinuria, and hydroflu-oric acid causes hypocalcemia. Hydrofluoric acid is a particu-larly common offender due to its widespread industrial uses. Calcium-based therapies are the mainstay of treating hydroflu-oric acid burns, with topical application of calcium gluconate onto wounds18 and IV administration of calcium gluconate for systemic hypocalcemia symptoms. Intra-arterial calcium gluco-nate infusion provides effective treatment of progressive tissue injury and intense pain.19,20 Patients undergoing intra-arterial therapy need continuous cardiac monitoring. Persistent refrac-tory hypocalcemia with electrocardiac abnormalities may signal the need for emergent excision of the burned areas.21BURN DEPTHBased on the original burn depth classification by Dupuytren in 1832,22 burn wounds are commonly classified as superficial (first-degree), partial-thickness (second-degree), full-thickness (third-degree), and fourth-degree burns, which affect underlying soft tissue. Fifth-degree burns (through muscle to bone) and sixth degree burns (charring bone) were also described although are less common. Partial-thickness burns are classified as either superficial or deep partial-thickness burns by depth of involved dermis. Clinically, first-degree burns are painful but do not blis-ter, second-degree burns have dermal involvement and are extremely painful with weeping and blisters, and third-degree burns are leathery, painless, and nonblanching. Jackson described three zones of tissue injury following burn injury.23 The zone of coagulation is the most severely burned portion and is typically in the center of the wound. As the name implies, the affected tissue is coagulated and sometimes frankly necrotic, much like a full thickness burn, and will need excision and graft-ing. Peripheral to that is a zone of stasis, with variable degrees of vasoconstriction and resultant ischemia, much like a second-degree burn. Appropriate resuscitation and wound care may pre-vent conversion to a deeper wound, but infection or suboptimal perfusion may result in an increase in burn depth. This is clini-cally relevant because many superficial partial-thickness burns will heal with nonoperative  management, and the majority of deep partial-thickness burns benefit from excision and skin grafting. The outermost area of a burn is called the zone of hyperemia, which will heal with minimal or no scarring and is most like a superficial partial thickness burn or first-degree burn.Unfortunately, even experienced burn surgeons have lim-ited ability to accurately predict the healing potential of partial-thickness burns soon after injury; one reason is that burn wounds evolve over the 48 to 72 hours after injury. Numerous burn depth assessment tools have been developed with the idea that 39%4.5%4.5%9%9%18%1%1%18%18%18%FrontBackFigure 8-1. The “rule of nines” can be used as a quick reference for estimating a patient’s burn size by dividing the body into regions to which total body surface area is allocated in multiples of nine.Brunicardi_Ch08_p0251-p0270.indd   25328/12/18   11:51 AM 254BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iearlier burn depth definition will expedite appropriate surgical decision-making. One of the most effective ways to determine burn depth is full-thickness biopsy, but this has several limita-tions; not only is the procedure painful and potentially scar-ring, but accurate interpretation of the histopathology requires a specialized pathologist and may have slow turnaround times.24 Laser Doppler can measure skin perfusion to predict burn  depth with sensitivities and specificity of up to 83% and 97%, respectively.25 Noncontact ultrasound has been postulated as a painless modality to predict nonhealing wounds and has the advantage of easily performed serial measurements.26 Unfortu-nately, none of these newer therapies have proven adequately superior to justify their cost and as yet have not substituted serial examination by experienced burn surgeons.PROGNOSISThe Baux score (mortality risk equals age plus %TBSA) was used for many years to predict mortality in burns. Analysis of multiple risk factors for burn mortality has validated age and burn size as the strongest predictors of mortality.27 Advance-ments in burn care have lowered overall mortality to the point that the original Baux score may no longer be accurate. How-ever, the Revised Baux Score, which accounts for age, burn size, and inhalation injury, has been found to be independently associated with mortality.28 As such, age, burn size, and inhala-tion injury continue to be the most robust indicators for burn mortality.29 Age even as a single variable strongly predicts mortality in burns,30 and in-hospital mortality in elderly burn patients is a function of age regardless of other comorbidities.31 In nonelderly patients, comorbidities such as preinjury human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), metastatic cancer, and kidney or liver disease may influence mortality and length of stay.32 A large database study of 68,661 burn patients found that the vari-ables with the highest predictive value for mortality were age, %TBSA, inhalation injury, coexistent trauma, and pneumonia.33 A more recent study analyzing 506,628 burn inpatients between 1998 and 2008 demonstrated an association between burn size, age, inhalation injury, and mortality. Other factors associated with mortality included African American race, female gender, and treatment in urban private hospitals (as opposed to urban academic hospitals).34Mortality is not the only outcome of interest in the burn population. Burn injury can significantly impact the subsequent quality of life for survivors, including but not limited to appear-ance, mobility, functional status, and ability to work. One study found that burn injury reduces short term quality of life by 30% and long-term quality of life by approximately 11%.35 Predic-tors of poorer physical and mental health 12 months removed from burn injury include older age, female gender, and greater %TBSA burn size.36 One factor impacting quality of life is itching—a late and bothersome consequence of burn injury that affects both adult and pediatric population.37,38 Other factors dis-cussed later in this chapter include hypertrophic scarring, con-tracture, and heterotopic ossification. Finally, return to work or school has been a useful tool to evaluate recovery and prognosis. A recent meta-analysis found that approximately 28% of burn survivors never return to work.39 A recent study using an inter-ventional bundle involving the patient, the employee, worker’s compensation, and burn clinic staff demonstrated a return to work rate of 93%.40 The return to school for pediatric patients is actually very prompt, averaging about 10 days after discharge. However, further study is needed to determine whether atten-dance and performance suffer despite early reentry to school.41 It is important to recognize these potential quality-of-life issues in burn patients and take necessary steps to diminish the impact that burn injury has on quality of life both in the hospital and following discharge.RESUSCITATIONA myriad of formulas exist for calculating fluid needs during burn resuscitation, suggesting that no one formula benefits all patients. The most commonly used formula, the Parkland or Baxter formula, consists of 3 to 4 mL/kg per % burn of Lac-tated Ringer’s, of which half is given during the first 8 hours after burn and the remaining half is given over the subsequent 16 hours.1 The most recent American Burn Association con-sensus formula recommends 2 mL/kg per % burn of Lactated Ringers given the tendency toward excessive fluid administra-tion with the traditional formulas.42 The concept behind continu-ous fluid requirements is simple. The burn (and/or inhalation injury) drives an inflammatory response that leads to capillary leak; as plasma leaks into the extravascular space, crystalloid administration maintains the intravascular volume. Therefore, if a patient receives a large fluid bolus in a prehospital setting or emergency department, the fluid has likely leaked into the interstitium, and the patient still requires ongoing burn resusci-tation according to the estimates. Continuation of fluid volumes should depend on the time since injury, urine output, and mean arterial pressure (MAP). As the capillary leak closes, the patient will require less volume to maintain these two resuscitation endpoints. Children under 20 kg have the additional require-ment that they do not have sufficient glycogen stores to main-tain an adequate glucose level in response to the inflammatory response. Specific pediatric formulas have been described, but the simplest approach is to deliver a weight-based maintenance IV fluid with glucose supplementation in addition to the calcu-lated resuscitation with lactated Ringer’s.It is important to remember that any formula for burn resuscitation is merely a guideline, and fluid must be titrated based on appropriate response to therapy. A number of parame-ters are widely used to gauge burn resuscitation, but the most common remain the simple outcomes of blood pressure and urine output. As in any critically ill patient,  a target MAP of 60 mmHg ensures optimal end-organ perfusion. Goals for urine out-put should be 30 mL/h in adults and 1 to 1.5 mL/kg per h in pediatric patients. Because blood pressure and urine output may not correlate perfectly with true tissue perfusion, the search continues for other adjunctive parameters that may more accu-rately reflect adequate resuscitation. Some centers have found serum lactate to be a better predictor of mortality in severe burns,43,44 and others have found that base deficit predicts even-tual organ dysfunction and mortality.45,46 Because burned patients with normal blood pressure and serum lactate levels may have compromised gastric mucosal perfusion, continuous measurement of mucosal pH with its logistical difficulties has garnered limited popularity.47,48 Invasive monitoring with pul-monary artery catheters typically results in significant excessive fluid administration without improved cardiac output or preload measurements; use of invasive monitoring seems to have vari-able effects on long-term outcomes.49Actual administrated fluid volumes typically exceed vol-umes predicted by standard formulas.50 One survey of burn 4Brunicardi_Ch08_p0251-p0270.indd   25428/12/18   11:51 AM 255BURNSCHAPTER 8centers showed that 58% of patients end up getting more fluids than would be predicted by Baxter’s formula.51 Comparison of modern-day patients with historical controls shows that over-resuscitation may be a relatively recent trend.52 One theory is that increased opioid analgesic use results in peripheral vaso-dilation and hypotension and the need for greater volumes of bolused resuscitative fluids.53 A classic study by Navar et al showed that burned patients with inhalation injury required an average of 5.76 mL/kg per % burn, vs. 3.98 mL/kg per % burn for patients without inhalation injury, and this has been corroborated by subsequent studies.54,55 Prolonged mechanical ventilation may also play a role in increased fluid needs.56 A multicenter study found that age, weight, %TBSA, and intu-bation on admission were significant predictors of more fluid delivery during the resuscitation period. Those patients receiv-ing higher fluid volumes were at increased risk of complications and death.57 Common complications include abdominal com-partment syndrome, extremity compartment syndrome, intraoc-ular compartment syndrome, and pleural effusions. Monitoring bladder pressures can provide valuable information about devel-opment of intra-abdominal hypertension.The use of colloid as part of the burn resuscitation has gen-erated much interest over the years. In late resuscitation when the capillary leak has closed, colloid administration may decrease overall fluid volumes and potentially may decrease associated complications such as intra-abdominal hypertension.58 A recent meta-analysis accounting for statistical heterogeneity among studies included demonstrated a trend toward mortality ben-efit for patients receiving albumin.59 However, albumin use has never been shown to definitively improve mortality in burn patients and has controversial effects on mortality in critically ill patients.60-63 Still, many burn centers including ours continue to use albumin as an adjunct during burn resuscitation.64 Attempts to minimize fluid volumes in burn resuscitation have included study of hypertonic solutions. A recent meta-analysis evaluating hyperosmotic vs. isoosmotic fluid resuscitation demonstrates decreased total fluid load (vol/%TBSA per weight) over the first 24 hours with use of hyperosmotic fluid with no difference in total fluid, urine output, creatinine, or mortality.65 A described downside of hypertonic fluid administration is hyperchloremic acidosis.66Other adjuncts are being increasingly used during initial burn resuscitation. High-dose ascorbic acid (vitamin C) may decrease fluid volume requirements and ameliorate respira-tory embarrassment during resuscitation, although no mortality benefit has been noted thus far in two trials.67,68 Plasmapheresis has also been associated with decreased fluid requirements and increased urine output in patients who require higher resuscita-tive volumes than predicted to maintain adequate urine output and MAP.69 It is postulated that plasmapheresis may filter out inflammatory mediators, thus decreasing ongoing vasodilation and capillary leak.70One adjunct that has found increasing utility in surgi-cal ICUs has been the application of bedside ultrasound.71  Ultrasound offers the potential to make rapid, noninvasive assessments during acute changes in clinical condition. For burn patients, bedside ultrasonography may be indicated for evalu-ation of volume status, gross assessment of cardiac function, and diagnosis of pneumothorax. Determining patient cardiac function and volume status may guide fluid resuscitation. Car-diac function can be evaluated with three common heart views: the parasternal long axis, parasternal short axis, and apical four-chamber views.72 Whereas no study has used ultrasound to guide fluid resuscitation in burn patients, volume status can be estimated by examination of cardiac function and evaluation of the inferior vena cava (IVC) diameter with changes in respira-tion, as has been done in patients with hemorrhage and shock.73 Ultrasound also allows timely diagnosis of pneumothorax.74 A high-frequency probe with an adequate window between ribs permits identification of lung parenchyma against the chest well. A pneumothorax appears as a transition on ultrasound between lung parenchyma, which has a heterogeneous appear-ance, and air, which has a hypoechoic appearance. Further stud-ies are warranted to identify indications for the use of ultrasound in burned patients.Machine learning and bedside computer decision support are other adjuncts gaining traction in caring for burn patients. These modalities can enhance patient care and aid in diagnosis, treatment, and research.75 The use of bedside computer decision support has been particularly appealing for resuscitation of burn patients in the first 48 hours and has been shown to improve fluid management during initial resuscitation.76The role of blood transfusion in critically injured patients has undergone a reevaluation in recent years.77,78 Blood transfu-sions are considered to be immunomodulatory and potentially immunosuppressive, which is one explanation to the links between blood transfusions and increased infection and shorter time to recurrence after oncologic surgery.79,80 A large multi-center study of blood transfusions in burn patients found that increased numbers of transfusions were associated with increased infections and higher mortality in burn patients, even when cor-recting for burn severity.81 A follow-up study implementing a restrictive transfusion policy in burned children showed that a hemoglobin threshold of 7 g/dL had no more adverse outcomes vs. a traditional transfusion trigger of 10 g/dL. In addition, costs incurred to the institution were significantly less.82 A recent ran-domized control trial in patients with >20% TBSA compared outcomes of a restrictive to a liberal red blood cell transfusion strategy (hemoglobin 7–8 vs. 10–11, respectively). There were no differences in blood stream infection, organ dysfunction, ven-tilator days, time to wound healing, or 30-day mortality between both groups.83 These data, in concert with other reported compli-cations such as transfusion-related lung injury,84 have led to rec-ommendations that blood transfusions be used only when there is an apparent physiologic need. Attempts to minimize blood transfusion in nonburned critically ill patients have led to use of erythropoietin by some centers. However, burn patients often have elevated erythropoietin levels, and a randomized study in burn patients showed that recombinant human erythropoietin did not effectively prevent anemia or decrease the number of transfusions given.85 Promising animal studies demonstrating erythropoietin-mediated prevention of secondary burn progres-sion have yet to be validated in humans.86INHALATION INJURY AND VENTILATOR MANAGEMENTInhalation injuries are commonly seen in tandem with burn inju-ries and are known to increase mortality in burned patients.87,88 Smoke inhalation is present in as many as 35% of hospital-ized burn patients and may triple the hospital stay compared to isolated burn injuries.89 Mortality for inhalation injury has been reported to be as high as 25%, with this increasing to 50% in patients with ≥20% TBSA burns.90 The pneumonia rate in Brunicardi_Ch08_p0251-p0270.indd   25528/12/18   11:51 AM 256BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ipatients with inhalation injury has been reported to be three times higher than those without inhalation injury, and it has been associated with increased length of stay, increased ven-tilator days, and need for tracheostomy.91,92 The combination of burns, inhalation injury, and pneumonia increases mortal-ity by up to 60% over burns alone.93 Subsequent development of the adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) is common in these patients and may be caused in part by recruitment of alveolar leukocytes with an enhanced endotoxin-activated cyto-kine response.94 When ARDS complicates burns and inhalation injury, mortality approaches 66%; in one study, patients with burns ≥60% TBSA in combination with inhalation injury and ARDS had 100% mortality.95Smoke inhalation causes injury in two ways: by direct heat injury to the upper airways and inhalation of combustion prod-ucts into the lower airways. Direct injury to the upper airway causes airway swelling that typically leads to maximal edema in the first 24 to 48 hours after injury and often requires a short course of endotracheal intubation for airway protection. Com-bustion products found in smoke, most commonly from syn-thetic substances in structural fires, cause lower airway injury. These irritants cause direct mucosal injury, which in turn leads to mucosal sloughing, edema, reactive bronchoconstriction, and finally obstruction of the lower airways. Injury to both the epi-thelium and pulmonary alveolar macrophages causes release of prostaglandins, chemokines, and other inflammatory mediators; neutrophil migration; increased tracheobronchial blood flow; and, finally, increased capillary permeability. All of these com-ponents of acute lung injury increase the risk of pneumonia and ARDS following an inhalation injury.The physiologic effects of smoke inhalation are numerous. Inhalation injury decreases lung compliance96 and increases air-way resistance work of breathing.97 Inhalation injury in the pres-ence of burns also increases overall metabolic demands.98 The most common physiologic derangement seen with inhalation injury is increased fluid requirement during resuscitation. Since severe inhalation injury may result in mucosal sloughing with obstruction of smaller airways, bronchoscopy findings including carbon deposits, erythema, edema, bronchorrhea, and a hemor-rhagic appearance may be useful for staging inhalation injury. The Abbreviated Injury Score—a scale from 0 to 4, with 0 representing no injury and 4 representing massive injury—is commonly used for grading inhalation injury. Higher grades of bronchoscopic inhalation injury have been associated with increased incidence of ARDS, increased ventilator days, higher rate of multiple organ dysfunction syndrome, and higher mortality.99 Bronchoscopic evaluation can also help isolate organisms early in the course of a potential pneumonia. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) within 24 hours after an inhalation injury demonstrates a high rate of positive quantitative cultures,100 suggesting that pneumonia develops soon after the acute lung injury. Bacterial contamina-tion from urgent intubation may contribute to early development of pneumonia in patients with inhalation injury.100 Early evalu-ation with bronchoscopy can identify causative organisms and guide appropriate antibiotic therapy.Because bronchoscopy is an invasive test, attempts have been made to utilize other diagnostic modalities, such as tho-racic computed tomography (CT) scans101 and xenon ventilationperfusion scanning.102,103 However, these are generally not uti-lized unless otherwise indicated, and the best tools available for diagnosing inhalation injury remain clinical presentation and bronchoscopic evaluation. Decreased PaO2:FiO2 ratio (<350) on admission may not only predict inhalation injury but also indi-cate increased fluid needs more accurately than bronchoscopic grading of the severity of inhalation.104Treatment of inhalation injury consists primarily of support-ive care. Aggressive pulmonary toilet and routine use of nebulized bronchodilators such as albuterol are recommended. Nebulized N-acetylcysteine is an antioxidant free radical scavenger designed to decrease the toxicity of high oxygen concentrations. Aero-solized heparin aims to prevent formation of fibrin plugs and decrease the formation of airway casts and has been associated with increased number of ventilator-free days.105 A recent meta-analysis demonstrated improved mortality with the use of inhaled anticoagulation regimens.106 Aerosolized tissue plasminogen activator107 and recombinant human antithrombin108 have shown promise in sheep models but have not yet seen widespread clinical use. Administration of intrabronchial surfactant has been used as a salvage therapy in patients with severe burns and inhalation injury.109 Inhaled nitric oxide may also be useful as a last effort in burn patients with severe lung injury who are failing other means of ventilator support.110 The use of steroids has traditionally been avoided due to the worse outcomes in burn patients111; however, some data demonstrate selectively improved outcomes with septic shock requiring vasopressor circulatory.112An important contributor to early mortality in burn patients and often seen in patients with inhalation injury is carbon mon-oxide (CO) poisoning. This clear, odorless gas has an affinity for hemoglobin is approximately 200 to 250 times more than that of oxygen. Carboxyhemoglobin decreases the levels of nor-mal oxygenated hemoglobin and can quickly lead to anoxia and death.113 CO also causes uncoupling of oxidative phosphory-lation in mitochondria, free radical generation, and increased systemic inflammatory response via platelet activation—all of which may increase cardiac and neurologic morbidity and mortality in CO toxicity.114 Unexpected neurologic or cardiac symptoms should raise the level of suspicion, and an arterial carboxyhemoglobin level must be obtained because pulse oxim-etry can be falsely elevated. Administration of 100% normo-baric oxygen is the gold standard for treating CO poisoning and reduces the half-life of CO from 250 minutes in room air to 40 to 60 minutes.115 Some authors have proposed hyperbaric  oxygen as an adjunctive therapy for CO poisoning.116 However, a recent meta-analysis offers mixed results regarding the suc-cess and long-term outcomes of hyperbaric oxygen, and its asso-ciated logistical difficulties and complications have limited its usefulness for patients with moderate or large burns.117 Patients who sustain a cardiac arrest as a result of their CO poisoning have an extremely poor prognosis regardless of the success of initial resuscitation attempts.118Hydrogen cyanide toxicity may also be a component of an overwhelming smoke inhalation injury. Cyanide inhibits cyto-chrome oxidase, which is required for oxidative phosphorylation.119 Afflicted patients may have a persistent, severe lactic acidosis, neurologic symptoms, pulmonary edema, or cardiac sequelae (ST elevation on electrocardiogram).120,121 Classic signs of cya-nide poisoning—including bitter almond breath and cherry-red skin changes—are rare and should not be used as the sole diagnostic criteria. Treatment consists of sodium thiosulfate, hydroxocobalamin, and 100% oxygen. Sodium thiosulfate works as a substrate for the metabolism cyanide into a nontoxic deriva-tive, but it works slowly and is not effective for acute therapy.121  Hydroxocobalamin—a vitamin B12 precursor—quickly Brunicardi_Ch08_p0251-p0270.indd   25628/12/18   11:51 AM 257BURNSCHAPTER 8complexes with cyanide, is excreted by the kidney, and is rec-ommended for immediate therapy.122 In the majority of patients, lactic acidosis will resolve with ventilation, and sodium thio-sulfate treatment becomes unnecessary.123 Given the unknown side-effects of hydroxocobalamin administration, it should be reserved only for patients with a strong suspicion of cyanide poisoning.New ventilator strategies have contributed to the improved mortality with ARDS. Although ARDS still contributes to mor-tality in burn patients, treatments have improved so that mor-tality is primarily from multisystem organ failure rather than isolated respiratory causes.124 The ARDS Network Study find-ing that low tidal volume (6 cc/kg) or “lung-protective ventila-tion” had a 22% lower mortality than patients with traditional tidal volumes (12 cc/kg)124 has dramatically changed the man-agement of patients with acute lung injury. A similar approach had previously been shown to improve outcomes in pediatric burn patients.125 In patients with refractory hypoxemia despite lung-protective ventilation, prone positioning may improve oxygenation and mortality.126,127 No specific studies have exam-ined prone positioning in burned patients, and in fact exclusion criteria from a large prone positioning trial included patients with ≥20% TBSA.127 Select reports demonstrate the feasibility of prone positioning in burn patients,128 although they pres-ent logistical challenges and caution must be used in patients with frontal and facial burns who are already at risk for loss of the grafts, invasive catheters, and the endotracheal tube. Highfrequency percussive ventilation (HFPV) has shown early promise in patients with inhalation injury.129 One study showed notable decreases in both morbidity and mortality with HFPV, especially in patients with burns <40% TBSA and inhalation injury.130 A randomized controlled trial between low-tidal vol-ume ventilation and HFPV in burn patients requiring mechani-cal ventilation demonstrated no significant difference in primary clinical outcomes.131 A related technique is high-frequency oscillatory ventilation (HFOV), which has been used primarily as a salvage modality in patients refractory to more conventional measures.132 However, two recent studies and a recent metaanalysis have concluded that HFOV yields no mortality benefit and in fact may actually increase patient mortality in patients with ARDS.133-135 Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) is typically reserved for salvage situations, although utilization of ECMO for burn patients is increasing and out-comes have been shown to be similar to other ECMO patients.136TREATMENT OF THE BURN WOUNDMultitudes of topical therapies exist for the treatment of burn wounds, many of which contain antimicrobial properties. A recent Cochrane Database Review nicely summarizes the data surrounding antisepsis for burns; however, much of the data is inconclusive.137 Silver sulfadiazine is one of the most widely used in clinical practice. Silver sulfadiazine has a wide range of antimicrobial activity, primarily as prophylaxis against burn wound infections rather than treatment of existing infec-tions. It has the added benefits of being inexpensive, being easily applied, and having soothing qualities. It is not signifi-cantly absorbed systemically and thus has minimal metabolic derangements. Silver sulfadiazine has a reputation for causing neutropenia, but this association is more likely due to neutro-phil margination from the inflammatory response following burn injury. True allergic reactions to the sulfa component of silver sulfadiazine are rare, and at-risk patients can have a small test patch applied to identify a burning sensation or rash. Silver sulfadiazine destroys skin grafts and is contraindicated on burns or donor sites in proximity to newly grafted areas. Also, silver sulfadiazine may retard epithelial migration in healing partial-thickness wounds.Mafenide acetate, either in cream or solution form, is an effective topical antimicrobial. It is effective even in the pres-ence of eschar and can be used in both treating and prevent-ing wound infections; the solution formulation is an excellent antimicrobial for fresh skin grafts. Use of mafenide acetate may be limited by pain with application to partial-thickness burns. As mafenide is a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor, a his-torically described side effect is metabolic acidosis. However, multiple studies have been performed using mafenide to treat burn wounds without any significant incidence of metabolic acidosis.138,139Silver nitrate has broad-spectrum antimicrobial activity as a topical solution. The solution used must be dilute (0.5%), and prolonged topical application leads to electrolyte extravasation with resulting hyponatremia. A rare complication is methemo-globinemia.140 Although inexpensive, silver nitrate solution causes black stains, and laundry costs may offset any fiscal benefit to the hospital. Although there is no definitive evidence regarding use in the burn population, Dakin’s solution (0.5% sodium hypochlorite solution) is an acceptable alternative as an inexpensive topical antimicrobial.For smaller burns or larger burns that are nearly healed, topical ointments such as bacitracin, neomycin, and polymyxin B can be used. These are also useful for superficial partial-thickness facial burns as they can be applied and left open to air without dressing coverage. Meshed skin grafts in which the interstices are nearly closed are another indication for use of these agents, preferably with greasy gauze to help retain the ointment in the affected area. All three have been reported to cause nephrotoxicity and should be used sparingly in large burns. Recent media coverage of methicillin-resistant Staphy-lococcus aureus (MRSA) has led to widespread use by commu-nity practitioners of mupirocin for new burns. Unless the patient has known risk factors for MRSA, mupirocin should only be used in culture-positive burn wound infections to prevent emer-gence of further resistance.Silver-impregnated dressings are increasingly being used for donor sites, skin grafts, and partial-thickness burns because of their potential to avoid daily dressing changes. These may be more comfortable for the patient, reduce the number of dressing changes, and shorten hospital length of stay, but they limit serial wound examinations. Biologic membranes such as Biobrane (Smith & Nephew Global Products) provide a prolonged barrier under which wounds may heal. Because of the occlusive nature of these dressings, these are typically used only on fresh, super-ficial, partial-thickness burns that are clearly not contaminated.NUTRITIONNutritional support may be more important in patients with large burns than in any other patient population. Not only does adequate nutrition play a role in acute issues such as immune responsiveness, but the hypermetabolic response in burn injury may raise baseline metabolic rates by as much as 200%.141 This can lead to catabolism of muscle proteins and decreased lean body mass that may delay functional recovery.142 Early enteral Brunicardi_Ch08_p0251-p0270.indd   25728/12/18   11:51 AM 258BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ifeeding for patients with burns >20% TBSA is safe and may reduce loss of lean body mass,143 slow the hypermetabolic response,144 and result in more efficient protein metabolism.145,146 Early enteral feeds have also been associated with shorter dura-tion of ICU stay and decreased rates of wound infection.147 If the enteral feeds are started within the first few hours after admis-sion, gastric ileus may be avoided. Adjuncts such as metoclo-pramide promote gastrointestinal motility; if other measures for gastric feeding are unsuccessful, advancing the tube into the small bowel with nasojejunal feeding can be attempted.148 In endotracheally intubated patients, trips to the operating room do not necessitate holding enteral feedings.149 Immune-modulating supplements such as glutamine may decrease infectious com-plications in burn patients,150,151 although the effect on mortality and wound closure remains unknown. One proposed mechanism for glutamine’s immune modulating properties is via preven-tion of T-cell suppression in mesenteric lymph nodes.152 There is currently a multicenter randomized control trial recruiting to determine the effect of glutamine on mortality, blood stream infections, and health-related quality of life (https://clinicaltri-als.gov/ct2/show/NCT00985205). Micronutrient supplementa-tion with antioxidant vitamins (vitamin E and ascorbic acid) and trace minerals (selenium, zinc, and copper) optimizes wound healing, enhances immune function, and fights oxida-tive stress.153Calculating the appropriate caloric needs of the burn patient can be challenging. A commonly used formula in non-burned patients is the Harris-Benedict equation, which calcu-lates caloric needs using factors such as gender, age, height, and weight. This formula uses an activity factor for specific inju-ries, and for burns, the basal energy expenditure is multiplied by two. The Harris-Benedict equation may be inaccurate in burns of <40% TBSA, and in these patients, the Curreri formula may be more appropriate. This formula estimates caloric needs to be  25 kcal/kg per d plus 40 kcal/%TBSA per d. Indirect calorim-etry can also be used to calculate resting energy expenditure, but in burn patients, a “metabolic cart” has not been documented to be more beneficial than the predictive equations.154 Titrating caloric needs closely is important because overfeeding patients will lead to storage of fat instead of muscle anabolism.155Modifying the hypermetabolic response is an area of intense study. β-Blocker use in pediatric patients decreases heart rate and resting energy expenditure and abrogates protein catabolism, even in long-term use.156 There may be benefits to β-blockade in adult patients,157 and many centers use β-blockers routinely in the adult population with limited safety and efficacy data.158 Some data suggests that β-blocker use in the adult burn population has a greater incidence of iatrogenic hypotension and bradycardia. As such, it is important to monitor hemodynamic status when starting β-blockers in these populations.159The anabolic steroid oxandrolone has been extensively studied in burn patients as well and has demonstrated improve-ments in lean body mass and bone density in severely burned children.160 The weight gain and functional improvements seen with oxandrolone may persist even after stopping administration of the drug.161,162 A double-blind, randomized study of oxandro-lone showed decreased length of stay, improved hepatic pro-tein synthesis, and no adverse effects on endocrine function, although the authors noted a rise in transaminases with unclear clinical significance.163 Oxandrolone therapy has also been asso-ciated with overall decreased mortality in patients with large burns.164Hyperglycemia has been associated with increased mortal-ity after burn injury,165 and intensive insulin therapy in critically ill patients has shown benefit, presumably from avoidance of hyperglycemia.166 However, in burn patients, the insulin itself may have a metabolic benefit, with improvements in lean body mass and amelioration of the inflammatory response to burn injury.167,168 Oral hypoglycemic agents such as metformin also help to avoid hyperglycemia and may contribute to prevention of muscle catabolism.169COMPLICATIONS IN BURN CAREThere are several complications commonly associated with treatment of burn patients. Though not always avoidable, main-taining vigilance for typical complications and using appro-priate techniques for prevention may limit the frequency and severity of complications. Ventilator-associated pneumonia, as in all critically ill patients, is a significant problem in burned patients. However, it is so common in patients with inhalation injury that a better nomenclature may be postinjury pneumonia. Unfortunately, commonly used scores in critical illness such as the Clinical Pulmonary Infection Score (CPIS) have not been shown to be reliable in burn patients. Quantitative broncho-scopic cultures in the setting of clinical suspicion of pneumo-nia should guide treatment of pneumonia.170 Simple measures such as elevating the head of the bed and maintaining excel-lent oral hygiene and pulmonary toilet are recommended to help decrease the risk of postinjury pneumonia. There is some question as to whether early tracheostomy decreases infectious morbidity in burn patients and whether it improves long-term outcomes. There do not seem to be any major differences in the rates of pneumonia with early tracheostomy, though there may be reduced development of subglottic stenosis compared with prolonged endotracheal intubation.171,172 Practical consid-erations such as protection of facial skin grafts may influence the decision for tracheostomy placement. One major consider-ation in deciding whether to perform a tracheostomy has been the presence of eschar at the insertion site, which complicates tracheostomy site care and increases the risk of airway infec-tion. Bedside percutaneous dilatational tracheostomy is a facile method for performing tracheostomy and is reported to be as safe as open tracheostomy in the burn population.173Massive resuscitation of burned patients may lead to an abdominal compartment syndrome characterized by increased airway pressures with hypoventilation and decreased urine output and hemodynamic compromise. Decompressive lapa-rotomy is the standard of care for refractory abdominal com-partment syndrome but carries an especially poor prognosis in burn patients.174 Adjunctive measures such as minimizing fluid, performing torso escharotomies, decreasing tidal volumes, and chemical paralysis should be initiated before resorting to decompressive laparotomy. Patients undergoing massive resus-citation also develop elevated intraocular pressures and may require lateral canthotomy.175Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and prophylaxis in the burn population has received increasing attention in the literature recently. Up to 25% of burn patients develop DVT, and fatal pulmonary emboli have been reported in burn patients.176,177 A recent prospective trial demonstrated an 8% incidence of DVT in patients with 30% to 60% TBSA burns not receiving low molecular weight heparin prophylaxis with no evidence of DVT in patients receiving prophylaxis. There were no complications Brunicardi_Ch08_p0251-p0270.indd   25828/12/18   11:51 AM 259BURNSCHAPTER 8from low molecular weight heparin prophylaxis.178 Thus, it appears that heparin prophylaxis is safe in burn patients and may help prevent thrombotic complications.Unfortunately, the use of both prophylactic and therapeu-tic heparin may be associated with heparin-associated throm-bocytopenia (HIT). One study of HIT in burn patients showed an incidence of 1.6% in heparinized burn patients. Thrombotic complications included DVT, pulmonary embolus, and even arterial thrombosis requiring limb amputation. Nonheparin anticoagulation for HIT commonly caused bleeding complica-tions requiring transfusion.179 Although rare, a high index of suspicion for HIT should be maintained in thrombocytopenic burn patients, particularly if the platelet counts drop at hospital days 7 to 10.Burn patients often require central venous access for fluid resuscitation and hemodynamic monitoring. Because of the ana-tomic relation of their burns to commonly used access sites, burn patients may be at higher risk for catheter-related blood-stream infections. The 2012 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention National Healthcare Safety Network report indicates that American burn centers have higher infectious complica-tion rates than any other ICUs.180 Because burn patients may commonly exhibit leukocytosis with a documented bloodstream infection, practice has been to rewire lines over a guide wire and to culture the catheter tip. However, this may increase the risk of catheter-related infections in burned patients, and a new site should be used if at all possible.181SURGERYFull-thickness burns with a rigid eschar can form a tourniquet effect as the edema progresses, leading to compromised venous outflow and eventually arterial inflow. The resulting compart-ment syndrome is most common in circumferential extremity burns, but abdominal and thoracic compartment syndromes also occur. Warning signs of impending compartment syndrome may include paresthesias, pain, decreased capillary refill, and progression to loss of distal pulses; in an intubated patient, the surgeon should anticipate the compartment syndrome and perform frequent neurovascular evaluations. Abdominal com-partment syndrome should be suspected with decreased urine output, increased ventilator airway pressures, and hypotension. Hypoventilation, increased airway pressures, and hypotension may also characterize thoracic compartment syndrome. Escha-rotomies are rarely needed within the first 8 hours following injury and should not be performed unless indicated because of the terrible aesthetic sequelae. When indicated, they are usu-ally performed at the bedside, preferably with electrocautery to minimize blood loss. Extremity incisions are made on the lateral and medial aspects of the limbs in an anatomic position and may extend onto thenar and hypothenar eminences of the hand. Digital escharotomies do not usually result in any meaningful salvage of functional tissue and are not recommended. Inad-equate perfusion despite proper escharotomies may indicate the need for fasciotomy, but this procedure should not be routinely performed as part of the eschar release. Thoracic escharotomies should be placed along the anterior axillary lines with bilateral subcostal and subclavicular extensions. Extension of the ante-rior axillary incisions down the lateral abdomen typically will allow adequate release of abdominal eschar.The strategy of early excision and grafting in burned patients revolutionized survival outcomes in burn care. Not only did it improve mortality, but early excision also decreased reconstruction surgery, hospital length of stay, and costs of care.182-184 Once the initial resuscitation is complete and the patient is hemodynamically stable, attention should be turned to excising the burn wound. Burn excision and wound coverage should ideally start within the first several days, and in larger burns, serial excisions can be performed as patient condition allows. Excision is performed with repeated tangential slices using a Watson or Goulian blade until viable, diffusely bleeding tissue remains. It is appropriate to leave healthy dermis, which will appear white with punctate areas of bleeding. Excision to fat or fascia may be necessary in deeper burns. The downside of tangential excision is a high blood loss, though this may be ame-liorated using techniques such as instillation of an epinephrine tumescence solution underneath the burn. Pneumatic tourni-quets are helpful in extremity burns, and compresses soaked in a dilute epinephrine solution are necessary adjuncts after excision. A fibrinogen and thrombin spray sealant (Tisseel Fibrin Sealant; Baxter, Deerfield, IL) also has beneficial effects on both hemo-stasis and graft adherence to the wound bed. The use of these techniques has markedly decreased the number of blood trans-fusions given during burn surgery.185 For patients with clearly deep burns and concern for excessive blood loss, fascial exci-sion may be employed. In this technique, electrocautery is used to excise the burned tissue and the underlying subcutaneous tis-sue down to muscle fascia. This technique markedly decreases blood loss but results in a cosmetically inferior appearance due to the loss of subcutaneous tissue. For excision of burns in dif-ficult anatomic areas, such as the face, eyelids, or hands, a pres-surized water dissector may offer more precision but is time consuming, has a steep learning curve, and is expensive.186WOUND COVERAGESince full-thickness burns are impractical for most burn wounds, split-thickness sheet autografts harvested with a power dermatome make the most durable wound coverings and have a decent cosmetic appearance. In larger burns, meshed auto-grafted skin provides a larger area of wound coverage. This also allows drainage of blood and serous fluid to prevent accumula-tion under the skin graft with subsequent graft loss. Areas of cosmetic importance such as the face, neck, and hands should be grafted with nonmeshed sheet grafts to ensure optimal appear-ance and function. Unfortunately, even extensive meshing of skin grafts in patients with limited donor sites may not provide adequate amounts of skin. One emerging technique for large burns with limited donor sites is the Meek micrografting tech-nique, or “postage-stamp” technique, where expansion ratios of up to 9:1 are able to be achieved. This technique has a con-siderable learning curve and requires further investigation to determine whether it is the optimal technique for large surface area burns with limited donor sites.187 Options for temporary wound coverage include human cadaveric allograft, which is incorporated into the wound but is rejected by the immune sys-tem and must be eventually replaced. This allows temporary biologic wound coverage until donor sites heal enough so that they may be reharvested. Xenograft appears to function as well as allograft for temporary wound coverage and is considerably less expensive.The search for a perfect permanent synthetic skin sub-stitute remains elusive. Integra (Integra LifeSciences Cor-poration, Plainsboro, NJ) is a bilayer product with a porous Brunicardi_Ch08_p0251-p0270.indd   25928/12/18   11:51 AM 260BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Icollagen-chondroitin 6-sulphate inner layer that is attached to an outer silastic sheet, which helps prevent fluid loss and infection as the inner layer becomes vascularized, creating an artificial neodermis. At approximately 2 weeks after placement, the silas-tic layer can be removed and a thin autograft can be placed over the neodermis. This results in faster healing of the more superfi-cial donor sites and has been increasingly utilized for treatment of complex wounds and injuries.188 Alloderm (LifeCell Corpo-ration, The Woodlands, TX) is a dermal substitute consisting of cryopreserved acellular human dermis. NovoSorb™ Biode-gradable Temporizing Matrix (PolyNovo Limited, Melbourne,  Australia) is a biodegradable polyurethane dermal substitute newly available and recently approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA). These dermal substitutes should also be used in combination with thin split-thickness skin grafts for final wound coverage.189Epidermal skin substitutes such as cultured epithelial auto-grafts are an option in patients with massive burns and very limited donor sites.190,191 Their clinical use has been limited by a long turnaround time for culturing, as well as the fragility of the cultured skin, which creates great difficulty with intraopera-tive handling and graft take. There are promising developments in skin culturing techniques and engineered skin development, but no other products are FDA approved and commercially available.188Thighs make convenient anatomic donor sites; they are eas-ily harvested and relatively hidden from an aesthetic standpoint. The thicker skin of the back is useful in older patients, who have thinner skin elsewhere and may have difficulty with healing of donor sites. The buttocks are an excellent donor site in infants and toddlers; silver sulfadiazine can be applied to the donor site with a diaper as coverage. The scalp is also an excellent donor site; the skin is thick and the many hair follicles allow rapid heal-ing, with the added advantage of being completely hidden once hair regrows. Epinephrine tumescence is necessary for harvest-ing the scalp, for both hemostasis of this hypervascular area and also to create a smooth contoured surface for harvesting.The list of commonly used donor site dressings is long and includes simple transparent films to hydrocolloids, petrolatum gauzes, and silver-impregnated dressings. Donor sites close to fresh grafts may be dressed with a porous nonadherent gauze, and both the donors and grafts are soaked with an antimicrobial solution. Principles behind choosing a dressing should balance ease of care, comfort, infection control, and cost. The choice of donor site dressing is largely institution dependent, and few data support the clear superiority of any single treatment plan.REHABILITATIONRehabilitation is an integral part of the clinical care plan for the burn patient and should be initiated on admission. Immediate and ongoing physical and occupational therapy is mandatory to prevent functional loss. Patients who are unable to actively participate should have passive range-of-motion exercises done at least twice a day. This includes patients with burns over joints, such as with hand burns. Patients should be taught exer-cises they can do themselves to maintain full range of motion. Patients with foot and extremity burns should be instructed to walk independently without crutches or other assistive devices to prevent extremity swelling, desensitize the burned areas, and prevent disuse atrophy; when patients are not ambulating, they must elevate the affected extremity to minimize swelling. If postoperative immobilization is used for graft protection, the graft should be evaluated early and at frequent intervals so that active exercise can be resumed at the earliest possible occasion. The transition to outpatient care should also include physical and occupational therapy, with introduction of exercises designed to accelerate return to activities of daily living as well as specific job-related tasks. Tight-fitting pressure garments provide vascu-lar support in burns that are further along in the healing process. Whether they prevent hypertrophic scar formation has been long debated. However, they do provide vascular support that many patients find more comfortable.LATE COMPLICATIONS: HYPERTROPHIC SCAR, CONTRACTURES, AND HETEROTOPIC OSSIFICATIONOnce patients have recovered from their acute burns, many face management of the hypertrophic burn scars. In patients with healed burns or donor sites, hypertrophic scar-related morbid-ity includes pruritus, erythema, pain, thickened tight skin, and even contractures. Within these scars, there is believed to be an increased inflammatory response, irregular neovascularization, aberrant cytokine and Toll-like receptor expression, abundant collagen production, and abnormal extracellular matrix struc-ture. Treatment for these scars has included nonsurgical therapies such as compression garments, silicone gel sheeting, massage, physical therapy, and corticosteroid. Surgical excision and scar revision represent more invasive scar management approaches that are often necessary for functional and aesthetic recovery.192Laser-based therapies provide additional treatment options for symptomatic hypertrophic scars. Two of the most common ones are the pulsed dye laser (PDL) and the ablative carbon dioxide (CO2) laser. The PDL causes photothermolysis of hemoglobin, resulting in coagulative necrosis.193 It obliterates small capillaries close to the skin and has had success treating congenital, cutaneous vascular malformations. The CO2 laser has been used for treatment of acne and recently has been gain-ing acceptance for its use to treat hypertrophic burn scars.194 It works by ablating microscopic columns of tissue to flatten scars and is also believed to stimulate matrix metalloproteinases and other signaling pathways to induce collagen reorganization. Lasers are ultimately believed to help with scar remodeling and collagen reorganization. CO2 laser therapy has been shown to decrease symptoms associated with hypertrophic scarring, including scar appearance, pliability, contracture, neuropathic pain, and pruritus. A recent prospective study utilizing PDL and CO2 laser therapy demonstrated improved signs and symptoms of hypertrophic scars based on the Vancouver Scar Scale and the University of North Carolina 4P Scar Scale.195 Outpatient and office-based treatment sessions are tolerated well by most patients. There is wide practice variation on when to start ther-apy and the number of treatments, but the literature has general support for starting treatment at 6 to 12 months and offering three treatments. More research is needed to determine the full potential of laser therapy to provide burn survivors a less inva-sive treatment of hypertrophic scars with improved symptoms and quality of life.Contractures are another long-term complication of burn injury that can result in significant morbidity. Contractures result from both wound contracture and scar contracture and prevents range of motion of a particular joint. Factors influenc-ing contracture development include burn depth and activation Brunicardi_Ch08_p0251-p0270.indd   26028/12/18   11:51 AM 261BURNSCHAPTER 8of dermal fibroblasts, myofibroblasts, fibrocytes, and helper  T cells.196 Despite aggressive physiotherapy, contractures have been reported to develop in as many as one-third of burn patients. A recent study of 1865 patients demonstrated that the shoulder is the most affected joint, followed by the elbow, wrist, ankle, and knee.197 A similar study in the pediatric population yielded similar results. Gender, race, and %TBSA were associated with contracture development in the adult population. Age and length of stay in the ICU were associated with contracture develop-ment, severity of contracture, and total number of contractures in the pediatric population. Treatment of contractures includes both nonsurgical and surgical options, ranging from pressure garments and splints to laser therapy and contracture excision.Heterotopic ossification (HO) is another long-term mor-bidity associated with burn injury. HO is the pathologic devel-opment of lamellar bone in peripheral tissue. Its incidence has been reported to be between 1% and 3% of burn patients.198 Symptoms include decreased range of motion, pain, and swell-ing overlying the affected joints. Often times, the pathologic bone formation can be visualized radiographically with plain X-rays. Risk factors include >30% TBSA, arm burns, arm grafts, ventilator days, and number of trips to the operat-ing room.199 Treatment includes aggressive physiotherapy,  NSAIDs, bisphosphonates, radiation therapy, and rarely surgi-cal excision. A risk scoring system has been developed to pre-dict which burn patients are at risk of developing HO based on admission criteria; however, further validation is warranted.200PSYCHOLOGICAL RECOVERYPsychological rehabilitation is equally important in the burn patient. Depression, posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), concerns about image, and anxiety about returning to society constitute predictable barriers to progress in both the inpa-tient and outpatient setting. Psychological distress occurs in as many as 38% of burn patients and persists in severity long after discharge.201 Rates of depression vary between 4% and 54% following injury, although these numbers vary dramatically based on the methodology used to diagnose depression.202 Still, depressive symptoms have been documented in up to 43% of patients 2 years following injury and have been associated with the female gender. Factors such as gender, extraversion, capac-ity for forgiveness, the event as a disaster or nondisaster, alcohol use, and peritraumatic emotional response have been identified as contributing factors to PTSD.203 Despite the psychological impact of burn injury, many patients will be able to quickly return to work or school, and goals should be set accordingly. The involvement of clinical psychologists and psychiatrists is invaluable in providing guidance and coping techniques to lessen the significant psychological burden of burn injury.PREVENTIONDespite many areas of progress in prevention over the past cen-tury, burns continue to be a common source of injury. The cor-nerstone for burn prevention programs has been “The Five Step Process,” a systematic method of assessing, implementing, and evaluating burn hazards and subsequent intervention impact, and The Five E’s—engineering/environment, enforcement, education, emergency response, and economic initiative.204 It has been shown that patients who live in environments opti-mal for sustaining burn injury have decreased knowledge of burn prevention strategies.205 Some successful initiatives have included school-based education and community-based inter-ventions targeting simple home safety measures. A 6-year study of second-graders demonstrated both shortand long-term retainment of information related to burn, fire, and life safety following multiple educational sessions. Smoke alarms are known to decrease mortality from structural fires, but not all homes are equipped with proper smoke alarms, particularly in low-income households. Mandatory smoke alarm installa-tion via community initiatives can be successful but seems to be contingent on close, long-term follow-up to ensure proper maintenance and function.206,207 Regulation of hot water heater temperatures has had some success and may be even more effec-tive in conjunction with community-based programs emphasiz-ing education and in-home inspections.208,209 A recent systematic review of prevention in lowand middle-income countries iden-tified multiple successful prevention programs.210 Burn profes-sionals have also demonstrated incomplete knowledge on best practices for fire safety and burn prevention.211 As such, appro-priate education of burn professionals participating in preven-tion programs is necessary.BURN DISASTERSAlthough rare, burn disasters can be devastating to those involved due to the sudden nature of the event, the difficulty of managing personnel and resources,212 a deficit of staff expe-rience in burn management, and relatively small resource availability for a potentially large number of patients.213 The American Burn Association has estimated that up to 30% of patients in mass casualty incidents suffer from burn injury.214 A recent review of the literature between 1990 and 2016 identi-fied 752 burn disasters world-wide, defined as an incident with ≥50 burn injuries and/or ≥30 burn-related deaths. The major-ity occurred in Asia and the Middle East and are thought to be secondary to rapid industrialization, inadequate fire-prevention strategies, and poor building codes. There was a significant increase in terrorist-related incidences from 2000 to 2015. Finally, the authors demonstrated that international adoption of the U.S. Health and Human Services guidelines on bed avail-ability for burns and trauma dramatically underestimated the number of beds needed for burn disasters.215Preparedness is paramount for reacting quickly, efficiently, and effectively to a burn disaster. General surgeons not trained in burn care may feel uncomfortable longitudinally caring for severely burned patients following a burn disaster. However, due to resource limitations, they should be prepared to care for burn patients for the first 72 hours of resuscitation or until the patients can be transferred to a center that specializes in burn care. This will involve initial evaluation, resuscitation, and potential inter-ventions including central line placement, intubation, and escha-rotomies. Coordination for burn disasters should take place at three levels: institutional/intrafacility, interfacility/intrastate, and interstate/regional. It is important to have multiple stakeholders involved in the development of a disaster plan, from the burn surgeons to the emergency department personnel to the emer-gency medical personnel who are first responders.216 Resource utilization can be guided by The American Burn Association Age/TBSA survival grid, which stratifies patients into benefit-to-resource categories (outpatient, high, low, and expectant) based on age and %TBSA.3 This allows providers to allocate resources during burn disasters based on the severity of injury Brunicardi_Ch08_p0251-p0270.indd   26128/12/18   11:51 AM 262BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iand expected survival.214 Another important consideration is the involvement of nonburn hospitals in the planning for burn disas-ters as burn centers do not possess enough resources to be sole providers in these events. Multiple strategies have been adopted by local burn centers, including the development of a consortium of hospitals surrounding one burn center in New Jersey to allow transfer of patients when resource capacity is in jeopardy.217Interest in mass burn casualty disaster planning invariably includes a discussion of radiation burns. Radioactive material results in both acute injury from immediate exposure and more prolonged injury from delayed exposure to radioactive fallout or contamination. When a 10-kiloton nuclear bomb is deto-nated, people at a distance 0.7 miles from ground zero absorb 4.5 Gy. At 60 days, the median lethal radiation dose (LD50) is 3.5 Sv; with aggressive medical care, this dose might be doubled to nearly 7 Sv. To put this in context, radiation expo-sure from a diagnostic CT of the chest or abdomen is 5 mSv, and the average annual background absorbed radiation dose is  3.6 mSv. Radiation is known to impact several organ systems and result in several syndromes based on increasing exposure doses. These syndromes include hematologic (1–8 Sv expo-sure), gastrointestinal (8–30 Sv exposure), and cardiovascular/neurologic syndromes (>30 Sv exposure), with the latter two being nonsurvivable.218-220After initial evaluation and decontamination by removing clothing, a useful way to estimate exposure is by determining the time to emesis. Patients who do not experience emesis within 4 hours of exposure are unlikely to have severe clinical effects. Emesis within 2 hours suggests a dose of at least 3 Sv, and emesis within 1 hour suggests at least 4 Sv. The hematologic system follows a similar dose-dependent temporal pattern for predicting radiation exposure, mortality, and treatment. These have been determined based on the Armed Forces Radiobiology Research Institute’s Biodosimetry Assessment Tool, which can be downloaded from www.afrri.usuhs.mil.The combination of radiation exposure and burn wounds has the potential to increase mortality compared with traditional burns. Early closure of wounds before radiation depletes circu-lating lymphocytes may be needed for wound healing (which occurs within 48 hours). Also, in radiation injuries combined with burn or trauma, laboratory lymphocyte counts may be unreliable.218-221 A significant difference between burn/traumatic injuries and radiation injures is that burn/traumatic injuries can result in higher mortality when not treated within hours.Decontamination and triage are vital to maximize the num-ber of survivors. Initial decontamination requires removal of clothing and washing wounds with water. Irrigation fluid should be collected to prevent radiation spread into the water supply. Work by many professional organizations, including the ABA, has focused on nationwide triage for disasters and will be vital to save as many lives as possible. Yet, it is likely that expectant or comfort care could be offered to more patients than typically seen in civilian hospitals, due to resource availability after the disaster.Finally, agents used in warfare—including white phos-phorus and sulfur mustard—can cause significant morbidity and mortality. White phosphorus oxidizes when exposed to the atmosphere, creating the highly corrosive phosphorus pentox-ide. Absorption of even small amounts of white phosphorus can result in hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia and their subse-quent cardiac side effects. Treatment consists of removal of all clothing, irrigation with cool liquid (as phosphorus pentoxide liquidizes above 44°C), application of saline soaked gauze  to prevent drying out and reignition, and potential surgical  excision.222,223 Sulfur mustard, more commonly known as mus-tard gas, is another chemical warfare agent that can cause lesions similar to burn lesions. The gas infiltrates the skin surface, caus-ing degranulation of mast cells, leukocyte invasion, and sub-sequent blistering of the skin. Treatment includes scrubbing to relieve the remaining skin of sulfur mustard, irrigation, and traditional burn therapy depending on the depth of the lesion.FUTURE AREAS OF STUDYIt has long been anecdotally noted that two patients of simi-lar ages and burn size may have very divergent responses to their burn injuries. Attention is being increasingly turned to identifying genetic differences among burn patients and how they affect response to injury. Specific allele variants have been linked with increased mortality in burned patients.224 It may be that genetic differences may predispose burn patients to severe sepsis,225 perhaps by downregulating the immune response.226 The Inflammation and the Host Response to Injury trial was a prospective, multicenter, federally funded study that aimed to define specific genetic pathways that differ in the response to both burns and traumatic injury.227 Blood and tissue samples from a strictly defined patient population were analyzed using gene arrays to determine whether differential expression in cer-tain genetic pathways affects clinical outcomes.228 Although data from this study are still being analyzed, some interesting findings suggest that sepsis, trauma, and burn patients share common gene expression patterns, starting early after injury.229 These genes can upregulate proinflammatory pathways as well as disrupt antigen presentation pathways. A better understand-ing of these common genomic responses may allow for the tar-geted treatment of immunologic and signal pathways to help improve patient survival from burn injuries.Another area of increasing interest includes integration of technology to burn size estimation and resuscitation. These include the use of smart device applications to assist with esti-mation of burn size and resuscitation recommendations.230-232 Further investigation is needed to determine the applicability of these models to burn estimation and resuscitation. However, as these models can include hourly updates and recommendations, they nudge clinicians to frequently reconsider fluid parameters during the critical stages of resuscitation.With the dramatic progress in improving survival follow-ing a major burn injury during the twentieth century, under-standing and addressing functional and psychological outcomes is critical to the well-being of burn survivors. Since 1993, the National Institute of Disability and Rehabilitation Research has funded four burn model systems to identify long-term sequelae of burn injuries and to develop ways to improve outcomes for survivors. Ongoing outcome studies are crucial for dismantling barriers that our patients face in returning to their communities and to the workplace or to school.REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Baxter CR, Shires T. Physiological response to crystal-loid resuscitation of severe burns. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1968;150(3):874-894. doi:10.1111/j.1749-6632.1968.tb14738.xBrunicardi_Ch08_p0251-p0270.indd   26228/12/18   11:51 AM 263BURNSCHAPTER 8	2.	Janzekovic Z. A new concept in the early excision and imme-diate grafting of burns. J Trauma. 1970;10(12):1103-1108. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/4921723. Accessed May 7, 2018.	3.	Taylor S, Curri T, Lawless M, Sen S, Greenhalgh DG, Palm-ieri TL. Predicting resource utilization in burn treatment. J Burn Care Res. 2014;35(Suppl 2):S235-S246. doi:10.1097/BCR.0000000000000076	4.	Gibran NS; Committee on Organization and Delivery of Burn Care ABA. Practice guidelines for burn care, 2006. J Burn Care Res. 27(4):437-438. doi:10.1097/01.BCR.0000226084.26680.56	5.	Supple KG, Fiala SM, Gamelli RL. Preparation for burn cen-ter verification. J Burn Care Rehabil. 1997;18(1 Pt 1):58-60. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9063789. Accessed May 7, 2018.	6.	Klein MB, Kramer CB, Nelson J, Rivara FP, Gibran NS, Con-cannon T. Geographic access to burn center hospitals. JAMA. 2009;302(16):1774-1781. doi:10.1001/jama.2009.1548	7.	Klein MB, Nathens AB, Emerson D, Heimbach DM, Gibran NS. An analysis of the long-distance transport of burn patients to a regional burn center. J Burn Care Res. 2007;28(1):49-55. doi:10.1097/BCR.0B013E31802C894B	8.	Stewart BT, Gyedu A, Agbenorku P, Amankwa R, Kushner AL, Gibran N. Routine systemic antibiotic prophylaxis for burn injuries in developing countries: a best evidence topic (BET). Int J Surg. 2015;21:168-172. doi:10.1016/j.ijsu.2015.08.002	9.	Kolodny A, Courtwright DT, Hwang CS, et al. The prescrip-tion opioid and heroin crisis: a public health approach to an epidemic of addiction. Annu Rev Public Health. 2015;36: 559-574. doi:10.1146/annurev-publhealth-031914-122957	10.	Agarwal V, O’Neill PJ, Cotton BA, et al. Prevalence and risk factors for development of delirium in burn intensive care unit patients. J Burn Care Res. 31(5):706-715. doi:10.1097/BCR.0b013e3181eebee9	11.	Freiburg C, Igneri P, Sartorelli K, Rogers F. Effects of differ-ences in percent total body surface area estimation on fluid resuscitation of transferred burn patients. J Burn Care Res. 2007;28(1):42-48. doi:10.1097/BCR.0B013E31802C88B2	12.	Burn incidence and treatment in the US: 2016 fact sheet. Available at: http://ameriburn.org/who-we-are/media/ burn-incidence-fact-sheet/. Accessed October 29, 2017.	13.	Ramati A, Pliskin NH, Keedy S, et al. Alteration in func-tional brain systems after electrical injury. J Neurotrauma. 2009;26(10):1815-1822. doi:10.1089/neu.2008.0867	14.	Saffle JR, Crandall A, Warden GD. Cataracts: a long-term complication of electrical injury. J Trauma. 1985;25(1):17-21. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3965734. Accessed May 7, 2018.	15.	Arnoldo B, Klein M, Gibran NS. Practice guidelines for the management of electrical injuries. J Burn Care Res. 27(4): 439-447. doi:10.1097/01.BCR.0000226250.26567.4C	16.	Gupta P. Fundamentals of Toxicology 1st Edition Essential Con-cepts and Applications. 1st ed. New York: Academic Press; 2016.	17.	Steven W. Salyer. Essential Emergency Medicine: For the Healthcare Practitioner. 1st ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2007.	18.	Chick LR, Borah G. Calcium carbonate gel therapy for hydrofluoric acid burns of the hand. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1990;86(5):935-940. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2236319. Accessed May 7, 2018.	19.	Hatzifotis M, Williams A, Muller M, Pegg S. Hydroflu-oric acid burns. Burns. 2004;30(2):156-159. doi:10.1016/j.burns.2003.09.031	20.	Dünser MW, Ohlbauer M, Rieder J, et al. Critical care man-agement of major hydrofluoric acid burns: a case report, review of the literature, and recommendations for therapy. Burns. 2004;30(4):391-398. doi:10.1016/j.burns.2004.01.005	21.	Wang X, Zhang Y, Ni L, et al. A review of treatment strat-egies for hydrofluoric acid burns: current status and future prospects. Burns. 2014;40(8):1447-1457. doi:10.1016/j.burns.2014.04.009	22.	Dupuytren G DA. Clinical Lectures on Surgery: Delivered at Hotel Dieu. Boston: Carter, Hendee; 1832.	23.	Jackson DM. The diagnosis of the depth of burning. Br J Surg. 1953;40(164):588-596. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/13059343.	24.	Watts AM, Tyler MP, Perry ME, Roberts AH, McGrouther DA. Burn depth and its histological measurement. Burns. 2001;27(2):154-160. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11226654.	25.	Shin JY, Yi HS. Diagnostic accuracy of laser Doppler imag-ing in burn depth assessment: systematic review and meta-analysis. Burns. 2016;42(7):1369-1376. doi:10.1016/j.burns.2016.03.012	26.	Iraniha S, Cinat ME, VanderKam VM, et al. Determination of burn depth with noncontact ultrasonography. J Burn Care Rehabil. 2000;21(4):333-338. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10935815. Accessed May 7, 2018.	27.	Zawacki BE, Azen SP, Imbus SH, Chang YT. Multifactorial probit analysis of mortality in burned patients. Ann Surg. 1979;189(1):1-5. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/758852. Accessed May 7, 2018.	28.	Heng JS, Clancy O, Atkins J, et al. Revised Baux Score and updated Charlson comorbidity index are independently asso-ciated with mortality in burns intensive care patients. Burns. 2015;41(7):1420-1427. doi:10.1016/j.burns.2015.06.009	29.	Ryan CM, Schoenfeld DA, Thorpe WP, Sheridan RL, Cassem EH, Tompkins RG. Objective estimates of the probability of death from burn injuries. N Engl J Med. 1998;338(6):362-366. doi:10.1056/NEJM199802053380604	30.	Moreau AR, Westfall PH, Cancio LC, Mason AD. Develop-ment and validation of an age-risk score for mortality predi-cation after thermal injury. J Trauma. 2005;58(5):967-972. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15920410. Accessed May 7, 2018.	31.	Mandell SP, Pham T, Klein MB. Repeat hospitalization and mortality in older adult burn patients. J Burn Care Res. 34(1):e36-41. doi:10.1097/BCR.0b013e31825adc81	32.	Thombs BD, Singh VA, Halonen J, Diallo A, Milner SM.  The effects of preexisting medical comorbidities on mortal-ity and length of hospital stay in acute burn injury: evidence from a national sample of 31,338 adult patients. Ann Surg. 2007;245(4):629-634. doi:10.1097/01.sla.0000250422. 36168.67	33.	McGwin G, George RL, Cross JM, Rue LW. Improving the ability to predict mortality among burn patients. Burns. 2008;34(3):320-327. doi:10.1016/j.burns.2007.06.003	34.	Veeravagu A, Yoon BC, Jiang B, et al. National trends in burn and inhalation injury in burn patients: results of analysis of the nationwide inpatient sample database. J Burn Care Res. 2015; 36(2):258-265. doi:10.1097/BCR.0000000000000064	35.	Miller T, Bhattacharya S, Zamula W, et al. Quality-of-life loss of people admitted to burn centers, United States. Qual Life Res. 2013;22(9):2293-2305. doi:10.1007/s11136-012-0321-5	36.	Wasiak J, Lee SJ, Paul E, et al. Predictors of health status and health-related quality of life 12 months after severe burn. Burns. 2014;40(4):568-574. doi:10.1016/j.burns.2014.01.021	37.	Carrougher GJ, Martinez EM, McMullen KS, et al. Pruritus in adult burn survivors: postburn prevalence and risk factors associated with increased intensity. J Burn Care Res. 2013; 34(1):94-101. doi:10.1097/BCR.0b013e3182644c25	38.	Schneider JC, Nadler DL, Herndon DN, et al. Pruritus in pediat-ric burn survivors: defining the clinical course. J Burn Care Res. 2015;36(1):151-158. doi:10.1097/BCR.0000000000000145Brunicardi_Ch08_p0251-p0270.indd   26328/12/18   11:51 AM 264BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART I	39.	Mason ST, Esselman P, Fraser R, Schomer K, Truitt A, Johnson K. Return to work after burn injury: a system-atic review. J Burn Care Res. 33(1):101-109. doi:10.1097/BCR.0b013e3182374439	40.	Carrougher GJ, Brych SB, Pham TN, Mandell SP, Gibran NS. An intervention bundle to facilitate return to work for burn-injured workers: report from a burn model system investigation. J Burn Care Res. 38(1):e70-e78. doi:10.1097/BCR.0000000000000410	41.	Christiansen M, Carrougher GJ, Engrav LH, et al. Time to school re-entry after burn injury is quite short. J Burn Care Res. 2007;28(3):478-481. doi:10.1097/BCR.0B013E318053d2EA	42.	American Burn Association. Advanced Burn Life Support Course Provider Manual 2016 Update; 2016. Available at: http://ameriburn.org/education/abls-program/abls-handbook/. Accessed May 7, 2018.	43.	Jeng JC, Jablonski K, Bridgeman A, Jordan MH. Serum lac-tate, not base deficit, rapidly predicts survival after major burns. Burns. 2002;28(2):161-166. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11900940. Accessed May 7, 2018.	44.	Cochran A, Edelman LS, Saffle JR, Morris SE. The relation-ship of serum lactate and base deficit in burn patients to mor-tality. J Burn Care Res. 2007;28(2):231-240. doi:10.1097/BCR.0B013E318031A1D1	45.	Cartotto R, Choi J, Gomez M, Cooper A. A prospective study on the implications of a base deficit during fluid resuscita-tion. J Burn Care Rehabil. 2003;24(2):75-84. doi:10.1097/01.BCR.0000054177.24411.13	46.	Andel D, Kamolz L-P, Roka J, et al. Base deficit and lac-tate: early predictors of morbidity and mortality in patients with burns. Burns. 2007;33(8):973-978. doi:10.1016/j.burns.2007.06.016	47.	Venkatesh B, Meacher R, Muller MJ, Morgan TJ, Fraser J. Monitoring tissue oxygenation during resuscitation of major burns. J Trauma. 2001;50(3):485-494. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11265028. Accessed May 7, 2018.	48.	Lorente JA, Ezpeleta A, Esteban A, et al. Systemic hemodynam-ics, gastric intramucosal PCO2 changes, and outcome in criti-cally ill burn patients. Crit Care Med. 2000;28(6):1728-1735. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10890610. Accessed May 7, 2018.	49.	Holm C, Mayr M, Tegeler J, et al. A clinical randomized study on the effects of invasive monitoring on burn shock resuscitation. Burns. 2004;30(8):798-807. doi:10.1016/j.burns.2004.06.016	50.	Cartotto RC, Innes M, Musgrave MA, Gomez M, Cooper AB. How well does the Parkland formula estimate actual fluid resuscitation volumes? J Burn Care Rehabil. 23(4):258-265. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12142578. Accessed May 7, 2018.	51.	Engrav LH, Colescott PL, Kemalyan N, et al. A biopsy of the use of the Baxter formula to resuscitate burns or do we do it like Charlie did it? J Burn Care Rehabil. 21(2):91-95. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10752739. Accessed May 7, 2018.	52.	Friedrich JB, Sullivan SR, Engrav LH, et al. Is supra-Baxter resuscitation in burn patients a new phenomenon? Burns. 2004;30(5):464-466. doi:10.1016/j.burns.2004.01.021	53.	Sullivan SR, Friedrich JB, Engrav LH, et al. “Opioid creep” is real and may be the cause of “fluid creep.” Burns. 2004;30(6):583-590. doi:10.1016/j.burns.2004.03.002	54.	Navar PD, Saffle JR, Warden GD. Effect of inhalation injury on fluid resuscitation requirements after thermal injury. Am J Surg. 1985;150(6):716-720. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/4073365. Accessed May 7, 2018.	55.	Dai NT, Chen TM, Cheng TY, et al. The comparison of early fluid therapy in extensive flame burns between inhalation and noninhalation injuries. Burns. 1998;24(7):671-675. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9882069. Accessed May 7, 2018.	56.	Cancio LC, Chávez S, Alvarado-Ortega M, et al. Predict-ing increased fluid requirements during the resuscitation of thermally injured patients. J Trauma. 2004;56(2):404-413. doi:10.1097/01.TA.0000075341.43956.E4	57.	Klein MB, Hayden D, Elson C, et al. The association between fluid administration and outcome following major burn: a multicenter study. Ann Surg. 2007;245(4):622-628. doi:10.1097/01.sla.0000252572.50684.49	58.	O’Mara MS, Slater H, Goldfarb IW, Caushaj PF. A prospec-tive, randomized evaluation of intra-abdominal pressures with crystalloid and colloid resuscitation in burn patients. J Trauma. 2005;58(5):1011-1018. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15920417. Accessed May 7, 2018.	59.	Navickis RJ, Greenhalgh DG, Wilkes MM. Albumin in burn shock resuscitation: a meta-analysis of controlled clinical studies. J Burn Care Res. 2016;37(3):e268-e278. doi:10.1097/BCR.0000000000000201	60.	Cochran A, Morris SE, Edelman LS, Saffle JR. Burn patient characteristics and outcomes following resuscita-tion with albumin. Burns. 2007;33(1):25-30. doi:10.1016/j.burns.2006.10.005	61.	Perel P, Roberts I. Colloids versus crystalloids for fluid resus-citation in critically ill patients. Cochrane database Syst Rev. 2007;(4):CD000567. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD000567.pub3	62.	Eljaiek R, Heylbroeck C, Dubois M-J. Albumin administration for fluid resuscitation in burn patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Burns. 2017;43(1):17-24. doi:10.1016/j.burns.2016.08.001	63.	Cartotto R, Greenhalgh DG, Cancio C. Burn state of the sci-ence: fluid resuscitation. J Burn Care Res. 38(3):e596-e604. doi:10.1097/BCR.0000000000000541	64.	Greenhalgh DG. Burn resuscitation: the results of the ISBI/ABA survey. Burns. 2010;36(2):176-182. doi:10.1016/j.burns.2009.09.004	65.	Kao Y, Loh E-W, Hsu C-C, et al. Fluid resuscitation in patients with severe burns: a meta-analysis of randomized con-trolled trials. Acad Emerg Med. October 2017. doi:10.1111/acem.13333	66.	Kinsky MP, Milner SM, Button B, Dubick MA, Kramer GC. Resuscitation of severe thermal injury with hypertonic saline dextran: effects on peripheral and visceral edema in sheep. J Trauma. 2000;49(5):844-853. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11086774. Accessed May 7, 2018.	67.	Tanaka H, Matsuda T, Miyagantani Y, Yukioka T, Matsuda H,  Shimazaki S. Reduction of resuscitation fluid volumes in severely burned patients using ascorbic acid admin-istration: a randomized, prospective study. Arch Surg. 2000;135(3):326-331. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10722036. Accessed May 7, 2018.	68.	Kahn SA, Beers RJ, Lentz CW. Resuscitation after severe burn injury using high-dose ascorbic acid: a retrospec-tive review. J Burn Care Res. 32(1):110-117. doi:10.1097/BCR.0b013e318204b336	69.	Klein MB, Edwards JA, Kramer CB, Nester T, Heimbach DM, Gibran NS. The beneficial effects of plasma exchange after severe burn injury. J Burn Care Res. 2009;30(2):243-248. doi:10.1097/BCR.0b013e318198a30d	70.	Warden GD, Stratta RJ, Saffle JR, Kravitz M, Ninnemann JL. Plasma exchange therapy in patients failing to resuscitate from burn shock. J Trauma. 1983;23(10):945-951. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/6632020. Accessed May 7, 2018.	71.	Cannon JW, Chung KK, King DR. Advanced technologies in trauma critical care management. Surg Clin North Am. 2012;92(4):903-923, viii. doi:10.1016/j.suc.2012.04.001Brunicardi_Ch08_p0251-p0270.indd   26428/12/18   11:51 AM 265BURNSCHAPTER 8	72.	Gunst M, Sperry J, Ghaemmaghami V, O’Keeffe T, Friese R, Frankel H. Bedside echocardiographic assessment for trauma/critical care: the BEAT exam. J Am Coll Surg. 2008;207(3):e1-3. doi:10.1016/j.jamcollsurg.2008.05.027	73.	Yanagawa Y, Sakamoto T, Okada Y. Hypovolemic shock evaluated by sonographic measurement of the inferior vena cava during resuscitation in trauma patients. J Trauma. 2007;63(6):1245-1248; discussion 1248. doi:10.1097/TA.0b013e318068d72b	74.	Yarmus L, Feller-Kopman D. Pneumothorax in the criti-cally ill patient. Chest. 2012;141(4):1098-1105. doi:10.1378/chest.11-1691	75.	Liu NT, Salinas J. Machine learning in burn care and research: a systematic review of the literature. Burns. 2015;41(8):1636-1641. doi:10.1016/j.burns.2015.07.001	76.	Salinas J, Chung KK, Mann EA, et al. Computerized deci-sion support system improves fluid resuscitation following severe burns: an original study. Crit Care Med. 2011;39(9): 2031-2038. doi:10.1097/CCM.0b013e31821cb790	77.	Callcut RA, Cotton BA, Muskat P, et al. Defining when to initiate massive transfusion: a validation study of individual massive transfusion triggers in PROMMTT patients. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2013;74(1):59-65, 67-87. doi:10.1097/TA.0b013e3182788b34	78.	Brown LM, Aro SO, Cohen MJ, et al. A high fresh frozen plasma: packed red blood cell transfusion ratio decreases mor-tality in all massively transfused trauma patients regardless of admission international normalized ratio. J Trauma. 2011;71(2 Suppl 3):S358-S363. doi:10.1097/TA.0b013e318227f152	79.	Benson D, Barnett CC. Perioperative blood transfu-sions promote pancreas cancer progression. J Surg Res. 2011;166(2):275-279. doi:10.1016/j.jss.2010.05.059	80.	Amato A, Pescatori M. Perioperative blood transfusions for the recurrence of colorectal cancer. Cochrane database Syst Rev. 2006;(1):CD005033. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD005033.pub2	81.	Palmieri TL, Caruso DM, Foster KN, et al. Effect of blood transfusion on outcome after major burn injury: a multicenter study. Crit Care Med. 2006;34(6):1602-1607. doi:10.1097/01.CCM.0000217472.97524.0E	82.	Palmieri TL, Lee T, O’Mara MS, Greenhalgh DG. Effects of a restrictive blood transfusion policy on outcomes in children with burn injury. J Burn Care Res. 28(1):65-70. doi:10.1097/BCR.0B013E31802C895E	83.	Palmieri TL, Holmes JH, Arnoldo B, et al. Transfusion requirement in burn care evaluation (TRIBE): a multi-center randomized prospective trial of blood transfusion in major burn injury. Ann Surg. 2017;266(4):595-602. doi:10.1097/SLA.0000000000002408	84.	Higgins S, Fowler R, Callum J, Cartotto R. Transfusion-related acute lung injury in patients with burns. J Burn Care Res. 28(1):56-64. doi:10.1097/BCR.0b013E31802C88EC	85.	Still JM, Belcher K, Law EJ, et al. A double-blinded pro-spective evaluation of recombinant human erythropoietin in acutely burned patients. J Trauma. 1995;38(2):233-236. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7869442. Accessed May 7, 2018.	86.	Tobalem M, Harder Y, Rezaeian F, Wettstein R. Secondary burn progression decreased by erythropoietin. Crit Care Med. 2013;41(4):963-971. doi:10.1097/CCM.0b013e318275cee7	87.	Hassan Z, Wong JK, Bush J, Bayat A, Dunn KW. Assess-ing the severity of inhalation injuries in adults. Burns. 2010;36(2):212-216. doi:10.1016/j.burns.2009.06.205	88.	Colohan SM. Predicting prognosis in thermal burns with associated inhalational injury: a systematic review of prog-nostic factors in adult burn victims. J Burn Care Res. 2010; 31(4):529-539. doi:10.1097/BCR.0b013e3181e4d680	89.	Tredget EE, Shankowsky HA, Taerum TV, Moysa GL, Alton JD. The role of inhalation injury in burn trauma. A Canadian experience. Ann Surg. 1990;212(6):720-727. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2256764. Accessed May 7, 2018.	90.	Kadri SS, Miller AC, Hohmann S, et al. Risk factors for in-hospital mortality in smoke inhalation-associated acute lung injury: data from 68 United States hospitals. Chest. 2016; 150(6):1260-1268. doi:10.1016/j.chest.2016.06.008	91.	Liodaki E, Kalousis K, Mauss KL, Kisch T, Mailaender P, Stang F. Epidemiology of pneumonia in a burn care unit: the influence of inhalation trauma on pneumonia and of pneumonia on burn mortality. Ann Burns Fire Disasters. 2015;28(2):128-133. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27252611. Accessed May 7, 2018.	92.	Rogers AD, Deal C, Argent AC, Hudson DA, Rode H. Venti-lator associated pneumonia in major paediatric burns. Burns. 2014;40(6):1141-1148. doi:10.1016/j.burns.2013.12.021	93.	Shirani KZ, Pruitt BA, Mason AD. The influence of inha-lation injury and pneumonia on burn mortality. Ann Surg. 1987;205(1):82-87. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3800465. Accessed May 7, 2018.	94.	Wright MJ, Murphy JT. Smoke inhalation enhances early alveolar leukocyte responsiveness to endotoxin. J Trauma. 2005;59(1):64-70. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16096540. Accessed May 7, 2018.	95.	Darling GE, Keresteci MA, Ibañez D, Pugash RA, Peters WJ, Neligan PC. Pulmonary complications in inhalation injuries with associated cutaneous burn. J Trauma. 1996;40(1):83-89. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8577005.	96.	Jones WG, Barie PS, Madden M, Finkelstein J, Goodwin CW. The use of compliance in predicting early mortality after inha-lation injury. Curr Surg. 45(4):309-312. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3246159. Accessed May 7, 2018.	97.	Mlcak R, Cortiella J, Desai M, Herndon D. Lung compliance, airway resistance, and work of breathing in children after inha-lation injury. J Burn Care Rehabil. 1997;18(6):531-534. Avail-able at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9404988.	98.	Demling R, Lalonde C, Youn YK, Picard L. Effect of graded increases in smoke inhalation injury on the early systemic response to a body burn. Crit Care Med. 1995;23(1):171-178. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8001368. Accessed May 7, 2018.	99.	Mosier MJ, Pham TN, Park DR, Simmons J, Klein MB, Gibran NS. Predictive value of bronchoscopy in assessing the severity of inhalation injury. J Burn Care Res. 33(1):65-73. doi:10.1097/BCR.0b013e318234d92f	100.	Mosier MJ, Gamelli RL, Halerz MM, Silver G. Microbial con-tamination in burn patients undergoing urgent intubation as part of their early airway management. J Burn Care Res. 2008; 29(2):304-310. doi:10.1097/BCR.0b013e318166daa5	101.	Gore MA, Joshi AR, Nagarajan G, Iyer SP, Kulkarni T, Khandelwal A. Virtual bronchoscopy for diagnosis of inha-lation injury in burnt patients. Burns. 2004;30(2):165-168. doi:10.1016/j.burns.2003.09.024	102.	Schall GL, McDonald HD, Carr LB, Capozzi A. Xenon venti-lation-perfusion lung scans. The early diagnosis of inhalation injury. JAMA. 1978;240(22):2441-2445. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/712935.	103.	Oh JS, Chung KK, Allen A, et al. Admission chest CT comple-ments fiberoptic bronchoscopy in prediction of adverse out-comes in thermally injured patients. J Burn Care Res. 2012; 33(4):532-538. doi:10.1097/BCR.0b013e318237455f	104.	Endorf FW, Gamelli RL. Inhalation injury, pulmonary perturbations, and fluid resuscitation. J Burn Care Res. 2007;28(1):80-83. doi:10.1097/BCR.0B013E31802C889FBrunicardi_Ch08_p0251-p0270.indd   26528/12/18   11:51 AM 266BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART I	105.	McIntire AM, Harris SA, Whitten JA, et al. Outcomes follow-ing the use of nebulized heparin for inhalation injury (HIHI Study). J Burn Care Res. 2017;38(1):45-52. doi:10.1097/BCR.0000000000000439	106.	Miller AC, Elamin EM, Suffredini AF. Inhaled antico-agulation regimens for the treatment of smoke inhalationassociated acute lung injury: a systematic review. Crit Care Med. 2014;42(2):413-419. doi:10.1097/CCM.0b013e3182a645e5	107.	Enkhbaatar P, Murakami K, Cox R, et al. Aerosolized tissue plasminogen inhibitor improves pulmonary function in sheep with burn and smoke inhalation. Shock. 2004;22(1):70-75. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15201705. Accessed May 7, 2018.	108.	Murakami K, McGuire R, Cox RA, et al. Recombi-nant antithrombin attenuates pulmonary inflammation following smoke inhalation and pneumonia in sheep. Crit Care Med. 2003;31(2):577-583. doi:10.1097/01.CCM.0000050444.52531.08	109.	Pallua N, Warbanow K, Noah EM, et al. Intrabronchial surfactant application in cases of inhalation injury: first results from patients with severe burns and ARDS. Burns. 1998;24(3):197-206. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9677021. Accessed May 7, 2018.	110.	Sheridan RL, Zapol WM, Ritz RH, Tompkins RG. Low-dose inhaled nitric oxide in acutely burned children with profound respiratory failure. Surgery. 1999;126(5):856-862. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10568185. Accessed May 7, 2018.	111.	Moylan JA, Alexander LG. Diagnosis and treatment of inha-lation injury. World J Surg. 1978;2(2):185-191. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/676331. Accessed  May 7, 2018.	112.	Fuchs PC, Bozkurt A, Johnen D, Smeets R, Groger A,  Pallua N. Beneficial effect of corticosteroids in catecholamine-dependent septic burn patients. Burns. 2007;33(3):306-311. doi:10.1016/j.burns.2006.07.026	113.	Prien T, Traber DL. Toxic smoke compounds and inhalation injury-a review. Burns. 1988;14(6):451-460. doi:10.1016/S0305-4179(88)80005-6	114.	Rose JJ, Wang L, Xu Q, et al. Carbon monoxide poison-ing: pathogenesis, management, and future directions of therapy. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2017;195(5):596-606. doi:10.1164/rccm.201606-1275CI	115.	Crapo RO. Smoke-inhalation injuries. JAMA. 1981;246(15): 1694-1696.	116.	Hampson NB, Mathieu D, Piantadosi CA, Thom SR, Weaver LK. Carbon monoxide poisoning: interpretation of random-ized clinical trials and unresolved treatment issues. Undersea Hyperb Med. 2001;28(3):157-164. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12067152. Accessed May 7, 2018.	117.	Buckley NA, Juurlink DN, Isbister G, Bennett MH,  Lavonas EJ. Hyperbaric oxygen for carbon monoxide poi-soning. Cochrane database Syst Rev. 2011;(4):CD002041. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD002041.pub3	118.	Hampson NB, Zmaeff JL. Outcome of patients experienc-ing cardiac arrest with carbon monoxide poisoning treated with hyperbaric oxygen. Ann Emerg Med. 2001;38(1):36-41. doi:10.1067/mem.2001.115532	119.	Charnock EL, Meehan JJ. Postburn respiratory injuries in chil-dren. Pediatr Clin North Am. 1980;27(3):661-676. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/6997814. Accessed May 7, 2018.	120.	Becker CE. The role of cyanide in fires. Vet Hum Toxicol. 1985;27(6):487-490. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/4082458. Accessed May 7, 2018.	121.	Reade MC, Davies SR, Morley PT, Dennett J, Jacobs IC; Aus-tralian Resuscitation Council. Review article: management of cyanide poisoning. Emerg Med Australas. 2012;24(3):225-238. doi:10.1111/j.1742-6723.2012.01538.x	122.	Hall AH, Dart R, Bogdan G. Sodium thiosulfate or hydroxo-cobalamin for the empiric treatment of cyanide poison-ing? Ann Emerg Med. 2007;49(6):806-813. doi:10.1016/j.annemergmed.2006.09.021	123.	Barillo DJ, Goode R, Esch V. Cyanide poisoning in victims of fire: analysis of 364 cases and review of the literature. J Burn Care Rehabil. 1994;15(1):46-57. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8150843. Accessed May 7, 2018.	124.	Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome Network; Brower RG, Matthay MA, Morris A, et al. Ventilation with lower tidal volumes as compared with traditional tidal volumes for acute lung injury and the acute respiratory distress syn-drome. N Engl J Med. 2000;342(18):1301-1308. doi:10.1056/NEJM200005043421801	125.	Sheridan RL, Kacmarek RM, McEttrick MM, et al. Permis-sive hypercapnia as a ventilatory strategy in burned children: effect on barotrauma, pneumonia, and mortality. J Trauma. 1995;39(5):854-859. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7474000. Accessed May 7, 2018.	126.	Bloomfield R, Noble DW, Sudlow A. Prone position for acute respiratory failure in adults. Cochrane database Syst Rev. 2015;(11):CD008095. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD008095.pub2	127.	Guérin C, Reignier J, Richard J-C, et al. Prone positioning in severe acute respiratory distress syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2013;368(23):2159-2168. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1214103	128.	Oto B, Orosco RI, Panter E, Velamuri R, Kar AR, Caffrey J. Prone positioning of the burn patient with acute respiratory distress syndrome: a review of the evidence and practical considerations. J Burn Care Res. June 2017. doi:10.1097/BCR.0000000000000601	129.	Reper P, Van Bos R, Van Loey K, Van Laeke P, Vanderkelen A. High frequency percussive ventilation in burn patients: hemodynamics and gas exchange. Burns. 2003;29(6):603-608. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12927989.	130.	Hall JJ, Hunt JL, Arnoldo BD, Purdue GF. Use of highfrequency percussive ventilation in inhalation injuries. J Burn Care Res. 28(3):396-400. doi:10.1097/BCR.0B013E318053D2D6	131.	Chung KK, Wolf SE, Renz EM, et al. High-frequency per-cussive ventilation and low tidal volume ventilation in burns: a randomized controlled trial. Crit Care Med. 2010;38(10): 1970-1977. doi:10.1097/CCM.0b013e3181eb9d0b	132.	Cartotto R, Ellis S, Gomez M, Cooper A, Smith T. High fre-quency oscillatory ventilation in burn patients with the acute respiratory distress syndrome. Burns. 2004;30(5):453-463. doi:10.1016/j.burns.2004.01.015	133.	Ferguson ND, Cook DJ, Guyatt GH, et al. High-frequency oscillation in early acute respiratory distress syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2013;368(9):795-805. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1215554	134.	Young D, Lamb SE, Shah S, et al. High-frequency oscilla-tion for acute respiratory distress syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2013;368(9):806-813. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1215716	135.	Goligher EC, Munshi L, Adhikari NKJ, et al. High-frequency oscillation for adult patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome. a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Am Thorac Soc. 2017;14(Supp_4):S289-S296. doi:10.1513/AnnalsATS.201704-341OT	136.	Nosanov LB, McLawhorn MM, Vigiola Cruz M, Chen JH, Shupp JW. A national perspective on ECMO utilization in patients with burn injury. J Burn Care Res. March 2017. doi:10.1097/BCR.0000000000000555	137.	Norman G, Christie J, Liu Z, et al. Antiseptics for burns. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017;7:CD011821. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD011821.pub2	138.	Kucan JO, Smoot EC. Five percent mafenide acetate solu-tion in the treatment of thermal injuries. J Burn Care Rehabil.  Brunicardi_Ch08_p0251-p0270.indd   26628/12/18   11:51 AM 267BURNSCHAPTER 814(2 Pt 1):158-163. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8501103. Accessed May 7, 2018.	139.	Lee JJ, Marvin JA, Heimbach DM, Grube BJ. Use of 5% sul-famylon (mafenide) solution after excision and grafting of burns. J Burn Care Rehabil. 9(6):602-605. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3065338. Accessed May 7, 2018.	140.	Chou TD, Gibran NS, Urdahl K, Lin EY, Heimbach DM, Engrav LH. Methemoglobinemia secondary to topical silver nitrate therapy—a case report. Burns. 1999;25(6):549-552. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10498367. Accessed May 7, 2018.	141.	Hart DW, Wolf SE, Mlcak R, et al. Persistence of muscle catabolism after severe burn. Surgery. 2000;128(2):312-319. doi:10.1067/msy.2000.108059	142.	Hart DW, Wolf SE, Chinkes DL, et al. Determinants of skeletal muscle catabolism after severe burn. Ann Surg. 2000;232(4):455-465. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10998644. Accessed May 7, 2018.	143.	Gottschlich MM, Jenkins ME, Mayes T, Khoury J, Kagan RJ, Warden GD. The 2002 Clinical Research Award. An evaluation of the safety of early vs delayed enteral support and effects on clinical, nutritional, and endocrine outcomes after severe burns. J Burn Care Rehabil. 2002;23(6):401-415. doi:10.1097/01.BCR.0000036588.09166.F1	144.	Hart DW, Wolf SE, Chinkes DL, et al. Effects of early excision and aggressive enteral feeding on hypermetabolism, catabo-lism, and sepsis after severe burn. J Trauma. 2003;54(4):755-764. doi:10.1097/01.TA.0000060260.61478.A7	145.	Jeschke MG, Herndon DN, Ebener C, Barrow RE, Jauch KW. Nutritional intervention high in vitamins, protein, amino acids, and omega 3 fatty acids improves protein metabolism dur-ing the hypermetabolic state after thermal injury. Arch Surg. 2001;136(11):1301-1306. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11695977. Accessed May 7, 2018.	146.	Mandell SP, Gibran NS. Early enteral nutrition for burn injury. Adv Wound Care. 2014;3(1):64-70. doi:10.1089/wound.2012.0382	147.	Mosier MJ, Pham TN, Klein MB, et al. Early enteral nutri-tion in burns: compliance with guidelines and associated out-comes in a multicenter study. J Burn Care Res. 32(1):104-109. doi:10.1097/BCR.0b013e318204b3be	148.	Sefton EJ, Boulton-Jones JR, Anderton D, Teahon K,  Knights DT. Enteral feeding in patients with major burn injury: the use of nasojejunal feeding after the failure of nasogastric feeding. Burns. 2002;28(4):386-390. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12052379. Accessed May 7, 2018.	149.	Jenkins ME, Gottschlich MM, Warden GD. Enteral feeding during operative procedures in thermal injuries. J Burn Care Rehabil. 1994;15(2):199-205. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8195265. Accessed May 7, 2018.	150.	Garrel D, Patenaude J, Nedelec B, et al. Decreased mortality and infectious morbidity in adult burn patients given enteral glutamine supplements: a prospective, controlled, random-ized clinical trial. Crit Care Med. 2003;31(10):2444-2449. doi:10.1097/01.CCM.0000084848.63691.1E	151.	van Zanten ARH, Dhaliwal R, Garrel D, Heyland DK. Enteral glutamine supplementation in critically ill patients: a sys-tematic review and meta-analysis. Crit Care. 2015;19:294. doi:10.1186/s13054-015-1002-x	152.	Choudhry MA, Haque F, Khan M, et al. Enteral nutritional supplementation prevents mesenteric lymph node T-cell sup-pression in burn injury. Crit Care Med. 2003;31(6):1764-1770. doi:10.1097/01.CCM.0000063053.31485.DF	153.	Nordlund MJ, Pham TN, Gibran NS. Micronutrients after burn injury: a review. J Burn Care Res. 35(2):121-133. doi:10.1097/BCR.0b013e318290110b	154.	Liusuwan RA, Palmieri TL, Kinoshita L, Greenhalgh DG. Comparison of measured resting energy expenditure versus predictive equations in pediatric burn patients. J Burn Care Rehabil. 2005;26(6):464-470. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16278559. Accessed May 7, 2018.	155.	Hart DW, Wolf SE, Herndon DN, et al. Energy expenditure and caloric balance after burn: increased feeding leads to fat rather than lean mass accretion. Ann Surg. 2002;235(1):152-161. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11753055. Accessed May 7, 2018.	156.	Herndon DN, Hart DW, Wolf SE, Chinkes DL, Wolfe RR. Reversal of catabolism by beta-blockade after severe burns. N Engl J Med. 2001;345(17):1223-1229. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa010342	157.	Arbabi S, Ahrns KS, Wahl WL, et al. Beta-blocker use is associated with improved outcomes in adult burn patients. J Trauma. 2004;56(2):265-9-71. doi:10.1097/01.TA.0000109859.91202.C8	158.	LeCompte MT, Rae L, Kahn SA. A survey of the use of propranolol in burn centers: who, what, when, why. Burns. 2017;43(1):121-126. doi:10.1016/j.burns.2016.07.007	159.	Brown DA, Gibbons J, Honari S, Klein MB, Pham TN, Gibran NS. Propranolol dosing practices in adult burn patients: implications for safety and efficacy. J Burn Care Res. 37(3):e218-e226. doi:10.1097/BCR.0000000000000240	160.	Murphy KD, Thomas S, Mlcak RP, Chinkes DL, Klein GL, Herndon DN. Effects of long-term oxandrolone administration in severely burned children. Surgery. 2004;136(2):219-224. doi:10.1016/j.surg.2004.04.022	161.	Demling RH, DeSanti L. Oxandrolone induced lean mass gain during recovery from severe burns is maintained after discon-tinuation of the anabolic steroid. Burns. 2003;29(8):793-797. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14636753. Accessed May 7, 2018.	162.	Porro LJ, Herndon DN, Rodriguez NA, et al. Five-year out-comes after oxandrolone administration in severely burned children: a randomized clinical trial of safety and efficacy. J Am Coll Surg. 2012;214(4):489-502-4. doi:10.1016/j.jamcollsurg.2011.12.038	163.	Jeschke MG, Finnerty CC, Suman OE, Kulp G, Mlcak RP, Herndon DN. The effect of oxandrolone on the endocrino-logic, inflammatory, and hypermetabolic responses during the acute phase postburn. Ann Surg. 2007;246(3):351-60-2. doi:10.1097/SLA.0b013e318146980e	164.	Pham TN, Klein MB, Gibran NS, et al. Impact of oxan-drolone treatment on acute outcomes after severe burn injury. J Burn Care Res. 2008;29(6):902-906. doi:10.1097/BCR.0b013e31818ba14d	165.	Gore DC, Chinkes D, Heggers J, Herndon DN, Wolf SE, Desai M. Association of hyperglycemia with increased mor-tality after severe burn injury. J Trauma. 2001;51(3):540-544. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11535907. Accessed May 7, 2018.	166.	van den Berghe G, Wouters P, Weekers F, et al. Inten-sive insulin therapy in critically ill patients. N Engl J Med. 2001;345(19):1359-1367. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa011300	167.	Thomas SJ, Morimoto K, Herndon DN, et al. The effect of prolonged euglycemic hyperinsulinemia on lean body mass after severe burn. Surgery. 2002;132(2):341-347. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12219032. Accessed May 7, 2018.	168.	Jeschke MG, Klein D, Herndon DN. Insulin treatment improves the systemic inflammatory reaction to severe trauma. Ann Surg. 2004;239(4):553-560. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15024317. Accessed May 7, 2018.	169.	Gore DC, Wolf SE, Sanford A, Herndon DN, Wolfe RR. Influence of metformin on glucose intolerance and Brunicardi_Ch08_p0251-p0270.indd   26728/12/18   11:51 AM 268BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Imuscle catabolism following severe burn injury. Ann Surg. 2005;241(2):334-342. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15650645. Accessed May 7, 2018.	170.	Pham TN, Neff MJ, Simmons JM, Gibran NS, Heimbach DM, Klein MB. The clinical pulmonary infection score poorly predicts pneumonia in patients with burns. J Burn Care Res. 28(1):76-79. doi:10.1097/BCR.0b013E31802C88DB	171.	Barret JP, Desai MH, Herndon DN. Effects of tracheosto-mies on infection and airway complications in pediatric burn patients. Burns. 2000;26(2):190-193. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10716364. Accessed May 7, 2018.	172.	Cochran A, Morris SE, Edelman LS, Saffle JR. Systemic Candida infection in burn patients: a case-control study of management patterns and outcomes. Surg Infect (Larchmt). 2002;3(4):367-374. doi:10.1089/109629602762539580	173.	Gravvanis AI, Tsoutsos DA, Iconomou TG, Papadopou-los SG. Percutaneous versus conventional tracheostomy in burned patients with inhalation injury. World J Surg. 2005;29(12):1571-1575. doi:10.1007/s00268-005-7905-y	174.	Hershberger RC, Hunt JL, Arnoldo BD, Purdue GF. Abdominal compartment syndrome in the severely burned patient. J Burn Care Res. 2007;28(5):708-714. doi:10.1097/BCR.0b013E318148C988	175.	Sullivan SR, Ahmadi AJ, Singh CN, et al. Elevated orbital pressure: another untoward effect of massive resuscitation after burn injury. J Trauma. 2006;60(1):72-76. doi:10.1097/01.ta.0000197657.25382.b2	176.	Wibbenmeyer LA, Hoballah JJ, Amelon MJ, et al. The preva-lence of venous thromboembolism of the lower extremity among thermally injured patients determined by duplex sonog-raphy. J Trauma. 2003;55(6):1162-1167. doi:10.1097/01.TA.0000057149.42968.1D	177.	Wahl WL, Brandt MM, Ahrns KS, et al. Venous thrombosis incidence in burn patients: preliminary results of a prospective study. J Burn Care Rehabil. 23(2):97-102. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11882798. Accessed May 7, 2018.	178.	Ahuja RB, Bansal P, Pradhan GS, Subberwal M. An analysis of deep vein thrombosis in burn patients (part II): a random-ized and controlled study of thrombo-prophylaxis with low molecular weight heparin. Burns. 2016;42(8):1693-1698. doi:10.1016/j.burns.2016.08.007	179.	Scott JR, Klein MB, Gernsheimer T, Honari S, Gibbons J, Gibran NS. Arterial and venous complications of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia in burn patients. J Burn Care Res. 2007;28(1):71-75. doi:10.1097/BCR.0b013E31802C8929	180.	Dudeck MA, Weiner LM, Allen-Bridson K, et al. National Healthcare Safety Network (NHSN) report, data summary for 2012, device-associated module. Am J Infect Control. 2013;41(12):1148-1166. doi:10.1016/j.ajic.2013.09.002	181.	O’Mara MS, Reed NL, Palmieri TL, Greenhalgh DG. Central venous catheter infections in burn patients with scheduled cath-eter exchange and replacement. J Surg Res. 2007;142(2):341-350. doi:10.1016/j.jss.2007.03.063	182.	Engrav LH, Heimbach DM, Reus JL, Harnar TJ, Marvin JA. Early excision and grafting vs. nonoperative treatment of burns of indeterminant depth: a randomized prospec-tive study. J Trauma. 1983;23(11):1001-1004. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/6355500. Accessed May 7, 2018.	183.	Thompson P, Herndon DN, Abston S, Rutan T. Effect of early excision on patients with major thermal injury. J Trauma. 1987;27(2):205-207. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3820353. Accessed May 7, 2018.	184.	Saaiq M, Zaib S, Ahmad S. Early excision and grafting versus delayed excision and grafting of deep thermal burns up to 40% total body surface area: a comparison of outcome. Ann Burns Fire Disasters. 2012;25(3):143-147. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23467391. Accessed May 7, 2018.	185.	Sheridan RL, Tompkins RG. What’s new in burns and metab-olism. J Am Coll Surg. 2004;198(2):243-263. doi:10.1016/j.jamcollsurg.2003.11.007	186.	Klein MB, Hunter S, Heimbach DM, et al. The Versajet water dissector: a new tool for tangential excision. J Burn Care Rehabil. 2005;26(6):483-487. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16278562. Accessed May 7, 2018.	187.	Rode H, Martinez R, Potgieter D, Adams S, Rogers AD. Experience and outcomes of micrografting for major pae-diatric burns. Burns. 2017;43(5):1103-1110. doi:10.1016/j.burns.2017.02.008	188.	Nyame TT, Chiang HA, Orgill DP. Clinical applications of skin substitutes. Surg Clin North Am. 2014;94(4):839-850. doi:10.1016/j.suc.2014.05.013	189.	Kearney JN. Clinical evaluation of skin substitutes. Burns. 2001;27(5):545-551.	190.	Compton CC, Gill JM, Bradford DA, Regauer S, Gallico GG, O’Connor NE. Skin regenerated from cultured epithelial auto-grafts on full-thickness burn wounds from 6 days to 5 years after grafting. A light, electron microscopic and immunohis-tochemical study. Lab Invest. 1989;60(5):600-612. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2469857. Accessed May 7, 2018.	191.	Cirodde A, Leclerc T, Jault P, Duhamel P, Lataillade J-J, Bargues L. Cultured epithelial autografts in massive burns: a single-center retrospective study with 63 patients. Burns. 2011;37(6):964-972. doi:10.1016/j.burns.2011.03.011	192.	Tredget EE, Levi B, Donelan MB. Biology and principles of scar management and burn reconstruction. Surg Clin North Am. 2014;94(4):793-815. doi:10.1016/j.suc.2014.05.005	193.	Parrett BM, Donelan MB. Pulsed dye laser in burn scars: current concepts and future directions. Burns. 2010;36(4): 443-449. doi:10.1016/j.burns.2009.08.015	194.	Cho S Bin, Lee SJ, Chung WS, Kang JM, Kim YK. Treatment of burn scar using a carbon dioxide fractional laser. J Drugs Dermatol. 2010;9(2):173-175. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20214184. Accessed May 7, 2018.	195.	Hultman CS, Friedstat JS, Edkins RE, Cairns BA, Meyer AA. Laser resurfacing and remodeling of hypertrophic burn scars: the results of a large, prospective, before-after cohort study, with long-term follow-up. Ann Surg. 2014;260(3):519-29-32. doi:10.1097/SLA.0000000000000893	196.	Kwan PO, Tredget EE. Biological principles of scar and contracture. Hand Clin. 2017;33(2):277-292. doi:10.1016/j.hcl.2016.12.004	197.	Goverman J, Mathews K, Goldstein R, et al. Adult contrac-tures in burn injury: a burn model system National Data-base Study. J Burn Care Res. 38(1):e328-e336. doi:10.1097/BCR.0000000000000380	198.	Chen H-C, Yang J-Y, Chuang S-S, Huang C-Y, Yang S-Y. Heterotopic ossification in burns: our experience and lit-erature reviews. Burns. 2009;35(6):857-862. doi:10.1016/j.burns.2008.03.002	199.	Levi B, Jayakumar P, Giladi A, et al. Risk factors for the devel-opment of heterotopic ossification in seriously burned adults: A National Institute on Disability, Independent Living and Rehabilitation Research burn model system database analysis. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2015;79(5):870-876. doi:10.1097/TA.0000000000000838	200.	Schneider JC, Simko LC, Goldstein R, et al. Predicting het-erotopic ossification early after burn injuries: a risk scor-ing system. Ann Surg. 2017;266(1):179-184. doi:10.1097/SLA.0000000000001841	201.	Cakir U, Terzi R, Abaci F, Aker T. The prevalence of post-trau-matic stress disorder in patients with burn injuries, and their Brunicardi_Ch08_p0251-p0270.indd   26828/12/18   11:51 AM 269BURNSCHAPTER 8quality of life. Int J Psychiatry Clin Pract. 2015;19(1):56-59. doi:10.3109/13651501.2014.981545	202.	Thombs BD, Bresnick MG, Magyar-Russell G. Depression in sur-vivors of burn injury: a systematic review. Gen Hosp Psychiatry. 2006;28(6):494-502. doi:10.1016/j.genhosppsych.2006.08.010	203.	Hobbs K. Which factors influence the development of post-traumatic stress disorder in patients with burn injuries? A sys-tematic review of the literature. Burns. 2015;41(3):421-430. doi:10.1016/j.burns.2014.10.018	204.	Grant EJ. Burn injuries: prevention, advocacy, and legisla-tion. Clin Plast Surg. 2017;44(3):451-466. doi:10.1016/j.cps.2017.02.005	205.	Cox SG, Burahee A, Albertyn R, Makahabane J, Rode H. Parent knowledge on paediatric burn prevention related to the home environment. Burns. 2016;42(8):1854-1860. doi:10.1016/j.burns.2016.05.015	206.	Ballesteros MF, Jackson ML, Martin MW. Working toward the elimination of residential fire deaths: the Centers for Dis-ease Control and Prevention’s Smoke Alarm Installation and Fire Safety Education (SAIFE) program. J Burn Care Rehabil. 2005;26(5):434-439. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16151290. Accessed May 7, 2018.	207.	DiGuiseppi C, Roberts I, Wade A, et al. Incidence of fires and related injuries after giving out free smoke alarms: cluster ran-domised controlled trial. BMJ. 2002;325(7371):995. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12411355.	208.	Fallat ME, Rengers SJ. The effect of education and safety devices on scald burn prevention. J Trauma. 1993;34(4): 560-3-4. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/ 8487342. Accessed May 7, 2018.	209.	Cagle KM, Davis JW, Dominic W, Gonzales W. Results of a focused scald-prevention program. J Burn Care Res. 2006; 27(6):859-863. doi:10.1097/01.BCR.0000245423.79531.50	210.	Rybarczyk MM, Schafer JM, Elm CM, et al. Prevention of burn injuries in lowand middle-income countries: a sys-tematic review. Burns. 2016;42(6):1183-1192. doi:10.1016/j.burns.2016.04.014	211.	Klas KS, Smith SJ, Matherly AF, Dillard BD, Grant EJ, Cusick-Jost J. Multicenter assessment of burn team injury prevention knowledge. J Burn Care Res. 2015;36(3):434-439. doi:10.1097/BCR.0000000000000130	212.	Conlon KM, Martin S. “Just send them all to a burn centre”: managing burn resources in a mass casualty incident. J Bus Contin Emer Plan. 2011;5(2):150-160. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21835753. Accessed May 7, 2018.	213.	Broeze CL, Falder S, Rea S, Wood F. Burn disasters—an audit of the literature. Prehosp Disaster Med. 2010;25(6):555-559. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21181692. Accessed May 7, 2018.	214.	ABA Board of Trustees, Committee on Organization and Delivery of Burn Care. Disaster management and the ABA Plan. J Burn Care Rehabil. 2005;26(2):102-106. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15756109. Accessed May 7, 2018.	215.	Dai A, Carrougher GJ, Mandell SP, Fudem G, Gibran NS, Pham TN. Review of recent large-scale burn disasters world-wide in comparison to preparedness guidelines. J Burn Care Res. 2017;38(1):36-44. doi:10.1097/BCR.0000000000000441	216.	Kearns RD, Conlon KM, Valenta AL, et al. Disaster planning: the basics of creating a burn mass casualty disaster plan for a burn center. J Burn Care Res. 2014;35(1):e1-e13. doi:10.1097/BCR.0b013e31829afe25	217.	Conlon KM, Ruhren C, Johansen S, et al. Developing and implementing a plan for large-scale burn disaster response in New Jersey. J Burn Care Res. 35(1):e14-20. doi:10.1097/BCR.0b013e3182779b59	218.	Wolbarst AB, Wiley AL, Nemhauser JB, Christensen DM, Hen-dee WR. Medical response to a major radiologic emergency: a primer for medical and public health practitioners. Radiology. 2010;254(3):660-677. doi:10.1148/radiol.09090330	219.	Flynn DF, Goans RE. Nuclear terrorism: triage and medical management of radiation and combined-injury casualties. Surg Clin North Am. 2006;86(3):601-636. doi:10.1016/j.suc.2006.03.005	220.	DiCarlo AL, Maher C, Hick JL, et al. Radiation injury after a nuclear detonation: medical consequences and the need for scarce resources allocation. Disaster Med Public Health Prep. 2011;5 Suppl 1:S32-S44. doi:10.1001/dmp.2011.17	221.	Palmer JL, Deburghgraeve CR, Bird MD, Hauer-Jensen M, Kovacs EJ. Development of a combined radiation and burn injury model. J Burn Care Res. 2011;32(2):317-323. doi:10.1097/BCR.0b013e31820aafa9	222.	Barillo DJ, Cancio LC, Goodwin CW. Treatment of white phosphorus and other chemical burn injuries at one burn center over a 51-year period. Burns. 2004;30(5):448-452. doi:10.1016/j.burns.2004.01.032	223.	Aviv U, Kornhaber R, Harats M, Haik J. The burning issue of white phosphorus: a case report and review of the literature. Disaster Mil Med. 2017;3:6. doi:10.1186/s40696-017-0034-y	224.	Barber RC, Aragaki CC, Chang L-YE, et al. CD14-159 C allele is associated with increased risk of mortality after burn injury. Shock. 2007;27(3):232-237. doi:10.1097/01.shk.0000239770.10528.9a	225.	Barber RC, Chang L-YE, Arnoldo BD, et al. Innate immu-nity SNPs are associated with risk for severe sepsis after burn injury. Clin Med Res. 2006;4(4):250-255. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17210974. Accessed May 7, 2018.	226.	Moore CB, Medina MA, van Deventer HW, et al. Down-regulation of immune signaling genes in patients with large surface burn injury. J Burn Care Res. 2007;28(6):879-887. doi:10.1097/BCR.0b013e318159a41e	227.	Xiao W, Mindrinos MN, Seok J, et al. A genomic storm  in critically injured humans. J Exp Med. 2011;208(13): 2581-2590. doi:10.1084/jem.20111354	228.	Klein MB, Silver G, Gamelli RL, et al. Inflammation and the host response to injury: an overview of the multicenter study of the genomic and proteomic response to burn injury. J Burn Care Res. 2006;27(4):448-451. doi:10.1097/01.BCR.0000227477.33877.E6	229.	Sood RF, Gibran NS, Arnoldo BD, et al. Early leukocyte gene expression associated with age, burn size, and inhalation injury in severely burned adults. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2016;80(2):250-257. doi:10.1097/TA.0000000000000905	230.	Godwin Z, Tan J, Bockhold J, Ma J, Tran NK. Development and evaluation of a novel smart device-based application for burn assessment and management. Burns. 2015;41(4): 754-760. doi:10.1016/j.burns.2014.10.006	231.	Barnes J, Duffy A, Hamnett N, et al. The Mersey Burns App: evolving a model of validation. Emerg Med J. 2015;32(8): 637-641. doi:10.1136/emermed-2013-203416	232.	Wurzer P, Parvizi D, Lumenta DB, et al. Smartphone appli-cations in burns. Burns. 2015;41(5):977-989. doi:10.1016/j.burns.2014.11.010Brunicardi_Ch08_p0251-p0270.indd   26928/12/18   11:51 AM
# Chunk 8874
Brunicardi_Ch08_p0251-p0270.indd   27028/12/18   11:51 AMThis page intentionally left blank

Wound HealingMunier Nazzal, Mohamed F. Osman, Heitham Albeshri, Darren B. Abbas, and Carol A. Angel 9chapterHISTORY OF WOUND HEALINGThe earliest accounts of wound healing date back to about 2000 b.c., when the Sumerians employed two modes of treatment: a spiritual method consisting of incantations, and a physical method of applying poultice-like materials to the wound. The Egyptians were the first to differentiate between infected and diseased wounds compared to noninfected wounds. The 1650 b.c. Edwin Smith Surgical Papyrus, a copy of a much older document, describes at least 48 different types of wounds. A later document (Ebers Papyrus, 1550 b.c.) relates the use of con-coctions containing honey (antibacterial properties), lint (absor-bent properties), and grease (barrier) for treating wounds. These same properties are still considered essential in contemporary daily wound management.The Greeks, equipped with the knowledge bequeathed by the Egyptians, went even further and classified wounds as acute or chronic in nature. Galen of Pergamum (120–201 a.d.), appointed as the doctor to the Roman gladiators, had an enormous number of wounds to deal with following gladiato-rial combats. He emphasized the importance of maintaining a moist environment to ensure adequate healing. It took almost  19 centuries for this important concept to be proven scientifi-cally, when it was shown that the epithelialization rate increases by 50% in a moist wound environment when compared to a dry wound environment.1The next major stride in the history of wound heal-ing was the discovery of antiseptics and their importance in reducing wound infections. Ignaz Philipp Semmelweis, a Hungarian obstetrician (1818–1865), noted that the inci-dence of puerperal fever was much lower if medical students, following cadaver-dissection class and prior to attending child-birth, washed their hands with soap and hypochlorite. Louis  Pasteur (1822–1895) was instrumental in dispelling the theory of spontaneous generation of germs and proving that germs existed in and were always introduced from the environment. Joseph Lister probably made one of the most significant con-tributions to wound healing. On a visit to Glasgow, Scotland, Lister noted that some areas of the city’s sewer system were less murky than the rest. He discovered that the water from pipes that were dumping waste containing carbolic acid (phenol) was clear. In 1865, Lister began soaking his surgical instruments in phenol and spraying the operating rooms, reducing the post-operative mortality rates from 50% to 15%. After attending an impressive lecture by Lister in 1876, Robert Wood Johnson left the meeting and began 10 years of research that would ulti-mately result in the production of an antiseptic dressing in the form of cotton gauze impregnated with iodoform. Since then, several other materials have been used to impregnate cotton gauze to achieve antisepsis.The 1960s and 1970s led to the development of polymeric dressings. These polymeric dressings can be custom made to specific parameters, such as permeability to gases (occlusive vs. semi-occlusive), varying degrees of absorbency, and different physical forms. Due to the ability to customize, the available range of materials that aid in wound care has grown exponen-tially to include an ever-expanding variety. Currently, the prac-tice of wound healing encompasses manipulation and/or use of, among others, inflammatory cytokines, growth factors, and bio-engineered tissue. It is the combination of all these modali-ties that enables optimal wound healing. The role of organism in the perpetuation of nonhealing of chronic wounds 1History of Wound Healing	271Phases of Wound Healing	272Hemostasis and Inflammation / 272Proliferation / 273Matrix Synthesis / 274Maturation and Remodeling / 275Epithelialization / 275Role of Growth Factors in Normal  Healing / 276Wound Contraction / 276Heritable Diseases of Connective Tissue	276Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome / 276Osteogenesis Imperfecta / 278Epidermolysis Bullosa / 279Acrodermatitis Enteropathica / 279Healing in Specific Tissues	279Gastrointestinal Tract / 279Bone / 280Cartilage / 281Tendon / 281Nerve / 281Fetal Wound Healing / 281Classification of Wounds	282Factors Affecting Wound Healing / 283Chronic Wounds / 289Excess Healing	291Treatment of Wounds	294Local Care / 294Antibiotics / 295Dressings / 295Skin Replacements / 296Cellular and Tissue-Based Products  in Chronic Wound and Ulcer Management / 297Oxygen Therapy in Wound Healing / 299Biofilm and Chronic Wound Healing / 299Brunicardi_Ch09_p0271-p0304.indd   27101/03/19   4:49 PM 272has been better understood. Although wounds are classified under one entity, it is believed that they behave differently based on the host and organism involved. The future of wound healing is in “precision medicine” in which treatment strategies will be based on the host, the underlying mechanism, and the organisms in the wound bed and tissue.PHASES OF WOUND HEALINGWound healing is a complex process of overlapping phases that is initiated by an injury or wound. Normal wound healing is divided into phases defined by characteristic cellular  popula-tions and biochemical activities: (a) hemostasis and inflammation, (b) proliferation, and (c) maturation and remodeling. An approximate timeline of these events is depicted in Fig. 9-1. This sequence of events in most circumstances spans the time from injury to resolution of acute wounds. All wounds need to progress through this series of cellular and biochemical events that characterize the phases of healing in order to suc-cessfully reestablish tissue integrity. However, multiple factors can interfere with this sequence and can lead to lengthy healing (chronic wounds) or nonhealing.Hemostasis and InflammationHemostasis precedes and initiates inflammation with the ensuing release of chemotactic factors from the wound site (Fig. 9-2A). Wounding by definition disrupts tissue integrity, leading to divi-sion of blood vessels and direct exposure of extracellular matrix to platelets. Exposure of subendothelial collagen to platelets results in platelet aggregation, degranulation, and activation of the coagulation cascade. Platelet α granules release a number of wound-active substances, such as platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), platelet-activating factor (PAF), fibronectin, and serotonin. In addition to achieving hemostasis, the fibrin clot serves as scaffolding for the migration into the wound of inflammatory cells such as poly-morphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs, neutrophils) and monocytes.Cellular infiltration after injury follows a character-istic, predetermined sequence (see Fig. 9-1). PMNs are the 2first infiltrating cells to enter the wound site, peaking at 24 to  48 hours. Increased vascular permeability, local prostaglan-din release, and the presence of chemotactic substances such as complement factors, interleukin-1 (IL-1), tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), TGF-β, platelet factor 4, or bacterial prod-ucts all stimulate neutrophil migration.The postulated primary role of neutrophils is phagocytosis of bacteria and tissue debris. PMNs are also a major source of cytokines early during inflammation, especially TNF-α3 which may have a significant influence on subsequent angiogenesis and collagen synthesis (see Fig. 9-2B). PMNs also release pro-teases such as collagenases, which participate in matrix and ground substance degradation in the early phase of wound heal-ing. Other than their role in limiting infections, these cells do not appear to play a role in collagen deposition or acquisition of mechanical wound strength. On the contrary, neutrophil fac-tors have been implicated in delaying the epithelial closure of wounds.4The second population of inflammatory cells that invades the wound consists of macrophages, which are recognized as being essential to successful healing.5 Derived from circulat-ing monocytes, macrophages achieve significant numbers in the wound by 48 to 96 hours post injury and remain present until wound healing is complete.Macrophages, like neutrophils, participate in wound debridement via phagocytosis and contribute to microbial stasis via oxygen radical and nitric oxide synthesis (see Fig. 9-2B,C). The macrophage’s central function is activation and recruitment of other cells via mediators such as cytokines and growth fac-tors, as well as directly by cell-cell interaction and intercellular adhesion molecules (ICAM). By releasing such mediators as TGF-β, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), insulin-like growth factor (IGF), epithelial growth factor (EGF), and lac-tate, macrophages regulate cell proliferation, matrix synthesis, and angiogenesis.6,7 Macrophages also play a significant role in regulating angiogenesis and matrix deposition and remodeling (Table 9-1).T lymphocytes comprise another population of inflam-matory/immune cells that routinely invades the wound. Less Key Points1	Wound healing is a complex cellular and biochemical  cascade that leads to restitution of integrity and function.2	All tissues heal by similar mechanisms, and the process undergoes phases of inflammation, cellular migration, pro-liferation, matrix deposition, and remodeling.3	Factors that impede normal healing include local, systemic, and technical conditions that the surgeon must take into account.4	Clinically, excess healing can be as significant a problem as impaired healing; genetic, technical, and local factors play a major role.5	Optimal outcome of acute wounds relies on complete eval-uation of the patient and of the wound and application of best practices and techniques.6	Antibiotics should be used only in the presence of infec-tion; colonization and contamination does not mean there is infection.7	Dressing should facilitate the major changes taking place during healing to produce an optimally healed wound and take into consideration the comorbid conditions associated with chronic wounds.8	Cellular and tissue-based products are additional mea-sures, and these products might accelerate the rate of heal-ing but will not replace basic wound care.9	Chronic wounds have a decrease in oxygen supply to the wound, which contributes to delayed healing; oxygen therapy might aid in the healing of certain types of wounds.10	Biofilm is the term used for the bacterial growth on a chronic wound that is encapsulated by a protective layer made up of the host and bacterial proteins; this layer makes it difficult to heal chronic wounds and control infection.Brunicardi_Ch09_p0271-p0304.indd   27201/03/19   4:49 PM 273WOUND HEALINGCHAPTER 9numerous than macrophages, T-lymphocyte numbers peak at about 1 week post injury and truly bridge the transition from the inflammatory to the proliferative phase of healing. Though known to be essential to wound healing, the role of lymphocytes in wound healing is not fully defined.8 A significant body of data supports the hypothesis that T lymphocytes play an active role in the modulation of the wound environment. Depletion of most wound T lymphocytes decreases wound strength and col-lagen content,9 while selective depletion of the CD8+ suppressor subset of T lymphocytes enhances wound healing. However, depletion of the CD4+ helper subset has no effect.10 Lympho-cytes also exert a downregulating effect on fibroblast collagen synthesis by cell-associated interferon IFN-γ, TNF-α, and IL-1. This effect is lost if the cells are physically separated, suggest-ing that extracellular matrix synthesis is regulated not only via soluble factors but also by direct cell-cell contact between lym-phocytes and fibroblasts.11ProliferationThe proliferative phase is the second phase of wound healing and roughly spans days 4 through 12 (see Fig. 9-2C). It is dur-ing this phase that tissue continuity is reestablished. Fibroblasts and endothelial cells are the last cell populations to infiltrate the healing wound, and the strongest chemotactic factor for fibroblasts is PDGF.12,13 Upon entering the wound environment, recruited fibroblasts first need to proliferate, and then become activated, to carry out their primary function of matrix synthesis remodeling. This activation is mediated mainly by the cytokines and growth factors released from wound macrophages.Fibroblasts isolated from wounds synthesize more colla-gen than nonwound fibroblasts, they proliferate less, and they actively carry out matrix contraction. Although it is clear that the cytokine-rich wound environment plays a significant role in this phenotypic alteration and activation, the exact mediators are only partially characterized.14,15 Additionally, lactate, which accumulates in significant amounts in the wound environment over time (∼10 mmol), is a potent regulator of collagen syn-thesis through a mechanism involving adenosine diphosphate (ADP)-ribosylation.16,17Endothelial cells also proliferate extensively during this phase of healing. These cells participate in the formation of new capillaries (angiogenesis), a process essential to successful wound healing. Endothelial cells migrate from intact venules close to the wound. Their migration, replication, and new capil-lary tubule formation is under the influence of such cytokines and growth factors as TNF-α, TGF-β, and VEGF. Although Figure 9-1. The cellular, biochemical, and mechanical phases of wound healing.Phases of healing0246810121416MaturationProliferationInflammationmonths0246810121416Relative number of cellsNeutrophilsMacrophagesFibroblastsLymphocytes0246810121416Relative amount ofmatrix synthesisDays postwoundingCollagen ICollagen IIIWound-breakingstrengthFibronectinBrunicardi_Ch09_p0271-p0304.indd   27301/03/19   4:50 PM 274BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Imany cells produce VEGF, macrophages represent a major source in the healing wound, and VEGF receptors are located specifically on endothelial cells.18,19Matrix SynthesisBiochemistry of Collagen. Collagen, the most abundant pro-tein in the body, plays a critical role in the successful comple-tion of adult wound healing. Its deposition, maturation, and subsequent remodeling are essential to the functional integrity of the wound.Although there are at least 18 types of collagen described, the main ones of interest to wound repair are types I and III. Type I collagen is the major component of extracellular matrix in skin. Type III, which is also normally present in skin, becomes more prominent and important during the repair process.Biochemically, each chain of collagen is composed of a glycine residue in every third position. The second position in the triplet is made up of proline or lysine during the translation process. The polypeptide chain that is translated from mRNA contains approximately 1000 amino acid residues and is called protocollagen. Release of protocollagen into the endoplasmic reticulum results in the hydroxylation of proline and lysine by specific hydroxylases (Fig. 9-3). Prolyl hydroxylase requires oxygen and iron as cofactors, α-ketoglutarate as co-substrate, and ascorbic acid (vitamin C) as an electron donor. In the endo-plasmic reticulum, the protocollagen chain is also glycosylated by the linking of galactose and glucose at specific hydroxyly-sine residues. These steps of hydroxylation and glycosylation alter the hydrogen bonding forces within the chain, imposing steric changes that force the protocollagen chain to assume an α-helical configuration. Three α-helical chains entwine to form a right-handed superhelical structure called procollagen. At both ends, this structure contains nonhelical peptide domains called registration peptides. Although initially joined by weak, ionic bonds, the procollagen molecule becomes much stronger by the covalent cross-linking of lysine residues.Extracellularly, the nonhelical registration peptides are cleaved by a procollagen peptidase, and the procollagen strands undergo further polymerization and cross-linking. The resulting collagen monomer is further polymerized and cross-linked by the formation of intraand intermolecular covalent bonds.Collagen synthesis, as well as posttranslational modifica-tions, are highly dependent on systemic factors such as an adequate oxygen supply; the presence of sufficient nutrients (amino acids and carbohydrates) and cofactors (vitamins and trace metals);  and the local wound environment (vascular supply and lack of infection). Addressing these factors and reversing nutritional defi-ciencies can optimize collagen synthesis and deposition.Proteoglycan Synthesis. Glycosaminoglycans comprise a large portion of the “ground substance” that makes up granula-tion tissue. Rarely found free, they couple with proteins to form proteoglycans. The polysaccharide chain is made up of repeat-ing disaccharide units composed of glucuronic or iduronic acid and a hexosamine, which is usually sulfated. The disaccharide EpidermisFibrinPlateletsClotNeutrophilsLymphocytesScabCollagenMacrophageEndothelialbudsDisruptedblood vesselRed bloodcellsDermisABCEpidermisDermisEpidermisDermisFibroblastFigure 9-2. The phases of wound healing viewed histologically.  A. The hemostatic/inflammatory phase. B. Latter inflammatory phases reflecting infiltration by mononuclear cells and lympho-cytes. C. The proliferative phase, with associated angiogenesis and collagen synthesis.Table 9-1Macrophage activities during wound healingACTIVITYMEDIATORSPhagocytosisReactive oxygen speciesNitric oxideDebridementCollagenase, elastaseCell recruitment and activationGrowth factors: PDGF, TGF-β, EGF, IGFCytokines: TNF-α, IL-1, IL-6FibronectinMatrix synthesisGrowth factors: TGF-β, EGF, PDGFCytokines: TNF-α, IL-1, IFN-γEnzymes: arginase, collagenaseProstaglandinsNitric oxideAngiogenesisGrowth factors: FGF, VEGFCytokines: TNF-αNitric oxideEGF = epithelial growth factor; FGF = fibroblast growth factor;  IGF = insulin-like growth factor; IFN-γ = interferon-γ; IL = interleukin;  PDGF = platelet-derived growth factor; TGF-β = transforming growth factor-β; TNF-α = tumor necrosis factor-α; VEGF = vascular endothelial growth factor.Brunicardi_Ch09_p0271-p0304.indd   27401/03/19   4:50 PM 275WOUND HEALINGCHAPTER 9composition of proteoglycans varies from about 10 units in the case of heparin sulfate to as much as 2000 units in the case of hyaluronic acid.The major glycosaminoglycans present in wounds are dermatan and chondroitin sulfate. Fibroblasts synthesize these compounds, increasing their concentration greatly during the first 3 weeks of healing. The interaction between collagen and proteoglycans is being actively studied. It is thought that the assembly of collagen subunits into fibrils and fibers is depen-dent upon the lattice provided by the sulfated proteoglycans. Furthermore, it appears that the extent of sulfation is critical in determining the configuration of the collagen fibrils. As scar collagen is deposited, the proteoglycans are incorporated into the collagen scaffolding. However, with scar maturation and collagen remodeling, the content of proteoglycans gradually diminishes.Maturation and RemodelingThe maturation and remodeling of the scar begins during the fibroplastic phase and is characterized by a reorganization of previously synthesized collagen. Collagen is broken down by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), and the net wound collagen content is the result of a balance between collagenolysis and collagen synthesis. There is a net shift toward collagen synthesis and eventually the reestablishment of extracellular matrix com-posed of a relatively acellular collagen-rich scar.Wound strength and mechanical integrity in the fresh wound are determined by both the quantity and quality of the newly deposited collagen. The deposition of matrix at the wound site follows a characteristic pattern: fibronectin and collagen type III constitute the early matrix scaffolding; glycosamino-glycans and proteoglycans represent the next significant matrix components; and collagen type I is the final matrix. By several weeks post injury, the amount of collagen in the wound reaches a plateau, but the tensile strength continues to increase for sev-eral more months.20 Fibril formation and fibril cross-linking result in decreased collagen solubility, increased strength, and increased resistance to enzymatic degradation of the collagen matrix. Fibrillin, a glycoprotein secreted by fibroblasts, is essen-tial for the formation of elastic fibers found in connective tis-sue. Scar remodeling continues for many (6 to 12) months post injury, gradually resulting in a mature, avascular, and acellular scar. The mechanical strength of the scar never achieves that of the uninjured tissue.There is a constant turnover of collagen in the extracellular matrix, both in the healing wound as well as during normal tissue homeostasis. Collagenolysis is the result of collagenase activity, a class of MMPs that require activation. Both collagen synthesis and lysis are strictly controlled by cytokines and growth factors. Some factors affect both aspects of collagen remodeling. For example, TGF-β increases new collagen transcription and also decreases collagen breakdown by stimulating synthesis of tis-sue inhibitors of metalloproteinase.21 This balance of collagen deposition and degradation is the ultimate determinant of wound strength and integrity.EpithelializationEpithelialization is the final step in establishing tissue integrity. This process is characterized primarily by proliferation and migration of epithelial cells adjacent to the wound (Fig. 9-4). The process begins within 1 day of injury and is seen as thicken-ing of the epidermis at the wound edge. Marginal basal cells at the edge of the wound lose their firm attachment to the underly-ing dermis, enlarge, and begin to migrate across the surface of the provisional matrix. Fixed basal cells in a zone near the cut edge undergo a series of rapid mitotic divisions, and these cells appear to migrate by moving over one another in a leapfrog fashion until the defect is covered.22 Once the defect is bridged, the migrating epithelial cells lose their flattened appearance, become more columnar in shape, and increase their mitotic activity. Layering of the epithelium is reestablished, and the surface layer eventually keratinizes.23LysyloxidaseALDOL condensationCollagen genesPre-mRNAmRNA transcriptionmRNA processingmRNA translationOHOHTriple helix formationRibosomeon roughendoplasmicreticulumGolgiSecretory vesicleCell membraneProline and Lysine hydroxylationCollagen mRNASyndesineAldimineCH      OCH      OH      OH      OHOHOProcollagen peptidaseExtracellular space˜-1˜-1˜-2NonenzymaticNH2CCCCFigure 9-3. The steps of collagen synthesis. mRNA = messenger RNA.Brunicardi_Ch09_p0271-p0304.indd   27501/03/19   4:50 PM 276BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IReepithelialization is complete in less than 48 hours in the case of approximated incised wounds but may take sub-stantially longer in the case of larger wounds, where there is a significant epidermal/dermal defect. If only the epithelium and superficial dermis are damaged, such as occurs in split-thickness skin graft donor sites or in superficial second-degree burns, then repair consists primarily of reepithelialization with minimal or no fibroplasia and granulation tissue formation. The stimuli for reepithelialization remain incompletely defined; however, it appears that the process is mediated by a combination of a loss of contact inhibition; exposure to constituents of the extracel-lular matrix, particularly fibronectin; and cytokines produced by immune mononuclear cells.24,25 In particular EGF, TGF-β, basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), PDGF, and IGF-1 have been shown to promote epithelialization.Role of Growth Factors in Normal HealingGrowth factors and cytokines are polypeptides produced in nor-mal and wounded tissue that stimulate cellular migration, pro-liferation, and function. They often are named for the cells from which they were first derived (e.g., platelet-derived growth fac-tor, PDGF) or for their initially identified function (e.g., fibro-blast growth factor, FGF). These names are often misleading because growth factors have been demonstrated to have mul-tiple functions. Most growth factors are extremely potent and produce significant effects in nanomolar concentrations.They may act in an autocrine manner (where the growth factor acts on the cell producing it), a paracrine manner (by release into the extracellular environment, where it acts on the immediately neighboring cells), or in an endocrine manner (where the effect of the substance is distant to the site of release, and the substance is carried to the effector site through the blood stream). In addition to the concentration of the growth factor, the timing of release is as important to determine their effective-ness. As these growth factors exert their effects by cell-surface receptor binding, the appropriate receptor on the responding cells must be present at the time of release in order for the bio-logic effect to occur. Table 9-2 summarizes the principal growth factors found in healing wounds and their known effects on cells participating in the healing process. Growth factors have diver-gent actions on different cells; they can be chemoattractive to one cell type while stimulating replication of a different cell type. Little is known about the ratio of growth factor concentra-tions, which may be as important as the absolute concentration of individual growth factors.Growth factors act on cells via surface receptor binding. Various receptor types have been described, such as ion chan-nels, G-protein linked, or enzyme linked. The response elicited in the cell is usually one of phosphorylation or dephosphoryla-tion of second-messenger molecules through the action of phos-phatases or kinases, resulting in activation or deactivation of proteins in the cytosol or nucleus of the target cell. Phosphoryla-tion of nuclear proteins is followed by the initiation of transcrip-tion of target genes.26 The signal is stopped by internalization of the receptor-ligand complex.Wound ContractionAll wounds undergo some degree of contraction. For wounds that do not have surgically approximated edges, the area of the wound will be decreased by this action (healing by secondary intention). The myofibroblast has been postulated as the major cell responsible for contraction, and it differs from the normal fibroblast in that it possesses a cytoskeletal structure. Typically this cell contains α-smooth muscle actin in thick bundles called stress fibers, giving myofibroblasts contractile capability.27 The α-smooth muscle actin is undetectable until day 6, and then it is increasingly expressed for the next 15 days of wound healing.28 After 4 weeks, this expression fades, and the cells are believed to undergo apoptosis.29 A puzzling point is that the identification of myofibroblasts in the wound does not correspond directly to the initiation of wound contraction, which starts almost immedi-ately after injury. It is believed that fibroblasts might play a role in contraction. In vitro, fibroblasts placed in a collagen lattice actively move in the lattice and contract it without expressing stress fibers. It is postulated that the movement of cells with concomitant reorganization of the cytoskeleton is responsible for contraction.30HERITABLE DISEASES OF CONNECTIVE TISSUEHeritable diseases of connective tissue consist of a group of generalized, genetically determined, primary disorders of one of the elements of connective tissue: collagen, elastin, or muco-polysaccharide. Five major types, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, Marfan’s syndrome, osteogenesis imperfecta, epidermolysis bullosa, and acrodermatitis enteropathica, will be discussed, as each provides unique challenges to the surgeon.Ehlers-Danlos SyndromeEhlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a group of 10 disorders that present as a defect in collagen formation. Over half of the Hair follicleSweat glandBlood vesselsWoundEpidermisDermisRegeneratingepitheliumEpithelialislandEpidermisDermisHair follicleSweat glandBlood vesselsEpidermisDermisFigure 9-4. The healing by epithelialization of superficial cutane-ous wounds.Brunicardi_Ch09_p0271-p0304.indd   27601/03/19   4:50 PM 277WOUND HEALINGCHAPTER 9Table 9-2Growth factors participating in wound healingGROWTH FACTORWOUND CELL ORIGINCELLULAR AND BIOLOGIC EFFECTSPDGFPlatelets, macrophages, monocytes, smooth muscle cells, endothelial cellsChemotaxis: fibroblasts, smooth muscle, monocytes, neutrophilsMitogenesis: fibroblasts, smooth muscle cellsStimulation of angiogenesisStimulation of collagen synthesisEnhance reepithelizationModulate tissue remodelingFGFFibroblasts, endothelial cells, keratinocytes, smooth muscle cells, chondrocytesStimulation of angiogenesis (by stimulation of endothelial cell proliferation and migration)Mitogenesis: mesoderm and neuroectodermHGFFibroblastsStimulates fibroblasts, keratinocytes, chondrocytes, myoblastsSuppresses inflammation, granulation tissue formation, angiogenesis, reepithelializationKeratinocyte growth factorKeratinocytes, fibroblastsSignificant homology with FGF; stimulates keratinocytesEGFPlatelets, macrophages, monocytes (also identified in salivary glands, duodenal glands, kidney, and lacrimal glands)Stimulates proliferation and migration of all epithelial cell typesTGF-αKeratinocytes, platelets, macrophagesHomology with EGF; binds to EGF receptorMitogenic and chemotactic for epidermal and endothelial cellsTGF-β (three isoforms: β1, β2, β3)Platelets, T lymphocytes, macrophages, monocytes, neutrophils, fibroblasts, keratinocytesStimulates angiogenesisStimulates leukocyte chemotaxisTGF-β1 stimulates wound matrix production (fibronectin, collagen glycosaminoglycans); regulation of inflammationTGF-β3 inhibits scar formationInsulin-like growth factors (IGF-1, IGF-2)Platelets (IGF-1 in high concentrations in liver; IGF-2 in high concentrations in fetal growth); likely the effector of growth hormone actionPromote protein/extracellular matrix synthesisIncrease membrane glucose transportVascular endothelial growth factorMacrophages, fibroblasts, endothelial cells, keratinocytesMitogen for endothelial cells (not fibroblasts)Stimulates angiogenesisProinflammatoryIL-1IL-4IL-6ActivinAngiopoitein-1/-2CX3CL1Macrophages, leukocytes, keratinocytes, fibroblastsLeukocytesFibroblasts, endothelial cells, macrophages, keratinocytesKeratinocytes, fibroblastsEndothelial cellsMacrophages, endothelial cellsProinflammatoryStimulates angiogenesis, reepithelialization, tissue  remodelingEnhances collagen synthesisStimulates inflammation, angiogenesis, reepithelialization, collagen deposition, tissue remodelingStimulates granulation tissue formation, keratinocyte differentiation, reepithelializationStimulates angiogenesisStimulates inflammation, angiogenesis, collagen depositionGranulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factorMacrophage/monocytes, endothelial cells, fibroblastsStimulates macrophage differentiation/proliferationCX3CL1 = chemokine (C-X3-C motif) ligand; EGF = epidermal growth factor; FGF = fibroblast growth factor; HGF = hepatocyte growth factor;  IL = interleukin; PDGF = platelet-derived growth factor; TGF = transforming growth factor.Brunicardi_Ch09_p0271-p0304.indd   27701/03/19   4:50 PM 278BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iaffected patients manifest genetic defects encoding α-chains of collagen type V, causing it to be either quantitatively or struc-turally defective. These changes lead to “classic” EDS with phenotypic findings that include thin, friable skin with promi-nent veins, easy bruising, poor wound healing, atrophic scar formation, recurrent hernias, and hyperextensible joints. Gas-trointestinal problems include bleeding, hiatal hernia, intesti-nal diverticulae, and rectal prolapse. Small blood vessels are fragile, making suturing difficult during surgery. Large vessels may develop aneurysms, varicosities, or arteriovenous fistulas or may spontaneously rupture.31-33 Table 9-3 presents a descrip-tion of EDS subtypes, including a recently recognized autoso-mal recessive form characterized by tenascin-X deficiency. The defect is a quantitative loss of protein, resulting in phenotypic changes similar to those observed in other types of EDS.EDS must be considered in every child with recurrent her-nias and coagulopathy, especially when accompanied by platelet abnormalities and low coagulation factor levels. Inguinal her-nias in these children resemble those seen in adults. Great care should be taken to avoid tearing the skin and fascia. The trans-versalis fascia is thin, and the internal ring is greatly dilated. Like adults, hernia repair in these patients with the use of mesh or felt may result in a lower incidence of recurrence.34Closing wounds in patients with EDS might represent a major challenge to the surgeon. Dermal wounds should be closed in two layers, approximated with the sutures under ten-sion, and the stitches should be left in place twice as long as usual. In addition, external fixation with adhesive tape can help reinforce the scar and prevent stretching.35Marfan’s Syndrome. Patients with Marfan’s syndrome have tall stature, arachnodactyly, lax ligaments, myopia, sco-liosis, pectus excavatum, and aneurysm of the ascending aorta. Patients who suffer from this syndrome also are prone to her-nias. Skin may be hyperextensible but shows no delay in wound healing.36,37The genetic defect associated with Marfan’s syndrome is a mutation in the FBN1 gene, which encodes for fibrillin. Pre-viously, it was thought that structural alteration of the micro-fibrillar system was responsible for the phenotypic changes seen with the disease. However, recent research indicates an intricate role that FBN1 gene products play in TGF-β signal-ing. These extracellular matrix molecules normally bind and regulate TGF-β signaling; abnormal FBN1 gene function may cause an increase in TGF-β signaling, particularly in the aortic wall.38Osteogenesis ImperfectaPatients with osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) have brittle bones, osteopenia, low muscle mass, hernias, and ligament and joint laxity. OI is a result of a mutation in type I collagen. Mutations in prolidase, an enzyme responsible for cleaving c-terminal pro-line and hydroxyproline, may have a role in the disease. There are four major OI subtypes with mild to lethal manifestations. Patients experience dermal thinning and increased bruisability. Scarring is normal, and the skin is not hyperextensible. Surgery can be successful but difficult in these patients, as the bones fracture easily under minimal stress.31,34 Table 9-4 lists the vari-ous features associated with the clinical subtypes of OI.Table 9-3Clinical, genetic, and biochemical aspects of Ehlers-Danlos subtypesTYPECLINICAL FEATURESINHERITANCEBIOCHEMICAL DEFECTISkin: soft, hyperextensible, easy bruising, fragile, atrophic scars; hypermobile joints; varicose veins; premature birthsADNot knownIISimilar to type I, except less severeADNot knownIIISkin: soft, not hyperextensible, normal scars; small and large joint hypermobilityADNot knownIVSkin: thin, translucent, visible veins, normal scarring, no hyperextensibility; no joint hypermobility; arterial, bowel, and uterine ruptureADType III collagen defectVSimilar to type IIXLRNot knownVISkin: hyperextensible, fragile, easy bruising; hypermobile joints; hypotonia; kyphoscoliosisARLysyl hydroxylase deficiencyVIISkin: soft, mild hyperextensibility, no increased fragility; extremely lax joints with dislocationsADType I collagen gene defectVIIISkin: soft, hyperextensible, easy bruising, abnormal scars with purple discoloration; hypermobile joints; generalized periodontitisADNot knownIXSkin: soft, lax; bladder diverticula and rupture; limited pronation and supination; broad clavicle; occipital hornsXLRLysyl oxidase defect with abnormal copper useXSimilar to type II with abnormal clotting studiesARFibronectin defectTNxHypermobile joints, skin fragilityARAbsence of tenascin X proteinAD = autosomal dominant; AR = autosomal recessive; XLR = X-linked recessive.Reproduced with permission from Cohen IK, Diegelmann RF, Lindblad WJ: Wound Healing: Biochemical and Clinical Aspects. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders/Elsevier; 1992.Brunicardi_Ch09_p0271-p0304.indd   27801/03/19   4:50 PM 279WOUND HEALINGCHAPTER 9Epidermolysis BullosaEpidermolysis bullosa (EB) is classified into four major sub-types: EB simplex, junctional EB, dystrophic EB, and Kindler’s syndrome. The first three are determined by location in various skin layers; the last can present as multiple blisters throughout different layers of skin. There are identified genetic defects for each subtype, but the overall phenotype is remarkably similar. The disease manifestations include impairment in tissue adhe-sion within the epidermis, basement membrane, or dermis, resulting in tissue separation and blistering with minimal trauma. Characteristic features of EB are blistering and ulceration. The recessively inherited dystrophic type is characterized by defects in the COL7A1 gene, encoding type 7 collagen, important for connecting the epidermis to the dermis, and therefore pheno-typically resulting in blistering.39 Management of nonhealing wounds in patients with EB is a challenge, as their nutritional status is compromised because of oral erosions and esophageal obstruction. Surgical interventions include esophageal dilata-tion and gastrostomy tube placement. Dermal incisions must be meticulously placed to avoid further trauma to skin.34,40 The skin requires nonadhesive pads covered by a “bulky” dressing to avoid blistering.Acrodermatitis EnteropathicaAcrodermatitis enteropathica (AE) is an autosomal recessive disease of children that causes an inability to absorb sufficient zinc from breast milk or food. The AE mutation affects zinc uptake in the intestine by preventing zinc from binding to the cell surface and its translocation into the cell. Recently, the genetic defect has been localized on chromosome 8q24.3 identi-fied as the SLC39A4 gene, expressed in the intestinal lumen and upregulated based on zinc stores.41 Zinc deficiency is associated with impaired granulation tissue formation, as zinc is a neces-sary cofactor for DNA polymerase and reverse transcriptase, and its deficiency may impair healing due to inhibition of cell proliferation.AE is characterized by impaired wound healing as well as erythematous pustular dermatitis involving the extremities and the areas around the bodily orifices. Diagnosis is confirmed by the presence of an abnormally low blood zinc level (<100 mg/dL). Oral supplementation with 100 to 400 mg zinc sulfate orally per day is curative for impaired healing.42,43HEALING IN SPECIFIC TISSUESGastrointestinal TractRepair and healing of the gastrointestinal tract is essential for the normal functions of the GI tract such as absorptive, bar-rier, and motor functions. Full-thickness GI injury healing remains an unresolved clinical issue. Healing of full-thickness GI wounds begins with a surgical or mechanical reapposition of the bowel ends, which is most often the initial step in the repair process. Sutures or staples are principally used, although various other means such as buttons, plastic tubes, and various wrappings have been attempted with variable success. Failure of healing results in dehiscence, leaks, and fistulas, which carry significant morbidity and mortality. Conversely, excessive heal-ing can be just as troublesome, resulting in stricture formation and stenosis of the lumen.The gross anatomic features of the GI tract are remarkably constant throughout most of its length. Within the lumen, the epithelium is supported by the lamina propria and underlying muscularis mucosa. The submucosa lies radially and circumfer-entially outside of these layers, is comprised of abundant col-lagenous and elastic fibers, and supports neural and vascular structures. Further toward the peritoneal surface of the bowel are the inner and outer muscle layers and ultimately a peritoneal extension, the serosa. The submucosa is the layer that imparts the greatest tensile strength and greatest suture-holding capac-ity, a characteristic that should be kept in mind during surgical repair of the GI tract. Additionally, serosal healing is essential for quickly achieving a watertight seal from the luminal side of the bowel. The importance of the serosa is underscored by the significantly higher rates of anastomotic failure observed clinically in segments of bowel that are extraperitoneal and lack serosa (i.e., the esophagus and rectum).Injuries to all parts of the GI tract undergo the same sequence of healing as cutaneous wounds. However, there are some significant differences (Table 9-5). Mesothelial (serosal) and mucosal healing can occur without scarring. The early integ-rity of the anastomosis is dependent on formation of a fibrin seal on the serosal side, which achieves water tightness, and on the suture-holding capacity of the intestinal wall, particularly the sub-mucosal layer. There is a significant decrease in marginal strength during the first week due to an early and marked collagenolysis. The lysis of collagen is carried out by collagenase derived from neutrophils, macrophages, and intraluminal bacteria. Recently, it has been shown that strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa undergo phenotypic shifts characterized by higher collagenase secretion in an injured/anastomosed bowel environment.44 Collagenase activ-ity occurs early in the healing process, and during the first 3 to 5 days, collagen breakdown far exceeds collagen synthesis. The integrity of the anastomosis represents equilibrium between col-lagen lysis, which occurs early, and collagen synthesis, which takes a few days to initiate (Fig. 9-5). Collagenase is expressed following injury in all segments of the GI tract, but it is much more marked in the colon compared to the small bowel. Colla-gen synthesis in the GI tract is carried out by both fibroblasts and smooth muscle cells. Colon fibroblasts produce greater amounts of collagen than skin fibroblasts, reflecting different phenotypic features, as well as different responses to cytokines and growth factors among these different fibroblast populations. Ultimate anastomotic strength is not always related to the absolute amount of collagen, and the structure and arrangement of the collagen matrix may be more important.45Table 9-4Osteogenesis imperfecta: clinical and genetic featuresTYPECLINICAL FEATURESINHERITANCEIMild bone fragility, blue scleraDominantII“Prenatal lethal”; crumpled long bones, thin ribs, dark blue scleraDominantIIIProgressively deforming; multiple fractures; early loss of ambulationDominant/recessiveIVMild to moderate bone fragility; normal or gray sclera; mild short statureDominantReproduced with permission from Cohen IK, Diegelmann RF, Lindblad WJ: Wound Healing: Biochemical and Clinical Aspects. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders/Elsevier; 1992.Brunicardi_Ch09_p0271-p0304.indd   27901/03/19   4:50 PM 280BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART ITechnical Considerations. Traditional teaching holds that in order for an anastomosis to heal without complications it must be tension free, have an adequate blood supply, receive adequate nutrition, and be free of sepsis. Although sound prin-ciples for all wound healing, there are several considerations unique to GI anastomotic healing. From a technical viewpoint, the ideal method of suturing two ends of bowel together has not yet been identified. Although debate exists concerning meth-ods of creating an anastomosis, clinically there has been no convincing evidence that any given technique has any advan-tage over another (i.e., hand-sutured vs. stapled, continuous vs. interrupted sutures, absorbable vs. nonabsorbable sutures, or singlevs. two-layer closure). A recent meta-analysis revealed that stapled ileocolic anastomoses have fewer leak rates than hand-constructed ones, but this might not apply to colo-colic or small bowel anastomoses.46Fluid third spacing, tissue edema, and increased intraab-dominal pressure secondary to overzealous fluid administration can result in blood flow compromise in small vessels at the edge of anastomosis and thus interfere with GI healing.47,48BoneFollowing any type of injury to bone, several changes take place at the site of injury to restore structural and functional integrity. Most of the phases of healing resemble those observed in der-mal healing, but some notable individual characteristics apply to Table 9-5Comparison of wound healing in the gastrointestinal tract and skin  GI TRACTSKINWound environmentpHVaries throughout GI tract in accordance with local exocrine secretionsUsually constant except during sepsis or local infection MicroorganismsAerobic and anaerobic, especially in the colon and rectum; problematic if they contaminate the peritoneal cavitySkin commensals rarely cause problems; infection usually results from exogenous contamination or hematogenous spread Shear stressIntraluminal bulk transit and peristalsis exert distracting forces on the anastomosisSkeletal movements may stress the suture line but pain usually acts as a protective mechanism preventing excess movement Tissue oxygenationDependent on intact vascular supply and neocapillary formationCirculatory transport of oxygen as well as diffusionCollagen synthesisCell typeFibroblasts and smooth muscle cellsFibroblasts Lathyrogensd-Penicillamine has no effect on collagen cross-linkingSignificant inhibition of cross-linking with decreased wound strength SteroidsContradictory evidence exists concerning their negative effect on GI healing; increased abscess in the anastomotic line may play a significant roleSignificant decrease in collagen accumulationCollagenase activity—Increased presence throughout GI tract after transection and reanastomosis; during sepsis, excess enzyme may promote dehiscence by decreasing suture-holding capacity of tissueNot as significant a role in cutaneous woundsWound strength—Rapid recovery to preoperative level.Less rapid than GI tissueScar formationAgeDefinite scarring seen in fetal wound sitesUsually heals without scar formation in the fetusDaysTensile strengthResultant curveStrength of newcollagen increaseswith synthesisStrength of collagendecreases due tolysisFigure 9-5. Diagrammatic representation of the concept of GI wound healing as a fine balance between collagen synthesis and collagenolysis. The “weak” period when collagenolysis exceeds col-lagen synthesis can be prolonged or exacerbated by any factors that upset the equilibrium. (Reproduced with permission from Dunphy JE: Fundamentals of Wound Management in Surgery. New York, NY: Chirurgecom, Inc.; 1976.)Brunicardi_Ch09_p0271-p0304.indd   28001/03/19   4:50 PM 281WOUND HEALINGCHAPTER 9bone injuries. The initial stage of hematoma formation consists of an accumulation of blood at the fracture site, which also con-tains devitalized soft tissue, dead bone, and necrotic marrow. The next stage accomplishes the liquefaction and degradation of nonviable products at the fracture site. The normal bone adja-cent to the injury site can then undergo revascularization, with new blood vessels growing into the fracture site. This is similar to the formation of granulation in soft tissue. The symptoms associated with this stage are characteristic of inflammation, with clinical evidence of swelling and erythema.Three to 4 days following injury, soft tissue forms a bridge between the fractured bone segments in the next stage (soft  callus stage). The soft tissue is deposited where neovasculariza-tion has taken place and serves as an internal splint, preventing damage to the newly laid blood vessels and achieving a fibrocar-tilaginous union. The soft callus is formed externally along the bone shaft and internally within the marrow cavity. Clinically, this phase of healing is characterized by the cessation of pain and inflammatory signs.The next phase consists of mineralization of the soft callus and conversion to bone (hard callus stage). This may take up to 2 to 3 months and leads to complete bony union. The bone is now considered strong enough to allow weight bearing and will appear healed on radiographs. Then remodeling phase follows, in which the excessive callus is reabsorbed and the marrow cav-ity is recanalized. Remodeling allows for the correct transmis-sion of forces and restores the contours of the bone.As in dermal healing, the process of osseous union is mediated by soluble growth factors and cytokines. The most extensively studied group is the bone morphogenic proteins (BMPs), which belong to the TGF-β superfamily. By stimulat-ing the differentiation of mesenchymal cells into chondroblasts and osteoblasts, BMPs directly affect bone and cartilage repair. Other growth factors such as PDGF, TGF-β, TNF-α, and bFGF also participate in bony repair by mediating the inflammatory and proliferative phases of healing.CartilageCartilage consists of cells (chondrocytes) surrounded by an extracellular matrix made up of several proteoglycans, colla-gen fibers, and water. Unlike bone, cartilage is very avascular and depends on diffusion for transmittal of nutrients across the matrix. Additionally, the hypervascular perichondrium contrib-utes substantially to the nutrition of the cartilage. Therefore, injuries to cartilage may be associated with permanent defects due to tenuous blood supply.The healing response of cartilage depends on the depth of injury. In a superficial injury, there is disruption of the pro-teoglycan matrix and injury to the chondrocytes. There is no inflammatory response, but an increase in synthesis of proteo-glycan and collagen dependent entirely on the chondrocyte. The healing power of cartilage is often inadequate, and over-all regeneration is incomplete. Therefore, superficial cartilage injuries are slow to heal and often result in persistent structural defects.In contrast to superficial injuries, deep injuries involve the underlying bone and soft tissue. This leads to the exposure of vascular channels of the surrounding damaged tissue that may help in the formation of granulation tissue. Hemorrhage allows for the initiation of the inflammatory response and the subse-quent mediator activation of cellular function for repair. As the granulation tissue is laid down, fibroblasts migrate toward the wound and synthesize fibrous tissue that undergoes chondrifica-tion. Gradually, hyaline cartilage is formed, which restores the structural and functional integrity of the injured site.TendonTendons and ligaments are specialized structures that link mus-cle and bone, and bone and bone, respectively. They consist of parallel bundles of collagen interspersed with spindle cells. Tendons and ligaments can be subjected to a variety of injuries, such as laceration, rupture, and contusion. Due to the mobility of the underlying bone or muscles, the damaged ends usually separate. Tendon and ligament healing progresses in a similar fashion as in other areas of the body (i.e., through hematoma formation, organization, laying down of reparative tissue, and scar formation). Matrix is characterized by accumulation of  types I and III collagen along with increased water, DNA, and glycosaminoglycan content. As the collagen fibers are orga-nized, transmission of forces across the damaged portion can occur. Restoration of the mechanical integrity may never be equal to that of the undamaged tendon.Tendon vasculature has a clear effect on healing. Hypovas-cular tendons tend to heal with less motion and more scar for-mation than tendons with better blood supply. The specialized cells, tenocytes, are metabolically very active and retain a large regenerative potential, even in the absence of vascularity. Cells on the tendon surface are identical to those within the sheath and play a role in tendon healing as well.NerveNerve injuries are very common, with an estimated 200,000 repairs performed every year in the United States. Peripheral nerves are a complex arrangement of axons, nonneuronal cells, and extracellular elements. There are three types of nerve inju-ries: neurapraxia (focal demyelination), axonotmesis (interrup-tion of axonal continuity but preservation of Schwann cell basal lamina), and neurotmesis (complete transection). Following all types of injury, the nerve ends progress through a predictable pattern of changes involving three crucial steps: (a) survival of axonal cell bodies; (b) regeneration of axons that grow across the transected nerve to reach the distal stump; and (c) migration and connection of the regenerating nerve ends to the appropriate nerve ends or organ targets.Phagocytes remove the degenerating axons and myelin sheath from the distal stump (Wallerian degeneration). Regen-erating axonal sprouts extend from the proximal stump and probe the distal stump and the surrounding tissues. Schwann cells envelope and help in remyelinating the regenerating axons. Functional units are formed when the regenerating axons con-nect with the appropriate end targets. Several factors play a role in nerve healing, such as growth factors, cell adhesion mol-ecules, and nonneuronal cells and receptors. Growth factors include nerve growth factor, brain-derived neurotrophic factor, basic and acidic fibroblastic growth factors, and neuroleukin. Cell adhesion molecules involved in nerve healing include nerve adhesion molecule, neuron-glia adhesion molecule, myelin adhesion glycoprotein, and N-cadherin. This complex interplay of growth factors and adhesion molecules helps in nerve regeneration.Fetal Wound HealingThe main characteristic that distinguishes the healing of fetal wounds from that of adult wounds is the lack of scar forma-tion. Understanding how fetal wounds achieve integrity without Brunicardi_Ch09_p0271-p0304.indd   28101/03/19   4:50 PM 282BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ievidence of scarring holds promise for the possible manipula-tion of unwanted fibrosis or excessive scar formation in adults.Although early fetal healing is characterized by the absence of scarring and resembles tissue regeneration, there is a phase of transition during gestational life when a more adult-like healing pattern emerges. This so-called “transition wound” occurs at the beginning of the third trimester, and during this period, there is scarless healing; however, there is a loss of the ability to regenerate skin appendages.49 Eventually a classic, adult-patterned healing with scar formation occurs exclusively, although overall healing continues to be faster than in adults.There are a number of characteristics that may influence the differences between fetal and adult wounds. These include wound environment, inflammatory responses, differential growth factor profiles, and wound matrix.Wound Environment. The fetus is bathed in a sterile, tem-perature-stable fluid environment, although this alone does not explain the observed differences. Experiments have demon-strated that scarless healing may occur outside of the amniotic fluid environment, and conversely, scars can form in utero.50,51Inflammation. The extent and robustness of the inflammatory response correlates directly with the amount of scar formation in all healing wounds. Reduced fetal inflammation due to the immaturity of the fetal immune system may partially explain the lack of scarring observed. Not only is the fetus neutrope-nic, but fetal wounds also contain lower numbers of PMNs and macrophages.52Growth Factors. Fetal wounds are notable for the absence of TGF-β, which may have a significant role in scarring. Blocking TGF-β1 or TGF-β2 using neutralizing antibodies considerably reduces scar formation in adult wounds. Exogenous application of TGF-β3 downregulates TGF-β1 and TGF-β2 levels at the wound site with a resultant reduction in scarring.53 Thus, the balance between the concentration and/or activity of TGF-β iso-forms may be important for regulating scar production.Wound Matrix. The fetal wound is characterized by excessive and extended hyaluronic acid production, a high-molecular-weight glycosaminoglycan that is produced primarily by fibro-blasts. Although adult wounds also produce hyaluronic acid, its synthesis is sustained only in the fetal wound. Components of amniotic fluid, most specifically fetal urine, have a unique abil-ity to stimulate hyaluronic acid production.54 Fetal fibroblasts produce more collagen than adult fibroblasts, and the increased level of hyaluronic acid may aid in the orderly organization of collagen. As a result of these findings, hyaluronic acid is used topically to enhance healing and to inhibit postoperative adhesion formation.55 The collagen pattern of fetal wounds is reticular in nature and resembles surrounding tissue, while adult patterns express large bundles of parallel collagen fibrils ori-ented perpendicular to the surface.56CLASSIFICATION OF WOUNDSWounds are classified as either acute or chronic. By definition, an acute wound becomes chronic if healing is not achieved after 4 weeks of treatment. Acute wounds heal in a predictable man-ner and time frame as previously mentioned. The process occurs with few, if any, complications, and the end result is a well-healed wound. Surgical wounds can heal in several ways. An incised wound that is clean and closed by sutures is said to heal by primary intention. Often, because of bacterial contamination or tissue loss, a wound will be left open to heal by granula-tion tissue formation and contraction; this constitutes healing by secondary intention. Delayed primary closure, or healing by tertiary intention, represents a combination of the first two, con-sisting of the placement of sutures, allowing the wound to stay open for a few days, and the subsequent closure of the sutures (Fig. 9-6).The healing spectrum of acute wounds is broad (Fig. 9-7). In examining the acquisition of mechanical integrity and strength during healing, the normal process is characterized by a con-stant and continual increase that reaches a plateau at some point after injury. In regular wounds, the maximal wound strength is reached after about 6 weeks of healing. A fully healed wound achieves only 75% to 80% of a normal tissue. Wounds with delayed healing are characterized by decreased wound-breaking strength in comparison to wounds that heal at a normal rate; however, they eventually achieve the same integrity and strength as wounds that heal normally. Conditions such as nutritional deficiencies, infections, or severe trauma cause delayed heal-ing, which reverts to normal with correction of the underlying pathophysiology. Impaired healing is characterized by a failure to achieve mechanical strength equivalent to normally healed wounds. Patients with compromised immune systems such as those with diabetes, chronic steroid usage, or tissues damaged by radiotherapy are prone to this type of impaired healing. The surgeon must be aware of these situations and exercise great care in the placement of incision and suture selection, postop-erative care, and adjunctive therapy to maximize the chances of healing without supervening complications.In general, wounds heal by a combination of mecha-nisms, including connective tissue deposition, contraction, and Primary IntentionSecondary IntentionTertiary IntentionContractionContractionConnective TissueRepairConnective TissueRepairEpithelializationEpithelializationFigure 9-6. Different clinical approaches to the closure and heal-ing of acute wounds.Brunicardi_Ch09_p0271-p0304.indd   28201/03/19   4:50 PM 283WOUND HEALINGCHAPTER 9epithelialization, depending on wound type. Surgically closed wounds need mostly epithelialization for healing, while open wounds require a combination of tissue contraction, connective tissue deposition, and epithelialization to a lesser extent. Chronic ulcers heal by secondary intention similar to open wounds.Normal healing is affected by both systemic and local fac-tors (Table 9-6). The clinician must be familiar with these fac-tors and should attempt to counteract their deleterious effects.  Complications occurring in wounds with higher risk can lead to failure of healing or the development of chronic, nonhealing wounds.Factors Affecting Wound HealingAdvanced Age. Most surgeons believe that aging produces intrinsic physiologic changes that result in delayed or impaired wound healing. Clinical experience with elderly patients tends to support this belief. Studies of hospitalized surgical patients show a direct correlation between older age and poor wound healing outcomes such as dehiscence and incisional hernia.57,58 However, these statistics fail to take into account underlying illnesses or diseases as a possible source of impaired wound healing in the elderly. The increased incidence of cardiovascu-lar disease, metabolic diseases (diabetes mellitus, malnutrition, and vitamin deficiencies), and cancer, and the widespread use of drugs that impair wound healing may all contribute to the higher incidence of wound problems in the elderly. However, more recent clinical experience suggests that major operative interventions can be accomplished safely in the elderly.The results of animal studies regarding the effects of aging on wound healing have yielded contradictory results. In healthy human volunteers, there was a significant delay of 1.9 days in the epithelialization of superficial skin defects in those older than 70 years of age when compared to younger volunteers.59 In the same volunteers, using a micro-model of fibroplasia, no dif-ference in DNA or hydroxyproline wound accumulation could be demonstrated between the young and elderly groups; how-ever, the young volunteers had a significantly higher amount of total α-amino nitrogen in their wounds, a reflection of total protein content of the wound. Thus, although wound collagen synthesis does not seem to be impaired with advanced age, non-collagenous protein accumulation at wounded sites is decreased with aging, which may impair the mechanical properties of scar-ring in elderly patients. Generally, in a relatively healthy person age will cause a delay in healing rather than nonhealing.Hypoxia, Anemia, and Hypoperfusion. Low oxygen tension has a profoundly deleterious effect on all aspects of wound heal-ing. Fibroplasia, although stimulated initially by the hypoxic wound environment, is significantly impaired by local hypoxia. Optimal collagen synthesis requires oxygen as a cofactor, partic-ularly for the hydroxylation steps. Increasing subcutaneous oxy-gen tension levels by increasing the fraction of inspired oxygen (Fio2) of inspired air for brief periods during and immediately following surgery results in enhanced collagen deposition and in decreased rates of wound infection after elective surgery.60-62Major factors affecting local oxygen delivery include hypoperfusion either for systemic reasons (low volume or car-diac failure) or due to local causes (arterial insufficiency, local vasoconstriction, or excessive tension on tissues). The level of vasoconstriction of the subcutaneous capillary bed is exquisitely responsive to fluid status, temperature, and hyperactive sympa-thetic tone as is often induced by postoperative pain. Correction of these factors can have a remarkable influence on wound out-come, particularly on decreasing wound infection rates.61-63 Mild to moderate normovolemic anemia does not appear to adversely affect wound oxygen tension and collagen synthesis. However, profound anemia with 15% less hematocrit can interfere with wound healing.63Steroids and Chemotherapeutic Drugs. Large doses or chronic usage of glucocorticoids reduce collagen synthesis and wound strength.64 The major effect of steroids is to inhibit the inflammatory phase of wound healing (angiogenesis, neutro-phil and macrophage migration, and fibroblast proliferation) and the release of lysosomal enzymes. The stronger the anti-inflammatory effect of the steroid compound used, the greater the inhibitory effect on wound healing. Steroids used after the first 3 to 4 days after injury do not affect wound healing as severely as when they are used in the immediate postoperative 3Normal healingDelayed healingImpaired healing chronicTimeWound mechanical strengthFigure 9-7. The acquisition of wound mechanical strength over time in normal, delayed, and impaired healing.Table 9-6Factors affecting wound healingSystemic Age Nutrition Trauma Metabolic diseases Immunosuppression Connective tissue disorders SmokingLocal Mechanical injury Infection Edema Ischemia/necrotic tissue Topical agents Ionizing radiation Low oxygen tension Foreign bodiesBrunicardi_Ch09_p0271-p0304.indd   28301/03/19   4:50 PM 284BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iperiod. Therefore, if possible, their use should be delayed, or alternatively, forms with lesser anti-inflammatory effects should be administered.In addition to their effect on collagen synthesis, steroids also inhibit epithelialization and contraction and contribute to increased rates of wound infection, regardless of the time of administration.64 Steroid-delayed healing of cutaneous wounds can be stimulated to epithelialize by topical application of  vitamin A.64,65 Collagen synthesis of steroid-treated wounds also can be stimulated by vitamin A.All chemotherapeutic antimetabolite drugs adversely affect wound healing by inhibiting early cell proliferation, wound DNA and protein synthesis, attenuation of the inflamma-tory phase, decrease fibrin deposition, and delay wound contrac-tion, all of which are critical to successful healing. The effect is worse if these agents are given preoperatively; so a delay in the use of such drugs for about 2 weeks after injury appears to lessen wound healing impairment.66 Extravasation of most che-motherapeutic agents is associated with tissue necrosis, marked ulceration, and protracted healing at the affected site.67Metabolic Disorders. Diabetes mellitus is the best known of the metabolic disorders contributing to increased rates of wound infection and failure.68 Uncontrolled diabetes results in reduced inflammation, angiogenesis, and collagen synthe-sis. Additionally, the largeand small-vessel disease that is the hallmark of advanced diabetes contributes to hypoperfusion and local hypoxemia. Defects in granulocyte function, capillary ingrowth, and fibroblast proliferation all have been described in diabetes. Obesity, insulin resistance, hyperglycemia, and dia-betic renal failure contribute significantly and independently to the impaired wound healing observed in diabetics.69 In wound studies on experimental diabetic animals, insulin restores colla-gen synthesis and granulation tissue formation to normal levels if given during the early phases of healing.70 In clean, nonin-fected, and well-perfused experimental wounds in human dia-betic volunteers, type 1 diabetes mellitus was noted to decrease wound collagen accumulation in the wound, independent of the degree of glycemic control. Type 2 diabetic patients showed no effect on collagen accumulation when compared to healthy, age-matched controls.71 Furthermore, the diabetic wound appears to be lacking in sufficient growth factor levels, which signal normal healing. It remains unclear whether decreased collagen synthesis or an increased breakdown due to an abnormally high proteolytic wound environment is responsible.Careful preoperative correction of blood sugar levels improves the outcome of wounds in diabetic patients. Increas-ing the inspired oxygen tension, judicious use of antibiotics, and correction of other coexisting metabolic abnormalities all can result in improved wound healing. Additionally, revasculariza-tion to local areas with chronic ulcers will aid in the healing process.Uremia also has been associated with disordered wound healing and impairs defenses for infection. Experimentally, uremic animals demonstrate decreased wound collagen synthe-sis and breaking strength, causing delayed healing of intestinal anastomosis and abdominal wounds. The contribution of uremia alone to this impairment, rather than that of associated malnutri-tion, is difficult to assess.69 The clinical use of dialysis to correct the metabolic abnormalities and nutritional restoration should impact greatly on the wound outcome of such patients. In some uremic patients, wounds might be associated with abnormal deposition of calcium and phosphate in the tissue leading to uremic gangrene syndrome (calciphylaxis). In such patients, the wounds are extremely painful and difficult to heal.Obesity is the largest growing public health problem in the United States and the world. Over 60% of Americans are overweight or obese. Uncomplicated obesity (i.e., in the absence of comorbid conditions such as cardiovascular disease, diabetes, or respiratory insufficiency) has by itself significant deleterious effects on wound healing. Visceral adiposity is active metaboli-cally and immunologically and, through generation of proin-flammatory cytokines and adipokines, leads to the development of the metabolic syndrome. Many of these molecules have effects on cells participating in the healing response. In nondia-betic obese rodents, wounds are mechanically weaker, and there is less dermal and reparative scar collagen. Preadipocytes infil-trate the dermis, and although they can evolve into fibroblasts, their regulatory mechanisms appear different from those of dermal or wound fibroblasts. Many studies indicate that obese patients have high rates of perioperative complications, with estimates as high as 30% for wound dehiscence, 17% for surgi-cal site infections, 30% for incisional hernias, 19% for seromas, 13% for hematomas, and 10% for fat necrosis.72-74 Increased subcutaneous fat was associated with a tenfold increased risk of surgery-related complications including anastomotic leaks, abdominal collection, and wound infections.75 In many studies, obesity is a constant and major risk factor for hernia formation and recurrence after repair. The mechanism by which obesity impairs wound healing awaits complete delineation.Nutrition. The importance of nutrition in the recovery from traumatic or surgical injury has been recognized by clinicians since the time of Hippocrates. Poor nutritional intake or lack of individual nutrients significantly alters many aspects of wound healing. The clinician must pay close attention to the nutritional status of patients with wounds, since wound failure or wound infections may be no more than a reflection of poor nutrition. Although the full interaction of nutrition and wound healing is still not fully understood, efforts are being made to develop wound-specific nutritional interventions and institute the phar-macologic use of individual nutrients as modulators of wound outcomes.Experimental rodents fed either a 0% or 4% protein diet have impaired collagen deposition with a secondary decrease in skin and fascial wound-breaking strength and increased wound infection rates. Induction of energy-deficient states by providing only 50% of the normal caloric requirement leads to decreased granulation tissue formation and matrix protein deposition in rats. Acute fasting in rats markedly impairs collagen synthesis while decreasing procollagen mRNA.76Clinically, it is extremely rare to encounter pure energy or protein malnutrition, and the vast majority of patients exhibit combined protein-energy malnutrition. Such patients have diminished hydroxyproline accumulation (an index of collagen deposition) into subcutaneously implanted polytetrafluoroeth-ylene tubes when compared to normally nourished patients (Fig. 9-8). Furthermore, malnutrition correlates clinically with enhanced rates of wound complications and increased wound failure following diverse surgical procedures. This reflects impaired healing response as well as reduced cell-mediated immunity, phagocytosis, and intracellular killing of bacte-ria by macrophages and neutrophils during protein-calorie malnutrition.76Two additional nutrition-related factors warrant discus-sion. First, the degree of nutritional impairment need not be Brunicardi_Ch09_p0271-p0304.indd   28401/03/19   4:50 PM 285WOUND HEALINGCHAPTER 9long-standing in humans, as opposed to the experimental situa-tion. Thus, patients with brief preoperative illnesses or reduced nutrient intake in the period immediately preceding the injury or operative intervention will demonstrate impaired fibroplasias.77,78 Second, brief and not necessarily intensive nutritional interven-tion, either via the parenteral or enteral route, can reverse or prevent the decreased collagen deposition noted with malnutri-tion or with postoperative starvation.79The possible role of single amino acids in enhanced wound healing has been studied for the last several decades. Arginine appears most active in terms of enhancing wound fibroplasia.  Arginine deficiency results in decreased wound-breaking strength and wound-collagen accumulation in chow-fed rats. Rats that are given 1% arginine HCl supplementation, and there-fore are not arginine-deficient, have enhanced wound-breaking strength and collagen synthesis when compared to chow-fed controls.80 Studies have been carried out in healthy human vol-unteers to examine the effect of arginine supplementation on collagen accumulation. Young, healthy, human volunteers (age 25–35 years) were found to have significantly increased wound-collagen deposition following oral supplementation with either 30 g of arginine aspartate (17 g of free arginine) or 30 g of argi-nine Hall (24.8 g of free arginine) daily for 14 days.81 In a study of healthy older humans (age 67–82 years), daily supplements of 30 g of arginine aspartate for 14 days resulted in significantly enhanced collagen and total protein deposition at the wound site when compared to controls given placebos. There was no enhanced DNA synthesis present in the wounds of the arginine-supplemented subjects, suggesting that the effect of arginine is not mediated by an inflammatory mode of action.82 In this and later studies, arginine supplementation, whether administered orally or parenterally, had no effect on the rate of epithelializa-tion of a superficial skin defect. This further suggests that the main effect of arginine on wound healing is to enhance wound collagen deposition. Recently, a dietary supplemental regimen of arginine, β-hydroxy-β-methyl butyrate, and glutamine was found to significantly and specifically enhance collagen depo-sition in elderly, healthy human volunteers when compared to an isocaloric, isonitrogenous supplement (Fig. 9-9).83 As increases in breaking strength during the first weeks of healing are directly related to new collagen synthesis, arginine supple-mentation may result in an improvement in wound strength as a consequence of enhanced collagen deposition.The vitamins most closely involved with wound healing are vitamin C and vitamin A. Scurvy or vitamin C deficiency leads to a defect in wound healing, particularly via a failure in collagen synthesis and cross-linking. Biochemically, vitamin C is required for the conversion of proline and lysine to hydroxy-proline and hydroxylysine, respectively. Vitamin C deficiency has also been associated with an increased incidence of wound infection, and if wound infection does occur, it tends to be more severe. These effects are believed to be due to an associated impairment in neutrophil function, decreased complement activ-ity, and decreased walling-off of bacteria secondary to insuffi-cient collagen deposition. The recommended dietary allowance is 60 mg daily. This provides a considerable safety margin for most healthy nonsmokers. In severely injured or extensively burned patients, this requirement may increase to as high as  2 g daily. There is no evidence that excess vitamin C is toxic; however, there is no evidence that supratherapeutic doses of vitamin C are of any benefit.84Vitamin A deficiency impairs wound healing, while sup-plemental vitamin A benefits wound healing in nondeficient humans and animals. Vitamin A increases the inflammatory OHP (nmol/mg)1.52.01.00.50.0Adequatefood intakeInadequatefood intake1.51.00.5OHP (µg/cm)0.0WellnourishedMalnourishedFigure 9-8. Effect of malnutrition on collagen deposition in exper-imental human wounds. OHP = hydroxyproline.54321ASPLYSOHPExperimentalControl˜ANFigure 9-9. Ratios of 14-day to 7-day values for aspartate (ASP), lysine (LYS), hydroxyproline (OHP), and α-amino nitrogen (αAN) in volunteers given dietary supplements of arginine, β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate, and glutamine. P <.05. (Reproduced with per-mission from Williams JZ, Abumrad NN, Barbul A. Effect of a specialized amino acid mixture on human collagen deposition, Ann Surg. 2002 Sep;236(3):369-374.)Brunicardi_Ch09_p0271-p0304.indd   28501/03/19   4:50 PM 286BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iresponse in wound healing, probably by increasing the labil-ity of lysosomal membranes. There is an increased influx of macrophages, with an increase in their activation and increased collagen synthesis. Vitamin A directly increases collagen pro-duction and epidermal growth factor receptors when it is added in vitro to cultured fibroblasts. As mentioned before, supple-mental vitamin A can reverse the inhibitory effects of cortico-steroids on wound healing. Vitamin A also can restore wound healing that has been impaired by diabetes, tumor formation, cyclophosphamide, and radiation. Serious injury or stress leads to increased vitamin A requirements. In the severely injured patient, supplemental doses of vitamin A have been recom-mended. Doses ranging from 25,000 to 100,000 IU per day have been advocated.The connections between specific minerals and trace ele-ments and deficits in wound healing are complex. Frequently, deficiencies are multiple and include macronutrient deficien-cies. As with some of the vitamins described earlier, the specific trace element may function as a cofactor or part of an enzyme that is essential for homeostasis and wound healing. Clinically, preventing deficiencies is often easier to accomplish than diag-nosing them.Zinc is the most well-known element in wound heal-ing and has been used empirically in dermatologic conditions for centuries. It is essential for wound healing in animals and humans. There are over 150 known enzymes for which zinc is either an integral part or an essential cofactor, and many of these enzymes are critical to wound healing.85 With zinc deficiency, there is decreased fibroblast proliferation, decreased collagen synthesis, impaired overall wound strength, and delayed epithe-lialization. These defects are reversed by zinc supplementation. To date, no study has shown improved wound healing with zinc supplementation in patients who are not zinc deficient.86Infections. Wound infections continue to represent a major medical problem, both in terms of how they affect the outcome of surgical procedures (surgical site infections), and for their impact on the length of hospital stay and medical costs.87 Many otherwise successful surgical operations fail because of the development of wound infections. The occurrence of infections is of major concern when implants are used, and their occur-rence may lead to the removal of the prosthetic material, thus subjecting the patient to further operations and severe risk of morbidity and mortality. Infections can weaken an abdominal closure or hernia repair and result in wound dehiscence or recur-rence of the hernia. Cosmetically, infections can lead to disfig-uring, unsightly, or delayed closures.Exhaustive studies have been undertaken that examine the appropriate prophylactic treatment of operative wounds. Bacte-rial contaminants normally present on skin are prevented from entry into deep tissues by intact epithelium. Surgery breaches the intact epithelium, allowing bacteria access to these tissues and the bloodstream. Antibiotic prophylaxis is most effective when adequate concentrations of antibiotic are present in the tissues at the time of incision, and assurance of adequate pre-operative antibiotic dosing and timing has become a significant hospital performance measure.88 The addition of antibiotics after operative contamination has occurred clearly is ineffective in preventing postoperative wound infections.Studies that compare operations performed with and without antibiotic prophylaxis demonstrate that classes II, III, and IV procedures (see below) treated with appropriate prophylactic antibiotics have only one third the wound infection rate of previously reported untreated series.89 More recently, repeat dosing of antibiotics has been shown to be essential in decreasing postoperative wound infections in operations with durations exceeding the biochemical half-life (t1/2) of the anti-biotic or in which there is large-volume blood loss and fluid  replacement.90,91 In lengthy cases, those in which prosthetic implants are used, or when unexpected contamination is encoun-tered, additional doses of antibiotic may be administered for  24 hours postoperatively.Selection of antibiotics for use in prophylaxis should be tailored to the type of surgery to be performed, operative con-taminants that might be encountered during the procedure, and the profile of resistant organisms present at the institution where the surgery is performed. The continuing widespread appear-ance of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), and vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE) has significantly restricted the selection of these agents for routine use. Surgery-specific treatment guidelines are provided in Table 9-7.90Patients with prosthetic heart valves or any implanted vascular or orthopedic prostheses should receive antibiotic prophylaxis prior to any procedure in which significant bac-teremia is anticipated. Dental procedures require prophylaxis with broad-spectrum penicillins or amoxicillin, while urologic instrumentation should be pretreated with a second-generation cephalosporin. Patients with prostheses who undergo gastroin-testinal surgery should receive anaerobic coverage combined with a cephalosporin. Nasal screening and decolonization for  S aureus carriers are recommended for selected procedures (i.e., cardiac, orthopedic, neurosurgical procedures with implants).The incidence of wound infection is about 5% to 10% nationwide and has not changed during the last few decades. Quantitatively, it has been shown that if the wound is contami-nated with >105 microorganisms per gram of tissue, the risk of wound infection is markedly increased, but this threshold may be much lower in the presence of foreign materials. The source of pathogens for the infection is usually the endogenous flora of the patient’s skin, mucous membranes, or from hollow organs. The most common organisms responsible for wound infections in order of frequency are Staphylococcus species, coagulase-negative Streptococcus, enterococci, and Escherichia coli. The incidence of wound infection bears a direct relationship to the degree of contamination that occurs during the operation from the disease process itself (clean—class I, clean contaminated—class II, contaminated—class III, and dirty—class IV). Many factors contribute to the development of postoperative wound infections. Most surgical wound infections become apparent within 7 to 10 days postoperatively, although a small number manifest years after the original operative intervention. With the hospital stay becoming shorter and shorter, many infections are detected in the outpatient setting, leading to underreporting of the true incidence of wound infections absent intensive sur-veillance. There has been much debate about the actual defini-tion of wound infection. The narrowest definition would include wounds that drain purulent material with bacteria identified on culture. The broader definition would include all wounds drain-ing pus, whether or not the bacteriologic studies are positive; wounds that are opened by the surgeon; and wounds that the surgeon considers infected.92Anatomically, wound infections can be classified as superficial incisional, deep incisional, and organ/space wound infections, involving fascia, muscle, or the abdominal cavity. Brunicardi_Ch09_p0271-p0304.indd   28601/03/19   4:50 PM 287WOUND HEALINGCHAPTER 9Table 9-7Antimicrobial prophylaxis for surgeryNATURE OF OPERATIONCOMMON PATHOGENSRECOMMENDED ANTIMICROBIALSADULT DOSAGE BEFORE SURGERY1CardiacStaphylococcus aureus,  S. epidermidisCefazolin orCefuroxime orVancomycin41–2 g IV2,31.5 g IV31 g IVGastrointestinalEsophageal/gastroduodenalEnteric gram-negative bacilli, gram-positive cocciHigh risk5 only: cefazolin61–2 g IV2Biliary tractEnteric gram-negative bacilli, enterococci, clostridiaHigh risk7 only: cefazolin6,81–2 g IV2ColorectalEnteric gram-negative bacilli, anaerobes, enterococciOral: neomycin + erythromycin base9 or metronidazole9Parenteral: cefoxitin6 orCefotetan6 orCefazolin +Metronidazole6 orAmpicillin/sulbactamsee note 91–2 g IV1–2 g IV1–2 g IV20.5 g IV3 g IVAppendectomy, nonperforated11Same as for colorectalCefoxitin6 or cefotetan6 orCefazolin6 +Metronidazole1–2 g IV1–2 g IV20.5 g IVGenitourinaryCystoscopy aloneEnteric gram-negative bacilli, enterococciHigh risk only12: ciprofloxacin10 orTrimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole500 mg PO or 400 mg IV1 DS tabletCystoscopy with manipulation or upper tract instrumentation13Enteric gram-negative bacilli, enterococciCiprofloxacin10 orTrimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole500 mg PO or 400 mg IV1 DS tabletOpen or laparoscopic surgery14Enteric gram-negative bacilli, enterococciCefazolin61–2 g IV2Gynecologic and obstetricVaginal, abdominal, or laparoscopic hysterectomyEnteric gram-negative bacilli, anaerobes, group B streptococci, enterococciCefazolin6 or cefoxitin6 or cefotetan6 or Ampicillin/sulbactam6,101–2 g IV23 g IVCesarean sectionSame as for hysterectomyCefazolin61–2 g IV2Abortion, surgicalSame as for hysterectomyDoxycycline300 mg PO15Head and neck surgeryIncisions through oral or pharyngeal mucosaAnaerobes, enteric gram-negative bacilli, S. aureusClindamycin orCefazolin +Metronidazole orAmpicillin/sulbactam10600–900 mg IV1–2 g IV20.5 g IV3 g IVNeurosurgeryS. aureus, S. epidermidisCefazolin1–2 g IV2OphthalmicS. epidermidis, S. aureus, streptococci, enteric gram-negative bacilli, Pseudomonas spp.Gentamicin, tobramycin, ciprofloxacin, gatifloxacin, levofloxacin, moxifloxacin, ofloxacin or neomycin-gramicidin-polymyxin BOR cefazolinMultiple drops topically over 2 to 24 hours100 mg subconjuctivallyOrthopedicS. aureus, S. epidermidisCefazolin16 or Vancomycin2,161–2 g IV2, 1 g IVThoracic (noncardiac)S. aureus, S. epidermidis, streptococci, enteric gram-negative bacilliCefazolin orAmpicillin/sulbactam10 or Vancomycin41–2 g IV23 g IV1 g IV(Continued)Brunicardi_Ch09_p0271-p0304.indd   28701/03/19   4:50 PM 288BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IAbout three-fourths of all wound infections are superficial, involving skin and subcutaneous tissue only. Clinical diagnosis is easy when a postoperative wound looks edematous and ery-thematous and is tender. Often the presentation is more subtle,  and the development of postoperative fever, usually low-grade; the development of a mild and unexplained leukocytosis; or the presence of undue incisional pain should direct attention to the wound. Inspection of the wound is most useful in detecting sub-tle edema around the suture or staple line, manifested as a waxy appearance of the skin, which characterizes the early phase of infection. If a wound infection is suspected, several stitches or staples around the most suspicious area should be removed with insertion of a cotton-tipped applicator into the subcutane-ous area to open a small segment of the incision. This causes minimal if any discomfort to the patient. Presence of pus man-dates further opening of the subcutaneous and skin layers to the full extent of the infected pocket. Samples should be taken for aerobic and anaerobic cultures, with very few patients requir-ing antibiotic therapy. Patients who are immunosuppressed (diabetics and those on steroids or chemotherapeutic agents), who have evidence of tissue penetration or systemic toxicity, or who have had prosthetic devices inserted (vascular grafts, heart valves, artificial joints, or mesh) should be treated with systemic antibiotics.92Deep wound infections arise immediately adjacent to the fascia, either above or below it, and often have an intra-abdominal component. Most intra-abdominal infections do not, however, communicate with the wound. Deep infections present with fever and leukocytosis. The incision may drain pus spon-taneously, or the intra-abdominal extension may be recognized following the drainage of what was thought to be a superficial wound infection, but pus draining between the fascial sutures will be noted. Sometimes wound dehiscence will occur.The most dangerous of the deep infections is necrotizing fasciitis. It results in high mortality, particularly in the elderly. This is an invasive process that involves the fascia and leads to secondary skin necrosis. Pathophysiologically, it is a septic thrombosis of the vessels between the skin and the deep layers. Table 9-7Antimicrobial prophylaxis for surgeryNATURE OF OPERATIONCOMMON PATHOGENSRECOMMENDED ANTIMICROBIALSADULT DOSAGE BEFORE SURGERY1VascularArterial surgery involving a prosthesis, the abdominal aorta, or a groin incisionS. aureus, S. epidermidis, enteric gram-negative bacilliCefazolin orVancomycin41–2 g IV21 g IVLower extremity amputation for ischemiaS. aureus, S. epidermidis, enteric gram-negative bacilli, clostridiaCefazolin or Vancomycin41–2 g IV21 g IV1Parenteral prophylactic antimicrobials can be given as a single IV dose begun within 60 min before the operation. For prolonged operations (>3 h) or those with major blood loss, or in patients with extensive burns, additional intraoperative doses should be given at intervals 1–2 times the half-life of the drug (ampicillin/sulbactam q2 h, cefazolin q4 h, cefuroxime q4 h, cefoxitin q2 h, clindamycin q6 h, vancomycin q12 h) for the duration of the procedure in a patient with normal renal function. If vancomycin or a fluoroquinolone is used, the infusion should be started 60–120 min before the initial incision to minimize the possibility of an infusion reaction close to the time of induction of anesthesia and to have adequate tissue levels at the time of incision.2The recommended dose of cefazolin is 1 g for patients who weigh 80 kg and 2 g for those >80 kg. Morbidly obese patients may need higher doses.3Some experts recommend an additional dose when patients are removed from bypass during open heart surgery.4Vancomycin can be used in hospitals in which methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and S. epidermidis are a frequent cause of postoperative wound infection, in patients previously colonized with MRSA, or for those who are allergic to penicillin or cephalosporins. Rapid IV administration may cause hypotension, which could be especially dangerous during induction of anesthesia. Even when the drug is given over 60 min, hypotension may occur; treatment with diphenhydramine (Benadryl and others) and further slowing of the infusion rate may be helpful. Some experts would give 15 mg/kg of vancomycin to patients weighing more than 75 kg up to a maximum of 1.5 g with a slower infusion rate (90 min for 1.5 g). For procedures in which gram-negative bacilli are common pathogens, many experts would add another drug such as an aminoglycoside (gentamicin, tobramycin, or amikacin), aztreonam, or a fluoroquinolone.5Morbid obesity, GI obstruction, decreased gastric acidity or gastrointestinal motility, gastric bleeding, malignancy or perforation, or immunosuppression.6For patients allergic to penicillin and cephalosporins, clindamycin or vancomycin with either gentamicin, ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, or aztreonam is a reasonable alternative. Fluoroquinolones should not be used for prophylaxis in cesarean section.7Age >70 y, acute cholecystitis, nonfunctioning gallbladder, obstructive jaundice, or common duct stones.8Cefotetan, cefoxitin, and ampicillin/sulbactam are reasonable alternatives.9In addition to mechanical bowel preparation, 1 g of neomycin plus 1 g of erythromycin at 1 p.m., 2 p.m., and 11 p.m. or 2 g of neomycin plus 2 g of metronidazole at 7 p.m. and 11 p.m. the day before an 8 a.m. operation.10Due to increasing resistance of E. coli to fluoroquinolones and ampicillin/sulbactam, local sensitivity profiles should be reviewed prior to use.11For a ruptured viscous, therapy is often continued for about 5 d.12Urine culture positive or unavailable, preoperative catheter, transrectal prostate biopsy, or placement of prosthetic material.13Shock wave lithotripsy, ureteroscopy.14Including percutaneous renal surgery, procedures with entry into the urinary tract, and those involving implantation of a prosthesis. If manipulation of bowel is involved, prophylaxis is given according to colorectal guidelines.15Divided into 100 mg before procedure and 200 mg after.16If a tourniquet is to be used in the procedure, the entire dose of antibiotic must be infused prior to its inflation.Reprinted with special permission from Treatment Guidelines from The Medical Letter, October 2012; Vol. 10(122):73. www.medicalletter.org.(Continued)Brunicardi_Ch09_p0271-p0304.indd   28801/03/19   4:50 PM 289WOUND HEALINGCHAPTER 9The skin demonstrates hemorrhagic bullae and subsequent frank necrosis, with surrounding areas of inflammation and edema. The fascial necrosis is usually wider than the skin involvement or than the surgeon estimates on clinical grounds. The patient is toxic and has high fever, tachycardia, and marked hypovo-lemia, which if uncorrected, progresses to cardiovascular col-lapse. Bacteriologically, this is a mixed infection, and samples should be obtained for Gram stain smears and cultures to aid in diagnosis and treatment. As soon as bacteriologic studies have been obtained, high-dose penicillin treatment needs to be started (20–40 million U/d intravenously) due to concern over the presence of Clostridia perfringens and other related species; broad-spectrum antibiotics should be added and the regimen modified based on culture results. Cardiovascular resuscitation with electrolyte solutions, blood, and/or plasma is carried out as expeditiously as possible prior to induction of anesthesia. The aim of surgical treatment is thorough removal of all necrosed skin and fascia. If viable skin overlies necrotic fascia, multiple longitudinal skin incisions can be made to allow for excision of the devitalized fascia. Although removal of all necrotic tissue is the goal of the first surgical intervention, the distinction between necrotic and simply edematous tissue often is difficult. Careful inspection every 12 to 24 hours will reveal any new necrotic areas, and these need further debridement and excision. When all necrotic tissue has been removed and the infection has been controlled, the wounds may be covered with homoor xeno-grafts until definitive reconstruction and autografting can take  place.The mere presence of bacteria in an open wound, either acute or chronic, does not constitute an infection, because large numbers of bacteria can be present in the normal situation. In addition, the bacteria identified by cultures may not be repre-sentative of the bacteria causing the actual wound infection. There seems to be confusion as to what exactly constitutes wound infection. For purposes of clarity, we have to differ-entiate between contamination, colonization, and infection.  Contamination is the presence of bacteria without multiplica-tion, colonization is multiplication without host response, and infection is the presence of host response in reaction to depo-sition and multiplication of bacteria. The presence of a host response helps to differentiate between infection and coloniza-tion as seen in chronic wounds. The host response that helps in diagnosing wound infection comprises cellulitis, abnormal discharge, delayed healing, change in pain, abnormal granula-tion tissue, bridging, and abnormal color and odor.As discussed previously, neutrophils play a major role in preventing wound infections. Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) comprises a genetically heterogeneous group of dis-eases in which the reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH)-dependent oxide enzyme is deficient. This defect impairs the intracellular killing of microorganisms, leav-ing the patient liable to infection by bacteria and fungi. Afflicted patients have recurrent infections and form granulomas, which can lead to obstruction of the gastric antrum and genitourinary tracts and poor wound healing. Surgeons become involved when the patient develops infectious or obstructive complications.The nitro blue tetrazolium (NBT) reduction test is used to diagnose CGD. Normal neutrophils can reduce this com-pound, while neutrophils from affected patients do not, facili-tating the diagnosis via a colorimetric test. Clinically, patients develop recurrent infections such as pneumonia, lymphadenitis, hepatic abscess, and osteomyelitis. Organisms most commonly responsible are S. aureus, Aspergillus, Klebsiella, Serratia, or Candida. When CGD patients require surgery, a preoperative pulmonary function test should be considered since they are predisposed to obstructive and restrictive lung disease. Wound complications, mainly infection, are common. Sutures should be removed as late as possible since the wounds heal slowly. Abscess drains should be left in place for a prolonged period until the infection is completely resolved.93Hyperglycemia has been shown to be a significant risk factor of postoperative infections.94 Tight blood glucose con-trol, beginning preoperatively and continued into the operating room and beyond, has been associated with significant reduc-tion in infectious complications, in particular following cardiac surgery.95,96 Too tight of a glycemic control (80–100 mg/dL) appears to be associated with more complications and is as effec-tive, if not less than, moderate control (120–180 mg/dL).97,98Another host factor that has been implicated in the devel-opment of superficial surgical site infection relates to the state of the subcutaneous capillary bed. Thomas K. Hunt had shown through several decades of work that this capillary bed is exqui-sitely sensitive to hypovolemia,99 hypothermia,100 and stress, leading to rapid vasoconstriction with secondary impaired oxy-gen delivery and increased rates of infection.61 Maintenance of euvolemia, core temperature above 36°C to 36.5°C, and pain control have all been shown singly and additively to reduce rates of wound infections.63 Another suggestion has been to increase inspired Fio2 to 0.8 for the duration of the operation and in the immediate postoperative period, as a means of increasing sub-cutaneous tissue oxygen delivery. Although successful in most studies,62,101 there have also been negative results from such a single approach102; this suggests that addressing volume, tem-perature, pain control, and oxygen delivery in concert may be the more fruitful approach to reduce surgical wound infections.Chronic WoundsChronic wounds are defined as wounds that have failed to pro-ceed through the orderly process that produces satisfactory ana-tomic and functional integrity or that have proceeded through the repair process without producing an adequate anatomic and functional result. The majority of wounds that have not healed in 3 months are considered chronic, although a duration as low as 4 weeks has been used to indicate chronicity. Skin ulcers, which usually occur in traumatized or vascular compromised soft tis-sue, are also considered chronic in nature, and proportionately are the major component of chronic wounds. In addition to the factors discussed earlier that can delay wound healing, other causative mechanisms may also play a role in the etiology of chronic wounds. Repeated trauma, poor perfusion or oxygen-ation, and/or excessive inflammation contribute to the causation and the perpetuation of the chronicity of wounds.Unresponsiveness to normal regulatory signals also has been implicated as a predictive factor of chronic wounds. This may come about as a failure of normal growth factor synthesis,103 and thus an increased breakdown of growth factors within a wound environment that is markedly proteolytic because of overexpression of protease activity or a failure of the normal antiprotease inhibitor mechanisms.104 Fibroblasts from chronic wounds also have been found to have decreased proliferative potential, perhaps because of senescence105 or decreased expres-sion of growth factor receptors.106 Chronic wounds occur due to various etiologic factors, and several of the most common are discussed later.Brunicardi_Ch09_p0271-p0304.indd   28901/03/19   4:50 PM 290BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IMalignant transformation of chronic ulcers can occur in any long-standing wound (Marjolin’s ulcer). Any wound that does not heal for a prolonged period of time is prone to malig-nant transformation. Malignant wounds are differentiated clini-cally from nonmalignant wounds by the presence of overturned wound edges (Fig. 9-10). In patients with suspected malignant transformations, biopsy of the wound edges must be performed to rule out malignancy. Cancers arising de novo in chronic wounds include both squamous and basal cell carcinomas.Ischemic Arterial Ulcers. These wounds occur due to a lack of blood supply and are typically extremely painful in patients with pure ischemic ulcers. They usually are associated with other symptoms of peripheral vascular disease, such as history of intermittent claudication, rest pain, and color or trophic changes. These wounds commonly are present at the most distal portions of the extremities such as the interdigital clefts, although more proxi-mal locations are also encountered. On examination, there may be diminished or absent pulses with decreased ankle-brachial index and poor formation of granulation tissue. Other signs of peripheral ischemia, such as dryness of skin, hair loss, scaling, and pallor can be present. The wound itself usually is shallow with smooth mar-gins, and a pale base and surrounding skin may be present. The management of these wounds is two-pronged and includes revas-cularization and wound care.107 Nonhealing of these wounds is the norm unless successful revascularization is performed. In patients with ischemia and bed confinement, prevention of ulcer devel-opment is extremely important. Removal of restrictive stockings (in patients with critical ischemia), frequent repositioning, and surveillance are vital to preventing these ulcers.108Venous Stasis Ulcers. Although there is unanimous agree-ment that venous ulcers are due to venous stasis and increased venous pressure, there is less consensus as to what are the exact pathophysiologic pathways that lead to ulceration and impaired healing. On the microvascular level, there is alteration and distention of the dermal capillaries with leakage of fibrinogen into the tissues; polymerization of fibrinogen into fibrin cuffs leads to perivascular cuffing that can impede oxygen exchange, thus contributing to ulceration. These same fibrin cuffs and the leakage of macromolecules such as fibrinogen and α2-macroglobulin trap growth factors and impede wound healing.103 Another hypothesis suggests that neutrophils adhere to the cap-illary endothelium and cause plugging with diminished dermal blood flow. Venous hypertension and capillary damage lead to extravasation of hemoglobin. The products of this breakdown are irritating and cause pruritus and skin damage. The result-ing brownish pigmentation of skin combined with the loss of subcutaneous fat produces characteristic changes called lipoder-matosclerosis. Regardless of the pathophysiologic mechanisms, the clinically characteristic picture is that of an ulcer that fails to reepithelialize despite the presence of adequate granulation tis-sue in a patient with skin color changes in the area of ulceration and signs of venous hypertension.Venous stasis occurs due to increased venous hyperten-sion caused by either venous insufficiency or venous outflow obstruction. Venous insufficiency can be due to any combina-tion of deep, superficial, and perforator vein valvular reflux. The higher the ambulatory venous hypertension, the higher the chance of ulceration. Chronic venous ulcers are commonly painless. Stasis ulcers tend to occur at the sites of incompetent Figure 9-10. Typical appearance of the malignant transformation of a long-standing chronic wound. (Used with permission by Dr. Robert S. Kirsner, University of Miami.)Brunicardi_Ch09_p0271-p0304.indd   29001/03/19   4:50 PM 291WOUND HEALINGCHAPTER 9perforators, the most common being above the medial malleo-lus, over Cockett’s perforator. Upon examination, the typical location combined with a history of venous incompetence and other skin changes is diagnostic. The wound usually is shallow with irregular margins and pigmented surrounding skin.The cornerstone of treatment of venous ulcers is compres-sion therapy, although the best method to achieve it remains controversial. Compression can be accomplished via rigid or flexible means. The most commonly used method is the rigid, zinc oxide–impregnated, nonelastic bandage. Others have proposed a four-layered bandage approach as a more optimal method of obtaining graduated compression.109 Wound care in these patients focuses on maintaining a moist wound environ-ment, which can be achieved with hydrocolloids. Other, more modern approaches include use of vasoactive substances and growth factor application, as well as the use of skin substitutes. Recently, sprayed allogeneic keratinocytes and fibroblasts plus four-layer bandages have been shown to hasten healing when compared to compression alone.110 Addressing the causes of venous hypertension aids in the healing of venous ulcers.109 Unfortunately, recurrences are frequent despite preventative measures, largely because of patients’ lack of compliance.111Diabetic Wounds. Ten percent to 25% of diabetic patients run the risk of developing ulcers. There are approximately 50,000 to 60,000 amputations performed in diabetic patients each year in the United States. The major contributors to the formation of diabetic ulcers include neuropathy, foot deformity, and isch-emia. It is estimated that 60% to 70% of diabetic ulcers are due to neuropathy, 15% to 20% are due to ischemia, and another 15% to 20% are due to a combination of both. The neuropathy is both sensory and motor and is secondary to persistently elevated glucose levels. The loss of sensory function allows unrecognized injury to occur from ill-fitting shoes, foreign bodies, or other trauma. The motor neuropathy or Charcot’s foot leads to col-lapse or dislocation of the interphalangeal or metatarsophalan-geal joints, causing pressure on areas with little protection. There is also severe microand macrovascular circulatory impairment.Once ulceration occurs, the chances of healing are poor and the chances of recurrent ulceration are high. The treatment of diabetic wounds involves local and systemic measures.112 Achievement of adequate blood sugar levels is very impor-tant. Most diabetic wounds are infected, and eradication of the infectious source is paramount to the success of healing. Treatment should address the possible presence of osteomyeli-tis and should employ antibiotics that achieve adequate levels both in soft tissue and bone. Wide debridement of all necrotic or infected tissue is another cornerstone of treatment. Offloading of the ulcerated area by using specialized orthotic shoes or casts allows for ambulation while protecting the fragile wound environment. Topical application of PDGF and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor has met with limited but significant success in achieving closure.113 The application of engineered skin allograft substitutes, although expensive, also has shown some significant success.114 Preven-tion and specifically foot care play an important role in the man-agement of diabetics.115Decubitus or Pressure Ulcers. The incidence of pressure ulcers ranges from 2.7% to 9% in the acute care setting, in com-parison to 2.4% to 23% in long-term care facilities. A pressure ulcer is a localized area of tissue necrosis that develops when soft tissue is compressed between a bony prominence and an external surface. Excessive pressure causes capillary collapse and impedes the delivery of nutrients to body tissues. Pressure ulcer formation is accelerated in the presence of friction, shear forces, and moisture. Other contributory factors in the patho-genesis of pressure ulcers include immobility, altered activity levels, altered mental status, chronic conditions, and altered nutritional status. The four stages of pressure ulcer formation are as follows: stage I, no blanching erythema of intact skin; stage II, partial-thickness skin loss involving epidermis or der-mis or both; stage III, full-thickness skin loss, but not through the fascia; and stage IV, full-thickness skin loss with extensive involvement of muscle and bone.The treatment of established pressure ulcers is most suc-cessful when carried out in a multidisciplinary manner by involving wound care teams consisting of physicians, nurses, dietitians, physical therapists, and nutritionists. Care of the ulcer itself comprises debridement of all necrotic tissue, maintenance of a favorable moist wound environment that will facilitate healing, relief of pressure, and addressing host issues such as nutritional, metabolic, and circulatory status. Debridement is most efficiently carried out surgically, but enzymatic proteo-lytic preparations and hydrotherapy also are used. The wound bed should be kept moist by employing dressings that absorb secretions but do not desiccate the wound.116 Operative repair, usually involving flap rotation, has been found to be useful in obtaining closure. Unfortunately, recurrence rates are extremely high, owing to the population at risk and the inability to fully address the causative mechanisms.117EXCESS HEALING Clinically, excess healing can be as significant as delayed or nonhealing. It is likely that more operative interventions are required for correction of the morbidity associated with excessive healing than are required for wound failure. The clinical manifestations of exuberant healing are protean and dif-fer in the skin (mutilating or debilitating scars, burn contrac-tions), tendons (frozen repairs), the GI tract (strictures or stenoses), solid organs (cirrhosis, pulmonary fibrosis), or the peritoneal cavity (adhesive disease).Hypertrophic scars (HTSs) and keloids represent an over-abundance of fibroplasia in the dermal healing process. HTSs rise above the skin level but stay within the confines of the origi-nal wound and often regress over time. Keloids rise above the skin level as well, but they extend beyond the border of the original wound and rarely regress spontaneously (Fig. 9-11). Both HTSs and keloids occur after trauma to the skin and may be tender, pruritic, and cause a burning sensation. Keloids are 15 times more common in darker-pigmented ethnicities, with individuals of African, Spanish, and Asian ethnicities being especially susceptible. Men and women are equally affected. Genetically, the predilection to keloid formation appears to be autosomal dominant with incomplete penetration and variable expression.117,118HTSs usually develop within 4 weeks after trauma. The risk of HTS increases if epithelialization takes longer than 21 days, independent of site, age, and race. Rarely elevated more than 4 mm above the skin level, HTSs stay within the boundaries of the wound. They usually occur across areas of tension and flexor surfaces, which tend to be at right angles to joints or skin creases. The lesions are initially erythematous and raised and over time may evolve into pale, flatter scars.4Brunicardi_Ch09_p0271-p0304.indd   29101/03/19   4:50 PM 292BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IKeloids can result from surgery, burns, skin inflamma-tion, acne, chickenpox, zoster, folliculitis, lacerations, abrasions, tattoos, vaccinations, injections, insect bites, or ear piercing, or may arise spontaneously. Keloids tend to occur 3 months to years after the initial insult, and even minor injuries can result in large lesions. They vary in size from a few millimeters to large, pedun-culated lesions with a soft to rubbery or hard consistency. While they project above surrounding skin, they rarely extend into underlying subcutaneous tissues. Certain body sites have a higher incidence of keloid formation, including the skin of the earlobe as well as the deltoid, presternal, and upper back regions. They rarely occur on eyelids, genitalia, palms, soles, or across joints. Keloids rarely involute spontaneously, and surgical intervention can lead to recurrence, often with a worse result (Table 9-8).Histologically, both HTSs and keloids demonstrate increased thickness of the epidermis with an absence of rete ridges. There is an abundance of collagen and glycoprotein deposition. Normal skin has distinct collagen bundles, mostly parallel to the epithelial surface, with random connections between bundles by fine fibrillar strands of collagen. In HTS, the collagen bundles are flatter and more random, and the fibers are in a wavy pattern. In keloids, the collagen bundles are virtu-ally nonexistent, and the fibers are connected haphazardly in loose sheets with a random orientation to the epithelium. The collagen fibers are larger and thicker, and myofibroblasts are generally absent.119Keloidal fibroblasts have normal proliferation param-eters but synthesize collagen at a rate 20 times greater than that observed in normal dermal fibroblasts, and 3 times higher than fibroblasts derived from HTS. Abnormal amounts of extracel-lular matrix such as fibronectin, elastin, and proteoglycans also are produced. The synthesis of fibronectin, which promotes clot generation, granulation tissue formation, and reepithelializa-tion, decreases during the normal healing process; however, production continues at high levels for months to years in HTSs and keloids. This perturbed synthetic activity is mediated by altered growth factor expression. TGF-β expression is higher in HTS, and both HTSand keloid-derived fibroblasts respond to lower concentrations of TGF-β than do normal dermal fibro-blasts. HTSs also express increased levels of insulin-like growth  factor-1, which reduces collagenase mRNA activity and increases mRNA for types I and II procollagen.120 Keloid fibroblasts have enhanced expression of TGF-β1 and TGF-β2, VEGF, and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 and an increased number of PDGF receptors; they also have upregulated anti-apoptotic gene expression, which can be differentially expressed within different areas of the same scar.The underlying mechanisms that cause HTSs and keloids are not known. The immune system appears to be involved in the formation of both HTSs and keloids, although the exact relationship is unknown. Much is inferred from the presence of various immune cells in HTSs and keloids. For example, in both HTSs and keloids, keratinocytes express human leuko-cyte antigen (HLA)-2 and ICAM-1 receptors, which are absent Figure 9-11. Recurrent keloid on the neck of a 17-year-old patient that had been revised several times. (Reproduced with permission from Cohen IK, Diegelmann RF, Lindblad WJ: Wound Healing: Biochemical and Clinical Aspects. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders/ Elsevier; 1992.)Table 9-8Characteristics of keloids and hypertrophic scars KELOIDHYPERTROPHIC SCARIncidenceRareFrequentEthnic groupsAfrican American, Asian, HispanicNo predilectionPrior injuryYesYesSite predilectionNeck, chest, ear lobes, shoulders, upper backAnywhereGeneticsAutosomal dominant with incomplete penetrationNoTimingSymptom-free interval; may appear years after injury4–6 weeks post injurySymptomsPain, pruritus, hyperesthesia, growth beyond wound marginsRaised, some pruritus, respects wound confinesRegressionNoFrequent spontaneousContractureRareFrequentHistologyHypocellular, thick, wavy collagen fibers in random orientationParallel orientation of collagen fibersBrunicardi_Ch09_p0271-p0304.indd   29201/03/19   4:50 PM 293WOUND HEALINGCHAPTER 9in normal scar keratinocytes. Keloids also have increased deposition of immunoglobulins IgG, IgA, and IgM, and their formation correlates with serum levels of IgE. Antinuclear antibodies against fibroblasts, epithelial cells, and endothelial cells are found in keloids, but not HTSs. HTSs have higher  T lymphocyte and Langerhans cell contents. There is also a larger number of mast cells present in both HTSs and keloids compared to normal scars. Another recently described cell pop-ulation is the fibrocyte, a leukocyte subpopulation derived from peripheral mononuclear cells. Present in large numbers at the site of excess scarring, fibrocytes can stimulate fibroblast num-bers and collagen synthesis. They also generate large numbers of cytokines, growth factors, and extracellular matrix proteins, which are characteristically upregulated in keloid tissue. Other mechanisms that may cause abnormal scarring include mechani-cal tension (although keloids often occur in areas of minimal tension) and prolonged irritation and/or inflammation that may lead to the generation of abnormal concentrations of profibrotic cytokines.Treatment goals for keloid and HTS include restoration of function to the area, relief of symptoms, and prevention of recurrence. Many patients seek intervention due to cosmetic concerns. Because the underlying mechanisms causing keloids and HTSs remain unknown, many different modalities of treat-ment have been used without consistent success.121Excision alone of keloids is subject to a high recurrence rate, ranging from 45% to 100%. Inclusion of the dermal advancing edge that characterizes keloids, use of incisions in skin tension lines, and tension-free closure all have been pro-posed to decrease recurrence rates. There are fewer recurrences when surgical excision is combined with other modalities such as intralesional corticosteroid injection, topical application of silicone sheets, or the use of radiation or pressure. Surgery is recommended for debulking large lesions or as second-line therapy when other modalities have failed. Silicone application is relatively painless and should be maintained for 24 hours a day for about 3 months to prevent rebound hypertrophy. It may be secured with tape or worn beneath a pressure garment. The mechanism of action is not understood, but increased hydration of the skin, which decreases capillary activity, inflammation, hyperemia, and collagen deposition, may be involved. Silicone is more effective than other occlusive dressings and is an espe-cially good treatment for children and others who cannot toler-ate the pain involved in other modalities.102Intralesional corticosteroid injections decrease fibroblast proliferation, collagen and glycosaminoglycan synthesis, the inflammatory process, and TGF-β levels. When used alone, however, there is a variable rate of response and recurrence; therefore, steroids are recommended as first-line treatment for keloids and second-line treatment for HTSs if topical thera-pies have failed. Intralesional injections are more effective on younger scars. They may soften, flatten, and give symptomatic relief to keloids, but they cannot make the lesions disappear, and they cannot narrow wide HTSs. Success is enhanced when used in combination with surgical excision. Serial injections every 2 to 3 weeks are required. Complications include skin atrophy, hypopigmentation, telangiectasias, necrosis, and ulceration.Although radiation destroys fibroblasts, it has variable, unreliable results and produces poor results, with 10% to 100% recurrence when used alone. It is more effective when combined with surgical excision. The timing, duration, and dosage for radiation therapy are still controversial, but doses ranging from 1500 to 2000 rads appear effective. Given the risks of hyperpig-mentation, pruritus, erythema, paresthesias, pain, and possible secondary malignancies, radiation should be reserved for adults with scars resistant to other modalities.Pressure aids collagen maturation, flattens scars, and improves thinning and pliability. It reduces the number of cells in a given area, possibly by creating ischemia, which decreases tissue metabolism and increases collagenase activity. External compression is used to treat HTSs, especially after burns. Ther-apy must begin early, and a pressure between 24 and 30 mmHg must be achieved in order to exceed capillary pressure, yet pre-serve peripheral blood circulation. Garments should be worn for 23 to 24 hours a day for up to 1 or more years to avoid rebound hypertrophy. Scars older than 6 to 12 months respond poorly.Topical retinoids also have been used as treatment for both HTSs and keloids, with reported responses of 50% to 100%. Intralesional injections of IFN-γ, a cytokine released by  T lymphocytes, reduce collagen types I, II, and III by decreasing mRNA and possibly by reducing levels of TGF-β. As mono-therapy, IFN-γ has failed because of high recurrence rates due to resistance to repeated injections. More recently, imiquimod, an immunomodulator that induces IFN-γ and other cytokines at the site of application, has been recommended following exci-sion. Intralesional injections of chemotherapeutic agents such as 5-fluorouracil have been used both alone and in combina-tion with steroids. The use of bleomycin or mitomycin C has been reported to achieve some success in older scars resistant to steroids.Peritoneal Scarring. Peritoneal adhesions are fibrous bands of tissues formed between organs that are normally separated and/or between organs and the internal body wall. Most intra-abdominal adhesions are a result of peritoneal injury, either by a prior surgical procedure or due to intra-abdominal infection. Postmortem examinations demonstrate adhesions in 67% of patients with prior surgical procedures and in 28% with a history of intra-abdominal infection. Intra-abdominal adhesions are the most common cause (65%–75%) of small bowel obstruction, especially in the ileum. Operations in the lower abdomen have a higher chance of producing small bowel obstruction. Follow-ing rectal surgery, left colectomy, or total colectomy, there is an 11% chance of developing small bowel obstruction within  1 year, and this rate increases to 30% by 10 years. Adhesions also are a leading cause of secondary infertility in women and can cause substantial abdominal and pelvic pain. Adhesions account for 2% of all surgical admissions and 3% of all lapa-rotomies in general surgery.122Adhesions form when the peritoneal surface is damaged due to surgery, thermal or ischemic injury, inflammation, or foreign body reaction. The injury disrupts the protective meso-thelial cell layer lining the peritoneal cavity and the underlying connective tissue. The injury elicits an inflammatory response consisting of hyperemia, fluid exudation, release, and activation of white blood cells and platelets in the peritoneal cavity, activa-tion of inflammatory cytokines, and the onset of the coagulation and complement cascades. Fibrin deposition occurs between the damaged but opposed serosal surfaces. These filmy adhesions often are transient and degraded by proteases of the fibrinolytic system, with restoration of the normal peritoneal surface. If insufficient fibrinolytic activity is present, permanent fibrous adhesions will form by collagen deposition within 1 week of the injury (Fig. 9-12).Brunicardi_Ch09_p0271-p0304.indd   29301/03/19   4:50 PM 294BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IExtensive research has been done on the effect of surgery and peritonitis on the fibrinolytic and inflammatory cascades within the peritoneal cavity. During normal repair, fibrin is prin-cipally degraded by the fibrinolytic protease plasmin, which is derived from inactive plasminogen through the action of two plasminogen activators (PA): tissue-type plasminogen activator (tPA) and urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA). Fibrino-lytic activity in peritoneal fluid is reduced after abdominal sur-gery due to initial decreases in tPA levels and later to increases in plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1), which are induced by various cytokines, including TNF-α, IL-1, and interleukin-6 (IL-6).123There are two major strategies for adhesion prevention or reduction. Surgical trauma is minimized within the peritoneum by careful tissue handling, avoiding desiccation and ischemia, and spare use of cautery, laser, and retractors. Fewer adhesions form with laparoscopic surgical techniques due to reduced tis-sue trauma. The second major advance in adhesion prevention has been the introduction of barrier membranes and gels, which separate and create barriers between damaged mesothelial sur-faces, allowing for adhesion-free healing. Currently, only three products are Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved for reducing adhesion formation: Interceed (oxidized regen-erated cellulose, indicated only in pelvic surgery), Seprafilm  (a film composed of hyaluronic acid and carboxymethylcel-lulose) that is usually applied below the incision, and Adept (4% icodextrin, a corn starch derivative in electrolyte solution, also for use mainly in pelvic surgery). However, use of these substances directly over bowel anastomoses is contraindicated due to an elevated risk of leak.124 There have been innumerable studies investigating different molecules in hopes of preventing adhesion formation, but most of the success is limited to animal models, and clinically significant results in humans have yet to be achieved.TREATMENT OF WOUNDSLocal Care (Fig. 9-13)Management of acute wounds begins with obtaining a careful history of the events surrounding the injury. The history is fol-lowed by a meticulous examination of the wound.  Examination should assess the depth and configuration of the wound, the extent of nonviable tissue, and the presence of foreign bodies and other contaminants. The wound/ulcer should be described based on location, dimensions, presence of infection, drainage and type of drainage, base characteristics, presence or absence of necrosis, presence of pain, and description of edges. Possible etiology should be mentioned, and the presence of sys-temic factors and circulation should be evaluated.After completion of the history, examination, and admin-istration of tetanus prophylaxis, the wound should be meticu-lously anesthetized. Lidocaine (0.5%–1%) or bupivacaine (0.25%–0.5%) combined with a 1:100,000 to 1:200,000 dilution of epinephrine provides satisfactory anesthesia and hemostasis. 5ThrombinCoagulationFibrinogenPeritoneal fluidInflammationFibrin++PAI-1, PAI-2tPA, uPAFibrin residuesFibrinolysisFibrinolysisdegradationRestitutionFibroblasts and capillariesFibrous adhesionPeritoneal injuryBleedingMacrophagesmesotheliumPlateletsTFFigure 9-12. Fibrin formation and degradation in peritoneal tis-sue repair and adhesion formation. PAI-1, PAI-2 = types 1 and 2 plasminogen activator inhibitor; TF = tissue factor; tPA = tissue plasminogen activator; uPA = urokinase plasminogen activator.Figure 9-13. Algorithm for management of acute wounds.Management of Acute Wounds1. Examinationa) Depth? Underlying structures injuredb) Configuration?c) Nonviable tissue?4. Follow-upa) Cellulitis/drainage?b) Suture removal -4–5 days for face -7–10 days other skin3. Approximationa) Deep layers -Fascial layers only -Absorbable sutureb) Superficial layers -Meticulous alignment -Nonabsorbable sutures in skin -Staples -Monofilament -Dermal glues2. Preparationa) Anesthetic -Lidocaine w or w/o epinephrineb) Exploration -Underlying structures injuredc) Cleansing -Pulsed irrigation, saline onlyd) Hemostasise) Debride nonviable tissuef) Betadine on surrounding sking) Antibiotics (rare)h) TetanusBrunicardi_Ch09_p0271-p0304.indd   29401/03/19   4:50 PM 295WOUND HEALINGCHAPTER 9Epinephrine should not be used in wounds of the fingers, toes, ears, nose, or penis, due to the risk of tissue necrosis secondary to terminal arteriole vasospasm in these structures.Irrigation to visualize all areas of the wound and remove foreign material is best accomplished with normal saline (with-out additives). High-pressure wound irrigation is more effective in achieving complete debridement of foreign material and non-viable tissues. Iodine, povidone-iodine, hydrogen peroxide, and organically based antibacterial preparations have all been shown to impair wound healing due to injury to wound neutrophils and macrophages, and thus should not be used. All hematomas present within wounds should be carefully evacuated and any remaining bleeding sources controlled with ligature or cautery. If the injury has resulted in the formation of a marginally viable flap of skin or tissue, this should be resected or revascularized prior to further wound repair and closure.After the wound has been anesthetized, explored, irri-gated, and debrided, the area surrounding the wound should be cleaned, inspected, and the surrounding hair clipped. The area surrounding the wound should be prepared with povi-done iodine, chlorhexidine, or similar bacteriostatic solutions and draped with sterile towels. Having ensured hemostasis and adequate debridement of nonviable tissues and removal of any remaining foreign bodies, irregular, macerated, or beveled wound edges should be debrided in order to provide a fresh edge for reapproximation. Although plastic surgical techniques such as Wor Z-plasty are seldom recommended for acute wounds, great care must be taken to realign wound edges properly. This is particularly important for wounds that cross the vermilion border, eyebrow, or hairline. Initial sutures that realign the edges of these different tissue types will speed and greatly enhance the aesthetic outcome of the wound repair.In general, the smallest suture required to hold the vari-ous layers of the wound in approximation should be selected in order to minimize suture-related inflammation. Nonabsorbable or slowly absorbing monofilament sutures are most suitable for approximating deep fascial layers, particularly in the abdomi-nal wall. Subcutaneous tissues should be closed with braided absorbable sutures, with care to avoid placement of sutures in fat. Multiple layer closure of the abdominal wall is preferable. However, additional layers with sutures might increase the risk of wound infection.In areas of significant tissue loss, rotation of adjacent mus-culocutaneous flaps or free flaps may be required to provide sufficient tissue mass for closure. In cases of significant superfi-cial tissue loss, split-thickness skin grafting (placed in a delayed manner to assure an adequate tissue bed) may be required and will speed formation of an intact epithelial barrier to fluid loss and infection. In acute, contaminated wounds with skin loss, use of porcine skin xenografts or skin cadaveric allografts might be needed to avoid infection.After closing deep tissues and replacing significant tissue deficits, skin edges should be reapproximated for cosmesis and to aid in rapid wound healing. Skin edges may be quickly reap-proximated with stainless steel staples or nonabsorbable mono-filament sutures. Care must be taken to remove these from the wound prior to epithelialization of the skin tracts where sutures or staples penetrate the dermal layer. Failure to remove the sutures or staples prior to 7 to 10 days after repair will result in a cosmetically inferior wound. Where wound cosmesis is impor-tant, the aforementioned problems may be avoided by place-ment of buried dermal sutures using absorbable braided sutures. This method of wound closure allows for a precise reapproxi-mation of wound edges and may be enhanced by application of wound closure tapes to the surface of the wound. Intradermal absorbable sutures do not require removal.The development of octyl-cyanoacrylate tissue glues has shown good results for the management of simple, linear wounds with viable skin edges. These new glues are less prone to brittleness and have superior burst-strength characteristics. Studies have shown them to be suitable for use in contaminated situations without significant risk of infection. When used in the previously mentioned types of wounds, these glues appear to provide superb cosmetic results and result in significantly less trauma than sutured repair, particularly when used in pediatric patients.AntibioticsAntibiotics should be used only when there is an obvious wound infection. Most wounds are contaminated or colonized with bacteria. The presence of a host response constitutes an infection and justifies the use of antibiotics. Signs of infec-tion to look for include erythema, cellulitis, swelling, and puru-lent discharge. Indiscriminate use of antibiotics should be avoided to prevent emergence of multidrug-resistant bacteria.Antibiotic treatment of acute wounds must be based on organisms suspected to be found within the infected wound and the patient’s overall immune status. When a single specific organism is suspected, treatment may be commenced using a single antibiotic. Conversely, when multiple organisms are suspected, as with enteric contamination or when a patient’s immune function is impaired by diabetes, chronic disease, or medication, treatment should commence with a broad-spectrum antibiotic or several agents in combination. Antibiotics also can be delivered topically as part of irrigations or dressings, although their efficacy is questionable.DressingsThe main purpose of wound dressings is to provide the ideal envi-ronment for wound healing. The dressing should facilitate the major changes taking place during healing to produce an opti-mally healed wound. Although the ideal dressing still is not a clinical reality, technological advances are promising (Table 9-9).Dressings should take into account the type of wound and the comorbid conditions and associated factors such as edema and circulation. In patients with edema, dressing should compress the edematous area to aid in healing. In patients with significant circulation compromise, a compressing dress-ing should be avoided. The dressing should maintain 67Table 9-9Desired characteristics of wound dressingsPromote wound healing (maintain moist environment)ConformabilityPain controlOdor controlNonallergenic and nonirritatingPermeability to gasSafetyNontraumatic removalCost-effectivenessConvenienceBrunicardi_Ch09_p0271-p0304.indd   29501/03/19   4:50 PM 296BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ian adequate moist environment but should help absorption excessive drainage. Occlusion of a wound with dressing mate-rial helps healing by controlling the level of hydration and oxy-gen tension within the wound. It also allows transfer of gases and water vapor from the wound surface to the atmosphere. Occlusion affects both the dermis and epidermis, and it has been shown that exposed wounds are more inflamed and develop more necrosis than covered wounds. Occlusion also helps in dermal collagen synthesis and epithelial cell migration and lim-its tissue desiccation. Since it may enhance bacterial growth, occlusion is contraindicated in infected and/or highly exudative wounds.Dressings can be classified as primary or secondary. A pri-mary dressing is placed directly on the wound and may provide absorption of fluids and prevent desiccation, infection, and adhe-sion of a secondary dressing. A secondary dressing is one that is placed on the primary dressing for further protection, absorption, compression, and occlusion. Although the ideal dressing does not exist, many types of dressings help achieve certain goals, so knowledge of the wound and the dressing function is essential to make it possible to choose the appropriate dressing.Absorbent Dressings. This type of dressing helps con-trol exudate without soaking through the dressing, which can increase infection potential.Nonadherent Dressings. Nonadherent dressings are impreg-nated with paraffin, petroleum jelly, or water-soluble jelly for use as nonadherent coverage. A secondary dressing must be placed on top to seal the edges and prevent desiccation and infection.Occlusive and Semiocclusive Dressings. Occlusive and semiocclusive dressings provide a good environment for clean, minimally exudative wounds. These film dressings are water-proof and impervious to microbes but permeable to water vapor and oxygen.Hydrophilic and Hydrophobic Dressings. These dressings are components of a composite dressing. Hydrophilic dressing aids in absorption, whereas a hydrophobic dressing is water-proof and prevents absorption.Hydrocolloid and Hydrogel Dressings. Hydrocolloid and hydrogel dressings attempt to combine the benefits of occlusion and absorbency. Hydrocolloids and hydrogels form complex structures with water, and fluid absorption occurs with particle swelling, which aids in atraumatic removal of the dressing. Absorption of exudates by the hydrocolloid dressing leaves a yellowish-brown gelatinous mass after dressing removal that can be washed off. Hydrogel is a cross-linked polymer that has high water content. Hydrogels allow a high rate of evaporation without compromising wound hydration, which makes them useful in burn wound treatment.Alginates. Alginates are derived from brown algae and con-tain long chains of polysaccharides containing mannuronic and glucuronic acid. The ratios of these sugars vary with the species of algae used, as well as the season of harvest. Processed as the calcium forms, alginates turn into soluble sodium alginate through ion exchange in the presence of wound exudates. The polymers gel, swell, and absorb a great deal of fluid. Alginates are being used when there is skin loss, in open surgical wounds with medium exudation, and on full-thickness chronic wounds. Alginate widely used as primary dressing and can be reinforced with other forms of dressing such as compression dressing.Absorbable Materials. Absorbable materials are mainly used within wounds as hemostats and include collagen, gelatin, oxi-dized cellulose, and oxidized regenerated cellulose.Medicated Dressings. Medicated dressings have long been used as a drug-delivery system. Agents delivered in the dress-ings include benzoyl peroxide, zinc oxide, neomycin, and bacitracin-zinc. These agents have been shown to increase epi-thelialization by 28%.The type of dressing to be used depends on the amount of wound drainage. A nondraining wound can be covered with semiocclusive dressing. Drainage of less than 1 to 2 mL/d may require a semiocclusive or absorbent nonadherent dressing. Moderately draining wounds (3–5 mL/d) can be dressed with a nonadherent primary layer plus an absorbent secondary layer plus an occlusive dressing to protect normal tissue. Heavily draining wounds (>5 mL/d) require a similar dressing as mod-erately draining wounds, but with the addition of a highly absor-bent secondary layer.Mechanical Devices. Mechanical therapy augments and improves on certain functions of dressings, in particular the absorption of exudates and control of odor. The negative pres-sure dressing systems assists in wound closure by applying localized negative pressure to the surface and margins of the wound. The negative-pressure therapy is applied to a special foam dressing cut to the dimensions of the wound and posi-tioned in the wound cavity or over a flap or graft. The continu-ous negative pressure is very effective in removing exudates from the wound. This form of therapy has been found to be effective for chronic open wounds (diabetic ulcers and stages III and IV pressure ulcers), acute and traumatic wounds,125 flaps and grafts, and subacute wounds (i.e., dehisced incisions), although more randomized trials need to be carried out to con-firm efficacy. Different types of sponges are available to use on wounds with negative pressure systems.Skin ReplacementsAll wounds require coverage in order to prevent evaporative losses and infection and to provide an environment that pro-motes healing. Both acute and chronic wounds may demand use of skin replacement, and several options are available.Conventional Skin Grafts. Skin grafts have long been used to treat both acute and chronic wounds. Split(partial-) thickness grafts consist of the epidermis plus part of the dermis, whereas full-thickness grafts retain the entire epidermis and dermis. Autologous grafts (autografts) are transplants from one site on the body to another; allogeneic grafts (allografts, homografts) are transplants from a living nonidentical donor or cadaver to the host; and xenogeneic grafts (heterografts) are taken from another species (e.g., porcine). Split-thickness grafts require less blood supply to restore skin function. The dermal component of full-thickness grafts lends mechanical strength and resists wound contraction better, resulting in improved cosmesis. Allo-geneic and xenogeneic grafts require the availability of tissue, are subject to rejection, and may contain pathogens.The use of skin grafts or bioengineered skin substitutes and other innovative treatments (e.g., topically applied growth factors, systemic agents, and gene therapy) cannot be effec-tive unless the wound bed is adequately prepared. This may include debridement to remove necrotic or fibrinous tissue, control of edema, revascularization of the wound bed, reduc-tion in the bacterial burden, with minimal exudate. Temporary Brunicardi_Ch09_p0271-p0304.indd   29601/03/19   4:50 PM 297WOUND HEALINGCHAPTER 9placement of allografts or xenografts may be used to prepare the wound bed.Cellular and Tissue-Based Products in Chronic Wound and Ulcer ManagementWound management and ulcer healing are among the most chal-lenging problems in medical  practices. The lack of large clini-cal trials, the heterogeneity of wound causes, and mechanisms of chronicity add to the complexity of wound management. In most cases, management is based on the experi-ence of the providers and the availability of the treatment modalities within the health facilities. In spite of advances in wound care, the basic principles of wound management remain to be essential to healing. Additional measures and products might accelerate the rate of healing but will not replace basic wound care. The basic principles include achieving optimal blood flow, control of infection, removal of debris, proper dress-ing, offloading the injured area, and compression therapy in certain cases. Once these basic principles have been achieved, advanced treatment modalities such as cellular and tissue-based products (CTP) can be considered for enhanced healing. CTPs presumably act by altering the biology of wounds and ulcers or by preparing the wound/ulcer bed for healing and other potential procedures. CTPs are divided into two categories: dermoindu-cive and democonductive.126 As the name indicates, dermoindu-cive products help provide cells and factors that will activate healing within the wound by inducing tissue growth or inducing granulation within the wound. Such products include Apligraph (Organogenesis, Canton, MA), Theraskin (Soluble systems, LLC, Newport News, VA), and Dermagraft (Organogenesis  Canton, MA). None of these products have achieved healing in all wounds, but generally they have improved the percentage of healing, or achieved healing over a shorter period of time. In a pivotal Apligraf study, for example, it was found that patients who received Apligraf achieved 56% healing over 65 days com-pared to 38% healing over 90 days in those who received saline dressing.127 On the other hand, the dermoconductive products provide scaffolding to a wound ending in a neodermis by allow-ing migration of surrounding tissues across the wound, and this helps healing. An example of such products is Integra, which is composed of type 1 bovine collagen, shark chrondroitin 6-sulfate, and a silicone layer and helps to prepare the wound bed for subsequent skin grafting.128 In our experience, we use Integra for wound bed preparation in superficial wounds but also, in some cases, in deeper wounds. In addition, we also use it to cover exposed bone, especially smaller areas and tendons; how-ever, it might require more than one application in some cases to achieve optimal wound bed preparation. In a systematic review of the literature, the authors reviewed 15 randomized trials, one prospective comparative study, and five systematic reviews. The authors concluded that living cell-based skin sub-stitutes have a convincing supportive body of evidence in wound healing with some promise for acellular skin substitutes.129 In their review, the authors indicated that the evidence they based their review on was of low quality. Stem cell–based therapy is gaining more traction in the management of difficult wounds. Although it was initially used as an attempt to achieve scarless healing, stem cell therapy has gained more popularity in recent years as a means for enhanced healing and skin regeneration, in addition to reduction of scar formation. Similar to other fields, stem cells in wound healing produce growth factors and che-mokines that can differentiate into different cells and tissues. Stem cells in wound healing are mostly derived from human amniotic membrane of placental tissue. Examples of such prod-ucts include Epiphex (MiMedx Group Inc, Marietta CA) and Grafix (Osirix Therapeutics Inc, Columbia, MD), among others. It is believed that the growth factors in the amniotic membranes are preserved through different processes, thus assisting with wound healing. Multiple growth factors derived from the amni-otic membrane are thought to contribute to wound healing, including vascular endothelia growth factor, platelet-derived growth factor, epidermal growth factor, transforming growth factor, and others.130,131 A significant drawback of such products is that they are extremely expensive. Furthermore, it is recom-mended that these products should be used weekly to achieve optimal healing, which adds to the cost of using such products.Originally, these products were devised to provide cover-age of extensive wounds because of the limited availability of autografts, which remains the ideal tissue coverage. However, CTPs have now gained acceptance as natural dressings. Manu-factured by tissue engineering, they combine novel materials with living cells to provide functional skin substitutes, providing a bridge between dressings and skin grafts.Skin substitutes have the theoretical advantages of being readily available and not requiring painful harvests like in skin grafts, and they may be applied freely or with surgical sutur-ing. In addition, they promote healing, either by stimulating host cytokine generation or by providing cells that may also produce growth factors locally. Their disadvantages include limited sur-vival, high cost, and the need for multiple applications (Table 9-10). Allografting, albeit with a very thin graft, may at times be required to accomplish complete coverage.A variety of skin substitutes are available, each with its own set of advantages and disadvantages; however, the ideal skin substitute has yet to be developed (Table 9-11). The devel-opment of the newer composite substitutes, which provide both the dermal and epidermal components essential for permanent skin replacement, may represent an advance toward that goal.Cultured epithelial autografts (CEAs) represent expanded autologous or homologous keratinocytes. CEAs are expanded from a biopsy of the patient’s own skin, will not be rejected, and can stimulate reepithelialization as well as the growth of underlying connective tissue. Keratinocytes harvested from a biopsy roughly the size of a postage stamp are cultured with fibroblasts and growth factors and grown into sheets that can cover large areas and give the appearance of normal skin. Until the epithelial sheets are sufficiently expanded, the wound must be covered with an occlusive dressing or a temporary allograft or xenograft. The dermis regenerates very slowly, if at all, for full-thickness wounds because the sheets are very fragile, are difficult to work with, are susceptible to infection, and do not resist contracture well, leading to poor cosmetic results.8Table 9-10Desired features of tissue-engineered skinRapid reestablishment of functional skin (epidermis/dermis)Receptive to body’s own cells (e.g., rapid “take” and integration)Graftable by a single, simple procedureGraftable on chronic or acute woundsEngraftment without use of extraordinary clinical intervention (i.e., immunosuppression)Brunicardi_Ch09_p0271-p0304.indd   29701/03/19   4:50 PM 298BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART ICEAs are available from cadavers, unrelated adult donors, or neonatal foreskins. Fresh or cryopreserved cultured alloge-neic keratinocytes can be left in place long enough to be super-seded by multiplying endogenous skin cells because, unlike allografts containing epidermal Langerhans cells, they do not express major histocompatibility antigens. Cryopreserved CEAs are readily available “off the shelf,” and provide growth factors that may aid healing. However, like autologous keratinocyte sheets, the grafts lack the strength provided by a dermal compo-nent and pose a risk of disease transmission.Viable fibroblasts can be grown on bioabsorbable or non-bioabsorbable meshes to yield living dermal tissue that can act as a scaffold for epidermal growth. Fibroblasts stimulated by growth factors can produce type I collagen and glycosamino-glycans (e.g., chondroitin sulfates), which adhere to the wound surface to permit epithelial cell migration, as well as adhesive ligands (e.g., the matrix protein fibronectin), which promote cell adhesion. This approach has the virtue of being less timeconsuming and expensive than culturing keratinocyte sheets. There are a number of commercially available, bioengineered dermal replacements approved for use in burn wound treatment as well as other indications.Bioengineered skin substitutes have evolved from kera-tinocyte monolayers to dermal equivalents to split-thickness products with a pseudo-epidermis, and most recently, to prod-ucts containing both epidermal and dermal components that resemble the three-dimensional structure and function of nor-mal skin (see Table 9-11). Indicated for use with standard com-pression therapy in the treatment of venous insufficiency ulcers and for the treatment of neuropathic diabetic foot ulcers, these bilayered skin equivalents also are being used in a variety of wound care settings.Growth Factor Therapy. As discussed previously, it is believed that nonhealing wounds result from insufficient or inadequate growth factors in the wound environment. A simplistic solu-tion would be to flood the wound with single or multiple growth factors in order to “jump-start” healing and reepithelialization. Although there is a large body of work demonstrating the effects of growth factors in animals, translation of these data into clinical practice has met with limited success. Growth factors for clinical use may be either recombinant or homologous/autologous. Autol-ogous growth factors are harvested from the patient’s own plate-lets, yielding an unpredictable combination and concentration of factors, which are then applied to the wound. This approach allows treatment with patient-specific factors at an apparently physiologic ratio of growth factor concentrations. Disappoint-ingly, a recent meta-analysis failed to demonstrate any value for autologous platelet-rich plasma in the treatment of chronic wounds.132 Recombinant molecular biologic means permit the purification of high concentrations of individual growth factors. Current FDA-approved formulations, as well as those used exper-imentally, deliver concentrations approximately 103 times higher than those observed physiologically.At present, only platelet-derived growth factor BB  (PDGF-BB) is currently approved by the FDA for treatment of diabetic foot ulcers. Application of recombinant human PDGF-BB in a gel suspension to these wounds increases the incidence of total healing and decreases healing time. Several other growth factors have been tested clinically and show some promise, but currently none are approved for use. A great deal more needs to be discovered about the concentration, temporal release, and receptor cell population before growth factor therapy is to make a consistent impact on wound healing.Gene or Cell Therapy. Given the disappointing results from the application of purified growth factors onto wounds, the pos-sible therapeutic potential of gene therapy has been recognized and studied. Direct access to the open wound bed, which char-acterizes almost all chronic wounds, has facilitated this therapy. Gene delivery to wounds includes traditional approaches such as viral vectors and plasmid delivery or, more recently, electro-poration and microseeding.Although a variety of genes expressing interleukin-8, PDGF, IGF-1, keratinocyte growth factor, and laminin-5 have been successfully delivered to wounds in both animal and human models, the effects have been modest and specific to unique wound situations. Delivering extra genes into the wound bed presents the challenge of expression of the necessary signals to turn the genes on and off at appropriate times so that dys-regulated, hypertrophic, and abnormal healing does not occur. Elaborate systems have been created for topical use as on/off switches for genes. The more important question is which genes to express, in what temporal sequence, and in what regions of the wound bed, as it is unlikely that a single gene coding for one protein can significantly affect overall healing. There is growing consensus that delivery of genes is not going to represent the universal solution. Although gene therapy replaces missing or Table 9-11Advantages and disadvantages of various bioengineered skin substitutesSKIN SUBSTITUTEADVANTAGESDISADVANTAGESCultured allogeneic keratinocyte graftNo biopsy needed“Off the shelf” availabilityProvides wound coveragePromotes healingUnstableDoes not prevent wound contractureInadequate cosmesisPossibility of disease transmissionFragileBioengineered dermal replacementPrevents contractureGood prep for graft applicationLimited ability to drive reepithelializationLargely serves as temporary dressingCultured bilayer skin equivalentMore closely mimics normal anatomyDoes not need secondary procedureEasily handledCan be sutured, meshed, etc.CostShort shelf lifeTrue engraftment questionableBrunicardi_Ch09_p0271-p0304.indd   29801/03/19   4:50 PM 299WOUND HEALINGCHAPTER 9defective genes, most acute wounds already have and express the necessary genes for successful healing and the wound envi-ronment produces signals adequate to the activation of these genes. What, if any, are the deficiencies in gene expression or activity in failed wounds is unknown.Another approach is to deliver multiple genes coding for proteins that can act synergistically and even in a timed sequence, as would occur during normal healing. This would involve the use of activated cells that participate in the heal-ing sequence that could be delivered in an activated state to the wound environment. Use of mesenchymal stem cells as a delivery vector for many genes simultaneously is the latest such approach. The feasibility of applying bone marrow-derived, umbilical cord-derived, adipose-derived, and epidermal stem cells that can differentiate into various cells that participate in the wound healing response also has been documented. These cells, as part of their differentiation and activation in the wound, have been shown to produce a variety of growth factors includ-ing VEGF, PDGF, bFGF, and MMP-9. The challenges remain how to maintain the viability and activity of the transplanted cells, how to document that the observed effects are due to the delivered cells, and what are the mechanisms necessary for reg-ulating or ending their activity.Oxygen Therapy in Wound HealingOxygen is required for almost all steps of wound healing and is also an important factor in the body’s defense against bacterial infection.133 In addition to its role in healing, oxygen plays an essential role in the production of reactive oxygen species such as superoxide that are angiogenesis stimulators and are bacterio-static.  Chronic wounds have a decreased oxygen supply, and for a long time lack of oxygen was recognized as a potential cause of delayed healing. To counteract this delay, supple-mental oxygen therapy was used to improve healing, and both local oxygen therapy and systemic therapy were used for that purpose. Local therapy included oxygen dressings and topical oxygen therapy, while systemic therapy included supplemental inspired oxygen therapy and pressurized oxygen treatment.134 Of the different methods of oxygen therapy, pressurized oxy-gen, also termed hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT) is the most used modality and the most investigated. In HBOT, oxygen is delivered under pressure, more than atmospheric pressure, lead-ing to a higher concentration of oxygen in tissues. The Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) defined HBOT as an intervention that involves breathing near 100% oxygen intermit-tently under high pressure achieved by a pressurized chamber to more than sea level pressure (sea level pressure = 1 atmosphere absolute [ATA]). The therapeutic pressure should be at least 1.4 ATA. Chambers can be single occupancy or multiple occu-pancy.135 Although there are numerous indications and potential indications for HBOT, there are 14 accepted indications by Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society, and the FDA. Indi-cations related to wounds and ulcers include clostridial myone-crosis, crush injury, radiation-induced soft tissue and bone necrosis, necrotizing soft tissue infections, diabetic ulcers Wag-ner III or higher, refractory osteomyelitis, and thermal burns.135 Two systemic reviews were published on the effect of HBOT on wound healing. The first one was published in 2003 on all stud-ies done up to 2001.136 Generally, the review showed beneficial effects of HBOT on different disease processes. HBOT was found to improve graft survival, complete healing of grafts, and lessen infection in patients with a graft. Patients with osteoradionecrosis showed improved bone changes. The effect on tissue radionecrosis was described as positive, but not all studies showed statistical significance. HBOT was found to have improved amputation rates in patients with gas gangrene with better healing. In addition, HBOT was found to reduce mortality rates from necrotizing fasciitis, and significantly decreased wound size in nonhealing diabetic wounds. In the sec-ond systemic review, a total of 29 studies published between 2001 and 2016 were included. A total of 14 studies were related to chronic wounds: 12 studies in acute wounds, 1 study on both acute and chronic wounds, and 2 experimental studies. Out of those 29 studies, 18 (62%) showed at least one positive out-come.134 One of the drawbacks of such studies in general is the lack of heterogeneity and the lack of accurate randomization. Perhaps, HBOT in diabetic foot ulcers attracted more attention than other forms of skin ulcers. In patients with diabetic foot ulcers, studies showed that HBOT led to significantly more healing wounds at 1 year,137 greater reduction in the wound bed,138 greater healing with less proximal amputation,139 and more complete wound healing at 1 month after HBOT.140Biofilm and Chronic Wound HealingTraditionally, nonhealing of chronic wounds has been associ-ated with numerous risk factors, including longer duration of ulcers, advanced age, increased body mass index, venous reflux, arterial and venous disease, nutritional deficiencies, diabetes mellitus, and smoking. Chronic bacterial infection is another factor that has been associated with nonhealing wounds.Chronic wounds, in general, behave differently in relation to bacterial growth when compared to acute wounds.  Chronic wounds develop bacterial growth that is resistant to invasion by antibiotics and is protected from the host immune defenses. Biofilm is the term used for the bacterial growth on a chronic wound that is encapsulated by a protective layer made up of the host and bacterial proteins. Bjarnsholt et al have suggested a simplified definition of the biofilm as “an aggregate of bacteria tolerant to treatment and the host defense.” It has been found that more than 60% of chronic wounds have a biofilm.141 Biofilms lead to a chronic inflammatory process that will interfere with healing.142 Biofilms are formed in three stages. The first stage—the reversible bacterial adhesion stage—is formed by adhesion of bacteria to the surface of the wound. The second stage is the permanent adhesion or maturation stage in which the organisms permanently attach, proliferate, and maturate in the wound surface. This stage depends on a micro-bial-to-microbial cell communication system, called quorum sensing, in which small signaling molecules are released and gradually increase in concentration. The signaling molecules regulate gene expression and help form the biofilm. Lastly, in the third stage, organisms secrete a surrounding protective matrix called the extracellular polymeric substance (EPS). Once a biofilm colony forms, it will continuously shed bacteria to uncolonized areas, causing more biofilm colonies to form.143,144The presence of biofilms protects bacteria from the host defenses. Bacteria will then begin to exhibit phenotypic and genotypic plurality: the former allows bacteria to adapt to dif-ferent growth conditions such as nutrient availability, pH, and oxidizing potential within the biofilm, while the latter allows for virulence and bacterial resistance to drugs. The genetic plurality is passed horizontally among bacteria in the wound, adding to the resistance to treatment and allowing the bacteria to avoid the defense mechanisms of the host such as bacterial phagocytosis, 910Brunicardi_Ch09_p0271-p0304.indd   29901/03/19   4:50 PM 300BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ineutrophil degranulation, and formation of reactive oxygen spe-cies.145-147 In some cases, the biofilm allows bacteria to become quiescent and thus become less sensitive to antimicrobials that typically affect dividing bacterial cells.144,148Biofilms can form and recover from debridement rap-idly. Fully mature biofilm colonies can form within 2 to 4 days depending on the species and growth conditions. Common bacterial species such as Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, and Pseudomonas can attach to the surface of the wound in min-utes, forming adherent microcolonies in 2 to 4 hours. Bacterial species develops the extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) and resistance to disinfectants, antiseptics, and antibiotics in 6 to 12 hours. The biofilm then develops into mature colonies in 2 to 4 days. Furthermore, it rapidly recovers form mechanical disruption, such as debridement, within 24 hours.144The presence of biofilms leads to delayed wound healing by stimulating chronic inflammation in the wound. The host responds to the biofilms by mobilizing macrophages and neutro-phils to the biofilm area, resulting in secretions of high levels of reactive oxygen species and proteases that can cause damage to the normal and healing tissue. The resulting increase in exudate production provides a source of nutrients to the biofilms, lead-ing to more resistance to healing.149The best method of treating wounds with biofilms is not well defined. It is believed that frequent debridement to mechanically remove the biofilm remains to be the best method of treatment. The frequency of debridement is not well defined, although a weekly debridement has been suggested to improve healing. More than one method of debridement might be needed in wounds resistant to healing. A few products have been sug-gested to control and remove biofilms, such as surfactant and some wound cleansing formulas. In addition, topical broad-spectrum antimicrobials such as silver, iodine, honey, and others have been suggested to aid in the treatment of biofilms. Using a various combination of debridement methods, cleansing agents, and antimicrobials may be needed in resistant chronic wounds. An effective therapy to combat biofilm should include effective removal of the biofilm, antimicrobial eradication of bacteria/organisms, and prevention of biofilm recurrence, and these treat-ment options may need to be repeated multiple times to achieve effective therapy. Many agents and devices thought to be effec-tive in eradicating and treating biofilms are under evaluation or development; however, their long-term effect is yet to be proven.REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Winter GD. Formation of the scab and the rate of epithelialisa-tion of superficial wounds in the skin of the young domestic pig. Nature. 1962;193:293-294.	2.	Gulliver G, ed. The Works of John Hunter. London: Longman; 1837.	3.	Feiken E, Romer J, Eriksen J, et al. Neutrophils express tumor necrosis factor-alpha during mouse skin wound healing.  J Invest Dermatol. 1995;105(1):120-123.	4.	Dovi JV, He L-K, DiPietro LA. Accelerated wound closure in neutrophil-depleted mice. J Leukoc Biol. 2003;73(4):448-455.	5.	Leibovich SJ, Ross R. The role of the macrophage in wound repair. A study with hydrocortisone and antimacrophage serum. Am J Pathol. 1975;78(1):71-100.	6.	DiPietro LA. Wound healing: the role of the macrophage and other immune cells. Shock. 1995;4(4):233-240.	7.	Zabel DD, Feng JJ, Scheuenstuhl H, et al. Lactate stimula-tion of macrophage-derived angiogenic activity is associated with inhibition of poly(ADP-ribose) synthesis. Lab Invest. 1996;74(4):644-649.	8.	Schäffer MR, Barbul A. Lymphocyte function in wound heal-ing and following injury. Br J Surg. 1998;85(4):444-460.	9.	Efron JE, Frankel HL, Lazarou SA, Wasserkrug HL,  Barbul A. Wound healing and T-lymphocytes. J Surg Res. 1990;48(5):460-463.	10.	Barbul A, Breslin RJ, Woodyard JP, Wasserkrug HL, Efron G. The effect of in vivo T helper and T suppressor lymphocyte depletion on wound healing. Ann Surg. 1989;209(4):479-483.	11.	Rezzonico R, Burger D, Dayer JM. Direct contact between  T lymphocytes and human dermal fibroblasts or synoviocytes down-regulates types I and III collagen production via cell-associated cytokines. J Biol Chem. 1998;273(30):18720-18728.	12.	Grotendorst GR. Chemoattractants and growth factors. In: Cohen K, Diegelmann RF, Lindblad WJ, eds. Wound Healing, Biochemical and Clinical Aspects. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1992:237-247.	13.	Bonner JC, Osornio-Vargas AR, Badgett A, Brody AR.  Differential proliferation of rat lung fibroblasts induced by the platelet-derived growth factor-AA, -AB, and -BB isoforms secreted by rat alveolar macrophages. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 1991;5(6):539-547.	14.	Pricolo VE, Caldwell MD, Mastrofrancesco B, Mills CD. Modulatory activities of wound fluid on fibroblast prolifera-tion and collagen synthesis. J Surg Res. 1990;48(6):534-538.	15.	Regan MC, Kirk SJ, Wasserkrug HL, Barbul A. The wound environment as a regulator of fibroblast phenotype. J Surg Res. 1991;50(5):442-448.	16.	Gimbel ML, Hunt TK, Hussain MZ. Lactate controls collagen gene promoter activity through poly-ADP-ribosylation. Surg Forum. 2000;51:26-27.	17.	Ghani QP, Hussain MZ, Hunt TK. Control of procollagen gene transcription and prolyl hydroxylase activity by poly(ADP-ribose). In: Poirier G, Moreaer A, eds. ADP-Ribosylation Reactions. New York: Springer-Verlag; 1992:111-117.	18.	Xiong M, Elson G, Legarda D, Leibovich SJ. Production of vascular endothelial growth factor by murine macrophages: regulation by hypoxia, lactate, and the inducible nitric oxide synthase pathway. Am J Pathol. 1998;153(2):587-598.	19.	Ferrara N, Davis-Smith T. The biology of vascular endothelial growth factor. Endocrine Rev. 1997;18(1):4-25.	20.	Levenson SM, Geever EF, Crowley LV, Oates JF III, Berard CW, Rosen H. The healing of rat skin wounds. Ann Surg. 1965;161(2):293-308.	21.	Zhou LJ, Ono I, Kaneko F. Role of transforming growth fac-tor-beta 1 in fibroblasts derived from normal and hypertrophic scarred skin. Arch Dermatol Res. 1997;289(11):646-652.	22.	Stenn KS, Depalma L. Re-epithelialization. In: Clark RAF, Hensen PM, eds. The Molecular and Cellular Biology of Wound Repair. New York: Plenum; 1988:321-325.	23.	Johnson FR, McMinn RMH. The cytology of wound healing of the body surface in mammals. Biol Rev Camb Philos Soc. 1960;35:364-412.	24.	Woodley DT, Bachman PM, O’Keefe EJ. The role of matrix components in human keratinocyte re-epithelialization. In: Barbul A, Caldwell MD, Eaglstein WH, et al, eds. Clinical and Experimental Approaches to Dermal and Epidermal Repair. Normal and Chronic Wounds. New York: Wiley-Liss; 1991:129.	25.	Lynch SE. Interaction of growth factors in tissue repair. In: Barbul A, Caldwell MD, Eaglstein WH, et al, eds. Clinical and Experimental Approaches to Dermal and Epidermal Repair. Normal and Chronic Wounds. New York: Wiley-Liss; 1991:341.Brunicardi_Ch09_p0271-p0304.indd   30001/03/19   4:50 PM 301WOUND HEALINGCHAPTER 9	26.	Jans DA, Hassan G. Nuclear targeting by growth factors, cytokines, and their receptors: a role in signaling? BioEssays. 1998;20:400-411.	27.	Schmitt-Graff A, Desmouliere A, Gabbiani G. Heterogeneity of myofibroblast phenotypic features: an example of fibroblas-tic cell plasticity. Virchows Arch. 1994;425(1):3-24.	28.	Darby I, Skalli O, Gabbiani G. Alpha-smooth muscle actin is transiently expressed by myofibroblasts during experimental wound healing. Lab Invest. 1990;63(1):21-29.	29.	Desmouliere A, Redard M, Darby I, Gabbiani G. Apop-tosis mediates the decrease in cellularity during the tran-sition between granulation tissue and scar. Am J Pathol. 1995;146(1):56-66.	30.	Ehrlich HP. Wound closure: evidence of cooperation between fibroblasts and collagen matrix. Eye (Lond). 1988; 2(pt 2):149-157.	31.	Phillips C, Wenstrup RJ. Biosynthetic and genetic disorders of collagen. In: Cohen IK, Diegelmann RF, Lindblad WJ, eds. Wound Healing Biochemical and Clinical Aspects. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1992:152.	32.	Sidhu-Malik NK, Wenstrup RJ. The Ehlers-Danlos syn-dromes and Marfan syndrome: inherited diseases of connec-tive tissue with overlapping clinical features. Semin Dermatol. 1995;14(1):40-46.	33.	Woolley MM, Morgan S, Hays DM. Heritable disorders of connective tissue. Surgical and anesthetic problems. J Pediatr Surg. 1967;2(4):325-331.	34.	McEntyre RL, Raffensperger JG. Surgical complications of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in children. J Pediatr Surg. 1977;12(4):531-535.	35.	Malfait F, Wenstrup RJ, DePaepe AD. Clinical and genetic aspects of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, classic type. Genetics Med. 2010;12(10):597-605.	36.	Hunt TK. Disorders of wound healing. World J Surg. 1980; 4(3):271-277.	37.	Anonymous. Heritable disorders of connective tissue. JAMA. 1973;224(5 suppl):774-776.	38.	Goff C, Cormier-Daire V. From tall to short: the role of TGF-β signaling in growth and its disorders. Am J Med Genetics  Part C (Semin Med Genetics). 2012;160C:145-153.	39.	Knaup J, Verwanger T, Gruber C, Ziegler V, Bauer JW,  Krammer B. Epidermolysis bullosa: a group of skin disease with different causes but commonalities in gene expression. Exp Dermatol. 2012;21(7):527-530.	40.	Carter DM, Lin AN. Wound healing and epidermolysis bul-losa. Arch Dermatol. 1988;124(5):732-733.	41.	Coromilas A, Brandling-Bennett H, Morel K, Chung WK. Novel SLC39A4 mutation in acrodermatitis enteropathica. Pediatr Dermatol. 2011;28(6):697-700.	42.	Kruse-Jarres JD. Pathogenesis and symptoms of zinc defi-ciency. Am Clin Lab. 2001;20(3):17-22.	43.	Okada A, Takagi Y, Nezu R, et al. Zinc in clinical surgery—a research review. Jpn J Surg. 1990;20(6):635-644.	44.	Olivas A, Shogan B, Valuckaite V, et al. Intestinal tissues induce an SNP mutation in Pseudomonas aeruginosa that enhances its virulence: possible role in anastomotic leak. PLOS One. 2012;7(8):e44326.	45.	Thornton FJ, Barbul A. Healing in the gastrointestinal tract. Surg Clin North Am. 1997;77(3):549-573.	46.	Choy PYG, Bissett IP, Docherty JG, Parry BR, Merrie AEH. Stapled versus handsewn methods for ileocolic anastomoses. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007;3:CD004320.	47.	Marjanovic G, Vilain C, Juettner E, et al. Impact of differ-ent crystalloid volume regimens on anastomotic stability. Ann Surg. 2009;249:181-185.	48.	Schnuriger B, Inaba K, Wu T, et al. Crystalloids after primary colon resection and anastomosis at initial trauma laparotomy: excessive volumes are associated with anastomotic leakage.  J Trauma. 2011;70:603-610.	49.	Lorenz PH, Whitby DJ, Longaker MT, Adzick NS. Fetal wound healing. The ontogeny of scar formation in the non-human primate. Ann Surg. 1993;217(4):391-396.	50.	Longaker MT, Whitby DJ, Ferguson MWJ, Lorenz HP,  Harrison MR, Adzick NS. Adult skin wounds in the fetal envi-ronment heal with scar formation. Ann Surg. 1994;219(1): 65-72.	51.	Lorenz HP, Longaker MT, Perkocha LA, Jennings RW,  Harrison MR, Adzick NS. Scarless wound repair: a human fetal skin model. Development. 1992;114(1):253-259.	52.	Adzick NS, Harrison MR, Glick PL, et al. Comparison of fetal, newborn and adult rabbit wound healing by histologic, enzyme-histochemical and hydroxyproline determinations.  J Pediatr Surg. 1991;20(4):315-319.	53.	Shah M, Foreman DM, Ferguson MWJ. Neutralizing anti-body to TGF-β1,2 reduces cutaneous scarring in adult rodents.  J Cell Sci. 1994;107(pt 5):1137-1157.	54.	Longaker MT, Adzick NS. The biology of fetal wound healing: a review. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1990;87(4):788-798.	55.	Seeger JM, Kaelin LD, Staples EM, et al. Prevention of post-operative pericardial adhesions using tissue-protective solu-tions. J Surg Res. 1997;68(1):63-66.	56.	Longaker MT, Whitby DJ, Adzick NS, et al. Studies in fetal wound healing. VI: Second and early third trimester fetal wounds demonstrate rapid collagen deposition without scar formation. J Pediatr Surg. 1990;25(1):63-68.	57.	Halasz NA. Dehiscence of laparotomy wounds. Am J Surg. 1968;116(2):210-214.	58.	Mendoza CB, Postlethwait RW, Johnson WD. Incidence of wound disruption following operation. Arch Surg. 1970;101(3):396-398.	59.	Holt D, Kirk SJ, Regan MC, Hurson M, Lindblad WJ,  Barbul A. Effect of age on wound healing in healthy humans. Surgery. 1992;112(2):293-297.	60.	Jonson K, Jensen JA, Goodson WH III, et al. Tissue oxygen-ation, anemia, and perfusion in relation to wound healing in surgical patients. Ann Surg. 1991;214(5):605-613.	61.	Hopf HW, Hunt TK, West JM, et al. Wound tissue oxygen ten-sion predicts the risk of wound infection in surgical patients. Arch Surg. 1997;132(9):997-1004.	62.	Greif R, Akca O, Horn EP, Kurz A, Sessler DI; Outcomes Research Group. Supplemental perioperative oxygen to reduce the incidence of surgical-wound infection. N Engl J Med. 2000;342(3):161-167.	63.	Kurz A, Sessler D, Leonhardt R. Perioperative normothermia to reduce the incidence of surgical-wound infection and shorten hospitalization. N Engl J Med. 1996;334(19):1209-1215.	64.	Ehrlich HP, Hunt TK. Effects of cortisone and vitamin A on wound healing. Ann Surg. 1968;167(3):324-328.	65.	Anstead GM. Steroids, retinoids, and wound healing. Adv Wound Care. 1998;11(6):277-285.	66.	Ferguson MK. The effect of antineoplastic agents on wound healing. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1982;154(3):421-429.	67.	Larson DL. Alterations in wound healing secondary to infu-sion injury. Clin Plast Surg. 1990;17(3):509-517.	68.	Cruse PJE, Foord RA. A prospective study of 23,649 surgical wounds. Arch Surg. 1973;107(2):206-210.	69.	Yue DK, McLennan S, Marsh M, et al. Effects of experimental diabetes, uremia, and malnutrition on wound healing. Diabetes. 1987;36(3):295-299.	70.	Goodson WH III, Hunt TK. Studies of wound healing in exper-imental diabetes mellitus. J Surg Res. 1977;22(3):221-227.	71.	Black E, Vibe-Petersen J, Jorgensen LN, et al. Decrease in collagen deposition in wound repair in type I diabetes independent of glycemic control. Arch Surg. 2003;138(1): 34-40.Brunicardi_Ch09_p0271-p0304.indd   30101/03/19   4:50 PM 302BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART I	72.	Spiliotis J, Tsiveriotis K, Datsis AD, et al. Wound dehiscence is still a problem in the 21st century: a retrospective study. World J Emerg Surg. 2009;4:12.	73.	Coon D, Gusenoff JA, Kannan N, et al. Body mass and surgi-cal complications in the postbariatric reconstructive patient: analysis of 511 cases. Ann Surg. 2009;249:397-401.	74.	Arthurs ZM, Cuadrado D, Sohn V, et al. Post-bariatric pan-niculectomy: pre-panniculectomy body mass index impacts the complication profile. Am J Surg. 2007;193:567-570.	75.	Tsukada K, Miyazaki T, Kato H, et al. Body fat accumulation and postoperative complications after abdominal surgery. Am Surg. 2004;70:347-351.	76.	Williams JZ, Barbul A. Nutrition and wound healing. Surg Clin North Am. 2003;83(3):571-596.	77.	Goodson WH, Jensen JA, Gramja-Mena L, West J, Granja-Mena L, Chavez-Estrella J. The influence of a brief pre-operative illness on postoperative healing. Ann Surg. 1987;205(3):250-255.	78.	Winsor JA, Knight GS, Hill GL. Wound healing in surgical patients: recent food intake is more important than nutritional status. Br J Surg. 1988;75(2):135-137.	79.	Haydock DA, Hill GL. Improved wound healing response in surgical patients receiving intravenous nutrition. Br J Surg. 1987;74(4):320-323.	80.	Seifter E, Rettura G, Barbul A, Levenson SM. Argi-nine: an essential amino acid for injured rats. Surgery. 1978;84(2):224-230.	81.	Barbul A, Lazarou S, Efron DT, Wasserkrug HL, Efron G. Arginine enhances wound healing in humans. Surgery. 1990;108(2):331-336.	82.	Kirk SJ, Regan MC, Holt D, Holt DR, Wasserkrug HL, Barbul A. Arginine stimulates wound healing and immune function in aged humans. Surgery. 1993;114(2):155-159.	83.	Williams JZ, Abumrad NN, Barbul A. Effect of a specialized amino acid mixture on human collagen deposition. Ann Surg. 2002;236(3):369-374.	84.	Levenson SM, Seifter E, VanWinkle W. Nutrition. In: Hunt TK, Dunphy JE, eds. Fundamentals of Wound Management in Surgery. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts; 1979:286.	85.	Jeejeebhoy KN, Cheong WK. Essential trace metals: defi-ciencies and requirements. In: Fischer JE, ed. Nutrition and Metabolism in the Surgical Patient. Boston: Little, Brown and Company; 1996:295.	86.	Wilkinson EAJ, Hawke CI. Oral zinc for arterial and venous ulcers (Cochrane Review), in The Cochrane Library, 1:2002. Oxford: Update Software.	87.	Robson MC. Wound infection: a failure of wound healing caused by an imbalance of bacteria. Surg Clin North Am. 1997;77(3):637-650.	88.	Birkmeyer NJO, Birkmeyer JD. Strategies for improving surgical quality—should payers reward excellence or effort?  N Engl J Med. 2006;354(8):864-870.	89.	Classen DC, Evans RS, Pestotnik SL, Horn SD, Menlove RL, Burke JP. The timing of prophylactic administration of antibi-otics and the risk of surgical-wound infection. N Engl J Med. 1992;326(5):281-286.	90.	Anonymous. Antimicrobial prophylaxis for surgery. Med  Letter. 2012;10(122):73-78.	91.	Gupta N, Kaul-Gupta R, Carstens MM, et al. Analyzing pro-phylactic antibiotic administration in procedures lasting more than four hours: are published guidelines being followed?  Am Surg. 2003;69(8):669-673.	92.	Arnold MA, Barbul A. Surgical site infections. In: Cameron JL, ed. Current Surgical Therapy. 9th ed. St. Louis: Mosby-Elsevier; 2008:1152-1160.	93.	Liese JG, Jendrossek V, Jannson A, et al. Chronic granuloma-tous disease in adults. Lancet. 1996;347(8996):220-223.	94.	Ramos M, Khalpey Z, Lipsitz S, et al. Relationship of peri-operative hyperglycemia and postoperative infections in patients who undergo general and vascular surgery. Ann Surg. 2008;248:585-591.	95.	Van den Berghe G, Wouters P, Weekers P, et al. Inten-sive insulin therapy in critically ill patients. N Engl J Med. 2001;345:1359-1367.	96.	Lazar HL, Chipkin SR, Fitzgerald CA, et al. Tight glyce-mic control in diabetic coronary artery bypass graft patients improves perioperative outcomes and decreases recurrent isch-emic events. Circulation. 2004;109:1497-1502.	97.	Gandhi GY, Nuttall GA, Abel MD, et al. Intensive intraop-erative insulin therapy versus conventional glucose manage-ment during cardiac surgery: a randomized trial. Ann Int Med. 2007;146:233-243.	98.	Lazar HL, McDonnell MM, Chipkin S, et al. Effects of aggressive versus moderate glycemic control on clinical out-comes in diabetic coronary artery bypass patients. Ann Surg. 2011;254:458-463.	99.	Gottrup F, Firmin R, Rabkin J, et al. Directly measured tissue oxygen tension and arterial oxygen tension assess tissue perfu-sion. Crit Care Med. 1987;15:1030-1036.	100.	Sheffield CW, Sessler DI, Hopf HW, et al. Centrally and locally mediated thermoregulatory responses alter subcutane-ous oxygen tension. Wound Repair Regen. 1996;4:339-345.	101.	Maragakis LL, Cosgrove SE, Martinez EA, et al. Intraopera-tive fraction of inspired oxygen is a modifiable risk factor for surgical site infection after spinal surgery. Anesthesiology. 2009;110:556-562.	102.	Meyhoff C, Weyyerslev J, Jorgensen LN, et al. Effect of high perioperative oxygen fraction on surgical site infection and pulmonary complications after abdominal surgery: the PROXI Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA. 2009;302:1543-1550.	103.	Falanga V, Eaglstein WH. The “trap” hypothesis of venous ulceration. Lancet. 1993;341(8851):1006-1008.	104.	Lobmann R, Ambrosch A, Schultz G, Waldmann K, Schiweck S, Lehnert H. Expression of matrix-metalloproteinases and their inhibitors in the wounds of diabetic and non-diabetic patients. Diabetologia. 2002;45(7):1011-1116.	105.	Stanley A, Osler T. Senescence and the healing rates of venous ulcers. J Vasc Surg. 2001;33(6):1206-1211.	106.	Kim BC, Kim HT, Park SH, et al. Fibroblasts from chronic wounds show altered TGF-β-signaling and decreased TGF-β type II receptor expression. J Cell Physiol. 2003;195(3):331-336.	107.	Hopf HW, Ueno C, Aslam R, et al. Guidelines for the treat-ment of arterial insufficiency ulcers. Wound Repair Regen. 2006;14(6):693-710.	108.	Hopf HW, Ueno C, Aslam R, et al. Guidelines for the pre-vention of lower extremity arterial ulcers. Wound Repair Regen. 2008;16(2):175-188.	109.	Robson MC, Cooper DM, Aslam R, et al. Guidelines for the treatment of venous ulcers. Wound Repair Regen. 2006;14(6):649-662.	110.	Kirsner RS, Marston WA, Snyder RJ, et al. Sprayed-applied cell therapy with human allogeneic fibroblasts and keratino-cytes for treatment of chronic venous leg ulcers: a phase 2, multicenter, double-blind, randomized, place-controlled trial. Lancet. 2012;380:977-985.	111.	Robson MC, Cooper DM, Aslam R, et al. Guidelines for the prevention of venous ulcers. Wound Repair Regen. 2008;16(2):147-150.	112.	Steed DL, Attinger C, Colaizzi T, et al. Guidelines for treatment of diabetic ulcers. Wound Repair Regen. 2006;14(6):680-692.	113.	Jeffcoate WJ, Harding KG. Diabetic foot ulcers. Lancet. 2003;361(9368):1545-1551.Brunicardi_Ch09_p0271-p0304.indd   30201/03/19   4:50 PM 303WOUND HEALINGCHAPTER 9	114.	Steed DL, Attinger C, Brem H, et al. Guidelines for the prevention of diabetic ulcers. Wound Repair Regen. 2008;16(2):169-174.	115.	Whitney J, Phillips L, Aslam R, et al. Guidelines for the treatment of pressure ulcers. Wound Repair Regen. 2006;14(6):663-679.	116.	Stechmiller JK, Cowan L, Whitney J, et al. Guidelines for the prevention of pressure ulcers. Wound Repair Regen. 2008;16(2):151-168.	117.	Niessen FB, Spauwen PH, Schalkwijk J, et al. On the nature of hypertrophic scars and keloids: a review. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1999;104(5):1435-1458.	118.	Marneros AG, Norris JE, Olsen BR, Reichenberger E. Clinical genetics of familial keloids. Arch Dermatol. 2001; 137(11):1429-1434.	119.	Gauglitz GG, Korting HC, Pavicic T, et al. Hypertrophic scar-ring and keloids: pathomechanisms and current and emerging treatment strategies. Mol Med. 2011;17:113-125.	120.	Butler PD, Longaker MT, Yang GP. Current progress in keloid research and treatment. J Am Coll Surg. 2008;206(4):731-741.	121.	Mustoe TA. Evolution of silicone therapy and mecha-nism of action in scar management. Aesthetic Plast Surg. 2008;32(1):82-92.	122.	Dijkstra FR, Nieuwenhuijzen M, Reijnen MM, van Goor H. Recent clinical developments in pathophysiology, epidemiol-ogy, diagnosis and treatment of intra-abdominal adhesions. Scand J Gastroenterol Suppl. 2000;232:52-59.	123.	Cheong YC, Laird SM, Shellton JB, Ledger WL, Li TC, Cooke ID. The correlation of adhesions and peritoneal fluid cytokine concentrations: a pilot study. Hum Reprod. 2002;17:1039-1045.	124.	Zeng Q, Yu Z, You J, Zhang Q. Efficacy and safety of Seprafilm for preventing postoperative abdominal adhe-sion: systematic review and meta-analysis. World J Surg. 2007;31(11):2125-2131.	125.	Armstrong DG, Lavery L; Diabetic Foot Study Consortium. Negative pressure wound therapy after partial diabetic foot amputation: a multicentre, randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2005;366:1704-1710.	126.	Kim PJ, Heilala M, Stenverg JS, Weinraub GM. Bioen-gineered alternative tissues and hyperbaric oxygen in lower extremity wound healing. Clin Podiatr Med Surg. 2007;24(3):529-546.	127.	Veves A, Falanga V, Armostrong DG, Sabolinski ML; Apligraf Diabetic Foot Ulcer Study. Graftskin, a human skin equivalent, is effective in the management of noninfected neuropathic dia-betic foot ulcers: a prospective randomized multicenter clini-cal trial. Diabetes Care. 2001;24(2):290-295.	128.	Kim PJ, Attinger CE, Steinberg JS, Evans KK. Integra bilayer wound matrix application for complex lower extremity soft tissue reconstruction. Surg Technol Inter. 2014;24:65-73.	129.	Felder JM, Goyal SS, Attinger CE. A systematic review of skin substitutes for foot ulcers. Plast Recontr Surg. 2012;130(1):145-164.	130.	Gu C, Huang S, Gao D, et al. Angiogenic effect of mesenchy-mal stem cells as a therapeutic target for enhancing diabetic wound healing. Int J Low Extrem Wounds. 2014;13(2):88-93.	131.	Zelen CM, Snyder RJ, Serena TE, Li WW. The use of human amnion/chroion membrane in the clinical setting for lower extremity repair: a review. Clin Podiatr Med Surg. 2015;32:135-146.	132.	Martinez-Zapata MJ, Marti-Carvajal AJ, Sola I, et al. Autol-ogous platelet-rich plasma for treating chronic wounds. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;10:CD006899.	133.	Rodriguez PG, Felix FN, Woodley DT, Shim EK. The role of oxygen in wound healing: a review of the literature. Dermatol Surg. 2008:34:1159-1169.	134.	De Smet GH, Kroese LF, Menon AG, et al. Oxygen thera-pies and their effects on wound healing. Wound Rep Reg. 2017;25(4):591-608.	135.	Weaver LK, ed. The Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Soci-ety Manual on Hyperbaric Oxygen Therapy Indications. 13th ed. North Palm Beach, FL: Best Publishing Company; 2014, ix-xi.	136.	Wang C, Schwaitzberg S, Berliner E, Zarin DA, Lau J. Hyper-baric oxygen for treating wounds: a systemic review of the literature. Arch Surg. 2003;138:272-280.	137.	Londahl M, Katzman P, Nilson A, Hammarlund C. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy facilitates healing of chronic wound ulcers in patients with diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2010;33(5):998-1003.	138.	Ma L, Li P, Shi Z, Hou T, Chen X, Du J. A prospective, random-ized, controlled study of hyperbaric oxygen therapy: effects on healing and oxidative stress of ulcer tissue in patients with diabetic foot ulcers. Ostomy Wound Manag. 2103;59(3):18-24.	139.	Duzgun AP, Satir HZ, Ozozan O, Saylam B, Kulah B, Coskun F. Effect of hyperbaric oxygen therapy on diabetic foot ulcers. J Foot Ankle Surg. 2008;47(6):515-519.	140.	Kaur S, Pawar M, Banerjee N, Garg R. Evaluation of the efficacy of hyperbaric oxygen therapy in the management of chronic nonhealing ulcer and role of periwound transcu-taneous oximetry as predictor of wound healing response: a randomized prospective controlled trial. J Anaesthesiol Clin Pharmacol. 2012:28(1):70-75.	141.	Bjarnsholt T, Cooper R, Fletcher J, et al. Management of biofilm. WoundsInternational.com. Available at: http://www .woundsinternational.com/wuwhs/view/position-document-management-of-biofilm. Accessed June 26, 2018.	142.	Wolcott R, Rhoads D, Dowd S. Biofilms and chronic wound inflammation. J Wound Care. 2008;17(8):333-341.	143.	Scali C, Kunimoto B. An update on chronic wounds and the role of biofilms. J Cutan Med Surg. 2013;17(6):371-376.	144.	Philips PL, Wolcott RD, Fletcher J, Schultz GS. Biofilms made easy. WoundsInternational.com. Available at: http://www .woundsinternational.com/made-easys/view/biofilms-made-easy. Accessed June 26, 2018.	145.	Thomson CH. Biofilms: do they affect wound healing? Int Wound J. 2011;8(1):63-67.	146.	Bjarnshot T, Bjarnsholt T, Kirketerp-Moller K, Jensen P, et al. Why chronic wounds won’t heal: a novel hypothesis. Wound Repair Regen. 2008;16(1):2-10.	147.	Leid J, Wilson C, Shirtliff M, Hassett DJ, Parsek MR, Jeffers AK. The exopolysaccharide alginate protects Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilm bacteria from INF-gamma-mediated mac-rophage killing. J Immunol. 2005;175(1):7512-7518.	148.	Hall-Stoodley L, Stoodley P. Evolving concepts in biofilm infections. Cell Microbiol. 2009;11(7):1034-1043.	149.	Lawrence JR, Swerhone GD, Kuhlicke U, Neu TR. In situ evidence of microdomains in the polymer matrix of bacterial microcolonies. Can J Microbiol. 2007;53(3):450-458.Brunicardi_Ch09_p0271-p0304.indd   30301/03/19   4:50 PM
# Chunk 8875
Brunicardi_Ch09_p0271-p0304.indd   30401/03/19   4:50 PMThis page intentionally left blank

ONCOLOGY AND SURGICAL PRACTICEAs the population ages, oncology is becoming a larger portion of surgical practice. The surgeon often is responsible for the initial diagnosis and management of solid tumors. Knowledge of cancer epidemiology, etiology, staging, and natural history is required for initial patient assessment, as well as to determina-tion of the optimal surgical therapy.Modern cancer therapy is multidisciplinary, involving the coordinated care of patients by surgeons, medical oncologists, radiation oncologists, reconstructive surgeons,  pathologists, radi-ologists, and primary care physicians. Primary (or defini-tive) surgical therapy refers to en bloc resection of tumor with adequate margins of normal tissues and regional lymph nodes as necessary. Adjuvant therapy refers to radiation therapy and systemic therapies, including chemotherapy, immunotherapy, hormonal therapy, and, increasingly, biologic therapy. The pri-mary goal of surgical and radiation therapy is local and regional control. On the other hand, the primary goal of adjuvant therapy is systemic control by treatment of distant foci of subclinical dis-ease to prevent distant recurrence. Surgeons must be familiar with adjuvant therapies to coordinate multidisciplinary care and to determine the best sequence of therapy. They must also be aware of the potential for patients to receive effective systemic therapies prior to surgery as a means of reducing tumor volume.Recent advances in molecular biology are revolutionizing medicine. New information is being translated rapidly into clinical use, with the development of new prognostic and predictive markers and new biologic therapies. Increasingly cancer therapy is becoming personalized, incorporating information about each patient’s tumor characteristics, patient’s own genome, as well as host immune responses and tumor microenvironment, into clinical decisionmaking. It is therefore essential that surgeons understand the prin-ciples of molecular oncology to appropriately interpret these new contributions and incorporate them into practice.12OncologyWilliam E. Carson III, Funda Meric-Bernstam,  and Raphael E. Pollock 10chapterOncology and Surgical Practice	305Epidemiology	306Basic Principles of Cancer  Epidemiology / 306Cancer Incidence and Mortality in the United States / 306Global Statistics on Cancer Incidence and Mortality / 307Cancer Biology	310Hallmarks of Cancer / 310Cell Proliferation and Transformation / 310Cancer Initiation / 310Cell-Cycle Dysregulation in Cancer / 311Oncogenes / 313Alterations in Apoptosis in Cancer  Cells / 314Autophagy in Cancer Cells / 315Cancer Invasion / 315Angiogenesis / 316Metastasis / 316Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition / 317Cancer Stem Cells / 318Cancer Etiology	318Cancer Genomics / 318Tumor Heterogeneity and Molecular Evolution / 319Genes Associated With Hereditary Cancer Risk / 320APC Gene and Familial Adenomatous Polyposis / 324PTEN and Cowden Disease / 325RET Proto-Oncogene and Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Type 2 / 325Chemical Carcinogens / 326Physical Carcinogens / 326Viral Carcinogens / 326Cancer Risk Assessment	328Cancer Screening	330Cancer Diagnosis	332Cancer Staging	333Tumor Markers	334Prognostic and Predictive  Tissue Markers / 334Serum Markers / 335Circulating Tumor Cells / 336Bone Marrow Micrometastases / 337Surgical Approaches to Cancer Therapy	337Multidisciplinary Approach  to Cancer / 337Surgical Management of  Primary Tumors / 337Surgical Management of the Regional Lymph Node Basin / 338Surgical Management of Distant Metastases / 339Chemotherapy	340Clinical Use of Chemotherapy / 340Principles of Chemotherapy / 340Anticancer Agents / 340Combination Chemotherapy / 341Drug Toxicity / 341Administration of Chemotherapy / 341Hormonal Therapy	342Targeted Therapy	342Immunotherapy	342Gene Therapy	345Mechanisms of Intrinsic and  Acquired Drug Resistance	345Radiation Therapy	346Physical Basis of Radiation Therapy / 346Biologic Basis of Radiation Therapy / 346Radiation Therapy Planning / 347Side Effects / 348Cancer Prevention	348Trends in Oncology	349Cancer Screening and Diagnosis / 349Surgical Therapy / 349Systemic Therapy / 349Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   30522/02/19   2:14 PM 306Key Points1	Modern cancer therapy is multidisciplinary, involving coor-dinated care by surgeons, medical oncologists, radiation oncologists, reconstructive surgeons, pathologists, radiolo-gists, and primary care physicians.2	Understanding cancer biology is essential to successfully implement personalized cancer therapy.3	The following alterations are critical for malignant cancer growth: self-sufficiency of growth signals, insensitivity to growth-inhibitory signals, evasion of apoptosis, potential for limitless replication, angiogenesis, invasion and metastasis, reprogramming of energy metabolism, and evading immune destruction.EPIDEMIOLOGYBasic Principles of Cancer EpidemiologyThe term incidence refers to the number of new cases occur-ring. Incidence is usually expressed as the number of new cases per 100,000 persons per year. Mortality refers to the number of deaths occurring and is expressed as the number of deaths per 100,000 persons per year. Incidence and mortality data are usually available through cancer registries. Mortality data are also available as public records in many countries where deaths are registered as vital statistics, often with the cause of death. In areas where cancer registries do not exist, mortality data are used to extrapolate incidence rates. These numbers are likely to be less accurate than registry data, as the relationship between incidence and cause-specific death is likely to vary significantly among countries owing to the variation in health care delivery.The incidence of cancer varies by geography. This is due in part to genetic differences and in part to differences in environ-mental and dietary exposures. Epidemiologic studies that moni-tor trends in cancer incidence and mortality have tremendously enhanced our understanding of the etiology of cancer. Further-more, analysis of trends in cancer incidence and mortality allows us to monitor the effects of different preventive and screening measures, as well as the evolution of therapies for specific cancers.The two types of epidemiologic studies that are conducted most often to investigate the etiology of cancer and the effect of prevention modalities are cohort studies and case-control stud-ies. Cohort studies follow a group of people who initially do not have a disease over time and measure the rate of development of a disease. In cohort studies, a group that is exposed to a certain environmental factor or intervention usually is compared to a group that has not been exposed (e.g., smokers vs. nonsmokers). A case-control study compares a group of patients affected with a disease to a group of individuals without the disease and looks back retrospectively to compare how frequently the exposure to a risk factor is present in each group to determine the rela-tionship between the risk factor and the disease. The results are expressed in terms of an odds ratio, or relative risk. A relative risk <1 indicates a protective effect of the exposure, whereas a relative risk >1 indicates an increased risk of developing the disease with exposure.Cancer Incidence and Mortality in the United StatesIn the year 2017, it is estimated that 1.7 million new cancer cases will be diagnosed in the United States, excluding carci-noma in situ of any site except bladder, and excluding basal cell and squamous cell carcinomas of the skin.1 In addition, 63,410 cases of carcinoma in situ of the breast, and 74,680 of melanoma in situ are expected.1It is estimated that in 2017 an estimated 600,920 people will die of cancer in the United States, corresponding to about 1650 deaths per day.1 The estimated new cancer cases and deaths by cancer type are shown in Table 10-1.1 The most com-mon causes of cancer death in men are cancers of the lung and bronchus, colon and rectum, and prostate; in women, the most common cancers are of the lung and bronchus, breast, and colon and rectum.1 These four cancers account for almost half of total cancer deaths among men and women.The annual age-adjusted cancer incidence rates among males and females for selected cancer types are shown in Fig. 10-1.1 Incidence rates are declining for most cancer sites (Fig. 10-2).1 Incidence rates for thyroid cancer have begun to stabilize recently, possibly due to changes in clinical practice guidelines that were initiated in 2009 and included more conservative indications for biopsy. The age-adjusted incidence rate of breast cancer started to decrease from 2001 to 2004.2 This decrease in breast cancer inci-dence has at least temporally been associated with the first report of the Women’s Health Initiative, which documented an increased risk of coronary artery disease and breast cancer with the use of hormone replacement therapy; this was followed by a drop in the use of hormone replacement therapy by postmenopausal women in the United States.2 Unfortunately, there was a slight increase in breast cancer incidence from 2004 to 2013. This was driven wholly by nonwhite women; rates increased by about 2% per year among women other than white or black and by 0.5% per year among black women. Thus, rates have risen slightly in women as a whole from 2013 to 2017, although rates remained stable in white women.Declines in colorectal cancer incidence have been mainly attributed to increased screening that allows for removal of pre-cancerous polyps. Prostate cancer rates rapidly increased and decreased between 1995 and 1998. These trends are thought to be attributable to increased use of prostate-specific antigen (PSA) screening.3 Due to growing concerns about overdiagno-sis and overtreatment, a U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommended against routine use of PSA testing to screen for prostate cancer. As a result, there was more than 10% annual reduction in prostate cancer incidence from 2010 to 2013. Dif-ferences in lung cancer incidence patterns between women and men are thought to reflect historical differences in tobacco use. Differences in smoking prevalence is also thought to contribute to regional differences in lung cancer incidence. Lung cancer incidence is fourfold higher in Kentucky, which has the highest smoking prevalence, compared with Utah, which has the lowest smoking prevalence.1The 5-year survival rates for selected cancers are listed in Table 10-2. From 2010 to 2014, cancer death rates decreased by 1.8% per year in men and by 1.4% per year in women.1 These declines in mortality have been consistent in the past decade and larger than what was observed in the previous decade.3 Over the Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   30622/02/19   2:14 PM 307ONCOLOGYCHAPTER 10Table 10-1Estimated new cancer cases and deaths, United States, 2017a ESTIMATED NEW CASESESTIMATED DEATHS ESTIMATED NEW CASESESTIMATED DEATHSAll cancers1,688,780600,920Genital system279,80059,100Oral cavity and pharynx49,6709700 Uterine cervix12,8204210Digestive system310,440157,700 Uterine corpus61,38010,920 Esophagus16,94015,690 Ovary22,44014,080 Stomach28,00010,960 Vulva60201150 Small intestine10,1901390 Vagina and other genital, female48101240 Colon and rectum95,520 / 39,91050,260b Prostate161,36026,730 Anus, anal canal,   and anorectum82001100 Testis8850410 Liver and   intrahepatic bile duct40,71028,920 Penis and other genital, male2120360 Gallbladder and other biliary11,7403830Urinary system146,65032,190 Pancreas53,67043,090 Urinary bladder79,03016,870 Other digestive organs55602460 Kidney and renal pelvis63,99014,400Respiratory system243,170160,420 Ureter and other urinary organs3630920 Larynx13,3603660Eye and orbit3130330 Lung and bronchus220,500155,870Brain and other nervous system23,80016,700 Other respiratory organs7310890Endocrine system59,2503010Bones and joints32601550 Thyroid56,8702010Soft tissue (including heart)12,3904990 Other endocrine23801000Skin (excluding basal and squamous)95,36013,590Lymphoma80,50021,210 Melanoma87,1109730Multiple myeloma30,28012,590 Other nonepithelial82503860Leukemia62,13024,500Breast255,18041,070Other and unspecified primary sitesc33,77042,270aRounded to the nearest 10, cases exclude basal cell and squamous cell skin cancers and in situ carcinoma except bladder. About 63,410 cases of carcinoma in situ of the female breast and 74,680 cases of melanoma in situ were diagnosed in 2017.bDeaths for colon and rectum cancers are combined because a large number of deaths from rectal cancer are misclassified as colon.cMore deaths than cases may reflect lack of specificity in recording underlying cause of death on death certificate and/or an undercount in the case estimate.Modified with permission from Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A: Cancer Statistics, 2017, CA Cancer J Clin. 2017 Jan;67(1):7-30.past 3 decades, the 5-year relative survival rate for all cancers combined has increased by 20% among whites and 24% among blacks. Improvements in survival for the most common cancers have been similar across both sexes but are more pronounced among patients age 50 to 64 years than among those older than 65 years. This difference may reflect reduced efficacy of new therapies in the elderly or perhaps lower utilization.1 Progress has been rapid for hematopoietic and lymphoid malignancies due to improved treatment protocols and the discovery of tar-geted therapies. The decrease in lung cancer death rates in men is thought to be due to a decrease in tobacco use, whereas the decreases in death rates from breast, colorectal cancer, and prostate cancer likely reflect advances in early detection and treatment. For instance, there is potential for lung cancer to be diagnosed at an earlier stage through the use of screening with low-dose computed tomography.Global Statistics on Cancer Incidence and MortalityThe five most common cancers for men worldwide are lung, prostate, colorectal cancer, stomach, and liver and for women are breast, colorectal, cervix, lung, and stomach.4 Notably, for several cancer types there is wide geographical variability in cancer incidence (Fig. 10-3). The mortality rates for different cancers also vary significantly among countries. This is attribut-able not only to variations in incidence but also to variations in survival after a cancer diagnosis. The survival rates are influ-enced by treatment patterns as well as by variations in cancer screening practices, which affect the stage of cancer at diagno-sis. For example, the 5-year survival rate for stomach cancer is much higher in Japan, where the cancer incidence is high enough to warrant mass screening, which is presumed to lead to earlier diagnosis. In the case of prostate cancer, on the other Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   30722/02/19   2:14 PM 308BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ihand, the mortality rates diverge much less than the incidence rates among countries. Survival rates for prostate cancer are much higher in North America than in developing countries.5 It is possible that the extensive screening practices in the United States allow discovery of cancers at an earlier, more curable stage; however, it is also possible that this screening leads to discovery of more latent, less biologically aggressive cancers, which may not have caused death even if they had not been identified.In 2008 (the last date for which complete data are available), about 1 million new cases of stomach cancer were estimated to have occurred (988,000 cases, 7.8% of the total), making it the fourth most common malignancy in the world, behind cancers of the lung, breast, and colorectal cancer. The incidence of stomach cancer varies significantly among different regions of the world. The difference in risk by country is presumed to be primarily due to differences in dietary factors. The risk is increased by high consumption of preserved salted foods, such as meats and pick-les, and decreased by high intake of fruits and vegetables.5 There also is some international variation in the incidence of infection with Helicobacter pylori, which is known to play a major role in gastric cancer development.5 Fortunately, a steady decline is being observed in the incidence and mortality rates of gastric cancer. This may be related to improvements in preservation and storage of foods as well as due to changes in the prevalence of H pylori.5 More than 70% of cases (713,000 cases) occur in developing countries, and half the cases in the world occur in Eastern Asia (mainly in China).4 Age-standardized incidence rates are about twice as high for men as for women, ranging from 3.9 in Northern Africa to 42.4 in Eastern Asia for men, and from 2.2 in Southern Africa to 18.3 in Eastern Asia for women. Stomach cancer is the second leading cause of cancer death in both sexes worldwide.Overall, the incidence of breast cancer is rising in most countries. Incidence varies from 19.3 per 100,000 women in Eastern Africa to 89.7 per 100,000 women in Western Europe, and are high in developed regions of the world (except Japan) and low in most of the developing regions.4 Although breast cancer has been linked to cancer susceptibility genes, mutations in these genes account for only 5% to 10% of breast tumors, which suggests that the wide geographic variations in breast cancer incidence are not due to geographic variations in the prevalence of these genes. Most of the differences, therefore, are attributed to differences in reproductive factors, diet, alcohol, obesity, physical activity, and other environmental differences. Indeed, breast cancer risk increases significantly in females MalesFemalesBreastLung & bronchusColon & rectumUterine corpusNon-Hodgkin lymphomaThyroidMelanoma of the skinPancreasLeukemiaKidney & renal pelvisAll Sites252,710105,51064,01061,38042,47034,94032,16025,84025,70023,380852,63030%12%8%7%5%4%4%3%3%3%100%MalesFemalesLung & bronchusProstateColon & rectumPancreasLiver & intrahepatic bile ductLeukemiaEsophagusUrinary bladderNon-Hodgkin lymphomaBrain & other nervous systemAll SitesLung & bronchusBreastColon & rectumPancreasOvaryLeukemiaNon-Hodgkin lymphomaUterine corpusLiver & intrahepatic bile ductBrain & other nervous systemAll Sites71,28040,61023,11020,79014,08010,92010,2009,3108,6907,080282,50025%14%8%7%5%4%4%3%3%3%100%84,59027,15026,73022,30019,61014,30012,72012,24011,4509,620318,42027%9%8%7%6%4%4%4%4%3%100%ProstateLung & bronchusColon & rectumUrinary bladderMelanoma of the skinNon-Hodgkin lymphomaKidney & renal pelvisOral cavity & pharynxLeukemiaLiver & intrahepatic bile ductAll Sites161,360116,99071,42060,49052,17040,61040,08036,29035,72029,200836,15019%14%9%7%6%5%5%4%4%3%100%Estimated new casesEstimated deathsFigure 10-1. Ten leading cancer types with the estimated new cancer cases and deaths by sex in the United States, 2013. *Excludes basal and squamous cell skin cancers and in situ carcinomas except those of the urinary bladder. Estimates are rounded to the nearest 10  (Modified with permission from Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A: Cancer Statistics, 2017, CA Cancer J Clin. 2017 Jan;67(1):7-30.)Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   30822/02/19   2:14 PM 309ONCOLOGYCHAPTER 10who have migrated from Asia to America.5 The range of breast cancer mortality rates is much less (approximately 6 to 19 per 100,000) because of the more favorable survival of breast cancer in developed regions. As a result, breast cancer ranks as the fifth cause of death from cancer overall (458,000 deaths), but it is still the most frequent cause of cancer death in women in both developing (269,000 deaths, 12.7% of total) and developed regions (estimated 189,000 deaths).4There is a 25-fold variation in colon cancer incidence world-wide.5 The incidence of colon and rectal cancer is higher in devel-oped countries than in developing countries. The incidence rates are highest in North America, Australia and New Zealand, and Western Europe, and especially in Japanese men.5 In contrast, the incidence is relatively low in North Africa, South America, and Eastern, Southeastern, and Western Asia. These geographic differences are thought to reflect environmental exposures and are presumed to be related mainly to dietary differences in con-sumption of animal fat, meat, and fiber.5Worldwide liver cancer is the fifth most common cancer in men (523,000 cases, 7.9% of the total) and the seventh in women (226,000 cases, 6.5% of the total). Almost 85% of liver cancer cases occur in developing countries, and particularly in men.4 The overall sex ratio of male to female is 2:4. The regions of high incidence are Eastern and Southeastern Asia, Middle and Western Africa, as well as Melanesia and Micronesia/Polynesia (particularly in men). Low rates are estimated in developed regions, with the exception of Southern Europe. There were an estimated 694,000 deaths from liver cancer in 2008 (477,000 in men, 217,000 in women), and because of its high fatality (overall ratio of mortality to incidence of 0.93), liver cancer is the third most common cause of death from cancer worldwide. The geographical distribution of the mortality rates is similar to that observed for incidence. Worldwide, the major risk factors for liver cancer are infection with hepatitis B and C viruses and consumption of foods contaminated with aflatoxin. Hepatitis B immunization in children has recently been shown to reduce the incidence of liver cancer.5In summary, the incidence rates of many common cancers vary widely by geography. This is due in part to genetic dif-ferences, including racial and ethnic differences. It is due also in part to differences in environmental and dietary exposures, factors that can potentially be altered. Therefore, establishment of regional and international databases is critical to improving our understanding of the etiology of cancer and will ultimately assist in the initiation of targeted strategies for global cancer prevention. Furthermore, the monitoring of cancer mortality rates and 5-year cancer-specific survival rates will identify regions where there are inequities of health care, so that access to health care can be facilitated and guidelines for treatment can be established.Liver*ThyroidUterine corpusMelanoma of the skinColorectumLung & bronchusBreastFemale197519801985199019952000200520102013025Year of diagnosis5075100125150175200225250025Year of diagnosisLiver*ThyroidMelanoma of the skinUrinary bladderColorectumLung & bronchusProstateMaleRate per 100,000 population5075100125150175200225250197519801985199019952000200520102013Figure 10-2. Trends in cancer incidence rates for selected cancer by sex among males and females for selected cancer types, United States, 1975 to 2009. Rates are age adjusted to the 2000 U.S. standard population. +Liver includes intrahepatic bile duct. (Modified with permission from Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A: Cancer Statistics, 2017, CA Cancer J Clin. 2017 Jan;67(1):7-30.)Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   30922/02/19   2:14 PM 310BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART ITable 10-2Five-year relative survival rates adjusted to normal life expectancy by year of diagnosis, United States, 1975–2008 RELATIVE 5-YEAR SURVIVAL RATES (%)CANCER TYPE1975–19771987–19892005-2011All cancers495669Brain222935Breast (female)758491Uterine cervix697069Colon516169Uterine corpus878383Esophagus51020Hodgkin’s disease727988Kidney505774Larynx666663Leukemia344362Liver3518Lung and bronchus121318Melanoma of the skin828893Multiple myeloma252849Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma475172Oral cavity535466Ovary363846Pancreas248Prostate688399Rectum485868Stomach152030Testis839597Thyroid929598Urinary bladder737979Data from Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A: Cancer Statistics, 2017, CA Cancer J Clin. 2017 Jan;67(1):7-30.CANCER BIOLOGYHallmarks of CancerAlthough there are >100 types of cancer, it has been proposed that there are six essential alterations in cell physiology that dic-tate malignant growth: self-sufficiency of growth signals, insen-sitivity to growth-inhibitory signals, evasion of apoptosis (programmed cell death), potential for limitless  replication, angiogenesis, and invasion and metastasis.6 Recently two additional hallmarks have emerged—reprogramming of energy metabolism and evading immune destruction.7 These hallmarks of cancer are being pursued as targets for cancer ther-apy (Fig. 10-4).Cell Proliferation and TransformationIn normal cells, cell growth and proliferation are under strict control. In cancer cells, cells become unresponsive to normal growth controls, which leads to uncontrolled cell division. Human cells require several genetic changes for neoplastic transformation. Cell type–specific differences also exist in the process by which a normal cell is transformed into a cancer-ous one. Abnormally proliferating, transformed cells outgrow normal cells in the culture dish (i.e., in vitro) and commonly display several abnormal characteristics.8 These include loss of contact inhibition (i.e., cells continue to proliferate after a con-fluent monolayer is formed); an altered appearance and poor adherence to other cells or to the substratum; loss of anchorage dependence for growth; immortalization; and gain of tumorige-nicity (i.e., the ability to give rise to tumors when injected into an appropriate host).Cancer InitiationTumorigenesis is proposed to have three steps: initiation, promo-tion, and progression. Initiating events such as gain of function of genes known as oncogenes or loss of function of genes known as tumor-suppressor genes may lead a single cell to acquire a dis-tinct growth advantage. Although tumors usually arise from a sin-gle cell or clone, it is thought that sometimes not a single cell but 3Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   31022/02/19   2:14 PM 311ONCOLOGYCHAPTER 10rather a large number of cells in a target organ may have under-gone the initiating genetic event. Thus, many normal-appearing cells may have an increased malignant potential. This is referred to as a field effect. The initiating events are usually genetic and occur as deletions of tumor-suppressor genes or amplification or mutation of oncogenes. Subsequent events can lead to accumula-tions of additional deleterious mutations in the clone.Cancer is thought to be a disease of clonal progression as tumors arise from a single cell and accumulate mutations that confer on the tumor an increasingly aggressive behavior. Most tumors go through a progression from benign lesions to in situ tumors to invasive cancers (e.g., atypical ductal hyperplasia to ductal carcinoma in situ to invasive ductal carcinoma of the breast). Fearon and Vogelstein proposed the model for colorec-tal tumorigenesis presented in Fig. 10-5.9 Colorectal tumors arise from the mutational activation of oncogenes coupled with muta-tional inactivation of tumor-suppressor genes, the latter being the predominant change.9 Mutations in at least four or five genes are required for formation of a malignant tumor, while fewer changes suffice for a benign tumor. Although genetic mutations often occur in a preferred sequence, a tumor’s biologic properties are determined by the total accumulation of its genetic changes.Gene expression is a multistep process that starts from transcription of a gene into messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) and then translation of this sequence into the functional protein. There are several controls at each level. In addition to alterations at the genome level (e.g., amplifications of a gene), alterations at the transcription level (e.g., methylation of the DNA leading to transcriptional silencing) or at the level of mRNA process-ing, mRNA stability, mRNA translation, or protein stability, all can alter the levels of critical proteins and thus contribute to tumorigenesis. Alternatively, changes in the genomic sequence can lead to a mutated product with altered function.Cell-Cycle Dysregulation in CancerThe proliferative advantage of tumor cells is a result of their ability to bypass a quiescent state. Cancer cells often show alterations in signal transduction pathways that lead to prolif-eration in response to external signals. Mutations or alterations in the expression of cell-cycle proteins, growth factors, growth factor receptors, intracellular signal transduction proteins, and nuclear transcription factors all can lead to disturbance of the basic regulatory mechanisms that control the cell cycle, allow-ing unregulated cell growth and proliferation.The cell cycle is divided into four phases (Fig. 10-6).10 During the synthetic or S phase, the cell generates a single copy of its genetic material, whereas in the mitotic or M phase, the cellular components (including copies of DNA) are partitioned between two daughter cells. The G1 and G2 phases represent gap phases, during which the cells prepare themselves for All cancers< 11.2< 0.3< 0.5< 0.7< 1.0< 11.2< 0.4< 0.7< 1.0< 1.6< 4.9Liver cancerStomach cancer< 13.4< 16.6< 22.5< 31.9< 2.2< 3.1< 4.1< 6.0< 11.4BreastFigure 10-3. Estimated cancer incidence worldwide in 2008. Age-standardized incidence rates per 100,000 for all cancers (upper left), breast cancer (upper right), liver cancer (lower left), and stomach cancer (lower right). (Modified with permission from Ferlay J, Shin HR, Bray F, et al: GLOBOCAN 2008 v2.0, Cancer Incidence and Mortality Worldwide: IARC CancerBase No. 10 [Internet]. Lyon, France: International Agency for Research on Cancer; 2010. Available from: http://globocan.iarc.fr.)Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   31122/02/19   2:14 PM 312BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Icompletion of the S and M phases, respectively. When cells cease proliferation, they exit the cell cycle and enter the quies-cent state referred to as G0. The two key classes of regulatory molecules that regulate cellular progress through the cell cycle are the cyclins and the cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs), which associate to form an activated heterodimer. CDKs are expressed constitutively and have a catalytic activity (phosphorylation of downstream proteins), whereas the cyclins serve a regula-tory function and are synthesized at specific times during the cell cycle. Two families of genes, the cip/kip (CDK interact-ing protein/Kinase inhibitory protein) family and the INK4a/ARF (Inhibitor of Kinase 4/Alternative Reading Frame) family Aerobic glycolysisinhibitorsSustainingproliferativesignalingEvadinggrowthsuppressorsEnablingreplicativeimmortalityActivatinginvasion &metastasisInducingangiogenesisGenomeinstability &mutationResistingcelldeathDeregulatingcellularenergeticsTumor-promotinginflammationAvoidingimmunedestructionEGFRinhibitorsCyclin-dependentkinase inhibitorsPARPinhibitorsInhibitors ofVEGF signalingInhibitors ofHGF/c-MetTelomeraseInhibitorsSelective anti-inflammatory drugsProapoptoticBH3 mimeticsImmune activatinganti-CTLA4 oranti-PD-1 mAbFigure 10-4. Hallmarks of cancer and their therapeutic implications. Drugs that interfere with each of the acquired capabilities necessary for tumor growth and progression are in clinical trials and in some cases approved for clinical use in treating forms of human cancer. The drugs listed are illustrative examples. (Reproduced with permission from Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: the next generation, CCell. 2011 Mar 4;144(5):646-674.)First Hit: APCSomatic Mutation(Sporadic CRC)First Hit: APCGermline Mutation(FAP)K-rasGenomic InstabilitySmad 4p53OtherAlterations˜-CateninNormalEpitheliumDysplasticACFEarlyAdenomaIntermediateAdenomaLateAdenomaCarcinomaMetastasisFigure 10-5. The adenoma-carcinoma model of human colorectal carcinogenesis. The neoplastic process is initiated by mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) or b-catenin genes. Tumor progression results from mutations in other genes (e.g., K-ras, Smad 4 and p53) and the development of genomic instability. Patients with familial adenomatous polyposis inherit mutations in the APC gene and develop multiple aberrant crypt foci. Some of these may progress to cancer as they acquire other genetic mutations. (Reproduced with permission from Li C-J, Zhang, X, Fan G-W. Updates in colorectal cancer stem cell research, J Cancer Res Ther. 2014 Dec;10 Suppl:233-239.)Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   31222/02/19   2:14 PM 313ONCOLOGYCHAPTER 10prevent the progression of the cell cycle. Mutation or altered expression of these genes can lead to tumor formation.OncogenesNormal cellular genes that contribute to cancer when abnormal are called oncogenes. The normal counterpart of such a gene is referred to as a proto-oncogene. Oncogenes are usually designated by three-letter abbreviations, such as myc or ras. Oncogenes are further designated by the prefix “v-” for virus or “c-” for cell or chromosome, corresponding to the origin of the oncogene when it was first detected. Proto-oncogenes can be activated (show increased activity) or overexpressed (expressed at increased pro-tein levels) by translocation (e.g., abl), promoter insertion (e.g., c-myc), mutation (e.g., ras), or amplification (e.g., HER2/neu). More than 100 oncogenes have been identified.Oncogenes may be growth factors (e.g., platelet-derived growth factor), growth factor receptors (e.g., HER2), intracel-lular signal transduction molecules (e.g., ras), nuclear tran-scription factors (e.g., c-myc), or other molecules involved in the regulation of cell growth and proliferation. Growth factors are ubiquitous proteins that are produced and secreted by cells locally and that stimulate cell proliferation by binding specific cell-surface receptors on the same cells (autocrine stimula-tion) or on neighboring cells (paracrine stimulation). Persis-tent overexpression of growth factors can lead to uncontrolled autostimulation and neoplastic transformation. Alternatively, growth factor receptors can be aberrantly activated (turned on) through mutations or overexpressed (continually presenting cells with growth-stimulatory signals, even in the absence of growth factors), which leads cells to respond as if growth factor levels are altered. The growth-stimulating effect of growth fac-tors and other mitogens is mediated through postreceptor signal Cell with duplicated chromosomesChromosome separationMitosisCell divisionCell with chromosomes in the nucleusDNA synthesisChromosome duplicationMG1SG2CDKCyclinFigure 10-6. Schematic representation of the phases of the cell cycle. Mitogenic growth factors can drive a quiescent cell from G0 into the cell cycle. Once the cell cycle passes beyond the restric-tion point, mitogens are no longer required for progression into and through S phase. The DNA is replicated in S phase, and the chromo-somes are condensed and segregated in mitosis. In early G1 phase, certain signals can drive a cell to exit the cell cycle and enter a quies-cent phase. Cell-cycle checkpoints have been identified in G1, S, G2, and M phases. CDK = cyclin-dependent kinase.transduction molecules. These molecules mediate the passage of growth signals from the outside to the inside of the cell and then to the cell nucleus, initiating the cell cycle and DNA transcrip-tion. Aberrant activation or expression of cell-signaling mol-ecules, cell-cycle molecules, or transcription factors may play an important role in neoplastic transformation. Protein tyrosine kinases account for a large portion of known oncogenes. One of the best-studied oncogenes, HER2 is discussed as an example later.HER2, also known as neu or c-erbB-2, is a member of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) family and is one of the best-characterized tyrosine kinases. Unlike other recep-tor tyrosine kinases, HER2/neu does not have a direct soluble ligand. It plays a key role in signaling, however, because it is the preferred partner in heterodimer formation with all the other EGFR family members (EGFR/c-erbB-1, HER2/c-erbB-3, and HER3/c-erbB-4), which bind at least 30 ligands, including epidermal growth factor (EGF), transforming growth factor α (TGFα), heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor, amphiregu-lin, and heregulin.11 Heterodimerization with HER2 potenti-ates recycling of receptors rather than degradation, enhances signal potency and duration, increases affinity for ligands, and increases catalytic activity.11HER2 can interact with different members of the HER fam-ily and activate mitogenic and antiapoptotic pathways (Fig. 10-7).  The specificity and potency of the intracellular signals are affected by the identity of the ligand, the composition of the receptors, and the phosphotyrosine-binding proteins associated with the erbB molecules. The Rasand Shc-activated mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway is a target of all erbB ligands, which increase the transcriptional activity of early response genes such as c-myc, c-fos, and c-jun.12 MAPK-independent  pathways such as the phosphoinositide-3 kinase (PI3K) pathway also are activated by most erbB dimers, although the potency and kinetics of activation may differ. Stimulation of the PI3K pathway through HER2 signaling also can lead to activation of survival molecule Akt, which suppresses apoptosis through mul-tiple mechanisms.The mutant rat neu gene was first recognized as an oncogene in neuroblastomas from carcinogen-treated rats.13 The HER2 gene is frequently amplified and the protein over-expressed in many cancers, including breast, ovarian, lung, gastric, and oral cancers. Overexpression of HER2 results in ligand-independent activation of HER2 kinase, which leads to mitogenic signaling. HER2 overexpression is associated with increased cell proliferation and anchorage-independent growth as well as resistance to proapoptotic stimuli. Further, overex-pression of HER2 increases cell migration and upregulates the activities of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and in vitro invasiveness. In animal models, HER2 increases tumorigenic-ity, angiogenesis, and metastasis. These results all suggest that HER2 plays a key role in cancer biology. More recently, HER2 mutations have also been reported in human cancer, including 3% of patients with lung cancer.14-17 A phase 2 study of the irre-versible kinase inhibitor neratinib showed it to have efficacy in HER2-mutated breast cancer lacking HER amplification.18The critical role of HER2 in cancer biology has been lever-aged for therapeutics, leading to several HER2-targeted drugs with different mechanism of action approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA): monoclonal antibodies trastu-zumab and pertuzumab, small molecule inhibitor lapatinib, and antibody-drug conjugate ado-trastuzumab emtansine. Anti-HER2 agents first showed efficacy in the metastatic setting but Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   31322/02/19   2:14 PM 314BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iare now routinely used as adjuvant therapy of breast cancer and also as neoadjuvant treatments (“up-front chemotherapy”).Alterations in Apoptosis in Cancer CellsApoptosis is a genetically regulated program to dispose of cells. Cancer cells must avoid apoptosis if tumors are to arise. The growth of a tumor mass is dependent not only on an increase in proliferation of tumor cells but also on a decrease in their apoptotic rate. Apoptosis is distinguished from necrosis because it leads to several characteristic changes. Soon after undergoing apoptosis, membrane phosphatidylserine translocates from the inner face of the plasma membrane to the cell surface where it can be detected via the use of a fluorescent conjugate of Annexin V, a protein that exhibits a high affinity for phosphatidylserine. Late in apoptosis there are characteristic changes in nuclear morphology, such as chromatin condensation, nuclear frag-mentation, and DNA laddering, as well as membrane blebbing. Apoptotic cells are then engulfed and degraded by phagocytic cells. The effectors of apoptosis are a family of proteases called caspases (cysteine-dependent and aspartate-directed proteases). The initiator caspases (e.g., 8, 9, and 10), which are upstream, cleave the downstream executioner caspases (e.g., 3, 6, and 7) that carry out the destructive functions of apoptosis.Two principal molecular pathways signal apoptosis by cleaving the initiator caspases with the potential for crosstalk: the mitochondrial pathway and the death receptor pathway. In the mitochondrial (or intrinsic) pathway, death results from the release of cytochrome c from the mitochondria. Cytochrome c, procaspase 9, and apoptotic protease activating factor 1 (Apaf-1) form an enzyme complex, referred to as the apoptosome, that activates the effector caspases. In addition to these proteins, the mitochondria contain other proapoptotic proteins such as Smac/DIABLO (second mitochondria-derived activator of cas-pase/direct inhibitor of apoptosis-binding protein with low pI). The mitochondrial pathway can be stimulated by many factors, including DNA damage, reactive oxygen species, or the with-drawal of survival factors. The permeability of the mitochon-drial membrane determines whether the apoptotic pathway will proceed. The Bcl-2 family of regulatory proteins includes both proapoptotic proteins (e.g., Bax, BAD, and Bak) and antiapop-totic proteins (e.g., Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL). The activity of the Bcl-2 proteins is centered on the mitochondria, where they regulate LigandsPI3KILKEZH2GSK3MDM2ForkheadCaspase-9CaspasesFas-LAktIKKBadI˜Bp27p214E-BP1TSC1/2sosGrb2ShcsrcMEKKMEKSEKMAPKSAPKELKMYCCREBJUNS6KS6elF4EAlterations in geneexpressionMigrationGrowthProliferationAngiogenesisSurvivalNF-˜BBcl-xLPLC-°IP31,2 diacyl-glycerolCa++mobilizationProteinkinase CRaf-1AdhesionmTORHER1/3/4HER2FAKRasFigure 10-7. The HER2 signaling pathway. HER2 can interact with different members of the HER family and activate mitogenic and antiapoptotic pathways. 4E-BP1 = eIF4E binding protein 1; CREB = cyclic adenosine monophosphate element binding; eIF4E = eukaryotic initiation factor 4E; EZH = enhancer of zeste homolog; FAK = focal adhesion kinase; Fas-L = Fas ligand; GSK3 = glycogen synthase kinase-3; HER = human epidermal growth receptor; IKK = IκB kinase; ILK= integrin-linked kinase; IP3 = inositol triphosphate; IκB = inhibitor of NF-κB; MAPK = mitogen-activated protein kinase; MDM2 = mouse double minute 2 homologue; MEK = mitogen-activated protein/extracel-lular signal regulated kinase kinase; MEKK = MEK kinase; mTOR = mammalian target of rapamycin; NF-κB = nuclear factor κB; PI3K = phosphoinositide-3 kinase; PLC-γ = phospholipase Cγ; SAPK = stress-activated protein kinase; SEK = SAPK/extracellular signal regulated kinase kinase; TSC = tuberous sclerosis complex. (Modified with permission from Meric-Bernstam F, Hung MC. Advances in targeting human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 signaling for cancer therapy, Clin Cancer Res. 2006 Nov 1;12(21):6326-6330.)Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   31422/02/19   2:14 PM 315ONCOLOGYCHAPTER 10membrane permeability. Growth factors promote survival sig-naling through the PI3K/Akt pathway, which phosphorylates and inactivates proapoptotic BAD. In contrast, growth fac-tor withdrawal may promote apoptosis through signaling by unphosphorylated BAD. The heat shock proteins, including Hsp70 and Hsp27, are also involved in inhibition of down-stream apoptotic pathways by blocking formation of the apop-tosome complex and inhibiting release of cytochrome c from the mitochondria.19The second principal apoptotic pathway is the death recep-tor pathway, sometimes referred to as the extrinsic pathway. Cell-surface death receptors include Fas/APO1/CD95, tumor necrosis factor receptor 1, and KILL-ER/DR5, which bind their ligands Fas-L, tumor necrosis factor (TNF), and TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL), respectively. When the receptors are bound by their ligands, they form a death-induc-ing signaling complex (DISC). At the DISC, procaspase 8 and procaspase 10 are cleaved, yielding active initiator caspases.20 The death receptor pathway may be regulated at the cell sur-face by the expression of “decoy” receptors for Fas (DcR3) and TRAIL (TRID and TRUNDD). The decoy receptors are closely related to the death receptors but lack a functional death domain; therefore, they bind death ligands but do not transmit a death signal. Another regulatory group is the FADD-like interleukin-1 protease-inhibitory proteins (FLIPs). FLIPs have homology to caspase 8; they bind to the DISC and inhibit the activation of caspase 8. Finally, inhibitors of apoptosis proteins (IAPs) block caspase 3 activation and have the ability to regulate both the death receptor and the mitochondrial pathway.In human cancers, aberrations in the apoptotic program include increased expression of Fas and TRAIL decoy receptors; increased expression of antiapoptotic Bcl-2; increased expres-sion of the IAP-related protein survivin; increased expression of c-FLIP; mutations or downregulation of proapoptotic Bax, cas-pase 8, APAF1, XAF1, and death receptors CD95, TRAIL-R1, and TRAIL-R2; alterations of the p53 pathway; overexpression of growth factors and growth factor receptors; and activation of the PI3K/Akt survival pathway.20Autophagy in Cancer CellsAutophagy (self-eating) is a major cellular pathway for protein and organelle turnover. The autophagic pathway is a mechanism for the delivery of cellular materials to lysosomes for degra-dation. This process leads to the basal turnover of cell com-ponents and provides energy and macromolecular precursors. This process helps maintain a balance between anabolism and catabolism for normal cell growth and development. Inability to activate autophagy in response to nutrient deprivation, or consti-tutive activation of autophagy in response to stress, can lead to cell death; thus, autophagy is sometimes referred to as a second form of programmed cell death. Autophagy plays an essential role during starvation, cellular differentiation, cell death, and aging. Autophagy is also involved in the elimination of cancer cells by triggering a nonapoptotic cell death program, which suggests a negative role in tumor development. Mouse models that are heterozygotes for the beclin 1 gene, an important gene for autophagy, have altered autophagic response and show a high incidence of spontaneous tumors, which establishes a role for autophagy in tumor suppression.21 This also suggests that mutations in other genes operating in this pathway may con-tribute to tumor formation through deregulation of autophagy. However, autophagy also acts as a stress response mechanism to protect cancer cells from low nutrient supply or therapeu-tic insults. Thus, in cancer, autophagy can have opposing and context-dependent roles, and interventions to both stimulate and inhibit autophagy have been proposed as possible antican-cer treatments. Studies on the molecular controls of autophagy are ongoing and are expected to generate novel therapeutic strategies. Chloroquin is an antimalarial drug that acts as an autophagic inhibitor by blocking the autophagosome and has been tested for its anticancer properties.Cancer InvasionA feature of malignant cells is their ability to invade the sur-rounding normal tissue. Tumors in which the malignant cells appear to lie exclusively above the basement membrane are referred to as in situ cancer, whereas tumors in which the malig-nant cells are demonstrated to breach the basement membrane, penetrating into surrounding stroma, are termed invasive cancer. The ability to invade involves changes in adhesion, initiation of motility, and proteolysis of the extracellular matrix (ECM).Cell-to-cell adhesion in normal cells involves interactions between cell-surface proteins. Calcium adhesion molecules of the cadherin family (E-cadherin, P-cadherin, and N-cadherin) are thought to enhance the cells’ ability to bind to one another and suppress invasion. Migration occurs when cancer cells pen-etrate and attach to the basal matrix of the tissue being invaded; this allows the cancer cell to pull itself forward within the tissue. Attachment to glycoproteins of the ECM such as fibronectin, laminin, and collagen is mediated by tumor cell integrin recep-tors. Integrins are a family of glycoproteins that form heterodi-meric receptors for ECM molecules. The integrins can form at least 25 distinct pairings of their α and β subunits, and each pairing is specific for a unique set of ligands. In addition to regulating cell adhesion to the ECM, integrins relay molecular signals regarding the cellular environment that influence shape, survival, proliferation, gene transcription, and migration.Factors that are thought to play a role in cancer cell motil-ity include autocrine motility factor, autotaxin, scatter factor (also known as hepatocyte growth factor), TGFα, EGF, and insulin-like growth factors. Also, serine, cysteine, and aspar-tic proteinases and MMPs have all been implicated in cancer invasion. Urokinase and tissue plasminogen activators (uPA and tPA) are serine proteases that convert plasminogen into plasmin. Plasmin, in return, can degrade several ECM components. Plas-min also may activate MMPs. uPA has been more closely corre-lated with tissue invasion and metastasis than tPA. Plasminogen activator inhibitors 1 and 2 (PAI-1 and PAI-2) are produced in tissues and counteract the activity of plasminogen activators.MMPs comprise a family of metal-dependent endopepti-dases. Upon activation, MMPs degrade a variety of ECM com-ponents. Although MMPs often are referred to by their common names, which reflect the ECM component for which they have specificity, a sequential numbering system has been adopted for standardization. For example, collagenase-1 is now referred to as MMP-1. The MMPs are further classified as secreted and membrane-type MMPs. Most of the MMPs are synthesized as inactive zymogens (pro-MMP) and are activated by proteolytic removal of the propeptide domain outside the cell by other active MMPs or serine proteinases.MMPs are upregulated in almost every type of cancer. Some of the MMPs are expressed by cancer cells, whereas others are expressed by the tumor stromal cells. Experimental models have demonstrated that MMPs promote cancer progression by Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   31522/02/19   2:14 PM 316BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iincreasing cancer cell growth, migration, invasion, angiogenesis, and metastasis. MMPs exert these effects by cleaving not only structural components of the ECM but also growth factor–binding proteins, growth factor precursors, cell adhesion molecules, and other proteinases to provide a growth advantage. The activity of MMPs is regulated by their endogenous inhibitors and tissue inhibitors of MMPs (TIMP-1, TIMP-2, TIMP-3, and TIMP-4).AngiogenesisAngiogenesis is the establishment of new blood vessels from a preexisting vascular bed. This neovascularization is essential for tumor growth and metastasis. Tumors develop an angiogenic phenotype as a result of accumulated genetic alterations and in response to local selection pressures such as hypoxia. Many of the common oncogenes and tumor-suppressor genes have been shown to play a role in the induction of angiogenesis.In response to the angiogenic switch, pericytes retract and the endothelium secretes several growth factors such as basic fibroblast growth factor, platelet-derived growth fac-tor (PDGF), and insulin-like growth factor. The basement membrane and stroma around the capillary are proteolytically degraded, a process that is mediated in most part by uPA. The endothelium then migrates through the degraded matrix, ini-tially as a solid cord and later forming lumina. Finally, sprout-ing tips anastomose to form a vascular network surrounded by a basement membrane.Angiogenesis is mediated by factors produced by various cells, including tumor cells, endothelial cells, stromal cells, and inflammatory cells. The first proangiogenic factor was identi-fied by Folkman and colleagues in 1971.22 Since then, several other factors have been shown to be proangiogenic or antian-giogenic. Of the angiogenic stimulators, the best studied are the vascular endothelial growth factors (VEGFs). The VEGF fam-ily consists of six growth factors (VEGF-A, VEGF-B, VEGF-C,  VEGF-D, VEGF-E, and placental growth factor) and three receptors (VEGFR1 or Flt-1, VEGFR2 or KDR/FLK-1, and VEGFR3 or Flt-4).23 Neuropilin 1 and 2 also may act as recep-tors for VEGF.24 VEGF is induced by hypoxia and by different growth factors and cytokines, including EGF, PDGF, TNF-α, TGFβ, and interleukin-1β. VEGF has various functions, includ-ing increasing vascular permeability, inducing endothelial cell proliferation and tube formation, and inducing endothelial cell synthesis of proteolytic enzymes such as uPA, PAI-1, uroki-nase plasminogen activator receptor, and MMP-1. Furthermore, VEGF may mediate blood flow by its effects on the vasodila-tor nitric oxide and act as an endothelial survival factor, thus protecting the integrity of the vasculature. The proliferation of new lymphatic vessels, lymphangiogenesis, is also thought to be controlled by the VEGF family. Signaling in lymphatic cells is thought to be modulated by VEGFR3.25 Experimental studies with VEGF-C and VEGF-D have shown that they can induce tumor lymphangiogenesis and direct metastasis via the lymphatic vessels and lymph nodes.25,26PDGFs A, B, C, and D also play important roles in angio-genesis. PDGFs are produced by tumor cells as well as support-ing cells in the tumor microenvironment. PDGFs can enhance endothelial cell proliferation directly, and they can also upreg-ulate VEGF expression in vascular smooth muscle cells, pro-moting endothelial cell survival via a paracrine effect.23 The angiopoietins, angiopoietin-1 and angiopoietin-2 (Ang-1 and Ang-2), are thought to regulate blood vessel maturation. Ang-1 and Ang-2 both bind to the angiopoietin-1 receptor (also known as tyrosine-protein kinase receptor TIE-2), but only the binding of Ang-1 activates signal transduction; thus Ang-2 is an Ang-1 antagonist. Ang-1, via the Tie-2 receptor, induces remodel-ing and stabilization of blood vessels. Therefore, the balance between these factors determines the angiogenetic capacity of a tumor.Tumor angiogenesis is regulated by several factors in a coordinated fashion. In addition to upregulation of proangiogenic molecules, angiogenesis also can be encouraged by suppression of naturally occurring inhibitors. Such inhibitors of angiogen-esis include thrombospondin 1 and angiostatin. Angiogenesis is a prerequisite not only for primary tumor growth but also for metastasis. Angiogenesis in the primary tumor, as determined by microvessel density, has been demonstrated to be an inde-pendent predictor of distant metastatic disease and survival in several cancers. Expression of angiogenic factors such as VEGFs has had prognostic value in many studies. These findings further emphasize the importance of angiogenesis in cancer biology.MetastasisMetastases arise from the spread of cancer cells from the pri-mary site and the formation of new tumors in distant sites. The metastatic process consists of a series of steps that need to be completed successfully (Fig. 10-8).27 First, the primary cancer must develop access to the circulation through either the blood circulatory system or the lymphatic system. After the cancer cells are shed into the circulation, they must survive. Next, the circulating cells lodge in a new organ and extravasate into the new tissue. Next, the cells need to initiate growth in the new tis-sue and eventually establish vascularization to sustain the new tumor. Overall, metastasis is an inefficient process, although the initial steps of hematogenous metastasis (the arrest of tumor cells in the organ and extravasation) are believed to be per-formed efficiently. Only a small subset of cancer cells is then able to initiate micrometastases, and an even smaller portion goes on to grow into macrometastases.Metastases can sometimes arise several years after the treatment of primary tumors. For example, although most breast cancer recurrences occur within the first 10 years after the initial treatment and recurrences are rare after 20 years, breast cancer recurrences have been reported decades after the original tumor. This phenomenon is referred to as dormancy, and it remains one of the biggest challenges in cancer biology. Persistence of solitary cancer cells in a secondary site such as the liver or bone marrow is one possible contributor to dormancy.28 Another explanation of dormancy is that cells remain viable in a qui-escent state and then become reactivated by a physiologically perturbing event. Interestingly, primary tumor removal has been proposed to be a potentially perturbing factor.29 An alternate explanation is that cells establish preangiogenic metastases in which they continue to proliferate but that the proliferative rate is balanced by the apoptotic rate. Therefore, when these small metastases acquire the ability to become vascularized, substan-tial tumor growth can be achieved at the metastatic site, leading to clinical detection. More recently, it has been proposed that dormancy may be the result of the host losing immunologic con-trol of subclinical metastatic foci of disease either through loss of immune cell populations with antigen-specific capabilities or via the mutation of tumor cells such that their immunogenicity is altered.30Several types of tumors metastasize in an organ-specific pattern. One explanation for this is mechanical and is based on Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   31622/02/19   2:14 PM 317ONCOLOGYCHAPTER 10the different circulatory drainage patterns of the tumors. When different tumor types and their preferred metastasis sites were compared, 66% of organ-specific metastases were explained on the basis of blood flow alone. The other explanation for pref-erential metastasis is what is referred to as the “seed and soil” theory, the dependence of the seed (the cancer cell) on the soil (the secondary organ). According to this theory, once cells have reached a secondary organ, their growth efficiency in that organ is based on the compatibility of the cancer cell’s biology with its new microenvironment. For example, breast cancer cells may grow more efficiently in bone than in some other organs because of favorable molecular interactions that occur in the bone microenvironment. The ability of cancer cells to grow in a specific site likely depends on features inherent to the cancer cell, features inherent to the organ, and the interplay between the cancer cell and its microenvironment.31Many of the oncogenes discovered to date, such as HER2 and ras, are thought to potentiate not only malignant transforma-tion but also one or more of the steps required in the metastatic process. Experimental models have suggested a role for several molecules, including RhoC, osteopontin and interleukin-11, and Twist, in tumor metastasis. Metastasis also may involve the loss of metastasis-suppressor genes. Laboratory work involving cancer cell lines that have been selected to have a higher meta-static potential have led to the realization that these more highly metastatic cells have a different gene expression profile than their less metastatic parental counterparts. This in turn has led to the currently held belief that the ability of a primary tumor to metastasize may be predictable by analysis of its gene expres-sion profile. Indeed, several studies have focused on identify-ing a gene expression profile or a molecular signature that is associated with metastasis. It has been shown that such a gene expression profile can be used to predict the probability that the patient will remain free of distant metastasis.32 This suggests that the metastatic potential of a tumor is already predetermined by the genetic alterations that the cancer cells acquire early in tumorigenesis. Notably, this hypothesis differs from the mul-tistep tumorigenesis theory in that the ability to metastasize is considered an inherent quality of the tumor from the beginning. It is assumed that metastasis develops not from a few rare cells in the primary tumor that acquire the ability to metastasize but that all cells in tumors with such molecular signatures develop the ability to metastasize. The reality probably lies in between since some early genetic changes detectable in the entire tumor can give tumors an advantage in the metastatic process, whereas additional genetic changes can give a clone of cells additional advantages, thus allowing them to succeed in metastasis.Epithelial-Mesenchymal TransitionA regulatory program referred to as epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a fundamental event in morphogenesis. During EMT, epithelial cells are converted to migratory and Figure 10-8. A schematic representation of the metastatic process. A. The metastatic process begins with an in situ cancer surrounded by an intact basement membrane. B. Invasion requires reversible changes in cell-cell and cell-extracellular matrix adherence, destruction of proteins in the matrix and stroma, and motility. C. Metastasizing cells can enter the circulation via the lymphatics. D. They can also directly enter the circulation. E. Intravascular survival of the tumor cells and extravasation of the circulatory system follow. F. Metastatic single cells can colonize sites and remain dormant for years as occult micrometastases. G. Subsequent progression and neovascularization leads to clinically detectable metastases and progressively growing, angiogenic metastases. (Reproduced with permission Steeg PS. Metastasis suppressors alter the signal transduction of cancer cells, Nat Rev Cancer. 2003 Jan;3(1):55-63.)Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   31722/02/19   2:14 PM 318BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iinvasive mesenchymal cells.33 EMT has also been implicated as the mechanism through which epithelial cells acquire the abil-ity to migrate, invade, resist apoptosis, and metastasize in the setting of cancer. EMT is a developmental process, and a set of pleiotropically acting transcriptional factors, including Snail, Twist, Slug, and Zeb1/2 orchestrate EMT. Several of these tran-scription factors can directly repress E-cadherin gene expression reducing levels of this key suppressor of motility and invasive-ness in cancer cells. This process also entails the induction of mesenchymal markers such as vimentin. It has been proposed that the process of invasion and metastases requires significant plasticity, suggesting that EMT is required for invasion, intrava-sation, and extravasation. Thus, suppression of EMT regulators (and consequently EMT reversion, or MET) can be important for metastatic outgrowth.34-36Cancer Stem CellsStem cells are cells that have the ability to perpetuate them-selves through self-renewal and to generate mature cells of a particular tissue through differentiation.37 It has been proposed that stem cells themselves may be the target of transformation. It was first documented for leukemia and multiple myeloma that only a small subset of cancer cells is capable of extensive prolif-eration. It has subsequently also been shown for many solid can-cers that only a small proportion of cells is clonogenic in culture and in vivo. Similarly, in many solid tumor types only a small proportion of cells is clonogenic in culture and in vivo. If indeed tumor growth and metastasis are driven by a small population of  cancer stem cells, this may alter our current approaches to cancer therapy. Currently available drugs can shrink metastatic tumors but often cannot eradicate them. The failure of these treatments usually is attributed to the acquisition of drug resistance by the cancer cells; however, the cancer stem cell hypothesis raises the possibility that existing therapies may simply fail to kill cancer stem cells effectively. Therapeutic approaches targeting stem cells specifically are under study.CANCER ETIOLOGYCancer GenomicsOne widely held opinion is that cancer is a genetic disease that arises from an accumulation of genomic alterations that leads to the selection of cells with increasingly aggressive behavior. These alterations may lead either to a gain of function by onco-genes or to a loss of function by tumor-suppressor genes. These acquired gene alterations present within the tumor are termed somatic mutations to distinguish them from germline mutations that are inherited from parents and transmitted to offspring. Somatic mutations in a cancer genome may consist of several classes of DNA sequence changes. These include substitutions of one base by another; insertions or deletions of small or large segments of DNA; rearrangements, in which the DNA sequence has been broken and then rejoined to another DNA segment; copy number losses that may result in complete absence of a DNA sequence; and copy number gains over and above the two copies present in the normal diploid genome.Somatic mutations in a cancer cell genome have accumu-lated over the lifetime of the patient (Fig. 10-9).38 DNA in normal cells is continuously damaged by internal and external mutagens. Most of this damage is repaired; however, a small fraction may remain as fixed mutations. Mutation rates increase in the pres-ence of substantial exogenous mutagenic exposures, such as tobacco carcinogens or various forms of radiation, including ultraviolet light. These exposures are associated with increased rates of lung and skin cancer, respectively, and somatic muta-tions within such cancers often exhibit the distinctive mutational signatures known to be associated with the mutagen.39 The rates of somatic mutations are also increased in several rare inher-ited diseases, such as Fanconi anemia, ataxia telangiectasia, and xeroderma pigmentosum, which are associated with increased risks of cancer.40,41 The rest of the somatic mutations in a can-cer cell have been acquired after the cancer cell already shows phenotypic evidence of neoplastic change. Whether the somatic AdulthoodEarly clonalexpansionBenigntumorEarly invasivecancerLate invasivecancerChemotherapy-resistantrecurrenceFertilized eggIntrinsicmutation processesPassenger mutationDriver mutationChemotherapyresistance mutationEnvironmentaland lifestyle exposures10s–1,000s of mitosesdepending on the organ10s–100s of mitosesdepending on the cancer10s–100,000 of morepassenger mutationsMutatorphenotypeChemotherapy1–10 or moredriver mutationsGestationInfancyChildhoodFigure 10-9. Accumulation of somatic mutations acquired by the cancer cell. Mutations may be acquired while the cell lineage is phenotypi-cally normal, reflecting intrinsic mutations acquired during normal cell division as well as the effects of exogenous mutagens. Other processes such as example DNA repair defects may contribute to the mutational burden. Passenger mutations do not have any effect on the cancer cell, but driver mutations cause clonal expansion. Relapse after chemotherapy can be associated with resistance mutations that may predate the initiation of treatment. (Reproduced with permission from Stratton MR, Campbell PJ, Futreal PA. The cancer genome, Nature. 2009  Apr 9;458(7239):719-724.)Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   31822/02/19   2:14 PM 319ONCOLOGYCHAPTER 10mutation rate is always higher during this part of the lineage is controversial. This is clearly the case for some cancers. For instance, colorectal and endometrial cancers with defective DNA mismatch repair due to abnormalities in genes such as MLH1 and MSH2, exhibit increased rates of single nucleotide changes and small insertions/deletions at repetitive noncoding polynucleotide tracts known as microsatellites.42 It has been proposed that one early step in tumor progression is the development of a “mutator phenotype” that is the result of mutations in genes that normally function in the maintenance of genetic stability. This hypothesis was formulated in order to account for the disparity between the low frequency of spontaneous mutations in normal cells as com-pared to the large number of mutations seen in human tumors.To date about 300 genes that have been reported to be mutated and causally implicated in cancer development.43 Ninety percent of cancer genes are mutated at the somatic or tumor level, 20% show germline mutations, and 10% show both. The most common class of genomic alterations among the known cancer genes is a chromosomal translocation that creates a chi-meric gene. Many more cancer genes have been found in leuke-mias, lymphomas, and sarcomas than in other types of cancer; and these genes are usually altered by chromosomal transloca-tion. The most common cancer genes are protein kinases. Several domains that are involved in DNA binding and transcriptional regulation are also common in proteins encoded by cancer genes. Somatic mutations in a cancer genome may be classified according to its consequences for cancer development. “Driver” mutations confer a growth advantage to the cells carrying them and have been positively selected during the evolution of the cancer. The remainder of mutations are “bystanders” or “pas-sengers” that do not confer growth advantage. It is likely that most somatic mutations are passenger mutations. Each tumor may have dozens to hundreds of genomic alterations, making it critical to determine which alterations are indeed drivers, and potentially better therapeutic targets.There have been many recent advancements in large-scale databases and tools to catalogue and interpret genomic vari-ants in cancer patient populations. Currently, the NCI Genomic Data Commons provides a unified data repository, The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), the NCI Center for Cancer Genomics (CCG), and the childhood cancer initiative entitled Therapeu-tically Applicable Research to Generate Effective Treatments (TARGET), as well as a suite of tools for users to interact with the GDC data and provide their own data. Other cancer genome repositories include the Catalogue of Somatic Mutations in Can-cer (COSMIC) and the International Cancer Genome Consor-tium (ICGC).44 The Precision Medicine Initiative launched in 2016 that includes the All of Us Research Program, which will collect genetic data, biologic samples, and other clinical informa-tion from at least 1 million volunteer participants. To facilitate the clinical and biologic interpretation of genomic variants in cancer genomes, several open-access tools have been developed and expanded, including MuSiC, MutSigCV, and OncodriveFM. Other curated database resources used to annotate clinical pheno-types to variants observed in cancer genomes include ClinVAR, Clinical Interpretation of Variants in Cancer (CiVic), and the Precision Medicine Knowledgebase (PMKB). These resources and tools are being utilized to conduct pan-cancer analyses to characterize genomic variation and other molecular aberra-tions observed across tumors to define cancer drivers, clinically actionable targets, and prognostic and predictive signatures. This information is being integrated into clinical practice in many UnknownKIF5B-RETROS1 fusionsNRASMAP2K1AKT1PIK3CABRAFHER2ALKfusionsKRASEGFRFigure 10-10. Molecular subsets of lung adenocarcinoma. Pie chart shows the percentage of tumors with each potentially action-able alteration. (Reproduced with permission from Pao W, Hutchinson  KE. Chipping away at the lung cancer genome, Nat Med. 2012  Mar 6;18(3):349-351.)Hereditary:Nonhereditary:TumorTumorFigure 10-11. Tumor heterogeneity. A. Patients with tumors with similar histologies may differ in genetic mutation status and other molecular features B. Cells within the primary tumor can acquire or lose genomic alterations in different metastatic sites. C. Intra-tumoral spatial heterogeneity: common initiating genomic events usually exist in all tumor cells but additional spatially separated heterogeneous somatic mutations or copy number changes may accumulate within an individual tumor. (Reproduced with permis-sion from Knudson AG: Two genetic hits (more or less) to cancer, Nat Rev Cancer. 2001 Nov;1(2):157-162.)tumor types, such as lung cancer, where molecular drivers are being taken into consideration when selecting systemic therapies (Fig. 10-10). TCGA data was recently leveraged in a study to identify TRK fusions in tumors from six different cancer types, which led to the development of novel TRK inhibitor therapies.Tumor Heterogeneity and Molecular EvolutionThere is increasing recognition that tumors are heterogeneous; this represents an important challenge to utilizing genomic alterations to personalize cancer therapy (Fig. 10-11).45 First, Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   31922/02/19   2:14 PM 320BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ithere may be significant heterogeneity between cancer patients, such that patients with tumors that seem similar histologically, may differ in genomic alterations and in malignant potential.46-48 Second, during cancer progression, subclones frequently arise, resulting in differences in the proportion and pattern of genomic alterations between the primary tumor and the metastases or local-regional recurrences.45 Third, there may also be signifi-cant heterogeneity within any one tumor deposit, with spatially separated heterogeneous somatic mutations and chromosomal imbalances.49 Such spatial heterogeneity of subclones within the primary tumor or metastases provides an additional challenge, as it has been proposed that sequencing of a biopsy specimen or only a portion of the tumor could miss therapeutically rel-evant genomic alterations. The genomic alterations found in a tumor can also change under the selective pressure of a targeted therapy, adding to the challenge of implementing genomically informed personalized therapy.Genes Associated With Hereditary Cancer RiskMost of our information on human cancer genes has been gained from hereditary cancers. In the case of hereditary cancers, the individual carries a particular germline mutation in every cell. To date, over 70 genes have been associated with hereditary cancers (Table 10-3).43 A few of these hereditary cancer genes are oncogenes, but most are tumor-suppressor genes. Although hereditary cancer syndromes are rare, somatic mutations that occur in sporadic cancer have been found to disrupt the cellular pathways altered in hereditary cancer syndromes, which sug-gests that these pathways are critical to normal cell growth, cell cycle, and proliferation. Recently, the results of a genome-wide association study of breast cancer in over 120,000 cases and 100,000 controls identified 65 new loci that are associated with overall breast cancer risk.50The following factors may suggest the presence of a hereditary cancer51:1.	Tumor development at a much younger age than usual2.	Presence of bilateral disease3.	Presence of multiple primary malignancies4.	Presentation of a cancer in the less affected sex (e.g., male breast cancer)5.	Clustering of the same cancer type in relatives6.	Occurrence of cancer in association with other conditions such as mental retardation or pathognomonic skin lesionsIt is crucial that all surgeons caring for cancer patients be aware of hereditary cancer syndromes, because a patient’s genetic background has significant implications for patient and family counseling, planning of surgical therapy, and cancer screening and prevention. Some of the more commonly encoun-tered hereditary cancer syndromes are discussed here.rb1Gene. The retinoblastoma gene rb1 was the first tumor sup-pressor to be cloned. The rb1 gene product, the Rb protein, is a regulator of transcription that controls the cell cycle, differen-tiation, and apoptosis in normal development.52 Retinoblastoma has long been known to occur in hereditary and nonhereditary forms. Interestingly, although most children with an affected parent develop bilateral retinoblastoma, some develop unilateral retinoblastoma. Furthermore, some children with an affected parent are not affected themselves but then have an affected child, which indicates that they are rb1 mutation carriers. These findings led to the theory that a single mutation is not sufficient for tumorigenesis. Alfred Knudson hypothesized that hereditary retinoblastoma involves two mutations, of which one is germ-line and one somatic, whereas nonhereditary retinoblastoma is due to two somatic mutations (Fig. 10-12).53 Thus, both heredi-tary and nonhereditary forms of retinoblastoma involve the same number of mutations, a hypothesis known as Knudson’s “two-hit” hypothesis. A “hit” may be a point mutation, a chro-mosomal deletion referred to as allelic loss, or a loss of hetero-zygosity, or silencing of an existing gene. Approximately 40% of retinoblastomas are hereditary and due to germline mutations in the RB1 gene. Children with hereditary RB are also at risk for developing a midline intracranial tumor, most commonly pineoblastoma.p53 and Li-Fraumeni Syndrome. Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) was first defined on the basis of observed clustering of malignancies, including early-onset breast cancer, soft tissue sarcomas, brain tumors, adrenocortical tumors, and leukemia.54 Criteria for classic LFS in an individual (the proband) include: (a) a bone or soft tissue sarcoma when younger than 45 years, (b) a first-degree relative with cancer before age 45 years, and (c) another firstor second-degree relative with either a sar-coma diagnosed at any age or any cancer diagnosed before age 45 years.55 Approximately 70% of LFS families have been shown to have germline mutations in the tumor-suppressor gene p53.56 Breast carcinoma, soft tissue sarcoma, osteosarcoma, brain tumors, adrenocortical carcinoma, Wilms’ tumor, and phyllodes tumor of the breast are strongly associated; pancre-atic cancer is moderately associated; and leukemia and neuro-blastoma are weakly associated with germline p53 mutations.57 Mutations of p53 have not been detected in approximately 30% of LFS families, and it is hypothesized that genetic alterations in other proteins interacting with p53 function may play a role in these families.Of the known genes in human cancer, p53 is the most commonly mutated within cancer cells. The p53 protein regu-lates cell-cycle progression as well as apoptotic cell death as part of stress response pathways after exposure to ionizing or ultraviolet (UV) irradiation, chemotherapy, acidosis, growth factor deprivation, or hypoxia. When cells are exposed to stress-ors, p53 acts as a transcription factor for genes that induce cell-cycle arrest or apoptosis. A majority of p53 mutations are found within a central DNA recognition motif and disrupt DNA bind-ing by p53. Families with germline missense mutations in the DNA-binding domain show a more highly penetrant phenotype than families with other p53 mutations.58 Furthermore, proband cancers are linked with significantly younger age at diagnosis in patients with missense mutations in the DNA-binding domain.58 It has become apparent that children and adults with LFS will benefit from intensive surveillance aimed at early detection of cancers and a modified version of the “Toronto protocol” that includes a combination of physical exams, blood tests, and imaging is recommended.BRCA1, BRCA2, and Hereditary Breast-Ovarian Cancer Syndrome. It is estimated that 5% to 10% of breast cancers are hereditary. Of women with early-onset breast cancer (age 40 years or younger), nearly 10% have a germline mutation in one of the breast cancer genes BRCA1 or BRCA2.59 Mutation carriers are more prevalent among women who have a firstor second-degree relative with premenopausal breast cancer or ovarian cancer at any age. The likelihood of a BRCA mutation is higher in patients who belong to a population in which founder Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   32022/02/19   2:14 PM 321ONCOLOGYCHAPTER 10Table 10-3Selected genes associated with hereditary cancerSYMBOLNAMETUMOR TYPES  (GERMLINE MUTATIONS)CANCER SYNDROMEALKanaplastic lymphoma kinase (Ki-1)NeuroblastomaFamilial neuroblastomaAPCadenomatous polyposis of the colon geneColorectal, pancreatic, desmoid, hepatoblastoma, glioma, other CNSAdenomatous polyposis coli; Turcot syndromeATMataxia telangiectasia mutatedLeukemia, lymphoma, medulloblastoma, gliomaAtaxia-telangiectasiaBLMBloom syndromeLeukemia, lymphoma, skin squamous cell, other cancersBloom syndromeBMPR1Abone morphogenetic protein receptor, type IAGastrointestinal polypsJuvenile polyposisBRCA1familial breast/ovarian cancer gene 1Breast, ovarianHereditary breast/ovarian cancerBRCA2familial breast/ovarian cancer gene 2Breast, ovarian, pancreaticHereditary breast/ovarian cancerBRIP1BRCA1 interacting protein C-terminal helicase 1AML, leukemia, breastFanconi anemia J, breast cancer susceptibilityBUB1BBUB1 budding uninhibited by benzimidazoles 1 homolog beta (yeast)RhabdomyosarcomaMosaic variegated aneuploidyCDH1cadherin 1, type 1, E-cadherin (epithelial) (ECAD)Gastric, lobular cancerFamilial gastric carcinomaCDK4cyclin-dependent kinase 4MelanomaFamilial malignant melanomaCDKN2Acyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A (p16[INK4a]) geneMelanoma, pancreaticFamilial malignant melanomaCDKN2a(p14)cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A– p14ARF proteinMelanoma, pancreaticFamilial malignant melanomaCHEK2CHK2 checkpoint homolog (S pombe)BreastFamilial breast cancerCYLDfamilial cylindromatosis geneCylindromaFamilial cylindromatosisDDB2damage-specific DNA binding protein 2Skin basal cell, skin squamous cell, melanomaXeroderma pigmentosum (E)DICER1dicer 1, ribonuclease type IIIPleuropulmonary blastomaFamilial pleuropulmonary blastomaEGFRepidermal growth factor receptor (erythroblastic leukemia viral [v-erb-b] oncogene homolog, avian)NSCLCFamilial lung cancerERCC2, 3, 4, 5excision repair cross-complementing rodent repair deficiency, complementation groupSkin basal cell, skin squamous cell, melanomaXeroderma pigmentosum  (D, B, F, G)EXT1multiple exostoses type 1 geneexostoses, osteosarcomaexostoses, osteosarcomaFANCA, C,  D2, E, F, GFanconi anemia, complementation groupAML, leukemiaFanconi anemia A, C, D2, E, F, GFHfumarate hydrataseleiomyomatas, renalHereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell cancerGPC3glypican 3Wilms’ tumorSimpson-Golabi-Behmel syndromeHRASv-Ha-ras Harvey rat sarcoma viral oncogene homologv-Ha-ras Harvey rat sarcoma viral oncogene homologCostello syndromeHRPT2Hyperparathyroidism 2 (parafibromin)parathyroid adenoma, multiple ossifying jaw fibromaHyperparathyroidism-jaw tumor syndrome(Continued)Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   32122/02/19   2:14 PM 322BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART ITable 10-3Selected genes associated with hereditary cancerSYMBOLNAMETUMOR TYPES  (GERMLINE MUTATIONS)CANCER SYNDROMEKITv-kit Hardy-Zuckerman 4 feline sarcoma viral oncogene homologGIST, epitheliomaFamilial gastrointestinal stromal tumorMADH4Homolog of Drosophila Mothers Against Decapentaplegic 4 geneGastrointestinal polypsJuvenile polyposisMEN1multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 geneParathyroid adenoma, pituitary adenoma, pancreatic islet cell, carcinoidParathyroid adenoma, pituitary adenoma, pancreatic islet cell, carcinoidMLH1E coli MutL homolog geneColorectal, endometrial, ovarian, CNSHereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer, Turcot syndromeMPLmyeloproliferative leukemia virus oncogene, thrombopoietin receptorMPDFamilial essential thrombocythemiaMSH2mutS homolog 2 (E coli)colorectal, endometrial, ovarianHereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancerMSH6mutS homolog 6 (E coli)colorectal, endometrial, ovarianHereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancerMUTYHmutY homolog (E coli)ColorectalAdenomatous polyposis coliNBS1Nijmegen breakage syndrome 1 (nibrin)NHL, glioma, medulloblastoma, rhabdomyosarcomaNijmegen breakage syndromeNF1neurofibromatosis type 1 geneNeurofibroma, gliomaNeurofibromatosis type 1NF2neurofibromatosis type 2 geneMeningioma, acoustic neuromaNeurofibromatosis type 2PALB2partner and localizer of BRCA2Wilms tumor, medulloblastoma, AML, breastFanconi anemia N, breast cancer susceptibilityPHOX2Bpaired-like homeobox 2bNeuroblastomaFamilial neuroblastomaPMS1PMS1 postmeiotic segregation increased 1  (S cerevisiae)Colorectal, endometrial, ovarianHereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancerPMS2PMS2 postmeiotic segregation increased 2  (S cerevisiae)Colorectal, endometrial, ovarian, medulloblastoma, gliomaHereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer, Turcot syndromePRKAR1Aprotein kinase, cAMP-dependent, regulatory,  type I, alpha (tissue specific extinguisher 1)Myxoma, endocrine, papillary thyroidCarney complexPTCHHomolog of Drosophila Patched geneSkin basal cell, medulloblastomaNevoid basal cell carcinoma syndromePTENphosphatase and tensin homolog geneHamartoma, glioma, prostate, endometrialCowden syndrome, Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndromeRB1retinoblastoma geneRetinoblastoma, sarcoma, breast, small cell lungFamilial retinoblastomaRECQL4RecQ protein-like 4Osteosarcoma, skin basal and squamous cellRothmund-Thompson syndromeRETret proto-oncogeneMedullary thyroid, papillary thyroid, pheochromocytomaMultiple endocrine neoplasia 2A/2BSBDSShwachman-Bodian-Diamond syndrome proteinAML, MDSSchwachman-Diamond syndrome(Continued)(Continued)Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   32222/02/19   2:14 PM 323ONCOLOGYCHAPTER 10Table 10-3Selected genes associated with hereditary cancerSYMBOLNAMETUMOR TYPES  (GERMLINE MUTATIONS)CANCER SYNDROMESDH5chromosome 11 open reading frame 79ParagangliomaFamilial paragangliomaSHD, B, Dsuccinate dehydrogenase complexParaganglioma, pheochromocytomaFamilial paragangliomaSMARCB1SWI/SNF related, matrix associated, actin dependent regulator of chromatin, subfamily b, member 1Malignant rhabdoidRhabdoid predisposition syndromeSTK11serine/threonine kinase 11 gene (LKB1)Jejunal hamartoma, ovarian, testicular, pancreaticPeutz-Jeghers syndromeSUFUsuppressor of fused homolog (Drosophila)MedulloblastomaMedulloblastoma predispositionTCF1transcription factor 1, hepatic (HNF1)Hepatic adenoma, hepatocellular carcinomaFamilial Hepatic AdenomaTP53tumor protein p53Breast, sarcoma, adrenocortical carcinoma, glioma, multiple other tumor typesLi-Fraumeni syndromeTSC1tuberous sclerosis 1 geneHamartoma, renal cellTuberous sclerosis 1TSC2tuberous sclerosis 2 geneHamartoma, renal cellTuberous sclerosis 2TSHRthyroid stimulating hormone receptorThyroid adenoma VHLvon Hippel-Lindau syndrome geneRenal, hemangioma, pheochromocytomavon Hippel-Lindau syndromeWRNWerner syndrome (RECQL2)Osteosarcoma, meningioma, othersWerner syndromeWT1Wilms’ tumor 1 geneWilms’Denys-Drash syndrome, Frasier syndrome, Familial Wilms tumorXPA, Cxeroderma pigmentosum, complementation groupSkin basal cell, skin squamous cell, melanomaXeroderma pigmentosum  (A C)A = amplification; AEL = acute eosinophilic leukemia; AL = acute leukemia; ALCL = anaplastic large-cell lymphoma; ALL = acute lymphocytic leukemia; AML = acute myelogenous leukemia; AML = acute myelogenous leukemia (primarily treatment associated); APL = acute promyelocytic leukemia;  B-ALL = B-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia; B-CLL = B-cell lymphocytic leukemia; B-NHL = B-cell non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma; CLL = chronic lymphatic leukemia; CML = chronic myeloid leukemia; CMML = chronic myelomonocytic leukemia; CNS = central nervous system; D = large deletion; DFSP = dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans; DLBL = diffuse large B-cell lymphoma; DLCL = diffuse large-cell lymphoma; Dom = dominant; E = epithelial; F = frameshift; GIST = gastrointestinal stromal tumor; JMML = juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia; L = leukemia/lymphoma; M = mesenchymal; MALT =  mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma; MDS = myelodysplastic syndrome; Mis = Missense; MLCLS = mediastinal large cell lymphoma with sclerosis; MM = multiple myeloma; MPD = myeloproliferative disorder; N = nonsense; NHL = non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma; NK/T = natural killer T cell; NSCLC = non-small cell lung cancer; O = other; PMBL = primary mediastinal B-cell lymphoma; pre-B All = pre-B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia; Rec = recessive; S = splice site; T = translocation; T-ALL = T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia; T-CLL = T-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia; TGCT = testicular germ cell tumor; T-PLL = T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia.Adapted with permission from Futreal PA, Coin L, Marshall M, et al. A census of human cancer genes. Nat Rev Cancer. 2004 Mar;4(3):177-183.(Continued)mutations may be prevalent, such as in the Ashkenazi Jewish population. For a female BRCA1 mutation carrier, the cumula-tive risks of developing breast cancer and ovarian cancer by age 70 have been estimated to be 87% and 44%, respectively.60 The cumulative risks of breast cancer and ovarian cancer by age 70 in families with BRCA2 mutation have been estimated to be 84% and 27%, respectively.61 Although male breast cancer can occur with either BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation, the majority of families (76%) with both male and female breast cancer have mutations in BRCA2.61 Besides breast and ovar-ian cancer, BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations may be associated with increased risks for several other cancers. BRCA1 mutations confer a fourfold increased risk for colon cancer and threefold increased risk for prostate cancer.60 BRCA2 mutations confer a fivefold increased risk for prostate cancer, sevenfold in men younger than 65 years.62 Furthermore, BRCA2 mutations confer Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   32322/02/19   2:14 PM 324BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ia fivefold increased risk for gallbladder and bile duct cancers, fourfold increased risk for pancreatic cancer, and threefold increased risk for gastric cancer and malignant melanoma.62BRCA1 was the first breast cancer susceptibility gene identi-fied and has been mapped to 17q21. BRCA2, mapped to 13q12.3, was reported shortly afterward. BRCA1 and BRCA2 encode large nuclear proteins, 208 kDa and 384 kDa, respectively, that have been implicated in processes fundamental to all cells, including DNA repair and recombination, checkpoint control of the cell cycle, and transcription.63 Although early studies suggested that the two proteins function together as a complex, subsequent data demonstrated that they have distinct functions.64,65 In fact, breast cancers arising from BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations are different at the molecular level and have been found to have distinct gene expression profiles.66 BRCA1-associated tumors are more likely to be estrogen receptor negative, whereas BRCA2-associated tumors are more likely to be estrogen receptor positive. Cur-rently, studies are ongoing to determine whether BRCA1 and BRCA2 status can be used to guide systemic therapy choices for breast cancer. Some targeted therapies are showing activity in BRCA mutation carriers with breast cancer such as PARP poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-inhibitors.APC Gene and Familial Adenomatous PolyposisPatients affected with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) characteristically develop hundreds to thousands of polyps in the colon and rectum. The polyps usually appear in adolescence and, if left untreated, progress to colorectal cancer. FAP is asso-ciated with benign extracolonic manifestations that may be use-ful in identifying new cases, including congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium, epidermoid cysts, and osteo-mas. In addition to colorectal cancer, patients with FAP are at risk for upper intestinal neoplasms (gastric and duodenal pol-yps, duodenal and periampullary cancer), hepatobiliary tumors (hepatoblastoma, pancreatic cancer, and cholangiocarcinoma), thyroid carcinomas, desmoid tumors, and medulloblastomas.The product of the adenomatous polyposis coli tumor-sup-pressor gene (APC) plays an important role in cell-cell interac-tions, cell adhesion, regulation of β-catenin, and maintenance of cytoskeletal microtubules. Alterations in APC lead to dys-regulation of several physiologic processes that govern colonic epithelial cell homeostasis, including cell-cycle progression, migration, differentiation, and apoptosis. Mutations in the APC have been identified in FAP and in 80% of sporadic colorectal cancers.67 Furthermore, APC mutations are the earliest known genetic alterations in colorectal cancer progression, which emphasizes its importance in cancer initiation. The germline mutations in APC may arise from point mutations, insertions, or deletions that lead to a premature stop codon and a truncated, functionally inactive protein. The risk of developing specific manifestations of FAP is correlated with the position of the FAP mutations, a phenomenon referred to as genotype-phenotype correlation. For example, desmoids usually are associated with mutations between codons 1403 and 1578.68,69 Mutations in the extreme 5′ or 3′ ends of APC, or in the alternatively spliced region of exon 9, are associated with an attenuated version of FAP. Better understanding of the genotype-phenotype correla-tions may assist in patient counseling and therapeutic planning.Mismatch Repair Genes and Hereditary Nonpolyposis Colorectal Cancer. Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC), also referred to as Lynch syndrome, is an autoso-mal dominant hereditary cancer syndrome that predisposes to a wide spectrum of cancers, including colorectal cancer without polyposis. Some have proposed that HNPCC consists of at least two syndromes: Lynch syndrome 1, which entails hereditary predisposition for colorectal cancer with early age of onset (approximately age 44 years) and an excess of synchronous and metachronous colonic cancers; and Lynch syndrome 2, featur-ing a similar colonic phenotype accompanied by a high risk for carcinoma of the endometrium, transitional cell carcinoma of the ureter and renal pelvis, and carcinomas of the stomach, small bowel, ovary, and pancreas.70 The diagnostic criteria for HNPCC are referred to as the Amsterdam criteria, or the 3-2-1-0 rule. The classic Amsterdam criteria were revised to include other HNPCC-related cancers (Table 10-4).71 These criteria are met when three or more family members have histologically ver-ified, HNPCC-associated cancers (one of whom is a first-degree relative of the other two), two or more generations are involved, at least one individual was diagnosed before age 50 years, and no individuals have FAP.71During DNA replication, DNA polymerases may intro-duce single nucleotide mismatches or small insertion or deletion loops. These errors are corrected through a process referred to as mismatch repair. When mismatch repair genes are inactivated, DNA mutations in other genes that are critical to cell growth and proliferation accumulate rapidly. In HNPCC, germline mutations have been identified in several genes that play a key role in DNA nucleotide mismatch repair: hMLH1 (human mutL homologue 1), hMSH2 (human mutS homologue 2), hMSH6, A Heterogeneity among patientsB Heterogeneity betweenprimary and metastatic sitesC Intratumoral spatialheterogeneityFigure 10-12. “Two-hit” tumor formation in both hereditary and nonhereditary cancers. A “one-hit” clone is a precursor to the tumor in nonhereditary cancer, whereas all cells are one-hit clones in hereditary cancer. (Reproduced with permission from Meric-Bernstam F, Mills GB. Overcoming implementation challenges of personalized cancer therapy, Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2012 Sep;9(9):542-548.)Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   32422/02/19   2:14 PM 325ONCOLOGYCHAPTER 10and hPMS1 and hPMS2 (human postmeiotic segregation 1  and 2), of which hMLH1 and hMSH2 are the most common.72-77 The hallmark of HNPCC is microsatellite instability, which occurs on the basis of unrepaired mismatches and small inser-tion or deletion loops. Microsatellite instability can be tested by comparing the DNA of a patient’s tumor with DNA from adja-cent normal epithelium, amplifying the DNA with polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using a standard set of markers, compar-ing the amplified genomic DNA sequences, and classifying the degree of microsatellite instability as high, low, or stable. Such microsatellite instability testing may help select patients who are more likely to have germline mutations. An analysis of patients with early-onset colorectal cancer (age less than 50) showed that 8% had an unsuspected germline mutation in a mismatch repair gene and could be considered as having Lynch syndrome. Thus, genetic counseling and testing with a multigene panel should be considered for such patients.78PTEN and Cowden DiseaseSomatic deletions or mutations in the tumor-suppressor gene PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homologue deleted on chromosome 10) have been observed in a number of glioma breast, prostate, and renal carcinoma cell lines and several primary tumor specimens.79PTEN encodes a 403-amino-acid protein, tyrosine phos-phatase. PTEN negatively controls the PI3K signaling pathway for the regulation of cell growth and survival by dephosphory-lating phosphoinositol 3,4,5-triphosphate; thus, mutation of PTEN leads to constitutive activation of the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway. The “hot spot” for PTEN mutations has been identi-fied in exon 5. Forty-three percent of CD mutations have been identified in this exon, which contains the tyrosine phosphatase core domain. This suggests that the PTEN catalytic activity is vital for its biologic function. PTEN was identified as the sus-ceptibility gene for the autosomal dominant syndrome Cowden disease (CD) or multiple hamartoma syndrome.80 Trichilem-momas, benign tumors of the hair follicle infundibulum, and mucocutaneous papillomatosis are pathognomonic of CD. Other common features include thyroid adenomas and multinodular goiters, breast fibroadenomas, and hamartomatous GI polyps. The diagnosis of CD is made when an individual or family has a combination of pathognomonic major and/or minor criteria pro-posed by the International Cowden Consortium.81 CD is associ-ated with an increased risk of breast and thyroid cancers. Breast cancer develops in 25% to 50% of affected women.81p16 and Hereditary Malignant Melanoma. The gene p16, also known as INK4A, CDKN1, CDKN2A, and MTS1, is a tumor suppressor that acts by binding CDK4 and CDK6 and inhibit-ing the catalytic activity of the CDK4-CDK6/cyclin D complex that is required for phosphorylation of Rb and subsequent cell-cycle progression. Studies suggest that germline mutations in p16 can be found in 20% of melanoma-prone families.82 Muta-tions in p16 that alter its ability to inhibit the catalytic activity of the CDK4-CDK6/cyclin D complex not only increase the risk of melanoma by 75-fold but also increase the risk of pancre-atic cancer by 22-fold.83 Interestingly, p16 mutations that do not appear to alter its function increase the risk of melanoma by 38-fold and do not increase the risk of pancreatic cancer.83 Genomic characterization of primary tumors has revealed that p16 is inactivated through point mutation, promoter methyla-tion, or deletion in a significant portion of sporadic tumors, including cancers of the pancreas, esophagus, head and neck, stomach, breast, and colon, as well as melanomas.E-cadherin and Hereditary Diffuse Gastric Cancer. E-cadherin is a cell adhesion molecule that plays an important role in nor-mal architecture and function of epithelial cells. The adhesive function of E-cadherin is dependent on interaction of its cyto-plasmic domain with βand γ-catenins and may be regulated by phosphorylation of β-catenin.Hereditary diffuse gastric carcinoma is an autosomal domi-nant cancer syndrome that results from germline mutations in the E-cadherin gene, CDH1. Carriers of CDH1 mutations have a 70% to 80% chance of developing gastric cancer.84 Furthermore, mutations of CDH1 have been described in sporadic cancers of the ovary, endometrium, breast, and thyroid. However, frequent mutations have been identified in only two particular tumors: dif-fuse gastric carcinomas and lobular breast carcinomas. Invasive lobular breast carcinomas often show inactivating mutations in combination with a loss of heterozygosity of the wild-type CDH1 allele.85 Interestingly, in gastric carcinomas the predominant mutations are exon skipping causing in-frame deletions, whereas most mutations identified in lobular breast cancers are premature stop codons; this suggests a genotype-phenotype correlation.RET Proto-Oncogene and Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Type 2The RET (rearranged during transfection) gene encodes for a transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinase that plays a role in pro-liferation, migration, and differentiation of cells derived from the neural crest. Gain-of-function mutations in the RET gene are associated with medullary thyroid carcinoma in isolation or mul-tiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN2) syndromes. MEN2A is associated with medullary thyroid carcinoma and pheochro-mocytoma (in 50%) or parathyroid adenoma (in 20%), whereas MEN2B is associated with medullary thyroid carcinoma, mar-fanoid habitus, mucosal neuromas, and ganglioneuromatosis of the gastrointestinal tract.86 RET mutations lead to uncontrolled growth of the thyroid C cells, and in familial medullary cancer, C-cell hyperplasia progresses to bilateral, multicentric medul-lary thyroid cancer. Mutations in the RET gene have also been identified in half of sporadic medullary thyroid cancers.Genetic Modifiers of Risk. Individuals carrying identi-cal germline mutations vary in regard to cancer penetrance (whether cancer will develop or not) and cancer phenotype (the tissues involved). It is thought that this variability may be due to environmental influences or, if genetic, to genetic modifiers Table 10-4Revised criteria for hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer (HNPCC) (Amsterdam criteria II)Three or more relatives with an HNPCC-associated cancer (colorectal cancer, endometrial cancer, cancer of the small bowel, ureter, or renal pelvis), one of whom is a first-degree relative of the other twoAt least two successive generations affectedAt least one case diagnosed before age 50 yFamilial adenomatous polyposis excludedTumors verified by pathologic examinationReproduced with permission from Vasen HF, Watson P, Mecklin JP,  et al: New clinical criteria for hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC, Lynch syndrome) proposed by the International Collaborative group on HNPCC. Gastroenterology. 1999 Jun;116(6):1453-1456.Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   32522/02/19   2:14 PM 326BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iof risk. Similarly, genetic modifiers of risk also can play a role in determining whether an individual will develop cancer after exposure to carcinogens.Chemical CarcinogensThe first report indicating that cancer could be caused by envi-ronmental factors was by John Hill, who in 1761 noted the association between nasal cancer and excessive use of tobacco snuff.87 Currently, approximately 60% to 90% of cancers are thought to be due to environmental factors. Any agent that can contribute to tumor formation is referred to as a carcinogen and can be a chemical, physical, or viral agent. Chemicals are clas-sified into three groups based on how they contribute to tumor formation. The first group of chemical agents, the genotoxins, can initiate carcinogenesis by causing a mutation. The second group, the cocarcinogens, by themselves cannot cause cancer but potentiate carcinogenesis by enhancing the potency of geno-toxins. The third group, tumor promoters, enhances tumor for-mation when given after exposure to genotoxins.The International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) maintains a registry of human carcinogens that is available through the World Wide Web (http://www.iarc.fr). The compounds are categorized into five groups based on an analysis of epidemio-logic studies, animal models, and short-term mutagenesis tests. Group 1 contains what are considered to be proven human carcinogens, based on formal epidemiologic studies among workers who were exposed for long periods (several years) to the chemicals.88 Group 2A contains what are considered to be probable human carcinogens. Suggestive epidemiologic evidence exists for compounds in this group, but the data are insufficient to establish causality. There is evidence of carcinogenicity, however, from animal studies carried out under conditions relevant to human exposure. Group 2B contains what are considered to be possible carcinogens because these substances are associated with a clear statistically and biologically significant increase in the incidence of malignant tumors in more than one animal species or strain. Group 3 agents are not classifiable, and Group 4 agents are prob-ably not carcinogenic to humans. Selected substances that have been classified as proven carcinogens (group 1) by the IARC in an expert panel review are listed in Table 10-5.89Physical CarcinogensPhysical carcinogenesis can occur through induction of inflam-mation and cell proliferation over a period of time or through exposure to physical agents that induce DNA damage. Foreign bodies can cause chronic irritation that can expose cells to carci-nogenesis due to other environmental agents. In animal models, for example, subcutaneous implantation of a foreign body can lead to the development of tumors that have been attributed to chronic irritation from the foreign objects. In humans, clinical sce-narios associated with chronic irritation and inflammation such as chronic nonhealing wounds, burns, and inflammatory bowel syn-drome have all been associated with an increased risk of cancer.  H pylori infection is associated with gastritis and gastric cancer, and thus, its carcinogenicity may be considered physical carci-nogenesis. Infection with the liver fluke Opisthorchis viverrini similarly leads to local inflammation and cholangiocarcinoma.The induction of lung and mesothelial cancers by asbes-tos fibers and nonfibrous particles such as silica are other examples of foreign body-induced physical carcinogenesis.90 Animal experiments have demonstrated that the dimensions and durability of the asbestos and other fibrous minerals are the key determinants of their carcinogenicity.91 Short fibers can be inactivated by phagocytosis, whereas long fibers (>10 μm) are cleared less effectively and are encompassed by proliferat-ing epithelial cells. The long fibers support cell proliferation and have been shown to preferentially induce tumors. Asbestosassociated biologic effects also may be mediated through reactive oxygen and nitrogen species. Furthermore, an inter-action occurs between asbestos and silica and components of cigarette smoke. Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) in cigarette smoke are metabolized by epithelial cells and form DNA adducts. If PAH is coated on asbestos, PAH uptake is increased.90 Both PAH and asbestos impair lung clearance, potentially increasing uptake further. Therefore, physical car-cinogens may be synergistic with chemical carcinogens.Radiation is the best-known agent of physical carcinogens and is classified as ionizing radiation (X-rays, gamma rays, and alpha and beta particles) or nonionizing radiation (UV). The car-cinogenic potential of ionizing radiation was recognized soon after Wilhelm Conrad Roentgen’s discovery of X-rays in 1895. Within the next 20 years, a large number of radiation-related skin cancers were reported. Long-term follow-up of survivors of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki revealed that virtually all tissues exposed to radiation are at risk for cancer.Radiation can induce a spectrum of DNA lesions that includes damage to the nucleotide bases and cross-linking, and DNA singleand double-strand breaks (DSBs). Misrepaired DSBs are the principal lesions of importance in the induction of chromosomal abnormalities and gene mutations. DSBs in irradiated cells are repaired primarily by a nonhomologous end-joining process, which is error prone; thus, DSBs facilitate the production of chromosomal rearrangements and other large-scale changes such as chromosomal deletions. It is thought that radiation may initiate cancer by inactivating tumor-suppressor genes. Activation of oncogenes appears to play a lesser role in radiation carcinogenesis.Although it has been assumed that the initial genetic events induced by radiation constitute direct mutagenesis from radiation, other indirect effects may contribute to carcinogenesis. For exam-ple, radiation induces genomic instability in cells that persists for at least 30 generations after irradiation. Therefore, even if cells do not acquire mutations at initial irradiation, they remain at risk for developing new mutations for several generations. Moreover, even cells that have not been directly irradiated appear to be at risk, a phenomenon referred to as the bystander effect.Nonionizing UV radiation is a potent DNA-damaging agent and is known to induce skin cancer in experimental ani-mals. Most nonmelanoma human skin cancers are thought to be induced by repeated exposure to sunlight, which leads to a series of mutations that allow the cells to escape normal growth control. Patients with inherited xeroderma pigmentosum lack one or more DNA repair pathways, which confers susceptibility to UV-induced cancers, especially on sun-exposed body parts. Patients with ataxia telangiectasia mutated syndrome also have a radiation-sensitive phenotype.Viral CarcinogensOne of the first observations that cancer may be caused by trans-missible agents was by Peyton Rous in 1910 when he demon-strated that cell-free extracts from sarcomas in chickens could transmit sarcomas to other animals injected with these extracts.92 This was subsequently discovered to represent viral transmission of cancer by the Rous sarcoma virus. At present, several human viruses are known to have oncogenic properties, and several Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   32622/02/19   2:14 PM 327ONCOLOGYCHAPTER 10Table 10-5Group 1 chemical carcinogens and evidence for carcinogenicity in humans and for genotoxicity as the main mechanism TUMOR SITES OR TYPES WITH SUFFICIENT EVIDENCE IN HUMANSEVIDENCE OF GENOTOXICITY AS THE MAIN MECHANISM4-AminobiphenylUrinary bladderStrongBenzidineUrinary bladderStrongDyes metabolized to benzidine⋅⋅Stronga4,4’-Methylenebis(2-chloroaniline)⋅⋅Stronga2-NapthylamineUrinary bladderStrongOrtho-toluidineUrinary bladderModerateAuramine productionUrinary bladderWeak/lack of databMagenta productionUrinary bladderWeak/lack of databBenzo[α]pyrene⋅⋅StrongaSoot (chimney sweeping)Skin, lungModerateCoal gasificationLungStrongCoal-tar distillationSkinStrongCoke productionLungStrongCoal-tar pitches (paving, roofing)LungStrongAluminum productionLung, urinary bladderWeak/moderateb,cAflatoxinsHepatocellular carcinomaStrongBenzeneANLLStrongBis (chloromethyl)ether/chloromethyl methyletherLungModerate/strong1,3-ButadieneHaematolymphatic organsStrongDioxin (2,3,7,8-TCDD)All cancers combinedaSee textd2,3,4,7,8-Pentachlorodibenzofuran⋅⋅See texta,d3,3’,4,4’,5-Pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB-126)⋅⋅See texta,dEthylene oxide⋅⋅StrongaFormaldehydeNasopharynxLeukemiagStrongModerateSulfur mustardLungStrongVinyl chlorideHepatic angiosarcoma, hepatocellular carcinomaStrongIron and steel foundingLungWeak/moderateIsopropyl alcohol manufacture using strong acidsNasal cavityWeak/lack of dataMineral oilsSkinWeak/lack of dataOccupational exposure as a painterLung, urinary bladder, pleural mesotheliomaStrongcRubber-manufacturing industryLeukaemia, lymphoma,g urinary bladder, lung,g stomachgStrongcShale oilsSkinWeak/lack of dataStrong inorganic acid mistsLarynxWeak/lack of dataANLL = acute nonlymphocytic leukemia; ALL = acute lymphocytic leukemia; CLL = chronic lymphocytic leukemia; MM = multiple myeloma;  NH = non-Hodgkin lymphoma; STS = soft-tissue sarcoma.aAgents classified in Group 1 on the basis of mechanistic information.bWeak evidence in workers, but strong evidence for some chemicals in this industry.cDue to the diversity and complexity of these exposures, other mechanisms may also be relevant.dStrong evidence for an aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)-mediated mechanism.eParticularly myeloid leukemia.fAfter maternal exposure (before or during pregnancy, or both).gNew epidemiological findings.Reproduced with permission from Baan R, Grosse Y, Straif K, et al. A review of human carcinogens–part F: chemical agents and related occupations, Lancet Oncol. 2009 Dec;10(12):1143-1144.Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   32722/02/19   2:14 PM 328BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART ITable 10-6Selected viral carcinogensaVIRUSPREDOMINANT TUMOR TYPEbEpstein-Barr virusBurkitt’s lymphoma Hodgkin’s disease Immunosuppression-related lymphoma Sinonasal angiocentric T-cell lymphoma Nasopharyngeal carcinomaHepatitis B virusHepatocellular carcinomaHepatitis C virusHepatocellular carcinomaHIV type 1Kaposi’s sarcoma Cervical cancer Non-Hodgkin’s lymphomaHuman herpes virus 8Kaposi’s sarcomaHuman papillomavirus  16 and 18 Cervical cancerVulvar and vaginal cancer Penile cancer Oropharyngeal cancer (commonly base of tongue and tonsil) Anal cancerHuman T-cell  lymphotropic virusesAdult T-cell leukemia/lymphomaMerkel cell polyoma virusMerkel cell carcinomaaData based on information in the International Agency for Research on Cancer monographs.bOnly tumor types for which causal relationships are established are listed. Other cancer types may be linked to the agents with a lower frequency or with insufficient data to prove causality.have been causally linked to human cancers (Table 10-6).88 It is estimated that 15% of all human tumors worldwide are caused by viruses.93Viruses may cause or increase the risk of malignancy through several mechanisms, including direct transformation, expression of oncogenes that interfere with cell-cycle check-points or DNA repair, expression of cytokines or other growth factors, and alteration of the immune system. Oncogenic viruses may be RNA or DNA viruses. Oncogenic RNA viruses are retro-viruses and contain a reverse transcriptase. After the viral infec-tion, the single-stranded RNA viral genome is transcribed into a double-stranded DNA copy, which is then integrated into the chromosomal DNA of the cell. Retroviral infection of the cell is permanent; thus, integrated DNA sequences remain in the host chromosome. Oncogenic transforming retroviruses carry onco-genes derived from cellular genes. These cellular genes, referred to as proto-oncogenes, usually are involved in mitogenic signal-ing and growth control, and include protein kinases, G proteins, growth factors, and transcription factors (Table 10-7).93Integration of the provirus upstream of a proto-oncogene may produce chimeric virus-cell transcripts and recombination during the next round of replication that could lead to incorpo-ration of the cellular gene into the viral genome.93 Then again, many retroviruses do not possess oncogenes but can cause tumors in animals regardless. This occurs by integration of the provirus near a normal cellular proto-oncogene and activation of the expression of these genes by the strong promoter and enhancer sequences in the integrated viral sequence.Unlike the oncogenes of the RNA viruses, those of the DNA tumor viruses are viral, not cellular, in origin. These genes are required for viral replication using the host cell machinery. In permissive hosts, infection with an oncogenic DNA virus may result in a productive lytic infection, which leads to cell death and the release of newly formed viruses. In nonpermis-sive cells, the viral DNA can be integrated into the cellular chromosomal DNA, and some of the early viral genes can be synthesized persistently, which leads to transformation of cells to a neoplastic state. The binding of viral oncoproteins to cellu-lar tumor-suppressor proteins p53 and Rb is fundamental to the carcinogenesis induced by most DNA viruses, although some target different cellular proteins.Like other types of carcinogenesis, viral carcinogenesis is a multistep process. Some retroviruses contain two cellular onco-genes, rather than one, in their genome and are more rapidly tumorigenic than single-gene transforming retroviruses, which emphasizes the cooperation between transforming genes. Further-more, some viruses encode genes that suppress or delay apoptosis.Although immunocompromised individuals are at ele-vated risk, most patients infected with oncogenic viruses do not develop cancer. When cancer does develop, it usually occurs sev-eral years after the viral infection. It is estimated, for example, that the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) among individu-als infected with hepatitis C virus is 1% to 3% after 30 years.94 There may be synergy between various environmental factors and viruses in carcinogenesis.Recognition of a viral origin for some tumors has led to the pursuit of vaccination as a preventive strategy. The use of childhood hepatitis B vaccination has already translated into a decrease in liver cancer incidence in the East Asia.5 Similarly, it is recognized that cervical cancer and its obligate precursors, cervical intraepithelial neoplasia grades 2 and 3, and adenocar-cinoma in situ, are caused by oncogenic human papillomavirus (HPV); administration of HPV vaccine to HPV-naive women, substantially reduces the incidence of HPV16/18-related cervi-cal precancers and cervical cancer.95 Studies suggest that HPV vaccination may also reduce oral HPV infections that are a risk factor for the development of oropharyngeal cancer.96 The American Cancer Society recommends routine HPV vaccina-tion for girls and boys starting at age 11 or 12. The vaccination series can be started as early as age 9. HPV vaccination is also recommended for females 13 to 26 years old and for males 13 to 21 years old who have not started the vaccines, or who have started but have not completed the series. Males 22 to 26 years old may also be vaccinated. HPV vaccination is also recom-mended up until age 26 for men who have sex with men and for people with weakened immune systems (including people with HIV infection), if they have not previously been vaccinated. It is important for patients to know that vaccination at older ages is less effective in lowering cancer risk.97CANCER RISK ASSESSMENTCancer risk assessment is an important part of the initial evalua-tion of any patient. A patient’s cancer risk not only is an impor-tant determinant of cancer screening recommendations but also Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   32822/02/19   2:14 PM 329ONCOLOGYCHAPTER 10Table 10-7Selected cellular oncogenes in retrovirusesONCOGENEVIRUS NAMEORIGINPROTEIN PRODUCTablAbelson murine leukemia virusMouseTyrosine kinasefesST feline sarcoma virusCatTyrosine kinasefpsFujinami sarcoma virusChickenTyrosine kinasesrcRous sarcoma virusChickenTyrosine kinaseerbBAvian erythroblastosis virusChickenEpidermal growth factor receptorfmsMcDonough feline sarcoma virusCatColony-stimulating factor receptorkitHardy-Zuckerman 4 feline sarcoma virusCatStem cell factor receptormilAvian myelocytoma virusChickenSerine/threonine kinasemosMoloney murine sarcoma virusMouseSerine/threonine kinaserafMurine sarcoma virus 3611MouseSerine/threonine kinasesisSimian sarcoma virusMonkeyPlatelet-derived growth factorH-rasHarvey murine sarcoma virusRatGDP/GTP bindingK-rasKirsten murine sarcoma virusRatGDP/GTP bindingerbAAvian erythroblastosis virusChickenTranscription factor (thyroid hormone receptor)etsAvian myeloblastosis virus E26ChickenTranscription factorfosFBJ osteosarcoma virusMouseTranscription factor (AP1 component)junAvian sarcoma virus 17ChickenTranscription factor (AP1 component)mybAvian myeloblastosis virusChickenTranscription factormycMC29 myelocytoma virusChickenTranscription factor (NF-κB family)AP1 = activator protein 1; FBJ = Finkel-Biskis-Jinkins; GDP = guanosine diphosphate; GTP = guanosine triphosphate; NF-κB = nuclear factor κB.Data from Coffin JM, Hughes SH, Varmus HE: Retroviruses. Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; 1997.may alter how aggressively an indeterminant finding will be pursued for diagnosis. A “probably benign” mammographic lesion, for example, defined as one with <2% probability of malignancy (American College of Radiology category III) is usually managed with a 6-month follow-up mammogram in a patient at baseline cancer risk, but obtaining a tissue diagnosis may be preferable in a patient at high risk for breast cancer.98Cancer risk assessment starts with taking a complete his-tory that includes history of environmental exposures to potential carcinogens and a detailed family history. Risk assessment for breast cancer, for example, includes obtaining a family history to determine whether another member of the family is known to carry a breast cancer susceptibility gene; whether there is famil-ial clustering of breast cancer, ovarian cancer, thyroid cancer, sarcoma, adrenocortical carcinoma, endometrial cancer, brain tumors, dermatologic manifestations, leukemia, or lymphoma; and whether the patient is from a population at increased risk, such as individuals of Ashkenazi Jewish descent. Patients who have a family history suggestive of a cancer susceptibility syn-drome such as hereditary breast-ovarian syndrome, Li-Fraumeni Syndrome, or Cowden’s Disease would benefit from genetic counseling and possibly genetic testing.There are several models that can estimate risk based on complex family histories and assist clinicians in estimat-ing breast cancer risk or the likelihood that a BRCA mutation is present, including the Claus model, Tyrer-Cuzick model, BRCAPRO model, and the Breast and Ovarian Analysis of Dis-ease Incidence and Carrier Estimation Algorithm (BOADICEA) model.99-102 Patients who do have a strong hereditary component of risk can be evaluated on the basis of their age, race, per-sonal history, and exposures. One of the most commonly used models for risk assessment in breast cancer is the Gail model.103 Gail and colleagues analyzed the data from 2852 breast cancer cases and 3146 controls from the Breast Cancer Detection and Demonstration Project, a mammography screening project conducted in the 1970s, and developed a model for project-ing breast cancer incidence. The model uses risk factors such as an individual’s age, age at menarche, age at first live birth, number of first-degree relatives with breast cancer, number of previous breast biopsy specimens, and whether the biopsy speci-men results revealed atypical ductal hyperplasia (Table 10-8).103 This model has led to the development of a breast cancer risk assessment tool, which is available on the World Wide Web.104 This tool incorporates the risk factors used in the Gail model, as well as race and ethnicity, and allows a health professional to project a woman’s individualized estimated risk for invasive breast cancer over a 5-year period and over her lifetime (to age  90 years). Notably, these risk projections assume that the woman is undergoing regular clinical breast examinations and screen-ing mammograms. Also of note is that this program underes-timates the risk for women who have already had a diagnosis of invasive or noninvasive breast cancer and does not take into account specific genetic predispositions such as mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2. However, risk assessment tools such as this have been validated and are now in widespread clinical use. Similar models are in development or are being validated for Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   32922/02/19   2:14 PM 330BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART ITable 10-8Assessment of risk for invasive breast cancerRISK FACTORRELATIVE RISK (%)Age at menarche (years)  >141.00 12–131.10 <121.21Age at first live birth (years) Patients with no first-degree relatives with cancer  <201.00 20–241.24 25–29 or nulliparous1.55 ≥301.93Patients with one first degree-relative with cancer  <201.00 20–242.64 25–29 or nulliparous2.76 ≥302.83Patients with ≥2 first-degree relatives with cancer  <206.80 20–245.78 25–29 or nulliparous4.91 ≥304.17Breast biopsies (number) Patients aged <50 y at counseling  01.00 11.70 ≥22.88Patients aged ≥50 y at counseling  01.00 11.27 ≥21.62Atypical hyperplasia  No biopsies1.00 At least 1 biopsy, no atypical   hyperplasia0.93 No atypical hyperplasia,   hyperplasiastatus unknown for at least 1 biopsy1.00 Atypical hyperplasia in at least   1 biopsy1.82Modified with permission from Gail MH, Brinton LA, Byar DP,  et al. Projecting individualized probabilities of developing breast cancer for white females who are being examined annually, J Natl Cancer Inst. 1989 Dec 20;81(24):1879-1886.as presence or absence of single nucleotide polymorphisms which each may confer low or intermediate cancer risk. Risk models that include biologic as well as environmental factors may accurately predict cancer risk, providing better guidance as to which patients should undergo more intensive screening (e.g., screening with magnetic resonance imaging of the breast, computerized tomography screening of the lung), and should be considered for preventive strategies.CANCER SCREENINGEarly detection is the key to success in cancer therapy. Screen-ing for common cancers using relatively noninvasive tests is expected to lead to early diagnosis, allow more conservative surgical therapies with decreased morbidity, and potentially improve surgical cure rates and overall survival rates. Key factors that influence screening guidelines are how prevalent the cancer is in the population, what risk is associated with the screening measure, and whether early diagnosis actually affects outcome. The value of a widespread screening measure is likely to go up with the prevalence of the cancer in a population, which often determines the age cutoffs for screening and explains why screening is done only for common cancers. The risks asso-ciated with the screening measure are a significant consider-ation, especially with more invasive screening measures such as colonoscopy. The consequences of a false-positive screening test result also need to be considered. For example, when 1000 screening mammograms are taken, only 2 to 4 new cases of cancer will be identified; this number is slightly higher (6 to 10 prevalent cancers per 1000 mammograms) for initial screen-ing mammograms.106 However, as many as 10% of screening mammograms may be potentially suggestive of an abnormal-ity, which requires further imaging (i.e., a 10% recall rate). Of those women with abnormal mammogram findings, only 5% to 10% will be determined to have a breast cancer. Among women for whom biopsy specimen is recommended, 25% to 40% will have a breast cancer. A false-positive screening result is likely to induce significant emotional distress in patients, leads to unnecessary biopsy specimens, and has cost implications for the health care system.American Cancer Society guidelines for the early detec-tion of cancer are listed in Table 10-9.96 These guidelines are updated periodically to incorporate emerging technologies and new data on the efficacy of screening measures. Besides the American Cancer Society, several other professional bodies make recommendations for screening. Although the screening guidelines differ somewhat, most organizations do not empha-size one screening strategy as superior to another, but all empha-size the importance of age-appropriate screening.Screening guidelines are developed for the general base-line-risk population. These guidelines need to be modified for patients who are at high risk. For example, more intensive colorectal cancer screening is recommended for individuals at increased risk because of a history of adenomatous polyps, a personal history of colorectal cancer, a family history of either colorectal cancer or colorectal adenomas diagnosed in a first-degree relative before age 60 years, a personal history of inflam-matory bowel disease of significant duration, or a family history or genetic test result indicating FAP or HNPCC. For some dis-eases, in higher risk populations, both the screening modality and the screening intensity may be altered. For example, breast magnetic resonance imaging is recommended as an adjunct to other cancers. For example, a lung cancer risk prediction model, which includes age, sex, asbestos exposure history, and smoking history, has been found to predict risk of lung cancer.105 There is now growing interest in using each individuals genotype, such Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   33022/02/19   2:14 PM 331ONCOLOGYCHAPTER 10Table 10-9American Cancer Society recommendations for early detection of cancer in average-risk, asymptomatic  individualsCANCER SITEPOPULATIONTEST OR PROCEDUREFREQUENCYBreastWomen age 40 and aboveMammographyWomen with an average risk of breast cancer should undergo regular screening mammography starting at age 45 years. Women age 45 to 54 years should be screened annually. Women 55 years and older should transition to biennial screening or have the opportunity to continue screening annually. Women should continue screening mammography as long as their overall health is good and they have a life expectancy of 10 years or longer. The ACS does not recommend clinical breast examination for breast cancer screening among average-risk women at any age.CervixWomen, age 21–65 yPap test and  HPV DNA testCervical cancer screening should begin at age 21 y. For women age 21–29 y, screening should be done every 3 y with conventional or liquid-based Pap tests. For women age  30–65 y, screening should be done every 5 y with both the HPV test and the Pap test (preferred), or every 3 y with the Pap test alone (acceptable). Women age >65 y who have had ≥3 consecutive negative Pap tests or ≥2 consecutive negative HPV and Pap tests within the last 10 y, with the most recent test occurring within the last 5 y, and women who have had a total hysterectomy should stop cervical cancer screening.ColorectalMen and women age ≥50 ygFOBT, or FIT, or sDNA with a high sensitivity for cancerAnnual, starting at age 50 y.  FSIG, orEvery 5 y, starting at age 50 y. FSIG can be performed alone, or consideration can be given to combining FSIG performed every 5 y with a highly sensitive guaiac-based FOBT or FIT performed annually.  DCBE, orEvery 5 y, starting at age 50 y.  ColonoscopyEvery 10 y, starting at age 50 y.  CT colonographyEvery 5 yr, starting at age 50 y.EndometrialWomen, at menopause At the time of menopause, women at average risk should be informed about the risks and symptoms of endometrial cancer and strongly encouraged to report any unexpected bleeding or spotting to their physicians.LungCurrent or former smokers age 50–74 in good health with at least a 30 pack/year historyLDCTClinicians with access to high-volume, high-quality lung cancer screening and treatment centers should initiate a discussion about lung cancer screening with apparently healthy patients age 55–74 y who have at least a 30 pack-y smoking history, and who currently smoke or have quit within the past 15 y. A process of informed and shared decision-making with a clinician related to the potential benefits, limitations, and harms associated with screening for lung cancer with LDCT should occur before any decision is made to initiate lung cancer screening. Smoking cessation counseling remains a high priority for clinical attention in discussions with current smokers, who should be informed of their continuing risk of lung cancer. Screening should not be viewed as an alternative to smoking cessation.(Continued)Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   33122/02/19   2:14 PM 332BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART ITable 10-9American Cancer Society recommendations for early detection of cancer in average-risk, asymptomatic  individualsCANCER SITEPOPULATIONTEST OR PROCEDUREFREQUENCYProstateMen, age ≥50 yDRE and PSAMen who have at least a 10-y life expectancy should have an opportunity to make an informed decision with their health care provider about whether to be screened for prostate cancer, after receiving information about the potential benefits, risks, and uncertainties associated with prostate cancer screening. Prostate cancer screening should not occur without an informed decision-making process. Men at average risk should receive this information beginning at age 50 years. Men in higher risk groups should receive this information before age 50 years. Men should either receive this information directly from their health care providers or be referred to reliable and culturally appropriate sources. Patient decision aids are helpful in preparing men to make a decision whether to be tested.Cancer-related checkupMen and women age ≥20 y On the occasion of a periodic health examination, the cancer-related checkup should include examination for cancers of the thyroid, testicles, ovaries, lymph nodes, oral cavity, and skin, as well as health counseling about tobacco, sun exposure, diet and nutrition, risk factors, sexual practices, and environmental and occupational exposures.ACS = American Cancer Society; BSE = breast self-examination; CBE = clinical breast examination; Pap = Papanicolaou; HPV = human papillomavirus; gFOBT = guaiac-based fecal occult blood test; FIT = fecal immunochemical test; sDNA, stool DNA; DRE = digital rectal examination; FSIG = flexible sigmoidoscopy; DCBE = double-contrast barium enema; CT = computed tomography; LDCT = low-dose helical CT; PSA = prostate-specific antigen.Reproduced with permission from Smith RA, Brooks D, Cokkinides V, et al: Cancer screening in the United States, 2013: a review of current American Cancer Society guidelines, current issues in cancer screening, and new guidance on cervical cancer screening and lung cancer screening, CA Cancer J Clin. 2013 Mar-Apr;63(2):88-105.mammography for breast cancer screening in BRCA mutation carriers, first-degree relatives of carriers, and women with a life-time breast cancer risk of 20% to 25% or higher.107The National Lung Screening Trial demonstrated a 20% reduction in lung cancer deaths in adults age 55 to 74 years who were at high risk of lung cancer and randomized to low-dose helical computed tomography (LDCT) screening compared with screening with annual CXR.108 In 2013, the American Cancer Society updated their lung cancer screening recommendations to emphasize that clinicians with access to high-volume, high-quality lung cancer screening and treatment centers should ascertain the smoking history of their patients 55 to 74 years of age, and should discuss lung cancer screening with those who have at least a 30 pack per year smoking history, currently smoke, or have quit within the past 15 years, and who are in relatively good health.109 It is recommended that this discussion include the benefits, uncertainties, and harms associated with screening for lung cancer with LDCT.CANCER DIAGNOSISThe definitive diagnosis of solid tumors is obtained by perform-ing a biopsy specimen of the lesion. Biopsy findings determine the tumor histology and grade and thus, assist in definitive ther-apeutic planning. Biopsy specimens of mucosal lesions usually are obtained endoscopically (e.g., via colonoscope, broncho-scope, or cystoscope). Lesions that are easily palpable, such as those of the skin, can either be excised or sampled by punch biopsy specimen. Deep-seated lesions can be localized with computed tomographic (CT) scan or ultrasound guidance for acquisition of a biopsy specimen.A sample of a lesion can be obtained with a needle or with an open incisional or excisional biopsy specimen. Fine-needle aspiration is easy and relatively safe, but has the disad-vantage of not giving information on tissue architecture. For example, fine-needle aspiration biopsy specimen of a breast mass can make the diagnosis of malignancy but cannot dif-ferentiate between an invasive and noninvasive tumor. There-fore core-needle biopsy specimen is more advantageous when  the histologic findings will affect the recommended therapy. Core biopsy specimen, like fine-needle aspiration, is relatively safe and can be performed either by direct palpation (e.g., a breast mass or a soft tissue mass) or can be guided by an imag-ing study (e.g., stereotactic core biopsy specimen of the breast). Core biopsy specimens, like fine-needle aspirations, have the disadvantage of introducing sampling error. For example, 19% to 44% of patients with a diagnosis of atypical ductal hyperpla-sia based on core biopsy specimen findings of a mammographic abnormality are found to have carcinoma upon excision of the entire lesion.110 It is crucial to ensure that the histologic find-ings are consistent with the clinical scenario and to know the appropriate interpretation of each histologic finding. A needle biopsy specimen for which the report is inconsistent with the clinical scenario should be either repeated or followed by an open biopsy procedure.Open biopsy specimens have the advantage of providing more tissue for histologic evaluation and the disadvantage of being an operative procedure. Incisional biopsy specimens are (Continued)Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   33222/02/19   2:14 PM 333ONCOLOGYCHAPTER 10reserved for very large lesions in which a definitive diagnosis cannot be made by needle biopsy specimen. Excisional biopsy specimens are performed for lesions for which either core biopsy specimen is not possible or the results are nondiagnostic. Excisional biopsy specimens should be performed with curative intent, that is, by obtaining adequate tissue around the lesion to ensure negative surgical margins. Marking of the orientation of the margins by sutures or clips by the surgeon and inking of the specimen margins by the pathologist will allow for determina-tion of the surgical margins and will guide surgical reexcision if one or more of the margins are positive for microscopic tumor or are close. The biopsy specimen incision should be oriented to allow for excision of the biopsy specimen scar if repeat opera-tion is necessary. Furthermore, the biopsy specimen incision should directly overlie the area to be removed rather than tun-neling from another site, which runs the risk of contaminating a larger field. Meticulous hemostasis during a biopsy specimen is essential because a hematoma can lead to contamination of the tissue planes and can make subsequent follow-up with physical examinations much more challenging.In the case where an enlarged lymph node is being inves-tigated due to a suspicion of lymphoma, it will usually be nec-essary for the surgeon to remove an entire lymph node through an open biopsy in order to permit an analysis of lymph node architecture and provide sufficient tissue for molecular and flow cytometric analyses.CANCER STAGINGCancer staging is a system used to describe the anatomic extent of a malignant process in an individual patient. Staging sys-tems may incorporate relevant clinical prognostic factors such as tumor size, location, extent, grade, and dissemination to regional lymph nodes or distant sites. Accurate staging is essen-tial in designing an appropriate treatment regimen for an indi-vidual patient. Staging of the lymph node basin is considered a standard part of primary surgical therapy for most surgical procedures and is discussed later in this chapter. Cancer patients who are considered to be at high risk for distant metastasis usu-ally undergo a preoperative staging work-up. This involves a set of imaging studies of sites of preferential metastasis for a given cancer type. For a patient with breast cancer, for example, a staging work-up would include a chest radiograph, bone scan, and liver ultrasound, or CT scans to evaluate for lung, bone, and liver metastases, respectively. A distant staging work-up usually is performed only for patients likely to have metastasis based on the characteristics of the primary tumor; for example, a staging work-up for a patient with ductal carcinoma in situ of the breast or a small invasive breast tumor is likely to be low yield and not cost effective.Recently there also is increased usage of molecular imag-ing with positron emission tomography (PET) scanning, or PET/CT, for cancer staging. Most commonly PET scanning is performed with fluorine 18 incorporated into fluorodeoxy-glucose (FDG). FDG PET assesses the rate of glycolysis. FDG uptake is increased in most malignant tissues but also in benign pathologic conditions such as inflammatory disorders, trauma, infection, and granulomatous disease. PET/CT combines a PET scanner and an X-ray CT scanner in a single gantry, in order to acquire sequential images from both devices in the same ses-sion. These separate images are combined into a single coreg-istered image that gives information on the size and shape of abnormal masses in conjunction with their metabolic activity. It has been especially useful in the staging and management of lymphoma, lung cancer, and colorectal cancer. The role of PET in evaluating many other cancers is evolving, and additional molecular tracers, such as 3′-deoxy-3′ (18F)-fluorothymidine, used to assess proliferation, are being actively pursued.A PET scan can be useful in staging a cancer that poten-tially can be treated radically, such as small cell lung cancer. In the case of some cancers such as GIST, a PET scan can be used to establish baseline staging before commencing targeted therapy and assessing the overall response to therapy. Another use for PET scanning is the evaluation of an indeterminate lesion as in the case of a solitary pulmonary nodule that is suspected to be malignant in nature. In testicular cancer (seminoma) and lymphoma, this imaging modality has been shown to be effec-tive in assessing suspected disease recurrence, relapse, and/or residual disease. Finally, PET scans have been effective in guid-ing biopsies in the setting of mesothelioma. Standardization of staging systems is essential to allow comparison of results from different studies from different institutions and worldwide. The staging systems proposed by the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) and the Union Internationale Contre le Cancer (International Union Against Cancer, or UICC) are among the most widely accepted staging systems. Both the AJCC and the UICC have adopted a shared tumor, node, and metastasis (TNM) staging system that defines the cancer in terms of the anatomic extent of disease and is based on assessment of three components: the size of the primary tumor (T), the presence (or absence) and extent of nodal metastases (N), and the presence (or absence) and extent of distant metastases (M).The TNM staging applies only to tumors that have been microscopically confirmed to be malignant. Standard TNM staging (clinical and pathologic) is completed at initial diag-nosis. Clinical staging (cTNM or TNM) is based on informa-tion gained up until the initial definitive treatment. Pathologic staging (pTNM) includes clinical information and information obtained from pathologic examination of the resected primary tumor and regional lymph nodes. Tumor size following neo-adjuvant chemotherapy is designated as ypT, and should be based on the largest single focus of residual invasive cancer. Other classifications, such as staging at the time of retreatment for recurrence (rTNM) or autopsy staging (aTNM), should be clearly identified as such.The clinical measurement of tumor size (T) is the one judged to be the most accurate for each individual case based on physical examination and imaging studies. For example, in breast cancer the size of the tumor could be obtained from a physical examination, mammogram, or ultrasound, and the tumor size is based only on the invasive component.If even one lymph node is involved by tumor, the N com-ponent is at least N1. For many solid tumor types, simply the absence or presence of lymph node involvement is recorded, and the tumor is categorized either as N0 or N1. For other tumor types, the number of lymph nodes involved, the size of the lymph nodes or the lymph node metastasis, or the regional lymph node basin involved also has been shown to have prog-nostic value. In these cancers, the designations N1, N2, and N3 suggest an increasing abnormality of lymph nodes based on size, characteristics, and location. NX indicates that the lymph nodes cannot be fully assessed.Cases in which there is no distant metastasis are designated M0, cases in which one or more distant metastases are detected Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   33322/02/19   2:14 PM 334BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iare designated M1, and cases in which the presence of distant metastasis cannot be assessed are designated MX. In clinical practice, negative findings on clinical history and examination are sufficient to designate a case as M0. However, in clinical trials, routine follow-up often is performed to standardize the detection of distant metastases.The practice of dividing cancer cases into groups accord-ing to stage is based on the observation that the survival rates are higher for localized (lower-stage) tumors than for tumors that have extended beyond the organ of origin. Therefore, staging assists in selection of therapy, estimation of prognosis, evalu-ation of treatments, and exchange of information among treat-ment centers. Notably, the AJCC regularly updates its staging system to incorporate advances in prognostic technology to improve the predictive accuracy of the TNM system. There-fore, it is important to know which revision of a staging system is being used when evaluating studies.TUMOR MARKERSPrognostic and Predictive Tissue MarkersTumor markers are substances that can be detected in higher than normal amounts in the serum, urine, or tissues of patients with certain types of cancer. Tumor markers are produced either by the cancer cells themselves or by the body in a response to the cancer.Over the past decade, there has been an especially high interest in identifying tissue tumor markers that can be used as prognostic or predictive markers. Although the terms prognostic marker and predictive marker are sometimes used interchange-ably, the term prognostic marker generally is used to describe molecular markers that predict disease-free survival, disease-specific survival, and overall survival, whereas the term predic-tive marker often is used in the context of predicting response to certain therapies.The goal is to identify prognostic markers that can give information on prognosis independent of other clinical charac-teristics and therefore can provide information to supplement the projections based on clinical presentation. This would allow practitioners to further classify patients as being at higher or lower risk within clinical subgroups and to identify patients who may benefit most from adjuvant therapy. For example, ideal prognostic tumor markers would be able to help determine which patients with node-negative breast cancer are at higher risk of relapse so that adjuvant systemic therapy could be given only to that group. However, although a large number of studies have identified potential novel prognostic markers, most have not been tested with enough vigor to be shown to be of clinical util-ity. In the 2017, American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) guidelines, it was decided that level of uPA/PAI-1 measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay could be used to determine prognosis in cases of newly diagnosed node-negative, hormone receptor positive breast cancer.111 In contrast, the data for many other markers, including Ki-67, p27, HER1/EGFR, and p53 were felt to be insufficient to support their use in the management of these breast cancer patients.111 Similarly, guidelines are avail-able for the management of patients with colorectal cancer and emphasize the processes that need to be in place for accurate measurement of abnormalities in DNA mismatch repair genes as well as EGFR and BRAF mutational status.112Predictive markers are markers that can prospectively identify patients who will benefit from a certain therapy. For Low-riskgroupIntermediate-risk groupHigh-riskgroup005510101515202025253030353540404550Rate of distant recurrence at 10 y(% of patients)Recurrence scoreFigure 10-13. Distant recurrence as a continuous function of the recurrence score derived from tumor levels of expression of 21 genes. (Redrawn from Paik S, Shak S, Tang G, et al: A multigene assay to predict recurrence of tamoxifen-treated, node-negative breast cancer, N Engl J Med. 2004 Dec 30;351(27):2817-2826.)example in breast cancer, estrogen receptor (ER), and HER2 assessment can identify patients who can benefit from anti-estrogen therapies (e.g., tamoxifen) and anti-HER2 targeted therapies (e.g., trastuzumab), respectively, and the ASCO guide-lines recommend that these markers be routinely assessed.111 High-throughput techniques such as transcriptional profiling allow for assessment of the relative mRNA levels of thou-sands of genes simultaneously in a given tumor using micro-array technology. With the advent of such molecular profiling technologies, researchers have focused on identifying expres-sion profiles that are prognostic for different cancer types. For breast cancer, although many such multiparameter tests are under development, few have reached the large-scale valida-tion stage.113 In 2007, ASCO guidelines suggested that one of these, the Oncotype DX assay, can be used to predict recurrence in women with node-negative, ER-positive breast cancer who are treated with tamoxifen.111 Oncotype DX is a quantitative reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) test that used paraffin-fixed tissue. A 21-gene recurrence score (RS) is generated based on the expression of 16 cancer genes and  5 reference genes. The levels of expression are used to derive an RS that ranges from 0 to 100, using a prospectively defined mathematical algorithm. This novel quantitative approach to the evaluation of the best-known molecular pathways in breast cancer has produced impressive results. Use of this multigene assay to predict recurrence was validated in the National Surgi-cal Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project (NSABP) B-14 trial, in which ER-positive, node-negative patients had received tamoxifen.114 By multivariate Cox proportional analysis, RS was found to be independently associated with recurrence risk, with a hazard ratio of 3.21 (95% confidence interval of 2.23 to 4.65, P <.001). The RS was indeed able to stratify patients by freedom from distant recurrence (Fig. 10-13).114 The Trial Assessing Individualized Options for Treatment for breast  cancer (TAILORx) is evaluating the utility of Oncotype DX for predicting prognosis in patients with ER-positive, node-negative tumors and will focus on women with intermediate RS scores in whom the role of chemotherapy is unclear. Several other multigene predictors for breast cancer are available including MammaPrint, a gene expression profiling platform assessing a Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   33422/02/19   2:14 PM 335ONCOLOGYCHAPTER 1070-gene transcriptional signature.115 This assay was approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in February 2007. The usefulness of this assay in making therapy-related decisions was tested prospectively in a large-scale study, the Microarray in Node-Negative Disease May Avoid Chemotherapy (MIND-ACT) trial. Among women with early-stage breast cancer who were determined to be at high clinical risk and low genomic risk for cancer recurrence, the receipt of no adjuvant chemotherapy on the basis of the 70-gene signature result led to a 5-year metas-tasis survival rate that was 1.5% lower than the rate in patients who had received chemotherapy. In light of these findings, 45% of women with breast cancer who are considered to be at high clinical risk might not require adjuvant chemotherapy.116Multigene profiles to predict prognosis are in development or in validation phases for many other solid tumor types, includ-ing lung cancer, ovarian cancer, pancreatic cancer, colorectal cancer, and melanoma. Gene signatures and genomic alterations also are being studied for their ability to predict response to specific chemotherapy regimens or targeted therapies. Many of these multigene marker sets will likely be incorporated into clinical practice in the years to come.Serum MarkersSerum markers are under active investigation because they may allow early diagnosis of a new cancer or may be used to follow cancer response to therapy or monitor for recurrence. Unfor-tunately, identification of serum markers of clinical value has been challenging. Many of the tumor markers proposed so far have had low sensitivities and specificities.113 Tumor marker levels may not be elevated in all patients with cancer, especially in the early stages, when a serum marker would be most use-ful for diagnosis. Therefore, when a tumor marker is used to monitor recurrence, it is important to be certain that the level of the tumor marker was elevated before primary therapy. More-over, tumor marker levels can be elevated in benign conditions. Many tumor markers are not specific for a certain type of cancer and can be elevated with more than one type of tumor. Since there may be significant laboratory variability, it is important to obtain serial results from the same laboratory. In spite of these many clinical limitations, several serum markers are in clinical use. A few of the commonly measured serum tumor markers are discussed in the following sections.Prostate-Specific Antigen. Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) is an androgen-regulated serine protease produced by the pros-tate epithelium. PSA is normally present in low concentrations in the blood of all adult males. PSA levels may be elevated in the blood of men with benign prostate conditions such as pros-tatitis and benign prostatic hyperplasia, as well as in men with prostate cancer. PSA levels have been shown to be useful in evaluating the effectiveness of prostate cancer treatment and monitoring for recurrence after therapy. In monitoring for recur-rence, a trend of increasing levels is considered more significant than a single absolute elevated value.Although PSA has been widely used for prostate cancer screening, the utility of PSA screening remains controversial. There is concern that the number of men who avoid dying from prostate cancer due to screening is small, while the harms related to the treatment of screen-detected cancers, including inconti-nence and erectile dysfunction are at least moderate. In 2012, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force concluded with moder-ate certainty that the harms of PSA testing outweigh the benefits and on that basis recommended against PSA-based screening for all men.117 In 2010, the American Cancer Society updated its guidelines for the early detection of prostate cancer to state that men who have at least a 10-year life expectancy should have an opportunity to make an informed decision with their health care provider about whether to be screened for prostate cancer with digital rectal exam and serum PSA, after receiving information about the benefits, risks, and uncertainties associated with pros-tate cancer screening118; this recommendation was reinforced in their most recent guidelines.96Carcinoembryonic Antigen. Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) is a glycoprotein found in the embryonic endodermal epithelium. Elevated CEA levels have been detected in patients with primary colorectal cancer as well as in patients with breast, lung, ovarian, prostate, liver, and pancreatic cancer. Levels of CEA also may be elevated in benign conditions, including diverticulitis, peptic ulcer disease, bronchitis, liver abscess, and alcoholic cirrhosis, especially in smokers and in elderly persons.CEA measurement is most commonly used in the man-agement of colorectal cancer. However, the appropriate use of CEA testing in patients with colorectal cancer has been debated. Use of CEA level as a screening test for colorectal cancer is not recommended. CEA levels may be useful if obtained pre-operatively and postoperatively in patients with a diagnosis of colorectal cancer. Preoperative elevation of CEA level is an indicator of poor prognosis. However, the ASCO clinical prac-tice guidelines state that the data are insufficient to support the use of CEA to determine whether to give a patient adjuvant therapy; the data are stronger for the use of CEA for monitoring for postoperative recurrence.111 CEA measurement is the most cost-effective approach for detecting metastasis, with over 60% of recurrences being detected first by an elevation in CEA level. Therefore, in cases in which the patient would be a candidate for resection of recurrent colorectal cancer or systemic therapy, the ASCO guidelines recommend that postoperative CEA testing be performed every 3 months in patients with stage II or III disease for at least 3 years.112 CEA is the marker of choice for monitor-ing metastatic colorectal cancer during systemic therapy.112Alpha-Fetoprotein. Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) is a glycoprotein normally produced by a developing fetus. AFP levels decrease soon after birth in healthy adults. An elevated level of AFP sug-gests the presence of either primary liver cancer or a germ cell tumor of the ovary or testicle. Rarely, other types of cancer such as gastric are associated with an elevated AFP level. Benign conditions that can cause elevations of AFP include cirrhosis, hepatic necrosis, acute hepatitis, chronic active hepatitis, ataxia-telangiectasia, Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, and pregnancy.119The sensitivity of an elevated AFP level for detecting HCC is approximately 60%. AFP is considered to be sensitive and specific enough to be used for screening for HCC in high-risk populations. Current consensus recommendations are to screen healthy hepatitis B virus carriers with annual or semi-annual measurement of AFP level and to screen carriers with cirrhosis or chronic hepatitis and patients with cirrhosis of any etiology with twice-yearly measurement of AFP level and liver ultrasonography.120 Although AFP testing has been used widely for a long time, its efficacy in early diagnosis of HCC is limited. With improvements in imaging technology, a larger proportion of patients diagnosed with HCC are now AFP seronegative.Cancer Antigen 19-9. Cancer antigen 19-9 (CA 19-9) is a tumor-related antigen that was originally defined by a monoclo-nal antibody produced by a hybridoma prepared from murine Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   33522/02/19   2:14 PM 336BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ispleen cells immunized with a human colorectal cancer cell line.112 The data are insufficient to recommend use of CA 19-9 for screening, diagnosis, surveillance, or monitoring of therapy for colon cancer.112 Based on the 2006 ASCO guidelines, there are also insufficient data to recommend use of CA 19-9 for screening, diagnosis, or determination of the operability of pan-creatic cancer.112 However, for patients with locally advanced or metastatic cancer receiving active therapy, CA 19-9 can be measured at the start of therapy and every 1 to 3 months while therapy is given; elevations in serial CA 19-9 levels may indi-cate progressive disease and should be confirmed by additional studies.112Cancer Antigen 15-3. Cancer antigen 15-3 (CA 15-3) is an epitope of a large membrane glycoprotein encoded by the MUC1 gene that tumor cells shed into the bloodstream. The CA 15-3 epitope is recognized by two monoclonal antibodies in a sandwich radioimmunoassay. CA 15-3 levels are most useful in following the course of treatment in women diagnosed with advanced breast cancer. CA 15-3 levels are infrequently elevated in early-stage breast cancer. CA 15-3 levels can be increased in benign conditions such as chronic hepatitis, tuberculosis, sar-coidosis, pelvic inflammatory disease, endometriosis, systemic lupus erythematosus, pregnancy, and lactation, and in other types of cancer such as lung, ovarian, endometrial, and GI cancers.The sensitivity of CA 15-3 is higher for metastatic disease, and in these cases studies have shown sensitivity to be between 54% and 87%, with specificity as high as 96%. This has led to interest in using CA 15-3 for monitoring patients with advanced breast cancer for recurrence. Elevated CA 15-3 levels have been reported before relapse in 54% of patients, with a lead time of  4.2 months. Therefore, detection of elevated CA 15-3 levels dur-ing follow-up should prompt evaluation for recurrent disease. However, 6% to 8% of patients without recurrence will have ele-vated CA 15-3 levels that require evaluation. Furthermore, moni-toring with the use of CA 15-3 levels has shown no demonstrated impact on survival. Therefore, the 2007 ASCO guidelines state that the routine use of CA 15-3 for screening, diagnosis, stag-ing, or surveillance of breast cancer is not recommended because available data are insufficient.111 For monitoring patients during active therapy, CA 15-3 can be used in conjunction with diag-nostic imaging and history and physical examination.111 In the absence of measurable disease, an increase may be interpreted to indicate treatment failure. However, caution is advised when interpreting rising levels in the first 4 to 6 weeks of therapy.111Cancer Antigen 27-29. The MUC-1 gene product in the serum may be quantitated by using radioimmunoassay with a monoclonal antibody against the cancer antigen 27-29 (CA 27-29). CA 27-29 levels can be elevated in breast cancer as well as in cancers of the colon, stomach, kidney, lung, ovary, pan-creas, uterus, and liver. First-trimester pregnancy, endometrio-sis, benign breast disease, kidney disease, and liver disease also may be associated with elevated CA 27-29 levels.CA 27-29 has been reported to have a sensitivity of 57%, a specificity of 98%, a positive predictive value of 83%, and a negative predictive value of 93% in detecting breast cancer recurrences.121 Although CA 27-29 has been found to predict recurrence an average of 5.3 months before other symptoms or tests, testing of CA 27-29 levels has not been demonstrated to affect disease-free and overall survival rates.121,122 Therefore, the ASCO guidelines state that, as with CA 15-3, the routine use of CA 27-29 for screening, diagnosis, staging, or surveillance of breast cancer is not recommended because available data are insufficient.111 CA 27-29 levels can be used together with diag-nostic imaging and history and physical examination to monitor patients during active therapy.111 When no measurable disease is present, an increase in level may be considered to indicate treat-ment failure. However, rising levels in the first 4 to 6 weeks of therapy should be interpreted with caution.111Circulating Tumor CellsCirculating tumor cells (CTCs) are cells present in the blood that possess antigenic or genetic characteristics of a specific tumor type.111 One CTC detection methodology is capture and quantita-tion of CTCs with immunomagnetic beads coated with antibody specific for cell-surface, epithelial, or cancer antigens. Another methodology used to detect cancer cells in the peripheral blood is RT-PCR. It has been suggested that measurement of CTCs can be an effective tool for selecting patients who have a high risk of relapse and for monitoring efficacy of cancer therapy.CTCs have probably been most extensively studied in breast cancer.111 The most promising data come from the use of CTC measures in metastatic breast cancer. In a prospective multicenter trial, the number of CTCs (≥5 CTCs vs. <5 CTCs per 7.5 mL of whole blood) before treatment of metastatic breast cancer was an independent predictor of progression-free and overall survival rates.123 The presence of >5 CTCs after the first course of therapy predicted lack of response to treatment. This technology, known as CellSearch, has been approved by the FDA for clinical use. In a well-designed single institutional study, detection of one or more CTCs in stage I to III breast cancer patients was associated with both decreased progres-sion-free survival and overall survival.124 A large clinical trial was launched by the German SUCCESS study group to evalu-ate the prognostic significance of CTCs in early breast cancer. Blood samples were obtained from over 2000 average-to-high-risk nonmetastatic breast cancer patients before chemotherapy and nearly 1500 patients post chemotherapy and examined for CTCs. Women with detectable CTCs before chemotherapy had significantly worse disease-free and overall survival, and those with five or more CTCs had the highest relapse risk.125 How-ever, there is limited data to prove that the use of CTC testing leads to improved survival or improved quality of life; thus, the ASCO 2017 guidelines update did not recommend the use of CTC measurement in any clinical setting.111 The clinical util-ity of measuring CTC response to initial therapy is now being tested prospectively in multiple clinical trials. The ability to conduct comprehensive analyses of cancer genomes within indi-vidual cells is becoming a real possibility, although the clinical utility of such information is still evolving. In addition to CTC, it has become possible in recent years to conduct a so-called “liquid tumor biopsy” by measuring levels of circulating tumor DNA and also circulating microRNAs. These new techniques are investigational but have the potential to provide prognos-tic and diagnostic information via their presumed correlation with tumor progression and the development of genomic altera-tions.126 The prognostic implications of detection of CTCs by RT-PCR have been intensively studied for melanoma. In the recent multicenter Sunbelt Melanoma Trial, serial RT-PCR was performed on peripheral blood samples using four markers—tyrosinase, melanoma antigen reacting to T cell (MART-1), melanoma antigen 3 (MAGE3), and gp 100—to detect occult Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   33622/02/19   2:14 PM 337ONCOLOGYCHAPTER 10melanoma cells in the bloodstream.127 Although there were no differences in survival rates among patients in whom at least one marker was detected and those in whom no markers were detected, the disease-free survival and distant disease-free sur-vival rates were worse for patients in whom more than one marker was detected at any time during follow-up.127Bone Marrow MicrometastasesMicrometastatic disease in the bone marrow, also referred to as minimal residual disease, continues to be investigated as a potential prognostic marker. Bone marrow micrometastatic disease usually is detected by staining bone marrow aspirates with monoclonal antibodies to cytokeratin, but other method-ologies such as flow cytometry and RT-PCR are in use. Breast cancer patients with bone marrow micrometastasis have larger tumors, tumors with a higher histologic grade, more lymph node metastases, and more hormone receptor-negative tumors than patients without bone marrow micrometastasis. In 4700 patients with stage I, II, or III breast cancer, micrometastasis was a sig-nificant prognostic factor associated with poor overall survival, breast cancer-specific survival, disease-free survival, and distant disease-free survival during a 10-year observation period.128 The American College of Surgeons Oncology Group Z0010 trial enrolled women with clinical T1 to T2N0M0 invasive breast carcinoma in a prospective observational study to determine the association between survival and metastases detected by immunochemical staining of bone marrow specimens from patients with early-stage breast cancer.129 Of 3413 bone mar-row specimens examined by immunocytochemistry, only 104 (3.0%) were positive for tumor. Bone marrow involvement was associated with a decreased overall survival, but this association was not significant on multivariable analysis. The prognostic implication of bone marrow involvement continues to be stud-ied by the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project.At this time, the routine use of bone marrow testing is not recommended.111 Ongoing clinical trials are evaluating the role of routine assessment of bone marrow status in the care of patients with early and advanced breast cancer. The utility of assessment of bone marrow micrometastasis has also been evaluated in other tumor types, including gastric, esophageal, colorectal, lung, cervical, and ovarian cancer.130SURGICAL APPROACHES TO CANCER THERAPYMultidisciplinary Approach to CancerAlthough surgery is an effective therapy for most solid tumors, patients who die from cancer usually die of metastatic disease. Therefore, to improve patient survival rates, a multimodality approach, including systemic therapy and radiation therapy, is key for most tumors. It is important that surgeons involved in cancer care not only know the techniques for performing a  cancer operation but also know the alternatives to surgery and be well versed in reconstructive options. It is also crucial that the surgeon be familiar with the indications for and complications of preoperative and postoperative chemotherapy and radiation therapy. Although the surgeon may not be delivering these other therapies, as the first physician to see a patient with a cancer diagnosis, he or she is ultimately responsible for initiating the appropriate consultations. For this reason, the surgeon often is responsible for determining the most appropriate adjuvant ther-apy for a given patient as well as the best sequence for therapy. In most instances, a multidisciplinary approach beginning at the patient’s initial presentation is likely to yield the best result.Surgical Management of Primary TumorsThe goal of surgical therapy for cancer is to achieve oncologic cure. A curative operation presupposes that the tumor is confined to the organ of origin or to the organ and the regional lymph node basin. Patients in whom the primary tumor is not resectable with negative surgical margins are considered to have inoperable disease. The operability of primary tumors is best determined before surgery with appropriate imaging studies that can define the extent of local-regional disease. For example, a preoperative thin-section CT scan is obtained to determine resectability of pancreatic cancer, which is based on the absence of extrapancre-atic disease, the absence of tumor extension to the superior mes-enteric artery and celiac axis, and a patent superior mesenteric vein-portal vein confluence.131 Disease involving multiple distant metastases is deemed inoperable because it is usually not curable with surgery of the primary tumor. Therefore, patients who are at high risk of having distant metastasis should undergo a staging work-up before surgery for the primary tumor. On occasion, pri-mary tumors are resected in these patients for palliative reasons, such as improving the quality of life by alleviating pain, infec-tion, or bleeding. An example of this is toilet mastectomies for large ulcerated breast tumors. Patients with limited metastases from a primary tumor on occasion are considered surgical candi-dates if the natural history of isolated distant metastases for that cancer type is favorable or the potential complications associated with leaving the primary tumor intact are significant.In the past, it was presumed that the more radical the sur-gery, the better the oncologic outcome would be. Over the past three decades, this has been recognized as not necessarily being true, which has led to more conservative operations, with wide local excisions replacing compartmental resections of sarcomas, and partial mastectomies, skin-sparing mastectomies, and breast-conserving therapies replacing radical mastectomies for breast cancer. The uniform goal for all successful oncologic operations seems to be achieving widely negative margins with no evidence of macroscopic or microscopic tumor at the surgical margins. The importance of negative surgical margins for local tumor control and/or survival has been documented for many tumor types, including sarcoma, breast cancer, pancreatic cancer, and rectal cancer. Thus, it is clear that every effort should be made to achieve microscopically negative surgical margins. Inking of the margins, orientation of the specimen by the surgeon, and immediate gross evaluation of the margins by a pathologist using frozen-section analysis when necessary may assist in achiev-ing negative margins at the first operation. In the end, although radiation therapy and systemic therapy can assist in decreasing local recurrence rates in the setting of positive margins, adjuvant therapy cannot substitute for adequate surgery.Although it is clear that the surgical gold standard is nega-tive surgical margins, the appropriate surgical margins for optimal local control are controversial for many cancer types. In contrast, in melanoma the optimal margin width for any tumor depth has been better defined, owing to the systematic study of this ques-tion in randomized clinical trials.132,133 Although such randomized studies may not be possible for all tumor types, it is important to determine optimal surgical margins for each cancer type so that adjuvant radiation and systemic therapy can be offered to patients deemed to be at increased risk for local treatment failure.Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   33722/02/19   2:14 PM 338BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IFigure 10-14. Lymphatic mapping and sen-tinel lymph node biopsy specimen for breast cancer. A. Peritumoral injection of blue dye. B. Blue dye draining into the sentinel lymph node.Surgical Management of the Regional Lymph Node BasinMost neoplasms have the ability to metastasize via the lymphat-ics. Therefore, most oncologic operations have been designed to remove the primary tumor and draining lymphatics en bloc. This type of operative approach usually is undertaken when the lymph nodes draining the primary tumor site lie adjacent to the tumor bed, as is the case for colorectal cancers and gastric can-cers. For tumors in which the regional lymph node basin is not immediately adjacent to the tumor (e.g., melanomas), lymph node surgery can be performed through a separate incision. Unlike most carcinomas, soft tissue sarcomas rarely metasta-size to the lymph nodes (<5%); therefore, lymph node surgery usually is not necessary.It is generally accepted that a formal lymphadenectomy is likely to minimize the risk of regional recurrence of most cancers. For example, the introduction of total mesorectal excision of rectal cancer has been associated with a large decline in local-regional recurrence, and this procedure has become the new standard of operative management.134 On the other hand, there have been two opposing views regarding the role of lymphadenectomy in survival of cancer patients. The traditional Halsted view states that lymphadenectomy is important for staging and survival. The opposing view coun-ters that cancer is systemic at inception and that lymphade-nectomy, although useful for staging, does not affect survival. For most cancers, involvement of the lymph nodes is one of the most significant prognostic factors. Interestingly, in some studies removal of a larger number of lymph nodes has been found to be associated with an improved overall survival rate for many tumors, including breast cancer, colon cancer, and lung cancer. Although this seems to support the Halsted the-ory that more extensive lymphadenectomy yielding of nodes reduces the risk of regional recurrence, there may be alterna-tive explanations for the same finding. For example, the sur-geon who performs a more extensive lymphadenectomy may obtain wider margins around the tumor or even provide better overall care, such as ensuring that patients receive the appropri-ate adjuvant therapy or undergo a more thorough staging work-up. Alternatively, the pathologist may perform a more thorough examination, identifying more nodes and more accurately stag-ing the nodes. The effect of appropriate staging on survival is twofold. Patients with nodal metastases may be offered adjuvant therapy, which improves their survival chances. Further, the enhanced staging can improve perceived survival rates through a “Will Rogers effect.” Such a phenomenon is observed when moving an element from one set to another set raises the average value of both sets. When commenting on the 1930s migration of poor farmers from a dustbowl state to a more prosperous west-ern state, humorist Will Rogers quipped that this event raised the average intelligence of both states. Thus, identification of small metastases that had formerly been silent and unidenti-fied leads to stage migration for these patients and thus to a perceived improvement in chances of survival for the higher stage. In addition, there is improved survival for the lower stage, which is now minus the patients with low volume nodal disease. Clearly the impact of lymphadenectomy on survival will con-tinue to be a topic of clinical research.Surgical management of the clinically negative regional lymph node basin has evolved with the introduction of lym-phatic mapping technology (Fig. 10-14).135 Lymphatic mapping and sentinel lymph node biopsy specimen were first reported in 1977 by Cabanas for penile cancer.136 Now, sentinel node biopsy specimen is the standard of care for the management of melanoma and breast cancer. The utility of sentinel node biopsy is being explored in other cancer types such as head and neck squamous cell cancer and vulvar cancer.The first node to receive drainage from the tumor site is termed the sentinel node. This node is the node most likely to contain metastases, if metastases to that regional lymph node basin are present. The goal of lymphatic mapping and senti-nel lymph node biopsy specimen is to identify and remove the lymph node most likely to contain metastases in the least inva-sive fashion. The practice of sentinel lymph node biopsy speci-men followed by regional lymph node dissection for selected patients with a positive sentinel lymph node avoids the morbid-ity of lymph node dissections in patients with negative nodes. An additional advantage of the sentinel lymph node technique is that it directs attention to a single node, which allows more careful analysis of the lymph node most likely to have a positive yield and increases the accuracy of nodal staging. Two criteria are used to assess the efficacy of a sentinel lymph node biopsy specimen: the sentinel lymph node identification rate and the false-negative rate. The sentinel lymph node identification rate Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   33822/02/19   2:14 PM 339ONCOLOGYCHAPTER 10is the proportion of patients in whom a sentinel lymph node was identified and removed among all patients undergoing an attempted sentinel lymph node biopsy specimen. The false-negative rate is the proportion of patients with regional lymph node metastases in whom the sentinel lymph node was found to be negative. False-negative biopsy specimen results may be due to identifying the wrong node or to missing the sentinel node (i.e., surgical error) or they may be due to the cancer cells’ establishing metastases not in the first node encountered but in a second-echelon node (i.e., biologic variation). Alternatively, false-negative biopsy specimen results may be due to inadequate histologic evaluation of the lymph node. The false-negative rates for sentinel lymph node biopsy specimen in study series range between 0% and 11%. Both increases in the identification rate and decreases in the false-negative rate have been observed as surgeons gain experience with the technique.Lymphatic mapping is performed by using isosulfan blue dye, technetium-labeled sulfur colloid or albumin, or a combi-nation of both techniques to detect sentinel nodes. The combina-tion of blue dye and technetium has been reported to improve the capability of detecting sentinel lymph nodes. The nodal drainage pattern usually is determined with a preoperative lym-phoscintigram, and the “hot” and/or blue nodes are identified with the assistance of a gamma probe and careful nodal basin exploration. Careful manual palpation is a crucial part of the procedure to minimize the false-negative rate.The nodes are evaluated with serial sectioning, hematoxy-lin and eosin staining, and immunohistochemical analysis with S-100 protein and homatropine methylbromide staining for mel-anoma and cytokeratin staining for breast cancer. The utility of molecular techniques such as RT-PCR to assess the sentinel nodes is still being explored.Another area of active investigation is the prognostic value of minimal nodal involvement. For example, in breast cancer, nodes with isolated tumor cell deposits of <0.2 mm are considered to be N0 by the sixth edition of the AJCC staging manual. However, some retrospective studies have suggested that even this amount of nodal disease burden has negative prognostic implications.137 Molecular ultrastaging with RT-PCR for patients with node-negative disease was assessed in a pro-spective multicenter trial and was found not to be prognostic in malignant melanoma.127 However, a recent meta-analysis of 22 studies enrolling 4019 patients found that PCR positivity was associated with worse overall and disease-free survival.138 Fur-ther study of the utility of ultrastaging of nodes in breast cancer, melanoma, and several other tumor types is ongoing.Until recently, in breast cancer management, when senti-nel node mapping revealed a positive sentinel node, this was fol-lowed by a completion axillary lymph node dissection. Results of the American College of Surgeons Oncology Group Z0011 trial, challenged this practice. ACOSOG Z11 was a phase 3 mul-ticenter noninferiority trial conducted to determine the effects of complete axillary lymph node dissection on survival of patients with sentinel lymph node metastasis of breast cancer.129 Patients were women with clinical T1-T2 invasive breast cancer, no pal-pable adenopathy, and 1 to 2 SLNs containing metastases identi-fied by frozen section, touch preparation, or hematoxylin-eosin staining on permanent section. All patients underwent breast-conserving surgery and tangential whole-breast irradiation. Those with sentinel node metastases identified by sentinel node biopsy specimen were randomized to undergo axillary lymph node dissection or no further axillary treatment. At a median follow-up of 6.3 years, 5-year overall survival was 91.8% (95% confidence interval [CI], 89.1%–94.5%) with axillary lymph node dissection and 92.5% (95% CI, 90.0%–95.1%) with sen-tinel node alone. The 5-year disease-free survival was 82.2% (95% CI, 78.3%–86.3%) with axillary lymph node dissection, and 83.9% (95% CI, 80.2%–87.9%) with sentinel node alone. Thus, ACOSOGZ11 demonstrated that among breast cancer patients with limited sentinel node metastasis treated with breast conservation and systemic therapy, the use of sentinel node alone compared with axillary lymph node dissection did not result in inferior survival. This study challenges the traditional surgical dictum of regional management, and has led to a selec-tive utilization of completion axillary lymph node dissection in breast cancer patients undergoing breast conservation. The role of completion lymph node dissections in melanoma is under investigation. In the MSLT-II clinical trial, melanoma patients with sentinel-node metastases were randomized to immediate completion lymph-node dissection or nodal observation with ultrasonography. The primary end point of this study was mela-noma-specific survival. Immediate completion lymph-node dis-section led to increased regional disease control and provided prognostic information but did not increase melanoma-specific survival among patients with intermediate-thickness melanoma and sentinel-node metastases.139Surgical Management of Distant MetastasesThe treatment of a patient with distant metastases depends on the number and sites of metastases, the cancer type, the rate of tumor growth, the previous treatments delivered and the responses to these treatments, and the patient’s age, physical condition, and desires. Although once a tumor has metastasized it usually is not curable with surgical therapy, such therapy has resulted in cure in selected cases with isolated metastases to the liver, lung, or brain.Patient selection is the key to the success of surgical therapy for distant metastases. The cancer type is a major determinant in surgical decision making. A liver metastasis from a colon cancer is more likely to be an isolated and thus resectable lesion than a liver metastasis from a pancreatic carcinoma. The growth rate of the tumor also plays an important role and can be determined in part by the disease-free interval and the time between treatment of the primary tumor and detection of the distant recurrence. Patients with longer disease-free intervals have a higher survival rate after surgical metastasectomy than those with a short disease-free interval. Similarly, patients who have synchronous metastases (metastases diagnosed at the initial cancer diagnosis) do worse after metastasectomy than patients who develop metachronous metastases (metastasis diagnosed after a disease-free interval). The natural history of metastatic disease is so poor for some tumors (e.g., pancreatic cancer) that there is no role at this time for surgical metastasectomy. In cancers with a more favorable outlook, observation for several weeks or months, potentially with initial treatment with systemic therapy, can allow the sur-geon to monitor for metastases at other sites.In curative surgery for distant metastases, as with surgery for primary tumors, the goal is to resect the metastases with negative margins. In patients with hepatic metastases that are unresectable because their location near intrahepatic blood ves-sels precludes a margin-negative resection, or because they are multifocal or hepatic function is inadequate, tumor ablation with cryotherapy or radiofrequency ablation is an alternative.140,141 Curative resections or ablative procedures should be attempted Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   33922/02/19   2:14 PM 340BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ionly if the lesions are accessible and the procedure can be per-formed safely.CHEMOTHERAPYClinical Use of ChemotherapyIn patients with documented distant metastatic disease, chemo-therapy is usually the primary modality of therapy. The goal of therapy in this setting is to decrease the tumor burden, thus prolonging survival. It is rare to achieve cure with chemother-apy for metastatic disease for most solid tumors. Chemotherapy administered to a patient who is at high risk for distant recur-rence but has no evidence of distant disease is referred to as adjuvant chemotherapy. The goal of adjuvant chemotherapy is eradication of micrometastatic disease, with the intent of decreasing relapse rates and improving survival rates.Adjuvant therapy can be administered after surgery (post-operative chemotherapy) or before surgery (preoperative che-motherapy, neoadjuvant chemotherapy, or induction therapy). A portion or all of the planned adjuvant chemotherapy can be administered before the surgical removal of the primary tumor. Preoperative chemotherapy has three potential advantages. The first is that preoperative regression of tumor can facilitate resection of tumors that were initially inoperable or allow more conservative surgery for patients whose cancer was operable to begin with. In the NSABP B-18 project, for example, women were randomly assigned to receive adjuvant doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide preoperatively or postoperatively. More patients treated before surgery than after surgery underwent breast-conserving surgery (68% vs. 60%).142 The second advan-tage of preoperative chemotherapy is the treatment of microme-tastases without the delay of postoperative recovery. The third advantage is the ability to assess a cancer’s response to treat-ment clinically, after a number of courses of chemotherapy, and pathologically, after surgical resection. This is especially impor-tant if alternative treatment regimens are available to be offered to patients whose disease responded inadequately. Molecular characterization of the residual disease may also give insight into mechanisms of chemoresistance and possible therapeutic targets.There are some potential disadvantages to preoperative chemotherapy, however. Although disease progression while the patient is receiving preoperative chemotherapy is rare in chemotherapy-sensitive tumors such as breast cancer, it is more frequent in relatively chemotherapy-resistant tumors such as sarcomas.143 Thus, patient selection is critical to ensure that the opportunity to treat disease surgically is not lost by giving pre-operative chemotherapy. Often, rates of postoperative wound infection, flap necrosis, and delays in postoperative adjuvant therapy do not differ between patients who are treated with preoperative chemotherapy and patients who are treated with surgery first. However, preoperative chemotherapy can intro-duce special challenges to tumor localization, margin analysis, lymphatic mapping, and pathologic staging.Response to chemotherapy is monitored clinically with imaging studies as well as physical examinations. Response usually is defined as complete response, partial response, stable disease, or progression. Response generally is assessed using the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) criteria.144 Objective tumor response assessment is critical because tumor response is used as a prospective endpoint in clinical trials and tumor response is a guide to clinicians regard-ing continuation of current therapy.Principles of ChemotherapyChemotherapy destroys cells by first-order kinetics, which means that with the administration of a drug a constant percent-age of cells is killed, not a constant number of cells. If a patient with 1012 tumor cells is treated with a dose that results in 99.9% cell kill (3-log cell kill), the tumor burden will be reduced from 1012 to 109 cells (or 1 kg to 1 g). If the patient is retreated with the same drug, which theoretically could result in another 3-log cell kill, the cells would decrease in number from 109 to 106  (1 g to 1 mg) rather than being eliminated totally.Chemotherapeutic agents can be classified according to the phase of the cell cycle during which they are effective. Cell-cycle phase-nonspecific agents (e.g., alkylating agents) have a linear dose-response curve, such that the fraction of cells killed increases with the dose of the drug.145 In contrast, the cell-cycle phase-specific drugs have a plateau with respect to cell killing ability, and cell kill will not increase with further increases in drug dose.Anticancer AgentsAlkylating Agents. Alkylating agents are cell-cycle– nonspecific agents, that is, they are able to kill cells in any phase of the cell cycle. They act by cross-linking the two strands of the DNA helix or by causing other direct damage to the DNA. The damage to the DNA prevents cell division and, if severe enough, leads to apoptosis. The alkylating agents are composed of three main subgroups: classic alkylators, nitrosoureas, and miscellaneous DNA-binding agents (Table 10-10).Antitumor Antibiotics. Antitumor antibiotics are the prod-ucts of fermentation of microbial organisms. Like the alkylat-ing agents, these agents are cell-cycle nonspecific. Antitumor antibiotics damage the cell by interfering with DNA or RNA synthesis, although the exact mechanism of action may differ by agent.Antimetabolites. Antimetabolites are generally cell-cycle–specific agents that have their major activity during the S phase of the cell cycle and have little effect on cells in G0. These drugs are most effective, therefore, in tumors that have a high growth fraction. Antimetabolites are structural analogues of naturally occurring metabolites involved in DNA and RNA synthesis. Therefore, they interfere with normal synthesis of nucleic acids by substituting for purines or pyrimidines in the metabolic path-way to inhibit critical enzymes in nucleic acid synthesis. The antimetabolites include folate antagonists, purine antagonists, and pyrimidine antagonists.Plant Alkaloids. Plant alkaloids are derived from plants such as the periwinkle plant, Vinca rosea (e.g., vincristine, a vinca alkaloid), or the root of American mandrake, Podophyllum  peltatum (e.g., etoposide, a podophyllotoxin).145 Vinca alkaloids affect the cell by binding to tubulin in the S phase. This blocks microtubule polymerization, which results in impaired mitotic spindle formation in the M phase. Taxanes such as paclitaxel, on the other hand, cause excess polymerization and stability of microtubules, which blocks the cell cycle in mitosis. The epi-podophyllotoxins (e.g., etoposide) act to inhibit a DNA enzyme called topoisomerase II by stabilizing the DNA-topoisomerase II complex. This results in an inability to synthesize DNA, and thus the cell cycle is stopped in the G1 phase.145Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   34022/02/19   2:14 PM 341ONCOLOGYCHAPTER 10Combination ChemotherapyCombination chemotherapy may provide greater efficacy than single-agent therapy by three mechanisms: (a) it provides maxi-mum cell kill within the range of toxicity for each drug that can be tolerated by the host, (b) it offers a broader range of coverage of resistant cell lines in a heterogeneous population, and (c) it prevents or delays the emergence of drug-resistant cell lines.145 When combination regimens are devised, drugs known to be active as single agents usually are selected. Drugs with different mechanisms of action are combined to allow for additive or syn-ergistic effects. Combining cell-cycle–specific and cell-cycle–nonspecific agents may be especially advantageous. Drugs with differing dose-limiting toxic effects are combined to allow for each drug to be given at therapeutic doses. Drugs with differ-ent patterns of resistance are combined whenever possible to minimize cross-resistance. The treatment-free interval between cycles is kept to the shortest possible time that will allow for recovery of the most sensitive normal tissue.Drug ToxicityTumors are more susceptible than normal tissue to chemothera-peutic agents, in part because they have a higher proportion of dividing cells. Normal tissues with a high growth fraction, such as the bone marrow, oral and intestinal mucosa and hair follicles are sensitive to chemotherapeutic effects. Therefore, treatment with chemotherapeutic agents can produce toxic effects such as bone marrow suppression, stomatitis, ulceration of the GI tract, and alopecia. Toxic effects usually are graded from 0 to 4 on the basis of World Health Organization standard criteria.146 Significant drug toxicity may necessitate a dosage reduction. A toxic effect requiring a dose modification or change in dose intensity is referred to as a dose-limiting toxic effect. Because maintaining dose intensity is important to preserve as high a tumor cell kill as possible, several supportive strategies have been developed, such as administration of colony-stimulating factors and erythropoietin to treat poor bone marrow reserve and administration of cytoprotectants such as mesna and amifostine to prevent renal dysfunction. Some toxicities, such as neuropa-thy, are not as easily reversible, and their potential effects on lifestyle must be considered when evaluating a patient prior to the initiation of chemotherapy.Administration of ChemotherapyChemotherapy usually is administered systemically (IV, IM, SC, or PO). Systemic administration treats micrometastases at widespread sites and prevents systemic recurrence. However, it increases the drug’s toxicity to a wide range of organs through-out the body. One method to minimize systemic toxicity while enhancing target organ delivery of chemotherapy is regional administration of chemotherapy. Many of these approaches require surgical access, such as intrahepatic delivery of chemo-therapy for hepatic carcinomas or metastatic colorectal cancer using a hepatic artery infusion pump, limb perfusion for extrem-ity melanoma and sarcoma, and intraperitoneal hyperthermic Table 10-10Classification of chemotherapeutic agentsAlkylating agents Classic alkylating agents  Busulfan  Chlorambucil  Cyclophosphamide  Ifosfamide  Mechlorethamine (nitrogen mustard)  Melphalan  Mitomycin C  Triethylene thiophosphoramide (thiotepa) Nitrosoureas  Carmustine (BCNU)  Lomustine (CCNU)  Semustine (MeCCNU)  Streptozocin Miscellaneous DNA-binding agents  Carboplatin  Cisplatin  Dacarbazine (DTIC)  Hexamethylmelamine  ProcarbazineAntitumor antibiotics Bleomycin Dactinomycin (actinomycin D) Daunorubicin Doxorubicin Idarubicin Plicamycin (mithramycin)Antimetabolites Folate analogues  Methotrexate		 Purine analogues		  Azathioprine		  Mercaptopurine		  Thioguanine		  Cladribine (2-chlorodeoxyadenosine)		  Fludarabine		  Pentostatin		 Pyrimidine analogues		  Capecitabine		  Cytarabine		  Floxuridine		  Gemcitabine		 Ribonucleotide reductase inhibitors		  Hydroxyurea		Plant alkaloids		 Vinca alkaloids		  Vinblastine		  Vincristine		  Vindesine		  Vinorelbine		 Epipodophyllotoxins		  Etoposide		  Teniposide		 Taxanes		  Paclitaxel		  Docetaxel		Miscellaneous agents		  Asparaginase		  Estramustine		  MitotaneBrunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   34122/02/19   2:14 PM 342BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iperfusion for pseudomyxoma peritonei. Alternately, percutane-ous access may be utilized, such as limb infusion with percuta-neously placed catheters.HORMONAL THERAPYSome tumors, most notably breast and prostate cancers, origi-nate from tissues whose growth is under hormonal control. The first attempts at hormonal therapy were through surgical ablation of the organ producing the hormones involved, such as oophorectomy for breast cancer. Currently, hormonal anti-cancer agents include androgens, antiandrogens, antiestrogens, estrogens, glucocorticoids, gonadotropin inhibitors, progestins, aromatase inhibitors, and somatostatin analogues. Hormones or hormone-like agents can be administered to inhibit tumor growth by blocking or antagonizing the naturally occurring sub-stance, such as with the estrogen antagonist tamoxifen. Other substances that block the synthesis of the natural hormone can be administered as alternatives. Aromatase inhibitors, for exam-ple, block the peripheral conversion of endogenous androgens to estrogens in postmenopausal women. Hormonal therapy pro-vides a highly tumor-specific form of therapy in sensitive tis-sues. In breast cancer, estrogen and progesterone receptor status is used to predict the success of hormonal therapy. Androgen receptor is also being pursued as a therapeutic target for breast cancer treatment.TARGETED THERAPYOver the past decade, increased understanding of cancer biol-ogy has fostered the emerging field of molecular therapeutics. The basic principle of molecular therapeutics is to exploit the molecular differences between normal cells and cancer cells to develop targeted therapies. Thus, targeted therapies usually are directed at the processes involved in tumor growth rather than directly targeting the tumor cells. The ideal molecular target would be exclusively expressed in the cancer cells, be the driv-ing force of the proliferation of the cancer cells, and be critical to their survival. A large number of molecular targets are cur-rently being explored, both preclinically and in clinical trials. The major groups of targeted therapy agents are inhibitors of growth factor receptors, inhibitors of intracellular signal trans-duction, cell-cycle inhibitors, apoptosis-based therapies, and anti-angiogenic compounds.Protein kinases have come to the forefront as attrac-tive therapeutic targets with the success of imatinib mesylate (Gleevec) in treating chronic myelogenous leukemia and GI stromal tumors, and trastuzumab (Herceptin) in treating breast cancer, and vemurafanib in treating melanoma. These drugs work by targeting bcr-abland c-kit (imatinib) and HER2 and BRAF, respectively. For example, a phase 3 randomized trial demonstrated that, compared with dacarbazine, standard of care chemotherapy option for patients with metastatic melanoma with a V600E BRAF mutation, the BRAF inhibitor vemurafenib led to significantly higher response rates (48% vs. 5%).147 At 6 months, overall survival was 84% (95% CI, 78–89) in the vemurafenib group and 64% (95% CI, 56–73) in the dacarba-zine group. The hazard ratio for tumor progression in the vemu-rafenib group was 0.26 (95% CI, 0.20–0.33; P<0.001). The estimated median progression-free survival was 5.3 months in the vemurafenib group and 1.6 months in the dacarbazine group. This trial highlights the fact that in at least some tumor types targeted therapies that inhibit a genomic alteration that is a driver is likely to be more effective than an unselected thera-peutic option.Sequencing of the human genome has revealed approxi-mately 500 protein kinases. Several tyrosine kinases have been shown to have oncogenic properties and many other protein kinases have been shown to be aberrantly activated in cancer cells.93 Therefore, protein kinases involved in these aberrantly activated pathways are being aggressively pursued in molecular therapeutics. Potential targets like HER2 can be targeted via dif-ferent strategies, such as transcriptional downregulation, targeting of mRNA, RNA inhibition, antisense strategies, direct inhibition of protein activity, and induction of immunity against the protein. Most of the compounds in development are monoclonal antibod-ies like trastuzumab or small-molecule kinase inhibitors like ima-tinib or vemurafanib. Some other agents, such as sunitinib, are multitargeted kinase inhibitors. Selected FDA-approved targeted therapies are listed in Table 10-11. Many of the promising path-ways, such as the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway, are being pursued as therapeutic targets with several drugs in development, targeting different aspects of the pathway (Fig. 10-15).148Development of molecularly targeted agents for clinical use presents several unique challenges. Once an appropriate compound is identified and confirmed to have activity in pre-clinical testing, predictive markers for activity in the preclinical setting must be defined. Expression of a target may not be suf-ficient to predict response because the pathway of interest may not be activated or critical to the cancer’s survival. Although in traditional phase 1 trials the goal is to identify the maximum tol-erated dosage, the maximum dosage of biologic agents may not be necessary to achieve the desired biologic effect. Thus, assays to verify modulation of the target need to be developed to deter-mine at what dosage the desired effect is achieved. When phases 2 and 3 clinical trials are initiated, biomarker modulation studies should be integrated into the trial to determine whether clinical response correlates with target modulation and thus to identify additional parameters that impact response. Rational dose selec-tion and limitation of study populations to patients most likely to respond to the molecular therapy as determined by predictive markers are most likely to lead to successful clinical transla-tion of a product. Finally, most biologic agents are cytostatic, not cytotoxic. Thus, rational combination therapy mixing new biologic agents with either established chemotherapeutic agents that have synergy or with other biologic agents is more likely to lead to cancer cures.IMMUNOTHERAPYThe aim of immunotherapy is to induce or potentiate inherent antitumor immunity that can destroy cancer cells. Central to the process of antitumor immunity is the ability of the immune sys-tem to recognize tumor-associated antigens present on human cancers and to direct cytotoxic responses through humoral or T-cell–mediated immunity. Overall, T-cell–mediated immunity appears to have the greater potential of the two for eradicating tumor cells. T cells recognize antigens on the surfaces of target cells as small peptides presented by class I and class II MHC molecules.Several antitumor strategies are under investigation. One approach to antitumor immunity is nonspecific immunotherapy, which stimulates the immune system as a whole through admin-istration of bacterial agents or their products, such as bacille Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   34222/02/19   2:14 PM 343ONCOLOGYCHAPTER 10Table 10-11Selected FDA-approved targeted therapiesGENERIC NAMETRADE NAMETARGETFDA-APPROVED INDICATIONSAdo-trastuzumab emtansineKadcylaHER2Breast cancerAxitinibInlytaKIT, FDGFRβ, VEGFR1/2/3RCCBevacizumabAvastinVEGFColorectal cancer, lung cancer, glioblastoma, NSCLCRCCBortezomibVelcadeProteasomeMyelomaBosutinibBosulifABLCML (Philadelphia chromosome+)CabozantinibCometriqFLT3, KIT, MET, RET, VEGR2Medullary thyroid cancerCetuximabErbituxEGFRColorectal cancer (KRAS wild-type)Squamous cell cancer of the head and neckCrizotinibXalkoriALK (anaplastic lymphoma kinase) and ROS1 (c-ros oncogene 1) inhibitorNon-small cell lung carcinomaDabrafenibTafinolarBRAF V600E mutationMelanomaDasatinibSprycelABL, src family, KIT, EPHA2, PDGFR-βCMLErlotinibTarcevaEGFRNSCLC,Pancreatic cancerEverolimusAfinitormTORPNET,RCC,Breast cancer.Nonresectable subependymal giant cell astrocytoma associated with tuberous sclerosisGefitinibIressaEGFRNSCLC with known/previous benefit from gefitinib (limited approval)IbrutinibImbruvicaBruton’s Tyrosine KinaseChronic lymphocytic leukemiaImatinibGleevecKIT, ABL, PDGFRCML,GIST (KIT+),Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberansLapatinibTykerbEGFR and HER2Breast cancer (HER2+)NilotinibTasignaABLCML (Philadelphia chromosome+)PanitumumabVectibixEGFRColorectal cancer (KRAS wild type)PazopanibVotrientVEGFR, PDGFR, KITRCCPertuzumabPerjetaHER2Breast cancer (HER+)PonatinibIclusigABL, FGFR1-3, FLT3, VEGFR2CML, ALL (Philadelphia chromosome+)RegorafenibStivargaKIT, PDGFRβ, RAF, RET, VEGFR1/2/3Colorectal cancer, GISTSorafenibNexavarVEGFR, PDGFR, KIT, RAFHCCRCCSunitinibSutentVEGFR PDGFR KIT, Flt-3, RETGIST,RCC,PNETTemsirolimusToriselmTORRCCTrastuzumabHerceptinHER2Breast cancer (HER2+)Gastric cancer (HER2+)VandetanibCaprelsaEGFR, RET, VEGFR2Medullary thyroid cancerVemurafenibZelborafBRAFMelanoma (BRAF V600E mutant)VorinostatZolinzaHistone deacetylasesCutaneous T-cell lymphomaCML = chronic myelogenous leukemia; EGFR = epidermal growth factor receptor; EPHA2 = ephrin A2; FDA = Food and Drug Administration;  Flt-3 = fms-related tyrosine kinase 3; GIST = GI stromal tumor; HCC = hepatocellular cancer, HER2 = human epidermal growth factor receptor 2; mTOR = mammalian target of rapamycin; NSCLC = non-small cell lung cancer, PDGF = platelet-derived growth factor; PDGFR = platelet-derived growth factor receptor; PNET = pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor; RCC = renal cell carcinoma; RET = rearranged during transfection; VEGF = vascular endothelial growth factor; VEGFR = vascular endothelial growth factor receptor.Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   34322/02/19   2:14 PM 344BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IGlucoseAminoAcidsIRS1PI3KPDK1PIP2PIP3ATPAMPKActivatorsMAP4K3AMPKRapalogsFKBP12AktTSC2TSC1PI3KInhibitorsAktInhibitorsPTENmTORC2ProctorRICTORmTORmLST8SIN1GSK3FOXOBADASK1GDPGTPRhebRhebmTORC1PRAS40mTORRAPTORmLST84EBP1S6KeIF4EPDCD4eEF3KS6eIF4BmTORKinase InhibitorsDual Pl3K/mTORKinase InhibitorsPPFigure 10-15. Targeting PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling. This central pathway is altered in many tumor types and is being pursued as a therapeu-tic target through development of numerous pathway inhibitors targeting PI3K, Akt, mTOR, and dual inhibitors as well as several upstream and downstream regulators. (Reproduced with permission from McAuliffe PF, Meric-Bernstam F, Mills GB, et al: Deciphering the role of PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway in breast cancer biology and pathogenesis, Clin Breast Cancer. 2010 Nov;10 Suppl 3:S59-S65.)Calmette-Guérin. This approach is thought to activate the effec-tors of antitumor response such as natural killer cells and macro-phages, as well as polyclonal lymphocytes.149 Another approach to nonspecific immunotherapy is systemic administration of cytokines such as interleukin-2, interferon-α, and interferon-γ. Interleukin-2 stimulates proliferation of cytotoxic T lympho-cytes and maturation of effectors such as natural killer cells into lymphokine-activated killer cells. Interferons, on the other hand, exert antitumor effects directly by inhibiting tumor cell prolif-eration and indirectly by activating host immune cells, includ-ing macrophages, dendritic cells, and natural killer cells, and by enhancing human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I expression on tumor cells.149Antigen-specific immunotherapy can be active, as is achieved through antitumor vaccines, or passive. In pas-sive immunotherapy, antibodies to specific tumor-associated antigens can be produced by hybridoma technique and then administered to patients whose cancers express these antigens, inducing antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity.The early attempts at vaccination against cancers used allo-geneic cultured cancer cells, including irradiated cells, cell lysates, and shed antigens isolated from tissue culture supernatants. An alternate strategy is the use of autologous tumor vaccines. These have the potential advantage of being more likely to contain anti-gens relevant for the individual patient but have the disadvantage of requiring a large amount of tumor tissue for preparation, which restricts eligibility of patients for this modality. Strategies to enhance immunogenicity of tumor cells include the introduction of genes encoding cytokines or chemokines, and fusion of the tumor cells to allogeneic MHC class II-bearing cells.150 Alternatively, heat shock proteins derived from a patient’s tumor can be used because heat shock protein peptide complexes are readily taken up by dendritic cells for presentation to T cells.150Identification of tumor antigens has made it possible to perform antigen-specific vaccination. For example, in the case of melanoma, several antigens have been identified that can be recognized by both CD8+ cytotoxic T cells and CD4+ helper T cells, including MART-1, gp 100, MAGE1, tyrosinase, TRP-1, TRP-2, and NY-ESO-1.151 Antigens tested usually are over-expressed or mutated in cancer cells. Tissue specificity and immunogenicity are important determinants in choosing an appropriate target. Vaccines directed at defined tumor antigens aim to combine selected tumor antigens and appropriate routes for delivering these antigens to the immune system to optimize antitumor immunity.152 Several different vaccination approaches have been studied, including tumor cell-based vaccines, pep-tide-based vaccines, recombinant virus-based vaccines, DNA-based vaccines, and dendritic cell vaccines.In adoptive transfer, antigen-specific effector cells (i.e., cytotoxic T lymphocytes) or antigen-nonspecific effector cells Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   34422/02/19   2:14 PM 345ONCOLOGYCHAPTER 10(i.e., natural killer cells) can be transferred to a patient. These effector cells can be obtained from the tumor (tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes) or the peripheral blood.Clinical experience in patients with metastatic disease has shown objective tumor responses to a variety of immunothera-peutic modalities. It is thought, however, that the immune sys-tem is overwhelmed with the tumor burden in this setting, and thus adjuvant therapy may be preferable, with immunotherapy reserved for decreasing tumor recurrences. Trials to date sug-gest that immunotherapy is a potentially useful approach in the adjuvant setting. How to best select patients for this approach and how to integrate immunotherapy with other therapies are not well understood for most cancer types.Tolerance to self-antigens expressed in tumors is a limi-tation in generating antitumor responses.153 Recently, several pathways that modulate tolerance and approaches to manipulat-ing these pathways have been identified: pathways that activate professional antigen-presenting cells such as Toll-like receptors, growth factors, and the CD40 pathway; cytokines to enhance immunoactivation; and pathways that inhibit T-cell inhibitory signals or block the activity of immune-suppressive regulatory T cells (Tregs).153A new and highly effective strategy to activate the T-cell arm of anticancer immunity is the use of monoclonal antibodies to block inhibitory signaling pathways employed by the immune system to prevent T cell over activation and the development of auto-immunity. CTLA-4 and PD-1 are two important inhibitory  T-cell checkpoints that can be blocked with neutralizing antibod-ies and result in an effective antigen-specific anti-tumor response.CTLA-4 is an inhibitory receptor expressed by activated  T cells that belongs to the immunoglobulin superfamily. CTLA4 is related to the T-cell costimulatory receptor, CD28, and both are bound by CD80 and CD86 (also known as B7-1 and B7-2) which are expressed on antigen-presenting cells. CTLA-4 con-veys an inhibitory signal to the T cell, whereas engagement of CD28 with ligand sends a stimulatory signal. CTLA-4 is able to outcompete CD28 for CD80 and CD86 ligands and therefore is able to dominate immune signaling in the setting of antigen recognition. CTLA-4 is also expressed by regulatory T cells, which contributes to their ability to inhibit T-cell function.154 Programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) is a 40 kDa type 1 trans-membrane protein that is thought to play an important role in suppressing the immune system. PD-L1 binds to its receptor, PD-1, which is found on activated T cells. The PD1/PDL1 path-way is increasingly recognized as a key contributor to tumor-mediated immune suppression. The interaction between PD-1 leads to reduced proliferation, altered production of stimulatory cytokines, and reduced T-cell lytic activity. Thus, both anti-PD1 and anti-PD-L1 strategies are actively being pursued for cancer therapy.155The FDA-approved CTLA-4 blocking antibody ipi-limumab has shown efficacy in patients with metastatic mela-noma.156,157 Nivolumab and pembrolizumab are antibodies that target PD-1, whereas blockade of PD-L1 is accomplished with agents such as atezolizumab.158 Cancers for which checkpoint inhibitors have found utility include melanoma, renal cell car-cinoma, bladder carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck, and carcinoma of the lung. These agents pro-duce durable shrinkage of advanced disease in 20% to 40% of patients, and combination strategies that employ checkpoint inhibitors with cytokines, vaccines, cellular therapies, and other targeted agents are under active investigation.GENE THERAPYGene therapy is being pursued as a possible approach to modify-ing the genetic program of cancer cells as well as treating meta-bolic diseases. The field of cancer gene therapy uses a variety of strategies, ranging from replacement of mutated or deleted tumor-suppressor genes to enhancement of immune responses to cancer cells.159 Indeed, in preclinical models, approaches such as replacement of tumor-suppressor genes leads to growth arrest or apoptosis. However, the translation of these findings into clinically useful tools presents special challenges.One of the main difficulties in getting gene therapy tech-nology from the laboratory to the clinic is the lack of a perfect delivery system. An ideal vector would be administered through a noninvasive route and would transduce all of the cancer cells and none of the normal cells. Furthermore, the ideal vector would have a high degree of activity, that is, it would produce an adequate amount of the desired gene product to achieve target cell kill. Unlike genetic diseases in which delivery of the gene of interest into only a portion of the cells may be sufficient to achieve clinical effect, cancer requires either that the therapeutic gene be delivered to all of the cancer cells or that a therapeutic effect be achieved on nontransfected cells as well as transfected cells through a bystander effect. However, treatment of a meta-bolic disease requires prolonged gene expression, whereas tran-sient expression may be sufficient for cancer therapy.Several vector systems are under study for gene ther-apy; however, none is considered ideal. One of the promising approaches to increase the number of tumor cells transduced is the use of a replication-competent virus like a parvovirus, human reovirus, or vesicular stomatitis virus that selectively replicates within malignant cells and lyses them more efficiently than it does normal cells. Another strategy for killing tumor cells with suicide genes exploits tumor-specific expression elements, such as the MUC-1, PSA, CEA, or VEGF promoters, that can be used to achieve tissue-specific or tumor-specific expression of the desired gene.Because the goal in cancer therapy is to eradicate systemic disease, optimization of delivery systems is the key to success for gene therapy strategies. Gene therapy is likely to be most successful when combined with standard therapies, but it will provide the advantage of customization of therapy based on the molecular status of an individual’s tumor.MECHANISMS OF INTRINSIC AND ACQUIRED DRUG RESISTANCESeveral tumor factors influence tumor cell kill. Tumors are het-erogeneous, and, according to the Goldie-Coldman hypothesis, tumor cells are genetically unstable and tend to mutate to form different cell clones. This has been used as an argument for giv-ing chemotherapy as soon as possible in treatment to reduce the likelihood that resistant clones will emerge. Tumor size is another important variable. Larger tumors may have greater het-erogeneity, although heterogeneity may also differ based on bio-logic subtype. Tumor growth may be described by a Gompertz curve, named after Benjamin Gompertz, which has the form of a sigmoid function. Gompertzian models have thus been used to describe changes in tumor cell numbers over time where growth is slowest at the start and end of a time period, but are quite rapid in the middle. Theoretically, for any tumor, there is a period of time where cancer cells grow rapidly (exponential growth Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   34522/02/19   2:14 PM 346BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iphase), and then the growth slows down owing to hypoxia and decreased nutrient supply. Because of the larger proportion of cells dividing, smaller tumors may be more chemosensitive.Multiple mechanisms of systemic therapy resistance have been identified (Table 10-12).160 Cells may exhibit reduced sen-sitivity to drugs by virtue of their cell-cycle distribution. For example, cells in the G0 phase are resistant to drugs active in the S phase. This phenomenon of “kinetic resistance” usually is temporary, and if the drug level can be maintained, all cells will eventually pass through the vulnerable phase of the cell cycle.145 Alternatively, tumor cells may exhibit “pharmacologic  resistance,” in which the failure to kill cells is due to insuffi-cient drug concentration. This may occur when tumor cells are located in sites where effective drug concentrations are difficult to achieve (such as the central nervous system) or can be due to enhanced metabolism of the drug after its administration, decreased conversion of the drug to its active form, or decrease in the intracellular drug level caused by increased removal of the drug from the cell associated with enhanced expression of  P-glycoprotein (Pgp). Pgp is the protein product of multidrug resis-tance gene 1 and extrudes cytotoxic drugs at the expense of ATP hydrolysis. Other mechanisms of resistance include decreased affinity of the target enzyme for the drug, altered amount of the target enzyme, or enhanced repair of the drug-induced defect. For drug-sensitive cancers, another factor limiting optimal killing is inadequate dosing. Relative dose intensity (RDI) is defined as the actual amount of a particular chemotherapy given over a specific time in relation to what was ordered and is usually expressed as a percentage. An RDI below 80% is considered suboptimal and may impact survival in the adjuvant setting.145Cancer cells demonstrate adaptive responses to targeted therapy, like activating alternate pathways of survival; thus, these alterations may blunt therapeutic efficacy. Cancer cells also acquire resistance upon prolonged treatment with targeted therapy through a variety of mechanisms. One mechanism is through the loss of the target. For example, this was observed in a study of patients with HER2-positive breast cancer patients who were treated with neoadjuvant trastuzumab-based chemo-therapy.161 Post neoadjuvant treatment, a third of the samples from patients who did not have a complete pathologic response displayed loss of the HER2 amplification that had been pres-ent in their pretreatment-biopsy specimens.161 Another means by which cancers develop resistance is the acquisition of addi-tional genomic aberrations. In lung cancer, a second mutation in EGFR (T790M) and MET amplification have been described as two main mechanisms of drug resistance to EGFR inhibi-tors erlotinib and gefinitib.162-164 Other mechanisms like novel genetic changes, including HER2 and EGFR amplification, PIK3CA mutations, and markers of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition have also been reported in EGFR inhibitor resistant lung.165,166 Analysis of metastases from patients with colorectal cancer who developed resistance to cetuximab or panitumumab showed the emergence of KRAS amplification in one sample and acquisition of secondary KRAS mutations in 60% of the cases.167 These studies emphasize the utility of repeat tumor biopsy specimens at the time of relapse or progression to iden-tify mechanisms of resistance and best combinatorial therapies.RADIATION THERAPYPhysical Basis of Radiation TherapyIonizing radiation is energy strong enough to remove an orbital electron from an atom. This radiation can be electromagnetic, like a high-energy photon, or particulate, such as an electron, proton, neutron, or alpha particle. Radiation therapy is delivered primar-ily as high-energy photons (gamma rays and X-rays) and charged particles (electrons). Gamma rays are photons that are released from the nucleus of a radioactive atom. X-rays are photons that are created electronically, such as with a clinical linear accelerator. Currently, high-energy radiation is delivered to tumors primarily with linear accelerators. X-rays traverse the tissue, depositing the maximum dose beneath the surface, and thus spare the skin. Elec-trons are used to treat superficial skin lesions, superficial tumors, or surgical beds to a depth of 5 cm. Gamma rays typically are produced by radioactive sources used in brachytherapy.The dose of radiation absorbed correlates with the energy of the beam. The basic unit is the amount of energy absorbed per unit of mass (joules per kilogram) and is known as a gray (Gy). One gray is equivalent to 100 rads, the unit of radiation measurement used in the past.Biologic Basis of Radiation TherapyRadiation deposition results in DNA damage manifested by singleand double-strand breaks in the sugar phosphate back-bone of the DNA molecule.168 Cross-linking between the DNA strands and chromosomal proteins also occurs. The mecha-nism of DNA damage differs by the type of radiation deliv-ered. Electromagnetic radiation is indirectly ionizing through the actions of short-lived hydroxyl radicals, which are pro-duced primarily by the ionization of cellular hydrogen perox-ide (H2O2).168 Protons and other heavy particles are directly ionizing and directly damage DNA.Table 10-12General mechanisms of drug resistanceCellular and biochemical mechanisms Decreased drug accumulation  Decreased drug influx  Increased drug efflux  Altered intracellular trafficking of drug Decreased drug activation Increased inactivation of drug or toxic intermediate Increased repair of drug-induced damage to:  DNA  Protein  Membranes Alteration of drug targets (quantitatively or qualitatively) Alteration of cofactor or metabolite levels Alteration of gene expression  DNA mutation, amplification, or deletion  Altered transcription, posttranscription processing, or   translation  Altered stability of macromoleculesMechanisms relevant in vivo Pharmacologic and anatomic drug barriers   (tumor sanctuaries) Host-drug interactions  Increased drug inactivation by normal tissues  Decreased drug activation by normal tissues  Relative increase in normal tissue drug sensitivity   (toxicity)Host-tumor interactionsReproduced with permission from Bast R, Kufe D, Pollock R: Cancer Medicine. Hamilton: BC Decker, Inc; 2000.Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   34622/02/19   2:14 PM 347ONCOLOGYCHAPTER 10Radiation damage is manifested primarily by the loss of cellular reproductive integrity. Most cell types do not show signs of radiation damage until they attempt to divide, so slowly proliferating tumors may persist for months and appear viable. Some cell types, however, undergo apoptosis.The extent of DNA damage after radiation exposure is dependent on several factors. The most important of these is cellular oxygen. Hypoxic cells are significantly less radiosensi-tive than aerated cells. The presence of oxygen is thought to pro-long the half-life of free radicals produced by the interaction of X-rays and cellular H2O2, and thus indirectly ionizing radiation is less efficacious in tumors with areas of hypoxia.168 In contrast, radiation damage from directly ionizing radiation is independent of cellular oxygen levels.The extent of DNA damage from indirectly ionizing radiation is dependent on the phase of the cell cycle. The most radiation-sensitive phases are G2 and M, whereas G1 and late S phases are less sensitive. Thus, irradiation of a population of tumor cells results in killing of a greater proportion of cells in G2 and M phases. However, delivery of radiation in divided doses, a concept referred to as fractionation, allows the surviv-ing G1 and S phase cells to progress to more sensitive phases, a process referred to as reassortment. In contrast to DNA dam-age after indirectly ionizing radiation, that after exposure to directly ionizing radiation is less dependent on the cell-cycle phase.169Several chemicals can modify the effects of ionizing radia-tion. These include hypoxic cell sensitizers such as metronida-zole and misonidazole, which mimic oxygen and increase cell kill of hypoxic cells.168 A second category of radiation sensitiz-ers are the thymidine analogues iododeoxyuridine and bromo-deoxyuridine. These molecules are incorporated into the DNA in place of thymidine and render the cells more susceptible to radiation damage; however, they are associated with consid-erable acute toxicity. Several other chemotherapeutic agents sensitize cells to radiation through various mechanisms, includ-ing 5-fluorouracil, actinomycin D, gemcitabine, paclitaxel, topotecan, doxorubicin, and vinorelbine.168 The development of novel radiosensitizers is an active area of research and mul-tiple small molecules as well as novel nanomaterials are under investigation.170Radiation Therapy PlanningRadiation therapy is delivered in a homogeneous dose to a well-defined region that includes tumor and/or surrounding tissue at risk for subclinical disease. The first step in planning is to define the target to be irradiated as well as the dose-limiting organs in the vicinity.171 Treatment planning includes evaluation of alter-native treatment techniques, which is done through a process referred to as simulation. Once the beam distribution that will best achieve homogeneous delivery to the target volume and minimize the dose to the normal tissue is determined, immo-bilization devices and markings or tattoos on the patient’s skin are used to ensure that each daily treatment is given in the same way. Conventional fractionation is 1.8 to 2 Gy/d, administered 5 days each week for 3 to 7 weeks.Radiation therapy may be used as the primary modality for palliation in certain patients with metastatic disease, pri-marily patients with bony metastases. In these cases, radiation is recommended for symptomatic metastases only. However, lytic metastases in weight-bearing bones such as the femur, tibia, or humerus also are considered for irradiation. Another circumstance in which radiation therapy might be appropriate is spinal cord compression due to metastases to the vertebral body that extend posteriorly to the spinal canal.The goal of adjuvant radiation therapy is to decrease local-regional recurrence rates. Adjuvant radiation therapy can be given before surgery, after surgery, or, in selected cases, during surgery. Preoperative radiation therapy has several advantages. It may minimize seeding of the tumor during surgery and it allows for smaller treatment fields because the operative bed has not been contaminated with tumor cells. Also, radiation therapy for inoperable tumors may achieve adequate reduction to make them operable. The disadvantages of preoperative therapy are an increased risk of postoperative wound healing problems and the difficulty in planning subsequent radiation therapy in patients who have positive surgical margins. If radiation therapy is given postoperatively, it is usually given 3 to 4 weeks after surgery to allow for wound healing. The advantage of postoperative radia-tion therapy is that the surgical specimen can be evaluated histo-logically and radiation therapy can be reserved for patients who are most likely to benefit from it. Further, the radiation therapy can be modified on the basis of margin status. The disadvantages of postoperative radiation therapy are that the volume of nor-mal tissue requiring irradiation may be larger owing to surgical contamination of the tissue planes and that the tumor may be less sensitive to radiation owing to poor oxygenation. Postlapa-rotomy adhesions may decrease the mobility of the small bowel loops, increasing the risk for radiation injury in abdominal or pel-vic irradiation. Given the potential advantages and disadvantages of both approaches, the roles of preoperative and postoperative radiation therapy are being actively evaluated and compared for many cancer types.Another mode of postoperative radiation therapy is brachytherapy. In brachytherapy, unlike in external beam therapy, the radiation source is in contact with the tissue being irradiated. The radiation source may be cesium, gold, iridium, or radium. Brachytherapy is administered via temporary or per-manent delivery implants such as needles, seeds, or catheters. Temporary brachytherapy catheters are placed either during open surgery or percutaneously soon after surgery. The implants are loaded interstitially, and treatment usually is given postop-eratively for a short duration, such as 1 to 3 days. Although brachytherapy has the disadvantages of leaving scars at the cath-eter insertion site and requiring special facilities for inpatient brachytherapy, the advantage of patient convenience owing to the shorter treatment duration has made intracavitary treatment approaches popular for the treatment of breast cancer.Another short delivery approach is intraoperative radio-therapy (IORT), often used in combination with external beam therapy. The oncologic consequences of the limited treatment volume and duration associated with brachytherapy and IORT are not well understood. Accelerated partial breast irradiation with interstitial brachytherapy, intracavitary brachytherapy (MammoSite), IORT, and three-dimensional conformal external beam radiotherapy is being compared with whole breast irra-diation in an intergroup phase 3 trial (NSABP B-39/Radiation Therapy Oncology Group 0413). Several additional studies of adjuvant IORT also are ongoing internationally. There has also been increased interest in utilizing intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT). IMRT is a complex technique for the delivery of radiation therapy preferentially to target structures while mini-mizing doses to adjacent normal critical structures.172 It is widely utilized for the treatment of a variety of tumor types, including Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   34722/02/19   2:14 PM 348BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ithe central nervous system, head and neck, breast, prostate, gas-trointestinal tract, and gynecologic organs, as well as in patients where previous radiation therapy has been delivered. Stereotac-tic radiosurgery uses extremely accurate image-guidance and patient positioning to deliver a high dose of radiation to a small tumor with well-defined margins. In this manner, the dose of radiation being applied to normal tissues can be minimized. It is most commonly used for the treatment of brain and spinal tumors. Protons are a charged particle that can be also used in external beam radiation therapy. Proton therapy employs a beam of protons as a means of delivering radiation to a tumor. In con-trast to photons, which deposit energy continuously during their passage through tissue, protons deposit a large amount of their energy near the end of their path (known as the Bragg peak) and release less energy along the way. Thus, proton therapy could theoretically reduce the exposure of normal tissue to radiation, allowing the delivery of higher doses of radiation to a tumor. It is thought that chemotherapy given concurrently with radiation improves survival rates. Chemotherapy before radiation has the advantage of reducing the tumor burden, which facilitates radia-tion therapy. On the other hand, some chemotherapy regimens, when given concurrently with radiation, may sensitize the cells to radiation therapy. Chemoradiation is being investigated in many tumor types, including rectal cancer, pancreatic cancer, and esophageal cancer.173-175 In a Cochrane review of six ran-domized controlled trials, it was demonstrated that in patients with T3/4 rectal cancer, chemoradiation was associated with a significantly lower local recurrence rate compared with radiation therapy alone (OR 0.56, 95% CI 0.42–0.75, P <0.0001) but was not associated with improved survival.173Side EffectsBoth tumor and normal tissue have radiation dose-response rela-tionships that can be plotted as a sigmoidal curve (Fig. 10-16).171 A minimum dose of radiation must be given before any response is seen. The response to radiation then increases slowly with an increase in dose. At a certain dose level the curves become exponential, with increases in tumor response and normal tissue toxicity with each incremental dose increase. The side effects of radiation therapy can be acute, occurring during or 2 to 3 weeks after therapy, or chronic, occurring weeks to years after therapy. The side effects depend on the tissue included in the target volume. Some of the major acute and chronic sequelae of radiation are summarized in Table 10-13.171,176 In addition to these effects, a small increase in the risk for secondary malignancies is attribut-able to radiation therapy.CANCER PREVENTIONThe truth of the old axiom “An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure” is being increasingly recognized in oncology. Cancer prevention can be divided into three categories: (a) pri-mary prevention (i.e., prevention of initial cancers in healthy indi-viduals), (b) secondary prevention (i.e., prevention of cancer in individuals with premalignant conditions), and (c) tertiary pre-vention (i.e., prevention of second primary cancers in patients cured of their initial disease).The systemic or local administration of therapeutic agents to prevent the development of cancer, called chemoprevention, is being actively explored for several cancer types. In breast can-cer, the NSABP Breast Cancer Prevention Trial demonstrated that tamoxifen administration reduces the risk of breast cancer by one half and reduces the risk of estrogen receptor-positive tumors by 69% in high-risk patients.177 Therefore, tamoxifen has been approved by the FDA for breast cancer chemoprevention. The subsequent NSABP P-2 trial demonstrated that raloxifene is as effective as tamoxifen in reducing the risk of invasive breast cancer and is associated with a lower risk of thromboembolic events and cataracts but a nonstatistically significant higher risk of noninvasive breast cancer; these findings led the FDA to approve raloxifene for prevention as well. Several other agents are also under investigation.178 Celecoxib (a cyclooxygenase 2 [COX-2] inhibitor) has been shown to reduce polyp number and polyp burden in patients with FAP, which led to its approval by the FDA for these patients. However, celecoxib is no longer widely used as a primary preventative treatment in this setting due to the association between COX-2 inhibitors and coronary artery disease. In head and neck cancer, 13-cis-retinoic acid has been shown both to reverse oral leukoplakia and to reduce sec-ond primary tumor development.179,180 However, a large phase 3 clinical trial that utilized low-dose 13-cis-retinoic acid in patients with early stage squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck showed no significant difference in the incidence of tumor recurrence or the second primary tumors between the pla-cebo and chemoprevention arms.181 Thus, the chemoprevention trials completed so far have had mixed results. Much remains to be done over the next few years to improve outcomes and decrease therapy-related toxic effects. It is important for sur-geons to be aware of these preventive options because they are likely to be involved in the diagnosis of premalignant and malig-nant conditions and will be the ones to counsel patients about their chemopreventive options.In selected circumstances, the risk of cancer is high enough to justify surgical prevention. These high-risk settings include hereditary cancer syndromes such as hereditary breast-ovarian cancer syndrome, hereditary diffuse gastric cancer, multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2, FAP, and hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer, as well as some nonhereditary Tumor controlComplicationsABDosePercentFigure 10-16. The probability of tumor control and of complica-tions at different radiation doses. A. At lower doses, the probability of complications is low, with a moderate chance of tumor control. B. Increasing the dose may gain a higher chance of tumor control at the price of significantly higher complication risks. (Reproduced with permission from Eisbruch A, Lichter AS. What a surgeon needs to know about radiation, Ann Surg Oncol. 1997 Sep;4(6):516-522.)Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   34822/02/19   2:14 PM 349ONCOLOGYCHAPTER 10conditions such as chronic ulcerative colitis. Most prophy-lactic surgeries are large ablative surgeries (e.g., bilateral risk-reducing mastectomy or total proctocolectomy). There-fore, it is important that the patient be completely informed about potential surgical complications as well as long-term lifestyle consequences. Further, the conservative options of close surveillance and chemoprevention need to be discussed. The patient’s cancer risk needs to be assessed accurately and implications for survival discussed. Ultimately, the decision to proceed with surgical prevention should be individualized and made with caution.TRENDS IN ONCOLOGYCancer Screening and DiagnosisIt is clear that the practice of oncology will change dramati-cally over the next few decades because our understanding of the molecular basis of cancer and available technologies are evolving rapidly. One of the critical changes expected is earlier detection of cancers. With improvements in available imaging modalities and development of newer functional imaging tech-niques, it is likely that many tumors will be detected at earlier, more curable stages in the near future.Another area of rapid development is the identification of serum markers. High-throughput technologies such as matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spec-troscopy and liquid chromatography ion-spray tandem mass spectroscopy have revolutionized the field of proteomics and are now being used to compare the serum protein profiles of patients with cancer with those of individuals without cancer. Identification of unique proteins as well as unique proteomic profiles for most cancer types is being pursued actively by many researchers and, if successful, could dramatically enhance our ability to detect cancers early.182DNA fragments that are derived from tumors and are circulating in the blood stream are referred to as circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA). Analysis of ctDNA can potentially pro-vide information on the entire tumor genome and has poten-tial clinical utility as a so-called “liquid biopsy” when blood samples are obtained during important junctures of a clinical scenario. ctDNA may originate directly from the tumor or from circulating tumor cells, which refers to intact tumor cells that are shed from primary tumors and enter the bloodstream. The precise mechanism of ctDNA release has not been determined; however, there is evidence to show that the length of the DNA fragments are similar to those seen during the process of apop-tosis. ctDNA can be reliably procured from peripheral blood and analyzed via a number of advanced techniques, including next generation sequencing. The main advantages of using ctDNA in genomic studies is the ability to obtain information on the entire tumor genome, thus avoiding the difficulties of tumor heteroge-neity that are encountered with needle biopsies, and the ability to obtain multiple samples with much less risk to the patient.181Surgical TherapyThe current trend in surgery is toward more conservative resec-tions. With earlier identification of tumors, more conservative operations may be possible. The goal, however, is always to remove the tumor en bloc with wide negative margins. Another interesting area being explored is the destruction of tumors by techniques such as radiofrequency ablation, cryoablation, and heat-producing technologies like lasers, microwaves, or focused ultrasound.The debate over how to manage the regional lymph node basins for certain cancer types continues. With an increasing understanding of the metastatic process, surgeons may be able to stratify patients on the basis of the likelihood that their disease will spread metastatically, based on the gene expression profile of their primary tumors, and offer regional therapy accordingly. There is also a growing interest in minimally invasive surgical treatments for a variety of cancer types.Systemic TherapyThe current trend in systemic therapy is toward individual-ized therapy. Therefore, the intent is to determine the under-lying biology of each tumor to tailor therapy accordingly. Genomic, transcriptional, and proteomic profiling approaches are being used to identify molecular signatures that correlate Table 10-13Local effects of radiationORGANACUTE CHANGESCHRONIC CHANGESSkinErythema, wet or dry desquamation, epilationTelangiectasia, subcutaneous fibrosis, ulcerationGI tractNausea, diarrhea, edema, ulceration, hepatitisStricture, ulceration, perforation, hematocheziaKidney—Nephropathy, renal insufficiencyBladderDysuriaHematuria, ulceration, perforationGonadsSterilityAtrophy, ovarian failureHematopoietic tissueLymphopenia, neutropenia, thrombocytopeniaPancytopeniaBoneEpiphyseal growth arrestNecrosisLungPneumonitisPulmonary fibrosisHeart—Pericarditis, vascular damageUpper aerodigestive tractMucositis, xerostomia, anosmiaXerostomia, dental cariesEyeConjunctivitisCataract, keratitis, optic nerve atrophyNervous systemCerebral edemaNecrosis, myelitisBrunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   34922/02/19   2:14 PM 350BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iwith response to certain agents. It is likely that in the near future all tumors can be tested and treatments individualized. Patients who will respond to conventional therapies can be treated with these regimens, whereas patients who will not respond will not, which spares them the toxicity. Instead, the latter patients can be offered novel therapies. Furthermore, with the advent of effec-tive immune-based therapies, it is likely that patients may be given treatments that can specifically target the alterations driv-ing tumor growth in combination with drugs that can enhance the anticancer immune response. Patients can be genotyped for critical alleles that may affect drug metabolism and thus, may influence the efficacy as well as the side effects of the drugs given. Finally, stratification of patients by gene expression pro-file for prognosis may assist in determining which patients are at higher risk of relapse so that patients whose tumors have less aggressive biologic characteristics can be spared further therapy.REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Siegel R, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2017. CA Cancer J Clin. 2017;67:7-30.	2.	Ravdin PM, Cronin KA, Howlader N, et al. The decrease in breast-cancer incidence in 2003 in the United States. N Engl J Med. 2007;356:1670-1674.	3.	Siegel R, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2016. CA: Cancer J Clin. 2016;66:7-30.	4.	Ferlay J, Shin HR, Bray F, Forman D, Mathers C, Parkin DM; International Agency for Research on Cancer. GLO-BOCAN 2008 v2.0, Cancer incidence and mortality world-wide. Available at: https://www.iarc.fr/en/media-centre/iarcnews/2010/globocan2008.php. Accessed July 1, 2018.	5.	Parkin DM, Bray F, Ferlay J, Pisani P. Global cancer statistics, 2002. CA Cancer J Clin. 2005;55:74-108.	6.	Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. The hallmarks of cancer. Cell. 2000;100:57-70.	7.	Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: the next gen-eration. Cell. 2011;144:646-674.	8.	Pelengaris S, Khan M, Evan G. c-MYC: more than just a mat-ter of life and death. Nat Rev Cancer. 2002;2:764-776.	9.	Li C-J, Zhang, X, Fan G-W. Updates in colorectal cancer stem cell research. J Cancer Res Ther. 2014;10:233-239.	10.	Kastan M, Skapek S. Molecular biology of cancer: the cell cycle. In: DeVita V, Hellman S, Rosenberg S, eds. Cancer: Principles and Practice of Oncology. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2005.	11.	Eccles SA. The role of c-erbB-2/HER2/neu in breast cancer progression and metastasis. J Mammary Gland Biol Neopla-sia. 2001;6:393-406.	12.	Wang SC, Hung MC. HER2 overexpression and cancer target-ing. Semin Oncol. 2001;28:115-124.	13.	Schechter AL, Stern DF, Vaidyanathan L, et al. The neu onco-gene: an erb-B-related gene encoding a 185,000-Mr tumour antigen. Nature. 1984;312:513-516.	14.	Arcila ME, Chaft JE, Nafa K, et al. Prevalence, clinicopatho-logic associations, and molecular spectrum of ERBB2 (HER2) tyrosine kinase mutations in lung adenocarcinomas. Clin  Cancer Res. 2012;18:4910-4918.	15.	Wang SE, Narasanna A, Perez-Torres M, et al. HER2 kinase domain mutation results in constitutive phosphorylation and activation of HER2 and EGFR and resistance to EGFR tyro-sine kinase inhibitors. Cancer Cell. 2006;10:25-38.	16.	Li D, Ambrogio L, Shimamura T, et al. BIBW2992, an irre-versible EGFR/HER2 inhibitor highly effective in preclinical lung cancer models. Oncogene. 2008;27:4702-4711.	17.	Shimamura T, Ji H, Minami Y, et al. Non-small-cell lung cancer and Ba/F3 transformed cells harboring the ERBB2 G776insV_G/C mutation are sensitive to the dual-specific epi-dermal growth factor receptor and ERBB2 inhibitor HKI-272. Cancer Res. 2006;66:6487-6491.	18.	Ma CX, Bose R, Gao F, et al. Neratinib efficacy and circu-lating tumor DNA detection of HER2 mutations in HER2 nonamplified metastatic breast cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2017;23:5687-5695.	19.	Kim R, Tanabe K, Uchida Y, Emi M, Inoue H, Toge T. Cur-rent status of the molecular mechanisms of anticancer drug-induced apoptosis. The contribution of molecular-level analysis to cancer chemotherapy. Cancer Chemother Phar-macol. 2002;50:343-352.	20.	Igney FH, Krammer PH. Death and anti-death: tumour resis-tance to apoptosis. Nat Rev Cancer. 2002;2:277-288.	21.	Levy JMM, Towers CG, Thorburn A. Targeting autophagy in cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2017;17:528-542.	22.	Folkman J, Merler E, Abernathy C, Williams G. Isolation of a tumor factor responsible for angiogenesis. J Exp Med. 1971;133:275-288.	23.	McCarty MF, Liu W, Fan F, et al. Promises and pitfalls of anti-angiogenic therapy in clinical trials. Trends Mol Med. 2003;9:53-58.	24.	Soker S, Takashima S, Miao HQ, Neufeld G, Klagsbrun M. Neuropilin-1 is expressed by endothelial and tumor cells as an isoform-specific receptor for vascular endothelial growth factor. Cell. 1998;92:735-745.	25.	Stacker SA, Achen MG, Jussila L, Baldwin ME, Alitalo K. Lymphangiogenesis and cancer metastasis. Nat Rev Cancer. 2002;2:573-583.	26.	He Y, Kozaki K, Karpanen T, et al. Suppression of tumor lym-phangiogenesis and lymph node metastasis by blocking vas-cular endothelial growth factor receptor 3 signaling. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2002;94:819-825.	27.	Steeg PS. Metastasis suppressors alter the signal transduction of cancer cells. Nat Rev Cancer. 2003;3:55-63.	28.	Naumov GN, MacDonald IC, Weinmeister PM, et al. Per-sistence of solitary mammary carcinoma cells in a second-ary site: a possible contributor to dormancy. Cancer Res. 2002;62:2162-2168.	29.	Demichelu R. Tumour dormancy: findings and hypotheses from clinical research on breast cancer. Semin Cancer Biol. 2001;11:297-306.	30.	Tohme S, Simmons RL, Tsung A. Surgery for cancer: a trigger for metastases. Cancer Res. 2017;77:1548-1552.	31.	Chambers AF, Groom AC, MacDonald IC. Dissemination and growth of cancer cells in metastatic sites. Nat Rev Cancer. 2002;2:563-572.	32.	Stadler ZK, Come SE. Review of gene-expression profiling and its clinical use in breast cancer. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2009;69:1-11.	33.	De Craene B, Berx G. Regulatory networks defining EMT during cancer initiation and progression. Nat Rev Cancer. 2013;13:97-110.	34.	Alderton GK. Metastasis: epithelial to mesenchymal and back again. Nat Rev Cancer. 2013;13:3.	35.	Ocana OH, Corcoles R, Fabra A, et al. Metastatic colonization requires the repression of the epithelial-mesenchymal transi-tion inducer Prrx1. Cancer Cell. 2012;22:709-724.	36.	Tsai JH, Donaher JL, Murphy DA, Chau S, Yang J. Spatio-temporal regulation of epithelial-mesenchymal transition is essential for squamous cell carcinoma metastasis. Cancer Cell. 2012;22:725-736.	37.	Reya T, Morrison SJ, Clarke MF, Weissman IL. Stem cells, cancer, and cancer stem cells. Nature. 2001;414:105-111.	38.	Stratton MR, Campbell PJ, Futreal PA. The cancer genome. Nature. 2009;458:719-724.Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   35022/02/19   2:14 PM 351ONCOLOGYCHAPTER 10	39.	Olivier M, Hussain SP, Caron de Fromentel C, Hainaut P, Harris CC. TP53 mutation spectra and load: a tool for gen-erating hypotheses on the etiology of cancer. IARC Sci Publ. 2004:247-270.	40.	Kennedy RD, D’Andrea AD. DNA repair pathways in clini-cal practice: lessons from pediatric cancer susceptibility syn-dromes. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:3799-3808.	41.	Hanks S, Rahman N. Aneuploidy-cancer predisposition syn-dromes: a new link between the mitotic spindle checkpoint and cancer. Cell Cycle. 2005;4:225-227.	42.	Lengauer C, Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B. Genetic instabilities in human cancers. Nature. 1998;396:643-649.	43.	Futreal PA, Coin L, Marshall M, et al. A census of human cancer genes. Nat Rev Cancer. 2004;4:177-183.	44.	Forbes SA, Tang G, Bindal N, et al. COSMIC (the Catalogue of Somatic Mutations in Cancer): a resource to investigate acquired mutations in human cancer. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010;38:D652-D657.	45.	Meric-Bernstam F, Mills GB. Overcoming implementa-tion challenges of personalized cancer therapy. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2012;9:542-548.	46.	Perou CM, Sorlie T, Eisen MB, et al. Molecular portraits of human breast tumours. Nature. 2000;406:747-752.	47.	Sorlie T, Tibshirani R, Parker J, et al. Repeated observation of breast tumor subtypes in independent gene expression data sets. Proc Natl Acad Sciences USA. 2003;100:8418-8423.	48.	Sorlie T, Perou CM, Tibshirani R, et al. Gene expression patterns of breast carcinomas distinguish tumor subclasses with clinical implications. Proc Natl Acad Sciences USA. 2001;98:10869-10874.	49.	Gerlinger M, Rowan AJ, Horswell S, et al. Intratumor het-erogeneity and branched evolution revealed by multiregion sequencing. N Engl J Med. 2012;366:883-892.	50.	Michailidou K, Lindström S, Dennis J. Association anal-ysis identifies 65 new breast cancer risk loci. Nature. 2017;551:92-94.	51.	Vahteristo P, Tamminen A, Karvinen P, et al. p53, CHK2, and CHK1 genes in Finnish families with Li-Fraumeni syndrome: further evidence of CHK2 in inherited cancer predisposition. Cancer Res. 2001;61:5718-5722.	52.	DiCiommo D, Gallie BL, Bremner R. Retinoblastoma: the disease, gene and protein provide critical leads to understand cancer. Semin Cancer Biol. 2000;10:255-269.	53.	Knudson AG. Two genetic hits (more or less) to cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2001;1:157-162.	54.	Li FP, Fraumeni JF, Jr. Soft-tissue sarcomas, breast cancer, and other neoplasms. A familial syndrome? Ann Intern Med. 1969;71:747-752.	55.	Li FP, Fraumeni JF, Jr., Mulvihill JJ, et al. A cancer fam-ily syndrome in twenty-four kindreds. Cancer Res. 1988;48:5358-5362.	56.	Birch JM, Hartley AL, Tricker KJ, et al. Prevalence and diver-sity of constitutional mutations in the p53 gene among 21 Li-Fraumeni families. Cancer Res. 1994;54:1298-1304.	57.	Birch JM, Alston RD, McNally RJ, et al. Relative frequency and morphology of cancers in carriers of germline TP53 muta-tions. Oncogene. 2001;20:4621-4628.	58.	Birch JM, Blair V, Kelsey AM, et al. Cancer phenotype cor-relates with constitutional TP53 genotype in families with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Oncogene. 1998;17:1061-1068.	59.	Loman N, Johannsson O, Kristoffersson U, Olsson H, Borg A. Family history of breast and ovarian cancers and BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations in a population-based series of early-onset breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2001;93:1215-1223.	60.	Ford D, Easton DF, Bishop DT, Narod SA, Goldgar DE. Risks of cancer in BRCA1-mutation carriers. Breast Cancer Linkage Consortium. Lancet. 1994;343:692-695.	61.	Ford D, Easton DF, Stratton M, et al. Genetic heterogeneity and penetrance analysis of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes in breast cancer families. The Breast Cancer Linkage Consor-tium. Am J Hum Genet. 1998;62:676-689.	62.	The Breast Cancer Linkage Consortium. Cancer risks in BRCA2 mutation carriers. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1999;91: 1310-1316.	63.	Venkitaraman AR. Cancer susceptibility and the functions of BRCA1 and BRCA2. Cell. 2002;108:171-182.	64.	Liu Y, West SC. Distinct functions of BRCA1 and BRCA2 in double-strand break repair. Breast Cancer Res. 2002;4:9-13.	65.	Venkitaraman AR. Functions of BRCA1 and BRCA2 in the biological response to DNA damage. J Cell Sci. 2001;114:3591-3598.	66.	Hedenfalk I, Duggan D, Chen Y, et al. Gene-expression pro-files in hereditary breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2001;344: 539-548.	67.	Sieber OM, Tomlinson IP, Lamlum H. The adenomatous pol-yposis coli (APC) tumour suppressor–genetics, function and disease. Mol Med Today. 2000;6:462-469.	68.	Caspari R, Olschwang S, Friedl W, et al. Familial adenomatous polyposis: desmoid tumours and lack of ophthalmic lesions (CHRPE) associated with APC mutations beyond codon 1444. Hum Mol Genet. 1995;4:337-340.	69.	Davies DR, Armstrong JG, Thakker N, et al. Severe Gardner syndrome in families with mutations restricted to a specific region of the APC gene. Am J Hum Genet. 1995;57:1151-1158.	70.	Lynch HT, Smyrk TC, Watson P, et al. Genetics, natural his-tory, tumor spectrum, and pathology of hereditary nonpolypo-sis colorectal cancer: an updated review. Gastroenterology. 1993;104:1535-1549.	71.	Vasen HF, Watson P, Mecklin JP, Lynch HT. New clinical cri-teria for hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC, Lynch syndrome) proposed by the International Collaborative group on HNPCC. Gastroenterology. 1999;116:1453-1456.	72.	Leach FS, Nicolaides NC, Papadopoulos N, et al. Mutations of a mutS homolog in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. Cell. 1993;75:1215-1225.	73.	Fishel R, Lescoe MK, Rao MR, et al. The human mutator gene homolog MSH2 and its association with hereditary nonpol-yposis colon cancer. Cell. 1993;75:1027-1038.	74.	Miyaki M, Konishi M, Tanaka K, et al. Germline mutation of MSH6 as the cause of hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. Nat Genet. 1997;17:271-272.	75.	Bronner CE, Baker SM, Morrison PT, et al. Mutation in the DNA mismatch repair gene homologue hMLH1 is associ-ated with hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer. Nature. 1994;368:258-261.	76.	Papadopoulos N, Nicolaides NC, Wei YF, et al. Mutation of a mutL homolog in hereditary colon cancer. Science. 1994;263:1625-1629.	77.	Nicolaides NC, Papadopoulos N, Liu B, et al. Mutations of two PMS homologues in hereditary nonpolyposis colon can-cer. Nature. 1994;371:75-80.	78.	Pearlman R, Frankel WL, Swanson. Prevalence and spec-trum of germline cancer susceptibility gene mutations among patients with early-onset colorectal cancer. JAMA Oncol. 2017;3:464-471.	79.	Steck PA, Pershouse MA, Jasser SA, et al. Identification of a candidate tumour suppressor gene, MMAC1, at chromosome 10q23.3 that is mutated in multiple advanced cancers. Nat Genet. 1997;15:356-362.	80.	Liaw D, Marsh DJ, Li J, et al. Germline mutations of the PTEN gene in Cowden disease, an inherited breast and thyroid cancer syndrome. Nat Genet. 1997;16:64-67.	81.	Eng C. Will the real Cowden syndrome please stand up: revised diagnostic criteria. J Med Genet. 2000;37:828-830.Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   35122/02/19   2:14 PM 352BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART I	82.	Greene MH. The genetics of hereditary melanoma and nevi. 1998 update. Cancer. 1999;86:2464-2477.	83.	Goldstein AM, Fraser MC, Struewing JP, et al. Increased risk of pancreatic cancer in melanoma-prone kindreds with p16INK4 mutations. N Engl J Med. 1995;333:970-974.	84.	Fitzgerald RC, Caldas C. E-cadherin mutations and heredi-tary gastric cancer: prevention by resection? Dig Dis. 2002;20:23-31.	85.	Berx G, Van Roy F. The E-cadherin/catenin complex: an important gatekeeper in breast cancer tumorigenesis and malignant progression. Breast Cancer Res. 2001;3:289-293.	86.	Alsanea O, Clark OH. Familial thyroid cancer. Curr Opin Oncol. 2001;13:44-51.	87.	Redmond DE, Jr. Tobacco and cancer: the first clinical report, 1761. N Engl J Med. 1970;282:18-23.	88.	International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC). IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans, Complete List of Agents Evaluated and Their Clas-sification. Avaialable at: http://monographs.iarc.fr/ENG/Clas-sification/index.php. Accessed July 1, 2018.	89.	Baan R, Grosse Y, Straif K, et al. A review of human car-cinogens–part F: chemical agents and related occupations. Lancet Oncol. 2009;10:1143-1144.	90.	Timblin C, Jannsen-Heininger Y, Mossman B. Physical agents in human carcinogenesis. In: Coleman W, Tsongalis G, eds. The Molecular Basis of Human Cancer. Totowa, NJ: Humana Press; 2002:223.	91.	Stanton MF, Layard M, Tegeris A, et al. Relation of par-ticle dimension to carcinogenicity in amphibole asbestoses and other fibrous minerals. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1981;67: 965-975.	92.	Rous P. A transmissible avian neoplasm. (Sarcoma of the com-mon fowl.) J Exp Med. 1910;12(5):696-705.	93.	Butel JS. Viral carcinogenesis: revelation of molecular mechanisms and etiology of human disease. Carcinogenesis. 2000;21:405-426.	94.	El-Serag HB. Hepatocellular carcinoma and hepatitis C in the United States. Hepatology. 2002;36:S74-S83.	95.	Ault KA. Effect of prophylactic human papillomavirus L1 virus-like-particle vaccine on risk of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia grade 2, grade 3, and adenocarcinoma in situ: a combined analysis of four randomised clinical trials. Lancet. 2007;369:1861-1868.	96.	Chaturvedi AK, Graubard BI, Broutian T, et al. Effect of pro-phylactic human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccination on oral HPV infections among young adults in the United States.  J Clin Oncol. 2018;36(3):262-267.	97.	Smith RA, Brooks D, Cokkinides V, Saslow D, Brawley OW. Cancer screening in the United States, 2013: a review of current American Cancer Society guidelines, current issues in cancer screening, and new guidance on cervical cancer screening and lung cancer screening. CA Cancer J Clin. 2013;63:87-105.	98.	Whitman G, Stelling C. Stereotactic core needle biopsy of breast lesions: experience at the University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center. In: Singletary S, ed. Breast Cancer. New York: Springer-Verlag; 1999:4.	99.	Claus EB, Risch N, Thompson WD. Autosomal dominant inheritance of early-onset breast cancer. Implications for risk prediction. Cancer. 1994;73:643-651.	100.	Tyrer J, Duffy SW, Cuzick J. A breast cancer prediction model incorporating familial and personal risk factors. Stat Med. 2004;23:1111-1130.	101.	Berry DA, Iversen ES, Jr, Gudbjartsson, et al. BRCAPRO vali-dation, sensitivity of genetic testing of BRCA1/BRCA2, and prevalence of other breast cancer susceptibility genes. J Clin Oncol. 2002;20:2701-2712.	102.	Antoniou AC, Pharoah PP, Smith P, Easton DF. The BOA-DICEA model of genetic susceptibility to breast and ovarian cancer. Br J Cancer. 2004;91:1580-1590.	103.	Gail MH, Brinton LA, Byar DP, et al. Projecting individu-alized probabilities of developing breast cancer for white females who are being examined annually. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1989;81:1879-1886.	104.	National Cancer Institute. Breast Cancer Risk Assessment Tool. Available at: http://www.cancer.gov/bcrisktool. Accessed July 1, 2018.	105.	Bach PB, Kattan MW, Thornquist MD, et al. Variations in lung cancer risk among smokers. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2003;95:470-478.	106.	Bassett L, Hendrick R, Bassford T. Quality determinants of mammography. In: Agency for Health Care Policy and Research PHS, ed. Clinical Practice Guideline No 13. Rockville, MD: US Department of Health and Human Services; 1994.	107.	Saslow D, Boetes C, Burke W, et al. American Cancer Soci-ety guidelines for breast screening with MRI as an adjunct to mammography. Cancer J Clin. 2007;57:75-89.	108.	Aberle DR, Adams AM, Berg CD, et al. Reduced lung-cancer mortality with low-dose computed tomographic screening. N Engl J Med. 2011;365:395-409.	109.	Wender R, Fontham ET, Barrera E, Jr., et al. American Can-cer Society lung cancer screening guidelines. Cancer J Clin. 2013;63:106-117.	110.	Jacobs TW, Connolly JL, Schnitt SJ. Nonmalignant lesions in breast core needle biopsies: to excise or not to excise? Am J Surg Pathol. 2002;26:1095-1110.	111.	Krop I, Ismaila N, Andre F, Bast RC, et al. Use of biomarkers to guide decisions on adjuvant systemic therapy for women with early-stage invasive breast cancer: American Society of Clinical Oncology clinical practice guideline focused update. J Clin Oncol. 2017;35:2838-2847.	112.	Sepulveda AR, Hamilton SR, Allegra CJ et al. Molecular biomarkers for the evaluation of colorectal cancer: Guideline from the American Society for Clinical Pathology, College of American Pathologists, Association for Molecular Pathology, and the American Society of Clinical Oncology. J Clin Oncol. 2017;35:1453-1486.	113.	Way BA, Kessler G. Tumour marker overview. Lab Med News-letter. 1996;4:1-7.	114.	Paik S, Shak S, Tang G, et al. A multigene assay to predict recurrence of tamoxifen-treated, node-negative breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2004;351:2817-2826.	115.	van ‘t Veer LJ, Dai H, van de Vijver MJ, et al. Gene expression profiling predicts clinical outcome of breast cancer. Nature. 2002;415:530-536.	116.	Cardoso F, van ‘t Veer LJ, Bogaerts J, et al; MINDACT Inves-tigators. Gene signature as an aid to treatment decisions in early-stage breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2016;375:717-729.	117.	Moyer VA. Screening for prostate cancer: U.S. Preventive Ser-vices Task Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2012;157:120-134.	118.	Wolf AM, Wender RC, Etzioni RB, et al. American Cancer Society guideline for the early detection of prostate cancer: update 2010. Cancer J Clin. 2010;60:70-98.	119.	Alpha-Fetoprotein (AFP), Serum, Tumor Marker (Serial Monitor), Laboratory Corporation of America. Available at: http://www.labcorp.com/datasets/labcorp/html/chapter/mono/ri000600.htm. Accessed December 26, 2008.	120.	Nguyen MH, Keeffe EB. Screening for hepatocellular carci-noma. J Clin Gastroenterol. 2002;35:S86-S91.	121.	Chan DW, Beveridge RA, Muss H, et al. Use of Truquant BR radioimmunoassay for early detection of breast cancer recur-rence in patients with stage II and stage III disease. J Clin Oncol. 1997;15:2322-2328.Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   35222/02/19   2:14 PM 353ONCOLOGYCHAPTER 10	122.	Outcomes of cancer treatment for technology assessment and cancer treatment guidelines. American Society of Clinical Oncology. J Clin Oncol. 1996;14:671-679.	123.	Cristofanilli M, Budd GT, Ellis MJ, et al. Circulating tumor cells, disease progression, and survival in metastatic breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2004;351:781-791.	124.	Lucci A, Hall CS, Lodhi AK, et al. Circulating tumour cells in non-metastatic breast cancer: a prospective study. Lancet Oncol. 2012;13:688-695.	125.	Rack B, Schindlbeck C, Jückstock J, et al. Circulating tumor cells predict survival in early average-to-high risk breast cancer patients. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2014;106(5). pii: dju066.	126.	Huang SK, Hoon DS. Liquid biopsy utility for the surveil-lance of cutaneous malignant melanoma patients. Mol Oncol. 2016;10:450-463.	127.	Scoggins CR, Ross MI, Reintgen DS, et al. Prospective multi-institutional study of reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction for molecular staging of melanoma. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:2849-2857.	128.	Braun S, Vogl FD, Naume B, et al. A pooled analysis of bone marrow micrometastasis in breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2005;353:793-802.	129.	Giuliano AE, Hawes D, Ballman KV, et al. Association of occult metastases in sentinel lymph nodes and bone marrow with survival among women with early-stage invasive breast cancer. JAMA. 2011;306:385-393.	130.	Janni W, Rack B, Lindemann K, Harbeck N. Detection of micrometastatic disease in bone marrow: is it ready for prime time? Oncologist. 2005;10:480-492.	131.	Grau A, Spitz F, Bouvet M. Pancreatic adenocarcinoma. In: Feig B, Berger D, Fuhrman G, eds. The MD Anderson Surgi-cal Oncology Handbook. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2003:303.	132.	Balch CM, Soong SJ, Smith T, et al. Long-term results of a prospective surgical trial comparing 2 cm vs. 4 cm excision margins for 740 patients with 1-4 mm melanomas. Ann Surg Oncol. 2001;8:101-108.	133.	Moore HG, Riedel E, Minsky BD, et al. Adequacy of 1-cm dis-tal margin after restorative rectal cancer resection with sharp mesorectal excision and preoperative combined-modalitytherapy. Ann Surg Oncol. 2003;10:80-85.	134.	Kapiteijn E, van de Velde CJ. The role of total mesorectal exci-sion in the management of rectal cancer. Surg Clin North Am. 2002;82:995-1007.	135.	Meric F, Hunt KK. Surgical options for breast cancer. In: Hunt KK, Robb GL, Strom EA, Ueno NT, eds. MD Anderson  Cancer Care Series—Breast Cancer. New York: Springer-Verlag; 2001:187-222.	136.	Cabanas RM. An approach for the treatment of penile carci-noma. Cancer. 1977;39:456-466.	137.	Querzoli P, Pedriali M, Rinaldi R, et al. Axillary lymph node nanometastases are prognostic factors for disease-free survival and metastatic relapse in breast cancer patients. Clin Cancer Res. 2006;12:6696-6701.	138.	Mocellin S, Pilati P, Lise M, Nitti D. Meta-analysis of hepatic arterial infusion for unresectable liver metastases from colorectal cancer: the end of an era? J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:5649-5654.	139.	Faries MB, Thompson JF, Cochran AJ, et al. Completion dis-section or observation for sentinel-node metastasis in mela-noma. N Engl J Med. 2017;376:2211-2222.	140.	Pearson AS, Izzo F, Fleming RY, et al. Intraoperative radiofre-quency ablation or cryoablation for hepatic malignancies. Am J Surg. 1999;178:592-599.	141.	Curley SA, Izzo F. Radiofrequency ablation of primary and met-astatic hepatic malignancies. Int J Clin Oncol. 2002;7:72-81.	142.	Fisher B, Bryant J, Wolmark N, et al. Effect of preoperative chemotherapy on the outcome of women with operable breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 1998;16:2672-2685.	143.	Meric F, Hess KR, Varma DG, et al. Radiographic response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy is a predictor of local control and survival in soft tissue sarcomas. Cancer. 2002;95:11201126.	144.	Therasse P, Arbuck SG, Eisenhauer EA, et al. New guidelines to evaluate the response to treatment in solid tumors. European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer, National Cancer Institute of the United States, National Cancer Institute of Canada. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2000;92:205-216.	145.	Page R. Principles of chemotherapy. In: Pazdur R, Hoskins W, Coia L, eds. Cancer Management: A Multidisciplinary Approach. Melville, NY: PRR Inc; 2001:21.	146.	Miller AB, Hoogstraten B, Staquet M, Winkler A. Reporting results of cancer treatment. Cancer. 1981;47:207-214.	147.	Chapman PB, Hauschild A, Robert C, et al. Improved survival with vemurafenib in melanoma with BRAF V600E mutation. N Engl J Med. 2011;364:2507-2516.	148.	McAuliffe PF, Meric-Bernstam F, Mills GB, Gonzalez-Angulo AM. Deciphering the role of PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway in breast cancer biology and pathogenesis. Clin Breast Cancer. 2010;10(suppl 3):S59-S65.	149.	Mocellin S, Rossi CR, Lise M, Marincola FM. Adjuvant immunotherapy for solid tumors: from promise to clinical application. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2002;51:583-595.	150.	Perales MA, Wolchok JD. Melanoma vaccines. Cancer Invest. 2002;20:1012-1026.	151.	Lizee G, Cantu MA, Hwu P. Less yin, more yang: confront-ing the barriers to cancer immunotherapy. Clin Cancer Res. 2007;13:5250-5255.	152.	Dermime S, Armstrong A, Hawkins RE, Stern PL. Cancer vac-cines and immunotherapy. Br Med Bull. 2002;62:149-162.	153.	Berinstein NL. Enhancing cancer vaccines with immunomod-ulators. Vaccine. 2007;25 Suppl 2:B72-B88.	154.	Cranmer LD, Hersh E. The role of the CTLA4 blockade in the treatment of malignant melanoma. Cancer Invest. 2007;25:613-631.	155.	Balar AV, Weber JS. PD-1 and PD-L1 antibodies in cancer: current status and future directions. Cancer Immunol Immu-nother. 2017;6:551-564.	156.	Hodi FS, O’Day SJ, McDermott DF, et al. Improved survival with ipilimumab in patients with metastatic melanoma. The  N Engl J Med. 2010;363:711-723.	157.	Robert C, Thomas L, Bondarenko I, et al. Ipilimumab plus dacarbazine for previously untreated metastatic melanoma.  N Engl J Med. 2011;364:2517-2526.	158.	Jacquelot N, Roberti MP, Enot DP, et al. Predictors of responses to immune checkpoint blockade in advanced mela-noma. Nat Commun. 2017;8:592.	159.	Cusack JC, Jr., Tanabe KK. Introduction to cancer gene ther-apy. Surg Oncol Clin N Am. 2002;11:497-519.	160.	Morrow C, Cowan K. Drug resistance and its clinical circum-vention. In: Bast R, Kufe D, Pollock R, eds. Cancer Medicine. Hamilton: B.C. Decker, Inc; 2000:539.	161.	Mittendorf EA, Wu Y, Scaltriti M, et al. Loss of HER2 amplification following trastuzumab-based neoadjuvant systemic therapy and survival outcomes. Clin Cancer Res. 2009;15:7381-7388.	162.	Pao W, Miller VA, Politi KA, et al. Acquired resistance of lung adenocarcinomas to gefitinib or erlotinib is associated with a second mutation in the EGFR kinase domain. PLoS Med. 2005;2:e73.	163.	Engelman JA, Zejnullahu K, Mitsudomi T, et al. MET amplifi-cation leads to gefitinib resistance in lung cancer by activating ERBB3 signaling. Science. 2007;316:1039-1043.Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   35322/02/19   2:14 PM 354BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART I	164.	Bean J, Brennan C, Shih JY, et al. MET amplification occurs with or without T790M mutations in EGFR mutant lung tumors with acquired resistance to gefitinib or erlotinib. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2007;104:20932-20937.	165.	Sequist LV, Waltman BA, Dias-Santagata D, et al. Genotypic and histological evolution of lung cancers acquiring resistance to EGFR inhibitors. Sci Transl Med. 2011;3:75ra26.	166.	Takezawa K, Pirazzoli V, Arcila ME, et al. HER2 amplifica-tion: a potential mechanism of acquired resistance to EGFR inhibition in EGFR-mutant lung cancers that lack the second-site EGFRT790M mutation. Cancer Discov. 2012;2:922-933.	167.	Misale S, Yaeger R, Hobor S, et al. Emergence of KRAS muta-tions and acquired resistance to anti-EGFR therapy in colorec-tal cancer. Nature. 2012;486:532-536.	168.	Mundt A, Roeske J, Weichelbaum R. Principles of radiation oncology. In: Bast R, Kuff D, Pollock R, eds. Cancer Medi-cine. Hamilton: B.C. Decker Inc; 2000:465.	169.	Raju MR, Carpenter SG. A heavy particle comparative study. Part IV: acute and late reactions. Br J Radiol. 1978;51:720-727.	170.	Wang H, Mu X, He H, Zhang XD. Cancer radiosensitizers. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2018;39:24-48.	171.	Eisbruch A, Lichter AS. What a surgeon needs to know about radiation. Ann Surg Oncol. 1997;4:516-522.	172.	Hartford AC, Galvin JM, Beyer DC, et al. American College of Radiology (ACR) and American Society for Radiation Oncology (ASTRO) Practice Guideline for Intensity-modulated Radiation Therapy (IMRT). Am J Clin Oncol. 2012;35:612-617.	173.	McCarthy K, Pearson K, Fulton R, Hewitt J. Pre-operative chemoradiation for non-metastatic locally advanced rectal cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;12:CD008368.	174.	Evans DB, Varadhachary GR, Crane CH, et al. Preoperative gemcitabine-based chemoradiation for patients with resect-able adenocarcinoma of the pancreatic head. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26:3496-3502.	175.	Courrech Staal EF, Aleman BM, Boot H, van Velthuysen ML, van Tinteren H, van Sandick JW. Systematic review of the ben-efits and risks of neoadjuvant chemoradiation for oesophageal cancer. Br J Surg. 2010;97:1482-1496.	176.	Daly J, Bertagnolli M, DeCosse J. Oncology. In: Schwartz S, Spencer F, Galloway A, eds. Principles of Surgery. New York: McGraw-Hill; 1999:297.	177.	Fisher B, Costantino JP, Wickerham DL, et al. Tamoxifen for prevention of breast cancer: report of the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project P-1 Study. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1998;90:1371-1388.	178.	Vogel VG, Costantino JP, Wickerham DL, et al. Effects of tamox-ifen vs raloxifene on the risk of developing invasive breast cancer and other disease outcomes: the NSABP Study of Tamoxifen and Raloxifene (STAR) P-2 trial. JAMA. 2006;295:2727-2741.	179.	Lippman SM, Batsakis JG, Toth BB, et al. Comparison of low-dose isotretinoin with beta carotene to prevent oral carcino-genesis. N Engl J Med. 1993;328:15-20.	180.	Hong WK, Lippman SM, Itri LM, et al. Prevention of second primary tumors with isotretinoin in squamous-cell carcinoma of the head and neck. N Engl J Med. 1990;323:795-801.	181.	Bettegowda C, Sausen M, Leary RJ, et al. Detection of circu-lating tumor DNA in earlyand late-stage human malignan-cies. Sci Transl Med. 2014;6:224ra24.	182.	Sidransky D. Emerging molecular markers of cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2002;2:210-219.	183.	Meric-Bernstam F, Hung MC. Advances in targeting human epi-dermal growth factor receptor-2 signaling for cancer therapy. Clin Cancer Res. 2006;12:6326-6330.	184.	Pao W, Hutchinson KE. Chipping away at the lung cancer genome. Nat Med. 2012;18:349-351.Brunicardi_Ch10_p0305-p0354.indd   35422/02/19   2:14 PM patients awaiting a transplant and the limited number of organs available is one of the field’s biggest challenges (Fig. 11-1). In 2017 alone, according to the United Network for Organ Shar-ing (UNOS), about 115,000 patients in the United States were awaiting a transplant, yet the number of transplants performed approached only about 35,000 (Fig. 11-2).DEFINITIONSIn addition to being the overall name of this relatively new field of medicine, transplantation is the process of transferring an organ, tissue, or cell from one place to another. An organ transplant is a surgical procedure in which a failing organ is replaced by a functioning one. The organ is transplanted either orthotopically (implanted in the same anatomic location in the recipient as it was in the donor) or heterotopically (implanted in TransplantationDavid L. Dunn, Angelika C. Gruessner, and  Rainer W.G. Gruessner 11chapterBackground	355Definitions	355History	356Transplant Immunobiology	357Transplant Antigens	358Allorecognition and   Lymphocyte Activation	358Clinical Rejection	358Hyperacute / 358Acute / 358Chronic / 358Clinical Immunosuppression	358Induction	359Depleting Antibodies / 359Nondepleting Antibodies / 359Maintenance	359Corticosteroids / 359Azathioprine / 360Mycophenolate Mofetil / 361Sirolimus / 361Cyclosporine / 362Tacrolimus / 362Belatacept / 362Humoral Rejection	362Rituximab / 362Bortezomib / 363Eculizumab / 363Infections and Malignancies	363Infections / 363Malignancies / 364Organ Procurement   and Preservation	364Deceased Donors / 364Living Donors / 366Organ Preservation / 366Kidney Transplantation	368Introduction / 368Pretransplant Evaluation / 368Medical Evaluation / 369Surgical Evaluation / 370Recipient Operation / 370Grafts With Multiple Renal Arteries / 372En Bloc Grafts / 372Perioperative Care / 373Results / 373Pancreas Transplantation	374Donor Operation / 374Back Table Preparation of the  Pancreas Graft / 375Recipient Operation / 375Complications / 377Living Donor Pancreas Transplants / 377Results / 378Islet versus Pancreas Transplants / 378Islet Transplantation	378Liver Transplantation	379History / 379Indications / 380Recipient Selection / 381Contraindications / 382Surgical Procedure / 382Pediatric Transplants / 383Deceased Donor Split-Liver  Transplants / 383Living Donor Transplants / 383Postoperative Care / 383Evaluation of Graft Function / 384Complications / 385Intestine and Multivisceral  Transplantation	385Indications and Recipient Selection / 386Surgical Procedure / 386Postoperative Care / 388Heart and Lung   Transplantation	388History / 388Heart Transplants / 389Lung Transplants /390Heart-Lung Transplants / 391Xenotransplants	391BACKGROUNDOrgan transplantation is a relatively novel field of medicine that has made significant progress since the second half of the 20th century. Advances in surgical technique and a better under-standing of immunology are the two main reasons that transplants have evolved from experimental procedures, just several decades ago, to a widely accepted treatment today for patients with end-stage organ failure. Throughout the world, for a variety of indications, kidney, liver, pancreas, intestine, heart, and lung transplants are now the current standard of care.But the success of transplantation has created new chal-lenges. A better understanding of the pathophysiology of end-stage organ failure as well as advances in critical care medicine and in the treatment of various diseases led to expanding the cri-teria for, and decreasing the contraindications to, transplants. As a result, the discrepancy between the ever-growing number of 1Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   35501/03/19   6:53 PM 356Figure 11-1. Patients on the waiting list and the number of organ transplants performed, 2000 to 2009. (U.S. data from the Scientific Registry of Transplant Recipients Annual Report, http://srtr.org)Key Points1	The field of transplantation has made tremendous advances in the last 50 years, mainly due to refinements in surgical technique and development of effective immunosuppressive medications.2	Although immunosuppressive medications are essential for transplantation, they are associated with significant shortand long-term morbidity.3	Opportunistic infections can be significantly lowered by the use of appropriate antimicrobial agents.4	Kidney transplantation represents the treatment of choice for almost all patients with end-stage renal disease. The gap between demand (patients on the waiting list) and supply (available kidneys) continues to widen.5	Pancreas transplantation represents the most reliable way to achieve euglycemia in patients with poorly controlled diabetes.6	The results of islet transplantation continue to improve but still trail those of pancreas transplantation.7	Liver transplantation has become the standard of care for many patients with end-stage liver failure and/or liver cancer.another anatomic location). Orthotopic transplants require the removal of the diseased organ (heart, lungs, liver, or intestine); in heterotopic transplants, the diseased organ is kept in place (kidney, pancreas).According to the degree of immunologic similarity between the donor and recipient, transplants are divided into three main categories: (a) an autotransplant is the transfer of cells, tissue, or an organ from one part of the body to another part in the same person, so no immunosuppression is required; this type of transplant includes skin, artery or vein, bone, carti-lage, nerve, and islet cell transplants; (b) an allotransplant is the transfer of cells, tissue, or an organ from one person to another of the same species; with the exception of identical twins, the immune system of the recipient recognizes the donated organ as a foreign body, so immunosuppression is required in order to avoid rejection; and (c) a xenotransplant is the transfer of cells, tissue, or an organ from one organism to another of a different species. To date, animal-to-human transplants are still experi-mental procedures, given the very complex immunologic and infectious issues that have yet to be solved.HISTORYOver the centuries, many different references to transplantation can be found in the world’s literature, yet transplantation as a recognized scientific and medical field began to emerge only in 2000200120022003200420052006200720082009010,00020,00030,00040,00050,00060,00070,00080,00090,000100,000110,000Number of patients# Waiting# Transplantedthe middle of the 20th century. Two major events led to the rise of transplantation.First, the surgical technique of the vascular anastomosis was developed by the French surgeon Alexis Carrel.1 This led to increased transplant activity, especially in animal models. Rus-sian surgeon Yu Yu Voronoy was the first to report a series of human-to-human kidney transplants in the 1940s.2 But the out-comes were dismal, mainly because of the lack of understanding of the underlying immunologic processes.Second, the findings of British scientist Sir Peter B. Medawar in the 1940s were also key.3 In his work with skin grafts in animal models and in human burn patients, he learned that the immune system plays a crucial role in the failure of skin grafts. His research led to a better understanding of the immune system and is considered to be the birth of transplant immunobiology.The first human transplant with long-term success was performed by Joseph Murray in Boston, Massachusetts, in 1954.4 Because it was a living related kidney transplant between identical twins, no immunosuppression was required; the recipi-ent lived for another 8 years before he died of issues unrelated to the transplanted kidney. Other centers performed similar trans-plants and could reproduce similar good results.Ultimately, attempts were made to perform kidney trans-plants between nonidentical individuals. For immunosup-pression, total-body radiation and an anticancer agent called Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   35601/03/19   6:53 PM 357TRANSPLANTATIONCHAPTER 11Figure 11-2. Patients on the waiting list and the number of organ transplants performed, 2009. KP = kidney and pancreas. (U.S. data from the Scientific Registry of Transplant Recipients Annual Report, http://srtr.org)TotalKidneyPancreas and KPLiverIntestineHeartLungsHeart/Lung010,00020,00030,00040,00050,00060,00070,00080,00090,000100,000110,000Number of patients# Waiting# Transplanted6-mercaptopurine were used, but given the profound toxicity of both those methods of immunosuppression, results were dis-couraging. A breakthrough was achieved in the early 1960s with the introduction of maintenance immunosuppression through a combination of corticosteroids and a less toxic derivative of 6-mercaptopurine, azathioprine.5,6Increasing experience with kidney transplants and the better results achieved with maintenance immunosuppression paved the way for the era of nonrenal transplants (Table 11-1). In 1963, the first liver transplant was performed by Thomas Starzl in Denver, Colorado, and the first lung transplant was performed by James Hardy in Jackson, Mississippi. In 1966, the first pancreas transplant was performed by William Kelly and Richard Lillehei in Minneapolis, Minnesota. In 1967, the first successful heart transplant was performed by Christiaan Barnard in Cape Town, South Africa. The early years of trans-plantation were marked by high mortality, mainly because of irreversible rejection. However, dramatic advances occurred with the further development of new forms of immunosup-pression. The groundbreaking event was the introduction of the first anti-T lymphocyte (T cell) drug, cyclosporine, in the early 1980s.7 Since then, with an even better understanding of immunologic processes, many other drugs have been introduced that target specific pathways that lead to rejection. As a result, rejection rates have decreased substantially, allowing a 1-year graft survival rate in excess of 80% in all types of transplants.Table 11-1Transplant historyORGANYEARSURGEONLOCATIONKidney1954Joseph E. MurrayBoston, MALiver1963Thomas E. StarzlDenver, COLung1963James D. HardyJackson, MSPancreas1966Richard C. LilleheiMinneapolis, MNHeart1967Christiaan N. BarnardCape Town, South AfricaSmall intestine1967Richard C. LilleheiMinneapolis, MNHeart/lung1981Bruce ReitzStanford, CAMultivisceral1989Thomas E. StarzlPittsburgh, PAThe gradual increase in the organ shortage led to inno-vative surgical techniques. For example, deceased donor split-liver transplants and living donor liver transplants have helped expand the liver donor pool. Similarly, living donor intestine and pancreas techniques have been developed. The evolution of donor nephrectomy from an open to a minimally invasive procedure (laparoscopic or robotic) has helped increase the pool of living kidney donors.TRANSPLANT IMMUNOBIOLOGYThe outcomes of early transplants were less than satisfactory. The limiting factor was the lack of understanding of immuno-logic processes, and irreversible rejection was the reason for graft loss in the vast majority of recipients. A better understand-ing of transplant immunobiology led to significant improve-ments in patient and graft survival rates.8,9 The immune system is designed as a defense system to protect the body from foreign pathogens, such as viruses, bacteria, and fungi, but it also acts to reject transplanted cells, tissues, and organs, recognizing them as foreign. It mediates other complex processes as well, such as the body’s response to trauma or to tumor growth. No matter what type of agent, the immune system recognizes it as foreign and triggers a strong response that is designed to either to eradi-cate pathogenic organisms or reject foreign cells or tissue.Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   35701/03/19   6:53 PM 358BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART ITRANSPLANT ANTIGENSTransplants between genetically nonidentical persons lead to recognition and rejection of the organ by the recipient’s immune system, if no intervention is undertaken. The main antigens responsible for this process are part of the major histocompat-ibility complex (MHC). In humans, these antigens make up the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) system. The antigen-encoding genes are located on chromosome 6. Two major classes of HLA antigens are recognized. They differ in their structure, function, and tissue distribution. Class I antigens (HLA-A, HLA-B, and HLA-C) are expressed by all nucleated cells. Class II antigens (HLA-DR, HLA-DP, and HLA-DQ) are expressed by antigen-presenting cells (APCs) such as B lymphocytes, dendritic cells, macrophages, and other phagocytic cells.The principal function of HLA antigens is to present the fragments of foreign proteins to T lymphocytes. This leads to recognition and elimination of the foreign antigen with great specificity. HLA molecules play a crucial role in transplant recipients as well. They can trigger rejection of a graft via two different mechanisms. The most common mechanism is cellular rejection, in which the damage is caused by acti-vated T lymphocytes. The process of activation and prolifera-tion is triggered by exposure of T lymphocytes to the donor’s HLA molecules. The other mechanism is humoral rejection, in which the damage is mediated by circulating antibodies against the donor’s HLA molecules. The donor-specific anti-bodies can be present either pretransplant, due to previous exposure (because of a previous transplant, pregnancy, blood transfusion, or immunization), or posttransplant. After anti-body binding to the donor’s HLA molecules, the complement cascade is activated, leading to cellular lysis.ALLORECOGNITION AND LYMPHOCYTE ACTIVATIONThe immune system of each person is designed to discriminate between self and nonself cells and tissues. This process is called allorecognition, with T cells playing the crucial role. The recog-nition of foreign HLA antigens by the recipient’s T cells may occur by either a direct or an indirect pathway. Direct recogni-tion occurs when the recipient’s T cells are activated by direct interaction with the donor’s HLA molecules. Indirect recogni-tion occurs when the recipient’s T cells are activated by interac-tion with APCs that have processed and presented the foreign antigen. The foreign antigen can be shed from the graft into the circulation, or it can be identified by the APCs within the graft itself.Independent of the pathway of foreign HLA antigen presentation, the ensuing activation of T cells is similar and involves complex cell surface receptors and markers, i.e., the T-cell receptor (TCR) and an array of cluster differentiation markers (CDs). A two-signal model, T-cell activation begins with the engagement of the TCR/CD3 complex with the foreign molecule. This interaction causes transmission of the signal into the cell, namely signal 1. However, this signal alone is not suf-ficient to activate the T cell. An additional costimulatory signal is required, i.e., signal 2. Two well-characterized costimula-tory interactions are the CD40/CD154 and B7/CD28 pathways. The “master switch” is turned on by the interaction of CD40 protein with APCs, along with the interaction of CD154 pro-tein with T cells; this ligation induces the upregulation of other costimulatory molecules. Transmission of signal 1 and signal 2 into the cell nucleus leads to upregulation of the transcrip-tion of genes for several cytokines, including the T-cell growth factor interleukin-2 (IL-2). In turn, IL-2 activates a number of pathways, leading to proliferation and differentiation of T cells. Rejection is the result of an attack of activated T cells on the transplanted organ.Although T-cell activation is the main culprit in rejection, B-cell activation and subsequent antibody production also play a role. After the foreign HLA antigen is processed by B cells, it interacts with activated helper T cells, leading to differentiation of B cells into plasma cells and subsequently to their prolifera-tion and antibody production.CLINICAL REJECTIONGraft rejection is due to a complex interaction of different com-ponents of the immune system, including B and T lymphocytes, APCs, and cytokines. The end result is graft damage caused by inflammatory injury. According to its onset and pathogenesis, rejection is divided into three main types: hyperacute, acute, and chronic, and each is described in the following sections.HyperacuteHyperacute rejection, a very rapid type of rejection, results in irreversible damage and graft loss within minutes to hours after organ reperfusion. It is triggered by preformed antibodies against the donor’s HLA or ABO blood group antigens. These antibodies activate a series of events that result in diffuse intra-vascular coagulation, causing ischemic necrosis of the graft. Fortunately, pretransplant blood group typing and cross-matching (in which the donor’s cells are mixed with the recipient’s serum, and then the cells are observed for any destruction) have virtu-ally eliminated the incidence of hyperacute rejection.AcuteAcute rejection, the most common type of rejection, usually occurs within a few days or weeks posttransplant. According to the mechanism involved, it is further divided into cellular (T-cell–mediated) rejection, humoral (antibody-mediated) rejection, or a combination of both. The diagnosis is based on the results of biopsies of the transplanted organ, special immu-nologic stains, and laboratory tests (such as elevated creatinine levels in kidney transplant recipients, elevated liver test values in liver transplant recipients, and elevated levels of glucose, amylase, and lipase in pancreas transplant recipients).ChronicChronic rejection occurs slowly and usually is progressive. It can manifest within the first year posttransplant but most often takes place gradually over several years. The mechanisms are not well understood, but the pathologic changes eventually lead to tissue fibrosis and loss of graft function. As advances in immunosuppression have diminished the incidence of acute rejection, this form of rejection is becoming more common.CLINICAL IMMUNOSUPPRESSIONA successful transplant hinges upon a balance between the extent of the recipient’s immune response, the health and viabil-ity of the donor allograft, and pharmacologic immunosuppres-sion. Immunosuppressive regimens are critical to graft and Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   35801/03/19   6:53 PM 359TRANSPLANTATIONCHAPTER 11patient survival posttransplant. Immunosuppression has evolved from the use of azathioprine and steroids in the 1960s and 1970s to the development in the 1980s of cyclosporine, the latter which markedly increased allograft survival.10,11 The intro-duction of tacrolimus and mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) in the 1990s further advanced the field of transplantation, enabling a variety of combinations to be used for immunosuppression often “tailored” for each recipient (Table 11-2).Presently, immunosuppressants are used in multidrug regimens aimed at increasing efficacy by targeting multiple pathways to lower the immune response and to decrease the toxicity of individual agents. Certain regimens may involve withdrawal, avoidance, or minimization of certain classes of drugs. Transplant centers generally institute their immunosup-pressive protocols based on experience, risk profiles, cost con-siderations, and outcomes. Immunosuppression is delivered in two phases: induction (starting immediately posttransplant, when the risk of rejection is highest) and maintenance (usu-ally starting within days posttransplant and usually continuing for the life of the graft and the recipient). Thus, the degree of immunosuppression is highest in the first 3 to 6 months posttransplant; during this time, prophylaxis against a number of different bacterial, viral, or even antifungal opportunistic pathogens is administered.12,13A conventional immunosuppressive protocol might include (a) induction with anti-T-lymphocyte–depleting or nondepleting antibodies and (b) maintenance with calcineurin inhibitors, antiproliferative agents, and corticosteroids. Char-acteristics of the most common immunosuppressive agents are listed in Table 11-3.2Table 11-2Immunosuppressive drugs by groupingImmunophilin binders Calcineurin inhibitors  Cyclosporine  Tacrolimus Noninhibitors of calcineurin  SirolimusAntimetabolites Inhibitors of de novo purine synthesis  Azathioprine  Mycophenolate mofetilBiologic immunosuppression Polyclonal antibodies  Atgam  Antithymocyte immunoglobulin Monoclonal antibodies  Muromonab-CD3  Basiliximab  Belatacept  Alemtuzumab  Rituximab  Bortezomib  EculizumabOther CorticosteroidsINDUCTIONInduction includes the use of depleting (polyclonal) antibodies or nondepleting antibodies within the first month posttransplant. Studies have shown that induction with antibody regimens may prevent acute rejection, potentially leading to improved graft survival and the use of less maintenance immunosuppression.Depleting AntibodiesRabbit antithymocyte globulin (Thymoglobulin) is a purified gamma globulin obtained by immunizing rabbits with human thymocytes. Atgam, which has largely been replaced by Thy-moglobulin, is a purified gamma globulin obtained by immu-nizing horses with human thymocytes. These agents contain antibodies to T cells and B lymphocytes (B cells), integrins, and other adhesion molecules, thereby resulting in rapid depletion of peripheral lymphocytes. Typically, the total dose of Thymo-globulin is roughly 6 mg/kg, a dose that has been shown to con-fer adequate lymphocyte depletion and better allograft survival. Doses of 3 mg/kg may not effectively prevent acute rejection, but more doses and prolonged administration increase the risk of infection and the potential occurrence of lymphoma. Thymo-globulin administration causes a cytokine release syndrome, so premedications (acetaminophen and diphenhydramine) are usu-ally given. The principal side effects of Thymoglobulin include fever, chills, arthralgias, thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, and an increased incidence of a variety of infections.14,15Nondepleting AntibodiesBasiliximab (Simulect) is an anti-CD25 monoclonal antibody. The alpha subunit of the IL-2 receptor, also known as Tac or CD25, is found exclusively on activated T cells. Blockade of this component by this monoclonal antibody selectively pre-vents IL-2–induced T-cell activation. No lymphocyte depletion occurs with basiliximab; thus, it is not designed to be used to treat acute rejection. Its selectivity in blocking IL-2–mediated responses makes it a powerful induction agent without the added risks of infections, malignancies, or other major side effects. Currently, basiliximab is the only available anti-CD25 mono-clonal antibody approved for clinical use. Usually, it is followed by the use of calcineurin inhibitors, corticosteroids, and MMF as maintenance immunosuppression.16Alemtuzumab (Campath, Lemtrada), another anti-CD52 monoclonal antibody, was initially used to treat chronic lym-phocytic leukemia. The use of alemtuzumab has grown in the field of transplantation, given its profound lymphocyte-depleting effects. It causes cell death by complement-mediated cytoly-sis, antibody-mediated cytotoxicity, and apoptosis. One dose alone (30 mg) depletes 99% of lymphocytes. Monocyte recov-ery can be seen at 3 months posttransplant; B-cell recovery at  12 months; and T-cell recovery, albeit only to 50% of base-line, at 36 months. Alemtuzumab causes a significant cytokine release reaction and often requires premedications (steroids and antihistamines). Because of the long-lasting T-cell depletion, the risks of infection and posttransplant lymphoproliferative dis-order remain. Initially, alemtuzumab was available only through a limited distribution program, but more recently has been stud-ied in a number of clinical trials.17,18MAINTENANCECorticosteroidsCorticosteroids have had a role in immunosuppression since the beginning of the field of transplantation. Despite numerous Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   35901/03/19   6:53 PM 360BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART ITable 11-3Summary of the main immunosuppressive drugsDRUGMECHANISM OF ACTIONADVERSE EFFECTSCLINICAL USESDOSAGECyclosporine (CSA)Binds to cyclophilinInhibits calcineurin and IL-2 synthesisNephrotoxicityTremorHypertensionHirsutismImproved bioavailability of microemulsion formOral dose 5 mg/kg per day (given in two divided doses)Tacrolimus (FK506)Binds to FKBPInhibits calcineurin and IL-2 synthesisNephrotoxicityHypertensionNeurotoxicityGI toxicity (nausea, diarrhea)Improved patient and graft survival in (liver) primary immunosuppression and rescue therapyUsed as mainstay of maintenance protocolsIV 0.015 mg/kg per day as continuous infusionPO 0.05 mg/kg per day (given every 12 h)Mycophenolate mofetilAntimetaboliteInhibits enzyme necessary for de novo purine synthesisLeukopeniaGI toxicityEffective for primary immunosuppression in combination with tacrolimus1 g bid POSirolimusInhibits lymphocyte effects driven by IL-2 receptorThrombocytopeniaIncreased serum cholesterol/LDLPoor wound healingMay allow early withdrawal of steroids and decreased calcineurin doses2–4 mg/d, adjusted to trough drug levelsCorticosteroidsMultiple actionsAnti-inflammatoryInhibits lymphokine productionCushingoid stateGlucose intoleranceOsteoporosisUsed in induction, maintenance, and treatment of acute rejectionVaries from milligrams to several grams per dayMaintenance doses, 5–10 mg/dAzathioprineAntimetaboliteInterferes with DNA and RNA synthesisThrombocytopeniaNeutropeniaLiver dysfunctionUsed in maintenance protocols or if intolerance to mycophenolate mofetil1–3 mg/kg per day for maintenanceBelataceptT-cell blockerIncreased risk of bacterial infectionsNew drug for maintenance immunosuppression in renal transplants only5–10 mg/kg per day infusionFKBP = FK506-binding protein; GI = gastrointestinal; IL = interleukin; IV = intravenous; LDL = low-density lipoprotein; PO = oralattempts to limit or discontinue their use, they remain an inte-gral component of most immunosuppressive protocols, for both induction and maintenance. Moreover, they are often the first-line agents in the treatment of acute rejection. Steroids bind to glucocorticoid-responsive elements in DNA that prevent the transcription of cytokine genes and cytokine receptors. In addition, steroids have an impact on lymphocyte depletion, on decreases in cell-mediated immunity, and on T-cell activation of many phases of rejection.Nonetheless, the numerous adverse effects of steroid therapy contribute significantly to morbidity in transplant recipients.19 Common side effects include acne, increased appetite and asso-ciated weight gain, mood changes, diabetes, hypertension, and impaired wound healing.One of the most common maintenance immunosuppres-sive regimens consists of triple-drug therapy: prednisone, a cal-cineurin inhibitor, and an antimetabolite. Large doses of steroids are usually given perioperatively and in the immediate postop-erative period. Protocols vary by center, but the steroid dose is usually tapered to an adult dose of roughly 5 to 15 mg daily, or completely stopped at some point. Steroids are substrates for CYP3A4, CYP3A5, and P-glycoprotein pathways where drug interactions might need to be monitored.20,21AzathioprineAn antimetabolite, azathioprine (AZA) is converted to  6-mercaptopurine and inhibits both the de novo purine synthe-sis and salvage purine synthesis. AZA decreases T-lymphocyte activity and decreases antibody production. It has been used as a first-line agent in transplant recipients for more than 40 years, but it became an adjunctive agent after the introduction of cyclospo-rine. With the development of newer agents such as MMF, the use of AZA has decreased significantly. However, it is preferred in recipients who are considering conceiving a child because MMF is teratogenic and can cause birth defects. Use of AZA remains an option for recipients who cannot tolerate the gastro-intestinal (GI) side effects of MMF.The most significant side effect of AZA, often dose-related, is bone marrow suppression. Leukopenia is often reversible with dose reduction or temporary cessation of the drug. Other significant side effects include hepatotoxicity, pancreatitis, neoplasia, anemia, and pulmonary fibrosis. Its most significant drug interaction is with allopurinol, which blocks AZA metabolism, increasing the risk of pancytope-nia. Recommendations are to not use AZA and allopurinol together, or if doing so is unavoidable, to decrease the dose of AZA by 75%.22Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   36001/03/19   6:53 PM 361TRANSPLANTATIONCHAPTER 11Mycophenolate MofetilApproved in May 1995 by the U.S. Food and Drug Admin-istration (FDA) for preventing acute rejection after kidney transplants, MMF has now been incorporated into routine maintenance regimens after many solid organ transplants. Mycophenolate is the prodrug of mycophenolate acid, derived from Penicillium fungi. Mycophenolate acid is an inhibitor of inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase (IMPDH) involved in the de novo pathway of purine synthesis.23 MMF is available in capsules (250 and 500 mg); the starting dose is 1 g twice daily. In hopes of decreasing the GI side effects, an enteric-coated formulation called Myfortic was developed; its benefits have not been clearly demonstrated in studies, but in some conversion studies patients did report less GI intolerance. The pharmacoki-netics of MMF are complex; mycophenolic acid (MPA) levels are not routinely performed at most transplant centers. Studies have shown that MPA levels and the incidence of rejection are not significantly correlated.24 The most common side effects of MMF are GI in nature, most commonly diarrhea, nausea, dys-pepsia, and bloating. Esophagitis and gastritis occur in roughly 5% of recipients and may represent a cytomegalovirus (CMV) Table 11-4Side effects and drug interactions of the main immunosuppressive drugs COMMON SIDE EFFECTSOTHER MEDICATIONS THAT INCREASE BLOOD LEVELSOTHER MEDICATIONS THAT DECREASE BLOOD LEVELSOTHER MEDICATIONS THAT POTENTIATE TOXICITYCyclosporine (CSA)Hypertension, nephrotoxicity, hirsutism, neurotoxicity, gingival hyperplasia, hypomagnesemia, hyperkalemiaVerapamil, diltiazem, clarithromycin, azithromycin, erythromycin, azole antifungals, protease inhibitors, grapefruit juiceIsoniazid, carbamazepine, phenobarbital, phenytoin, rifampin, St. John’s wortNephrotoxicity: ganciclovir, aminoglycosides, NSAIDs, ACE-Is, and ARBsTacrolimus (FK506)Hypertension, nephrotoxicity, alopecia, hyperglycemia, neurotoxicity, hypomagnesemia, hyperkalemiaVerapamil, diltiazem, clarithromycin, azithromycin, erythromycin, azole antifungals, protease inhibitors, grapefruit juiceIsoniazid, carbamazepine, phenobarbital, phenytoin, rifampin, St. John’s wortNephrotoxicity: ganciclovir, aminoglycosides, NSAIDs, ACE-Is, and ARBsSirolimusThrombocytopenia and neutropenia, elevated cholesterol, extremity edema, impaired wound healingVerapamil, diltiazem, clarithromycin, azithromycin, erythromycin, azole antifungals, protease inhibitors, grapefruit juiceIsoniazid, carbamazepine, phenobarbital, phenytoin, rifampin, St. John’s wort—Mycophenolate mofetilLeukopenia, thrombocytopenia, GI upset—Cholestyramine, antacidsBone marrow suppression: valganciclovir, ganciclovir, TMP-SMXCorticosteroidsHyperglycemia, osteoporosis, cataracts, myopathy, weight gain———AzathioprineLeukopenia, anemia, thrombocytopenia, neoplasia, hepatitis, cholestasis——Bone marrow suppression: allopurinol, sulfonamidesACE-I = angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor; ARB = angiotensin receptor blocker; NSAID = nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug; TMP-SMX = trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazoleor herpesvirus family infection. The other important side effects are leukopenia, anemia, and thrombocytopenia (Table 11-4). Leukopenia can sometimes be reversed by lowering the MMF dose and discontinuing other agents like valganciclovir. MMF does not have any significant drug interactions, but clinicians should be careful to avoid additive toxicities with other medica-tions that might lead to leukopenia and thrombocytopenia.SirolimusThe first mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitors to enter clinical use was sirolimus (Rapamune). A key regulatory kinase, mTOR changes cells from the G1 to S phase in the cell cycle, in response to proliferation signals provided by cytokines like IL-2. The mTOR inhibitors bind to FK506-binding pro-tein (FKBP), and the sirolimus-FKBP complex binds to mTOR. Sirolimus also inhibits proliferation of vascular smooth muscle cells, possibly easing the vasculopathy and progressive fibrosis that can affect allografts. Sirolimus is a substrate for CYP3A4/4 and has many significant drug interactions (see Table 11-4).To date, sirolimus has been used in a variety of com-binations for maintenance immunosuppression, alone or in Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   36101/03/19   6:53 PM 362BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART ITable 11-5Drug interactions and side effects associated with calcineurin inhibitorsINTERACTIONSMEDICATIONSInhibition of metabolismClarithromycin, erythromycin, azole antifungals, diltiazem, verapamil, nicardipine, amiodarone, grapefruit juice, ritonavir, azithromycinInduction of metabolismNevirapine, rifampin, St. John’s wort, carbamazepine, phenobarbital, phenytoin, caspofunginHyperkalemiaPotassium-sparing diuretics, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACE-Is), angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs), β-blockers, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazoleNephrotoxicityNonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, aminoglycosides, amphotericin, ACE-Is, ARBsconjunction with one of the calcineurin inhibitors. In such com-binations, sirolimus usually is used to help withdraw from, or completely avoid, the use of steroids. It also has been used as an alternative to tacrolimus or cyclosporine, in a calcineurin-sparing protocol. One of the most significant side effects of siro-limus is hypertriglyceridemia, a condition that may be resistant to statins and fibrates. Impaired wound healing (immediately posttransplant in particular), thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, and anemia also are associated with sirolimus, and these problems are exacerbated when it is used in combination with MMF.25,26CyclosporineThe introduction of cyclosporine in the early 1980s dramati-cally altered the field of transplantation by significantly improv-ing outcomes after kidney transplantation. Cyclosporine binds with its cytoplasmic receptor protein, cyclophilin, which sub-sequently inhibits the activity of calcineurin, thereby decreas-ing the expression of several critical T-cell activation genes, the most important being for IL-2. As a result, T-cell activation is suppressed.27Many formulations of cyclosporine exist, so it is important to know which one the transplant recipient is taking. Sandim-mune, an older, oil-based formulation, has poor bioavailabil-ity and variable absorption. The newer formulations, Gengraf and Neoral, are microemulsified with improved bioavailability. Cyclosporine can be given intravenously or orally to maintain trough levels of 250 to 350 ng/mL for the first 3 months post-transplant; then it can be tapered to 150 to 250 ng/mL.28The metabolism of cyclosporine is via the cytochrome P450 system, resulting in many significant drug interactions (see Table 11-4). Calcineurin inhibitors are nephrotoxic and constrict the afferent arteriole in a dose-dependent, reversible manner (Table 11-5). They also can cause hyperkalemia and hypomagnesemia. Several neurologic complications, including headaches, tremor, and seizures, also have been reported.29Cyclosporine has several undesirable cosmetic effects, including hirsutism and gingival hyperplasia. It is associated with a higher incidence of hypertension and hyperlipidemia than is tacrolimus.TacrolimusThe calcineurin inhibitor tacrolimus (Prograf) is now the back-bone of most immunosuppressive regimens. Tacrolimus acts by binding FKBPs, causing roughly 10 to 100 times more potent inhibition of IL-2 production than cyclosporine (which acts by binding cyclophilins). It can be given intravenously, orally, or sublingually to maintain trough levels of 8 to 12 ng/mL for the first 3 months posttransplant; then it can be tapered to 6 to 10 ng/mL. The metabolism of tacrolimus is via the cytochrome P450 system, resulting in many significant drug interactions (see Table 11-4).Tacrolimus causes a higher incidence of new-onset dia-betes posttransplant than does cyclosporine. Other side effects include alopecia, nephrotoxicity, neurotoxicity, hypertension, hyperkalemia, hypomagnesemia, and an increased incidence of certain types of infection.30BelataceptThe best-characterized pathway of T-cell costimulation includes CD28; its homologue, the cytotoxic T-lymphocyte–associated protein 4 (CTLA4); and their ligands, CD80 and CD86. Belatacept (also known as LEA29Y) was developed through two amino acid substitutions to abatacept (also known as CTLA4-Ig), a fusion protein consisting of the extracellular domain of CTLA4 and the Fc domain of immunoglobulin G (IgG). It is a high-avidity molecule with slower dissociation rates.Clinical trials have compared the use of belatacept vs. a standard cyclosporine protocol in recipients of living donor, deceased donor, and extended-criteria donor kidneys. Belata-cept was not inferior to cyclosporine in both patient and allograft survival rates, but was associated with a higher rate of biopsy-proven acute cellular rejection.In terms of adverse effects, belatacept differs from stan-dard calcineurin-based regimens because of an increased risk of posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorder (PTLD); the greatest risk is in recipients who are Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-seronegative pretransplant. The FDA recommends the use of belatacept only in seropositive recipients. Studies in liver trans-plant recipients were halted early because of increased mortality rates.However, belatacept does have a lower incidence of car-diovascular risk factors including metabolic lipid disorders, hypertension, neurotoxicity, glucose abnormalities, and adverse cosmetic effects. Except for the increased risk of malignancy, the more favorable adverse effect profile of belatacept and its convenient monthly dosing schedule may make it an attrac-tive option for maintenance of immunosuppression, possibly improving compliance.31,32HUMORAL REJECTIONRituximabA chimeric anti-CD20 (anti-B cell) monoclonal antibody, ritux-imab is currently FDA approved for treating several types of lymphoma. The CD20 antigen is expressed early in the B-cell cycle but is absent on mature plasma cells. The variable region binds to CD20 through three different mechanisms: (a) antibody-dependent cell cytotoxicity, (b) complement-dependent cell killing, and (c) induction of apoptotic cell death. The use of Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   36201/03/19   6:53 PM 363TRANSPLANTATIONCHAPTER 11rituximab has grown to include the treatment of antibody-mediated rejection and use in desensitization protocols. Studies so far have been small, with rituximab usually used in conjunc-tion with plasmapheresis, steroids, and intravenous immuno-globulin (IVIG).33-35BortezomibA proteasome inhibitor, bortezomib is FDA approved for treat-ing multiple myeloma. It can directly target plasma cells. Tradi-tional treatments have been successful in removing antibodies, inhibiting antibody activity, or lowering antibody production; however, targeting mature antibody production in plasma cells has not met with success. Bortezomib has been shown to cause apoptosis of normal plasma cells, thereby decreasing alloan-tibody production in sensitized patients. Several case reports and series have described the use of bortezomib for the treat-ment of antibody-mediated rejection and in desensitization protocols.34,36,37EculizumabA humanized monoclonal antibody with high affinity for C5, eculizumab is a first-in-class, FDA-approved agent for treat-ing paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria, hemolytic uremic syndrome, and generalized myasthenia gravis. It blocks the activation of the terminal complement cascade. Most antibody-mediated rejection episodes are associated with early comple-ment activation as evidenced on renal transplant biopsies by the presence of C4d+ staining of the peritubular capillaries. Given its highly selective mechanism of action, this agent is predicted to be useful to treat antibody-mediated rejection and to desensi-tize patients pretransplant. However, its serious adverse effects include an increased risk of infections, especially due to encap-sulated bacteria such as Neisseria meningitidis. Patients should be immunized with meningococcal vaccine at least 2 weeks before the administration of eculizumab.34,38,39INFECTIONS AND MALIGNANCIESAdvances in immunosuppression have led to improved graft survival rates. However, the growing population of immuno-suppressed patients, in turn, has led to an increased incidence of opportunistic infections and malignancies. Such posttransplant complications have become important barriers to long-term disease-free survival.InfectionsTransplant recipients are predisposed to a variety of infections. Immunosuppression is the obvious reason. Moreover, such patients have already endured end-stage organ disease pre-transplant and then the stress of an invasive transplant opera-tion. Posttransplant, they continue to have significant comorbid conditions.Early. Early infections (i.e., infections occurring within 1 month posttransplant) can be due to a wide spectrum of pathogens (bacterial, viral, and fungal). In the immediate postoperative period, recipients are significantly compromised from the stress of the operation, from induction immunosuppression, and often from initially impaired graft function. Infections during this period can be devastating.It is imperative to differentiate between medical and surgical infections. Surgical infections are the most common and require expedient surgical intervention. Typical examples include generalized peritonitis, intra-abdominal abscesses, and wound infections.In liver and pancreas recipients, surgical infections are most severe. The incidence of intra-abdominal infections is decreasing, but they remain a significant problem: they are the second most common reason (after vascular thrombosis) for graft loss in pancreas recipients.Lengthy operations with significant blood loss, prolonged warm and cold ischemic times, and spillage of contaminated fluid (bile, urine, or bowel contents) predispose patients to intra-abdominal infections. Other prominent risk factors are the high level of induction immunosuppression immediately post-transplant and anastomotic leaks. Furthermore, pretrans-plant infections can reemerge or worsen.The signs and symptoms of intra-abdominal infections are those of peritonitis: fever, hypotension, ileus, and abdominal pain, although the latter can be masked by immunosuppres-sion. Treatment entails a prompt return to the operating room. Intra-abdominal infections are usually polymicrobial, involving several bacterial and fungal species. Common bacterial isolates include Escherichia coli, as well as Enterococcus, Klebsiella, and Pseudomonas species. Common fungal isolates are Candida albicans, Candida krusei, and Candida glabrata. Localized infections or abscesses can be treated with percutaneous drain-age and antibiotics.Medical infections include respiratory, urinary tract, and bloodstream infections. Medical treatment should also be aggressive, often including empiric antibiotics and antifungal medications even before culture results are available. Recipients of organs from infected donors should be treated per the results of donor culture speciation and the antibiotic sensitivity profile.Late. Late infections primarily are due to chronic immunosup-pression, specifically the depression of cell-mediated immu-nity that renders recipients susceptible to viruses, fungi, and parasites.Members of the herpesvirus group are the most common etiologic agents of viral infections posttransplantation, with her-pes simplex virus (HSV), CMV, and EBV being the most prom-inent. Pretransplant exposure to viruses may confer immunity. Recipients who are seronegative for HSV, CMV, and/or EBV have a higher incidence of posttransplant infections, especially if they receive donor allografts from seropositive donors.CMV is a latent infection that can be transmitted to sero-naive recipients by donor organs from seropositive individuals, can reactivate during immunosuppression, or both. Infections usually occur 3 to 6 months posttransplant or during treatment for rejection. The incidence of CMV has been greatly reduced with 12-week acyclovir prophylaxis.40 CMV infections range from an asymptomatic or mild flu-like syndrome to tissue-invasive disease resulting in pneumonitis, hepatitis, and GI ulcerations. Symptomatic infections and all tissue-invasive CMV disease should be treated with intravenous (IV) ganciclovir, a reduction in immunosuppression, or both, although successful treatment of mild to moderate rejection and concurrent mild to moderate CMV disease has been described.EBV infections range from a mild mononucleosis syn-drome to severe hepatitis and highly morbid PTLD. PTLD ranges from a localized tumor to a progressive, diffuse infiltration of various organs including the brain. It results from the prolifera-tion of EBV-positive B cells in immunosuppressed patients. The main risk factors are a high degree of immunosuppression and 3Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   36301/03/19   6:53 PM 364BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ia predisposing EBV serostatus (seronaive recipient, seroposi-tive donor). Among patients with early lesions, the first line of treatment is to reduce immunosuppression. For those with more advanced PTLD, rituximab is used.After 6 months posttransplant, the risk of invasive fungal infections is closely associated with environmental exposures. Blastomyces dermatitidis grows in moist soil in the Midwest and Southeast regions of the United States. Diagnosis is con-firmed by biopsy; the preferred treatment is IV amphotericin B.Coccidioides immitis can cause invasive coccidioidomy-cosis after inhalation of aerosolized infectious particles. It is endemic in the Southwest, Northern Mexico, and various parts of Central and South America. This infection can be resilient and difficult to treat. The first line of treatment is high-dose amphotericin B.Histoplasma capsulatum is found in chicken, pidgeon, and bat droppings in the Ohio River and Mississippi River val-leys. Dissemination is commonplace; up to a quarter of patients have central nervous system (CNS) involvement. Treatment consists of prolonged (3 to 13 months) administration of oral itraconazole.Opportunistic infections with Aspergillus, Cryptococcus, Mucor, and Rhizopus species are rare but can cause serious infections. Patients with invasive Candida or Aspergillus infec-tions exhibit a 20% mortality rate. Prophylaxis with fluconazole has been shown to reduce invasive fungal infections in liver recipients.41Pneumocystis jiroveci (also known as PCP) is ubiqui-tous and can cause pulmonary disease in immunocompromised patients. However, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) is effective prophylaxis against PCP, and daily, lifelong administration has virtually eliminated this infection among transplant recipients.MalignanciesChronic immunosuppression increases the risk of develop-ing certain types of malignancies. The most extensive data, from a cohort study involving more than 175,000 solid organ transplant recipients, showed that 10,656 of them developed malignancies. The standardized incidence ratio was 2:10 (as compared with the general population). Recipients had at least a fivefold increase (as compared with the general population) in these types of malignancies: Kaposi’s sarcoma, nonmelanoma skin cancer, non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, and cancer of the liver, anus, vulva, and lip. In addition, recipients had a statistically significant increase (as compared with the general population) in melanoma, Hodgkin’s lymphoma, and cancer of the lung, kidney, colon, rectum, and pancreas.42ORGAN PROCUREMENT AND PRESERVATIONOrgan procurement is a key element in organ transplantation. Currently, over 100 organ procurement organizations (OPOs) exist in the United States, all members of the Organ Procure-ment and Transplantation Network (OPTN), which is a feder-ally mandated network created by and overseen by UNOS. Each OPO is responsible for evaluating and procuring deceased donor organs for transplantation in a specific geographic region. Hospitals receiving any type of federal reimbursement for their services (whether transplant-related or not) are required to report all deaths to their OPO in a timely manner. Each OPO then determines the medical suitability of the deceased for organ donation; requests consent for donation from family members; if consent is given, contacts the OPTN to analyze and identify potential recipients whose HLA antigens most closely match those of the donor; and arranges for the recovery and transport of any donated organs.Strategies to increase organ donation and utilization have been successfully implemented in the last 10 to 15 years. The nationwide “Organ Donation Breakthrough Collaborative,” sponsored by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Ser-vices in 2003, brought the OPOs and transplant communities into a single concerted program to develop best practices guide-lines. However, a severe donor shortage remains. The number of living organ donors peaked in 2007 and has declined since.Alternative options include tissue engineering and stem cell research, but those fields are in their infancy in terms of producing fully functional and vascularized human organs. With the development of genetic “knockout” pigs, xenotrans-plantation still shows promise, but two problems in particular—immunologic barriers and xenosis (also known as zoonosis) of endogenous porcine retroviruses—have yet to be satisfactorily addressed.Today, the gap between patients waiting for organ trans-plants and the number of organs available continues to widen. More than 118,000 patients are on the waiting list for solid organ transplants, but only 33,611 transplants were performed in 2016.Deceased DonorsMost transplants today utilize organs from deceased donors. Formerly, death was determined by the cessation of both cardiac and respiratory function.Donation After Brain Death. In 1968, the concept of “irre-versible coma” was introduced by an ad hoc committee report at Harvard Medical School; that concept was pivotal to the final acceptance, in 1981, of “brain death” as a legal definition in the United States. The legal language states that the declara-tion of brain death should be in accordance with acceptable medical standards but does not specify clinical methodology. It is customary for hospitals to establish their own policies to declare brain death, according to their standards of care and local regulations.Typically, brain death is defined as the irreversible cessa-tion of brain function, including the brainstem. The presence of medical conditions that mimic brain death—such as drug over-dose, medication side effects, severe hypothermia, hypoglyce-mia, induced coma, and chronic vegetative state—need to be excluded. The latest evidence-based guideline on determining brain death in adults reaffirmed the validity of current clinical practice.43 Briefly, the clinical diagnosis of brain death consists of four essential steps: (a) establishment of the proximate cause of the neurologic insult; (b) clinical examinations to determine coma, absence of brainstem reflexes, and apnea; (c) utilization of ancillary tests, such as electroencephalography (EEG), cere-bral angiography, or nuclear scans, in patients who do not meet clinical criteria; and (d) appropriate documentation. A similar guideline on determining brain death in pediatric patients was recently developed.44Once the diagnosis of brain death has been established, the local OPO assumes the care of the potential donor and initiates the process of donor evaluation and organ donation, and the potential donor is screened for contraindications to donation. The medical history and social history are obtained from the available family members. A battery of tests, including serologic Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   36401/03/19   6:53 PM 365TRANSPLANTATIONCHAPTER 11or molecular detection of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and viral hepatitis, are performed. The exact medical conditions that preclude donation vary; nonetheless, in the United States, infections and other medical conditions that determine eligibil-ity are dictated by UNOS bylaws and routinely reviewed and updated.The OPO focuses on preserving organ function and opti-mizing peripheral oxygen delivery until organ procurement commences.45 In all deceased donors, core temperature, sys-temic arterial blood pressure, arterial oxygen saturation, and urine output must be determined routinely and frequently. Arterial blood gases, serum electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, serum creatinine, liver enzyme, hemoglobin, and coagulation tests need to be monitored regularly. In all brain-dead donors, elevated intracranial pressure triggers a compensatory catechol-amine response to maintain cerebral profusion pressure. Isch-emic injury to the spinal cord and the sympathetic system may lead to a profound vasodilation. As a result, brain-dead donors frequently have severe hemodynamic and metabolic derange-ments, so aggressive monitoring and intervention are required to prevent loss of precious organs.Previous studies of deceased donor care focused on organ-specific resuscitation protocols that resulted in only marginal gains in the number of organs transplanted. The latest develop-ments center on multisystem protocols to increase the number of organs transplanted per donor (OTPD).46,47 The goals are to maintain a core temperature between 36.0°C and 37.5°C,  a mean arterial pressure >70 mmHg or a systolic pressure  >100 mmHg, and a hemoglobin level between 7 and 10 g/dL; hormonal therapy and aggressive treatment of arrhythmias and metabolic derangements are also called for.47Surgical Technique. Procurement of multiple organs (heart, lungs, kidney, liver, pancreas, and/or small bowel), or multivis-ceral procurement, was first described by the Pittsburgh group in 1987.48 Since then, most centers have incorporated changes, especially with regard to the timing and location of dissection and flushing.49,50 The basic steps involve a long incision to provide wide exposure of all thoracic and abdominal organs (Fig. 11-3). A Cattell-Braasch maneuver (complete mobiliza-tion of the distal small bowel, right colon, and duodenum) is performed to allow for identification of the distal aorta, iliac Figure 11-3. Exposure for thoracic and abdominal organ procurement.bifurcation, and distal inferior vena cava (IVC). The infrare-nal aorta is the site for inserting the cannula that will allow for flushing of the organs with cold preservation solution. Some-times, division of the inferior mesenteric artery is necessary to facilitate the exposure of the distal aorta. The third portion of the duodenum is retracted cephalad to expose the root of the supe-rior mesenteric artery (SMA). Limited dissection is performed at the root of the SMA, which is encircled with a vessel loop to enable its temporary occlusion at the time of flushing, thus reducing the incidence of overperfusion injury to the pancreas.A large anomalous or replaced right hepatic artery typi-cally rises from the SMA, and this should be identified and preserved. Lateral to the SMA is the inferior mesenteric vein (IMV), which can be cannulated for portal flushing. Dissection of the hepatic hilum and the pancreas should be limited to the common hepatic artery (CHA), and branches of the CHA (e.g., splenic, left gastric, and gastroduodenal arteries) are exposed. The gastrohepatic ligament is carefully examined to preserve a large anomalous or replaced left hepatic artery, if present. The supraceliac aorta can be exposed by dividing the left triangular ligament of the liver and the gastrohepatic ligament.The common bile duct is transected at the superior mar-gin of the head of the pancreas. The gallbladder is incised and flushed with ice-cold saline to clear the bile and sludge. If the pancreas is to be procured, the duodenum is flushed with anti-microbial solution. Before the cannulation of the distal aorta, systemic heparinization (300 units/kg) is administered. The supraceliac aorta is clamped; cold preservation fluid is infused via the aortic (systemic) and IMV (portal) cannulas. The tho-racic organs, liver, pancreas, and kidneys are then removed.Donation After Cardiac Death. Given the severe shortage of donor organs, donation after cardiac death (DCD)—also known as donation by non–heart-beating donors (NHBDs)—was rein-troduced to the transplant community in the 1990s.51 The cat-egory of DCD (Maastricht classification) was initially proposed at an international workshop and is now widely adopted for organ procurement.52 Currently, most NHBDs in the United States meet Maastricht classification III; that is, they have suffered a devastating injury with no chance of a meaningful recovery but do not meet the criteria for brain death. After consent for dona-tion is obtained from the next of kin, the donor’s life support is removed. After the cessation of cardiac and respiratory function, organ procurement commences. DCD procurement protocols vary between states; religious and cultural differences need to be taken into consideration. The surgical team must be familiar with, and respect, the local protocol.With cardiac death (as opposed to brain death), warm ischemic injury to organs can occur during the period between circulatory cessation and rapid core cooling through perfusion of preservation solution. However, the difference in long-term outcomes is negligible for recipients of organs from either type of donor. Still, a significant percentage of liver grafts procured after cardiac death, especially those with more than 25 minutes of warm ischemic time, develop devastating ischemic cholan-giopathy and fail.53A new development to minimize ischemic injury to organs procured after cardiac death has been the application of extra-corporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO). With ECMO, DCD differs in two key ways: (a) cannulation occurs before with-drawal of life support and (b) organs are perfused via ECMO with warm oxygenated blood after declaration of cardiac death. Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   36501/03/19   6:53 PM 366BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IThe initial experience with organs procured using ECMO has been encouraging.Surgical Technique. Surgeons who perform multiple organ retrieval should be familiar and experienced with the super-rapid technique described by the Pittsburgh group.54 Preferably, NHBDs undergo withdrawal of life support in the operating room after the surgical site is prepped and draped, as soon as the surgical team is ready. Alternatively, the NHBD is transported to the operating room after declaration of cardiac death.A midline incision is used to rapidly gain entry into the abdominal cavity. An assistant retracts the small bowel and the sigmoid colon laterally, so that the bifurcation of the aorta can be easily identified on the left side of the vertebral column. A short segment of the distal aorta is dissected out from the retro-peritoneum. A moist umbilical tape is passed around the aorta, which is used to secure a cannula. The distal aorta is clamped. Next, a cannula is passed cephalad through an aortotomy and secured. Flushing with cold preservation solution is started at once, followed by cross-clamping the aorta proximally (thoracic aorta) and venting through the vena cava. The portal flush is then instituted.The rest of the procedure is similar to procurement after brain death, with two noticeable differences. First, to avoid injury to a large anomalous or replaced left hepatic artery, the gastrohepatic ligament and the left gastric artery are separated from the stomach at the lesser curvature. Second, to avoid injury to a large anomalous or replaced right hepatic artery, the SMA is examined before it is divided. If the pancreas is not procured, a common aortic patch encompassing both the SMA and the celiac artery can be procured with the liver.Living DonorsThe maxim of medical ethics is “primum non nocere” (first, do no harm), and for that reason, living organ donation pres-ents unique ethical and legal challenges. Performing potentially harmful operations to remove organs from healthy individuals seems, at first glance, to contradict that maxim. But in fact, the ethical framework of living organ donation rests on three guid-ing principles respected in all discussions of medical practice: beneficence to the recipient, nonmaleficence to the donor, and the donor’s right to autonomy.55 In order to achieve optimal outcomes (the common good), transplant professionals should focus on maximizing the benefits for the recipient and minimiz-ing the damage to the donor. The Uniform Anatomical Gift Act adopted by all states in the United States (with slight variations) provides the legal framework for competent adult living donors to decide whether or not to donate. It is the fiduciary duty of transplant professionals to explain the risks of organ donation. Any decision to donate should be uncoerced, and no entice-ments should be offered.The use of living donors offers numerous advantages for recipients in need. First and foremost is the availability of lifesaving organs for those who would otherwise succumb to the progression of their end-stage disease. In certain parts of  the world, such as East Asia, the concept of brain death and the use of deceased donors conflict with the prevailing culture or religion. Even in countries where the use of deceased donors is accepted, the use of living donors may significantly shorten the waiting time for recipients. A shorter waiting time gener-ally implies a healthier recipient—one whose body has not been ravaged by prolonged end-stage organ failure. Moreover, with the use of living donors, transplants are planned (rather than emergency) procedures, allowing for better preoperative preparation of the recipient. Receiving an organ from a closely matched relative may also have immunologic benefits. And long-term results may be superior with the use of living donors, as is certainly the case with kidney transplants.The major disadvantage is the risk to the living donor. Medically, there is no possibility of benefit to the donor, only the potential for harm. The risk of death associated with dona-tion depends on the organ being removed. For a nephrectomy, the estimated mortality risk is less than 0.05%; for a partial hepatectomy, about 0.2%. The risk of surgical and medical complications also depends on the procedure being performed. In addition, long-term complications may be associated with a partial loss of organ function after donation. The guiding prin-ciple should be minimization of risk to the donor. All potential risks must be carefully explained to the potential donor, and written informed consent must be obtained.56Surgical Technique. The kidney, the first organ to be trans-planted from living donors, is still the most common organ donated by these individuals. The donor’s left kidney is usually preferable because of the long vascular pedicle. Use of living donor kidneys with multiple renal arteries should be avoided in order to decrease the complexity of the vascular reconstruction and to help avoid graft thrombosis. Most donor nephrectomies are now performed via minimally invasive techniques, that is, laparoscopically, whether hand-assisted or not. With laparo-scopic techniques, an intraperitoneal approach is most common: it involves mobilizing the colon, isolating the ureter and renal vessels, mobilizing the kidney, dividing the renal vessels and the distal ureter, and removing the kidney (Fig. 11-4). Extensive dissection around the ureter should be avoided, and the surgeon should strive to preserve as much length of the renal artery and vein as possible.Liver transplants with living donors are not as commonly performed, given the significantly higher rates of donor mor-tality and morbidity. Initially, only adult donors for pediatric recipients were selected, but now, living donor liver transplants also involve adult donors for adult recipients. In dual graft living donor liver transplants, segmental grafts from two living donors augment the recipient’s graft size.57 The donor hepatectomy is similar to a major lobar hepatectomy, except that it is impor-tant to preserve the integrity of the vascular structure until graft resection (Fig. 11-5).Living donor transplants of organs other than the kidney and liver are fairly uncommon, but certain centers do perform such transplants. Living donor pancreas transplants involve per-forming a distal pancreatectomy, with the graft consisting of the body and tail of the pancreas; vascular inflow and outflow are provided by the splenic artery and splenic vein. Living donor intestinal transplants usually involve removal of about 200 cm of the donor’s ileum, with inflow and outflow provided by the ileocolic vessels. Living donor lung transplants involve removal of one lobe of one lung from each of two donors; both grafts are then transplanted into the recipient.Organ PreservationThe development and continuing refinement of organ preser-vation methods have completely revolutionized the transplant field. Extending the time that organs can be safely stored after procurement has enabled better organ utilization and better recipient outcomes.58,59 Hypothermia and pharmacologic inhibi-tion are the two most frequent methods. Both slow—yet cannot Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   36601/03/19   6:53 PM 367TRANSPLANTATIONCHAPTER 11ABCDEFFigure 11-4. Laparoscopic left donor nephroureterectomy. A. Takedown of splenic flexure of colon to expose the left renal hilum. B. Dissection of left ureter off the psoas muscle. C. Dissection of left renal vein and gonadal vein. Left ureter seen lateral to the dissection. D. Dissection of left renal artery. Lumbar veins clipped and divided. E. Endo-TA stapler transection of the left renal artery. F. Placement of ports and Pfannenstiel incision for the donor kidney extraction.ABFigure 11-5. Donor hepatectomy (right hepatectomy). A. The liver parenchymal transection line (c, the Cantlie line) marked with cautery. Right portal vein (p) and right hepatic artery (a) isolated. b = bile duct. Cystic duct was cannulated for intraoperative cholangiography.  B. Exposure of hepatic veins after transection of the parenchyma. IVC = inferior vena cava; L = left hepatic vein; M = middle hepatic vein; R = right hepatic vein.Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   36701/03/19   6:54 PM 368BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Icompletely shut down—the removed organ’s metabolic activ-ity, so both have adverse effects, such as cellular swelling and degradation. Cold storage solutions were introduced to mitigate some of the adverse effects of hypothermia or pharmacologic inhibition alone. Such solutions help prevent cellular swelling and the loss of cellular potassium.One, and perhaps the most effective, preservation solu-tion was developed at the University of Wisconsin and remains in wide use.60 Its ingredients include lactobionate (which helps prevent cellular swelling and reperfusion injury), raffinose, and hydroxyethyl starch (which helps reduce swelling of endothe-lial cells, thereby decreasing edema). Histidine-tryptophan-ketoglutarate solution is also currently in wide use.61Despite enhancements in preservation methods, the amount of time that an organ can be safely stored remains rel-atively short (hours, not days), particularly with organs from marginal donors. Among kidney recipients, delayed graft func-tion becomes significantly more frequent after cold ischemic times of more than 24 hours, necessitating temporary dialysis, which is associated with increased risks of graft loss and higher costs.62 Among liver recipients, primary nonfunction and bili-ary complications ensue after prolonged cold ischemic times. In the case of heart and lung recipients, ischemic times should be under 6 hours. All of those times assume the use of normal donors.There is revived interest in the use of the pulsatile perfu-sion pump, a kidney graft preservation method that has been available for more than 40 years.63 With the increasing shortage of available donor organs and the rise in the use of organs after cardiac death, the pulsatile perfusion pump is garnering renewed enthusiasm as an adjunct method of preservation, even for donor organs other than kidneys.64,65KIDNEY TRANSPLANTATIONIntroductionUllman reported the first attempted human kidney transplant in 1902.66 For the next 50 years, sporadic attempts all ended in either technical failure or in graft failure from rejection. Joseph Murray performed the first successful kidney transplant in 1954, an epochal event in the history of organ transplantation. In that first case, the immunologic barrier was circumvented by transplanting a kidney between identical twins.67 For his pivotal contribution, Murray shared the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1990 with E. Donnall Thomas for their discoveries concerning “organ and cell transplantation in the treatment of human disease.”The introduction of AZA (Imuran) in 1960 marked the beginning of a new era in kidney transplantation. With the com-bination of steroids and AZA for maintenance immunosuppres-sion, the 1-year graft survival rate with a living related donor kidney approached 80%; with a deceased donor kidney, the rate was 65%.68 In the ensuing years, major milestones included the introduction of more effective immunosuppressive medications with lower toxicity profiles, such as polyclonal antilymphocyte globulin in the 1970s, cyclosporine in the 1980s, tacrolimus in the 1990s, and biologics in the first decade of the 21st century, as previously mentioned.Parallel to the developments in medical science were the transplant community’s concerted efforts to improve use of healthcare resources. In the United States, the Social Security amendments of 1972 provided Medicare coverage for patients with end-stage renal disease (ESRD). The National Organ Transplant Act of 1984 initiated the process of creating what later became UNOS, an umbrella organization to ensure access to organs by patients in need, to enhance organ procurement and allocation, and to improve posttransplant outcomes. This infrastructure later became the blueprint for other countries to follow. As a result, organ transplantation is the most transparent field of medicine. Data such as transplant center performance are readily available on public websites; penalties for violation of regulations and for underperformance often result in trans-plant programs being shut down.Today, a kidney transplant remains the most definitive and durable renal replacement therapy for patients with ESRD. It offers better survival and improved quality of life and is considerably more cost-effective than dialysis.69,70 According to the 2016 Scientific Registry of Transplant Recipients (SRTR) annual report, nearly 100,000 adult patients were on the kidney transplant waiting list, while nearly 20,000 patients underwent renal transplantation. Trends over the past decade indicated that living related transplants remained rela-tively stable, while the number of deceased donor transplants rose. Posttransplant outcomes have continued to improve: in 2015, the 1-year graft survival rate with a living donor kidney was nearly 98%; with a deceased donor kidney, the rate was approximately 95.0%.71The advantages of a living donor kidney transplant include better posttransplant outcomes, avoidance of prolonged waiting time and dialysis, and the ability to coordinate the donor and recipient procedures in a timely fashion. Living donor kidney recipients enjoy better long-term outcomes, a low incidence of delayed graft function, and reduced risks of posttransplant complications. Furthermore, the elective nature of living donor kidney transplants provides unique opportunities for recipient desensitization treatment if the donor and recipient are ABOincompatible or if the HLA cross-match results are positive.Some of the challenges transplant professionals face today are closing the growing gap between supply and demand and thereby reducing the current prolonged waiting times; refining immunosuppressive medications to achieve better outcomes with reduced toxicity; and caring for patients who develop rejection, especially antibody-mediated rejection.Pretransplant EvaluationActive infection or the presence of a malignancy, active substance abuse, and poorly controlled psychiatric illness are the few abso-lute contraindications to a kidney transplant. Studies have demon-strated the overwhelming benefits of kidney transplants in terms of patient survival, quality of life, and cost-effectiveness, so most patients with ESRD are referred for consideration of a kidney transplant. However, to achieve optimal transplant outcomes, the many risks (such as the surgical stress to the cardiovascu-lar system, the development of infections or malignancies with long-term immunosuppression, and the psychosocial and finan-cial impacts on compliance) must be carefully balanced.Any problems detected during the evaluation of transplant candidates are communicated to their referring physician and/or to a specialist if advanced evaluation and treatment are needed, ultimately improving overall care. Essentially, the pretransplant evaluation is a multifaceted approach to patient education and disease management.Before the pretransplant medical evaluation begins, kidney transplant candidates are encouraged to attend a group meeting 4Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   36801/03/19   6:54 PM 369TRANSPLANTATIONCHAPTER 11focused on patient education. The meeting is coordinated by a transplant physician or surgeon. The intent is to familiarize patients with the pretransplant evaluation process and with per-tinent medical concepts and terms. In an open forum format, important decisions such as type of donor (living vs. deceased) are discussed. The group meeting empowers patients to fully participate in their care and serves as an impetus for a meaning-ful dialogue with healthcare professionals.Medical EvaluationCardiovascular Disease. Diabetes and hypertension are the leading causes of chronic renal disease. Concomitant cardiovas-cular disease (CVD) is a common finding in this population. An estimated 30% to 42% of deaths with a functioning kidney graft are due to CVD.72,73 Therefore, assessment of the potential kid-ney transplant candidate’s cardiovascular status is an important part of the pretransplant evaluation.In fact, the American Heart Association and the American College of Cardiology Foundation recently published their expert consensus on CVD evaluation and management for solid organ transplant candidates.74 The process should focus on care-ful screening for the presence of significant cardiac conditions (e.g., angina, valvular disease, and arrhythmias) and for a prior history of congestive heart failure, coronary interventions, or valvular surgery. The perioperative risk assessment is based on patient symptoms and exercise tolerance. For all kidney trans-plant candidates, a resting 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) should be obtained. In addition, in this population, the use of echocardiography to analyze left ventricular function and to assess for pulmonary hypertension is useful.Stress testing may be considered in patients with no active cardiac condition but with risk factors such as diabetes, hemo-dialysis for more than 1 year, left ventricular hypertrophy, age greater than 60 years, smoking, hypertension, and dyslipidemia. The utility of noninvasive stress testing (as compared with angiographic studies) for evaluating coronary artery disease is controversial; an additional prognostic marker is the troponin T (cTnT) level.Malignancies. Because of the long-term use of immunosup-pressive medications, transplant recipients are at increased risk for development of malignancies. Untreated and/or active malig-nancies are absolute contraindications to a transplant (with two exceptions: nonmelanocytic skin cancer and incidental renal cell cancer identified at the time of concurrent nephrectomy [i.e., for polycystic kidney disease] and renal transplantation). For most patients who have undergone treatment of low-grade tumors with a low risk of recurrence (e.g., completely locally excised low-grade squamous cell cancer of the skin, colon cancer in a polyp absent stalk invasion), a wait of at least 2 years after suc-cessful treatment is recommended before a kidney transplant can be considered. However, for certain types of tumors, espe-cially at advanced stages or those with a high risk of recurrence (e.g., melanoma, lymphoma, renal cell cancer, breast cancer, colon cancer), a delay of at least 5 years is advisable. Accord-ing to the Israel Penn International Transplant Tumor Registry, tumor recurrence posttransplant is not infrequent: the recurrence rate is 67% in patients with multiple myeloma, 53% in nonme-lanocytic skin cancer, 29% in bladder cancer, and 23% in breast cancer.75Infections. A thorough history of infections and immuniza-tions should be obtained from transplant candidates, who need all recommended age-appropriate vaccinations according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) guidelines. Ideally, vaccinations should be completed at least 4 to 6 weeks before the kidney transplant takes place. Immunosuppressive medications blunt the immune response and reduce the effec-tiveness of vaccinations; even more important, with attenuated vaccines, vaccine-derived infections could occur. If a splenec-tomy is anticipated (e.g., in recipients whose donor is ABO-incompatible or whose HLA cross-match results are positive), then they should be immunized against encapsulated organisms (such as Neisseria meningitidis, Haemophilus influenzae, and Streptococcus pneumoniae) well in advance of the splenectomy.Transplant candidates should undergo routine tuberculosis (TB) screening. According to the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), in 2016, 9272 TB cases were diagnosed in the United States with 68.5 percent of cases occurring in foreign-born persons.76 Serologic screening combined with a chest roentgenogram for fungal infections such as coccidioidomycosis or histoplasmosis, in patients who either have a history of those infections or are from an endemic area, are recommended. Chronic infections such as osteomyelitis or endocarditis must be fully treated; a suitable waiting period after successful treatment must occur, in order to ensure that relapse does not occur.Hepatitis can be caused by five different type of viruses, hepatitis virus A, B, C, D, and E, with the first three being the most common. Acute viral hepatitis is a contraindication to a kidney transplant; however, chronic viral hepatitis (most com-monly caused by hepatitis B [HBV] or C [HCV]) does not pre-clude a recipient from undergoing a kidney transplant. In such candidates, obtaining a liver biopsy is essential to assess the disease severity. Recipients infected with HBV should undergo antiviral treatment (e.g., lamivudine) to prevent reactivation and progression of liver disease. Note that HBV is a noncytopathic virus; the liver damage is the result of an immune-mediated process.77 Moreover, the presence of normal liver enzymes in patients with HBV antigenemia does not predict the severity of parenchymal damage.Transplant candidates with chronic HCV infection often have HCV-related glomerulonephritis. As with HBV infection, the clinical presentation and biochemical findings with HCV infection are often unreliable in predicting liver damage. In such patients who also exhibit evidence of cirrhosis, a combined liver-kidney transplant should be considered. In appropriate candidates, pretransplant antiviral treatment with interferon-α may be considered. However, after a kidney transplant, inter-feron treatment is not recommended because it is an immunos-timulant, and thus HIV may precipitate graft rejection.Thanks to the excellent outcomes of highly active anti-retroviral therapy (HAART), infection with HIV is no longer considered a contraindication to a kidney transplant. Kidney transplant candidates with HIV must have an undetectable HIV viral load and a CD4 lymphocyte count greater than 200/mm3; in addition, they must not have developed any opportunistic infection in the previous year.78Latent viral infections such as CMV and EBV are of par-ticular interest in the field of transplantation, given the risks of reactivation posttransplant and their detrimental effects on graft and patient survival. Knowing the CMV and EBV sero-logic status of the recipient and donor helps transplant pro-fessionals gauge the risk of immunosuppressive regimens in relation to potential infection, thereby guiding plans for post-transplant antiviral prophylaxis treatment or, as noted earlier, Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   36901/03/19   6:54 PM 370BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iavoiding transplants between a seropositive donor and a sero-naive recipient.Kidney Disease. The third most common cause of graft loss in kidney transplant recipients is recurrence of glomerular diseases such as focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS), immunoglobulin A (IgA) nephropathy, hemolytic uremic syn-drome, systemic lupus erythematosus, and membranoprolifera-tive glomerulonephritis. FSGS deserves special mention due to its frequent occurrence and dramatic presentation of early graft loss. An estimated 30% to 40% of FSGS patients develop recur-rent disease posttransplant; of those, up to half eventually lose their graft.79 In recipients with a history of FSGS, posttrans-plant nephrotic proteinuria should be promptly investigated; if diagnosis is confirmed by transplant kidney biopsy, rescue plas-mapheresis should be instituted at once. Adjuvant therapy with rituximab has been proposed.80Hypercoagulopathy. Kidney transplant candidates with a history of thrombotic events, repeated miscarriages, or a fam-ily history of thrombophilia should be screened for the fol-lowing coagulopathic disorders: activated protein C resistance ratio, factor V Leiden mutation, factor II 20210 gene mutation, antiphospholipid antibody, lupus anticoagulant, protein C or S deficiency, antithrombin III deficiency, and hyperhomocyste-inemia. In recipients at risk for hypercoagulopathy, pediatric kidney grafts and any kidney allografts with a complex vascular anatomy should be avoided.81 A perioperative anticoagulation protocol is recommended in this population.Surgical EvaluationUrologic Evaluation. Kidney transplant candidates (pediatric patients, in particular) with chronic kidney disease as a result of congenital or genitourinary abnormalities should undergo a thorough urologic evaluation. A voiding cystourethrogram and a complete lower urinary tract evaluation to rule out out-let obstruction are essential. Indications for a native nephrec-tomy include chronic pyelonephritis, large polycystic kidneys with loss of intra-abdominal domain, significant vesicoureteral reflux, or uncontrollable renovascular hypertension.Vascular Evaluation. The potential implant sites for a kidney graft include the recipient’s iliac vessels and, less commonly, the aorta and vena cava. Careful physical examination often reveals significant central and/or peripheral vascular disease. Findings such as a pulsatile intra-abdominal mass, diminished or absent peripheral pulse, claudication, rest pain, and tissue loss in lower extremities should be further evaluated by abdomi-nal computed tomography scan or ultrasound, Doppler studies, and/or angiography. With the popularity of endovascular inter-ventions, transplant surgeons also should be familiar with such technology and obtain detailed anatomic studies of patients with vascular stents.Immunologic Evaluation. ABO blood typing and HLA typ-ing (HLA-A, -B, and -DR) are required before a kidney trans-plant. The method of screening for preformed antibodies against HLA antigens (because of prior transplants, blood transfusions, or pregnancies) continues to evolve. The panel-reactive anti-body (PRA) assay is a screening test that examines the ability of serum from a kidney transplant candidate to lyse lymphocytes from a panel of HLA-typed donors. A numeric value, expressed as a percentage, indicates the likelihood of a positive cross-match with a donor. A higher PRA level identifies patients at high risk for a positive cross-match and therefore serves as a surrogate marker to measure the difficulty of finding a suitable donor and the subsequent risk of graft rejection.An important development in anti-HLA antibody screen-ing is Luminex technology, using HLA-coated fluorescent microbeads and flow cytometry, which is considered the “gold standard.” This technology pinpoints donor-specific antibodies (DSAs) in the serum of a kidney transplant candidate with a high PRA level. Since all organ donors must undergo HLA typing, a negative cross-match for recipients with a high PRA level can be ensured by avoiding the selection of donors carrying unac-ceptable antigens (i.e., a virtual cross-match).82 Kidney trans-plant candidate data (including ABO blood types, HLA types, and DSAs) are entered into a nationwide central database to facilitate deceased donor kidney allocation, as described earlier.Psychosocial Evaluation. Psychiatric disorders have been recognized as important contributing factors to poor outcomes posttransplant. Patients with uncontrolled psychiatric disor-ders are at high risk for noncompliance with drug treatment, impaired cognitive function, and the development of substance abuse. A robust psychosocial evaluation is essential to ensure that transplant candidates understand the risks and benefits of the procedure and that they adhere to the lifetime immunosup-pressive medication regimen.Recipient OperationKidney allografts usually are transplanted heterotopically. The iliac fossa is recognized as the ideal position because of its prox-imity to the recipient’s bladder and iliac vessels.83,84Retroperitoneal allograft placement also allows easy access for percutaneous biopsies and interventions for ureteral complications. The right iliac fossa is the preferred site because of its easy access to the recipient’s iliac vessels. However, if a pancreas transplant is anticipated in the future or if now failed kidney grafts have been placed at the right iliac fossa, then the left iliac fossa is used for implantation. The current surgical technique for kidney transplants was developed and popularized in the 1950s and 1960s and has changed little since.85A large-bore three-lumen urinary catheter is inserted after the recipient is anesthetized, and it is occluded with a clamp beneath the surgical drapes. Recipients whose native kidneys produce urine will naturally fill up the urinary bladder; those individuals whose kidneys do not will require insufflation of saline prior to creation of the ureteral anastomosis.Exposure of the operative field starts with a curvilinear skin incision, one to two finger widths above the midline pubic bone and the lateral edge of the rectus sheath. Superiorly, the extension of the incision depends on the recipient’s body habitus and the size of the donor kidney. The anterior rectus sheath is incised, medially to laterally, until the lateral edge of the rectus sheath is exposed. The posterior rectus sheath is missing below the arcuate line, thus providing direct access to the extraperito-neal space. The rectus muscle can be easily mobilized medially without being divided. The remainder of the fascial incision is along the lateral edge of the rectus sheath until the desired expo-sure is achieved (Fig. 11-6).The retroperitoneal space of the iliac fossa is entered by mobilizing the peritoneum medially. The inferior epigastric ves-sels, the round ligament (in females), and the spermatic cord and its vasculature (in males) are encountered in this space; the former two structures are divided, while the latter is retracted with a vascular loop. A self-retained retractor is used to expose Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   37001/03/19   6:54 PM 371TRANSPLANTATIONCHAPTER 11ABCABFigure 11-6. Incision and exposure for kidney transplant. A. Mark for the skin incision. B. Anterior rectus sheath incised obliquely.  The abdominal muscle transected lateral to the rectus muscle. C. External iliac artery and vein dissected.Figure 11-7. Vascular anastomoses of kidney transplant. A. Arterial anastomosis: donor renal artery with Carrel patch to recipient external iliac artery, end-to-side. B. Venous anastomosis: donor renal vein with caval extension conduit to recipient external iliac vein, end-to-side.the surgical field. The iliac vessels should be dissected with great care. To minimize the risk of lymphocele development postoperatively, dissection of the iliac artery should be limited; the intertwining lymphatics around the iliac vessels should be ligated. In general, the donor’s renal artery and vein are anasto-mosed to the recipient’s external iliac vessels in an end-to-side fashion (Fig. 11-7). In recipients with a severely calcified iliac artery, the internal iliac artery can be used as an alternative, and in select cases, an endarterectomy must be performed.After restoring the circulation to the donor’s kidney, urinary continuity can be established via several approaches. The approach chosen depends on such factors as the length of the donor ureter and a recipient history of bladder surgery, native nephrectomy, or pelvic radiation. The two most com-mon procedures to restore urinary continuity are the Leadbetter-Politano and a modification of the Lich (e.g., extravesical) ureteroneocystostomy.During the former procedure, a large cystotomy is cre-ated in the dome of the bladder, and the donor ureter is brought through a lateral and somewhat inferior 1-cm submucosal tunnel into the bladder, the end of which is spatulated and then sewn in place without tension with interrupted absorbable sutures placed through the mucosa and submucosa on the inside of the bladder.An extravesical ureteroneocystostomy is performed by careful dissection of a 1-cm portion of the muscular layers on the anterolateral portion of the bladder until a “bubble” of mucosa is exposed. The donor ureter is spatulated in a diamond-shaped fashion, the bladder mucosa is incised, absorbable interrupted sutures are placed in four quadrants, and a mucosa-to-mucosa anastomosis is created using running absorbable sutures with a temporary ureteral stent in place of the first three-quarters of the anastomosis. The muscular lay-ers of the bladder are then carefully approximated over the anastomosis to prevent reflux.The decision to place a ureteral stent depends on the sur-geon, who must try to balance the risk of infectious compli-cations with the possible technical complications of a ureteral anastomosis, but in general, this is not required except during the rarely performed donor ureter to recipient ureter anastomo-sis or in the case of a pediatric kidney transplant. Fixation of the donor’s kidneys is not necessary, except in the case of small kidneys (usually from a pediatric donor) or en bloc kidneys.Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   37101/03/19   6:54 PM 372BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IFigure 11-8. Arterial and venous reconstruction. A. Two renal arteries combined into a single Carrel patch (arrow). Right renal vein exten-sion conduit constructed with stapled caval patch. IVC = inferior vena cava; R = right renal vein. B. Three renal arteries anastomosed to external iliac artery separately.ABABFigure 11-9. En bloc kidney transplant (3-month-old donor kidneys). A. En bloc kidneys benched. Vascular integrity tested with methylene blue (blue hue look of the kidneys). B. En bloc kidneys transplanted into a 62-year-old woman. Donor aorta anastomosed to recipient’s exter-nal iliac artery; donor cava, to recipient’s external iliac vein.Grafts With Multiple Renal ArteriesIn 10% to 30% of donor kidneys, multiple renal arteries are encountered. Unless kidney transplant candidates have hyper-coagulopathy, grafts with multiple renal arteries fare as well as those with single vessels.86 Vascular reconstruction options include implanting the donor’s arteries separately, reconstruct-ing the multiple arteries into a common channel, or combining multiple arteries into a common Carrel patch (Fig. 11-8).En Bloc GraftsDebate persists about whether to implant kidneys obtained from young donors (<5 years or whose body weight is under 20 kg) as a single en bloc unit into one recipient or separately into two recipients. The underlying issues are the shortage of donor organs, the complexity of the surgical procedure, the risks of graft thrombosis, ureteral complications, and long-term outcomes.In en bloc kidney transplants, the donor aorta and vena cava are used as the vascular inflow and outflow conduits. Therefore, reconstruction of the en bloc graft pretransplant is key to a successful transplant. The donor’s suprarenal vena cava and aorta are oversewn. The lumbar branches of the cava and aorta are ligated. Dissection around the renal hilum should be avoided. The orientation of the cava and aorta should be clearly marked, in order to avoid torsion of the anastomosis. If the color of the two kidneys looks different after reperfusion, repositioning should be attempted to rule out vascular torsion; fixation of the en bloc kidneys to the retroperitoneum is often necessary. The donor’s ureters are implanted to the recipient’s bladder, either as two separate anastomoses or as a common patch (Fig. 11-9). Only a handful of centers have performed en bloc kidney transplants, but the long-term outcomes are encouraging.87,88Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   37201/03/19   6:54 PM 373TRANSPLANTATIONCHAPTER 11Perioperative CarePreoperatively, a thorough history and physical examination should be performed. Any changes in transplant candidates’ recent medical history should be investigated in great detail. In those recipients with a historically negative PRA level who have recently undergone blood transfusions, a prospective tis-sue cross-match is necessary to avoid graft rejection. Electrolyte panels should be checked. Emergency dialysis may be neces-sary for transplant candidates experiencing hyperkalemia or fluid overload.For dialysis-dependent transplant candidates, the catheter sites should be examined preoperatively to rule out infections. Vascular access for hemodialysis is essential to avoid compli-cations related to posttransplant acute tubular necrosis (ATN). Vascular evaluation is mandatory; any changes in results should be investigated by appropriate imaging studies.As is routine for other major surgical procedures, trans-plant candidates should preoperatively undergo a chest X-ray, a 12-lead ECG, blood typing, cross-match tests, and prophylaxis against surgical site infection (by administration of a nonneph-rotoxic antibiotic with activity against both common skin micro-flora and gram-negative pathogens); candidates should receive nothing to eat or drink.Intraoperatively, transplant recipients should be kept well hydrated to avoid ATN and should receive heparin prior to vas-cular occlusion. Before reperfusion of the transplanted kidney, the desired central venous pressure should be maintained at around 10 mmHg, and the systolic blood pressure should be above 120 mmHg. In pediatric recipients of an adult graft, a superphysiologic condition may be necessary to avoid ATN or graft thrombosis. Mannitol often is administered before reper-fusion as a radical scavenger and diuretic agent, and a diuretic such as furosemide is administered as well.Postoperatively, the guiding principles for the care of kidney transplant recipients are the same as for other surgical patients. The crucial elements include hemodynamic stability and fluid and electrolyte balance. To achieve a euvolemic state, the recipient’s urine output is replaced with either an equal or a reduced volume of IV fluid on an hourly basis, depending on the medical status. In recipients undergoing brisk dieresis, aggressive replacement of electrolytes (including calcium, mag-nesium, and potassium) may be necessary. In recipients expe-riencing ATN, fluid overload, or hyperkalemia, however, fluid restriction, treatment for hyperkalemia, and even hemodialysis may be necessary.Hypotension is an unusual event immediately posttrans-plant. The differential diagnoses include hypovolemia, vasodila-tion, and myocardial infarction with cardiac failure. Immediate action should be taken to avoid life-threatening complications. Posttransplant hypertension can be mediated by catecholamines, fluid overload, or immunosuppressive agents.Postoperatively, urine output is used as a surrogate marker to monitor graft function. Among recipients whose native kid-neys produce significant amounts of urine, normal or increased urine output can be misleading; for them, serum blood urea nitrogen and creatinine levels are more reliable indicators of kidney graft function.Suddenly decreased or minimal urine output requires immediate attention. A change in volume status is the most common cause, but other culprits include blockage of the uri-nary catheter, urinary leak, vascular thrombosis, hypotension, drug-related nephrotoxicity, ATN, and rejection (all of which must be thoroughly investigated). Diagnostic studies such as Doppler ultrasound, nuclear renograms, or biopsies should be considered.Postoperative bleeding is an uncommon event after a kid-ney transplant. Recipients on anticoagulation or antiplatelet treatments are at increased risk. Signs and symptoms (such as an expanding hematoma over the surgical site, increased pain over the graft, a falling hemoglobin level, hypotension, and tachycardia) should arouse suspicion of hemorrhage. Doppler ultrasound is useful to establish the underlying cause. Surgical exploration seldom is required because the accumulated hema-toma tamponades the bleed. Indications for surgical explora-tion include ongoing transfusion requirement, hemodynamic instability, and graft dysfunction from hematoma compression. For recipients on anticoagulation or antiplatelet treatments, the threshold for surgical exploration is lower. Small unligated ves-sels at the donor’s renal hilum or recipient’s retroperitoneum are likely sources of bleeding.One of the most devastating postoperative complications in kidney recipients is graft thrombosis. It is rare, occurring in fewer than 1% of recipients. The recipient risk factors include a history of recipient hypercoagulopathy and severe peripheral vascular disease; donor-related risk factors include the use of en bloc or pediatric donor kidneys, procurement damage, techni-cal factors such as intimal dissection or torsion of vessels, and hyperacute rejection. Graft thrombosis usually occurs within the first several days posttransplant. Acute cessation of urine output in recipients with brittle posttransplant diuresis and the sudden onset of hematuria or graft pain should arouse suspicion of graft thrombosis. Doppler ultrasound may help confirm the diagnosis. In cases of graft thrombosis, an urgent thrombectomy is indi-cated; however, it rarely results in graft salvage.Urologic complications are seen in up to 5% of recipi-ents. The cause is often related to ureteral ischemia, damage during procurement of the donor’s distal ureter, or technical errors. Symptoms of urine leak include fever, pain, swelling at the graft site, increased creatinine level, decreased urine output, and cutaneous urinary drainage. Diagnosis can be confirmed by a combination of ultrasound, nuclear renography, drainage of perinephric fluid collection, and comparison of serum and fluid creatinine levels. Depending on the location and volume of the urine leak, satisfactory results can be achieved by surgi-cal exploration and repair or by percutaneous placement of a nephrostomy and ureteral stenting.Early urinary obstruction can be due to edema, blood clots, torsion of the ureter, or compression from a hematoma. Late urinary obstruction is often related to ischemia. The appear-ance of hydronephrosis on ultrasound is a good initial indicator. Treatment includes percutaneous placement of a nephrostomy and ureteral stenting. If transluminal intervention fails, surgical intervention (such as ureteral reimplantation or a ureteropyelos-tomy) can be undertaken.ResultsA kidney transplant remains the most common solid organ transplant in the world today. With the introduction of induc-tion immunosuppressive therapy and ever-improving, less toxic immunosuppressive medications, posttransplant outcomes have become better and better. And, as noted above, posttransplant outcomes have continued to improve: in 2014 allograft and patient survival rates were well over 90%, and in 2015, the 1-year graft survival rate with a living donor kidney was nearly Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   37301/03/19   6:54 PM 374BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART I98%; with a deceased donor kidney, the rate was approximately 95%.71,89The biggest improvements have been in the reduction of 1-year graft failure. With a deceased donor kidney, the 1-year graft failure rate dropped from approximately 20% in 1989 to less than 7% in 2009 to 4.8% in 2015; with a living donor  kidney, the rate dropped from 8.5% in 1989 to less than 3% in 2015.89 Furthermore, steroid-free protocols90 and calcineurin-free protocols91 have been validated and implemented in the last several decades, further reducing medication-related side effects and vastly improving the quality of life for tens of thousands of recipients.Currently, the most common cause of graft loss is recipi-ent death (usually from cardiovascular causes) with a function-ing graft. The second most common cause is chronic allograft nephropathy; characterized by a slow, unrelenting deterioration of graft function, it likely has multiple causes (both immuno-logic and nonimmunologic).92,93 The graft failure rate due to complications related to surgical technique has remained at about 1% to 2%.PANCREAS TRANSPLANTATIONA successful pancreas transplant currently is the only definitive long-term treatment for patients with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) that (a) restores normal glucose hemostasis without exposing patients to the risk of severe hypoglycemia and (b) prevents, halts, or, in some cases, reverses the development or progression of secondary complications of diabetes.94Given its vast medical, social, and financial implications, diabetes mellitus is a huge burden to patients and to society as a whole. An estimated 10% to 15% of the U.S. population is affected by it; of all diabetic patients, 10% have early-onset dis-ease. In the United States, diabetes mellitus is the most common cause of end-stage kidney disease, blindness, impotence, major limb amputations, and coronary or peripheral vascular bypass procedures. It is one of the most common causes of death, along with myocardial infarction and stroke. Diabetes significantly decreases not only the quality of life but also life expectancy.Despite improvements in exogenous insulin administra-tion (including the use of devices such as insulin pumps), wide fluctuations in glucose levels and the risk of hypoglycemic epi-sodes are common. The Diabetes Control and Complications Trial (DCCT) demonstrated in the late 1990s that intensive insulin therapy may slow the rate of secondary complications of diabetes—yet at the expense of (life-threatening) iatrogenic hypoglycemia. The annual mortality rate of patients with insu-lin-induced inadvertent hypoglycemia is estimated to be as high as 2% to 3%.Since the first pancreas transplant in December 1966, per-formed by William Kelly and Richard Lillehei at the Univer-sity of Minnesota, more than 25,000 pancreas transplants in the United States and more than 10,000 pancreas transplants from all over the world have been reported to the International Pan-creas Transplant Registry (IPTR).94,95Pancreas transplants are performed in three recipient categories:•	Simultaneous pancreas and kidney (SPK) transplant in diabetic and uremic patients. Almost 80% of pancreas trans-plants are performed in this category. The recipient is already 5obligated to lifelong immunosuppressive therapy, due to the need for a kidney transplant, so only the surgical risk of a pancreas transplant is added. A successful SPK transplant renders the recipient dialysis-free and insulin-independent.•	Pancreas after kidney (PAK) transplant in diabetic and  posturemic patients. Approximately 15% of all pancreas trans-plants fall into this category. These patients previously under-went a kidney transplant with either a living or deceased donor, but are candidates for a subsequent pancreas transplant because of poor glucose control or because of progression of secondary diabetic complications (which may include the development of diabetic nephropathy in the transplanted kidney).•	Pancreas transplant alone (PTA) in nonuremic patients with brittle diabetes mellitus. Only about 5% of all pancreas trans-plants are in this category. These patients have not yet devel-oped advanced diabetic nephropathy, but their glucose levels are extremely labile despite best efforts of control. Because of the lifelong need for immunosuppressive therapy, the sur-gical risk has to be balanced with the medical risks of brittle diabetes (e.g., frequent episodes of hypoglycemia and hypo-glycemic unawareness).In SPK recipients, a plethora of literature exists that demonstrates significant improvements in secondary dia-betic complications (across all organ systems) posttransplant. Improvements have been reported in diabetic nephropathy, neu-ropathy (autonomic and peripheral), microand macrovascular disease, retinopathy, gastroparesis, and other secondary com-plications.96 Currently, more than 1000 pancreas transplants are performed annually in the United States, with the goal of confer-ring the following benefits: excellent glucose control (similar to that of a functioning native pancreas), prevention or improve-ment of secondary diabetic complications, and increased quality of life and life expectancy. In addition, pancreas transplants can be successfully performed in patients who have undergone a total pancreatectomy for benign disease (such as chronic pan-creatitis) to treat both endocrine and exocrine deficiency after surgery.97Donor OperationThe general criteria for selecting deceased donors for pancreas procurement are similar to those for other solid organs; a history of type 1 diabetes mellitus obviously is a contraindication. Rela-tive contraindications include previous pancreatic procedure(s), as well as pancreatic disorders, such as chronic pancreatitis and intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm. Hyperglycemia in itself is not a contraindication to pancreas procurement because its cause in brain-dead donors usually is severe insulin resis-tance, which is rarely observed in recipients.In light of better anatomic understanding and improved surgical skills, all three abdominal organs that share a common blood supply (pancreas, liver, and intestine) can be procured at the same time and transplanted into three different recipi-ents (Fig. 11-10). During pancreas procurement, a “no-touch” technique of the gland is preferred; dissection of the pancreas is carried out in a way that avoids direct manipulation of the organ such that simultaneous procurement of the spleen, duodenum, and surrounding connective tissues occurs.In contrast to the liver and kidneys, the pancreas should not be extensively flushed at the end of the procurement. To minimize the amount of preservation fluid that reaches the pan-creas, the splenic artery and SMA can be temporarily clamped Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   37401/03/19   6:54 PM 375TRANSPLANTATIONCHAPTER 11MHVLHVRHVIPDAMCARCAFigure 11-10. Simultaneous pancreas, in situ split-liver, and intestine procurement. IPDA = inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery; LHV = left hepatic vein; MCA = middle cerebral artery; MHV = middle hepatic vein; RCA = right coro-nary artery; RHV= right hepatic vein. (Repro-duced from Gruessner RWG, Sutherland DER: Transplantation of the Pancreas. New York, NY: Springer, 2004.)at their origin from the aorta. Usually, the celiac axis with an aortic Carrel patch is retained with the liver. The splenic artery is divided close to its origin and is retained with the pancreas. The SMA is also procured with an aortic Carrel patch and is retained with the pancreas.In case of a replaced or aberrant right hepatic artery, this first branch off of the SMA is carefully dissected out from the posterior surface of the pancreas. A replaced or aberrant right hepatic artery does not transverse the pancreas and is not a con-traindication to combined pancreas and liver procurement. But with this anatomic variant, an aortic Carrel patch with the proxi-mal SMA and replaced or aberrant right hepatic artery remains with the liver; the distal SMA with the inferior pancreaticoduo-denal artery remains with the pancreas.In the relatively rare event that the liver is not procured, then neither the splenic nor the gastroduodenal arteries need to be divided at their respective takeoff; the donor’s celiac axis and the SMA are included on a common Carrel patch. This tech-nique allows a single arterial anastomosis to be performed in the recipient without reconstruction. At the end of the procurement, the pancreas is attached to the spleen, duodenum, and proximal jejunum, which is stapled at both ends.98Back Table Preparation of the Pancreas GraftBack table preparation of the pancreas graft consists of four steps: (a) removal of the spleen; (b) shortening, restapling, and/or suture reinforcement of the mesenteric root; (c) trimming of any excess distal and proximal duodenum, along with reinforce-ment of the proximal staple line; and (d) arterial reconstruction.Back table preparation is carried out in a basin filled with chilled preservation solution. The most common tech-nique to create a single arterial inflow to the pancreas graft is the “Y-graft” reconstruction, using a resected segment of the donor iliac artery bifurcation. In this technique, the donor exter-nal iliac artery is anastomosed end-to-end to the donor SMA, and the donor internal iliac artery is anastomosed end-to-end to the splenic artery (Fig. 11-11). This procedure allows the donor common iliac artery to be anastomosed as a single vessel to the recipient’s common iliac artery. For venous outflow, the portal vein is kept relatively short, in order to avoid the risk of venous thrombosis by kinking or impingement.98Recipient OperationOver the years, different surgical techniques have been described for (a) the management of exocrine pancreatic secretions and (b) the type of venous drainage. For the secretions, the two most common techniques are drainage of the duodenal segment to the bladder (bladder drainage) or to the small bowel (enteric drain-age) (Figs. 11-12 and 11-13). For venous drainage, systemic venous drainage is preferred over portal venous drainage.The pancreas graft is usually placed intra-abdominally and preferably on the right side because the iliac vessels are Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   37501/03/19   6:54 PM 376BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IFigure 11-11. Posterior view of the pancreas graft with Y-graft reconstruction. EIA = external iliac artery; IIA = internal iliac artery; SA = splenic artery; SMA = superior mesenteric artery. (Reproduced from Gruessner RWG, Sutherland DER: Transplanta-tion of the Pancreas. New York, NY: Springer, 2004.)Figure 11-12. Whole-organ transplant with systemic vein and bladder exocrine drainage. (Reproduced from Gruessner RWG, Sutherland DER: Transplantation of the Pancreas. New York, NY: Springer, 2004.)SAIIAEIASMASMAin a more shallow position on the right than on the left side; moreover, the vessels are already appropriately aligned for the vascular anastomoses (i.e., a lateral position for the com-mon iliac vein, a medial position for the common iliac artery). Venous and arterial anastomoses are performed end-to-side. After restoration of blood flow to the graft, hemostasis must be meticulously maintained. Because the donor portal vein pur-posely is kept short, ligation and transection of all of the recipi-ent’s internal iliac vein branches are frequently performed in order to prevent tension on the venous anastomosis. The pan-creas usually is placed with the pancreatic head and duodenum pointing caudally.Bladder drainage is performed using either a hand-sewn or a stapled anastomosis in which the antimesenteric side of the donor duodenum is sewn to the superior portion of the dome of the bladder. The stapled technique requires that a circular cut-ting stapler be inserted through the open distal end of the donor duodenum, which is subsequently closed. Bladder drainage has two main advantages. First, rejection of the exocrine pancreas precedes rejection of the endocrine pancreas by 5 to 7 days. Amylase levels are measured routinely in the recipient’s urine. With bladder drainage, antirejection treatment can successfully be implemented when the recipient is still normoglycemic and only hypoamylasuric. In the absence of hyperglycemia, more than 90% of pancreas rejection episodes are reversible. Second, bladder drainage avoids the bacterial contamination that occurs with enteric drainage. If an anastomotic leak occurs, it is easier to treat because the infection usually remains localized to the right lower quadrant.Enteric drainage is more physiologic and has advantages as well. The antimesenteric side of the donor’s duodenum is anastomosed to the antimesenteric portion of the recipient’s jejunum in a side-to-side fashion. The enteric anastomosis can also involve a defunctionalized Roux-en-Y loop, which mini-mizes the potential complications if an enteric leak occurs.98 Currently, in the United States, more than 80% of all pancreas transplants are performed with enteric drainage for the exocrine pancreatic secretions, and more than 90% employ systemic venous drainage.95Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   37601/03/19   6:54 PM 377TRANSPLANTATIONCHAPTER 11Figure 11-13. Whole-organ transplant with systemic vein and enteric exocrine drainage. (Reproduced from Gruessner RWG, Sutherland DER: Transplantation of the Pancreas. New York, NY: Springer, 2004.)ComplicationsThe technical complication rate for pancreas transplants is higher than for any other solid organ transplant. Four fac-tors contribute to the high surgical complication rate99: (a) the nature of the organ itself with inherent organ-specific surgical complications (e.g., pancreatitis, abscesses, necrosis, fistulas, and pseudocysts) and its low blood flow (which significantly increases the risk of thrombosis, as compared with a kidney or liver transplant); (b) the risk of a leak or infection after con-necting two hollow viscera (the duodenum and either the blad-der or small intestine); (c) the increased incidence of rejection episodes because the pancreas is one of the most immunogenic solid organs; and (d) the underlying disease of diabetes mellitus, predisposing patients not only to infections but also to cardio-vascular and other complications.The most common surgical complications are throm-bosis (an incidence of 5%–15%), intra-abdominal abscesses (5%–10%), and bleeding (6%–8%). Other pancreas-specific complications include graft pancreatitis (frequently due to pro-curement or reperfusion injury), pancreatic fistulas, and pan-creatic pseudocysts. Anastomotic leaks do not always require a graft pancreatectomy, but arterial pseudoaneurysms, arteriove-nous fistulas, and wound dehiscence may. Bleeding frequently requires relaparotomy.Thrombosis usually occurs within the first week posttrans-plant. It manifests as a sudden increase in insulin requirements or as a sharp drop in urinary amylase levels. Venous thrombosis, which is more common than arterial thrombosis, is associated with distinct clinical symptoms, including a swollen and tender graft, hematuria, lower extremity edema, and deep vein throm-bosis, the latter two occurring ipsilaterally. Arterial thrombosis is less symptomatic and may not initially cause pain; its diag-nosis is usually confirmed by Doppler ultrasonography. Surgi-cal exploration in recipients with thrombosis usually requires a graft pancreatectomy.With the advent of advanced interventional radiologic procedures to drain intra-abdominal abscesses, the reoperation rate has markedly decreased. Pancreas transplant recipients are usually kept on broad-spectrum antimicrobial agents for the first  7 days posttransplant.The most common nonsurgical complication posttrans-plant is rejection. The incidence of rejection is about 30% within the first year. The diagnosis is usually based on an increase in serum amylase and lipase levels and, in bladder-drained recipi-ents, a decrease in urinary amylase levels. A sustained drop in urinary amylase levels greater than 25% from baseline should prompt a pancreas graft biopsy to rule out rejection. In enteric-drained recipients, one must rely on serum amylase and lipase levels only. Other signs and symptoms of rejection include tenderness over the graft, unexplained fever, and hyperglyce-mia, which usually is a late finding; fewer than 5% of all rejec-tion episodes can be reversed in its presence. The diagnosis of rejection should be confirmed by a percutaneous pancreas graft biopsy.Other nonsurgical complications include infections with CMV, HCV, or extra-abdominal bacteria or fungi; malignan-cies, such as PTLD; and, rarely, graft-versus-host disease. For such complications, the diagnosis and treatment are similar to what is recommended after other solid organ transplants.Bladder-drained pancreas recipients may experience an array of unique urologic complications. Usually the result of the irritating nature of pancreatic enzymes on the urothelium in the bladder and urethra, these urologic complications can lead to cystitis, hematuria, and dysuria. With the loss of bicarbonate from pancreatic secretions, dehydration and metabolic acidosis are not uncommon. Many of these complications are chronic, such that approximately 20% to 30% of all bladder-drained recipients require conversion to enteric drainage within the first 5 years posttransplant.100Living Donor Pancreas TransplantsPancreas transplants using living donors also can be performed safely and successfully in select donors and recipients. Since 1979, about 150 such transplants have been performed world-wide, with 1-year graft survival rates in excess of 85% over the last decade. A meticulous donor evaluation using standard criteria remains key to a low donor metabolic and surgical com-plication rate. The concept of procuring the distal pancreas from a living donor is based on the observation that patients with benign or malignant pancreatic disorders can undergo a distal hemipancreatectomy without any serious change in endocrine function.Living donor pancreas transplants are ideal for patients with an identical twin, but other relatives can be suitable donors as well. In particular, patients with high PRA levels should be considered for a living donor transplant.Living donor pancreas transplants decrease the number of deaths of diabetic patients on the waiting list, help overcome the organ shortage, reduce mortality and morbidity, and improve the quality of life for patients with debilitating side effects of diabetes. The use of living donors also reduces the risk of graft rejection, as compared with the use of deceased donors. Yet living donor pancreas transplants remain relatively rare, per-formed under very selective circumstances. In terms of surgical technique, the donor splenic artery and vein are anastomosed to the recipient’s external iliac artery and vein in an end-to-side fashion, and exocrine drainage can occur via an anastomosis Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   37701/03/19   6:54 PM 378BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IFigure 11-14. Segmental transplant with systemic vein and blad-der exocrine drainage. The donor splenic artery and splenic vein are anastomosed end-to-side to the recipient’s external iliac artery and vein. The splenic artery anastomosis is lateral and proximal to the splenic vein anastomosis. A two-layer ductocystostomy is constructed. (Reproduced from Gruessner RWG, Sutherland DER: Transplantation of the Pancreas. New York, NY: Springer, 2004.)of the pancreatic duct and transected end of the pancreas to the bladder or bowel101 (Fig. 11-14).ResultsAs of December 2010, more than 35,000 pancreas transplants had been reported to the IPTR: more than 25,000 transplants in the United States and more than 10,000 in other countries. According to IPTR data, recipient age at the time of the trans-plant has increased significantly, and so has the number of trans-plants for patients with type 2 diabetes. The trend over time has been toward stricter donor criteria, with a concentration on younger donors, preferably trauma victims, and on short pan-creas graft preservation time.Drainage techniques have changed over time, too: enteric drainage of exocrine pancreatic secretions is now predominant, in combination with systemic drainage of the venous effluent of the pancreas graft. Immunosuppressive protocols have devel-oped toward antibody induction therapy, followed by administra-tion of tacrolimus and MMF for maintenance. Steroid avoidance has increased over time in all three recipient categories.Between 2005 and 2009 and 2010 and 2014, the num-ber of U.S. pancreas transplants declined by over 20%, while the overall number of pancreas transplants performed outside the United States has increased. The decline in U.S. numbers is predominantly due to the decline in primary and secondary pancreas after kidney transplants (PAK). During the time period studied, the number of PAK transplants dropped by 50%. In contrast, the number of simultaneous pancreas/kidney trans-plants (SPK) declined by only 10%, and the number of pan-creas transplants alone (PTA) by 20%. Over 90% of pancreas transplants worldwide were performed, with a simultaneous kidney transplant and excellent results. Transplant outcomes in SPK improved significantly because of a decrease in the rates of technical and immunologic graft loss. In 2010 to 2014 vs. 2005 to 2009, U.S. SPK transplant patient survival at 1 year posttransplant increased from 95.7% to 97.4%, pancreas graft function increased from 88.3% to 91.3%, and kidney func-tion increased from 93.6% to 95.5%. A significant improve-ment was also noted in PAK transplants. One-year patient survival increased from 96.4% to 97.9%, and pancreas graft function increased from 81.0% to 86.0%. PTA 1-year patient survival remained constant at 97%, and pancreas 1-year graft survival improved from 81.0% to 85.7%. IPTR data show sig-nificant improvements in patient survival and pancreas graft function rates since the inception of UNOS, over a course of  24 years.92,95,99,102 Clearly, pancreas transplants now offer excel-lent outcomes for patients with IDDM.Islet versus Pancreas TransplantsPancreas transplants are frequently compared with islet trans-plants (vide infra), which are less invasive and, therefore, more appealing. It is important to emphasize that these two types of transplants are not mutually exclusive but rather complementary. The results of islet transplants have improved over the past decade, but overall islet graft function, specifically long-term function, still significantly trails overall pancreas graft function.103 Islet transplants involve pancreas procurement (as described earlier) and then separation of islets from the exocrine pan-creatic tissues using proteolytic enzymes (as described later). The human pancreas contains about one million islets, of which half are lost during the isolation process. About 10,000 islets per kilo-gram of body weight are needed to achieve insulin independence when transplanted into the liver. Frequently, one donor pancreas does not suffice; in fact, up to four donor pancreases have been used for one islet recipient.Because of the relatively disappointing long-term out-comes, insurance providers in the United States do not provide reimbursement for islet transplants. Transplant centers with both pancreas and islet transplant programs follow an algorithm that favors islet transplants in patients with a high surgical risk and pancreas transplants in patients with a low surgical risk. Although solitary donor pancreases are not in short supply, only one donor pancreas is required for a successful pancreas transplant; in con-trast, two to four donor pancreases are commonly used for one islet recipient with less favorable long-term outcomes.Of note, the primary goal of current islet transplant trials is not insulin independence but rather a reduction in the inci-dence and severity of hypoglycemic events, a reduction in exog-enous insulin requirements, and an amelioration of hemoglobin A1c levels. Islet transplants rarely maintain long-term insulin independence. A recent study showed a higher rate of insulin independence in PTA recipients than in recipients of an islet transplant alone, despite the use of up to three donor pancreases in each of the islet recipients.104 Until islet transplant results sig-nificantly improve and include long-term insulin independence, a pancreas transplant remains the treatment of choice for β-cell replacement therapy in patients with IDDM.ISLET TRANSPLANTATIONTransplanting islets of Langerhans isolated from deceased donor pancreases is an appealing option for patients with type 1 diabetes. An islet transplant involves the procurement of a 6Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   37801/03/19   6:54 PM 379TRANSPLANTATIONCHAPTER 11donor pancreas and its transportation to a specialized islet iso-lation facility, where the pancreas is enzymatically digested; then, the islets are purified from the rest of the digested pan-creas using density gradients. The purified islets are then cul-tured and evaluated for their identity, viability, and potency, before being infused into the portal vein of a diabetic recipient. When the procedure is successful, these islet cells engraft into the recipient and secrete insulin, providing excellent moment-to-moment control of blood glucose, as is seen with a whole-pancreas transplant.A successful islet transplant offers advantages over exog-enous insulin injections—advantages that are similar to those of a whole-pancreas transplant. These advantages include restor-ing β-cell secretory capacity, improving glucose counterregula-tion, restoring hypoglycemia awareness, providing perfect or near-perfect glucose homeostasis, and, potentially, preventing secondary diabetic complications.Unlike a whole-pancreas transplant, an islet transplant does not involve a major surgical procedure with its associated mortality and morbidity. Instead, it can generally be performed as an outpatient procedure using percutaneous catheter-based therapy to cannulate a branch of the portal vein, with minimal recovery time for the recipient. Potential complications associ-ated with islet injection include portal hypertension, portal vein thrombosis, hepatic abscesses, and bacteremia. Theoretically, islet transplants could have wider application (as compared with current practice and with whole-pancreas transplants), given the significantly lower surgical risk, the relatively small tissue vol-ume transplanted, and the potential for islet immunomodula-tion or immunoisolation, which could minimize or eliminate the need for immunosuppression.The first reported attempt at an islet transplant was in 1893 by Watson-Williams and Harsant: they transplanted a sheep’s minced pancreas into the subcutaneous tissue of a young boy with ketoacidosis.105 The discovery of insulin may have reduced interest in islet transplants as a treatment for diabetes, at least until the realization that insulin could not provide perfect glyce-mic control and that, therefore, patients ultimately suffered dev-astating secondary complications. Several milestones ensued: the first whole-pancreas transplants,106 early success with rodent islet transplants,107 and then, in the 1970s, human islet autotrans-plants after pancreatectomy, in order to address the intractable pain associated with chronic pancreatitis, by Sutherland, Najarian, and colleagues in Minnesota.108Until recently, attempts to extend those trailblazing find-ings of clinical islet autotransplants to clinical islet allotrans-plants in patients with type 1 diabetes met with generally very poor success. For example, in 1995, a report of the International Islet Transplant Registry indicated that of 270 recipients, only 5% were insulin-independent at 1 year posttransplant.In 2000, Shapiro and colleagues reported the results of the Edmonton protocol, which enabled consistent diabetes rever-sal and short-term (<1 year) insulin independence.109-111 The Edmonton protocol prescribed transplanting a large number of freshly isolated islets (>10,000 islet equivalents per kilogram body weight, typically requiring the use of two to four pan-creases) with a specialized “islet-sparing,” steroid-free immu-nosuppressive protocol consisting of low-dose tacrolimus, sirolimus, and IL-2 receptor antibody induction. Those results were replicated at other experienced transplant centers,112,113 but the rates of long-term (>5 year) insulin independence remained poor, well below those of whole-pancreas transplants.114 Still, despite the low rates of long-term insulin independence, most islet recipients were C-peptide positive and retained hypoglycemia awareness, indicating residual islet function and benefit. In fact, at 9 years posttransplant, 15% remained insulin-independent, and 73% had hypoglycemia awareness and corrected hemoglo-bin A1c levels.115In the mid-2000s, new trials began with the goal of estab-lishing protocols that enable insulin independence, using islets from a single donor pancreas; the results were good, especially with strict donor and recipient selection.116,117 In the most expe-rienced centers, long-term rates of diabetes reversal are now about 50% at 5 years posttransplant. The reasons include refine-ments in pancreas preservation, islet isolation, and culture pro-tocols, as well as the use of newer induction immunosuppressive agent combinations, such as a T-cell–depleting antibody (anti-CD3 antibody, alemtuzumab, or antithymocyte globulin) and a tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) inhibitor (etanercept or infliximab). Presumably, viable β-cell mass is now preserved, both preand posttransplant.116-120 Thus, islet transplant results are approaching those of whole-pancreas transplants; however, because islets from more than one pancreas are typically needed, those results cannot be directly compared with the results of whole-pancreas transplants.121,122In the United States, an islet transplant is still officially deemed an experimental procedure. In contrast, since 2001, it has been considered a standard of care and is fully reimbursed in Canada and, more recently, in the United Kingdom, Sweden, Switzerland, France, and Italy as well.118 The full potential of islet transplants remains to be realized, but the future is excit-ing. As the latest improvements in pancreas preservation, islet isolation and purification, islet culture, and islet immunoiso-lation are implemented clinically, the hope is that sustained insulin independence may become consistently possible with a single pancreas donor and without the need for systemic immunosuppression.LIVER TRANSPLANTATIONThe first attempts at liver transplants in the late 1960s through the 1980s were largely experimental endeavors, with a 1-year survival rate of only 30%. But breakthroughs in immunosup-pression, surgical technique, organ preservation, anesthesia, and critical care have improved that rate to approximately 85% today. Liver transplants remain daunting, especially in the face of an organ shortage that results in sicker potential candidates. Unfortunately, the perioperative mortality rate and the 1-year mortality rate are among the highest of any surgical operation currently performed.HistoryThe first experimental liver transplants in dogs are often attrib-uted to C. Stuart Welch in 1955 and then Jack Cannon in 1956. However, current scholarship reveals that Vittorio Staudacher first described the technique in 1952.123 A series of canine experiments followed, which refined the surgical technique to ensure perioperative survival.The next obstacle—immunologic rejection—was addressed by drug immunosuppression with AZA and predni-sone. The first human liver transplant trials started in 1963 with Thomas Starzl, but a series of deaths led to a voluntary morato-rium for 3.5 years. With the resumption of clinical transplants in 1967, Starzl performed the first successful liver transplant. Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   37901/03/19   6:54 PM 380BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IStill, for the next decade, survival rates were dismal: only 20% of the 170 liver transplant recipients in Starzl’s program at the University of Colorado survived more than 5 years.124Several innovations dramatically improved outcomes. The advent of better immunosuppressive drugs was instrumental. In 1978, cyclosporine was introduced clinically in England. It was soon combined with prednisone to great effect. The arrival of tacrolimus in the 1990s further improved graft survival.Technical advances were also significant. Donor procure-ment techniques and cold organ preservation protocols were standardized, and the recipient operation was also refined. Choledochocholedochostomy or choledochojejunostomy to a Roux-en-Y limb became standard and significantly decreased the frequency of biliary complications. Innovations, including living donor liver transplants and deceased donor split-liver transplants, enabled more pediatric recipients to be transplanted. Improvements in portosystemic shunting and perioperative criti-cal care also were contributory.IndicationsIn general, any form of irreversible liver disease is an indication for a liver transplant. Chronic alcoholic disease and HCV are the most common indications in the United States. An extensive list of acute and chronic diseases of the liver that are treatable by a liver transplant is provided in Table 11-6.Offering transplants to alcoholic patients has always drawn some opposition because of the perception of it being a self-inflicted illness, as well as concerns about recidivism and the recipient’s possible inability to maintain postoperative immunosuppression and care. Yet studies have shown that such patients have excellent outcomes and that liver transplants for Table 11-6Diseases amenable to treatment by a liver transplantAutoimmune liver diseases Autoimmune hepatitis Primary biliary cirrhosis Primary sclerosing cholangitisCongenital Biliary atresiaViral hepatitis Hepatitis B Hepatitis CAlcoholic liver diseaseMetabolic diseases α1-Antitrypsin deficiency Cystic fibrosis Hemochromatosis Tyrosinemia Wilson’s diseaseHepatic malignancy Hepatocellular carcinoma Neuroendocrine tumor metastatic to liverFulminant hepatic failureOther Alagille syndrome Cryptogenic cirrhosis Budd-Chiari syndrome Polycystic liver disease Amyloidosisthem are cost-effective.125-127 Because patients who drink 4 to  8 ounces of liquor daily for 10 to 15 years have an increased risk of developing cirrhosis, the general requirement for accep-tance as a transplant candidate is 6 months of abstinence. Fur-thermore, most transplant centers recommend rehabilitation and Alcoholics Anonymous programs.Transplants for HCV have yielded worse outcomes than transplants for other diseases.128 The reason is the universal recurrence of the virus posttransplant. Viral levels reach pre-transplant levels as early as 72 hours posttransplant.129 The course of the viral infection is often accelerated posttransplant: 10% to 20% of recipients develop cirrhosis after just 5 years.130 Studies have suggested that use of older donors may increase the chance of aggressive recurrence.131 The best method to prevent recurrence would be to eradicate the infection pretransplant, but doing so is not always possible because patients with decom-pensated cirrhosis often cannot tolerate treatment. Once recur-rence occurs, treatment methods are limited. One study found that pegylated interferon and ribavirin therapy achieved a sus-tained viral response in 44% of patients.132A substantial number of patients undergo liver transplants for cholestatic disorders. Primary biliary cirrhosis, an autoim-mune disease, is characterized by damage to the intralobular bile ducts that progresses to liver cirrhosis. Trends toward earlier treatment may explain the slight decrease in liver transplants for this disorder.133 Posttransplant outcomes in patients with this disorder have been excellent, with many centers achieving 1-year survival rates of 90% to 95%. Recurrence is relatively uncommon: a large series reported a 30% recurrence rate at 10 years posttransplant.134The second most common cholestatic disorder among liver transplant candidates is primary sclerosing cholangitis. It is characterized by inflammation and fibrosis of large intraand extrahepatic biliary ducts; 70% of such patients also have inflammatory bowel disease. Recurrent cholangitis is common and increases mortality rates beyond what would be expected on the basis of laboratory values. On behalf of such patients, appeals can often be made for priority in allocation to the UNOS regional review boards. Posttransplant outcomes for such patients have been excellent. Primary sclerosing cholangitis is a significant risk factor for cholangiocarcinoma, so annual screen-ings (including imaging and measurement of serum CA 19-9 levels) should be carried out. Recurrence is fairly uncommon: studies have reported a recurrence rate of up to 20% at 10 years posttransplant.135Progressive metabolic disorders also are treatable with liver transplants. Hemochromatosis, an inherited disorder, results in excessive intestinal iron absorption. Iron deposition can cause cirrhosis and severe cardiomyopathy. Careful cardiac evaluation is necessary pretransplant.Another metabolic disorder, α1-antitrypsin deficiency, is characterized by insufficient levels of a protease inhibitor, resulting in early-onset emphysema and cirrhosis. Careful pul-monary evaluation is necessary pretransplant.Wilson’s disease, an autosomal recessive disorder char-acterized by impaired cellular copper transport, leads to cop-per accumulation in the liver, brain, and cornea. Patients can develop significant neurologic complications and cirrhosis. Several reports suggest improvement of neurologic deficiencies posttransplant.136,137Transplants can also be performed in patients with hepatic malignancies, but only in accordance with strict criteria. Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   38001/03/19   6:54 PM 381TRANSPLANTATIONCHAPTER 11Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), a complication of cirrhosis, is the most common type of hepatic malignancy. Resection is the first line of treatment if possible, but often, cirrhosis is too advanced. If the tumor meets the Milan criteria, a liver trans-plant can be performed. These criteria were established by a landmark paper in 1996 showing that patients with a single tumor under 5 cm in diameter, or with three tumors under 3 cm in diameter, in the absence of vascular invasion, had a 4-year survival rate of 85%.138 Patients with such tumors receive excep-tion points, based on their UNOS region, allowing for a timely transplant before their tumors spread.Transplants for cholangiocarcinoma remains controver-sial but may be performed if the center has an experimental protocol in place that entails strict recipient selection. The use of a multimodality oncologic approach including neoadjuvant chemo radiotherapy with subsequent OLT achieves excellent results for patients with localized, regional lymph node-negative phCCA. Patient survival after OLT is comparable to the results of OLT for other causes.139Acute fulminant hepatic failure also is an indication for a liver transplant; in fact, such patients are the highest priority for the next available liver in their UNOS region. This devas-tating illness is defined by acute and severe liver injury with impaired synthetic function and encephalopathy in a person who had normal liver function. It is often caused by acetaminophen overdose; acute fulminant viral hepatitis A, B, and E; other viral infections; drug toxicity; ingestion of Amanita mushrooms; acute fatty liver of pregnancy; or Wilson’s disease. A significant number of patients will recover with supportive care. The diffi-culty lies in predicting who will not recover and therefore would benefit from a liver transplant. The King’s College criteria were developed for this purpose: patients with acetaminophen-induced disease, a pH <7.3 or grade III/IV encephalopathy, a pro-thrombin time >100 seconds, and serum creatinine >3.4 mg/dL meet those criteria.140 Management of acute liver failure is very intensive. Such patients suffer from severe coagulopathy, hypoglycemia, lactic acidosis, and renal dysfunction. They are susceptible to infections, which are frequently overwhelming. Cerebral edema, a serious complication of acute liver failure, is a leading cause of death from brain herniation. Intracranial pressure monitoring and serial imaging are often necessary; if a patient develops irreversible brain damage, a transplant is not performed.Recipient SelectionThe diagnosis of cirrhosis itself is not an indication for a trans-plant. Patients may have compensated cirrhosis for years such that the traditional indication for a transplant is decompensated cirrhosis, manifested by hepatic encephalopathy, ascites, spon-taneous bacterial peritonitis, portal hypertensive bleeding, and hepatorenal syndrome (each described below).Hepatic encephalopathy is an altered neuropsychiatric state caused by metabolic abnormalities resulting from liver failure. The early stages result in sleep disturbances and depression. As the liver disease progresses, patients can become somnolent and confused and, in the end stages, comatose. Ammonia is pro-duced by enterocytes from glutamine and from colonic bacterial catabolism, and the use of serum ammonia levels as a marker of encephalopathy is controversial because a variety of factors can influence levels. Hyperammonemia suggests worsening liver function and bypass of portal blood flow around the liver. GI bleeding and infection can exacerbate hepatic encephalopathy.Ascites (the accumulation of fluid in the abdominal cavity) that is caused by cirrhosis is a transudate with a high serum-ascites gradient (>1.1 g/dL). Associated with portal hypertension, it is treated initially with sodium restriction and diuretics. Refractory ascites necessitates large-volume paracentesis and eventually a transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS). Contrain-dications to TIPS placement include significant hepatic enceph-alopathy, advanced liver disease, congestive heart failure, renal insufficiency, and severe pulmonary hypertension.141Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, an infection of the ascitic fluid without an evident intra-abdominal source, is char-acterized by fever, abdominal pain, and an ascitic fluid poly-morphonuclear count ≥250 cell/mm3 on paracentesis. The first line of empiric treatment is with a third-generation cephalospo-rin because the majority of cases are caused by aerobic gram-negative microbes such as E. coli, although Gram stain and culture results should be used to guide therapy.Portal hypertensive bleeding can be a devastating event for patients with cirrhosis. Each bleeding event carries a 30% mortality rate and accounts for a third of all deaths related to cirrhosis. Only 50% of bleeding events cease spontaneously, so treatment must be expedient. The initial medical treatment is with vasopressin and octreotide. The initial intervention is endoscopy with sclerotherapy and band ligation of bleeding varices. If those initial attempts fail, more aggressive treatment is necessary with a balloon tamponade (using a Sengstaken-Blakemore tube) and with emergent TIPS placement. The last line of treatment is emergency surgery to place a portosystemic shunt, transect the esophagus, or devascularize the gastroesoph-ageal junction (Sugiura procedure). Preventing variceal bleed-ing is essential and can be achieved, with some success, using β-blockers.Hepatorenal syndrome is a form of acute renal failure that develops as liver disease worsens. The etiology is unclear, but splanchnic vasodilation from portal hypertension and increased production of circulating vasodilators result in a decline in renal perfusion. Characterized by oliguria (<500 mL of urine/day) and low urine sodium levels (<10 mEq/L), hepatorenal syndrome is often reversed by a liver transplant, even after dialysis depen-dence. Pretransplant, other causes of renal failure need to be excluded, including ATN, drug nephrotoxicity, and chronic renal disease. The initial medical therapy includes octreotide, midodrine, and vasopressin analogs, but the syndrome often progresses to dialysis dependence.The Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) was originally developed to assess risk for TIPS placement.142 Later analysis revealed it to be an excellent model to predict survival among patients with cirrhosis, especially those on the waiting list for a liver transplant.143 In 2002, liver graft allocation was restructured to be based on the MELD score.Although the historic indication for a liver transplant is decompensated cirrhosis, a landmark analysis comparing wait-ing list mortality with posttransplant mortality established that a minimum MELD score of 18 is necessary to have a survival benefit posttransplant. A MELD score between 15 and 18 does not confer a survival advantage, but a transplant may be justified if the patient has significant morbidity from cirrhosis.144Acute liver failure itself is an indication for a liver trans-plant. To qualify for Status 1 (first priority for a donor liver within the UNOS region), the transplant candidate must meet the following criteria: (a) onset of hepatic encephalopa-thy within 8 weeks after the first symptoms of liver disease;  Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   38101/03/19   6:54 PM 382BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART I(b) absence of preexisting liver disease; and (c) ventilator depen-dence, dialysis, or an international normalized ratio (INR) >2.0.ContraindicationsIn general terms, contraindications to a liver transplant include insufficient cardiopulmonary reserve, uncontrolled malignancy or infection, and refractory noncompliance. Older age is only a relative contraindication: carefully selected recipients over the age of 70 years can achieve satisfactory outcomes.145Patients with reduced cardiopulmonary reserve are unlikely to survive a liver transplant. Candidates should have a normal ejection fraction. If coronary arterial disease is pres-ent, they should undergo revascularization pretransplant. Severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) with oxygen dependence is a contraindication. Severe pulmonary hyper-tension with a mean pulmonary artery pressure greater than  35 mmHg that is refractory to medical therapy is also a contra-indication. Candidates with pulmonary hypertension should be evaluated with a right heart catheterization.For candidates with alcoholic liver disease, few reliable predictors of posttransplant relapse exist.146 Most centers require 6 months of abstinence from drugs and alcohol. Insurance com-panies often make more stringent demands, including random drug screening and 1 year of abstinence.Uncontrolled infections pretransplant are a substantial risk posttransplant when the patient becomes significantly immuno-suppressed. Fungal and multidrug-resistant bacterial infections are relative contraindications. Some centers require an extended period of treatment and documented eradication pretransplant. HIV infection is a relative contraindication; some centers have strict protocols that exclude patients with a history of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)-related illnesses as well as those who are coinfected with HCV.Ideally, patients with a history of malignancy (with the exception of HCC) should be cured of the cancer pretransplant. In most cases, this means eradication, completion of curative therapy, and absence of recurrence over a certain period of time, which varies by the tumor type, but can be up to 5 years or lon-ger for aggressive tumors (see “Malignancies”).Surgical ProcedureA liver transplant is among the most extensive operations per-formed, and it can be associated with considerable blood loss. A bilateral subcostal incision with midline extension is used. Mechanical retraction spreads the rib cage to allow access. The ligamentous attachments of the liver are dissected free. The vascular structures are isolated, including the suprahepatic and infrahepatic vena cava, the portal vein, and hepatic artery (Fig. 11-15). The bile duct, portal structures, and vena cava are divided, completing the hepatectomy (Fig. 11-16)—often the bloodiest and most difficult part of the operation, particularly in the presence of extensive varices and severe coagulopathy.After the liver is removed, the anhepatic phase begins. This phase is characterized by the absence of inferior vena caval return to the heart and by portal congestion due to clamp-ing of the portal vein. Significant hemodynamic instability and increased variceal bleeding can occur. Patients who are unable to tolerate this phase can be placed on venovenous bypass, with cannulas drawing blood from the IVC via the femoral vein and via the portal vein, returning it to the systemic circulation via the subclavian vein. Venovenous bypass itself can cause complica-tions, including air embolism, thromboembolism, and trauma to the cannulated vessels.Figure 11-15. Cirrhotic liver immobilized in preparation for com-plete hepatectomy.Figure 11-16. Isolation and division of the hilar structures to dis-eased liver-hepatic artery, portal vein, and common bile duct.The donor liver is placed in the orthotopic position. The suprahepatic vena caval anastomosis is performed first in an end-to-end fashion, followed by the infrahepatic vena caval and portal anastomosis, both also end-to-end. The liver is then reper-fused, often leading to a period of hemodynamic instability and cardiac arrhythmias due to the release of byproducts of ischemia from the donor liver. Coagulopathy also can worsen because of these byproducts as well as fibrinolysis.The arterial anastomosis between the donor common hepatic or celiac trunk is most often performed with the recipi-ent CHA in an end-to-end fashion. Of course, many variations are possible. After arterial reperfusion, the bile duct anastomosis is performed between the donor and recipient common ducts, also in an end-to-end fashion. If necessary for technical reasons, the recipient common duct can be joined to a Roux-en-Y limb. Some surgeons choose to insert a T-tube or place internal stents in the common bile duct to protect the anastomosis.The piggyback technique is a common variation of the standard technique. The recipient’s IVC is preserved by care-fully dissecting off the posterior aspect of the liver. This added dissection is a disadvantage of this variation, often increas-ing hepatectomy time and blood loss. The recipient’s liver is Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   38201/03/19   6:55 PM 383TRANSPLANTATIONCHAPTER 11removed by dividing it at the confluence of the hepatic veins. The preserved IVC is an advantage of this variation, allow-ing venous return from the lower body to the heart during the anhepatic phase and improving renal perfusion. No randomized studies, however, have demonstrated the superiority of the pig-gyback technique over the standard technique.Pediatric TransplantsOutcomes after pediatric liver transplants are among the best after any type of transplant, with a 1-year survival rate of 90%. The most common indication is biliary atresia. After diagno-sis is confirmed, a Kasai procedure is promptly carried out: a Roux-en-Y loop of bowel is directly anastomosed to the hilum of the liver. The Kasai procedure often allows time for the chil-dren to grow in size, reducing the risk of a transplant when it is required, as it eventually is in 75% of such children.The other common indication for a pediatric liver trans-plant is a metabolic disorder, such as α1-antitrypsin deficiency, tyrosine metabolism deficiencies, and primary oxalosis. Since the MELD score was developed for adults, pediatric liver allo-cation is based on an analogous model, the Pediatric End-Stage Liver Disease (PELD) score, which incorporates bilirubin lev-els, INR, albumin levels, age, and growth failure.The surgical procedure is similar to the adult procedure. Graft implantation is more challenging, given the pediatric recipient’s smaller vascular structures. As a result, surgical complications are much more common in pediatric recipients. Hepatic artery thrombosis is about three times more common. Donor size matching is very important in the pediatric popula-tion and often limits the donor pool for pediatric recipients. To address this issue, deceased donor split-liver transplants and liv-ing donor transplants (both described in the following sections) have been developed.Deceased Donor Split-Liver TransplantsA deceased donor allograft can be split into two grafts, most frequently into a left lateral segment for a child and an extended right segment for an adult (Fig. 11-17). It can be done in vivo (during the donor operation) or ex vivo (on the back table after the donor liver is removed). Both techniques have simi-lar outcomes. Increased morbidity is associated with splitting allografts, whether for adult or pediatric recipients; however, the technique is justified given the donor shortage and has been important for improving access to transplants for pediatric recipients.147Living Donor TransplantsDonation by an adult living donor to an adult recipient requires either the right or left lobe of the liver (Fig. 11-18). Donation by an adult living donor to a pediatric recipient requires the left lateral lobe (Fig. 11-19). Donor safety is paramount. The over-all donor mortality rate after donation was 0.4%, and the over-all complication rate was 40%, with multiple complications occurring in 19% of the patients. The rate of serious complica-tions resulting in lasting disability was 1.1%, with liver failure or death in 0.4%148 Careful donor selection is vital. Potential donors should be medically and psychologically healthy, their hepatic anatomy should be amenable to donation, and absolutely no coercion can occur. A separate donor team should serve as the donor advocate and thoroughly explain all risks.Careful recipient selection is essential. Transplant can-didates also must qualify for a deceased donor liver trans-plant because a significant number of living donor transplant DonorLeft hepatic veinLeft portal veinLeft hepatic arteryRecipientHepatic arteryPortal veinRoux limbFigure 11-17. Donor and recipient procedure for living donor liver transplant into a pediatric recipient.recipients will eventually require a retransplant. Transplant can-didates should be medically fit enough to withstand the rigors of the operation and of the postoperative course with a partial graft. An absolute contraindication is a critical illness: the limited suc-cess of such transplants does not justify the risks to the living donor. The obvious advantages of a living donor transplant are that it can be done expediently (avoiding the waiting list mortal-ity associated with candidates for a deceased donor transplant) and that it can be planned.Postoperative CareA liver transplant imposes significant trauma on the major organ systems. Immediately posttransplant, the first goal is to stabi-lize those systems. Acid-base equilibrium and hemodynamic stability are often difficult to maintain but are essential. Periods of hypotension can increase the risk of hepatic artery throm-bosis. Careful attention needs to be paid to ongoing bleeding. Appropriate hemoglobin levels should be maintained. Ongoing bleeding mandates a return trip to the operating room; the rate of reoperation can be as high as 25% among high-risk patients. Transfusion of platelets and fresh frozen plaza must be done prudently because theoretically their administration can increase the risk of hepatic artery thrombosis. Graft function should be evaluated frequently; if it is impaired, an ultrasound is urgently required to assess for the presence of vascular complications.Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   38301/03/19   6:55 PM 384BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART ICHARHVMPVMHVLHVLHVS4S2FLS3IVCIVCLHVRHVMHVLHDLHALPVMPVPHACBDR.P.V.R.P.A.RHDC.A.C.D.ABFigure 11-18. A. Hepatic transection completed for right lobe removal. CA = cystic artery; CBD = common bile duct; CD = cystic duct; FL = falciform ligament; IVC = inferior vena cava; LHD = left hepatic duct; LHV= left hepatic vein; MHV = middle hepatic vein; MPV = main portal vein; PHA = proper hepatic artery; RHA = right hepatic artery; RHV = right hepatic vein; RPV = right portal vein; S2, S3, S4 = segments 2, 3, and 4. B. Implantation of the donor right lobe with the MHV. CHA = common hepatic artery. (Reproduced with permission from Gruessner RWG, Benedetti E: Living Donor Organ Transplantation. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Education; 2008.)Evaluation of Graft FunctionEvaluation of the graft begins in the operating room. Its appearance overall, any swelling, and the quantity and quality of bile production after reperfusion can help assess function. In the intensive care unit, hemodynamic stability, correc-tion of coagulopathy, euglycemia, successful temperature regulation, clearance of lactic acid, and restoration of neuro-logic status are all signs of a functioning graft, even before the first set of liver function test results are obtained. Trans-aminases usually peak by postoperative day 2. An aspartate transaminase (AST) level greater than 2500 IU/L is sugges-tive of significant injury. Cholestasis usually peaks from Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   38401/03/19   6:55 PM 385TRANSPLANTATIONCHAPTER 11Figure 11-19. A. Hepatic transection completed for removal of left lateral segments (S2 and S3). Bile ducts to segments 2 and  3 divided; vascular structures still intact. B. Implantation of the donor left lobe. (Reproduced with permission from Gruessner RWG, Benedetti E: Living Donor Organ Transplantation. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Education; 2008.)S2 + 3ABpostoperative day 7 to 12. The INR should improve shortly after reperfusion.In 3% to 4% of patients undergoing a liver transplant, the graft does not function for any identifiable reason, a condition termed primary nonfunction; in such cases, a retransplant is the only option. Some studies suggest that a peak AST level of 5000 IU/L may be predictive of primary nonfunction.149-151 Factors associated with primary nonfunction include donor macroste-atosis, prolonged cold and warm ischemic times, and prolonged donor hospital stay.151ComplicationsVascular complications occur in about 8% to 12% of recipi-ents and include thrombosis, stenosis, and pseudoaneurysm formation.The most common vascular complication is hepatic artery thrombosis. Initial reviews suggest that its incidence is between 1.6% and 4%152; the mortality rate is 50%, even after defini-tive therapy.153 Early presentation can be quite dramatic, with fulminant hepatic necrosis, primary nonfunction, transamini-tis, or fever. Late presentation, however, can be asymptom-atic or subtle, with cholangitis, bile leak, mild transaminitis, hepatic abscesses, or failure to thrive. Diagnostic imaging with ultrasound has more than 90% sensitivity and specificity. If hepatic artery thrombosis is identified, urgent reexploration is needed. A thrombectomy or revision of an anastomosis may be successful, but with significant hepatic necrosis, a retransplant is necessary.Thrombosis of the portal vein is very uncommon. Signs of early thrombosis include liver dysfunction, ascites, and variceal bleeding. Upon diagnosis, an operative thrombectomy should be attempted.Biliary complications remain the “Achilles’ heel” of liver transplantation, affecting 10% to 35% of these organ recipients. Signs include fever and abdominal pain, with bilious drainage from surgical drains. Diagnosis is made with cholangiography.Complications manifest themselves as leaks or strictures. Leaks require a reoperation and surgical correction, whereas strictures can most often be managed with radiologic or endo-scopic interventions. Two common reconstructions are cho-ledochostomy and choledochojejunostomy. Some centers also routinely use T-tube stents or internal stents. Consensus has not been reached as to which reconstruction technique is superior. Early infectious complications are often associated with initial graft function and pretransplant risk factors. Intra-abdominal infections should raise concerns of a possible bile leak. Fungal infections are often associated with poor graft function. Given the immunosuppressed and compromised state of liver recipi-ents, early infectious complications can be devastating.The types of opportunistic infections that occur in liver transplant recipients are similar to those that occur in other types of solid organ transplant recipients and are due to suppression of cell-mediated immunity by chronic immunosuppressive drug administration.Acute rejection occurs in approximately 20% of liver recipients. The first line of treatment is with a high dose of a corticosteroid, which is usually effective; if not, antilympho-cyte therapy is initiated. Rejection of the liver (unlike other transplanted organs) does not adversely affect patient or graft survival rates. Maintenance immunosuppression consists of a corticosteroid, tacrolimus, and mycophenolate.INTESTINE AND MULTIVISCERAL TRANSPLANTATIONAfter the introduction of long-term total parenteral nutrition (TPN) in the late 1970s and the early success of liver, kidney, and heart transplants, the first attempts at intestine transplants were made. Over the first two decades, the results were dismal. But the introduction of the immunosuppressive drug tacrolimus in the late 1980s led to significant improvement in graft and patient survival rates. Nonetheless, intestine transplants remain the least frequently performed of all transplants, with the lowest graft survival rates.The main obstacle is the high immunogenicity of the intestine, caused by its abundant lymphoid tissue. High lev-els of immunosuppression are needed, yet the rejection rate is still high. The microbial colonization of the intestine confers the risk of translocation of pathogenic microorganisms into the recipient’s circulation, causing severe systemic infections. Through the first decade of the 21st century, the survival of patients on long-term TPN was superior to the survival of intes-tine transplant recipients, so a transplant was considered only as rescue therapy for patients with life-threatening TPN-related complications.Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   38501/03/19   6:55 PM 386BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IOver the last several years, improvements in surgical tech-niques, in perioperative and postoperative care, and particularly in immunosuppressive protocols have led to significantly bet-ter patient and graft survival rates posttransplant.154 Recent data indicate that survival rates after an intestine transplant often are better than, or at least similar to, survival rates among patients receiving chronic TPN in the home setting with improved qual-ity of life in selected patients.155 Today, an intestine or multivis-ceral transplant is recognized as a feasible treatment.Indications and Recipient SelectionAn intestine transplant is indicated for patients with irreversible intestine failure in combination with TPN failure. The defini-tion of intestine failure does not specify the exact length of the remaining intestine. Intestine failure is typically multifactorial. Variables include what part of the small intestine is absent, whether or not the ileocecal valve is present, whether or not the patient underwent an ostomy, and how long the remaining colon is. TPN failure is defined as significant biochemical or pathologic evidence of liver injury, loss of central vein access with thrombosis of at least two central veins, frequent indwell-ing catheter infection or a single episode of fungal infection, and recurrent episodes of severe dehydration despite IV fluid supplementation.Indications for a transplant differ between the adult and pediatric population. The leading causes of intestine failure are summarized in Table 11-7. The disease involvement of organs other than the intestine dictates the extent of the operation required. Liver failure is often seen in patients on long-term TPN. If pathologic or biochemical evidence of severe liver damage is combined with signs of portal hypertension, then a combined liver-intestine transplant is the treatment of choice. However, a multivisceral transplant (liver, pancreas, stomach, duodenum, and/or small intestine) might be necessary among children who suffer diffuse intestinal dysmotility syndromes and adults who develop diffuse portomesenteric thrombosis, extensive intra-abdominal desmoid disease encasing the main visceral vascular structures with concurrent short gut syndrome, or massive abdominal trauma.Table 11-7Leading causes of intestine failureCHILDRENADULTSGastroschisisVisceral ischemia secondary to SMA/SMV thrombosisMidgut volvulusCrohn’s diseaseIntestinal atresiaTraumaNecrotizing enterocolitisMesenteric desmoid tumorsMicrovillus involution diseaseRadiation enteritisHirschsprung’s diseaseMassive resection secondary to tumorsCrohn’s diseaseChronic intestinal pseudo-obstructionPseudo-obstructionAutoimmune enteropathySMA = superior mesenteric artery; SMV = superior mesenteric veinSurgical ProcedureFor both the donor and recipient surgery, the key decision is which organs will be transplanted.156 For an isolated intestine transplant, the blood supply is based on the arterial inflow from the SMA and on the venous outflow from the superior mesen-teric vein (SMV). Both vessels are isolated at the root of the mesentery.For a combined liver-intestine transplant, the blood supply is based on the arterial inflow from the celiac axis and SMA, which are procured en bloc with an aortic patch. The liver, duo-denum, pancreas, and small intestine—because of their close anatomic relationship—are procured en bloc. If the hepatoduo-denal ligament is left intact, no biliary reconstruction is neces-sary, which virtually eliminates the risk of postoperative biliary complications.157 Because the entire splanchnic system drains into the liver, venous drainage is achieved by anastomosis of the hepatic veins to the recipient’s vena cava.For both an isolated intestine transplant and a combined liver-intestine transplant, the proximal transection of the GI tract occurs at the first portion of the duodenum. For a multivisceral transplant, the stomach is part of the graft; hence, the transection of the GI tract occurs at the distal esophagus. Figures 11-20 to 11-22 show these three main types of transplants.The vast majority of intestine transplants use a deceased donor organ. However, advances in surgical techniques have made the use of living donors a feasible alternative for either an isolated intestine transplant or a combined liver-intestine transplant. With a living donor, the donor operation is slightly different: for an isolated intestine transplant, 150 to 200 cm of the donor’s ileum, on a vascular pedicle comprising the ileocolic artery and vein, are used158 (Fig. 11-23); for a combined liver-intestine transplant, performed almost exclusively for pediatric recipients, segments II and III of the donor’s liver are used, in addition to the intestine (Fig. 11-24).Figure 11-20. Isolated intestine transplant.Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   38601/03/19   6:55 PM 387TRANSPLANTATIONCHAPTER 11Figure 11-21. Combined liver-intestine transplant.Figure 11-22. Multivisceral transplant.ABFigure 11-23. A. Donor operation. About 180 to 200 cm of distal ileum on a vascular pedicle comprising the ileocolic artery and vein are removed. B. Recipient operation. The donor’s ileocolic artery and vein (or the terminal branches of the donor’s superior mesenteric artery and vein) are anastomosed end-to-side to the recipient’s infrarenal aorta and vena cava. (Reproduced with permission from Gruessner RWG, Benedetti E: Living Donor Organ Transplantation. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Education; 2008.)Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   38701/03/19   6:55 PM 388BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IFigure 11-24. Recipient operation. For a combined living donor liver-intestine transplant in a pediatric recipient, liver segments 2 and 3 are implanted in standard fashion (the donor’s left hepatic vein to the recipient’s vena cava, the donor’s left hepatic artery to the recipient’s proper or common hepatic artery, the donor’s left portal vein branch to the recipient’s portal vein trunk). The donor’s ileocolic artery and vein are anastomosed to the recipient’s infra-renal aorta and cava. In the recipient, a duodenum-to-donor ileum anastomosis and a distal Bishop-Coop ileostomy are constructed to reestablish bowel continuity. A very short Roux-en-Y loop (10 to 20 cm) is anastomosed to the donor’s bile duct(s). (Reproduced with permission from Gruessner RWG, Benedetti E: Living Donor Organ Transplantation. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Education; 2008.)Similarly, the recipient operation also varies by the organs transplanted. Generally, the recipient’s infrarenal aorta is used to achieve the arterial inflow to the graft. For an isolated intestine transplant, venous drainage is achieved via systemic or portomesenteric drainage; for a combined liver-intestine trans-plant or a multivisceral transplant, venous drainage is achieved via the hepatic veins. Systemic venous drainage, given its lesser technical difficulty, is preferred over portomesenteric drainage. The diversion of splanchnic flow into the systemic venous cir-culation can cause several metabolic abnormalities, but no hard evidence shows any negative impact clinically on the recipient.After the organs are perfused, the continuity of the recipi-ent’s GI tract is restored, which includes the placement of a gastrostomy or jejunostomy feeding tube and an ileostomy. In the early postoperative period, the ileostomy enables regular endoscopic surveillance and biopsy of the intestinal mucosa. Once the recipient recovers, the ileostomy can be taken down.The last, but often the most difficult, part of the recipi-ent operation is abdominal wall closure. It is especially challenging in intestine transplant recipients because they have usually undergone multiple previous procedures, resulting in many scars, ostomies, feeding tubes, and the loss of abdomi-nal domain. To provide sufficient coverage of the transplanted organs, the use of prosthetic mesh often is necessary.Postoperative CareInitial postoperative care for intestine transplant recipients does not significantly differ from that for other organ transplant recipients. In the intensive care unit, each recipient’s cardio-vascular, pulmonary, and renal function is closely monitored; aggressive resuscitation with fluid, electrolytes, and blood prod-ucts is performed. Broad-spectrum antibiotics are an integral component of care.Of all solid organ transplants, intestine transplants have the highest rate of rejection. With intestine transplants, no sero-logic marker of rejection is available, so frequent biopsies and histologic evaluation of the intestinal mucosa are of utmost importance. Rejection leads to structural damage of the intes-tinal mucosa. Translocation of endoluminal pathogens into the circulation can cause systemic infections.Thanks to the introduction of new immunosuppressive protocols, the rejection rates and the overall patient and graft survival rates have improved significantly. Variations between the protocols exist, but the general concept is to induce immu-nosuppression with polyclonal T-cell antibody and high doses of a corticosteroid, followed by maintenance doses of cortico-steroids and the calcineurin inhibitor tacrolimus.Immediately, posttransplant, recipients are maintained on TPN. Enteral nutrition is initiated as early as possible, but it is advanced very cautiously. It can take several weeks for the transplanted intestine to achieve structural integrity and func-tionality and for the recipient to tolerate the full strength of tube feeds.Despite all the recent advances, the complication rate posttransplant remains high. The most common complica-tions include intra-abdominal abscesses, enteric leaks, intra-abdominal sepsis, the need for a reoperation, graft thrombosis, life-threatening bleeding, and central line problems. Immuno-suppression-specific complications include rejection, PTLD, graft-versus-host disease (GVHD), infections, and malignan-cies. Tailoring the recipient’s immunosuppression plays a critical role in preventing these complications: a low level of immunosuppression leads to graft rejection, but too much con-fers a high risk of infectious complications, PTLD, and, less commonly, GVHD—all of which are associated with a signifi-cantly increased risk of graft failure and mortality.The long-term results of intestine transplants have improved significantly, even though they still remain inferior to the results of other abdominal organ transplants.159,160HEART AND LUNG TRANSPLANTATIONHistoryThe first successful heterotopic heart transplant, in an animal model, was performed by Carrel and Guthrie in 1905.161 Subse-quent progress with cardiopulmonary bypass and immunologic modulation facilitated the first successful adult human heart transplant, performed by Christiaan Barnard in 1967 in Cape Town, South Africa.162 However, it was Norman Shumway at Stanford who persisted with heart transplants, in the face of disappointing patient outcomes at a number of early centers. Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   38801/03/19   6:55 PM 389TRANSPLANTATIONCHAPTER 11Thanks to the diligence of Shumway and colleagues in perfect-ing heart transplant techniques, along with the development, by Caves, of endomyocardial biopsy as a method of allograft rejection surveillance, human heart transplants began to reap-pear in the 1980s as a viable solution to end-stage heart failure. By 1981, the introduction of cyclosporin A finally created the necessary clinical immunologic modulation necessary to make long-term survival of heart recipients a reality.161Lung transplants have a similar history. In the 1950s, Metras in France and Hardin and Kittle in the United States performed canine lung transplants, demonstrating that meticu-lous anastomotic technique could produce normal pulmonary pressures. Hardy performed the first human lung transplant in 1963, although the patient lived only 18 days. The first suc-cessful long-term lung transplant was performed in 1983 in Toronto. These early lung recipients, however, were plagued by infection, rejection, and, most significantly, bronchial anas-tomotic dehiscence. Cooper and colleagues soon determined that the high-dose corticosteroids used for immunosuppression were responsible for the frequent occurrence of dehiscence. The combination of high-dose corticosteroids and ischemic donor bronchi was deadly to lung recipients. Cooper, Morgan, and colleagues showed that the bronchial anastomosis could be pro-tected by wrapping it with a vascular omental pedicle, which not only provided neovascularity but also offered a buttress against any partial dehiscence.163Once cyclosporine became available for lung recipients, corticosteroid doses could be quickly tapered and stopped; cyclosporine poses no danger to the integrity of the bronchial anastomosis. In fact, the introduction of cyclosporine allowed the success of the first combined heart-lung transplant at Stanford in 1981 (after unsuccessful attempts by Cooley in 1969, Lillehei in 1970, and Barnard in 1981, all of whom used only high-dose corticosteroids for immunosuppression). The 1980s marked the start of the modern age of thoracic transplants.Heart TransplantsIndications. The most common diagnosis leading to a heart transplant is ischemic dilated cardiomyopathy, which stems from coronary artery disease, followed by idiopathic dilated myopathy and congenital heart disease. About 3000 patients are added to the waiting list each year.Evaluation. Pretransplant, both candidates and potential donors are evaluated to ensure their suitability for the procedure. Transplant candidates undergo echocardiography, right and left heart catheterization, evaluation for any undiagnosed malignan-cies, laboratory testing to assess the function of other organs (such as the liver, kidneys, and endocrine system), a dental examination, psychosocial evaluation, and appropriate screen-ing (such as mammography, colonoscopy, and prostate-specific antigen testing). Once the evaluation is complete, the selec-tion committee determines, at a multidisciplinary conference, whether or not a heart transplant is needed and is likely to be successful. Transplant candidates who meet all of the center’s criteria are added to the waiting list, according to the UNOS criteria, which are based on health status.Once a potential deceased donor is identified, the surgeon reviews the status report and screening examination results. The donor is initially matched to the recipient per the recipient’s status on the UNOS waiting list, the size match, and the blood type. Results of the donor’s serologic testing, echocardiography, chest X-ray, hemodynamic testing, and possibly coronary artery evaluation are assessed, in order to determine whether or not the donor’s heart can withstand up to 4 hours of cold ischemic time during procurement, transport, and surgery.Procedure. Heart transplants are most often performed ortho-topically (Fig. 11-25). The recipient’s native heart is removed, leaving the superior vena cava, the IVC, the left atrial cuff, the aorta, and the pulmonary artery in situ, in order to allow for anastomosis of the donor’s heart. Usually the left atrial cuff is anastomosed first, providing left heart inflow. Right heart inflow is achieved using a bicaval technique, by directly sew-ing the donor’s superior vena cava and IVC to the recipient’s venae cavae or by creating an anastomosis of the right atrium to a right atrial cuff. The donor’s main pulmonary artery is con-nected to the recipient’s pulmonary artery, and finally, the aortic anastomosis is completed (Fig. 11-26).Once the cross-clamp is removed, the heart is allowed to receive circulation from the recipient and begins to function normally. Inotropic support with isoproterenol, dobutamine, or epinephrine is often required for 3 to 5 days, in order to support recovery from the cold ischemia.164On rare occasions, a heterotopic or “piggyback” heart can be transplanted, leaving the native heart in place. But this sce-nario is becoming very uncommon with the increasing use of mechanical circulatory support for single-ventricle failure.Posttransplant Care. Patient survival rates for heart recipients differ slightly after primary transplants vs. retransplants. In 2016, 3209 heart transplants were performed in the United States. New, active listings increased 57% since 2005. Overall 1-year survival for patients who underwent heart transplant in 2009 to 2011 was 90.1%, 3-year survival was 83.5%, and 5-year Figure 11-25. A donor’s heart brought forward for anastomosis.Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   38901/03/19   6:55 PM 390BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IFigure 11-26. Suture lines for bicaval anastomosis (a), biatrial anastomosis (b), aortic anastomosis (c), and pulmonary artery anas-tomosis (d).aacbdsurvival was 78.3%, and the most common cause of death within the first year after transplant was infection.165 An increasing number of heart recipients have now survived more than 15 to 20 years with their first graft, especially those with no significant history of either cellular or antibody-mediated rejection.Heart recipients must be monitored for both early and late complications. Early complications include primary graft dys-function, acute cellular or antibody-mediated rejection, right heart failure secondary to pulmonary hypertension, and infec-tion. Hemodynamic values are monitored to assess early graft function; pharmacologic and sometimes mechanical support is instituted if needed.The goal of immunosuppression is to prevent rejection, which is assessed by immunosuppressive levels and, early on, by endomyocardial biopsy. Both T-cell–mediated (cellular) and B-cell–mediated (antibody-mediated) rejection are moni-tored. Most of the immunosuppression used is aimed at T cells; however, if the recipient has many preformed antibodies or develops donor-specific antibodies, other strategies (such as plasmapheresis or rituximab) are used to reduce the antibody load. Immunosuppressive regimens can vary by center, but most often consist of three categories of medications: a calcineurin inhibitor (usually tacrolimus or cyclosporine), an antiprolifera-tive agent (MMF or AZA), and a corticosteroid (prednisone). Other immunosuppressive agents can be used, depending on the needs of individual recipients.Recipients are also assessed for any infections, with visual inspection of wound healing and with monitoring of the com-plete blood count and cultures as needed. Other common early sequelae include drug-induced nephrotoxicity, glucose intoler-ance, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, osteoporosis, malignancies, and biliary disease.Late complications include acquired transplant vasculopa-thy, progressive renal failure, and, most commonly, malignan-cies, especially skin cancer and PTLD. Accelerated coronary artery disease is the third most common cause of death posttrans-plant (after infections and acute rejection) and the most common cause after the first year. Coronary artery disease can begin to develop as early as 1 year posttransplant. Its pathogenesis is unknown, but it is believed to be immunologic. Because of these late complications, most transplant centers continue to perform screening tests and recipient examinations at least annually after the first year.Lung TransplantsIndications. The indications for a lung transplant include congenital disease, emphysema, COPD, cystic fibrosis, idio-pathic pulmonary fibrosis, primary pulmonary hypertension, α1-antitrypsin deficiency, and the need for a retransplant after primary graft failure. Each year in the United States, about 1600 patients are added to the waiting list; nearly a third of them have COPD and/or emphysema. The next most common diagnosis among patients on the waiting list is cystic fibrosis. A lung allo-cation score (LAS) was instituted in 2005. The average lung transplant candidate requires oxygen (often 4 L/min or more at rest) and has an extensively compromised quality of life, as documented by the results of pulmonary function and 6-minute walk tests.Evaluation. Evaluation for a lung transplant is very similar to evaluation for a heart transplant, except that lung transplant candidates undergo more extensive pulmonary function testing, a 6-minute walk test, chest computed tomography, ventilation-perfusion (V-Q) scanning, and arterial blood gas assessment. In addition, all lung transplant candidates must have adequate cardiac function and must meet psychosocial requirements.Potential lung donors are also screened for blood type and size match. Larger lungs are accepted for COPD patients; smaller lungs are chosen for the restricted chest cavity of fibrotic patients. Donors should have a partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood (Pao2) value >300 mmHg on a fraction of inspired oxygen (Fio2) of 100% and a positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) value of 5. Ideally, donors will have normal chest X-ray results, but exceptions for isolated abnormalities that will not affect subsequent graft function can be made. Living donors can donate a single lobe to a smaller recipient, such as a child. Single-lung transplants are common in many centers and can serve to increase the availability of lungs for multiple recipients. Newer concepts, such as “lung in the box” extracorporeal lung perfusion and stem cell technologies, may further improve the availability of donor lungs by optimizing the use of otherwise marginal grafts.Procedure. Lung transplants can be done either as (a) single-lung transplants (to either side via thoracotomy) or as (b) sequential bilateral-lung transplants (via bilateral thoracotomies or via a single clamshell incision that divides the sternum; Fig. 11-27). They can be done absent extracorporeal mechanical cardiopul-monary perfusion (bypass), with the lung with the worst func-tion (as predicted by preoperative ventilation and perfusion scanning) transplanted first. Despite careful surgical technique and excellent anesthesia, the poor pulmonary reserve of some lung recipients may require the institution of cardiopulmonary bypass to complete the transplant. Bypass is initiated through the chest by direct cardiac cannulation or peripherally via the femoral vessels.Once the thoracotomy is made, a recipient pneumonec-tomy is performed with care, in order to avoid injury to the phrenic or recurrent laryngeal nerves. The pulmonary veins and main pulmonary artery are encircled outside the peri-cardium. At this point, once the main pulmonary vessels are occluded, the need for cardiopulmonary bypass can be assessed.  Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   39001/03/19   6:55 PM 391TRANSPLANTATIONCHAPTER 11Figure 11-27. Clamshell incision. Bronchial anastomosis with ligated pulmonary arteries and veins.Figure 11-28. Bronchial anastomosis.The vessels and bronchus are ligated; the donor’s lung is pre-pared and brought to the table wrapped in cold iced gauze, in order to extend the cold preservation time. The bronchial anas-tomosis (Fig. 11-28) is performed first and then covered with peribronchial tissue or pericardium. The pulmonary artery and, finally, the vein are anastomosed. The lung is then de-aired before the final anastomotic suture is tightened, with gentle lung insufflation. All clamps are removed, and the lung is aerated. At least two chest tubes are left in place. After the transplant is complete, a bronchoscopy is performed to clear the airway of blood and secretions.Posttransplant Care. Patient survival rates for lung recipients vary significantly after primary vs. redo transplants. After pri-mary transplants, the patient survival rates at 1, 3, and 5 years are 83%, 62%, and 46%, respectively; after retransplants, the rates are 64%, 38%, and 28%.Postoperative care of lung recipients can be very labor-intensive. These patients require meticulous ventilator manage-ment, in order to maintain Fio2 at a minimum and to keep Pao2 at 70 mmHg. Most patients are extubated within the first 24 to 48 hours. Recipients can require multiple bronchoscopies for both airway management and surveillance biopsies. Diuretics are used generously to counteract any positive fluid balance from the operation and to help with pulmonary recovery.Early complications include technical complications, graft dysfunction, infections, and rejection. Technical complications often involve stenosis of one or more anastomoses leading to graft dysfunction. Bronchoscopy, V-Q scanning, echocardiogra-phy, and radiologic imaging are useful in identifying the causes of graft dysfunction. In up to 20% of recipients, primary early graft dysfunction can occur with no obvious cause. Such dys-function may be due to some pathology from the donor, perhaps an unknown aspiration, infection, or contusion; or it could result from poor graft preservation at the time of organ procurement. In the intensive care unit, aggressive ventilator and pharmaco-logic management can help, but recipients can nonetheless prog-ress to the need for mechanical support in the form of ECMO. Infections are treated with appropriate antibiotics, which can be challenging in patients with cystic fibrosis and a history of multidrug-resistant organisms. Rejection is monitored by biop-sies and treated as needed.Late complications include airway complications, such as strictures and, rarely, dehiscence, bronchiolitis obliterans, and malignancies. Strictures are treated with bronchoscopic dilation and intervention. Bronchiolitis obliterans often is a sequela of chronic rejection, but can be due to aspiration, chronic infec-tions, or various other causes. In recipients with a progressive fall in their forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1), bron-chiolitis obliterans is suspected. All recipients should be taught to perform microspirometry at home as a screening tool post-transplant. Biopsies are performed to confirm the diagnosis of any complication and, if possible, the cause. Despite aggres-sive screening and treatment, more than 50% of recipients will develop graft dysfunction. Most if not all of the sequelae of chronic immunosuppression that occur in lung transplant recipi-ents are similar to those occurring in other groups of solid organ transplants.Heart-Lung TransplantsEvery year in the United States, 30 to 50 patients are added to the list of patients waiting to receive a simultaneous heart-lung transplant. The most common diagnosis is idiopathic pulmo-nary fibrosis, followed by primary pulmonary hypertension. Heart-lung candidates are often younger than their single-organ counterparts. The patient survival rates at 1, 3, and 5 years are 66%, 48%, and 39%, respectively. Often, lung complications ultimately lead to graft failure. The immunosuppression is the same as that for single thoracic organ recipients, with emphasis on weaning the patient off corticosteroids as early as possible.XENOTRANSPLANTSXenotransplants (i.e., cross-species transplants of organs, tis-sues, or cells) have immense, yet untapped, potential to solve the critical shortage of available grafts. A primary hurdle is the formidable immunologic barrier between species, especially Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   39101/03/19   6:55 PM 392BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iwith vascularized whole organs.161-170 Other problems include the potential risk of transmitting infections (known as zoono-ses or xenoses) and the ethical problems of using animals for widespread human transplants, even though great progress has been made in the past few years in efforts to overcome these problems.166-172Pigs are generally accepted as the most likely donor spe-cies for xenotransplants into human beings.173 Pigs would also be easier to raise on a large-scale basis. Guidelines for raising pigs in specialized facilities designated as pathogen-free have been established; in anticipation of clinical trials, such facilities have already been created and populated.171,172The immunologic barrier in pig-to-human xenotrans-plants is highly complex, but generally involves four subtypes of rejection.166 The first is hyperacute rejection (HAR), which is mediated by the presence of natural (preformed) xenoantibod-ies in humans. These antibodies bind to antigens found mainly on the vascular endothelial cells of porcine donor organs, lead-ing to complement activation, intravascular coagulation, and rapid graft ischemia soon after the transplant. The second sub-type is acute humoral xenograft rejection (AHXR), a delayed form of antibody-mediated rejection seen in pig-to-nonhuman-primate transplants after steps to prevent HAR—steps such as depletion of antipig antibodies or complement from nonhu-man primates’ serum. Alternative names for AHXR include acute vascular rejection or delayed xenograft rejection. The third subtype is an acute cellular rejection process (similar to the classic T-cell–mediated acute rejection seen in allograft recipients). The fourth subtype is chronic rejection in grafts that survive for more than a few weeks (similar to the chronic rejection seen in long-surviving allograft recipients, with fea-tures of chronic vasculopathy).Many different options are being tested to overcome this immunologic barrier, including the genetic engineering of pigs, the use of agents to inhibit platelet aggregation and complement activation, and the administration of powerful immunosuppres-sive drugs.166-173During the first decade of the 21st century, the field of whole-organ xenotransplantation progressed significantly, thanks to the increasing availability of genetically engineered pigs and new immunosuppressive protocols. At a recent sympo-sium organized by the International Xenotransplantation Asso-ciation, data presented demonstrated extended survival time of porcine solid organs in nonhuman primates: from about 30 days to an average of 60 days and even up to 250 days (depending on the model).166,169,174,175 However, clinical application is still limited by thrombotic microangiopathy and consumptive coagu-lopathy; novel methods to prevent those complications will be required for further progress.Cellular xenotransplants have made great strides and are currently in the early stages of clinical trials. Porcine islet xenotransplants are the most advanced form; five independent groups have now demonstrated survival and function of porcine islets in nonhuman primates for more than 100 days.166,175-181 For the clinical trials, cost-benefit models have been developed, and the regulatory framework has been established.170-172,178 One trial of particular interest involves transplanting encapsulated porcine islets without immunosuppression.179 Early results are encouraging. But the efficacy of that approach may be limited until further genetic engineering enables proper oxygenation and nourishment of islet grafts, thereby supporting their viabil-ity and function.The future of xenotransplantation is exciting. Continued active research will focus on further genetic engineering of pigs, newer immunosuppressive drugs, and tissue engineering approaches that will minimize or eliminate the need for immu-nosuppression. Given recent progress, routine clinical applica-tion of cellular xenotransplants is likely within the next decade.REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Carrel A. The surgery of blood vessels, etc. B Johns Hopkins Hosp. 1907;18:18-28.	2.	Hamilton D, Reid, WA. Yu Yu Voronoy and the first human kidney allograft. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1984;159(3):289-294.	3.	Medawar PB. Immunity to homologous grafted skin; the suppression of cell division in grafts transplanted to immu-nized animals. Br J Exp Pathol. 1946;27:9-14.	4.	Merrill JP, Murray J, Harrison JH. Successful homotransplan-tation of the human kidney between identical twins. JAMA. 1956;160(4):277-282.	5.	Murray JE, Merrill J, Harrison JH, et al. Prolonged sur-vival of human-kidney homografts by immunosuppressive drug therapy. N Engl J Med. 1963;268:1315-1323.	6.	Starzl TE, Waddell WR, Marchioro TL. Reversal of rejection in human renal homografts with subsequent development of homograft tolerance. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1963;117(4):385.	7.	Calne RY, Rolles K, Thiru S, et al. Cyclosporin A initially as the only immunosuppressant in 34 recipients of cadav-eric organs: 32 kidneys, 2 pancreases, and 2 livers. Lancet. 1979;2(8151):1033-1036.	8.	Hall BM, Dorsch S, Roser B. Cellular basis of allograft-rejection in vivo. 1. Cellular requirements for 1st set rejection of heart grafts. J Exp Med. 1978;148(4):878-889.	9.	Hall BM, Dorsch S, Roser B. Cellular basis of allograft-rejection in vivo. 2. Nature of memory cells mediating second set heart graft rejection. J Exp Med. 1978;148(4):890-902.	10.	Hariharan S, Johnson CP, Bresnahan BA, et al. Improved graft survival after renal transplantation in the United States, 1988 to 1996. N Engl J Med. 2000;342(9):605-612.	11.	Cicciarelli J. Cyclosporine and trends in kidney transplanta-tion. Clin Transpl. 1986;6;223-320.	12.	Meier-Kriesche HU, Li S, Gruessner RW, et al. Immuno-suppression: evolution in practice and trends, 1994-2004. Am J Transplant. 2006;6(5 Pt 2):1111-1131.	13.	Halloran PF. Immunosuppressive drugs for kidney transplanta-tion. N Engl J Med. 2004;351(26):2715-2729.	14.	Zand MS, Vo T, Huggins J, et al. Polyclonal rabbit antithy-mocyte globulin triggers B-cell and plasma cell apoptosis by multiple pathways. Transplantation. 2005;79(11):1507-1515.	15.	Brennan DC, Daller JA, Lake KD, Cibrik D, Del Castillo D. Rabbit antithymocyte globulin versus basiliximab in renal transplantation. N Engl J Med. 2006;355(19):1967-1977.	16.	Vega O, Cardenas G, Correa-Rotter R, Alberu J, Morales-Buenrostro LE. Basilizimab vs. limited dose daclizumab  (2 mg/kg) administered in single or two separated doses in kidney transplantation. Rev Invest Clin. 2008;60(2):82-86.	17.	Kirk AD, Hale DA, Mann RB, et al. Results from a human renal allograft tolerance trial evaluating the humanized CD52-specific monoclonal antibody alemtuzumab (CAMPAH-1H). Transplantation. 2003;76(1):120-129.	18.	Agarwal A, Shen LY, Kirk AD. The role of alemtuzumab in facilitating maintenance immunosuppression minimiza-tion following solid organ transplantation. Transpl Immunol. 2008;20(1-2):6-11.	19.	Fryer JP, Granger DK, Leventhal JR, et al. Steroid-related complications in the cyclosporine era. Clin Transplant. 1994; 8:224.Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   39201/03/19   6:55 PM 393TRANSPLANTATIONCHAPTER 11	20.	Humar A, Crotteau S, Gruessner A, et al. Steroid minimization in liver transplant recipients: impact on hepatitis C recurrence and posttransplant diabetes. Clin Transplant. 2007;21:526.	21.	Matas AJ, Kandaswamy R, Gillingham KJ, et al. Prednisone-free maintenance immunosuppression—a 5-year experience. Am J Transplant. 2005;5:2473.	22.	Elion GB. The George Hitchings and Gertrude Elion Lecture. The pharmacology of azathioprine. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1993; 685:400-407.	23.	Remuzzi G, Lesti M, Gotti E, et al. Mycophenolate mofetil versus azathioprine for prevention of acute rejection in renal transplantation (MYSS): a randomized trial. Lancet. 2004;364:503.	24.	Bolin P, Tanriover B, Zibari GB, et al. Improvement in 3-month patient-reported gastrointestinal symptoms after con-version from mycophenolate mofetil to enteric-coated myco-phenolate sodium in renal transplant patients. Transplantation. 2007;84(11):1443-1451.	25.	Kaplan B, Schold J, Srinivas T, et al. Effect of sirolimus with-drawal in patients with deteriorating renal function. Am J Transpl. 2004;4(10):1709-1712.	26.	Larson TS, Dean PG, Stegall MD, et al. Complete avoidance of calcineurin inhibitors in renal transplantation: a randomized trial comparing sirolimus and tacrolimus. Am J Transplant. 2006;6:514.	27.	Burke JF, Pirsch JD, Ramos EL, et al. Long-term efficacy and safety of cyclosporine in renal transplant recipients. N Engl J Med. 1994;331:358.	28.	Calne RY, Rolles K, White DJG, et al. Cyclosporin A initially as the only immunosuppressant in 34 recipients of cadaveric organs. Lancet. 1979;2:1033.	29.	Sweny P, Farrington K, Younis F, et al. Sixteen months expe-rience with cyclosporin A in human kidney transplantation. Transplant Proc. 1981;13:365.	30.	Mihatsch MJ, Kyo M, Morozumi K, et al. The side-effects of ciclosporine-A and tacrolimus. Clin Nephrol. 1998;49(6):356-363.	31.	Larsen CP, Pearson TC, Adams AB, et al. Rational devel-opment of LEA29Y (belatacept), a high-affinity variant of CTLA4-Ig with potent immunosuppressive properties. Am J Transplant. 2005;5:443.	32.	Vincenti F, Larsen C, Durrback A, et al. Costimulation block-ade with belatacept in renal transplantation. N Engl J Med. 2005;353;770.	33.	Pescovitz MD. Rituximab, an anti-cd20 monoclonal anti-body: history and mechanism of action. Am J Transplant. 2006;6:859.	34.	Blume OR, Yost SE, Kaplan B. Antibody-mediated rejection: pathogenesis, prevention, treatment, and outcomes. J Trans-plant. 2012:201754.	35.	Becker YT, Becker BN, Pirsch JD, Sollinger HW. Rituximab as treatment for refractory kidney transplant rejection. Am J Transplant. 2004;4:996.	36.	Perry DK, Burns JM, Pollinger HS, et al. Proteasome inhibi-tion causes apoptosis of normal human plasma cells prevent-ing alloantibody production. Am J Transplant. 2009;9:201.	37.	Everly MJ, Everly JJ, Susskind B, et al. Bortezomib provides effective therapy for antibodyand cell-mediated acute rejec-tion. Transplantation. 2008;86:1754.	38.	Lock JE, Magro CM, Singer AL, et al. The use of antibody to complement protein C5 for salvage treatment of severe antibody-mediated rejection. Am J Transplant. 2011;24:e61.	39.	Stegall MD, Diwan T, Raghavaiah S, et al. Terminal comple-ment inhibition decreases antibody-mediated rejection in sensitized renal transplant recipients. Am J Transplant. 2011; 11:2405.	40.	Hodson EM, Jones CA, Webster AC, et al. Antiviral medica-tions to prevent cytomegalovirus disease and early death in recipients of solid-organ transplants: a systemic review of ran-domized controlled trials. Lancet. 2005;365(9477):2105-2115.	41.	Playford EG, Webster AC, Sorell TC, Craig JC. Antifungal agents for preventing fungal infections in solid organ transplant recipients. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2004;3:CD004291.	42.	Engels EA, Pfeiffer RM, Fraumeni JF, Jr., et al. Spectrum of cancer risk among US solid organ transplant recipients. JAMA. 2011;306(17):1891-1901.	43.	Wijdicks EFM, Varelas PN, Gronseth GS, et al. Evidence-based guideline update: determining brain death in adults. Report of the Quality Standards Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology. Neurology. 2010;74(23):1911-1918.	44.	Nakagawa TA, Ashwal S, Mathur M, et al. Guidelines for the determination of brain death in infants and children: an update of the 1987 Task Force Recommendations—Executive Summary. Ann Neurol. 2012;71(4):573-585.	45.	Delgado DH, Rao V, Ross HJ. Donor management in cardiac transplantation. Can J Cardiol. 2002;18(11):1217-1223.	46.	Malinoski DJ, Daly MC, Patel MS, et al. Achieving donor management goals before deceased donor procurement is associated with more organs transplanted per donor. J Trauma. 2011;71(4):990-995.	47.	Shemie SD, Ross H, Pagliarello J, et al. Organ donor manage-ment in Canada: recommendations of the forum on Medical Management to Optimize Donor Organ Potential. Can Med Assoc J. 2006;174(6):S13-S30.	48.	Starzl TE, Miller C, Broznick B, et al. An improved tech-nique for multiple organ harvesting. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1987;165(4):343-348.	49.	Abu-Elmagd K, Fung J, Bueno J, et al. Logistics and tech-nique for procurement of intestinal, pancreatic, and hepatic grafts from the same donor. Ann Surg. 2000;232(5):680-687.	50.	Boggi U, Vistoli F, Del Chiaro M, et al. A simplified technique for the en bloc procurement of abdominal organs that is suit-able for pancreas and small-bowel transplantation. Surgery. 2004;135(6):629-641.	51.	Cho YW, Terasaki PI, Cecka JM. High kidney graft survival rates using non-heart-beating trauma donors. Transplant Proc. 1998;30(7):3795-3796.	52.	Kootstra G, Daemen JHC, Oomen APA. Categories of non-heart-beating donors. Transplant Proc. 1995;27(5):2893-2894.	53.	Jay CL, Lyuksemburg V, Ladner DP, et al. Ischemic cholan-giopathy after controlled donation after cardiac death liver transplantation a meta-analysis. Ann Surg. 2011;253(2): 259-264.	54.	Casavilla A, Ramirez C, Shapiro R, et al. Liver and kidney transplantation from non-heart beating donors: the Pittsburgh experience. Transplant Proc. 1995;27(1):710-712.	55.	Reese PP, Caplan AL, Kesselheim AS, et al. Creating a medi-cal, ethical, and legal framework for complex living kidney donors. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2006;1(6):1148-1153.	56.	Barr ML, Belghiti J, Villamil FG, et al. A report of the  Vancouver forum on the care of the live organ donor: lung, liver, pancreas, and intestine data and medical guidelines. Transplantation. 2006;81(10):1373-1385.	57.	Jeon H, Lee SG. Living donor liver transplantation. Curr Opin Organ Transplant. 2010;15(3):283-287.	58.	St. Peter SD, Imber CJ, Friend PJ. Liver and kidney preserva-tion by perfusion. Lancet. 2002;359(9306):604-613.	59.	Van der Werf WJ, D’Alessandro AM, Hoffmann RM, et al. Procurement, preservation, and transport of cadaver kidneys. Surg Clin North Am. 1998;78(1):41.	60.	Dalessandro AM, Southard JH, Love RB, et al. Organ preser-vation. Surg Clin North Am. 1994;74(5):1083.	61.	Feng L, Zhao N, Yao X, et al. Histidine-tryptophanketoglutarate solution vs. University of Wisconsin solution for liver transplantation: a systematic review. Liver Transplant. 2007;13(8):1125-1136.Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   39301/03/19   6:55 PM 394BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART I	62.	Siedlecki A, Irish W, Brennan DC. Delayed graft function in the kidney transplant. Am J Transplant. 2011;11(11):2279-2296.	63.	Sterling WA, Pierce JC, Lee HM, et al. Comparison of meth-ods of preservation of cadaver kidneys. Transplant Proc. 1972;4(4):621-623.	64.	Leeser DB, Bingaman AW, Poliakova L, et al. Pulsatile pump perfusion of pancreata before human islet cell isolation. Trans-plant Proc. 2004;36(4):1050-1051.	65.	van der Plaats A, Maathuis MHJ, Hart NAT, et al. The Groningen hypothermic liver perfusion pump: functional evaluation of a new machine perfusion system. Ann Biomed Engineer. 2006; 34(12):1924-1934.	66.	Ullman E. Tissue and organ transplantation. Ann Surg. 1914; 60:195-219.	67.	Murray JE, Hills W. The first successful organ transplants in man. J Am Coll Surg. 2005;200(1):5-9.	68.	Murray JE. The 50th anniversary of the first successful human organ transplant. Revista De Investigacion Clinica. 2005;57(2):118-119.	69.	Wolfe RA, Ashby VB, Milford EL, et al. Comparison of mortality in all patients on dialysis, patients on dialysis awaiting transplantation, and recipients of a first cadaveric transplant. N Engl J Med. 1999;341(23):1725-1730.	70.	Wyld M, Morton RL, Hayen A, et al. A systematic review and meta-analysis of utility-based quality of life in chronic kidney disease treatments. PLoS Med. 2012;9(9):e1001307.	71.	Hart A, Smith JM, Skeans MA, et al. OPTN/SRTR 2016 annual data report: kidney. Am J Transplant. 2018;18(Supp 1):18-113.	72.	Ojo AO, Hanson JA, Wolfe RA, et al. Long-term survival in renal transplant recipients with graft function. Kidney Int. 2000;57(1):307-313.	73.	Kahwaji J, Bunnapradist S, Hsu JW, et al. Cause of death with graft function among renal transplant recipients in an integrated healthcare system. Transplantation. 2011;91(2):225-230.	74.	Lentine KL, Costa SP, Weir MR, et al. Cardiac disease evalu-ation and management among kidney and liver transplanta-tion candidates: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association and the American College of Cardiology Foundation: endorsed by the American Society of Transplant Surgeons, American Society of Transplantation, and National Kidney Foundation. Circulation. 2012;126(5):617-663.	75.	Penn I. Evaluation of transplant candidates with pre-existing malignancies. Ann Transplant. 1997;2(4):14-17.	76.	Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Trends in tubercu-losis, 2016. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/tb/publications/factsheets/statistics/tbtrends.htm. Accessed May 8, 2018.	77.	Chisari FV, Ferrari C. Hepatitis B virus immunopathogenesis. Annu Rev Immunol. 1995;13:29-60.	78.	Harbell J, Fung J, Nissen N, et al. Surgical complications in 275 HIV-infected liver and/or kidney transplantation recipi-ents. Surgery. 2012;152(3):376-381.	79.	Fine RN. Recurrence of nephrotic syndrome/focal segmental glomerulosclerosis following renal transplantation in children. Pediatr Nephrol. 2007;22(4):496-502.	80.	Araya CE, Dharnidharka VR. The factors that may predict response to rituximab therapy in recurrent focal segmen-tal glomerulosclerosis: a systematic review. J Transplant. 2011;2011:374213.	81.	Pham PT, Pham PA, Pham PC, et al. Evaluation of adult  kidney transplant candidates. Semin Dial. 2010;23(6):595-605.	82.	Tait BD. Detection of HLA antibodies in organ transplant recipients–triumphs and challenges of the solid phase bead assay. Front Immunol. 2016;7:570. Available at: https://doi .org/10.3389/fimmu.2016.00570. Accessed May 8, 2018.	83.	Hume DM, Merrill JP, Miller BF, et al. Experiences with renal homotransplantation in the human: report of 9 cases. J Clin Invest. 1955;34(2):327-382.	84.	Murray JE, Merrill JP, Harrison JH. Kidney transplan-tation between 7 pairs of identical twins. Ann Surg. 1958;148(3):343-359.	85.	Starzl TE, Marchioro TL, Dickinson TC, et al. Technique of renal homotransplantation: experience with 42 cases. Arch Surg. 1964;89(1):87-104.	86.	Ghazanfar A, Tavakoli A, Zaki MR, et al. The outcome of living donor renal transplants with multiple renal arteries; a large cohort study with a mean follow-up period of 10 years. Transplant Proc. 2010;42:1654.	87.	Laurence JM, Sandroussi C, Lam VWT, et al. Utilization of small pediatric donor kidneys: a decision analysis. Transplantation. 2011;91(10):1110-1113.	88.	Lau KK, Berg GM, Schjoneman YG, et al. Pediatric en bloc kidney transplantation into pediatric recipients. Pediatr Transplant. 2010;14(1):100-104.	89.	Wang JH, Skeans MA, Israni AK. Current status of kidney transplant outcomes: dying to survive. Adv Chronic Kidney Dis. 2016;23(5):281-286.	90.	Rizzari MD, Suszynski TM, Gillingham KJ, et al. Ten-year outcome after rapid discontinuation of prednisone in adult primary kidney transplantation. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2012;7(3):494-503.	91.	Vincenti F, Larsen CP, Alberu J, et al. Three-year outcomes from BENEFIT, a randomized, active-controlled, parallel-group study in adult kidney transplant recipients. Am J Transplant. 2012;12(1):210-217.	92.	Massy ZA, Guijarro C, Wiederkehr MR, et al. Chronic renal allograft rejection: immunologic and nonimmunologic risk factors. Kidney Int. 1996;49(2):518-524.	93.	Traynor C, Jenkinson A, Williams Y, et al. Twenty-year sur-vivors of kidney transplantation. Am J Transplant. 2012; 12:3289.	94.	Sutherland DER, Gruessner RWG. History of pancreas trans-plantation (Chapter 4). In: Gruessner RWG, Sutherland DER, eds. Transplantation of the Pancreas. New York: Springer-Verlag; 2004:39-68.	95.	Gruessner AC, Gruessner RW. Pancreas transplantation of U.S. and non-U.S. cases from 2005 to 2014 as reported to the United Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS) and the International Pancreas Transplant Registry (IPTR). Rev Diabet Stud. 2016:13(1):35-58.	96.	Fioretto P, Maurer M. Effects of pancreas transplantation on secondary complications of diabetes (Chapter 16). In: Gruess-ner RWG, Sutherland DER, eds. Transplantation of the Pancreas. New York: Springer-Verlag; 2004:455-508.	97.	Gruessner RW, Sutherland DE, Drangstveit MB, Kandaswamy R, Gruessner AC. Pancreas allotransplants in patients with a previous total pancreatectomy for chronic pancreatitis. J Am Coll Surg. 2008;206:458-465.	98.	Benedetti E, Pierpaolo S. Surgical aspects of pancreas trans-plantation (Chapter 8). In: Gruessner RWG, Sutherland DER, eds. Transplantation of the Pancreas. New York: Springer-Verlag; 2004:111-178.	99.	Sutherland DER, Zamir GA, Brayman KL. Transplantation of the pancreas. In: Cameron JL, Cameron AM, eds. Current Surgical Therapy. 10th ed. New York: Elsevier Saunders; 2011:460-471.	100.	Leone AP, Christensen K. Postoperative management (Chapter 9). In: Gruessner RWG, Sutherland DER, eds. Trans-plantation of the Pancreas. New York: Springer-Verlag; 2004: 179-266.	101.	Pancreas transplantation (Section II). In: Gruessner RWG, Benedetti E, eds. Living Donor Organ Transplantation. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2008:369-437.	102.	Gruessner AC, Sutherland DER, Gruessner RWG. Long-term outcome after pancreas transplantation. Curr Opin Transplant. 2012;17:100-105.Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   39401/03/19   6:55 PM 395TRANSPLANTATIONCHAPTER 11	103.	Hering BJ, Clarke WR, Bridges ND, et al. Phase 3 trial of transplantation of human islets in type 1 diabetes compli-cated by severe hypoglycemia. Diabetes Care. 2016;39(7): 1230-1240.	104.	Maffi P, Scavini M, Socci C, et al. Risks and benefits of trans-plantation in the cure of type 1 diabetes; whole pancreas ver-sus islet transplantation. A single center study. Rev Diabet Stud. 2011;8:44-50.	105.	Williams PW. Notes on diabetes treated with extract and by grafts of sheep’s pancreas. Br Med J. 1894;1303-1304.	106.	Kelly WD, Lillehei RC, Merkel FK, et al. Allotransplantation of the pancreas and duodenum along with the kidney in dia-betic nephropathy. Surgery. 1967;61(6):827-837.	107.	Ballinger WF, Lacy PE. Transplantation of intact pancreatic islets in rats. Surgery. 1972;72:175-186.	108.	Najarian JS, Sutherland DE, Baumgartner D, et al. Total or near total pancreatectomy and islet autotransplantation for treat-ment of chronic pancreatitis. Ann Surg. 1980;192(4):526-542.	109.	Shapiro AM, Lakey JR, Ryan EA, et al. Islet transplanta-tion in seven patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus using a  glucocorticoid-free immunosuppressive regimen. N Engl J Med. 2000;343(4):230-238.	110.	Ryan EA, Lakey JR, Paty BW, et al. Successful islet transplan-tation: continued insulin reserve provides long-term glycemic control. Diabetes. 2002;51(7):2148-2157.	111.	Ryan EA, Lakey JR, Rajotte RV, et al. Clinical outcomes and insulin secretion after islet transplantation with the Edmonton protocol. Diabetes. 2001;50(4):710-719.	112.	Shapiro AM, Ricordi C, Hering B. Edmonton’s islet suc-cess has indeed been replicated elsewhere. Lancet. 2003; 362(9391):1242.	113.	Shapiro AM, Ricordi C, Hering Bj, et al. International trial of the Edmonton protocol for islet transplantation. N Engl J Med. 2006;355(13):1318-1330.	114.	Ryan EA, Paty BW, Senior PA, et al. Five-year follow-up after clinical islet transplantation. Diabetes. 2005;54(7): 2060-2069.	115.	McCall M, James Shapiro AM. Update on islet transplanta-tion. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2012;2(7):1-16.	116.	Markmann JF, Deng S, Huang X, et al. Insulin independence following isolated islet transplantation and single islet infu-sions. Ann Surg. 2003;237(6):741-749.	117.	Hering BJ, Kandaswamy R, Ansite JD, et al. Single-donor, marginal-dose islet transplantation in patients with type 1 dia-betes. JAMA. 2005;293(7):830-835.	118.	Shapiro AM. Strategies toward single-donor islets of Lang-erhans transplantation. Curr Opin Organ Transplant. 2011; 16(6):627-631.	119.	Bellin MD, Kandaswamy R, Parkey J, et al. Prolonged insulin independence after islet allotransplants in recipients with type 1 diabetes. Am J Transplant. 2008;8(11):2463-2470.	120.	Bellin MD, Barton FB, Heitman A, et al. Potent induction immunotherapy promotes long-term insulin independence after islet transplantation in type 1 diabetes. Am J Transplant. 2012;12(6):1576-1583.	121.	Rickels MR. Recovery of endocrine function after islet and pancreas transplantation. Curr Diabet Rep. 2012;12:587-596.	122.	Barton FB, Rickels MR, Alejandro R, et al. Improvement in outcomes of clinical islet transplantation: 1999-2010. Diabetes Care. 2012;35(7):1436-1445.	123.	Busuttil RW, De Carlis LG, Mihaylov PV, Gridelli B,  Fassati LR, Starzl TE. The first report of orthotopic liver trans-plantation in the Western world. Am J Transplant. 2012;12(6): 1385-1387.	124.	Starzl TE, Demetris AJ, Trucco M, et al. Cell migra-tion and chimerism after whole-organ transplantation: the basis of graft acceptance. Hepatology. 1993;17(6): 1127-1152.	125.	Cohen C, Benjamin M. Alcoholics and liver transplantation. The Ethics and Social Impact Committee of the Transplant and Health Policy Center. JAMA. 1991;265(10):1299-1301.	126.	Lucey MR. Liver transplantation in patients with alcoholic liver disease. Liver Transplant. 2011;17(7):751-759.	127.	Longworth L, Young T, Buxton MJ, et al. Midterm cost-effectiveness of the liver transplantation program of England and Wales for three disease groups. Liver Transplant. 2003; 9(12):1295-1307.	128.	Charlton M, Ruppert K, Belle SH, et al. Long-term results and modeling to predict outcomes in recipients with HCV infec-tion: results of the NIDDK liver transplantation database. Liver Transplant. 2004;10(9):1120-1130.	129.	Garcia-Retortillo M, Forns X, Feliu A, et al. Hepatitis C virus kinetics during and immediately after liver transplantation. Hepatology. 2002;35(3):680-687.	130.	Berenguer M, Prieto M, Rayon JM, et al. Natural history of clinically compensated hepatitis C virus-related graft cirrho-sis after liver transplantation. Hepatology. 2000;32(4 Pt 1): 852-858.	131.	Lake JR, Shorr JS, Steffen BJ, Chu AH, Gordon RD, Wiesner RH. Differential effects of donor age in liver trans-plant recipients infected with hepatitis B, hepatitis C, and without viral hepatitis. Am J Transplant. 2005;5(3):549-557.	132.	Neff GW, Montalbano M, O’Brien CB, et al. Treatment of established recurrent hepatitis C in liver-transplant recipients with pegylated interferon-alfa-2b and ribavirin therapy. Transplantation. 2004;78(9):1303-1307.	133.	Lee J, Belanger A, Doucette JT, Stanca C, Friedman S, Bach N. Transplantation trends in primary biliary cirrhosis. Clin Gas-troenterol Hepatol. 2007;5(11):1313-1315.	134.	Liermann Garcia RF, Evangelista Garcia C, McMaster P, Neuberger J. Transplantation for primary biliary cirrhosis: ret-rospective analysis of 400 patients in a single center. Hepatol-ogy. 2001;33(1):22-27.	135.	Campsen J, Zimmerman MA, Trotter JF, et al. Clinically recur-rent primary sclerosing cholangitis following liver transplanta-tion: a time course. Liver Transplant. 2008;14(2):181-185.	136.	Schilsky ML, Scheinberg IH, Sternlieb I. Liver transplantation for Wilson’s disease: indications and outcome. Hepatology. 1994;19(3):583-587.	137.	Medici V, Mirante VG, Fassati LR, et al. Liver transplantation for Wilson’s disease: the burden of neurological and psychiat-ric disorders. Liver Transplant. 2005;11(9):1056-1063.	138.	Mazzaferro V, Regalia E, Doci R, et al. Liver transplanta-tion for the treatment of small hepatocellular carcinomas in patients with cirrhosis. N Engl J Med. 1996;334(11):693-699.	139.	Sapisochín G, Fernández de Sevilla E, Echeverri J, et al. Liver transplantation for cholangiocarcinoma: Current status and new insights. World J Hepatol. 2015;7(22):2396-2403.	140.	O’Grady JG, Alexander GJ, Hayllar KM, Williams R.  Early indicators of prognosis in fulminant hepatic failure. Gastroenterology. 1989;97(2):439-445.	141.	Boyer TD, Haskal ZJ. The role of transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) in the management of portal hypertension: update 2009. Hepatology. 2010;51(1):306.	142.	Kamath PS, Wiesner RH, Malinchoc M, et al. A model to predict survival in patients with end-stage liver disease. Hepatology. 2001;33(2):464-470.	143.	Wiesner R, Edwards E, Freeman R, et al. Model for end-stage liver disease (MELD) and allocation of donor livers.  Gastroenterology. 2003;124(1):91-96.	144.	Merion RM, Schaubel DE, Dykstra DM, Freeman RB, Port FK, Wolfe RA. The survival benefit of liver transplantation. Am J Transplant. 2005;5(2):307-313.	145.	Safdar K, Neff GW, Montalbano M, et al. Liver transplant for the septuagenarians: importance of patient selection. Transplant Proc. 2004;36(5):1445-1448.Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   39501/03/19   6:55 PM 396BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART I	146.	Bellamy CO, DiMartini AM, Ruppert K, et al. Liver transplan-tation for alcoholic cirrhosis: long term follow-up and impact of disease recurrence. Transplantation. 2001;72(4):619-626.	147.	Vagefi PA, Parekh J, Ascher NL, Roberts JP, Freise CE. Out-comes with split liver transplantation in 106 recipients: the University of California, San Francisco, experience from 1993 to 2010. Arch Surg. 2011;146(9):1052-1059.	148.	Abecassis MM, Fisher RA, Olthoff KM, et al. Complications of living donor hepatic lobectomy—a comprehensive report. Am J Transplant 2012;12:1208-1217.	149.	Bilzer M, Gerbes AL. Preservation injury of the liver: mech-anisms and novel therapeutic strategies. J Hepatol. 2000; 32(3):508-515.	150.	Jaeschke H. Preservation injury: mechanisms, prevention, and consequences. J Hepatol. 1996;25(5):774-780.	151.	Serracino-Inglott F, Habib NA, Mathie RT. Hepatic ischemia-reperfusion injury. Am J Surg. 2001;181(2):160-166.	152.	Drazan K, Shaked A, Olthoff KM, et al. Etiology and man-agement of symptomatic adult hepatic artery thrombo-sis after orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT). Am Surg. 1996;62(3):237-240.	153.	Tzakis AG, Gordon RD, Shaw BW, Jr., Iwatsuki S, Starzl TE. Clinical presentation of hepatic artery thrombosis after liver transplantation in the cyclosporine era. Transplantation. 1985;40(6):667-671.	154.	Grant D, Abu-Elmagd K, Reyes J, et al. 2003 report of the intestine transplant registry: a new era has dawned. Ann Surg. 2005;241(4):607-613.	155.	Bharadwaj S, Tandon P, Gohel TD, et al. Current status of intestinal and multivisceral transplantation. Gastroenterol Rep. 2017;5(1):20-28.	156.	Yersiz H, Renz JF, Hisatake GM, et al. Multivisceral and iso-lated intestinal procurement techniques. Liver Transplant. 2003;9(8):881-886.	157.	Bueno J, Abu-Elmagd K, Mazariegos G, Madariaga J, Fung J, Reyes J. Composite liver–small bowel allografts with preser-vation of donor duodenum and hepatic biliary system in chil-dren. J Pediatr Surg. 2000;35(2):291-295; discussion 95-96.	158.	Farmer DG, McDiarmid SV, Edelstein S, et al. Improved out-come after intestinal transplantation at a single institution over 12 years. Transplant Proc. 2004;36(2):303-304.	159.	Tzakis AG, Kato T, Levi DM, et al. 100 multivisceral trans-plants at a single center. Ann Surg. 2005;242(4):480-490; dis-cussion 91-93.	160.	Gruessner RWG, Sharp HL. Living related intestinal trans-plantation: first report of a standardized surgical tech-nique. Transplant. 1997;64:1605-1607.	161.	Kouchoukos NT, Blackstone EH, Doty DB. Heart failure. In: Kouchoukos NT, Blackstone EH, Doty DB, et al, eds. Cardiac Surgery. 3rd ed. New York: Kirklin/Barratt-Boyes; 2003:1725.	162.	First human heart transplant. The History Channel website. Available at: https://www.history.com/this-day-in-history/first-human-heart-transplant. Accessed May 8, 2018.	163.	Meyers BF, Patterson GA, Haverich A, Harringer W. Lung transplantation, heart-lung transplantation. In: Pearson FG, Cooper JD, Deslauriers J, et al, eds. Thoracic Surgery. 2nd ed. New York: Churchill-Livingston; 2002:1085-1131.	164.	Costanzo MR, Dipchand A, Starling R, et al. The International Society of Heart and Lung Transplantation guidelines for care of heart transplant recipients. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2010;29(8):914-956.	165.	Colvin M, Smith JM, Hadley N, et al. OPTN/SRTR 2016 annual data report: heart. Amer J Transplant. 2018;18(S1):291-362.	166.	Esker B, Cooper DKC. Overcoming the barriers to xenotrans-plantation: prospects for the future. Exp Rev Clin Immunol. 2010;6(2):219-230.	167.	Schuurman HJ. Xenotransplantation: from the lab to the clinic: Sunrise Symposium at the XXIII International Congress of the Transplantation Society, Vancouver, Canada, August 2010. Clin Transplant. 2011;25(4):E415-E421.	168.	Dooldeniya MD, Warrens AN. Xenotransplantation: where are we today? J R Soc Med. 2003;96:111.	169.	Thompson P, Badell IR, Lowe M, et al. Alternative immu-nomodulatory strategies for xenotransplantation: CD40/154 pathway-sparing regimens promote xenograft survival. Am J Transplant. 2012;12(7):1765-1775.	170.	Hering BJ, Cooper DKC, Cozzi E, et al. The International Xenotransplantation Association consensus statement on con-ditions for undertaking clinical trials of porcine islet products in type I diabetes: executive summary. Xenotransplantation. 2009;16:196-202.	171.	Schuurman HJ. Regulatory aspects of pig-to-human islet transplantation. Xenotransplantation. 2008;15(2):116-120.	172.	Schuurman HJ. The International Xenotransplantation Associ-ation consensus statement on conditions for undertaking clini-cal trials of porcine islet products in type 1 diabetes—chapter 2: Source pigs. Xenotransplantation. 2009;16(4):215-222.	173.	Meier RPH, Muller YD, Balaphas A, et al. Xenotransplanta-tion: back to the future? Transplant Int. 2017; doi: 10.1111/tri.13104.	174.	Greenstein JL, Schuurman H-J. Solid organ xenotransplantation: progress, promise, and regulatory issues. J Comm Biotech. 2001;8:15-29.	175.	Thompson P, Badell IR, Lowe M, et al. Islet xenotransplanta-tion using gal-deficient neonatal donors improves engraftment and function. Am J Transplant. 2011;11:2593-2602.	176.	Rood PPM, Cooper DKC. Islet xenotransplantation: are we really ready for clinical trials? Am J Transplant. 2006; 6(6):1269-1274.	177.	Mihalicz D, Rajotte R, Rayat G. Porcine islet xenotransplan-tation for the treatment of type I diabetes. In: Type I Diabetes: Pathogenesis, Genetics and Immunotherapy. New York: InTech; 2011:479-502.	178.	Beckwith J, Nyman JA, Flanagan B, et al. A health-economic anal-ysis of porcine islet xenotransplantation. Xenotransplantation.  2010;17:233-242.	179.	Elliot RB, Living Cell Technologies, Ltd. Towards xeno-transplantation of pig islets in the clinic. Curr Opin Organ Transplant. 2011;16(2):195-200.	180.	Marigliano M, Bertera S, Grupillo M, et al. Pig-to-nonhuman primate pancreatic islet xenotransplantation: an overview. Curr Diab Rep. 2011;11(5):402-412.	181.	Dufrane D, Gianello P. Pig islet for xenotransplantation in human: structural and physiological compatibility for human clinical application. Transplant Rev (Orlando). 2012;26:183-188.Brunicardi_Ch11_p0355-p0396.indd   39601/03/19   6:55 PM errors, observing that 34% of patients with health problems in the United States report experiencing medical, medication, or test errors—the highest rate of any nation, and an analysis sug-gests that the problem of medical care gone wrong, i.e., medical errors including systems errors, may rank as the third leading cause of death in the United States.1Medical error is defined as an unintended act (either of omission or commission) or one that does not achieve its intended outcome, the failure of a planned action to be com-pleted as intended (an error of execution) or the use of a wrong plan to achieve an aim (an error of planning), and a deviation from the process of care, which may or may not cause harm to the patient. Medical error can occur at the individual provider level or at the system level. An expanding taxonomy is matur-ing to better categorize the types of factors and events that are avoidable. The role of error may be complex; error can some-times tragically end the life of a thriving person with a long life expectancy, or it can also accelerate an imminent death.The most commonly cited report on the incidence of deaths due to medical error, the 1999 Institute of Medicine (IOM) report, describes an incidence of 44,000 to 98,000 deaths annually.2 However, this estimate by the IOM was not based on primary research conducted by the IOM; rather, it was based on two older studies conducted in 1984 and 1992. Both studies were small and limited. In 2013, after compiling more recent evidence from multiple sources, James estimated an incidence range of 210,000 to 400,000 deaths a year associated with Quality, Patient Safety, Assessments of Care,  and ComplicationsMartin A. Makary, Peter B. Angood, and  Mark L. Shapiro 12chapterBackground	397Medical Care Gone Wrong / 397Unnecessary Medical Care / 398The Science of Patient Safety	399High Reliability Organizations / 399The Conceptual Model / 399Creating a Culture of Safety	400Assessing an Organization’s Safety Culture / 401Teamwork and Communication	402Measuring Teamwork / 402Communication Tools	402Operating Room Briefings  (A Surgical Checklist) / 402Operating Room Debriefings / 403Sign Outs / 403Implementation / 403Comprehensive Unit-Based   Safety Program	404Measuring Quality in Surgery	405Practice Pattern Measures / 405Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality Patient Safety Indicators / 406The Surgical Care Improvement Project Measures / 406National Surgical Quality Improvement Program / 407The Leapfrog Group / 408World Health Organization “Safe Surgery Saves Lives” Initiative / 408National Quality Forum / 408“Never Events” in Surgery	409Retained Surgical Items / 409Surgical Counts / 410Wrong-Site Surgery / 411The Joint Commission Universal Protocol to Ensure Correct Surgery / 411Transparency in Healthcare	412Public Reporting and Patient  Assessment of Care / 412Risk Management	413The Importance of Communication in  Managing Risk / 413Complications	415Robotic Surgery / 415Complications in Minor Procedures / 415Organ System Complications / 418Wounds, Drains, and Infection / 424Nutritional and Metabolic Support Complications / 426Problems with Thermoregulation / 427BACKGROUNDPatient harm due to medical mistakes can be catastrophic, result-ing in high-profile consequences  for the patient, surgeon, and institution. A single error can even destroy a surgeon’s career. While mistakes are inherent to human nature, it is becoming more recognized that many mistakes are preventable.Patient safety is a science that promotes the use of evi-dence-based medicine and local  wisdom to minimize the impact of human error on quality patient care. Wrong-site/wrong-procedure surgeries, retained sponges, unchecked blood transfusions, mismatched organ transplants, and overlooked allergies are all examples of potentially catastrophic events that can be prevented by implementing safer hospital systems. This chapter provides an overview of the modern-day field of patient safety by reviewing key measures of safety and quality, compo-nents of culture, interventions and tools, assessment methods, risk management strategies, and a selected review of common complications in surgery.Medical Care Gone WrongToday, there are more medications, diagnoses, procedures, and handoffs performed than ever in the history of medicine. More-over, overtreatment is now an endemic problem in some areas of healthcare. With more medical care being delivered, there are naturally more opportunities for things to go wrong. In fact, harm may be associated with complexity. The Commonwealth Fund reported that the United States leads the world in medical 12Brunicardi_Ch12_p0397-p0432.indd   39720/02/19   3:57 PM 398Figure 12-1. Causes of death in the United States 2013. (Reproduced with permission from Makary MA, Daniel M. Medical error–the third leading cause of death in the US, BMJ. 2016 May 3;353:i2139.)Key Points1	Medical error ranks as the third leading cause of death in the United States when defined to include system errors.2	One form of medical error is unnecessary or excessive medi-cal care, which represents 21% of medical care administered in the United States.3	New peer-comparison metrics evaluate appropriateness of surgical care by measuring a physician’s practice pattern among all the physician’s patients benchmarked to the phy-sician’s peers.4	Judicious opioid prescribing upon discharge after surgery is critical given the magnitude of the opioid crisis.5	The structure-process-outcome framework within the context of an organization’s culture helps to clarify how risks and hazards embedded within the organization’s structure may potentially lead to error and injure or harm  patients.6	Poor communication contributes to approximately 60% of the sentinel events reported to The Joint Commission.7	Operating room briefings are team discussions of critical issues and potential hazards that can improve the safety of the operation and have been shown to improve operating room culture and decrease operating room delays.8	National Quality Forum surgical “never events” include retained surgical items, wrong-site surgery, and death on the day of surgery of a normal healthy patient (American Soci-ety of Anesthesiologists Class 1).9	The most important determinant of malpractice claims against a surgeon is patient rapport, not undertesting.medical errors among hospital patients.3 Any point estimate in this range would rank the problem of dying from “medical care gone wrong” as the third leading cause of death in the United States. In caring for patients and considering the risks of tests and procedures done for borderline indications, it is important to consider the magnitude of the problem of patients dying from the care they receive rather than from the disease or injury that brought them to care.Human error is inevitable. But while we cannot eliminate human error, we can better measure the problem to design safer systems mitigating its frequency, visibility, and consequences. Hospitals should consider the magnitude of the problem of med-ical error as a barrier to achieving safe, highly-reliable medical care. Investigating errors to learn from them can guide local changes to prevent future events. The strategy to rein in the endemic problem of death from medical care should include three areas: (a) make errors less frequent (by following prin-ciples that take human limitations into account); (b) make errors more visible when they occur so that their effects can be intercepted; and (c) have remedies at hand when errors affect a patient. This multitier approach necessitates guidance from reliable data.Unnecessary Medical CareIncreasingly preventable complications and complications from unnecessary procedures are considered to be forms of medical error. Unnecessary medical care accounts for an estimated $210 billion in excess spending each year, according to the National Academy of Medicine. The issue represents a significant oppor-tunity to make improve patient safety and lower healthcare Causes of death, US, 2013Based on our estimate,medical error is the3rd most commoncause of death in the USMedicalerror251 kCancer585 kHeartdisease611 kCOPD149 kAll causes2,597 kMotorvehicles34 kFirearms34 kSuicide41 kBrunicardi_Ch12_p0397-p0432.indd   39820/02/19   3:57 PM 399QUALITY, PATIENT SAFETY, ASSESSMENTS OF CARE, AND COMPLICATIONSCHAPTER 12costs. In a Johns Hopkins study, surveying over 2000 physicians in the United States, unnecessary medical care was reported to be common.4 On average, these authors reported that 21% of medical care is unnecessary. Breaking the problem down by type of medical care, the doctors reported that 22% of prescription medications, 25% of medical tests, and 11% of procedures are unnecessary. These perceptions by U.S. physi-cians validate previous estimates of the National Academy of Medicine that suggest that one-third of healthcare spending is wasteful and does not result in better health. Addressing avoid-able medical and surgical care is a topic gaining increasing recog-nition in healthcare.One example of overtreatment in surgical care is opioid over-prescribing.5 In the United States in 2015 alone, clini-cians handed out 249 million opioid prescriptions, almost one for every American adult. And in 2016, the United States produced 14 billion opioid pills (40 for every American citizen). With the exception of pain specialists treating patients with pain syndromes, surgeons are the most common prescribers of opi-oids. Judicious opioid prescribing is important because of the addictive potential of these medications. Moreover, many patients can recover comfortably after hospital discharge with nonopioid or nonaddictive pain regimens.THE SCIENCE OF PATIENT SAFETYMedicine is considered a high-risk system with a high error rate, but these two characteristics are not always correlated. Other high-risk industries have managed to maintain an impeccably low error rate. For example, one of the highest risk systems in existence today, the U.S. Navy’s nuclear submarine program, has an unmatched safety record.Much of the credit for their safety record is due to the culture of the nuclear submarine program, with its insistence on individual ownership, responsibility, attention to detail, professionalism, moral integrity, and mutual respect.6 These characteristics have created the cultural context necessary for high-quality communications under high-risk, high-stress con-ditions. Each reactor operator is aware of what is going on at all times and is responsible for understanding the implications and possible consequences of any action. Communication flows freely between crewmen and officers, and information about any mistakes that occur are dispersed rapidly through the entire system so that other workers can learn how to prevent similar mistakes in the future.High Reliability OrganizationsThe nuclear submarine program is an example of an organi-zation that has achieved the distinction of being considered a “high reliability organization.” High reliability organization theory recognizes that there are certain high-risk industries and organizations that have achieved very low accident and error rates compared to what would be expected given the inherent risks involved in their daily operations. Other high reliability industries and organizations include aircraft carrier flight decks, nuclear power plants, and the Federal Aviation Administration’s air traffic control system. In fact, one reason why nuclear power plants have such an excellent reliability record may be that their operators are often former naval submarine officers whose pre-vious experience and training within one highly reliable organi-zation are easily transferable to other organizations.7One of the assumptions underlying the science of high reliability organizations is that humans who operate and manage 34complex systems are themselves not sufficiently complex to sense and anticipate the problems generated by the system.7 This introduces another important idea undergirding the sci-ence of patient safety: the concept of normal accident theory. Instead of attributing accidents to individual error, this theory states that accidents are intrinsic to high-volume activities and even inevitable in some settings. Accidents should not be used merely to identify and punish the person at fault, but should be seen as a systems problem and addressed at a broader level. As Ruchlin states, even the “best people can make the worst errors as a result of latent conditions.”7High-risk systems, as defined by Perrow in 19848:•	Have the potential to create a catastrophe, loosely defined as an event leading to loss of human or animal life, despoiling of the environment, or some other situation that gives rise to the sense of “dread.”•	Are complex, in that they have large numbers of highly inter-dependent subsystems with many possible combinations that are nonlinear and poorly understood.•	Are tightly coupled, so that any perturbation in the sys-tem is transmitted rapidly between subsystems with little attenuation.However, high reliability organization theory suggests that proper oversight of people, processes, and technology can handle complex and hazardous activities and keep error rates acceptably low.7 Studies of multiple high reliability organiza-tions show that they share the following common characteristics:•	People are supportive of one another.•	People trust one another.•	People have friendly, open relationships emphasizing cred-ibility and attentiveness.•	The work environment is resilient and emphasizes creativity and goal achievement, providing strong feelings of credibility and personal trust.Developing these characteristics is an important step toward achieving a low error rate in any organization. For this reason, safety culture is a measure used by hospitals nationwide to improve outcomes and is increasingly recognized as a metric of hospital quality.The Conceptual ModelThe Donabedian model of measuring quality identifies three main types of improvements:  changes to organizational struc-ture, changes in organizational processes, and changes in outcomes.9 Structure refers to the physical and organiza-tional tools, equipment, and policies that improve safety. Struc-tural measures ask, “Do the right tools, equipment, and policies exist?” Process is the application of these tools, equipment, and policies/procedures to patients (good practices and evidence-based medicine). Process measures ask, “Are the right tools, policies, and equipment being used?” Outcome is the result on patients. Outcome measures ask, “How often are patients harmed?” In this model, structure (how care is organized) plus process (what we do) influences patient outcomes (the results achieved).10The structure, process, and outcome components of qual-ity measurement all occur within the context of an organiza-tion’s overall culture. The local culture impacts all aspects of the delivery of care because it affects how front-line personnel 5Brunicardi_Ch12_p0397-p0432.indd   39920/02/19   3:57 PM 400BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART ITable 12-1Types of medical errorAdverse event• Injury caused by medical management rather than the underlying condition of the patient• Prolongs hospitalization, produces a disability at discharge, or both• Classified as preventable or unpreventableNegligence• Care that falls below a recognized standard of care• Standard of care is considered to be care a reasonable physician of similar knowledge, training, and experience would use in similar circumstancesNear miss• An error that does not result in patient harm• Analysis of near misses provides the opportunity to identify and remedy system failures before the occurrence of harmSentinel event• An unexpected occurrence involving death or serious physical or psychological injury• The injury involves loss of limb or function• This type of event requires immediate investigation and response• Other examples• Hemolytic transfusion reaction involving administration of blood or blood products having major blood group incompatibilities• Wrong-site, wrong-procedure, or wrong-patient surgery• A medication error or other treatment-related error resulting in death• Unintentional retention of a foreign body in a patient after surgeryReproduced with permission from Makary M: General Surgery Review. Washington, DC: Ladner-Drysdale; 2008.Case 12-1  Systems change resulting from medical errorLibby Zion was an 18-year-old woman who died after being admitted to the New York Hospital with fever and agitation on the evening of October 4, 1984. Her father, Sidney Zion, a lawyer and columnist for the N.Y. Daily News, was convinced that his daughter’s death was due to inadequate staffing and overworked physicians at the hospital and was determined to bring about changes to prevent other patients from suffering as a result of the teaching hospital system. Due to his efforts to publicize the circumstances surrounding his daughter’s death, Manhattan District Attorney Robert Morgenthau agreed to let a grand jury consider murder charges. Although the hospital was not indicted, in May 1986, a grand jury issued a report strongly criticizing “the supervision of interns and junior resi-dents at a hospital in NY County.”As a result, New York State Health Commissioner David Axelrod convened a panel of experts headed by Bertrand M. Bell, a primary care physician at Albert Einstein College of Medicine who had long been critical of the lack of supervision of physicians-in-training, to evaluate the training and supervision  of doctors in New York State. The Bell Commission recom-mended that residents work no more than 80 hours per week and no more than 24 consecutive hours per shift, and that a senior physician needed to be physically present in the hospital at all times. These recommendations were adopted by New York State in 1989. In 2003, the Accreditation Council on Graduate Medi-cal Education followed by mandating that all residency training programs adhere to the reduced work hour schedule.understand and deliver safe patient care. In fact, culture (col-lective attitudes and beliefs of caregivers) is increasingly being recognized to be the fourth measurable component to the structure-process-outcome model. This recognition is based on growing evidence that local culture is linked to a variety of important clinical outcomes.10 For any new patient safety initiative to be deemed successful, any change in structure or process must lead to a corresponding positive change in patient outcomes.11CREATING A CULTURE OF SAFETYCulture is to an organization what personality is to the individual—a hidden, yet unifying theme that provides meaning, direction, and mobilization.7 Organizations with effective safety cultures share a constant commitment to safety as a top-level priority that permeates the entire organization. These organizations fre-quently share the following characteristics12:•	An acknowledgment of the high-risk, error-prone nature of an organization’s activities•	A nonpunitive environment where individuals are able to report errors or close calls without fear of punishment or retaliation•	An expectation of collaboration across ranks to seek solutions to vulnerabilities•	A willingness on the part of the organization to direct resources to address safety concernsTraditional surgical culture stands almost in direct oppo-sition to the values upheld by organizations with effective safety cultures for several reasons. Surgeons are less likely to acknowledge their propensity to make mistakes or to admit these mistakes to others.13 Surgeons tend to minimize the effect of stress on their ability to make decisions.14 The surgical cul-ture, especially in the operating room (OR), is traditionally rife with hierarchy. Intimidation of other OR personnel by sur-geons was historically accepted as the norm. This can prevent nurses and other OR staff from pointing out potential errors or Brunicardi_Ch12_p0397-p0432.indd   40020/02/19   3:57 PM 401QUALITY, PATIENT SAFETY, ASSESSMENTS OF CARE, AND COMPLICATIONSCHAPTER 12•	I know the proper channels to direct questions regarding patient safety in this clinical area.•	I receive appropriate feedback about my performance.•	I would feel safe being treated here as a patient.•	In this clinical area, it is not difficult to discuss mistakes.Although perceptions of teamwork climate can differ as a function of one’s role in the OR, perceptions of safety climate are relatively consistent across OR providers in a given hospital. Validated in over 500 hospitals, the SAQ is used to establish benchmark safety culture scores by healthcare worker type, department, and hospital. Using this survey, hospitals can com-pare culture between different types of healthcare workers within a department as well as culture between departments throughout the institution. Scores can be compared to those of other par-ticipating institutions to compare safety climates. This allows hospitals to participate with one another to implement programs to improve safety culture. In addition, scores are used to evaluate the effectiveness of safety interventions by comparing the SAQ safety climate scores after implementation to baseline scores.Strong teamwork is at the core of any effective organiza-tion and is a key element to ensuring patient safety in the OR. Teamwork is dependent on the underlying culture and patterns of communication. The ability for all team members, to “speak up” about patient safety concerns is one of the most important elements of creating a culture of patient safety.TEAMWORK AND COMMUNICATIONAccording to The Joint Commission, communication breakdown is one of the top three root causes of sentinel events such as wrong-site surgery (Fig. 12-2). Poor communication contributed to over 60% of sentinel events reported to The Joint Commission in 2011.17 Good communication is an essential component of teamwork and is especially important in the OR, one of the most complex work environments in healthcare.Within the realm of patient care, there are enormous amounts of information being exchanged between healthcare pro-viders on a daily basis. Much of this information, if prioritized correctly, has the potential to prevent unintended medical errors and serious harm to patients. The importance of good communi-cation in preventing medical errors is undeniable; however, it is difficult to achieve. The traditional surgical hierarchy can prevent OR personnel from sharing important patient data and expressing safety concerns. One perioperative field study showed a 30% rate of communication failure in the OR, with 36% of these break-downs having a substantial impact on patient safety.18In addition to overcoming the cultural barrier to better teamwork and communication, the prospective study by Chris-tian and associates of patient safety in the OR demonstrated that the standard workflow of the OR itself presents many opportunities for the loss or degradation of critical informa-tion.19 Hand-offs of patient care from the OR to other locations or providers are particularly prone to information loss, which has been demonstrated in other clinical settings. Hand-offs and auxiliary tasks, such as surgical sponge and instrument counts, frequently take place during critical portions of the case and place competing demands on provider attention from primary patient-centered activities. Communication between the surgeon and pathologist also is vulnerable because the communication often occurs through secondary messengers such as nurses or technicians. This information loss can lead to delays, overuse of 6Case 12-2  High-profile sentinel eventOn December 3, 1994, Betsy Lehman, a Boston Globe health columnist, died as a result of receiving four times the intended dose of chemotherapy for breast cancer. Remarkably, 2 days later, Maureen Bateman, a teacher being treated for cancer, also received a chemotherapy overdose and suffered irrevers-ible heart damage. After investigating the medication errors, the prescribing doctor, three druggists, and 15 nurses were disciplined by state regulators. The hospital was sued by the two women’s families and by one of the doctors disciplined.As a result of this widely publicized event, the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute invested more than $11 million to overhaul their safety programs, including providing new training for their employees and giving doctors more time to meet with patients. The hospital adopted a full disclosure policy so that patients would be informed anytime a mistake had affected their care. Dana-Farber also started a patient com-mittee providing advice and feedback on ways to improve care at the hospital.mistakes. Moreover, this culture is not limited to the OR. In the intensive care unit (ICU), when compared to physicians, nurses reported more difficulty speaking up, disagreements were not appropriately resolved, and decisions were made without ade-quate input.15 In addition, the field of medicine strongly values professional autonomy, which frequently promotes individual-ism over cooperation, often to the detriment of patient care.16 Finally, patient safety, although often viewed as important, is seldom promoted from an organizational priority to an organiza-tional value. Organizations often do not feel the need to devote resources to overhauling their patient safety systems as long as they perceive their existing processes to be adequate. It often takes a high-profile sentinel event to motivate leaders to com-mit the necessary time and resources to improving patient safety within their organization, as exemplified by the Dana-Farber Institute in the aftermath of Betsy Lehman’s death (Case 12-2).Assessing an Organization’s Safety CultureEfforts to foster cultural change within an organization with regard to patient safety have been limited in the past by the inability to measure the impact of any given intervention. How-ever, studies have shown that employee attitudes about culture are associated with error reduction behaviors in aviation and with patient outcomes in ICUs. The Safety Attitudes Question-naire (SAQ) is a validated survey instrument that can be used to measure culture in a healthcare setting.9 Adapted from two safety tools used in aviation, the Flight Management Attitudes Questionnaire and its predecessor, the Cockpit Management Attitudes Questionnaire, the SAQ consists of a series of ques-tions measuring six domains: teamwork climate, safety climate, job satisfaction, perception of management, stress recognition, and working conditions.The safety climate scale portion of the questionnaire con-sists of the following seven items:•	I am encouraged by my colleagues to report any patient safety concerns I may have.•	The culture in this clinical area makes it easy to learn from the mistakes of others.•	Medical errors are handled appropriately in this clinical area.Brunicardi_Ch12_p0397-p0432.indd   40120/02/19   3:57 PM 402BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART I0 20 40 60 80 Medication UseContinuum of CareCare PlanningOperative CareInformation ManagementPhysical EnvironmentAssessmentCommunicationLeadershipHuman FactorsPercent of Events (%)Figure 12-2. Root causes of sentinel events 2004 to 2012. (Data from The Joint Commission, 2012.)staff and resources, uncertainty in clinical decision making and planning, and oversights in patient preparation.Measuring TeamworkResearch in commercial aviation has demonstrated a strong correlation between better teamwork and improved safety per-formance. Cockpit crew members’ reluctance to question a cap-tain’s judgment has been identified as a root cause of aviation accidents. Good attitudes about teamwork are associated with error-reduction behaviors in aviation, improved patient out-comes in ICUs, and decreased nurse turnover in the OR. It is also associated with higher job satisfaction ratings and less sick time taken from work.The SAQ can be used to measure teamwork and provide benchmarks for departments or hospitals seeking to measure and improve their teamwork climate.20 The SAQ teamwork scores are responsive to interventions that aim to improve team-work among operating teams, such as the implementation of ICU checklists, executive walk rounds, and preoperative brief-ing team discussions. The communication and collaboration sections of the SAQ reflect OR caregiver views on teamwork and can be used to distinguish meaningful interventions from impractical and ineffective programs.In a survey of OR personnel across 60 hospitals, the SAQ identified substantial differences in the perception of team-work in the OR depending on one’s role. Physicians frequently rated the teamwork of others as good, while nurses at the same institutions perceived teamwork as poor (Fig. 12-3). Similar 100%87%Surgeon rates OR nurseOR nurse rates surgeon48%90%80%70%60%Percent rating quality of collaborationand communication as high or very high50%40%30%20%10%0%Figure 12-3. Differences in teamwork perceptions between sur-geons and operating room (OR) nurses. (Reproduced with permis-sion from Makary MA, Sexton JB, Freischlag JA, et al. Operating room teamwork among physicians and nurses: teamwork in the eye of the beholder, J Am Coll Surg. 2006 May;202(5):746-752.)discrepancies have been found in ICUs. These discrepancies can be attributed to differences in the communication skills that are valued by surgeons and nurses. For example, nurses describe good collaboration as having their input respected, while physicians describe good collaboration as having nurses who can anticipate their needs and follow instructions. Efforts to improve the communication that takes place between physicians and nurses can directly improve the perception of teamwork and collaboration by the OR team (Table 12-2). Empowering well-respected surgeons to promote principles of teamwork and communication can go a long way toward transforming attitu-dinal and behavioral changes in fellow physicians as well as other members of the surgical team. Surgeons are increasingly encouraging the respectful and timely voicing of concerns of OR personnel.COMMUNICATION TOOLSHigh reliability organizations such as aviation frequently use tools such as prompts, checks, standard operating protocols, and communication interventions such as team briefings and debriefings. These tools identify and mitigate hazards and allow an organization to complete tasks more efficiently. They also foster a culture of open communication and speaking up if a  team member senses a safety concern. Safety checks and standardized team discussions serve as prompts to help “engineer out” human error, providing quality assurance and improving information flow. They also can prevent errors related to omissions, which are more likely to occur when there is information overload, multiple steps in a process, repetitions in steps, and planned departures from routine processes, and when there are other interruptions and distractions present while the process is being executed. These same interventions have been shown to improve patient safety in ORs and ICUs.21,22Operating Room Briefings (A Surgical Checklist)Preoperative briefings and checklists, when used appropriately, help to facilitate transfer of information between team members (Table 12-3). A briefing, or checklist, is any preprocedure dis-cussion of requirements, needs, and special issues of the proce-dure. Briefings often are locally adapted to the specific needs of the specialty. They have been associated with an improved safety culture, including increased awareness of wrong-site/wrong-procedure errors, early reporting of equipment prob-lems, reduced operational costs and fewer unexpected delays. In one study, 30.9% of OR personnel reported a delay before the 7Brunicardi_Ch12_p0397-p0432.indd   40220/02/19   3:57 PM 403QUALITY, PATIENT SAFETY, ASSESSMENTS OF CARE, AND COMPLICATIONSCHAPTER 12Table 12-2Percentage of operating room caregivers reporting a high or very high level of collaboration with other members of the operating room teamCAREGIVER POSITION PERFORMING RATING CAREGIVER POSITION BEING RATEDSURGEONANESTHESIOLOGISTNURSECRNASurgeon85848887Anesthesiologist70968992Nurse48638168CRNA58757693The best teamwork scores were recorded by anesthesiologists when they rated their teamwork with other anesthesiologists (“high” or “very high” 96% of the time). The lowest teamwork ratings were recorded by nurses when they rated their teamwork with surgeons (“high” or “very high” 48% of the time).CRNA = certified registered nurse anesthetist.Reproduced with permission from Makary MA, Sexton JB, Freischlag JA, et al. Operating room teamwork among physicians and nurses: teamwork in the eye of the beholder, J Am Coll Surg. 2006 May;202(5):746-752.Table 12-3Five-point operating room briefingWhat are the names and roles of the team members?Is the correct patient/procedure confirmed? (The Joint Commission Universal Protocol [TIME-OUT])Have antibiotics been given? (if appropriate)What are the critical steps of the procedure?What are the potential problems for the case?Data from Makary MA, Mukherjee A, Sexton JB, et al. Operating room briefings and wrong-site surgery, J Am Coll Surg. 2007 Feb; 204(2):236-243.institution of OR briefings, and only 23.3% reported delays after briefings were instituted.23 OR briefings are increasingly being used to ensure evidence-based measures are used, such as the appropriate administration of preoperative antibiotics and deep vein thrombosis (DVT) prophylaxis. Briefings allow personnel to discuss potential problems, before they become a “near miss” or cause actual harm.Operating Room DebriefingsPostprocedural debriefings improve patient safety by allowing for discussion and reflection on causes for errors and critical incidents that occurred during the case. Errors or critical inci-dents are regarded as learning opportunities rather than cause for punishment. During the debriefing, the team also can discuss what went well during the case and designate a point person to follow up on any proposed actions that result from the discus-sion. In addition, most debriefings include a verification of the sponge, needle, and instrument counts and confirmation of the correct labeling of the surgical specimen.Errors in surgical specimen labeling have not received as much attention as incorrect sponge or instrument counts as an indicator of the quality of communication in the OR. How-ever, an error in communication or during the hand-off process increases the risk of mislabeling a surgical specimen before its arrival in a pathology laboratory. In one study, this type of identification error occurred in 4.3 per 1000 surgical specimens, which implies an annualized rate of occurrence of 182 misla-beled specimens per year (Fig. 12-5).24 Errors involving speci-men identification can result in delays in care, the need for an additional biopsy or therapy, failure to use appropriate therapy, or therapy administered to the wrong body site, side, or patient. These system failures can lead to significant harm to the patient, costs to the institution, and distrust by a community. Given the frequency of occurrence and the feasibility and validity of mea-suring them, mislabeled surgical specimens may serve as a use-ful indicator of patient safety and should be included in any postprocedural debriefing checklist.Sign OutsIn healthcare, information frequently passes to covering provid-ers without prioritizing potential concerns. This makes sign outs a very vulnerable process of care, which can lead to catastrophic events.The term sign out can refer to either the verbal or written communication of patient information to familiarize oncoming physicians about patients who will be under their care. Sign outs should occur whenever a patient’s care setting or provider is changing. When performed well, sign outs help to ensure the transfer of pertinent information. However, previous studies have shown the hand-off process to be variable, unstructured, and prone to error. Common categories of communication fail-ure during sign outs include content omissions, such as failure to mention active medical problems, and failures in the actual communication process, such as leaving illegible or unclear notes (Case 12-3).25 These failures lead to confusion and uncer-tainty by the covering physician during patient care decisions, resulting in the delivery of inefficient and suboptimal care.The use of more structured verbal communication such as the Situational Debriefing Model, otherwise known as SBAR (situation, background, assessment, and recommendation), used by the U.S. Navy, can be applied to healthcare to improve the communication of critical information in a timely and orderly fashion.25 In addition, all sign outs should begin with the state-ment, “In this patient, I am most concerned about . . .” to signal to the healthcare provider on the receiving end the most impor-tant safety concerns regarding that specific patient.ImplementationTools such as checklists, sign outs, briefings, and debrief-ings improve communication between healthcare providers and create a safer patient environment (Fig. 12-6). Although their use in healthcare is still highly variable, specialties that Brunicardi_Ch12_p0397-p0432.indd   40320/02/19   3:57 PM 404BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART ISurgical Safety ChecklistHas the patient conÿrmed his/her identity, site, procedure, and consent?YesIs the site marked?YesNot applicableYesYesNoYesDifÿcult airway or aspiration risk?NoYes, and equipment/assistance availableRisk of >500ml blood loss (7ml/kg in children)?NoYes, and two IVs/central access and ˜uids plannedConÿrm all team members have introduced themselves by name and role.Conÿrm the patient’s name, procedure, and where the incision will be made.Has antibiotic prophylaxis been given within the last 60 minutes?YesNot applicableAnticipated Critical EventsTo Surgeon:What are the critical or non-routine steps?How long will the case take?What is the anticipated blood loss?To Anaesthetist:Are there any patient-speciÿc concerns?To Nursing Team:Has sterility (including indicator results) been conÿrmed?Are there equipment issues or any concerns?YesNurse Verbally Conÿrms:The name of the procedureCompletion of instrument, sponge andneedle countsSpecimen labelling (read specimen labelsaloud, including patient name)Whether there are any equipment problemsto be addressedWhat are the key concerns for recovery andmanagement of this patient? This checklist is not intended to be comprehensive. Additions and modiÿcations to ÿt local practice are encouraged.(with at least nurse and anaesthetist)(with nurse, anaesthetist and surgeon)(with nurse, anaesthetist and surgeon)© WHO, 2009Before induction of anaesthesiaBefore skin incisionBefore patient leaves operating roomRevised 1 / 2009To Surgeon, Anaesthetist and Nurse:Is essential imaging displayed?Not applicableIs the anaesthesia machine and medicationcheck complete?  Is the pulse oximeter on the patient andfunctioning?Known allergy? Does the patient have a: Figure 12-4. World Health Organization’s surgical safety checklist. (Reproduced with permission from World Health Organization Safe Surgery Saves Lives. Available at: http://www.who.int/patientsafety/safesurgery/en/. Accessed November 8, 2012.)Specimennot labeledEmptycontainerIncorrectlateralityIncorrecttissue siteIncorrectpatientnameNo patientnameNo tissuesite0.90.80.70.60.50.40.30.20.10Incidence (per 1000 specimens)Error typeFigure 12-5. Incidence of identification errors observed per 1000 specimens (n = 21,351). (Reproduced with permission from Makary MA, Epstein J, Pronovost PJ, et al. Surgical specimen identification errors: a new mea-sure of quality in surgical care, Surgery. 2007 Apr;141(4):450-455.)have incorporated them, such as intensive care and anesthesia, have made impressive strides in patient safety. Currently, com-munication breakdowns, information loss, hand off, multiple competing tasks, and high workload are considered “annoy-ing but accepted features” of the perioperative environment.20 As physician attitudes toward errors, stress, and teamwork in medicine become more favorable toward the common goals of reducing error and improving teamwork and communication, medicine will likely achieve many of the milestones in safety that high-reliability industries such as aviation have already accomplished.COMPREHENSIVE UNIT-BASED SAFETY PROGRAMAs medical care and hospitals continue to expand, the care that is provided to patients is becoming more fragmented. This frag-mentation makes communication more difficult and opportuni-ties for medical errors more common. These problems require common sense solutions, often necessitating a change in the way that care is delivered on the local level. Unit-based meetings to discuss processes that are potentially dangerous for patients can quickly bring danger areas out into the open. These meetings Brunicardi_Ch12_p0397-p0432.indd   40420/02/19   3:57 PM 405QUALITY, PATIENT SAFETY, ASSESSMENTS OF CARE, AND COMPLICATIONSCHAPTER 12Case 12-3 Inadequate sign out leading to medical errorJosie King was an 18-month-old child who was admitted to Johns Hopkins Hospital in January of 2001 for firstand second-degree burns. She spent 10 days in the pediatric intensive care unit and was well on her way to recovery. She was transferred to an intermediate care floor with the expectation that she would be sent home in a few days.The following week, her central line was removed, but nurses would not allow Josie to drink anything by mouth. Around 1 pm the next day, a nurse came to Josie’s bedside with a syringe of methadone. Although Josie’s mother told the nurse that there was no order for narcotics, the nurse insisted that the orders had been changed and administered the drug. Josie’s heart stopped, and her eyes became fixed. She was moved to the pediatric intensive care unit and placed on life support. Two days later, on February 22, 2001, she died from severe dehydration.After her death, Josie’s parents, Sorrel and Jay King, were motivated to work with leaders at Johns Hopkins to ensure that no other family would have to endure the death of a child due to medical error. They later funded the Josie King Patient Safety Program and an academic scholarship in the field of safety.A preoperativediscussionincreased myawareness of thesurgical site andside beingoperated on.01020304050Percent of respondents who agreed60708090100The surgical siteof the operationwas clear to mebefore theincision.Decision makingutilized inputfrom relevantpersonnel.Surgery andanesthesiaworked togetheras a well-coordinatedteam.Postbriefing PrebriefingFigure 12-6. Impact of operating room briefings on team-work and communication.should be held on a regular basis and bring together a multidisci-plinary team of physicians, nurses, technicians, social workers, and other staff who can each voice their concerns about safety hazards in their area. This enables all aspects of patient care to be addressed and improved continuously, thereby streamlining and improving patient care.26The implementation of the Comprehensive Unit-based Safety Program (CUSP) involves measurement of a unit’s safety culture prior to starting the program and inclusion of hospital management from the start. Having management involved allows for more efficient allocation of resources and allows them to better understand the problems faced by front-line pro-viders. Once CUSP is in place, changes can be made using local wisdom to advance patient care.26 The impact of changes made using CUSP can be measured using both patient outcomes and safety culture data.Implementation of CUSP has been associated with improved patient outcomes, including decreased surgical site infections. In a 2-year study of colorectal patients, where the first year was pre-CUSP implementation and the second year was post-CUSP implementation, there was a 33% decrease in the surgical site infection rate after CUSP.27 In this study, the CUSP group met monthly and came up with a list of interven-tions based on their experience with these cases, including stan-dardization of skin preparation and warming of patients in the preanesthesia area. This study showed that CUSP can be highly effective in ameliorating patient harm and improving patient care.MEASURING QUALITY IN SURGERYDespite the newfound focus on patient safety in surgery and the number of initiatives being undertaken by many organizations to improve their safety culture, there are few tools to actually measure whether these efforts are effective in reducing the num-ber of errors. Several agencies and private groups have devel-oped criteria to evaluate quality and safety within hospitals.Practice Pattern MeasuresNew quality measures in healthcare focus on the appropriate-ness of medical care.28 These appropriateness indicators are doctor-defined and specialty-specific so they are smart and fair. One of the first of these new appropriateness metrics is the aver-age number of tissue blocks a skin cancer (Mohs) surgeon will use to surgically remove a skin cancer. The American College of Mohs Surgeons formalized and endorsed the surgeon metric: average number of blocks a surgeon requires to remove a stan-dardized skin cancer. In a report describing the national distri-bution of surgeons by their mean number of blocks per case, the national average was found to be 1.7 blocks per surgeon. Statistical outlier surgeons had an average four or more blocks per patient. Boundaries of normal variation was determined by expert physician leaders to define an acceptable range and an Brunicardi_Ch12_p0397-p0432.indd   40520/02/19   3:57 PM 406BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iunacceptable range (greater than two standard deviations from the national norm). The American College of Mohs Surgeons sent letters to outliers, letting them know where they stand, and offered coaching and retraining help. The new Mohs surgery metric demonstrates the opportunity to reduce unwarranted clinical variation and lower healthcare costs by simply using clinical wisdom and the power of peer-comparison.Appropriateness measures approach quality differently than traditional quality measures and rely on expert physicians to define the metric and set boundaries of reasonable versus unsafe variation in an individual physician’s practice pattern rel-ative to his or her peers nationally. This concept is being applied to utilization rates of minimally invasive surgery in candidate patients as well as rates of physical therapy utilization before elective spine surgery for chronic pain.Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality Patient Safety IndicatorsThe Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) was created in 1989 as a Public Health Service agency in the Depart-ment of Health and Human Services. Its mission is to improve the quality, safety, efficiency, and effectiveness of healthcare for all Americans. Nearly 80% of the AHRQ’s budget is awarded as grants and contracts to researchers at universities and other research institutions across the country. The AHRQ sponsors and conducts research that provides evidence-based information on healthcare outcomes, quality, cost, use, and access. It has advocated the use of readily available hospital inpatient admin-istrative data to measure healthcare quality. The information helps healthcare decision makers make more informed decisions and improve the quality of healthcare services.29One of the major contributions of the AHRQ is a set of Patient Safety Indicators (PSIs), initially released in 2003 and revised in 2010. PSIs are a tool to help health system leaders identify potential adverse events occurring during hospitaliza-tion. Developed after a comprehensive literature review, analy-sis of International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision, Clinical Modification (ICD-9-CM) codes, review by a clini-cian panel, implementation of risk adjustment, and empirical analyses, these 27 indicators provide information on potential in-hospital complications and adverse events following surger-ies, procedures, and childbirth (Table 12-4).Provider-level indicators provide a measure of the poten-tially preventable complications for patients who received their initial care and the complication of care within the same hos-pitalization. They include only those cases where a secondary diagnosis code flags a potentially preventable complication. Area-level indicators capture all cases of the potentially pre-ventable complications that occur in a given area (e.g., metro-politan area or county), either during their initial hospitalization or resulting in subsequent hospitalization.30Currently, PSIs are considered indicators, not definitive measures, of patient safety concerns. They can identify potential safety problems that merit further investigation. They also can be used to better prioritize and evaluate local and national initiatives, and even as benchmarks for tracking progress in patient safety. In the future, further growth in electronic health data will make administrative data-based tools like the PSIs more useful.31The Surgical Care Improvement Project MeasuresThe Surgical Care Improvement Project (SCIP) was established in 2003 by a national partnership of organizations committed Table 12-4Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality patient safety indicatorsProvider-level patient safety indicators• Complications of anesthesia• Death in low mortality diagnosis-related groups• Decubitus ulcer• Failure to rescue• Foreign body left in during procedure• Iatrogenic pneumothorax• Selected infections due to medical care• Postoperative hip fracture• Postoperative hemorrhage or hematoma• Postoperative physiologic and metabolic derangements• Postoperative respiratory failure• Postoperative pulmonary embolism or deep vein thrombosis• Postoperative sepsis• Postoperative wound dehiscence in abdominopelvic surgical patients• Accidental puncture and laceration• Transfusion reaction• Birth trauma—injury to neonate• Obstetric trauma—vaginal delivery with instrument• Obstetric trauma—vaginal delivery without instrument• Obstetric trauma—cesarean deliveryArea-level patient safety indicators• Foreign body left in during procedure• Iatrogenic pneumothorax• Selected infections due to medical care• Postoperative wound dehiscence in abdominopelvic surgical patients• Accidental puncture and laceration• Transfusion reaction• Postoperative hemorrhage or hematomaReproduced with permission from Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. Patient Safety Indicators Overview. AHRQ Quality Indicators. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; February 2006. Available at: https://www.qualityindicators.ahrq.gov/. Accessed October 24, 2018.to improving surgical care by reducing surgical complications. The steering committee is comprised of groups such as the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, the American Hos-pital Association, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Institute for Healthcare Improvement, The Joint Com-mission, and others.The incidence of postoperative complications ranges from 6% for patients undergoing noncardiac surgery to more than 30% for patients undergoing high-risk surgery. Common post-operative complications include surgical site infections (SSIs), myocardial infarction, postoperative pneumonia, and thrombo-embolic complications. Patients who experience postoperative complications have increased hospital length of stay (3 to 11 days longer than those without complications), increased hospital costs (ranging from $1398 for an infectious complication to $18,310 for a thromboembolic event), and increased mortality (median patient survival decreases by up to 69%).32Despite well-established evidence that many of these adverse events are preventable, failure to comply with standards Brunicardi_Ch12_p0397-p0432.indd   40620/02/19   3:57 PM 407QUALITY, PATIENT SAFETY, ASSESSMENTS OF CARE, AND COMPLICATIONSCHAPTER 12of care known to prevent them results in unnecessary harm to a large number of patients. SCIP has identified three broad areas within surgery where potential complications have a high inci-dence and cost and there is a significant opportunity for pre-vention: SSIs, venous thromboembolism, and adverse cardiac events. The SCIP measures aim to reduce the incidence of these events during the perioperative period by advocating the use of proven process and outcome measures. These process and outcome measures are detailed in Table 12-5.SSIs account for 14% to 16% of all hospital-acquired infections and are a common complication of care, occurring in 2% to 5% of patients after clean extra-abdominal operations and up to 20% of patients undergoing intra-abdominal procedures. By implementing steps to reduce SSIs, hospitals could recog-nize a savings of $3152 and reduction in extended length of stay by 7 days on each patient developing an infection.33Adverse cardiac events occur in 2% to 5% of patients undergoing noncardiac surgery and as many as 34% of patients undergoing vascular surgery. Certain perioperative cardiac Table 12-5The Surgical Care Improvement Project measuresProcess of care performance measuresInfection• Prophylactic antibiotic received within 1 h before surgical incision• Prophylactic antibiotic selection for surgical patients• Prophylactic antibiotics discontinued within 24 h after surgery end time (48 h for cardiac patients)• Cardiac surgery patients with controlled 6 a.m. postoperative serum glucose• Surgery patients with appropriate hair removal• Colorectal surgery patients with immediate postoperative normothermiaVenous thromboembolism• Surgery patients with recommended venous thromboembolism prophylaxis ordered• Surgery patients who received appropriate venous thromboembolism prophylaxis within 24 h before surgery to 24 h after surgeryCardiac events• Surgery patients on a β-blocker prior to arrival who received a β-blocker during the perioperative periodProposed outcome measuresInfection• Postoperative wound infection diagnosed during index hospitalizationVenous thromboembolism• Intraor postoperative pulmonary embolism diagnosed during index hospitalization and within 30 d of surgery• Intraor postoperative deep vein thrombosis diagnosed during index hospitalization and within 30 d of surgeryCardiac events• Intraor postoperative acute myocardial infarction diagnosed during index hospitalization and within 30 d of surgeryGlobal measures• Mortality within 30 d of surgery• Readmission within 30 d of surgeryData from The Joint Commission, 2012.events, such as myocardial infarction, are associated with a mortality rate of 40% to 70% per event, prolonged hospitaliza-tion, and higher costs. Appropriately administered β-blockers reduce perioperative ischemia, especially in at-risk patients. It has been found that nearly half of the fatal cardiac events could be preventable with β-blocker therapy.33DVT occurs after approximately 25% of all major surgi-cal procedures performed without prophylaxis, and pulmonary embolism (PE) occurs after 7%. Despite the well-established efficacy and safety of preventive measures, studies show that prophylaxis often is underused or used inappropriately. Both low-dose unfractionated heparin and low molecular weight heparin have similar efficacy in DVT and PE prevention. Pro-phylaxis using low-dose unfractionated heparin has been shown to reduce the incidence of fatal PEs by 50%.33The SCIP effort provides an infrastructure and guidelines for data collection and quality improvement on a national scale. By achieving high levels of compliance with evidence-based practices to reduce SSIs, venous thromboembolism events, and perioperative cardiac complications, the potential number of lives saved in the Medicare patient population alone exceeds 13,000 annually.32National Surgical Quality Improvement ProgramThe National Surgical Quality Improvement Program (NSQIP) is a measurement program that allows hospitals to sample their rates of postoperative events and compare them to similar hos-pitals. Created by the Veterans Health Administration (VA) in 1991, NSQIP has been credited with measuring and improving morbidity and mortality outcomes at the VA, reducing 30-day mortality rate after major surgery by 31%, and 30-day postop-erative morbidity by 45% in its first decade.34 Beta testing at 18 non-VA sites from 2001 to 2004 demonstrated the feasibility and utility of the program in the private sector. The program was subsequently expanded to the private sector in 2004 when the American College of Surgeons endorsed the program and encouraged hospital participation to measure and evaluate out-comes on a large scale. A study of 118 hospitals participating in NSQIP between 2005 to 2007 showed that 82% of hospitals decreased their complication rates and there was a decrease in morbidity of 11% and mortality of 17% annually per hospital.35 Currently, over 400 private-sector U.S. hospitals participate in the program.NSQIP uses a risk-adjusted ratio of the observed to expected outcome (focusing primarily on 30-day morbidity and mortal-ity) to compare the performance of participating hospitals with their peers. The data the program has compiled also can be used to conduct observational studies using prospectively collected information on more than 1.5 million patients and operations. The expansion of NSQIP to the private sector has helped shift the focus from merely preventing the provider errors and sentinel events highlighted by the IOM publication “To Err Is Human” to the larger goal of preventing all adverse postoperative outcomes.Several insights about patient safety have arisen as a result of NSQIP. First, safety is indistinguishable from overall quality of surgical care and should not be addressed separately. Defin-ing quality in terms of keeping a patient safe from adverse out-comes allows the NSQIP data to be used to assess and improve quality of care by making improvements in patient safety. In other words, prevention of errors is synonymous with the reduc-tion of adverse outcomes and can be used as a reliable quality measure. Second, during an episode of surgical care, adverse Brunicardi_Ch12_p0397-p0432.indd   40720/02/19   3:57 PM 408BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ioutcomes, and hence, patient safety, are primarily determined by the quality of the systems of care. Errors in hospitals with higher than expected observed to expected outcomes ratios are more likely to be from system errors than from provider incom-petence. This underscores the importance of adequate communi-cation, coordination, and teamwork in achieving quality surgical care. Finally, reliable comparative outcomes data are imperative for the identification of system problems. Risk-adjusted rates of adverse outcomes must be compared with those at peer institu-tions to appreciate more subtle system errors that lead to adverse outcomes to prompt changes in the quality of an institution’s processes and structures.The Leapfrog GroupOne of the largest efforts to standardize evidence-based med-icine in the United States is led by The Leapfrog Group, an alliance of large public and private healthcare purchasers rep-resenting more than 37 million individuals across the United States. This healthcare consortium was founded in 2000 with the aim to exert their combined leverage toward improving nation-wide standards of healthcare quality, optimizing patient out-comes, and ultimately lowering healthcare costs. The Leapfrog Group’s strategy to achieve these goals is through providing patient referral, financial incentives, and public recognition for hospitals that practice or implement evidence-based healthcare standards.The healthcare quality and safety practices (leaps) that Leapfrog initially identified to measure healthcare standards were hospital use of computerized physician order entry systems, 24-hour ICU physician staffing, and evidence-based hospital  referral (EBHR) standards for five high-risk operations.36 In 2010, after the National Quality Forum (NQF) released its updated Safe Practices for Better Healthcare, Leapfrog added a safe practices leap, which includes eight practices from the NQF report.37Leapfrog collects data on these practices through adminis-tration of an ongoing, voluntary, web-based hospital quality and safety survey. This survey is conducted in 41 regions that cover over half of the U.S. population and 62% of all hospital beds in the country. In 2011, more than 1200 urban, suburban, and rural hospitals participated in the survey. Leapfrog asks for informa-tion on eight high-risk conditions or procedures, including coro-nary artery bypass graft, percutaneous coronary intervention, abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) repair, pancreatic resection, and esophagectomy. These procedures were chosen because evidence exists that adherence to certain process measures can dramatically improve the outcomes of these procedures. In addi-tion, more than 100 studies also have demonstrated that better results are obtained at high-volume hospitals when undergoing cardiovascular surgery, major cancer resections, and other high-risk procedures. Hospitals fulfilling the EBHR Safety Standard are expected to meet the hospital and surgeon volume criteria shown in Table 12-6. Hospitals that do not meet these criteria but adhere to the Leapfrog-endorsed process measures for coro-nary artery bypass graft surgery, percutaneous coronary inter-vention, AAA repair, and care for high-risk neonates, receive partial credit toward fulfilling the EBHR Safety Standard. Leap-frog purchasers work to recognize and reward hospitals that pro-vide care for their enrollees who meet EBHR standards.35In a recent study, Brooke and associates analyzed whether achieving Leapfrog’s established evidence-based standards for AAA repair, including meeting targets for case volume and Table 12-6Recommended annual volumes: hospitals and surgeons1. Coronary artery bypass graft≥450/1002. Percutaneous coronary intervention≥400/753. Abdominal aortic aneurysm repair≥50/224. Aortic valve replacement≥120/225. Pancreatic resection≥11/26. Esophagectomy≥13/27. Bariatric surgery>100/20Reproduced with permission from The Leapfrog Group. Available at: http://www.leapfroggroup.org/.perioperative β-blocker usage, correlated with improved patient outcomes over time.36 After controlling for differences in hos-pital and patient characteristics, hospitals that implemented a policy for perioperative β-blocker usage had an estimated 51% reduction in mortality following open AAA repair cases. Among 111 California hospitals in which endovascular AAA repair was performed, in-hospital mortality was reduced by an estimated 61% over time among hospitals meeting Leapfrog case volume standards, although this result was not statistically significant. These results suggest that hospital compliance with Leapfrog standards for elective AAA repair is an effective means to help improve in-hospital mortality outcomes over time and support further efforts aimed at standardizing patient referral to hospi-tals that comply with evidence-based medicine standards for other surgical procedures.The newest effort of the Leapfrog group is to promote transparency of hospital outcomes using a safety scorecard. This information can be viewed at www.hospitalsafetygrade.org.World Health Organization “Safe Surgery Saves Lives” InitiativeIn October 2004, the WHO launched a global initiative to strengthen healthcare safety and monitoring systems by creat-ing the World Alliance for Patient Safety. As part of the group’s efforts to improve patient safety, the alliance implemented a series of safety campaigns that brought together experts in spe-cific problem areas through individual Global Patient Safety Challenges. The second Global Patient Safety Challenge focuses on improving the safety of surgical care. The main goal of the campaign, called Safe Surgery Saves Lives, is to reduce surgical deaths and complications through the universal adaptation of a comprehensive perioperative surgical safety checklist in ORs worldwide (Fig. 12-4). In addition to the checklist, the WHO defined a set of uniform measures for national and international surveillance of surgical care to better assess the quantity and quality of surgical care being delivered worldwide.38 At the pop-ulation level, metrics include the number of surgeon, anesthesia, and nurse providers per capita, the number of ORs per capita, and overall surgical case volumes and mortality rates. At the hospital level, metrics include safety improvement structures and a surgical “Apgar score,” a validated method of prognos-ticating patient outcomes based on intraoperative events (i.e., hypotension, tachycardia, blood loss).39National Quality ForumThe National Quality Forum (NQF) is a coalition of health-care organizations that has worked to develop and implement a national strategy for healthcare quality measurement and Brunicardi_Ch12_p0397-p0432.indd   40820/02/19   3:57 PM 409QUALITY, PATIENT SAFETY, ASSESSMENTS OF CARE, AND COMPLICATIONSCHAPTER 12reporting. Their mission is to improve the quality of American healthcare by setting national priorities and goals for perfor-mance improvement, endorsing national consensus standards for measuring and publicly reporting on performance, and pro-moting the attainment of national goals through education and outreach programs.One of the major contributions of the NQF is the develop-ment of a list of Serious Reportable Events, which are frequently referred to as “never events.”40 According to the NQF, “never events” are errors in medical care that are clearly identifiable, preventable, and serious in their consequences for patients and that indicate a real problem in the safety and credibility of a healthcare facility. Examples of never events include surgery performed on the wrong body part; a foreign body left in a patient after surgery; a mismatched blood transfusion; a major  medication error; a severe pressure ulcer acquired in the hospital; and preventable postoperative deaths. Criteria for inclusion as a never event are listed in Table 12-7. The event must be:•	Unambiguous (i.e., the event must be clearly identifiable and measurable, and thus feasible to include in a reporting system);•	Usually preventable, with the recognition that some events are not always avoidable, given the complexity of healthcare;•	Serious, resulting in death or loss of a body part, disability, or more than transient loss of a body function; and•	Any one of the following:•	Adverse, and/or•	Indicative of a problem in a healthcare facility’s safety sys-tems, and/or•	Important for public credibility or public accountability.These events are not a reasonable medical risk of under-going surgery that the patient must accept but medical errors that should never happen (Case 12-4). The occurrence of any of these events signals that an organization’s patient safety culture or processes have defects that need to be evaluated and cor-rected (Table 12-8).“NEVER EVENTS” IN SURGERYNever events are errors in medical care that are clearly identifi-able, preventable, and serious in their consequences for patients and that indicate a real problem in the safety and credibility of a healthcare facility.40 Despite widespread agreement that surgi-cal never events are preventable and despite several national and local programs being launched to decrease them, never 8Table 12-7Surgical “never events”• Surgery performed on the wrong body part• Surgery performed on the wrong patient• Wrong surgical procedure performed on a patient• Unintended retention of a foreign object in a patient after surgery or other procedure• Intraoperative or immediately postoperative death in an ASA Class 1 patientASA = American Society of Anesthesiologists.Reproduced with permission from Serious Reportable Events in Healthcare 2011 Update: A Consensus Report. Washington, DC: National Quality Forum; 2011.Case 12-4 Surgical “never event”In 2002, Mike Hurewitz, a reporter for The Times Union of Albany, suddenly began vomiting blood 3 days after donating part of his liver to his brother while recovering on a hospital floor in which 34 patients were being cared for by one first-year resident. He aspirated and died immediately with no other physician available to assist the overworked first-year resident.Recognized for its advances in the field of liver trans-plantation, at the time, Mount Sinai Hospital was performing more adult-to-adult live-donor operations than any other hos-pital in the country. But the program was shut down by this event. Mount Sinai was held accountable for inadequate care and was banned from performing any live-donor adult liver transplants for more than 1 year. Of the 92 complaints inves-tigated by the state, 75 were filed against the liver transplant unit, with 62 involving patient deaths. The state concluded that most of the 33 serious violations exhibited by the hospital occurred within the liver transplant unit.As a result of the investigation, Mount Sinai revamped many of the procedures within its transplant unit. Among the changes, first-year residents no longer staffed the transplant service, two healthcare practitioners physically present in the hospital oversaw the transplant unit at all times, and any page coming from the transplant unit had to be answered within 5 minutes of the initial call. In addition, nurses monitored patients’ vital signs more closely after surgery, transplant sur-geons were required to make postoperative visits to both organ donor and recipient, and each registered nurse was assigned to four patients, rather than six or seven. The death also led New York to become the first state to develop guidelines for treating live organ donors. Finally, Mike Hurewitz’s widow became a patient safety advocate, urging stricter controls on live donor programs.events are still a significant problem. A study from Mehtsun and colleagues showed that from October 1990 to October 2010, nationwide there were 9744 paid malpractice claims for never events. Of these, mortality was reported in 6.6%, permanent injury in 33%, and temporary injury in 59%. The cost of the never events totaled $1.3 billion. Also, of physicians who were named in a surgical never event claim, 12.4% were named in a future never events claim.41 Another study in 2010 by The Joint Commission found that wrong-site surgery occurs 40 times per week nationwide.42 Future directions for decreasing these prob-lems include public reporting of never events by hospitals to increase hospital accountability, more formal training in team-work, and CUSP programs in hospitals that have higher rates of never events to help elucidate the root cause.Retained Surgical ItemsA retained surgical item refers to any surgical item found to be inside a patient after he or she has left the OR, thus requiring a second operation to remove the item.43 Estimates of retained for-eign bodies in surgical procedures range from one case per 8000 to 18,000 operations, corresponding to one case or more each year for a typical large hospital or approximately 1500 cases per year in the United States.44 This estimate is based on an analy-sis of malpractice claims and is likely to underestimate the true incidence. The risk of having a retained surgical item increases during emergency surgery, when there are unplanned changes in Brunicardi_Ch12_p0397-p0432.indd   40920/02/19   3:57 PM 410BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART ITable 12-8Four patient events that advanced the modern field of patient safetyPATIENTINSTITUTIONYEAREVENTROOT CAUSEOUTCOMELibby ZionNew York Hospital, New York, NY1984Missed allergy to DemerolPhysician fatigueBell Commission shortened resident work hoursBetsy LehmanDana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA1994Chemotherapy overdoseLack of medication checks and triggersFired doctor, three pharmacists, 15 nurses; overhauled safety programJosie KingJohns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, MD2001Severe dehydrationPoor communicationIncreased safety research fundingMike HurewitzMt. Sinai Hospital, New York, NY2002Inadequate postoperative careInadequate supervisionTransplant program shut down until better patient safety safeguards implementedprocedure (due to new diagnoses encountered in the OR), and in patients with higher body mass index (Table 12-9).44The most common retained surgical item is a surgical sponge, but other items, such as surgical instruments and nee-dles, can also be inadvertently left inside a patient during an operation. Retained surgical sponges are commonly discovered as an incidental finding on a routine postoperative radiograph, but also have been discovered in patients presenting with a mass or abdominal pain. Patients with sponges that were originally left in an intracavitary position (such as inside the chest or abdomen) also can present with complications such as abscess, erosion through the skin, fistula formation, bowel obstruction, hematuria, or the development of a new, tumor-like lesion.Retained surgical needles usually are discovered inciden-tally, and reports of retained needles are uncommon. Retained surgical needles have not been reported to cause injury in the same way that nonsurgical needles (e.g., sewing needles, hypo-dermic needles) have been reported to perforate bowel or lodge in vessels and migrate. However, there have been reports of chronic pelvic pain and ocular irritation caused by retained sur-gical needles. A study of plain abdominal radiographs in pigs has demonstrated that mediumto large-size needles can eas-ily be detected. The decision to remove these retained needles depends on symptoms and patient preference. Needles smaller than 13 mm have been found to be undetectable on plain radio-graph in several studies, have not been shown to cause injury to vessels or visceral organs, and can probably be left alone.Although the actual incidence of retained surgical instru-ments is unknown, they are retained with far less frequency than surgical sponges. The initial presentation of a retained surgical instrument is most commonly pain in the surgical site or the Table 12-9Risk factors for retained surgical sponges• Emergency surgery• Unplanned changes in procedure• Patient with higher body mass index• Multiple surgeons involved in same operation• Multiple procedures performed on same patient• Involvement of multiple operating room nurses/staff members• Case duration covers multiple nursing “shifts”sensation of a mass of fullness after a surgical procedure that leads to the discovery of a metallic object on a radiographic study. Commonly retained instruments include the malleable and “FISH” instrument that are used to protect the viscera when closing abdominal surgery.A retained surgical foreign body should be included in the differential diagnosis of any postoperative patient who presents with pain, infection, a palpable mass, or a radiopaque structure on imaging. The diagnosis can usually be made using a com-puted tomographic (CT) scan, and this is often the only test needed. If a retained surgical item is identified in the setting of an acute clinical presentation, the treatment usually is removal of the item. However, if the attempt to remove the retained sur-gical item can potentially cause more harm than the item itself, as in the case of a needle or a small part of a surgical item, then removal is occasionally not recommended. Retained surgical sponges should always be removed.The American College of Surgeons and the Association of Perioperative Registered Nurses, in addition to The Joint Com-mission, have issued guidelines to try to prevent the occurrence of retained surgical items. Current recommendations include the use of standard counting procedures, performing a thorough wound exploration before closing a surgical site, and using only X-ray–detectable items in the surgical wound. These organiza-tions also strongly endorse the completion of a postoperative debriefing after every operation. An X-ray at the completion of an operation is encouraged if there is any concern for a foreign body based on confusion regarding the counts by even a single member of the OR team or in the presence of a risk factor.Surgical CountsThe benefit of performing surgical counts to prevent the occur-rence of retained surgical items is controversial. The increased risk of a retained surgical item during emergency surgery in the study by Gawande and colleagues appeared to be related to bypassing the surgical count in many of these cases.44 However, in another study, the “falsely correct count,” in which a count is performed and declared correct when it is actually incorrect, occurred in 21% to 100% of cases in which a retained surgical item was found.45 This type of count was the most common circumstance encountered in all retained surgical item cases, which suggests that performing a surgical count in and of itself does not prevent this error from taking place. The counting pro-tocol also imposes significant demands on the nursing staff and Brunicardi_Ch12_p0397-p0432.indd   41020/02/19   3:57 PM 411QUALITY, PATIENT SAFETY, ASSESSMENTS OF CARE, AND COMPLICATIONSCHAPTER 12distracts them from focusing on other primarily patient-centered tasks, often during critical portions of the case.19A retained surgical item can occur even in the presence of a known incorrect count. This event is usually a result of poor communication in which a surgeon will dismiss the incorrect count and/or fail to obtain a radiograph before the patient leaves the OR. Having stronger institutional policies in place in case of an incorrect count (such as requiring a mandatory radiograph while the patient is still in the OR) can avoid conflict among caregivers and mitigate the likelihood of a retained surgical item occurring as a result of a known incorrect count.Although there is no single tool to prevent all errors, the development of multiple lines of defense to prevent retained surgical items and universally standardizing and adhering to OR safety protocols by all members of the surgical team will help reduce the incidence of this never event.45 Surgeons should take the lead in the prevention of retained surgical items by avoid-ing the use of small or nonradiologically detectable sponges in large cavities, performing a thorough wound inspection before closing any surgical incision, and having a vested interest in the counting procedure performed by nursing staff. The value of routine radiography to prevent a retained surgical item in emergency cases or when major procedures involving multiple surgical teams are being performed is becoming more apparent.The widely accepted legal doctrine when a foreign body is erroneously left in a patient is that the mere presence of the item in the plaintiff’s body indicates that the patient did not receive proper surgical care. The characteristics of the surgeon and their style, bedside manner, honesty, and confidence demonstrated in the management of the case can go a long way in averting a lawsuit or mitigating damages.Wrong-Site SurgeryWrong-site surgery is any surgical procedure performed on the wrong patient, wrong body part, wrong side of the body, or wrong level of a correctly identified anatomic site. It is dif-ficult to determine the true incidence of wrong-site surgery for several reasons. First, there is no standard definition for what constitutes wrong-site surgery among various healthcare orga-nizations. Another factor is that wrong-site surgery is under-reported by healthcare providers. Finally, the total number of potential opportunities for each type of wrong-site error is unknown. However, various studies show incidences ranging from 1 in 112,994 cases to 1 in 15,500 cases.46 The Washington University School of Medicine suggests a rate of 1 in 17,000 operations, which adds up to approximately 4000 wrong-site surgeries in the United States each year. If these numbers are correct, wrong-site surgery is the third most frequent life-threat-ening medical error in the United States.47Several states now require mandatory reporting of all wrong-site surgery events, including near misses. These data provide some insight into the number of actual errors compared to the number of potential opportunities to perform wrong-site surgery. Of the 427 reports of wrong-site surgery submitted from June 2004 through December 2006 to the Pennsylvania Patient Safety Reporting System, more than 40% of the errors actually reached the patient, and nearly 20% involved comple-tion of a wrong-site procedure.46The risk of performing wrong-site surgery increases when there are multiple surgeons involved in the same operation or multiple procedures are performed on the same patient, espe-cially if the procedures are scheduled or performed on different areas of the body.47 Time pressure, emergency surgery, abnor-mal patient anatomy, and morbid obesity are also thought to be risk factors. Communication errors are the root cause in more than 70% of the wrong-site surgeries reported to The Joint Com-mission.46 Other risk factors include receiving an incomplete preoperative assessment; having inadequate procedures in place to verify the correct surgical site; or having an organizational culture that lacks teamwork or reveres the surgeon as someone whose judgment should never be questioned.There is a one in four chance that surgeons who work on symmetric anatomic structures will be involved in a wrong-site error sometime during their careers.47 The specialties most com-monly involved in reporting wrong-site surgeries according to The Joint Commission are orthopedic/podiatric surgery (41%); general surgery (20%); neurosurgery (14%); urology (11%); and maxillofacial, cardiovascular, otolaryngology, and oph-thalmology (14%).46 Most errors involved symmetric anatomic structures: lower extremities (30%), head/neck (24%), and geni-tal/urinary/pelvic/groin (21%).42 Although orthopedic surgery is the most frequently involved, this may be due to the higher volume of cases performed as well as the increased opportu-nity for lateralization errors inherent in the specialty. In addi-tion, because the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons has historically tried as a professional organization to reduce wrong-site operations, orthopedic surgeons may be more likely to report these events when they do occur.47The Joint Commission Universal Protocol to Ensure Correct SurgeryThe movement to eliminate wrong-site surgery began among professional orthopedic societies in the mid-1990s, when both the Canadian Orthopaedic Association and the American Acad-emy of Orthopaedic Surgeons issued position statements and embarked on educational campaigns to prevent the occurrence of wrong-site surgery within their specialty.47 Other organiza-tions that issued position statements advocating for the elimina-tion of wrong-site surgery include the North American Spine Society, the American Academy of Ophthalmology, the Asso-ciation of Perioperative Registered Nurses, and the American College of Surgeons. After issuing a review of wrong-site sur-gery in their Sentinel Event Alert in 1998, The Joint Commis-sion made the elimination of wrong-site surgery one of their first National Patient Safety Goals in 2003 and adopted a uni-versal protocol for preventing wrong-site, wrong-procedure, and wrong-person surgery in 2004. The protocol has been endorsed by more than 50 professional associations and organizations.A preoperative “time-out” or “pause for the cause” to con-firm the patient, procedure, and site to be operated on before incision was recommended by The Joint Commission and is now mandatory for all ORs in the United States. Elements of the protocol include the following:•	Verifying the patient’s identity•	Marking the surgical site•	Using a preoperative site verification process such as a checklist•	Confirming the availability of appropriate documents and studies before the start of a procedure•	Taking a brief time-out immediately before skin incision, in which all members of the surgical team actively communicate and provide oral verification of the patient’s identity, surgi-cal site, surgical procedure, administration of preoperative Brunicardi_Ch12_p0397-p0432.indd   41120/02/19   3:57 PM 412BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Imedications, and presence of appropriate medical records, imaging studies, and equipment•	Monitoring compliance with protocol recommendationsFocusing on individual process components of the uni-versal protocol, such as surgical site marking or the time-out, is not enough to prevent wrong-site surgery. Over a 30-month period in Pennsylvania, 21 wrong-site errors occurred despite the proper use of time-out procedures, with 12 of these errors resulting in complete wrong-site procedures. During the same period, correct site markings failed to prevent another 16 wrong-site surgeries, of which six were not recognized until after the procedure had been completed.47Site verification begins with the initial patient encounter by the surgeon, continues throughout the preoperative verifica-tion process and during multiple critical points in the OR, and requires the active participation of the entire operating team, especially the surgeon and anesthesia provider. Based on a recent review of malpractice claims, two-thirds of wrong-site operations could have been prevented by a site-verification protocol.48Despite the proliferation of wrong-site protocols in the last decade, their effectiveness is difficult to measure as the inci-dence of wrong-site surgery is too rare to measure as a rate. Interestingly, the number of sentinel events reported to The Joint Commission has not changed significantly since the wide-spread implementation of the Universal Protocol in 2004.47 This could be due to an increase in reporting rather than an actual increase in the incidence of wrong-site surgery.The legal treatment of wrong-site surgery is similar to that of surgical items erroneously left in a patient: the mere fact that it occurred indicates that the patient did not receive proper surgical care. A malpractice claim may lead to a settlement or award on verdict in the sixor seven-figure range in 2011 U.S. dollars.41Ultimately, the occurrence of retained surgical items or wrong-site surgery is a reflection of the quality of professional communication between caregivers and the degree of teamwork among the members of the operating team. In addition to stan-dardizing procedures like the surgical count, instituting man-datory postoperative radiographs in the presence of a known miscount, and reforming the processes of patient identification and site verification, organizations should also strive to create a culture of safety, create independent and redundant checks for key processes, and create a system in which caregivers can learn from their mistakes (Table 12-10).49TRANSPARENCY IN HEALTHCAREDespite a large increase in data being collected about patient safety and harm, much of it is not available to the public or other hospitals. This lack of transparency allows some hos-pitals to continue to practice outdated medicine and, in some cases, puts patients at a higher risk of serious complications. In a study by Mark Chassin, the health commissioner of New York State, having hospitals publicly disclose their mortality rates for coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) procedures resulted in a 41% decline in mortality from CABGs statewide.50 In this study, when CABG mortality data were initially made public, there was a wide range in cardiac surgery-related mortality from 1% to 18%, depending on the hospital; the standard of care is 2%. The reasons for higher mortality in the poorly performing Table 12-10Best practices for operating room safety• Conduct The Joint Commission Universal Protocol (“time-out”) to prevent wrong-site surgery.• Perform an operating room briefing (checklist) to identify and mitigate hazards early.• Promote a culture of speaking up about safety concerns.• Use a screening X-ray to detect foreign bodies in high-risk cases.• Begin patient sign-outs with the most likely immediate safety hazard.Data from Michaels RK, Makary MA, Dahab Y, et al. Achieving the National Quality Forum’s “Never Events”: Prevention of wrong site, wrong procedure, and wrong patient operations, Ann Surg. 2007 Apr;245(4):526-532.hospitals ranged from poor communication between care teams to one rogue surgeon operating when the surgeon should not have been. The consequence of making this data transparent was that the hospitals held multidisciplinary, CUSP-like meetings, where as a team they decided on the measures to implement for improvement. Through this, over the next year, most hospitals decreased their mortality rate to below 2%. Even the hospital that had an 18% mortality rate decreased it to 7% within 3 years and 1.7% over the next several years.Transparency in healthcare is becoming central to the healthcare quality discussion. A new SCIP core measure is pub-lishing practitioner performance, and all Leapfrog survey results are published online where other hospitals and the public can see them. Additionally, different large medical societies, includ-ing the Society for Thoracic Surgery (STS), are encouraging and rewarding practitioners and hospitals that are transparent with their outcomes. Making hospital outcomes transparent makes hospitals accountable to the public for their outcomes and, in the case of New York, caused a radical improvement in the quality of care provided to patients. It also empowers patients by mak-ing them better informed about which hospital they choose for their care, which will further incentivize hospitals to improve.Public Reporting and Patient Assessment of CareThe epiphany moment in contemporary healthcare created by the Institute of Medicine report2 generated far-reaching effects. One important aspect has been development of a variety of ini-tiatives focused on the generation, endorsement, and reporting of numerous measures related to the safety and quality of health-care—primarily process and outcomes measures. However, the science of measure development is slow paced and, unfortu-nately, has difficulty evolving at the same pace of change as clinical medicine or healthcare delivery systems.Given the strong interest for improved knowledge and information by consumers of healthcare, the trend toward public reporting has rapidly gained momentum and outpaced report-ing from the measurement science community. This has sub-sequently created occasional confusion and uncertainty in the marketplace—simply because the generation of public reports are not necessarily always based upon solid scientific data or evidence. The resulting net effect can be creation of a prema-ture focus by organizations and providers on achieving success within influential public reporting venues (e.g., U.S. News Best Hospitals) and uncertainty by patients on what are optimal healthcare information resources.Brunicardi_Ch12_p0397-p0432.indd   41220/02/19   3:57 PM 413QUALITY, PATIENT SAFETY, ASSESSMENTS OF CARE, AND COMPLICATIONSCHAPTER 12Ideally centered on the public good, federal government sponsored healthcare payment plans are also focused upon mea-surement and reporting within the industry. One such initiative funded and overseen by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) is the Hospital Consumer Assessment of Health-care Providers and Systems (HCAHPS) program.51 AHRQ works closely with a consortium of public and private research organi-zations to develop and maintain the HCAHPS surveys, but they do not administer any of the surveys to patients or require use of the surveys. The intent of the HCAHPS initiative is to provide a standardized survey instrument and data collection methodology for measuring patients’ perspectives on hospital care (Fig. 12-7).While many hospitals have collected information on patient satisfaction, prior to HCAHPS there was no national standard for collecting or publicly reporting patients’ perspec-tives of care information that would enable valid comparisons to be made across all hospitals. Three broad goals have shaped the HCAHPS Survey. First, the survey is designed to produce comparable data on the patient’s perspective on care that allows objective and meaningful comparisons between hospitals on domains that are important to consumers. Second, public report-ing of the survey results is designed to create incentives for hospitals to improve their quality of care. Hospitals frequently distribute the results of HCAHPS surveys of individual ser-vices or physicians to incentivize corrective steps and improve patients’ perceptions of their care. Third, public reporting will serve to enhance public accountability in healthcare by increas-ing the transparency of the quality of hospital care provided in return for the public investment (www.hcahpsonline.org).HCAHPS scores are now directly tied to a hospital’s CMS reimbursement by federal law, and survey results account for 25% of the value-based purchasing score—directly impacting a hospital’s Medicare payments.52 In May 2005, the National Quality Forum (NQF), an organization established to standard-ize healthcare quality measurement and reporting, formally endorsed the HCAHPS Hospital Survey. The NQF endorsement represents the consensus of many healthcare providers, consumer groups, professional associations, purchasers, federal agencies, and research and quality organizations (www.qualityforum.org).While the American College of Surgeons and other profes-sional societies continue to develop and implement scientifically based healthcare measures, the escalating prevalence of less robust measures developed outside of scientific communities will also continue to expand. The patient population, provider organizations, payer organization, and the surgical community will necessarily need to find the balance of developing and uti-lizing valid patient-based information for decision-making.RISK MANAGEMENTBetween one-half to two-thirds of hospital-wide adverse events are attributable to surgical care. Most surgical errors occur in the OR and are technical in nature. Surgical complications and adverse outcomes have previously been linked to lack of surgeon specialization, low hospital volume, communication breakdowns, fatigue, surgical residents and trainees, and numer-ous other factors.53However, poor surgical outcomes are not necessarily cor-related with a surgeon’s level of experience in performing a cer-tain procedure. In one study, three-fourths of the technical errors that occurred in a review of malpractice claims data involved fully trained and experienced surgeons operating within their area of expertise, and 84% occurred in routine operations that do not require advanced training. Rather than surgeon expertise, these errors likely occurred due to situations complicated by patient comorbidity, complex anatomy, repeat surgery, or equip-ment problems (Table 12-11). Because these errors occurred during routine operations, previous suggestions to limit the per-formance of high-complexity operations using selective refer-ral, regionalization, or limitation of privileging may not actually be effective in reducing the incidence of technical error among surgical patients.53In any event, although there has been much emphasis on reducing the prevalence of surgical technical errors as a way of improving surgical care, a technical error in the OR may not be the most important indicator of whether a surgeon will be sued by a patient. Recent studies point to the importance of a surgeon’s communication skills in averting malprac-tice litigation. In the American College of Surgeons’ Closed Claims Study, although intraoperative organ injuries occurred in 40% of patients, a surgical technical misadventure was the most deficient component of care in only 12% of patients. In fact, communication and practice pattern violations were the most common deficiency in care for one third of patients in the Closed Claims Study who received the expected standard of surgical care.54The Importance of Communication in Managing RiskThe manner and tone in which a physician communicates is potentially more important to avoiding a malpractice claim than the actual content of the dialogue. For example, a physician relating to a patient in a “negative” manner may trigger litigious feelings when there is a bad result, whereas a physician relating in a “positive” manner may not. Expressions of dominance, in which the voice tone is deep, loud, moderately fast, unaccented, and clearly articulated, may communicate a lack of empathy and understanding for the patient, whereas concern or anxiety in the surgeon’s voice is often positively related to expressing concern and empathy. General and orthopedic surgeons whose tone of voice was judged to be more dominant were more likely to have been sued than those who sounded less dominant.55When significant medical errors do occur, physicians have an ethical and professional responsibility to immediately dis-close them to patients. Failure to disclose errors to patients undermines public confidence in medicine and can create legal liability related to fraud. Physicians’ fear of litigation represents a major barrier to error disclosure. However, when handled appropriately, immediate disclosure of errors frequently leads to improved patient  rapport, improved satisfaction, and fewer malpractice claims.56 In fact, rapport is the most important factor in determining whether a lawsuit is filed against a physician.In 1987, the Department of Veterans Affairs Hospital in Lexington, Kentucky, implemented the nation’s first formal apology and medical error full disclosure program, which called for the hospital and its doctors to work with patients and their families to settle a case. As a result, the hospital improved from having one of the highest malpractice claims totals in the VA system to being ranked among the lowest quartile of a com-parative group of similar hospitals for settlement and litiga-tion costs over a 7-year period. Its average payout in 2005 was $16,000 per settlement vs the national VA average of $98,000 per settlement, and only two lawsuits went to trial during a 9Brunicardi_Ch12_p0397-p0432.indd   41320/02/19   3:57 PM 414BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IYOUR CARE FROM DOCTORSDuring this hospital stay, how oftendid doctors treat you with courtesyand respect?5.NeverSometimesUsuallyAlways1234During this hospital stay, how oftendid doctors listen carefully to you?6.NeverSometimesUsuallyAlways1234During this hospital stay, how oftendid doctors explain things in a wayyou could understand?7.During this hospital stay, how oftenwere your room and bathroom keptclean?8.NeverSometimesUsuallyAlways1234THE HOSPITAL ENVIRONMENTNeverSometimesUsuallyAlways1234During this hospital stay, how oftenwas the area around your room quietat night?9.NeverSometimesUsuallyAlways1234YOUR EXPERIENCES IN THIS HOSPITALDuring this hospital stay, did youneed help from nurses or otherhospital staff in getting to thebathroom or in using a bedpan?10.YesNo If No, Go to Question 1212During this hospital stay, did youhave any pain?12.YesNo If No, Go to Question 1512NeverSometimesUsuallyAlways1234How often did you get help in gettingto the bathroom or in using a bedpanas soon as you wanted?11.NeverSometimesUsuallyAlways1234During this hospital stay, how oftendid hospital staff talk with you abouthow much pain you had?13.During this hospital stay, how oftendid hospital staff talk with you abouthow to treat your pain?14.NeverSometimesUsuallyAlways12342January 2018Table 12-11Common causes of lawsuits in surgery• Positional nerve injury• Common bile duct injury• Failure to diagnose or delayed diagnosis• Failure to treat, delayed treatment, or wrong treatment• Inadequate documentation• Inappropriate surgical indication• Failure to call a specialist• Cases resulting in amputation/limb lossFigure 12-7. Survey page from 2018 HCAHPS patient questionnaire. (Modified with permission from Hospital Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers and Systems (HCAHPS) https://www.hcahpsonline.org/en/survey-instruments/. Accessed October 24, 2018.)10-year period. As a result of the success of this program, the Department of Veteran Affairs expanded the program to all VA hospitals nationwide in October 2005. This model also was rep-licated at the University of Michigan Health System with simi-lar results. Its full-disclosure program cut the number of pending lawsuits by one half and reduced litigation costs per case from $65,000 to $35,000, saving the hospital approximately $2 mil-lion in defense litigation bills each year. In addition, University of Michigan’s doctors, patients, and lawyers are happier with this system. The cultural shift toward honesty and openness also has led to the improvement of systems and processes to reduce medical errors, especially repeat medical errors.57Brunicardi_Ch12_p0397-p0432.indd   41420/02/19   3:57 PM 415QUALITY, PATIENT SAFETY, ASSESSMENTS OF CARE, AND COMPLICATIONSCHAPTER 12With regard to risk management, the importance of good communication by surgeons and other care providers cannot be overemphasized. Whether alerting other members of the care team about a patient’s needs, openly discussing concerns the patient and/or family might have, or disclosing the cause of a medical error, open communication with all parties involved can reduce anger and mistrust of the medical system; the frequency, morbidity, and mortality of preventable adverse events; and the likelihood of litigation.COMPLICATIONSDespite the increased focus on improving patient safety and minimizing medical errors, it is impossible to eliminate human error entirely. Individual errors in judgment or technique can cause minor or major complications during or after a surgical procedure. Although these types of errors may not be quantified as easily as wrong-site surgery or a retained surgical item, they can still lead to surgical complications that prolong the course of illness, lengthen hospital stay, and increase morbidity and mortality rates. In addition to technical and management errors, patient comorbidities also increase the risk of complications. The recognition and management of complications is a critical component of surgical care.Robotic SurgerySurgical advancements would not exist without intellectual curi-osity, innovation, and technical developments; robotic surgery is a prime example of such an advance. With these advance-ments, however, errors and complications appear to be an inevi-table and recognized risk by institutions and stakeholders due to unforeseen risks inherent in the new technology and the failure or delay of achieving expertise with a new device or technology. Although the reward for adopting new advances may be noto-riety, increased patient referrals, improved patient satisfaction, decreased pain, and possibly decreased length of stay, the risks of adopting new technologies and methods become apparent only after widespread use.Multiple surgical specialties have begun or continue to develop their experiences using robotic surgery from general surgery procedures such as inguinal hernia repairs to pancreati-coduodenectomies to complex thoracic, urologic and ear, nose, and throat procedures. When robotic surgery goes awry, how-ever, the complications can be serious. The MAUDE (Manu-facturer and User Facility Device Experience) is an open access database where mandatory and voluntary adverse events are collected. As it relates to robotic surgery, some important infor-mation has been elucidated. Device failures (electrocautery, instrument malfunctions), make up roughly half of the com-plications. A retrospective study over the past 14 years in the United States documented over 10,000 robotic device-related complications that have occurred, of which 98% were reported by the manufacturers and distributers, and 2% were voluntary reports by hospitals and physicians. The data revealed that 1535 adverse events (14.4%) led to significant negative patient expe-riences (1391 injuries and 144 deaths). Additionally, the abso-lute number of reports increased 32 times since 2006, while in the same time period, the number of cases performed has only increased tenfold.58 Despite the large number of reports con-tained within this database, the extent to which it is a true rep-resentation of the complications associated with robotic surgery is uncertain due to the lack of comprehensive and mandatory reporting.59Despite the numbers and trends reported from this data-base, few prospective, controlled trials exist that examine the risks and benefits of robotic surgery with those of open and laparoscopic surgery. The data from 5 to 10 years ago may also be misleading as the approved use of robotic surgery continues to expand to additional specialties. The more recent adoption of robotic surgery by specialties such as gynecologic surgery, for example, appears to be accompanied by a disproportionately high rate of morbidity and mortality in robotically assisted pro-cedures.59 Teaching institutions are producing a newer genera-tion of robotic surgeons who will continue important advances in surgery and identify those patients who would benefit most from this type of approach. The challenge for the surgical com-munity is to develop robust and effective training programs to allow trainees and practicing surgeons to acquire the skills nec-essary to perform robotic procedures with the highest degree of safety. This need replicates the development of skill acquisition processes that reversed the high number of bile duct injuries after the introduction of laparoscopic cholecystectomy and sug-gests that validated curricula and the use of robotic simulation applications will be crucial to achieve these goals (see Chapter 53, Skills and Simulation).Complications in Minor ProceduresWhen performing procedures such as central line insertion or arterial line insertion, one should consider the necessity of the access, the use of less invasive or lower risk alternatives such as PICC line insertion instead of central line insertion, and non-invasive cardiac monitoring instead of arterial line insertion. While these alternatives may not be reliable substitutes in all patients, considering less invasive procedures can reduce the problem of avoidable harm.Central Venous Access Catheters. Complications of central venous access catheters are common. Improvements in ultra-sound technology and mass education surrounding the use and techniques in ultrasonography have led to increased employ-ment and enthusiasm for its use in central venous catheter placement. Numerous institutions have mandated the use of ultrasound for placement of all central venous lines. In addition, many subclavian catheters have been alternatively placed at the internal jugular position due to a perceived benefit of decreasing the complication of pneumothorax. This theoretical benefit may be offset by an increase in line infections as the neck is a dif-ficult site to keep clean and the dressing intact. Steps to decrease complications include:•	Ensure that central venous access is indicated.•	Experienced personnel should insert the catheter or should supervise the insertion.•	Use proper positioning and sterile technique.•	Ultrasound is recommended for internal jugular vein insertion.•	All central venous catheters should be assessed on a daily basis and should be exchanged only for specific indications (not as a matter of routine).•	All central catheters should be removed as soon as possible.Common complications of central venous access include the following.Pneumothorax Occurrence rates from both subclavian and internal jugular vein approaches are 1% to 6%. Prevention requires proper positioning of the patient and correct insertion technique. A postprocedure chest X-ray is recommended to confirm the presence or absence of a pneumothorax, regardless Brunicardi_Ch12_p0397-p0432.indd   41520/02/19   3:57 PM 416BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iof whether a pneumothorax is suspected. Recent reports have questioned whether a chest X-ray is required when the line is placed and confirmed under ultrasound guidance. Pneumotho-rax rates are higher among inexperienced providers and under-weight patients but occur with experienced operators as well. If the patient is stable, and the pneumothorax is small (<15%), close expectant observation may be adequate. If the patient is symptomatic, a thoracostomy tube should be placed. Occasion-ally, pneumothorax will occur as late as 48 to 72 hours after central venous access attempts. This usually creates sufficient compromise that a tube thoracostomy is required.Arrhythmias Arrhythmias can result from myocardial irritabil-ity secondary to guidewire placement and usually resolve when the catheter or guidewire is withdrawn from the right heart. Pre-vention requires electrocardiogram (ECG) monitoring whenever possible during catheter insertion and rapid recognition when a new arrhythmia occurs.Arterial Puncture Inadvertent puncture or laceration of an adja-cent artery with bleeding can occur, but the majority will resolve with direct pressure on or near the arterial injury site. Rarely will angiography, stent placement, or surgery be required to repair the puncture site, but close observation and a chest X-ray are indi-cated. Ultrasound-guided insertion has not mitigated this com-plication, but it may decrease the incidence of arterial puncture. Ultrasound use has also been shown to decrease the number of attempts and the time it takes to complete insertion.Lost Guidewire A guidewire or catheter that inadvertently migrates further into the vascular space away from the insertion site can be readily retrieved with interventional angiography techniques. A prompt chest X-ray and close monitoring of the patient until retrieval are indicated.Air Embolus Although estimated to occur in only 0.2% to 1% of patients, an air embolism can be dramatic and fatal. If an embolus is suspected, the patient should immediately be placed into a left lateral decubitus Trendelenburg position so the entrapped air can be stabilized within the right ventricle. Aus-cultation over the precordium may reveal a “crunching” sound, but a portable chest X-ray will help confirm the diagnosis. Aspi-ration via a central venous line accessing the heart may decrease the volume of gas in the right side of the heart and minimize the amount traversing into the pulmonary circulation. Subsequent recovery of intracardiac and intrapulmonary air may require open surgical or angiographic techniques. Treatment may prove futile if the air bolus is larger than 50 mL, however.Pulmonary Artery Rupture Flow-directed, pulmonary artery (Swan-Ganz) catheters can cause pulmonary artery rupture due to excessive advancement of the catheter into the pulmonary cir-culation. There usually is a sentinel bleed with coughing noted when a pulmonary artery catheter balloon is inflated, followed by uncontrolled hemoptysis. Reinflation of the catheter balloon is the initial step in management, followed by immediate airway intubation with mechanical ventilation, an urgent portable chest X-ray, and notification of the OR that an emergent thoracotomy may be required. If there is no further bleeding after the bal-loon is reinflated, the X-ray shows no significant consolidation of lung fields from ongoing bleeding, and the patient is easily ventilated, then a conservative nonoperative approach may be considered. However, more typically a pulmonary angiogram with angioembolization or vascular stenting is required. Hemo-dynamically unstable patients rarely survive because of the time needed to initiate and perform interventional procedures or a thoracotomy and to identify the ruptured branch of the pulmo-nary artery.Central Venous Line Infection The CDC reports mortal-ity rates of 12% to 25% when a central venous line infection becomes systemic, with a cost of approximately $25,000 per episode.60-62 The CDC does not recommend routine central line changes, but when the clinical suspicion of infection is high, the site of venous access must be changed. Nearly 15% of hospital-ized patients will acquire central venous line sepsis. In many instances, once an infection is recognized as central line sepsis, removing the line is adequate. Staphylococcus aureus infections, however, present a unique problem because of the potential for metastatic seeding of bacterial emboli. The required treatment is 4 to 6 weeks of tailored antibiotic therapy. Using a check-list when inserting central venous catheters has been shown to significantly decrease rates of line infections.63 Following a checklist strategy and close monitoring of catheters has resulted in significant reductions in infection rates for numerous institu-tions, and many are now reporting zero annual infection rates.Arterial Lines. Arterial lines are placed to facilitate arterial blood gas sampling and hemodynamic monitoring. The use of ultrasound to assist in placement of these catheters has become commonplace and markedly reduces the number of attempts and time for insertion completion.Arterial access requires a sterile Seldinger technique, and a variety of arteries are used, including the radial, femoral, bra-chial, axillary, dorsalis pedis, or superficial temporal arteries. Although complications occur less than 1% of the time, they can be catastrophic. Complications include thrombosis, bleed-ing, hematoma, arterial spasm (nonthrombotic pulselessness), and infection. Thrombosis or embolization of an extremity arte-rial catheter can result in the loss of a digit, hand, or foot, and the risk is nearly the same for both femoral and radial cannula-tion. Thrombosis with distal tissue ischemia is treated with anti-coagulation, but occasionally surgical intervention is required. Pseudoaneurysms and arteriovenous fistulae can also occur.Endoscopy and Bronchoscopy. The principal risk of gastro-intestinal (GI) endoscopy is perforation. Perforations occur in 1 in 10,000 patients with endoscopy alone but have a higher incidence rate when biopsies are performed (up to 10%). This increased risk is due to complications of intubating a GI diver-ticulum (either esophageal or colonic) or from the presence of weakened or inflamed tissue in the intestinal wall (e.g., diver-ticulitis, glucocorticoid use, or inflammatory bowel disease).Patients will usually complain of diffuse abdominal pain shortly after the procedure and then progress with worsen-ing abdominal discomfort and peritonitis on examination. In obtunded or elderly patients, a change in clinical status may be delayed for 24 to 48 hours. Radiologic studies to look for free intraperitoneal air, retroperitoneal air, or a pneumothorax are diagnostic. Open or laparoscopic exploration locates the perfo-ration and allows repair and local decontamination of the sur-rounding tissues.The occasional patient who may be a candidate for nonop-erative management is one in whom perforation arises during an elective, bowel-prepped endoscopy and who does not have sig-nificant pain or clinical signs of infection. These patients must be closely observed in a monitored setting and must be on strict dietary restriction and broad-spectrum antibiotics.Complications of bronchoscopy include bronchial plug-ging, hypoxemia, pneumothorax, lobar collapse, and bleeding. Brunicardi_Ch12_p0397-p0432.indd   41620/02/19   3:57 PM 417QUALITY, PATIENT SAFETY, ASSESSMENTS OF CARE, AND COMPLICATIONSCHAPTER 12When diagnosed in a timely fashion, they are rarely life-threatening. Bleeding usually resolves spontaneously and rarely requires surgery but may require repeat endoscopy for thermocoagula-tion or fibrin glue application. The presence of a pneumothorax necessitates placement of a thoracostomy tube when significant deoxygenation occurs or the pulmonary mechanics are compro-mised. Lobar collapse or mucous plugging usually responds to aggressive pulmonary toilet but occasionally requires repeat bronchoscopy. If biopsies have been performed, the risk for these complications increases.Tracheostomy. Tracheostomy facilitates weaning from a ventilator, may decrease length of ICU or hospital stay, and improves pulmonary toilet. Tracheostomies are performed open, percutaneously, with or without bronchoscopy, and with or without Doppler guidance. The advantages of percutaneous tracheostomy include efficiency and cost containment over open tracheostomy. A recent literature review examining early (<3–7 days) vs late (>14 days) tracheostomy after endotracheal intubation demonstrates little difference in outcomes but does demonstrate greater patient comfort in those patients with tra-cheostomy than those with an endotracheal tube. Complications and outcomes between the two different methods remain largely equivalent.Recent studies do not support obtaining a routine chest X-ray after percutaneous or open tracheostomy.64,65 However, significant lobar collapse can occur from copious tracheal secre-tions or mechanical obstruction. The most dramatic complica-tion of tracheostomy is tracheoinnominate artery fistula (TIAF) (Fig. 12-8).66,67 This occurs rarely (∼0.3%) but carries a 50% to 80% mortality rate. TIAFs can occur as early as 2 days or as late as 2 months after tracheostomy. A sentinel bleed occurs in 50% of TIAF cases, followed by a large-volume bleed. Should a TIAF be suspected, the patient should be transported imme-diately to the OR for fiberoptic evaluation. If needed, remove the tracheostomy and place a finger through the tracheostomy site to apply direct pressure anteriorly for compression of the innominate artery while preparation for a more definitive approach is organized.Percutaneous Endogastrostomy. A misplaced percutane-ous endogastrostomy (PEG) tube may lead to intra-abdominal sepsis with peritonitis and/or an abdominal wall abscess with necrotizing fasciitis. As in other minor procedures, the initial placement technique must be fastidious to avoid complications. Figure 12-8. This illustration depicts improper positioning of the percutaneous needle. It is possible to access the innominate artery via the trachea, thus placing the patient at risk for early tracheoin-nominate artery fistula.XEndoscopic transillumination of the abdomen from within the stomach has been proposed to decrease the risk for error, but this is without supporting evidence. Inadvertent colotomies, intraperitoneal placement of the tube and subsequent leakage of tube feeds with peritonitis, and abdominal wall abscesses require surgery to correct the complications and to replace the PEG with an alternate feeding tube, usually a jejunostomy.A dislodged or prematurely removed PEG tube should be replaced as early as possible after dislodgment because the gas-trostomy site closes rapidly. A contrast X-ray (sinogram) should be performed to confirm the tube’s intragastric position before feeding. If there is uncertainty of the tube location, conversion to an open tube placement procedure is required.Tube Thoracostomy. Chest tube insertion is performed for pneumothorax, hemothorax, pleural effusions, or empyema. In most patients, a chest tube can be easily placed with a combina-tion of local analgesia and light conscious sedation. Common complications include inadequate analgesia or sedation, incom-plete penetration of the pleura with formation of a subcutaneous tube track, lacerations to the lung or diaphragm, intraperitoneal placement of the tube through the diaphragm, and bleeding. Additional problems include slippage of the tube out of posi-tion or mechanical problems related to the drainage system. In patients with bullous disease, there can be significant intrapleu-ral scarring, and it can be easy to mistakenly place the chest tube into bullae. All of these complications can be avoided with proper initial insertion techniques, plus a daily review of the drainage system and follow-up radiographs. Tube removal can create a residual pneumothorax if the patient does not maintain positive intrapleural pressure by Valsalva maneuver during tube removal and dressing application.Complications of Angiography. Intramural dissection of a cannulated artery can lead to complications such as ischemic stroke from a carotid artery dissection or occlusion, mesenteric ischemia from dissection of the superior mesenteric artery, or a more innocuous finding of “blue toe syndrome” from a dissected artery in a peripheral limb. Invasive or noninvasive imaging studies confirm the suspected problem. The severity of ischemia and extent of dissection determine if anticoagulation therapy or urgent surgical exploration is indicated.Bleeding from a vascular access site usually is obvious, but may not be visible when the blood loss is tracking into the retroperitoneal tissue planes after femoral artery cannulation. These patients can present with hemorrhagic shock; an abdomi-nopelvic CT scan delineates the extent of bleeding along the retroperitoneum. Initial management is direct compression at the access site and resuscitation as indicated. Urgent surgical exploration may be required to control the bleeding site and evacuate larger hematomas.Renal complications of angiography occur in 1% to 2% of patients. Contrast nephropathy is a temporary and prevent-able complication of radiologic studies such as CT, angiogra-phy, and/or venography. Intravenous (IV) hydration before and after the procedure is the most efficient method for preventing contrast nephropathy. Nonionic contrast also may be of benefit in higher-risk patients. Close communication between provid-ers is often required to resolve the priorities in care as well as to balance the risks versus benefits of renal protection when managing patients in need of angiographic procedures.Complications of Biopsies. Lymph node biopsies have direct and indirect complications that include bleeding, infection, Brunicardi_Ch12_p0397-p0432.indd   41720/02/19   3:57 PM 418BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ilymph leakage, and seromas. Measures to prevent direct com-plications include proper surgical hemostasis, proper skin prepa-ration, and a single preoperative dose of antibiotic to cover skin flora 30 to 60 minutes before incision. Bleeding at a biopsy site usually can be controlled with direct pressure. Infection at a biopsy site will appear 5 to 10 days postoperatively and may require opening of the wound to drain the infection. Seromas or lymphatic leaks resolve with aspiration of seromas and the application of pressure dressings but may require repeated treat-ments or even placement of a vacuum drain.Organ System ComplicationsNeurologic System. Neurologic complications that occur after surgery include motor or sensory deficits and mental sta-tus changes. Peripheral motor and sensory deficits are often due to neurapraxia secondary to improper positioning and/or pad-ding during operations. Treatment is largely clinical observa-tion, and the majority of deficits resolve spontaneously within 1 to 3 months.Direct injury to nerves during a surgical intervention is a well-known complication of several specific operations, includ-ing superficial parotidectomy (facial nerve), carotid endarterec-tomy (hypoglossal nerve), thyroidectomy (recurrent laryngeal nerve), prostatectomy (nervi erigentes), inguinal herniorrhaphy (ilioinguinal nerve), and mastectomy (long thoracic and thora-codorsal nerves). The nerve injury may be a stretch injury or an unintentionally severed nerve. In addition to loss of function, severed nerves can result in a painful neuroma that may require subsequent surgery.Mental status changes in the postoperative patient can have numerous causes (Table 12-12). Mental status changes must be continually assessed. A noncontrast CT scan should be used early to detect new or evolving intracranial causes.Atherosclerotic disease increases the risk for intraoperative and postoperative stroke (cerebrovascular accident). Postopera-tively, hypotension and hypoxemia are the most likely causes of a cerebrovascular accident. Neurologic consultation should be obtained immediately to confirm the diagnosis. Management is largely supportive and includes adequate intravascular volume replacement plus optimal oxygen delivery. Advents in inter-ventional radiology by radiologists and vascular and neurologic Table 12-12Common causes of mental status changesELECTROLYTE IMBALANCETOXINSTRAUMAMETABOLICMEDICATIONSSodiumEthanolClosed head injuryThyrotoxicosisAspirinMagnesiumMethanolPainAdrenal insufficiencyβ-BlockersCalciumVenoms and poisonsShockHypoxemiaNarcoticsInflammationEthylene glycolPsychiatricAcidosisAntiemeticsSepsisCarbon monoxideDementiaSevere anemiaMAOIsAIDS DepressionHyperammonemiaTCAsCerebral abscess ICU psychosisPoor glycemic controlAmphetaminesMeningitis SchizophreniaHypothermiaAntiarrhythmicsFever/hyperpyrexia  HyperthermiaCorticosteroids, anabolic steroidsAIDS = acquired immunodeficiency syndrome; ICU = intensive care unit; MAOI = monoamine oxidase inhibitor; TCA = tricyclic antidepressant.surgeons have proven successful alternatives in patients requir-ing diagnostic and therapeutic care in the immediate and acute postoperative period. Catheter-directed therapy with anticoagu-lants such as the kinases and tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) has potential benefit in postoperative thrombosis where reopera-tion carries significant risk. In addition, endoluminal stents with drug-eluting stents (DESs) or non-DESs have been used with some degree of success. DESs do require systemic antiplatelet therapy due to the alternative coagulation pathway. Duration of antiplatelet therapy of 1 year is routine.Eyes, Ears, and Nose. Corneal abrasions are unusual, but are due to inadequate protection of the eyes during anesthe-sia. Overlooked contact lenses in patients occasionally cause conjunctivitis.Persistent epistaxis can occur after nasogastric tube place-ment or removal, and nasal packing is the best treatment option if prolonged persistent direct pressure on the external nares fails. Anterior and posterior nasal gauze packing with balloon tam-ponade, angioembolization, and fibrin glue placement may be required in refractory cases. The use of antibiotics for posterior packing is controversial.External otitis and otitis media occasionally occur post-operatively. Patients complain of ear pain or decreased hearing, and treatment includes topical antibiotics and nasal deconges-tion for symptomatic improvement.Ototoxicity due to aminoglycoside administration occurs in up to 10% of patients and is often irreversible. Vancomycin-related ototoxicity occurs about 3% of the time when used alone, and as often as 6% when used with other ototoxic agents.68Vascular Problems of the Neck. Complications of carotid endarterectomy include central or regional neurologic defi-cits or bleeding with an expanding neck hematoma. An acute change in mental status or the presence of localized neurologic deficit requires an immediate return to the OR. An expanding hematoma may warrant emergent airway intubation and subse-quent transfer to the OR for control of hemorrhage. Intraopera-tive anticoagulation with heparin during carotid surgery makes bleeding a postoperative risk. Other complications include arte-riovenous fistulae, pseudoaneurysms, and infection, all of which are treated surgically.Brunicardi_Ch12_p0397-p0432.indd   41820/02/19   3:57 PM 419QUALITY, PATIENT SAFETY, ASSESSMENTS OF CARE, AND COMPLICATIONSCHAPTER 12Intraoperative hypotension during manipulation of the carotid bifurcation can occur and is related to increased tone from baroreceptors that reflexively cause bradycardia. Should hypotension occur when manipulating the carotid bifurcation, an injection of 1% lidocaine solution around this structure should attenuate this reflexive response.The most common delayed complication following carotid endarterectomy remains myocardial infarction. The possibility of a postoperative myocardial infarction should be considered as a cause of labile blood pressure and arrhythmias in high-risk patients.Thyroid and Parathyroid Glands. Surgery of the thyroid and parathyroid glands can result in hypocalcemia in the immedi-ate postoperative period. Manifestations include ECG changes (shortened P-R interval), muscle spasm (tetany, Chvostek’s sign, and Trousseau’s sign), paresthesias, and laryngospasm. Treatment includes calcium gluconate infusion and, if tetany ensues, chemical paralysis with intubation. Maintenance treat-ment is thyroid hormone replacement (after thyroidectomy) in addition to calcium carbonate and vitamin D.Recurrent laryngeal nerve (RLN) injury occurs in less than 5% of patients. Of those with injury, approximately 10% are permanent. Dissection near the inferior thyroid artery is a com-mon area for RLN injury. At the conclusion of the operation, if there is suspicion of an RLN injury, direct laryngoscopy is diag-nostic. The cord on the affected side will be in the paramedian position. With bilateral RLN injury, the chance of a successful extubation is poor. If paralysis of the cords is not permanent, function may return 1 to 2 months after injury. Permanent RLN injury can be treated by various techniques to stent the cords in a position of function.Superior laryngeal nerve injury is less debilitating, as the common symptom is loss of projection of the voice. The glottic aperture is asymmetrical on direct laryngoscopy, and manage-ment is limited to clinical observation.Respiratory System. Surgical complications that put the respiratory system in jeopardy are not confined to techni-cal errors. Malnutrition, inadequate pain control, inadequate mechanical ventilation, inadequate pulmonary toilet, and aspi-ration can cause serious pulmonary problems.Pneumothorax can occur from central line insertion during anesthesia or from a diaphragmatic injury during an abdomi-nal procedure. Hypotension, hypoxemia, and tracheal deviation away from the affected side may be present. A tension pneumo-thorax can cause complete cardiovascular collapse. Treatment is by needle thoracostomy, followed by tube thoracostomy. The chest tube is inserted at the fifth intercostal space in the anterior axillary line. The anterior chest wall is up to 1 cm thicker than the lateral chest wall, so needle decompression is more effec-tive in the lateral position. Attempted prehospital needle decom-pression in the traditional anterior position results in only 50% needle entry into the thoracic cavity.Hemothoraces should be evacuated completely. Delay in evacuation of a hemothorax leaves the patient at risk for empy-ema and entrapped lung. If evacuation is incomplete with tube thoracostomy, video-assisted thoracoscopy or open evacuation and pleurodesis may be required.Pulmonary atelectasis results in a loss of functional resid-ual capacity (FRC) of the lung and can predispose to pneumo-nia. Poor pain control in the postoperative period contributes to poor inspiratory effort and collapse of the lower lobes in particular. The prevention of atelectasis is facilitated by sit-ting the patient up as much as possible, early ambulation, and adequate pain control. An increase in FRC by 700 mL or more can be accomplished by sitting patients up to greater than 45°. For mechanically ventilated patients, simply placing the head of the bed at 30° to 45° elevation and delivering adequate tidal volumes (8–10 mL/kg) improves pulmonary outcomes.69Patients with inadequate pulmonary toilet are at increased risk for bronchial plugging and lobar collapse. Patients with copious and tenacious secretions develop these plugs most often, but foreign bodies in the bronchus can be the cause of lobar collapse as well. The diagnosis of bronchial plugging is based on chest X-ray and clinical suspicion with acute pulmo-nary decompensation with increased work of breathing and hypoxemia. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy can be useful to clear mucous plugs and secretions.Aspiration complications include pneumonitis and pneu-monia. The treatment of pneumonitis is similar to that for acute respiratory distress syndrome (see later in this section) and includes oxygenation with general supportive care. Antibiotics are not indicated. Hospitalized patients who develop aspiration pneumonitis have a mortality rate as high as 70% to 80%. Early, aggressive, and repeated bronchoscopy for suctioning of aspi-rated material from the tracheobronchial tree will help mini-mize the inflammatory reaction of pneumonitis and facilitate improved pulmonary toilet. Forced diuresis to overcome ana-sarca and over-resuscitation remains controversial and unsub-stantiated. Complications of forced diuresis include electrolyte disturbances, replacement of those electrolytes, metabolic alka-losis, hypotension, and acute kidney injury.Pneumonia is the second most common nosocomial infec-tion and is the most common infection in ventilated patients. Ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP) occurs in 15% to 40% of ventilated ICU patients, with a probability rate of 5% per day, up to 70% at 30 days. The 30-day mortality rate of nosocomial pneumonia can be as high as 40% and depends on the micro-organisms involved and the timeliness of initiating appropri-ate antimicrobials. Protocol-driven approaches for prevention and treatment of VAP are recognized as beneficial in managing these difficult infectious complications.Once the diagnosis of pneumonia is suspected (an abnormal chest X-ray, fever, productive cough with purulent sputum, and no other obvious fever sources), it is invariably necessary to ini-tially begin treatment with broad-spectrum antibiotics until proper identification, colony count (≥100,000 colony-forming units [CFU]), and sensitivity of the microorganisms are determined. The spectrum of antibiotic coverage should be narrowed as soon as the culture sensitivities are determined. Double-coverage anti-biotic strategy for the two pathogens, Pseudomonas and Acineto-bacter spp., may be appropriate if the local prevalence of these particularly virulent organisms is high. One of the most helpful tools in treating pneumonia and other infections is the tracking of a medical center’s antibiogram every 6 to 12 months.70Epidural analgesia decreases the risk of perioperative pneumonia. This method of pain control improves pulmonary toilet and the early return of bowel function; both have a sig-nificant impact on the potential for aspiration and for acquir-ing pneumonia. The routine use of epidural analgesia results in a lower incidence of pneumonia than patient-controlled analgesia.71Acute lung injury (ALI) was a diagnosis applied to patients with similar findings to those with acute respiratory distress Brunicardi_Ch12_p0397-p0432.indd   41920/02/19   3:57 PM 420BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Isyndrome (ARDS). The Berlin definition of ARDS developed by the American-European Consensus Conference of 2012 not only simplifies the definition of ARDS but also eliminates the term ALI from critical care vernacular. ARDS is now classified by partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood (Pao2)/fraction of inspired oxygen (Fio2) ratios as mild (300–201 mmHg), moder-ate (200–101 mmHg), and severe (<100 mmHg). Elements of modification of the definition include the following: <7 days of onset; removal of pulmonary artery occlusion pressure; and clinical judgment for characterizing hydrostatic pulmonary edema is acceptable, unless risk factors for ARDS have been eliminated, in which case objective analysis is necessary.72-75The definition of ARDS traditionally included five crite-ria (Table 12-13). The multicenter ARDS Research Network (ARDSnet) research trial demonstrated improved clinical out-comes for ARDS patients ventilated at tidal volumes of only  5 to 7 mL/kg.76 This strategy is no longer prescribed solely for patients with ARDS but is also recommended for patients with normal pulmonary physiology who are intubated for reasons other than acute respiratory failure. The beneficial effects of positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) for ARDS were con-firmed in this study as well. The maintenance of PEEP during ventilatory support is determined based on blood gas analysis, pulmonary mechanics, and requirements for supplemental oxy-gen. As gas exchange improves with resolving ARDS, the initial step in decreasing ventilatory support should be to decrease the levels of supplemental oxygen first, and then to slowly bring the PEEP levels back down to minimal levels.77 This is done to minimize the potential for recurrent alveolar collapse and a worsening gas exchange.Not all patients can be weaned easily from mechanical ventilation. When the respiratory muscle energy demands are not balanced or there is an ongoing active disease state external to the lungs, patients may require prolonged ventilatory sup-port. Protocol-driven ventilator weaning strategies are success-ful and have become part of the standard of care. The use of a weaning protocol for patients on mechanical ventilation greater than 48 hours reduces the incidence of VAP and the overall length of time on mechanical ventilation. Unfortunately, there is still no reliable way of predicting which patient will be suc-cessfully extubated after a weaning program, and the decision for extubation is based on a combination of clinical parameters and measured pulmonary mechanics.78 The Tobin Index (fre-quency [breaths per minute]/tidal volume [L]), also known as the rapid shallow breathing index, is perhaps the best negative predictive instrument.79 If the result equals less than 105, then Table 12-13Inclusion criteria for the acute respiratory distress syndromeAcute onsetPredisposing conditionPao2:Fio2 <200 (regardless of positive end-expiratory pressure)Bilateral infiltratesPulmonary artery occlusion pressure <18 mmHgNo clinical evidence of right heart failureFio2 = fraction of inspired oxygen; Pao2 = partial pressure of arterial oxygen.there is nearly a 70% chance the patient will pass extubation. If the score is greater than 105, the patient has an approximately 80% chance of failing extubation. Other parameters such as the negative inspiratory force, minute ventilation, and respiratory rate are used, but individually these have no better predictive value than the rapid shallow breathing index.80Malnutrition and poor nutritional support may adversely affect the respiratory system. The respiratory quotient (RQ), or respiratory exchange ratio, is the ratio of the rate of carbon dioxide (CO2) produced to the rate of oxygen uptake (RQ = Vco2/V.O2). Lipids, carbohydrates, and protein have differing effects on CO2 production. Patients consuming a diet of mostly carbohydrates have an RQ of 1 or greater. The RQ for a diet of mostly lipids is closer to 0.7, and that for a diet of mostly protein is closer to 0.8. Ideally, an RQ of 0.75 to 0.85 suggests adequate balance and composition of nutrient intake. An excess of car-bohydrate may negatively affect ventilator weaning because of the abnormal RQ due to higher CO2 production and altered pul-monary gas exchange.Although not without risk, tracheostomy decreases the pulmonary dead space and provides for improved pulmonary toilet. When performed before the tenth day of ventilatory sup-port, tracheostomy may decrease the incidence of VAP, the overall length of ventilator time, and the number of ICU patient days.The occurrence of PE is probably underdiagnosed. Its eti-ology is thought to stem from DVT. This concept, however, has recently been questioned by Spaniolas et al.81 The diagno-sis of PE is made when a high degree of clinical suspicion for PE leads to imaging techniques such as ventilation–perfusion nuclear scans or CT pulmonary angiogram. Clinical findings include elevated central venous pressure, hypoxemia, shortness of breath, hypocarbia secondary to tachypnea, and right heart strain on ECG. Ventilation–perfusion nuclear scans are often indeterminate in patients who have an abnormal chest X-ray and are less sensitive than a CT angiogram or pulmonary angio-gram for diagnosing PE. The pulmonary angiogram remains the gold standard for diagnosing PE, but spiral CT angiogram has become an alternative method because of its relative ease of use and reasonable rates of diagnostic accuracy. For cases without clinical contraindications to therapeutic anticoagula-tion, patients should be empirically started on heparin infusion until the imaging studies are completed if the suspicion of a PE is high.Sequential compression devices on the lower extremities and low-dose subcutaneous heparin or low molecular weight heparinoid administration are routinely used to prevent DVT and, by inference, the risk of PE. Neurosurgical and orthopedic patients have higher rates of PE, as do obese patients and those at prolonged bed rest.When anticoagulation is contraindicated, or when a known clot exists in the inferior vena cava (IVC), decreasing the risk for PE includes insertion of an IVC filter. The Greenfield filter has been most widely studied, and it has a failure rate of less than 4%. Newer devices include those with nitinol wire that expands with body temperature and retrievable filters. Retrievable filters, however, must be considered as permanent. In most studies, the actual retrievable rate only reached about 20%. Some studies recognize the benefit of automated reminders and diligence of outlying patient follow-up, where higher retrieval rates have been achieved.82 Patients with spinal cord injury and multiple long-bone or pelvic fractures frequently receive IVC filters, and Brunicardi_Ch12_p0397-p0432.indd   42020/02/19   3:57 PM 421QUALITY, PATIENT SAFETY, ASSESSMENTS OF CARE, AND COMPLICATIONSCHAPTER 12there appears to be a low, but not insignificant, long-term com-plication rate with their use. However, IVC filters do not prevent PEs that originate from DVTs of the upper extremities.Cardiac System. Arrhythmias are often seen preoperatively in elderly patients but may occur postoperatively in any age group. Atrial fibrillation is the most common arrhythmia83 and occurs between postoperative days 3 to 5 in high-risk patients. This is typically when patients begin to mobilize their intersti-tial fluid into the vascular fluid space. Contemporary evidence suggests that rate control is more important than rhythm con-trol for atrial fibrillation.84,85 The first-line treatment includes β-blockade and/or calcium channel blockade. β-Blockade must be used judiciously because hypotension, as well as withdrawal from β-blockade with rebound hypertension, is possible. Cal-cium channel blockers are an option if β-blockers are not toler-ated by the patient, but caution must be exercised in those with a history of congestive heart failure. Although digoxin is still a standby medication, it has limitations due to the need for opti-mal dosing levels. Cardioversion may be required if patients become hemodynamically unstable and the rhythm cannot be controlled.Ventricular arrhythmias and other tachyarrhythmias may occur in surgical patients as well. Similar to atrial rhythm prob-lems, these are best controlled with β-blockade, but the use of other antiarrhythmics or cardioversion may be required if patients become hemodynamically unstable.Cardiac ischemia is a cause of postoperative mortality. Acute myocardial infarction (AMI) can present insidiously, or it can be more dramatic with the classic presentation of short-ness of breath, severe angina, and sudden cardiogenic shock. The workup to rule out an AMI includes an ECG and cardiac enzyme measurements. The patient should be transferred to a monitored (telemetry) floor. Morphine, supplemental oxygen, nitroglycerine, and aspirin (MONA) are the initial therapeutic maneuvers for those being investigated for AMI.Gastrointestinal System. Surgery of the esophagus is poten-tially complicated because of its anatomic location and blood supply. Nutritional support strategies should be considered for esophageal resection patients to maximize the potential for sur-vival. The two primary types of esophageal resection performed are the transhiatal resection and the transthoracic (Ivor-Lewis) resection.86 The transhiatal resection has the advantage that a formal thoracotomy incision is avoided. However, dissection of the esophagus is blind, and anastomotic leaks occur more than with other resections. However, when a leak does occur, simple opening of the cervical incision and draining the leak is all that is usually required.The transthoracic Ivor-Lewis resection includes an esoph-ageal anastomosis performed in the chest near the level of the azygos vein. These have lower leak rates, but the leaks that do occur result in mediastinitis and can be difficult to control. The reported mortality is about 50% with an anastomotic leak, and the overall mortality of the procedure is about 5%, which is similar to transhiatal resection.Postoperative ileus is related to dysfunction of the neural reflex axis of the intestine. Excessive narcotic use may delay return of bowel function. Epidural anesthesia results in better pain control, and there is an earlier return of bowel function and a shorter length of hospital stay. The limited use of naso-gastric tubes and the initiation of early postoperative feeding are associated with an earlier return of bowel function.87 The use of chewing gum and other oral stimulants to minimize ileus remains controversial.Pharmacologic agents commonly used to stimulate bowel function include metoclopramide and erythromycin. Metoclo-pramide’s action is limited to the stomach and duodenum, and it may help primarily with gastroparesis. Erythromycin is a motilin agonist that works throughout the stomach and bowel. Several studies demonstrate significant benefit from the administration of erythromycin in those suffering from an ileus.88 Alvimopan, a newer agent and a µ-opioid receptor antagonist, has shown some promise in many studies for earlier return of gut function and subsequent reduction in length of stay.89,90 Neostigmine has been used in refractory pan-ileus patients (Ogilvie’s syndrome) with some degree of success. It is recommended for patients receiving this type of therapy to be in a monitored unit.91Small bowel obstruction occurs in less than 1% of early postoperative patients. When it does occur, adhesions are usu-ally the cause. Internal and external hernias, technical errors, and infections or abscesses are also causative. Hyaluronidase is a mucolytic enzyme that degrades connective tissue, and the use of a methylcellulose form of hyaluronidase, Seprafilm®, has been shown to result in a 50% decrease in adhesion formation in some patients.92,93 This may translate into a lower occurrence of postoperative bowel obstruction, but has yet to be proven.Fistulae are the abnormal communication of one structure to an adjacent structure or compartment and are associated with extensive morbidity and mortality. Common causes for fistula formation are summarized in the mnemonic FRIENDS (Foreign body, Radiation, Ischemia/Inflammation/Infection, Epitheli-alization of a tract, Neoplasia, Distal obstruction, and Steroid use). Postoperatively, they are most often caused by infection or obstruction leading to an anastomotic leak. The cause of the fis-tula must be recognized early, and treatment may include non-operative management with observation and nutritional support, or a delayed operative management strategy that also includes nutritional support and wound care.Gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding can occur perioperatively (Table 12-14). Technical errors such as a poorly tied suture, a nonhemostatic staple line, or a missed injury can all lead to Table 12-14Common causes of upper and lower gastrointestinal (GI) hemorrhageUPPER GI BLEEDLOWER GI BLEEDErosive esophagitisAngiodysplasiaGastric varicesRadiation proctitisEsophageal varicesHemangiomaDieulafoy’s lesionDiverticulosisAortoduodenal fistulaNeoplastic diseasesMallory-Weiss tearTraumaPeptic ulcer diseaseVasculitisTraumaHemorrhoidsNeoplastic diseaseAortoenteric fistulaIntussusceptionIschemic colitisInflammatory bowel diseasePostprocedure bleedingBrunicardi_Ch12_p0397-p0432.indd   42120/02/19   3:57 PM 422BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ipostoperative intestinal bleeding.94,95 The source of bleeding is in the upper GI tract about 85% of the time and is usually detected and treated endoscopically. Surgical control of intesti-nal bleeding is required in up to 40% of patients.96When patients in the ICU have a major bleed from stress gastritis, the mortality risk is as high as 50%. It is important to keep the gastric pH greater than 4 to decrease the overall risk for stress gastritis in patients mechanically ventilated for 48 hours or greater and patients who are coagulopathic.97 Proton pump inhibitors, H2-receptor antagonists, and intragastric antacid installation are all effective measures. However, patients who are not mechanically ventilated or who do not have a history of gastritis or peptic ulcer disease should not be placed on gastritis prophylaxis postoperatively because it carries a higher risk of causing pneumonia.Hepatobiliary-Pancreatic System. Complications involv-ing the hepatobiliary system are usually due to technical errors. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy has become the standard of care for cholecystectomy, but common bile duct injury remains a nemesis of this approach. Intraoperative cholangiography has not been shown to decrease the incidence of common bile duct injuries because the injury to the bile duct usually occurs before the cholangiogram.98,99 Early recognition and immediate repair of an injury are important because delayed bile duct leaks often require a more complex repair.Ischemic injury due to devascularization of the common bile duct has a delayed presentation days to weeks after an operation. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) demonstrates a stenotic, smooth common bile duct, and liver function studies are elevated. The recommended treatment is a Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy.A bile leak due to an unrecognized injury to the ducts may present after cholecystectomy as a biloma. These patients may present with abdominal pain and hyperbilirubinemia. The diag-nosis of a biliary leak can be confirmed by CT scan, ERCP, or radionuclide scan. Once a leak is confirmed, a retrograde biliary stent and external drainage are the treatment of choice.Hyperbilirubinemia in the surgical patient can be a com-plex problem. Cholestasis makes up the majority of causes for hyperbilirubinemia, but other mechanisms of hyperbiliru-binemia include reabsorption of blood (e.g., hematoma from trauma), decreased bile excretion (e.g., sepsis), increased unconjugated bilirubin due to hemolysis, hyperthyroidism, and impaired excretion due to congenital abnormalities or acquired disease. Errors in surgery that cause hyperbilirubinemia largely involve missed or iatrogenic injuries.The presence of cirrhosis predisposes to postoperative complications. Abdominal or hepatobiliary surgery is problem-atic in the cirrhotic patient. Ascites leak in the postoperative period can be an issue when any abdominal operation has been performed. Maintaining proper intravascular oncotic pressure in the immediate postoperative period can be difficult, and resus-citation should be maintained with crystalloid solutions. Pre-vention of renal failure and the management of the hepatorenal syndrome can be difficult, as the demands of fluid resuscitation and altered glomerular filtration become competitive. Spirono-lactone with other diuretic agents may be helpful in the post-operative care. These patients often have a labile course, and bleeding complications due to coagulopathy are common. The operative mortality in cirrhotic patients is 10% for Child class A, 30% for Child class B, and 82% for Child class C patients.100Pyogenic liver abscess occurs in less than 0.5% of adult admissions, due to retained necrotic liver tissue, occult intesti-nal perforations, benign or malignant hepatobiliary obstruction, sepsis, and hepatic arterial occlusion. The treatment is long-term antibiotics with percutaneous drainage of large abscesses.Pancreatitis can occur following injection of contrast dur-ing cholangiography and after endoscopic cholangiopancreatog-raphy (ERCP). These episodes range from a mild elevation in amylase and lipase with abdominal pain, to a fulminant course of pancreatitis with necrosis requiring surgical debridement. The incidence of post-ERCP pancreatitis has been shown to be reduced by the administration of rectal indomethacin.101 Stud-ies are underway to determine whether the prophylactic use of pancreatic duct stenting in patients at high risk for post-ERCP pancreatitis can be avoided with the use of rectal indomethacin.Traumatic injuries to the pancreas can occur during surgi-cal procedures on the kidneys, GI tract, and spleen most com-monly. Treatment involves serial CT scans and percutaneous drainage to manage infected fluid and abscess collections; ster-ile collections should not be drained because drain placement can introduce infection. A pancreatic fistula may respond to antisecretory therapy with a somatostatin analogue. Manage-ment of these fistulae initially includes ERCP with or without pancreatic stenting, percutaneous drainage of any fistula fluid collections, total parenteral nutrition (TPN) with bowel rest, and repeated CT scans. The majority of pancreatic fistulae will eventually heal spontaneously.Renal System. Renal failure can be classified as prerenal failure, intrinsic renal failure, and postrenal failure. Postrenal failure, or obstructive renal failure, should always be consid-ered when low urine output (oliguria) or anuria occurs. The most common cause is a misplaced or clogged urinary catheter. Other, less common causes to consider are unintentional ligation or transection of ureters during a difficult surgical dissection (e.g., colon resection for diverticular disease) or a large retro-peritoneal hematoma (e.g., ruptured aortic aneurysm).Oliguria is initially evaluated by flushing the urinary cath-eter using sterile technique. Urine electrolytes should also be measured (Table 12-15). A hemoglobin and hematocrit level should be checked immediately. Patients in compensated shock from acute blood loss may manifest anemia and end-organ mal-perfusion as oliguria.Acute tubular necrosis (ATN) carries a mortality risk of 25% to 50% due to the many complications that can cause, or result from, this insult. When ATN is due to poor inflow (prer-enal failure), the remedy begins with IV administration of crys-talloid or colloid fluids as needed. If cardiac insufficiency is the problem, the optimization of vascular volume is achieved first, followed by inotropic agents, as needed. Intrinsic renal failure Table 12-15Urinary electrolytes associated with acute renal failure and their possible etiologies FENaOSMOLARITYURNaETIOLOGYPrerenal<1>500<20CHF, cirrhosisIntrinsic failure>1<350>40Sepsis, shockCHF = congestive heart failure; FENa = fractional excretion of sodium; URNa = urinary excretion of sodium.Brunicardi_Ch12_p0397-p0432.indd   42220/02/19   3:57 PM 423QUALITY, PATIENT SAFETY, ASSESSMENTS OF CARE, AND COMPLICATIONSCHAPTER 12and subsequent ATN are often the result of direct renal toxins. Aminoglycosides, vancomycin, and furosemide, among other commonly used agents, contribute directly to nephrotoxicity. Contrast-induced nephropathy usually leads to a subtle or tran-sient rise in creatinine. In patients who are volume depleted or have poor cardiac function, contrast nephropathy may perma-nently impair renal function.102-105The treatment of renal failure due to myoglobinuria has shifted away from the use of sodium bicarbonate for alkalinizing the urine, to merely maintaining brisk urine output of 100 mL per hour with crystalloid fluid infusion. Mannitol and furosemide are not recommended. Patients who do not respond to resusci-tation are at risk for needing renal replacement therapy. Fortu-nately, most of these patients eventually recover from their renal dysfunction.Musculoskeletal System. A compartment syndrome can develop in any compartment of the body. Compartment syn-drome of the extremities generally occurs after a closed fracture. The injury alone may predispose the patient to compartment syndrome, but aggressive fluid resuscitation can exacerbate the problem. Pain with passive motion is the hallmark of com-partment syndrome, and the anterior compartment of the leg is usually the first compartment to be involved. Confirmation of the diagnosis is obtained by direct pressure measurement of the individual compartments. If the pressures are greater than 20 to 25 mmHg in any of the compartments, then a four-compartment fasciotomy is considered. Compartment syndrome can be due to ischemia-reperfusion injury, after an ischemic time of 4 to 6 hours. Renal failure (due to myoglobinuria), tissue loss, and a permanent loss of function are possible results of untreated compartment syndrome.Decubitus ulcers are preventable complications of pro-longed bed rest due to traumatic paralysis, dementia, chemi-cal paralysis, or coma. Unfortunately, they are still occurring despite extensive research and clinical initiatives that demon-strate successful prevention strategies. Ischemic changes in the microcirculation of the skin can be significant after 2 hours of sustained pressure. Routine skin care and turning of the patient help ensure a reduction in skin ulceration. This can be labor intensive, and special mattresses and beds are available to help. The treatment of a decubitus ulcer in the noncoagulopathic patient is surgical debridement. Once the wound bed has a via-ble granulation base without an excess of fibrinous debris, a vacuum-assisted closure dressing can be applied. Wet to moist dressings with frequent dressing changes is the alternative and is labor intensive. Expensive topical enzyme preparations are also available. If the wounds fail to respond to these measures, soft tissue coverage by flap is considered.Contractures are the result of muscle disuse. Whether from trauma, amputation, or vascular insufficiency, contractures can be prevented by physical therapy and splinting. If not attended to early, contractures will prolong rehabilitation and may lead to further wounds and wound healing issues. Depending on the functional status of the patient, contracture releases may be required for long-term care.Hematologic System. The traditional transfusion guideline of maintaining the hematocrit level in all patients at greater than 30% is no longer valid. Only patients with symptomatic anemia, who have significant cardiac disease, or who are critically ill and require increased oxygen-carrying capacity to adequately perfuse end organs require higher levels of hemoglobin. Other than these select patients, the decision to transfuse should gener-ally not occur until the hemoglobin level falls to 7 mg/dL or the hematocrit reaches 21%.Transfusion reactions are common complications of blood transfusion. These can be attenuated with a leukocyte filter, but not completely prevented. The manifestations of a transfusion reaction include simple fever, pruritus, chills, muscle rigidity, and renal failure due to myoglobinuria secondary to hemolysis. Discontinuing the transfusion and returning the blood products to the blood bank is an important first step, but administration of antihistamine and possibly steroids may be required to control the reaction symptoms. Severe transfusion reactions are rare but can be fatal.Infectious complications in blood transfusion range from cytomegalovirus transmission, which is benign in the nontrans-plant patient, to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infec-tion, to passage of the hepatitis viruses (Table 12-16).Patients on warfarin (Coumadin) who require surgery can have anticoagulation reversal by administration of fresh frozen plasma. Each unit of fresh frozen plasma contains 200 to 250 mL of plasma and includes one unit of coagulation factor per milliliter of plasma.Thrombocytopenia may require platelet transfusion for a platelet count less than 20,000/mL when invasive procedures are performed, or when platelet counts are low and ongoing bleed-ing from raw surface areas persists. One unit of platelets will increase the platelet count by 5000 to 7500 per mL in adults. It is important to delineate the cause of the low platelet count. Usually there is a self-limiting or reversible condition such as sepsis. Rarely, it is due to heparin-induced thrombocytopenia I and II. Complications of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia II can be serious because of the diffuse thrombogenic nature of the disorder. Simple precautions to limit this hypercoagulable state include saline solution flushes instead of heparin solutions and limiting the use of heparin-coated catheters. The treatment is anticoagulation with synthetic agents such as argatroban.For patients with uncontrollable bleeding due to dissemi-nated intravascular coagulopathy (DIC), a potentially useful drug is factor VIIa, but its use should be judicious.106-109 Origi-nally used in hepatic trauma and obstetric emergencies, this agent was lifesaving in some circumstances. The CONTROL Trial,109 however, has largely decreased overuse of this agent because investigators demonstrated no benefit over simple fac-tor replacement in severely coagulopathic patients. Factor VIIa use may also be limited due to its potential thrombotic com-plications. For some situations, the combination of ongoing, Table 12-16Rate of viral transmission in blood product transfusionsaHIV1:1.9 millionHBVb1:137,000HCV1:1 millionaPost-nucleic acid amplification technology (1999). Earlier rates were erroneously reported higher due to lack of contemporary technology.bHBV is reported with prenucleic acid amplification technology. Statistical information is unavailable with postnucleic acid amplification technology at this writing.Note that bacterial transmission is 50 to 250 times higher than viral transmission per transfusion.HBV = hepatitis B virus; HCV = hepatitis C virus.Brunicardi_Ch12_p0397-p0432.indd   42320/02/19   3:57 PM 424BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Inonsurgical bleeding and renal failure can occasionally be suc-cessfully treated with desmopressin.In addition to classic hemophilia, other inherited coagula-tion factor deficiencies can be difficult to manage in surgery. When required, transfusion of appropriate replacement products is coordinated with the regional blood bank center before sur-gery. Other blood dyscrasias seen by surgeons include hyper-coagulopathic patients. Those who carry congenital anomalies such as the most common factor V Leiden deficiency, as well as protein C and S deficiencies, are likely to form thromboses if inadequately anticoagulated, and these patients should be man-aged in consultation with a hematologist.Abdominal Compartment Syndrome. Multisystem trauma, thermal burns, retroperitoneal injuries, and surgery related to the retroperitoneum are the major initial causative factors that may lead to abdominal compartment syndrome (ACS). Ruptured AAA, major pancreatic injury and resection, or multiple intes-tinal injuries are also examples of clinical situations in which a large volume of IV fluid resuscitation puts these patients at risk for intra-abdominal hypertension. Manifestations of ACS typically include progressive abdominal distention followed by increased peak airway ventilator pressures, oliguria followed by anuria, and an insidious development of intracranial hyperten-sion.110 These findings are related to elevation of the diaphragm and inadequate venous return from the vena cava or renal veins secondary to the transmitted pressure on the venous system.Measurement of abdominal pressures is easily accom-plished by transducing bladder pressures from the urinary catheter after instilling 100 mL of sterile saline into the urinary bladder.111 A pressure greater than 20 mmHg constitutes intra-abdominal hypertension, but the diagnosis of ACS requires intra-abdominal pressure greater than 25 to 30 mmHg, with at least one of the following: compromised respiratory mechan-ics and ventilation, oliguria or anuria, or increasing intracranial pressures.112-114The treatment of ACS is to open any recent abdominal incision to release the abdominal fascia or to open the fascia directly if no abdominal incision is present. Immediate improve-ment in mechanical ventilation pressures, intracranial pressures, and urine output is usually noted. When expectant management for ACS is considered in the OR, the abdominal fascia should be left open and covered under sterile conditions (e.g., a vac-uum-assisted open abdominal wound closure system) with plans made for a second-look operation and delayed fascial closure. Patients with intra-abdominal hypertension should be monitored closely with repeated examinations and measurements of blad-der pressure, so that any further deterioration is detected and operative management can be initiated. Left untreated, ACS may lead to multiple system end-organ dysfunction or failure and has a high mortality.Abdominal wall closure should be attempted every 48 to 72 hours until the fascia can be reapproximated. If the abdo-men cannot be closed within 5 to 7 days following release of the abdominal fascia, a large incisional hernia is the net result. A variety of surgical options have evolved for prevention and closure of the resultant hernias, but no standard approach has yet evolved.Wounds, Drains, and InfectionWound (Surgical Site) Infection. No prospective, random-ized, double-blind, controlled studies exist that demonstrate antibiotics used beyond 24 hours in the perioperative period prevent infections. Prophylactic use of antibiotics should sim-ply not be continued beyond this time. Irrigation of the operative field and the surgical wound with saline solution has shown benefit in controlling wound inoculum.115 Irrigation with an antibiotic-based solution has not demonstrated significant ben-efit in controlling postoperative infection.Antibacterial-impregnated polyvinyl placed over the oper-ative wound area for the duration of the surgical procedure has not been shown to decrease the rate of wound infection.116-120 Although skin preparation with 70% isopropyl alcohol has the best bactericidal effect, it is flammable and could be hazard-ous when electrocautery is used. The contemporary formulas of chlorhexidine gluconate with isopropyl alcohol remain more advantageous.121-123There is a difference between wound colonization and infection. Overtreating colonization is just as injurious as under-treating infection. The strict definition of wound (soft tissue) infection is more than 105 CFU per gram of tissue. This warrants expeditious and proper antibiotic/antifungal treatment.124 Often, however, clinical signs raise enough suspicion that the patient is treated before a confirmatory culture is undertaken. The clinical signs of wound infection include rubor, tumor, calor, and dolor (redness, swelling, heat, and pain). Once the diagnosis of wound infection has been established, the most definitive treatment remains open drainage of the wound. The use of antibiotics for wound infection treatment should be limited.125-128One type of wound dressing/drainage system that has gained popularity is the vacuum-assisted closure dressing. The principle of the system is to decrease local wound edema and to promote healing through the application of a sterile dressing that is then covered and placed under controlled suction for a period of 2 to 4 days at a time. Although costly, the benefits are frequently dramatic and may offset the costs of nursing care, frequent dressing changes, and operative wound debridement.Drain Management. The four indications for applying a surgi-cal drain are:•	To collapse surgical dead space in areas of redundant tissue (e.g., neck and axilla)•	To provide focused drainage of an abscess or grossly infected surgical site•	To provide early warning notice of a surgical leak (either bowel contents, secretions, urine, air, or blood)—the so-called sentinel drain•	To control an established fistula leakOpen drains are often used for large contaminated wounds such as perirectal or perianal fistulas and subcutaneous abscess cavities. They prevent premature closure of an abscess cavity in a contaminated wound. More commonly, surgical sites are drained by closed suction drainage systems, but data do not sup-port closed suction drainage to “protect an anastomosis” or to “control a leak” when placed at the time of surgery. Closed suc-tion devices can exert a negative pressure of 70 to 170 mmHg at the level of the drain; therefore, the presence of this excess suction may call into question whether an anastomosis breaks down on its own or whether the drain creates a suction injury that promotes leakage (Fig. 12-9).129On the other hand, CTor ultrasound-guided placement of percutaneous drains is now the standard of care for abscesses, loculated infections, and other isolated fluid collections such Brunicardi_Ch12_p0397-p0432.indd   42420/02/19   3:57 PM 425QUALITY, PATIENT SAFETY, ASSESSMENTS OF CARE, AND COMPLICATIONSCHAPTER 12ABFigure 12-9 This illustration demonstrates typical intraoperative placement of closed suction devices in pancreatic or small bowel surgery, where there may be an anastomosis. At negative pressures of 70 to 170 mmHg, these devices may actually encourage anas-tomotic leaks and not prevent them or become clogged by them.as pancreatic leaks. The risk of surgery is far greater than the placement of an image-guided drain.The use of antibiotics when drains are in place is often unnecessary as the drain provides direct source control. Twenty-four to 48 hours of antibiotic use after drain placement is pro-phylactic, and after this period, only specific treatment of positive cultures should be performed to avoid increased drug resistance and superinfection.Urinary Catheters. Several complications of urinary cath-eters can occur that lead to an increased length of hospital stay and morbidity. In general, use of urinary catheters should be minimized and every opportunity to expeditiously remove them should be encouraged. If needed, it is recommended that the catheter be inserted its full length up to the hub and that urine flow is established before the balloon is inflated because mis-placement of the catheter in the urethra with premature inflation of the balloon can lead to tears and disruption of the urethra.Enlarged prostatic tissue can make catheter insertion dif-ficult, and a catheter coudé may be required. If this attempt is also unsuccessful, then a urologic consultation for endoscopic placement of the catheter may be required to prevent harm to the urethra. For patients with urethral strictures, filiform-tipped catheters and followers may be used, but these can potentially cause bladder injury. If endoscopic attempts fail, the patient may require a percutaneously placed suprapubic catheter to obtain decompression of the bladder. Follow-up investigations of these patients are recommended so definitive care of the ure-thral abnormalities can be pursued.The most frequent nosocomial infection is urinary tract infection (UTI). These infections are classified into compli-cated and uncomplicated forms. The uncomplicated type is a UTI that can be treated with outpatient antibiotic therapy. The complicated UTI usually involves a hospitalized patient with an indwelling catheter whose UTI is diagnosed as part of a fever workup. The interpretation of urine culture results of less than 100,000 CFU/mL is controversial. Before treating such a patient, one should change the catheter and then repeat the cul-ture to see if the catheter was simply colonized with organisms. Cultures with more than 100,000 CFU/mL should be treated with the appropriate antibiotics and the catheter changed or removed as soon as possible. Undertreatment or misdiagnosis of a UTI can lead to urosepsis and septic shock.Recommendations are mixed on the proper way to treat Candida albicans fungal bladder infections. Continuous blad-der washings with fungicidal solution for 72 hours have been recommended, but this is not always effective. Replacement of the urinary catheter and a course of fluconazole are appropriate treatments, but some infectious disease specialists claim that C. albicans in the urine may serve as an indication of fungal infection elsewhere in the body. If this is the case, then screen-ing cultures for other sources of fungal infection should be per-formed whenever a fungal UTI is found.Empyema. One of the most debilitating infections is an empyema, or infection of the pleural space. Frequently, an overwhelming pneumonia is the source of an empyema, but a retained hemothorax, systemic sepsis, esophageal perforation from any cause, and infections with a predilection for the lung (e.g., tuberculosis) are potential etiologies as well. The diag-nosis is confirmed by chest X-ray or CT scan, followed by aspiration of pleural fluid for bacteriologic analysis. Gram’s stain, lactate dehydrogenase, protein, pH, and cell count are obtained, and broad-spectrum antibiotics are initiated while the laboratory studies are performed. Once the specific organisms are confirmed, anti-infective agents are tailored appropriately. Placement of a thoracostomy tube is needed to evacuate and drain the infected pleural fluid, but depending on the specific nidus of infection, video-assisted thoracoscopy may also be Brunicardi_Ch12_p0397-p0432.indd   42520/02/19   3:57 PM 426BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ihelpful for irrigation and drainage of the infection. Refractory empyemas require specialized surgical approaches.Abdominal Abscesses. Postsurgical intra-abdominal abscesses can present with vague complaints of intermittent abdominal pain, fever, leukocytosis, and a change in bowel habits. Depending on the type and timing of the original pro-cedure, the clinical assessment of these complaints is some-times difficult, and a CT scan is usually required. When a fluid collection within the peritoneal cavity is found on CT scan, antibiotics and percutaneous drainage of the collection is the treatment of choice. Initial antibiotic treatment is usually with broad-spectrum antibiotics such as piperacillin-tazobactam or imipenem. Should the patient exhibit signs of peritonitis and/or have free air on X-ray or CT scan, then re-exploration should be considered.For patients who present primarily (i.e., not postopera-tively) with the clinical and radiologic findings of an abscess but are clinically stable, the etiology of the abscess must be determined. A plan for drainage of the abscess and decisions about further diagnostic studies with consideration of the tim-ing of any definitive surgery all need to be balanced. This can be a complex set of decisions, depending on the etiology (e.g., appendicitis or diverticulitis), but if the patient exhibits signs of peritonitis, urgent surgical exploration should be performed.Necrotizing Fasciitis. Postoperative infections that progress to the fulminant soft tissue infection known as necrotizing fas-ciitis are uncommon. Group A streptococcal (M types 1, 3, 12, and 28) soft tissue infections, as well as infections with Clos-tridium perfringens and C. septicum, carry a mortality of 30% to 70%. Septic shock can be present, and patients can become hypotensive less than 6 hours following inoculation. Manifesta-tions of a group A Streptococcus pyogenes infection in its most severe form include hypotension, renal insufficiency, coagu-lopathy, hepatic insufficiency, ARDS, tissue necrosis, and ery-thematous rash.These findings constitute a surgical emergency, and the mainstay of treatment remains wide debridement of the necrotic tissue to the level of bleeding, viable tissue. A gray serous fluid at the level of the necrotic tissue is usually noted, and as the infection spreads, thrombosed blood vessels are noted along the tissue planes involved with the infection. Typically, the patient requires serial trips to the OR for wide debridement until the infection is under control. Antibiotics are an important adjunct to surgical debridement, and broad-spectrum coverage should be used because these infections may be polymicrobial (i.e., so-called mixed-synergistic infections). Streptococcus pyogenes is eradicated with penicillin, and it should still be used as the initial drug of choice.Systemic Inflammatory Response Syndrome, Sepsis, and Multiple-Organ Dysfunction Syndrome. The systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) and the multiple-organ dysfunction syndrome (MODS) carry significant mortal-ity risks (Table 12-17). Specific criteria have been established for the diagnosis of SIRS (Table 12-18), but two criteria are not required for the diagnosis of SIRS: lowered blood pressure and blood cultures positive for infection. SIRS is the result of proin-flammatory cytokines related to tissue malperfusion or injury. The dominant cytokines implicated in this process include interleukin (IL)-1, IL-6, and tissue necrosis factor (TNF). Other mediators include nitric oxide, inducible macrophage-type nitric oxide synthase, and prostaglandin I2.Table 12-17Mortality associated with patients exhibiting two or more criteria for systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS)PROGNOSISMORTALITY (%)2 SIRS criteria53 SIRS criteria104 SIRS criteria15–20Table 12-18Inclusion criteria for the systemic inflammatory response syndromeTemperature >38°C or <36°C (>100.4°F or <96.8°F)Heart rate >90 beats/minRespiratory rate >20 breaths/min or Paco2 <32 mmHgWhite blood cell count <4000 or >12,000 cells/mm3 or >10% immature formsPaco2 = partial pressure of arterial carbon dioxide.Sepsis is categorized as sepsis, severe sepsis, and septic shock. Sepsis is SIRS plus infection. Severe sepsis is sepsis plus signs of cellular hypoperfusion or end-organ dysfunction. Septic shock is sepsis plus hypotension after adequate fluid resuscitation.MODS is the culmination of septic shock and multiple end-organ failure.130 Usually there is an inciting event (e.g., perforated sigmoid diverticulitis), and as the patient undergoes resuscitation, he or she develops cardiac hypokinesis and oli-guric or anuric renal failure, followed by the development of ARDS and eventually septic shock with death.The international Surviving Sepsis Campaign (www.sccm.org/Documents/SSC-Guidelines.pdf) continues to dem-onstrate the importance of early recognition and initiation of specific treatment guidelines for optimal management of sep-sis. Management of SIRS/MODS includes aggressive global resuscitation and support of end-organ perfusion, correction of the inciting etiology, control of infectious complications, and management of iatrogenic complications.131-133 Drotrecogin-α, or recombinant activated protein C, appears to specifically counteract the cytokine cascade of SIRS/MODS, but its use is still limited.134,135 Other adjuncts for supportive therapy include tight glucose control, low tidal volumes in ARDS, vasopressin in septic shock, and steroid replacement therapy.Nutritional and Metabolic Support ComplicationsNutrition-Related Complications. A basic principle is to use enteral feeding whenever possible, but complications can inter-vene such as aspiration, ileus, and to a lesser extent, sinusitis. There is no difference in aspiration rates when a small-caliber feeding tube is placed postpyloric or if it remains in the stom-ach. Patients who are fed via nasogastric tubes are at risk for aspiration pneumonia because these large-bore tubes stent open the gastroesophageal junction, creating the possibility of gas-tric reflux. The use of enteric and gastric feeding tubes obviates Brunicardi_Ch12_p0397-p0432.indd   42620/02/19   3:57 PM 427QUALITY, PATIENT SAFETY, ASSESSMENTS OF CARE, AND COMPLICATIONSCHAPTER 12complications of TPN, such as pneumothorax, line sepsis, upper extremity DVT, and the related expense. There is growing evi-dence to support the initiation of enteral feeding in the early postoperative period, before the return of bowel function, where it is usually well tolerated.In patients who have had any type of nasal intubation who are having high, unexplained fevers, sinusitis must be enter-tained as a diagnosis. CT scan of the sinuses is warranted, fol-lowed by aspiration of sinus contents so the organism(s) are appropriately treated.Patients who have not been enterally fed for prolonged periods secondary to multiple operations, those who have had enteral feeds interrupted for any other reason, or those with poor enteral access are at risk for the refeeding syndrome, which is characterized by severe hypophosphatemia and respiratory fail-ure. Slow progression of the enteral feeding administration rate can avoid this complication.Common TPN problems are mostly related to electrolyte abnormalities that may develop. These electrolyte errors include deficits or excesses in sodium, potassium, calcium, magnesium, and phosphate. Acid-base abnormalities can also occur with the improper administration of acetate or bicarbonate solutions.The most common cause for hypernatremia in hospitalized patients is under-resuscitation, and, conversely, hyponatremia is most often caused by fluid overload. Treatment for hyponatre-mia is fluid restriction in mild or moderate cases and the admin-istration of hypertonic saline for severe cases. An overly rapid correction of the sodium abnormality may result in central pon-tine myelinolysis, which results in a severe neurologic deficit. Treatment for hyponatremic patients includes fluid restriction to correct the free water deficit by 50% in the first 24 hours. An overcorrection of hyponatremia can result in severe cerebral edema, a neurologic deficit, or seizures.Glycemic Control. In 2001, Van den Berghe and colleagues demonstrated that tight glycemic control by insulin infusion is associated with a 50% reduction in mortality in the critical care setting.136 This prospective, randomized, controlled trial of 1500 patients had two study arms: the intensive-control arm, where the serum glucose was maintained between 80 and 110 mg/dL with insulin infusion; and the control arm, where patients received an insulin infusion only if blood glucose was greater than 215 mg/dL, but serum glucose was then maintained at 180 to 200 mg/dL.The tight glycemic control group had an average serum glucose level of 103 mg/dL, and the average glucose level in the control group was 153 mg/dL. Hypoglycemic episodes (glu-cose <40 mg/dL) occurred in 39 patients in the tightly controlled group, while the control group had episodes in six patients. The overall mortality was reduced from 8% to 4.6%, but the mortal-ity of those patients whose ICU stay lasted longer than 5 days was reduced from 20% to 10%. Secondary findings included an improvement in overall morbidity, a decreased percentage of ventilator days, less renal impairment, and a lower incidence of bloodstream infections. These finding have been corrobo-rated by subsequent similar studies, and the principal benefit appears to be a greatly reduced incidence of nosocomial infec-tions and sepsis. It is not known whether the benefits are due to strict euglycemia, to the anabolic properties of insulin, or both, but the maintenance of strict euglycemia between 140 and 180 mg/dL appears to be a powerful therapeutic strategy.136-138 A number of studies followed this sentinel publication of tight glycemic control. The NICE-SUGAR139 and COIITSS140 trials revisited the Van den Berghe study and found that the glyce-mic goals found initially to improve outcomes in critically ill patients were now found to be associated with a higher mortality when glucose was kept below 180 mg/dL, due to an increase in incidents of hypoglycemia. When targeted goals of 180 mg/dL are achieved, fewer occurrences of hypoglycemia have been docu-mented, and improved survivorship has been achieved. In addi-tion, some studies find no relationship between glycemic control and improved outcomes. Thus, glycemic control in the critically ill still remains unclear and elusive at best.141,142 Part of the dif-ficulty in achieving “tight glycemic control” is the necessity for frequent (every 1–2 hours) blood glucose determinations. When this is performed, glycemic control is enhanced and hypoglyce-mia is avoided.Metabolism-Related Complications. “Stress dose steroids” have been advocated for the perioperative treatment of patients on corticosteroid therapy, but recent studies strongly discour-age the use of supraphysiologic doses of steroids when patients are on low or maintenance doses (e.g., 5–15 mg) of prednisone daily. Parenteral glucocorticoid treatment need only replicate physiologic replacement steroids in the perioperative period. When patients are on steroid replacement doses equal to or greater than 20 mg per day of prednisone, it may be appropriate to administer additional glucocorticoid doses for no more than 2 perioperative days.143-145Adrenal insufficiency may be present in patients with a baseline serum cortisol less than 20 μg/dL. A rapid provocative test with synthetic adrenocorticotropic hormone may confirm the diagnosis. After a baseline serum cortisol level is drawn, 250 μg of cosyntropin is administered. At exactly 30 and 60 minutes follow-ing the dose of cosyntropin, serum cortisol levels are obtained. There should be an incremental increase in the cortisol level of between 7 and 10 μg/dL for each half hour. If the patient is below these levels, a diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency is made, and glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid administration is then warranted. Mixed results are common, but the complication of performing major surgery on an adrenally insufficient patient is sudden or profound hypotension that is not responsive to fluid resuscitation.131Thyroid hormone abnormalities usually consist of previ-ously undiagnosed thyroid abnormalities. Hypothyroidism and the so-called sick-euthyroid syndrome are more commonly recognized in the critical care setting. When surgical patients are not progressing satisfactorily in the perioperative period, screening for thyroid abnormalities should be performed. If the results show mild to moderate hypothyroidism, then thyroid replacement should begin immediately, and thyroid function studies should be monitored closely. All patients should be reas-sessed after the acute illness has subsided regarding the need for chronic thyroid replacement therapy.Problems with ThermoregulationHypothermia. Hypothermia is defined as a core tempera-ture less than 35°C (95°F) and is divided into subsets of mild (35°C–32°C [95°F–89.6°F]), moderate (32°C–28°C [89.6°F –82.4°F]), and severe (<28°C [<82.4°F]) hypothermia. Shiver-ing, the body’s attempt to reverse the effects of hypothermia, occurs between 37°C and 31°C (98.6°F and 87.8°F), but ceases at temperatures below 31°C (87.8°F). Patients who are moder-ately hypothermic are at higher risk for complications than are those who are more profoundly hypothermic.Brunicardi_Ch12_p0397-p0432.indd   42720/02/19   3:57 PM 428BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IHypothermia creates a coagulopathy that is related to platelet and clotting cascade enzyme dysfunction. This triad of metabolic acidosis, coagulopathy, and hypothermia is com-monly found in long operative cases and in patients with blood dyscrasias. The enzymes that contribute to the clotting cascade and platelet activity are most efficient at normal body tempera-tures; therefore, all measures must be used to reduce heat loss intraoperatively.146The most common cardiac abnormality is the develop-ment of arrhythmias when body temperature drops below 35°C (95°F). Bradycardia occurs with temperatures below 30°C (86°F). It is well known that hypothermia may induce CO2 retention, resulting in respiratory acidosis. Renal dysfunction of hypothermia manifests itself as a paradoxic polyuria and is related to an increased glomerular filtration rate, as peripheral vascular constriction creates central shunting of blood. This is potentially perplexing in patients who are undergoing resuscita-tion for hemodynamic instability because the brisk urine output provides a false sense of an adequate intravascular fluid volume.Induced peripheral hypothermia for hyperpyrexia due to infection (not to include neurologic or cardiac disease) is likely deleterious and does not appear to be beneficial. Plac-ing cooling blankets on or under the patient or ice packs in the axillae or groin may be effective in cooling the skin, and when this occurs, a subsequent feedback loop triggers the hypothalamus to raise the internally regulated set point, thus raising core temperature even higher. This paradoxical reac-tion may be why those who feel the need to treat a fever in the ICU by cooling the skin and arguably the core have worse outcomes. Cooling core temperatures can be achieved reli-ably with catheter-directed therapy with commercially avail-able devices. Whether this is a worthwhile practice or not may be controversial. Poor data exist in support of treating fevers lower than 42°C in any fashion.147-149Adult trauma patients who underwent induced hypother-mia had poor outcomes in a recent investigation, and thus, this remains a procedure to be avoided. In a similar vein, pediatric patients who were induced did not show any improvement, and therefore, induced hypothermia is not recommended. Compli-cations with induced hypothermia include, but are not limited to, hypokalemia, diuresis, DVT (due to catheter-related vein injury), arrhythmias, shivering, undiagnosed catheter-related bloodstream infection, and bacteremia.150-152Neurologic dysfunction is inconsistent in hypothermia, but a deterioration in reasoning and decision-making skills progresses as body temperature falls, and profound coma (and a flat electroencephalogram) occurs as the temperature drops below 30°C (86°F). The diagnosis of hypothermia is important, so accurate measurement techniques are required to get a true core temperature.Methods used to warm patients include warm air circu-lation over the patient and heated IV fluids, as well as more aggressive measures such as bilateral chest tubes with warm solution lavage, intraperitoneal rewarming lavage, and extra-corporeal membrane oxygenation. A rate of temperature rise of 2°C to 4°C (3.6°F–7.2°F) per hour is considered adequate, but the most common complication for nonbypass rewarming is arrhythmia with ventricular arrest.Hyperthermia. Hyperthermia is defined as a core temperature greater than 38.6°C (101.5°F) and has a host of etiologies (Table 12-19).147 Hyperthermia can be environmentally induced (e.g., summer heat with inability to dissipate heat or control exposure), iatrogenically induced (e.g., heat lamps and medica-tions), endocrine in origin (e.g., thyrotoxicosis), or neurologi-cally induced (i.e., hypothalamic dysfunction).Malignant hyperthermia occurs intraoperatively after exposure to agents such as succinylcholine and some halothane-based inhalational anesthetics. The presentation is dramatic, with rapid onset of increased temperature, rigors, and myoglo-binuria related to myonecrosis. Medications must be discontin-ued immediately and dantrolene administered (2.5 mg/kg every 5 minutes) until symptoms subside. Aggressive cooling meth-ods are also implemented, such as an alcohol bath, or packing in ice. In cases of severe malignant hyperthermia, the mortality rate is nearly 30%.153,154Thyrotoxicosis can occur after surgery due to undiagnosed Graves’ disease. Hallmarks of the syndrome include hyperther-mia (>40°C [104°F]), anxiety, copious diaphoresis, congestive heart failure (present in about one fourth of episodes), tachycar-dia (most commonly atrial fibrillation), and hypokalemia (in up to 50% of patients). The treatment of thyrotoxicosis includes glucocorticoids, propylthiouracil, β-blockade, and iodide (Lugol’s solution) delivered in an emergent fashion. As the name suggests, these patients are usually toxic and require sup-portive measures as well. Acetaminophen, the cooling modali-ties noted in the previous paragraph, and vasoactive agents often are indicated.REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Makary MA, Daniel M. Medical error—the third lead-ing cause of death in the US. Brit Med J. 2016;353:i2139. doi:10.1136/bmj.i2139	2.	Kohn KT, Corrigan JM, Donaldson MS. To Err Is Human: Building a Safer Health System. Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 1999.	3.	James JTA. A new, evidence-based estimate of patient harms associated with hospital care. J Patient Saf. 2013;9:122-128.	4.	Lyu H, Xu T, Brotman D, et al. Overtreatment in the U.S. PLOS One. 2017;12(9):e0181970.	5.	Makary MA, Overton HN, Wang P. Overprescribing is major contributor to opioid crisis. Brit Med J. 2017;359:j4792. doi: 10.1136/bmj.j4792Table 12-19Common causes of elevated temperature in surgical patientsHYPERTHERMIAHYPERPYREXIAEnvironmentalSepsisMalignant hyperthermiaInfectionNeuroleptic malignant syndromeDrug reactionThyrotoxicosisTransfusion reactionPheochromocytomaCollagen disordersCarcinoid syndromeFactitious syndromeIatrogenicNeoplastic disordersCentral/hypothalamic responses Pulmonary embolism Adrenal insufficiency Brunicardi_Ch12_p0397-p0432.indd   42820/02/19   3:57 PM 429QUALITY, PATIENT SAFETY, ASSESSMENTS OF CARE, AND COMPLICATIONSCHAPTER 12	6.	Bierly PE III, Spender JC. Culture and high reliability orga-nizations: the case of the nuclear submarine. J Manage. 1995;21:639-656.	7.	Ruchlin HS, Dubbs NL, Callahan MA. The role of leadership in instilling a culture of safety: lessons from the literature.  J Healthcare Mgmt. 2004;49:47-58.	8.	Perrow C. Normal Accidents: Living with High Risk Technolo-gies. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press; 1984.	9.	Makary MA, Sexton JB, Freischlag JA, et al. Patient safety in surgery. Ann Surg. 2006;243:628-635.	10.	Berenholtz SM, Pronovost PJ. Monitoring patient safety. Crit Care Clin 2007;23:659-673.	11.	Baker DP, Gustafson S, Beaubien J, et al. Medical team train-ing. In: Medical Teamwork and Patient Safety: The Evidence-Based Relation. Literature Review. AHRQ Publication No. 05-0053. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; April 2005. Available at: http://www.ahrq.gov/qual/medteam/medteam4.htm. Accessed November 13, 2012.	12.	Pizzi LT, Goldfarb NI, Nash DB. Promoting a culture of safety. In: Making Healthcare Safer: A Critical Analysis of Patient Safety Practices. Evidence Report/Technology Assessment: Number 43. AHRQ Publication No. 01-E058. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; July 2001. Available at: http://www.ahrq.gov/clinic/ptsafety/chap40.htm. Accessed November 12, 2012.	13.	Chan DK, Gallagher TH, Reznick R, Levinson W. How sur-geons disclose medical errors to patients: a study using stan-dardized patients. Surgery. 2005;138:851-858.	14.	Sexton JB, Thomas EJ, Helmreich RL. Error, stress, and team-work in medicine and aviation: cross sectional surveys. BMJ. 2000;320:745-749.	15.	Thomas EJ, Sexton JB, Helmreich RL. Discrepant attitudes about teamwork among critical care nurses and physicians. Crit Care Med. 2003;31:956-959.	16.	Amalberti R, Auroy Y, Berwick D, Barach P. Five system barriers to achieving ultrasafe healthcare. Ann Intern Med. 2005;142:756-764.	17.	The Joint Commission. Sentinel event statistics. Available at: http://www.jointcommission.org/SentinelEvents/Statistics. Accessed November 8, 2012.	18.	Lingard L, Espin S, Whyte S, et al. Communication fail-ures in the operating room: an observational classification of recurrent types and effects. Qual Saf Health Care. 2004;13: 330-334.	19.	Christian CK, Gustafson ML, Roth EM, et al. A prospec-tive study of patient safety in the operating room. Surgery. 2006;139:159-173.	20.	Makary MA, Sexton JB, Freischlag JA, et al. Operating room teamwork among physicians and nurses: team-work in the eye of the beholder. J Am Coll Surg. 2006;202: 746-752.	21.	Pronovost PJ, Berenholtz SM, Goeschel CA, et al. Creating high reliability in health care organizations. Health Serv Res. 2006;41:1599-1617.	22.	Makary MA, Mukherjee A, Sexton JB, et al. Operating room briefings and wrong-site surgery. J Am Coll Surg. 2007;204:236-243.	23.	Nundy S, Mukherjee A, Sexton JB, et al. Impact of pre-operative briefings on operating room delays. Arch Surg. 2008;143:1068-1072.	24.	Makary MA, Epstein J, Pronovost PJ, Millman EA, Hart-mann EC, Freischlag JA. Surgical specimen identification errors: a new measure of quality in surgical care. Surgery. 2007;141:450-455.	25.	Arora V, Johnson J, Lovinger D, Humphrey H, Meltzer D. Communication failures in patient sign-out and suggestions for improvement: a critical incident analysis. Qual Saf Health Care. 2005;14:401-407.	26.	Cooper M, Makary M. A comprehensive unit-based safety program (CUSP) in surgery: improving quality through trans-parency. Surg Clin North Am. 2012;92(1):51-63.	27.	Wick ED, Hobson DB, Bennett JL, et al. Implementation of a surgical comprehensive unit-based safety program to reduce surgical site infections. J Am Coll Surg. 2012;215(2):193-200.	28.	Makary M, Mehta A, Xu T. Improving wisely using physician metrics. Am J Med Qual. 2018;33(1):103-105.	29.	Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. AHRQ Profile: Quality Research for Quality Healthcare. AHRQ Publication No. 00-P005. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; March 2001. Available at: http://www.ahrq.gov/about/profile.htm. Accessed May 12, 2018.	30.	Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. Patient Safety Indicators Overview. AHRQ Quality Indicators. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; February 2006. Available at: http://www.qualityindicators.ahrq.gov/psi_overview.htm. Accessed November 10, 2012.	31.	Zhan C, Miller MR. Administrative data based patient safety research: a critical review. Qual Saf Health Care. 2003;12(suppl 2):ii58-ii63.	32.	Bratzler DW. The Surgical Infection Prevention and Surgical Care Improvement Projects: promises and pitfalls. Am Surg. 2006;72:1010-1016.	33.	The Joint Commission. SCIP Target Areas. Available at: http://www.jointcommission.org/surgical_care_improvement_proj-ect/. Accessed November 1, 2012.	34.	Khuri SF. Safety, quality, and the National Surgical Quality Improvement Program. Am Surg. 2006;72:994-998.	35.	Hall BL, Hamilton BH, Richards K, Bilimoria KY, Cohen ME, Ko CY. Does surgical quality improve in the American College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement Program: an evaluation of all participating hospitals. Ann Surg. 2009;250(3):363-376.	36.	Brooke BS, Perler BA, Dominici F, Makary MA, Prono-vost PJ. California hospitals meeting Leapfrog quality stan-dards for abdominal aortic aneurysm repair. J Vasc Surg. 2008;47:1155-1164.	37.	The Leapfrog Group. Available at: http://www.leapfrog-group.org/56440/leapfrog_hospital_survey_copy/leapfrog_safety_practices/evidence-based_hospital_referral. Accessed  November 7, 2010.	38.	World Health Organization. Guidelines for Safe Surgery. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2009.	39.	Gawande AA, Kwaan MR, Regenbogen SE, Lipsitz SA, Zinner MJ. An Apgar score for surgery. J Am Coll Surg. 2007;204:201-208.	40.	The National Quality Forum. Serious Reportable Events in Healthcare 2011 Update: A Consensus Report. Washington, DC: National Quality Forum; 2011.	41.	Mehtsun W, Ibrahim A, Pronovost P, et al. Surgical never events: cost and outcome for patients and providers. Surgery. 2013;153(4):465-472.	42.	Crane M. Wrong-site surgery occurs 40 times a week. Med-scape Medical News; 2011. Available at: http://www.med-scape.com/viewarticle/745581. Accessed May 12, 2018.	43.	Gibbs VC, Coakley FD, Reines HD. Preventable errors in the operating room: retained foreign bodies after surgery—Part 1. Curr Probl Surg. 2007;44(5):281-337.	44.	Gawande AA, Studdert DM, Orav EJ, Brennan TA, Zinner MJ. Risk factors for retained instruments and sponges after surgery. N Engl J Med. 2003;34:229-235.	45.	Lincourt AE, Harrell A, Cristiano J, Sechrist C, Kercher K, Heniford BT. Retained foreign bodies after surgery. J Surg Res. 2007;138:170-174.	46.	Pennsylvania Patient Safety Reporting System. Doing the “right” things to correct wrong-site surgery. Patient Safety Advisory. 2007;4(2):29-45.Brunicardi_Ch12_p0397-p0432.indd   42920/02/19   3:57 PM 430BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART I	47.	Clarke JR, Johnston J, Finley ED. Getting surgery right. Ann Surg. 2007;246:395-405.	48.	Kwaan MR, Studdert DM, Zinner MJ, Gawande AA. Inci-dence, patterns, and prevention of wrong-site surgery. Arch Surg. 2006;141:353.	49.	Michaels RK, Makary MA, Dahab Y, et al. Achieving the National Quality Forum’s “never events”: prevention of wrong site, wrong procedure, and wrong patient opera-tions. Ann Surg. 2007;245:526-532.	50.	Chassin MR. Achieving and sustaining improved quality: lessons from New York state and cardiac surgery. Health Aff. 2002;21(4):40-51.	51.	Giordano LA, Elliott MN, Goldstein E, Lehrman WG, Spencer PA. Development, implementation and public reporting of the HCAHPS survey. Med Care Res Rev. 2010;67(1):27-37.	52.	Elliott MN, Beckett MK, Lehrman PD, et al. Understanding the role played by Medicare’s patient experience points system in hospital reimbursement. Health Aff. 2016;35(9):1673-1680.	53.	Regenbogen SE, Greenberg CC, Studdert DM, Lipsitz SR, Zinner MJ, Gawande AA. Patterns of technical error among surgical malpractice claims: an analysis of strategies to prevent injury to surgical patients. Ann Surg. 2007;246(5):705-711.	54.	Griffin FD, Stephens LS, Alexander JB, et al. The American College of Surgeons’ closed claims study: new insights for improving care. J Am Coll Surg. 2007;204(4):561-569.	55.	Ambady N, LaPlante D, Nguyen T, Rosenthal R, Chaumeton N, Levinson W. Surgeons’ tone of voice: a clue to malpractice history. Surgery. 2002;132(1):5-9.	56.	Woreta TA, Makary MA. Patient safety. In: Makary M, ed. General Surgery Review. Washington, DC: Ladner-Drysdale; 2008:553.	57.	Wojcieszak D, Banja J, Houk C. The sorry works! Coalition: making the case for full disclosure. Jt Comm J Qual Patient Saf. 2006;32:344-350.	58.	Alemzadeh H, Raman J, Leveson N, Kalbarczyk Z, and Iyer RK. Adverse events in robotic surgery: a retrospective study of 14 years of FDA data. PLoS One. 2016;11(4):e0151470. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0151470.	59.	Cooper MA, Ibrahim A, Lyu H, Makary MA. Underreport-ing of robotic surgery complications. J Healthcare Qual. 2015;37:133-138.	60.	Veenstra DL, Saint S, Sullivan SD. Cost-effectiveness of antiseptic-impregnated central venous catheters for the pre-vention of catheter-related bloodstream infection. JAMA. 1999;282:554-560.	61.	O’Grady NP, Alexander M, Dellinger EP, et al. Guidelines for the prevention of intravascular catheter-related infections. Am J Infect Control. 2002;30(8):476-489.	62.	Stoiser B, Kofler J, Staudinger T, et al. Contamination of central venous catheters in immunocompromised patients: a comparison between two different types of central venous catheters. J Hosp Infect. 2002;50(3):202-206.	63.	Berenholtz S, Pronovost P, Lipsett P, et al. Eliminating cath-eter-related bloodstream infections in the intensive care unit. Crit Care Med. 2004;32(10):2014-2020.	64.	Tyroch AH, Kaups K, Lorenzo M, Schreiber M, Solis D. Rou-tine chest radiograph is not indicated after open tracheostomy: a multicenter perspective. Am Surg. 2002;68(1):80-82.	65.	Datta D, Onyirimba F, McNamee MJ. The utility of chest radiographs following percutaneous dilatational tracheostomy. Chest. 2003;123:1603-1606.	66.	Gelman JJ, Aro M, Weiss SM. Tracheo-innominate artery fis-tula. J Am Coll Surg. 1994;179:626-634.	67.	Keçeligil HT, Erk MK, Kolbakir F, Yildirim A, Yilman M, Ünal R. Tracheoinnominate artery fistula following tracheos-tomy. Cardiovasc Surg. 1995;3:509.	68.	Rybak MJ, Abate BJ, Kang SL, Ruffing MJ, Lerner SA, Drusano GL. Prospective evaluation of the effect of an aminoglycoside doing regimen on rates of observed neph-rotoxicity and ototoxicity. Animicrob Agents Chemother. 1999;43(7):1549-1555.	69.	Sandur S, Stoller JK. Pulmonary complications of mechanical ventilation. Clin Chest Med. 1999;20:223-247.	70.	Hughes MG, Evans HL, Chong TW, et al. Effect of an inten-sive care unit rotating empiric antibiotic schedule on the devel-opment of hospital-acquired infections on the non-intensive care unit ward. Crit Care Med. 2004;32(1):53-60.	71.	Horn SD, Wright HL, Couperus JJ, et al. Association between patient-controlled analgesia pump use and postoperative sur-gical site infection in intestinal surgery patients. Surg Infect (Larchmt). 2002;3(2):109-118.	72.	Ferguson ND, Fan E, Camporota L, et al. The Berlin definition of ARDS: an expanded rationale, justification, and supplemen-tary material. Intensive Care Med. 2012;38(10):1573-1582.	73.	Villar J, Kacmarek RM. The American-European Consensus Conference definition of the acute respiratory distress syn-drome is dead, long live positive end-expiratory pressure! Med Intensiva. 2012;36(8):571-575.	74.	ARDS Definition Task Force, Ranieri VM, Rubenfeld GD,  et al. Acute respiratory distress syndrome: the Berlin Defini-tion. JAMA. 2012;307(23):2526-2533.	75.	Thille AW, Esteban A, Fernández-Segoviano P, et al. Com-parison of the Berlin definition for acute respiratory dis-tress syndrome with autopsy. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2013;187(7):761-767.	76.	The Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome Network. Ventila-tion with lower tidal volumes as compared with traditional tidal volumes for acute lung injury and the acute respiratory distress syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2000;342:1301-1308.	77.	Valente Barbas CS. Lung recruitment maneuvers in acute respiratory distress syndrome and facilitating resolution. Crit Care Med. 2003;31:S265-S271.	78.	Singh JM, Stewart TE. High-frequency mechanical ventilation principles and practices in the era of lung-protective ventila-tion strategies. Respir Care Clin North Am. 2002;8:247-260.	79.	Yang KL, Tobin MJ. A prospective study of indexes predicting the outcome of trials of weaning from mechanical ventilation. N Engl J Med. 1991;324:1445-1450.	80.	Epstein SK. Etiology of extubation failure and the predictive value of the rapid shallow breathing index. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1995;152:545-549.	81.	Spaniolas K, Velmahos GC, Wicky S, et al. Is upper extremity deep venous thrombosis underdiagnosed in trauma patients? Am Surg. 2008;74(2):124-128.	82.	Dabbagh O, Nagam N, Chitima-Matsiga R, Bearelly S, Bearelly D. Retrievable inferior vena cava filters are not getting retrieved: where is the gap? Thromb Res. 2010;126(6):493-497.	83.	Falk RH. Atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2001;344:1067-1078.	84.	Van Gelder IC, Hagens VE, Bosker HA, et al. A comparison of rate control and rhythm control in patients with recurrent persis-tent atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2002;347(23):1834-1840.	85.	Wyse DG, Waldo AL, DiMarco JP, et al. A comparison of rate control and rhythm control in patients with atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2002;347(23):1825-1833.	86.	Franklin RH. Ivor Lewis Lecture, 1975. The advancing frontiers of oesophageal surgery. Ann R Coll Surg Engl. 1977;59(4):284-287.	87.	Stewart BT, Woods RJ, Collopy BT, Fink RJ, Mackay JR, Keck JO. Early feeding after elective open colorectal resections: a prospective randomized trial. Aust N Z J Surg. 1998;68(2):125-128.	88.	Asao T, Kuwano H, Nakamura J, Morinaga N, Hirayama I, Ide M. Gum chewing enhances early recovery from post-operative ileus after laparoscopic colectomy. J Am Coll Surg. 2002;195(1):30-32.Brunicardi_Ch12_p0397-p0432.indd   43020/02/19   3:57 PM 431QUALITY, PATIENT SAFETY, ASSESSMENTS OF CARE, AND COMPLICATIONSCHAPTER 12	89.	Kelley SR, Wolff BG, Lovely JK, Larson DW. Fast-track path-way for minimally invasive colorectal surgery with and with-out alvimopan (Entereg)(TM): which is more cost-effective? Am Surg. 2013;79(6):630-633.	90.	Wang S, Shah N, Philip J, Caraccio T, Feuerman M, Malone B. Role of alvimopan (entereg) in gastrointestinal recov-ery and hospital length of stay after bowel resection. P T. 2012;37(9):518-525.	91.	Elsner JL, Smith JM, Ensor CR. Intravenous neostigmine for postoperative acute colonic pseudo-obstruction. Ann Pharma-cother. 2012;46(3):430-435.	92.	Tang CL, Seow-Choen F, Fook-Chong S, Eu KW. Bioresorb-able adhesion barrier facilitates early closure of the defunction-ing ileostomy after rectal excision: a prospective, randomized trial. Dis Colon Rectum. 2003;46(9):1200-1207.	93.	Beck DE, Cohen Z, Fleshman JW, Kaufman HS, van Goor H, Wolff BG; Adhesion Study Group Steering Committee. A prospective, randomized, multicenter, controlled study of the safety of Seprafilm adhesion barrier in abdominopelvic surgery of the intestine. Dis Colon Rectum. 2003;46(10):1310-1319.	94.	Smoot RL, Gostout CJ, Rajan E, et al. Is early colonoscopy after admission for acute diverticular bleeding needed? Am J Gastroenterol. 2003;98:1996-1999.	95.	Sorbi D, Gostout CJ, Peura D, et al. An assessment of the management of acute bleeding varices: a multicenter prospective member-based study. Am J Gastroenterol. 2003;98(11):2424-2434.	96.	Domschke W, Lederer P, Lux G. The value of emergency endoscopy in upper gastrointestinal bleeding: review and analysis of 2014 cases. Endoscopy. 1983;15(suppl 1):126-131.	97.	Cash BD. Evidence-based medicine as it applies to acid suppression in the hospitalized patient. Crit Care Med. 2002;30(suppl 6):S373-S380.	98.	Lidwig K, Bernhardt J, Steffen H, Lorenz D. Contribution of intraoperative cholangiography to incidence and outcome of common bile duct injuries during laparoscopic cholecystec-tomy. Surg Endosc. 2002;16(7):1098-1104.	99.	Flum DR, Dellinger EP, Cheadle A, Chan L, Koepsell T. Intra-operative cholangiography and risk of common bile duct injury during cholecystectomy. JAMA. 2003;289(13):1639-1644.	100.	Yoon YH, Hsiao-ye Y, Grant BF, Doufour M. Surveillance Report No. 57: Liver Cirrhosis Mortality in the United States, 1970-98. Rockville, MD: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism; December 2001.	101.	Elmunzer BJ, Scheiman JM, Lehman GA, et al. A randomized trial of rectal indomethacin to prevent post-ERCP pancreatitis. N Engl J Med. 2012;366(15):1414-1422.	102.	Solomon R, Werner C, Mann D, D’Elia J, Silva P. Effects of saline, mannitol, and furosemide to prevent acute decreases in renal function induced by radiocontrast agents. N Engl J Med. 1994;331(21):1416-1420.	103.	Stevens MA, McCullough PA, Tobin KJ, et al. A prospective randomized trial of prevention measures in patients at high risk for contrast nephropathy: results of the P.R.I.N.C.E. study. Prevention of Radiocontrast Induced Nephropathy Clinical Evaluation. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1999;33(2):403-411.	104.	Birck R, Krzossok S, Markowetz F, Schnülle P, van der Woude FJ, Braun C. Acetylcysteine for prevention of contrast nephropathy: meta-analysis. Lancet. 2003;362(9384):598-603.	105.	Baker CS, Wragg A, Kumar S, De Palma R, Baker LR, Knight CJ. A rapid protocol for the prevention of contrast-induced renal dysfunction: the RAPPID study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003;41(12):2114-2118.	106.	Laffan M, O’Connell NM, Perry DJ, et al. Analysis and results of the recombinant factor VIIa extended-use registry. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis. 2003;14:S35-238.	107.	Hedner U. Dosing with recombinant factor VIIa based on cur-rent evidence. Semin Hematol. 2004;41(suppl 1):35-39.	108.	Midathada MV, Mehta P, Waner M, Fink LM. Recombinant factor VIIa in the treatment of bleeding. Am J Clin Pathol. 2004;121(1):124-137.	109.	Dutton RP, Parr M, Tortella BJ, et al. Recombinant activated factor VII safety in trauma patients: results from the CONTROL trial. J Trauma. 2011;71(1):12-19.	110.	Bloomfield GL, Dalton JM, Sugerman HJ, et al. Treatment of increasing intracranial pressure secondary to the acute abdominal compartment syndrome in a patient with combined abdominal and head trauma. J Trauma. 1995;39(6):1168-1170.	111.	Kron I, Harman PK, Nolan SP. The measurement of intra-abdominal pressure as a criterion for abdominal re-exploration. Ann Surg. 1984;199(1):28-30.	112.	Ivatury RR, Porter JM, Simon RJ, et al. Intra-abdominal hypertension after life-threatening penetrating abdominal trauma: prophylaxis, incidence, and clinical relevance to gastric mucosal pH and abdominal compartment syndrome.  J Trauma. 1998;44(6):1016-1021.	113.	Ivatury RR, Sugerman HJ, Peitzman AB. Abdominal com-partment syndrome: recognition and management. Adv Surg. 2001;35:251-269.	114.	Saggi BH, Sugerman HJ, Ivatury RR, Bloomfield GL. Abdom-inal compartment syndrome. J Trauma. 1998;45(3):597-609.	115.	Anglen J, Apostoles PS, Christensen G, Gainor B, Lane J. Removal of surface bacteria by irrigation. J Orthop Res. 1966;14:251-254.	116.	Lewis DA, Leaper DJ, Speller DC. Prevention of bacterial colonization of wounds at operation: comparison of iodine-impregnated (“Ioban”) drapes with conventional methods.  J Hosp Infect. 1984;5:431-437.	117.	O’Rourke E, Runyan D, O’Leary J, Stern J. Contami-nated iodophor in the operating room. Am J Infect Control. 2003;31:255-256.	118.	Ostrander RV, Brage ME, Botte MJ. Bacterial skin contamina-tion after surgical preparation in foot and ankle surgery. Clin Orthop. 2003;406:246-252.	119.	Ghogawala Z, Furtado D. In vitro and in vivo bactericidal activities of 10%, 2.5%, and 1% povidone-iodine solution. Am J Hosp Pharm. 1990;47:1562-1566.	120.	Anderson RL, Vess RW, Carr JH, Bond WW, Panlilio AL, Favero MS. Investigations of intrinsic Pseudomonas cepa-cia contamination in commercially manufactured povidone-iodine. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 1991;12(5):297-302.	121.	Birnbach DJ, Meadows W, Stein DJ, Murray O, Thys DM, Sor-dillo EM. Comparison of povidone iodine and DuraPrep, an iodophor-in-isopropyl alcohol solution, for skin disinfection prior to epidural catheter insertion in parturients. Anesthesiol-ogy. 2003;98(1):164-169.	122.	Moen MD, Noone MG, Kirson I. Povidone-iodine spray technique versus traditional scrub-paint technique for pre-operative abdominal wall preparation. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2002;187(6):1434-1436; discussion 1436-1437.	123.	Strand CL, Wajsbort RR, Sturmann K. Effect of iodophor vs iodine tincture skin preparation on blood culture contamina-tion rate. JAMA. 1993;269(8):1004-1006.	124.	Paterson DL, Ko WC, Von Gottberg A, et al. International pro-spective study of Klebsiella pneumoniae bacteremia: impli-cations of extended-spectrum beta-lactamase production in nosocomial infections. Ann Intern Med. 2004;140(1):26-32.	125.	Wittmann DH, Schein M. Let us shorten antibiotic prophylaxis and therapy in surgery. Am J Surg. 1966;172(6A):26S-32S.	126.	Dellinger EP. Duration of antibiotic treatment in surgical infec-tions of the abdomen. Undesired effects of antibiotics and future studies. Eur J Surg Suppl. 1996;576:29-31; discussion 31.	127.	Fry DE. Basic aspects of and general problems in surgical infections. Surg Infect (Larchmt). 2001;2(suppl 1):S3-S11.	128.	Barie PS. Modern surgical antibiotic prophylaxis and therapy—less is more. Surg Infect (Larchmt). 2000;1:23-29.Brunicardi_Ch12_p0397-p0432.indd   43120/02/19   3:57 PM 432BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART I	129.	Grobmyer SR, Graham D, Brennan MF, Coit D. High-pressure gradients generated by closed-suction surgical drainage sys-tems. Surg Infect (Larchmt). 2002;3(3):245-249.	130.	Power DA, Duggan J, Brady HR. Renal-dose (low-dose) dopa-mine for the treatment of sepsis-related and other forms of acute renal failure: ineffective and probably dangerous. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol Suppl. 1999;26:S23-S28.	131.	Vincent JL, Abraham E, Annane D, Bernard G, Rivers E, Van de Berghe G. Reducing mortality in sepsis: new directions. Crit Care. 2002;6(suppl 3):S1-S18.	132.	Malay MB, Ashton RC Jr, Landry DW, Townsend RN. Low-dose vasopressin in the treatment of vasodilatory septic shock. J Trauma. 1999;47:699-703; discussion 703-705.	133.	Annane D, Sebille V, Charpentier C, et al. Effect of treat-ment with low doses of hydrocortisone and fludrocorti-sone on mortality in patients with septic shock. JAMA. 2002;288(7):862-871.	134.	Dhainaut JF, Laterre PF, LaRosa SP, et al. The clinical evaluation committee in a large multicenter phase 3 trial of drotrecogin alfa (activated) in patients with severe sepsis (PROWESS): role, methodology, and results. Crit Care Med. 2003;31(9):2291-2301; comment 2405.	135.	Betancourt M, McKinnon PS, Massanari RM, Kanji S, Bach D, Devlin JW. An evaluation of the cost effectiveness of drotrecogin alfa (activated) relative to the number of organ system failures. Pharmacoeconomics. 2003;21:1331-1340.	136.	Van den Berghe G, Wouters P, Weekers F, et al. Intensive insulin therapy in critically ill patients. N Engl J Med. 2001;345(19):1359-1367.	137.	Finney SJ, Zekveld C, Elia A, Evans TW. Glucose con-trol and mortality in critically ill patients. JAMA. 2003;290(15):2041-2047.	138.	Furnary AP, Gao G, Grunkemeier GL, et al. Continuous insu-lin infusion reduces mortality in patients with diabetes under-going coronary artery bypass grafting. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2003;125(5):1007-1021.	139.	NICE-SUGAR Study Investigators, Finfer S, Chittock DR,  et al. Intensive versus conventional glucose control in critically ill patients. N Engl J Med. 2009;360(13):1283-1297.	140.	COIITSS Study Investigators, Annane D, Cariou A, et al. Corticosteroid treatment and intensive insulin therapy for septic shock in adults: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2010;303(4):341-348.	141.	Saberi F, Heyland D, Lam M, et al. Prevalence, incidence, and clinical resolution of insulin resistance in critically ill patients: an observational study. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 2008;32(3):227-235.	142.	Arabi YM, Dabbagh OC, Tamim HM, et al. Intensive versus conventional insulin therapy: a randomized controlled trial in medical and surgical critically ill patients. Crit Care Med. 2008;36(12):3190-3197.	143.	La Rochelle GE, Jr, La Rochelle AG, Ratner RE, Borenstein DG. Recovery of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis in patients with rheumatic diseases receiving low-dose predni-sone. Am J Med. 1993;95(3):258-264.	144.	Bromberg JS, Alfrey EJ, Barker CF, et al. Adrenal suppres-sion and steroid supplementation in renal transplant recipients. Transplantation. 1991;51(2):385-390.	145.	Friedman RJ, Schiff CF, Bromberg JS. Use of supplemental steroids in patients having orthopaedic operations. J Bone Joint Surg. 1995;77(12):1801-1806.	146.	Kempainen RR, Brunette DD. The evaluation and management of accidental hypothermia. Respir Care. 2004;49(2):192-205.	147.	Niven DJ, Stelfox HT, Léger C, et al. Assessment of the safety and feasibility of administering antipyretic therapy in criti-cally ill adults: a pilot randomized clinical trial. J Crit Care. 2013;28(3):296-302.	148.	Schortgen F, Clabault K, Katsahian S, et al. Fever control using external cooling in septic shock: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Respir Criti Care Med. 2012;185(10):1088-1095.	149.	Hoedemaekers CW, Ezzahti M, Gerritsen A, van der Hoeven JG. Comparison of cooling methods to induce and main-tain normoand hypothermia in intensive care unit patients: a prospective intervention study. Crit Care (London). 2007;11(4):R91.	150.	O’Donnell J, Axelrod P, Fisher C, et al. Use and effectiveness of hypothermia blankets for febrile patients in the intensive care unit. Clin Infect Dis. 1997;24(6):1208-1213.	151.	Adelson PD, Wisniewski SR, Beca J, et al. Comparison of hypothermia and normothermia after severe traumatic brain injury in children (Cool Kids): a phase 3, randomised con-trolled trial. Lancet Neurol. 2013;12(6):546-553.	152.	Georgiou AP, Manara AR. Role of therapeutic hypothermia in improving outcome after traumatic brain injury: a systematic review. Br J Anaesth. 2013;110(3):357-367.	153.	Peterson K, Carson S, Carney N. Hypothermia treatment for traumatic brain injury: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Neurotrauma. 2008;25(1):62-71.	154.	Schulman CI, Namias N, Doherty J, et al. The effect of anti-pyretic therapy upon outcomes in critically ill patients: a ran-domized, prospective study. Surg Infect. 2005;6(4):369-375.Brunicardi_Ch12_p0397-p0432.indd   43220/02/19   3:57 PM
# Chunk 8876
Physiologic Monitoring of the Surgical PatientAnthony R. Cyr and Louis H. Alarcon 13chapterINTRODUCTIONThe Latin verb monere, which means “to warn, or advise” is the origin for the English word monitor. In modern medical prac-tice, patients undergo monitoring to detect pathologic varia-tions in physiologic parameters, providing advanced warning of impending deterioration in the status of one or more organ systems. The intended goal of this endeavor is to allow the clini-cian to take appropriate actions in a timely fashion to prevent or ameliorate the physiologic derangement. Furthermore, physi-ologic monitoring is used not only to warn, but also to titrate therapeutic interventions, such as fluid resuscitation or the infu-sion of vasoactive or inotropic drugs. The intensive care unit (ICU) and operating room are the two locations where the most advanced monitoring capabilities are routinely employed in the care of critically ill patients.In the broadest sense, physiologic monitoring encom-passes a spectrum of endeavors, ranging in complexity from the routine and intermittent measurement of the classic vital signs (i.e., temperature, heart rate, arterial blood pressure, and respira-tory rate) to the continuous recording of the oxidation state of cytochrome oxidase, the terminal element in the mitochondrial electron transport chain. The ability to assess clinically relevant parameters of tissue and organ status and employ this knowl-edge to improve patient outcomes represents the “holy grail” of critical care medicine. Unfortunately, consensus is often lacking regarding the most appropriate parameters to monitor in order to achieve this goal. Furthermore, making an inappropriate ther-apeutic decision due to inaccurate physiologic data or misinter-pretation of good data can lead to a worse outcome than having no data at all. Of the highest importance is the integration of physiologic data obtained from monitoring into a coherent and evidenced-based treatment plan. Current technologies available to assist the clinician in this endeavor are summarized in this chapter. Also presented is a brief look at emerging tech-niques that may soon enter into clinical practice.In essence, the goal of hemodynamic monitoring is to ensure that the flow of oxygenated blood through the microcir-culation is sufficient to support aerobic metabolism at the cel-lular level. In general, mammalian cells cannot store oxygen for subsequent use in oxidative metabolism, although a relatively tiny amount is stored in muscle tissue as oxidized myoglobin. Thus, aerobic synthesis of adenosine triphosphate (ATP), the energy “currency” of cells, requires the continuous delivery of oxygen by diffusion from hemoglobin in red blood cells to the oxidative machinery within mitochondria. Delivery of oxygen to mitochondria may be insufficient for several reasons. For example, cardiac output, hemoglobin concentration of blood, or the oxygen content of arterial blood each can be inadequate 1Introduction	433Arterial Blood Pressure	434Noninvasive Measurement of  Arterial Blood Pressure / 434Invasive Monitoring of Arterial  Blood Pressure / 435Electrocardiographic   Monitoring	435Algorithmic Integrative   Monitoring	436Cardiac Output and Related  Parameters	436Determinants of Cardiac  Performance / 436Placement of the Pulmonary   Artery Catheter	437Hemodynamic Measurements	438Measurement of Cardiac Output by Thermodilution / 439Mixed Venous Oximetry / 439Effect of Pulmonary Artery   Catheterization on Outcome	440Minimally Invasive Alternatives   to the Pulmonary Artery   Catheter	442Transpulmonary Thermodilution / 442Doppler Ultrasonography / 443Impedance Cardiography / 443Pulse Contour Analysis / 443Partial Carbon Dioxide Rebreathing / 444Transesophageal Echocardiography / 444Assessing Preload Responsiveness / 444Near-Infrared Spectroscopic  Measurement of Tissue Hemoglobin Oxygen Saturation / 444Respiratory Monitoring	445Arterial Blood Gases / 445Determinants of Oxygen Delivery / 445Peak and Plateau Airway Pressure / 446Pulse Oximetry / 446Pulse CO-Oximetry / 446Capnometry /447Renal Monitoring	447Urine Output / 447Bladder Pressure / 447Neurologic Monitoring	447Intracranial Pressure / 447Electroencephalogram and Evoked Potentials / 448Transcranial Doppler  Ultrasonography / 448Jugular Venous Oximetry / 448Transcranial Near-Infrared  Spectroscopy / 449Brain Tissue Oxygen Tension / 449Conclusions	449Brunicardi_Ch13_p0433-p0452.indd   43322/02/19   2:20 PM 434Figure 13-1. Graphical representation of the relationship between oxygen utilization (VO2) and oxygen delivery (DO2). Under most normal physiologic conditions oxygen utilization does not depend on oxygen delivery, but below the critical value DO2crit oxygen utili-zation decreases linearly as a function of oxygen delivery, rendering tissues susceptible to ischemic injury.Key Points1	The delivery of modern critical care is predicated on the abil-ity to monitor a large number of physiologic variables and formulate evidenced-based therapeutic strategies to manage these variables. Technological advances in monitoring have at least a theoretical risk of exceeding our ability to under-stand the clinical implications of the derived information. This could result in the use of monitoring data to make inap-propriate clinical decisions. Therefore, the implementation of any new monitoring technology must take into account the relevance and accuracy of the data obtained, the risks to the patient, and the evidence supporting any intervention directed at correcting the detected abnormality.2	The routine use of invasive monitoring devices, specifically the pulmonary artery catheter, must be questioned in light of the available evidence that does not demonstrate a clear ben-efit to its widespread use in various populations of critically ill patients. The future of physiologic monitoring will be dominated by the application of noninvasive and highly accurate devices which guide evidenced-based therapy.for independent reasons. Alternatively, despite adequate cardiac output, perfusion of capillary networks can be impaired as a consequence of dysregulation of arteriolar tone, microvascular thrombosis, or obstruction of nutritive vessels by sequestered leukocytes or platelets. Hemodynamic monitoring that does not take into account all of these factors will portray an incomplete and perhaps misleading picture of cellular physiology.Under normal conditions when the supply of oxygen is plentiful, aerobic metabolism is determined by factors other than the availability of oxygen. These factors include the hor-monal milieu and mechanical workload of contractile tissues. However, in pathologic circumstances when oxygen availabil-ity is inadequate, oxygen utilization (VO2) becomes dependent upon oxygen delivery (DO2). The relationship of VO2 to DO2 over a broad range of DO2 values is commonly represented as two intersecting straight lines (Fig. 13-1). In the region of higher DO2 values, the slope of the line is approximately equal to zero, indicating that VO2 is largely independent of DO2. In contrast, in the region of low DO2 values, the slope of the line is nonzero and positive, indicating that VO2 is supply-dependent. The region where the two lines intersect is called the point of critical oxy-gen delivery (DO2crit), and represents the transition from supplyindependent to supply-dependent oxygen uptake. Below a critical Oxygen delivery, DO2Tissue hypoxiaSupply-dependentoxygen consumptionSupply-independentoxygen consumptionTissue normoxiaOxygen utilization, VO2DO2critthreshold of oxygen delivery, increased oxygen extraction can-not compensate for the delivery deficit; hence, oxygen con-sumption begins to decrease. The slope of the supply-dependent region of the plot reflects the maximal oxygen extraction capa-bility of the vascular bed being evaluated.The subsequent sections will describe the techniques and utility of monitoring various physiologic parameters.ARTERIAL BLOOD PRESSUREThe pressure exerted by blood in the systemic arterial system, commonly referred to simply as “blood pressure,” is a cardinal parameter measured as part of the hemodynamic monitoring of patients. Extremes in blood pressure are either intrinsically deleterious or are indicative of a serious perturbation in normal physiology. Arterial blood pressure is a complex function of both cardiac output and vascular input impedance. Thus, inex-perienced clinicians may assume that the presence of a normal blood pressure is evidence that cardiac output and tissue perfu-sion are adequate. This assumption is frequently incorrect and is the reason why some critically ill patients may benefit from forms of hemodynamic monitoring in addition to measurement of arterial pressure.Blood pressure can be determined directly by measuring the pressure within the arterial lumen or indirectly using a cuff around an extremity. When the equipment is properly set up and calibrated, direct intra-arterial monitoring of blood pressure pro-vides accurate and continuous data. Additionally, intra-arterial catheters provide a convenient way to obtain samples of blood for measurements of arterial blood gases and other laboratory studies. Despite these advantages, intra-arterial catheters are invasive devices and occasionally are associated with serious complications.Noninvasive Measurement of Arterial Blood PressureBoth manual and automated means for the noninvasive determi-nation of blood pressure use an inflatable sphygmomanometer cuff to increase pressure around an extremity and to detect the presence or absence of arterial pulsations. Several methods exist for this purpose. The time-honored approach is the auscultation of the Korotkoff sounds, which are heard over an artery distal to the cuff as the cuff is deflated from a pressure higher than systolic pressure to one less than diastolic pressure. Systolic pressure is defined as the pressure in the cuff when tapping sounds are first audible. Diastolic pressure is the pressure in the cuff when audible pulsations first disappear.Brunicardi_Ch13_p0433-p0452.indd   43422/02/19   2:20 PM 435PHYSIOLOGIC MONITORING OF THE SURGICAL PATIENTCHAPTER 13Another means for pulse detection when measuring blood pressure noninvasively depends upon the detection of oscillations in the pressure within the bladder of the cuff. This approach is simple, and unlike auscultation, can be performed even in a noisy environment (e.g., a busy emergency depart-ment or medical helicopter). Unfortunately, this approach is neither accurate nor reliable. Other methods, however, can be used to reliably detect the reappearance of a pulse distal to the cuff and thereby estimate systolic blood pressure. Two excellent and widely available approaches for pulse detection are use of a Doppler stethoscope (reappearance of the pulse produces an audible amplified signal) or a pulse oximeter (reappearance of the pulse is indicated by flashing of a light-emitting diode).A number of automated devices are capable of repeti-tively measuring blood pressure noninvasively. Some of these devices measure pressure oscillations in the inflatable bladder encircling the extremity to detect arterial pulsations as pressure in the cuff is gradually lowered from greater than systolic to less than diastolic pressure. Other automated noninvasive devices use a piezoelectric crystal positioned over the brachial artery as a pulse detector. The accuracy of these devices is variable, and often dependent on the size mismatch between the arm cir-cumference and the cuff size.1 If the cuff is too narrow (relative to the extremity), the measured pressure will be artifactually elevated. Therefore, the width of the cuff should be approxi-mately 40% of its circumference.Another noninvasive approach for measuring blood pres-sure relies on a technique called photoplethysmography. This method is capable of providing continuous information, since systolic and diastolic blood pressures are recorded on a beat-to-beat basis. Photoplethysmography uses the transmission of infrared light to estimate the amount of hemoglobin (directly related to the volume of blood) in a finger placed under a servo-controlled inflatable cuff. A feedback loop controlled by a microprocessor continually adjusts the pressure in the cuff to maintain the blood volume of the finger constant. Under these conditions, the pressure in the cuff reflects the pressure in the digi-tal artery. The measurements obtained using photoplethysmog-raphy generally agree closely with those obtained by invasive monitoring of blood pressure.2 However, these readings may be less accurate in patients with hypotension or hypothermia.Invasive Monitoring of Arterial Blood PressureDirect and continuous monitoring of arterial pressure in criti-cally ill patients may be performed by using fluid-filled tubing to connect an intra-arterial catheter to an external strain-gauge transducer. The signal generated by the transducer is electroni-cally amplified and displayed as a continuous waveform by an oscilloscope or computerized display. Digital values for systolic and diastolic pressure also are displayed. Mean pressure, calcu-lated by electronically averaging the amplitude of the pressure waveform, can also be displayed. The fidelity of the catheter-tubing-transducer system is determined by numerous factors, including the compliance of the tubing, the surface area of the transducer diaphragm, and the compliance of the diaphragm. If the system is underdamped, then the inertia of the system, which is a function of the mass of the fluid in the tubing and the mass of the diaphragm, causes overshoot of the points of maximum positive and negative displacement of the diaphragm during sys-tole and diastole, respectively. Thus, in an underdamped system, systolic pressure will be overestimated and diastolic pressure will be underestimated. In an overdamped system, displacement of the diaphragm fails to track the rapidly changing pressure waveform, and systolic pressure will be underestimated and diastolic pressure will be overestimated. It is important to note that even in an underdamped or overdamped system, mean pres-sure will be accurately recorded, provided the system has been properly calibrated. For these reasons, when using direct mea-surement of intra-arterial pressure to monitor patients, clinicians should make clinical decisions based primarily on the measured mean arterial blood pressure.The radial artery at the wrist is the site most commonly used for intra-arterial pressure monitoring. Other sites include the femoral and axillary artery. It is important to recognize, however, that measured arterial pressure is determined in part by the site where the pressure is monitored. Central (i.e., aortic) and peripheral (e.g., radial artery) pressures typically are dif-ferent as a result of the impedance and inductance of the arte-rial tree. Systolic pressures typically are higher and diastolic pressures are lower in the periphery, whereas mean pressure is approximately the same in the aorta and more distal sites.Distal ischemia is an uncommon complication of intra-arterial catheterization. The incidence of thrombosis is increased when larger-caliber catheters are employed and when catheters are left in place for an extended period of time. The incidence of thrombosis can be minimized by using a 20-gauge (or smaller) catheter in the radial artery and removing the catheter as soon as feasible. The risk of distal ischemic injury can be reduced by ensuring that adequate collateral flow is present prior to catheter insertion. At the wrist, adequate collateral flow can be documented by performing a modified version of the Allen test, wherein the artery to be cannulated is digitally compressed while using a Doppler stethoscope to listen for perfusion in the palmar arch vessels.Another potential complication of intra-arterial monitor-ing is retrograde embolization of air bubbles or thrombi into the intracranial circulation. In order to minimize this risk care should be taken to avoid flushing arterial lines when air is pres-ent in the system, and only small volumes of fluid (less than 5 mL) should be employed for this purpose. Catheter-related infections can occur with any intravascular monitoring device. However, catheter-related bloodstream infection is a relatively uncommon complication of intra-arterial lines used for monitor-ing, occurring in 0.4% to 0.7% of catheterizations.3 The inci-dence increases with longer duration of arterial catheterization.ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHIC MONITORINGThe electrocardiogram (ECG) records the electrical activity associated with cardiac contraction by detecting voltages on the body surface. A standard 3-lead ECG is obtained by placing electrodes that correspond to the left arm (LA), right arm (RA), and left leg (LL). The limb leads are defined as lead I (LA-RA), lead II (LL-RA), and lead III (LL-LA). The ECG waveforms can be continuously displayed on a monitor, and the devices can be set to sound an alarm if an abnormality of rate or rhythm is detected. Continuous ECG monitoring is widely available and applied to critically ill and perioperative patients. Monitoring of the ECG waveform is essential in patients with acute coronary syndromes or blunt myocardial injury because dysrhythmias are the most common lethal complication. In patients with shock or sepsis, dysrhythmias can occur as a consequence of inadequate myocardial oxygen delivery or as a complication of vasoactive or inotropic drugs used to support blood pressure and cardiac Brunicardi_Ch13_p0433-p0452.indd   43522/02/19   2:20 PM 436BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ioutput. Dysrhythmias can be detected by continuously moni-toring the ECG tracing, and timely intervention may prevent serious complications. With appropriate computing hardware and software, continuous ST-segment analysis also can be per-formed to detect ischemia or infarction.Additional information can be obtained from a 12-lead ECG, which is essential for patients with potential myocardial ischemia or to rule out cardiac complications in other acutely ill patients. Continuous monitoring of the 12-lead ECG may be beneficial in certain patient populations. In a study of 185 vas-cular surgical patients, continuous 12-lead ECG monitoring was able to detect transient myocardial ischemic episodes in 20.5% of the patients.4 This study demonstrated that the precordial lead V4, which is not routinely monitored on a standard 3-lead ECG, is the most sensitive for detecting perioperative ischemia and infarction. To detect 95% of the ischemic episodes, two or more precordial leads were necessary. Furthermore, in a pro-spective observational study, 51 peripheral artery vascular sur-gery patients underwent ambulatory continuous 12-lead ECG monitoring in the postoperative setting. Ischemic load, defined as the area under the curve defined by ischemic ST-segment deviation and ischemic time, was shown to predict perioperative myocardial infarction with an area under the receiver operating characteristics curve of 0.87. Notably, ischemia was asymptom-atic in 14 of the 17 identified patients, demonstrating value of this modality as a warning tool.5 Thus, continuous 12-lead ECG monitoring may provide greater sensitivity than 3-lead ECG for the detection of perioperative myocardial ischemia, and may become standard for monitoring high-risk surgical patients.Currently, there is considerable interest in using comput-erized approaches to analyze ECG waveforms and patterns to uncover hidden information that can be used to predict sudden cardiac death or the development of serious dysrhythmias. ECG patterns of interest include repetitive changes in the morphol-ogy of the T-wave (T-wave alternans; TWA)6 and heart rate variability.7ALGORITHMIC INTEGRATIVE MONITORINGIntegrated monitoring systems employ software that integrates vital signs to produce a single-parameter index that allows early detection of physiologic perturbations. The input variables include noninvasive measurements of heart rate, respiratory rate, blood pressure, SpO2, and temperature. The software uses neural networking to develop a probabilistic model of normal-ity, previously developed from a representative sample patient training set. Variance from this data set is used to evaluate the probability that the patient-derived vital signs are within the normal range. An abnormal index can occur while no single vital sign parameter is outside the range of normal if their com-bined patterns are consistent with known instability patterns. Employing such an integrated monitoring system in step-down unit patients has been shown to be a sensitive method to detect early physiologic abnormalities that may precede hemodynamic instability.8 This subsequently was demonstrated to reduce the amount of overall patient instability by facilitating earlier iden-tification and appropriate intervention by the medical team.9The large expansion of the electronic medical record (EMR) is also driving the development of new algorithmic assessment tools for inpatient monitoring. The Rothman Index (RI) is a proprietary data analysis toolkit encompassing a total of 26 variables including vital signs, nursing assessments, laboratory test values, and cardiac rhythms and was developed to make use of the vast amount of data input into the EMR on a real-time basis to help provide a global assessment of patient status. In the initial derivation, Rothman and colleagues dem-onstrated concordance of the RI with the Modified Early  Warning Score (MEWS) system, which is designed to alert medical teams to clinical deterioration that precedes cardiac or pulmonary arrest events.10 Subsequent publications evaluated performance of the RI in predicting both readmission to surgical ICUs in the postoperative setting as well as for rapid response team activations.11-13 Although more work is required to evalu-ate the broad applicability of the RI and similar measures, the evidence to date is compelling. Furthermore, as EMR interfaces become more sophisticated, other real-time data analysis soft-ware packages will likely be developed that provide further insight into the care of postsurgical patients.CARDIAC OUTPUT AND RELATED PARAMETERSBedside catheterization of the pulmonary artery was introduced into clinical practice in the 1970s. Although the pulmonary artery catheter initially was used primarily to manage patients with cardiogenic shock and other acute cardiac diseases, indi-cations for this form of invasive hemodynamic monitoring gradually expanded to encompass a wide variety of clinical con-ditions. Clearly, many clinicians believe that information valu-able for the management of critically ill patients is afforded by having a pulmonary artery catheter (PAC) in place. However, unambiguous data in support of this view are scarce, and several studies suggest that bedside pulmonary artery catheterization may not benefit most critically ill patients and in fact may lead to some serious complications (see “Effect of Pulmonary Artery Catheterization on Outcome”).Determinants of Cardiac PerformanceCardiac performance requires the integration of multiple mechanical and physiologic parameters of both the heart itself and of the circulatory system through which blood flows. The following sections discuss some of these factors, including preload, contractility, and afterload. A brief review of some of the graphical tools for evaluating cardiac physiology is demon-strated in Fig. 13-2.Preload. Starling’s law of the heart states that the force of muscle contraction depends on the initial length of the cardiac fibers. Using terminology that derives from early experiments using isolated cardiac muscle preparations, preload is the stretch of ventricular myocardial tissue just prior to the next contrac-tion. Strictly speaking, preload is determined by end-diastolic volume (EDV). In practice, EDV is challenging to measure precisely during the cardiac cycle, and so clinicians utilize the end-diastolic pressure (EDP) as a reasonable surrogate. For the right ventricle, central venous pressure (CVP) approximates right ventricular EDP. For the left ventricle, pulmonary artery occlusion pressure (PAOP), which is measured by transiently inflating a balloon at the end of a pressure monitoring catheter positioned in a small branch of the pulmonary artery, approxi-mates left ventricular EDP. The presence of atrioventricular val-vular stenosis may alter this relationship.There are limits to the utilization of EDP as a surrogate for EDV when evaluating preload. For example, EDP is deter-mined not only by volume but also by the diastolic compliance of the ventricular chamber. Ventricular compliance is altered by Brunicardi_Ch13_p0433-p0452.indd   43622/02/19   2:20 PM 437PHYSIOLOGIC MONITORING OF THE SURGICAL PATIENTCHAPTER 13Figure 13-2 A-D.  Left ventricular pressure-volume loops constructed for various clinically relevant scenarios. For further information refer to the text. A. Standard left ventricular pressure-volume loop, with stroke volume, end systolic volume, and end diastolic volume highlighted for reference. Note the directionality of the pressure-volume loop, which is not annotated in the other figures for clarity. B-D. Demonstration of the effect of changing preload (B), contractility (C), or afterload (D) on the pressure-volume relationships in the left ventricle. Note the differences in stroke volume for various conditions, as well as the end-systolic volume and pressures, as these represent clinically significant parameters that govern patient care.various pathologic conditions and pharmacologic agents. Fur-thermore, the relationship between EDP and true preload is not linear, but rather is exponential (Fig. 13-2A,B). This fact limits the utility of EDP as a surrogate marker at extremes of EDV.Contractility. Contractility is defined as the inotropic state of the myocardium. Contractility is said to increase when the force of ventricular contraction increases at constant preload and afterload. Clinically, contractility is difficult to quantify because virtually all of the available measures are dependent to a certain degree on preload and afterload. If pressure-volume loops are constructed for each cardiac cycle, small changes in preload and/or afterload will result in shifts of the point defining the end of systole. These end-systolic points on the pressure-versus-volume diagram describe a straight line, known as the end-systolic pressure-volume line. A steeper slope of this line indicates greater contractility, as illustrated in Fig. 13-2C.Afterload. Afterload is another term derived from in vitro experiments using isolated strips of cardiac muscle and is defined as the force resisting fiber shortening once systole begins. Defined specifically for the in vivo system, afterload is the resistance to the expulsion of blood from the heart chamber of interest, usually the left ventricle. Several factors comprise the in vivo correlate of ventricular afterload, including ven-tricular chamber geometry, intracavitary pressure generation, and the arterial impedance in the systemic circulation. Since these factors are difficult to assess clinically, afterload is com-monly approximated by calculating systemic vascular resistance (SVR), defined as mean arterial pressure (MAP) divided by car-diac output (Fig. 13-2D).PLACEMENT OF THE PULMONARY ARTERY CATHETERIn its simplest form, the PAC has four channels. One channel terminates in a balloon at the tip of the catheter. The proximal end of this channel is connected to a syringe to permit inflation of the balloon with air. Prior to insertion of the PAC, the integ-rity of the balloon should be verified by inflating it. In order to minimize the risk of vascular or ventricular perforation by the relatively inflexible catheter, it also is important to verify that the inflated balloon extends just beyond the tip of the device. A second channel in the catheter contains wires that are connected Brunicardi_Ch13_p0433-p0452.indd   43722/02/19   2:21 PM 438BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ito a thermistor located near the tip of the catheter. At the proxi-mal end of the PAC, the wires terminate in a fitting that permits connection to appropriate hardware for the calculation of car-diac output using the thermodilution technique. The final two channels are used for pressure monitoring and the injection of the thermal indicator for determinations of cardiac output. One of these channels terminates at the tip of the catheter; the other terminates 20 cm proximal to the tip.Placement of a PAC requires access to the central venous circulation. Such access can be obtained at a variety of sites, including the antecubital, femoral, jugular, and subclavian veins. Percutaneous placement through either the jugular or sub-clavian vein generally is preferred. Right internal jugular vein cannulation carries the lowest risk of complications, and the path of the catheter from this site into the right atrium is straight. In the event of inadvertent arterial puncture, local pressure is significantly more effective in controlling bleeding from the carotid artery as compared to the subclavian artery. Neverthe-less, it is more difficult to keep occlusive dressings in place on the neck than in the subclavian fossa. Furthermore, the anatomic landmarks in the subclavian position are quite constant, even in patients with anasarca or massive obesity; the subclavian vein is always attached to the deep (concave) surface of the clavicle. In contrast, the appropriate landmarks to guide jugular venous cannulation are sometimes difficult to discern in obese or very edematous patients. However, ultrasonic guidance, which should be used routinely, has been shown to facilitate bedside jugular venipuncture.14Cannulation of the vein is normally performed percuta-neously, using the Seldinger technique. A small-bore needle is inserted through the skin and subcutaneous tissue into the vein. After documenting return of venous blood, a guidewire with a flexible tip is inserted through the needle into the vein, and the needle is withdrawn. A dilator/introducer sheath is passed over Figure 13-3. Representative pressure traces at different stages of insertion of the PAC. In the central venous circulation, the pressure remains low, with characteristic waves from atrial filling and tricuspid valve closing. Upon entry into the right ventricle, the pressure increases sharply, with the broadest range between systole and diastole. When in the main pulmonary artery, the systolic pressure remains elevated to the same degree, but the diastolic pressure is now significantly elevated due to the closure of the pulmonic valve during the cardiac cycle. Upon further advancement with the balloon inflated, the pressure differences become smaller and the magnitude of the mean pressure drops, reflecting an estimate of the left atrial pressure.the wire, and the wire and the dilator are removed. The proxi-mal terminus of the distal port of the PAC is connected through low-compliance tubing to a strain-gauge transducer, and the tubing-catheter system is flushed with fluid. While constantly observing the pressure tracing on a monitor screen, the PAC is advanced with the balloon deflated until respiratory excur-sions are observed. The balloon is then inflated, and the catheter advanced further, while monitoring pressures sequentially in the right atrium and right ventricle en route to the pulmonary artery. The pressure waveforms for the right atrium, right ventricle, and pulmonary artery are each characteristic (Fig. 13-3). The cath-eter is advanced out the pulmonary artery until a damped tracing indicative of the “wedged” position is obtained. The balloon is then deflated, taking care to ensure that a normal pulmonary arterial tracing is again observed on the monitor; leaving the balloon inflated can increase the risk of pulmonary infarction or perforation of the pulmonary artery. Unnecessary measurements of the pulmonary artery occlusion pressure are discouraged as rupture of the pulmonary artery may occur.HEMODYNAMIC MEASUREMENTSEven in its simplest embodiment, the PAC is capable of pro-viding clinicians with a remarkable amount of information about the hemodynamic status of patients. Additional informa-tion may be obtained if various modifications of the standard PAC are employed. By combining data obtained through use of the PAC with results obtained by other means (i.e., blood hemoglobin concentration and oxyhemoglobin saturation), derived estimates of systemic oxygen transport and utilization can be calculated. Direct and derived parameters obtainable by bedside pulmonary arterial catheterization, along with sev-eral associated approximate normal ranges, are summarized in Table 13-1.Brunicardi_Ch13_p0433-p0452.indd   43822/02/19   2:21 PM 439PHYSIOLOGIC MONITORING OF THE SURGICAL PATIENTCHAPTER 13Table 13-1Directly measured and derived hemodynamic data obtainable by bedside pulmonary artery catheterization, with normal associated rangesPARAMETERNORMAL RANGECVP0–6 mmHgPAPVariesPAOP6–12 mmHgSv–O2 (intermittent or continuous)65%–70%QT (intermittent or continuous)4–6 L/minQT* (intermittent or continuous)2.5–3.5 L·min-1·m-2RVEF>55%SV40–80 mLSVR800–1400 dyne·sec·cm-5SVRI1500–2400 dyne·sec·cm-5·m-2PVR100–150 dyne·sec·cm-5PVRI200–400 dyne·sec·cm-5·m-2RVEDVVariableD.O2400–660 mL·min-1·m-2V–O2115–165 mL·min-1·m-2ERVariableQS/QTVariableCVP = mean central venous pressure; D.O2 = systemic oxygen delivery; ER = systemic oxygen extraction ratio; PAOP = pulmonary artery occlusion (wedge) pressure; PAP = pulmonary artery pressure; PVR = pulmonary vascular resistance; PVRI = pulmonary vascular resistance index; QS/QT = fractional pulmonary venous admixture (shunt fraction); QT = cardiac output; QT* = cardiac output indexed to body surface area (cardiac index); RVEDV = right ventricular end-diastolic volume; RVEF = right ventricular ejection fraction; SV = stroke volume; SVI = stroke volume index; Sv–O2= fractional mixed venous (pulmonary artery) hemoglobin saturation; SVR = systemic vascular resistance; SVRI = systemic vascular resistance index; V–O2 = systemic oxygen utilization.Measurement of Cardiac Output by ThermodilutionBefore the development of the PAC, determining cardiac output (QT) at the bedside required careful measurements of oxygen consumption (Fick method) or spectrophotometric determina-tion of indocyanine green dye dilution curves. Measurements of QT using the thermodilution technique are simple and reason-ably accurate. The measurements can be performed repetitively, and the principle is straightforward. If a bolus of an indicator is rapidly and thoroughly mixed with a moving fluid upstream from a detector, then the concentration of the indicator at the detector will increase sharply and then exponentially diminish back to zero. The area under the resulting time-concentration curve is a function of the volume of indicator injected and the flow rate of the moving stream of fluid. Larger volumes of indi-cator result in greater areas under the curve, and faster flow rates of the mixing fluid result in smaller areas under the curve. When QT is measured by thermodilution, the indicator is heat and the detector is a temperature-sensing thermistor at the distal end of the PAC. The relationship used for calculating QT is called the Stewart-Hamilton equation:QVKK(TT)T(t)dtT12BIB=−˛where V is the volume of the indicator injected, TB is the tem-perature of blood (i.e., core body temperature), TI is the tem-perature of the indicator, K1 is a constant that is the function of the specific heats of blood and the indicator, K2 is an empiri-cally derived constant that accounts for several factors (the dead space volume of the catheter, heat lost from the indicator as it traverses the catheter, and the injection rate of the indicator), and ∫TB(t)dt is the area under the time-temperature curve. In clinical practice, the Stewart-Hamilton equation is solved by a microprocessor.Determination of cardiac output by the thermodilution method is generally quite accurate, although it tends to system-atically overestimate QT at low values. Changes in blood tem-perature and QT during the respiratory cycle can influence the measurement. Therefore, results generally should be recorded as the mean of two or three determinations obtained at random points in the respiratory cycle. Using cold injectate widens the difference between TB and TI and thereby increases signal-to-noise ratio. Nevertheless, most authorities recommend using room temperature injectate (normal saline or 5% dextrose in water) to minimize errors resulting from warming of the fluid as it transferred from its reservoir to a syringe for injection.Technologic innovations have been introduced that per-mit continuous measurement of QT by thermodilution. In this approach, thermal transients are not generated by injecting a bolus of a cold indicator, but rather by heating the blood with a tiny filament located on the PAC upstream from the thermistor. By correlating the amount of current supplied to the heating element with the downstream temperature of the blood, it is pos-sible to estimate the average blood flow across the filament and thereby calculate QT. Based upon the results of several studies, continuous determinations of QT using this approach agree well with data generated by conventional measurements using bolus injections of a cold indicator.15 Information is lacking regarding the clinical value of being able to monitor QT continuously.Mixed Venous OximetryThe Fick equation can be written as222QVO(COCO)Tav=−where CaO2 is the content of oxygen in arterial blood and CvO2 is the content of oxygen in mixed venous blood. The oxygen content in both arterial and venous blood is a function of the hemoglobin concentration in the blood, the hemoglobin satura-tion, and the partial pressure of oxygen:CO1.36HgbSO1000.0031POa/v2a/v2a/v2=××˛˝˙ˆˇ˘+×CO1.36HgbSO100//av2av2=××˛˝˙ˆˇ˘where Sa/vO2 is the fractional saturation of hemoglobin in either arterial or venous blood, Hgb is the concentration of hemoglobin Brunicardi_Ch13_p0433-p0452.indd   43922/02/19   2:21 PM 440BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iin blood, and Pa/vO2 is the partial pressure of oxygen in the arte-rial or venous blood. Under most circumstances the contribution of dissolved oxygen to both CaO2 and CvO2 is negligible, allow-ing the second portion of equation to be functionally eliminated (see previous equation). Given that, if the Fick equation is rear-ranged to the following:2COCOVOQv2a2T=−Oxygen saturation can replace oxygen content, yielding the final clinically valuable equation:(1.36)222SOSOVOQHgbvaT=−××where SVO2 is the fractional saturation of hemoglobin in mixed venous blood, SaO2 is the fractional saturation of hemoglobin in arterial blood, and Hgb is the concentration of hemoglobin in blood. Thus, it can be seen that SVO2 is a function of VO2 (i.e., metabolic rate), QT, SaO2, and Hgb. Accordingly, subnormal val-ues of SVO2 can be caused by a decrease in QT (due, for example, to heart failure or hypovolemia), a decrease in SaO2 (due, for example, to intrinsic pulmonary disease), a decrease in Hgb (i.e., anemia), or an increase in metabolic rate (due, for example, to seizures or fever). With a conventional PAC, measurements of SVO2 require aspirating a sample of blood from the distal (i.e., pulmonary arterial) port of the catheter and injecting the sample into a blood gas analyzer. Therefore, for practical purposes, mea-surements of SVO2 can be performed only intermittently.By adding a fifth channel to the PAC, it is possible to mon-itor SVO2 continuously. The fifth channel contains two fiber-optic bundles, which are used to transmit and receive light of the appropriate wavelengths to permit measurements of hemoglobin saturation by reflectance spectrophotometry. Continuous SVO2 devices provide measurements of SVO2 that agree quite closely with those obtained by conventional analyses of blood aspi-rated from the pulmonary artery. Despite the theoretical value of being able to monitor SVO2 continuously, data are lacking to show that this capability favorably improves outcomes. In a prospective, observational study of 3265 patients undergoing cardiac surgery with either a standard PAC or a PAC with con-tinuous SVO2 monitoring, the oximetric catheter was associated with fewer arterial blood gases and thermodilution cardiac out-put determinations but no difference in patient outcome.16 Since pulmonary artery catheters that permit continuous monitoring of SVO2 are more expensive than conventional PACs, the routine use of these devices cannot be recommended.The saturation of oxygen in the right atrium or superior vena cava (ScvO2) correlates closely with SvO2 over a wide range of conditions,17 although the correlation between ScvO2 and SvO2 has been questioned.18 Since measurement of ScvO2 requires placement of a central venous catheter rather than a PAC, it is somewhat less invasive and easier to carry out. By using a cen-tral venous catheter equipped to permit fiber-optic monitoring of ScvO2, it may be possible to titrate the resuscitation of patients with shock using a less invasive device than the PAC.17,19 The Surviving Sepsis Campaign international guidelines for the management of severe sepsis and septic shock recommends that during the first 6 hours of resuscitation, the goals of initial resuscitation of sepsis-induced hypoperfusion should include all of the following: CVP 8 to 12 mm Hg, MAP ≥65 mm Hg, urine output ≥0.5 mL/kg per hour, and ScvO2 of 70% or SvO2 65%.20EFFECT OF PULMONARY ARTERY CATHETERIZATION ON OUTCOMEDespite initial enthusiasm for using the PAC in the manage-ment of critically ill patients, several studies have failed to show improved outcomes with their use. Connors and col-leagues reported results of a major observational study evaluat-ing the value of pulmonary artery catheterization in critically ill patients.21 These researchers compared two groups of patients: those who did undergo placement of a PAC during their first 24 hours of ICU care and those who did not. The investiga-tors recognized that the value of their intended analysis was completely dependent on the robustness of their methodology for case-matching because sicker patients (i.e., those at greater risk of mortality based upon the severity of their illness) were presumably more likely to undergo pulmonary artery catheter-ization. Accordingly, the authors used sophisticated statistical methods for generating a cohort of study (i.e., PAC) patients, each one having a paired control matched carefully for severity of illness. Connors and associates concluded that placement of a pulmonary artery catheter during the first 24 hours of stay in an ICU is associated with a significant increase in the risk of mortality, even when statistical methods are used to account for severity of illness.A number of prospective, randomized controlled trials of pulmonary artery catheterization are summarized in Table 13-2. The study by Pearson and associates was underpowered with only 226 patients enrolled.22 In addition, the attending anes-thesiologists were permitted to exclude patients from the CVP group at their discretion; thus randomization was compromised. The study by Tuman and coworkers was large (1094 patients were enrolled), but different anesthesiologists were assigned to the different groups.23 Furthermore, 39 patients in the CVP group underwent placement of a PAC because of hemodynamic complications. All of the individual single-institution studies of vascular surgery patients were relatively underpowered, and all excluded at least certain categories of patients (e.g., those with a history of recent myocardial infarction).24,25In the largest randomized controlled trial of the PAC, Sandham and associates randomized nearly 2000 American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) classes III and IV patients undergoing major thoracic, abdominal, or orthopedic surgery to placement of a PAC or CVP catheter.26 In the patients assigned to receive a PAC, physiologic goal-directed therapy was imple-mented by protocol. There were no differences in mortality at 30 days, 6 months, or 12 months between the two groups, and ICU length of stay was similar. There was a significantly higher rate of pulmonary emboli in the PAC group (0.9% vs. 0%). This study has been criticized because most of the patients enrolled were not in the highest risk category.In the “PAC-Man” trial, a multicenter, randomized trial in 65 UK hospitals, over 1000 ICU patients were managed with or without a PAC.27 The specifics of the clinical management were then left up to the treating clinicians. There was no dif-ference in hospital mortality between the 2 groups (with PAC 68% vs. without PAC 66%, P = 0.39). However, a 9.5% com-plication rate was associated with the insertion or use of the PAC, although none of these complications were fatal. Clearly, these were critically ill patients, as noted by the high hospital mortality rates. Supporters of the PAC may cite methodology problems with this study, such as loose inclusion criteria and the lack of a defined treatment protocol.Brunicardi_Ch13_p0433-p0452.indd   44022/02/19   2:21 PM 441PHYSIOLOGIC MONITORING OF THE SURGICAL PATIENTCHAPTER 13Table 13-2Summary of randomized, prospective clinical trials comparing pulmonary artery catheter (PAC) with central venous pressure (CVP) monitoringAUTHORSTUDY POPULATIONGROUPSOUTCOMESSTRENGTHS/WEAKNESSESPearson  et al22“Low risk” patients undergoing cardiac or vascular surgeryCVP catheter (group 1); PAC (group 2); PAC with continuous Sv–O2 readout (group 3)No differences among groups for mortality or length of ICU stay; significant differences in costs (group 1 < group 2 < group 3)Underpowered (266 total patients enrolled); compromised randomization protocolsTuman  et al23Cardiac surgical patientsPAC; CVPNo differences between groups for mortality, length of ICU stay, or significant noncardiac complicationsLarge trial (1094 patients); different anesthesiologists for different groupsBender  et al24Vascular surgery patientsPAC; CVPNo differences between groups for mortality, length of ICU stay, or length of hospital stayRelatively underpoweredValentine et al25Aortic surgery patientsPAC + hemodynamic optimization in ICU night before surgery; CVPNo difference between groups for mortality or length of ICU stay; significantly higher incidence of postoperative complications in PAC groupRelatively underpoweredSandham et al26“High risk” major surgeryPAC; CVPNo differences between groups for mortality, length of ICU stay; increased incidence of pulmonary embolism in PAC groupLargest RCT of PAC utilization; commonly criticized for smaller number of highest risk category patientsHarvey S et al27PAC-Man TrialMedical and surgical ICU patientsPAC vs no PAC, with option for alternative CO measuring device in non-PAC groupNo difference in hospital mortality between the 2 groups, increased incidence of complications in the PAC groupLoose inclusion criteria with lack of a defined treatment protocol for use of PAC dataBinanay  et al29ESCAPE TrialPatients with CHFPAC vs no PACNo difference in hospital mortality between the groups, increased incidence of adverse events in the PAC groupNo formal treatment protocol for PAC-driven therapyWheeler  et al30FACTT TrialPatients with ALIPAC vs CVC with a fluid and inotropic management protocolNo difference in ICU or hospital mortality, or incidence of organ failure between the groups; increased incidence of adverse events in the PAC group ALI = acute lung injury; CHF = congestive heart failure; CO = cardiac output; CVC = central venous catheter; ICU = intensive care unit; PAC = pulmonary artery catheter; Sv–O2 = fractional mixed venous (pulmonary artery) hemoglobin saturation.A meta-analysis of 13 randomized studies of the PAC that included over 5000 patients was published in 2005.28 A broad spectrum of critically ill patients was included in these hetero-geneous trials, and the hemodynamic goals and treatment strate-gies varied. While the use of the PAC was associated with an increased use of inotropes and vasodilators, there were no differ-ences in mortality or hospital length of stay between the patients managed with a PAC and those managed without a PAC.The ESCAPE trial (which was one of the studies included in the previous meta-analysis)29 evaluated 433 patients with severe or recurrent congestive heart failure (CHF) admitted to the ICU. Patients were randomized to management by clinical assessment and a PAC or clinical assessment without a PAC. The goal in both groups was resolution of CHF, with addi-tional PAC targets of a pulmonary capillary occlusion pressure of 15 mmHg and a right atrial pressure of 8 mmHg. There was no formal treatment protocol, but inotropic support was dis-couraged. Substantial reduction in symptoms, jugular venous pressure, and edema was noted in both groups. There was no significant difference in the primary end point of days alive and out of the hospital during the first 6 months, or hospital mortality (PAC 10% vs without PAC 9%). Adverse events Brunicardi_Ch13_p0433-p0452.indd   44122/02/19   2:21 PM 442BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iwere more common among patients in the PAC group (21.9% vs 11.5%; P = 0.04).Finally, the Fluids and Catheters Treatment Trial (FACTT) conducted by the Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS) Clinical Trials Network was published in 2006.30 The risks and benefits of PAC compared with central venous catheters (CVC) were evaluated in 1000 patients with acute lung injury. Patients were randomly assigned to receive either a PAC or a CVC to guide management for 7 days via an explicit protocol. Patients also were randomly assigned to a conservative or liberal fluid strategy in a 2 × 2 factorial design (outcomes based on the fluid management strategy were published separately). Mortality dur-ing the first 60 days was similar in the PAC and CVC groups (27% and 26%, respectively; P = .69). The duration of mechani-cal ventilation and ICU length of stay also were not influenced by the type of catheter used. The type of catheter employed did not affect the incidence of shock, respiratory or renal failure, ventilator settings, or requirement for hemodialysis or vaso-pressors. There was a 1% rate of crossover from CVC-guided therapy to PAC-guided therapy. The catheter used did not affect the administration of fluids or diuretics, and the fluid balance was similar in the two groups. The PAC group had approxi-mately twice as many catheter-related adverse events (mainly arrhythmias).Few subjects in critical care medicine have historically gen-erated more emotional responses among experts in the field than the use of the PAC. As these studies demonstrate, it is not possible to show that therapy directed by use of the PAC saves lives when it is evaluated in a large population of patients. Certainly, given the available evidence, routine use of the PAC cannot be justified.  Whether selective use of the device in a few relatively uncommon clinical situations is warranted or valuable remains a controversial issue. Consequently, a marked decline in the use of the PAC from 5.66 per 1000 medical admissions in 1993 to 1.99 per 1000 medical admissions in 2004 has been seen.31 Based upon the results and exclusion criteria in these pro-spective randomized trials, reasonable criteria for perioperative monitoring without use of a PAC are presented in Table 13-3.One of the reasons for using a PAC to monitor critically ill patients is to optimize cardiac output and systemic oxygen delivery. Defining what constitutes the optimum cardiac out-put, however, has proven to be difficult. A number of random-ized trials evaluating the effect on outcome of goal-directed as compared to conventional hemodynamic resuscitation have 2Table 13-3Suggested criteria for perioperative monitoring without use of a pulmonary artery catheter in patients undergoing cardiac or major vascular surgical proceduresNo anticipated need for suprarenal or supraceliac aortic cross-clampingNo history of myocardial infarction during 3 months prior to operationNo history of poorly compensated congestive heart failureNo history of coronary artery bypass graft surgery during  6 weeks prior to operationNo history of ongoing symptomatic mitral or aortic valvular heart diseaseNo history of ongoing unstable angina pectorisbeen published. Some studies provide support for the notion that interventions designed to achieve supraphysiologic goals for DO2, VO2, and QT improve outcome.32,33 However, other pub-lished studies do not support this view, and a meta-analysis con-cluded that interventions designed to achieve supraphysiologic goals for oxygen transport do not significantly reduce mortality rates in critically ill patients.34,35 At this time, supraphysiologic resuscitation of patients in shock cannot be endorsed.There is no simple explanation for the apparent lack of effectiveness of pulmonary artery catheterization, although sev-eral concurrent possibilities exist. First, even though bedside pulmonary artery catheterization is quite safe, the procedure is associated with a finite incidence of serious complications, including ventricular arrhythmias, catheter-related sepsis, cen-tral venous thrombosis, pulmonary arterial perforation, and pul-monary embolism.26 The adverse effects of these complications on outcome may equal or even outweigh any benefits associated with using a PAC to guide therapy. Second, the data generated by the PAC may be inaccurate, leading to inappropriate thera-peutic interventions. Third, the measurements, even if accurate, are often misinterpreted.36 Furthermore, the current state of understanding is primitive when it comes to deciding what is the best management for certain hemodynamic disturbances, par-ticularly those associated with sepsis or septic shock. Taking all of this into consideration, it may be that interventions prompted by measurements obtained with a PAC are actually harmful to patients. As a result, the marginal benefit now available by placing a PAC may be quite small. Less invasive modalities are available that may provide clinically useful hemodynamic information.It may be true that aggressive hemodynamic resusci-tation of patients, guided by various forms of monitoring, is valuable only during certain critical periods, such as the first  few hours after presentation with septic shock or during surgery. For example, Rivers and colleagues reported that survival of patients with septic shock is significantly improved when resus-citation in the emergency department is guided by a protocol that seeks to keep ScvO2 greater than 70%.19 Similarly, a study using an ultrasound-based device (see “Doppler Ultrasonogra-phy”) to assess cardiac filling and SV showed that maximizing SV intraoperatively results in fewer postoperative complications and shorter hospital length of stay.37MINIMALLY INVASIVE ALTERNATIVES TO THE PULMONARY ARTERY CATHETERBecause of the cost, risks, and questionable benefit associated with bedside pulmonary artery catheterization, there has been interest in the development of practical means for less invasive monitoring of hemodynamic parameters. Several approaches have been developed that have achieved variable degrees of suc-cess. None of these methods render the standard thermodilution technique of the pulmonary artery catheter obsolete. However, these strategies may contribute to improvements in the hemody-namic monitoring of critically ill patients.Transpulmonary ThermodilutionIn the standard PAC thermodilution technique, measurements rely on the detection of temperature changes in a relatively small area from the injection port to the thermistor on the same catheter. In contrast, the transpulmonary thermodilution (TPTD) technique measures temperature changes from cold Brunicardi_Ch13_p0433-p0452.indd   44222/02/19   2:21 PM 443PHYSIOLOGIC MONITORING OF THE SURGICAL PATIENTCHAPTER 13bolus solution injected centrally, then measured using an arte-rial thermistor on a special arterial line, generally placed in the femoral artery. Both standard PAC thermodilution and TPTD make use of the Stewart-Hamilton equation to subsequently cal-culate cardiac output. Studies have demonstrated that this tech-nique provides comparable estimates of cardiac output when compared to routine PAC thermodilution and can accurately detect changes in cardiac output as small as 12%.38 However, due to the large blood circuit between the central injection point and the thermistor, data can be challenging to interpret in cer-tain pathophysiologic conditions (e.g., in pulmonary edema, as excess lung water serves as a temperature sink). On the other hand, thoughtful application of TPTD data allows clinicians access to several additional variables that the traditional PAC does not provide, such as estimation of the global end-diastolic volume (GEDV) and the extravascular lung water volume (EVLW).38 While these variables are of scientific interest, they are not yet in wide clinical use, and further studies are required to determine their utility. However, TPTD does currently play a prominent in the real-time calibration of pulse contour analysis, described in greater detail later in this chapter.Doppler UltrasonographyWhen ultrasonic sound waves are reflected by moving erythro-cytes in the bloodstream, the frequency of the reflected signal is increased or decreased, depending on whether the cells are mov-ing toward or away from the ultrasonic source. This change in frequency is called the Doppler shift, and its magnitude is deter-mined by the velocity of the moving red blood cells. Therefore, measurements of the Doppler shift can be used to calculate red blood cell velocity. With knowledge of both the cross-sectional area of a vessel and the mean red blood cell velocity of the blood flowing through it, one can calculate blood flow rate. If the ves-sel in question is the aorta, then QT can be calculated as:QT = HR × A × ∫ V(t)dtwhere A is the cross-sectional area of the aorta and ∫V(t)dt is the red blood cell velocity integrated over the cardiac cycle.Two approaches have been developed for using Doppler ultrasonography to estimate QT. The first approach uses an ultrasonic transducer, which is manually positioned in the suprasternal notch and focused on the root of the aorta. Aortic cross-sectional area can be estimated using a nomogram, which factors in age, height, and weight, back-calculated if an indepen-dent measure of QT is available, or by using two-dimensional transthoracic or transesophageal ultrasonography. While this approach is completely noninvasive, it requires a highly-skilled operator in order to obtain meaningful results and is labor-intensive. Moreover, unless QT measured using thermodilution is used to back-calculate aortic diameter, accuracy using the suprasternal notch approach is not acceptable. Accordingly, the method is useful only for obtaining very intermittent estimates of QT, and it has not been widely adopted by clinicians.A more promising, albeit more invasive, approach has been introduced. In this method blood flow velocity is con-tinuously monitored in the descending thoracic aorta using a continuous-wave Doppler transducer introduced into the esoph-agus. The probe is connected to a monitor which continuously displays the blood flow velocity profile in the descending aorta as well as the calculated QT. In order to maximize the accuracy of the device, the probe position must be adjusted to obtain the peak velocity in the aorta. In order to transform blood flow in the descending aorta into QT, a correction factor is applied that is based on the assumption that only 70% of the flow at the root of the aorta is still present in the descending thoracic aorta. Aortic cross-sectional area is estimated using a nomogram based on the patient’s age, weight, and height. Results using these methods appear to be reasonably accurate across a broad spectrum of patients. A meta-analysis of the available data shows a good correlation between cardiac output estimates obtained by trans-esophageal Doppler and PAC in critically ill patients.39 The ultrasonic device also calculates a derived parameter termed flow time corrected (FTc), which is the systolic flow time in the descending aorta corrected for heart rate. FTc is a function of preload, contractility, and vascular input impedance. Although it is not a pure measure of preload, Doppler-based estimates of SV and FTc have been used successfully to guide volume resuscitation in high-risk surgical patients undergoing major operations.37Impedance CardiographyThe impedance to flow of alternating electrical current in regions of the body is commonly called bioimpedance. In the thorax, changes in the volume and velocity of blood in the tho-racic aorta lead to detectable changes in bioimpedance. The first derivative of the oscillating component of thoracic bio-impedance (dZ/dt) is linearly related to aortic blood flow. On the basis of this relationship, empirically derived formulas have been developed to estimate SV, and subsequently QT, nonin-vasively. This methodology is called impedance cardiography. The approach is attractive because it is noninvasive, provides a continuous readout of QT, and does not require extensive train-ing. Despite these advantages, measurements of QT obtained by impedance cardiography are not sufficiently reliable to be used for clinical decision making and have poor correlation with thermodilution.40Because of the limitations of bioimpedance devices, a newer approach for processing the impedance signal was devel-oped and commercialized. This approach is based on the recog-nition that the impedance signal has two components: amplitude and phase. Whereas the amplitude of the thoracic impedance signal is determined by all of the components of the thoracic cavity (bone, blood, muscle, and other soft tissues), phase shifts are determined entirely by pulsatile flow. The vast majority of pulsatile flow is related to blood moving within the aorta. There-fore, the “bioreactance” signal correlates closely with aortic flow, and cardiac output determined using this approach agrees closely with cardiac output measured using conventional indica-tor dilution techniques.41Pulse Contour AnalysisAnother method for determining cardiac output is an approach called pulse contour analysis for estimating SV on a beat-to-beat basis. The mechanical properties of the arterial tree and SV determine the shape of the arterial pulse waveform. The pulse contour method of estimating QT uses the arterial pressure waveform as an input for a model of the systemic circulation in order to determine beat-to-beat flow through the circulatory system. The parameters of resistance, compliance, and imped-ance are initially estimated based on the patient’s age and sex and can be subsequently refined by using a reference standard measurement of QT. The reference standard estimation of QT is obtained periodically using the indicator dilution approach by injecting the indicator into a central venous catheter and Brunicardi_Ch13_p0433-p0452.indd   44322/02/19   2:21 PM 444BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Idetecting the transient increase in indicator concentration in the blood using an arterial catheter. In one commercially available embodiment of this approach, the lithium ion (Li+) is the indi-cator used for the periodic calibrations of the device. The lith-ium carbonate indicator can be injected into a peripheral vein, and the doses do not exert pharmacologically relevant effects in adult patients. The Li+ indicator dilution method has shown to be at least as reliable as other thermodilution methods over a broad range of CO in a variety of patients.41 In another com-mercially available system, a conventional bolus of cold fluid is used as the indicator for calibration, via TPTD approaches as described previously. When the pulse contour analysis is com-bined with intermittent TPTD in this fashion, the continuous data provided by contour analysis is more precise than TPTD alone.38Measurements of QT based on pulse contour monitoring using these two approaches are comparable in accuracy to stan-dard pulmonary artery catheter (PAC)-thermodilution methods, but they are less invasive because transcardiac catheterization is not needed.42 Using online pressure waveform analysis, the computerized algorithms can calculate SV, QT, SVR, and an estimate of myocardial contractility, the rate of rise of the arte-rial systolic pressure (dP/dT). The use of pulse contour analy-sis has been applied using noninvasive photoplethysmographic measurements of arterial pressure. However, the accuracy of this technique has been questioned, and its clinical utility remains to be determined.43One commercially available device that can be used for estimating cardiac output does not require external calibration. Instead, the relationship between pulse pressure and stroke vol-ume is determined using a proprietary algorithm that uses bio-metric data, such as age, gender and height, as inputs. Although this methodology is gaining fairly wide acceptance in critical care medicine, reported accuracy (in comparison to “gold stan-dard” approaches) is not very good.41Partial Carbon Dioxide RebreathingPartial carbon dioxide (CO2) rebreathing uses the Fick prin-ciple to estimate QT noninvasively. By intermittently altering the dead space within the ventilator circuit via a rebreathing valve, changes in CO2 production (VCO2) and end-tidal CO2 (ETCO2) are used to determine cardiac output using a modified Fick equation:Q=VETTCOCO22˜˜Commercially available devices use this Fick principle to cal-culate QT using intermittent partial CO2 rebreathing through a disposable rebreathing loop. These devices consist of a CO2 sen-sor based on infrared light absorption, an airflow sensor, and a pulse oximeter. Changes in intrapulmonary shunt and hemody-namic instability impair the accuracy of QT estimated by partial CO2 rebreathing. Continuous inline pulse oximetry and inspired fraction of inspired O2 (Fio2) are used to estimate shunt fraction to correct QT.Some studies of the partial CO2 rebreathing approach sug-gest that this technique is not as accurate as thermodilution, the gold standard for measuring QT.42,44 However, other studies sug-gest that the partial CO2 rebreathing method for determination of QT compares favorably to measurements made using a PAC in critically ill patients.45Transesophageal EchocardiographyTransesophageal echocardiography (TEE) has made the transi-tion from operating room to intensive care unit. TEE requires that the patient be sedated and usually intubated for airway pro-tection. Using this powerful technology, global assessments of LV and RV function can be made, including determinations of ventricular volume, EF, and QT. Segmental wall motion abnor-malities, pericardial effusions, and tamponade can be readily identified with TEE. Doppler techniques allow estimation of atrial filling pressures. The technique is somewhat cumbersome and requires considerable training and skill in order to obtain reliable results. Recently, a TEE probe has been introduced into practice that is small enough in diameter that it can be left in place for as long as 72 hours. While only limited data are cur-rently available with this probe, it seems like it will be a useful cardiac monitoring tool for use in selected, complex patients.Assessing Preload ResponsivenessAlthough pulse contour analysis or partial CO2 rebreathing may be able to provide estimates of SV and QT, these approaches alone can offer little or no information about the adequacy of preload. Thus, if QT is low, some other means must be employed to estimate preload. Many clinicians assess the adequacy of car-diac preload by determining CVP or PAOP. However, neither CVP nor PAOP correlate well with the true parameter of inter-est, left ventricular end-diastolic volume (LVEDV).46 Extremely high or low CVP or PAOP results are informative, but readings in a large middle zone (i.e., 5 to 20 mmHg) are less useful. Fur-thermore, changes in CVP or PAOP fail to correlate well with changes in stroke volume.47,48 Echocardiography can be used to estimate LVEDV, but this approach is dependent on the skill and training of the individual using it, and isolated measure-ments of LVEDV fail to predict the hemodynamic response to alterations in preload.49When intrathoracic pressure increases during the appli-cation of positive airway pressure in mechanically ventilated patients, venous return decreases, and as a consequence, left ventricular stroke volume (LVSV) also decreases. Therefore, pulse pressure variation (PPV) during a positive pressure episode can be used to predict the responsiveness of cardiac output to changes in preload.50,51 PPV is defined as the differ-ence between the maximal pulse pressure and the minimum pulse pressure divided by the average of these two pressures  (Fig. 13-4). This approach has validated this by comparing PPV, CVP, PAOP, and systolic pressure variation as predictors of pre-load responsiveness in a cohort of critically ill patients. Patients were classified as being “preload responsive” if their cardiac index increased by at least 15% after rapid infusion of a standard volume of intravenous fluid.52 Receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) curves demonstrated that PPV was the best predictor of preload responsiveness. Although atrial arrhythmias can inter-fere with the usefulness of this technique, PPV remains a useful approach for assessing preload responsiveness in most patients because of its simplicity and reliability.49Near-Infrared Spectroscopic Measurement of Tissue Hemoglobin Oxygen SaturationNear-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) allows continuous, nonin-vasive measurement of tissue hemoglobin oxygen saturation (StO2) using near-infrared wave lengths of light (700–1000 nm). This technology is based on Beer’s law, which states that the transmission of light through a solution with a dissolved Brunicardi_Ch13_p0433-p0452.indd   44422/02/19   2:21 PM 445PHYSIOLOGIC MONITORING OF THE SURGICAL PATIENTCHAPTER 13Figure 13-4. Calculation of pulse pressure variation as it would appear on bedside monitor. This provides a helpful and rapid assessment of fluid responsiveness in the critically ill mechanically ventilated patient.PPmax + PPmin2PPV (%) =PPmax – PPmin× 100InspirationArterial blood pressure (mmHg)ExpirationInspirationInspirationExpirationTimePPminPPmaxsolute decreases exponentially as the concentration of the sol-ute increases. In mammalian tissue, three compounds change their absorption pattern when oxygenated: cytochrome aa3, myoglobin, and hemoglobin. Because of the distinct absorption spectra of oxyhemoglobin and deoxyhemoglobin, Beer’s law can be used to detect their relative concentrations within tissue. Thus, the relative concentrations of the types of hemoglobin can be determined by measuring the change in light inten-sity as it passes through the tissue. Since about 20% of blood volume is intra-arterial and the StO2 measurements are taken without regard to systole or diastole, spectroscopic measure-ments are primarily indicative of the venous oxyhemoglobin concentration.NIRS has been evaluated to assess the severity of traumatic shock in animal models and in trauma patients. Studies have shown that peripheral muscle StO2, as determined by NIRS, is as accurate as other endpoints of resuscitation (i.e., base deficit, mixed venous oxygen saturation) in a porcine model of hemor-rhagic shock.53 Continuously measured StO2 has been evaluated in blunt trauma patients as a predictor of the development of multiple organ dysfunction syndrome (MODS) and mortality.54 383 patients were prospectively studied at seven level I trauma centers. StO2 was monitored for 24 hours after admission along with vital signs and other endpoints of resuscitation such as base deficit (BD). Minimum StO2 (using a minimum StO2 ≤75% as a cutoff) had a similar sensitivity and specificity in predicting the development of MODS as BD ≥6 mEq/L. StO2 and BD were also comparable in predicting mortality. Thus, NIRS-derived muscle StO2 measurements perform similarly to BD in identify-ing poor perfusion and predicting the development of MODS or death after severe torso trauma, yet have the additional advan-tages of being continuous and noninvasive. Ongoing prospec-tive studies will help determine the clinical utility of continuous monitoring of StO2 in clinical scenarios such as trauma, hemor-rhagic shock, sepsis, etc.RESPIRATORY MONITORINGThe ability to monitor various parameters of respiratory func-tion is of utmost importance in critically ill patients. Many  of these patients require mechanical ventilation. Monitoring of their respiratory physiology is necessary to assess the adequacy of oxygenation and ventilation, guide weaning and liberation from mechanical ventilation, and detect adverse events associ-ated with respiratory failure and mechanical ventilation. These parameters include gas exchange, neuromuscular activity, respi-ratory mechanics, and patient effort.Arterial Blood GasesBlood gas analysis may provide useful information when caring for patients with respiratory failure. However, even in the absence of respiratory failure or the need for mechanical ventilation, blood gas determinations also can be valuable to detect alterations in acid-base balance due to low QT, sepsis, renal failure, severe trauma, medication or drug overdose, or altered mental status. Arterial blood can be analyzed for pH, Po2, Pco2, HCO3– con-centration and calculated base deficit. When indicated, carboxy-hemoglobin and methemoglobin levels also can be measured. In recent years, efforts have been made to decrease the unnecessary use of arterial blood gas analysis. Serial arterial blood gas deter-minations are not necessary for routine weaning from mechanical ventilation in the majority of postoperative patients.Most bedside blood gas analyses still involve removal of an aliquot of blood from the patient, although continuous bedside arterial blood gas determinations are now possible without sam-pling via an indwelling arterial catheter that contains a biosensor. In studies comparing the accuracy of continuous arterial blood gas and pH monitoring with a conventional laboratory blood gas analyzer, excellent agreement between the two methods has been demonstrated.55 Continuous monitoring can reduce the volume of blood loss due to phlebotomy and dramatically decrease the time necessary to obtain blood gas results. Continuous monitor-ing, however, is expensive and is not widely employed.Determinants of Oxygen DeliveryThe primary goal of the cardiovascular and respiratory systems is to deliver oxygenated blood to the tissues. DO2 is dependent to a greater degree on the oxygen saturation of hemoglobin (Hgb) in arterial blood (Sao2) than on the partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood (Pao2). DO2 also is dependent on QT and Hgb. As discussed earlier and illustrated mathematically by previous equations, the dissolved oxygen in blood makes only a negligible contribution to DO2. Sao2 in mechanically venti-lated patients depends on the mean airway pressure, the frac-tion of inspired oxygen (Fio2), and SvO2. Thus, when Sao2 is low, the clinician has only a limited number of ways to improve this parameter. The clinician can increase mean airway pres-sure by increasing positive-end expiratory pressure (PEEP) or inspiratory time. Fio2 can be increased to a maximum of 1.0 by decreasing the amount of room air mixed with the oxygen sup-plied to the ventilator. SvO2 can be increased by increasing Hgb Brunicardi_Ch13_p0433-p0452.indd   44522/02/19   2:21 PM 446BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ior QT or decreasing oxygen utilization (e.g., by administering a muscle relaxant and sedation).Peak and Plateau Airway PressureAirway pressures are routinely monitored in mechanically ven-tilated patients. The peak airway pressure measured at the end of inspiration (Ppeak) is a function of the tidal volume, the resistance of the airways, lung/chest wall compliance, and peak inspiratory flow. The airway pressure measured at the end of inspiration when the inhaled volume is held in the lungs by briefly clos-ing the expiratory valve is termed the plateau airway pressure  (Pplateau). As a static parameter, plateau airway pressure is indepen-dent of the airway resistance and peak airway flow and is related to the lung/chest wall compliance and delivered tidal volume. Mechanical ventilators monitor Ppeak with each breath and can be set to trigger an alarm if the Ppeak exceeds a predetermined thresh-old. Pplateau is not measured routinely with each delivered tidal vol-ume but rather is measured intermittently by setting the ventilator to close the exhalation circuit briefly at the end of inspiration and record the airway pressure when airflow is zero.If both Ppeak and Pplateau are increased (and tidal volume is not excessive), then the problem is a decrease in the compli-ance in the lung/chest wall unit. Common causes of this problem include pneumothorax, hemothorax, lobar atelectasis, pulmo-nary edema, pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), active contraction of the chest wall or diaphragmatic muscles, abdominal distention, and intrinsic PEEP, such as occurs in patients with bronchospasm and insufficient expira-tory times. When Ppeak is increased but Pplateau is relatively nor-mal, the primary problem is an increase in airway resistance, such as occurs with bronchospasm, use of a small-caliber endo-tracheal tube, or kinking or obstruction of the endotracheal tube. A low Ppeak also should trigger an alarm, as it suggests a discon-tinuity in the airway circuit involving the patient and the ventila-tor. These scenarios are outlined in Table 13-4.Ventilator-induced lung injury (VILI) is now an estab-lished clinical entity of great relevance to the care of critically ill patients. Excessive airway pressure and tidal volume adversely affect pulmonary and possibly systemic responses to critical illness. Subjecting the lung parenchyma to excessive pressure, known as barotrauma, can result in parenchymal lung injury, diffuse alveolar damage similar to ARDS, and pneumothorax, and can impair venous return and therefore limit cardiac output. Lung-protective ventilation strategies have been developed to prevent the development of VILI and improve patient outcomes. Table 13-4Scenarios associated with different combinations of Ppeak and Pplateau in ventilated patientsCONDITIONPpeakPplateauDecreased compliance of the system (ARDS, abdominal distention, intrinsic PEEP)⇑⇑Increase in airway resistance (bronchospasm, endotracheal tube obstruction/kinking, or small-caliber endotracheal tube)⇑normalDisconnected circuit⇓⇓In a large, multicenter, randomized trial of patients with ARDS from a variety of etiologies, limiting plateau airway pressure to less than 30 cm H2O and tidal volume to less than 6 mL/kg of ideal body weight reduced 28-day mortality by 22% relative to a ventilator strategy that used a tidal volume of 12 mL/kg.56 For this reason, monitoring of plateau pressure and using a low tidal volume strategy in patients with ARDS is now the standard of care. Recent data also suggest that a lung-protective ventila-tion strategy is associated with improved clinical outcomes in ventilated patients without ARDS.57 Importantly, this strategy also has been shown to have benefit for high-risk patients under-going general anesthesia for surgical procedures, leading to a reduced overall rate of pulmonary complications in the peri-operative period as well as a reduced length of stay following surgery.58Pulse OximetryThe pulse oximeter is a microprocessor-based device that inte-grates oximetry and plethysmography to provide continuous noninvasive monitoring of the oxygen saturation of arterial blood (Sao2). It is considered one of the most important and useful technologic advances in patient monitoring. Continuous, noninvasive monitoring of arterial oxygen saturation is pos-sible using light-emitting diodes and sensors placed on the skin. Pulse oximetry employs two wavelengths of light (i.e., 660 nm and 940 nm) to analyze the pulsatile component of blood flow between the light source and sensor. Because oxyhemoglobin and deoxyhemoglobin have different absorption spectra, differ-ential absorption of light at these two wavelengths can be used to calculate the fraction of oxygen saturation of hemoglobin. Under normal circumstances, the contributions of carboxyhe-moglobin and methemoglobin are minimal. However, if car-boxyhemoglobin levels are elevated, the pulse oximeter will incorrectly interpret carboxyhemoglobin as oxyhemoglobin and the arterial saturation displayed will be falsely elevated. When the concentration of methemoglobin is markedly increased, the Sao2 will be displayed as 85%, regardless of the true arterial saturation.59 The accuracy of pulse oximetry begins to decline at Sao2 values less than 92% and tends to be unreliable for values less than 85%.60Several studies have assessed the frequency of arterial oxygen desaturation in hospitalized patients and its effect on outcome. Monitoring pulse oximetry in surgical patients is asso-ciated with a reduction in unrecognized deterioration, rescue events, and transfers to the ICU.61 Because of its clinical rel-evance, ease of use, noninvasive nature, and cost-effectiveness, pulse oximetry has become a routine monitoring strategy in patients with respiratory disease, intubated patients, and those undergoing surgical intervention under sedation or general anes-thesia. Pulse oximetry is especially useful in the titration of Fio2 and PEEP for patients receiving mechanical ventilation, and during weaning from mechanical ventilation. The widespread use of pulse oximetry has decreased the need for arterial blood gas determinations in critically ill patients.Pulse CO-OximetryWhile simple pulse oximeters such as those described previ-ously are helpful for determination of the Sao2, extensions of the technology may prove valuable for determination of total hemoglobin concentration as well. Through the use of multiple additional wavelengths of light, clinicians can leverage the dif-ferent spectrophotometric properties of the multiple different Brunicardi_Ch13_p0433-p0452.indd   44622/02/19   2:21 PM 447PHYSIOLOGIC MONITORING OF THE SURGICAL PATIENTCHAPTER 13oxidative states of hemoglobin to get a complete readout of the total hemoglobin present in a given volume, leading to a noninvasive measurement of Hgb. These devices are referred to as pulse CO-Oximeters, as opposed to pulse oximeters, to dif-ferentiate that they are capable of measuring other hemoglobin moieties. Currently, there are two such devices that are com-mercially available for clinical use.Theoretically, the capacity to noninvasively measure Hgb concentration in real time would offer significant clinical ben-efit. These include obviating the need for serial blood draws, the early detection of potential postsurgical hemorrhage, and more judicious usage of blood transfusions. In practice, there are mul-tiple factors that currently affect the accuracy of the technique. Multiple studies have demonstrated that biases with noninvasive Hgb monitoring are inversely correlated with hemoglobin con-centration in a variety of monitoring scenarios; with decreasing hemoglobin values the noninvasive approaches tend to overes-timate the true Hgb.62-64 This poses a significant challenge for monitoring the critically ill patient, as frequently anemia is a common comorbid condition. On the other hand, if the continu-ous monitoring capacity afforded by these monitors can provide usable trend data, that may still provide clinical utility despite less accuracy at low hemoglobin levels. To date, there have been relatively few studies validating the trending capacity of noninvasive Hgb monitoring compared to serial blood draws, with limited agreement due to differences in analysis and study design.65 Further studies are required to evaluate the clinical utility of this potentially useful technology.CapnometryCapnometry is the measurement of carbon dioxide in the airway throughout the respiratory cycle. Capnometry is most commonly measured by infrared light absorption. CO2 absorbs infrared light at a peak wavelength of approximately 4.27 µm. Capnom-etry works by passing infrared light through a sample chamber to a detector on the opposite side. More infrared light passing through the sample chamber (i.e., less CO2) causes a larger sig-nal in the detector relative to the infrared light passing through a reference cell. Capnometric determination of the partial pressure of CO2 in end-tidal exhaled gas (Petco2) is used as a surrogate for the partial pressure of CO2 in arterial blood (Paco2) during mechanical ventilation. In healthy subjects, Petco2 is about 1 to 5 mmHg less than Paco2.66 Thus, Petco2 can be used to estimate Paco2 without the need for blood gas determination. However, changes in Petco2 may not correlate with changes in Paco2 dur-ing a number of pathologic conditions.Capnography allows the confirmation of endotracheal intubation and continuous assessment of ventilation, integrity of the airway, operation of the ventilator, and cardiopulmonary function. Capnometers are configured with either an inline sen-sor or a sidestream sensor. The sidestream systems are lighter and easy to use, but the thin tubing that samples the gas from the ventilator circuit can become clogged with secretions  or condensed water, preventing accurate measurements.  The inline devices are bulky and heavier but are less likely to become clogged. Continuous monitoring with capnography has become routine during surgery under general anesthesia and for some intensive care patients. A number of situations can be promptly detected with continuous capnography. A sudden reduction in Petco2 suggests either obstruction of the sam-pling tubing with water or secretions, or a catastrophic event such as loss of the airway, airway disconnection or obstruction, ventilator malfunction, or a marked decrease in QT. If the airway is connected and patent and the ventilator is functioning prop-erly, then a sudden decrease in Petco2 should prompt efforts to rule out cardiac arrest, massive pulmonary embolism, or cardio-genic shock. Petco2 can be persistently low during hyperven-tilation or with an increase in dead space such as occurs with pulmonary embolization (even in the absence of a change in QT). Causes of an increase in Petco2 include reduced minute ventilation or increased metabolic rate.RENAL MONITORINGUrine OutputBladder catheterization with an indwelling catheter allows the monitoring of urine output, usually recorded hourly by the nurs-ing staff. With a patent Foley catheter, urine output is a gross indicator of renal perfusion. The generally accepted normal urine output is 0.5 mL/kg per hour for adults and 1 to 2 mL/kg per hour for neonates and infants. Oliguria may reflect inadequate renal artery perfusion due to hypotension, hypovolemia, or low QT. Low urine flow also can be a sign of intrinsic renal dysfunc-tion. It is important to recognize that normal urine output does not exclude the possibility of impending renal failure.Bladder PressureThe triad of oliguria, elevated peak airway pressures, and ele-vated intra-abdominal pressure is known as abdominal com-partment syndrome (ACS). This syndrome, first described in patients after repair of ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm, is associated with interstitial edema of the abdominal organs, resulting in elevated intra-abdominal pressure (IAP). When IAP exceeds venous or capillary pressures, perfusion of the kidneys and other intra-abdominal viscera is impaired. Oligu-ria is a cardinal sign. While the diagnosis of ACS is a clinical one, measuring IAP is useful to confirm the diagnosis. Ideally, a catheter inserted into the peritoneal cavity could measure IAP to substantiate the diagnosis. In practice, transurethral bladder pressure measurement reflects IAP and is most often used to confirm the presence of ACS. After instilling 50 to 100 mL of sterile saline into the bladder via a Foley catheter, the tubing is connected to a transducing system to measure bladder pressure in the supine position at end-expiration.Intra-abdominal hypertension is defined as an IAP  ≥12 mmHg recorded on three standard measurements conducted 4 to 6 hours apart and is separated into several grades. The diag-nosis of ACS is the presence of an IAP ≥20 mmHg recorded by three measurements 1 to 6 hours apart, along with new onset of organ dysfunction (Table 13-5).67-69 Less commonly, gastric or inferior vena cava pressures can be monitored with appropriate catheters to detect elevated intra-abdominal pressures.NEUROLOGIC MONITORINGIntracranial PressureBecause the brain is rigidly confined within the bony skull, cere-bral edema or mass lesions increase intracranial pressure (ICP). Monitoring of ICP is currently recommended in patients with severe traumatic brain injury (TBI), defined as a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score less than or equal to 8 with an abnormal computed tomography (CT) scan, and in patients with severe TBI and a normal CT scan if two or more of the following are present: age >40 years, unilateral or bilateral motor posturing, Brunicardi_Ch13_p0433-p0452.indd   44722/02/19   2:21 PM 448BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART ITable 13-5Bladder pressure measurements in the assessment of intra-abdominal hypertension or abdominal compartment syndromeRECORDED PRESSURE (mmHg)GRADE OF IAH OR ACS5–7NormalIn the absence of organ dysfunction:12–15Grade I IAH16–20Grade II IAH21–25Grade III IAH>25Grade IV IAHIn the presence of new onset organ dysfunction:>20ACSData from Kirkpatrick AW, Roberts DJ, De Waele J, et al. Intra-abdominal hypertension and the abdominal compartment syndrome: updated consensus definitions and clinical practice guidelines from the World Society of the Abdominal Compartment Syndrome, Intensive Care Med. 2013 Jul;39(7):1190-1206.or systolic blood pressure <90 mmHg.70 ICP monitoring also is indicated in patients with acute subarachnoid hemorrhage with coma or neurologic deterioration, intracranial hemorrhage with intraventricular blood, ischemic middle cerebral artery stroke, fulminant hepatic failure with coma and cerebral edema on CT scan, and global cerebral ischemia or anoxia with cerebral edema on CT scan. The goal of ICP monitoring is to ensure that cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP) is adequate to support perfu-sion of the brain. CPP is equal to the difference between MAP and ICP: CPP = MAP – ICP.One type of ICP measuring device, the ventriculostomy catheter, consists of a fluid-filled catheter inserted into a cere-bral ventricle and connected to an external pressure transducer. This device permits measurement of ICP but also allows drain-age of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) as a means to lower ICP and sample CSF for laboratory studies. Other devices locate the pressure transducer within the central nervous system and are used only to monitor ICP. These devices can be placed in the intraventricular, parenchymal, subdural, or epidural spaces. Ventriculostomy catheters are the accepted standard for moni-toring ICP in patients with TBI due to their accuracy, ability to drain CSF, and low complication rate. The associated com-plications include infection (5%), hemorrhage (1.1%), catheter malfunction or obstruction (6.3–10.5%), and malposition with injury to cerebral tissue.71The purpose of ICP monitoring is to detect and treat abnormal elevations of ICP that may be detrimental to cere-bral perfusion and function. In TBI patients, ICP greater than 20 mmHg is associated with unfavorable outcomes.72 However, few studies have shown that treatment of elevated ICP improves clinical outcomes in human trauma patients. In a randomized, controlled, double-blind trial, Eisenberg and colleagues dem-onstrated that maintaining ICP less than 25 mmHg in patients without craniectomy and less than 15 mmHg in patients with craniectomy is associated with improved outcome.73 In patients with low CPP, therapeutic strategies to correct CPP can be directed at increasing MAP or decreasing ICP. While it has been recommended that CPP be maintained between 50 and 70 mmHg, the evidence to support this recommendation are not overly compelling.74 Furthermore, a retrospective cohort study of patients with severe TBI found that ICP/CPP-targeted neurointensive care was associated with prolonged mechanical ventilation and increased therapeutic interventions, without evi-dence for improved outcome in patients who survive beyond 24 hours.75Electroencephalogram and Evoked PotentialsElectroencephalography offers the capacity to monitor global neurologic electrical activity, while evoked potential monitor-ing can assess pathways not detected by the conventional EEG. Continuous EEG (CEEG) monitoring in the intensive care unit permits ongoing evaluation of cerebral cortical activity. It is especially useful in obtunded and comatose patients. CEEG also is useful for monitoring of therapy for status epilepticus and detecting early changes associated with cerebral ischemia. CEEG can be used to adjust the level of sedation, especially if high-dose barbiturate therapy is being used to manage elevated ICP. Somatosensory and brain stem evoked potentials are less affected by the administration of sedatives than is the EEG. Evoked potentials are useful for localizing brain stem lesions or proving the absence of such structural lesions in cases of metabolic or toxic coma. They also can provide prognostic data in posttraumatic coma.An advance in EEG monitoring is the use of the bispectral index (BIS) to titrate the level of sedative medications. While sedative drugs are usually titrated to the clinical neurologic examination, the BIS device has been used in the operating room to continuously monitor the depth of anesthesia. The BIS is an empiric measurement statistically derived from a data-base of over 5000 EEGs.76 The BIS is derived from bifrontal EEG recordings and analyzed for burst suppression ratio, rela-tive alpha to beta ratio, and bicoherence. Using a multivariate regression model, a linear numeric index (BIS) is calculated, ranging from 0 (isoelectric EEG) to 100 (fully awake). Its use has been associated with lower consumption of anesthet-ics during surgery and earlier awakening and faster recovery from anesthesia.77 The BIS also has been validated as a useful approach for monitoring the level of sedation for ICU patients, using the revised Sedation-Agitation Scale as a gold standard.78Transcranial Doppler UltrasonographyThis modality provides a noninvasive method for evaluating cerebral hemodynamics. Transcranial Doppler (TCD) measure-ments of middle and anterior cerebral artery blood flow velocity are useful for the diagnosis of cerebral vasospasm after sub-arachnoid hemorrhage. Qureshi and associates demonstrated that an increase in the middle cerebral artery mean flow velocity as assessed by TCD is an independent predictor of symptom-atic vasospasm in a prospective study of patients with aneurys-mal subarachnoid hemorrhage.79 In addition, while some have proposed using TCD to estimate ICP, studies have shown that TCD is not a reliable method for estimating ICP and CPP and currently cannot be endorsed for this purpose.80 TCD also is useful to confirm the clinical examination for determining brain death in patients with confounding factors such as the presence of CNS depressants or metabolic encephalopathy.Jugular Venous OximetryWhen the arterial oxygen content, hemoglobin concentration, and the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve are constant, changes in jugular venous oxygen saturation (Sjo2) reflect changes in the difference between cerebral oxygen delivery and demand. Brunicardi_Ch13_p0433-p0452.indd   44822/02/19   2:21 PM 449PHYSIOLOGIC MONITORING OF THE SURGICAL PATIENTCHAPTER 13Generally, a decrease in Sjo2 reflects cerebral hypoperfusion, whereas an increase in Sjo2 indicates the presence of hyperemia. Sjo2 monitoring cannot detect decreases in regional cerebral blood flow if overall perfusion is normal or above normal. This technique requires the placement of a catheter in the jugular bulb, usually via the internal jugular vein. Catheters that permit intermittent aspiration of jugular venous blood for analysis or continuous oximetry catheters are available.Low Sjo2 is associated with poor outcomes after TBI.81 Nevertheless, the value of monitoring Sjo2 remains unproven. If it is employed, it should not be the sole monitoring technique, but rather should be used in conjunction with ICP and CPP monitoring. By monitoring ICP, CPP, and Sjo2, early interven-tion with volume, vasopressors, and hyperventilation has been shown to prevent ischemic events in patients with TBI.82Transcranial Near-Infrared SpectroscopyTranscranial near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) is a noninvasive continuous monitoring method to determine cerebral oxygen-ation. It employs technology similar to that of pulse oximetry to determine the concentrations of oxyand deoxyhemoglobin with near-infrared light and sensors and takes advantage of the relative transparency of the skull to light in the near-infrared region of the spectrum. Continuous monitoring of cerebral per-fusion via transcranial NIRS may provide a method to detect early cerebral ischemia in patients with traumatic brain injury.83 Nevertheless, this form of monitoring remains largely a research tool at the present time.Recently, some authors have reported its use as a poten-tial triage tool for prehospital care in the management of TBI, as NIRS allows for rapid screening for intracranial hematoma. Two small EMS studies demonstrated that handheld NIRS devices may be feasible adjunct tools in this setting, particularly when CT scanners may not be readily available.84,85Brain Tissue Oxygen TensionWhile the standard of care for patients with severe TBI includes ICP and CPP monitoring, this strategy does not always prevent secondary brain injury. Growing evidence suggests that moni-toring local brain tissue oxygen tension (PbtO2) may be a useful adjunct to ICP monitoring in these patients. Normal values for PbtO2 are 20 to 40 mmHg, and critical levels are 8 to 10 mmHg. A recent clinical study sought to determine whether the addi-tion of a PbtO2 monitor to guide therapy in severe traumatic brain injury was associated with improved patient outcomes.86 Twenty-eight patients with severe traumatic brain injury (GCS score ≤8) were enrolled in an observational study at a level I trauma center. These patients received invasive ICP and PbtO2 monitoring and were compared with 25 historical controls matched for age, injuries, and admission GCS score that had undergone ICP monitoring alone. Goals of therapy in both groups included maintaining an ICP <20 mmHg and a CPP >60 mmHg. Among patients with PbtO2 monitoring, therapy also was directed at maintaining PbtO2 >25 mmHg. The groups had similar mean daily ICP and CPP levels. The mortality rate in the historical controls treated with standard ICP and CPP management was 44%. Mortality was significantly lower in the patients who had therapy guided by PbtO2 monitoring in addition to ICP and CPP (25%; P <.05). The benefits of PbtO2 monitoring may include the early detection of brain tissue isch-emia despite normal ICP and CPP. In addition, PbtO2-guided management may reduce potential adverse effects associated with therapies to maintain ICP and CPP.CONCLUSIONSModern intensive care is predicated by the need and ability to continuously monitor a wide range of physiologic parameters. This capability has dramatically improved the care of critically ill patients and advanced the development of the specialty of critical care medicine. In some cases, the technological abil-ity to measure such variables has surpassed our understanding  of the significance or the knowledge of the appropriate inter-vention to ameliorate such pathophysiologic changes. In addi-tion, the development of less invasive monitoring methods has been promoted by the recognition of complications associated with invasive monitoring devices. The future portends the con-tinued development of noninvasive monitoring devices along with their application in an evidenced-based strategy to guide rational therapy.REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Bur A, Herkner H, Vlcek M, et al. Factors influencing the accu-racy of oscillometric blood pressure measurement in critically ill patients. Crit Care Med. 2003;31(3):793-799.	2.	Fischer MO, Avram R, Carjaliu I, et al. Non-invasive continu-ous arterial pressure and cardiac index monitoring with Nexfin after cardiac surgery. Br J Anaesth. 2012;109(4):514-521.	3.	Traore O, Liotier J, Souweine B. Prospective study of arterial and central venous catheter colonization and of arterialand central venous catheter-related bacteremia in intensive care units. Crit Care Med. 2005;33(6):1276-1280.	4.	Landesberg G, Mosseri M, Wolf Y, Vesselov Y, Weissman C. Perioperative myocardial ischemia and infarction: identifica-tion by continuous 12-lead electrocardiogram with online ST-segment monitoring. Anesthesiology. 2002;96(2):264-270.	5.	Ollila A, Virolainen J, Vanhatalo J, et al. Postoperative cardiac ischemia detection by continuous 12-lead electrocardiographic monitoring in vascular surgery patients: a prospective, observa-tional study. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2017;31(3):950-956.	6.	Yu H, Pi-Hua F, Yuan W, et al. Prediction of sudden cardiac death in patients after acute myocardial infarction using T-wave alter-nans: a prospective study. J Electrocardiol. 2012;45(1):60-65.	7.	Chen WL, Tsai TH, Huang CC, Chen JH, Kuo CD. Heart rate variability predicts short-term outcome for successfully resusci-tated patients with out-of-hospital cardiac arrest. Resuscitation. 2009;80(10):1114-1118.	8.	Hravnak M, Edwards L, Clontz A, Valenta C, Devita MA,  Pinsky MR. Defining the incidence of cardiorespiratory instabil-ity in patients in step-down units using an electronic integrated monitoring system. Arch Intern Med. 2008;168(12):1300-1308.	9.	Hravnak M, Devita MA, Clontz A, Edwards L, Valenta C,  Pinsky MR. Cardiorespiratory instability before and after implementing an integrated monitoring system. Crit Care Med. 2011;39(1):65-72.	10.	Rothman MJ, Rothman SI, Beals J 4th. Development and vali-dation of a continuous measure of patient condition using the  Electronic Medical Record. J Biomed Inform. 2013;46(5):837-848.	11.	Tepas JJ 3rd, Rimar JM, Hsiao AL, Nussbaum MS. Auto-mated analysis of electronic medical record data reflects the pathophysiology of operative complications. Surgery. 2013;154(4):918-924; discussion 924-926.	12.	Piper GL, Kaplan LJ, Maung AA, Lui FY, Barre K, Davis KA. Using the Rothman index to predict early unplanned surgical intensive care unit readmissions. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2014;77(1):78-82.	13.	Wengerter BC, Pei KY, Asuzu D, Davis KA. Rothman Index variability predicts clinical deterioration and rapid response activation. Am J Surg. 2017;215(3):37-41.Brunicardi_Ch13_p0433-p0452.indd   44922/02/19   2:21 PM 450BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART I	14.	Hayashi H, Amano M. Does ultrasound imaging before puncture facilitate internal jugular vein cannulation? Prospective random-ized comparison with landmark-guided puncture in ventilated patients. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2002;16(5):572-575.	15.	Mihm FG, Gettinger A, Hanson CW 3rd, et al. A multicenter evaluation of a new continuous cardiac output pulmonary artery catheter system. Crit Care Med. 1998;26(8):1346-1350.	16.	London MJ, Moritz TE, Henderson WG, et al. Standard ver-sus fiberoptic pulmonary artery catheterization for cardiac surgery in the Department of Veterans Affairs: a prospec-tive, observational, multicenter analysis. Anesthesiology. 2002;96(4):860-870.	17.	Rivers EP, Ander DS, Powell D. Central venous oxygen satura-tion monitoring in the critically ill patient. Curr Opin Crit Care. 2001;7(3):204-211.	18.	Varpula M, Karlsson S, Ruokonen E, Pettila V. Mixed venous oxygen saturation cannot be estimated by central venous oxygen saturation in septic shock. Intens Care Med. 2006;32(9):1336-1343.	19.	Rivers E, Nguyen B, Havstad S, et al. Early goal-directed therapy in the treatment of severe sepsis and septic shock. N Engl J Med. 2001;345:1368-1377.	20.	Dellinger RP, Levy MM, Rhodes A, et al. Surviving sepsis cam-paign: international guidelines for management of severe sep-sis and septic shock: 2012. Crit Care Med. 2013;41(2):580-637.	21.	Connors AF, Jr, Speroff T, Dawson NV, et al. The effec-tiveness of right heart catheterization in the initial care of critically ill patients. SUPPORT Investigators. JAMA. 1996;276(11):889-897.	22.	Pearson KS, Gomez MN, Moyers JR, Carter JG, Tinker JH. A cost/benefit analysis of randomized invasive monitor-ing for patients undergoing cardiac surgery. Anesth Analg. 1989;69(3):336-341.	23.	Tuman KJ, McCarthy RJ, Spiess BD, et al. Effect of pulmonary artery catheterization on outcome in patients undergoing coro-nary artery surgery. Anesthesiology. 1989;70(2):199-206.	24.	Bender JS, Smith-Meek MA, Jones CE. Routine pulmonary artery catheterization does not reduce morbidity and mortality of elective vascular surgery: results of a prospective, random-ized trial. Ann Surg. 1997;226(3):229-236.	25.	Valentine RJ, Duke ML, Inman MH, et al. Effectiveness of pul-monary artery catheters in aortic surgery: a randomized trial. J Vasc Surg. 1998;27(2):203-211; discussion 211-212.	26.	Sandham JD, Hull RD, Brant RF, et al. A randomized, con-trolled trial of the use of pulmonary-artery catheters in high-risk surgical patients. N Engl J Med. 2003;348(1):5-14.	27.	Harvey S, Harrison DA, Singer M, et al. Assessment of the clinical effectiveness of pulmonary artery catheters in manage-ment of patients in intensive care (PAC-Man): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2005;366(9484):472-477.	28.	Shah MR, Hasselblad V, Stevenson LW, et al. Impact of the pul-monary artery catheter in critically ill patients: meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. JAMA. 2005;294(13):1664-1670.	29.	Binanay C, Califf RM, Hasselblad V, et al. Evaluation study of congestive heart failure and pulmonary artery catheterization effectiveness: the ESCAPE trial. JAMA. 2005;294(13):1625-1633.	30.	National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Acute Respira-tory Distress Syndrome (ARDS) Clinical Trials Network; Wheeler AP, Bernard GR, Thompson BT, et al. Pulmonary-artery versus central venous catheter to guide treatment of acute lung injury. N Engl J Med. 2006;354(21):2213-2224.	31.	Wiener RS, Welch HG. Trends in the use of the pulmo-nary artery catheter in the United States, 1993-2004. JAMA. 2007;298(4):423-429.	32.	Shoemaker WC, Appel PL, Kram HB, Waxman K, Lee TS.  Prospective trial of supranormal values of survivors as therapeutic goals in high-risk surgical patients. Chest. 1988;94(6):1176-1186.	33.	Bishop MH, Shoemaker WC, Appel PL, et al. Prospective, randomized trial of survivor values of cardiac index, oxygen delivery, and oxygen consumption as resuscitation endpoints in severe trauma. J Trauma. 1995;38(5):780-787.	34.	Heyland DK, Cook DJ, King D, Kernerman P, Brun-Buisson C.  Maximizing oxygen delivery in critically ill patients: a methodologic appraisal of the evidence. Crit Care Med. 1996;24(3):517-524.	35.	Alia I, Esteban A, Gordo F, et al. A randomized and controlled trial of the effect of treatment aimed at maximizing oxygen delivery in patients with severe sepsis or septic shock. Chest. 1999;115(2):453-461.	36.	Gnaegi A, Feihl F, Perret C. Intensive care physicians’ insuf-ficient knowledge of right-heart catheterization at the bedside: time to act? Crit Care Med. 1997;25(2):213-220.	37.	Gan TJ, Soppitt A, Maroof M, et al. Goal-directed intraopera-tive fluid administration reduces length of hospital stay after major surgery. Anesthesiology. 2002;97(4):820-826.	38.	Monnet X, Teboul JL. Transpulmonary thermodilution: advan-tages and limits. Crit Care. 2017;21(1):147.	39.	Dark PM, Singer M. The validity of trans-esophageal Doppler ultrasonography as a measure of cardiac output in critically ill adults. Intensive Care Med. 2004;30(11):2060-2066.	40.	Imhoff M, Lehner JH, Lohlein D. Noninvasive whole-body electrical bioimpedance cardiac output and invasive thermodi-lution cardiac output in high-risk surgical patients. Crit Care Med. 2000;28(8):2812-2818.	41.	Marik PE. Noninvasive cardiac output monitors: a state-of the-art review. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2013;27(1):121-134.	42.	Mielck F, Buhre W, Hanekop G, Tirilomis T, Hilgers R, Sonntag H.  Comparison of continuous cardiac output measurements in patients after cardiac surgery. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2003;17(2):211-216.	43.	Remmen JJ, Aengevaeren WR, Verheugt FW, et al. Finapres arterial pulse wave analysis with Modelflow is not a reliable non-invasive method for assessment of cardiac output. Clin Sci (Lond). 2002;103(2):143-149.	44.	van Heerden PV, Baker S, Lim SI, Weidman C, Bulsara M. Clinical evaluation of the non-invasive cardiac output (NICO) monitor in the intensive care unit. Anaesth Intensive Care. 2000;28(4):427-430.	45.	Odenstedt H, Stenqvist O, Lundin S. Clinical evaluation of a partial CO2 rebreathing technique for cardiac output moni-toring in critically ill patients. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 2002;46(2):152-159.	46.	Godje O, Peyerl M, Seebauer T, Lamm P, Mair H, Reichart B. Central venous pressure, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure and intrathoracic blood volumes as preload indicators in cardiac surgery patients. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 1998;13(5):533-539.	47.	Pinsky MR, Teboul JL. Assessment of indices of preload and vol-ume responsiveness. Curr Opin Crit Care. 2005;11(3):235-239.	48.	Lichtwarck-Aschoff M, Zeravik J, Pfeiffer UJ. Intrathoracic blood volume accurately reflects circulatory volume status in critically ill patients with mechanical ventilation. Intens Care Med. 1992;18(3):142-147.	49.	Gunn SR, Pinsky MR. Implications of arterial pressure varia-tion in patients in the intensive care unit. Curr Opinion Crit Care. 2001;7(3):212-217.	50.	Mesquida J, Kim HK, Pinsky MR. Effect of tidal volume, intrathoracic pressure, and cardiac contractility on variations in pulse pressure, stroke volume, and intrathoracic blood volume. Intens Care Med. 2011;37(10):1672-1679.	51.	Michard F, Chemla D, Richard C, et al. Clinical use of respiratory changes in arterial pulse pressure to monitor the hemodynamic effects of PEEP. Am J Resp Crit Care. 1999;159(3):935-939.Brunicardi_Ch13_p0433-p0452.indd   45022/02/19   2:21 PM 451PHYSIOLOGIC MONITORING OF THE SURGICAL PATIENTCHAPTER 13	52.	Michard F, Boussat S, Chemla D, et al. Relation between respi-ratory changes in arterial pulse pressure and fluid responsive-ness in septic patients with acute circulatory failure. Am J Resp Crit Care. 2000;162(1):134-138.	53.	Crookes BA, Cohn SM, Burton EA, Nelson J, Proctor KG. Noninvasive muscle oxygenation to guide fluid resuscitation after traumatic shock. Surgery. 2004;135(6):662-670.	54.	Cohn SM, Nathens AB, Moore FA, et al. Tissue oxygen satu-ration predicts the development of organ dysfunction during traumatic shock resuscitation. J Trauma. 2007;62(1):44-54; discussion; 54-55.	55.	Haller M, Kilger E, Briegel J, Forst H, Peter K. Continuous intra-arterial blood gas and pH monitoring in critically ill patients with severe respiratory failure: a prospective, criterion standard study. Crit Care Med. 1994;22(4):580-587.	56.	The Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome Network; Brower RG,  Matthay MA, Morris A, et al. Ventilation with lower tidal vol-umes as compared with traditional tidal volumes for acute lung injury and the acute respiratory distress syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2000;342(18):1301-1308.	57.	Serpa Neto A, Cardoso SO, Manetta JA, et al. Associa-tion between use of lung-protective ventilation with lower tidal volumes and clinical outcomes among patients without acute respiratory distress syndrome: a meta-analysis. JAMA. 2012;308(16):1651-1659.	58.	Futier E, Constantin JM, Paugam-Burtz C, et al. A trial of intra-operative low-tidal-volume ventilation in abdominal surgery. N Engl J Med. 2013;369(5):428-437.	59.	Tremper KK, Barker SJ. Pulse oximetry. Chest. 1989; 70(1):713-715.	60.	Shoemaker WC, Belzberg H, Wo CCJ, et al. Multicenter study of noninvasive monitoring systems as alternatives to invasive monitoring of acutely ill emergency patients. Chest. 1998;114(6):1643-1652.	61.	Taenzer AH, Pyke JB, McGrath SP, Blike GT. Impact of pulse oximetry surveillance on rescue events and intensive care unit transfers: a before-and-after concurrence study. Anesthesiology. 2010;112(2):282-287.	62.	Applegate RL 2nd, Barr SJ, Collier CE, Rook JL, Mangus DB,  Allard MW. Evaluation of pulse cooximetry in patients undergoing abdominal or pelvic surgery. Anesthesiology. 2012;116(1):65-72.	63.	Gayat E, Aulagnier J, Matthieu E, et al. Non-invasive measure-ment of hemoglobin: assessment of two different point-of-care technologies. PLoS One. 2012;7:e30065.	64.	Park YH, Lee JH, Song HG, Byon HJ, Kim HS, Kim JT. The accuracy of noninvasive hemoglobin monitoring using the radical-7 pulse CO-Oximeter in children undergoing neurosur-gery. Anesth Analg. 2012;115(6):1302-1307.	65.	Suehiro K, Joosten A, Alexander B, Cannesson M. Continu-ous noninvasive hemoglobin monitoring: ready for prime time? Curr Opin Crit Care. 2015;21(3):265-270.	66.	Jubran A, Tobin MJ. Monitoring during mechanical ventilation. Clin Chest Med. 1996;17(3):453-473.	67.	Sugrue M. Abdominal compartment syndrome. Curr Opin Crit Care. 2005;11(4):333-338.	68.	Ivatury RR, Porter JM, Simon RJ, Islam S, John R, Stahl WM. Intra-abdominal hypertension after life-threatening penetrat-ing abdominal trauma: prophylaxis, incidence, and clinical relevance to gastric mucosal pH and abdominal compartment syndrome. J Trauma. 1998;44(6):1016-1021; discussion 21-23.	69.	Kirkpatrick AW, Roberts DJ, De Waele J, et al. Intra-abdominal hypertension and the abdominal compartment syndrome: updated consensus definitions and clinical practice guidelines from the World Society of the Abdominal Compartment  Syndrome. Intens Care Med. 2013;39(7):1190-1206.	70.	Brain Trauma Foundation; American Association of  Neurological Surgeons; Congress of Neurological Surgeons,  et al. Guidelines for the management of severe traumatic brain injury. VI. Indications for intracranial pressure monitoring.  J Neurotrauma. 2007;24(suppl 1):S37-S44.	71.	Brain Trauma Foundation; American Association of Neurologi-cal Surgeons; Congress of Neurological Surgeons, et al. Guide-lines for the management of severe traumatic brain injury. VII. Intracranial pressure monitoring technology. J Neurotrauma. 2007;24(suppl 1):S45-S54.	72.	Juul N, Morris GF, Marshall SB, Marshall LF. Intracranial hypertension and cerebral perfusion pressure: influence on neurological deterioration and outcome in severe head injury. The Executive Committee of the International Selfotel Trial.  J Neurosurg. 2000;92(1):1-6.	73.	Eisenberg HM, Frankowski RF, Contant CF, Marshall LF, Walker MD. High-dose barbiturate control of elevated intracra-nial pressure in patients with severe head injury. J Neurosurg. 1988;69(1):15-23.	74.	Brain Trauma Foundation; American Association of Neuro-logical Surgeons; Congress of Neurological Surgeons, et al. Guidelines for the management of severe traumatic brain injury. IX. Cerebral perfusion thresholds. J Neurotrauma. 2007;24(suppl 1):S59-S64.	75.	Cremer OL, van Dijk GW, van Wensen E, et al. Effect of intra-cranial pressure monitoring and targeted intensive care on functional outcome after severe head injury. Crit Care Med. 2005;33(10):2207-2213.	76.	Sigl JC, Chamoun NG. An introduction to bispectral analysis for the electroencephalogram. J Clin Monit. 1994;10(6):392-404.	77.	Gan TJ, Glass PS, Windsor A, et al. Bispectral index monitoring allows faster emergence and improved recovery from propo-fol, alfentanil, and nitrous oxide anesthesia. BIS Utility Study Group. Anesthesiology. 1997;87(4):808-815.	78.	Simmons LE, Riker RR, Prato BS, Fraser GL. Assessing seda-tion during intensive care unit mechanical ventilation with the Bispectral Index and the Sedation-Agitation Scale. Crit Care Med. 1999;27(8):1499-1504.	79.	Qureshi AI, Sung GY, Razumovsky AY, Lane K, Straw RN, Ulatowski JA. Early identification of patients at risk for symp-tomatic vasospasm after aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage. Crit Care Med. 2000;28(4):984-990.	80.	Czosnyka M, Matta BF, Smielewski P, Kirkpatrick PJ,  Pickard JD. Cerebral perfusion pressure in head-injured patients: a noninvasive assessment using transcranial Doppler ultrasonography. J Neurosurg. 1998;88(5):802-808.	81.	Feldman Z, Robertson CS. Monitoring of cerebral hemody-namics with jugular bulb catheters. Crit Care Clin. 1997;13(1): 51-77.	82.	Vigue B, Ract C, Benayed M, et al. Early SjvO2 monitoring in patients with severe brain trauma. Intensive Care Med. 1999;25(5):445-451.	83.	Murkin JM, Arango M. Near-infrared spectroscopy as an index of brain and tissue oxygenation. Br J Anaesth. 2009;103(suppl 1):i3-i13.	84.	Peters J, Van Wageningen B, Hoogerwerf N, Tan E. Near-infrared spectroscopy: a promising prehospital tool for man-agement of traumatic brain injury. Prehosp Disaster Med. 2017;32(4):414-418.	85.	Schober P, Bossers SM, Schwarte LA. Intracranial hematoma detection by near infrared spectroscopy in a helicopter emer-gency medical service: practical experience. Biomed Res Int. 2017;2017:1846830.	86.	Stiefel MF, Spiotta A, Gracias VH, et al. Reduced mortality rate in patients with severe traumatic brain injury treated with brain tissue oxygen monitoring. J Neurosurg. 2005;103(5):805-811.Brunicardi_Ch13_p0433-p0452.indd   45122/02/19   2:21 PM
# Chunk 8877
Brunicardi_Ch13_p0433-p0452.indd   45222/02/19   2:21 PMThis page intentionally left blank

Minimally Invasive Surgery, Robotics, Natural Orifice Transluminal Endoscopic Surgery, and Single-Incision Laparoscopic SurgeryDonn H. Spight, Blair A. Jobe, and John G. Hunter 14chapterINTRODUCTIONMinimally invasive surgery describes an area of surgery that crosses all traditional disciplines, from general surgery to neu-rosurgery. It is not a discipline unto itself, but more a philosophy of  surgery, a way of thinking. Minimally invasive surgery is a means of performing major operations through small inci-sions, often using miniaturized, high-tech imaging sys-tems, to minimize the trauma of surgical exposure. Some believe that the term minimal access surgery more accurately describes the small incisions generally necessary to gain access to surgical sites in high-tech surgery, but John Wickham’s term minimally invasive surgery (MIS) is widely used because it describes the paradox of postmodern high-tech surgery—small holes, big operations.Robotic surgery today is practiced using a single platform (Intuitive, Inc, Sunnyvale, CA) and should better be termed computer-enhanced surgery because the term robotics assumes autonomous action that is not a feature of the da Vinci robotic system. Instead, the da Vinci robot couples an ergonomic work-station that features stereoptic video imaging and intuitive micromanipulators (surgeon side) with a set of arms deliver-ing specialized laparoscopic instruments enhanced with more degrees of freedom than are allowed by laparoscopic surgery alone (patient side). A computer between the surgeon side and patient side removes surgical tremor and scales motion to allow 1precise microsurgery, which is helpful for microdissection and difficult anastomoses.Single-incision laparoscopic surgery (SILS), also called laparoendoscopic single-site surgery (LESS), is a recent addi-tion to the armamentarium of the minimally invasive surgeon. As public awareness has grown, so too has its spread outside of larger institutions. SILS challenges the well-established paradigm of standard laparoscopic surgery by placing multiple trocars within the fascia at the umbilicus or through a single multichannel trocar at the umbilicus. The manipulation of tightly spaced instruments across the fulcrum of the abdomi-nal wall requires that the surgeon either operate in a crossed hands fashion or use specialized curved instruments to avoid clashing outside the body while working intra-abdominally. The primary advantage of SILS is the reduction to one surgical scar. Greater efficacy, safety, and cost savings have yet to be fully elucidated in the increasing number of procedures that are being attempted in this manner. The advent of a robotic SILS platform now enables the computer reassignment of the surgeon’s hands, thus eliminating the difficult ergonomic challenges making the technique far more accessible.Natural orifice transluminal endoscopic surgery (NOTES) is an extension of interventional endoscopy. Using the mouth, anus, vagina, and urethra (natural orifices), flexible endoscopes are passed through the wall of the esophagus, stomach, colon, Introduction	453Historical Background	454Physiology and Pathophysiology   of Minimally Invasive Surgery	455Laparoscopy / 455Thoracoscopy / 457Extracavitary Minimally  Invasive Surgery / 457Anesthesia / 457The Minimally Invasive Team / 458Room Setup and the Minimally  Invasive Suite / 458Patient Positioning / 458General Principles of Access / 459Laparoscopic Access / 459Access for Subcutaneous and Extraperitoneal Surgery / 460Hand-Assisted Laparoscopic Access / 461Natural Orifice Transluminal Endoscopic Surgery Access / 461Single-Incision Laparoscopic Surgery Access / 462Port Placement / 462Imaging Systems / 463Energy Sources for Endoscopic and Endoluminal Surgery / 465Instrumentation / 467Robotic Surgery / 467Endoluminal and Endovascular  Surgery / 469Natural Orifice Transluminal Endoscopic Surgery / 470Single-Incision Laparoscopic  Surgery / 471Special Considerations	473Pediatric Laparoscopy / 473Laparoscopy During Pregnancy / 473Minimally Invasive Surgery and  Cancer Treatment / 474Considerations in the Elderly  and Infirm / 474Cirrhosis and Portal Hypertension / 474Economics of Minimally Invasive  Surgery / 474Education and Skill Acquisition / 474Telementoring / 475Innovation and Introduction of  New Procedures / 475Brunicardi_Ch14_p0453-p0478.indd   45301/03/19   4:58 PM 454bladder, or vagina entering the mediastinum, the pleural space, or the peritoneal cavity. The advantage of this method of mini-mal access is principally the elimination of the scar associated with laparoscopy or thoracoscopy. Other advantages have yet to be elucidated, including pain reduction, need for hospitalization, and cost savings.HISTORICAL BACKGROUNDAlthough the term minimally invasive surgery is relatively recent, the history of its component parts is nearly 100 years old. What is considered the newest and most popular variety of MIS, laparoscopy, is in fact the oldest. Primitive laparos-copy, placing a cystoscope within an inflated abdomen, was first performed by Kelling in 1901.1 Illumination of the abdomen required hot elements at the tip of the scope and was danger-ous. In the late 1950s, Hopkins described the rod lens, a method of transmitting light through a solid quartz rod with no heat and little light loss.1 Around the same time, thin quartz fibers were discovered to be capable of trapping light internally and conducting it around corners, opening the field of fiber optics and allowing the rapid development of flexible endoscopes.2,3 In the 1970s, the application of flexible endoscopy grew faster than that of rigid endoscopy except in a few fields such as gyne-cology and orthopedics.4 By the mid-1970s, rigid and flexible endoscopes made a rapid transition from diagnostic instruments to therapeutic ones. The explosion of video-assisted surgery in the past 20 years was a result of the development of compact, high-resolution, charge-coupled devices (CCDs) that could be mounted on the internal end of flexible endoscopes or on the external end of a Hopkins telescope. Coupled with bright light sources, fiber-optic cables, and high-definition video monitors, the videoendoscope has changed our understanding of surgical anatomy and reshaped surgical practice.Flexible endoscopic imaging started in the 1960s with the first bundling of many quartz fibers into bundles, one for illu-mination and one for imaging. The earliest upper endoscopes revolutionized the diagnosis and treatment of gastroesophageal reflux and peptic ulcer disease and made possible early detec-tion of upper and lower gastrointestinal (GI) cancer at a stage that could be cured. The first endoscopic surgical procedure  was the colonoscopic polypectomy, developed by Shinya and Wolfe, two surgeons from New York City. The percutane-ous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) invented by Gauderer and Ponsky may have been the first NOTES procedure, reported  in 1981.5 Endoscopic pancreatic pseudocyst drainage is thought to be the next NOTES procedure developed; however, there was little energy and money put into the development of NOTES until a number of gastroenterologists claimed the ability to remove the gallbladder with a flexible endoscope, using a transgastric technique. With this pronouncement, the surgical community took notice and seized the momentum for NOTES research and development. Today most intra-abdominal NOTES procedures remain within the realm of research or incorporate a hybrid laparoscopic technique outside of highly specialized centers. Clinically the transvaginal approach has been studied the most extensively. Evaluation of 551 female patients from the  German NOTES registry has shown conversion and compli-cation rates similar to conventional laparoscopic surgery for cholecystectomy and appendectomy procedures.6 Endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR) of early-stage esophageal and gastric lesions has revolutionized the management of these malignan-cies. The peroral endoscopic myotomy (POEM) procedure for achalasia is showing clinical efficacy and gaining popularity.As the race to minimize the size and increase the function-ality of laparoscopic instruments progressed, the notion of using fewer access points to accomplish the same operations resulted in the development of single-incision laparoscopic surgery (SILS), synonymously termed laparoendoscopic single-site surgery (LESS). Viewed as a progression of laparoscopic surgery, SILS has recently garnered greater enthusiasm over its transvisceral NOTES counterpart.7 Currently the single-incision technique is used regularly across a wide variety of surgical areas including general, urologic, gynecologic, colorectal, and bariatric surgery.8 Although optical imaging produced the majority of MIS pro-cedures, other (traditionally radiologic) imaging technologies allowed the development of innovative procedures in the 1970s. Fluoroscopic imaging allowed the adoption of percutaneous vas-cular procedures, the most revolutionary of which was balloon angioplasty. Balloon-based procedures spread into all fields of medicine used to open up clogged lumens with minimal access. Stents were then developed that were used in many disciplines to keep the newly ballooned segment open. The culmination of fluoroscopic balloon and stent proficiency is exemplified by the transvenous intrahepatic portosystemic shunt and by the aortic stent graft, which has nearly replaced open elective abdominal aortic aneurysm repair.MIS procedures using ultrasound imaging have been limited to fairly crude exercises, such as fragmenting kidney stones and freezing liver tumors, because of the relatively low Key Points1	Minimally invasive surgery describes a philosophical approach to surgery in which access trauma is minimized without compromising the quality of the surgical procedure.2	The carbon dioxide pneumoperitoneum used for laparoscopy induces some unique pathophysiologic consequences.3	Robotic surgery has been most valuable in the performance of minimally invasive urologic, gynecologic, colorectal, and complex abdominal wall reconstruction procedures.4	Natural orifice transluminal endoscopic surgery represents an opportunity to perform truly scar-free surgery.5	Single-incision laparoscopic surgery reduces the amount of abdominal wall trauma but presents unique challenges to the traditional tenets of laparoscopic ergonomics.6	Laparoscopy during pregnancy is best performed in the sec-ond trimester and is safe if appropriate monitoring is performed.7	Laparoscopic surgery for cancer is also appropriate if good tissue handling techniques are maintained.8	Training for laparoscopy requires practice outside of the operating room in a simulation laboratory.Brunicardi_Ch14_p0453-p0478.indd   45401/03/19   4:58 PM 455MINIMALLY INVASIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 14resolution of ultrasound devices. Newer, high-resolution ultra-sound methods with high-frequency crystals may act as a guide while performing minimally invasive resections of individual layers of the intestinal wall.Axial imaging, such as computed tomography (CT), has allowed the development of an area of MIS that often is not recognized because it requires only a CT scanner and a long needle. CT-guided drainage of abdominal fluid collections and percutaneous biopsy of abnormal tissues are minimally invasive means of performing procedures that previously required a celi-otomy. CT-guided percutaneous radiofrequency (RF) ablation has emerged as a useful treatment for primary and metastatic liver tumors. This procedure also is performed laparoscopically under ultrasound guidance.9A powerful, noninvasive method of imaging that will  allow the development of the least invasive—and potentially noninvasive—surgery is magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). MRI is an extremely valuable diagnostic tool, but it is only slowly coming to be of therapeutic value. One obstacle to the use of MRI for MIS is that image production and refreshment of the image as a procedure progresses are slow. Another is that all instrumentation must be nonmetallic when working with the powerful magnets of an MRI scanner. Moreover, MRI magnets are bulky and limit the surgeon’s access to the patient. Open magnets have been developed that allow the surgeon to stand between two large MRI coils, obtaining access to the portion of the patient being scanned. The advantage of MRI, in addition to the superb images produced, is that there is no radiation expo-sure to patient or surgeon. Some neurosurgeons are accumu-lating experience using MRI to perform frameless stereotactic surgery.Robotic surgery has been dreamed about for some time, and many science fiction–like devices have been developed over the years to provide mechanical assistance for the surgeon. The first computer-assisted robot was designed to accurately drill femoral shaft bone for wobble-free placement of hip prostheses. Although the concept was appealing, the robot proved no better than a skilled orthopedic surgeon and was a good deal slower. Following this, the first and only two commercially successful robots for laparoscopic surgery were developed in California. Computer Motion, founded by Yulun Wang in Santa Barbara, used National Science Foundation funds to create a mechanical arm, the Aesop robot, which held and moved the laparoscope with voice, foot, or hand control. In Northern California, a master-slave system first developed for surgery on the multina-tional space station by Philip Green was purchased by Fred Moll and Lonnie Smith, and then reengineered with the surgeon in mind to create a remarkably intuitive computer-enhanced surgi-cal platform. The company, Intuitive Surgical, was aptly named, and their primary product, the da Vinci robot, is currently the only major robotic platform on the market, although competi-tors are rapidly emerging in the horizon. Although eschewed by many experienced laparoscopists, the da Vinci achieved a toehold among many skilled surgeons who found that the robot could facilitate MIS procedures that were difficult with standard laparoscopic procedures. The latest iteration of the  da Vinci Xi platform released in 2014 features high-defini-tion, three-dimensional vision and a dual-console capability allowing greater visualization, assistance, and instruction capa-bilities. Additionally, the new overhead boom design facilitates anatomical access from virtually any position enabling complex multiquadrant surgeries.PHYSIOLOGY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF MINIMALLY INVASIVE SURGERYEven with the least invasive of the MIS procedures, physiologic changes occur. Many minimally invasive procedures require minimal or no sedation, and there are few adverse consequences to the cardiovascular, endocrinologic, or immunologic systems. The least invasive of such procedures include stereotactic biopsy of breast lesions and flexible GI endoscopy. Minimally invasive procedures that require general anesthesia have a greater physi-ologic impact because of the anesthetic agent, the incision (even if small), and the induced pneumoperitoneum.LaparoscopyThe unique feature of laparoscopic surgery is the need to lift the abdominal wall from the abdominal organs. Two methods have been devised for achieving this.10 The first, used by most sur-geons, is a pneumoperitoneum. Throughout the early 20th century, intraperitoneal visualization was achieved by inflating the abdominal cavity with air, using a sphygmomanometer bulb.11 The problem with using air insufflation is that nitrogen is poorly soluble in blood and is slowly absorbed across the peritoneal surfaces. Air pneumoperitoneum was believed to be more pain-ful than nitrous oxide (N2O) pneumoperitoneum, but less pain-ful than carbon dioxide (CO2) pneumoperitoneum. Subsequently, CO2 and N2O were used for inflating the abdomen. N2O had the advantage of being physiologically inert and rap-idly absorbed. It also provided better analgesia for laparoscopy performed under local anesthesia when compared with CO2  or air.12 Despite initial concerns that N2O would not suppress combustion, controlled clinical trials have established its safety within the peritoneal cavity.13 In addition, N2O has been shown to reduce the intraoperative end-tidal CO2 and minute ventila-tion required to maintain homeostasis when compared to CO2 pneumoperitoneum.13 The effect of N2O on tumor biology and the development of port site metastasis are unknown. As such, caution should be exercised when performing laparoscopic can-cer surgery with this agent. Finally, the safety of N2O pneumo-peritoneum in pregnancy has yet to be elucidated.The physiologic effects of CO2 pneumoperitoneum can be divided into two areas: (a) gas-specific effects and (b) pressure-specific effects (Fig. 14-1). CO2 is rapidly absorbed across the peritoneal membrane into the circulation. In the circulation, 2Local effectsPeritoneal distentionVagal reactionElevated diaphragmAltered venous returnPainSystemic effectsHypercarbiaAcidosisIncreased afterloadIncreased catecholaminesMyocardial stressCO2Figure 14-1. Carbon dioxide gas insufflated into the peritoneal cavity has both local and systemic effects that cause a complex set of hemodynamic and metabolic alterations. (Reproduced with permission from Hunter JG: Bailliere’s Clinical Gastroen-terology Laparoscopic Surgery. London/Philadelphia: Bailliere  Tindall; 1993.)Brunicardi_Ch14_p0453-p0478.indd   45501/03/19   4:58 PM 456BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART ICO2 creates a respiratory acidosis by the generation of carbonic acid.14 Body buffers, the largest reserve of which lies in bone, absorb CO2 (up to 120 L) and minimize the development of hypercarbia or respiratory acidosis during brief endoscopic pro-cedures.14 Once the body buffers are saturated, respiratory aci-dosis develops rapidly, and the respiratory system assumes the burden of keeping up with the absorption of CO2 and its release from these buffers.In patients with normal respiratory function, this is not difficult; the anesthesiologist increases the ventilatory rate or vital capacity on the ventilator. If the respiratory rate required exceeds 20 breaths per minute, there may be less efficient gas exchange and increasing hypercarbia.15 Conversely, if vital capacity is increased substantially, there is a greater opportunity for barotrauma and greater respiratory motion–induced disrup-tion of the upper abdominal operative field. In some situations, it is advisable to evacuate the pneumoperitoneum or reduce the intra-abdominal pressure to allow time for the anesthesiologist to adjust for hypercarbia.16 Although mild respiratory acidosis probably is an insignificant problem, more severe respiratory acidosis leading to cardiac arrhythmias has been reported.17 Hypercarbia also causes tachycardia and increased systemic vascular resistance, which elevates blood pressure and increases myocardial oxygen demand.14,17The pressure effects of the pneumoperitoneum on cardio-vascular physiology also have been studied. In the hypovolemic individual, excessive pressure on the inferior vena cava and a reverse Trendelenburg position with loss of lower extremity muscle tone may cause decreased venous return and decreased cardiac output.14,18 This is not seen in the normovolemic patient. The most common arrhythmia created by laparoscopy is brady-cardia. A rapid stretch of the peritoneal membrane often causes a vagovagal response with bradycardia and, occasionally, hypo-tension.19 The appropriate management of this event is desuf-flation of the abdomen, administration of vagolytic agents (e.g., atropine), and adequate volume replacement.20With the increased intra-abdominal pressure compressing the inferior vena cava, there is diminished venous return from the lower extremities. This has been well documented in the patient placed in the reverse Trendelenburg position for upper abdominal operations. Venous engorgement and decreased venous return promote venous thrombosis.21,22 Many series of advanced laparoscopic procedures in which deep venous thrombosis (DVT) prophylaxis was not used demonstrate the frequency of pulmonary embolus. This usually is an avoidable complication with the use of sequential compression stockings, subcutaneous heparin, or low molecular weight heparin.20,23 In short-duration laparoscopic procedures, such as appendectomy, hernia repair, or cholecystectomy, the risk of DVT may not be sufficient to warrant extensive DVT prophylaxis.The increased pressure of the pneumoperitoneum is trans-mitted directly across the paralyzed diaphragm to the thoracic cavity, creating increased central venous pressure and increased filling pressures of the right and left sides of the heart. If the intra-abdominal pressures are kept under 20 mmHg, the car-diac output usually is well maintained.22-24 The direct effect of the pneumoperitoneum on increasing intrathoracic pressure increases peak inspiratory pressure, pressure across the chest wall, and also, the likelihood of barotrauma. Despite these concerns, disruption of blebs and consequent pneumothoraces are rare after uncomplicated laparoscopic surgery.24 Pneumo-thoraces occurring with laparoscopic esophageal surgery may be very significant. The pathophysiology and management are discussed at the end of this section. Increased intra-abdominal pressure decreases renal blood flow, glomerular filtration rate, and urine output. These effects may be mediated by direct pressure on the kidney and the renal vein.25,26 The secondary effect of decreased renal blood flow is to increase plasma renin release, thereby increasing sodium retention. Increased circu-lating antidiuretic hormone levels also are found during the pneumoperitoneum, increasing free water reabsorption in the distal tubules.27 Although the effects of the pneumoperitoneum on renal blood flow are immediately reversible, the hormonally mediated changes such as elevated antidiuretic hormone levels decrease urine output for up to 1 hour after the procedure has ended. Intraoperative oliguria is common during laparoscopy, but the urine output is not a reflection of intravascular volume status; intravenous (IV) fluid administration during an uncom-plicated laparoscopic procedure should not be linked to urine output. Because insensible fluid losses through the open abdo-men are eliminated with laparoscopy, the need for supplemen-tal fluid during a laparoscopic surgical procedure should only keep up with venous pooling in the lower limbs, third-space losses into the bowel, and blood loss, which is generally less than occurs with an equivalent open operation.The hemodynamic and metabolic consequences of pneu-moperitoneum are well tolerated by healthy individuals for a prolonged period and by most individuals for at least a short period. Difficulties can occur when a patient with compromised cardiovascular function is subjected to a long laparoscopic pro-cedure. It is during these procedures that alternative approaches should be considered or insufflation pressure reduced. Alterna-tive gases that have been suggested for laparoscopy include the inert gases helium, neon, and argon. These gases are appeal-ing because they cause no metabolic effects, but are poorly soluble in blood (unlike CO2 and N2O) and are prone to create gas emboli if the gas has direct access to the venous system.22 Gas emboli are rare but serious complications of laparoscopic surgery.23,28 They should be suspected if hypotension develops during insufflation. Diagnosis may be made by listening (with an esophageal stethoscope) for the characteristic “mill wheel” murmur. The treatment of gas embolism is to place the patient in a left lateral decubitus position with the head down to trap the gas in the apex of the right ventricle.23 A rapidly placed central venous catheter then can be used to aspirate the gas out of the right ventricle.In some situations, minimally invasive abdominal surgery can be performed without insufflation. This is possible with the assistance of an abdominal lift device that can be placed through a 10to 12-mm trocar at the umbilicus.29 These devices have the advantage of creating little physiologic derangement, but they are bulky and intrusive. The exposure and working room offered by lift devices also are inferior to those accomplished by pneumoperitoneum. Lifting the anterior abdominal wall reduces space available laterally and thereby displaces the bowel medi-ally and anteriorly into the operative field. A pneumoperi-toneum, with its well-distributed intra-abdominal pressure, provides better exposure. Abdominal lift devices also cause more postoperative pain, but they do allow the performance of MIS with standard (nonlaparoscopic) surgical instruments.Endocrine responses to laparoscopic surgery are not always intuitive. Serum cortisol levels after laparoscopic opera-tions are often higher than after the equivalent operation per-formed through an open incision.30 The greatest difference Brunicardi_Ch14_p0453-p0478.indd   45601/03/19   4:58 PM 457MINIMALLY INVASIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 14between the endocrine response of open and laparoscopic sur-gery is the more rapid equilibration of most stress-mediated hormone levels after laparoscopic surgery. Immune suppression also is less after laparoscopy than after open surgery. There is a trend toward more rapid normalization of cytokine levels after a laparoscopic procedure than after the equivalent procedure performed by celiotomy.31Transhiatal mobilization of the distal esophagus is com-monly performed as a component of many laparoscopic upper abdominal procedures. If there is compromise of the mediastinal pleura with resultant CO2 pneumothorax, the defect should be enlarged so as to prevent a tension pneumothorax. Even with such a strategy, tension pneumothorax may develop, as medi-astinal structures may seal the hole during inspiration, allowing the chest to fill during expiration. In addition to enlargement of the hole, a thoracostomy tube (chest tube) should be placed across the breach into the abdomen with intra-abdominal pres-sures reduced below 8 mmHg, or a standard chest tube may be placed. When a pneumothorax occurs with laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication or Heller myotomy, it is preferable to place an 18-French red rubber catheter with multiple side holes cut out of the distal end across the defect. At the end of the procedure, the distal end of the tube is pulled out a 10-mm port site (as the port is removed), and the pneumothorax is evacuated to a primitive water seal using a bowl of sterile water or saline. During laparo-scopic esophagectomy, it is preferable to leave a standard chest tube, as residual intra-abdominal fluid will tend to be siphoned through the defect postoperatively if the tube is removed at the end of the case.ThoracoscopyThe physiology of thoracic MIS (thoracoscopy) is different from that of laparoscopy. Because of the bony confines of the thorax, it is unnecessary to use positive pressure when working in the thorax.32 The disadvantages of positive pressure in the chest include decreased venous return, mediastinal shift, and the need to keep a firm seal at all trocar sites. Without positive pressure, it is necessary to place a double-lumen endotracheal tube so that the ipsilateral lung can be deflated when the opera-tion starts. By collapsing the ipsilateral lung, working space within the thorax is obtained. Because insufflation is unneces-sary in thoracoscopic surgery, it can be beneficial to use stan-dard instruments via extended port sites in conjunction with thoracoscopic instruments. This approach is particularly useful when performing advanced procedures such as thoracoscopic anatomic pulmonary resection.Extracavitary Minimally Invasive SurgeryMany MIS procedures create working spaces in extrathoracic and extraperitoneal locations. Laparoscopic inguinal her-nia repair usually is performed in the anterior extraperitoneal Retzius space.33,34 Laparoscopic nephrectomy often is per-formed with retroperitoneal laparoscopy. Endoscopic retro-peritoneal approaches to pancreatic necrosectomy have seen some limited use.35 Lower extremity vascular procedures and plastic surgical endoscopic procedures require the development of working space in unconventional planes, often at the level of the fascia, sometimes below the fascia, and occasionally in nonanatomic regions.36 Some of these techniques use insuffla-tion of gas, but many use balloon inflation to develop the space, followed by low-pressure gas insufflation or lift devices to maintain the space (Fig. 14-2). These techniques produce fewer and less severe adverse physiologic consequences than does the ABCFigure 14-2. Balloons are used to create extra-anatomic working spaces. In this example (A through C), a balloon is introduced into the space between the posterior rectus sheath and the rectus abdom-inal muscle. The balloon is inflated in the preperitoneal space to create working room for extraperitoneal endoscopic hernia repair.pneumoperitoneum, but the insufflation of carbon dioxide into extraperitoneal locations can spread widely, causing subcutane-ous emphysema and metabolic acidosis.AnesthesiaProper anesthesia management during laparoscopic surgery requires a thorough knowledge of the pathophysiology of the CO2 pneumoperitoneum.20 The laparoscopic surgeon can influ-ence cardiovascular performance by reducing or removing the CO2 pneumoperitoneum. Insensible fluid losses are negligible, and therefore, IV fluid administration should not exceed that necessary to maintain circulating volume. MIS procedures are often outpatient procedures, so short-acting anesthetic agents are preferable. Because the factors that require hospitaliza-tion after laparoscopic procedures include the management of nausea, pain, and urinary retention, the anesthesiologist should minimize the use of agents that provoke these conditions and maximize the use of medications that prevent such problems. Critical to the anesthesia management of these patients is the use of nonnarcotic analgesics (e.g., ketorolac) when hemosta-sis allows it and the liberal use of antiemetic agents, including ondansetron and steroids.The Minimally Invasive TeamFrom the beginning, the tremendous success of MIS was founded on the understanding that a team approach was Brunicardi_Ch14_p0453-p0478.indd   45701/03/19   4:58 PM 458BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART ITable 14-1Laparoscopic surgical proceduresBASICADVANCEDAppendectomyNissen fundoplicationLymph node dissectionCholecystectomyHeller myotomyRoboticsInguinal hernia repairParaesophageal herniaBariatricEnteral accessGastrectomyComplex abdominal wall reconstruction Lysis of adhesionsEsophagectomy Bile duct explorationHepatectomy ColectomyPancreatectomy SplenectomyProstatectomy AdrenalectomyHysterectomy Nephrectomy Figure 14-3. An example of a typical minimally invasive surgery suite. All core equipment is located on easily movable consoles.necessary. The many laparoscopic procedures performed daily range from basic to advanced complexity, and require that the surgical team have an intimate understanding of the operative conduct (Table 14-1). Minimally invasive procedures require complicated and fragile equipment that demands constant main-tenance. In addition, multiple intraoperative adjustments to the equipment, camera, insufflator, monitors, and patient/surgeon position are made during these procedures. As such, a coordi-nated team approach is mandated to ensure patient safety and excellent outcomes. More and more, flexible endoscopes are used to guide or provide quality control for laparoscopic pro-cedures. As NOTES, SILS, and robotic surgery become more common, hybrid procedures (laparoscopy and endoscopy) and complicated robotics cases will require a nursing staff capable of maintaining flexible endoscopes and understanding the oper-ation of sophisticated technology.A typical MIS team may consist of a laparoscopic surgeon and an operating room (OR) nurse with an interest in laparo-scopic and endoscopic surgery. Adding dedicated assistants and circulating staff with an intimate knowledge of the equipment will add to and enhance team competency. Studies have dem-onstrated that having a designated laparoscopic team increases the efficiency and safety of laparoscopic surgery, which is trans-lated into a benefit for the patient and the hospital.37Room Setup and the Minimally Invasive SuiteNearly all MIS, whether using fluoroscopic, ultrasound, or opti-cal imaging, incorporates a video monitor as a guide. Occasion-ally, two images are necessary to adequately guide the operation, as in procedures such as endoscopic retrograde cholangiopan-creatography, laparoscopic common bile duct exploration, and laparoscopic ultrasonography. When two images are necessary, the images should be displayed on two adjacent video monitors or projected on a single screen with a picture-in-picture effect. The video monitor(s) should be set across the operating table from the surgeon. The patient should be interposed between the surgeon and the video monitor; ideally, the operative field also lies between the surgeon and the monitor. In pelviscopic sur-gery, it is best to place the video monitor at the patient’s feet, and in laparoscopic cholecystectomy, the monitor is placed at the 10 o’clock position (relative to the patient) while the surgeon stands on the patient’s left at the 4 o’clock position. The insuf-flating and patient-monitoring equipment ideally also is placed across the table from the surgeon so that the insufflating pres-sure and the patient’s vital signs and end-tidal CO2 tension can be monitored.The development of the minimally invasive surgical suite has been a tremendous contribution to the field of laparoscopy in that it has facilitated the performance of advanced proce-dures and techniques (Fig. 14-3). By having the core equipment (monitors, insufflators, and imaging equipment) located within mobile, ceiling-mounted consoles, the surgery team is able to accommodate and make small adjustments rapidly and con-tinuously throughout the procedure. The specifically designed minimally invasive surgical suite serves to decrease equipment and cable disorganization, ease the movements of operative per-sonnel around the room, improve ergonomics, and facilitate the use of advanced imaging equipment such as laparoscopic ultra-sound.38 Although having a minimally invasive surgical suite available is very useful, it is not essential to successfully carry out advanced laparoscopic procedures.Patient PositioningPatients usually are placed in the supine position for laparo-scopic surgery. When the operative field is the gastroesophageal junction or the left lobe of the liver, it is easiest to operate from between the legs. The legs may be elevated in Allen stirrups or abducted on leg boards to achieve this position. When pel-vic procedures are performed, it usually is necessary to place the legs in Allen stirrups to gain access to the perineum. A lat-eral decubitus position with the table flexed provides the best access to the retroperitoneum when performing nephrectomy or adrenalectomy. For laparoscopic splenectomy, a 45° tilt of the patient provides excellent access to the lesser sac and the lateral peritoneal attachments to the spleen. For thoracoscopic surgery, the patient is placed in the lateral position with table flexion to open the intercostal spaces and the distance between the iliac crest and costal margin (Fig. 14-4). Additional con-sideration must be made in robotic operations to position the Brunicardi_Ch14_p0453-p0478.indd   45801/03/19   4:58 PM 459MINIMALLY INVASIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 14Figure 14-4. Proper padding and protection of pressure points is an essential consideration in laparoscopic and thoracoscopic approaches. In preparation for thoracoscopy, this patient is placed in left lateral decubitus position with the table flexed, which serves to open the intercostal spaces and increase the distance between the iliac crest and the inferior costal margin.patient appropriately before starting. Clashing of the robotic arms with surrounding equipment or each other can occur if not positioned correctly. This is more common in predecessors of the da Vinci Xi platform. Unless an operative table with inte-grated table motion is available, once the robot is docked to the patient the bed cannot be moved without undocking.When the patient’s knees are to be bent for extended peri-ods or the patient is going to be placed in a reverse Trendelen-burg position for more than a few minutes, DVT prophylaxis should be used. Sequential compression devices should be placed on the lower extremities during laparoscopic procedures to increase venous return and provides inhibition of thrombo-plastin activation.General Principles of AccessThe most natural ports of access for MIS and NOTES are the anatomic portals of entry and exit. The nares, mouth, anus, vagina, and urethra are used to access the respiratory, GI, and urinary systems. The advantage of using these points of access is that no incision is required. The disadvantages lie in the long distances between the orifice and the region of interest. For NOTES procedures, the vagina may serve as point of access, entering the abdomen via the posterior cul-de-sac of the pelvis. Similarly, the peritoneal cavity may be reached through the side wall of the stomach or colon.Access to the vascular system may be accomplished under local anesthesia by cutting down and exposing the desired vessel, usually in the groin. Increasingly, vascular access is obtained with percutaneous techniques using a small incision, a needle, and a guidewire, over which are passed a variety of different-sized access devices. This approach, known as the Seldinger technique, is most frequently used by general sur-geons for placement of Hickman catheters, but it also is used to gain access to the arterial and venous system for performance of minimally invasive procedures. Guidewire-assisted, Seldinger-type techniques also are helpful for gaining access to the gut for procedures such as PEG, for gaining access to the biliary system through the liver, and for gaining access to the upper urinary tract.In thoracoscopic surgery, the access technique is similar to that used for placement of a chest tube. In these procedures, general anesthesia and single lung ventilation are essential. A small incision is made over the top of a rib and, under direct vision, carried down through the pleura. The lung is collapsed, and a trocar is inserted across the chest wall to allow access with a telescope. Once the lung is completely collapsed, subse-quent access may be obtained with direct puncture, viewing all entry sites through the videoendoscope. Because insufflation of the chest is unnecessary, simple ports that keep the small inci-sions open are all that is required to allow repeated access to the thorax.Laparoscopic AccessThe requirements for laparoscopy are more involved because the creation of a pneumoperitoneum requires that instruments of access (trocars) contain valves to maintain abdominal inflation.Two methods are used for establishing abdominal access during laparoscopic procedures.39,40 The first, direct puncture laparoscopy, begins with the elevation of the relaxed abdominal wall with two towel clips or a well-placed hand. A small inci-sion is made in the umbilicus, and a specialized spring-loaded (Veress) needle is placed in the abdominal cavity (Fig. 14-5). Figure 14-5. A. Tip of spring loaded (Veress) needle. B. Veress needle held at its serrated collar with a thumb and forefinger. At the umbilicus, the abdominal wall is grasped with fingers or penetrating towel clip to elevate the abdominal wall away from the underlying structures.ABBrunicardi_Ch14_p0453-p0478.indd   45901/03/19   4:58 PM 460BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IFigure 14-6. It is essential to be able to interpret the insufflator pressure readings and flow rates. These readings indicate proper intraperitoneal placement of the Veress needle.Figure 14-7. The open laparoscopy technique involves identifica-tion and incision of the peritoneum, followed by the placement of a specialized trocar with a conical sleeve to maintain a gas seal. Spe-cialized wings on the trocar are attached to sutures placed through the fascia to prevent loss of the gas seal.With the Veress needle, two distinct pops are felt as the surgeon passes the needle through the abdominal wall fascia and the peritoneum. The umbilicus usually is selected as the preferred point of access because, in this location, the abdominal wall is quite thin, even in obese patients. The abdomen is inflated with a pressure-limited insufflator. CO2 gas usually is used, with maximal pressures in the range of 14 to 15 mmHg. During the process of insufflation, it is essential that the surgeon observe the pressure and flow readings on the monitor to confirm an intraperitoneal location of the Veress needle tip (Fig. 14-6). Laparoscopic surgery can be performed under local anesthesia, but general anesthesia is preferable. Under local anesthesia, N2O is used as the insufflating agent, and insufflation is stopped after 2 L of gas is insufflated or when a pressure of 10 mmHg is reached.After peritoneal insufflation, direct access to the abdomen is obtained with a 5or 10-mm trocar. This can be performed through a radially dilating sheath placed over the Veress needle or an optical viewing trocar. In the latter technique, a camera is placed inside of a clear pyramidal trocar. Direct puncture entry is observed as the trocar is passed through the abdominal wall. The critical issues for safe direct-puncture laparoscopy include the use of a vented stylet for the trocar, or a trocar with a safety shield or dilating tip. An optical viewing trocar can be used without prior insufflation; however, proper recognition of the abdominal wall layers is critical to avoid entry into the mes-entery or underlying structures. In all direct puncture entry the trocar must be pointed away from the sacral promontory and the great vessels.41 Patient position should be surveyed before trocar placement to ensure a proper trajectory.Occasionally, the direct peritoneal access (Hasson) tech-nique is advisable.42 With this technique, the surgeon makes a small incision just below the umbilicus and under direct vision locates the abdominal fascia. Two Kocher clamps are placed on the fascia, and with curved Mayo scissors, a small incision is made through the fascia and underlying peritoneum. A fin-ger is placed into the abdomen to make sure that there is no adherent bowel. A sturdy suture is placed on each side of the fascia and secured to the wings of a specialized trocar, which is then passed directly into the abdominal cavity (Fig. 14-7). Rapid insufflation can make up for some of the time lost with the initial dissection. This technique is preferable for the abdo-men of patients who have undergone previous operations in which small bowel may be adherent to the undersurface of the abdominal wound. The close adherence of bowel to the perito-neum in the previously operated abdomen does not eliminate the possibility of intestinal injury but should make great vessel injury extremely unlikely. Because of the difficulties in visual-izing the abdominal region immediately adjacent to the primary trocar, it is recommended that the telescope be passed through a secondary trocar to inspect the site of initial abdominal access.40 Secondary punctures are made with 5and 10-mm trocars.  For safe access to the abdominal cavity, it is critical to visualize all sites of trocar entry.41,42 At the completion of the operation, all trocars are removed under direct vision, and the insertion sites are inspected for bleeding. If bleeding occurs, direct pres-sure with an instrument from another trocar site or balloon tamponade with a Foley catheter placed through the trocar site generally stops the bleeding within 3 to 5 minutes. When this is not successful, a full-thickness abdominal wall suture has been used successfully to tamponade trocar site bleeding.It is generally agreed that 5-mm trocars need no site sutur-ing. Ten-millimeter trocars placed off the midline, through a radially dilating sheath or above the transverse mesocolon do not typically require repair. Conversely, if the fascia has been dilated to allow the passage of the gallbladder or other organ, it should be repaired at the fascial level with interrupted sutures. The port site may be closed with suture delivery systems simi-lar to crochet needles enabling mass closure of the abdominal wall. This is especially helpful in obese patients where direct fascial closure may be challenging, through a small skin inci-sion. Failure to close lower abdominal trocar sites that are 10 mm in diameter or larger can lead to an incarcerated hernia.Access for Subcutaneous and  Extraperitoneal SurgeryThere are two methods for gaining access to nonanatomic spaces. For retroperitoneal locations, balloon dissection is effec-tive. This access technique is appropriate for the extraperitoneal repair of inguinal hernias and for retroperitoneal surgery for adrenalectomy, nephrectomy, lumbar discectomy, pancreatic necrosectomy, or para-aortic lymph node dissection.43,44 The Brunicardi_Ch14_p0453-p0478.indd   46001/03/19   4:58 PM 461MINIMALLY INVASIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 14initial access to the extraperitoneal space is performed in a way similar to direct puncture laparoscopy, except that the last layer (the peritoneum) is not traversed. Once the transversalis fascia has been punctured, a specialized trocar with a balloon on the end is introduced. The balloon is inflated in the extraperitoneal space to create a working chamber. The balloon then is deflated, and a Hasson trocar is placed. An insufflation pressure of  10 mmHg usually is adequate to keep the extraperitoneal space open for dissection and will limit subcutaneous emphysema. Higher gas pressures force CO2 into the soft tissues and may contribute to hypercarbia. Extraperitoneal endosurgery provides less working space than laparoscopy but eliminates the possibil-ity of intestinal injury, intestinal adhesion, herniation at the tro-car sites, and ileus. These issues are important for laparoscopic hernia repair because extraperitoneal approaches prevent the small bowel from sticking to the prosthetic mesh.34Subcutaneous surgery has been most widely used in car-diac, vascular, and plastic surgery.36 In cardiac surgery, subcu-taneous access has been used for saphenous vein harvesting, and in vascular surgery for ligation of subfascial perforating veins (Linton procedure). With minimally invasive techniques, the entire saphenous vein above the knee may be harvested through a single incision (Fig. 14-8).45,46 Once the saphenous vein is located, a long retractor that holds a 5-mm laparoscope allows the coaxial dissection of the vein and coagulation or clipping of Figure 14-8. With two small incisions, virtually the entire saphe-nous vein can be harvested for bypass grafting.each side branch. A small incision above the knee also can be used to ligate perforating veins in the lower leg.Subcutaneous access also is used for plastic surgery pro-cedures.46 Minimally invasive approaches are especially well suited to cosmetic surgery, in which attempts are made to hide the incision. It is easier to hide several 5-mm incisions than one long incision. The technique of blunt dissection along fascial planes combined with lighted retractors and endoscope-holding retractors is most successful for extensive subcutaneous surgery. Some prefer gas insufflation of these soft tissue planes. The pri-mary disadvantage of soft tissue insufflation is that subcutane-ous emphysema can be created.Hand-Assisted Laparoscopic AccessHand-assisted laparoscopic surgery is thought to combine the tactile advantages of open surgery with the minimal access of laparoscopy and thoracoscopy. This approach commonly is used to assist with difficult cases before conversion to celiotomy is necessary. Additionally, hand-assisted laparoscopic surgery is used to help surgeons negotiate the steep learning curve associ-ated with advanced laparoscopic procedures.47 This technology uses an entryway for the hand that preserves the pneumoperi-toneum and enables laparoscopic visualization in combination with the use of minimally invasive instruments (Fig. 14-9). For-mal investigation of this modality has been limited primarily to case reports and small series and has focused primarily on solid organ and colon surgery.Intraperitoneal, intrathoracic, and retroperitoneal access for robotic surgery adheres to the principles of laparoscopic and thoracoscopic access; however, the port size for the primary puncture is 12 mm to allow placement of the stereo laparoscope. Remaining trocars are 8 mm.Natural Orifice Transluminal Endoscopic Surgery AccessMultiple studies have shown safety in the performance of NOTES procedures. Transvaginal, transvesicle, transanal, transcolonic, transgastric, and transoral approaches have all been attempted with varying success. The ease of decontamina-tion, entry, and closure of these structures create variable chal-lenges. The transvaginal approach for resection of the uterus has been employed for many years by gynecologists and has been modified by laparoscopists with great success. Extraction of the gallbladder, kidney, bladder, large bowel, and stomach can be Figure 14-9. This is an example of hand-assisted laparoscopic surgery during left colectomy. The surgeon uses a hand to provide retraction and counter tension during mobilization of the colon from its retroperitoneal attachments, as well as during division of the mesocolon. This technique is particularly useful in the region of the transverse colon.Brunicardi_Ch14_p0453-p0478.indd   46101/03/19   4:58 PM 462BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IFigure 14-10. Submucosal tunnel technique for transesophageal mediastinoscopy. (Reproduced with permission from Khashab MA, Kalloo AN. NOTES: current status and new horizons, Gastroenterology. 2012 Apr;142(4):704-710.e1.)performed via the vagina. The esophagus can be traversed to enter the mediastinum. Leaving the orifice or organ of entry with an endoscope requires the use of an endoscopic needle knife followed by submucosal tunneling or direct puncture and balloon dilation (Fig. 14-10). Closure has been performed using endoscopic clips or sutures with advanced endoscopic platforms.Single-Incision Laparoscopic Surgery AccessThere is no standardized approach for SILS, and access tech-niques vary by surgeon preference. Traditionally, a single skin incision is made directly through the umbilical scar ranging from 1 to 3 cm. Through this single incision, multiple low-profile trocars can be placed separately into the fascia to allow insufflation, camera, and working instruments. The advantage of this technique is that conventional laparoscopic tools can be employed. The disadvantage becomes apparent when an extrac-tion site is needed. A variety of specialized multilumen trocars are on the market that can be placed through the umbilical ring48 (Fig. 14-11A,B). The advantages of these devices include faster access, improved safety, minimization of air leaks, and plat-form-derived instrument triangulation. The major disadvantage is cost.Port PlacementTrocars for the surgeon’s left and right hand should be placed at least 10 cm apart. For most operations, it is possible to orient ABCDEthe telescope between these two trocars and slightly back from them. The ideal trocar orientation creates an equilateral triangle between the surgeon’s right hand, left hand, and the telescope, with 10 to 15 cm on each leg. If one imagines the target of the operation (e.g., the gallbladder or gastroesophageal junc-tion) oriented at the apex of a second equilateral triangle built on the first, these four points of reference create a diamond  (Fig. 14-12). The surgeon stands behind the telescope, which provides optimal ergonomic orientation but frequently requires that a camera operator (or mechanical camera holder) reach between the surgeon’s hands to guide the telescope. SILS is challenging for even the experienced laparoscopist because it violates most of the aforementioned ergonomic principles. Hav-ing only a single point of entry into the abdominal cavity creates an inherently crowded port and hand position. The inability to space trocars severely limits the ability to triangulate the leftand right-hand instruments. As a result, the surgeon must often work in a crossed hands fashion (Fig. 14-13). Additionally, the axis of the camera view is often in line with the working instru-ments, making visualization difficult without a deflectable tip laparoscope.The position of the operating table should permit the sur-geon to work with both elbows in at the sides, with arms bent 90° at the elbow.49 It usually is necessary to alter the operating table position with left or right tilt with the patient in the Tren-delenburg or reverse Trendelenburg position, depending on the operative field.50,51Brunicardi_Ch14_p0453-p0478.indd   46201/03/19   4:58 PM 463MINIMALLY INVASIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 14Figure 14-11. A. Specialized multilumen trocars can facilitate instrument placement. B. For single-incision laparoscopic surgery, multiple fascial punctures can be performed via a single skin incision. (Reproduced with permission from The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD; 2014. Illustration by Corinne Sandone.)Multiple trocarsthrough singleskin incision Single portaccommodatesmultiple trocarsABTHE DIAMOND OF SUCCESS"Home plate"(telescope)"First base"(R hand)"Third base"(L hand)"Second base"(hiatal hernia)15  cmFigure 14-12. The diamond configuration created by placing the telescope between the left and the right hand, recessed from the target by about 15 cm. The distance between the left and the right hand is also ideally 10 to 15 cm. In this “baseball diamond” con-figuration, the surgical target occupies the second base position.Figure 14-13. The single point of abdominal entry for trocars often requires that the surgeon work in a crossed hands fashion. (Reproduced with permission from The Johns Hopkins University School of Medi-cine, Baltimore, MD; 2014. Illustration by Corinne Sandone.)Imaging SystemsTwo methods of videoendoscopic imaging are widely used. Both methods use a camera with a charge-coupled device (CCD), which is an array of photosensitive sensor elements (pixels) that convert the incoming light intensity to an electric charge. The electric charge is subsequently converted into a color image.52With videoendoscopy, the CCD chip is placed on the inter-nal end of a long, flexible endoscope. With older flexible endo-scopes, thin quartz fibers are packed together in a bundle, and the CCD camera is mounted on the external end of the endoscope. Most standard GI endoscopes have the CCD chip at the distal end, but small, delicate choledochoscopes and nephroscopes are equipped with fiber-optic bundles.53 Distally mounted CCD chips have been developed for laparoscopy but remain very expensive and therefore have not become as widely used.Video cameras come in two basic designs. Nearly all lapa-roscopic cameras contain a red, green, and blue input, and are identical to the color cameras used for television production.52 An additional feature of many video cameras is digital enhance-ment. Digital enhancement detects edges, areas where there are drastic color or light changes between two adjacent pixels.54 By enhancing this difference, the image appears sharper and surgi-cal resolution is improved. New laparoscopic cameras contain a high-definition (HD) chip, which increases the lines of resolu-tion from 480 to 1080 lines. To enjoy the benefit of the clarity of HD video imaging, HD monitors also are necessary.Priorities in a video imaging system for MIS are illumina-tion first, resolution second, and color third. Without the first two attributes, video surgery is unsafe. Illumination and resolu-tion are as dependent on the telescope, light source, and light cable as on the video camera used. Imaging for laparoscopy, thoracoscopy, and subcutaneous surgery uses a rigid metal telescope, usually 30 cm in length. Longer telescopes are avail-able for obese patients and for reaching the mediastinum and deep in the pelvis from a periumbilical entry site. The standard Brunicardi_Ch14_p0453-p0478.indd   46301/03/19   4:58 PM 464BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IFigure 14-14. The laparoscope tips come in a variety of angled configurations. All laparoscopes have a 70° field of view. A 30°-angled scope enables the surgeon to view this field at a 30° angle to the long axis of the scope.Figure 14-15. The Hopkins rod lens telescope includes a series of optical rods that effectively transmit light to the eyepiece. The video camera is placed on the eyepiece to provide the working image. The image is only as clear as the weakest link in the image chain.  CCD = charge-coupled device. (Reproduced with permission from Toouli JG, Gossot D, Hunter JG: Endosurgery. New York/London: Churchill-Livingstone/Elsevier; 1996.)telescope contains a series of quartz optical rods and focusing lenses.55 Telescopes vary in size from 2 to 12 mm in diameter. Because light transmission is dependent on the cross-sectional area of the quartz rod, when the diameter of a rod/lens system is doubled, the illumination is quadrupled. Little illumination is needed in highly reflective, small spaces such as the knee, and a very small telescope will suffice. When working in the abdomi-nal cavity, especially if blood is present, the full illumination of a 10-mm telescope usually is necessary.Rigid telescopes may have a flat or angled end. The flat end provides a straight view (0°), and the angled end provides an oblique view (30° or 45°).52 Angled telescopes allow greater flexibility in viewing a wider operative field through a single trocar site (Fig. 14-14A); rotating an angled telescope changes LampLight sourceCameracontrollerCameraobjectivelensRelayedimageIlluminationlight guideImage formedby objective lensObservationpositionAdaption opticObjectivelens sectionRelaylens sectionEyepiecelens sectionFocus ringCCD chipMonitorCondensor lensLight guide cablethe field of view. The use of an angled telescope has distinct advantages for most videoendoscopic procedures, particularly in visualizing the common bile duct during laparoscopic cho-lecystectomy or visualizing the posterior esophagus or the tip of the spleen during laparoscopic fundoplication. Flexible tip laparoscopes offer even greater optical freedom.Light is delivered to the endoscope through a fiber-optic light cable. These light cables are highly inefficient, losing >90% of the light delivered from the light source. Extremely bright light sources (300 watts) are necessary to provide ade-quate illumination for laparoscopic surgery.The quality of the videoendoscopic image is only as good as the weakest component in the imaging chain (Fig. 14-15). Therefore, it is important to use a video monitor that has a reso-lution equal to or greater than the camera being used.55 Resolu-tion is the ability of the optical system to distinguish between line pairs. The larger the number of line pairs per millimeter, the sharper and more detailed the image. Most high-resolution monitors have up to 700 horizontal lines. HD television can deliver up to eight times more resolution than standard moni-tors; when combined with digital enhancement, a very sharp and well-defined image can be achieved.52,55 A heads-up display is a high-resolution liquid crystal monitor that is built into eyewear worn by the surgeon.56 This technology allows the surgeon to view the endoscopic image and operative field simultaneously. The proposed advantages of heads-up display include a high-resolution monocular image, which affords the surgeon mobility and reduces vertigo and eyestrain. However, this technology has not yet been widely adopted.Interest in three-dimensional (3-D) laparoscopy has waxed and waned. 3-D laparoscopy provides the additional depth of field that is lost with two-dimensional endosurgery and improves performance of novice laparoscopists performing complex tasks of dexterity, including suturing and knot tying.57 The advantages of 3-D systems are less obvious to experienced Brunicardi_Ch14_p0453-p0478.indd   46401/03/19   4:58 PM 465MINIMALLY INVASIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 14laparoscopists. Additionally, because 3-D systems require the flickering of two similar images, which are resolved with spe-cial glasses, the images’ edges become fuzzy and resolution is lost. The optical accommodation necessary to rectify these slightly differing images is tiring and may induce headaches when one uses these systems for a long period of time. The da Vinci robot uses a specialized laparoscope with two optical bundles on opposite sides of the telescope. A specialized bin-ocular eyepiece receives input from two CCD chips, each cap-turing the image from one of the two quartz rod lens systems, thereby creating true 3-D imaging without needing to employ active or passive technologies that have made 3-D laparoscopy so disappointing.Single-incision laparoscopy presents new challenges to visualization of the operative field. In the traditional laparo-scope, the light source enters the scope at a 90° angle. That position coupled with a bulky scope handle creates crowding in an already limited space. Additionally, because the scope and instruments enter the abdomen at the same point, an adequate perspective is often unobtainable even with a 30° scope. The advent of increased length laparoscopes with lighting coming from the end and a deflectable tip now allows the surgeon to recreate a sense of internal triangulation with little compromise externally. The ability to move the shaft of the scope off line while maintaining the same image provides a greater degree of freedom for the working ports.Energy Sources for Endoscopic and Endoluminal SurgeryMany MIS procedures use conventional energy sources, but the benefits of bloodless surgery to maintain optimal visualization have spawned new ways of applying energy. The most common energy source is RF electrosurgery using an alternating current with a frequency of 500,000 cycles/s (Hz). Tissue heating pro-gresses through the well-known phases of coagulation (60°C [140°F]), vaporization and desiccation (100°C [212°F]), and carbonization (>200°C [392°F]).58The two most common methods of delivering RF electro-surgery are with monopolar and bipolar electrodes. With mono-polar electrosurgery, a remote ground plate on the patient’s leg or back receives the flow of electrons that originate at a point source, the surgical electrode. A fine-tipped electrode causes a high current density at the site of application and rapid tissue heating. Monopolar electrosurgery is inexpensive and easy to modulate to achieve different tissue effects.59 A short-duration, high-voltage discharge of current (coagulation current) provides extremely rapid tissue heating. Lower-voltage, higher-wattage current (cutting current) is better for tissue desiccation and vaporization. When the surgeon desires tissue division with the least amount of thermal injury and least coagulation necrosis, a cutting current is used.With bipolar electrosurgery, the electrons flow between two adjacent electrodes. The tissue between the two electrodes is heated and desiccated. There is little opportunity for tissue cutting when bipolar current is used alone, but the ability to coapt the electrodes across a vessel provides the best method of small-vessel coagulation without thermal injury to adjacent  tissues.60 Advanced laparoscopic device manufacturers have leveraged the ability to selectively use bipolar energy and combined it with compressive force and a controllable blade to create a number of highly functional dissection and vessel-sealing tools (Fig. 14-16).Figure 14-16. Examples of advanced bipolar devices. The flow of electrons passes from one electrode to the other heating and desic-cating tissue. A controllable blade travels the length of the jaw to divide intervening tissue.To avoid thermal injury to adjacent structures, the lapa-roscopic field of view must include all uninsulated portions of the electrosurgical electrode. In addition, the integrity of the insulation must be maintained and assured. Capacitive coupling occurs when a plastic trocar insulates the abdominal wall from the current; in turn, the current is bled off of a metal sleeve or laparoscope into the viscera54 (Fig. 14-17A). This may result in thermal necrosis and a delayed fecal fistula. Another potential mechanism for unrecognized visceral injury may occur with the direct coupling of current to the laparoscope and adjacent bowel58 (Fig. 14-17B).Another method of delivering RF electrosurgery is argon beam coagulation. This is a type of monopolar electrosurgery in which a uniform field of electrons is distributed across a tissue surface by the use of a jet of argon gas. The argon gas jet distrib-utes electrons more evenly across the surface than does spray electrofulguration. This technology has its greatest application for coagulation of diffusely bleeding surfaces such as the cut edge of liver or spleen. It is of less value in laparoscopic proce-dures because the increased intra-abdominal pressures created by the argon gas jet can increase the chances of a gas embolus. It is paramount to vent the ports and closely monitor insufflation pressure when using this source of energy within the context of laparoscopy.With endoscopic endoluminal surgery, RF alternating cur-rent in the form of a monopolar circuit represents the mainstay for procedures such as snare polypectomy, sphincterotomy, lower esophageal sphincter ablation, and biopsy.61,62 A ground-ing (return) electrode is necessary for this form of energy. Bipo-lar electrocoagulation is used primarily for thermal hemostasis. The electrosurgical generator is activated by a foot pedal so the endoscopist may keep both hands free during the endoscopic procedure.Gas, liquid, and solid-state lasers have been available for medical application since the mid-1960s.63 The CO2 laser (wavelength 10.6 µm) is most appropriately used for cutting Brunicardi_Ch14_p0453-p0478.indd   46501/03/19   4:58 PM 466BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IFigure 14-17. A. Capacitive coupling occurs as a result of high current density bleeding from a port sleeve or laparoscope into adjacent bowel. B. Direct coupling occurs when current is transmitted directly from the electrode to a metal instrument or laparoscope, and then into adjacent tissue. (Reproduced with permission from Hunter JG, Sackier JM: Minimally Invasive Surgery. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Education; 1993.)Figure 14-18. This graph shows the absorption of light by various tissue compounds (water, melanin, and oxyhemoglobin) as a func-tion of the wavelength of the light. The nadir of the oxyhemoglo-bin and melanin curves is close to 1064 nm, the wavelength of the neodymium yttrium-aluminum garnet laser. (Reproduced with per-mission from Hunter JG, Sackier JM: Minimally Invasive Surgery.  New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Education; 1993.)Conduction through ungrounded telescopeCannulaPlastic cannulaTelescopeBCapacitive coupled fault conditionCapacitivelycoupled energyto metalcannulaPlastic collarover metaltrocarAand superficial ablation of tissues. It is most helpful in locations unreachable with a scalpel such as excision of vocal cord granu-lomas. The CO2 laser beam must be delivered with a series of mirrors and is therefore somewhat cumbersome to use. The next most popular laser is the neodymium yttrium-aluminum garnet (Nd:YAG) laser. Nd:YAG laser light is 1.064 µm (1064 nm) in wavelength. It is in the near-infrared portion of the spectrum and, like CO2 laser light, is invisible to the naked eye. A unique feature of the Nd:YAG laser is that 1064-nm light is poorly absorbed by most tissue pigments and therefore travels deep into tissue.64 Deep tissue penetration provides deep tissue heating (Fig. 14-18). For this reason, the Nd:YAG laser is capable of the greatest amount of tissue destruction with a single application.63 Absorption coefficientWavelength (nm)10610510410310210110–110–211001000   10,000UV        Visible            InfaredHbO2H2OH2O1064 nmMelanin Such capabilities make it the ideal laser for destruction of large fungating tumors of the rectosigmoid, tracheobronchial tree, or esophagus. A disadvantage is that the deep tissue heating may cause perforation of a hollow viscus.When it is desirable to coagulate flat lesions in the cecum, a different laser should be chosen. The frequency-doubled Nd:YAG laser, also known as the KTP laser (potassium thionyl phosphate crystal is used to double the Nd:YAG frequency), pro-vides 532-nm light. This is in the green portion of the spectrum, and at this wavelength, selective absorption by red pigments in tissue (such as hemangiomas and arteriovenous malformations) is optimal. The depth of tissue heating is intermediate, between those of the CO2 and the Nd:YAG lasers. Coagulation (without vaporization) of superficial vascular lesions can be obtained without intestinal perforation.64In flexible GI endoscopy, the CO2 and Nd:YAG lasers have largely been replaced by heater probes and endoluminal stents. The heater probe is a metal ball that is heated to a tem-perature (60–100°C [140°–212°F]) that allows coagulation of bleeding lesions without perforation.Photodynamic therapy is a palliative treatment for obstruct-ing cancers of the GI tract.65 Patients are given an IV dose of porfimer sodium, which is a photosensitizing agent that is taken up by malignant cells. Two days after administration, the drug is endoscopically activated using a laser. The activated porfimer sodium generates oxygen free radicals, which kill the tumor cells. The tumor is later endoscopically debrided. The use of this modality for definitive treatment of early cancers is limited.A unique application of laser technology provides extremely rapid discharge (<10–6 s) of large amounts of energy (>103 volts). These high-energy lasers, of which the pulsed dye laser has seen the most clinical use, allow the conversion of light energy to mechanical disruptive energy in the form of a shock wave. Such energy can be delivered through a quartz fiber, and with rapid repetitive discharges, can provide sufficient shock-wave energy to fragment kidney stones and gallstones.66 Shock waves also may be created with miniature electric spark-plug discharge systems known as electrohydraulic lithotriptors. These devices Brunicardi_Ch14_p0453-p0478.indd   46601/03/19   4:58 PM 467MINIMALLY INVASIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 14also are inserted through thin probes for endoscopic application. Lasers have the advantage of pigment selectivity, but electrohy-draulic lithotriptors are more popular because they are substan-tially less expensive and are more compact.Methods of producing shock waves or heat with ultrasonic energy are also of interest. Extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy creates focused shock waves that intensify as the focal point of the discharge is approached. When the focal point is within the body, large amounts of energy are capable of fragmenting stones. Slightly different configurations of this energy can be used to provide focused internal heating of tissues. Potential applications of this technology include the ability to noninvasively produce sufficient internal heating to destroy tissue without an incision.A third means of using ultrasonic energy is to create rap-idly oscillating instruments that are capable of heating tissue with friction; this technology represents a major step forward in energy technology.67 An example of its application is the lapa-roscopic coagulation shears device (Harmonic Scalpel), which is capable of coagulating and dividing blood vessels by first occluding them and then providing sufficient heat to weld the blood vessel walls together and to divide the vessel (Fig. 14-19). This nonelectric method of coagulating and dividing tissue with a minimal amount of collateral damage has facilitated the performance of numerous endosurgical procedures.68 It is espe-cially useful in the control of bleeding from medium-sized ves-sels that are too big to manage with monopolar electrocautery. The ability to clamp tissue between an active blade and passive blade allows annealing of tissues followed by cutting.InstrumentationHand instruments for MIS usually are duplications of conven-tional surgical instruments made longer, thinner, and smaller at the tip. It is important to remember that when grasping tissue with laparoscopic instruments, a greater force is applied over a smaller surface area, which increases the risk for perforation or injury.69Certain conventional instruments such as scissors are easy to reproduce with a diameter of 3 to 5 mm and a length of 20 to 45 cm, but other instruments such as forceps and clamps can-not provide remote access. Different configurations of grasp-ers were developed to replace the various configurations of surgical forceps and clamps. Standard hand instruments are  5 mm in diameter and 30 cm in length, but smaller and shorter hand instruments are now available for pediatric surgery, for microlaparoscopic surgery, and for arthroscopic procedures.69 A unique laparoscopic hand instrument is the monopolar electrical hook. This device usually is configured with a suction and irriga-tion apparatus to eliminate smoke and blood from the operative Figure 14-19. Ultrasonic shear. When closed vibration of black (active blade) against white (passive blade) cuts and cauterizes intervening tissue.field. The monopolar hook allows tenting of tissue over a bare metal wire with subsequent coagulation and division of the tissue.Instrumentation for NOTES is still evolving, but many long micrograspers, microscissors, electrocautery adapters, suturing devices, clip appliers, and visceral closure devices are in design and application. These instruments often require an entirely different endoscopic platform requiring manipula-tion by a surgeon and assistant to accomplish complex maneu-vers. Techniques such as mucosotomy, hydrodissection, and clip application require specialized training. The sheer size of the instrumentation often requires an overtube to allow easy exchange throughout the procedure. Instrumentation for SILS seeks to restore the surgeon’s ability to triangulate the left and right hands through variation in length, mechanical articulation, or curved design. Additionally, a lower profile camera head helps reduce the instrument crowding that occurs at the single point of abdominal entry.Robotic SurgeryThe term robot defines a device that has been programmed to perform specific tasks in place of those usually performed by people. The devices that have earned the title “surgical robots” would be more aptly termed computer-enhanced surgical devices, as they are controlled entirely by the surgeon for the purpose of improving performance. The first computer-assisted surgical device was the laparoscopic camera holder (Aesop, Computer Motion, Goleta, CA), which enabled the surgeon to maneuver the laparoscope either with a hand control, foot con-trol, or voice activation. Randomized studies with such camera holders demonstrated a reduction in operative time, steadier image, and a reduction in the number of required laparoscope cleanings.70 This device had the advantage of eliminating the need for a human camera holder, which served to free valuable OR personnel for other duties. This technology has now been eclipsed by simpler systems using passive positioning of the camera with a mechanical arm, but the benefits of a steadier image and fewer members of the OR team remain.The major revolution in robotic surgery was the develop-ment of a master-slave surgical platform that returned the wrist to laparoscopic surgery and improved manual dexterity by developing an ergonomically comfortable work station, with 3-D imaging, tremor elimination, and scaling of movement (e.g., large, gross hand movements can be scaled down to allow suturing with microsurgical precision) (Fig. 14-20). The most recent iteration of the robotic platform features a second surgi-cal console enabling greater assisting and teaching opportuni-ties. The surgeon is physically separated from the operating table, and the working arms of the device are placed over the patient (Fig. 14-21). An assistant remains at the bedside and changes the instruments as needed, providing retraction as needed to facilitate the procedure. The robotic platform (da Vinci, Intuitive Surgical, Sunnyvale, CA) was initially greeted with some skepticism by expert laparoscopists, as it was difficult to prove additional value for operations performed with the da Vinci robot. Not only were the operations longer and the equip-ment more expensive, but additional quality could not be dem-onstrated. Two randomized controlled trials compared robotic and conventional laparoscopic approaches to Nissen fundoplica-tion.71,72 In both of these trials, the operative time was longer for robotic surgery, and there was no difference in ultimate outcome. Similar results were achieved for laparoscopic cholecystec-tomy.73 Nevertheless, the increased dexterity provided by the da Brunicardi_Ch14_p0453-p0478.indd   46701/03/19   4:58 PM 468BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IFigure 14-21. Room setup and position of surgeon and assistant for robotic surgery. (© 2013 Intuitive Surgical, Inc. Reprinted with permission.)Vinci robot convinced many surgeons and health administrators that robotic platforms were worthy of investment, for marketing purposes if for no other reason. The success story for computer-enhanced surgery with the da Vinci started with cardiac surgery and migrated to the pelvis. Mitral valve surgery, performed with right thoracoscopic access, became one of the more popular procedures performed with the robot.74To date, a myriad of publications have demonstrated suc-cess performing procedures from thyroidectomies to colec-tomies with total mesorectal excision. Almost any procedure performed laparoscopically has been attempted robotically, although true advantage is demonstrated only very sparingly. In most cases, increased cost and operative time challenge the notion of “better.”The tidal wave of enthusiasm for robotic surgery came when most minimally invasive urologists declared robotic prostatectomy to be preferable to laparoscopic and open pros-tatectomy.75 The great advantage—it would appear—of robotic prostatectomy is the ability to visualize and spare the pelvic nerves responsible for erectile function. In addition, the cre-ation of the neocystourethrotomy, following prostatectomy, was greatly facilitated by needle holders and graspers with a wrist in them. Female pelvic surgery with the da Vinci robot is also reaching wide appeal. The magnified imaging provided makes this approach ideal for microsurgical tasks such as reanastomo-sis of the Fallopian tubes. In general surgery, there is emerging 3Figure 14-20. Robotic instruments and hand controls. The sur-geon is in a sitting position, and the arms and wrists are in an ergo-nomic and relaxed position.Brunicardi_Ch14_p0453-p0478.indd   46801/03/19   4:58 PM 469MINIMALLY INVASIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 14popularity for the use of the robotic platform for revisional bar-iatric surgery and complex abdominal wall reconstruction. The ability to close the defect before placement of mesh in ventral hernia repairs or to perform complex transversus abdominus release herniorrhaphy is revolutionizing MIS hernia repair.The final frontier for computer-enhanced surgery is the promise of telesurgery, in which the surgeon is a great distance from the patient (e.g., combat or space). This application has rarely been used, as the safety provided by having the surgeon at bedside cannot be sacrificed to prove the concept. However, remote laparoscopic cholecystectomy has been performed when a team of surgeons located in New York performed a cholecys-tectomy on a patient located in France.76Endoluminal and Endovascular SurgeryThe fields of vascular surgery, interventional radiology, neu-roradiology, gastroenterology, general surgery, pulmonology, and urology all encounter clinical scenarios that require the urgent restoration of luminal patency. Based on this need, fun-damental techniques have been pioneered that are applicable to all specialties and virtually every organ system. As a result, all minimally invasive surgical procedures, from coronary artery angioplasty to palliation of pancreatic malignancy, involve the use of access devices, catheters, guidewires, balloon dilators, stents, and other devices (e.g., lasers, atherectomy catheters) that are capable of opening up the occluded biologic cylinder77 (Table 14-2). Endoluminal balloon dilators may be inserted through an endoscope, or they may be fluoroscopically guided. Balloon dilators all have low compliance—that is, the balloons do not stretch as the pressure within the balloon is increased. The high pressures achievable in the balloon create radial expansion of the narrowed vessel or orifice, usually disrupting the atherosclerotic plaque, the fibrotic stricture, or the muscular band (e.g., esophageal achalasia).78Once the dilation has been attained, it is frequently ben-eficial to hold the lumen open with a stent.79 Stenting is particu-larly valuable in treating malignant lesions and atherosclerotic Figure 14-22. The deployment of a metal stent across an isolated vessel stenosis is illustrated. (Reproduced with permission from Hunter JG, Sackier JM, eds. Minimally Invasive Surgery. New York: McGraw-Hill; 1993:235.)GuidewireBalloonSheathBalloon with stentStent expandedStent in placeTable 14-2Modalities and techniques of restoring luminal patencyMODALITYTECHNIQUECore outPhotodynamic therapyLaserCoagulationEndoscopic biopsy forcepsChemicalUltrasoundFractureUltrasoundEndoscopic biopsyBalloonDilateBalloonBougieAngioplastyEndoscopeBypassTransvenous intrahepatic portosystemic shuntSurgical (synthetic or autologous conduit)StentSelf-expanding metal stentPlastic stentocclusions or aneurysmal disease (Fig. 14-22). Stenting is also of value to seal leaky cylinders, including aortic dissections, traumatic vascular injuries, leaking GI anastomoses, and fistu-las. Stenting usually is not applicable for long-term manage-ment of benign GI strictures except in patients with limited life expectancy (Fig. 14-23).79–81A variety of stents are available that are divided into six basic categories: plastic stents, metal stents, drug-eluting stents (to decrease fibrovascular hyperplasia), covered metal stents, anchored stent grafts, and removable covered plastic stents80 (Fig. 14-24). Plastic stents came first and are used widely as endoprostheses for temporary bypass of obstructions in the biliary or urinary systems. Metal stents generally are delivered over a balloon and expanded with the balloon to the desired size. These metal stents usually are made of titanium or niti-nol and are still used in coronary stenting. A chemotherapeutic agent was added to coronary stents several years ago to decrease endothelial proliferation. These drug-eluting stents provide greater long-term patency but require long-term anticoagula-tion with antiplatelet agents to prevent thrombosis.82 Coated metal stents are used to prevent tissue ingrowth. Ingrowth may Brunicardi_Ch14_p0453-p0478.indd   46901/03/19   4:59 PM 470BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IFigure 14-23. This is an esophagram in a patient with severe dys-phagia secondary to advanced esophageal cancer (A) before and  (B) after placement of a covered self-expanding metal stent.ABFigure 14-24. Covered self-expanding metal stents. These devices can be placed fluoroscopically or endoscopically.be an advantage in preventing stent migration, but such tissue ingrowth may occlude the lumen and cause obstruction anew. This is a particular problem when stents are used for palliation of GI malignant growth and may be a problem for the long-term use of stents in vascular disease. Filling the interstices with Silastic or other materials may prevent tumor ingrowth but also makes stent migration more likely. In an effort to minimize stent migration, stents have been incorporated with hooks and barbs at the proximal end of the stent to anchor it to the wall of the vessel. Endovascular stenting of aortic aneurysms has nearly replaced open surgery for this condition. Lastly, self-expanding plastic stents have been developed as temporary devices to be used in the GI tract to close internal fistulas and bridge leaking anastomoses.Natural Orifice Transluminal  Endoscopic SurgeryThe use of the flexible endoscope to enter the GI, urinary, or reproductive tracts and then traverse the wall of the structure to enter the peritoneal cavity, the mediastinum, or the chest has  strong appeal to patients wishing to avoid scars and pain caused by abdominal wall trauma. In truth, transluminal surgery has been performed in the stomach for a long time, either from the inside out (e.g., percutaneous, PEG, and transgastric pseudocyst drainage) or from the outside in (e.g., laparoscopic-assisted intragastric tumor resection). The catalyz-ing events for NOTES were the demonstration that a porcine gallbladder could be removed with a flexible endoscope passed through the wall of the stomach and then removed through the mouth and the demonstration in a series of 10 human cases from India of the ability to perform transgastric appendectomy. Since that time, a great deal of money has been invested by endo-scopic and MIS companies to help surgeons and gastroenterolo-gists explore this new territory. Systemic inflammatory markers such as C-reactive protein, tumor necrosis factor-α, interleukin (IL)-1β, and IL-6 have been shown to be similar in transgastric and transcolonic NOTES when compared to laparoscopy in por-cine models.83 Concerns about the safety of transluminal access and limitations in equipment remain the greatest barriers to expansion. To date, the most headline-grabbing procedures have been the transvaginal and transgastric removal of the  gallbladder84-86 (Fig. 14-25). To ensure safety, all human cases thus far have involved laparoscopic assistance to aid in retrac-tion and ensure adequate closure of the stomach or vagina. To date, thousands of transvaginal and transgastric procedures have been performed internationally, with two large registries dem-onstrating noninferiority to conventional laparoscopy.87 The fact that the vast majority of these procedures are being done trans-vaginally creates an obvious limitation in applicability.The rapid growth of endoscopic technology catalyzed by NOTES has already spun off new technologies capable of performing a wide variety of endoscopic surgical procedures from EMR, to ablation of Barrett’s esophagus, to creation of competent antireflux valves in patients with gastroesophageal reflux disease.Peroral esophageal myotomy (POEM) has shown promise as a NOTES treatment for esophageal achalasia.88 In this proce-dure, a 1.5to 2-cm mucosotomy is created within the anterior esophagus 10 cm proximal to the gastroesophageal junction. A submucosal tunnel is then created using a combination of elec-trocautery, hydrodissection, and carbon dioxide insufflation. The scope is advanced beyond the gastroesophageal junction, and a circular myotomy is performed avoiding disruption of the longitudinal fibers. The mucosotomy is then closed using endo-scopic clips (Fig. 14-26). Over 1000 clinical POEM cases have been performed worldwide. Data from expert NOTES surgeons suggest that this selective myotomy avoids abdominal trauma 4Brunicardi_Ch14_p0453-p0478.indd   47001/03/19   4:59 PM 471MINIMALLY INVASIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 14Figure 14-25. Transgastric cholecystectomy using natural orifice transluminal endoscopic surgery technology and one to three laparoscopic ports has been performed occasionally in several locations around the world. (Reproduced with permission from The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD; 2007. Illustration by Jennifer Fairman.)and minimally disrupts the normal anatomic characteristics of the gastroesophageal junction while providing significant relief of symptoms.89 Randomized clinical trials and long-term follow-up need to be performed to further evaluate efficacy.Although this application is still considered experimen-tal, there is little doubt that when equivalent operations can be performed with less pain, fewer scars, and less disability, patients will flock to it. NOTES procedures are associated with an increased mental workload and significant learning curve for even experienced surgical endoscopists. Surgeons should engage only when they can perform these procedures with the safety and efficacy demanded by our profession.Single-Incision Laparoscopic SurgeryAs a surgical technique, SILS seems to be a natural progression from conventional laparoscopic surgery. As surgeons sought to reduce the number and size of abdominal wall trocars and NOTES procedures necessitated laparoscopic surveillance, the idea of a hybridization took off. An incision in the umbilicus, a preexisting scar, is thought to be less painful, have fewer wound complications, lead to quicker return to activity, and have a bet-ter cosmetic appearance than conventional laparoscopy. Per-haps one of the earliest examples of SILS is the application of laparoscopic instrumentation to resect lesions in the rectum or sigmoid colon. Using the anus as the portal of entry, transanal endoscopic microsurgery (TEMS) employs a specialized mul-tichannel trocar to reach lesions located 8 to 18 cm away from the anal verge (Fig. 14-27).More deformable versions of these complex trocars have been developed with features to allow insufflation and be ame-nable to maintaining a seal within the natural orifice of the umbili-cus (see Fig. 14-11). Ports typically contain three or four channels. The latter often affords the ability to place a dedicated retractor.There are many challenges faced by the operating surgeon in SILS procedures. These  include crowded trocar placement, a lack of triangulation of leftand right-hand instruments, fre-quent crossing or clashing of instruments, limited visualiza-tion, and limited retraction ability. These challenges are mitigated by surgeon’s experience and the development of specialized instruments. Articulating or curved instruments of varying lengths and an extended length can improve working space. Curved instruments are typically reusable and offer less clutter than their more sophisticated counterparts, providing some cost reduction (Fig. 14-28). A low-profile HD scope with or without a deflect-able tip can improve visualization greatly. Even with such instru-mentation, the learning curve is very steep, particularly when the surgeon is forced to work in a cross-handed technique. The accomplished SILS surgeon will possess a tool bag of innovative 5Brunicardi_Ch14_p0453-p0478.indd   47101/03/19   4:59 PM 472BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IFigure 14-28. Example of curved instruments used in single-incision laparoscopic surgery. (© 2013 Intuitive Surgical, Inc. Reprinted with permission.)Figure 14-26. A. Peroral endoscopic esophageal myotomy for the treatment of achalasia. (Reproduced with permission from Inoue H, Minami H, Kobayashi Y, et al. Peroral endoscopic myot-omy (POEM) for esophageal achalasia, Endoscopy. 2010 Apr; 42(4):265-271.) B. Serial images showing overtube in submuco-sal tunnel, using needle knife to divide circular muscle fibers of esophagus, and closure of myotomy with clips. (Reproduced with permission from Rieder E, Dunst CM, Kastenmeier AS, et al: Devel-opment and technique of per oral endoscopic myotomy (POEM) for achala, Eur Surg 2011 June;43(3):140–145.) ABFigure 14-27. Transanal endoscopic microsurgery scope. (Repro-duced with permission from The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD; 2014. Illustration by Corinne Sandone.)strategies to retract structures like the gallbladder away from the operative field. These tricks may range from the use of percutane-ous needlescopic instruments to the application of transfascial sutures. Expert consensus recommendations for efficient SILS are shown in Tables 14-3 and 14-4.8 When performing SILS proce-dures, it is imperative to follow proven tenets of operative con-duct such as visualizing the “critical view” of safety in a laparoscopic cholecystectomy. As safety should always be the paramount concern, the addition of extra trocars or conversion to traditional laparoscopy should not be considered a failure.Contraindications include those true of traditional lapa-roscopy. Relative contraindications include previous surgery and high body mass index (BMI). Patients with a high BMI or central obesity can pose a challenge because the umbilicus may be located far from operative target. Size and morphology of the target organ should always be considered when doing SILS.Many studies have demonstrated equivalency to standard laparoscopic procedures regarding intraoperative and postop-erative complications. However, it is questionable what the full benefit of the dramatic reduction in ergonomics and the increase in complexity provide beyond an improved cosmetic appear-ance. This is in large part due to the already improved benefits of laparoscopic surgery.A meta-analysis performed by Ahmed and colleagues in 2010 found the conversion rate from SILS to conventional lapa-roscopy to be 0% to 24% for cholecystectomies, 0% to 41% Table 14-3Expert panel recommendations for accomplishing single-incision laparoscopic surgery efficientlyMultichannel port preferably to be placed intraumbilically, but an extraumbilical approach can be used in certain casesExtra ports should be used where there is a clinical needWhen applicable, sutures can be useful for added retractionClosure should be accomplished using sutures of absorbable material placed either continuously or interruptedSkin should be closed with absorbable sutures or glueReproduced with permission from Ahmed I, Cianco F, Ferrar V, et al. Current status of single-incision laparoscopic surgery: European experts’ views, Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech. 2012 Jun;22(3):194-199.Brunicardi_Ch14_p0453-p0478.indd   47201/03/19   4:59 PM 473MINIMALLY INVASIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 14Figure 14-29. A and B. Robotic single-incision surgery platform. (©2013 Intuitive Surgical, Inc. Reprinted with permission.)ABTable 14-4Expert panel recommendations for single-incision laparoscopic surgery equipment and instrumentationRECOMMENDED EQUIPMENT/INSTRUMENTATIONBENEFIT TO SURGEONSlimline instruments with low-profile designReduces internal and external clashingVaried-length instrumentsReduces extracorporeal clashingLonger instrumentsAdvantageous for reaching the surgical fieldArticulating (or prebent) instrumentsRestore triangulationSmall-diameter, low-profile angle scopeReduces clashing by providing additional spaceHigh-definition cameraAchieves high-quality images for intraoperative visualizationReproduced with permission from Ahmed I, Cianco F, Ferrar V, et al. Current status of single-incision laparoscopic surgery: European experts’ views, Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech. 2012 Jun;22(3):194-199.for appendectomies, and 0% to 33% for nephrectomies.90 The most common complications were intra-abdominal abscesses and wound infections. Existing and emerging robotics platforms may provide the bridge necessary to bypass the significant tech-nical skills learning curve required to operate through a single site (Fig. 14-29).SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONSPediatric LaparoscopyThe advantages of MIS in children may be more significant than in the adult population. MIS in the adolescent is little dif-ferent from that in the adult, and standard instrumentation and trocar positions usually can be used. However, laparoscopy in the infant and young child requires specialized instrumentation. The instruments are shorter (15–20 cm), and many are 3 mm in diameter rather than 5 mm. Because the abdomen of the child is much smaller than that of the adult, a 5-mm telescope pro-vides sufficient illumination for most operations. The develop-ment of 5-mm clippers and bipolar devices has obviated the need for 10-mm trocars in pediatric laparoscopy.91 Because the abdominal wall is much thinner in infants, a pneumoperitoneum pressure of 8 mmHg can provide adequate exposure. DVT is rare in children, so prophylaxis against thrombosis probably is unnecessary. A wide variety of pediatric surgical procedures are frequently performed with MIS access, from pull-through procedures for colonic aganglionosis (Hirschsprung’s disease) to repair of congenital diaphragmatic hernias.92Laparoscopy During PregnancyConcerns about the safety of laparoscopic cholecystectomy or appendectomy in the pregnant patient have been thoroughly investigated and are readily managed. Access to the abdomen in the pregnant patient should take into consideration the height of the uterine fundus, which  reaches the umbilicus at 20 weeks. In order not to damage the uterus or its blood supply, most surgeons feel that the open (Hasson) approach should be 6used in favor of direct puncture laparoscopy. The patient should be positioned slightly on the left side to avoid compression of the vena cava by the uterus. Because pregnancy poses a risk for thromboembolism, sequential compression devices are essential for all procedures. Fetal acidosis induced by maternal hypercar-bia also has been raised as a concern. The arterial pH of the fetus follows the pH of the mother linearly; and therefore, fetal acido-sis may be prevented by avoiding a respiratory acidosis in the mother.93 The pneumoperitoneum pressure induced by laparos-copy is not a safety issue either as it has been proved that mid-pregnancy uterine contractions provide a much greater pressure in utero than a pneumoperitoneum of 15 mmHg. More than  100 cases of laparoscopic cholecystectomy in pregnancy have been reported with uniformly good results.94 The operation should be performed during the second trimester of pregnancy if possible. Protection of the fetus against intraoperative X-rays Brunicardi_Ch14_p0453-p0478.indd   47301/03/19   4:59 PM 474BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iis imperative. Some believe it advisable to track fetal pulse rates with a transvaginal ultrasound probe; however, the significance of fetal tachycardia or bradycardia is a bit unclear in the second trimester of pregnancy. To be prudent, however, heart rate decelerations reversibly associated with pneumoperitoneum cre-ation might signal the need to convert to open cholecystectomy or appendectomy.Minimally Invasive Surgery and  Cancer TreatmentMIS techniques have been used for many decades to provide palliation for the patient with an obstructive cancer. Laser treat-ment, intracavitary radiation, stenting, and dilation are outpa-tient techniques that can be used to reestablish the continuity of an obstructed esophagus, bile duct, ureter, or airway. MIS techniques also have been used in the staging of cancer. Medias-tinoscopy is still used occasionally before thoracotomy to assess the status of the mediastinal lymph nodes. Laparoscopy also is used to assess the liver in patients being evaluated for pancre-atic, gastric, or hepatic resection. New technology and greater surgical skills allow for accurate minimally invasive staging of cancer.95 Occasionally, it is appropriate to perform pallia-tive measures (e.g., laparoscopic gastrojejunostomy to bypass a pancreatic cancer) at the time of diagnostic laparoscopy if diag-nostic findings preclude attempts at curative resection.Initially controversial, the role of MIS to provide a safe curative treatment of cancer has  proven to be no different from the principles of open surgery. All gross and microscopic tumor should be removed (an R0 resection), and an ade-quate lymphadenectomy should be performed to allow accurate staging. Generally, this number has been 10 to 15 lymph nodes, although there is still debate as to the value of more extensive lymphadenectomy. All of the major abdominal cancer opera-tions have been performed with laparoscopy. Of the three major cancer resections of GI cancer (liver lobe, pancreatic head, and esophagus), only esophagectomy is routinely performed by a fair number of centers.96,97 Laparoscopic hepatectomy has attracted a loyal following, and distal pancreatectomy frequently is performed with laparoscopic access. In Japan, laparoscopic-assisted gastrectomy has become quite popular for early gastric cancer, an epidemic in Japan far exceeding that of colon cancer in North America and Northern Europe. The most common can-cer operation performed laparoscopically is segmental colec-tomy, which has proven itself safe and efficacious in a multicenter, controlled, randomized trial.98Considerations in the Elderly and InfirmLaparoscopic cholecystectomy has made possible the removal of a symptomatic gallbladder in many patients previously thought to be too elderly or too ill to undergo a laparotomy. Older patients are more likely to require conversion to lapa-rotomy because of disease chronicity.98Operations on these patients require close monitoring of anesthesia. The intraoperative management of these patients may be more difficult with laparoscopic access than with open access. The advantage of MIS lies in what happens after the operation. Much of the morbidity of surgery in the elderly is a result of impaired mobility. In addition, pulmonary compli-cations, urinary tract sepsis, DVT, pulmonary embolism, con-gestive heart failure, and myocardial infarction often are the result of improper fluid management and decreased mobility. By allowing rapid and early mobilization, laparoscopic surgery 7has made possible the safe performance of procedures in the elderly and infirm.Cirrhosis and Portal HypertensionPatients with hepatic insufficiency pose a significant challenge for any type of surgical intervention.99 The ultimate surgical out-come in this population relates directly to the degree of under-lying hepatic dysfunction.100 Often, this group of patients has minimal reserve, and the stress of an operation will trigger com-plete hepatic failure or hepatorenal syndrome. These patients are at risk for major hemorrhage at all levels, including trocar insertion, operative dissection in a field of dilated veins, and secondary to an underlying coagulopathy. Additionally, ascitic leak from a port site may occur, leading to bacterial peritonitis. Therefore, a watertight port site closure should be carried out in all patients.It is essential that the surgeon be aware of the severity of hepatic cirrhosis as judged by a Model of End-Stage Liver Dis-ease (MELD) score or Child’s classification. Additionally, the presence of portal hypertension is a relative contraindication to laparoscopic surgery until the portal pressures are reduced with portal decompression. For example, if a patient has an incarcer-ated umbilical hernia and ascites, a preoperative paracentesis or transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt procedure in con-junction with aggressive diuresis may be considered. Because these patients commonly are intravascularly depleted, insuffla-tion pressures should be reduced to prevent a decrease in cardiac output, and minimal amounts of Na+-sparing IV fluids should be given.Economics of Minimally Invasive SurgeryMinimally invasive surgical procedures reduce the costs of sur-gery most when length of hospital stay can be shortened and return to work is quickened. For example, shorter hospital stays can be demonstrated in laparoscopic cholecystectomy, Nissen fundoplication, splenectomy, and adrenalectomy. Procedures such as inguinal herniorrhaphy that are already performed as outpatient procedures are less likely to provide cost savings. Procedures that still require a 4to 7-day hospitalization, such as laparoscopy-assisted colectomy, are less likely to deliver a lower bottom line than their open surgery counterparts. None-theless, with responsible use of disposable instrumentation and a commitment to the most effective use of the inpatient setting, most laparoscopic procedures can be made less expensive than their conventional equivalents.Education and Skill AcquisitionHistorically, surgeons in training (residents, registrars, and fel-lows) acquired their skills in minimally invasive techniques through a series of operative experiences of graded complexity. This training occurred on patients. Although such a paradigm did not compromise patient safety, learning in the OR is costly. In addition, the recent worldwide constraint placed on resident work hours makes it attractive to teach laparoscopic skills out-side of the OR.Skills labs started at nearly every surgical training center in the 1990s with low fidelity box-type trainers. These were rudimentary simulated abdominal cavities with a video camera, monitor, trocars, laparoscopic instruments, and target models. These targets were often as simple as a pegboard and rubber rings, or a latex drain to practice suturing and knot tying. Virtual reality training devices present a unique opportunity to improve and enhance experiential learning in endoscopy and laparoscopy Brunicardi_Ch14_p0453-p0478.indd   47401/03/19   4:59 PM 475MINIMALLY INVASIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 14Figure 14-30. The progress of general sur-gery can be reflected by a series of performance curves. General anesthesia and sterile technique allowed the development of maximally inva-sive open surgery over the last 125 years. Video optics allowed the development of minimally invasive surgery over the last 25 years. Nonin-vasive (seamless) surgery will result when a yet undiscovered transformational event allows sur-gery to occur without an incision, and perhaps without anesthesia.PerformanceGeneral anesthesiasterile techniqueVideo optics?1880190019201940196019801985199019952000??Open surgeryLaparoscopic surgerySeamless surgeryProgress in surgeryfor all surgeons. This technology has the advantage of enabling objective measurement of psychomotor skills, which can be used to determine progress in skill acquisition and, ultimately, techni-cal competency.101 Several of these devices have been validated as a means of measuring proficiency in skill performance. More importantly, training on virtual reality platforms has proven to translate to improved operative performance in  randomized tri-als.102,103 Currently, surgical skills labs are mandatory for Resi-dency Review Committee credentialing. Successful completion of the Fundamentals of Laparoscopic Surgery (FLS) technical and cognitive examination became a mandatory prerequisite for the American Board of Surgery (ABS) qualification examination in general surgery in 2010. The Fundamentals of Endoscopic Surgery (FES) became a prerequisite to ABS qualification in 2015. In the future, institutions may require simulator training to document specific entrustable professional activities (EPA) related to laparoscopic procedures before privileging in the OR. A Fundamentals of Robotic Surgery (FRS) high stakes exam is on the horizon for future surgical trainees. The American Col-lege of Surgeons has taken a leadership position in accrediting skills labs across the world as American College of Surgeons–accredited educational institutes.TelementoringIn response to the Institute of Medicine’s call for the develop-ment of unique technologic solutions to deliver health care to rural and underserved areas, surgeons are beginning to explore the feasibility of telementoring. Teleconsultation or telemen-toring is two-way audio and visual communication between two geographically separated providers. This communication can take place in the office setting or directly in the OR when complex scenarios are encountered. Although local commu-nication channels may limit its performance in rural areas, the technology is available and currently is being used, espe-cially in states and provinces with large geographically remote populations.103Innovation and Introduction of  New ProceduresThe revolution in minimally invasive general surgery, which occurred in 1990, created ethical challenges for the profession. The problem was this: If competence is gained from experience, how was the surgeon to climb the competence curve (otherwise known as the learning curve) without injuring patients? If it was indeed impossible to achieve competence without making mis-takes along the way, how should one effectively communicate this to patients such that they understand the weight of their decisions? Even more fundamentally important is determining the path that should be followed before one recruits the first patient for a new procedure.Although procedure development is fundamentally dif-ferent than drug development (i.e., there is great individual variation in the performance of procedures, but no difference between one tablet and the next), adherence to a process simi-lar to that used to develop a new drug is a reasonable path for a surgical innovator. At the outset, the surgeon must iden-tify the problem that is not solved with current surgical pro-cedures. For example, although the removal of a gallbladder through a Kocher incision is certainly effective, it creates a great deal of disability, pain, and scarification. As a result of those issues, many patients with very symptomatic biliary colic delayed operation until life-threatening complications occurred. Clearly, there was a need for developing a less inva-sive approach (Fig. 14-30).Once the opportunity has been established, the next step involves a search through other disciplines for technologies and techniques that might be applied. Again, this is analogous to the drug industry, where secondary drug indications have often turned out to be more therapeutically important than the primary indication for drug development. The third step is in vivo stud-ies in the most appropriate animal model. These types of studies are controversial because of the resistance to animal experimen-tation, and yet without such studies, many humans would be injured or killed during the developmental phase of medical drugs, devices, and techniques. These steps often are called the preclinical phase of procedure development.The decision as to when such procedures are ready to come out of the lab is a difficult one. Put simply, the proce-dure should be reproducible, provide the desired effect, and not have serious side effects. Once these three criteria are reached, the time for human application has arrived. Before the surgeon discusses the new procedure with patients, it is important to achieve full institutional support. Involvement of the medi-cal board, the chief of the medical staff, and the institutional review board is essential before commencing on a new proce-dure. These bodies are responsible for the use of safe, high-quality medical practices within their institution, and they will demand that great caution and all possible safeguards are in place before proceeding.The dialogue with the patient who is to be first must be thorough, brutally honest, and well documented. The psychology Brunicardi_Ch14_p0453-p0478.indd   47501/03/19   4:59 PM 476BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ithat allows a patient to decide to be first is quite interesting, and may, under certain circumstances, require psychiatric evalua-tion. Certainly, if a dying cancer patient has a chance with a new drug, this makes sense. Similarly, if the standard surgical procedure has a high attendant morbidity and the new procedure offers a substantially better outcome, the decision to be first is understandable. On the other hand, when the benefits of the new approach are small and the risks are largely unknown, a more complete psychological profile may be necessary before proceeding.For new surgical procedures, it generally is wise to assemble the best possible operative team, including a surgeon experienced with the old technique, and assistants who have participated in the earlier animal work. This initial team of experienced physicians and nurses should remain together until full competence with the procedure is attained. This may take  10 procedures, or it may take 50 procedures. The team will know that it has achieved competence when the majority of procedures take the same length of time and the team is relaxed and sure of the flow of the operation. This will complete phase I of the procedure development.In phase II, the efficacy of the procedure is tested in a nonrandomized fashion. Ideally, the outcome of new techniques must be as good as or better than the procedure that is being replaced. This phase should occur at several medical centers to prove that good outcomes are achievable outside of the pioneer-ing institution. These same requirements may be applied to the introduction of new technology into the OR. The value equation requires that the additional measurable procedure quality exceeds the additional measurable cost to the patient or healthcare system. In phase III, a randomized trial pits the new procedure against the old.Once the competence curve has been climbed, it is appro-priate for the team to engage in the education of others. Dur-ing the ascension of the competence curve, other learners in the institution (i.e., surgical residents) may not have the opportunity to participate in the first case series. Although this may be dif-ficult for them, the best interest of the patient must be put before the education of the resident.The second stage of learning occurs when the new pro-cedure has proven its value and a handful of experts exist, but the majority of surgeons have not been trained to perform the new procedure. In this setting, it is relatively unethical for sur-geons to forge ahead with a new procedure in humans as if they had spent the same amount of time in intensive study that the first team did. The fact that one or several surgical teams were able to perform an operation does not ensure that all others with the same medical degrees can perform the operation with equal skill. It behooves the learners to contact the experts and request their assistance to ensure an optimal outcome at the new center. Although it is important that the learners contact the experts, it is equally important that the experts be willing to share their experience with their fellow professionals. As well, the experts should provide feedback to the learners as to whether they feel the learners are equipped to forge ahead on their own. If not, further observation and assistance from the experts are required. Although this approach may sound obvious, it is fraught with difficulties. In many situations, ego, competitiveness, and mon-etary concerns have short-circuited this process and led to poor patient outcomes. To a large extent, MIS has recovered from the black eye it received early in development, when inadequately trained surgeons caused an excessive number of significant complications.If innovative procedures and technologies are to be devel-oped and applied without the mistakes of the past, surgeons must be honest when they answer these questions: Is this procedure safe? Would I consider undergoing this procedure if I developed a surgical indication? Is the procedure as good as or better than the procedure it is replacing? Do I have the skills to apply this procedure safely and with equivalent results to the more expe-rienced surgeon? Answering these questions in the affirmative should be a professional obligation. A negative response should motivate the surgeon to seek an alternative procedure or outside assistance before subjecting a patient to the new procedure.REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Hopkins HH. Optical principles of the endoscope. In: Berci G, ed. Endoscopy. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts; 1976:3-27.	2.	Katzir A. Optical fibers in medicine. Sci Am. 1989;260:120-125.	3.	Hirschowitz BI. A personal history of the fiberscope. Gastro-enterology. 1979;76:864-869.	4.	Veritas TF. Coelioscopy: a synthesis of Georg Kelling’s work with insufflation, endoscopy, and luft tamponade. In: Litynski GS, ed. Highlights in the History of Laparoscopy. Frankfurt/Main: Barbara Bernert Verlag; 1996:3.	5.	Ponsky JL, Gauderer MW. Percutaneous endoscopic gastros-tomy: a nonoperative technique for feeding gastrostomy. Gastrointest Endosc. 1981;27:9-11.	6.	Lehman KS, Ritz JP, Wibmer A, et al. The German registry for natural orifice translumenal endoscopic surgery: the report of the first 551 patients. Ann Surg. 2010;252(2):263-270.	7.	Autorino R, White WM, Gettman MT, et al. Public percep-tion of “scarless” surgery: a critical analysis of the litera-ture. Urology. 2012;80(3):495-502.	8.	Ahmed I, Ciancio F, Ferrar V, et al. Current status of single-incision laparoscopic surgery: European experts’ views. Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech. 2012;22(3):194-199.	9.	Wood BJ, Ramkaransingh JR, Fogo T, Walther MM, Libutti SK. Percutaneous tumor ablation with radiofrequency. Cancer. 2002;94(2):443-451.	10.	Smith RS, Fry WR, Tsoi EK, et al. Gasless laparoscopy and conventional instruments: the next phase of minimally inva-sive surgery. Arch Surg. 1993;128(10):1102-1107.	11.	Litynski GS. Highlights in the History of Laparoscopy. Frankfurt/Main: Barbara Bernert Verlag; 1996:78.	12.	Hunter JG, Staheli J, Oddsdottir M, Trus T. Nitrous oxide pneumoperitoneum revisited: is there a risk of combustion? Surg Endosc. 1995;9(5):501-504.	13.	Tsereteli Z, Terry ML, Bowers S, et al. Prospective random-ized clinical trial comparing nitrous oxide and carbon dioxide pneumoperitoneum for laparoscopic surgery. J Am Coll Surg. 2002;195(2):173-179.	14.	Callery MP, Soper NJ. Physiology of the pneumoperito-neum. In: Hunter JG, ed. Baillière’s Clinical Gastroenterol-ogy: Laparoscopic Surgery. London/Philadelphia: Baillière Tindall; 1993:757.	15.	Ho HS, Gunther RA, Wolfe B. Intraperitoneal carbon diox-ide insufflation and cardiopulmonary functions. Arch Surg. 1992;127(8):928-932.	16.	Wittgen CM, Andrus CH, Fitzgerald S, Baudendistel LJ, Dahms TE, Kaminski DL. Analysis of the hemodynamic and ventilatory effects of laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Arch Surg. 1991;126(8):997-1000.	17.	Cullen DJ, Eger EI. Cardiovascular effects of carbon dioxide in man. Anesthesiology. 1974;41(4):345-349.	18.	Cunningham AJ, Turner J, Rosenbaum S, et al. Transoesopha-geal echocardiographic assessment of haemodynamic func-tion during laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Br J Anaesth. 1993;70(6):621-625.8Brunicardi_Ch14_p0453-p0478.indd   47601/03/19   4:59 PM 477MINIMALLY INVASIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 14	19.	Harris MNE, Plantevin OM, Crowther A, et al. Cardiac arrhythmias during anaesthesia for laparoscopy. Br J Anaesth. 1984;56(11):1213-1217.	20.	Borten M, Friedman EA. Choice of anaesthesia. In: Laparo-scopic Complications: Prevention and Management. Toronto: BC Decker; 1986:173.	21.	Jorgenson JO, Hanel K, Lalak NJ, Hunt Dr, North L, Morris DL. Thromboembolic complications of laparoscopic cholecys-tectomy (letter). Br Med J. 1993;306:518-519.	22.	Ho HS, Wolfe BM. The physiology and immunology of endo-surgery. In: Toouli JG, Gossot D, Hunter JG, eds. Endosur-gery. New York/London: Churchill-Livingstone; 1996:163.	23.	Sackier JM, Nibhanupudy B. The pneumoperitoneumphysiology and complications. In: Toouli JG, Gossot D, Hunter JG, eds. Endosurgery. New York/London: Churchill-Livingstone; 1996:155.	24.	Kashtan J, Green JF, Parsons EQ, Holcroft JW. Hemody-namic effects of increased abdominal pressure. J Surg Res. 1981;30(3):249-255.	25.	McDougall EM, Monk TG, Wolf JS Jr, et al. The effect of prolonged pneumoperitoneum on renal function in an animal model. J Am Coll Surg. 1996;182(4):317-328.	26.	Lindberg F, Bergqvist D, Bjorck M, Rasmussen I. Renal hemodynamics during carbon dioxide pneumoperitoneum: an experimental study in pigs. Surg Endosc. 2003;17(3): 480-484.	27.	Hazebroek EJ, de Vos tot Nederveen Cappel R, Gommers D, et al. Antidiuretic hormone release during laparoscopic donor nephrectomy. Arch Surg. 2002;137(5):600-604; discussion 605.	28.	Ostman PL, Pantle-Fisher FH, Fanre EA, Glosten B. Circula-tory collapse during laparoscopy. J Clin Anesth. 1990;2(2): 129-132.	29.	Alijani A, Cuschieri A. Abdominal wall lift systems in lapa-roscopic surgery: gasless and low-pressure systems. Semin Laparosc Surg. 2001;8(1):53-62.	30.	Ozawa A, Konishi F, Nagai H, Okada M, Kanazawa K. Cytokine and hormonal responses in laparoscopic-assisted colectomy and conventional open colectomy. Surg Today. 2000;30(2):107-111.	31.	Burpee SE, Kurian M, Murakame Y, Benevides S, Gagner M. The metabolic and immune response to laparoscopic versus open liver resection. Surg Endosc. 2002;16(6):899-904.	32.	Gossot D. Access modalities for thoracoscopic surgery. In: Toouli JG, Gossot D, Hunter JG, eds. Endosurgery. New York/London: Churchill-Livingstone; 1996:743.	33.	Memon MA, Cooper NJ, Memon B, Memon MI, Abrams KR. Meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials compar-ing open and laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair. Br J Surg. 2003;90(12):1479-1492.	34.	Himpens J. Laparoscopic preperitoneal approach to the ingui-nal hernia. In: Toouli JG, Gossot D, Hunter JG, eds. Endosur-gery. New York/London: Churchill-Livingstone; 1996:949.	35.	Horvath KD, Kao LS, Wherry KL, Pellegrini CA, Sinanan MN. A technique for laparoscopic-assisted percutaneous drainage of infected pancreatic necrosis and pancreatic abscess. Surg Endosc. 2001;15(10):1221-1225.	36.	Eaves FF. Basics of endoscopic plastic surgery. In: Bostwick J, Eaves FF, Nahai F, eds. Endoscopic Plastic Surgery. St Louis: Quality Medical Publishing; 1995:59.	37.	Kenyon TA, Lenker MP, Bax TW, Swanström LL. Cost and benefit of the trained laparoscopic team. A comparative study of a designated nursing team vs. a nontrained team. Surg Endosc. 1997;11(8):812-814.	38.	Herron DM, Gagner M, Kenyon TL, Swanström LL. The mini-mally invasive surgical suite enters the 21st century. A discussion of critical design elements. Surg Endosc. 2001;15(4):415-422.	39.	Byron JW, Markenson G, Miyazawa K. A randomised com-parison of Veress needle and direct insertion for laparoscopy. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1993;177(3):259-262.	40.	Fletcher DR. Laparoscopic access. In: Toouli JG, Gossot D, Hunter JG, eds. Endosurgery. New York/London: Churchill-Livingstone; 1996:189.	41.	Hanney RM, Alle KM, Cregan PC. Major vascular injury and laparoscopy. Aust N Z J Surg. 1995;65(7):533-535.	42.	Catarci M, Carlini M, Gentileschi P, Santoro E. Major and minor injuries during the creation of pneumoperito-neum. A multicenter study on 12,919 cases. Surg Endosc. 2001;15(6):566-569.	43.	Siperstein AE, Berber E, Engle KL, Duh QY, Clark OH. Lap-aroscopic posterior adrenalectomy: technical considerations. Arch Surg. 2000;135(8):967-971.	44.	Vasilev SA, McGonigle KF. Extraperitoneal laparo-scopic para-aortic lymph node dissection. Gynecol Oncol. 1996;61(3):315-320.	45.	Schurr UP, Lachat ML, Reuthebuch O, et al. Endoscopic saphenous vein harvesting for CABG—a randomized prospec-tive trial. Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2002;50(3):160-163.	46.	Lumsden AB, Eaves FF. Vein harvest. In: Bostwick J, Eaves FF, Nahai F, eds. Endoscopic Plastic Surgery. St. Louis: Qual-ity Medical Publishing; 1995:535.	47.	Targarona EM, Gracia E, Rodriguez M, et al. Hand-assisted laparoscopic surgery. Arch Surg. 2003;138(2):133-141.	48.	Ross S, Rosemurgy A, Albrink M, et al. Consensus state-ment of the consortium for LESS cholecystectomy. Surg Endosc. 2012;26(10):2711-2716.	49.	Berquer R, Smith WD, Davis S. An ergonomic study of the optimum operating table height for laparoscopic surgery. Surg Endosc. 2002;16(3):416-421.	50.	Berguer R, Smith WD, Chung YH. Performing laparoscopic surgery is significantly more stressful for the surgeon than open surgery. Surg Endosc. 2001;15(10):1204-1247.	51.	Emam TA, Hanna G, Cuschieri A. Ergonomic principles of task alignment, visual display, and direction of execution of laparoscopic bowel suturing. Surg Endosc. 2002;16(2): 267-271.	52.	Prescher T. Video imaging. In: Toouli JG, Gossot D, Hunter JG,  eds. Endosurgery. New York/London: Churchill-Livingstone; 1996:41.	53.	Margulies DR, Shabot MM. Fiberoptic imaging and measure-ment. In: Hunter JG, Sackier JM, eds. Minimally Invasive Surgery. New York: McGraw-Hill; 1993:7.	54.	Wenzl R, Lehner R, Holzer A, Windberger U, Heinzl H, Losert UM. Improved laparoscopic operating techniques using a digi-tal enhancement video system. J Am Assoc Gynecol Laparosc. 1998;5(2):175-178.	55.	Berci G, Paz-Partlow M. Videoendoscopic technology. In: Toouli JG, Gossot D, Hunter JG, eds. Endosurgery. New York/London: Churchill-Livingstone; 1996:33.	56.	Levy ML, Day JD, Albuquerque F, Schumaker G, Giannotta SL, McComb JG. Heads-up intraoperative endoscopic imag-ing: a prospective evaluation of techniques and limitations. Neurosurgery. 1997;40(3):526-530.	57.	Taffinder N, Smith SG, Huber J, Russell RC, Darzi A. The effect of a second-generation 3D endoscope on the laparo-scopic precision of novices and experienced surgeons. Surg Endosc. 1999;13(11):1087-1092.	58.	Odell RC. Laparoscopic electrosurgery. In: Hunter JG, Sackier JM, eds. Minimally Invasive Surgery. New York: McGraw-Hill; 1993:33.	59.	Voyels CR, Tucker RD. Education and engineering solutions for potential problems with laparoscopic monopolar electro-surgery. Am J Surg. 1992;164(1):57-62.	60.	Nduka CC, Super PA, Monson JR, Darzi AW. Cause and pre-vention of electrosurgical injuries in laparoscopy. J Am Coll Surg. 1994;179(2):161-170.	61.	Tucker RD. Principles of electrosurgery. In: Sivak MV, ed. Gastroenterologic Endoscopy. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2000:125.Brunicardi_Ch14_p0453-p0478.indd   47701/03/19   4:59 PM 478BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART I	62.	Barlow DE. Endoscopic application of electrosurgery: a review of basic principles. Gastrointest Endosc. 1982;28(2):73-76.	63.	Trus TL, Hunter JG. Principles of laser physics and tis-sue interaction. In: Toouli JG, Gossot D, Hunter JG, eds. Endosurgery. New York/London: Churchill-Livingstone;  1996:103.	64.	Bass LS, Oz MC, Trokel SL, Treat MR. Alternative lasers for endoscopic surgery: comparison of pulsed thulium-holmium-chromium:YAG with continuous-wave neodymium:YAG laser for ablation of colonic mucosa. Lasers Surg Med. 1991;11(6):545-549.	65.	Greenwald BD. Photodynamic therapy for esophageal cancer. Chest Surg Clin North Am. 2000;10(3):625-637.	66.	Hunter JG, Bruhn E, Goodman G, et al. Reflectance spectros-copy predicts safer wavelengths for pulsed laser lithotripsy of gallstones (abstract). Gastrointest Endosc. 1991;37:273.	67.	Amaral JF, Chrostek C. Comparison of the ultrasonically acti-vated scalpel to electrosurgery and laser for laparoscopic sur-gery. Surg Endosc. 1993;7:141.	68.	Huscher CG, Liriei MM, Di Paola M, et al. Laparoscopic cho-lecystectomy by ultrasonic dissection without cystic duct and artery ligature. Surg Endosc. 2003;17(3):442-451.	69.	Jobe BA, Kenyon T, Hansen PD, et al. Mini-laparoscopy: cur-rent status, technology and future applications. Minim Invasive Ther Allied Technol. 1998;7:201.	70.	Aiono S, Gilbert JM, Soin B, Finaly PA, Gordan A. Con-trolled trial of the introduction of a robotic camera assistant (EndoAssist) for laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Surg Endosc. 2002;16(9):1267-1270.	71.	Melvin WS, Needleman BJ, Krause KR, Schneider C, Ellison EC. Computer-enhanced vs. standard laparoscopic anti-reflux surgery. J Gastrointest Surg. 2002;6(1):11-15.	72.	Costi R, Himpens J, Bruyns J, Guy Bernard Cadière. Robotic fundoplication: from theoretic advantages to real problems.  J Am Coll Surg. 2003;197(3):500-507.	73.	Ruurda JP, Broeders IA, Simmermacher RP, Rinkes B, Inne HM, Van Vroohoven TJ. Feasibility of robot-assisted laparoscopic surgery: an evaluation of 35 robot-assisted laparoscopic cholecystectomies. Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech. 2002(1);12:41-45.	74.	Rodriguez E, Nifong LW, Chu MW, Wood W, Vos PW, Chitwood WR. Robotic mitral valve repair for anterior leaflet and bileaflet prolapse. Ann Thorac Surg. 2008;85(2):438-444; discussion 444.	75.	Menon M, Tewari A, Baize B, Guillonneau B, Vallancien G. Prospective comparison of radical retropubic prostatectomy and robot-assisted anatomic prostatectomy: the Vattikuti Urology Institute experience. Urology. 2002;60(5):864-868.	76.	Marescaux J, Leroy J, Gagner M, et al. Transatlantic robot-assisted telesurgery. Nature. 2001;414(6865):379-380.	77.	Fleischer DE. Stents, cloggology, and esophageal cancer.  Gastrointest Endosc. 1996;43(3):258-260.	78.	Foutch P, Sivak M. Therapeutic endoscopic balloon dilata-tion of the extrahepatic biliary ducts. Am J Gastroenterol. 1985;80(7):575-580.	79.	Hoepffner N, Foerster EC, Högemann B, Domschke W. Long-term experience in wall stent therapy for malignant choledo-chostenosis. Endoscopy. 1994;26(7):597-602.	80.	Kozarek RA, Ball TJ, Patterson D. Metallic self-expanding stent application in the upper gastrointestinal tract: caveats and concerns. Gastrointest Endosc. 1992;38(1):1-6.	81.	Anderson JR, Sorenson SM, Kruse A, Rokkjaer M, Matzen P. Randomized trial of endoscopic endoprosthesis versus operative bypass in malignant obstructive jaundice. Gut. 1989;30(8):1132-1135.	82.	Ruygrok PN, Sim KH, Chan C, et al. Coronary intervention with a heparin-coated stent and aspirin only. J Invasive Cardiol. 2003;15(8):439-441.	83.	Hucl T, Benes M, Kocik M, et al. Comparison of inflam-matory response to transgastric and transcolonic NOTES. Gastrointest Endosc. 2012;75(4 suppl):AB272.	84.	Bessler M, Stevens PD, Milone L, Hogle NJ, Durak E, Fowler D. Transvaginal laparoscopic cholecystectomy: laparoscopically assisted. Surg Endosc. 2008;22:1715-1716.	85.	Marescaux J, Dallemagne B, Perretta S, Wattiez A,  Mutter D, Coumaros D. Surgery without scars: report of transluminal cholecystectomy in a human being. Arch Surg. 2007;142(9):823-827; discussion 826.	86.	Bessler M, Stevens PD, Milone L, et al. Transvaginal lapa-roscopic cholecystectomy: laparoscopically assisted. Surg Endosc. 2008;22:1715-1716.	87.	Khashab MA, Kalloo AN. NOTES: current status and new horizons. Gastroenterology. 2012;142:704-710.	88.	Inoue H, Minami H, Kobayashi Y, et al. Peroral endoscopic myotomy (POEM) for esophageal achalasia. Endoscopy. 2010;42:265-271.	89.	Kurian AA, Dunst CM, Sharata A, Bhayani NH, Reavis KM, Swanstom LL. Peroral endoscopic esophageal myot-omy: defining the learning curve. Gastrointest Endosc. 2013;12:S5016-S5107.	90.	Ahmed K, Wang TT, Patel VM, et al. The role of single incision laparoscopic surgery in abdominal and pelvic sur-gery: a systematic review. Surg Endosc. 2010;25:378-396.	91.	Georgeson KE. Pediatric laparoscopy. In: Toouli JG, Gossot D, Hunter JG, eds. Endosurgery. New York/London: Churchill-Livingstone; 1996:929.	92.	Holcomb GW. Diagnostic laparoscopy: equipment, technique, and special concerns in children. In: Holcomb GW, ed. Pediatric Endoscopic Surgery. Norwalk: Appleton & Lange; 1993:9.	93.	Hunter JG, Swanstrom LL, Thornburg K. Carbon dioxide pneumoperitoneum induces fetal acidosis in a pregnant ewe model. Surg Endosc. 1995;9:272-279.	94.	Morrell DG, Mullins JR, Harrison P. Laparoscopic cholecys-tectomy during pregnancy in symptomatic patients. Surgery. 1992;112(5):856-859.	95.	Callery MP, Strasberg SM, Doherty GM, Soper NJ, Norton JA. Staging laparoscopy with laparoscopic ultrasonography: optimizing resectability in hepatobiliary and pancreatic malig-nancy. J Am Coll Surg. 1997;185(1):33-39.	96.	Luketich JD, Alvelo-Rivera M, Buenaventura PO, et al. Mini-mally invasive esophagectomy: outcomes in 222 patients. Ann Surg. 2003;238(4):486-494; discussion 494.	97.	Fleshman J, Sargent DJ, Green E, for the Clinical Out-comes of Surgical Therapy Study Group. Laparoscopic col-ectomy for cancer is not inferior to open surgery based on 5-year data from the COST Study Group trial. Ann Surg. 2007;246(4):655-662; discussion 662.	98.	Fried GM, Clas D, Meakins JL. Minimally invasive surgery in the elderly patient. Surg Clin North Am. 1994;74(2):375-387.	99.	Borman PC, Terblanche J. Subtotal cholecystectomy: for the difficult gallbladder in portal hypertension and cholecystitis. Surgery. 1985;98(1):1-6.	100.	Litwin DWM, Pham Q. Laparoscopic surgery in the compli-cated patient. In: Eubanks WS, Swanstrom LJ, Soper NJ, eds. Mastery of Endoscopic and Laparoscopic Surgery. Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins; 2000:57.	101.	Gallagher AG, Smith CD, Bowers SP, et al. Psychomotor skills assessment in practicing surgeons experienced in per-forming advanced laparoscopic procedures. J Am Coll Surg. 2003;197(3):479-488.	102.	Seymour NE, Gallagher AG, Roman SA, et al. Virtual real-ity training improves operating room performance: results of a randomized, double-blinded study. Ann Surg. 2002;236(4): 458-463; discussion 463.	103.	Anvari M. Telesurgery: remote knowledge translation in clinical surgery. World J Surg. 2007;31(8):1545-1550.Brunicardi_Ch14_p0453-p0478.indd   47801/03/19   4:59 PM
# Chunk 8878
Molecular Biology, The Atomic Theory of Disease, and Precision SurgeryXin-Hua Feng, Xia Lin, Xinran Li, Juehua Yu,   John Nemunaitis, and F. Charles Brunicardi 15chapterOVERVIEW OF MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGYThe beginning of modern medicine can be traced back to centu-ries ago when physicians and scientists began studying human anatomy from cadavers in morgues and animal physiology fol-lowing hunting expeditions. Gradually, from the study of ani-mals and plants in greater detail and the discovery of microbes, scientific principles governing life led to the emergence of the biologic sciences. As biologic science developed and expanded, scientists and physicians began to utilize its principles to solve challenges of human diseases while continuing to explore the fundamentals of life in greater detail. With ever-evolving state-of-the-art scientific tools, our understanding of how cells, tis-sues, organs, and entire organisms function, down to the level of molecular and subatomic structure, has resulted in modern biology with an enormous impact on modern healthcare and the discovery of amazing treatments for disease at an exponential pace. Significant progress has been made in molecular studies of organ development, cell signaling, and gene regulation. The advent of recombinant DNA technology, polymerase chain reac-tion (PCR) techniques, and next-generation genomic sequenc-ing, which resulted in the sequencing of the human genome, holds the potential to have a transformational influence on healthcare and society this century by not only broadening our understanding of the pathophysiology of disease, but also by bringing about necessary changes in personalized medicine.Today’s practicing surgeons are becoming increasingly aware that many modern surgical procedures rely on the infor-mation gained through molecular research (i.e., precision surgery). Genomic information, such as deleterious BRCA and RET proto-oncogene mutations, is being used to help direct prophylactic procedures to remove potentially harmful tissues before they do damage to patients. Molecular engineering has led to cancer-specific gene therapy that could serve in the near future as a more effective adjunct to surgical debulking of tumors than radiation or chemotherapy, so surgeons will benefit from a clear introduction to how basic biochemical and biologic principles relate to the developing area of molecular biology. This chapter reviews the current information on modern molecular biology for the surgical community.Basic Concepts of Molecular ResearchThe modern era of molecular biology, which has been mainly concerned with how genes govern cell activity, began in 1953 when James D. Watson and Francis H. C. Crick made one of the greatest scientific discoveries by deducing the double-helical structure of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA).1,2 The year 2003 marked the 50th anniversary of this great discovery. In the same year, the Human Genome Project completed with sequencing approximately 20,000 to 25,000 genes and 3 billion base pairs in human DNA.3 Before 1953, one of the most mysterious aspects of biology was how genetic material was precisely duplicated from one generation to the next. Although DNA had been implicated as genetic material, it was the base-paired structure of DNA that provided a logical inter-pretation of how a double helix could “unzip” to make copies of itself. This DNA synthesis, termed replication, immediately gave rise to the notion that a template was involved in the trans-fer of information between generations, and thus confirmed the suspicion that DNA carried an organism’s hereditary information.Within cells, DNA is packed tightly into chromosomes. One important feature of DNA as genetic material is its abil-ity to encode important information for all of a cell’s functions (Fig. 15-1). Based on the principles of base complementarity, scientists also discovered how information in DNA is accurately transferred into the protein structure. DNA serves as a template for RNA synthesis, termed transcription, including messenger RNA (mRNA, or the protein-encoding RNA), ribosomal RNA (rRNA), and transfer RNA (tRNA). mRNA carries the informa-tion from DNA to make proteins, termed translation, with the assistance of rRNA and tRNA. Each of these steps is precisely 12Overview of Molecular Cell   Biology	479Basic Concepts of Molecular  Research /479Molecular Approaches to Surgical Research /480Fundamentals of Molecular   and Cell Biology	480DNA and Heredity /480Gene Regulation /481Human Genome /485Cell Cycle and Apoptosis /486Signal Transduction Pathways /487Gene Therapy and Molecular Drugs in Cancer /490Stem Cell Research /492The Atomic Theory of Disease /493Technologies of Molecular   and Cell Biology	493DNA Cloning /493Detection of Nucleic Acids  and Proteins /494Cell Manipulations /499Genetic Manipulations /500Precision Medicine and Surgery /505Targeted Genome Editing Using the CRISPR-Cas9 System /506Brunicardi_Ch15_p0479-p0510.indd   47918/02/19   11:12 AM 480Figure 15-1. The flow of genetic information from DNA to pro-tein to cell functions. The process of transmission of genetic infor-mation from DNA to RNA is called transcription, and the process of transmission from RNA to protein is called translation. Proteins are the essential controlling components for cell structure, cell sig-naling, and metabolism. Genomics and proteomics are the study of the genetic composition of a living organism at the DNA and pro-tein level, respectively. The study of the relationship between genes and their cellular functions is called functional genomics.Key Points1	The biologic sciences have developed drastically in the last 66 years after the uncovering of DNA structure by Watson and Crick.2	The completion of the human genome sequence in 2003 rep-resents a great milestone in modern science.3	The technology emerging from molecular and cellular biol-ogy has revolutionized the understanding of disease and will radically transform the practice of surgery.4	The use of genetically modified mouse models and cell lines using gene therapy and RNA interference therapy has greatly contributed to the understanding of the molecular basis for human diseases and targeted therapies.5	The sequencing of each individual’s genome has the poten-tial to improve the predication, prevention, and targeted treatment of disease, resulting in precision medicine and surgery.6	Fast-developing targeted genome editing tools like the CRISPR-Cas9 system greatly facilitate biomedical research in native conditions and have shown their potential in the treatment of genetic diseases, including cancers, with a high degree of personalization and precision.7	The use of functional genomics and modern molecular anal-yses will facilitate the discovery of actionable genes to guide choice of care, including precision surgery.GenomicsProteomicsFunctionalgenomicsDNA RNAProteinsTranscriptionTranslationStructureMetabolismSignalingCell functionscontrolled in such a way that genes are properly expressed in each cell at a specific time and location. In recent years, new classes of noncoding RNAs (ncRNA), for example, microRNA (or miRNA), piwi-interacting RNA (or piRNA), and long inter-genic noncoding RNA (or lincRNA), have been identified. Although the number of ncRNAs encoded in the human genome is unknown and a lot of ncRNAs have not been validated for their functions, ncRNAs have been associated to regulate gene expression through posttranscriptional gene regulation such as mRNA degradation or epigenetic regulation such as chromatin structure modification and DNA methylation induction.4 Con-sequently, the differential gene activity in a cell determines its actions, properties, and functions.Molecular Approaches to Surgical ResearchRapid advances in molecular and cellular biology over the past half century have revolutionized the understanding of disease and will radically transform the practice of surgery. In the future, molecular techniques will be increasingly applied to surgical disease and will lead to new strategies for the selection and implementation of operative therapy. Surgeons should be familiar with the fundamental principles of molecular and cel-lular biology so that emerging scientific breakthroughs can be translated into improved care of the surgical patient.The greatest advances in the field of molecular biology have been in the areas of analysis and manipulation of DNA.1 Since Watson and Crick’s discovery of DNA structure, an inten-sive effort has been made to unlock the deepest biologic secrets of DNA. Among the avalanche of technical advances, one dis-covery in particular has drastically changed the world of molec-ular biology: the uncovering of the enzymatic and microbiologic techniques that produce recombinant DNA. Recombinant DNA technology involves the enzymatic manipulation of DNA and, subsequently, the cloning of DNA. DNA molecules are cloned for a variety of purposes including safeguarding DNA samples, facilitating sequencing, generating probes, and expressing recombinant proteins in one or more host organisms. DNA can be produced by a number of means, including restricted diges-tion of an existing vector, PCR, and cDNA synthesis. As DNA cloning techniques have developed over the last quarter cen-tury, researchers have moved from studying DNA to studying the functions of proteins, and from cell and animal models to molecular therapies in humans. Expression of recombinant pro-teins provides a method for analyzing gene regulation, structure, and function. In recent years, the uses for recombinant proteins have expanded to include a variety of new applications, includ-ing gene therapy and biopharmaceuticals. The basic molecular approaches for modern surgical research include DNA cloning, cell manipulation, disease modeling in animals, and clinical tri-als in human patients.FUNDAMENTALS OF MOLECULAR  AND CELL BIOLOGYDNA and HeredityDNA forms a right-handed, double-helical structure that is composed of two antiparallel strands of unbranched polymeric deoxyribonucleotides linked by phosphodiester bonds between the 5′ carbon of one deoxyribose moiety to the 3′ carbon of the next (Fig. 15-2). DNA is composed of four types of deoxyribo-nucleotides: adenine (A), cytosine (C), guanine (G), and thy-mine (T). The nucleotides are joined together by phosphodiester bonds. In the double-helical structure deduced by Watson and Crick, the two strands of DNA are complementary to each other. Brunicardi_Ch15_p0479-p0510.indd   48018/02/19   11:12 AM 481MOLECULAR BIOLOGY, THE ATOMIC THEORY OF DISEASE, AND PRECISION SURGERYCHAPTER 15Building blocks of DNAGTGGCCTAAA5'3'3'5'ATCGATGGCCTAGGCTTA3'5'5'3'5'3'GGGCTADNA strandCAGGCCTTTASugarphosphatePhosphateSugarBaseDouble-stranded DNADNA double helixSugar-phosphatebackboneHydrogen-bondedpairs+NucleotideFigure 15-2. Schematic representation of a DNA molecule form-ing a double helix. DNA is made of four types of nucleotides, which are linked covalently into a DNA strand. A DNA molecule is composed of two DNA strands held together by hydrogen bonds between the pair bases. The arrowheads at the ends of the DNA strands indicate the polarities of the two strands, which run anti-parallel to each other in the DNA molecule. The diagram at the bottom left of the figure shows the DNA molecule straightened out. In reality, the DNA molecule is twisted into a double helix, of which each turn of DNA is made up of 10.4 nucleotide pairs, as shown on the right.Because of size, shape, and chemical composition, A always pairs with T, and C with G, through the formation of hydrogen bonds between complementary bases that stabilize the double helix.Recognition of the hereditary transmission of genetic information is attributed to the Austrian monk, Gregor Mendel. His seminal work, ignored upon publication until its rediscovery in 1900, established the laws of segregation and of independent assortment. These two principles established the existence of paired elementary units of heredity and defined the statistical laws that govern them.5 DNA was isolated in 1869, and a number of important observations of the inherited basis of certain dis-eases were made in the early part of the 20th century. Although today it appears easy to understand how DNA replicates, before the 1950s the idea of DNA as the primary genetic material was not appreciated. The modern era of molecular biology began in 1944 with the demonstration that DNA was the substance that carried genetic information. The first experimental evidence that DNA was genetic material came from simple transforma-tion experiments conducted in the 1940s using Streptococcus pneumoniae. One strain of the bacteria could be converted into another by incubating it with DNA from the other, just as the treatment of the DNA with deoxyribonuclease would inactivate the transforming activity of the DNA. Similarly, in the early 1950s, before the discovery of the double-helical structure of DNA, the entry of viral DNA and not the protein into the host bacterium was believed to be necessary to initiate infection by the bacterial virus or bacteriophage. Key historical events con-cerning genetics are outlined in Table 15-1.For cells to pass on the genetic material (DNA) to each progeny, the amount of DNA must be doubled. Watson and Crick recognized that the complementary base-pair structure of DNA implied the existence of a template-like mechanism for the copying of genetic material.1 The transfer of DNA material from the mother cell to daughter cells takes place during somatic cell division (also called mitosis). Before a cell divides, DNA must be precisely duplicated. During replication, the two strands of DNA separate, and each strand creates a new complementary strand by precise base-pair matching (Fig. 15-3). The two, new, double-stranded DNAs carry the same genetic information, which can then be passed on to two daughter cells. Proofread-ing mechanisms ensure that the replication process occurs in a highly accurate manner. The fidelity of DNA replication is absolutely crucial to maintaining the integrity of the genome from generation to generation. However, mistakes can still occur during this process, resulting in mutations, which may lead to a change of the DNA’s encoded protein and, consequently, a change of the cell’s behavior. The reliable dependence of many features of modern organisms on subtle changes in genome is linked to Mendelian inheritance and also contributes to the pro-cesses of Darwinian evolution. In addition, massive changes, so-called genetic instability, can occur in the genome of somatic cells such as cancer cells.Gene RegulationLiving cells have the necessary machinery to enzymatically transcribe DNA into RNA and translate the mRNA into pro-tein. This machinery accomplishes the two major steps required for gene expression in all organisms: transcription and trans-lation (Fig. 15-4). However, gene regulation is far more com-plex, particularly in eukaryotic organisms. For example, many gene transcripts must be spliced to remove the intervening sequences. The sequences that are spliced off are called introns, which appear to be useless, but in fact may carry some regula-tory information. The sequences that are joined together, and are eventually translated into protein, are called exons. Additional regulation of gene expression includes modification of mRNA, control of mRNA stability, and its nuclear export into cytoplasm (where it is assembled into ribosomes for translation). After mRNA is translated into protein, the levels and functions of the proteins can be further regulated posttranslationally. However, the following sections will mainly focus on gene regulation at transcriptional and translational levels.Transcription. Transcription is the enzymatic process of RNA synthesis from DNA.6 In bacteria, a single RNA polymerase carries out all RNA synthesis, including that of mRNA, rRNA, Brunicardi_Ch15_p0479-p0510.indd   48118/02/19   11:12 AM 482BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IFigure 15-3. DNA replication. As the nucleotide A only pairs with T, and G with C, each strand of DNA can determine the nucleotide sequence in its complementary strand. In this way, double-helical DNA can be copied precisely.Table 15-1Historical events in genetics and molecular biologyYEARINVESTIGATOREVENT1865MendelLaws of genetics established1869MiescherDNA isolated1905GarrodHuman inborn errors of metabolism1913SturtevantLinear map of genes1927MullerX-rays cause inheritable genetic damage1928GriffithTransformation discovered1941Beadle and Tatum“One gene, one enzyme” concept1944Avery, MacLeod, McCartyDNA as material of heredity1950McKlintockExistence of transposons confirmed1953Watson and CrickDouble-helical structure of DNA1957Benzer and KornbergRecombination and DNA polymerase1966Nirenberg, Khorana, HolleyGenetic code determined1970Temin and BaltimoreReverse transcriptase1972Cohen, Boyer, BergRecombinant DNA technology1975SouthernTransfer of DNA fragments from sizing gel to nitrocellulose (Southern blot)1977Sanger, Maxim, GilbertDNA sequencing methods1982—GenBank database established1985MullisPolymerase chain reaction1986—Automated DNA sequencing1989CollinsCystic fibrosis gene identified by positional cloning and linkage analysis1990—Human Genome Project initiated1997Roslin InstituteMammalian cloning (Dolly)2001IHGSC and Celera GenomicsDraft versions of human genome sequence published2003—Human Genome Project completedIHGSC = International Human Genome Sequencing Consortium.GTGGCCTAAACAGGCCTTTACAGGCCTTTAGTGGCCTAAACAGGCCTTTAGTGGCCTAAAS strandS strandNew S strandNew S strandTemplate S strandTemplate S strand5'3'3'5'5'5'5'5'3'3'3'Parent DNA double helix (shown flat):3'DNA is a template for its own duplicationBrunicardi_Ch15_p0479-p0510.indd   48218/02/19   11:12 AM 483MOLECULAR BIOLOGY, THE ATOMIC THEORY OF DISEASE, AND PRECISION SURGERYCHAPTER 15NucleusCytoplasmDNARNAtranscriptmRNAmRNAProteinActiveproteinmRNAturnoverProteinturnoverTranscriptionRNAtransportTranscriptionalcontrolPosttranscriptionalcontrolTranslationalcontrolPosttranslationalcontrolNuclear envelopeRNAdegradationProteindegradationPosttranslationalmodificationTranslationRNAprocessingFigure 15-4. Four major steps in the control of eukaryotic gene expression. Transcriptional and posttranscriptional control determine the level of messenger RNA (mRNA) that is available to make a protein, while translational and posttranslational control determine the final outcome of functional proteins. Note that posttranscriptional and posttranslational controls consist of several steps.and tRNA. Transcription often is coupled with translation in such a way that an mRNA molecule is completely accessible to ribosomes, and bacterial protein synthesis begins on an mRNA molecule even while it is still being synthesized. Therefore, a discussion of gene regulation with a look at the simpler prokary-otic system precedes that of the more complex transcription and posttranscriptional regulation of eukaryotic genes.Transcription in Bacteria Initiation of transcription in pro-karyotes begins with the recognition of DNA sequences by RNA polymerase. First, the bacterial RNA polymerase cata-lyzes RNA synthesis through loose binding to any region in the double-stranded DNA and then through specific binding to the promoter region with the assistance of accessory pro-teins called σ factors (sigma factors). A promoter region is the DNA region upstream of the transcription initiation site. RNA polymerase binds tightly at the promoter sites and causes the double-stranded DNA structure to unwind. Consequently, few nucleotides can be base-paired with the DNA template to begin transcription. Once transcription begins, the σ factor is released. The growing RNA chain may begin to peel off as the chain elongates. This occurs in such a way that there are always about 10 to 12 nucleotides of the growing RNA chains that are base-paired with the DNA template.The bacterial promoter contains a region of about 40 bases that include two conserved elements called –35 region and –10 region. The numbering system begins at the initiation site, which is designated +1 position, and counts backward (in nega-tive numbers) on the promoter and forward on the transcribed region. Although both regions on different promoters are not the same sequences, they are fairly conserved and very similar. This conservation provides the accurate and rapid initiation of transcription for most bacterial genes. It is also common in bac-teria that one promoter serves to transcribe a series of clustered genes, called an operon. A single transcribed mRNA contains a series of coding regions, each of which is later independently translated. In this way, the protein products are synthesized in a coordinated manner. Most of the time, these proteins are involved in the same metabolic pathway, thus demonstrating that the control by one operon is an efficient system. After ini-tiation of transcription, the polymerase moves along the DNA to elongate the chain of RNA, although at a certain point, it will stop. Each step of RNA synthesis, including initiation, elongation, and termination, will require the integral functions of RNA polymerase as well as the interactions of the poly-merase with regulatory proteins.Transcription in Eukaryotes Transcription mechanisms in eukaryotes differ from those in prokaryotes. The unique features of eukaryotic transcription are as follows: (a) Three separate RNA polymerases are involved in eukaryotes: RNA polymerase I transcribes the precursor of 5.8S, 18S, and 28S rRNAs; RNA polymerase II synthesizes the precursors of mRNA as well as microRNA; and RNA polymerase III makes tRNAs and 5S rRNAs. (b) In eukaryotes, the initial transcript is often the pre-cursor to final mRNAs, tRNAs, and rRNAs. The precursor is then modified and/or processed into its final functional form. RNA splicing is one type of processing to remove the noncoding introns (the region between coding exons) on an mRNA. (c) In contrast to bacterial DNA, eukaryotic DNA often is packaged with histone and nonhistone proteins into chromatins. Transcrip-tion will only occur when the chromatin structure changes in such a way that DNA is accessible to the polymerase. (d) RNA is made in the nucleus and transported into cytoplasm, where translation occurs. Therefore, unlike bacteria, eukaryotes undergo uncoupled transcription and translation.Eukaryotic gene transcription also involves the recogni-tion and binding of RNA polymerase to the promoter DNA. However, the interaction between the polymerase and DNA is far more complex in eukaryotes than in prokaryotes. Because the majority of studies have been focused on the regulation and functions of proteins, this chapter primarily focuses on how protein-encoding mRNA is made by RNA polymerase II.Translation. DNA directs the synthesis of RNA; RNA in turn directs the synthesis of proteins. Proteins are variable-length polypeptide polymers composed of various combinations of 20 different amino acids and are the working molecules of the cell. The process of decoding information on mRNA to synthesize proteins is called translation (see Fig. 15-1). Translation takes place in ribosomes composed of rRNA and ribosomal proteins. The numerous discoveries made during the 1950s made it easy to understand how DNA replication and transcription involve base-pairing between DNA and DNA or DNA and RNA. How-ever, at that time, it was still impossible to comprehend how mRNA transfers the information to the protein-synthesizing machinery. The genetic information on mRNA is composed of Brunicardi_Ch15_p0479-p0510.indd   48318/02/19   11:12 AM 484BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART ITable 15-2The genetic codeSECOND BASE IN CODON  U  C  A  G    First Base  in CodonUUUUPhe[F]UCUSer[S]UAUTyr[Y]UGUCys[C]UThird Base  in Codon  UUCPhe[F]UCCSer[S]UACTyr[Y]UGCCys[C]C   UUALeu[L]UCASer[S]UAASTOP—UGASTOP—A   UUGLeu[L]UCGSer[S]UAGSTOP—UGGTrp[W]G  CCUULeu[L]CCUPro[P]CAUHis[H]CGUArg[R]U   CUCLeu[L]CCCPro[P]CACHis[H]CGCArg[R]C   CUALeu[L]CCAPro[P]CAAGln[Q]CGAArg[R]A   CUGLeu[L]CCGPro[P]CAGGln[Q]CGGArg[R]G  AAUUIle[I]ACUThr[T]AAUAsn[N]AGUSer[S]U   AUCIle[I]ACCThr[T]AACAsn[N]AGCSer[S]C   AUAIle[I]ACAThr[T]AAALys[K]AGAArg[R]A   AUGMet[M]ACGThr[T]AAGLys[K]AGGArg[R]G  GGUUVal[V]GCUAla[A]GAUAsp[D]GGUGly[G]U   GUCVal[V]GCCAla[A]GACAsp[D]GGCGly[G]C   GUAVal[V]GCAAla[A]GAAGlu[E]GGAGly[G]A   GUGVal[V]GCGAla[A]GAGGlu[E]GGGGly[G]G A = adenine; C = cytosine; G = guanine; U = uracil; Ala = alanine; Arg = arginine; Asn = asparagine; Asp = aspartic acid; Cys = cysteine; Glu = glutamic acid; Gln = glutamine; Gly = glycine; His = histidine; Ile = isoleucine; Leu = leucine; Lys = lysine; Met = methionine; Phe = phenylalanine; Pro = proline; Ser = serine; Thr = threonine; Trp = tryptophan; Tyr = tyrosine; Val = valine. Letter in [ ] indicates single letter code for amino acid.arranged sequences of four bases that are transferred to the lin-ear arrangement of 20 amino acids on a protein. Amino acids are characterized by a central carbon unit linked to four side chains: an amino group (–NH2), a carboxy group (–COOH), a hydrogen, and a variable (–R) group. The amino acid chain is assembled via peptide bonds between the amino group of one amino acid and the carboxy group of the next. Because of this decoding, the information carried on mRNA relies on tRNA. Translation involves all three RNAs. The precise transfer of information from mRNA to protein is governed by genetic code, the set of rules by which codons are translated into an amino acid (Table 15-2). A codon, a triplet of three bases, codes for one amino acid. In this case, random combinations of the four bases form 4 × 4 × 4, or 64 codes. Because 64 codes are more than enough for 20 amino acids, most amino acids are coded by more than one codon. The start codon is AUG, which also corresponds to methionine; therefore, almost all proteins begin with this amino acid. The sequence of nucleotide triplets that follows the start codon signal is termed the reading frame. The codons on mRNA are sequentially recognized by tRNA adaptor proteins. Specific enzymes termed aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases link a specific amino acid to a specific tRNA. The translation of mRNA to protein requires the ribosomal complex to move step-wise along the mRNA until the initiator methionine sequence is identified. In concert with various protein initiator factors, the methionyl-tRNA is positioned on the mRNA and protein synthesis begins. Each new amino acid is added sequentially by the appropriate tRNA in conjunction with proteins called elongation factors. Protein synthesis proceeds in the amino-to-carboxy-terminus direction.The biologic versatility of proteins is astounding. Among many other functions, proteins serve as enzymes that catalyze critical biochemical reactions, carry signals to and from the extracellular environment, and mediate diverse signaling and regulatory functions in the intracellular environment. They also transport ions and various small molecules across plasma mem-branes. Proteins make up the key structural components of cells and the extracellular matrix and are responsible for cell motility. The unique functional properties of proteins are largely deter-mined by their structure (Fig. 15-5).Regulation of Gene Expression. The human organism is made up of a myriad of different cell types that, despite their vastly different characteristics, contain the same genetic mate-rial. This cellular diversity is controlled by the genome and is accomplished by tight regulation of gene expression. This leads to the synthesis and accumulation of different complements of RNA and, ultimately, to the proteins found in different cell types. For example, muscle and bone express different genes or the same genes at different times. Moreover, the choice of which genes are expressed in a given cell at a given time depends on signals received from its environment. There are multiple levels at which gene expression can be controlled along the pathway from DNA to RNA to protein (see Fig. 15-4). Transcriptional control refers to the mechanism for regulating when and how often a gene is transcribed. Splicing of the primary RNA tran-script (RNA processing control) and selection of completed Brunicardi_Ch15_p0479-p0510.indd   48418/02/19   11:12 AM 485MOLECULAR BIOLOGY, THE ATOMIC THEORY OF DISEASE, AND PRECISION SURGERYCHAPTER 15Figure 15-5. Maturation of a functional protein. Although the lin-ear amino acid sequence of a protein often is shown, the function of a protein also is controlled by its correctly folded three-dimensional structure. In addition, many proteins also have covalent posttransla-tional modifications such as phosphorylation or noncovalent bind-ing to a small molecule or a protein.Unfolded inactive proteinFolded inactive protein Mature inactive proteinBinding proteinPosttranslationalmodification(e.g., phosphorylation)PCofactor bindingmRNAs for nuclear export (RNA transport control) represent additional potential regulatory steps. The mRNAs in the cyto-plasm can be selectively translated by ribosomes (translational control) or selectively stabilized or degraded (mRNA degrada-tion control). Finally, the resulting proteins can undergo selec-tive activation, inactivation, or compartmentalization (protein activity control).Because a large number of genes are regulated at the tran-scriptional level, regulation of gene transcripts (i.e., mRNA) often is referred to as gene regulation in a narrow definition. Each of the steps during transcription is properly regulated in eukaryotic cells. Because genes are differentially regulated from one another, one gene can be differentially regulated in differ-ent cell types or at different developmental stages. Therefore, gene regulation at the level of transcription is largely context dependent. However, there is a common scheme that applies to transcription at the molecular level (Fig. 15-6). Each gene promoter possesses unique sequences called TATA boxes that can be recognized and bound by a large complex containing RNA polymerase II, forming the basal transcription machinery. Usually located upstream of the TATA box (but sometimes lon-ger distances) are a number of regulatory sequences referred to as enhancers that are recognized by regulatory proteins called transcription factors. These transcription factors specifically bind to the enhancers, often in response to environmental or developmental cues, and cooperate with each other and with basal transcription factors to initiate transcription. Regulatory sequences that negatively regulate the initiation of transcription also are present on the promoter DNA. The transcription factors that bind to these sites are called repressors, in contrast to the activators that activate transcription. The molecular interactions Figure 15-6. Transcriptional control by RNA polymerase. DNA is packaged into a chromatin structure. TATA = the common sequence on the promoter recognized by TBP and polymerase II holoenzyme; TBP = TATA-binding protein and associated factors; TF = hypothetical transcription factor; TFBS = transcription factor binding site; ball-shaped structures = nucleosomes. Coactivator or corepressor is a factor linking the TF with the Pol II complex.TFCoactivator orCorepressorPol IIHoloenzymeTBPTBPTATATFBSbetween transcription factors and promoter DNA, as well as between the cooperative transcription factors, are highly regu-lated and context-dependent. Specifically, the recruitment of transcription factors to the promoter DNA occurs in response to physiologic signals. A number of structural motifs in these DNA-binding transcription factors facilitate this recognition and interaction. These include the helix-turn-helix, the homeodo-main motif, the zinc finger, the leucine zipper, and the helix-loop-helix motifs.Human GenomeGenome is a collective term for all genes present in one organ-ism. The human genome contains DNA sequences of 3 billion base pairs, carried by 23 pairs of chromosomes. The human genome has an estimated 25,000 to 30,000 genes, and overall it is 99.9% identical in all people.7,8 Approximately 3 million locations where single-base DNA differences exist have been identified and termed single nucleotide polymorphisms. Single nucleotide polymorphisms may be critical determinants of human variation in disease susceptibility and responses to envi-ronmental factors.The completion of the human genome sequence in 2003 represented another great milestone in modern science. The Human Genome Project created the field of genomics, which is the study of genetic material in detail (see Fig. 15-1). The medical field is building on the knowledge, resources, and technologies emanating from the human genome to further the understanding of the relationship of the genes and their muta-tions to human health and disease. This expansion of genomics into human health applications resulted in the field of genomic medicine.The emergence of genomics as a science will transform the practice of medicine and surgery in this century. This break-through has allowed scientists the opportunity to gain remarkable insights into the lives of humans. Ultimately, the goal is to use this information to develop new ways to treat, cure, or even prevent the thousands of diseases that afflict humankind. In the 21st century, work will begin to incorporate the information embedded in the human genome sequence into surgical practices. By doing so, the genomic information can be used for diagnosing and predicting disease and disease suscep-tibility. Diagnostic tests can be designed to detect errant genes in patients suspected of having particular diseases or of being at risk for developing them. Furthermore, exploration into the function of each human gene is now possible, which will shed 3Brunicardi_Ch15_p0479-p0510.indd   48518/02/19   11:12 AM 486BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ilight on how faulty genes play a role in disease causation. This knowledge also makes possible the development of a new gen-eration of therapeutics based on genes. Drug design is being revolutionized as researchers create new classes of medicines based on a reasoned approach to the use of information on gene sequence and protein structure function rather than the tradi-tional trial-and-error method. Drugs targeted to specific sites in the body promise to have fewer side effects than many of today’s medicines. Finally, other applications of genomics will involve the transfer of genes to replace defective versions or the use of gene therapy to enhance normal functions such as immunity.Proteomics refers to the study of the structure and expression of proteins as well as the interactions among pro-teins encoded by a human genome (see Fig. 15-1).9 A num-ber of Internet-based repositories for protein sequences exist, including Swiss-Prot (www.expasy.ch). These databases allow comparisons of newly identified proteins with previously char-acterized sequences to allow prediction of similarities, identifi-cation of splice variants, and prediction of membrane topology and posttranslational modifications. Tools for proteomic profil-ing include two-dimensional gel electrophoresis, time-of-flight mass spectrometry, matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization, and protein microarrays. Structural proteomics aims to describe the three-dimensional structure of proteins that is critical to understanding function. Functional genomics seeks to assign a biochemical, physiologic, cell biologic, and/or developmental function to each predicted gene. An ever-increasing arsenal of approaches, including transgenic animals, RNA interference (RNAi), and various systematic mutational strategies, will allow dissection of functions associated with newly discovered genes. Although the potential of this field of study is vast, it is in its early stages.It is anticipated that a genomic and proteomic approach to human disease will lead to a new understanding of pathogenesis that will aid in the development of effective strategies for early diagnosis and treatment.10 For example, identification of altered protein expression in organs, cells, subcellular structures, or protein complexes may lead to development of new biomark-ers for disease detection. Moreover, improved understanding of how protein structure determines function will allow rational identification of therapeutic targets, and thereby not only accel-erate drug development, but also lead to new strategies to evalu-ate therapeutic efficacy and potential toxicity.9Cell Cycle and ApoptosisEvery organism is composed of many different cell types at dif-ferent developmental stages. Some cell types continue to grow, while some cells stop growing after a developmental stage or resume growth after a break. For example, embryonic stem cells grow continuously, while nerve cells and striated muscle cells stop dividing after maturation. Cell cycle is the process for every cell including DNA replication and protein synthe-sis, DNA segregation in half, and package DNA and protein in two newly formed cells to enable passage of identical genetic information from one parental cell to two daughter cells. Thus, the cell cycle is the fundamental mechanism to maintain tissue homeostasis. A cell cycle comprises four periods: G1 (first gap phase before DNA synthesis), S (synthesis phase when DNA replication occurs), G2 (the gap phase before mitosis), and M (mitosis, the phase when two daughter cells with identical DNA are generated) (Fig. 15-7). After a full cycle, the daughter Figure 15-7. The cell cycle and its control system. M is the mito-sis phase, when the nucleus and the cytoplasm divide; S is the phase when DNA is duplicated; G1 is the gap between M and S; G2 is the gap between S and M. A complex of cyclin and cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) controls specific events of each phase. Without cyclin, CDK is inactive. Different cyclin/CDK complexes are shown around the cell cycle. A, B, D, and E stand for cyclin A, cyclin B, cyclin D, and cyclin E, respectively.B/CDK1A/CDK1A/CDK2E/CDK2D/CDK4D/CDK6G1G2SMMitosisDNA replicationcells enter G1 again, and when they receive appropriate signals, undergo another cycle, and so on. The machinery that drives cell cycle progression is made up of a group of enzymes called cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs). Cyclin expression fluctuates during the cell cycle, and cyclins are essential for CDK activi-ties and form complexes with CDK. The cyclin A/CDK1 and cyclin B/CDK1 drive the progression for the M phase, while cyclin A/CDK2 is the primary S phase complex. Early G1 cyclin D/CDK4/6 or late G1 cyclin E/CDK2 controls the G1-S transi-tion. There also are negative regulators for CDK termed CDK inhibitors, which inhibit the assembly or activity of the cyclin-CDK complex. Expression of cyclins and CDK inhibitors often is regulated by developmental and environmental factors.The cell cycle is connected with signal transduction path-ways as well as gene expression. Although the S and M phases rarely are subjected to changes imposed by extracellular sig-nals, the G1 and G2 phases are the primary periods when cells decide whether or not to move on to the next phase. During the G1 phase, cells receive greenor red-light signals, S phase entry or G1 arrest, respectively. Growing cells proliferate only when supplied with appropriate mitogenic growth factors. Cells become committed to entry of the cell cycle only toward the end of G1. Mitogenic signals stimulate the activity of early G1 CDKs (e.g., cyclin D/CDK4) that inhibit the activity of pRb protein and activate the transcription factor called E2F to induce the expression of batteries of genes essential for G1-S progression. Meanwhile, cells also receive antiproliferative signals such as those from tumor suppressors. These antiproliferative signals also act in the G1 phase to stop cells’ progress into the S phase by inducing CKI production. For example, when DNA is dam-aged, cells will repair the damage before entering the S phase. Therefore, G1 contains one of the most important checkpoints for cell cycle progression. If the analogy is made that CDK is to a cell as an engine is to a car, then cyclins and CKI are the gas pedal and brake, respectively. Accelerated proliferation or Brunicardi_Ch15_p0479-p0510.indd   48618/02/19   11:12 AM 487MOLECULAR BIOLOGY, THE ATOMIC THEORY OF DISEASE, AND PRECISION SURGERYCHAPTER 15improper cell cycle progression with damaged DNA would be disastrous. Genetic gain-of-function mutations in oncogenes (that often promote expression or activity of the cyclin/CDK complex) or loss-of-function mutations in tumor suppressor (that stimulate production of CKI) are causal factors for malig-nant transformation.In addition to cell cycle control, cells use genetically pro-grammed mechanisms to kill cells. This cellular process, called apoptosis or programmed cell death, is essential for the mainte-nance of tissue homeostasis (Fig. 15-8).Normal tissues undergo proper apoptosis to remove unwanted cells, those that have completed their jobs or have been damaged or improperly proliferated. Apoptosis can be activated by many physiologic stimuli such as death receptor signals (e.g., Fas or cytokine tumor necrosis factor), growth fac-tor deprivation, DNA damage, and stress signals. Two major pathways control the biochemical mechanisms governing apop-tosis: the death receptor and mitochondrial. However, recent advances in apoptosis research suggest an interconnection of the two pathways. What is central to the apoptotic machinery is the activation of a cascade of proteinases called caspases. Similar to CDK in the cell cycle, activities and expression of caspases are well controlled by positive and negative regulators. The complex machinery of apoptosis must be tightly controlled. Perturbations of this process can cause neoplastic transforma-tion or other diseases.Signal Transduction PathwaysGene expression in a genome is controlled in a temporal and spatial manner, at least in part by signaling pathways.11 A sig-naling pathway generally begins at the cell surface and, after a signaling relay by a cascade of intracellular effectors, ends up in the nucleus (Fig. 15-9). All cells have the ability to sense changes in their external environment. The bioactive substances to which cells can respond are many and include proteins, short peptides, amino acids, nucleotides/nucleosides, steroids, reti-noids, fatty acids, and dissolved gases. Some of these substances are lipophilic and thereby can cross the plasma membrane by NucleusDeath signal(e.g., TNF or Fas)DeathreceptorPlasmamembraneActivation ofcaspase cascadeCytochrome creleaseDeathreceptorsignalingpathwayMitochondrionNormal target cellApoptotic target cellFigure 15-8. A simplified view of the apop-tosis pathways. Extracellular death receptor pathways include the activation of Fas and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptors and consequent activation of the caspase path-way. Intracellular death pathway indicates the release of cytochrome c from mitochon-dria, which also triggers the activation of the caspase cascade. During apoptosis, cells undergo DNA fragmentation and nuclear and cell membrane breakdown and are eventually digested by other cells.Ligand(e.g., growth factor)Cell-surfacereceptorPlasmamembraneNucleusGeneexpressionLigand(e.g., hormone)Signaling cascadeIntracellularreceptorFigure 15-9. Cell-surface and intracellular receptor pathways. Extracellular signaling pathway: Most growth factors and other hydrophilic signaling molecules are unable to move across the plasma membrane and directly activate cell-surface receptors such as G-protein–coupled receptors and enzyme-linked receptors. The receptor serves as the receiver and in turn activates the downstream signals in the cell. Intracellular signaling pathway: Hormones or other diffusible molecules enter the cell and bind to the intracel-lular receptor in the cytoplasm or in the nucleus. Either extracel-lular or intracellular signals often reach the nucleus to control gene expression.Brunicardi_Ch15_p0479-p0510.indd   48718/02/19   11:12 AM 488BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Idiffusion to bind to a specific target protein within the cyto-plasm (intracellular receptor). Other substances bind directly with a transmembrane protein (cell-surface receptor). Binding of ligand to receptor initiates a series of biochemical reactions (signal transduction) typically involving protein-protein inter-actions and the transfer of high-energy phosphate groups, lead-ing to various cellular end responses.Control and specificity through simple protein-protein interactions—referred to as adhesive interactions—is a com-mon feature of signal transduction pathways in cells.12 Signaling also involves catalytic activities of signaling molecules, such as protein kinases/phosphatases, that modify the structures of key signaling proteins. Upon binding and/or modification by upstream signaling molecules, downstream effectors undergo a conformational (allosteric) change and, consequently, a change in function. The signal that originates at the cell surface and is relayed by the cytoplasmic proteins often ultimately reaches the transcriptional apparatus in the nucleus. It alters the DNA binding and activities of transcription factors that directly turn genes on or off in response to the stimuli. Abnormal alterations in signaling activities and capacities in otherwise normal cells can lead to diseases such as cancer.Advances in biology in the last two decades have dramati-cally expanded the view on how cells are wired with signal-ing pathways. In a given cell, many signaling pathways operate simultaneously and crosstalk with one another. A cell gener-ally may react to a hormonal signal in a variety of ways: (a) by changing its metabolite or protein, (b) by generating an electric current, or (c) by contracting. Cells continually are subject to multiple input signals that simultaneously and sequentially acti-vate multiple receptorand non–receptor-mediated signal trans-duction pathways, which form a signaling network. Although the regulators responsible for cell behavior are rapidly identified as a result of genomic and proteomic techniques, the specific functions of the individual proteins, how they assemble, and the networks that control cellular behavior remain to be defined. An increased understanding of cell regulatory pathways—and how they are disrupted in disease—will likely reveal common themes based on protein interaction domains that direct associa-tions of proteins with other polypeptides, phospholipids, nucleic acids, and other regulatory molecules. Advances in the under-standing of signaling networks will require methods of inves-tigation that move beyond traditional “linear” approaches into medical informatics and computational biology. The bewilder-ing biocomplexity of such networks mandates multidisciplinary and transdisciplinary research collaboration. The vast amount of information that is rapidly emerging from genomic and pro-teomic data mining will require the development of new model-ing methodologies within the emerging disciplines of medical mathematics and physics.Signaling pathways often are grouped according to the properties of signaling receptors. Many hydrophobic signaling molecules are able to diffuse across plasma membranes and directly reach specific cytoplasmic targets. Steroid hormones, thyroid hormones, retinoids, and vitamin D are examples that exert their activity upon binding to structurally related recep-tor proteins that are members of the nuclear hormone receptor superfamily. Ligand binding induces a conformational change that enhances transcriptional activity of these receptors. Most extracellular signaling molecules interact with transmembrane protein receptors that couple ligand binding to intracellular sig-nals, leading to biologic actions.There are three major classes of cell-surface receptors: transmitter-gated ion channels, seven-transmembrane G-protein–coupled receptors (GPCRs), and enzyme-linked receptors. The superfamily of GPCRs is one of the largest families of proteins, representing over 800 genes of the human genome. Members of this superfamily share a characteristic seven-transmembrane configuration. The ligands for these receptors are diverse and include hormones, chemokines, neurotransmitters, protein-ases, inflammatory mediators, and even sensory signals such as odorants and photons. Most GPCRs signal through het-erotrimeric G proteins, which are guanine-nucleotide regula-tory complexes. Thus, the receptor serves as the receiver, the  G protein serves as the transducer, and the enzyme serves as the effector arm. Enzyme-linked receptors possess an extracellular ligand-recognition domain and a cytosolic domain that either has intrinsic enzymatic activity or directly links with an enzyme. Structurally, these receptors usually have only one transmembrane-spanning domain. Of at least five forms of enzyme-linked recep-tors classified by the nature of the enzyme activity to which they are coupled, the growth factor receptors such as tyrosine kinase receptor or serine/threonine kinase receptors mediate diverse cellular events including cell growth, differentiation, metabolism, and survival/apoptosis. Dysregulation (particularly mutations) of these receptors is thought to underlie conditions of abnormal cellular proliferation in the context of cancer. The following sections will further review two examples of growth factor signaling pathways and their connection with human diseases.Insulin Pathway and Diabetes.13 The discovery of insulin in the early 1920s is one of the most dramatic events in the treatment of human disease. Insulin is a peptide hormone that is secreted by the β-cell of the pancreas. Insulin is required for the growth and metabolism of most mammalian cells, which contain cell-surface insulin receptors (InsR). Insulin binding to InsR activates the kinase activity of InsR. InsR then adds phosphoryl groups, a process referred to as phosphorylation, and subsequently activates its immediate intracellular effector, called insulin receptor substrate (IRS). IRS plays a central role in coordinating the signaling of insulin by activating distinct sig-naling pathways, the PI3K-Akt pathway and MAPK pathway, both of which possess multiple protein kinases that can control transcription, protein synthesis, and glycolysis (Fig. 15-10).The primary physiologic role of insulin is in glucose homeostasis, which is accomplished through the stimulation of glucose uptake into insulin-sensitive tissues such as fat and skeletal muscle. Defects in insulin synthesis/secretion and/or responsiveness are major causal factors in diabetes, one of the leading causes of death and disability in the United States, affecting an estimated 16 million Americans. Type 2 diabetes accounts for about 90% of all cases of diabetes. Clustering of type 2 diabetes in certain families and ethnic populations points to a strong genetic background for the disease. More than 90% of affected individuals have insulin resistance, which develops when the body is no longer able to respond correctly to insu-lin circulating in the blood. Although relatively little is known about the biochemical basis of this metabolic disorder, it is clear that the insulin-signaling pathways malfunction in this disease. It is also known that genetic mutations in the InsR or IRS cause type 2 diabetes, although which one is not certain. The majority of type 2 diabetes cases may result from defects in  downstream-signaling components in the insulin-signaling pathway.  Brunicardi_Ch15_p0479-p0510.indd   48818/02/19   11:12 AM 489MOLECULAR BIOLOGY, THE ATOMIC THEORY OF DISEASE, AND PRECISION SURGERYCHAPTER 15PlasmamembraneNucleusInsulinreceptor(InsR)GeneexpressionMAPKcascadeLipid & glucosemetabolismCellsurvivalIRSInsulinAdaptorPI3KFigure 15-10. Insulin-signaling pathway. Insulin is a peptide growth factor that binds to and activates the heterotetrameric recep-tor complex (InsR). InsR possesses protein tyrosine kinase activity and is able to phosphorylate the downstream insulin receptor sub-strate (IRS). Phosphorylated IRS serves as a scaffold and controls the activation of multiple downstream pathways for gene expres-sion, cell survival, and glucose metabolism. Inactivation of the insulin pathway can lead to type 2 diabetes.Type 2 diabetes also is associated with declining β-cell func-tion, resulting in reduced insulin secretion; these pathways are under intense study. A full understanding of the basis of insulin resistance is crucial for the development of new therapies for type 2 diabetes. Furthermore, apart from type 2 diabetes, insulin resistance is a central feature of several other common human disorders, including atherosclerosis and coronary artery disease, hypertension, and obesity.Transforming Growth Factor-a (TGF-a) Pathway and  Cancers.14 Growth factor signaling controls cell growth, differ-entiation, and apoptosis. Although insulin and many mitogenic growth factors promote cell proliferation, some growth factors and hormones inhibit cell proliferation. TGF-β is one of them. The balance between mitogens and TGF-β plays an important role in controlling the proper pace of cell cycle progression. The growth inhibition function of TGF-β signaling in epithelial cells plays a major role in maintaining tissue homeostasis.The TGF-β superfamily comprises a large number of struc-turally related growth and differentiation factors that act through a receptor complex at the cell surface (Fig. 15-11). The com-plex consists of transmembrane serine/threonine kinases. The receptor signals through activation of heterotrimeric complexes of intracellular effectors called SMADs (which are contracted from homologous Caenorhabditis elegans Sma and Drosophila Mad, two evolutionarily conserved genes for TGF-β signaling). Upon phosphorylation by the receptors, SMAD complexes translocate into the nucleus, where they bind to gene promoters and cooperate with specific transcription factors to regulate the expression of genes that control cell proliferation and differen-tiation. For example, TGF-β strongly induces the transcription PlasmamembraneTGF b  receptorGeneexpressionNucleusSMADTGF bAnti-proliferationFigure 15-11. TGF-β signaling pathway. The TGF-β family has at least 29 members encoded in the human genome. They are also peptide growth factors. Each member binds to a heterotetrameric complex consisting of a distinct set of type I and type II recep-tors. TGF-β receptors are protein serine/threonine kinases and can phosphorylate the downstream substrates called SMAD proteins. Phosphorylated SMADs are directly transported into the nucleus, where they bind to the DNA and regulate gene expression that is responsible for inhibition of cell proliferation. Inactivation of the TGF-β pathway through genetic mutations in the TGF-β receptors or SMADs is frequent in human cancer, leading to the uncontrolled proliferation of cancer cells.of a gene called p15INK4B (a type of CKI) and, at the same time, reduces the expression of many oncogenes such as c-Myc. The outcome of the altered gene expression leads to the inhibition of cell cycle progression. Meanwhile, the strength and dura-tion of TGF-β signaling is fine-tuned by a variety of positive or negative modulators, including protein phosphatases. Therefore, controlled activation of TGF-β signaling is an intrinsic mecha-nism for cells to ensure controlled proliferation.Resistance to TGF-β’s anticancer action is one hall-mark of human cancer cells. TGF-β receptors and SMADs are identified as tumor suppressors. The TGF-β signaling circuit can be disrupted in a variety of ways and in different types of human tumors. Some lose TGF-β responsiveness through downregulation or mutations of their TGF-β receptors. The cytoplasmic SMAD4 protein, which transduces signals from ligand-activated TGF-β receptors to downstream targets, may be eliminated through mutation of its encoding gene. The locus encoding cell cycle inhibitor p15INK4B may be deleted. Alterna-tively, the immediate downstream target of its actions, cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4), may become unresponsive to the inhibitory actions of p15INK4B because of mutations that block p15INK4B binding. The resulting cyclin D/CDK4 complexes con-stitutively inactivate tumor suppressor pRb by hyperphosphory-lation. Finally, functional pRb, the end target of this pathway, may be lost through mutation of its gene. For example, in pan-creatic and colorectal cancers, 100% of cells derived from these cancers carry genetic defects in the TGF-β signaling pathway. Therefore, the antiproliferative pathway converging onto pRb Brunicardi_Ch15_p0479-p0510.indd   48918/02/19   11:12 AM 490BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Iand the cell division cycle is, in one way or another, disrupted in a majority of human cancer cells. Besides cancer, dysregu-lation of TGF-β signaling also has been associated with other human diseases such as Marfan’s syndrome and thoracic aortic aneurysm.Gene Therapy and Molecular Drugs in CancerModern advances in the use of molecular biology to manipulate genomes have greatly contributed to the understanding of the molecular basis for how cells live, die, or differentiate. Given the fact that human diseases arise from improper changes in the genome, the continuous understanding of how the genome func-tions will make it possible to tailor medicine on an individual basis. Although significant hurdles remain, the course toward therapeutic application of molecular biology already has been mapped out by many proof-of-principle studies in the literature. In this section, cancer is used as an example to elaborate some therapeutic applications of molecular biology. Modern molecu-lar medicine includes gene therapy and molecular drugs that target genes or gene products within human cells.Cancer is a complex disease, involving uncontrolled growth and spread of tumor cells (Fig. 15-12). Cancer development depends on the acquisition and selection of specific character-istics that set the tumor cell apart from normal somatic cells. Cancer cells have defects in regulatory circuits that govern nor-mal cell proliferation and homeostasis. Many lines of evidence indicate that tumorigenesis in humans is a multistep process and that these steps reflect genetic alterations that drive the progres-sive transformation of normal human cells into highly malignant derivatives. The genomes of tumor cells are invariably altered at multiple sites, having suffered disruption through lesions as sub-tle as point mutations and as obvious as changes in chromosome complement. A succession of genetic changes, each conferring one or another type of growth advantage, leads to the progressive conversion of normal human cells into cancer cells.Cancer research in the past 20 years has generated a rich and complex body of knowledge, revealing cancer to be a dis-ease involving dynamic changes in the genome. The causes of cancer include genetic predisposition, environmental influences, infectious agents, and aging. These transform normal cells into cancerous ones by derailing a wide spectrum of regulatory pathways including signal transduction pathways, cell cycle machinery, or apoptotic pathways.15,16 The early notion that cancer was caused by mutations in genes critical for the control of cell growth implied that genome stability is important for preventing oncogenesis. There are two classes of cancer genes in which alteration has been identified in human and animal cancer cells: oncogenes, with dominant gain-of-function muta-tions, and tumor suppressor genes, with recessive loss-of-function mutations. In normal cells, oncogenes promote cell growth by activating cell cycle progression, whereas tumor suppres-sors counteract oncogenes’ functions. Therefore, the balance between oncogenes and tumor suppressors maintains a well-controlled state of cell growth.During the development of most types of human cancer, cancer cells can break away from primary tumor masses, invade adjacent tissues, and hence travel to distant sites where they form new colonies. This spreading process of tumor cells, called metastasis, is the cause of 90% of human cancer deaths. Meta-static cancer cells that enter the bloodstream can reach virtu-ally all tissues of the body. Bones are one of the most common places for these cells to settle and start growing again. Bone Figure 15-12. Tumor clonal evolution and metastasis. A tumor develops from mutant cells with multiple genetic mutations. Through repeated alterations in the genome, mutant epithelial cells are able to develop into a cluster of cells (called a tumor clone) that proliferates in an uncontrollable fashion. Further changes in the tumor cells can transform the tumor cells into a population of cells that can enter the blood vessels and repopulate in a new location.Tumor cells escape fromblood vessel and proliferateto form metastatic tumorsBlood vesselTumor cells break looseand enter bloodstreamUncontrolled cellproliferationCell proliferationCell proliferationCell with multiplemutationsCell with two mutationsMutant epithelial cellNormal epithelial cellmetastasis is one of the most frequent causes of pain in people with cancer. It also can cause bones to break and create other symptoms and problems for patients.The progression in the knowledge of cancer biology has been accelerating in recent years. All of the scientific knowledge Brunicardi_Ch15_p0479-p0510.indd   49018/02/19   11:12 AM 491MOLECULAR BIOLOGY, THE ATOMIC THEORY OF DISEASE, AND PRECISION SURGERYCHAPTER 15acquired through hard work and discovery has made it possible for cancer treatment and prevention. As a result of explosive new discoveries, some modern treatments were developed. The success of these therapies, together with traditional treatments such as surgical procedures, is further underscored by the fact that in 2002 the cancer rate was reduced in the United States. Current approaches to the treatment of cancer involve killing cancer cells with toxic chemicals, radiation, or surgery. Alterna-tively, several new biologicand gene-based therapies are aimed at enhancing the body’s natural defenses against invading can-cers. Understanding the biology of cancer cells has led to the development of designer therapies for cancer prevention and treatment. Gene therapy, immune system modulation, geneti-cally engineered antibodies, and molecularly designed chemical drugs are all promising fronts in the war against cancer.Immunotherapy. The growth of the body is controlled by many natural signals through complex signaling pathways. Some of these natural agents have been used in cancer treatment and have been proven effective for fighting several cancers through the clinical trial process. These naturally occurring biologic agents, such as interferons, interleukins, and other cytokines, can now be produced in the laboratory. These agents, as well as the synthetic agents that mimic the natural signals, are given to patients to influence the natural immune response agents either by directly altering the cancer cell growth or by acting indirectly to help healthy cells control the cancer. One of the most exciting applications of immunotherapy has come from the identification of certain tumor targets called antigens and the aiming of an antibody at these targets. This was first used as a means of local-izing tumors in the body for diagnosis and was more recently used to attack cancer cells. Trastuzumab (Herceptin) is an exam-ple of such a drug.17 Trastuzumab is a monoclonal antibody that neutralizes the mitogenic activity of cell-surface growth fac-tor receptor HER-2, which is overexpressed in approximately 25% of breast cancers. HER-2–overexpressing tumors tend to grow faster and generally are more likely to recur than tumors that do not overproduce HER-2. Trastuzumab is designed to attack cancer cells that overexpress HER-2 by slowing or pre-venting the growth of these cells, resulting in increased survival of HER-2–positive breast cancer patients. Another significant example is the administration of interleukin-2 (IL-2) to patients with metastatic melanoma or kidney cancer, which has been shown to mediate the durable regression of metastatic cancer. IL-2, a cytokine produced by human helper T lymphocytes, has a wide range of immune regulatory effects, including the expansion of lymphocytes following activation by a specific antigen. Although IL-2 has no direct impact on cancer cells, the impact of IL-2 on cancers in vivo derives from its ability to expand lymphocytes with antitumor activity. The expanded lymphocyte pool enables recognition of the antigen on cancer cells. Thus, the molecular identification of cancer antigens has opened new possibilities for the development of effective immunotherapies for patients with cancer. Clinical studies using immunization with peptides derived from cancer antigens have shown that high levels of lymphocytes with antitumor activity can be produced in cancer-bearing patients. Highly avid antitu-mor lymphocytes can be isolated from immunized patients and grown in vitro for use in cell-transfer therapies.Chemotherapy. The primary function of anticancer chemicals is to block different steps involved in cell growth and replica-tion. These chemicals often block a critical chemical reaction in a signal transduction pathway or during DNA replication or gene expression. For example, STI571, also known as Gleevec, is one of the first molecularly targeted drugs based on the changes that cancer causes in cells.18 STI571 offers promise for the treatment of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) and may soon surpass interferon-γ as the standard treatment for the disease. In CML, STI571 is targeted at the Bcr-Abl kinase, an activated oncogene product in CML (Fig. 15-13). Bcr-Abl is an overly activated protein kinase resulting from a specific genetic abnor-mality generated by chromosomal translocation that is found in the cells of patients with CML. STI571-mediated inhibi-tion of Bcr-Abl kinase activity not only prevents cell growth of Bcr-Abl–transformed leukemic cells, but also induces apoptosis. Clinically, the drug quickly corrects the blood cell abnormali-ties caused by the leukemia in a majority of patients, achiev-ing a complete disappearance of the leukemic blood cells and the return of normal blood cells. Additionally, the drug appears to have some effect on other cancers including certain brain tumors and gastrointestinal (GI) stromal tumors, a very rare type of stomach cancer.Gene Therapy. Gene therapy is an experimental treatment that involves genetically altering a patient’s own tumor cells or lym-phocytes (cells of the immune system, some of which can attack cancer cells). For years, the concept of gene therapy has held promise as a new, potentially potent weapon to attack cancer. Although a rapid progression in the understanding of the molec-ular and clinical aspects of gene therapy has been witnessed in the past decade, gene therapy treatment has not yet been shown to be superior to standard treatments in humans.Inactive(In the absence of ATP)Overly activeUncontrolledcell proliferationBlockedcell proliferationBlocked activityATPSubstrateBcr-AblkinasePO4TyrSTI571SubstrateBcr-AblkinaseTyrSubstrateBcr-AblkinaseTyrFigure 15-13. Mechanism of STI571 as a molecular drug. Bcr-Abl is an overly activated oncogene product resulting from a specific genetic abnormality generated by chromo-somal translocation that is found in cells of patients with chronic myeloid leukemia. Bcr-Abl is an activated protein kinase and thus requires adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to phosphorylate substrates, which in turn promote cell proliferation. STI571 is a small molecule that competes with the ATP-bind-ing site and thus blocks the transfer of phos-phoryl group to substrate. PO4 = phosphate; Tyr = tyrosine.Brunicardi_Ch15_p0479-p0510.indd   49118/02/19   11:12 AM 492BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART ISeveral problems must be resolved to transform it into a clinically relevant form of therapy. The major issues that limit its translation to the clinic are improving the selectivity of tumor targeting, improving the delivery to the tumor, and the enhance-ment of the transduction rate of the cells of interest. In most gene therapy trials for malignant diseases, tumors can be accessed and directly injected (in situ gene therapy). In situ gene therapy also offers a better distribution of the vector virus throughout the tumor. Finally, a combination of gene therapy strategies will be more effective than the use of a single gene therapy system. An important aspect of effective gene therapy involves the choice of appropriate genes for manipulation. Genes that promote the production of messenger chemicals or other immune-active sub-stances can be transferred into the patient’s cells. These include genes that inhibit cell cycle progression, induce apoptosis, enhance host immunity against cancer cells, block the ability of cancer cells to metastasize, and cause tumor cells to undergo suicide. Recent development of RNAi technology, which uses a loss-of-function approach to block gene functions, ensures a new wave of hopes for gene therapy. Nonetheless, gene therapy is still experimental and is being studied in clinical trials for many different types of cancer. The mapping of genes respon-sible for human cancer is likely to provide new targets for gene therapy in the future. The preliminary results of gene therapy for cancer are encouraging, and as advancements are made in the understanding of the molecular biology of human cancer, the future of this rapidly developing field holds great potential for treating cancer.It is noteworthy that the use of multiple therapeutic meth-ods has proven more powerful than a single method. The use of chemotherapy after surgery to destroy the few remaining cancerous cells in the body is called adjuvant therapy. Adju-vant therapy was first tested and found to be effective in breast cancer. It was later adopted for use in other cancers. A major discovery in chemotherapy is the advantage of multiple che-motherapeutic agents (known as combination or cocktail  chemotherapy) over single agents. Some types of fast-growing leukemias and lymphomas (tumors involving the cells of the bone marrow and lymph nodes) responded extremely well to combination chemotherapy, and clinical trials led to gradual improvement of the drug combinations used. Many of these tumors can be cured today by combination chemotherapy. As cancer cells carry multiple genetic defects, the use of combina-tion chemotherapy, immunotherapy, and gene therapies may be more effective in treating cancers.Stem Cell ResearchStem cell biology represents a cutting-edge scientific research field with potential clinical applications.19 It may have an enor-mous impact on human health by offering hope for curing human diseases such as diabetes mellitus, Parkinson’s disease, neuro-logic degeneration, and congenital heart disease. Stem cells are endowed with two remarkable properties (Fig. 15-14). First, stem cells can proliferate in an undifferentiated but pluripotent state and, as a result, can self-renew. Second, they have the abil-ity to differentiate into many specialized cell types. There are two groups of stem cells: embryonic stem (ES) cells and adult stem cells.Human ES cells (hESCs) are derived from early preim-plantation embryos called blastocysts (5 days postfertilization) and are capable of generating all differentiated germ layers in the body by chimera assays or 2-D/3-D differentiation in a Self-renewalStem cellDifferentiationTerminallydifferentiatedcellFigure 15-14. Stem cells. A stem cell is capable of self-renewal (unlimited cell cycle) and differentiation (becoming nondividing cells with specialized functions). Differentiating stem cells often undergo additional cell divisions before they become fully mature cells that carry out specific tissue functions.dish—ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm—and therefore are considered pluripotent. There are two pluripotent states associ-ated with hESCs, one of which is the classic culture with bFGF (basic fibroblast growth factor) and knock out replacer (KSR), termed as “primed” pluripotent state. More recently, “naive” hESC culture methods have been introduced based on mouse studies, by supplementing 2i inhibitors (MEK1 and GSK3β inhibitors) into the medium in addition to bFGF.Adult stem cells are present in and can be isolated from adult tissues. They often are tissue specific and only can gen-erate the cell types comprising a particular tissue in the body; therefore, they are considered multipotent. However, in some cases, they can transdifferentiate into cell types found in other tissues, called transdifferentiation. For example, hematopoietic stem cells are adult stem cells. They reside in bone marrow and are capable of generating all cell types of the blood and immune system. Another example is mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), which is initially identified in the bone marrow (BM) to sup-port hematopoietic stem cell homeostasis. In addition to BM, MSCs are also present in adipose tissue, umbilical cord, pla-centa, amniotic fluid, dental pulp, skeletal muscle, tendons, and synovial, etc., and are reported to obtain the ability to differen-tiate into osteogenic, chondrogenic, and adipogenic lineages in vitro. Due to their characteristics of easy acquisition (from adi-pose tissue, for example), strong ex vivo proliferation, immune-modulatory function, and ability to migrate to damaged tissue, MSCs have been utilized in regenerative medicine.Stem cells can be grown in culture and be induced to dif-ferentiate into a particular cell type, either in vitro or in vivo. With the recent and continually increasing improvement in culturing stem cells, scientists are beginning to understand the molecular mechanisms of stem cell self-renewal and differentia-tion in response to environmental cues. It is believed that dis-covery of the signals that control self-renewal vs differentiation will be extremely important for the therapeutic use of stem cells in treating disease. It is possible that success in the study of the changes in signal transduction pathways in stem cells will lead to the development of therapies to replace diseased or damaged cells in the body using stem cell derivatives. Recently, stem cell research has been transformed by the discovery from the Shinya Yamanaka group and the James Thomsen group, who have found that a simple genetic manipulation can reprogram adult differentiated cells back into pluripotent stem cells.20,21 This exciting discovery not only bypasses the ethical issues of using early embryos to generate ES cells, but also ensures a Brunicardi_Ch15_p0479-p0510.indd   49218/02/19   11:12 AM 493MOLECULAR BIOLOGY, THE ATOMIC THEORY OF DISEASE, AND PRECISION SURGERYCHAPTER 15potentially limitless source of patient-specific stem cells for tis-sue engineering and regenerative medicine.The Atomic Theory of Disease22As early as the 5th century b.c., the ancient Greek Democritus first proposed that matter is composed of indivisible particles called “atoms.” In the 17th and 18th centuries, Isaac Newton described the expansion of gases as rushed atoms into empty space. The existence of atoms was doubted until the discovery of subatomic particles in the 20th century, which demonstrated that the atom was actually divisible into protons, neutrons, and electrons.Over 100 years after this discovery, direct impacts from utilizing subatomic particles were revealed. This began with the discovery of the X-ray. The most advanced and well-applied atomic technologies include accurate imaging such as X-ray computed tomography (CT) scan, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT), and positron emission tomography (PET). Additional applica-tions include radiation oncology, which utilizes ionizing parti-cles to treat malignant diseases by inducing double-strand DNA breaks resulting in programed cell death.The staggering advances in anatomy, physiology, and molecular biology over the past centuries have led us to our current state in which the atom is now the anatomy of the 21st century. As 99% of the body is composed of six elements (oxygen, carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, calcium, and phosphorus), the next great advance in medicine will be bridging the sub-atomic, molecular, and genomic levels by forming an atomic theory of disease, which states that alterations in the composi-tion of subatomic particles are the root cause of disease. The atomic theory of disease would include genetic alterations at the atomic/subatomic level that are akin to single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), in which alleles for a gene differ on the exact nucleotide in a single location, which can change the ulti-mate protein structure. This can lead to subtle changes in func-tion or dramatic results that cause pathology. We hypothesize that on a subatomic level, there could potentially be polymor-phisms as well, in which there are subtle changes in the sea of subatomic particles. Isotopes, discovered 100 years ago, would fall into this category of subatomic polymorphism, as they dif-fer in the number of neutrons present in the atom. Differences in other particles may not change the mass of the atom, but may alter some of the characteristics of the atom. This is where the basic human variations originate because an atomic polymerism would result in particular genetic change. Remarkably, somatic point mutations of KRAS and P53 are caused by a single proton shift in cytosine, which is known as tautomerization of cyto-sine. In turn, the tautomerized cytosine binds with adenine, and not guanine, thus leading to point mutations in KRAS and P53, which are well known driver mutations for many cancers. This is another example of alterations in subatomic particles that directly cause disease.A known example of a change in the subatomic milieu of an element leading to a disease process is that of methemo-globinemia, a disorder characterized by an overabundance of methemoglobin. Methemoglobin contains an oxidized form of iron (carrying an extra electron), as opposed to the reduced form in normal hemoglobin. This results in a shift in the oxygen-hemoglobin dissociation curve to the left, causing hypoxia. Met-hemoglobinemia can be congenital, due to a defect in an enzyme that normally reduces methemoglobin back to hemoglobin, or acquired, caused by breakdown products of drugs that can oxi-dize hemoglobin. Although there is less than 1% of methemo-globin normally present in human tissues, affecting local blood flow and inflammation through its effects on nitric oxide and heme, large quantities can lead to respiratory failure and death.Another example would be exposure to external energy such as radiation that leads to instability of nuclear genome. In Chernobyl and Fukushima, radiolabeled food was metabolized and incorporated into body cells and decay to emit gamma radi-ation, causing DNA damage. This radiation damage occurs pri-marily at a subatomic level from a radiobiologic point of view with a direct or indirect ionization of atoms. The clinical results depend on the tissue characteristics and the equilibrium between the damage applied to normal and diseased tissues.TECHNOLOGIES OF MOLECULAR  AND CELL BIOLOGYDNA CloningSince the advent of recombinant DNA technology three decades ago, hundreds of thousands of genes have been identi-fied. Recombinant DNA technology is the technology that uses advanced enzymatic and microbiologic techniques to manipu-late DNA.23 Pure pieces of any DNA can be inserted into bac-teriophage DNA or other carrier DNA such as plasmids to produce recombinant DNA in bacteria. In this way, DNA can be reconstructed, amplified, and used to manipulate the functions of individual cells or even organisms. This technology, often referred to as DNA cloning, is the basis of all other DNA analy-sis methods. It is only with the awesome power of recombinant DNA technology that the completion of the Human Genome Project was possible. It also has led to the identification of the entire gene complements of organisms such as viruses, bacteria, worms, flies, and plants.Molecular cloning refers to the process of cloning a DNA fragment of interest into a DNA vector that ultimately is deliv-ered into bacterial or mammalian cells or tissues24,25 (Fig. 15-15). This represents a very basic technique that is widely used in almost all areas of biomedical research. DNA vectors often are called plasmids, which are extrachromosomal molecules of DNA that vary in size and can replicate and be transmitted from bacterial cell to cell. Plasmids can be propagated either in the cytoplasm or after insertion, as part of the bacterial chromosome in Escherichia coli. The process of molecular cloning involves several steps of manipulation of DNA. First, the vector plasmid DNA is cleaved with a restriction enzyme to create compatible ends with the foreign DNA fragment to be cloned. The vec-tor and the DNA fragment are then joined in vitro by a DNA ligase. Alternatively, DNA cloning can be simply done through the so-called Gateway Technology that allows for the rapid and efficient transfer of DNA fragments between different cloning vectors while maintaining reading frame and orientation, with-out the use of restriction endonucleases and DNA ligase. The technology, which is based on the site-specific recombination system of bacteriophage l, is simple, fast, robust, and automat-able and thus compatible for high-throughput DNA cloning.Finally, the ligation product or the Gateway reaction prod-uct is introduced into competent host bacteria; this procedure is called transformation, which can be done by either calcium/heat shock or electroporation. Precautions must be taken in every step of cloning to generate the desired DNA construct. Brunicardi_Ch15_p0479-p0510.indd   49318/02/19   11:12 AM 494BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IFigure 15-15. Generation of recombinant DNA. The vector is a circular DNA molecule that is capable of replicating in Escherichia coli cells. Insert DNA (often your favorite gene) is ligated to the vector after ends of both DNA are properly treated with restriction enzymes. Ligated DNA (i.e., the recombinant plasmid DNA) is then transformed into E. coli cells, where it replicates to produce recombinant progenies. E. coli cells carrying the recombinant plasmid can be propagated to yield large quantities of plasmid DNA.InsertDNA of interestDigest withrestriction enzymeVectorLigationRecombinantplasmidIntroduceinto E. coliE. coli containingrecombinant plasmidPropagationE. coli containingrecombinant plasmidThe vector must be correctly prepared to maximize the creation of recombinants; for example, it must be enzymatically treated to prevent self-ligation. Host bacteria must be made sufficiently competent to permit the entry of recombinant plasmids into cells. The selection of desired recombinant plasmid-bearing E. coli normally is achieved by the property of drug resistance conferred by the plasmid vectors. The plasmids encoding mark-ers provide specific resistance to (i.e., the ability to grow in the presence of) antibiotics such as ampicillin, kanamycin, and  tetracycline. The foreign component in the plasmid vector can be a mammalian expression cassette, which can direct expres-sion of foreign genes in mammalian cells. The resulting plasmid vector can be amplified in E. coli to prepare large quantities of DNA for its subsequent applications such as transfection, gene therapy, transgenics, and knockout mice.Detection of Nucleic Acids and ProteinsSouthern Blot Hybridization. Southern blotting refers to the technique of transferring DNA fragments from an electropho-resis gel to a membrane support and the subsequent analysis of the fragments by hybridization with a radioactively or chemi-luminescently labeled probe (Fig. 15-16).26 Southern blotting is named after E. M. Southern, who in 1975 first described the technique of DNA analysis. It enables reliable and efficient analysis of size-fractionated DNA fragments in an immobilized membrane support. Southern blotting is composed of several steps. It normally begins with the digestion of the DNA samples with appropriate restriction enzymes, which will discriminate wild-type and mutant DNA by size and the separation of DNA samples in an agarose gel by electrophoresis with appropriate DNA size markers, called the DNA ladder. The DNA gel is stained with a dye, usually ethidium bromide, and photographed with a ruler laid alongside the gel so that band positions can later be identified on the membrane. The DNA gel then is treated so the DNA fragments are denatured (i.e., strand separation). The DNA then is transferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane by capillary diffusion or under electricity. After immobilization, the DNA can be subjected to hybridization analysis, enabling bands with sequence similarity to a radioactively or chemilumi-nescently labeled probe to be identified.The development of Southern transfer and the associated hybridization techniques made it possible for the first time to obtain information about the physical organization of single and multicopy sequences in complex genomes. The later applica-tion of Southern blotting hybridization to the study of restriction fragment length polymorphisms opened up new possibilities DNA is digested withrestriction enzymes.DNA fragments are denaturedand separated by gelelectrophoresis.DNA fragments are transferredto a membrane filter.The filter is hybridized with a radioactive DNA probe.DNA fragment that is hybridized to the radioactive DNA is detected by autoradiography.Radioactive probeFigure 15-16. Southern blotting. Restriction enzymatic fragments of DNA are separated by agarose gel electrophoresis, transferred to a membrane filter, and then hybridized to a radioactive probe.such as genetic fingerprinting and prenatal diagnosis of genetic diseases.Northern Blot Hybridization. Northern blotting refers to the technique of size fractionation of RNA in a gel and the transfer-ring of an RNA sample to a solid support (membrane) in such a manner that the relative positions of the RNA molecules are maintained. The resulting membrane then is hybridized with a labeled probe complementary to the mRNA of interest. Signals generated from detection of the membrane can be used to deter-mine the size and abundance of the target RNA. In principle, Brunicardi_Ch15_p0479-p0510.indd   49418/02/19   11:12 AM 495MOLECULAR BIOLOGY, THE ATOMIC THEORY OF DISEASE, AND PRECISION SURGERYCHAPTER 15Northern blot hybridization is similar to Southern blot hybrid-ization (and hence its name), with the exception that RNA, not DNA, is on the membrane. Although reverse-transcriptase PCR has been used in many applications (described in the next sec-tion, “Polymerase Chain Reaction”), Northern analysis is the only method that provides information regarding mRNA size and has remained a standard method for detection and quantita-tion of mRNA. The process of Northern hybridization involves several steps, as does Southern hybridization, including elec-trophoresis of RNA samples in an agarose-formaldehyde gel, transfer to a membrane support, and hybridization to a radio-actively labeled DNA probe. Data from hybridization allow Etc.Double-strandedDNAHeat toseparatestrandsHybridization of primers+DNA polymerase+dATP+dGTP+dCTP+dTTP5'5'DNAfromsynthesisprimersStep 1Step 2Step 3First cycleSeparate DNA strandsand add primerDNAsynthesisRegion ofdouble-stranded DNA to beamplifiedDNA oligonucleotideprimersSeparate DNA strandsand annual primerDNAsynthesisSeparate DNA strandsand annual primerDNAsynthesisFirst cycleProducing two double-strandedDNA moleculesSecond cycleProducing four double-strandedDNA moleculesThird cycleProducing eight double-strandedDNA moleculesABFigure 15-17. Amplification of DNA using the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technique. Knowledge of the DNA sequence to be ampli-fied is used to design two synthetic DNA oligonucleotides, each complementary to the sequence on one strand of the DNA double helix at opposite ends of the region to be amplified. These oligonucleotides serve as primers for in vitro DNA synthesis, which is performed by a DNA polymerase, and they determine the segment of the DNA that is amplified. A. PCR starts with a double-stranded DNA, and each cycle of the reaction begins with a brief heat treatment to separate the two strands (Step 1). After strand separation, cooling of the DNA in the presence of a large excess of the two primer DNA oligonucleotides allows these primers to hybridize to complementary sequences in the two DNA strands (Step 2). This mixture is then incubated with DNA polymerase and the four deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates so that DNA is synthesized, starting from the two primers (Step 3). The entire cycle is then begun again by a heat treatment to separate the newly synthesized DNA strands. B. As the procedure is performed over and over again, the newly synthesized fragments serve as templates in their turn, and, within a few cycles, the predominant DNA is identical to the sequence bracketed by and including the two primers in the original template. Of the DNA put into the original reaction, only the sequence bracketed by the two primers is amplified because there are no primers attached anywhere else. In the example illustrated in B, three cycles of reaction produce 16 DNA chains, eight of which (boxed in brown) are the same length as and correspond exactly to one or the other strand of the original bracketed sequence shown at the far left; the other strands contain extra DNA downstream of the original sequence, which is replicated in the first few cycles. After three more cycles, 240 of the 256 DNA chains cor-respond exactly to the original bracketed sequence, and after several more cycles, essentially all of the DNA strands have this unique length. quantification of steady-state mRNA levels and, at the same time, provide information related to the presence, size, and integrity of discrete mRNA species. Thus, Northern blot analy-sis, also termed RNA gel blot analysis, commonly is used in molecular biology studies relating to gene expression.Polymerase Chain Reaction. PCR is an in vitro method for the polymerase-directed amplification of specific DNA sequences using two oligonucleotide primers that hybridize to opposite strands and flank the region of interest in the tar-get DNA (Fig. 15-17).27 One cycle of PCR reaction involves template denaturation, primer annealing, and the extension of Brunicardi_Ch15_p0479-p0510.indd   49518/02/19   11:12 AM 496BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ithe annealed primers by DNA polymerase. Because the primer extension products synthesized in one cycle can serve as a template in the next, the number of target DNA copies nearly doubles at each cycle. Thus, a repeated series of cycles result in the exponential accumulation of a specific fragment in which the termini are sharply defined by the 5′ ends of the primers. The introduction of the thermostable DNA polymerase (e.g., Taq polymerase) transforms the PCR into a simple and robust reaction. The reaction components (e.g., template, primers, Taq polymerase, 2′-deoxynucleoside 5′-triphosphates, and buffer) could all be assembled and the amplification reaction carried out by simply cycling the temperatures within the reaction tube. The specificity and yield in amplifying a particular DNA frag-ment by PCR reaction are affected by the proper setting of the reaction parameters (e.g., enzyme, primer, and Mg2+ concen-tration, as well as the temperature cycling profile). Modifying various PCR parameters to optimize the specificity of amplifi-cation yields more homogenous products, even in rare template reactions.The emergence of the PCR technique has dramatically altered the approach to both fundamental and applied bio-logic problems. The capability of amplifying a specific DNA fragment from a gene or the whole genome greatly advances the study of the gene and its function. It is simple, yet robust, speedy, and most of all, flexible. As a recombinant DNA tool, it underlies almost all of molecular biology. This revolution-ary technique enabled the modern methods for the isolation of genes, construction of a DNA vector, introduction of alterations into DNA, and quantitation of gene expression, making it a fun-damental cornerstone of genetic and molecular analysis.Immunoblotting and Immunoprecipitation. Analyses of proteins are primarily carried out by antibody-directed immu-nologic techniques. For example, Western blotting, also called immunoblotting, is performed to detect protein levels in a popu-lation of cells or tissues, whereas immunoprecipitation is used to concentrate proteins from a larger pool. Using specific antibod-ies, microscopic analysis called immunofluorescence and immu-nohistochemistry is possible for the subcellular localization and expression of proteins in cells or tissues, respectively.Immunoblotting refers to the process of identifying a pro-tein from a mixture of proteins (Fig. 15-18). It consists of five steps: (a) sample preparation; (b) electrophoresis (separation of a protein mixture by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis); (c) transfer (the electrophoretic transfer of proteins from gel onto membrane support [e.g., nitrocel-lulose, nylon, or polyvinylidene difluoride]); (d) staining (the subsequent immunodetection of target proteins with specific antibody); and (e) development (colorimetric, chemilumines-cent, and recently fluorescent visualization of the antibody-recognized protein). Thus, immunoblotting combines the resolution of gel electrophoresis with the specificity of immu-nochemical detection. Immunoblotting is a powerful tool used to determine a number of important characteristics of proteins. For example, immunoblotting analysis will determine the pres-ence and the quantity of a protein in a given cellular condition and its relative molecular weight. Immunoblotting also can be used to determine whether posttranslational modification such as phosphorylation has occurred on a protein. Importantly, through immunoblotting analysis, a comparison of the protein levels and modification states in normal vs diseased tissues is possible.Cell tissue lysates• Sample  preparation• Gel  electrophoresis  Separation of proteins• Western  transfer  Transfer of proteins   to membrane• Immunostaining  Block membrane  1°/2° antibody staining• Development  Colorimetric/chemiluminescence detection123456123456Figure 15-18. Immunoblotting. Proteins are prepared from cells or tissues, separated according to size by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, and transferred to a membrane filter. Detection of a protein of interest can be done by sequential incubation with a primary antibody directed against the protein, and then with an enzyme-conjugated secondary antibody that rec-ognizes the primary antibody. Visualization of the protein is carried out by using colorimetric or luminescent substrates for the conju-gated enzyme.Immunoprecipitation, another widely used immunochemi-cal technique, is a method that uses antibody to enrich a pro-tein of interest and any other proteins that are associated with it  (Fig. 15-19). The principle of the technique lies in the property of a strong and specific affinity between antibodies and their anti-gens to locate and pull down target proteins in solution. Once the antibody-antigen (target protein) complexes are formed in the solution, they are collected and purified using small agarose beads with covalently attached protein A or protein G. Both protein A and protein G specifically interact with the antibodies, Brunicardi_Ch15_p0479-p0510.indd   49618/02/19   11:12 AM 497MOLECULAR BIOLOGY, THE ATOMIC THEORY OF DISEASE, AND PRECISION SURGERYCHAPTER 15Enriched YFP & YBPsWashSDS-PAGEAnti-YFP beadsAnti-YFP conjugated to beadsYour favorite protein (YFP)YFP-binding proteins (YBPs)Junk proteinsFigure 15-19. Immunoprecipitation. Proteins prepared from cells or tissues can be enriched using an antibody directed against them. The anti-body is first conjugated to agarose beads and then incubated with protein mixture. Due to the spe-cific high-affinity interaction between antibody and its antigen (the protein), the antigen-antibody complex can be collected on beads by centrifuga-tion. The immunoprecipitated protein can then be analyzed by immunoblotting. Alternatively, if pro-teins are radiolabeled in cells or tissues, detection of immunoprecipitated proteins can be achieved by simple sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis followed by autoradiography.thus forming a large immobilized complex of antibody-antigen bound to beads. The purified protein can then be analyzed by a number of biochemical methods. When immunoprecipitation is combined with immunoblotting, it can be used for the sensitive detection of proteins in low concentrations, which would other-wise be difficult to detect. Moreover, combined immunoprecipi-tation and immunoblotting analysis is very efficient in analyzing the protein-protein interactions or determining the posttransla-tional modifications of proteins. In addition, immunoprecipi-tated proteins can be used as preparative steps for assays such as intrinsic or associated enzymatic activities. The success of immunoprecipitation is influenced by two major factors: (a) the abundance of the protein in the original preparation and (b) the specificity and affinity of the antibody for this protein.Recently, immunoprecipitation is even used to enrich modi-fied DNA (for example, 5-methylcytosine) for bisulfite sequenc-ing. Besides proteins of interest, specific antibodies can also be raised against specially modified DNA. Like the protein immuno-precipitation, modified DNA can be pulled down, taking advan-tage of the specificity and affinity of antibody to antigen.DNA Microarray. Now that the human genome sequence is completed, the primary focus of biologists is rapidly shifting toward gaining an understanding of how genes function. One of the interesting findings about the human genome is that there are only approximately 25,000 to 30,000 protein-encoding genes. However, it is known that genes and their products function in a complicated and yet orchestrated fashion and that the surprisingly small number of genes from the genome sequence is sufficient to make a human being. Nonetheless, with the tens of thousands of genes present in the genome, traditional methods in molecular biology, which generally work on a one-gene-in-one-experiment basis, cannot generate the whole picture of genome function. In the past several years, a new technology called DNA microarray has attracted tremendous interest among biologists as well as cli-nicians. This technology promises to monitor the whole genome on a single chip so researchers can have a better picture of the interactions among thousands of genes simultaneously.DNA microarray, also called gene chip, DNA chip, and gene array, refers to large sets of probes of known sequences orderly arranged on a small chip, enabling many hybridization reactions to be carried out in parallel in a small device  (Fig. 15-20).28 Like Southern and Northern hybridization, the underlying principle of this technology is the remarkable abil-ity of nucleic acids to form a duplex between two strands with complementary base sequences. DNA microarray provides a medium for matching known and unknown DNA samples based on base-pairing rules and automating the process of identify-ing the unknowns. Microarrays require specialized robotics and imaging equipment that spot the samples on a glass or nylon substrate, carry out the hybridization, and analyze the data gener-ated. DNA microarrays containing different sets of genes from a variety of organisms are now commercially available, allowing biologists to simply purchase the chips and perform hybridiza-tion and data collection. The massive scale of microarray experi-ments requires the aid of computers. They are used during the capturing of the image of the hybridized target, the conversion of the image into usable measures of the extent of hybridization, and the interpretation of the extent of hybridization into a mean-ingful measure of the amount of the complementary sequence in the target. Some data-analysis packages are available commer-cially or can be found in the core facility of certain institutions.DNA microarray technology has produced many signifi-cant results in quite different areas of application. There are two major application forms for the technology: identifica-tion of sequence (gene/gene mutation) in multiple regions of a genome and determination of expression level (abundance) of large numbers of genes simultaneously. For example, analysis of genomic DNA detects amplifications and deletions found in human tumors. Differential gene expression analysis also has uncovered networks of genes differentially present in can-cers that cannot be distinguished by conventional means. Sig-nificantly, recent advancements in next-generation sequencing (e.g., Solexa and 454 technology) have demonstrated the preci-sion and speed to analyze gene expression in any genome.Next-Generation Sequencing.29,30 First-generation sequenc-ing, also termed Sanger’s sequencing, requires a single-stranded DNA template, a specific DNA primer, a DNA polymerase, nor-mal deoxynucleoside triphosphates (dNTPs), and modified di-deoxynucleotidetriphosphates (ddNTPs). In the process of DNA sequencing, DNA polymerase adds random dNTP or ddNTP Brunicardi_Ch15_p0479-p0510.indd   49718/02/19   11:12 AM 498BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART ICell #1Cell #2mRNAcDNADNA microarrayDNA microarray datacDNAmRNAFigure 15-20. DNA microarrays. DNA microarrays, also referred to as gene chips, have arrayed oligonucleotides or com-plementary DNAs (cDNAs) corresponding to tens or hundreds of distinct genes. DNA microarray is used to comparatively analyze gene expression in different cells or tissues. Messenger RNAs (mRNAs) extracted from different sources are converted into cDNAs, which are then labeled with different fluorescent dyes. The two fluorescent cDNA probes are mixed and hybridized to the same DNA microarrays. The ratio of red to green fluorescence at each spot on the chip represents the relative expression of levels of that gene between two different cells. In the example shown in the figure, cDNA from cell #1 is labeled with red fluorescence and that from cell #2 is labeled with green fluorescence. On the micro-array, red spots demonstrate that the gene in the cell sample #1 is expressed at a higher level than the corresponding gene in cell sample #2. The green spots indicate that the gene in the cell sam-ple #2 is expressed at a higher level than the corresponding gene in the cell sample #1. Yellow spots represent equal expression of the gene in both cell samples.after the primer. If ddNTP is incorporated at the end of the chain, it terminizes the reaction and results in DNA fragments of different sizes. The ddNTPs could be radioactively or fluo-rescently labeled for auto-machine detection. Usually, Sanger’s sequencing is able to read sequence below 1 kb with the quality deteriorating after 700 bp. The accuracy and success rate largely depends on the DNA polymerase used.Recombinant DNA technology greatly impacts the com-pletion of the Human Genome Project due to the invention of shotgun sequencing, which includes breaking the genome DNA into small pieces and randomly cloning those pieces into DNA vectors that are easily sequenced. Based on the overlapping sequence of each clone, computer analysis can be programmed to map and align the DNA sequence that will ultimately cover the whole human genome.Based on shotgun sequencing, as the sequencing technol-ogies advance, next-generation sequencing (NGS), also called second-generation sequencing, has become one of the most powerful tools to analyze DNA mutation, identify epigenetic modification, and profile gene expression or ncRNA expression.31 The next-generation sequencing process usually includes library construction, sequencing, and data analysis. There are three major NGS platforms: Roche 454, Life Technologies Ion Tor-rent, and Illumina Solexa. Take the Illumina next-generation sequencing as an example: DNA are shared or digested into small pieces and then used to generate a DNA library with adapt-ers on both ends of each DNA piece. Then, the DNA library is diluted and loaded on a chamber of a slide, called a lane, for cluster amplification. Cycled fluorescent deoxyribonucleotide triphosphates (dNTPs) are then added to the chamber to enable DNA polymerization, resulting in different fluorescent emis-sion representing different dNTP reading on different clusters, into a microscope. The fluorescent signal is transformed into sequencing data that will be aligned and mapped to a standard genome database. The advantages of next-generation sequenc-ing include the following: no necessity of DNA cloning; fast and cost-effective; and a huge amount of data to give good depth and accuracy of the sequence.Based on the applications, the most common next-generation sequencing technologies for whole-genome sequencing are whole-genome DNA sequencing, whole-genome bisulfite sequencing (BS-seq), RNA sequencing (RNA-seq), and chro-matin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) sequencing (ChIP-seq). Whole-genome DNA sequencing is purely to sequence the DNA sequence of a genome without any preprocessing of the DNA, reflecting any deletions, replications, and mutations within the genomic DNA. Given that the genomic information for human is enormous, to achieve great depth and accuracy the genome needs to be sequenced multiple times to reach statistic significance and pass quality control. Therefore, whole-genome DNA sequencing is still considered to be costly for diagnosis as well as for research purposes. Under clinical settings, one of the most applied DNA sequencing technologies is whole-exome sequencing, i.e., using techniques to capture and analyze exons in all coding genes, given that most known diseases are due to mutations in spliced-in regions of coding genes. Whole-exome sequencing is mostly used for detecting single nucleotide vari-ants and is less reliable in detecting insertion-deletion variants or small copy number variants.BS-seq is commonly used to identify DNA methyla-tion on the genome (5-methylcytosine [5mC]). The process always involves a bisulfite treatment of DNA before library Brunicardi_Ch15_p0479-p0510.indd   49818/02/19   11:12 AM 499MOLECULAR BIOLOGY, THE ATOMIC THEORY OF DISEASE, AND PRECISION SURGERYCHAPTER 15construction, during which the unmethylated cytosine will be transformed to a uracil, resulting in reading as a thymine in data output, whereas 5mC is protected and remains as cytosine in data output. Thus, 5mC and cytosine are distinguished this way. To perform whole-genome BS-seq, the library construc-tion starts with a decent amount of DNA followed by a complete conversion of unmethylated cytosine. Because it is also counted as whole-genome sequencing, a certain depth of data needs to be achieved for accurate and convincing results. To develop an affordable genome-wide DNA methylation analysis, the reduced representation bisulfite sequencing (RRBS) approach has been applied to enrich CpG-dense regions of the genome by digesting genomic DNA using a methylation-insensitive restric-tion enzyme, usually MspI. This method covers a majority of promoters as well as some repetitive regions in the genome.RNA-seq is usually performed to analyze transcription for the same purpose as performing a microarray. However, RNA-seq is more accurate and provides more information such as splicing variants than traditional microarray. Usually, cDNA that is reversely transcribed from extracted RNA is used to generate libraries. Depending on the needs, mRNA and ncRNA can be enriched in different protocols for RNA extraction. Currently, techniques have been improved to perform RNA profiling on a single cell level. Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) allows expression analysis of individual cells in a population. One use is to examine heterogeneity in tumor cells. Although low copy number genes are usually poorly detected, scRNA-seq on a large number of cells can reveal rare cell subpopula-tions and uncommon RNA expression patterns among different subpopulations.ChIP-seq is always used to map the location of a DNA-binding protein in the genome. Prior to library construction, ChIP is performed to enrich DNA bound by the protein of interest (POI). First, POI and DNA are cross-linked before sonication. Then, a specific antibody is used to pull down POI and attached DNA fragments. After the protein and DNA are reverse cross-linked, DNA is purified to make the ChIP-seq library. If using an antibody against particular transcription fac-tor (TF), DNA sequences bound by this TF are pulled down CellisolationPrimaryculturePropagationTissuesampleProduction of recombinant proteinsAnalysis of gene functionTransfectionwith DNAABFigure 15-21. Cell culture and transfection. A. Primary cells can be isolated from tissues and cultured in medium for a limited period of time. After genetic manipulations to over-come the cell aging process, primary cells can be immortalized into cell lines for long-term culture. B. DNA can be introduced into cells to produce recombinant gene products or to ana-lyze the biologic functions of the gene.and examined. The TF binding consensus sequences is then pre-dicted, and if the TF binds to a promoter region, it is likely that the gene using this promoter is regulated by this TF. If using an antibody against an epigenetic modification, the modified regions are marked up into the genome to facilitate identifica-tion of potential epigenetic regulating mechanisms.By using next-generation sequencing technology, any potential mutations in a patient can be scrutinized as well as any defects in epigenetic modification. By combining data from different kinds of sequencing (DNA-seq, RNA-seq, ChIP-seq), better understanding of mutation or transcription-caused diseases aligning with epigenetic regulation can be achieved, which will greatly facilitate the diagnosis of patients and per-sonalization of medicine in a fast and economic way by prevent-ing unnecessary medical costs and procedures.Third-generation sequencing has emerged rapidly at the research level to involve single molecule real-time sequencing (SMRT). Although first developed and marketed by Pacific Biosciences (Pac Bio), Roche is now leading this technology. Third-generation sequencing allows amplification-free single-molecule sequencing with read length extension up to mega-bases and reduced sequencing coverage bias. It can be used to build the gap in the human genome (for example, low complex-ity regions), provide access to structural genomic variants, and simultaneously analyze genome-wide single-nucleotide methyl-ation. So far, clinical application and research is heavily depen-dent on NGS, especially standardizing and reducing the cost of post-NGS analysis. Third-generation sequencing is under fast development and has been adapted to aid and append NGS.Cell ManipulationsCell Culture. Cell culture has become one of the most power-ful tools in biomedical laboratories, as cultured cells are being used in a diversity of biologic fields ranging from biochemistry to molecular and cellular biology.32 Through their ability to be maintained in vitro, cells can be manipulated by the introduc-tion of genes of interest (cell transfection) and be transferred into in vivo biologic receivers (cell transplantation) to study the biologic effect of the interested genes (Fig. 15-21). In common Brunicardi_Ch15_p0479-p0510.indd   49918/02/19   11:12 AM 500BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ilaboratory settings, cells are cultured either as a monolayer (in which cells grow as one layer on culture dishes), considered 2-D, or in suspension or biomedical material skeleton such as hydrogel, considered 3-D.It is important to know the wealth of information concern-ing cell culturing before attempting the procedure. For example, conditions of culture will depend on the cell types to be cultured (e.g., origins of the cells such as epithelial or fibroblasts, or pri-mary vs immortalized/transformed cells). It is also necessary to use a cell type-specific culture medium that varies in combi-nation of growth factors and serum concentrations. If primary cells are derived from human patients or animals, some com-mercial resources have a variety of culture media available for testing. Generally, cells are manipulated in a sterile hood, and the working surfaces are wiped with 70% to 80% ethyl alcohol solution. Cultured cells are usually maintained in a humidified 5% carbon dioxide incubator at 37°C (98.6°F) to maintain a Ph value raging from 7.2 ∼ 7.4 and need to be examined daily under an inverted microscope to check for possible contamination and confluency (the area cells occupy on the dish). In some cases, cells need to be maintained in hypoxia, and the oxygen input could be reduced to as low as 1%. As a general rule, cells should be fed with fresh medium every 2 to 3 days and split when they reach confluency. Depending on the growth rate of cells, the actual time and number of plates required to split cells in two varies from cell line to cell line. Splitting a monolayer requires the detachment of cells from plates by using a trypsin or colla-genase treatment, of which concentration and time period vary depending on cell lines. If cultured cells grow continuously in suspension, they are split or subcultured by dilution.Because cell lines may change their properties when cul-tured, it is not possible to maintain cell lines in culture indefi-nitely. Therefore, it is essential to store cells at various time passages for future use. The common procedure to use is cryo-preservation. The solution for cryopreservation is usually fetal calf serum containing 10% dimethyl sulfoxide or glycerol, stored in liquid nitrogen (−196°C [−320.8°F]) for years of pres-ervation. However, the viability and health of cells when thawed will decrease over time even in liquid nitrogen.Cell Transfection. Cells are cultured for two reasons: to main-tain and to manipulate them (see Fig. 15-21). The transfer of foreign macromolecules, such as nucleic acid, into living cells provides an efficient method for studying a variety of cellular processes and functions at the molecular level. DNA transfec-tion has become an important tool for studying the regulation and function of genes. The cDNA to be expressed should be in a plasmid vector, behind an appropriate promoter working in mammalian cells (e.g., the constitutively active cytomegalo-virus promoter or inducible promoter). Depending on the cell type, many ways of introducing DNA into mammalian cells have been developed. Commonly used approaches include cal-cium phosphate, electroporation, liposome-mediated transfec-tion, the nonliposomal formulation, and the use of viral vectors. These methods have shown variable success when attempting to transfect a wide variety of cells. Transfection can be performed in the presence or absence of serum. It is suggested to test the transfection efficiency of cell lines of interest by comparing transfection with several different approaches. For a detailed transfection protocol, it is best to follow the manufacturer’s instructions for the particular reagent. General considerations for a successful transfection depend on several parameters, such as the quality and quantity of DNA and cell culture (type of cell and growth phase). To minimize variations in both of these in transfection experiments, it is best to use cells that are healthy, proliferate well, and are plated at a constant density.Depending on the transfection method, DNA expression can be transient or stable. Using calcium phosphate and lipo-some-mediated transfection, after DNA is introduced into the cells it is normally maintained epitopically in cells and will be diluted while host cells undergo cell division. Therefore, func-tional assays should be performed 24 to 72 hours after transfec-tion, also termed transient transfection. In many applications, it is important to study the long-term effects of DNA in cells by stable transfection. Thus, electroporation and viral vector are often used in these situations to enable integration of ectopic DNA into the host genome. Stable cell clones can be selected when plasmids carry an antibiotic-resistant marker. In the pres-ence of antibiotics, only those cells that continuously carry the antibiotic-resistant marker (after generations of cell division) can survive. One application of stable transfection is the gen-eration of transgenic or knockout mouse models, in which the transgene has to be integrated in the mouse genome in the ES cells, followed by microinjection of those transgenic ES cells into blastocysts to generate chimera mice. Stable cells also can be transplanted into host organs to test the effect of transgenic cells in vivo.Genetic ManipulationsUnderstanding how genes control the growth and differentia-tion of the mammalian organism has been the most challenging topic of modern research. It is essential for us to understand how genetic mutations and chemicals lead to the pathologic condi-tion of human bodies. The knowledge and ability to change the genetic program will inevitably make a great impact on society and have far-reaching effects on how we think of ourselves.The mouse has become firmly established as the primary experimental model for studying how genes control mammalian development. Genetically altered mice are powerful tools to study the function and regulation of genes as well as modeling human diseases.33 The gene function can be studied by cre-ating mutant mice through homologous recombination (gene knockout). A gene of interest (GOI) also can be intro-duced into the mouse (transgenic mouse) to study its effect on development or diseases. Because mouse models do not pre-cisely represent human biology, genetic manipulations of human somatic or ES cells provide a great means for the understanding of the molecular networks in human cells in addition to mouse models. In all cases, the gene to be manipulated must first be cloned. Gene cloning has been made easy by recombinant DNA technology and the availability of human and mouse genomes (see “Human Genome”). The following section briefly describes the technologies and the principles behind combining both mouse genetics and human cell culture to explore gene function and disease mechanisms.Transgenic Mice. During the past 20 years, DNA cloning and other techniques have allowed the introduction of new genetic material into the mouse germline. As early as 1980, the first genetic material was successfully introduced into the mouse germline by using pronuclear microinjection of DNA (Fig. 15-22). These animals, called transgenic, contain for-eign DNA within their genomes. In simple terms, a transgenic mouse is created by the microinjection of ectopic DNA into the one-celled mouse embryo to induce integration, allowing the 4Brunicardi_Ch15_p0479-p0510.indd   50018/02/19   11:12 AM 501MOLECULAR BIOLOGY, THE ATOMIC THEORY OF DISEASE, AND PRECISION SURGERYCHAPTER 15DNAPronucleusDNA microinjected intopronucleus of fertilized eggFoster mothercarryingmicroinjected DNATransgenicmouseFigure 15-22. Transgenic mouse tech-nology. DNA is microinjected into a pro-nucleus of a fertilized egg, which is then transplanted into a foster mother. The microinjected egg develops offspring mice. Incorporation of the injected DNA into offspring is indicated by the differ-ent coat color of offspring mice.efficient introduction of cloned genes into the following devel-oping mouse somatic tissues, as well as into the germline.Designs of a Transgene The transgenic technique has proven to be extremely important for basic investigations of gene regu-lation, creation of animal models of human disease, and genetic engineering of livestock. The design of a transgene construct is a simple task. Like constructs used in cell transfection, a simple transgene construct consists of a protein-encoding gene and a promoter that precedes it. The most common applications for the use of transgenic mice are similar to those in the cell culture system: (a) to study the functions of proteins encoded by the transgene, (b) to analyze the tissue-specific and developmental-stage–specific activity of a gene promoter, and (c) to generate reporter lines to facilitate biomedical studies. Examples of the first application include overexpression of oncogenes, growth factors, hormones, and other key regulatory genes, as well as genes of viral origins. Overexpression of the transgene normally represents gain-of-function mutations. The tissue distribution or expression of a transgene is determined primarily by cis-acting promoter enhancer elements within or in the immediate vicin-ity of the genes themselves. Thus, controlled expression of the transgene can be made possible by using an inducible or tissue-specific promoter. Furthermore, transgenic mice carry-ing dominant negative mutations of a regulatory gene also have been generated. For example, a truncated growth factor receptor that can bind to the ligand, but loses its catalytic activity when expressed in mice, can block the growth factor binding to the endogenous protein. In this way, the transgenic mice exhibit a loss of function of phenotype, possibly resembling the knockout of the endogenous gene. The second application of the trans-genic expression is to analyze the gene promoter of interest. The gene promoter of interest normally is fused to a reporter gene that encodes β-galactosidase (also called LacZ), luciferase, or green fluorescence protein. Chemical staining of LacZ activity or detection of chemiluminescence/fluorescence can easily visu-alize the expression of the reporter gene. The third application originates from the second: when the activity of the promoter is known, a fluorescent reporter gene (such as GFP) will be driven by the tissue-specific promoter, therefore labeling a particular type of cells at a particular stage. This application is generally used to isolate a special cell type expressing the GFP reporter by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS), as well as lineage-tracing experiments.Production of Transgenic Mice The success of generating transgenic mice is largely dependent on the proper quality and concentration of the DNA supplied for microinjection. For DNA to be microinjected into mouse embryos, it should be linear-ized by restriction digestion to increase the chance of proper transgene integration. Concentration of DNA should be accu-rately determined. Mice that develop from injected eggs often are termed founder mice.Genotyping of Transgenic Mice The screening of founder mice and the transgenic lines derived from the founders is accomplished by determining the integration of the injected gene into the genome. This normally is achieved by performing PCR or Southern blot analysis with a small amount of DNA extracted from the mouse tail. Once a given founder mouse is identified to be transgenic, it will be mated to begin establish-ing a transgenic line. Usually, for a given gene, more than one transgenic line is generated to assure that the phenotype is due to transgene but not to the interruption of the gene where the transgene integrates into.Analysis of Phenotype of Transgenic Mice Phenotypes of transgenic mice are dictated by both the expression pattern and biologic functions of the transgene. Depending on the promoter and the transgene, phenotypes can be predictable or unpredict-able. Elucidation of the functions of the transgene-encoded pro-tein in vitro often offers some clue to what the protein might function to do in vivo. When a constitutively active promoter is used to drive the expression of transgenes, mice should express the gene in every tissue; however, this mouse model may not allow the identification and study of the earliest events in dis-ease pathogenesis. Ideally, the use of tissue-specific or induc-ible promoter allows one to determine if the pathogenic protein leads to a reversible or irreversible disease process in a cell-autonomous manner. For example, rat insulin promoter can tar-get transgene expression exclusively in the β-cells of pancreatic islets. The phenotype of insulin promoter-mediated transgenic mice is projected to affect the function of human β-cells.Gene Knockout in Mice. The first recorded knockout mouse was created by Mario R. Capecchi, Sir Martin J. Evans, and Oliver Smithies in 1989. They were awarded the 2007 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. The isolation and genetic manipulation of mouse ES cells represents one of the most important milestones for modern genetic technologies.34 Sev-eral unique properties of ES cells, such as the pluripotency to differentiate into all germ layers in an embryo, including the germline, make them an efficient vehicle to introduce genetic alterations in mice. An important breakthrough from this idea is to generate gene-targeted mutation in mice, first by introduc-ing the targeting vector into the ES cells, allowing selection Brunicardi_Ch15_p0479-p0510.indd   50118/02/19   11:12 AM 502BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IES cells growingin tissue cultureAltered versionof target geneconstructed bygenetic engineeringLet each cellgrow to forma colonyTest for the rarecolony in whichthe DNA fragmenthas replaced one copy of the normal geneES cells with one copy of target genereplaced by mutant geneInjectES cellsintoearly embryoFemale mouseMate and wait3 daysIsolatedearlyembryoEarly embryo partlyformed fromES cellsIntroduceearly embryo intopseudopregnantmouseSomatic cellsof offspring tested forpresence ofaltered gene, and selected mice bredto test for genein germline cellsTransgenic mouse with one copy of target genereplaced by altered gene in germlineABBirthIntroduce a DNA fragmentcontaining altered geneinto many cellsFigure 15-23. Knockout mouse technology. Summary of the procedures used for making gene replacements in mice. In the first step (A), an altered version of the gene is introduced into cultured embryonic stem (ES) cells. Only a few rare ES cells will have their corresponding normal genes replaced by the altered gene through a homologous recombination event. Although the procedure is often laborious, these rare cells can be identified and cultured to produce many descendants, each of which carries an altered gene in place of one of its two normal corresponding genes. In the next step of the procedure (B), these altered ES cells are injected into a very early mouse embryo; the cells are incorporated into the growing embryo, and a mouse produced by such an embryo will contain some somatic cells that carry the altered gene. Some of these mice also will contain germline cells that contain the altered gene. When bred with a normal mouse, some of the progeny of these mice will contain the altered gene in all of their cells. If two such mice are in turn bred (not shown), some of the progeny will contain two altered genes (one on each chromosome) in all of their cells. If the original gene alteration completely inactivates the function of the gene, these mice are known as knockout mice. When such mice are missing genes that function during development, they often die with specific defects long before they reach adulthood. These defects are carefully analyzed to help decipher the normal function of the missing gene. (Reproduced with permission from Alberts B, Johnson A, Lewis J, et al: Molecular Biology of the Cell, 6th ed. New York, NY: WW Norton Company; 2015.)for successful homologous recombination in a dish, then intro-ducing the selected ES clone into the blastocysts, and finally recovering animals bearing the mutant allele from the germline (Fig. 15-23). This not only makes mouse genetics a powerful approach to address important gene functions, but also identifies the mouse as a great system to model human disease.Targeting Vector The basic concept in building a target vec-tor to knock out a gene is to use two segments of homologous sequence to a GOI that flank a part of the gene essential for functions (e.g., the coding region). In the targeting vector, a pos-itive selectable marker (e.g., the neo gene) is placed between the homology arms. Upon the homologous recombination between the arms of the vector and the corresponding genomic regions of the GOI in ES cells, the positive selectable marker will replace the essential segment of the target gene, thus creating a null allele. In addition, a negative selectable marker also can Brunicardi_Ch15_p0479-p0510.indd   50218/02/19   11:12 AM 503MOLECULAR BIOLOGY, THE ATOMIC THEORY OF DISEASE, AND PRECISION SURGERYCHAPTER 15be used alone or in combination with the positive selectable marker, but must be placed outside of the homologous arms to enrich for homologous recombination. To create a conditional knockout (i.e., gene knockout in a spatiotemporal fashion), site-specific recombinases such as the popular cre-loxP system are used. If the consensus loxP sequences that are recognized by cre recombinases are properly designed into targeting loci, con-trolled expression of the recombinase as a transgene can result in the site-specific recombination at the right time and in the right place (i.e., cell type or tissue). This method, often referred to as conditional knockout, is markedly useful to prevent devel-opmental compensations and to introduce null mutations in the adult mouse that would otherwise be lethal. To bring in addi-tional control to tissue-specific cre, an inducible cre could be adopted on top of the tissue-specific promoter. The most popu-lar inducible cre includes CreER: CreER encodes a cre fused with estrogen receptor located to cytosol. With the signaling of tamoxifen, CreER is released and then translocates into the nucleus to induce the recombination of loxP. Therefore, the tim-ing of recombination could be precisely determined by control-ling the time of administering tamoxifen. Overall, this cre-loxP system allows for spatial and temporal control over transgene expression and takes advantage of inducers with minimal pleio-tropic effects.Introduction of the Targeting Vector into ES Cells ES cell lines can be obtained from other investigators or commer-cial sources or established from blastocyst-stage embryos. To maintain ES cells at their full developmental potential, opti-mal growth conditions should be provided in culture. If cul-ture conditions are inappropriate or inadequate, ES cells may acquire genetic lesions or alter their gene expression patterns and consequently decrease their pluripotency. Excellent proto-cols are available in public domains or in mouse facilities in most institutions.To alter the genome of ES cells, the targeting vector DNA then is transfected into ES cells. Electroporation is the most widely used and the most efficient transfection method for ES cells. Similar procedures for stable cell transfection are used for selecting ES cells that carry the targeting vector. High-quality, targeting-vector DNA free of contaminating chemicals is first linearized and then electroporated into ES cells. Stable ES cells are selected in the presence of a positive selectable antibiotic drug. After a certain period of time and depending on the type of antibiotics, all sensitive cells die, and the resistant cells grow into individual colonies of the appropriate size for subcloning by picking. It is extremely important to minimize the time dur-ing which ES cells are in culture between selection and injection into blastocysts. Before injecting the ES cells, DNA is prepared from ES colonies to screen for positive ES cells that exhibit the correct integration or homologous recombination of the target-ing vector. Positive ES colonies are then expanded and used for creation of chimeras.Creation of the Chimera A chimeric organism is one in which cells originate from more than one embryo source. Here, chi-meric mice are denoted as those that contain some tissues from the ES cells with an altered genome. When these ES cells give rise to the lineage of the germ layer, the germ cells carrying the altered genome can be passed on to the offspring, thus creating the germline transmission from ES cells. There are two methods for introducing ES cells into preimplantation-stage embryos: injection and aggregation. The injection of embryonic cells directly into the cavity of blastocysts is one of the fundamen-tal methods for generating chimeras, but aggregation chimeras also have become an important alternative for transmitting the ES cell genome into mice. Since every tissue type of a chimera should contain cells from different origins, the mixture of rec-ognizable markers (e.g., coat color) that are specific to the donor mouse and the ES cells can be used to identify chimeric mice. However, most experimenters probably use existing mouse core facilities already established in some institutions or contract a commercial vendor for the creation of a chimera.Genotyping and Phenotyping of Knockout Animals The next step is to analyze whether germline transmission of tar-geted mutation occurs in mice. DNA from a small amount of tissue from offspring of the chimera is extracted and subjected to genomic PCR or Southern blot DNA hybridization. Positive mice (i.e., those with properly integrated targeting vector into the genome) will be used for the propagation of more knockout mice for phenotype analysis. When the knockout genes are cru-cial for early embryogenesis, mice often die in utero, an occur-rence called embryonic lethality. When this happens, only the phenotype of the homozygous (both alleles ablated) knockout mouse embryos and the phenotype of the heterozygous (only one allele ablated) adult mice can be studied. Because most researchers are interested in the phenotype of adult mice, in par-ticular when using mice as disease models, it is recommended to create the conditional knockout using the cre-loxP system so that the GOI can be knocked out at will.To date, more than 5000 genes have been disrupted by homologous recombination and transmitted through the germline. The phenotypic studies of these mice provide ample information about the functions of these genes in growth and differentiation of organisms and during development of human diseases.RNA Interference. Although gene ablation in animal models provides an important means to understand the in vivo functions of GOI, animal models may not adequately represent human biology. Alternatively, gene targeting can be used to knock out genes in human cells, including human ES cells. Gene targeting in human ES cells by homologous recombination has extremely low efficiency, although there are more new techniques emerg-ing aimed at increasing the targeting efficiency. A number of recent advances have made gene targeting in somatic cells as easy as in murine ES cells.33 However, gene targeting (knocking out both alleles) in somatic cells is a time-consuming process.Development of RNAi technology in the past few years has provided a more promising approach to understanding the biologic functions of human genes in human cells.35 RNAi is an ancient natural mechanism by which small, double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) acts as a guide for an enzyme complex that destroys complementary RNA and downregulates gene expres-sion in a sequence-specific manner. Although the mechanism by which dsRNA suppresses gene expression is not entirely understood, experimental data provide important insights. In nonmammalian systems such as Drosophila, it appears that longer dsRNA is processed into 21–23 nt dsRNA (called small interfering RNA or siRNA) by an enzyme called Dicer contain-ing RNase III motifs. The siRNA apparently then acts as a guide sequence within a multicomponent nuclease complex to target complementary mRNA for degradation. Because long dsRNA induces a potent antiviral response pathway in mammalian cells, short siRNAs are used to perform gene silencing experiments in mammalian cells (Fig. 15-24).Brunicardi_Ch15_p0479-p0510.indd   50318/02/19   11:12 AM 504BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IPol IIITTTTTshRNAsiRNADicerRISCUUUUUUmRNAm7GAAAAAAmRNA targeted by siRNAUUm7GAAAAAAmRNA cleaved and degradedm7GAAAAAAFigure 15-24. RNA interference in mammalian cells. Small interfering RNA (siRNA) can be produced from a polymerase III–driven expres-sion vector. Such a vector first synthesizes a 19–29 nt double-stranded (ds)RNA stem and a loop (labeled as shRNA in the figure), and then the RNase complex called Dicer processes the hairpin RNA into a small dsRNA (labeled as siRNA in the figure). siRNA can be chemically synthesized and directly introduced into the target cell. In the cell, through RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC), siRNA recognizes and degrades target messenger RNAs (mRNAs).For siRNA studies in mammalian cells, researchers have used two 21-mer RNAs with 19 complementary nucleotides and 3′ terminal noncomplementary dimers of thymidine or uri-dine. The antisense siRNA strand is fully complementary to the mRNA target sequence. Target sequences for an siRNA are identified visually or by software.The target 19 nucleotides should be compared to an appro-priate genome database to eliminate any sequences with sig-nificant homology to other genes. Those sequences that appear to be specific to the GOI are the potential siRNA target sites. A few of these target sites are selected for siRNA design. The antisense siRNA strand is the reverse complement of the target sequence. The sense strand of the siRNA is the same sequence as the target mRNA sequence. A deoxythymidine dimer is rou-tinely incorporated at the 3′ end of the sense strand siRNA, although it is unknown whether this noncomplementary dinu-cleotide is important for the activity of siRNAs.There are two ways to introduce siRNA to knock down gene expression in human cells:1.	RNA transfection: siRNA can be made chemically or using an in vitro transcription method. Like DNA oligos, chemically synthesized siRNA oligos can be commercially ordered. However, synthetic siRNA is expensive, and sev-eral siRNAs may have to be tried before a particular gene is successfully silenced. In vitro transcription provides a more economic approach. Both short and long RNA can be synthesized using bacteriophage RNA polymerase T7, T3, or SP6. In the case of long dsRNAs, RNase such as recom-binant Dicers will be used to process the long dsRNA into a mixture of 21–23 nt siRNA. siRNA oligos or mixtures can be transfected into a few characterized cell lines such as HeLa (human cervical carcinoma) and 293T cells (human kidney carcinoma). Transfection of siRNA directly into pri-mary cells may be difficult.2.	DNA transfection: Expression vectors for expressing siRNA have been made using RNA polymerase III promoters such as U6 and H1. These promoters precisely transcribe a hairpin structure of dsRNA, which will be processed into siRNA in the cell (see Fig. 15-24). Therefore, properly designed DNA oligos corresponding to the desired siRNA will be inserted downstream of the U6 or H1 promoter. There are two advan-tages of the siRNA expression vectors over siRNA oligos. First, it is easier to transfect DNA into cells. Second, sta-ble populations of cells can be generated that maintain the long-term silencing of target genes. Furthermore, the siRNA expression cassette can be incorporated into a retroviral or adenoviral vector to provide a wide spectrum of applications in gene therapy.There has been a fast and fruitful development of RNAi tools for in vitro and in vivo use in mammals. These novel approaches, together with future developments, will be crucial to put RNAi technology to use for effective disease therapy or to exert the awesome power of mammalian genetics. Therefore, the applications of RNAi to human health are enormous. siRNA can be applied as a new tool for sequence-specific regulation of gene expression in functional genomics and biomedical studies. With the availability of the human genome sequences, RNAi approaches hold tremendous promise for unleashing the dor-mant potential of sequenced genomes.Practical applications of RNAi will possibly result in new therapeutic interventions. In 2002, the concept of using siRNA in battling infectious diseases and carcinogenesis was proven effective. These include notable successes in blocking repli-cation of viruses, such as HIV, hepatitis B virus, and hepati-tis C virus, in cultured cells using siRNA targeted at the viral genome or the human gene encoding viral receptors. RNAi has been shown to antagonize the effects of hepatitis C virus in mouse models. In cancers, silencing of oncogenes such as c-Myc or Ras can slow down the proliferation rate of cancer cells. Finally, siRNA also has potential applications for some dominant genetic disorders.The 21st century, already heralded as the “century of the gene,” carries great promise for alleviating suffering from dis-ease and improving human health. On the whole, completion of Brunicardi_Ch15_p0479-p0510.indd   50418/02/19   11:12 AM 505MOLECULAR BIOLOGY, THE ATOMIC THEORY OF DISEASE, AND PRECISION SURGERYCHAPTER 15the human genome blueprint, the promise of gene therapy and molecular therapies, and the existence of stem cells have cap-tured the imagination of the public and the biomedical commu-nity. Aside from their potential in curing human diseases, these emerging technologies also have provoked many political, eco-nomic, religious, and ethical discussions. As more is discerned about the technologic scientific advances, more attention must also be paid to concerns for their inherent risks and social impli-cations. It is important for surgeons to play a leadership role in the emergence of personalized medicine and surgery, as sur-geons have access to the diseased tissues. Surgeons should be establishing collaborations with the genomic and molecular sci-entists to develop genomic biobanks in order to study the genome and molecular signaling of the disease tissues that will help with an understanding of the underlying cause of an indi-vidual’s disease and ultimately lead to effective, targeted thera-pies. Surgeons must take this enormous opportunity to collaborate with basic and clinical scientists to develop the field of precision medicine and surgery this century.Bifunctional RNAi Technology.36 Over the last 20 years, the field has worked to define oncogene and nononcogene addic-tion, discriminate between driver and passenger genes, and appreciate the complexity of complex, robust, network interac-tions. These insights have led to a preliminary understanding of therapeutically relevant sensitivity and resistance pathway signal patterns requiring multiple target modulation. However, this knowledge has not been effectively or reproducibly clini-cally translated. Clinical response is usually far greater when a combination of single-target molecular therapy is administered. However, it must also be realized that targeting two or more pathways may also increase the toxicity profile, particularly if target specificity is limited. When attempted, off-target toxic-ity has been demonstrated with combination small-molecule therapy. In contrast, multitargeting bifunctional short hairpin (bi-shRNA) DNA vectors are designed to limit off-target effect given the high specificity for the genes they are designed to target.Exogenously applied hairpin constructs can be designed to be incorporated into cleavage-dependent RISC or cleav-age-independent RISC complexes, or both. The concept of a bifunctional shRNA37 is to increase knockdown efficiency without loss of sequence specificity by engaging both siRNA and miRNA-like (i.e., common biogenic pathway but comple-mentary to target sequence) RISCs, thereby concurrently acti-vating nucleolytic (Ago2-RISC) and nonnucleolytic (Ago1, 3, 4 ± Ago2-RISC) processes.38 Each bi-shRNA contains both a matched stem sequence to promote Ago2-mediated passenger strand cleavage and a second partial mismatched stem sequence for cleavage-independent passenger strand departure. Thus, functionality of the effectors is set by programmed passenger strand guided RISC loading rather than Ago subset distribution in the cancer cell. Both component Ago2 and Ago (1, 2, 4 ± 3) RNAi moieties are fully complementary to the mRNA target sequence. Preliminary data indicate reduced “off-target effects” by shRNA compared with target-identical siRNAs. More than two mismatches in sequences within the target region drasti-cally reduce knockdown effect to undetectable levels (unpub-lished results). The design process involves in silico scanning of the entire human mRNA RefSeq database to avoid any potential sequence-related “off-target effects.” Published data also indicate persistent susceptibility to shRNA-mediated gene 5knockdown despite recent evidence of reduced Dicer expression in human cancer cells.39The first clinical experience with the bi-shRNA platform involved the ex vivo knockdown of furin, a Ca2+-dependent, nonredundant proprotein convertase that is essential for pro-teolytic maturational processing of immunosuppressive TGF-β isoforms (β1 and β2). An autologous whole-cell cancer vac-cine, FANG™ (furin-knockdown and GMCSF-augmented),40 was produced based on a dual function immunosensitization principle of augmenting tumor antigen expression, presentation, and processing via granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GMCSF) cytokine transgene expression and attenuating secretory immunosuppressive TGF-β. Harvested, autologous cancer cells are transfected with the GMCSF/bi-shRNAfurin (FANG) expression plasmid via electroporation. A phase I clinical trial (BB-IND 14205) involving 52 cancer patients was recently completed. Results demonstrated better than 90% knockdown of the bi-shRNA target, furin, and better than 90% knockdown of furin-regulated proteins TGF-β1 and TGF-β2, thereby confirming the mechanistic expectation of this novel RNAi platform. Moreover, predicted extensive GMCSF expres-sion verified our ability to successfully construct multi-cassette vectors with good manufacturing practice techniques fulfilling Food and Drug Administration requirements for clinical testing.Twenty-seven patients received one or more vaccine dose, and 23 patients achieved stable disease as their best response. No toxic effect was identified. Median survival of the FANG™-treated patients from time of procurement was 554 days and has not been reached from time of treatment. Expected survival of similar patients is historically less than 1 year. Sequential enzyme-linked immunosorbent spot (ELISPOT) analysis revealed a dramatic and significant increase in immune response from baseline to month 4 in half of the FANG™-treated patients. Comparison of survival between ELISPOT-positive and ELISPOT-negative patients demonstrated a statistically  significant increase in survival from time of procurement (P = .045) and time of treatment (P = .025).These phase 1 study results demonstrated mechanism, safety, and effectiveness of the bi-shRNA technology and clini-cal functionality of a multitargeting (dual) DNA expression vec-tor. Further utilization of bi-shRNAi technology is under way clinically (targeting STMN1, a microtubule modulation criti-cal to cancer program) and preclinically targeting PDX141 (an oncogene-like transcription factor for pancreatic embryogenesis using nonviral nanoparticle delivery mechanisms).42Precision Medicine and Surgery43Genes determine our susceptibility to diseases and direct our body’s response to medicine. Because an individual’s genes dif-fer from those of another, the determination of each individual’s genome has the potential to improve the predication, prevention, and treatment of disease. Sequencing of individual genomes holds the key to realize this revolution called precision medicine and surgery. Next-generation sequencing, such as Illumina sequencing and 454 pyrosequencing technology, is promising to reduce the time and cost so that genome sequencing can be affordable within healthcare systems. The goal of precision medicine and surgery is to identify the gene variations in each individual and to target the specific gene variations causing the disease by choosing personalized treatments that effectively work in association with the individual’s genomic profile. The importance of surgeons in this transformational field of Brunicardi_Ch15_p0479-p0510.indd   50518/02/19   11:12 AM 506BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Ibiomedical science is that surgeons have access to the diseased tissues on a daily basis. Surgeons should partner with the genomic scientists to develop genomic biobanks in order to study the genome of the disease tissues and determine how this information can improve the outcomes of surgery, i.e., precision surgery. These discovery studies are rapidly leading to the uncovering of mutations and SNPs that are the underlying cause of an individual’s disease and ultimately lead to targeted thera-pies. Although precision medicine and surgery holds the poten-tial to revolutionize the practice of modern medicine, there currently exists a gap between our ability to sequence any given individual’s genome and how clinicians can apply this informa-tion to guide care. There is a rapidly growing list of single genes that are currently guiding care, and these genes are listed as type 1 precision genes. Examples of these genes are BRCA1, RET proto-oncogene, and CHD1 mutation, which guide potential use of mastectomy, thyroidectomy, and gastrec-tomy, respectively; however, the great challenge before the sci-entific and medical community this century is to learn to use the entire genome to guide precision care.Targeted Genome Editing Using the  CRISPR-Cas9 SystemConventional genetic manipulations have proven their value in biomedical research. Researchers today depend on the manipu-lation of genetic materials in cells or in animal models in almost every project they work on. These genetic manipulation tech-niques (see “Genetic Manipulations”), though sufficient for gen-eral research purposes, suffer from disadvantages. Transfection of target genes into cells is quick and specific, but nonnative. RNA interference (RNAi) is easy to perform and targets native genes, but RNAi never fully eliminates the target gene, and off-target effects are commonly seen using RNAi. Gene knockout mice provide an ideal platform to study native genes with clean background, but conventional knockout methods are time-consuming and costly.An entirely new gene-editing method now known as the CRISPR-Cas9 system has emerged since 201344-46 and has quickly gained popularity among biologists for gene edit-ing. This new method is easy to perform, can work specifi-cally on the desired gene or DNA sequence, and can generate gene knockout, knock-in, point mutation, or the insertion of an epitope tag in almost any cell line or animal models with high efficiencies.CRISPR stands for Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats.47 It is a region on the genomic DNA first discovered in the microbes as an adapted immune system against exogenous DNA. A typical CRISPR region contains a cluster of short (21–48 bp) DNA repeats (ranging from 2 to hundreds) interspaced by nonrepetitive sequences called spacers.47 Within a CRISPR region, while each spacer has its unique sequence, the sequence of the repeats is highly conserved. Several genes, called the CRISPR-associated (Cas) genes, are almost always found directly flanking the CRISPR region.Extensive studies in the past decade revealed the function of the CRISPR-cas system in DNA-interfering. When bacte-ria or archaea carrying the CRISPR-cas system are invaded by phage or plasmid DNA, a new spacer can be added to the CRISPR region with its sequence identical to the “proto-spacer,” a fragment of the invading DNA.47 It was found that the proto-spacer must be followed by a recognition sequence (NGG in the case of Cas9) called proto-spacer associated motif 67(PAM).46 With constitutive transcription, the CRISPR region is transcribed as mRNA, and cut by Cas proteins to generate RNA fragments minimally containing one spacer and parts of the repetitive sequence.47 This fragment associates with target DNA through Watson-Crick base-pairing and directs the cutting of target DNA by Cas proteins with nuclease activity.Several CRISPR-Cas systems have been characterized, with a variety of Cas proteins found in these systems. Cas9 in the type II system from Streptococcus pyogenes is the most commonly used Cas for gene editing.46,48 Cas9 contains one RuvC-like nuclease domain near its N-terminal and one HNH-like nuclease domain in the middle of the protein. The RuvC-like domain cuts the proto-spacer strand (the strand with PAM), and the HNH-like domain cuts the strand pairing with the spacer,49 resulting in a double-strand break (DSB) on the target DNA. It is known that Cas9 cuts a blunt end 3 bp 5’ to the PAM sequence.46 The specificity provided by the spacer, or so-called “guide RNA,” and the ability of Cas9 to cut double-stranded DNA means that this system can specifically target anywhere in a genome with a known sequence.CRISPR-Cas9–Guided Gene Editing. The CRISPR-Cas9 sys-tem was made suitable for gene editing in mammalian cell lines and in animal models through several years of optimization. The key concept for CRISPR-Cas9–mediated gene editing is to introduce DNA strand break and let the cell repair the break. Through the repair process, sequence deletions, insertions, and mutations can be applied to the target gene.Two DNA repair pathways are utilized in CRISPR-Cas9–mediated gene editing: the nonhomologous end-joining (NHEJ) pathway and the homology-directed repair (HDR).49 When a homologous repair template is unavailable, the NHEJ path-way joins the ends of the DSB together, usually with random insertion/deletion (indel) mutations. Such mutations within an open reading frame can cause frameshift and/or premature stop codons. When a repair template is available, however, the cell may choose HDR and repair the DSB through pairing with the template. The HDR pathway can introduce longer insertion/ deletion mutations than NHEJ and can specify the mutated sequence (by contrast, NHEJ creates random mutations). However, HDR is usually only active in dividing cells and is of a lower efficiency than NHEJ. Its efficiency also depends on gene loca-tion, cell type, and the repair template.50 Therefore, the choice of the pathway depends on the need of the outcome: to simply create a gene knockout, NHEJ is much simpler and highly effi-cient; to achieve precise gene editing (introduce a specific muta-tion, add or delete a specific sequence), HDR must be used. The two pathways have similar protocols, but they differ in certain details in experimental designs.Gene Editing Through NHEJ Tools for NHEJ-mediated gene editing can be incorporated onto one simple plasmid, including a single-guide RNA (sgRNA) sequence containing the guide RNA, a U6 promoter driving the expression of the sgRNA, and an expression cassette including codon-optimized Cas9 fused with nuclear localization sequences (NLS) and an optional selection marker (puromycin resistance or a GFP).46 NHEJ is usually used to knock out a target gene (Fig. 15-24). Generally, a 20 bp sequence preceding a PAM sequence (NGG for Cas9) is selected as the guide RNA sequence. This sequence can be chosen within the first couple of exons through running online search engines against the target genome to minimize off-target probabilities. The guide RNA sequence is then inserted into the Brunicardi_Ch15_p0479-p0510.indd   50618/02/19   11:12 AM 507MOLECULAR BIOLOGY, THE ATOMIC THEORY OF DISEASE, AND PRECISION SURGERYCHAPTER 15Figure 15-25. CRISPR-Cas9–mediated gene editing through NHEJ or HDR. The Cas9 protein cleaves target DNA through its RuvC-like and HNH-like domains, guided by the sgRNA. The cell repairs the double-strand break through either NHEJ or HDR. In NHEJ, the broken ends are recognized, bound, and tethered by end-binding protein complexes. The ends are then processed and ligated but may result in ran-dom insertion/deletion (experimentally, deletions are more commonly seen) mutations at the break site. The repair process in HDR, however, generates no random error due to the presence of a homologous repair template. During the repair, the broken strands find the homologous template and proceed with DNA synthesis using the template. This results in a repaired DNA that has the same sequence as the repair template. Therefore, point mutations, insertions, or deletions carried on the template will be inherited by the repaired DNA and thus achieve precise gene editing.designed site within the sgRNA, and the constructed plasmid is transfected into target cells. Expressed Cas9 proteins would associate with expressed sgRNAs to mediate DSB directed by the guide RNA sequence. For cell lines, pure mutant clones can be generated by separating single colonies. Knockout mutations can be confirmed through PCR amplification of the target region and sequencing. If antibodies against the target protein are avail-able, western blotting can be used as a supplemental method to DNA sequencing results to confirm the knockout of the gene.Gene Editing Through HDR HDR requires a homologous tem-plate to repair the DSB. Therefore, apart from the guide RNA, another sequence homologous to the flanking regions of the DSB needs to be present (Fig. 15-25). The homologous sequence can carry insertions, deletions, and mutations to replace the sequence at the DSB, thus achieving precise gene editing on the target. The homologous sequence can be introduced into the cell either as a template on a plasmid or as a single-stranded oligonucleotide.46 After the induction of the DSB, the homologous template pairs with the flanking regions of the DSB and serves as the template for the repair of the break site. HDR happens at lower efficiency than NHEJ and therefore is of lower success rate than NHEJ-mediated gene editing. Therefore, HDR is only recommended when precise mutations are desired. Fast screen of positive mutant clones can be achieved by incorporating restriction enzyme cutting sites within the homologous template.Reducing Off-Target Effects Using Cas9 Nickase The CRISPR-Cas9 system uses a 20 bp guide RNA for sequence recognition. Due to the similar length of recognition sequence to RNAi techniques, CRISPR-Cas9 system also suffers from off-target effects. Because CRISPR-Cas9 requires a PAM site directly following the guide RNA sequence, one way to reduce off-targets is to run through online databases against the genome of the target cell to select a target sequence with the least number of possible off-targets (CRISPR-Cas9 system tolerates no more than three mismatches). On the other hand, a mutant version of the Cas9 called Cas9 nickase can be used to minimize the risk of off-targets.As mentioned, Cas9 contains one RuvC-like and one HNH-like nuclease domain, each responsible for cutting one strand.49 The D10A mutant Cas9 (Cas9 nickase) lacks the activ-ity of the RuvC-like domain, leaving the proto-spacer strand intact and a nick on the antisense strand.46 Using two prop-erly spaced (0–20 bp apart), oppositely oriented guide RNA, the Cas9 nickase will leave two single-strand nicks on both strands in close proximity, creating a double-strand break with 5’ overhangs on both strands. This leads to NHEJ or HDR at this breaking site, while other off-target single-strand nicks will be repaired without impact. This strategy doubles the number of base pairs required for site recognition, reducing off-target possibilities almost to zero (from about 1 off-target in 30 million bp to 1 in 1000 trillion bp).Application of the CRISPR-Cas9 System in Biomedical  Sciences The biggest advantage of the CRISPR-Cas9 system is its ability to edit genes in almost any cell type and any ani-mal model with high efficiency and accuracy. Plus, it is easy to design and easy to use. Within a couple of years, success-ful gene editing in C. elegans,51 zebrafish,52 fruit fly,53 mouse,54 dogs,55 and even nonhuman primates56 was achieved. CRISPR-Cas9 was also reported to be successful in a variety of cell types including stem cells.Currently, CRISPR-Cas9 is most used for editing single genes, through gene knockout, gene mutation, or the addition of an epitope tag to a native gene, for functional characterization of the gene of interest. For example, oncogenes or tumor suppres-sor genes can be knocked out to identify the causative gene for a particular cancer type; point mutations in functional domains homologous templateprecise editingNHEJ5’3’5’3’5’3’5’3’5’3’3’5’3’5’3’5’3’5’3’5’3’Cas9 RuvC domainHNHdomainPAMsgRNA5’5’3’HDRRandom insertion/deletionBrunicardi_Ch15_p0479-p0510.indd   50718/02/19   11:12 AM 508BASIC CONSIDERATIONSPART Imay illustrate the mechanism of action of a protein; for proteins without available antibodies, epitope tags can be inserted onto the native gene for the detection of the native protein.Apart from single gene editing, CRISPR-Cas9 can be used for large scale loss-of-function gene screen. Multiple lentiviral guide RNA libraries have been established covering the whole human/mouse genome or particular subsets.Owing to its ability to bind to specific nucleotide sequences, CRISPR-Cas9 has also been used for non–gene-editing purposes. To achieve this, both the RuvC-like and the HNH-like domains are mutated to give a catalytically inactive Cas9 (dCas9). Directed by guide RNA, this dCas9 can bind to particu-lar genes to reversibly suppress or activate gene transcription by the fusion of transcription activators or suppressors with dCas9. Epigenetic modulators (e.g., DNA methylase) can also be fused with dCas9 to achieve controlled epigenetic modulations. More-over, dCas9 can also be fused with fluorescent markers such as GFP to track a particular DNA region in live cells.The most exciting potential application of the CRISPR-Cas9 system is perhaps the correction or modification of dis-ease-causing genes in human embryos or in human patients to eradicate disease-causing genes. However, extension of this application may lead to the creation of the so called “perfect human,” hence raising huge ethical concerns and controversies.57 Because of such ethical considerations, gene editing in human embryos should be cautiously conducted. Nonetheless, reports have shown the great potential of this powerful gene-editing technique in correcting gene mutations.58-60In conclusion, the CRISPR-Cas9 system is the most pow-erful gene-editing system characterized so far, showing its strong ability to edit genes efficiently and precisely. Its applica-tions greatly benefit biomedical researches and, with a solution to ethical issues, can greatly benefit clinical medicine as well.REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Watson JD, Crick FH. Molecular structure of nucleic acids: a structure for deoxyribose nucleic acid. Nature. 1953;171(4356):737-738.	2.	Alberts B, Johnson A, Lewis J, et al. Molecular Biology of the Cell. 4th ed. New York: Garland Science; 2002.	3.	International Human Genome Sequencing Consortium. Finish-ing the euchromatic sequence of the human genome. Nature. 2004;431(7011):931-945.	4.	ENCODE Project Consortium, Birney E, Stamatoyannopou-los JA, et al. Identification and analysis of functional elements in 1% of the human genome by the ENCODE pilot project. Nature. 2007;447(7146):799-816.	5.	Mendel G. Versuche über Planzen-Hybriden. Verhandlungen des naturforschenden Vereines, Abhandlungen. Brünn: 4, 3, 1866.	6.	Carey M, Smale ST. Transcriptional Regulation in Eukaryotes. New York: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; 2000.	7.	Wolfsberg TG, Wetterstrand KA, Guyer MS, Collins FS, Baxevanis AD. A user’s guide to the human genome. Nat Genet. 2002;32(suppl):1-79.	8.	U.S. Department of Energy. Genomics and its impact on science and society: the human genome project and beyond. Published online by Human Genome Management Information System (HGMIS). Available at: http://web.ornl.gov/sci/techresources/Human_Genome/publicat/primer2001/primer11.pdf.	9.	Simpson RJ. Proteins and Proteomics. New York: CSHL Press; 2003.	10.	Hanash S. Disease proteomics. Nature. 2003;422(6928):226-232.	11.	Ptashne M, Gann A. Genes & Signals. New York: CSHL Press; 2002.	12.	Pawson T, Nash P. Assembly of cell regulatory systems through protein interaction domains. Science. 2003;300(5618): 445-452.	13.	Lizcano JM, Alessi DR. The insulin signaling pathway. Curr Biol. 2002;12(7):R236-R238.	14.	Feng X-H, Derynck R. Specificity and versatility in TGF-beta signaling through Smads. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2005;21: 659-693.	15.	Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. The hallmarks of cancer. Cell. 2000;100(1):57-70.	16.	Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: the next generation. Cell. 2011;144(5):646-674.	17.	McNeil C. Herceptin raises its sights beyond advanced breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1998;90:882.	18.	Druker BJ, Tamura S, Buchdunger E, et al. Effects of a selective inhibitor of the Abl tyrosine kinase on the growth of Bcr-Abl positive cells. Nat Med. 1996;2(5):561.	19.	Kiessling AA, Anderson SC. Human Embryonic Stem Cells: An Introduction to the Science and Therapeutic Potential. Boston: Jones & Bartlett Pub; 2003.	20.	Takahashi K, Tanabe K, Ohnuki M, et al. Induction of pluripo-tent stem cells from adult human fibroblasts by defined factors. Cell. 2007;131(5):861-872.	21.	Yu J, Vodyanik MA, Smuga-Otto K, et al. Induced pluripotent stem cell lines derived from human somatic cells. Science. 2007;318(5858):1917-1920.	22.	Orcutt S, Nguyen T, Harring TR. Subatomic medicine and the atomic theory of disease. Transl Med. 2012;2:2.	23.	Cohen SN, Chang AC, Boyer HW, Helling RB. Construction of biologically functional bacterial plasmids in vitro. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1973;70(11):3240-3244.	24.	Green MR, Sambrook J. Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory Manual. 4th ed. New York: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; 2012.	25.	Ausubel FM, Brent R, Kingston RE, et al. Current Protocols in Molecular Biology. 3rd ed. New York: John Wiley & Sons; 1995.	26.	Southern EM. Detection of specific sequences among DNA fragments separated by gel electrophoresis. J Mol Biol. 1975;98(3):503.	27.	Mullis K, Faloona F, Scharf S, Saiki R, Horn G, Erlich H. Specific enzymatic amplification of DNA in vitro: the poly-merase chain reaction. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 1986;51(pt 1):263-273.	28.	Bowtell D, Sambrook J. DNA Microarrays: A Molecular Clon-ing Manual. 1st ed. New York: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; 2002.	29.	Caruccio N. Preparation of next-generation sequencing libraries using Nextera™ technology: simultaneous DNA fragmentation and adaptor tagging by in vitro transposition. Methods Mol Biol. 2011;733:241-255.	30.	Pettersson E, Lundeberg J, Ahmadian A. Generations of sequencing technologies. Genomics. 2009;93(2):105-111.	31.	Biankin AV, Waddell N, Kassahn KS, et al. Pancreatic cancer genomes reveal aberrations in axon guidance pathway genes. Nature. 2012;491(7424):399-405.	32.	Bonifacino JS, Dasso M, Harford JB, et al. Current Protocols in Cell Biology. New York: John Wiley & Sons; 2003.	33.	Nagy A. Manipulating the Mouse Embryo: A Laboratory Manual. 3rd ed. New York: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; 2002.	34.	Evans M. Discovering pluripotency: 30 years of mouse embry-onic stem cells. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2011;12(10):680-686.	35.	Steitz JA. In: Hannon GH, ed. RNAi: A Guide to Gene Silenc-ing. New York: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; 2003.Brunicardi_Ch15_p0479-p0510.indd   50818/02/19   11:12 AM 509MOLECULAR BIOLOGY, THE ATOMIC THEORY OF DISEASE, AND PRECISION SURGERYCHAPTER 15	36.	Rao DD, Senzer N, Wang Z, Kumar P, Jay CM, Nemunaitis J. Bifunctional short hairpin RNA (bi-shRNA): design and pathway to clinical application. Methods Mol Biol. 2013; 942:259-278.	37.	Rao DD, Maples PB, Senzer N, et al. Enhanced target gene knockdown by a bifunctional shRNA: a novel approach of RNA interference. Cancer Gene Ther. 2010;17(11):780-791.	38.	MacRae IJ, Zhou K, Li F, et al. Structural basis for double-stranded RNA processing by dicer. Science. 2006;311(5758): 195-198.	39.	Senzer N, Rao D, Nemunaitis J. Letter to the editor: does dicer expression affect shRNA processing? Gene Regul Syst Bio. 2009;3:103-104.	40.	Senzer N, Barve M, Kuhn J, et al. Phase I trial of  “bi-shRNAi(furin)/GMCSF DNA/autologous tumor cell” vac-cine (FANG) in advanced cancer. Mol Ther. 2012;20(3):679-686.	41.	Liu SH, Patel S, Gingras MC, et al. PDX-1: demonstra-tion of oncogenic properties in pancreatic cancer. Cancer. 2011;117(4):723-733.	42.	Templeton NS, Lasic DD, Frederik PM, et al. Improved DNA: liposome complexes for increased systemic delivery and gene expression. Nat Biotechnol. 1997;15(7):647-652.	43.	Nemunaitis J, Rao DD, Liu SH, Brunicardi FC. Personalized cancer approach: using RNA interference technology. World J Surg. 2011;35(8):1700-1714.	44.	Mali P, Yang L, Esvelt KM, et al. RNA-guided human genome engineering via Cas9. Science. 2013;339(6121):823-826.	45.	Cong L, Ran FA, Cox D, et al. Multiplex genome engineering using CRISPR/Cas systems. Science. 2013;339(6121):819-823.	46.	Ran FA, Hsu PD, Wright J, Argarwala V, Scott DA, Zhang F. Genome engineering using the CRISPR-Cas9 system. Nat Protoc. 2013;8(11):2281-2308.	47.	Deveau H, Garneau JE, Moineau S. CRISPR/Cas system and its role in phage-bacteria interactions. Annu Rev Microbiol. 2010;64:475-493.	48.	Ma Y, Zhang L, Huang X. Genome modification by CRISPR/Cas9. FEBS J. 2014;281(23):5186-5193.	49.	Lu XJ, Xue HY, Ke ZP, Jin-Lian C, Li-Juan J. CRISPR-Cas9: a new and promising player in gene therapy. J Med Genet. 2015;52(5):289-296.	50.	Saleh-Gohari N, Helleday T. Conservative homologous recom-bination preferentially repairs DNA double-strand breaks in the S phase of the cell cycle in human cells. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004;32(12):3683-3688.	51.	Farboud B. Targeted genome editing in Caenorhabditis elegans using CRISPR/Cas9. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Dev Biol. 2017;6(6).	52.	Liu J, Zhou Y, Qi X, et al. CRISPR/Cas9 in zebrafish: an effi-cient combination for human genetic diseases modeling. Hum Genet. 2017;136(1):1-12.	53.	Ren X, Holsteens K, Li H, et al. Genome editing in Dro-sophila melanogaster: from basic genome engineering to the multipurpose CRISPR-Cas9 system. Sci China Life Sci. 2017;60(5):476-489. 	54.	Chadwick AC, Musunuru K. Treatment of dyslipidemia using CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing. Curr Atheroscler Rep. 2017;19(7):32.	55.	Zou Q, Wang X, Liu Y, et al. Generation of gene-target dogs using CRISPR/Cas9 system. J Mol Cell Biol. 2015;7(6):580-583.	56.	Niu Y, Shen B, Cui Y, et al. Generation of gene-modified cyno-molgus monkey via Cas9/RNA-mediated gene targeting in one-cell embryos. Cell. 2014;156(4):836-843.	57.	Krishan K, Kanchan T, Singh B. Human genome editing and ethical considerations. Sci Eng Ethics. 2016;22(2):597-599.	58.	Ma H, Marti-Gutierrez N, Park SW, et al. Correction of a pathogenic gene mutation in human embryos. Nature. 2017; 548(7668):413-419.	59.	Ledford H. CRISPR fixes disease gene in viable human embryos. Nature. 2017;548(7665):13-14.	60.	Ormond KE, Mortlock DP, Scholes DT, et al. Human germline genome editing. Am J Hum Genet. 2017;101(2):167-176.Brunicardi_Ch15_p0479-p0510.indd   50918/02/19   11:12 AM
# Chunk 8879
Brunicardi_Ch16_p0511-p0540.indd   51219/02/19   3:08 PMThis page intentionally left blank

The Skin and Subcutaneous TissuePatrick Harbour and David H. Song 16chapterINTRODUCTIONThe skin is a complex organ encompassing the body’s surface and is continuous with the mucous membranes. Accounting for approximately 15% of total body weight, it is the largest organ in the human body. Enabled by an array of tissue and cell types, intact skin protects the body from external insults. However, the skin is also the source of a myriad of pathologies that include inflammatory disorders, mechanical and thermal injuries, infec-tious diseases, and benign and malignant tumors. The intrica-cies and complexities of this organ and associated pathologies are reasons the skin and subcutaneous tissue remain of great interest and require the attention of various surgical disciplines that include plastic surgery, dermatology, general surgery, and surgical oncology.ANATOMY AND HISTOLOGYBackgroundIt is important that surgeons understand completely the cutane-ous anatomy and its variability as they play an enormous role in patient health and satisfaction. The skin is made up of tissues derived from both the ectodermal and mesodermal germ cell layers.1 Three distinct tissue layers comprise the organ, and differ in composition based on location, age, sex, and ethnicity, among other variables. The outermost layer is the epidermis, which is predominantly characterized by a protective, highly keratinized layer of cells. The next layer is the dermis, which is made up of an organized collagen network to support the numerous epider-mal appendages, neurovascular structures, and supportive cells within the skin. The fatty layer below the dermis is collectively known as the hypodermis and functions in body processes of thermoregulation and energy storage, among others. These three distinct layers function together harmoniously and participate in numerous activities essential to life.2EpidermisThe epidermis is the outermost layer of the cutaneous tissue, and consists primarily of continually regenerating keratinocytes. The tissue is also stratified, forming four to five histologically distinct layers, depending on the location in the body. These layers are, from deep to superficial, the stratum basale, stratum spinosum, stratum granulosum, stratum lucidum and stratum corneum (Fig. 16-1). The different layers of the epidermis represent layers of keratinocytes at differing stages of their approximately thirty-day life cycle. A minority of other cell types are found in different layers of the epidermis as well. Some of these cells are permanent residents, while others are visitors from other parts of the body. All the epidermal appendages, such as sweat glands and pilosebaceous follicles, are derived from this tissue. The thickness of the epidermis is quite variable with regard to location and age, ranging from 75 to 150 µm in thin skin (eyelids) to 0.4 to 1.5 mm in thick skin (palms and soles).2 The epidermis lacks any vascular Introduction513Anatomy and Histology513Background / 513Epidermis / 513Epidermal Components / 514Epidermal Appendages / 515Dermal Components / 516Cells / 516Cutaneous Vasculature / 516Cutaneous Innervation / 517Hypodermis / 517Inflammatory Conditions517Hidradenitis Suppurativa / 517Pyoderma Gangrenosum / 517Epidermal Necrolysis / 517Injuries518Radiation-Induced Injuries / 518Trauma-Induced Injuries / 519Caustic Injury / 520Thermal Injury / 521Pressure Injury / 523Bioengineered Skin Substitutes524Bacterial Infections of the Skin  and Subcutaneous Tissue524Introduction / 524Uncomplicated Skin Infections / 524Complicated Skin Infections / 524Actinomycosis / 526Viral Infections with Surgical Implications526Human Papillomavirus Infections / 526Cutaneous Manifestations of Human Immunodeficiency Virus / 527Benign Tumors527Hemangioma / 527Nevi / 527Cystic Lesions / 527Keratosis / 528Soft Tissue Tumors / 528Neural Tumors / 528Malignant Tumors528Basal Cell Carcinoma / 528Squamous Cell Carcinoma / 529Melanoma / 530Merkel Cell Carcinoma / 534Kaposi’s Sarcoma / 535Dermatofibrosarcoma Protuberans / 535Malignant Fibrous Histiocytoma (Undifferentiated Pleomorphic Sarcoma and Myxofibrosarcoma) / 535Angiosarcoma / 535Extramammary Paget’s Disease / 536Conclusion536Brunicardi_Ch16_p0511-p0540.indd   51319/02/19   3:08 PM 514Hair shaftStratum corneumPigment ligamentStratum germinativumStratum spinosumStratum basaleArrector pili muscleSebaceous glandHair folliclePapilla of hairBlood andlymph vesselsNerve ÿberSweatporeDermalpapillaSensory nerve ending for touchEpidermisDermisSubcutis(hypodermis)VeinArteryPaciniancorpuscleSweatglandFigure 16-1. Schematic representation of the skin and its appendages. Note that the root of the hair follicle may extend beneath the dermis into the subcutis.structures and obtains all nutrients from the dermal vasculature by diffusion.3Epidermal ComponentsKeratinocytes. Keratinocytes typically make up about 90% of the cells of the epidermis. These cells have four to five distinct stages in their life cycle, each visibly different under light microscopy. The stratum basale, or germinative layer, is a deep, single layer of asynchronous, continuously rep-licating cuboidal to columnar epithelial cells and is the 1beginning of the life cycle of the keratinocytes of the epidermis. This layer is bound to its basement membrane by complexes made of keratin filaments and anchoring structures called hemidesmosomes. They are bound to other keratinocytes by structures called desmosomes. High mitotic activity and thus large nuclei and basophilic staining characterize the stratum basale on light microscopy. This layer also lines the epidermal appendages that reside largely within the substance of the der-mis and later serves as a regenerative source of epithelium in the event of partial thickness wounds.Key Points1	The epidermis consists of continually regenerating strati-fied epithelium, and 90% of cells are ectodermally derived keratinocytes.2	Pilosebaceous units are lined by the germinal epithelium of the epidermis and thus serve as an important source of epidermal regeneration after partial-thickness injury or split-thickness skin graft.3	Dermal fibers are predominantly made of type I and III collagen in a 4:1 ratio. They are responsible for the mechanical resistance of skin.4	The drugs most commonly associated with epidermal necrolysis include aromatic anticonvulsants, sulfonamides, allopurinol, oxicams (nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs), and nevirapine.5	In wounds being allowed to heal secondarily, negative pressure wound therapy can increase the rate of granula-tion tissue formation.6	Staphylococcus aureus is the most common isolate of all skin infections. Impetigo, cellulitis, erysipelas, folliculitis, furuncles, and simple abscesses are examples of uncompli-cated infections, whereas deep-tissue infections, extensive cellulitis, necrotizing fasciitis, and myonecrosis are exam-ples of complicated infections.7	Hemangiomas arise from benign proliferation of endothe-lial cells surrounding blood-filled cavities. They most commonly present after birth, rapidly grow during the first year of life, and gradually involute in most cases.8	Basal cell carcinoma represents the most common tumor diagnosed in the United States, and the nodular variant is the most common subtype. The natural progression of basal cell carcinoma is one of local invasion rather than distant metastasis.9	Squamous cell carcinoma is the second most common skin cancer, and typically arises from an actinic keratosis precur-sor. Primary treatment modalities are surgical excision and Mohs microsurgery. Cautery and ablation, cryotherapy, drug therapy, and radiation therapy are alternative treatments.10	Tumor thickness, ulceration, and mitotic rate are the most important prognostic indicators of survival in melanoma. Sentinel lymph node biopsy is often used to stage indi-viduals with biopsy-proven high risk melanoma and clini-cally node-negative disease.Brunicardi_Ch16_p0511-p0540.indd   51419/02/19   3:08 PM 515THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUECHAPTER 16The next layer is the stratum spinosum, or “spiny” layer. This layer is from five to fifteen cells in thickness and is so named due to the spinous appearance of the intercellular des-mosomal attachments under light microscopy. The production of keratin in this cell layer is responsible for their eosinophilic appearance on hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining.As the keratinocytes continue to migrate superficially, they begin to flatten and develop basophilic keratohyalin gran-ules. There are also structures called lamellar granules within these cells that contain the lipids and glycolipids that will ulti-mately undergo exocytosis to produce the lipid layer around the cells. It is in this layer that the keratinocytes manufacture many of the structures that will eventually serve to protect the skin and underlying tissues from environmental insult.4 At the super-ficial aspect of this layer, the keratinocytes begin to undergo programmed cell death, losing all cellular structures except for the keratin filaments and their associated proteins. In thick skin, such as that found on the palms and soles, there is a layer of flat, translucent keratinocytes called the stratum lucidum.The final stage of the keratinocyte life cycle results in the layer of the epidermis known as the stratum corneum, or cor-nified layer. The protein-rich, flattened keratinocytes are now anucleate and surrounded by a lipid-rich matrix. Together the cells and surrounding matrix of this layer serve to protect the tissue from mechanical, chemical, and bacterial disruption while preventing insensible water losses through the skin.4,5Langerhans Cells. Of the cells in the epidermis, 3% to 6% are immune cells known as Langerhans cells.6 Typically found within the stratum spinosum, these mobile, dendritic cells inter-digitate between keratinocytes of the epidermis to create a dense network, sampling any antigens that attempt to pass through the cutaneous tissue. Through use of their characteristic rodor racket-shaped Birbeck granules, they take up antigens for pre-sentation to T-cells.7 These monocyte-derived cells represent a large part of the skin’s adaptive immunity. Because of the effec-tiveness of their antigen presentation, Langerhans cells could be utilized as vaccine vehicles in the future.8 The Langerhans cells are functionally impaired by UV radiation, specifically UVB radiation, and may play a role in the development of cutaneous malignancies after UV radiation exposure.9Melanocytes. Within the stratum basale are melanocytes, the cells responsible for production of the pigment melanin in the skin. These neural crest-derived cells are present in a density of four to ten keratinocytes per melanocytes, and about 500 to 2000 melanocytes per mm2 of cutaneous tissue. This density varies based on location in the body, but differences in skin pig-mentation are based on the activity of individual melanocytes and not the number of melanocytes. In darker-skinned ethnici-ties, melanocytes create and store melanosomes in keratinocytes at a higher rate, but still have a pale-staining cytoplasm on light microscopy. Hemidesmosomes also attach these cells to the basement membrane, but the intercellular desmosomal connec-tions are not present. The melanocytes interact with keratino-cytes of the stratum basale and spinosum via long cytoplasmic extensions leading to invaginations in several keratinocytes. Tyrosinase is created and distributed into melanosomes, and these organelles travel along the dendritic processes to eventu-ally become phagocytized by keratinocytes and distributed in a supranuclear orientation. This umbrella-like cap then serves to protect the nuclear material from damage by radiation; this could explain why light-skinned ethnicities are more prone to the development of cutaneous malignancies.10,11 Melanocytes express the bcl-2 protein, S100 protein, and vimentin, which are important in the pathology and histologic diagnosis of disorders of melanocytes.Merkel Cells. Merkel cells are slow-adapting mechanorecep-tors of unclear origin essential for light touch sensation. Thus, they typically aggregate among basal keratinocytes of the skin in areas where light tactile sensation is warranted, such as the digits, lips, and bases of some hair follicles.12-14 They are joined to keratinocytes in the basal layer by desmosomes and have dense neurosecretory granules containing peptides. These neu-rosecretory granules allow communication with the CNS via afferent, unmyelinated nerve fibers that contact the basolateral portion of the cell via expanded terminal discs.3 The clinical significance of Merkel cells arises in the setting of Merkel cell carcinoma, a rare, but difficult-to-treat malignancy.Lymphocytes. Less than 1% of the cells in the epidermis are lymphocytes, and these are found primarily within the basal layer of keratinocytes. They typically express an effector memory T-cell phenotype.15,16Toker Cells. Toker cells are found in the epidermis of the nip-ple in 10% of both males and females and were first described in 1970. While distinct from Paget’s cells, immunohistochemical studies have implicated them as a possible source of Paget’s disease of the nipple.17-20Epidermal AppendagesSweat Glands. Sweat glands, like other epidermal appendages, are derived from the embryologic ectoderm, but the bulk of their substance resides within the dermis. Their structure consists of a tubular-shaped exocrine gland and excretory duct. Eccrine sweat glands make up a majority of the sweat glands in the body and are extremely important to the process of thermoregu-lation. Solutes are released into the gland via exocytosis. They are present in greatest numbers on the palms, soles, axillae, and forehead. Collectively they produce approximately 10 L/d in an adult. These glands are the most effective means of temperature regulation in humans via evaporative heat loss.A second type of sweat gland, known as the apocrine sweat gland, is found around the axilla, anus, areola, eyelid, and external auditory canal. The cells in this gland undergo an excretion process that involves decapitation of part of the cell. These apocrine glands are typically activated by sex hormones and thus activate around the time of puberty. The secretion from apocrine glands is initially odorless, but bacteria in the region may cause an odor to develop. Pheromone production may have been a function of the apocrine glands, but this may now be vestigial. While eccrine sweat glands are activated by the cho-linergic system, apocrine glands are activated by the adrenergic system.There is also a third type of sweat gland called apoeccrine. This is similar to an apocrine gland but opens directly to the skin surface and does not present until puberty. 21 Both types of glands are surrounded by a layer of myoepithelial cells that can contract and assist in the excretion of glandular contents to the skin surface.Pilosebaceous Units. A pilosebaceous unit is a multicompo-nent unit made up of a hair follicle, sebaceous gland, an erector pili muscle, and a sensory organ. These units are responsible for the production of hair and sebum and are present almost entirely Brunicardi_Ch16_p0511-p0540.indd   51519/02/19   3:08 PM 516SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIthroughout the body, sparing the palms, soles, and mucosa. They are lined by the germinal epithelium of the epidermis and thus serve as an important source of epidermal regenera-tion after partial-thickness injury or split-thickness skin graft. The sebaceous glands secrete sebum into the follicle and skin via a duct. The lipid-secreting glands are largely influenced by androgens and become functionally active during puberty. They are present in greatest numbers on the face and scalp.Nails. The nails are keratinaceous structures overlying the dis-tal phalanges of the fingers and toes. The nail is made of three main parts. The proximal portion of the nail, continuous with the germinal nail matrix, is the nail root. The root is an adher-ence point for the nail. The nail plate is the portion of the nail that lies on top of the nail bed, the shape of which is determined by the underlying phalanx. The third part of the nail is the free edge, which overlies a thickened portion of epidermis known as the hyponychium. The nail functions to protect the distal digits and augment the function of the pulp of the digits as a source of counter-pressure.Dermal ComponentsArchitecture. The dermis is a mesoderm-derived tissue that protects and supports the epidermis while anchoring it to the underlying subcutaneous tissue. It consists primarily of three unique components: a fibrous structure, the ground substance that surrounds those fibers, and the cell population that is sup-ported by the dermis. In addition, the dermis houses the neuro-vasculature that supports the epidermis and facilitates interaction with the outward environment, as well as the epidermal append-ages previously described. The dermis varies in thickness based upon body region, thinnest in the eyelids and reaching a thick-ness of up to 4 mm on the back, and is composed of two distinct layers, the papillary layer and the reticular layer. The papillary layer is made up of papillae that interdigitate with the rete ridges of the deep portion of the epidermis. This structure increases the surface area between the dermis and epidermis, increasing the resistance to shear forces as well as facilitating greater diffusion of nutrients across the dermal-epidermal junction. The papil-lary layer is characterized by a greater density of cells, and the reticular layer is almost entirely made up of a coarse network of fibers and the ground substance that surrounds it.Fibers and Ground Substance. Ninety-eight percent of the dry weight of the dermis is made up of collagen, typically 80% to 90% type I collagen and 8% to 12% type III collagen. Collagen types IV and VII are also found in much smaller quantities in the dermo-epidermal junction. The structure of the fibers varies along the depth of the dermis. At the superficial part of the dermis, in the papillary layer, the collagen bundles are arranged more loosely and are primarily made up of type III collagen.22 Deeper in the reticular layer of the dermis, the col-lagen fibrils are larger in diameter and organized into interwo-ven bundles surrounded by elastic fibers all within the hydrated ground substance. In a healthy adult, these dermal fibers are in a constant state of breakdown and production, dictated by the activity of matrix metalloproteases and fibroblasts, respectively. The activity of the MMPs is induced by UV radiation, thus lead-ing to increased degradation and disorganization of the collagen fibers, resulting in wrinkling and weakening of the dermis in sun-exposed areas.The retractile properties of skin are due in part to elas-tic fibers found throughout the dermis. These fibers, like the collagen fibers, are thinner and more perpendicularly oriented in the papillary dermis and become thicker and parallel in the reticular dermis. These elastic fibers are also produced by fibro-blasts, but they are unique in that they can stretch to twice their original length, and return to their original configuration. The elastic fibers are also in a constant state of turnover that can be negatively impacted by the effects of UV radiation.The fibrous network of the dermis lies within a hydrated amorphous ground substance made of a variety of proteoglycans and glycosaminoglycans, molecules that can contain up to 1000 times their weight in water. This ground substance facilitates the development of the structure of the dermis and cell migration within the dermis. It also assists in redistributing forces placed on the cutaneous tissues.CellsFibroblasts. Fibroblasts, like most cells in the dermis, are found in the loose, papillary layer, and are the fundamental cells of the dermis. They are responsible for producing all der-mal fibers and the ground substance within which those fibers reside. They are typically spindleor stellate-shaped and have a well-developed rough endoplasmic reticulum, typical of cells engaging in active protein production. The fibroblasts can also differentiate into myofibroblasts, cell types that harbor myofila-ments of smooth muscle actin and, more rarely, desmin, which help to decrease the surface area of the wound by contraction.23 Because of these fundamental functions of fibroblasts, they are the workhorses of wound healing, while macrophages are the orchestrators.Dermal Dendrocytes. Dermal dendrocytes are comprised of a variety of mesenchymal dendritic cells recognizable mainly by immunohistochemistry. They are responsible for antigen uptake and processing for presentation to the immune system, as well as the orchestration of processes involved in wound healing and tissue remodeling. They are typically found in the papillary dermis around vascular structures as well as sweat glands and pilosebaceous units.Mast Cells. Mast cells are effector secretory cells of the immune system that are responsible for immediate type 1 hyper-sensitivity reactions. When primed with IgE antibodies, encoun-ter with a provoking antigen causes the release of histamine and cytokines, leading to vasodilation and dermatitis commonly seen in allergic reactions.Cutaneous VasculatureWhile the epidermis is void of any vasculature structures, the dermis has a rich supply of blood and nutrients supported by paired plexuses connected by a system of arteriovenous shunts. The superficial, subpapillary plexus is located between the papillary and reticular dermis and provides a vascular loop to every papilla of the papillary dermis.24 The deep dermal plexus is located at the junction of the reticular dermis and hypodermis, and it derives its blood supply from perforating arteries of larger vessels below the cutaneous tissues. The arteriovenous shunts connecting the two horizontal plexuses can divert blood flow to or away from the skin when necessary to conserve or release body heat, or to divert blood flow to vital organs when needed. Associated with the vascular loops of the dermal papillae are the blind-ended beginnings of lymphatic vessels, which serve to transport extravasated fluid and proteins from the soft tissues back into the venous circulatory system.23Brunicardi_Ch16_p0511-p0540.indd   51619/02/19   3:08 PM 517THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUECHAPTER 16Cutaneous InnervationThe skin is a highly specialized tool for interacting with our environment and, as such, carries a rich network of nervous tis-sue to facilitate this purpose. An afferent component made up of free nerve endings and specialized corpuscular receptors is responsible for conveying to our brain information about the environment, while numerous functions of the cutaneous tis-sues, such as AV-shunting, piloerection, and sweat secretion are controlled by the myelinated and unmyelinated fibers of an efferent component of the CNS.25HypodermisThe hypodermis, or subcutaneous tissue, is a richly vascularized loose connective tissue that separates and attaches the dermis to the underlying muscle and fascia. It is made up primarily of pockets of lipid-laden adipocytes separated by septae that contain cellular components similar to the dermis, neurovas-cular structures supplying the cutaneous tissue, and the deepest parts of sweat glands.26 The hypodermis serves multiple func-tions—namely insulation, storage of energy, and protection from mechanical forces, allowing the skin to glide over the underlying tissues.INFLAMMATORY CONDITIONSHidradenitis SuppurativaHidradenitis suppurativa, also known as acne inversa, is a pain-ful skin condition typically affecting areas of the body bear-ing apocrine glands—typically the axillae, perineum, and the inframammary and inguinal folds. It is characterized by tender, deep nodules that can expand, coalesce, spontaneously drain, and form persistent sinus tracts in some cases leading to sig-nificant scarring and hyperkeratosis. There can be superimposed bacterial infection during episodic flares of the disease as well. In women, flares often occur premenstrually.Hidradenitis suppurativa typically affects females (female to male ratio of 3:1), most commonly during the third decade of life and has demonstrated associations with smoking and obesity.27 While the etiology of hidradenitis is incompletely understood, it is thought to be the consequence of a genetic pre-disposition exacerbated by environmental factors. About one-third of affected patients endorse a family history of the disease. A specific gene locus has not been identified, but mutations in the γ-secretase gene have been linked to the disease in some familial cases.28 The histologic progression of the disease is characterized by atrophy of the sebaceous gland, followed by inflammation of the pilosebaceous unit from both the innate and adaptive immune systems, causing hyperkeratosis and eventual granuloma forma-tion.29 Some studies have shown involvement of the IL12-IL23 pathway and TNF-α, supporting the theory that the disease is at least in part caused by an inflammatory disorder.30,31The diagnosis of hidradenitis is clinical, and the presenta-tion is most commonly categorized by the Hurley classification system, divided into three stages. Single or multiple nodules or abscesses without any sinus tracts or scarring would be classi-fied as stage 1 disease. As abscesses recur and sinus tracts and scarring form, the disease is classified as Hurley stage 2. Stage 3  is the most advanced stage, with diffuse disease and intercon-nected sinus tracts and abscesses.Treatment is typically based on Hurley staging, with topi-cal and systemic antibiotics (typically clindamycin) being used for stage I and II disease,32 while radical excision, laser treat-ment, and biologic agents are reserved for more advanced stage II and III disease.33-36 Even with complete surgical resection, recurrence rates are still high, reaching up to 50% in the infra-mammary and inguino-perineal regions. Because of increased risks of recurrence with primary closure, it is preferable to pur-sue other methods of wound closure, like split-thickness skin grafting, local or regional flaps, and healing by secondary inten-tion. Topical antimicrobial creams should be used during the healing process.Pyoderma GangrenosumPyoderma gangrenosum is an uncommon inflammatory con-dition of the skin characterized by the development of sterile pustules which progress to painful, ulcerating lesions with purple borders. This disease is typically diagnosed between the ages of 40 and 60 years and has a slightly higher prevalence in females. Although the exact etiology is currently unknown, it typically arises in individuals with a hematologic malignancy or inflammatory disorder, such as inflammatory bowel disease or rheumatoid arthritis. The most commonly affected sites are the legs, but lesions can occur anywhere. Extracutaneous mani-festations are also possible, and it can affect mucosal tissue and solid organs. While the initial pathology is sterile, it can easily become secondarily infected. The diagnosis of this condition is based upon history and clinical presentation after the exclu-sion of infectious etiologies. There are five distinct types of pyoderma gangrenosum described: vegetative, pustular, peris-tomal, ulcerative, and bullous. The pathogenesis of this disease is incompletely understood, but it is thought to be a genetic predisposition that is triggered by an environmental influence. An inciting cutaneous injury can often be identified preceding the ulceration. Histopathologic studies have demonstrated sig-nificantly elevated levels of inflammatory cytokines, as well as neutrophils exhibiting aberrant chemotactic signaling.37-39 Treat-ment of pyoderma gangrenosum generally involves treatment of the underlying disorder (i.e., management of Crohn’s disease) as well as systemic anti-inflammatory medications such as steroids or immunosuppressants like calcineurin inhibitors. Patients with Crohn’s disease and PG treated with infliximab (tumor necrosis factor [TNF]-α inhibitor) and etanercept (TNF-α antagonist) had a marked improvement in their PG.40,41 In cases of peri-stomal pyoderma gangrenosum, topical calcineurin inhibitors have been shown to be useful.42 Concurrent treatment with sys-temic and topical antimicrobials, as well as local wound care, including the debridement of purulent exudate and devitalized tissue, is also beneficial. Surgical therapy without proper sys-temic treatment will generally result in recurrent disease. Final wound closure can be achieved with primary closure or grafts.Epidermal NecrolysisEpidermal necrolysis (EN) is a rare mucocutaneous disorder characterized by cutaneous destruction at the dermoepidermal junction. EN is commonly referred to as either Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS) or toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) depending on the extent of skin involvement present. SJS refers to cases in which <10% of total body surface area is involved, while cases with >30% involvement are considered TEN, with an SJS-TEN overlap syndrome referring to all cases in between. These two disorders are now considered to be the same clinical entity that vary simply on the extent of cutaneous involvement. Erythema multiforme was once considered as part of the clinical subgroup Brunicardi_Ch16_p0511-p0540.indd   51719/02/19   3:08 PM 518SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 16-2. Blisters on the forearm of a patient several days after exposure to vancomycin. Note the clear antishear dressing and the dark silver-impregnated antimicrobial dressing (Acticoat).encompassing SJS and TEN, but it is now thought to be a sepa-rate entity related to herpetic or Mycoplasma infections.The clinical presentation usually occurs within 8 weeks of initiation of a new drug treatment and is characterized by a macular rash beginning in the face and trunk and progressing to the extremities within hours to days. A positive Nikolsky sign is often present, in which lateral pressure on the skin causes separation of the epidermis from the dermis. (Fig. 16-2). The macular rashes then begin to blister and coalesce, forming bul-lae that eventually burst, leaving partial thickness wounds with exposed dermis. Mucous membrane involvement is seen in 90% of cases and can involve the oral, genital, and ocular mucosa, as well as the respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts. The cutaneous manifestations can also be associated with high fever and pain. It is important to distinguish EN from infectious etiologies like staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome due to their similar clini-cal presentation.While the etiology is not entirely clear, it is well docu-mented to be a reaction to various drugs. While over 100 drugs have been implicated as the inciting agent of EN,43,44 there are a handful of high-risk drugs that account for a majority of the cases.45 The drugs most commonly associated with EN include aromatic anticonvulsants, sulfonamides, allopurinol, oxi-cams (nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs), and nevirap-ine. The pathophysiology is also incompletely understood, but it has generally been accepted that it involves cell-mediated cytotoxicity targeted at keratinocytes and the cytokine-induced expression of “death-receptors” like Fas-L. Recently, studies have demonstrated greatly increased concentrations of granuly-sin, an apoptotic protein secreted by cytotoxic T cells, within EN lesions, and thus this protein may be implicated in the patho-genesis of EN.46 A genetic component may also exist, and genetic testing before carbamazepine treatment is recommended in people of Han Chinese ancestry to exclude carriers of HLA-B1502.47The prognosis of EN is generally related to the surface area affected and secondary complications of extensive cutane-ous damage, like secondary infections and loss of hemodynamic stability due to increased insensible losses and third spacing of fluid. Modern burnand ICU-care has decreased mortality 4significantly.48 The first principle of management of EN is dis-continuation of the offending agent, and in drugs with short half-lives, this can significantly increase chances of survival.49 Other management principles include maintenance of euvolemia, early enteral feeding, and measures to reduce risk of infection. This includes surgical debridement of devitalized tissue, the use of topical antibiotics or antimicrobial dressings, nonadherent dress-ings, or temporary biologic or synthetic grafts until the underly-ing dermis can reepithelialize. The cornea should regularly be inspected with a Wood’s lamp to evaluate for corneal sloughing. The use of systemic corticosteroids in the acute setting is con-troversial as there have been mixed results. Some studies have shown a slowed disease progression when corticosteroid therapy was administered early,50 while others showed increased rates of sepsis and overall mortality with no effect on disease progression. IVIG has also been used in an effort to inhibit the Fas-L cytotoxic pathway, with some mixed results. A 2007 meta-analysis of nine IVIG trials concluded that high-dose IVIG improves survival,51 while a large retrospective analysis in 2013 concluded that there was no mortality benefit.52 Other agents, like cyclosporine A, plasmapheresis and anti-TNF-α have been studied with mixed results.48 Recent guidelines out of the United Kingdom confirm that there is still no treatment with clearly demonstrated benefit in the management of EN.53 The cutaneous manifestations of EN generally progress for 7 to 10 days, while reepithelialization gen-erally occurs over 3 weeks.INJURIESRadiation-Induced InjuriesRadiation injuries can result from exposure to electromag-netic radiation from industrial/occupation applications or, more commonly, from environmental exposure and medical treatments. This is especially true in the continually evolv-ing role of radiation therapy in the multidisciplinary approach to oncologic disease and other skin conditions. In addition to treatment for lymphomas, head and neck squamous cell car-cinomas, and prostate adenocarcinoma, it is often an adjuvant or neoadjuvant component of the surgical treatment of rectal, breast, esophageal, and cervical cancers. Although the new modalities and principles of radiation therapy have allowed for more precise administration of this therapy, there is still collateral damage in the cutaneous and visceral tissues sur-rounding the treatment site.Environmental sources of radiation damage are typi-cally from UV radiation. UVC rays are filtered by the ozone layer, so the only UV rays that humans typically encounter are UVA (320–400 nm) and UVB (290–320 nm).54 The amount of exposure to UV radiation is dependent on seasonal, temporal, geographic and environmental variables. Ninety-five percent of the UV rays that reach the earth’s surface are UVA rays. This radiation is less energetic (longer wavelength) than UVB rays and affects the cutaneous tissues differently. UVA waves pen-etrate deeper into the tissues, with 20% to 30% reaching the deep dermis. UVB rays are mostly absorbed in the epidermis, with 70% reaching the stratum corneum, 20% reaching the deep epidermis, and only 10% reaching the papillary dermis. Major chromophores in the cutaneous tissue include nucleic acids, aro-matic amino acids, and melanin.The short-term effects of solar radiation include erythema and pigmentation. The resultant erythema peaks at 6 to 24 hours Brunicardi_Ch16_p0511-p0540.indd   51819/02/19   3:08 PM 519THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUECHAPTER 16after exposure. The pigmentation occurs differently for UVA and UVB rays. Pigmentation occurs because of photooxidation of melanin by UVA radiation. Partial fading of this pigment change occurs within an hour after exposure, but with higher and repeated doses of UVA, stable residual pigmentation is observed. UVB waves induce neomelanization, increasing the total amount of melanin in the epidermal tissues and resulting in an effect that is observable 72 hours after exposure. The increase in melanin as a result of UVB exposure serves as a protective mechanism to defend the nuclei of the basal keratinocytes from further radiation-induced damage by absorbing the high-energy radiation in future exposures. Long-term effects of exposure to UV radiation can lead to chronic skin changes, such as irregular pigmentation, melasma, postinflammatory pigmentation, and actinic lentigines (sun spots). Lysozyme, an enzyme secreted by cells of the immune system, typically inhibits the activity of collagenase and elastase, playing a role in turnover of the elas-tin and collagen network of the dermis. Long-term exposure to UV radiation increases the activity of lysozyme, thus impairing the natural turnover of these fibers, resulting in a disorganized accumulation of elastin, and an increase in the ratio of type III to type I collagen. This results in loss of firmness and resilience of the skin, leading to wrinkles and an aged appearance.The other major source of radiation injury that a surgeon will likely encounter is from therapeutic radiation. The vari-ous forms of radiation work to destroy the replicative potential of the target cells via damage to the nucleic acid structures in the cell. This is typically used to treat oncologic disease, but it can also be used to treat benign disease like eczema, psoria-sis, and keloid scarring at relatively low exposures. While this goal is accomplished, surrounding tissues are also affected and damaged. The most radiosensitive components of the cutane-ous tissue are the basal keratinocytes, hair follicle stem cells, and melanocytes. Exposure to this intense radiation results in disorganized, uncontrolled cell death, leading to the release of reactive oxygen species and further damage and inflammation to the surrounding cellular network. Damage to the basal kera-tinocytes and fibroblasts hinders the replicative capacity of the epidermis and dermis, respectively.Acute skin changes to these structures manifest within weeks as erythema, edema, and alopecia. Permanent hyper-pigmentation, tightening, thickening, and fibrosis of the skin become apparent as the tissue attempts to heal. In severe radia-tion injury, there can be complete loss of the epidermis, resulting in partial-thickness wounds and fibrinous exudate. Reepitheli-alization typically occurs 14 days following initial injury, pro-vided other variables affecting wound healing are optimized (bacterial colonization, nutrition.) Long-term effects include compromise of the functional integrity of the skin secondary to thrombosis and necrosis of capillaries, hypovascularity, telangi-ectasia, ulceration, fibrosis, poor wound healing, and infection. These can present weeks to years after exposure.Treatment of minor radiation injury includes skin mois-turizers and local wound care when appropriate. Severe radia-tion injury may warrant surgical excision and reconstruction with free-tissue transfer from a part of the body unaffected by radiation.Trauma-Induced InjuriesMechanical Injury. Physical disruption of the skin can occur via numerous mechanisms. Treatment of the wound is depen-dent on the size of the defect left behind by the insult, any exposed structures that remain in the wound bed, and the pres-ence of contaminating debris or infection. Clean, simple lacera-tions can be irrigated, debrided, and closed primarily. There is no systematic evidence to guide the optimal timing of closure within 24 hours,55 but many surgeons will close primarily within 6 hours of injury. Grossly contaminated or infected wounds should be allowed to heal by secondary intention or delayed primary closure.56 In wounds allowed to heal secondarily, nega-tive pressure wound therapy can increase the rate of granu-lation tissue formation.57 Tangential abrasions are treated similarly to burn wounds, with depth of injury dictating man-agement. Partial thickness injuries with preservation of the regenerative pilosebaceous units can be allowed to heal on their own while maintaining a moist, antimicrobial wound environ-ment. Full thickness wounds may require reconstruction with splitor full-thickness skin grafting depending on the size of the defect and the need for future cosmesis and durability. In the setting of devitalization of full thickness tissue, the damaged tissue may be used as a full thickness graft, provided the wound is appropriately cleaned.Bite Wounds. Dog bites alone recently accounted for  4.5 million bites to humans in a single year. Bites from dogs, humans, and other animals can quickly lead to severe deep-tissue infections if not properly recognized and treated.58 The most com-mon location of bite wounds is the hand. This area is of particular importance, as the anatomy of the hand allows for rapid pro-gression of deep infection long relatively avascular structures and can lead to long term morbidity if not adequately treated.59 Bite bacteriology is influenced by normal mouth flora, as well as  the content of the offending animal’s diet. Early presentation bite wounds yield polymicrobial cultures, while cultures from a late infection will typically exhibit one dominant pathogen. Common aerobic bacteria include Pasteurella multocida, Streptococcus, Staphylococcus, Neisseria, and Corynebacterium; anaerobic organisms include Fusobacterium, Porphyromonas, Prevotella, Propionibacterium, Bacteroides, and Peptostreptococcus.  Capnocytophaga canimorsus bacteria after a dog bite are rare, and it appears that immunocompromised patients are most susceptible to this type of infection and its complications. The bacterial load in dog bites is heavily influenced by the last meal of the animal, increasing with wet food and shorter time since the last meal60 (Fig. 16-3). Cat bite bacteriology is similar, with slightly higher prevalence of Pasturella species. Infections from  Francisella tularensis (tularemia) and Yersinia pestis (human plague) have been reported.Bacteria colonizing human bites are those present on the skin or in the mouth. These include the gram-positive aerobic organisms Staphylococcus aureus, Staphylococcus epidermidis, and Streptococcus species, and anaerobes including Peptococ-cus species, Peptostreptococcus species, Bacteroides species, and Eikenella corrodens (facultative anaerobe). Human bites are characterized by a higher bacterial load (>105). Antibiotic prophylaxis after a human bite is recommended as it has been shown to significantly decrease the rate of infection.61 A course of 3 to 7 days of amoxicillin/clavulanate is typically used. Alter-natives are doxycycline or clindamycin with ciprofloxacin.There is controversy over the closure of bite wounds. Typically, in areas of aesthetic importance, the wound is thor-oughly irrigated and debrided and primarily closed with a short course of antibiotics and close follow-up to monitor for signs of infection. In areas that are less cosmetically sensitive and bites that look grossly contaminated or infected, the wounds 5Brunicardi_Ch16_p0511-p0540.indd   51919/02/19   3:08 PM 520SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIABCFigure 16-3. A. Dog bite to the face involving the lip. B. Primary multilayer closure following debridement and irrigation. Closure was performed due to aesthetic and functional considerations. C. Follow up 1 week after injury following suture removal.are allowed to close secondarily. Special consideration should be paid to puncture wounds in areas like the hands, which have multiple small compartments. Some groups have found that as long as wounds are properly irrigated and cleansed with povidone iodine solution while a short course of antibiotics is prescribed, there is no difference in infection rates in dog bite wounds closed primarily.62Rabies in domestic animals in the United States is rare, and most cases are contracted from bat bites. In developing countries, dog bites remain the most common source of rabies. Management of this is beyond the scope of this chapter.Caustic InjuryChemical burns make up to 10.7% of all burns but account for up to 30% of all burn-related deaths.63 The number of cases of industrial chemical burns is declining while chemical burns in the domestic setting is on the rise. The extent of tissue destruc-tion from a chemical burn is dependent on type of chemical agent, concentration, volume, and time of exposure, among other variables.Injuries from acidic solutions are typically not as severe as those from basic solutions. This is due to the mechanism of injury of each. Acidic injuries typically result in superficial eschar formation because the coagulative necrosis caused by acids limits tissue penetration. Acids can cause thermal injury in addition to the coagulative necrosis due to exothermic reactions. Without treatment, acid injuries will progress to erythema and ulcers through the subcutaneous tissue. Injuries from basic solu-tions undergo liquefactive necrosis, unlike acids, and thus have no barrier preventing them from causing deeper tissue injury. Brunicardi_Ch16_p0511-p0540.indd   52019/02/19   3:08 PM 521THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUECHAPTER 16Figure 16-4. Self-inflicted alkali burn with cleaner fluid.(Fig. 16-4). Common examples of agents that often cause alka-line chemical burns are sodium hydroxide (drain decloggers and paint removers) and calcium hydroxide (cement).Treatment for acidic or alkaline chemical burns is first and foremost centered around dilution of the offending agent, typically using distilled water or saline for 30 minutes for acidic burns and 2 hours for alkaline injuries. Attempting to neutralize the offending agent is typically discouraged, as it does not offer an advantage over dilution and the neutralization reaction could be exothermic, increasing the amount of tissue damage. After removal of the caustic agent, the burn is treated like other burns and is based on the depth of tissue injury. Topical antimicrobials and nonadherent dressings are used for partial-thickness wounds with surgical debridement and reconstruction if needed for full-thickness injuries. Liposuction and saline dilution have been used in cases were injury to deeper structures was suspected.64 Prophylactic use of antibiotics is generally avoided.There are several chemical agents that have specific treat-ments, including the use of calcium gluconate for hydrofluoric acid burns and polyethylene glycol for phenol burns. These types of treatments are specific to the offending agent and out-side of the scope of this chapter.One type of caustic injury that is commonly seen in the hos-pital is extravasation injury, especially in the setting of chemo-therapeutic administration. Extravasation is estimated to occur in 0.1% to 0.7% of all cytotoxic drug administrations. Like other chemical burns, extravasation injuries depend on properties of the offending agent, time of exposure, concentration, and volume of drug delivered to the tissues. Extravasation injuries typically cause little damage, but they can cause significant morbidity in those with thin skin, fragile veins, and poor tissue perfusion, like neonates and the critically ill. (Fig. 16-5).Initial presentation of extravasation injuries usually involves swelling, pain, erythema, and blistering. It may take days or longer for the extent of tissue damage to demarcate. Thorough evaluation to rule out injury to deeper tissues should be conducted. The treatment for extravasation injuries is usu-ally conservative management with limb elevation, but saline aspiration with a liposuction cannula in an effort to dilute and remove the offending agent has been used soon after injury pre-sentation.65 Infiltration of specific antidotes directed toward the offending agent has been described, but it lacks the support of randomized controlled trials, and no consensus in treatment has been reached.66 It is best to avoid cold or warm compression because the impaired temperature regulation of the damaged tissue may lead to thermal injury. After the wound demarcates, full-thickness skin death should be surgically debrided and man-aged like other wounds based on depth of injury.Thermal InjuryThermal injury involves the damage or destruction of the soft tissue due to extremes of temperature, and the extent of injury is dependent on the degree temperature to which the tissue is exposed and the duration of exposure. The pathophysiology and management are discussed in detail in a separate chapter. Briefly, the management of thermal wounds is initially guided by the concept of three distinct zones of injury. The focus of thermal injury that has already undergone necrosis is known as the  zone of coagulation. Well outside the zone of coagulation is the zone of hyperemia, which exhibits signs of inflammation but Brunicardi_Ch16_p0511-p0540.indd   52119/02/19   3:08 PM 522SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIABCFigure 16-5. A. Potassium chloride intravenous infiltrate in a critically ill patient on multiple vasopressors. B. Following operative debride-ment to paratenon layer. C. Temporary coverage with Integra skin substitute.will likely remain viable. In between these two zones is a zone of stasis with questionable tissue viability, and it is this area at which proper burn care can salvage viable tissue and decrease the extent of injury67 (Fig. 16-6).The mechanisms of injury in hypothermic situation dif-fer. Direct cellular damage can occur as a result of the crys-tallization of intracellular and extracellular components with resultant dehydration of the cell and disruption of lipid protein Brunicardi_Ch16_p0511-p0540.indd   52219/02/19   3:08 PM 523THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUECHAPTER 16complexes. During rewarming, further damage occurs because of the shifts of fluid in response to melting ice. Indirect effects of hypothermic injury include microvascular thrombosis and tis-sue ischemia. This, together with subsequent edema and inflam-mation upon rewarming, propagates tissue injury even further.68 Even so, the standard treatment of frostbite injury begins with rapid rewarming to 40°C to 42°C. In addition, further treatment includes debridement of all devitalized tissue, hydrotherapy, elevation, topical antimicrobials, topical antithromboxanes (aloe vera), and systemic antiprostaglandins (aspirin).Pressure InjuryA problem that all surgeons will encounter very early in their careers is pressure necrosis. The development of pressure ulcers is increasingly being regarded as a marker of quality of care, and strategies aimed at prevention have been the source of recent study. Pressure ulcers are known to affect the critically ill (22% to 49% of all critically ill patients are affected), but pressure sources can also affect the chronically bedor wheelchair-bound, patients undergoing surgical procedures, and those with Foley catheters, artificial airways, or other medical equipment (Fig. 16-7).Pressure ulcers can present in several ways depending on the stage at presentation. They are typically grouped into 4 stages: stage 1, nonblanching erythema over intact skin; stage 2, partial-thickness injury with blistering or exposed dermis; stage 3, full-thickness injury extending down to, but not including, fascia and without undermining of adjacent  tissue; and stage 4, full-thickness skin injury with destruction Figure 16-6. Scald burn of upper arm, back, and buttock. Pink areas are superficial partial-thickness burn, whereas whiter areas are deeper burns in the dermis.ABFigure 16-7. A. Pressure wound after removal of a poorly padded cast. Stage cannot be determined until debridement but is at least a grade 2 lesion. B. Decubitus ulcer of the sacral region, stage 4, to the tendinous and bone layers.or necrosis of muscle, bone, tendon, or joint capsule. Tissue destruction occurs most easily at bony prominences due to the inability to redistribute forces along a greater surface area. The average perfusion pressure of the microcirculation is about  30 mmHg, and pressures greater than that cause local tissue isch-emia. In animal models, pressure greater than twice the capillary perfusion pressure produces irreversible tissue necrosis in just  2 hours. The most common areas affected are the ischial tuber-osity (28%), greater trochanter (19%), sacrum (17%), and heel (9%). Tissue pressures can measure up to 300 mmHg in the ischial region during sitting and 150 mmHg over the sacrum while lying supine.69 Tissues with a higher metabolic demand are Brunicardi_Ch16_p0511-p0540.indd   52319/02/19   3:09 PM 524SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IItypically susceptible to insult from tissue hypoperfusion more rapidly than tissues with a lower metabolic demand. Because of this, it is possible to have muscle necrosis beneath cutaneous tis-sue that has yet to develop signs of irreversible damage.Management of pressure sores first and foremost involves avoidance of prolonged pressure to at-risk areas. Strategies typically employed are pressure-offloading hospital  beds or assist devices, patient repositioning every 2 hours, early mobilization, prophylactic silicone dressings, and nurs-ing education.70 From a wound healing perspective, patients should be nutritionally optimized and surgically debrided as appropriate.71,72 The presence of stage III or IV pressure ulcers is not necessarily an indication for surgery, and fevers in a patient with chronic pressure ulcers are often from a urinary or pulmonary source.73-75 Goals of surgical intervention are drain-age of fluid collections, wide debridement of devitalized and scarred tissue, excision of pseudobursa, ostectomy of involved bones, hemostasis, and tension-free closure of dead space with well-vascularized tissue (muscle, musculocutaneous, or fasciocutaneous flaps). Stage 2 and 3 ulcers may be left to heal secondarily after debridement. Subatmospheric pressure wound therapy devices (vacuum-assisted closure) play a role in wound management by removing excess interstitial fluid, promoting capillary circulation, decreasing bacterial coloniza-tion, increasing vascularity and granulation tissue formation, and contributing to wound size reduction.57BIOENGINEERED SKIN SUBSTITUTESThe management of soft tissue defects is more commonly including the use of bioengineered skin substitutes. These products are typically derived from or designed to imitate dermal tissue, providing a regenerative matrix or stimulating autogenous dermal regeneration while protecting the underly-ing soft tissue and structures. There are generally four types of skin substitutes: (a) autografts, which are taken from the patient and placed over a soft tissue defect (split-thickness and full-thickness skin grafts); (b) allografts, which are taken from human organ donors; (c) xenografts, which are taken from members of other animal species; and (d) synthetic and semisynthetic biomaterials that are constructed de novo and may be combined with biologic materials.76 Acellular dermal matrices are one type of skin substitute and are used quite often for wound healing and support of soft tissue reconstruction. They are from allogenic or xenogeneic sources and are com-posed of collagen, elastin, laminin, and glycosaminoglycans. Tissue incorporation generally occurs within 1 to 2 weeks.77 Dermal matrices have been shown to be an effective bridge to split-thickness skin grafting for wounds that have exposed nerves, vessels, tendons, bones, or cartilage.78 Bilayered matri-ces can also be used to promote dermal regeneration in acute or chronic wounds. These products can be temporary, needing to be removed prior to grafting, or permanent, integrating into the host tissue and being grafted directly.BACTERIAL INFECTIONS OF THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUEIntroductionIn 1998, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) categorized infections of the skin and skin structures for the purpose of clini-cal trials. A revision of this categorization in 2010 excluded spe-cific diagnoses such as bite wounds, decubitus ulcers, diabetic foot ulcers, perirectal abscesses, and necrotizing fasciitis. The general division into “uncomplicated” and “complicated” skin infections can be applied to help guide management.79 The agent most commonly responsible for skin and soft tissue infections is S aureus and is isolated in 44% of spec-imens.80 Less common isolates include other gram-positive bacteria such as Enterococcus species (9%), β-hemolytic strep-tococci (4%), and coagulase-negative staphylococci (3%).  S aureus is more commonly responsible for causing abscesses. Patients with an impaired immune system (diabetic, cirrhotic, or neutropenic patients) are at higher risk of infection from gram-negative species like Pseudomonas aeruginosa (11%), Esche-richia coli (7.2%), Enterobacter (5%), Klebsiella (4%), and Serratia (2%), among others.Uncomplicated Skin InfectionsUncomplicated infections involve relatively small surface area (<75 cm2) and bacterial invasion limited to the skin and its appendages. Impetigo, erysipelas, cellulitis, folliculitis, and simple abscess fall into this category. Impetigo is a superficial infection, typically of the face, that occurs most frequently in infants or children, resulting in honey-colored crusting. Erysip-elas is a cutaneous infection localized to the upper layers of the dermis, while cellulitis is a deeper infection, affecting the deeper dermis and subcutaneous tissue. Folliculitis describes inflammation of the hair follicle, and a furuncle describes a fol-licle with swelling and a collection of purulent material. These lesions can sometimes coalesce into a carbuncle, an abscess with multiple different draining sinus tracts.It is recommended to culture infectious lesions to help identify the causative agent, but treatment without these studies is reasonable in typical cases. Minor infections can be safely treated with topical antimicrobials like 2% mupirocin to pro-vide coverage for methicillin-resistant S aureus (MRSA). Fol-liculitis generally resolves with adequate hygiene and warm soaks. Furuncles, carbuncles and other simple abscesses can be incised, drained, and packed, typically without the use of systemic antibiotics. The decision to use systemic antibiotics after incision and drainage of abscess should be made based upon presence or absence of systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) criteria.81For nonpurulent, uncomplicated cellulitis in which there is no drainable collection, systemic antibiotic coverage for β-hemolytic streptococcus is recommended. If there is no improvement in 48 to 72 hours or worsening of symptoms, antibiotic coverage should be added for MRSA. Systemic therapy for purulent cellulitis, which includes cutaneous abscesses, should cover MRSA, and empiric coverage for streptococcus is likely unnecessary. Antibiotic coverage for streptococcus is generally accomplished with β-lactam antibi-otics like penicillins or first-generation cephalosporins. MRSA coverage is accomplished with clindamycin, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, linezolid, and tetracyclines. Clindamycin, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, linezolid, or tetracycline combined with a β-lactam can all be used for dual coverage of streptococcus and MRSA.Complicated Skin InfectionsComplicated skin infections include superficial cellulitis encompassing a large surface area (>75 cm2) or deeper infec-tions extending below the dermis. Necrotizing soft tissue infec-tions (NSTIs), including necrotizing fasciitis, can rapidly cause extensive morbidity and mortality, thus their prompt diagnosis and appropriate management is crucial. A thorough history and 6Brunicardi_Ch16_p0511-p0540.indd   52419/02/19   3:09 PM 525THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUECHAPTER 16exam should be performed to elicit information (e.g., history of trauma, diabetes mellitus, cirrhosis, neutropenia, bites, IV or subcutaneous drug abuse) as well as physical findings such as crepitus (gas-forming organism), fluctuance (abscess), purpura (sepsis in streptococcal infections), bullae (streptococci, Vibrio vulnificus), lymphangitis, and signs of a systemic inflammatory response.Extensive cellulitis is managed in a similar fashion as simple cellulitis. Initial treatment consists of intravenous anti-biotics that cover β-hemolytic streptococcus, such as ceph-alosporins, with the addition of MRSA coverage if there is no improvement in symptoms. Vancomycin is typically the first choice for MRSA coverage, but this drug is inferior to β-lactams for coverage of MSSA. Alternative antibiotics that are typically effective against MRSA are linezolid, daptomy-cin, tigecycline, and telavancin. Clindamycin is approved for use against MRSA, but resistance rates are increasing, and its use is discouraged if institutional rates of clindamycin resis-tance are >15%.81Necrotizing soft tissue infections occur 500 to 1500 times a year in the United States82 and are frequently asso-ciated with diabetes mellitus, intravenous drug abuse, obe-sity, alcohol abuse, immune suppression, and malnutrition.83 Because NSTIs can often present initially with nonspecific findings, the physician should always have a high index of suspicion when evaluating a patient. The threshold for surgi-cal exploration and debridement should be low, particularly in a weakened host. Occasionally an inciting event or point of entry can be identified, but in 20% to 50% of cases, the exact cause is unknown. These infections are associated with a high mortality, ranging from 25% to 40%, with higher rates in the truncal and perineal cases.NSTIs are classified based on anatomic site, involved tis-sues, and the offending organisms. NSTIs commonly originate at the genitalia, perineum (Fournier’s gangrene), and abdomi-nal wall. Subcutaneous tissue, fascia and muscle can all be affected. Necrotizing fasciitis involves infection of the fascia, and the infection can quickly travel along the easily separable, avascular planes. There are three types of NSTIs when clas-sified by the offending agent. The most common is type 1, which is caused by a polymicrobial source including gram-positive cocci, gram-negative rods, and anaerobic bacteria, specifically Clostridium perfringens and C septicum. Type 2 is caused by a monomicrobial source of β-hemolytic Strepto-coccus or Staphylococcus species, with MRSA contributing to the increasing number of community-acquired NSTIs.84 A his-tory of trauma is often elicited and can be associated with toxic shock syndrome. Type 3 is a rare but fulminant subset result-ing from a V vulnificus infection of traumatized skin exposed to a body of salt-water.In addition to signs of SIRS, patients can present with skin changes like erythema, bullae, necrosis, pain, and crepitus. (Fig. 16-8). They may exhibit signs of hemodynamic instability, and gas within the soft tissues on imaging is pathognomonic. Patients can present with a range of symptoms, from minimal skin change to frank necrosis, and the time of progression to fulminant disease varies in each patient. Laboratory values are nonspecific and resemble values seen in sepsis. There have been attempts at creating scoring systems to assist in the diagnosis of NSTI. One study in 2000 used the criteria of a white blood cell count >15,400 and a serum sodium level <135 mmol/L. This test was found to have a negative predictive value of 99%, but a positive predictive value of only 26%.85 In 2004, six criteria ABFigure 16-8. A. Initial presentation of necrotizing soft issue infec-tion in an obese, diabetic patient. B. Following operative debride-ment to muscle layer.were used and referred to as the Laboratory Risk Indicator for Necrotizing Fasciitis, or LRINEC, and included C-reactive protein (CRP), white blood cell (WBC) count, hemoglobin, plasma sodium, creatinine, and glucose.86 A score of 8 or greater Brunicardi_Ch16_p0511-p0540.indd   52519/02/19   3:09 PM 526SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIsuggested a high probability of NSTI, 6 or 7 an intermediate probability, and <5 a low probability. This test was internally validated and found to have a PPV of 92% and an NPV of 96%. However, some have criticized this study because of its small sample size and over-reliance on CRP, which can be elevated in multiple other conditions. Blood cultures are not always posi-tive, and tissue samples will demonstrate necrosis, white blood cell infiltration, thrombosis, angiitis, and microorganisms. The use of cross-sectional imaging in the diagnosis of NSTI is lim-ited, and it should not delay appropriate surgical treatment.Three principles form the foundation of the management of NSTIs: (a) source control with wide surgical debridement, (b) broad-spectrum intravenous antibiotics, and (c) supportive care and resuscitation. As soon as the diagnosis is clear or the sus-picion is high, the patient should be taken for operative explo-ration and debridement. Incisions should be made parallel to neurovascular structures and through the fascial plane, removing any purulent or devitalized tissue until viable, bleeding tissue is encountered. On inspection, the tissue will appear necrotic with dead muscle, thrombosed vessels, the classic “dishwater” fluid, and a positive finger test, in which the tissue layers can be easily separated from one another. In Fournier’s gangrene, one should aim to preserve the anal sphincter as well as the testicles (blood supply is independent of the overlying tissue and is usually not infected). Return to the OR should be planned for the next 24 to 48 hours to verify source control and the extent of damage. Broad spectrum antibiotic therapy should be initiated as soon as possible, with the intent of covering gram positives (including MRSA), gram negatives, and anaerobic organisms. The Infec-tious Diseases Society of America recommends initiating ther-apy with intravenous vancomycin and piperacillin/tazobactam, unless a monomicrobial agent is identified, in which case more directed therapy would be appropriate.81 Antibiotic therapy should continue until the patient requires no further debride-ment, is clinically improving, and has been afebrile for 48 to 72 hours.Adjuncts to surgery include topical antimicrobial creams, subatmospheric pressure wound dressings, and optimization of nutrition. Controversial topics include the role of hyperbaric oxygen87 (may inhibit infection by creating an oxidative burst, with anecdotally fewer debridements required and improved survival, but limited availability) and IVIG (may modulate the immune response to streptococcal superantigens). Wound clo-sure is performed once bacteriologic, metabolic, and nutritional balances are obtained.ActinomycosisActinomycetes is a genus of gram positive rods that inhabit the oropharynx, gastrointestinal tract, and female genital tract. The most commonly isolated species causing disease in humans is  A isrealii. The cervicofacial form of Actinomycetes infection is the most common presentation, representing 55% of cases, and typically presenting as an acute pyogenic infection in the submandibular or paramandibular area. Patients can also exhibit chronic soft tissue swelling, fibrosis, and sinus discharge of sulfur granules.88 Demonstration of gram-positive filamentous organisms and sulfur granules on histological examination is strongly supportive of a diagnosis of actinomycosis.89 These infections are typically treated with high doses of intravenous followed by oral penicillin therapy. Surgical treatment is uti-lized if there is extensive necrotic tissue, poor response to anti-biotics, or the need for tissue biopsy to rule out malignancy.VIRAL INFECTIONS WITH SURGICAL IMPLICATIONSHuman Papillomavirus InfectionsHuman papillomaviruses represent a group of over 100 iso-lated types of small DNA viruses of the Papovavirus fam-ily that is highly host-specific to humans.90 These viruses are transmitted via cutaneous contact with individuals who have clinical or subclinical infection and occur more fre-quently in immunocompromised individuals. The viruses are responsible for the development of verrucae, or warts. These are histologically characterized by nonspecific findings of hyperkeratosis, papillomatosis, and acanthosis, as well as the hallmark koilocytes (clear halo around nucleus). Clinically, these generally arise as slow-growing papules on the skin or mucosal surfaces. Regression of HPV lesions is frequently an immune-mediated, spontaneous event that is exemplified by the persistent and extensive manifestation of this virus in the immune-compromised patient.The subtypes are generally grouped, based on their pre-sentation, as cutaneous or mucosal. Cutaneous types most com-monly affect the hands and fingers. Verruca vulgaris, or common warts, are caused by HPV types 1, 2, and 4, with a prevalence of up to 33% in school children and 3.5% in adults, and a higher prevalence in the immunosuppressed population.91 Plantar and palmar warts (HPV-1 and -4) typically occur at points of pres-sure and are characterized by a keratotic plug surrounded by a hyperkeratotic ring with black dots (thrombosed capillaries) on the surface. Plane warts occur on the face, dorsum of hands, and shins. They are caused by HPV-3 and -10 and tend to be multiple, flat-topped lesions with a smooth surface and light brown color. Cutaneous warts typically regress spontaneously in the immunocompetent patient. Epidermodysplasia verruci-formis is a rare, autosomal recessive inherited genetic skin dis-order that confers increased susceptibility to certain types of HPV. This presents with difficult-to-treat and often widespread verrucae that carry a higher risk of malignant transformation (30%–50% risk of squamous cell carcinoma), especially when caused by HPV types 5 and 8.92 A similar clinical picture has been described in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and transplant patients.93,94Mucosal HPV types cause lesions in the mucosal or geni-tal areas and behave like sexually transmitted infections. The most common mucosal types are HPV-6, -11, -16, -18, -31 and -33. These lesions present as condylomata acuminata, genital or veneral warts, papules that occur on the perineum, external genitalia, anus, and can extend into the mucosal surfaces of the vagina, urethra and rectum. These lesions are at risk for malig-nant transformation, with types 6 and 11 conferring low risk, and types 16, 18, 31 and 33 conferring a high risk. The recently developed quadrivalent HPV vaccine, targeting HPV types -6, -11, -16, and -18, is now available to both males and females age 9 to 26 and is associated with an up to 90% reduction of infections from those HPV types.95Treatment is aimed at physical destruction of the affected cells. Children often require no treatment as spontaneous regres-sion is common. In cases causing physical or emotional discom-fort, or in cases of immunocompromise or risk of transmission, treatment may be indicated. Cryotherapy using liquid nitrogen is an effective treatment for most warts, but care must be taken not to damage underlying structures.96 Topical preparations of salicylic acid, silver nitrate, and glutaraldehyde may also be Brunicardi_Ch16_p0511-p0540.indd   52619/02/19   3:09 PM 527THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUECHAPTER 16used. Treatment of recalcitrant lesions includes a variety of ther-apeutic options aimed at physically destroying the lesions by electrodessication, cryoablation, and pulsed dye laser therapy. Additional modalities such as H2-antagonists and zinc sulfate may have a role in augmenting the immune response and reduc-ing recurrence rates.Cutaneous Manifestations of Human Immunodeficiency VirusThe HIV-infected patient is significantly more susceptible to infectious and inflammatory skin conditions than the rest of the population.97 These skin disorders may be due to the HIV infection itself or from opportunistic infections secondary to immunosuppression. During early stages, nonspecific cutane-ous manifestations may occur. Acute retroviral syndrome occurs following inoculation in one-half to two-thirds of patients, and 30% to 50% of these patients can present with an acute viral exanthem.98 This is usually a morbilliform rash affecting the face, trunk, and upper extremities. Other skin changes, as well as common skin disorders with atypical features, can occur, including recurrent varicella zoster, hyperkeratotic warts, and seborrheic dermatitis. Condylomata acuminate and verrucae appear early; however, their frequency and severity do not change with disease progression.Late-presenting cutaneous manifestations include chronic herpes simplex virus (HSV), cytomegalovirus, and, to a lesser extent, molluscum contagiousum, which is typically treatable with imiquimod. HSV is the most common viral infection in the patient with HIV, and is more likely to display atypical fea-tures and less likely to spontaneously resolve in these patients.99 Mycobacterial infections and mucocutaneous candidiasis also occur. Bacterial infections such as impetigo and folliculitis may be more persistent and widespread.Malignant lesions such as Kaposi’s sarcoma occur in less than 5% of HIV-infected patients in the United States, although the worldwide prevalence in acquired immunodeficiency syn-drome (AIDS) patients exceeds 30%. Kaposi’s sarcoma is a vas-cular neoplasm that can affect cutaneous and visceral tissues. While the rates of Kaposi’s sarcoma development have sharply declined since the widespread use of antiretroviral therapy, the rates of other cutaneous malignancies have remained stable. The risk of an HIV-infected patient developing a cutaneous malig-nancy is about 5.7%, with basal cell carcinoma being the most common type encountered.100With regard to general surgical considerations in HIV patients, contributing related morbidities such as malnutrition, decreased CD4 count, and presence of opportunistic infection may result in delayed and attenuated wound healing capacity.101BENIGN TUMORSHemangiomaHemangiomas are benign vascular tumors that arise from the proliferation of endothelial cells that surround blood-filled cavities. They occur in about 4% of children by 1 year of age. Their natural history is typically presentation shortly after birth, a period of rapid growth during the first year, and then gradual involution over childhood in more than 90% of cases. These hemangiomas are generally managed nonsurgically prior to involution. Occasionally, during the rapid growth phase, the lesions can obstruct the airway, GI tract, vision, and musculo-skeletal function. In these cases, surgical resection is indicated prior to the involution phase. Hemangiomas can sometimes con-sume a large percentage of cardiac output, resulting in high-output heart failure or a consumptive coagulopathy, which may also necessitate resection. These lesions characteristically express the GLUT-1 glucose transporter protein, which is absent in cells of the normal cutaneous vasculature.102 First-line ther-apy for these infantile hemangiomas is propranolol, which causes cessation of growth and, in most cases, actual regression of the lesions.103,104 Systemic corticosteroids and interferon-α can impede tumor progression, and laser therapy has been used as well. If tumors persist into adolescence leaving a cosmeti-cally undesirable defect, surgical resection may be considered. When surgical resection or debulking is considered, upfront selective embolization can help with planned resection.NeviNevi (singular, nevus) are areas of melanocytic hyperplasia or neoplasia. These collections can be found in the epidermis (junctional), partially in the dermis (compound), or completely within the dermis (dermal). They commonly develop in child-hood and young adulthood, and will sometimes spontaneously regress. Exposure to UV radiation is associated with increased density of these lesions.105 Nevi are typically symmetric and small. Congenital nevi are the result of abnormal development of melanocytes. The events leading to this abnormal develop-ment may also affect the surrounding cells, resulting in longer, darker hair. Congenital nevi are found in less than 1% of neo-nates, and when characterized as giant congenital nevi, they have up to a 5% chance of developing into a malignant mela-noma, and may do so even in the first years of childhood.106,107 Treatment, therefore, consists of surgical excision of the lesion as early as is feasible. For larger lesions, serial excision and tissue expansion may be required, with the goal of lesion exci-sion being maintenance of function and form while decreasing oncologic risk.Cystic LesionsCutaneous cysts are benign lesions that are characterized by overgrowth of epidermis towards the center of the lesion, resulting in keratin accumulation. Epidermoid cysts (often mistakenly referred to as sebaceous cysts) are classically the result of keratin-plugged pilosebaceous units. They commonly affect adult men and women, and present as a dermal or sub-cutaneous cyst with a single, keratin-plugged punctum at the skin surface, often at or above the upper chest and back. Epi-dermoid cysts are the most common cutaneous cyst and are histologically characterized by mature epidermis complete with granular layer. Another type of cystic lesion is known as a trichilemmal cyst. These cysts are derived from the outer sheath of hair follicles, and, in contrast to epidermoid cysts, lack a granular layer. They are almost always found on the scalp and more commonly in women. A third type of cutaneous cyst is a dermoid cyst. Dermoid cysts are congenital variants that occur as the result of persistent epithelium within embry-onic lines of fusion. They occur most commonly between the forehead and nose tip, and the most frequent site is the eye-brow. They can lie in the subcutaneous tissue or intracranially, and often communicate with the skin surface via a small fis-tula. These cystic structures contain epithelial tissue, hair, and a variety of epidermal appendages. Treatment for these cystic structures includes surgical excision with care taken to remove the cyst lining to prevent recurrence.7Brunicardi_Ch16_p0511-p0540.indd   52719/02/19   3:09 PM 528SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIKeratosisActinic Keratosis. Actinic keratoses are neoplasms of epi-dermal keratinocytes that represent a range in a spectrum of disease from sun damage to squamous cell carcinoma. They typically occur in fair-skinned, elderly individuals in primarily sun-exposed areas, and UV radiation exposure is the greatest risk factor. There are multiple variants, and they can present as erythematous and scaly to hypertrophic, keratinized lesions. They can become symptomatic, causing bleeding, pruritis and pain. They can regress spontaneously, persist without change, and transform into invasive squamous cell carcinoma. It is estimated that approximately 10% of actinic keratoses will transform into invasive squamous cell carcinoma, and that pro-gression takes about 2 years on average.108 About 60% to 65% of squamous cell carcinomas are believed to originate from actinic keratoses. The presence of actinic keratoses also serves as a predictor of development of other squamous cell and basal cell carcinomas.109 Treatment options are excision, fluorouracil, cautery and destruction, and dermabrasion.110,111Seborrheic Keratosis. Seborrheic keratoses are benign lesions of the epidermis that typically present as well-demarcated, “stuck on” appearing papules or plaques over elderly individu-als. Clonal expansion of keratinocytes and melanocytes make up the substance of these lesions. They carry no malignant potential and treatment is primarily for cosmetic purposes.Soft Tissue TumorsAcrochordons. Acrochordons, also known as skin tags, are benign, pedunculated lesions on the skin made up of epider-mal keratinocytes surrounding a collagenous core. Although they can become irritated or necrotic, their removal is generally cosmetic.Dermatofibromas. Dermatofibromas are benign cutaneous proliferations that appear most commonly on the lower extremi-ties of women. They appear as pink to brown papules that pucker or dimple in the center when the lesion is pinched. It remains unclear whether these lesions have a neoplastic etiology or if they are the result of minor trauma or infection.112 These lesions are typically asymptomatic, and treatment is only indicated for cosmetic concerns or when a histologic diagnosis is required. Surgical excision is the recommended treatment, although cryo-therapy and laser treatment may be used.113 In rare cases, a basal cell carcinoma may develop within a dermatofibroma.Lipomas. Lipomas are the most common subcutaneous neo-plasm and have no malignant potential.114 They present as a painless, slow-growing, mobile mass of the subcutaneous tissue. Usually less than 5 cm in diameter, these neoplasms can reach much larger sizes. Lipomas are largely asymptomatic but may cause pain due to regional nerve deformation. Surgical resection is indicated in cases of local pain, mass effect, or cosmetically sensitive areas. The tumors are usually well circumscribed and amenable to surgical resection. Liposarcoma is a malignant fatty tumor that can mimic a lipoma, but is often deep-seated, rapidly growing, painful, and invasive. In these cases, cross-sectional imaging is recommended prior to any surgical resection.Neural TumorsNeuromas. Neuromas do not represent a true clonal prolifera-tion of neural tissue, but rather disordered growth of Schwann cells and nerve axons, often at the site of previous trauma. They can present within surgical scar lines or at the site of previous trauma as flesh-colored papules or nodules and are typically painful.Schwannomas. A schwannoma is a benign proliferation of the Schwann cells of the peripheral nerve sheath, and can arise sporadically or in association with type 2 neurofibromatosis. It contains no axons, but may displace the affected nerve and cause pain along the distribution of the nerve.Neurofibromas. Neurofibromas, in contrast, are benign prolif-erations that are made up of all nerve elements, and arise as fleshy and nontender, sessile or pedunculated masses on the skin. They can arise sporadically or in association with type 1 neurofibroma-tosis, and in these cases, are associated with café-au-lait spots and Lisch nodules. They are often asymptomatic, but may be pruritic. The development of pain at the site of a previously asymptomatic neurofibroma may indicate a rare malignant transformation and requires surgical excision and biopsy.MALIGNANT TUMORSBasal Cell CarcinomaBasal cell carcinoma (BCC) is the most common tumor diag-nosed in the United States, with an estimated one million new cases occurring each year. It represents 75% of non-melanoma skin cancers and 25% of all cancers diagnosed each year.115 BCC is seen slightly more commonly in males and indi-viduals over the age of 60, though the incidence in younger age groups is increasing. The primary risk factor for disease devel-opment is sun exposure (UVB rays more than UVA rays), par-ticularly during adolescence. The pathogenesis of BCC stems from mutations of genes involved in tumor suppression, often caused by ionizing radiation. The p53 tumor suppressor gene is defective in approximately 50% of cases.116 There is a latency period of 20 to 50 years.BCC tends to occur on sun-exposed areas of the skin, most commonly the nose and other parts of the face. A malignant lesion on the upper lip is almost always BCC, and BCC is the most common malignant eyelid tumor. Because of the photo-protective effect of melanin, dark-skinned individuals are far less commonly affected. Other risk factors for development of BCC include immune suppression, chemical exposure, and ion-izing radiation exposure. There are also genetic susceptibilities to development of BCC in conditions such as xeroderma pig-mentosa, unilateral basal cell nevus syndrome, and nevoid BCC syndrome.115 The natural history of BCC is typically one of local invasion rather than distant metastasis, but untreated BCC can often result in significant morbidity.There are multiple variants of BCC, and presentation can range from red, flesh-colored, or white macule or papule, to nodules and ulcerated lesions. Growth patterns of these lesions can either be well-circumscribed or diffuse and the most com-mon types of BCC are nodular and micronodular, superficial spreading, and infiltrative.117 The most common subtype is the nodular variant, characterized by raised, pearly pink papules with telangiectasias and occasionally a depressed tumor center with raised borders giving the classic “rodent ulcer” appearance. Superficial spreading BCC is confined to the epidermis as a flat, pink, scaling or crusting lesion, often mistaken for eczema, actinic keratosis, fungal infection, or psoriasis. This subtype typically appears on the trunk or extremities and the mean age of diagnosis is 57 years. The infiltrative form appears on the 8Brunicardi_Ch16_p0511-p0540.indd   52819/02/19   3:09 PM 529THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUECHAPTER 16head and neck in the late 60s, often at embryonic fusion lines,117 with an opaque yellow-white color that blends with surrounding skin and has no raised edges.118 The morpheaform subtype rep-resents 2% to 3% of all BCC and is the most aggressive subtype. It usually presents as an indurated macule or papule with the appearance of an enlarging scar. The clinical margins are often indistinct, and the rate of positive margins after excision is high. There is also a pigmented variant of BCC that can be difficult to distinguish from certain melanoma subtypes.Treatment of BCC varies according to size, location, type, and highor low-risk. Treatment options include surgical exci-sion, medical, or destructive therapies. Surgical excision should include 4 mm margins for small, primary BCC on cosmetically sensitive areas, and 10 mm margins otherwise.119 Mohs micro-surgical excision is sequential horizontal excision and has been shown to be cost-effective and associated with low recurrence rates for BCC (1%).120,121 It is the treatment of choice for mor-pheaform or other BCC with aggressive features, poorly delin-eated margins, recurrent tumors, or cosmetically sensitive areas, especially in the midface. A common approach used by derma-tologists for very small (<2 mm) and low risk lesions is cau-tery and destruction, although it should be kept in mind that the local cure rates can be operator and institution dependent. Other destructive techniques include cryosurgery and laser ablation. Radiation therapy can be used as adjuvant therapy following surgery, or as primary therapy in poor surgical candidates with low-risk lesions. The practitioner must be aware of the poten-tial consequences of radiation therapy, including poor cosmetic outcomes and future cancer risk.Superficial medical therapies are generally reserved for patients in whom surgical and radiation treatment is not an option. Topical imiquimod or 5-fluorouracil have been used for periods of 6 to 16 weeks for small, superficial BCC of the neck, trunk or extremities.122-126 Lastly, topical photodynamic therapy has shown some benefit in treatment of premalignant or super-ficial low-risk lesions as well.Patients with BCC need to have regular follow-up with full skin examinations every 6 to 12 months. Sixty-six percent of recurrences develop within 3 years, and with a few excep-tions occurring decades after initial treatment, the remaining recur within 5 years of initial treatment.121,127 A second primary BCC may develop after treatment and, in 40% of cases, presents within the first 3 years after treatment.Squamous Cell CarcinomaSquamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is the second most common skin cancer and accounts for approximately 100,000 cases each year. The primary risk factor for the development of SCC is UV radiation exposure128; however, other risks include light Fitzpatrick skin type (I or II), environmental factors such as chemical agents, physical agents (ionizing radiation), pso-ralen, HPV-16 and -18 infections, immunosuppression, smok-ing, chronic wounds, burn scars, and chronic dermatoses. Heritable risk factors include xeroderma pigmentosum, epider-molysis bullosa, and oculocutaneous albinism.SCC classically appears as a scaly or ulcerated papule or plaque, and bleeding of the lesion with minimal trauma is not uncommon, but pain is rare. It can exhibit in situ (confined to the epidermis) or invasive subtypes. The most common in situ variant of SCC is actinic keratosis, described previously in this chapter. Invasive squamous cell carcinomas may arise de novo, but more commonly evolve from these precursors. Another in 9Figure 16-9. Squamous cell carcinoma forming in a chronic wound.situ variant is known as Bowen disease. This is characterized by full-thickness epidermal dysplasia and clinically appears as a scaly, erythematous patch often with pigmentation and fis-suring. When it occurs on the glans penis, it is known as eryth-roplasia of Queyrat. Ten percent of these cases will eventually become invasive.129 Outside of these instances, most in situ cases grow slowly and do not progress to invasive disease.Invasive SCC is characterized by invasion through the basement membrane into the dermis of the skin. It usually arises from an actinic keratosis precursor, but de novo varieties do occur and are higher risk. De novo invasive SCC commonly occurs in organ transplant and immunocompromised patients, and has a metastatic rate as high as 14%.130 De novo invasive SCC arising in areas of chronic wounds or burn scars are known as Marjolin’s ulcers, and have a higher metastatic potential (Fig. 16-9). Keratoacanthoma is now being accepted as a sub-type of SCC that is characterized by a rapidly growing nodule with a central keratin plug.131 The natural history of invasive disease depends on location and inherent tumor characteristics. Clinical risk factors for recurrence include presentation with neurologic symptoms, immunosuppression, tumor with poorly defined borders, and tumor that arises at a site of prior radiation. Perineural involvement also has a poorer survival with increased local recurrence and lymph node metastasis. Grades of differen-tiation are based on the ratio of differentiated to undifferentiated cells, with a lower ratio associated with a greater metastatic and recurrent potential. Large (>2 cm) lesions, depth of invasion >4 mm, rapid growth, and location on the ear, lips, nose, scalp, or genitals are all also indicators of worse prognosis.When feasible, wide surgical excision including subcuta-neous fat is the treatment of choice for SCC. Margins of 4 mm are recommended for low-risk lesions and 6 mm for high-risk lesions.128 Mohs microsurgical excision is indicated for posi-tive margins, recurrent tumors, sites where cosmesis or function preservation is critical, poorly differentiated tumors, invasive lesions, and verrucous tumors. Using this modality often results in lower recurrence rates.127,130 It has also found use in nail bed lesions and in those arising in a background of osteomyelitis. The role of lymph node dissection in the setting of SCC contin-ues to evolve. Lymphadenectomy is indicated following fine-needle aspiration or core biopsy for clinically palpable lymph nodes or nodes detected on cross-sectional imaging. Nodes Brunicardi_Ch16_p0511-p0540.indd   52919/02/19   3:09 PM 530SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIshould also be removed from susceptible regional lymph node basins in patients with SCC in the setting of chronic wounds. Patients with parotid disease benefit from a superficial or total parotidectomy (with facial nerve preservation) and adjuvant radiotherapy. Sentinel lymph node dissection may be used in high risk cases with clinically negative nodal disease. Radiation therapy is typically reserved as primary therapy for those who are poor surgical candidates, and as adjuvant therapy after surgi-cal resection for large, high-risk tumors. When used as primary therapy, cure rates may approach 90%.121MelanomaBackground. In 2017, an estimated 87,110 new cases of melanoma were diagnosed, as well as 9730 melanoma-related deaths. The incidence of melanoma is rising faster than most other solid malignancies, and these numbers likely represent an underestimation given the many in situ and thin melanoma cases that are underreported. These tumors primarily arise from mela-nocytes at the epidermal-dermal junction but may also originate from mucosal surfaces of the oropharynx, nasopharynx, eyes, proximal esophagus, anorectum, and female genitalia. Mela-noma characteristically metastasizes quite often, and can travel to most other tissues in the body. This metastasis confers a poor prognosis in patients, with a median life span of 6 to 8 months after diagnosis.132The most important risk factor for the development of melanoma is exposure to UV radiation. It was recently reported that greater than 10 tanning bed sessions by adolescents and young adults increased their relative risk of developing mela-noma twofold,133 and there is a positive association with inter-mittent childhood sunburns and melanoma development.134 There is also an association with residence at high altitudes or in close proximity to the equator. Both personal and family history of melanomas increase the risk of primary melanoma develop-ment. Individuals with dysplastic nevi have a 6% to10% overall lifetime risk of melanoma, with tumors arising from preexisting nevi or de novo. Individuals with familial atypical multiple-mole melanoma syndrome have numerous melanocytic nevi and a greatly increased risk of cutaneous melanoma. Congenital nevi increase the risk for melanoma proportionally with size, and giant congenital nevi (generally considered >20 cm in diameter) are associated with a 5% to 8% lifetime risk. Melanoma development is strongly associated with the p16/CDK4,6/Rb  and p14ARF/HMD2/p53 tumor suppressor pathways and the RAF-MEK-ERK and PI3K-Akt oncogenic pathways.135Clinical Presentation. The presentation of melanoma is com-monly used to determine subtype but often starts as a localized, radial growth phase followed by a more aggressive, vertical growth phase. Approximately 30% of melanoma lesions arise from a preexisting melanocytic nevus. The most common sub-type of melanoma is superficial spreading (Fig. 16-10). This accounts for 50% to 70% of melanomas and typically arises from a precursor melanocytic nevus. Nodular subtype accounts for 15% to 30% of melanomas, and typically arises de novo, most commonly in men and on the trunk (Figs. 16-11 and 16-12).  This subtype is aggressive with an early vertical growth pat-tern and is often diagnosed at a later stage. Up to 5% of these lesions will lack melanin and can be mistaken for other cutane-ous lesions. Lentigo maligna represents 10% of melanoma cases and is a less aggressive subtype of melanoma in situ that typi-cally arises on sun-exposed areas of the head and neck. Acral Figure 16-10. Primary cutaneous melanoma seen in the scalp of a 61-year-old male.Figure 16-11. Nodular melanoma seen in the leg of a 55-year-old male.lentiginous melanoma accounts for 29% to 72% of melanomas in dark-skinned individuals, is occasionally seen in Caucasians, and is found on palmar, plantar, and subungual surfaces. This subtype is not thought to be due to sun exposure.Melanoma most commonly manifests as cutaneous dis-ease, and clinical characteristics of malignant transformation are often remembered by the initialism ABCDE. These lesions are typically Asymmetric with irregular Borders, Color variations, a Diameter greater than 6 mm, and are undergoing some sort of Evolution or change. Other key clinical characteristics include a pigmented lesion that has enlarged, ulcerated, or bled. Amela-notic lesions appear as raised pink, purple, or flesh-colored skin papules and are often diagnosed late.Diagnosis and Staging. Workup should begin with a his-tory and physical exam. The entire skin should be checked for synchronous primaries, satellite lesions, and in-transit metas-tases, and all nodal basins should be examined for lymphade-nopathy. Suspicious lesions should undergo excisional biopsy with 1to 3-mm margins; however, tumors that are large or are in a cosmetically or anatomically challenging area can be approached by incisional biopsy, including punch biopsy.136 Brunicardi_Ch16_p0511-p0540.indd   53019/02/19   3:09 PM 531THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUECHAPTER 16ABCFigure 16-12. A. AP view of advanced melanoma in a 59-year-old male. B. Lateral view C. After resection and reconstruction with skin grafting.Tissue specimen should include full thickness of the lesion and a small section of normal adjacent skin to aid the pathologist in diagnosis. Clinically suspicious lymph nodes should undergo fine-needle aspiration (FNA), as this has been shown to have a high sensitivity and specificity for detection of melanoma in large lymph nodes.136-139Melanoma is characterized according to the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) as localized disease (stage I and II), regional disease (stage III), or distant metastatic disease (stage IV). The Breslow tumor thickness replaced the Clark’s level as the most important prognostic indicator for melanoma stag-ing.132,140 The Breslow tumor thickness measures the depth of penetration of the lesions from the top of the granular layer of the epidermis into the dermal layer and is directly related to the risk of disease progression. Tumor ulceration, mitotic rate ≥1 per mm2, and metastasis are all also associated with worse prognosis. In the presence of regional node metastasis, the num-ber of nodes affected is the most important prognostic indicator. For stage IV disease, the site of metastasis is strongly associated with prognosis, and elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) is associated with a worse prognosis.141There is no supportive evidence for chest X-ray or com-puted tomography (CT) in the staging of patients unless there is positive regional lymph node disease, although it can be used to work up specific signs and symptoms when metastatic disease is suspected.136 In patients with stage III or greater disease, there is a high risk for distant metastasis, and imaging is recommended for baseline staging. These patients should receive additional imaging that includes CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis; whole-body positon emission tomography (PET)-CT; or brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).136The sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB) technique for melanoma was introduced in 1992 and has become a corner-stone in the management of melanoma, although its role in man-agement continues to be refined. SLNB is a standard staging procedure to evaluate the regional nodes for patients with clini-cally node-negative malignant melanoma. Detecting subclinical nodal metastasis in may benefit from lymphadenectomy or adju-vant therapy. This technique identifies the first draining lymph node from the primary lesion and has shown excellent accuracy and significantly less morbidity compared to complete resection of nodal basins. It is almost always performed at the time of initial wide excision, as SLN mapping after lymphatic violation from surgical excision could decrease the accuracy of the test. Recently, the results of MSLT-1, an international, multicenter, phase III trial were published. This study randomized clinically node negative patients to either SLNB at the time of primary melanoma excision (and completion lymphadenectomy if posi-tive) or nodal basin monitoring (and delayed complete lymph-adenectomy for recurrent lymph node disease).142 The results of this study demonstrated that SLNB, with immediate lymphad-enectomy if positive, improved disease-free survival by 7% and 10% in patients with intermediate thickness (1.2–3.5 mm) and thick (>3.5 mm) lesions respectively. The use of SLNB in lesions <1.2 mm thick did not affect disease-free survival. SLNB should also be offered to thin lesions with high-risk features (thickness >0.75, ulceration, mitoses ≥1 per mm2.136 The SLNB involves preoperative lymphoscintigraphy with intradermal injections of technetium-sulfur colloid to delineate lymphatic drainage and intraoperative intradermal injection of 1 mL of isosulfan or methylene blue dye near the tumor or biopsy site. (Figs. 16-13 and 16-14). The radioactive tracer-dye combination allows the sentinel node to be identified in 98% of cases. An incision over the lymph node basin of interest allows nodes to be excised and studied with hematoxylin and eosin and immunohistochemistry (S100, HMB45, and MART-1/Melan-A) staining (Fig. 16-15). 10Brunicardi_Ch16_p0511-p0540.indd   53119/02/19   3:09 PM 532SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIABSentinellymph nodeInjection siteSurgical exposure of sentinel lymph nodeAfferent lymphaticchannelsSentinellymph nodePrimary melanomaSentinellymphnodeInguinal nodesABCFLOWINJ SITEAxillaryNODEANTFLOWPOSTTymphoMelanoma Primary Injection SiteSubmanibular Lymph nodesPopliteal nodesFigure 16-13. After injection of radioactive technetium-99–labeled sulfur colloid tracer at the primary cutaneous melanoma site, sentinel lymph node basins are identified. A. Lymphoscintig-raphy of 67-year-old male with a malignant melanoma of the right heel; sentinel lymph nodes in both the right popliteal fossa and inguinal region. B. Lymphoscintigraphy of 52-year-old male with a malignant melanoma of the posterior right upper arm; sentinel lymph node in the right axillary region. C. Lymphoscintigraphy of 69-year-old male with a facial melanoma; sentinel lymph nodes in the submandibular region. ANT = anterior; INJ = injection;  POST = posterior.Risks of this technique are uncommon but include skin necrosis near the site of injection, anaphylactic shock, lymphedema, sur-gical site infections, seromas, and hematomas.Surgical Management of the Primary Tumors and Lymph Nodes. The appropriate excision margin is based on primary tumor thickness. Several retrospective studies suggest that for melanoma in situ, 0.5 to 1 cm margins are sufficient.143-145 We believe that 1-cm margins should be obtained in anatomically fea-sible areas given the possibility of an incidental finding of a small invasive component in permanent sections. Several studies com-pared 1to 3-cm margins and 2to 5-cm margins in melanoma  <2 mm thick, and 2to 4-cm margins in melanoma lesions 1 to 4 mm thick and found no difference. 146-149 A British trial suggested that there is a limit to how narrow margins can be for melanomas >2  mm thick by showing that 1-cm margins provide worse outcomes compared to 3-cm margins.150 Tumors <1 mm thick require 0.5 to 1 cm margins. Tumors 1 to 2 mm thick require 1 to 2 cm margins, and tumors >2 mm thick require 2-cm margins.Completion lymphadenectomy is commonly performed in cases of sentinel nodes with metastatic disease, but it has been shown that most of these nodal basins do not have addi-tional disease. Thus, many surgeons do not perform routine completion lymphadenectomy for positive nodes, and data from the MSLT-2 may provide guidance. It has been shown that those patients with nonsentinel lymph node positivity found on completion lymph node dissection after a positive SLN have higher rates of recurrence and lower rates of sur-vival. The therapeutic value, however, has not been clearly demonstrated. In patients with clinically positive lymph nodes but absent signs of distant metastasis on PET-CT, therapeu-tic lymph node dissection is associated with 5-year survival rates of 30% to 50%. In these cases, resection of the primary melanoma lesion and a completion lymphadenectomy should be performed.Individuals with face, anterior scalp, and ear prima-ries who have a positive SLNB should undergo a superficial parotidectomy in addition to a modified radical neck dissection. Figure 16-14. Technique of sentinel lymph node biopsy for cutaneous melanoma. A. After injection of radioactive technetium-99–labeled sulfur colloid tracer at a lower abdominal wall primary cutaneous melanoma site, B. sentinel lymph node basins are identified. (Reproduced with permission from Gershenwald JE, Ross MI: Sentinel-lymph-node biopsy for cutane-ous melanoma, N Engl J Med. 2011 May 5;364(18):1738-1745.)Brunicardi_Ch16_p0511-p0540.indd   53219/02/19   3:09 PM 533THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUECHAPTER 16ABFigure 16-15. Operation of sentinel lymph node biopsy for cutaneous melanoma. After preoperative injection of radioactive technetium-99–labeled sulfur colloid tracer and intraoperative injection of Lymphazurin blue dye around the primary melanoma excision site, the nodal basin of interest is identified. An incision is made directly overlying the lymph node basin in the posterior axillary space. The sentinel lymph nodes are identified and excised.Patients with positive sentinel nodes in the inguino-femoral nodal basin should undergo an inguino-femoral lymphadenec-tomy that includes removal of Cloquet’s node. If Cloquet’s node is positive or the patient has three or more nodes that contain melanoma metastases the probability of clinically occult posi-tive pelvic nodes is increased. The effect of ileo-obturator lymph node dissection on the survival of these patients is unknown.Surgery for Regional and Distant Metastasis. Nonmeta-static, in-transit disease should undergo excision to clear mar-gins when feasible. However, disease not amenable to complete excision derives benefit from isolated limb perfusion (ILP) and isolated limb infusion (ILI) (Fig. 16-16). These two modali-ties are used to treat regional disease, and their purpose is to administer high doses of chemotherapy, commonly melphalan, to an affected limb while avoiding systemic drug toxicity. ILI was shown to provide a 31% response rate in one study, while hyperthermic ILP provided a 63% complete response rate in an independent study.151-154The most common sites of metastasis of melanoma are the lung and liver. These are followed by the brain, gastroin-testinal tract, distant skin, and subcutaneous tissue. A limited subset of patients with small-volume, limited distant metastases to the brain, gastrointestinal tract, or distant skin can be treated with surgical resection or directed radiation. Liver metastases are better dealt without surgical resection unless they arise from an ocular primary. Adjuvant therapy after resection of meta-static lesions is not standard of care. However, there are ongo-ing clinical trials addressing whether drugs and vaccines will be beneficial in this setting.115 Surgery may provide palliation for patients with gastrointestinal obstruction, gastrointestinal hem-orrhage, and nongastrointestinal hemorrhage. Radiotherapy for symptomatic bony or brain metastases provides palliation in dif-fuse disease.Adjuvant and Palliative Therapies. Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) Trials 1684, 1690, and 1694 were prospective randomized controlled trials that demonstrated Overhead heaterHot air blanketVenouscatheterArterialcatheterPneumatictourniquetPumpchamber25cc SyringeWarmingcoilEsmarchbandageDrug inpre-warmedsalineFigure 16-16. Isolated limb infusion. Schematic of isolated limb infusion of lower extremity. (Adapted with permis-sion from Testori A, Verhoef C, Kroon HM, et al: Treatment of melanoma metas-tases in a limb by isolated limb perfusion and isolated limb infusion, J Surg Oncol. 2011 Sep;104(4):397-404.)Brunicardi_Ch16_p0511-p0540.indd   53319/02/19   3:09 PM 534SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIdisease-free survival advantages in patients with melanoma >4 mm in thickness with or without lymph node involvement if they received adjuvant treatment with high-dose interferon (IFN).155-157 A European Organization for Research and Treat-ment of Cancer (EORTC) trial also showed recurrence-free survival benefit with pegylated IFN.158 It is important to note that IFN therapy is not well tolerated and the pooled analysis of these trials did not show an improvement in overall survival benefit.Most patients with melanoma will not be surgical candi-dates. Although medical options for melanoma have historically been poor, several recent studies have shown promise in drug therapy for metastatic melanoma. BRAF inhibitors (sorafenib), anti-PD1 antibodies, CTLA antibodies (ipilimumab), and high-dose interleukin-2 (IL-2) with and without vaccines have been shown in randomized studies to provide survival benefit in metastatic disease.159-165 Despite the excitement of recent drugs, surgery will likely play an adjunct role in treating individuals who develop resistance to these drugs over time.Special Circumstances. Special circumstances of note are melanoma in pregnant women, melanoma of unknown prima-ries, and noncutaneous melanomas. The prognosis of pregnant patients is similar to women who are not pregnant. Extrapo-lation of studies examining the SLNB technique in pregnant women with breast cancer suggests lymphoscintigraphy may be done safely during pregnancy without risk to the fetus (blue dye is contraindicated). General anesthesia should be avoided during the first trimester, and local anesthetics should be used during this time. It has been suggested by some that after excising the primary tumor during pregnancy, the SLNB may be performed after delivery.Unknown primary melanoma occurs in 2% to 5% of cases and most commonly occurs in the lymph nodes. In these cases, a thorough search for the primary lesion should be sought, includ-ing eliciting a history about prior skin lesions, skin procedures (e.g., curettage and electrodessication, excision, laser), and review of any prior “benign” pathology. The surgeon should be aware that melanoma is known to spontaneously regress because of an immune response. Melanoma of unknown pri-mary has survival rates comparable to melanoma diagnosed with a known primary of the same stage.The most common noncutaneous disease site is ocular melanoma, and treatment of this condition includes photocoag-ulation, partial resection, radiation, or enucleation.166-168 Ocular melanomas exclusively metastasize to the liver and not regional lymph nodes, and some patients benefit from liver resection. Melanoma of the mucous membranes most commonly presents in the oral cavity, oropharynx, nasopharynx, paranasal sinus, anus, rectum, and female genitalia. Patients with this presenta-tion have a worse prognosis (10% 5-year survival) than patients with cutaneous melanomas. Management should be excision to negative margins, and radical resections should be avoided because the role of surgery is locoregional control, not cure. Generally speaking, lymph node dissection should be avoided because the benefit is unclear.Merkel Cell CarcinomaMerkel cell carcinoma (MCC) is an aggressive neuroendocrine tumor of the skin whose incidence has been rapidly increas-ing. Although it is a much rarer malignancy than melanoma, the prognosis is much worse, with a 5-year survival of 46%.169 Merkel cells are epidermal appendages involved in the sensation Figure 16-17. Merkel cell carcinoma seen just above the left knee in a 44-year-old female.of light touch, and along with Merkel cell carcinoma, are cyto-keratin-20 positive. This stain is now used to confirm the diag-nosis. Other risk factors include age >65 years (the median age of diagnosis is 70 years), UV exposure, Merkel cell polyoma virus, and immunosuppression. MCC typically presents as a rapidly growing, flesh-colored to red or purple papule or plaque (Fig. 16-17). Regional nodes are involved in 30% of patients at diagnosis, and 50% will develop systemic disease (skin, lymph nodes, liver, lung, bone, and brain).170,171 There are no standard-ized diagnostic imaging studies for staging, but CT of the chest, abdomen, pelvis and octreotide scans may provide useful infor-mation when clinically indicated.After a thorough skin examination, treatment should begin by evaluating nodal basins. Patients without clinical nodal dis-ease should undergo an SLNB prior to wide local excision because studies suggest a benefit.172 In patients with sentinel lymph nodes with metastatic disease, completion lymphad-enectomy and/or radiation therapy may follow, and in patients with node-negative disease, observation or radiation therapy should be considered.172 SLNB is important for staging and treatment, and the literature suggests that it predicts recurrenceand relapse-free survival. Elective lymph node dissection may decrease regional nodal recurrence and in-transit metastases. Patients with clinically positive nodes should have an FNA to confirm disease. If positive, a metastatic staging workup should follow, and, if negative, treatment of the primary and nodal basin as managed for sentinel lymph node-positive disease should be considered. A negative FNA and open biopsy-negative disease should be managed by treatment of the primary disease alone. Brunicardi_Ch16_p0511-p0540.indd   53419/02/19   3:09 PM 535THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUECHAPTER 16Patients with metastatic disease should be managed according to consensus from a multidisciplinary tumor board.Important surgical principles for excision of the primary lesion are to excise with wide margins down to fascia and com-plete circumferential and peripheral deep-margin assessment. Recommended management for margins is 1 to 3 cm, but there are no randomized trials defining these margins. Chemotherapy and adjuvant radiation are commonly used, but there are no data to support a specific regimen or that demonstrate a definitive survival benefit.Recurrence of MCC is common. One study of 95 patients showed a 47% recurrence, with 80% of recurrences occurring within 2 years and 96% occurring within 5 years.173,174 Regional lymph node disease is common, and 70% of patients will have nodal spread within 2 years of disease presentation. Five-year overall survival of head and neck disease in surgically treated patients is between 40% and 68%.Kaposi’s SarcomaKaposi’s sarcoma is characterized by the proliferation and inflammation of endothelial-derived spindle cell lesions. There are five major forms of this angioproliferative disorder: classic (Mediterranean), African endemic, HIV-negative men having sex with men (MSM)-associated, and immunosuppression-associated. They are all driven by the human herpesvirus  (HHV-8).175 Kaposi’s sarcoma is diagnosed after the fifth decade of life and predominantly found on the skin but can occur  anywhere in the body. In North America, the Kaposi’s sarcoma herpes virus is transmitted via sexual and nonsexual routes and predominantly affects individuals with compromised immune systems such as those with HIV and transplant recipients on immune-suppressing medications. Clinically, Kaposi’s sarcoma appears as multifocal, rubbery blue-red nodules. Treatment of AIDS-associated Kaposi’s sarcoma is with antiviral therapy, and many patients experience a dramatic treatment response.176,177 Those individuals who do not respond and have limited muco-cutaneous disease may benefit from cryotherapy, photodynamic therapy, radiation therapy, intralesional injections, and topical therapy. Surgical biopsy is important for disease diagnosis, but given the high local recurrence and the fact that Kaposi’s sar-coma represents more of a systemic rather than local disease, the benefit of surgery is limited and generally should not be pursued except for palliation.Dermatofibrosarcoma ProtuberansThis rare, low-grade sarcoma of fibroblast origin commonly afflicts individuals during their third decade of life. It has low distant metastatic potential, but it behaves aggressively locally with finger-like extensions. Tumor depth is the most important prognostic variable. Presentation is characteristically a slow-growing, asymptomatic, violaceous plaque involving the trunk, head, neck, or extremities (Fig. 16-18). Nearly all cases are posi-tive for CD34 and negative for factor XIIIa.178,179 Treatment is wide local excision with 3-cm margins down to deep underly-ing fascia or Mohs microsurgery in cosmetically sensitive areas where maximum tissue preservation will benefit.180 No nodal dissection is needed, and both approaches provide similar local control.181 Some clinicians have used radiation therapy and bio-logic agents (imatinib) as adjuvant therapy with some success in patients with advanced disease. Local recurrence occurs in 50% to 75% of cases, usually within 3 years of treatment. Thus, clini-cal follow-up is important. Recurrent tumors should be resected whenever possible.Figure 16-18. Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans of the left flank.Malignant Fibrous Histiocytoma (Undifferentiated Pleomorphic Sarcoma and Myxofibrosarcoma)This uncommon, cutaneous, spindle-cell, soft tissue sarcoma occurs in the extremities, head, and neck of elderly patients. They present as solitary, soft to firm, skin-colored subcutane-ous nodules. Complete surgical resection is the treatment of choice, and adjuvant radiation therapy provides local control; patients with positive margins benefit most from this combina-tion. Nevertheless, patients undergoing complete gross resection will experience recurrence in 30% to 35% of cases.135 Up to 50% of patients may present with distant metastasis, and this is a contraindication to surgical resection.AngiosarcomaAngiosarcoma is an uncommon, aggressive cancer that arises from vascular endothelial cells and occurs in four variants, all of which have a poor prognosis.182 The 5-year survival estimate is 15%.183 The head and neck variant presents in individuals older than 40 years as an ill-defined red patch on the face or scalp, often with satellite lesions and distant metastasis, and has a median survival of 18 to 28 months. Lymphedema-associated angiosarcoma (Stewart-Treves) develops on an extremity ipsi-lateral to an axillary lymphadenectomy. It appears on the upper, medial arm as a violaceous plaque in an individual with nonpit-ting edema and has a poor survival. Radiation-induced angio-sarcoma occurs 4 to 25 years after radiation therapy for benign and malignant conditions. Finally, the epithelioid variant of angiosarcoma involves the lower extremities and also has a poor prognosis. Surgical excision with wide margins is the treatment Brunicardi_Ch16_p0511-p0540.indd   53519/02/19   3:09 PM 536SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIof choice for localized disease, but the rate of recurrence is high. Adjuvant radiation therapy can be considered in a multidisci-plinary fashion. Cases of extremity disease can be considered for amputation. For widely metastatic disease, chemotherapy and radiation may provide palliation, but these modalities do not prolong overall survival.115Extramammary Paget’s DiseaseThis rare adenocarcinoma of apocrine glands arises in axillary, perianal, and genital regions of men and women.184 Clinical pre-sentation is that of erythematous or nonpigmented plaques with an eczema-like appearance that often persist after failed treat-ment from other therapies. An important characteristic and one that the surgeon must be acutely aware of is the high incidence of concomitant other malignancies with this cutaneous disease. Forty percent of cases are associated with primary gastrointesti-nal and genitourinary malignancies, and a diligent search should be made after a diagnosis of extramammary Paget’s disease is made. Treatment is surgical resection with negative microscopic margins, and adjuvant radiation may provide additional locore-gional control.CONCLUSIONThe skin is the largest organ in the human body and is com-posed of three organized layers that are the source of numer-ous pathologies. Recognition and management of cutaneous and subcutaneous diseases require an astute clinician to opti-mize clinical outcomes. Improvements in drugs, therapies, and healthcare practices have helped recovery from skin injuries. Skin and subcutaneous diseases are often managed medically, although surgery frequently complements treatment. Benign tumors are surgical diseases, while malignant tumors are pri-marily treated surgically, and additional modalities including chemotherapy and radiation therapy are sometimes required. The management of melanoma is at an exciting phase, requiring the coordinated multidisciplinary care of medical oncologists, surgical oncologists, radiation oncologists, der-matopathologists, and plastic and reconstructive surgeons. The advent of new drug therapies will redefine the role of surgery in this disease in the coming years.REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Kanitakis J. Anatomy, histology and immunohistochemistry of normal human skin. Eur J Dermatology. 2002;12(4):390-401.	2.	Chug D, Hake A, Holbrook K. The structure and development of skin. In: Freedberg I, Eisen A, Wolff K, eds. Fitzpatrick’s  Dermatology in General Medicine. 6th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2003:47-88.	3.	Michael Weitz, Brian Kearns, eds. Skin. In: Junqueira’s Basic Histology. 14th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill Education; 2016.	4.	Segre JA. Epidermal barrier formation and recovery in skin disorders. J Clin Invest. 2006;116(5):1150-1158.	5.	Elias PM. Stratum corneum defensive functions: an integrated view. J Invest Dermatol. 2005;125(2):183-200.	6.	Girolomoni G, Caux C, Dezutter-Dambuyant C, Dezutter-Dambuyant C, Ricciardi-Castagnoli P. Langerhans cells: still a fundamental paradigm for studying the immunobiology of dendritic cells. Trends Immunol. 2002;23(1):6-8.	7.	Mutyambizi K, Berger CL, Edelson RL. The balance between immunity and tolerance: the role of Langerhans cells. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2009;66(5):831-840.	8.	Lori F, Kelly LM, Lisziewicz J. APC-targeted immuniza-tion for the treatment of HIV-1. Expert Rev Vaccines. 2004;3 (4 suppl):S189-S198.	9.	Yu SH, Bordeaux JS, Baron ED. The immune system and skin cancer. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2014;810:182-191.	10.	Lens MB, Dawes M. Global perspectives of contemporary epi-demiological trends of cutaneous malignant melanoma. Br J Dermatol. 2004;150(2):179-185.	11.	Lock-Andersen J, Drzewiecki KT, Wulf HC. Eye and hair colour, skin type and constitutive skin pigmentation as risk factors for basal cell carcinoma and cutaneous malignant melanoma. A Danish case-control study. Acta Derm Venereol. 1999;79(1):74-80.	12.	Tachibana T. The Merkel cell: recent findings and unresolved problems. Arch Histol Cytol. 1995;58(4):379-396.	13.	Munde PB, Khandekar SP, Dive AM, Aparna Sharmal. Pathophysiology of merkel cell. J Oral Maxillofac Pathol. 2013;17(3):408-412.	14.	Ogawa H. The Merkel cell as a possible mechanoreceptor cell. Prog Neurobiol. 1996;49(4):317-334.	15.	Bos JD, Zonneveld I, Das PK, Krieg SR, van der Loos CM, Kapsenberg ML. The skin immune system (SIS): distribution and immunophenotype of lymphocyte subpopulations in nor-mal human skin. J Invest Dermatol. 1987;88(5):569-573.	16.	Spetz AL, Strominger J, Groh-Spies V. T cell subsets in normal human epidermis. Am J Pathol. 1996;149(2):665-674.	17.	Toker C. Clear cells of the nipple epidermis. Cancer. 1970;25(3):601-610.	18.	Garijo MF, Val D, Val-Bernal JF. An overview of the pale and clear cells of the nipple epidermis. Histol Histopathol. 2009;24(3):367-376.	19.	Dillon DA, Lester SC. Lesions of the nipple. Surg Pathol Clin. 2009;2(2):391-412.	20.	Lundquist K, Kohler S, Rouse R V. Intraepidermal cytoker-atin 7 expression is not restricted to Paget cells but is also seen in Toker cells and Merkel cells. Am J Surg Pathol. 1999;23(2):212-219.	21.	Sato K, Leidal R, Sato F. Morphology and development of an apoeccrine sweat gland in human axillae. Am J Physiol. 1987;252(1 Pt 2):R166-80.	22.	Burgeson RE, Nimni ME. Collagen types. Molecular structure and tissue distribution. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 1992;(282):250-272.	23.	Eyden B. The myofibroblast: an assessment of controversial issues and a definition useful in diagnosis and research. Ultra-struct Pathol. 25(1):39-50.	24.	Braverman IM. The cutaneous microcirculation. J Investig Dermatology Symp Proc. 2000;5:3-9.	25.	Johansson O. The innervation of the human epidermis. J Neurol  Sci. 1995;130(2):228.	26.	Avram AS, Avram MM, James WD. Subcutaneous fat in normal and diseased states: 2. Anatomy and physiology of white and brown adipose tissue. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2005;53(4):671-683.	27.	König A, Lehmann C, Rompel R, Happle R. Cigarette smok-ing as a triggering factor of hidradenitis suppurativa. Derma-tology. 1999;198(3):261-264.	28.	Pink AE, Simpson MA, Desai N, Trembath RC, Barker JNW. γ-Secretase mutations in hidradenitis suppurativa: new insights into disease pathogenesis. J Invest Dermatol. 2013;133(3):601-607.	29.	Jemec GBE. Clinical practice. Hidradenitis suppurativa.  N Engl J Med. 2012;366(2):158-164.	30.	Matusiak L, Bieniek A, Szepietowski JC. Increased serum tumour necrosis factor-alpha in hidradenitis sup-purativa patients: is there a basis for treatment with anti-tumour necrosis factor-alpha agents? Acta Derm Venereol. 2009;89(6):601-603.Brunicardi_Ch16_p0511-p0540.indd   53619/02/19   3:09 PM 537THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUECHAPTER 16	31.	Schlapbach C, Hänni T, Yawalkar N, Hunger RE. Expression of the IL-23/Th17 pathway in lesions of hidradenitis suppura-tiva. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2011;65(4):790-798.	32.	Clemmensen OJ. Topical treatment of hidradenitis suppurativa with clindamycin. Int J Dermatol. 1983;22(5):325-328.	33.	Mandal A, Watson J. Experience with different treatment mod-ules in hidradenitis suppuritiva: a study of 106 cases. Surgeon. 2005;3(1):23-26.	34.	Tierney E, Mahmoud BH, Hexsel C, Ozog ND, Hamzavi I. Randomized control trial for the treatment of hidradenitis sup-purativa with a neodymium-doped yttrium aluminium garnet laser. Dermatologic Surg. 2009;35(8):1188-1198.	35.	Shuja F, Chan CS, Rosen T. Biologic drugs for the treatment of hidradenitis suppurativa: an evidence-based review. Dermatol Clin. 2010;28(3):511-521, 523-524.	36.	Falola RA, DeFazio MV, Anghel EL, Mitnick CD, Attinger CE, Evans KK. What heals hidradenitis suppurativa: surgery, immunosuppression, or both? Plast Reconstr Surg. 2016;138 (3 suppl):219S-229S.	37.	Marzano A V, Cugno M, Trevisan V, et al. Role of inflam-matory cells, cytokines and matrix metalloproteinases in neutrophil-mediated skin diseases. Clin Exp Immunol. 2010;162(1):100-107.	38.	Bister V, Mäkitalo L, Jeskanen L, Saarialho-Kere U. Expres-sion of MMP-9, MMP-10 and TNF-alpha and lack of epithelial MMP-1 and MMP-26 characterize pyoderma gangrenosum.  J Cutan Pathol. 2007;34(12):889-898.	39.	Shore RN. Pyoderma gangrenosum, defective neutrophil chemo-taxis, and leukemia. Arch Dermatol. 1976;112(12):1792-1793.	40.	Hommes DW, Oldenburg B, van Bodegraven AA, et al. Guide-lines for treatment with infliximab for Crohn’s disease. Neth J Med. 64(7):219-229.	41.	Roy DB, Conte ET, Cohen DJ. The treatment of pyoderma gangrenosum using etanercept. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2006;54 (3 suppl 2):S128-S134.	42.	Khurrum Baig M, Marquez H, Nogueras JJ, Weiss EG, Wexner SD. Topical tacrolimus (FK506) in the treatment of recalcitrant parastomal pyoderma gangrenosum associated with Crohn’s disease: report of two cases. Color Dis. 2004;6(4):250-253.	43.	Lyell A. Toxic epidermal necrolysis (the scalded skin syn-drome): a reappraisal. Br J Dermatol. 1979;100(1):69-86.	44.	Stern RS, Chan HL. Usefulness of case report literature in determining drugs responsible for toxic epidermal necrolysis. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1989;21(2 pt 1):317-322.	45.	Valeyrie-Allanore L, Roujeau J-C. Epidermal necrolysis. In: Fitzpatrick’s Dermatology in General Medicine. 8th ed.  New York: McGraw-Hill; 2012.	46.	Chung W-H, Hung S-I, Yang J-Y, et al. Granulysin is a key mediator for disseminated keratinocyte death in Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis. Nat Med. 2008;14(12):1343-1350.	47.	Chung W-H, Hung S-I, Hong H-S, et al. Medical genet-ics: a marker for Stevens–Johnson syndrome. Nature. 2004;428(6982):486-486.	48.	Downey A, Jackson C, Harun N, et al. Toxic epidermal necrol-ysis: review of pathogenesis and management. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2012;66(6):995-1003.	49.	Garcia-Doval I, LeCleach L, Bocquet H, Otero XL, Roujeau JC. Toxic epidermal necrolysis and Stevens-Johnson syn-drome: does early withdrawal of causative drugs decrease the risk of death? Arch Dermatol. 2000;136(3):323-327.	50.	Kardaun S, Jonkman M. Dexamethasone pulse therapy for Stevens-Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis. Acta Derm Venereol. 2007;87(2):144-148.	51.	French LE, Trent JT, Kerdel FA. Use of intravenous immuno-globulin in toxic epidermal necrolysis and Stevens–Johnson syndrome: Our current understanding. Int Immunopharmacol. 2006;6(4):543-549.	52.	Lee HY, Lim YL, Thirumoorthy T, Pang SM. The role of intravenous immunoglobulin in toxic epidermal necrolysis: a retrospective analysis of 64 patients managed in a specialized centre. Br J Dermatol. 2013;169(6):1304-1309.	53.	Creamer D, Walsh SA, Dziewulski P, et al. UK guidelines for the management of Stevens–Johnson syndrome/toxic epider-mal necrolysis in adults 2016. J Plast Reconstr Aesthetic Surg. 2016;69(6):e119-e153.	54.	Battie C, Verschoore M. Cutaneous solar ultraviolet exposure and clinical aspects of photodamage. Indian J Dermatol Venereol  Leprol. 2012;78 suppl 1(7):S9-S14.	55.	Eliya-Masamba MC, Banda GW. Primary closure versus delayed closure for non bite traumatic wounds within 24 hours post injury. In: Eliya-Masamba MC, ed. Cochrane Database of Sys-tematic Reviews. Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd; 2013.	56.	Presutti RJ. Bite wounds. Postgrad Med. 1997;101(4):243-254.	57.	Argenta LC, Morykwas MJ. Vacuum-assisted closure: a new method for wound control and treatment: clinical expe-rience. Ann Plast Surg. 1997;38(6):563-576; discussion 577.  This seminal paper laid the foundation for the use of nega-tive pressure wound therapy devices for open wounds.	58.	Abrahamian FM, Goldstein EJC. Microbiology of animal bite wound infections. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2011;24(2):231-246.	59.	Kennedy SA, Stoll LE, Lauder AS. Human and other mam-malian bite injuries of the hand. J Am Acad Orthop Surg. 2015;23(1):47-57.	60.	Robson MC, Krizek TJ, Heggers JP. Biology of surgical infec-tion. Curr Probl Surg. March 1973:1-62.	61.	Cummings P. Antibiotics to prevent infection in patients with dog bite wounds: a meta-analysis of randomized trials. Ann Emerg Med. 1994;23(3):535-540. A meta-analysis of eight randomized trials demonstrated the reduced risk of infec-tion after dog bites with the use of prophylactic antibiotics.	62.	Paschos NK, Makris EA, Gantsos A, Georgoulis AD. Primary closure versus non-closure of dog bite wounds. A randomised controlled trial. Injury. 2014;45(1):237-240.	63.	Hardwicke J, Hunter T, Staruch R, Moiemen N. Chemical burns—an historical comparison and review of the literature. Burns. 2012;38(3):383-387.	64.	Vandeweyer E, Heymans O, Deraemaecker R. Extravasation injuries and emergency suction as treatment. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2000;105(1):109-110.	65.	Kumar RJ, Pegg SP, Kimble RM. Management of extravasa-tion injuries. ANZ J Surg. 2001;71(5):285-289.	66.	Harrold K, Gould D, Drey N. The management of cytotoxic chemotherapy extravasation: a systematic review of the lit-erature to evaluate the evidence underpinning contemporary practice. Eur J Cancer Care (Engl). 2015;24(6):771-800.	67.	Frye K, Luterman A. Thermal burns. In: Plastic Surgery Secrets Plus. 2nd ed. Mosby, Inc; 2010:643-647.	68.	Britt LD, Dascombe WH, Rodriguez A. New horizons in man-agement of hypothermia and frostbite injury. Surg Clin North Am. 1991;71(2):345-370.	69.	Lindan O, Greenway RM, Piazza JM. Pressure distribution on the surface of the human body. I. Evaluation in lying and sitting positions using a “bed of springs and nails.” Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 1965;46:378-385.	70.	Tayyib N, Coyer F. Effectiveness of pressure ulcer preven-tion strategies for adult patients in intensive care units: a systematic review. Worldviews Evidence-Based Nurs. 2016;13(6):432-444.	71.	Lyder CH. Pressure ulcer prevention and management. JAMA. 2003;289(2):223.	72.	Cannon BC, Cannon JP. Management of pressure ulcers. Am J Health Syst Pharm. 2004;61(18):1895-1905.	73.	Larson JD, Altman AM, Bentz ML, Larson DL. Pressure ulcers and perineal reconstruction. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2014;133(1):39e-48e.Brunicardi_Ch16_p0511-p0540.indd   53719/02/19   3:09 PM 538SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	74.	Waites KB, Canupp KC, Chen Y, DeVivo MJ, Moser SA. Bac-teremia after spinal cord injury in initial versus subsequent hospitalizations. J Spinal Cord Med. 2001;24(2):96-100.	75.	Siroky MB. Pathogenesis of bacteriuria and infection in the spinal cord injured patient. Am J Med. July 2002:67S-79S.	76.	Límová M. Active wound coverings: bioengineered skin and dermal substitutes. Surg Clin North Am. 2010;90(6):1237-1255.	77.	Nahabedian MY. Acellular dermal matrices in primary breast reconstruction. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2012;130(5 suppl 2): 44S-53S.	78.	Ellis CV, Kulber DA. Acellular dermal matrices in hand reconstruction. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2012;130(5 suppl 2): 256S-269S.	79.	Rajan S. Skin and soft-tissue infections: classifying and treat-ing a spectrum. Cleve Clin J Med. 2012;79(1):57-66.	80.	Moet GJ, Jones RN, Biedenbach DJ, Stilwell MG, Fritsche TR. Contemporary causes of skin and soft tissue infections in North America, Latin America, and Europe: report from the SENTRY Antimicrobial Surveillance Program (1998–2004). Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis. 2007;57(1):7-13.	81.	Stevens DL, Bisno AL, Chambers HF, et al. Executive sum-mary: practice guidelines for the diagnosis and manage-ment of skin and soft tissue infections: 2014 update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis. 2014;59(2):147-159.	82.	Goldstein EJC, Anaya DA, Dellinger EP. Necrotizing soft-tissue infection: diagnosis and management. Clin Infect Dis. 2007;44(5):705-710.	83.	Bosshardt TL, Henderson VJ, Organ CH. Necrotizing soft-tissue infections. Arch Surg. 1996;131(8):846-854.	84.	Miller LG, Perdreau-Remington F, Rieg G, et al. Necrotizing fasciitis caused by community-associated methicillin-resis-tant Staphylococcus aureus in Los Angeles. N Engl J Med. 2005;352(14):1445-1453.	85.	Wall DB, Klein SR, Black S, et al. A simple model to help distinguish necrotizing fasciitis from nonnecrotizing soft tis-sue infection. J Am Coll Surg. 2000;191(3):227-231.	86.	Wong C-H, Khin L-W, Heng K-S, Tan KC, Low CO. The LRINEC (Laboratory Risk Indicator for Necrotizing Fasciitis) score: a tool for distinguishing necrotizing fasciitis from other soft tissue infections. Crit Care Med. 2004;32(7): 1535-1541.	87.	Willy C, Rieger H, Vogt D. Hyperbare Oxygenation bei nekrotisierenden Weichteilinfektionen: Kontra. Der Chir. 2012;83(11):960-972.	88.	Moghimi M, Salentijn E, Debets-Ossenkop Y, Karagozoglu KH, Forouzanfar T. Treatment of cervicofacial actinomycosis: a report of 19 cases and review of literature. Med Oral Patol Oral Cir Bucal. 2013;18(4):e627-32.	89.	Wong VK, Turmezei TD, Weston VC. Actinomycosis. BMJ. 2011;343:d6099.	90.	de Villiers E-M. Cross-roads in the classification of papilloma-viruses. Virology. 2013;445(1-2):2-10.	91.	Cardoso JC, Calonje E. Cutaneous manifestations of human papillomaviruses: a review. Acta dermatovenerologica Alpina, Pannonica, Adriat. 2011;20(3):145-154.	92.	Majewski S, Jablonska S. Human papillomavirus-associ-ated tumors of the skin and mucosa. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1997;36(5 pt 1):659-685.	93.	Rogers HD, Macgregor JL, Nord KM, et al. Acquired epidermodysplasia verruciformis. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2009;60(2):315-320.	94.	Jacobelli S, Laude H, Carlotti A, et al. Epidermodysplasia verruciformis in human immunodeficiency virus-infected patients: a marker of human papillomavirus-related disor-ders not affected by antiretroviral therapy. Arch Dermatol. 2011;147(5):590-596.	95.	Garland SM, Kjaer SK, Muñoz N, et al. Impact and effec-tiveness of the quadrivalent human papillomavirus vaccine: a systematic review of 10 years of real-world experience. Clin Infect Dis. 2016;63(4):519-527.	96.	Connolly M, Bazmi K, O’Connell M, Lyons JF, Bourke JF. Cryotherapy of viral warts: a sustained 10-s freeze is more effective than the traditional method. Br J Dermatol. 2001;145(4):554-557.	97.	Coopman SA, Johnson RA, Platt R, Stern RS. Cutaneous disease and drug reactions in HIV infection. N Engl J Med. 1993;328(23):1670-1674.	98.	Khambaty MM, Hsu SS. Dermatology of the patient with HIV. Emerg Med Clin North Am. 2010;28(2):355-368.	99.	Severson JL, Tyring SK. Relation between herpes simplex viruses and human immunodeficiency virus infections. Arch Dermatol. 1999;135(11):1393-1397.	100.	Crum-Cianflone N, Hullsiek KH, Satter E, et al. Cutaneous malignancies among HIV-infected persons. Arch Intern Med. 2009;169(12):1130.	101.	Davis PA, Wastell C. A comparison of biomechanical proper-ties of excised mature scars from HIV patients and non-HIV controls. Am J Surg. 2000;180(3):217-222.	102.	North PE, Waner M, Mizeracki A, Mihm MC Jr. GLUT1: a newly discovered immunohistochemical marker for juvenile hemangiomas. Hum Pathol. 2000;31(1):11-22.	103.	Léauté-Labrèze C, Dumas de la Roque E, Hubiche T, Boralevi F, Thambo JB, Taïeb A. Propranolol for severe hemangiomas of infancy. N Engl J Med. 2008;358(24):2649-2651.	104.	Léauté-Labrèze C, Hoeger P, Mazereeuw-Hautier J, et al. A randomized, controlled trial of oral propranolol in infantile hemangioma. N Engl J Med. 2015;372(8):735-746. A multi-center, randomized, double-blind, adaptive, phase 2 and 3 trial that showed propranolol is a very effective treatment for infantile hemangioma.	105.	Kelly JW, Rivers JK, MacLennan R, Harrison S, Lewis AE, Tate BJ. Sunlight: a major factor associated with the develop-ment of melanocytic nevi in Australian schoolchildren. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1994;30(1):40-48.	106.	Krengel S, Hauschild A, Schafer T. Melanoma risk in con-genital melanocytic naevi: a systematic review. Br J Dermatol. 2006;155(1):1-8.	107.	Schaffer J V. Pigmented lesions in children: when to worry. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2007;19(4):430-440.	108.	Fuchs A, Marmur E. The kinetics of skin cancer: progression of actinic keratosis to squamous cell carcinoma. Dermatol Surg. 2007;33(9):1099-1101.	109.	Marks R, Rennie G, Selwood T. The relationship of basal cell carcinomas and squamous cell carcinomas to solar keratoses. Arch Dermatol. 1988;124(7):1039-1042.	110.	Robins P, Gupta AK. The use of topical fluorouracil to treat actinic keratosis. Cutis. 2002;70(2 suppl):4-7.	111.	Fu W, Cockerell CJ. The actinic (solar) keratosis: a 21st-century perspective. Arch Dermatol. 2003;139(1):66-70.	112.	Pariser RJ. Benign neoplasms of the skin. Med Clin North Am. 1998;82(6):1285-307, v-vi.	113.	Lee EH, Nehal KS, Disa JJ. Benign and premalignant skin lesions. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2010;125(5):188e-198e.	114.	Mentzel T. Cutaneous lipomatous neoplasms. Semin Diagn Pathol. 2001;18(4):250-257.	115.	Reszko A, Wilson L, Leffell D. Devita, Hellman, Rosenberg’s Cancer: Principles and Practice. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2011.	116.	Benjamin CL, Ananthaswamy HN. p53 and the pathogenesis of skin cancer. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2007;224(3):241-248.	117.	Netscher DT, Leong M, Orengo I, Yang D, Berg C, Krishnan B. Cutaneous malignancies: melanoma and nonmelanoma types. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2011;127(3):37e-56e.Brunicardi_Ch16_p0511-p0540.indd   53819/02/19   3:09 PM 539THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUECHAPTER 16	118.	Siegle RJ, MacMillan J, Pollack S V. Infiltrative basal cell carcinoma: a nonsclerosing subtype. J Dermatol Surg Oncol. 1986;12(8):830-836.	119.	Kimyai-Asadi A, Alam M, Goldberg LH, et al. Efficacy of narrowmargin excision of well-demarcated primary facial basal cell carcinomas. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2005;53(3):464-468.	120.	Rowe DE, Carroll RJ, Day CL. Mohs surgery is the treat-ment of choice for recurrent (previously treated) basal cell carcinoma. J Dermatol Surg Oncol. 1989;15(4):424-431. A heavily referenced paper from 1989 demonstrating the effectiveness of Mohs micrographic surgery in local control of recurrent basal cell carcinoma.	121.	Rowe DE, Carroll RJ, Day CL. Long-term recurrence rates in previously untreated (primary) basal cell carcinoma: implications for patient follow-up. J Dermatol Surg Oncol. 1989;15(3):315-328.	122.	Geisse J, Caro I, Lindholm J, Golitz L, Stampone P, Owens M. Imiquimod 5% cream for the treatment of superficial basal cell carcinoma: results from two phase III, random-ized, vehicle-controlled studies. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2004;50(5):722-733. A multicenter, randomized, parallel, vehicle-controlled, double-blind, phase III clinical study which showed that 5% imiquimod cream was an effective treatment for superficial BCC.	123.	Marks R, Gebauer K, Shumack S, et al. Imiquimod 5% cream in the treatment of superficial basal cell carcinoma: results of a multicenter 6-week dose-response trial. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2001;44(5):807-813.	124.	Schulze HJ, Cribier B, Requena L, et al. Imiquimod 5% cream for the treatment of superficial basal cell carcinoma: results from a randomized vehicle-controlled phase III study in Europe. Br J Dermatol. 2005;152(5):939-947.	125.	Shumack S, Robinson J, Kossard S, et al. Efficacy of topical 5% imiquimod cream for the treatment of nodular basal cell carcinoma: comparison of dosing regimens. Arch Dermatol. 2002;138(9):1165-1171.	126.	Vidal D, Matías-Guiu X, Alomar A. Open study of the efficacy and mechanism of action of topical imiquimod in basal cell carcinoma. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2004;29(5):518-525.	127.	Rowe DE, Carroll RJ, Day CL. Prognostic factors for local recurrence, metastasis, and survival rates in squamous cell carcinoma of the skin, ear, and lip. Implications for treatment modality selection. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1992;26(6):976-990.	128.	National Comprehensive Cancer Network. Squamous cell carcinoma, National Comprehensive Cancer Network clini-cal practice guidelines in oncology, squamous cell carcinoma, version 1.2018. In: National Comprehensive Cancer Network. Fort Washington, PA; 2017.	129.	Kao GF. Carcinoma arising in Bowen’s disease. Arch Derma-tol. 1986;122(10):1124-1126.	130.	Cassarino DS, Derienzo DP, Barr RJ. Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma: a comprehensive clinicopathologic classifica-tion. Part one. J Cutan Pathol. 2006;33(3):191-206.	131.	Schwartz RA. Keratoacanthoma. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1994;30(1):1-19.	132.	Balch CM, Soong SJ, Gershenwald JE, et al. Prognostic factors analysis of 17,600 melanoma patients: validation of the American Joint Committee on Cancer melanoma staging system. J Clin Oncol. 2001;19(16):3622-3634. This paper looked at over 17,000 melanoma patients in 2001, validating the AJCC TNM staging system for melanoma.	133.	Cust AE, Armstrong BK, Goumas C, et al. Sunbed use dur-ing adolescence and early adulthood is associated with increased risk of early-onset melanoma. Int J Cancer. 2011;128(10):2425-2435.	134.	Elwood JM, Jopson J. Melanoma and sun exposure: an over-view of published studies. Int J Cancer. 1997;73(2):198-203.	135.	Chudnovsky Y, Khavari PA, Adams AE. Melanoma genetics and the development of rational therapeutics. J Clin Invest. 2005;115(4):813-824.	136.	National Comprehensive Cancer Network. Melanoma, National Comprehensive Cancer Network clinical practice guidelines in oncology, melanoma, Version 1.2017. In: National Compre-hensive Cancer Network. Fort Washington, PA; 2016.	137.	Basler GC, Fader DJ, Yahanda A, Sondak VK, Johnson TM. The utility of fine needle aspiration in the diagnosis of melanoma metastatic to lymph nodes. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1997;36(3 pt 1):403-408.	138.	Hall BJ, Schmidt RL, Sharma RR, Layfield LJ. Fine-needle aspiration cytology for the diagnosis of metastatic melanoma: systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Clin Pathol. 2013;140(5):635-642.	139.	Cangiarella J, Symmans WF, Shapiro RL, et al. Aspiration biopsy and the clinical management of patients with malig-nant melanoma and palpable regional lymph nodes. Cancer. 2000;90(3):162-166.	140.	Balch CM, Gershenwald JE, Soong S, et al. Final version of 2009 AJCC melanoma staging and classification. J Clin Oncol. 2009;27(36):6199-6206.	141.	Weide B, Elsässer M, Büttner P, et al. Serum markers lactate dehydrogenase and S100B predict independently disease outcome in melanoma patients with distant metastasis. Br J Cancer. 2012;107(3):422-428.	142.	Morton DL, Thompson JF, Cochran AJ, et al. Final trial report of sentinel-node biopsy versus nodal observation in melanoma. N Engl J Med. 2014;370(7):599-609. This was a phase 3 trial evaluating outcomes in 2001 patients with primary cutaneous melanoma that demonstrated the use-fulness of SLN biopsy in patients with thick and interme-diate-thickness melanoma.	143.	Duffy KL, Truong A, Bowen GM, et al. Adequacy of 5-mm surgical excision margins for non-lentiginous melanoma in situ. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2014;71(4):835-838.	144.	Akhtar S, Bhat W, Magdum A, Stanley PR. Surgical excision margins for melanoma in situ. J Plast Reconstr Aesthetic Surg. 2014;67(3):320-323.	145.	Felton S, Taylor RS, Srivastava D. Excision margins for melanoma in situ on the head and neck. Dermatologic Surg. 2016;42(3):327-334.	146.	Veronesi U, Cascinelli N, Adamus J, et al. Thin stage I primary cutaneous malignant melanoma. N Engl J Med. 1988;318(18):1159-1162.	147.	Cohn-Cedermark G, Rutqvist LE, Andersson R, et al. Long term results of a randomized study by the Swedish Melanoma Study Group on 2-cm versus 5-cm resection margins for patients with cutaneous melanoma with a tumor thickness of 0.8-2.0 mm. Cancer. 2000;89(7):1495-1501.	148.	Balch CM, Soong SJ, Smith T, et al. Long-term results of a prospective surgical trial comparing 2 cm vs. 4 cm excision margins for 740 patients with 1-4 mm melanomas. Ann Surg Oncol. 2001;8(2):101-108.	149.	Balch CM, Urist MM, Karakousis CP, et al. Efficacy of 2-cm surgical margins for intermediate-thickness melanomas (1 to  4 mm). Results of a multi-institutional randomized surgical trial. Ann Surg. 1993;218(3):262-269.	150.	Hayes AJ, Maynard L, Coombes G, et al. Wide versus nar-row excision margins for high-risk, primary cutaneous mela-nomas: long-term follow-up of survival in a randomised trial. Lancet Oncol. 2016;17(2):184-192. A multicenter random-ized trial that demonstrated superiority of 3 cm margins over 1 cm margins for cutaneous melanoma >2 mm in thickness.	151.	Beasley GM, Caudle A, Petersen RP, et al. A multi-institu-tional experience of isolated limb infusion: defining response and toxicity in the US. J Am Coll Surg. 2009;208(5):706-715.Brunicardi_Ch16_p0511-p0540.indd   53919/02/19   3:09 PM 540SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	152.	Boesch CE, Meyer T, Waschke L, et al. Long-term outcome of hyperthermic isolated limb perfusion (HILP) in the treat-ment of locoregionally metastasised malignant melanoma of the extremities. Int J Hyperthermia. 2010;26(1):16-20.	153.	Lindnér P, Doubrovsky A, Kam PCA, Thompson JF. Prognos-tic factors after isolated limb infusion with cytotoxic agents for melanoma. Ann Surg Oncol. 2002;9(2):127-136.	154.	Lens MB, Dawes M. Isolated limb perfusion with melphalan in the treatment of malignant melanoma of the extremities: a systematic review of randomised controlled trials. Lancet Oncol. 2003;4(6):359-364.	155.	Kirkwood JM, Manola J, Ibrahim J, et al. A pooled analy-sis of eastern cooperative oncology group and intergroup trials of adjuvant high-dose interferon for melanoma. Clin Cancer Res. 2004;10(5):1670-1677. A multicenter, random-ized trial that demonstrated high-dose interferon may be effective as an adjuvant treatment for melanoma.	156.	Kirkwood JM, Strawderman MH, Ernstoff MS, Smith TJ, Borden EC, Blum RH. Interferon alfa-2b adjuvant therapy of high-risk resected cutaneous melanoma: the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Trial EST 1684. J Clin Oncol. 1996;14(1):7-17.	157.	Kirkwood JM, Ibrahim JG, Sondak VK, et al. Highand low-dose interferon alfa-2b in high-risk melanoma: first analy-sis of intergroup trial E1690/S9111/C9190. J Clin Oncol. 2000;18(12):2444-2458.	158.	Eggermont AMM, Suciu S, Santinami M, et al. Adjuvant ther-apy with pegylated interferon alfa-2b versus observation alone in resected stage III melanoma: final results of EORTC 18991, a randomised phase III trial. Lancet (London, England).  2008;372(9633):117-126.	159.	Flaherty LE, Othus M, Atkins MB, et al. Southwest Oncology Group S0008: A phase III trial of high-dose interferon alfa-2b versus cisplatin, vinblastine, and dacarbazine, plus interleu-kin-2 and interferon in patients with high-risk melanoma— an Intergroup Study of Cancer and Leukemia Group B, Children’s Oncology Group, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group, and Southwest Oncology Group. J Clin Oncol. 2014; 32(33):3771-3778.	160.	Eggermont AMM, Chiarion-Sileni V, Grob J-J, et al. Adjuvant ipilimumab versus placebo after complete resection of high-risk stage III melanoma (EORTC 18071): a randomised, doubleblind, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2015;16(5):522-530.	161.	Atkins MB, Lotze MT, Dutcher JP, et al. High-dose recombi-nant interleukin 2 therapy for patients with metastatic mela-noma: analysis of 270 patients treated between 1985 and 1993. J Clin Oncol. 1999;17(7):2105-2116.	162.	Chapman PB, Hauschild A, Robert C, et al. Improved sur-vival with vemurafenib in melanoma with BRAF V600E mutation. N Engl J Med. 2011;364(26):2507-2516. A phase 3 clinical trial demonstrating effectiveness of vemurafenib in melanoma patients with BRAF V600E mutations.	163.	Hodi FS, O’Day SJ, McDermott DF, et al. Improved survival with ipilimumab in patients with metastatic melanoma.  N Engl J Med. 2010;363(8):711-723. A phase III clinical trial demonstrating some improvement in survival with the use of ipilimumab in the treatment of recalcitrant metastatic melanoma.	164.	Smith FO, Downey SG, Klapper JA, et al. Treatment of meta-static melanoma using interleukin-2 alone or in conjunction with vaccines. Clin Cancer Res. 2008;14(17):5610-5618.	165.	Rosenberg SA, Yang JC, Topalian SL, et al. Treatment of 283 consecutive patients with metastatic melanoma or renal cell cancer using high-dose bolus interleukin 2. JAMA. 271(12):907-913.	166.	Albert DM, Ryan LM, Borden EC. Metastatic ocular and cutaneous melanoma: a comparison of patient characteris-tics and prognosis. Arch Ophthalmol (Chicago, Ill 1960). 1996;114(1):107-108.	167.	Inskip PD, Devesa SS, Fraumeni JF. Trends in the incidence of ocular melanoma in the United States, 1974-1998. Cancer Causes Control. 2003;14(3):251-257.	168.	Starr OD, Patel D V, Allen JP, McGhee CN. Iris melanoma: pathology, prognosis and surgical intervention. Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2004;32(3):294-296.	169.	Lemos BD, Storer BE, Iyer JG, et al. Pathologic nodal evalu-ation improves prognostic accuracy in Merkel cell carcinoma: analysis of 5823 cases as the basis of the first consensus stag-ing system. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2010;63(5):751-761.	170.	Akhtar S, Oza KK, Wright J. Merkel cell carcinoma: report of 10 cases and review of the literature. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2000;43(5):755-767.	171.	Medina-Franco H, Urist MM, Fiveash J, Heslin MJ, Bland KI, Beenken SW. Multimodality treatment of Merkel cell carci-noma: case series and literature review of 1024 cases. Ann Surg Oncol. 2001;8(3):204-208.	172.	National Comprehensive Cancer Network. Merkel cell carcinoma. In: National Comprehensive Cancer Network Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology, Merkel Cell Carcinoma Version 1.2018. Fort Washington, PA; 2017.	173.	Bichakjian CK, Lowe L, Lao CD, et al. Merkel cell carcinoma: critical review with guidelines for multidisciplinary manage-ment. Cancer. 2007;110(1):1-12.	174.	Ott MJ, Tanabe KK, Gadd MA, et al. Multimodal-ity management of Merkel cell carcinoma. Arch Surg. 1999;134(4):388-393.	175.	Ramírez-Amador V, Anaya-Saavedra G, Martínez-Mata G. Kaposi’s sarcoma of the head and neck: a review. Oral Oncol. 2010;46(3):135-145.	176.	Bower M, Weir J, Francis N, et al. The effect of HAART in 254 consecutive patients with AIDS-related Kaposi’s sarcoma. AIDS. 2009;23(13):1701-1706.	177.	Martinez V, Caumes E, Gambotti L, et al. Remission from Kaposi’s sarcoma on HAART is associated with suppression of HIV replication and is independent of protease inhibitor therapy. Br J Cancer. 2006;94(7):1000-1006.	178.	Aiba S, Tabata N, Ishii H, Ootani H, Tagami H. Dermatofi-brosarcoma protuberans is a unique fibrohistiocytic tumour expressing CD34. Br J Dermatol. 1992;127(2):79-84.	179.	Abenoza P, Lillemoe T. CD34 and factor XIIIa in the differ-ential diagnosis of dermatofibroma and dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans. Am J Dermatopathol. 1993;15(5):429-434.	180.	Fields RC, Hameed M, Qin L-X, et al. Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans (DFSP): predictors of recurrence and the use of systemic therapy. Ann Surg Oncol. 2011;18(2):328-336.	181.	Meguerditchian A-N, Wang J, Lema B, Kraybill WG, Zeitouni NC, Kane JM 3rd. Wide excision or Mohs micrographic sur-gery for the treatment of primary dermatofibrosarcoma protu-berans. Am J Clin Oncol. 2009;33(3):1.	182.	Requena L, Sangueza OP. Cutaneous vascular proliferations. Part III. Malignant neoplasms, other cutaneous neoplasms with significant vascular component, and disorders errone-ously considered as vascular neoplasms. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1998;38(2 pt 1):143-175.	183.	Holden CA, Spittle MF, Jones EW. Angiosarcoma of the face and scalp, prognosis and treatment. Cancer. 1987;59(5):1046-1057.	184.	Wagner G, Sachse MM. Extramammary Paget disease— clinical appearance, pathogenesis, management. JDDG J der Dtsch Dermatologischen Gesellschaft. 2011;9(6):448-454.Brunicardi_Ch16_p0511-p0540.indd   54019/02/19   3:09 PM
# Chunk 8880
The BreastCatherine C. Parker, Senthil Damodaran,  Kirby I. Bland, and Kelly K. Hunt 17chapterA BRIEF HISTORY OF BREAST CANCER THERAPYBreast cancer has captured the attention of surgeons throughout the ages. The Smith Surgical Papyrus (3000–2500 b.c.) is the earliest known document to refer to breast cancer. The cancer was in a man, but the description encompassed most of the common clinical features. In reference to this cancer, the author concluded, “There is no treatment.”1 There were few other historical references to breast cancer until the first century. In  De Medicina, Celsus commented on the value of operations for early breast cancer: “None of these may be removed but the cacoethes (early cancer), the rest are irritated by every method of cure. The more violent the operations are, the more angry they grow.”2 In the second century, Galen inscribed his classical clinical observation: “We have often seen in the breast a tumor exactly resembling the animal the crab. Just as the crab has legs on both sides of his body, so in this disease the veins extending out from the unnatural growth take the shape of a crab’s legs. We have often cured this disease in its early stages, but after  it has reached a large size, no one has cured it. In all operations we attempt to excise the tumor in a circle where it borders on the healthy tissue.”3The Galenic system of medicine ascribed cancers to an excess of black bile and concluded that excision of a local bodily outbreak could not cure the systemic imbalance. Theories espoused by Galen dominated medicine until the Renaissance. In 1652, Tulp introduced the idea that cancer was contagious when he reported an elderly woman and her housemaid who both developed breast cancer (N. Tulp, Observationes medi-cae 1652). This single incidence was accepted as conclusive A Brief History of Breast  Cancer Therapy541Embryology and Functional  Anatomy of the Breast543Embryology / 543Functional Anatomy / 544Physiology of the Breast547Breast Development and Function / 547Pregnancy, Lactation,  and Senescence / 548Gynecomastia / 549Infectious and Inflammatory Disorders of the Breast550Bacterial Infection / 550Mycotic Infections / 550Hidradenitis Suppurativa / 550Mondor’s Disease / 550Common Benign Disorders and Diseases of the Breast551Aberrations of Normal Development and Involution / 551Pathology of Nonproliferative  Disorders / 552Pathology of Proliferative Disorders Without Atypia / 553Pathology of Atypical Proliferative Diseases / 553Treatment of Selected Benign Breast Disorders and Diseases / 554Risk Factors for Breast Cancer555Hormonal and Nonhormonal  Risk Factors / 555Risk Assessment Models / 555Risk Management / 556BRCA Mutations / 558Epidemiology and Natural  History of Breast Cancer561Epidemiology / 561Natural History / 562Histopathology of Breast Cancer563Carcinoma In Situ / 563Invasive Breast Carcinoma / 565Diagnosis of Breast Cancer567Examination / 567Imaging Techniques / 567Breast Biopsy / 574Breast Cancer Staging and Biomarkers575Breast Cancer Staging / 575Biomarkers / 575Overview of Breast Cancer  Therapy580In Situ Breast Cancer (Stage 0) / 580Early Invasive Breast Cancer  (Stage I, IIA, or IIB) / 582Advanced Local-Regional Breast Cancer (Stage IIIA or IIIB) / 585Internal Mammary Lymph Nodes / 587Distant Metastases (Stage IV) / 587Local-Regional Recurrence / 587Breast Cancer Prognosis / 587Surgical Techniques in  Breast Cancer Therapy588Excisional Biopsy With Needle Localization / 588Sentinel Lymph Node Dissection / 590Breast Conservation / 591Mastectomy and Axillary Dissection / 591Modified Radical Mastectomy / 592Reconstruction of the  Breast and Chest Wall / 593Nonsurgical Breast  Cancer Therapies594Radiation Therapy / 594Chemotherapy Adjuvant / 594Antiestrogen Therapy / 597Ablative Endocrine Therapy / 598Anti-HER2 Therapy / 598Special Clinical Situations599Nipple Discharge / 599Axillary Lymph Node Metastases  in the Setting of an Unknown  Primary Cancer / 600Breast Cancer During Pregnancy / 600Male Breast Cancer / 600Phyllodes Tumors / 600Inflammatory Breast Carcinoma / 601Rare Breast Cancers / 602Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   54101/03/19   5:04 PM 542evidence and started an idea which persisted into the 20th century among some lay people. The majority of respected sur-geons considered operative intervention to be a futile and ill-advised endeavor. The Renaissance and the wars of the 16th and 17th centuries brought developments in surgery, particularly in anatomical understanding. However, there were no new theories espoused in relation to cancer. Beginning with Morgagni, surgi-cal resections were more frequently undertaken, including some early attempts at mastectomy and axillary dissection. The 17th century saw the start of the Age of Enlightenment, which lasted until the 19th century. In terms of medicine, this resulted in the abandonment of Galen’s humoral pathology, which was repudi-ated by Le Dran, and the subsequent rise in cellular pathology as espoused by Virchow. Le Dran stated that breast cancer was a local disease that spread by way of lymph vessels to axillary lymph nodes. When operating on a woman with breast cancer, he routinely removed any enlarged axillary lymph nodes.4In the 19th century, Moore, of the Middlesex Hospital, London, emphasized complete resection of the breast for cancer and stated that palpable axillary lymph nodes also should be removed.5 In a presentation before the British Medical Asso-ciation in 1877, Banks supported Moore’s concepts and advo-cated the resection of axillary lymph nodes even when palpable lymphadenopathy was not evident, recognizing that occult involvement of axillary lymph nodes was frequently present. In 1894, Halsted and Meyer reported their operations for treatment of breast cancer.6 By demonstrating superior local-regional con-trol rates after radical resection, these surgeons established radi-cal mastectomy as state-of-the-art treatment for that era. Halsted and Meyer advocated complete dissection of axillary lymph node levels I to III. Both routinely resected the long thoracic nerve and the thoracodorsal neurovascular bundle with the axil-lary contents. In 1943, Haagensen and Stout described the grave signs of breast cancer, which included: (a) edema of the skin of the breast, (b) skin ulceration, (c) chest wall fixation, (d) an axillary lymph node >2.5 cm in diameter, and (e) fixed axillary lymph nodes. Women with two or more signs had a 42% local recurrence rate and only a 2% 5-year disease-free survival rate.7 Based on these findings, they declared that women with grave signs were beyond cure by radical surgery. In 1948, Patey and Dyson of the Middlesex Hospital, London, advocated a modi-fied radical mastectomy for the management of advanced oper-able breast cancer, explaining, “Until an effective general agent for treatment of carcinoma of the breast is developed, a high proportion of these cases are doomed to die.”8 Their technique included removal of the breast and axillary lymph nodes with preservation of the pectoralis major muscle. They showed that removal of the pectoralis minor muscle allowed access to and clearance of axillary lymph node levels I to III.During the 1970s, there was a transition from the Halsted radical mastectomy to the modified radical mastectomy as the surgical procedure most frequently used by American surgeons to treat breast cancer. This transition acknowledged that: (a) fewer patients were presenting with advanced local disease with or without the grave signs described by Haagensen, (b) extirpation of the pectoralis major muscle was not essential for local-regional control in stages I and II breast cancer, and (c) neither the modified radical mastectomy nor the Halsted radi-cal mastectomy consistently achieved local-regional control of stage III breast cancer. Radiation therapy was incorporated into the management of advanced breast cancer and demonstrated improvements in local-regional control. The National Surgical Key Points1	The breast receives its principal blood supply from per-forating branches of the internal mammary artery, lateral branches of the posterior intercostal arteries, and branches from the axillary artery, including the highest thoracic, lat-eral thoracic, and pectoral branches of the thoracoacromial artery.2	The axillary lymph nodes usually receive >75% of the lymph drainage from the breast, and the rest flows through the lymph vessels that accompany the perforating branches of the internal mammary artery and enters the parasternal (internal mammary) group of lymph nodes.3	Breast development and function are initiated by a variety of hormonal stimuli, with the major trophic effects being modulated by estrogen, progesterone, and prolactin.4	Benign breast disorders and diseases are related to the nor-mal processes of reproductive life and to involution, and there is a spectrum of breast conditions that ranges from normal to disorder to disease (aberrations of normal devel-opment and involution classification).5	To calculate breast cancer risk using the Gail model, a woman’s risk factors are translated into an overall risk score by multiplying her relative risks from several cat-egories. This risk score is then compared with an adjusted population risk of breast cancer to determine the wom-an’s individual risk. This model is not appropriate for use in women with a known BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation or women with lobular or ductal carcinoma in situ.6	Routine use of screening mammography in women ≥50 years of age reduces mortality from breast cancer by 25%. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) screening is recom-mended in women with BRCA mutations and may be con-sidered in women with a greater than 20% to 25% lifetime risk of developing breast cancer.7	Core-needle biopsy is the preferred method for diagnosis of palpable or nonpalpable breast abnormalities.8	When a diagnosis of breast cancer is made, the surgeon should determine the clinical stage, histologic characteris-tics, and appropriate biomarker levels before initiating local therapy.9	Sentinel node dissection is the preferred method for stag-ing of the regional lymph nodes in women with clinically node-negative invasive breast cancer. Axillary dissection may be avoided in women with one to two positive senti-nel nodes who are treated with breast conserving surgery, whole breast radiation, and systemic therapy.10	Local-regional and systemic therapy decisions for an indi-vidual patient with breast cancer are best made using a multidisciplinary treatment approach. The sequencing of therapies is dependent on patient and tumor related factors including breast cancer subtype.Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   54201/03/19   5:04 PM 543THE BREASTCHAPTER 17Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project (NSABP) conducted a ran-domized trial in the early 1970s to determine the impact of local and regional treatments on survival in operable breast cancer. In the B-04 trial, 1665 women were enrolled and stratified by clinical assessment of the axillary lymph nodes. The clinically node-negative women were randomized into three treatment groups: (a) Halsted radical mastectomy; (b) total mastectomy plus radiation therapy; and (c) total mastectomy alone. Clini-cally node-positive women were randomized to Halsted radical mastectomy or total mastectomy plus radiation therapy. This trial accrued patients between 1971 and 1974, an era that pre-dated widespread availability of effective systemic therapy for breast cancer and therefore reflect survival associated with local-regional therapy alone. There were no differences in survival between the three groups of node-negative women or between the two groups of node-positive women. These overall survival equivalence patterns persisted at 25 years of follow-up.9The next major advance in the surgical management of breast cancer was the development of breast conserving surgery. Breast conserving surgery and radium treatment was first reported by Geoffrey Keynes of St Bartholomew’s  Hospital, London in the British Medical Journal in 1937.10 Several decades later, the NSABP launched the B-06 trial, a phase 3 study that randomized 1851 patients to total mastec-tomy, lumpectomy alone, or lumpectomy with breast irradia-tion. The results showed no difference in disease-free, distant disease-free, and overall survival among the three groups; how-ever, the omission of radiation therapy resulted in significantly higher rates of ipsilateral breast tumor recurrence in those who received lumpectomy alone.11 The B-06 trial excluded patients who had palpable axillary lymph nodes, and those patients randomized to breast conserving surgery had frozen sections performed. If on frozen section the margins were involved, the surgeon proceeded to perform a mastectomy, but the patient was included in the analysis as having had a breast conserv-ing operation. Furthermore, in B-06, local in-breast recurrences were regarded as “nonevents” in terms of disease-free survival. Both the NSABP B-04 and B-06 trials were taken to refute the Halstedian concept that cancer spread throughout a region of the breast to lymphatics and then on to distant sites. Bernard Fisher proposed the “alternative hypothesis” that breast cancer was a systemic disease at diagnosis and that tumor cells had access to both the blood and lymphatic systems and that regional lymph nodes were a marker of systemic disease and not a barrier to the dissemination of cancer cells. He proposed that host factors were important in the development of metastasis and that varia-tions in the local-regional approach to breast cancer treatment were not likely to substantially impact survival. This idea was dominant for a number of years but has been challenged by the Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group (EBCTCG) overview analysis, which reported that “the avoidance of recur-rence in a conserved breast . . . avoids about one breast cancer death over the next 15 years for every four such recurrences avoided,”12 indicating that not all breast cancer is a systemic disease at presentation.During the 1970s, clinical trials were initiated to determine the value of systemic therapy in the postoperative setting as an adjuvant to surgery. The EBCTCG was established in 1985 to coordinate the meta-analysis of data from randomized clinical trials in order to examine the impact of adjuvant treatments for breast cancer on recurrence and mortality. The EBCTCG overview has demonstrated that anthracycline containing regimens are superior to cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and 5-fluorouracil (CMF), and more recently, that the addition of a taxane to an anthracycline-based regimen reduces breast cancer mortality by one-third.11 The overview has also demonstrated that tamoxifen is of benefit only in patients with estrogen recep-tor (ER) positive breast cancer and that tamoxifen may decrease mortality from breast cancer by as much as 30%.13 Importantly, the EBCTCG data have shown that proportional reduction in risk was not significantly affected by standard clinical and pathologic factors such as tumor size, ER status, and nodal  status.14 This underscores the importance of stratification of risk in determining adjuvant therapy decisions in order to minimize the toxicities of therapies in those unlikely to benefit, yet real-ize the substantial benefits gained in local-regional control and survival in those at higher risk.Many early randomized clinical trials considered all patients similarly in terms of treatment viewing breast cancer as more of a homogeneous disease. Breast cancer has traditionally been defined by pathologic determinants using conventional light microscopy and basic histologic techniques. In the 1980s, immunohistochemistry allowed assessment of the expression of individual tumor markers (most commonly proteins) while DNA was initially assessed in terms of its ploidy status. Sub-sequently, breast cancer specimens have been interrogated at the level of the DNA by labeling genes of interest and allow-ing fluorescent dyes to quantify the abundance of a particular gene and comparing a large number of genes simultaneously in a single breast cancer specimen. Gene expression arrays have shown that breast cancers cluster according to their intrinsic gene expression patterns into at least five intrinsic subtypes and these intrinsic subtypes correlate with breast cancer outcomes.15 Breast cancers are now classified by molecular subtypes and these are being used for risk stratification and decision making in terms of local-regional and systemic therapies.Currently, 50% of American women will consult a sur-geon regarding breast disease, 25% will undergo breast biopsy for diagnosis of an abnormality, and 12% will develop some variant of breast cancer. Considerable progress has been made in the integration of surgery, radiation therapy, and systemic therapy to control local-regional disease, enhance survival, and improve the quality of life of breast cancer survivors. Surgeons are traditionally the first physician consulted for breast care, and it is critical for them to be well trained in all aspects of the breast from embryologic development, to growth and development, to benign and malignant disease processes. This will allow the greatest opportunity to achieve optimal outcomes for patients and their families.EMBRYOLOGY AND FUNCTIONAL  ANATOMY OF THE BREASTEmbryologyAt the fifth or sixth week of fetal development, two ventral bands of thickened ectoderm (mammary ridges, milk lines) are evident in the embryo.16 In most mammals, paired breasts develop along these ridges, which extend from the base of the forelimb (future axilla) to the region of the hind limb (inguinal area). These ridges are not prominent in the human embryo and disappear after a short time, except for small portions that may persist in the pectoral region. Accessory breasts (polymastia) or accessory nipples (polythelia) may Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   54301/03/19   5:04 PM 544SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 17-1. The mammary milk line. (Visual Art: © 2013.  The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center.)Figure 17-2. Anatomy of the breast. Tangential and cross-sectional (sagittal) views of the breast and associated chest wall. (Reproduced with permission from Bland KI, Copeland EMI: The Breast: Comprehensive Management of Benign and Malignant Diseases, 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier/Saunders; 2009.)occur along the milk line (Fig. 17-1) when normal regression fails. Each breast develops when an ingrowth of ectoderm forms a primary tissue bud in the mesenchyme. The primary bud, in turn, initiates the development of 15 to 20 secondary buds. Epithelial cords develop from the secondary buds and extend into the surrounding mesenchyme. Major (lactiferous) ducts develop, which open into a shallow mammary pit. Dur-ing infancy, a proliferation of mesenchyme transforms the mammary pit into a nipple. If there is failure of a pit to elevate above skin level, an inverted nipple results. This congenital malformation occurs in 4% of infants. At birth, the breasts are identical in males and females, demonstrating only the pres-ence of major ducts. Enlargement of the breast may be evi-dent, and a secretion, historically referred to as witch’s milk, may be produced. These transitory events occur in response to maternal hormones that cross the placenta.The breast remains undeveloped in the female until puberty, when it enlarges in response to ovarian estrogen and progesterone, which initiate proliferation of the epithelial and connective tissue elements. However, the breasts remain incompletely developed until pregnancy occurs. Absence of the breast (amastia) is rare and results from an arrest in mam-mary ridge development that occurs during the sixth fetal week. Poland’s syndrome consists of hypoplasia or complete absence of the breast, costal cartilage and rib defects, hypoplasia of the subcutaneous tissues of the chest wall, and brachysyndactyly. Breast hypoplasia also may be iatrogenically induced before puberty by trauma, infection, or radiation therapy. Symmastia is a rare anomaly recognized as webbing between the breasts across the midline. Accessory nipples (polythelia) occur in <1% of infants and may be associated with abnormalities of the urinary and cardiovascular systems. Supernumerary breasts may occur in any configuration along the mammary milk line but most frequently occur between the normal nipple location and the symphysis pubis. Turner’s syndrome (ovarian agenesis and dysgenesis) and Fleischer’s syndrome (displacement of the nipples and bilateral renal hypoplasia) may have polymastia as a component. Accessory axillary breast tissue is uncommon and usually is bilateral.Functional AnatomyThe breast is composed of 15 to 20 lobes (Fig. 17-2), which are each composed of several lobules.17 Fibrous bands of con-nective tissue travel through the breast (Cooper’s suspensory ligaments), insert perpendicularly into the dermis, and provide structural support. The mature female breast extends from the level of the second or third rib to the inframammary fold at the sixth or seventh rib. It extends transversely from the lateral border of the sternum to the anterior axillary line. The deep or posterior surface of the breast rests on the fascia of the pecto-ralis major, serratus anterior, and external oblique abdominal muscles, and the upper extent of the rectus sheath. The retro-mammary bursa may be identified on the posterior aspect of the breast between the investing fascia of the breast and the fascia of the pectoralis major muscles. The axillary tail of Spence extends laterally across the anterior axillary fold. The upper outer quad-rant of the breast contains a greater volume of tissue than do the other quadrants. The breast has a protuberant conical form. The base of the cone is roughly circular, measuring 10 to 12 cm in diameter. Considerable variations in the size, contour, and den-sity of the breast are evident among individuals. The nulliparous breast has a hemispheric configuration with distinct flattening above the nipple. With the hormonal stimulation that accom-panies pregnancy and lactation, the breast becomes larger and increases in volume and density, whereas with senescence, it assumes a flattened, flaccid, and more pendulous configuration with decreased volume.Nipple-Areola Complex. The epidermis of the nipple-are-ola complex is pigmented and is variably corrugated. During puberty, the pigment becomes darker and the nipple assumes an elevated configuration. Throughout pregnancy, the areola Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   54401/03/19   5:04 PM 545THE BREASTCHAPTER 17Figure 17-3. Inactive human breast (100x). The epithelium, which is primarily ductal, is embedded in loose connective tissue. Dense connective tissue surrounds the terminal duct lobular units (TDLU). (Used with permission from Dr. Sindhu Menon, Consultant Histo-pathologist and Dr. Rahul Deb, Consultant Histopathologist and Lead Breast Pathologist, Royal Derby Hospital, Derby, UK.)Figure 17-4. Active human breast: pregnancy and lactation (160x). The alveolar epithelium becomes conspicuous during the early pro-liferative period. The alveolus is surrounded by cellular connective tissue. (Used with permission from Dr. Sindhu Menon, Consultant Histopathologist and Dr. Rahul Deb, Consultant Histopathologist and Lead Breast Pathologist, Royal Derby Hospital, Derby, UK.)enlarges and pigmentation is further enhanced. The areola con-tains sebaceous glands, sweat glands, and accessory glands, which produce small elevations on the surface of the areola (Montgomery’s tubercles). Smooth muscle bundle fibers, which lie circumferentially in the dense connective tissue and longi-tudinally along the major ducts, extend upward into the nipple, where they are responsible for the nipple erection that occurs with various sensory stimuli. The dermal papilla at the tip of the nipple contains numerous sensory nerve endings and Meiss-ner’s corpuscles. This rich sensory innervation is of functional importance because the sucking of the infant initiates a chain of neurohumoral events that results in milk letdown.Inactive and Active Breast. Each lobe of the breast termi-nates in a major (lactiferous) duct (2–4 mm in diameter), which opens through a constricted orifice (0.4–0.7 mm in diameter) into the ampulla of the nipple (see Fig. 17-2). Immediately below the nipple-areola complex, each major duct has a dilated portion (lactiferous sinus), which is lined with stratified squa-mous epithelium. Major ducts are lined with two layers of cuboidal cells, whereas minor ducts are lined with a single layer of columnar or cuboidal cells. Myoepithelial cells of ectoder-mal origin reside between the epithelial cells in the basal lamina and contain myofibrils. In the inactive breast, the epithelium is sparse and consists primarily of ductal epithelium (Fig. 17-3). In the early phase of the menstrual cycle, minor ducts are cord-like with small lumina. With estrogen stimulation at the time of ovulation, alveolar epithelium increases in height, duct lumina become more prominent, and some secretions accumulate. When the hormonal stimulation decreases, the alveolar epithe-lium regresses.With pregnancy, the breast undergoes proliferative and developmental maturation. As the breast enlarges in response to hormonal stimulation, lymphocytes, plasma cells, and eosin-ophils accumulate within the connective tissues. The minor ducts branch and alveoli develop. Development of the alveoli is asymmetric, and variations in the degree of development may occur within a single lobule (Fig. 17-4). With parturition, enlargement of the breasts occurs via hypertrophy of alveolar epithelium and accumulation of secretory products in the lumina of the minor ducts. Alveolar epithelium contains abundant endo-plasmic reticulum, large mitochondria, Golgi complexes, and dense lysosomes. Two distinct substances are produced by the alveolar epithelium: (a) the protein component of milk, which is synthesized in the endoplasmic reticulum (merocrine secretion); and (b) the lipid component of milk (apocrine secretion), which forms as free lipid droplets in the cytoplasm. Milk released in the first few days after parturition is called colostrum and has low lipid content but contains considerable quantities of anti-bodies. The lymphocytes and plasma cells that accumulate within the connective tissues of the breast are the source of the antibody component. With subsequent reduction in the number of these cells, the production of colostrum decreases and lipid-rich milk is released.Blood Supply, Innervation, and Lymphatics. The breast receives its principal blood supply from: (a) perforating branches of the internal mammary artery; (b) lateral branches of the poste-rior intercostal arteries; and (c) branches from the axillary artery, including the highest thoracic, lateral thoracic, and pectoral branches of the thoracoacromial artery (Fig. 17-5). The second, third, and fourth anterior intercostal perforators and branches of the internal mammary artery arborize in the breast as the medial mammary arteries. The lateral thoracic artery gives off branches to the serratus anterior, pectoralis major and pectoralis minor, and subscapularis muscles. It also gives rise to lateral mammary branches. The veins of the breast and chest wall follow the course of the arteries, with venous drainage being toward the axilla. The three principal groups of veins are: (a) per-forating branches of the internal thoracic vein, (b) perforating branches of the posterior intercostal veins, and (c) tributaries of the axillary vein. Batson’s vertebral venous plexus, which invests the vertebrae and extends from the base of the skull to the sacrum, may provide a route for breast cancer metastases to the vertebrae, skull, pelvic bones, and central nervous system. Lymph vessels generally parallel the course of blood vessels.1Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   54501/03/19   5:04 PM 546SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 17-5. Arterial supply to the breast, axilla, and chest wall. (Reproduced with permission from Bland KI, Copeland EMI: The Breast: Comprehensive Management of Benign and Malignant Diseases, 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier/Saunders; 2009.)Figure 17-6. Lymphatic pathways of the breast. Arrows indicate the direction of lymph flow. (Visual Art: © 2013. The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center.)Figure 17-7. Axillary lymph node groups. Level I includes lymph nodes located lateral to the pectoralis minor muscle; level II  includes lymph nodes located deep to the pectoralis minor; and level III includes lymph nodes located medial to the pectoralis minor. The axillary vein with its major tributaries and the supracla-vicular lymph node group are also illustrated. (Visual Art: © 2013.The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center.)Lateral cutaneous branches of the third through sixth inter-costal nerves provide sensory innervation of the breast (lateral mammary branches) and of the anterolateral chest wall. These branches exit the intercostal spaces between slips of the serratus anterior muscle. Cutaneous branches that arise from the cervical plexus, specifically the anterior branches of the supraclavicular nerve, supply a limited area of skin over the upper portion of the breast. The intercostobrachial nerve is the lateral cutane-ous branch of the second intercostal nerve and may be visual-ized during surgical dissection of the axilla. Resection of the intercostobrachial nerve causes loss of sensation over the medial aspect of the upper arm.The boundaries for lymph drainage of the axilla are not well demarcated, and there is considerable variation in the posi-tion of the axillary lymph nodes. The six axillary lymph node groups recognized by surgeons (Figs. 17-6 and 17-7) are: (a) the axillary vein group (lateral), which consists of four to six lymph nodes that lie medial or posterior to the vein and receive most of the lymph drainage from the upper extremity; (b) the external mammary group (anterior or pectoral group), which consists of five to six lymph nodes that lie along the lower border of the pectoralis minor muscle contiguous with the lateral thoracic vessels and receive most of the lymph drainage from the lat-eral aspect of the breast; (c) the scapular group (posterior or subscapular), which consists of five to seven lymph nodes that lie along the posterior wall of the axilla at the lateral border of the scapula contiguous with the subscapular vessels and receive lymph drainage principally from the lower posterior neck, the posterior trunk, and the posterior shoulder; (d) the central group, which consists of three or four sets of lymph nodes that are embedded in the fat of the axilla lying immediately posterior to the pectoralis minor muscle and receive lymph drainage both from the axillary vein, external mammary, and scapular groups of lymph nodes, and directly from the breast; (e) the subcla-vicular group (apical), which consists of six to twelve sets of lymph nodes that lie posterior and superior to the upper bor-der of the pectoralis minor muscle and receive lymph drainage from all of the other groups of axillary lymph nodes; and (f) the interpectoral group (Rotter’s lymph nodes), which consists of one to four lymph nodes that are interposed between the pec-toralis major and pectoralis minor muscles and receive lymph drainage directly from the breast. The lymph fluid that passes Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   54601/03/19   5:04 PM 547THE BREASTCHAPTER 17through the interpectoral group of lymph nodes passes directly into the central and subclavicular groups.As indicated in Fig. 17-7, the lymph node groups are assigned levels according to their anatomic relationship to the pectoralis minor muscle. Lymph nodes located lateral to or below the lower border of the pectoralis minor muscle are referred to as level I lymph nodes, which include the axillary vein, external mammary, and scapular groups. Lymph nodes located superficial or deep to the pectoralis minor muscle are referred to as level II lymph nodes, which include the central and interpectoral groups. Lymph nodes located medial to or above the upper border of the pectoralis minor muscle are referred to as level III lymph nodes, which consist of the subclavicular group. The plexus of lymph vessels in the breast arises in the interlobular connective tissue and in the walls of the lactiferous ducts and communicates with the subareolar plexus of lymph vessels. Efferent lymph vessels from the breast pass around the lateral edge of the pectoralis major muscle and pierce the clavipectoral fascia, ending in the external mammary (anterior, pectoral) group of lymph nodes. Some lymph vessels may travel directly to the subscapular (pos-terior, scapular) group of lymph nodes. From the upper part of the breast, a few lymph vessels pass directly to the subclavicular (api-cal) group of lymph nodes. The axillary lymph nodes usually receive >75% of the lymph drainage from the breast. The rest is derived primarily from the medial aspect of the breast, flows through the lymph vessels that accompany the per-forating branches of the internal mammary artery, and enters the parasternal (internal mammary) group of lymph nodes.PHYSIOLOGY OF THE BREASTBreast Development and FunctionBreast development and function are initiated by a variety of hormonal stimuli, including estrogen, progesterone, prolactin, oxytocin, thyroid hormone, cortisol, and growth hormone.17,18 Estrogen, progesterone, and prolactin especially have profound trophic effects that are essential to normal breast develop-ment and function. Estrogen initiates ductal development, whereas progesterone is responsible for differentiation of epithe-lium and for lobular development. Prolactin is the primary hor-monal stimulus for lactogenesis in late pregnancy and the postpartum period. It upregulates hormone receptors and stimu-lates epithelial development. Fig. 17-8 depicts the secretion of neurotrophic hormones from the hypothalamus, which is respon-sible for regulation of the secretion of the hormones that affect the breast tissues. The gonadotropins luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) regulate the release of estrogen and progesterone from the ovaries. In turn, the release of LH and FSH from the basophilic cells of the anterior pituitary is regulated by the secretion of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) from the hypothalamus. Positive and negative feedback effects of circulating estrogen and progesterone regulate the secretion of LH, FSH, and GnRH. These hormones are respon-sible for the development, function, and maintenance of breast tissues (Fig. 17-9A). In the female neonate, circulating estrogen and progesterone levels decrease after birth and remain low throughout childhood because of the sensitivity of 23GRFLH-RHDopamineOxy/ADHTRHCRF-Figure 17-8. Overview of the neuroendocrine con-trol of breast development and function. ADH = antidiuretic hormone; CRF = corticotropin-releasing factor; GRF = growth hormone releasing factor; LH-RH = luteinizing hormone–releasing hormone; Oxy = oxytocin; TRH = thyrotropin-releasing hor-mone. (Reproduced with permission from Bland KI, Copeland EMI: The Breast: Comprehensive Man-agement of Benign and Malignant Diseases, 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier/Saunders; 2009.)Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   54701/03/19   5:04 PM 548SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIABCDFigure 17-9. The breast at different physi-ologic stages. The central column contains three-dimensional depictions of microscopic structures. A. Adolescence. B. Pregnancy.  C. Lactation. D. Senescence.the hypothalamic-pituitary axis to negative feedback from these hormones. With the onset of puberty, there is a decrease in the sensitivity of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis to negative feed-back and an increase in its sensitivity to positive feedback from estrogen. These physiologic events initiate an increase in GnRH, FSH, and LH secretion and ultimately an increase in estrogen and progesterone secretion by the ovaries, leading to establish-ment of the menstrual cycle. At the beginning of the menstrual cycle, there is an increase in the size and density of the breasts, which is followed by engorgement of the breast tissues and epi-thelial proliferation. With the onset of menstruation, the breast engorgement subsides and epithelial proliferation decreases.Pregnancy, Lactation, and SenescenceA dramatic increase in circulating ovarian and placental estro-gens and progestins is evident during pregnancy, which initiates striking alterations in the form and substance of the breast (see Fig. 17-9B).17-19 The breast enlarges as the ductal and lobular epithelium proliferates, the areolar skin darkens, and the acces-sory areolar glands (Montgomery’s glands) become prominent. In the first and second trimesters, the minor ducts branch and develop. During the third trimester, fat droplets accumulate in the alveolar epithelium, and colostrum fills the alveolar and duc-tal spaces. In late pregnancy, prolactin stimulates the synthesis of milk fats and proteins.After delivery of the placenta, circulating progesterone and estrogen levels decrease, permitting full expression of the lactogenic action of prolactin. Milk production and release are controlled by neural reflex arcs that originate in nerve endings of the nipple-areola complex. Maintenance of lactation requires regular stimulation of these neural reflexes, which results in prolactin secretion and milk letdown. Oxytocin release results from the auditory, visual, and olfactory stimuli associated with nursing. Oxytocin initiates contraction of the myoepithelial cells, which results in compression of alveoli and expulsion of milk into the lactiferous sinuses. After weaning of the infant, prolactin and oxytocin release decreases. Dormant milk causes increased pressure within the ducts and alveoli, which results in atrophy of the epithelium (Fig. 17-9C). With menopause, there is a decrease in the secretion of estrogen and progesterone by Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   54801/03/19   5:04 PM 549THE BREASTCHAPTER 17Table 17-1Pathophysiologic mechanisms of gynecomastia	I.	Estrogen excess states	A.	Gonadal origin	1.	True hermaphroditism	2.	Gonadal stromal (nongerminal) neoplasms of  the testis	a.	Leydig cell (interstitial)	b.	Sertoli cell	c.	Granulosa-theca cell	3.	Germ cell tumors	a.	Choriocarcinoma	b.	Seminoma, teratoma	c.	Embryonal carcinoma	B.	Nontesticular tumors	1.	Adrenal cortical neoplasms	2.	Lung carcinoma	3.	Hepatocellular carcinoma	C.	Endocrine disorders	D.	Diseases of the liver—nonalcoholic and alcoholic cirrhosis	E.	Nutrition alteration states	II.	Androgen deficiency states	A.	Senescence	B.	Hypoandrogenic states (hypogonadism)	1.	Primary testicular failure	a.	Klinefelter’s syndrome (XXY)	b.	Reifenstein’s syndrome	c.	Rosewater-Gwinup-Hamwi familial gynecomastia	d.	Kallmann syndrome	e.	Kennedy’s disease with associated gynecomastia	f.	Eunuchoidal state (congenital anorchia)	g.	Hereditary defects of androgen biosynthesis	h.	Adrenocorticotropic hormone deficiency	2.	Secondary testicular failure	a.	Trauma	b.	Orchitis	c.	Cryptorchidism	d.	Irradiation	C.	Renal failure	III.	Pharmacologic causes	IV.	Systemic diseases with idiopathic mechanismsthe ovaries and involution of the ducts and alveoli of the breast. The surrounding fibrous connective tissue increases in density, and breast tissues are replaced by adipose tissues (Fig. 17-9D).GynecomastiaGynecomastia refers to an enlarged breast in the male.20 Physi-ologic gynecomastia usually occurs during three phases of life: the neonatal period, adolescence, and senescence. Common to each of these phases is an excess of circulating estrogens in relation to circulating testosterone. Neonatal gynecomastia is caused by the action of placental estrogens on neonatal breast tissues, whereas in adolescence, there is an excess of estradiol relative to testosterone, and with senescence, the circulating testosterone level falls, which results in relative hyperestrin-ism. In gynecomastia, the ductal structures of the male breast enlarge, elongate, and branch with a concomitant increase in epithelium. During puberty, the condition often is unilateral and typically occurs between ages 12 and 15 years. In contrast, senescent gynecomastia is usually bilateral. In the nonobese male, breast tissue measuring at least 2 cm in diameter must be present before a diagnosis of gynecomastia may be made. Mammography and ultrasonography are used to differentiate breast tissues. Dominant masses or areas of firmness, irregular-ity, and asymmetry suggest the possibility of a breast cancer, particularly in the older male. Gynecomastia generally does not predispose the male breast to cancer. However, the hypoandro-genic state of Klinefelter’s syndrome (XXY), in which gyneco-mastia is usually evident, is associated with an increased risk of breast cancer. Gynecomastia is graded based on the degree of breast enlargement, the position of the nipple with reference to the inframammary fold, and the degree of breast ptosis and skin redundancy: Grade I—mild breast enlargement without skin redundancy; Grade IIa—moderate breast enlargement without skin redundancy; Grade IIb—moderate breast enlargement with skin redundancy; and Grade III—marked breast enlargement with skin redundancy and ptosis.Table 17-1 identifies the pathophysiologic mechanisms that may initiate gynecomastia: estrogen excess states; andro-gen deficiency states; pharmacologic causes; and idiopathic causes. Estrogen excess results from an increase in the secretion of estradiol by the testicles or by nontesticular tumors, nutri-tional alterations such as protein and fat deprivation, endocrine disorders (hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism), and hepatic dis-ease (nonalcoholic and alcoholic cirrhosis). Refeeding gyne-comastia is related to the resumption of pituitary gonadotropin secretion after pituitary shutdown. Androgen deficiency may initiate gynecomastia. Concurrently occurring with decreased circulating testosterone levels is an elevated level of circulating testosterone-binding globulin, which results in a reduction of free testosterone. This senescent gynecomastia usually occurs in men age 50 to 70 years. Hypoandrogenic states can be from primary testicular failure or secondary testicular failure. Kline-felter’s syndrome (XXY) is an example of primary testicular failure that is manifested by gynecomastia, hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, and azoospermia. Secondary testicular failure may result from trauma, orchitis, and cryptorchidism. Renal failure, regardless of cause, also may initiate gynecomastia.Pharmacologic causes of gynecomastia include drugs with estrogenic activity (digitalis, estrogens, anabolic steroids, marijuana) or drugs that enhance estrogen synthesis (human chorionic gonadotropin). Drugs that inhibit the action or syn-thesis of testosterone (cimetidine, ketoconazole, phenytoin, spironolactone, antineoplastic agents, diazepam) also have been implicated. Drugs such as reserpine, theophylline, verapamil, tricyclic antidepressants, and furosemide induce gynecomastia through idiopathic mechanisms.When gynecomastia is caused by androgen deficiency, then testosterone administration may cause regression. When it is caused by medications, then these are discontinued if possi-ble. When endocrine defects are responsible, then these receive specific therapy. As soon as gynecomastia is progressive and does not respond to other treatments, surgical therapy is con-sidered. Techniques include local excision, liposuction or sub-cutaneous mastectomy. Attempts to reverse gynecomastia with danazol have been successful, but the androgenic side effects of the drug are considerable.Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   54901/03/19   5:04 PM 550SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIINFECTIOUS AND INFLAMMATORY DISORDERS OF THE BREASTInfections in the postpartum period remain proportionately the most common time for breast infections to occur. Infections of the breast unrelated to lactation are proportionately less com-mon, however, are still a relatively common presentation to breast specialists. The latter are classified as intrinsic (second-ary to abnormalities in the breast) or extrinsic (secondary to an infection in an adjacent structure, e.g., skin, thoracic cavity) the most common being probably periductal mastitis and infected sebaceous cysts, respectively.Bacterial InfectionStaphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus species are the organisms most frequently recovered from nipple discharge from an infected breast.17 Typically breast abscesses are seen in staphylococcal infections and present with point tenderness, erythema, and hyperthermia. When these abscesses are related to lactation they usually occur within the first few weeks of breastfeeding. If there is progression of a staphylococcal infec-tion, this may result in subcutaneous, subareolar, interlobular (periductal), and retromammary abscesses (unicentric or multi-centric). Previously almost all breast abscesses were treated by operative incision and drainage, but now the initial approach is antibiotics and repeated aspiration of the abscess, usually ultra-sound-guided aspiration.21 Operative drainage is now reserved for those cases that do not resolve with repeated aspiration and antibiotic therapy or cases in which there is some other indica-tion for incision and drainage (e.g., thinning or necrosis of the overlying skin). Preoperative ultrasonography is effective in delineating the required extent of the drainage procedure. While staphylococcal infections tend to be more localized and may be situated deep in the breast tissues, streptococcal infections usually present with diffuse superficial involvement. They are treated with local wound care, including application of warm compresses, and the administration of IV antibiotics (penicillins or cephalosporins). Breast infections may be chronic, possibly with recurrent abscess formation. In this situation, cultures are performed to identify acid-fast bacilli, anaerobic and aerobic bacteria, and fungi. Uncommon organisms may be encountered, and long-term antibiotic therapy may be required.Biopsy of the abscess cavity wall should be considered at the time of incision and drainage to rule out underlying breast cancer in patients where antibiotics and drainage have been ineffective.Nowadays hospital-acquired puerperal infections of the breast are much less common, but nursing women who pres-ent with milk stasis or noninfectious inflammation may still develop this problem. Epidemic puerperal mastitis is initiated by highly virulent strains of methicillin-resistant S aureus that are transmitted via the suckling neonate and may result in sub-stantial morbidity and occasional mortality. Purulent fluid may be expressed from the nipple. In this circumstance, breastfeed-ing is stopped, antibiotics are started, and surgical therapy is initiated. Nonepidemic (sporadic) puerperal mastitis refers to involvement of the interlobular connective tissue of the breast by an infectious process. The patient develops nipple fissuring and milk stasis, which initiates a retrograde bacterial infection. Emptying of the breast using breast suction pumps shortens the duration of symptoms and reduces the incidence of recurrences. The addition of antibiotic therapy results in a satisfactory out-come in >95% of cases.Zuska’s disease, also called recurrent periductal mastitis, is a condition of recurrent retroareolar infections and abscesses.22,23 Smoking has been implicated as a risk factor for this condition.24,25 This syndrome is managed symptomatically by antibiotics coupled with incision and drainage as necessary. Attempts to obtain durable long-term control by wide debride-ment of chronically infected tissue and/or terminal duct resec-tion have been reported and can be curative, but they can also be frustrated by postoperative infections.26Mycotic InfectionsFungal infections of the breast are rare and usually involve blas-tomycosis or sporotrichosis.27 Intraoral fungi that are inoculated into the breast tissue by the suckling infant initiate these infec-tions, which present as mammary abscesses in close proxim-ity to the nipple-areola complex. Pus mixed with blood may be expressed from sinus tracts. Antifungal agents can be adminis-tered for the treatment of systemic (noncutaneous) infections. This therapy generally eliminates the necessity of surgical inter-vention, but occasionally drainage of an abscess, or even partial mastectomy, may be necessary to eradicate a persistent fungal infection. Candida albicans affecting the skin of the breast presents as erythematous, scaly lesions of the inframammary or axillary folds. Scrapings from the lesions demonstrate fungal elements (filaments and binding cells). Therapy involves the removal of predisposing factors such as maceration and the topi-cal application of nystatin.Hidradenitis SuppurativaHidradenitis suppurativa of the nipple-areola complex or axilla is a chronic inflammatory condition that originates within the accessory areolar glands of Montgomery or within the axillary sebaceous glands.27 Women with chronic acne are predisposed to developing hidradenitis. When located in and about the nipple-areola complex, this disease may mimic other chronic inflammatory states, Paget’s disease of the nipple, or invasive breast cancer. Involvement of the axillary skin is often multifo-cal and contiguous. Antibiotic therapy with incision and drain-age of fluctuant areas is appropriate treatment. Excision of the involved areas may be required. Large areas of skin loss may necessitate coverage with advancement flaps or split-thickness skin grafts.Mondor’s DiseaseMondor’s disease is a variant of thrombophlebitis that involves the superficial veins of the anterior chest wall and breast.28 In 1939, Mondor described the condition as “string phlebitis,” a thrombosed vein presenting as a tender, cord-like structure.29 Frequently involved veins include the lateral thoracic vein, the thoracoepigastric vein, and, less commonly, the superficial epi-gastric vein. Typically, a woman presents with acute pain in the lateral aspect of the breast or the anterior chest wall. A ten-der, firm cord is found to follow the distribution of one of the major superficial veins. Rarely, the presentation is bilateral, and most women have no evidence of thrombophlebitis in other ana-tomic sites. This benign, self-limited disorder is not indicative of a cancer. When the diagnosis is uncertain, or when a mass is present near the tender cord, biopsy is indicated. Therapy for Mondor’s disease includes the liberal use of anti-inflammatory medications and application of warm compresses along the symptomatic vein. The process usually resolves within 4 to 6 weeks. When symptoms persist or are refractory to therapy, excision of the involved vein segment may be considered.Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   55001/03/19   5:04 PM 551THE BREASTCHAPTER 17COMMON BENIGN DISORDERS AND  DISEASES OF THE BREASTBenign breast disorders and diseases encompass a wide range of clinical and pathologic entities. Surgeons require an in-depth understanding of benign breast disorders and diseases so that clear explanations may be given to affected women, appropriate treat-ment is instituted, and unnecessary long-term follow up is avoided.Aberrations of Normal Development and InvolutionThe basic principles underlying the aberrations of normal devel-opment and involution (ANDI) classification of benign breast conditions are the following: (a) benign breast disorders and diseases are related to the normal processes of reproductive life and to involution; (b) there is a spectrum of breast conditions that ranges from normal to disorder to disease; and (c) the ANDI classification encompasses all aspects of the breast condition, including pathogenesis and the degree of abnormality.30 The horizontal component of Table 17-2 defines ANDI along a spectrum from normal, to mild abnormality (disorder), to severe abnormality (disease). The vertical component indi-cates the period during which the condition develops.Early Reproductive Years. Fibroadenomas are seen and pres-ent symptomatically predominantly in younger women age 15 to 25 years (Fig. 17-10).31 Fibroadenomas usually grow to 1 or 2 cm in diameter and then are stable but may grow to a larger size. Small fibroadenomas (≤1 cm in size) are considered nor-mal, whereas larger fibroadenomas (≤3 cm) are disorders, and giant fibroadenomas (>3 cm) are disease. Similarly, multiple fibroadenomas (more than five lesions in one breast) are very uncommon and are considered disease. It is noted that with the introduction of mammographic screening, asymptomatic 4Table 17-2ANDI classification of benign breast disorders NORMALDISORDERDISEASEEarly reproductive years (age 15–25 y) Lobular developmentStromal developmentFibroadenomaAdolescent hypertrophyGiant fibroadenomaGigantomastia Nipple eversionNipple inversionSubareolar abscess   Mammary duct fistulaLater reproductive years (age 25–40 y)Cyclical changes of menstruationCyclical mastalgiaIncapacitating mastalgia  Nodularity  Epithelial hyperplasia of pregnancyBloody nipple discharge Involution (age 35–55 y)Lobular involutionMacrocysts—  Sclerosing lesions  Duct involution    DilatationDuct ectasiaPeriductal mastitis  SclerosisNipple retraction— Epithelial turnoverEpithelial hyperplasiaEpithelial hyperplasia with atypiaANDI = aberrations of normal development and involution.Reproduced with permission from Mansel RE, Webster D, Sweetland H: Hughes, Mansel & Webster’s Benign Disorders and Diseases of the Breast, 3rd ed. London: Elsevier/Saunders; 2009.Figure 17-10. Fibroadenoma (40x). These benign tumors are typi-cally well circumscribed and are comprised of both stromal and glandular elements. (Used with permission from Dr. Sindhu Menon, Consultant Histopathologist and Dr. Rahul Deb, Consultant  Histopathologist and Lead Breast Pathologist, Royal Derby Hospital, Derby, UK.)fibroadenomas are sometimes found in an older screened popu-lation. The precise etiology of adolescent breast hypertrophy is unknown. A spectrum of changes from limited to massive stro-mal hyperplasia (gigantomastia) is seen. Nipple inversion is a disorder of development of the major ducts, which prevents nor-mal protrusion of the nipple. Mammary duct fistulas arise when nipple inversion predisposes to major duct obstruction, leading to recurrent subareolar abscess and mammary duct fistula.Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   55101/03/19   5:04 PM 552SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIABFigure 17-11. A. Ductal epithelial hyperplasia. The irregular intra-cellular spaces and variable cell nuclei distinguish this process from carcinoma in situ. B. Lobular hyperplasia. The presence of alveo-lar lumina and incomplete distention distinguish this process from carcinoma in situ. (Used with permission from Dr. R.L. Hackett.)Table 17-3Cancer risk associated with benign breast disorders and in situ carcinoma of the breastABNORMALITYRELATIVE RISKNonproliferative lesions of the breastNo increased riskSclerosing adenosisNo increased riskIntraductal papillomaNo increased riskFlorid hyperplasia1.5 to 2-foldAtypical lobular hyperplasia4-foldAtypical ductal hyperplasia4-foldDuctal involvement by cells of  atypical ductal hyperplasia7-foldLobular carcinoma in situ10-foldDuctal carcinoma in situ10-foldData from Dupont WD, Page DL. Risk factors for breast cancer in women with proliferative breast disease, N Engl J Med. 1985 Jan 17; 312(3):146-151.Table 17-4Classification of benign breast disordersNonproliferative disorders of the breast Cysts and apocrine metaplasia Duct ectasia Mild ductal epithelial hyperplasia Calcifications Fibroadenoma and related lesionsProliferative breast disorders without atypia Sclerosing adenosis Radial and complex sclerosing lesions Ductal epithelial hyperplasia Intraductal papillomasAtypical proliferative lesions Atypical lobular hyperplasia Atypical ductal hyperplasiaData from Godfrey SE: Is fibrocystic disease of the breast precancerous? Arch Pathol Lab Med. 1986 Nov;110(11):991.include ductal and lobular hyperplasia, both of which display some features of carcinoma in situ. Women with atypical ductal or lobular hyperplasia have a fourfold increase in breast cancer risk (Table 17-3).Pathology of Nonproliferative DisordersOf paramount importance for the optimal management of benign breast disorders and diseases is the histologic differentia-tion of benign, atypical, and malignant changes.32,33 Determin-ing the clinical significance of these changes is a problem that is compounded by inconsistent nomenclature. The classifica-tion system originally developed by Page separates the various types of benign breast disorders and diseases into three clini-cally relevant groups: nonproliferative disorders, proliferative disorders without atypia, and proliferative disorders with atypia (Table 17-4). Nonproliferative disorders of the breast account for 70% of benign breast conditions and carry no increased risk Later Reproductive Years. Cyclical mastalgia and nodular-ity usually are associated with premenstrual enlargement of the breast and are regarded as normal. Cyclical pronounced mastal-gia and severe painful nodularity are viewed differently than are physiologic discomfort and lumpiness. Painful nodularity that persists for >1 week of the menstrual cycle is considered a disor-der. In epithelial hyperplasia of pregnancy, papillary projections sometimes give rise to bilateral bloody nipple discharge.Involution. Involution of lobular epithelium is dependent on the specialized stroma around it. However, an integrated invo-lution of breast stroma and epithelium is not always seen, and disorders of the process are common. When the stroma invo-lutes too quickly, alveoli remain and form microcysts, which are precursors of macrocysts. The macrocysts are common, often subclinical, and do not require specific treatment. Sclerosing adenosis is considered a disorder of both the proliferative and the involutional phases of the breast cycle. Duct ectasia (dilated ducts) and periductal mastitis are other important components of the ANDI classification. Periductal fibrosis is a sequela of periductal mastitis and may result in nipple retraction. About 60% of women ≥70 years of age exhibit some degree of epi-thelial hyperplasia (Fig. 17-11). Atypical proliferative diseases Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   55201/03/19   5:04 PM 553THE BREASTCHAPTER 17for the development of breast cancer. This category includes cysts, duct ectasia, periductal mastitis, calcifications, fibroad-enomas, and related disorders.Breast macrocysts are an involutional disorder, have a high frequency of occurrence, and are often multiple. Duct ecta-sia is a clinical syndrome characterized by dilated subareolar ducts that are palpable and often associated with thick nipple discharge. Haagensen regarded duct ectasia as a primary event that led to stagnation of secretions, epithelial ulceration, and leakage of duct secretions (containing chemically irritating fatty acids) into periductal tissue.34 This sequence was thought to pro-duce a local inflammatory process with periductal fibrosis and subsequent nipple retraction. An alternative theory considers periductal mastitis to be the primary process, which leads to weakening of the ducts and secondary dilatation. It is possible that both processes occur and together explain the wide spec-trum of problems seen, which include nipple discharge, nipple retraction, inflammatory masses, and abscesses.Calcium deposits are frequently encountered in the breast. Most are benign and are caused by cellular secretions and debris or by trauma and inflammation. Calcifications that are associated with cancer include microcalcifications, which vary in shape and density and are <0.5 mm in size, and fine, linear calcifications, which may show branching. Fibroadenomas have abundant stroma with histologically normal cellular elements. They show hormonal dependence similar to that of normal breast lobules in that they lactate during pregnancy and invo-lute in the postmenopausal period. Adenomas of the breast are well circumscribed and are composed of benign epithelium with sparse stroma, which is the histologic feature that differentiates them from fibroadenomas. They may be divided into tubular adenomas and lactating adenomas. Tubular adenomas are seen in young nonpregnant women, whereas lactating adenomas are seen during pregnancy or during the postpartum period. Ham-artomas are discrete breast tumors that are usually 2 to 4 cm in diameter, firm, and sharply circumscribed. Adenolipomas con-sist of sharply circumscribed nodules of fatty tissue that contain normal breast lobules and ducts.Fibrocystic Disease. The term fibrocystic disease is nonspe-cific. Too frequently, it is used as a diagnostic term to describe symptoms, to rationalize the need for breast biopsy, and to explain biopsy results. Synonyms include fibrocystic changes, cystic mastopathy, chronic cystic disease, chronic cystic mas-titis, Schimmelbusch’s disease, mazoplasia, Cooper’s disease, Reclus’ disease, and fibroadenomatosis. Fibrocystic disease refers to a spectrum of histopathologic changes that are best diagnosed and treated specifically.Pathology of Proliferative Disorders  Without AtypiaProliferative breast disorders without atypia include sclerosing adenosis, radial scars, complex sclerosing lesions, ductal epithe-lial hyperplasia, and intraductal papillomas.32,33 Sclerosing ade-nosis is prevalent during the childbearing and perimenopausal years and has no malignant potential. Histologic changes are both proliferative (ductal proliferation) and involutional (stro-mal fibrosis, epithelial regression). Sclerosing adenosis is char-acterized by distorted breast lobules and usually occurs in the context of multiple microcysts, but occasionally presents as a palpable mass. Benign calcifications are often associated with this disorder. Sclerosing adenosis can be managed by observa-tion as long as the imaging features and pathologic findings are concordant. Central sclerosis and various degrees of epithelial proliferation, apocrine metaplasia, and papilloma formation characterize radial scars and complex sclerosing lesions of the breast. Lesions up to 1 cm in diameter are called radial scars, whereas larger lesions are called complex sclerosing lesions. Radial scars originate at sites of terminal duct branching where the characteristic histologic changes radiate from a central area of fibrosis. All of the histologic features of a radial scar are seen in the larger complex sclerosing lesions, but there is a greater disturbance of structure with papilloma formation, apocrine metaplasia, and occasionally sclerosing adenosis. Distinguish-ing between a radial scar and invasive breast carcinoma can be challenging based on core-needle biopsy sampling. Often the imaging features of a radial scar (which can be quite similar to an invasive cancer) will dictate the need for either a vacuum-assisted biopsy or surgical excision in order to exclude the pos-sibility of carcinoma.Mild ductal hyperplasia is characterized by the presence of three or four cell layers above the basement membrane. Moder-ate ductal hyperplasia is characterized by the presence of five or more cell layers above the basement membrane. Florid duc-tal epithelial hyperplasia occupies at least 70% of a minor duct lumen. It is found in >20% of breast tissue specimens, is either solid or papillary, and is associated with an increased cancer risk (see Table 17-3). Intraductal papillomas arise in the major ducts, usually in premenopausal women. They generally are <0.5 cm in diameter but may be as large as 5 cm. A common presenting symptom is nipple discharge, which may be serous or bloody. Grossly, intraductal papillomas are pinkish tan, fri-able, and usually attached to the wall of the involved duct by a stalk. They rarely undergo malignant transformation, and their presence does not increase a woman’s risk of developing breast cancer (unless accompanied by atypia). However, multiple intraductal papillomas, which occur in younger women and are less frequently associated with nipple discharge, are susceptible to malignant transformation.Pathology of Atypical Proliferative DiseasesThe atypical proliferative diseases have some of the features of carcinoma in situ but either lack a major defining feature of car-cinoma in situ or have the features in less than fully developed form.34 Atypical ductal hyperplasia (ADH) appears similar to low grade ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) histologically and is composed of monotonous round, cuboidal, or polygonal cells enclosed by basement membrane with rare mitoses. A lesion will be considered to be ADH if it is up to 2 or 3 mm in size but would be called DCIS if it is larger than 3 mm. The diagnosis can be difficult to establish with core-needle biopsy specimen alone and many cases will require excisional biopsy specimen for classification. Individuals with a diagnosis of ADH are at increased risk for development of breast cancer and should be counseled appropriately regarding risk reduction strategies.In 1978, Haagensen et al described lobular neoplasia, a spectrum of disorders ranging from atypical lobular hyperplasia to lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS).35 Atypical lobular hyper-plasia (ALH) results in minimal distention of lobular units with cells that are similar to those seen in LCIS. The diagnosis of LCIS is made when small monomorphic cells that distend the terminal ductal lobular unit are noted. In cases of LCIS, the acini are full and distended while the overall lobular architec-ture is maintained (Fig. 17-12). Classic LCIS is not associated with a specific mammographic or palpable abnormality but is Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   55301/03/19   5:04 PM 554SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 17-12. Lobular carcinoma in situ (100x). There are small monomorphic cells that distend the terminal duct lobular unit, with-out necrosis or mitoses. (Used with permission from Dr. Sindhu Menon, Consultant Histopathologist and Dr. Rahul Deb, Consul-tant Histopathologist and Lead Breast Pathologist, Royal Derby Hospital, Derby, UK.)an incidental finding noted on breast biopsy. There is a variant of LCIS that has been termed pleomorphic LCIS. In the case of pleomorphic LCIS, there can be calcifications or other suspi-cious mammographic changes that dictate the need for biopsy. Classic LCIS is not treated with excision as the patient is at risk for developing invasive breast cancer in either breast and therefore the patient is counseled regarding appropriate risk reduction strategies. Pleomorphic LCIS can be difficult to dis-tinguish from high-grade DCIS and there are some proponents who have suggested that patients with pleomorphic LCIS be managed similar to those with DCIS with attention to margins and consideration for radiation therapy in the setting of breast conserving treatment. The use of immunohistochemical stain-ing for E-cadherin can help to discriminate between LCIS and DCIS. In lobular neoplasias, such as ALH and LCIS, there is a lack of E-cadherin expression, whereas the majority of ductal lesions will demonstrate E-cadherin reactivity.Treatment of Selected Benign Breast Disorders and DiseasesCysts. Because needle biopsy of breast masses may produce artifacts that make mammography assessment more difficult, many multidisciplinary teams prefer to image breast masses before performing either fine-needle aspiration or core-needle biopsy.36,37 In practice, however, the first investigation of pal-pable breast masses may be a needle biopsy, which allows for the early diagnosis of cysts. A 21-gauge needle attached to a 10-mL syringe is placed directly into the mass, which is fixed by fingers of the nondominant hand. The volume of a typical cyst is 5 to 10 mL, but it may be 75 mL or more. If the fluid that is aspirated is not bloodstained, then the cyst is aspirated to dryness, the needle is removed, and the fluid is discarded because cytologic examination of such fluid is not cost effec-tive. After aspiration, the breast is carefully palpated to exclude a residual mass. In most cases, however, imaging has been per-formed prior to a needle being introduced into the breast, and indeed the majority of cysts are now aspirated under ultrasound guidance. If a mass was noted on initial ultrasound or there is a residual mass post aspiration, then a tissue specimen is obtained, usually by core biopsy. When cystic fluid is bloodstained, fluid can be sent for cytologic examination. A simple cyst is rarely of concern, but a complex cyst may be the result of an underlying malignancy. A pneumocystogram can be obtained by injecting air into the cyst and then obtaining a repeat mammogram. When this technique is used, the wall of the cyst cavity can be more carefully assessed for any irregularities.Fibroadenomas. Most fibroadenomas are self-limiting and many go undiagnosed, so a more conservative approach is reasonable. Careful ultrasound examination with core-needle biopsy will provide for an accurate diagnosis. Ultrasonogra-phy may reveal specific features that are pathognomonic for fibroadenoma, and in a young woman (e.g., under 25 years) where the risk of breast cancer is already very low a core-needle biopsy may not be necessary. In patients where biopsy is performed, the patient is counseled concerning the ultra-sound and biopsy results, and surgical excision of the fibroad-enoma may be avoided. Cryoablation and ultrasound-guided vacuum-assisted biopsy are approved treatments for fibroad-enomas of the breast, especially lesions <3 cm. Larger lesions are often still best treated by excision. With short-term follow-up, a significant percentage of fibroadenomas will decrease in size and will no longer be palpable.38 However, many will remain palpable, especially those larger than 2 cm.39 There-fore, women should be counseled that the options for treat-ment include surgical removal, cryoablation, vacuum assisted biopsy, or observation.Sclerosing Disorders. The clinical significance of scleros-ing adenosis lies in its imitation of cancer. On physical exami-nation, it may be confused with cancer, by mammography, and at gross pathologic examination. Excisional biopsy and histologic examination are frequently necessary to exclude the diagnosis of cancer. The diagnostic work-up for radial scars and complex sclerosing lesions frequently involves stereo-tactic biopsy. It usually is not possible to differentiate these lesions with certainty from cancer by mammographic features, so a larger tissue biopsy is recommended either by way of vacuum-assisted biopsy or an open surgical excisional biopsy. The mammographic appearance of a radial scar or sclerosing adenosis (mass density with spiculated margins) will usually lead to an assessment that the results of a core-needle biopsy specimen showing benign disease are discordant with the radiographic findings.Periductal Mastitis. Painful and tender masses behind the nipple-areola complex are aspirated with a 21-gauge needle attached to a 10-mL syringe. Any fluid obtained is submitted for culture using a transport medium appropriate for the detec-tion of anaerobic organisms. In the absence of pus, women are started on a combination of antibiotics to cover polymicrobial infections while awaiting the results of culture. Antibiotics are then continued based on sensitivity tests. Many cases respond satisfactorily to antibiotics alone, but when considerable puru-lent material is present, repeated ultrasound guided aspiration is performed, and ultimately in a proportion of cases surgical treatment is required. Unlike puerperal abscesses, a subareo-lar abscess is usually unilocular and often is associated with a single duct system. Ultrasound will accurately delineate its extent. In those cases that come to surgery, the surgeon may either undertake simple drainage with a view toward formal Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   55401/03/19   5:04 PM 555THE BREASTCHAPTER 17Table 17-5Treatment of recurrent subareolar sepsisSUITABLE FOR FISTULECTOMYSUITABLE FOR TOTAL  DUCT EXCISIONSmall abscess localized to one segmentLarge abscess affecting >50% of the areolar circumferenceRecurrence involving the same segmentRecurrence involving a different segmentMild or no nipple inversionMarked nipple inversionPatient unconcerned about nipple inversionPatient requests correction of nipple inversionYounger patientOlder patientNo discharge from other ductsPurulent discharge from other ductsNo prior fistulectomyRecurrence after fistulectomyModified with permission from Mansel RE, Webster DJT: Benign Disorders and Diseases of the Breast: Concepts and Clinical Management, 2nd ed. London: Elsevier/Saunders; 2000.surgery, should the problem recur, or proceed with definitive surgery. In a woman of childbearing age, simple drainage is preferred, but if there is an anaerobic infection, recurrent infection frequently develops. Recurrent abscess with fistula is a difficult problem. Treatment of periductal fistula was ini-tially recommended to be opening up of the fistulous track and allowing it to granulate.40 This approach may still be used, especially if the fistula is recurrent after previous attempts at fistulectomy. However, nowadays the preferred initial surgical treatment is by fistulectomy and primary closure with anti-biotic coverage.41 Excision of all the major ducts is an alter-native option depending on the circumstances (Table 17-5). When a localized periareolar abscess recurs at the previous site and a fistula is present, the preferred operation is fistulec-tomy, which has minimal complications and a high degree of success. However, when subareolar sepsis is diffused rather than localized to one segment or when more than one fistula is present, total duct excision is the most expeditious approach. The first circumstance is seen in young women with squamous metaplasia of a single duct, whereas the latter circumstance is seen in older women with multiple ectatic ducts. Age is not always a reliable guide, however, and fistula excision is the preferred initial procedure for localized sepsis irrespective of age. Antibiotic therapy is useful for recurrent infection after fistula excision, and a 2to 4-week course is recommended before total duct excision.Nipple Inversion. More women request correction of con-genital nipple inversion than request correction for the nipple inversion that occurs secondary to duct ectasia. Although the results are usually satisfactory, women seeking correction for cosmetic reasons should always be made aware of the surgi-cal complications of altered nipple sensation, nipple necrosis, and postoperative fibrosis with nipple retraction. Because nipple inversion is a result of shortening of the subareolar ducts, a com-plete division of these ducts is necessary for permanent correc-tion of the disorder.RISK FACTORS FOR BREAST CANCERHormonal and Nonhormonal Risk FactorsIncreased exposure to estrogen is associated with an increased risk for developing breast cancer, whereas reducing exposure is thought to be protective.42-48 Correspondingly, factors that increase the number of menstrual cycles, such as early men-arche, nulliparity, and late menopause, are associated with increased risk. Moderate levels of exercise and a longer lacta-tion period, factors that decrease the total number of menstrual cycles, are protective. The terminal differentiation of breast epi-thelium associated with a full-term pregnancy is also protective, so older age at first live birth is associated with an increased risk of breast cancer. Finally, there is an association between obesity and increased breast cancer risk. Because the major source of estrogen in postmenopausal women is the conversion of andro-stenedione to estrone by adipose tissue, obesity is associated with a long-term increase in estrogen exposure.Nonhormonal risk factors include radiation exposure. Young women who receive mantle radiation therapy for Hodg-kin’s lymphoma have a breast cancer risk that is 75 times greater than that of age-matched control subjects. Survivors of the atomic bomb blasts in Japan during World War II have a very high incidence of breast cancer, likely because of somatic muta-tions induced by the radiation exposure. In both circumstances, radiation exposure during adolescence, a period of active breast development, magnifies the deleterious effect. Studies also sug-gest that the risk of breast cancer increases as the amount of alcohol a woman consumes increases.49 Alcohol consumption is known to increase serum levels of estradiol. Finally, evidence suggests that long-term consumption of foods with a high fat content contributes to an increased risk of breast cancer by increasing serum estrogen levels.Risk Assessment ModelsThe average lifetime risk of breast cancer for newborn U.S. women is 12%.50,51 The longer a woman lives without cancer, the lower her risk of developing breast cancer. Thus, a woman age 50 years has an 11% lifetime risk of developing breast cancer, and a woman age 70 years has a 7% lifetime risk of developing breast cancer. Because risk factors for breast cancer interact, evaluating the risk conferred by combinations of risk factors is difficult. There are several risk assessment models available to predict the risk of breast cancer. From the Breast Cancer Detec-tion Demonstration Project, a mammography screening program conducted in the 1970s, Gail et al developed the model most frequently used in the United States, which incorporates age, age at menarche, age at first live birth, the number of breast biopsy specimens, any history of atypical hyperplasia, and number of first-degree relatives with breast cancer.52 It predicts the cumula-tive risk of breast cancer according to decade of life. To calculate breast cancer risk using the Gail model, a woman’s risk factors are translated into an overall risk score by multiplying her rela-tive risks from several categories (Table 17-6). This risk score is then compared to an adjusted population risk of breast cancer to determine a woman’s individual or absolute risk. The output is a 5-year risk and a lifetime risk of developing breast cancer. A software program incorporating the Gail model is available from the National Cancer Institute at http://bcra.nci.nih.gov/brc. This model was recently modified to more accu-rately assess risk in African American women.52,53 There have also been modifications that project individualized absolute 5Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   55501/03/19   5:04 PM 556SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 17-6Relative risk estimates for the Gail modelVARIABLERELATIVE RISKAge at menarche (years) ≥14 12–13 <12Number of biopsy specimens/history of benign breast disease, age <50 y 0 1 ≥2Number of biopsy specimens/history of benign breast disease, age ≥50 y 0 1 ≥2Age at first live birth (years) <20 y  Number of first-degree relatives with history of breast cancer  0  1  ≥2 20–24 y  Number of first-degree relatives with history of breast cancer  0  1  ≥2 25–29 y  Number of first-degree relatives with history of breast cancer  0  1  ≥2 ≥30 y  Number of first-degree relatives with history of breast cancer  0  1  ≥21.001.101.211.001.702.881.021.271.621.002.616.801.242.685.781.552.764.911.932.834.17Reproduced with permission from Armstrong K, Eisen A, Weber B: Assessing the risk of breast cancer, N Engl J Med. 2000  Feb 24;342(8):564-571.invasive breast cancer risk for Asian and Pacific Island American women. The Gail model is the most widely used model in the United States. Gail and colleagues have also described a revised model that includes body weight and mammographic density but excludes age at menarche.54Claus et al, using data from the Cancer and Steroid Hor-mone Study, a case-control study of breast cancer, developed the other frequently used risk assessment model, which is based on assumptions about the prevalence of high-penetrance breast cancer susceptibility genes.55 Compared with the Gail model, the Claus model incorporates more information about family his-tory but excludes other risk factors. The Claus model provides individual estimates of breast cancer risk according to decade of life based on presence of firstand second-degree relatives with breast cancer and their age at diagnosis. Risk factors that are less consistently associated with breast cancer (diet, use of oral contraceptives, lactation) or are rare in the general population (radiation exposure) are not included in either the Gail or Claus risk assessment model. Other models have been proposed that account for mammographic breast density in assessing breast cancer risk.54,56Neither the Gail model nor the Claus model accounts for the risk associated with mutations in the breast cancer suscepti-bility genes BRCA1 and BRCA2 (described in detail in the fol-lowing section). The BRCAPRO model is a Mendelian model that calculates the probability that an individual is a carrier of a mutation in one of the breast cancer susceptibility genes based on their family history of breast and ovarian cancer.57 The prob-ability that an individual will develop breast or ovarian cancer is derived from this mutation probability based on age-specific incidence curves for both mutation carriers and noncarriers.58 Use of the BRCAPRO model in the clinic is challenging since it requires input of all family history information regarding breast and ovarian cancer. The Tyrer-Cuzick model attempts to utilize both family history information and individual risk information. It uses the family history to calculate the probability that an individual carries a mutation in one of the breast cancer suscep-tibility genes, and then the risk is adjusted based on personal risk factors, including age at menarche, parity, age at first live birth, age at menopause, history of atypical hyperplasia or LCIS, height, and body mass index.59 Once a risk model has been uti-lized to assess breast cancer risk, this must be communicated to the individual and put into context with competing risk and medical comorbidities. This information can then be used to discuss options that are available to the individual for manag-ing risk.Risk ManagementSeveral important medical decisions may be affected by a wom-an’s underlying risk of developing breast cancer.60-68 These deci-sions include when to use postmenopausal hormone replacement therapy, at what age to begin mammography screening or incor-porate magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) screening, when to use tamoxifen to prevent breast cancer, and when to perform prophylactic mastectomy to prevent breast cancer. Postmeno-pausal hormone replacement therapy was widely prescribed in the 1980s and 1990s because of its effectiveness in controlling the symptoms of estrogen deficiency, namely vasomotor symp-toms such as hot flashes, night sweats and their associated sleep deprivation, osteoporosis, and cognitive changes. Furthermore, these hormone supplements were thought to reduce coronary artery disease as well. Use of combined estrogen and progester-one became standard for women who had not undergone hyster-ectomy because unopposed estrogen increases the risk of uterine cancer. Concerns of prolonging a woman’s lifetime exposure to estrogen, coupled with conflicting data regarding the impact of these hormones on cardiovascular health, motivated the imple-mentation of large-scale phase 3 clinical trials to definitively evaluate the risks vs. benefits of postmenopausal hormone replacement therapy. The Women’s Health Initiative (WHI) was therefore designed by the National Institutes of Health as a series of clinical trials to study the effects of diet, nutritional supplements, and hormones on the risk of cancer, cardiovascular disease, and bone health in postmenopausal women. Findings from primary studies of postmenopausal hormone replacement therapy were released in 2002, demonstrating conclusively that Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   55601/03/19   5:04 PM 557THE BREASTCHAPTER 17breast cancer risk is threefold to fourfold higher after >4 years of use and there is no significant reduction in coronary artery or cerebrovascular risks. The Collaborative Group on Hormonal Factors in Breast Cancer combined and reanalyzed data from a number of studies totaling 52,705 women with breast cancer and 108,411 women without breast cancer. They found an increased risk of breast cancer with every use of estrogen replacement therapy. They also reported increased risk among current users but not past users and risk increased with increasing duration of use of hormone replacement therapy.69 Cheblowski et al also reported from the WHI study that estrogen + progesterone  increased the incidence of breast cancer.70 This was con-firmed by the Million Women study, which also showed that the increased risk was substantially greater for the combined estrogen + progesterone replacement therapy than other types of hormone replacement therapy.71Breast Cancer Screening. Routine use of screening mam-mography in women ≥50 years of age has been reported to reduce mortality from breast cancer by 25%.72 This reduc-tion comes at an acceptable economic cost. More recently, there has been debate over the potential harms associated with breast screening.73 Controversy over the age to initiate screening mammography is evident in the current recommendations. The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF), the American Cancer Society (ACS), and the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) are three organizations with differing recom-mendations for screening mammography in average risk women. The guidelines, however, similarly define high-risk women as those with personal history of breast cancer, history of chest radiation at young age, and confirmed or suspected genetic mutation known to increase risk for developing breast cancer. The USPSTF recommends biennial screening mammog-raphy for women age 50 to 74 years. The USPSTF applies these guidelines to asymptomatic women age >40 years who do not have a preexisting breast cancer or who were not previously diagnosed with a high-risk breast lesion, and who are not at high risk for breast cancer because of a known underlying genetic mutation or history of chest radiation at a young age.74-76 In October 2015, the ACS released updated guidelines stating average-risk women should start annual screening mammogra-phy at 45 years of age. Women age 45 to 54 years should be screened annually, and those 55 years and older should transi-tion to biennial screening or have the opportunity to continue annual screening. Women should have the opportunity to begin annual screening between the ages of 40 and 44 years and should continue screening as long as their overall health is good and have a life expectancy of 10 years or longer. The ACS does not recommend clinical breast examination for breast cancer screening among average-risk women at any age.77 The NCCN recommends that average-risk women begin annual screening mammograms at ≥40 years of age, along with annual clinical breast exams and breast awareness.78The United Kingdom recently established an independent expert panel to review the published literature and estimate the benefits and harms associated with screening women  >50 years of age in its national screening program.79 The expert panel estimated that an invitation to breast screening delivers about a 20% reduction in breast cancer mortality. At the same time, however, the panel estimated that in women invited to the screening, about 11% of the cancers diagnosed in their lifetime constitute overdiagnosis. Despite the overdiagnosis, the panel concluded that breast screening confers significant benefit and should continue. The use of screening mammography in women <50 years of age is more controversial for several reasons: (a) breast density is greater, and screening mammography is less likely to detect early breast cancer (i.e., reduced sensitivity); (b) screening mammography results in more false-positive test findings (i.e., reduced specificity), which results in unneces-sary biopsy specimens; and (c) younger women are less likely to have breast cancer (i.e., lower incidence), so fewer young women will benefit from screening.80,81 In the United States, on a population basis, however, the benefits of screening mam-mography in women between the ages of 40 and 49 years is still felt to outweigh the risks; although targeting mammography to women at higher risk of breast cancer improves the balance of risks and benefits and is the approach some health care sys-tems have taken. In one study of women age 40 to 49 years, an abnormal mammography finding was three times more likely to be cancer in a woman with a family history of breast cancer than in a woman without such a history. Furthermore, as noted previously in the section Risk Assessment Models, mounting data regarding mammographic breast density demonstrate an independent correlation with breast cancer risk. Incorporation of breast density measurements into breast cancer risk assess-ment models appears to be a promising strategy for increasing the accuracy of these tools. Unfortunately, widespread applica-tion of these modified models is hampered by inconsistencies in the reporting of mammographic density. Ultrasonography can also be used for breast cancer screening in women with dense breasts, but there is no data available that the additional cancers detected with this modality reduce mortality from breast cancer.Current recommendations by the United States Preventive Services Task Force are that women undergo biennial mammo-graphic screening between the ages of 50 and 74 years.77 The use of MRI for breast cancer screening is recommended by the ACS for women with a 20% to 25% or greater lifetime risk using risk assessment tools based mainly on family history, BRCA mutation carriers, those individuals who have a family member with a BRCA mutation who have not been tested themselves, individuals who received radiation to the chest between the ages of 10 and 30 years, and those individuals with a history of Li-Fraumeni syndrome, Cowden syndrome, or Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome or those who have a first-degree relative with one of these syndromes. MRI is an extremely sensitive screening tool that is not limited by the density of the breast tissue as mammography is; however, its specificity is moderate, leading to more false-positive events and the increased need for biopsy.Chemoprevention. Tamoxifen, a selective estrogen receptor modulator, was the first drug shown to reduce the incidence of breast cancer in healthy women. There have been four pro-spective studies published evaluating tamoxifen vs. placebo for reducing the incidence of invasive breast cancer for women at increased risk. The largest trial was the Breast Cancer Preven-tion Trial (NSABP P-01), which randomly assigned >13,000 women with a 5-year Gail relative risk of breast cancer of 1.66% or higher or LCIS to receive tamoxifen or placebo. After a mean follow-up period of 4 years, the incidence of breast cancer was reduced by 49% in the group receiving tamoxifen.60 The decrease was evident only in ER-positive breast cancers with no significant change in ER-negative tumors. The Royal Marsden Hospital Tamoxifen Chemoprevention Trial,78 the Italian Tamox-ifen Prevention Trial,82 and the International Breast Cancer  Intervention Study I (IBIS-I) trial all83 showed a reduction in 6Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   55701/03/19   5:04 PM 558SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIER-positive breast cancers with the use of tamoxifen compared with placebo. There was no effect on mortality; however, the trials were not powered to assess either breast cancer mortality or all-cause mortality events. The adverse events were similar in all four randomized trials, including an increased risk of endo-metrial cancer, thromboembolic events, cataract formation, and vasomotor disturbances in individuals receiving tamoxifen.Tamoxifen therapy currently is recommended only for women who have a Gail relative risk of 1.66% or higher, who are age 35 to 59, women over the age of 60, or women with a diagnosis of LCIS or atypical ductal or lobular hyperplasia. In addition, deep vein thrombosis occurs 1.6 times as often, pulmonary emboli 3.0 times as often, and endometrial cancer 2.5 times as often in women taking tamoxifen. The increased risk for endometrial cancer is restricted to early stage cancers in postmenopausal women. Cataract surgery is required almost twice as often among women taking tamoxifen. Gail et al sub-sequently developed a model that accounts for underlying risk of breast cancer as well as comorbidities to determine the net risk-benefit ratio of tamoxifen use for chemoprevention.84The NSABP completed a second chemoprevention trial, designed to compare tamoxifen and raloxifene for breast cancer risk reduction in high-risk postmenopausal women. Raloxifene, another selective estrogen receptor modulator, was selected for the experimental arm in this follow-up prevention trial because its use in managing postmenopausal osteoporosis suggested that it might be even more effective at breast cancer risk reduc-tion, but without the adverse effects of tamoxifen on the uterus. The P-2 trial, the Study of Tamoxifen and Raloxifene (known as the STAR trial), randomly assigned 19,747 postmenopausal women at high-risk for breast cancer to receive either tamoxi-fen or raloxifene. The initial report of the P-2 trial showed the two agents were nearly identical in their ability to reduce breast cancer risk, but raloxifene was associated with a more favor-able adverse event profile.85 An updated analysis revealed that raloxifene maintained 76% of the efficacy of tamoxifen in pre-vention of invasive breast cancer with a more favorable side effect profile. The risk of developing endometrial cancer was significantly higher with tamoxifen use at longer follow-up.86 Although tamoxifen has been shown to reduce the incidence of LCIS and DCIS, raloxifene did not have an effect on the frequency of these diagnoses.Aromatase inhibitors (AIs) have been shown to be more effective than tamoxifen in reducing the incidence of contra-lateral breast cancers in postmenopausal women receiving AIs for adjuvant treatment of invasive breast cancer. The MAP.3 trial was the first study to evaluate an AI as a chemopreventive agent in postmenopausal women at high risk for breast cancer. The trial randomized 4560 women to exemestane 25 mg daily vs. placebo for 5 years. After a median follow-up of 35 months, exemestane was shown to reduce invasive breast cancer inci-dence by 65%. Side effect profiles demonstrated more grade II or higher arthritis and hot flashes in patients taking exemestane.87  The IBIS II trial on the other hand, randomized 3864 postmeno-pausal women to either anastrozole, a nonsteroidal aromatase inhibitor, vs. placebo with a further randomization to bisphospho-nate or not based on bone density.88,89 After a median follow-up of 5 years, anastrozole reduced the incidence of invasive breast cancer by about 50%. The trial also had an initial sub-study that looked at the effect of the aromatase inhibitor on cogni-tive function and reported no adverse effects.90 The American  Society of Clinical Oncology recommends tamoxifen for chemoprevention in premenopausal or postmenopausal women and consideration for raloxifene or exemestane in postmeno-pausal women who are noted to be at increased risk of breast cancer.91,92 The discussion with an individual patient should include risk assessment and potential risks and benefits with each agent.Risk-Reducing Surgery. A retrospective study of women at high risk for breast cancer found that prophylactic mastectomy reduced their risk by >90%.62 However, the effects of prophylac-tic mastectomy on the long-term quality of life are poorly quan-tified. A study involving women who were carriers of a breast cancer susceptibility gene (BRCA) mutation found that the ben-efit of prophylactic mastectomy differed substantially according to the breast cancer risk conferred by the mutations. For women with an estimated lifetime risk of 40%, prophylactic mastec-tomy added almost 3 years of life, whereas for women with an estimated lifetime risk of 85%, prophylactic mastectomy added >5 years of life.66 Domchek et al evaluated a cohort of BRCA1 and 2 mutation carriers who were followed prospectively and reported on outcomes with risk-reducing surgery.93 They found that risk-reducing mastectomy was highly effective at preventing breast cancer in both BRCA1 and 2 mutation carriers.  Risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy was highly effective at reducing the incidence of ovarian cancer and breast cancer in BRCA mutation carriers and was associated with a reduction in breast cancer-specific mortality, ovarian cancer-specific mor-tality, and all-cause mortality. While studies of bilateral pro-phylactic or risk-reducing mastectomy have reported dramatic reductions in breast cancer incidence among those without known BRCA mutations, there is little data to support a survival benefit. Another consideration is that while most patients are satisfied with their decision to pursue risk-reducing surgery, some are dissatisfied with the cosmetic outcomes mostly due to reconstructive issues.BRCA MutationsBRCA1. Up to 5% of breast cancers are caused by inheritance of germline mutations such as BRCA1 and BRCA2, which are inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion with varying degrees of penetrance (Table 17-7).94-100 BRCA1 is located on chromosome arm 17q, spans a genomic region of approximately 100 kilobases (kb) of DNA, and contains 22 coding exons for 1863 amino acids. Both BRCA1 and BRCA2 function as tumor-suppressor genes, and for each gene, loss of both alleles is required for the initiation of cancer. Data accumulated since the isolation of the BRCA1 gene suggest a role in transcription, cell-cycle control, and DNA damage repair pathways. More than 500 sequence variations in BRCA1 have been identified. It now is known that germline mutations in BRCA1 represent a predisposing genetic factor in as many as 45% of hereditary breast cancers and in at least 80% of hereditary ovarian cancers. Female mutation carriers have been reported to have up to an 85% lifetime risk (for some families) for developing breast cancer and up to a 40% lifetime risk for developing ovarian cancer. The initial families reported had high penetrance and subsequently the average lifetime risk has been reported to lie between 60% and 70%. Breast cancer susceptibility in these families appears as an autosomal dominant trait with high pen-etrance. Approximately 50% of children of carriers inherit the trait. In general, BRCA1-associated breast cancers are invasive ductal carcinomas, are poorly differentiated, are in the majority Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   55801/03/19   5:04 PM 559THE BREASTCHAPTER 17Table 17-7Incidence of sporadic, familial, and hereditary breast cancerSporadic breast cancer65%–75%Familial breast cancer20%–30%Hereditary breast cancer5%–10% BRCA1a45% BRCA235% p53a (Li-Fraumeni syndrome)1% STK11/LKB1a (Peutz-Jeghers syndrome)<1% PTENa (Cowden disease)<1% MSH2/MLH1a (Muir-Torre syndrome)<1% ATMa (Ataxia-telangiectasia)<1% Unknown20%aAffected gene.Data from Martin AM, Weber BL: Genetic and hormonal risk factors in breast cancer, J Natl Cancer Inst. 2000 Jul 19;92(14):1126-1135.hormone receptor negative, and have a triple receptor negative (immunohistochemical profile: ER-negative, PR-negative, and HER2-negative) or basal phenotype (based on gene expression profiling). BRCA1-associated breast cancers have a number of distinguishing clinical features, such as an early age of onset compared with sporadic cases; a higher prevalence of bilateral breast cancer; and the presence of associated cancers in some affected individuals, specifically ovarian cancer and possibly colon and prostate cancers.Several founder mutations have been identified in BRCA1. The two most common mutations are 185delAG and 5382insC, which account for 10% of all the mutations seen in BRCA1. These two mutations occur at a 10-fold higher frequency in the Ashkenazi Jewish population than in non-Jewish Caucasians. The carrier frequency of the 185delAG mutation in the Ashkenazi Jewish population is 1% and, along with the 5382insC mutation, accounts for almost all BRCA1 mutations in this population. Analysis of germline mutations in Jewish and non-Jewish women with early-onset breast cancer indicates that 20% of Jewish women who develop breast cancer before age  40 years carry the 185delAG mutation. There are founder BRCA1 mutations in other populations including, among others, Dutch, Polish, Finnish, and Russian populations.101-105BRCA2. BRCA2 is located on chromosome arm 13q and spans a genomic region of approximately 70 kb of DNA. The 11.2-kb coding region contains 26 coding exons.94-100 It encodes a pro-tein of 3418 amino acids. The BRCA2 gene bears no homology to any previously described gene, and the protein contains no previously defined functional domains. The biologic function of BRCA2 is not well defined, but like BRCA1, it is postulated to play a role in DNA damage response pathways. BRCA2 mes-senger RNA also is expressed at high levels in the late G1 and  S phases of the cell cycle. The kinetics of BRCA2 protein regu-lation in the cell cycle is similar to that of BRCA1 protein, which suggests that these genes are coregulated. The mutational spec-trum of BRCA2 is not as well established as that of BRCA1. To date, >250 mutations have been found. The breast cancer risk for BRCA2 mutation carriers is close to 85%, and the life-time ovarian cancer risk, while lower than for BRCA1, is still estimated to be close to 20%. Breast cancer susceptibility in BRCA2 families is an autosomal dominant trait and has a high penetrance. Approximately 50% of children of carriers inherit the trait. Unlike male carriers of BRCA1 mutations, men with germline mutations in BRCA2 have an estimated breast cancer risk of 6%, which represents a 100-fold increase over the risk in the general male population. BRCA2-associated breast cancers  are invasive ductal carcinomas, which are more likely to be well differentiated and to express hormone receptors than are BRCA1-associated breast cancers. BRCA2-associated breast cancer has a number of distinguishing clinical features, such as an early age of onset compared with sporadic cases, a higher prevalence of bilateral breast cancer, and the presence of associ-ated cancers in some affected individuals, specifically ovarian, colon, prostate, pancreatic, gallbladder, bile duct, and stomach cancers, as well as melanoma. A number of founder mutations have been identified in BRCA2. The 6174delT mutation is found in Ashkenazi Jews with a prevalence of 1.2% and accounts for 60% of ovarian cancer and 30% of early-onset breast cancer patients among Ashkenazi women.106 Another BRCA2 founder mutation, 999del5, is observed in Icelandic and Finnish popula-tions, while more recently 3036delACAA has been observed in a number of Spanish families.107-109Identification of BRCA Mutation Carriers. Identifying hereditary risk for breast cancer is a four-step process that includes: (a) obtaining a complete, multigenerational family history, (b) assessing the appropriateness of genetic testing for a particular patient, (c) counseling the patient, and (d) interpret-ing the results of testing.110 Genetic testing should not be offered in isolation, but only in conjunction with patient education and counseling, including referral to a genetic counselor. Initial determinations include whether the individual is an appropriate candidate for genetic testing and whether genetic testing will be informative for personal and clinical decision-making. A thor-ough and accurate family history is essential to this process, and the maternal and paternal sides of the family are both assessed because 50% of the women with a BRCA mutation have inher-ited the mutation from their fathers. To help clinicians advise women about genetic testing, statistically based models that determine the probability that an individual carries a BRCA mutation have been developed. A method for calculating carrier probability that has been demonstrated to have acceptable per-formance (i.e., both in terms of calibration and discrimination) such as the Manchester scoring system and BODICEA should be used to offer referral to a specialist genetic clinic. A heredi-tary risk of breast cancer is considered if a family includes Ash-kenazi Jewish heritage; a first-degree relative with breast cancer before age 50; a history of ovarian cancer at any age in the patient or firstor second-degree relative with ovarian cancer; breast and ovarian cancer in the same individual; two or more firstor second-degree relatives with breast cancer at any age; patient or relative with bilateral breast cancer; and male breast cancer in a relative at any age.111 The threshold for genetic test-ing is lower in individuals who are members of ethnic groups in whom the mutation prevalence is increased.BRCA Mutation Testing. Appropriate counseling for the individual being tested for a BRCA mutation is strongly rec-ommended, and documentation of informed consent is required.110,112 The test that is clinically available for analyzing BRCA mutations is gene sequence analysis. In a family with a history suggestive of hereditary breast cancer and no previously Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   55901/03/19   5:04 PM 560SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IItested member, the most informative strategy is first to test an affected family member. This person undergoes complete sequence analysis of both the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. If a mutation is identified, relatives are usually tested only for that specific mutation. An individual of Ashkenazi Jewish ancestry is tested initially for the three specific mutations that account for hereditary breast and ovarian cancer in that population. If results of that test are negative, it may then be appropriate to fully analyze the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes.A positive test result is one that discloses the presence of a BRCA mutation that interferes with translation or function of the BRCA protein. A woman who carries a deleterious mutation has a breast cancer risk of up to 85% (in some families) as well as a greatly increased risk of ovarian cancer. A negative test result is interpreted according to the individual’s personal and family history, especially whether a mutation has been previously iden-tified in the family, in which case the woman is generally tested only for that specific mutation. If the mutation is not present, the woman’s risk of breast or ovarian cancer may be no greater than that of the general population. In addition, no BRCA muta-tion can be passed on to the woman’s children. In the absence of a previously identified mutation, a negative test result in an affected individual generally indicates that a BRCA mutation is not responsible for the familial cancer. However, the possibil-ity remains of an unusual abnormality in one of these genes that cannot yet be identified through clinical testing. It also is possible that the familial cancer is indeed caused by an identifi-able BRCA mutation but that the individual tested had sporadic cancer, a situation known as phenocopy. This is especially pos-sible if the individual tested developed breast cancer close to the age of onset of the general population (age 60 years or older) rather than before age 50 years, as is characteristic of BRCA mutation carriers. Overall, the false-negative rate for BRCA mutation testing is <5%. Some test results, especially when a single base-pair change (missense mutation) is identified, may be difficult to interpret. This is because single base-pair changes do not always result in a nonfunctional protein. Thus, missense mutations not located within critical functional domains, or those that cause only minimal changes in protein structure, may not be disease associated and are usually reported as indetermi-nate results. In communicating indeterminate results to women, care must be taken to relay the uncertain cancer risk associ-ated with this type of mutation and to emphasize that ongoing research might clarify its meaning. In addition, testing other family members with breast cancer to determine if a genetic variant tracks with their breast cancer may provide clarification as to its significance. Indeterminate genetic variance currently accounts for 12% of the test results.Concern has been expressed that the identification of hereditary risk for breast cancer may interfere with access to affordable health insurance. This concern refers to discrimina-tion directed against an individual or family based solely on an apparent or perceived genetic variation from the normal human genotype. The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) made it illegal in the United States for group health plans to consider genetic information as a preexist-ing condition or to use it to deny or limit coverage. Most states also have passed laws that prevent genetic discrimination in the provision of health insurance. In addition, individuals applying for health insurance are not required to report whether relatives have undergone genetic testing for cancer risk, only whether those relatives have actually been diagnosed with cancer. Currently, there is little documented evidence of genetic dis-crimination resulting from findings of available genetic tests.Cancer Prevention for BRCA Mutation Carriers. Risk man-agement strategies for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers include the following:1.	Risk-reducing mastectomy and reconstruction2.	Risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy3.	Intensive surveillance for breast and ovarian cancer4.	ChemopreventionAlthough removal of breast tissue reduces the likeli-hood that BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers will develop breast cancer, mastectomy does not remove all breast tissue, and women continue to be at risk because a germline muta-tion is present in any remaining breast tissue. For postmeno-pausal BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers who have not had a mastectomy, it may be advisable to avoid hormone replace-ment therapy because no data exist regarding the effect of the therapy on the penetrance of breast cancer susceptibility genes. Because breast cancers in BRCA mutation carriers have the same mammographic appearance as breast cancers in noncarri-ers, a screening mammogram is likely to be effective in BRCA mutation carriers, provided it is performed and interpreted by an experienced radiologist with a high level of suspicion. Pres-ent screening recommendations for BRCA mutation carriers who do not undergo risk-reducing mastectomy include clinical breast examination every 6 months and mammography every 12 months beginning at age 25 years because the risk of breast cancer in BRCA mutation carriers increases after age 30 years. Recent attention has been focused on the use of MRI for breast cancer screening in high-risk individuals and known BRCA mutation carriers. MRI appears to be more sensitive at detect-ing breast cancer in younger women with dense breasts.113 How-ever, as noted previously, MRI does lead to the detection of benign breast lesions that cannot easily be distinguished from malignancy, and these false-positive events can result in more interventions, including biopsy specimens. The current recom-mendations from the American Cancer Society are for annual MRI in women with a 20% to 25% or greater lifetime risk of developing breast cancer (mainly based on family history), women with a known BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation, those who have a first-degree relative with a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation and have not had genetic testing themselves, women who were treated with radiation therapy to the chest between the ages of 10 and 30 years, and those who have Li-Fraumeni syndrome, Cowden syndrome, or Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome, or a first-degree relative with one of these syndromes.75,114 Despite a 49% reduction in the overall incidence of breast cancer and a 69% reduction in the incidence of estrogen receptor positive tumors in high-risk women taking tamoxifen reported in the NSABP P1 trial, there is insufficient evidence to recommend the use of tamoxifen uniformly for BRCA1 mutation carriers.60 Cancers arising in BRCA1 mutation carriers are usually high grade and are most often hormone receptor negative. Approxi-mately 66% of BRCA1-associated DCIS lesions are estrogen receptor negative, which suggests early acquisition of the hor-mone-independent phenotype. In the NSABP P1 trial there was a 62% reduction in the incidence of breast cancer in BRCA2 carriers, similar to the overall reduction seen in the P1 trial. In contrast, there was no reduction seen in breast cancer incidence in BRCA1 carriers who started tamoxifen in P1 age 35 years or Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   56001/03/19   5:04 PM 561THE BREASTCHAPTER 17older.115 Tamoxifen appears to be more effective at preventing estrogen receptor-positive breast cancers.The risk of ovarian cancer in BRCA1 and BRCA2 muta-tion carriers ranges from 20% to 40%, which is 10 times higher than that in the general population. Risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy is a reasonable prevention option in mutation carriers. In women with a documented BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation, consideration for bilateral risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy should be between the ages of 35 and 40 years at the completion of childbearing. Removing the ovaries reduces the risk of ovarian cancer and breast cancer when per-formed in premenopausal BRCA mutation carriers. Hormone replacement therapy is discussed with the patient at the time of oophorectomy. The Cancer Genetics Studies Consortium recommends yearly transvaginal ultrasound timed to avoid ovulation and annual measurement of serum cancer antigen 125 levels beginning at age 25 years as the best screening modalities for ovarian carcinoma in BRCA mutation carriers who have opted to defer risk-reducing surgery.PALB2 (partner and localizer of BRCA2) has recently been characterized as a potential high-risk gene for breast cancer. PALB2 allows nuclear localization of BRCA2 and provides a scaffold for the BRCA1–PALB2–BRCA2 complex. Analysis by Antoniou et al has suggested that the risk of breast cancer for PALB2 mutation carriers is as high as that of BRCA2 mutation carriers.116 The absolute risk of breast cancer for PALB2 female mutation carriers by 70 years of age ranged from 33% (95% CI, 25–44) for those with no family history of breast cancer to 58% (95% CI, 50–66) for those with two or more first-degree relatives with breast cancer at 50 years of age. The risk of breast cancer for female PALB2 mutation carriers, depending on the age, was about five to nine times as high compared with the gen-eral population. While screening with mammogram along with MRI has been suggested for PALB2 mutation carriers starting at age 30 with consideration of risk-reducing mastectomy, there is currently insufficient evidence regarding the risk of ovarian cancer and its management.Other hereditary syndromes associated with an increased risk of breast cancer include Cowden disease (PTEN mutations, in which cancers of the thyroid, GI tract, and benign skin and subcutaneous nodules are also seen), Li-Fraumeni syndrome (TP53 mutations, also associated with sarcomas, lymphomas, and adrenocortical tumors), hereditary diffuse gastric cancer syndrome (CDH1 mutations, associated with diffuse gastric cancer and lobular breast cancers), and syndromes of breast and melanoma. With the discovery of additional genes related to breast cancer susceptibility, panel testing is available for a number of genes in addition to BRCA1 and BRCA2. The inter-pretation of results is complex and is best done with a genetic counselor.EPIDEMIOLOGY AND NATURAL HISTORY OF BREAST CANCEREpidemiologyBreast cancer is the most common site-specific cancer in women and is the leading cause of death from cancer for women age 20 to 59 years. Based on Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results registries (SEER) data, 266,120 new cases were esti-mated in 2018 with 40,920 estimated deaths attributed to breast cancers.117 It accounts for 30% of all newly diagnosed cancers in women and is responsible for 14% of the cancer-related deaths in women.Breast cancer was the leading cause of cancer-related mortality in women until 1987, when it was surpassed by lung cancer. In the 1970s, the probability that a woman in the  United States would develop breast cancer at some point in her lifetime was estimated at 1 in 13; in 1980 it was 1 in 11; and in 2004 it was 1 in 8. Cancer registries in Connecticut and upper New York State document that the age-adjusted incidence of new breast cancer cases had steadily increased since the mid-1940s. The incidence in the United States, based on data from nine SEER registries, has been decreasing by 23% per year since 2000. The increase had been approximately 1% per year from 1973 to 1980, and there was an additional increase in inci-dence of 4% between 1980 and 1987, which was characterized by frequent detection of small primary cancers. The increase in breast cancer incidence occurred primarily in women age  ≥55 years and paralleled a marked increase in the percentage of older women who had mammograms taken. At the same time, incidence rates for regional metastatic disease dropped and breast cancer mortality declined. From 1960 to 1963, 5-year overall survival rates for breast cancer were 63% and 46% in white and African American women, respectively, whereas the rates for 1981 to 1983 were 78% and 64%, respectively. For 2002 to 2008 rates were 92% and 78%, respectively.There is a 10-fold variation in breast cancer incidence among different countries worldwide. Cyprus and Malta have the highest age-adjusted mortality for breast cancer (29.6 per 100,000 population), whereas Haiti has the lowest (2.0 deaths per 100,000 population). The United States has an age-adjusted mortality for breast cancer of 19.0 cases per 100,000 population. Women living in less industrialized nations tend to have a lower incidence of breast cancer than women living in industrialized countries, although Japan is an exception. In the United States, Mormons, Seventh Day Adventists, American Indians, Alaska natives, Hispanic/Latina Americans, and Japanese and Filipino women living in Hawaii have a below-average incidence of breast cancer, whereas nuns (due to nulliparity) and Ashkenazi Jewish women have an above-average incidence.The incidence rates of breast cancer increased in most countries through the 1990s. Since the estimates for 1990, there was an overall increase in incidence rates of approximately 0.5% annually. It was predicted that there would be approxi-mately 1.4 million new cases in 2010. The cancer registries in China have noted annual increases in incidence of up to 3% to 4%, and in eastern Asia, increases are similar.Data from the SEER program reveal declines in breast cancer incidence over the past decade, and this is widely attrib-uted to decreased use of hormone replacement therapy as a con-sequence of the Women’s Health Initiative reports.118Breast cancer burden has well-defined variations by geog-raphy, regional lifestyle, and racial or ethnic background.119 In general, both breast cancer incidence and mortality are rela-tively lower among the female populations of Asia and Africa, relatively underdeveloped nations, and nations that have not adopted Westernized reproductive and dietary patterns. In contrast, European and North American women and women from heavily industrialized or Westernized countries have a substantially higher breast cancer burden. These international patterns are mirrored in breast cancer incidence and mortality rates observed for the racially, ethnically, and culturally diverse population of the United States.120Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   56101/03/19   5:04 PM 562SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II10090807060504030201083%68%54%41%Middlesex  Hospital 1805-1933 (250 cases)86%66%44%28%18%9%3.6%2%0.8%1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10   11   12   13   14   15   16   17   18   19  Median survival 2.7 years Natural survivalSurvival untreated casesDuration of life from onset of symptoms (years)% SurvivalFigure 17-13. Survival of women with untreated breast cancer compared with natural survival. (Reproduced with permission from Bloom HJG, Richardson WW, Harries EJ: Natural history of untreated breast cancer (1805-1933). Comparison of untreated and treated cases according to histological grade of malignancy, Br Med J. 1962 Jul 28;2(5299):213-221.)Although often related, the factors that influence breast cancer incidence may differ from those that affect mortality. Incidence rates are lower among populations that are heavily weighted with women who begin childbearing at young ages and who have multiple full-term pregnancies followed by pro-longed lactation. These are features that characterize many underdeveloped nations and also many eastern nations. Breast cancer mortality rates should be lower in populations that have a lower incidence, but the mortality burden will simultaneously be adversely affected by the absence of effective mammographic screening programs for early detection and diminished access to multidisciplinary cancer treatment programs. These features are likely to account for much of the disproportionate mortal-ity risks that are seen in underdeveloped nations. Similar fac-tors probably account for differences in breast cancer burden observed among the various racial and ethnic groups within the United States. Interestingly, breast cancer incidence and mortality rates rise among secondand third-generation Asian Americans as they adopt Western lifestyles.Disparities in breast cancer survival among subsets of the American population are generating increased publicity because they are closely linked to disparities in socioeconomic status. Poverty rates and proportions of the population that lack health care insurance are two to three times higher among minority racial and ethnic groups such as African Americans and His-panic/Latino Americans. These socioeconomic disadvantages create barriers to effective breast cancer screening and result in delayed breast cancer diagnosis, advanced stage distribu-tion, inadequacies in comprehensive treatment, and, ultimately, increased mortality rates. Furthermore, the rapid growth in the Hispanic population is accompanied by increasing problems in health education because of linguistic barriers between physi-cians and recently immigrated, non–English-speaking patients. Recent studies also are documenting inequities in the treatments delivered to minority breast cancer patients, such as increased rates of failure to provide systemic therapy, use of sentinel lymph node dissection, and breast reconstruction. Some of the treatment delivery disparities are related to inadequately con-trolled comorbidities (such as hypertension and diabetes), which are more prevalent in minority populations. However, some studies that adjust for these factors report persistent and unex-plained unevenness in treatment recommendations. It is clear that breast cancer disparities associated with racial or ethnic background have a multifactorial cause, and improvements in outcome will require correction of many public health problems at both the patient and provider levels.Advances in the ability to characterize breast cancer sub-types and the genetics of the disease are now provoking specula-tion regarding possible hereditary influences on breast cancer risk that are related to racial or ethnic ancestry.121 These questions become particularly compelling when one looks at disparities in breast cancer burden between African Americans and Cau-casians. Lifetime risk of breast cancer is lower for African Americans, yet a paradoxically increased breast cancer mortal-ity risk also is seen. African Americans also have a younger age distribution for breast cancer; among women <45 years of age, breast cancer incidence is highest among African Americans compared to other subsets of the American population. Lastly and most provocatively, African American women of all ages have notably higher incidence rates for estrogen receptor-negative tumors. These same patterns of disease are seen in con-temporary female populations of western, sub-Saharan Africa, who are likely to share ancestry with African American women as a consequence of the Colonial-era slave trade. Interestingly, male breast cancer also is seen with increased frequency among both African Americans and Africans.Natural HistoryBloom and colleagues described the natural history of breast cancer based on the records of 250 women with untreated breast cancers who were cared for on charity wards in the Middlesex Hospital, London, between 1805 and 1933. The median survival of this population was 2.7 years after initial diagnosis (Fig. 17-13).122 The 5and 10-year survival rates for these women were 18.0% and 3.6%, respectively. Only 0.8% survived for 15 years or longer. Autopsy data confirmed that 95% of these women died of breast cancer, whereas the remaining 5% died of other causes. Almost 75% of the women developed ulcer-ation of the breast during the course of the disease. The longest surviving patient died in the 19th year after diagnosis.Primary Breast Cancer. More than 80% of breast cancers show productive fibrosis that involves the epithelial and stro-mal tissues. With growth of the cancer and invasion of the surrounding breast tissues, the accompanying desmoplastic response entraps and shortens Cooper’s suspensory ligaments to produce a characteristic skin retraction. Localized edema (peau d’orange) develops when drainage of lymph fluid from the skin is disrupted. With continued growth, cancer cells invade the skin, and eventually ulceration occurs. As new areas of skin are invaded, small satellite nodules appear near the primary ulceration. The size of the primary breast cancer correlates with disease-free and overall survival, but there is a close associa-tion between cancer size and axillary lymph node involvement (Fig. 17-14). In general, up to 20% of breast cancer recurrences are local-regional, >60% are distant, and 20% are both local-regional and distant.Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   56201/03/19   5:04 PM 563THE BREASTCHAPTER 17xxxxxxxxxx**********Diameter (cm)0.980.950.900.800.700.600.500.400.300.20Proportion of patients with metastases10100Volume (ml)2345676891011100908070605040302010Percent survivors31529717363653126317714265321234909214425N + >3 (183)N + (381)N + 1 (198)N (335)Whole series (716)241068Years after mastectomyABFigure 17-14. A. Overall survival for women with breast cancer according to axillary lymph node status. The time periods are years after radical mastectomy. (Reproduced with permission from Vala-gussa P, Bonadonna G, Veronesi U, et al: Patterns of relapse and survival following radical mastectomy. Analysis of 716 consecutive patients, Cancer. 1978 Mar;41(3):1170-1178.) B. Risk of metasta-ses according to breast cancer volume and diameter. (Reproduced with permission from Koscielny S, Tubiana M, Lê MG, et al: Breast cancer: Relationship between the size of the primary tumour and the probability of metastatic dissemination, Br J Cancer. 1984 Jun;49(6):709-715.)Axillary Lymph Node Metastases. As the size of the pri-mary breast cancer increases, some cancer cells are shed into cellular spaces and transported via the lymphatic network of the breast to the regional lymph nodes, especially the axillary lymph nodes. Lymph nodes that contain metastatic cancer are at first ill-defined and soft but become firm or hard with con-tinued growth of the metastatic cancer. Eventually the lymph nodes adhere to each other and form a conglomerate mass. Cancer cells may grow through the lymph node capsule and fix to contiguous structures in the axilla, including the chest wall. Typically, axillary lymph nodes are involved sequentially from the low (level I) to the central (level II) to the apical (level III) lymph node groups. Approximately 95% of the women who die of breast cancer have distant metastases, and traditionally the most important prognostic correlate of disease-free and over-all survival was axillary lymph node status (see Fig. 17-14A). Women with node-negative disease had less than a 30% risk of recurrence, compared with as much as a 75% risk for women with node-positive disease.Distant Metastases. At approximately the 20th cell dou-bling, breast cancers acquire their own blood supply (neovas-cularization). Thereafter, cancer cells may be shed directly into the systemic venous blood to seed the pulmonary circulation via the axillary and intercostal veins or the vertebral column via Batson’s plexus of veins, which courses the length of the vertebral column. These cells are scavenged by natural killer lymphocytes and macrophages. Successful implantation of metastatic foci from breast cancer predictably occurs after the primary cancer exceeds 0.5 cm in diameter, which corresponds to the 27th cell doubling. For 10 years after initial treatment, distant metastases are the most common cause of death in breast cancer patients. For this reason, conclusive results cannot be derived from breast cancer trials until at least 5 to 10 years have elapsed. Although 60% of the women who develop distant metastases will do so within 60 months of treatment, metastases may become evident as late as 20 to 30 years after treatment of the primary cancer.123 Patients with estrogen receptor nega-tive breast cancers are proportionately more likely to develop recurrence in the first 3 to 5 years, whereas those with estrogen receptor positive tumors have a risk of developing recurrence, which drops off more slowly beyond 5 years than is seen with ER-negative tumors.124 Recently, a report showed that tumor size and nodal status remain powerful predictors of late recur-rences compared to more recently developed tools such as the immunohistochemical score (IHC4) and two gene expression profile tests (Recurrence Score and PAM50).125 Common sites of involvement, in order of frequency, are bone, lung, pleura, soft tissues, and liver. Brain metastases are less frequent over-all, although with the advent of adjuvant systemic therapies it has been reported that CNS disease may be seen earlier.126,127 There are also reports of factors that are associated with the risk of developing brain metastases.128 For example, they are more likely to be seen in patients with triple receptor negative breast cancer (ER-negative, PR-negative, and HER2-negative) or patients with HER2-positive breast cancer who have received chemotherapy and HER2-directed therapies.HISTOPATHOLOGY OF BREAST CANCERCarcinoma In SituCancer cells are in situ or invasive depending on whether or not they invade through the basement membrane.129,130 Broders’s original description of in situ breast cancer stressed the absence of invasion of cells into the surrounding stroma and their confine-ment within natural ductal and alveolar boundaries.129 Because areas of invasion may be minute, the accurate diagnosis of in situ cancer necessitates the analysis of multiple microscopic sec-tions to exclude invasion. In 1941, Foote and Stewart published Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   56301/03/19   5:04 PM 564SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 17-8Salient characteristics of in situ ductal (DCIS) and lobular (LCIS) carcinoma of the breast LCISDCISAge (years)44–4754–58Incidencea2%–5%5%–10%Clinical signsNoneMass, pain, nipple dischargeMammographic signsNoneMicrocalcificationsPremenopausal2/31/3Incidence of synchronous invasive carcinoma5%2%–46%Multicentricity60%–90%40%–80%Bilaterality50%–70%10%–20%Axillary metastasis1%1%–2%Subsequent carcinomas:   Incidence25%–35%25%–70% LateralityBilateralIpsilateral Interval to diagnosis15–20 y5–10 y Histologic typeDuctalDuctalaIn biopsy specimens of mammographically detected breast lesions.Reproduced with permission from Bland KI, Copeland ED: The Breast: Comprehensive Management of Benign and Malignant Diseases, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsesvier/Saunders; 1998.Table 17-9Classification of breast ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS)HISTOLOGIC SUBTYPE DETERMINING CHARACTERISTICSDCIS GRADE NUCLEAR GRADENECROSISComedoHighExtensiveHighIntermediateaIntermediateFocal or absentIntermediateNoncomedobLowAbsentLowaOften a mixture of noncomedo patterns.bSolid, cribriform, papillary, or focal micropapillary.Adapted with permission from Koo JS, Kim MJ, Kim EK, et al: Comparison of immunohistochemical staining in breast papillary neoplasms of cytokeratin 5/6 and p63 in core needle biopsies and surgical excisions, Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2012 Mar;20(2):108-115.a landmark description of LCIS, which distinguished it from DCIS.130 In the late 1960s, Gallagher and Martin published their study of whole-breast sections and described a stepwise progres-sion from benign breast tissue to in situ cancer and subsequently to invasive cancer. Before the widespread use of mammography, diagnosis of breast cancer was by physical examination. At that time, in situ cancers constituted <6% of all breast cancers, and LCIS was more frequently diagnosed than DCIS by a ratio of >2:1. However, when screening mammography became popular, a 14-fold increase in the incidence of in situ cancer (45%) was demonstrated, and DCIS was more frequently diagnosed than LCIS by a ratio of >2:1. Table 17-8 lists the clinical and patho-logic characteristics of DCIS and LCIS. Multicentricity refers to the occurrence of a second breast cancer outside the breast quadrant of the primary cancer (or at least 4 cm away), whereas multifocality refers to the occurrence of a second cancer within the same breast quadrant as the primary cancer (or within 4 cm of it). Multicentricity occurs in 60% to 90% of women with LCIS, whereas the rate of multicentricity for DCIS is reported to be 40% to 80%. LCIS occurs bilaterally in 50% to 70% of cases, whereas DCIS occurs bilaterally in 10% to 20% of cases.Lobular Carcinoma In Situ. LCIS originates from the termi-nal duct lobular units and develops only in the female breast. It is characterized by distention and distortion of the terminal duct lobular units by cells that are large but maintain a normal nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio. Cytoplasmic mucoid globules are a distinctive cellular feature. LCIS may be observed in breast tissues that contain microcalcifications, but the calcifications associated with LCIS typically occur in adjacent tissues. This neighborhood calcification is a feature that is unique to LCIS and contributes to its diagnosis. The frequency of LCIS in the general population cannot be reliably determined because it usu-ally presents as an incidental finding. The average age at diag-nosis is 45 years, which is approximately 15 to 25 years younger than the age at diagnosis for invasive breast cancer. LCIS has a distinct racial predilection, occurring 12 times more frequently in white women than in African-American women. Invasive breast cancer develops in 25% to 35% of women with LCIS. Invasive cancer may develop in either breast, regardless of which breast harbored the initial focus of LCIS, and is detected synchronously with LCIS in 5% of cases. In women with a his-tory of LCIS, up to 65% of subsequent invasive cancers are duc-tal, not lobular, in origin. For these reasons, LCIS is regarded as a marker of increased risk for invasive breast cancer rather than as an anatomic precursor. Individuals should be counseled regarding their risk of developing breast cancer and appropriate risk reduction strategies, including observation with screening, chemoprevention, and risk-reducing bilateral mastectomy.Ductal Carcinoma In Situ. Although DCIS is predominantly seen in the female breast, it accounts for 5% of male breast cancers. Published series suggest a detection frequency of 7% in all biopsy tissue specimens. The term intraductal carcinoma is frequently applied to DCIS, which carries a high risk for progres-sion to an invasive cancer. Histologically, DCIS is characterized by a proliferation of the epithelium that lines the minor ducts, resulting in papillary growths within the duct lumina. Early in their development, the cancer cells do not show pleomorphism, mitoses, or atypia, which leads to difficulty in distinguishing early DCIS from benign hyperplasia. The papillary growths (papillary growth pattern) eventually coalesce and fill the duct lumina so that only scattered, rounded spaces remain between the clumps of atypical cancer cells, which show hyperchroma-sia and loss of polarity (cribriform growth pattern). Eventually pleomorphic cancer cells with frequent mitotic figures obliterate the lumina and distend the ducts (solid growth pattern). With continued growth, these cells outstrip their blood supply and become necrotic (comedo growth pattern). Calcium deposition occurs in the areas of necrosis and is a common feature seen on mammography. DCIS is now frequently classified based on nuclear grade and the presence of necrosis (Table 17-9). Based Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   56401/03/19   5:04 PM 565THE BREASTCHAPTER 17on multiple consensus meetings, grading of DCIS has been rec-ommended. Although there is no universal agreement on clas-sification, most systems endorse the use of cytologic grade and presence or absence of necrosis.131The risk for invasive breast cancer is increased nearly fivefold in women with DCIS.132 The invasive cancers are observed in the ipsilateral breast, usually in the same quadrant as the DCIS that was originally detected, which suggests that DCIS is an anatomic precursor of invasive ductal carcinoma (Fig. 17-15A and B).Invasive Breast CarcinomaInvasive breast cancers have been described as lobular or duc-tal in origin.128-131 Early classifications used the term lobular to describe invasive cancers that were associated with LCIS, whereas all other invasive cancers were referred to as ductal. Current histologic classifications recognize special types of breast cancers (10% of total cases), which are defined by spe-cific histologic features. To qualify as a special-type cancer, at least 90% of the cancer must contain the defining histologic features. About 80% of invasive breast cancers are described as invasive ductal carcinoma of no special type (NST). These can-cers generally have a worse prognosis than special-type cancers. Foote and Stewart originally proposed the following classifica-tion for invasive breast cancer130:1.	Paget’s disease of the nipple2.	Invasive ductal carcinoma—Adenocarcinoma with produc-tive fibrosis (scirrhous, simplex, NST), 80%3.	Medullary carcinoma, 4%4.	Mucinous (colloid) carcinoma, 2%5.	Papillary carcinoma, 2%6.	Tubular carcinoma, 2%7.	Invasive lobular carcinoma, 10%8.	Rare cancers (adenoid cystic, squamous cell, apocrine)Paget’s disease of the nipple was described in 1874. It fre-quently presents as a chronic, eczematous eruption of the nipple, which may be subtle but may progress to an ulcerated, weeping lesion. Paget’s disease usually is associated with extensive DCIS and may be associated with an invasive cancer. A palpable mass may or may not be present. A nipple biopsy specimen will show a population of cells that are identical to the underlying DCIS cells (pagetoid features or pagetoid change). Pathognomonic of this cancer is the presence of large, pale, vacuolated cells (Paget cells) in the rete pegs of the epithelium. Paget’s disease may be confused with superficial spreading melanoma. Differ-entiation from pagetoid intraepithelial melanoma is based on the presence of S-100 antigen immunostaining in melanoma and carcinoembryonic antigen immunostaining in Paget’s disease. Surgical therapy for Paget’s disease may involve lumpectomy or mastectomy, depending on the extent of involvement of the nipple-areolar complex and the presence of DCIS or invasive cancer in the underlying breast parenchyma.Invasive ductal carcinoma of the breast with productive fibrosis (scirrhous, simplex, NST) accounts for 80% of breast cancers and presents with macroscopic or microscopic axillary lymph node metastases in up to 25% of screen-detected cases and up to 60% of symptomatic cases. This cancer occurs most frequently in perimenopausal or postmenopausal women in the fifth to sixth decades of life as a solitary, firm mass. It has poorly defined margins, and its cut surfaces show a central stellate con-figuration with chalky white or yellow streaks extending into surrounding breast tissues. The cancer cells often are arranged in small clusters, and there is a broad spectrum of histologic types with variable cellular and nuclear grades (Fig. 17-16A and B). In a large patient series from the SEER database, 75% of ductal cancers showed estrogen receptor expression.133Medullary carcinoma is a special-type breast cancer; it accounts for 4% of all invasive breast cancers and is a fre-quent phenotype of BRCA1 hereditary breast cancer. Grossly, the cancer is soft and hemorrhagic. A rapid increase in size may occur secondary to necrosis and hemorrhage. On physi-cal examination, it is bulky and often positioned deep within the breast. Bilaterality is reported in 20% of cases. Medullary carcinoma is characterized microscopically by: (a) a dense lym-phoreticular infiltrate composed predominantly of lymphocytes and plasma cells; (b) large pleomorphic nuclei that are poorly ABFigure 17-15. Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS). A. Craniocau-dal mammographic view shows a poorly defined mass containing microcalcifications. (Used with permission from Dr. Anne Turnbull, Consultant Radiologist/Director of Breast Screening, Royal Derby Hospital, Derby, UK.) B. Histopathologic preparation of the sur-gical specimen confirms DCIS with necrosis (100x). (Used with permission from Dr. Sindhu Menon, Consultant Histopathologist and Dr. Rahul Deb, Consultant Histopathologist and Lead Breast Pathologist, Royal Derby Hospital, Derby, UK.)Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   56501/03/19   5:04 PM 566SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIABFigure 17-16. Invasive ductal carcinoma with productive fibrosis (scirrhous, simplex, no special type) A. 100x. B. 200x. (Used with permis-sion from Dr. Sindhu Menon, Consultant Histopathologist and Dr. Rahul Deb, Consultant Histopathologist and Lead Breast Pathologist, Royal Derby Hospital, Derby, UK.)Figure 17-17. Lobular carcinoma (100×). Uniform, relatively small lobular carcinoma cells are seen arranged in a single-file orientation (“Indian file”). (Used with permission from Dr. Sindhu Menon, Consultant Histopathologist and Dr. Rahul Deb, Consul-tant Histopathologist and Lead Breast Pathologist, Royal Derby Hospital, Derby, UK.)differentiated and show active mitosis; and (c) a sheet-like growth pattern with minimal or absent ductal or alveolar dif-ferentiation. Approximately 50% of these cancers are associated with DCIS, which characteristically is present at the periphery of the cancer, and <10% demonstrate hormone receptors. In rare circumstances, mesenchymal metaplasia or anaplasia is noted. Because of the intense lymphocyte response associated with the cancer, benign or hyperplastic enlargement of the lymph nodes of the axilla may contribute to erroneous clinical staging. Women with this cancer have a better 5-year survival rate than those with NST or invasive lobular carcinoma.Mucinous carcinoma (colloid carcinoma), another spe-cial-type breast cancer, accounts for 2% of all invasive breast cancers and typically presents in the older population as a bulky tumor. This cancer is defined by extracellular pools of mucin, which surround aggregates of low-grade cancer cells. The cut surface of this cancer is glistening and gelatinous in quality. Fibrosis is variable, and when abundant it imparts a firm consis-tency to the cancer. Over 90% of mucinous carcinomas display hormone receptors.133 Lymph node metastases occur in 33% of cases, and 5and 10-year survival rates are 73% and 59%, respectively. Because of the mucinous component, cancer cells may not be evident in all microscopic sections, and analysis of multiple sections is essential to confirm the diagnosis of a mucinous carcinoma.Papillary carcinoma is a special-type cancer of the breast that accounts for 2% of all invasive breast cancers. It generally presents in the seventh decade of life and occurs in a dispropor-tionate number of nonwhite women. Typically, papillary car-cinomas are small and rarely attain a size of 3 cm in diameter. These cancers are defined by papillae with fibrovascular stalks and multilayered epithelium. In a large series from the SEER database 87% of papillary cancers have been reported to express estrogen receptor.133 McDivitt and colleagues noted that these tumors showed a low frequency of axillary lymph node metas-tases and had 5and 10-year survival rates similar to those for mucinous and tubular carcinoma.134Tubular carcinoma is another special-type breast cancer and accounts for 2% of all invasive breast cancers. It is reported in as many as 20% of women whose cancers are diagnosed by mammographic screening and usually is diagnosed in the perimenopausal or early menopausal periods. Under low-power magnification, a haphazard array of small, randomly arranged tubular elements is seen. In a large SEER database 94% of tubular cancers were reported to express estrogen receptor.133 Approximately 10% of women with tubular carcinoma or with invasive cribriform carcinoma, a special-type cancer closely related to tubular carcinoma, will develop axillary lymph node metastases. However, the presence of metastatic disease in one or two axillary lymph nodes does not adversely affect survival. Distant metastases are rare in tubular carcinoma and invasive cribriform carcinoma. Long-term survival approaches 100%.Invasive lobular carcinoma accounts for 10% of breast cancers. The histopathologic features of this cancer include small cells with rounded nuclei, inconspicuous nucleoli, and scant cytoplasm (Fig. 17-17). Special stains may confirm the Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   56601/03/19   5:04 PM 567THE BREASTCHAPTER 17presence of intracytoplasmic mucin, which may displace the nucleus (signet-ring cell carcinoma). At presentation, invasive lobular carcinoma varies from clinically inapparent carcinomas to those that replace the entire breast with a poorly defined mass. It is frequently multifocal, multicentric, and bilateral. Because of its insidious growth pattern and subtle mammographic fea-tures, invasive lobular carcinoma may be difficult to detect. Over 90% of lobular cancers express estrogen receptor.133DIAGNOSIS OF BREAST CANCERIn ∼30% of cases, the woman discovers a lump in her breast. Other less frequent presenting signs and symptoms of breast cancer include: (a) breast enlargement or asymmetry; (b) nipple changes, retraction, or discharge; (c) ulceration or erythema of the skin of the breast; (d) an axillary mass; and (e) musculoskel-etal discomfort. However, up to 50% of women presenting with breast complaints have no physical signs of breast pathology. Breast pain usually is associated with benign disease.Misdiagnosed breast cancer accounts for the greatest num-ber of malpractice claims for errors in diagnosis and for the largest number of paid claims. Litigation often involves younger women, whose physical examination and mammogram may be misleading. If a young woman (≤45 years) presents with a palpable breast mass and equivocal mammographic findings, ultrasound examination and biopsy are used to avoid a delay in diagnosis.ExaminationInspection. The clinician inspects the woman’s breast with her arms by her side (Fig. 17-18A), with her arms straight up in the air (Fig. 17-18B), and with her hands on her hips (with and without pectoral muscle contraction).135,136 Symmetry, size, and shape of the breast are recorded, as well as any evidence of edema (peau d’orange), nipple or skin retraction, or erythema. With the arms extended forward and in a sitting position, the woman leans forward to accentuate any skin retraction.Figure 17-18. Examination of the breast. A. Inspection of the breast with arms at sides. B. Inspection of the breast with arms raised. C. Palpation of the breast with the patient supine. D. Palpa-tion of the axilla.Palpation. As part of the physical examination, the breast is carefully palpated. With the patient in the supine position (see Fig. 17-18C) the clinician gently palpates the breasts, making certain to examine all quadrants of the breast from the sternum laterally to the latissimus dorsi muscle and from the clavicle inferiorly to the upper rectus sheath. The examination is per-formed with the palmar aspects of the fingers, avoiding a grasp-ing or pinching motion. The breast may be cupped or molded in the examiner’s hands to check for retraction. A systematic search for lymphadenopathy then is performed. Figure 17-18D shows the position of the patient for examination of the axilla. By supporting the upper arm and elbow, the examiner stabi-lizes the shoulder girdle. Using gentle palpation, the clinician assesses all three levels of possible axillary lymphadenopathy. Careful palpation of supraclavicular and parasternal sites also is performed. A diagram of the chest and contiguous lymph node sites is useful for recording location, size, consistency, shape, mobility, fixation, and other characteristics of any palpable breast mass or lymphadenopathy (Fig. 17-19).Imaging TechniquesMammography. Mammography has been used in North Amer-ica since the 1960s, and the techniques used continue to be mod-ified and improved to enhance image quality.137-140 Conventional mammography delivers a radiation dose of 0.1 cGy per study. By comparison, chest radiography delivers 25% of this dose. However, there is no increased breast cancer risk associated with the radiation dose delivered with screening mammography. Screening mammography is used to detect unexpected breast cancer in asymptomatic women. In this regard, it supplements history taking and physical examination. With screening mam-mography, two views of the breast are obtained: the craniocau-dal (CC) view (Fig. 17-20A,B) and the mediolateral oblique (MLO) view (Fig. 17-20C,D). The MLO view images the great-est volume of breast tissue, including the upper outer quadrant and the axillary tail of Spence. Compared with the MLO view, the CC view provides better visualization of the medial aspect of the breast and permits greater breast compression. Diagnos-tic mammography is used to evaluate women with abnormal Figure 17-19. A breast examination record. Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   56701/03/19   5:04 PM 568SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIABCDFigure 17-20. A-D. Mammogram of a premenopausal breast with a dense fibroglandular pattern. E-H. Mammogram of a postmenopausal breast with a sparse fibroglandular pattern. (Used with permission from Dr. Anne Turnbull, Consultant Radiologist/Director of Breast Screening, Royal Derby Hospital, Derby, UK.)Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   56801/03/19   5:04 PM 569THE BREASTCHAPTER 17EFGHFigure 17-20. (Continued)findings such as a breast mass or nipple discharge. In addition to the MLO and CC views, a diagnostic examination may use views that better define the nature of any abnormalities, such as the 90° lateral and spot compression views. The 90° lateral view is used along with the CC view to triangulate the exact location of an abnormality. Spot compression may be done in any pro-jection by using a small compression device, which is placed directly over a mammographic abnormality that is obscured by overlying tissues (Fig. 17-21C). The compression device mini-mizes motion artifact, improves definition, separates overlying tissues, and decreases the radiation dose needed to penetrate the breast. Magnification techniques (×1.5) often are combined with spot compression to better resolve calcifications and the margins of masses. Mammography also is used to guide inter-ventional procedures, including needle localization and needle biopsy.Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   56901/03/19   5:04 PM 570SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIABCFigure 17-21. Mammogram revealing a small, spiculated mass in the right breast A. A small, spiculated mass is seen in the right breast with skin tethering (CC view). B. Mass seen on oblique view of the right breast. C. Spot compression mammography view of the cancer seen in A and B. The spiculated margins of the cancer are accentuated by compression. (Used with permission from Dr. Anne Turnbull, Consultant Radiologist/Director of Breast Screening, Royal Derby Hospital, Derby, UK.)Specific mammographic features that suggest a diagnosis of breast cancer include a solid mass with or without stellate features, asymmetric thickening of breast tissues, and clustered microcalcifications. The presence of fine, stippled calcium in and around a suspicious lesion is suggestive of breast cancer and occurs in as many as 50% of nonpalpable cancers. These microcalcifications are an especially important sign of cancer in younger women, in whom it may be the only mammographic abnormality. The clinical impetus for screening mammogra-phy came from the Health Insurance Plan study and the Breast Cancer Detection Demonstration Project, which demonstrated a 33% reduction in mortality for women after72 screening mam-mography. Mammography was more accurate than clinical examination for the detection of early breast cancers, providing a true-positive rate of 90%. Only 20% of women with nonpal-pable cancers had axillary lymph node metastases, compared with 50% of women with palpable cancers.141 Current guide-lines of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network suggest that normal-risk women ≥20 years of age should have a breast examination at least every 3 years. Starting at age 40 years, breast examinations should be performed yearly, and a yearly mammogram should be taken.142 Screening mammography in women ≥50 years of age has been noted to reduce breast cancer mortality by 20% to 25%.72,79 With the increased discussion about the potential harms associated with breast screening, the United Kingdom recently established an independent expert panel to review the published literature and estimate the ben-efits and harms associated with its national screening program for women age >50 years. The panel estimated that in women invited to screening, about 11% of the cancers diagnosed in their lifetime constitute overdiagnosis. Despite this overdiagno-sis, the panel concluded that breast screening programs confer significant benefit and should continue. The use of screening mammography in women <50 years of age is more controversial for previously noted reasons: (a) reduced sensitivity, (b) reduced specificity, and (c) lower incidence of breast cancer. Because of the combination of these three reasons, targeting mammography screening to women <50 years of age, who are at higher risk of breast cancer, improves the balance of risks and benefits and is the approach some health care systems have taken. There are now a number of risk assessment models—as described earlier in this chapter—that can be used to estimate a younger woman’s risk of developing breast cancer and that help assess the risks and benefits of regular screening.Screen film mammography has replaced xeromam-mography because it requires a lower dose of radiation and provides similar image quality. Digital mammography was developed to allow the observer to manipulate the degree of contrast in the image. This is especially useful in women with dense breasts and women <50 years of age. Recently, investigators directly compared digital vs. screen film mam-mography in a prospective (DMIST) trial that enrolled over 42,000 women.143 The investigators found that digital and screen film mammography had similar accuracy; however, digital mammography was more accurate in women <50 years of age, women with mammographically dense breasts, and premenopausal or perimenopausal women. The use of digital breast tomosynthesis with 3D images has been introduced as an alternative to standard 2D mammography imaging that is limited by superimposition of breast parenchyma and breast density.144,145 The STORM trial reported that in 7,292 women screened, 3D mammography had a higher cancer detection  rate and fewer false-positive recalls than the standard 2D imaging.146,147 Randomized controlled trials are planned to fur-ther study tomosynthesis and its role in breast cancer screen-ing. Standard two-dimensional mammography has limitations, Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   57001/03/19   5:04 PM 571THE BREASTCHAPTER 17such as the parenchymal density or superimposition of breast tissue, which obscures cancers or causes normal structures to appear suspicious reducing the sensitivity of mammography and increasing the false-positive rates. Digital breast tomo-synthesis is a technology developed to assist with overcom-ing these limitations. In digital breast tomosynthesis, multiple projection images are reconstructed to allow visual review of thin breast sections, each reconstructed slice as thin as 0.5 mm, which provides better characterization of noncalcified lesions. These multiple projection exposures are obtained by a digi-tal detector from a mammography X-ray source that moves through a limited arc angle while the breast is compressed. Then these projection image data sets are reconstructed using specific algorithms, which provide the clinical reader a series of images through the entire breast.148In 2011, tomosynthesis was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to be used in combination with standard digital mammography for breast cancer screening. The total radiation dose when tomosynthesis is added is about twice the current dose of digital mammography alone but remains below the limits set by the FDA.149The STORM-2 trial reported that synthetic 2D-3D mammography yields similar breast cancer detection as dual-acquisition 2D-3D mammography with the advantage of reduc-ing radiation exposure.150Contrast-enhanced digital mammography (CEDM) was also approved by the FDA in 2001, which utilizes an iodinated contrast material and modified digital mammography units for imaging.148 CEDM has been shown to be feasible and detects breast cancers at a rate similar to MRI, which has potential to offer an alternative to MRI.151 The advantages of CEDM over MRI are that the use of compression limits motion, there is decrease in cost, decrease in exam time, and there is an option for patients who are unable to tolerate MRI or who due to vari-ous reasons cannot have MRI due to incompatibility, such as the presence of a pacemaker or tissue expanders.148,152Ductography. The primary indication for ductography is nipple discharge, particularly when the fluid contains blood. Radiopaque contrast media is injected into one or more of the major ducts, and mammography is performed. A duct is gen-tly enlarged with a dilator, and then a small, blunt cannula is inserted under sterile conditions into the nipple ampulla. With the patient in a supine position, 0.1 to 0.2 mL of dilute con-trast media is injected, and CC and MLO mammographic views are obtained without compression. Intraductal papillomas are seen as small filling defects surrounded by contrast media (Fig. 17-22). Cancers may appear as irregular masses or as mul-tiple intraluminal filling defects.Ultrasonography. Second only to mammography in fre-quency of use for breast imaging, ultrasonography is an impor-tant method of resolving equivocal mammographic findings, defining cystic masses, and demonstrating the echogenic qual-ities of specific solid abnormalities. On ultrasound examina-tion, breast cysts are well circumscribed, with smooth margins and an echo-free center (Fig. 17-23). Benign breast masses usually show smooth contours, round or oval shapes, weak internal echoes, and well-defined anterior and posterior mar-gins (Fig. 17-24). Breast cancer characteristically has irregular walls (Fig. 17-25) but may have smooth margins with acous-tic enhancement. Ultrasonography is used to guide fine-needle aspiration biopsy, core-needle biopsy, and needle localization ABFigure 17-22. Ductogram. Craniocaudal (A) and mediolateral oblique (B) mammographic views demonstrate a mass (arrows) posterior to the nipple and outlined by contrast, which also fills the proximal ductal structures. (Used with permission from B. Steinbach.)of breast lesions. Its findings are highly reproducible, and it has a high patient acceptance rate, but it does not reliably detect lesions that are ≤1 cm in diameter. Ultrasonography can also be utilized to image the regional lymph nodes in patients with breast cancer (Fig. 17-26). The sensitivity of examination for the status of axillary nodes ranges from 35% to 82% and specificity ranges from 73% to 97%. The features of a lymph node involved with cancer include cortical thickening, change in shape of the node to more circular appearance, size larger Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   57101/03/19   5:05 PM 572SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIABFigure 17-24. Ultrasonography images of benign breast tumors. A. Fibroadenoma. B. Intraductal papilloma (see arrow). (Used with permission from Dr. Anne Turnbull, Consultant Radiologist/Director of Breast Screening, Royal Derby Hospital, Derby, UK.)ABCFigure 17-23. Breast cyst. A. Simple cyst. Ultrasound image of the mass shows it to be anechoic with a well-defined back wall, characteristic of a cyst. B. Complex solid and cystic mass.  C. Complex solid and cystic mass characteristic of intracystic papillary tumor. (Used with permission from Dr. Anne Turnbull, Consultant Radiologist/Director of Breast Screening, Royal Derby Hospital, Derby, UK.)than 10 mm, absence of a fatty hilum and hypoechoic internal echoes.153Magnetic Resonance Imaging. In the process of evaluating magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) as a means of character-izing mammographic abnormalities, additional breast lesions have been detected. However, in the circumstance of negative findings on both mammography and physical examination, the probability of a breast cancer being diagnosed by MRI is extremely low. There is current interest in the use of MRI to screen the breasts of high-risk women and of women with a newly diagnosed breast cancer. In the first case, women who have a strong family history of breast cancer or who carry known genetic mutations require screening at an early age because mammographic evaluation is limited due to the increased breast density in younger women. In the second case, an MRI study of the contralateral breast in women with a known breast cancer has shown a contralateral breast cancer in 5.7% of these women (Fig. 17-27). MRI can also detect additional tumors in the index breast (multifocal or multicen-tric disease) that may be missed on routine breast imaging and this may alter surgical decision making (Fig. 17-28). In fact, MRI has been advocated by some for routine use in surgical treatment planning based on the fact that additional disease can be identified with this advanced imaging modality and the Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   57201/03/19   5:05 PM 573THE BREASTCHAPTER 17Figure 17-25. Ultrasonography images of malignant breast lesions. A. 25 mm irregular mass. B. Ultrasound 30 mm mass anterior to an implant. C. Ultrasound breast cancer with calcification. D. Ultrasound shows a 9 mm spiculated mass (see arrow) with attenuation. (Used with permission from Dr. Anne Turnbull, Consultant Radiologist/Director of Breast Screening, Royal Derby Hospital, Derby, UK.)extent of disease may be more accurately assessed. A random-ized trial performed in the United Kingdom (COMICE trial) that enrolled 1623 women did not show a decrease in rates of reoperation in those women randomized to undergo MRI in addition to mammography and ultrasonography (19%) com-pared to those undergoing standard breast imaging without MRI (19%).154 Houssami and colleagues performed a meta-analysis including two randomized trials and seven compara-tive cohort studies to examine the effect of preoperative MRI compared to standard preoperative evaluation on surgical out-comes.155 They reported that the use of MRI was associated with increased mastectomy rates. This is problematic because there is no evidence that the additional disease detected by MRI is of clinical or biologic significance, particularly in light of the low local-regional failure rates currently reported in patients undergoing breast conserving surgery who receive whole breast irradiation and systemic therapies. There is an ongoing trial in the Alliance for Clinical Trials in Oncology that is randomizing patients to preoperative MRI vs. standard imaging to assess the impact of MRI on local regional recur-rence rates in patients with triple receptor negative and HER2 positive breast cancers.The use of dedicated breast coils is mandatory in the MRI imaging of the breast. A BIRADS lexicon is assigned to each examination and an abnormality noted on MRI that is not seen on mammography requires a focused ultrasound examination for further assessment. If the abnormality is not seen on corre-sponding mammogram or ultrasound, then MRI-guided biopsy is necessary. Some clinical scenarios where MRI may be use-ful include the evaluation of a patient who presents with nodal metastasis from breast cancer without an identifiable primary tumor; to assess response to therapy in the setting of neoadjuvant ABCDBrunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   57301/03/19   5:05 PM 574SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 17-26. Ultrasonography images of lymph nodes. A. Nor-mal axillary lymph node (see arrows). B. Indeterminate axillary lymph node. C. Malignant appearing axillary lymph node. (Used with permission from Dr. Anne Turnbull, Consultant Radiologist/Director of Breast Screening, Royal Derby Hospital, Derby, UK.)ABCsystemic treatment; to select patients for partial breast irradia-tion techniques; and evaluation of the treated breast for tumor recurrence.Breast BiopsyNonpalpable Lesions. Image-guided breast biopsy specimens are frequently required to diagnose nonpalpable lesions.156 Ultrasound localization techniques are used when a mass is present, whereas stereotactic techniques are used when no mass is present (microcalcifications or architectural distortion only). The combination of diagnostic mammography, ultrasound or stereotactic localization, and fine-needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy achieves almost 100% accuracy in the preoperative diag-nosis of breast cancer. However, although FNA biopsy permits cytologic evaluation, core-needle permits the analysis of breast tissue architecture and allows the pathologist to determine whether invasive cancer is present. This permits the surgeon and patient to discuss the specific management of a breast cancer before therapy begins. Core-needle biopsy is preferred over open biopsy for nonpalpable breast lesions because a single sur-gical procedure can be planned based on the results of the core biopsy. The advantages of core-needle biopsy include a low complication rate, minimal scarring, and a lower cost compared with excisional breast biopsy.Palpable Lesions. FNA or core biopsy of a palpable breast mass can usually be performed in an outpatient setting.157 A 1.5-in,  22-gauge needle attached to a 10-mL syringe or a 14-gauge core biopsy needle is used. For FNA, use of a syringe holder 7Figure 17-27. MRI examination revealing contralateral breast cancer (see arrows) in a patient diag-nosed with unilateral breast cancer on mammography (two arrows). (Used with permission from Dr. Anne Turnbull, Consultant Radiologist/Director of Breast Screening, Royal Derby Hospital, Derby, UK.)Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   57401/03/19   5:05 PM 575THE BREASTCHAPTER 17enables the surgeon performing the FNA biopsy to control the syringe and needle with one hand while positioning the breast mass with the opposite hand. After the needle is placed in the mass, suction is applied while the needle is moved back and forth within the mass. Once cellular material is seen at the hub of the needle, the suction is released and the needle is with-drawn. The cellular material is then expressed onto microscope slides. Both air-dried and 95% ethanol–fixed microscopic sec-tions are prepared for analysis. When a breast mass is clinically and mammographically suspicious, the sensitivity and specific-ity of FNA biopsy approaches 100%. Core-needle biopsy of palpable breast masses is performed using a 14-gauge needle, such as the Tru-Cut needle. Automated devices also are avail-able. Vacuum-assisted core biopsy devices (with 8–10 gauge needles) are commonly utilized with image guidance where between 4 and 12 samples can be acquired at different posi-tions within a mass, area of architectural distortion or micro-calcifications. If the target lesion was microcalcifications, the specimen should be radiographed to confirm appropriate sam-pling. A radiopaque marker should be placed at the site of the biopsy to mark the area for future intervention. In some cases the entire lesion is removed with the biopsy technique and clip placement allows for accurate targeting of the site for surgi-cal resection. Tissue specimens are placed in formalin and then processed to paraffin blocks. Although the false-negative rate for core-needle biopsy specimens is very low, a tissue speci-men that does not show breast cancer cannot conclusively rule out that diagnosis because a sampling error may have occurred. The clinical, radiographic, and pathologic findings should be in concordance. If the biopsy findings do not concur with the clinical and radiographic findings, the multidisciplinary team (including clinician, radiologist, and pathologist) should review the findings and decide whether or not to recommend an image-guided or open biopsy to be certain that the target lesion has been adequately sampled for diagnosis.BREAST CANCER STAGING AND BIOMARKERSBreast Cancer StagingThe clinical stage of breast cancer is determined primarily through physical examination of the skin, breast tissue, and regional lymph nodes (axillary, supraclavicular, and internal mammary).158 However, clinical determination of axillary lymph node metastases has an accuracy of only 33%. Ultrasound (US) is more sensitive than physical examination alone in determining axillary lymph node involvement during preliminary staging of breast carcinoma. FNA or core biopsy of sonographically inde-terminate or suspicious lymph nodes can provide a more defini-tive diagnosis than US alone.153,159 Pathologic stage combines the findings from pathologic examination of the resected pri-mary breast cancer and axillary or other regional lymph nodes. Fisher and colleagues found that accurate predictions regarding the occurrence of distant metastases were possible after resec-tion and pathologic analysis of 10 or more levels I and II axillary lymph nodes.160 A frequently used staging system is the TNM (tumor, nodes, and metastasis) system. The American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) has recently modified the TNM system for breast cancer to include both anatomic and biologic factors161 (Tables 17-10 and 17-11). Koscielny and colleagues demonstrated that tumor size correlates with the presence of axillary lymph node metastases (see Fig. 17-14B). Others have shown an association between tumor size, axillary lymph node metastases, and disease-free survival. One of the most important predictors of 10and 20-year survival rates in breast cancer is the number of axillary lymph nodes involved with metastatic disease. Routine biopsy of internal mammary lymph nodes is not generally performed; however, it has been reported that in the context of a “triple node” biopsy approach either the internal  mammary node or a low axillary node when positive alone carried the same prognostic weight. When both nodes were positive, the prognosis declined to the level associated with apical node positivity. A double node biopsy of the low axil-lary node and either the apical or the internal mammary node gave the same maximum prognostic information as a triple node biopsy.162 With the advent of sentinel lymph node dissection and the use of preoperative lymphoscintigraphy for localization of the sentinel nodes, surgeons have again begun to biopsy the internal mammary nodes but in a more targeted manner. The 8th edition of the AJCC staging system does allow for staging based on findings from the internal mammary sentinel nodes.163 Drainage to the internal mammary nodes is more frequent with central and medial quadrant cancers. Clinical or pathologic evi-dence of metastatic spread to supraclavicular lymph nodes is no longer considered stage IV disease, but routine scalene or supraclavicular lymph node biopsy is not indicated.BiomarkersBreast cancer biomarkers are of several types. Risk factor biomarkers are those associated with increased cancer risk.164-168 These include familial clustering and inherited germline abnormalities, proliferative breast disease with atypia, and mammographic density. Exposure biomarkers are a subset of risk factors that include measures of carcinogen exposure such as DNA adducts. Surrogate endpoint biomarkers are biologic alterations in tissue that occur between cancer initiation and development. These biomarkers are used as endpoints in short-term chemoprevention trials and include histologic changes, indices of proliferation, and genetic alterations leading to cancer. Prognostic biomarkers provide information regarding Figure 17-28. MRI imaging of the breast reveal-ing multifocal tumors not detected with standard breast imaging. (Used with permission from Dr. Anne Turnbull, Consultant Radiologist/Director of Breast Screening, Royal Derby Hospital, Derby, UK.)Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   57501/03/19   5:05 PM 576SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 17-10TNM staging system for breast cancerPrimary tumor (T)The T classification of the primary tumor is the same regardless of whether it is based on clinical or pathologic criteria, or both. Size should be measured to the nearest millimeter. If the tumor size is slightly less than or greater than a cutoff for a given T classification, it is recommended that the size be rounded to the millimeter reading that is closest to the cutoff. For example, a reported size of 1.1 mm is reported as 1 mm, or a size of 2.01 cm is reported as 2.0 cm. Designation should be made with the subscript “c” or “p” modifier to indicate whether the T classification was determined by clinical (physical examination or radiologic) or pathologic measurements, respectively. In general, pathologic determination should take precedence over clinical determination of T size.TXT0Tis (DCIS)*Tis (Paget)T1 T1mi T1a T1b T1cT2T3T4 T4a T4b T4c T4dPrimary tumor cannot be assessedNo evidence of primary tumorDuctal carcinoma in situPaget disease of the nipple NOT associated with invasive carcinoma and/or carcinoma in situ (DCIS) in the underlying breast parenchyma. Carcinomas in the breast parenchyma associated with Paget disease are categorized based on the size and characteristics of the parenchymal disease, although the presence of Paget disease should still be noted.Tumor ≤20 mm in greatest dimensionTumor ≤1 mm in greatest dimensionTumor >1 mm but ≤5 mm in greatest dimension (round any measurement >l.0–1.9 mm to 2 mm).Tumor >5 mim but ≤10 mm in greatest dimensionTumor >10 mm but ≤20 mm in greatest dimensionTumor >20 mm but ≤50 mm in greatest dimensionTumor >50 mm in greatest dimensionTumor of any size with direct extension to the chest wall and/or to the skin (ulceration or macroscopic nodules); invasion of the dermis alone does not qualify as T4Extension to the chest wall; invasion or adherence to pectoralis muscle in the absence of invasion of chest wall structures does not qualify as T4Ulceration and/or ipsilateral macroscopic satellite nodules and/or edema (including peau d’orange) of the skin that does not meet the criteria for inflammatory carcinomaBoth T4a and T4b are presentInflammatory carcinoma (see section “Rules for Classification”)*Note: Lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS) is a benign entity and is removed from TNM staging in the AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, 8th edition.Regional lymph nodes—Clinical (N)cNX*cN0cN1 cN1mi**cN2 cN2a cN2bcN3 cN3a cN3b cN3cRegional lymph nodes cannot be assessed (e.g., previously removed)No regional lymph node metastases (by imaging or clinical examination)Metastases to movable ipsilateral Level I, II axillary lymph node(s)Micrometastases (approximately 200 cells, larger than 0.2 mm, but none larger than 2.0 mm)Metastases in ipsilateral Level I, II axillary lymph nodes that are clinically fixed or matted;or in ipsilateral internal mammary nodes in the absence of axillary lymph node metastasesMetastases in ipsilateral Level I, II axillary lymph nodes fixed to one another (matted) or to other structuresMetastases only in ipsilateral internal mammary nodes in the absence of axillary lymph node metastasesMetastases in ipsilateral infraclavicular (Level III axillary) lymph node(s) with or without Level I, II axillary lymph node involvement;or in ipsilateral internal mammary lymph node(s) with Level I, II axillary lymph node metastases;or metastases in ipsilateral supraclavicular lymph node(s) with or without axillary or internal mammary lymph node involvementMetastases in ipsilateral infraclavicular lymph node(s)Metastases in ipsilateral internal mammary lymph node(s) and axillary lymph node(s)Metastases in ipsilateral supraclavicular lymph node(s)Note: (sn) and (f) suffixes should be added to the N category to denote confirmation of metastasis by sentinel node biopsy or fine needle aspiration/core needle biopsy respectively.*the cNX category is used sparingly in cases where regional lymph nodes have previously been surgically removed or where there is no documentation of physical examination of the axilla.**cN1mi is rarely used but may be appropriate in cases where sentinel node biopsy is performed before tumor resection, most likely to occur in cases treated with neoadjuvant therapy.(Continued)Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   57601/03/19   5:05 PM 577THE BREASTCHAPTER 17Table 17-10TNM staging system for breast cancerRegional lymph nodes—Pathologic (pN)pNXpN0 pN0(i+) pN0(mol+)pN1 pN1mi pN1a pN1b pN1cRegional lymph nodes cannot be assessed (e.g., not removed for pathological study or previously removed)No regional lymph node metastasis identified or ITCs onlyITCs only (malignant cell clusters no larger than 0.2 mm) in regional lymph node(s)Positive molecular findings by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR); no ITCs detectedMicrometastases; or metastases in 1–3 axillary lymph nodes; and/or clinically negative internal mammary nodes with micrometastases or macrometastases by sentinel lymph node biopsyMicrometastases (approximately 200 cells, larger than 0.2 mm, but none larger than 2.0 mm)Metastases in 1–3 axillary lymph nodes, at least one metastasis larger than 2.0 mmMetastases in ipsilateral internal mammary sentinel nodes, excluding ITCspN1a and pNlb combinedpN2 pN2a pN2bpN3 pN3a pN3b pN3cMetastases in 4–9 axillary lymph nodes; or positive ipsilateral internal mammary lymph nodes by imaging in the absence of axillary lymph node metastasesMetastases in 4–9 axillary lymph nodes (at least one tumor deposit larger than 2.0 mm)Metastases in clinically detected internal mammary lymph nodes with or without microscopic confirmation; with pathologically negative axillary nodesMetastases in 10 or more axillary lymph nodes;or in infraclavicular (Level III axillary) lymph nodes;or positive ipsilateral internal mammary lymph nodes by imaging in the presence of one or more positive  Level I, II axillary lymph nodes; or in more than three axillary lymph nodes and micrometastases or macrometastases by sentinel lymph node biopsy in clinically negative ipsilateral internal mammary lymph nodes; or in ipsilateral supraclavicular lymph nodesMetastases in 10 or more axillary lymph nodes (at least one tumor deposit larger than 2.0 mm); or metastases to the infraclavicular (Level III axillary lymph) nodespNla or pN2a in the presence of cN2b (positive internal mammary nodes by imaging); or pN2a in the presence of pNlbMetastases in ipsilateral supraclavicular lymph nodesNote: (sn) and (f) suffixes should be added to the N category to denote confirmation of metastasis by sentinel node biopsy or FNA/core needle biopsy respectively, with NO further resection of nodes.Distant metastasis (M)M0 cM0(i+)cM1pM1No clinical or radiographic evidence of distant metastases*No clinical or radiographic evidence of distant metastases in the presence of tumor cells or deposits no larger than 0.2 mm detected microscopically or by molecular techniques in circulating blood, bone marrow, or other nonregional nodal tissue in a patient without symptoms or signs of metastasesDistant metastases detected by clinical and radiographic meansAny histologically proven metastases in distant organs; or if in non-regional nodes, metastases greater than  0.2 mmUsed with the permission of the American College of Surgeons. Amin MB, Edge SB, Greene FL, et al. (Eds.) AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, 8th Ed. Springer New York, 2017.(Continued)cancer outcome irrespective of therapy, whereas predictive bio-markers provide information regarding response to therapy.169 Candidate prognostic and predictive biomarkers and biologic targets for breast cancer include (a) the steroid hormone recep-tor pathway; (b) growth factors and growth factor receptors such as human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)/neu, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), transforming growth factor, platelet-derived growth factor, and the insulin-like growth factor family; (c) indices of proliferation such as proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) and Ki-67; (d) indi-ces of angiogenesis such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and the angiogenesis index; (e) the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling pathway; (f) tumor-suppressor genes such as p53; (g) the cell cycle, cyclins, and cyclin-depen-dent kinases; (h) the proteasome; (i) the COX-2 enzyme; (j) the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs); and (k) indices of apoptosis and apoptosis modulators such as bcl-2 and the bax:bcl-2 ratio.Steroid Hormone Receptor Pathway. Hormones play an important role in the development and progression of breast cancer. Estrogens, estrogen metabolites, and other steroid hor-mones such as progesterone all have been shown to have an effect. Breast cancer risk is related to estrogen exposure over time. In postmenopausal women, hormone replacement therapy consisting of estrogen plus progesterone increases the risk of breast cancer by 26% compared to placebo.70 Patients with hor-mone receptor-positive tumors survive two to three times longer after a diagnosis of metastatic disease than do patients with hor-mone receptor-negative tumors. Patients with tumors negative for both estrogen receptors and progesterone receptors are not considered candidates for hormonal therapy. Tumors positive Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   57701/03/19   5:05 PM 578SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 17-11TNM stage groupingsWhen T is...And N is...And M is...Then the stage group is...TisN0M00T1N0M0IAT0N1miM0IBT1N1miM0IBT0N1M0IIAT1N1M0IIAT2N0M0IIAT2N1M0IIBT3N0M0IIBT0N2M0IIIAT1N2M0IIIAT2N2M0IIIAT3N1M0IIIAT3N2M0IIIAT4N0M0IIIBT4N1M0IIIBT4N2M0IIIBAny TN3M0IIICAny TAny NM1IVNotes:1. T1 includes Tl mi.2. T0 and T1 tumors with nodal micrometastases (N1mi) are staged as Stage IB.3. T2, T3, and T4 tumors with nodal micrometastases (N1mi) are staged using the N1 category.4. M0 includes M0(i+).5. The designation pM0 is not valid; any M0 is clinical.6. If a patient presents with M1 disease prior to neoadjuvant systemic therapy, the stage is Stage IV and remains Stage IV regardless of response to neoadjuvant therapy.7. Stage designation may be changed if postsurgical imaging studies reveal the presence of distant metastases, provided the studies are per-formed within 4 months of diagnosis in the absence of disease progres-sion, and provided the patient has not received neoadjuvant therapy.8. Staging following neoadjuvant therapy is denoted with a “yc” or “yp” prefix to the T and N classification. There is no anatomic stage group assigned if there is a complete pathological response (pCR) to neoad-juvant therapy, for example, ypT0ypN0cM0.Used with the permission of the American College of Surgeons. Amin MB, Edge SB, Greene FL, et al. (Eds.) AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, 8th Ed. Springer New York, 2017.for estrogen or progesterone receptors have a higher response rate to endocrine therapy than tumors that do not express estro-gen or progesterone receptors. The determination of estrogen and progesterone receptor status used to require biochemical evaluation of fresh tumor tissue. Today, however, estrogen and progesterone receptor status can be measured in archived tis-sue using immunohistochemical techniques. Hormone receptor status also can be measured in specimens obtained with fine-needle aspiration biopsy or core-needle biopsy, and this can help guide treatment planning. Testing for estrogen and progesterone receptors should be performed on all primary invasive breast cancer specimens. The tumor hormone receptor status should be ascertained for both premenopausal and postmenopausal patients to identify patients who are most likely to benefit from endocrine therapy.Growth Factor Receptors and Growth Factors. Overexpres-sion of EGFR in breast cancer correlates with estrogen recep-tor–negative status and with p53 overexpression.170-172 Similarly, increased immunohistochemical membrane staining for the HER2 growth factor receptor in breast cancer is associated with mutated TP53, Ki67 overexpression, and estrogen receptor–negative status. HER2 is a member of the ErbB family of growth factor receptors in which ligand binding results in recep-tor homodimerization and tyrosine phosphorylation by tyrosine kinase domains within the receptor. Tyrosine phosphorylation is followed by signal transduction, which results in changes in cell behavior. An important property of this family of receptors is that ligand binding to one receptor type also may result in heterodimerization between two different receptor types that are coexpressed; this leads to transphosphorylation and transactiva-tion of both receptors in the complex (transmodulation). In this context, the lack of a specific ligand for the HER2/neu receptor suggests that HER2/neu may function solely as a co-receptor, modulating signaling by other EGFR family members. HER2/neu is both an important prognostic factor and a predictive fac-tor in breast cancer.173 When overexpressed in breast cancer, HER2/neu promotes enhanced growth and proliferation, and increases invasive and metastatic capabilities. Clinical studies have shown that patients with HER2/neu–overexpressing breast cancer have poorly differentiated tumors with high prolifera-tion rates, positive lymph nodes, decreased hormone receptor expression, and an increased risk of recurrence and death due to breast cancer.173-177 Routine testing of the primary tumor specimen for HER2/neu expression should be performed on all invasive breast cancers. This can be done with immunohis-tochemical analysis to evaluate for overexpression of the cell-surface receptor at the protein level or by using fluorescence in situ hybridization to evaluate for gene amplification. While HER2/ERBB2 activation can also be assessed based on mRNA expression and reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) (Oncotype Dx, Genomic Health), this approach is not recommended for clinical decision-making because of the high false negative rate.178 Patients whose tumors show HER2 ampli-fication or HER2/neu protein overexpression are candidates for anti-HER2/neu therapy. Trastuzumab (Herceptin) is a recombi-nant humanized monoclonal antibody directed against HER2. Randomized clinical trials have demonstrated that single-agent trastuzumab therapy is well tolerated and active in the treatment of women with HER2/neu–overexpressing metastatic breast cancer.179 Subsequent adjuvant trials demonstrated that trastu-zumab also was highly effective in the treatment of women with early-stage breast cancer when used in combination with che-motherapy.180-182 Patients who received trastuzumab in combina-tion with chemotherapy had between a 40% and 50% reduction in the risk of breast cancer recurrence and approximately a one-third reduction in breast cancer mortality compared with those who received chemotherapy alone.181,183-185Indices of Proliferation. PCNA is a nuclear protein asso-ciated with a DNA polymerase whose expression increases in phase G1 of the cell cycle, reaches its maximum at the G1/S inter-face, and then decreases through G2.186-189 Immunohistochemical staining for PCNA outlines the proliferating compartments in Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   57801/03/19   5:05 PM 579THE BREASTCHAPTER 17breast tissue. Good correlation is noted between PCNA expres-sion and (a) cell-cycle distributions seen on flow cytometry based on DNA content, and (b) uptake of bromodeoxyuridine and the proliferation-associated Ki67 antigen. Individual prolif-eration markers are associated with slightly different phases of the cell cycle and are not equivalent. PCNA and Ki67 expression are positively correlated with p53 overexpression, high S-phase fraction, aneuploidy, high mitotic index, and high histologic grade in human breast cancer specimens, and are negatively cor-related with estrogen receptor content. Ki67 was included with three other widely measured breast cancer markers (ER, PR, and HER2) into a panel of four immunohistochemical makers (IHC4), which together provided similar prognostic informa-tion to that in the 21 Gene Recurrence Score (Oncotype DX, Genomic Health).190 While there has been significant interest in using Ki67 as a biomarker, and while the IHC4 panel would be much less expensive than the 21 Gene Recurrence Score, there remain issues regarding reproducibility across laboratories.Indices of Angiogenesis. Angiogenesis is necessary for the growth and invasiveness of breast cancer and promotes cancer progression through several different mechanisms, including delivery of oxygen and nutrients and the secretion of growth-promoting cytokines by endothelial cells.191,192 VEGF induces its effect by binding to transmembrane tyrosine kinase recep-tors. Overexpression of VEGF in invasive breast cancer is cor-related with increased microvessel density and recurrence in node-negative breast cancer. An angiogenesis index has been developed in which microvessel density (CD31 expression) is combined with expression of thrombospondin (a negative modulator of angiogenesis) and p53 expression. Both VEGF expression and the angiogenesis index may have prognostic and predictive significance in breast cancer.193 Bevacizumab (a monoclonal antibody to VEGF) was approved by the FDA for use in metastatic breast cancer in combination with pacli-taxel chemotherapy. This approval was based on results from a phase 3 trial by the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group. The group’s E2100 trial showed that when bevacizumab was added to paclitaxel chemotherapy, median progression-free survival increased to 11.3 months from the 5.8 months seen in patients who received paclitaxel alone.194 The results were not repro-duced in other trials, and the indication for the drug was revoked by the FDA in 2011.Indices of Apoptosis. Alterations in programmed cell death (apoptosis), which may be triggered by p53-dependent or p53-independent factors, may be important prognostic and pre-dictive biomarkers in breast cancer.195-197 Bcl-2 family proteins appear to regulate a step in the evolutionarily conserved pathway for apoptosis, with some members functioning as inhibitors of apoptosis and others as promoters of apoptosis. Bcl-2 is the only oncogene that acts by inhibiting apoptosis rather than by directly increasing cellular proliferation. The death-signal protein bax is induced by genotoxic stress and growth factor deprivation in the presence of wild-type (normal) p53 and/or AP-1/fos.  The bax to bcl-2 ratio and the resulting formation of either bax-baxhomodimers, which stimulate apoptosis, or bax–bcl-2 het-erodimers, which inhibit apoptosis, represent an intracellular regulatory mechanism with prognostic and predictive implica-tions. In breast cancer, overexpression of bcl-2 and a decrease in the bax to bcl-2 ratio correlate with high histologic grade, the presence of axillary lymph node metastases, and reduced disease-free and overall survival rates. Similarly, decreased bax expression correlates with axillary lymph node metastases, a poor response to chemotherapy, and decreased overall survival.The remaining biomarkers and biologic targets listed ear-lier are still in preclinical testing, and clinical trials are evaluat-ing their importance in breast cancer for both prognostic and predictive purposes.Coexpression of Biomarkers. Selection of optimal therapy for breast cancer requires both an accurate assessment of prog-nosis and an accurate prediction of response to therapy. The breast cancer markers that are most important in determining therapy are estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, and HER2/neu. Clinicians evaluate clinical and pathologic staging and the expression of estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, and HER2/neu in the primary tumor to assess prognosis and assign therapy. Adjuvant! Online (http://www.adjuvantonline.com) is one of a number of programs available to clinicians that incor-porates clinical and pathologic factors for an individual patient and calculates risk of recurrence and death due to breast cancer and then provides an assessment of the reduction in risk of recurrence that would be expected with the use of combination chemotherapy, endocrine therapy, or both of these. Adjuvant! Online was developed using information from the SEER data-base, the EBCTCG overview analyses, and results from other individual published trials.198 The website is updated and modi-fied as new information becomes available. Clinicopathologic factors are used to separate breast cancer patients into broad prognostic groups, and treatment decisions are made on this basis (Table 17-12). Other indices and programs that are vali-dated and used include the Nottingham Prognostic Index, and PREDICT.199-201 When an approach, which combines prognostic factors is used, up to 70% of early breast cancer patients receive adjuvant chemotherapy that is either unnecessary or ineffective. As described earlier, a wide variety of biomarkers have been shown to individually predict prognosis and response to therapy, but they do not improve the accuracy of either the assessment of prognosis or the prediction of response to therapy.As knowledge regarding cellular, biochemical, and molec-ular biomarkers for breast cancer have improved, prognostic indices have been developed that combine the predictive power Table 17-12Traditional prognostic and predictive factors for invasive breast cancerTUMOR FACTORSHOST FACTORSNodal statusAgeTumor sizeMenopausal statusHistologic/nuclear gradeFamily historyLymphatic/vascular invasionPrevious breast cancerPathologic stageImmunosuppressionHormone receptor statusNutritionDNA content (ploidy, S-phase fraction)Prior chemotherapyExtent of intraductal componentPrior radiation therapyHER2/neu expression Modified with permission from Ellis N: Inherited Cancer Syndromes. New York, NY: Springer-Verlag; 2004.Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   57901/03/19   5:05 PM 580SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 17-13Diagnostic studies for breast cancer patients CANCER STAGE 0IIIIIIIVHistory & physicalXXXXXComplete blood count, platelet count  XXXLiver function tests and alkaline phosphatase level  XXXChest radiograph  XXXBilateral diagnostic mammograms, ultrasound as indicatedXXXXXHormone receptor statusXXXXXHER2/neu expression XXXXBone scan   XXAbdominal (without or without pelvis) computed tomographic scan or ultrasound or magnetic resonance imaging   XXAbdominal imaging and bone scanning are indicated for evaluation of symptoms or abnormal laboratory test results at any presenting stage.Data from NCCN Practice Guidelines in Oncology. Fort Washington, PA: National Comprehensive Cancer Network, 2006.of several individual biomarkers with the relevant clinicopatho-logic factors.Recent technological advances have enabled implemen-tation of high throughput gene expression assays in clinical practice.202 These assays enable detailed stratification of breast cancer patients for assessment of prognosis and for predic-tion of response to therapy. The Oncotype DX is a 21-gene RT-PCR–based assay that has been approved for use in newly diagnosed patients with node-negative, ER-positive breast cancer.203 A recurrence score is generated, and those patients with high recurrence scores are likely to benefit from che-motherapy, whereas those with low recurrence scores benefit most from endocrine therapy and may not require chemother-apy. Results from the Trial Assessing Individualized Options for Treatment for breast cancer (TAILORx), designed to pro-spectively validate the use of 21-gene expression assay, have shown that patients with low recurrence score (0 to 10) have a low rate of local-regional and distant recurrence (98.7%) and very good overall survival at 5 years (98%) with endocrine therapy alone without chemotherapy.204 This study has ran-domly assigned patients with an intermediate recurrence score (11 to 25) to endocrine therapy alone or to chemotherapy fol-lowed by endocrine therapy.Additionally, retrospective analysis has shown that the 21-gene recurrence score can be used in postmenopausal patients with ER-positive tumors and 1 to 3 involved axillary lymph nodes to predict the benefit of chemotherapy in addition to endocrine therapy.205 Knowledge of the recurrence score has been shown to alter treatment recommendations by oncologists, and patients likewise change their decision to undergo treatment based on the risk of recurrence.206 The MammaPrint assay uses a 70-gene expression profile to assess the risk of distant metas-tasis. Mammaprint is FDA approved for use in stage-1 or stage-2, node negative, ER-positive or ER-negative breast cancers to identify patients with high or low risk of recurrence. Although fresh tissue was initially required to perform the assay, it has since been adapted for use in paraffin-embedded tissue sam-ples. The prospective RASTER study reported that patients classified as low risk based on MammaPrint had a 97% distant recurrence-free interval at five years.207 Results of the prospec-tive MINDACT (MicroarrayInNode negative and 1–3 positive lymph node Disease may Avoid ChemoTherapy) trial were recently reported.208 The study was designed to assess whether the 70-gene expression assay would help avoid chemotherapy in patients who are considered clinically high risk but categorized as low genomic risk based on the assay. A 5-year rate of distant metastasis-free survival of more than 92% was identified as the cutoff for the benefit of chemotherapy. At 5 years, the rate of survival without distant metastasis in patients with high clinical risk and low genomic risk was 94.7%, meeting the criteria for noninferiority. However, the rate of disease-free survival and overall survival was higher with chemotherapy in the intention to treat population.OVERVIEW OF BREAST CANCER THERAPYBefore diagnostic biopsy, the surgeon must consider the possi-bility that a suspicious mass or mammographic finding may be a breast cancer. Once a diagnosis of breast cancer is made, the type of therapy offered to a breast cancer patient is determined by the stage of the disease, the biologic subtype, and the general health status of the individual. Laboratory tests and imaging studies are performed based on the initial stage as presented in Table 17-13. Before therapy is initiated, the patient and the sur-geon must share a clear perspective on the planned course of treatment. Before initiating local therapy, the surgeon should determine the clinical stage,  histologic characteristics, and appropriate biomarker levels.In Situ Breast Cancer (Stage 0)Both LCIS and DCIS may be difficult to distinguish from atypical hyperplasia or from cancers with early invasion.60,209-214 Expert pathologic review is required in all cases. Bilateral mammography is performed to determine the extent of the in situ cancer and to exclude a second cancer. Because LCIS is considered a marker for increased risk rather than an inevitable precursor of invasive disease, the current treatment options for LCIS include observation, chemoprevention, and bilateral total mastectomy. The goal of treatment is to prevent or detect at an early stage the invasive cancer that subsequently develops in 25% to 35% of these women. There is no benefit to excis-ing LCIS because the disease diffusely involves both breasts in many cases and the risk of developing invasive cancer is equal for both breasts. The use of tamoxifen as a risk-reduction strat-egy should be considered in women with a diagnosis of LCIS.Women with DCIS and evidence of extensive disease (>4 cm of disease or disease in more than one quadrant) usu-ally require mastectomy (Fig. 17-29). For women with lim-ited disease, lumpectomy and radiation therapy are generally recommended. For nonpalpable DCIS, needle localization or other image-guided techniques are used to guide the surgical resection. Specimen mammography is performed to ensure that all visible evidence of cancer is excised. Adjuvant tamoxi-fen therapy is considered for DCIS patients with ER-positive 8Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   58001/03/19   5:05 PM 581THE BREASTCHAPTER 17ABFigure 17-29. Extensive DCIS seen on mammography. A. Exten-sive calcifications are seen throughout the breast on this cranial caudal view. B. Magnification view of calcifications. Due to the extent of the disease the patient is not a good candidate for breast conserving surgery. (Used with permission from Dr. Anne Turnbull, Consultant Radiologist/Director of Breast Screening, Royal Derby Hospital, Derby, UK.)disease. The gold standard against which breast conservation therapy for DCIS is evaluated is mastectomy. Women treated with mastectomy have local recurrence and mortality rates of <2%. There is no randomized trial comparing mastectomy vs. breast conserving surgery, and none of the randomized trials of breast-conserving surgery with or without radiotherapy for DCIS were powered to show a difference in mortality. Women treated with lumpectomy and adjuvant radiation therapy in the initial clinical trials were noted to have a local recurrence rate that is increased compared to mastectomy. About 45% of these recurrences will be invasive cancer when radiation therapy is not used. The B-17 trial was conducted by the NSABP to assess the need for radiation in patients treated with breast conserv-ing surgery for DCIS.215 Patients were randomly assigned to lumpectomy with radiation or lumpectomy alone, and after a mean follow-up time of 90 months rates of both ipsilateral noninvasive and invasive recurrences were significantly lower in patients who received radiation. However, in the B-17 trial the margins were not prospectively assessed, and it is estimated that up to half of the patients may have had tumor at the mar-gin of resection. The benefit of the addition of radiation over breast-conserving surgery alone for DCIS has also been dem-onstrated in several other randomized trials where margins were prospectively assessed including the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) protocol 10853;  the United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand DCIS Trial; and the Swedish Trial.209,216-218 In 2016, the Society of Surgi-cal Oncology (SSO), American Society for Radiation Oncol-ogy (ASTRO), and the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) established consensus guidelines on margins for patients with DCIS undergoing breast-conserving surgery.219 Based on a multidisciplinary consensus panel using a meta-analysis of margin width and ipsilateral breast tumor recur-rence, a 2-mm margin was determined as adequate width for DCIS for patients undergoing breast-conserving surgery with whole-breast radiation therapy.219Despite the data from randomized trials showing a benefit in all patient subgroups with the addition of radiation in DCIS, there has been an interest in trying to define a subset where radiation could be avoided in order to minimize the cost and inconvenience associated with radiation. In addition, there have been several studies published where patients were treated with excision alone and never developed invasive breast cancer even at 25 years of follow-up. Silverstein and colleagues were pro-ponents of avoiding radiation therapy in selected patients with DCIS who have widely negative margins after surgery.213 They reported that when greater than 10-mm margins were achieved, there was no additional benefit from radiation therapy. When margins were between 1 and 10 mm, there was a relative risk of local recurrence of 1.49, compared to 2.54 for those with margins less than 1 mm. These data suggested that appropri-ately selected patients with DCIS might not require postopera-tive radiation therapy.The Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) initi-ated a prospective registry trial (ECOG 5194) to identify those patients who could safely undergo breast-conserving surgery without radiation.222 Eligible patients were those with low or intermediate grade DCIS measuring 2.5 cm or less who had negative margins of at least 3 mm and those with high-grade DCIS who had tumors measuring 1 cm or less with a negative margin of at least 3 mm. At a median follow-up of 6.2 years, patients with low or intermediate grade DCIS had an in-breast Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   58101/03/19   5:05 PM 582SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIrecurrence rate of 6.1% while those with high-grade DCIS had a recurrence rate of 15.3%. Approximately 4% of patients developed a contralateral breast cancer during follow-up in both the low/intermediate and high-grade groups. This study identi-fied an acceptable recurrence rate for those patients with low or intermediate grade DCIS treated with excision alone with a margin of at least 3 mm. In contrast, patients with high-grade DCIS had an unacceptably high local recurrence rate.The Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) initi-ated the 9804 trial for patients with “good risk” DCIS and randomized them to lumpectomy vs. lumpectomy with whole breast irradiation. Eligible patients were those with unicentric, low or intermediate grade DCIS measuring 2.5 cm or less with a margin of 3 mm or greater. The trial was closed early due to slow accrual; however, the results for 585 patients were recently reported with a median follow-up of 6.46 years.223,224 The local recurrence rate at 5 years was 0.4% for patients ran-domized to receive radiation and 3.2% for those who did not receive radiation.Solin et al utilized samples from the ECOG 5194 trial to develop a quantitative multigene RT-PCR assay for predict-ing recurrence risk in patients with DCIS treated with surgery alone.201 They were able to define low, intermediate, and high risk groups using a DCIS Score. The DCIS Score was able to quantify the risk of recurrence in the breast for both DCIS and invasive events. This tool has recently been evaluated in another dataset and appears to be a promising tool for clinical use.225 When selecting therapy for patients with DCIS, one must con-sider clinical and pathologic factors, including tumor size, grade, mammographic appearance, and patient preference. There is no single correct surgical treatment, and many patients will require extensive counseling in order to make a decision regarding sur-gical therapy. The role of axillary staging in patients with DCIS is limited. One consideration is for patients undergoing mastec-tomy. Since most lesions are currently diagnosed with needle core biopsy, there is about a 20% incidence of invasive breast cancer on final pathologic assessment of the primary tumor. Since it is not feasible to perform sentinel node dissection after mastectomy, most surgeons will recommend the use of sentinel node dissection at the time of mastectomy for DCIS.Results from the NSABP B-24 trial reported a signifi-cant reduction in local recurrence after 5 years of tamoxifen in women with ER-positive DCIS. Based on this finding, some guidelines have advocated that all patients (women with ER-positive DCIS without contraindications to tamoxifen therapy) should be offered tamoxifen following surgery and radiation therapy for a duration of 5 years. The B-24 trial revealed a sig-nificant reduction in recurrence with adjuvant tamoxifen therapy for patients with DCIS; however, the results were not initially assessed based on ER status.226 There were 1804 women with DCIS randomized to lumpectomy and radiation with or without tamoxifen. The rate of breast cancer events was significantly lower in those who received tamoxifen at a median follow-up of 74 months (8.2% vs. 13.4%, P = 0.0009). Subsequently, Allred and colleagues evaluated 41% of patients with DCIS in the NSABP B-24 trial to determine the effect of tamoxifen based on ER status measured in the primary tumor.203 They found that 76% of women had DCIS that was ER-positive and these women had a greater reduction in ipsilateral breast tumor recur-rence with tamoxifen than did patients with ER-negative DCIS (11% vs. 5.2%, P <0.001). However, it should be noted that 15% of patients in B-24 had tumor at the resection margins. For these patients, tamoxifen could be viewed as treating what, by the current standard, would be viewed as inadequate local exci-sion of the primary tumor.Early Invasive Breast Cancer  (Stage I, IIA, or IIB)There have been six prospective randomized trials comparing breast-conserving surgery to mastectomy in early stage breast cancer, and all have shown equivalent survival rates regardless of the surgical treatment type. One caveat, however, is that the majority of studies had a restriction of tumor size; most were either 2 cm or 2.5 cm, while the NSABP B-06 trial was 4 cm, and the NCI trial was up to 5 cm. NSABP B-06, which is the largest of all the breast conservation trials, compared total mastectomy to lumpectomy with or without radiation therapy in the treatment of women with stages I and II breast cancer.227-233 After 5and 8-year follow-up periods, the disease-free (DFS), distant dis-ease-free, and overall survival (OS) rates for lumpectomy with or without radiation therapy were similar to those observed after total mastectomy. However, the incidence of ipsilateral breast cancer recurrence was higher in the group not receiving radia-tion therapy. These findings supported the use of lumpectomy and radiation therapy in the treatment of stages I and II breast cancer and this has since become the preferred method of treat-ment for women with early stage breast cancer who have uni-focal disease and who are not known BRCA mutation carriers.  Reanalysis of the B-06 study results was undertaken after  20 years of follow-up and confirmed that there was no differ-ence in disease-free survival rates after total mastectomy or after lumpectomy with or without adjuvant radiation therapy. The in-breast recurrence rate was substantially higher in the lumpec-tomy alone group (39.2%) compared with the lumpectomy plus adjuvant radiation therapy group (14.3%), confirming the importance of radiation therapy in the management of patients with invasive disease. However, it should be noted that there were several criteria in the B-06 study. There was a specific lymphadenopathy exclusion criteria. Secondly, all patients ran-domized to breast-conserving surgery had a frozen section, and if the margins were involved, they were converted to mastec-tomy but were included in the analysis as having had a breast-conserving operation (on the basis of intention to treat). Finally, in the breast-conserving group recurrences in the treated breast were considered as a “nonevent.”Data from all of the randomized trials where breast con-servation was performed with or without radiation therapy have been examined by the EBCTCG.12 At 15 years of follow-up, the absolute reduction in mortality with the use of radiation therapy after lumpectomy was 5.1% in node-negative patients and 7.1% in node-positive patients. These data support the concept that the addition of radiation not only improves local control but also has an impact on survival. Similar to DCIS, clinicians have sought to identify subgroups of patients who may not benefit from the addition of radiation therapy, particularly older patients who may have a shorter life expectancy due to medical comor-bidities. Randomized trials have shown that in selected patients with small, ER-positive, low-grade tumors, lumpectomy alone without radiation therapy may be appropriate.211,212 The Cancer and Leukemia Group B (CALGB) C9343 trial enrolled women over the age of 70 with T1N0 breast cancer and randomized them to lumpectomy with or without radiation therapy. All patients received adjuvant tamoxifen.233a At 5 years, although Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   58201/03/19   5:05 PM 583THE BREASTCHAPTER 17there were fewer local recurrences with radiation (1% vs. 4%, P <0.001), there were no differences in DFS and OS. While long-term follow-up at 10 years showed fewer local recurrences with radiation (2% vs. 10%), there were no significant differ-ences in time to distant metastasis, breast cancer–specific sur-vival, or OS between the two groups. A trial similar to CALGB C9343 was conducted in Canada where they enrolled women age 50 years and older and randomized them to lumpectomy with or without radiation. Mean age was 68 years, and 80% of women had ER-positive tumors. Again, local recurrence rates were lower in women who received radiation (0.6% vs. 7.7%, P <0.001); however, at a median follow-up of 5.6 years, there were no differences in DFS or OS. The PRIME-2 study enrolled women age 65 years or older with ER-positive, node-negative, up to 3 cm breast cancers, who had undergone breast-conserving surgery and were candidates for adjuvant endocrine treatment. They were assigned to receive whole-breast irradiation or no treatment. After a median follow-up of 5 years, ipsilateral breast tumor recurrence was 1.3% with radiation vs. 41% in those assigned to no radiotherapy. However, no differences in distant metastases, contralateral breast cancers, or overall survival were noted between the groups.234 These studies suggest that radia-tion can be avoided in select older patients with ER-positive, early-stage breast cancer.Accelerated partial breast irradiation (APBI) is also an option for carefully selected patients with DCIS and early-stage breast cancer. Since the majority of recurrences after breast conservation occur in or adjacent to the tumor bed, there has been interest in limiting the radiation to the area of the primary tumor bed with a margin of normal tissue. APBI is delivered in an abbreviated fashion (twice daily for 5 days) and at a lower total dose compared with the standard course of 5 to 6 weeks of radiation (50 Gy with or without a boost) in the case of whole breast irradiation. Proponents have suggested that this shortened course of treatment may increase the feasibility of breast con-servation for some women and may improve radiation therapy compliance. The RTOG 04-13/NSABP B-39 trial is a random-ized comparison of whole breast irradiation to APBI in women with early stage breast cancer. The trial has completed accrual, and it will likely be several years before data are mature to report outcomes between the two radiation treatment strategies. TARGIT is another study that randomized 3451 patients in 33 centers in over 10 countries to intraoperative breast irradiation (IORT) or external beam radiotherapy (EBRT). The prelimi-nary results were reported in 2012: with a median follow-up of  2.4 years, use of IORT had a recurrence rate of 3.3% vs. 1.3% with EBRT, a 2% increased recurrence risk.235,236 ASTRO developed guidelines for the use of APBI outside of clinical trials based on data reported from published studies.237,238 The ASTRO guidelines describe patients “suitable” for APBI to include women age 60 years or older with a unifocal, T1, ER-positive tumor with no lymphovascular invasion and margins of at least 2 mm. They describe a group where there is uncer-tainty about the appropriateness of APBI (“cautionary” group) to include patients with invasive lobular histology, a tumor size of 2.1 cm to 3 cm, ER-negative disease, focal lymphovascular invasion, or margins less than 2 mm. Finally, a group felt to be “unsuitable” for APBI includes those with T3 or T4 disease, ER-negative disease, multifocality, multicentricity, extensive LVI, or positive margins.Currently, mastectomy with axillary staging and breast conserving surgery with axillary staging and radiation therapy are considered equivalent treatments for patients with stages I  and II breast cancer. Breast conservation is considered for all  patients because of the important cosmetic advantages and equivalent survival outcomes; however, this approach is not advised in women who are known BRCA mutation carriers due to the high lifetime risk for development of additional breast cancers. Relative contraindications to breast conserva-tion therapy include (a) prior radiation therapy to the breast or chest wall, (b) persistently positive surgical margins after reex-cision, (c) multicentric disease, and (d) scleroderma or lupus erythematosus.For most patients with early-stage disease, reconstruc-tion can be performed immediately at the time of mastectomy. Immediate reconstruction allows for skin-sparing, thus optimiz-ing cosmetic outcomes. Skin-sparing mastectomy with immedi-ate reconstruction has been popularized over the past decade as reports of low local-regional failure rates have been reported and reconstructive techniques have advanced. There is a grow-ing interest in the use of nipple-areolar sparing mastectomy with reports suggesting the oncologic safety of this approach in early stage breast cancer. Patients who are planned for postmastec-tomy radiation therapy may not be ideal candidates for nipple-sparing mastectomy because of the effects of radiation on the preserved nipple. In addition to providing optimal cosmesis from preservation of the skin and/or the nipple-areolar complex,  immediate reconstruction allows patients to wake up with a breast mound, which provides some psychological benefit for the patient. Immediate reconstruction is also more economical as both the extirpative and reconstructive surgery are combined in one operation.Immediate reconstruction can be performed using implants or autologous tissue; tissue flaps commonly used include the transverse rectus abdominis myocutaneous flap, deep inferior epigastric perforator flap, and latissimus dorsi flap (with or without an implant). If postmastectomy radiation therapy is needed, a tissue expander can be placed at the time of mastec-tomy to save the shape of the breast and reduce the amount of skin replacement needed at the time of definitive reconstruc-tion. The expander can be deflated at the initiation of radiation therapy to allow for irradiation of the chest wall and regional nodal basins. Removal of the tissue expander and definitive reconstruction, usually with autologous tissue, can proceed  6 months to 1 year after completion of radiation therapy.Axillary lymph node status has traditionally been an important determinant in staging and prognosis for women with early stage breast cancer. Historically, axillary lymph node dis-section (ALND) was utilized for axillary staging and regional control by removing involved lymph nodes. Randomized tri-als evaluating immediate ALND over ALND performed in a delayed fashion once clinically palpable axillary disease became evident have not shown any detriment in survival.9,239 With increased mammographic screening and detection of smaller, node-negative breast cancers, it became clear that routine use of ALND for axillary staging was not necessary in up to 75% percent of women with operable breast cancer presenting with a negative axilla at the time of screening. Lymphatic mapping and sentinel lymph node (SLN) dissection were initially devel-oped for assessment of patients with clinically node-negative melanoma. Given the changing landscape of newly diagnosed breast cancer patients with a clinically node-negative axilla, sur-geons quickly began to explore the utility of SLN dissection as a replacement for ALND in axillary staging.Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   58301/03/19   5:05 PM 584SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIIn the early 1990s, David Krag at the University of Vermont began performing SLN dissection with injection of a radioisotope in the primary tumor site and localizing the SLN node with a handheld gamma probe.240 He was able to identify a SLN in 18 of 22 patients examined, and the SLN was posi-tive in all 7 patients with positive lymph nodes. Giuliano and colleagues initiated a pilot study in 1991 to examine the use of SLN dissection using blue dye in patients with clinically nega-tive nodes. They reported successful identification of a SLN in 114 (65.5%) of 174 patients, and in 109 (95.6%), the SLN accurately predicted the status of the axillary nodes.241,242 These studies along with initial work by Doug Reintgen and Charles Cox at the Moffitt Cancer Center and Umberto Veronesi and his colleagues at the European Institute of Oncology in Milan led the way toward validation of the technique in large single institution and multicenter studies.Following validation of the technique of SLN dissection for staging of the axilla by multiple centers, randomized tri-als were initiated in order to determine if SLN dissection could replace ALND in the contemporary management of breast cancer  patients. The ALMANAC trial randomized 1031 patients with primary operable breast cancer to SLN dissection vs. standard axillary surgery. The incidence of lymphedema and sensory loss for the SLN group was significantly lower than with the standard axillary treatment. At 12 months, drain usage, length of hospital stay, and time to resumption of normal day-to-day activities after surgery were also statistically significantly lower in the SLN group.221The NSABP B-32 trial compared clinically node-negative patients undergoing SLN dissection followed by ALND with patients undergoing SLN dissection with ALND only if a SLN was positive for metastatic disease.243 A total of 5611 patients were randomized with a SLN identification rate of 97% and a false-negative rate of 9.7%. A total of 26% of these clini-cally node-negative patients had a positive SLN. Over 60% of patients with positive SLNs had no additional positive lymph nodes within the ALND specimen. The B-32 trial and other randomized trials demonstrated no difference in DFS, OS, and local-regional recurrence rates between patients with negative SLNs who had SLN dissection alone compared with those who underwent ALND.244,245 Most important, patients who had SLN dissection alone were found to have decreased morbidity (arm swelling and range of motion) and improved quality of life vs. patients who underwent ALND.245,246The American College of Surgeons Oncology Group (ACOSOG) initiated the Z0010 and Z0011 trials in order to evaluate the incidence and prognostic significance of occult metastases identified in the bone marrow and SLNs (Z0010) of early-stage clinically node-negative patients and to evaluate the utility of ALND in patients with clinical T1-2, N0 breast cancer with 1 or 2 positive SLNs for patients treated with breast-conserving surgery and whole breast irradiation (WBI) (Z0011).247,248The Z0010 study enrolled 5539 patients with clinical T1-2 breast cancer planned for breast conserving surgery and WBI.247 Of these patients, 24% proved to have positive SLNs based on standard pathologic assessment, and of the negative SLNs sub-jected to immunohistochemical staining for cytokeratin, 10.5% proved to have occult metastasis. Of the patients who had bone marrow aspiration, 3.0% had immunohistochemically detected tumor cells in the bone marrow. Although the presence of dis-ease in the bone marrow identified a population at high risk for recurrence, neither immunohistochemical detection of disease in the SLNs or the bone marrow was statistically significant on multivariable analysis with clinicopathologic and treatment factors included. The investigators concluded that routine use of immunohistochemistry to detect occult disease in SLNs is not warranted.The Z0011 trial was a companion study to Z0010 and was designed to study the role of completion ALND on survival in women with positive SLNs. Patients were not eligible if they received neoadjuvant chemotherapy or neoadjuvant hormonal therapy or if their treatment plan included mastectomy, lumpec-tomy without radiation, or lumpectomy with APBI. WBI was to be administered using standard tangential fields without specific treatment of the axilla or additional fields targeting other nodal basins. Patients with 1 or 2 positive SLNs were randomized to completion ALND or no further surgery. Adjuvant systemic therapy recommendations were left to the treating clinicians. After median follow-up of 6.3 years, there was no difference between patients randomized to ALND and those randomized to no further surgery (SLN only) in terms of OS (91.9% and 92.5%, respectively; P = 0.25) or DFS (82.2% and 83.8%, respectively; P = 0.14). The low local regional failure rates and similar survival outcomes were recently reported with 10-year follow-up.249,250The morbidity of SLN dissection alone vs. SLN dissec-tion with completion ALND has been reported by the ACOSOG investigators.251,252 Immediate effects of SLN dissection in the Z0010 trial included wound infection in 1%, axillary seroma in 7.1%, and axillary hematoma in 1.4%.251 At 6 months following surgery, axillary paresthesias were noted in 8.6% of patients, decreased range of motion in the upper extremity was reported in 3.8%, and 6.9% of patients had a change in the arm circum-ference of >2 cm on the ipsilateral side, which was reported as lymphedema. Younger patients were more likely to report paresthesias, whereas increasing age and body mass index were more predictive of lymphedema. When adverse surgical effects were examined in the Z0011 trial, patients undergoing SLN dissection with ALND had more wound infections, seromas, and paresthesias than those women undergoing SLN dissec-tion alone. Lymphedema at 1 year after surgery was reported by 13% in the SLN plus ALND group but only 2% in the SLN dissection alone group. Arm circumference measurements were greater at 1 year in patients undergoing SLN dissection plus ALND, but the difference between study groups was not statisti-cally significant.252 This supports the results published from the ALMANAC trial.Prior to the publication of ACOSOG Z0011, completion ALND was standard of care for patients with positive SLNs. Since the reporting of ACOSOG Z0011, the National Com-prehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines now state that there was no OS difference for patients with 1 or 2 positive SLNs treated with breast-conserving surgery who underwent completion ALND vs. those who had no further axillary sur-gery. In addition, the American Society of Breast Surgeons issued a consensus statement supporting omission of ALND for patients who meet Z0011 criteria.253 The results of ACOSOG Z0011 have revolutionized management of the axilla and changed practice such that selected patients with axillary metas-tasis can now avoid ALND if they have clinical and pathologic features similar to those patients enrolled on Z0011. However, there have been some concerns raised about the Z0011 study that include the fact that the study only recruited about half of Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   58401/03/19   5:05 PM 585THE BREASTCHAPTER 17the intended patients and that there was no standardization of whether or not patients received irradiation to the low axilla when the radiation oncologist irradiated the breast. These issues have thus far limited the uptake of the results of Z0011 by some centers.The International Breast Cancer Study Group (IBCSG) 23-01 trial was similar in design to Z0011 but enrolled only patients with micrometastases in the SLNs. Patients with SLN micrometastases were randomized to ALND vs. no further sur-gery. Unlike Z0011, the 23-01 trial did not exclude patients treated with mastectomy. Approximately 9% of patients ran-domized to each study arm underwent mastectomy. The inves-tigators published the primary and secondary endpoints of the trial showing no differences in OS or local-regional recurrence between the study arms.254 However, as with the Z0011 trial, some concerns have been raised regarding the 23-01 study. For example, in the statistics on the primary endpoint, local recur-rence included contralateral breast cancer and other tumor types as events. No hypothesis was presented as to why the differ-ence in axillary surgery should impact on either of these events. Including these events therefore reduced the power of the study to show a statistical difference between treatment arms. There is also concern that the study appears underpowered to show a meaningful difference in overall survival.Most pathology laboratories perform a more detailed anal-ysis of the SLN than is routinely done for axillary nodes recov-ered from a levels I and II dissection. This can include examining thin sections of the node with step sectioning at multiple levels through the paraffin blocks or performing immunohistochemi-cal staining of the SLN for cytokeratin or a combination of these techniques. The results of ACOSOG Z0010 and NSABP B-32 showed no clinically meaningful difference in survival based on detection of occult metastases in the SLNs using immu-nohistochemical staining and do not support the routine use in SLN processing. The type of intraoperative assessment of SLNs also varies for different clinicians and pathology labo-ratories. Some centers prefer to use touch preparation cyto-logic analysis of the SLNs, whereas others use frozen-section analysis, and the sensitivity and specificity of these assays vary considerably. The GeneSearch Breast Lymph Node Assay is a real-time reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction assay that detects breast tumor cell metastasis in lymph nodes through the identification of the gene expression markers mammaglobin and cytokeratin 19. These markers are present in higher lev-els in breast tissue and not in nodal tissue (cell type-specific messenger RNA). The GeneSearch breast lymph node assay generates expression data for genes of interest, which are then evaluated against predetermined criteria to provide a qualitative (positive/negative) result. The assay is designed to detect foci that correspond to metastases that are seen with examination by standard hematoxylin and eosin staining and measure >0.2 mm.  The GeneSearch assay results have been compared with per-manent-section histologic analysis and frozen-section analy-sis of sentinel nodes in a prospective trial, and the assay was approved by the FDA for the intraoperative assessment of senti-nel nodes.255 When a positive node is identified intraoperatively by touch preparation, frozen-section analysis, or GeneSearch assay, the surgeon can proceed with immediate ALND. With the findings of ACOSOG Z0011 that there is not a survival ben-efit to the use of ALND in selected patients, many surgeons have abandoned the intraoperative evaluation of SLNs. There are a number of nomograms and predictive models designed to determine which patients with a positive SLN are at risk for har-boring additional positive non-SLNs in the axilla. These tools can be helpful in determining the likelihood of additional disease in the axilla and may be used clinically to counsel patients.256In patients who present with axillary lymphadenopa-thy that is confirmed to be metastatic disease on FNA or core biopsy, SLN dissection is not necessary, and patients can pro-ceed directly to ALND or be considered for preoperative sys-temic therapy (see “Neoadjuvant [Preoperative] Chemotherapy” under “Nonsurgical Breast Cancer Therapies”). Initially there was controversy about the suitability of SLN dissection in women with larger primary tumors (T3) and those treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy. The American Society of Clini-cal Oncology has included SLN dissection is its guidelines as appropriate for axillary staging in these patients.257,258 If an SLN cannot be identified, then ALND is generally performed for appropriate staging. However, this is not universally accepted, and there are as yet no randomized studies that have assessed how a patient with a locally advanced cancer at presentation should be treated if SLN dissection reveals no metastases or micrometastases after neoadjuvant therapy.The ASCO guidelines suggest that adjuvant chemo-therapy should be considered for patients with positive lymph nodes, ER-negative disease, HER2-positive disease, Adju-vant! Online mortality greater than 10%, grade 3 node-neg-ative tumors >5 mm, triple-negative tumors, lymphovascular invasion, or estimated distant relapse risk of greater than 15% at 10 years based on the 21 gene recurrence score assay.259 Adjuvant endocrine therapy is considered for women with hormone receptor-positive cancers, and an aromatase inhibi-tor is recommended if the patient is postmenopausal. HER2/neu status is determined for all patients with newly diagnosed invasive breast cancer and when positive, should be used to guide systemic therapy recommendations. The FDA approved trastuzumab in November 2006 for use as part of a treatment regimen containing doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, and pacli-taxel for treatment of HER2/neu-positive, node-positive breast cancer.181,183 Subsequently, the BCIRG 006 study reported that giving trastuzumab concurrently with docetaxel and carbopla-tin appeared as effective as giving trastuzumab following an anthracycline containing regimen.182,185 In addition to trastu-zumab, pertuzumab has also recently been FDA approved for adjuvant use in patients with HER2 amplified breast cancers with high risk of recurrence.Advanced Local-Regional Breast Cancer  (Stage IIIA or IIIB)Women with stage IIIA and IIIB breast cancer have advanced local-regional breast cancer but have no clinically detected distant metastases (Fig. 17-30).260 In an effort to provide opti-mal local-regional disease-free survival as well as distant dis-ease-free survival for these women, surgery is integrated with radiation therapy and chemotherapy (Fig. 17-31). However, it should be noted that these patients have an increased risk of distant metastasis that is often highlighted by radiological evidence when staging PET or CT and bone scans are per-formed. Thus, the paradigm for small screen detected cancers where cure can be expected in >90% of patients, often by local treatment alone, is not appropriate for patients with locally advanced disease.Preoperative (also known as neoadjuvant) chemotherapy should be considered in the initial management of patients with Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   58501/03/19   5:05 PM 586SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 17-30. Locally advanced breast cancer. A. Mammography of the right breast reveals a large tumor with enlarged axillary lymph nodes. B. Imaging of the left breast is normal. (Used with permission from Dr. Anne Turnbull, Consultant Radiologist/Director of Breast Screening, Royal Derby Hospital, Derby, UK.)Figure 17-31. Treatment pathways for stage IIIA and stage IIIB breast cancer.locally advanced stage III breast cancer, especially those with estrogen receptor negative tumors. Chemotherapy is used to maximize distant disease-free survival, whereas radiation ther-apy is used to maximize local-regional control and disease-free survival.In selected patients with stage IIIA cancer, preoperative chemotherapy can reduce the size of the primary cancer and permit breast-conserving surgery. Investigators from the MD Anderson Cancer Center reported that low local-regional fail-ure rates could be achieved in selected patients with stage III disease treated with preoperative chemotherapy followed by breast-conserving surgery and radiation.261 The 5-year actuarial ipsilateral breast tumor recurrence-free survival rates in this study were 95%. They noted that the ipsilateral breast tumor recurrence rates increased when patients had clinical N2 or N3 disease, >2 cm of residual disease in the breast at surgery, a pattern of multifocal residual disease in the breast at surgery, and lymphovascular space invasion in the primary tumor. This study demonstrated that breast-conserving surgery can be used for appropriately selected patients with locally advanced breast cancer who achieve a good response with preoperative che-motherapy. However, the Oxford overview of all randomized studies of neoadjuvant therapy (vs. adjuvant therapy) reported a hazard ratio of 1.5 (i.e., 50% increase) in local recurrence rates. ABBrunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   58601/03/19   5:05 PM 587THE BREASTCHAPTER 17A meta-analysis reported a hazard ratio of 1.3.262 These stud-ies included some patients treated with radiation therapy alone without resection of the primary tumor bed, which results in higher local failure rates. These findings are important in view of the previous findings that the avoidance of recurrence in a conserved breast avoids about one breast cancer death over the next 15 years for every four such recurrences avoided.12 The German Breast Cancer Group recently reported their local recurrence rate in 5535 patients in seven studies. With a median of 46 months (range 1–127) follow-up the local recurrence rates ranged from 7.6% to 19.5% for T1-T4 tumors and from 6.4% to 17.9% for N0-N3 tumors treated with neoadjuvant therapy.238 For patients with stage IIIA disease who experience minimal response to chemotherapy and for patients with stage IIIB breast cancer, preoperative chemotherapy can decrease the local-regional cancer burden enough to permit subsequent modified radical mastectomy to establish local-regional con-trol. In both stages IIIA and IIIB disease, surgery is followed by adjuvant radiation therapy. However there is a small percent-age of patients who experience progression of disease during neoadjuvant therapy, and therefore the surgeon should review patients with the oncologist at regular points during the neoad-juvant regimen.For selected clinically indolent, ER-positive, locally advanced tumors, primary endocrine therapy may be considered, especially if the patient has other comorbid conditions. A series of 195 patients with ER-positive, locally advanced breast cancer treated by endocrine therapy—median age 69 years, median tumor size 6 cm, median follow-up 61 months—reported a 5-year overall survival of 76%, a breast cancer–specific sur-vival of 86%, and a metastasis-free survival of 77%. The median time to an alternative treatment was 48 months.263 Given that this was a 20-year series, the number of such patients is small but should be considered when the clinician is discussing treat-ment options. Results from the ACOSOG Z1031 trial suggest that neoadjuvant endocrine therapy is a good option for tumor downstaging in patients with strongly ER-positive tumors. The preoperative endocrine prognostic index (PEPI score) can be calculated based on pathologic findings from surgery following neoadjuvant endocrine therapy. This can help guide decision-making regarding the need for systemic chemotherapy in this patient population.264,265Internal Mammary Lymph NodesMetastatic disease to internal mammary lymph nodes may be occult, may be evident on chest radiograph or CT scan, or may present as a painless parasternal mass with or without skin involvement. There is no consensus regarding the need for internal mammary lymph node radiation therapy in women who are at increased risk for occult involvement (cancers involving the medial aspect of the breast, axillary lymph node involve-ment) but who show no signs of internal mammary lymph node involvement. Systemic chemotherapy and radiation therapy are indicated in the treatment of grossly involved internal mammary lymph nodes.Distant Metastases (Stage IV)Treatment for stage IV breast cancer is not curative but may prolong survival and enhance a woman’s quality of life.266 Endocrine therapies that are associated with minimal toxicity are preferred to cytotoxic chemotherapy in ER-positive disease. Appropriate candidates for initial endocrine therapy include women with hormone receptor-positive cancers who do not have immediately life threatening disease (or “visceral crisis”). This includes not only women with bone or soft tissue metastases but also women with limited visceral metastases. Symptoms per se (e.g., breathlessness) are not in themselves an indication for chemotherapy. For example, breathlessness due to a pleural effusion can be treated with percutaneous drainage, and if the breathlessness is relieved, the patient should be commenced on endocrine therapy; if the breathlessness is due to lymphangitic spread, then chemotherapy would be the treatment of choice. The same approach should be taken to other symptoms such as pain. Systemic chemotherapy is indicated for women with hormone receptor-negative cancers, “visceral crisis,” and hormone-refractory metastases. Women with stage IV breast cancer may develop anatomically localized problems that will benefit from individualized surgical or radiation treatment, such as brain metastases, pleural effusion, pericardial effusion, biliary obstruction, ureteral obstruction, impending or existing pathologic fracture of a long bone, spinal cord compression, and painful bone or soft tissue metastases. Bisphosphonates or anti-RANKL (receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B ligand) agent, denosumab, which may be given in addition to chemo-therapy or endocrine therapy, should be considered in women with bone metastases. Whether to perform surgical resection of the local-regional disease in women with stage IV breast cancer has been debated after several reports have suggested that women who undergo resection of the primary tumor have improved survival over those who do not. Khan and associates used the National Cancer Data Base to identify patterns of treat-ment in women with metastatic breast cancer and found that those who had surgical resection with negative margins had a better prognosis than those women who did not have surgical therapy.267 Gnerlich et al reported similar findings using the SEER database, and there have been several reports subsequent to this study from single institutions that have confirmed these findings.268 Some have suggested that the finding of improved survival is due to selection bias and that local therapy should be reserved for palliation of symptoms. A randomized trial through ECOG (E2108) was designed to address this question.269 The surgical management of patients with stage IV disease should be addressed by obtaining multidisciplinary input and by con-sidering the treatment goals of each individual patient and the patient’s treating physicians.Local-Regional RecurrenceWomen with local-regional recurrence of breast cancer may be separated into two groups: those who have had mastec-tomy and those who have had lumpectomy. Women treated previously with mastectomy undergo surgical resection of the local-regional recurrence and appropriate reconstruction. Chemotherapy and antiestrogen therapy are considered, and adjuvant radiation therapy is given if the chest wall has not pre-viously received radiation therapy or if the radiation oncologist feels that given the time from previous treatment there is scope for further radiation therapy, particularly if this is palliative. Women treated previously with a breast-conservation procedure undergo a mastectomy and appropriate reconstruction. Chemo-therapy and antiestrogen therapy are considered depending of the hormone receptor status and HER2 status of the tumor.Breast Cancer PrognosisSurvival rates for women diagnosed with breast cancer in the United States can be obtained from the SEER Program of the Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   58701/03/19   5:05 PM 588SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIABFigure 17-32. Lesion to be targeted for excisional biopsy. A. Craniocaudal view of the left breast demonstrating 2 lesions (arrows) to be targeted for needle localization and excision. B. Oblique view demonstrating target lesions. (Used with permission from Dr. Anne Turnbull, Consultant Radiologist/Director of Breast Screening, Royal Derby Hospital, Derby, UK.)National Cancer Institute. Data have been collected since 1973 and are updated at regular intervals. The overall 5-year rela-tive survival for breast cancer patients from the time period of 2003 to 2009 from 18 SEER geographic areas was 89.2%.270 The 5-year relative survival by race was reported to be 90.4% for white women and 78.7% for black women. The 5-year sur-vival rate for patients with localized disease (61% of patients) is 98.6%; for patients with regional disease (32% of patients), 84.4%; and for patients with distant metastatic disease (5% of patients), 24.3%. Breast cancer survival has significantly increased over the past two decades due to improvements in screening and local and systemic therapies. Data from the American College of Surgeons National Cancer Data Base can also be accessed; this data reports survival based on stage of disease at presentation using the AJCC staging system.SURGICAL TECHNIQUES IN  BREAST CANCER THERAPYExcisional Biopsy With Needle LocalizationExcisional biopsy implies complete removal of a breast lesion with a margin of normal-appearing breast tissue. In the past, surgeons would obtain prior consent from the patient, allow-ing mastectomy if the initial biopsy results confirmed cancer. Today it is important to consider the options for local therapy (lumpectomy vs. mastectomy with or without reconstruction) and the need for nodal assessment with SLN dissection. Needle-core biopsy is the preferred diagnostic method, and excisional biopsy should be reserved for those cases in which the needle biopsy results are discordant with the imaging findings or clini-cal examination (Fig. 17-32). In general, circumareolar incisions can be used to access lesions that are subareolar or within a short distance of the nipple-areolar complex. Elsewhere in the breast, incisions can be placed along the lines of tension in the skin that are generally concentric with the nipple-areola complex. In the lower half of the breast, the use of radial incisions typically provides the best outcome. When the tumor is quite distant from the central breast, the biopsy incision can be excised separately from the primary mastectomy incision, should a mastectomy be required. Radial incisions in the upper half of the breast are not recommended because of possible scar contracture resulting in displacement of the ipsilateral nipple-areola complex. Similarly, curvilinear incisions in the lower half of the breast may displace the nipple-areolar complex downward.After excision of a suspicious breast lesion, the specimen should be X-rayed to confirm that the lesion has been excised with appropriate margins. The biopsy tissue specimen is ori-entated for the pathologist using sutures, clips, or dyes. Addi-tional margins (superior, inferior, medial, lateral, superficial, and deep) may be taken from the surgical bed if the specimen X-ray shows the lesion is close to one or more margins. Some surgeons also take additional shavings from the margins as one approach to confirm complete excision of the suspicious lesion. Electrocautery or absorbable ligatures are used to achieve wound hemostasis. Cosmesis may be facilitated by approxima-tion of the surgical defect using 3-0 absorbable sutures. A run-ning subcuticular closure of the skin using 4-0 or 5-0 absorbable monofilament sutures is performed. Wound drainage is usually not required.Excisional biopsy with needle or seed localization requires a preoperative visit to the mammography suite for placement of a localization wire or a radioactive or magnetic seed that can be detected intraoperatively with a handheld probe. The lesion can also be targeted by sonography in the imaging suite or in the operating room. The lesion to be excised is accurately localized by mammography, and the tip of a thin wire hook or a seed is positioned close to the lesion (Fig. 17-33). Using the wire hook as a guide, or detection of the seed with a handheld probe, the surgeon subsequently excises the suspicious breast lesion while removing a margin of normal-appearing breast tissue. Before the patient leaves the operating room, specimen radiography is performed to confirm complete excision of the suspicious lesion (Fig. 17-34).Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   58801/03/19   5:05 PM 589THE BREASTCHAPTER 17Figure 17-33. Wire localization procedure. Mammographic images of hookwire in place targeting lesions for excision in the left breast (A) and the right breast (B). (Used with permission from Dr. Anne Turnbull, Consultant Radiologist/Director of Breast Screen-ing, Royal Derby Hospital, Derby, UK.)Figure 17-34. Specimen mammography. Specimen mam-mograms demonstrating excision of targeted (A) density,  (B) calcifications, and (C) spiculated mass seen on preoperative imaging. (Used with permission from Dr. Anne Turnbull, Con-sultant Radiologist/Director of Breast Screening, Royal Derby Hospital, Derby, UK.)ABCABBrunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   58901/03/19   5:05 PM 590SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IISentinel Lymph Node DissectionSentinel lymph node (SLN) dissection is primarily used to assess the regional lymph nodes in women with early breast cancers who are clinically node-negative by physical examina-tion and imaging studies.271-279 This method also is accurate in women with larger tumors (T3 N0), but nearly 75% of these women will prove to have axillary lymph node metastases on histologic examination, and wherever possible it is better to identify them preoperatively as this will allow a definitive procedure for known axillary disease. SLN dissection has also been reported to be accurate for staging of the axilla after chemotherapy in women with clinically node-negative dis-ease at initial presentation.280,281 Tan et al in a review and meta-analysis of 449 cases of SLN biopsy in clinically lymph node-negative disease reported a sensitivity of 93%, giving a false negative rate of 7% with a negative predictive value of 94% and an overall accuracy of 95%.282 Clinical situations where SLN dissection is not recommended include patients with inflammatory breast cancers, those with biopsy proven metasta-sis, DCIS without mastectomy, or prior axillary surgery. Although limited data are available, SLN dissection appears to be safe in pregnancy when performed with radioisotope alone.Evidence from large prospective studies suggests that the combination of intraoperative gamma probe detection of radioactive colloid and intraoperative visualization of blue dye (isosulfan blue dye or methylene blue) is more accurate for identification of SLNs than the use of either agent alone. Some surgeons use preoperative lymphoscintigraphy, although it is not required for identification of the SLNs. On the day before surgery, or the day of surgery, the radioactive colloid is injected either in the breast parenchyma around the primary tumor or prior biopsy site, into the subareolar region, or subdermally in proximity to the primary tumor site. With a 25-gauge needle, 0.5 mCi of 0.2-μm technetium 99m–labeled sulfur colloid is injected for same-day surgery, or a higher dose of 2.5 mCi of technetium-labeled sulfur colloid is administered when the isotope is to be injected on the day before surgery. Subdermal injections are given in proximity to the cancer site or in the subareolar location. Later, in the operating room, 3 to 5 mL of blue dye is injected either in the breast parenchyma or in the subareolar location. It is not recommended that the blue dye be used in a subdermal injection because this can result in tattoo-ing of the skin (isosulfan blue dye) or skin necrosis (methylene blue). For nonpalpable cancers, the injection of the technetium-labeled sulfur colloid solution can be guided by ultrasound or by mammographic guidance. In women who have undergone previous excisional biopsy, the injections are made in the breast parenchyma around the biopsy cavity but not into the cavity itself. Women are told preoperatively that the isosulfan blue dye injection will cause a change in the color of their urine and that there is a very small risk of allergic reaction to the dye (1 in 10,000). Anaphylactic reactions have been documented, and some groups administer a regimen of antihistamine, steroids, and a histamine H-2 receptor antagonist preoperatively as a prophylactic regimen to prevent allergic reactions. The use of radioactive colloid is safe, and radiation exposure is very low. Sentinel node dissection can be performed in pregnancy with the radioactive colloid without the use of blue dye.A hand-held gamma counter is used to transcutaneously identify the location of the SLN. This can help to guide place-ment of the incision. A 3to 4-cm incision is made in line with that used for an axillary dissection, which is a curved transverse 9incision in the lower axilla just below the hairline. After dis-secting through the subcutaneous tissue, the surgeon dissects through the axillary fascia, being mindful to identify blue lym-phatic channels. Following these channels can lead directly to the SLN and limit the amount of dissection through the axillary tissues. The gamma probe is used to facilitate the dissection and to pinpoint the location of the SLN. As the dissection continues, the signal from the probe increases in intensity as the SLN is approached. The SLN also is identified by visualization of blue dye in the afferent lymph vessel and in the lymph node itself. Before the SLN is removed, a 10-second in vivo radioactivity count is obtained. After removal of the SLN, a 10-second ex vivo radioactive count is obtained, and the node is then sent to the pathology laboratory for either permanentor frozen-section analysis. The lowest false-negative rates for SLN dissection have been obtained when all blue lymph nodes and all lymph nodes with counts >10% of the 10-second ex vivo count of the SLN are harvested (“10% rule”). Based on this, the gamma counter is used before closing the axillary wound to measure residual radioactivity in the surgical bed. A search is made for additional SLNs if the counts remain high. This procedure is repeated until residual radioactivity in the surgical bed is less than 10% of the 10-second ex vivo count of the most radioac-tive SLN and all blue nodes have been removed. Studies have demonstrated that 98% of all positive SLNs will be recovered with the removal of four SLNs; therefore, it is not necessary to remove greater than four SLNs for accurate staging of the axilla.Results from the NSABP B-32 trial showed that the false-negative rate for SLN dissection is influenced by tumor loca-tion, type of diagnostic biopsy, and number of SLNs removed at surgery.243 The authors reported that tumors located in the lateral breast were more likely to have a false-negative SLN. This may be explained by difficulty in discriminating the hot spot in the axilla when the radioisotope has been injected at the primary tumor site in the lateral breast. Those patients who had undergone an excisional biopsy before the SLN procedure were significantly more likely to have a false-negative SLN. This report further confirms that surgeons should use needle biopsy for diagnosis whenever possible and reserve excisional biopsy for the rare situations in which needle biopsy findings are non-diagnostic or discordant. Finally, removal of a larger number of SLNs at surgery appears to reduce the false-negative rate. In B-32, the false-negative rate was reduced from 17.7% to 10% when two SLNs were recovered and to 6.9% when three SLNs were removed. Yi and associates reported that the number of SLNs that need to be removed for accurate staging is influenced by individual patient and primary tumor factors.283In the B-32 trial, SLNs were identified outside the levels I and II axillary nodes in 1.4% of cases. This was significantly influenced by the site of radioisotope injection. When a subareo-lar or periareolar injection site was used, there were no instances of SLNs identified outside the level I or II axilla, compared with a rate of 20% when a peritumoral injection was used. This sup-ports the overall concept that the SLN is the first site of drain-age from the lymphatic vessels of the primary tumor. Although many patients will have similar drainage patterns from injec-tions given at the primary tumor site and at the subareolar plexus, some patients will have extra-axillary drainage, either alone or in combination with axillary node drainage, and this is best assessed with a peritumoral injection of the radioiso-tope. Kong et al reported that internal mammary node drain-age on preoperative lymphoscintigraphy was associated with Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   59001/03/19   5:05 PM 591THE BREASTCHAPTER 17worse distant disease-free survival in early-stage breast cancer patients.284Breast ConservationBreast conservation involves resection of the primary breast cancer with a margin of normal-appearing breast tissue, adju-vant radiation therapy, and assessment of regional lymph node status.285,286 Resection of the primary breast cancer is alterna-tively called segmental mastectomy, lumpectomy, partial mas-tectomy, wide local excision, and tylectomy. For many women with stage I or II breast cancer, breast-conserving therapy (BCT) is preferable to total mastectomy because BCT produces survival rates equivalent to those after total mastectomy while preserv-ing the breast.287 Six prospective randomized trials have shown that overall and disease-free survival rates are similar with BCT and mastectomy; however, three of the studies showed higher local-regional failure rates in patients undergoing BCT. In two of these studies, there were no clear criteria for histologically negative margins.285-287 Data from the EBCTCG meta-analysis revealed that the addition of radiation reduces recurrence by half and improves survival at year 15 by about a sixth.288 When all of this information is taken together, BCT is considered to be oncologically equivalent to mastectomy.In addition to being equivalent to mastectomy in terms of oncologic safety, BCT appears to offer advantages over mas-tectomy with regard to quality of life and aesthetic outcomes. BCT allows for preservation of breast shape and skin as well as preservation of sensation, and it provides an overall psychologic advantage associated with breast preservation.Breast conservation surgery is currently the standard treat-ment for women with stage 0, I, or II invasive breast cancer. Women with DCIS require only resection of the primary cancer and adjuvant radiation therapy without assessment of regional lymph nodes. When a lumpectomy is performed, a curvilinear incision lying concentric to the nipple-areola complex is made in the skin overlying the breast cancer when the tumor is in the upper aspect of the breast. Radial incisions are preferred when the tumor is in the lower aspect of the breast. Skin excision is not necessary unless there is direct involvement of the overlying skin by the primary tumor. The breast cancer is removed with an envelope of normal-appearing breast tissue that is adequate to achieve a cancer-free margin. Significant controversy has existed on the appropriate margin width for BCT.260 However, recently the SSO and ASTRO developed a consensus statement, supported by data from a systematic review data, encouraging “no tumor on ink” to be the standard definition of a negative margin for invasive stages I and II breast cancer in patients who undergo breast conserving surgery with whole-breast irradiation. The meta-analysis found that increasing the margin width does not affect local recurrence rates as long as the inked or transected margin is microscopically negative.289-292 Specimen X-ray should routinely be performed to confirm the lesion has been excised. Specimen orientation is performed by the surgeon. Additional margins from the surgical bed are taken as needed to provide a histologically negative margin. Requests for determination of ER, PR, and HER2 status are conveyed to the pathologist.It is the surgeon’s responsibility to ensure complete removal of cancer in the breast. Ensuring surgical margins that are free of breast cancer will minimize the chances of local recurrence and will enhance cure rates. If negative margins are not obtainable with reexcision, mastectomy is required. SLN is performed before removal of the primary breast tumor. When indicated, intraoperative assessment of the sentinel node can proceed while the segmental mastectomy is being performed.The use of oncoplastic surgery can be entertained at the time of segmental mastectomy or at a later time to improve the overall aesthetic outcome. The use of oncoplastic techniques range from a simple reshaping of breast tissue to local tissue rearrangement to the use of pedicled flaps or breast reduction techniques. The overall goal is to achieve the best possible aes-thetic result. In determining which patients are candidates for oncoplastic breast surgery, several factors should be considered, including the extent of the resection of breast tissue necessary to achieve negative margins, the location of the primary tumor within the breast, and the size of the patient’s breast and body habitus. Oncoplastic techniques are of prime consideration when (a) a significant area of breast skin will need to be resected with the specimen to achieve negative margins; (b) a large vol-ume of breast parenchyma will be resected resulting in a signifi-cant defect; (c) the tumor is located between the nipple and the inframammary fold, an area often associated with unfavorable cosmetic outcomes; or (d) excision of the tumor and closure of the breast may result in malpositioning of the nipple.Mastectomy and Axillary DissectionA skin-sparing mastectomy removes all breast tissue, the nipple-areola complex, and scars from any prior biopsy pro-cedures.293,294 There is a recurrence rate of less than 6% to 8%, comparable to the long-term recurrence rates reported with stan-dard mastectomy, when skin-sparing mastectomy is used for patients with Tis to T3 cancers. A total (simple) mastectomy without skin sparing removes all breast tissue, the nipple-areola complex, and skin. An extended simple mastectomy removes all breast tissue, the nipple-areola complex, skin, and the level I axillary lymph nodes. A modified radical (“Patey”) mastectomy removes all breast tissue, the nipple-areola complex, skin, and the levels I, II, and III axillary lymph nodes; the pectoralis minor that was divided and removed by Patey may be simply divided, giving improved access to level III nodes, and then left in situ, or occasionally the axillary clearance can be performed with-out dividing pectoralis minor. The Halsted radical mastectomy removes all breast tissue and skin, the nipple-areola complex, the pectoralis major and pectoralis minor muscles, and the levels I, II, and III axillary lymph nodes. The use of systemic che-motherapy and hormonal therapy as well as adjuvant radiation therapy for breast cancer have nearly eliminated the need for the radical mastectomy.Nipple-areolar sparing mastectomy has been popularized over the last decade especially for risk-reducing mastectomy in high risk women. For those patients with a cancer diagno-sis, many consider the following factors for eligibility: tumor located more than 2 to 3 cm from the border of the areola, smaller breast size, minimal ptosis, no prior breast surgeries with periareolar incisions, body mass index less than 40 kg/m2, no active tobacco use, no prior breast irradiation, and no evi-dence of collagen vascular disease.For a variety of biologic, economic, and psychosocial rea-sons, some women desire mastectomy rather than breast con-servation. Women who are less concerned about cosmesis may view mastectomy as the most expeditious and desirable thera-peutic option because it avoids the cost and inconvenience of radiation therapy. Some women whose primary breast cancers cannot be excised with a reasonable cosmetic result or those who have extensive microcalcifications are best treated with Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   59101/03/19   5:05 PM 592SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IImastectomy. Similarly, women with large cancers that occupy the subareolar and central portions of the breast and women with multicentric primary cancers also undergo mastectomy.Modified Radical MastectomyA modified radical mastectomy preserves the pectoralis major muscle with removal of levels I, II, and III (apical) axillary lymph nodes.293 The operation was first described by David Patey, a surgeon at St Bartholomew’s Hospital London, who reported a series of cases where he had removed the pectoralis minor muscle allowing complete dissection of the level III axil-lary lymph nodes while preserving the pectoralis major and the lateral pectoral nerve. A modified radical mastectomy permits preservation of the medial (anterior thoracic) pectoral nerve, which courses in the lateral neurovascular bundle of the axilla and usually penetrates the pectoralis minor to supply the lateral border of the pectoralis major. Anatomic boundaries of the mod-ified radical mastectomy are the anterior margin of the latissi-mus dorsi muscle laterally, the midline of the sternum medially, the subclavius muscle superiorly, and the caudal extension of the breast 2 to 3 cm inferior to the inframammary fold inferiorly. Skin-flap thickness varies with body habitus but ideally is 7 to 8 mm inclusive of skin and telasubcutanea (Fig. 17-35). Once the skin flaps are fully developed, the fascia of the pectoralis major muscle and the overlying breast tissue are elevated off the underlying musculature, which allows for the complete removal of the breast (Fig. 17-36).Subsequently, an axillary lymph node dissection is per-formed. The most lateral extent of the axillary vein is identified, and the areolar tissue of the lateral axillary space is elevated as the vein is cleared on its anterior and inferior surfaces. The areo-lar tissues at the junction of the axillary vein and the anterior edge of the latissimus dorsi muscle, which include the lateral and subscapular lymph node groups (level I), are cleared. Care is taken to preserve the thoracodorsal neurovascular bundle. The dissection then continues medially with clearance of the central axillary lymph node group (level II). The long thoracic nerve of Bell is identified and preserved as it travels in the investing fascia of the serratus anterior muscle. Every effort is made to preserve this nerve because permanent disability with a winged scapula and shoulder weakness will follow denervation of the serratus anterior muscle. Patey divided the pectoralis minor and removed it to allow access right up to the apex of the axilla. The pectoralis minor muscle is usually divided at the tendinous portion near its insertion onto the coracoid process (Fig. 17-37 inset), which allows dissection of the axillary vein medially to the costoclavicular (Halsted’s) ligament. Finally, the breast and axillary contents are removed from the surgical bed and are sent for pathologic assessment. In his modified radical mastectomy, Patey removed the pectoralis minor muscle. Many surgeons now divide only the tendon of the pectoralis minor muscle at its insertion onto the coracoid process while leaving the rest of the muscle intact, which still provides good access to the apex of the axilla.Figure 17-35. Modified radical mastectomy: eleva-tion of skin flaps. Skin flaps are 7 to 8 mm in thick-ness, inclusive of the skin and telasubcutanea. (Visual Art: © 2013. The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center.)Figure 17-36. Modified radical mastectomy after resection of breast tissue. The pectoralis major muscle is cleared of its fascia as the overlying breast is elevated. The latissimus dorsi muscle is the lateral boundary of the dissection. (Visual Art: © 2013. The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center.)Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   59201/03/19   5:05 PM 593THE BREASTCHAPTER 17Seromas beneath the skin flaps or in the axilla represent the most frequent complication of mastectomy and axillary lymph node dissection, reportedly occurring in as many as 30% of cases. The use of closed-system suction drainage reduces the incidence of this complication. Catheters are retained in the wound until drainage diminishes to <30 mL per day. Wound infections occur infrequently after a mastectomy, and the majority are a result of skin-flap necrosis. Cultures of speci-mens taken from the infected wound for aerobic and anaerobic organisms, debridement, and antibiotic therapy are effective management. Moderate or severe hemorrhage in the postop-erative period is rare and is best managed with early wound exploration for control of hemorrhage and reestablishment of closed-system suction drainage. The incidence of functionally significant lymphedema after a modified radical mastectomy is approximately 20% but can be as high as 50% to 60% when postoperative radiation is employed. Extensive axillary lymph node dissection, the delivery of radiation therapy, the presence of pathologic lymph nodes, and obesity are predisposing factors. Patients should be referred to physical therapy at the earliest signs of lymphedema to prevent progression to the later stages. The use of individually fitted compressive sleeves and complex decongestive therapy may be necessary.Reconstruction of the Breast and Chest WallThe goals of reconstructive surgery after a mastectomy for breast cancer are wound closure and breast reconstruction, which is either immediate or delayed.295 In most cases, wound closure after mastectomy is accomplished with simple approximation of the wound edges. However, if a more radical removal of skin and subcutaneous tissue is necessary, a pedicled myocutane-ous flap from the latissimus dorsi muscle is generally the best approach for wound coverage. A skin graft provides functional coverage that will tolerate adjuvant radiation therapy; however, this is not preferred because poor graft adherence may delay delivery of radiation therapy. Breast reconstruction after risk-reducing mastectomy or after mastectomy for early-stage breast cancer may be performed at the same time as the mastectomy. This allows for a skin-sparing mastectomy to be performed, which offers the best overall cosmetic outcomes. Reconstruc-tion can proceed with an expander/implant reconstruction or with autologous tissue such as a pedicled myocutaneous flap or a free flap using microvascular techniques. In patients with locally advanced breast cancer, reconstruction is often delayed until after completion of adjuvant radiation therapy to ensure that local-regional control of disease is obtained. The expected use of postmastectomy radiotherapy should also be considered as a reason for delayed reconstruction as radiotherapy to a reconstructed breast has been reported to result in inferior cos-metic outcomes. Consideration can be made for placement of a tissue expander to allow for skin-sparing, but this should be discussed with the radiation oncologist and other members of the treatment team. If chest wall coverage is needed to replace a large skin or soft tissue defect, many different types of myo-cutaneous flaps are employed, but the latissimus dorsi and the rectus abdominis myocutaneous flaps are most frequently used. The latissimus dorsi myocutaneous flap consists of a skin paddle based on the underlying latissimus dorsi muscle, which Figure 17-37. Modified radical mastectomy (Patey): axillary lymph node dissection. The dissection proceeds from lateral to medial, with complete visualization of the anterior and inferior aspects of the axillary vein. Loose areolar tissue at the junction of the axillary vein and the anterior margin of the latissimus dorsi muscle is swept inferomedially inclusive of the lateral (axillary) lymph node group (level I). Care is taken to preserve the thoracodorsal artery, vein, and nerve in the deep axillary space. The lateral lymph node group is resected in continuity with the subscapular lymph node group (level I) and the external mammary lymph node group (level I). Dissection anterior to the axillary vein allows removal of the central lymph node group (level II) and the apical (subclavicular) lymph node group (level III). The superomedial limit of this dissection is the clavipectoral fascia (Halsted’s ligament). Inset depicts division of the insertion of the pectoralis minor muscle at the coracoid process. The surgeon’s finger shields the underlying brachial plexus. (Reproduced with permission from Bland KI, Copeland EMI: The Breast: Comprehensive Management of Benign and Malignant Diseases, 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier/Saunders; 2009.)Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   59301/03/19   5:05 PM 594SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIis supplied by the thoracodorsal artery with contributions from the posterior intercostal arteries. A transverse rectus abdominis myocutaneous (TRAM) flap consists of a skin paddle based on the underlying rectus abdominis muscle, which is supplied by vessels from the deep inferior epigastric artery. The free TRAM flap uses microvascular anastomoses to establish blood supply to the flap. When the bony chest wall is involved with cancer, resection of a portion of the bony chest wall is indicated. If only one or two ribs are resected and soft tissue coverage is pro-vided, reconstruction of the bony defect is usually not necessary because scar tissue will stabilize the chest wall. If more than two ribs are sacrificed, it is advisable to stabilize the chest wall with prosthetic material, which is then covered with soft tissue by using a latissimus dorsi or TRAM flap.NONSURGICAL BREAST CANCER THERAPIESRadiation TherapyRadiation therapy is used for all stages of breast cancer depending on whether the patient is undergoing BCT or mas-tectomy.296-302 Adjuvant radiation for patients with DCIS and early-stage breast cancer have been described previously in this chapter. Those women treated with mastectomy who have cancer  at the surgical margins are at sufficiently high risk for local recurrence to warrant the use of adjuvant radiation therapy to the chest wall postoperatively. Women with metastatic disease involving four or more axillary lymph nodes and premeno-pausal women with metastatic disease involving one to three lymph nodes also are at increased risk for recurrence and are candidates for the use of chest wall and supraclavicular lymph node radiation therapy. In advanced local-regional breast can-cer (stage IIIA or IIIB), women are at high risk for recurrent disease after surgical therapy, and adjuvant radiation therapy is used to reduce the risk of recurrence. Current recommenda-tions for stages IIIA and IIIB breast cancer are (a) adjuvant radiation therapy to the breast and supraclavicular lymph nodes after neoadjuvant chemotherapy and segmental mastectomy with or without axillary lymph node dissection, (b) adjuvant radiation therapy to the chest wall and supraclavicular lymph nodes after neoadjuvant chemotherapy and mastectomy with or without axillary lymph node dissection, and (c) adjuvant radiation therapy to the chest wall and supraclavicular lymph nodes after segmental mastectomy or mastectomy with axillary lymph node dissection and adjuvant chemotherapy. Data from the EBCTCG has shown improvements in local-regional con-trol and survival in patients treated with mastectomy and post-mastectomy radiation therapy for one to three positive axillary lymph nodes.303 This data is based on clinical trials from the era of axillary lymph node dissection for staging prior to the routine use of sentinel lymph node dissection. It is likely that the vol-ume of disease in the earlier trials was greater overall than what is currently seen in patients who have small volume metastases detected at sentinel node dissection. It is important to include all multidisciplinary team members (medical oncology, plastic surgery, radiation oncology, and surgical oncology) regarding the risks and benefits of postmastectomy radiation therapy in patients with one to three positive nodes.The use of partial breast irradiation (APBI) for patients treated with breast-conserving surgery has also been previously described. APBI can be delivered via brachytherapy, external beam radiation therapy using 3D conformal radiation, or inten-sity-modulated radiation therapy. Although initial results are Table 17-14Adjuvant chemotherapy regimens for breast cancerHER-2 NEGATIVEHER-2 POSITIVEPreferred Dose dense AC → Paclitaxel every  2 weeksDose dense AC → Paclitaxel weeklyTC (T = docetaxel)Other RegimensCMFAC →  Docetaxel  every 3 weeksAC → Paclitaxel weeklyTAC (T = docetaxel)AC → T + trastuzumab +/pertuzumab (T = paclitaxel)TCH (docetaxel, carboplatin, trastuzumab +/pertuzumab)Other RegimensAC → T + trastuzumab +/pertuzumab (T = docetaxel)Docetaxel + cyclophosphamide + trastuzumabFEC → Docetaxel + trastuzumab + pertuzumabFEC → Paclitaxel + trastuzumab + pertuzumabPaclitaxel + trastuzumabPaclitaxel + trastuzumab + pertuzumab →  FECDocetaxel + trastuzumab + pertuzumab →  FECA = Adriamycin (doxorubicin); C = cyclophosphamide; E = epirubicin; F = 5-fluorouracil; M = methotrexate; T = Taxane (docetaxel or paclitaxel); → = followed by.Data from NCCN Practice Guidelines in Oncology. Fort Washington, PA: National Comprehensive Cancer Network, 2006.promising in highly selected low-risk populations, use of APBI should be based on current guidelines or offered in the setting of a prospective trial.304Chemotherapy AdjuvantChemotherapy. The Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collabora-tive Group overview analysis of adjuvant chemotherapy demon-strated reductions in the odds of recurrence and death in women ≤70 years of age with stage I, IIA, or IIB breast cancer.123,305-309 For those ≥70 years of age, the lack of definitive clinical trial data regarding adjuvant chemotherapy prevented definitive rec-ommendations. Adjuvant chemotherapy is of minimal benefit to women with negative nodes and cancers ≤0.5 cm in size and is not recommended. Women with negative nodes and cancers  0.6 to 1.0 cm are divided into those with a low risk of recurrence and those with unfavorable prognostic features that portend a higher risk of recurrence and a need for adjuvant chemotherapy. Adverse prognostic factors include blood vessel or lymph ves-sel invasion, high nuclear grade, high histologic grade, HER2/neu overexpression, and negative hormone receptor status. American Society of Clinical Oncology guidelines suggest that adjuvant chemotherapy should be considered for patients with positive lymph nodes, HER2-positive disease, Adjuvant! Online mortality greater than 10%, grade 3 lymph node negative tumors >5 mm, triple-negative tumors, lympho-vascular invasion, or estimated distant relapse risk of greater than 15% at 10 years based on 21 gene recurrence score.259 Adjuvant chemotherapy is recommended by the NCCN guidelines for women with these unfavorable prognostic features. Table 17-14 lists the frequently used chemotherapy regimens for breast cancer.For women with hormone receptor-negative cancers that are >1 cm in size, adjuvant chemotherapy is appropriate. Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   59401/03/19   5:05 PM 595THE BREASTCHAPTER 17However, women with node-negative hormone receptor–positive cancers and T1 tumors are candidates for antiestrogen therapy with or without chemotherapy. Assessment of overall risk using known prognostic factors or additional testing such as the 21-gene recurrence score assay can help to guide deci-sion making regarding chemotherapy in patients with node-negative, ER-positive breast cancer. For special-type cancers (tubular, mucinous, medullary, etc), which are usually strongly estrogen receptor positive, adjuvant antiestrogen therapy should be advised for cancers >1 cm. For women with node-positive tumors or with a special-type cancer that is >3 cm, the use of chemotherapy is appropriate; those with hormone receptor-positive tumors should receive antiestrogen therapy.For stage IIIA breast cancer, preoperative chemotherapy with an anthracycline and taxane-containing regimen followed by either a modified radical mastectomy or segmental mastec-tomy with axillary dissection followed by adjuvant radiation therapy should be considered, especially for estrogen receptor negative disease. While the same regimen may be considered for estrogen receptor positive disease, it is known that these tumors respond less well to chemotherapy with <10% pCR rate overall and <3% pCR rate for lobular cancers. Other options such as neoadjuvant endocrine therapy followed by local-regional treatment or in some cases primary endocrine therapy may be considered depending on other tumor characteristics and the patient’s comorbid conditions and preference.Neoadjuvant (Preoperative) Chemotherapy. In the early 1970s, the National Cancer Institute in Milan, Italy, initiated two prospective randomized multimodality clinical trials for women with T3 or T4 breast cancer.310 The best results were achieved when surgery was interposed between chemotherapy courses, with 82% local-regional control and 25% having a 5-year dis-ease-free survival. The NSABP B-18 trial evaluated the role of neoadjuvant chemotherapy in women with operable stages II and III breast cancer.206 Women entered into this study were randomly assigned to receive either surgery followed by che-motherapy or neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by surgery. There was no difference in the 5-year disease-free survival rates for the two groups, but after neoadjuvant chemotherapy there was an increase in the number of lumpectomies performed and a decreased incidence of node positivity. It was suggested that neoadjuvant chemotherapy be considered for the initial manage-ment of breast cancers judged too large for initial lumpectomy.Several prospective clinical trials have evaluated the neo-adjuvant approach, and two meta-analyses have been performed, each showing that neoadjuvant vs. adjuvant chemotherapy are equivalent in terms of OS.262,311 These analyses also evaluated local-regional recurrence (LRR) and found that there was an increase in LRR rates for patients receiving neoadjuvant chemo-therapy when radiation therapy was used alone without surgery after completion of chemotherapy. Mittendorf and colleagues evaluated a contemporary series of almost 3000 patients treated with breast conserving surgery and radiation therapy who received either neoadjuvant or adjuvant chemotherapy for breast cancer.312 They found that the risk of LRR was driven by bio-logic factors and disease stage and was not impacted by the timing of chemotherapy delivery. These data high-light the importance of the multidisciplinary management of patients with breast cancer in achieving the best outcomes.The use of neoadjuvant chemotherapy offers the oppor-tunity to observe the response of the intact primary tumor 10and any regional nodal metastases to a specific chemotherapy regimen.279 For patients whose tumors remain stable in size or even progress with the initial neoadjuvant chemotherapy regi-men, a new regimen may be considered that uses another class of agents, although there is no randomized data confirming this will improve outcome.After treatment with neoadjuvant chemotherapy, patients are assessed for clinical and pathologic response to the regimen. Patients whose tumors achieve a pathologic complete response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy have been shown to have statisti-cally improved survival outcomes to those of patients whose tumors demonstrate only a partial response, remain stable, or progress on treatment. Researchers at MD Anderson Cancer  Center have shown that residual cancer burden (RCB)—categorized into four classes, RCB-0 or pathologic complete response, RCB-1, RCB-2, and RCB-3—is predictive of 10-year relapse-free survival with neoadjuvant chemotherapy in triple negative, ER-positive, and HER2-positive tumors.313 Patients who experience progression of disease during neoadjuvant che-motherapy have the poorest survival.314,315 This means that while patients who achieve a pCR will have a better prognosis based on their response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Equally other patients will have a poorer prognosis compared to when they started neoadjuvant therapy based on the nonresponse to treat-ment. Consequently, the FDA has supported the use of the neo-adjuvant platform and pathologic response rates as an endpoint for mechanism of accelerated approval for new agents in high risk early stage breast cancer, though the short-term endpoints (i.e., pCR) have not been shown to correlate with long-term out-comes (i.e., disease free survival and overall survival).Current NCCN recommendations for treatment of oper-able advanced local-regional breast cancer are neoadjuvant chemotherapy with an anthracycline-containing or taxane-containing regimen or both, followed by mastectomy or lumpec-tomy with axillary lymph node dissection if necessary, followed by adjuvant radiation therapy. For patients with HER2-positive breast cancer, trastuzumab and pertuzumab can be combined with chemotherapy in the preoperative setting to increase patho-logic complete response rates. For inoperable stage IIIA and for stage IIIB breast cancer, neoadjuvant chemotherapy is used to decrease the local-regional cancer burden. This may then permit subsequent modified radical or radical mastectomy, which is followed by adjuvant radiation therapy.Nodal Evaluation in Patients Receiving Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy. The management of the axilla after neoadjuvant chemotherapy has not been specifically addressed in randomized trials. Standard practice has been to perform an axillary lymph node dissection after chemotherapy or to perform a sentinel lymph node dissection before chemotherapy for nodal staging before chemotherapy is initiated. A number of small single-institution studies, one multicenter study, and a recent meta-analysis have explored the use of SLN dissection at the completion of chemo-therapy. The published results from these studies have demon-strated the feasibility of SLN dissection in breast cancer patients after neoadjuvant chemotherapy. A review of 14 studies with 818 patients showed a false negative rate of 11% with an overall accu-racy of 94%.280,281,316 While SLN dissection has been accepted for assessment of the axilla in the clinically node-negative axilla after neoadjuvant chemotherapy, clinicians have been slower to adopt this approach for axillary staging after chemotherapy in patients who started with initial node-positive disease. Several clinical Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   59501/03/19   5:05 PM 596SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IItrials have been performed to evaluate the accuracy of SLN dis-section in patients with documented axillary metastases at initial presentation, including ACOSOG Z1071, SENTINA, and SN FNAC. ACOSOG Z1071 (Alliance) analyzed women with clini-cal T0-T4, N1-N2, M0 breast cancer who underwent both SLN surgery and axillary lymph node dissection (ALND).317 The pri-mary endpoint was the false-negative rate (FNR) of SLN surgery after chemotherapy with clinically node-positive disease with a prespecified endpoint of 10% considered to be an acceptable rate. However, the FNR was found to be 12.6%, though it was lower when dual-agent mapping technique was used and at least three or more SLNs removed.317 The SENTINA and SN FNAC trials had findings similar to Z1071. The results from Z1071 were further analyzed to determine if a clip was placed in the positive node at initial diagnosis and if the clipped node location at surgery (SLN or ALND) was evaluated. Indeed, this showed that identification of the clipped node during the surgical procedure further decreased the FNR.318 The results from the ACOSOG Z1071 (Alliance) trial, in cases presenting with cN1 disease and at least two SLN resec-tions and clipped node was within the SLN specimen, showed that the FNR was 6.8%.318 Caudle et al at MD Anderson Cancer Center performed a prospective study of patients with biopsy-confirmed nodal metastases with a clip placed in the biopsy-proven lymph node, who were treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy; at the time of surgery these patients underwent SLN dissection with targeting and removal of the clipped node (targeted axillary dis-section [TAD]).319 TAD includes SLN surgery and selective local-ization and removal of the clipped node, with the goal to determine if pathologic changes in the clipped node accurately reflect the status of the nodal basin, and proposing that TAD improves the FNR compared to SLN surgery alone.319 In patients undergoing SLN surgery and ALND (n = 118), the FNR was 10.1% (95% CI, 4.2–19.8), and adding evaluation of the clipped node reduced the FNR to 1.4% (95% CI, 0.03–7.3; P = .03). TAD followed by ALND was performed in 85 patients, with an FNR of 2.0% (1 of 50; 95% CI, 0.05–10.7).319 Although the use of dual tracer tech-nique, retrieval of three or more SLNs, and TAD improve axillary staging after neoadjuvant chemotherapy, there is no long-term data about the oncologic safety of omitting ALND in patients who con-vert from cN1 to cN0 disease at this time.Neoadjuvant Endocrine Therapy. While initially used in elderly women who were deemed poor candidates for surgery or cytotoxic chemotherapy, neoadjuvant endocrine therapy is being increasingly evaluated in clinical trials. As clinicians have gained experience with neoadjuvant treatment strategies, it is now clear from examination of predictors of complete pathologic response that ER-positive tumors do not shrink in response to chemotherapy as readily as ER-negative tumors.320 Indeed, the pCR rate in ER-negative tumors is approximately three times that of ER-positive tumors. Fisher et al examined the results of the NSABP B-14 and B-20 trials and found that, as age increased, women obtained less benefit from chemo-therapy. They recommended that factors214 including tumor estrogen receptor concentration, nuclear grade, histologic grade, tumor type, and markers of proliferation should be considered in these patients before choosing between the use of chemotherapy and hormonal therapy. If in fact the tumor is estrogen-receptor rich, these patients may benefit more from endocrine therapy in the neoadjuvant setting than they might if they received stan-dard chemotherapy. Neoadjuvant endocrine therapy has been shown to shrink tumors, enabling breast-conserving surgery in women with hormone receptor-positive disease who otherwise would have to be treated with mastectomy, although long-term recurrence rates have not been reported.265 The IMPACT trial evaluated neoadjuvant use of tamoxifen or anastrozole or both in combination in postmenopausal women with ER-positive operable or locally advanced breast cancer.321 While there were no significant differences in objective tumor response among tamoxifen, anastrozole, or a combination of the two, in patients who were initially deemed as mastectomy candidates, only 31% had breast-conserving surgery with tamoxifen, whereas 44% underwent breast-conserving surgery with anastrozole. Invasive lobular cancers in particular have been shown to respond poorly to neoadjuvant chemotherapy and may have better response to neoadjuvant endocrine therapy.322-324 A meta-analysis evaluating the response rate and rate of breast conservation surgery with the use of neoadjuvant endocrine therapy compared to combi-nation chemotherapy was recently reported. This meta-analysis included nearly 3500 patients across 20 studies.325 Interestingly, aromatase inhibitors had a similar response, and breast conserva-tion rates in comparison with combination chemotherapy albeit with lower toxicity suggest that neoadjuvant endocrine therapy is an appropriate alternative in ER-positive breast cancers.  However, the incidence of complete pathological response was low (<10%) with both approaches. Also, aromatase inhibitors were associated with significantly higher response and breast conservation rates compared with tamoxifen. The ALTER-NATE (Alternate Approaches for Clinical Stage II or III Estro-gen Receptor Positive Breast Cancer Neoadjuvant Treatment in Postmenopausal Women) trial is currently evaluating neo-adjuvant endocrine therapy with fulvestrant or anastrozole or in combination.Increasing knowledge of secondary resistance mecha-nisms to endocrine therapy and cross talk between ER and the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway have led to the evaluation of PI3K pathway inhibitors in combination with endocrine therapy. Post-menopausal women with ER-positive early breast cancers were treated with letrozole or letrozole in combination with everoli-mus, a mTOR inhibitor, in a randomized, phase 2 clinical trial. Clinical response and antiproliferative response, characterized by reduction in Ki67, was superior in the combination arm, sug-gesting that everolimus can increase efficacy of neoadjuvant letrozole.326 The LORLEI study is evaluating the use of taselisib, a PI3K inhibitor in combination with letrozole compared with letrozole alone. With the approval of CDK 4/6 inhibitors in the metastatic setting, clinical trials are evaluating the use of CDK inhibitors in combination with neoadjuvant endocrine therapy. Neoadjuvant anastrozole in combination with palbociclib, a CDK4/6 inhibitor, has been shown to significantly reduce Ki67, suggesting that CDK4/6 inhibition can increase the efficacy of neoadjuvant endocrine therapy.With the use of neoadjuvant chemotherapy or endocrine therapy, observation of the response of the intact tumor and/or nodal metastases to a specific regimen could ultimately help to define which patients will benefit from specific therapies in the adjuvant setting. In adjuvant trials the primary endpoint is typi-cally survival, whereas in neoadjuvant trials the endpoints have more often been clinical or pathologic response rates. There are a number of clinical trials underway comparing neoadjuvant chemotherapy and endocrine therapy regimens with pretreat-ment and posttreatment biopsy samples obtained from the pri-mary tumors in all of the participants. These samples are being subjected to intensive genomic and proteomic analyses that may Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   59601/03/19   5:05 PM 597THE BREASTCHAPTER 17help to define a more personalized or individualized approach to breast cancer treatment in the future.Antiestrogen TherapyTamoxifen. Within the cytosol of breast cancer cells are spe-cific proteins (receptors) that bind and transfer steroid moieties into the cell nucleus to exert specific hormonal effects.308,327-331 The most widely studied hormone receptors are the estrogen receptor and progesterone receptor. Hormone receptors are detectable in >90% of well-differentiated ductal and lobular invasive cancers. Although the receptor status may remain the same between the primary cancer and metastatic disease in the same patient in the majority of cases, there are instances where the status is changed in the metastatic focus; therefore, biopsy of newly diagnosed metastatic disease should be considered for assessment of hormone receptor and HER2 status.After binding to estrogen receptors in the cytosol, tamoxi-fen blocks the uptake of estrogen by breast tissue. Clini-cal responses to antiestrogen are evident in >60% of women with hormone receptor-positive breast cancers but in <10% of women with hormone receptor-negative breast cancers. A meta-analysis by the Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collabora-tive Group showed that adjuvant therapy with tamoxifen for 5 years reduced breast cancer mortality by about a third through the first 15 years of follow-up.14 This mortality benefit contin-ues to be statistically significant in the second and third 5-year periods (i.e., years 5–9 and 10–15) when the patients are no longer receiving endocrine treatment—the so-called carry-over effect. The analysis also showed a 39% reduction in the risk of cancer in the contralateral breast. The antiestrogens do have defined toxicity, including bone pain, hot flashes, nausea, vom-iting, and fluid retention. Thrombotic events occur in <3% of treated women. Cataract surgery is more frequently performed in patients receiving tamoxifen. The Stockholm trial showed that 5 years of tamoxifen was associated with a significant reduction in locoregional recurrences and distant metastasis in postmenopausal women with ER-positive breast cancer.332 However, an increase in endometrial cancers was observed with long-term tamoxifen use. The NSABP B14 trial evaluated 10 years of tamoxifen compared to 5 years.333 However, the study was terminated based on interim analyses indicating no addi-tional benefit from tamoxifen beyond 5 years. The ATLAS trial also evaluated the use of tamoxifen for 5 years vs. 10 years in nearly 13,000 women across the world. This study showed that continuing tamoxifen for 10 years vs. 5 years produced a  significant reduction in recurrence and mortality.334 Interestingly, the benefit was not seen in the second 5 years (i.e., years 5–9)  while the patients were on treatment, but it was seen from  years 10 to 15. One reason the NSABP B14 study was led to conclude that 10 years of tamoxifen was not beneficial was that the follow-up time was shorter. Results of the ATLAS study were also corroborated by the aTTom study. Similarly, extended adjuvant therapy with letrozole after 5 years of tamoxifen was shown to improve disease-free survival without improvement in overall survival except in node-positive patients.335Tamoxifen therapy is also considered for women with DCIS that is found to be ER-positive. The goals of such ther-apy are to decrease the risk of an ipsilateral recurrence after breast conservation therapy for DCIS and to decrease the risk of a primary invasive breast cancer or a contralateral breast cancer event. Consequently, tamoxifen is not recommended for patients who have had bilateral mastectomies with ER-positive DCIS. With the use of aromatase inhibitors in postmenopausal women, use of adjuvant tamoxifen has increasingly been limited to premenopausal women.Aromatase Inhibitors. In postmenopausal women, aromatase inhibitors are now considered first-line therapy in the adjuvant setting. Currently, three third-generation aromatase inhibitors are approved for clinical use: the reversible nonsteroidal inhibitors anastrozole and letrozole and the irreversible steroidal inhibitor exemestane. While all the aromatase inhibitors have been shown to have similar efficacy with a similar spectrum of adverse effects, the Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group meta-analyses of 31,920 postmenopausal women with ER-positive early breast cancers treated with tamoxifen or aroma-tase inhibitors demonstrated that 5 years of aromatase inhibitors reduced the rate of recurrence by 30% and 10-year breast cancer mortality by about 15% compared to 5 years of tamoxifen.336-339 The NSABP B42 study evaluated whether an additional 5 years of letrozole improved disease-free survival in postmenopausal women who have completed 5 years of tamoxifen or an aromatase inhibitor. After a median follow-up of 6.9 years, while extended letrozole significantly improved breast cancer-free interval, no improvement in disease-free survival, the primary endpoint, was observed. Recently, the results of the MA-17R study, designed to assess the efficacy of adjuvant letrozole for 10 years, were reported.340 Similar to NSABP B42, extended letrozole improved disease-free survival without significant improvement in overall survival. Patients who are node-positive, have received adjuvant chemotherapy, with prior receipt of tamoxifen are likely to ben-efit from long-term use of an aromatase inhibitor.The aromatase inhibitors are less likely than tamoxifen to cause endometrial cancer but do lead to changes in bone mineral density that may result in osteoporosis and an increased rate of fractures in postmenopausal women. The risk of osteoporosis can be averted by treatment with bisphosphonates. Joint pains are a side effect that affects a significant number of patients. Node-negative and node-positive breast cancer patients whose tumors express hormone receptors should be considered for endocrine therapy in the adjuvant setting. Women with hormone receptor–positive cancers achieve significant reduction in risk of recurrence of breast cancer and mortality from breast cancer through the use of endocrine therapies.For postmenopausal women with ER-positive, HER2-negative, metastatic breast cancer, available endocrine thera-pies include nonsteroidal aromatase inhibitors (anastrozole and letrozole); steroidal aromatase inhibitors (exemestane); serum ER modulators (tamoxifen or toremifene); ER down-regulators  (fulvestrant); progestin (megestrol acetate); androgens (fluoxymesterone); and high-dose estrogen (ethinyl estradiol). A third generation nonsteroidal aromatase inhibitor or palbo-ciclib, the CDK 4/6 inhibitor, in combination with letrozole may be considered as a treatment option for first-line therapy. Activation of CDK4/CDK6 cell cycle signaling axis has been implicated in mediating endocrine resistance. Consequently, PALOMA-1 evaluated the safety and efficacy of palbociclib in combination with letrozole vs. letrozole alone as first-line treat-ment for patients with ER-positive, HER2-negative advanced breast cancer. Median progression-free survival (PFS) was doubled with the combination compared to letrozole alone  (20.2 months vs. 10.2 months for the letrozole).341 Based on this, the FDA approved palbociclib in combination with letrozole for the treatment of postmenopausal women with ER-positive, HER2-negative advanced breast cancer as initial treatment. The Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   59701/03/19   5:05 PM 598SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIbenefit of palbociclib in combination with letrozole was sub-sequently confirmed in a phase 3 trial (PFS 24.8 months vs.  14.5 months for letrozole).342 Two additional CDK4/6 inhibitors, ribociclib and abemaciclib, have been approved for use in com-bination with endocrine therapy for patients with hormone receptor–positive advanced breast cancer.On the other hand, PALOMA-3 compared the combina-tion of palbociclib and fulvestrant to fulvestrant alone in preor postmenopausal ER-positive, HER2-negative metastatic breast cancer patients, whose disease progressed on prior endocrine therapy. Premenopausal women also received the GNRH ago-nist, goserelin. The median PFS was 9.2 months for the combi-nation compared to 3.8 months with fulvestrant alone.343 Thus, fulvestrant with palbociclib is a potential option for women with metastatic breast cancer who have progressed on prior endo-crine therapy. Additionally, abemaciclib in combination with fulvestrant or as single agent is approved for use in ER-posi-tive advanced breast cancers previously treated with endocrine therapy.In premenopausal women with stage IV ER-positive breast cancer without previous exposure to endocrine therapy, initial treatment with tamoxifen or ovarian suppression/ablation plus aromatase inhibitor with or without CDK4/6 inhibitors are reasonable options.Activation of the PI3K/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signal transduction pathway has also been implicated in secondary resistance to estrogen targeting. BOLERO-2 eval-uated the use of exemestane in combination with everolimus in postmenopausal women with ER-positive tumors who had progressed or recurred on a nonsteroidal aromatase inhibitor.344 An improvement in PFS was observed with combination com-pared to exemestane alone (11 vs. 4.1 months) leading to FDA approval. Similar improvement in PFS was observed with a combination of tamoxifen and everolimus.345 However, a phase 3 trial of letrozole in combination with temsirolimus, an mTOR inhibitor, did not show any improvement in PFS in aromatase inhibitor–naive metastatic postmenopausal women.346 Trials evaluating the adjuvant use of mTOR inhibitors and CDK 4/6 inhibitors are currently in progress.Women whose tumors respond to an endocrine therapy with either shrinkage of their breast cancer (objective response) or long-term stabilization of disease (stable disease) are con-sidered to represent “clinical benefit” and should receive addi-tional endocrine therapy at the time of progression because their chances of a further response remain high.294-296 Patients whose tumors progress de novo on an endocrine agent have a low rate of clinical benefit (<20%) to subsequent endocrine therapy; the choice of endocrine or chemotherapy should be considered based on the disease site and extent as well as the patient’s general condition and treatment preference.294The adjuvant use of aromatase inhibitors and recent advances in tumor genome sequencing technologies have enabled the identification of secondary ESR1 mutations.347,348 These mutations, typically present in the ligand binding domains, lead to ligand-independent activation of the receptor, mediate resistance to aromatase inhibitors, and are associated with shorter survival.349 Reported incidence of these mutations are variable (20%–30%) based on prior exposure to aroma-tase inhibitors and are uncommon in primary breast cancers. Clinical trials evaluating novel selective estrogen receptor degraders with potential activity against these mutations are in progress.Ablative Endocrine TherapyIn the past, adrenalectomy and/or hypophysectomy were the pri-mary endocrine modalities used to treat metastatic breast cancer, but today these approaches are seldom used. In women who are premenopausal at diagnosis, ovarian ablation can be accomplished by oophorectomy or ovarian radiation. Ovarian suppression can be accomplished by the use of gonadotrophin-hormone releasing hormone agonists, such as goserelin or leuprolide. Evaluation of the combination of goserelin with tamoxifen vs. cyclophospha-mide/methotrexate/fluorouracil chemotherapy in premenopausal ER-positive early-stage breast cancers showed that relapse-free survival was superior with endocrine therapy combination, with a similar trend in overall survival.350 Data from the SOFT and TEXT trials on adjuvant endocrine therapy show that exemes-tane plus ovarian suppression significantly reduces recurrences as compared with tamoxifen plus ovarian suppression.351,352  In these trials, ovarian suppression was achieved with the use of the gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist triptorelin, oopho-rectomy, or ovarian irradiation. The disease-free survival was 89% in the tamoxifen plus ovarian suppression group, while it was 93% in exemestane plus ovarian suppression group; how-ever, there was no significant differences in overall survival. In the SOFT trial, while tamoxifen plus ovarian suppression was not superior to tamoxifen alone in terms of disease-free survival, improved outcomes were observed in ovarian suppression in women with a high risk of recurrence. In women who received no adjuvant chemotherapy, no meaningful benefit was obtained with ovarian suppression. Thus, ovarian suppression in combi-nation with an aromatase inhibitor can be considered in select premenopausal women with high-risk features (age <40 years, positive lymph nodes) who warranted adjuvant chemotherapy.Anti-HER2 TherapyThe determination of tumor HER-2 expression or gene ampli-fication for all newly diagnosed patients with breast cancer is now recommended.353-356 It is used to assist in the selection of adjuvant chemotherapy in both node-negative and node-positive patients. Trastuzumab was initially approved for the treatment of HER2/neu-positive breast cancer in patients with metastatic disease. Once efficacy was demonstrated for patients with metastatic disease, the NSABP and the North Central Cancer Treatment Group conducted phase 3 trials that evaluated the impact of adjuvant trastuzumab therapy in patients with early-stage breast cancer. After approval from the FDA, these groups amended their adjuvant trastuzumab trials (B-31 and N9831, respectively), to provide for a joint efficacy analysis. The first joint interim efficacy analysis demonstrated an improvement in 3-year disease-free survival from 75% in the control arm to 87% in the trastuzumab arm (hazard ratio = 0.48, P <.0001). There was an accompanying 33% reduction in mortality in the patients who received trastuzumab (hazard ratio = 0.67, P = 0.015). The magnitude of reduction in hazard for disease-free survival events crossed prespecified early reporting boundaries, so the data-monitoring committees for both groups recommended that randomized accrual to the trials be ended, and the results were subsequently published.181While anthracycline-based adjuvant chemotherapy was considered preferable in HER2-positive breast cancer, the BCIRG 006 compared the use of anthracycline with taxane and trastuzumab (AC-TH) versus taxane, carboplatin chemotherapy with trastuzumab (TCH).182 With 10 years of follow-up, no statistical significance with regard to disease-free and overall Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   59801/03/19   5:05 PM 599THE BREASTCHAPTER 17survival was observed for anthracycline-based chemotherapy. While anthracycline chemotherapy was numerically superior, this was accompanied by an increase in the incidence of leu-kemia and congestive heart failure. A year of adjuvant trastu-zumab is considered standard of care. Two years of adjuvant trastuzumab has been shown to be more effective, although it is associated with more toxicity than 1 year of trastuzumab.357 On the other hand, the PHARE trial examined 6 months vs. stan-dard 12 months of trastuzumab. After 3.5 years of follow-up, the study failed to demonstrate that 6 months was noninferior com-pared to the standard therapy.358 Patients with HER2-positive tumors benefit if trastuzumab is added to taxane chemotherapy. Because of overlapping cardiotoxicities, trastuzumab is not usu-ally given concurrently with anthracyclines.Buzdar and colleagues reported the results of a random-ized neoadjuvant trial of trastuzumab in combination with sequential paclitaxel followed by FEC-75 (5-fluorouracil, epi-rubicin, cyclophosphamide) vs. the same chemotherapy regimen without trastuzumab in 42 women with early-stage operable breast cancer. The pathologic complete response rates in this trial increased from 25% to 66.7% when chemotherapy was given concurrently with trastuzumab.301 A subsequent report that included additional patients treated with concurrent chemo-therapy and trastuzumab further confirmed the high pathologic complete response rates and continued to show that cardiac function was preserved.302While novel agents have been approved for the treatment of women with metastatic HER2-positive breast cancers, cur-rently trastuzumab is the only HER2-targeted agent approved for use in the adjuvant setting. Lapatinib is a dual tyrosine kinase inhibitor that targets both HER2 and EGFR. It was approved for use with capecitabine in patients with HER2-positive meta-static disease. Adjuvant lapatinib was shown to be inferior to trastuzumab, and the combination of lapatinib with trastuzumab did yield a significant improvement in disease-free survival compared to trastuzumab alone. Ado-trastuzumab emtansine (T-DM1) is approved for HER2-positive metastatic breast cancer patients who have previously received trastuzumab and a taxane either separately or in combination. T-DM1 is an antibody drug conjugate that incorporates the HER2 targeted activity of trastuzumab with the cytotoxic activity of DM1, a microtubule inhibitory agent leading to apoptosis.359Pertuzumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody that binds at a different epitope of the HER2 extracellular domain (subdomain II) and prevents dimerization of HER2 with other members of the family, primarily HER3. In the metastatic setting, it is approved in combination with trastuzumab and docetaxel for patients with metastatic HER2-positive breast cancer who have not received prior HER2-targeted therapy or chemotherapy for metastatic disease.360 In the neoadjuvant setting, pertuzumab is approved in combination with trastu-zumab and docetaxel in HER2-positive, early stage breast cancers that are greater than 2 cm or node-positive. However, this approval is based on improvement in pathologic complete response rate, and not data based on improvement in event free or overall survival.361,362 In the NeoSphere trial, neoadjuvant use of pertuzumab with trastuzumab and docetaxel led to nearly a 17% increase in pathologic complete response in the breast  (P = .0141).361 While in the TRYPHAENA study, pathologic complete responses ranging from 57% to 66% were observed with neoadjuvant pertuzumab and trastuzumab combination given with anthracycline-containing or nonanthracycline-containing chemotherapy.362 With the use of dual antibody therapy, cur-rently there is significant interest in identifying patients who can avoid chemotherapy and potentially be treated with HER2-targeted agents alone. The NeoSphere study showed 27% pathologic complete response in HER2-positive, ER-negative, breast cancer patients treated with pertuzumab and trastuzumab alone. Pertuzumab was recently FDA approved in combination with trastuzumab and chemotherapy in the adjuvant setting in HER2 amplified breast cancers with high risk of recurrence. Approval is based on APHINITY trial showing that the addition of pertuzumab improved invasive disease free survival (7.1%) compared to placebo (8.7%) (HR 0.82, 95% CI: 0.67, 1.00;  p = 0.047). Overall survival data is not mature.The ExteNET study evaluated the use of neratinib, an irreversible inhibitor of EGFR, HER2, and HER4, in HER2-positive early stage patients who have completed adjuvant trastuzumab. A year of neratinib after completion of chemo-therapy and trastuzumab-based adjuvant therapy significantly improved 2-year disease-free survival, the primary endpoint.363 After two years, invasive disease free survival was 94.2% in patients treated with neratinib compared with 91.9% in those receiving placebo (HR 0.66; 95% CI: 0.49, 0.90, p = 0.008) leading to FDA approval for HER2 amplified breast cancers following a year of adjuvant trastuzumab.In addition to amplifications or copy number alterations, activating mutations or single nucleotide variants in HER2 have been described (2%).364 Typically observed in ER-positive breast cancers, a higher prevalence of HER2 mutations have been reported in invasive lobular carcinomas, particularly in the pleomorphic subtype.365 These mutations, usually exclusive with HER2 amplification, are observed in kinase or extracellular domains and predict for responses or resistance to HER2-targeting  agents.366,367 A phase 2 trial of neratinib in HER2-mutated meta-static breast cancers showed a clinical benefit rate of 36% with one complete response and one partial response in a heavily pre-treated population. A clinical trial evaluating the combination of neratinib with fulvestrant, in HER2-mutated, ER-positive breast cancers, is in progress.SPECIAL CLINICAL SITUATIONSNipple DischargeUnilateral Nipple Discharge. Nipple discharge is a finding that can be seen in a number of clinical situations. It may be suggestive of cancer if it is spontaneous, unilateral, localized to a single duct, present in women ≥40 years of age, bloody, or associated with a mass. A trigger point on the breast may be present so that pressure around the nipple-areolar complex induces discharge from a single duct. In this circumstance, mammography and ultrasound are indicated for further evalu-ation. A ductogram also can be useful and is performed by can-nulating a single discharging duct with a small nylon catheter or needle and injecting 1.0 mL of water-soluble contrast solu-tion. Nipple discharge associated with a cancer may be clear, bloody, or serous. Testing for the presence of hemoglobin is helpful, but hemoglobin may also be detected when nipple dis-charge is secondary to an intraductal papilloma or duct ecta-sia. Definitive diagnosis depends on excisional biopsy of the offending duct and any associated mass lesion. A 3.0 lacrimal duct probe can be used to identify the duct that requires exci-sion. Another approach is to inject methylene blue dye within Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   59901/03/19   5:05 PM 600SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIthe duct after ductography. The nipple must be sealed with collodion or a similar material so that the blue dye does not discharge through the nipple but remains within the distended duct facilitating its localization. Localization with a wire or seed is performed when there is an associated mass that lies >2.0 to 3.0 cm from the nipple.Bilateral Nipple Discharge. Nipple discharge is suggestive of a benign condition if it is bilateral and multiductal in origin, occurs in women ≤39 years of age, or is milky or blue-green. Prolactin-secreting pituitary adenomas are responsible for bilat-eral nipple discharge in <2% of cases. If serum prolactin levels are repeatedly elevated, plain radiographs of the sellaturcica are indicated, and thin section CT scan is required. Optical nerve compression, visual field loss, and infertility are associated with large pituitary adenomas.Axillary Lymph Node Metastases in the Setting of an Unknown Primary CancerA woman who presents with an axillary lymph node metasta-sis that is consistent with a breast cancer metastasis has a 90% probability of harboring an occult breast cancer.303 However, axillary lymphadenopathy is the initial presenting sign in only 1% of breast cancer patients. Fine-needle aspiration biopsy or core-needle biopsy can be used to establish the diagnosis when an enlarged axillary lymph node is identified. When metastatic cancer is found, immunohistochemical analysis may classify the cancer as epithelial, melanocytic, or lymphoid in origin. The presence of hormone receptors (estrogen or progesterone receptors) suggests metastasis from a breast cancer but is not diagnostic. The search for a primary cancer includes careful examination of the thyroid, breast, and pelvis, including the rectum. The breast should be examined with diagnostic mam-mography, ultrasonography, and MRI to evaluate for an occult primary lesion. Further radiologic and laboratory studies should include chest radiography and liver function studies. Additional imaging of the chest, abdomen, and skeleton may be indicated if the extent of nodal involvement is consistent with stage III breast cancer. Suspicious findings on mammography, ultra-sonography, or MRI necessitate breast biopsy. When a breast cancer is found, treatment consists of an axillary lymph node dissection with a mastectomy or preservation of the breast fol-lowed by whole-breast radiation therapy. Chemotherapy and endocrine therapy should be considered.Breast Cancer During PregnancyBreast cancer occurs in 1 of every 3000 pregnant women, and axillary lymph node metastases are present in up to 75% of these women.368 The average age of the pregnant woman with breast cancer is 34 years. Fewer than 25% of the breast nodules developing during pregnancy and lactation will be cancerous. Ultrasonography and needle biopsy specimens are used in the diagnosis of these nodules. Mammography is rarely indicated because of its decreased sensitivity during pregnancy and lac-tation; however, the fetus can be shielded if mammography is needed. Approximately 30% of the benign conditions encoun-tered will be unique to pregnancy and lactation (galactoceles, lobular hyperplasia, lactating adenoma, and mastitis or abscess). Once a breast cancer is diagnosed, complete blood count, chest radiography (with shielding of the abdomen), and liver function studies are performed.Because of the potential deleterious effects of radiation therapy on the fetus, radiation cannot be considered until the fetus is delivered. A modified radical mastectomy can be per-formed during the first and second trimesters of pregnancy, even though there is an increased risk of spontaneous abortion after first-trimester anesthesia. During the third trimester, lumpec-tomy with axillary node dissection can be considered if adju-vant radiation therapy is deferred until after delivery. Lactation is suppressed. Chemotherapy administered during the first tri-mester carries a risk of spontaneous abortion and a 12% risk of birth defects. There is no evidence of teratogenicity resulting from administration of chemotherapeutic agents in the second and third trimesters. For this reason, many clinicians now con-sider the optimal strategy to be delivery of chemotherapy in the second and third trimesters as a neoadjuvant approach, which allows local therapy decisions to be made after the delivery of the baby. Pregnant women with breast cancer often present at a later stage of disease because breast tissue changes that occur in the hormone-rich environment of pregnancy obscure early cancers. However, pregnant women with breast cancer have a prognosis, stage by stage, that is similar to that of nonpregnant women with breast cancer.Male Breast CancerFewer than 1% of all breast cancers occur in men.369,370 The inci-dence appears to be highest among North Americans and the British, in whom breast cancer constitutes as much as 1.5% of all male cancers. Jewish and African-American men have the highest incidence. Male breast cancer is preceded by gyneco-mastia in 20% of men. It is associated with radiation exposure, estrogen therapy, testicular feminizing syndromes, and Kline-felter’s syndrome (XXY). Breast cancer is rarely seen in young males and has a peak incidence in the sixth decade of life. A firm, nontender mass in the male breast requires investigation. Skin or chest wall fixation is particularly worrisome.DCIS makes up <15% of male breast cancer, whereas infil-trating ductal carcinoma makes up >85%. Special-type cancers, including infiltrating lobular carcinoma, have occasionally been reported. Male breast cancer is staged in the same way as female breast cancer, and stage by stage, men with breast cancer have the same survival rate as women. Overall, men do worse because of the more advanced stage of their cancer (stage II, III or IV) at the time of diagnosis. The treatment of male breast cancer is surgi-cal, with the most common procedure being a modified radical mastectomy. SLN dissection has been shown to be feasible and accurate for nodal assessment in men presenting with a clinically node-negative axilla. Adjuvant radiation therapy is appropriate in cases in which there is a high risk for local-regional recurrence. Approximately 80% of male breast cancers are hormone recep-tor–positive, and adjuvant tamoxifen is considered. Systemic che-motherapy is considered for men with hormone receptor-negative cancers and for men with large primary tumors, multiple positive nodes, and locally advanced disease.Phyllodes TumorsThe nomenclature, presentation, and diagnosis of phyllodes tumors (including cystosarcoma phyllodes) have posed many problems for surgeons.371 These tumors are classified as benign, borderline, or malignant. Borderline tumors have a greater potential for local recurrence.Mammographic evidence of calcifications and morpho-logic evidence of necrosis do not distinguish between benign, borderline, and malignant phyllodes tumors. Consequently, it is difficult to differentiate benign phyllodes tumors from the Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   60001/03/19   5:05 PM 601THE BREASTCHAPTER 17malignant variant and from fibroadenomas. Phyllodes tumors are usually sharply demarcated from the surrounding breast tissue, which is compressed and distorted. Connective tissue composes the bulk of these tumors, which have mixed gelati-nous, solid, and cystic areas. Cystic areas represent sites of infarction and necrosis. These gross alterations give the gross cut tumor surface its classical leaf-like (phyllodes) appearance. The stroma of a phyllodes tumor generally has greater cellular activity than that of a fibroadenoma. After microdissection to harvest clusters of stromal cells from fibroadenomas and from phyllodes tumors, molecular biology techniques have shown the stromal cells of fibroadenomas to be either polyclonal or mono-clonal (derived from a single progenitor cell), whereas those of phyllodes tumors are always monoclonal.Most malignant phyllodes tumors (Fig. 17-38) contain liposarcomatous or rhabdomyosarcomatous elements rather than fibrosarcomatous elements. Evaluation of the number of mitoses and the presence or absence of invasive foci at the tumor mar-gins may help to identify a malignant tumor. Small phyllodes tumors are excised with a margin of normal-appearing breast tissue. When the diagnosis of a phyllodes tumor with suspicious ABFigure 17-38. A. Malignant phyllodes tumor (cystosarcoma-phyllodes). B. Histologic features of a malignant phyllodes tumor (hematoxylin and eosin stain, ×100).malignant elements is made, reexcision of the biopsy specimen site to ensure complete excision of the tumor with a 1-cm mar-gin of normal-appearing breast tissue is indicated. Large phyl-lodes tumors may require mastectomy. Axillary dissection is not recommended because axillary lymph node metastases rarely occur.Inflammatory Breast CarcinomaInflammatory breast carcinoma (stage IIIB) accounts for <3% of breast cancers. This cancer is characterized by the skin changes of brawny induration, erythema with a raised edge, and edema (peau d’orange).372 Permeation of the dermal lymph vessels by cancer cells is seen in skin biopsy specimens. There may be an associated breast mass (Fig. 17-39). The clinical differentia-tion of inflammatory breast cancer may be extremely difficult, especially when a locally advanced scirrhous carcinoma invades dermal lymph vessels in the skin to produce peau d’orange and lymphangitis (Table 17-15). Inflammatory breast cancer also may be mistaken for a bacterial infection of the breast. More than 75% of women who have inflammatory breast cancer present with palpable axillary lymphadenopathy, and distant metastases also are frequently present. A PET-CT scan should be considered at the time of diagnosis to rule out concurrent metastatic disease. A report of the SEER program described distant metastases at diagnosis in 25% of white women with inflammatory breast carcinoma.Surgery alone and surgery with adjuvant radiation therapy have produced disappointing results in women with inflamma-tory breast cancer. However, neoadjuvant chemotherapy with an anthracycline-containing regimen may affect dramatic regres-sions in up to 75% of cases. Tumors should be assessed for HER2 and hormone receptors with treatment dictated based on receptor status. Modified radical mastectomy is performed after demonstrated response to systemic therapy to remove residual cancer from the chest wall and axilla. Adjuvant chemotherapy may be indicated depending on final pathologic assessment of the breast and regional nodes. Finally, the chest wall and the Figure 17-39. Inflammatory breast carcinoma. Stage IIIB cancer of the breast with erythema, skin edema (peau d’orange), nipple retraction, and satellite skin nodules.Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   60101/03/19   5:06 PM 602SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIsupraclavicular, internal mammary, and axillary lymph node basins receive adjuvant radiation therapy. This multimodal approach results in 5-year survival rates that approach 30%. Patients with inflammatory breast cancer should be encouraged to participate in clinical trials.Rare Breast CancersSquamous Cell (Epidermoid) Carcinoma. Squamous cell (epidermoid) carcinoma is a rare cancer that arises from metaplasia within the duct system and generally is devoid of distinctive clinical or radiographic characteristics.373 Regional metastases occur in 25% of patients, whereas distant metastases are rare.Adenoid Cystic Carcinoma. Adenoid cystic carcinoma is very rare, accounting for <0.1% of all breast cancers. It is typically indistinguishable from adenoid cystic carcinoma arising in sali-vary tissues. These cancers are generally 1 to 3 cm in diameter at presentation and are well circumscribed. Axillary lymph node metastases are rare, but deaths from pulmonary metastases have been reported.Apocrine Carcinomas. Apocrine carcinomas are well-differentiated cancers that have rounded vesicular nuclei and prominent nucleoli. There is a very low mitotic rate and little variation in cellular features. However, apocrine carcinomas may display an aggressive growth pattern.Sarcomas. Sarcomas of the breast are histologically similar to soft tissue sarcomas at other anatomic sites. This diverse group includes fibrosarcoma, malignant fibrous histiocytoma, liposarcoma, leiomyosarcoma, malignant schwannoma, rhab-domyosarcoma, osteogenic sarcoma, and chondrosarcoma. The clinical presentation is typically that of a large, painless breast mass with rapid growth. Diagnosis is by core-needle biopsy or by open incisional biopsy. Sarcomas are graded based on cellular-ity, degree of differentiation, nuclear atypia, and mitotic activity. Primary treatment is wide local excision, which may necessitate mastectomy. Axillary dissection is not indicated unless there is biopsy proven lymph node involvement. Angiosarcomas are classified as de novo, as postradiation, or as arising in associa-tion with postmastectomy lymphedema. In 1948, Stewart and Treves described lymphangiosarcoma of the upper extremity in women with ipsilateral lymphedema after radical mastectomy.374 Angiosarcoma is now the preferred name. The average interval between modified radical or radical mastectomy and the devel-opment of an angiosarcoma is 7 to 10 years. Sixty percent of women developing this cancer have a history of adjuvant radia-tion therapy. Forequarter amputation may be necessary to palli-ate the ulcerative complications and advanced lymphedema.Lymphomas. Primary lymphomas of the breast are rare, and there are two distinct clinicopathologic variants. One type occurs in women ≤39 years of age, is frequently bilateral, and has the histologic features of Burkitt’s lymphoma. The second type is seen in women ≥40 years of age and is usually of the B-cell type. Breast involvement by Hodgkin’s lymphoma has been reported. An occult breast lymphoma may be diagnosed after detection of palpable axillary lymphadenopathy. Treatment depends on the stage of disease. Lumpectomy or mastectomy may be required. Axillary dissection for clearance of disease may be necessary. Recurrent or progressive local-regional disease is best man-aged by chemotherapy and radiation therapy. The prognosis is favorable, with 5and 10-year survival rates of 74% and 51%, respectively. More recently anaplastic large cell lymphoma has been described in association with breast implants for cosmetic or reconstructive purposes. This disease is treated with complete excision of the implant capsule with any associated soft tissue mass. More advanced cases may require systemic therapy and radiation treatment.REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Breasted JH. The Edwin Smith Surgical Papyrus. University of Chicago Press, 1930;405.	2.	Celsus AC. De Medicina (ed Loeb Classical Library Ed). Cambridge: Harvard University Press; 1935;131.	3.	Beenken SW. History of the therapy of breast cancer. In: Copeland BA, ed. The Breast: Comprehensive Manage-ment of Benign and Malignant Disorder. Philadelphia: Saunders;2004;5.	4.	Le Dran F. Mémoire avec une précis de plusieurs observa-tions sur le. Mem Acad Roy Chir Paris. 1757;3:1.	5.	Moore C. On the influence of inadequate operations on the theory of cancer. R Med Chir Soc. 1867;1:244.	6.	Halsted WS I. The results of operations for the cure of cancer of the breast performed at the Johns Hopkins Hospital from June, 1889, to January, 1894. Ann Surg. 1894;20:497-555.	7.	Haagensen CD, Stout AP. Carcinoma of the breast. II-criteria of operability. Ann Surg. 1943;118:1032-1051.	8.	Patey DH, Dyson WH. The prognosis of carcinoma of the breast in relation to the type of operation performed. Br J Cancer. 1948;2:7-13.	9.	Fisher B, Jeong JH, Anderson S, et al. Twenty-five-year follow-up of a randomized trial comparing radical mas-tectomy, total mastectomy, and total mastectomy followed by irradiation. N Engl J Med. 2002;347:567-575.	10.	Keynes G. Conservative treatment of cancer of the breast.  Br Med J. 1937;2(3):643-666.	11.	Fisher B, Anderson S, Bryant J, et al. Twenty-year follow-up of a randomized trial comparing total mastectomy, lumpec-tomy, and lumpectomy plus irradiation for the treatment of invasive breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2002;347:1233-1241.Table 17-15Inflammatory vs. noninflammatory breast cancerINFLAMMATORYNONINFLAMMATORYDermal lymph vessel invasion is present with or without inflammatory changes.Inflammatory changes are present without dermal lymph vessel invasion.Cancer is not sharply delineated.Cancer is better delineated.Erythema and edema frequently involve >33% of the skin over the breast.Erythema is usually confined to the lesion, and edema is less extensive.Lymph node involvement is present in >75% of cases.Lymph nodes are involved in approximately 50% of the cases.Distant metastases are more common at the initial presentation (25% of cases).Distant metastases are less common at presentation. Modified with permission from Bland KI, Copeland ED: The Breast: Comprehensive Management of Benign and Malignant Diseases, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsesvier/Saunders; 1998.Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   60201/03/19   5:06 PM 603THE BREASTCHAPTER 17	12.	Clarke M, Collins R, Darby S, et al. Effects of radiotherapy and of differences in the extent of surgery for early breast cancer on local recurrence and 15-year survival: an overview of the randomised trials. Lancet. 2005;366:2087-2106.	13.	Peto R, Davies C, Godwin J, et al. Comparisons between dif-ferent polychemotherapy regimens for early breast cancer:  meta-analyses of long-term outcome among 100,000 women in 123 randomised trials. Lancet. 2012;379:432-444.	14.	Davies C, Godwin J, Gray R, et al. Relevance of breast cancer hormone receptors and other factors to the efficacy of adju-vant tamoxifen: patient-level meta-analysis of randomised trials. Lancet. 2011;378:771-784.	15.	Sorlie T, Perou CM, Tibshirani R, et al. Gene expression patterns of breast carcinomas distinguish tumor subclasses with clinical implications. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001;98:10869-10874.	16.	Bland KI, Romrell LJ. Congenital and acquired disturbances of breast development and growth. In: Bland KI, Cope-land EMI, eds. The Breast: Comprehensive Management of Benign and Malignant Diseases. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1998:214.	17.	Lonnerdal B. Nutritional and physiologic significance of human milk proteins. Am J Clin Nutr. 2003;77:1537S-1543S.	18.	Rosenbloom AL. Breast physiology: normal and abnormal development and function. In: Bland KI, Copeland EMI, eds. The Breast: Comprehensive Management of Benign and Malignant Diseases. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1998:38.	19.	Van de Perre P. Transfer of antibody via mother’s milk.  Vaccine. 2003;21(24):3374-3376.	20.	Bland KI, Graves TA. Gynecomastia. In: Bland KI, Copeland EMI, eds. The Breast: Comprehensive Management of Benign and Malignant Diseases. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1998:153.	21.	Dixon JM. Outpatient treatment of non-lactational breast abscesses. Br J Surg. 1992;79:56-57.	22.	Furlong AJ, al-Nakib L, Knox WF, et al. Periductal inflamma-tion and cigarette smoke. J Am Coll Surg. 1994;179:417-420.	23.	Zuska JJ, Crile G, Jr., Ayres WW. Fistulas of lactifierous ducts. Am J Surg. 1951;81:312-317.	24.	Dixon JM. Infection in surgical practice. In: Taylor EW, ed. Breast Surgery. Oxford: Oxford Medical Publications; 1992;187.	25.	Dixon JM. Periductal mastitis and duct ectasia: an update. Breast. 1998;7:128-130.	26.	Dixon JM, Kohlhardt SR, Dillon P. Total duct excision. Breast. 1998;7:216-219.	27.	Frykberg ER, Bland KI. Current concepts on the biology and management of in situ (Tis, stage 0) breast carcinoma. In: Bland KI, Copeland EMI, eds. The Breast: Comprehensive Management of Benign and Malignant Diseases. Philadel-phia: WB Saunders; 1998:1020.	28.	Camiel MR. Mondor’s disease in the breast. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1985;152:879-881.	29.	Mondor H. Tronculite sous-cutanée subaiguë de la paroi thoracique antero-latérale. Mem Acad Chir Paris. 1939; 65:1271.	30.	Hughes LE, Mansel RE, Webster DJ. Aberrations of normal development and involution (ANDI): a new perspective on pathogenesis and nomenclature of benign breast disorders. Lancet. 1987;2:1316-1319.	31.	Archer F, Omar M. The fine structure of fibro adenoma of the human breast. J Pathol. 1969;99:113-117.	32.	Page DL, Anderson TJ. Diagnostic Histopathology of the Breast. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone; 1987.	33.	Page DL, Simpson JF. Benign, high-risk, and premalignant lesions of the breast. In: Bland KI, Copeland EMI, eds. The Breast: Comprehensive Management of Benign and Malig-nant Diseases. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1998:191.	34.	Haagensen CD. Diseases of the Breast. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1986.	35.	Haagensen CD, Lane N, Lattes R, et al. Lobular neoplasia (so-called lobular carcinoma in situ) of the breast. Cancer. 1978;42:737-769.	36.	Gadd MA, Souba WW. Evaluation and treatment of benign breast disorders. In: Bland KI, Copeland EMI, eds. The Breast: Comprehensive Management of Benign and Malig-nant Diseases. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1998:233.	37.	Marchant DJ. Benign breast disease. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am. 2002;29:1-20.	38.	Nurko J, Mabry CD, Whitworth P, et al. Interim results from the FibroAdenoma Cryoablation Treatment Registry. Am J Surg. 2005;190:647-651; discussion 651-652.	39.	Dixon JM. Conservative management of fibroadenoma of the breast. Br J Surg. 1996;83:1798-1799.	40.	Atkins HJ. Mammillary fistula. Br Med J. 1955;2:1473-1474.	41.	Dixon JM, Thompson AM. Effective surgical treatment for mammary duct fistula. Br J Surg. 1991;78:1185-1186.	42.	Bernstein L, Henderson BE, Hanisch R, et al. Physical exer-cise and reduced risk of breast cancer in young women. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1994;86:1403-1408.	43.	Blackburn GL, Copeland T, Khaodhiar L, et al. Diet and breast cancer. J Womens Health (Larchmt). 2003;12: 183-192.	44.	Goss PE, Sierra S. Current perspectives on radiation-induced breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 1998;16:338-347.	45.	Hulka BS. Epidemiologic analysis of breast and gynecologic cancers. Prog Clin Biol Res. 1997;396:17-29.	46.	Pujol P, Galtier-Dereure F, Bringer J: Obesity and breast cancer risk. Hum Reprod. 1997;12(1):116-125.	47.	Singletary SE. Rating the risk factors for breast cancer. Ann Surg. 2003;237:474-482.	48.	Wynder EL, Cohen LA, Muscat JE, et al. Breast cancer: weighing the evidence for a promoting role of dietary fat.  J Natl Cancer Inst. 1997;89:766-775.	49.	Baan R, Straif K, Grosse Y, et al. Carcinogenicity of alcoholic beverages. Lancet Oncol. 2007;8:292-293.	50.	Howlader N, Noone AM, Krapcho M, et al. SEER Cancer Statistics Review, 1975-2010, National Cancer Institute, based on November 2012 SEER data submission. Bethesda; 2013.	51.	Domchek SM, Eisen A, Calzone K, et al. Application of breast cancer risk prediction models in clinical practice. J Clin Oncol. 2003;21:593-601.	52.	Gail MH, Brinton LA, Byar DP, et al. Projecting individu-alized probabilities of developing breast cancer for white females who are being examined annually. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1989;81:1879-1886.	53.	Edwards BK, Brown ML, Wingo PA, et al. Annual report to the nation on the status of cancer, 1975-2002, featuring population-based trends in cancer treatment. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2005;97:1407-1427.	54.	Chen J, Pee D, Ayyagari R, et al. Projecting absolute invasive breast cancer risk in white women with a model that includes mammographic density. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2006;98:1215-1226.	55.	Claus EB, Risch N, Thompson WD. The calculation of breast cancer risk for women with a first degree family history of ovarian cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 1993;28:115-120.	56.	Kerlikowske K, Ichikawa L, Miglioretti DL, et al. Longitudi-nal measurement of clinical mammographic breast density to improve estimation of breast cancer risk. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2007;99:386-395.	57.	Berry DA, Parmigiani G, Sanchez J, et al. Probability of car-rying a mutation of breast-ovarian cancer gene BRCA1 based on family history. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1997;89:227-238.	58.	Parmigiani G, Berry D, Aguilar O. Determining carrier prob-abilities for breast cancer-susceptibility genes BRCA1 and BRCA2. Am J Hum Genet. 1998;62:145-158.Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   60301/03/19   5:06 PM 604SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	59.	Tyrer J, Duffy SW, Cuzick J. A breast cancer prediction model incorporating familial and personal risk factors. Stat Med. 2004;23:1111-1130.	60.	Fisher B, Costantino JP, Wickerham DL, et al. Tamoxi-fen for prevention of breast cancer: report of the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project P-1 Study. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1998;90:1371-1388.	61.	Grodstein F, Stampfer MJ, Colditz GA, et al. Postmeno-pausal hormone therapy and mortality. N Engl J Med. 1997;336:1769-1775.	62.	Hartmann LC, Schaid DJ, Woods JE, et al. Efficacy of bilat-eral prophylactic mastectomy in women with a family history of breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 1999;340:77-84.	63.	Kerlikowske K, Grady D, Rubin SM, et al. Efficacy of screening mammography. A meta-analysis. JAMA. 1995;273:149-154.	64.	Rowe TC, Chen GL, Hsiang YH, et al. DNA damage by anti-tumor acridines mediated by mammalian DNA topoisomer-ase II. Cancer Res. 1986;46:2021-2026.	65.	Sakorafas GH. The management of women at high risk for the development of breast cancer: risk estimation and preven-tative strategies. Cancer Treat Rev. 2003;29:79-89.	66.	Schrag D, Kuntz KM, Garber JE, et al. Decision analysis—effects of prophylactic mastectomy and oophorectomy on life expectancy among women with BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations. N Engl J Med. 1997;336:1465-1471.	67.	Vogel VG. Management of the high-risk patient. Surg Clin North Am. 2003;83:733-751.	68.	Wu K, Brown P. Is low-dose tamoxifen useful for the treat-ment and prevention of breast cancer? J Natl Cancer Inst. 2003;95:766-767.	69.	Collaborative Group on Hormonal Factors in Breast Cancer. Breast cancer and hormone replacement therapy: collabora-tive reanalysis of data from 51 epidemiological studies of 52,705 women with breast cancer and 108,411 women with-out breast cancer. Lancet. 1997;350:1047-1059.	70.	Chlebowski RT, Hendrix SL, Langer RD, et al. Influence of estrogen plus progestin on breast cancer and mammography in healthy postmenopausal women: the Women’s Health Ini-tiative Randomized Trial. JAMA. 2003;289:3243-3253.	71.	Beral V. Breast cancer and hormone-replacement therapy in the Million Women Study. Lancet. 2003;362:419-427.	72.	Glasziou P, Houssami N. The evidence base for breast cancer screening. Prev Med. 2011;53:100-102.	73.	Olsen O, Gotzsche PC. Cochrane review on screening for breast cancer with mammography. Lancet. 2001;358:1340-1342.	74.	Siu AL. Screening for Breast Cancer: U.S. Preventive Ser-vices Task Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2016;164:279-296.	75.	Oeffinger KC, Fontham ET, Etzioni R, et al. Breast can-cer screening for women at average risk: 2015 guide-line update from the American Cancer Society. JAMA. 2015;314:1599-1614.	76.	National Comprehensive Cancer Network. Breast cancer screening and diagnosis, version 1.2016. Available at: https://www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/breast-screening.pdf. Accessed July 9, 2018.	77.	US Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for breast cancer: US Preventive Services Task Force recommenda-tion statement. Ann Intern Med. 2009;151:716-726, W-236.	78.	Powles TJ, Ashley S, Tidy A, Smith IE, Dowsett M. Twenty-year follow-up of the Royal Marsden randomized, double-blinded tamoxifen breast cancer prevention trial. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2007;99:283-290.	79.	Independent UK Panel on Breast Cancer Screening. The ben-efits and harms of breast cancer screening: an independent review. Lancet. 2012;380:1778-1786.	80.	Nyström L, Andersson I, Bjurstam N, Frisell J, Norden-skjöld B, Rutqvist LE. Long-term effects of mammography screening: updated overview of the Swedish randomised trials.  Lancet. 2002;359:909-919.	81.	Moss S, Thomas I, Evans A, Thomas B, Johns, L. Ran-domised controlled trial of mammographic screening in women from age 40: results of screening in the first 10 years. Br J Cancer. 2005;92:949-954.	82.	Veronesi U, Maisonneuve P, Sacchini V, Rotmensz N, Boyle P. Tamoxifen for breast cancer among hysterectomised women. Lancet. 2002;359:1122-1124.	83.	Cuzick J, Forbes JF, Sestak I, et al. Long-term results of tamoxifen prophylaxis for breast cancer–96-month follow-up of the randomized IBIS-I trial. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2007;99: 272-282.	84.	Gail MH, Costantino JP, Bryant J, et al. Weighing the risks and benefits of tamoxifen treatment for preventing breast cancer.  J Natl Cancer Inst. 1999;91:1829-1846.	85.	Vogel VG, Costantino JP, Wickerham DL, et al. Effects of tamoxifen vs. raloxifene on the risk of developing inva-sive breast cancer and other disease outcomes: the NSABP Study of Tamoxifen and Raloxifene (STAR) P-2 trial. JAMA. 2006;295:2727-2741.	86.	Vogel VG, Costantino JP, Wickerham DL, et al. Update of the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project Study of Tamoxifen and Raloxifene (STAR) P-2 Trial: Preventing breast cancer. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2010;3:696-706.	87.	Goss PE, Ingle JN, Ales-Martinez JE, et al. Exemestane for breast-cancer prevention in postmenopausal women. N Engl J Med. 2011;364:2381-2391.	88.	Cuzick J. IBIS II: a breast cancer prevention trial in post-menopausal women using the aromatase inhibitor anastro-zole. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2008;8:1377-1385.	89.	Sestak I, Singh S, Cuzick J, et al. Changes in bone mineral density at 3 years in postmenopausal women receiving anas-trozole and risedronate in the IBIS-II bone substudy: an inter-national, double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Oncol. 2014;15:1460-1468.	90.	Jenkins VA, Ambroisine LM, Atkins L, et al. Effects of anas-trozole on cognitive performance in postmenopausal women: a randomised, double-blind chemoprevention trial (IBIS II). Lancet Oncol. 2008;9:953-961.	91.	Nelson HD, Smith ME, Griffin JC, et al. Use of medications to reduce risk for primary breast cancer: a systematic review for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 2013;158:604-614.	92.	Visvanathan K, Hurley P, Bantug E, et al. Use of pharmaco-logic interventions for breast cancer risk reduction: american society of clinical oncology clinical practice guideline. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31:2942-2962.	93.	Domchek SM, Friebel TM, Singer CF, et al. Association of risk-reducing surgery in BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation carriers with cancer risk and mortality. JAMA. 2010;304: 967-975.	94.	Ford D, Easton DF, Stratton M, et al. Genetic heterogeneity and penetrance analysis of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes in breast cancer families. The Breast Cancer Linkage Consor-tium. Am J Hum Genet. 1998;62:676-689.	95.	Gowen LC, Avrutskaya AV, Latour AM, et al. BRCA1 required for transcription-coupled repair of oxidative DNA damage. Science. 1998;281:1009-1012.	96.	Martin AM, Weber BL. Genetic and hormonal risk factors in breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2000;92:1126-1135.	97.	Oddoux C, Struewing JP, Clayton CM, et al. The carrier frequency of the BRCA2 6174delT mutation among Ash-kenazi Jewish individuals is approximately 1%. Nat Genet. 1996;14:188-190.	98.	Roa BB, Boyd AA, Volcik K, et al. Ashkenazi Jewish pop-ulation frequencies for common mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2. Nat Genet. 1996;14:185-187.Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   60401/03/19   5:06 PM 605THE BREASTCHAPTER 17	99.	Rosen EM, Fan S, Pestell RG, et al. BRCA1 gene in breast cancer. J Cell Physiol. 2003;196:19-41.	100.	Wooster R, Weber BL. Breast and ovarian cancer. N Engl J Med. 2003;348:2339-2347.	101.	Petrij-Bosch A, Peelen T, van Vliet M, et al. BRCA1 genomic deletions are major founder mutations in Dutch breast cancer patients. Nat Genet. 1997;17:341-345.	102.	Gorski B, Byrski T, Huzarski T, et al. Founder mutations in the BRCA1 gene in Polish families with breast-ovarian can-cer. Am J Hum Genet. 2000;66:1963-1968.	103.	Sarantaus L, Huusko P, Eerola H, et al. Multiple founder effects and geographical clustering of BRCA1 and BRCA2 families in Finland. Eur J Hum Genet. 2000;8:757-763.	104.	Gayther SA, Harrington P, Russell P, et al. Frequently occurring germ-line mutations of the BRCA1 gene in ovarian cancer families from Russia. Am J Hum Genet. 1997;60:1239-1242.	105.	Szabo CI, King MC. Population genetics of BRCA1 and BRCA2. Am J Hum Genet. 1997;60:1013-1020.	106.	Abeliovich D, Kaduri L, Lerer I, et al. The founder muta-tions 185delAG and 5382insC in BRCA1 and 6174delT in BRCA2 appear in 60% of ovarian cancer and 30% of early-onset breast cancer patients among Ashkenazi women. Am J Hum Genet. 1997;60:505-514.	107.	Johannesdottir G, Gudmundsson J, Bergthorsson JT, et al. High prevalence of the 999del5 mutation in Icelandic breast and ovarian cancer patients. Cancer Res. 1996;56:3663-3665.	108.	Hakansson S, Johannsson O, Johansson U, et al. Moder-ate frequency of BRCA1 and BRCA2 germ-line mutations in Scandinavian familial breast cancer. Am J Hum Genet. 1997;60:1068-1078.	109.	Infante M, Duran M, Acedo A, et al. The highly prevalent BRCA2 mutation c.2808_2811del (3036delACAA) is located in a mutational hotspot and has multiple origins. Carcinogenesis.  2013;34:2505-2511.	110.	Warner E, Foulkes W, Goodwin P, et al. Prevalence and pen-etrance of BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene mutations in unselected Ashkenazi Jewish women with breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1999;91:1241-1247.	111.	Khatcheressian JL, Hurley P, Bantug E, et al. Breast can-cer follow-up and management after primary treatment: American Society of Clinical Oncology clinical practice guideline update. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31:961-965.	112.	Schneider KA. Genetic counseling for BRCA1/BRCA2 test-ing. Genet Test. 1997;1:91-98.	113.	Kriege M, Brekelmans CT, Boetes C, et al. Efficacy of MRI and mammography for breast-cancer screening in women with a familial or genetic predisposition. N Engl J Med. 2004;351:427-437.	114.	Saslow D, Boetes C, Burke W, et al. American Cancer Soci-ety guidelines for breast screening with MRI as an adjunct to mammography. CA Cancer J Clin. 2007; 57:75-89.	115.	King MC, Wieand S, Hale K, et al. Tamoxifen and breast cancer incidence among women with inherited mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2: National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project (NSABP-P1) Breast Cancer Prevention Trial. JAMA. 2001;286:2251-2256.	116.	Antoniou AC, Foulkes WD, Tischkowitz M. Breast-cancer risk in families with mutations in PALB2. N Engl J Med. 2014;371(17):497-506.	117.	Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2016. CA Cancer J Clin. 2016;66:7-30.	118.	Clarke CA, Glaser SL, Uratsu CS, et al. Recent declines in hor-mone therapy utilization and breast cancer incidence: clinical and population-based evidence. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:e49-e50.	119.	Ferlay J, Bray F, Pisani P, Parkin DM. Globocan 2002: Cancer Incidence, Mortality and Prevalence Worldwide. Lyon, France: IARC Press; 2004.	120.	National Cancer Institute. SEER Cancer Statistics Review, 1975-2002. Available at: https://seer.cancer.gov/archive/csr/1975_2002/. Accessed July 8, 2018.	121.	Fregene A, Newman LA. Breast cancer in sub-Saharan Africa: how does it relate to breast cancer in African-Ameri-can women? Cancer. 2005;103:1540-1550.	122.	Bloom HJ, Richardson WW, Harries EJ. Natural history of untreated breast cancer (1805-1933). Comparison of untreated and treated cases according to histological grade of malignancy. Br Med J. 1962;2:213-221.	123.	Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group. Tamoxi-fen for early breast cancer. an overview of the randomised trials. Lancet. 1998;351:1451-1467.	124.	Saphner T, Tormey DC, Gray R. Annual hazard rates of recur-rence for breast cancer after primary therapy. J Clin Oncol. 1996;14:2738-2746.	125.	Sestak I, Dowsett M, Zabaglo L, et al. Factors predicting late recurrence for estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2013;105:1504-1511.	126.	Gonzalez-Angulo AM, Cristofanilli M, Strom EA, et al. Central nervous system metastases in patients with high-risk breast carcinoma after multimodality treatment. Cancer. 2004;101:1760-1766.	127.	Carey LA, Ewend MG, Metzger R, et al. Central nervous system metastases in women after multimodality ther-apy for high risk breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2004;88:273-280.	128.	Evans AJ, James JJ, Cornford EJ, et al. Brain metastases from breast cancer: identification of a high-risk group. Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol). 2004;16:345-349.	129.	Broders AC. Carcinoma in situ contrasted with benign pen-etrating epithelium. JAMA. 1932;99:1670.	130.	Foote FW, Stewart FW. Lobular carcinoma in situ: a rare form of mammary cancer. Am J Pathol. 1941;17:491-496.	131.	Consensus conference on the classification of ductal carci-noma in situ. Hum Pathol. 1997; 28:1221-1225.	132.	Recht A, Rutgers EJ, Fentiman IS, et al. The fourth EORTC DCIS Consensus meeting (Chateau Marquette, Heemskerk, The Netherlands, 23-24 January 1998)–conference report.  Eur J Cancer. 1998;34:1664-1669.	133.	Dunnwald LK, Rossing MA, Li CI. Hormone receptor status, tumor characteristics, and prognosis: a prospective cohort of breast cancer patients. Breast Cancer Res. 2007;9:R6.	134.	McDivitt RW, Boyce W, Gersell D. Tubular carcinoma of the breast. Clinical and pathological observations concerning 135 cases. Am J Surg Pathol. 1982;6:401-411.	135.	Jatoi I. Screening clinical breast examination. Surg Clin North Am. 2003;83:789-801.	136.	Rosato FE, Rosato EL. Examination techniques: roles of the physician and patient evaluating breast diseases. In: Bland KI, Copeland EMI, eds. The Breast: Comprehensive Management of Benign and Malignant Diseases. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1998:615.	137.	Bassett LW. Breast imaging. In: Bland KI, Copeland EMI, eds. The Breast: Comprehensive Management of Benign and Malignant Diseases. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1998:648.	138.	Fletcher SW, Elmore JG. Clinical practice. Mammographic screening for breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2003;348:1672-1680.	139.	Miller AB. Screening and detection. In: Bland KI, Cope-land EMI, eds. The Breast: Comprehensive Management of Benign and Malignant Diseases. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1998:625.	140.	Schnall MD. Breast MR imaging. Radiol Clin North Am. 2003;41:43-50.	141.	Seidman H, Gelb SK, Silverberg E, et al. Survival experience in the Breast Cancer Detection Demonstration Project. CA Cancer J Clin. 1987;37:258-290.Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   60501/03/19   5:06 PM 606SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	142.	Bevers T, Bibbins-Domingo K, Oeffinger KC, Smith ML. Controversies in breast cancer screening strategies. J Natl Compr Canc Netw. 2016;14:651-653.	143.	Pisano ED, Gatsonis C, Hendrick E, et al. Diagnostic perfor-mance of digital versus film mammography for breast-cancer screening. N Engl J Med. 2005;353:1773-1783.	144.	Helvie MA. Digital mammography imaging: breast tomo-synthesis and advanced applications. Radiol Clin North Am. 2010;48:917-929.	145.	Friedewald SM, Rafferty EA, Rose SL, et al. Breast cancer screening using tomosynthesis in combination with digital mammography. JAMA. 2014;311:2499-2507.	146.	Bernardi D, Macaskill P, Pellegrini M, et al. Breast cancer screening with tomosynthesis (3D mammography) with acquired or synthetic 2D mammography compared with 2D mammography alone (STORM-2): a population-based pro-spective study. Lancet Oncol. 2016;17(8):1105-1113.	147.	Ciatto S, Houssami N, Bernardi D, et al. Integration of 3D digital mammography with tomosynthesis for population breast-cancer screening (STORM): a prospective comparison study. Lancet Oncol. 2013;14:583-589.	148.	Helvie MA. Digital mammography imaging: breast tomo-synthesis and advanced applications. Radiol Clin North Am. 2010;48:917-929.	149.	Friedewald SM, Rafferty EA, Rose SL, et al. Breast cancer screening using tomosynthesis in combination with digital mammography. JAMA. 2014;311:2499-2507.	150.	Bernardi D, Macaskill P, Pellegrini M, et al. Breast cancer screening with tomosynthesis (3D mammography) with acquired or synthetic 2D mammography compared with 2D mammography alone (STORM-2): a population-based pro-spective study. Lancet Oncol. 2016;17(8):1105-1113.	151.	Jochelson MS, Dershaw DD, Sung JS, et al. Bilateral con-trast-enhanced dual-energy digital mammography: feasibility and comparison with conventional digital mammography and MR imaging in women with known breast carcinoma. Radi-ology. 2013;266(3):743-751.	152.	Jochelson MS, Dershaw DD, Sung JS, et al. Bilateral con-trast-enhanced dual-energy digital mammography: feasibility and comparison with conventional digital mammography and MR imaging in women with known breast carcinoma. Radi-ology. 2013;266(3):743-751.	153.	Krishnamurthy S, Sneige N, Bedi DG, et al. Role of ultra-sound-guided fine-needle aspiration of indeterminate and suspicious axillary lymph nodes in the initial staging of breast carcinoma. Cancer. 2002;95:982-988.	154.	Turnbull L, Brown S, Harvey I, et al. Comparative effective-ness of MRI in breast cancer (COMICE) trial: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2010;375:563-571.	155.	Houssami N, Turner R, Morrow M. Preoperative magnetic resonance imaging in breast cancer: meta-analysis of surgical outcomes. Ann Surg. 2013;257:249-255.	156.	Robinson DS, Sundaram M. Stereotactic imaging and breast biopsy. In: Bland KI, Copeland EMI, eds. The Breast: Com-prehensive Management of Benign and Malignant Diseases. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1998:698.	157.	Wilkinson EJ, Masood S. Cytologic needle samplings of the breast: techniques and end results. In: Bland KI, Copeland EMI, eds. The Breast: Comprehensive Management of Benign and Malignant Diseases. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1998:705.	158.	Greene FL, Page DL, Fleming ID, eds. Breast. AJCC Cancer Staging Manual. 6th ed. New York: Springer-Verlag: 2002.	159.	Britton PD, Goud A, Godward S, et al. Use of ultrasound-guided axillary node core biopsy in staging of early breast cancer. Eur Radiol. 2009;19:561-569.	160.	Fisher B, Slack NH. Number of lymph nodes examined and the prognosis of breast carcinoma. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1970;131:79-88.	161.	Giuliano AE, et al. Breast cancer—major changes in the American Joint Committee on Cancer eighth edition cancer staging manual. CA Cancer J Clin. 2017;67:290-303.	162.	Du Toit RS, Locker AP, Ellis IO, Elston CW, Blamey RW. Evaluation of the prognostic value of triple node biopsy in early breast cancer. Br J Surg. 77:163-167.	163.	Edge SB, Byrd DR, Compton CC, Fritz AG, Greene FL, Trotti A, eds. AJCC Cancer Staging Manual. 7th ed. France: Springer; 2010.	164.	Dillon DA. Molecular markers in the diagnosis and staging of breast cancer. Semin Radiat Oncol. 2002;12:305-318.	165.	Esteva FJ, Sahin AA, Cristofanilli M, et al. Molecular prog-nostic factors for breast cancer metastasis and survival. Semin Radiat Oncol. 2002;12:319-328.	166.	Haffty BG. Molecular and genetic markers in the localre-gional management of breast cancer. Semin Radiat Oncol. 2002;12:329-340.	167.	Morabito A, Magnani E, Gion M, et al. Prognostic and pre-dictive indicators in operable breast cancer. Clin Breast Can-cer. 2003;3:381-390.	168.	Rogers CE, Loveday RL, Drew PJ, et al. Molecular prog-nostic indicators in breast cancer. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2002;28:467-478.	169.	Rampaul R, Ellis IO, Robertson JFR. Prognostic indices in breast cancer. In: Autier BP, Adebamowo C, Anderson BO,  et al, eds. World Breast Cancer Report. iPRI:2012: 323-332.	170.	Athanassiadou PP, Veneti SZ, Kyrkou KA, et al. Presence of epidermal growth factor receptor in breast smears of cyst fluids: relationship to electrolyte ratios and pH concentration. Cancer Detect Prev. 1992;16:113-118.	171.	Tsutsumi Y, Naber SP, DeLellis RA, et al. Neu oncogene protein and epidermal growth factor receptor are indepen-dently expressed in benign and malignant breast tissues. Hum Pathol. 1990;21:750-758.	172.	van de Vijver MJ, Peterse JL, Mooi WJ, et al. Neu-protein overexpression in breast cancer. Association with com-edotype ductal carcinoma in situ and limited prognostic value in stage II breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 1988;319: 1239-1245.	173.	Slamon DJ, Clark GM, Wong SG, et al. Human breast cancer: correlation of relapse and survival with amplification of the HER-2/neu oncogene. Science. 1987;235:177-182.	174.	Gusterson BA, Gelber RD, Goldhirsch A, et al. Prognostic importance of c-erbB-2 expression in breast cancer. Interna-tional (Ludwig) Breast Cancer Study Group. J Clin Oncol. 1992;10:1049-1056.	175.	McCann AH, Dervan PA, O’Regan M, et al. Prognostic sig-nificance of c-erbB-2 and estrogen receptor status in human breast cancer. Cancer Res. 1991;51:3296-3303.	176.	Slamon DJ, Godolphin W, Jones LA, et al. Studies of the HER-2/neu proto-oncogene in human breast and ovarian cancer. Science. 1989;244:707-712.	177.	Wright C, Angus B, Nicholson S, et al. Expression of c-erbB-2 oncoprotein: a prognostic indicator in human breast cancer. Cancer Res. 1989;49:2087-2090.	178.	Dabbs DJ, Klein ME, Mohsin SK, Tubbs RR, Shuai Y, Bhargava R. High false-negative rate of HER2 quantita-tive reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction of the Oncotype DX test: an independent quality assurance study.  J Clin Oncol. 2011;29(32):4279-4285.	179.	Vogel CL, Cobleigh MA, Tripathy D, et al. Efficacy and safety of trastuzumab as a single agent in first-line treatment of HER2-overexpressing metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 20;(3):719-726.	180.	Piccart-Gebhart MJ, Proctor M, Leyland-Jones B, et al. Trastuzumab after adjuvant chemotherapy in HER2-positive breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2005;353(16):1659-1672.Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   60601/03/19   5:06 PM 607THE BREASTCHAPTER 17	181.	Romond EH, Perez EA, Bryant J, et al. Trastuzumab plus adjuvant chemotherapy for operable HER2-positive breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2005;353:1673-1684.	182.	Slamon D, Eiermann W, Robert N, et al. Adjuvant trastu-zumab in HER2-positive breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2011;365:1273-1283.	183.	Smith I, Procter M, Gelber RD, et al. 2-year follow-up of trastuzumab after adjuvant chemotherapy in HER2-posi-tive breast cancer: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2007;369:29-36.	184.	Slamon D, Eiermann W, Robert N, et al. Adjuvant trastu-zumab in HER2-positive breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2011;365:1273-1283.	185.	Dahabreh IJ, Linardou H, Siannis F, et al. Trastuzumab in the adjuvant treatment of early-stage breast cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Oncologist. 2008;13:620-630.	186.	Monaghan P, Perusinghe NP, Nicholson RI, et al. Growth fac-tor stimulation of proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) in human breast epithelium in organ culture. Cell Biol Int Rep. 1991;15:561-570.	187.	Siitonen SM, Isola JJ, Rantala IS, et al. Intratumor varia-tion in cell proliferation in breast carcinoma as determined by antiproliferating cell nuclear antigen monoclonal anti-body and automated image analysis. Am J Clin Pathol. 1993;99:226-231.	188.	Tuccari G, Rizzo A, Muscara M, et al. PCNA/cyclin expres-sion in breast carcinomas: its relationships with Ki-67, ER, PgR immunostainings and clinico-pathologic aspects. Patho-logica. 1993;85:47-55.	189.	van Dierendonck JH, Wijsman JH, Keijzer R, et al. Cell-cyclerelated staining patterns of anti-proliferating cell nuclear antigen monoclonal antibodies. Comparison with BrdUrd labeling and Ki-67 staining. Am J Pathol. 1991;138: 1165-1172.	190.	Cuzick J, Dowsett M, Pineda S, et al. Prognostic value of a combined estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, Ki-67, and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 immunohis-tochemical score and comparison with the Genomic Health recurrence score in early breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2011;29: 4273-4278.	191.	Brown LF, Berse B, Jackman RW, et al. Expression of vas-cular permeability factor (vascular endothelial growth factor) and its receptors in breast cancer. Hum Pathol. 1995;26:86-91.	192.	Gasparini G, Toi M, Gion M, et al. Prognostic significance of vascular endothelial growth factor protein in node-negative breast carcinoma. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1997;89:139-147.	193.	Schneider BP, Gray RJ, Radovich M, et al. Prognostic and predictive value of tumor vascular endothelial growth factor gene amplification in metastatic breast cancer treated with paclitaxel with and without bevacizumab; results from ECOG 2100 trial. Clin Cancer Res. 2013;19(5):1281-1289.	194.	Miller K, Wang M, Gralow J, et al. Paclitaxel plus bevaci-zumab versus paclitaxel alone for metastatic breast cancer.  N Engl J Med. 2007;357:2666-2676.	195.	Allan DJ, Howell A, Roberts SA, et al. Reduction in apop-tosis relative to mitosis in histologically normal epithelium accompanies fibrocystic change and carcinoma of the pre-menopausal human breast. J Pathol. 1992;167:25-32.	196.	Bargou RC, Daniel PT, Mapara MY, et al. Expression of the bcl-2 gene family in normal and malignant breast tissue: low bax-alpha expression in tumor cells correlates with resistance towards apoptosis. Int J Cancer. 1995;60:854-859.	197.	Binder C, Marx D, Binder L, Schaurer A, Hiddemann W. Expression of Bax in relation to Bcl-2 and other predictive parameters in breast cancer. Ann Oncol. 1996;7:129-133.	198.	Ravdin PM, Siminoff LA, Davis GJ, et al. Computer program to assist in making decisions about adjuvant therapy for women with early breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2001;19:980-991.	199.	Blamey RW, Ellis IO, Pinder SE, et al. Survival of inva-sive breast cancer according to the Nottingham Prognos-tic Index in cases diagnosed in 1990-1999. Eur J Cancer. 2007;43:1548-1555.	200.	Blamey RW, Pinder SE, Ball GR, et al. Reading the prog-nosis of the individual with breast cancer. Eur J Cancer. 2007;43:1545-1547.	201.	Wishart GC, Azzato EM, Greenberg DC, et al. PREDICT: a new UK prognostic model that predicts survival follow-ing surgery for invasive breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res. 2010;12:R1.	202.	Perou CM, Jeffrey SS, van de Rijn M, et al. Distinctive gene expression patterns in human mammary epithelial cells and breast cancers. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999;96:9212-9217.	203.	Paik S, Shak S, Tang G, et al. A multigene assay to pre-dict recurrence of tamoxifen-treated, node-negative breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2004:351:2817-2826.	204.	Sparano JA, Gray RJ, Makower DF, et al. Prospective valida-tion of a 21-gene expression assay in breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2015;373(21):2005-2014.	205.	Albain KS, Barlow WE, Shak S, et al. Prognostic and pre-dictive value of the 21-gene recurrence score assay in postmenopausal women with node-positive, oestrogen-receptor-positive breast cancer on chemotherapy: a ret-rospective analysis of a randomised trial. Lancet Oncol. 2010;11(1):55-65.	206.	Lo SS, Mumby PB, Norton J, et al. Prospective multicenter study of the impact of the 21-gene recurrence score assay on medical oncologist and patient adjuvant breast cancer treat-ment selection. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28(10):1671-1676.	207.	Drukker CA, Bueno-de-Mesquita JM, Retèl VP, et al. A prospective evaluation of a breast cancer prognosis sig-nature in the observational RASTER study. Int J Cancer. 2013;133(4):929-936.	208.	Cardoso F, van’t Veer LI, Bogaerts J, et al. 70-gene signature as an aid to treatment decisions in early-stage breast cancer.  N Engl J Med. 2016;375:717-729.	209.	Julien JP, Bijker N, Fentiman IS, et al. Radiotherapy in breast-conserving treatment for ductal carcinoma in situ: first results of the EORTC randomised phase III trial 10853. EORTC Breast Cancer Cooperative Group and EORTC Radiotherapy Group. Lancet. 2000;355:528-533.	210.	Lagios MD, Margolin FR, Westdahl PR, et al. Mammo-graphically detected duct carcinoma in situ. Frequency of local recurrence following tylectomy and prognostic effect of nuclear grade on local recurrence. Cancer. 1989;63:618-624.	211.	Rosai J. Borderline epithelial lesions of the breast. Am J Surg Pathol. 1991;15:209-221.	212.	Schnitt SJ, Connolly JL, Tavassoli FA, et al. Interobserver reproducibility in the diagnosis of ductal proliferative breast lesions using standardized criteria. Am J Surg Pathol. 1992;16:1133-1143.	213.	Silverstein MJ, Lagios MD, Groshen S, et al. The influence of margin width on local control of ductal carcinoma in situ of the breast. N Engl J Med. 1999;340:1455-1461.	214.	Tan-Chiu E. The effect of tamoxifen on benign breast dis-ease: Findings from the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project (NSABP) breast cancer prevention trial (BCPT). Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2001;69:abstract 7.	215.	Fisher B, Dignam J, Wolmark N, et al. Lumpectomy and radi-ation therapy for the treatment of intraductal breast cancer: findings from National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project B-17. J Clin Oncol. 1998;16:441-452.	216.	Bijker N, Meijnen P, Peterse JL, et al. Breast-conserving treatment with or without radiotherapy in ductal carci-noma-in-situ: ten-year results of European Organisation for Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   60701/03/19   5:06 PM 608SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIResearch and Treatment of Cancer randomized phase III trial 10853–a study by the EORTC Breast Cancer Coopera-tive Group and EORTC Radiotherapy Group. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:3381-3387.	217.	Houghton J, George WD, Cuzick J, et al. Radiotherapy and tamoxifen in women with completely excised ductal carcinoma in situ of the breast in the UK, Australia, and New Zealand: ran-domised controlled trial. Lancet. 2003;362:95-102.	218.	Emdin SO, Granstrand B, Ringberg A, et al. SweDCIS: Radiotherapy after sector resection for ductal carcinoma in situ of the breast. Results of a randomised trial in a population offered mammography screening. Acta Oncol. 2006;45:536-543.	219.	Morrow M, Van Zee KJ, Solin LJ, et al. Society of Surgical Oncol-ogy–American Society for Radiation Oncology–American Soci-ety of Clinical Oncology consensus guideline on margins for breast-conserving surgery with whole-breast irradiation in ductal carcinoma in situ. J Clin Oncol. 2016;34(33):4040-4046.	220.	Marinovich ML, Azizi L, Macaskill P, Irwig L, et al. The Association of Surgical Margins and Local Recurrence in Women with Ductal Carcinoma In Situ Treated with Breast-Conserving Therapy: A Meta-Analysis. Ann Surg Oncol. 2016;23(12):3811-3821.	221.	Mansel RE, Fallowfield L, Kissin M, et al. Randomized mul-ticenter trial of sentinel node biopsy versus standard axillary treatment in operable breast cancer: the ALMANAC Trial.  J Natl Cancer Inst. 2006;98:599-609.	222.	Hughes LL, Wang M, Page DL, et al. Local excision alone without irradiation for ductal carcinoma in situ of the breast: a trial of the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group. J Clin Oncol. 2009;27:5319-5324.	223.	McCormick B. RTOG 9804: a prospective randomized trial for “good risk” ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS), com-paring radiation (RT) to observation (OBS). J Clin Oncol. 2012;30(suppl):abstr 1004.	224.	McCormick B, Winter K, Hudis C, et al. RTOG 9804: a pro-spective randomized trial for good-risk ductal carcinoma in situ comparing radiotherapy with observation. J Clin Oncol. 2015;33(7):709-715.	225.	Rakovitch E, Nofech-Mozes S, Hanna W, et al. A population-based validation study of the DCIS Score predicting recur-rence risk in individuals treated by breast-conserving surgery alone. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2015;152(2):389-398.	226.	Fisher B, Dignam J, Wolmark N, et al. Tamoxifen in treat-ment of intraductal breast cancer: National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project B-24 randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 1999;353:1993-2000.	227.	Effects of radiotherapy and surgery in early breast cancer. An overview of the randomized trials. Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group. N Engl J Med. 1995;333:1444-1455.	228.	Arriagada R, Le MG, Rochard F, et al. Conservative treatment versus mastectomy in early breast cancer: patterns of failure with 15 years of follow-up data. Institut Gustave-Roussy Breast Cancer Group. J Clin Oncol. 1996;14:1558-1564.	229.	Cooke T, Reeves J, Lanigan A, et al. HER2 as a prognos-tic and predictive marker for breast cancer. Ann Oncol. 2001;12(suppl 1):S23-S28.	230.	Fisher B, Anderson S, Redmond CK, et al. Reanalysis and results after 12 years of follow-up in a randomized clinical trial comparing total mastectomy with lumpectomy with or without irradiation in the treatment of breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 1995;333:1456-1461.	231.	Gump FE, Jicha DL, Ozello L. Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS): a revised concept. Surgery. 102:790-795.	232.	Paik S, Bryant J, Tan-Chiu E, et al. HER2 and choice of adju-vant chemotherapy for invasive breast cancer: National Surgi-cal Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project Protocol B-15. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2000;92:1991-1998.	233.	Veronesi U, Cascinelli N, Mariani L, et al. Twenty-year fol-lowup of a randomized study comparing breast-conserving surgery with radical mastectomy for early breast cancer.  N Engl J Med. 2002;347:1227-1232.233a.	Hughes KS, Schnaper LA, Berry D, et al: Lumpectomy plus tamoxifen with or without irradiation in women 70 years of age or older with early breast cancer. N Engl J Med 351:971-7, 2004.	234.	Kunkler IH, Williams LJ, Jack WJ, Cameron DA, Dixon JM; PRIME II investigators. Breast-conserving surgery with or without irradiation in women aged 65 years or older with early breast cancer (PRIME II): a randomised controlled trial.  Lancet Oncol. 2015;16(3):266-273.	235.	Vaidya J, Wenz F, Bulsara M, et al. Abstract S4-2: Targeted intraoperative radiotherapy for early breast cancer: TARGIT-A trial-updated analysis of local recurrence and first analysis of survival. Cancer Res. 2012;72:S4-2-S4-2.	236.	Corica T, Nowak AK, Saunders CM, et al. Cosmesis and breast-related quality of life outcomes after intraoperative radiation therapy for early breast cancer: a substudy of the TARGIT-A trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2016;96(1):55-64.	237.	Vaidya JS, Wenz F, Bulsara M, et al. Risk-adapted targeted intraoperative radiotherapy versus whole-breast radiotherapy for breast cancer: 5-year results for local control and over-all survival from the TARGIT-A randomised trial. Lancet. 2014;383:603-613.	238.	Smith BD, Arthur DW, Buchholz TA, et al. Accelerated par-tial breast irradiation consensus statement from the American Society for Radiation Oncology (ASTRO). J Am Coll Surg. 2009;209:269-277.	239.	Fisher B, Redmond C, Fisher ER, et al. Ten-year results of a randomized clinical trial comparing radical mastectomy and total mastectomy with or without radiation. N Engl J Med. 1985;12:674-681.	240.	Krag D, Weaver DL, Alex JC, et al. Surgical resection and radiolocalization of the sentinel lymph node in breast cancer using a gamma probe. Surg Oncol. 1993;2:335-339.	241.	Giuliano AE, Dale PS, Turner RR, et al. Improved axillary staging of breast cancer with sentinel lymphadenectomy. Ann Surg. 1995;222:394-399; discussion 399-401.	242.	Giuliano AE, Kirgan DM, Guenther JM, et al. Lymphatic mapping and sentinel lymphadenectomy for breast cancer. Ann Surg. 1994;220:391-398; discussion 398-401.	243.	Krag DN, Anderson SJ, Julian TB, et al. Technical outcomes of sentinel-lymph-node resection and conventional axillary lymph-node dissection in patients with clinically node-negative breast cancer: results from the NSABP B-32 ran-domised phase III trial. Lancet Oncol. 2007;8:881-888.	244.	Veronesi U, Paganelli G, Viale G, et al. A randomized com-parison of sentinel-node biopsy with routine axillary dissec-tion in breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2003;349:546-553.	245.	Veronesi U, Viale G, Paganelli G, et al. Sentinel lymph node biopsy in breast cancer: ten-year results of a randomized con-trolled study. Ann Surg. 2010;251:595-600.	246.	Ashikaga T, Krag DN, Land SR, et al. Morbidity results from the NSABP B-32 trial comparing sentinel lymph node dissection versus axillary dissection. J Surg Oncol. 2010;102:111-118.	247.	Giuliano AE, Hawes D, Ballman KV, et al. Association of occult metastases in sentinel lymph nodes and bone marrow with survival among women with early-stage invasive breast cancer. JAMA. 2011;306:385-393.	248.	Giuliano AE, Hunt KK, Ballman KV, et al. Axillary dis-section vs no axillary dissection in women with invasive breast cancer and sentinel node metastasis: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2011;305:569-575.	249.	Giuliano AE, Ballman KV, McCall L, et al. Effect of axil-lary dissection vs no axillary dissection on 10-year overall Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   60801/03/19   5:06 PM 609THE BREASTCHAPTER 17survival among women with invasive breast cancer and senti-nel node metastasis: the ACOSOG Z0011 (Alliance) random-ized clinical trial. JAMA. 2017;318(10):918-926.	250.	Giuliano AE, Ballman KV, McCall L, et al. Locoregional recurrence after sentinel lymph node dissection with or with-out axillary dissection in patients with sentinel lymph node metastases: long-term follow-up from the American College of Surgeons Oncology Group (Alliance) ACOSOG Z0011 randomized trial. Ann Surg. 2016;264:413-420.	251.	Wilke LG, McCall LM, Posther KE, et al. Surgical compli-cations associated with sentinel lymph node biopsy: results from a prospective international cooperative group trial. Ann Surg Oncol. 2006;13:491-500.	252.	Lucci A, McCall LM, Beitsch PD, et al. Surgical complica-tions associated with sentinel lymph node dissection (SLND) plus axillary lymph node dissection compared with SLND alone in the American College of Surgeons Oncology Group Trial Z0011. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:3657-3663.	253.	The American Society of Breast Surgeons position state-ment on management of the axilla in patients with invasive breast cancer. Available at: http://www.breastsurgeons.org/statements/PDF_Statements/Axillary_Management.pdf. Accessed February, 26, 2014.	254.	Galimberti V, Cole BF, Zurrida S, et al. Axillary dissection versus no axillary dissection in patients with sentinel-node micrometastases (IBCSG 23-01): a phase 3 randomised con-trolled trial. Lancet Oncol. 2013;14:297-305.	255.	Julian TB, Blumencranz P, Deck K, et al. Novel intraop-erative molecular test for sentinel lymph node metastases in patients with early-stage breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26:3338-3345.	256.	Van Zee KJ, Manasseh DM, Bevilacqua JL, et al. A nomo-gram for predicting the likelihood of additional nodal metas-tases in breast cancer patients with a positive sentinel node biopsy. Ann Surg Oncol. 2003;10:1140-1151.	257.	Lyman GH, Giuliano AE, Somerfield MR, et al. American Society of Clinical Oncology guideline recommendations for sentinel lymph node biopsy in early-stage breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2005:23:7703-7720.	258.	Lyman GH, Somerfield MR, Giuliano AE. Sentinel lymph node biopsy for patients with early-stage breast cancer: American Society of Clinical Oncology Clinical Practice guideline update. J Clin Oncol. 2017;35:561-564.	259.	Henry P, Wasserstein D, Paterson M, Kreder H, Jenkinson R. Risk factors for reoperation and mortality after the operative treatment of tibial plateau fractures in Ontario, 1996-2009.  J Orthop Trauma. 2015;29:182-188.	260.	Hortobagyi GN, Singletary SE, et al. Treatment of locally advanced and inflammatory breast cancer. In: Harris JR, et al, eds. Diseases of the Breast. Philadelphia: Lippincott Wil-liams Wilkins: 2000:645.	261.	Chen AM, Meric-Bernstam F, Hunt KK, et al. Breast con-servation after neoadjuvant chemotherapy: the MD Anderson cancer center experience. J Clin Oncol. 2004;22:2303-2312.	262.	Mieog JS, Van Der Hage JA, Van de Velde CJ. Neoadju-vant chemotherapy for operable breast cancer. Br J Surg. 2007;94:1189-1200.	263.	Mathew J, Agrawal A, Asgeirsson KS, et al. Primary endo-crine therapy in locally advanced breast cancers–the Not-tingham experience. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2009;113: 403-407.	264.	Ellis MJ, Suman VJ, Hoog J, et al. Ki67 proliferation index as a tool for chemotherapy decisions during and after neoad-juvant aromatase inhibitor treatment of breast cancer: results from the American College of Surgeons Oncology Group Z1031 trial (Alliance). J Clin Oncol. 2017;35:1061-1069.	265.	Ellis MJ, Suman VJ, Hoog J, et al. Randomized phase ii neoadjuvant comparison between letrozole, anastrozole, and exemestane for postmenopausal women with estrogen recep-tor-rich stage 2 to 3 breast cancer: clinical and biomarker outcomes and predictive value of the baseline PAM50-based intrinsic subtype-ACOSOG Z1031. J Clin Oncol. 2011;29:2342-2349.	266.	Favret AM, Carlson RW, Goffinet DR, et al. Locally advanced breast cancer: is surgery necessary? Breast J. 2001;7:131-137.	267.	Khan SA, Stewart AK, Morrow M. Does aggressive local therapy improve survival in metastatic breast cancer? Sur-gery. 2002;132:620-626; discussion 626-627.	268.	Gnerlich J, Jeffe DB, Deshpande AD, et al. Surgical removal of the primary tumor increases overall survival in patients with metastatic breast cancer: analysis of the 1988-2003 SEER data. Ann Surg Oncol. 2007;14:2187-2194.	269.	Khan SA, DesJardin ESM. Readdressing the role of surgery of the primary tumor in de novo stage IV breast cancer. Can-cer Treat Res. 2018;173:73-88.	270.	Howlader N, Cronin KA, Kurian AW, Andridge R. Dif-ferences in breast cancer survival by molecular subtypes in the United States. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2018;27(6):619-626.	271.	Bass SS, Lyman GH, McCann CR, et al. Lymphatic mapping and sentinel lymph node biopsy. Breast J. 1999;5(5):288-295.	272.	Cox CE, Nguyen K, Gray RJ, et al. Importance of lymphatic mapping in ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS): why map DCIS? Am Surg. 2001;67:513-519; discussion 519-521.	273.	Dupont E, Cox C, Shivers S, et al. Learning curves and breast cancer lymphatic mapping: institutional volume index. J Surg Res. 2001;97:92-96.	274.	Krag D, Weaver D, Ashikaga T, et al. The sentinel node in breast cancer—a multicenter validation study. N Engl J Med. 1988;339:941-946.	275.	McMasters KM, Giuliano AE, Ross MI, et al. Sentinel-lymphnode biopsy for breast cancer—not yet the standard of care. N Engl J Med. 1998;339:990-995.	276.	O’Hea BJ, Hill AD, El-Shirbiny AM, et al. Sentinel lymph node biopsy in breast cancer: initial experience at Memo-rial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. J Am Coll Surg. 1998;186:423-427.	277.	Souba WW, Bland KI. Indications and techniques for biopsy. In: Bland KI, Copeland EMI, eds. The Breast: Comprehen-sive Management of Benign and Malignant Diseases. Phila-delphia: WB Saunders; 1998:802.	278.	Veronesi U, Paganelli G, Galimberti V, et al. Sentinel-node biopsy to avoid axillary dissection in breast cancer with clini-cally negative lymph-nodes. Lancet. 1997;349:1864-1867.	279.	Wilke LG, Giuliano A: Sentinel lymph node biopsy in patients with early-stage breast cancer: status of the National Clinical Trials. Surg Clin North Am. 2003;83:901-910.	280.	Xing Y, Foy M, Cox DD, et al. Meta-analysis of sentinel lymph node biopsy after preoperative chemotherapy in patients with breast cancer. Br J Surg. 2006;93:539-546.	281.	Hunt KK, Yi M, Mittendorf EA, et al. Sentinel lymph node surgery after neoadjuvant chemotherapy is accurate and reduces the need for axillary dissection in breast cancer patients. Ann Surg. 2009;250:558-566.	282.	Tan VK, Goh BK, Fook-Chong S, et al. The feasibility and accuracy of sentinel lymph node biopsy in clinically noden-egative patients after neoadjuvant chemotherapy for breast cancer—a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Surg Oncol. 2011;104:97-103.	283.	Yi M, Meric-Bernstam F, Ross MI, et al. How many sentinel lymph nodes are enough during sentinel lymph node dissec-tion for breast cancer? Cancer. 2008;113:30-37.	284.	Kong AL, Tereffe W, Hunt KK, et al. Impact of internal mam-mary lymph node drainage identified by preoperative lym-phoscintigraphy on outcomes in patients with stage I to III breast cancer. Cancer. 2012;118:6287-6296.Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   60901/03/19   5:06 PM 610SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	285.	Fisher B. Lumpectomy (segmental mastectomy and axillary dissection). In: Bland KI, Copeland EMI, eds. The Breast: Comprehensive Management of Benign and Malignant Diseases. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1998:917.	286.	Newman LA, Washington TA. New trends in breast conserva-tion therapy. Surg Clin North Am. 2003;83:841-883.	287.	NIH consensus conference. Treatment of early-stage breast cancer. JAMA. 1991;265:391-395.	288.	Group EBCTC. Effect of radiotherapy after breast-conserv-ing surgery on 10-year recurrence and 15-year breast cancer death: meta-analysis of individual patient data for 10 801 women in 17 randomised trials. Lancet. 2011;378:1707-1716.	289.	Houssami N, Macaskill P, Marinovich ML, et al. Meta-analysis of the impact of surgical margins on local recurrence in women with early-stage invasive breast cancer treated with breast-conserving therapy. Eur J Cancer. 2010;46:3219-3232.	290.	Moran MS, Schnitt SJ Giuliano AE, et al. Society of Surgical Oncology–American Society for Radiation Oncology con-sensus guideline on margins for breast-conserving surgery with whole-breast irradiation in stages I and II invasive breast cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2014;88(3):553-564.	291.	Houssami N, Macaskill P, Marinovich ML, Morrow M. The association of surgical margins and local recurrence in women with early-stage invasive breast cancer treated with breast-conserving therapy: a meta-analysis. Ann Surg Oncol. 2014;21:717-730.	292.	Moran MS, Schnitt SJ Giuliano AE, et al. Society of Surgi-cal Oncology–American Society for Radiation Oncology consensus guideline on margins for breast-conserving sur-gery with whole-breast irradiation in stages I and II inva-sive breast cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2014;88(3): 553-564.	293.	Bland KI, Chang HR. Modified radical mastectomy and total (simple) mastectomy. In: Bland KI, Copeland EMI, eds. The Breast: Comprehensive Management of Benign and Malig-nant Diseases. Philadelphia: WB Saunders;1998:881.	294.	Simmons RM, Adamovich TL. Skin-sparing mastectomy. Surg Clin North Am. 2003;83:885-899.	295.	McCraw JB, Papp C. Breast reconstruction following mas-tectomy, In: Bland KI, Copeland EMI, eds. The Breast: Com-prehensive Management of Benign and Malignant Diseases. Philadelphia: WB Saunders;1998:96.	296.	Fortin A, Dagnault A, Larochelle M, et al. Impact of locore-gional radiotherapy in node-positive patients treated by breast-conservative treatment. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2003;56:1013-1022.	297.	Hellman S. Stopping metastases at their source. N Engl J Med. 1997;337:996-997.	298.	Overgaard M, Hansen PS, Overgaard J, et al. Postopera-tive radiotherapy in high-risk premenopausal women with breast cancer who receive adjuvant chemotherapy. Danish Breast Cancer Cooperative Group 82b Trial. N Engl J Med. 1997;337:949-955.	299.	Overgaard M, Jensen MB, Overgaard J, et al. Postopera-tive radiotherapy in high-risk postmenopausal breast-cancer patients given adjuvant tamoxifen: Danish Breast Cancer Cooperative Group DBCG 82c randomised trial. Lancet. 1999;353:1641-1648.	300.	Ragaz J, Jackson SM, Le N, et al. Adjuvant radiotherapy and chemotherapy in node-positive premenopausal women with breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 1997;337:956-962.	301.	Recht A, Edge SB. Evidence-based indications for postmas-tectomy irradiation. Surg Clin North Am. 2003;83:995-1013.	302.	Recht A, Edge SB, Solin LJ, et al. Postmastectomy radio-therapy: clinical practice guidelines of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. J Clin Oncol. 2001;19:1539-1569.	303.	EBCTCG (Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collabora-tive Group); McGale P, Taylor C, Correa C, et al. Effect of radiotherapy after mastectomy and axillary surgery on 10-year recurrence and 20-year breast cancer mortality: meta-analysis of individual patient data for 8135 women in 22 randomised trials. Lancet. 2014;383:2127-2135.	304.	Smith BD, Bellon JR, Blitzblau R, et al. Radiation therapy for the whole breast: Executive summary of an American Society for Radiation Oncology (ASTRO) evidence-based guideline. Pract Radiat Oncol. 2018;8:145-152.	305.	Polychemotherapy for early breast cancer: an overview of the randomised trials. Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collabora-tive Group. Lancet. 352:930-942.	306.	Fisher B, Brown AM, Dimitrov NV, et al. Two months of doxorubicin-cyclophosphamide with and without interval reinduction therapy compared with 6 months of cyclophos-phamide, methotrexate, and fluorouracil in positive-node breast cancer patients with tamoxifen-nonresponsive tumors: results from the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project B-15. J Clin Oncol. 1990;8:1483-1496.	307.	Kelleher M, Miles D. 21. The adjuvant treatment of breast cancer. Int J Clin Pract. 2003;57:195-199.	308.	Loprinzi CL, Thome SD. Understanding the utility of adju-vant systemic therapy for primary breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2001;19:972-979.	309.	Wood WC, Budman DR, Korzun AH, et al. Dose and dose intensity of adjuvant chemotherapy for stage II, node-positive breast carcinoma. N Engl J Med. 1994;330:1253-1259.	310.	Bonadonna G, Bignami P, Buzzoni R, et al. New adjuvant trials for resectable breast cancer at the Istituto Nazionale Tumori of Milan. Recent Results. Cancer Res. 1984;91:210-213.	311.	Mauri D, Pavlidis N, Ioannidis JP. Neoadjuvant versus adju-vant systemic treatment in breast cancer: a meta-analysis.  J Natl Cancer Inst. 2005;97:188-194.	312.	Mittendorf EA, Buchholz TA, Tucker SL, et al. Impact of chemotherapy sequencing on local-regional failure risk in breast cancer patients undergoing breast-conserving therapy. Ann Surg. 257:173-179.	313.	Symmans WF, Wei C, Gould R, et al. Long-term prognos-tic risk after neoadjuvant chemotherapy associated with residual cancer burden and breast cancer subtype. J Clin Oncol. 2017;35(10):1049-1060.	314.	Kuerer HM, Newman LA, Smith TL, et al. Clinical course of breast cancer patients with complete pathologic primary tumor and axillary lymph node response to doxorubicin-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol. 1999;17:460-469.	315.	Caudle AS, Gonzalez-Angulo AM, Hunt KK, et al. Predictors of tumor progression during neoadjuvant chemotherapy in breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28:1821-1828.	316.	Mamounas EP, Brown A, Anderson S, et al. Sentinel node biopsy after neoadjuvant chemotherapy in breast cancer: results from National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project Protocol B-27. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23:2694-2702.	317.	Boughey JC, Suman VJ, Mittendorf EA, et al. Sentinel lymph node surgery after neoadjuvant chemotherapy in patients with node-positive breast cancer: the ACOSOG Z1071 (Alliance) clinical trial. JAMA. 2013;310:1455-1461.	318.	Boughey JC, Ballman KV, Le-Petross HT, et al. Identification and resection of clipped node decreases the false-negative rate of sentinel lymph node surgery in patients presenting with node-positive breast cancer (T0–T4, N1–N2) who receive neoadjuvant chemotherapy: results from ACOSOG Z1071 (Alliance). Ann Surg. 2016;263(4):802-807.	319.	Caudle AS, Yang WT, Krishnamurthy S, et al. Improved axil-lary evaluation following neoadjuvant therapy for patients with node-positive breast cancer using selective evaluation of clipped nodes: implementation of targeted axillary dissec-tion. J Clin Oncol. 2016;34:1072-1078.	320.	Guarneri V, Broglio K, Kau SW, et al. Prognostic value of pathologic complete response after primary chemotherapy in Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   61001/03/19   5:06 PM 611THE BREASTCHAPTER 17relation to hormone receptor status and other factors. J Clin Oncol. 24:1037-1044.	321.	Smith IE, Dowsett M, Ebbs SR, et al. Neoadjuvant treatment of postmenopausal breast cancer with anastrozole, tamoxifen, or both in combination: the Immediate Preoperative Anastro-zole, Tamoxifen, or Combined with Tamoxifen (IMPACT) multicenter double-blind randomized trial. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23(22):5108-5116.	322.	Delpech Y, Coutant C, Hsu L, et al. Clinical benefit from neoadjuvant chemotherapy in oestrogen receptor-positive invasive ductal and lobular carcinomas. Br J Cancer. 2013;108(2):285-291.	323.	Joh JE, Esposito NN, Kiluk JV, et al. Pathologic tumor response of invasive lobular carcinoma to neo-adjuvant che-motherapy. Breast J. 2012;18(6):569-574.	324.	Dixon JM, Renshaw L, Dixon J, Thomas J. Invasive lobular carcinoma: response to neoadjuvant letrozole therapy. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2011;130:871-877.	325.	Spring LM, Gupta A, Reynolds KL, et al. Neoadjuvant endocrine therapy for estrogen receptor-positive breast can-cer: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Oncol. 2016;2(11):1477-1486.	326.	Baselga J, Semiglazov V, van Dam P, et al. Phase II random-ized study of neoadjuvant everolimus plus letrozole compared with placebo plus letrozole in patients with estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2009;27:2630-2637.	327.	Baum M, Buzdar A. The current status of aromatase inhibi-tors in the management of breast cancer. Surg Clin North Am. 83:973-994.	328.	Bonneterre J, Thurlimann B, Robertson JF, et al. Anastrozole versus tamoxifen as first-line therapy for advanced breast cancer in 668 postmenopausal women: results of the Tamoxi-fen or Arimidex Randomized Group Efficacy and Tolerability study. J Clin Oncol. 2000;18:3748-3757.	329.	Buzdar A, Douma J, Davidson N, et al. Phase III, multicenter, double-blind, randomized study of letrozole, an aromatase inhibitor, for advanced breast cancer versus megestrol ace-tate. J Clin Oncol. 2001;19:3357-3366.	330.	Buzdar AU, Jonat W, Howell A, et al. Anastrozole ver-sus megestrol acetate in the treatment of postmenopausal women with advanced breast carcinoma: results of a sur-vival update based on a combined analysis of data from two mature phase III trials. Arimidex Study Group. Cancer. 1998;83:1142-1152.	331.	Campos SM, Winer EP. Hormonal therapy in postmenopausal women with breast cancer. Oncology. 2003;64:289-299.	332.	Rutqvist LE, Johansson H; Stockholm Breast Cancer Study Group. Long-term follow-up of the randomized Stockholm trial on adjuvant tamoxifen among postmeno-pausal patients with early stage breast cancer. Acta Oncol. 2007;46(2):133-145.	333.	Fisher B, Dignam J, Bryant J, et al. Five versus more than five years of tamoxifen therapy for breast cancer patients with negative lymph nodes and estrogen receptor-positive tumors. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1996;88(21):1529-1542.	334.	Davies C, Pan H, Godwin J, et al. Long-term effects of continuing adjuvant tamoxifen to 10 years versus stop-ping at 5 years after diagnosis of oestrogen receptor-pos-itive breast cancer: ATLAS, a randomised trial. Lancet. 2013;381(9869):805-816.	335.	Goss PE, Ingle JN, Martino S, et al. Randomized trial of letrozole following tamoxifen as extended adjuvant therapy in receptor-positive breast cancer: updated findings from NCIC CTG MA.17. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2005;97:1262-1271.	336.	Goss PE, Ingle JN, Pritchard KI, et al. Exemestane versus anas-trozole in postmenopausal women with early breast cancer:  NCIC CTG MA.27—a randomized controlled phase III trial. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31(11):1398-1404.	337.	Goss PE, Hershman DL, Cheung AM, et al. Effects of adju-vant exemestane versus anastrozole on bone mineral density for women with early breast cancer (MA.27B): a compan-ion analysis of a randomised controlled trial. Lancet Oncol. 2014;15(4):474-482.	338.	Smith I, Yardley D, Burris H, et al. Comparative efficacy and safety of adjuvant letrozole versus anastrozole in postmeno-pausal patients with hormone receptor-positive, node-positive early breast cancer: final results of the randomized phase III Femara Versus Anastrozole Clinical Evaluation (FACE) trial. J Clin Oncol. 2017;35(10):1041-1048.	339.	Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group. Aro-matase inhibitors versus tamoxifen in early breast cancer: patient-level meta-analysis of the randomised trials. Lancet. 2015;386(10001):1341-1352.	340.	Goss PE, Ingle JN, Pritchard KI, et al. Extending aromatase-inhibitor adjuvant therapy to 10 years. N Engl J Med. 2016;375:209-219.	341.	Finn RS, Crown JP, Lang I, et al. The cyclin-dependent kinase 4/6 inhibitor palbociclib in combination with letro-zole versus letrozole alone as first-line treatment of oestrogen receptor-positive, HER2-negative, advanced breast cancer (PALOMA-1/TRIO-18): a randomised phase 2 study. Lancet Oncol. 2015;16(1): 25-35.	342.	Finn RS, Martin M, Rugo HS, et al. Palbociclib and letrozole in advanced breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2016;375(20):1925-1936.	343.	Cristofanilli M, Turnr NC, Bondarenko I, et al. Fulvestrant plus palbociclib versus fulvestrant plus placebo for treatment of hormone-receptor-positive, HER2-negative metastatic breast cancer that progressed on previous endocrine therapy (PALOMA-3): final analysis of the multicentre, double-blind, phase 3 randomised controlled trial. Lancet Oncol. 2016;17(4):425-439.	343a.	Goetz, M. P., et al. (2017). MONARCH 3: Abemaciclib As Initial Therapy for Advanced Breast Cancer. J Clin Oncol. 35(32): 3638-3646.	343b.	Sledge, G. W., Jr., et al. (2017). MONARCH 2: Abemaci-clib in Combination With Fulvestrant in Women With HR+/HER2Advanced Breast Cancer Who Had Progressed While Receiving Endocrine Therapy. J Clin Oncol. 35(25): 2875-2884.	344.	Baselga J, Campone M, Piccart M, et al. Everolimus in postmenopausal hormone-receptor-positive advanced breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2012;366:520-529.	345.	Bachelot T, Bourgier C, Cropet C, et al. Randomized phase II trial of everolimus in combination with tamoxifen in patients with hormone receptor-positive, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-negative metastatic breast cancer with prior exposure to aromatase inhibitors: a GINECO study. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30(22):2718-2724.	346.	Wolff AC, Lazar AA, Bondarenko I, et al. Randomized  phase III placebo-controlled trial of letrozole plus oral tem-sirolimus as first-line endocrine therapy in postmenopausal women with locally advanced or metastatic breast cancer.  J Clin Oncol. 2013;31(2):195-202.	347.	Schiavon G, Hrebien S, Garcia-Murillas I, et al. Analysis of ESR1 mutation in circulating tumor DNA demonstrates evo-lution during therapy for metastatic breast cancer. Sci Transl Med. 2015;7(313):313ra182.	348.	Robinson DR, Wu YM, Vats P, et al. Activating ESR1 muta-tions in hormone-resistant metastatic breast cancer. Nat Genet. 2013;45(12):1446-1451.	349.	Toy W, Weir H, Razavi P, et al. Activating ESR1 mutations differentially affect the efficacy of ER antagonists. Cancer Discov. 2017;7(3):277-287.	350.	Jakesz R, Hausmaninger H, Kubista E, et al. Random-ized adjuvant trial of tamoxifen and goserelin versus Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   61101/03/19   5:06 PM 612SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIcyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and fluorouracil: evidence for the superiority of treatment with endocrine blockade in pre-menopausal patients with hormone-responsive breast cancer—Austrian Breast and Colorectal Cancer Study Group Trial 5.  J Clin Oncol. 2002;20(24):4621-4627.	351.	Francis PA, Regan MM, Fleming GF, et al. Adjuvant ovar-ian suppression in premenopausal breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2015;372(5):436-446.	352.	Pagani O, Regan MM, Walley BA, et al. Adjuvant exemes-tane with ovarian suppression in premenopausal breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2014;371:107-118.	353.	Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group (EBCTCG). Effects of chemotherapy and hormonal ther-apy for early breast cancer on recurrence and 15-year survival: an overview of the randomised trials. Lancet. 2005;365:1687-1717.	354.	Paik S, Bryant J, Tan-Chiu E, et al. Real-world performance of HER2 testing—National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project experience. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2002;94:852-854.	355.	Press MF, Slamon DJ, Flom KJ, et al. Evaluation of HER-2/neu gene amplification and overexpression: comparison of frequently used assay methods in a molecularly char-acterized cohort of breast cancer specimens. J Clin Oncol. 2002;20:3095-3105.	356.	Volpi A, De Paola F, Nanni O, et al. Prognostic significance of biologic markers in node-negative breast cancer patients: a prospective study. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 63:181-192.	357.	Goldhirsch A, Gelber RD, Piccart-Gebhart MJ, et al. 2 years versus 1 year of adjuvant trastuzumab for HER2-positive breast cancer (HERA): an open-label, randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2013;382(9897):1021-1028.	358.	Pivot X, Romieu G, Debled M, et al. 6 months versus  12 months of adjuvant trastuzumab for patients with HER2-positive early breast cancer (PHARE): a randomised phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2013;14(8):741-748.	359.	Verma S, Miles D, Gianni L, et al. Trastuzumab emtansine for HER2-positive advanced breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2012;367:1783-1791.	360.	Baselga J, Cortés J, Kim SB, et al. Pertuzumab plus trastu-zumab plus docetaxel for metastatic breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2012;366(2):109-119.	361.	Gianni L, Pienkowski T, Im YH, et al. Efficacy and safety of neoadjuvant pertuzumab and trastuzumab in women with locally advanced, inflammatory, or early HER2-positive breast cancer (NeoSphere): a randomised multi-centre, open-label, phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2012;13(1): 25-32.	362.	Schneeweiss A, Chia S, Hickish T, et al. Pertuzumab plus trastuzumab in combination with standard neoad-juvant anthracycline-containing and anthracycline-free chemotherapy regimens in patients with HER2-positive early breast cancer: a randomized phase II cardiac safety study (TRYPHAENA). Ann Oncol. 2013;24(9):2278-2284.362a.	Von Minckwitz, G., et al. (2017). Adjuvant Pertuzumab and Trastuzumab in Early HER2-Positive Breast Cancer. N Engl J Med. 377(2): 122-131.	363.	Chan A, Delaloge S, Holmes FA, et al. Neratinib after trastuzumab-based adjuvant therapy in patients with HER2-positive breast cancer (ExteNET): a multicentre, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2016;17(3):367-377.	364.	Bose R, Kavuri SM, Searleman AC, et al. Activating HER2 mutations in HER2 gene amplification negative breast cancer. Cancer Discov. 2013;3(2):224-237.	365.	Lien HC, Chen YL, Juang YL, Jeng YM. Frequent alterations of HER2 through mutation, amplification, or overexpression in pleomorphic lobular carcinoma of the breast. Breast Can-cer Res Treat. 2015;150:447-455.	366.	Ben-Baruch NE, Bose R, Kavuri SM, Ma CX, Ellis MJ. HER2-mutated breast cancer responds to treatment with single-agent neratinib, a second-generation HER2/EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor. J Natl Compr Canc Netw. 2015;13:1061-1064.	367.	Gandhi L, Bahleda R, Tolaney SM, et al. Phase I study of neratinib in combination with temsirolimus in patients with human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-dependent and other solid tumors. J Clin Oncol. 2014;32(2):68-75.	368.	Robinson DS, Sundaram M, et al. Carcinoma of the breast in pregnancy and lactation. In: Bland KI, Copeland EMI, eds. The Breast: Comprehensive Management of Benign and Malignant Diseases. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1998:1433.	369.	Giordano SH, Buzdar AU, Hortobagyi GN: Breast cancer in men. Ann Intern Med. 2002;137:678-687.	370.	Wilhelm MC. Cancer of the male breast. In: Bland KI, Cope-land EMI, eds. The Breast: Comprehensive Management of Benign and Malignant Diseases. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1998:1416.	371.	Khan SA, Badve S. Phyllodes tumors of the breast. Curr Treat Options Oncol. 2001;2:139-147.	372.	Chittoor SR, Swain SM. Locally advanced breast cancer: Role of medical oncology. In: Bland KI, Copeland EMI, eds. The Breast: Comprehensive Management of Benign and Malignant Diseases. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1998:1403.	373.	Mies C. Mammary sarcoma and lymphoma. In: Bland KI, Copeland EMI, eds. The Breast: Comprehensive Management of Benign and Malignant Diseases. Philadelphia: WB Saunders;  1998:307.	374.	Stewart FW, Treves N. Lymphangiosarcoma in postmas-tectomy lymphedema; a report of six cases in elephantiasis chirurgica. Cancer. 1948;1:64-81.Brunicardi_Ch17_p0541-p0612.indd   61201/03/19   5:06 PM
# Chunk 8881
Disorders of the Head and NeckAntoine Eskander, Stephen Y. Kang, Michael S. Harris, Bradley A. Otto, Oliver Adunka, Randal S. Weber, and Theodoros N. Teknos 18chapterCOMPLEX ANATOMY AND FUNCTIONThe anatomy of the head and neck is complex because of the proximity of vital structures such as framework, nerves, and arteries. Functionally, these structures afford most of the human senses: vision, taste, smell, and hearing. Even more fundamental, the upper aerodigestive tract is critical for breathing, speech, and swallowing. Otolaryngology—head and neck surgery is the field that predominantly deals with disorders of the head and neck; however, a multidisciplinary approach is required to achieve optimal outcomes. The multidisciplinary team can include audi-ology, speech language pathology, allergy/immunology, neurol-ogy, neurosurgery, radiation, and medical oncology. This chapter aims to provide an overview of the most common diseases pre-senting to and treated by the otolaryngologist—head and neck surgeon. It reviews benign conditions, trauma, malignancies, reconstruction, tracheotomy, and rehabilitation.BENIGN CONDITIONS OF THE HEAD AND NECKOtologyInfectious. Infectious processes of the ear may be consid-ered by their location (external, middle, or inner ear), their time course (acute or chronic), and the presence of complications. The external ear or pinna consists of a cartilaginous frame-work, perichondrium, and a relatively thin layer of skin. Ery-sipelas (St Anthony’s Fire) or impetigo are causes of external ear infection affecting the dermis or hypodermis of the auricle, typically caused by Streptococcus pyogenes or Staphylococcus aureus, respectively, that may be encountered posttraumatically or related to ear piercing. Treatment is oral antibiotic therapy targeting these organisms. History and clinical features such as presence of bullae and golden crusting distinguish erysipelas and impetigo from other benign entities causing erythema and edema of the auricle, such as relapsing polychondritis, which is typically diffuse, lobule-sparing, and steroid-responsive.Acute otitis externa, often referred to as “swimmer’s ear,” denotes infection of the skin of the external auditory canal.1 Typically, the pathology is incited by moisture within the canal leading to skin maceration and pruritus. Subsequent trauma to the canal skin by scratching (i.e., instrumentation with a cot-ton swab or fingernail), erodes the normally protective skin/cerumen barrier. Hearing aid use and comorbid dermatologic conditions such as eczema or other forms of dermatitis may similarly serve as predisposing factors. The milieu of the exter-nal ear canal—dark, warm, humid—is ideal for rapid microbial proliferation. The most common offending organism is Pseu-domonas aeruginosa, although other bacteria and fungi may also be involved. Symptoms and signs of otitis externa include itching during the initial phases and pain with marked swelling of the canal soft tissues as the infection progresses. Treatment involves removal of debris under otomicroscopy and applica-tion of appropriate ototopical antimicrobials, such as neomycin/polymyxin or quinolone-containing eardrops. The topical ste-roid component of these drops (e.g., hydrocortisone or dexa-methasone) addresses swelling and, as a result, decreases the often intense pain associated with this infection. In cases of marked ear canal edema, the use of an otowick is required to facilitate delivery of ototopical medication medially into the ear canal. Fungal infections may call for the addition of 2% acetic acid to reestablish the premorbid pH balance. Patients with otitis externa should also be instructed to keep the ear dry. Systemic antibiotics are reserved for those with severe infections, diabet-ics, and immunosuppression.Complex Anatomy and Function	613Benign Conditions of the Head   and Neck	613Otology / 613Sinonasal Inflammatory Disease / 617Pharyngeal and Adenotonsillar  Disease / 622Benign Conditions of the Larynx / 624Vascular Lesions / 626Trauma of the Head and Neck	627Soft Tissue / 627Facial Fractures / 628Temporal Bone Fractures / 629Tumors of the Head and Neck	629Etiology and Epidemiology / 630Anatomy and Histopathology / 630Second Primary Tumors in the Head  and Neck / 631Staging / 632Upper Aerodigestive Tract / 632Nose and Paranasal  Sinuses / 643Nasopharynx / 644Ear and Temporal Bone / 645Neck / 646Salivary Gland Tumors / 650Reconstruction	651Local Flaps and Skin Grafts / 651Regional Flaps / 651Free Tissue Transfer / 651Tracheotomy	652Indications and Timing / 652Technique and Complications / 652Speech with Tracheotomy and Decannulation / 653Long Term Management   and Rehabilitation	654Palliative Care / 654Follow-Up Care / 654Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   61301/03/19   5:22 PM 614Figure 18-1. Acute otitis media.Malignant otitis externa, a fulminant necrotizing infec-tion of the soft tissues of the external ear canal combined with osteomyelitis of the temporal bone, is a potentially life-threatening form of otitis externa seen most commonly among elderly patients with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus or immunodeficiency.2,3 The classic physical finding is granulation tissue along the floor of the external auditory canal near the bony cartilaginous junction. Symptoms include persistent otalgia for longer than one month and purulent otorrhea. Biopsy is called for in order to exclude malignancy. Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) define the extension of disease. Technetium 99-m scans are useful in gauging extend of bony involvement in early disease. Gallium-67 scans are valu-able for monitoring disease during the course of treatment and for determining duration of antibiotic therapy. These patients require aggressive medical therapy including ototopical and IV antibiotics targeting Pseudomonas. Other gram-negative bacteria and fungi are occasionally implicated, necessitating culturedirected therapy. Patients who do not respond to medical  management require surgical debridement. This condition may progress to involvement of the adjacent skull base and soft  tissues, meningitis, brain abscess, and death.Acute otitis media (AOM) typically implies a bacterial infec-tion of the middle ear.4 This diagnosis accounts for 25% of pedi-atric antibiotic prescriptions and is the most common bacterial infection of childhood. Most cases occur before 2 years of age and are secondary to immaturity of the Eustachian tube. Well-recog-nized contributing factors include upper respiratory viral infection and daycare attendance, as well as craniofacial conditions affect-ing Eustachian tube function, such as cleft palate.It is important to distinguish between acute otitis media and otitis media with effusion (OME). The later denotes unin-fected serous fluid accumulation within the middle ear space. In children not already considered “at risk” for developmen-tal difficulties, OME is generally observed for resolution for a period of 3 months.5 Age-appropriate hearing testing should be performed when OME persists for ≥3 months or at any time when language delay, learning problems, or a significant hear-ing loss is suspected. In the absence of these factors, the child with OME should be reexamined at 3to 6-month intervals until the effusion is no longer present or until significant hear-ing loss is identified or structural abnormalities of the eardrum or middle ear are suspected. When hearing, speech, or structural concerns exist, myringotomy with tympanostomy tube place-ment is indicated.Signs and symptoms of infectious otitis media occurring for <3 weeks denote AOM. In this phase, otalgia and fever are the most common symptoms and physical exam reveals a bulging, opaque tympanic membrane (Fig. 18-1). If the process lasts 3 to 8 weeks, it is deemed subacute. Chronic otitis media, lasting more than 8 weeks, usually results from an unresolved acute otitis media. The most common organisms responsible are Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and Moraxella catarrhalis.In order to minimize antibiotic resistance and obviate complications of antimicrobial therapy such as allergic reaction and diarrhea, guidelines have been established for the treatment of AOM.6,7 Pain associated with AOM should be recognized and treated with oral analgesics. In children older than 6 months who are not otherwise considered “high risk” for complications (e.g., immunocompromised, previous cochlear implantation, developmental anomalies of the inner ear) with symptoms con-sistent with unilateral AOM without otorrhea, an initial period of observation is offered. If initial observation is selected by the physician and family, a mechanism for reexamination in 48 to 72 hours to evaluate for clinical improvement must be in place. When these criteria are not met, or clinical improvement is not observed within 48 to 72 hours, oral antibiotics are begun. First-line therapy is high-dose amoxicillin or amoxicillin-clavulanate, for β-lactamase coverage. Chronic otitis media is frequently Key Points1	One of the most common benign head and neck disorders includes sinonasal inflammatory disease which can present as acute or chronic rhinosinusitis.2	Acute adeno-tonsillitis is a major cause of morbidity in children and adenotonsillectomy can significantly improve symptoms of both sleep disordered breathing and of symp-toms during acute infections.3	Squamous cell carcinoma comprises >90% of all of the malignant pathology of the mucosal lining of the upper aerodigestive tract.4	The ideal treatment protocol for these cancers varies by subsite, stage, patient comorbidity, and center preference/experience. Early stage disease is treated with unimodality and late stage disease is treated with multiple modalities in the form of primary surgery with adjuvant radiotherapy or primary concurrent chemoradiotherapy.5	Free flap reconstruction of head and neck defects is integral to help improve patient-reported quality of life and to re-establish form and function.Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   61401/03/19   5:22 PM 615DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECKCHAPTER 18treated with myringotomy and tube placement (Fig. 18-2). This treatment is indicated for frequent acute episodes and in the set-ting of COME as discussed previously. The purpose of this pro-cedure is to remove the effusion and provide a route for middle ear ventilation. Episodes of AOM following tube placement are still possible. Myringotomy tubes, however, allow for preven-tion of painful tympanic membrane distension, risk of perfora-tion and other complications, and permit delivery of ototopicals into the middle ear space, in most cases obviating the need for systemic antibiotic therapy.Spontaneous tympanic membrane perforation during acute otitis media provides for drainage of purulent fluid and middle ear ventilation and frequently results in immediate resolution of severe pain. In the majority of cases, these perforations will heal spontaneously after the infection has resolved.8 Chronic otitis media, however, may be associated with nonhealing tympanic membrane perforations. Patients may have persistent otorrhea, which is treated with topical drops. Preparations containing ami-noglycoside are avoided because this class of drugs is toxic to the inner ear. Solutions containing alcohol or acetic acid may be irritating or caustic to the middle ear and are also avoided in the setting of a perforation. Nonhealing perforation requires surgical closure (tympanoplasty) after medical treatment of any residual acute infection.Chronic inflammatory changes from otitis media intersect with and share common etiological factors with cholesteatoma. Cholesteatoma is an epidermoid cyst of the middle ear and/or mastoid cavity that develops as result of Eustachian tube dysfunction. While several theories exist regarding causes of cholesteatoma, most cholesteatoma arises from squamous epi-thelium drawn into the middle ear via retraction pockets, most commonly in the pars flaccida.9 Squamous epithelium may also migrate into the middle ear via a perforation. Chronic mastoid-itis that fails medical management or is associated with cho-lesteatoma is treated by mastoidectomy. Chronic inflammation and destruction of middle ear structures by osteolytic enzymes of cholesteatoma matrix may also be associated with erosion of the ossicular chain, which can be reconstructed with various prostheses or autologous ossicular replacement techniques.Complications of otitis media with or without cholestea-toma may be grouped into two categories: intratemporal (oto-logic) and intracranial.10 Fortunately, complications are rare in the antibiotic era, but mounting antibiotic resistance necessitates an increased awareness of these conditions. Intratemporal com-plications include acute coalescent mastoiditis, petrositis, facial nerve paralysis, and labyrinthitis. In acute coalescing mastoid-itis, destruction of the bony lamellae by an acute purulent pro-cess results in severe pain, fever, and fluctuance behind the ear. The mastoid air cells coalesce into one common space filled with pus. Mastoid infection may also spread to the petrous apex, causing retro-orbital pain and sixth-nerve palsy. These diagno-ses are confirmed by computed tomographic scan. Facial nerve paralysis may also occur secondary to an acute inflammatory process in the middle ear or mastoid.11Intratemporal complications of otitis media are managed by myringotomy tube placement in addition to appropriate IV antibiotics. In acute coalescent mastoiditis and petrositis, mas-toidectomy is also performed as necessary to drain purulent foci. Labyrinthitis refers to inflammation of the inner ear. Most cases are idiopathic or are secondary to viral infections of the endolymphatic space. The patient experiences vertigo together with sensorineural hearing loss, and symptoms may smolder over several weeks. Labyrinthitis associated with middle ear infection may be serous or suppurative. In the former case, bac-terial products and/or inflammatory mediators transudate into the inner ear via the round window membrane, establishing an inflammatory process therein. Total recovery is eventually pos-sible after the middle ear is adequately treated.Suppurative labyrinthitis, however, is a much more toxic condition in which the acute purulent bacterial infection extends into the inner ear and causes marked destruction of the sensory hair cells and neurons of the eighth-nerve ganglion. This con-dition may be a harbinger for meningitis and must be treated rapidly. The goal of management of inner ear infection, which occurs secondary to middle ear infection, is to “sterilize” the middle ear space with antibiotics and the placement of a myr-ingotomy tube.The most common intracranial complication of otitis media is meningitis. Otologic meningitis in children is most commonly associated with an H. influenzae type B infection. Other intra-cranial complications include epidural abscess, subdural abscess, brain abscess, otitic hydrocephalus, and sigmoid sinus thrombo-phlebitis. In these cases, the otogenic source must be urgently treated with antibiotics and myringotomy tube placement. Mas-toidectomy and neurosurgical consultation may be necessary.Facial Nerve Disorders. Bell’s palsy is the most common etiology of facial nerve weakness/paralysis and is clinically dis-tinct from that occurring as a complication of otitis media in that the otologic exam is normal.12 Bell’s palsy is rapid, unilat-eral and, historically, considered idiopathic. It is now accepted, however, that the majority of these cases represent a viral neu-ropathy caused by herpes simplex. It is critical that clinicians distinguish Bell’s palsy from other causes of facial weakness/palsy. Alternative diagnoses are suggested by weakness/paraly-sis that arise gradually (rather than <72 hours), is bilateral, is accompanied by other neurological deficits, or does not show some recovery within 2 to 3 weeks and complete recovery at 3 to 4 months. Treatment includes oral steroids plus antiviral ther-apy (i.e., valacyclovir). Complete recovery is the norm, but it does not occur universally, and selected cases may benefit from surgical decompression of the nerve within its bony canal. Elec-trophysiologic testing has been used to identify those patients in whom surgery might be indicated.13 The procedure involves decompression of the nerve via exposure in the mastoid and middle cranial fossa.Figure 18-2. Myringotomy and tube.Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   61501/03/19   5:22 PM 616SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIVaricella zoster virus may also cause facial nerve paraly-sis when the virus reactivates from dormancy in the nerve. This condition, known as Ramsay Hunt syndrome, is characterized by severe otalgia followed by the eruption of vesicles of the external ear and the soft palate. Treatment is similar to Bell’s palsy, but full recovery is only seen in approximately two-thirds of cases.Traumatic facial nerve injuries may occur secondary to accidental trauma or surgical injury. Iatrogenic facial nerve trauma most often occurs during mastoidectomy, most com-monly to the vertical segment of the nerve.14 Detailed knowl-edge of facial nerve anatomy and adjunctive use of nerve integrity monitoring systems are imperative in this context. When the facial nerve is injured during an operative procedure, it is explored. Injury to >50% of the neural diameter of the facial nerve is addressed either with primary reanastomosis or recon-structed with the use a nerve graft. Complete recovery of nerve function is uncommon in these cases.Lesions of the Internal Auditory Canal and Cerebello-pontine Angle. The most common lesion affecting the inter-nal auditory canal (IAC) and the cerebellopontine angle (CPA) is vestibular schwannoma (formerly referred to as “acoustic neuroma”). Less commonly encountered lesions of the IAC and CPA include meningioma and epidermoid tumors. Vestibular schwannomas are benign tumors that comprise 60% to 92% of all CPA lesions and 6% to 10% of intracranial tumors. They demon-strate an average growth rate of 1 to 2 mm per year.15 Vestibular schwannomas are most commonly unilateral and sporadic; bilat-eral tumors are the hallmark of neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2), an autosomal dominant condition linked to mutation of a tumor suppressor gene mapped to chromosome 22. The most common presenting symptoms of vestibular schwannoma are asymmetric sensorineural hearing loss and speech perception deficits often out of proportion to degree of hearing loss indicated by audiom-etry. Unilateral tinnitus is also frequently reported. Disequilib-rium or, less commonly, episodic vertigo may be present. Facial nerve weakness or paralysis is rare. Larger tumors may feature facial numbness and loss of the cornea reflex from compression of the trigeminal nerve. Very large lesions can lead to brainstem compression, obstructive hydrocephalus, and death.Gadolinium-enhancement on T1-weighted MRI is the gold standard for diagnosis and detects even very small tumors (Fig. 18-3) The conventional armamentarium for vestibular Figure 18-3. A. Axial T1 magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) post-contrast showing left cerebellopontine angle tumor with avid gadolinium enhancement. Minimal internal auditory canal involvement is noted. B. Axial T2 MRI showing left cerebellopontine angle tumor with thin cerebrospinal fluid cleft between tumor and brainstem/cerebellum. C. Axial T1 MRI post-contrast showing left cerebellopontine angle tumor with avid gadolinium enhancement. The lesion is confined to the internal auditory canal with minimal cerebellopontine angle involvement. D. Intraoperative phono during microsurgical resection via translabyrinthine approach. Black arrow indicates cochlear nerve.ABCDBrunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   61601/03/19   5:22 PM 617DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECKCHAPTER 18schwannoma includes observation, microsurgical resection, and stereotactic radiation.16 Management of patients with ves-tibular schwannomas involves weighing a multitude of vari-ables particular to the tumor (location, size, growth pattern), the patient (age, overall health, individual wishes), and the inter-action between tumor and patient (symptoms currently expe-rienced, symptoms likely to develop with lesion progression, degree of residual hearing). For patients who have hearing that may still benefit from acoustic amplification using a hearing aid, either a retrosigmoid or a middle fossa approach may be offered, depending on tumor location, size, patient preference, and provider experience. For patients without serviceable hear-ing preoperatively, a translabyrinthine approach is most com-monly offered.Sinonasal Inflammatory DiseaseRhinosinusitis. Rhinosinusitis is defined as symptomatic inflammation of the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses. Rhi-nosinusitis is preferred over sinusitis because sinusitis almost always is accompanied by inflammation of the contiguous nasal mucosa. Rhinosinusitis is a significant health burden, affect-ing nearly 12% of the population.17 Rhinosinusitis is the fifth most common diagnosis responsible for antibiotic prescription and accounts for more than 20% of all antibiotics prescribed to adults. Rhinosinusitis may be broadly classified based on duration of symptomatology. Symptoms lasting <4 weeks may be classified as acute rhinosinusitis (ARS), while symptoms lasting >12 weeks may be classified as chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS). Rhinosinusitis lasting between 4 and 12 weeks has his-torically been defined as “subacute,” although the current clini-cal practice guideline published by the American Academy of Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery does not distinguish rhinosinusitis in this time frame, noting that this group likely represents crossover symptoms from one of the other two sub-classes. Hence, the decision on how to manage this group of patients must be individualized.18 Because common conditions such as atypical migraine headache, laryngopharyngeal reflux, and allergic rhinitis frequently mimic rhinosinusitis, diagno-sis of rhinosinusitis is based not only on symptomatic criteria but also on objective evaluation with either imaging and/or endoscopy.Acute Rhinosinusitis. Acute rhinosinusitis most commonly occurs in the setting of a viral upper respiratory tract infection (URI). Although it is believed that acute bacterial rhinosinusitis (ABRS) typically follows a viral URI, it has been estimated that only up to 2% of viral URIs lead to ABRS.19 The most common viruses involved in ARS include rhinovirus, influenza virus, and parainfluenza virus. It is not known whether the viral URI precedes or only occurs along with ABRS. Regardless, viral infection leads to mucosal edema with sinus ostium obstruction, mucus stasis, tissue hypoxia, ciliary dysfunction, and epithelial damage, which may enhance bacterial adherence.20 Other con-ditions that may contribute to ABRS should be investigated, especially in the setting of recurrent ABRS. Such conditions include foreign body, sinus fungal ball (with bacterial secondary infection), and periapical dental disease (Figs. 18-4 and 18-5).The symptomatic criteria used to define ABRS include up to 4 weeks of purulent nasal drainage accompanied by nasal obstruction, facial pain with pressure and fullness, or both.18 ABFigure 18-4. A. Right periapical abscess (arrow) leading to acute bacterial rhinosinusitis. B. Follow-up scan of the same patients after administration of antibiotics demonstrating resolution of the sinonasal inflammatory changes. Therapy subsequently directed at the offending tooth will prevent recurrent symptoms.Figure 18-5. Computed tomography scan demonstrating a fungal ball of the right maxillary sinus, characterized by heterogeneous opacification of the sinus.Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   61701/03/19   5:22 PM 618SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIOther historical factors that may predict the development of ABRS include persistence of symptoms beyond 10 days, or worsening of symptoms, following initial improvement, within 10 days (“double worsening”). Although routine head and neck examination may identify anteriorly or posteriorly draining purulent secretions, the utilization of a rigid endoscope may improve diagnostic sensitivity and may also facilitate culture acquisition (Fig. 18-6).The management of ABRS is heavily dependent on anti-biotics, either culture-directed or empirically chosen to cover the most common isolates of ABRS, including S pneumoniae, H influenza, and M catarrhalis. Nosocomial ABRS more com-monly involves P aeruginosa or S aureus. Methicillin-resistant S aureus (MRSA) has been isolated with increasing frequency.20 Other treatments include topical and systemic decongestants, nasal saline spray, topical nasal steroids, and oral steroids in selected cases. In the acute setting, surgery is reserved for com-plications or pending complications, which may include exten-sion to the eye (orbital cellulitis or abscess) or the intracranial space (meningitis or intracranial abscess).Chronic Rhinosinusitis. Chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) is characterized by symptomatic inflammation of the nose and paranasal sinuses lasting over 12 weeks. CRS has been clini-cally classified into two main groups: those with CRS with nasal polyps (CRSwNP) tend to exhibit a Th2-biased inflammatory profile, and those with CRS without nasal polyps (CRSsNP) tend to exhibit a Th1-biased profile. Although the etiology of CRS is unclear and the development of the clinical subtypes may be distinct, there exists significant overlap not only in phys-iologic manifestations but also in symptomatology. Hence, the sinonasal cavities of patients with both subtypes of CRS tend to exhibit mucosal edema, ostial obstruction, ciliary dysfunction, and an abhorrent inflammatory milieu.Two of the following symptomatic criteria must be pres-ent to diagnose CRS: purulent nasal drainage, nasal obstruc-tion, facial pain-pressure-fullness, and decreased sense of smell. These patients may also experience acute exacerbation, generally signified by an escalation of symptoms. Frequently, this is due to bacterial infection. However, patients with acute exacerbation of CRS may be distinguished from patients with recurrent acute bacterial rhinosinusitis (four or more episodes of ABRS per year) through baseline comparison: patients with CRS are symptomatic, even while at baseline, while patients with recurrent acute bacterial sinusitis are normal at baseline. As with ARS, the diagnosis of CRS requires objective confirmation utilizing either nasal endoscopy, CT scans, or, less commonly, MRI.Nasal endoscopy is a critical element of the diagnosis of CRS. Abnormalities that may confirm the diagnosis of CRS include•	Purulent mucus in the middle meatus or anterior ethmoid region•	Edema in the middle meatus or ethmoid region•	Polyps in nasal cavity or the middle meatusIn addition to establishing the diagnosis, nasal endoscopy can be valuable in antibiotic selection by facilitating specific culture acquisition. Furthermore, simple polypectomy or ste-roid injection can be performed under topical anesthesia in the appropriate clinical setting.Imaging is also an important clinical tool in the diagnosis of CRS. In general, CT is the modality of choice for diagno-sis and management of CRS. Usual diagnostic criteria include mucosal thickening, sinus opacification, and bony remodeling (erosion or hyperostosis). It should be underscored, however, that CT scan is not the positive gold standard because many asymptomatic patients will demonstrate findings on a sinus CT scan, and many patients with presumed sinusitis will have negative findings.19 CT scan has excellent negative predic-tive value when performed in the setting of active symptoms. Thus, if a patient complains of rhinosinusitis-like symptoms but has no specific physical (endoscopic) findings, and the scan Figure 18-6.  Nasal endoscopy is commonly performed in the clinic setting to aid in the diagnosis and management of rhinosinusitis.Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   61801/03/19   5:22 PM 619DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECKCHAPTER 18Figure 18-7. Point-of-care computed tomography system. All components can be fit within an 8′ × 10′ room in an outpatient office setting.Figure 18-8.  Triplanar imaging revealing proximity to critical structures such as the orbital wall and skull base. This can be used for diag-nosis of sinus opacification as well as stereotactic intraoperative navigation, where endoscope view (lower right) can be radiologically cor-related with location in the three cardinal planes. This case reflects classic allergic fungal sinusitis where the opacified sinuses are filled with heterogeneous whitish material on computed tomography images. Polyps in the ethmoid cavity are seen on the endoscope image.is negative, other diagnoses (e.g., allergic rhinitis, migraine headache, tension headaches, and laryngopharyngeal reflux) should be sought. This has led to the utility of point-of-care CT (POC-CT) scan that can be performed in the physician’s office. POC-CT utilizes cone beam technology,21 which acquires the equivalent of >100 axial slices in approximately 1 minute at an effective resolution of 0.3 mm or less. The equipment occupies a room of 8’ × 10’ and can thus be accommodated in almost any office setting (Fig. 18-7). Perhaps most important, the radiation dosing for even the most sophisticated protocol is 0.17 mSv, which is <10% the dose of a conventional head CT and equivalent to approximately 20 days of background radia-tion. One theoretical shortcoming of this technology is that it does not permit soft tissue imaging. This is seldom a concern in sinonasal evaluation, as this is typically undertaken in bone windows. The acquired data are immediately formatted into triplanar (axial, sagittal, coronal) reconstructions and is also compatible with devices used for intraoperative stereotactic navigation, which can be used to confirm relationships between the disease process, medial orbital wall, and skull base during surgery (Figs. 18-8 and 18-9).Medical management of CRS is heavily dependent on topical intranasal therapy. The reasons for this lie not only in established effectiveness but also in tolerability and safety—the chronic nature of CRS generally lends to requisite long-term medication administration despite other measures such as surgery. Nasal irrigation and topical nasal steroids are commonplace in the management of CRSwNP and CRSsNP. Oral steroids have demonstrated effectiveness in patients with CRSwNP, although the role in CRSsNP is less clear. Although otolaryngologists commonly utilize antibiotics in the man-agement of CRS, indications and administration practices are not uniform. Oral antibiotic therapy given for short duration (<4 weeks) is generally useful in the management of acute exac-erbation related to bacterial infection. Long-term utilization of antibiotics may be necessary in the setting of chronic infection or osteomyelitis. Additionally, long-term macrolide administra-tion may be utilized for anti-inflammatory effects in the appro-priate clinical setting.In most cases, patients considering endoscopic sinus surgery (ESS) for CRS should have significant residual Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   61901/03/19   5:22 PM 620SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIsymptomatology despite medical therapy. However, there cur-rently exists no consensus regarding what constitutes a “maxi-mum” course of medical therapy. It should be noted that unless there is suspicion of neoplasm or pending complication of rhinosinusitis, the decision to proceed with surgery is highly individualized. This is because surgery for uncomplicated CRS is elective, and patients who “fail” medical management will exhibit significant variability in symptoms, physical signs, and CT findings. Furthermore, ESS is not necessarily curative—the intent of ESS is to remove the symptoms related to CRS rather than cure the underlying condition itself.Surgery is typically preformed endoscopically where the goals are to remove polyps, enlarge or remove obstruct-ing tissue surrounding the natural sinus ostia (Fig. 18-10), and remove chronically infected bone and mucosa to promote both ventilation and drainage of the sinus cavities. Inspissated mucin or pus is drained and cultured. Eventual resolution of the chronic inflammatory process can be attained with a com-bination of meticulous surgery and directed medical therapy, although the patient must understand that surgery may not alter the underlying immunologic pathophysiology. In cases where resection of inflammatory tissue and polyps are not required, recent trends have also included use of angioplasty-type balloons to dilate sinus ostia. The exact role for this tech-nology is unclear, but it appears to have promise in outpatient office management of patients with focal or limited obstruc-tive pathology.Endoscopic Skull Base Surgery. Over the past three decades, the development and expansion of multidisciplinary skull base teams has become somewhat commonplace at large academic institutions. Facilitated mainly by growing cooperation between otolaryngologists and neurosurgeons, a variety of approaches that utilize the sinonasal corridor to treat a plethora of patho-logic processes of the anterior skull base have been developed.Technological advances in endoscopy, instrumentation, and imaging have also facilitated the development of endo-scopic endonasal approaches (EEAs), allowing team members to work simultaneously while maintaining optimal visualization of the relevant anatomy and freedom of movement within the corridor. Although historically the sphenoid sinus has been the common access route in the management of sellar pathology, a series of modular approaches of varied complexity have been developed that have broadened the reach of EEAs to address lesions at virtually all comportments of the ventral skull base, from the crista galli to the anterior arch of C2.22One of the key tenets of the EEA is that the sinonasal cor-ridor presents the most prudent and safest path to the lesion of interest. Accordingly, the EEA is generally chosen for lesions adjacent to the skull base, without intervening brain parenchyma, cranial nerves, major vessels, or other important anatomical structures. Currently, EEAs are utilized to treat a significant number of pathologic process involving the skull base, including: cerebrospinal fluid leaks, encephaloceles, meningoceles, pseudomeningoceles, benign intracranial tumors (Fig. 18-11), benign sinonasal tumors, malignant sinonasal tumors, and inflammatory or traumatic conditions leading to compression at the craniovertebral junction. Although EEAs tend to be considered “minimally invasive,” the corridor created in the sinonasal cavity is nonetheless comprehensive enough to Figure 18-9. Sphenoid sinus fungal ball. The sinus has been opened revealing cheesy material during this intraoperative endoscopic view (lower right). The crosshairs stereotactically confirm location within the sphenoid sinus radiologically in the cardinal planes.Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   62001/03/19   5:22 PM 621DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECKCHAPTER 18ABFigure 18-10. A. Endoscopic view of the right nasal cavity demonstrating the uncinate process (U), ethmoid bulla (EB), middle turbinate (MT), inferior turbinate (IT), and nasal septum (S). B. Endoscopic view of a microdebrider being used to widen the right maxillary sinus ostium.ABCDFigure 18-11. Preoperative coronal (A) and sagittal (B) magnetic resonance images of a large olfactory groove meningioma removed using endoscopic endonasal approach. Postoperative coronal (C) and sagittal (D) images demonstrating removal of the tumor. The skull base can be reconstructed using local flaps (most commonly a nasoseptal flap pedicled on the posterior nasal artery).Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   62101/03/19   5:23 PM 622SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIprovide maximal freedom of movement for the critical compo-nent of the case (i.e., tumor resection near vital structures). Once the corridor is created by the otolaryngologist, the neurosurgeon joins, and a two-person, threeto four-hand technique is utilized to address the lesion of interest and reconstruct the skull base (Fig. 18-12).Despite the relatively confined aperture provided by the nostrils, even large tumors can be removed using EEAs, albeit via piecemeal removal. For malignant tumors, this has required a philosophical shift whereby en bloc resection of the entire tumor is replaced by piecemeal removal of the bulk of the tumor followed by complete resection of the pedicle with sufficient margins. Outcomes utilizing EEAs for resection of malignant tumors, when chosen appropriately, parallel those of traditional open approaches. However, EEAs are not favored over tradi-tional approaches when oncological principles would otherwise need to be violated.Pharyngeal and Adenotonsillar DiseaseWaldeyer’s ring consists of the palatine tonsils between the anterior and posterior tonsillar pillars, the lingual tonsils (lym-phoid tissue in the base of tongue), and the adenoid located in the nasopharynx. These four main sites of Waldeyer’s ring are connected by other minor lymphoid tissue along the posterior and lateral pharyngeal wall completing the ring. These are all considered mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT). These tissues react to inflammatory disease, infection, trauma, acid reflux, and radiotherapy. Even the vibratory effects of chronic snoring have been implicated in the development of adenoton-sillar disease. Inflammation of these tissues can lead to referred pain through cranial nerves IX and X to the throat and ear. Adenotonsillar tissue does not have any afferent lymphatics and receives antigen presentation directly, with appropriate produc-tion of memory cells. However, there is no clear immune com-promise after removal.Figure 18-12.  Two-surgeon, threeto four-hand technique uti-lized in endoscopic endonasal surgery.Microbiology and Complications. Adenotonsillar infections present with three temporal patterns: acute, recurrent acute, and chronic. Acute infection is typically viral in origin but second-ary bacterial invasion may initiate chronic disease. Viruses do not cause chronic infections; however, Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV) can cause significant hypertrophy. Systemic EBV infection, also known as mononucleosis, can mimic bacterial pharyngitis, but the progression of signs and symptoms demonstrates lymphade-nopathy, splenomegaly, and hepatitis. This can be diagnosed on bloodwork (heterophile antibody or atypical lymphocytes). The most common bacterial causes of acute tonsillitis are group A β-hemolytic streptococcus species (GABHS) and S pneumoniae.23 If GABHS is confirmed, then antibiotic therapy is warranted in the pediatric population to decrease the risk (3%) of developing rheu-matic fever. A positive test for GABHS historically meant a throat swab with culture and sensitivity; however, rapid antigen assays have been demonstrated to be reasonably sensitive and specific (85% and 95%, respectively), thus largely replacing cultures.24 If the rapid assay is negative, then a culture is warranted. The remainder of the bacteriology for adenotonsillar disease is similar to otitis media and sinusitis, which includes H influenzae and  M catarrhalis. Atypical infections include Corynebacterium diph-theria, Neisseria gonorrhoeae, and Chlamydia trachomatis.Complications of GABHS pharyngitis, typically from S pyogenes, can be systematic and include poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis, scarlet fever, and rheumatic fever. Anti-biotic therapy does not decrease the incidence of glomerulo-nephritis. Scarlet fever, caused by blood-borne streptococcal toxins, causes a strawberry tongue and a punctate rash on the trunk that spreads distally while sparing the palms and soles. Peritonsillar abscess is also a common complication that is treated in an ambulatory setting through a transoral approach after appropriate topicalization and local anesthetic. Deep neck space infections are rare from pharyngitis but can occur from odontogenic and salivary gland infections. These typically require a transcervical approach for incision and drainage.Adenoids and Adenoidectomy. Acute adenoiditis typically presents with purulent rhinorrhea, nasal obstruction, and fever and can be associated with otitis media, particularly in the pedi-atric population. Recurrent acute adenoiditis is defined as four or more acute infections in a 6-month period, but in an adult, this may be difficult to distinguish from recurrent acute sinus-itis, and endoscopy with or without imaging of the sinuses may be warranted to distinguish between the two diagnoses. Chronic adenoiditis presents with persistent nasal discharge, halitosis, chronic congestion, and postnasal drip. In children, obstructive adenoid hyperplasia often requires surgical intervention to help relieve obstructive symptoms such as snoring, obligate mouth breathing, and hyponasal voice.The management of adenoid disease is slightly different than that for tonsillar disease. Chronic infection can be treated with antibiotics, although this often does not lead to a full reso-lution of symptoms. If the adenoid bed appears hyperplastic on lateral X-ray imaging or endoscopy, a 2-month trial of nasal steroids may be helpful. Adenoidectomy is indicated for recur-rent and chronic infections that have failed conservative man-agement. These infections are not limited to the adenoid bed but also involve the sinuses and the middle year. Adenoidectomy with a myringotomy and ventilation tube placement is benefi-cial for recurrent or chronic otitis media in children because the Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   62201/03/19   5:23 PM 623DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECKCHAPTER 18adenoid functions as a reservoir for bacteria that can enter the middle ear through the Eustachian tube.25Adenoidectomy is also the first line of surgical manage-ment for children with chronic sinusitis because the adenoid can obstruct mucociliary clearance from the sinonasal tract into the choana and ultimately into the pharynx. Patients with obstruc-tive systems attributable to the adenoids and suspected benign or malignant neoplasms of the adenoid bed are also candidates. However, the procedure is contraindicated in patients with vel-opalatine insufficiency (VPI) and in patients with a cleft pal-ate. Prior to adenoidectomy, patients should be examined for a submucous cleft, a lack of midline muscular tissue of the soft palate. Clinical signs of this include a bifid uvula, a translucent portion of the muscular diastasis of the soft palate (zona pel-lucida), and a palpable notched hard palate.26 A number of dif-ferent methods can be used to perform an adenoidectomy: cold steel, suction coagulator, microdebrider, and coblation. Adenoid regrowth and bleeding rates are both low, and no study has been able to demonstrate the superiority of one technique over the other for either outcome.27,28 Adenoidectomy is not without complications though, beyond VPI and bleeding, halitosis and adenoid bed regrowth (∼1%) are common complications. Rare complications include torticollis secondary to inflammation of the prevertebral fascia, nasopharyngeal stenosis, and cervi-cal spine subluxation, which is more common in patients with Down syndrome.Tonsils and Tonsillectomy Patients with acute tonsillitis present with sore throat, fever, dysphagia, and tender cervi-cal nodes with erythematous or exudative tonsils. The Centor Criteria is used to identify the likelihood of bacterial infection in adult patients complaining of sore throat in the emergency department or walk-in clinic, a point is given for each of the following: fever, tonsillar exudate, lymphadenopathy, and lack of cough.29-31 A score of 0 to 1 warrants no treatment, a score of 2 to 3 warrants GABHS testing, and a score of 4 warrants initiation of antibiotic therapy. First-line treatment is with peni-cillin or a cephalosporin; however, in those with an allergy, a macrolide can be considered. Documentation of recurrent acute infections should include a temperature (>38.3oC), cervical adenopathy, tonsillar exudate, and a positive test for GABHS. According to the American Academy of Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery (AAO-HNS) clinical practice guideline on tonsillectomy in children, tonsillectomy is indicated when chil-dren have more than 7 documented episodes per year, 5 epi-sodes per year in the past 2 years, or 3 episodes per year in the past 3 years.23 Tonsillectomy can still be considered in children who do not meet these criteria if they have multiple antibiotic allergies or intolerances, have a history of peritonsillar abscess after the acute inflammation has resolved, or have PFAPA (peri-odic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis, and adenitis). A peritonsillar abscess is an infection of the peritonsillar salivary gland (Weber’s gland), located between the tonsil capsule and the muscles of the tonsillar fossa. In selected cases of active peritonsillar abscess, tonsillectomy is required in the acute set-ting to treat systemic toxicity or impending airway compromise. Multiple techniques have been described, including electrocau-tery, sharp dissection, laser, and radiofrequency ablation. There is no consensus as to the best method.Sleep Disordered Breathing and Adenotonsillar Disease.  Patients with sleep-disordered breathing (SDB) and tonsil-lar hypertrophy may also benefit from tonsillectomy if they have growth retardation, poor school performance, enuresis, or behavioral problems. The benefits may be accentuated in children with abnormal polysomnography; however, DB may require further treatment after tonsillectomy when it is multifac-torial. Clinical documentation of tonsillar grade/size is based on the percentage of the transverse oropharyngeal space measured between the anterior tonsillar pillars: grade 1+ <25%; grade 2+ 25% to 49%; grade 3+ 50% to 74%; grade 4+ ≥75% or more sometimes referred to as “kissing tonsils.”32 Tonsillectomy is effective for control of SDB in 60% to 70% of patients with tonsillar hypertrophy, although this much lower (10%–25%) in obese children, and it is therefore not curative in obese chil-dren but may improve some of their symptoms nonetheless. In patients with Down syndrome, obesity, craniofacial abnormali-ties, neuromuscular disorders, sickle cell disease, or mucopoly-saccharidoses, polysomnography (PSG) should be performed prior to tonsillectomy.33 When the need for surgery is uncertain or when there is a discordance between tonsillar size on physi-cal examination and the reported severity of SDB, physicians should advocate for PSG prior to tonsillectomy. Tonsillectomy, usually with adenoidectomy if the adenoids are enlarged, is often performed on an outpatient basis unless the patient has documented or strongly suspected obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), is <3 years of age, or has severe OSA (in children, an apnea-hypopnea index ≥10 or more, oxygen saturation <80%, or both). Other reasons for admission include a home >1 hour from a hospital, patients with craniofacial abnormalities, or any other medical issue. There is strong evidence to suggest the routine administration of a single intraoperative dose of IV dexametha-sone in children undergoing tonsillectomy, though antibiotics should not be administered or prescribed perioperatively in children. The complications from tonsillectomy include peri-operative bleeding (3%–5%), airway obstruction, death, and readmission from postoperative dysphagia leading to dehydra-tion.34 It is recommended that surgeons calculate and quote their own primary and secondary posttonsillectomy hemorrhage rates yearly.23 A rare but serious complication in patients with obstructive adenotonsillar disease post adenotonsillectomy is postobstructive pulmonary edema syndrome, which presents with decreased oxygen saturation and frothy, blood-tinged oral secretions. Patients usually recover with reintubation, positive pressure, diuresis, and supportive care.Multilevel Sleep Surgery. SDB surgery is often multilevel and is not limited to adenotonsillar disease. Patients with nasal obstruction may benefit from septoplasty and trubinate reduc-tion, although in the adult population this is most commonly used to allow patients to tolerate their OSA appliances. Simi-larly, patients with significant lingual tonsillar hypertrophy and a large base of tongue may benefit from a base of tongue reduction, tongue base advancement, or geniohyoidopexy. A base of tongue reduction alone does not often provide enough apnea-hypopnea index reduction (30%–60%) for resolution of symptoms and is fraught with a high morbidity rate.35 Rarely, maxillomandibular advance is required to open up the retrolin-gual space. In patients with life threatening symptoms (right heart failure/cor pulmonale, oxygen saturation <70%, comorbid cardiopulmonary disease) who have failed other measures, the only “cure” for OSA is a tracheotomy.Other Tonsillar Pathology. Unilateral tonsillar hypertrophy is mostly likely benign but can also be the result of Mycobac-terium tuberculosis, atypical mycobacterium, fungi, or Actino-myces. With the epidemic rise in incidence of oropharyngeal Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   62301/03/19   5:23 PM 624SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIcancers, neoplasms (squamous cell carcinoma and lymphoma) have increasingly also presented as tonsillar asymmetry.36 Man-agement of these lesions is dependent on the pretest probability of malignancy and the type of malignancy. If squamous cell car-cinoma is suspected, then a biopsy alone is sufficient so as to not impact the possibility of other future surgical interventions such as transoral robotic surgery. If lymphoma or a nonmalignant pathology is suspected, tonsillectomy is often recommended for diagnostic and therapeutic reasons, and the specimen should be sent fresh to pathology for a lymphoma protocol workup, bacte-rial and fungal culture, and gram stain. Pharyngitis may also be seen in immune-mediated conditions such as erythema multi-forme, bullous pemphigoid, and pemphigus vulgaris.Benign Conditions of the LarynxHoarseness is the most common presenting symptom for patients with a voice complaint. Other complaints include breathiness, weakness/hypophonia, aphonia, and pitch breaks. Voice disor-ders affect a large range of patient ages, occupations, and socio-economic statuses and affect both genders equally. They can be associated with dysphagia, globus sensation, laryngopharyngeal reflux (LPR) disease and, rarely, airway obstruction.37 Smoking can both cause and aggravate preexisting benign laryngeal con-ditions and raises the suspicion of malignancy often requiring a biopsy to exclude this diagnosis.Any discussion of laryngeal disorders should start with a review of the anatomy of the vocal cords (Fig. 18-13). The true vocal cords are formed from stratified squamous epithelium, beneath which is the superficial lamina propria (in Reinke’s space). Beneath this is the ligament that includes the middle and deep lamina propria. Beneath this ligament is the muscular layer that includes the thyroarytenoid muscle or vocalis. The cover-body theory describes the freely mobile cover (mucosa and Reinke’s space) over the more rigid body (vocal ligament and vocalis).38Membranous vocal cord lesions have been notoriously dif-ficult to classify reliably; however, increased availability of vid-eostroboscopic examination and standardized definitions have improved the classification of these lesions.39 These lesions are usually mid cord because that is the site of maximal lateral displacement and amplitude. Vocal fold nodules are typically bilateral, fairly symmetric, and with normal or mild impairment of the mucosal wave, and they almost always resolve with voice therapy. A vocal fold polyp is more often unilateral than bilat-eral, is exophytic, and is associated with unorganized gelatinous debris in the subepithelial space. These can be hemorrhagic as is often seen in males secondary to capillary rupture within the mucosa by shearing forces during voice abuse. Hemorrhagic polyps are seen more often in patients on anticoagulants. These lesions usually fail conservative measures (voice rest, voice therapy, smoking cessation, and reflux management) usually requiring micorlaryngeal surgery to remove the lesion while preserving normal mucosa. Vocal fold cyst is an encapsulated lesion within the subepithelial or ligamentous space and is asso-ciated with reduced mucosal wave. It typically does not resolve with voice therapy. These lesions require microlaryngeal sur-gery for complete removal of the cyst while preserving the over-lying mucosa, and this surgery can be performed with cold steel or carbon dioxide (CO2) laser. A fibrous mass of the vocal fold is amorphous fibrous material within the subepithelial space or EpiglottisEpitheliumLayers oflamina propriaSuperficialIntermediateDeepVocalisHyoid boneCushion ofepiglottisThyroidcartilageFalse vocal cordLaryngealsinusTrue vocalcordThyroarytenoidmuscleCricoid cartilageAryteno-epiglottideanfoldFigure 18-13. Coronal view of the larynx demonstrate the supraglottic, glottic and subglottis (LEFT) and the layers of the true vocal cord (RIGHT).Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   62401/03/19   5:23 PM 625DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECKCHAPTER 18ligament often associated with reduced mucosal wave, and it also does not resolve with voice therapy.Reinke’s edema is characterized by edema in the superfi-cial lamina propria of the vocal cord. Edema is thought to arise from injury to the capillaries that exist in this layer, with sub-sequent extravasation of fluid. The etiology is multifactorial: smoking, LPR, hypothyroidism, and vocal misuse.40 This pathol-ogy is more common in women (because they present early due to a deep vocal pitch change in their voice) and heavy smokers. The physical examination findings are typically bilateral. Sur-gery typically involves microlaryngoscopy with removal of the gelatinous debris in Reinke’s space with trimming of the excess mucosa. However, smoking cessation and surgery do not fully reverse the structural abnormalities due to the presence of pos-sible structure alterations in fibroblasts caused by the toxicity of cigarette components, resulting in uncontrolled production of fibrous matrix in the lamina propria, thus preventing complete vocal recovery.41Laryngeal granulomas typically occur in the posterior lar-ynx on the arytenoid mucosa (Fig. 18-14). These lesions are typically multifactorial: chronic throat clearing, phonotrauma, endotracheal intubation, compensatory supraglottic squeeze from vocal fold paralysis, and LPR.42 The majority of these lesions (82%) disappear within 48 weeks with conservative measures such as voice therapy, vocal rest, oral steroids, inhaled steroids, and proton pump inhibitors.42 Botulinum toxin of thy-roarytenoid and lateral cricoarytenoid muscles can be used as first-line treatment in patients who prefer a chemically activated voice rest regiment.42 LPR appears to be the most important contributing factor,42 and when aggressive conservative and medical therapy has failed, a Nissen fundoplication may be indicated. Surgery is rarely required for patients with laryngeal granulomas because it does not address the underlying etiol-ogy and is frequently associated with recurrence. Nonetheless, excision is sometimes required in patients with airway obstruc-tion or the suspicion of malignancy. Careful preservation of the arytenoid perichondrium intraoperatively is required to assist with reepithelialization and to decrease the risk of recurrence postoperatively.Recurrent respiratory papillomatosis (RRP) is pathophysi-ologically associated with human papillomavirus (HPV) within the mucosa of the upper aerodigestive tract. The glottis and supra-glottis are the two most common involved subsites. HPV 6 and 11 are the most often implicated types; however, LPR and herpes simplex virus (HSV) type-2 are risk factors of adult-onset RRP.43 The disorder typically presents in early childhood (juvenile-onset RR; JoRRP) secondary to HPV acquisition during vaginal deliv-ery; however, children born by caesarean section are also at risk for the disease. JoRRP usually resolves around puberty but can progress into adulthood. Adult-onset RRP is less severe and is more likely to involve extralaryngeal subsites. There is no cure for RRP. Surgery excision is used to improve voice and airway symptoms in a palliative fashion. Surgical excision in the operat-ing room involves microlaryngoscopy with the use of the laser (CO2 for bulky disease or KTP for more superficial disease) or the use of a microdebrider. The microdebrider has been dem-onstrated to have superior voice outcomes in JoRRP; however, CO2 laser is the most commonly used operative ablative tech-nique used in adults.44 Recent advances have made it possible to treat a select group of adult RRP patients in the office using the KTP laser, typically for those with a lower disease burden.45 Several adjuvant treatments are used to increase the intersurgical interval, including intralesional cidofovir injection, oral indole-3-carbinol, oral methotrexate, and retinoic acid. In addition to preventing RRP in some patients, the HPV vaccine has also been demonstrated to increase the intersurgical interval in the most aggressive JoRRP patients.46,47Leukoplakia is a white patch seen on mucosa that can be wiped off on physical examination. This can be seen anywhere in the upper aerodigestive tract. In the larynx, this is typically seen on the superior surface of the true vocal cords and may represent squamous hyperplasia, dysplasia, and/or carcinoma with an associated risk of malignant transformation of 1% to 3% in hyperplastic lesions and 10% to 30% in dysplastic lesions. Lesions that are not overtly suspicious for malignancy, particularly in patients without a strong smoking or alcohol history, can be managed conservatively (increased hydration, elimination of poor vocal habits, phonotrauma, and manage-ment of LPR) for 1 month before reevaluation with fiberoptic laryngoscopy. Any lesions that progress, persist, or recur could have microlaryngoscopy with complete excision. Similarly, because erythroplasia and ulceration are more suggestive of malignancy, these lesions also require an excisional biopsy in the operating room.The most common cause of unilateral vocal cord paresis is iatrogenic in origin, following surgery to the thyroid, parathy-roid, carotid, spine through an anterior approach,48 or cardiotho-racic structures.49 It is therefore very important that all patients undergoing thyroid surgery receive preoperative visualization of the larynx, usually in the form of fiberoptic nasolaryngos-copy, although an indirect mirror exam can be used if adequate visualization is possible.50 Postthyroidectomy visualization may also be required to document normal vocal cord move-ment. Less common causes include malignancy of structures near the recurrent laryngeal nerve (RLN) from the skull base jugular foramen to the mediastinum. In the pediatric population, there can be neurologic causes, the most common of which is the Arnold-Chiari malformation.51 Overall, the left vocal cord is more commonly involved secondary to the longer course of the RLN on that side. Other rare etiologies include trauma, intu-bation injury, atypical infections, and neurotoxic medications. Patients typically present with a weak breathy voice and may have aspiration secondary to diminished supraglottic sensa-tion if the proximal vagal nerve or superior laryngeal nerve is involved. RLN injury is also associated with delayed relaxation Figure 18-14. Laryngeal granuloma.Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   62501/03/19   5:23 PM 626SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIof the cricopharyngeus muscle that can lead to dysphagia and decreased sensation in the hypopharynx, which can cause pool-ing of secretions. In children, stridor, weak cry, and airway com-promise may be presenting symptoms, whereas in adults this is rarely the case unless there is bilateral vocal cord paralysis. When an obvious cause is not identified after a thorough history and physical examination including fiberoptic nasolaryngos-copy, then a more comprehensive workup is required. A workup should not include autoimmune serology as a screen because this is low yield, but this can be included if there is a suspicion of autoimmune disorders. Imaging, in the form of a CT scan, is the mainstay of the workup and should include the skull base to the mediastinum. Repeat imaging is beneficial in this population within a 2-year period because many patients have undiagnosed small malignancies as the primary cause of their paralysis that are too small to detect on initial imaging.52 Laryngeal electro-myography can assist with identifying whether the paresis is a result of a paralysis or cricoarytenoid joint fixation/disloca-tion. It can also help prognosticate a paralysis. This is, however, rarely used in practice. Despite an extensive workup, 20% to 35% of cases are idiopathic.The management of bilateral vocal cord paralysis almost always requires a tracheotomy because the cords are left in a paramedian position leaving a slit light glottic aperture. If the paralysis is permanent, then a cordectomy with or without ary-tenoidectomy can be used to open up the airway in an attempt to eventually decannulate the patient. However, this has obvi-ous implications for voice with a weak and breathing voice. Many patients with a unilateral paralysis compensate when the cord is in the paramedian position using supraglottic structure and the contralateral cord on their own or with speech therapy. However, in patients with a less than adequate voice-related quality of life, four techniques have been used to surgically manage patients with a unilateral vocal cord paralysis: injection laryngoplasty, medialization thyroplasty, arytenoid adduction, and laryngeal reinnervation. Injection laryngoplasty involves injecting a temporary filler medial to the vocalis into the liga-ment at the posterior and midmembranous vocal cord. This can be performed in the office or in the operating room, depend-ing on the comfort of the surgeon and patient characteristics. Materials used include autologous (fat, collagen) or alloplastic (hydroxyapatite, hyaluronic acid, micronized cadaveric human collagen) compounds. Early medialization is recommended in patients with mediastinal and thoracic malignancies because it is safe and has been shown to improve quality of life in a palli-ative setting.53 Teflon is historic and is no longer used because of its granulomatous side effects on the larynx. A more per-manent medialization can be performed using a medialization thyroplasty, during which a small window is created in the inferolateral aspect of the thyroid cartilage and a submucosal-carved silastic block is placed in the operating room with the patient under neurolept anesthetic so that vocalization and flex-ible laryngoscopic visualization of the larynx can be improved (Fig. 18-15). In some cases, this is not enough of a medialization due to a large posterior glottic chink, and an arytenoid adduction is required to provide better closure of the posterior glottis and supraglottis with ensuing improved vocal outcomes. This is a technically challenging procedure that is rarely required, but in select patients it is associated with significant improvements in voice. Lastly, laryngeal reinnervation, typically with the ansa cervicalis that supplies motor function to the strap muscles, can also be performed. This is the best approach in patients who have had a recurrent laryngeal nerve severed during a central or upper mediastinal neck procedure because it is in the field.54 Multiple studies demonstrate favorable outcomes; however, no significant differences between treatment arms has been demon-strated based on perceptual, acoustic, quality of life, and laryn-goscopic outcomes.55Vascular LesionsVascular lesions can be broadly classified into two groups: hem-angiomas and vascular malformations.56Hemangiomas. Hemangiomas are the most common vascular lesion present in infancy and early childhood. Infantile heman-giomas present largely within the first few weeks of life. Initially they proliferate (2 weeks to 1 year), and then they begin to invo-lute (1–7 years) until they have fully involuted, leaving the child with redundant skin, scar, or a fatty lesion. Children with large facial infantile hemangiomas benefit from regular neurological examinations and brain MRI to rule out PHACES syndrome (Posterior fossa malformations, Hemangiomas, Arterial lesions, Cardiac abnormalities/aortic coarctation, Eye abnormalities). Only 10% of these lesions require early intervention because of impairment of vision or swallowing, or airway compromise. Early intervention can include medical management, such as systemic steroids, intralesional steroids, intralesional interferon α-2a, or photocoagulation therapy, and surgical management, including excision with CO2 laser/microdebrider and tracheot-omy. Systemic steroids assist with rapidly proliferating lesions until the child reaches approximately one year of age; however, it is associated with growth retardation and immune suppres-sion. Intralesional interferon α-2a has been largely abandoned because it is a daily subcutaneous injection and is associated Figure 18-15.  Hand carved silastic block for thyroplasty.Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   62601/03/19   5:23 PM 627DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECKCHAPTER 18with significant neurological side effects, including spastic diplegia. Photocoagulation therapy with either the flashlamp-pumped pulsed-dye laser (FPDL), the potassium titanyl phos-phate (KTP) laser, or the neodymium yttrium-aluminum garnet (Nd:YAG) laser, is repeated every 4 to 6 weeks until the lesion disappears. A randomized trial recently demonstrated that pro-pranolol was effective at a dose of 3mg/kg per day for 5 months in the treatment of infantile hemangioma with a very acceptable and low side-effect profile.57 Other groups have had success at discontinuing propranolol at 1 year of age with excellent out-comes.58 For patients who do not require early intervention, the lesion is observed every 3 months for involution after the pro-liferative phase has ended. Surgery is considered if regression has not occurred by 5 years of age because the cosmetic result is less likely to be satisfactory.Congenital hemangiomas differ from infantile heman-giomas in that they reach their maximal size at birth and do not have a proliferative phase. There are two subtypes: rapidly involuting (RICH), which typically disappears by 1 of age with minimal fatty appearance upon resolution, and noninvoluting (NICH). The management is similar to infantile hemangiomas with the exception that medical management is not typically necessary.Vascular Malformations. Vascular malformations, in contrast to infantile hemangioma, are always present at birth, although they may not be apparent for a few months. Although they do not have a proliferative phase, they grow with the patient, have hormonal growth spurts and do not involute.59 Vascular mal-formations can be classified as low flow (capillary, venous, lymphatic, and mixed), which comprise approximately two-thirds of all vascular malformations, or high flow (arteria and arteriovenous).Capillary malformations arise from the cutaneous super-ficial plexus and are made up of capillary and postcapillary venules with a pink, red, or purple macular-papular appearance. Venous malformations arise from dilated vascular channels lined by normal endothelium; therefore, they are soft, compress-ible, and nonpulsatile. If they are superficial, they will increase in size with Valsalva or dependent positioning. They can grow suddenly with trauma or in association with hormonal changes. Lymphatic malformations typically present at birth with the majority (90%) being identified by 2 years of age. They can be macrocystic (>2 cm), microcystic (≤2 cm), or a combina-tion. They are most commonly found in the head and neck, particularly on the neck, and on physical examination they are soft and doughy with normal overlying skin. Infrahyoid lesions tend to be macrocystic, well circumscribed, and discrete and can be totally excised, whereas suprahyoid lesions are typically microcystic, infiltrative, and excision is usually incomplete. On MRI, the best imaging modality for this malformation, a sep-tated mass with low-intensity signal on T1 and high-intensity signal on T2 is noted. They grow slowly with the patient but can have a sudden increase in size with hemorrhage or infection. Rarely, they cause airway compromise, feeding difficulties, and failure to thrive.Treatment of vascular malformations is based on depth, size, and growth pattern. Capillary malformations are typically treated with the pulsed dye laser (585 nm). Venous lesions can be treated with the KTP laser (532 nm) or the Nd:YAG laser (1064 nm), sclerotherapy, and, in select cases, complete surgi-cal excision is possible. Arteriovenous malformations are rare but typically require surgical excision with negative margins often after embolization. Lymphatic malformations are typically treated at least in part with surgical excision, although this is less successful for microcystic lesions. OK-432 is lyophilized low virulence S pyogenes cultured in penicillin. It is used as a sclerotherapy agent for lymphatic malformations and has a 94% response rate in macrocystic lesions, a 63% response rate in mixed macromicrocystic lesions, and no response in micro-cystic lesions.60TRAUMA OF THE HEAD AND NECKSoft TissueSoft tissue trauma of the head and neck is managed with the same general surgical principles as any other body subsite with a few particularities. Most lacerations can be closed primarily if there is not soft tissue loss; even some devitalized soft tis-sue should be preserved because of the excellent blood sup-ply to head and neck tissue that allows it to recover at a higher rate. Thus, minimal debridement is usually required. Thor-ough irrigation to remove foreign bodies and clean the tissue is required. This is followed by a careful layered closure. On the face, the deep layers are usually closed with a 3-0 or 4-0 Vicryl/Polysorb after a minimal amount of undermining, and interrupted 5-0 or 6-0 Prolene or Nylon is used for the skin. These sutures are removed at 5 days on the face. Antibiotics are reserved for through-and-through mucosal lacerations, con-taminated wounds, bite injuries, and when delayed closure is performed (>72 hours). The chosen antibiotic should cover  S aureus. Patients are instructed to avoid sunlight because this can cause pigmentary abnormalities in the suture line as it heals and matures over the first year.Eyelid lacerations are closed in layers with careful reap-proximation of the orbicularis oculi as a separate layer. Another important layer to reapproximate separately is the gray line (con-junctival margin) so as to avoid height mismatch or lid notching. Lip injuries follow the same principle with a three-layer closure involving the orbicularis oris, which is the strength layer, fol-lowed by careful reapproximation of the vermillion border to avoid a step-deformity (Fig. 18-16). Of course, a mucosal layer closure may also be required for through-and-through defects. Rarely, locoregional flaps or grafts are required for closure when greater than one-fourth of the eyelid width or one-third of the lip width is missing. Auricular hematoma is managed with prompt incision and drainage followed by bolstering technique; anteriorly and posteriorly placed dental pledgets secured with through-and-through sutures. These are to remain in place for at least 4 days to prevent reaccumulation of the hematoma and to prevent a cauliflower ear deformity. Auricular lacerations are typically closed primarily with perichondrial sutures to preserve the precarious cartilage blood supply followed by a primary clo-sure of the skin, making sure to cover the cartilage to prevent chondritis. Given the rich vascular supply to the face and neck, many soft-tissue components that appear devitalized will indeed survive, and therefore minimal debridement of devitalized tissue is required.Facial lacerations resulting in facial nerve injury are not explored if they are anterior to a vertical line dropped from the lateral cantus as there is excellent collateral innervation in the anterior midface. Posterior to this line, the nerve should be repaired, primarily if possible, using 8-0 to 10-0 monofila-ment suture to approximate the epineurium under the operative Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   62701/03/19   5:23 PM 628SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IImicroscope. If primary reapproximation is not possible due to a missing segment, cable nerve grafts can be performed using the sural nerve or the greater auricular nerve. If the buccal branch is injured, this raises suspicion regarding injury to the parotid duct, which lies along an imaginary line drawn from the tragus to the midline upper lip. The duct should be repaired over a 22-gauge stent or marsupialized into the oral cavity.Facial FracturesThe most common facial fracture involves the mandible. Fig. 18-17 demonstrates the most common sites of fracture, which include the condyle (36%), body (35%), and angle (20%). In most cases, more than one site is involved due to reciprocating forces. The vector forces from the muscles of mastication, vertical from the masseter and horizontal from the pterygoid muscles, can cause a fracture to be favorable or unfavorable depending on the angle of the fracture line. After taking a history and performing a physical examination, imaging is performed in the form of a Panorex or a CT scan. Where closed reduction can be achieved, patients are placed in maxillomandibular fixation (MMF) with arch bars applied via circumdental wiring, and these are left in place for 4 to 6 weeks depending on patient factors and the fracture location. In elderly patients, this is kept in for 6 to  8 weeks. In children and patients with condylar fractures only 2 to 3 weeks is required, and this is important to prevent condylar ankylosis. During this time, patients are placed on a liquid diet and are provided with wire cutters in case of aspiration or airway emergency. Open reduction and fixation is indicated in patients with open, comminuted, displaced, or unfavorable fractures. In these patients, MMF is usually only temporary with a soft diet starting almost immediately in the postoperative setting. Because the MMF is temporary with rigid fixation, it is per-formed usually using the 4-point fixation technique, where the maxilla and mandible are held in occlusion by wires attached to intraoral cortical bone screws, with two screws above and below the occlusal line anteriorly. This is a benefit of open reduction and internal fixation because prolonged MMF is associated with gingival and dental disease, as well as with significant weight loss and malnutrition, during the fixation period. After fixation, the fracture is exposed, more commonly from a transcervical compared to a transoral approach. Care is made not to injure the marginal mandibular branch of the facial nerve during this exposure. A rigid, locking, load-bearing mandibular plate is used. In edentulous patients, determining the baseline occlusion is of less significance because dentures may be refashioned once healing is complete.Midface fractures are rarely isolated and include multiple subsites. However, isolated zygoma fractures are typically dis-placed inferior inferiorly and medially with disruption of the suture lines between the temporal, frontal, and maxillary bones and the zygoma. If multiple zygoma fractures are present or if the zygomatic arch is significantly displaced, a coronal incision is required to perform the reduction and fixation. However, if it is an isolated depressed fracture, a Gilles reduction can be achieved inferiorly (transorally) or superiorly (along temporalis muscle). The pathophysiology of orbital blow-out fractures is (a) hydraulic from increased intraocular pressure or (b) buckling from direct bone conduction. This requires surgical intervention if there is a defect of >2 cm2 or >50% of the floor with herniation.61  A forced duction test, where the muscular attachment of the inferior oblique is grasped with forceps and manipulated to determine passive ocular mobility, is performed to ensure that there is not inferior rectus entrapment. If there is entrapment, this would also result in diploplia with upward gaze. Blowout fractures demonstrating significant entrapment or enophthal-mos are treated by orbital exploration and reinforcement of the floor with titanium mesh, hydroxyapatite, or split calvarial bone grafts. Sometimes, the anterior maxillary bone that has been fractured and is accessed in the process of repairing other factures can also be used.62There are three classic patterns of more extensive mid-face fractures: Le Fort I, II, and III. However, fractures rarely follow this exact pattern, and the two sides of the face may have different Le Fort fractures. Nonetheless, a full under-standing of midface buttresses is central in understanding these fractures (Fig. 18-18). There are three vertical buttresses: the nasofrontal-maxillary, the frontozygomaticomaxillary, and Key stitchFigure 18-16.  Approximation of the vermilion border is the key step in the repair of lip lacerations.3%3%36%2%20%21%14%Figure 18-17.  Sites of common mandible fractures.Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   62801/03/19   5:23 PM 629DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECKCHAPTER 18pterygomaxillary. There are five horizontal buttresses: the fron-tal bone, nasal bones, upper alveolus, zygomatic arches, and the infraorbital region.63 Signs of midface fractures include subcon-junctival hemorrhage, ocular signs/symptoms, malocclusion, facial asymmetry, midface hypoesthesia (V2), hematoma, and a mobile maxillary complex. Transverse maxillary alveolus frac-tures above the teeth are Le Fort I fractures, which may result in a mobile hard palate. When this fracture extends superiorly to include the nasofrontal buttress, medial orbital wall, and even as high as the infraorbital rim and zygomaticomaxillary articula-tion laterally, it is considered a Le Fort II. Mobility includes the palate, nasal dorsum, which is separated from the upper face, and the inferomedial aspect of the orbital rim. When the frac-ture disrupts the frontozygomaticomaxillary, frontomaxillary, and frontonasal suture line, there craniofacial disjunction, a Le Fort III fracture. Of note, all of the Le Fort fractures involve the pterygoid plates posteriorly (Fig. 18-19).Temporal Bone FracturesTemporal bone fractures occur in approximately one fifth of skull fractures. Temporal bone fractures were previously clas-sified as longitudinal or transverse describing the path along the temporal bone of the fracture line, but this has been largely replaced by the more relevant otic capsule sparing or involv-ing classification given that most fractures are oblique.64 Otic capsule sparing fractures present with conductive hearing loss, ossicular injury, bloody otorrhea, and labyrinthine concussion.65 The facial nerve is rarely injured nor cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak common with this fracture pattern. However, in patients with otic capsule involving temporal bone fractures, typically caused by occipitomastoid impact, sensorineural hearing loss, vestibular dysfunction, facial nerve paralysis, and CSF leak are far more common.65 Regardless of the fracture pattern, when CSF leak is suspected, it usually resolves with conservative measures including bed rest, elevation of the head of the bed, stool softeners, and avoiding sneezing or straining. In some cases, a CSF drain can be placed if there is a delay in spontane-ous resolution. Rarely will surgical repair be required. Unlike CSF leaks with temporal bone fractures, the facial nerve needs to be assessed and managed urgently. An incomplete or delayed facial nerve paralysis almost always resolves spontaneously with conservative measures, including oral steroids. An imme-diate complete paralysis that does not recover within 1 week should be prognosticated to consider nerve decompression. Electroneurography (ENoG), EMG, and nerve stimulation tests have been used to help determine which patients with delayed-onset complete paralysis will benefit from surgical decompres-sion. The finding of >90% degeneration more than 72 hours after the onset of complete paralysis is considered an indica-tion for surgery.66 A nerve excitability test, where thresholds are increased to elicit visible muscle contraction on each side, can indicate advanced degeneration when there is a difference of >3.0 to 3.5 mA between sides. Whether surgical intervention is indicated or not for facial nerve paresis, it is crucial to pro-tect the eye because a corneal drying and abrasion can lead to blindness in the abscess of eye closure and a blink reflex. This requires application of ocular lubricant at night with the eye taped shut, frequent artificial tears application while awake, and a humidity chapter.67TUMORS OF THE HEAD AND NECKSquamous cell carcinoma (SCC) comprises >90% of all of the malignant pathology of the mucosal lining of the upper aerodi-gestive tract. Naturally, a discussion of tumors of the head and neck typically focuses on this pathology presenting from the lips and oral cavity to the larynx and hypopharynx. Management of these tumors requires a systematic approach.The ideal treatment protocol varies by subsite, stage, patient comorbidity, and center preference/experience. Given the relative rarity of these tumors, multidisciplinary management is of the utmost importance to provide the patient with a balanced perspective. This can be performed in the form of a multidisciplinary clinic where radiation and surgical oncologists simultaneously see the patient or through a tumor board where a new patient’s history, physical examination findings, imaging, and prior pathology Frontal barLateralzygomatico-maxillarybuttressesMedial nasomaxillary buttressesFigure 18-18.  Major buttresses of the midface.IIIIIIFigure 18-19.  Classic Le Fort fracture patterns.Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   62901/03/19   5:23 PM 630SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIspecimens are reviewed. This encourages discussion from multiple points of view concerning the most appropriate treatment options available. In addition to radiation and surgical oncology, medical oncology, dentistry, speech language pathologists, radiologists, and pathologists contribute to the decision-making in this patient population. Some of the greatest advances in head and neck oncology over the last several decades include the development of standardized organ preservation protocols, advances in free flap reconstruction with microvascular techniques, and vaccinations. The future of head and neck oncology is bright with advances in molecular biology, immunotherapy, and preventative methods with vaccination. These have the potential of significantly decreasing incidence rates and improving survival and quality of life for those with the disease.Etiology and EpidemiologyThe main etiological factors associated with head and neck cancers are tobacco products and alcohol. Overall, there has been a decline in incidence of head and neck cancers of the oral cavity and larynx/hypopharynx subsites,68 likely related to public health campaigns and government taxation policies as it relates to cigarette consumption.69 Similarly, the incidence of head and neck cancer between countries varies widely and is strongly associated with the incidence of cigarette smok-ing. Cigarette smoking triples the likelihood of developing an oral cavity cancer, while the addition of alcohol synergistically increases the likelihood by 10to 15-fold.70 The risk increases as the number of years smoking and number of cigarettes smoked per day increases. Individuals who both smoke (two packs per day) and drink (four units of alcohol per day) had a 35-fold increased risk for the development of a carcinoma compared to controls.71The preoperative and perioperative periods are excellent opportunities for head and neck oncologists to pursue a smok-ing cessation intervention. Continued smoking after completion of treatment is associated with a 3to 4-fold increased risk of developing a second primary or recurrent tumor.72-74 A study assessing patients diagnosed with a new head and neck cancer demonstrated that of the patients that were smoking at diagno-sis, only 54% were able to quit, highlighting the difficulty this population has with smoking cessation.75Betel nut/quid chewing, which is a product of the areca catechu tree, is endemic to some parts of Asia and India, and in these regions oral cavity cancer is one of the most common can-cers.76,77 Betel nut when chewed acts as a mild stimulant similar to that of coffee but can be associated with submucous fibrosis that adds an additional challenge in the management of patients who present with a concurrent oral cavity cancer.77 These prod-ucts are associated with particular subsites secondary to direct contact (e.g., buccal mucosa) as well as subsites with depen-dent saliva drainage (e.g., floor of mouth, mandibular alveolus, and wet lip). Reverse smoking, where the lighted portion of the tobacco product is placed within the mouth during inhalation is also associated with oral cavity cancer, specifically hard palate carcinoma. The risk for this cancer is 47 times greater in patients that exhibit this behavior compared to nonsmokers.78In Europe and North America there has been an increas-ing interest in decriminalizing marijuana smoking. There is a strong correlation between this activity and head and neck can-cers (OR 2.5; 95% CI 1.1–6.6) when compared to nonusers.79 Furthermore, there is a dose-response relationship that is stron-ger in young patients (55 years of age or less). Ultraviolet light VermilionBuccal mucosaHard palateSoft palateRetromolar trigoneCircumvallate papillaeLower gingivaPalatine raphePalatine tonsilFigure 18-20.  Oral cavity landmarks.exposure is associated with cutaneous malignancies of the head and neck as well as lip cancer. The lower lip is at a higher risk due to its increased anterior-posterior projection, and the major-ity of squamous cell carcinomas of the lip arise along the ver-milion border of the lower lip. Immunocompromised patients, particularly those who have received solid organ and bone mar-row transplants are at an increased risk of head and neck can-cers.80 Similarly, HIV-infected patients have a higher incidence of head and neck cancers, and despite aggressive treatment have poorer results compared to HIV-negative patients.81,82 Other conditions associated with oral cancer include Plummer-Vinson syndrome (iron-deficiency anemia, dysphagia, glossitis, cheilo-sis, and esophageal webs), dyskeratosis congenita,83,84 Bloom’s syndrome,85,86 and Fanconi anemia.87HPV is a double stranded DNA virus that is transmitted through sexual contact. Over the last two decades, this virus, specifically the 16 and 18 subtypes,88 has been associated with an epidemic rise in oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma.89,90 The p16 protein is a surrogate for HPV positivity. HPV status in oropharynx cancer has prognostic and therefore treatment-related implications.91,92Anatomy and HistopathologyThe upper aerodigestive tract is divided into several distinct sites that include the oral cavity, pharynx, larynx, and nasal cav-ity/paranasal sinuses. Each of these sites has separate subsites as alluded to earlier with specific etiological, pathological, prog-nostic, and treatment-related peculiarities. Locoregional tumor spread is determined by weaknesses in the framework, fascial planes, and the course of neurovascular and lymphatic channels.The oral cavity extends from the vermilion border of the lip to the hard-palate/soft-palate junction superiorly, to circumval-late papillae inferiorly, and to the anterior tonsillar pillars later-ally. It is divided into eight subsites including the (a) mucosal lip, (b) the mandibular alveolus, (c) floor of mouth, (d) tongue (ante-rior two-thirds), (e) buccal mucosa, (f) retromolar trigone, (g) maxillary alveolus, and (e) hard palate (Fig. 18-20). Advanced oral cavity cancer can present with mandibular and/or maxillary invasion requiring resection, at least in part, of these structures. Oral cavity cancers typically metastasize to the submental, sub-mandibular, and upper jugular lymph nodes (levels I-III).Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   63001/03/19   5:23 PM 631DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECKCHAPTER 18The pharynx is divided into three regions: nasopharynx, oropharynx, and hypopharynx (Fig. 18-21). The nasopharynx extends from the posterior nasal septum and choana to the skull base and includes the fossa of Rosenmüller and torus tubarius of the Eustachian tubes laterally. The inferior margin of the nasopharynx is the superior surface of the soft palate.  In adults, the adenoids are typically absent secondary to invo-lution during late adolescence, but these can be seen in some adults in the posterior aspect of this subsite. Isolated posterior triangle (level V) lymphadenopathy in an adult should be con-sidered nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) until proven other-wise. Due to its midline location, bilateral regional metastatic spread is common in nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Given the epi-demic rise oropharyngeal cancers, isolated level V adenopathy in an adult may also represent oropharyngeal cancer, although cancers at this site typically drain to the upper and lower cervi-cal nodes (levels II–IV) as well as the retropharyngeal nodes. The oropharynx has a number of subsites including the tonsillar region, base of tongue, soft palate, and posterolateral pharyn-geal walls. The hypopharynx extends from the vallecula to the lower border of the cricoid posterior and lateral the larynx. It includes several subsites as well including the pyriform fossa, the postcricoid space, and the posterior pharyngeal wall. Lym-phatic drainage is to the mid and lower cervical nodes (levels III–IV); however, usually the upper cervical nodes (level II) are addressed at the same time for tumors at this site.The larynx is divided into three regions: the supraglottis, glottis, and subglottis (Fig. 18-22). The supraglottis includes sev-eral subsites: the epiglottis, false vocal cords, medial surface of the aryepiglottic folds, and the upper half of the laryngeal ventri-cles. The glottic larynx includes the true vocal cords, the anterior and posterior commissure, and the lower half of the laryngeal ventricles. The subglottis extends from below the true vocal SoftpalateHardpalateUvulaNasopharynxOropharynxLaryngopharynxPalatinetonsilsLingualtonsilsEpiglottisOesophagusTracheaLarynxHyoid boneFigure 18-21. Sagittal view of the head and neck demonstrating the distinction between the nasopharynx, oropharynx and larynx/hypopharynx including the boundaries of each.SupraglottisGlottisHyoid boneLarynxSubglottisCricoidcartilageArytenoidcartilageFalse cordVocal cordPre-epiglotticspaceThyroid cartilageVentricle of MorganiFigure 18-22.  Sagittal view of the larynx with the divisions of the supraglottis, glottis, and subglottis demonstrated.cords to the superior cricoid border from within. The supraglottis has a high rate of bilateral metastatic spread secondary to its rich lymphatic drainage, whereas isolated glottic cancers rarely have lymphatic spread. Laryngeal cancers, in addition to having the propensity for lymphatic spread, particularly in advanced cases, can have preepiglottic and paraglottic invasion as well as inva-sion of the laryngeal framework (thyroid and cricoid cartilage). Furthermore, glottic and subglottic lesions, in addition to poten-tial spread to the upper and lower cervical nodes (levels II–IV), have the propensity for spread to the central neck (level VI) in the paralaryngeal and paratracheal region.Second Primary Tumors in the Head and NeckPatients with head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) are at increased risk for the development of a second primary malignancy (SPM), which is defined as a second malignancy that presents either simultaneously or after the diagnosis of an index tumor. A synchronous SPM is diagnosed simultaneously or within 6 months of the index tumor, while a metachronous SPM is diagnosed >6 months after the index tumor. SPMs need to be distinguished from local recurrences or metastasis of the primary tumor. The incidence of SPM ranges from 2% to 7% per year,93-95 and this risk remains constant from the time of initial diagnosis throughout the lifetime of the patient.93 Sec-ond primary malignancies represent the second leading cause of death in patients with HNSCC.96 One-quarter to one-third of deaths in these patients are attributable to SPM,96-98 highlight-ing the importance of SPM in the successful management of HNSCC.The classic criteria for defining second primary malig-nancy (SPM) were proposed by Warren and Gates and are: (a) histologic confirmation of malignancy in both the index and secondary tumors; (b) two malignancies that are anatomically Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   63101/03/19   5:23 PM 632SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIseparated by normal mucosa; and (c) the possibility of the SPM being a metastasis from the index tumor must be excluded. Most investigators use these criteria to define an SPM. However, dis-agreement exists regarding the application of the second and third criteria. For example, when both tumors appear in the same anatomic subsite, there is no agreement on the distance that should exist between the tumors, with some investigators favoring 1.5 cm99 and others requiring 2 cm.100 Furthermore, when the tumors occur in the same anatomic subsite, some investigators add that the SPM must present at least three years after the diagnosis of the index tumor,100 while others require that the SPM present at least five years after the index tumor.101 Others suggest that molecular analysis is required to classify a tumor as an SPM.102Treatment of SPMs of the upper aerodigestive tract is site specific. In general, the SPM should be treated as a sep-arate entity, in the same manner as a primary index tumor at the anatomic subsite. In many cases, particularly in metachro-nous SPMs, patients have already received a full complement of treatment, including primary or adjuvant radiation and/or chemoradiation treatment. In these cases, surgical treatment of the SPM is often indicated when feasible. Reirradiation is an option in carefully selected cases when salvage surgery is not possible. Proper patient selection for reirradiation is criti-cal, and only patients with minimal comorbidity and toxicity of previous radiation treatment should be considered.103 Patients at high risk for local recurrence after salvage surgery may benefit from increased locoregional control from adjuvant reirradiation, although there is no survival advantage compared with salvage surgery alone.103 Survival in patients with SPM depends upon the stage and location of the primary site of the SPM. Patients with SPM arising in the head and neck have significantly improved survival when compared with patients with SPM aris-ing in the lung and esophagus.104StagingStaging for upper aerodigestive tract malignancies is defined by the American Joint Committee on Cancer and follows the TNM (primary tumor, regional nodal metastases, distant metastasis) staging format which was recently updated in the 8th edition in 2017.105 The T stage for each subsite incorporates relevant anatomy; for instance, T3 lesions of the glottis are associated with vocal cord immobility. Recent changes have incorporated HPV/P16 status for oropharynx cancer (Tables 18-1 and 18-2) and depth of invasion for oral cavity cancers (Table 18-3).The N classification for head and neck sites is nearly uni-form for all sites (Tables 18-4 and 18-5) except for the nasophar-ynx and for HPV-associated (p16-positive) oropharynx cancer. Recent changes have also incorporated extracapsular extension into this nodal staging to improve the discrimination and prog-nostication of the classification.Upper Aerodigestive TractThere are similarities in the initial assessment and manage-ment of all patients with a newly diagnosed upper aerodiges-tive tract malignancy. The frequently reviewed clinical practice guidelines (National Comprehensive Cancer Network; NCCN) provide valuable information by site and stage with regard to workup and management and should be used to direct care.106 After a thorough history that should include assessment of the previously discussed risk factors, a comprehensive physical examination should follow. A full head and neck examination including inspection and palpation is critical for nearly all head and neck cancers. Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancers should be palpated when possible to provide additional tactile informa-tion regarding depth of invasion, mobility, and invasion into adjacent structures. A cranial nerve (CN) examination with a focus on the assessment of trigeminal (V2/V3) parasthesia/Table 18-1Clinical and pathologic T category for HPV-associated (p16-positive) oropharyngeal cancerT CATEGORYT CRITERIAT0No primary identifiedT1Tumor 2 cm or smaller in greatest dimensionT2Tumor larger than 2 cm but not larger than  4 cm in greatest dimensionT3Tumor larger than 4 cm in greatest dimension or extension to lingual surface of epiglottisT4Moderately advanced local diseaseTumor invades the larynx, extrinsic muscle of tongue, medial pterygoid, hard palate, or mandible or beyond**Mucosal extension to lingual surface of epiglottis from primary tumors of the base of the tongue and vallecula does not constitute invasion of the larynx.Used with the permission of the American College of Surgeons. Amin MB, Edge SB, Greene FL, et al. (Eds.) AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, 8th Ed. Springer New York, 2017.Table 18-2Clinical and pathologic T category for non–HPV-associated (p16-negative) oropharyngeal cancerT CATEGORYT CRITERIATXPrimary tumor cannot be assessedTisCarcinoma in situT1Tumor 2 cm or smaller in greatest dimensionT2Tumor larger than 2 cm but not larger than  4 cm in greatest dimensionT3Tumor larger than 4 cm in greatest dimension or extension to lingual surface of epiglottisT4Moderately advanced or very advanced local disease T4aModerately advanced local diseaseTumor invades the larynx, extrinsic muscle of tongue, medial pterygoid, hard palate, or mandible* T4bVery advanced local diseaseTumor invades lateral pterygoid muscle, pterygoid plates, lateral nasopharynx, or skull base or encases carotid artery*Mucosal extension to lingual surface of epiglottis from primary tumors of the base of the tongue and vallecula does not constitute invasion of the larynx.Used with the permission of the American College of Surgeons. Amin MB, Edge SB, Greene FL, et al. (Eds.) AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, 8th Ed. Springer New York, 2017.Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   63201/03/19   5:23 PM 633DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECKCHAPTER 18anesthesia, CN VII, CN XI, and CN XII function. Flexible fiber-optic nasolaryngoscopy should be carried out to better charac-terize tumor extent, assess vocal cord mobility in laryngeal cancers, assess airway patency, and rule out any synchronous second primary tumors, as previously discussed.Investigations should include a diagnostic laryngoscopy and esophagoscopy to rule out second primaries and obtain tis-sue of any concerning lesions. A pathologic specimen is nearly always required before initiation of treatment. A metastatic work up including a CT of the neck and chest with contrast is indicated in all patients with a newly diagnosed head and neck cancer. In certain jurisdictions, a positron emission tomography (PET)-CT is used to rule out any distant metastases; however, this approach does lead to a high false positive rate.107Patients are then assessed in a multidisciplinary manner with radiation and surgical oncology. A dental evaluation is initiated before treatment because many patients undergoing primary or adjuvant radiotherapy require dental extraction to decrease the risk of osteoradionecrosis in the posttreatment period. Assessment by speech language pathology in the pre-operative period is imperative in all patients, but it is especially important in patients with laryngeal/hypopharyngeal pathology because speech and swallowing dysfunction needs to be charac-terized and often helps drive management. Smoking cessation is initiated as early as possible.Lip. The lips starting at the vermillion border represent a tran-sition between external skin to internal mucosa. The sphincter function of the lip is created by activation of the circumferen-tial musculature of the orbicularis oris, a critical structure in lip form and function. Lip cancers are most common in men and are often seen in those with fairer complexions. In addition to tobacco use and immunosuppression, UV exposure is an addi-tional important risk factor unique to this head and neck subsite. The majority (>90%) of lip cancers present on the lower lip due to its increased protrusion and increased sun exposure.108 Although the vast majority of lip cancers are SCC, other cuta-neous malignancies such as basal cell carcinoma and malignant melanoma are not uncommon at this subsite.Basal cell carcinoma presents more frequently on the upper lip than lower.Negative prognostic factors for lip cancers include peri-neural invasion, invasion into bone (maxilla or mandible), upper Table 18-3Clinical and pathologic T category for oral cavity cancerT CATEGORYT CRITERIATXPrimary tumor cannot be assessedTisCarcinoma in situT1Tumor ≤2 cm, ≤5 mm depth of invasion (DOI)DOI is depth of invasion and not tumor thickness.T2Tumor ≤2 cm, DOI >5 mm and ≤10 mmor tumor >2 cm but ≤4 cm, and DOI ≤10 mmT3Tumor >4 cmor any tumor with DOI >10 mm but ≤20 mmT4Moderately advanced or very advanced local disease T4aModerately advanced local diseaseTumor invades adjacent structures only (e.g., through cortical bone of the mandible or maxilla, or involves the maxillary sinus or skin of the face) or extensive tumor with bilateral tongue involvement and/or  DOI >20 mm.Note: Superficial erosion of bone/tooth socket (alone) by a gingival primary is not sufficient to classify a tumor as T4. T4bVery advanced local diseaseTumor invades masticator space, pterygoid plates, or skull base and/or encases the internal carotid arteryUsed with the permission of the American College of Surgeons. Amin MB, Edge SB, Greene FL, et al. (Eds.) AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, 8th Ed. Springer New York, 2017.Table 18-4Clinical N category for non–HPV-associated (p16-negative) oropharyngeal cancerN CATEGORYN CRITERIANXRegional lymph nodes cannot be assessedN0No regional lymph node metastasisN1Metastasis in a single ipsilateral lymph node, 3 cm or smaller in greatest dimension and ENE(-)N2Metastasis in a single ipsilateral node larger than 3 cm but not larger than 6 cm in greatest dimension and ENE(-); or metastases in multiple ipsilateral lymph nodes, none larger than 6 cm in greatest dimension and ENE(-); or in bilateral or contralateral lymph nodes, none larger than 6 cm in greatest dimension and ENE(-) N2aMetastasis in a single ipsilateral node larger than 3 cm but not larger than 6 cm in greatest dimension and ENE(-) N2bMetastasis in multiple ipsilateral nodes, none larger than 6 cm in greatest dimension and ENE(-) N2cMetastasis in bilateral or contralateral lymph nodes, none larger than 6 cm in greatest dimension and ENE(-)N3Metastasis in a lymph node larger than 6 cm in greatest dimension and ENE(-); or metastasis in any node(s) and clinically overt ENE(+) N3aMetastasis in a lymph node larger than 6 cm in greatest dimension and ENE(-) N3bMetastasis in any node(s) and clinically overt ENE(+)ENE = extranodal extension.Used with the permission of the American College of Surgeons. Amin MB, Edge SB, Greene FL, et al. (Eds.) AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, 8th Ed. Springer New York, 2017.Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   63301/03/19   5:23 PM 634SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIlip or oral commissure involvement, positive regional metasta-sis, and young age at diagnosis.The primary management of lip cancer is a surgical resection of the primary site with an adequate margin (1 cm). This provides margin analysis and additional pathologic information that can help stratify which patients may benefit from adjuvant treatment. The primary regional nodal drainage basin for lip cancers is the submandibular, submental, and perifacial nodes (level I), and metastases occur in <10% of patients with a higher incidence in those with upper lip cancers.109 When there are clinical evident notes, a neck dissection is indicated. Otherwise, in the clinically and radiographically negative neck observation is acceptable.109 Unfortunately, many lip cancers are not appropriately staged, and advanced regional failure is not infrequently seen. Adjuvant (postoperative) radiotherapy is indicated in patients with close (<5 mm) or positive margins, lymph node metastases, tumors with perineural invasion, and in thick (>4 mm) tumors.110 The overall 10-year survival rate is 84% to 92% for early stage disease but drops precipitously (11%–28%) for advanced stage disease predicted by regional and distant metastases.111The goals of lip reconstruction include providing oral competence, maintaining dynamic function, and achieving acceptable cosmesis, while avoiding severe microstomia. The proportion of the lip excised and whether the defect involves the oral commissure determines the reconstructive options. Regardless of the reconstructive technique, realignment of the vermilion border and reapproximation of the orbicularis oris are critical steps to a successful outcome. Defects of less than one-third of the lip are closed primarily, while defects between one-third and two-thirds of the lip borrow tissue from surrounding regions, mainly the upper lip and cheek to recreate the lip. This can be accomplished using an Abbe (lip switch) (Fig. 18-23) or Karapandzic flap (Fig. 18-24), if the commissure is preserved, or an Estlander flap (lip switch) if the commissure is resected. If there is insufficient lip tissue, rectangular excisions can be closed using upper Burrow’s triangles in combination with bilateral advancement flaps made possible by mental crease relaxing incisions; this technique is called Bernard-Burrow (Fig. 18-25).112 When more than two-thirds of the lip is excised, the Karapandzic can still be used when the defect is up to 80% as this provides a sensate lip with sphincter-like function; however, microstomia becomes a serious concern, and larger defects require free flap reconstruction. This typically does not achieve sphincter function even when a sling is used. Microstomia can be a problem in patients that are edentulous who then cannot insert their dentures and in the dentulous who may not be able to get dental work performed with significant negative impact on their dental health.Oral Cavity. As previously mentioned, the oral cavity is com-posed of several sites. The anatomy of each subsite can uniquely impact the aggressiveness of disease, the function after resec-tion, and the surgical approach. We therefore in this next section briefly review each subsite with a focus on the relevant anatomy and treatment options.The preferred approach to management of these tumors is a surgical resection with adequate (1 cm) surgical margins with management of the regional nodal basin. In general, tumors of the oral cavity metastasize to the submandibular, submental, and upper cervical nodes and are almost always treated with a supra-omohyoid neck dissection at the time of primary resection with a few rare exceptions (T1 oral tongue lesions that have less than 4 mm depth of invasion). In the “Neck” section of this chapter, we will discuss this in more detail. Adjuvant radiotherapy is indicated in patients with close margins, regional lymphade-nopathy, advanced stage tumors (T3/T4), perineural invasion, and lymphovascular invasion, while adjuvant chemoradiother-apy is reserved for those with positive margins or extracapsular invasion.113,114Oral Tongue The oral tongue is a muscular structure composed of intrinsic (longitudinal, vertical, and transverse muscle fibers) and extrinsic (genioglossus, hyoglossus, styloglossus, and pala-toglossus) muscles separated by a midline raphe and has overly-ing nonkeratinizing squamous epithelium. The posterior limit of the oral tongue is the circumvallate papillae beyond which the oropharynx begins while the ventral portion is contiguous with the anterior floor of mouth.Table 18-5Clinical N category for oral cavity, larynx, and hypopharynx cancerN CATEGORYN CRITERIANXRegional lymph nodes cannot be assessedN0No regional lymph node metastasisN1Metastasis in a single ipsilateral lymph node,  3 cm or smaller in greatest dimension ENE(-)N2Metastasis in a single ipsilateral node larger than 3 cm but not larger than 6 cm in greatest dimension and ENE(-); or metastases in multiple ipsilateral lymph nodes, none larger than 6 cm in greatest dimension and ENE(-); or in bilateral or contralateral lymph nodes, none larger than 6 cm in greatest dimension, and ENE(-) N2aMetastasis in a single ipsilateral node larger than 3 cm but not larger than 6 cm in greatest dimension, and ENE(-) N2bMetastasis in multiple ipsilateral nodes, none larger than 6 cm in greatest dimension, and ENE(-) N2cMetastasis in bilateral or contralateral lymph nodes, none larger than 6 cm in greatest dimension, and ENE(-)N3Metastasis in a lymph node larger than 6 cm in greatest dimension and ENE(-); or metastasis in any node(s) and clinically overt ENE(+) N3aMetastasis in a lymph node larger than 6 cm in greatest dimension and ENE(-) N3bMetastasis in any node(s) and clinically overt ENE(+)ENE = extranodal extension.Used with the permission of the American College of Surgeons. Amin MB, Edge SB, Greene FL, et al. (Eds.) AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, 8th Ed. Springer New York, 2017.Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   63401/03/19   5:23 PM 635DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECKCHAPTER 18Tumors of the tongue typically start along the epithelial surface and can be endophytic or exophytic with or without ulceration (Fig. 18-26) and are typically seen on the lateral and ventral surfaces of the tongue. Lesions on the dorsal aspect of the tongue, particularly along the midline, are less likely to be malignant. What is seen on the surface is typically the tip of the iceberg, and palpation can provide further information regarding the depth of invasion of the tumor. These tumors can be extensive, and when they cross the midline and start to involve the base of tongue an extensive surgical resection including a total glossectomy may be required. However, most tumors present at an early stage due to significant pain, otal-gia, voice change secondary to difficulties with articulation, and dysphagia, which may lead to weight loss. On history and physical examination, ipsilateral paresthesias and deviation of the tongue protrusion with fasciculations or atrophy may indicate lingual nerve and hypoglossal nerve tumor invasion respectively (Fig. 18-27).Early lesions (T1–T2) can be closed primarily, allowed to heal by secondary intention, or reconstructed with a split thickness ACBDFigure 18-23.  Estlander flap. A. Intra-operative image of lower lip squamous cell carcinoma with buccal and cutaneous extension  pre-excision; B. Intra-operative defect and Estlander flap design. C. Immediate post-operative flap. D. One year post-operative image.ABCFigure 18-24.  A-C. Karapandzic labiaplasty for lower lip carcinoma.Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   63501/03/19   5:23 PM 636SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIskin graft after partial glossectomy. This procedure allows rea-sonable speech and swallowing function as long as there is not significant tethering in the floor of the mouth if this has been resected. Articulation is determined by premaxillary contact of the tongue, and dental appliances can be used in the postoperative setting to improve this. Tongue protrusion and lateral movement predicts a patient’s ability to swallow, and this is less difficult to repair secondarily. Therefore, many patients, even with small tongue cancers that require significant floor of mouth resection, receive soft pliable fasciocutaneous free flap reconstruction to improve these functional outcomes.115 Advanced lesions that require a more radical resection require free flaps, which obliter-ate the oral cavity dead space while creating bulk in the posterior oropharynx to improve the pharyngeal swallowing phase.116ABFigure 18-25. Bernard burrow flap reconstruction for a total lower lip defect involving upper and lip advancement rotation flap and cheek advancement.Figure 18-26.  Oral tongue squamous cell carcinoma.ABSubmandibular glandDigastric m.(anterior belly)Myohyoid m.Stylopharyngeus,stylohyoid andstyloglossus mm.Digastric muscle(posterior belly)Styloid processHypoglossal n.Middleconstrictor m.External carotid a.Hyoid boneHyoglossus m.Lingual n.Deep lingual a.Dorsal lingual a.Genioglossus m.Geniohyoid m.Sublingual a.Lingual n.Hyoid boneHypoglossal n.Figure 18-27.  A and B. Anatomy of the floor of mouth and submandibular space. a. = artery; m. = muscle; n. = nerve.Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   63601/03/19   5:24 PM 637DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECKCHAPTER 18Floor of Mouth The floor of mouth is a mucosal-covered semilu-nar area that extends from the anterior tonsillar pillar posteriorly to the frenulum anteriorly, and from the inner surface of the mandible to the ventral surface of the oral tongue. The ostia of the submax-illary and sublingual glands are contained in the anterior floor of mouth. The muscular floor of mouth is composed of the sling-like genioglossus, mylohyoid, and hyoglossus muscles, which serve as a barrier to the spread of disease. Invasion into these muscles can result in decreased tongue mobility and poor articulation.The floor of mouth begins just below the lingual surface of the mandibular alveolus and ends at the ventral tongue where the frenulum connects the floor of mouth to the tongue along the mid-line and at the anterior tonsillar pillars posteriorly. Just deep to the floor of mouth mucosa is the submandibular (Wharton’s) duct and sublingual minor salivary glands followed by the genio-glossus, hyoglossus, and mylohyoid muscles. Direct invasion of these structures is not uncommon and can result in direct spread to the sublingual and submandibular spaces as well as decreased tongue mobility, leading to articulation complaints. The lingual nerve (a branch of V3) provides sensory innerva-tion to this subsite and is in close proximity to it, often requir-ing resection of this structure. The contiguity of the floor of mouth mucosa with the lingual surface of the mandible can lead to mandibular invasion. This needs to be carefully examined bimanually on physical examination and using imaging (CT, MRI, or Panorex) because a marginal or segmental mandibu-lectomy may be required to excise these tumors (Fig. 18-28). If the lesion is not fixed to the mandibular cortex on physical examination, then a mandible-sparing procedure is feasible.117 Extension to the sublingual and submandibular ducts and spaces requires that the neck dissection specimen be removed en bloc with the primary tumor. Invasion of the intrinsic tongue muscu-lature requires a partial glossectomy. In our experience, except for the smallest (T1) very superficial floor of mouth lesions, cancers at this subsite nearly always require a reconstructive procedure to separate the floor of mouth from the neck and to avoid tethering of the tongue using a pliable fasciocutaneous flap. If a segmental resection is performed, the vascularized osteocutaneous free flap is used. Given the anterior location of this tumor, a lip-splitting incision is rarely used unless resection of lip and chin skin is required as part of the resection in a select group of T4a tumors with through-and-through involvement.Mandibular Alveolus and Gingiva The alveolar mucosa overlies the bone of the mandible and extends from the gin-givobuccal sulcus to the mucosa of the floor of mouth to the second and third molar, which is the anterior border of the ret-romolar trigone subsite. Treatment of these lesions requires at the very least marginal resection of the mandibular bone given the proximity and early invasion of the periosteum in this region. A marginal resection is acceptable if there is only very early bony invasion (Fig. 18-29). If the inferior alveolar canal or the medullary cavity is invaded on physical examination or preoperative imaging, a negative locoregional prognostic fac-tor, a segmental resection is recommended with appropriate reconstruction.118,119Retromolar Trigone The retromolar trigone (RMT) is bor-dered medially by the anterior tonsillar pillar, anteriorly by the ABIncisionTissue excisedFigure 18-28.  A and B. Differences in the transoral resection of a floor of mouth and alveolar ridge lesion.Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   63701/03/19   5:24 PM 638SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIsecond or third molar, posteriorly by the maxillary tuberosity, inferiorly by the posterior mandibular alveolus, superiorly by the coronoid process of the mandible, and laterally by the buc-cal mucosa. Negative margin resection often requires a mar-ginal shave mandibulectomy, even when there is no evidence of mandibular cortical invasion, because of the close proxim-ity to the mandibular periosteum. This is typically achieved through a transoral approach while carefully protecting the lips and cheek.120 Extension to adjacent subsites including the buccal mucosa, maxillary tuberosity, floor of mouth, and posterolateral tongue often requires these structures be resected as part of the margin. Trismus at this and other subsites is an advanced indica-tion of involvement of the muscles of mastication in the masti-cator space, which can extend to the skull base. These tumors are aggressive. Infiltration into the masticator space and bony invasion (maxilla more often than mandible) significantly wors-ens the prognosis.121Buccal Mucosa The buccal mucosa includes all of the mucosal lining from the inner surface of the lips to the line of attachment of mucosa of the alveolar ridges and pterygomandibular raphe. The mucosa includes the parotid (Stenson’s) duct opening adja-cent to the first and second maxillary molars. An understanding of the layers of the cheek from medial to lateral is important because these layers are very closely adherent to the buccal mucosa. Therefore, tumors in this region have a high propensity for early deep invasion and early lymphatic spread. The layers of the cheek from medial to lateral are: (a) buccal mucosa, (b) pharyngobasilar fascia, (c) buccinator muscle, (d) buccopha-ryngeal fascia, (e) buccinator fat pad, (f) masseter muscle, (g) muscles of facial expression and the superficial muscular apo-neurotic system (SMAS), (h) subcutaneous tissue, and (i) facial skin. It is not uncommon for tumors with deep invasion into the cheek to require a through-and-through resection. Reconstruc-tion aimed at providing both an internal and external lining may be accomplished with a folded fasciocutaneous free flap or a combination of a local flap for the external component and a free flap for the internal component. Marginal bone resection is often required in tumors that extend to the mandibular or maxil-lary alveolus.Maxillary Alveolus and Hard Palate The hard palate and maxillary alveolus have classically been considered two sepa-rate subsites, but due to their anatomic contiguity and the simi-larities in their oncologic outcomes these two subsites should be discussed together.122 The junction between the hard palate and soft palate is the posterior border, while the maxillary tuberos-ity is the posterolateral border separating the retromolar trigone from the maxillary alveolus. The periosteum is at this subsite is closely adherent to the mucosa, and as such, superficial lesions require resection of the bone to achieve a clear margin. An infrastructure maxillectomy may be required for larger lesions involving the palate or maxillary antrum. The greater palatine nerve and foramen can be a pathway for neuropathic spread, and it is important to identify perineural invasion on these tumors in the biopsy specimen.Although SCC continues to be the primary malignant pathology at this subsite, minor salivary gland tumors such as adenoid cystic carcinoma, mucoepidermoid carcinoma, and adenocarcinoma can also present in this location. Minor sali-vary gland tumors tend to arise at the junction of the hard and soft palate.Nonmalignant pathology includes necrotizing sialometa-plasia, which appears as a butterfly-shaped ulcer on the hard palate that otherwise looks like a neoplasm. Treatment is symp-tomatic as these lesions typical disappear with time; however, a biopsy is warranted to confirm the diagnosis. A torus palatini is a benign bony outgrowth seen on midline of the hard palate. This does not require biopsy to confirm the diagnosis and only requires treatment to relieve symptoms.Reconstruction of the maxillectomy defect depends on a number of variables, including patient preference, dentition, patient comorbidity, and extent of defect. A partial palatectomy or partial infrastructure palatectomy can often be reconstructed with a dental obturator or a soft tissue flap alone to separate the oral cavity from the nasal cavity and maxillary sinus. More extensive suprastructure maxillectomies can be reconstructed with a free flap composed only of soft tissue, although this will leave the patient with a significant malar asymmetry over an osseous free flap. The layered fibular free flap and the scapular tip have been recently popularized to reconstruct more extensive orbitomaxillary reconstruction.123,124 Supporting the orbital floor when it is resected is critical in supporting the orbital contents and avoiding eventual diploplia because there can be a drop in these contents when they are not supported.Oropharynx The borders of the oropharynx start at the soft pal-ate superiorly, the hyoid (vallecular root) inferiorly, the anterior tonsillar pillar anterolaterally, and the cricumvallate papilla at the junction between the anterior two-thirds and posterior third of the tongue. There are five subsites in the oropharynx: the tonsillar region that includes the anterior and posterior tonsillar pillars, the soft palate, the posterior pharyngeal wall, the lateral pharyngeal wall, and the base of tongue. Tumors at this subsite can have direct extension laterally in the parapharyngeal space, posteriorly into the retropharyngeal space, anteriorly into the oral cavity, superiorly into the nasopharynx, or inferiorly into Figure 18-29.  Anterior mandibulotomy with mandibular swing to approach a posterior lesion.Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   63801/03/19   5:24 PM 639DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECKCHAPTER 18the supraglottic larynx. Laterally, through the superior con-strictor, invasion of the jugular vein, carotid artery, and cranial nerves IX to XII, as well as the sympathetic chain, is possible. The pharyngobasilar fascia (resectable) deep to the constrictor muscles is a natural barrier from invasion into the prevertebral fascia (unresectable). The ascending ramus of the mandible can be involved when tumors invade the medial pterygoid muscle.Although SCC is the predominant pathology, minor sali-vary gland tumors can present as submucosal lesions in the soft palate or tongue base, and lymphoma can present in the tonsils as an asymmetric enlargement, underlying the importance of a tissue diagnosis before treatment.Oropharyngeal cancers, other than those on the soft palate or tonsils, are often not obvious on oral cavity exam inspection; therefore, a high degree of suspicion should exist in patients with a muffled voice as would be experienced in tongue base tumors, patients with dysphagia and weight loss, or referred otalgia from the tympanic branches of CN IX and X. Trismus may indicate advanced disease with pterygoid involvement. As previously mentioned, because of the epidemic rise in incidence of oropharyngeal cancers, secondary to HPV-associated tumors, and the high regional metastatic rate for these tumors, the pre-senting symptom is often a nontender cervical lymphadenopa-thy, which should be investigated with a fine-needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy. Approximately 50% of patients have metastases at the time of diagnosis. Bilateral metastases are common in patients with soft palate and base of tongue tumors. Treatment of the neck should include the upper jugulodigastric nodes to which these tumors most commonly metastasize to, followed by levels II, IV, V, and the retropharyngeal lymph nodes.A discussion about oropharyngeal cancer cannot be had without discussing the important prognostic information pro-vided by the HPV status of these tumors. The incidence of oro-pharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma has increased significantly over the last four decades secondary to HPV-16 related develop-ment of this tumor.125 HPV infection can induce the production of two viral oncoproteins, E6 and E7, which inactivate tumor suppressors p53 and Rb leading to tumor promotion.126 HPV-positive tumors are more common in younger male patients and are associated with a history of a higher lifetime number of sexual partners and oral sex.127 Ang et al demonstrated that oropharyngeal cancers can be stratified on overall survival into low risk (HPV-positive tumors in patients with ≤10 pack years of smoking or >10 pack years of smoking but N0-N2a), intermediate risk (HPV-positive tumors with >10 pack years of smoking and N2b-N3 or HPV-negative tumors in patients with ≤10 pack years of smoking and T2-T3 tumors), and high risk (HPV-negative tumors in patients with ≤10 pack years of smok-ing and T4 tumors or HPV-negative tumors in patients with >10 pack years of smoking).92 The rate of distant metastases in the HPV-positive and HPV-negative tumors does not differ, and therefore the survival benefit in the HPV-positive group is due to improved locoregional control.Management of squamous cell cancers of this region includes single modality (surgery or radiotherapy alone) treat-ment for early stage disease (stage I/II) and multimodality treatment for advanced stage (stage III/IV) disease (surgery followed by postoperative radiotherapy or concurrent chemora-diotherapy).106 Historically, from 1971 to 2000, oropharyngeal cancers, at the time mostly HPV-negative, were treated hetero-geneously with surgery followed by radiotherapy or primary radiotherapy similar survival until Parsons et al demonstrated in a meta-analysis similar survival rates between the two treatment groups with improved locoregional control in the radiation-alone group and much higher complication rates in the surgery group (32% severe complications, 3.5% mortality) compared to the radiotherapy group (3.8% severe complications, 0.4% mortal-ity).128 For this reason, for many years, advanced-stage tumors were treated with primary concurrent chemoradiotherapy. How-ever, this is now a moving target given the excellent results in early and some intermediate-stage HPV-positive disease regardless of treatment. More recently, there has been a push to study de-escalation, particularly in the aforementioned low and intermediate risk groups given the excellent survival rates. The standard of care, regardless of HPV status, for advanced tumors (T3/T4 or N2b-N3 or evidence of gross ECE) continues to be concurrent chemoradiotherapy.129The high complication and mortality rate in the surgi-cal group analyzed by Parsons et al was associated not just with HPV-negative tumors but also with open resections for advanced tumors that necessitated a lip-splitting mandibulotomy approach. More recently, particularly for early stage tumors (T1, T2, N0-N2a), there has been a push towards minimally invasive transoral robotic surgery (TORS) using the da Vinci Surgical System. Oncologic outcomes are similar between surgery and radiotherapy in this group, and TORS has been demonstrated to be cost-effective in this setting.130-132 Functional outcomes related to swallowing (G-tube dependency) and airway (tra-cheotomy dependency) are also similar between the groups.130 These outcomes are heavily dependent on the surgeon’s abil-ity to achieve negative margins, which can be challenging, and on good preoperative predictive value of imaging to stage the neck, given that advanced nodal disease, particularly with ECE, continues to benefit from adjuvant chemoradiotherapy. Positive margins or ECE ultimately leads to adjuvant chemoradiother-apy. This results in triple modality treatment with its associated higher morbidity. Therefore, clinical recommendations based on these favorable early retrospective poorly controlled studies with small sample sizes is not yet possible. Meanwhile, clinical trial evidence is pending to help elucidate in which settings and patients this new approach may be beneficial.133Extensive oropharyngeal cancers that fail concurrent chemoradiotherapy are treated with resection. If the mandible is involved, a marginal mandibulectomy or segmental man-dibulectomy may be required depending on the extent of bony invasion. Tongue base resection may necessitate total glossec-tomy depending on the contralateral extent of the tumor and the ability to save the lingual artery and to a lesser extent the hypo-glossal nerve on that side. When the larynx is preserved many patients, if careful reconstruction is performed, 90% of patients can be decannulated and have acceptable voice outcomes.134 However, it is not uncommon to have to perform a total laryn-gectomy at the same time as the total glossectomy for tumors with supraglottic extent, and this is associated with poor quality of life. Generally, these patients also have poorer survival.135-137The primary goal of oropharyngeal reconstruction is swal-lowing rehabilitation. For soft palate defects, palatal obturators may assist in providing a seal between the nasopharynx and the posterior pharyngeal wall. The modified Gehanno technique sutures the posterior wall of the remaining soft palate to the remaining incised pharyngeal mucosa to close off the ipsilateral hemi-nasopharyngeal port.138,139 A flap can then be inset overly-ing this defect, which has effectively separated the nasopharynx from the oropharynx. This prevents nasal regurgitation of air Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   63901/03/19   5:24 PM 640SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIand liquids, therefore impacting both speech and swallowing. Similarly, total glossectomy reconstruction has several goals, including filling the oral cavity dead space, allowing the neo-tongue to reach the premaxilla to assist with articulation, and, most importantly, creating posterior bulk to allow the base of tongue to touch the posterior pharyngeal wall, which assists with the pharyngeal phase of swallowing. This is often achieved with a large rectus abdominis or anterolateral thigh free flap.138 If the neotongue does not successfully touch the premaxilla and hard palate and speech is impeded, a palatal obturator can be used to bring down the palate and achieve better contact.Hypopharynx and Cervical Esophagus The hypopharynx, which extends from the vallecular to the lower border of the cricoid cartilage (Fig. 18-30), has three subsites; the pyriform sinuses, the lateral and posterior pharyngeal walls, and the post cricoid space. SCC of the hypopharynx typically presents with progressive dysphagia, first to solids then to liquids, fol-lowed by weight loss. Similar to oropharyngeal tumors, patients can also present with voice change, referred otalgia or a neck mass. Rarely, when the larynx is involved, patients may pres-ent with stridor and airway compromise necessitating an urgent tracheotomy.Unfortunately, there is significant delay in diagnosis of patients with hypopharyngeal cancer and late presentation is common.140 Routine physical examination will not typically detect the tumor. Fiberoptic nasolaryngoscopy is important in assessing the extent of the tumor and laryngeal function. Vocal cord paralysis is a poor prognostic factor and indicates fixation of the cricoarytenoid joint from direct extension of the tumor or recurrent laryngeal nerve invasion. A Valsalva maneuver dur-ing laryngoscopy allows for a better evaluation of the opened pyriform sinuses and postcricoid space. Functional endoscopic evaluation of swallowing (FEES) can be useful to assess laryn-geal penetration and aspiration, but a modified barium swal-low (MBS) is better at assessing inferior extent of the disease, multifocality within the esophagus, and aspiration. A thorough metastatic workup is required, with special attention paid to paratracheal and upper mediastinal metastases.This site has the poorest survival outcomes of all head and neck subsites. There is no difference in survival when surgery is used as the primary modality of treatment followed by radio-therapy or chemoradiotherapy compared to primary radiother-apy or concurrent chemoradiotherapy followed by surgery.141 Concurrent chemoradiotherapy appears to be the modality of choice for laryngeal preservation; however, when surgical sal-vage is required, there is a low cure rate and increased wound complications.142 Early T1 lesions without clinical or radio-graphic evidence of adenopathy can be treated with primary radiotherapy, but this is relatively rare for this subsite due to a high rate of adenopathy and an advanced T stage at presentation.Surgical resection, typically in the salvage setting, involves a total laryngopharyngectomy typically with a circumferential defect or a very small strip of mucosa preserved in continuity with the cervical esophagus. A total thyroidectomy and cen-tral neck dissection (level VI) is simultaneously performed and removed en bloc with the specimen. Bilateral neck dissection of levels II to IV is indicated. Careful dissection of the central neck, and in some cases the upper mediastinum (level VII), is required to clear regional disease, and this is critical in prevent-ing a peristomal recurrence.Given the circumferential or near circumferential defect, reconstruction is required to prevent saliva from accumulating in the wound and to create a neopharynx. A pedicled pectoralis major flap sutured to the prevertebral fascia has been described, but advances in free flap reconstruction has popularized a num-ber of fasciocutaneous flaps for reconstruction of this defect, namely the radial forearm flap and the anterolateral thigh free flap.143-146 When total laryngopharyngoesophagectomy is required, a gastric pull-up may be performed for the pharyngeal reconstruction.Larynx Laryngeal carcinoma typical presents with a progres-sive voice complaint in a long-time smoker (Fig. 18-31). A thorough understanding of laryngeal anatomy is critical in the proper diagnosis, staging, and treatment of laryngeal cancers. The larynx is divided into the supraglottis, glottis, and subglottis as previously described (Fig. 18-32). The larynx starts superi-orly at the epiglottis and ends inferiorly at the inferior border of the cricoid cartilage of the larynx span from the epiglottis supe-riorly to the cricoid cartilage inferiorly. Laterally, it is separated from the hypopharynx by the aryepiglottic folds.The supraglottis includes all of the laryngeal structures above the inferior half of the ventricle, and this includes the upper half of the ventricle, the false vocal cords, the arytenoids, the aryepiglottic folds, and the epiglottis. The membranes and cartilages of the larynx act as barriers to laryngeal spread: the thyroid and cricoid cartilage, conus elasticus, the quandrangular membrane, the ventricle, the hyoepiglottic ligament, thyrohyoid membrane, and cricothyroid membrane. Although the majority of tumors of the larynx are SCC, minor salivary glands, and their associated malignancies, can be found in the supraglot-tis and subglottis. Other rarer pathologies include granular cell EpiglottisNasopharynxOropharynxEustachiantube orificeSoft palateHyoid boneLarynxHypopharynxPalatine tonsilAdenoidThyroid glandCricoidcartilageFigure 18-30.  Relationship of nasopharynx, oropharynx, and hypopharynx.Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   64001/03/19   5:24 PM 641DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECKCHAPTER 18tumors and laryngeal framework tumors, typically arising from the cricoid, such as chondroma and chondrosarcoma.The larynx functions to (a) phonate, (b) protect the air-way during swallowing, and (c) maintain airway patency. This is a fine balance. For instance, if the glottic aperture is enlarged and/or supraglottic structures are excised, phonation and air-way protection suffer while airway patency is improved. It is therefore not surprising that patients with laryngeal tumors can present with dysphonia (hot potato voice in supraglottic tumors and hoarseness in glottic tumors), dysphagia, and airway con-cerns. These patients can also present with dysphagia, weight loss, referred otalgia, and a neck mass. Vocal cord fixation can be a result of a mass effect from large obstructing masses, sec-ondary to direct extension into the paraglottic space or through direct invasion of the cricoarytenoid joint involving either the muscle or the recurrent laryngeal nerve (RLN). Although sub-glottic tumors represent <1% of laryngeal cancers, they can also present with vocal cord paralysis and/or airway compromise.Direct laryngoscopy is beneficial in the assessment of laryngeal tumors to assess the local extent of tumor spread. This is particularly important in assessing vallecula and base of tongue as there can be direct extension to the oropharynx. Simi-larly, glottic cancers can have subglottic extension, which neces-sitates a wider radiation field and/or a more extensive resection. Esophagoscopy and bronchoscopy are also recommended to assess second primary tumors. Furthermore, when a laryngec-tomy is planned, the direct laryngoscopy provides information about the best possible site of entry into the pharynx. Entry can be achieved through (a) a suprahyoid pharyngotomy, (b) ) lat-eral pharyngotomy (lateral to the thyroid cartilage), or (c) infe-riorly through a postcricoid or hypopharyngeal pharyngotomy.Appropriate preoperative staging with a CT scan with contrast is critical in assessing cervical lymphadenopathy and extralaryngeal spread. Erosion or invasion of the thyroid and cri-coid cartilage can significantly impact outcomes and treatment as can extension into the preepiglottic or paraglottic spaces. The supraglottic and subglottic sites are lymphatic rich, and bilateral lymphadenopathy is not uncommon, whereas the glottic site has relatively poor lymphatic drainage (1%–4% regional metasta-sis for isolated larynx cancer). The supraglottis drains through the neurovascular bundle to the thyrohyoid membrane, mainly draining to the upper and lateral cervical nodes (levels II–IV), whereas the glottis and subglottis drain through the cricothyroid membrane and can have spread to the prelaryngeal (Delphian nodes), paratracheal, and lower cervical nodes (levels IV and VI), although in these cases we still treat levels II to IV surgi-cally because of the significant occult nodes in this region.The primary management of laryngeal cancer depends on a variety of factors, including tumor extent, patient comorbidi-ties, and surgeon/center experience. In general, similar to other subsites, early-stage disease can be treated with single modality treatment (surgery or radiotherapy) while advanced stage dis-ease is treated with at least two modalities, typically either sur-gery followed by radiotherapy (with or without chemotherapy) or concurrent chemoradiotherapy. Supraglottic and subglottic lesions are typically treated with primary concurrent chemo-radiotherapy in an attempt to preserve the organ; however, in patients where the primary functions of the larynx are not being fulfilled preoperatively (tracheotomy– and gastrostomy tube–dependent), primary surgical management with a total lar-yngectomy (Fig. 18-33) can be considered. The original trials that popularized organ preservation techniques with concurrent chemoradiotherapy either excluded or had a very small sample size of large (T4) tumors.147,148 Similarly, advanced glottic can-cers (T3/T4a), even when there is no evidence of nodal disease  or supraglottic tumors of all stages, have superior survival out-comes when surgery is used as the primary treatment modality.149,150  This is particularly true for tumors that extend beyond the  endolarynx or with cartilage destruction, for which total Figure 18-31.  Endoscopic view of a laryngeal squamous carcinoma.Figure 18-32.  Total laryngectomy specimen featuring a locally invasive advanced stage glottic squamous carcinoma.Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   64101/03/19   5:24 PM 642SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIlaryngectomy followed by postoperative radiotherapy continues to be the standard of care. When primary chemoradiotherapy is used, surgical salvage is available if there is treatment failure or recurrent disease.The early glottic and supraglottic lesions can be safely treated with CO2 laser transoral microlaryngoscopic resection with excellent oncologic outcomes and laryngeal preservation rates.151,152 Patients with limited involvement of the arytenoid or anterior commissure are the best candidates for a good posttreat-ment vocal quality result with this approach. One of the benefits of this approach is that it does not burn any bridges to more inva-sive treatment. Often, multiple procedures are required to control the disease. Nonetheless, for early stage cancers of the glottis and the supraglottis, radiation therapy is equally as effective as surgery in controlling disease with excellent voice outcomes.Laryngeal Preservation Techniques Beyond CO2 laser tran-soral microlaryngoscopic resection for the most early of lesions, more advanced open laryngeal preservation techniques have been developed for the resection of select, moderately advanced supraglottic and glottic tumors. These techniques can be divided into vertical and horizontal partial laryngeal procedures.Vertical partial larygnectomy (VPL) (Fig. 18-34) involves a midline thyrotomy followed by dissection of the inner peri-chondrium off of the thyroid cartilage with resection of the entire true cord and a portion of the false cords, followed by reconstruction with pedicle strap muscles and bipedicled outer perichondrial flaps. A temporoparietal fascial free flap has also been used to reconstruct these defects with excellent voice outcomes.153 This can be extended to include a frontal verti-cal VPL where the excision crosses the midline as far laterally as to leave only the posterior commissure and one functional cricoarytenoid unit. This procedure is best reserved for recurrent glottic T1/T2 lesions involving only one vocal cord (although anterior commissure involvement is not a contraindication),  <5 mm sublottic extension, with a mobile cord, and no cricoid cartilage or extralaryngeal extension. This technique leads to excellent locoregional control with improvements in voice related quality of life with advanced reconstructive techniques.153Supraglottic and supracricoid partial laryngectomies are horizontally oriented resections. In a supraglottic laryngectomy, a laryngectomy is performed below the hyoid and includes the upper portion of the thyroid cartilage while preserving a lower portion approximately the height of the cricoid cartilage. This is reserved for lesions not involving the vocal cords, false cords, or the arytenoids. Cartilage invasion and extensive base of tongue involvement are contraindications. Most lesions amenable for resection using this procedure are typically small enough that a laser or TORS procedure is adequate for resection, and there-fore this procedure is rarely performed. For T3 glottic lesions without preepiglottic space or cricoarytenoid joint involvement, a supracricoid laryngectomy with a cricohyoidopexy or crico-hyoidoepiglottopexy (CHEP) are options. A single cricoaryte-noid unit is preserved to allow for phonation through apposition with the remnant epiglottis or base of tongue. The procedure is associated with excellent oncologic outcomes, tracheostomy decannulation rates, and swallowing function.154 Phonation is reasonable after this procedure but can be characterized as breathy and coarse. Many surgeons prefer not to decannulate patients until the patient has had a significant period of time with good oral intake to allow for pulmonary toilet given the high initial rate of aspiration with this procedure.All partial laryngeal procedures are associated with a high risk of aspiration. Therefore, patients should have excellent pul-monary reserve through pulmonary function tests. When this is not possible, a simple measure includes whether patients can climb two flights of stairs without stopping.PerichondriumUnilaterallesionThyroidcartilageFigure 18-33.  Example of the resection of a vertical partial laryn-gectomy for an early stage glottic carcinoma.Angle of mandibleOhngren'slineMaxillarysinusMedial canthusFigure 18-34.  Example of the Ohngren’s line and the relationship to the maxilla.Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   64201/03/19   5:24 PM 643DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECKCHAPTER 18Speech and Swallowing Rehabilitation Speech and lan-guage pathology (SLP) assessment is critical in the manage-ment of patients with laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancer. It is a critical part of the preoperative assessment and counseling and postoperative therapy. In the elderly larynx cancer popula-tion, Starmer et al demonstrated that SLP care is underutilized and is largely reserved for select patients in anticipation of total laryngectomy or after the onset of impaired airway and swal-lowing function. SLP care was, however, strongly associated with improved outcomes (lower rates of dysphagia, stricture, weight loss, and pneumonia).155SLP often discusses with the patient speech rehabilita-tion options after total laryngectomy, which include esophageal speech, tracheoesophageal puncture, and use of an electrolar-ynx. Esophageal speech is produced by actively swallowing and releasing air from the esophagus, resulting in vibrations of the esophageal walls and pharynx that can then be articulated into words. This requires a very motivated patient, and unfor-tunately, <20% of postlaryngectomy patients develop fluent esophageal speech.The electrolarynx is a device that creates vibratory elec-tric type sounds when held against the neck or cheek that the patient can articulate into speech. This device is typically used in the postoperative inpatient setting, but it can also be used by patients who are not able to create esophageal speech.The ultimate speech rehabilitation for patients with laryn-gectomy is a tracheoesophageal puncture (TEP) with insertion of a voice prosthesis. This prosthesis is a one-way valve that allows air from the trachea to enter the upper esophagus while preventing retrograde passage of food or saliva into the trachea. Patients who undergo placement of a tracheoesophageal punc-ture have a success rate of >90% in achieving functional speech. Many surgeons do not like to place a TEP at the time of the primary laryngectomy, particularly in the salvage setting after radiotherapy due to wound complication concerns. However, primary and secondary TEP patients experience similarly high complication rates, and the extent of the pharyngeal reconstruc-tion rather than preoperative exposure to radiotherapy appear to be more important factors in selection of TEP timing.156 Free flap patients used their TEP more commonly for primary com-munication after secondary versus primary TEP.Postoperative swallowing rehabilitation is another impor-tant task performed by SLPs. Modified barium swallows where the consistency and amount of food provided is varied to mini-mize aspiration can be critical particularly in the management of patients with partial laryngeal procedures. This is performed under fluorosocopy in the radiology suite to allow for the assess-ment of all phases of swallowing. A more limited examination in FEES utilizes the fiberoptic nasolaryngoscope to visualize the larynx during swallow and directly visualize whether there is any laryngeal penetration.Unknown Primary Tumors Patients with cervical nodal metas-tases confirmed to be carcinoma without clinical or radiologic evidence of an upper aerodigestive tract primary tumor are referred to as having carcinoma of unknown primary (CUP). CUP comprise 2% to 5% of all head and neck cancers, although the true incidence is probably lower given advances in surgical visualization and radiological imaging to identify the primary site.157-159 Recently, there has been a rise in CUP likely related to the increase in HPV-associated oropharyngeal cancer, although CUP could also be from a primary thyroid or skin malignancy.160 After a thorough history and physical examination including fiberoptic nasolaryngoscopy, an FNA biopsy is used to confirm carcinoma in the cervical metastases. This is preferred over an open biopsy to avoid the risk of tumor spillage, challeng-ing revision surgery secondary to disruption of fascial planes, and increased risk of recurrence and distant metastases.161 If the primary is not identified on physical examination, patients should undergo a PET-CT scan. A recent systematic review of 7 studies (246 patients) demonstrates an overall sensitivity of 44% and specificity of 97% with this technique, which can often detect tumors >1 cm in size.162 This should be followed by thorough diagnostic operative endoscopy (nasopharyngos-copy, direct laryngoscopy, esophagoscopy, and bronchoscopy). Operative manipulation of the tissues in the upper aerodiges-tive tract specifically with biopsy may lead to false positive results on the PET-CT scan, and therefore PET-CT should be performed before endoscopy. Furthermore, having the PET-CT results prior to operative endoscopy allows the surgeon to focus on specific high-risk sites for biopsy, particularly as it relates to the base of tongue.163 When the primary site is not evident, bilat-eral tonsillectomies and bilateral base of tongue biopsies can be performed to try to identify the primary site. Patients in whom a primary is identified proceed to receive appropriate treatment, and if radiotherapy is part of this treatment regimen, a more limited radiation field is administered, highlighting the impor-tance of identifying a primary site. When the primary site is not identified, primary chemoradiotherapy is advocated, treating all of the mucosal sources of the upper aerodigestive tract at risk (from nasopharynx to hypopharynx) and the cervical regional basin bilaterally. For patients with advanced neck disease (N2a or greater) or with persistent lymphadenopathy after radiation, a neck dissection may be necessary. In the preradiation setting, a neck dissection is preferred over radiotherapy for patients with N1 disease, according to the NCCN guidelines, because some of these patients will be upstaged, ECE is not accurately diagnosed on imaging alone, and because some patients without ECE and a pathologically N1 node benefit from radiation alone without chemotherapy.106,164 The additional prognostic information pro-vided by a neck dissection can significantly impact treatment algorithms and is also associated with lower morbidity com-pared to postoperative neck dissection.Nose and Paranasal SinusesCancers of the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses are exceed-ingly rare, and pathology in this anatomic subsite is dominated by infectious and inflammatory sources as previously discussed in the “Sinonasal Inflammatory Disease” section of this chapter. Malignant pathology at this site is often diagnosed after failed repeated treatment of suspected benign inflammatory sinona-sal pathology. Concerning preoperative imaging findings (uni-lateral disease; extensive disease; bony, orbital or intracranial invasion) and unusual clinical features may raise concerns about malignancy, and in these cases referral to a tertiary head and neck oncology center is preferred. A concerning history is one that involves a slow progression and worsening of symptoms, which may include nasal obstruction, facial pain, headache, epistaxis, and facial numbness. Most tumors at this site pres-ent with advanced stage given the inevitable delay in diagnosis. Numbness in the V2 distribution suggests invasion of pterygo-palatine fossa, and V3 distribution numbness can be an indi-cation of extension to the infratemporal fossa and skull base invasion to foramen ovale. Proptosis, epiphora, diploplia, and change in vision (typically starting with loss of color vision) are Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   64301/03/19   5:24 PM 644SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIall signs of advanced orbital invasion. Maxillary sinus tumors, the most common site for cancers of this site, can be prognos-ticated simply using Ohgren’s line (Fig. 18-35), an imaginary line from medial canthus to the angle of the mandible, which divides maxillary sinus into anterior-inferior and posterior-superior parts. Tumors from the anterior-inferior are more prognostically favorable.Although the most common pathology at this site continues to be squamous cell carcinoma, a brief discussion of other histo-pathology is warranted given significant variety, prognostic, and treatment-related differences between these at this subsite. Benign pathology at this site includes inverted papilloma, hemangiomas, hemangiopericytomas, angiofibromas, minor salivary tumors, and benign fibrous histiocytomas. Fibro-osseous and osseous lesions, such as fibrous dysplasias, ossifying fibromas, osteo-mas, and myxomas, can also arise in this region. Additionally, encephaloceles and meningo-encephaloceles with herniation of intracranial content into the nasal cavity can present as sinonasal lesions; therefore, imaging, typically with an MRI, is warranted before biopsy of any sinonasal mass to prevent an iatrogenic CSF leak. In the evaluation of sinonasal malignant pathology, both CT and MRI are required because they provide complimentary information. MRI provides improved skull base, intracranial, and orbital invasion assessment, while CT provides better assessment of bony anatomy and invasion.Beyond squamous cell carcinoma, the next two most com-mon malignancies at this site include adenoid cystic carcinoma and adenocarcinoma. Other pathologies include sinonasal undif-ferentiated carcinoma (SNUC), mucosal melanoma, lymphoma, esthesioneuroblastoma (previously known as olfactory neuro-blastoma), rhabdomyosarcoma, and angiosarcoma. Unlike other head and neck cancers, metastases to the regional lymphatic basis are extremely rare, and rarely will patients require or receive pri-mary or adjuvant treatment to the neck unless there is clinical or radiographic evidence of neck disease (approximately 15%).165The standard treatment for malignant tumors of the para-nasal sinuses is driven by the primary pathology; however, for most pathology, including SCC, the standard of care includes surgical resection followed by adjuvant radiotherapy.166 Advances in EEAs has led to a shift in management of these tumors with minimally invasive approaches that are associated with significantly lower complication and morbidity rates with comparable oncologic outcomes.167,168 Open approaches are, however, indicated when there is tumor abutting the anterior wall of the frontal sinus, anterior extension into nasal bones, anterior maxillary wall invasion, facial skin or soft tissue inva-sion, dural involvement above the orbit or periorbital invasion, tumors with significant inratemporal fossa invasion, and exten-sion into the oral cavity, including the hard palate or the floor of the maxillary sinus. Many tumors can be treated with an endo-scopic approach such a medial maxillectomy when the tumor arises from the medial wall of the maxilla. Multidisciplinary assessment and treatment should include a skull base tumor board discussion with a head and neck oncologist/surgeon, a neurosurgeon, opthalmologist including oculoplastic surgeons, prosthodontists, and reconstructive surgeons. Preoperative embolization within 24 hours of tumor excision can be useful for vascular tumors.Extent of surgery and prognosis is dependent on the tumor location and extension. For tumors limited to the hard palate and lower maxillary sinus, an infrastructure maxillectomy is sufficient. A total maxillectomy without removal of the orbital floor may be warranted for more extensive tumors limited to the maxillary sinus. When the orbital periosteum is not invaded but tumor abuts this region, removal of the orbital floor with appro-priate reconstruction is warranted. When there is invasion of periorbita, an orbital exenteration is warranted for most pathol-ogy. Tumors originating in the ethmoid sinuses may require excision of the cribriform plate and repair of subsequent skull base defect if the tumor originates or invades through the bony skull base. This is performed through an anterior craniofacial resection, where a neurosurgeon performs a frontal craniotomy for exposure of the anterior cranial fossa floor, while the head and neck surgeon performs a transfacial or endoscopic resection of the inferior bony and soft tissue structures. This approach often requires resection of dura and a dural repair to achieve negative margins. A less extensive surgery including a sphe-noethmoidectomy or medial maxillectomy can be entertained for smaller tumors originating in the lateral nasal wall through endoscopic or open approaches.Tumors are deemed to be unresectable if both optic nerves are involved, if there is carotid artery invasion, or if there is extensive intracranial extension. Chemotherapy has a limited application in the management of tumors at this subsite with two exceptions: rhabdomyosarcoma, which is primarily treated with chemotherapy followed by radiation therapy with surgery reserved for the salvage setting, and SNUC, where triple modal-ity treatment is required given tumor aggressiveness. Chemo-therapy in this setting may help to reduce the tumor bulk and allow for orbital preservation.NasopharynxThe anatomic borders of the nasopharyx are superiorly the adenoid patch, superolaterally the fossa of Rosenmüller and the Eustachian tube orifices (torus tubarius), inferiorly the plane of the hard palate from the choana, anteriorly the posterior nasal cavity, and posteriorly the posterior pharyngeal wall. Malignant Subtotal temporalbone resectionTotal temporalbone resectionLateraltemporalbone resectionFigure 18-35.  Examples of resection specimens for lateral tem-poral bone resection, subtotal temporal bone resection, and total temporal bone resection.Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   64401/03/19   5:24 PM 645DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECKCHAPTER 18tumors of the nasopharynx are typically well differentiated or lymphoepithelial SCC. However, other tumors can present in this region including lymphoma, chordoma, chondroma, nasopharyngeal cyst (Tornwaldt’s cyst), angiofibroma, minor salivary gland tumor, paraganglioma, rhabdomyosarcoma, extramedullary plasmacytoma, and, rarely, sarcoma.Unlike other head and neck cancers, the nasopharynx site has unique ethnic and geographic predilection, namely, a higher incidence in southern China, Africa, Alaska, and in Green-land Eskimos. EBV is also more commonly seen in patients with NPC, and EBV titers are helpful in following treatment response.As previously discussed, a posterior (level V) neck mass should be considered NPC until proven otherwise. Other signs and symptoms include nasal obstruction, epistaxis, unilateral serous otitis media in an adult, and otalgia. Advanced disease can present with cranial neuropathies, particularly of the cranial nerves, which run in the cavernous sinus (CN V1, V2, III, IV, VI). Bilateral regional disease spread is common, and the lym-phatic level involved include the posterior neck (level V), as well as the upper (level II) cervical nodes and retropharyngeal nodes. Distant metastatic disease is present in 5% of patients at diagnosis, highlighting the importance of a thorough staging workup.Staging includes a thorough physical examination using either a flexible or rigid endoscope to assess the mucosal extent of the disease. CT and MRI are complimentary as in the assess-ment of nasal cavity and paranasal sinus tumors with CT provid-ing better assessment of bony invasion and the MRI providing better soft tissue delineation, skull base invasion, and perineural spread with cranial nerve enhancement. Multimodality therapy with chemoradiotherapy is superior to radiotherapy alone in the management of nasopharyngeal carcinoma.169 Recurrent tumors are treated typically with reirradiation; however, there has been recent success with surgical salvage procedures, particular in those patients in which a negative margin can be achieved.170When resection is contemplated for recurrent nasopharyn-geal carcinoma or for low grade tumors such as some minor salivary gland tumors, a number of surgical approaches can be utilized for resection. These include endoscopic, transpalatal, transfacial via a maxillary swing procedure, and transcervical. In many cases, a combination of these techniques is required to achieve a negative margin. The transcervical approach pro-vides the added benefit of early access and control of the carotid artery. For benign and low-grade tumors, advances in EEA have made use of the open approaches less common.Ear and Temporal BoneTemporal bone and ear tumors are rare account for <0.5% of all head and neck cancers. Subsites in this head and neck site from lateral to medial include the pinna (external ear), external auditory canal, middle ear, mastoid, and petrous portion of the temporal bone. Although the typical pathology at this site is squamous cell carcinoma, minor salivary gland tumors such as adenocarcinoma and adenoid cystic carcinoma can also present here. Given that the ear is in the high-risk region for aggressive skin cancers due to its unique exposure to ultraviolet light, cuta-neous malignancies such as basal cell carcinoma and melanoma can also present here. In the pediatric population, soft tissue sar-comas, most commonly rhabdomyosarcoma, can present at this site. These tumors typically present with an advanced stage,171 and resection with clear margins and functional preservation is challenging because of the close proximity of vital structures, namely the facial nerve and the external auditory canal.172 Tumors involving the petrous apex or intracranial structures may present with headache and palsies of CN V and VI as well.Patients can present with ulceration, granulation, or bleed-ings from the external ear and auditory canal. This is often mistaken for an infectious or inflammatory process given the rarity of malignancy at this subsite; however, persistent granu-lation tissue in the ear should be biopsied and imaged to rule out malignancy. Patients can then present with otorrhea, otal-gia, hearing loss, vertigo, and facial nerve paralysis. Appropri-ate imaging with CT and MRI is often required to appropriately delineate the lesion and stage and assist with the appropriate management plan.Cutaneous malignancies of the pinna and tragus can usu-ally be locally excised. However, at this subsite, spread into the perichondrium and cartilage can lead to rapid spread long that tissue plane. The importance of negative margins cannot be overstated at this subsite. Mohs microsurgery has been advo-cated for select tumors at this subsite for this reason; however, some tumors are so extensive that a total auriculectomy provides the best oncologic and cosmetic result. When there is exten-sion of tumor to the bony cartilaginous EAC junction, spread to parotid, temporomandibular joint, and skull base is possible. Advanced tumors anterior to a vertical line along the EAC from a sagittal view benefit from a parotidectomy as well as a suprao-mohyoid neck dissection (levels I–III), whereas those behind this line benefit from a posterolateral neck dissection (levels II–V). As with other cutaneous malignancies, adjuvant radio-therapy is indicated for positive margins, perineural spread, or multiple involved lymph nodes.Tumors involving the EAC and middle ear require differ-ent management, including a sleeve resection of the external auditory canal, a lateral temporal bone resection, or a subtotal temporal bone resection (Fig. 18-36). A sleeve resection of the EAC skin and cartilage is rarely enough to achieve negative margins with the exception of some basal cell carcinomas of the skin overlying the cartilaginous EAC. For more extensive IIIIIIVIIVVFigure 18-36.  Levels of the neck denoting lymph node bearing regions.Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   64501/03/19   5:24 PM 646SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IItumors and more aggressive pathology, a lateral temporal bone resection may be required removing the cartilaginous and bony external auditory canal as well as the middle ear en bloc.173 A subtotal temporal bone resection also removes the inner ear and facial nerve as part of the resection and is indicated when the tumor extends into the middle ear and a deeper resection margin is required. Both of these procedures are followed by postopera-tive radiotherapy, which provides improved locoregional con-trol.173 The neck is managed in a similar fashion to pinna and external auditory canal malignancies typically requiring a supra-omohyoid (levels I–III) neck dissection. Survival outcomes are poor with a 5-year overall survival of <40%.174 Important pre-dictors of disease free survival include margin status, perineu-ral invasion, and regional lymphatic spread; the most important of these on multivariate analysis being lymphatic spread of disease.171Lateral temporal bone resections often require reconstruc-tion to close the wound, provide bulk, and vascularize tissue. If dura is encountered and even resected, a watertight dural closure is required to prevent a CSF leak and meningitis. Vascularized tissue has the added benefit of preparing the surgical bed for postoperative radiotherapy. These defects can be reconstructed with regional pedicled flaps (e.g., submental flap) or free flaps. The most common free flaps used are the anterolateral thigh, although depending on body habitus and the depth of the defect, the radial forearm, lateral arm, and rectus abdominus may also be used.175 The deformity resulting from a total auriculectomy is often not reconstructed primarily, but an auricular prosthesis can be designed for further rehabilitation. Facial nerve reconstruc-tion when sacrifice is required is typically performed with cable grafts from the proximal facial nerve to select distal facial nerve branches. Because of the long distance between the proximal and distal branches, facial movement is typically delayed 6 to 12 months. However, if the masseteric nerve is connected through a cable graft to select distal facial nerve branches (typically the zygomatic branch), a shorter cable graft is required, and facial movement can be achieved earlier. A variety of other static and dynamic procedures can be provided secondarily. The most important of these procedures are related to preserving eye clo-sure to avoid corneal abrasions or desiccation, which can ulti-mately lead to blindness. In the immediate postoperative period, taping of the eyelids and generous application of eye lubrication is required to prevent exposure keratitis. Upper lid gold weight implants, lower lid shortening procedures, and tarsorrhaphy can be performed secondarily to assist with eye closure.NeckAn undiagnosed neck mass needs to be carefully evaluated and worked up so as to not interfere with the definitive management of the patient and future treatment options. The patient’s age, social history, including alcohol and smoking history, preced-ing illness history, and synchronous upper aerodigestive tract physical examination findings can significantly impact the dif-ferential diagnosis and the investigation to work up a neck mass. A thorough history and head and neck examination, including fiberoptic nasolaryngoscopy, are therefore paramount to com-plete evaluation. With regard to age, in children, a neck mass is far more likely to be congenital, inflammatory, or infectious, whereas in adults, neck masses >2 cm have a >80% probability of being malignant. Typically, the first investigation is an FNA biopsy, which can be performed with ultrasound or CT guid-ance when the mass is not easily palpable or largely cystic with a small solid component. Imaging is critical in characterizing the neck mass, particularly assessing the borders, consistency, and location which then impacts the differential diagnosis. For instance, a cystic neck mass can be a branchial cleft cyst or a regional metastasis from an oropharynx cancer or metastatic papillary thyroid cancer. Therefore, the imaging findings also significantly impact the differential diagnosis.When the imaging and FNA does not provide adequate information for a diagnosis, a core biopsy can be considered, particularly if the diagnosis of lymphoma is suspected and an open biopsy wants to be avoided. For a suspected carcinoma, an open biopsy may be required; however, in that case, the incision needs to be planned such that the procedure can be converted to a neck dissection, and a frozen section can be sent. If the diagnosis of squamous cell carcinoma is confirmed on frozen section, then a neck dissection should be performed to further prognosticate the disease. In the case of lymphoma, biopsy does not need to remove the entire lymphoma, particularly if there is an added risk of injuring normal anatomical structures.Patterns of Lymph Node Metastasis. The lymphatic drain-age into the neck is divided into seven levels with standardized reporting within and across specialties, particularly as radiolo-gists, pathologists, surgeons, radiation oncologists, and radiolo-gists share the findings176,177 (Fig. 18-37). The levels include•	Level I—the submental and submandibular nodes•	Level Ia—the submental nodes; medial to the anterior belly of the digastric muscle bilaterally, symphysis of mandible superiorly, and hyoid inferiorly; this level does not have any laterality as it includes both right and left sides•	Level Ib—the submandibular nodes and gland; posterior to the anterior belly of digastric, anterior to the posterior belly of digastric, and inferior to the body of the mandibleFigure 18-37.  Shaded region indicates the region included in a supraomohyoid neck dissection.Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   64601/03/19   5:24 PM 647DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECKCHAPTER 18•	Level IIa—upper jugular chain nodes; anterior to the poste-rior border of the sternocleidomastoid (SCM) muscle, poste-rior to the posterior aspect of the posterior belly of digastric, superior to the level of the hyoid, inferior to spinal accessory nerve (CN XI)•	Level IIb—submuscular recess; superior to spinal accessory nerve to the level of the skull base•	Level III—middle jugular chain nodes; inferior to the hyoid, superior to the level of the cricoid, deep to SCM muscle from posterior border of the muscle to the strap muscles medially•	Level IV—lower jugular chain nodes; inferior to the level of the cricoid, superior to the clavicle, deep to SCM muscle from posterior border of the muscle to the strap muscles medially•	Level V—posterior triangle nodes•	Level Va—lateral to the posterior aspect of the SCM muscle, inferior and medial to splenius capitis and trapezius, superior to the spinal accessory nerve•	Level Vb—lateral to the posterior aspect of SCM muscle, medial to trapezius, inferior to the spinal accessory nerve, superior to the clavicle•	Level VI—anterior compartment nodes; inferior to the hyoid, superior to suprasternal notch, medial to the lateral extent of the strap muscles bilaterally•	Level VII—paratracheal nodes; inferior to the suprasternal notch in the upper mediastinumThere is a well-established pattern of regional spread from upper aerodigestive tract primary tumors.178 Lesions of the lip and oral cavity typically metastasize to levels I to III and skip metastases to the lower basin (levels III–IV) without involve-ment of the upper level (levels I–II). Oropharyngeal, laryngeal, and hypopharyngeal tumors most commonly spread to the lat-eral neck (levels II–IV). It is rare for any of these tumors to have isolated regional metastases to level V; however, naso-pharyngeal, thyroid, and head and neck malignant melanoma can metastasize to this level. Other sites for metastasis include the retropharyngeal nodes (oropharyngeal, nasopharyngeal, and hypopharyngeal tumors), paratracheal and level VII nodes (thyroid, hypopharynx, and cervical esophageal tumors), and pretracheal (Delphian) nodes (thyroid and advanced glottic tumors with subglottic extension).Historically, a radical neck dissection (RND) was per-formed for all upper aerodigestive tract malignancies with sac-rifice of the SCM, internal jugular vein (IJV), and accessory nerve (CN XI) and removal of all lymphatic level (levels I–V). This was because cervical metastasis decreased the 5-year over-all survival rate by approximately 50%. However, growing evi-dence demonstrated that this was not necessary, and now a neck dissection is only recommended for upper aerodigestive tract malignancies when the risk of occult disease is >20% in the clinically negative neck.179 When the neck is clinically positive, the level discussed in the previous paragraph for each site are excised with every attempt to preserve the SCM, IJV, and CN XI (selective neck dissection; SND). When there is direct exten-sion of the tumor or extralymphatic spread into these structures, sacrifice may be necessary in a modified radical neck dissection (MRND). The RND has been largely abandoned because the SND and MRND have been demonstrated to be equally effec-tive when it comes to oncologic outcomes with far improved functional outcomes.180,181SND has become the standard of care for most patients who are clinically node negative (cN0) and in those with limited cN1 disease. Patients with oral cavity cancer typically receive a supraomohyoid (Fig. 18-38) neck dissection (levels I–III). Many surgeons will include a portion of level IV just below the omohyoid muscle given the rate of skip metastases previously discussed. Approximately 80% of patients with oral cavity can-cer present cN0; however, the rate of occult metastatic disease is approximately 30% and differs by subsite.182 This rate is further impacted by tumor thickness at the tongue subsite, with tumors 4 mm or thicker having a higher rate of occult disease.183 A recent prospective, randomized trial demonstrated the oncologic benefit of an elective neck dissection in cN0 oral cavity patients regardless of tumor thickness over an observation followed by therapeutic neck dissection in those with regional failures.184 An additional role of SND is as a staging tool to determine the need for postoperative radiation therapy. The lateral (Fig. 18-39) neck dissection (levels II–IV) is typically used in laryngeal and hypo-pharyngeal cancers. The posterolateral (Fig. 18-40 neck dissec-tion (levels II–V) is typically recommended in thyroid cancers, although recent evidence has demonstrated that a partial level V dissection may be all that is necessary for equivalent outcomes to a full level II to V neck dissection.176,185,186Despite advances in the surgical management of neck dis-ease, in clinically advanced nodal disease (with the exception of uncomplicated N1 disease), an MRND remains the treatment of choice. When the neck disease is advanced with extrano-dal extension (ENE), perineural invasion (PNI), lymphovas-cular invasion (LVI), and the presence of multiple involved nodes, postoperative radiotherapy improves locoregional con-trol.103 If there is a positive margin or ENE, then the addition of adjuvant chemotherapy to radiotherapy provides a survival benefit.113,187,188In patients receiving primary radiotherapy with advanced N stage disease (N2a or greater) or only a partial response to Figure 18-38.  Shaded region indicates the region included in a lateral neck dissection.Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   64701/03/19   5:24 PM 648SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IItreatment, a planned postradiotherapy neck dissection can be performed 6 to 8 weeks after completion of radiotherapy. This is to consolidate the treatment and provide prognostic information.Tumor factors that preclude surgery include prevertebral fascia invasion, skull base invasion, and >270o circumferential encasement of the internal carotid artery. These factors are asso-ciated with very poor 5-year survival (<20%). In such cases, sac-rifice of the carotid is not indicated given the risk of stroke and death. Surgical debulking is also not associated with improved survival. However, there is a role for neoadjuvant chemother-apy, and in those that respond and if the disease becomes resect-able, survival benefit has been demonstrated.189 Recurrent neck metastasis after radiotherapy to the neck or a comprehensive neck dissection is associated with very poor survival.190Parapharyngeal Space Masses. The parapharyngeal space is a potential inverted pyramidal space bordered superiorly at the skull base along the sphenoid and inferiorly at the greater cornu of the hyoid. Medially it is bordered by the buccopha-ryngeal fascia covering the superior constrictor, anteriorly the pterygomandibular raphe, posteriorly the prevertebral fascia, and laterally by the deep surface of the parotid gland and ramus of the mandible. The differential diagnosis for parapharyngeal masses is very much dependent on the anatomy and contents of this space which is divided into the preand poststyloid spaces by the tensor-styloid fascia. This fascia attaches the tensor veli palatini muscle to the styloid. The contents of the prestyloid parapharyngeal space include fat, the deep lobe of the parotid, and lymph nodes, and branches of V3 (lingual, inferior alveo-lus, and auriculotemporal nerves), whereas the contents of the poststyloid space including cranial nerves IX to XII, the inter-nal jugular vein, the internal carotid artery, and the sympathetic chain. Nearly half of all parapharyngeal masses are of parotid origin, while 20% to 25% are of neurogenic origin, such as paragangliomas (glomus vagale, carotid body tumor), schwan-nomas, and neurofibromas. Lymphatic origin masses such as lymphoma and lymph node metastases represent 15% of tumors at this subsite. Therefore, most prestyloid lesions are considered of salivary gland origin, whereas poststyloid lesions are typi-cally vascular or neurogenic.Tumors of the parapharyngeal space can displace the lat-eral pharyngeal wall medially into the oropharynx (Fig. 18-41) and can thus cause obstructive sleep apnea, voice change, and dysphagia in addition to cranial neuropathies, Horner’s syn-drome, or vascular compression. In addition to CT and MRI, poststyloid lesions should be investigated with a 24-hour uri-nary catecholamine collection because some paragangliomas are functional and this should be managed preoperatively.Surgical access to these tumors can be performed using a purely transcervical approach with the excision of the subman-dibular gland for access. A transfacial or transparotid approach can be used as an adjunct for certain tumors by removing the parotid gland. This ensures identification of the facial nerve Figure 18-39.  Shaded region indicates the region included in a posterolateral neck dissection.ParotidglandStylomandibularligamentFigure 18-40.  Parapharyngeal mass—prestyloid with prominent oropharyngeal presentation typical of a dumbbell tumor.Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   64801/03/19   5:24 PM 649DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECKCHAPTER 18prior to removal of the mass, which is just deep to it. Rarely, a transmandibular approach is required by performing a midline or parasymphyseal mandibulotomy with a lateral swing. Tran-soral approaches have been described, but they are not recom-mended and are largely contraindicated due to poor exposure and control of the associated vasculature.Benign Neck Masses. Many benign neck masses require surgical intervention for diagnostic, cosmetic, and symptom-atic relief. This is particularly true for lesions that are prone to recurrent infections, especially in the pediatric population. Such masses include thyroglossal duct cyst, branchial cleft cyst, lymphangioma (cystic hygroma), hemangioma, and der-moid cyst. Lymphangioma and hemangioma were previously discussed and will not be discussed in this section.During fetal growth, the thyroid gland descends along a tract from the foramen cecum at the base of tongue into the ante-rior low neck. A vestigial remainder of this tract is called a thy-roglossal duct cyst, which typically presents as a subcutaneous swelling near the hyoid in the midline or slightly paramedian. Patients may complain of recurrent infections of this mass after an upper respiratory tract infection. Investigations include thy-roid function tests and a neck and thyroid ultrasound to confirm that the patient has thyroid tissue in the lower neck . Treatment involves removal of the cyst, the tract, and the central portion of the hyoid (Sistrunk procedure), often with a small portion of the base of tongue if the tract extends above the hyoid.During fetal growth, the branchial cleft apparatus may persist, forming a branchial cleft remnant (cyst, sinus, or tract), numbered to their corresponding embryologic branchial cleft. First branchial cleft anomalies parallel the EAC (Work Type I;  preauricular) or go through the parotid gland ending at the bony-cartilaginous EAC junction (Work Type II; angle of the mandible). Second branchial anomalies (Fig. 18-42), the most common type, start at the anterior border of the SCM and head toward the tonsillar fossa traveling deep to second arch struc-tures (CN VII and external carotid artery) and superficial to third arch structures (stylopharyngeus, IX, and internal carotid artery). Third and fourth branchial anomalies are difficult to dis-tinguish clinically and frequently open into the pyriform sinus often presenting with recurrent thyroid infections.191 These anomalies ascend posterior the internal carotid artery and deep to CN IX but superficial to CN XI and XII. Dermoid cysts tend to present as midline masses and represent trapped epithelium originating from the embryonic closure of the midline. These can be reliably diagnosed and distinguished from thyroglossal duct cysts using an ultrasound predictive model.192Cervical Fascial Planes. The fascial planes often predict the pathway and extent of infectious spread in the neck and are there-fore clinically important. The deep fascial layers of the neck Figure 18-41. Computed tomography scan demonstrating a branchial cleft cyst with operative specimen.Facial n.Anterior facial v.Retromandibular v.Temporal branchFrontal branchPosterior bellyof digastric m.StylomastoidforamenCervicalbranchMasseter m.Zygomatic branchParotid ductBuccalbranchMandibularbranchFigure 18-42.  Example of a tumor in the parotid with the pattern of the facial nerve and associated anatomy. m. = muscle; n. = nerve; v. = vein.Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   64901/03/19   5:24 PM 650SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIinclude three separate layers: the superficial deep (investing) layer, the pretracheal (visceral) layer, and the prevertebral layer. The investing layer forms a cone around the neck and surrounds the SCM muscle and the anterior and posterior neck. It spans from the mandible to the clavicle and manubrium. The visceral layer surrounds the trachea, thyroid, and esophagus and blends laterally with the carotid sheath extending inferiorly to the upper mediastinum. Between this layer and the prevertebral fascia is the retropharyngeal space. The prevertebral fascia covers the pre-vertebral musculature and space and extends down to the tho-racic vertebra and diaphragm. Infections of the prevertebral space between this fascia and the prevertebral musculature are considered to be in the prevertebral space and can extend all the way down to the sacrum. Therefore, neck infections can extend to the mediasti-num or beyond and need to be treated aggressively.Salivary Gland TumorsPrimary malignant tumors of the salivary glands are relatively rare and account for <2% of all head and neck malignancies. As previously mentioned, minor salivary gland malignancies can present anywhere in the upper aerodigestive tract, particularly on the palate; however, the major salivary glands are the parotid, submandibular, and sublingual glands. The majority of tumors (80%) arise in the parotid gland (Fig. 18-44); however, 80% of these are benign, most commonly, pleomorphic adenomas (benign mixed tumors). As the salivary gland gets smaller, the proportion of tumors that are malignant increases; 50% of sub-mandibular/sublingual tumors and 80% of minor salivary gland tumors are malignant.Patients typically present with a mass because these tumors are well circumscribed and slow growing. However, certain signs and symptoms, such as pain, paresthesia, facial nerve weakness, or rapid growth, raise the concern for malig-nancy. If there is facial nerve weakness (10%–15% of cases), this usually represents tumor invading the facial nerve. Sub-mandibular and sublingual tumors present with a mass or swell-ing in the neck or floor of the mouth, respectively. Tumors in this region can invade the lingual nerve leading to tongue par-esthesia or the hypoglossal nerve invasion leading to paralysis. The close proximity to the mandible and tongue necessitates a thorough bimanual palpation to assess for fixation to these structures.The decision to dissect the neck in parotid cancers is fraught with uncertainty. However, parotid malignancies, par-ticularly carcinomas, have a propensity for regional lymphatic spread, first to the intraand periglandular nodes followed by the upper cervical chain (levels I–III). Occult nodal metastases are present in 30% of cases and are predicted by intraor peri-glandular nodes, high-risk histology (high histological grade), and extraparotid extension.193 Patients with advanced tumor stage (T3/T4a), perineural invasion, high risk histology, or clin-ically involved adenopathy should have their neck dissected. Submandibular gland cancers metastasize to the submental (Ia) and submandibular triangle lymph nodes followed by the upper cervical chain (levels II–III). Extraglandular extension and regional metastases are poor prognostic factors.Following a thorough history and physical examination, an FNA biopsy should be performed to provide an accurate preoperative diagnosis in 70% to 80% of cases when reviewed by an experienced cytopathologist. If the biopsy is nondiag-nostic, a repeat biopsy should be performed under image-guidance, typically with an ultrasound. An open or incisional biopsy should be avoided because of the risk of tumor spill-age and cutaneous spread. Also, this approach is fraught with risk to the facial nerve. Salivary gland tumors are worked up with appropriate imaging, typically with an MRI because of the increased soft tissue definition. FNA and imaging results are critical in guiding the surgeon to the extent of surgery. The minimal extent of surgery for salivary gland tumors is a superficial parotidectomy, removing all of the salivary gland tissue superficial to CN VII, which is meticulously dissected during this procedure.The final histopathologic diagnosis in salivary gland tumors can be challenging. Nonetheless, there is a well-outlined histological classification used by pathologists.194 Benign and malignant tumors of the salivary glands are divided into epi-thelial, nonepithelial, and metastatic neoplasms. Benign epithe-lial tumors are most commonly pleomorphic adenoma (85%), monomorphic adenoma, Warthin’s tumor (papillary cystad-enoma lymphomatosum), oncocytoma, or sebaceous neoplasm. Nonepithelial benign lesions include lipoma and hemangioma. Treatment of benign neoplasms is surgical excision for diag-nostic and therapeutic purposes. The parotid superficial lobe is usually dissected off of the facial nerve, which is preserved. For pleomorphic adenoma, an extracapsular dissection is favored over enucleation due to tumor pseudopods, incomplete excision, and a higher risk of tumor spillage, all of which are associated with higher recurrence rates.195 Recurrence is associated with a high degree of morbidity.Malignant epithelial tumors range in aggressiveness based on tumor histology, grade, perineural invasion, and regional metastases. Mucoepidermoid carcinoma is the most common primary malignancy of the salivary glands and can be high grade (more epidermoid) or low grade (more mucinous). High grade mucoepidermoid carcinoma can be hard to differentiated from squamous cell carcinoma, particularly on FNA. Adenoid cystic is the second most common primary salivary gland malignancy and has three histological subtypes: tubular, cribriform, and solid. Higher grade/risk tumors have a higher degree of solid differentiation.194 Adenoid cystic cancers are known for peri-neural invasion and late recurrences and distant metastases. Car-cinoma ex pleomorphic adenoma is an aggressive malignancy that arises from a preexisting benign mixed tumor highlighting the importance of removing these benign masses before malig-nant transformation.Surgical excision remains the standard of care, typi-cally with facial nerve preservation unless the nerve is directly invaded by tumor. For tumors that extend beyond the superficial lobe, nerve branches can be splayed, and a total parotid can be performed by removing parotid tissue deep to the nerve while preserving the integrity and function of the nerve. Whenever possible, the nerve is preserved even if microscopic disease is left on the nerve, so long as gross tumor is not left behind (i.e., the nerve is not encased). If this is not possible or if the nerve is not working preoperatively, nerve sacrifice is usually recommended.Elective neck dissection is warranted in high-grade muco-epidermoid carcinomas and other high-risk pathology and grade where the risk of occult disease is greater than 15% to 20%. Therapeutic neck dissection is recommended in patients with clinically or radiographically evident disease. Postoperative radiotherapy is indicated in patients with perineural invasion, advanced local disease (T4a), extraglandular disease including regional metastases, and high-grade histology.Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   65001/03/19   5:24 PM 651DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECKCHAPTER 18RECONSTRUCTIONLocal Flaps and Skin GraftsLocal flaps are commonly used for cutaneous reconstruction in the head and neck. Local flaps are most commonly utilized for reconstruction after Mohs micrographic surgery for cutaneous malignancy, or for reconstruction of melanoma defects. Skin grafts are also commonly used for reconstruction of scalp defects after surgical resection of cutaneous malignancies. Skin grafts may also be utilized in the oral cavity for resurfacing of super-ficial defects of the tongue, floor of mouth, and buccal mucosa.Regional FlapsThree regional flaps deserve mention as potential flaps for head and neck reconstruction. The first is the pectoralis major myo-cutaneous flap, based upon the thoracoacromial artery.196 This flap may be used as a primary option for hypopharyngeal recon-struction after total laryngectomy. This flap may also be utilized to protect the great vessels from becoming exposed, or as a sal-vage reconstructive procedure should the great vessels become exposed. Another commonly utilized regional flap is the sub-mental flap, based upon the submental vessel branches of the facial artery. This flap may be utilized for intraoral reconstruc-tion and/or parotid and temporal bone reconstruction.197 Care must be taken during the neck dissection in order to preserve the submental vessels that supply this flap. Finally, the supraclavic-ular flap is based upon the supraclavicular artery, arising from the transverse cervical artery.198 This is a thin, fasciocutaneous flap that is commonly used for external neck and facial recon-struction in which thin tissue is desired.Free Tissue TransferThe majority of major defects of the head and neck require free tissue transfer for optimal reconstruction.199 A full discussion of head and neck reconstructive microsurgery is beyond the scope of this chapter; however, a brief overview of free tissue transfer is provided in this section. Free tissue transfer allows the sur-geon to transplant tissue from a wide array of donor sites, each of which have distinct advantages.200 For example, for floor of mouth reconstruction, where thin tissue is desired, the surgeon may select the radial forearm as the donor site. On the other hand, when presented with a total glossectomy defect, where thick tissue is desired for adequate volume reconstruction, the rectus may be the optimal donor site. Considering osseous defects, for reconstruction of a segmental mandible defect with minimal soft tissue deficit, the fibula osseocutaneous free tis-sue transfer may be the optimal choice.201 On the other hand, reconstruction of an osseous mandible defect with a large muco-sal and external soft tissue deficit may be best served by the scapula donor site, where vascularized bone can be combined with a large skin paddle, and an additional latissimus dorsi myocutaneous free tissue transfer, if needed.202 The ability to harvest tissue from multiple donor sites is critical to obtain-ing the optimal reconstructive result. Table 18-6 lists the com-monly utilized donor sites and their reconstructive advantages and disadvantages.Table 18-6Free tissue transfer donor sites for head and neck reconstructionFLAPBLOOD SUPPLYCHARACTERISTICSCOMMON DEFECTSRadial forearmRadial arteryThin, pliable, long pediclePartial and hemiglossectomy, floor of mouth, buccal defectsAnterolateral thighDescending branch of lateral femoral circumflex arteryThicker adipose than radial forearm,  can have myocutaneous  (most common) or septocutaneous perforatorsHypopharynx, external neck/facial skin, extended hemiglossectomy/total glossectomyLateral armPosterior radial collateral arteryOutstanding color match for facial skin, resists ptosis, diminutive pedicleParotid, temporal bone, external face and neck skinRectusDeep inferior epigastric arteryThick adipose tissue for large volume defects, long pedicle, poor external skin color matchTotal glossectomy, skull baseLatissimus dorsiThoracodorsal arteryLarge surface area of muscle, requires semi-lateral position, can be difficult for two-team harvestExtensive scalp and skull base defectsFibula osseocutaneousPeroneal arteryExcellent bone stock and length, long pedicle, thin skin paddleSegmental mandible and maxillaScapula osseocutaneousCircumflex scapular arteryLess bone length compared to fibula, large scapular or parascapular skin paddles ideal for large composite defectsSegmental mandible and maxilla defects with extensive soft tissue componentsRadial forearm osseocutaneousRadial arteryLong pedicle, diminutive bone stockPartial mandible defects, orbitIliac crestDeep circumflex iliac arteryUp to 16 cm of bone available, limited soft tissue, significant donor site morbiditySegmental mandible defects with small intraoral component and large external skin componentBrunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   65101/03/19   5:24 PM 652SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 18-43 shows a prototypical hemiglossectomy defect from a T2 N0 oral tongue cancer that was reconstructed with a rectangle template radial forearm free tissue transfer.203 The radial forearm free tissue transfer provides thin, pliable tis-sue, with a long pedicle, and is a staple for hemiglossectomy and partial glossectomy reconstruction.Figure 18-44 shows a composite mandible defect from a T4a N0 mandibular alveolus cancer, after segmental mandibu-lectomy, reconstructed with a fibula osseocutaneous free tissue transfer.204 The 2.5-mm titanium reconstruction plate was bent to a mandible model. A template of the osseous defect is made and transferred to the fibula, and wedge ostectomies are made in the bone so that it can be snug fit into the bone defect.Figure 18-45 shows a palate defect after an infrastructure maxillectomy for a T2 N0 maxillary alveolus cancer. The defect resulted in direct communication with the buccal space, nasal cavity, and maxillary sinus. A radial forearm free tissue transfer was utilized to achieve oronasal separation.TRACHEOTOMYIndications and TimingThe most common cause for tracheotomy is prolonged intuba-tion typically in critically ill intensive care unit patients. Pro-longed intubation increases the risk of laryngeal and subglottic injury, which may lead to stenosis. In the critically ill patient, it has been hypothesized that early tracheotomy may improve inpatient survival and decreased intensive care unit length of stay while increasing patient comfort. However, a large ran-domized clinical trial demonstrated no benefit from early tra-cheotomy on shortor long-term survival and other important secondary outcomes.205 Furthermore, clinicians are poor pre-dictors of which patients require extended ventilatory support. Another study demonstrated no evidence that early tracheos-tomy reduced mortality, duration of mechanical ventilation, intensive care unit stay, or ventilatory associated pneumonia.206 It did, however, provide a shorter duration of sedation. Beyond prolonged intubation, tracheotomy is also indicated in patients who require frequent pulmonary toilet, in patients with neu-rologic deficits that impair protective airway reflexes, and in head and neck upper aerodigestive tract surgery as a temporary airway in the perioperative period to bypass airway obstruction.Technique and ComplicationsThe procedure can be performed using an open or a percuta-neous technique. Complications of tracheostomy include pneu-mothorax, tracheal stenosis, wound infection/stomatitis with large-vessel erosion, and failure to close after decannulation. A meta-analysis of 15 randomized studies assessing nearly 1000 patients demonstrated no difference between the open and percutaneous techniques, although there was a trend toward fewer complications in the percutaneous approach.207 The per-cutaneous approach was also found to be cheaper and had the added benefit of being performed at the bedside outside of the operating room. A Cochrane review on the topic lower wound infection/stomatitis and unfavorable scarring rates with the per-cutaneous approach.208 Mortality and serious adverse events did not differ between the two techniques.The use of cricothyroidotomy, typically in the emergency setting, is inferior to a tracheotomy due to higher incidence of vocal cord dysfunction and subglottic stenosis. There-fore, soon after a cricothyroidotomy is performed, a formal Figure 18-43. A. Defect after left hemiglossectomy for T2 N0 oral tongue squamous cell carcinoma. B. Radial forearm free tissue transfer harvested for reconstruction. C. Inset of the radial forearm free tissue transfer.ABCBrunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   65201/03/19   5:25 PM 653DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECKCHAPTER 18Figure 18-45. A. Palate defect after infrastructure maxillectomy for T2 N0 squamous cell carcinoma of the maxillary alveolus.  B. Inset of radial forearm free tissue transfer. C. Six month postop-erative result, with complete oronasal separation and return to full, preoperative levels of speech and swallowing.tracheotomy should be used with decannulation of the crico-thyroidotomy site. Most tracheostomies are not permanent and can be reversed simply by removing the tube and applying a pressure dressing. The stoma usually spontaneously heals within 2 to 3 weeks.Speech with Tracheotomy and DecannulationWhen a large cuffed tracheostomy is initially placed, speech is not possible, particularly when the cuff is up. However, when the tube is downsized to a cuffless tracheostomy tube, ABCFigure 18-44. A. Segmental mandible defect after composite resec-tion for T4a N0 squamous cell carcinoma of the mandibular alveolus. B. Fibula free tissue transfer harvested for reconstruction and template for wedge ostectomy. C. Inset of fibula free tissue transfer.ABCBrunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   65301/03/19   5:25 PM 654SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIintermittent finger occlusion or placement of Passy-Muir valve can allow the patient to voice while still bypassing the upper airway obstruction in inspiration. Prior to decannulation, the patient has to tolerate capping for 24 to 48 hours, but this period can be extended in patients with concerns for pulmonary toilet and an inability to clear secretions.LONG TERM MANAGEMENT AND REHABILITATIONPalliative CareFor patients with unresectable disease (greater than 180o of encasement around the carotid artery, prevertebral fascia inva-sion, and skull base invasion) or distant metastases, palliative care options exist. The NCCN guidelines recommend clinical trials for patients in this category because there is not a single accepted regimen for patients with incurable disease but the goal of treatment is to control symptoms and maintain quality of life while minimizing the side effects of treatment.106 This may include a combination of radiotherapy, usually in a hypofrac-tionated pattern with high dose per fraction regimen, chemother-apy, or simply pain management. A recent trial demonstrated the utility of immunotherapy, specifically, Nivolumab, in the management of recurrent unresectable head and neck cancer, showing a higher response rate (13.3%) compared to standard therapy (5.8%) with lower treatment-related adverse events (13.1% vs. 35.1%, respectively).209 From a surgical perspective, some patients require tracheostomy or gastrostomy tube place-ment to manage airway compromise and dysphagia, respec-tively. Palliative care facilities and hospice care allow patients to retain dignity when they have a limited short-term outlook.Follow-Up CarePatients diagnosed and treated for a head and neck tumor require follow-up care aimed at monitoring for recurrence and the side effects of therapy. The NCCN guidelines recommend follow-up assessment every 3 months for the first year after treatment, every 4 months during the following year, and then every  6 months until year 4, with an annual follow-up at 5 years post treatment and thereafter.106 This regimen is not well followed in North America, and further investigation is required to assess why this might be and to improve adherence rates.210 Follow-up should consist of a thorough history to assess for any emerg-ing symptoms such as pain, otalgia, or dysphagia as these are often the first sign of a recurrence. Assessment by speech lan-guage pathology and a dietician is often beneficial to ascertain swallowing function and nutritional intake, respectively. Some patients require dilation or reinsertion of a gastrostomy tube if they develop pharyngeal strictures and are unable to maintain their weight. The history should be followed with a thorough head and neck examination, including fiberoptic nasolaryg-noscopy, because of the significant risk of developing a sec-ond primary in the upper aerodigestive tract.93 Patients should have their thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) checked once a year, especially in those that have radiation as they may develop hypothyroidism at an earlier age than the general population. Shoulder dysfunction after neck dissection with extensive accessory nerve dissection or in patients who have had a scapu-lar system free flap should be managed with physiotherapy to minimize the long-term effects and improve function. Chronic pain can occur in head and neck cancer patients, and this is often assessed and managed by a pain specialist. Ongoing dental evaluation is needed in some patients to treat caries and prevent osteoradionecrosis.REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Hajioff D, MacKeith S. Otitis externa. BMJ Clin Evid. 2015;2015:0510.	2.	Sylvester MJ, Sanghvi S, Patel VM, Eloy JA, Ying YM. Malignant otitis externa hospitalizations: analysis of patient characteristics. Laryngoscope. 2017;127(10):2328-2336.	3.	Carfrae MJ, Kesser BW. Malignant otitis externa. Otolaryngol Clin North Am. 2008;41(3):537-549, viii-ix.	4.	Venekamp RP, Damoiseaux RA, Schilder AG. Acute otitis media in children. Am Fam Physician. 2017;95(2):109-110.	5.	Rosenfeld RM, Shin JJ, Schwartz SR, et al. Clinical practice guideline: otitis media with effusion execu-tive summary (update). Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2016;154(2):201-214.	6.	American Academy of Pediatrics Subcommittee on Manage-ment of Acute Otitis Media. Diagnosis and management of acute otitis media. Pediatrics. 2004;113(5):1451-1465.	7.	Lieberthal AS, Carroll AE, Chonmaitree T, et al. The diag-nosis and management of acute otitis media. Pediatrics. 2013;131(3):e964-e999.	8.	Principi N, Marchisio P, Rosazza C, Sciarrabba CS, Esposito S. Acute otitis media with spontaneous tympanic membrane perforation. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2017;36(1): 11-18.	9.	Kuo CL, Shiao AS, Yung M, et al. Updates and knowl-edge gaps in cholesteatoma research. Biomed Res Int. 2015;2015:854024.	10.	Cunningham M, Guardiani E, Kim HJ, Brook I. Otitis media. Future Microbiol. 2012;7(6):733-753.	11.	Choi JW, Park YH. Facial nerve paralysis in patients with chronic ear infections: surgical outcomes and radiologic anal-ysis. Clin Exp Otorhinolaryngol. 2015;8(3):218-223.	12.	Baugh RF, Basura GJ, Ishii LE, et al. Clinical practice guide-line: Bell’s palsy. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2013;149 (3 suppl):S1-S27.	13.	Gantz BJ, Rubinstein JT, Gidley P, Woodworth GG. Surgical management of Bell’s palsy. Laryngoscope. 1999;109(8):1177-1188.	14.	Danner CJ. Facial nerve paralysis. Otolaryngol Clin North Am. 2008;41(3):619-632.	15.	Jackler RK, Pfister MHF. Acoustic neuroma (vestibular schwanomma). In: Jackler RK, Brackmann DE, eds. Neurotol-ogy. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier Mosby; 2005:727-782.	16.	Carlson ML, Habermann EB, Wagie AE, et al. The chang-ing landscape of vestibular schwannoma management in the United States—a shift toward conservatism. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2015;153(3):440-446.	17.	Blackwell DL, Lucas JW, Clarke TC. Summary health statis-tics for U.S. adults: national health interview survey, 2012. Vital Health Stat 10. 2014;(260):1-161.	18.	Rosenfeld RM, Piccirillo JF, Chandrasekhar SS, et al. Clinical practice guideline (update): adult sinus-itis executive summary. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2015;152(4):598-609.	19.	Fokkens WJ, Lund VJ, Mullol J, et al. EPOS 2012: European position paper on rhinosinusitis and nasal polyps 2012. A sum-mary for otorhinolaryngologists. Rhinology. 2012;50(1):1-12.	20.	Brook I. Microbiology of sinusitis. Proc Am Thorac Soc. 2011;8(1):90-100.	21.	Miracle AC, Mukherji SK. Conebeam CT of the head and neck, part 2: clinical applications. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2009;30(7):1285-1292.Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   65401/03/19   5:25 PM 655DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECKCHAPTER 18	22.	de Lara D, Ditzel Filho LF, Prevedello DM, et al. Endonasal endoscopic approaches to the paramedian skull base. World Neurosurg. 2014;82(6 suppl):S121-S129.	23.	Baugh RF, Archer SM, Mitchell RB, et al. Clinical prac-tice guideline: tonsillectomy in children. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2011;144(1 suppl):S1-S30.	24.	Cohen JF, Bertille N, Cohen R, Chalumeau M. Rapid antigen detection test for group A streptococcus in children with phar-yngitis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016;7:CD010502.	25.	Gates GA, Avery CA, Cooper JC Jr, Prihoda TJ. Chronic secretory otitis media: effects of surgical management. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol Suppl. 1989;138:2-32.	26.	Caterson EJ, Tsai DM, Cauley R, Dowdall JR, Tracy LE. Transillumination of the occult submucous cleft palate. J Cra-niofac Surg. 2014;25(6):2160-2163.	27.	Ozkiris M, Karacavus S, Kapusuz Z, Saydam L. Compari-son of two different adenoidectomy techniques with special emphasis on postoperative nasal mucociliary clearance rates: coblation technique vs. cold curettage. Int J Pediatr Otorhi-nolaryngol. 2013;77(3):389-393.	28.	Sapthavee A, Bhushan B, Penn E, Billings KR. A comparison of revision adenoidectomy rates based on techniques. Otolar-yngol Head Neck Surg. 2013;148(5):841-846.	29.	Centor RM, Witherspoon JM, Dalton HP, Brody CE, Link K. The diagnosis of strep throat in adults in the emergency room. Med Decis Making. 1981;1(3):239-246.	30.	Little P, Stuart B, Hobbs FD, et al. Predictors of suppurative complications for acute sore throat in primary care: prospec-tive clinical cohort study. BMJ. 2013;347:f6867.	31.	Fine AM, Nizet V, Mandl KD. Large-scale validation of the centor and McIsaac scores to predict group A streptococcal pharyngitis. Arch Intern Med. 2012;172(11):847-852.	32.	Brodsky L. Modern assessment of tonsils and adenoids. Pedi-atr Clin North Am. 1989;36(6):1551-1569.	33.	Roland PS, Rosenfeld RM, Brooks LJ, et al. Clinical practice guideline: polysomnography for sleep-disordered breathing prior to tonsillectomy in children. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2011;145(1 suppl):S1-S15.	34.	Statham MM, Myer CM 3rd. Complications of adeno-tonsillectomy. Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2010;18(6):539-543.	35.	Friedman M, Hamilton C, Samuelson CG, et al. Transoral robotic glossectomy for the treatment of obstructive sleep apnea-hypopnea syndrome. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2012;146(5):854-862.	36.	Chaturvedi AK, Anderson WF, Lortet-Tieulent J, et al. World-wide trends in incidence rates for oral cavity and oropharyn-geal cancers. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31(36):4550-4559.	37.	Knabel MJ, Bock JM. Globus sensation and laryngopha-ryngeal reflux. Ear Nose Throat J. 2015;94(10-11):445-447.	38.	Story BH, Titze IR. Voice simulation with a body-cover model of the vocal folds. J Acoust Soc Am. 1995;97(2): 1249-1260.	39.	Rosen CA, Gartner-Schmidt J, Hathaway B, et al. A nomen-clature paradigm for benign midmembranous vocal fold lesions. Laryngoscope. 2012;122(6):1335-1341.	40.	Martins RH, do Amaral HA, Tavares EL, Martins MG, Gon-calves TM, Dias NH. Voice disorders: etiology and diagnosis. J Voice. 2016;30(6):761.e1-761.e9.	41.	Martins RH, Tavares EL, Pessin AB. Are vocal alterations caused by smoking in Reinke’s edema in women entirely reversible after microsurgery and smoking cessation? J Voice. 2017;31(3):380.e11-380.e14.	42.	Ogawa M, Hosokawa K, Iwahashi T, Inohara H. The results of Kaplan-Meier and multivariate analyses of etiological factors related to the outcome of combined pharmacologi-cal therapy against laryngeal granuloma. Acta Otolaryngol. 2016;136(11):1141-1146.	43.	Formanek M, Jancatova D, Kominek P, Matousek P, Zelenik K. Laryngopharyngeal reflux and herpes simplex virus type 2 are possible risk factors for adult-onset recurrent respiratory papillomatosis (prospective case-control study). Clin Otolar-yngol. 2017;42(3):597-601.	44.	Holler T, Allegro J, Chadha NK, et al. Voice outcomes fol-lowing repeated surgical resection of laryngeal papillomata in children. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2009;141(4): 522-526.	45.	Tatar EC, Kupfer RA, Barry JY, Allen CT, Merati AL. Office-based vs traditional operating room management of recurrent respiratory papillomatosis: impact of patient characteristics and disease severity. JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2017;143(1):55-59.	46.	Baumanis MM, Elmaraghy CA. Intersurgical interval increased with use of quadrivalent human papillomavirus vac-cine (Gardasil) in a pediatric patient with recurrent respiratory papillomatosis: a case report. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2016;91:166-169.	47.	Sullivan C, Curtis S, Mouzakes J. Therapeutic use of the HPV vaccine in recurrent respiratory papillomatosis: a case report. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2017;93:103-106.	48.	Tan TP, Govindarajulu AP, Massicotte EM, Venkatraghavan L. Vocal cord palsy after anterior cervical spine surgery: a qualita-tive systematic review. Spine J. 2014;14(7):1332-1342.	49.	Myssiorek D. Recurrent laryngeal nerve paralysis: anatomy and etiology. Otolaryngol Clin North Am. 2004;37(1): 25-44, v.	50.	Haugen BR, Alexander EK, Bible KC, et al. 2015 American Thyroid Association management guidelines for adult patients with thyroid nodules and differentiated thyroid cancer: the American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force on thyroid nodules and differentiated thyroid cancer. Thyroid. 2016;26(1):1-133.	51.	Paquette CM, Manos DC, Psooy BJ. Unilateral vocal cord paralysis: a review of CT findings, mediastinal causes, and the course of the recurrent laryngeal nerves. Radiographics. 2012;32(3):721-740.	52.	Noel JE, Jeffery CC, Damrose E. Repeat imaging in idiopathic unilateral vocal fold paralysis: is it necessary? Ann Otol Rhi-nol Laryngol. 2016;125(12):1010-1014.	53.	Morrissey AT, O’Connell DA, Allegretto M. Medialization thyroplasty for unilateral vocal cord paralysis secondary to advanced extralaryngeal malignant disease: review of opera-tive morbidity and patient life expectancy. J Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2012;41(1):41-45.	54.	Butskiy O, Mistry B, Chadha NK. Surgical interventions  for pediatric unilateral vocal cord paralysis: a systematic review. JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2015;141(7): 654-660.	55.	Siu J, Tam S, Fung K. A comparison of outcomes in interven-tions for unilateral vocal fold paralysis: a systematic review. Laryngoscope. 2016;126(7):1616-1624.	56.	Hoff SR, Rastatter JC, Richter GT. Head and neck vascular lesions. Otolaryngol Clin North Am. 2015;48(1):29-45.	57.	Leaute-Labreze C, Hoeger P, Mazereeuw-Hautier J, et al. A randomized, controlled trial of oral propranolol in infantile hemangioma. N Engl J Med. 2015;372(8):735-746.	58.	Hong P, Tammareddi N, Walvekar R, et al. Successful dis-continuation of propranolol for infantile hemangiomas of the head and neck at 12 months of age. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolar-yngol. 2013;77(7):1194-1197.	59.	Frischer JS, Huang J, Serur A, Kadenhe A, Yamashiro DJ, Kandel JJ. Biomolecular markers and involution of heman-giomas. J Pediatr Surg. 2004;39(3):400-404.	60.	Smith MC, Zimmerman MB, Burke DK, et al. Efficacy and safety of OK-432 immunotherapy of lymphatic malforma-tions. Laryngoscope. 2009;119(1):107-115.Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   65501/03/19   5:25 PM 656SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	61.	Shumrick KA, Campbell AC. Management of the orbital rim and floor in zygoma and midface fractures: criteria for selec-tive exploration. Facial Plast Surg. 1998;14(1):77-81.	62.	Morong S, Snell L, Nishtar S, Mahoney JL, Elahi MM.  Maxillary bone grafts for the repair of traumatic orbital floor defects. J Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2010;39(5):579-585.	63.	Manson PN, Clark N, Robertson B, et al. Subunit principles in midface fractures: the importance of sagittal buttresses, soft-tissue reductions, and sequencing treatment of segmental frac-tures. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1999;103(4):1287-306; quiz 1307.	64.	Dahiya R, Keller JD, Litofsky NS, Bankey PE, Bonassar LJ, Megerian CA. Temporal bone fractures: otic capsule sparing versus otic capsule violating clinical and radiographic consid-erations. J Trauma. 1999;47(6):1079-1083.	65.	Song SW, Jun BC, Kim H. Clinical features and radiological evaluation of otic capsule sparing temporal bone fractures.  J Laryngol Otol. 2017;131(3):209-214.	66.	Coker NJ. Facial electroneurography: analysis of techniques and correlation with degenerating motoneurons. Laryngo-scope. 1992;102(7):747-759.	67.	Sohrab M, Abugo U, Grant M, Merbs S. Management of the eye in facial paralysis. Facial Plast Surg. 2015;31(2):140-144.	68.	Eskander A, Irish JC, Urbach DR, Goldstein DP, eds. Head and Neck Cancer Surgery in Ontario, 2003–2010: An ICES Atlas. 1st ed. Toronto, Ontario, Canada: Institute for Clinical Evaluative Sciences; 2015.	69.	Jha P, MacLennan M, Chaloupka FJ, et al. Global hazards of tobacco and the benefits of smoking cessation and tobacco taxes. In: Gelband H, Jha P, Sankaranarayanan R, Horton S, eds. Cancer: Disease Control Priorities, 3rd ed. (vol. 3). Washington (DC): International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank; 2015. NBK343639 [bookaccession].	70.	Hashibe M, Brennan P, Chuang SC, et al. Interaction between tobacco and alcohol use and the risk of head and neck cancer: pooled analysis in the international head and neck cancer epi-demiology consortium. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2009;18(2):541-550.	71.	Blot WJ, McLaughlin JK, Winn DM, et al. Smoking and drinking in relation to oral and pharyngeal cancer. Cancer Res. 1988;48(11):3282-3287.	72.	Leon X, del Prado Venegas M, Orus C, Lopez M, Garcia J, Quer M. Influence of the persistence of tobacco and alco-hol use in the appearance of second neoplasm in patients with a head and neck cancer. a case-control study. Cancer Causes Control. 2009;20(5):645-652.	73.	Day GL, Blot WJ, Shore RE, et al. Second cancers following oral and pharyngeal cancers: role of tobacco and alcohol.  J Natl Cancer Inst. 1994;86(2):131-137.	74.	Do KA, Johnson MM, Doherty DA, et al. Second primary tumors in patients with upper aerodigestive tract cancers: joint effects of smoking and alcohol (United States). Cancer Causes Control. 2003;14(2):131-138.	75.	Chan Y, Irish JC, Wood SJ, et al. Smoking cessation in patients diagnosed with head and neck cancer. J Otolaryngol. 2004;33(2):75-81.	76.	Lin YS, Jen YM, Wang BB, Lee JC, Kang BH. Epidemiol-ogy of oral cavity cancer in Taiwan with emphasis on the role of betel nut chewing. ORL J Otorhinolaryngol Relat Spec. 2005;67(4):230-236.	77.	Chourasia NR, Borle RM, Vastani A. Concomitant association of oral submucous fibrosis and oral squamous cell carcinoma and incidence of malignant transformation of oral submucous fibrosis in a population of central India: a retrospective study. J Maxillofac Oral Surg. 2015;14(4):902-906.	78.	Reddy CR. Carcinoma of hard palate in India in rela-tion to reverse smoking of chuttas. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1974;53(3):615-619.	79.	Zhang ZF, Morgenstern H, Spitz MR, et al. Marijuana use and increased risk of squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 1999;8(12):1071-1078.	80.	Nelissen C, Lambrecht M, Nevens F, et al. Noncutaneous head and neck cancer in solid organ transplant patients: single cen-ter experience. Oral Oncol. 2014;50(4):263-268.	81.	(S008) the impact of HPV, HIV, and smoking on oncologic and functional outcomes in patients with head and neck can-cer. Oncology (Williston Park). 2015;29(4 suppl 1):204954.	82.	D’souza G, Carey TE, William WN Jr, et al. Epidemiology of head and neck squamous cell cancer among HIV-infected patients. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2014;65(5):603-610.	83.	Alter BP, Giri N, Savage SA, Quint WG, de Koning MN, Schiffman M. Squamous cell carcinomas in patients with Fan-coni anemia and dyskeratosis congenita: a search for human papillomavirus. Int J Cancer. 2013;133(6):1513-1515.	84.	Ray JG, Swain N, Ghosh R, Richa, Pattanayak Mohanty S. Dyskeratosis congenita with malignant transformation. BMJ Case Rep. 2011;2011:10.1136/bcr.03.2010.2848.	85.	van Monsjou HS, Wreesmann VB, van den Brekel MW, Balm AJ. Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma in young patients. Oral Oncol. 2013;49(12):1097-1102.	86.	Berkower AS, Biller HF. Head and neck cancer associated with Bloom’s syndrome. Laryngoscope. 1988;98(7):746-748.	87.	Kutler DI, Auerbach AD, Satagopan J, et al. High inci-dence of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma in patients with Fanconi anemia. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2003;129(1):106-112.	88.	Galloway DA, Laimins LA. Human papillomaviruses: shared and distinct pathways for pathogenesis. Curr Opin Virol. 2015;14:87-92.	89.	Gillison ML, Koch WM, Capone RB, et al. Evidence for a causal association between human papillomavirus and a subset of head and neck cancers. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2000;92(9):709-720.	90.	Ryerson AB, Peters ES, Coughlin SS, et al. Burden of potentially human papillomavirus-associated cancers of the oropharynx and oral cavity in the US, 1998-2003. Cancer. 2008;113(10 suppl):2901-2909.	91.	Gillison ML, Zhang Q, Jordan R, et al. Tobacco smoking and increased risk of death and progression for patients with p16-positive and p16-negative oropharyngeal cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30(17):2102-2111.	92.	Ang KK, Harris J, Wheeler R, et al. Human papillomavi-rus and survival of patients with oropharyngeal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2010;363(1):24-35.	93.	Gan SJ, Dahlstrom KR, Peck BW, et al. Incidence and pat-tern of second primary malignancies in patients with index oropharyngeal cancers versus index nonoropharyngeal head and neck cancers. Cancer. 2013;119(14):2593-2601.	94.	Lee DH, Roh JL, Baek S, et al. Second cancer incidence, risk factor, and specific mortality in head and neck squa-mous cell carcinoma. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2013;149(4):579-586.	95.	Kim SY, Roh JL, Yeo NK, et al. Combined 18F-fluorodeoxy-glucose-positron emission tomography and computed tomog-raphy as a primary screening method for detecting second primary cancers and distant metastases in patients with head and neck cancer. Ann Oncol. 2007;18(10):1698-1703.	96.	Baxi SS, Pinheiro LC, Patil SM, Pfister DG, Oeffinger KC, Elkin EB. Causes of death in long-term survivors of head and neck cancer. Cancer. 2014;120(10):1507-1513.	97.	Leon X, Del Prado Venegas M, Orus C, Kolanczak K, Gar-cia J, Quer M. Metachronous second primary tumours in the aerodigestive tract in patients with early stage head and neck squamous cell carcinomas. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2005;262(11):905-909.Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   65601/03/19   5:25 PM 657DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECKCHAPTER 18	98.	Sturgis EM, Miller RH. Second primary malignancies in the head and neck cancer patient. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol. 1995;104(12):946-954.	99.	Scholes AG, Woolgar JA, Boyle MA, et al. Synchronous oral carcinomas: independent or common clonal origin? Cancer Res. 1998;58(9):2003-2006.	100.	Schwartz LH, Ozsahin M, Zhang GN, et al. Synchronous and metachronous head and neck carcinomas. Cancer. 1994;74(7):1933-1938.	101.	Morris LG, Sikora AG, Patel SG, Hayes RB, Ganly I. Second primary cancers after an index head and neck cancer: subsite-specific trends in the era of human papillomavirus-associated oropharyngeal cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2011;29(6):739-746.	102.	Braakhuis BJ, Tabor MP, Leemans CR, van der Waal I, Snow GB, Brakenhoff RH. Second primary tumors and field cancerization in oral and oropharyngeal cancer: molecular techniques provide new insights and definitions. Head Neck. 2002;24(2):198-206.	103.	Strojan P, Corry J, Eisbruch A, et al. Recurrent and second primary squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck: when and how to reirradiate. Head Neck. 2015;37(1):134-150.	104.	Chen MC, Huang WC, Chan CH, Chen PT, Lee KD. Impact of second primary esophageal or lung cancer on survival of patients with head and neck cancer. Oral Oncol. 2010;46(4):249-254.	105.	Lydiatt WM, Patel SG, O’Sullivan B, et al. Head and neck cancers-major changes in the American Joint Committee on Cancer eighth edition cancer staging manual. CA Can-cer J Clin. 2017;67(2):122-137.	106.	National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN clini-cal practice guidelines in oncology: head and neck cancers. 2016. Available at: https://www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/default.aspx. Accessed May 21, 2018.	107.	Huang SH, Chuang HC, Chien C, et al. The proposed physi-ology-based FDG PET/CT criteria in reducing false-positive results in advanced head and neck cancer after chemoradiother-apy. Q J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2016 (Epub ahead of print).	108.	Han AY, Kuan EC, Mallen-St Clair J, Alonso JE, Arshi A, St John MA. Epidemiology of squamous cell carcinoma of the lip in the United States: a population-based cohort analysis. JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2016;142(12):1216-1223.	109.	Bhandari K, Wang DC, Li SC, et al. Primary cN0 lip squa-mous cell carcinoma and elective neck dissection: systematic review and meta-analysis. Head Neck. 2015;37(9):1392-1400.	110.	Najim M, Cross S, Gebski V, Palme CE, Morgan GJ, Veness MJ. Early-stage squamous cell carcinoma of the lip: the Aus-tralian experience and the benefits of radiotherapy in improv-ing outcome in high-risk patients after resection. Head Neck. 2013;35(10):1426-1430.	111.	Salihu S, Guven O, Gllareva E, Prekazi M, Salihu L. A clinical study on survival rate of patients with squamous cell carci-noma of the lower lip in Kosovo. J Craniomaxillofac Surg. 2014;42(8):1773-1777.	112.	Brinca A, Andrade P, Vieira R, Figueiredo A. Karapandzic flap and Bernard-Burrow-Webster flap for reconstruction of the lower lip. An Bras Dermatol. 2011;86(4 suppl 1):S156-S159.	113.	Bernier J, Domenge C, Ozsahin M, et al. Postoperative irradiation with or without concomitant chemotherapy for locally advanced head and neck cancer. N Engl J Med. 2004;350(19):1945-1952.	114.	Bernier J, Cooper JS, Pajak TF, et al. Defining risk levels in locally advanced head and neck cancers: a comparative analy-sis of concurrent postoperative radiation plus chemotherapy trials of the EORTC (#22931) and RTOG (# 9501). Head Neck. 2005;27(10):843-850.	115.	Lu M, Sun G, Hu Q, Tang E, Wang Y. Functional assessment: free thin anterolateral thigh flap versus free radial forearm reconstruction for hemiglossectomy defects. Med Oral Patol Oral Cir Bucal. 2015;20(6):e757-e762.	116.	Mazarro A, de Pablo A, Puiggros C, et al. Indications, recon-structive techniques, and results for total glossectomy. Head Neck. 2016;38 Suppl 1:E2004-E2010.	117.	Rodgers LW Jr, Stringer SP, Mendenhall WM, Parsons JT, Cassisi NJ, Million RR. Management of squamous cell carcinoma of the floor of mouth. Head Neck. 1993;15(1): 16-19.	118.	Overholt SM, Eicher SA, Wolf P, Weber RS. Prognostic fac-tors affecting outcome in lower gingival carcinoma. Laryngo-scope. 1996;106(11):1335-1339.	119.	Fives C, Nae A, Roche P, et al. Impact of mandibular invasion on prognosis in oral squamous cell carcinoma four centime-ters or less in size. Laryngoscope. 2017;127(4):849-854.	120.	Cobzeanu BM, Popescu E, Costan VV, Ungureanu D, Cobzeanu MD. Retromolar trigone—oropharynx junc-tion maligns tumor surgery: transmandibular versus oral approach. Rev Med Chir Soc Med Nat Iasi. 2015;119(1): 119-126.	121.	Hao SP, Tsang NM, Chang KP, Chen CK, Huang SS. Treat-ment of squamous cell carcinoma of the retromolar trigone. Laryngoscope. 2006;116(6):916-920.	122.	Givi B, Eskander A, Awad MI, et al. Impact of elective neck dissection on the outcome of oral squamous cell carcinomas arising in the maxillary alveolus and hard palate. Head Neck. 2016;38 suppl 1:E1688-E1694.	123.	Pagedar NA, Gilbert RW, Chan H, Daly MJ, Irish JC, Siew-erdsen JH. Maxillary reconstruction using the scapular tip free flap: a radiologic comparison of 3D morphology. Head Neck. 2012;34(10):1377-1382.	124.	Shipchandler TZ, Waters HH, Knott PD, Fritz MA. Orbito-maxillary reconstruction using the layered fibula osteocutane-ous flap. Arch Facial Plast Surg. 2012;14(2):110-115.	125.	Shiboski CH, Schmidt BL, Jordan RC. Tongue and tonsil car-cinoma: increasing trends in the U.S. population ages 20-44 years. Cancer. 2005;103(9):1843-1849.	126.	Gillison ML, Shah KV. Chapter 9: role of mucosal human papillomavirus in nongenital cancers. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr. 2003;(31)(31):57-65.	127.	Fakhry C, Westra WH, Li S, et al. Improved survival of patients with human papillomavirus-positive head and neck squamous cell carcinoma in a prospective clinical trial. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2008;100(4):261-269.	128.	Parsons JT, Mendenhall WM, Stringer SP, et al. Squamous cell carcinoma of the oropharynx: surgery, radiation ther-apy, or both. Cancer. 2002;94(11):2967-2980.	129.	Huang SH, Hansen A, Rathod S, O’Sullivan B. Primary surgery versus (chemo)radiotherapy in oropharyngeal can-cer: the radiation oncologist’s and medical oncologist’s perspectives. Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2015;23(2):139-147.	130.	de Almeida JR, Byrd JK, Wu R, et al. A systematic review of transoral robotic surgery and radiotherapy for early oropharynx cancer: a systematic review. Laryngoscope. 2014;124(9):2096-2102.	131.	de Almeida JR, Li R, Magnuson JS, et al. Oncologic outcomes after transoral robotic surgery: a multi-institutional study. JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2015;141(12):1043-1051.	132.	de Almeida JR, Moskowitz AJ, Miles BA, et al. Cost-effec-tiveness of transoral robotic surgery versus (chemo)radio-therapy for early T classification oropharyngeal carcinoma: a cost-utility analysis. Head Neck. 2016;38(4):589-600.	133.	Howard J, Masterson L, Dwivedi RC, et al. Minimally inva-sive surgery versus radiotherapy/chemoradiotherapy for small-volume primary oropharyngeal carcinoma. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016;12:CD010963.	134.	Vega C, Leon X, Cervelli D, et al. Total or subtotal glossec-tomy with microsurgical reconstruction: functional and onco-logical results. Microsurgery. 2011;31(7):517-523.Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   65701/03/19   5:25 PM 658SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	135.	Cohen WA, Albornoz CR, Cordeiro PG, et al. Health-related quality of life following reconstruction for com-mon head and neck surgical defects. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2016;138(6):1312-1320.	136.	Lin DT, Yarlagadda BB, Sethi RK, et al. Long-term func-tional outcomes of total glossectomy with or without total laryngectomy. JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2015;141(9):797-803.	137.	Sinclair CF, Carroll WR, Desmond RA, Rosenthal EL. Func-tional and survival outcomes in patients undergoing total glossectomy compared with total laryngoglossectomy. Oto-laryngol Head Neck Surg. 2011;145(5):755-758.	138.	Chepeha DB, Sacco AG, Erickson VR, et al. Oropha-ryngoplasty with template-based reconstruction of oro-pharynx defects. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2009;135(9):887-894.	139.	Kimata Y, Uchiyama K, Sakuraba M, et al. Velopharyn-geal function after microsurgical reconstruction of lat-eral and superior oropharyngeal defects. Laryngoscope. 2002;112(6):1037-1042.	140.	Hall SF, Groome PA, Irish J, O’Sullivan B. Towards further understanding of prognostic factors for head and neck cancer patients: the example of hypopharyngeal cancer. Laryngo-scope. 2009;119(4):696-702.	141.	Hall SF, Groome PA, Irish J, O’Sullivan B. Radiotherapy or surgery for head and neck squamous cell cancer: establish-ing the baseline for hypopharyngeal carcinoma? Cancer. 2009;115(24):5711-5722.	142.	Dirven R, Swinson BD, Gao K, Clark JR. The assessment of pharyngocutaneous fistula rate in patients treated pri-marily with definitive radiotherapy followed by salvage surgery of the larynx and hypopharynx. Laryngoscope. 2009;119(9):1691-1695.	143.	Burke MS, Kaplan SE, Kaplowitz LJ, et al. Pectoralis major myocutaneous flap for reconstruction of circumferential pha-ryngeal defects. Ann Plast Surg. 2013;71(6):649-651.	144.	Patel RS, Goldstein DP, Brown D, Irish J, Gullane PJ, Gilbert RW. Circumferential pharyngeal reconstruction: history, critical analy-sis of techniques, and current therapeutic recommendations. Head Neck. 2010;32(1):109-120.	145.	Murray DJ, Gilbert RW, Vesely MJ, et al. Functional outcomes and donor site morbidity following circumferential pharyn-goesophageal reconstruction using an anterolateral thigh flap and salivary bypass tube. Head Neck. 2007;29(2):147-154.	146.	Durmus K, Kakarala K, Old MO, Teknos TN, Ozer E. Antero-lateral thigh butterfly free flap reconstruction for peristomal recurrence following laryngectomy: our experience in six patients. Clin Otolaryngol. 2013;38(4):339-342.	147.	Induction chemotherapy plus radiation compared with sur-gery plus radiation in patients with advanced laryngeal cancer. The Department of Veterans Affairs Laryngeal Cancer Study Group. N Engl J Med. 1991;324(24):1685-1690.	148.	Weber RS, Berkey BA, Forastiere A, et al. Outcome of salvage total laryngectomy following organ preservation therapy: the radiation therapy oncology group trial 91-11. Arch Otolaryn-gol Head Neck Surg. 2003;129(1):44-49.	149.	Harris BN, Bhuskute AA, Rao S, Farwell DG, Bewley AF. Primary surgery for advanced-stage laryngeal cancer: a stage and subsite-specific survival analysis. Head Neck. 2016;38(9):1380-1386.	150.	Vengalil S, Giuliani ME, Huang SH, et al. Clinical outcomes in patients with T4 laryngeal cancer treated with primary radiotherapy versus primary laryngectomy. Head Neck. 2016;38 Suppl 1:E2035-E2040.	151.	Day AT, Sinha P, Nussenbaum B, Kallogjeri D, Haughey BH. Management of primary T1-T4 glottic squamous cell carcinoma by transoral laser microsurgery. Laryngoscope. 2017;127(3):597-604.	152.	Suarez C, Rodrigo JP, Silver CE, et al. Laser surgery for early to moderately advanced glottic, supraglottic, and hypopharyn-geal cancers. Head Neck. 2012;34(7):1028-1035.	153.	Gilbert RW, Goldstein DP, Guillemaud JP, Patel RS,  Higgins KM, Enepekides DJ. Vertical partial laryngectomy with temporoparietal free flap reconstruction for recurrent laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma: technique and long-term outcomes. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2012;138(5): 484-491.	154.	Leone CA, Capasso P, Topazio D, Russo G. Supracricoid laryngectomy for recurrent laryngeal cancer after chemora-diotherapy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Acta Oto-rhinolaryngol Ital. 2016;36(6):439-449.	155.	Starmer HM, Quon H, Simpson M, et al. Speech-language pathology care and shortand long-term outcomes of laryngeal cancer treatment in the elderly. Laryngoscope. 2015;125(12):2756-2763.	156.	Gitomer SA, Hutcheson KA, Christianson BL, et al. Influ-ence of timing, radiation, and reconstruction on complications and speech outcomes with tracheoesophageal puncture. Head Neck. 2016;38(12):1765-1771.	157.	de Braud F, al-Sarraf M. Diagnosis and management of squa-mous cell carcinoma of unknown primary tumor site of the neck. Semin Oncol. 1993;20(3):273-278.	158.	Grau C, Johansen LV, Jakobsen J, Geertsen P, Andersen E, Jensen BB. Cervical lymph node metastases from unknown primary tumours. Results from a national survey by the Dan-ish Society for Head and Neck Oncology. Radiother Oncol. 2000;55(2):121-129.	159.	Jereczek-Fossa BA, Jassem J, Orecchia R. Cervical lymph node metastases of squamous cell carcinoma from an unknown primary. Cancer Treat Rev. 2004;30(2):153-164.	160.	Motz K, Qualliotine JR, Rettig E, Richmon JD, Eisele DW, Fakhry C. Changes in unknown primary squamous cell carci-noma of the head and neck at initial presentation in the era of human papillomavirus. JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2016;142(3):223-228.	161.	McGuirt WF, McCabe BF. Significance of node biopsy before definitive treatment of cervical metastatic carcinoma. Laryn-goscope. 1978;88(4):594-597.	162.	Zhu L, Wang N. 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography-computed tomography as a diagnostic tool in patients with cervical nodal metastases of unknown primary site: a meta-analysis. Surg Oncol. 2013;22(3):190-194.	163.	Waltonen JD, Ozer E, Hall NC, Schuller DE, Agrawal A. Metastatic carcinoma of the neck of unknown primary origin: evolution and efficacy of the modern workup. Arch Otolaryn-gol Head Neck Surg. 2009;135(10):1024-1029.	164.	Chai RL, Rath TJ, Johnson JT, et al. Accuracy of com-puted tomography in the prediction of extracapsular spread of lymph node metastases in squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2013;139(11):1187-1194.	165.	Robbins KT, Ferlito A, Silver CE, et al. Contemporary management of sinonasal cancer. Head Neck. 2011;33(9): 1352-1365.	166.	Ganly I, Patel SG, Singh B, et al. Craniofacial resection for malignant paranasal sinus tumors: report of an international collaborative study. Head Neck. 2005;27(7):575-584.	167.	Ganly I, Patel SG, Singh B, et al. Complications of cra-niofacial resection for malignant tumors of the skull base: report of an international collaborative study. Head Neck. 2005;27(6):445-451.	168.	Fu TS, Monteiro E, Muhanna N, Goldstein DP, de Almeida JR. Comparison of outcomes for open versus endoscopic approaches for olfactory neuroblastoma: a systematic review and individual participant data meta-analysis. Head Neck. 2016;38 Suppl 1:E2306-E2316.Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   65801/03/19   5:25 PM 659DISORDERS OF THE HEAD AND NECKCHAPTER 18	169.	Al-Sarraf M, LeBlanc M, Giri PG, et al. Chemoradiotherapy versus radiotherapy in patients with advanced nasopharyngeal cancer: phase III randomized intergroup study 0099. J Clin Oncol. 1998;16(4):1310-1317.	170.	Vlantis AC, Tsang RK, Yu BK, et al. Nasopharyngectomy and surgical margin status: a survival analysis. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2007;133(12):1296-1301.	171.	Sinha S, Dedmon MM, Naunheim MR, Fuller JC, Gray ST, Lin DT. Update on surgical outcomes of lateral temporal bone resection for ear and temporal bone malignancies. J Neurol Surg B Skull Base. 2017;78(1):37-42.	172.	Beyea JA, Moberly AC. Squamous cell carcinoma of the  temporal bone. Otolaryngol Clin North Am. 2015;48(2): 281-292.	173.	Mazzoni A, Zanoletti E, Marioni G, Martini A. En bloc temporal bone resections in squamous cell carcinoma of the ear. technique, principles, and limits. Acta Otolaryngol. 2016;136(5):425-432.	174.	Gurgel RK, Karnell LH, Hansen MR. Middle ear cancer: a population-based study. Laryngoscope. 2009;119(10): 1913-1917.	175.	Rosenthal EL, King T, McGrew BM, Carroll W, Magnuson JS, Wax MK. Evolution of a paradigm for free tissue transfer reconstruction of lateral temporal bone defects. Head Neck. 2008;30(5):589-594.	176.	Ferris R, Goldenberg D, Haymart MR, et al. American Thyroid Association consensus review of the anatomy, ter-minology and rationale for lateral neck dissection in dif-ferentiated thyroid cancer. Thyroid. 2012;22(5):501-508.	177.	Robbins KT, Clayman G, Levine PA, et al. Neck dissection classification update:revisions proposed by the American Head and Neck Society and the American Academy of Otolar-yngology—Head and Neck Surgery. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2002;128(7):751-758.	178.	Wang Y, Ow TJ, Myers JN. Pathways for cervical metasta-sis in malignant neoplasms of the head and neck region. Clin Anat. 2012;25(1):54-71.	179.	Weiss MH, Harrison LB, Isaacs RS. Use of decision analy-sis in planning a management strategy for the stage N0 neck. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 1994;120(7):699-702.	180.	Bocca E, Pignataro O, Oldini C, Cappa C. Functional neck dissection: an evaluation and review of 843 cases. Laryngo-scope. 1984;94(7):942-945.	181.	Medina JE, Byers RM. Supraomohyoid neck dissection: rationale, indications, and surgical technique. Head Neck. 1989;11(2):111-122.	182.	Shah JP. Patterns of cervical lymph node metastasis from squamous carcinomas of the upper aerodigestive tract. Am J Surg. 1990;160(4):405-409.	183.	Huang SH, Hwang D, Lockwood G, Goldstein DP, O’Sullivan B. Predictive value of tumor thickness for cervi-cal lymph-node involvement in squamous cell carcinoma of the oral cavity: a meta-analysis of reported studies. Cancer. 2009;115(7):1489-1497.	184.	D’Cruz AK, Vaish R, Kapre N, et al. Elective versus thera-peutic neck dissection in node-negative oral cancer. N Engl J Med. 2015;373(6):521-529.	185.	Farrag T, Lin F, Brownlee N, Kim M, Sheth S, Tufano RP. Is routine dissection of level II-B and V-A necessary in patients with papillary thyroid cancer undergoing lateral neck dissec-tion for FNA-confirmed metastases in other levels. World J Surg. 2009;33(8):1680-1683.	186.	Eskander A, Merdad M, Freeman JL, Witterick IJ. Pattern of spread to the lateral neck in metastatic well-differenti-ated thyroid cancer: a systematic review and meta-analy-sis. Thyroid. 2013;23(5):583-592.	187.	Cooper JS, Zhang Q, Pajak TF, et al. Long-term follow-up of the RTOG 9501/intergroup phase III trial: postoperative concurrent radiation therapy and chemotherapy in high-risk squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2012;84(5):1198-1205.	188.	Bernier J, Cooper JS, Pajak TF, et al. Defining risk levels in locally advanced head and neck cancers: a comparative analysis of concurrent postoperative radiation plus chemo-therapy trials of the EORTC (#22931) and RTOG (# 9501). Head Neck. 2005;27(10):843-850.	189.	Patil VM, Prabhash K, Noronha V, et al. Neoadjuvant che-motherapy followed by surgery in very locally advanced technically unresectable oral cavity cancers. Oral Oncol. 2014;50(10):1000-1004.	190.	Zafereo M. Surgical salvage of recurrent cancer of the head and neck. Curr Oncol Rep. 2014;16(5):386-014-0386-0.	191.	James A, Stewart C, Warrick P, Tzifa C, Forte V. Branchial sinus of the piriform fossa: reappraisal of third and fourth bran-chial anomalies. Laryngoscope. 2007;117(11):1920-1924.	192.	Oyewumi M, Inarejos E, Greer ML, et al. Ultrasound to differ-entiate thyroglossal duct cysts and dermoid cysts in children. Laryngoscope. 2015;125(4):998-1003.	193.	Stodulski D, Mikaszewski B, Majewska H, Wisniewski P, Stankiewicz C. Probability and pattern of occult cervical lymph node metastases in primary parotid carcinoma. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2017;274(3):1659-1664.	194.	Seethala RR. An update on grading of salivary gland carcino-mas. Head Neck Pathol. 2009;3(1):69-77.	195.	Colella G, Cannavale R, Chiodini P. Meta-analysis of sur-gical approaches to the treatment of parotid pleomorphic adenomas and recurrence rates. J Craniomaxillofac Surg. 2015;43(6):738-745.	196.	Ariyan S. The functional pectoralis major musculocutaneous island flap for head and neck reconstruction. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1990;86(4):807-808.	197.	Howard BE, Nagel TH, Barrs DM, Donald CB, Hayden RE. Reconstruction of lateral skull base defects: a comparison of the submental flap to free and regional flaps. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2016;154(6):1014-1018.	198.	Herr MW, Emerick KS, Deschler DG. The supraclavicular artery flap for head and neck reconstruction. JAMA Facial Plast Surg. 2014;16(2):127-132.	199.	Chepeha DB, Annich G, Pynnonen MA, et al. Pectoralis  major myocutaneous flap vs revascularized free tissue trans-fer: complications, gastrostomy tube dependence, and hospi-talization. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2004;130(2): 181-186.	200.	Kang SY, Old MO, Teknos TN. Lateral arm free tissue transfer for parotid reconstruction: a pictorial essay. Head Neck. 2017.	201.	Chepeha DB, Teknos TN, Fung K, et al. Lateral oroman-dibular defect: when is it appropriate to use a bridging reconstruction plate combined with a soft tissue revascu-larized flap? Head Neck. 2008;30(6):709-717.	202.	Chepeha DB, Khariwala SS, Chanowski EJ, et al. Thoracodor-sal artery scapular tip autogenous transplant: vascularized bone with a long pedicle and flexible soft tissue. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2010;136(10):958-964.	203.	Chepeha DB, Teknos TN, Shargorodsky J, et al. Rectangle tongue template for reconstruction of the hemiglossectomy defect. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2008;134(9):993-998.	204.	Kang SY, Old MO, Teknos TN. Contour and osteotomy of free fibula transplant using a ruler template. Laryngoscope. 2016;126(10):2288-2290.	205.	Young D, Harrison DA, Cuthbertson BH, Rowan K, Trac-Man Collaborators. Effect of early vs late tracheostomy placement on survival in patients receiving mechani-cal ventilation: the TracMan randomized trial. JAMA. 2013;309(20):2121-2129.	206.	Szakmany T, Russell P, Wilkes AR, Hall JE. Effect of early tracheostomy on resource utilization and clinical outcomes in Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   65901/03/19   5:25 PM 660SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIcritically ill patients: meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Br J Anaesth. 2015;114(3):396-405.	207.	Higgins KM, Punthakee X. Meta-analysis comparison of open versus percutaneous tracheostomy. Laryngoscope. 2007;117(3):447-454.	208.	Brass P, Hellmich M, Ladra A, Ladra J, Wrzosek A. Percuta-neous techniques versus surgical techniques for tracheostomy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016;7:CD008045.	209.	Ferris RL, Blumenschein G, Jr, Fayette J, et al. Nivolumab for recurrent squamous-cell carcinoma of the head and neck. N Engl J Med. 2016.	210.	Eskander A, Monteiro E, Irish J, et al. Adherence to guideline-recommended process measures for squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck in ontario: impact of surgeon and hospi-tal volume. Head Neck. 2016;38 Suppl 1:E1987-E1992.Brunicardi_Ch18_p0613-p0660.indd   66001/03/19   5:25 PM
# Chunk 8882
Chest Wall, Lung, Mediastinum, and PleuraKatie S. Nason, Rose B. Ganim, and  James D. Luketich 19chapterTRACHEAAnatomyThe trachea is composed of cartilaginous and membranous por-tions, beginning with the cricoid cartilage, the first complete cartilaginous ring of the airway. The cricoid cartilage consists of an anterior arch and a posterior broad-based plate. Articulat-ing with the posterior cricoid plate are the arytenoid cartilages. The vocal cords originate from the arytenoid cartilages and then attach to the thyroid cartilage. The subglottic space, the nar-rowest part of the trachea with an internal diameter of approxi-mately 2 cm, begins at the inferior surface of the vocal cords and extends to the first tracheal ring. The remainder of the distal trachea is 10.0 to 13.0 cm long, consists of 18 to 22 rings, and has an internal diameter of 2.3 cm (Fig. 19-1).1Bronchoscopically, the tracheal rings are visible as C-shaped hyaline cartilaginous structures that provide rigid-ity to the anterior and lateral tracheal walls. The open ends of the C-rings are connected by the trachealis smooth muscle and encased in a dense band of connective tissue called perichon-drium. The first tracheal ring is attached directly to the cricoid cartilage; there are approximately two rings for every 1 cm of tracheal length.The tracheal blood supply, which includes the inferior thy-roid, subclavian, supreme intercostal, internal thoracic, innomi-nate, and superior and middle bronchial arteries, enters the airway near the junction of the membranous and cartilaginous portions (Fig. 19-2). Each arterial branch supplies a segment of 1.0 to 2.0 cm, thereby limiting circumferential mobilization to that same distance. The vessels are interconnected along the lat-eral surface of the trachea by an important longitudinal vascular anastomosis that feeds transverse segmental vessels to the soft tissues between the cartilages.Tracheal InjuryTracheal injury can result from a variety of causes, includ-ing inhalation of smoke or toxic fumes, aspiration of liquids or solid objects, endotracheal intubation, blunt and penetrating trauma, and iatrogenic injury during operative procedures. Early diagnosis is critical to avoid subsequent complications, includ-ing respiratory infection and tracheal stenosis. Management of smoke or toxic fume inhalation and liquid aspiration is com-monly supportive; use of antibiotics, respiratory support, and airway clearance with flexible bronchoscopy is dictated by the patient’s condition. In rare circumstances, extracorporeal mem-brane oxygenation is required if there is associated injury to the more distal airways and lung parenchyma.Despite ubiquitous use of high-volume–low-pressure cuffs, overinflation of the endotracheal cuff is the most common cause of injury secondary to endotracheal intubation. High cuff pressures can cause ischemia of the contiguous airway wall in as short as 4 hours. Prolonged overinflation can lead to scarring Trachea661Anatomy / 661Tracheal Injury / 661Tracheal Fistulas / 664Tracheal Neoplasms / 665Lung667Anatomy / 667Normal Lung Histology / 668Preinvasive Lesions / 669Invasive or Malignant Lesions / 670Lung Cancer Epidemiology / 673Screening for Lung Cancer in  High-Risk Populations / 675Solitary Pulmonary Nodule / 677Metastatic Lesions to the Lung / 678Primary Lung Cancer-Associated  Signs and Symptoms / 680Lung Cancer Management / 683Lung Cancer Treatment / 693Options for Thoracic Surgical  Approaches / 701Postoperative Care / 703Postoperative Complications / 705Spontaneous Pneumothorax / 705Pulmonary Infections / 706Massive Hemoptysis / 717End-Stage Lung Disease / 719Chest Wall720Chest Wall Mass / 720Benign Chest Wall Neoplasms / 722Primary Malignant Chest Wall  Tumors / 723Other Tumors of the Chest Wall / 725Chest Wall Reconstruction / 726Mediastinum726Anatomy and Pathologic Entities / 726History and Physical Examination / 727Imaging and Serum Markers / 727Diagnostic Nonsurgical Biopsies of  the Mediastinum / 729Surgical Biopsies and Resection of Mediastinal Masses / 730Mediastinal Neoplasms / 730Mediastinal Cysts / 735Mediastinitis / 735Pleura and Pleural Space736Anatomy / 736Pleural Effusion / 736Access and Drainage of Pleural  Fluid Collections / 736Malignant Pleural Effusion / 739Empyema / 740Chylothorax / 741Tumors of the Pleura / 743Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   66101/03/19   7:00 PM 662Key Points1	Lung cancer continues to be a highly lethal and extremely common cancer, with 57% of patients presenting with dis-tant metastasis and 5-year survival of 18%. Lung cancer incidence is second only to the incidence of prostate cancer in men and breast cancer in women, with 222,500 esti-mated new cases in 2017. Squamous cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma of the lung are the most common sub-types and are rarely found in the absence of a smoking history. Nonsmokers who live with smokers have a 24% increased risk of lung cancer compared to nonsmokers who do not live with smokers.2	A multidisciplinary approach to evaluation of NSCLC, with standardized criteria and terminology for diagnosis in cytologic and small biopsy specimens, and routine molec-ular testing for known mutations, such as EGFR mutations and EML4-ALK fusion oncogenes is now recommended for the evaluation and management of lung nodules due to major advances in targeted therapy. Adequate tissue acquisition at the time of diagnostic workup is critical and facilitates patient care while minimizing the number of procedures to which the patient is subjected.3	The terms bronchioloalveolar carcinoma and mixed subtype adenocarcinoma have been eliminated from the classification of lung adenocarcinoma as a result of increased understanding of important clinical, radiologic, pathologic, and genetic differences between mucinous and nonmucinous adenocarcinomas. The classification system delineates a stepwise pathologic progression, from AAH to invasive adenocarcinoma based on the predominant histo-logic growth patterns.4	The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force now recommends annual screening for lung cancer with low-dose computed tomography screening in high risk patients. Annual screen-ing averted 14% of lung cancer deaths when applied to a population of asymptomatic adults age 55 to 80 years who have a 30 pack-year smoking history and are either currently smoking or have quit within the past 15 years. Patients should be healthy enough to tolerate curative treat-ment, specifically surgery per guidelines, and screening should be discontinued once the patient has not smoked for 15 years or develops a life-limiting health condition, becomes unable to tolerate lung surgery, or is unwilling to undergo curative lung resection. With this approach, it is expected that 50% of diagnosed cancers will be early stage. Screening of patients age 50 years or older with a 20 pack-year or greater history and additional risk factors (as determined by the Tammemagi lung cancer risk calculator or other validated risk scores) that increase the risk of lung cancer to 1.3% or greater should also be considered as part of lung cancer screening programs. In all cases, patient–physician shared decision-making should be undertaken, with a discussion of the risks and benefits of screening.5	Assessment of patient risk before thoracic resection is based on clinical judgment and systematic assessment of cardiopulmonary status using established algorithms.6	Maximum oxygen consumption (v. o2max) values provide important additional information in those patients with severely impaired Dlco and forced expiratory volume in 1 second. Values of <10 mL/kg per minute generally pro-hibit any major pulmonary resection because the mortality in patients with these levels is 26% compared with only 8.3% in patients whose v. o2max is ≥10 mL/kg per minute;  values of >15 mL/kg per minute generally indicate the patient’s ability to tolerate pneumonectomy.7	Tumor ablative strategies are viable alternatives to surgical resection for early stage lung cancer in inoperable patients. While premature, ablative techniques may ultimately be shown to have efficacy equivalent to lobectomy for the pri-mary treatment of very small peripheral early-stage lung cancers and become primary therapy, even in operable patients, although limited resection with wedge (at least  2 cm margin and at least 1:1 tumor/margin ratio) and seg-mentectomy provide better margins of treatment and nodal sampling ensures occult nodal metastasis are identified. Multidisciplinary collaboration among thoracic surgery, interventional radiology/pulmonology, and radiation oncol-ogy is required to ensure that development of these ablative techniques occurs through properly designed and well-con-trolled prospective studies and will ensure that patients receive the best available therapy, regardless of whether it is surgical resection or ablative therapy.8	The term non–small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) includes many tumor cell types, including large cell, squa-mous cell, and adenocarcinoma. The approach to diagno-sis and management and the terminology used in describing these tumors are evolving rapidly. In particular, the evaluation and management of adenocarcinoma of the lung has shifted dramatically and firm establishment of NSCLC cell type prior to chemotherapy for advanced stage lung cancer is essential.9	Increasing evidence suggests a significant role for gastro-esophageal reflux disease in the pathogenesis of chronic lung diseases such as bronchiectasis and idiopathic pulmo-nary fibrosis, and it may also contribute to bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome in lung transplant patients.10	Treatment of pulmonary aspergillosis/aspergilloma is indi-vidualized. Following colonization of a lung cavity or area of bronchiectasis, fungal growth within the cavity appears as an irregular cavitary lining, progressing over time as a late finding in chronic pulmonary aspergillosis to a fungal ball called an aspergilloma. Asymptomatic patients can be observed without any additional therapy. Similarly, mild hemoptysis, which is not life-threatening, can be managed with medical therapy, including antifungals and cough suppressants. Oral triazole therapy is now considered the standard of care for chronic, cavitary pulmonary aspergil-losis. Massive hemoptysis had traditionally been an indi-cation for urgent or emergent operative intervention. However, with the advancement of endovascular tech-niques, bronchial artery embolization in select centers with experience in these techniques has been effective.11	In patients with malignant pleural effusion, poor expan-sion of the lung (because of entrapment by tumor or adhe-sions) generally predicts a poor result with pleurodesis and is the primary indication for placement of indwelling pleu-ral catheters. These catheters have dramatically changed the management of end-stage cancer treatment because they substantially shorten the amount of time patients spend in the hospital during their final weeks of life.Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   66201/03/19   7:00 PM
# Chunk 8883
CHAPTER 19663CHEST WALL, LUNG, MEDIASTINUM, AND PLEURAEpiglottisAryepiglottic m.Transverse, obliquearytenoid mm.Lateralcricoarytenoid m.Posteriorcricoarytenoid m.Thyroid cartilage            facetRecurrentlaryngeal n.Internallaryngeal n.Thyroepiglottic m.Thyroarytenoid m.Cricothyroid m.(cut)Inferiorthyroid a.Branch from internal thoracic a. Superior bronchial a.Middle bronchial a.1Lateral longitudinalanastomosis32Figure 19-2. Arterial blood supply to the larynx and upper trachea. a. = artery.Figure 19-1. Anatomy of the larynx and upper trachea.  m. = muscle; n. = nerve.and stenosis; full-thickness injury can result in fistulae between the innominate artery anteriorly and the esophagus posteriorly. Avoidance requires careful cuff management to keep pressures as low as possible; in circumstances of prolonged ventilatory support and high airway pressure, cuff pressure monitoring (to maintain pressures <20 mmHg) is advisable.Historically, clinically significant tracheal stenosis after tracheostomy occurred in 3% to 12% of cases, with severe stenosis in 1% to 2%.2 With the use of low-pressure cuffs, the estimated incidence has decreased to 4.9 cases per million patients per year. Intubation-related risk factors include pro-longed intubation; high tracheostomy through the first tracheal ring or cricothyroid membrane; transverse rather than vertical incision on the trachea; oversized tracheostomy tube; prior tra-cheostomy or intubation; and traumatic intubation. Stenosis is also more common in older patients, in women, after radiation, or after excessive corticosteroid therapy, and in the setting of concomitant diseases such as autoimmune disorders, severe reflux disease, or obstructive sleep apnea and the setting of severe respiratory failure. However, even a properly placed tra-cheostomy can lead to tracheal stenosis because of scarring and local injury. Mild ulceration and stenosis are frequently seen after tracheostomy removal. Use of the smallest tracheostomy tube possible, rapid downsizing, and a vertical tracheal incision minimize the risk for posttracheostomy stenosis.Stridor and dyspnea on exertion are the primary symp-toms of tracheal stenosis. In the setting of postintubation injury, a significant portion of the cartilaginous structural support to the airway is destroyed by regional ischemic necrosis; during healing, a weblike fibrous growth develops and narrows the airway (Fig. 19-3). In contrast, stenosis caused by tracheostomy is most commonly due to an excess of granulation tissue forma-tion around the tracheal stoma site. Time to onset of symptoms after extubation or tracheostomy decannulation usually ranges from 2 to 12 weeks, but symptoms can appear immediately or as long as 1 to 2 years later. Frequently, patients are misdiag-nosed as having asthma or bronchitis, and treatment for such illnesses can persist for some time before the correct diagnosis is discovered. Generally, symptom intensity is related to the degree of stenosis and to the patient’s underlying pulmonary disease.Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   66301/03/19   7:00 PM 664SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 19-3. Diagram of the principal postintubation lesions. A. A circumferential lesion at the cuff site after the use of an endotracheal tube. B. Potential lesions after the use of tracheostomy tubes. Anterolateral stenosis can be seen at the stomal level. Circumferential stenosis can be seen at the cuff level (lower than with an endotracheal tube). The segment in between is often inflamed and malacotic. C. Damage to the subglottic larynx. D. Tracheoesophageal fistula occurring at the level of the tracheostomy cuff; circumferential damage is usual at this level. E. Tracheoinnominate artery fistula. (Adapted with permission from Grillo H. Surgical treatment of postintubation tracheal injuries.  J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1979 Dec;78(6):860-875.)Acute Management. A comprehensive bronchoscopic evalua-tion is critical in the initial phase of evaluation. Stenosis length, location, distance between the vocal cords and proximal steno-sis, and distance from the distal aspect to the major carina must be documented. In patients with severe stenosis and respiratory compromise, rigid bronchoscopy can be used to dilate the steno-sis; this provides immediate relief of the airway obstruction and facilitates thorough evaluation of the stenosis. Rarely, if ever, is tracheostomy necessary.Most intubation injuries are located in the upper third of the trachea and can be accessed for resection through a col-lar incision. Resection typically involves 2 to 4 cm of trachea for benign stenosis. It is critical to fully resect all inflamed and scarred tissue. However, a primary anastomosis can still be per-formed without undue tension, even if up to one half of the tra-chea requires resection.2 Ideally, the patient is extubated in the operating room or shortly thereafter. For patients in whom tra-cheal resection is not possible, such as patients with significant comorbidities or with an excessively long stenosis, endotracheal stenting, typically silicone T-tubes, can provide palliation. Wire mesh stents should not be used, given their known propensity to erode through the wall of the airway. Balloon dilation, laser ablation, and tracheoplasty have also been described, although the efficacy is marginal.Tracheal replacement is evolving as an option for manage-ment of tracheal stenosis as bioengineering techniques for decel-lularizing donor trachea have been developed. This removes all antigens against which the recipient immune system might react and enables use of the donor trachea scaffolding without risk of rejection. Following decellularization, the donor tracheal scaf-folding is seeded with recipient chondrocytes, to restore tracheal rigidity, and with recipient epithelial cells, to recreate the inner epithelial lining. Several case reports of successful allogeneic tracheal transplantation have been published. The technique continues to be limited to a few highly specialized centers, due, in part, to the scarcity of donor trachea and the need for tissue bioengineering expertise as well as the lack of established effi-cacy for the approach. Current efforts are focused on creation of biosynthetic scaffolding that can be used instead of donor trachea. This would substantially increase the availability of the tracheal replacement material and enable widespread use of the technique, but early results have been contested, including three case reports called into question as containing multiple data fab-rications and omissions.Tracheal FistulasTracheoinnominate Artery Fistula. Tracheoinnominate artery fistula has two main causes: low placement of a trache-ostomy and hyperinflation of the tracheal cuff. Tracheostomy placement should be through the second to fourth tracheal rings without reference to the location of the sternal notch. When placed below the fourth tracheal ring, the inner curve of the tracheostomy cannula will be positioned to exert pressure on the posterior aspect of the innominate artery, leading to arterial ero-sion. Similarly, the tracheal cuff, when hyperinflated, will cause ischemic injury to the anterior airway and subsequent erosion into the artery. Most cuff-induced fistulas will develop within 2 weeks after placement of the tracheostomy.Clinically, tracheoinnominate artery fistulas present with bleeding. A premonitory hemorrhage often occurs and, although it is usually not massive, must not be ignored or simply attrib-uted to general airway irritation or wound bleeding. With sig-nificant bleeding, the tracheostomy cuff can be hyperinflated to temporarily occlude the arterial injury. If such an effort is unsuccessful, the tracheostomy incision should be immediately opened widely and a finger inserted to compress the artery Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   66401/03/19   7:00 PM
# Chunk 8884
CHAPTER 19665CHEST WALL, LUNG, MEDIASTINUM, AND PLEURA1Cuffhyperinflation2Digital control3 BronchoscopiccompressionOrotracheal tubeready in place if neededOrotrachealtube replacingtracheostomytubeForward pressureapplied withbronchoscopeFigure 19-4. Steps in the emergency management of a tracheoinnominate artery fistula.against the manubrium (Fig. 19-4). The patient can then be orally intubated, and the airway suctioned free of blood. Emer-gent surgical resection of the involved segment of artery is per-formed, usually without reconstruction.Tracheoesophageal Fistula. Tracheoesophageal fistu-las (TEFs) occur primarily in patients receiving prolonged mechanical ventilator support concomitant with an indwelling nasogastric tube.4 Cuff compression of the membranous trachea against the nasogastric tube leads to airway and esophageal injury and fistula development. Clinically, airway suctioning reveals saliva, gastric contents, or tube feedings. Gastric insuf-flation, secondary to positive pressure ventilation, can occur. Bronchoscopy is diagnostic; with the bronchoscope inserted, the endotracheal tube is withdrawn, and the fistula at the cuff site is exposed. Alternatively, esophagoscopy demonstrates the cuff of the endotracheal tube in the esophagus.Treatment, first and foremost, requires removing tubes from the esophagus and weaning the patient from the ventila-tor. The cuff of the endotracheal tube should be placed below the fistula, avoiding overinflation. To minimize aspiration, a gastrostomy tube should be placed for gastric decompression (to prevent reflux) and a jejunostomy tube for feeding. If aspira-tion persists, esophageal diversion with cervical esophagostomy can be performed. Once weaned from the ventilator, tracheal resection and primary anastomosis, repair of the esophageal defect, and interposition of a muscle flap between the trachea and esophagus can be performed (Fig. 19-5).5Tracheal NeoplasmsAlthough extremely rare, the most common primary tracheal neoplasms are squamous cell carcinomas (related to smoking) and adenoid cystic carcinomas. Clinically, tracheal tumors pres-ent with cough, dyspnea, hemoptysis, stridor, or symptoms of invasion of contiguous structures (such as the recurrent laryn-geal nerve or the esophagus). The most common radiologic finding of tracheal malignancy is tracheal stenosis, but it is found in only 50% of cases. With tumors other than squamous cell carcinomas, symptoms may persist for months because of slow tumor growth rates. Stage of presentation is advanced, with approximately 50% of patients presenting with stage IV disease. Five-year survival for all tracheal neoplasms is 40% but falls to 15% for those with stage IV disease.6Squamous cell carcinomas often present with regional lymph node metastases and are frequently unresectable at pre-sentation. Their biologic behavior is similar to that of squamous cell carcinoma of the lung. Adenoid cystic carcinomas, a type of Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   66501/03/19   7:00 PM 666SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIACBDCricoidSternohyoid m.EsophagusFigure 19-5. Single-stage operation for clo-sure of a tracheoesophageal fistula and tra-cheal resection. A. The fistula is divided, and the trachea is transected below the level of damage. B. The fistula is closed on the tra-cheal side in a single layer and the esopha-geal side in a double layer. The damaged trachea segment is resected. C. A pedicled muscle flap, such as the sternohyoid muscle, is used to buttress the esophageal repair. D. View of completed tracheal anastomosis.  m. = muscle.salivary gland tumor, are generally slow growing, spread sub-mucosally, and tend to infiltrate along nerve sheaths and within the tracheal wall. Although indolent in nature, adenoid cystic carcinomas are malignant and can spread to regional lymph nodes, lung, and bone. Squamous cell carcinoma and adenoid cystic carcinomas represent approximately 65% of all tracheal neoplasms. The remaining 35% is comprised of small cell car-cinomas, mucoepidermoid carcinomas, adenocarcinomas, lym-phomas, and others.7Therapy. Evaluation and treatment of patients with tracheal tumors should include neck and chest computed tomography (CT) and rigid bronchoscopy. Rigid bronchoscopy permits gen-eral assessment of the airway and tumor; it also allows debride-ment or laser ablation of the tumor to provide relief of dyspnea. If the tumor is judged to be completely resectable, primary resection and anastomosis is the treatment of choice for these tumors (Fig. 19-6). Up to 50% of the length of the trachea can be resected with primary anastomosis. In most tracheal resections, anterolateral tracheal mobilization and suturing of the chin to the sternum for 7 days are done routinely. Use of laryngeal and hilar release is determined at the time of surgery, based on the surgeon’s judgment of the degree of tension present. For longer resections, specialized maneuvers are necessary such as laryn-geal release and right hilar release to minimize tension on the anastomosis.Postoperative mortality, which occurs in up to 10% of patients, is associated with the length of tracheal resection, use of laryngeal release, the type of resection, and the histologic type of the cancer. Factors associated with improved long-term survival include complete resection and use of radiation as adjuvant therapy in the setting of incomplete resection.8 Due to their radiosensitivity, radiotherapy is frequently given postop-eratively after resection of both adenoid cystic carcinomas and squamous cell carcinomas.9 A dose of 50 Gy or greater is usual. Nodal positivity does not seem to be associated with worse sur-vival. Survival at 5 and 10 years is much better for adenoid Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   66601/03/19   7:00 PM
# Chunk 8885
CHAPTER 19667CHEST WALL, LUNG, MEDIASTINUM, AND PLEURAHigh-index of suspicion(cough, dyspnea, hemoptysis,stridor, and hoarseness)Complete staging: computedtomography/PETscan/mediastinoscopyFlexible/rigid bronchoscopyTumor resectablePerformance statusadequate for surgeryDebridement and/orlaser ablationPrinciples of tracheal resection• May resect up to 50% of tracheal length• Anterolateral mobilization only• Suture head in forward flexion for 7 days• Laryngeal and hilar release as needed for relief of tensionRadiotherapy 50 Gy (±chemotherapy)(primary treatment or postoperatively)Tumor unresectable1) Probable grossly positive tracheal resection margin2) Metastatic disease3) Length of resection precludes safe reconstruction4) Invasion of unresectable adjacent organsPoor performancestatuscystic (73% and 57%, respectively) than for tracheal cancers (47% and 36%, respectively; P <.05). For patients with unre-sectable tumors, radiation may be given as the primary therapy to improve local control, but it is rarely curative. For recurrent airway compromise, stenting or laser therapies should be con-sidered as part of the treatment algorithm.LUNGAnatomySegmental Anatomy. The segmental bronchial and vascular anatomy of the lungs allows subsegmental and segmental resec-tions, if the clinical situation requires or if lung tissue can be preserved10 (Fig. 19-7). Note the continuity of the pulmonary parenchyma between adjacent segments of each lobe.Lymphatic Drainage. Lymph nodes that drain the lungs are divided into two groups according to the tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) staging system for lung cancer: the pulmonary lymph nodes (N1) and the mediastinal nodes (N2) (Fig. 19-8).The N1 lymph nodes constitute the following: (a) intrapul-monary or segmental nodes that lie at points of division of seg-mental bronchi or in the bifurcations of the pulmonary artery; (b) lobar nodes that lie along the upper, middle, and lower lobe bronchi; (c) interlobar nodes located in the angles formed by the main bronchi bifurcating into the lobar bronchi; and (d) hilar nodes along the main bronchi. The interlobar lymph nodes lie in the depths of the interlobar fissure on each side and constitute a lymphatic sump for each lung, referred to as the lymphatic sump of Borrie; all of the pulmonary lobes of the corresponding lung drain into this group of nodes (Fig. 19-9). On the right, the nodes of the lymphatic sump lie around the bronchus inter-medius (bounded above by the right upper lobe bronchus and below by the middle lobe and superior segmental bronchi). On the left, the lymphatic sump is confined to the interlobar fis-sure, with the lymph nodes in the angle between the lingular and lower lobe bronchi. These nodes are always in close proximity to pulmonary arterial branches and typically must be carefully dissected to identify the pulmonary arterial segments for divi-sion during lung resection.The N2 lymph nodes consist of four main groups. (a) The anterior mediastinal nodes are located in association with the upper surface of the pericardium, the phrenic nerves, the liga-mentum arteriosum, and the left aspect of the innominate vein. (b) The posterior mediastinal group includes paraesophageal lymph nodes within the inferior pulmonary ligament and, more superiorly, between the esophagus and trachea near the arch of the azygos vein. (c) The tracheobronchial lymph nodes are made up of three subgroups that are located near the bifurcation of the trachea. These include the subcarinal nodes, which lie in the obtuse angle between the trachea and each main stem bronchus, and the nodes that lay anterior to the lower end of the trachea. (d) Paratracheal lymph nodes are located in proximity to the trachea in the superior mediastinum. Those on the right side form a chain with the tracheobronchial nodes inferiorly and with some of the deep cervical nodes above (scalene lymph nodes).Lymphatic drainage to the mediastinal lymph nodes from the right lung is ipsilateral, except for occasional bilateral drain-age to the superior mediastinum. In contrast, in the left lung, particularly the left lower lobe, lymphatic drainage occurs with equal frequency to ipsilateral and contralateral superior medi-astinal nodes.Figure 19-6. Algorithm for eval-uation and treatment of tracheal neoplasm. PET = positron emis-sion tomography.Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   66701/03/19   7:00 PM 668SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIRight lung and bronchiLeft lung and bronchi11112222333333444445555556666668888888999999101010101010107771+21+2Segments 1. Apical2. Posterior3. Anterior4. Lateral5. Medial6.   Superior7.   Medial Basal *8.   Anterior Basal9.   Lateral Basal10. Posterior Basal * Medial basal (7) not present in left lungFigure 19-7. Segmental anatomy of the lungs and bronchi.3p3a6AoPA512LBrachiocephalicartery2R4RAo4LAzygos vein10R711R12,13,14R8R9R9L8LPA11L10L12,13,14LFigure 19-8. The location of regional lymph node stations for lung cancer.Figure 19-9. The lymphatic sump of Borrie includes the groups of lymph nodes that receive lymphatic drainage from all pulmonary lobes of the corresponding lung.Normal Lung HistologyThe lung can be conveniently viewed as two linked compo-nents: the tracheobronchial tree (or conducting airways com-ponent) and the alveolar spaces (or gas exchange component). The tracheobronchial tree consists of approximately 23 airway divisions to the level of the alveoli. It includes the main bronchi, lobar bronchi, segmental bronchi (to designated bronchopulmo-nary segments), and terminal bronchioles (i.e., the smallest air-ways still lined by bronchial epithelium and without alveoli). The tracheobronchial tree is normally lined by pseudostratified ciliated columnar cells and mucous (or goblet) cells, which both derive from basal cells (Fig. 19-10). Ciliated cells predominate. Goblet cells, which release mucus, can significantly increase in number in acute bronchial injury, such as exposure to cigarette smoke. The normal bronchial epithelium also contains bron-chial submucosal glands, which are mixed salivary-type glands Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   66801/03/19   7:00 PM
# Chunk 8886
CHAPTER 19669CHEST WALL, LUNG, MEDIASTINUM, AND PLEURABAFigure 19-10. Normal lung histology. A. Pseudostratified ciliated columnar cells and mucous cells normally line the tracheobronchial tree. B. A Kulchitsky cell is depicted (arrow).containing mucous cells, serous cells, and neuroendocrine cells called Kulchitsky cells, which are also found within the surface epithelium. The bronchial submucosal glands can give rise to salivary gland–type tumors, including mucoepidermoid carci-nomas and adenoid cystic carcinomas.Two cell types, called type I and type II pneumocytes, make up the alveolar epithelium. Type I pneumocytes com-prise 40% of the total number of alveolar epithelial cells, but cover 95% of the surface area of the alveolar wall. These cells are not capable of regeneration because they have no mitotic potential. Type II pneumocytes cover only 3% of the alveo-lar surface, but comprise 60% of the alveolar epithelial cells. In addition, clusters of neuroendocrine cells are seen in the alveolar spaces.Preinvasive LesionsThe term “precancerous” does not mean that an inevitable pro-gression to invasive carcinoma will occur, but such lesions, particularly those with high-grade dysplasia,11,12 do constitute a clear marker for potential development of invasive cancer. Three precancerous lesions of the respiratory tract are currently recognized.1.	Squamous dysplasia and carcinoma in situ. Cigarette smoke can induce a transformation of the tracheobron-chial pseudostratified epithelium to metaplastic squamous mucosa, with subsequent evolution to dysplasia as cellu-lar abnormalities accumulate. Dysplastic changes include altered cellular polarity and increased cell size, number of cell layers, nuclear-to-cytoplasmic ratio, and number of mitoses. Gradations are considered mild, moderate, or severe. Carcinoma in situ represents carcinoma still con-fined by the basement membrane.2.	Atypical adenomatous hyperplasia (AAH). AAH is a lesion smaller than 5.0 mm, comprising epithelial cells lining the alveoli that are similar to type II pneumocytes. Histologically, AAH is similar to adenocarcinoma in situ; it represents the beginning stage of a stepwise evolution to adenocarcinoma in situ and then to adenocarcinoma. With the availability of thin-section CT, it is possible to detect Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   66901/03/19   7:00 PM 670SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIpreinvasive adenocarcinoma lesions as early as AAH. These lesions can be multiple, are typically small (5 mm or less), and have a ground-glass appearance.3.	Diffuse idiopathic pulmonary neuroendocrine cell hyper-plasia. This rare lesion represents a diffuse proliferation of neuroendocrine cells, but without invasion of the basement membrane. It can exist as a diffuse increase in the number of single neuroendocrine cells, or as small lesions less than 5.0 mm in diameter. Lesions over 5.0 mm in size or that breach the basement membrane are carcinoid tumors.Invasive or Malignant LesionsThe pathologic diagnosis of lung cancer is currently based on light microscopic criteria and is broadly divided into two main groups: non–small cell lung carcinoma and neuroendocrine tumors.13 Immunohistochemical staining and electron micros-copy are used as adjuncts in diagnosis, particularly in the assess-ment of potential neuroendocrine tumors.Non–Small Cell Lung Carcinoma. The term non–small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) includes many tumor cell types, including large cell, squamous cell, and adenocarcinoma. His-torically, these subtypes were considered to be a uniform group based on limited understanding of the distinct clinical behaviors of the subtypes as well as the fact that there were few treat-ment options available. With increasing understanding of the molecular biology underlying these tumor subtypes, however, the approach to diagnosis and management and the terminology used in describing these tumors are evolving rapidly.Adenocarcinoma The incidence of adenocarcinoma has increased over the last several decades, and it is now the most common lung cancer, accounting for 30% of lung cancers in Table 19-1Difference between invasive mucinous adenocarcinoma and nonmucinous adenocarcinoma in situ/minimally invasive adenocarcinoma/lepidic predominant adenocarcinoma INVASIVE MUCINOUS ADENOCARCINOMA  (FORMERLY MUCINOUS BAC)NONMUCINOUS AIS/MIA/LPA  (FORMERLY NONMUCINOUS BAC)Female49/84 (58%)52,120-123101/140 (72%)52,120-123Smoker39/87 (45%)52,120-122,12475/164 (46%)52,120-122,124Radiographic appearanceMajority consolidation; air bronchogram125Majority ground-glass attenuation23,56,58,103,129-134 Frequent multifocal and multilobar presentation56,125-128 Cell typeMucin-filled, columnar, and/or goblet50-52,125,135Type II pneumocyte and/or Clara cell50-52,125,135Phenotype   CK7Mostly positive (∼88%)a54,55,136-139Positive (∼98%)a54,55,136-139 CK20Positive (∼54%)a54,55,136-139Negative (∼5%)a54,55,136-139 TTF-1Mostly negative (∼17%)a54,55,120,137-139Positive (∼67%)a54,55,120,137-139Genotype   KRAS mutationFrequent (∼76%)a55,94,121,127,140-144Some (∼13%)a55,121,127,140-144 EGFR mutationAlmost none (∼3)a55,121,127,140-142Frequent (∼45%)a55,121,127,140-142Note: aNumbers represent the percentage of cases that are reported to be positive.Abbreviations: BAC = bronchioloalveolar carcinoma; AIS = adenocarcinoma in situ; MIA = minimally invasive adenocarcinoma; LPA = lepidic predominant adenocarcinoma; EGFR = epidermal growth factor receptor; TTF = thyroid transcription factor.Reproduced with permission from Travis WD, Brambilla E, Noguchi M, et al: International association for the study of lung cancer/american thoracic society/european respiratory society international multidisciplinary classification of lung adenocarcinoma, J Thorac Oncol. 2011 Feb;6(2):244-285.male smokers and 40% of lung cancers in female smokers.  Adenocarcinoma is the histologic subtype for 80% and 60% of lung cancers in nonsmoking females and males, respectively. It occurs more frequently in females than in males. It is the most frequent histologic subtype in women, patients who are under 45 years of age, and Asian populations.14Histologic Subtyping of Adenocarcinoma. Increasing under-standing of lung adenocarcinoma, such as important clinical, radiologic, pathologic, and genetic differences between mucinous and nonmucinous adenocarcinomas, prompted multiple changes in the classification system in 2011.15 Based on consensus, the international working group proposed a multidisciplinary approach, with standardized criteria and terminology for diagno-sis in cytologic and small biopsy specimens, and routine molecu-lar testing for known mutations, such as EGFR and KRAS mutations (Table 19-1). The new classification system delineated a stepwise pathologic progression, from AAH to invasive adenocarcinoma based on the predominant histologic growth patterns; the terms bronchioloalveolar carcinoma and mixed subtype adenocarcinoma were eliminated in favor of more biologically driven classification (Table 19-2).1.	Adenocarcinoma in situ (AIS). AISs are small (≤3 cm) sol-itary adenocarcinomas that have pure lepidic growth; lepidic growth is characterized by tumor growth within the alveolar spaces. These lesions are not invasive into the stroma, vas-cular system, or pleura and do not have papillary or micro-papillary patterns or intra-alveolar tumor cells. They are very rarely mucinous, consisting of type II pneumocytes or Clara cells. These patients are expected to have 100% dis-ease-specific survival with complete surgical resection. On CT scan, AIS can appear as a pure ground-glass neoplasm, 123Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   67001/03/19   7:00 PM
# Chunk 8887
CHAPTER 19671CHEST WALL, LUNG, MEDIASTINUM, AND PLEURATable 19-2New classification system for lung adenocarcinomaPreinvasive lesions Atypical adenomatous hyperplasia Adenocarcinoma in situ (≤3 cm formerly BAC)  Nonmucinous  Mucinous  Mixed mucinous/nonmucinousMinimally invasive adenocarcinoma (≤3 cm lepidic predominant tumor with ≤5 mm invasion) Nonmucinous Mucinous Mixed mucinous/nonmucinousInvasive adenocarcinoma Lepidic predominant (formerly nonmucinous BAC pattern, with >5 mm invasion) Acinar predominant Papillary predominant Micropapillary predominant Solid predominant with mucin productionVariants of invasive adenocarcinoma Invasive mucinous adenocarcinoma (formerly  mucinous BAC) Colloid Fetal (low and high grade) EntericAbbreviations: BAC = bronchioloalveolar carcinoma; IASLC = International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer; ATS = American Thoracic Society; ERS = European Respiratory Society.Reproduced with permission from Travis WD, Brambilla E, Noguchi M,  et al: International association for the study of lung cancer/american thoracic society/european respiratory society international multidisciplinary classification of lung adenocarcinoma, J Thorac Oncol. 2011 Feb;6(2):244-285.but occasionally it will present as part of a solid or part-solid nodule. Mucinous AIS is more likely to appear solid or to have the appearance of consolidation. As with AAH, the lesions can be single or multiple; the ground-glass changes in AIS, however, tend to have a higher attenuation com-pared to AAH. The 8th edition American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) staging manual t-stage for AIS is tumor in situ (Tis).2.	Minimally invasive adenocarcinoma (MIA). In the same size solitary lesion, if less than 5 mm of invasion are noted within a predominantly lepidic growth pattern, the lesion is termed minimally invasive adenocarcinoma (MIA) to indicate a patient group with near 100% survival when the lesion is completely resected. This differentiates patients with AIS, but recognizes the fact that the presence of invasion becomes prognostically significant when the size of the invasive com-ponent reaches 5 mm or greater in size.16 If multiple areas of microscopic invasion are found within the lepidic growth, the size of the largest invasive area, measured in the larg-est dimension, is used; this area must be ≤5 mm to be con-sidered MIA. As with AIS, MIA is very rarely mucinous. The invasive component histologically is acinar, papillary, micropapillary, and/or solid and shows tumor cells infil-trating into the surrounding myofibroblastic stroma. On CT scan, the appearance of MIA is often a part-solid nodule (≤5 mm) with a predominant ground-glass component, but can be highly variable. The 8th edition American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) staging manual t-stage for MIA is T1mi.3.	Lepidic predominant adenocarcinoma (LPA). If lympho-vascular invasion, pleural invasion, tumor necrosis, or more than 5 mm of invasion are noted in a lesion that has lepidic growth as its predominant component, MIA is excluded, the lesion is called lepidic predominant adenocarcinoma (LPA), and the size of the invasive component is recorded for the T stage.4.	Invasive adenocarcinoma. The new classification system now recommends classifying invasive adenocarcinoma by the most predominant subtype after histologic evaluation of the resection specimen. To determine the predominant subtype, histologic sections are evaluated, and the patterns are determined, in 5% increments, throughout the speci-men. This semiquantitative method encourages the viewer to identify and quantify all patterns present, rather than focus-ing on a single pattern. In the pathology report, the tumor is classified by the predominant pattern, with percentages of the subtypes also reported (Fig. 19-11).Subtypes include:a.	Lepidic predominantb.	Acinar predominantc.	Papillary predominantd.	Micropapillary predominante.	Solid predominantAdenocarcinoma is often peripherally located and frequently discovered incidentally on routine chest radiographs, unlike squamous cell cancers. When symptoms occur, they are due to pleural or chest wall invasion (pleuritic or chest wall pain) or pleural seeding with malignant pleural effusion. Invasive adenocarcinoma is usually solid by CT scan, but can also be part-solid and even a ground-glass nodule. Occasionally, a lobar ground-glass opacification may be present, which is often associated with significant respiratory compromise and can be mistaken for lobar pneumonia. Bubble-like or cystic lucency on CT scan in small (≤2 cm) adenocarcinomas or extensive associated ground-glass components correlate with slow growth and well-differentiated tumors and a more favor-able prognosis. Intratumoral air bronchograms are usually indicative of well-differentiated tumor, whereas spiculations that are coarse and thick (≥2 mm) portend vascular invasion and nodal metastasis and are associated with decreased sur-vival following complete surgical resection. Pleural retraction is also a poor prognostic indicator.5.	Additional histologic variants include colloid adenocarci-noma (formerly mucinous cystadenocarcinoma), fetal ade-nocarcinoma, and enteric adenocarcinoma. Clear cell and signet ring cell types are no longer considered to be distinct subtypes as they are found in association with most of the five dominant histologic patterns (lepidic, acinar, papillary, micropapillary, and solid). However, they are still notable, as they can signal clinically relevant molecular changes, such as the presence of the EML4-ALK fusion gene in solid tumors with signet ring features.Squamous Cell Carcinoma Representing 30% to 40% of lung cancers, squamous cell carcinoma is the most frequent cancer in men and highly correlated with cigarette smoking. They arise primarily in the main, lobar, or first segmental bronchi, which are collectively referred to as the central airways. Symptoms of airway irritation or obstruction are common, and include cough, Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   67101/03/19   7:00 PM 672SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 19-11. Major histologic patterns of invasive adenocarcinoma. A. Lepidic predominant pattern with mostly lepidic growth (right) and a smaller area of invasive acinar adenocarcinoma (left). B. Lepidic pattern consists of a proliferation type II pneumo-cytes and Clara cells along the surface alveolar walls.  C. Area of invasive acinar adenocarcinoma (same tumor as in A and B). D. Acinar adenocarcinoma con-sists of round to oval-shaped malignant glands invad-ing a fibrous stroma. E. Papillary adenocarcinoma consists of malignant cuboidal to columnar tumor cells growing on the surface of fibrovascular cores. F. Micropapillary adenocarcinoma consists of small papillary clusters of glandular cells growing within this airspace, most of which do not show fibrovascular cores. G. Solid adenocarcinoma with mucin consist-ing of sheets of tumor cells with abundant cytoplasm and mostly vesicular nuclei with several conspicuous nucleoli. No acinar, papillary, or lepidic patterns are seen, but multiple cells have intracytoplasmic baso-philic globules that suggest intracytoplasmic mucin. H. Solid adenocarcinoma with mucin. Numerous intracytoplasmic droplets of mucin are highlighted with this diastase-periodic acid Schiff stain. (Repro-duced with permission from Travis WD, Brambilla E, Noguchi M, et al: International association for the study of lung cancer/american thoracic society/european respiratory society international multidisci-plinary classification of lung adenocarcinoma, J Thorac Oncol. 2011 Feb;6(2):244-285.)hemoptysis, wheezing (due to high-grade airway obstruction), dyspnea (due to bronchial obstruction with or without postob-structive atelectasis), and pneumonia (caused by airway obstruc-tion with secretion retention and atelectasis).Occasionally a more peripherally based squamous cell carcinoma will develop in a tuberculosis scar or in the wall of a bronchiectatic cavity. Histologically, cells develop a pattern of clusters with intracellular bridges and keratin pearls. Central necrosis is frequent and may lead to the radiographic findings of a cavity (possibly with an air-fluid level). Such cavities may become infected, with resultant abscess formation.Large Cell Carcinoma Large cell carcinoma accounts for 10% to 20% of lung cancers and may be located centrally or periph-erally. These tumors have cell diameters of 30 to 50 µm, which are often admixed with various other malignant cell types. Large cell carcinoma can be confused with a large cell variant of neu-roendocrine carcinoma, but can be differentiated by special immunohistochemical stains.Salivary Gland–Type Neoplasms. Salivary-type submucosal bronchial glands throughout the tracheobronchial tree can give rise to tumors that are histologically identical to those seen in the salivary glands. The two most common are adenoid cystic carcinoma and mucoepidermoid carcinoma. Both occur cen-trally due to their site of origin. Adenoid cystic carcinoma is a slow-growing tumor that is locally and systemically invasive, growing submucosally and infiltrating along perineural sheaths. Mucoepidermoid carcinoma consists of squamous and mucous cells and is graded as low or high grade, depending on mitotic rate and degree of necrosis.Neuroendocrine Neoplasms. Neuroendocrine lung tumors are classified into neuroendocrine hyperplasia and three grades of neuroendocrine carcinoma (NEC). Immunohistochemical staining for neuroendocrine markers (including chromogranins, synaptophysin, CD57, and neuron-specific enolase) is essential to accurate diagnosis.17Grade I NEC (classic or typical carcinoid) is a low-grade NEC; 80% arise in the central airway epithelium and occur primarily in younger patients. Because it is a central lesion, hemoptysis, with or without airway obstruction and pneumonia is the most common presentation. Histologically, tumor cells Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   67201/03/19   7:00 PM
# Chunk 8888
CHAPTER 19673CHEST WALL, LUNG, MEDIASTINUM, AND PLEURAare arranged in cords and clusters with a rich vascular stroma, which can lead to life-threatening hemorrhage with even simple bronchoscopic biopsy maneuvers. Regional lymph node metas-tases are seen in 15% of patients, but systemic spread and death from Grade I NEC is rare.Grade II NECs (atypical carcinoid) have a much higher malignant potential and, unlike grade I NEC, are etiologically linked to cigarette smoking and more likely to be peripherally located. Histologic findings may include areas of necrosis, nuclear pleomorphism, and higher mitotic rates. Lymph node metastases are found in 30% to 50% of patients. At diagnosis, 25% of patients already have remote metastases.Grade III NEC large cell–type tumors occur primarily in heavy smokers and in the mid to peripheral lung fields. Often large with central necrosis and a high mitotic rate, their neuro-endocrine nature is revealed by positive immunohistochemical staining for at least one neuroendocrine marker.Grade IV NEC (small cell lung carcinoma [SCLC]) is the most malignant NEC and accounts for 25% of all lung cancers; these NECs often have early, widespread metastases. These cancers also arise primarily in the central airways. As with squamous cell cancers, symptoms include cough, hemoptysis, wheezing (due to high-grade airway obstruction), dyspnea (due to bronchial obstruction with or without postobstructive atel-ectasis), and pneumonia (caused by airway obstruction with secretion retention and atelectasis). Evaluation includes expert pathology review and comprehensive evaluation for metastatic disease. Three groups of grade IV NEC are recognized: pure small cell carcinoma (previously referred to as oat cell carci-noma), small cell carcinoma with a large cell component, and combined (mixed) tumors.Grade IV NECs consist of smaller cells (diameter 10 to 20 µm) with little cytoplasm and very dark nuclei; they can be difficult to distinguish from lymphoproliferative lesions and atypical carcinoid tumors. Histologically, a high mitotic rate with easily visualized multiple mitoses and areas of extensive necrosis are characteristic. Importantly, very small bronchoscopic biopsies can distinguish NSCLC from SCLC, but crush artifact may make NSCLC appear similar to SCLC. If uncertainty exists, special immunohistochemical stains or rebiopsy (or both) will be necessary. These tumors are the leading producer of paraneoplastic syndromes.Lung Cancer EpidemiologyLung cancer is the leading cancer killer and second most frequently diagnosed cancer in the United States, account-ing for 26% of all cancer deaths in 2017—more than cancers of the breast, prostate, ovary, and colon and rectum com-bined (Fig. 19-12).18 Lung cancer incidence continues to decline, though at twice the rate for men compared to women (Fig. 19-13A, B). It is encouraging, however, that the average annual death rate declined by 3.5% per year for men and 2% per year for women from 2010 to 2014, representing a 43% decline in mortality for men and a 17% decline for women from 1990 MalesFemalesBreastLung & bronchusColon & rectumUterine corpusNon-Hodgkin lymphomaThyroidMelanoma of the skinPancreasLeukemiaKidney & renal pelvisAll Sites252,710105,51064,01061,38042,47034,94032,16025,84025,70023,380852,63030%12%8%7%5%4%4%3%3%3%100%MalesFemalesLung & bronchusProstateColon & rectumPancreasLiver & intrahepatic bile ductLeukemiaEsophagusUrinary bladderNon-Hodgkin lymphomaBrain & other nervous systemAll SitesLung & bronchusBreastColon & rectumPancreasOvaryLeukemiaNon-Hodgkin lymphomaUterine corpusLiver & intrahepatic bile ductBrain & other nervous systemAll Sites71,28040,61023,11020,79014,08010,92010,2009,3108,6907,080282,50025%14%8%7%5%4%4%3%3%3%100%84,59027,15026,73022,30019,61014,30012,72012,24011,4509,620318,42027%9%8%7%6%4%4%4%4%3%100%ProstateLung & bronchusColon & rectumUrinary bladderMelanoma of the skinNon-Hodgkin lymphomaKidney & renal pelvisOral cavity & pharynxLeukemiaLiver & intrahepatic bile ductAll Sites161,360116,99071,42060,49052,17040,61040,08036,29035,72029,200836,15019%14%9%7%6%5%5%4%4%3%100%Estimated new casesEstimated deathsFigure 19-12. Leading new cancer cases and deaths: 2017 estimates. *Excludes basal and squamous cell skin cancers and in situ carcinomas except urinary bladder. (Reproduced with permission from Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A: Cancer Statistics, 2017, CA Cancer J Clin. 2017 Jan;67(1):7-30.)Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   67301/03/19   7:00 PM 674SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 19-13. Trends in death rates by sex for select cancers, United States, 1930 to 2014. A. Males. B. Female rates are age-adjusted to the 2000 U.S. standard population. Due to improvements in International Classification of Diseases (ICD) coding over time, numerator data for cancers of the lung and bronchus, colon and rectum, liver, and uterus differ from the contemporary time period. For example, rates for lung and bronchus include pleura, trachea, mediastinum, and other respiratory organs. (Adapted with permission from Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A: Cancer Statistics, 2017, CA Cancer J Clin. 2017 Jan;67(1):7-30.)0102030405060708090100Pancreas†StomachLung and BronchusColon and RectumProstateLiver†LeukemiaTrends in Age-Adjusted Cancer Death Rates* by Site, Males, US, 1930-2014*Per 100,000, age adjusted to the 2000 US standard population.†Mortality rates for pancreatic and liver cancers are increasing.1930193419381942194619501954195819621966197019741978198219861990199419982002200620102014Trends in Age-Adjusted Cancer Death Rates* by Site, Females, US, 1930-2014*Per 100,000, age adjusted to the 2000 US standard population.†Uterus refers to uterine cervix and uterine corpus combined.‡Mortality rates for liver cancer are increasing.010203040505152535451930193419381942194619501954195819621966197019741978198219861990199419982002200620102014StomachColon and RectumPancreas‡Lung and BronchusBreastUterus†Liver‡Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   67401/03/19   7:00 PM
# Chunk 8889
CHAPTER 19675CHEST WALL, LUNG, MEDIASTINUM, AND PLEURATable 19-3Relative risk of lung cancer in smokersSMOKING CATEGORYRELATIVE RISKNever smoked1.0Currently smoke15.8–16.3Formerly smoked  Years of abstinence  1–95.9–19.5 10–192.0–6.1 >201.9–3.7Data from Samet JM. Health benefits of smoking cessation, Clin Chest Med. 1991;12(4):669-679.to 2014.18 Unfortunately, most patients are still diagnosed at an advanced stage of disease (22% with regional metastasis and 57% with distant metastasis), so therapy is rarely curative.18Prognostic markers for lung cancer survival include female sex (5-year survival of 18.3% for women vs. 13.8% for men), younger age (5-year survival of 22.8% for those  <45 years vs. 13.7% for those >65 years), and white race (5-year survival of 16.1% for whites vs. 12.2% for blacks). When access to advanced medical care is unrestricted, as for the military pop-ulation, the racial difference in survival disappears, suggesting that, at least in part, differences in survival may be explained by less access to advanced medical care and later diagnosis.19Risk Factors for Lung Cancer. Cigarette smoking is the leading preventable cause of cancer death, accounting for 29% of the popu-lation attributable fraction in 2010, and is implicated as a causal factor in approximately 90% of lung cancers in men and nearly 80% in women. Two lung cancer types—squamous cell and small cell carcinoma—are extraordinarily rare in the absence of cigarette smoking. The risk of developing lung cancer escalates with the number of cigarettes smoked, the number of years of smoking, and the use of unfiltered cigarettes. Conversely, the risk of lung cancer declines with smoking cessation, but never drops to that of never smokers, regardless of the length of abstinence (Table 19-3).20 Radon exposure accounts for the vast majority of the remaining cancers. Approximately 25% of all lung cancers worldwide and 53% of cancers in women are not related to smoking, and most of them (62%) are adenocarcinomas. Table 19-4 summarizes the existing data regarding the etiology of lung cancer in nonsmokers.21Nearly 3500 deaths from lung cancer each year are attrib-utable to secondhand (environmental) smoke exposure, which confers an excess risk for lung cancer of 24% when a non-smoker lives with a smoker.22 Risk is conferred by exposure to any burning tobacco, including cigars. The amount of second-hand exposure from one large cigar is equivalent to the exposure from 21 cigarettes. As with active smoking, risk of developing lung cancer increases with longer duration and higher level of exposure to environmental tobacco.Over 7000 chemicals have been identified in tobacco smoke, and more than 70 of the compounds are known to be carcinogens. The main chemical carcinogens are polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, which are actively or passively inhaled in the tobacco smoke and absorbed; these compounds are acti-vated by specific enzymes and become mutagenic, bind to mac-romolecules such as deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), and induce genetic mutations. In treating any patient with a previous smok-ing history, it is important to remember that there has been field cancerization of the entire aerodigestive tract. The patient’s risk is increased for cancers of the oral cavity, pharynx, larynx, tra-cheobronchial tree and lung, and esophagus. In examining such patients, a detailed history and physical examination of these organ systems must be performed.Other causes of lung cancer include exposure to a num-ber of industrial compounds, including asbestos, arsenic, and chromium compounds. In fact, the combination of asbestos and cigarette smoke exposure has a multiplicative effect on risk. Pre-existing lung disease confers an increased risk of lung cancer—up to 13%—for individuals who have never smoked. Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease are at higher risk for lung cancer than would be predicted based on smoking risk alone. Patients with secondary scar formation related to a his-tory of tuberculosis or other lung infections also have a higher risk of primary lung carcinoma. This increase is thought to be related to poor clearance of inhaled carcinogens and/or to the effects of chronic inflammation.Screening for Lung Cancer in  High-Risk PopulationsIn 2002, the National Lung Screening Trial (NLST) was launched to determine whether screening with CT in high-risk populations would reduce mortality from lung cancer. The study randomized 53,353 eligible patients age 55 to 74 years to either three annual low-dose helical CT scans (LDCT; aka spiral CT) or posteroante-rior view chest radiograph. Patients were eligible for the trial if they had a greater than 30 pack-year history of cigarette smoking; had smoked within the past 15 years if a former smoker; had no prior history of lung cancer; had no history of other life-threatening cancers in the prior 5 years; did not have symptoms suggestive of an undiagnosed lung cancer (such as hemoptysis or weight loss); and had not had a chest CT scan in the prior 18 months. Accrual to the study was excellent, and the primary endpoint of a 20% rela-tive reduction in mortality was achieved in 2010. An absolute risk reduction of lung cancer death of four per 1000 individuals screened by LDCT was realized. Interestingly, all-cause mortality was also reduced by nearly 7% in the LDCT group, further empha-sizing the impact of lung cancer on the mortality of smokers and former smokers.23 The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force  (USPSTF) now recommends annual screening for lung cancer with low-dose computed tomography screening in high risk patients.  Annual screening averted 14% of lung cancer deaths when applied to a population of asymptomatic adults age 55 to 80 years who have a 30 pack-year smoking history and are either currently smoking or have quit within the past 15 years. Patients should be healthy enough to tolerate curative treatment, specifically surgery per guidelines, and screening should be dis-continued once the patient has not smoked for 15 years or develops a life-limiting health condition, becomes unable to tolerate lung surgery or is unwilling to undergo curative lung resection. Require-ments for coverage differ between Medicare and private insurers, with private insurers following the USPSTF guidelines, while Medicare uses age 55 to 77 years with the same smoking history but does not define comorbid conditions. Use of standardized reporting with criteria for lung nodule identification and classifica-tion is required by the Center for Medicaid & Medicare Services (CMS) but is only recommended by private insurers. Shared deci-sion-making is also required by Medicare, but it is only recom-mended by private insurers. Medicare also differs from private 4Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   67501/03/19   7:00 PM 676SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 19-4Summary of selected studies of risk factors for lung cancer in individuals who never smokedRISK FACTORRISK ESTIMATE (95% CI)COMMENTSREFERENCEEnvironmental tobacco smoke1.19 (90% CI: 1.04–1.35)Meta-analysis of 11 U.S. studies of spousal exposure (females only)2251.21 (1.13–1.30)Meta-analysis of 44 case-control studies worldwide of spousal exposure2261.22 (1.13–1.33)Meta-analysis of 25 studies worldwide of workplace exposure2261.24 (1.18–1.29)Meta-analysis of 22 studies worldwide of workplace exposure227Residential radon8.4% (3.0%–15.8%) per 100 Bq m3 increase in measured radonMeta-analysis of 13 European studies22811% (0%–28%) per 100 Bq m3Meta-analysis of 7 North American studies229Cooking oil vapors2.12 (1.81–2.47)Meta-analysis of 7 studies from China and Taiwan (females who never smoked)230Indoor coal and wood burning2.66 (1.39–5.07)Meta-analysis of 7 studies from China and Taiwan (both sexes)2301.22 (1.04–1.44)Large case-control study (2861 cases and 3118 controls) from Eastern and Central Europe (both sexes)2312.5 (1.5–3.6)Large case-control study (1205 cases and 1541 controls) from Canada (significant for women only)232Genetic factors: family history, CYP1A1 Ile462Val polymorphism, XRCC1 variants1.51 (1.11–2.06)Meta-analysis of 28 case-control, 17 cohort, and 7 twin studies2332.99 (1.51–5.91)Meta-analysis of 14 case-control studies of Caucasian never smokers2342.04 (1.17–3.54)Meta-analysis of 21 case-control studies of Caucasian and Asian never smokers (significant for Caucasians only)235No associationMeta-analysis of 13 case-control studies236No association overall; reduced risk 0.65 (0.46–0.83) with Arg194Trp polymorphism and 0.56 (0.36–0.86) with Arg280His for heavy smokersLarge case-control study from Europe (2188 cases and 2198 controls)237Increased risk for never smokers 1.3 (1.0–1.8) and decreased risk for heavy smokers 0.5 (0.3–1.0) with Arg299GlnLarge case-control study from the  United States (1091 cases and  1240 controls)238Viral factors: HPV 16 and 1810.12 (3.88–26.4) for never smoking women >60 yCase-control study (141 cases, 60 controls) from Taiwan of never smoking women239Abbreviations: Bq = becquerels; CI = confidence interval; CYP1A1 = cytochrome P450 enzyme 1A1; HPV = human papilloma virus.Reproduced with permission from Sun S, Schiller JH, Gazdar AF: Lung cancer in never smokers—a different disease, Nat Rev Cancer. 2007 Oct; 7(10):778-790.insurers in that it requires accreditation of the imaging center and submission of all low-dose CT data to a CMS-approved national registry, among other specifications. With this approach, it is expected that 50% of diagnosed cancers will be early stage. Screening of patients age 50 years or older with a 20 pack-year or greater history and additional risk factors (as determined by the Tammemagi lung cancer risk calculator or other validated risk scores) that increase the risk of lung cancer to 1.3% or greater should also be considered as part of lung cancer screening pro-grams. In all cases, patient–physician shared decision-making should be undertaken, with a discussion of the risks and benefits of screening. It is important to note that there was a 7% false-positive rate in NLST trial, which can lead to patient anxiety, invasive testing, and potentially morbid procedures to further evaluate the finding. The impact of these issues on patient quality of life and cost-effectiveness requires further study, particularly as screening programs are implemented outside of the controlled set-ting of a clinical trial. It is also critical that regulatory guidelines for patient eligibility, frequency of screening, interpretation of the scans, processes for further evaluation and management of posi-tive findings, and dose of radiation are well established and well accepted to ensure the generalizability of the results for patients who will be screened in the general medical community rather than in the specialized centers that performed the trial.Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   67601/03/19   7:00 PM
# Chunk 8890
CHAPTER 19677CHEST WALL, LUNG, MEDIASTINUM, AND PLEURAABCDFigure 19-14. Spiral computed tomography scan showing normal transverse chest anatomy at four levels. A. At the level of the tracheal bifurcation, the aorticopulmonary window can be seen. B. The origin of the left pulmonary artery can be seen at a level 1 cm inferior to A. C. The origin and course of the right pulmonary artery can be seen at this next most cephalad level. The left upper lobe bronchus can be seen at its origin from the left main bronchus. D. Cardiac chambers and pulmonary veins are seen in the lower thorax. AA = ascending aorta; APW =  aorticopulmonary window; DA = descending aorta; LA = left ventricle; LMB = left main bronchus; LPA = left pulmonary artery; MPA = main pulmonary artery; RA = right atrium; RPA = right pulmonary artery; RV = right ventricle; SVC = superior vena cava; T = trachea.Solitary Pulmonary NoduleA solitary pulmonary nodule is typically described as a single, well-circumscribed, spherical lesion that is 3 cm or less cm in diameter and completely surrounded by normal aerated lung parenchyma.24 Lung atelectasis, hilar enlargement, and pleural effusion are absent. The majority are detected incidentally on chest radiographs (CXRs) or CT scans obtained for some other purpose. About 150,000 solitary nodules are found inciden-tally each year, with increasing numbers as low-dose computed tomography screening in high-risk populations is adopted. The clinical significance of such a lesion depends on whether or not it represents a malignancy.The differential diagnosis of a solitary pulmonary nodule should include a broad variety of congenital, neoplastic, inflam-matory, vascular, and traumatic disorders. The probability of cancer in a solitary pulmonary nodule increases if the patient has a history of smoking (50% or higher for smokers compared to 20% to 40% in never smokers). It is also more likely to be malignant if it is symptomatic or the patient is older, male, or has had occupational exposures.Solitary pulmonary nodules were defined by findings on CXR, but with the increased sensitivity of low-dose screening CT, up to 50% of solitary lesions are found to be associated with multiple (one to six) other, usually subcentimeter, nodules. In the Early Lung Cancer Action project, almost 7% of healthy volunteers were found to have between one and three nodules, and 25% had up to six nodules. CT scanning is necessary to characterize nodule number, location, size, margin morphol-ogy, calcification pattern, and growth rate.25 Spiral (helical) CT allows continuous scanning as the patient is moved through a scanning gantry, allowing the entire thorax to be imaged during a single breath hold (Fig. 19-14). Compared to conventional CT, this provides a superior image quality, because motion artifacts are eliminated, and improves detection of pulmonary nodules and central airway abnormalities.26 The shorter acquisition time of spiral CT also allows for consistent contrast filling of the great vessels, resulting in markedly improved visualization of pathologic states and anatomic variation contiguous to vascular structures. In addition, three-dimensional spiral CT images can be reconstructed for enhanced visualization of spatial anatomic relationships.27 Thin sections (1 to 2 mm collimation) at 1-cm intervals should be used to evaluate pulmonary parenchyma and peripheral bronchi. If the goal is to find any pulmonary metas-tases, thin sections at intervals of 5 to 7 mm collimation are recommended. For assessing the trachea and central bronchi, collimation of 3 to 5 mm is recommended. Providing accurate clinical history and data is of paramount importance to obtaining appropriate imaging.CT findings characteristic of benign lesions include small size, calcification within the nodule, and stability over time. Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   67701/03/19   7:00 PM 678SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIABCFigure 19-15. Computed tomography scan images of solitary pulmonary nodules. A. The corona radiata sign demonstrated by a solitary nodule. Multiple fine striations extend perpendicularly from the surface of the nodule like the spokes of a wheel. B. A biopsy-proven adenocarcinoma demonstrating spiculation. C. A lesion with a scalloped border, an indeterminate finding suggesting an intermediate probability for malignancy.Table 19-5Actuarial survival data from the International Registry of Lung MetastasesSURVIVALCOMPLETE RESECTION (%)INCOMPLETE RESECTION (%)5 years361310 years26715 years22—Four patterns of benign calcification are common: diffuse, solid, central, and laminated or “popcorn.” Granulomatous infections such as tuberculosis can demonstrate the first three patterns, whereas the popcorn pattern is most common in hamartomas. In areas of endemic granulomatous disease, differentiating benign versus malignant can be challenging. Infectious granulomas arising from a variety of organisms account for 70% to 80% of this type of benign solitary nodules; hamartomas are the next most common single cause, accounting for about 10%.CT findings characteristic of malignancy include growth over time; increasing density on CT scan (40% to 50% of partial solid lesions are malignant compared to only 15% of subcenti-meter solid or nonsolid nodules); size >3 cm; irregular, lobu-lated, or spiculated edges; and the finding of the corona radiata sign (consisting of fine linear strands extending 4 to 5 mm out-ward and appearing spiculated on radiographs) (Fig. 19-15). Calcification that is stippled, amorphous, or eccentric is usually associated with cancer.Growth over time is an important characteristic for differentiating benign and malignant lesions. Lung cancers have volume-doubling times from 20 to 400 days; lesions with shorter doubling times are likely due to infection, and longer doubling times suggest benign tumors, but can represent slower-growing  lung cancer. Positron emission tomography (PET) scan-ning can differentiate benign from malignant nodules28; most  lung tumors have increased signatures of glucose uptake, as compared with healthy tissues, and thus glucose metabolism can be measured using radio-labeled 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). Meta-analysis estimates 97% sensitivity and 78% spec-ificity for predicting malignancy in a nodule. False-negative results can occur (especially in patients who have AIS, MIA, or LPA, carcinoids, and tumors <1 cm in diameter), as well as false-positive results (because of confusion with other infectious or inflammatory processes).Metastatic Lesions to the LungThe cause of a new pulmonary nodule(s) in a patient with a previous malignancy can be difficult to discern.29 Features sug-gestive of metastatic disease are multiplicity; smooth, round borders on CT scan; and temporal proximity to the original pri-mary lesion. One must always entertain the possibility that a single new lesion is a primary lung cancer. The probability of a new primary cancer vs. metastasis in patients presenting with solitary lesions depends on the type of initial neoplasm. The highest likelihood of a new primary lung cancer is in patients with a history of uterine (74%), bladder (89%), lung (92%), and head and neck (94%) carcinomas.Surgical resection of pulmonary metastases has a role in properly selected patients.30 The best data regarding outcomes of resection of pulmonary metastases come from the Interna-tional Registry of Lung Metastases (IRLM). The registry was established in 1991 by 18 thoracic surgery departments in Europe, the United States, and Canada and included data on 5206 patients. About 88% of patients underwent complete resection. Survival analysis at 5, 10, and 15 years (grouping all primary tumor types) was performed (Table 19-5). Multivariate analysis showed a better prognosis for patients with germ cell tumors, osteosarcomas, a disease-free interval over 36 months, and a single metastasis.31 Depicted in Fig. 19-16, survival after metastasectomy in a variety of cancers is optimal when meta-static disease is resectable, solitary, and identified 36 or more months after initial treatment. When any or all of these optimal characteristics are absent, survival progressively declines.Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   67801/03/19   7:00 PM
# Chunk 8891
CHAPTER 19679CHEST WALL, LUNG, MEDIASTINUM, AND PLEURA10080604020002448All Sites7296120Soft Tissue Sarcomas100806040200024487296120Breast Cancer100806040200024487296120Osteosarcoma1001234806040200024487296120Colon Cancer100806040200024487296120Melanoma100806040200024487296120ABCDEFFigure 19-16. The actuarial survival after metastasectomy is depicted for patients with various tumor types (A-F) further categorized into four groups according to resectabil-ity, solitary or multiple, the inter-val between primary resection and metastesectomy, and a combination of factors known in our work and in others, as follows: (1) resectable, soli-tary, and disease-free interval (DFI) greater than or equal to 36 months; (2) resectable, solitary, and DFI 36+ months; (3) resectable, multiple metastases, and DFI <36 months; and (4) unresectable. (Reproduced with permission from Pastorino U: The development of an international registry, J Thorac Oncol. 2010 Jun; 5(6 Suppl 2):S196-S197.)The general principles of patient selection for metasta-sectomy are listed in Table 19-6. The technical aim of pulmo-nary metastasectomy is complete resection of all macroscopic tumors. In addition, any involved adjacent structures should be resected en bloc (i.e., chest wall, diaphragm, and pericardium). Multiple lesions and/or hilar lesions may require lobectomy. Pneumonectomy is rarely justified or employed.Pulmonary metastasectomy can be approached through a thoracotomy or via video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) techniques. McCormack and colleagues reported their expe-rience at Memorial Sloan-Kettering in a prospective study of 18 patients who presented with no more than two pulmonary metastatic lesions and underwent VATS resection.32 A thora-cotomy was performed during the same operation; if palpation Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   67901/03/19   7:00 PM 680SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 19-7Clinical presentation of lung cancerCATEGORYSYMPTOMCAUSEPulmonary symptomsCoughBronchus irritation or compressionDyspneaAirway obstruction or compressionWheezing>50% airway obstructionHemoptysisTumor erosion or irritationPneumoniaAirway obstructionNonpulmonary thoracic symptoms Pleuritic painParietal pleural irritation or invasionLocal chest wall painRib and/or muscle involvementRadicular chest painIntercostal nerve involvementPancoast’s syndromeStellate ganglion, chest wall, brachial plexus involvementHoarsenessRecurrent laryngeal nerve involvementSwelling of head and armsBulky involved mediastinal lymph nodes Medially based right upper lobe tumorTable 19-6General principles governing appropriate selection of patients for pulmonary metastasectomy1.	Primary tumor must already be controlled.2.	Patient must be able to tolerate general anesthesia, potential single-lung ventilation, and the planned pulmonary resection.3.	Metastases must be completely resectable based on computed tomographic imaging.4.	There is no evidence of extrapulmonary tumor burden.5.	Alternative superior therapy must not be available.identified any additional lesions, they were resected. The study concluded that the probability that a metastatic lesion will be missed by VATS excision is 56%. Patients in the Memorial study were evaluated before the advent of spiral CT scanning, however, and it remains controversial whether metastasis resec-tion should be performed via VATS. Proponents of VATS argue that the resolution of spiral CT scanning is so superior that prior studies using standard CT scanners are no longer relevant. Indeed, a recent study suggested that only 18% of malignant nodules would be missed using a VATS approach in the current era while another study from the United Kingdom found equiv-alent outcomes with regard to missed lesions and pulmonary progression comparing open and VATS approaches. To date, no prospective study using spiral CT scan has been performed to resolve this clinical dilemma.Primary Lung Cancer-Associated Signs and SymptomsLung cancer displays one of the most diverse presentation pat-terns of all human maladies (Table 19-7). The wide range of symptoms and signs is related to (a) histologic features, which often help determine the anatomic site of origin in the lung; (b) the specific tumor location in the lung and its relationship to surrounding structures; (c) biologic features and the pro-duction of a variety of paraneoplastic syndromes; and (d) the presence or absence of metastatic disease. Symptoms related to the local intrathoracic effect of the primary tumor can be conveniently divided into two groups: pulmonary and nonpul-monary thoracic.Pulmonary Symptoms. Pulmonary symptoms result from the direct effect of the tumor on the bronchus or lung tissue. Symptoms (in order of frequency) include cough (secondary to irritation or compression of a bronchus), dyspnea (usually due to central airway obstruction or compression, with or without atelectasis), wheezing (with narrowing of a central airway of >50%), hemoptysis (typically, blood streaking of mucus that is rarely massive; indicates a central airway location), pneu-monia (usually due to airway obstruction by the tumor), and lung abscess (due to necrosis and cavitation, with subsequent infection).Nonpulmonary Thoracic Symptoms. Nonpulmonary tho-racic symptoms result from invasion of the primary tumor directly into a contiguous structure (e.g., chest wall, diaphragm, pericardium, phrenic nerve, recurrent laryngeal nerve, superior vena cava, and esophagus), or from mechanical compression of a structure (e.g., esophagus or superior vena cava) by enlarged tumor-bearing lymph nodes.Peripherally located tumors (often adenocarcinomas) extending through the visceral pleura lead to irritation or growth into the parietal pleura and potentially to continued growth into the chest wall structures. Three types of symptoms, depend-ing on the extent of chest wall involvement, are possible:  (a) pleuritic pain, from noninvasive contact of the parietal pleura with inflammatory irritation or direct parietal pleural invasion; (b) localized chest wall pain, from deeper invasion and involvement of the rib and/or intercostal muscles; and (c) radicular pain, from involvement of the intercostal nerve(s). Radicular pain may be mistaken for renal colic in the case of tumors invading the inferoposterior chest wall.Other specific nonpulmonary thoracic symptoms include:1.	Pancoast’s syndrome. Tumors originating in the supe-rior sulcus (posterior apex) elicit: apical chest wall and/or shoulder pain (from involvement of the first rib and chest wall); Horner’s syndrome (unilateral enophthal-mos, ptosis, miosis, and facial anhidrosis from invasion of the stellate sympathetic ganglion); and radicular arm pain (from invasion of T1, and occasionally C8, brachial plexus nerve roots).2.	Phrenic nerve palsy. The phrenic nerve traverses the hemi-thorax along the mediastinum, parallel and posterior to the superior vena cava and anterior to the pulmonary hilum. Tumors at the medial lung surface or anterior hilum can directly invade the nerve; symptoms include shoulder pain (referred), hiccups, and dyspnea with exertion because of Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   68001/03/19   7:00 PM
# Chunk 8892
CHAPTER 19681CHEST WALL, LUNG, MEDIASTINUM, AND PLEURAdiaphragm paralysis. Radiographically, unilateral diaphragm elevation on chest radiograph is present; the diagnosis is confirmed by fluoroscopic examination of the diaphragm with paradoxical motion with breathing and sniffing (the “sniff” test).3.	Recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy. Recurrent laryngeal nerve (RLN) involvement most commonly occurs on the left side, given the hilar location of the left RLN as it passes under the aortic arch. Paralysis results from: (a) invasion of the vagus nerve above the aortic arch by a medially based left upper lobe tumor; or (b) direct invasion of the RLN by hilar tumor and/or hilar or aortopulmonary lymph node metastases. Symptoms include voice change, often referred to as hoarseness, but more typically a loss of tone associ-ated with a breathy quality, and coughing, particularly when drinking liquids.4.	Superior vena cava (SVC) syndrome. As a result of bulky enlargement of involved mediastinal lymph nodes com-pressing or a medially based right upper lobe tumor invad-ing the SVC, SVC syndrome symptoms include variable degrees of swelling of the head, neck, and arms; headache; and conjunctival edema. It is seen most commonly with NEC grade IV (small cell) lung cancer.5.	Pericardial tamponade. Pericardial effusions (benign or malignant), associated with increasing levels of dyspnea and/or arrhythmias, and pericardial tamponade occur with direct pericardial invasion. Diagnosis requires a high index of suspicion in the setting of a medially based tumor with symptoms of dyspnea and is confirmed by CT scan or echocardiography.6.	Back pain. Results from direct invasion of a vertebral body and is often localized and severe. If the neural foramina are involved, radicular pain may also be present.7.	Other local symptoms. Dysphagia is usually secondary to external esophageal compression by enlarged lymph nodes involved with metastatic disease, usually with lower lobe tumors. Finally, dyspnea, pleural effusion, or referred shoulder pain can result from invasion of the diaphragm by a tumor at the base of a lower lobe.Associated Paraneoplastic Syndromes. All lung cancer his-tologies are capable of producing a variety of paraneoplastic syndromes, most often from systemic release of tumor-derived biologically active materials (Table 19-8). Paraneoplastic syn-dromes may produce symptoms even before any local symp-toms are produced by the primary tumor, thereby aiding in early diagnosis. Their presence does not influence resectabil-ity or treatment options. Symptoms often abate with success-ful treatment; paraneoplastic symptom recurrence may herald tumor recurrence. The majority of such syndromes are associ-ated with grade IV NEC (small cell carcinoma), including many endocrinopathies.1.	Hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy (HPO). Often severely debilitating, symptoms of HPO may antedate the diagnosis of cancer by months. Clinically, ankle, feet, fore-arm, and hand tenderness and swelling are characteristic, resulting from periostitis of the fibula, tibia, radius, meta-carpals, and metatarsals. Clubbing of the digits may occur in up to 30% of patients with grade IV NEC (Fig. 19-17).  Plain radiographs show periosteal inflammation and elevation, while bone scans demonstrate intense but Table 19-8Paraneoplastic syndromes in patients with lung cancerEndocrineHypercalcemia (ectopic parathyroid hormone)Cushing’s syndromeSyndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormoneCarcinoid syndromeGynecomastiaHypercalcitoninemiaElevated growth hormone levelElevated levels of prolactin, follicle-stimulating hormone, luteinizing hormoneHypoglycemiaHyperthyroidismNeurologicEncephalopathySubacute cerebellar degenerationProgressive multifocal leukoencephalopathyPeripheral neuropathyPolymyositisAutonomic neuropathyEaton-Lambert syndromeOptic neuritisSkeletalClubbingPulmonary hypertrophic osteoarthropathyHematologicAnemiaLeukemoid reactionsThrombocytosisThrombocytopeniaEosinophiliaPure red cell aplasiaLeukoerythroblastosisDisseminated intravascular coagulationCutaneousHyperkeratosisDermatomyositisAcanthosis nigricansHyperpigmentationErythema gyratum repensHypertrichosis lanuginosa acquistaOtherNephrotic syndromeHypouricemiaSecretion of vasoactive intestinal peptide with diarrheaHyperamylasemiaAnorexia or cachexiasymmetric uptake in the long bones. Aspirin or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents provide temporary relief; treat-ment requires successful tumor eradication.2.	Hypercalcemia. Up to 10% of patients with lung cancer will have hypercalcemia, most often due to metastatic disease. Ectopic parathyroid hormone secretion by the tumor, most often squamous cell carcinoma, is causative in up to 15%, however, and should be suspected if metastatic bone disease is not present. Symptoms of hypercalcemia include leth-argy, depressed level of consciousness, nausea, vomiting, Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   68101/03/19   7:00 PM 682SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIABCFigure 19-17. Hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy associated with small cell carcinoma. A. Painful clubbing of the fingers. B. Painful clubbing of the toes (close-up). C. The arrows point to new bone formation on the femur.and dehydration. Following complete tumor eradication, the calcium level will normalize. Unfortunately, tumor recur-rence is extremely common and may manifest as recurrent hypercalcemia.3.	Hyponatremia. Characterized by confusion, lethargy, and possible seizures, hyponatremia can result from the inappro-priate secretion of antidiuretic hormone from the tumor into the systemic circulation (syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone [SIADH]) in 10% to 45% of patients with grade IV NEC (small cell). It is diagnosed by the pres-ence of hyponatremia, low serum osmolality, and high urinary sodium and osmolality. Another cause of hyponatremia can be the ectopic secretion of atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP).4.	Cushing’s syndrome. Autonomous tumor production of an adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)-like molecule leads to rapid serum elevation of ACTH and subsequent severe hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, and hyperglycemia. Symptoms are primarily related to the metabolic changes while the physical signs of Cushing’s syndrome (e.g., trun-cal obesity, buffalo hump, striae) are unusual due to the rapidity of ACTH elevation. Diagnosis is made by dem-onstrating hypokalemia (<3.0 mmol/L); nonsuppressible elevated plasma cortisol levels that lack the normal diurnal variation; elevated blood ACTH levels; or elevated urinary 17-hydroxycorticosteroids, all of which are not suppressible by administration of exogenous dexamethasone. Immuno-reactive ACTH is present in nearly all extracts of SCLC, and a high percentage of patients with SCLC have elevated ACTH levels by radioimmunoassay, yet fewer than 5% have symptoms of Cushing’s syndrome.5.	Peripheral and central neuropathies. Unlike other para-neoplastic syndromes, which are usually due to ectopic secretion of an active substance, these syndromes are felt to be immune mediated. Cancer cells are thought to secrete antigens normally expressed only by the nervous system, generating antibodies leading either to interference with neurologic function or to immune neurologic destruction. Up to 16% of lung cancer patients have neuromuscular dis-ability, and, of these, half have grade IV NEC (small cell) and 25% have squamous cell carcinomas. In patients with neurologic or muscular symptoms, central nervous system (CNS) metastases must be ruled out with CT or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head. Other metastatic dis-ease leading to disability must also be excluded.6.	Lambert-Eaton syndrome. This myasthenia-like syndrome is caused by tumor secretion of immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies targeting voltage-gated calcium channels, which causes a neuromuscular conduction defect by decreasing the amount of acetylcholine released from presynaptic sites at the motor end plate. Symptoms, including gait abnormali-ties from proximal muscle weakness and impaired coordi-nation, may actually precede radiographic evidence of the tumor. Therapy is directed at the primary tumor with resec-tion, radiation, and/or chemotherapy. Many patients have dramatic improvement after successful therapy. For patients with refractory symptoms, treatment consists of guanidine Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   68201/03/19   7:00 PM
# Chunk 8893
CHAPTER 19685CHEST WALL, LUNG, MEDIASTINUM, AND PLEURATable 19-9Evaluation of patients with lung cancer PRIMARY TUMORMETASTATIC DISEASEFUNCTIONAL ASSESSMENTHistoryPulmonaryWeight lossAbility to walk up two flights of stairsNonpulmonary thoracicMalaiseAbility to walk on a flat surface indefinitelyParaneoplastic  New bone painNeurologic signs or symptomsSkin lesionsPhysical examination  VoiceSupraclavicular node palpationAccessory muscle usage Skin examinationAir flow by auscultation Neurologic examinationForce of coughRadiographic examinationChest CTChest CT, PETChest CT: tumor anatomy, atelectasisTissue analysisBronchoscopyBone scan, head MRI, abdominal CTQuantitative perfusion scanTransthoracic needle aspiration and biopsy Bronchoscopic lymph node FNAEndoscopic ultrasoundMediastinoscopyBiopsy of suspected metastasisOtherThoracoscopy—Pulmonary function tests (FEV1, Dlco, O2 consumption)Abbreviations: CT = computed tomography; Dlco = carbon monoxide diffusion capacity; FEV1 = forced expiratory volume in 1 second; FNA = fine-needle aspiration; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging; O2 = oxygen; PET = positron emission tomography.Diagnostic tissue from bronchoscopy can be obtained by one of four methods:1.	Brushings and washings for cytology2.	Direct forceps biopsy of a visualized lesion3.	Endobronchial ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration (FNA) of an externally compressing lesion without visual-ized endobronchial tumor4.	Transbronchial biopsy with fluoroscopy to guide forceps to the lesion or electromagnetic navigational bronchoscopyElectromagnetic navigation bronchoscopy is a recent addi-tion to the surgeon’s armamentarium for transbronchial biopsy of peripheral lung lesions. Using electromagnetic markers that create a three-dimensional image and align the recorded CT images to the patient’s true anatomy, a transbronchial catheter is advanced, and brushings, FNA, cup biopsy, and washings can be performed. Diagnostic yield using electromagnetic naviga-tion bronchoscopy as an adjunct to standard bronchoscopy is reported as high as 80%. The approach can also be used for placement of fiducial markers for subsequent stereotactic body radiation therapy and for tattooing the perilesional region to guide subsequent video-assisted thoracoscopic resection.Pneumothorax rates are approximately 1% to 3.5%.For peripheral lesions (roughly the outer half of the lung), transbronchial biopsy is performed first, followed by brushings and washings. This improves diagnostic yield by disrupting the lesion with the biopsy forceps and mobilizing additional cells. For central lesions, direct forceps biopsy is often possible. For central lesions with external airway compression but no visible endobronchial lesions, endobronchial ultrasound (EBUS) is highly accurate and safe for transbronchial biopsies of both the primary tumor (when it abuts the central airways) as well as the mediastinal lymph nodes.33Image-guided transthoracic FNA (ultrasound or CT FNA) biopsy can accurately diagnose appropriately selected peripheral pulmonary lesions in up to 95% of patients. Three biopsy results are possible after image-guided biopsy procedures: malignant, a specific benign process, or indeterminate. Because falsenegative rates range from 3% to 29%, further diagnostic efforts are warranted in the absence of a specific benign diagnosis (such as granulomatous inflammation or hamartoma) because malig-nancy is not ruled out.34 The primary complication is pneumo-thorax in as many as 30% of cases. Intrapulmonary bleeding occurs, but it rarely causes clinically significant hemoptysis or respiratory compromise.Some groups advocate use of video-assisted thoracoscopic biopsy as the first option for diagnosis, citing superior diagnostic accuracy and low surgical risk. With VATS, the nodule can be excised with a wedge or segmental resection, if less than 3 cm, or a core-needle biopsy can be performed under direct vision for larger lesions. VATS can also provide valuable staging informa-tion, including sampling/dissection of mediastinal lymph nodes and assessing whether the primary tumor has invaded a contigu-ous structure (such as the chest wall or mediastinum).Lesions most suitable for VATS are those that are located in the outer one-third of the lung. The surgeon should avoid direct manipulation of the nodule or violation of the visceral pleura overlying the nodule. In addition, the excised nodule must be extracted from the chest within a bag to prevent seeding of the chest wall. If the patient’s pulmonary reserve is adequate, the surgeon can proceed to lobectomy (either VATS or open) after frozen section diagnosis.Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   68501/03/19   7:00 PM 686SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIA thoracotomy is occasionally necessary to diagnose and stage a primary tumor. Although this occurs rarely, two circum-stances may require such an approach: (a) a deep-seated lesion that yielded an indeterminate needle biopsy result or that could not be biopsied for technical reasons; or (b) inability to determine inva-sion of a mediastinal structure by any method short of palpation. In the circumstance of a deep-seated lesion without a diagnosis, tissue can be obtained via thoracotomy using FNA, core-needle biopsy, or excisional biopsy. Intraoperative frozen-section analysis is required; if the open biopsy frozen-section result is indetermi-nate, a lobectomy may be necessary in extremely rare situations. If a pneumonectomy is required to remove the lesion, a tissue diag-nosis of cancer must be made before proceeding.Assessment for Metastatic Disease Approximately 40% of patients with newly diagnosed lung cancer present with distant metastasis. The presence of lymph node or systemic metastases may imply inoperability. As with the primary tumor, assess-ment for the presence of metastatic disease should begin with the history and physical examination, focusing on new bone pain, neurologic symptoms, and new skin lesions. In addition, constitutional symptoms (e.g., anorexia, malaise, and unin-tentional weight loss of >5% of body weight) suggest either a large tumor burden or the presence of metastases. Physical examination focuses on overall appearance, noting any evi-dence of weight loss such as redundant skin or muscle wasting, and a complete examination of the head and neck, including NegativetestsPositivetestsNoNoNew SPN (8 mm to 30 mm)identified on CXR orCT scanBenign calcificationpresent or 2-year stabilitydemonstrated?Surgical risk acceptable?Assess clinicalprobability of cancer Low probabilityof cancer(<5%)Intermediateprobability of cancer(>5%–60%)High probabilityof cancer(>60%)Establish diagnosis bybiopsy when possible.Consider XRT or monitorfor symptoms andpalliate as necessarySerial high-resolutionCT at 3, 6, 12 and24 monthsAdditional testing• PET imaging, if available• Contrast-enhanced CT, depending on institutional expertise• Transthoracic fine-needle aspiration biopsy, if nodule is peripherally located• Bronchoscopy, if airbronchogram present or if operator has expertise with newer guided techniques Video-assistedthoracoscopic surgery:examination of a frozensection, followed byresection if nodule ismalignantYesYesNo further interventionrequired except forpatients with pure groundglass opacities, in whomlonger annual follow-upshould be consideredFigure 19-19. Recommended management algorithm for patients with solitary pulmonary nodules (SPNs) measuring 8 mm to 30 mm in diameter. CT = computed tomography; CXR = chest radiograph; PET = positron emission tomography; XRT = radiotherapy. (Adapted with permission from Gould MK, Fletcher J, Iannettoni MD, et al: Evaluation of patients with pulmonary nodules: when is it lung cancer?: ACCP evidence-based clinical practice guidelines (2nd edition), Chest. 2007 Sep;132(3 Suppl):108S-130S.24)Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   68601/03/19   7:01 PM
# Chunk 8894
CHAPTER 19687CHEST WALL, LUNG, MEDIASTINUM, AND PLEURAevaluation of cervical and supraclavicular lymph nodes and the oropharynx. This is particularly true for patients with a sig-nificant tobacco history. The skin should be thoroughly exam-ined. Routine laboratory studies include serum levels of hepatic enzymes (e.g., serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase and alkaline phosphatase), and serum calcium (to detect bone metas-tases or the ectopic parathyroid syndrome). Elevation of either hepatic enzymes or serum calcium levels typically occurs with extensive metastases.Mediastinal Lymph Nodes. Chest CT scanning facilitates assessment of mediastinal and hilar nodes for enlargement. How-ever, a positive CT result (i.e., nodal diameter >1.0 cm) predicts actual metastatic involvement in only about 70% of lung cancer patients. Thus, up to 30% of such nodes are enlarged from non-cancerous reactive causes (e.g., inflammation due to atelectasis or pneumonia secondary to the tumor). Patients should not be denied an attempt at curative resection just because of a posi-tive CT result for mediastinal lymph node enlargement; any CT finding of metastatic nodal involvement must be confirmed his-tologically. The negative predictive value of normal-appearing lymph nodes by CT (lymph nodes <1.0 cm) is better than the positive predictive value of a suspicious-appearing lymph node, particularly with small squamous cell tumors. With normal-size lymph nodes and a T1 tumor, the false-negative rate is less than 10%, leading many surgeons to omit mediastinoscopy. How-ever, the false-negative rate increases to nearly 30% with cen-trally located and T3 tumors. It has also been demonstrated that T1 adenocarcinomas or large cell carcinomas have a higher rate of early micrometastasis. Therefore, all such patients should undergo mediastinoscopy.Mediastinal lymph node staging by PET scanning appears to have greater accuracy than CT scanning. PET staging of mediastinal lymph nodes has been evaluated in two meta-analyses. The overall sensitivity for mediastinal lymph node metastasis was 79% (95% confidence interval [CI] 76%–82%), with a specificity of 91% (95% CI 89%–93%) and an accuracy of 92% (95% CI 90%–94%).35In comparing PET with CT scans in patients who also underwent lymph node biopsies, PET had a sensitivity of 88% and a specificity of 91%, whereas CT scanning had a sensitivity of 63% and a specificity of 76%. Combining CT and PET scan-ning may lead to even greater accuracy.36 In one study of CT, PET, and mediastinoscopy in 68 patients with potentially opera-ble NSCLC, CT correctly identified the nodal stage in 40 patients (59%). It understaged the tumor in 12 patients and overstaged it in 16 patients. PET correctly identified the nodal stage in 59 patients (87%). It understaged the tumor in five patients and overstaged it in four. For detecting N2 and N3 disease, the combination of PET and CT scanning yielded a sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy of 93%, 95%, and 94%, respectively. CT scan alone yielded 75%, 63%, and 68%, respectively. Studies examining combined PET-CT consistently show improved accuracy compared to PET or CT alone; accuracy for PET-CT nodal positivity confirmed by medi-astinoscopy is approximately 75%, with a negative predictive value of approximately 90%. Right upper lobe lesions were more likely to have occult N2 disease than other lobes of the lung.37-40  PET-positive mediastinal lymph nodes require histologic verifica-tion of node positivity, either by EBUS-guided FNA or mediasti-noscopy, to minimize the risk of undertreatment, assuming node positivity without histologic confirmation relegates the patient to, at a minimum, induction chemotherapy. If there is a suggestion of TABLE 19-10Techniques for invasive mediastinal stagingEndoscopicEndobronchial ultrasound with transbronchial needle aspirationEndoscopic ultrasound with needle aspirationTransbronchial needle aspirationComputed tomography–guided transthoracic needle aspirationSurgicalVideo-assisted mediastinoscopyTranscervical extended mediastinal lymphadenectomy (TEMLA)Video-assisted mediastinal lymphadenectomy (VAMLA)Thoracoscopic transthoracic lymphadenectomyIndications for invasive mediastinal staging in lung cancer1.	Radiographically enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes2.	Centrally located tumors3.	N1 nodal enlargement4.	Tumor size >3 cm5.	Peripheral clinical stage I tumor with nonenlarged but FDG-avid mediastinal lymph nodesIndications for prethoracotomy/thoracoscopy biopsy of stations 5 and 6 lymph nodes1.	Criteria for invasive staging met and other mediastinal lymph node stations are negative (assuming patient would have induction therapy if any nodal station positive)2.	Enrollment criteria for induction therapy protocol require pathologic confirmation of N2 disease3.	Computed tomography scan shows evidence of bulky nodal metastasis or extracapsular spread that could prevent complete resection4.	Tissue diagnosis of a hilar mass or of lymph nodes causing recurrent laryngeal nerve paralysis is neededN3 disease, the patient would be incorrectly staged as having IIIB disease and would not be considered a candidate for potentially curative surgical resection.It is important for surgeons who are managing patients with lung cancer to have a clear algorithm for invasive medias-tinal staging. In general, invasive staging is underutilized, plac-ing many patients at risk for overor understaging and, thus, inappropriate treatment. An absolute indication for obtaining a tissue diagnosis is mediastinal lymph node enlargement greater than 1.0 cm by CT scan. There are several options for invasive mediastinal staging (Table 19-10):1.	Endobronchial Ultrasound (EBUS)-guided transbron-chial needle aspiration. Less invasive than mediasti-noscopy, EBUS enables image-guided transtracheal and transbronchial FNA cytologic samples from hilar masses and lymph nodes from level 4R and 4L, level 7, level 10, and level 11. Rapid onsite pathologic evaluation with expert cytopathology evaluation greatly increases the diagnostic accuracy of the procedure; importantly, the intraoperative evaluation will confirm whether the target lesion is being sampled and greatly facilitates acquisition of satisfactory samples for determining the morphologic diagnosis as well as sufficient material for cell block for immunohistochemistry Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   68701/03/19   7:01 PM 688SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 19-20. Cervical mediastinoscopy. Paratracheal and sub-carinal lymph node tissues (within the pretracheal space) can be sampled using a mediastinoscope introduced through a suprasternal skin incision.and molecular testing. EBUS does not allow assessment of level 3, 5, or 6 nodal stations.2.	Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS). EUS can accurately visual-ize mediastinal paratracheal lymph nodes (stations 4R, 7, and 4L), paraesophageal (station 8) and inferior pulmonary ligament (station 9) lymph nodes and visualize primary lung lesions contiguous with or near the esophagus (see Fig. 19-8). Using FNA or core-needle biopsy, samples of lymph nodes or primary lesions can be obtained. Diagnos-tic yield is improved with intraoperative cytologic evalua-tion, which can be performed with the cytopathologist in the operating room. Limitations of EUS include the inability to visualize the anterior (pretracheal) mediastinum; thus, EUS does not replace mediastinoscopy/EBUS for complete medi-astinal nodal staging. However, it may not be necessary to perform mediastinoscopy if findings on EUS are positive for N2 nodal disease, particularly if more than one station is found to harbor metastases.3.	Cervical video-assisted mediastinoscopy. Mediastinos-copy provides tissue sampling of all paratracheal and sub-carinal lymph nodes and permits visual determination of the presence of extracapsular extension of nodal metastasis (Fig. 19-20). With complex hilar or right paratracheal primary tumors, it allows direct biopsies and assessment of invasion into the mediastinum. Mediastinoscopy is recommended for centrally located tumors, T2 and T3 primary tumors, and occasionally for T1 adenocarcinomas or large cell  carcinomas (due to their higher rate of metastatic spread). Some surgeons perform mediastinoscopy in all lung cancer patients because of the poor survival associated with surgi-cal resection of N2 disease.4.	It is important to note that EBUS or EUS can be used for initial diagnosis in enlarged lymph nodes, but the predictive value of a negative EBUS in a patient with radiographically suspicious mediastinal disease is not sufficient to accurately guide treatment. At the authors’ institutions, it is standard to begin mediastinal lymph node staging with EBUS-guided FNA of clinically suspicious mediastinal lymphadenopathy. If intraoperative rapid onsite cytologic evaluation is nega-tive, mediastinoscopy is performed in the same operative setting to ensure accurate mediastinal staging. However, if the FNA is positive, mediastinoscopy is not performed, and the patient is referred to medical oncology for induc-tion therapy; avoiding a pretreatment mediastinoscopy in this manner facilitates the safe performance of a postinduc-tion mediastinoscopy for restaging of the mediastinum in patients who respond favorably to induction therapy.5.	Left video-assisted thoracoscopic lymph node sampling may be needed for patients with left upper lobe tumors who have localized regional spread to stations 5 and 6 lymph nodes, without mediastinal paratracheal involvement (see Fig. 19-8). If there is a low index of suspicion for nodal metastasis, the patient can be schedule for VATS biopsy and lobectomy under the same anesthesia; the procedure begins by sampling the level 5 and 6 nodes for frozen section, and if the nodes are negative, the anatomic lung resection is performed. If the index of suspicion is high, the VATS biopsy is performed as a separate procedure. Cervical mediastinoscopy should precede VATS biopsy, even if patients have normal para-tracheal lymph nodes. Additional diagnostic evaluation of the lymph nodes in stations 5 and 6 may be unnecessary if the mediastinal lymph nodes are proven to be benign with biopsy during cervical mediastinoscopy and the preoperative CT scan suggests complete respectability of the tumor. There are, however, several indications for prethoracotomy biopsy of stations 5 and 6 lymph nodes, which are listed in Table 19-10. It is particularly important to prove that mediastinal lymph nodes are pathologically involved and not just radio-graphically suspicious for nodal metastasis prior to deciding that the patient is not a candidate for resection.Pleural Effusion. The presence of pleural effusion on radio-graphic imaging should not be assumed to be malignant. Pleural effusion may be secondary to atelectasis or consolidation (seen with central tumors), cardiac dysfunction, or may be a reac-tive effusion. When associated with a peripherally based tumor abutting the visceral or parietal pleural surface, probability of being malignant is higher. If this is the only site concerning for metastatic disease, pathologic confirmation is mandatory. It is reasonable to start with thoracentesis, but cytology reveals malignant cells in only 50% of malignant effusions on initial thoracentesis; negative cytology 5 times is needed to have 95% certainty of a benign process. Thoracoscopy may be needed to rule out pleural metastases in select patients and is usually per-formed as a separate staging procedure, often with subsequent mediastinoscopy if thoracoscopy is negative for metastasis.Distant Metastases. Currently, chest CT and PET are rou-tine in the evaluation of patients with lung cancer. Integrated PET-CT scanners have become standard and have substan-tially improved accuracy of detection and localization of lymph node and distant metastases, as compared with independently performed PET and CT scans (Fig. 19-21). This technology overcomes the imprecise information on the exact location of focal abnormalities seen on PET and has become the standard imaging modality for lung cancer. Compared to routine chest or abdominal CT and bone scans, PET scanning detects 10% to 15% more distant metastases, but should be confirmed with MRI and/or biopsies if the patient otherwise has early-stage dis-ease. Brain MRI should be performed when the suspicion or risk of brain metastases is increased, such as in patients with Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   68801/03/19   7:01 PM
# Chunk 8895
CHAPTER 19689CHEST WALL, LUNG, MEDIASTINUM, AND PLEURAABCFigure 19-21. Imaging of non–small cell lung cancer by integrated positron emission tomography (PET)-computed tomography (CT) scan. A. CT of the chest showing a tumor in the left upper lobe.  B. PET scan of the chest at the identical cross-sectional level.  C. Coregistered PET-CT scan clearly showing tumor invasion (con-firmed intraoperatively). (Adapted with permission from Lardinois D, Weder W, Hany TF, et al. Staging of non-small-cell lung can-cer with integrated positron-emission tomography and computed tomography, N Engl J Med. 2003 Jun 19;348(25):2500-2507.)clinical stage III disease. In the absence of neurologic symp-toms or signs, the probability of a negative head CT scan is 95%. Liver abnormalities that are not clearly simple cysts or hemangiomas and adrenal enlargement, nodules, or masses are further evaluated by MRI scanning and, occasionally, by needle biopsy. Adrenal adenomas have a high lipid content (secondary to steroid production), but metastases and most primary adrenal malignancies contain little if any lipid; thus, MRI is usually able to distinguish the two.Tumor, Node, and Metastasis: Lung Cancer Staging The staging of any tumor is an attempt to estimate the extent of dis-ease and determine the patient’s prognosis; in a given patient, tumors are typically classified into a clinical stage and a patho-logic stage. Clinical staging includes history and physical examination, radiographic test results, and diagnostic biopsy information. Therapeutic plans are generated based on clinical stage. After surgical resection of tumor and lymph nodes, post-operative pathologic stage (pTNM) is determined, providing further prognostic information.The staging of solid epithelial tumors is based on the TNM staging system. The primary tumor “T” status provides infor-mation about tumor size and relationship to surrounding struc-tures; the “N” status provides information about regional lymph nodes; and the “M” status provides information about the pres-ence or absence of metastatic disease. The designation of lymph nodes as N1, N2, or N3 requires familiarity with the lymph node mapping system41 (see Fig. 19-8). Based on clearly delineated anatomic boundaries, accurate and reproducible localization of thoracic lymph nodes is possible, facilitating detailed nodal staging for individual patients and standardization of nodal assessment between surgeons.Pathologic staging criteria are based on the predicted sur-vival relative to each combination of tumor, node, and metas-tasis status. In 2018, the AJCC eighth edition incorporated multiple changes into the staging system for NSCLC based on analysis of survival predictors from 77,156 lung cancer patients worldwide. Table 19-11a shows the clinical and pathologic cri-teria changes implemented and each of the TNM descriptors currently used in staging NSCLC (Table 19-11b) and the over-all stage classifications (Table 19-11c). T-staging is markedly changed, including T category designation for each centimeter in size up to 5 cm, as well as size of the invasive component in lepidic growth tumors. Visceral pleural invasion increases T-stage to T2 for patients with tumors ≤3 cm in size, and syn-chronous primary tumors have an added T suffix (m) in tumor staging. Metastatic disease has also been subdivided into intra-thoracic, single-site extrathoracic, and multiple extrathoracic metastasis. In addition to the TNM stage, it is recommended that histologic grade, lymphovascular invasion, adequacy of resec-tion margins and mediastinal dissection, tumor mutation status, treatment, and residual tumor after treatment also be recorded into cancer registries to facilitate evaluation of these potential predictors in future analysis of staging criteria.Staging for small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is typically based on the extent of disease. SCLC presenting with bulky locoregional disease confined to the ipsilateral hemithorax, with no evidence for distant metastatic disease, is termed “limited” SCLC. Limited disease must be treatable within a tolerable field of radiation. Using AJCC descriptors, this includes any T stage, any N stage, without metastatic disease (M0). The only excep-tion is when multiple lung nodules are widely spread throughout the ipsilateral lung in the same hemithorax; in these patients, the size of the involved area would preclude a “safe” radiation field. In contrast, in “disseminated” disease, tumor is beyond the ipsi-lateral hemithorax or widely spread within the ipsilateral lung and to distant sites. Metastases to the pleura and pericardium, with resultant effusions, are considered disseminated disease. Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   68901/03/19   7:01 PM 690SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 19-11aChanges in Descriptors for non-small cell lung cancer comparing the 7th and 8th editions of the American Joint Committee on Cancer Staging ManualDESCRIPTORSEVENTH EDITIONEIGHTH EDITIONT component0 cm (pure lepidic adenocarcinoma ≤3 cm total size)T1a if ≤2 cm; T1b if >2–3 cmTis (AIS)≤0.5 cm invasive size (lepidic predominant adenocarcinoma ≤3 cm total size)T1a if ≤2 cm; T1b if >2–3 cmT1mi≤1 cmT1aT1a>1–2 cmT1aT1b>2–3 cmT1bT1c>3–4 cmT2aT2a>4–5 cmT2aT2b>5–7 cmT2bT3>7 cmT3T4Bronchus <2 cm from carinaT3T2Total atelectasis/pneumonitisT3T2Invasion of diaphragmT3T4Invasion of mediastinal pleuraT3-N componentNo assessment, no involvement, or involvement of regional lymph nodesNX, N0, N1, N2, N3No changeM componentMetastases within the thoracic cavityM1aM1aSingle extrathoracic metastasisM1bM1bMultiple extrathoracic metastasesM1bM1cAbbreviations: AIS, adenocarcinoma in situ; mi, minimally invasive adenocarcinoma; Tis, tumor in situ.Modified with permission from Rami-Porta R, Asamura H, Travis WD, et al: Lung cancer — major changes in the American Joint Committee on Cancer eighth edition cancer staging manual, A Cancer J Clin. 2017 Mar;67(2):138-155.(Continued)Table 19-11bAmerican Joint Committee on Cancer Lung Cancer Staging Eight EditionTPRIMARY TUMORTXPrimary tumor cannot be assessed, or tumor proven by the presence of malignant cells in sputum or bronchial washings but not visualized by imaging or bronchoscopyT0No evidence of primary tumorTisCarcinoma in situSquamous cell carcinoma in situ (SCIS)Adenocarcinoma in situ (AIS); adenocarcinoma with pure lepidic pattern, ≤3 cm in greatest dimensionT1Tumor ≤3 cm in greatest dimension, surrounded by lung or visceral pleura, without bronchoscopic evidence of invasion more proximal than the lobar bronchus (i.e., not in the main bronchus) T1miMinimally invasive adenocarcinoma: adenocarcinoma (≤3 cm in greatest dimension) with a predominantly lepidic pattern and ≤5 mm invasion in greatest dimension T1aTumor ≤1 cm in greatest dimension. A superficial, spreading tumor of any size whose invasive component is limited to the bronchial wall and may extend proximal to the main bronchus also is classified as T1a, but these tumors are uncommon. T1bTumor >1 cm but ≤2 cm in greatest dimension T1cTumor >2 cm but ≤3 cm in greatest dimensionT2Tumor >3 cm but ≤5 cm or having any of the following features:• Involves the main bronchus regardless of distance to the carina, but without involvement of the carina• Invades visceral pleura (PL1 or PL2)• Associated with atelectasis or obstructive pneumonitis that extends to the hilar region, involving part or all of the lungT2 tumors with these features are classified as T2a if ≤4 cm or if the size cannot be determined and T2b if >4 cm but ≤5 cm.Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   69001/03/19   7:01 PM
# Chunk 8896
CHAPTER 19691CHEST WALL, LUNG, MEDIASTINUM, AND PLEURATable 19-11cStage Group in the 8th AJCC Tumor, Node, Metastasis staging systemN0N1N2N3T1/M0T1aIA1IIBIIIAIIIBT1bIA2IIBIIIAIIIBT1cIA3IIBIIIAIIIBT2/M0T2aIBIIBIIIAIIIBT2bIIAIIBIIIAIIIBT3/M0IIBIIIAIIIBIIICT4/M0IIIAIIIAIIIBIIICTX/M1M1aIVAIVAIVAIVAM1bIVAIVAIVAIVAM1cIVBIVBIVBIVBUsed with the permission of the American College of Surgeons. Amin MB, Edge SB, Greene FL, et al. (Eds.) AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, 8th Ed. Springer New York, 2017.Table 19-11bAmerican Joint Committee on Cancer Lung Cancer Staging Eight Edition T2aTumor >3 cm but ≤4 cm in greatest dimension T2bTumor >4 cm but ≤5 cm in greatest dimensionT3Tumor >5 cm but ≤7 cm in greatest dimension or directly invading any of the following: parietal pleura (PL3), chest wall (including superior sulcus tumors), phrenic nerve, parietal pericardium; or separate tumor nodule(s) in the same lobe as the primaryT4Tumor >7 cm or tumor of any size invading one or more of the following: diaphragm, mediastinum, heart, great vessels, trachea, recurrent laryngeal nerve, esophagus, vertebral body, or carina; separate tumor nodule(s) in an ipsilateral lobe different from that of the primaryNREGIONAL LYMPH NODENXRegional lymph nodes cannot be assessedN0No regional lymph node metastasisN1Metastasis in ipsilateral peribronchial and/or ipsilateral hilar lymph nodes and intrapulmonary nodes, including involvement by direct extensionN2Metastasis in ipsilateral mediastinal and/or subcarinal lymph node(s)N3Metastasis in contralateral mediastinal, contralateral hilar, ipsilateral or contralateral scalene, or supraclavicular lymph node(s)MDISTANT METASTASISM0No distant metastasisM1Distant metastasis M1aSeparate tumor nodule(s) in a contralateral lobe; tumor with pleural or pericardial nodules or malignant pleural or pericardial effusion. Most pleural (pericardial) effusions with lung cancer are a result of the tumor. In a few patients, however, multiple microscopic examinations of pleural (pericardial) fluid are negative for tumor, and the fluid is nonbloody and not an exudate. If these elements and clinical judgment dictate that the effusion is not related to the tumor, the effusion should be excluded as a staging descriptor. M1bSingle extrathoracic metastasis in a single organ (including involvement of a single nonregional node) M1cMultiple extrathoracic metastases in a single organ or in multiple organsUsed with the permission of the American College of Surgeons. Amin MB, Edge SB, Greene FL, et al. (Eds.) AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, 8th Ed. Springer New York, 2017.Metastases to brain, bone, bone marrow, and the pleural and pericardial spaces are common.Assessment of Functional Status Patients with potentially resectable tumors require careful assessment of their functional status and ability to tolerate either lobectomy or pneumonectomy. The surgeon should first estimate the likelihood of pneumonec-tomy, lobectomy, or possibly sleeve resection, based on the CT images. A sequential process of evaluation then unfolds.5A patient’s history is the most important tool for gauging risk. Specific questions regarding performance status should be routinely asked. If the patient can walk on a flat surface indefi-nitely, without oxygen and without having to stop and rest sec-ondary to dyspnea, he will be very likely to tolerate lobectomy. If the patient can walk up two flights of stairs (up two stan-dard levels), without having to stop and rest secondary to dys-pnea, she will likely tolerate pneumonectomy. Finally, nearly (Continued)Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   69101/03/19   7:01 PM 692SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIPercent mortalityppoDLCO%504030201002030405060708090100Figure 19-22. Operative mortality after major pulmonary resec-tion for non–small cell lung cancer (334 patients) as a function of percent predicted postoperative carbon monoxide diffusion capacity (ppoDlco%). Solid line indicates logistic regression model; dashed lines indicate 95% confidence limits. (Reproduced with permission from Wang J, Olak J, Ferguson MK: Diffusing capacity predicts operative mortality but not long-term survival after resection for lung cancer, J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1999 Mar;117(3):581-586.)all patients, except those with carbon dioxide (CO2) retention on arterial blood gas analysis, will be able to tolerate periods of single-lung ventilation and wedge resection. Formal assess-ment of cardiac fitness is mandatory; use of risk scores such  as the Thoracic Revised Cardiac Risk Index developed by  Dr. Brunelli and colleagues provides useful prognostic infor-mation for postresection survival from early-stage lung cancer.Current smoking status and sputum production are also pertinent. Current smokers and patients with a greater than  60 pack-year history of smoking have a significantly increased risk of postoperative pulmonary complications; heavy smokers are 2.5 times more likely to develop pulmonary complications and three times more likely to develop pneumonia compared to patients with a ≤60 pack-year history (odds ratio [OR] 2.54; 95% CI 1.28–5.04; P = .0008). Impaired exchange of CO2 is also pre-dictive of increased risk, independent of the smoking history. For every 10% decline in percent carbon monoxide diffusion capac-ity (%Dlco), the risk of any pulmonary complication increased by 42% (OR 1.42; 95% CI 1.16–1.75; P = .008).42 Risk reduc-tion requires smoking cessation at least 8 weeks preoperatively, a requirement that is often not feasible in a cancer patient. Nev-ertheless, abstinence for at least 2 weeks before surgery should be encouraged. Smoking cessation on the day of surgery leads to increased sputum production and potential secretion reten-tion postoperatively, and some authors have reported increased rates of pulmonary complications in this group.43 Patients with chronic daily sputum production will have more problems post-operatively with retention and atelectasis; they are also at higher risk for pneumonia. Sputum culture, antibiotic administration, and bronchodilators may be warranted preoperatively.Pulmonary function studies are routinely performed when any resection greater than a wedge resection will be performed. Of all the measurements available, the two most valuable are forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) and carbon mon-oxide diffusion capacity (Dlco). General guidelines for the use of FEV1 in assessing the patient’s ability to tolerate pulmonary resection are as follows: greater than 2.0 L can tolerate pneumo-nectomy, and greater than 1.5 L can tolerate lobectomy. It must be emphasized that these are guidelines only. It is also important to note that the raw value is often imprecise because normal values are reported as “percent predicted” based on corrections made for age, height, and gender. For example, a raw FEV1 value of 1.3 L in a 62-year-old, 75-inch (190-cm) male has a percent predicted value of 30% (because the normal expected value is 4.31 L); in a 62-year-old, 62-inch female, the predicted value is 59% (normal expected value 2.21 L). The male patient is at high risk for lobectomy, while the female could potentially tolerate pneumonectomy.To calculate the predicted postoperative value for FEV1 or Dlco, the percent predicted value of FEV1 or Dlco is mul-tiplied by the fraction of remaining lung after the proposed sur-gery. For example, with a planned right upper lobectomy, a total of three segments will be removed. Therefore, three of a total 20 segments will leave the patient with (20 – 3/20) × 100 = 85% of their original lung capacity. In the two patients mentioned ear-lier, the man will have a predicted postoperative FEV1 of 30% × 0.85 = 25%, whereas the woman will have a predicted postop-erative FEV1 of 50%. Percent predicted value of less than 50% for either FEV1 or Dlco correlates with risk for postoperative complications, particularly pulmonary complications; the risk of complications increases in a stepwise fashion for each 10% decline. Figure 19-22 shows the relationship between predicted postoperative Dlco and estimated operative mortality.Quantitative perfusion scanning is used in select circum-stances to help estimate the functional contribution of a lobe or whole lung. Such perfusion scanning is most useful when the impact of a tumor on pulmonary physiology is difficult to discern. With complete collapse of a lobe or whole lung, the impact is apparent, and perfusion scanning is usually unneces-sary. Figure 19-23 shows a tumor with significant right main stem airway obstruction with associated atelectasis and volume loss of the right lung. At presentation, the patient was dyspneic with ambulation, and the FEV1 was 1.38 L. Six months prior, this patient could walk up two flights of stairs without dyspnea. The surgeon can anticipate that the patient will tolerate pneumo-nectomy because the lung is already not functioning due to main stem airway obstruction, and may, in fact, be contributing to a shunt. However, with centrally located tumors associated with partial obstruction of a lobar or main bronchus or of the pulmo-nary artery, perfusion scanning may be valuable in predicting the postoperative result of resection. For example, if the quan-titative perfusion to the right lung is measured to be 21% (nor-mal is 55%) and the patient’s percent predicted FEV1 is 60%, the predicted postoperative FEV1 after a right pneumonectomy would be 60% × 0.79 = 47%, indicating the ability to tolerate pneumonectomy. If the perfusion value is 55%, the predicted postoperative value would be 27%, and pneumonectomy would pose a significantly higher risk.It is not uncommon to encounter patients with significant reductions in their percent predicted FEV1 and Dlco whose his-tory shows a functional status that is inconsistent with the pul-monary function tests. In these circumstances, exercise testing that yields maximal oxygen consumption (v. o2max ) has emerged as a valuable decision-making technique to help patients with abnormal FEV1 and Dlco (Table 19-12). Values <10 mL/kg/min are associated with a 26% mortality after major pulmonary Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   69201/03/19   7:01 PM
# Chunk 8897
CHAPTER 19693CHEST WALL, LUNG, MEDIASTINUM, AND PLEURAFigure 19-23. Chest computed tomography scan of an obstructing right main stem lung tumor. Arrow indicates location of right main bron-chus. The right lung volume is much less than the left lung volume.Table 19-12Relation between maximum oxygen consumption (v. o2max) as determined by preoperative exercise testing and perioperative mortalitySTUDYDEATHS/TOTALv. o2max 10–15 mL/kg per minute Smith et al1961/6 (33%) Bechard and Wetstein1970/15 (0%) Olsen et al1981/14 (7.1%) Walsh et al1991/5 (20%) Bolliger et al2002/17 (11.7%) Markos et al2011/11 (9.1%) Wang et al2020/12 (0%) Win et al2032/16 (12.5%)  Total8/96 (8.3%)v. o2max <10 mL/kg per minute Bechard and Wetstein1972/7 (29%) Olsen et al1983/11 (27%) Holden et al2042/4 (50%) Markos et al2010/5 (0%)  Total7/27 (26%)Reproduced with permission from Colice GL, Shafazand S, Griffin JP: Physiologic evaluation of the patient with lung cancer being considered for resectional surgery: ACCP evidenced-based clinical practice guidelines (2nd edition), Chest. 2007 Sep;132(3 Suppl):161S-177S.resection compared to only 8.3% with v. o2max ≥10 mL/kg/min.  Values >15 mL/kg/min generally indicate the patient’s ability to tolerate pneumonectomy.The risk assessment of a patient is an amalgam of clinical judgment and data that must be integrated with the experienced clinician’s sense of the patient and with the patient’s attitude 6toward the disease and toward life. Figure 19-24 provides a  useful algorithm for determining suitability for lung resection.44Lung Cancer TreatmentGrade IV NEC (Small Cell) Lung Carcinoma. In rare cir-cumstances where SCLC presents as an isolated lung lesion, lobectomy followed by chemotherapy is warranted after sur-gical mediastinal staging has confirmed the absence of N2 disease. Often, ultrasound-guided FNA provides a definitive positive diagnosis and more invasive approaches are not needed. However, less than 5% are stage I, and there is no benefit from surgical resection for more advanced-stage disease; treatment is chemotherapy with or without radiation therapy depending on the extent of disease and the patient performance status.Early-Stage Non–Small Cell Lung Cancer. Early-stage disease includes T1 and T2 tumors (with or without N1 nodal involvement) and T3 tumors (without N1 nodal involvement). This group represents a small but increasing proportion of the total number of patients diagnosed with lung cancer each year (approximately 16% of an estimated 222,500 patients in 2017).18 Surgical resection is the current standard, ideally accomplished by video-assisted lobectomy or pneumonectomy, depending on the tumor location.Despite the term “early-stage,” the overall 5-year sur-vival rate for all localized lung cancer is 55% and only 26% when regional metastasis was present between 2004 and 2009.45 Median survival for untreated patients with stage IA NSCLC is 14 months, and 5-year survival rate is 22%.46 After surgical resection of postoperative pathologic stage IA disease, 5-year survival is better than with no treatment, but still only 67%.41 Survival declines with higher stages. Advanced age at diagno-sis, male sex, low socioeconomic status, nonsurgical treatment, and poor histologic grade are associated with increased mortal-ity risk on multivariate analysis.45Depending on tumor size and location, lobectomy, sleeve lobectomy, and occasionally pneumonectomy, with mediastinal lymph node dissection or sampling, are appropriate for patients with clinical early-stage disease. Sleeve resection is performed for tumors located at airway bifurcations when an adequate bronchial Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   69301/03/19   7:01 PM 694SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIVO2max > 15 ml/kg/minPerform spirometryUnexplained dyspneaor diffuse parenchymaldisease on CXR/CT?Perform CPETEstimate %ppoFEV1 and %ppoDLCOIncreased riskVO2max>15 mL/kg/minVO2max10 to 15 mL/kg/minVO2max<10 mL/kg/minFEV1 >1.5 L lobectomyFEV1 >2 L pneumonectomyFEV1 >80% predictedFEV1 <1.5 L lobectomyFEV1 <2 L pneumonectomyFEV1 <80% predictedYesNoDLCO >80%predictedDLCO <80%predicted%ppo FEV1 and%ppo DLCO >40%ppo FEV1 or%ppo DLCO <40%ppo FEV1 <30 or%ppo FEV1 x%ppo DLCO <1650Measure DLCOAverage riskIncreased riskFigure 19-24. Algorithm for preoperative evaluation of pulmonary function and reserve prior to resectional lung surgery. CPET =  cardiopulmonary exercise test; CT = computed tomographic scan; CXR = chest radiograph; Dlco = carbon monoxide diffusion capacity; FEV1 = forced expiratory volume in 1 second; %ppo = percent predicted postoperative lung function; V.o2max = maximum oxygen consumption. (Modified with permission from Colice GL, Shafazand S, Griffin JP: Physiologic evaluation of the patient with lung cancer being considered for resectional surgery: ACCP evidenced-based clinical practice guidelines (2nd edition), Chest. 2007 Sep;132(3 Suppl):161S-177S.44)Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   69401/03/19   7:01 PM
# Chunk 8898
CHAPTER 19695CHEST WALL, LUNG, MEDIASTINUM, AND PLEURAmargin cannot be obtained by standard lobectomy. Pneumonec-tomy is rarely performed; primary indications for pneumonec-tomy in early-stage disease include large central tumors involving the distal main stem bronchus and inability to completely resect involved N1 lymph nodes. The latter circumstance occurs with bulky adenopathy or with extracapsular nodal spread.Management of Early-Stage Lung Cancer in the High-Risk Patient Lobectomy may not be an option for some patients with early-stage disease, due to poor cardiopulmonary function or other comorbid illnesses. The ultimate decision that a patient is inoperable, both with regard to the patient’s ability to tolerate surgery and the likelihood of successful resection, should be accepted only after evaluation by an expert surgeon. Surgeons with limited expertise, when faced with a complicated patient, should refer the patient to a high-volume center for further eval-uation if they are unable to offer the patient surgical resection in their own center.Rationale for Limited Resection in Early-Stage Lung Cancer.  Limited resection, defined as segmentectomy or wedge resec-tion, is a viable option for achieving local control in high-risk patients. Historically, limited resection with wedge or segmen-tectomy has been considered a compromise operation due to unacceptably high rates of local recurrence and concerns for worse survival.47,48 Subsequent meta-analysis of the literature shows that the difference in death rate is likely negligible49 (Table 19-13). The high rates of local recurrence demonstrated by Ginsberg and others, however, remain a significant concern and continue to restrict the use of limited resection for early-stage lung cancer to the high-risk patient.With the recent publication of a 20% reduction in lung cancer mortality with screening CT scans in high-risk popula-tions, the topic of limited resection is again the subject of inten-sive review. Studies investigating anatomic segmentectomy (or extended wedge resection) with hilar and mediastinal lymph node dissection suggest that close attention to the ratio of surgi-cal margin to tumor diameter and a careful assessment of the lymph nodes substantially reduce local recurrence.50-52 Recur-rence rates were 6.2%, comparable to rates associated with lobectomy, when the margin-to-tumor diameter ratio exceeded 1, compared to 25% if the margin-to-tumor diameter ratio was less than 1.50 In most centers, this requires use of a thora-cotomy, although increasing experience with VATS in highvolume centers shows that limited resection is safe and feasi-ble, with perioperative adverse outcomes that are comparable to lobectomy.52-55Rationale for Tumor Ablation in the Management of Primary  Lung Cancer. Limited resection, by definition, requires that the patient has sufficient cardiopulmonary reserve to undergo a general anesthesia and loss of at least one pulmonary seg-ment. For the high-risk or nonoperable patient, as determined by experience pulmonary surgeons, tumor ablation techniques have been developed for treatment of early-stage lung cancers.Current limitations of this approach include the absence of nodal staging, lack of tissue for molecular profiling, chemo-resistance, or sensitivity testing, concerns about definitions of locoregional recurrence, and a lack of uniformity across cen-ters. Surgeons typically define locoregional recurrence as tumor growth within the operative field, including resectable lymph nodes, whereas local recurrence after ablation is most com-monly defined as tumor growth within the field of treatment. Despite the fact that in-transit or lymph node metastases are present in up to 27% of clinically stage I NSCLCs at resection, any tumor growth outside the field of ablative treatment is not be considered treatment failure.56Despite these limitations, tumor ablative strategies are increasingly proposed as viable alternatives to surgical resec-tion, even in potentially operable patients.57-62 While prema-ture, ablative techniques may ultimately be shown to have efficacy equivalent to lobectomy for the primary treatment of very small peripheral early-stage lung cancers. Multidisci-plinary collaboration between thoracic surgery, interventional radiology/pulmonology, and radiation oncology is required to ensure that development of these ablative techniques occurs through properly designed and well-controlled prospective studies and will ensure that patients receive the best available therapy, regardless of whether it is surgical resection or ablative therapy.The two most commonly applied ablation techniques are radiofrequency ablation and stereotactic body radiotherapy.1.	Radiofrequency ablation. Radiofrequency ablation is per-formed using either monopolar or bipolar delivery of elec-trical current to electrodes placed within the tumor tissue. In lung tumors, the electrodes are typically inserted into the tumor mass under CT guidance. An electrical current is delivered; the current is converted by means of friction into heat, which quickly leads to immediate and irreparable tissue destruction in the tissue surrounding the electrode. The efficacy of radiofrequency ablation for controlling the primary tumor and improving survival in poor operative candidates (either due to significant comorbid diseases precluding general anesthesia or poor pulmonary function excluding lung resection) is safe and feasible for peripheral lung nodules. In tumors <3.5 cm, the rate of radiographic resolution of tumor is up to 80%, and cancer-specific sur-vival at 2 years was approximately 90%, indicating excel-lent local control of the primary site.57-59,63 It has become the preferred modality for small peripheral tumors over standard external-beam radiation in centers where the tech-nique is available.		Radiofrequency ablation is an excellent modality for the patient at risk for adverse outcomes with pulmonary resec-tion or for patients who refuse surgery, and surgeons should have an algorithm for determining which patients are optimal for this modality64-69 (see Fig. 19-24). Target lesions larger than 5 cm, tumor abutting the hilum, associated malignant pleural or pericardial effusion, greater than three lesions in one lung, and the presence of pulmonary hypertension are all contraindications to radiofrequency ablation.64 Proximity to a large vessel is a contraindication not only due to the risk of massive bleeding, but also because large blood vessels act as a heat sink and lethal cellular temperatures are less likely to be achieved. For these patients, stereotactic body radiotherapy may provide local tumor control with less risk of major complications. Combination therapy with either external-beam radiation or stereotactic body radiotherapy is also under investigation.2.	Stereotactic body radiotherapy. Stereotactic body radiotherapy applies highly focused, high-intensity, three-dimensional conformal radiation to the target lesion over a few sessions. Tumor motion quantification and image guidance technologies have significantly improved the delivery of radiation with high levels of precision 7Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   69501/03/19   7:01 PM 696SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 19-13New classification system for lung adenocarcinomaSTUDY OR  SUBGROUPlog [HAZARD RATIO]SESEGMENTECTOMY TOTALLOBECTOMY  TOTALWEIGHTHAZARD RATIO IV, RANDOM, 95% CIHAZARD RATIO IV, RANDOM, 95% CIBando 2002–0,3150,3495741323,3%0,73 [0,37,1,45]Favours Segmentectomy0.005200100.11Favours LobectomyCheng 2012–0,210,2908132324,8%0,81 [0,46, 1,43]Dai 20160,3320,21044240115209,2%1,39 [0,92, 2,11]Ginsberg 19950,3680,21571221258,7%1,44 [0,95, 2,21]Hamatake 20120,19890,280632775,1%1,22 [0,70, 2,11]Iwasaki 2007–0,083380,5076531551,6%0,92 [0,34, 2,49]Keenan 20040,1310,4158541472,3%1,14 [0,50, 2,58]Kilic 2009–0,23570,21683106788,6%0,79 [0,52, 1,21]Kodama 19970,10110,573246771,2%1,11 [0,36, 3,40]Koike 20030,07730,4385741592,1%1,08 [0,46, 2,55]Landreneau 20140,460,24821021176,6%1,58 [0,97, 2,58]Martin–Ucar 2005–1,04350,707117170,8%0,35 [0,09, 1,41]Nakamura 20110,2391382890,4%1,27 [0,18, 9,02]Okada 2001–0,11650,7168681040,8%0,89 [0,22, 3,63]Okumura 2007–0,16320,3595672733,1%0,85 [0,42, 1,72]Razi 2016–0,020,256911910516,1%0,98 [0,59, 1,62]Read 19900,31480,41841131312,3%1,37 [0,60, 3,11]Sienel 20071,04020,91581491500,5%2,83 [0,47,17,03]Soukiasian 20120,28521,6735561780,1%1,33 [0,05, 35,35]Sugi 2010–0,02020,2543956,5%0,98 [0,60, 1,60]Tsutani 2014–0,71330,3087983834,3%0,49 [0,27, 0,90]Warren 19940,54810,5661031,6%1,73 [0,65, 4,61]Watanabe 2005–0,61620,8979620570,5%0,54 [0,09, 3,14]Yamashita 20120,198860,73469901240,8%1,22 [0,29, 5,15]Yamato 20080,30010,40561532772,5%1,35 [0,61 , 2,99]Yendamuri 20110,2390,2756216225995,3%1,27 [0,74, 2,18]Zhong 2012–0,16250,19388398110,8%0,85 [0,58, 1,24]Total (95% CI)611118431100,0%1,04 [0,92, 1,18]Heterogeneity: Tau2 = 0,00; Chi2 = 25,04, df = 26 (P = 0,52); I2 = 0%Test for overall effect: Z = 0,68 (P = 0,50)Forest plot of HR for overall survival impact of operative approach (segmentectomy versus lobectomy) of stage I NSCLC patients. The pooled HR displayed in this figure when compared with segmentectomy suggested that there was not a significant benefit of lobectomy on HR of stage I patients (7-21) (HR 1.04; 95% CI, 0.92–1.18, P = 0.50) (22–33).Abbreviations: HR = hazard ratio; NSCLC = non–small cell lung cancer; CI = confidence interval; df = degree of freedom; SE = standard error.Reproduced with permission from Bedetti B, Bertolaccini L, Rocco R, et al: Segmentectomy versus lobectomy for stage I non-small cell lung cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis, J Thorac Dis. 2017 Jun; 9(6):1615-1623.Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   69601/03/19   7:01 PM
# Chunk 8899
CHAPTER 19697CHEST WALL, LUNG, MEDIASTINUM, AND PLEURAto the target lesion. This accuracy is important because the lung is extremely sensitive to radiation injury and  the majority of patients with early-stage lung cancer who are currently considered candidates for ablative therapy have marginal lung function; excessive injury to normal surrounding lung tissue is not desirable. Importantly, these techniques allow the safe delivery of up to 66 Gy of radiation to the target tumors without exceeding the maximum-tolerated dose.62-70 A phase II North American multicenter study recently demonstrated the safety and efficacy of this approach in 59 nonoperable patients.62 Patients with biopsy-proven, node-negative peripheral NSCLCs less than 5 cm in diameter (T1 or T2) were treated with stereotactic body radiotherapy after they were deemed inoperable, based on coexisting medical conditions, by a thoracic surgeon and/or pulmonolo-gist. Primary tumor control was excellent; at 3 years, 97.6% were deemed to have primary tumor control by the authors, and 90.6% had local control. However, it is important to note that primary tumor failure was defined specifically as at least a 20% increase in the longest diam-eter of the gross tumor volume by CT scan and evidence of tumor viability either by biopsy confirming carcinoma or by demonstration of FDG avidity on PET scan. For viability to be confirmed with PET scan, the uptake was required to be of similar intensity to the pretreatment staging PET scan. Failure beyond a 1.5to 2-cm margin around the primary tumor volume was considered local failure. Failure in regional node basins was seen in two patients. When compared to locoregional control rates of approximately 6.5% with limited resection, the 3-year locoregional recurrence was higher at 12.8%.3.	Patient selection for stereotactic body radiotherapy, as with limited resection and radiofrequency ablation, is impor-tant. Because the radiation field is so precise, patients with severe emphysema and chronic obstructive pulmonary dis-ease can be safely treated without significant concern for worsening lung function. However, patients with central tumors near the mediastinum and hilum have increased incidence of significant hypoxia, hemoptysis, atelecta-sis, pneumonitis, and reduced pulmonary function.70 In the multicenter trial detailed earlier, treated tumors were required to be greater than 2 cm from the proximal bron-chial tree in all directions (which they defined as the distal 2 cm of the trachea, carina, and named major lobar bronchi up to their first bifurcation).62Rationale for Chemotherapy in the Management of Early-Stage NSCLC. The role of chemotherapy in early-stage (stages I and II) NSCLC is evolving, with several pro-spective phase 2 studies having shown a potential benefit.71,72 Initial concerns that induction chemotherapy may result in increased perioperative morbidity or mortality appear to be unwarranted, as the incidence of perioperative morbidity and mortality is not different between the two groups, except in patients undergoing right-sided pneumonectomy after induc-tion chemotherapy.73 As shown in Table 19-14, an absolute survival benefit of 4% to 7% can be realized using induction for all stages of lung cancer, and in situations where use of adjuvant chemotherapy is anticipated, induction chemother-apy is an acceptable alternative.Table 19-14Five-year stage-specific survival after induction chemotherapy followed by surgerySTAGE5-YEAR  SURVIVAL (%)ABSOLUTE  BENEFIT (%)NEW 5-YEAR  SURVIVAL (%)IA75479IB55661IIA50757IIB40747IIIA15–356–721–42IIIB5–103–58–15Reproduced with permission from Burdett SS, Stewart LA, Rydzewska L:  Chemotherapy and surgery versus surgery alone in non-small cell lung cancer, Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007 Jul 18;(3):CD006157.National Comprehensive Cancer Network guidelines cur-rently recommend observation for T1a (≤1 cm), T1b (>1–2 cm),  and T1c (>2–3 cm), node-negative, completely resected NSCLCs (T1abcN0M0). For patients with larger tumors (T2a tumor >3–4 cm; T2b tumor >4–5 cm) that are node-negative, it is recommended that chemotherapy be considered in high-risk patients, ideally in the setting of a clinical trial. High-risk tumor characteristics include poorly differentiated tumors, moderately to poorly differentiated lung neuroendocrine tumors, vascular invasion, resection limited to wedge resection only, tumors >4 cm  in size, visceral pleural involvement, and when lymph node sampling at the time of resection was incomplete (Nx).Evaluation and Management of Locally Advanced NSCLC. Five-year relative survival in patients with locore-gional disease is 28%, but there is significant heterogeneity within the group. Stage III disease includes patients with small tumors that have metastasized to the mediastinal lymph nodes as well as large tumors (>7 cm), and tumor invading unresectable structures or the major carina with no nodal metastasis at all. Patients with clinically evident N2 disease (i.e., bulky adenopa-thy present on CT scan or mediastinoscopy, with lymph nodes often replaced by tumor) have a 5-year survival rate of 5% to 10% with surgery alone. In contrast, patients with microscopic N2 disease discovered incidentally in one lymph node station after surgical resection have a 5-year survival rate that may be as high as 30%. As a result, many surgeons and oncologists dif-ferentiate between microscopic and bulky N2 lymphadenopathy and the number of involved N2 nodal stations in determining whether to proceed with resection following induction therapy. It is generally accepted that surgical resection is appropriate for patients with a single-station metastasis with a single lymph node smaller than 3 cm, although randomized trials specifically investigating resection following induction therapy for patients with single-station microscopic disease have not yet been performed.Histologic confirmation of N2 nodal metastases is impera-tive; false-positive findings on PET scan are unacceptably high, and reliance on this modality will lead to significant undertreat-ment of patients with earlier stage cancers. This is particularly true in regions with high incidence of granulomatous diseases. Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   69701/03/19   7:01 PM 698SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIWhen N2 nodes are found, incidentally, to harbor metastasis at the time of planned anatomic lung resection, the decision to proceed with resection varies depending on surgeon preference; it is acceptable to either proceed with anatomic resection and mediastinal lymph node sampling/dissection or to stop the pro-cedure, refer the patient for induction therapy, and reevaluate for resection after induction therapy is completed.When histologically confirmed metastases are found dur-ing preoperative staging evaluation, patients should be referred for induction chemotherapy; patients in whom the mediastinal nodes are sterilized by induction therapy have a better prognosis, and surgical resection is generally warranted as part of a mul-timodal approach. As with preinduction evaluation, histologic confirmation of persistent N2 disease after induction therapy is imperative; patients should not be denied surgical resection fol-lowing induction chemotherapy based on radiographic evidence for N2 disease because the survival for resected NSCLC is sig-nificantly better than with definitive chemotherapy.Surgery in T4 and Stage IV Disease Surgery is occasion-ally appropriate for highly selected patients with tumors invad-ing the SVC, carinal or vertebral body involvement, or satellite nodules in the same lobe (T3, N0-1, M0) or in T4, N0-1 tumors with limited invasion into the mediastinum, heart, great vessels, trachea, recurrent laryngeal nerve, esophagus, vertebral body, diaphragm or carina through direct extension. Surgery gener-ally does not have a role in the care of patients with any tumor with N3 disease or T4 tumors with N2 disease. Survival rates remain extremely low for these patients. Similarly, the treat-ment of patients with stage IV disease is chemotherapy. How-ever, on occasion, patients with a single site of metastasis are encountered, particularly with adenocarcinomas presenting with a solitary brain metastasis. In this highly select group, 5-year survival rates of 10% to 15% can be achieved with surgical exci-sion of the brain metastasis and the primary tumor, assuming it is early stage.Surgery for Management of Pancoast’s Tumor Carcinoma arising in the extreme apex of the chest with associated arm and shoulder pain, atrophy of the muscles of the hand, and Horner’s syndrome presents a unique challenge to the surgeon. Any tumor of the superior sulcus, including tumors without evi-dence for involvement of the neurovascular bundle, is now com-monly known as Pancoast’s tumors, after Henry Pancoast who described the syndrome in 1932. The designation is reserved for tumors involving the parietal pleura or deeper structures overly-ing the first rib. Chest wall involvement at or below the second rib is not a Pancoast’s tumor.74 Treatment is multidisciplinary; due to the location of the tumor and involvement of the neu-rovascular bundle that supplies the ipsilateral extremity, pre-serving postoperative function of the extremity is critical. For this reason, resection should only be performed in patients who are proven negative for mediastinal lymph node involvement. Survival with N2 positive nodes is poor, and the morbidity and mortality associated with surgical resection are high. If bulky lymphadenopathy is present, EBUSor EUS-guided FNA may prove nodal involvement. However, a negative FNA is not suf-ficient for proving the absence of mediastinal involvement and should be followed by mediastinoscopy to ensure accurate and complete evaluation of the mediastinum.Because Pancoast’s tumors have high rates of local recur-rence and incomplete resection, induction chemoradiotherapy fol-lowed by surgery is recommended. This treatment regimen was well tolerated in a study performed by the Southwest Oncology Group, with 95% of patients completing induction treatment. Com-plete resection was achieved in 76%. Five-year survival was 44% overall and 54% when complete resection was achieved. Disease progression with this regimen was predominantly at distant sites, with the brain being the most common.75 The current treatment algorithm for Pancoast’s tumors is presented in Fig. 19-25.Surgical excision is performed via thoracotomy with en bloc resection of the chest wall and vascular structures and ana-tomic lobectomy. A portion of the lower trunk of the brachial plexus and the stellate ganglion are also typically resected. With chest wall involvement, en bloc chest wall resection, along with lobectomy, is performed, with or without chest wall reconstruction.For small rib resections or those posterior to the scapula, chest wall reconstruction is usually unnecessary. Larger defects (two rib segments or more) are usually reconstructed with Gore-Tex to provide chest wall contour and stability. En bloc resection is also used for other locally advanced tumors (T3) with direct invasion of the adjacent chest wall, diaphragm, or pericardium. If a large portion of the pericardium is removed, reconstruction with thin Gore-Tex membrane will be required to prevent cardiac herniation and venous obstruction.Preoperative (Induction) Chemotherapy for NSCLC The use of chemotherapy before anatomic surgical resection has a number of potential advantages:1.	The tumor’s blood supply is still intact, allowing better chemotherapy delivery and avoiding tumor cell hypoxia (in any residual microscopic tumor remaining postoperatively), which would increase radioresistance.2.	The primary tumor may be downstaged, enhancing resectability.3.	Patients are better able to tolerate chemotherapy before sur-gery and are more likely to complete the prescribed regimen than after surgery.4.	It functions as an in vivo test of the primary tumor’s sensi-tivity to chemotherapy.5.	Response to chemotherapy can be monitored and used to guide decisions about additional therapy.6.	Systemic micrometastases are treated.7.	It identifies patients with progressive disease/nonresponders and spares them a pulmonary resection.Potential disadvantages include:1.	There is a possible increase in the perioperative complica-tion rate in patients requiring right pneumonectomy after induction chemotherapy.2.	While the patient is receiving chemotherapy, potentially curative resection is delayed; if the patient does not respond, this delay could result in tumor spread.In stage IIIA N2 disease, the response rates to induction chemotherapy are high, in the range of 70%. The treatment is generally safe, as it does not cause a significant increase in peri-operative morbidity. Two randomized trials have now compared surgery alone for patients with N2 disease to preoperative che-motherapy followed by surgery. Both trials were stopped before complete accrual because of a significant increase in survival for the chemotherapy arm.The initially observed survival differences have been maintained for up to 3 years and beyond (5-year data not shown). Given these results, induction chemotherapy with Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   69801/03/19   7:01 PM
# Chunk 8900
CHAPTER 19699CHEST WALL, LUNG, MEDIASTINUM, AND PLEURAConfirm T3–4, N0-1 M0 NSCLCNo evidence for metastatic or N2 nodal diseaseTumor progression orpoor performance statusDefinitivechemoradiotherapyMetastatic disease or N2nodal diseaseConcurrent induction chemotherapy (Cisplatin/Etoposide)And radiotherapy: 45 Gy over 5 weeksCT chest/upper abdomenMRI/MRA of vessels/brachialplexusMediastinoscopyBrain CT or MRI andPET scanReassessment performance score, physiologic reserve,tumor responseRadiographic evaluation: CT scans of thechest, upper abdomen, and brain. PET scan for metastasesAdditional chemotherapyas toleratedAssess performance status:performance score, cardiopulmonary reserve,renal function and neurologic functionInitial evaluation, biopsy and stagingThoracotomy, en bloc chest wall resection, lobectomy, chest wall with reconstructionTumor stable/regression; good toexcellent performance statusPoor performance statusGood to excellent performance statusFigure 19-25. Treatment algo-rithm for Pancoast’s tumors. CT = computed tomography; MRA = magnetic resonance angiography; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging; NSCLC =  non–small cell lung cancer;  PET = positron emission tomography.cisplatin-based regimen (two to three cycles) has become stan-dard for patients with N2 disease. Table 19-15 summarizes the findings of a systematic review and meta-analysis reporting response rates, progression-free survival, and overall survival after induction chemotherapy followed by surgical resection.Postoperative (Adjuvant) Chemotherapy for NSCLC Post-operative adjuvant chemotherapy was previously thought to confer no benefit based on multiple prospective randomized tri-als, in part because patients who had undergone thoracotomy and lung resection had difficulty tolerating the adjuvant regi-mens. More recently, however, newer, more effective agents have shown promise, and adjuvant therapy is better tolerated after minimally invasive lung resection (i.e., VATS or robotic anatomic resection). Targeted therapies, which have been shown to be beneficial in advanced-stage lung cancer, are of particular interest.Any patient with nodal metastasis (N1 or N2) or with T3 tumors (defined as tumors >5 to ≤7 cm or separate tumor in same lobe or direct invasion of chest wall [includes parietal pleura and superior sulcus]/parietal pericardium/phrenic nerve) should receive adjuvant chemotherapy if they are able to toler-ate the regimen. In the situation where the margins of resec-tion are positive, re-resection is recommended. If not possible, concurrent chemoradiation is recommended for macroscopic residual tumor and sequential chemoradiation for microscopic residual tumor.Definitive Nonsurgical Treatment for NSCLC. Recent advances in targeted therapies have changed the management of advanced NSCLC from a generalized, platinum-based approach to one in which molecular analysis and targeted, personalized therapies are now standard of care.  It is now mandatory that the pathologist clearly differentiate between squamous cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma because the therapeutic options are different and use of bevacizumab, while beneficial in patients with adenocarcinoma, has been found to cause exces-sive pulmonary hemorrhage in patients with squamous histol-ogy. For the surgeon, this requirement translates into a much more aggressive approach to tissue diagnosis. At our institution, the cytopathologist provides onsite rapid assessment of the fine-needle aspirate to determine whether tumor cells are present and confirm that sufficient tumor cells are present to enable molecu-lar testing. This has increased the number of passes performed during an EBUS-guided FNA or during CT-guided aspiration of a pulmonary or intrathoracic lesion; typically, an additional two to three passes are made for cell block material after confirming the presence of tumor cells in the target area. When insufficient cells are obtained for molecular testing, despite having a diag-nosis, additional sampling is warranted; this is mandatory in patients with adenocarcinoma and likely to become necessary for other non–small cell histologic types as advances in targeted therapies become available for clinical use. Acquiring adequate tissue for diagnosis may require mediastinoscopy or VATS; close communication between the oncologist, surgeon, patholo-gist, and patient is needed to ensure that the benefits to the patient clearly outweigh the risks and that results obtained through more aggressive diagnostic measures are needed to direct subsequent care.8Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   69901/03/19   7:01 PM 700SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 19-15Selected randomized trials of neoadjuvant chemotherapy for stage III non–small cell lung cancerTRIAL (REFERENCE)NO. OF PATIENTS (STAGE III)CHEMOTHERAPYRESPONSE RATE (%)PCR (%)COMPLETE RESECTIONPFSOS5-YEAR SURVIVALRosell et al8560 (60)MitomycinIfosfamideCisplatin60485%12 vs. 5 mo (DFS; P = .006)22 vs. 10 mo (P = .005)16% vs. 0%Roth et al9060 (60)Cyclophosphamide EtoposideCisplatin35NR39% vs. 31%Not reached vs. 9 mo (P = .006)64 vs. 11 mo (P = .008)56% vs. 15%aPass et al9127 (27)EtoposideCisplatin62885% vs. 86%12.7 vs. 5.8 mo (P = .083)28.7 vs. 15.6 mo (P = .095)NRNagai et al9262 (62)CisplatinVindesine28065% vs. 77%NR17 vs. 16 mo (P = .5274)10% vs. 22%Gilligan et al93519 (80)Platinum basedb49482% vs. 80%NR54 vs. 55 mo (P = .86)44% vs. 45%Depierre et al94355 (167)MitomycinIfosfamideCisplatin641192% vs. 86%26.7 vs. 12.9 mo (P = .033)37 vs. 26 mo (P = .15)43.9% vs. 35.3%cPisters et al95354 (113)dCarboplatinPaclitaxel41NR94% vs. 89%33 vs. 21 mo (P = .07)75 vs. 46 mo (P = .19)50% vs. 43%Sorensen et al9690 (NR)PaclitaxelCarboplatin46079% vs. 70%NR34.4 vs. 22.5 mo (NS)36% vs. 24% (NS)Mattson et al97274 (274)Docetaxel28NR77% vs. 76%e9 vs. 7.6 mo (NS)14.8 vs. 12.6 mo (NS)NRa3-year survival.bOptions included MVP (mitomycin C, vindesine, and platinum), MIC (mitomycin, ifosfamide, and cisplatin), NP (cisplatin and vinorelbine), PacCarbo (paclitaxel and carboplatin), GemCis (gemcitabine and cisplatin), and DocCarbo (docetaxel and carboplatin).c4-year survival.d113 patients (32%) were reported to have stage IIB or IIIA disease.e22 patients in the chemotherapy arm and 29 patients in the control arm had resectable disease.Abbreviations: DFS = disease-free survival; NR = not recorded; NS = not significant; OS = overall survival; pCR = pathologic complete response; PFS = progression-free survival.Reproduced with permission from Allen J, Jahanzeb M: Neoadjuvant chemotherapy in stage III NSCLC, J Natl Compr Canc Netw. 2008 Mar;6(3):285-293.Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   70001/03/19   7:01 PM
# Chunk 8901
CHAPTER 19701CHEST WALL, LUNG, MEDIASTINUM, AND PLEURAOnce a treatment plan has been devised, two strategies for delivery are available. “Sequential” chemoradiation involves full-dose systemic chemotherapy (i.e., cisplatin combined with a second agent) followed by standard radiotherapy (approxi-mately 60 Gy). The combination of chemotherapy followed by radiation has improved 5-year survival from 6% with radio-therapy alone to 17%.76 An alternative approach, referred to as “concurrent chemoradiation,” administers chemotherapy and radiation at the same time. Certain chemotherapeutic agents sen-sitize tumor cells to radiation and, thus, enhance the radiation effect. The advantages of this approach are improved primary tumor and locoregional lymph node control and elimination of the delay in administering radiotherapy that occurs with sequential treatment. A disadvantage, however, is the necessary reduction in chemotherapy dosage in order to diminish over-lapping toxicities; this can potentially lead to undertreatment of systemic micrometastases. Randomized trials have shown a modest 5-year survival benefit as compared with chemotherapy. In a systematic review of 47 trials and six meta-analyses, an absolute survival benefit of 4% at 2 years was seen when con-current platinum-based chemoradiation was given compared to sequential radiation.77Definitive radiotherapy is predominantly used for pallia-tion of symptoms in patients with poor performance status; cure rates with radiation as a single modality in patients with N2 or N3 disease is less than 7%. Recent improvement has been seen with three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy and altered frac-tionation. Such poor results for patients with stage III lung cancer  reflect the limitations of locoregional treatment in a disease where death results from systemic metastatic spread.Options for Thoracic Surgical ApproachesThoracic surgical approaches have changed over recent years with advancements in minimally invasive surgery. A surgeon trained in advanced minimally invasive techniques can now perform pleural-based, pulmonary and mediastinal procedures through multiple thoracoscopic ports without the need for a sub-stantial, rib-spreading incision. Subjective measures of quality of life after VATS, such as pain (Fig. 19-26) and perceived functional recovery, consistently and reproducibly favor VATS OpenVATSNoneMildModerateSeverep<0.001Figure 19-26. Pie chart comparison of pain control at 3 weeks after lobectomy by standard thoracotomy or video-assisted tho-racic surgery (VATS). The pie charts show that patients undergo-ing VATS have significantly less pain (P <.01) as measured by the most potent analgesic still required: severe—schedule II nar-cotic; moderate—schedule III or lower narcotic; mild–nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) or acetaminophen. (Reproduced with permission from Demmy TL, Nwoque C. Is video-assisted  thoracic surgery lobectomy better? Quality of life considerations, Ann  Thorac Surg. 2008 Feb;85(2):S719-S728.)over thoracotomy. Objective measures such as functional sta-tus as measured by 6-minute walk, return to work, and ability to tolerate chemotherapy also favor VATS over thoracotomy. Finally, recovery of respiratory function occurs earlier in VATS patients. These findings are pronounced in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and in the elderly—populations whose quality of life can be dramatically impacted by changes in their respiratory symptoms and function, thoracic pain, and physical performance. Table 19-16 provides a summary of pop-ulations that may benefit from VATS approaches.Video-Assisted (VATS)/Robotic-Assisted Thoraco-scopic Surgery (RATS). VATS/RATS has become the rec-ommended approach to diagnosis and treatment of pleural effusions, recurrent pneumothoraces, lung biopsies, lobec-tomy or segmental resection, resection of bronchogenic and mediastinal cysts, and intrathoracic esophageal mobilization for esophagectomy.78 These approaches are also utilized for pneumonectomy in some centers of excellence with very high Table 19-16Special circumstances under which lobectomy by video-assisted thoracic surgery may be preferableCONDITIONEXAMPLESPulmonary compromisePoor FEV1/Dlco, heavy smoking, sleep apnea, recent pneumoniaCardiac dysfunctionCongestive heart failure, severe coronary artery disease, recent myocardial infarction, valvular diseaseExtrathoracic malignancySolitary brain metastasis from lung cancer, deep pulmonary metastases requiring lobectomyPoor physical performancePerformance status equivalent to a Zubrod score of 2 or 3, morbid obesityRheumatologic/orthopedic conditionSpinal disease, severe rheumatoid arthritis, severe kyphosis, lupus erythematosus, osteomyelitisAdvanced ageAge >70 yearsVascular problemsAneurysm, severe peripheral vascular diseaseRecent or impending major operationUrgent abdominal operation, joint replacement requiring use of crutches, need for contralateral thoracotomyPsychological/neurologic conditionsSubstance abuse, poor command following, pain syndromesImmunosuppression/ impaired wound healingRecent transplantation, diabetesAbbreviations: Dlco = carbon monoxide diffusion capacity; FEV1 = forced expiratory volume in 1 second.Reproduced with permission from Demmy TL, Nwoque C. Is video-assisted thoracic surgery lobectomy better? Quality of life considerations, Ann Thorac Surg. 2008 Feb;85(2):S719-S728.Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   70101/03/19   7:01 PM 702SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIvolumes of VATS lung resection. VATS is performed via two to four incisions measuring 0.5 to 1.2 cm in length to allow insertion of the thoracoscope and instruments. An access incision, typically in the fourth or fifth intercostal space in the anterior axillary line, is used for dissection of the hilum during lung resection. The incision location varies accord-ing to the procedure. With respect to VATS lobectomy, port placement varies according to the lobe being resected and is highly variable among surgeons.79 The basic principle is to position the ports high enough on the thoracic cage to have access to the hilar structures. Endoscopic staplers are used to divide the major vascular structures and bronchus (Fig. 19-27). Robotic approaches are similarly tailored to the side and lobe under-going resection, with the entire operation performed using DissectBADCERetractRetractRetractRetractRetractViewViewViewViewHoldViewDissectFigure 19-27. Selected video-assisted thoracic surgery lobectomy maneuvers. All the maneuvers are shown with the patient positioned in the left lateral decubitus position. The same maneuvers can be performed in mirror image for left-sided work. A. Medial viewing and inferior holding of lung to allow dissection through the access incision. Example shows dissection of the apical hilum. B. Medial viewing and access holding of lung to allow stapling of hilar structures from below. Example shows division of the apical pulmonary artery trunk to the right upper lobe (upper lobe branch of vein divided and reflected away). C. Standard viewing and use of working port to dissect and divide structures while lung is retracted through access incision. Example shows use of stapler to divide pulmonary artery to right lower lobe.  D. Standard viewing and use of working port to retract lung and access incision to dissect structures. This method is commonly used to dis-sect the pulmonary artery in the major fissure. Example shows inferior pulmonary vein after the pulmonary ligament was divided using this maneuver. E. Standard viewing and use of access incision to deliver stapler to divide fissures. Example shows division of the posterior fissure between the right lower lobe and the upper lobe.Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   70201/03/19   7:01 PM
# Chunk 8902
CHAPTER 19705CHEST WALL, LUNG, MEDIASTINUM, AND PLEURAmay be possible to avoid Foley catheterization by simply reminding the patient to void on a regular basis. In male patients with voiding difficulty prior to surgery, urinary catheterization may be required. In addition, the use of local anesthetics may cause sympathetic outflow blockade, leading to vasodilation and hypotension often requiring intravenous vasoconstrictors (an α-agonist such as phenylephrine) and/or fluid administration. In such circumstances, fluid administration for hypotension may be undesirable in pulmonary surgery patients, particularly after pneumonectomy. Paravertebral catheters provide equivalent pain control with less effect on hemodynamics.85 Recently, lipo-somal bupivacaine was introduced and has become the standard approach to pain management after thoracic surgery in several centers. The formulation allows for slow-release of bupivacaine for up to 72 hours after injection. Injected directly into the inter-costal spaces immediately prior to chest closure, the formulation has shown great promise in several retrospective reports, with randomized trials not yet completed. One limiting factor in use of the formulation is the cost; future trials are needed, with cost-analysis, to determine whether the benefits in pain, reduction in narcotic use, shorter hospital stay and possibly decreased pul-monary complications justify the cost.Alternatively, intravenous narcotics via patient-controlled analgesia can be used, often in conjunction with ketorolac, gabapentin, and intravenous Tylenol. Dosing must be titrated to balance the degree of pain relief with the degree of seda-tion. Oversedated patients are as ominous as patients without adequate pain control because of the significant risk of secre-tion retention, atelectasis/pneumonia, and pulmonary aspiration, especially in elderly patients who should be carefully assessed for aspiration risk when ordered for dietary advancement. Proper pain control with intravenous narcotics requires a care-fully regulated balance of pain relief and sedation to maximize the benefits of pain control while minimizing these very real and potentially life-threatening complications.Whether on epidural, paravertebral, or intravenous pain control, the patient is typically transitioned to oral pain medica-tion on the third or fourth postoperative day. During both the parenteral and oral phase of pain management, a standardized regimen of stool softeners and laxatives is advisable in order to prevent severe constipation.Respiratory Care. The best respiratory care is achieved when the patient is able to deliver an effective cough to clear secre-tions and results from the commitment and proper training of all involved healthcare providers. The process begins preopera-tively, with clear instructions on using pillows (or other support techniques) over the wound and then applying pressure.Postoperatively, proper pain control without oversedation (as outlined earlier) is essential. Daily morning rounds should include a careful assessment of the patient’s pulmonary status, reminders to the patient and family about the importance of coughing and deep breathing, including use of adjunctive respi-ratory equipment if ordered, and mobilization of the patient. Early transition to a chair and to ambulation is the best respira-tory therapy and should be strongly encouraged. When avail-able, physical and/or cardiopulmonary rehabilitation services are vital additional members of the care team.Postoperative ComplicationsPostoperative complications after pulmonary resection range from minor to life-threatening. Strict attention to volume sta-tus, early and aggressive pulmonary toilet, and good pain control can reduce the risk of most complications, but does not completely eliminate them, even in centers of excellence. The most devastating complication after pulmonary resection is postpneumonectomy pulmonary edema, which occurs in 1% to 5% of patients undergoing pneumonectomy and more often after right compared to left pneumonectomy. Clinically, symp-toms of respiratory distress manifest hours to days after sur-gery. Radiographically, diffuse interstitial infiltration or frank alveolar edema is seen. The pathophysiologic causes are related increased permeability and filtration pressure and decreased lymphatic drainage from the affected lung. Judicious use of intravenous fluids perioperatively, including use of vasopres-sors rather than fluid boluses for hypotension intraand post-operatively, is critical to minimizing the risk of this syndrome. Treatment consists of ventilatory support, fluid restriction, and diuretics. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation may be life-saving in centers where this option is available. The syndrome reportedly has a nearly 100% mortality rate despite aggressive therapy.Other postoperative complications include air leak and bronchopleural fistula. Although these are two very differ-ent problems, distinguishing between them may be difficult. Postoperative air leaks are common after pulmonary resection, particularly in patients with emphysematous lung, because the fibrosis and destroyed blood supply impairs healing of surface injuries. Prolonged air leaks (i.e., those lasting >5 days) may be treated by diminishing or discontinuing suction (if used), by continuing chest drainage, or by instilling a pleurodesis agent, usually doxycycline or talcum powder, which will cause pleurodesis of the lung within the chest cavity and minimize the possible collapse of the lung due to persistent air leak. This is useful only in patients in whom full lung expansion is achieved, either with suction or on water seal, as patients with a persistent pneumothorax on CXR will not have adequate lung-to-parietal pleural apposition to achieve adequate pleurodesis.If the leak is moderate to large, a high index of suspicion for bronchopleural fistula from the resected bronchial stump should be maintained, particularly if the patient is immunocom-promised or had induction chemoand/or radiation therapy. If suspected, flexible bronchoscopy is performed to evaluate the bronchial stump. Management options include continued pro-longed chest tube drainage, reoperation, and reclosure (with stump reinforcement with intercostal or pedicled serratus mus-cle flap). If the fistula is very small (<4 mm), bronchoscopic fibrin glue application has been used successfully to seal the hole in some patients. Patients often have concomitant empy-ema, and open drainage may be necessary.Spontaneous PneumothoraxSpontaneous pneumothorax is secondary to intrinsic abnormali-ties of the lung and can be classified as primary and secondary. Primary spontaneous pneumothorax is defined as a spontaneous pneumothorax without underlying lung disease. The most com-mon cause is rupture of an apical subpleural bleb. The cause of these blebs is unknown, but they occur more frequently in smokers and males, and they tend to predominate in young postadolescent males with a tall thin body habitus. Treatment is generally chest tube insertion with water seal. If a leak is present and persists for greater than 3 days, thoracoscopic man-agement (i.e., bleb resection with pleurodesis by talc or pleural abrasion) is performed. Recurrences or complete lung collapse with the first episode are generally indications for thoracoscopic Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   70501/03/19   7:01 PM 706SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIintervention.86 Additional indications for intervention on the first episode include occupational hazards such as air travel, deep-sea diving, or travel to remote locations. CT findings of multiple small bullae or a large bleb are associated with an increased risk of recurrent pneumothorax.87 Many surgeons are now using screening CT scan to recommend VATS bleb resection with pleurodesis for first-episode spontaneous pneumothorax.Secondary spontaneous pneumothorax occurs in the set-ting of underlying lung disease, such as emphysema (rupture of a bleb or bulla), cystic fibrosis, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), metastatic cancer (especially sarcoma), asthma, lung abscess, and occasionally lung cancer. Catame-nial pneumothorax, a rare but interesting cause of spontaneous pneumothorax in women in their second and third decades, occurs within 72 hours of the onset of menses and is possibil-ity related to endometriosis. Management of pneumothorax in these circumstances is similar to that of primary spontane-ous pneumothorax in that drainage and lung reexpansion are required. Additional therapy, however, is often tied to therapy of the specific disease process and may involve lung resection, thoracoscopic pleurectomy, or talc pleurodesis.Pulmonary InfectionsLung Abscess. A lung abscess is a localized area of pulmonary parenchymal necrosis caused by an infectious organism; tissue destruction results in a solitary or dominant cavity measuring at least 2 cm in diameter. Less often, there may be multiple, smaller cavities (<2 cm). In that case, the infection is typically referred to as a necrotizing pneumonia. An abscess that is pres-ent for more than 6 weeks is considered chronic.Based on the etiology (Table 19-17), lung abscesses are further classified as primary or secondary. A primary lung abscess occurs, for example, in immunocompromised patients, as a result of highly virulent organisms inciting a necrotizing pulmonary infection, or in patients who have a predisposition to aspirate oropharyngeal or gastrointestinal secretions. A second-ary lung abscess occurs in patients with an underlying condition such as a partial bronchial obstruction, a lung infarct, or adjacent suppurative infections (subphrenic or hepatic abscesses).88Pathogenesis Lung abscesses result when necrotizing micro-organisms infect the lower respiratory tract via inhalation of aerosolized particles, aspiration of oropharyngeal secretions, or hematogenous spread from distant sites. Direct extension from a contiguous site is less frequent. Most primary lung abscesses are suppurative bacterial infections secondary to aspiration. Risk factors for pulmonary aspiration include advanced age, conditions of impaired consciousness, suppressed cough reflex, dysfunctional esophageal motility, laryngopharygeal reflux disease, and centrally acting neurologic diseases (e.g., stroke). At the time of aspiration, the composition of the oropharyn-geal flora determines the etiologic organisms. With increasing use of proton pump inhibitors to suppress acid secretion in the stomach, the oropharyngeal flora has shifted, and the risk of developing bacterial lung infections after an aspiration event has increased.89 Secondary lung abscesses occur most often distal to an obstructing bronchial carcinoma. Infected cysts or bullae are not considered true abscesses.Microbiology Normal oropharyngeal secretions contain many more Streptococcus species and more anaerobes (approxi-mately 1 × 108 organisms/mL) than aerobes (approximately  1 × 107 organisms/mL). Pneumonia that follows from Table 19-17Causes of lung abscess	I.	Primary	A.	Necrotizing pneumonia	1.	Staphylococcus aureus, Klebsiella, Pseudomonas, Mycobacterium	2.	Bacteroides, Fusobacterium, Actinomyces	3.	Entamoeba, Echinococcus	B.	Aspiration pneumonia	1.	Anesthesia	2.	Stroke	3.	Drugs or alcohol	C.	Esophageal disease	1.	Achalasia, Zenker’s diverticulum, gastroesophageal reflux	D.	Immunodeficiency	1.	Cancer (and chemotherapy)	2.	Diabetes	3.	Organ transplantation	4.	Steroid therapy	5.	Malnutrition	II.	Secondary	A.	Bronchial obstruction	1.	Neoplasm	2.	Foreign body	B.	Systemic sepsis	1.	Septic pulmonary emboli	2.	Seeding of pulmonary infarct	C.	Complication of pulmonary trauma	1.	Infection of hematoma or contusion	2.	Contaminated foreign body or penetrating injury	D.	Direct extension from extraparenchymal infection	1.	Pleural empyema	2.	Mediastinal, hepatic, subphrenic abscessAdapted with permission from Schwartz SI, Fischer JE, Daly JM, et al: Principles of Surgery, 7th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Education; 1999.aspiration, with or without abscess development, is typically polymicrobial. An average of two to four isolates present in large numbers have been cultured from lung abscesses sam-pled percutaneously. Overall, at least 50% of these infections are caused by purely anaerobic bacteria, 25% are caused by mixed aerobes and anaerobes, and 25% or fewer are caused by aerobes only. In nosocomial pneumonia, 60% to 70% of the organisms are gram-negative bacteria. Immunosuppressed patients may develop abscesses because of the usual pathogens as well as less virulent and opportunistic organisms such as Salmonella species, Legionella species, Pneumocystis carinii, atypical mycobacteria, and fungi.Clinical Features and Diagnosis The typical presentation may include productive cough, fever (>38.9°C), chills, leuko-cytosis (>15,000 cells/mm3), weight loss, fatigue, malaise, pleu-ritic chest pain, and dyspnea. Lung abscesses may also present in a more indolent fashion, with weeks to months of cough, mal-aise, weight loss, low-grade fever, night sweats, leukocytosis, and anemia. After aspiration pneumonia, 1 to 2 weeks typically elapse before cavitation occurs; 40% to 75% of such patients produce putrid, foul-smelling sputum. Severe complications Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   70601/03/19   7:01 PM
# Chunk 8903
CHAPTER 19707CHEST WALL, LUNG, MEDIASTINUM, AND PLEURAABCFigure 19-30. Lung abscess resulting from emesis and aspi-ration after an alcoholic binge. A. Chest X-ray showing an abscess cavity in the left upper lobe. B. A coronal tomogram highlights the thin wall of the abscess. C. Healing of the abscess cavity after 4 weeks of antibiotic therapy and pos-tural drainage.such as massive hemoptysis, endobronchial spread to other portions of the lungs, rupture into the pleural space and devel-opment of pyopneumothorax, or septic shock and respiratory failure are rare in the modern antibiotic era. The mortality rate is about 5% to 10%, except in the presence of immunosuppres-sion, where rates range from 9% to 28%.The CXR is the primary tool for diagnosing a lung abscess (Fig. 19-30). Its distinguishing characteristic is a density or mass with a relatively thin-walled cavity. An air-fluid level observed within the abscess indicates communication with the tracheobronchial tree. CT scan of the chest clarifies the diag-nosis when CXR is equivocal and identifies endobronchial obstruction and/or an associated mass and other pathologic anomalies. A cavitating lung carcinoma is frequently mistaken for a lung abscess. Differential diagnosis also includes loculated or interlobar empyema, infected lung cysts or bullae, tuberculo-sis, bronchiectasis, fungal infections, and noninfectious inflam-matory conditions (e.g., Wegener’s granulomatosis).Ideally, the specific etiologic organism is identified before antibiotic administration. Bronchoscopy, which is essential to Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   70701/03/19   7:01 PM 708SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIrule out endobronchial obstruction due to tumor or foreign body, is ideal for obtaining uncontaminated cultures using bronchoal-veolar lavage. Culture samples can also be obtained by percu-taneous, transthoracic FNA under ultrasound or CT guidance. Routine sputum cultures are often of limited usefulness because of contamination with upper respiratory tract flora.Actinomycosis and nocardiosis, although rare, are particu-larly virulent infections associated with lung abscess. Diagnosis can be difficult.90 Both frequently masquerade as other clinical syndromes; thus, it is important for the surgeon to keep these bacteria in mind when considering the differential diagnosis for cavitary lung lesions. Actinomyces, a normal oropharyngeal bacterium, causes extensive pulmonary damage. Actinomyco-sis lung infection typically begins as acute pneumonitis after pulmonary aspiration. The symptoms mimic pulmonary tuber-culosis, including chronic cough, night sweats, weight loss, and hemoptysis.Ongoing infection leads to chronic inflammation and fibrosis; cavitation occurs due to destruction of the pulmonary tissues. Without treatment, the infection continues to destroy surrounding structures, resulting in fistula formation to adja-cent structures, including the adjacent lung, interlobar fissures, pleural space, chest wall, and mediastinum. Actinomyces israelii is the most common of the species to cause disease. Nocardi-osis is also a rare opportunistic infection that usually occurs in an immunocompromised host (HIV or cancer patients) and causes both local and systemic suppurative infections. The most common site is pulmonary, caused by Nocardia asteroides in 90% of cases. Infection is slowly progressive, with weight loss, fatigue, cough, and hemoptysis. An acute pulmonary infec-tion is common, with necrotizing pneumonia and cavitation or slowly enlarging pulmonary nodule. In some cases, empyema also develops.Management of Lung Abscess Systemic antibiotics directed against the causative organism represent the mainstay of therapy. The duration of antimicrobial therapy varies from 3 to 12 weeks for necrotizing pneumonia and lung abscess. It is likely best to treat until the cavity is resolved or until serial radiographs show significant improvement. Parenteral therapy is generally used until the patient is afebrile and able to demonstrate consistent enteral intake. Oral therapy can then be used to complete the course of therapy. For community-acquired infections second-ary to aspiration, likely pathogens are oropharyngeal streptococci and anaerobes. Penicillin G, ampicillin, and amoxicillin are the main therapeutic agents, but a β-lactamase inhibitor or metro-nidazole should be added to cover the increasing prevalence of gram-negative anaerobes that produce β-lactamase. Clindamycin is also a primary therapeutic agent. For hospital-acquired infec-tions, Staphylococcus aureus and aerobic gram-negative bacilli are common organisms of the oropharyngeal flora. Piperacillin with a β-lactamase inhibitor (or equivalent alternatives) provide better coverage of likely pathogens.Surgical drainage of lung abscesses is uncommon since drainage usually occurs spontaneously via the tracheobron-chial tree. Indications for intervention are listed in Table 19-18. Drainage and resection may be required for actinomycosis and nocardiosis; diagnosis is often delayed because the bacteria are difficult to culture; invasion of the infection into surrounding structures is, therefore, common. Once identified, long-term antibiotics (months to years) are typically required along with drainage, debridement, and resection as needed. While penicil-lin derivatives are effective against most Actinomyces species, the infections are typically polymicrobial, and broad-spectrum parenteral antibiotics may be required. Nocardia species, in contrast, are highly variable; specific identification of the infect-ing species with antibiotic sensitivities is needed to direct appro-priate therapy. Evaluation for malignant spread, particularly to the brain, is also required in the management of nocardiosis, as systemic dissemination occurs early and frequently.External drainage may be accomplished with tube tho-racostomy, percutaneous drainage, or surgical cavernostomy. The choice between tube thoracostomy versus radiographically guided catheter placement depends on the treating physician’s  preference and institutional technical expertise in placing image-guided thoracostomy tubes. Surgical resection is required in fewer than 10% of lung abscess patients. Lobectomy is the preferred intervention for bleeding from a lung abscess or pyo-pneumothorax. An important intraoperative consideration is to protect the contralateral lung with a double-lumen tube, bron-chial blocker, or contralateral main stem intubation. Surgical treatment has a 90% success rate, with associated mortality of 1% to 13%.Bronchiectasis. Bronchiectasis is defined as a pathologic and permanent dilation of bronchi with bronchial wall thickening. This condition may be localized to certain bronchial segments, or it may be diffuse throughout the bronchial tree, typically affecting the medium-sized airways. Overall, this is a rare clini-cal entity in the United States with a prevalence of less than 1 in 10,000, although the incidence has increased in recent years and noncystic fibrosis–related bronchiectasis is now thought to affect 27.5 out of every 10,000 persons over age 75.Pathogenesis Development of bronchiectasis can be attributed to either congenital or acquired causes. The principal congeni-tal diseases that lead to bronchiectasis include cystic fibrosis, primary ciliary dyskinesia, and immunoglobulin deficiencies (e.g., selective IgA deficiency). Congenital causes commonly produce a diffuse pattern of bronchial involvement. Acquired causes are categorized broadly as infectious and inflammatory. Bronchial obstruction from cancer, inhaled objects, extrinsic airway compression, or inspissated sputum promotes localized infection and subsequent medium airway destruction. Diffuse pneumonic processes from pathogens including necrotizing bacterial pneumonia, pertussis and measles pneumonia, severe influenza, or varicella pneumonia can lead to widespread bron-chiectasis. Chronic granulomatous disease, immunodeficiency disorders, and hypersensitivity disorders can also lead to diffuse bronchiectasis.Noninfectious causes of bronchiectasis include inhala-tion of toxic gases such as ammonia, which results in severe Table 19-18Indications for surgical drainage procedures for lung abscesses	1.	Failure of medical therapy	2.	Abscess under tension	3.	Abscess increasing in size during appropriate treatment	4.	Contralateral lung contamination	5.	Abscess >4–6 cm in diameter	6.	Necrotizing infection with multiple abscesses, hemoptysis, abscess rupture, or pyopneumothorax	7.	Inability to exclude a cavitating carcinomaBrunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   70801/03/19   7:01 PM
# Chunk 8904
CHAPTER 19709CHEST WALL, LUNG, MEDIASTINUM, AND PLEURAFigure 19-31. Multiple cystic-type bronchiectatic cavities can be seen on a cut section of right lower lobe lung.and destructive airway inflammatory responses. Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis, Sjögren’s syndrome, and α1-antitrypsin deficiency are some additional examples of presumed immunologic disorders that may be accompanied by bronchiectasis.In addition, recent studies have suggested an association between chronic gastroesophageal reflux disease, acid sup-pression, and nontuberculous mycobacterial infection with bronchiectasis.91,92 This interaction is thought to be related to chronic aspiration of colonized gastric secretions in the setting of acid suppression; while not proven to be causative, these findings suggest a role for gastroesophageal reflux dis-ease in the pathogenesis of bronchiectasis. The process shared by all causes of bronchiectasis is impairment of airway defenses or deficits in immunologic mechanisms, which permit bacterial colonization and chronic infection. Common organisms include Haemophilus species (55%), Pseudomonas species (26%), and Streptococcus pneu-moniae (12%).93 Both the bacterial organisms and the inflamma-tory cells recruited to thwart the bacteria elaborate proteolytic and oxidative molecules, which progressively destroy the mus-cular and elastic components of the airway walls; those compo-nents are then replaced by fibrous tissue. Thus, chronic airway inflammation is the essential pathologic feature of bronchiec-tasis. The dilated airways are usually filled with thick purulent material; more distal airways are often occluded by secretions or obliterated by fibrous tissue. Bronchial wall vascularity increases, bronchial arteries become hypertrophied, and abnor-mal anastomoses form between the bronchial and pulmonary arterial circulation.There are three principal types of bronchiectasis, based on pathologic morphology: cylindrical—uniformly dilated bronchi;  varicose—an irregular or beaded pattern of dilated bronchi; and saccular (cystic)—peripheral balloon-type bronchial dilation. The saccular type is the most common after bronchial obstruc-tion or infection (Fig. 19-31).Clinical Manifestations and Diagnosis Typical symptoms are a daily persistent cough and purulent sputum production; the quantity of daily sputum production (10 mL to >150 mL) corre-lates with disease extent and severity. Other patients may appear asymptomatic or have a dry nonproductive cough (“dry bronchi-ectasis”). These patients are prone to have involvement of the upper lobes. The clinical course is characterized by progressive 9symptoms and respiratory impairment. Increasing resting and exertional dyspnea are the result of progressive airway obstruc-tion. Acute exacerbations may be triggered by viral or bacterial pathogens. Bleeding attributable to chronically inflamed, friable airway mucosa causes increasingly more frequent hemoptysis with disease progression. Massive bleeding may result from ero-sion of the hypertrophied bronchial arteries.Both mild and severe forms of bronchiectasis are read-ily demonstrated with chest CT scanning because it provides a highly detailed, cross-sectional view of bronchial architecture. CXRs, although less sensitive, may reveal characteristic signs of bronchiectasis such as lung hyperinflation, bronchiectatic cysts, and dilated, thick-walled bronchi forming train track–like pat-terns radiating from the lung hila. Sputum culture may identify characteristic pathogens.Sputum acid-fast bacillus smears/cultures should be performed to evaluate for nontuberculous mycobacteria, which is common in this setting. Spirometry provides assessment of the severity of airway obstruction and can be followed to track the course of disease. Management of Bronchiectasis Standard therapy includes optimizing airway clearance, use of bronchodilators to reverse any airflow limitation, and correction of reversible underly-ing causes whenever possible.94 Chest physiotherapy based on vibration, percussion, and postural drainage is widely accepted, although randomized trials demonstrating efficacy are lacking. Acute exacerbations should be treated with a 2to 3-week course of broad-spectrum intravenous antibiotics tailored to culture and sensitivity profiles, followed by an oral regimen; this will result in a longer-lasting remission.Macrolide antibiotics have been shown to decrease sputum production, inhibit cytokine release, and inhibit neutrophil adhe-sion and formation of reactive oxygen species. They also inhibit migration of Pseudomonas, disrupt biofilm, and prevent release of virulence factors.95 While macrolide therapy does appear to be efficacious, it is important to remember that macrolides have sig-nificant activity against nontuberculous mycobacteria, and wide-spread prophylactic use for patients with bronchiectasis may lead to multidrug-resistant nontuberculous mycobacterial species. It has also been suggested that inhaled antibiotics, such as tobramy-cin and colistin, improve rates of bacterial clearance and slow the decline in pulmonary function associated with bronchiectasis. Meta-analysis of 12 randomized trials involving 1154 patients showed efficacy of inhaled antibiotics compared to controls, but did not reduce risk of acute exacerbation. Quality of life, like-wise, was not improved and antibiotic-resistant Pseudomonas rates were similar. Importantly, inhaled antibiotics were associ-ated with a statistically significant reduction in forced expiratory volume in 1 second measures over time.96,97In addition to antibiotics, daily nebulized hypertonic saline appears to be effective. A recent randomized crossover study comparing lung function and quality of life has shown that 7% normal saline, compared to isotonic saline, results in a statisti-cally significant 15% increase in FEV1 and an 11% increase in forced vital capacity (compared to 1.8% and 0.7%, respec-tively, with isotonic saline). Antibiotic use and emergency room utilization were significantly decreased; from this, hypertonic saline appears to be a reasonable adjunct to maintaining quality of life and decreasing exacerbations by reducing sputum vol-ume, improving mucociliary clearance, and slowing the decline in lung function.98 Studies supporting mucolytics such as DNase and Mucomyst for non–cystic fibrosis bronchiectasis have Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   70901/03/19   7:01 PM 710SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIshown either no change or a worsening of pulmonary status and require further study in the non–cystic fibrosis population.Surgical resection of a localized bronchiectatic segment or lobe, preserving as much functional lung as possible, may bene-fit patients with refractory symptoms while on maximal medical therapy. Multifocal disease must be excluded before any attempt at surgery; any uncorrectable predisposing factor (e.g., ciliary dyskinesia) must also be excluded. Patients with end-stage lung disease from bronchiectasis may be potential candidates for a bilateral lung transplant. Surgical resection is also indicated in patients with significant hemoptysis, although bronchial artery embolization is the preferred first option. Antireflux surgery may also prove beneficial in patients with chronic aspiration, but further studies are required. It is particularly important to recognize that antireflux surgery in patients with severe under-lying pulmonary dysfunction has higher risk for perioperative adverse outcomes than in the general population. It should be undertaken only by very experienced surgeons with direct involvement of the pulmonary medicine physicians to minimize postoperative pulmonary compromise.Mycobacterial Infections Epidemiology Tuberculosis is a widespread problem that affects nearly one-third of the world’s population. It is the ninth lead-ing cause of death worldwide and the leading infectious cause of death. The rate of death from tuberculosis has declined, from 1.7 million in 2000 to 1.3 million among HIV-negative people in 2016. There were 6.3 million new cases of tubercu-losis worldwide in 2016 according to the World Health Orga-nization (WHO); 56% are in the countries of India, Indonesia, China, the Philippines, and Pakistan. Treatment success rate was 83%. Only 9257 new cases were reported to the WHO in the United States in 2016. HIV infection is the strongest risk fac-tor for developing active tuberculosis. The elderly, minorities, and recent immigrants are the most common populations to have clinical manifestations of infection, yet no age group, sex, or race is exempt from infection. In most large urban centers, reported cases of tuberculosis are more numerous among the homeless, prisoners, and drug-addicted populations. Immunocompromised patients additionally contribute to an increased incidence of tuber-culosis infection, often developing unusual systemic as well as pulmonary manifestations.99 As compared with past decades, presently surgical intervention is required more frequently in patients with multidrug-resistant or rifampicin-resistant (but isoniazid-susceptible) tuberculosis organisms (MDR/RR-TB) who do not respond to medical treatment and in selected patients with nontuberculous mycobacterial infections (NTM).Microbiology Mycobacterial species are obligate aerobes. They are primarily intracellular parasites with slow rates of growth. Their defining characteristic is the property of acid-fastness, which is the ability to withstand decolorization by an acidalcohol mixture after being stained. Mycobacterium tuberculosis is the highly virulent bacillus of this species that produces invasive infection among humans, principally pulmonary tuberculosis.100  Infections with M tuberculosis are primary when they are the first infection in a previously unsensitized host and secondary or postprimary when reactivation of a previous infection occurs.Because of improper application of antimycobacterial drugs and multifactorial interactions, MDR-TB organisms, defined by their resistance to at least two of the first-line anti-mycobacterial drugs (isoniazid and rifampin), and rifampicin-resistant (but isoniazid-susceptible) (RR-TB), have emerged. According to the WHO Global Tuberculosis Report 2017, in 2014, there were 108 reported cases of TB from MDR/RR-TB organisms, with 78% of cases successfully treated. In addition, there is another rare variant termed extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis (XDR-TB). These organisms are resistant to iso-niazid and rifampin and have also developed resistance to either fluoroquinolones and injectable second-line drugs (e.g., capreomycin, amikacin, kanamycin), the two other classes of medications in the MDR-TB treatment regimen. In 2014, there were 109,680 MDRTB cases globally, with 6777 (6.2%) extensively drug resistant. Successful treatment was achieved in 54% of MDRTB and only 30% of XDR-TB. In 2016, it was estimated that MDR/RR was the responsible organism for more than 4% of new cases and nearly 20% of previously treated cases.The more important NTM organisms include Mycobacte-rium kansasii, M avium and M intracellulare complex (MAC), and M fortuitum. The highest incidence of M kansasii infection is in Midwestern U.S. cities among middle-aged men from good socioeconomic surroundings. MAC organisms are important infections in elderly and immunocompromised patient groups. M fortuitum infections are common complications of underly-ing severe debilitating disease. None of these organisms are as contagious as M tuberculosis.Pathogenesis and Pathology The main route of transmission is via airborne inhalation of viable mycobacteria. Three stages of primary infection have been described. In the first stage, alveolar macrophages become infected through ingesting the bacilli. In the second stage, from days 7 to 21, the patient typi-cally remains asymptomatic while the bacteria multiply within the infected macrophages. The third stage is characterized by the onset of cell-mediated immunity (CD4+ helper T cells) and delayed-type hypersensitivity. Activated macrophages acquire an increased capacity for bacterial killing. Macrophage death increases, resulting in the formation of a granuloma, the charac-teristic lesion found on pathologic examination.Tuberculous granulomas are composed of blood-derived macrophages, degenerating macrophages or epithelioid cells, and multinucleated giant cells (fused macrophages with nuclei around the periphery; also known as Langerhans cells). The low oxygen content of this environment inhibits macrophage func-tion and bacillary growth, with subsequent central caseation as macrophage death occurs. A Ghon complex is a single, small lung lesion that is often the only remaining trace of a primary infection. The primary infection is usually located in the periph-eral portion of the middle zone of the lungs.Reactivation tuberculosis may occur after hydrolytic enzymes liquefy the caseum. Typically, the apical and posterior segments of the upper lobes and the superior segments of the lower lobes are involved. Edema, hemorrhage, and mononuclear cell infiltration are also present. The tuberculous cavity may become secondarily infected with other bacteria, fungi, or yeasts, all of which may con-tribute to enhanced tissue destruction.The pathologic changes caused by NTM organisms are similar to those produced by M tuberculosis. M intracellulare complex infections commonly occur, not only in immunocom-promised patients but also in patients with previously damaged lungs. Caseous necrosis is uncommon and is characterized by clusters of tissue macrophages filled with mycobacteria. It has a poor granulomatous response and confinement of immune cell infiltration to the interstitium and alveolar walls. Cavitary dis-ease is infrequent, although nodules may be noted.Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   71001/03/19   7:01 PM
# Chunk 8905
CHAPTER 19711CHEST WALL, LUNG, MEDIASTINUM, AND PLEURAClinical Presentation and Diagnosis The clinical course of infection and the presentation of symptoms are influenced by many factors, including the site of primary infection, the stage of disease, and the degree of cell-mediated immunity. About 80% to 90% of tuberculosis patients present with clinical dis-ease in the lungs. In 85% to 90% of these patients, involution and healing occur, leading to a dormant phase that may last a lifetime. The only evidence of tuberculosis infection may be a positive skin reaction to tuberculin challenge or a Ghon com-plex observed on CXR. Within the first 2 years of primary infec-tion, reactivation may occur in up to 10% to 15% of infected patients. In 80%, reactivation occurs in the lungs; other reacti-vation sites include the lymph nodes, pleura, and the musculo-skeletal system.After primary infection, pulmonary tuberculosis is fre-quently asymptomatic. Systemic symptoms of low-grade fever, malaise, and weight loss are subtle and may go unnoticed. A productive cough may develop, usually after tubercle cavita-tion. Many radiographic patterns can be identified at this stage, including local exudative lesions, local fibrotic lesions, cavita-tion, bronchial wall involvement, acute tuberculous pneumonia, bronchiectasis, bronchostenosis, and tuberculous granulomas. Hemoptysis often develops from complications of disease such as bronchiectasis or erosion into vascular malformations associ-ated with cavitation.Extrapulmonary involvement is due to hematogenous or lymphatic spread from pulmonary lesions. Virtually any organ can become infected, giving rise to the protean manifestations of tuberculosis. The pleura, chest wall, and mediastinal organs may all be involved. More than one-third of immunocompro-mised patients have disseminated disease, with hepatomegaly, diarrhea, splenomegaly, and abdominal pain.The definitive diagnosis of tuberculosis requires identi-fication of the mycobacterium in a patient’s bodily fluids or involved tissues. Skin testing using purified protein deriva-tive is important for epidemiologic purposes and can help exclude infection in uncomplicated cases. For pulmonary tuberculosis, sputum examination is inexpensive and has a high diagnostic yield.Bronchoscopy with alveolar lavage may also be a useful diagnostic adjunct and has high diagnostic accuracy. Chest CT scan can delineate the extent of parenchymal disease.Management Medical therapy is the primary treatment of pul-monary tuberculosis and is often initiated before a mycobacte-rial pathogen is definitively identified. Combinations of two or more drugs are routinely used in order to minimize resistance, which inevitably develops with only single-agent therapy. A current treatment algorithm is outlined in Fig. 19-32. Gener-ally, therapy lasts about 26 weeks (2 months intensive therapy followed by 4 months continuation therapy). A 7-month con-tinuation phase should be considered for patients with cavitary pulmonary TB who remain positive on sputum culture after the 2-month intensive therapy, those patients who did not receive pyrazinamide during the intensive phase, HIV-positive patients who did not receive concomitant antiretroviral therapy, and patients treated with INH and rifapentine once weekly (not rec-ommended) who have persistent positive sputum after 2 months of intensive therapy.In the United States, surgical intervention is most often required in order to treat patients with MDR/RR-TB organ-isms whose lungs have been destroyed and who have persis-tent thick-walled cavitation.101 The indications for surgery related to mycobacterial pulmonary infections are presented in Table 19-19. The governing principle of mycobacterial surgery is to remove all gross disease while preserving any uninvolved lung tissue. Scattered nodular disease may be left intact, given its low mycobacterial burden. Antimycobacterial medications should be given preoperatively (for about 3 months) and con-tinued postoperatively for 12 to 24 months. Overall, more than 90% of patients who were deemed good surgical candidates are cured when appropriate medical and surgical therapy is used.Pulmonary Fungal Infections. The incidence of fungal infections has increased significantly, with many new opportu-nistic fungi emerging. This increase is attributed to the growing population of immunocompromised patients (e.g., organ trans-plant recipients, cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy, HIV patients, and young and elderly patients) who are more likely to become infected with fungi.102 Clinically significant examples include species of Aspergillus, Cryptococcus, Candida, and Mucor. Other at-risk patient populations include those who are malnourished, severely debilitated, or diabetic or who have hematologic disorders.Patients receiving high-dose, intensive antibiotic therapies are also susceptible. There are, however, some fungi that are primary or true pathogens, able to cause infections in other-wise healthy patients. Some endemic examples in the United States include species of Histoplasma, Coccidioides, and Blastomyces.103Direct identification of the organism in body exudates or tissues, preferably as growth in culture, provides definitive diag-nosis. Serologic testing to identify mycotic-specific antibodies may also be useful. Several new classes of antifungal agents have proven effective against many life-threatening fungi and are less toxic than older agents. In addition, thoracic surgery may be a useful therapeutic adjunct for patients with pulmonary mycoses.Aspergillosis The genus Aspergillus comprises over 150 spe-cies and is the most common cause of mortality due to inva-sive mycoses in the United States. It is typically acute in onset and life-threatening and occurs in the setting of neutropenia, chronic steroid therapy, or cytotoxic chemotherapy. It can also occur in the general intensive care unit population of critically ill patients, including patients with underlying chronic obstruc-tive pulmonary disease (COPD), postoperative patients, patients with cirrhosis or alcoholism, and postinfluenza patients, with-out any of these factors present. The species most commonly responsible for clinical disease include A fumigatus, A flavus,  A niger, and A terreus. Aspergillus is a saprophytic, filamentous fungus with septate hyphae. Spores (2.5 to 3 µm in diameter) are released and easily inhaled by susceptible patients; because the spores are microns in size, they are able to reach the distal bronchi and alveoli.Diagnosis of aspergillosis requires one or more cavities on lung imaging, with or without fungal ball or nodules, micros-copy or culture positive for Aspergillus, or antibodies (precipi-tins) to Aspergillus on serum testing. The characteristics must have been present for 3 months. Aspergillus can manifest as one of three clinical syndromes: Aspergillus hypersensitivity lung disease, aspergilloma, or invasive pulmonary aspergil-losis. Overlap occurs between these syndromes, depending on the patient’s immune status.104 Aspergillus hypersensitiv-ity manifests as a productive cough, fever, wheezing, pulmo-nary infiltrates, eosinophilia, and elevation of IgE antibodies Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   71101/03/19   7:01 PM 712SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIINH/RIFINH/RIFINH/RIFINH/RIFINH/RIF/EMB*/PZA†0123469Time (months)INH/RPT‡§INH/RIF2-monthculture negativeHigh clinicalsuspicionfor activetuberculosis2-monthculture positiveCavitation on CXRorpositive AFB smearat 2 monthsNo cavitation on CXRandnegative AFB smearat 2 monthsNo cavitationCavitationFigure 19-32. Treatment algorithm for tuberculosis. Patients in whom tuberculosis is proven or strongly suspected should have treatment initiated with isoniazid (INH), rifampin (RIF), pyrazinamide (PZA), and ethambutol (EMB) for the initial 2 months. A repeat smear and cul-ture should be performed when 2 months of treatment has been completed. If cavities were seen on the initial chest radiograph (CXR) or the acid-fast bacillus (AFB) smear results are positive at completion of 2 months of treatment, the continuation phase of treatment should consist of INH and RIF daily or twice daily for 4 months to complete a total of 6 months of treatment. If cavitation was present on the initial CXR and the culture results at the time of completion of 2 months of therapy are positive, the continuation phase should be lengthened to 7 months (total of 9 months of treatment). If the patient has HIV infection and the CD4+ cell count is <100/µL, the continuation phase should consist of daily or three times weekly INH and RIF. In HIV-uninfected patients with no cavitation on CXR and negative results on AFB smears at completion of 2 months of treatment, the continuation phase may consist of either once weekly INH and rifapentine (RPT) or daily or twice weekly INH and RIF to complete a total of 6 months of treatment (bottom). For patients receiving INH and RPT whose 2-month culture results are positive, treatment should be extended by an additional 3 months (total of 9 months). *EMB may be discontinued when results of drug susceptibility testing indicate no drug resistance. †PZA may be discontinued after it has been taken for 2 months (56 doses). ‡RPT should not be used in HIV-infected patients with tuberculosis or in patients with extrapulmonary tuberculosis. §Therapy should be extended to 9 months if results of 2-month culture are positive. (Reproduced with permission from Blumberg HM, Burman WJ, Chaisson RE, et al. American Thoracic Society/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention/Infectious Diseases Society of America: treatment of tuberculosis, Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2003 Feb 15;167(4):603-662.)Table 19-19Indications for surgery to treat mycobacterial pulmonary infections	1.	Complications resulting from previous thoracic surgery to treat tuberculosis	2.	Failure of optimized medical therapy (e.g., progressive disease, lung gangrene, or intracavitary aspergillosis superinfection)	3.	Need for tissue acquisition for definitive diagnosis	4.	Complications of pulmonary scarring (e.g., massive hemoptysis, cavernomas, bronchiectasis, or bronchostenosis)	5.	Extrapulmonary thoracic involvement	6.	Pleural tuberculosis	7.	Nontuberculous mycobacterial infectionto Aspergillus, whereas aspergilloma (fungal ball) is a matted sphere of hyphae, fibrin, and inflammatory cells that tends to colonize preexisting intrapulmonary cavities. Grossly, aspergil-loma appears as a round or oval, friable, gray (or red, brown, or even yellow), necrotic-looking mass (Fig. 19-33). This form is the most common presentation of noninvasive pulmonary asper-gillosis. The most common symptoms are hemoptysis, chronic and productive cough, clubbing, malaise, or weight loss. CXR can suggest the diagnosis by the finding of a crescentic radiolu-cency above a rounded radiopaque lesion (Monad sign).The natural history varies greatly between patients and, therefore, treatment is individualized.  Factors associated with poor prognosis include severe underlying pulmonary disease, growth in the number or size of the aspergilloma(s) during observation, immunosuppression or HIV infection, history of lung transplantation, chronic pulmonary sarcoidosis, and increasing Aspergillus-specific IgG titers. 10Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   71201/03/19   7:01 PM
# Chunk 8906
CHAPTER 19713CHEST WALL, LUNG, MEDIASTINUM, AND PLEURAACBFigure 19-33. Pulmonary aspergilloma. A. The chest X-ray shows a solid mass within a cavity surrounded by a rim of air between the mass and cavity wall (Monad sign, arrows). B. A cut section shows the “fungus ball” occupying an old, fibrotic cavity. C. Histologic stain reveals characteristic Aspergillus hyphae invading the wall of the cavity.Asymptomatic patients can be observed without any additional therapy. Antifungals have limited utility due to the poor blood supply to the aspergilloma. Oral triazole therapy is now consid-ered the standard of care for chronic, cavitary pulmonary asper-gillosis. Hemoptysis is a harbinger of erosion of the disease into adjacent bronchial arteries and typically requires intervention. In the setting of very mild hemoptysis (e.g., blood-streaked spu-tum), cough suppression is warranted while further therapeutic evaluation is performed.Bronchial artery embolization is the first-line therapy for massive hemoptysis and may be definitive therapy.105 This is particularly important to consider for patients with severely impaired pulmonary function who may not have sufficient reserve to tolerate even a very small pulmonary resection. Operative intervention may be required for recur-rent hemoptysis, particularly after bronchial artery emboli-zation, chronic cough with systemic symptoms, progressive infiltrate around the mycetoma, and a pulmonary mass of unknown cause.106When operative intervention is indicated, the surgeon must remain cognizant of the goals of the procedure. In the setting of simple aspergilloma, VATs wedge resection is pre-ferred. As this disease typically occurs in patients with signifi-cantly impaired pulmonary function, attempts should be made to excise all diseased tissue with as limited a resection as pos-sible. Once resection is completed, the postresection space in the hemithorax should be obliterated with a pleural tent, pneu-moperitoneum, decortication of the remaining lung, intratho-racic rotation of a muscle or omental flap, or thoracoplasty. If completely resected for single aspergilloma, antifungal therapy is not needed. If multiple nodules are present or the disease is incompletely resected, however, antifungal therapy should be considered. Long-term follow-up is necessary, given that the recurrence rate after surgery is about 7%.Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   71301/03/19   7:01 PM 714SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIInvasive pulmonary aspergillosis typically affects immu-nocompromised patients who have dysfunctional cellular immu-nity, namely defective polymorphonuclear leukocytes. Invasion of pulmonary parenchyma and blood vessels by a necrotizing bronchopneumonia may be complicated by thrombosis, hemor-rhage, and then dissemination. Patients present with fever that is nonresponsive to antibiotic therapy in the setting of neutro-penia. They may also have pleuritic chest pain, cough, dys-pnea, or hemoptysis. Characteristic signs on CT scan include the halo sign and cavitary lesions. Treatment with voriconazole must be prompt and aggressive, including reversal of neutrope-nia, if there is to be any chance for recovery. Mortality ranges from 93% to 100% in bone marrow transplant recipients, to approximately 38% in kidney transplant recipients, although this improves to approximately 60% at 12 weeks with antifun-gal therapy. Several other advances in diagnosis and treatment, including CT scans in high-risk populations and development of additional triazoles and echinocandins, have improved the early identification and response to therapy in this patient population. Additional treatment considerations include the use of hema-topoietic growth factors to minimize the neutropenic period, which contributes to uncontrolled disease. Surgical removal of the infectious nidus is advocated by some groups because medical treatment has such poor outcomes. Treatment continues until microbiologic clearance is achieved and clinical signs and radiographic imaging indicate resolution of disease. In addition, the patient should no longer be immunosuppressed. If continu-ation of immunosuppressive medications is required, antifungal therapy should also continue to prevent recurrence of invasive disease.Cryptococcosis Cryptococcosis is a subacute or chronic infec-tion caused by Cryptococcus neoformans, a round, budding yeast (5 to 20 µm in diameter) that is sometimes surrounded by a characteristic wide gelatinous capsule. Cryptococci are typically present in soil and dust contaminated by pigeon drop-pings. When inhaled, such droppings can cause a nonfatal dis-ease primarily affecting the pulmonary and central nervous systems. At present, cryptococcosis is one of the most common opportunistic infection in patients with HIV infection, affecting ∼3% of that population. Four basic pathologic patterns are seen in the lungs of infected patients: granulomas; granulomatous pneumonia; diffuse alveolar or interstitial involvement; and pro-liferation of fungi in alveoli and lung vasculature. Symptoms are nonspecific, as are the radiographic findings. Cryptococcus neoformans may be isolated from sputum, bronchial washings, percutaneous needle aspiration of the lung, or cerebrospinal fluid. If disease is suspected, serum cryptococcal antigen titers should be obtained; if positive or if the patient has persistent fever, evidence of progression, physiologic compromise, or dissemination, treatment should be promptly initiated. Accord-ing to the CDC, multiple antifungal agents are effective against  C neoformans; asymptomatic infections, such as those identified through targeted screening, should be treated with fluconazole while severe lung infections require amphotericin B combined with flucytosine followed by fluconazole for an extended length of time. Duration of therapy is longer in patients who are immunocompromised.Candidiasis Candida organisms are oval, budding cells (with or without mycelial elements) that colonize the oropharynx of many healthy individuals. The fungi of this genus are com-mon hospital and laboratory contaminants. Usually, Candida albicans causes disease in the oral or bronchial mucosa, among other anatomic sites. Approximately 95% of all invasive  Candida infections are caused by five species: C albicans,  C tropicalis, C parapsilosis, C glabrata, and C krusei. The specific pathogen varies between patient populations and geo-graphic regions. Non–C albicans infections now constitute nearly 70% of all cases in the United States, with C glabrata leading the list. Resistance to fluconazole is common in the non–C albicans species, either natural or developed in response to antifungal therapy, and the shift is likely related to the wide-spread use of this antifungal agent.107The incidence of Candida infections has increased and is no longer confined to immunocompromised patients. Increasing incidence of infection has been identified in patients with any of the following risk factors: critical illness of long duration; use of long-term antibiotics, particularly multiple; indwelling urinary or vascular catheter; gastrointestinal perforation; or burn wounds.108 With respect to the thorax, such patients commonly have candidal pneumonia, pulmonary abscess, esophagitis, and mediastinitis. Pulmonary candidal infections typically result in an acute or chronic granulomatous reaction. Because Candida can invade blood vessel walls and a variety of tissues, systemic or disseminated infections can occur, but are less common.Treatment for candidal infection includes both fungicidal and fungistatic agents. The fungicidal medications include poly-enes (amphotericin B deoxycholate [AmB-D] and various lipid-associated amphotericin B preparations) and the echinocandins (caspofungin, micafungin, and anidulafungin). Fungistatic drugs include the triazoles (fluconazole, itraconazole, voricon-azole, and posaconazole). The availability of multiple effective therapies allows for specific tailoring of treatment, including combination regimens, based on the patient’s ability to toler-ate associated toxicities, the microbiologic information for the specific candidal species, and the route of administration. While demonstrated efficacy is similar, the triazoles and echinocan-dins appear to have fewer side effects and are better tolerated than the other classes of antifungal drugs. The current initial recommended regimen for adults with invasive candidiasis is an echinocandin.107In addition to prompt institution of antifungal therapy, it is advisable to remove all central venous catheters as soon as can be safely achieved. For fungemia, an eye examination should be performed. Treatment should continue for at least 2 weeks after the last positive blood culture. For patients with Candida medi-astinitis (which has a mortality rate of >50%), surgical inter-vention to debride all infected tissues is required, in addition to prolonged administration of antifungal drugs.Mucormycosis The Mucor species, rare members of the class Zygomycetes, are responsible for rapidly fatal disease in immunocompromised patients. Other disease-causing spe-cies of the class Zygomycetes include Absidia, Rhizopus, and Mortierella.109 Characteristic of these fungi are nonsep-tate, branching hyphae that are difficult to culture. Infec-tion occurs via inhalation of spores. Immunocompromised patients, including patients with neutropenia, acidosis, dia-betes, and hematologic malignancy all predispose to clinical susceptibility. In the lungs, disease consists of blood vessel invasion, thrombosis, and infarction of infected organs.Tissue destruction is significant, along with cavitation and abscess formation. Initial treatment is to correct underly-ing risk factors and administer antifungal therapies, although Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   71401/03/19   7:01 PM
# Chunk 8907
CHAPTER 19715CHEST WALL, LUNG, MEDIASTINUM, AND PLEURAthe optimal duration and optimal total dose are unknown. Lipid formulations of amphotericin B are recommended at this time. Surgical resection of any localized disease should be performed after initial medical treatment attempts fail.Primary Fungal Pathogens Histoplasma capsulatum Histoplasma capsulatum is a dimor-phic fungus existing in mycelial form in soil contaminated by fowl or bat excreta and in yeast form in human hosts. The most common of all fungal pulmonary infections, histoplasmosis, primarily affects the respiratory system after spores are inhaled. It is endemic in the Midwest and Mississippi River Valley of the United States, where about 500,000 new cases arise each year. In immunocompromised patients, the infection becomes systemic and more virulent; because cell-mediated immunity is impaired, uninhibited fungal proliferation occurs within pulmo-nary macrophages and then spreads. Acute forms of the disease present as primary or disseminated pulmonary histoplasmosis; chronic forms present as pulmonary granulomas (histoplasmo-mas), chronic cavitary histoplasmosis, mediastinal granulomas, fibrosing mediastinitis, or bronchiolithiasis. Histoplasmosis is definitively diagnosed by fungal smear, culture, direct biopsy of infected tissues, or serologic testing.The clinical presentation depends on the inoculum size and on host factors.Symptoms of acute pulmonary histoplasmosis are fever, chills, headache, chest pain, musculoskeletal pain, and nonpro-ductive cough. CXRs may be normal or may show mediastinal lymphadenopathy and patchy parenchymal infiltrates. Most patients improve in a few weeks; mild to moderate disease can be treated with itraconazole. Amphotericin B is the treatment of choice if moderate symptoms persist for 2 to 4 weeks or if the illness is extensive, including dyspnea and hypoxia, and if patients are immunosuppressed.110As the pulmonary infiltrates from acute histoplasmosis heal, consolidation into an asymptomatic solitary nodule or histoplasmoma may occur and is usually seen incidentally on radiographs as a coin-shaped lesion. Central and concentric calcification may occur; if so, no further treatment is required. Noncalcification of the lesion requires further diagnostic workup including chest CT scan, needle biopsy, or surgical excision to rule out a malignancy. Figure 19-34 demonstrates the differ-ences in pathologic findings between infections in normal and immunocompromised hosts.111When lymph nodes and pulmonary granulomas calcify over time, pressure atrophy on the bronchial wall may result in erosion and migration of the granulomatous mass into the bronchus, causing bronchiolithiasis. Typical symptoms include cough, hemoptysis, and dyspnea. Life-threatening complica-tions include massive hemoptysis or bronchoesophageal fistula. In addition to radiography, bronchoscopy should be performed to aid in diagnosis. Definitive treatment requires surgical exci-sion of the bronchial mass and repair of the airway and contigu-ous structures. Endobronchial debridement is not advised as this can result in massive, fatal bleeding.Fibrosing mediastinitis is an uncommon manifestation of histoplasmosis but can be fatal due to progressive distortion and compression of the major vessels and central airways.Diagnosis can be difficult, and symptoms may be present for extended periods, even years, before the diagnosis is made. The differential diagnosis for the disease process includes granu-lomatous mediastinitis related to recent infection, malignancy, and chronic pulmonary thromboembolism. A trial of itracon-azole is worthwhile, although it is not proven to be effective. In cases where radiographic or physiologic improvement is achieved after a trial of 12 week of therapy, continuation of therapy is con-sidered for a full 12 months. In the majority of patients, how-ever, antifungal therapy has not been proven. There is no role for corticosteroids at this time or for antifibrotics. Occasionally, intravascular stents have been helpful for severe vascular compro-mise. Balloon dilatation and endobronchial silicone stents may be needed for airway compromise, although this should be directed by a surgeon with expertise in mediastinal and airway disease management.Chronic pulmonary histoplasmosis occurs in about 10% of patients who become symptomatic after infection. Most such patients have preexisting lung pathology, particularly emphy-sema, which becomes colonized, and subsequent pneumonitis and necrosis, cavity enlargement, new cavity formation, and pulmonary dissemination occur. Nonspecific symptoms, such as cough, sputum production, fever, weight loss, weakness, and hemoptysis are common. Chest radiography may reveal intrapulmonary cavitation and scarring. Occasionally, par-tial resolution of the inflammatory changes may be observed. Itraconazole provides effective therapy, but must be given for  12 to 24 months. It is superior to ketoconazole and fluconazole; these should only be used if itraconazole is not tolerated. Vori-conazole and posaconazole have been found to be useful for salvage therapy. Serum itraconazole levels should be monitored to ensure that the drug is being absorbed. Occasionally, lipid-associated amphotericin B is necessary for more severe infec-tions. Surgical excision should be considered in patients with adequate pulmonary reserve and localized, thick-walled cavities that have been unresponsive to antifungal therapy.Disseminated histoplasmosis occurs most frequently in patients who are severely immunocompromised, such as post-transplantation patients, patients with HIV, and patients using immunosuppressive medications. Presentation ranges from non-specific signs of fever, weight loss, and malaise, to shock, respi-ratory distress, and multiorgan failure. Diagnosis can be made with a combination of Histoplasma urine antigen, serologic assay, and fungal culture and should be suspected in patients with the above symptoms in any endemic area, particularly if the patient is immunosuppressed.112 Any of the antifungal thera-pies can be used in treatment of disseminated histoplasmosis. Use of amphotericin B has decreased the mortality rate to less than 25% in this type of serious infection.Coccidioides immitis Coccidioides immitis is an endemic fun-gus found in soil and dust of the southwestern United States. Agricultural workers, military personnel, and other occupa-tions with extensive exposure to soil, especially in areas of endemic growth, are at highest risk, as are immunocompro-mised individuals.113 Spores (arthroconidia) are inhaled, swell into spherules, and subdivide into endospores, and subsequent infection develops. Diagnosis can be achieved through serum analysis for anticoccidioidal antibody, spherule identification in tissue, or by isolating the fungus in cultures from sputum, other body fluid, or tissue.Inhalation of the fungus causes pulmonary involvement in 95% of patients with symptomatic disease. Three main cat-egories of pulmonary involvement, based on the associated signs and symptoms, are possible: primary, complicated, and residual pulmonary coccidioidomycosis. Primary pulmonary Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   71501/03/19   7:01 PM 716SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIABCDEFFigure 19-34. Pathologic findings of infection in normal and immunocompromised hosts. Histopathologic preparations are shown contrast-ing acute diffuse pulmonary involvement in a lung segment of a normal host with a probable primary infection (A through D) with pulmonary granulomas from an immunocompromised patient who had an opportunistic reinfection with Histoplasma capsulatum (E, F). A. Diffuse interstitial pneumonitis in an adult (normal host) with recent heavy environmental exposure and subsequent development of progressive pulmonary disease. There is an inflammatory cell infiltrate primarily involving the interalveolar interstitial spaces but present within many alveolar spaces as well. The exudate consists mostly of mononuclear phagocytes, lymphocytes, and occasional plasma cells. Many of the alveolar walls are markedly thickened (hematoxylin and eosin stain [H&E], ×50). B. Another area from the same lung as in A showing focal vasculitis with an infiltrate of lymphocytes and macrophages (H&E, ×25). C. Relatively large alveolar macrophages packed with single and budding yeasts 2 to 4 µm in diameter (same lung as in A and B). The basophilic cytoplasm of these yeasts is retracted from their thin outer cell walls, leaving halo-like clear areas that can be confused with capsules (H&E, ×500). D. Intracellular and extracellular yeasts, 2 to 4 µm in diameter, some of which are single, budding, or in short chains (Gomori methenamine silver stain, ×500). E. Nonnecrotizing (sometimes called epithelioid cell or noncaseating) granuloma from a patient who had recently received chemotherapy for a germ cell tumor (different patient than in A through D). This lesion consists of a focal collection of macrophages (sometimes referred to as histiocytes or epithelioid cells) plus lymphocytes and occasional plasma cells. A few multinucleated macrophages are present. A thin layer of fibroblasts circumscribes the lesion. Yeasts of H capsulatum, probably present within macrophages of this lesion at an earlier stage, were not identified in this granuloma or in any of several other nonnecrotizing granulomas within the specimen. Lesions of this type often undergo necrosis to become necrotiz-ing granulomas (H&E, ×50). F. Necrotizing (sometimes referred to as caseating) granuloma from the same lung as in E. This lesion has a necrotic center surrounded by macrophages, encapsulating fibroblasts, fibrous connective tissue in the periphery, and scattered lymphocytes. A prominent giant cell is present in the lower left of the granuloma (at approximately 8 o’clock). Microorganisms are usually present only in relatively small numbers in these types of lesions. They are most frequently detected within the most central necrotic material in these granulomas (H&E, ×25). (Reproduced with permission from Hage CA, Wheat LJ, Loyd J, et al: Pulmonary histoplasmosis, Semin Respir Crit Care Med. 2008 Apr;29(2):151-165.)Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   71601/03/19   7:01 PM
# Chunk 8908
CHAPTER 19717CHEST WALL, LUNG, MEDIASTINUM, AND PLEURAcoccidioidomycosis occurs in about 40% of people who inhale spores. The other 60% will remain asymptomatic and develop life-long immunity. The constellation of symptoms of “valley fever,” including fever, chills, headache, erythema multiforme, erythema nodosum, polyarthralgias, nonproductive cough, and chest pain, and a CXR showing hilar and paratracheal adenopa-thy are highly suggestive of pulmonary coccidioidomycosis. In many patients, initial diagnosis is community-acquired pneumo-nia, and it is only when the patient fails to respond to appropriate antibiotic therapy that pulmonary coccidioidomycosis is consid-ered. The disease is self-limited in the majority of patients, and treatment is not required in these cases.Therapy should be considered for (a) patients with impaired cellular immunity; (b) comorbid illnesses that are adversely impacted by the infection, including chronic pulmo-nary dysfunction, renal failure, and congestive heart failure; and (c) when symptoms and radiographic findings persist for more than 6 to 8 weeks, at which time the disease is considered to be persistent coccidioidal pneumonia and occurs in approximately 1% of patients. Progression to caseous nodules, cavities, and calcified, fibrotic, or ossified lesions indicates complicated or residual stages of coccidioidomycosis.There are several relative indications for surgery in pulmo-nary coccidioidomycosis. A rapidly expanding (>4 cm) cavity that is close to the visceral pleura is a high risk for rupture into the pleural space and subsequent empyema. Other indications for operative intervention include life-threatening hemoptysis; hemoptysis that is persistent despite medical therapy; symptom-atic fungus ball; bronchopleural fistula; cavitary lesions with persistent positive sputum; and pulmonary nodules that degen-erate over time. Finally, any nodule with signs that are concern-ing for malignancy should undergo further evaluation, including biopsy or resection, to determine the underlying etiology.Diagnosis of coccidioidomycosis is confirmed by histo-pathologic, mycologic, and serologic evaluation. Extrapulmo-nary disease may develop in approximately 0.5% of infected patients, with involvement of meninges, bones, joints, skin, or soft tissues. Immunocompromised patients are especially sus-ceptible to disseminated coccidioidomycosis, which carries a mortality rate over 40%. Treatment options for this disease vary depending on the severity of the disease as well as the stage. Amphotericin B deoxycholate or the triazoles continue to be the primary antifungal medications. If meningeal involvement is identified, fluconazole or itraconazole therapy is required for the remainder of the patient’s life. Intrathecal amphotericin B can also be administered in some cases.Blastomyces dermatitidis Blastomyces dermatitidis is a round, single-budding yeast with a characteristic thick, refrac-tile cell wall. It resides in the soil as a nonmotile spore called conidia. Exposure occurs when contaminated soil is disturbed and the conidia are aerosolized. The spore is inhaled and trans-forms into a yeast phase at body temperature.114 Infection is typically self-limited. A small minority of patients will develop chronic pulmonary infection or disseminated disease, includ-ing cutaneous, osteoarticular, and genitourinary involvement.  B dermatitidis has a worldwide distribution; in the United States, it is endemic in the central states.115 With chronic infec-tion, the organism induces a granulomatous and pyogenic reac-tion with microabscesses and giant cells; caseation, cavitation, and fibrosis may also occur. Symptoms are nonspecific and con-sistent with chronic pneumonia in 60% to 90% of patients. They include cough, mucoid sputum production, chest pain, fever, malaise, weight loss, and, uncommonly, hemoptysis. In acute disease, radiographs are either completely negative or have nonspecific findings; in chronic disease, fibronodular lesions (with or without cavitation) similar to tuberculosis are noted. Pulmonary parenchymal abnormalities in the upper lobe(s) may be noted. Mass lesions similar to carcinoma are frequent, and lung biopsy is frequently used. Over 50% of patients with chronic blastomycosis also have extrapulmonary manifesta-tions, but less than 10% of patients present with severe clinical manifestation.114Once a patient manifests symptoms of chronic blastomy-cosis, antifungal treatment is required to achieve resolution. Mortality approaches 60% if untreated.114 While controversial, a short course of triazole therapy (oral itraconazole 200 mg daily) for 6 months is the treatment of choice for most patients with mild to moderate forms of the disease. Because itraconazole has poor CNS penetration, the most common site of recurrence after apparently successful therapy is in the CNS. In the absence of therapy, close follow-up is warranted for evidence of progres-sion to chronic or extrapulmonary disease. Amphotericin B is warranted for patients with severe or life-threatening disease, CNS involvement, disseminated disease, or extensive lung involvement and in immunocompromised patients. After ade-quate drug therapy, surgical resection of known cavitary lesions should be considered because viable organisms are known to persist in such lesions.Massive HemoptysisMassive hemoptysis is generally defined as expectoration of over 600 mL of blood within a 24-hour period. It is a medi-cal emergency associated with a mortality rate of 30% to 50%. Most clinicians would agree that losing over a liter of blood via the airway within 1 day is significant, yet use of an abso-lute volume criterion presents difficulties. First, it is difficult for the patient or caregivers to quantify the volume of blood being lost. Second, and most relevant, the rate of bleeding nec-essary to incite respiratory compromise is highly dependent on the individual’s prior respiratory status. For example, the loss of  100 mL of blood over 24 hours in a 40-year-old male with normal pulmonary function would be of little immediate con-sequence, because his normal cough would ensure his ability to clear the blood and secretions. In contrast, the same amount of bleeding in a 69-year-old male with severe COPD, chronic bronchitis, and an FEV1 of 1.1 L may be life-threatening.Anatomy. The lungs have two sources of blood supply: the pulmonary and bronchial arterial systems. The pulmonary sys-tem is a high-compliance, low-pressure system, and the walls of the pulmonary arteries are very thin and delicate. The bronchial arteries, part of the systemic circulation, have systemic pres-sures and thick walls; most branches originate from the proxi-mal thoracic aorta. Most cases of massive hemoptysis involve bleeding from the bronchial artery circulation or from the pul-monary circulation pathologically exposed to the high pres-sures of the bronchial circulation. In many cases of hemoptysis, particularly those due to inflammatory disorders, the bronchial arterial tree becomes hyperplastic and tortuous. The systemic pressures within these arteries, combined with a disease process within the airway and erosion, lead to bleeding.Causes. Significant hemoptysis has many causes, most com-monly including pulmonary, extrapulmonary, and iatrogenic. Table 19-20 summarizes the most common causes of hemopty-sis. Most are secondary to inflammatory processes. Aneurysms Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   71701/03/19   7:01 PM 718SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 19-20Pulmonary and extrapulmonary causes of massive hemoptysisPULMONARYEXTRAPULMONARYIATROGENICPulmonary parenchymal diseaseBronchitisBronchiectasisTuberculosisLung abscessPneumoniaCavitary fungal infection (e.g., aspergilloma)Lung parasitic infection (ascariasis, schistosomiasis, paragonimiasis)Pulmonary neoplasmPulmonary infarction or embolismTraumaArteriovenous malformationPulmonary vasculitisPulmonary endometriosisWegener’s granulomatosisCystic fibrosisPulmonary hemosiderosisCongestive heart failureCoagulopathyMitral stenosisMedicationsIntrapulmonary catheterTable 19-21Treatment priorities in the management of massive hemoptysis	1.	Achieve respiratory stabilization and prevent asphyxiation.	2.	Localize the bleeding site.	3.	Control the hemorrhage.	4.	Determine the cause.	5.	Definitively prevent recurrence.of the pulmonary artery (referred to as Rasmussen’s aneurysm) can develop within pulmonary cavities and can result in massive bleeding. Hemoptysis due to lung cancer is usually mild, result-ing in blood-streaked sputum. Massive hemoptysis in patients with lung cancer is typically caused by malignant invasion of pulmonary artery vessels by large central tumors. Although rare, it is often a terminal event.Management. Life-threatening hemoptysis is best managed by a multidisciplinary team of intensive care physicians, interven-tional radiologists, and thoracic surgeons. Treatment priorities begin with respiratory stabilization; intubation with isolation of the bleeding lung may be required to prevent asphyxiation. This can be done with main-stem intubation into the nonbleeding lung, endobronchial blockers into the bleeding lung, or double-lumen endotracheal intubation, depending on the urgency of the situation and the expertise of the providers. Once adequate ven-tilation has been achieved, the bleeding site should be localized; bronchoscopy can often provide direct visualization of blood coming from a specific area of the tracheobronchial anatomy. Control of the hemorrhage is then achieved endobronchially with laser or bronchial occlusion, endovascularly with bronchial and/or pulmonary artery embolization, or surgically with resec-tion of the involved area.116 The order of priorities in manage-ment is detailed in Table 19-21.The clinically pragmatic definition of massive hemoptysis is a degree of bleeding that threatens respiratory stability. There-fore, clinical judgment of respiratory compromise is the first step in evaluating a patient.117,118 Two scenarios are possible: (a) bleeding is significant and persistent, but its rate allows a rapid but sequential diagnostic and therapeutic approach, and (b) bleeding is so rapid that emergency airway control and ther-apy are necessary.Scenario 1: Significant, Persistent, but Nonmassive Bleeding  Although bleeding is brisk in scenario 1, the patient may be able to maintain clearance of the blood and secretions with his or her own respiratory reflexes. Immediate measures are admission to an intensive care unit; strict bed rest; Trendelenburg position-ing with the affected side down (if known); administration of humidified oxygen; cough suppression; monitoring of oxygen saturation and arterial blood gases; and insertion of large-bore intravenous catheters. Strict bed rest with sedation may lead to slowing or cessation of bleeding, and the judicious use of intravenous narcotics or other relaxants to mildly sedate the patient and diminish some of the reflexive airway activity is often necessary. Also recommended are administration of aero-solized adrenaline, intravenous antibiotic therapy if needed, and correction of abnormal blood coagulation study results. Finally, unless contraindicated, intravenous vasopressin (20 U over  15 minutes, followed by an infusion of 0.2 U/min) can be given.A CXR is the first test and often proves to be the most revealing. Localized lesions may be seen, but the effects of blood soiling of other areas of the lungs may predominate, obscuring the area of pathology. Chest CT scan provides more detail and is nearly always performed if the patient is stable. Pathologic areas may be obscured by blood soiling.Flexible bronchoscopy is the next step in evaluating the patient’s condition. Some clinicians argue that rigid bronchos-copy should always be performed. However, if the patient is clinically stable and the ongoing bleeding is not imminently threatening, flexible bronchoscopy is appropriate. It allows diagnosis of airway abnormalities and will usually permit Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   71801/03/19   7:01 PM
# Chunk 8909
CHAPTER 19719CHEST WALL, LUNG, MEDIASTINUM, AND PLEURAlocalization of the bleeding site to either a lobe or even a seg-ment. The person performing the bronchoscopy must be pre-pared with excellent suction and must be able to perform saline lavage with a dilute solution of epinephrine.Most cases of massive hemoptysis arise from the bron-chial arterial tree; therefore, the next therapeutic option fre-quently is selective bronchial arteriography and embolization. Prearteriogram bronchoscopy is extremely useful to direct the angiographer. However, if bronchoscopy fails to localize the bleeding site, then bilateral bronchial arterio-grams can be performed. More recently, use of multidetec-tor CT angiography in patients with hemoptysis that is not immediately life-threatening has been shown to facilitate endovascular intervention; reformatting of the images in mul-tiple projections allows clear delineation of the pulmonary vascular anatomy.105 With this approach, abnormal bronchial and nonbronchial arteries can be visualized and subsequently targeted for therapeutic arterial embolization.119 Once the tar-geted arterial system has been embolized, immediate control and cessation of the hemoptysis is achieved in more than 80% of patients. If bleeding persists after bronchial artery emboli-zation, a pulmonary artery source should be suspected and a pulmonary angiogram performed at the same setting.Recurrence is seen in 30% to 60% of cases and is very common in the setting of invasive fungal infections such as aspergilloma. Recurrence after bronchial artery embolization is less common in the setting of malignancy and active tuberculo-sis but does occur and can ultimately result in patient death.120 Repeat embolization can be effective and is warranted for ini-tial management of recurrent hemoptysis, but early surgical intervention should be considered, particularly in the setting of aspergilloma or other cavitary lesions.105If respiratory compromise is impending, orotracheal intu-bation should be performed. After intubation, flexible bronchos-copy should be performed to clear blood and secretions and to attempt localization of the bleeding site. Depending on the pos-sible causes of the bleeding, bronchial artery embolization or (if appropriate) surgery can be considered.Scenario 2: Significant, Persistent, and Massive Bleeding  Life-threatening bleeding requires emergency airway control and preparation for potential surgery. Such patients are best cared for in an operating room equipped with rigid bronchos-copy. Immediate orotracheal intubation may be necessary to gain control of ventilation and suctioning. However, rapid trans-port to the operating room with rigid bronchoscopy should be facilitated. Rigid bronchoscopy allows adequate suctioning of bleeding with visualization of the bleeding site; the nonbleed-ing side can be cannulated with the rigid scope and the patient ventilated. After stabilization, ice-saline lavage of the bleeding site can then be performed (up to 1 L in 50-mL aliquots); bleed-ing stops in up to 90% of patients.121Alternatively, blockade of the main stem bronchus of the affected side can be accomplished with a double-lumen endo-tracheal tube, with a bronchial blocker, or by intubation of the nonaffected side by an uncut standard endotracheal tube. Place-ment of a double-lumen endotracheal tube is challenging in these circumstances, given the bleeding and secretions. Proper placement and suctioning may be difficult, and attempts could compromise the patient’s ventilation. The best option is to place a bronchial blocker in the affected bronchus with inflation. Endovascular embolization can be performed to stop the bleeding after control has been achieved with the bronchial blocker. The blocker is left in place for 24 hours; after 24 hours, the area is reexamined bronchoscopically.Surgical Intervention. In most patients, bleeding can be stopped, recovery can occur, and plans to definitively treat the underlying cause can be made. In scenario 1 (significant, persis-tent, but nonmassive bleeding), the patient may undergo further evaluation as an inpatient or outpatient. A chest CT scan and pulmonary function studies should be obtained preoperatively. In scenario 2 (patients with significant, persistent, and massive bleeding), surgery, if appropriate, will usually be performed during the same hospitalization as the rigid bronchoscopy or main stem bronchus blockade. In a small number of patients (<10%), immediate surgery will be necessary due to the extent of bleeding. The bleeding site in these patients is localized using rigid bronchoscopy with immediate thoracotomy or sternotomy to follow.Surgical treatment is individualized according to the source of bleeding and the patient’s medical condition, prog-nosis, and pulmonary reserve. General indications for urgent surgery are presented in Table 19-22. In patients with significant cavitary disease or with fungus balls, the walls of the cavities are eroded and necrotic; rebleeding will likely ensue. In addi-tion, bleeding from cavitary lesions may be due to pulmonary artery erosion, which requires surgery for control.End-Stage Lung DiseaseLung Volume Reduction Surgery. The ideal patient for lung volume reduction surgery (LVRS) has heterogeneous emphy-sema with apical predominance, meaning the worst emphyse-matous changes are in the apex (seen on chest CT scan) of the lungs. The physiologic lack of function of these areas is dem-onstrated by quantitative perfusion scan, which shows minimal or no perfusion. By surgically excising these nonfunctional areas, the volume of the lung is reduced, theoretically restor-ing respiratory mechanics. Diaphragm position and function are improved, and there may be an improvement in the dynamic small airway collapse in the remaining lung.Operative mortality in the initial experience was 16.9%, with a 1-year mortality of 23%. In response, the National Emphysema Treatment Trial (NETT) performed a randomized trial of 1218 patients in a noncrossover design to medical versus surgical management after a 10-week pretreatment pulmonary rehabilitation program. Subgroup analysis demonstrated that in patients with the anatomic changes delineated by Cooper and colleagues, LVRS significantly improved exercise capacity, lung function, quality of life, and dyspnea compared to medi-cal therapy. After 2 years, functional improvements began to decline toward baseline. Similar parameters in medically treated patients steadily decline below baseline. LVRS was associated with increased short-term morbidity and mortality and did not confer a survival benefit over medical therapy.122Table 19-22General indications for urgent operative intervention for massive hemoptysis	1.	Presence of a fungus ball	2.	Presence of a lung abscess	3.	Presence of significant cavitary disease	4.	Failure to control the bleedingBrunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   71901/03/19   7:01 PM 720SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IISurvival123BOS-free survival1.00.80.60.40.2Years posttransplantFigure 19-36. The survival rate after lung transplantation in the absence of bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome (BOS) at the University of Minnesota.Survival123Primary graft failure1.00.80.60.40.2No PGFPGFYears posttransplantFigure 19-37. The survival rate after lung transplantation at the University of Minnesota as a function of primary graft failure (PGF).Lung Transplantation. The most common indications for lung transplant are COPD and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). Most patients with IPF and older patients with COPD are offered a single-lung transplant. Younger COPD patients and patients with α1-antitrypsin deficiency and severe hyperinflation of the native lungs are offered a bilateral-lung transplant. Most patients with primary pulmonary hypertension and almost all patients with cystic fibrosis are treated with a bilateral-lung transplant. A heart-lung transplant is reserved for patients with irreversible ventricular failure or uncorrectable congenital cardiac disease.Patients with COPD are considered for placement on the transplant waiting list when their FEV1 has fallen to below 25% of its predicted value. Patients with significant pulmonary hyper-tension should be listed earlier. IPF patients should be referred when their forced vital capacity has fallen to less than 60% or their Dlco has fallen to less than 50% of their predicted values.In the past, patients with primary pulmonary hypertension and New York Heart Association (NYHA) class III or IV symp-toms were listed for a lung transplant. However, treatment of such patients with intravenous prostacyclin and other pulmonary vasodilators has now markedly altered that strategy. Virtually all patients with primary pulmonary hypertension are now treated with intravenous epoprostenol. Several of these patients have experienced a marked improvement in their symptoms associ-ated with a decrease in their pulmonary arterial pressures and an increase in exercise capacity. Listing of these patients is deferred until they develop NYHA class III or IV symptoms or until their mean pulmonary artery pressure rises above 75 mmHg.Medium-term and bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome (BOS)–free survival rates of patients who underwent a lung transplant at the University of Minnesota are shown in Figs. 19-35 and 19-36. The mortality of patients while waiting for transplants is about 10%. In an effort to expand the number of lung donors, many transplant groups have liberalized their criteria for donor selection. Still, the partial pressure of arterial oxygen (Pao2) should be greater than 300 mmHg on a fraction of inspired oxygen (Fio2) of 100%. In special circumstances, lungs may be used from donors with a smoking history; from donors older than 50 years of age; and from donors with positive Gram stains or infiltrates on CXR.123,124 The use of two living donors, each donating a single lower lobe, is another strategy for increasing the donor pool. Recipient outcomes are similar to those with cadaver donors in carefully selected patients.Survival123Overall survival1.00.80.60.40.2Years posttransplantFigure 19-35. The overall survival rate after lung transplantation at the University of Minnesota.Most of the early mortality after lung transplant is related to primary graft failure resulting from a severe ischemia-reper-fusion injury to the lung(s) (Fig. 19-37). Reperfusion injury is characterized radiographically by interstitial and alveolar edema and clinically by hypoxia and ventilation-perfusion mismatch. Donor neutrophils and recipient lymphocytes prob-ably play an important role in the pathogenesis of reperfu-sion injury. The most important impediment to longer-term survival after a lung transplant is the development of BOS, a manifestation of chronic rejection. Episodes of acute rejection are the major risk factors for developing BOS. Other injuries to the lung (including early reperfusion injury and chronic gas-troesophageal reflux disease) may also adversely affect long-term outcomes of patients.125,126CHEST WALLChest Wall MassClinical Approach. Surgeons confronted with a patient with a chest wall mass must be cognizant that their approach to diagno-sis and treatment has significant impact on the patient’s chances Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   72001/03/19   7:01 PM
# Chunk 8910
CHAPTER 19721CHEST WALL, LUNG, MEDIASTINUM, AND PLEURADiagnosis is clear;a surgical resection is theprimary treatmentLesion <2.0 cmBenign Tumors  Fibrous dysplasia  Chondroma  Osteochondroma  Eosinophilic granulomaMalignant Tumors  ChondrosarcomaWide surgical excisionCT or MRI or bothChest wall massFigure 19-38. Systematic approach for evaluating a chest wall mass when the clinical scenario is uncomplicated and initial imag-ing studies suggest a clear diagnosis. CT = computed tomography; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging.for long-term survival. All chest wall tumors should be consid-ered malignant until proven otherwise. It is critically important that the surgeon(s) be mindful of this tenet and well versed in the diagnostic and treatment principles for chest wall malignan-cies. These tenets must be applied from the initial biopsy, as the placement of the incision can impact significantly on the successful complete resection and reconstruction of the chest wall. Complete resection is imperative if there is any hope for cure and/or long-term survival. A general approach is outlined in Figs. 19-38 and 19-39.Patients with chest wall tumors, regardless of etiology, typically complain of a slowly enlarging palpable mass (50% to 70%), chest wall pain (25% to 50%), or both. Interestingly, growing masses are often not noticed by the patient until they suffer a trauma to the area. Pain from a chest wall mass is typi-cally localized to the area of the tumor; it occurs more often and more intensely with malignant tumors, but it can also be present in up to one-third of patients with benign tumors. With Ewing’s sarcoma, fever and malaise may also be present. Benign chest wall tumors tend to occur in younger patients (average age  26 years), whereas malignant tumors tend to be found in older patients (average age 40 years). Overall, between 50% and 80% of chest wall tumors are malignant.Evaluation and Management. Laboratory evaluations are useful in assessing chest wall masses for the following:1.	Plasmacytoma. Serum protein electrophoresis demon-strates a single monoclonal spike, which is measuring the overproduction of one immunoglobulin from the malignant plasma cell clone.Chest wall massCT or MRI or bothDiagnosis is NOT clearPreoperative chemotherapyWide surgical excisionOsteosarcomaRhabdomyosarcomaNonrhabdomyosarcomaPNET/Ewing’s sarcomaNonrhabdosarcoma  Fibrosarcoma  Malignant fibrous histiocytoma  Liposarcoma  Synovial cell sarcoma  DesmoidNeedle biopsyor incisional biopsyFigure 19-39. Systematic approach for evaluating a chest wall mass for which the diagnosis is not unequivocal. A tissue diagnosis is critical for effective management of chest wall masses. CT =  computed tomography; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging; PNET =  primitive neuroectodermal tumor.2.	Osteosarcoma. Alkaline phosphatase levels may be elevated.3.	Ewing’s sarcoma. Erythrocyte sedimentation rates may be elevated.Radiography CXR may reveal rib destruction, calcification within the lesion, and if old films are available, a clue to growth rate. CT scanning, however, is necessary to determine the rela-tionship of the chest wall mass to contiguous structures (e.g., mediastinum, lung, soft tissues, and other skeletal elements), evaluate for pulmonary metastases, and assess for extraosseous bone formation and bone destruction, both typically seen with osteosarcoma.Because MRI provides multiple planes of imaging (coronal,  sagittal, and oblique), better definition of the relationship between tumor and muscle, and tumor and contiguous or nearby neurovascular structures or the spine, it is an important radio-graphic adjunct for preoperative planning. Compared to CT scan alone, MRI may further delineate tissue abnormalities, poten-tially enhancing the ability to distinguish benign from malignant sarcoma.Biopsy The first step in the management of all chest wall tumors is to obtain a tissue diagnosis. Inappropriate or mis-guided attempts at tissue diagnosis through casual open biopsy techniques have the potential (if the lesion is a sarcoma) to seed surrounding tissues and contiguous body cavities (e.g., the pleural space) with tumor cells, potentially compromising local Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   72101/03/19   7:01 PM 722SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IItumor control and patient survival. Tissue diagnosis is accom-plished using one of three methods: needle biopsy (typically CT-guided, FNA, or a core biopsy), incisional biopsy, or exci-sional biopsy in limited and specific situations.1.	Needle biopsy. Pathologists experienced with sarcomas can accurately diagnose approximately 90% of patients using FNA cytology. A needle biopsy (FNA or core) has the advantage of avoiding wound and body cavity contami-nation (a potential complication with an incisional biopsy).2.	Incisional biopsy. If a needle biopsy is nondiagnostic, an incisional biopsy may be performed, with caveats. First, the skin incision must be placed directly over the mass and ori-ented to allow subsequent scar excision and skin flaps, and drains should be avoided. If the surgeon believes a hema-toma is likely to develop, a drain is useful for limiting soft tissue contamination by tumor cells. At the time of definitive surgical resection, the en bloc resection includes the biopsy scar and the drain tract along with the tumor.3.	Excisional biopsy. Any lesion less than 2.0 cm can be excised as long as the resulting wound is small enough to close primarily. Otherwise, excisional biopsy is per-formed only when the initial diagnosis (based on radio-graphic evaluation) indicates that the lesion is benign or when the lesion has the classic appearance of a chondro-sarcoma (in which case, definitive surgical resection can be undertaken).Benign Chest Wall Neoplasms1.	Chondroma. Chondromas, seen primarily in children and young adults, are one of the more common benign tumors of the chest wall. They usually occur at the costochondral junction anteriorly and may be confused with costochondri-tis, except that a painless mass is present. Radiographically, the lesion is lobulated and radiodense; it may have diffuse or focal calcifications; and it may displace the bony cortex without penetration. Chondromas may grow to huge sizes if left untreated. Treatment is surgical resection with a 2-cm margin. Large chondromas may harbor well-differentiated chondrosarcoma and should be managed with a 4-cm mar-gin to prevent local recurrence.1272.	Fibrous dysplasia. As with chondromas, fibrous dysplasia most frequently occurs in young adults and may be associ-ated with trauma. Pain is an infrequent complaint, and the lesion is typically located in the posterolateral aspect of the rib cage. Radiographically, an expansile mass is present, with cortical thinning and no calcification. Local excision with a 2-cm margin is curative.3.	Osteochondroma. Osteochondromas, often found inciden-tally as a solitary lesion on radiograph, are the most common benign bone tumor. Osteochondromas occur in the first two decades of life, and they arise at or near the growth plate of bones. Osteochondromas in the thorax arise from the rib cortex. They are one of several components to the autosomal dominant syndrome, hereditary multiple exostoses. When part of this syndrome, osteochondromas have a high rate of degeneration into chondrosarcomas. Any patient with heredi-tary multiple exostoses syndrome who develops new pain at the site of an osteochondroma or who notes gradual growth in the mass over time should be carefully evaluated for osteosarcoma. Local excision of a benign osteochondroma is sufficient. If malignancy is determined, wide excision is performed with a 4-cm margin.4.	Eosinophilic granuloma. Eosinophilic granulomas are benign osteolytic lesions. Eosinophilic granulomas of the ribs can occur as solitary lesions or as part of a more gener-alized disease process of the lymphoreticular system termed Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH). In LCH, the involved tissue is infiltrated with large numbers of histiocytes (similar to Langerhans cells seen in skin and other epithelia), which are often organized as granulomas. The cause is unknown. Of all LCH bone lesions, 79% are solitary eosinophilic granulomas, 7% involve multiple eosinophilic granulomas, and 14% belong to other forms of more systemic LCH. Iso-lated single eosinophilic granulomas can occur in the ribs or skull, pelvis, mandible, humerus, and other sites. They are diagnosed primarily in children between the ages of 5 and  15 years. Because of the associated pain and tenderness, they may be confused with Ewing’s sarcoma or with an inflammatory process such as osteomyelitis. Healing may occur spontaneously, but the typical treatment is limited sur-gical resection with a 2-cm margin.5.	Desmoid tumors. Soft tissue neoplasms arising from fas-cial or musculoaponeurotic structures, desmoid tumors con-sist of proliferations of benign-appearing fibroblastic cells, abundant collagen, and few mitoses. Desmoid tumors pos-sess alterations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC)/β-catenin pathway. Cyclin D1 dysregulation is thought to play a significant role in their pathogenesis.128 Associations with other diseases and conditions are well documented, espe-cially those with similar alterations in the APC pathway, such as familial adenomatous polyposis (Gardner’s syn-drome). Other conditions with increased risk of desmoid tumor formation include increased estrogen states (preg-nancy) and trauma. Surgical incisions (abdominal and tho-rax) have been the site of desmoid development, either in or near the scar.	 Clinically, patients are usually in the third to fourth decade of life and have pain, a chest wall mass, or both. The tumor is usually fixed to the chest wall, but not to the over-lying skin. There are no typical radiographic findings, but MRI may delineate muscle or soft tissue infiltration. Des-moid tumors do not metastasize, but they have a significant propensity to recur locally, with rates as high as 5% to 50%, sometimes despite complete initial resection with histologi-cally negative margins.129 Such locally aggressive behavior is secondary to microscopic tumor infiltration of muscle and surrounding soft tissues and prompts some to consider them a low-grade form of fibrosarcoma.	 Because the lesions have low cellularity and poor yield with FNA, an open incisional biopsy for lesions over 3 to 4 cm is often necessary, following the caveats listed ear-lier (see biopsy section). Surgery consists of wide local excision with a 2to 4-cm margin and intraoperative fro-zen section assessment of resection margins. Typically, chest wall resection, including the involved rib(s) and one rib above and below the tumor with a 4to 5-cm margin of rib, is required. A margin of less than 1 cm results in much higher local recurrence rates. If a major neurovascu-lar structure would have to be sacrificed, leading to high morbidity, then a margin of less than 1 cm would have to suffice. Survival after wide local excision with negative margins is 90% at 10 years.130Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   72201/03/19   7:01 PM
# Chunk 8911
CHAPTER 19725CHEST WALL, LUNG, MEDIASTINUM, AND PLEURAFigure 19-41. Chest computed tomography scan showing a right posterior lung tumor. In the appropriate clinical setting, stippled calcifica-tions (white streaks in right lung mass) are highly indicative of chondrosarcomas.3.	Malignant fibrous histiocytoma. Originally thought to derive from histiocytes because of the microscopic appear-ance of cultured tumor cells, these tumors likely originate from the fibroblast. MFHs are generally the most common soft tissue sarcoma of late adult life, although they are rare on the chest wall. The typical age at presentation is between age 50 and 70 years. Presentation is pain, with or without a palpable mass. Radiographically, a mass is usually evident, with destruction of surrounding tissue and bone. Treatment is wide resection with a margin of 4 cm or more and recon-struction. Over two-thirds of patients suffer from distant metastasis or local recurrence.4.	Liposarcoma. Liposarcomas make up 15% of chest wall sarcomas. Most liposarcomas are low-grade tumors that have a propensity to recur locally, given their infiltrative nature. They typically present as a painless mass. Treatment is wide resection and reconstruction. Intraoperative mar-gins should be evaluated (as with all sarcomas) and resec-tion continued, if feasible, until margins are negative. Local recurrence can be treated with reexcision, with occasional use of radiotherapy.5.	Fibrosarcoma. Often presenting as a large, painful mass, these lesions are visible on plain radiograph or CT, with sur-rounding tissue destruction. Treatment is wide local excision with intraoperative frozen-section analysis of margins, fol-lowed by reconstruction. Local and systemic recurrence is frequent. Patient survival at 5 years is about 50% to 60%.6.	Rhabdomyosarcoma. Rhabdomyosarcomas are rare tumors of the chest wall. Microscopically, they are a spindle cell tumor. The diagnosis often depends on immunohistochemi-cal staining for muscle markers. Rhabdomyosarcomas are sensitive to chemotherapy. Treatment consists of preopera-tive chemotherapy with subsequent surgical resection.Other Tumors of the Chest Wall1.	Primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNETs) and Ewing’s sarcoma. PNETs (neuroblastomas, ganglioneuroblastomas, and ganglioneuromas) derive from primordial neural crest cells that migrate from the mantle layer of the developing spinal cord. Histologically, PNETs and Ewing’s sarcomas are small, round cell tumors; both possess a translocation between the long arms of chromosomes 11 and 22 within their genetic makeup. They also share a consistent pattern of proto-oncogene expression and have been found to express the product of the MIC2 gene.	 Ewing’s sarcoma occurs in adolescents and young adults who present with progressive chest wall pain, but without the presence of a mass. Systemic symptoms of malaise and fever are often present. Laboratory studies reveal an ele-vated erythrocyte sedimentation rate and mild white blood cell elevation. Radiographically, the characteristic onion peel appearance is produced by multiple layers of perios-teum in the bone formation. Evidence of bony destruction is also common. The diagnosis can be made by a percutaneous needle biopsy or an incisional biopsy.	 These tumors have a strong propensity to metastasize to the lungs and skeleton; patient survival rates are thus only 50% or less at 3 years. Increasing tumor size is associated with decreasing survival. Treatment has improved sig-nificantly and now consists of multiagent chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and surgery. Patients are typically treated preoperatively with chemotherapy and reevaluated with radiologic imaging. When residual disease is identified, sur-gical resection and reconstruction are performed followed by maintenance chemotherapy.2.	Plasmacytoma. Solitary plasmacytomas of the chest wall are very rare, with approximately 25 to 30 cases per year in the United States.133 The typical presentation is pain with-out a palpable mass. Plain radiographs show an osteolytic lesion in the region of the pain. As with other chest wall tumors, a needle biopsy under CT guidance is performed for diagnosis. Histologically, the lesion is identical to multiple myeloma, with sheets of plasma cells. It occurs at an aver-age age of 55 years. Evaluation for systemic myeloma is performed with bone marrow aspiration, testing of calcium levels, and measurement of urinary Bence Jones proteins. If the results of these studies are negative, then a solitary Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   72501/03/19   7:01 PM 726SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIplasmacytoma is diagnosed. Surgery is usually limited to a biopsy only, which may be excisional.134 Treatment consists of radiation with doses of 4000 to 5000 cGy. Up to 75% of patients develop systemic multiple myeloma with 10-year survival of approximately 20%.Chest Wall ReconstructionThe primary determinant of long-term freedom from recurrence and overall survival is margin status; therefore, adequate mar-gins of normal tissue must be included in the en bloc resec-tion. En bloc resection should include involved ribs, sternum, superior sulcus, or spine if necessary; invasion of these struc-tures should not be considered a contraindication to surgery in an otherwise fit patient. The resection should include at least one normal adjacent rib above and below the tumor, with all intervening intercostal muscles and pleura. In addition, an en bloc resection of overlying chest wall muscles is often neces-sary, such as of the pectoralis minor or major, serratus anterior, or latissimus dorsi. When the periphery of the lung is involved with the neoplasm, it is appropriate to resect the adjacent part of the pulmonary lobe in continuity (Fig. 19-42). Involvement of the sternum by a malignant tumor requires total resection of the sternum with the adjacent cartilage. Techniques for postop-erative respiratory support are now good enough that resection should not be compromised because of any concern about the patient’s ability to be adequately ventilated in the early postop-erative period.The extent of resection depends on the tumor’s location and on any involvement of contiguous structures. Laterally based lesions often require simple wide excision, with resec-tion of any contiguously involved lung, pleura, muscle, or skin. Anteriorly based lesions contiguous with the sternum require partial sternectomy. Primary malignant tumors of the sternum may require complete sternectomy. Posterior lesions involving the rib heads over their articulations with the vertebral bodies may, depending on the extent of rib involvement, require partial en bloc vertebrectomy.Optimal management of larger tumors includes care-ful preoperative planning and execution of the surgery by the thoracic surgeon and an experienced plastic surgeon in order to ensure optimal physiologic and cosmetic results. With these measures, reconstruction at the same operation can be accomplished.135 Reconstruction of a large defect in the chest wall requires the use of some type of material to prevent lung herniation and to provide stability for the chest wall (see Fig. 19-42). Mild degrees of paradoxical motion are often well tolerated if the area of instability is relatively small. Historically, a wide variety of materials have been used to reestablish chest wall stability, including rib autografts, steel struts, acrylic plates, and numerous synthetic meshes. The current preference is either a 2-mm polytetrafluoroethylene (Gore-Tex) patch or a double-layer polypropylene (Marlex) mesh sandwiched with methylmethacrylate. There are sev-eral properties that make Gore-Tex an excellent material for use in chest wall reconstruction: (a) it is impervious to fluid, which prevents pleural fluid from entering the chest wall and minimizes the formation of seromas, which can compromise the myocutaneous flap viability and provide a nidus for infec-tion; and (b) it provides excellent rigidity and stability when secured taut to the surrounding bony structure and, as a result, provides a firm platform for myocutaneous flap reconstruc-tion. Except for smaller lesions, tissue coverage requires the use of myocutaneous flaps (latissimus dorsi, serratus anterior, rectus abdominis, or pectoralis major muscles).136,137MEDIASTINUMAnatomy and Pathologic EntitiesThe mediastinum can be divided into compartments for classi-fication of anatomic components and disease processes, which, despite substantial overlap, facilitates understanding of general concepts of surgical interest. Several classification schemes exist, but for the purposes of this chapter, the three-compart-ment model is used (Fig. 19-43). The anterior compartment lies between the sternum and the anterior surface of the heart and great vessels. The visceral or middle compartment is located between the great vessels and the trachea. As the name implies, the posterior compartment lies posterior and includes the para-vertebral sulci, bilaterally, and the paraesophageal area.ABFigure 19-42. Principles of recon-struction after resection of a chest wall tumor (osteogenic sarcoma) are shown. A. En bloc resection of the involved chest wall, including nor-mal ribs above and below the tumor as well as pulmonary parenchyma, must be performed. The resected specimen is shown. B. A prosthesis has been sewn in place. In the lower third of the prosthesis, the line of diaphragm reattachment is seen. The skin defect was closed with a myo-cutaneous flap from the ipsilateral rectus muscle.Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   72601/03/19   7:01 PM
# Chunk 8912
CHAPTER 19727CHEST WALL, LUNG, MEDIASTINUM, AND PLEURAPosteriormediastinumAnterosuperiormediastinumMiddlemediastinumFigure 19-43. Anatomic division of the mediastinum.ThymusFigure 19-44. Normal appearance of the thymus gland in childhood. Ao = aorta; PA = pulmonary artery; VC = vena cava.The normal content of the anterior compartment includes the thymus gland or its remnant, the internal mammary artery and vein, lymph nodes, and fat. The thymus gland is large during childhood, occupying the entire anterior mediastinum  (Fig. 19-44) but decreases in both thickness and length after adolescence and takes on a more fatty content, with only resid-ual islands of thymic cellular components (Fig. 19-45). The middle mediastinal compartment contains the pericardium and its contents, the ascending and transverse aorta, the superior and inferior venae cavae, the brachiocephalic artery and vein, the phrenic and upper vagus nerves, the trachea and main bronchi and corresponding lymph nodes, and the central portions of the pulmonary arteries and veins. The posterior compartment contains the descending aorta, esophagus, thoracic duct, azygos and hemiazygos veins, and lymph nodes. Numerous pathologic variants may be present in the various compartments, with much overlap. Table 19-25 includes the most common pathologic entities listed by compartment.138,139History and Physical ExaminationMediastinal pathology varies significantly by patient age. In children, neurogenic tumors of the posterior mediastinum are most common, followed by lymphoma, which is usually located in the anterior or middle compartment. Thymoma in child-hood is rare (Table 19-26). In adults, the most common tumors include neurogenic tumors of the posterior compartment, benign cysts occurring in any compartment, and thymomas of the ante-rior mediastinum (Table 19-27). In both age groups, about 25% of mediastinal tumors are malignant. Pediatric tumors will be discussed in Chapter 39.Up to two-thirds of mediastinal tumors in adults are dis-covered as asymptomatic abnormalities on radiologic studies ordered for other problems, particularly now that screening CT examinations are more prevalent. When symptomatic, these tumors are significantly more likely to be malignant. Charac-teristics such as size, location, rate of growth, and associated inflammation are important factors that correlate with symp-toms. Large, bulky tumors, expanding cysts, and teratomas can cause compression of mediastinal structures, in particular the trachea, and lead to cough, dyspnea on exertion, or stridor. Chest pain or dyspnea may be reported secondary to associated pleural effusions, cardiac tamponade, or phrenic nerve involve-ment. Occasionally, a mediastinal mass near the aortopulmonary window may be identified in a workup for hoarseness because of left recurrent laryngeal nerve involvement. The patient in  Fig. 19-46 presented with hoarseness due to nodal compression of the left recurrent laryngeal nerve from a primary lung cancer with metastases to the level 5 and 6 lymph nodes in the region of the aortopulmonary window.The history and physical examination in conjunction with the  imaging findings may suggest a specific diagnosis (Table 19-28).  In one series, systemic symptoms were present in 50% of patients with a mediastinal mass and a lymphoproliferative dis-order, as compared with only 29% of patients with other masses (such as thymic or neurogenic). Laboratory signs of inflamma-tion were also noted; the erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein levels were elevated and leukocytosis was present in 86% of patients with a lymphoproliferative disorder, as compared with only 58% of patients with other types of medi-astinal masses.Imaging and Serum MarkersChest CT or MRI is required to fully delineate the anatomy.140 A contrast-enhanced CT scan enables clear delineation of the Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   72701/03/19   7:01 PM 728SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 19-25Usual location of the common primary tumors and cysts of the mediastinumANTERIOR COMPARTMENTVISCERAL COMPARTMENTPARAVERTEBRAL SULCIThymomaEnterogenous cystNeurilemoma-schwannomaGerm cell tumorLymphomaNeurofibromaLymphomaPleuropericardial cystMalignant schwannomaLymphangiomaMediastinal granulomaGanglioneuromaHemangiomaLymphoid hamartomaGanglioneuroblastomaLipomaMesothelial cystNeuroblastomaFibromaNeuroenteric cystParagangliomaFibrosarcomaParagangliomaPheochromocytomaThymic cystPheochromocytomaFibrosarcomaParathyroid adenomaThoracic duct cystLymphomaReproduced with permission from Shields TW: Mediastinal Surgery. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger; 1991.Table 19-26Mediastinal tumors in childrenTUMOR TYPEPERCENTAGE  OF TOTALLOCATIONNeurogenic tumors40PosteriorLymphomas18Anterior/middleCysts18AllGerm cell tumors11AnteriorMesenchymal tumors9AllThymomasRareAnteriorReproduced with permission from Silverman NA, Sabiston DC: Mediastinal masses, Surg Clin North Am. 1980 Aug;60(4):757-777.Figure 19-45. Computed tomography scan showing the normal appearance of an involuted thymus gland in an adult. Note the near-total fatty appearance of the gland with only tiny islands of soft tissue scattered within it (small arrows).soft tissue structures from the vasculature and is preferred over noncontrast studies. If there is concern for invasion of vas-cular structures or spinal involvement, MRI is more accurate than CT scan and provides important information regarding respectability.If an endocrine origin is suspected, several other imaging modalities are available (Table 19-29). Single-photon emission CT (SPECT) technology may be used to improve image contrast and give information on three-dimensional localization, largely replacing conventional two-dimensional nuclear imaging studies.  If a thyroid origin is suspected, a thyroid scan using 131I or  123I can identify most intrathoracic goiters and identify the extent of functioning thyroid tissue. If indicated, the thyroid scan should precede other scans requiring iodine-containing contrast agents because they would subsequently interfere with iodine tracer uptake by thyroid tissue. If a pheochromo-cytoma or neuroblastoma is suspected, the octreotide scan or 123I-metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) scans are helpful in diag-nosis and localization. The sestamibi scan may be useful for diagnosing and localizing a mediastinal parathyroid gland. PET is useful for distinguishing malignant from benign tumors and may help detect distant metastases in some patients. However, the role of routine PET imaging for staging surgically resectable lesions of the mediastinum has not been established.The use of serum markers to evaluate a mediastinal mass can be invaluable in some patients. For example, nonsemino-matous and seminomatous germ cell tumors can frequently be diagnosed and often distinguished from one another by the lev-els of α-fetoprotein (AFP) and human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG). In over 90% of nonseminomatous germ cell tumors, either the AFP or the hCG level will be elevated. Results are close to 100% specific if the level of either AFP or hCG is greater than 500 ng/mL. Some centers institute chemotherapy based on this result alone, without biopsy confirmation of the diagnosis. In contrast, the AFP level in patients with mediastinal seminoma is always normal; only 10% will have elevated hCG, which is usually less than 100 ng/mL. Other serum markers, such as intact parathyroid hormone level for ectopic parathyroid Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   72801/03/19   7:01 PM
# Chunk 8913
CHAPTER 19729CHEST WALL, LUNG, MEDIASTINUM, AND PLEURAFigure 19-46. Computed tomography scan of a patient who pre-sented with hoarseness due to compression of the left recurrent laryngeal nerve caused by mediastinal lymph node metastases to the aortopulmonary window area (arrow) from a primary lung cancer.adenomas, may be useful for diagnosing and also for intraopera-tively confirming complete resection. After successful resection of a parathyroid adenoma, this hormone level should rapidly normalize.Diagnostic Nonsurgical Biopsies  of the MediastinumThe treatment of up to 60% of patients with anterior mediastinal masses is ultimately nonsurgical, so it is essential to understand all options for obtaining adequate tissue for a definitive diagno-sis using the least invasive approach. CT-guided needle biopsy, EBUSand EUS-guided FNA, and even core-needle biopsy (either CT-guided and EUS-guided) have proven most useful for cytologic and tissue diagnosis of mediastinal masses and lymphadenopathy.When FNA and core-needle biopsy were combined, the accuracy was 98%, compared to 79% for each modality inde-pendently. In addition, core-needle biopsy changed the diagno-sis in nine cases that had been missed by FNA due to inadequate specimens. Finally, core-needle biopsy was better at diagnosis for benign diseases compared to FNA. Accessible nodal stations Table 19-27Mediastinal tumors in adultsTUMOR TYPEPERCENTAGE OF TOTALLOCATIONNeurogenic tumors21PosteriorCysts20AllThymomas19AnteriorLymphomas13Anterior/middleGerm cell tumors11AnteriorMesenchymal tumors7AllEndocrine tumors6Anterior/middleData from Shields TW: General Thoracic Surgery, 4th ed. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1994.include subcarinal (level 7), aortopulmonary (level 5), parae-sophageal (level 8), and inferior pulmonary ligament (level 9) as well as paratracheal (level 4).141 Technical expertise in these modalities should be pursued by thoracic and general surgeons.Historically, needle biopsies of anterior mediastinal masses were reportedly sensitive and specific for most carcinomatous tumors, but there were questions regarding accuracy for diagnos-ing lymphomas.142 However, advances in cytopathology as well as needle biopsy technology have substantially improved diag-nostic accuracy such that most centers are reporting yields rang-ing from 75% to 80% for the diagnosis of lymphoma as well. To achieve maximal diagnostic yield for mediastinal masses sug-gestive of a lymphoma, it is necessary to obtain multiple fine-needle aspirates, preferably with immediate onsite rapid cytologic analysis to confirm sampling of the target tissue and adequate cellularity. This also facilitates processing of the sample to ensure that proper studies for lymphoma, including flow cytometry, are obtained. If the needle biopsy is inconclusive, surgical biopsy can be performed.143,144 If the lesion is accessible by CT-guided or EUS-guided core-needle biopsy, intraoperative frozen section or immediate cytologic smear of a core biopsy can also be per-formed. Currently, core-needle biopsy with EBUS is not possible. The authors perform their own endobronchial, endoscopic, and CT-guided transbronchial and transthoracic biopsies, and in our experience, lack of cellularity in the aspirate is readily apparent. In general, plans to proceed with surgical biopsy are made in combination with the image-guided aspiration and, as such, are performed in the same setting. This enables the authors to avoid a more invasive surgical procedure when FNA or core-needle biopsy is sufficient without contributing to delays in diagnosis by having multiple attempts from multiple providers (such as inter-ventional radiology and pulmonology) before involvement of the surgeon in the diagnostic workup.Table 19-28Signs and symptoms suggestive of various diagnoses in the setting of a mediastinal massDIAGNOSISHISTORY AND PHYSICAL FINDINGSCOMPARTMENT LOCATION OF MASSLymphomaNight sweats, weight loss, fatigue, extrathoracic adenopathy, elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate or C-reactive protein level, leukocytosisAny compartmentThymoma with myasthenia gravisFluctuating weakness, early fatigue, ptosis, diplopiaAnteriorMediastinal granulomaDyspnea, wheezing, hemoptysisVisceral (middle)Germ cell tumorMale gender, young age, testicular mass, elevated levels of human chorionic gonadotropin and/or α-fetoproteinAnteriorBrunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   72901/03/19   7:01 PM 730SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 19-29Nuclear imaging relevant to the mediastinumRADIOPHARMACEUTICAL,  RADIONUCLIDE, OR  RADIOCHEMICALLABELDISEASE OF  INTERESTIodine131I, 123IRetrosternal goiter, thyroid cancerMonoclonal antibodies111In, 99mTcNSCLC, colon and breast cancer, prostate cancer metastasesOctreotide111InAmine precursor uptake decarboxylation tumors: carcinoid, gastrinoma, insulinoma, small cell lung cancer, pheochromocytoma, glucagonoma, medullary thyroid carcinoma, paragangliomaGallium67GaLymphoma, NSCLC, melanomaSestamibi99mTcMedullary thyroid carcinoma, nonfunctional papillary or follicular thyroid carcinoma, Hürthle cell thyroid carcinoma, parathyroid adenoma or carcinomaThallium201TlSee sestamibiMIBG131I, 123IPheochromocytoma, neuroblastoma; see also octreotideFluorodeoxyglucose18FGeneral oncologic imaging, breast and colon cancer, melanomaAbbreviations: MIGB = metaiodobenzylguanidine; NSCLC = non–small cell lung cancer.Reproduced with permission from Pearson FG, Cooper JD, Deslauriers J, et al: Thoracic Surgery, 2nd ed. New York, NY: Elsevier/Churchill Livingstone; 2002.Surgical Biopsies and Resection  of Mediastinal MassesFor tumors of the mediastinum that are not amenable to an endo-scopic or CT-guided needle biopsy or that do not yield sufficient tissue for diagnosis, a surgical biopsy is indicated. The defini-tive approach to a surgical biopsy of the anterior mediastinum is through a median sternotomy. At the time of sternotomy, if the lesion is easily resectable, it should be completely removed. Given the invasiveness of the procedure and the inability in some patients to obtain a definitive diagnosis by frozen section, less invasive procedures are preferable if the lesion is large or if the CT scan or history suggests that surgery is not the best definitive treatment.Masses in the paratracheal region are easily biopsied by mediastinoscopy. For tumors of the anterior or posterior medi-astinum, a left or right VATS approach often allows safe and adequate surgical biopsies. In some patients, an anterior medi-astinotomy (i.e., Chamberlain procedure) may be ideal for an anterior tumor or a tumor with significant parasternal extension. Before a surgical biopsy is pursued, a discussion should be held with the pathologist regarding routine histologic assessment, spe-cial stains and markers, and requirements for lymphoma workup.Surgical resection using minimally invasive approaches, including video-assisted and robotic thoracoscopic surgery and transcervical, are now routine for the vast majority of middle and posterior tumors and for moderate sized (<5 to  6 cm) anterior mediastinal tumors.145-148 Outcomes comparing VATS to open thymectomy in patients with myasthenia gravis without thymoma were prospectively evaluated by Chang and colleagues in 2005, and no differences were seen in terms of response to therapy and recurrence of symptoms. Pain scores were significantly better in the VATS approach.149 These reports and others support application of VATS for the majority of ante-rior mediastinal masses.Other minimally invasive approaches are under study. For example, good results have been reported using a cervical incision with a sternal retractor for thymus removal. The upward lift allows the surgeon reasonable access to the anterior medi-astinum and has proven adequate in some centers for definitive resection of the thymus gland for myasthenia gravis.150For larger anterior mediastinal masses or in centers where expertise in thoracoscopy is not available, median sternotomy and thoracotomy remain excellent options for resection of ante-rior mediastinal masses. Occasionally, a lateral thoracotomy with sternal extension (hemi-clamshell) provides excellent exposure for extensive mediastinal tumors that have a lateral component.Most surgeons would agree that if a larger anterior medi-astinal tumor is seen or malignancy is suspected, a median ster-notomy with a more radical resection should be performed.Mediastinal NeoplasmsThymic Hyperplasia. Diffuse thymic hyperplasia was first described in children after successful chemotherapy for lym-phoma. It has now been described in adults and is referred to as “rebound thymic hyperplasia.”151 It is most frequently reported after chemotherapy for lymphoma or germ cell tumors. Ini-tially, atrophy of the thymic gland is seen with subsequent thymic gland enlargement, which can be dramatic. The usual time course for thymic hyperplasia is about 9 months after ces-sation of chemotherapy (range 2 weeks to 12 months). Benign hyperplasia must be clearly distinguished from recurrent lym-phoma or germ cell tumors, which may be difficult since thymic hyperplasia is dramatic in some patients; careful follow-up with serial CT scans is the minimum requirement. The role of PET scanning is unclear. Thymic hyperplasia is a known cause of false-positive PET scans; in many patients, CT scan will show a triangular soft tissue density in the retrosternal space that has a characteristic bilobed anatomic appearance consistent with thymus gland.152 In addition, a low standardized uptake value of tracer on PET scan suggests a benign tumor.153 Biopsies may be required if the clinical index of suspicion is high.Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   73001/03/19   7:01 PM
# Chunk 8914
CHAPTER 19731CHEST WALL, LUNG, MEDIASTINUM, AND PLEURAThymoma. While it is the most frequently encountered neo-plasm of the anterior mediastinum in adults (seen most fre-quently between 40 and 60 years of age), thymoma is rare in children. Between 10% and 50% of patients with thymoma will have symptoms suggestive of myasthenia gravis or have circulating antibodies to acetylcholine receptor, but less than 10% of patients with myasthenia gravis have a thymoma. Most patients with thymoma are asymptomatic. Thymectomy leads to improvement or resolution of symptoms of myasthe-nia gravis in only about 25% of patients with thymomas. In contrast, in patients with myasthenia gravis and no thymoma, thymectomy results are superior: up to 50% of patients have a complete remission, and 90% improve. In 5% of patients with thymomas, other paraneoplastic syndromes, including red cell aplasia, hypogammaglobulinemia, systemic lupus erythema-tosus, Cushing’s syndrome, or SIADH, may be present. Large thymic tumors may present with symptoms related to a mass effect, which may include cough, chest pain, dyspnea, or SVC syndrome.The diagnosis may be suspected based on CT scan and history, but imaging alone is not diagnostic. In most centers, the diagnosis is made after surgical resection because of the rela-tive difficulty of obtaining a needle biopsy and the likelihood that removal will ultimately be recommended. Biopsy should be avoided in cases where imaging is highly suggestive of thy-moma. In most patients, the distinction between lymphomas and thymomas can be made on CT scan since most lymphomas have marked lymphadenopathy and thymomas most frequently appear as a solitary encapsulated mass. PET scan may have a role in differentiating thymic cancer from thymoma, as thymic cancer tends to be very FDG avid.153 In addition, PET scan may facilitate identification of low-risk and minimally invasive thy-moma; a standardized uptake value (SUV) <5 was associated with Masaoka stage I or II thymoma, whereas invasive thymoma and mediastinal lymphoma were more likely when the SUV was >5.154 In cases where the diagnosis is unclear, transmediastinal, not transpleural, CT-guided FNA biopsy has a diagnostic sen-sitivity of 87% and a specificity of 95% in specialized centers.The most commonly accepted staging system for thymoma is that of Masaoka.155 It is based on the presence or absence of gross or microscopic invasion of the capsule and of surrounding structures, as well as on the presence or absence of metastases (Table 19-30). Histologically, thymomas are characterized by a mixture of epithelial cells and mature lymphocytes. Grossly, many thymomas remain well encapsulated. Even those with capsular invasion often lack histologic features of malignancy; they appear cytologically benign and identical to early-stage tumors. This lack of classic cellular features of malignancy is why most pathologists use the term “thymoma” or “invasive thymoma” rather than “malignant thymoma.” Thymic tumors with malignant cytologic features are classified separately and referred to as “thymic carcinoma.”The definitive treatment for thymoma is complete surgical removal; local recurrence rates and survival vary according to stage (Fig. 19-47). In centers with significant experience with VATS procedures, thymoma is not a contraindication to VATS approach, provided the principles of resection are adhered to, such as a complete resection without disrupting the capsule.156 Otherwise, resection is generally accomplished by median ster-notomy with extension to hemi-clamshell in more advanced cases. Even advanced tumors with local invasion of resectable structures such as the pericardium, SVC, or innominate vessels should be considered for resection with reconstruction.A multidisciplinary approach to nonresectable and more advanced lesions (stage ≥II) is mandatory to optimize patient care. The goal for surgical resection should be complete exci-sion of the mass with total thymectomy. All contiguous and noncontiguous disease is removed at the same setting; this may include resection of the pericardium or pleura, adjacent adher-ent lung, phrenic nerve, major vascular structures, and pleural metastasis. Bilateral phrenic nerve resection should be avoided, however, due to the major respiratory morbidity associated with bilateral paralyzed hemidiaphragms.The role of adjuvant or neoadjuvant therapies for advanced-stage tumors remains unclear. Traditionally, stage II thymomas have been treated by complete surgical resection fol-lowed by mediastinal radiation, but randomized trials have not been done. A recent retrospective review of a single-institution series of stage II thymoma patients showed no difference in survival or local recurrence after complete surgical resection alone, as compared with surgical resection with radiotherapy. Advanced thymomas have been shown to respond to platinum-based chemotherapy and to corticosteroids.157 One summary of chemotherapy trials showed an overall response rate of about 70%. Cisplatin/doxorubicin-based regimens appear to yield the best results. The combination radiotherapy and chemotherapy for local progression appears to prolong survival in some small series.158 Radiation therapy in surgically resected stage III thy-moma is likely beneficial in extending disease-specific survival; an analysis of the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) database identified 476 patients with stage III thymoma treated with primary surgery. Postoperative radiation was given Table 19-30Masaoka staging system for thymomaStage IEncapsulated tumor with no gross or microscopic evidence of capsular invasionStage IIGross capsular invasion or invasion into the mediastinal fat or pleura or microscopic capsular invasionStage IIIGross invasion into the pericardium, great vessels, or lungStage IVAPleural or pericardial disseminationStage IVBLymphogenous or hematogenous metastasis1.0.8.6.4.20Proportion surviving02010YearsP=.002Stage IStage IVStage IIIStage IIFigure 19-47. Stage-specific survival for thymomas.Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   73101/03/19   7:01 PM 732SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 19-48. Massive thymolipoma that was asymptomatic in an 18-year-old female.to 322 patients with a significant improvement in survival  (127 months compared to 105 months, P = .038) despite the fact that these patients were more likely to have had debulking rather than curative resection. In multivariate analysis, disease-specific survival was better in the adjuvant radiation group.159 There-fore, it is imperative that all patients with thymomas undergo a thorough evaluation for potential resection. Current guidelines recommend radiation for patients with unresectable thymoma who have failed induction chemotherapy or for patients with incompletely resected invasive thymoma or thymic cancer. Planning the radiation ports requires input from the surgeon; it is important for the surgeon to carefully document areas of adherence between the thymoma and adjacent structures during the operation, with clips or other radiopaque markers placed to guide radiation therapy postoperatively. Extracapsular extension and positive surgical margins should be noted by the pathologist and correlated anatomically so that the surgeon and radiation oncologist can ensure appropriate radiation treatment.Thymic Carcinoma. Thymic carcinomas are unequivocally malignant at the microscopic level. Suster and Rosai classified thymic carcinomas into low-grade and high-grade tumors.160 Low-grade tumors are well differentiated with squamous cell, mucoepidermoid, or basaloid features. High-grade thymic car-cinomas include those with lymphoepithelial, small cell neu-roendocrine, sarcomatoid, clear cell, and undifferentiated or anaplastic features. Care must be taken to differentiate thymic carcinoma from lung cancer metastatic to the thymus gland as the histologic features can be similar between the two. Com-pared with thymomas, they are a more heterogeneous group of malignancies with a propensity for early local invasion and widespread metastases. Malignant pleural and pericardial effu-sions occur frequently.Five-year survival rates are between 30% and 50%. Com-plete resection is occasionally curative and leads to improved survival, but most thymic carcinomas will recur and are refractory to chemotherapy.157 Management, therefore, depends on the completeness of the resection. Postoperative care includes radiation therapy, guided by residual gross disease or microscopically positive margins from the resection specimen. Chemotherapy may also be given, with carboplatin/paclitaxel recommended based on the best response rates with the least toxicity in clinical trials. The prognosis of patients with thymic cancer remains poor.Thymolipoma. Thymolipomas are rare benign tumors that may grow to a very large size prior to diagnosis. On CT scan, their appearance can be dramatic, with a characteristic fat den-sity dotted by islands of soft tissue density representing islands of thymic tissue (Fig. 19-48). Thymolipomas are generally well-encapsulated, soft, and pliable masses that do not invade surrounding structures. Resection is recommended for large masses.Neurogenic Tumors. Most neurogenic tumors of the medi-astinum arise from the cells of the nerve sheath, from ganglion cells, or from the paraganglionic system (Table 19-31). The incidence, cell types, and risk of malignancy strongly correlate with patient age. Tumors of nerve sheath origin predominate in adults. Most present as asymptomatic incidental findings, and most are benign. In children and young adults, tumors of the autonomic ganglia predominate, with up to two-thirds being malignant.161Nerve Sheath Tumors. Nerve sheath tumors account for 20% of all mediastinal tumors. More than 95% of nerve sheath tumors are benign neurilemomas or neurofibromas. Malignant neurosarcomas are much less common.Neurilemoma. Neurilemomas, also called schwannomas, arise from Schwann cells in intercostal nerves. They are firm, well encapsulated, and generally benign. Two characteristic histo-logic components are referred to as Antoni type A and Antoni type B regions. Antoni type A regions contain compact spindle Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   73201/03/19   7:01 PM
# Chunk 8915
CHAPTER 19733CHEST WALL, LUNG, MEDIASTINUM, AND PLEURAFigure 19-49. Magnetic resonance image of a neurogenic tumor with extension into the spinal canal via the foramen, giving a typical dumbbell appearance.Table 19-31Classification of neurogenic tumors of the mediastinumTUMOR ORIGINBENIGNMALIGNANTNerve sheathNeurilemoma, neurofibroma, melanotic schwannoma, granular cell tumorNeurofibrosarcomaGanglion cellGanglioneuromaGanglioneuroblastoma, neuroblastomaParaganglionic cellChemodectoma, pheochromocytomaMalignant chemodectoma, malignant pheochromocytomaReproduced with permission from Pearson FG, Cooper JD, Deslauriers J, et al: Thoracic Surgery, 2nd ed. New York, NY: Elsevier/Churchill Livingstone; 2002.cells with twisted nuclei and nuclear palisading. Antoni type B regions contain loose and myxoid connective tissue with hap-hazard cellular arrangement. These characteristics distinguish neurilemoma from malignant fibrosarcomatous tumors, which lack encapsulation and have no Antoni features. If routine CT scan suggests extension of a neurilemoma into the intervertebral foramen, MRI is used to evaluate the extent of this “dumbbell” configuration (Fig. 19-49). Such a configuration may lead to cord compression and paralysis and requires a more complex surgical approach. Resection is recommended; VATS has been established as safe and effective for simple and, in experienced centers, even the more complex operations.162 It is reasonable to follow small, asymptomatic paravertebral tumors in older patients or in patients at high risk for surgery. In children, ganglioneuroblastomas or neuroblastomas are more common; therefore, all neurogenic tumors should be completely resected.Neurofibroma. Neurofibromas consist of both nerve sheath and nerve cells and account for up to 25% of nerve sheath tumors. Up to 40% of patients with mediastinal fibromas have general-ized neurofibromatosis (von Recklinghausen’s disease). About 70% of neurofibromas are benign, but malignant degeneration to neurofibrosarcoma occurs in 25% to 30% of patients.163 The risk of malignant degeneration increases with advancing age, von Recklinghausen’s disease, and exposure to previous radia-tion. Neurofibrosarcomas carry a poor prognosis because of rapid growth and aggressive local invasion along nerve bun-dles. Complete surgical resection is the mainstay of treatment. Adjuvant radiotherapy or chemotherapy does not confer a sig-nificant benefit, but may be added if complete resection is not possible.164 The 5-year survival rate is 53%, but it drops to 16% in patients with neurofibromatosis or with large tumors (>5 cm).Ganglion Cell Tumors Ganglion cell tumors (ganglioneuro-mas, ganglioneuroblastomas, and neuroblastomas) arise from the sympathetic chain or from the adrenal medulla.1.	Ganglioneuroma. Well-differentiated, benign tumors char-acterized histologically by well-differentiated ganglion cells with a background of Schwann cells, these are most often found incidentally in asymptomatic young adults. Diarrhea related to secretion of a vasoactive intestinal peptide has been described in some patients. These tumors have a pro-pensity for intraspinal canal extension, although they remain well-encapsulated; complete resection is curative, with a low risk of local recurrence.Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   73301/03/19   7:01 PM 734SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II2.	Ganglioneuroblastoma. Ganglioneuroblastomas contain a mixture of benign ganglion cells and malignant neuro-blasts. The distribution of these cells within the tumor is predictive of the clinical course. The nodular pattern has a high incidence of metastatic disease, whereas the diffuse pattern rarely metastasizes. Gross examination typically reveals encapsulated tumor; histologically, there are focal calcifications around regions of neuroblasts. Ganglioneu-roblastomas arise most frequently in infants and children <3 years old. The majority are resectable, with 80% 5-year survival.3.	Neuroblastoma. Highly malignant, neuroblastomas are the most common extracranial solid malignancy of childhood. The primary site is intrathoracic malignancy in 14%; exten-sion into the spinal canal and osseous invasion commonly present. These thoracic tumors are not as recalcitrant to chemotherapy and surgical resection as other chest malig-nancies; they are more likely to be resectable, with less inva-sion of surrounding organs. More than half occur in children under 2 years old; 90% arise within the first decade of life, and thus, these malignancies are discussed in more detail in Chapter 39.Paraganglionic Tumors. Paraganglionic tumors arising in the thoracic cavity include chemodectomas and pheochromo-cytomas. Only 10% of all pheochromocytomas are located in an extra-adrenal site. Intrathoracic pheochromocytomas are one of the rarest tumors.Approximately 10% of thoracic pheochromocytomas are malignant, a rate similar to that of adrenal tumors. The most common thoracic location is within the costovertebral sulcus, but paraganglionic tumors also arise within the visceral com-partment of the mediastinum. These catecholamine-producing lesions can lead to life-threatening hemodynamic problems, so complete removal is important. Diagnosis is generally confirmed by measuring elevated levels of urinary catecholamines and their metabolites. Localization is by CT scan, aided by MIBG scintigraphy. Preoperative care includes αand β-adrenergic blockade to prevent intraoperative malignant hypertension and arrhythmias. These tumors tend to be highly vascular and should be approached with care. Chemodectomas are rare tumors that may be located around the aortic arch, vagus nerves, or aor-ticosympathetics. They rarely secrete catecholamines and are malignant in up to 30% of patients.Lymphoma. Overall, lymphomas are the most common malig-nancy of the mediastinum. In about 50% of patients who have both Hodgkin’s and non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, the mediasti-num may be the primary site. The anterior compartment is most commonly involved, with occasional involvement of the mid-dle compartment and hilar nodes. The posterior compartment is rarely involved. Chemotherapy and/or radiation results in a cure rate of up to 90% for patients with early-stage Hodgkin’s disease and up to 60% with more advanced stages.Mediastinal Germ Cell Tumors. Germ cell tumors are uncom-mon neoplasms, but they are the most common malignancy in young men 15 to 35 years of age. Most germ cell tumors are gonadal in origin; primary mediastinal germ cell tumors com-prise less than 5% of all germ cell tumors and less than 1% of all mediastinal tumors (usually occurring in the anterior com-partment). If a malignant mediastinal germ cell tumor is found, it is important to exclude a gonadal primary tumor. Primary mediastinal germ cell tumors (including teratomas, seminomas, and nonseminomatous malignant germ cell tumors) are a het-erogeneous group of benign and malignant neoplasms thought to originate from primitive pluripotent germ cells “misplaced” in the mediastinum during embryonic development. Previ-ously, most mediastinal germ cell tumors were thought to be metastatic. However, two lines of evidence suggest that many mediastinal germ cell tumors are primary, developing from plu-ripotent primordial germ cells in the mediastinum: (a) several autopsy series showed that patients with extragonadal sites of germ cell tumors, presumed previously to have originated from the gonads, had no evidence of an occult primary tumor or of any residual scar of the gonads, even after an exhaustive search; and (b) patients treated by surgery or radiation for their medi-astinal germ cell tumors had long-term survival with no late testicular recurrences.165About one-third of all primary mediastinal germ cell tumors are seminomatous. Two-thirds are nonseminomatous tumors or teratomas. Treatment and prognosis vary consider-ably within these two groups. Mature teratomas are benign and can generally be diagnosed by the characteristic CT findings of multilocular cystic tumors, encapsulated with combinations of fluid, soft tissue, calcium, and/or fat attenuation in the anterior compartment. FNA biopsy alone may be diagnostic for semi-nomas, usually with normal serum markers, including hCG and AFP. In 10% of seminomas, hCG levels may be slightly ele-vated. FNA findings, along with high hCG and AFP levels, can accurately diagnose nonseminomatous tumors. If the diagnosis remains uncertain after assessment of FNA findings and serum marker levels, then core-needle biopsies or surgical biopsies may be required. Thoracoscopy is the most frequent diagnostic surgical approach.1.	Seminoma. Most patients with seminomas have advanced disease at the time of diagnosis and present with symptoms of local compression, including SVC syndrome, dyspnea, or chest discomfort. With advanced disease, the preferred treatment is combination cisplatin-based chemotherapy regimens with bleomycin and either etoposide or vinblas-tine. Complete responses have been reported in over 75% of patients treated with these regimens. Surgical resection may be curative for small asymptomatic seminomas that are found incidentally with screening CT scans. Surgical resection of residual masses after chemotherapy may be indicated.2.	Nonseminomatous germ cell tumors. Nonseminomatous germ cell tumors include embryonal cell carcinomas, cho-riocarcinomas, endodermal sinus tumors, and mixed types. They are often bulky, irregular tumors of the anterior medi-astinum with areas of low attenuation on CT scan because of necrosis, hemorrhage, or cyst formation. Frequently, adjacent structures have been involved, with metastases to regional lymph nodes, pleura, and lungs. Lactate dehy-drogenase (LDH), AFP, and hCG levels are frequently elevated. Chemotherapy is the preferred treatment and includes combination therapy with cisplatin, bleomycin, and etoposide, followed by surgical resection of residual disease. With this regimen, survival is 67% at 2 years and 60% at 5 years. Surgical resection of residual masses is indicated, as it may guide further therapy. Up to 20% of residual masses contain additional tumors; in another 40%, mature teratomas; and the remaining 40%, fibrotic tissue. Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   73401/03/19   7:01 PM
# Chunk 8916
CHAPTER 19735CHEST WALL, LUNG, MEDIASTINUM, AND PLEURAIt is important to note that oxygen toxicity can occur in patients who have been exposed to bleomycin; high lev-els of oxygen supplementation in the perioperative setting should be avoided in these patients as respiratory failure and death can ensue.166 Factors independently predictive of survival after induction chemotherapy followed by resec-tion are elevated serum tumor markers after resection, postchemotherapy pathologic findings (complete necrosis vs. teratoma), and persistent germ cell or non–germ cell cancer in the pathologic specimen.1663.	Teratoma. Teratomas are the most common type of medi-astinal germ cell tumors, accounting for 60% to 70% of mediastinal germ cell tumors. They contain two or three embryonic layers that may include teeth, skin, and hair (ectodermal), cartilage and bone (mesodermal), or bron-chial, intestinal, or pancreatic tissue (endodermal). Ther-apy for mature, benign teratomas is surgical resection, which confers an excellent prognosis. Rarely, teratomas may contain a focus of carcinoma; these malignant tera-tomas (or teratocarcinomas) are locally aggressive. Often diagnosed at an unresectable stage, they respond poorly to chemotherapy and in a limited manner to radiotherapy; prognosis is uniformly poor.Mediastinal CystsBenign cysts account for up to 25% of mediastinal masses and are the most frequently occurring mass in the middle medias-tinal compartment. A CT scan showing characteristic features of near water density in a typical location is virtually 100% diagnostic.1671.	Pericardial cyst. Usually asymptomatic and detected inci-dentally in the right costophrenic angle, pericardial cysts typically contain a clear fluid and are lined with a single layer of mesothelial cells. For most simple, asymptomatic pericardial cysts, observation alone is recommended. Sur-gical resection or aspiration may be indicated for complex cysts or large symptomatic cysts.2.	Bronchogenic cyst. Developmental anomalies that occur during embryogenesis and occur as an abnormal budding of the foregut or tracheobronchial tree, bronchogenic cysts arise most often in the mediastinum just posterior to the carina or main stem bronchus. Approximately 15% occur within the pulmonary parenchyma. Thin-walled and lined with respiratory epithelium, they contain a protein-rich mucoid material and varying amounts of seromucous glands, smooth muscle, and cartilage. They may commu-nicate with the tracheobronchial tree. In adults, over half of all bronchogenic cysts are found incidentally during workup for an unrelated problem or during screening. The natural history of an incidentally diagnosed, asymptomatic bronchogenic cyst is unknown, but it is clear that many such cysts do not lead to clinical problems. In one study of young military personnel, 78% of all bronchogenic cysts found on routine CXRs were asymptomatic. However, in other reports with more comprehensive follow-up, up to 67% of adults with incidentally found bronchogenic cysts eventu-ally became symptomatic. Symptoms include chest pain, cough, dyspnea, and fever. If large (>6 cm) or symptomatic, resection is generally recommended since serious compli-cations may occur if the cyst becomes larger or infected. Complications include airway obstruction, infection, rup-ture, and, rarely, malignant transformation.168,169 	 Traditionally, complete removal of the cyst wall has been via posterolateral thoracotomy.170 Resection of infected cysts may be quite difficult because of dense adhesions; elective removal is often recommended before infection has a chance to occur. Thoracoscopic exploration and resec-tion are possible for small cysts with minimal adhesions. With increasing experience using video-assisted or robotic-assisted thoracoscopy, a greater proportion of these lesions are amenable to minimally invasive resection.3.	Enteric cyst. Most clinicians agree that in contrast to bronchogenic cysts, esophageal cysts should be removed, regardless of the presence or absence of symptoms. Esopha-geal cysts have a propensity for serious complications sec-ondary to enlargement, leading to hemorrhage, infection, or perforation. Thus, surgical resection is the treatment of choice in both adults and children. As with bronchogenic cysts, experienced surgeons are approaching enteric cyst resections using minimally invasive techniques with great success.4.	Thymic cyst. Generally asymptomatic, thymic cysts are often discovered incidentally. Simple cysts are of no con-sequence; however, the occasional cystic neoplasm must be ruled out. Cystic components occasionally are seen in patients with thymoma and Hodgkin’s disease.5.	Ectopic endocrine glands. Up to 5% of all mediastinal masses are of thyroid origin; most are simple extensions of thyroid masses. Usually nontoxic, over 95% can be com-pletely resected through a cervical approach. True ectopic thyroid tissue of the mediastinum is rare. About 10% to 20% of abnormal parathyroid glands are found in the mediasti-num; most can be removed during exploration from a cervi-cal incision. In cases of true mediastinal parathyroid glands, thoracoscopic or open resection may be indicated. Location can generally be pinpointed by a combination of CT scan and Sestamibi scans.MediastinitisAcute Mediastinitis. Acute mediastinitis is a fulminant infec-tious process that spreads rapidly along the continuous fascial planes connecting the cervical and mediastinal compartments. Infections originate most commonly from esophageal perfora-tions, sternal infections, and oropharyngeal or neck infections, but a number of less common etiologic factors can lead to this deadly process (Table 19-32). Clinical signs and symptoms include fever, chest pain, dysphagia, respiratory distress, and cervical and upper thoracic subcutaneous crepitus. In severe cases, the clinical course can rapidly deteriorate to florid sepsis, hemodynamic instability, and death. Thus, a high index of sus-picion is required in the context of any infection with access to the mediastinal compartments.A chest CT scan illuminates the extent of spread and guides selection of the best approach to surgical drainage. Acute mediastinitis is a true surgical emergency; treatment must be instituted immediately and aimed at correcting the primary problem, such as the esophageal perforation or oro-pharyngeal abscess, and debridement and drainage of the spreading infectious process within the mediastinum, neck, pleura, and other tissue planes. Antibiotics, fluid resusci-tation, and other supportive measures are also important. Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   73501/03/19   7:01 PM 736SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 19-32Etiologic factors in acute mediastinitisEsophageal perforation Iatrogenic  Balloon dilatation (for achalasia)  Bougienage (for peptic stricture)  Esophagoscopy  Sclerotherapy (for variceal bleeding) Spontaneous  Postemetic (Boerhaave’s syndrome) Straining during:  Elimination  Weight lifting Seizure  Pregnancy  Childbirth Ingestion of foreign bodies Trauma  Blunt  Penetrating Postsurgical  Infection  Anastomotic leak Erosion by cancerDeep sternotomy wound infectionOropharynx and neck infectionsLudwig’s anginaQuinsyRetropharyngeal abscessCellulitis and suppurative lymphadenitis of the neckInfections of the lung and pleuraSubphrenic abscessRib or vertebral osteomyelitisHematogenous or metastatic abscessReproduced with permission from Pearson FG, Cooper JD, Deslauriers J, et al: Thoracic Surgery, 2nd ed. New York, NY: Elsevier/Churchill Livingstone; 2002.Debridement may need to be repeated and other planes and cavities explored depending on the patient’s clinical status. Blood cell counts and serial CT scans may also be required. Persistent sepsis or collections on CT scan may require further radical surgical debridement.Chronic Mediastinitis. Sclerosing or fibrosing mediastinitis results from chronic mediastinal inflammation that originates in the lymph nodes, most frequently from granulomatous infec-tions such as histoplasmosis or tuberculosis. Chronic, low-grade inflammation leads to fibrosis and scarring, which can, in some patients, result in entrapment and compression of the low-pressure veins (including the SVC and innominate and azy-gos veins), the esophagus, and pulmonary arteries. There is no definitive treatment. Surgery is indicated only for diagnosis or in specific patients to relieve airway or esophageal obstruction or to achieve vascular reconstruction. Reports of palliative suc-cess with less invasive procedures (such as dilation and stenting of airways, the esophagus, or the SVC) are promising. In one series of 22 patients, ketoconazole was effective in controlling progression. In another series of 71 patients, 30% died from disease-associated complications during long-term follow-up. Chronic mediastinitis is similar to retroperitoneal fibrosis, scle-rosing cholangitis, and Riedel’s thyroiditis.PLEURA AND PLEURAL SPACEAnatomyEach hemithorax has a mesothelial lining that invaginates at the hilum of each lung and continues on to cover each lung. The portion lining the bony rib cage, mediastinum, and dia-phragm is called the parietal pleura, whereas the portion encas-ing the lung is known as the visceral pleura. Between these two surfaces is the potential pleural space, which is normally occupied by a thin layer of lubricating pleural fluid. A network of somatic, sympathetic, and parasympathetic fibers innervates the parietal pleura. Irritation of the parietal surface by inflam-mation, tumor invasion, trauma, and other processes can lead to a sensation of chest wall pain. The visceral pleura have no somatic innervation.171,172Pleural EffusionPleural effusion refers to any significant collection of fluid within the pleural space. Normally, between 5 and 10 L of fluid enters the pleural space each day by filtration through microves-sels supplying the parietal pleura (located mainly in the less dependent regions of the cavity). The net balance of pressures in these capillaries leads to fluid flow from the parietal pleural surface into the pleural space, and the net balance of forces in the pulmonary circulation leads to absorption through the vis-ceral pleura. Normally, 15 to 20 mL of pleural fluid is present at any given time. Any disturbance in these forces can lead to imbalance and accumulation of pleural fluid. Common patho-logic conditions in North America that lead to pleural effusion include congestive heart failure, bacterial pneumonia, malig-nancy, and pulmonary emboli (Table 19-33).173Access and Drainage of Pleural  Fluid CollectionsMost patients with pleural effusions of unknown cause should undergo thoracentesis with the following exceptions: effusions in the setting of congestive heart failure, hepatic failure or renal fail-ure, or small effusions associated with an improving pneumonia. If the clinical history suggests congestive heart failure as a cause, particularly in the setting of bilateral effusions, a trial of diuresis may be indicated (rather than thoracentesis). Up to 75% of effu-sions due to congestive heart failure resolve within 48 hours with diuresis alone. Similarly, thoracentesis can be avoided in patients with small effusions associated with resolving pneumonia. These patients typically present with cough, fever, leukocytosis, and uni-lateral infiltrate, and the effusion is usually a result of a reactive, parapneumonic process. If the effusion is small and the patient responds to antibiotics, a diagnostic thoracentesis may be unneces-sary. If the effusion is large and compromising respiratory efforts, or if the patient has a persistent white blood cell count despite improving signs of pneumonia, an empyema of the pleural space must be considered. In these patients, early and aggressive drainage with chest tubes is required, possibly with surgical intervention.Once the decision is made to access a pleural effusion, the next step is to determine if a sample of the fluid or complete drainage of the pleural space is desired. This step is influenced by the clinical history, the type and amount of fluid present, the Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   73601/03/19   7:01 PM
# Chunk 8917
CHAPTER 19737CHEST WALL, LUNG, MEDIASTINUM, AND PLEURATable 19-33Leading causes of pleural effusion in the United States, based on data from patients undergoing thoracentesisCAUSEANNUAL INCIDENCETRANSUDATEEXUDATECongestive heart failure500,000YesNoPneumonia300,000NoYesCancer200,000NoYesPulmonary embolus150,000SometimesSometimesViral disease100,000NoYesCoronary artery bypass surgery60,000NoYesCirrhosis with ascites50,000YesNoData from Light RW: Pleural diseases, 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2001.nature of the collection (such as free-flowing or loculated), the cause, and the likelihood of recurrence. For small, free-flowing effusions, an outpatient diagnostic and/or therapeutic thora-centesis with a relatively small-bore needle or catheter (14to 16-gauge) can be performed (Fig. 19-50). The appearance of the fluid is informative: clear straw-colored fluid is often transuda-tive; turbid or bloody fluid is often exudative.The site of entry for drainage of a pleural effusion or pneumothorax may be based on the CXR alone if the effu-sion is demonstrated to be free-flowing. For free-flowing effu-sions, a low approach at the eighth or ninth intercostal space in the posterior midclavicular line facilitates complete drainage.  If the effusion is loculated, CTor ultrasound-guided drainage may be indicated. If the goal is complete drainage, a small-bore pigtail catheter is inserted and connected to a closed drainage system with applied suction (typically –20 cm H2O). In general, the smallest-bore drainage catheter that will effec-tively drain the pleural space should be chosen. Smaller-diam-eter catheters significantly decrease the pain associated with the placement of chest tubes but are more prone to clogging and twisting.174,175 For clinical situations requiring biopsy or for potential interventions such as adhesiolysis or pleurodesis, minimally invasive surgery may be indicated, using a VATS approach.Figure 19-50. Techniques for aspiration and drainage of a pleural effusion. A. Needle aspiration. With careful appraisal of the x-ray findings, the best interspace is selected, and fluid is aspirated with a needle and syringe. Large volumes of fluid can be removed with a little patience and a large-bore needle. B. Chest tube insertion. After careful skin preparation, draping, and administration of local anesthesia, a short skin incision is made over the correct interspace. The incision is deepened into the intercostal muscles, and the pleura is penetrated (usually with a clamp). When any doubt exists about the status of the pleural space at the site of puncture, the wound is enlarged bluntly to admit a finger, which can be swept around the immediately adjacent pleural space to assess the situation and break down any adhesions. The tube is inserted, with the tip directed toward the optimal position suggested by the chest X-rays. In general, a high anterior tube is best for air (pneumothorax), and a low posterior tube is best for fluid. A 28F to 32F tube is adequate for most situations. A 36F tube is preferred for hemothorax or for a viscous empyema. Many surgeons prefer a very small tube (16F to 20F) for drainage of simple pneumothorax. C. The tube is connected to a water-seal drainage system. Suction is added, if necessary, to expand the lung; it usually will be required in a patient with a substantial air leak (bronchopleural fistula).Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   73701/03/19   7:01 PM 738SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 19-34Differential diagnosis of pleural effusions	I.	Transudative pleural effusions	A.	Congestive heart failure	B.	Cirrhosis	C.	Nephrotic syndrome	D.	Superior vena caval obstruction	E.	Fontan procedure	F.	Urinothorax	G.	Peritoneal dialysis	H.	Glomerulonephritis	I.	Myxedema	J.	Cerebrospinal fluid leaks to pleura	K.	Hypoalbuminemia	L.	Pulmonary emboli	M.	Sarcoidosis	II.	Exudative pleural effusions	A.	Neoplastic diseases	1.	Metastatic disease	2.	Mesothelioma	3.	Body cavity lymphoma	4.	Pyothorax-associated lymphoma	B.	Infectious diseases	1.	Tuberculosis	2.	Other bacterial infections	3.	Fungal infections	4.	Parasitic infections	5.	Viral infections	C.	Pulmonary embolization	D.	Gastrointestinal disease	1.	Pancreatic disease	2.	Subphrenic abscess	3.	Intrahepatic abscess	4.	Intrasplenic abscess	5.	Esophageal perforation	6.	After abdominal surgery	7.	Diaphragmatic hernia	8.	Endoscopic variceal sclerosis	9.	After liver transplantation	E.	Heart diseases	1.	After coronary artery bypass graft surgery	2.	Post-cardiac injury (Dressler’s) syndrome	3.	Pericardial disease	F.	Obstetric and gynecologic diseases	1.	Ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome	2.	Fetal pleural effusion	3.	Postpartum pleural effusion	4.	Megis’ syndrome	5.	Endometriosis	G.	Collagen vascular diseases	1.	Rheumatoid pleuritis	2.	Systemic lupus erythematosus	3.	Drug-induced lupus	4.	Immunoblastic lymphadenopathy	5.	Sjögren’s syndrome	6.	Familial Mediterranean fever	7.	Churg-Strauss syndrome	8.	Wegener’s granulomatosis	H.	Drug-induced pleural disease	1.	Nitrofurantoin	2.	Dantrolene	3.	Methysergide	4.	Ergot alkaloids	5.	Amiodarone	6.	Interleukin-2	7.	Procarbazine	8.	Methotrexate	9.	Clozapine	I.	Miscellaneous diseases and conditions	1.	Asbestos exposure	2.	After lung transplantation	3.	After bone marrow transplantation	4.	Yellow nail syndrome	5.	Sarcoidosis	6.	Uremia	7.	Trapped lung	8.	Therapeutic radiation exposure	9.	Drowning	10.	Amyloidosis	11.	Milk of calcium pleural effusion	12.	Electrical burns	13.	Extramedullary hematopoiesis	14.	Rupture of mediastinal cyst	15.	Acute respiratory distress syndrome	16.	Whipple’s disease	17.	Iatrogenic pleural effusions	J.	Hemothorax	K.	ChylothoraxReproduced with permission from Light RW: Pleural diseases, 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2007.Complications of Pleural Drainage. The most common complications of invasive pleural procedures are inadvertent injury to adjacent organs, including lung, with air leakage and pneumothorax; subdiaphragmatic entry and damage to the liver, spleen, or other intra-abdominal viscera; intercostal ves-sel injury with subsequent bleeding or larger vessel injury; and even cardiac puncture. Sometimes, bleeding may be the result of an underlying coagulopathy or anticoagulant therapy. Other technical complications include loss of a catheter, guidewire, or fragment in the pleural space and infections. Occasionally, rapid drainage of a large effusion can be followed by shortness of breath, clinical instability, and a phenomenon referred to as postexpansion pulmonary edema. For this reason, it is recom-mended to drain only up to 1500 mL initially. Most complica-tions can be avoided by consulting with a clinician experienced in pleural drainage techniques.Pleural Fluid Analysis. Pleural fluid collections are generally classified as transudates and exudates (Table 19-34). Transu-dates are protein-poor ultrafiltrates of plasma that result from alterations in the systemic hydrostatic pressures or colloid Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   73801/03/19   7:01 PM
# Chunk 8918
CHAPTER 19739CHEST WALL, LUNG, MEDIASTINUM, AND PLEURAosmotic pressures (for example, with congestive heart failure or cirrhosis). On gross visual inspection, a transudative effusion is generally clear or straw-colored. Exudates are protein-rich pleural fluid collections that generally result from inflamma-tion or pleural invasion by tumor. Grossly, they are often turbid, bloody, or purulent. Absent trauma, grossly bloody effusions are frequently malignant, but they may also occur in the setting of a pulmonary embolism or pneumonia.Transudates and exudates can be differentiated using Light’s criteria. An effusion is exudative if the pleural fluid-to-serum ratio of protein is greater than 0.5 and the LDH ratio is greater than 0.6 or the absolute pleural LDH level is greater than two-thirds of the normal upper limit for serum. If criteria suggest a transudate, a careful evaluation for congestive heart failure, cirrhosis, or conditions associated with transudates is under-taken. If criteria suggest an exudate, further diagnostic studies may be helpful. If total and differential cell counts reveal a pre-dominance of neutrophils (>50% of cells), the effusion is likely associated with an acute inflammatory process (such as a para-pneumonic effusion or empyema, pulmonary embolus, or pan-creatitis). A predominance of mononuclear cells suggests a more chronic inflammatory process (such as cancer or tuberculosis). Gram stains and cultures should be obtained if possible, with inoculation into culture bottles at the bedside. Pleural fluid glu-cose levels are frequently decreased (<60 mg/dL) with complex parapneumonic effusions or malignant effusions. It is important to note that while the distinction between transudate and exudate can be diagnostically useful, the ultimate decision for prolonged chest tube drainage or surgery depends on the effusion size and adequacy of drainage, presence of loculations, adequacy of lung reexpansion after drainage, and recurrence after initial drainage.A pleural effusion occurring in association with pleuritic chest pain, hemoptysis, or dyspnea out of proportion to the size of the effusion should raise concern for pulmonary embolism. These effusions may be transudative, but if an associated infarct near the pleural surface occurs, an exudate may be seen. If a pulmonary embolism is suspected in a postoperative patient, most clinicians would obtain a spiral CT scan. Alternatively, duplex ultrasonography of the lower extremities may yield a diagnosis of deep vein thrombosis, thereby indicating antico-agulant therapy and precluding the need for a specific diagnosis of pulmonary embolism. In some patients, a blood test for levels of d-dimer may be helpful; if a sensitive d-dimer blood test is negative, pulmonary embolism may be ruled out.Malignant Pleural EffusionMalignant pleural effusions may occur in association with a number of different malignancies, most commonly lung can-cer, breast cancer, and lymphomas, depending on the patient’s age and gender (Tables 19-35 and 19-36).176 Cytologic testing should be done on exudative effusions to rule out an associated malignancy; accuracy is 70% when associated with adenocarci-nomas, but it is less sensitive for mesotheliomas (<10%), squa-mous cell carcinomas (20%), or lymphomas (25% to 50%). If the diagnosis remains uncertain after drainage and fluid analy-sis, thoracoscopy and direct biopsies are indicated.177,178 Malig-nant effusions are exudative and often tinged with blood. An effusion in the setting of a malignancy means a more advanced stage; mean survival ranges from 3 to 11 months, depending on the primary tumor location.Occasionally, effusions associated with a bronchogenic NSCLC are benign, and surgical resection may still be indicated.Table 19-35Primary organ site or neoplasm type in male patients with malignant pleural effusionsPRIMARY SITE OR  TUMOR TYPENO. OF MALE PATIENTSPERCENTAGE OF MALE PATIENTSLung14049.1Lymphoma/leukemia6021.1Gastrointestinal tract207.0Genitourinary tract176.0Melanoma41.4Miscellaneous less common tumors103.5Primary site unknown3110.9Total285100.0Reproduced with permission from Johnston WW. The malignant pleural effusion: a review of cytopathologic diagnoses of 584 specimens from 472 consecutive patients, Cancer. 1985 Aug 15;56(4):905-909.Table 19-36Primary organ site or neoplasm type in female patients with malignant pleural effusionsPRIMARY SITE OR  TUMOR TYPENO. OF FEMALE PATIENTSPERCENTAGE OF FEMALE PATIENTSBreast7037.4Female genital tract3820.3Lung2815.0Lymphoma148.0Gastrointestinal tract84.3Melanoma63.2Urinary tract21.1Miscellaneous less common tumors31.6Primary site unknown179.1Total187100.0Reproduced with permission from Johnston WW. The malignant pleural effusion: a review of cytopathologic diagnoses of 584 specimens from 472 consecutive patients, Cancer. 1985 Aug 15;56(4):905-909.Effusion size and degree of associated dyspnea influence management. Symptomatic, moderate to large effusions should be drained by tunneled indwelling pleural catheter, tube thora-costomy (chest tube or pigtail catheter) with subsequent instilla-tion of a sclerosing agent, or VATS with talc instillation. Management is based on patient preference, degree of known or anticipated lung reexpansion, and patient tolerance for operative intervention. Lung entrapment by tumor or adhesions limits reexpansion and generally predicts a poor result with pleurode-sis; it is the primary indication for placement of indwelling pleu-ral catheters. Patient preference is also considered, as is their life expectancy. Tunneled indwelling pleural catheters have dramati-cally changed the management of end-stage cancer treatment Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   73901/03/19   7:01 PM 740SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 19-37Pathogenesis of empyemaContamination from a source contiguous to the pleural  space (50%–60%) Lung Mediastinum Deep cervical area Chest wall and spine Subphrenic areaDirect inoculation of the pleural space (30%–40%) Minor thoracic interventions Postoperative infections Penetrating chest injuriesHematogenous infection of the pleural space from a  distant site (<1%)Reproduced with permission from Pearson FG, Cooper JD, Deslauriers J, et al: Thoracic Surgery, 2nd ed. New York, NY: Elsevier/Churchill Livingstone; 2002.Outpatient referral for management of MPEPlacement ofindwelling pleuralcatheterLoculatedfluid/trapped lungFree-flowing with fulllung expansion Excellent performancestatus/long life expectancyVATS pleurodesisPoor performancestatus/short life expectancyPlacement of indwellingpleural catheterDecubitus films and/or CT scan  Figure 19-51. Treatment decision algorithm for the management of malignant pleural effusion (MPE).  CT = computed tomography; VATS = video-assisted tho-racic surgery.because they substantially shorten the amount of time patients spend in the hospital during their final weeks of life.179  If the lung is expected to fully expand and the patient has a longer life expectancy (e.g., malignant effusions in the setting of breast cancer), drainage with sclerosis is the preferred option. The choice of sclerosant includes mechanical pleurodesis or pleurectomy, talc, bleomycin, or doxycycline. Success rates range from 60% to 90% and are highest with talc. Typically, talc is administered as an aerosolized powder during video-assisted thoracoscopy, whereas doxycycline or a talc slurry is infused at the bedside through a previously placed pigtail catheter or larger bore chest tube. Figure 19-51 presents a decision algorithm for the management of malignant pleural effusion.EmpyemaThoracic empyema is defined by a purulent pleural effusion. Patients of all ages can develop empyema, but the frequency is increased in older or debilitated patients. Common associ-ated conditions include a pneumonic process in patients with pulmonary disorders and neoplasms, cardiac problems, diabe-tes mellitus, drug and alcohol abuse, neurologic impairments, postthoracotomy problems, and immunologic impairments. The mortality of empyema frequently depends on the degree of severity of the comorbidity; it may range from as low as 1% to over 40% in immunocompromised patients.Pathophysiology. The most common causes are parapneu-monic, but postsurgical, posttraumatic, and GI-associated (e.g., subphrenic or hepatic abscess, perforation of esophagus or other viscus) empyema is also common (Table 19-37). The spectrum of organisms involved in pneumonic processes that progress to empyema is changing. Pneumococci and staphylococci continue to be the most common, but gram-negative aerobic bacteria and anaerobes are becoming more prevalent. Cases involving myco-bacteria or fungi are rare. Multiple organisms may be found in up to 50% of patients. Cultures may be sterile, however, if antibiotics were initiated before the culture or if the culture pro-cess was not efficient. It is also fairly common for Pneumococ-cus to grow in blood cultures but not to grow in the pleural fluid cultures. The choice of antibiotics, therefore, is guided 11by the clinical scenario and not just the organisms found on culture. Broad-spectrum coverage may be required even when cultures do not grow out an organism or if a single organism is grown when the clinical picture is more consistent with a mul-tiorganism process. For example, a polymicrobial gram stain, particularly including yeast, is strongly suggestive of esopha-geal perforation. Common gram-negative organisms include Escherichia coli, Klebsiella, Pseudomonas, and Enterobacte-riaceae. Anaerobic organisms may be fastidious and difficult to document by culture and are associated with periodontal dis-eases (especially Streptococcus species), aspiration syndromes, alcoholism, general anesthesia, drug abuse, or other functional associations with gastroesophageal reflux.Organisms gain entry into the pleural cavity through con-tiguous spread from pneumonia, lung abscess, liver abscess, or another, adjacent infectious processes. Organisms may also enter the pleural cavity by direct contamination from thora-centesis, thoracic surgical procedures, esophageal injuries,  Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   74001/03/19   7:01 PM
# Chunk 8919
CHAPTER 19741CHEST WALL, LUNG, MEDIASTINUM, AND PLEURAor trauma. As organisms enter the pleural space, an influx of polymorphonuclear cells and fluid occurs, with subsequent release of inflammatory mediators and toxic oxygen radi-cals. These mechanisms lead to variable degrees of endothe-lial injury and capillary instability. This process overwhelms the normal pleural lymphatic drainage. This early effusion is watery and free-flowing in the pleural cavity. Thoracentesis at this stage yields fluid with a pH typically above 7.3, a glucose level greater than 60 mg/dL, and a low LDH level (<500 U/L). At this stage, the decision to use antibiotics alone or perform a repeat thoracentesis, chest tube drainage, thoracoscopy, or open thoracotomy depends on the amount of pleural fluid, its consis-tency, the clinical status of the patient, the degree of expansion of the lung after drainage, and the presence of loculated fluid in the pleural space (vs. free-flowing purulent fluid). Early in the parapneumonic process, when the purulent fluid is relatively thin, complete drainage with simple large-bore thoracentesis is possible. If complete lung expansion is obtained and the pneu-monic process is responding to antibiotics, no further drainage may be necessary. Pleural fluid with a pH lower than 7.2 and with a glucose level of less than 40 mg/dL means that a more aggressive approach to drainage should be pursued.The pleural fluid may become thick and loculated over the course of hours to days and may be associated with fibrinous adhesions (the fibrinopurulent stage). At this stage, chest tube insertion with closed-system drainage or drainage with thora-coscopy may be necessary to remove the fluid and adhesions and facilitate complete lung expansion.180 Further progression of the inflammatory process leads to the formation of a pleu-ral peel, which may be flimsy and easy to remove early on. However, as the process progresses, a thick pleural rind may develop, leaving a trapped lung; complete lung decortication by either thoracoscopy or thoracotomy would then be necessary.The use of intrapleural fibrinolytic therapy for manage-ment of empyema has been investigated in several large pro-spective trials. Intrapleural infusion of tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA) alone did not improve outcomes, whereas combined intrapleural t-PA and DNase was associated with a reduction in hospital stay of nearly 7 days, 77% fewer refer-rals for surgical intervention at 3 months, and more than double the reduction in the infected pleural fluid collection by CXR imaging.181 In this trial, the medications were given twice daily by intrapleural injection; the dose was 5 mg for the DNase and 10 mg for t-PA. The chest drain was clamped for 1 hour after injection and released. This study suggests that the combination of fibrinolysis (t-PA) and cleavage of uncoiled DNA by DNase reduces fluid viscosity and facilitates pleural clearance.Management. If there is a residual space, persistent pleural infection is likely to occur. A persistent pleural space may be secondary to contracted, but intact, underlying lung; or it may be secondary to surgical lung resection. If the space is small and well drained by a chest tube, a conservative approach may be possible. This requires leaving the chest tubes in place and attached to closed-system drainage until symphysis of the vis-ceral and parietal surfaces takes place. At this point, the chest tubes can be removed from suction; if the residual pleural space remains stable, the tubes can be cut and advanced out of the chest over the course of several weeks. If the patient is stable, tube removal can frequently be done in the outpatient setting, guided by the degree of drainage and the size of the residual space visualized on serial CT scans. Larger spaces may require open thoracotomy and decortication in an attempt to reexpand the lung to fill this residual space. If reexpansion has failed or appears too high risk, then open drainage, rib resection, and prolonged packing may be required, with delayed closure with muscle flaps or thoracoplasty.182 Most chronic pleural space problems can be avoided by early specialized thoracic surgi-cal consultation and complete drainage of empyema, allowing space obliteration by the reinflated lung.ChylothoraxChylothorax develops most commonly after surgical trauma to the thoracic duct or a major branch, but may be also associ-ated with a number of other conditions (Table 19-38).183 It is generally unilateral; for example, it may occur after dissection of the distal esophagus where the duct lies in close proximity to the esophagus as it enters the right chest from its origin in the Table 19-38Etiology of chylothoraxCongenital Atresia of thoracic duct Thoracic duct-pleural space fistula Birth traumaTraumatic and/or iatrogenic Blunt injury Penetrating injury Surgery  Cervical   Excision of lymph nodes   Radical neck dissection  Thoracic   Correction of patent ductus arteriosus   Correction of coarctation of the aorta   Vascular procedure involving the origin of the left subclavian artery   Esophagectomy   Sympathectomy   Resection of thoracic aneurysm   Resection of mediastinal tumors   Left pneumonectomy  Abdominal   Sympathectomy   Radical lymph node dissection  Diagnostic procedures   Translumbar arteriography   Subclavian vein catheterization   Left-sided heart catheterizationNeoplasmsInfections Tuberculous lymphadenitis Nonspecific mediastinitis Ascending lymphangitis FilariasisMiscellaneous Venous thrombosis  Left subclavian-jugular vein  Superior vena cava Pulmonary lymphangiomatosisReproduced with permission from Sabiston DC, Spencer FC: Surgery of the Chest, 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 1995.Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   74101/03/19   7:01 PM 742SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIabdomen at the cisterna chyli (Fig. 19-52). If the mediastinal pleura are disrupted on both sides, bilateral chylothoraces may occur. Left-sided chylothoraces may develop after a left-sided neck dissection, especially in the region of the confluence of the subclavian and internal jugular veins. Chylothorax may also follow nonsurgical trauma, including penetrating or blunt inju-ries to the chest or neck area, central line placements, and other surgical misadventures. It may be seen in association with a variety of benign and malignant diseases that generally involve the lymphatic system of the mediastinum or neck.Pathophysiology. Most commonly, the thoracic duct origi-nates in the abdomen from the cisterna chyli, which is located in the midline, near the level of the second lumbar vertebra. From this origin, the thoracic duct ascends into the chest through the aortic hiatus at the level of T10 to T12, and courses just to the right of the aorta (see Fig. 19-52). As the thoracic duct courses cephalad above the diaphragm, it most commonly remains in the right chest, lying just behind the esophagus, between the aorta and azygos vein. The duct continues superiorly, lying just to the right of the vertebral column. Then, at the fourth thoracic ver-tebra, it crosses behind the aorta and the aortic arch into the left posterior mediastinum and travels superiorly, staying near the esophagus and mediastinal pleura as it exits the thoracic inlet. As it exits the thoracic inlet, it passes to the left, just behind the carotid sheath and anterior to the inferior thyroid and vertebral bodies. Just medial to the anterior scalene muscle, it courses inferiorly and drains into the union of the internal jugular and subclavian veins. Given the extreme variability in the main duct and its branches, accumulation of chyle in the chest or flow from penetrating wounds may be seen after a variety of trau-matic and medical conditions.184The main function of the duct is to transport fat absorbed from the digestive system along with variable amounts of protein and lymphatic material (Table 19-39). Given the high volume of chyle that flows through the thoracic duct, signifi-cant injuries can cause leaks in excess of 2 L per day; if left untreated, protein, lymphocyte, and volume depletion can lead to serious metabolic effects and death. Thoracentesis is usually grossly suggestive, revealing milky, nonpurulent pleural fluid. However, if the patient is taking nothing by mouth, the pleural fluid may not be grossly abnormal. Laboratory analysis of the pleural fluid shows the presence of chylomicrons, a high lym-phocyte count and high triglyceride levels. If the triglyceride level is greater than 110 mg/100 mL, a chylothorax is almost certainly present (a 99% accuracy rate). If the triglyceride level is less than 50 mg/mL, there is only a 5% chance of chylothorax. In many clinical situations, the accumulation of chyle may be slow because of minimal digestive fat flowing through the gas-trointestinal tract after major trauma or surgery, so the diagnosis may be more difficult to establish.Management. The treatment plan for any chylothorax depends on its cause, the amount of drainage, and the patient’s clinical status (Fig. 19-53). In general, most patients are treated with a short period of chest tube drainage, nothing by mouth (NPO) orders, total parenteral nutrition (TPN), and observation. In cen-ters with interventional radiology expertise, thoracic duct embo-lization as soon as possible after diagnosis should be considered. Thoracic d.Cisterna chyliFigure 19-52. Normal thoracic duct anatomy. The esophagus comes into close proximity with the thoracic duct as it enters the chest from its origin in the abdomen at the cisterna chyli.Table 19-39Composition of chyleCOMPONENTAMOUNT (PER 100 ML)Total fat0.4–5 g Total cholesterol65–220 mgTotal protein2.21–5.9 g Albumin1.1–4.1 g Globulin1.1–3.1 g Fibrinogen16–24 gSugars48–200 gElectrolytesSimilar to levels in plasmaCellular elements  Lymphocytes400–6800/mm3 Erythrocytes50–600/mm3Antithrombin globulin>25% of plasma concentrationProthrombin>25% of plasma concentrationFibrinogen>25% of plasma concentrationReproduced with permission from Miller JI: Diagnosis and management of chylothorax, Chest Surg Clin N Am. 1996 Feb;6(1):139-148.Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   74201/03/19   7:02 PM
# Chunk 8920
CHAPTER 19743CHEST WALL, LUNG, MEDIASTINUM, AND PLEURARadiationtherapyMedicallyunstablePleuralperitonealshuntDrainagepersists(Nonmalignant)Drainage persists(>500 mL/d)MalignantchylothoraxThoracentesisConfirm diagnosisMedicallystableThoracotomyChest tubeConservative management NPOChest tube to suctionCentral hyperalimentationWait 2 weeks*Drainage decrease(<250 mL/d)Continue1 weekThoracotomyDuct ligationMass ligationDecorticationPleurectomyDrainagestopsRemovechest tube Figure 19-53. Algorithm for the management of chylothorax. *If high output persists (>50 mL/d), early surgical ligation of the thoracic duct may be considered. NPO = nothing by mouth.Chest cavity drainage must be adequate to allow complete lung reexpansion. Somatostatin has been advocated by some authors, with variable results. If significant chyle drainage (>500 mL per day in an adult, >100 mL in an infant) continues despite TPN and good lung expansion, early surgical duct ligation or embo-lization is recommended (within 4–7 days following diagnosis). Ligation can be approached best by right thoracotomy, and in some experienced centers, by right thoracoscopy. Chylothoraces due to malignant conditions often respond to radiation and/or  chemotherapy and less commonly require surgical ligation. Significant nutritional and immunologic depletion results from untreated chylothorax; associated mortality is in excess of 50%. With early recognition and aggressive medical management as well as early surgical ligation or embolization for persistent leaks, the mortality rate of chylothorax is now less than 10%.Tumors of the PleuraMalignant mesothelioma is the most common type of primary tumor of the pleura, with approximately 3000 cases per year in the United States. Other, less common tumors include benign and malignant fibrous tumors of the pleura, lipomas, and cysts.Malignant Mesothelioma. The only known risk factor for mesothelioma is exposure to asbestos, identified in over 50% of cases. Exposure is typically work-related in industries using asbestos in the manufacturing process, such as shipbuilding and brake pad linings. The risk extends to family members who are Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   74301/03/19   7:02 PM 744SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIexposed to the dust of the clothing or to the work environment. Asbestos exposure and smoking synergistically increase the risk for lung cancer, but smoking does not increase risk for malig-nant mesotheliomas. Male predominance is 2:1, and it occurs most commonly after the age of 40.Risk of developing mesothelioma after asbestos exposure differs depending on the physical characteristics of the asbestos and similar fibers (either serpentine or amphibole). The serpen-tine fibers are large and curly and are generally not able to travel beyond larger airways. However, the narrow, straight amphibole fibers, in particular the crocidolite fibers, may navigate distally into the pulmonary parenchyma and are most clearly associated with mesotheliomas. Like many carcinogens, the latency period between asbestos exposure and the development of mesothe-lioma is at least 20 years. The tumor generally is multicentric, with multiple pleural-based nodules coalescing to form sheets of tumor. This process initially involves the parietal pleura, gener-ally with early spread to the visceral surfaces and with a variable degree of invasion of surrounding structures. Autopsy studies have shown that most patients have distant metastases, but the natural history of the disease in untreated patients culminates in death due to local extension and effective strangulation of the lung.Clinical Presentation Most patients present with dyspnea and chest pain. Over 90% have a pleural effusion, but thora-centesis is diagnostic in less than 10% of patients. Frequently, a thoracoscopy or open pleural biopsy with special stains is required to differentiate mesotheliomas from adenocarcinomas (Table 19-40). Epithelial subtypes are associated with a more favorable prognosis, and long-term survival may be seen in rare patients with no treatment. Sarcomatous and mixed tumors share a more aggressive course.Management The treatment of malignant mesotheliomas remains controversial. Treatment options include supportive care only, surgical resection, and multimodality approaches (using a combination of surgery, chemotherapy, and radia-tion therapy).186 Surgical approaches range from extrapleural pneumonectomy (removal of the lung, entire parietal pleural, ipsilateral pericardium, and hemidiaphragm with patch recon-struction), pleurectomy and decortication (removal of the vis-ceral and parietal pleura only), and palliative procedures such as talc pleurodesis and insertion of long-term tunneled indwelling pleural catheters.Table 19-40Differentiation of mesothelioma from adenocarcinoma MESOTHELIOMAADENOCARCINOMAImmunohistochemical results   Carcinoembryonic antigenNegativePositive VimentinPositiveNegative Low molecular weight cytokeratinsPositiveNegativeElectron microscopic featuresLong, sinuous villiShort, straight villi with fuzzy glycocalyxFibrous Tumors of the Pleura. Fibrous tumors of the pleura are unrelated to asbestos exposure or malignant mesotheliomas. They generally occur as a single pedunculated mass arising from the visceral pleura but can occasionally arise from the parietal pleura. They can grow to be quite large, with most ranging from 5 to 10 cm and 100 to 400 g in size by the time they are dis-covered. Architecturally, the most common microscopic feature is the “patternless pattern.” This is characterized by randomly situated areas of hypercellularity, containing spindle cells with bland, vesicular, ovoidal nuclei and scarce cytoplasm, and hypo-cellularity, with fibrous connective tissue, hemorrhage, myxoid, or necrosis. They can also have an hemangiopericytoma-like appearance. The neoplastic cells are immunoreactive for CD34 and CD99 but negative for cytokeratins and desmin. Immuno-reactivity for Bcl-2 is variably positive.187They are frequently discovered incidentally on routine CXRs, without an associated pleural effusion. They occur with equal frequency in males and females and are most common in the sixth to seventh decade of life. Fibrous tumors of the pleura may be benign or malignant.188 Symptoms such as cough, chest pain, and dyspnea occur in 30% to 40% of patients but are found in 75% of patients with malignant tumors. Malignant tumors are differentiated from benign tumors based on high cellularity, more than four mitotic figures per 10 high-power fields, nuclear pleomorphism, tumor necrosis, and hemorrhage. They are more likely to arise from the parietal pleura of the chest wall, dia-phragm, or mediastinum, or in the fissures or invaginating into the lung parenchyma. Hypoglycemia, associated pleural effu-sion, and hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy (clubbed digits, long bone ossifying periostitis, and arthritis) are associ-ated with these lesions in approximately 25% of patients. Less common are fever and hemoptysis.Symptoms resolve with surgical resection. Given the well-circumscribed and often pedunculated nature of fibrous tumors of the pleura, all benign lesions and approximately 50% of malignant lesions are cured by complete surgical resection.188 Incompletely resected malignant tumors may recur locally or metastasize, and more than 50% of patients with malignant tumors will die from the disease; frequently, they are fatal within 2 to 5 years.REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Cusimano RJ, Pearson FG. Anatomy, physiology, and embry-ology of the upper airway. In: Pearson FG, Cooper JD, Deslauriers J, et al, eds. Thoracic Surgery. 2nd ed. New York: Churchill Livingstone; 2002:215.	2.	Grillo HC. Surgical treatment of postintubation tracheal inju-ries. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1979;78(6):860-875.	3.	Nouraei SA, Ma E, Patel A, et al. Estimating the population incidence of adult post-intubation laryngotracheal stenosis. Clin Otolaryngol. 2007;32(5):411-412.	4.	Couraud L, Ballester MJ, Delaisement C. Acquired tracheo-esophageal fistula and its management. Semin Thorac Cardio-vasc Surg. 1996;8(4):392-399.	5.	Mathisen DJ, Grillo HC, Wain JC, Hilgenberg AD. Manage-ment of acquired nonmalignant tracheoesophageal fistula. Ann Thorac Surg. 1991;52(4):759-765.	6.	Bhattacharyya N. Contemporary staging and prognosis for primary tracheal malignancies: a population-based analysis. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2004;131:639-642.Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   74401/03/19   7:02 PM
# Chunk 8921
CHAPTER 19747CHEST WALL, LUNG, MEDIASTINUM, AND PLEURAthoracic paravertebral and epidural infusion of 0.2% ropi-vacaine after lung resection surgery. Eur J Anaesthesiol. 2006;23(12):999-1004.	86.	Inderbitzi RG, Leiser A, Furrer M, Althaus U. Three years’ experience in video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) for spontaneous pneumothorax. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1994;107(6):1410-1415.	87.	Warner BW, Bailey WW, Shipley RT. Value of computed tomography of the lung in the management of primary spon-taneous pneumothorax. Am J Surg. 1991;162(1):39-42.	88.	Mansharamani N, Balachandran D, Delaney D, Zibrak JD, Silvestri RC, Koziel H. Lung abscess in adults: clinical com-parison of immunocompromised to non-immunocompromised patients. Respir Med. 2002;96(3):178-185.	89.	Laheij RJ, Sturkenboom MC, Hassing RJ, Dieleman J, Stricker BH, Jansen JB. Risk of community-acquired pneu-monia and use of gastric acid-suppressive drugs. JAMA. 2004;292(16):1955-1960.	90.	Conant EF, Wechsler RJ. Actinomycosis and nocardiosis of the lung. J Thorac Imaging. 1992;7(4):75-84.	91.	Thomson RM, Armstrong JG, Looke DF. Gastroesopha-geal reflux disease, acid suppression, and Mycobacterium avium complex pulmonary disease. Chest. 2007;131(4): 1166-1172.	92.	Koh WJ, Lee JH, Kwon YS, et al. Prevalence of gastroesopha-geal reflux disease in patients with nontuberculous mycobac-terial lung disease. Chest. 2007;131(6):1825-1830.	93.	Angrill J, Agusti C, de Celis R, et al. Bacterial colonisation in patients with bronchiectasis: microbiological pattern and risk factors. Thorax. 2002;57(1):15-19.	94.	Barker AF. Bronchiectasis. N Engl J Med. 2002;346(18):1383-1393.	95.	Ilowite J, Spiegler P, Chawla S. Bronchiectasis: new find-ings in the pathogenesis and treatment of this disease. Curr Opin Infect Dis. 2008;21(2):163-167.	96.	Xu L, Zhang F, Du S, et al. Inhaled antibiotics in non-cystic  fibrosis bronchiectasis: a meta-analysis. Pharmazie. 2016;71:491-498.	97.	Steinfort DP, Steinfort C. Effect of long-term nebulized colis-tin on lung function and quality of life in patients with chronic bronchial sepsis. Intern Med J. 2007;37(7):495-498.	98.	Kellett F, Robert NM. Nebulised 7% hypertonic saline improves lung function and quality of life in bronchiectasis. Respir Med. 2011;105:1831-1835.	99.	Frieden TR, Sterling TR, Munsiff SS, Watt CJ, Dye C. Tuber-culosis. Lancet. 2003;362(9387):887-899.	100.	Haque AK. The pathology and pathophysiology of mycobac-teria infections. J Thorac Imaging. 1990;5:8-16.	101.	Iseman MD. Treatment of multidrug-resistant tuberculosis.  N Engl J Med. 1993;329(19):784-791.	102.	Kubak BM. Fungal infection in lung transplantation. Transpl Infect Dis. 2002;4(suppl 3):24-31.	103.	Wheat LJ, Goldman M, Sarosi G. State-of-the-art review of pulmonary fungal infections. Semin Respir Infect. 2002;17(2):158-181.	104.	Marr KA, Patterson T, Denning D. Aspergillosis. Pathogen-esis, clinical manifestations, and therapy. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 2002;16(4):875-894.	105.	Chun JY, Belli AM. Immediate and long-term outcomes of bronchial and non-bronchial systemic artery emboli-sation for the management of haemoptysis. Eur Radiol. 2010;20:558-565.	106.	Corr P. Management of severe hemoptysis from pulmonary aspergilloma using endovascular embolization. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol. 2006;29(5):807-810.	107.	Pappas PG, Kauffman CA, Andes DR, et al. Clinical practice guideline for the management of candidiasis: 2016 update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis. 2016;62:e1-50.	108.	Ostrosky-Zeichner L, Rex JH, Bennett J, Kullberg BJ. Deeply invasive candidiasis. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 2002;16(4):821-835.	109.	Gonzalez CE, Rinaldi MG, Sugar AM. Zygomycosis. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 2002;16(4):895-914.	110.	Wheat LJ, Kauffman CA. Histoplasmosis. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 2003;17(1):1-19.	111.	Hage CA, Wheat LJ, Loyd J, Allen SD, Blue D, Knox KS. Pulmonary histoplasmosis. Semin Respir Crit Care Med. 2008;29(2):151-165.	112.	Assi MA, Sandid MS, Baddour LM, Roberts GD, Walker RC.  Systemic histoplasmosis: a 15-year retrospective insti-tutional review of 111 patients. Medicine (Baltimore). 2007;86(3):162-169.	113.	Spinello IM, Munoz A, Johnson RH. Pulmonary coccidioido-mycosis. Semin Respir Crit Care Med. 2008;29(2):166-173.	114.	Pappas PG. Blastomycosis. Semin Respir Crit Care Med. 2004;25(2):113-121.	115.	Bradsher RW, Chapman SW, Pappas PG. Blastomycosis. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 2003;17(1):21-40.	116.	Corder R. Hemoptysis. Emerg Med Clin North Am. 2003;21(2):421-435.	117.	Conlan AA. Massive hemoptysis—diagnostic and therapeutic implications. Surg Annu. 1985;17:337-354.	118.	Cahill BC, Ingbar DH. Massive hemoptysis. Assessment and management. Clin Chest Med. 1994;15(1):147-167.	119.	Noe GD, Jaffe SM, Molan MP. CT and CT angiography in massive haemoptysis with emphasis on pre-embolization assessment. Clin Radiol. 2011;66:869-875.	120.	Poyanli A, Acunas B, Rozanes I, et al. Endovascular therapy in the management of moderate and massive haemoptysis.  Br J Radiol. 2007;80:331-336.	121.	Conlan AA, Hurwitz SS. Management of massive haemoptysis with the rigid bronchoscope and cold saline lavage. Thorax. 1980;35(12):901-904.	122.	Russi EW, Bloch KE, Weder W. Lung volume reduction sur-gery: what can we learn from the National Emphysema Treat-ment Trial? Eur Respir J. 2003;22(4):571-573.	123.	Bhorade SM, Vigneswaran W, McCabe MA, Garrity ER. Lib-eralization of donor criteria may expand the donor pool with-out adverse consequence in lung transplantation. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2000;19(12):1199-1204.	124.	Pierre AF, Sekine Y, Hutcheon MA, Waddell TK, Keshavjee SH. Marginal donor lungs: a reassessment. J Thorac Cardio-vasc Surg. 2002;123(3):421-427; discussion 427.	125.	Palmer SM, Miralles AP, Howell DN, Brazer SR, Tapson VF,  Davis RD. Gastroesophageal reflux as a reversible cause of allograft dysfunction after lung transplantation. Chest. 2000;118(4):1214-1217.	126.	Dahlberg PS, Prekker ME, Hertz M, Thompson DJ, Park SJ. Recent trends in lung transplantation: the University of Min-nesota experience. Clin Transpl. 2002;243-251.	127.	Somers J, Faber LP. Chondroma and chondrosarcoma. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1999;11(3):270-277.	128.	Andino L, Cagle PT, Murer B, et al. Pleuropulmonary des-moid tumors: immunohistochemical comparison with solitary fibrous tumors and assessment of beta-catenin and cyclin D1 expression. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2006;130(10):1503-1509.	129.	Baliski CR, Temple WJ, Arthur K, Schachar NS. Desmoid tumors: a novel approach for local control. J Surg Oncol. 2002;80(2):96-99.	130.	Abbas AE, Deschamps C, Cassivi SD, et al. Chest-wall des-moid tumors: results of surgical intervention. Ann Thorac Surg. 2004;78(4):1219-1223; discussion 1219-1223.	131.	Gutierrez JC, Perez EA, Franceschi D, Moffat FL Jr, Livingstone  AS, Koniaris LG. Outcomes for soft-tissue sarcoma in 8249 cases from a large state cancer registry. J Surg Res. 2007;141(1):105-114.Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   74701/03/19   7:02 PM 748SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	132.	Walsh GL, Davis BM, Swisher SG, et al. A single-institutional, multidisciplinary approach to primary sarcomas involving the chest wall requiring full-thickness resections. J Thorac Car-diovasc Surg. 2001;121(1):48-60.	133.	Liptay MJ, Fry WA. Malignant bone tumors of the chest wall. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1999;11(3):278-284.	134.	Shah AA, D’Amico TA. Primary chest wall tumors. J Am Coll Surg. 2010;210:360-366.	135.	Incarbone M, Pastorino U. Surgical treatment of chest wall tumors. World J Surg. 2001;25(2):218-230.	136.	Deschamps C, Tirnaksiz BM, Darbandi R, et al. Early and long-term results of prosthetic chest wall reconstruction.  J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1999;117(3):588-591; discussion 591-592.	137.	Graeber GM. Chest wall resection and reconstruction. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1999;11(3):251-263.	138.	Kirschner PA. Anatomy and surgical access of the mediasti-num. In: Pearson FG, ed. Thoracic Surgery. 2nd ed. New York: Churchill Livingstone; 2002:1563.	139.	Strollo DC, Rosado-de-Christenson ML, Jett JR. Primary mediastinal tumors. Part II: tumors of the middle and posterior mediastinum. Chest. 1997;112:1344-1357.	140.	Takahashi K, Al-Janabi NJ. Computed tomography and mag-netic resonance imaging of mediastinal tumors. J Magn Reson Imaging. 2010;32:1325-1339.	141.	Storch I, Shah M, Thurer R, Donna E, Ribeiro A. Endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration and Tru-Cut biopsy in thoracic lesions: when tissue is the issue. Surg Endosc J. 2008;22(1):86-90.	142.	Herman SJ, Holub RV, Weisbrod GL, Chamberlain DW. Ante-rior mediastinal masses: utility of transthoracic needle biopsy. Radiology. 1991;180(1):167-170.	143.	Assaad MW, Pantanowitz L. Diagnostic accuracy of image-guided percutaneous fine needle aspiration biopsy of the medi-astinum. Diagn Cytopathol. 2007;35:705-709.	144.	Pedote P, Gaudio F, Moschetta M, et al. CT-guided needle biopsy performed with modified coaxial technique in the diagnosis of malignant lymphomas. Radiol Med. 2010;115: 1292-1303.	145.	Demmy TL, Krasna MJ. Multicenter VATS experience with mediastinal tumors. Ann Thorac Surg. 1998;66:187-192.	146.	Bodner J, Wykypiel H, Greiner A, et al. Early experience with robot-assisted surgery for mediastinal masses. Ann Thorac Surg. 2004;78:259-265.	147.	Yim AP. Video-assisted thoracoscopic resection of anterior mediastinal masses. Int Surg. 1996;81(4):350-353.	148.	Weksler B, Tavares J. Robot-assisted thymectomy is superior to transsternal thymectomy. Surg Endosc. 2012;26:261-266.	149.	Chang PC, Chou SH, Kao EL, et al. Bilateral video-assisted thoracoscopic thymectomy vs. extended transsternal thymec-tomy in myasthenia gravis: a prospective study. Eur Surg Res. 2005;37:199-203.	150.	Meyers BF, Cooper JD. Transcervical thymectomy for myas-thenia gravis. Chest Surg Clin N Am. 2001;11(2):363-368.	151.	Small EJ, Venook AP, Damon LE. Gallium-avid thymic hyper-plasia in an adult after chemotherapy for Hodgkin disease. Cancer. 1993;72(3):905-908.	152.	Smith CS, Schoder H. Thymic extension in the superior medi-astinum in patients with thymic hyperplasia: potential cause of false-positive findings on 18F-FDG PET/CT. AJR Am J Roent-genol. 2007;188:1716-1721.	153.	Quint LE. PET: other thoracic malignancies. Cancer Imaging. 2006;6:S82-S88.	154.	Luzzi L, Campione A, Gorla A, et al. Role of fluorinefluo-rodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography in preoperative assessment of anterior mediastinal masses. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2009;36:475-479.	155.	Masaoka A, Monden Y, Nakahara K, Tanioka T. Follow-up study of thymomas with special reference to their clinical stages. Cancer. 1981;48(11):2485-2492.	156.	Pennathur A, Qureshi I, Schuchert T, et al. Comparison of surgical techniques for early-stage thymoma: feasibility of minimally invasive thymectomy and comparison with open resection. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2011;141(3):694-701.	157.	Chahinian AP. Chemotherapy of thymomas and thymic carci-nomas. Chest Surg Clin N Am. 2001;11(2):447-456.	158.	Blumberg D, Port JL, Weksler B, et al. Thymoma: a multivari-ate analysis of factors predicting survival. Ann Thorac Surg. 1995;60(4):908-913; discussion 914.	159.	Weksler B, Shende M. The role of adjuvant radiation therapy for resected stage III thymoma: a population-based study. Ann Thorac Surg. 2012;93:1822-1828; discussion 1828-1829.	160.	Suster S, Rosai J. Thymic carcinoma. A clinicopathologic study of 60 cases. Cancer. 1991;67(4):1025-1032.	161.	Bousamra M. Neurogenic tumors of the mediastinum. In: Pearson  FG, ed. Thoracic Surgery. 2nd ed. New York: Churchill Liv-ingstone; 2002:1732.	162.	Venissac N, Leo F, Hofman P, Paquis P, Mouroux J. Medi-astinal neurogenic tumors and video-assisted thoracoscopy: always the right choice? Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech. 2004;14(1):20-22.	163.	Coleman BG, Arger PH, Dalinka MK, Obringer AC, Raney BR,  Meadows AT. CT of sarcomatous degeneration in neurofibro-matosis. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 1983;140(2):383-387.	164.	Ducatman BS, Scheithauer BW, Piepgras DG,  Reiman HM, Ilstrup DM. Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors. A clinicopathologic study of 120 cases. Cancer. 1986;57(10):2006-2021.	165.	Nichols CR, Saxman S, Williams SD, et al. Primary medi-astinal nonseminomatous germ cell tumors. A modern single institution experience. Cancer. 1990;65(7):1641-1646.	166.	Kesler KA, Rieger KM, Hammoud Z, et al. A 25-year sin-gle institution experience with surgery for primary medias-tinal nonseminomatous germ cell tumors. Ann Thorac Surg. 2008;85:371-378.	167.	Rice TW. Benign neoplasms and cysts of the mediastinum. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1992;4(1):25-33.	168.	Di Lorenzo M, Collin PP, Vaillancourt R, Duranceau A. Bron-chogenic cysts. J Pediatr Surg. 1989;24(10):988-991.	169.	Ribet ME, Copin MC, Gosselin B. Bronchogenic cysts of the mediastinum. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1995;109(5):1003-1010.	170.	St-Georges R, Deslauriers J, Duranceau A, et al. Clinical spec-trum of bronchogenic cysts of the mediastinum and lung in the adult. Ann Thorac Surg. 1991;52(1):6-13.	171.	Agostoni E. Mechanics of the pleural space. In: Fisherman AP,  Macklem PT, Mead J, et al, eds. Mechanics of Breathing: Handbook of Physiology. Vol 3. Bethesda, MD: American Physiological Society; 1986.	172.	Lawrence GH. Considerations of the anatomy and physiology of the pleural space. In: Lawrence GH, ed. Problems of the Pleural Space. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1983.	173.	Rusch VW. Pleural effusion: benign and malignant. In: Pear-son FG, ed. Thoracic Surgery. 2nd ed. New York: Churchill Livingstone; 2002:1157.	174.	Gammie JS, Banks MC, Fuhrman CR, et al. The pigtail cath-eter for pleural drainage: a less invasive alternative to tube thoracostomy. JSLS. 1999;3(1):57-61.	175.	Luketich JD, Kiss M, Hershey J, et al. Chest tube insertion: a prospective evaluation of pain management. Clin J Pain. 1998;14(2):152-154.	176.	Johnston WW. The malignant pleural effusion. A review of cytopathologic diagnoses of 584 specimens from 472 consecu-tive patients. Cancer. 1985;56(4):905-909.Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   74801/03/19   7:02 PM
# Chunk 8922
Brunicardi_Ch19_p0661-p0750.indd   75001/03/19   7:02 PMThis page intentionally left blank

Congenital Heart DiseaseRaghav Murthy, Tabitha G. Moe, Glen S. Van Arsdell, John J. Nigro, and Tara Karamlou20chapterINTRODUCTIONCongenital heart surgery is a dynamic and evolving field. The last 20 years have brought about rapid developments in technol-ogy, emphasis on a multidisciplinary approach to treatment, and a more thorough understanding of both the anatomy and patho-physiology of congenital heart disease, leading to the improved care of these challenging patients.These advancements have created a sustained paradigm shift in the field of congenital heart surgery. The traditional strategy of initial palliation followed by definitive correction at a later age, which had pervaded the thinking of most surgeons, began to evolve into emphasizing early repair. Defects such as hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS) are now successfully managed with staged palliation, resulting in excellent survival outcomes for these children.The goal in most cases of congenital heart disease (CHD) is appropriate timing of complete repair. Rather than subdivid-ing lesions into cyanotic or noncyanotic lesions, a more appro-priate classification divides defects into three categories based on the feasibility of achieving complete repair: (a) defects that have no reasonable palliation and for which repair is the only option; (b) defects for which repair is not possible and for which palliation is the only option; and (c) defects that can either be repaired or palliated in infancy. It bears mentioning that all defects in the second category are those in which the appropriate anatomic components either are not present, as in hypoplastic left heart syndrome, or cannot be created from existing structures, i.e., unguarded tricuspid orifice.1Eight out of every 1000 live births will have some form of CHD, most of which, however, are mild.1 In the United States nearly 40,000 infants are affected each year.2 As of 2010, it is estimated that there are about 2 million people living with CHD in the United States, and as of 2011 there are more adults (>18) than children.2 CHD is the most common birth defect and the most common cause of infant death related to birth defects, accounting for 28% of deaths due to birth defects in the first month of life. There are currently 127 centers in North America that perform congenital heart surgery. The Society for Thoracic Surgeons (STS) reports an overall national mortality of 3.1%.3DEFECTS AMENABLE TO COMPLETE REPAIRAtrial Septal DefectAn atrial septal defect (ASD) is defined as discontinuity of the interatrial septum that permits direct mixing of blood between the systemic venous and pulmonary venous circulations.Embryology. The atrial and ventricular septa form between the third and sixth weeks of fetal development. After the paired heart tubes fuse into a single tube folded onto itself, the distal por-tion of the tube indents to form the roof of the common atrium. Near this portion of the roof, the septum primum originates and descends in a crescentic formation toward the atrioventricular (AV) junction. The ostium primum is situated superiorly to the crux of the heart at the atrioventricular junction. Prior to completion of endocardial cushion fusion with the septum pri-mum, a sequence of fenestrations appear that coalesce into the Introduction	751Defects Amenable to   Complete Repair	751Atrial Septal Defect / 751Aortic Stenosis / 755Patent Ductus Arteriosus / 759Aortic Coarctation / 761Truncus Arteriosus / 764Total Anomalous Pulmonary Venous Connection / 765Cor Triatriatum / 768Aortopulmonary Window / 769Vascular Rings and Pulmonary  Artery Slings / 769Defects Requiring Palliation	770Tricuspid Atresia / 770Hypoplastic Left Heart Syndrome / 773Defects That May be Palliated   or Repaired	777Ebstein’s Anomaly / 777Transposition of the Great Arteries / 780Double-Outlet Right Ventricle / 783Double-Outlet Right Ventricle  With Noncommitted Ventricular  Septal Defect / 783Double-Outlet Right Ventricle With Subaortic or Doubly Committed Ventricular Septal Defect Without Pulmonary Stenosis / 784Double-Outlet Right Ventricle With Subaortic or Doubly Committed Ventricular Septal Defect With Pulmonary Stenosis / 784Taussig–Bing Syndrome Without Pulmonary Stenosis / 784Taussig–Bing Syndrome With Pulmonary Stenosis / 784Tetralogy of Fallot / 784Ventricular Septal Defect / 786Atrioventricular Canal Defects / 789Interrupted Aortic Arch / 790Pediatric Mechanical Circulatory  Support / 790Pediatric Heart Transplantation / 791Public Reporting and the STS Database in Congenital Heart Surgery / 792Future Directions / 793Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   75122/02/19   2:54 PM 752ostium secundum. During this coalescence, the septum secun-dum grows downward from the roof of the atrium, parallel to and to the right of the septum primum. The septum primum does not fuse, but creates an oblique pathway, called the foramen ovale, within the interatrial septum. After birth, the increase in left atrial pressure associated with an increase in SVR relative to PVR typically closes this pathway in approximately 80% of the population, obliterating the interatrial communication.Anatomy. ASDs can be classified into three different types (Fig. 20-1): (a) ostium secundum type defect (Fig. 20-1B,C) (deficiency of septum primum), which are the most prevalent subtype, comprising 80% of all ASDs; (b) ostium primum defects (Fig. 20-1A), which may also be described as partial or transitional AV canal defect; and (c) sinus venosus type defects, comprising approximately 5% to 10% of all ASDs.4Pathophysiology. ASDs result in an increase in pulmonary blood flow secondary to primarily left-to-right shunting through the defect. The direction of the intracardiac shunt is predomi-nantly determined by the compliance of the respective ventri-cles. In utero, the distensibility, or compliance, of the right and left ventricles is equal, but postnatally the left ventricle (LV) becomes less compliant than the right ventricle (RV). This shift occurs because the resistance of the downstream vascular beds changes after birth. The pulmonary vascular resistance falls with the infant’s first breath, decreasing RV pressure, whereas the systemic vascular resistance rises dramatically, increasing LV pressure. The increase in LV pressure promotes hypertrophy with a thicker muscle mass, which offers a greater resistance to diastolic filling than does the RV; thus, the majority of flow through the ASD occurs from left to right. The greater volume of blood returning to the right atrium causes volume overload in the RV, but because of its lower muscle mass and low-resistance output, it easily distends to accommodate the increased volume.The long-term consequences of RV volume overload include hypertrophy with elevated RV end-diastolic pressure and a relative pulmonary stenosis across the pulmonary valve because it cannot accommodate the increased RV flow. Com-pliance gradually decreases as the right ventricular pressure approaches systemic pressure, and the size of the left-to-right shunt decreases. Patients at this stage have a balanced circula-tion and may deceptively appear less symptomatic.Key Points1	Congenital heart disease comprises a wide morphologic spec-trum. In general, lesions can be conceptualized as those that can be completely repaired, those that should be palliated, and those that can be either repaired or palliated depending on particular patient and institutional characteristics.2	Percutaneous therapies for congenital heart disease are quickly becoming important adjuncts, and in some cases, alternatives, to standard surgical therapy. Important exam-ples include percutaneous closure of atrial and ventricular septal defects, the hybrid approach to hypoplastic left heart syndrome, radiofrequency perforation of the pulmonary valve, and percutaneous pulmonary valve placement. Further studies are necessary to establish criteria and current bench-marks for the safe integration of these novel approaches into the care of patients with congenital heart surgery.3	Patients with critical left ventricular outflow tract obstruc-tion, such as neonatal critical aortic stenosis, represent a challenging population. It is critical that the correct decision (whether to pursue univentricular or biventricular repair) be made prior to the initial operation, as attrition when the incorrect decision is made is high. There are several pub-lished criteria (Congenital Heart Surgeons’ Society critical stenosis calculator) to help surgeons decide which strategy to pursue.4	Optimum strategy for repair of total anomalous pulmonary venous connection (TAPVC) remains a topic of some con-tention. Sutureless repair, formerly reserved for initial reste-nosis after conventional repair, has evolved in many centers to be the primary approach for high-risk patients. Defining whether sutureless repair should be considered in all patients with TAPVC will require further study.5	Vascular rings and pulmonary artery slings often require multidisciplinary approaches for management. They can be associated with complete tracheal rings and tracheobronchomalacia.6	A recent prospective, randomized, multi-institutional trial sponsored by the National Institutes of Health, the Systemic Ventricle Reconstruction (SVR) trial, compared the out-comes of neonates with hypoplastic left heart syndrome hav-ing either a modified Blalock–Taussig shunt (MBTS) versus a right ventricle-to-pulmonary artery (RV-PA) shunt. The SVR trial demonstrated that transplantation-free survival  12 months after randomization was higher with the RV-PA shunt than with the MBTS. However, data collected over a mean follow-up period of 32 ± 11 months showed a nonsig-nificant difference in transplantation-free survival between the two groups.7	Outcomes have improved substantially over time in congeni-tal heart surgery, and most complex lesions can be operated in early infancy. Neurologic protection, however, remains a key issue in the care of neonates undergoing surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass and deep hypothermic circulatory arrest. New monitoring devices and perioperative strategies are currently under investigation. Attention in the field has shifted from analyses of perioperative mortality, which for most lesions is under 10%, to longer-term outcomes, includ-ing quality of life and neurologic function.8	Pediatric mechanical circulatory support and heart transplan-tation is an upcoming and rapidly evolving component of congenital heart surgery. These are offering options for res-cue, palliation, and treatment of complex defects or children who were palliated and failing.9	Public reporting has become an integral part of this subspe-cialty. The Society of Thoracic Surgeons Congenital Heart Surgery Database (STS CHSD) remains the largest database in the world for congenital and pediatric heart surgery. Transparency in overall outcomes, mortality, and morbidity is allowing patients and their families an insight into the complexity of their diagnoses as well as the level of perfor-mance of different centers.Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   75222/02/19   2:54 PM 753CONGENITAL HEART DISEASECHAPTER 20ABCFigure 20-1. A. Echocardiogram of a patient with primum type artial septal defect (‘*’ points to the atrial septal defect). B. Echocardiogram of a large secundum type ASD (‘*’ points to the defect). C. Intra-operative picture during repair of atrial septal defect. A large fenestrated atrial septum is seen. Bicaval venous cannulation has been performed and a right atriotomy provides exposure to the atrial septum.Patients with large ASDs gradually develop progressive pulmonary vascular changes as a result of chronic overcircu-lation. The increased pulmonary vascular resistance in these patients leads to an equalization of left and right ventricular pressures, and their ratio of pulmonary (Qp) to systemic flow (Qs), Qp to Qs, will approach 1.5 This does not mean, however, that there is no intracardiac shunting, only that the ratio between the left-to-right component and the right-to-left component is equal.The ability of the RV to recover normal function is related to the duration of chronic overload because those undergoing ASD closure before age 10 years have a better likelihood of achieving normal RV volumes and function in the postopera-tive period.6The physiology of sinus venosus ASDs is similar to that discussed earlier, except that these are frequently accompanied by anomalous pulmonary venous drainage. This often results in significant hemodynamic derangements that accelerate the clinical course of these infants.The same increase in symptoms is true for those with ostium primum defects because the associated mitral insuffi-ciency from the “cleft” mitral valve can lead to more atrial vol-ume load and increased atrial level shunting.Diagnosis. Patients with ASDs upon auscultation may reveal prominence of the first heart sound with fixed splitting of the second heart sound. This results from the relatively fixed left-to-right shunt throughout all phases of the cardiac cycle. A diastolic flow murmur indicating increased flow across the tricuspid valve may be discerned, and frequently, an ejection flow mur-mur can be heard across the pulmonary valve. A right ventricu-lar heave and increased intensity of the pulmonary component of the second heart sound indicates pulmonary hypertension.Chest radiographs in the patient with an ASD demonstrate increased pulmonary vascularity, with prominent hilar mark-ings and cardiomegaly. The electrocardiogram shows right axis deviation with an incomplete bundle-branch block. When right bundle-branch block is associated with a leftward or superior axis, an AV canal defect should be strongly suspected.Diagnosis is clarified by two-dimensional echocardiogra-phy (Fig. 20-1A,C), and use of color-flow mapping facilitates an understanding of the physiologic derangements created by the defects. Older children and adults with unrepaired ASDs may present with stroke or systemic embolism from paradoxical embolism or atrial arrhythmias from dilation of the right atrium.Echocardiography also enables the clinician to estimate the amount of intracardiac shunting, and it can demonstrate the degree of mitral regurgitation in patients with ostium primum defects. With the addition of an agitated saline injection (bubble study), it can also assist in the detection of sinus venosus defects.The advent of two-dimensional echocardiography with color-flow Doppler has largely superseded the use of cardiac catheterization because the ASD can be well defined by echo-cardiography alone. However, in cases where the right ventric-ular systolic pressure is elevated, or patient is older than age 40 years, catheterization can quantify the degree of pulmonary hypertension because those with a fixed pulmonary vascular resistance greater than 12 U/mL may be considered inoperable.7 Cardiac catheterization also can be useful in that it provides data that enable the calculation of Qp and Qs so that the magnitude of the intracardiac shunt can be determined. The ratio (Qp to Qs) can then be used to determine whether closure is indicated in equivocal cases, because a ratio of Qp to Qs greater than 1.5:1 Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   75322/02/19   2:54 PM 754SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIis generally accepted as the threshold for surgical intervention. Finally, in patients older than age 40 years, cardiac catheteriza-tion can be important to evaluate for the presence of coronary artery disease.In general, ASDs are closed when patients are between 4 and 5 years of age. Children of this size can usually be oper-ated on without the use of blood transfusion and have excellent outcomes. Patients who are symptomatic may require repair earlier, even in infancy. Some surgeons advocate routine repair in infants and children especially in cases where prematurity-related lung disease may accelerate damage to the pulmonary vascular bed, though this philosophy may not be widespread. In a review by Reddy and colleagues, 116 neonates weighing less than 2500 g who underwent repair of simple and complex cardiac defects with the use of cardiopulmonary bypass were found to have no intracerebral hemorrhages, no long-term neu-rologic sequelae, and a low operative mortality rate (10%). These results correlated with the length of cardiopulmonary bypass and the complexity of repair.8 These investigators also found an 80% actuarial survival at 1 year and, more importantly, that growth following complete repair was equivalent to weight-matched neonates free from cardiac defects.8Treatment. Simple secundum type ASDs can frequently be repaired via a transcatheter technique, and assessment for trans-catheter closure with TTE assessment is generally indicated prior to consideration of a surgical repair. The most common surgical approach requires standard cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) tech-nique through a midline sternotomy approach. The details of the repair itself are generally straightforward. An oblique atriotomy is made, the position of the coronary sinus and all systemic and pulmonary veins are determined, and the rim of the defect is completely visualized. Closure of an ostium secundum defect is accomplished either by primary repair or by insertion of a patch that is sutured to the rim of the defect. The decision of whether patch closure is necessary can be determined by the size and shape of the defect as well as by the quality of the edges.The type of repair used for sinus venosus ASDs associated with partial anomalous pulmonary venous connection is dictated by the location of the anomalous pulmonary vein. If the anoma-lous veins connect to the atria or to the superior vena cava cau-dal to where the cava is crossed by the right pulmonary artery, the ASD can be repaired by inserting a patch, with redirection of the pulmonary veins behind the patch to the left atrium. Care must be taken with this approach to avoid obstruction of the pulmonary veins or the superior vena cava, although usually the superior vena cava is dilated and provides ample room for patch insertion. If the anomalous vein connects to the superior vena cava cranial to the right pulmonary artery, an alternative technique, the Warden procedure, may be necessary. In this operation, the superior vena cava is transected cranial to the connection of the anomalous vein (usually the right superior pulmonary vein). The caudal end of the transected cava is over-sewn. The cranial end of the transected cava is anastomosed to the auricle of the right atrium. Inside the atrium, a patch is used to redirect pulmonary venous blood flow to the left atrium. In contrast to the repair for a defect where the pulmonary veins enter the right atrium or the superior vena cava below the right pulmonary artery, the patch covers the superior vena caval right atrial junction so that blood from the anomalous pulmonary vein that enters the cava is directed to the left atrium. Blood returning from the upper body enters the right atrium via the anastomosis between the superior vena cava and the right atrial appendage.Results and Complications of Surgical ASD Closure. Tra-ditional operative strategies, such as pericardial or synthetic patch closure, have been well established, with a low complica-tion rate and a mortality rate of zero among patients without pulmonary hypertension.9 The most frequently reported imme-diate complications include postpericardiotomy syndrome and atrial arrhythmias. Beyond immediate postoperative outcomes, long-term outcomes following surgical closure (up to 20 years) document the low mortality rates and durability of functional status benefit. Importantly, however, atrial arrhythmias, par-ticularly atrial fibrillation, are not completely mitigated by closure and can occur in 10% to 40% of patients, especially in older patients (>40 years) or those with preexisting arrhyth-mias.10 Kutty and colleagues11 followed 300 patients from their institution, 152 of whom had surgical closure. Late mortality at 10 years was 3%, and functional health status had declined in only 15 patients during follow-up. Recently, there have been an increasing number of reports regarding the results follow-ing surgical closure among elderly patients (>60 years of age), which demonstrate equivalent survival to younger patients, albeit with slightly higher complication rates.11-13 Hanninen and colleagues14 studied 68 patients between 68 and 86 years at their institution undergoing either surgical (n = 13) or device (n = 54) closure. Although the 23% incidence of major complications (including pneumothorax, heart failure, and pneumonia) was higher than that recently reported by Mascio et al15 using the Society of Thoracic Surgeons’ Congenital Database (20%) or a single-institution review by Hopkins et al16 (12%), there were no operative deaths among the elderly cohort. Moreover, after ASD closure, echocardiographic indices of right ventricular size and function were significantly improved from preoperative val-ues, and functional capacity as measured by standardized survey instruments was also significantly improved.New and Future Approaches to Traditional Surgical ASD Closure. Because of the uniformly excellent outcomes with traditional surgery, attention has shifted to improving the cos-metic result and minimizing hospital stay and convalescence. Multiple strategies have been described to achieve these aims, including the right submammary incision with anterior thora-cotomy, limited bilateral submammary incision with partial sternal split, and limited midline incision with partial sternal split. Some surgeons use either video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) in conjunction with the submammary and transxiphoid approaches to facilitate closure within a constricted operative field or totally endoscopic repair in selected patients.17-20 Use of robotics has also been reported in a small series of 12 adult patients by Argenziano and colleagues.18 The morbidity and mortality of all of these approaches are comparable to those of the traditional median sternotomy; however, each has technical drawbacks. Operative precision must be maintained with limited exposure in any minimally invasive technique. Extended CPB and aortic cross-clamp times, coupled with increased cost, may limit the utility of totally endoscopic or robotic-assisted ASD closure except at specific centers. Moreover, certain approaches have a specific patient population in whom they are most appli-cable. For example, the anterolateral thoracotomy should not be employed in prepubescent girls because it will interfere with breast development. Most totally endoscopic approaches are not feasible in very young patients because of the size of the tho-racoscopic ports. Despite these potential drawbacks, however, in carefully selected patients, minimally invasive techniques have demonstrated benefits. Luo and associates performed Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   75422/02/19   2:54 PM 755CONGENITAL HEART DISEASECHAPTER 20ABFigure 20-2. A. Picture of the Amplatzr device after open retrieval from the heart (dislodged during percutaenous catheter placement). B. Echocardiographic view of the septum after transcatheter closure of the atrial septal defect with an Amplatzar device.a prospective randomized study comparing ministernotomy (division of the upper sternum for aortic and pulmonary lesions and the lower sternum for septal lesions) to full sternotomy in 100 consecutive patients undergoing repair of septal lesions.19 The patients in the ministernotomy group had longer procedure times (by 15 to 20 minutes) but had less bleeding and shorter hospital stays. Consistent with these initiatives, conversion of “low-risk” patients undergoing minimally invasive ASD closure to an ambulatory population (discharge from hospital within  24 hours) has recently been described.21First performed in 1976, transcatheter closure of ASDs with the use of various occlusion devices is gaining widespread accep-tance.22 Certain types of ASDs, including patent foramen ovale, secundum defects, and some fenestrated secundum defects, are amenable to device closure, as long as particular ana-tomic criteria (e.g., an adequate superior and inferior rim for device seating and distance from the AV valve) are met. Since the introduction of percutaneous closure (Fig. 20-2A,B), there has been a dramatic rise in device closure prevalence to the point where device closure has supplanted surgical therapy as the domi-nant treatment modality for secundum ASD.23 A study from Karamlou et al23 found that ASD and patent foramen ovale clo-sures per capita increased dramatically from 1.08 per 100,000 population in 1988 to 2.59 per 100,000 population in 2005, an increase of 139%. When analyzed by closure type, surgical clo-sure increased by only 24% (from 0.86 per 100,000 population in 1988 to 1.07 per 100,000 in 2005), whereas transcatheter closure increased by 3475% (from 0.04 per 100,000 population in 1988 to 1.43 per 100,000 in 2005). Importantly, this study determined that the paradigm shift favoring transcatheter closure has occurred mainly due to increased prevalence of closure in adults over age 40 years rather than an increase in closure in infants or children.Despite the simplicity of ASD repair, there are a myriad of options for patients and physicians who care for patients with CHD. The patient population that might benefit from closure (whether device or surgical) is likely to increase, challenging current ideas and treatment algorithms that optimize outcomes.2Aortic StenosisAnatomy and Classification. The spectrum of aortic valve abnormality represents the most common form of CHD, with the great majority of patients being asymptomatic until midlife. Obstruction of the left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) occurs at multiple levels: subvalvular, valvular, and supravalvular (Fig. 20-3A-D). The critically stenotic aortic valve in the neo-nate or infant is commonly unicommissural or bicommissural, with thickened, dysmorphic, and myxomatous leaflet tissue and a reduced cross-sectional area at the valve level. Associ-ated left-sided lesions are often present. In a review of 32 cases from the Children’s Hospital in Boston, 59% had unicommis-sural valves, and 40% had bicommissural valves.24 Associated lesions were frequent, occurring in 88% of patients, most com-monly patent ductus arteriosus, mitral regurgitation, and hypo-plastic LV. Endocardial fibroelastosis (EFE) also is common among infants with critical aortic stenosis (AS). In this condi-tion, the LV is usually prohibitively hypoplastic and noncom-pliant, rendering these patients poor candidates for recruitment of the LV into the systemic circulation with techniques that can be utilized in those with more normal sized LVs. In some neonates with critical AS, a dilated LV with poor diastolic com-pliance rather than a hypertrophied LV is encountered.24Neonates with critical AS are a challenging population because one must make a decision about the suitability of the left-sided structures to support a biventricular circulation. There are recent approaches that include techniques, such as aortic valvotomy coupled with EFE resection and mitral valve inter-vention, that are directed at LV rehabilitation. The advent of fetal valvotomy for critical AS may also increase the number of infants who are candidates for biventricular repair.Pathophysiology. The unique intracardiac and extracardiac shunts present in fetal life allow even neonates with critical AS to survive. In utero, left ventricular hypertrophy and ischemia cause left atrial hypertension, which reduces the right-to-left flow across the foramen ovale. In severe cases, a reversal of Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   75522/02/19   2:54 PM 756SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 20-3. A. Congenital aortic valve stenosis, en fosse echocardiographic view of the stenotic bicuspid aortic valve. Parasternal long axis view of the same valve with a gradient of 60 mm of Hg (‘*’ points to the valve). B. Parasternal long axis ecocardiographic view of a patient with discrete subaortic membrane (‘*’ points to the membrane). C. Parasternal long axis ecocardiographic view of a patient with diffuse tunnel like subvalvar aortic stenosis with membrane. Doppler revealed a gradient of 81 mm of hg (‘*’ represents the area of diffuse narrowing).  D. Appearance of supravalvar aortic stenosis on an aortogram performed in the cardiac catheterization lab (‘*’ points to the stenosis).  E. Appearance after four patch reconstruction of the same patient shown in Figure 20.3 d. (Re-formatted images obtained from a CT angiogram).ABCDEBrunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   75622/02/19   2:54 PM 757CONGENITAL HEART DISEASECHAPTER 20flow may occur, causing right ventricular volume loading. The RV then provides the entire systemic output via the patent duc-tus arteriosus (ductal-dependent systemic blood flow). Although cardiac output is maintained, the LV suffers continued damage as the intracavitary pressure precludes adequate coronary perfu-sion, resulting in LV infarction and subendocardial fibroelas-tosis. The presentation of the neonate with critical AS is then determined by the morphology of the LV and other left-sided heart structures, the degree of left ventricular dysfunction, and the completeness of the transition from a parallel circulation to an in-series circulation (i.e., on closure of the foramen ovale and the ductus arteriosus). Those infants with mild-to-moderate AS in whom LV function is preserved are asymptomatic at birth. The only abnormalities may be a systolic ejection murmur and electrocardiogram (ECG) evidence of left ventricular hypertro-phy. However, those neonates with severe AS and compromised LV function are unable to provide adequate cardiac output at birth and will present in circulatory collapse once the ductus closes, with dyspnea, tachypnea, irritability, narrowed pulse pressure, oliguria, and profound metabolic acidosis.24 If ductal patency is maintained, systemic perfusion will be provided by the RV via ductal flow, and cyanosis may be the only finding.Diagnosis. Neonates and infants with severe valvular AS may have a relatively nonspecific history of irritability and failure to thrive. Angina, if present, is usually manifested by episodic, inconsolable crying that coincides with feeding. As discussed previously, evidence of poor peripheral perfusion, such as extreme pallor, indicates severe LVOT obstruction. Differen-tial cyanosis is an uncommon finding, but it is present when enough antegrade flow occurs only to maintain normal upper body perfusion, while a large patent ductus arteriosus produces blue discoloration of the abdomen and legs.Physical findings include a systolic ejection murmur, although a quiet murmur may paradoxically indicate a more severe condition with reduced cardiac output. A systolic click correlates with a valvular etiology of obstruction. As LV dys-function progresses, evidence of congestive heart failure occurs.The chest radiograph is variable but may show dilatation of the aortic root, and the ECG often demonstrates LV hypertro-phy. Echocardiography with Doppler flow is extremely useful in establishing the diagnosis, as well as quantifying the transvalvular gradient. Furthermore, echocardiography can facilitate evaluation for the several associated defects that can be present in critical neonatal AS, including mitral stenosis, LV hypoplasia, LV endo-cardial fibroelastosis, subaortic stenosis, VSD, or coarctation. The presence of any or several of these defects has important impli-cations related to treatment options for these patients. Although cardiac catheterization is not routinely performed for diagnostic purposes, it can be invaluable as part of the treatment algorithm if the lesion is amenable to balloon valvotomy. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is another very useful technique for assessing the adequacy of the left-sided structures and is increasingly utilized to determine candidacy for biventricular repairs.Treatment. As alluded to previously, the first decision that must be made in the neonate with critical LVOT obstruction is whether the patient is a candidate for biventricular or univen-tricular repair. Central to this decision is assessment of the degree of hypoplasia of the LV and other left-sided structures. Alsoufi and colleagues25 have described a rational approach to the neonate with critical LVOT obstruction. The options vary depending on whether the infant follows a single or a 3biventricular pathway. The options for a single ventricle include the Norwood operation, a hybrid strategy (initial ductal stent and bilateral pulmonary artery bands followed by later completion of the Norwood operation) or heart transplantation. The options for a biventricular heart include balloon valvuloplasty, surgical val-votomy, neonatal Ross operation, or a Yasui operation. Often valvotomy is accompanied by LV rehabilitation techniques, including EFE resection and mitral valve interventions. Fetal aortic valvotomy, which is now offered at specialized centers, is another promising strategy to decompress the LV in fetal life and potentially allow growth of the left-sided structures sufficient to permit a biventricular circulation. Regardless of whether the baby is triaged to a single or biventricular strategy, any infant with severe AS requires urgent intervention. Preoperative stabi-lization, however, has dramatically altered the clinical algorithm and outcomes for this patient population.25 The preoperative strategy begins with endotracheal intubation and inotropic sup-port. Prostaglandin infusion is initiated to maintain ductal patency, and confirmatory studies are performed prior to opera-tive intervention. Therapy is generally indicated in the presence of a transvalvular gradient of 50 mmHg with associated symp-toms including syncope, CHF, or angina, or if a gradient of 50 to 75 mmHg exists with concomitant ECG evidence of LV strain or ischemia. In the critically ill neonate, a gradient across the aortic valve may not be present because of poor LV function. However, the decision regarding treatment options must be based on a complete understanding of associated defects. For example, in the presence of a hypoplastic LV (left ventricular end-diastolic volume <20 mL/m2) or a markedly abnormal mitral valve, iso-lated aortic valvotomy should not be performed because studies have demonstrated high mortality in this population following isolated valvotomy.26Patients who have an LV capable of providing systemic output are candidates for intervention to relieve AS, generally through balloon valvotomy. Occasionally, if catheter-based therapy is not an option, relief of valvular AS in infants and children can be accomplished with surgical valvotomy using standard techniques of CPB and direct exposure to the aortic valve. A transverse incision is made in the ascending aorta above the sinus of Valsalva, extending close to, but not into, the noncoronary sinus. Exposure is attained with placement of a retractor into the right coronary sinus. After inspection of the valve, the chosen commissure is incised to within 1 to 2 mm of the aortic wall (Fig. 20-4A,B).Balloon valvotomy performed in the catheterization lab is generally the procedure of choice for reduction of transvalvular gradients in symptomatic infants and children without signifi-cant aortic insufficiency. Balloon valvotomy provides relief of the valvular gradient and allows future surgical intervention (which is generally required in most patients when a larger prosthesis can be implanted) to be performed on an unscarred chest. An important issue when planning aortic valvotomy, whether percutaneously or via open surgical technique, is the risk of inducing hemodynamically significant aortic regurgita-tion. Induction of more than moderate aortic regurgitation is poorly tolerated in the infant with critical AS and may require an urgent procedure to replace or repair the aortic valve. Most often in these patients, a Ross procedure represents the only real option as mechanical valve replacement in a neonate has exceptionally poor outcome.In general, catheter-based balloon valvotomy has supplanted open surgical valvotomy. The decision regarding Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   75722/02/19   2:54 PM 758SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 20-4. A. Intra-operative picture of a stenotic bicuspid aortic valve (as seen through an aortotomy). B. Intra-operative picture of the valve after a controlled valvotomy if performed. Note the forceps is across the opening of the aortic valve (‘*’ points to the valvotomy).the most appropriate method to use depends on several factors, including the available medical expertise, the patient’s overall status and hemodynamics, and the presence of associated cardiac defects requiring repair.25 Although evidence is emerging to the contrary, simple valvotomy, whether performed using percutaneous or open technique, is generally considered a palliative procedure. The goal is to relieve LVOT obstruction without producing clinically significant regurgitation, in order to allow sufficient annular growth for eventual aortic valve replacement. The reintervention rate is higher if balloon valvuloplasty is performed as the initial palliation (54%) compared to a surgical valvolomy (23%) as the latter is a more controlled division of the aortic commissure25 (Fig. 20-4C). The majority of infants who undergo aortic valvotomy will require further intervention on the aortic valve within 10 years following initial intervention.26Neonates with severely hypoplastic LVs or significant LV endocardial fibroelastosis may not be candidates for biventricu-lar repair and are treated the same as infants with the hypoplas-tic left heart syndrome (HLHS), which is discussed later (see “Hypoplastic Left Heart Syndrome”).As mentioned previously, fetal intervention for the aortic valve has been described with the goal being to improve the growth of the left ventricle. The group at Boston Children’s Hospital have reported fairly favorable results in a small cohort.34Many surgeons previously avoided aortic valve replace-ment for AS in early childhood because the more commonly used mechanical valves would be outgrown and require replace-ment later and the obligatory anticoagulation for mechanical valves resulted in a substantial risk for complications. In addi-tion, prosthetic valves have an incidence of bacterial endocardi-tis or perivalvular leak requiring reintervention.The use of allografts and the advent of the Ross procedure have largely obviated these issues and made early definitive cor-rection of critical AS a viable option.23,27,28 Donald Ross first described transposition of the pulmonary valve into the aortic position with allograft reconstruction of the pulmonary outflow tract in 1967.27 The result of this operation is a normal trileaf-let semilunar valve made of a patient’s native tissue with the potential for growth to adult size in the aortic position in place of the damaged aortic valve (Fig. 20-5). The Ross procedure has become a useful option for aortic valve replacement in children because it has improved durability and can be performed with acceptable morbidity and mortality rates. The placement of a pulmonary conduit, which does not grow and becomes calci-fied and stenotic over time, does obligate the patient to rein-tervention (either surgically or using transcatheter techniques) to replace the RV-to-pulmonary artery conduit. Karamlou and colleagues29 have reviewed the outcomes and associated risk factors for aortic valve replacement in 160 children from the Hospital for Sick Children in Toronto. They found that younger age, lower operative weight, concomitant performance of aortic root replacement or reconstruction, and use of prosthesis type other than a pulmonary autograft were significant predictors of death, whereas the use of a bioprosthetic or allograft valve type and earlier year of operation were identified as significant risk factors for repeated aortic valve replacement. Autograft use was associated with a blunted progression of the peak prosthetic valve gradient and a rapid decrease in the left ventricular end-diastolic dimension. In agreement with these findings, Lupinetti and Jones28 compared allograft aortic valve replacement with the Ross procedure and found a more significant transvalvular gradient reduction and regression of left ventricular hypertro-phy in those patients who underwent the Ross procedure. In some cases, the pulmonary valve may not be usable because of associated defects or congenital absence. These children are not candidates for the Ross procedure and can be treated with cryopreserved allografts (cadaveric human aortic valves) or prosthetic aortic valve replacement. At times, there may be a size discrepancy between the right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) and the LVOT, especially in cases of severe critical AS in infancy. For these cases, the pulmonary autograft is placed in a manner that also provides enlargement of the aortic annulus (Ross/Konno).Subvalvular AS occurs beneath the aortic valve and may be classified as discrete or tunnel-like (diffuse). A thin, ABBrunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   75822/02/19   2:54 PM 759CONGENITAL HEART DISEASECHAPTER 20fibromuscular diaphragm immediately proximal to the aortic valve characterizes discrete subaortic stenosis. This diaphragm typically extends for 180o or more in a crescentic or circular fash-ion, often attaching to the mitral valve as well as the interven-tricular septum. The aortic valve itself is usually normal in this condition, although the turbulence imparted by the subvalvular stenosis may affect leaflet morphology and valve competence.Diffuse subvalvular AS results in a long, tunnel-like obstruction that may extend to the left ventricular apex. In some individuals, there may be difficulty in distinguishing between hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and diffuse subaortic steno-sis. Operation for subvalvular AS is indicated with a gradient exceeding 30 mmHg, in the presence of aortic valve insuffi-ciency, or when symptoms indicating LVOT obstruction are present.30 Given that repair of isolated discrete subaortic ste-nosis can be done with low rates of morbidity and mortality, some surgeons advocate repair in all cases of discrete AS to avoid progression of the stenosis and the development of aortic insufficiency, although more recent data demonstrate that sub-aortic resection should be delayed until the LV gradient exceeds  30 mmHg because most children with an initial LV gradient less than 30 mmHg have quiescent disease.31 Diffuse AS is a more complex lesion and often requires aortoventriculoplasty. Results are generally excellent, with operative mortality less than 5%.32Supravalvular AS occurs more rarely and also can be clas-sified into a discrete type, which produces an hourglass defor-mity of the aorta, and a diffuse form that can involve the entire arch and brachiocephalic arteries. The aortic valve leaflets are usually normal, but in some cases, the leaflets may adhere to the supravalvular stenosis, thereby narrowing the sinuses of Valsalva in diastole and restricting coronary artery perfusion. In addition, accelerated intimal hyperplastic changes in the coronary arteries can be demonstrated in these patients because the proximal position of the coronary arteries subjects them to abnormally high perfusion pressures.The signs and symptoms of supravalvular AS are similar to other forms of LVOT obstruction. An asymptomatic murmur is the presenting manifestation in approximately half of these patients. Syncope, poor exercise tolerance, and angina may all occur with nearly equal frequency. Supravalvar AS is associated with Williams’ syndrome, a constellation of elfin facies, mental retardation, and hypercalcemia.33 Following routine evaluation, cardiac catheterization should be performed in order to delin-eate coronary anatomy, as well as to delineate the degree of obstruction. A gradient of 50 mmHg or greater is an indication for operation. However, the clinician must be cognizant of any coexistent lesions, most commonly pulmonic stenosis, which may add complexity to the repair.The localized form of supravalvular AS can be treated by creating an inverted Y-shaped aortotomy across the area of ste-nosis, straddling the right coronary artery. The obstructing shelf is then excised, and a pantaloon-shaped patch (Doty technique) or individual sinus patch enlargement (Brom technique) is used (Fig. 20-3E).The diffuse form of supravalvular stenosis is more vari-able (Fig. 20-6), and the particular operative approach must be tailored to each specific patient’s anatomy. In general, either an aortic endarterectomy with patch augmentation can be per-formed or if the narrowing extends past the aorta arch, a pros-thetic graft can be placed between the ascending and descending aorta. Operative results for discrete supravalvular AS are gen-erally good, with a hospital mortality of less than 1% and an actuarial survival rate exceeding 90% at 20 years.35 In contrast, however, the diffuse form is more hazardous to repair and car-ried a mortality of 15% in a recent series.35,36Patent Ductus ArteriosusAnatomy. The ductus arteriosus is derived from the sixth aor-tic arch and normally extends from the main or left pulmonary artery to the upper descending thoracic aorta, distal to the left subclavian artery. In the normal fetal cardiovascular system, ductal flow is considerable (approximately 60% of the com-bined ventricular output) and is directed exclusively from the pulmonary artery to the aorta. In infancy, the length of the duc-tus may vary from 2 to 8 mm, with a diameter of 4 to 12 mm.Locally produced and circulating prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) and prostaglandin I2 (PGI2) induce active relaxation of the duc-tal musculature, maintaining maximal patency during the fetal period.38 At birth, increased pulmonary blood flow metabo-lizes these prostaglandin products, and absence of the placenta removes an important source of them, resulting in a marked decrease in these ductal-relaxing substances. In addition, release of histamines, catecholamines, bradykinin, and acetylcholine all promote ductal contraction. Despite all of these complex Figure 20-5. Appearance of the stenotic aortic valve during aortography performed in the cardiac catheterization lab. (left). Balloon  valvuloplasty being performed. (right). The ‘*’ points to the the “waist” created by the stenotic valve during dilation. (Used with permission from Kelly Rosso MD.)Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   75922/02/19   2:54 PM 760SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 20-6. Reformatted image obtained after CT angiography of a child with diffuse supravalvar aortic stenosis (‘*’ points to the transverse aortic arch).interactions, the rising oxygen tension in the fetal blood is the main stimulus causing smooth muscle contraction and ductal closure within 10 to 15 hours postnatally.39 Anatomic closure by fibrosis produces the ligamentum arteriosum connecting the pulmonary artery to the aorta.Delayed closure of the ductus is termed prolonged patency, whereas failure of closure causes persistent patency, which may occur as an isolated lesion or in association with more complex congenital heart defects. In many of these infants with more complex congenital heart defects, either pulmonary or systemic perfusion may depend on ductal flow, and these infants may decompensate if exogenous PGE is not administered to maintain ductal patency.Natural History. The incidence of patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) is approximately 1 in every 2000 births; however, it increases dramatically with increasing prematurity.39 In some series, PDAs have been noted in 75% of infants of 28 to 30 weeks gestation. Persistent patency occurs more commonly in females, with a 2:1 ratio.40PDA is not a benign entity, although prolonged survival has been reported. The estimated death rate for infants with iso-lated, untreated PDA is approximately 30%.41 The leading cause of death is congestive heart failure, with respiratory infection as a secondary cause. Endocarditis is more likely to occur with a small ductus and is rarely fatal if aggressive antibiotic therapy is initiated early.Clinical Manifestations and Diagnosis. After birth, in an otherwise normal cardiovascular system, a PDA results in a left-to-right shunt that depends on both the size of the ductal lumen and its total length. As the pulmonary vascular resistance falls 8 to 10 weeks postnatally, the shunt will increase, and its flow will ultimately be determined by the relative resistances of the pulmonary and systemic circulations.The hemodynamic consequences of an unrestrictive duc-tal shunt are left ventricular volume overload with increased left atrial and pulmonary artery pressures and right ventricular strain from the augmented afterload. These changes result in increased sympathetic discharge, tachycardia, tachypnea, and ventricular hypertrophy. The diastolic shunt results in lower aortic diastolic pressure and increases the potential for myo-cardial ischemia and underperfusion of other systemic organs, while the increased pulmonary flow leads to increased work of breathing and decreased gas exchange. Unrestrictive ductal flow may lead to pulmonary hypertension within the first year of life. These changes will be significantly attenuated if the size of the ductus is only moderate, and they will be completely absent if the ductus is small.Physical examination of the afflicted infant will reveal evi-dence of a hyperdynamic circulation with a widened pulse pres-sure and a hyperactive precordium. Auscultation demonstrates a systolic or continuous murmur, often termed a machinery mur-mur. Cyanosis is not present in uncomplicated isolated PDA.The chest radiograph may reveal increased pulmonary vascularity or cardiomegaly, and the ECG may show LV strain, left atrial enlargement, and possibly RV hypertrophy. Echocar-diogram with color mapping reliably demonstrates the patency of the ductus as well as estimates the shunt size. Cardiac cath-eterization is necessary only when pulmonary hypertension is suspected.Therapy. The presence of a persistent PDA is sufficient indica-tion for closure because of the increased mortality and risk of endocarditis.40 In older patients with pulmonary hypertension, closure may not improve symptoms and is associated with much higher mortality.In premature infants, aggressive intervention with indometh-acin or ibuprofen to achieve early closure of the PDA is beneficial unless contraindications such as necrotizing enterocolitis or renal insufficiency are present.41 Term infants, however, are gener-ally unresponsive to pharmacologic therapy with indomethacin, so mechanical closure must be undertaken once the diagnosis is established. This can be accomplished either surgically (Fig. 20-7) or with catheter-based therapy.15,42,43 Currently, transluminal placement of various occlusive devices, such as the Rashkind  double-umbrella device or embolization with Gianturco coils, is in widespread use.42 However, there are a number of complications inherent with the use of percutaneous devices, such as thromboem-bolism, endocarditis, incomplete occlusion, vascular injury, and hemorrhage secondary to perforation.43 In addition, these tech-niques may not be applicable in very young infants because the peripheral vessels do not provide adequate access for the delivery devices. Attempts are being made to develop such devices for pre-mature infants with early successful results in study populations.44Surgical closure can be achieved via either open or video-assisted approaches. The open approach employs a muscle-sparing posterior lateral thoracotomy in the third or fourth intercostal space on the side of the aorta (generally the left). The lung is then retracted anteriorly. In the neonate, the PDA is singly ligated with a surgical clip or permanent suture. Care must be taken to avoid the recurrent laryngeal nerve, which courses around the PDA. The PDA can also be ligated via a median sternotomy; however, this approach is generally reserved for patients who have additional cardiac or great vessel lesions requiring repair. Occasionally, a short, broad ductus, in which the dimension of Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   76022/02/19   2:54 PM 761CONGENITAL HEART DISEASECHAPTER 20its width approaches that of its length, will be encountered. In this case, division between vascular clamps with oversewing of both ends is advisable (Fig. 20-8). In extreme cases, the use of CPB to decompress the large ductus during ligation is an option.Video-assisted thoracoscopic occlusion, using metal clips, also has been described, although it offers few advantages over the standard surgical approach. Preterm newborns and children may do well with a surgical technique, while older patients (older than age 5 years) and those with smaller ducts (<3 mm) do well with coil occlusion. In fact, Moore and colleagues recently concluded from their series that coil occlusion is the procedure Figure 20-7. Chest x-ray before and after PDA ligation showing the dramatic improvement in the lung fields after ligation (arrow points to the clip used for PDA ligation).Figure 20-8. Surgical PDA ligation. A clip has been applied to occlude the ductus arteriosus. Note the relationship of the recurrent laryngeal nerve to the ductus arteriosus. (Used with permission from Kelly Rosso MD.)of choice for ducts smaller than 4 mm.45 Complete closure rates using catheter-based techniques have steadily improved.Outcomes. In premature infants, the surgical mortality is very low, although the overall hospital death rate is significant as a consequence of other complications of prematurity. In older infants and children, mortality is less than 1%. Bleeding, chylo-thorax, vocal cord paralysis, and the need for reoperation occur infrequently. With the advent of muscle-sparing thoracotomy, the risk of subsequent arm dysfunction or breast abnormalities is virtually eliminated.46Aortic CoarctationAnatomy. Coarctation of the aorta (COA) is defined as a lumi-nal narrowing in the aorta that causes an obstruction to blood flow. This narrowing is most commonly located distal to the left subclavian artery. The embryologic origin of COA is a sub-ject of some controversy. One theory holds that the obstructing shelf, which is largely composed of tissue found within the duc-tus, forms as the ductus involutes.47 The other theory holds that a diminished aortic isthmus develops secondary to decreased aortic flow in infants with enhanced ductal circulation.Extensive collateral circulation develops, predominantly involving the intercostals and mammary arteries as a direct result of aortic flow obstruction. This translates into the well-known finding of “rib-notching” on chest radiograph, as well as a prominent pulsation underneath the ribs.Other associated anomalies, such as ventricular septal defect, PDA, and ASD, may be seen with COA, but the most common is that of a bicuspid aortic valve, which can be demon-strated in 25% to 42% of cases.48Pathophysiology. Infants with COA develop symptoms con-sistent with left ventricular outflow obstruction, including pulmo-nary overcirculation and, later, biventricular failure. In addition, proximal systemic hypertension develops as a result of mechanical obstruction to ventricular ejection, as well as hypoperfusion-induced activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system. PAAoBrunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   76122/02/19   2:54 PM 762SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 20-9. Reformatted images obtained from CT angiography of a baby showing a descrete coarctation of the aorta (‘*’ points to the coarctation).ABFigure 20-10. A. Reformatted images obtained from a CT angio-gram of a child with discrete coarctation of the aorta (‘*’ points to the coarctation). B. Aortogram performed in the cardiac catheteriza-tion lab after stenting the coarctation (‘*’ points to the stent).Interestingly, hypertension is often persistent after surgical correction despite complete amelioration of the mechanical obstruction and pressure gradient.49 It has been shown that early surgical correction may prevent the development of long-term hypertension, which undoubtedly contributes to many of the adverse sequelae of COA, including the development of circle of Willis aneurysms, aortic dissection and rupture, and an increased incidence of coronary arteriopathy with resulting myocardial infarction.50Diagnosis. COA is likely to become symptomatic either in the newborn period if other anomalies are present or in the late ado-lescent period with the onset of left ventricular failure.Physical examination will demonstrate a hyperdynamic precordium with a harsh murmur localized to the left chest and back. Femoral pulses will be dramatically decreased when com-pared to upper extremity pulses, and differential cyanosis may be apparent until ductal closure.Echocardiography will reliably demonstrate the narrowed aortic segment, as well as define the pressure gradient across the stenotic segment. In addition, detailed information regarding other associated anomalies can be gleaned. Aortography (Fig. 20-9) is reserved for those cases in which the echocardiographic findings are equivocal. Cross-sectional imaging with computed tomogra-phy (CT) scan or MRI is also increasing to facilitate definition of arch anatomy (i.e., transverse arch hypoplasia), assess intracardiac volumes, and associated defects.Therapy. The routine management of hemodynamically sig-nificant COA in all age groups has traditionally been surgical. Transcatheter repairs (Fig. 20-10) are used with increasing frequency in older patients and those with recoarctation fol-lowing surgical repair. Balloon dilatation of native coarctation in neonates generally is avoided because of the high recoarc-tation rate. However, in infants who present with severely depressed LV function and a closed ductus arteriosus, initial decompression with balloon dilation of the COA followed by later surgical intervention may be useful. The most common surgical techniques in current use are resection with end-to-end anastomosis or extended end-to-end anastomosis, taking care to remove all residual ductal tissue.51,52 Extended end-to-end anastomosis (Fig. 20-11) may also allow the surgeon to treat transverse arch hypoplasia, which is commonly encoun-tered in infants with aortic coarctation.53,54 The subclavian flap Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   76222/02/19   2:55 PM 763CONGENITAL HEART DISEASECHAPTER 20aortoplasty is another repair, although it is used less frequently in the modern era because of the risk of late aneurysm formation and possible underdevelopment of the left upper extremity isch-emia.52 In this method, the left subclavian artery is transected and brought down over the coarcted segment as a vascular-ized patch. The main benefit of these techniques is that they do not involve the use of prosthetic materials, and evidence sug-gests that extended end-to-end anastomosis may promote arch growth, especially in infants with the smallest initial aortic arch diameters.53Despite the benefits, however, extended end-to-end anas-tomosis may not be feasible when there is a long segment of coarctation or in the presence of previous surgery because suf-ficient mobilization of the aorta above and below the lesion may not be possible. In this instance, prosthetic materials, such as a patch aortoplasty, in which a prosthetic patch is used to enlarge the coarcted segment, or an interposition tube graft must be employed. One of the most important decisions in infants and neonates with COA and some degree of transverse arch hypoplasia is whether the lesion should be approached with a sternotomy or a thoracotomy. Cross-sectional imaging with  CT scan can be extremely helpful in assessing the adequacy of the transverse arch and any associated abnormalities with branching that may complicate repair from the side.The most common complications after COA repair are late restenosis (Fig. 20-12) and aneurysm formation at the repair site.55-57 Aneurysm formation is particularly common after patch aortoplasty when using Dacron material. In a large series of 891 patients, aneurysms occurred in 5.4% of the total, with 89% occurring in the group who received Dacron-patch aortoplasty and only 8% occurring in those who received resection with primary end-to-end anastomosis.55 A further complication, although uncommon, is lower-body paralysis resulting from ischemic spinal cord injury during the repair. This dreaded outcome complicates 0.5% of all surgical repairs, but its incidence can be lessened with the use of some form of distal perfusion, preferably left heart bypass with the use of femoral arterial or distal thoracic aorta for arterial inflow and Figure 20-11. Appearance of the aorta after resection of the seg-ment of coarctation and reconstruction with an extended end-to-end anastomosis. (Used with permission from Kelly Rosso MD.)Figure 20-12. Reformatted images obtained from a CT angiogram after recurrent coarctation repaired by an extra anatomic bypass  (‘*’ points to the bypass graft).the femoral vein or left atrium for venous return.51 These tech-niques are generally reserved for older patients with complex coarctations that may need prolonged aortic cross clamp times for repair, often in the setting of large collateral vessels and/or previous surgery.58Hypertension is also well recognized following repair of COA. Bouchart and colleagues reported that in a cohort of 35 hypertensive adults (mean age, 28 years) undergoing repair, despite a satisfactory anatomic outcome, only 23 patients were normotensive at a mean follow-up period of 165 months.56 Like-wise, Bhat and associates reported that in a series of 84 patients (mean age at repair, 29 years), 31% remained hypertensive at a mean follow-up of 5 years following surgery.57Although operative repair is still the gold standard, treat-ment of COA by catheter-based intervention has become more widespread for older children and adults. Both balloon dilata-tion and primary stent implantation have been used successfully. The most extensive study of the results of balloon angioplasty reported on 970 procedures: 422 native and 548 recurrent COAs. Mean gradient reduction was 74% ± 24% for native and 70% ± 31% for recurrent COA.59 This demonstrated that catheter-based therapy could produce equally effective results both in recurrent and in primary COA, a finding with far-reaching implications in the new paradigm of multidisciplinary treatment algorithms for CHD. In the Valvuloplasty and Angioplasty of Congeni-tal Anomalies (VACA) report, higher preangioplasty gradient, earlier procedure date, older patient age, and the presence of recurrent COA were independent risk factors for suboptimal procedural outcome.5The gradient after balloon dilatation in most series is gen-erally acceptable. However, there is a significant minority of patients (0%–26%) for whom the procedural outcome is sub-optimal, with a postprocedure gradient of 20 mmHg or greater. These patients may be ideal candidates for primary stent place-ment. Deaths from the procedure also are infrequent (<1% of cases), and the main major complication is aneurysm formation, PAAoBrunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   76322/02/19   2:55 PM 764SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIwhich occurs in 7% of patients.51 With stent implantation, many authors have demonstrated improved resolution of stenosis compared with balloon dilatation alone, yet the long-term com-plications on vessel wall compliance remain largely unknown because only mid-term data are widely available.In summary, children younger than age 6 months with native COA should be treated with surgical repair, while those requiring intervention at later ages may be ideal candidates for balloon dilatation or primary stent implantation.51 Additionally, catheter-based therapy should be employed for those cases of restenosis following either surgical or primary endovascular management.Truncus ArteriosusAnatomy. Truncus arteriosus is a rare anomaly, compris-ing between 1% and 2% of all live born cases of CHD.60 It is characterized by a single great artery that arises from the heart, overrides the ventricular septum, and supplies the pulmonary, systemic, and coronary circulations.The two major classification systems are those of Collett and Edwards, described in 1949, and Van Praagh, described in 1965 (Fig. 20-13).61,62 The Collett and Edwards classification focuses mainly on the origin of the pulmonary arteries from the common arterial trunk, whereas the Van Praagh system is based on the presence or absence of a VSD, the degree of formation of the aorticopulmonary septum, and the status of the aortic arch.During embryonic life, the truncus arteriosus normally begins to separate and spiral into a distinguishable anterior pul-monary artery and posterior aorta. Persistent truncus, therefore, represents an arrest in embryologic development at this stage.63 Other implicated events include twisting of the dividing trun-cus because of ventricular looping, subinfundibular atresia, and abnormal location of the semilunar valve anlages.64The neural crest may also play a crucial role in the normal formation of the great vessels, as experimental studies in chick embryos have shown that ablation of the neural crest results in persistent truncus arteriosus.65 The neural crest also develops into the pharyngeal pouches that give rise to the thymus and parathyroids, which likely explains the prevalent association of truncus arteriosus and DiGeorge’s syndrome.66The annulus of the truncal valve usually straddles the ventricular septum in a “balanced” fashion; however, it is not unusual for it to be positioned predominantly over the RV, which increases the potential for LVOT obstruction following surgical repair. In the great majority of cases, the leaflets are thickened and deformed, which leads to valvular insufficiency. There are usually three leaflets (60%), but occasionally a bicus-pid (5%) or even a quadricuspid valve (25%) is present.61In truncus arteriosus, the pulmonary trunk bifurcates, with the left and right pulmonary arteries forming posteriorly and to the left in most cases. The caliber of the pulmonary arterial branches is usually normal, with stenosis or diffuse hypoplasia occurring in rare instances.The coronary arteries may be normal; however, anomalies are not unusual and occur in 50% of cases.67 Many of these are relatively minor, although two variations are of particular importance because they have implications in the conduct of operative repair. The first is that the left coronary ostium may arise high in the sinus of Valsalva or even from the truncal tis-sue at the margin of the pulmonary artery tissue. This coronary artery can be injured during repair when the pulmonary arteries are removed from the trunk or when the resulting truncal defect is closed. The second is that the right coronary artery can give rise to an important accessory anterior descending artery, which often passes across the RV in the exact location where the right ventriculotomy is commonly performed during repair.68Physiology and Diagnosis. The main pathophysiologic con-sequences of truncus arteriosus are (a) the obligatory mixing of systemic and pulmonary venous blood at the level of the ven-tricular septal defect (VSD) and truncal valve, which leads to arterial saturations near 85% and (b) the presence of a nonre-strictive left-to-right shunt, which occurs during both systole and diastole, the volume of which is determined by the relative resistances of the pulmonary and systemic circulations. Addi-tionally, truncal valve stenosis or regurgitation, the presence of important LVOT obstruction, and stenosis of pulmonary artery branches can further contribute to both pressure and volume-loading of the ventricles. The presence of these lesions often results in severe heart failure and cardiovascular instability early in life. Pulmonary vascular resistance may develop as early as 6 months of age, leading to poor results with late surgical correction.Patients with truncus arteriosus usually present in the neo-natal period, with signs and symptoms of congestive heart fail-ure and mild to moderate cyanosis. A pansystolic murmur may be noted at the left sternal border, and occasionally a diastolic murmur may be heard in the presence of truncal regurgitation.Chest radiography will be consistent with pulmonary over-circulation, and a right aortic arch can be appreciated 35% of the time. The thymus is prominent by its absence if associated with DiGeorge syndrome (Fig. 20-14). The ECG is usually non-specific, demonstrating normal sinus rhythm with biventricular hypertrophy.Echocardiography with Doppler color-flow or pulsed Doppler is diagnostic and usually provides sufficient informa-tion to determine the type of truncus arteriosus, the origin of the Figure 20-13. Collett & Edwards classification for Truncus arteriosus. (Used with permission from Kelly Rosso MD.)RPARPARPAType 1Type 2Type 3LPALPALPABrunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   76422/02/19   2:55 PM 765CONGENITAL HEART DISEASECHAPTER 20coronary arteries and their proximity to the pulmonary trunk, the character of the truncal valves, and the extent of truncal insuffi-ciency (Fig. 20-15). CT scan helps define the pulmonary arteries and the coronary anatomy (Fig. 20-16). Cardiac catheterization can be helpful in cases where pulmonary hypertension is sus-pected or to further delineate coronary artery anomalies prior to repair.The presence of truncus is an indication for surgery. Repair should be undertaken in the neonatal period or as soon as the diagnosis is established.Repair. Truncus arteriosus was first managed with pulmonary artery banding as described by Armer and colleagues in 1961.69 However, this technique led to only marginal improvements in 1-year survival rates because ventricular failure inevitably occurred. In 1967, however, complete repair was accomplished by McGoon and his associates based on the experimental work of Rastelli, who introduced the idea that an extracardiac valved conduit could be used to restore ventricular-to-pulmonary artery continuity.70 Over the next 20 years, improved survival rates led to uniform adoption of complete repair even in the youngest and smallest infants.71Surgical correction entails the use of CPB. Repair is completed by separation of the pulmonary arteries from the aorta, closure of the aortic defect (occasionally with a patch) to minimize coronary flow complications, placement of a valved cryopreserved allograft or jugular venous valved conduit (Con-tegra) to reconstruct the RVOT, and VSD closure. Important branch pulmonary arterial stenosis should be repaired at the time of complete repair and can usually be accomplished with longitudinal allograft patch arterioplasty. Severe truncal valve insufficiency occasionally requires truncal valve repair or even replacement, which can be accomplished with a cryopreserved allograft.72Results. The results of complete repair of truncus have steadily improved. Ebert reported a 91% survival rate in his series of 77 patients who were younger than 6 months of age; later reports by others confirmed these findings and demonstrated that excel-lent results could be achieved in even smaller infants with com-plex-associated defects.71Newer extracardiac conduits also have been developed and used with success, which has widened the repertoire of the modern congenital heart surgeon and improved outcomes.72,73 Severe truncal regurgitation, interrupted aortic arch, coexistent coronary anomalies, chromosomal or genetic anomalies, and age younger than 100 days are risk factors associated with peri-operative death and poor outcome.Total Anomalous Pulmonary  Venous ConnectionTotal anomalous pulmonary venous connection (TAPVC) occurs in 1% to 2% of all cardiac malformations and is char-acterized by abnormal drainage of the pulmonary veins into the right heart, whether through connections into the right atrium or into its tributaries.74 Accordingly, the only mechanism by which oxygenated blood can return to the left heart is through an ASD, which is almost uniformly present with TAPVC.Figure 20-14. Chest x-ray of a baby with DiGeorge syndrome and truncus arteriosus. Note the absence of the thymic shadow in the superior mediastinum (‘*’).Figure 20-15. Echo appearance of a baby with Truncus Ateriosus. The ‘*’ represents the VSD, and the arrow points to the truncal valve.Figure 20-16. CT scan of a baby with Truncus Arteriosus Type 2. The ‘*’ mark the RPA and the LPA. Note the stenosis at the origin of the LPA.Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   76522/02/19   2:55 PM 766SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIUnique to this lesion is the absence of a definitive form of palliation. Thus, TAPVC with concomitant obstruction (Fig. 20-17) represents one of the only true surgical emergen-cies across the entire spectrum of congenital heart surgery.Anatomy and Embryology. The lungs develop from an out-pouching of the foregut, and their venous plexus arises as part of the splanchnic venous system. TAPVC arises when the pul-monary vein evagination from the posterior surface of the left atrium fails to fuse with the pulmonary venous plexus surround-ing the lung buds. In place of the usual connection to the left atrium, at least one connection of the pulmonary plexus to the splanchnic plexus persists. Accordingly, the pulmonary veins drain to the heart through a systemic vein.Darling and colleagues classified TAPVC (Fig. 20-18) according to the site or level of connection of the pulmonary veins to the systemic venous system75: type I (45%), anomalous connection at the supracardiac level; type II (25%), anomalous connection at the cardiac level; type III (25%), anomalous con-nection at the infracardiac level; and type IV (5%), anomalous connection at multiple levels.76 Within each category, further subdivisions can be implemented, depending on whether pul-monary venous obstruction exists. Obstruction to pulmonary venous drainage is a powerful predictor of adverse natural out-come and occurs most frequently with the infracardiac type, especially when the pattern of infracardiac connection prevents the ductus venosus from bypassing the liver.77Pathophysiology and Diagnosis. Because both pulmonary and systemic venous blood returns to the right atrium in all forms of TAPVC, a right-to-left intracardiac shunt must be present in order for the afflicted infant to survive. This invariably occurs via a nonrestrictive patent foramen ovale. Because of this obliga-tory mixing, cyanosis is usually present, and its degree depends on the ratio of pulmonary to systemic blood flow. Decreased Figure 20-17. Infracardiac type of TAPVR. Note the stenosis (‘*’) of the descending vertical vein as it drains into the portal system.Figure 20-18. The various types of TAPVC as described by Darling and colleagues. (Used with permission from Nicholas Clarke MD.)pulmonary blood flow is a consequence of pulmonary venous obstruction, the presence of which is unlikely if the right ven-tricular pressure is less than 85% of systemic pressure.78The child with TAPVC may present with severe cyanosis and respiratory distress, necessitating urgent surgical interven-tion if a severe degree of pulmonary venous obstruction is pres-ent. However, in cases where there is no obstructive component, the clinical picture is usually one of pulmonary overcircula-tion, hepatomegaly, tachycardia, and tachypnea with feeding. In a child with serious obstruction, arterial blood gas analysis reveals severe hypoxemia (partial pressure of oxygen [Po2] < 20 mmHg), with metabolic acidosis.79Chest radiography (Fig. 20-19) will show normal heart size with generalized pulmonary edema. Two-dimensional echocardiography is very useful in establishing the diagnosis and also can assess ventricular septal position, which may be leftward secondary to small left ventricular volumes, as well as estimate the right ventricular pressure based on the height of the tricuspid regurgitant jet. Echocardiography can usually identify the pulmonary venous connections (types I to IV), and it is rarely necessary to perform other diagnostic tests.Cardiac catheterization is not recommended in these patients because the osmotic load from the intravenous contrast can exacerbate the degree of pulmonary edema.80 When cardiac catheterization is performed, equalization of oxygen saturations in all four heart chambers is a hallmark finding in this disease because the mixed blood returned to the right atrium gets dis-tributed throughout the heart.Therapy. Operative correction of TAPVC requires anastomo-sis of the common pulmonary venous channel to the left atrium, obliteration of the anomalous venous connection, and closure of the ASD.79,81IIIAIVCIVCSVCLPVLARARPVIVCRVLVRARVDVVVPVLVLASVCCPVIVCIIBIIISVCVVLPVCPVSVCRPRALARVLVCPVLALVRARVBrunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   76622/02/19   2:55 PM 767CONGENITAL HEART DISEASECHAPTER 20All types of TAPVC are approached through a median ster-notomy, and many surgeons use deep hypothermic circulatory arrest in order to achieve an accurate and widely patent anastomo-sis. The technique for supracardiac TAPVC includes early division of the vertical vein, retraction of the aorta and the superior vena cava laterally to expose the posterior aspect of the left atrium and the pulmonary venous confluence, and a side-to-side anastomosis between a long, horizontal biatrial incision and a longitudinal inci-sion within the pulmonary venous confluence. The ASD can then be closed with an autologous pericardial or synthetic patch.In patients with TAPVC to the coronary sinus without obstruction, a simple unroofing of the coronary sinus can be performed through a single right atriotomy with concomitant closure of the ASD. If pulmonary venous obstruction is pres-ent, the repair should include generous resection of roof of the coronary sinus.79Repair of infracardiac TAPVC entails ligation of the verti-cal vein at the diaphragm, followed by construction of a proximal, patulous longitudinal venotomy. This repair is usually performed by “rolling” the heart toward the left, thus exposing the left atrium where it usually overlies the descending vertical vein.As originally described by Lacour-Gayet and colleagues at the Marie-Lannelongue Hospital, Paris, and Coles and col-leagues at The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, the suture-less technique was developed for patients with anastomotic stenosis occurring after TAPVC repair.80,81 After determining that favorable outcomes were possible using this technique, it is currently used in selected patients upon initial presentation of TAPVC.81 Incisions are made in the venous confluence. Based on the surgeon’s discretion, the incisions are extended into both upper and lower pulmonary veins separately if judged to be important for an unobstructed pathway. An atriopericardial anastomosis is created using the pericardium adjacent to where the pulmonary veins enter the pericardium (Fig. 20-20). This anastomosis avoids direct contact with the incision site in the wall of the pulmonary veins and allows the free egress of blood from the lungs to the left atrium.The perioperative care of these infants is crucial because episodes of pulmonary hypertension can occur within the first 48 hours, which contribute significantly to mortality following repair. Muscle relaxants and narcotics should be administered during this period to maintain a constant state of anesthesia. Arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide (Pco2) should be maintained at 30 mmHg with use of a volume ventilator, and the fraction of inspired oxygen (Fio2) should be increased to keep the pulmonary arterial pressure at less than two-thirds of the systemic pressure.Results. Results of TAPVC in infancy have markedly improved in recent years, with an operative mortality of 5% or less in some series.79-82 This improvement is probably multifac-torial, mainly as a consequence of early noninvasive diagnosis and aggressive perioperative management. The routine use of echocardiography; improvements in myocardial protection with specific attention to the RV; creation of a large, tension-free anastomosis with maximal use of the venous confluence and atrial tissue; use of a sutureless technique in selected cases; and prevention of pulmonary hypertensive events have likely played a major role in reducing operative mortality. The importance of risk factors for early mortality, such as venous obstruction at presentation, urgency of operative repair, and infradiaphrag-matic anatomic type, has been debated.81,83Bando and colleagues84 made the controversial statement that both preoperative pulmonary venous obstruction and ana-tomic type had been neutralized as potential risk factors beyond calendar year 1991. Hyde et al82 similarly reported that connec-tion type was not related to outcome. However, a large single-institution report of 377 children with TAPVC by the author from the Hospital for Sick Children in Toronto85 found that, although outcomes had improved over time, patient anatomic factors were still important determinants of both survival and the need for subsequent reoperation. Risk factors for postrepair death were earlier operation year, younger age at repair, cardiac connection type, and postoperative pulmonary venous obstruc-tion. Risk-adjusted estimated 1-year survival for a patient repaired at birth with unfavorable morphology in 2006 was 37% (95% confidence interval [CI], 8%–80%) compared with 96% (95% CI, 91%–99%) for a patient with favorable morphology repaired at age 1 year. Freedom from reoperation was 82% ± 6% 4Figure 20-19. Chest x-ray of a newborn with obstructed infracar-diac type of TAPVR rescued by ECMO. Note the ECMO cannulas in the right neck (‘*’).InfracardiacTAPVCConventionalRepairSuturelessRepairFigure 20-20. Differences between conventional repair of total anomalous pulmonary venous connection (TAPVC) and sutureless repair of TAPVC. In the sutureless techniques, there are no sutures placed in the fragile veins themselves. Rather, the pericardial flaps are used to create a “well” for the pulmonary venous return (bottom inset). Early and late extrinsic stenosis are thought to be reduced using this latter technique.Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   76722/02/19   2:55 PM 768SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIat 11 years after repair, with increased risk associated with mixed connection and postoperative pulmonary venous obstruction. A study from the Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, showed a lower incidence of reoperation in the sutureless technique com-pared to conventional pulmonary venous confluence–left atrial anastomosis.86 However, there was no statistically significant difference suggesting similar results between the strategies. Although the sutureless technique appears to have favorable outcomes at primary repair for TAPVC, long-term follow-up is necessary to evaluate the occurrence of arrhythmias, such as complete heart block and atrial tachycardia, since an incision on the atrial septum and atrial wall is more invasive compared to the conventional technique.The most significant postoperative complication of TAPVC repair is pulmonary venous obstruction (Figure 20-21), which occurs 9% to 11% of the time, regardless of the surgi-cal technique employed. Mortality varies between 30% and 45%, and alternative catheter interventions do not offer defini-tive solutions.80 Recurrent pulmonary venous obstruction can be localized at the site of the pulmonary venous anastomosis (extrinsic), which usually can be cured with patch enlargement or balloon dilatation, or it may be secondary to endocardial thickening of the pulmonary venous ostia frequently resulting in diffuse pulmonary venous sclerosis (intrinsic), which car-ries a 66% mortality rate because few good solutions exist.77 More commonly, postrepair left ventricular dysfunction can occur as the noncompliant LV suddenly is required to handle an increased volume load from redirected pulmonary venous return. This can manifest as an increase in pulmonary artery pressure but is distinguishable from primary pulmonary hyper-tension (another possible postoperative complication following repair of TAPVC) from the elevated left atrial pressure and LV dysfunction along with echocardiographic evidence of poor LV contractility. In pulmonary hypertension, the left atrial pressure may be low, the LV may appear “underfilled” (by echocardiog-raphy), and the RV may appear dilated. In either case, postop-erative support for a few days with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation may be lifesaving, and TAPVC should be repaired in centers that have this capacity.Some investigators have speculated that preoperative pul-monary venous obstruction is associated with increased medial thickness within the pulmonary vasculature, which may predis-pose these infants to intrinsic pulmonary venous stenosis despite adequate pulmonary venous decompression.82 The majority of studies demonstrating that preoperative pulmonary venous obstruction is a predictor of subsequent need for reoperation to correct recurrent pulmonary venous obstruction lend credence to this notion.Cor TriatriatumAnatomy. Cor triatriatum is a rare congenital heart defect char-acterized by the presence of a fibromuscular diaphragm that par-titions the left atrium into two chambers: a superior chamber that receives drainage from the pulmonary veins, and an inferior chamber that communicates with the mitral valve and the LV (Fig. 20-22). An ASD frequently exists between the superior chamber and the right atrium, or, more rarely, between the right atrium and the inferior chamber.Pathophysiology and Diagnosis. Cor triatriatum results in obstruction of pulmonary venous return to the left atrium. The degree of obstruction is variable and depends on the size of fen-estrations present in the left atrial membrane, the size of the ASD, and the existence of other associated anomalies. If the communication between the superior and inferior chambers is <3 mm, patients usually are symptomatic during the first year of life. The afflicted infant will present with the stigmata of low cardiac output and pulmonary venous hypertension, as well as congestive heart failure and poor feeding.Physical examination may demonstrate a loud pulmonary S2 sound and a right ventricular heave, as well as jugular venous distention and hepatomegaly. Chest radiography will show car-diomegaly and pulmonary vascular prominence, and the ECG will suggest right ventricular hypertrophy. Two-dimensional echocardiography provides a definitive diagnosis in most cases, with catheterization necessary only when echocardiographic evaluation is equivocal.Therapy. Operative treatment for cor triatriatum is fairly simple. CPB and cardioplegic arrest are used. A right atriotomy usually Figure 20-21. Angiogram showing the discrete stenosis (‘*’) of the right-sided pulmonary veins after conventional repair for supra-cardiac type TAPVC.Figure 20-22. Echocardiogram (apical 4 chamber view) showing the discrete membrane (‘*’) in a patient with Cor triatritum.Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   76822/02/19   2:55 PM 769CONGENITAL HEART DISEASECHAPTER 20allows access to the left atrial membrane through the existing ASD because it is dilated secondary to communication with the pulmonary venous chamber. The membrane is then excised, tak-ing care not to injure the mitral valve or the interatrial septum, and the ASD is closed with a patch. Alternatively, if the right atrium is small, the membrane can be exposed through an inci-sion directly into the superior left atrial chamber, just anterior to the right pulmonary veins. Surgical results are uniformly excel-lent for this defect, with survival approaching 100%.The utility of catheter-based intervention for this diagnosis remains controversial, although there have been some reports of successful balloon dilatation.87Aortopulmonary WindowEmbryology and Anatomy. Aortopulmonary window (APW) is a rare congenital lesion, occurring in about 0.2% of patients, characterized by incomplete development of the septum that normally divides the truncus into the aorta and the pulmonary artery88In the vast majority of cases, APW occurs as a single defect of minimal length, which begins a few millimeters above the semilunar valves on the left lateral wall of the aorta (Fig. 20-23). Coronary artery anomalies, such as aberrant origin of the right or left coronary artery from the main pulmonary artery, are occa-sionally present.Pathophysiology and Diagnosis. The dominant pathophysi-ology of APW is that of a large left-to-right shunt with increased pulmonary flow and the early development of congestive heart failure. Like other lesions with left-to-right flow, the magnitude of the shunt is determined by both the size of the defect and the pulmonary vascular resistance.Infants with APW present with frequent respiratory tract infections, tachypnea with feeding, and failure to thrive. Cya-nosis usually is absent because these infants deteriorate prior to the onset of significant pulmonary hypertension. The rapid decline with this defect occurs because shunt flow continues during both phases of the cardiac cycle, which limits systemic perfusion and increases ventricular work.89The diagnosis of APW begins with the physical exami-nation, which may demonstrate a systolic flow murmur, a hyperdynamic precordium, and bounding peripheral pulses. The chest radiograph will show pulmonary overcirculation and cardiomegaly, and the ECG will usually demonstrate either left ventricular hypertrophy or biventricular hypertrophy. Echocar-diography (Fig. 20-24) can detect the defect and also provide information about associated anomalies. Retrograde aortogra-phy will confirm the diagnosis but is rarely necessary.Therapy. All infants with APW require surgical correction once the diagnosis is made. Repair is undertaken through a median sternotomy and the use of CPB. The pulmonary arteries are occluded once the distal aorta is cannulated, and a transaor-tic repair using a prosthetic patch for pulmonary artery closure is then carried out. The coronary ostia must be carefully visual-ized and included on the aortic side of the patch. Alternatively, a two-patch technique can be used, which may eliminate recurrent fistulas from suture line leaks that occasionally occur with the single-patch method.90Results. Results are generally excellent, with an operative mortality in most large series of less than 5%.Vascular Rings and Pulmonary Artery SlingsVascular rings constitute a group of disorders derived from anomalies that result from abnormal development of the aortic arches resulting in compression of the trachea or esophagus. The surgical management of vascular rings dates back to 1945 when Dr. Gross described the surgical management of a kid with double aortic arch.91 Most children present with symptoms during the first few months of life. Vascular rings can be com-plete (e.g., double aortic arch, right aortic arch with left liga-ment) or partial (e.g., innominate artery compression syndrome, pulmonary artery sling).Anatomy. The embryologic basis of vascular rings involves the development of six pairs of aortic arches and the dorsal and ventral aortae. The development of a specific type of vascular ring depends of the deletion or preservation of a specific seg-ment of these structures. The persistence of the right and left fourth arches leads to the development of double aortic arch. Persistence of the fourth right aortic arch and the involution of the left fourth arch leads to the development of a right aor-tic arch system with various combinations of mirror imaging Figure 20-23. Cartoon depicting the various types of aortopulmonary window. (Used with permission from Nicholas Clarke MD.)Figure 20-24. Echo demonstrating an aortopulmonary window (‘*’).Type IType IIType IIIBrunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   76922/02/19   2:55 PM 770SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIbranching, aberrant subclavian arteries or with a left-sided liga-mentum arterisum. When the developing left lung captures its blood supply from the right sixth arch caudad to the tracheo-bronchial tree, it leads to the development of a pulmonary artery sling. The left pulmonary artery arises from the right pulmonary artery and then wraps around the trachea and esophagus forming a “sling.”92 The pathophysiology of innominate artery compres-sion syndrome is not very well understood.Pathophysiology and Diagnosis. The symptoms associated with vascular rings include respiratory distress, barking cough, stridor, apnea, dysphagia, and recurrent respiratory tract infec-tions. The diagnosis often requires a high index of suspicion. Minor respiratory tract infections may precipitate serious respi-ratory distress. The work up includes chest X-rays, echocardiog-raphy, bronchoscopy, CT scan (Fig. 20-25), MRI (Fig. 20-26), and, rarely, cardiac catheterization. Chest X-rays show the rela-tionship of the aortic arch to the trachea. Tracheal compression can be better evaluated using lateral films. Unilateral hyperinfla-tion of the lung is sometimes seen and is often associated with a pulmonary artery sling (Fig. 20-27). PA slings (Fig. 20-28) are often associated with complete tracheal rings necessitating a bronchoscopy when this diagnosis is made (Fig. 20-29). Patients with dysphagia require a barium esophagogram as a part of their work-up (Fig. 20-30).Treatment. All symptomatic patients should undergo surgery. On close questioning nearly all patients are symptomatic.93 The treatment varies depending on the type of vascular ring. A left posterolateral thoracotomy provides good exposure to most types. A right thoracotomy is often used for innominate artery compression syndrome, and a median sternotomy often with cardiopulmonary bypass is used to treat pulmonary artery slings with or without associated complete tracheal rings. The out-comes and results for vascular rings are excellent (Fig. 20-31). Video-assisted thoracoscopic approaches have been developed for the management of these conditions.94-96 The criticism often stated involves retraction of vascular structures into the medias-tinum and losing control of the stumps prior to definitve control leading to exsanguination.96DEFECTS REQUIRING PALLIATIONTricuspid AtresiaTricuspid atresia occurs in 2% to 3% of patients with CHD and is characterized by atresia of the tricuspid valve. This results in discontinuity between the right atrium and RV. The RV is generally hypoplastic, and left-heart filling is dependent on an ASD. Tricuspid atresia is the most common form of the single-ventricle complex, indicating that there is functionally only one ventricular chamber.Anatomy. As mentioned, tricuspid atresia results in a lack of communication between the right atrium and the RV, and in the 5Figure 20-25. CT angiogram showing the four artery sign classic of double aortic arch.Figure 20-26. MRI showing a double aortic arch.Figure 20-27. Unilateral hyperinflation of the left lung associ-ated with a rare vascular ring: left ascending aorta and right sided descending aorta.Figure 20-28. CT angiogram showing a PA sling. Note the LPA wrapping around behind the trachea.Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   77022/02/19   2:55 PM 771CONGENITAL HEART DISEASECHAPTER 20majority of patients there is no identifiable valve tissue or rem-nant.98 The right atrium is generally enlarged and muscular, with a fibrofatty floor. An unrestrictive ASD is usually present. The LV is often enlarged as it receives both systemic and pulmonary blood flow, but the left AV valve is usually normal.The RV, however, is usually severely hypoplastic, and there is sometimes a VSD in its trabeculated or infundibular portion. In many cases, the interventricular communication is a site of obstruction to pulmonary blood flow, but obstruction may also occur at the level of the outlet valve or in the subval-vular infundibulum.99 In most cases, pulmonary blood flow is dependent on the presence of a PDA, and there may be no flow into the pulmonary circulation except for this PDA.Tricuspid atresia is classified according to the relationship of the great vessels and by the degree of obstruction to pulmo-nary blood flow. Because of the rarity of tricuspid atresia with transposed great arteries, we will restrict our discussion to tri-cuspid atresia with normally related great vessels.Pathophysiology. The main pathophysiology in tricuspid atresia is that of a univentricular heart of left ventricular morphology. That is, the LV must receive systemic blood via the interatrial communication and then distribute it to both the pulmonary circulation and the systemic circulation. Unless there is a VSD (as is found in some cases), pulmonary flow is dependent on the presence of a PDA. As the ductus begins to close shortly after birth, infants become intensely cyanotic. Reestablishing ductal patency (with PGE1) restores pulmonary blood flow and stabilizes patients for surgical intervention. Pulmonary hypertension is unusual in tricuspid atresia. However, occasional patients have a large VSD between the LV and the infundibular portion of the RV (just below the pulmonary valve). If there is no obstruction at the level of this VSD or at the valve, these infants may actually present with heart failure from excessive pulmonary blood flow. Regardless of whether these infants are “ductal-dependent” for pulmonary blood flow or have pulmonary blood flow provided across a VSD, they will be cyanotic since the obligatory right-to-left shunt at the atrial level will provide complete mixing of systemic and pulmonary venous return so that the LV ejects a hypoxemic mixture into the aorta.Diagnosis. The signs and symptoms of tricuspid atresia are dependent on the underlying anatomic variant, but most infants are cyanotic and hypoxic as a result of decreased pulmonary blood flow and the complete mixing at the atrial level. When pulmonary blood flow is provided through a VSD, there may be a prominent systolic murmur. Tricuspid atresia with pulmonary blood flow from a PDA may present with the soft, continuous murmur of a PDA in conjunction with cyanosis.In the minority of patients with tricuspid atresia, symp-toms of congestive heart failure will predominate. This is often related to excessive flow across a VSD. The natural history of the muscular VSDs in these infants is that they will close and the congestive heart failure will dissipate and transform into cyano-sis with reduced pulmonary blood flow. Chest radiography will show decreased pulmonary vascularity. The ECG is strongly suggestive because uncharacteristic left axis deviation will be present, due to underdevelopment of the RV. Two-dimensional echocardiography readily confirms the diagnosis and the ana-tomic subtype. (Fig 20-32)Treatment. The treatment for tricuspid atresia in the earlier era of palliation was aimed at correcting the defect in the pul-monary circulation. That is, patients with too much pulmonary flow received a pulmonary band, and those with insufficient flow received a systemic-to-pulmonary artery shunt. Systemic-to-pulmonary artery shunts, or Blalock–Taussig (BT) shunts, were first applied to patients with tricuspid atresia in the 1940s and 1950s.98 Likewise pulmonary artery banding was applied Figure 20-29. Rigid bronchoscopy showing complete tracheal rings in a the patient with pulmonary artery sling.Figure 20-30. Barium esophagogram showing posterior indenta-tion of the esophagus caused by a vascular ring (right aortic arch, aberrant left subclavian artery and left ligamentum).Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   77122/02/19   2:55 PM 772SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIto patients with tricuspid atresia and congestive failure in 1957. However, despite the initial relief of either cyanosis or conges-tive heart failure, long-term mortality was high, as the single ventricle was left unprotected from either volume or pressure overload.99Recognizing the inadequacies of the initial repairs, Glenn described the first successful cavopulmonary anastomosis, an end-to-side right pulmonary artery-to-superior vena cava shunt in 1958, and later modified this to allow flow to both pulmonary arteries.100 This end-to-side right pulmonary artery-to-superior vena cava anastomosis was known as the bidirectional Glenn, and it is the first stage to final Fontan repair in widespread use today (Fig. 20-33). The Fontan repair was a major advancement in the treatment of CHD, as it essentially bypassed the right heart and allowed separation of the pulmonary and systemic circulations. It was first performed by Fontan in 1971 and con-sisted of a classic Glenn anastomosis, ASD closure, and direct connection of the right atrium to the proximal end of the left pulmonary artery using an aortic homograft.101 The main pul-monary artery was ligated, and a homograft valve was inserted into the orifice of the inferior vena cava.Figure 20-32. Echo showing tricuspid atresia. The ‘*’ demonstrates the membranous tissue instead of the presence of a tricuspid valve.Figure 20-33. Angiogram showing a widely patent Glenn. The SVC (‘*’) is seen draining into the central pulmonary artery.Figure 20-31. Bronchoscopy before and after repair of a vascular ring: right arch, left descending aorta, and left ligament.Multiple modifications of this initial repair were per-formed over the next 20 years. One of the most important was the description by deLeval and colleagues of the creation of an interatrial lateral tunnel that allowed the inferior vena caval blood to be channeled exclusively to the superior vena cava.102 A total cavopulmonary connection could then be accomplished by dividing the superior vena cava and suturing the superior portion to the upper side of the right pulmonary artery and the inferior end to the augmented undersurface of the right pulmonary artery. Pulmonary flow then occurs passively, in a laminar fashion, driven by the central venous pressure. This repair became known as the modified Fontan operation.Another important modification, the fenestrated Fontan repair, was introduced in 1988.103 In this procedure, a residual 20% to 30% right-to-left shunt is either created or left unre-paired at the time of cavopulmonary connection to help sustain systemic output in the face of transient elevations in the pulmo-nary vascular resistance postoperatively.103Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   77222/02/19   2:55 PM 773CONGENITAL HEART DISEASECHAPTER 20The last notable variation on the original Fontan repair uses an extracardiac prosthetic tube graft (Fig. 20-34), usually 18 to 20 mm in diameter, as the conduit directing inferior vena cava blood to the pulmonary arteries.105 This technique has the advantages of decreasing atrial geometric alterations by avoid-ing intra-atrial suture lines and improving flow dynamics in the systemic venous pathway by maximizing laminar flow. Several investigators have shown a decrease in supraventricular arrhyth-mias, as well as an improvement in ventricular function, which may be secondary to decreased atrial tension and alleviation of chronic elevations in coronary sinus pressure.102,103One potential disadvantage of the extracardiac Fontan is that it delays performance of the Fontan in order to allow placement of a conduit of sufficient size. Despite these innova-tive approaches, the current strategy for operative management still relies on the idea of palliation. Patients are approached in a staged manner, to maximize their physiologic state so that they will survive to undergo a Fontan operation. The therapeu-tic strategy must begin in the neonatal period and should be directed toward reducing the patient’s subsequent risk factors for a Fontan procedure. Accordingly, small systemic pulmonary shunts, which are usually performed through a median sternot-omy, should be constructed for palliation of ductus-dependent univentricular physiology. This can easily be replaced with a bidirectional Glenn shunt or hemi-Fontan operation at 6 months of life. In non–ductus-dependent univentricular physiology, the infant can be managed medically until primary construction of a bidirectional cavopulmonary anastomosis becomes feasible. This is possible in the majority of cases because the physiologi-cally elevated pulmonary vascular resistance prevents pulmo-nary overcirculation during the neonatal period.The Fontan is usually performed when the child is between 2 and 4 years of age, and it is generally successful if the infant was staged properly, with a protected single ventricle, and there is adequate pulmonary artery growth. The pulmonary vascular resistance should be below 4 Wood units, and the ejection frac-tion should be more than 45% to ensure success.106 In patients with high pulmonary artery pressure, fenestration of the atrial baffle may be helpful because their pulmonary vascular resis-tance may preclude adequate cardiac output postoperatively.99,103Results. Recent reports of the Fontan procedure for tricuspid atresia have been encouraging, with an overall survival of 86% and an operative mortality of 2%.107 The main complications following repair are atrial arrhythmias, particularly atrial flutter; conduit obstruction requiring reoperation; protein-losing enter-opathy; and decreased exercise tolerance.A prospective multi-institutional study from the Congeni-tal Heart Surgeons Society reported the outcomes of 150 neo-nates with tricuspid atresia and normally related great vessels.107 Five-year survival was 86%, and by the age of 2 years, 89% had undergone cavopulmonary anastomosis, and 75% of those surviving cavopulmonary anastomosis underwent Fontan opera-tion within 3 years. Competing risks methodology was used in this study to determine the rates of transition to end-states and their associated determinants (Fig. 20-35). Risk factors for death without cavopulmonary anastomosis in this study included the presence of mitral regurgitation and palliation with systemic-to-pulmonary artery shunts not originating from the innominate artery. Factors associated with decreased transition rate to cavo-pulmonary anastomosis included patient variables (younger age at admission to a participating institution and noncardiac anom-alies) and procedural variables (larger systemic-to-pulmonary arterial shunt diameter and previous palliation).9Hypoplastic Left Heart SyndromeHLHS comprises a wide spectrum of cardiac malformations, including hypoplasia or atresia of the aortic and mitral valves and hypoplasia of the LV and ascending aorta.108 HLHS has a reported prevalence of 0.2 per 1000 live births and occurs twice as often in boys as in girls. Left untreated, HLHS is invari-ably fatal and is responsible for 25% of early cardiac deaths in neonates.109 However, the recent evolution of palliative surgical procedures has dramatically improved the outlook for patients with HLHS, and an improved understanding of anatomic and physiologic alterations has spurred advances in parallel arenas such as intrauterine diagnosis and fetal intervention, echocardio-graphic imaging, and neonatal critical care.Anatomy. As implied by its name, HLHS involves varying degrees of underdevelopment of left-sided structures (Fig. 20-36), including the LV and the aortic and mitral valves. Thus, HLHS can be classified into four anatomic subtypes based on the val-vular morphology: (a) aortic and mitral stenosis; (b) aortic and mitral atresia; (c) aortic atresia and mitral stenosis; and (d) AS and mitral atresia. Aortic atresia tends to be associated with more severe degrees of hypoplasia of the ascending aorta than does AS.Even in cases without frank aortic atresia, however, the aortic arch is generally hypoplastic and, in severe cases, may even be interrupted. There is an associated coarctation shelf in 80% of patients with HLHS, and the ductus itself is usually quite large, as is the main pulmonary artery.7The segmental pulmonary arteries, however, are small, secondary to reduced intrauterine pulmonary blood flow, which is itself a consequence of the left-sided outflow obstruction (Fig. 20-36). The left atrial cavity is generally smaller than nor-mal and is accentuated because of the leftward displacement of the septum primum. There is almost always an interatrial com-munication via the foramen ovale, which can be large, but more Figure 20-34. Angiogram in a patient with a fenestrated extra-cardiac fontan constructed with a 20 mm Gore-tex tube graft (‘*’).Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   77322/02/19   2:55 PM 774SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIcommonly restricts right-to-left flow. In rare cases, there is no atrial-level communication, which can be lethal for these infants because there is no way for pulmonary venous return to cross over to the RV.Associated defects can occur with HLHS, and many of them have importance with respect to operative repair. For example, if a VSD is present, the LV can retain its normal size during development even in the presence of mitral atresia. This is because a right-to-left shunt through the defect impels growth of the LV.110 This introduces the feasibility of biventricular repair for this subset of patients.Although HLHS undoubtedly results from a complex interplay of developmental errors in the early stages of cardio-genesis, many investigators have hypothesized that the altered blood flow is responsible for the structural underdevelopment that characterizes HLHS. In other words, if the stimulus for nor-mal development of the ascending aorta from the primordial aortic sac is high-pressure systemic blood flow from the LV through the aortic valve, then an atretic or stenotic aortic valve, which impedes flow and leads to only low-pressure diastolic retrograde flow via the ductus, will change the developmental signals and result in hypoplasia of the downstream structures (Fig. 20-37). Normal growth and development of the LV and mitral valve can be secondarily affected, resulting in hypoplasia or atresia of these structures.108Pathophysiology and Diagnosis. In HLHS, pulmonary venous blood enters the left atrium, but atrial systole cannot propel blood across the stenotic or atretic mitral valve into the LV. Thus, the blood is shunted across the foramen ovale into the right atrium, where it contributes to volume loading of the RV. The end result is pulmonary venous hypertension from outflow obstruction at the level of the left atrium, as well as pulmonary overcirculation and right ventricular failure. As the pulmonary vascular resistance falls postnatally, the condition is exacerbated because right ventricular output is preferentially directed away from the systemic circulation, resulting in profound underperfu-sion of the coronary arteries and the vital organs. Closure of the ductus is incompatible with life in these neonates.Neonates with severe HLHS receive all pulmonary, sys-temic, and coronary blood flow from the RV. Generally, a child with HLHS will present with respiratory distress within the first day of life, and mild cyanosis may be noted. These infants must be rapidly triaged to a tertiary center, and echocardiography should be performed to confirm the diagnosis. Prostaglandin E1 must be administered to maintain ductal patency, and the Figure 20-36. Echo In a patient with HLHS. Note the extremely hypoplastic left ventricle (‘*’).0200.00.40.81.2Years from diagnosis1.62.0406080100Proportion (%) of patients in each stateBDCPA (2 year prevalence = 90%)Dead without BDCPA(2 year prevalence = 5%)Single-stage Fontan(2 year prevalence = 1%)Alive without BDCPA(2 year prevalence = 4%)Figure 20-35. Competing risks depiction of events after diagnosis in 150 patients with tricuspid atresia. All patients began alive and thereafter migrated to one of four mutually exclusive end states (death, bidirectional cavopulmonary anastomosis [BDCPA], single-stage Fontan completion, or remaining alive without BDCPA) at time-dependent rates defined by the underlying hazard functions. At any point in time, the sum of propor-tions of children in each state is 100%. For example, estimated prevalences after 2 years from diagnosis are as follows: 89% BDCPA, 6% dead without BDCPA, 4% alive without BDCPA, and 1% single-stage Fontan completion. Solid lines represent parametric point estimates; dashed lines enclose 70% confidence intervals; circles with error bars represent nonparametric estimates; numbers in parentheses indicate the estimated propor-tion of patients in each state at 2 years from diagnosis. (Reproduced with permission from Karamlou T, Ashburn DA, Caldarone CA, et al: Matching procedure to morphology improves outcomes in neonates with tricuspid atresia, J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2005 Dec;130(6):1503-1510.) Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   77422/02/19   2:55 PM 775CONGENITAL HEART DISEASECHAPTER 20ventilatory settings must be adjusted to avoid excessive oxygen-ation and increase carbon dioxide tension. These maneuvers will maintain pulmonary vascular resistance and promote improved systemic perfusion.5,7,108 Cardiac catheterization should gener-ally be avoided because it is not usually helpful and might result in injury to the ductus and compromised renal function second-ary to the osmotic dye load.Treatment. In 1983, Norwood and colleagues described a two-stage palliative surgical procedure for relief of HLHS111 that was later modified to the currently used three-stage method of palliation.109 Stage 1 palliation, also known as the modified Norwood procedure (Fig. 20-38), bypasses the LV by creating a single outflow vessel, the neoaorta, which arises from the RV.The current technique of arch reconstruction involves completion of a connection between the pulmonary root, the native ascending aorta, and a piece of pulmonary homograft used to augment the diminutive native aorta. There are several modifications of this anastomosis, most notably the Damus-Kaye-Stansel (DKS) anastomosis, which involves dividing both the aorta and the pulmonary artery at the sinotubular junction. The proximal aorta is anastomosed to the proximal pulmonary artery, creating a “double-barreled” outlet from the heart. This outlet is anastomosed to the distal aorta, which can be augmented with homograft material if there is an associated coarctation. At the completion of arch reconstruction, a 3.5or 4-mm shunt is placed from the innominate artery to the right pulmonary artery. The interatrial septum is then widely excised, thereby creating a large interatrial communication and prevent-ing pulmonary venous hypertension.The DKS connection, as described earlier, might avoid postoperative distortion of the tripartite connection in the neo-aorta, and thus decrease the risk of coronary insufficiency.112 It can be used when the aorta is 4 mm or larger. Unfortunately, in many infants with HLHS, especially if there is aortic atresia, the aorta is diminutive and often less than 2 mm in diameter. The alternate technique available to provide pulmonary blood flow instead of a shunt is a RV-PA conduit often referred to as a “Sano.” It is usually a 5 or 6 mm ribbed Gore-tex graft.113The postoperative management of infants following stage 1 palliation is complex because favorable outcomes depend on establishing a delicate balance between pulmonary and systemic perfusion. Recent literature suggests that these infants require adequate postoperative cardiac output in order to supply both the pulmonary and the systemic circulations and that the use of oxi-metric catheters to monitor mixed venous oxygen saturation (Svo2) aids clinicians in both the selection of inotropic agents and in ventilatory management.114 Introduction of a shunt between the RV and the pulmonary artery (Sano shunt) dimin-ishes the diastolic flow created by the modified BT shunt and may augment coronary perfusion, resulting in improved postop-erative cardiac function.113 A recent prospective, randomized, multi-institutional trial sponsored by the National Institutes of Health, the Systemic Ventricle Reconstruction (SVR) trial, com-pared the outcomes of neonates having either a modified Blalock–Taussig shunt (MBTS) or a Sano shunt.115 The SVR trial demonstrated that transplantation-free survival 12 months after randomization was higher with the Sano shunt than with the MBTS (74% vs. 64%, P = .01). However, the Sano shunt group had more unintended interventions (P = .003) and complications (P = .002). Right ventricular size and function at the age of 14 months and the rate of nonfatal serious adverse events at the age of 12 months were similar in the two groups. Data collected over a mean (± standard deviation) follow-up period of 32 ± 11 months showed a nonsignificant difference in transplanta-tion-free survival between the two groups (P = .06).115Since the initial SVR publications in 2010, the 3-year and 6-year results have been analyzed. At 3 years, the com-bined death and cardiac transplantation rates for the RVPAS vs. MBTS groups were 33% vs. 39% (P = 0.14). When all available data were examined by Kaplan-Meier analysis (mean follow-up 4.4 ± 1.0 years), there was also no difference between groups (log rank P = 0.11). Overall, there were 100 deaths and 10 trans-plantations in the MBTS cohort and 86 deaths and 11 transplan-tations in the RVPAS group.116 At 6 years, although the point averages continued to reflect a difference favoring the RVPAS (combined death/transplantation rate, 36%) in comparison with the MBTS (41%), the number of subjects was not sufficient to 6Figure 20-37. Angiogram obtained in a patient with HLSH (AS/MS). Note the extremely diminutive ascending aorta (‘*’).PatchmBTSRPALPAFigure 20-38. Cartoon depicting the Norwood procedure. The anas-tomosis of the aortic and pulmonary valve annulus is not shown. The ascending aorta and hyplastic arch are reconstructed by patch augmentation. The pulmonary blood flow has been provided in this case by a mBTS. (Used with permission from Kelly Rosso MD.)Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   77522/02/19   2:55 PM 776SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIdemonstrate a statistically significant difference between the two groups (log rank P = 0.13). Similar to the 3-year results, RVPAS subjects had a higher incidence of any catheter inter-vention (0.38 vs. 0.23 interventions/patient-year, P <0.001), including balloon angioplasty (P = 0.014), stent (P = 0.009), and coiling (P <0.001).113,114 Currently, there remains an ongoing controversy regarding MBTS vs. RV-PA conduit as the source of pulmonary blood flow after the Norwood operation.119,120Although surgical palliation with the Norwood procedure is still the mainstay of therapy for infants with HLHS, a combined surgical and percutaneous option (hybrid procedure), which con-sists of bilateral pulmonary artery banding and placement of a ductal stent, has emerged as a promising alternative that obviates the need for CPB in the fragile neonatal period.121,122 The hybrid procedure is performed in a “hybrid suite,” incorporating both advanced fluoroscopic imaging facilities combined with com-plete operating room capabilities. A 3or 3.5-mm PTFE tube graft is cut to a width of 3 to 4 mm and used as the bands on the branch pulmonary arteries, placed just distal to the main pulmo-nary artery. The ductal stent is then positioned in order to cover all ductal tissue and is deployed through a purse-string suture in the main pulmonary artery. A reverse systemic-to-pulmonary shunt is considered in patients with aortic atresia and preductal coarctation to improve coronary perfusion; however, a recent study demonstrated no difference in survival between those with and without the shunt.123 The hybrid procedure can also be used as a bridge to heart transplantation in those infants with severe AV valve regurgitation or otherwise unsuitable single-ventricle anatomy.124Following stage 1 palliation, the second surgical proce-dure is the creation of a bidirectional cavopulmonary shunt (Fig. 20-39) or hemi-Fontan, generally at 3 to 6 months of life when the pulmonary vascular resistance has decreased to nor-mal levels. This is the first step in separating the pulmonary and systemic circulations, and it decreases the volume load on the single ventricle. The existing innominate artery-to-pulmonary shunt (or RV-to-pulmonary shunt) or MBTS is eliminated dur-ing the same operation.The third stage of surgical palliation, known as the modi-fied Fontan procedure, completes the separation of the sys-temic and pulmonary circulations and is performed between 18 months and 3 years of age, or when the patient experiences increased cyanosis (i.e., has outgrown the capacity to perfuse the systemic circulation with adequately oxygenated blood). This has traditionally required a lateral tunnel within the right atrium to direct blood from the inferior vena cava to the pulmo-nary artery, allowing further relief of the volume load on the RV and providing increased pulmonary blood flow to alleviate cyanosis. More recently, many favor using an extracardiac con-duit (e.g., 18to 20-mm tube graft) to connect the inferior vena cava to the pulmonary artery (Fig. 20-40).Not all patients with HLHS require this three-stage pallia-tive repair. Some infants afflicted with a milder form of HLHS, recently described as hypoplastic left heart complex (HLHC), have aortic or mitral hypoplasia without intrinsic valve stenosis and antegrade flow in the ascending aorta. In this group, a two-ventricle repair can be achieved with reasonable outcome. Tch-ervenkov has published the results with 12 patients with HLHC who underwent biventricular repair at a mean age of 7 days.114 The operative technique consisted of a pulmonary homograft patch aortoplasty of the aortic arch and ascending aorta and closure of the interatrial and interventricular communications. The left heart was capable of sustaining systemic perfusion in 92% of patients, and early mortality was 15.4%. Four patients required reoperations to relieve LVOT obstruction, most com-monly between 12 and 39 months following repair. The group from Boston Children’s Hospital has been very aggressive in left ventricular recruitment. These operations still carry a high burden of late death and several reoperations.Although the Norwood procedure is the most widely per-formed initial operation for HLHS, transplantation can be used as a first-line therapy and may be preferred when anatomic or physiologic considerations exist that preclude a favorable out-come with palliative repair. Significant tricuspid regurgitation, intractable pulmonary artery hypertension, or progressive right ventricular failure are cases where cardiac replacement may be advantageous. Widespread adaptation of transplantation as SVCLPAAtriumFigure 20-39. Cartoon depicting a bidirectional Glenn. (Used with permission from Kelly Rosso MD.)SVCGore-textube graftAtriumIVCFigure 20-40. Extra cardiac fenestrated Fontan. ‘*’ shows the fen-estration. (Used with permission from Kelly Rosso MD.)Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   77622/02/19   2:55 PM 777CONGENITAL HEART DISEASECHAPTER 20first-line treatment for HLHS has been limited by improved Norwood survival rates as the operation and preand postop-erative management of the patient have evolved and by lim-ited organ availability. Organ availability should be considered prior to electing transplantation, as 24% of infants died awaiting transplantation in the largest series to date.126,127Results. Outcomes for HLHS are still significantly worse than those for other complex cardiac defects. However, with improvements in perioperative care and modifications in surgical technique, the survival following the Norwood proce-dure now exceeds 90% in experienced centers.115-120 The out-come for low-birth-weight infants has improved, but low weight still remains a major predictor of adverse survival, especially when accompanied by significant tricuspid valve insufficiency, a restructive interatrial communication, poor RV function, or extracardiac or chromosomal anomalies.DEFECTS THAT MAY BE PALLIATED  OR REPAIREDEbstein’s AnomalyAnatomy. This is a rare defect, occurring in less than 1% of CHD patients. The predominant maldevelopment in this lesion is the inferior displacement of the tricuspid valve into the RV, although Bove128 and others have emphasized the fact that Ebstein’s anomaly is primarily a defect in right ventricular morphology rather than an isolated defect in the tricuspid valve. The anterior leaflet is usually attached in its normal position to the annulus, but the septal and posterior leaflets are displaced toward the ventricle. This effectively divides the RV into two parts: the inlet portion (atrialized RV) and the outlet portion (true or trabeculated RV) (Fig. 20-41). The atrialized RV is usu-ally thin and dilated. Similarly, the tricuspid annulus and the right atrium are extremely dilated, and the tricuspid valve is usually regurgitant with a “sail-like” leaflet (Fig. 20-42). There is commonly an ASD present, which results in a right-to-left shunt at the atrial level. Occasionally, there is true anatomic pulmonary atresia or milder forms of RVOT obstruction.A Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome (Fig. 20-43) type of accessory pathway with associated preexcitation is pres-ent in 15% of patients.128Pathophysiology. Right ventricular dysfunction occurs in patients with Ebstein’s anomaly because of two basic mecha-nisms: the inflow obstruction at the level of the atrialized ven-tricle, which produces ineffective RV filling and contractile dysfunction. Inflow obstruction and tricuspid regurgitation, which is exacerbated by progressive annular dilatation, both produce ineffective RV filling. Contractile dysfunction of the RV is a result of a decrease in the number of myocardial fibers, as well as the discordant contraction of the large atrialized portion.The lack of forward flow at the right ventricular level may lead to physiologic or functional pulmonary atresia, and the infant is dependent on ductal patency for survival. All sys-temic venous return must be directed through an ASD to the left atrium, where it can be shunted through the ductus for gas exchange. However, the left ventricular function is usually compromised in infants with severe Ebstein’s anomaly as well because the enormous RV and the to-and-fro flow within the atrialized RV prevent adequate intracardiac mixing. Left ven-tricular function may also be severely compromised in Ebstein’s anomaly because the large RV causes left ventricular compres-sion (Fig. 20-44A,B).Diagnosis. There is a spectrum of clinical presentation in infants with Ebstein’s anomaly that mirrors the anatomic spec-trum of this anomaly. Some infants with less severe forms may present with a mild degree of cyanosis, whereas the onset of clinical symptoms in patients surviving childhood is gradual, with the average age of diagnosis in the mid-teens.However, the infant with severe atrialization and pulmo-nary stenosis will be both cyanotic and acidotic at birth. The chest radiograph may demonstrate the classic appearance, which 7Figure 20-41. Echo showing a patient with Ebsteins anomaly. Note the inferiorly displaced tricuspid valve (‘*’) and the atrialized por-tion of the RV (arrow).Figure 20-42. Echo in a patient with severe Ebsteins anomaly showing the large ‘sail like’ anterior leaflet (‘*’).Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   77722/02/19   2:56 PM 778SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIconsists of a globular “wall-to-wall” heart (Fig. 20-45), similar to that seen with pericardial effusion. The ECG may show right bundle-branch block and right axis deviation. WPW syndrome, as mentioned earlier, is a common finding in these patients. Echocardiography will confirm the diagnosis and provide criti-cal information including tricuspid valvular function, size of the atrialized portion of the RV, degree of pulmonary stenosis, and the atrial size.128The Great Ormond Street Score (GOSE) (Table 20-1),129 which consists of the area of the right atrium plus the area of the atrialized portion of the RV divided by the diastolic area of the remaining cardiac chambers, has been proposed as a useful prognostic tool to stratify neonates with Ebstein’s anomaly. A score of greater than 2 translates into uniformly fatal outcome. Electrophysiology study with radiofrequency ablation is indi-cated in patients with evidence of WPW syndrome or in children Figure 20-43. EKG of a newborn with Ebsteins anomaly and WPW syndrome. Note the pre-excitation (arrow).ABFigure 20-44. A. Echo (short axis view) of a patient with severe Ebsteins anomaly showing the large RV (‘*’) and small LV (arrow) in diastole. B. Echo (short axis view) of a patient with severe Ebsteins anomaly showing the large RV (‘*’) and small ‘pancaked’ LV (arrow) in systole.Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   77822/02/19   2:56 PM 779CONGENITAL HEART DISEASECHAPTER 20with a history of supraventricular tachycardia, undefined wide-complex tachycardia, or syncope.Treatment. Surgery is indicated for symptomatic infants and for older children and adults with arrhythmias, progressive cya-nosis, or New York Heart Association class III or IV. How-ever, the operative repair may be different, depending on the patient’s age, because older children usually are candidates for a biventricular or one-and-a-half ventricle repair, whereas moder-ate survival has been reported for neonates, using a procedure that converts the anatomy to a single-ventricle physiology, as described by Starnes and coworkers.130The surgical approach in widespread use today for patients surviving infancy was described by Danielson and colleagues in 1992.128,131 This procedure entails excision of redundant right atrial tissue and patch closure of any associated ASD, plication of the atrialized portion of the ventricle with obliteration of the aneurysmal cavity, posterior tricuspid annuloplasty to narrow the tricuspid annulus, reconstruction of the tricuspid valve if the anterior leaflet is satisfactory, or replacement of the tricuspid valve if necessary.131 If the tricuspid valve is not amenable to reconstruction, valve replacement should be considered. Care must be taken when performing the posterior annuloplasty, or during the conduct of tricuspid valve replacement, to avoid the conduction system, because complete heart block can compli-cate this procedure. In addition, patients who demonstrated preoperative evidence of preexcitation should undergo electro-physiologic mapping and ablation.Neonatal Ebstein’s anomaly is a separate entity. Results with surgical correction have been poor, and many neonates are not candidates for operative repair as previously described. Surgical options for the symptomatic neonate include palliative procedures, the one-and-a-half ventricle repair, or conversion to single-ventricle physiology.132 Arguably, the most favorable out-comes in symptomatic neonatal Ebstein’s anomaly or repair in slightly older infants have been achieved using the right ventric-ular exclusion premise. This technique, known as the “Starnes” procedure (Fig. 20-46),130 uses a fenestrated patch to close the tricuspid valve orifice coupled with systemic-to-pulmonary artery shunt. The patch must be fenestrated to allow decom-pression of the RV in instances of anatomic pulmonary atresia. Although Knott-Craig and colleagues132 have described tricus-pid valve repair for the full spectrum of neonates and infants with excellent shortand mid-term results, these results have not been reproduced in other institutions.133 The one-and-a-half ventricle repair was first described by Billingsly and cowork-ers as an attempt to achieve a more physiologic “pulsatile” pul-monary circulation in patients with a hypoplastic or dysplastic RV.134 This is accomplished by diverting the superior vena caval blood directly into the pulmonary arterial system by a bidirec-tional cavopulmonary shunt while recruiting the RV to propel the inferior vena caval blood directly to the pulmonary arteries via the RVOT. Thus, the hemodynamics of the one-and-a-half ventricle repair are characterized by separate systemic and pul-monary circulations in series. The systemic circulation is fully supported by a systemic ventricle, and the pulmonary circula-tion is supported by both the bidirectional Glenn shunt and the hypoplastic (pulmonary) ventricle. Proponents of this approach report a decreased right atrial pressure and a decrease in inferior vena cava hypertension, which is theorized to be responsible for many of the dreaded complications of the Fontan circulation, including protein-losing encephalopathy, hepatic congestion, atrial arrhythmias, and systemic ventricular failure. In addition, the maintenance of pulsatile pulmonary blood flow, as opposed to continuous laminar flow as in the Fontan circulation, may be advantageous to the pulmonary microcirculation, although it has not been proven in any studies thus far.134,135 Certain criteria, most notably an adequate tricuspid valve Z score, as well as Figure 20-45. CXR in a newborn with severe Ebsteins anomaly showing a ‘wall-to-wall’ heart.Table 20-1The Great Ormond Street Score (GOSE)GOSE Score: Area of RA + aRA/Area of RV + LA + LVGOSE ScoreRatioMortality (%)1<0.5820.5–1.0831.1–1.41004>1.5100Figure 20-46. Echo appearance after a Starnes operation. Note the jet of flow across the fenestration In the patch.Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   77922/02/19   2:56 PM 780SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIthe absence of severe pulmonary hypertension or concomitant defects requiring intricate intracardiac repair, should be satis-fied prior to electing the one-and-a-half ventricle approach.136 Patients who do not fulfill these criteria may be approached with a two-ventricle repair and atrial fenestration or a Fontan repair.In the infant with severe Ebstein’s anomaly, initial stabili-zation with prostaglandin to maintain ductal patency, mechanical ventilation, and correction of cyanosis is mandatory. Metabolic acidosis, if present from compromised systemic perfusion, must be aggressively treated with afterload reduction. Many of these infants will improve over 1 to 2 weeks as pulmonary vascu-lar resistance falls and they are able to improve antegrade flow into the pulmonary circulation through their abnormal RV and tricuspid valve. When stabilization and medical palliation fail, surgical management remains an option, although its success depends on numerous anatomic factors (e.g., adequacy of the tricuspid valve, RV, and pulmonary outflow tract), and surgery for symptomatic neonates with Ebstein’s anomaly carries a high risk. Knott-Craig and associates reported three cases where two-ventricle repair was undertaken by subtotal closure of the ASD, extensive resection of the right atrium, and vertical plication of the atrialized chamber.132 Five-year follow-up revealed all patients to be asymptomatic and in sinus rhythm without medi-cations. Recently, they have reported on their 20-year experi-ence with treating 32 such neonates with an overall mortality of 40%. Surgical management of neonates with Ebstein’s anom-aly remains challenging. For neonates with Ebstein’s anomaly and anatomical pulmonary atresia, single-ventricle palliation is associated with lower early mortality compared with two-ventricle repair.132Results. In the neonatal period, the most common postopera-tive problem, whether after a simple palliative procedure such as a BT shunt or following a more extensive procedure such as attempted exclusion of the RV, has been low cardiac out-put. Supraventricular tachycardia also has been problematic postoperatively. Complete heart block necessitating pacemaker implantation should be uncommon if the techniques described to avoid suturing between the coronary sinus and the tricuspid annulus are used.There are few published reports of outcomes, due to the rarity of this defect. However, based on the natural history of this condition, which is remarkably benign for the majority of older patients, the outlook should be excellent for patients who have survived the neonatal period.127,131,132,137Transposition of the Great ArteriesAnatomy. Complete transposition is characterized by connec-tion of the atria to their appropriate ventricles with inappropriate ventriculoarterial connections. Thus, the aorta arises anteriorly from the RV, while the pulmonary artery arises posteriorly from the LV. Van Praagh and coworkers introduced the term dextro-transposition of the great arteries (D-TGA) to describe this defect, whereas levo-transposition of the great arteries (L-TGA) describes a form of corrected transposition where there is concomitant AV discordance.138,139D-TGA requires an obligatory intracardiac mixing of blood, which usually occurs at both the atrial and the ventricu-lar levels or via a patent ductus. Significant coronary anomalies occur frequently in patients with D-TGA. The most common pattern, occurring in 68% of cases, is characterized by the left main coronary artery arising from the leftward coronary sinus, giving rise to the left anterior descending and circumflex arteries. The most common variant is for the circumflex coro-nary artery to arise as a branch from the right coronary artery instead of from the left coronary artery.Pathophysiology. D-TGA results in parallel pulmonary and systemic circulations, with patient survival dependent on intracardiac mixing of blood. After birth, both ventricles are relatively noncompliant, and thus, infants initially have higher pulmonary flow due to the decreased downstream resistance. This causes left atrial enlargement and a left-to-right shunt via the patent foramen ovale.Postnatally, the LV does not hypertrophy because it is not subjected to systemic afterload. The lack of normal extrauter-ine left ventricular maturation has important implications for the timing of surgical repair because the LV must be converted to the systemic ventricle and be able to function against sys-temic vascular resistance. If complete repair is done within the first few weeks of life, the LV usually adapts easily to systemic resistance since it is conditioned to high intrauterine pulmonary vascular resistance. After a few weeks of life, the LV that is conditioned to the decrease in pulmonary resistance that occurs when the lungs inflate after birth may have difficulty adapting to systemic vascular resistance without preoperative preparation or postoperative support. Novel techniques of LV “preparation” using a pulmonary arterial band have been used in cases where complete repair has been delayed (Fig. 20-47A,B).Clinical Manifestations and Diagnosis. Infants with D-TGA and an intact ventricular septum are usually cyanotic at birth, with an arterial Po2 between 25 and 40 mmHg. If duc-tal patency is not maintained, deterioration will be rapid with ensuing metabolic acidosis and death. Conversely, those infants with a coexisting VSD may be only mildly hypoxemic and may come to medical attention after 2 to 3 weeks, when the falling pulmonary vascular resistance leads to symptoms of congestive heart failure.The ECG will reveal right ventricular hypertrophy, and the chest radiograph will reveal the classic egg-shaped con-figuration. Definitive diagnosis is made by echocardiography, which reliably demonstrates ventriculoarterial discordance and any associated lesions. Cardiac catheterization is rarely nec-essary, except in infants requiring surgery after the neonatal period, to assess the suitability of the LV to support the sys-temic circulation. Limited catheterization, however, is useful for performance of atrial septostomy in neonates with inadequate intracardiac mixing.Surgical Repair. Blalock and Hanlon introduced the first operative intervention for D-TGA with the creation of an atrial septectomy to enhance intracardiac mixing.140 This initial proce-dure was feasible in the pre-CPB era, but carried a high mortal-ity rate. Later, Rashkind and Causo developed a catheter-based balloon septostomy, which largely obviated the need for open septectomy.42These early palliative maneuvers, however, met with lim-ited success, and it was not until the late 1950s, when Senning and Mustard developed the first “atrial repair,” that outcomes improved. The Senning operation consisted of rerouting venous flow at the atrial level by incising and realigning the atrial sep-tum over the pulmonary veins and using the right atrial free wall to create a pulmonary venous baffle (Fig. 20-48).141Although the Mustard repair (Fig. 20-49) was similar, it made use of either autologous pericardium or synthetic material to create the interatrial baffle.142 These atrial switch procedures Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   78022/02/19   2:56 PM 781CONGENITAL HEART DISEASECHAPTER 20ABFigure 20-47. A. Echocardiographic appearance of the LV (‘*’) prior to “LV training”. B. Echocardiographic appearance of the LV (‘*’) after “LV training” achieved by the application of a tight PA band and a mBTS.ACBDFigure 20-48. The Senning operation. A. The atrial septum is cut near the tricuspid valve, creating a flap attached posteriorly between the caval veins. B. The flap of atrial septum is sutured to the anterior lip of the orifices of the left pulmonary veins, effectively separating the pulmonary and systemic venous channels. C. The posterior edge of the right atrial incision is sutured to the remnant of the atrial septum, diverting the systemic venous channel to the mitral valve. D. The anterior edge of the right atrial incision (lengthened by short incisions at each corner) is sutured around the cava above and below to the lateral edge of the LA incision, completing the pulmonary channel and diversion of pulmonary venous blood to the tricuspid valve area. (Reproduced with permission from Mavroudis C, Backer CL: Pediatric Cardiac Surgery, 2nd ed. St. Louis, MO: Mosby; 1994.) Figure 20-49. Angiographic appearance of a Mustard type baffle repair for dTGA.resulted in a physiologic correction, but not an anatomic one, as the systemic circulation is still based on the RV. Still, survival rose to 95% in most centers by using an early balloon septostomy fol-lowed by an atrial switch procedure at 3 to 8 months of age.141,142Despite the improved early survival rates, long-term problems, such as superior vena cava or pulmonary venous obstruction, baffle leak, arrhythmias, tricuspid valve regurgita-tion, and right ventricular failure, prompted the development of the arterial switch procedure by Jatene in 1975.143 The arterial switch procedure involves the division of the aorta and the pul-monary artery, posterior translocation of the aorta (LeCompte maneuver), mobilization of the coronary arteries, placement of a pantaloon-shaped pericardial patch, and proper alignment of the coronary arteries on the neoaorta (Fig. 20-50).The most important consideration is the timing of surgical repair because arterial switch should be performed within 2 weeks after birth, before the LV loses its ability to pump against sys-temic afterload. In patients presenting later than 2 weeks, the LV can be retrained with preliminary pulmonary artery banding Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   78122/02/19   2:56 PM 782SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 20-50. The Arterial Switch Operation. A. The maneuver of Lecompte (positioning the pulmo-nary artery anterior to the aorta) is shown with aortic cross-clamp repositioning to retract the pulmonary artery during the neoaortic reconstruction. A and B. After the coronary patches are rotated for an optimal lie, they are sutured to the linearly incised sinuses of Valsalva at the old pulmonary artery (neoaorta) (C). (Reproduced with permission from Mavroudis C, Backer CL: Arterial Switch. Cardiac Surgery: State of the Art Review. Vol. 5, no. 1. Philadelphia, PA: Hanley & Belfus; 1991.) Figure 20-51. Angiographic appearance of the pulmonary arteries before and after balloon dilation. The RV pressures dropped from “systemic” to “1/2 systemic” after dilation.and aortopulmonary shunt followed by definitive repair. Alter-natively, the unprepared LV can be supported following arterial switch with a mechanical assist device for a few days while it recovers ability to manage systemic pressures. Echocardiogra-phy can be used to assess left ventricular performance and guide operative planning in these circumstances.The subset of patients who present with D-TGA compli-cated by LVOT obstruction and VSD may not be suitable for an arterial switch operation. The Rastelli operation, first performed in 1968, uses placement of an intracardiac baffle to direct left ventricular blood to the aorta and an extracardiac valved conduit to establish continuity between the RV and the pulmonary artery, which has led to successful outcomes in these complex patients.144Results. For patients with D-TGA, intact ventricular septum, and VSD, the arterial switch operation provides excellent long-term results with a mortality rate of less than 5%. Operative risk is increased when unfavorable coronary anatomic configu-rations are present or when augmentation of the aortic arch is required. The most common complication is supravalvular pul-monary stenosis, occurring 10% of the time, which may require ballooning or reoperation (Fig. 20-51).145Results of the Rastelli operation have improved substan-tially, with an early mortality rate of 5%.146 Late mortality rate results were less favorable because conduit failure requiring reoperation, pacemaker insertion, or relief of LVOT obstruc-tion was frequent.Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   78222/02/19   2:56 PM 783CONGENITAL HEART DISEASECHAPTER 20Double-Outlet Right VentricleAnatomy. Double-outlet RV (DORV) accounts for 5% of CHD and exists when both the aorta and pulmonary artery arise wholly, or in large part, from the RV (Fig. 20-52). DORV encompasses a spectrum of malformations because the incom-plete shift of the aorta toward the LV is often associated with other abnormalities of cardiac development, such as ventricular looping and infundibular-truncal spiraling.147 The vast majority of hearts exhibiting DORV have a concomitant VSD, which varies in its size and spatial association with the great vessels. The VSD is usually nonrestrictive and represents the only out-flow for the LV; its location relative to the great vessels dictates the dominant physiology of DORV, which can be analogous to that of a large isolated VSD, tetralogy of Fallot, or D-TGA. In 1972, Lev et al148 suggested considering DORV as a spectrum of hearts that “pass imperceptibly from tetralogy with VSD with overriding aorta into double-outlet right ventricle with subaor-tic VSD.” Thus, Lev and colleagues described a classification scheme for DORV based on the “commitment” of the VSD to either or both great arteries.148 The VSD can be subaortic, dou-bly committed, noncommitted, or subpulmonic.The subaortic type is the most common (47%) and occurs when the VSD is located directly beneath the aortic annulus. Doubly committed VSD (4%) is present when the VSD lies beneath both the aorta and the pulmonary artery, which are usually side-by-side in this lesion. The noncommitted VSD (26%) exists when the VSD is remote from the great vessels. The subset of DORV hearts with the VSD located beneath the pulmonary valve also are classified as the Taussig–Bing syn-drome (Fig. 20-53).149 This occurs in 23% of cases of DORV with VSD, and it occurs when the aorta rotates more anteriorly, with the pulmonary artery rotated more posteriorly.150Clinical Manifestations and Diagnosis. Patients with DORV typically present with one of the following three scenar-ios: (a) those with doubly committed or subaortic VSD present with congestive heart failure and a high propensity for pulmo-nary hypertension, much like infants with a large single VSD; (b) those with a subaortic VSD and pulmonary stenosis present with cyanosis and hypoxia, much like infants with tetralogy of Fallot; and (c) those with subpulmonic VSD present with cya-nosis, much like those with D-TGA, because streaming directs desaturated systemic venous blood to the aorta and oxygenated blood to the pulmonary artery.140 Thus, the three critical factors influencing the clinical presentation and subsequent manage-ment of infants with DORV are the size and location of the VSD, the presence or absence of important RVOT obstruc-tion, and the presence of other anomalies (especially associ-ated hypoplasia of left-sided structures sometimes seen with subpulmonary VSD).Echocardiography is the mainstay of diagnosis and can also provide valuable information regarding the feasibility of biventricular repair. Specific anatomic questions that should be resolved to assist in surgical planning in addition to those mentioned earlier include the coronary anatomy (presence of a conal branch or left anterior descending from the right coronary coursing across the conus), the presence of additional muscular VSDs remote from either great vessel, and the distance between the tricuspid and pulmonary valve. Cardiac catheterization is rarely necessary in neonates or infants, except to determine the degree of pulmonary hypertension and to determine the effects of previous palliative procedures on the pulmonary arterial anatomy.Therapy. The goals of corrective surgery are to relieve pul-monary stenosis, to provide separate and unobstructed outflow pathways from each ventricle to the correct great vessel, and to achieve separation of the systemic and pulmonary circulations.Double-Outlet Right Ventricle With Noncommitted Ventricular Septal DefectThe repair of hearts with DORV and noncommitted VSD can be accomplished by constructing an intraventricular tunnel con-necting the VSD to the aorta, closing the pulmonary artery, and placing a valved extracardiac conduit from the RV to the pulmonary artery. In patients without pulmonary stenosis who have intractable congestive failure, a pulmonary artery band can be placed in the first 6 months to control pulmonary artery Figure 20-53. Angiographic appearance of the aorta in a patient with Taussig-Bing anomaly. Note the hypoplastic arch (‘*’).Figure 20-52. DORV, aortomitral discontinuity (‘*’), aorta mostly arising from RV (arrow).Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   78322/02/19   2:56 PM 784SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIovercirculation and prevent the development of pulmonary hypertension.Infants with pulmonary stenosis can be managed with a systemic-to-pulmonary shunt followed by biventricular repair as described by Belli and colleagues in 1999, or with a modi-fied Fontan.151 There is no consensus on the timing of repair, but recent literature suggests that repair within the first 6 months is associated with better outcome. However, in cases where an extracardiac-valved conduit is necessary, it is better to delay definitive repair until the child is 2 to 3 years of age because this allows placement of a larger conduit and possibly reduces the number of future obligatory conduit replacements.147Double-Outlet Right Ventricle With Subaortic or Doubly Committed Ventricular Septal Defect Without Pulmonary StenosisThis group of patients can be treated by creating an intracardiac baffle that directs blood from the LV into the aorta. Enlargement of the VSD may be necessary to allow ample room for the baf-fle; this should be done anterosuperiorly to avoid injury to the conduction system that normally lies inferoposteriorly along the border of the VSD. In addition, other important considerations in constructing the LV outflow tunnel include the prominence of the conal septum, the attachments of the tricuspid valve to the conal septum, and the distance between the tricuspid and pulmonary valves. In some instances, unfavorable anatomy may preclude placement of an adequate intracardiac baffle, neces-sitating single ventricle repair.Double-Outlet Right Ventricle With Subaortic or Doubly Committed Ventricular Septal Defect With Pulmonary StenosisRepair of this defect is similar to the above except that concomi-tant RVOT reconstruction must be performed in addition to the intracardiac tunnel. The RVOT augmentation can be accom-plished with the placement of a transannular patch or with place-ment of an extracardiac-valved conduit when an anomalous left anterior descending artery precludes use of a patch.Taussig–Bing Syndrome Without  Pulmonary StenosisThese infants are best treated with a balloon septostomy dur-ing the neonatal period to improve mixing, followed by VSD closure baffling LV egress to the pulmonary artery and an arte-rial switch operation. The Kawashima procedure,152 in which an intraventricular tunnel is used to baffle LV egress directly to the aorta, may alternatively be used when the aorta is more posterior or when there is associated pulmonary stenosis.Taussig–Bing Syndrome With  Pulmonary StenosisThis defect may be treated with a variety of techniques, depend-ing on the specific anatomic details and the expertise of the treat-ment team. A Rastelli-type repair, which involves construction of an intraventricular tunnel through the existing VSD that con-nects the LV to both great vessels, followed by division of the pulmonary artery at its origin and insertion of a valved conduit from the RV to the distal pulmonary artery, can be performed.153 Alternatively, a Yasui procedure, which involves baffling the VSD to the pulmonary artery and creation of a DKS anastomo-sis between the pulmonary artery and the aorta with patch aug-mentation, can be accomplished concomitant with placement of an RV pulmonary artery conduit.154Results. The results of DORV repairs are generally favor-able, especially for the tetralogy-type DORV with subaortic VSD.150,155 However, more complex types of DORV, including noncommitted VSD and Taussig–Bing type, still carry impor-tant morbidity and mortality.150,151,155 Furthermore, repeated interventions for RVOT reconstruction or staged operations for patients triaged to single-ventricle pathways pose late hazards for patients surviving initial repair. A single-institution series evaluated 393 patients with DORV.150 The authors found that the need for reintervention approached 37% at 15 years follow-ing repair. Arterial switch operation, as opposed to Rastelli-type repair, was associated with an increased risk of early postrepair mortality, but mitigated against the risk of late death. Patients with hypoplastic left-sided structures and a nonsubaortic VSD may fare better with a single-ventricle repair.Tetralogy of FallotAnatomy. The original description of tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) by Ettienne Louis Fallot,156 as the name implies, included four abnormalities: a large perimembranous VSD adjacent to the tri-cuspid valve; an overriding aorta; a variable degree of RVOT obstruction, which might include hypoplasia and dysplasia of the pulmonary valve as well as obstruction at the subvalvar and pulmonary artery level; and right ventricular hypertrophy. More recently, the Van Praagh et al157 pointed out that TOF could be more correctly termed monology of Fallot, since the four com-ponents are explained by the malposition of the infundibular sep-tum. When the infundibular septum is displaced anteriorly and leftward, the RVOT is narrowed and its anterior displacement results in failure of fusion of the ventricular septum between the arms of the trabeculo-septo-marginalis (Fig. 20-54).The morphology of TOF is markedly heterogeneous and includes an absent pulmonary valve, concomitant AV septal defects, and pulmonary atresia with major aortopulmonary collaterals. The present discussion will focus only on the so-called classic presentation of TOF without coexisting intracardiac defects.Anomalous coronary artery patterns, related to either ori-gin or distribution, have been described in TOF.158 However, the most surgically important coronary anomaly occurs when AortaMPAVSDMultilevelpulmonary stenosisRVHFigure 20-54. Tetrology of Fallot. (Used with permission from Kelly Rosso MD.)Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   78422/02/19   2:56 PM 785CONGENITAL HEART DISEASECHAPTER 20the left anterior descending artery arises as a branch of the right coronary artery. This occurs in approximately 3% of cases of TOF and may preclude placement of a transannular patch, as the left anterior descending coronary artery crosses the RVOT at varying distances from the pulmonary valve annulus.159Pathophysiology and Clinical Presentation. The initial presentation of a child afflicted with TOF depends on the degree of RVOT obstruction. Children with cyanosis at birth usually have severe pulmonary annular hypoplasia with concomitant hypoplasia of the peripheral pulmonary arteries. Most children, however, present with mild cyanosis at birth, which then pro-gresses as the right ventricular hypertrophy further compromises the RVOT. Cyanosis usually becomes significant within the first 6 to 12 months of life, and the child may develop characteristic “tet” spells, which are periods of extreme hypoxemia. These spells are characterized by decreased pulmonary blood flow and an increase in systemic blood flow. They can be triggered by any stimulus that decreases systemic vascular resistance, such as fever, agitation, or vigorous physical activity. Cyanotic spells increase in severity and frequency as the child grows, and older patients with uncorrected TOF may often squat, which increases peripheral vascular resistance and relieves the cyanosis.Evaluation in the older patient with TOF may demonstrate clubbing, polycythemia, hemoptysis, or brain abscesses. Chest radiography will demonstrate a boot-shaped heart (Fig. 20-55), and EKG will show the normal pattern of right ventricular hypertrophy. Echocardiography confirms the diagnosis because it demonstrates the position and nature of the VSD, defines the character of the RVOT obstruction, and often visualizes the branch pulmonary arteries and the proximal coronary arteries. Cardiac catheterization is rarely necessary and is actually risky in TOF since it can create spasm of the RVOT muscle and result in a hypercyanotic episode (tet spell). Occasionally, aortogra-phy (Fig. 20-56) is necessary to delineate the coronary artery anatomy.Treatment. John Deanfield160 stated “…long follow-up inevi-tably means surgery in an earlier era: More recent surgery, at a younger age, with better preoperative, operative, and post-operative care, will improve long-term results. Data from the former (earlier) era will be overly pessimistic.” This statement is particularly pertinent as surgical correction of TOF has evolved from a staged approach of antecedent palliation in infancy fol-lowed by intracardiac repair to primary repair during the first few months of life without prior palliative surgery.However, systemic-to-pulmonary shunts, generally an MBTS, may still be preferred with an unstable neonate younger than 3 months of age, when an extracardiac conduit is required because of an anomalous left anterior descending coronary artery, or when pulmonary atresia, significant branch pulmo-nary artery hypoplasia, or severe noncardiac anomalies coexist with TOF.Traditionally, TOF was repaired through a right ventricu-lotomy, providing excellent exposure for closure of the VSD and relief of the RVOT obstruction, but concerns that the resul-tant scar would significantly impair right ventricular function or lead to lethal arrhythmias led to the development of a transatrial approach. Transatrial repair, except in cases when the presence of diffuse RVOT hypoplasia requires insertion of a transannular patch, is now being increasingly advocated by many, although its superiority has not been conclusively demonstrated.161The operative technique involves the use of CPB. All existing systemic-to-pulmonary arterial shunts, as well as the ductus arteriosus, are ligated. A right atriotomy is then made, and the anatomy of the VSD and the RVOT are assessed by retracting the tricuspid valve. The outflow tract obstruction is relieved by resecting the offending portion of the infundibular septum as well as any muscle trabeculations. If necessary, a pul-monary valvotomy or, alternatively, a longitudinal incision in the main pulmonary artery can be performed to improve expo-sure. The diameter of the pulmonary valve annulus is assessed by inserting Hegar dilators across the outflow tract; if the pul-monary artery/aorta diameter is less than 0.5, or the estimated RV/LV pressure is greater than 0.7, or the size of the pulmo-nary valve is less than a Z score of −2.5, a transannular patch is inserted. Patch closure of the VSD is then accomplished, taking Figure 20-56. CT aortogram showing the large aorta often associated with conotruncal anomalies, rotated coronaries, and extremely hypoplastic main and branch pulmonary arteries in a patient with TOF.Figure 20-55. Chest x-ray showing a boot shaped heart in an infant with tetralogy of Fallot.Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   78522/02/19   2:56 PM 786SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIcare when placing sutures along the posteroinferior portion to avoid the conduction system.Results. Operative mortality for primary repair of TOF in infancy is less than 5% in most series.161 Previously reported risk factors such as transannular patch insertion or younger age at time of repair have been eliminated secondary to improved intraoperative and postoperative care. According to the Society of Thoracic Surgeons Congenital Heart Surgery Database, dis-charge mortality from 3059 operations from 2002 to 2007 was 7.5% for initial palliation, 1.3% for primary repair, and 0.9% for staged repair, indicating similar outcomes for patients get-ting primary repair compared to staged repair.162 Nevertheless, for neonatal repair, discharge mortality increased to 6.2% with palliation and 7.8% with primary repair. This may be partly explained by a higher chance of postoperative complications in neonates.A major complication of repaired TOF is the develop-ment of pulmonary insufficiency, which subjects the RV to the adverse effects of acute and chronic volume overload. This is especially problematic if residual lesions such as a VSD or peripheral pulmonary stenosis exist. Pulmonary valve regurgita-tion after repair of TOF is relatively well tolerated in the short term, partly because the hypertrophied RV usually adapts to the altered hemodynamic load.163 The detrimental effects of chronic pulmonary valve regurgitation are, however, numerous, and include progressive right ventricular dilatation and failure, tri-cuspid valve regurgitation, exercise intolerance, arrhythmia, and sudden death. Mechanoelectrical interaction, by which a dila-tated RV provides the substrate for electrical instability, might underlie the propensity toward ventricular arrhythmia.164 In sup-port of this contention, Gatzoulis and colleagues163,164 found that the risk of symptomatic arrhythmia was high in patients with marked right ventricular enlargement and QRS prolongation on resting ECG of more than 180 ms. Karamlou et al have shown that similar structural and hemodynamic abnormalities, including a larger right atrial volume and right ventricular chamber size, are also related to atrial arrhythmias in patients following TOF repair.165 We found that prolongation of the QRS duration beyond a threshold of 160 ms increased the risk of atrial arrhythmias.165 Together, these data show that a similar mechanism could be responsible for both atrial and ventricular arrhythmias after repair in TOF patients.When significant deterioration of ventricular func-tion occurs, insertion of a pulmonary valve may be required, although this is rarely necessary in infants. Unfortunately, there are no universal criteria establishing the timing of pulmonary valve replacement. The current criteria for pulmonary valve replacement are the presence of two of the following criteria: RVEDD index >160 ml/m2, RVEDI >70 ml/m2, LVEDV index >65 ml/m2, RVEF <45%, RVOT aneurysm, and clinical symp-toms or signs, including syncope or VT.166 PVR can be achieved with minimal morbidity and mortality.167The alternative to surgical PVR is percutaneous pulmo-nary valve implantation. The Melody valve system (Fig. 20-57) is the most popular of such systems. Following risk adjustment, no significant differences were observed between surgical or transcatheter PVR. However, transcatheter PVR was associated with a shorter hospitalization. Hospitalization costs are similar for both procedures.168Arrhythmias are potentially the most serious late complication following TOF repair. In a multicenter cohort of 793 patients studied by Gatzoulis et al,164 a steady increase was documented in the prevalence of ventricular and atrial tachyarrhythmia and sudden cardiac death in the first 5 to 10 years after intracardiac repair. Clinical events were reported in 12% of patients at 35 years after repair. Prevalence of atrial arrhythmias from other studies, however, ranges from 1% to 11%,163,164 which is a reflection of the strong time dependence of arrhythmia onset.Underlying causes of arrhythmia following repair are complex and multifactorial, resulting in poorly defined opti-mum screening and treatment algorithms. Older repair age has been associated with an increased frequency of both atrial and ventricular arrhythmias. Impaired ventricular function second-ary to a protracted period of cyanosis before repair might con-tribute to the propensity for arrhythmia in older patients.Ventricular Septal DefectAnatomy. VSD refers to a hole between the LV and RV. These defects are common, comprising 20% to 30% of all cases of CHD, and may occur as an isolated lesion or as part of a more Figure 20-57. The Melody valve.Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   78622/02/19   2:56 PM 787CONGENITAL HEART DISEASECHAPTER 20complex malformation.169 VSDs vary in size from 3 to 4 mm to more than 3 cm and are classified into four types based on their location in the ventricular septum: perimembranous (or paramembranous, conoventricular), AV canal (inlet), outlet or supracristal, and muscular (Fig. 20-58).Perimembranous VSDs are the most common type requir-ing surgical intervention, comprising approximately 80% of cases.169 These defects involve the membranous septum and include the malalignment defects seen in tetralogy of Fallot. In rare instances, the anterior and septal leaflets of the tricus-pid valve adhere to the edges of the perimembranous defect, forming a channel between the LV and the right atrium. These defects result in a large left-to-right shunt due to the large pres-sure differential between the two chambers.AV canal defects, also known as inlet defects, occur when part or all of the septum of the AV canal is absent. The VSD lies beneath the tricuspid valve and is limited upstream by the tricuspid annulus, without intervening muscle.The supracristal or outlet VSD results from a defect within the conal septum. Characteristically, these defects are limited upstream by the pulmonary valve and are otherwise surrounded by the muscle of the infundibular septum.Muscular VSDs are the most common type and may lie in four locations: anterior, midventricular, posterior, or apical. These are surrounded by muscle and can occur anywhere along the trabecular portion of the septum. The rare “Swiss-cheese” type of muscular VSD consists of multiple communications between the RV and LV, complicating operative repair.Pathophysiology and Clinical Presentation. The size of the VSD determines the initial pathophysiology of the disease. Large VSDs are classified as nonrestrictive and are at least equal in diameter to the aortic annulus. These defects allow free flow of blood from the LV to the RV, elevating right ventricular pres-sures to the same level as systemic pressure.Consequently, the pulmonary-to-systemic flow ratio (Qp to Qs) is inversely dependent on the ratio of pulmonary vas-cular resistance to systemic vascular resistance. Nonrestrictive VSDs produce a large increase in pulmonary blood flow, and the afflicted infant will present with symptoms of congestive heart failure. However, if untreated, these defects will cause pulmonary hypertension with a corresponding increase in pulmonary vascular resistance. This will lead to a reversal of flow (a right-to-left shunt), which is known as Eisenmenger’s syndrome.Small restrictive VSDs offer significant resistance to the passage of blood across the defect, and therefore right ventricu-lar pressure is either normal or only minimally elevated and the ratio of Qp to Qs rarely exceeds 1.5. These defects are generally asymptomatic because there are few physiologic consequences. However, there is a long-term risk of endocarditis because endo-cardial damage from the jet of blood through the defect may serve as a possible nidus for colonization (Fig. 20-59A,B).Diagnosis. The child with a large VSD will present with severe congestive heart failure and frequent respiratory tract infections. Children with Eisenmenger’s syndrome may be deceptively asymptomatic until frank cyanosis develops.The chest radiograph will show cardiomegaly and pulmo-nary overcirculation, and the ECG will show signs of left ven-tricular or biventricular hypertrophy. Echocardiography provides definitive diagnosis and can estimate the degree of shunting as well as pulmonary arterial pressures. Cardiac catheterization has MembranousMuscularInletSupracristalTVFigure 20-58. Types of VSD. (Used with permission from Kelly Rosso MD.)ABFigure 20-59. A. Severe TV and VSD endocarditis (‘*’) in a  4 yo untreated patient. B. Echocardiographic appearance of the same patient after patch repair(‘*’) of the VSD and complete exci-sion of the tricuspid valve.Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   78722/02/19   2:56 PM 788SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIlargely been supplanted by echocardiography, except in older children where measurement of pulmonary resistance is neces-sary prior to recommending closure of the defect.Treatment. VSDs may close or narrow spontaneously, and the probability of closure is inversely related to the age at which the defect is observed. Thus, infants at 1 month of age have an 80% incidence of spontaneous closure, whereas a child at 12 months of age has only a 25% chance of closure.170 This has an important impact on operative decision-making because a small or moder-ate-size VSD may be observed for a period of time in the absence of symptoms. Large defects and those in severely symptomatic neonates should be repaired during infancy to relieve symptoms and because irreversible changes in pulmonary vascular resis-tance may develop during the first year of life.Repair of isolated VSDs requires the use of CPB with moderate hypothermia and cardioplegic arrest. The right atrial approach (Fig. 20-60) is preferable for most defects, except apical muscular defects, which often require a right ventricu-lotomy for adequate exposure. Supracristal defects may alter-natively be exposed via a pulmonary arteriotomy or through an incision in the RV immediately beneath the pulmonary valve (Fig. 20-61). Regardless of the type of defect present, a right atrial approach can be used initially to inspect the anatomy, as this may be abandoned should it offer inadequate exposure for repair. After careful inspection of the heart for any associated malformations, a patch repair is employed, taking care to avoid the conduction system. Routine use of intraoperative trans-esophageal echocardiography should be used to assess for any residual defect.Successful percutaneous device closure of VSDs using the Amplatzer device has been described.152 The device has demon-strated a 100% closure rate in a small series of patients with iso-lated or residual VSDs, or as a collaborative treatment strategy for the VSD component in more complex congenital lesions. Proponents of device closure argue that its use can decrease the complexity of surgical repair, avoid reoperation for a small residual lesion, or avoid the need for a ventriculotomy. The use of devices to close paramembranous defects can cause heart block because the defect is in close association to the conduction system (Fig 20-62).171 The procedure can be performed percuta-neously or through the per ventricular approach. Embolization of the device is an added risk.Multiple or “Swiss-cheese” VSDs represent a special case, and many cannot be repaired during infancy. In patients in whom definitive VSD closure cannot be accomplished, tem-porary placement of a pulmonary artery band can be employed to control pulmonary flow. This allows time for spontaneous closure of many of the smaller defects, thus simplifying surgi-cal repair.172Some centers, however, have advocated early definitive repair of the Swiss-cheese septum, by using oversize patches, fibrin glue, and combined intraoperative device closure, as well as techniques to complete the repair transatrially.173Results. Even in very small infants, closure of VSDs can be safely performed with hospital mortality near 0%. The main risk factor remains the presence of other associated lesions, espe-cially when present in symptomatic neonates with large VSDs.Figure 20-60. Intra-op picture during a VSD closure performed by interrupted suture technique with patch closure.Figure 20-61. Echocardiographic appearance of a supracristal VSD (arrow). Note its location just beneath the pulmonary valve (‘*’).Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   78822/02/19   2:56 PM 789CONGENITAL HEART DISEASECHAPTER 20Atrioventricular Canal DefectsAnatomy. AV canal defects result from failure of fusion of the endocardial cushions in the central portion of the heart, caus-ing a lesion that involves the atrial and the ventricular septum, as well as the anterior mitral and septal tricuspid valve leaf-lets. Defects involving primarily the atrial septum are known as partial AV canal defects and frequently occur in conjunction with a cleft anterior mitral leaflet. Complete AV canal defects have a combined deficiency of the atrial and ventricular sep-tum associated with a common AV orifice rather than separate tricuspid and mitral valves. The common AV valve generally  has five leaflets, three lateral (free wall) and two bridging (septal) leaflets. The defect in the ventricular septum can lie either between the two bridging leaflets or beneath them. The relationship between the septal defect and the anterior bridging leaflet forms the basis of the Rastelli classification for complete AV canal defects (Fig. 20-63).174,175Pathophysiology and Diagnosis. Partial AV canal defects, in the absence of AV valvular regurgitation, frequently resemble isolated ASDs. Left-to-right shunting predominates as long as pulmonary vascular resistance remains low. However, 40% of patients with partial AV canal defects have moderate-to-severe valve incompetence, and progressive heart failure occurs early in this patient population.175 Complete AV canal defects produce more severe pathophysiologic changes because the large intra-cardiac communication and significant AV valve regurgitation contribute to ventricular volume loading and pulmonary hyper-tension. Children with complete AV canal defects develop signs of congestive heart failure within the first few months of life.Physical examination may reveal a right ventricular heave and a systolic murmur. Children may also present with endo-carditis or paradoxical emboli as a result of the intracardiac communication. Chest radiography will be consistent with con-gestive heart failure, and the EKG demonstrates right ventricu-lar hypertrophy with a prolonged PR interval and is classically associated with left axis deviation.Two-dimensional echocardiography (Fig. 20-64) with color-flow mapping is confirmatory, but cardiac catheterization can be employed to define the status of the pulmonary vascula-ture, with a pulmonary vascular resistance greater than 12 Wood units indicating inoperability.Treatment. The management of patients with AV canal defects can be especially challenging. Timing of operation is individualized. Patients with partial defects can be electively repaired between 2 and 5 years of age, whereas complete AV canal defects should be repaired within the first year of life to prevent irreversible changes in the pulmonary circulation. Complete repair in infancy should be accomplished, with palliative procedures such as pulmonary artery banding reserved for only those infants with other complex lesions or who are too ill to tolerate CPB.The operative technique requires the use of either continu-ous hypothermic CPB or, for small infants, deep hypothermic circulatory arrest. The heart is initially approached through an oblique right atriotomy, and the anatomy is carefully observed. In the case of a partial AV canal, the cleft in the mitral valve is repaired with interrupted sutures and the ASD is closed with a pericardial patch. Complete AV canal defects are repaired by patch closure of the VSD, separating the common AV valve into tricuspid and mitral components and suspending the neovalves from the top of the VSD patch and closing the ASD.Results. Partial AV canal defects have an excellent outcome, with a mortality rate of 0% to 2% in most series.175 Complete AV canal defects are associated with anoperative mortality of 3% to 4%.176The most frequently encountered postoperative problems are complete heart block (1%–2%), right bundle-branch block (22%), arrhythmias (11%), RVOT obstruction (11%), and severe mitral regurgitation (13%–24%).175 The increasing use of intraoperative transesophageal echocardiography may positively Figure 20-62. Intraoperative picture at the time of removal of a percutaneously placed VSD device causing severe TR and complete heart block. Note the close association of the device to the tricuspid valve leaflet (arrow) and cordae.Type AType BType CFigure 20-63. Rastelli classification of complete AVSD. (Used with permission from Kelly Rosso MD.)Figure 20-64. Echo of an infant with complete AVSD. Note the prominent absence of the ‘crux’ (‘*’) of the heart in this defect.Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   78922/02/19   2:56 PM 790SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIinfluence outcomes, as the adequacy of repair can be assessed and treated without need for subsequent reoperation.174-175Interrupted Aortic ArchAnatomy. Interrupted aortic arch (IAA) is a rare defect, com-prising approximately 1% of all cases of CHD.177 It is defined as an absence of luminal continuity between the ascending and descending aorta and does not occur as an isolated defect in most cases because a VSD or PDA is usually present. IAA is classified based on the location of the interruption (Fig. 20-65 to Fig. 20-67).Clinical Manifestations and Diagnosis. Infants with IAA have ductal-dependent systemic blood flow and will develop profound metabolic acidosis and hemodynamic collapse upon ductal closure. In the rare instance of failed ductal closure, the diagnosis may be missed during infancy, and the child will pres-ent with symptoms of congestive heart failure from a persistent left-to-right shunt.Once definitive diagnosis is made in infants, usually with echocardiography, preparations are made for operative interven-tion, and prostaglandin E1 is infused to maintain ductal patency and correct acidosis. The infant’s hemodynamic status should Figure 20-66. CT angiogram of a Type A IAA.AoAoPAType AType BType CPAPAAoFigure 20-65. Types of IAA. (Used with permission from Nicholas Clarke MD.)Figure 20-67. MRI reconstruction of a Type B IAA.be optimized with mechanical ventilation and inotropic support. An effort should be made to increase pulmonary vascular resis-tance by decreasing the fractional inspired oxygen and avoiding hyperventilation because this will preferentially direct blood into the systemic circulation.Treatment. Initial strategies for the management of IAA involved palliation though a left thoracotomy by using one of the arch vessels as a conduit to restore aortic continuity. Pulmo-nary artery banding can be simultaneously performed to limit left-to-right shunting because it is not feasible to repair the VSD or other intracardiac communications with this approach.However, complete one stage surgical repair in infants with IAA is now preferable. The operative technique involves use of a median sternotomy and CPB with short periods of cir-culatory arrest. Aortic arch reconstruction can be accomplished with either direct anastomosis or patch aortoplasty followed by closure of the VSD.178In certain cases, the defect will involve hypoplasia of the left heart, precluding attempts at definitive repair. These infants should be managed with a Norwood procedure followed by a Fontan repair.Results. Outcomes in infants with IAA have improved sub-stantially over the last decades as a result of improved periop-erative care. Operative mortality is now less than 10% in most series.177,179 Some authors advocate the use of patch augmenta-tion of the aorta to ensure adequate relief of LVOT obstruction and to diminish anastomotic tension, thus reducing the subse-quent risk of restenosis and tracheobronchial compression.178Pediatric Mechanical Circulatory SupportMechanical circulatory support has become standard therapy for adults with end stage heart failure. There has been a sig-nificant lag with development of similar devices for the pediatric population. This is probably related to the smaller mar-ket for these devices and the technical challenges associated with the anatomical constraints secondary to anatomy and size of the patients. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) 8Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   79022/02/19   2:56 PM 791CONGENITAL HEART DISEASECHAPTER 20has been the mainstay of mechanical support in many centers for the pediatric population. The adaptation of other adult devices to the pediatric population las led to the slow but steady devel-opment of pediatric durable mechanical devices. The Berlin Heart EXCOR (Berlin Heart AG, Berlin, Germany) device was approved by the FDA in 2011 in the United States as a paracor-poreal device that can be used as a bridge to transplantation. This device has a 73% overall survival post implant at 12 months.97 Infection, stroke and bleeding remain significant morbidities associated with it. Young age and small body surface area still remain poor prognostic factors. In 2010, the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute launched the Pumps for Kids, Infants, and Neonates (PumpKIN) program to promote development of new devices with the goal of clinical use.ECMO remains the most commonly used form of mechan-ical support in the pediatric population in the United States. Per the ECLS Registry report released by the Extracorporeal Life Support Organization, as of January 2017, there were a total of 16,531 ECMO runs performed for cardiac causes, internation-ally.180 The survival to discharge is about 40% in the neona-tal population as opposed to 50% in the pediatric population. ECMO remains the only means of salvage for newborns and infants in many institutions. The biggest limitation remains the short duration it can be used. It is often used as a bridge to recovery and sometimes as a bridge to transplantation. The abil-ity to place small infants on ECMO with peripheral cannulation continues to make it a very attractive first line option.Ventricular assist devices can be either of the pulsatile or continuous types. The Berlin Heart EXCOR (Berlin Heart AG, Berlin, Germany) remains a classic example of a pulsa-tile device. The Impella 2.5 (Abiomed) (Fig. 20-68) has been used in the pediatric population as a temporary support device for recovering myocarditis, during treatment of acute rejection after heart transplantation and high-risk interventions in frag-ile patients with marginal function.181,182 Other continuous flow devices available for the pediatric patient include the Heartmate II Figure 20-68. Impella 2.5 (Abiomed). (Reproduced with permis-sion from Abiomed. Danvers, MA.)Figure 20-69. Heartware HVAD. (HeartWare® HVAD (Heart-Ware Inc., Miami Lakes, FL.)and Heartmate III devices (Thoratec, Pleasanton, CA), DeBakey VAD Child (MicroMed Technology, Houston, TX), PediMag (Thoratec, Pleasanton, CA), Jarvik2015 and HeartWare HVAD (Fig 20-69) (HeartWare international Inc, Framingham, MA).183 The total artificial heart (SynCardia Systems Inc, Tuscon, Az, USA) is an implantable biventricular device that replaces both ventricles. With the new introduction of the 50 ml pump, its popularity in the pediatric population has risen.Posttransplant survival of patients bridged with and with-out mechanical circulatory support (ventricular assist device or total artificial heart) at 5 years post transplant remains the same. However, patients bridged to transplant with ECMO have a sig-nificantly worse survival.184 All in all, the field of pediatric heart surgery is very exciting and rapidly expanding.Pediatric Heart TransplantationHeart transplantation is currently an accepted mode of therapy in infants and children. Annually, about 600 pediatric heart transplants are performed worldwide,184 about 400 of which are performed in the United States.185 The common indications for heart transplant in the pediatric population are congenital heart disease, dilated cardiomyopathy, retransplantation, and other rare indications (e.g., arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia, cancer, muscular dystrophy, and restrictive cardio-myopathy). The most common congenital heart defect requir-ing transplantation remains hypoplastic left heart syndrome. Although in the past some centers have advocated primary heart transplantation for this lesion, the improved outcomes with surgical palliation have eliminated this as an option. The first year post transplant remains the greatest risk for mortality. The overall median survival is 20.7 years for infants, 18.2 years for children age 1 to 5 years, 14 years for age 6 to 10 years, and 12.7 years for those age 11 to 17 years.184 Males seem to have a modestly superior overall survival compared with females. The causes of mortality include cardiac allograft vasculopathy, acute Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   79122/02/19   2:57 PM 792SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIrejection, infections, and graft failures. In the current era, the expected 1-year survival rate is 80% to 90%, the 2-year survival rate is 80% to 85%, and the 5-year survival rate is approximately 70% to 80% in experienced centers.186 Interestingly, infants who undergo transplantation in the first month of life appear to have a survival advantage over infants who undergo transplantation during the remainder of the first year of life.The two main techniques for performing the implant of the heart are the right atrial technique developed by Lower and Shumway and the bicaval-left atrial technique described by Sievers and associates.187 In the latter technique, implantation consists of five anastamoses performed using a running prolene suture. These include the left atrial cuff, aorta, pulmonary artery, and the superior and inferior vena cave. One of the cornerstones of postoperative management remains immunosuppression. The triple drug regimen remains popular, corticosteroids, calcineurin inhibitor (cyclosporine or tacrolimus), and an antiproliferative agent (azathioprine or mycophenolate mofetil). Endomyocardial biopsy and coronary angiography are performed at regular inter-vals to monitor rejection. The field of pediatric heart transplan-tation has made huge strides since the days of “Baby Fae.”188,189Public Reporting and the STS Database in Congenital Heart SurgeryThere has been a recent impetus in the filed of congenital and pediatric cardiac surgery toward public reporting of out-comes. The advantages of this include promoting patient autonomy, shows a commitment to quality improvement, and also serves as a free marketing tool. The Society of Thoracic Surgeons Congenital Heart Surgery Database (STS-CHSD), is the largest clinical database in the world for congenital and pedi-atric cardiac surgery. It was founded in 1994. It contains data of about 394,980 operations as of September 9, 2016.192 These data are the foundation for assessment of performance by benchmark and comparison of individual programmatic outcomes to national aggregate data, development and subsequent applica-tion of sophisticated risk adjustment models, quality improve-ment initiatives, research, voluntary public reporting, development of reimbursement strategies, and governmental and regulatory collaborations.190 The database is currently in its 25th overall data harvest and records and represents data from 120 participants and 392 surgeons. Thus, this database has greater than 95% penetrance. STS CHSD public reporting started in January 2015, and participation is voluntary. Report-ing is restricted to the hospital level and involves a rolling 4-year analytic window of data. Public reporting is based on the STS CHSD Operative Mortality Risk Model. Developed in 2014, this risk model calculates the operative mortality rate of hospitals performing such surgery, adjusting for procedural and patient level factors. The overall mortality rate over a 4-year period and the operative mortality rate for each of the five STAT (Society of Thoracic Surgeons—European Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery) categories is reported. The STAT categories are a multi-institutional, validated complexity stratification tool. They range from a score of 1 to 5, and the risk of mortality increases with each category.190 In addition, the STS star rating system was introduced, and every institution is rated as one, two, or three stars. This system is based on the confidence limits of the O/E (observed to expected) overall mortality for the institu-tion (Fig. 20-70). One star equals higher than expected operative 9Rady Children’s Hospital San DiegoRady Children’s Hospital San Diego SurgeonsEnc Devaney, MDDaniel DiBardino, MDJohn Lambert, MDPeter Pastuszko, MDOverall Star RatingPopulation: Neonates,Infants, Children & AdultsOvarallSTAT Mortality Category 1STAT Mortality Category 2STAT Mortality Category 3STAT Mortality Category 4STAT Mortality Category 5#/Eligible28/11650/3067/3991/12817/2953/37Observed2.4%0.0%1.8%0.8%5.8%8.1%Expected3.0%0.6%1.5%2.1%6.7%14.7%OE (95% CI)0.79 (0.53, 1.14)0.00 (0.00, 2.16)1.20 (0.48, 2.45)0.37 (0.01, 2.05)0.87 (0.51, 1.36)0.55 (0.12, 1.49)Adj. Rate (95% CI)2.5 (1.6, 3.5)0.0 (0.0, 1.1)2.0 (0.8, 4.1)1.0 (0.0, 5.3)6.0 (3.5, 9.4)8.7 (1.8, 23.6)San DiegoCAWebsite: http://www.rchsd.org/programs-services/cardiologyOperative and Adjusted Operative Mortality, Last 4 Years (January 2012–December 2015)Figure 20-70. Program performance as currently reported by the STS-CHSD.Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   79222/02/19   2:57 PM 793CONGENITAL HEART DISEASECHAPTER 20mortality (the 95% confidence interval for their risk-adjusted O/E mortality ratio was entirely above the number 1), two stars equals the same as expected operative mortality (the 95% con-fidence interval for their risk-adjusted O/E mortality ratio over-lapped with the number 1), and three stars equals lower than expected operative mortality (the 95% confidence interval for their risk-adjusted O/E mortality ratio was entirely below the number 1). The Spring 2016 STS CHSD Feedback Report includes data from 117 participants in the STS-CHSD, including 14 one-star programs, 83 two-star programs, and 8 three-star programs. Twelve participants did not receive a star rating due to incomplete data.191 Public reporting increased from 23% to 57.6% (all three-star programs, 50 two-star and three one-star programs). The online public reporting portal can be accessed at www.sts.org/congenital-public-reporting-module-search.There are several criticisms to the current methodology used for reporting. Important limitations of current publicly reported data (including the STS star rating system) will need to be addressed in future initiatives in order to completely engage parents of children with CHD and reassure providers that risk-adjustment models are optimized. There are four spe-cific areas that should be considered when making decisions how to improve this methodology: (a) While the mortality risk-adjustment model on which the star rating system is based is mature now, there are not comparable models that provide risk-adjusted morbidity (complication) rates. The assessment of the quality of congenital heart disease care at different centers should include complication metrics and incorporate failure-to-rescue as an important discriminator; (b) the star rating system does not provide risk-adjusted outcomes for specific procedures or, more importantly, for specific diagnoses. This is mainly because of the exceptionally wide spectrum of diagnoses and procedures in pediatric cardiac surgery that preclude sufficiently large numbers in most procedure-specific categories; (c) the star rating system, although the “best” we have at present, may not be understood equally by all families. It will be critical to provide equivalent information to the large numbers of under-resourced and non–English-speaking families; (d) finally, the current adjusted mortality rate reported by the STS is calculated from a statistical formula and refers to what the hospital’s mor-tality rate would be if the measured performance (in this case the mortality rate) were extrapolated to the overall case-mix or make-up of patients within the entire STS database. This is a critical point because a hospital’s case-mix is highly variable, and discrimination based on mortality is mostly related to out-comes of more complex procedures. In other words, if hospital A has excellent survival for less complex procedures and therefore performs very few highly complex procedures (i.e., choosing a case-mix consistent with its expertise), the application of an extrapolated mortality rate may not reflect the actual quality of care for that particular hospital. This issue is evident because the majority of experienced centers with arguably the highest complexity received a “middle star” rating of 2. This rating may reflect calibration issues with the current rating system, whereby centers are potentially penalized for high-complexity predominance.Fortunately, there are efforts to correct these deficien-cies. In 2016, the STS CHSD Task Force and STS Quality Measurement Task Force began to collaborate on an initiative to refine risk adjustment for chromosomal abnormalities, syn-dromes, and noncardiac congenital anatomic abnormalities and to then enhance the STS CHSD Mortality Risk Model with this additional information. Upon completion of this project, STS CHSD Task Force plans to collaborate with the STS Quality Measurement Task Force to study the relationship between vol-ume (programmatic volume and surgeon volume) and outcome using this enhanced STS CHSD Mortality Risk Model.192 Also, currently under development is a multidomain quality metric that incorporates mortality, morbidity, postoperative length of stay, and the occurrence of complications. As the largest con-genital and pediatric cardiac surgical clinical data registry in the world, containing data about nearly all pediatric cardiac operations performed in the United States, STS CHSD contains a truly representative sample of national aggregate data that is useful for multiple purposes.192Future DirectionsThe future of congenital heart surgery remains very bright and exciting. The development of novel technologies such as four-dimensional MRI flow studies (Fig. 20-71) and three-dimen-sional printing have offered this field several new tools to help understand complex anatomy and pathophysiology. Three-dimensional printing of complex congenital heart defects has helped surgeons in preoperative planning by allowing transla-tion of two-dimensional cross-sectional imaging studies into a tangible and easily visualized model.193 The hollow nature of the human heart and the direct correlation of structure to disease in the congenital population allows this technology to be used in abundance in this field. Its utilization to train young surgeons is very appealing (Figs. 20-72 and 20-73).194,196 Current research in the field of genetics, device bioengineering and miniaturization, stem cell therapy, and fusion imaging technology is expected to further improve patient outcome.195,198 The improved outcomes and survival of these young and fragile patients with congeni-tal heart disease has led to the development of a complex new field termed adult congenital heart disease. The field of con-genital heart surgery is young and offers brilliant, motivated, and upcoming surgeons a very daunting challenge to better the future of these babies.Figure 20-71. 4D MRI flow study obtained in a complex single ventricle patient for the evaluation of persistent hypoxia.Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   79322/02/19   2:57 PM 794SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 20-72. 3D printed models of complex heart defects which were very helpful for preoperative surgical planning and patient education.ADEFBCMAPCAPulmonaryArteryAortaFigure 20-73. Example of Pre-Interventional Planning Using 3D Printed Models. Transthoracic echocardiogram (A) confirms tetralogy of Fallot/pulmonary atresia/multiple aortopulmonary collateral arteries (MAPCAs) diagnosis. Three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction (B and C) illustrates spatial relationship of patient-specific geometry such as true pulmonary arteries (blue), aorta (red), and MAPCAs (green and yellow) for central aortopulmonary shunt placement and coil planning. Three-dimensional printing (D) provides absolute scaling for planning purposes, as well as patient/family education. Angiography (E and F) captured after central shunt and prior to placement of MAPCA embolization coils. (Reproduced with permission from Ryan JR, Moe TG, Richardson R, et al: A novel approach to neonatal management of tetralogy of Fallot, with pulmonary atresia, and multiple aortopulmonary collaterals, JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2015 Jan;8(1):103-104.)Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   79422/02/19   2:57 PM 795CONGENITAL HEART DISEASECHAPTER 20REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	American Heart Association. About congenital heart defects. Available at: http://www.heart.org/HEARTORG/Conditions/CongenitalHeartDefects/Congenital-Heart-Defects_UCM_001090_SubHomePage.jsp. Accessed May 18, 2018.	2.	Congenital Heart Public Health Consortium. FAQ fact sheet. Available at: https://www.aap.org/en-us/Documents/chphc/chd_fact_sheet_long.pdf. Accessed May 18, 2018.	3.	Society for Thoracic Surgeons. Congenital heart surgery pub-lic reporting. Available at: https://www.sts.org/congenital-public-reporting-module-search. Accessed May 18, 2018.	4.	Kouchoukos NT, Blackstone EH, Doty DB, et al. Atrial septal defect and partial anomalous pulmonary venous connection. In: Kouchoukos NT, Blackstone EH, Doty DB, et al, eds. Kirklin/Barrat-Boyes Cardiac Surgery. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone; 2003:716.	5.	Kirklin JW, Pacifico AD, Kirklin JK. The surgical treat-ment of atrioventricular canal defects. In: Arciniegas E, ed. Pediatric Cardiac Surgery. Chicago: Yearbook Medical; 1985:2398.	6.	Peterson GE, Brickner ME, Reimold SC. Transesophageal echocardiography: clinical indications and applications. Circulation. 2003;107:2398-2402.	7.	Kouchoukos NT, Blackstone EH, Doty DB, et al. Atrial septal defect and partial anomalous pulmonary venous connection. In: Kouchoukos NT, Blackstone EH, Doty DB, et al, eds. Kirklin/Barrat-Boyes Cardiac Surgery. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone; 2003:740.	8.	Reddy VM. Cardiac surgery for premature and low birth weight neonates. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg Pediatr Card Surg Annu. 2001;4:271-276. Congenital heart defects in low-birth-weight infants are typically managed with sup-portive therapy or palliative surgery, and definitive repair is delayed. This paper describes the outcomes in 116 neonates and infants under 2500 g who underwent complete repair of simple and complex cardiac defects using cardiopulmo-nary bypass.	9.	Thompson JD, Abuwari EH, Watterson KG, et al. Surgi-cal and transcatheter (Amplatzer) closure of atrial septal defect: a prospective comparison of results and cost. Heart. 2002;87:466-469.	10.	Du ZD, Hijazi ZM, Kleinman CS, et al. Comparison between transcatheter and surgical closure of secundum atrial septal defect in children and adults: results of a multicenter nonran-domized trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2002;39:1836-1844.	11.	Kutty S, Hazeem AA, Brown K, et al. Long-term (5-to 20-year) outcomes after transcatheter or surgical treatment of hemodynamically significant isolated secundum atrial septal defect. Am J Cardiol. 2012;109:1348-1352.	12.	Highes ML, Maskell G, Goh TH, Wilkinson JL. Prospective comparison of costs and short term health outcomes of surgi-cal versus device closure of atrial septal defect in children. Heart. 2002;88:67-70.	13.	Murphy JG, Gersh BJ, McGoon MD, et al. Long-term out-come after surgical repair of isolated atrial septal defect. N Engl J Med. 1990;323:1645-1650.	14.	Hanninen M, Kmet A, Taylor DA, et al. Atrial septal defect closure in the elderly is associated with excellent quality of life, functional improvement, and ventricular remodeling. Can J Cardiol. 2011;27:698-704.	15.	Mascio CE, Pasquali SK, Jacobs JP, et al. Outcomes in adult congenital heart surgery: analysis of the Society of Tho-racic Surgeons (STS) Database. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2011;142:1090-1097.	16.	Hopkins RA, Bert AA, Buchholz B, et al. Surgical patch closure of atrial septal defects. Ann Thorac Surg. 2004;77:2144-2150.	17.	Liu G, Qiao Y, Zou C, et al. Totally thoracoscopic surgical treatment for atrial septal defect: mid-term follow-up results in 45 consecutive patients. Heart Lung Circ. 2012;S1443-S9506.	18.	Argenziano M, Oz M, Kohmoto T, et al. Totally endoscopic atrial septal defect repair with robotic assistance. Circulation. 2003;108(suppl II):II-191-II-194.	19.	Luo W, Chang C, Chen S. Ministernotomy vs. full sternotomy in congenital heart defects: a prospective randomized study. Ann Thorac Surg. 2001;71(2):473-475.	20.	Sebastian VA, Guleserian KJ, Leonard SR, Forbess JM. Min-isternotomy for repair of congenital cardiac disease. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2009;9(5):819-821.	21.	Srivastava AR, Banerjee A, Tempe DK, et al. A comprehen-sive approach to fast tracking in cardiac surgery: ambula-tory low-risk open-heart surgery. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2008;33:955-960.	22.	King TD, Thompson SL, Steiner C, Mills NL. Secundum atrial septal defects: nonoperative closure during cardiac cath-eterization. JAMA. 1976;235(23):2506-2509.	23.	Karamlou T, Diggs BS, McCrindle BW, Ungerleider RM, Welke KF. The rush to atrial septal defect closure: is the introduction of percutaneous closure driving utilization? Ann Thorac Surg. 2008;86:1584-1590.	24.	Zeevi B, Keane JF, Castaneda AR, Perry SB, Lock JE. Neonatal critical valvular aortic stenosis. A comparison of surgical and balloon dilatation therapy. Circulation. 1989;80(4):831-839.	25.	Alsoufi B, Karamlou T, McCrindle BW, Caldarone CA. Man-agement options in neonates and infants with critical left ven-tricular outflow tract obstruction. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2007;31(6):1013-1021.	26.	Hammon JW Jr, Lupinetti FM, Maples MD, et al. Predictors of operative mortality in critical aortic stenosis presenting in infancy. Ann Thorac Surg. 1988;45(5):537-540.	25.	Hill GD, Ginde S, Rios R, Frommelt PC, Hill KD. Surgical  valvotomy versus balloon valvuloplasty for congenital aor-tic valve stenosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis.  J Am Heart Assoc. 2016;5(8):e003931. A review article and a meta-analysis comparing balloon valvuloplasty to surgi-cal aortic valvotomy. This article describes the outcomes and reintervention rates in both the groups.	26.	Moore P, Egito E, Mowrey H, Perry SB, Lock JE, Keane JF. Midterm results of balloon dilatation of congenital aortic stenosis: predictors of success. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1996;27(5):1257-1263.	27.	Ross DN. Replacement of aortic and mitral valves with a pul-monary autograft. Lancet. 1967;57(7523):956-958.	28.	Jones TK, Lupinetti FM. Comparison of Ross procedures and aortic valve allografts in children. Ann Thorac Surg. 1998;66(6 suppl):S170-S173.	29.	Karamlou T, Jang K, Williams WG, et al. Outcomes and associated risk factors for aortic valve replacement in 160 children: a competing risks analysis. Circulation. 2005;29(22):3462-3469.	30.	Marasini M, Zannini L, Ussia GP, et al. Discrete subaor-tic stenosis: incidence, morphology, and surgical impact of associated subaortic anomalies. Ann Thorac Surg. 2003;75(6):1763-1768.	31.	Karamlou T, Gurofsky R, Bojcevski A, et al. Prevalence and associated risk factors for intervention in 313 children with subaortic stenosis. Ann Thorac Surg. 2007;84:900-906.	32.	Somerville J, Stone S, Ross D. Fate of patients with fixed subaortic stenosis after surgical removal. Br Heart J. 1980; 43(6):629-647.	33.	Williams JCP, Barratt-Boyes BG, Lowe JB. Supravalvular aortic stenosis. Circulation. 1961;24:1311-1318.Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   79522/02/19   2:57 PM 796SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	34.	Tworetzky W, Wilkins-Haug L, Jennings RW, et al. Balloon dilation of severe aortic stenosis in the fetus: potential for pre-vention of hypoplastic left heart syndrome: candidate selection, technique, and results of successful intervention. Circulation. 2004;110(15):2125-2131.	35.	van Son JM, Danielson GK, Puga FJ, et al. Supravalvular aor-tic stenosis: long-term results of surgical treatment. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1994;107(1):103-114.	36.	Sharma BK, Fujiwara H, Hallman GL, et al. Supravalvular aortic stenosis: a 29-year review of surgical experience. Ann Thorac Surg. 1991;51:1031-1039.	37.	McElhinney DB, Petrossian E, Tworetzky W, Silverman NH, Hanley FL. Issues and outcomes in the management of supravalvular aortic stenosis. Ann Thorac Surg. 2000;69(2): 562-567.	38.	Clyman RI, Mauray F, Roman C, Rudolph AM, Heymann MA. Circulating PGE2 concentration and patent ductus arteriosus in fetal and neonatal lambs. J Pediatr. 1982;97(3):455-463.	39.	McMurphy DM, Heymann MA, Rudolph AM, Melmon KL. Developmental change in constriction of the ductus arteriosus: response to oxygen and vasoactive substances in the isolated duc-tus arteriosus of the fetal lamb. Pediatr Res. 1972;6(4):231-238.	40.	Mitchell SC, Korones SB, Berendes HW. Congenital heart disease in 56,109 births. Incidence and natural history. Circu-lation. 1971;43(3):323-332.	40.	Campbell M. Natural history of persistent ductus arteriosus. Br Heart J. 1968;30(1):4-13.	41.	Itabashi K, Ohno T, Nishida H. Indomethacin responsive-ness of patent ductus arteriosus and renal abnormalities in preterm infants treated with indomethacin. J Pediatr. 2003;143(2):203-207.	42.	Rashkind WJ, Cuaso CC. Transcatheter closure of patent duc-tus arteriosus. Pediatr Cardiol. 1979;1(1):3-7.	43.	Moore JW, Schneider DJ, Dimeglio D. The duct-occlud device: design, clinical results, and future directions. J Interv Cardiol. 2001;14(2):231-237.	44.	Zahn EM, Peck D, Phillips A, et al. Transcatheter closure of patent ductus arteriosus in extremely premature newborns: early results and midterm follow-up. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2016;9(23):2429-2437. This article shows that percutaneous closure of PDAs even in extremely small babies is possible.	45.	Moore P, Egito E, Mowrey H, Perry SB, Lock JE, Keane JF. Midterm results of balloon dilation of congenital aor-tic stenosis: predictors of success. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1996;27(5):1257-1263.	46.	Mavroudis C, Backer CL, Gevitz M. Forty-six years of pat-ent ductus arteriosus division at Children’s Memorial Hospital of Chicago. Standards for comparison. Ann Thorac Surg. 1994;220(3):402-409.	47.	Elzenga NJ, Gittenberger-de Groot AC, Oppenheimer-Dekker A. Coarctation and other obstructive arch anoma-lies: their relationship to the ductus arteriosus. Int J Cardiol. 1986;13(3):289-308.	48.	Locher JP, Kron IL. Coarctation of the aorta. In: Mavroudis C, Backer CL, eds. Pediatric Cardiac Surgery. St. Louis: Mosby; 1994:167.	49.	Presbitero P, Demaie D, Villani M, et al. Long-term results (15–30 years) of surgical repair of coarctation. Br Heart J. 1987;57(5):462-467.	50.	Cohen M, Fuster V, Steele PM, Driscoll D, McGoon DC. Coarctation of the aorta: long-term follow-up and predic-tion of outcome after surgical correction. Circulation. 1989;80(4):840-845.	51.	Hornung TS, Benson LN, McLaughlin PR. Interventions for aortic coarctation. Cardiol Rev. 2002;10(3):139-148.	52.	Waldhausen JA, Nahrwold DL. Repair of coarctation of the aorta with a subclavian flap. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1966;51(4):532-533.	53.	Karamlou T, Bernasconi A, Jaeggi E, et al. Factors associated with arch reintervention and growth of the aortic arch after coarctation repair in neonates weighing less than 2.5 kg.  J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2009;137:1163-1167.	54.	van Heum LW, Wong CM, Speigelhalter DJ, et al. Surgi-cal treatment of aortic coarctation in infants younger than 3 months: 1985-1990. Success of extended end-to-end arch aor-toplasty. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1994;107:74-85.	55.	Knyshov GV, Sitar LL, Glagola MD, Atamanyuk MY. Aortic aneurysms at the site of the repair of coarctation of the aorta: a review of 48 patients. Ann Thorac Surg. 1996;61(3):935-939.	56.	Bouchart F, Dubar A, Tabley A, et al. Coarctation of the aorta in adults: surgical results and long-term follow-up. Ann Thorac Surg. 2000;70(5):1483-1489.	57.	Bhat MA, Neelakhandran KS, Unnikriahnan M, Rathore RS, Mohan Singh MP, Lone GN. Fate of hypertension after repair of coarctation of the aorta in adults. Br J Surg. 2001;88(4):536-538.	58.	Acher C, Wynn M. Paraplegia after thoracoabdominal aortic surgery: not just assisted circulation, hypothermic arrest, clamp and sew, or TEVAR. Ann Cardiothorac Surg. 2012;1(3):365-372.	59.	McCrindle BW, Jones TK, Morrow WR, et al. Acute results of balloon angioplasty of native coarctation versus recurrent aor-tic obstruction are equivalent. Valvuloplasty and Angioplasty of Congenital Anomalies (VACA) Registry Investigators.  J Am Coll Cardiol. 1996;28(7):1810-1817.	60.	Egbe A, Uppu S, Lee S, Ho D, Srivastava S. Changing preva-lence of severe congenital heart disease: a population-based study. Pediatr Cardiol. 2014;35(7):1232-1238.	61.	Collett RW, Edwards JE. Persistent truncus arteriosus: a clas-sification according to anatomic subtypes. Surg Clin North Am. 1949;29(4):1245-1270.	62.	Van Praagh R, Van Praagh S. The anatomy of common aor-ticopulmonary trunk (truncus arteriosus communis) and its embryologic implications: a study of 57 necroscopy cases. Am J Cardiol. 1965;16(3):406-425.	63.	De la Cruz MV, Pio da Rocha J. An ontogenic theory for the explanation of congenital malformations involving the truncus and conus. Am Heart J. 1976;51(5):782-805.	64.	Manner J. Cardiac looping in the chick embryo: a morpho-logic review with special reference to terminological and biomechanical aspects of the looping process. Anat Rec. 2000;259(3):242-262.	65.	Hutson MR, Kirby ML. Neural crest and cardiovascular development: a 20-year perspective. Birth Defects Res Part C Embryo Today. 2003;69(1):2-13.	66.	Ziolkowska L, Kawalec W, Turska-Kmiec A, et al. Chromo-some 22q11.2 microdeletion in children with conotruncal heart defects: frequency, associated cardiovascular anoma-lies, and outcome following cardiac surgery. Eur J Pediatr. 2008;167(10):1135-1140.	67.	Anderson KR, McGoon DC, Lie JT. Surgical significance of the coronary arterial anatomy in truncus arteriosus communis. Am J Cardiol. 1978;41(1):76-81.	68.	Chiu IS, Wu SJ, Chen MR, Chen SJ, Wang JK. Anatomic rela-tionship of the coronary orifice and truncal valve in truncus arteriosus and their surgical implication. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2002;123(2):350-352.	69.	Armer RM, De Oliveira PF, Lurie PR. True truncus arteriosus. Review of 17 cases and report of surgery in 7 patients. Circu-lation. 1961;24:878-890.	70.	McGoon DC, Rastelli GC, Ongley PA. An operation for the correction of truncus arteriosus. JAMA. 1968;205(2): 69-73.	71.	Ebert PA. Truncus arteriosus. In: Glenn WWL, Baue AE, Geha AS, eds. Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery. 4th ed. Norwalk: Appleton-Century-Crofts; 1983:731.Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   79622/02/19   2:57 PM 797CONGENITAL HEART DISEASECHAPTER 20	72.	Forbess JM, Shah AS, St Louis JD, Jaggers JJ, Ungerleider RM. Cryopreserved homografts in the pulmonary position: determinants of durability. Ann Thorac Surg. 2001;71:54-59.	73.	Aupecle B, Serraf A, Belli E, et al. Intermediate follow-up of a composite stentless porcine valved conduit of bovine pericardium in the pulmonary circulation. Ann Thorac Surg. 2002;74(1):127-132.	74.	Correa-Villaseñor A, Ferencz C, Boughman JA, Neill CA. Total anomalous pulmonary venous return: familial and envi-ronmental factors. The Baltimore-Washington Infant Study Group. Teratology. 1991;44(4):415-428.	75.	Darling RC, Rothney WB, Craij JM. Total pulmonary venous drainage into the right side of the heart. Lab Invest. 1957;6(1):44-64.	76.	Delisle G, Ando M, Calder AL, et al. Total anomalous pul-monary venous connection: report of 93 autopsied cases with emphasis on diagnostic and surgical considerations. Am Heart J. 1976;91(1):99-122.	77.	Michielon G, Di Donato RM, Pasquini L, et al. Total anoma-lous pulmonary venous connection: long-term appraisal with evolving technical solutions. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2002;22(2):184-191.	78.	Jonas RA, Smolinsky A, Mayer JE, Castaneda AR. Obstructed pulmonary venous drainage with total anomalous pulmo-nary venous connection to the coronary sinus. Am J Cardiol. 1987;59(5):431-435.	79.	Austin EH. Disorders of pulmonary venous return. In: Sabis-ton DC, Lyerly HK, eds. Textbook of Surgery: The Biologi-cal Basis of Modern Surgical Practice. 15th ed. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders; 1997:2001.	80.	Lacour-Gayet F, Rey C, Planche C. Pulmonary vein steno-sis. Description of a sutureless surgical procedure using the pericardium in situ (in French). Arch Mal Coeur Vaiss. 1996;89(5):633-636.	81.	Najm HK, Caldarone CA, Smallhorn J, Coles JG. A suture-less technique for the relief of pulmonary vein stenosis with the use of in situ pericardium. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1998;115(2):468-470.	82.	Hyde JAJ, Stumper O, Barth MJ, et al. Total anomalous pul-monary venous connection: outcome of surgical correction and management of recurrent venous obstruction. Eur J Car-diothorac Surg. 1999;15(6):735-740.	83.	Korbmacher B, Buttgen S, Schulte HD, et al. Long-term results after repair of total anomalous pulmonary venous con-nection. Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2001;49(2):101-106.	84.	Bando K, Turrentine MW, Ensing GJ, et al. Surgical man-agement of total anomalous pulmonary venous connection. Thirty-year trends. Circulation. 1996;95(9 suppl):II12-II26.	85.	Karamlou T, Gurofsky R, Al Sukhni E, et al. Factors associated with mortality and reoperation in 377 children  with total anomalous pulmonary venous connection.  Circulation. 2007;115(12):1591-1598. This article describes the era-specific changes in the incidence of mortality and reoperation in children with total anomalous pulmonary venous connection and describes the unfavorable anatomic characteristics that determine postrepair survival.	86.	Salomone G, Tiraboschi R, Bianchi T, Ferri F, Crippa M, Parenzan L. Cor triatriatum: clinical presentation and operative results. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1991;101(6):1088-1092.	87.	Huang TC, Lee CL, Lin CC, Tseng CJ, Hsieh KS. Use of an Inoue balloon dilatation method for treatment of cor triatriatum stenosis in a child. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 2002;57(2):252-256.	88.	Cooley DA, McNamara DG, Latson JR. Aorticopulmonary septal defect: diagnosis and surgical treatment. Surgery. 1957;42(1):101-120.	89.	Scalia D, Russo P, Anderson RH, et al. The surgical anatomy of hearts with no direct communication between the right atrium and the ventricular mass—so-called tricuspid atresia. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1984;87(5):743-755.	90.	Cheung HC, Lincoln C, Anderson RH, et al. Options for surgical repair in hearts with univentricular atrioventricular connection and subaortic stenosis. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1990;100(5):672-681.	91.	Gross RE. Surgical relief for tracheal obstruction from a vas-cular ring. N Engl J Med. 1945;233:586-590.	92.	Sade RM, Rosenthal A, Fellows K, Castaneda AR. Pulmonary artery sling. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1975;69(3):333-346.	93.	Clarke NS, Murthy R, Hernandez J, Megison S, Guleserian KJ. Aortoesophageal fistula in a child with undiagnosed vascular ring: life-threatening or lethal? Ann Thorac Surg. 2016;102(4):e325-e327.	94.	Laborde F, Noirhomme P, Karam J, Batisse A, Bourel P, Saint Maurice O. A new video-assisted thoracoscopic surgi-cal technique for interruption of patient ductus arteriosus in infants and children. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1993;105(2): 278-280.	95.	Burke RP, Wernovsky G, van der Velde M, Hansen D, Castaneda AR. Video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery for congenital heart disease. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1995;109(3):499-507; discussion 508.	96.	Kogon BE, Forbess JM, Wulkan ML, Kirshbom PM, Kanter KR. Video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery: is it a superior technique for the division of vascular rings in children? Congenit Heart Dis. 2007;2(2):130-133.	97.	Berlin Heart. EXCOR pediatric update. Available at: http://www.berlinheart.de/UserFiles/ClinicalUpdateEXCORPedi-atricMai2016.pdf. Accessed May 19, 2018.	98.	Trusler GA, Williams WG. Long-term results of shunt procedures for tricuspid atresia. Ann Thorac Surg. 1980; 29(4):312-316.	99.	Dick M, Gyler DC, Nadas AS. Tricuspid atresia: clinical course in 101 patients. Am J Cardiol. 1975;36(3):327-337.	100.	Glenn WWL, Patino JF. Circulatory by-pass of the right heart. Preliminary observations on the direct delivery of vena caval blood into the pulmonary arterial circulation. Azygous vein-pulmonary artery shunt. Yale J Biol Med. 1954;27(3): 147-151.	101.	Fontan F, Baudet E. Surgical repair of tricuspid atresia. Thorax. 1971;26(3):240-248.	102.	deLeval MR, Kilner P, Gerwillig M, Bull C. Total cavopulmo-nary connection: a logical alternative to atriopulmonary con-nection for complex Fontan operations. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1988;96(5):682-695.	103.	Laks H, Haas GS, Pearl JM, et al. The use of an adjust-able interatrial communication in patients undergoing the Fontan and definitive heart procedures. Ann Thorac Surg. 1991;52(5):1084-1094.	105.	Haas GS, Hess H, Black M, Onnasch J, Mohr FW, van Son JA. Extracardiac conduit Fontan procedure: early and intermedi-ate results. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2000;17(6):648-654.	106.	Tokunaga S, Kado H, Imoto Y, et al. Total cavopulmonary connection with an extracardiac conduit: experience with 100 patients. Ann Thorac Surg. 2002;73(1):76-80.	107.	Karamlou T, Ashburn DA, Caldarone CA, Blackstone EH. Matching procedure to morphology improves outcome in neonates with tricuspid atresia. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2005;130:1503-1510.	108.	Bardo DME, Frankel DG, Applegate KE, Murphy DJ, Saneto RP. Hypoplastic left heart syndrome. Radiographics. 2001;21(3): 706-717.	109.	Norwood WI Jr. Hypoplastic left heart syndrome. Ann Thorac Surg. 1991;52(3):688-695.	110.	Bronshtein M, Zimmer EZ. Early sonographic diagnosis of fetal small left heart ventricle with a normal proximal outlet tract: a medical dilemma. Prenat Diagn. 1997;17(3):249-253.Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   79722/02/19   2:57 PM 798SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	111.	Norwood WI, Lang P, Hansen DD. Physiologic repair of aor-tic atresia-hypoplastic left heart syndrome. N Engl J Med. 1983;308(1):23-26.	112.	Tweddell JS, Hoffman GM, Ghanayem NS, et al. Ventilatory control of pulmonary vascular resistance is not necessary to achieve a balanced circulation in the postoperative Norwood patient. Circulation. 1999;100(18 suppl):I-671.	113.	Sano S, Ishino K, Kawada M. Right ventricle-pulmonary artery shunt in first-stage palliation of hypoplastic left heart syndrome. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2003;126(2):504-509; discussion 1609-1610.	114.	Tchervenkov CI. Two-ventricle repair for hypoplastic left heart syndrome. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg Pediatr Card Surg Annu. 2001;4:83-93.	115.	Ohye RG, Sleeper la, Mahony L, et al. Comparison of shunt types in the Norwood procedure for single ventricle lesions. N Engl J Med. 2010;362:1980-1992.	116.	Newburger JW, Sleeper LA, Frommelt PC, et al; Pediatric Heart Network Investigators. Transplantation-free sur-vival and interventions at 3 years in the single ventricle reconstruction trial. Circulation. 2014;129:2013-2020. This article discusses the long-term outcomes of the Norwood procedure for patients with the Sano or BT shunt. This is a landmark article in the field.	117.	Pasquali SK, Ohye RG, Lu M, et al; Pediatric Heart Network Investigators. Variation in perioperative care across centers for infants undergoing the Norwood procedure. J Thorac Cardio-vasc Surg. 2012;144:915-144.	118.	Ohye RG, Schranz D, D’Udekem Y. Current therapy for hypo-plastic left heart syndrome and related single ventricle lesions. Circulation. 2016 Oct;134(17):1265-1279.	119.	Murthy R, Sebastian VA, Huang R, Guleserian KJ, Forbess JM. Selective use of the Blalock–Taussig shunt and right ventricle-to-pulmonary artery conduit dur-ing the Norwood procedure. World J Pediatr Congenit Heart Surg. 2016;7(3):329-333. This article elucidates the extensive debate that determines the source of pulmonary blood flow after the Norwood operation. The selective use of mBTS can be beneficial.	120.	Wilder TJ, McCrindle BW, Phillips AB, et al. Survival and right ventricular performance for matched children after stage-1 Norwood: modified Blalock–Taussig shunt versus right-ventricle-to-pulmonary-artery conduit. J Thorac Cardio-vasc Surg. 2015;150(6):1440-1450; discussion 1450-1452.	121.	Akintuerk H, Michel-Behnke I, Valeske K, et al. Stenting of the arterial duct and banding of the pulmonary arteries: basis for combined Norwood Stage I and II repair in hypoplastic left heart. Circulation. 2002;105:1099-1103.	122.	Caldarone CA, Benson L, Holtby H, Li J, Redington AN, VanArsdell GS. Initial experience with hybrid palliation for neonates with single ventricle physiology. Ann Thorac Surg. 2007;84:1294-1300.	123.	Baba K, Honjo O, Chaturvedi R, et al. “Reverse Blalock–Taussig shunt”: application in single ventricle hybrid pallia-tion. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013;146(2):352-357.	124.	Guleserian KJ, Barker GM, Sharma MS, et al. Bilateral pul-monary artery banding for resuscitation in high-risk, single-ventricle neonates and infants: a single-center experience. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013;145(1):206-213; discussion 213-214.	125.	Myers PO, Baird CW, Del Nido PJ, et al. Neonatal mitral valve repair in biventricular repair, single ventricle palliation, and secondary left ventricular recruitment: indications, tech-niques, and mid-term outcomes. Front Surg. 2015;2:59.	126.	Bailey LL, Gundry SR, Razzouk AJ, et al. Bless the babies: 115 late survivors of heart transplantation during the first year of life. The Loma Linda University Pediatric Heart Transplant Group. J Thorac Cardiovas Surg. 1993;105:805-814.	127.	Gaynor JW, Mahle WT, Cohen MI, et al. Risk factors for mor-tality after the Norwood procedure. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2002;22:82-89.	128.	Bove EL. Ebstein’s anomaly in the neonate. Rev Port Cardiol. 2001;20(9):865-873.	129.	Celermajer DS, Cullen S, Sullivan ID, et al. Outcome in neonates with Ebstein’s anomaly. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1992;19:1041-1046.	130.	Starnes VA, Pitlick PT, Bernstein D, Griffin ML, Choy M, Shumway NE. Ebstein’s anomaly appearing in the neonate. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1991;101(6):1082-1087.	131.	Danielson GK, Driscoll DJ, Mair DD, Warnes CA, Oliver WC Jr. Operative treatment of Ebstein’s anomaly. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1992;104:1195-1202.	132.	Knott-Craig CJ, Overholt ED, Ward KE, Razook JD. Neo-natal repair of Ebstein’s anomaly: indications, surgical technique, and medium-term follow-up. Ann Thorac Surg. 2000;69(5):1505-1510.	133.	Yetman AT, Freedom RM, McCrindle BW. Outcome in cyanotic neonates with Ebstein’s anomaly. Am J Cardiol. 1998;81(6):749-754.	134.	Billingsly AM, Laks H, Boyce SW, George B, Santulli T, Williams RG. Definitive repair in patients with pulmonary atresia and intact ventricular septum. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1989;97(5):746-754.	135.	Stellin G, Vida VL, Milanesi O, et al. Surgical treatment of complex cardiac anomalies: the “one and one half ventricle repair.” Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2002;22(3):435-437.	136.	Chowdhury UK, Airan B, Sharma R, et al. One and a half ventricle repair with pulsatile Glenn: results and guidelines for patient selection. Ann Thorac Surg. 2001;71(6):2000-2002.	137.	Knott-Craig CJ, Kumar TK, Arevalo AR, Joshi VM. Surgical management of symptomatic neonates with Ebstein’s anomaly: choice of operation. Cardiol Young. 2015;25(6):1119-1123.	138.	Van Praagh R, Van Praagh S, Vlad P, Keith JC. Anatomic sub-types of congenital dextrocardia: diagnostic and embryologic implications. Am J Cardiol. 1964;13:510-531.	139.	Van Praagh R, Van Praagh S. Isolated ventricular inversion: a consideration of the morphogenesis, definition, and diagnosis of nontransposed and transposed great arteries. Am J Cardiol. 1966;17:395-406.	140.	Blalock A, Hanlon CR. The surgical treatment of complete transposition of the aorta and the pulmonary artery. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1950;90(1):1-15.	141.	Senning A. Surgical correction of transposition of the great vessel. Surgery. 1959;45(6):966-980.	142.	Mustard WT, Chute AL, Keith JD, Sirek A, Rowe RD, Vlad P. A surgical approach to transposition of the great vessels with extracorporeal circuit. Surgery. 1954;36:31-59.	143.	Jatene AD, Fontes VF, Paulista PP, et al. Successful anatomic correction of transposition of the great vessels: a preliminary report. Arq Bras Cardiol. 1975;28(4):461-464.	144.	Rastelli GC. A new approach to the “anatomic” repair of transposition of the great arteries. Mayo Clin Proc. 1969; 44(1):1-12.	145.	Culbert EL, Ashburn DA, Cullen-Dean G, et al. Quality of life after repair of transposition of the great arteries. Circulation. 2003;108:857-862.	146.	Dearani JA, Danielson GK, Puga FJ, Mair DD, Schleck CD. Late results of the Rastelli operation for transposition of the great arteries. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg Pediatr Card Surg Annu. 2001;4:3-15.	147.	Freedom RM, Yoo SJ. Double-outlet right ventricle: pathol-ogy and angiocardiography. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg Pediatr Card Surg Annu. 2000;3:3-19.	148.	Lev M, Bharati S, Meng CCL, et al. A concept of double outlet right ventricle. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1972; 64(2):271-281.Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   79822/02/19   2:57 PM 799CONGENITAL HEART DISEASECHAPTER 20	149.	Taussig HB, Bing RJ. Complete transposition of the aorta and a levoposition of the pulmonary artery. Am Heart J. 1949;37(4):551-559.	150.	Bradley TJ, Karamlou T, Kulik A, et al. Determinants of repair type, reintervention, and mortality in 393 children with double-outlet right ventricle. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2007;134(4):967-973.e6.	151.	Belli E, Serraf A, Lacour-Gayet F, et al. Double-outlet right ventricle with non-committed ventricular septal defect. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 1999;15(6):747-752.	152.	Kawashima Y, Matsuda H, Yagihara T, et al. Intraventricular repair for Taussig–Bing anomaly. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1993;105:591-596.	153.	Rastelli GC, McGoon DC, Wallace RB. Anatomic correction of transposition of the great arteries with ventricular septal defect and subpulmonic stenosis. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1969;58(4):545-552.	154.	Yasui H, Kado H, Nakano E, et al. Primary repair of inter-rupted aortic arch with severe stenosis in neonates. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1987;93:539-545.	155.	Brown JW, Ruzmetov M, Okada Y, Vijay P, Turrentine MW. Surgical results in patients with double outlet right ventricle: a 20-year experience. Ann Thorac Surg. 2001;72(5):1630-1635.	156.	Fallot A. Contribution a l’anatomie pathologique de la mal-adie bleue (cyanose cardiaque) (French). Marseille Med. 1888;25:77-403.	157.	Van Praagh R, Van Praagh S, Nebesar RA, et al. Tetralogy of Fallot: underdevelopment of the pulmonary infundibulum and its sequelae. Am J Cardiol. 1970;26:25-53.	158.	Need LR, Powell AJ, del Nido P, Geva T. Coronary echocar-diography in tetralogy of Fallot: diagnostic accuracy, resource utilization, and surgical implications over 13 years. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2000;36(4):1371-1377.	159.	Mahle WT, McBride MG, Paridon SM. Exercise performance in tetralogy of Fallot: the impact of primary complete repair in infancy. Pediatr Cardiol. 2002;23(2):224-229.	160.	Deanfield JE. Adult congenital heart disease with special refernce to the data on long-term follow-up of patients sur-viving to adulthood with or without surgical correction. Eur Heart J. 1992;13(suppl H):111-116.	161.	Alexiou C, Chen Q, Galogavrou M, et al. Repair of tetral-ogy of Fallot in infancy with a transventricular or a transatrial approach. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2002;22(2):174-183.	162.	Al Habib HF, Jacobs JP, Mavroudis C, et al. Contemporary patterns of management of tetralogy of Fallot: data from the Society of Thoracic Surgeons database. Ann Thorac Surg. 2010;90(3):813-819; discussion 819-820.	163.	Karamlou T, McCrindle BW, Williams WG. Surgery insight: late complications following repair of tetralogy of Fallot and related surgical strategies for management. Nature Cardiovasc Med. 2006;3:611-622.	164.	Gatzoulis MA, Till JA, Somerville J, et al. Mechanoelectrical interaction in tetralogy of Fallot. QRS prolongation relates to right ventricular size and predicts malignant ventricular arrhythmias and sudden death. Circulation. 1995;92:231-237.	165.	Karamlou T, Silber I, Lao R, et al. Outcomes after late reop-eration in patients with repaired tetralogy of Fallot: the impact of arrhythmia and arrhythmia surgery. Ann Thorac Surg. 2006;81:1786-1793.	166.	Geva T. Indications and timing of pulmonary valve replace-ment after tetralogy of Fallot repair. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg Pediatr Card Surg Annu. 2006:11-22. Review.	167.	Khanna AD, Hill KD, Pasquali SK, et al. Benchmark out-comes for pulmonary valve replacement using the Soci-ety of Thoracic Surgeons databases. Ann Thorac Surg. 2015;100(1):138-145; discussion 145-6. doi: 10.1016/j.atho-racsur.2015.03.025. With the increasing number of adults with congenital heart disease, this article describes the benchmark outcomes for one of the most commonly per-formed operations in this population.	168.	Steinberg ZL, Jones TK, Verrier E, Stout KK, Krieger EV, Karamlou T. Early outcomes in patients undergoing trans-catheter versus surgical pulmonary valve replacement. Heart. 2017 Mar 28. doi: 10.1136/heartjnl-2016-310776.	169.	Turner SW, Hornung T, Hunter S. Closure of ventricular septal defects: a study of factors influencing spontaneous and surgi-cal closure. Cardiol Young. 2002;12(4):357-363.	170.	Waight DJ, Bacha EA, Khahana M, Cao QL, Heitschmidt M, Hijazi ZM. Catheter therapy of Swiss cheese ventricular septal defects using the Amplatzer muscular VSD occluder. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 2002;55(3):360-361.	171.	Predescu D, Chaturvedi RR, Friedberg MK, Benson LN, Ozawa A, Lee KJ. Complete heart block associated with device closure of perimembranous ventricular septaldefects. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2008;136(5):1223-1228.	172.	Seddio F, Reddy VM, McElhinney DB, Tworetzky W, Silverman NH, Hanley FL. Multiple ventricular septal defects: how and when should they be repaired? J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1999;117(1):134-139.	173.	Tsang VT, Hsia TY, Yates RW, Anderson RH. Surgical repair of supposedly multiple defects within the apical part of the muscular ventricular septum. Ann Thorac Surg. 2002;73(1):58-62.	174.	Rastelli G, Kirklin JW, Titus JL. Anatomic observations on complete form of persistent common atrioventricular canal with special reference to atrioventricular valves. Mayo Clin Proc. 1966;41(5):296-308.	175.	Ungerleider RM. Atrial septal defects, ostium primum defects, and atrioventricular canals. In: Sabiston DC, Lyerly HK, eds. Textbook of Surgery: The Biologic Basis of Modern Surgical Practice. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders; 1997:1993.	176.	Fortuna RS, Ashburn DA, Carias De Oliveira N, Burkhart HM, Konstantinov IE, Coles JG, Smallhorn JF, Williams WG, Van Arsdell GS. Atrioventricular septal defects: effect of bridging leaflet division on early valve function. Ann Thorac Surg. 2004;77(3):895-902; discussion 902.	177.	Kouchoukos NT, Blackstone EH, Doty DB, et al. Coarcta-tion of the aorta and interrupted aortic arch. In: Kouchoukos NT, Blackstone EH, Doty DB, et al, eds. Kirklin/Barrat-Boyes Cardiac Surgery. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone; 2003:1353.	178.	Roussin R, Belli E, Lacour-Gayet F, et al. Aortic arch recon-struction with pulmonary autograft patch aortoplasty. J Tho-rac Cardiovasc Surg. 2002;123(3):443-448.	179.	Brown JW, Ruzmetov M, Okada Y, Vijay P, Rodefeld MD, Turrentine MW. Outcomes in patients with interrupted aortic arch and associated anomalies: a 20-year experience. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2006;29(5):666-673; discussion 673-674.	180.	Extracorporeal Life Support Organization. ECLS registry report. Available at: https://www.elso.org/Registry/Statistics.aspx. Accessed May 19, 2018.	181.	Murthy R, Brenes J, Dimas VV, Guleserian KJ. Ringed polytetrafluoroethylene (Gore-Tex) tunneled “chimney” graft for pediatric use of Impella 2.5 axial flow pump. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2014;147(4):1421-1422.	182.	Dimas VV, Murthy R, Guleserian KJ. Utilization of the Impella 2.5 micro-axial pump in children for acute circulatory support. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 2014;83(2):261-262.	183.	Ferro G, Murthy R, Williams D, Sebastian VA, Forbess JM, Guleserian KJ. Early outcomes with HeartWare HVAD as bridge to transplant in children: a single institution expe-rience. Artif Organs. 2016;40(1):85-89. A contemporary article describing the use of left ventricular assist devices in the pediatric population.	184.	Rossano JW, Dipchand AI, Edwards LB, et al; International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation. The Registry of Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   79922/02/19   2:57 PM 800SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIthe International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation: nineteenth pediatric heart transplantation report, 2016; focus theme: primary diagnostic indications for transplant. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2016;35(10):1185-1195.	185.	Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network. National data. Available at: https://optn.transplant.hrsa.gov/data/view-data-reports/national-data/#. Accessed May 18, 2018.	186.	Reinhartz O, Maeda K, Reitz BA, et al. Changes in risk pro-file over time in the population of a pediatric heart transplant program. Ann Thorac Surg. 2015;100(3):989-994; discussion 995.	187.	Sievers HH, Leyh R, Jahnke A, et al. Bicaval versus atrial anastomoses in cardiac transplantation. Right atrial dimension and tricuspid valve function at rest and during exercise up to thirty-six months after transplantation. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1994;108(4):780-784.	188.	Bailey LL, Nehlsen-Cannarella SL, Concepcion W, Jolley WB. Baboon-to-human cardiac xenotransplantation in a neo-nate. JAMA. 1985;254(23):3321-3329.	189.	Murthy R, Bajona P, Bhama JK, Cooper DK. Heart xenotrans-plantation: historical background, experimental progress, and clinical prospects. Ann Thorac Surg. 2016;101(4):1605-1613.	190.	O’Brien SM, Clarke DR, Jacobs JP, et al. An empirically based tool for analyzing mortality associated with congenital heart surgery. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2009;138:1139-1153.	191.	https://www.sts.org/congenital-public-reporting-module-search. March 2017.	192.	Jacobs JP, Mayer JE Jr, Mavroudis C, et al. The Society of Thoracic Surgeons Congenital Heart Surgery Database: 2017 Update on Outcomes and Quality. Ann Thorac Surg. 2017;103(3):699-709. An important article to understand the STS database, outcomes reporting, and where the future of the filed of public reporting is headed.	193.	Bramlet M, Olivieri L, Farooqi K, Ripley B, Coakley M. Impact of three-dimensional printing on the study and treatment of congenital heart disease. Circ Res. 2017;120(6): 904-907. This article describes the new and innovative tech-nology of three-dimensional printing and its impact on the field of pediatric and congenital cardiac surgery.	194.	Yoo SJ, Spray T, Austin EH 3rd, Yun TJ, van Arsdell GS. Hands-on surgical training of congenital heart surgery using 3-dimensional print models. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2017 Feb 9.	195.	Seghaye MC. Management of children with congenital heart defect: state of the art and future prospects. Future Cardiol. 2017;13(1):65-79. doi:10.2217/fca-2016-0039.	196.	Ryan JR, Moe TG, Richardson R, Frakes DH, Nigro JJ, Pophal S. A novel approach to neonatal management of tetralogy of Fallot, with pulmonary atresia, and multiple aortopulmonary collaterals. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2015;8(1):103-104.	197.	Ferro G, Murthy R, Sebastian VA, Guleserian KJ, Forbess JM. Single-center experience with the Senning Proce-dure in the Current Era. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2016;28(2):514-520.	198.	Zuluaga MA, Burgos N, Mendelson AF, Taylor AM, Ourselin S. Voxelwise atlas rating for computer assisted diagnosis: Application to congenital heart diseases of the great arteries. Med Image Anal. 2015;26(1):185-194.Brunicardi_Ch20_p0751-p0800.indd   80022/02/19   2:57 PM
# Chunk 8923
Acquired Heart DiseaseMatthew R. Schill, Ali J. Khiabani, Puja Kachroo,  and Ralph J. Damiano Jr 21chapterCardiac Assessment	801Clinical Evaluation / 801History / 801Physical Examination / 803Cardiac Risk Assessment in Noncardiac Surgery Patients / 804Diagnostic Studies / 804Extracorporeal Perfusion	807History / 807Technique / 807Adverse Effects / 808Myocardial Protection / 808Coronary Artery Disease	808History / 808Etiology and Pathogenesis / 809Risk Factors and Prevention / 809Clinical Manifestations / 809Preoperative Evaluation / 809Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting	809Indications / 809Percutaneous Coronary Intervention vs. Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting / 810Summary / 811Operative Techniques and Results / 811New Developments / 814Valvular Heart Disease	814General Principles / 814Surgical Options / 815Mitral Valve Disease	817Mitral Stenosis / 817Mitral Regurgitation / 819Mitral Valve Operative Techniques  and Results / 821Aortic Valve Disease	823Aortic Stenosis / 823Aortic Insufficiency / 825Aortic Valve Operative Techniques  and Results / 828Tricuspid Valve Disease	829Tricuspid Stenosis and Insufficiency / 829Multivalve Disease / 831Surgical Therapy for   the Failing Heart	831Epidemiology of Heart Failure / 831Etiology and Pathophysiology / 831CABG for Ischemic Cardiomyopathy / 831Secondary Mitral Regurgitation / 832Left Ventricular Aneurysmorrhaphy and Surgical Ventricular Restoration / 833Mechanical Circulatory Support / 835Right Ventricular Assist Devices and Biventricular Assist Devices / 837Total Artificial Heart / 837Surgery For Arrhythmias	837Atrial Fibrillation / 838Surgery for Pericardial Disease	839Acute Pericarditis / 839Relapsing Pericarditis / 840Chronic Constrictive Pericarditis / 840Cardiac Neoplasms	841Overview and General  Clinical Features / 841Myxoma / 842Other Benign Cardiac Tumors / 843Malignant Cardiac Tumors / 843Metastatic Cardiac Tumors / 843CARDIAC ASSESSMENTClinical EvaluationAs with any other field in medicine, the history and physical examination form the foundation for the evaluation of a patient with acquired heart disease requiring surgical intervention. Obtaining a complete history identifies comorbid conditions and assists in delineating the operative risks and prognosis after sur-gery. Physical examination reveals factors that may increase the complexity of surgery, such as previous surgery or the presence of peripheral arterial or cerebrovascular disease. These may influence the operative approach, but they also help guide the choice and sequence of diagnostic studies. A complete assess-ment of the patient allows the surgeon to make educated deci-sions regarding the optimal treatment strategy for the patient.HistorySymptoms suggestive of heart disease include: chest discomfort, fatigue, edema, dyspnea, palpitations, and syncope. Adequate definition of these symptoms calls for detailed history-taking, paying particular attention to onset, intensity, radiation, dura-tion, and exacerbating or alleviating factors. The demands on the heart are determined by its loading conditions and the metabolic state of the patient. Cardiac symptoms are commonly accentuated with physical exertion or postural changes.Angina pectoris is the hallmark of coronary artery disease (CAD), but may occur with other cardiac pathologies that result in ischemia from a mismatch between the supply of oxygen by the coronary circulation and the metabolic demand of the myo-cardium. Typically, angina is described as tightness, heaviness, or dull pain, frequently substernal, that lasts for a few minutes. This discomfort may radiate to the left arm, neck, mandible, or epigastrium. Angina is most often provoked by activities that increase metabolic demand on the heart such as exercise, eating, and states of intense emotion, and it is typically alleviated by rest or use of nitroglycerin. It is important to note that a signifi-cant number of patients with myocardial ischemia, particularly diabetics, females, and the elderly, may have “silent” angina or angina equivalents (dyspnea, diaphoresis, nausea, or fatigue). The overlap of these features with those of noncardiac etiologies Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   80101/03/19   5:32 PM 802such as costochondritis, biliary colic, gastroesophageal reflux disease, diffuse esophageal spasm, and peptic ulcer disease, to name a few, can sometimes lead to misdiagnosis.Heart failure can occur from either left and/or right heart dysfunction, and respective symptoms arise from congestion of blood flow owing to an inadequate cardiac output. Left heart failure manifests as dyspnea, usually with exertion. Orthopnea, defined as dyspnea while lying flat, suggests worsened pulmo-nary congestion with increased venous return. Ascites, periph-eral edema, and hepatomegaly reflect congestion in the systemic venous circulation and are prominent features of right heart failure. Peripheral edema can occur in right heart failure second-ary to systemic venous congestion or in left heart failure due to salt and fluid retention as a result of impaired renal perfusion. Patients with chronic suboptimal perfusion and oxygenation can also have digital clubbing and cyanosis.It is difficult to implicate cardiac disease based solely on the presence of fatigue, which is a very nonspecific symptom. However, most cardiac pathologies do result in fatigue or exer-cise intolerance to some degree. It is important to differenti-ate fatigue from exertional dyspnea which some patients may describe as “fatigue.”Dyspnea is another common symptom. Although gen-erally a late symptom in patients with valvular heart disease or cardiomyopathy, it may be a relatively early complaint in some patients, particularly those with mitral stenosis. As stated previously, dyspnea is also an anginal equivalent and may sig-nal a myocardial ischemic episode. Many primary pulmonary disorders feature dyspnea as their cardinal symptom and should be evaluated simultaneously as the physiology of the heart and lungs are intimately related and can have dramatic influences on one another.Patients typically describe palpitations as a “skipped beat” or “racing heart.” Depending on the clinical context, such as occasional premature atrial or ventricular beats in otherwise healthy individuals, these may be benign. Clinically significant arrhythmias, however, require thorough investigation. Atrial fibrillation is the most common arrhythmia and can occur alone or with other cardiac pathologies. It results in an irregular, and at times, rapid heartbeat. Concurrent symptoms such as angina, lightheadedness, or syncope are particularly worrisome for life-threatening arrhythmias such as ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation, particularly in patients with preexisting heart failure.Syncope associated with heart disease results from an abrupt reduction in cerebral perfusion. Many of the potential cardiac etiologies are serious, including sinus node dysfunction, atrioventricular conduction abnormalities, malignant arrhyth-mias, aortic stenosis, and hypertrophic obstructive cardiomy-opathy. Noncardiac causes of syncope includes, but are not limited to, neurologic causes (e.g., transient ischemic attacks [TIAs]), orthostatic hypotension, vasavagal events, and carotid sinus hypersensitivity. Any episode of syncope warrants a thor-ough evaluation and search for the root cause.1,2 In addition to a thorough inquiry regarding the aforementioned symptoms, it is important to obtain details about the patient’s medical and Key Points1	Although advances have been made in percutaneous coro-nary intervention techniques for coronary artery disease, survival is superior with coronary artery bypass grafting in patients with left main disease, multivessel disease, and in diabetic patients.2	Despite the theoretical advantages, the superiority of off-pump coronary artery bypass to conventional coronary artery bypass grafting has not been clearly established, and other factors likely dominate the overall outcome for either technique.3	Although mechanical valves offer enhanced durability over tissue valve prosthesis, they require permanent systemic anticoagulation therapy to mitigate the risk of valve throm-bosis and thromboembolic sequelae and thus are associated with an increased risk of hemorrhagic complications.4	Mitral valve repair is recommended over mitral valve replacement in the majority of patients with severe chronic mitral regurgitation. The decision to proceed with mitral valve repair is based on the skill and experience of the sur-geon in performing the repair and on the pathology of mitral valve disease encountered at the time of operation. Trans-catheter mitral valve therapies are also becoming increas-ingly available as options to offer patients who are deemed high risk for surgical intervention for their mitral valve disease.5	Although open aortic valve replacement has traditionally been the only effective treatment in patients with severe cal-cific aortic stenosis, transcatheter aortic valve replacement is a developing technology that has proven beneficial for the treatment of aortic stenosis in seriously ill patients that had previously been deemed high risk or inoperable. It has also recently been approved for us in patients at moderate risk for surgical aortic valve replacement and is in clinical trials for low-risk patients.6	Mechanical circulatory support with newer generation con-tinuous flow left ventricular assist devices has proven to be durable and effective both as a bridge to transplant and as a means of destination therapy for patients who are not trans-plant candidates.7	Performing a biatrial Cox-Maze lesion set results in freedom from atrial fibrillation in approximately 90% of patients and is superior to both catheter-ablation and more limited lesion sets for patients with persistent atrial fibrillation or enlarged left atria. Surgical ablation of atrial fibrillation is recom-mended for patients referred with concomitant valvular dis-ease and those who have previously failed or are poor candidates for catheter-based approaches.8	The preferred treatment for pericarditis depends on the underlying cause, although the disease typically follows a self-limited course and is best managed medically. Surgical pericardiectomy may have a role in treating relapsing peri-carditis and, more commonly, chronic constrictive pericarditis.9	Myxomas are the most common cardiac tumors, and, while benign, they should be promptly excised after diagnosis due to the risk of embolization, obstructive complications, and arrhythmias.Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   80201/03/19   5:32 PM 803ACQUIRED HEART DISEASECHAPTER 21Table 21-1New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional classificationCLASSDESCRIPTIONIPhysical activity not limited by symptoms: fatigue, palpitations, or dyspnea.IIComfortable at rest. Slight limitation of physical activity. Fatigue, palpitations, or dyspnea with ordinary physical activity.IIIComfortable at rest. Marked limitation of physical activity. Fatigue, palpitations, or dyspnea with less than ordinary physical activity.IVInability to carry out any physical activity. Symptoms may be present at rest and increase with activity.Table 21-2Canadian Cardiovascular Society (CCS) angina classificationCLASSDESCRIPTIONIOrdinary physical activity (walking, climbing stairs) does not cause angina. Angina occurs with strenuous, rapid, or prolonged exertion during work or recreation.IISlight limitation of ordinary activity. Angina occurs with climbing stairs rapidly, walking uphill in the wind, under emotional stress, in the cold, or after meals. Walking more than 2 blocks or climbing one flight of stairs causes angina.IIIMarked limitation of ordinary physical activity (climbing a flight of stairs or walking 1 to  2 blocks at a normal pace).IVInability to carry out any physical activity without discomfort. Angina may be present at rest.surgical history, family history, social habits (including alcohol and tobacco use), current medications, focused review of sys-tems, as well as an assessment of the patient’s functional status and frailty. Frailty is often defined as a state of increased vul-nerability to adverse health outcomes. Clinicians can use frailty index calculators to assess a patient’s risk for adverse outcomes following cardiac intervention. Specific attention should also be directed to the patient’s comorbidities which not only sheds light on their general health but also helps delineate expected risks from surgery. A strong family history of coronary artery disease, myocardial infarction, hypertension, or diabetes is of particular importance as they increase the individual’s risk for having an adverse cardiac event.Functional Disability and Angina. With regard to heart failure, functional capacity is strongly correlated with mortality. The New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional class is a widely used classification system in categorizing patients based on their functional status (Table 21-1).3 The NYHA clas-sification has become one basis by which to compare patient populations in many studies. Although less commonly used, the Canadian Cardiovascular Society (CCS) angina classification is also used to incorporate anginal symptoms into the functional assessment for prognostic value (Table 21-2).Physical ExaminationThe physical examination is an invaluable tool in directing further diagnostic studies in the management of a patient with suspected heart disease. The astute clinician may be able to detect subtle signs that may further characterize the underlying pathology.The general appearance of a patient is important in the clinical assessment. A pale, diaphoretic, and obviously uncom-fortable patient is more likely to be in a clinically critical condition than one who is conversing comfortably with an unre-markable demeanor. In addition to basic vital signs, particular attention should be directed to the patient’s mental status as well as the color and temperature of the skin, as these may be reflec-tive of the general adequacy of perfusion. Overall frailty and dementia have also been shown to be predictors of operative and late mortality.4Palpation of the precordium may demonstrate devia-tion in the point of maximal impulse, indicative of ventricular hypertrophy, or parasternal heaves, seen in right ventricular overload. Auscultation should be performed in a quiet envi-ronment as critical murmurs, rubs, or gallops may be subtle. Murmurs are characterized by their location, timing, quality, and radiation. They are typically secondary to valvular or other structural pathology, and new findings require further investi-gation. A rub due to pericardial friction is indicative of pericar-ditis. A third heart sound (S3) is generated by the rapid filling of a stiff ventricle and can be normal in young patients, but when present in older adults, is indicative of diastolic dysfunction and is pathologic. Increased contribution of the atrial pump function to ventricular filling may manifest as a fourth heart sound (S4) and is also suggestive of ventricular dysfunction.Palpation of peripheral pulses is important not only to assess the adequacy of perfusion, but also the burden of coro-nary artery disease often correlates with the degree of peripheral arterial disease. The presence of a carotid bruit may indicate clinically significant stenosis and may alter the course and tim-ing of treatment, especially if symptomatic.Heart failure will frequently have extracardiac manifesta-tions and examination of the other organ systems should not be neglected. For example, auscultation of the lung fields may reveal rales in patients with pulmonary edema. The use of acces-sory muscles of breathing may be present in patients with sig-nificant pleural effusions and volume overload. The presence of jugular venous distention and hepatosplenomegaly may signal right heart failure.Additionally, clinicians should know the manifestation of other cardiac pathologies including endocarditis and rheu-matic heart disease, although less commonly seen. Endocarditis is an inflammation of the endocardium, usually on the heart valves. A cardiac murmur is a common physical exam finding. Relatively uncommon but more specific clinical manifestations for infectious endocarditis are: Janeway lesions, which are nontender erythematous macules on the palms and soles; Osler nodes, which are described as tender subctanous nodules mostly on the pads of the fingers and toes; and Roth spots, which are exudative hemorrhagic lesions of the retina with pale centers.Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   80301/03/19   5:32 PM 804SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IICardiac Risk Assessment in Noncardiac Surgery PatientsCardiovascular complications occur in approximately 3% of patients undergoing inpatient noncardiac surgery.5 The American College of Cardiology (ACC) and American Heart Association (AHA) have formed a joint task force to publish a consensus statement, with periodic focused updates, on guide-lines and recommendations that were revised in 2017.6 The aim of these guidelines is to incorporate surgery-specific risks and patient characteristics to guide perioperative decision-making in the management of patient with valvular heart disease.Surgical procedures have been categorized based on cardiovascular risk into low risk, moderate risk, and vascu-lar procedures. Vascular procedures, likely due to both the nature of the procedures themselves as well as the associated cardiovascular pathology in many of these patients, carry the highest reported risk of cardiac events at more than 7%.5 Low risk procedures, including endoscopic procedures, superficial operations, cataract surgery, breast surgery, and ambulatory surgeries, have a risk generally less than 1%. Intermediate risk procedures include intraperitoneal and intrathoracic surgery, head and neck surgery, orthopedic procedures, and prostate surgery.5Patient characteristics can be classified by the status of the patient’s cardiac disease, comorbid conditions, and functional capacity. Patients are considered to be at major perioperative clinical risk if they have one or more of the following active car-diac conditions: acute coronary syndrome, decompensated heart failure, significant arrhythmias, or severe valvular heart disease. In these patients, intensive evaluation and treatment prior to sur-gery (unless emergent) is warranted, prior to proceeding with the noncardiac surgery.If the patient does not have any of the previously men-tioned active cardiac conditions, the perioperative risk of major adverse cardiac events (MACE) should be estimated. Both the operation performed and the patient’s risk factors are predictive of MACE, and the ACC/AHA guidelines recommend the use of either the American College of Surgeons’ NSQIP risk calculator or the Revised Cardiac Risk Index for the estimation of patient-specific risk. Patients at low (<1%) risk or patients at elevated risk with functional capacity greater than or equal to 4 metabolic equivalents (METs), should proceed to surgery without further testing. It is reasonable to perform pharmacologic stress testing in patients with poor or unknown functional capacity if this test-ing will impact decision making or perioperative care. Patients with abnormal stress test results should undergo confirmatory test such as coronary angiography, if indicated, before an elec-tive noncardiac surgery. The previous guidelines included inter-mediate and low cardiovascular risk profiles, but this has been replaced by cardiovascular risk factors in the update. These risk factors are: history of ischemic heart disease, history of prior or compensated heart failure, history of cerebrovascular dis-ease, diabetes mellitus, and renal insufficiency. Based on the number of present risk factors and the surgery-specific risk, the guidelines recommend pathways for further evaluation and risk management. The most recent guidelines from ACC/AHA were published in 2014 (Fig. 21-1).7 One important subgroup of patients at elevated risk are those who have recently undergone percutaneous coronary intervention. In these patients, elective noncardiac surgery should be delayed until the risk of stent thrombosis decreases (30 days for bare metal stents and 180 to 365 days for drug-eluting stents), and dual antiplatelet therapy should be continued unless the risk of bleeding exceeds the risk of stent thrombosis.5Diagnostic StudiesElectrocardiogram and Chest X-ray. Electrocardiograms (ECGs) and chest X-rays are noninvasive diagnostic studies that provide invaluable information in the preoperative assess-ment of patients with cardiac pathology. ECGs can be useful in detecting old myocardial infarction, dilation or hypertrophy of the cardiac chambers, arrhythmias, and conduction abnormali-ties. A stress ECG requires a patient to exercise to a target heart rate and is used to help diagnose ischemic pathologies that may not be evident at rest.A plain film of the chest can detect pulmonary pathol-ogy, sequelae of heart failure (e.g., pulmonary edema, cardiac enlargement, pleural effusions), as well as presence of hardware (e.g., prosthetic heart valves, sternal wires, pacemakers, and defibrillators).Echocardiography. Echocardiography utilizes reflected sound waves to image the heart. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) is used widely due to its noninvasive nature. It is the pri-mary diagnostic tool used to evaluate structural diseases of the heart, including valvular pathology, septal defects, cardiomyop-athies, and cardiac masses. Although more invasive, transesoph-ageal echocardiography (TEE) can provide more information and better definition of some valvular and structural abnormali-ties. It is particularly useful in identifying left atrial thrombi in patients with atrial fibrillation. Echocardiography is indispens-able in assessing surgical prostheses such as valves, leads, or mechanical circulatory support devices. These examinations can be performed with M-mode imaging (motion along a single line) as well as two-dimensional (2D) and three-dimensional (3D) imaging depending on the information required.Doppler technology has become a standard addition to assess changes in flow patterns across dysfunctional valves. Velocity measurements can be obtained to estimate pres-sure gradients across structures using the continuity equation. A common example would be the estimation of pulmonary  arterial systolic pressure calculated from the regurgitant  tricuspid jet profile during right ventricular systole.Transthoracic echocardiography requires no sedation and is generally performed with the patient in a slight left lateral decubitus position. Standardized views are obtained with the ultrasound probe placed in the apical, parasternal, subcostal, and suprasternal positions. The apical four-chamber view is a use-ful window for visualizing all four cardiac chambers simultane-ously as well as the tricuspid and mitral valves. Other windows can be obtained to assess specific structures such as the individ-ual valve anatomy or myocardial wall segments. Dobutamine-stress echocardiography is a study similar in idea to the stress ECG that utilizes a pharmacologic agent to assess the patient for ischemia or stress-induced valvular abnormalities.Transesophageal echocardiography, on the other hand, is performed using a special endoscope with an ultrasound probe mounted on its end that is introduced orally into the esophagus under sedation. Posterior structures such as the mitral valve and left atrium are particularly well visualized. TEEs are frequently used intraoperatively during cardiothoracic surgery to assess global cardiac function, integrity of valve repairs and replace-ments, intracavitary thrombus and/or air, and aortic athero-sclerosis or dissections that can have significant influences on operative strategy.Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   80401/03/19   5:32 PM 805ACQUIRED HEART DISEASECHAPTER 21Figure 21-1. Stepwise approach to perioperative cardiac assessment for coronary artery disease. (Reproduced with permission from Fleisher LA, Fleischmann KE, Auerbach AD, et al: 2014 ACC/AHA guideline on perioperative cardiovascular evaluation and management of patients undergoing noncardiac surgery: executive summary: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines, Circulation. 2014 Dec 9;130(24):2215-2245.)EmergencyACS†(Step 2)YesYesNoNoModerate or greater(˜4 METs) functionalcapacityPoor OR unknownfunctional capacity(<4 METs):Will further testing impactdecision making ORperioperative care?(Step 6)No orunknownPatient scheduled for surgery withknown or risk factors for CAD*(Step 1)Clinical risk stratiÿcationand proceed to surgeryEvaluate and treataccording to GDMT†Estimated perioperative risk of MACEbased on combined clinical/surgical risk(Step 3)Low risk (<1%)(Step 4)Proceed tosurgeryElevated risk(Step 5)No furthertesting(Class III:NB)Proceed to surgeryaccording to GDMT ORalternate strategies(noninvasive treatment,palliation)(Step 7)No furthertesting(Class lIa)No furthertesting(Class IIb)Pharmacologicstress testing(Class lIa)Coronaryrevascularizationaccording toexisting CPGs(Class I)Proceed tosurgeryYesIfnormalIfabnormalNoExcellent(>10 METs)Moderate/Good(˜4–10 METs)Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   80501/03/19   5:32 PM 806SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIThere are some more recent additions to the echocardio-graphic armamentarium that capitalize on the strengths of ultra-sound imaging. Three-dimensional TEE is playing an increasing role in the preoperative and intraoperative evaluation of patients with valvular heart disease and is especially helpful in percuta-neous mitral intervention. Tissue Doppler imaging is based on principles akin to conventional Doppler echocardiography, but attention is directed to the myocardium itself as opposed to the motion of blood to quantify abnormalities in wall motion. Strain imaging with speckle-tracking echocardiography measures the actual deformation of the myocardium by following inhomoge-neities inherent to the myocardium and is a useful measure of myocardial function.Radionuclide Studies. Although ECGs are useful, inexpen-sive, and safe, baseline abnormalities in the ECG may limit its diagnostic capacity. In particular, ventricular rhythms, bundle-branch blocks, left ventricular hypertrophy, drug effects, and baseline ST-segment depressions can make stress ECGs dif-ficult to interpret for the presence of myocardial ischemia. In this setting, myocardial perfusion imaging (MPI) using radionu-clides can be utilized. Thallium 201 (201Tl) was the initial radio-nuclide used for MPI, but due to its long half-life and relatively low photopeak, it has largely been replaced by technetium-99m (sestamibi and tetrofosmin) because of its more favorable char-acteristics. In the past, planar imaging with three separate 2D views of the heart were obtained. Currently, it is more common to have the images acquired by single-photon emission com-puted tomography (SPECT) technology, which detects emit-ted photons from 180° to 360° around the patient. The signals are then processed to reconstruct multiple slices that together provide a 3D image. The distribution of radionuclides depends on perfusion, and therefore areas that show uptake at rest, but not during stress, are concerning for ischemia. The amount of uptake at both rest and stressed states is compared to assess ischemia and viability of the myocardium. Territories that do not show uptake at rest or during stress are likely to be nonvi-able scar. The sensitivity and specificity of exercise SPECT are 87% and 73%, respectively.8,9The image acquisition may also be gated to a simultane-ously obtained ECG to assess global ventricular function. The endocardial and epicardial borders (as delineated by radionu-clide uptake) are detected throughout the cardiac cycle and the ejection fraction, along with end-systolic and end-diastolic vol-umes, can be calculated. This study is also useful in revealing hypokinetic segments of the myocardium.One significant drawback of SPECT imaging is that it shows regional ischemia well, but it does not adequately detect global or “balanced” ischemia that can occur with diffuse CAD. Positron emission tomography (PET) has been used due to its ability to obtain absolute quantitative data on both myocardial perfusion and metabolism. Tracers used in PET scans can be divided into those that assess perfusion (oxygen-15, nitrogen-13, and rubidiuim-82) and those that assess metabolism (carbon-11 and fluorine-18). The specificity of PET in detecting CAD  is better than SPECT at 86% due to its superior spatial resolution.10Magnetic Resonance Imaging. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has a wide variety of uses in cardiac imaging depending on the pulse sequence and signal weighting. Cine-loop imaging of the heart throughout the cardiac cycle can yield information on global chamber function, geometry, and valvular pathologies. The differential response of normal and ischemic myocardium to certain pulse sequences allows imaging of myocardial per-fusion using MRI. Use of contrast agents such as gadolinium can enhance scar tissue and are very useful in viability assess-ment. Myocardial strain imaging can also be performed taking advantage of radio-frequency tagging of the myocardium, which deforms with the tissue and can be followed throughout the car-diac cycle.Cardiac Catheterization. Cardiac catheterization involves access to the cardiac chambers, coronary arteries, and great vessels with a peripherally inserted catheter under fluoroscopic guidance. It is a versatile tool used to investigate cardiac cham-ber pressures, valvular abnormalities, wall motion, and coronary artery anatomy. While some of these roles are being replaced by less invasive techniques mentioned previously, cardiac cath-eterization continues to be widely performed and is the gold standard for the assessment of coronary artery disease.11Left heart catheterization is performed by percutaneous access of the femoral, or radial, artery. Under fluoroscopic guid-ance, the catheter is threaded into the ascending aorta where a contrast aortogram may be performed. Coronary angiography requires manipulation of this catheter into the coronary ostia where contrast is directly injected. With advancement of the catheter retrograde through the aortic valve, left ventricular pressures can be obtained. This measurement is used to calcu-late direct pressure gradients across the aortic valve, in con-trast to echocardiography that indirectly measures pressure, and can be used to confirm severe aortic stenosis. Again, contrast injection into the left ventricle can be used to estimate ejection fraction and visualize hypokinetic segments of the myocardium. Inappropriate retrograde leakage of contrast may indicate insuf-ficiency of the aortic and/or mitral valves.Coronary angiography provides information on hemody-namically significant stenoses in the coronary circulation as well as an anatomical roadmap for surgeons to plan revascularization (Fig. 21-2A,B). A stenosis is considered to be significant if it narrows the lumen of the artery by 70% (or 50% in the case of left main coronary artery). Borderline lesions or complex lesions may be assessed by fractional flow reserve (FFR) or instant wave-free radio (iFR), which obviates the need of adenosine.12 This has been shown to very helpful in guiding revasculariza-tion strategies in recent clinical trials.13 Additional assessment can also be done using intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) inside the coronary circulation. There is some variability in the coro-nary arterial anatomy with the posterior descending artery being supplied by the right coronary artery in approximately 80% of patients (right dominant) or the left coronary artery in approxi-mately 15% of patients (left dominant). The remaining patients have a codominant circulation where the posterior descending artery is supplied by both the right and left coronaries.Right heart catheterization is performed by the introduc-tion of catheter through a peripheral vein that is advanced into the right side of the heart.14 Right-sided pressures and structures are assessed in a similar fashion as in the left heart. Extension of the catheter into the pulmonary artery allows measurement of pulmonary artery pressures as well as pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (reflecting left ventricular end diastolic pres-sure) with an occlusive balloon. In addition to these measure-ments, cardiac output can be measured using thermodilution or by the Fick method using oxygen saturations of blood sampled from the various locations during the procedure.Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   80601/03/19   5:32 PM 807ACQUIRED HEART DISEASECHAPTER 21Figure 21-2. Cardiac catheterization angiography. A. Stenosis of right coronary artery indicated by the arrow. B. Still image of a normal left ventriculogram.ABAn advantage of cardiac catheterization is that it offers an opportunity for interventional therapy of coronary artery disease, arrhythmias, valvular abnormalities, and other struc-tural defects of the heart. Cardiac catheterization is generally safe, but being an invasive procedure, it is associated with rare complications. The overall mortality is 0.11%, and total rate of major complications, including MI, stroke, arrhythmia, vascular injury, contrast reaction including allergic reaction and contrast-induced nephropathy, hemodynamic instability, and cardiac per-foration is usually <2%.15Cardiac Computed Tomography. Multislice computed tomography (CT) imaging can be used to assess the coronary vasculature. The coronary calcium score is an index devel-oped to quantify the degree of coronary atherosclerotic burden by measuring Hounsfield units in a noncontrast cardiac CT. Although this technique is quite sensitive for angiographic stenoses (>50%) it remains fairly nonspecific as calcification often precedes significant luminal narrowing.16 CT coronary angiography using intravenous contrast is also utilized clini-cally to assess coronary pathology and is particularly useful in the emergency room to perform a “triple rule-out” for acute coronary events, pulmonary embolism, and aortic dissection in patients who present with undifferentiated chest pain. LV ejec-tion fraction may be measured by this technique, and, together with the degree of coronary stenosis, it has been shown to have incremental prognostic value for the presence of coronary artery disease and in the prediction of adverse coronary events.17EXTRACORPOREAL PERFUSIONHistoryPrior to the development of extracorporeal perfusion, heart sur-gery was rarely performed and was limited to brief periods of asystole and/or hypothermia. The need for obtaining a bloodless operating field, while maintaining perfusion of heart and other organs, was evident.John Gibbon’s motivation to develop a means for extra-corporeal perfusion came from a desire to safely open the pulmonary artery in a patient who suffered from a pulmonary embolus following a cholecystectomy. After numerous experi-mental iterations, Gibbon’s cardiopulmonary bypass machine was first used clinically in 1953 to repair an atrial septal defect in an 18-year-old woman.18 Although Gibbon is credited for its invention, the development of modern cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) is a culmination of the work of many investi-gators throughout the world. The early bubble oxygenators have evolved into the currently used membrane oxygenators. The search for an ideal biocompatible material that minimizes the inflammatory cascade initiated by the contact of blood with the circuit components continues to this day.TechniqueThe basic CPB circuit consists of the venous cannulae, a venous reservoir, pump, oxygenator, filter, and the arterial cannula.Anticoagulation is required during CPB, and 300 to  400 units/kg of heparin are given to increase the activated clotting time (ACT) to greater than 450 seconds. Once an ade-quate level of anticoagulation is achieved, arterial cannulation is performed through a purse-string suture or through a side graft sewn onto the native artery. The distal ascending thoracic aorta is the most common site of cannulation. Other routinely utilized sites of cannulation include the femoral artery, the axillary artery, the innominate artery, or the distal aortic arch, and they are altered based on the indicated surgical repair and the pres-ence of native arterial disease. Venous cannulation is performed through purse-string sutures placed on the right atrium either for a single cannula or for two separate cannulae placed into the superior and inferior vena cava, respectively. Alternatively, the venous cannula may be inserted from the femoral vein and advanced into the right atrium and superior vena cava using TEE guidance. This technique is frequently used in minimally invasive cardiac surgery.Effective communication between the surgeon, the anes-thesiologist, and the perfusionist is mandatory for effective Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   80701/03/19   5:32 PM 808SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIcardiopulmonary bypass. Once the appropriate cannulations and connections are complete, CPB is commenced. Venous return is initiated followed by arterial flow while monitoring systemic blood pressure. At normothermia, the flow required is approxi-mately 2.4 L/min/m2, but with hypothermia, oxygen consump-tion is reduced by 50% for every 10°C drop in temperature, and a flow of only 1 L/min/m2 is required at 18°C. Once the heart is decompressed and hemodynamics are acceptable, ventilation is stopped. The oxygenator is adjusted to maintain a Pao2 of  150 mmHg and normocarbia. Blood can also be filtered and returned through vents that are placed in chambers of the heart (such as the left ventricle or pulmonary artery) or through the cardiotomy suction used to aspirate blood from the surgical field. When the cardiac procedure is complete, the patient is rewarmed, the lungs ventilated, and the heart defibrillated, if needed. The venous return to the CPB machine is gradually reduced allowing the heart to fill. The pump is also slowed while hemodynamics and global cardiac function are assessed with a TEE probe. Ino-tropic and vasopressor support may be used to augment cardiac function and treat hypotension. Once CPB has been weaned and stable hemodynamics achieved, the cannulae are removed. The heparin anticoagulation is reversed with 1 mg protamine per 100 units of heparin and hemostasis is achieved.19Adverse EffectsCardiopulmonary bypass has a number of deleterious effects as various intertwining processes result in derangements in hemo-stasis, an enhanced systemic inflammatory response, and end-organ function.Anticoagulation prior to the commencement of CPB is required as contact of blood with the artificial surfaces of the cir-cuit can initiate a thrombogenic cascade. Generation of thrombin plays a major role in both thrombotic and bleeding phenomena during CPB. The endothelium that normally regulates the fine balance between procoagulant and anticoagulant pathways is perturbed. Fibrinogen is consumed rapidly as thrombin converts fibrinogen to fibrin while fibrinolytic mechanisms (initiated by the activated endothelium) degrade the fibrin macromolecules. Platelets are activated by the converging hemostatic pathways and are consumed.The response of the humoral and cellular immune systems partly overlap with the hemostatic pathways. The classic and alternative complement pathways are activated by CPB gen-erating powerful chemotaxic molecules and anaphylatoxins.20 Monocytes, platelets, and neutrophils are activated releasing acute inflammatory mediators and cytokines that persist even after conclusion of CPB.21 These inflammatory cells also pro-duce reactive oxidants that may have cytotoxic and cardiovas-cular effects such as vasodilation and hypotension.The large quantity of unfractionated heparin used during cardiac surgery predisposes patients to developing heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) with an incidence of 1% to 5%.22 Platelet factor-4 (PF4) is produced by platelets and avidly binds to heparin to form a heparin-PF4 complex that can be antigenic in some patients binding IgG. The IgG-heparin-PF4 complex can bind to platelets, which causes release of more PF4, perpetuating the process. The earliest sign is a sudden drop of more than 50% in the platelet count, usually seen from sev-eral hours to days after surgery. HIT can be confirmed with an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) or serotonin release assay (SRA). Of the patients with HIT, 20% to 50% of patients develop thromboses in arterial or venous beds, designated as heparin-induced thrombocytopenia and thrombo-sis (HITT), which can be life-threatening.23 Treatment is anti-coagulation with nonheparin anticoagulant (e.g., argatroban, bivalirudin).The etiology of end-organ dysfunction resulting from extracorporeal circulation can mostly be categorized into one of three mechanisms: hypoperfusion, embolization, and whole-body inflammatory response. Although cardiac output and blood pressure are monitored carefully during CPB, they are surrogates for regional perfusion and cannot detect end-organ hypoperfusion directly. This can be a problem particularly with the cerebral, renal, and mesenteric circulations. With manip-ulation of diseased vessels and dysregulation of the native coagulation system, macroscopic and microscopic emboli are a concern. Activated cells and circulating cytotoxic products of the immune response may cause microvascular injury and edema of other organs manifesting as neurocognitive deficits, respiratory failure, and renal injury.24Myocardial ProtectionDuring CPB, pharmacologic agents in cardioplegic solutions may be delivered into the coronary circulation to arrest the heart, allowing for a still operating target and improved myocardial protection. The most common cardioplegia consists of potas-sium-rich solutions that can be mixed with autologous blood and are delivered into the coronary circulation.25 Antegrade cardioplegia is delivered into the root of a cross-clamped aorta or directly into the individual coronary ostial using specialized catheters. A retrograde cardioplegia catheter is a balloon-cuffed catheter that is placed through the right atrium into the coro-nary sinus and is used to perfuse the coronary circulation in the opposite direction through the venous circulation. This has the advantage of more uniform distribution in patients with diffuse coronary artery disease and is not dependent on a competent aortic valve for delivery.There is continued debate regarding the best method (ante-grade vs. retrograde vs. both), type (crystalloid vs. blood), tem-perature (cold vs. warm vs. tepid), and interval (continuous vs. intermittent) of cardioplegia delivery. The optimal combination is beyond the scope of this text. However, most cardiac surgeons in the United States favor cold blood potassium cardioplegia.CORONARY ARTERY DISEASEHistoryAortocoronary bypass for myocardial ischemia was first pro-posed and performed in laboratory animals by Carrel in 1910.26 The Vineberg operation, one of the initial attempts at surgical revascularization of the myocardium, was introduced in 1951.27 This procedure involved implantation of the internal thoracic artery directly into the myocardium itself. While some patients were relieved of their anginal symptoms, this resulted in vir-tually no increase in coronary flow and was soon supplanted by methods to restore flow directly. Coronary endarterectomy was introduced by Longmire during this time period but had high rates of restenosis and occlusion.28 The use of vein patches to repair the arteriotomy sites was described by Senning in 1961.29 The first saphenous vein coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) was performed by Sabiston in 1962,30 but was popular-ized by Favalaro and Sones in 1967.31 In 1968, the internal tho-racic artery was introduced as a bypass conduit by Green, who used it to bypass the left anterior descending coronary artery.32Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   80801/03/19   5:32 PM 809ACQUIRED HEART DISEASECHAPTER 21Etiology and PathogenesisAtherosclerotic stenoses are the primary mechanism of CAD. The pathophysiologic process is initiated with vascular endo-thelial injury and is potentiated by inflammatory mechanisms, circulating lipids, toxins, and other vasoactive agents in the blood. Macrophages and platelets are attracted to this area of endothelial dysfunction inciting a local inflammatory response. During this process, macrophages infiltrate into the intimal lay-ers and accumulate cholesterol-containing low-density lipo-proteins. The growth factors secreted promote proliferation of smooth muscle cells within the intima and media of the arteries. Together with the accumulation of the lipid-laden macrophages, the smooth muscle hyperplasia results in an atheroma and subse-quent stenosis of the vessel. These atheromas have a fibrous cap that may rupture, exposing the underlying cells and extracellular matrix, which are very prothrombotic. Acute plaque rupture and thrombus formation is thought to be the main pathophysiologic mechanism responsible for acute coronary syndromes.33-35Risk Factors and PreventionPrior to the establishment of modern management strategies, the annual mortality rate from ischemic heart disease was 482 out of 100,000 persons.36 Since the peak of coronary heart dis-ease mortality in 1968, modern primary and secondary preven-tion strategies such as risk factor modification, percutaneous and surgical revascularization, use of medications (e.g., aspirin, HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors [statins], and β-blockers), has decreased mortality from coronary artery disease by 74%.36The major risk factors for atherosclerosis include advanced age, cigarette smoking, hypertension, dyslipidemias, sedentary lifestyle, obesity, and diabetes. Likely due to increased public awareness and aggressive medical management, these risk fac-tors (with the exception of glucose intolerance and obesity) have recently been on the decline.Current guidelines outlined in the AHA/ACC consensus statement summarize the secondary prevention recommendations.37 Class I recommendations include smoking cessation and avoid-ance of environmental tobacco exposure, blood pressure con-trol to under 140/90 mmHg (under 130/80 mmHg in those with diabetes or chronic kidney disease), LDL cholesterol levels less than 100 mg/dL, aspirin therapy in all patients without contra-indications, a BMI target of less than 25 kg/m2, diabetes man-agement with target HbA1c <7%, and encouragement of daily moderate-intensity aerobic exercise. β-Blockers should be used in all patients with LV dysfunction and following MI, ACS, or revascularization, unless a specific contraindication is pres-ent. Renin-angiogensin-aldosterone system blockade in patients with hypertension, LV dysfunction, diabetes, or chronic kidney disease should also be considered.Clinical ManifestationsPatients with CAD may have a spectrum of presentations, including angina pectoris, myocardial infarction, ischemic heart failure, arrhythmias, and sudden death.Angina pectoris is the pain or discomfort caused by myo-cardial ischemia and is typically substernal and may radiate to the left upper extremity, neck, or epigastrium. The variety of presentations can make myocardial ischemia challenging to diagnose. Characteristics of chest pain that make myocardial ischemia less likely include pleuritic chest pain, pain reproduc-ible by movement or palpation, or brief episodes lasting only seconds. Typical angina is relieved by rest and/or use of sub-lingual nitroglycerin. Differential diagnoses to be considered include, but are not limited to, musculoskeletal pain, pulmonary disorders, esophageal spasm, pericarditis, aortic dissection, gas-troesophageal reflux, neuropathic pain, and anxiety.Myocardial infarction is a serious consequence of CAD occurring when ischemia results in myocardial necrosis. This may be silent and need not be preceded by angina. Necrosis may result in disruption of the myocardial integrity leading to devastating conditions such as intracardiac shunts from ventric-ular septal defects, acute valvular regurgitation from rupture of necrotic papillary muscles, and cardiac aneurysms, which have the potential for fatal rupture.Ischemic insults from CAD may lead to congestive heart failure. The initial myocardial damage sets off a cascade of both local and systemic responses. Over time, these changes can cause deleterious myocardial loading and abnormal neuro-humoral responses that result in pathologic remodeling of the heart. Heart failure should be suspected in patients who present with dyspnea, orthopnea, fatigue, and edema.Arrhythmias may also be sequelae of CAD. Ischemic etiologies should be investigated in patients who present with new arrhythmias. CAD may result in arrhythmias following an acute MI or as the result of ultrastructural and electrophysi-ologic remodeling secondary to chronic ischemic heart disease. Ischemia of the electrical conduction system may be present in the form of new onset complete or partial atrioventricular conduction blocks.Preoperative EvaluationA focused history and physical examination is essential with par-ticular attention directed to the signs, symptoms, and clinical man-ifestations mentioned previously. The patient’s functional status is of importance not only because it is a component of preoperative risk assessment, but also because quality of life improvement and symptomatic relief are both goals of surgical therapy.Coronary angiography is the primary diagnostic tool. The coronary anatomy and degrees of stenoses are delineated allow-ing for planning of surgical revascularization.Noninvasive diagnostic studies, in combination with pro-vocative maneuvers (exercise or pharmacologic agents) offer information regarding the functional significance of ischemic disease. A stress ECG is frequently used as a screening tool with 50% sensitivity and 90% specificity for coronary artery with a threshold of 1 mm of ST-segment depression.38 This test, how-ever, requires patients to achieve a certain elevation in their heart rate and is therefore not suitable for those that cannot achieve this goal. Furthermore, baseline ECG abnormalities may render it impossible to detect typical ischemic changes with stress.Echocardiography and nuclear imaging may be performed under pharmacologic stress (with dobutamine or dipyridamole) to assess reversible ischemia and myocardial viability. Technetium-99m or thallium-201 perfusion scans and stress echocardiogra-phy are more sensitive than stress ECG.39 These studies also have the ability to assess global ventricular function in terms of left ventricle ejection fraction, which can be used to determine operative risk. Please refer to the diagnostic studies section for more details.CORONARY ARTERY BYPASS GRAFTINGIndicationsA joint committee established by the ACC/AHA have pub-lished guidelines for surgical revascularization (CABG) in Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   80901/03/19   5:32 PM 810SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 21-3Algorithm set forth by ACC/AHA guidelines for preoperative cardiovascular evaluation before noncardiac surgery for patients who are scheduled for nonemergent, non-low risk surgery, no active cardiac disease, and less than  3 METsNUMBER OF RISK FACTORSaRECOMMENDATION0Proceed with planned surgery.1–2Control HR and proceed with planned surgery or pursue further testing if it will change management.3–5Pursue further testing if it will advance management.aRisk factors are history of ischemic heart disease, history of prior or compensated heart failure, history of cerebrovascular disease, diabetes mellitus, and renal insufficiency.Table 21-4Data from ACC/AHA guidelines for CABG in CAD to improve survivalANATOMYCLASS OF RECOMMENDATIONLEVEL OF EVIDENCE• LMIB• 3-vessel +/− proximal LADIB• 2-vessel + proximal LADIB• 2-vessel – proximal LADIIa – with extensive ischemiaIIb – without extensive ischemiaBC• Multivessel disease with DMIIa (CABG preferred over PCI)B• Proximal LAD onlyIIa – with LITA for long-term benefitB• 1-vessel – proximal LADIII – HarmB• LV dysfunctionIIa – LVEF 35%–50%IIb – LVEF <35% without LM diseaseBB• Survivor of ischemia-mediated VTIBDM = Diabetes mellitus; LITA = Left internal thoracic/mammary artery; LM = Left main coronary artery; LV = left ventricle; VT = ventricular tachycardia. Class of recommendation: I – Benefit far outweighs risks and procedure should be performed; IIa – Benefit outweighs risks and procedure is considered to be reasonable; IIb – Potential benefits may exceed risks and procedure may be considered; III – Procedure not helpful and may cause harm. Level of evidence: A – Strong; multiple supporting randomized controlled trials or meta-analyses, B – Limited; data based on a single randomized trial or nonrandomized trials, C – Very limited; based on expert consensus, case studies or standards of care.CAD. The indications, categorized by presentation and angio-graphic disease burden as well as by treatment intention (sur-vival improvement and symptom relief), are summarized later (Tables 21-3, 21-4, and 21-5).40,41Percutaneous Coronary Intervention vs. Coronary Artery Bypass GraftingThere have been multiple prospective, randomized, controlled trials as well as large retrospective studies looking at the com-parative effectiveness of percutaneous coronary interventions (PCI) and CABG. Some of the representative studies are sum-marized here.The New York State Study (2005). A retrospective review of 59,314 patients in a New York state registry with multivessel (two or more) coronary disease was performed. Of these, 37,212 patients received a CABG, and the remainder underwent a PCI. After adjusting by means of proportional-hazards methods, CABG was associated with higher adjusted rates of long-term survival than PCI.42Stent or Surgery Trial (2008). An international multicenter, randomized, controlled trial of 988 patients (n = 488 PCI,  n = 500 CABG) with multivessel CAD was performed to compare revascularization strategies. The median follow-up was extended to 6 years, and a survival advantage persisted in the CABG group over the PCI group.43Synergy Between Percutaneous Coronary Intervention With Taxus and Cardiac Surgery (SYNTAX Trial, 2009, updated 2013). Revascularization strategies, CABG vs. PCI, were compared in a 1:1 randomized prospective trial of 1800 patients with high-risk coronary artery disease (left-main or triple-vessel disease). Rates of requirement for repeat revascu-larization and major adverse cardiac or cerebrovascular events (MACCE) at 1 year were lower in the CABG patients (5.9% and 12.4%, respectively) compared to PCI patients (13.5% and 17.8%, respectively). No difference in mortality was seen between the groups at 1 year.44 At 5 years, the estimated rate of MACCE was 26.9% in the CABG group vs. 37.3% in the PCI group. No difference in all-cause mortality was seen. The dif-ference in MACCE between PCI and CABG was confined to patients with intermediate or high SYNTAX scores.45The ACCF and STS Database Collaboration on the Com-parative Effectiveness of Revascularization Strategies (ASCERT Study, 2012). This study, performed by collabo-ration of the American College of Cardiology Foundation and the Society of Thoracic Surgeons, reviewed their respective national databases of patients over the age of 65 who had multi-vessel coronary disease (excluding those with left main disease). CABG was performed on 86,244 patients, and 103,549 under-went PCI. There was no difference in adjusted mortality at 1 year, but there was a significantly lower mortality with CABG than PCI at 4 years.46 Although CABG had higher cost, this was Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   81001/03/19   5:32 PM 811ACQUIRED HEART DISEASECHAPTER 21Table 21-5Data from ACC/AHA guidelines for CABG in CAD to improve symptomsANATOMY ASSOCIATED SYMPTOMSCLASS OF RECOMMENDATIONLEVEL OF EVIDENCE• Unacceptable angina with presence of ≥1 stenoses amenable to revascularization despite medical treatmentIA• Complex 3-vessel CAD +/− proximal LAD involvementIIa (CABG preferred over PCI)B• Unacceptable angina with presence of ≥1 stenoses amenable to revascularization but medical treatment is not possibleIIaC• Previous CABG with ≥1 stenoses associated with ischemia and angina despite medical treatmentIIbCmodest with an incremental cost-effectiveness ratio of $30,454 per quality-adjusted life year gained.47Everolimus-Eluting Stents or Bypass Surgery for Left Main Coronary Artery Disease (EXCEL Trial, 2016). This study randomized 1905 patients with left main coronary artery disease of low or intermediate complexity to PCI or CABG. At 3 years, no difference was observed in the primary endpoint of death, stroke, myocardial infarction or ischemia-driven revas-cularization. However, it should be noted that the PCI group exhibited a greater increase in these events between 30 days and three years than the CABG group (11.5% vs. 7.9%).48SummaryPCI technology has improved over time, and rates of periproce-dural adverse events have decreased significantly. Man-agement strategies must be tailored to the individual patient’s clinical status and context, but CABG maintains improved long-term outcome and remains the standard of care for patients with left-main, multivessel coronary artery disease and patients with diabetes. Recent and upcoming trials will con-tinue to clarify which patient populations benefit most from either revascularization strategy.Operative Techniques and ResultsBypass Conduit Selection. The most important criterion in conduit selection is graft patency. The conduit with the highest patency rate (98% at 5 years and 85%–90% at 10 years) is the internal thoracic artery, which is most commonly left attached proximally to the subclavian artery (although occasionally used as a free graft) and anastomosed distally to the target coronary artery.49,50 The use of both internal thoracic arteries has been shown to increase event-free survival in a number of studies.51,52The greater saphenous vein can be harvested using an open or endoscopic technique. In the open technique, the initial inci-sion is made along the course of the vein on the medial aspect of the lower extremity. The vein is harvested with meticulous attention directed towards minimizing manipulation of the vein itself. The incision may be continuous or bridged in an attempt to decrease the size of the incision, but multiple bridged inci-sions may have the potential risk of increased conduit manipula-tion during harvest. Endoscopic harvest is performed by making a small incision just above and medial to the knee where the endoscope is inserted. Side branches are cauterized under endo-scopic visualization using bipolar electrocautery until dissec-tion is carried proximally until the required length of vein is mobilized. A proximal counterincision is then made to extract the venous conduit, which is prepared in the standard fashion.1The radial artery is another frequently used conduit. After confirmation of ulnar collateral flow to the hand by the clinical Allen’s test or a duplex ultrasound study, an incision is made from a point just proximal to the radial styloid process and end-ing just medial and distal to the biceps tendon on the nondomi-nant hand. With lateral retraction of the brachioradialis muscle, the radial artery is dissected sharply with care to avoid injury to the cutaneous nerves in this area and minimize manipulation of the artery itself. This artery can also be harvested using an endoscopic technique.Many studies have looked at the patency rates of the radial artery graft in comparison to the saphenous vein graft. Although some studies have resulted in equivocal data, general consen-sus favors the use of radial arterial grafts over vein grafts with 5-year patency rates of 98% and 86%, respectively.53,54From a historical perspective, the anterior circulation (left anterior descending artery) is generally bypassed using the internal thoracic artery, and the lateral (circumflex artery) or inferior (right coronary artery) territories are bypassed using a saphenous vein or radial artery graft. These conduits may be combined to form a composite Tor Y-graft, or sewn to multiple targets as sequential grafts. Since patency is best with arterial grafts, recent data have suggested that the best long-term results are achieved using a multiple or all-arterial revascularization strategy, particularly in patients >70 years of age and patients with diabetes.55-57 Other conduits such as the gastroepiploic arteries, lesser saphenous veins, and cephalic veins have been described, but these are not widely used and will not be dis-cussed here.Conventional Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting. Tradi-tionally, CABGs are performed with the patient lying supine through a median sternotomy. Left internal thoracic artery and other conduit harvests are performed. After the patient is heparinized, cardiopulmonary bypass is initiated. The aorta is cross-clamped, and cardioplegia is delivered. Once adequate myocardial protection has been achieved, coronary arterioto-mies are made, and distal anastomoses are performed using polypropylene suture (Fig. 21-3A,B). The proximal anastomo-ses are then performed directly onto the ascending aorta or onto preexisting grafts. It is important to note that significant coro-nary stenoses can cause differential distribution of cardioplegia and myocardial protection. It is therefore recommended to use retrograde cardioplegia or to revascularize the area with the most concern for ischemia first and give cardioplegia down the completed graft. The left internal thoracic artery to left anterior descending (LAD) graft is frequently performed last to avoid kinking or disruption of this important conduit. Once all grafts Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   81101/03/19   5:32 PM 812SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 21-3. Coronary artery bypass grafting. A. Intraoperative photograph of the distal anastomoses performed between the left internal thoracic artery and left anterior descending coronary artery with a continuous 8-0 suture. B. Fifteen-year follow-up coronary angiogram of a left internal thoracic artery to left anterior descend-ing coronary artery bypass demonstrating a widely patent free of any significant atherosclerotic stenosis. Anastomotic site is shown by the arrow.Figure 21-4. Epicardial stabilizing device used during off-pump coronary anastomosis.ABare in place, the patient is weaned from bypass. During this time, the heart is monitored closely by direct visual inspection, transesophageal echocardiography. It is recommended that bypass graft patency be assessed with ultrasonic flow probes or Doppler to confirm flow and determine the pulsatility index (PI). These tools are utilized to detect abnormalities that may signify inadequate revascularization or technical problems with the bypass grafts. Upon confirmation of hemostasis, chest tubes are placed, the sternum is approximated with sternal wires, and the incisions are closed.Conventional CABG Results. Several early randomized trials showed improved survival in patients who received a CABG as opposed to medical therapy.58-60 A propensity-matched study identified that CABG greatly benefited patients with LV dysfunction and left main stenosis >50% compared to medi-cal management.61 The Bypass Angioplasty Revascularization Investigation (BARI) trial demonstrated impressively superior results with CABG compared to PCI in terms of 5-year cardiac mortality (5.8% vs. 20.6%) in patients with diabetes in addi-tion to CAD.62 In a study examining the benefits of CABG over medical management for specific CAD distributions, survival was better in patients with proximal LAD stenoses, regardless of the number of diseased vessels.63 In general, these studies show survival rates of over 90% at 5 years and approximately 75% at 10 years following CABG.The mortality and morbidity of the procedure itself has changed over time. Data from the Society of Thoracic Surgeons (STS) database accounts for 1,497,254 patients who under-went solitary CABG from 2000 to 2009. The mortality rate of CABGs has improved significantly from 2.4% in 2000 to 1.9% in 2009, despite the relatively constant predicted mortality rate of around 2.3%. In parallel with this, postoperative complication rates have also decreased: stroke (1.6%–1.2%), bleeding requir-ing reoperation (2.4%–2.2%), and deep sternal wound infection (0.59%–0.37%).64Off-pump Coronary Artery Bypass. To avoid the adverse consequences of cardiopulmonary bypass, off-pump coronary artery bypass (OPCAB) was developed and has been adopted in some centers over the past two decades.With OPCAB, the heart is left beating. Performing anas-tomoses on the beating heart requires the use of myocardial sta-bilization devices, which help portions of the epicardial surface to remain relatively immobile while the anastomoses are being performed (Fig. 21-4).Apical suction devices are used to aid in exposure, particu-larly of the lateral and inferior vessels. Many creative maneu-vers have been developed, including patient repositioning, opening the right pleural space to allow for cardiac displace-ment, and creation of a pericardial cradle to minimize compro-mise of cardiac function while exposing the various surfaces of the heart. Temporary proximal occlusion of the target coronary artery, or the use of an intracoronary shunt, are necessary to Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   81201/03/19   5:32 PM 813ACQUIRED HEART DISEASECHAPTER 21provide adequate exposure of the anastomosis. Occlusion causes temporary ischemia, and if not tolerated during a test occlusion, coronary shunts can be employed.OPCAB Results. The superiority of OPCAB over on-pump CABG remains a controversy despite the large body of literature on this topic. A pooled analysis of two random-ized trials, the Beating Heart Against Cardioplegic Arrest Studies (BHACAS 1 & 2), is one of several studies that have touted lower short-term mortality rates with the off-pump com-pared to the on-pump technique.65-67 Other studies, however, have demonstrated equivocal or contrary results.68-70 Further-more, the prospective and much larger ROOBY (Randomized On/Off Bypass) trial showed increased rates of adverse cardiac events with OPCAB compared to conventional CABG.71 Despite the initial enthusiasm for the theoretical advantages of avoiding cardiopulmonary bypass, consistent benefits in clinical outcome have not been observed. There does seem to be a more or less uniform trend towards decreased perioperative blood product transfusions with OPCAB compared to on-pump CABG. In terms of other measures of early outcome, postoperative renal failure, stroke, and acute MI, the superiority of OPCAB has been unclear.69,72,73 A more recent Cochrane review by Moller et al did not demonstrate any significant benefit of off-pump compared with on-pump CABG regarding mortality, stroke, or myocardial infarction. In contrast, better long-term survival in the group of patients undergoing on-pump CABG with the use of cardiopul-monary bypass and cardioplegic arrest was observed.74The higher cardiac morbidity in the ROOBY trial was associated with decreased 1-year angiographic patency rates.71 However, studies with contrasting findings exist, quoting equiv-alent rates of graft patency for OPCAB usage.75,76 The broad variety in results may be suggestive that other factors (e.g., surgeon skill, technical difficulty, patient factors) may be dom-inating the outcome rather than the use or avoidance of cardio-pulmonary bypass.77 After almost two decades, OPCAB has not been widely adopted and remains less than 20% of all CABG procedures in the United States.Minimally Invasive Direct Coronary Artery Bypass. As an extension of the off-pump coronary revascularization technique, minimally invasive direct coronary artery bypass (MIDCAB) has been described. MIDCAB is performed using a left ante-rior mini-thoracotomy through which mobilization of the left internal thoracic and direct in situ anastomosis to the left ante-rior descending artery (or its diagonal branches) is performed. This technique is primarily applicable to single-vessel disease, although reports of multivessel revascularizations do exist.MIDCAB Results. A review of 411 patients undergoing MID-CAB quotes an operative mortality >1%. In this study, all patients received revascularization of the LAD only, regard-less of the number of diseased vessels. The 3-year mortality in patients with single-vessel disease following a MIDCAB was 3.1%, which was, not surprisingly, lower than those with multi-vessel disease (8.7%).78There is an inherent selection bias in retrospective reviews comparing MIDCAB to OPCAB or conventional CABG as MIDCAB patients tend to have less extensive disease. Because of this, there have been multiple randomized controlled trials looking at the efficacy of MIDCAB compared to PCI. A meta-analysis of 12 randomized prospective trials comparing PCI to MIDCAB revascularization of isolated proximal left anterior descending artery demonstrated comparable results in terms of 2mortality and MI but a lower revascularization requirement in the MIDCAB group.79A recent meta-analysis by Lee et al revealed CABG, as compared with PCI with DES, reduced long-term rates of the composite of all-cause death, myocardial infarction, or stroke in patients with left main or multivessel CAD. Compared to PCI with DES, CABG was found to be superior in patients with multivessel CAD (P = 0.001), but no between-group differences in those with left main CAD (P = 0.427).80 Similar conclusions have been made by multiple other studies.Total Endoscopic Coronary Artery Bypass. With the advent of robotic surgical technology allowing stereoscopic visual-ization and increased instrument dexterity, total endoscopic coronary artery bypass (TECAB) has become possible. In July of 2004, the da Vinci robotic surgical system received FDA approval for use in coronary anastomoses. Extracorporeal cir-culation with peripheral cannulation has been used in earlier reports, but the development of mechanical stabilizers has pro-vided the ability to perform the internal thoracic artery harvest and coronary anastomosis off-pump with use of the robotic arms only. Several studies have looked at the feasibility of TECAB and have shown acceptable results, but this procedure has not been adopted by most surgeons because of its steep learning curve, longer operative times, and lack of demonstrable clinical benefit.81-83 Although the volume of robotic-assisted CABG is increasing, such procedures constituted <1% of all CABG pro-cedures performed in the United States in 2012.84Hybrid Coronary Revascularization. With the increasing collaboration between cardiothoracic surgeons and interven-tional cardiologists, hybrid coronary revascularization (HCR) combining a minimally invasive surgical technique (MIDCAB or TECAB) with PCI has become a reality. This capitalizes on a major advantage of both treatments, utilizing the durable left internal thoracic artery to left anterior descending coronary artery bypass graft while treating other stenoses with PCI, obvi-ating the need for a large surgical incision or cardiopulmonary bypass. HCR is not without its downsides as there are some concerns with this approach because aggressive anti-platelet therapy is required with PCI and may increase the hemorrhagic complications of surgical revascularization. A small study com-paring HCR to OPCAB showed comparable graft patency and decreased hospital stay with HCR without an increase in com-plication rates.85 There are, however, some studies that have reported increased rates of requirement for reintervention in patients undergoing HCR, and this requires further study.86,87 A recent multicenter prospective observational study showed equivalent outcomes between HCR and multivessel PCI.88 HCR has not gained widespread acceptance, and its clinical value remains a matter of debate.Transmyocardial Laser Revascularization. Despite the advancement of technology and revascularization strategies, patients with end-stage coronary artery disease may not be amenable to complete revascularization. Transmyocardial laser revascularization (TMR) relies on a CO2 or holmium:yttrium-aluminum-garnet (Ho:YAG) laser to create multiple transmu-ral channels (1 mm in diameter) through the myocardium. The initial concept was that these channels would serve as conduits for direct perfusion from the ventricle, but evidence suggests that the resultant angiogenesis is primarily responsible for the improved perfusion. A meta-analysis of seven randomized con-trolled trials comparing TMR to medical therapy for chronic Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   81301/03/19   5:32 PM 814SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 21-6Classification of cardiac murmursMURMURCONDITIONMECHANISM/ETIOLOGYSYSTOLIC MURMURSHolosystolic (pansystolic)VSDFlow between chambers that have widely different pressures throughout systoleMid-systolic (systolic ejection)High flow rate, MS, MR, TS, TIOften crescendo-decrescendo in configuration; occur as blood is ejected into the left and right ventricular outflow tractsEarly systolicEarly TI, acute MRLess commonMid to late systolicMR, MVPSoft to moderate high-pitched murmurs at the LV apex; often due to apical tethering and malcoaptation of MV leaflets; an associated click indicates prolapse of the MV leafletsDIASTOLIC MURMURSEarly high-pitchedAI, PRGenerally decrescendo in configuration; occur when the associated ventricular pressure drops sufficiently below that of the outflow tractMid-diastolicMS, TS, PDA*, VSD*, ASD*Due to a relative disproportion between valve orifice size and diastolic blood flow volume; seen in normal MV and TV with increased diastolic blood flow associated with these conditions*PresystolicMS, TSOccur during the period of ventricular filling that follows atrial contraction (i.e., only occur in sinus rhythm)CONTINUOUS MURMURSPDAUncommon, due to shunts that persist through the end of systole and the some or all of diastoleAI = aortic insufficiency; ASD = atrial septal defect; MR = mitral regurgitation; MS = mitral stenosis; MVP = mitral valve prolapse; PDA = patent ductus arteriosus; PR = pulmonic regurgitation; TI = tricuspid insufficiency; TS = tricuspid stenosis; VSD = ventricular septal defect.angina has shown higher rates of angina improvement in the TMR but was not able to show a difference in mortality between the two groups.89TMR is also being used as an adjunct to CABG in the treatment of extensive CAD that is not amenable to surgical revascularization alone. In a study looking at the benefits of TMR in addition to CABG, Allen et al concluded that TMR decreases angina burden when added to CABG in patients who cannot be revascularized by CABG alone.90 The current STS guidelines support the consideration of TMR in patients with ischemic myocardial territories that cannot be revascularized by PCI or CABG.91 Because of equivocal late results at most centers, this therapeutic strategy has not gained widespread acceptance, and ACC/AHA guidelines give TMR a class IIb recommendation for treatment of refractory angina.39New DevelopmentsRegenerative Medicine and Tissue Engineering. Provoca-tive investigations are being performed on the level of signaling molecules, gene therapy, stem cells, and tissue engineering to regenerate or replace damaged tissue in patients with ischemic heart disease. Growth factors, such as fibroblast growth fac-tor (FGF) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), are receiving attention due to their ability to induce growth of new vessels. Although concerns regarding systemic administration of these pleiotropic signaling molecules exist, early placebo-controlled clinical trials have shown some promising results with administration of these agents.92,93 Adenoviral transfection of diseased tissue with transgenes for growth factors and tran-scription factors has been attempted with variable results.Research in tissue engineering has been directed at cre-ation of vascular conduits that are resistant to atherosclerosis. Stem cells have also been infused directly into the site of injury or in the generation of new tissue around a biodegradable scaffold.94 Despite their potential, these technologies are still in their infancy, and significant progress will be needed before more widespread clinical adoption.VALVULAR HEART DISEASEGeneral PrinciplesThe number of patients undergoing surgical management of valvular heart disease has increased over the last decade, from a total of 26,547 isolated aortic or mitral valve procedures reported to the STS Adult Cardiac Surgery Database in 2006 to 45,253 such procedures in 2015.95 In 2016, valve procedures represented over 50% of the cases performed at our institution. Although congenital and inherited etiologies represent impor-tant clinical entities, age-associated and acquired conditions still represent the primary causes of valvular heart disease and are the focus of this section.The most common screening method for valvular heart disease is cardiac auscultation, with murmurs classified based primarily on their timing in the cardiac cycle, but also on their configuration, location and radiation, pitch, intensity, and dura-tion (Table 21-6).96 Although some systolic murmurs are related to normal physiologic increases in blood flow, some may indi-cate cardiac disease, such as valvular aortic stenosis (AS), that are important to diagnose, even when asymptomatic. Diastolic and continuous murmurs, on the other hand, are frequently Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   81401/03/19   5:32 PM 815ACQUIRED HEART DISEASECHAPTER 21Table 21-7Hemodynamic alterations in cardiac murmur intensityINTERVENTIONEFFECTRespirationRight-sided murmurs increase with inspiration. Left-sided murmurs increase with expiration.Valsalva maneuverMost murmurs decrease in length and intensity. The murmur of HCM becomes louder, and the murmur of MVP becomes louder and longer.ExerciseBenign flow murmurs and murmurs caused by stenotic valves become louder with isotonic and isometric exercise. The murmurs of MR, VSD, and AI also increase with isometric exercise.Positional changesMost murmurs decrease with standing; the murmur of HCM becomes louder, and the murmur of MVP becomes louder and longer. Brisk squatting and passive leg raising increases most murmurs; the murmurs of HCM and MVP diminish.Postventricular premature beat or atrial fibrillationBenign flow murmurs and stenosis at the semilunar valves increase in intensity following a ventricular premature beat or a long cycle length in atrial fibrillation. Systolic murmurs of atrioventricular valve regurgitation do not change.Pharmacologic interventionsThe initial hypotensive phase following inhalation of amyl nitrate decreases the murmurs of MR, VSD, and AI, and increases the murmur of AS. The later tachycardic phase following inhalation of amyl nitrate increases right-sided murmurs and the murmur of MS. The response in MVP is biphasic (softer then louder than control).Transient arterial occlusionTransient external compression of the upper extremity increases the murmurs of MR, VSD, and AI.AI = aortic insufficiency; AS = aortic stenosis; HCM = hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; MR = mitral regurgitation; MS = mitral stenosis; MVP = mitral valve prolapse; VSD = ventricular septal defect.pathologic in nature. Dynamic cardiac auscultation provides further evidence as to the significance and origin of many mur-murs (Table 21-7).96Although auscultation may provide initial evidence to the existence of valvular disease, associated signs and symptoms may help narrow the diagnosis. Abnormalities in the splitting of the heart sounds and additional heart sounds should be noted, as should the presence of pulmonary rales. Peripheral pulses should be checked for abnormal intensity or timing, and the presence of a jugular venous wave should be documented. Addi-tionally, symptoms of syncope, angina pectoris, heart failure, and peripheral thromboembolism are important and may help guide diagnosis and management.Several imaging examinations are also available to aid in the diagnosis and classification of various valvular disorders. Electrocardiograms may provide information regarding ven-tricular hypertrophy, atrial enlargement, arrhythmias, conduc-tion abnormalities, prior myocardial infarction, and evidence of active ischemia that would prompt further workup. Posteroan-terior and lateral chest X-rays are also easy to obtain and may yield information regarding cardiac chamber size, pulmonary blood flow, pulmonary and systemic venous pressure, and cardiac calcifications. The gold standard for the evaluation of valvular heart disease is transthoracic echocardiography (TTE), which is helpful in the noninvasive evaluation of valve mor-phology and function, chamber size, wall thickness, ventricu-lar function, pulmonary and hepatic vein flow, and pulmonary artery pressures. Specialized examinations based on the specific findings of TTE examinations are discussed in the following sections.Regardless of the etiology, valvular heart disease can pro-duce a myriad of hemodynamic derangements. Left untreated, valvular stenosis and insufficiency can produce significant pressure and volume overload on the affected cardiac chamber, respectively, with mixed disease consequently causing mixed pathology. Although the heart can initially compensate for alter-ations in cardiac physiology, cardiac function eventually dete-riorates, leading to heart failure, decreased patient functional status, ventricular dysfunction, and eventually death. In order to optimize long-term survival, surgery or transcatheter therapeu-tics are recommended in various forms of valvular heart disease and in an increasing number of elderly and high-risk patients.Surgical OptionsAlthough valve repair is increasingly indicated, especially in patients with aortic, mitral or tricuspid insufficiency, valve replacement is appropriate in certain patient populations. Valve replacement can be accomplished with either mechanical or bio-logical prostheses, and the choice of valve depends on many patient-specific factors such as age, health status, and desire for future pregnancy. Preexisting indications or contraindications to anticoagulation therapy also influence the choice of mechanical versus tissue valve prosthesis.Current options for mechanical valve replacement include either tilting disc valves or bileaflet valves. Although mechanical valves are highly durable, they require perma-nent anticoagulation to mitigate the risk of valve thrombosis and thromboembolic sequelae.97 Due to the concordant risk of hem-orrhagic complications, patient characteristics such as debility, lifestyle, and contraindications to systemic anticoagulation therapy may preclude mechanical valve replacement. Moreover, young women who are planning future pregnancies cannot take warfarin due to its teratogenic potential. Conversely, patients with other indications for systemic anticoagulation, such as other risk factors for thromboembolism (i.e., atrial fibrillation), or the presence of a mechanical prosthetic valve in place in another position, may benefit from mechanical valve replace-ment. Current ACC/AHA guidelines recommend a shared-decision-making process between patient and physician when determining the choice of valve prosthesis, with the use of 3Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   81501/03/19   5:32 PM 816SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 21-5. SJM Regent mechanical heart valve. (SJM Regent and St. Jude Medical are trademarks of St. Jude Medical, LLC or its related companies. Reproduced with permission of St. Jude Medical, ©2017. All rights reserved.)bioprosthetic valves in all patients who have a contraindication to lifelong anticoagulation or who are unwilling to receive it.98The potential to avoid the hazards of serious bleeding com-plications spurred the development of valve prostheses using biological materials, which obviate the need for systemic anti-coagulation therapy. As tissue valves are naturally less throm-bogenic, the attendant yearly risks of both thromboembolic and anticoagulation-related complications are considerably less than with mechanical valves.99 Consequently, tissue valve replace-ment is generally recommended for patients averse to systemic anticoagulation therapy, with potential concerns regarding com-pliance or follow-up while taking anticoagulant medications, and in the case of reoperation for a thrombosed mechanical valve. However, biological valves are more prone to degenera-tion, especially when implanted in the mitral position, and in younger patients, and those in renal failure, on hemodialysis, or with hypercalcemia.99 Improved manufacturing methods have made currently available tissue valves more durable than previ-ous versions, and valve replacement with a biological prosthesis is generally preferred in patients without other indications for anticoagulation therapy who are >60 years of age for the aortic position and >70 years of age for the mitral position. The avail-ability of transcatheter aortic valves for re-replacement, has resulted in patients and surgeons preferring bioprosthetic aortic valves in patients even <60 years of age in many centers.Mechanical Valves. The first bileaflet mechanical valve was introduced in 1977. Bileaflet valves are comprised of two semi-circular leaflets that open and close, creating one central and two peripheral orifices (Fig. 21-5). Bileaflet mechanical valves have demonstrated excellent flow characteristics, low risk of late valve-related complications, including valve failure, and are currently the most commonly implanted type of mechanical valve prosthesis in the world.100Although mechanical valves necessitate systemic antico-agulation, careful monitoring of the International Normalized Ratio (INR) reduces the risk of thromboembolic events and hemorrhagic complications and improves overall survival.101 Patients undergoing mechanical aortic valve replacement gen-erally have a target INR of 2 to 3 times normal; however, after a randomized study, one of the mechanical aortic valves has been improved for an INR range of 1.5 to 2.0.102 Patients undergoing mechanical mitral valve replacement frequently have increased left atrial size, concomitant atrial fibrillation, and are at higher risk for thromboembolism that those undergoing aortic valve replacement and are thus recommended to have a target INR 2.5 to 3.5 times normal. When managed appropriately, the yearly risk of major bleeding is <1.4%. Patients with mechanical mitral valve prostheses have nearly twice the thromboembolic risk of those with mechanical aortic valve prostheses (1.3% vs. 0.8% per year).103Tissue Valves. A xenograft valve is one implanted from another species, such as porcine xenograft valves, or manufac-tured from tissue such as bovine pericardium. A variety of xeno-graft tissue valves exist and are primarily differentiated by the presence or absence of a mounting stent. Stented valves are the most commonly implanted, and the most popular valve in the United States is a stented bovine pericardial valve.104The more traditional stented valves are attached to a sew-ing ring, which decreases the technical complexity of valve replacement compared with stentless valves (Fig. 21-6). The chief disadvantage of stented tissue valves is a smaller effective orifice area, which increases the transvalvular gradient. This phenomenon is referred to as patient prosthetic mismatch. This effect is most pronounced in patients with small prosthetic valve areas, specifically <0.85 cm2 valve area per square meter body surface area and may affect survival, symptomatic improve-ment, and the hemodynamic response to exercise following surgery.105Stentless porcine xenograft valves were developed in order to minimize the limitations in flow characteristics seen in patients with small prosthetic valve areas and have demon-strated an increase in effective valve area of approximately 10% over stented xenografts of equivalent size.100 They can result in improved hemodynamics, both at rest and with exercise.106 The absence of a stent and sewing ring both increases the techni-cal complexity of valve replacement and takes advantage of the biologic mobility of the aortic valve apparatus. Though results with stentless valves seem promising, some stentless valves have been shown to have poor durability,107 and stentless valves have not been widely adopted due to the technical complexity of implantation.Recently, rapid deployment valves have been introduced to further decrease the complexity and time required for aortic valve replacement. Two of these valves are on the market in the United States. The Perceval valve by LivaNova is the only sutureless, stentless valve available.108 These rapid deployment valves have shown improved hemodynamics, particularly in patients with small annuli, and shorter implantation times. In some series, these benefits have been shown to reduce early morbidity.108Homografts. Homograft valves from human cadavers, also known as allografts, have been used for aortic valve replace-ment since the technique was originally described over 50 years ago.109 Since that time, homografts have typically been used for aortic and pulmonary valve replacements and have been successfully harvested from brain dead organ donors and the Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   81601/03/19   5:32 PM 817ACQUIRED HEART DISEASECHAPTER 21Figure 21-6. Carpentier-Edwards PERIMOUNT Magna Ease stented porcine bioprosthesis. (Edwards Lifesciences LLC, Irvine, CA. Additionally, it should be noted that Edwards, Edwards Lifesciences, the stylized E logo, Carpentier-Edwards, Carpentier-Edwards Classic, Magna, Magna Ease, Magna Mitral Ease are trademarks of Edwards Lifesciences Corporation.)explanted hearts of heart transplant recipients. Following har-vest, these valves are sterilized using an antibiotic solution and subsequently stored in fixative or cryopreservation solution.Like other types of tissue valves, the risk of thrombo-embolic complications with homograft valves is low, and sys-temic anticoagulation therapy is not required. Additionally, the structure of homograft valves is naturally low-profile, allow-ing for larger effective valve orifices and lower postoperative transvalvular gradients compared with stented xenograft valves. Additionally, they have been shown to have some advantages in patients with endocarditis.110The major shortcoming of homograft valves is their lim-ited long-term durability due to tissue degeneration. Within one year of implantation, these valves undergo substantial loss of cellular components and subsequent structural compro-mise, which may ultimately lead to valve failure.111 Although enhanced preservation techniques has improved cellular viabil-ity, which approaches the 15-year viability of xenograft valves, the limited availability of these valves and techniques has lim-ited the use of homograft tissue valves.Autografts. In 1967, Donald Ross described a procedure in which the diseased aortic valve was replaced using the patient’s native pulmonary valve as an autograft, which was in turn replaced with a homograft in the pulmonic position.112 The pro-cedure resulted in minimal transvalvular gradients and favor-able left ventricular mechanics, both at rest and during exercise. Known as the Ross procedure, this operation has been shown to be particularly beneficial in children, as the pulmonary trunk grows with the child and long-term anticoagulation is not required.113The late results of the Ross procedure are discussed later in this chapter. In addition to potential concerns with durability, performance of the Ross procedure has also been limited by its technical complexity and the increased surgical risk associated with double valve replacement.Valve Repair. Valve repair offers a number of advantages over valve replacement, due in large part to the preservation of the patient’s native valvular and subvalvular apparatus. In mitral valve (MV) surgery, preservation of the mitral apparatus has been shown to lead to better postoperative left ventricular func-tion and survival.114,115 Additionally, as there is no implanted prosthesis, the patient avoids the risks of chronic anticoagula-tion, infection, thromboembolic complications, and prosthetic valve failure after surgery.In the case of MV repair, freedom from reoperation and valve-related complications has been excellent in certain patient populations, even at 20-year follow-up.116 It has also been dem-onstrated that patients undergoing MV surgery with moder-ate functional tricuspid regurgitation (TR) do not experience increased perioperative complication rates when a concomitant tricuspid valve (TV) repair is performed.117 Midterm results in this group are encouraging, with greater than 98% freedom from reoperation reported by some groups at 5 years, suggesting fur-ther indications for valve repair.Despite its advantages for the patient, valve repair is gen-erally more technically demanding than valve replacement and may occasionally fail. Both the suitability of the patient for valve repair and the skill and expertise of the surgeon perform-ing the operation are important when considering valve repair in the individual patient.MITRAL VALVE DISEASEMitral StenosisEtiology. Acquired mitral stenosis (MS) is most often caused by rheumatic fever, with approximately 60% of patients with pure MS presenting with a clinical history of rheumatic heart disease.96 Rarely, other conditions can cause obstruction to fill-ing of the left ventricle (LV), mimicking MS. Acquired causes of MV stenosis include left atrial myxoma, prosthetic valve thrombosis, mucopolysaccharidosis, previous chest radiation, and severe annular calcification.Pathology. Although rheumatic heart disease is associated with a transmural pancarditis, pathological fibrosis of the valves Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   81701/03/19   5:32 PM 818SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 21-7. Mitral stenosis. The thickened, fused leaflets of the diseased mitral valve are viewed through a left atriotomy. (Reproduced with permission from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Edwin P. Ewing, Jr.)Table 21-8Data from ACC/AHA guidelines for the classification of the severity of mitral valve disease in adultsMITRAL STENOSISINDICATORMILDMODERATESEVEREMean gradient (mmHg)a< 55–10>10Pulmonary artery systolic  pressure (mmHg)< 3030–50> 50Valve area (cm2)>1.51.0–1.5< 1.0MITRAL REGURGITATIONQUALITATIVEMILDMODERATESEVEREAngiographic grade1+2+3+Color Doppler jet areaSmall, central jet  (< 4 cm2 or <  20% left atrial area)More than mild criteria, but no severe criteria presentVena contracta width > 0.7 cm with large central jet (area > 40% of left atrial area) or with a wall-impinging jet of any size, swirling in left atriumDoppler vena contracta width (cm)< 0.30.3–0.69≥ 0.7QUANTITATIVE (CATH OR ECHO)Regurgitant volume (ml per beat)< 3030–59≥ 60Regurgitant fraction (%)< 3030–49≥ 50Regurgitant orifice area (cm2)0.20.2–0.39≥ 0.4ADDITIONAL ESSENTIAL CRITERIALeft atrial size  EnlargedLeft ventricular size  EnlargedaValve gradients are flow dependent and when used as estimates of severity of valve stenosis should be assessed with knowledge of cardiac output or forward flow across the valve.results primarily from the endocarditic process. The damage caused by endocardial inflammation and fibrosis is progressive, causing commissural fusion, subvalvular shortening of the chor-dae tendineae, and calcification of the valvular and subvalvu-lar apparatus.118 The resulting stenotic MV has a funnel shape, with doming of the leaflets, and a significantly narrowed orifice caused by interchordal and commissural fusion (Fig. 21-7). The degree of mitral stenosis should be determined preoperatively, as these pathological features may help determine the timing and type of intervention to perform.96Pathophysiology. As the normal MV area of 4.0 to 5.0 cm2 is reduced by the rheumatic process, blood can flow from the left atrium to the left ventricle only if it is propelled by an ever-increasing pressure gradient. This increased left atrial pressure causes left atrial enlargement and eventually pulmonary hyper-tension and decreased exercise tolerance. Patients with diastolic valve doming, usually accompanied by a history of rheumatic fever, are defined as having stage A MS, even with normal trans-mitral flow velocities. Stage B MS is defined by an increased transmitral flow velocity with mitral valve area greater than 1.5 cm2. This condition is associated with mild to moderate left atrial enlargement but normal pulmonary arterial pressure.  Stage C MS consists of a severely stenotic valve (mitral valve area  ≤1.5 cm2) without symptoms. This is frequently associated with commissural fusion and diastolic doming of the leaflets as well as a pulmonary arterial pressure of >30 mmHg. Stage D MS is defined as the aforementioned criteria with the onset of decreased exercise tolerance and/or dyspnea on exertion (Table 21-8).98The onset of symptoms is due to the evolution of patho-physiological processes, beginning with an elevation in left atrial pressure. The increased left atrial pressure is subsequently transmitted to the pulmonary venous system, causing pulmo-nary edema as the hydrostatic pressure in the vessels exceeds the plasma oncotic pressure. Decreased pulmonary venous compli-ance exacerbates the pulmonary venous hypertension, though a concomitant decrease in microvascular permeability may Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   81801/03/19   5:32 PM 819ACQUIRED HEART DISEASECHAPTER 21preclude pulmonary edema in the chronic setting.119 Patients may also develop pulmonary arterial hypertension, owing to vasoconstriction, intimal hyperplasia, and medial hypertrophy of the pulmonary arterioles in response to the increased pul-monary venous pressure. The secondary obstruction to flow caused by reactive pulmonary arterial hypertension may serve to protect against pulmonary edema, but it also exacerbates the intractable decrease in cardiac output that develops as stenosis worsens.120Throughout the process, the left atrium becomes dilated and hypertrophied due to increased work in filling the ventricle against a fixed obstruction. Atrial fibrillation (AF) may develop, exacerbating the patient’s symptoms and increasing the risk of left atrial thrombus and subsequent embolization. Left ventricu-lar structure and function are typically preserved owing to the protective effect of the stenotic valve.Clinical Manifestations. The sudden opening of the thick-ened, nonpliable valve with left atrial contraction produces an opening snap, followed by a diastolic rumble caused by rapid entry of blood into the left ventricle. When diastole is complete, the MV subsequently closes very rapidly, causing an increased first heart sound. The murmur, classically known as the aus-cultatory triad, is best heard at the apex. Associated mitral and tricuspid insufficiencies are heard as a pansystolic murmur radi-ating to the axilla and a systolic murmur at the xiphoid process, respectively.The first clinical signs of MS are those associated with pulmonary venous congestion, namely exertional dyspnea, decreased exercise capacity, orthopnea, and paroxysmal noctur-nal dyspnea. Hemoptysis and pulmonary edema may develop as the venous hypertension worsens. Advanced MS can also cause pulmonary arterial hypertension and subsequent right heart fail-ure, manifested as jugular venous distention, hepatomegaly, ascites, and lower extremity edema.2As mentioned previously, atrial fibrillation may develop as left atrial pathology worsens, causing atrial stasis and subse-quent thromboembolism. Patients with MS may initially present with signs of arterial embolization, even rarely with angina from coronary occlusion.2Diagnostic Studies. All patients with a clinical history and physical exam suggestive of MS should have an electrocardio-gram (ECG) and chest X-ray. Abnormalities in the ECG may include atrial fibrillation, left atrial enlargement, or right axis deviation. Chest X-ray findings may include enlargement of the left atrium and pulmonary artery, creating a double contour behind the right atrial shadow and obliterating the normal con-cavity between the aorta and left ventricle. Findings consistent with pulmonary congestion may also be present.2The diagnostic tool of choice is TTE, which not only con-firms the diagnosis of MS, but also rules out other concomi-tant myocardial or valvular heart disease.121 Two-dimensional TTE can be used to calculate the MV area and to determine the morphology of the MV apparatus, including leaflet mobility and flexibility, leaflet thickness and calcification, subvalvular fusion, and the appearance of the commissures. Doppler TTE can also be used in combination with various equations to esti-mate the hemodynamic severity of MS in terms of the mean transmitral pressure gradient, the MV area, and the pulmonary artery systolic pressure.In most cases, further examinations are not necessary. A preoperative TEE may be utilized to rule out left atrial appendage thrombus, when the patient is being considered for percutane-ous balloon mitral commissurotomy, or if the preoperative TTE is insufficient for diagnosis. Exercise TTE is indicated when resting TTE parameters are discordant with symptom sever-ity.122 Routine coronary angiography is usually performed prior to valve surgery,98 except in young patients (≤30 years of age) with no risk factor for coronary artery disease.Indications for Operation. Depending on the severity and the morphology of the diseased MV (see Table 21-8), balloon commissurotomy, surgical repair, or MV replacement may be indicated for the treatment of MS (Table 21-9).98Mitral RegurgitationEtiology. The most important cause of MR in the United States is myxomatous degenerative disease of the MV, which occurs in 2% to 3% of the population.123 Other important causes of MR include rheumatic heart disease, infective endocarditis, ischemic heart disease, and dilated cardiomyopathies. Less frequently, MR can be caused by collagen vascular diseases, trauma, pre-vious chest radiation, hypereosinophilic syndrome, carcinoid disease, and exposure to certain drugs.96Pathology. The MV apparatus consists of the mitral leaflets, chordae tendineae, papillary muscles, and mitral annulus, and abnormalities in any one of these components has the potential to cause MR.124 The system for classifying MR proposed by Carpentier focuses on the functional and anatomic characteris-tics of the MV pathology and proposes three basic types of dis-eased valves based on the motion of the free edge of the leaflet relative to the plane of the mitral annulus.125In Type I MR, valvular insufficiency occurs secondary to annular dilatation or leaflet perforation, and normal leaflet motion is maintained. Type II MR is seen in patients with mitral valve prolapse and is due to prolapse of often thickened exces-sive leaflet tissue that gives the valve a “billowing” appearance, in addition to ruptured or elongated chordae tendineae caus-ing increased leaflet motion. Type III insufficiency, as seen in patients with rheumatic and ischemic heart disease, occurs from restricted leaflet motion, either during systole and diastole (Type IIIA) or during systole alone (Type IIIB).Pathophysiology. The basic pathophysiologic abnormality of MR is the retrograde flow of a portion of the LV stroke volume into the left atrium during systole due to an incompetent MV or dilated MV annulus.Acute severe MR can result from ruptured chordae ten-dineae, a ruptured papillary muscle, or infective endocarditis and causes a sudden volume overload of both the left atrium and ventricle.96 Although an acute increase in preload provides a modest increase in overall stroke volume, the left atrium and ventricle are unable to fully accommodate the regurgitant vol-ume or maintain forward stroke volume in the acute setting due to a lack of remodeling.Chronic MR generally has a more indolent course, with increasing volume overload of the left atrium and ventricle as the effective regurgitant orifice size becomes larger. The result-ing increase in left atrial and ventricular volume initially allows for an increase in the total stroke volume by Starling’s law and accommodation of the regurgitant volume, thus maintaining forward cardiac output and alleviating pulmonary congestion during the compensatory phase of chronic MR.126 However, as the left atrium becomes more dilated, the development of AF becomes more likely, disrupting atrioventricular synchrony and Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   81901/03/19   5:32 PM 820SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 21-9Data from ACC/AHA guidelines for MV surgery in specific clinical contextsCLINICAL SETTINGCLASS OF RECOMMENDATIONLEVEL OF EVIDENCEBalloon Valvotomy for Mitral Stenosis•	Symptomatic patients (NYHA II, III, IV) with moderate or severe MS and favorable valve morphology, without left atrial thrombus or moderate to severe MR•	Asymptomatic patients with moderate or severe MS, favorable valve morphology, and  pulmonary hypertension (PASP > 50 mmHg at rest, > 60 mmHg with exercise), without left atrial thrombus or moderate to severe MR•	Symptomatic patients (NYHA III, IV) with moderate or severe MS and favorable valve  morphology, who are high risk or not candidates for surgery•	Asymptomatic patients with moderate or severe MS, favorable valve morphology, and new onset atrial fibrillation, without left atrial thrombus or moderate to severe MR•	Symptomatic patients (NYHA II, III, IV) with MV area > 1.5 cm2 if there is evidence of hemodynamically significant MS (PASP > 60 mmHg, PAWP ≥ 25 mmHg, mean MV  gradient >15 mmHg during exercise)•	Symptomatic patients (NYHA III, IV) with moderate or severe MS and favorable valve  morphology, as an alternative to surgery•	Patients with mild MS•	Patients with moderate to severe MR or left atrial thrombusIIIIaIIbIIbIIbIII – HarmIII – HarmACCCCCCCSurgery for Mitral Stenosisa•	Symptomatic patients (NYHA III, IV) with moderate or severe MS when:Balloon valvotomy is unavailableBalloon valvotomy is contraindicated due to thrombus or MRValve morphology is not favorable for balloon valvotomy•	Symptomatic patients with moderate to severe MS who also have moderate to severe MR•	Mildly symptomatic patients (NYHA I, II) with severe MS and severe pulmonary  hypertension (PASP > 60 mmHg)•	Asymptomatic patients with moderate or severe MS and recurrent embolic events while receiving adequate anticoagulation, when the likelihood of successful MVr is high•	MVr in the setting of mild MS•	Closured commissurotomy in the setting of MVr; open commissurotomy should be performedIIIIaIIbIII – HarmIII – HarmBCCCCCSurgery for Mitral Regurgitationa•	Symptomatic patients with acute severe MR•	Symptomatic patients (NYHA II, III, IV) with chronic severe MR without LV dysfunction (LVEF < 0.30) and/or end-systolic dimension > 55 mm•	Asymptomatic patients with chronic severe MR and mild to moderate LV dysfunction  (LVEF 0.30–0.60) and/or end-systolic dimension ≥ 40 mm•	Asymptomatic patients with chronic severe MR and preserved LV function (LVEF > 0.60, end-systolic dimension < 40 mm), when the likelihood of successful MVr is > 90%•	Asymptomatic patients with chronic severe MR, preserved LV function, and 1) New onset atrial fibrillation, 2) Pulmonary hypertension (PASP > 50 mmHg at rest, > 60 mmHg with exercise)•	Symptomatic patients (NYHA III, IV) with chronic severe MR due to a primary abnormality of the mitral apparatus and severe LV dysfunction (LVEF < 0.30, end-systolic dimension  > 55 mm), when the likelihood of successful MVr is high•	Symptomatic patients (NYHA III, IV) with chronic severe MR secondary to severe LV dys-function (LVEF < 0.30) who remain symptomatic despite optimal medical management for heart failure, including biventricular pacing•	Asymptomatic patients with MR and preserved LV function (LVEF > 0.60, end-systolic dimension < 40 mm), when the likelihood of successful repair is low•	Isolated MV surgery in the setting of mild or moderate MRIIIIIaIIaIIaIIbIII – HarmIII – HarmBBBBCCCCCLV = left ventricular; LVEF = left ventricular ejection fraction; MR = mitral regurgitation; MS = mitral stenosis; MV = mitral valve; MVr = mitral valve repair; MVR = mitral valve replacement; NYHA = New York Heart Association; PASP = pulmonary artery systolic pressure; PAWP = pulmonary artery wedge pressure; a = mitral valve repair should be performed when possible in this population.Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   82001/03/19   5:32 PM 821ACQUIRED HEART DISEASECHAPTER 21predisposing to thrombus formation. Additionally, chronic vol-ume overload may lead to LV contractile dysfunction, result-ing in impaired ejection and end-systolic volume increases. LV dilatation and elevated LV end-diastolic pressures may also worsen throughout the progression of MR, reducing cardiac output and causing congestion of the pulmonary vasculature. These changes herald LV decompensation and heart failure and often indicate irreversible myocardial injury.Clinical Manifestations. In cases of acute severe MR, patients are often symptomatic and present with pulmonary congestion and reduced forward stroke volume. In severe cases, patients may present with cardiogenic shock.2 Because the LV has not remodeled in the acute setting, a hyperdynamic apical impulse may not be present in the precordium. The typical sys-tolic murmur of MR may be holosystolic or absent, with a third heart sound and/or diastolic flow murmur being the only aus-cultatory findings.In cases of chronic MR, patients may remain asymptom-atic for long periods of time due to the compensatory mecha-nisms of the remodeled LV. However, once the LV begins to fail, patients become increasingly symptomatic from exertional dyspnea, decreased exercise capacity, orthopnea, and eventu-ally pulmonary hypertension and right heart failure.2 Physical examination may demonstrate displacement of the LV apical impulse due to cardiac enlargement from chronic volume over-load, a third heart sound, or an early diastolic flow rumble. The characteristic auscultatory findings also include an apical sys-tolic murmur, which is variably transmitted to the axilla or the left sternal border, depending on the location of the pathology. As mentioned previously, patients may present with AF due to dilatation of the left atrium. Findings consistent with pulmonary hypertension frequently indicate late-stage disease.Diagnostic Studies. In the setting of acute heart failure, TTE should be performed and may demonstrate the anatomical loca-tion and severity of the MV pathology. However, TTE may underestimate lesion severity due to inadequate views of the color flow jet. In this case, severe MR should be suspected if hyperdy-namic systolic function of the LV is visualized, and TEE may be used to confirm the diagnosis and direct repair strategies.127In cases of chronic MR, ECG and chest X-ray are per-formed to assess rhythm status and the degree of pulmonary vascular congestion.96,98 An initial 2D and Doppler TTE should be performed for a baseline estimation of LV and left atrial size, LV systolic function, pulmonary artery pressure, MV morphol-ogy, and MR severity.128 A central color flow jet in the setting of a structurally normal MV on TTE suggests functional MR, which may be due to LV dilatation or tethering of the posterior leaflet in patients with ischemic heart disease. In the setting of organic MR (i.e., rheumatic and degenerative MR), which is suggested by the presence of an eccentric color flow jet and morphological abnormalities in the MV apparatus on TTE, the presence of calcium in the annulus or leaflets, the redundancy of the leaflets, and the anatomy of the MV pathology should be assessed. Follow-up TTE is indicated on an annual or semian-nual basis in patients with asymptomatic moderate to severe MR in order to assess changes from baseline parameters and direct the timing of surgery. Any abrupt change in signs or symp-toms in a patient with chronic MR is also an indication for TTE examination.98Additional preoperative studies are variably indicated in certain patient populations. Preoperative TEE is indicated in patients with indications for surgery or poor windows on TTE in order to determine the severity and anatomic basis of MR and to evaluate LV systolic function.96 Preoperative TEE is also indicated in cases when a discrepancy exists between a patient’s functional status and the severity of MR on TTE. It is helpful for preoperative planning when assessing the feasibility of repair in the individual patient. Exercise stress-echocardiography may also be useful to detect LV systolic dysfunction in well-compensated patients, who may not demonstrate a rise in the end-systolic dimension of the heart or a drop in ejection fraction on routine TTE.129 Coronary angiography should be performed prior to valve surgery in patients with evidence of ischemia, decreased LV systolic function, a history of coronary artery dis-ease or coronary risk factors, including postmenopausal status and age ≥40 in men and premenopausal women.98Indications for Operation. Based on the etiology, morphol-ogy, and severity of MR (see Table 21-8), MV repair, MV replacement with preservation of part or all of the mitral apparatus may be variably performed for the treatment of MR. As the intraoperative findings may dictate MV replacement whenever a MV repair is planned, current recommendations are for MV surgery in general (see Table 21-9).98Mitral Valve Operative Techniques and ResultsMitral valve surgery is performed on the arrested heart with the assistance of cardiopulmonary bypass. Traditionally, a median sternotomy incision has been used; however, the left atrium can also be approached via minimally invasive incisions, such as a right thoracotomy, or a fully endoscopic approach. The MV is commonly exposed through a left atrial incision placed poste-rior and parallel to the intra-atrial groove or via a transseptal approach through the right atrium.Commissurotomy. Upon opening the left atrium, the MV is visualized and the left atrium is examined for thrombus. A nerve hook or right-angle clamp is subsequently introduced beneath the commissures and used to evaluate the MV apparatus for leaflet mobility, commissural fusion, and subvalvular chordal abnormalities. The commissure is then carefully incised in a slightly anterior direction 2 to 3 mm at a time, making sure with each extension of the incision that the chordae tendineae remain attached to the commissural leaflets. The commissurotomy is generally stopped 1 to 2 mm from the annulus where the leaf-let tissue thins, indicating the transition to normal commissural tissue. The papillary muscles are subsequently examined and incised as necessary in order to maximize the mobility of the leaflets.After the commissurotomy is complete and the associated chordae tendineae and papillary muscles are mobilized, leaflet mobility is assessed. The anterior leaflet is grasped with forceps and brought through its complete range of motion. If subvalvu-lar restriction or leaflet rigidity is identified, further division or excision of fused chordae and debridement of calcium may be necessary. Occasionally, the leaflets can be debrided carefully to increase mobility. In rheumatic patients, the thickened leaf-lets can be thinned by careful dissection.130 Valve replacement may be more appropriate if extensive secondary mobilization is required. At the end of the procedure, competence of the valve is assessed with injection of cold saline into the ventricle.Open surgical commissurotomy has an operative risk of <1%, and has been shown to have good long-term results, with freedom from reoperation as high as 88.5%, 80.3%, and 78.7% at 10, 20, and 30 years, respectively.131 The incidence of 4Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   82101/03/19   5:32 PM 822SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 21-8. Mitral valve replacement. A St. Jude bileaflet mechanical valve is viewed through a left atriotomy.postoperative thromboembolic complications is generally <1% per patient-year, and the lack of required systemic anticoagula-tion precludes the development of hemorrhagic complications long term.132 In some institutions, balloon valvuloplasty has replaced commissurotomy.Mitral Valve Replacement. After exposing the valve, an inci-sion is made in the anterior mitral leaflet, in the midline. The chordal attachments are preserved if possible, with leaflet tis-sue being excised as needed. Attempts are made to preserve the annular and subvalvular apparatus when possible. If it is necessary to excise the anterior leaflet and chordae, the papil-lary muscles can be reattached to the annulus with PTFE suture. If possible, the posterior leaflet along with its associated sub-valvular structures are preserved. The annulus is subsequently sized, and an appropriate mitral prosthesis is implanted using pledgeted horizontal mattress sutures. The annular sutures may be placed from the atrial to the ventricular side, seating the valve intra-annularly, or from the ventricular to the atrial side, seating the valve in a supra-annular position. When placing the mattress sutures, care must be taken to stay within the annular tissue, as excessively deep bites may cause injury to critical structures such as the circumflex coronary artery posterolaterally, the atrioventricular node anteromedially, or the aortic valve antero-laterally. The sutures are subsequently placed through the sew-ing ring, and the valve prosthesis is lowered onto the annulus, where it is secured (Fig. 21-8).The factors associated with increased operative risk for MV replacement include age, left ventricular systolic dys-function, emergent procedure status, NYHA functional status, previous cardiac surgery, associated coronary artery disease, and concomitant disease in another valve. However, for most patients, MV replacement is associated with an operative mor-tality between 2% to 6%, and 65% to 70% 5-year survival.133,134 Although preservation of the mitral apparatus during MV replacement is important for subsequent left ventricular func-tion, there was no difference between complete and partial preservation with respect to 30-day and 5-year mortality.133 Mechanical valves are associated with increased durability compared to bioprosthetic valves, and they have demonstrated a freedom from reoperation of 98% vs. 79% at 15 years, respectively.135 Despite these findings, the choice of prosthetic valve depends on many factors and should be decided on a patient-by-patient basis.Mitral Valve Repair. There are many techniques available for MV repair that are variably used depending on the preoperative and intraoperative assessment of valvular pathology. On open-ing the atrium, the endocardium is examined for a jet lesion, a roughened area caused by a regurgitant jet striking the wall, in order to better localize the area of valvular insufficiency. The commissures are examined for evidence of prolapse, fusion, and malformation. The subvalvular apparatus and individual leaflets are subsequently examined, and areas of prolapse, restriction, fibrosis, and calcification are identified. Leaflet perforations are generally repaired primarily, or with a pericardial patch. The degree of annular dilation is also noted. The basic components of MV repair based on this assessment may include resection of the posterior and/or anterior leaflet, chordal shortening, chordal transposition, artificial chordal replacement, and annuloplasty. Recent trends have been toward leaflet preservation.One of the mainstays of MV repair is triangular resection of the posterior leaflet. Excision of the diseased leaflet tissue extends down towards but generally not to the mitral annulus. After repair has been completed, valvular competency is evalu-ated by injecting saline into the ventricle with a bulb syringe and assessing leaflet mobility and apposition. If focal insufficiency is identified in other areas, additional procedures are performed.The anterior leaflet may be repaired via chordal shorten-ing, chordal transposition, artificial chordal replacement, and triangular resection of the anterior leaflet. Chordal shortening has generally been abandoned in favor of chordal replacement. During chordal transposition, a resected portion of the posterior leaflet with attached chordae is transposed onto the prolapsed portion of the anterior leaflet to provide structural support, and this is followed by posterior leaflet repair, as described pre-viously. The procedure of artificial chordal replacement uses polytetrafluoroethylene sutures to attach the papillary muscle to the free edge of the prolapsing anterior leaflet. Triangular resection with primary repair of the anterior leaflet removes the prolapsing segment of the anterior MV leaflet, while preserv-ing adjacent chordal tissue, and may be especially helpful in patients with a ruptured chord or large amount of redundant anterior leaflet tissue.Annular dilation is generally corrected using a MV annu-loplasty device, such as a ring or partial band. Annuloplasty is known to improve the durability of all types of MV repair (Fig. 21-9).136 A number of devices are available and include rigid or semirigid rings that geometrically remodel the annulus, flexible rings or bands that restrict annular dilation while main-taining the physiologic sphincter motion of the annulus, and semirigid bands that provide a combination of annular remodel-ing and support of physiologic motion.Another technique known as the “double-orifice” or “edge-to-edge” repair was introduced by Alfieri in 1995, and it involves tacking the free edge of the anterior leaflet to the opposing free edge of the posterior leaflet.137 This procedure effectively gives the valve a double-orifice “bow tie” configura-tion, and it has been used as both a primary repair technique and an adjunct to other repair techniques, usually in cases of anterior leaflet pathology or Barlow’s disease. While some groups report excellent late results, its use remains controversial, and it is used mainly as a bail-out procedure of last resort in many centers.Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   82201/03/19   5:32 PM 823ACQUIRED HEART DISEASECHAPTER 21Figure 21-9. Mitral valve repair. The narrow arrow indicates the posterior leaflet repair, and the wide arrow indicates the ring annu-loplasty as viewed through a left atriotomy.Figure 21-10. Aortic stenosis. The aorta has been removed to demonstrate the thickened, fused aortic valve leaflets associated with rheumatic heart disease. (Reproduced with permission from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Edwin P. Ewing, Jr.)Due to the variety in operations and etiologies of MV dis-ease, there is heterogeneity in outcomes following MV repair. In general, the operative risk for elective, younger patients undergoing MV repair is <1%, and late results across a broad range of patients have demonstrated benefits in survival and valve-related complications, such as thromboembolic events, infective endocarditis, and anticoagulation-related hemorrhage, compared to MV replacement.116,138 Patients with MR due to degenerative disease have especially encouraging outcomes, demonstrating rates of survival and freedom from reoperation of >50% and >94% at 20 years, respectively.116 Historically, isolated anterior leaflet prolapse increased the risk of reopera-tion fivefold in this population. However, increasing experi-ence and the expanded use of chordal replacement has greatly improved these results in recent series.139 Independent predic-tors of mortality have included higher NYHA class, lower left ventricular ejection fraction, renal dysfunction, and age. Older patients have demonstrated slightly worse outcomes overall, with an operative mortality of approximately 4%, and a 10-year survival of 54% in patients ≥65 years of age. However, the superiority of repair over replacement persists even for patients >80 years of age.134Patients with rheumatic disease have demonstrated slightly worse outcomes, with one study showing significantly better freedom from operation at 10 years in patients with non-rheumatic MV disease (88% vs. 73%, P <0.005).140 Similarly, in patients with MR secondary to myocardial ischemia, there is growing recent evidence that mitral valve replacement may be significantly more durable than repair.141,142 Despite these differ-ences in outcomes, MV repair remains the procedure of choice for the majority of patients with amenable MV disease.Transcatheter Mitral Valve Repair and Replace-ment. Since the successful introduction of transcatheter aortic valve replacement, efforts have been made to translate the les-sons learned to treatment of the mitral valve. The first device to receive FDA approval for repair of severe mitral regurgitation due to degenerative mitral disease was the MitraClip (Abbott, Abbott Park, IL), introduced in 2003. This device allows a sur-geon or cardiologist to grasp the anterior and posterior leaflets of the mitral valve together, approximating the Alfieri double-orifice repair technique.143 Transcatheter mitral valve repair is now in clinical use in patients with chronic severe primary MR in whom surgery would be too great a risk, as judged by a heart team approach including a cardiologist skilled in structural heart intervention and an experienced mitral valve surgeon (see Table 21-9). In a recent randomized controlled trial comparing trans-catheter mitral valve repair to open surgical mitral valve repair, 20.1% (n = 37) of patients who received transcatheter mitral valve repair (n = 184) underwent second intervention with sur-gical mitral valve repair or replacement within 12 months com-pared with 2% (n = 2) of patients who underwent surgical repair (n = 95) (P <0.001).143,144 Surgical repair was associated with higher rates of blood transfusion and mechanical ventilation >48 hours but had otherwise equivalent safety. Other transcatheter techniques, including transcatheter mitral valve replacement, have begun clinical trials. This is an area of active research; however, at present, open surgical repair or replacement remains the standard of care for most patients.AORTIC VALVE DISEASEAortic StenosisEtiology. The most common cause of adult aortic stenosis (AS) is calcification of a normal trileaflet or congenital bicuspid aortic valve, particularly in patients >70 years of age. Another important cause of AS is rheumatic heart disease, which is par-ticularly common in developing countries (Fig. 21-10).Pathology. Calcific aortic valve disease, also known as senile or degenerative disease, is an age-related disorder characterized by lipid accumulation, proliferative and inflammatory changes, upregulation of angiotensin-converting enzyme activity, oxidative stress, and infiltration of macrophages and T lymphocytes.145 This process, which closely resembles atherosclerotic vascular calcification, initially results in bone formation within the base of the cusps, reducing leaflet motion. Calcification progresses to involve the leaflets, and eventually results in obstructive Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   82301/03/19   5:32 PM 824SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 21-10Data from ACC/AHA guidelines for the classification of the severity of aortic valve disease in adultsAORTIC STENOSISINDICATORMILDMODERATESEVEREJet velocity (m per s)< 303.0–4.0> 40Mean gradient (mmHg)a< 2525–40> 4.0Valve area (cm2)> 1.51.0–1.5< 1.0Valve area index (cm2 per m2)  < 0.6AORTIC REGURGITATIONQUALITATIVEMILDMODERATESEVEREAngiographic grade1+2+3–4+Color Doppler jet widthCentral jet, width < 25% of left ventricular outflow tractGreater than mild, but no signs of severe regurgitationCentral jet, width >65% of left ventricular outflow tractDoppler vena contracta width (cm)< 0.30.3–0.6> 0.6QUANTITATIVE (CATH OR ECHO)Regurgitant volume (ml per beat)< 3030–59≥ 60Regurgitant fraction (%)< 3030–49≥ 50Regurgitant orifice area (cm2)< 0.10.1–0.29≥ 0.3ADDITIONAL ESSENTIAL CRITERIALeft ventricular size  EnlargedaValve gradients are flow dependent and when used as estimates of severity of valve stenosis should be assessed with knowledge of cardiac output or forward flow across the valve.disease, with a reduced effective valve area without signs of leaflet fusion.Pathophysiology. In general, once moderate AS is present, the average rate of progression includes an increase in jet velocity of 0.3 m/s per year, an increase in mean pressure gradient of 7 mmHg per year, and a decrease in valve area of 0.1 cm2 per year (Table 21-10).96 In most adult patients with AS, obstruction develops gradually and includes a long latent period free from symptoms. During this time, the LV typically hypertrophies in response to systolic pressure overload, and normal intracavi-tary volume is maintained.146 Afterload, which is defined as left ventricular systolic wall stress, and thus ejection fraction remain normal early in this process as the increase in myocardial thickness is usually enough to counter the increased intracavi-tary systolic pressures. Patients without a typical hypertrophic response to systolic pressure overload or with a depressed con-tractile state of the myocardium do not follow the common clini-cal course, but they experience an early decrease in ejection fraction due to excessively increased afterload without a com-pensatory response.147Concentric LV hypertrophy without chamber dilatation eventually leads to increased end-diastolic pressures and dia-stolic dysfunction. Forceful atrial contraction in the face of elevated end-diastolic pressures becomes an important compo-nent of ventricular filling, even as mean left atrial and pulmo-nary venous pressures remain in the normal range. Disorders such as atrial fibrillation that disrupt atrial contraction can lead to clinical deterioration. Although systolic function is gener-ally preserved long into the natural history of the disease, left ventricular decompensation eventually occurs in the setting of longstanding increased afterload and is an indication for surgery even in the absence of other symptoms.Although concentric hypertrophy is a compensatory mech-anism to maintain ejection fraction in the face of high intracavi-tary pressures, the hypertrophied heart becomes increasingly vulnerable to ischemic injury. Coronary blood flow may become inadequate, despite the absence of epicardial coronary artery disease.148 Coronary vasodilation is mitigated by the hypertro-phied myocardium, and the hemodynamic stress of exercise or tachyarrhythmias can lead to subendocardial ischemia and  further systolic or diastolic dysfunction. When ischemic insults occur, patients with ventricular hypertrophy experience larger infarcts and higher mortality rates than those without  hypertrophy.149 In some patients, ventricular hypertrophy occurs in excess of what is needed to compensate for increased intra-cavitary pressures, creating a high-output state that is also asso-ciated with increased perioperative morbidity and mortality.150Clinical Manifestations. The characteristic auscultatory findings of AS include a harsh, crescendo-decrescendo systolic murmur at the right second or third intercostal space, often with radiation to the carotid arteries.2 As the disease progresses, aor-tic valve closure may follow pulmonic valve closure, causing paradoxical splitting of the second heart sound. Other physical findings associated with AS include an apical impulse com-monly described as a “prolonged heave,” and the presence of a narrow and sustained peripheral pulse, known as pulsus parvus et tardus.The classic symptoms of AS are exertional dyspnea, angina, and syncope.2 Although many patients are diagnosed prior to the onset of symptoms, the most common clinical Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   82401/03/19   5:32 PM 825ACQUIRED HEART DISEASECHAPTER 21presentation in patients with a known diagnosis of AS is wors-ening exertional dyspnea. Angina occurs in over half of patients with AS and is due to the increased oxygen demand of the hypertrophied myocardium in the setting of reduced oxygen supply secondary to coronary compression. Although some patients may have concomitant coronary disease, angina occurs without significant epicardial coronary artery disease in half of all patients with AS.151 Syncope is most common during exer-tion, as systemic vasodilation in the setting of a fixed cardiac output causes decreased cerebral perfusion. However, at times, it may occur at rest secondary to paroxysmal atrial fibrillation and subsequent loss of atrial booster pump function. Late find-ings of AS include atrial fibrillation, pulmonary hypertension, systemic venous hypertension, and, rarely, sudden death.Diagnostic Studies. Evidence of LV hypertrophy is found in approximately 85% of patients with AS on routine ECG, though the correlation between the absolute electrocardiographic volt-ages in precordial leads and the severity of AS is poor.2 ECG also may demonstrate signs of left atrial enlargement and vari-ous forms and degrees of atrioventricular or intraventricular block due to calcific infiltration of the conduction system. Rou-tine chest X-ray usually demonstrates a normal heart size, with rounding of the left ventricular border and apex. A late finding on chest X-ray is cardiac enlargement, or cardiomegaly, a sign of LV failure.Transthoracic echocardiography is indicated in all patients with a systolic murmur graded ≥2/6, a single second heart sound, or symptoms characteristic of AS.98 Initial TTE examinations are often diagnostic and provide an assessment of left ventricular size and function, the degree of left ventricular hypertrophy, the degree of valvular calcification, and the pres-ence of other associated valvular disease. Doppler evaluation should be performed to define the maximum jet velocity, which is a useful measure for following disease severity and predict-ing clinical outcome.2 Additionally, color flow Doppler assesses the severity of the stenotic lesion by allowing calculation of the mean transvalvular pressure gradient and effective valve orifice area (see Table 21-10).98 Follow-up TTE is indicated depending on the severity of AS in order to assess changes from baseline parameters and direct the timing of surgery: yearly for severe AS; every 1 to 2 years for moderate AS; and every 3 to 5 years for mild AS. Any abrupt change in signs or symptoms in a patient with AS is an indication for TTE examination.Additional preoperative studies may be necessary in some patients. Rarely, when TTE images are suboptimal, TEE or fluo-roscopy may be indicated to assess the degree of valve calcifica-tion and effective valve orifice area. As in other patients with valvular heart disease, coronary angiography should be per-formed prior to aortic valve surgery in most patients.98 Since the symptoms of AS often mimic those of ischemic heart disease, left heart catheterization and coronary angiography may be nec-essary at the initial evaluation in patients with AS. Stress echo-cardiography may also be useful in the asymptomatic patient with AS in order to elicit exercise-induced symptoms or abnor-mal blood pressure responses during exertion. It is also useful in the evaluation of low-gradient AS in patients with depressed LV function.98 However, exercise stress-echocardiography is con-traindicated in patients with ischemic heart disease.98 In patients with evidence of aortic root disease by TTE, chest computed tomography is useful in evaluating aortic dilatation at several anatomic levels and is necessary for clinical decision making and surgical planning.2Indications for Operation. Based on the severity of AS (see Table 21-10) and the predicted risk with surgical aortic valve replacement (SAVR) determined using the STS risk calculator, SAVR or transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) may be recommended for the treatment of AS (Table 21-11).98,152 As this field is rapidly evolving, attention to guideline updates and a multidisciplinary heart team approach to risk stratification and treatment selection are mandatory. In patients with severe calcific AS, AVR via either approach is the only effective treat-ment, though controversy exists as to the timing of intervention in asymptomatic patients. Balloon aortic valvuloplasty creates a modest hemodynamic effect and temporary symptom improve-ment in patients with calcific AS. However, the procedure has not been shown to affect long-term outcomes and is often used in hemodynamically unstable patients as a bridge to AVR.98Aortic InsufficiencyEtiology. The most common cause of isolated aortic insuffi-ciency (AI) in patients undergoing AVR is aortic root disease, and it represents over 50% of such patients in some studies.2 Other common causes of AI include congenital abnormalities of the aortic valve such as bicuspid aortic valve, calcific degenera-tion, rheumatic disease, infective endocarditis, systemic hyper-tension, myxomatous degeneration, dissection of the ascending aorta, and Marfan syndrome. Less common causes of AI include traumatic injuries to the aortic valve, ankylosing spondylitis, syphilitic aortitis, rheumatoid arthritis, osteogenesis imperfecta, giant cell aortitis, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, Reiter’s syndrome, discrete subaortic stenosis, and ventricular septal defects with prolapse of an aortic cusp.96 Although most of these lesions produce chronic aortic insufficiency, rarely acute severe aortic regurgitation can result, often with devastating consequences.Pathology. Regardless of its cause, AI produces volume over-load with dilation and hypertrophy of the left ventricle and sub-sequent dilation of the MV annulus. Depending on the severity of AI, the left atrium may undergo dilation and hypertrophy as well. Frequently, the regurgitant jet causes endocardial lesions at the site of impact on the left ventricular wall.Diseases causing AI can be classified as primary disorders of the aortic valve leaflets and/or disorders involving the wall of the aortic root. Diseases causing dilation of the ascending aorta are a more common indication for AVR due to isolated AI, and they include disorders such as age-related (degenera-tive) aortic dilation, cystic medial necrosis of the aorta as is seen in Marfan syndrome, aortic dilation secondary to bicuspid valves, and aortic dissection, to name a few.153 In these disor-ders, the aortic annulus becomes dilated, causing separation of the valve leaflets and subsequent AI. The diseased aortic wall may dissect secondarily and further escalate regurgitation across the valve, and secondary thickening and shortening of the valve cusps may occur due to undue tension placed on the valvular apparatus by the dilated aortic root. As the disease progresses, the valve leaflets become too small to close the aortic orifice, causing further aortic insufficiency and exacerbating dilation of the ascending aorta.There are also many primary valvular diseases that cause AI, generally in association with AS. One such disorder is age-related calcific AS, which causes some degree of AI in up to 75% of patients.154 Infective endocarditis may involve the aortic valve apparatus and cause AI through direct destruction of the valve leaflets, perforation of a leaflet, or formation of vegetations that interfere with proper coaptation of the valve Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   82501/03/19   5:32 PM 826SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 21-11Data from ACC/AHA guidelines for AV surgery in specific clinical contextsCLINICAL SETTINGCLASS OF RECOMMENDATIONLEVEL OF EVIDENCEBalloon Valvotomy for Aortic Stenosis• Bridge to surgery in hemodynamically unstable patients with AS at high risk for AVRIIbC• Palliation in adult patients with AS, who are not candidates for AVRIIbC• Alternative to AVR in adult patients with ASIII – HarmBSurgery for Aortic Stenosis• Symptomatic patients with severe ASIB• Severe AS in the setting of1) Concomitant CABG2) Concomitant valvular or aortic surgery3) LV systolic dysfunction (LVEF <0.50)IC• Moderate AS in the setting of1) Concomitant CABG2) Concomitant valvular or aortic surgeryIIaB• Asymptomatic patients with severe AS and• Abnormal response to exercise• High likelihood of rapid progression• High likelihood of delay if surgery is withheld until time of symptom onset• Expected operative mortality ≤1.0%IIbC• Mild AS in patients undergoing CABG, when there is high likelihood of rapid progressionIIbC• AVR for prevention of sudden death in asymptomatic patients with AS without any of the findings aboveIII – HarmBSurgery for Aortic Insufficiency• Symptomatic patients with severe AIIB• Asymptomatic patients with chronic severe AI in the setting of1) Concomitant CABG2) Concomitant valvular or aortic surgery3) LV systolic dysfunction (LVEF ≤0.50)ICCB• Asymptomatic patients with severe AI, normal LV systolic function (LVEF >0.50), but severe LV dilatation (end-diastolic dimension >75 mm, end-systolic dimension >55 mm)IIaB• Moderate AI in the setting of1) Concomitant CABG2) Concomitant surgery on the ascending aortaIIbC• Asymptomatic patients with severe AI, normal LV systolic function at rest (LVEF >0.50), and LV dilatation (end-diastolic dimension ≥70 mm, end-systolic dimension ≥50 mm) in the setting of1) Progressive LV dilatation2) Declining exercise tolerance3) Abnormal hemodynamic responses to exerciseIIbC• Asymptomatic patients with mild, moderate, or severe AI and normal LV systolic function (LVEF >0.50), when the degree of LV dilatation is not moderate or severe (end-diastolic dimension <70 mm, end-systolic dimension <50 mm)III – HarmBAS = aortic stenosis; AVR = aortic valve replacement; CABG = coronary artery bypass grafting; LV = left ventricular; LVEF = left ventricular ejection fraction; NYHA = New York Heart Association.cusps. Rheumatic disease causes fibrous infiltration of the valve cusps and subsequent retraction of the valve leaflets, inhibiting apposition of the cusps during diastole and producing a central regurgitant jet. Patients with large ventricular septal defects or membranous subaortic stenosis may develop progressive AI, owing to a Venturi effect that results in prolapse of the aortic valve leaflets.Pathophysiology. The basic pathophysiologic abnormality of AI is the retrograde flow of a portion of the LV stroke volume into the LV during diastole, producing volume overload.Acute severe AI results most commonly from infective endocarditis, acute aortic dissection, or trauma, and it causes a sudden volume overload of the left ventricle.54 Although an acute increase in preload provides a small increase in overall Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   82601/03/19   5:32 PM 827ACQUIRED HEART DISEASECHAPTER 21stroke volume due to the Starling mechanism, the left ventricle often is unable to accommodate the large regurgitant volume and maintain forward stroke volume in the acute setting due to a lack of remodeling. Left ventricular end-diastolic and left atrial pressures increase dramatically as the LV is unable to develop compensatory chamber dilation. Although tachycardia develops as a compensatory mechanism to maintain forward flow, this attempt is often inadequate, and patients frequently present in heart failure and even cardiogenic shock. Moreover, subendo-cardial myocardial ischemia frequently develops as a result of decreased coronary diastolic perfusion pressures and increased LV end-diastolic pressure, as well as increased myocardial oxy-gen demand due to acute dilation. In the setting of a chronic ventricular hypertrophy and preexisting diastolic dysfunction, the pressure-volume relationship is even more extreme, exacer-bating the hemodynamic derangements seen in acute AI.Chronic AI generally has a more indolent course, with vol-ume overload of the LV causing compensatory increases in left ventricular end-diastolic volume and chamber compliance as well as a combination of eccentric and concentric hypertrophy.155 Compensatory remodeling of the LV allows for accommodation of the regurgitant volume without a significant increase in fill-ing pressures and maintains the preload reserve of the cham-ber. Eccentric left ventricular hypertrophy develops, permitting normal contractile performance across the enlarged chamber circumference and subsequent ejection of a larger total stroke volume in order to maintain forward flow, despite the regurgi-tant fraction.155,156 However, the enlarged chamber size results in an increase in systolic myocardial wall stress and causes further ventricular hypertrophy. As the disease progresses, recruitment of preload reserve and compensatory hypertrophy maintains ejection fraction within the normal range despite elevated after-load, causing many patients to remain asymptomatic throughout the compensatory phase.155,157Eventually, left ventricular compensatory mechanisms fail, and systolic dysfunction ensues. As the disease progresses, preload reserve may become exhausted, the hypertrophic response may become inadequate, and impaired myocardial contractility may develop so that ejection fraction begins to decline.158 Although left ventricular systolic dysfunction related to excessive afterload is reversible early in the course, irrevers-ible damage occurs once chamber enlargement predominates as the primary cause of diminished myocardial contractility.Clinical Manifestations. In cases of acute severe AI, patients are symptomatic and invariably present with compensatory tachycardia, often associated with acute pulmonary congestion and cardiogenic shock.2 Because the left ventricular and aortic pressures often equalize before the end of diastole, the diastolic murmur of AI may be short and/or soft. The reduced systolic pressure may attenuate the increase in peripheral pulse pressure seen in chronic AI, and early closing of the mitral valve due to elevated left ventricular end-diastolic pressures may diminish the intensity of the first heart sound in the acute setting.In patients with chronic AI, symptoms of heart fail-ure and myocardial ischemia develop after the compensatory phase.2 Patients gradually begin to complain of exertional dys-pnea, fatigue, orthopnea, and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, often after significant myocardial dysfunction has developed. Angina is a common complaint late in the course, especially during sleep when heart rate slows and arterial diastolic pres-sure falls. Patients also may experience exertional angina secondary to diminished coronary perfusion in the setting of myocardial hypertrophy. Occasionally, the compensatory tachy-cardia that develops with chronic AI will cause palpitations, and the increased pulse pressure will cause a sensation of pound-ing in the patient’s head. Peripherally, the widened pulse pres-sure causes a forceful, bounding, and quickly collapsing pulse known as Corrigan’s water-hammer pulse. Premature ventricu-lar contractions have been reported to cause particularly trou-bling symptoms, owing to the heave of the volume-loaded left ventricle during the postextrasystolic beat. The classic ausculta-tory finding associated with AI is a high-pitched decrescendo diastolic murmur heard best in the left third intercostal space; an associated S3 gallop is often indicative of late disease. The Austin Flint murmur has also been described, and it is heard as a middiastolic rumble at the apex that simulates mitral stenosis and occurs in severe AI when the regurgitant jet impedes mitral valve leaflet opening.Diagnostic Studies. In the acute setting, TTE should be per-formed to confirm the presence and severity of aortic regurgita-tion, the degree of pulmonary hypertension, and the cause of valvular dysfunction.98 When aortic dissection is suspected as the cause of acute AI, TEE or chest CT angiography may be substituted if more readily available.159,160 In these patients with confirmed aortic dissection, cardiac catheterization and coro-nary angiography are rarely indicated and can delay life-saving urgent surgical intervention.In cases of chronic AI, the ECG frequently demonstrates left axis deviation and, late in the course, intraventricular con-duction defects associated with left ventricular dysfunction. On chest X-ray, the left ventricle enlarges predominantly in an infe-rior and leftward direction, causing marked increase in the long axis diameter of the heart, frequently with little or no change in the transverse diameter. The chest X-ray should be examined for aneurysmal dilation of the aorta.2 An initial TTE should be performed to confirm the diagnosis and severity of AI, assess the cause of AI (including valve morphology and aortic root size and morphology), and assess the degree of left ventricular hypertrophy, volume, and systolic function.98 Follow-up TTE is indicated on an annual or semiannual basis in patients with asymptomatic moderate to severe AI in order to assess changes from baseline parameters and direct the timing of surgery. Any abrupt change in signs or symptoms in a patient with chronic AI is an indication for TTE examination.Additional preoperative studies are indicated in certain patient populations.98 In patients with poor windows on TTE, TEE or MRI is indicated for initial and serial assessment of AI severity and left ventricular volume and function at rest. In symptomatic patients with chronic AI, it is reasonable to pro-ceed directly to TEE or cardiac catheterization if TTE examina-tions are inadequate. Exercise stress testing may be helpful for an assessment of functional capacity and symptomatic responses in patients with equivocal symptoms. Coronary angiography should be performed prior to valve surgery in most patients.98Indications for Operation. Based on the morphology and severity of valve dysfunction (see Table 21-10), AV repair or replacement may be performed for the treatment of AI (see Table 21-11).96 Although the indications for AV repair and AV replacement do not differ, it is recommended that AV repair be performed only in those surgical centers that have developed the appropriate technical expertise, gained experience in patient selection, and which have demonstrated outcomes equivalent to those of valve replacement.Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   82701/03/19   5:32 PM 828SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIAortic Valve Operative Techniques and ResultsAortic valve surgery has traditionally been performed through a median sternotomy with the assistance of cardiopulmonary bypass. However, minimally invasive incisions for aortic valve surgery have been introduced, including mini-sternotomy and mini-thoracotomy approaches. After the aorta is cross-clamped, cold blood cardioplegia is delivered antegrade through the aortic root and/or retrograde through the coronary sinus.Aortic Valve Replacement. During aortic valve replacement, an aortotomy is performed, extending medially from approxi-mately 1 to 2 cm above the right coronary artery and inferiorly into the noncoronary sinus. The valve is completely excised. The annulus is thoroughly debrided of calcium deposits. At this point, the annulus is sized and an appropriate prosthesis is selected. Pledgeted horizontal mattress sutures are then placed into the aortic valve annulus and subsequently through the sew-ing ring of the prosthetic valve, taking care to avoid damage to the coronary ostia, the conduction system, and the MV appara-tus. The annular sutures may be placed from below the annulus, seating the valve supra-annularly, or from above the annulus for intra-annular placement (Fig. 21-11).The major components to increased operative risk associ-ated with surgical AVR include age, body surface area, diabetes, renal failure, hypertension, chronic lung disease, peripheral vas-cular disease, neurologic events, infectious endocarditis, previ-ous cardiac surgery, myocardial infarction, cardiogenic shock, NYHA functional status, and pulmonary hypertension. For most patients, the risk of operative mortality associated with AVR is 1% to 5%, and 5-year survival has been reported to be >80%, even in patients >70 years of age.138-161 The choice of valve is dependent on many patient-related factors, and it is accompa-nied by the attendant postoperative risks of decreased durability and thromboembolic vs. hemorrhagic complications for biologi-cal and mechanical valves, respectively.Aortic Valve Repair. Although aortic valve replacement is performed more commonly, AV repair may be recommended at centers of excellence.96For patients with aortoannular ectasia, AI is due to annular dilatation and distortion of the sinotubular junction. For these Figure 21-11. Aortic valve replacement. The stented porcine bio-prosthesis as viewed through an aortotomy.patients, competence of the aortic valve can be achieved by functionally repairing the annulus in a method analogous to homograft implantation. The aneurysmal portion of the aor-tic root is excised, and the aortic valve is reimplanted inside a tubular Dacron graft, with concomitant reimplantation of the coronary arteries. Alternatively, the aneurysmal tissue and supravalvular tissue can be excised in their entirety, with subse-quent implantation of the Dacron graft onto the superior aspect of the annulus and reimplantation of the coronary arteries.Valve-sparing root replacement for root and annular sta-bilization in patients with AI due to aortoannular ectasia has led to a more durable outcome than is seen with subcommis-sural annuloplasty or leaflet-related procedures alone. One study demonstrated equivalent overall survival between patients undergoing subcommissural annuloplasty or aortic valve repair without annuloplasty and patients undergoing valve-sparing root replacement at 6 years.162 However, patients who under-went valve-sparing root replacement had higher freedom from reoperation and aortic insufficiency >2+ (100% vs. 90%, P = 0.03; and 100% vs. 77%, P = 0.002, respectively) at midterm follow-up.162For patients with AI associated with redundant leaflet tis-sue, aortic valve repair may be accomplished with free margin plication or resuspension of the valve cusps, with or without triangular resection of the redundant segment. Excision of the diseased portion of the involved valve cusp improves symme-try of the valve leaflets, and annular plication of one or both commissures helps to ensure adequate coaptation. Generally, the free margins of the excised leaflets are reapproximated pri-marily, but in the absence of adequate cusp tissue, a triangular autologous or bovine pericardial patch may be used for cusp restoration.AV cusp repair with a free margin plication or resuspen-sion technique has demonstrated encouraging results in expert centers, both in patients with tricuspid and bicuspid aortic valves. Freedom from AV reoperation in patients with a tricus-pid AV has been reported to be 89% to 92% at 10 years, with a freedom from recurrent AI >2+ of 80% to 86% at the same time point. In patients with bicuspid aortic valves, who gener-ally represent a younger cohort of patients, 10-year survival has been reported at 94% following AV repair, with a freedom from AV reoperation of 81% at the same time point.163Ross Procedure. As mentioned previously, the Ross procedure involves replacing the diseased AV with the patient’s native pulmonary valve as an autograft, which is in turn replaced with a homograft in the pulmonic position.112 The autograft may be implanted in the aortic position directly with resuspension of the valve commissures, or in association with a root replacement, which requires reimplantation of the coronary ostia.The cylinder root replacement technique is most reproduc-ible and involves transecting the native aorta approximately 5 mm above the sinotubular ridge, with subsequent excision of the aortic valve leaflets and supra-annular tissue. The main pulmonary artery is transected at the bifurcation, and the right ventricular outflow tract is incised, allowing the pulmonary valve and artery to be removed en bloc from the outflow tract. The annulus of the pulmonary autograft is sewn to the native aortic annulus with continuous or interrupted sutures, and the coronary ostia are reimplanted into the pulmonary artery graft. The pulmonary valve and right ventricular outflow tract are subsequently reconstructed using an aortic homograft.Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   82801/03/19   5:32 PM 829ACQUIRED HEART DISEASECHAPTER 21The primary benefit of the Ross procedure compared to traditional AV surgery is a low risk of thromboembolism with-out the need for systemic anticoagulation. Although patients undergoing the Ross procedure are generally younger, periop-erative mortality has been reported to be as low as 2.5% in this group, with an overall survival of 90% at 18-year follow-up.164 However, the long-term durability of the procedure is somewhat questionable. Although Ross reported a freedom from autograft replacement of 75% at 20 years, other groups have reported freedom from autograft reoperation and allograft reinterven-tion of 51% and 82%, respectively, at 18-year follow-up.164,165 Progressive aortic insufficiency has been described as a cause of late failure in these patients, as well as calcification of the pulmonary homograft and pulmonary stenosis.Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement. Transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) has proven beneficial for the treatment of AS in patients who are either moderate or high-risk candidates for conventional surgery. TAVR is now indicated for patients with severe AS with a STS score predicted risk of mortality of greater than or equal to 3%.152 Clinical trials in the low-risk population are currently underway.There are two types of transcatheter valves that are approved for commercial use: a balloon-expandable valve (Edwards) and a self-expandable valve (CoreValve). A trans-catheter valve may be inserted via the femoral artery, the left subclavian artery, the ascending thoracic aorta via an upper mini-sternotomy, or LV apex via a small left anterior thoracot-omy. By far the most common route is transfemoral, making up the majority of TAVR in most centers. The principle of valves placed via these routes are to place the aortic prosthesis inside the patient’s native aortic valve. Rigorous preoperative plan-ning is needed to ensure adequate sizing of the valve as well as placement to ensure there is no risk of coronary occlusion or malalignment of the valve.A series of large, multicenter clinical trials have been per-formed investigating the role and safety of TAVR in patients with severe aortic stenosis requiring surgical treatment. The PARTNER I trial looked at mortality rate as the primary endpoint in patients with severe aortic stenosis who were not suitable can-didates for surgery (high-risk patients).166 TAVR, as compared with standard surgical treatment (SAVR), significantly reduced the rates of death from any cause (30.7% vs. 50.7%, at 1 year, P <0.001), the composite endpoint of death from any cause or repeat hospitalization (42.5% vs. 71.6%, P <0.001), and cardiac symptoms (25.2% vs. 58.0%, P <0.001), despite the higher inci-dence of major strokes (5.0% vs. 1.1%, P = 0.06) and major vas-cular events (16.2% vs. 1.1%, P <0.001).166 In the PARTNER II trial, 2032 intermediate-risk patients with severe aortic stenosis were randomly assigned to undergo either TAVR or SAVR.167 It was found that in intermediate-risk patients, TAVR was simi-lar to SAVR with respect to the primary end point of death or disabling stroke (P = 0.001 for noninferiority). TAVR resulted in larger aortic valve areas than did surgery and also resulted in lower rates of acute kidney injury, severe bleeding, and new-onset atrial fibrillation; surgery resulted in fewer major vascu-lar complications and less paravalvular aortic regurgitation.167 Similarly, the Surgical or Transcatheter Aortic-Valve Replace-ment in Intermediate-Risk patients trial (SURTAVI) evaluated the clinical outcomes in intermediate-risk patients with severe, symptomatic aortic stenosis in a randomized trial comparing TAVR (performed with the use of a self-expanding prosthesis) 5with surgical aortic-valve replacement.168 TAVR was found to be a noninferior (i.e., similar composite endpoint of death from any cause or disabling stroke at 24 months) alternative to surgery in patients with severe aortic stenosis at intermediate surgical risk, with a different pattern of adverse events associ-ated with each procedure. Surgery was associated with higher rates of acute kidney injury, atrial fibrillation, and transfusion requirements, whereas TAVR had higher rates of residual aor-tic regurgitation and need for pacemaker implantation.168 The PARTNER III trial, currently under investigation, is designed to establish the safety and effectiveness of TAVR in patients with severe, calcific aortic stenosis who are at low operative risk for standard surgical aortic valve replacement (SAVR). Ongoing trials will continue to define the roles for SAVR and TAVR in the future.TRICUSPID VALVE DISEASETricuspid Stenosis and InsufficiencyEtiology. Acquired tricuspid valve (TV) disease can be clas-sified as either organic or functional and affects approximately 0.8% of the general population.169 Tricuspid stenosis (TS) is almost always a result of rheumatic heart disease or rarely endo-carditis. In the case of rheumatic disease, tricuspid stenosis with or without associated insufficiency is invariably associated with mitral valve disease. Other less common causes of obstruction to right atrial emptying include congenital tricuspid atresia, right atrial tumors, and endomyocardial fibrosis.Tricuspid insufficiency (TR), on the other hand, is most often a functional disease caused by secondary dilation of the tricuspid annulus due to pulmonary hypertension and/or right heart failure. This is most commonly caused by MV disease. Conditions such as right ventricular infarction and pulmonic stenosis can also lead to increased right ventricular pressures and functional TR. The less common causes of organic TR, with or without associated stenosis, include endocarditis, carcinoid syndrome, radiation therapy, trauma such as repeated endomyo-cardial biopsy, and Marfan syndrome.Pathology. The changes associated with TS closely resemble those associated with MS, including fusion of the commissures.169 In the case of rheumatic disease, mixed TS and TR may result from fusion and shortening of the chordae tendineae, and fusion of the commissures, causing retraction of the valve leaflets. The right atrium is frequently dilated and thickened in chronic TS, and chronic obstruction to right ventricular filling often produces signs of systemic venous congestion such as hepatomegaly and splenomegaly.2In most cases of TR, dilation and deformation of the tri-cuspid annulus is the most prominent feature; the valve leaflets oftentimes appear stretched but are otherwise pliable and nor-mal in appearance.2 When TR is caused by carcinoid syndrome, white fibrous carcinoid plaques are found on the ventricular sur-faces of the TV, causing the cusps to adhere to the underlying right ventricular wall and stenting the valve open.2Pathophysiology. The basic pathophysiologic abnormality of both TS and severe TR is elevated right atrial pressure, produc-ing systemic congestion and right heart failure. Severe TS is marked by a valve area <1.0 cm2, and severe TR is defined as a vena contracta width of >0.7 cm in combination with sys-tolic flow reversal in the hepatic veins.98 However, in patients with TS, a diastolic pressure gradient of only 5 mmHg, or a TV Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   82901/03/19   5:32 PM 830SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 21-12Data from ACC/AHA guidelines for TV surgery in specific clinical contextsCLINICAL SETTINGCLASS OF RECOMMENDATIONLEVEL OF EVIDENCESurgery for Tricuspid Valve Disease• TVr for severe TI in patients with MV disease requiring MV surgeryIB• TVR or annuloplasty for severe symptomatic primary TIIIaC• TVR for severe TI secondary to diseased/abnormal TV leaflets not amenable to annuloplasty or TVrIIaC• Annuloplasty for less than severe TI in patients undergoing MV surgery in the setting of1) Pulmonary hypertension2) Tricuspid annular dilatationIIbC• TVR or annuloplasty is not indicated in asymptomatic patients with TI, a normal MV, and a PASP <60 mmHgIII – HarmC• TVR or annuloplasty is not indicated in patients with mild primary TIIII – HarmCMV = mitral valve; PASP = pulmonary artery systolic pressure; TI = tricuspid insufficiency; TV = tricuspid valve; TVr = tricuspid valve repair;  TVR = tricuspid valve replacement.orifice <1.5 cm2, is frequently enough to cause jugular venous distention, organomegaly, and peripheral edema. In severe cases, cardiac output is compromised, especially during exercise when the fixed obstruction prevents an increase in forward flow. Patients with severe insufficiency and pulmonary hypertension experience similar hemodynamic derangements.Clinical Manifestations. Patients with TS and severe TR develop symptoms of right heart failure associated with chroni-cally elevated right atrial pressures.2 The classic clinical signs and symptoms of TS and severe TR are jugular venous disten-tion, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, ascites, and lower extremity edema. Uncomfortable fluttering in the neck has been reported in patients with TV disease, and sensations of throbbing in the eyeballs and pulsatile varicose veins have been reported to occur, especially in patients with severe TR.The low cardiac output syndrome occasionally associated with TS and severe TR can cause fatigue, weakness, and exer-cise intolerance in these patients. In the absence of pulmonary hypertension, dyspnea is not a prominent feature of tricuspid disease. The auscultatory findings associated with TS include a presystolic and middiastolic murmur characterized by a tri-cuspid opening snap that increases on inspiration. The lower left parasternal murmur of TR may be holosystolic or less than holosystolic, depending on the degree of regurgitation, may be associated with a middiastolic murmur in severe cases, and may increase on inspiration.Diagnostic Studies. In patients with TV disease, chest X-ray frequently demonstrates enlargement of the right atrium and ventricle. Patients with TS demonstrate an exaggerated a wave and a diminished rate of y descent in the jugular venous pulse, while patients with TR have abnormal systolic c and v waves.2 TTE examination should be performed in patients with TV disease in order to characterize the structure and motion of the TV, the size of the tricuspid annulus, and other cardiac abnormalities that may affect TV function.98 In patients with a pulmonary artery systolic pressure >55 mmHg, TI commonly occurs in the setting of structurally normal valves; however, structural derangement of the TV apparatus is frequently present if TR is documented with a pulmonary artery systolic pressure <40 mmHg. Doppler TTE allows estimations of the severity of TR, the right ventricular systolic pressure, and the TV diastolic gradient.Indications for Operation. As an isolated lesion, mild or moderate TV disease does not require surgical correction. How-ever, patients with severe TV disease should be considered for surgical intervention, especially in the setting of right ventricu-lar enlargement and impaired systolic function, as this improves life expectancy and the development of sequelae such as heart failure and atrial fibrillation.169 Depending on the patient’s clini-cal status and the cause of TV dysfunction, TV repair and TV replacement be variably recommended for the treatment of TV dysfunction (Table 21-12).98 In patients with TR, the valve can usually be repaired with modern techniques.Operative Techniques and Results. The TV can be approached through a median sternotomy, a right thoracotomy, or port-based techniques. Surgery is performed with the assis-tance of cardiopulmonary bypass and, though TV surgery is usually performed on the beating heart, a brief period of car-dioplegic arrest may be rarely needed to allow for complete inspection of the interatrial septum and to close any defects that may be present.TV repair may include a suture or ring annuloplasty as well as valvuloplasty, and multiple methods have been described.169 Historically, bicuspidization of the TV was accomplished by a figure-of-eight suture plication of the annulus of the posterior leaflet; however, this technique has been essentially replaced by suture or ring annuloplasty. Suture annuloplasty is gener-ally performed by placing pledgeted sutures along the base of the anterior and posterior leaflets, partially encircling the annulus. Ring annuloplasty can be accomplished by suturing the TV annulus to a variety of rigid or semirigid annuloplasty rings, which generally have an opening at the level of the anterosep-tal commissure to avoid passing the anchoring sutures near to the conduction system. Most surgeons favor ring over suture annuloplasty. In severe annular dilatation, augmentation of the anterior leaflet with autologous pericardium has been used with some success. Tricuspid valvuloplasty is infrequently performed and may include commissurotomy, triangular leaflet resection, Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   83001/03/19   5:32 PM 831ACQUIRED HEART DISEASECHAPTER 21primary perforation repair, and traditional leaflet repair tech-niques such as chordal transfer, shortening, and replacement, papillary muscle plication, tricuspid leaflet augmentation, and the edge-to-edge repair technique used in MV prolapse.For patients with functional TV disease, TV repair is gen-erally preferred to replacement due to favorable results without the associated risks of thrombosis and the need for anticoagu-lation. In the setting of concomitant mitral valve surgery, TV repair has not been associated with additional perioperative complications, and 5-year freedom from reoperation has been impressive at 98%. However, a subgroup of patients report late failure following TV repair, and this may be worse following suture annuloplasty compared with ring annuloplasty.117Prosthetic valve replacement may be necessary due to extensive leaflet destruction, as may be seen in patients with endocarditis, or marked annular dilatation not amenable to repair. In some cases, the valve prosthesis may be anchored directly to the leaflet tissue instead of the valve annulus, reduc-ing the risk of injury to the conduction system.169 If this tech-nique is used, it should be confirmed that the residual tissue does not interfere with the movement of the prosthetic leaflets after implantation. Pledgeted sutures should be used and may be placed on the ventricular or atrial side of the annulus.Outcomes data following TV replacement are difficult to interpret, as most reports are in patients with previous TV surgery and/or signs of severe right heart failure. Operative mortality has been >20% in some studies.169 One study of 87 patients undergoing TV replacement between 1994 and 2007 showed an in-hospital mortality of only 1.4%. The choice of prosthetic valve is also somewhat controversial. Though bio-prosthetic valves are more durable in the tricuspid than mitral or aortic positions, valve degeneration is an important cause of bioprosthetic valve dysfunction at reoperation. The ability to replace a degenerated tricuspid valve bioprosthesis with a trans-catheter valve has led some surgeons to favor biological valves in this position. This is particularly true since the increased risk of valve thrombosis seen with mechanical valves mandates rig-orous systemic anticoagulation. Even with these precautions, mechanical tricuspid valves are associated with an increased risk of hemorrhagic and thrombotic complications. The choice of valve is usually decided on a case-by-case basis, and late out-comes have been similar with biological and mechanical valves in this position. In general, TV replacement may be a reasonable choice in select patients, though more data are needed regarding long-term outcomes in the modern era.Multivalve DiseasePathology involving multiple valves is relatively common and may result from diseases such as rheumatic fever, calcific dis-ease, Marfan syndrome, and other connective tissue disorders. However, multivalve disease may also be caused by secondary valvular dysfunction due to a distal valvular lesion, as in the case of myxomatous degeneration of the mitral valve, resulting in pulmonary hypertension, dilation of the tricuspid annulus, and functional TR. If the primary pathology is corrected early in the disease course, these secondary functional changes may resolve without the need for intervention.In patients with multivalve disease, the clinical manifesta-tions may be dependent on the severity of each individual valve lesion, but this is not always the case.2 In patients with con-comitant mitral and tricuspid dysfunction, the prominent symp-toms of dyspnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, and orthopnea commonly associated with MV dysfunction are sometimes diminished by associated TV dysfunction. Symptoms of multi-valve disease are most commonly masked when valvular abnor-malities are of approximately equal severity, highlighting the importance of careful examination of each valve both preopera-tively and in the operating room.Surgery for multivalve disease is associated with a higher perioperative mortality than single-valve procedures, and this risk is exacerbated by factors such as pulmonary artery hyper-tension, age, triple-valve procedures, concomitant coronary artery bypass grafting, previous heart surgery, renal insuffi-ciency, and diabetes.170 Failing to recognize significant con-comitant valvular dysfunction at the time of surgery is also associated with higher perioperative mortality. For this reason, patients suspected of having multivalve involvement should undergo full preoperative Doppler TTE or TEE evaluation and heart catheterization.98 In selected patients, procedures correcting multivalve disease demonstrate significant clinical improvement in symptoms and quality of life, as well as accept-able mortality and survival rates.170SURGICAL THERAPY FOR THE FAILING HEARTEpidemiology of Heart FailureHeart failure affects approximately 5 million patients in the United States, with >550,000 new cases diagnosed annually.171 The disorder is the primary reason for 12 to 15 million office visits and >1 million hospitalizations each year. Overall 1-year mortality is estimated to be around 25%, but this can increase to as high as 75% for patients with more advanced heart failure (NYHA class IV).172 While heart transplantation remains the gold standard for the treatment of end stage disease, an increas-ing number of patients deteriorate while on the waiting list, and up to 30% die before transplantation.173 The total direct and indirect costs associated with the treatment of heart failure are estimated to be $32 billion, and this is projected to increase to $70 billion by 2030.174 Advances in the surgical management of heart failure over the two decades have pushed surgery for CHF into the mainstream. As a result, there is an increasing number of patients with lateor end-stage disease who are being consid-ered for surgical therapies.Etiology and PathophysiologyHeart failure can be classified as acute or chronic, genetic or acquired, left-sided and/or right-sided, and systolic and/or diastolic dysfunction. The underlying causes and treatments for each of these vary considerably. In the Framingham Heart Study, coronary artery disease accounted for 67% of heart fail-ure cases, valvular heart disease accounted for 10%, and 20% of cases were attributable to primary myocardial diseases, of which dilated cardiomyopathy predominated.175 In all cases, heart failure is a progressive disorder that through complex mechanisms of ventricular remodeling, altered hemodynamics, neurohumoral activation, cytokine overexpression, and vascu-lar and endothelial dysfunction either disrupts the ability of the myocardium to generate force or results in a loss of function-ing cardiac myocytes, thereby preventing normal myocardial contraction.CABG for Ischemic CardiomyopathySurgical coronary revascularization is among the most com-monly performed procedures for CHF. CABG is beneficial as it protects from further myocardial infarction and/or malignant Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   83101/03/19   5:32 PM 832SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIventricular arrhythmias. It is most successful when treating hibernating as opposed to infarcted myocardium.While the majority of evidence supporting CABG for patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy comes from nonran-domized, retrospective studies, the prospective, randomized, multicenter international Surgical Treatment of Ischemic Heart Failure (STICH) trial compared CABG with medical therapy to medical therapy alone. Entry criteria included an EF ≤35% with CAD and anatomy suitable for CABG. No significant difference was seen in overall mortality by study completion, but patients who underwent CABG did have fewer deaths or hospitalizations from cardiovascular causes (58% vs. 68%, P <0.001).176,177Myocardial viability testing has been shown by multiple studies to be pivotal in identifying patients that will have improved outcomes following CABG for ischemic cardiomyopathy.178,179 A meta-analysis performed by Allman et al demonstrated an 80% reduction in mortality in patients who underwent revas-cularization with viable myocardium compared to patients who received medical therapy alone (3.2% vs. 16%, P <0.0001). Most importantly, in this analysis, CABG had no benefit over medical therapy for patients without viable myocardium. A more recent study by Gerber et al prospectively compared CABG and medical therapy to medical therapy alone in 114 patients with CAD and low EF (24% ± 8%) who underwent viability testing using delayed-enhancement cardiac MRI.180 This study demon-strated worse 3-year survival in medically treated patients with dysfunctional but viable myocardium than in medically treated patients with nonviable myocardium (48% vs. 77%, P = 0.02). This corresponded with a 4.56 times increased hazard of death when medical treatment was selected over full revasculariza-tion. In contrast, survival after CABG was not significantly different whether myocardium was viable or not (88% vs. 71%, P = NS). These studies underscore both the importance of viable myocardium as well as the adverse consequences of not offering a patient with viability surgical intervention.Patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy are a heterogeneous group, and, as with any surgery, appropriate patient selection is central to success. In one retrospective study of 96 patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy (EF ≤25%), age and poor distal vessel quality were predictors of poor outcomes.181 Mortality in patients with poor vessel quality was 100%, compared with 90% when vessel quality was fair and 10% when it was good. Therefore, poor vessel quality should be considered a contraindication to surgical revascularization even in the presence of angina.LV size and LV dyssynchrony are also risk factors for adverse shortand intermediate-term outcomes. A LV end-diastolic dimension of >100 mL/m2 is associated with a signifi-cantly reduced 5-year survival following CABG (85% vs. 53%, P <0.05), as well as worse 5-year freedom from recurrent CHF (85% vs. 31%).182 Moreover, LV dyssynchrony has been shown to have a significant impact on mortality in patients undergo-ing moderateto high-risk revascularization and may compound risk in patients with nonviable myocardium.183 In patients with severe preoperative LV dyssynchrony, the 30-day mortality was 27% vs. 3% in patients without significant dyssynchrony (P <0.001). Similar differences were seen with the presence of postoperative LV dyssynchrony, and outcomes were worse when patients also had fewer segments of viable myocardium.Secondary Mitral RegurgitationSecondary mitral regurgitation describes MR that results from damage to the left ventricle as a result of either ischemia or dilated cardiomyopathy rather than from a problem with the valve itself.184 Ischemic MR (IMR) typically results from sys-tolic restriction of the mitral leaflets due to tethering of the subvalvular apparatus. This occurs mainly from regional wall motion abnormalities in areas of the LV adjacent to papillary muscle attachments. Alterations in the size and shape of the mitral annulus and posterior displacement of the posteromedial papillary muscle, which occurs primarily after an inferoposterior MI, may also contribute. Additionally, functional MR (FMR) is caused by LV dilatation and increased sphericity, which displace the papillary muscles apically and radially, creating lateral forces on the valve that lead to increased retraction of the mitral leaflets by the chordae tendineae. LV dyssynchrony may also contribute to FMR through poor coordination of the contraction of the septum and lateral walls, producing MR that may vary in intensity during the cardiac cycle. Functional MR is usually referred to as a Carpentier class I/IIIb lesion due to the presence of both annular dilatation (Carpentier type I) and systolic restriction of the mitral leaflets due to LV dysfunction (Carpentier type IIIb). Ultimately, increased regurgitation leads to increased preload, LV wall tension, and LV work load, all of which contribute to progressive dysfunction of the LV and worsening heart failure.Several observational and population-based studies have demonstrated a significant impact of secondary MR on long-term survival. Following MI, the 5-year survival rate dropped significantly from 61% in patients who did not have MR to 47% and 29% in patients with mild and moderate to severe MR, respectively.185 Similarly, in a series of 2057 patients with symptomatic heart failure and an LVEF <40%, the 5-year sur-vival rate for patients without MR was 54%, and it decreased to 40% in patients with moderate to severe secondary MR.186 Moreover, medical therapy and PCI have not reduced the impact of IMR on late mortality.187Although specific recommendations to intervene for secondary MR are controversial and have not been rigorously defined, guidelines are available (Table 21-13).96,188 Some sur-geons initially advocated performing only revascularization in cases of moderate ischemic MR with the idea that revasculariz-ing viable myocardium would lead to improvements in LV func-tion and effect reverse remodeling, ultimately contributing to a decrease in MR. While several studies, including a recent large, multicenter, randomized, controlled trial, have shown that MR often persists following revascularization alone, the addition of a mitral valve annuloplasty in those studies did not improve long-term functional status or survival in patients with isch-emic MR.189-192 Nevertheless, other studies have shown that the persistence of MR after CABG is associated with a decreased survival rate and that CABG alone only has modest effects on reducing MR at 1 month follow-up.184 As a result, some centers continue to repair moderate MR in this patient population. Indi-cations for surgery in ischemic MR patients in the absence of revascularization options are even less well defined.For patients with functional MR, the goal of mitral valve surgery is to avoid or postpone transplantation in eligible patients. Mitral valve repair has been considered the procedure of choice when surgery is indicated for secondary MR. How-ever, in patients with severe ischemic MR, a recent randomized, multicenter trial showed improved late freedom from moderate or severe recurrent MR with mitral valve replacement compared to repair (2.3% vs. 32.6%, P <0.001).141 There was not a signifi-cantly higher mortality in the replacement group in this study.141 Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   83201/03/19   5:32 PM 833ACQUIRED HEART DISEASECHAPTER 21Table 21-13Data guidelines for surgical intervention for secondary mitral regurgitationCLINICAL SETTINGCLASS OF RECOMMENDATIONLEVEL OF EVIDENCEChronic Ischemic MR (ESC Guidelines)• Severe MR, LVEF >30%, undergoing CABGIC• Moderate MR, undergoing CABG, if mitral repair is feasibleIIaC• Severe MR, symptomatic patients, LVEF <30%, candidate for revascularizationIIaC• Severe MR, LVEF >30%, no option for revascularization, refractory to optimal medical therapy, low comorbidityIIbCChronic Functional MR (ESC and ACC/AHA Guidelines)• Chronic severe MR due to LV dysfunction, EF <30%, persistent NYHA class III-IV, symptoms despite optimal medical therapyIIbCMR = mitral regurgitation; ESC = European Society of Cardiology; CABG = coronary artery bypass grafting; LVEF = left ventricular ejection fraction; LV = left ventricle; ACC = American College of Cardiology; AHA = American Heart Association; NYHA = New York Heart Association.In patients with poor LV function, dilated LV, and severe MR with significant leaflet tethering, we favor MV replacement with preservation of the subvalvular apparatus. Bioprosthetic valve is usually used due to the poor late survival in this group of patients. Currently, for patients undergoing repair recom-mendations are to use a semirigid or rigid annuloplasty ring to downsize the mitral annulus.184 There have also been various techniques proposed to correct the papillary muscle displace-ment, but most reports are single center, retrospective, and small. Mitral valve replacement with preservation of the sub-valvular apparatus is indicated when repair is not feasible due to severe tethering of the leaflets or massive LV dilation.Outcomes from surgery vary among centers and among patients in this heterogeneous group. Operative mortality ranges between 0% and 9% in most modern series.184 Generally speak-ing, mortality and recurrence rates are higher and long-term prognosis is worse compared to outcomes for primary MR. Recurrent MR is as high as 15% to 30% in some series, and 5-year mortality is between 44% and 48%.184,193,194 Some reduc-tions in left atrial dimension and LV reverse remodeling may be achieved.195Left Ventricular Aneurysmorrhaphy and Surgical Ventricular RestorationPathophysiology of Ventricular Aneurysms. A transmural infarction of approximately 5% to 10% of the myocardium may result in formation of an LV aneurysm as necrotic myocardium is replaced by fibrous tissue. This usually occurs 4 to 8 weeks following the infarct. In the last decade, prompt revasculariza-tion of the culprit artery by either surgical or interventional tech-niques generally results in sparing of the subepicardial muscle while the subendocardial muscle remains necrotic.196 There-fore, it is not uncommon for the LV wall to show both living myocardium during thallium testing and an akinetic zone on echocardiogram or angiogram. It has been demonstrated that once more than 20% of the myocardium is necrosed there is irreversible progression to ventricular dilation and failure.197 Once heart failure develops after postinfarction remodeling, the 1-year mortality reaches 32% despite current therapies.198 The classic aneurysm is a 4 to 6 mm thick scar, which bulges out-ward in paradoxical motion as the LV contracts during systole. More than 80% develop in the anteroseptal and apical portions of the left ventricle as a result of left anterior descending artery occlusion. The rest are inferior in location and the result of cir-cumflex or right coronary occlusion.This patient population typically suffers from associated ventricular arrhythmias for several reasons. First, electrical dys-synchrony results from postinfarction remodeling, and triggers for ventricular arrhythmias typically occur in the scar border zone in patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy.199,200 Second, increased ventricular volume causes high wall stress and stretch, and stretch has been shown to be arrhythmogenic.201 Third, LV aneurysms represent an independent risk factor for SCD after MI.202 Surgical ventricular restoration (SVR) addresses each of these issues by removing the anatomic substrate during resection of the postinfarct scar and/or aneurysm, accomplishing volume reduction and mechanical resynchronization and relieving ischemia through complete revascularization and reduction in myocardial wall tension and oxygen demand.Clinical Presentation and Diagnosis. Symptoms of LV aneurysms include angina, CHF, ventricular arrhythmias, and, rarely, embolic phenomenon. Rupture is extremely uncommon. Patients generally present for coronary artery bypass or during evaluation of CHF or arrhythmias. While transthoracic echo-cardiography gives pertinent information regarding LV func-tion, size, mitral valve function, and the presence of thrombus, it is generally accepted that cardiac MRI is the best diagnostic modality to accurately identify areas of scar and viable tissue and to best define ventricular geometry.197Surgical Treatment and Results. In 1985, Vincent Dor described a surgical technique called the endoventricular cir-cular patch plasty that was intended to improve geometric reconstruction compared with the standard linear repair in LV aneurysm surgery. SVR is a somewhat broader term that arose from surgical repair of ventricular aneurysms and has now come to be applied to a group of surgical procedures designed to correct the effects of postinfarction ventricular remodeling. It is also sometimes referred to as surgical ventricular remodel-ing or reconstruction, surgical anterior ventricular endocardial reconstruction (SAVER), or the Dor procedure. SVR is specifi-cally intended to reduce the size and sphericity of the LV by Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   83301/03/19   5:32 PM 834SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIexcluding akinetic and dyskinetic areas, most often by using a circular patch inserted inside the ventricle on contractile myo-cardium (Fig. 21-12A,B).Candidates for SVR are typically patients who have had a remote anterior or anteroseptal myocardial infarction, signifi-cant ventricular enlargement with a significant area of akinetic or dyskinetic myocardium, a discrete aneurysm, a clinical pic-ture consistent with heart failure (LVEF <40%), retained func-tion of the basilar and lateral portions of the heart, and good right ventricular function. These patients should also be candi-dates for repair of any other concomitant cardiac disease. Dor currently emphasizes the importance of complete revasculariza-tion and repair of any mitral pathology at the time of operative SVR. In patients with spontaneous (13%) or inducible (25%) ventricular tachycardia (VT), it is additionally necessary to per-form nonguided endocardial resection and cryoablation encir-cling the resected area.197Results with this approach have been good in treating both heart failure and its sequelae, such as VT. In Dor’s series of 1150 patients, the operative mortality varied based on the LVEF, ranging from 1% (patients with EF >40%) to 13% (patients with EF <30%), and the 5-year survival approached 85%.197 Overall, more than 80% of survivors either stabilized or improved, and the quality of life was shown to improve significantly by  6 months after the Dor procedure.203 This is likely due in part to the fact that the Dor procedure restores LV geometry, resulting in a mean ejection fraction increase between 10% and 15%, with significant alleviation of symptoms.197,204-206 These data are rein-forced by the international RESTORE group, which examined SVR in a registry of 1198 postinfarction patients between 1998 and 2003.207 They found that 5-year overall freedom from hos-pital readmission for CHF was 78%. Moreover, 67% of patients had preoperative NYHA class III or IV symptoms, whereas 85% of patients were NYHA functional class I or II postoperatively.With respect to VT, Dor et al reported on 106 patients with ischemic ventricular arrhythmias that underwent recon-struction for postinfarction LV aneurysm and visually directed endocardiectomy plus or minus cryoablation and coronary revascularization.208 At a mean follow-up of 21.3 months, only 10.8% of patients had inducible VT, and no spontaneous VT was documented. Results from similar series have also been  excellent,197,206,209 but the efficacy of left ventricular restoration alone has been controversial.210,211 Inferior results seen in some Figure 21-12. Surgical ventricular restoration of a ventricular aneurysm using the Dor procedure. A. The size and sphericity of the left ventricle are reduced by excluding akinetic and dyskinetic areas. B. Most often this is completed using a circular patch inserted inside the ventricle on contractile myocardium.series have been attributed to failure to perform endocardial resection and/or cryoablation at the border of the transitional zone, as well as differences in stimulation protocols and pos-sible inadequate volume reduction of the ventricle.A large, randomized, multicenter study, the STICH trial, concluded that adding SVR to reduce ventricular volume to CABG does not improve symptoms or exercise tolerance and fails to lower death rate or cardiac rehospitalization compared to CABG alone.176 While this trial has some shortcomings, it has resulted in a marked decrease in referrals for this procedure. The main problem is that the LV volume was reduced by only 19% in the STICH trial, reflecting an inadequate repair as determined by the Surgery Therapy Committee, whose “acceptable STICH procedure” guideline required a 30% reduction at the 4-month postoperative cardiac MRI.212 Previous studies have reported an average reduction of end-systolic volume index (ESVI) of 40% with a range between 30% and 58%, suggesting that the STICH SVR procedure may have involved an inadequately small LV plication or limited intracavitary reconstruction.212 Moreover, this trial enrolled 13% of patients who had never had an MI and changed criteria such that enrollment required documented LV anterior wall dysfunction rather than demonstration of scar. This could have captured patients with hibernating myocardium that would recover following CABG alone. Dor subsequently pub-lished the results of 117 patients who would have been eligible for the STICH trial and demonstrated durable improvement in left ventricular function.213 However, this was a single-center, retrospective experience. Caution should be exercised so as not to broadly extrapolate the results of the STICH trial and inap-propriately deny appropriate patients effective treatment. This remains an area of controversy.With the recent advances in percutaneous interventions, the Parachute device has been trialed in human subjects. It is composed of a self-expanding nitinol frame covered with an impermeable fluoropolymer that is deployed into the LV apex walling off akinetic or dyskinetic segments of the LV. The PARACHUTE trial reported 3-year echocardiographic and clinical outcomes of patients with ischemic heart failure who underwent placement of the Parachute device as a feasibility and safety study. They demonstrated that of the 31 patients who received the device, there was improvement or maintenance of NYHA functional class in 85% as well as significant reduction of the LV EDV index.198Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   83401/03/19   5:32 PM 835ACQUIRED HEART DISEASECHAPTER 21Mechanical Circulatory SupportIntra-Aortic Balloon Pump. The intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) is a commonly used device for mechanical circulatory support and has been in use since 1968. The device is inserted percutaneously through a peripheral artery into the thoracic aorta. The balloon is synchronized so that it inflates during dias-tole and deflates during systole, resulting in augmentation of diastolic perfusion of the coronary arteries and decreased after-load. Typically, this improves cardiac index and decreases both preload and myocardial oxygen consumption.Common indications for use of an IABP is cardiogenic shock during or following cardiac catheterization or cardiac sur-gery. It also is utilized for preoperative stabilization of high-risk patients with either severe coronary artery disease, LV dysfunc-tion, or refractory, unstable angina. Kang et al have reported that risk-adjusted mortality was significantly lower for selected high-risk patients undergoing open heart surgery when a pre-operative IABP was used.214 In 2012, Thiele et al reported their data following a randomized, prospective, multicenter clinical trial looking at the outcome of using intra-aortic balloon pump in the treatment of cardiogenic shock complicating acute myo-cardial infarction in patients who underwent early revasculariza-tion (by means of percutaneous coronary intervention or bypass surgery) (IABP-SHOCK II trial).215 IABP did not significantly reduce 30-day mortality in this group of patients. Addition-ally, they reported no significant differences in secondary end points, including the time to hemodynamic stabilization, the length of stay in the intensive care unit, serum lactate levels, the dose and duration of catecholamine therapy, renal function, and major complications including major bleeding and peripheral ischemia.215Generally, an IABP is used for a few days and the amount of support is weaned as the patient’s condition improves. Mor-bidity associated with device use is typically minimal; however, in one series of 911 patients undergoing CABG who received an IABP, there was a 12% incidence of minor or major vascu-lar complications, including an approximately 3% incidence of limb ischemia requiring thromboembolectomy. This is the most serious complication of IABP placement. To prevent this prob-lem, frequent lower extremity neurovascular checks are neces-sary while an IABP is in place.216Ventricular Assist Device Indications and Cannulation.  Patients in need of ventricular assist devices (VADs) may have preexisting chronic heart failure, refractory ventricular arrhythmias, or acute heart failure following an MI, cardiopul-monary arrest, viral illness, pregnancy, or cardiotomy. Device therapy is intended to preserve end-organ perfusion and func-tion and may be categorized as shortor long-term support for the left heart, the right heart, or both. In general, VADs may be used rarely for support while the heart recovers (bridge to recovery, BTR), while the patient waits for a heart transplant (bridge to transplant, BTT) or increasingly more commonly to treat a chronic heart failure patient who is not a transplant candidate (destination therapy, DT). The Interagency Registry for Mechanically Assisted Circulatory Support (INTERMACS) database, a joint effort by the NHLBI, FDA, CMS, academia, and industry to prospectively track patient outcomes, reported that in 2015 and 2016 indications for device implantation were BTR (0.2%), BTT listed (26.4%), BTT likely (15.5%), BTT moderate (7.7%), BTT unlikely (2.5%), DT (49.2%), and res-cue therapy (0.5%).217 The percentage of patients receiving a VAD as destination therapy has markedly increased over the last decade as results and devices improved.Left ventricular assist devices (LVADs) provide support for the failing heart by unloading blood from the left ventricle and pumping it into the aorta. Cannulas may be inserted into the LV apex or the left atrium for inflow into the pump, and return is through an arterial cannula or graft sewn to either the ascending or descending aorta. For right-sided devices, inflow drainage is most often from a cannula in the right atrium, and blood is returned through a graft sewn to the pulmonary artery or right ventricular outflow tract.Left Ventricular Assist Devices. The first generation LVADs were pulsatile devices. They provided adequate support for the heart but were limited by their large size and durabil-ity.218 More recently, continuous-flow LVADs based on rotary pump technology have been introduced. These devices are smaller, quieter, and durable enough for long term support. The two most commonly used devices today are the HeartMate II (Thoratec, Pleasanton, CA) and the HeartWare HVAD (Heart-Ware, Inc., Framingham, MA) (Figs. 21-13A,B and 21-14A,B). These devices differ in that the HeartMate II is implanted sub-diaphragmatically, whereas the smaller HeartWare HVAD is implanted within the pericardium. Frequently used short-term support devices include the Abiomed BVS 5000 (Abiomed, Inc., Danvers, MA) and the CentriMag (Thoratec), which are both extracorporeal pumps, as well as the Impella (Abiomed), which may be inserted percutaneously. These devices are com-monly used in either post-MI or postcardiotomy heart failure. They have the benefit of faster and easier insertion, making them ideal rescue devices and allowing time for patient transfer to a tertiary referral center, device weaning, transplantation, or transition to a permanent VAD as DT or BTT.Bridge to Recovery. The ideal clinical situation would be for all LVADs to be temporary with the goal of myocardial recov-ery. However, as noted previously, this is rare with only 0.2% of devices in the most recent INTERMACS data placed with intent for bridge to recovery.217 The LVAD Working Group Recovery Study, a prospective multicenter trial investigating myocardial recovery in BTT patients, has shown significant improvements in left ventricular ejection fraction and significant reductions in left ventricular end-diastolic diameter following support with continuous flow pumps, but myocardial recovery resulting in device explantation was still only seen in six patients (9%).219 Current data suggest that significant reverse remodeling is more likely to occur in the young and those with myocarditis.220Nevertheless, some encouraging results have been reported using a combination of treatment modalities. In a few small studies of patients with LVADs inserted for nonischemic cardiomyopathy, deliberate and aggressive medical therapy, including the β2-agonist clenbuterol, resulted in successful LVAD explantation in 69% to 73% of patients,221,222 but these results have been difficult to replicate. Moreover, early results from clinical trials using stem cell therapy to treat patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy suggest that stem cells may be another adjuvant treatment with potential to aid in myocardial recovery.223,224Bridge to Transplant. LVADs are used as a bridge to trans-plant in patients who are candidates for heart transplantation but are not predicted to survive the waiting list period due to sequelae of cardiac failure, including end-organ dysfunc-tion, rising pulmonary artery pressures, escalating inotrope Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   83501/03/19   5:32 PM 836SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIABFigure 21-13. The HeartMate II LVAD viewed from the (A) outside and (B) inside. The device is an axial flow, rotary pump that produces no pulsatile action. The pump contains a magnet, and the rotor assembly functions by the electromotive force generated by the motor. The result is that blood is propelled from the inflow cannula to systemic circulation at flows up to 10 L/min. (HeartMate, HeartMate II and St. Jude Medical are trademarks of St. Jude Medical, LLC or its related companies. Reproduced with permission of St. Jude Medical, ©2017. All rights reserved.)ABFigure 21-14. The HeartWare HVAD system. A. Both the device controller and batteries are held in a wearable carrying case and con-nected to the ventricular assist device through the driveline. B. The main component is a centrifugal blood pump, called the HVAD, which is implanted within the pericardium. The only moving part in the device, the impeller, is suspended within the pump using magnets and thrust bearings. Similar to the HeartMate II, it can deliver a flow rate of up to 10 L/min. (Reproduced with permission of Medtronic, Inc.)requirements, malignant ventricular arrhythmias, and risk for sudden death. Due to the scarcity of donor organs, the improved survival seen with LVAD usage has resulted in more patients remaining alive while on the transplantation waiting list. It is currently estimated that 35% of patients who go on to receive a heart transplant have had a previous LVAD implantation, although at more aggressive tertiary care facilities this number may be as high as 75% to 90%.172The HeartMate II pump was evaluated as a BTT in an observational, prospective multicenter trial of 133 patients with persistent NYHA class IV heart failure despite optimal medical management who were status 1A or 1B on the transplant list.225 At 6 months, 100 patients (75%) had undergone transplantation, had cardiac recovery, or continued on mechanical support while remaining eligible for transplantation. There were significant improvements in both quality of life and functional status with device therapy. At 3 months, 81% of patients were in class I or II heart failure. Moreover, complications, including bleeding requir-ing reoperation, stroke, drive-line infection, and need for right ventricular assist device support, were significantly less frequent than with the previous generation HeartMate XVE.226 These data led to FDA approval of the HeartMate II as a BTT LVAD in 2008, and clinical use of the device increased dramatically. More recently, a multicenter, prospective trial compared the Heart-Ware HVAD to contemporaneously inserted devices for use as a BTT.227 This trial demonstrated noninferiority of the HeartWare HVAD, but in contrast to the 2007 trial, approximately 90% of patients in both groups were transplanted, explanted for recovery, or remained alive and eligible for transplant with LVAD support at 6 months. Most important, data suggest that patients bridged to transplant with an LVAD in the current era experience similar shortand long-term posttransplant survival and complications and do not have a higher incidence of allosensitization compared to standard cardiac transplant patients.228,229Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   83601/03/19   5:32 PM 837ACQUIRED HEART DISEASECHAPTER 21Most recently, in 2017, Mehra et al reported their multi-center outcome (Mechanical Circulatory Support Therapy with HeartMate 3 trial—MOMENTUM 3) comparing the safety and effectiveness of centrifugal-flow pump (HeatMate 3) to the axial-flow pump (HeatMate II).230 Implantation of a fully mag-netically levitated centrifugal-flow pump (HeartMate 3) was associated with better outcomes at 6 months than was implanta-tion of an axial-flow pump (HeartMate II). The improved out-comes were primarily due to the lower rate of reoperation for pump malfunction. Additionally, no patients in the HeartMate 3 group were suspected or found to have pump thrombosis.230Destination Therapy. The Randomized Evaluation of Mechan-ical Assistance for Treatment of Congestive Heart Failure (REMATCH) trial was conducted to compare the efficacy of LVAD insertion against optimal medical management in patients with NYHA class IV heart failure. While the pulsatile devices used in this trial had high failure rates, poor durability, and high associated mortality, there was still a clear survival ben-efit in patients treated with LVADs. This led to the FDA approval of the first LVADs for destination therapy in 2002.218Subsequent trials have proven the increased efficacy of second-generation devices for DT. In one such landmark trial, patients with advanced heart failure who were ineligible for transplantation were randomized in a 2:1 ratio to either a Heart-Mate II or HeartMate XVE.231 While both groups showed sig-nificant improvements in functional capacity and quality of life, actuarial survival at 2 years was superior for HeartMate II patients (58% vs. 24%, P = 0.008) and adverse event rates were signifi-cantly lower. These data established the benefit of continuous flow LVADs over optimal medical management for end-stage heart failure, and led to FDA approval of the HeartMate II for  DT in 2010. In certain populations, 2-year survival with the HeartMate II is now 80%.232 Several smaller third generation devices are in various stages of development or clinical trials. Some of these devices eliminate the drive line by using alter-native energy sources, thereby removing a significant nidus for device infections. Long-term outcomes with these devices are expected to continue to improve, approaching that of cardiac transplantation and providing a viable solution to organ short-age for many patients.232 In 2013, Slaughter et al reported their multicenter clinical trial outcome to evaluate the HeartWare Ventricular Assist Device (HVAD) system for BTT in patients with advance heart failure in the United States (ADVANCE BTT trial).233 The use of the HeartWare pump as a BTT continued to demonstrate a high 180-day survival rate (91%) despite a low rate of transplant. Adverse event rates were similar or better than those observed in historical BTT trials, despite longer exposure times due to longer survival and lower transplant rates.233Current eligibility criteria for mechanical support as des-tination therapy include (a) NYHA class III or IV heart failure despite guideline-directed medical therapy including cardiac resynchronization therapy if indicated; (b) peak oxygen con-sumption <12 mL/kg per min or failure to wean from continuous IV inotropes; (c) left ventricular ejection fraction <25%; and  (d) presence of a contraindication for heart transplantation (i.e., age >65 years, irreversible pulmonary hypertension, chronic renal failure, insulin-dependent diabetes with end-organ dam-age, or other clinically significant comorbidities).172,234 Once a patient has an LVAD inserted as DT, close and intensive follow-up by a multidisciplinary heart failure team is required in order to optimize medical therapy, reduce device-related morbidity, and improve survival.6It is also important to keep in mind that while some con-traindications to transplantation are irreversible, others can be modified. As such, approximately 10% of patients implanted with an initial strategy of destination therapy become BTT patients,172 and in some patients, the LVAD itself facilitates this transition. For example, an improvement in mean pulmonary vascular resistance was reported following implantation of the HeartMate II in patients with end-stage heart failure (2.1 vs. 3.6 Woods units, P <0.001).235 These data are also relevant to patients that receive LVADs as a bridge to decision.Right Ventricular Assist Devices and Biventricular Assist DevicesMost patients who present with advanced heart failure and a failing left ventricle also have some degree of right ventricu-lar dysfunction, but the majority of these patients do well with only an LVAD. However, implantation of an LVAD may cause acute worsening of tricuspid regurgitation and exacerbations of right heart failure through leftward deviation of the intraven-tricular septum and as a result of the significant volume-loading and transfusion requirement that is often necessary to achieve adequate flows postoperatively. Overall, approximately 20% of HeartMate II BTT patients had persistent right ventricular failure (RVF) requiring either a subsequent RVAD (6%) or intravenous inotropic support for >14 days (14%), and these patients had significantly worse 6-month survival compared to those without RVF (71% vs. 89%, P <0.001).236 Typically, mechanical right-ventricular support is temporary with intent to wean the device, and isolated right-ventricular assist devices are unusual.Biventricular support is most commonly indicated for acute cardiogenic shock after an MI or postcardiotomy heart failure. Biventricular support is temporary, although some patients may be successfully bridged to transplant or perma-nent left-sided assist devices. There is currently no destination therapy device for biventricular failure.Total Artificial HeartThe total artificial heart (TAH, SynCardia Systems, Tucson, AZ) is currently indicated as a bridge to transplant for patients in biventricular failure, particularly for those who are critically ill and too large for extracorporeal BiVAD support. Unlike ven-tricular assist devices, the TAH replaces the entire heart. The ven-tricles of the TAH are implanted orthotopically to the atrial cuffs on the ventricular side of the AV groove, and the outflow conduits are attached to the great vessels. This approach has the benefit of obviating the hemodynamic influence of pulmonary hyperten-sion, right heart failure, myocardial or valvular problems, cardiac arrhythmias, and inotropic agents.237 While this device has failed to reach its potential as a replacement for cardiac transplantation, the TAH has achieved favorable results as a BTT with a >70% survival in selected centers.238-240 However, at most centers results with the TAH have been suboptimal, and it is not frequently used. A total of 226 TAH implants between 2013 and 2016 were reported to INTERMACS database. One-year and 2-year sur-vival was reported at 52% and 37%, respectively. Compare to the previously reported survival (2006 through 2012), no significant improvement in survival was noted with time.217SURGERY FOR ARRHYTHMIASThe success of catheter-based ablation and implantable cardio-verter defibrillators (ICDs) has significantly diminished refer-rals for the surgical treatment of arrhythmias such as ventricular Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   83701/03/19   5:32 PM 838SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IItachycardia, Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, atrial flutter, and atrioventricular nodal reentry. On the other hand, the intro-duction of surgical ablation modalities such as radiofrequency and cryothermal energy, has simplified the surgical treatment of atrial fibrillation and has led to an increase in the number of surgical procedures performed annually for AF, although this has plateaued in recent years.241,242Atrial FibrillationEpidemiology of Atrial Fibrillation.  AF remains the most common arrhythmia in the world with an overall prevalence of 0.4% to 1% that increases to 8% in those older than 80 years old.243 The most serious complication of AF is thromboembo-lism with resultant stroke,244 but serious morbidity and mortality may also result from hemodynamic compromise due to loss of atrial contraction and exacerbations of CHF from atrioventricu-lar asynchrony and tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy.Medical Management. Most patients are treated medically, but the shortcomings of pharmacological management have left an important role for interventional therapies. Antiarrhythmic medications have been limited by modest efficacy and sig-nificant proarrhythmic and systemic toxicities.245 Conversely, rate control strategies leave the patient in AF, do not address the impaired hemodynamics or symptoms associated with this arrhythmia, and may render subsequent attempts at rhythm con-trol therapies less effective for younger patients who may suf-fer irreversible cardiac remodeling due to the prolonged period of time in AF. Additionally, AF is associated with a fivefold greater risk of ischemic stroke or systemic embolism compared with normal sinus rhythm. Annual risk of major bleeding in those on anticoagulation is estimated at 1.2%.246Restoration of normal sinus rhythm has several potential benefits over other strategies.247-249 These include improvement in atrial systolic function, which improves cardiac output and often symptoms of CHF; lowered risks of stroke; potential free-dom from anticoagulation; and likely reversal of atrial structural and/or electrical remodeling.Indications for Surgical Management. Consensus guide-lines published by the Heart Rhythm Society state that surgical ablation for atrial fibrillation is indicated for (a) all symptom-atic AF patients undergoing other cardiac surgery; (b) selected asymptomatic AF patients undergoing cardiac surgery in which the ablation can be performed with minimal additional risk; and (c) symptomatic patients with lone AF who have failed medi-cal therapy and prefer a surgical approach, have failed one or more attempts at catheter ablation, or are poor candidates for catheter ablation.243 At our institution, relative indications for surgical ablation in patients with permanent AF that were not included in the consensus statement are (a) a contraindica-tion to long term anticoagulation for patients at high risk for stroke (CHADS2 score ≥2) and (b) a history of stroke while on therapeutic anticoagulation. Since the consensus statement was released, a multicenter, randomized, controlled trial of surgical ablation in patients undergoing mitral valve surgery showed a significant improvement in freedom from atrial fibrillation in patients receiving surgical ablation (63% vs. 29%, P <0.001).250 Controversially, this trial did not show a difference between left atrial and biatrial ablation; this may have been due to techni-cal issues with the operations.251 The STS has recently released guidelines for surgical ablation that give a Class I Level A rec-ommendation for concomitant surgical ablation at the time of mitral valve surgery and a Class I Level B-NR recommendation for concomitant surgical ablation at the time of AVR, CABG, or AVR-CABG.252The Cox-Maze IV Procedure. The first successful operation for atrial fibrillation, the Cox-Maze procedure, was introduced clinically in 1987 by James Cox. The procedure involved the completion of a maze-like pattern of surgical incisions across both the right and left atrial that were designed to interrupt the multiple macroreentrant circuits thought to be responsible for AF, while still allowing propagation of the sinus impulse, restoring atrioventricular synchrony, and preserving atrial trans-port function. While effective at eliminating AF and reducing the risk of thromboembolism, it was not widely performed because it was technically difficult and significantly prolonged time on cardiopulmonary bypass. In 2002, the Cox-Maze IV, was introduced. The Cox-Maze IV uses a combination of bipo-lar radiofrequency (RF) ablation and cryoablation to effectively replace the majority of incisions that comprise the Cox-Maze III while significantly shortening cross-clamp time and reducing operative complexity.The Cox-Maze IV is performed on cardiopulmonary bypass through either a median sternotomy, often in combina-tion with other cardiac surgery or a right minithoracotomy.253,254 In most cases, the right atrial lesion set performed on the beat-ing heart, whereas the left atrial lesions are performed during cardioplegic arrest (Fig. 21-15).Results from the Cox-Maze IV procedure have been excellent. The Washington University group reported a series of 576 consecutive patients in 2015, demonstrating free-dom from atrial tachyarrhythmias in 92% of patients at 1 year and 73% of patients at 5 years postoperatively.255 Additionally, freedom from atrial tachyarrhythmias and antiarrhythmic drugs was 81% at 1 year and 61% at 5 years. A recent propensity-matched analysis showed that the addition of the Cox-Maze IV procedure to a routine cardiac surgery did not significantly increase postoperative morbidity or mortality and was associ-ated with improved late survival compared with patients with untreated AF and a similar survival to patients without a his-tory of AF.256 A propensity analysis has shown that results are similar between the traditional “cut-and-sew” maze (Cox-Maze III) and the Cox-Maze IV.257 This procedure is often successful in patients who are poor candidates for catheter-based ablation, such as those with large left atria and patients with long-standing persistent AF.The combination of surgical management of the left atrial appendage (LAA) and restoration of normal sinus rhythm after the Cox-Maze procedure significantly reduces stroke risk. It is our practice to stop warfarin at 3 months postoperatively in patients who are in normal sinus rhythm and without another indication for anticoagulation, regardless of CHA2DS2-VASc score. With this approach, the stroke rate following the Cox-Maze procedure off anticoagulation has been remarkably low (annual risk = 0.2%).258 In contrast, in one report the annual rate of intracranial hemorrhage in anticoagulated patients with AF was 0.9% per year, and the overall rate of major bleeding complications was 2.3% per year.259Left Atrial Lesion Sets. Some surgeons perform more lim-ited ablation procedures, such as isolated pulmonary vein isola-tion or lesion sets that are limited to the left side of the heart. This is done in order to further reduce the complexity of the pro-cedure and takes advantage of the fact that in most patients AF 7Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   83801/03/19   5:32 PM 839ACQUIRED HEART DISEASECHAPTER 21Figure 21-15. The Cox-Maze IV Lesion Set. A. The left atrial lesion set is comprised of right and left pulmonary vein isolation, connecting lesions between the left and right superior and inferior pulmonary veins, a lesion from the left atrial appendage excision site to the pulmonary vein, and a lesion to the mitral valve annulus. B. The right atrial lesion set consists of lines of ablation along the superior and inferior vena cavae, the free wall of the right atrium, and down to the tricuspid valve annulus. (Reproduced with permission from Weimar T, Bailey MS, Watanabe Y, et al: The Cox-maze IV procedure for lone atrial fibrillation: a single center experience in 100 consecutive patients, J Interv Card Electrophysiol. 2011 Jun;31(1):47-54.)ABoriginates from the pulmonary veins and posterior left atrium. However, there is seldom justification for limited lesion sets in experienced hands.While there is a high degree of variability in both the techniques and energy sources that have been attempted for left-sided atrial lesion sets, these procedures have all incorpo-rated some subset of the left atrial lesion set of the Cox-Maze procedure. Pulmonary vein isolation is ubiquitously performed, and the LAA is often excised. Results differ greatly between series, including the recent CTSNet multicenter trial,250 but a meta-analysis of the published literature by Ad and colleagues revealed that a biatrial lesion set resulted in a significantly higher late freedom from AF compared with a left atrial lesion set alone (87% vs. 73%, P = 0.05).260 These results are not sur-prising, as our intraoperative mapping experience with such patients showed a distinct region of stable dominant frequency in the left atrium only 30% of the time.261 The dominant fre-quency was located in the right atrium 12% of the time and moved during the recording period in almost half of all patients. It must also be kept in mind that recurrent right atrial flutter is a known complication of performing only the left atrial lesions. When it does occur, atrial flutter can be treated with catheter-based ablation; however, recurrent left atrial flutter can be very difficult to ablate.Pulmonary Vein Isolation. Pulmonary vein isolation (PVI) is an attractive therapeutic option because it can be performed off of cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) through small or thora-coscopic incisions. The results of PVI have been variable and highly dependent on patient selection since outcomes are con-sistently worse in patients with longstanding persistent AF. In a study from Edgerton et al, only 56% of patients were free from AF at 6 months (35% off antiarrhythmic drugs), and with concomitant procedures, the success rate of PVI has been even lower.262 Several devices are available to close the LAA at the time of PVI. These include staplers and epicardial clips that can be placed without the need for CPB.263While surgical PVI has had poorer results than a Cox-Maze procedure, it has had superior results to catheter-based PVI. The Atrial Fibrillation Catheter Ablation Versus Surgi-cal Ablation Treatment (FAST) Trial, which was a two cen-ter, randomized clinical trial, compared catheter-based ablation to thoracoscopic PVI in patients with antiarrhythmic drug-refractory AF and either left atrial dilatation and hypertension or failed prior catheter-ablation.264 This study demonstrated that the 12-month freedom from AF and antiarrhythmic drugs was 37% for the catheter ablation group and 66% for the PVI group (P = 0.002).264SURGERY FOR PERICARDIAL DISEASEAcute PericarditisPericarditis is characterized by infiltration of the cellular and fibrous pericardium by inflammatory cells. The exact incidence and prevalence of pericarditis is unknown, but it is estimated that pericarditis is found in approximately 1% of autopsies and accounts for up to 5% of presentations of nonischemic chest pain.265,266 The etiologies of acute pericarditis are diverse and may result from primary pericardial disorders or occur sec-ondary to a systemic illness.267 In developed countries, 80% to 90% of cases are now considered idiopathic or related to a viral pathogen, but nonviral infection, autoimmune diseases, myocardial infarction, radiation, malignancy, endocrinopathy, myocarditis, aortic dissection, uremia, trauma, pharmacologi-cal side effects, and previous cardiothoracic surgery must be included in the differential diagnosis. The relative incidences of peri-infarction pericarditis, which was once common, and post-cardiac injury syndrome have been dramatically reduced with the advent of thrombolytics and coronary angioplasty.267Clinical Presentation and Diagnosis. Diagnosis of acute pericarditis typically requires the identification of at least two of four cardinal features (Table 21-14). The presentation may be confused with several more common cardiopulmonary condi-tions, particularly myocardial infarction, making a careful his-tory and physical critical. Patients with pericarditis classically complain of sudden onset, retrosternal pain that may be pleuritic in nature. The pain may also be positional, with alleviation of pain when the patient is upright and leaning forward. Pain from pericarditis is typically sharp or stabbing, as opposed to the dull pain or pressure that is common with angina, and it typically does not crescendo. While both conditions cause pain that often radiates to the neck, arms, and shoulders, pericarditis pain may Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   83901/03/19   5:32 PM 840SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIuniquely radiate to the trapezius ridge due to innervation from the phrenic nerve.268-269The presence of a pericardial friction rub is pathogno-monic for pericarditis, but it tends to vary in intensity over time and may be absent in 15% to 65% of patients.265,268 As such, the sensitivity of this physical finding is dependent on the fre-quency and quality of auscultation. A pericardial friction rub is best heard at the left lower sternal border and is typically described as a high-pitched scratchy or squeaky sound with a triphasic cadence corresponding to the movement of the heart during atrial systole, ventricular systole, and early ventricular diastole. However, it may be monophasic or biphasic in up to 50% of patients.Electrocardiogram changes typically progress through four stages representing global subepicardial myocarditis and subsequent recovery. Pericarditis patients may have concave ST deflections with diffuse changes, spanning the leads of multiple coronary artery distributions, but ST segment abnormalities are absent in 20% to 40% of patients.270,271 Acute pericarditis should not result in the development of infarct patterns, such as Q waves or loss of R waves, and T-wave inversions from pericarditis tend to result later in the disease process after the ST segment has returned to baseline.Echocardiography is routinely performed in the evaluation of acute pericarditis. Its role is primarily to assess for a pericar-dial effusion. However, in a patient who can be demonstrated to have previously had normal cardiac function, it may be used to exclude segmental wall motion abnormalities that may suggest ischemia.The remaining workup should attempt to determine the underlying cause of the pericarditis and should be directed by the history and physical. Most inflammatory markers and labo-ratory tests are nonspecific, but C-reactive protein may be useful in predicting recurrence risks and in guiding the duration of anti-inflammatory medications.272 Rarely, other imaging modalities, such as CT scanning, pericardial biopsies, or pericardiocentesis may aid in diagnosis.Treatment. The preferred treatment depends on the underly-ing cause of the pericarditis. The disease usually follows a self-limited and benign course and can be successfully treated with a short course of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents (NSAIDs). The addition of colchicine may be beneficial.273 Some patients may require judicious use of steroids or IV anti-biotics. In cases of purulent pyogenic pericarditis, surgical exploration and drainage are occasionally necessary. Rarely, accumulation of fluid in the pericardium may lead to tampon-ade, requiring prompt evacuation of the pericardial space. While pericardiocentesis will typically suffice, surgical drain-age may be required for thick, viscous, or clotted fluid or in patients with significant scarring from previous operations. More commonly, surgical intervention is required to manage recurrent disease.8Table 21-14Features of acute pericarditis• Pleuritic and positional, retrosternal chest pain• Pericardial friction rub• EKG changes: diffuse ST elevation and PR depression• Pericardial effusionEKG = Electrocardiogram.Relapsing PericarditisAs many as one-third of patients with acute pericarditis will develop at least one episode of relapse.267 While many of these patients can be treated medically during their initial relapse and do not experience further episodes, a subset of patients experi-ence chronic relapsing pericarditis that can significantly impact their quality of life. Recurrence may develop either from the original etiology or from an autoimmune process that occurs as a consequence of damage from the initial episode. Relapsing pericarditis normally responds to a longer course of NSAIDS ±  colchicine. While steroids may induce rapid symptomatic response, their use should be limited to patients who have mul-tiple relapses and are unresponsive to first-line agents, as several studies have suggested that steroid administration may favor relapse.273,274Pericardiectomy may be considered a last resort treatment in patients with relapsing pericarditis who are severely symp-tomatic despite optimal medical management, are unable to tol-erate steroids, or have recurrence with tamponade. Evidence for this approach is lacking, as few studies have described pericar-diectomy in this population.275-277 The largest study and the only one to compare surgical treatment with medical management for patients with persistent relapsing pericarditis was a report of 184 patients from the Mayo Clinic.276 About 58 patients were identi-fied as having undergone a pericardiectomy after failed medi-cal treatment, whereas the remainder were treated with medical management only. Compared to medical treatment only, peri-cardiectomy resulted in significantly fewer relapses (8.6% vs. 28.6%, P = 0.009) at long term follow-up, as well as a nonsig-nificant trend towards less medication and corticosteroid usage. Of note, 80% of patients in the pericardiectomy group who had relapses reported significant improvements in their symptoms and had fewer relapses than before pericardiectomy. No periop-erative deaths were observed, and only two patients (3%) had major complications. Hence, at experienced centers pericardi-ectomy may be a safe and viable option in select patients with relapsing pericarditis.Chronic Constrictive PericarditisEtiology, Pathology, and Pathophysiology. Constrictive pericarditis can occur after any pericardial disease process but remains a rare outcome of recurrent pericarditis. It results when chronic pericardial scarring and fibrosis cause adhesion of the visceral and parietal layers and resultant obliteration of the pericardial space. While the pericardium is often grossly thickened with either focal or diffuse calcification in chronic disease, constriction may occur with normal pericardial thick-ness in approximately 20% of cases.267,278 In developed nations, idiopathic causes and cardiac surgery (accounting for almost 40% of cases in some series) are the predominant underlying eti-ologies, followed by mediastinal radiation, pyogenic infections (i.e., Staphylococcus), and other miscellaneous causes. Tuber-culosis is an additional common cause in immunosuppressed patients and in developing or underdeveloped countries.Clinically, pericardial constriction limits diastolic filling of the ventricles and mimics right heart failure since the right-sided chambers are more affected by a rise in filling pressures. Subsequent increases in central venous pressure result in the progressive development of hepatomegaly, ascites, peripheral edema, abdominal pain, dyspnea on exertion, anorexia, and nausea (in part due to hepatic and bowel congestion). In many patients, these symptoms develop insidiously over a course Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   84001/03/19   5:32 PM 841ACQUIRED HEART DISEASECHAPTER 21of years. Since many of these symptoms are similar to those seen in patients with restrictive cardiomyopathy, the distinc-tion between the two entities is difficult, but it remains critical because the treatment is completely different for restriction. The primary difference is that restrictive cardiomyopathy is defined by a nondilated ventricle with a rigid myocardium that causes a significant decrease in myocardial compliance, which is not seen in constrictive pericarditis.Clinical and Diagnostic Findings. Classic physical exam findings include jugular venous distention with Kussmaul’s sign, diminished cardiac apical impulses, peripheral edema, ascites, pulsatile liver, a pericardial knock, and, in advanced disease, signs of liver dysfunction, such as jaundice or cachexia. The “pericardial knock” is an early diastolic sound that reflects a sudden impediment to ventricular filling, similar to an S3 but of higher pitch.Several findings are characteristic on noninvasive and invasive testing. CVP is often elevated 15 to 20 mmHg or higher. ECG commonly demonstrates nonspecific low voltage QRS complexes and isolated repolarization abnormalities. Chest X-ray may demonstrate calcification of the pericardium, which is highly suggestive of constrictive pericarditis in patients with heart failure, but this is present in only 25% of cases.274 Cardiac CT or MRI (cMRI) typically demonstrate increased pericardial thickness (>4 mm) and calcification, dilation of the inferior vena cava, deformed ventricular contours, and flattening or leftward shift of the ventricular septum. Pericardial adhesions may also be seen on tagged cine MRI studies.As discussed, it is most important to distinguish peri-cardial constriction from restrictive cardiomyopathy, which is best done with either echocardiography or right heart catheter-ization. Findings favoring constriction on echocardiography include respiratory variation of ventricular septal motion and mitral inflow velocity, preserved or increased mitral annulus early diastolic filling velocity, and increased hepatic vein flow reversal with expiration.267,274 Cardiac catheterization will show increased atrial pressures, equalization of end-diastolic pressure and early ventricular diastolic filling with a subsequent plateau, called the “square-root sign.” Additional findings upon cath-eterization that would favor constriction include respiratory variation in ventricular filling and increased ventricular inter-dependence, manifest as a discordant change in the total area of the LV and RV systolic pressure curve with respiration.Surgical Treatment. Transient constrictive pericarditis may occur weeks to months after an initial injury and follows a self-limiting course of weeks to a few months. These patients are best treated with medical therapy alone. They often lack calci-fication of their pericardium, and the degree of late gadolinium enhancement of the pericardium on cardiac MRI has shown promise in predicting which patients may have resolution of the process.279 Still, there is no ideal way to distinguish these patients from those who will develop chronic constrictive peri-carditis, which is permanent. Therefore, if a newly diagnosed patient is hemodynamically stable, it is recommended that con-servative management is attempted for 2 to 3 months prior to performing a pericardiectomy.278 Surgical therapy should not be delayed indefinitely, however, as results are improved when the operation is performed earlier in the course of the disease. A series of 938 patients undergoing pericardiectomy reported by the Mayo Clinic, 355 of whom underwent pericardiec-tomy for constrictive pericarditis, showed significantly lower survival in patients with constrictive pericarditis compared with patients with effusive/relapsing pericarditis.280 Patients with left ventricular systolic dysfunction or right ventricular dilata-tion are at increased risk of early mortality.281 Additional fac-tors that predict adverse long-term outcomes include older age and prior ionizing radiation, as well as cardiopulmonary and renal dysfunction.274,281 Surgery should therefore be approached cautiously in patients with advanced, “end-stage” constrictive pericarditis, mixed constrictive-restrictive disease (often from radiation), and significant myocardial or renal dysfunction, as those patients are at increased risk from surgery and may not experience improvement of symptoms.In order to minimize recurrence following pericardiec-tomy, complete pericardial resection is desirable. This is typi-cally performed through either a median sternotomy or left anterolateral thoracotomy while on cardiopulmonary bypass. Radical pericardiectomy involves wide resection of the con-stricting pericardium from the anterior surface of the heart between the phrenic nerves and the diaphragmatic surface. Decortication of the right atrium and vena cavae is not univer-sally performed, but doing so improves the risk of persistent disease or relapse.282,283The extent of myocardial involvement may also affect long-term outcomes, and, thus, the depth of decortication is an important consideration.282 Even when an adequate pericardi-ectomy is performed, epicardial sclerosis can cause persistent hemodynamic instability or a delayed response to surgery. Scle-rotic epicardium is often thin and nearly transparent, but in cases of severe chronic constrictive pericarditis it can be difficult to remove it without injury to the heart.Surgical Results. While most patients experience significant improvement in their symptoms following pericardiectomy, symptomatic relief may take several months. Since there is a significant perioperative morbidity and mortality, pericardiec-tomy is best performed by experienced surgeons at high-volume centers. Between 1970 and 1985, the operative mortality was reported to be 12%, but a lower mortality of approximately 4% to 8% was noted between 1977 and 2006 at several experienced centers.278,283-287Long-term survival is in part determined by etiology of the disease. In a report from the Cleveland Clinic, 7-year survival rates following pericardiectomy for idiopathic, postsurgical, and radiation-induced constrictive pericarditis were 88%, 66%, and 27%, respectively.284 Results are worst for radiation-induced disease because ionizing radiation is often associated with myo-cardial injury as well as pericardial disease.Despite the risks, many patients experience significant benefits from surgical treatment. In one large series, 83% of patients were reported to be free of symptoms at last follow-up.287 This is in agreement with other studies that have shown a signif-icant improvement in NYHA functional status from class III/IV preoperatively to class I/II following pericardiectomy in >95% of patients.283,285-287CARDIAC NEOPLASMSOverview and General Clinical FeaturesCardiac neoplasms are rare, with an incidence ranging from 0.001% to 0.3% in autopsy studies and a 0.15% incidence in major echocardiographic series.288,289 In one large autopsy series, 99.2% of cardiac tumors were metastatic in origin; however, Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   84101/03/19   5:32 PM 842SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIthese patients almost never present for surgical management as they usually have fatal diffuse metastatic disease.290 As a result, a majority of surgical series describe management of primary cardiac neoplasms. Benign cardiac tumors are most common and account for 75% of primary neoplasms. Approximately 50% of benign cardiac tumors are myxomas, with the remainder being papillary fibroelastomas, lipomas, rhabdomyomas, fibro-mas, hemangiomas, teratomas, lymphangiomas, and others, in order of decreasing frequency. Most malignant primary cardiac tumors are sarcomas (angiosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, fibro-sarcoma, leiomyosarcoma, and liposarcoma), with a small inci-dence of malignant lymphomas.Clinical Presentation. The clinical presentation of cardiac neoplasms varies greatly depending on the location of the tumor, as well as its size, rate of growth, invasiveness, and fri-ability. While as many as 10% of patients are asymptomatic, most manifest some combination of symptoms from the classic triad resulting from blood flow obstruction, tumor embolization, and constitutional symptoms.291,292 Systemic manifestations of disease include fever, myalgias, chills, night sweats, weight loss, and fatigue and occur in up to one-third of patients.Obstruction of cardiac blood flow accounts for the major-ity of presenting symptoms.292 When the tumor is located in the left atrium, symptoms tend to mimic mitral valve disease with dyspnea and pulmonary edema; although more severe presenta-tions with syncopal episodes, hypotension, and sudden cardiac death have been reported from temporary valve orifice occlu-sion. When the tumor is located in the right atrium, symptoms may mimic right heart failure and include hepatomegaly, asci-tes, and peripheral edema. Outflow tract obstruction is rare but may be caused by large ventricular tumors.293Tumor lysis and embolization may also lead to neurologic presentations such as stroke, retinal artery occlusion, or cere-bral aneurysms, particularly in the case of pedunculated tumors and those with frond-like projections.294 Embolic tumor cells are able to lodge and penetrate distant vessel walls via subintimal growth, which leads to weakening of the arterial wall and sub-sequent aneurysm formation. This has been documented as late as 5 years after successful primary myxoma resection.295 Alter-natively, embolic implants may metastasize and create space occupying lesions. While rare, myxomatous tumor emboli have also been identified in the coronary arteries, common iliac and femoral arteries, kidney, spleen, pancreas, and liver.294Certain clinical features may be helpful in distinguishing benign from malignant primary cardiac tumors.292 Malignant tumors, primarily sarcomas, do not demonstrate a gender pref-erence and tend to present after the fourth decade of life. They are often multifocal within the right atrium, and intramyocardial invasion can lead to refractory congestive heart failure, arrhyth-mias, hemopericardium, and ischemia. Conversely, benign tumors, primarily myxomas, are typically unifocal in the left atrium, have a 3:1 female preference, and occur in younger patients. Arrhythmias and pericardial effusions are very rare in this population.Diagnosis and Characterization of Cardiac Masses. Trans-thoracic echocardiography is the mainstay imaging technique for the detection of cardiac tumors.292 However, echocardiogra-phy is limited by dependence on an acoustic window, subopti-mal visualization of extracardiac extension, and poor soft-tissue visualization. TEE is generally only beneficial for small local-ized tumors due to its limited field of view. cMRI is therefore the current standard for delineating the anatomical extent of the tumor and assessing the paracardiac space and great vessels. Advantages of cMRI over CT scans include better soft-tissue evaluation without the need for iodinated contrast and no expo-sure to ionizing radiation.It is important in the initial workup to distinguish a cardiac tumor from an intracardiac thrombus, which may be common in the atria of patients with AF and can mimic echocardiographic features of atrial myxomas. This determination is critical, as an atrial thrombus may be expected to resolve with anticoagula-tion, whereas a tumor requires surgical intervention. Moreover, anticoagulation can potentially increase the risk of peripheral embolization in patients with cardiac tumors. Delayed enhance-ment cMRI is the best modality to separate these two entities. cMRI may show vascularization, areas of necrosis, hemorrhage, or calcification in cardiac tumors that are not present in thrombi.MyxomaPathology and Genetics. Cardiac myxomas are the most common cardiac tumor and are characterized by several distinguishing features. About 75% of the time, they arise from the interatrial septum near the fossa ovalis in the left atrium.296 Most others will develop in the right atrium, but, less commonly, they can arise from valvular surfaces and the walls of other cardiac chambers. Macroscopically, these tumors are pedunculated with a gelatinous consistency, and the surface may be smooth (65%), villous, or friable.291 Size varies greatly with these tumors and ranges from 1 to 15 cm in diameter. Internally, myxomas are heterogeneous and often contain hemorrhage, cysts, necrosis, or calcification. Histologically, these tumors contain cells that arise from a multipotent mesenchyme and are contained within a mucopolysaccharide stroma.297While the majority of myxomas occur spontaneously with the highest incidence in women aged 40 to 60 years old, approx-imately 7% of cases are familial as part of Carney complex.291 Carney complex is an autosomal dominant disorder character-ized by two or more of the following conditions: atrial and extra-cardiac myxomas, schwannomas, cutaneous lentiginosis, spotty pigmentation, myxoid fibroadenomas of the breast, endocrine overactivity (pituitary adenomas or primary adrenal hyperplasia with Cushing’s syndrome), and testicular tumors. Compared to sporadic myxomas, those that occur as part of Carney complex are more commonly found in the right atrium (37% vs. 18%) or one of the ventricles (25% vs. 0%), more often multicentric (33% vs. 6%) and more likely to recur (20% vs. 3%).296 They also present earlier at an average age of 24 years old (range 4–48 years).Pathophysiology. Larger tumors are more likely to be asso-ciated with cardiovascular symptoms from obstruction, and embolic symptoms tend to occur from organized thrombi pres-ent on friable or villous tumors (Fig. 21-16). The relative fre-quencies of symptoms was illustrated by a series of 112 patients who reported cardiovascular symptoms (67%), most commonly resembling mitral valve obstruction; systemic embolization (29%); neurologic deficits (20%); and constitutional symptoms (34%).291 Similar incidences of symptoms have been reported in other large studies.Treatment. Cardiac myxomas should be promptly excised after diagnosis due to the significant risk of embolization and cardiovascular complications, including sudden death. Resec-tion may be performed through either a median sternotomy or 9Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   84201/03/19   5:32 PM 843ACQUIRED HEART DISEASECHAPTER 21Figure 21-16. Massive left atrial myxoma. A. Intraoperative echocardiogram of a large left atrial mass, diagnosed preoperatively as a left atrial myxoma. The mass can be seen prolapsing through the mitral valve orifice causing intermittent symptoms of mitral stenosis. B. The resected specimen. The neck of the mass that was obstructing the mitral orifice is clearly delineated.a minimally invasive right thoracotomy while on cardiopulmo-nary bypass. Care is taken not to manipulate the tumor before cross clamping of the aorta in order to avoid embolization. Left atrial tumors may be approached through a standard left atriotomy.298 Exposure of large tumors attached to the interatrial septum may be facilitated by an additional parallel incision in the right atrium, but this is rarely necessary. An ideal resection encompasses both the tumor and a portion of the cardiac wall or interatrial septum to which it is attached. In order to prevent recurrence, a full thickness excision of the attachment site is preferred, but partial thickness excisions and cryoablation of the base have been performed with good late results.298 The defect created in the atrial septum can either be repaired primarily or with a small patch. Finally, patients with valvular involvement may require additional valvular reconstruction or replacement, and rare cases of cardiac autotransplantation (with atrial recon-struction) or transplantation have been reported as strategies for complex cases of recurrent atrial myxoma.299,300Shortand long-term results following excision are excellent for benign cardiac myxomas. Operative mortality is low, and the probability of disease-free survival at 20 years has been reported to be as high as 92% for benign, sporadic myxomas.291,298 Risk of recurrence is significantly higher for familial cases. Other risk factors for recurrence include younger age, smaller tumor mass, and ventricular tumor location.301Other Benign Cardiac TumorsThere are several benign cardiac tumors apart from myxomas that are infrequent but have distinct pathophysiologic features.292 Papillary fibroelastomas are the second most common primary cardiac tumor, representing approximately 8% of all cases. These tumors typically occur in more elderly patients; are small (<1 cm in diameter) sessile, pedunculated masses that arise from the mitral or aortic valves; and frequently result in embo-lization. Fibroelastomas can almost always be resected with preservation of the native valve leaflets, and cryoablation of the valve leaflet after resection can help prevent recurrence. Lipomas are encapsulated tumors that usually arise from the epicardium and remain asymptomatic in most patients. Heman-giomas, which may arise from any cardiac structure, including the pericardium, account for 2% of benign cardiac tumors, and atrioventricular node tumors, which often lead to sudden cardiac death from heart block and ventricular fibrillation, are exceedingly rare.In children, rhabdomyomas are the most common pri-mary cardiac tumor, whereas fibromas are the most commonly resected cardiac tumor. Rhabdomyomas are myocardial hamar-tomas that are often multicentric in the ventricles. About 50% of cases are associated with tuberous sclerosis, and while resection is occasionally necessary, most disappear spontaneously. Fibro-mas are congenital lesions that one-third of the time are found in children younger than 1-year old. These tumors, conversely, are ordinarily solitary lesions found in the inner interventricu-lar septum, and they may present with heart failure, cyanosis, arrhythmias, syncopal episodes, chest pain, or sudden cardiac death.Malignant Cardiac TumorsPrimary cardiac malignancies are very rare, but when they occur they tend to have a right-sided predominance and frequently demonstrate extracardiac extension and involvement.292,302 Malignant cardiac tumors include intimal sarcoma, angiosar-coma, osteosarcoma, leiomyosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, liposarcoma, and primary cardiac lymphomas. Intimal sarcoma is the most common subtype.303 Angiosarcomas are aggressive, rapidly invading adjacent structures, and 47% to 89% of patients present with lung, liver, or brain metastases by the time of diag-nosis. Leiomyosarcomas are sessile masses with a mucous appearance that are typically found in the posterior wall of the left atrium. Rhabdomyosarcomas are bulky (>10 cm in diam-eter) tumors that usually occur in children and do not have a predilection for any particular chamber. They frequently invade nearby cardiac structures and are multicentric in 60% of cases. Finally, while not as frequent as secondary cardiac lymphomas, primary cardiac lymphomas are increasing in frequency due to lymphoproliferative disorders caused by Epstein-Barr virus in immunosuppressed patients. The absence of necrotic foci in lymphomas can be used to differentiate these tumors from car-diac sarcomas.Metastatic Cardiac TumorsCardiac metastases have been found in approximately 10% of autopsies performed for malignant disease.292 Secondary cardiac tumors, unlike primary tumors, are therefore relatively common. They may arise from direct extension of mediastinal tumors, hematological spread, intracavitary extension from the inferior vena cava or lymphatic extension, although the latter is the most common mechanism.While they can occur with most any primary tumor, they are generally observed late in the course of disease. Malignant melanomas have a high potential for cardiac involvement, but Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   84301/03/19   5:32 PM 844SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIother soft tissue tumors such as lung cancer, breast cancer, sarcomas, renal carcinoma, esophageal cancer, hepatocellu-lar carcinoma, and thyroid cancer may all progress to cardiac involvement. Cardiac metastases may also develop from leuke-mia and lymphoma in 25% to 40% of cases.304Metastatic cardiac tumors are typically found in random locations, excluding the valvular tissue where lymphatics are absent, and they may be multifocal or diffusely extend along the epicardial surface. Signs of malignant cardiac involvement in cancer patients include pericardial effusion or tamponade, tachyarrhythmias, and heart failure symptoms. Workup is simi-lar to other cardiac tumors. Treatment is generally with com-bined chemotherapy and radiation and is rarely effective.REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Task Force for the Diagnosis and Management of Syncope; European Society of Cardiology (ESC); European Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA); et al. Guidelines for the diag-nosis and management of syncope (version 2009). Eur Heart J. 2009;30(21):2631-2671.	2.	Braunwald E, Bonow RO. Braunwald’s Heart Disease:  A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine, 9th ed. Philadel-phia: Saunders; 2012.	3.	New York Heart Association. Diseases of the Heart and Blood Vessels: Nomenclature and Criteria for Diagnosis, 6th ed. Boston: Little, Brown; 1964.	4.	Lee DH, Buth KJ, Martin BJ, Yip AM, Hirsch GM. Frail patients are at increased risk for mortality and pro-longed institutional care after cardiac surgery. Circulation. 2010;121(8):973-978.	5.	Smilowitz NR, Gupta N, Ramakrishna H, Guo Y, Berger JS, Bangalore S. Perioperative major adverse cardiovascular and cerebrovascular events associated with noncardiac surgery. JAMA Cardiol. 2017;2(2):181-187.	6.	Nishimura RA, Otto CM, Bonow RO, et al. 2017 AHA/ACC focused update of the 2014 AHA/ACC guideline for the man-agement of patients with valvular heart disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on clinical practice guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;70(2):252-289.	7.	Fleisher LA, Fleischmann KE, Auerbach AD, et al. 2014 ACC/AHA guideline on perioperative cardiovascular eval-uation and management of patients undergoing noncardiac surgery: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on practice guide-lines. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;64(22):e77-e137.	8.	Klocke FJ, Baird MG, Lorell BH, et al. ACC/AHA/ASNC guide-lines for the clinical use of cardiac radionuclide imaging— executive summary: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines (ACC/AHA/ASNC Committee to Revise the 1995 Guidelines for the Clinical Use of Cardiac Radionuclide Imaging). Circulation. 2003;108(11):1404-1418.	9.	Badheka AO, Hendel RC. Radionuclide cardiac stress testing. Curr Opin Cardiol. 2011;26(5):370-378.	10.	Bax JJ, Boogers MM, Schuijf JD. Nuclear imaging in heart failure. Cardiology clinics. 2009;27(2):265-276.	11.	Proudfit WL, Shirey EK, Sones FM, Jr. Selective cine coro-nary arteriography. Correlation with clinical findings in 1,000 patients. Circulation. 1966;33(6):901-910.	12.	Shuttleworth K, Smith K, Watt J, Smith JAL, Leslie SJ. Hybrid instantaneous wave-free ratio-fractional flow reserve versus fractional flow reserve in the real world. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2017:435.	13.	Gotberg M, Cook CM, Sen S, Nijjer S, Escaned J, Davies JE. The evolving future of instantaneous wave-free ratio and frac-tional flow reserve. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;70(11):1379-1402.	14.	Forssmann W. Die sondierung des rechten herzens. Klinische Wochenschrift. 1929;8(45):3.	15.	Scanlon PJ, Faxon DP, Audet AM, et al. ACC/AHA guide-lines for coronary angiography. A report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on practice guidelines (Committee on Coronary  Angiography). Developed in collaboration with the Society for Cardiac Angiography and Interventions. J Am Coll  Cardiol. 1999;33(6):1756-824.	16.	Berman DS, Hachamovitch R, Shaw LJ, et al. Roles of nuclear cardiology, cardiac computed tomography, and cardiac mag-netic resonance: assessment of patients with suspected coro-nary artery disease. J Nucl Med. 2006;47(1):74-82.	17.	Chow BJ, Small G, Yam Y, et al. Incremental prognostic value of cardiac computed tomography in coronary artery disease using CONFIRM: COroNary computed tomography angiogra-phy evaluation for clinical outcomes: an InteRnational Multi-center registry. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging. 2011;4(5):463-472.	18.	Edmunds LH, Jr. The evolution of cardiopulmonary bypass: lessons to be learned. Perfusion. 2002;17(4):243-251.	19.	Cohn LH. Cardiac Surgery in the Adult, 4th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2012.	20.	Kirklin JK, Westaby S, Blackstone EH, Kirklin JW,  Chenoweth DE, Pacifico AD. Complement and the damaging effects of cardiopulmonary bypass. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1983;86(6):845-857.	21.	Asimakopoulos G. Systemic inflammation and cardiac  surgery: an update. Perfusion. 2001;16(5):353-360.	22.	Salter BS, Weiner MM, Trinh MA, et al. Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia: a comprehensive clinical review. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;67(21):2519-2532.	23.	Greinacher A. Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia. N Engl J Med. 2015;373(19):1883-1884.	24.	Murphy GJ, Angelini GD. Side effects of cardiopulmonary bypass: what is the reality? J Cardiac Surg. 2004;19(6):481-488.	25.	Gay WA, Jr, Ebert PA. Functional, metabolic, and morpho-logic effects of potassium-induced cardioplegia. Surgery. 1973;74(2):284-290.	26.	Carrel A. VIII. On the experimental surgery of the thoracic aorta and heart. Ann Surg. 1910;52(1):83-95.	27.	Vineberg A, Miller G. Internal mammary coronary anastomo-sis in the surgical treatment of coronary artery insufficiency. Can Med Assoc J. 1951;64(3):204-210.	28.	Longmire WP, Jr, Cannon JA, Kattus AA. Direct-vision  coronary endarterectomy for angina pectoris. N Engl J Med. 1958;259(21):993-999.	29.	Senning A. Strip grafting in coronary arteries. Report of a case. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1961;41:542-549.	30.	Sabiston DC, Jr. The William F. Rienhoff, Jr. lecture. The coro-nary circulation. Johns Hopkins Med J. 1974;134(6):314-329.	31.	Favaloro RG, Effler DB, Groves LK, Sones FM, Jr, Fergusson DJ. Myocardial revascularization by internal mammary artery implant procedures. Clinical experience. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1967;54(3):359-370.	32.	Greason KL, Schaff HV. Myocardial revascularization by coronary arterial bypass graft: past, present, and future. Curr Prob Cardiol. 2011;36(9):325-368.	33.	Crea F, Liuzzo G. Pathogenesis of acute coronary syndromes. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;8;61(1):1-11.	34.	Fuster V, Badimon L, Badimon JJ, Chesebro JH. The patho-genesis of coronary artery disease and the acute coronary syn-dromes (1). N Engl J Med. 1992;326(4):242-250.	35.	Libby P. Mechanisms of acute coronary syndromes and their implications for therapy. N Engl J Med. 2013;368(21): 2004-2013.Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   84401/03/19   5:32 PM 845ACQUIRED HEART DISEASECHAPTER 21	36.	National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health. Morbidity and mortality: 2012 chart book on car-diovascular, lung, and blood diseases. 2012.	37.	Smith SC, Jr, Benjamin EJ, Bonow Row, et al. AHA/ACCF secondary prevention and risk reduction therapy for patients with coronary and other atherosclerotic vascular disease: 2011 update: a guideline from the American Heart Association and American College of Cardiology Foundation. Circulation. 2011;124(22):2458-2473.	38.	Gibbons RJ, Balady GJ, Bricker Jt, et al. ACC/AHA 2002 guideline update for exercise testing: summary article: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines (Committee to Update the 1997 Exercise Testing Guidelines). Circulation. 2002;106(14):1883-1892.	39.	Fihn SD, Gardin JM, Abrams J, et al. 2012 ACCF/AHA/ACP/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for the diagnosis and management of patients with stable ischemic heart disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association task force on practice guidelines, and the American College of Physicians, American Associa-tion for Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Circulation. 2012;126(25):e354-e471.	40.	Fihn SD, Blankenship JC, Alexander KP, et al. 2014 ACC/AHA/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS focused update of the guide-line for the diagnosis and management of patients with stable ischemic heart disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines, and the American Association for Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Circulation. 2014;130(19):1749-1767.	41.	Hillis LD, Smith PK, Anderson JL, et al. 2011 ACCF/AHA guideline for coronary artery bypass graft surgery: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circula-tion. 2011;124(23):e652-e735.	42.	Hannan EL, Racz MJ, Walford G, et al. Long-term outcomes of coronary-artery bypass grafting versus stent implantation. N Engl J Med. 2005;352(21):2174-2183.	43.	Booth J, Clayton T, Pepper J, et al. Randomized, controlled trial of coronary artery bypass surgery versus percutaneous coronary intervention in patients with multivessel coronary artery disease: six-year follow-up from the Stent or Surgery Trial (SoS). Circulation. 2008;118(4):381-388.	44.	Serruys PW, Morice MC, Kappetein AP, et al. Percutane-ous coronary intervention versus coronary-artery bypass grafting for severe coronary artery disease. N Engl J Med. 2009;360(10):961-972.	45.	Mohr FW, Morice MC, Kappetein AP, et al. Coronary artery bypass graft surgery versus percutaneous coronary interven-tion in patients with three-vessel disease and left main cor-onary disease: 5-year follow-up of the randomised, clinical SYNTAX trial. Lancet. 2013;381(9867):629-638.	46.	Weintraub WS, Grau-Sepulveda MV, Weiss JM, et al. Com-parative effectiveness of revascularization strategies. N Engl J Med. 2012;366(16):1467-1476.	47.	Zhang Z, Kolm P, Grau-Sepulveda MV, et al. Cost-effective-ness of revascularization strategies: the ASCERT study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;65(1):1-11.	48.	Stone GW, Sabik JF, Serruys PW, et al. Everolimus-eluting stents or bypass surgery for left main coronary artery disease. N Engl J Med. 2016;375(23):2223-2235.	49.	Tatoulis J, Buxton BF, Fuller JA. Patencies of 2127 arterial to coronary conduits over 15 years. Ann Thorac Surg. 2004;77(1): 93-101.	50.	Goldman S, Zadina K, Moritz T, et al. Long-term patency of saphenous vein and left internal mammary artery grafts after coronary artery bypass surgery: results from a Department of Veterans Affairs Cooperative Study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2004;44(11):2149-2156.	51.	Dorman MJ, Kurlansky PA, Traad EA, Galbut DL, Zucker M, Ebra G. Bilateral internal mammary artery grafting enhances survival in diabetic patients: a 30-year follow-up of pro-pensity score-matched cohorts. Circulation. 2012;126(25): 2935-2942.	52.	Kelly R, Buth KJ, Legare JF. Bilateral internal thoracic artery grafting is superior to other forms of multiple arterial grafting in providing survival benefit after coronary bypass surgery.  J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2012;144(6):1408-1415.	53.	Athanasiou T, Saso S, Rao C, et al. Radial artery versus saphe-nous vein conduits for coronary artery bypass surgery: forty years of competition—which conduit offers better patency? A systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2011;40(1):208-220.	54.	Collins P, Webb CM, Chong CF, et al. Radial artery versus saphenous vein patency randomized trial: five-year angio-graphic follow-up. Circulation. 2008;117(22):2859-2864.	55.	Zacharias A, Schwann TA, Riordan CJ, Durham SJ, Shah AS, Habib RH. Late results of conventional versus all-arterial revascularization based on internal thoracic and radial artery grafting. Ann Thorac Surg. 2009;87(1):19-26e2.	56.	Zacharias A, Habib RH, Schwann TA, Riordan CJ, Durham SJ, Shah A. Improved survival with radial artery versus vein con-duits in coronary bypass surgery with left internal thoracic artery to left anterior descending artery grafting. Circulation. 2004;109(12):1489-1496.	57.	Tatoulis J, Wynne R, Skillington PD, Buxton BF. Total arte-rial revascularization: a superior strategy for diabetic patients who require coronary surgery. Ann Thorac Surg. 2016;102(6): 1948-1955.	58.	Caracciolo EA, Davis KB, Sopko G, et al. Comparison of sur-gical and medical group survival in patients with left main equivalent coronary artery disease. Long-term CASS experi-ence. Circulation. 1995;91(9):2335-2344.	59.	Grover FL, Hammermeister KE, Burchfiel C. Initial report of the Veterans Administration Preoperative Risk Assessment Study for Cardiac Surgery. Ann Thorac Surg. 1990;50(1): 12-26; discussion 27-28.	60.	Yusuf S, Zucker D, Peduzzi P, et al. Effect of coronary artery bypass graft surgery on survival: overview of 10-year results from randomised trials by the Coronary Artery Bypass Graft Surgery Trialists Collaboration. Lancet. 1994;344(8922): 563-570.	61.	De Lorenzo A, Tura B, Bassan F, Pittella F, Rocha AS. Out-comes of patients with left main coronary artery disease under-going medical or surgical treatment: a propensity-matched analysis. Cor Artery Dis. 2011;22(8):585-589.	62.	Influence of diabetes on 5-year mortality and morbidity in a randomized trial comparing CABG and PTCA in patients with multivessel disease: the Bypass Angioplasty Revascularization Investigation (BARI). Circulation. 1997;96(6):1761-1769.	63.	Jones RH, Kesler K, Phillips HR 3rd, et al. Long-term survival benefits of coronary artery bypass grafting and percutaneous transluminal angioplasty in patients with coronary artery dis-ease. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1996;111(5):1013-1025.	64.	ElBardissi AW, Aranki SF, Sheng S, O’Brien SM,  Greenberg CC, Gammie JS. Trends in isolated coronary artery bypass grafting: an analysis of the Society of Thoracic  Surgeons adult cardiac surgery database. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2012;143(2):273-281.	65.	Angelini GD, Taylor FC, Reeves BC, Ascione R. Early and midterm outcome after off-pump and on-pump surgery in Beating Heart Against Cardioplegic Arrest Studies (BHACAS Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   84501/03/19   5:32 PM 846SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II1 and 2): a pooled analysis of two randomised controlled trials. Lancet. 2002;359(9313):1194-1199.	66.	Lemma MG, Coscioni E, Tritto FP, et al. On-pump versus off-pump coronary artery bypass surgery in high-risk patients: operative results of a prospective randomized trial (on-off study). J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2012;143(3):625-631.	67.	Mack MJ, Brown P, Houser F, et al. On-pump versus off-pump coronary artery bypass surgery in a matched sample of women: a comparison of outcomes. Circulation. 2004; 110(11 suppl 1):II1-II6.	68.	Hu S, Zeng Z, Yuan X, et al. Increasing long-term major vas-cular events and resource consumption in patients receiving off-pump coronary artery bypass: a single-center prospective observational study. Circulation. 2010;121(16):1800-1808.	69.	Lamy A, Devereaux PJ, Prabhakaran D, et al. Off-pump or on-pump coronary-artery bypass grafting at 30 days. N Engl J Med. 2012;366(16):1489-1497.	70.	Diegeler A, Börgermann J, Kappert U, et al. Off-pump versus on-pump coronary-artery bypass grafting in elderly patients. N Engl J Med. 2013;368(13):1189-1198.	71.	Hattler B, Messenger JC, Shroyer Al, et al. Off-Pump coronary artery bypass surgery is associated with worse arterial and saphenous vein graft patency and less effec-tive revascularization: results from the Veterans Affairs Randomized On/Off Bypass (ROOBY) trial. Circulation. 2012;125(23):2827-2835.	72.	Hannan EL, Wu C, Smith CR, et al. Off-pump versus on-pump coronary artery bypass graft surgery: differences in short-term outcomes and in long-term mortality and need for subsequent revascularization. Circulation. 2007;116(10):1145-1152.	73.	Hueb W, Lopes NH, Pereira AC, et al. Five-year follow-up of a randomized comparison between off-pump and on-pump stable multivessel coronary artery bypass grafting. The MASS III Trial. Circulation. 2010;122(11 suppl):S48-S52.	74.	Moller CH, Penninga L, Wetterslev J, Steinbrüchel DA, Gluud C. Off-pump versus on-pump coronary artery bypass grafting for ischaemic heart disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012(3):CD007224.	75.	Widimsky P, Straka Z, Stros P, et al. One-year coronary bypass graft patency: a randomized comparison between off-pump and on-pump surgery angiographic results of the PRAGUE-4 trial. Circulation. 2004;110(22):3418-3423.	76.	Puskas JD, Williams WH, O’Donnell R, et al. Off-pump and on-pump coronary artery bypass grafting are associated with similar graft patency, myocardial ischemia, and freedom from reintervention: long-term follow-up of a randomized trial. Ann Thorac Surg. 2011;91(6):1836-1842; discussion 1842-1843.	77.	Sellke FW, Di Maio JM, Caplan LR, et al. Comparing on-pump and off-pump coronary artery bypass grafting: numer-ous studies but few conclusions: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association council on cardiovascular surgery and anesthesia in collaboration with the interdisciplin-ary working group on quality of care and outcomes research. Circulation. 2005;111(21):2858-2864.	78.	Lichtenberg A, Kilma U, Paeschke H, et al. Impact of multi-vessel coronary artery disease on outcome after isolated mini-mally invasive bypass grafting of the left anterior descending artery. Ann Thorac Surg. 2004;78(2):487-491.	79.	Deppe AC, Liakopoulos OJ, Kuhn EW, et al. Minimally inva-sive direct coronary bypass grafting versus percutaneous coro-nary intervention for single-vessel disease: a meta-analysis of 2885 patients. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2015;47(3):397-406; discussion 406.	80.	Lee CW, Ahn JM, Cavalcante R, et al. Coronary artery bypass surgery versus drug-eluting stent implantation for left main or multivessel coronary artery disease: a meta-analysis of individual patient data. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2016;9(24): 2481-2489.	81.	Acharya MN, Ashrafian H, Athanasiou T, Casula R. Is totally endoscopic coronary artery bypass safe, feasible and effective? Int Cardiovasc Thoracic Surg. 2012;15(6):1040-1046.	82.	Bonatti J, Schachner T, Bonaros N, et al. Effectiveness and safety of total endoscopic left internal mammary artery bypass graft to the left anterior descending artery. Am J Cardiol. 2009;104(12):1684-1688.	83.	Srivastava S, Gadasalli S, Agusala M, et al. Beating heart totally endoscopic coronary artery bypass. Ann Thorac Surg. 2010;89(6):1873-1879; discussion 1879-1880.	84.	Whellan DJ, McCarey MM, Taylor BS, et al. Trends in robotic-assisted coronary artery bypass grafts: a study of the Society of Thoracic Surgeons Adult Cardiac Surgery Database, 2006 to 2012. Ann Thorac Surg. 2016;102(1):140-146.	85.	Reicher B, Poston RS, Mehra MR, et al. Simultaneous “hybrid” percutaneous coronary intervention and minimally invasive surgical bypass grafting: feasibility, safety, and clini-cal outcomes. Am Heart J. 2008;155(4):661-667.	86.	Holzhey DM, Jacobs S, Mochalski M, et al. Minimally inva-sive hybrid coronary artery revascularization. Ann Thorac Surg. 2008;86(6):1856-1860.	87.	Katz MR, Van Praet F, de Canniere D, et al. Integrated coro-nary revascularization: percutaneous coronary intervention plus robotic totally endoscopic coronary artery bypass. Circu-lation. 2006;114(1 suppl):I473-I476.	88.	Puskas JD, Halkos ME, DeRose JJ, et al. Hybrid coronary revascularization for the treatment of multivessel coronary artery disease: a multicenter observational study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;68(4):356-365.	89.	Briones E, Lacalle JR, Marin I. Transmyocardial laser revas-cularization versus medical therapy for refractory angina. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009(1):CD003712.	90.	Allen KB, Dowling RD, Schuch DR, et al. Adjunctive trans-myocardial revascularization: five-year follow-up of a prospec-tive, randomized trial. Ann Thorac Surg. 2004;78(2):458-465; discussion 458-465.	91.	Bridges CR, Horvath KA, Nugent WC, et al. The Society of Thoracic Surgeons practice guideline series: transmyocar-dial laser revascularization. Ann Thorac Surg. 2004;77(4): 1494-14502.	92.	Henry TD, Annex BH, McKendall GR, et al. The VIVA trial: Vascular endothelial growth factor in Ischemia for Vascular Angiogenesis. Circulation. 2003;107(10):1359-1365.	93.	Simons M, Annex BH, Laham RJ, et al. Pharmacological treat-ment of coronary artery disease with recombinant fibroblast growth factor-2: double-blind, randomized, controlled clinical trial. Circulation. 2002;105(7):788-793.	94.	Kumar VA, Brewster LP, Caves JM, Chaikof EL. Tis-sue engineering of blood vessels: functional requirements, progress, and future challenges. Cardiovasc Eng Technol. 2011;2(3):137-148.	95.	D’Agostino RS, Jacobs JP, Badwar V, et al. The Society of Tho-racic Surgeons adult cardiac surgery database: 2017 update on outcomes and quality. Ann Thorac Surg. 2017;103(1):18-24.	96.	Bonow RO, Carabello BA, Chatterjee K, et al. 2008 focused update incorporated into the ACC/AHA 2006 guidelines for the management of patients with valvular heart disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines (Writing Com-mittee to revise the 1998 guidelines for the management of patients with valvular heart disease). Endorsed by the Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, Society for Cardiovascu-lar Angiography and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2008;52(13):e1-142.	97.	Rosendaal FR. The Scylla and Charybdis of oral anticoagulant treatment. N Engl J Med. 1996;335(8):587-589.	98.	Nishimura RA, et al. 2014 AHA/ACC guideline for the man-agement of patients with valvular heart disease: a report Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   84601/03/19   5:32 PM 847ACQUIRED HEART DISEASECHAPTER 21of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on practice guidelines. Circulation. 2014;129(23):e521-e643.	99.	Hammermeister K. Outcomes 15 years after valve replacement with a mechanical versus a bioprosthetic valve: final report of the Veterans Affairs randomized trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2000;36(4):1152-1158.	100.	Bloomfield P. Choice of heart valve prosthesis. Heart. 2002;87(6):583-589.	101.	Butchart EG, et al. Better anticoagulation control improves survival after valve replacement. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2002;123(4):715-723.	102.	Puskas J, Gerdisch M, Nichols D, et al. Reduced anticoagula-tion after mechanical aortic valve replacement: interim results from the prospective randomized on X-valve anticoagulation clinical trial randomized Food and Drug Administration inves-tigational device exemption trial. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2014;147(4):1202-1210; discussion 1210-1211.	103.	Cannegieter SC, Rosendaal FR, Briet E. Thromboembolic and bleeding complications in patients with mechanical heart valve prostheses. Circulation. 1994;89(2):635-641.	104.	Hoffmann G, Lutter G, Cremer J. Durability of bioprosthetic cardiac valves. Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2008;105(8):143-148.	105.	Pibarot P, Dumesnil JG, Jobin J, Cartier P, Honos G, Durand LG. Hemodynamic and physical performance during maximal exercise in patients with an aortic bioprosthetic valve: com-parison of stentless versus stented bioprostheses. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1999;34(5):1609-1617.	106.	Fries R, Wendler O, Schieffer H, Schäfers HJ. Comparative rest and exercise hemodynamics of 23-mm stentless versus 23-mm stented aortic bioprostheses. Ann Thorac Surg. 2000;69(3): 817-22.	107.	Pavoni D, Badano LP, Ius F, et al. Limited long-term durabil-ity of the Cryolife O’Brien stentless porcine xenograft valve. Circulation. 2007;116(11 suppl): I307-I313.	108.	Powell R, Pelletier MP, Chu MWA, Bouchard D, Melvin KN, Adams C. The perceval sutureless aortic valve: review of outcomes, complications, and future direction. Innovations (Phila). 2017;12(3):155-173.	109.	Ross DN. Homograft replacement of the aortic valve. Lancet. 1962;2(7254):487.	110.	Anguera I, Miro JM, San Roman JA, et al. Periannular com-plications in infective endocarditis involving prosthetic aortic valves. Am J Cardiol. 2006;98(9):1261-1268.	111.	Vogt F, et al. Pulmonary homografts for aortic valve replace-ment: long-term comparison with aortic grafts. Heart Surg Forum. 2011;14(4):E237-E241.	112.	Ross DN. Replacement of aortic and mitral valves with a pul-monary autograft. Lancet. 1967;2(7523):956-958.	113.	Gerosa G, McKay R, Davies J, Ross DN. Comparison of the aortic homograft and the pulmonary autograft for aortic valve or root replacement in children. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1991;102(1):51-60; discussion 60-61.	114.	David TE, Uden DE, Strauss HD. The importance of the mitral apparatus in left ventricular function after correction of mitral regurgitation. Circulation. 1983;68(3 pt 2):II76-II82.	115.	Enriquez-Sarano M, Schaff HV, Orszulak TA, Tajik AJ, Bailey KR, Frye RL. Valve repair improves the outcome of surgery for mitral regurgitation. A multivariate analysis. Circulation. 1995;91(4):1022-1028.	116.	David TE, Armstrong S, McCrindle BW, Manlhiot C. Late outcomes of mitral valve repair for mitral regurgitation due to degenerative disease. Circulation. 2013;127(14): 1485-1492.	117.	Pfannmueller B, Verevkin A, Borger Ma, et al. Role of tricus-pid valve repair for moderate tricuspid regurgitation during minimally invasive mitral valve surgery. Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013;61(5):386-391.	118.	Roberts WC, Perloff JK. Mitral valvular disease. A clinico-pathologic survey of the conditions causing the mitral valve to function abnormally. Ann Intern Med. 1972;77(6):939-975.	119.	Snopek G, Pogorzelska H, Rywik TM, Browarek A, Janas J, Korewicki J. Usefulness of endothelin-1 concentration in capillary blood in patients with mitral stenosis as a predic-tor of regression of pulmonary hypertension after mitral valve replacement or valvuloplasty. Am J Cardiol. 2002;90(2): 188-189.	120.	Gorlin R. The mechanism of the signs and symptoms of mitral valve disease. Br Heart J. 1954;16(4):375-380.	121.	Martin RP, Rakowski H, Kleiman JH, Beaver W, London E, Popp RL. Reliability and reproducibility of two dimensional echocardiograph measurement of the stenotic mitral valve ori-fice area. Am J Cardiol. 1979;43(3):560-568.	122.	Cheriex EC, Pieters FA, Janssen JH, de Swart H, Palmans-Meulemans A. Value of exercise Doppler-echocardiography in patients with mitral stenosis. Int J Cardiol. 1994;45(3):219-226.	123.	Delling FN, Vasan RS. Epidemiology and pathophysiology of mitral valve prolapse: new insights into disease progression, genetics, and molecular basis. Circulation. 2014;129(21): 2158-2170.	124.	Enriquez-Sarano M, Akins CW, Vahanian A. Mitral regurgita-tion. Lancet. 2009;373(9672):1382-1394.	125.	Carpentier A. Cardiac valve surgery—the “French correction.” J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1983;86(3):323-337.	126.	Zile MR, Gaasch WH, Carroll JD, Levine HJ. Chronic mitral regurgitation: predictive value of preoperative echocardio-graphic indexes of left ventricular function and wall stress.  J Am Coll Cardiol. 1984;3(2 pt 1):235-242.	127.	Castello R, Fagan L, Jr, Lenzen P, Pearson AC, Labovitz AJ. Comparison of transthoracic and transesophageal echocar-diography for assessment of left-sided valvular regurgitation. Am J Cardiol. 1991;68(17):1677-1680.	128.	Enriquez-Sarano M. Quantitative determinants of the out-come of asymptomatic mitral regurgitation. N Engl J Med. 2005;352(9):875-883.	129.	Picano E, Pibarot P, Lancellotti P, Monin JL, Bonow RO. The emerging role of exercise testing and stress echocardiography in valvular heart disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;54(24): 2251-2560.	130.	Kitamura N, Uemura S, Kunitomo R, Utoh J, Noji S. A new technique for debridement in rheumatic valvular disease: the rasping procedure. Ann Thorac Surg. 2000;69(1):121-125.	131.	Reichart DT, Sodian R, Zenker R, Klinner W, Schmitz C, Reichart B. Long-term (</= 50 years) results of patients after mitral valve commissurotomy—a single-center experience.  J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2012;143(4 suppl):S96-S98.	132.	Choudhary SK, Dhareshwar J, Govil A, Airan B, Kumar AS. Open mitral commissurotomy in the current era: indications, technique, and results. Ann Thorac Surg. 2003;75(1):41-46.	133.	Mohty D, Orszulak TA, Schaff HV, et al. Very long-term sur-vival and durability of mitral valve repair for mitral valve prolapse. Circulation. 2001;104(12 suppl 1):I1-I7.	134.	Vassileva CM, Mishkel G, McNeely C, et al. Long-term sur-vival of patients undergoing mitral valve repair and replace-ment: a longitudinal analysis of medicare fee-for-service beneficiaries. Circulation. 2013;127(18):1870-1876.	135.	Khan SS, Trento A, DeRobertis M, et al. Twenty-year com-parison of tissue and mechanical valve replacement. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2001;122(2):257-269.	136.	Gillinov AM, Cosgrove DM. Mitral valve repair for degenera-tive disease. J Heart Valve Dis. 2002;11(suppl 1):S15-S20.	137.	Fucci C. Improved results with mitral valve repair using new surgical techniques. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 1995;9(11): 621-626.	138.	O’Brien SM, Shahian DM, Filardo G, et al. The Society of Thoracic Surgeons 2008 cardiac surgery risk models: part Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   84701/03/19   5:32 PM 848SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II2—isolated valve surgery. Ann Thorac Surg. 2009;88(1 suppl): S23-S42.	139.	Castillo JG, Anyanwu AC, El-Eshmawi A, Adams DH. All anterior and bileaflet mitral valve prolapses are repairable in the modern era of reconstructive surgery. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2014;45(1):139-145.	140.	Braunberger E, Deloche A, Berrebi A, et al. Very long-term results (more than 20 years) of valve repair with carpentier’s techniques in nonrheumatic mitral valve insufficiency. Circu-lation. 2001;104(12 suppl 1):I8-I11.	141.	Acker MA, Parides MK, Perrault LP, et al. Mitral-valve repair versus replacement for severe ischemic mitral regurgitation. N Engl J Med. 2014;370(1):23-32.	142.	Goldstein D, Moskowitz AJ, Geljins AC, et al. Two-year out-comes of surgical treatment of severe ischemic mitral regurgi-tation. N Engl J Med. 2016;374(4):344-353.	143.	Feldman T, Wasserman HS, Herrmann HC, et al. Percutane-ous mitral valve repair using the edge-to-edge technique: six-month results of the EVEREST Phase I Clinical Trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005;46(11):2134-2140.	144.	Feldman T, Foster E, Glower DD, et al. Percutaneous repair or surgery for mitral regurgitation. N Engl J Med. 2011;364(15): 1395-1406.	145.	O’Brien KD. Pathogenesis of calcific aortic valve disease: a disease process comes of age (and a good deal more). Arterio-scler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2006;26(8):1721-1728.	146.	Murakami T, Hess OM, Gage JE, Grimm J, Krayenbuehl HP. Diastolic filling dynamics in patients with aortic stenosis. Cir-culation. 1986;73(6):1162-1174.	147.	Gunther S, Grossman W. Determinants of ventricular func-tion in pressure-overload hypertrophy in man. Circulation. 1979;59(4):679-688.	148.	Marcus ML, Doty DB, Hiratzka LF, Wright CB, Eastham CL. Decreased coronary reserve: a mechanism for angina pectoris in patients with aortic stenosis and normal coronary arteries. N Engl J Med. 1982;307(22):1362-1366.	149.	Gaasch WH, Zile MR, Hoshino PK, Weinberg EO, Rhodes DR, Apstein CS. Tolerance of the hypertrophic heart to ischemia. Studies in compensated and failing dog hearts with pressure overload hypertrophy. Circulation. 1990;81(5):1644-1653.	150.	Orsinelli DA, Aurigemma GP, Battista S, Krendel S, Gaasch WH. Left ventricular hypertrophy and mortality after aortic valve replacement for aortic stenosis. A high risk sub-group identified by preoperative relative wall thickness. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1993;22(6):1679-1683.	151.	Lumley M, Williams R, Asrress KN, et al. Coronary physiol-ogy during exercise and vasodilation in the healthy heart and in severe aortic stenosis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;68(7):688-697.	152.	Nishimura RA, Otto CM, Bonow RO, et al. 2017 AHA/ACC focused update of the 2014 aha/acc guideline for the man-agement of patients with valvular heart disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Asso-ciation task force on clinical practice guidelines. Circulation. 2017;135(25):e1159-e1195.	153.	Roberts WC, JO JM, Moore TR, Jones WH. Causes of pure aortic regurgitation in patients having isolated aortic valve replacement at a single US tertiary hospital (1993 to 2005). Circulation. 2006;114(5):422-429.	154.	Roberts WC, Ko JM. Frequency by decades of unicuspid, bicus-pid, and tricuspid aortic valves in adults having isolated aortic valve replacement for aortic stenosis, with or without associ-ated aortic regurgitation. Circulation. 2005;111(7):920-925.	155.	Grossman W, Jones D, McLaurin LP. Wall stress and pat-terns of hypertrophy in the human left ventricle. J Clin Invest. 1975;56(1):56-64.	156.	Ross J, Jr, McCullagh WH. Nature of enhanced performance of the dilated left ventricle in the dog during chronic volume overloading. Circ Res. 1972;30(5):549-556.	157.	Wisenbaugh T, Spann SF, Carabello BA. Differences in myo-cardial performance and load between patients with similar amounts of chronic aortic versus chronic mitral regurgitation. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1984;3(4):916-923.	158.	Ross J, Jr. Afterload mismatch in aortic and mitral valve dis-ease: implications for surgical therapy. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1985;5(4):811-826.	159.	Nienaber CA, von Kodolitsch Y, Nicolas V, et al. The diagnosis of thoracic aortic dissection by noninvasive imaging proce-dures. N Engl J Med. 1993;328(1):1-9.	160.	Smith DC, Bansal RC. Transesophageal echocardiography in the diagnosis of traumatic rupture of the aorta. N Engl J Med. 1995;332(6):356-362.	161.	Sasaki Hirai H, Hosono M, et al. Adding coronary artery bypass grafting to aortic valve replacement increases opera-tive mortality for elderly (70 years and older) patients with aortic stenosis. Gen Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013;61(11): 626-631.	162.	de Kerchove L, Boodhwani M, Glineur D, et al. Valve sparing-root replacement with the reimplantation technique to increase the durability of bicuspid aortic valve repair. J Thorac Cardio-vasc Surg. 2011 Dec;142(6):1430-8.	163.	El Khoury G, de Kerchove L. Principles of aortic valve repair. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013;145(3 suppl):S26-S29.	164.	Mokhles MM, Rizopoulos D, Andrinopoulou ER, et al. Autograft and pulmonary allograft performance in the sec-ond post-operative decade after the Ross procedure: insights from the Rotterdam Prospective Cohort Study. Eur Heart J. 2012;33(17):2213-2224.	165.	Chambers JC, Somerville J, Stone S, Ross DN. Pulmonary autograft procedure for aortic valve disease: long-term results of the pioneer series. Circulation. 1997;96(7):2206-2214.	166.	Leon MB, Smith CR, Mack M, et al. Transcatheter aortic-valve implantation for aortic stenosis in patients who cannot undergo surgery. N Engl J Med. 2010;363(17):1597-1607.	167.	Leon MB, Smith CR, Mack MJ, et al. Transcatheter or surgical aortic-valve replacement in intermediate-risk patients. N Engl J Med. 2016;374(17):1609-1620.	168.	Reardon MJ, Van Mieghem NM, Popma JJ, et al. Surgical or transcatheter aortic-valve replacement in intermediate-risk patients. N Engl J Med. 2017;376(14):1321-1331.	169.	Shinn SH, Schaff HV. Evidence-based surgical management of acquired tricuspid valve disease. Nature reviews. Cardiology. 2013;10(4):190-203.	170.	Galloway AC, Grossi EA, Baumann FG. Multiple valve operation for advanced valvular heart disease: results and risk factors in 513 patients. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1992;19(4): 725-732.	171.	Hunt SA, Abraham WT, Chin MH, et al. 2009 focused update incorporated into the ACC/AHA 2005 guidelines for the diag-nosis and management of heart failure in adults: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association task force on practice guidelines: developed in collaboration with the International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation. Circulation. 2009;119(14):e391-e479.	172.	Kilic A, Ailawadi G. Left ventricular assist devices in heart failure. Expert Rev Cardiovasc Ther. 2012;10(5):649-656.	173.	Harper AM, Rosendale JD. The UNOS OPTN waiting list and donor registry: 1988-1996. Clin Transpl. 1996:69-90.	174.	Go AS, Mozaffarian D, Roger VL, et al. Heart disease and stroke statistics—2013 update a report from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2013;127(1):143-152.	175.	Levy D, Kenchaiah S, Larson MG, et al. Long-term trends in the incidence of and survival with heart failure. N Engl J Med. 2002;347(18):1397-1402.	176.	Jones RH, Velazquez EJ, Michler RE, et al. Coronary bypass surgery with or without surgical ventricular reconstruction. N Engl J Med. 2009;360(17):1705-1717.Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   84801/03/19   5:32 PM 849ACQUIRED HEART DISEASECHAPTER 21	177.	McGee EC, Jr, McCarthy PM. Do patients with heart failure benefit from coronary artery bypass grafting? Curr Opin Cardiol. 2012;27(6):629-633.	178.	Allman KC, Shaw LJ, Hachamovitch R, Udelson JE. Myo-cardial viability testing and impact of revascularization on prognosis in patients with coronary artery disease and left ventricular dysfunction: a meta-analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2002;39(7):1151-1158.	179.	Chareonthaitawee P, Gersh BJ, Araoz PA, Gibbons RJ. Revas-cularization in severe left ventricular dysfunction: the role of viability testing. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005;46(4):567-574.	180.	Gerber BL, Rousseau MF, Ahn SA, et al. Prognostic value of myocardial viability by delayed-enhanced magnetic resonance in patients with coronary artery disease and low ejection frac-tion: impact of revascularization therapy. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;59(9):825-835.	181.	Langenburg SE, Buchanan SA, Blackbourne LH, et al. Pre-dicting survival after coronary revascularization for ischemic cardiomyopathy. Ann Thorac Surg. 1995;60(5):1193-1196; discussion 1196-1197.	182.	Yamaguchi A, Ino T, Adachi H, et al. Left ventricular volume predicts postoperative course in patients with ischemic cardio-myopathy. Ann Thorac Surg. 1998;65(2):434-438.	183.	Penicka M, Bartunek J, Lang O, et al. Severe left ventricular dyssynchrony is associated with poor prognosis in patients with moderate systolic heart failure undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007;50(14):1315-1323.	184.	Ciarka A, Van de Veire N. Secondary mitral regurgita-tion: pathophysiology, diagnosis, and treatment. Heart. 2011;97(12):1012-1023.	185.	Grigioni F, Enriquez-Sarano M, Zehr KJ, Bailey KR, Tajik AJ. Ischemic mitral regurgitation: long-term outcome and prog-nostic implications with quantitative Doppler assessment. Cir-culation. 2001;103(13):1759-1764.	186.	Trichon BH, Felker GM, Shaw LK, Cabell CH, O’Connor CM. Relation of frequency and severity of mitral regurgitation to survival among patients with left ventricular systolic dysfunction and heart failure. Am J Cardiol. 2003;91(5): 538-543.	187.	Ellis SG, Whitlow PL, Raymond RE, Schneider JP. Impact of mitral regurgitation on long-term survival after percutaneous coronary intervention. Am J Cardiol. 2002;89(3):315-318.	188.	Vahanian A, Alfieri O, Andreotti F, et al. Guidelines on the management of valvular heart disease: the task force on the management of valvular heart disease of the European Society of Cardiology. Eur Heart J. 2007;28(2):230-268.	189.	DiDonato M, Sabatier M, Dor V, Buckberg G; RESTORE Group. Ventricular arrhythmias after LV remodelling: surgi-cal ventricular restoration or ICD? Heart Fail Rev. 2004;9(4): 299-306; discussion 347-351.	190.	Mihaljevic T, Lam BK, Rajeswaran J, et al. Impact of mitral valve annuloplasty combined with revascularization in patients with functional ischemic mitral regurgitation. J Am Coll  Cardiol. 2007;49(22):2191-2201.	191.	Wu AH, Aaronson KD, Bolling SF, Pagani FD, Welch K, Koelling TM. Impact of mitral valve annuloplasty on mortality risk in patients with mitral regurgitation and left ventricular systolic dysfunction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005;45(3):381-387.	192.	Michler RE, Smith PK, Parides MK, et al. Two-year outcomes of surgical treatment of moderate ischemic mitral regurgita-tion. N Engl J Med. 2016;374(20):1932-1941.	193.	Acker MA, Bolling S, Shemin R, et al. Mitral valve surgery in heart failure: insights from the Acorn Clinical Trial. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2006;132(3):568-577, 577 e1-e4.	194.	McGee EC, Gillinov AM, Blackstone EH, et al. Recur-rent mitral regurgitation after annuloplasty for functional ischemic mitral regurgitation. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2004;128(6):916-924.	195.	Bax JJ, Braun J, Somer ST, et al. Restrictive annuloplasty and coronary revascularization in ischemic mitral regurgita-tion results in reverse left ventricular remodeling. Circulation. 2004;110(11 suppl 1):II103-II108.	196.	Bogaert J, Maes A, Van de Werf F, et al. Functional recovery of subepicardial myocardial tissue in transmural myocardial infarction after successful reperfusion: an important contribu-tion to the improvement of regional and global left ventricular function. Circulation. 1999;99(1):36-43.	197.	Dor V, Sabatier M, Montiglio F, Civaia F, DiDonato M. Endoventricular patch reconstruction of ischemic failing ven-tricle. A single center with 20 years experience. Advantages of magnetic resonance imaging assessment. Heart Fail Rev. 2004;9(4):269-286.	198.	Costa MA, Mazzaferri EL, Jr, Sievert H, Abraham WT. Per-cutaneous ventricular restoration using the parachute device in patients with ischemic heart failure: three-year outcomes of the PARACHUTE first-in-human study. Circ Heart Fail. 2014;7(5):752-758.	199.	Fenoglio JJ, Jr, Pham TD, Harken AH, Horowitz LN, Josephson ME, Wit AL. Recurrent sustained ventricular tachy-cardia: structure and ultrastructure of subendocardial regions in which tachycardia originates. Circulation. 1983;68(3): 518-533.	200.	Scherlag BJ, el-Sherif N, Hope R, Lazzara R. Characteriza-tion and localization of ventricular arrhythmias resulting from myocardial ischemia and infarction. Circulation Res. 1974;35(3):372-383.	201.	Koilpillai C, Quiñones MA, Greenberg B, et al. Rela-tion of ventricular size and function to heart failure sta-tus and ventricular dysrhythmia in patients with severe left ventricular dysfunction. Am J Cardiol. 1996;77(8): 606-611.	202.	Hassapoyannes CA, Stuck LM, Hornung CA, Berbin MC, Flowers NC. Effect of left ventricular aneurysm on risk of sud-den and nonsudden cardiac death. Am J Cardiol. 1991;67(6): 454-459.	203.	Sartipy U, Albage A, Lindblom D. Improved health-related quality of life and functional status after surgical ventricular restoration. Ann Thorac Surg. 2007;83(4):1381-1387.	204.	Isomura T. Surgical left ventricular reconstruction. Gen Tho-rac Cardiovasc Surg. 2011;59(5):315-325.	205.	Maxey TS, Reece TB, Ellman PI, et al. Coronary artery bypass with ventricular restoration is superior to coronary artery bypass alone in patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy.  J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2004;127(2):428-434.	206.	Mickleborough LL, Merchant N, Ivanov J, Rao V, Carson S. Left ventricular reconstruction: early and late results. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2004;128(1):27-37.	207.	Athanasuleas CL, Buckberg GD, Stanley AW, et al. Surgi-cal ventricular restoration: the RESTORE Group experience. Heart Fail Rev. 2004;9(4):287-297.	208.	Dor V, Sabatier M, Montiglio F, Rossi P, Toso A, Di Donato M. Results of nonguided subtotal endocardiectomy asso-ciated with left ventricular reconstruction in patients with ischemic ventricular arrhythmias. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1994;107(5):1301-1307; discussion 1307-1308.	209.	Sartipy U, Albåge A, Strååt E, Insulander P, Lindblom D. Sur-gery for ventricular tachycardia in patients undergoing left ventricular reconstruction by the Dor procedure. Ann Thorac Surg. 2006;81(1):65-71.	210.	Matthias Bechtel JF, Tölg R, Graf B, et al. High incidence of sudden death late after anterior LV-aneurysm repair. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2004;25(5):807-811.	211.	O’Neill JO, Starling RC, Khaykin Y, et al. Residual high inci-dence of ventricular arrhythmias after left ventricular recon-structive surgery. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2005;130(5): 1250-1256.Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   84901/03/19   5:32 PM 850SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	212.	Buckberg GD, Athanasuleas CL. The STICH trial: misguided conclusions. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2009;138(5): 1060-1064 e2.	213.	Dor V, Civaia F, Alexandrescu C, Sabatier M, Montiglio F. Favorable effects of left ventricular reconstruction in patients excluded from the Surgical Treatments for Isch-emic Heart Failure (STICH) trial. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2011;141(4):905-916, 916 e1-e4.	214.	Kang N, Edwards M, Larbalestier R. Preoperative intraaor-tic balloon pumps in high-risk patients undergoing open heart surgery. Ann Thorac Surg. 2001;72(1):54-57.	215.	Thiele H, Zeymer U, Neumann FJ, et al. Intraaortic balloon support for myocardial infarction with cardiogenic shock.  N Engl J Med. 2012;367(14):1287-1296.	216.	Meharwal ZS, Trehan N. Vascular complications of intra-aortic balloon insertion in patients undergoing coronary reavs-cularization: analysis of 911 cases. Eur J Cardiovasc Surg. 2002;21(4):741-747.	217.	Kirklin JK, Pagani FD, Kormos RL, et al. Eighth annual INTERMACS report: special focus on framing the impact of adverse events. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2017; 36(10): 1080-1086.	218.	Rose EA, Gelijns AC, Moskowitz AJ, et al. Long-term use of a left ventricular assist device for end-stage heart failure. N Engl J Med. 2001;345(20):1435-1443.	219.	Maybaum S, Mancini D, Xydas S, et al. Cardiac improve-ment during mechanical circulatory support: a prospective multicenter study of the LVAD Working Group. Circulation. 2007;115(19):2497-2505.	220.	Lamarche Y, Kearns M, Josan K, et al. Successful weaning and explantation of the Heartmate II left ventricular assist device. Can J Cardiol. 2011;27(3):358-362.	221.	Birks EJ, George RS, Hedger M, et al. Reversal of severe heart failure with a continuous-flow left ventricular assist device and pharmacological therapy: a prospective study. Circulation. 2011;123(4):381-390.	222.	Birks EJ, Tansley PD, Hardy J, et al. Left ventricular assist device and drug therapy for the reversal of heart failure.  N Engl J Med. 2006;355(18):1873-1884.	223.	Chugh AR, Beache GM, Loughran JH, et al. Administra-tion of cardiac stem cells in patients with ischemic cardio-myopathy: the SCIPIO trial: surgical aspects and interim analysis of myocardial function and viability by magnetic resonance. Circulation. 2012;126(11 suppl 1):S54-S64.	224.	Hare JM, Fishman JE, Gerstenblith G, et al. Comparison of allogeneic vs autologous bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells delivered by transendocardial injection in patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy: the POSEIDON randomized trial. JAMA. 2012;308(22):2369-2379.	225.	Miller LW, Pagani FD, Russell SD, et al. Use of a continuous-flow device in patients awaiting heart transplantation. N Engl J Med. 2007;357(9):885-896.	226.	Frazier OH, Rose EA, Oz MC, et al. Multicenter clinical eval-uation of the HeartMate vented electric left ventricular assist system in patients awaiting heart transplantation. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2001;122(6):1186-1195.	227.	Aaronson KD, Slaughter MS, Miller LW, et al. Use of an intrapericardial, continuous-flow, centrifugal pump in patients awaiting heart transplantation. Circulation. 2012;125(25): 3191-3200.	228.	John R, Pagani FD, Naka Y, et al. Post-cardiac transplant survival after support with a continuous-flow left ventricu-lar assist device: impact of duration of left ventricular assist device support and other variables. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2010;140(1):174-181.	229.	Pal JD, Piacentino V, Cuevas AD, et al. Impact of left ven-tricular assist device bridging on posttransplant outcomes. Ann Thorac Surg. 2009;88(5):1457-1461; discussion 1461.	230.	Mehra MR, Naka Y, Uriel N, et al. A fully magnetically levi-tated circulatory pump for advanced heart failure. N Engl J Med. 2017;376(5):440-450.	231.	Slaughter MS, Rogers JG, Milano CA, et al. Advanced heart failure treated with continuous-flow left ventricular assist device. N Engl J Med. 2009;361(23):2241-2251.	232.	Kirklin JK, Naftel DC, Pagani FD, et al. Long-term mechani-cal circulatory support (destination therapy): on track to com-pete with heart transplantation? J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2012;144(3):584-603; discussion 597-598.	233.	Slaughter MS, Pagani FD, McGee EC, et al. HeartWare ven-tricular assist system for bridge to transplant: combined results of the bridge to transplant and continued access protocol trial. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2013;32(7):675-683.	234.	Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, et al. 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of heart failure: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association task force on practice guidelines. J Am Coll  Cardiol. 2013;62(16):e147-e239.	235.	John R, Liao K, Kamdar F, Eckman P, Boyle A, Colvin-Adams M. Effects on preand posttransplant pulmonary hemody-namics in patients with continuous-flow left ventricular assist devices. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2010;140(2):447-452.	236.	Kormos RL, Teuteberg JJ, Pagani FD, et al. Right ventricu-lar failure in patients with the HeartMate II continuous-flow left ventricular assist device: incidence, risk factors, and effect on outcomes. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2010;139(5): 1316-1324.	237.	Neragi-Miandoab S. A ventricular assist device as a bridge to recovery, decision making, or transplantation in patients with advanced cardiac failure. Surg Today. 2012;42(10):917-926.	238.	Copeland JG, Smith RG, Arabia FA, et al. Cardiac replace-ment with a total artificial heart as a bridge to transplantation. N Engl J Med. 2004;351(9):859-867.	239.	El-Hamamsy I, Jacques F, Perrault LP, et al. Results follow-ing implantation of mechanical circulatory support systems: the Montreal Heart Institute experience. Can J Cardiol. 2009;25(2):107-110.	240.	Meyer A, Slaughter M. The total artificial heart. Panminerva Med. 2011;53(3):141-154.	241.	Gammie JS, Haddad M, Milford Beland S, et al. Atrial fibril-lation correction surgery: lessons from the Society of Tho-racic Surgeons national cardiac database. Ann Thorac Surg. 2008;85(3):909-914.	242.	Ad N, Suri RM, Gammie JS, Sheng S, O’Brien SM, Henry L. Surgical ablation of atrial fibrillation trends and outcomes in North America. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2012;144(5): 1051-1060.	243.	Calkins H, Kuck KH, Cappato R, et al. 2012 HRS/EHRA/ECAS expert consensus statement on catheter and surgical ablation of atrial fibrillation: recommendations for patient selection, procedural techniques, patient management and follow-up, definitions, endpoints, and research trial design: a report of the Heart Rhythm Society (HRS) Task Force on Catheter and Surgical Ablation of Atrial Fibrillation. Devel-oped in partnership with the European Heart Rhythm Associa-tion (EHRA), a registered branch of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) and the European Cardiac Arrhythmia Soci-ety (ECAS); and in collaboration with the American College of Cardiology (ACC), American Heart Association (AHA), the Asia Pacific Heart Rhythm Society (APHRS), and the Society of Thoracic Surgeons (STS). Endorsed by the governing bod-ies of the American College of Cardiology Foundation, the American Heart Association, the European Cardiac Arrhythmia Society, the European Heart Rhythm Association, the Society of Thoracic Surgeons, the Asia Pacific Heart Rhythm Soci-ety, and the Heart Rhythm Society. Heart Rhythm. 2012;9(4): 632-696 e21.Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   85001/03/19   5:32 PM 851ACQUIRED HEART DISEASECHAPTER 21	244.	Hart RG, Halperin JL. Atrial fibrillation and thromboembo-lism: a decade of progress in stroke prevention. Ann Intern Med. 1999;131(9):688-695.	245.	Zimetbaum P. Antiarrhythmic drug therapy for atrial fibrilla-tion. Circulation. 2012;125(2):381-389.	246.	Potpara TS, Lip GY. Oral anticoagulant therapy in atrial fibril-lation patients at high stroke and bleeding risk. Prog Cardio-vasc Dis. 2015;58(2):177-194.	247.	Corley SD, Epstein AE, Di Marco JP, et al. Relationships between sinus rhythm, treatment, and survival in the Atrial Fibrillation Follow-Up Investigation of Rhythm Management (AFFIRM) study. Circulation. 2004;109(12):1509-1513.	248.	Cox JL, Ad N, Palazzo T. Impact of the maze procedure on the stroke rate in patients with atrial fibrillation. J Thorac Cardio-vasc Surg. 1999;118(5):833-840.	249.	Feinberg MS, Waggoner AD, Kater KM, Cox JL, Lindsay BD, Pérez JE. Restoration of atrial function after the maze proce-dure for patients with atrial fibrillation. Assessment by Doppler echocardiography. Circulation. 1994;90(5 pt 2):II285-II292.	250.	Gillinov AM, Geljins AC, Parides MK, et al. Surgical ablation of atrial fibrillation during mitral-valve surgery. N Engl J Med. 2015;372(15):1399-1409.	251.	Cox JL. Surgical ablation for atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2015;373(5):483.	252.	Badhwar V, Rankin JS, Damiano RE, Jr, et al. The Society of Thoracic Surgeons 2017 clinical practice guidelines for the surgical treatment of atrial fibrillation. Ann Thorac Surg. 2017;103(1):329-341.	253.	Weimar T, Schena S, Bailey MS, et al. The Cox-maze IV pro-cedure for lone atrial fibrillation: a single center experience in 100 consecutive patients. J Interv Card Electrophysiol. 2011;31(1):47-54.	254.	Robertson JO, Saint LL, Leidenfrost JE, Damiano RJ, Jr. Illus-trated techniques for performing the Cox-Maze IV procedure through a right mini-thoracotomy. Ann Cardiothorac Surg. 2014;3(1):105-116.	255.	Henn MC, Lancaster TS, Miller JR, et al. Late outcomes after the Cox maze IV procedure for atrial fibrillation. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2015;150(5):1168-1176, 1178 e1-e2.	256.	Musharbash FN, Schill MR, Sinn LA, et al. Performance of the Cox-maze IV procedure is associated with improved long-term survival in patients with atrial fibrillation undergo-ing cardiac surgery. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2018;155(1): 159-170.	257.	Lall SC, Melby SJ, Voeller RK, et al. The effect of ablation technology on surgical outcomes after the Cox-maze pro-cedure: a propensity analysis J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2007;133(2):389-396.	258.	Pet M, Robertson JO, Bailey M, et al. The impact of CHADS(2) score on late stroke after the Cox maze procedure. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013;146(1):85-89.	259.	Bleeding during antithrombotic therapy in patients with atrial fibrillation. The Stroke Prevention in Atrial Fibrillation Inves-tigators. Arch Intern Med. 1996;156(4):409-416.	260.	Barnett SD, Ad N. Surgical ablation as treatment for the elimi-nation of atrial fibrillation: a meta-analysis. J Thorac Cardio-vasc Surg. 2006;131(5):1029-1035.	261.	Schuessler RB, Kay MW, Melby SJ, Branham BH, Boineau JP, Damiano RJ, Jr. Spatial and temporal stability of the domi-nant frequency of activation in human atrial fibrillation. J Electrocardiol. 2006;39(4 suppl):S7-S12.	262.	Edgerton JR, Edgerton ZJ, Weaver T, et al. Minimally invasive pulmonary vein isolation and partial autonomic denervation for surgical treatment of atrial fibrillation. Ann Thorac Surg. 2008;86(1):35-38; discussion 39.	263.	Jazayeri MA, Vuddanda, Turagam MK, et al. Safety profiles of percutaneous left atrial appendage closure devices: an analysis of the Food and Drug Administration manufacturer and user facility device experience (MAUDE) database from 2009-2016. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2018;29(1):5-13.	264.	Boersma LV, Castella M, van Boven W, et al. Atrial fibril-lation catheter ablation versus surgical ablation treatment (FAST): a 2-center randomized clinical trial. Circulation. 2012;125(1):23-30.	265.	Imazio M, Demichelis B, Parrini I, et al. Day-hospital treat-ment of acute pericarditis: a management program for outpa-tient therapy. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2004;43(6):1042-1046.	266.	Launbjerg J, Fruergaard P, Hesse B, Jørgensen F, Elsborg L, Petri A. Long-term risk of death, cardiac events and recurrent chest pain in patients with acute chest pain of different origin. Cardiology. 1996;87(1):60-66.	267.	Dudzinski DM, Mak GS, Hung JW. Pericardial diseases. Curr Probl Cardiol. 2012;37(3):75-118.	268.	Lange RA, Hillis LD. Clinical practice. Acute pericarditis.  N Engl J Med. 2004;351(21):2195-2202.	269.	Spodick DH. Acute pericarditis: current concepts and practice. JAMA. 2003;289(9):1150-1153.	270.	Bruce MA, Spodick DH. Atypical electrocardiogram in acute pericarditis: characteristics and prevalence. J Electrocardiol. 1980;13(1):61-66.	271.	Salisbury AC, Olalla-Gómez C, Rihal CS, et al. Frequency and predictors of urgent coronary angiography in patients with acute pericarditis. Mayo Clin Proc. 2009. 84(1):11-15.	272.	Imazio M, Brucato A, Maestroni S, et al. Prevalence of C-reactive protein elevation and time course of normalization in acute pericarditis: implications for the diagnosis, therapy, and prog-nosis of pericarditis. Circulation. 2011;123(10):1092-1097.	273.	Imazio M, Bobbio M, Cecchi E, et al. Colchicine in addition to conventional therapy for acute pericarditis: results of the COlchicine for acute PEricarditis (COPE) trial. Circulation. 2005;112(13):2012-2016.	274.	Khandaker MH, Espinosa RE, Nishimura R, et al. Pericar-dial disease: diagnosis and management. Mayo Clin Proc. 2010;85(6):572-593.	275.	Fowler NO. Recurrent pericarditis. Cardiol Clin. 1990;8(4): 621-626.	276.	Khandaker MH, Schaff HV, Greason KL, et al. Pericardiec-tomy vs medical management in patients with relapsing peri-carditis. Mayo Clin Proc. 2012;87(11):1062-1070.	277.	Tuna IC, Danielson GK. Surgical management of pericardial diseases. Cardiol Clin. 1990;8(4):683-696.	278.	Azam S, Hoit BD. Treatment of pericardial disease. Cardio-vasc Ther. 2011;29(5):308-314.	279.	Feng D, Glockner J, Kim K, et al. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging pericardial late gadolinium enhancement and elevated inflammatory markers can predict the reversibility of constric-tive pericarditis after antiinflammatory medical therapy: a pilot study. Circulation. 2011;124(17):1830-1837.	280.	Gillaspie EA, Stulak JM, Daly RC, et al. A 20-year experi-ence with isolated pericardiectomy: analysis of indications and outcomes. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2016;152(2): 448-458.	281.	Busch C, Penov K, Amorim PA, et al. Risk factors for mor-tality after pericardiectomy for chronic constrictive pericardi-tis in a large single-centre cohort. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2015;48(6):e110-e116.	282.	Ariyoshi T, Hashizume K, Taniguchi S, et al. Surgical experi-ence with chronic constrictive pericarditis. Gen Thorac Car-diovasc Surg. 2012;60 (12):796-802.	283.	Chowdhury UK, Subramaniam GK, Kumar AS, et al. Peri-cardiectomy for constrictive pericarditis: a clinical, echo-cardiographic, and hemodynamic evaluation of two surgical techniques. Ann Thorac Surg. 2006;81(2):522-529.	284.	Bertog SC, Thambidorai SK, Parakh K, et al. Constrictive pericarditis: etiology and cause-specific survival after pericar-diectomy. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2004;43(8):1445-1452.Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   85101/03/19   5:32 PM 852SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	285.	DeValeria PA, Baumgartner WA, Casale AS, et al. Current indications, risks, and outcome after pericardiectomy. Ann Thorac Surg. 1991;52(2): 219-224.	286.	Ghavidel AA, Gholampour, Kyavar M, et al. Constrictive pericarditis treated by surgery. Tex Heart Inst J. 2012;39(2): 199-205.	287.	Ling LH, et al. Constrictive pericarditis in the modern era: evolving clinical spectrum and impact on outcome after peri-cardiectomy. Circulation. 1999;100(13):1380-1386.	288.	Abushaban L, Denham B, Duff D. 10 year review of cardiac tumours in childhood. Br Heart J. 1993;70(2):166-169.	289.	Reynen K. Frequency of primary tumors of the heart. Am J Cardiol. 1996;77(1):107.	290.	Butany J, Leong SW, Carmichael K, Komeda M. A 30-year analysis of cardiac neoplasms at autopsy. Can J Cardiol. 2005;21(8):675-680.	291.	Pinede L, Duhaut P, Loire R. Clinical presentation of left atrial cardiac myxoma. A series of 112 consecutive cases. Medicine (Baltimore). 2001;80(3):159-172.	292.	Castillo JG, Silvay GG. Characterization and management of car-diac tumors. Semin Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2010;14(1): 6-20.	293.	Kusano KF, Ohe T. Cardiac tumors that cause arrhythmias. Cardiac Electrophysiol Rev. 2002;6(1-2):174-177.	294.	Lee VH, Connolly HM, Brown RD, Jr. Central nervous system manifestations of cardiac myxoma. Arch Neurol. 2007;64(8): 1115-1120.	295.	Jean WC, Walski-Easton SM, Nussbaum ES. Multiple intra-cranial aneurysms as delayed complications of an atrial myxoma: case report. Neurosurgery. 2001;49(1):200-202; discussion 202-203.	296.	Jain D, Maleszewski JJ, Halushka MK. Benign cardiac tumors and tumorlike conditions. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2010;14(3):215-230.	297.	Pucci A, Gagliardotto P, Zanini C, Pansini S, di Summa M, Mollo F. Histopathologic and clinical characterization of car-diac myxoma: review of 53 cases from a single institution. Am Heart J. 2000;140(1):134-138.	298.	Bakaeen FG, Reardon MJ, Coselli JS, et al. Surgical out-come in 85 patients with primary cardiac tumors. Am J Surg. 2003;186(6):641-647; discussion 647.	299.	Gammie JS, Abrishamchian AR, Griffith BP. Cardiac autotransplantation and radical bi-atrial resection for recurrent atrial myxoma. Ann Thorac Surg. 2007;83(4): 1545-1547.	300.	Goldstein DJ, Oz MC, Michler RE. Radical excisional therapy and total cardiac transplantation for recurrent atrial myxoma. Ann Thorac Surg. 1995;60(4):1105-1107.	301.	Shah IK, Dearani JA, Daly RC, et al. Cardiac myxomas: a 50-year experience with resection and analysis of risk factors for recurrence. Ann Thorac Surg. 2015;100(2):495-500.	302.	Putnam JB, Jr, Sweeney MS, Colon R, Lanza LA, Frazier OH, Cooley DA. Primary cardiac sarcomas. Ann Thorac Surg. 1991;51(6):906-910.	303.	Neuville A, Collin F, Bruneval P, et al. Intimal sarcoma is the most frequent primary cardiac sarcoma: clinicopathologic and molecular retrospective analysis of 100 primary cardiac sarco-mas. Am J Surg Pathol. 2014;38(4):461-469.	304.	Neragi-Miandoab S, Kim J, Vlahakes GJ. Malignant tumours of the heart: a review of tumour type, diagnosis and therapy. Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol). 2007;19(10):748-756.Brunicardi_Ch21_p0801-p0852.indd   85201/03/19   5:32 PM
# Chunk 8924
Thoracic Aneurysms  and Aortic DissectionScott A. LeMaire, Ourania Preventza,  and Joseph S. Coselli 22chapterANATOMY OF THE AORTAThe aorta consists of two major segments—the proximal aorta and the distal aorta—whose anatomic characteristics affect both the clinical manifestations of disease in these segments and the selection of treatment strategies for such disease (Fig. 22-1). The proximal aortic segment includes the ascending aorta and the transverse aortic arch. The ascending aorta begins at the aortic valve and ends at the origin of the innominate artery. The first portion of the ascending aorta is the aortic root, which includes the aortic valve annulus and the three sinuses of Valsalva; the coronary arteries originate from two of these sinuses. The aortic root joins the tubular portion of the ascending aorta at the sinotubular ridge. The transverse aortic arch is the area from which the brachio-cephalic branches arise. The distal aortic segment includes the descending thoracic aorta and the abdominal aorta. The descending thoracic aorta begins distal to the origin of the left subclavian artery and extends to the diaphragmatic hia-tus, where it joins the abdominal aorta. The descending tho-racic aorta gives rise to multiple bronchial and esophageal branches, as well as to the segmental intercostal arteries, which provide circulation to the spinal cord.The volume of blood that flows through the thoracic aorta at high pressure is far greater than that found in any other vascular structure. For this reason, any condition that disrupts the integrity of the thoracic aorta, such as aortic dissection, aneurysm rupture, or traumatic injury, can have catastrophic consequences.Historically, open surgical repair of such conditions has been an intimidating undertaking associated with significant morbidity and mortality. Strategies for protecting the brain and spinal cord during such repairs have become critical in preventing devastating complications. Endovascular therapy for such conditions in selected patients has become accepted practice, producing fewer adverse outcomes than traditional approaches.THORACIC AORTIC ANEURYSMSAortic aneurysm is defined as a permanent, localized dilatation of the aorta to a diameter that is at least 50% greater than is normal at that anatomic level.1 The annual incidence of thoracic aortic aneurysms is estimated to be 5.9 per 100,000 persons.2 The clinical manifestations, methods of treatment, and treatment results in patients with aortic aneurysms vary according to the cause and the aortic segment involved. Causes of thoracic aortic aneurysms include degenerative disease of the aortic wall, aor-tic dissection, aortitis, infection, and trauma. Aneurysms can be localized to a single aortic segment, or they can involve multiple segments. Thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms, for example, involve both the descending thoracic aorta and the abdominal aorta. In the most extreme cases, the entire aorta is aneurysmal; this condition is often called mega-aorta.Aortic aneurysms can be either “true” or “false.” True aneurysms can take two forms: fusiform and saccular. Fusiform aneurysms are more common and can be described as sym-metrical dilatations of the aorta. Saccular aneurysms are local-ized outpouchings of the aorta. False aneurysms, also called pseudoaneurysms, are leaks in the aortic wall that are contained by the outer layer of the aorta and/or the periaortic tissue; they are caused by disruption of the aortic wall and lead blood to collect in pouches of fibrotic tissue.Aneurysms of the thoracic aorta consistently increase in size and eventually progress to cause serious complications. These include rupture, which usually is a fatal event. Therefore, aggressive treatment is indicated in all but the poorest surgical candidates. Small, asymptomatic thoracic aortic aneurysms can be followed, especially in high-surgical-risk patients, and can be treated surgically later if symptoms or complications develop, or if progressive enlargement occurs. Meticulous control of hyper-tension is the primary medical treatment for patients with small, asymptomatic aneurysms.Elective resection with graft replacement is indicated in asymptomatic patients with an aortic diameter of at least twice Anatomy of the Aorta853Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms853Causes and Pathogenesis / 854Clinical History / 857Clinical Manifestations / 857Diagnostic Evaluation / 858Treatment / 860Aortic Dissection876Pathology and Classification / 876Causes and Clinical History / 879Clinical Manifestations / 879Diagnostic Evaluation / 880Treatment / 881Outcomes885Repair of Proximal Aortic  Aneurysms / 885Treatment of Acute Ascending Aortic Dissection / 888Repair of Distal Aortic Aneurysms / 888Treatment of Descending Thoracic  Aortic Dissection / 888Conclusions889Acknowledgments889Brunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   85301/03/19   5:40 PM 854Figure 22-1. Illustration of normal thoracic aortic anatomy. The brachiocephalic vessels arise from the transverse aortic arch and are used as anatomic landmarks to define the aortic regions. The ascending aorta is proximal to the innominate artery, whereas the descending aorta is distal to the left subclavian artery.normal in the involved segment (5 to 6 cm in most thoracic segments). Elective repair is contraindicated by extreme opera-tive risk due to severe coexisting cardiac or pulmonary dis-ease and by other conditions that limit life expectancy, such as malignancy. An emergency operation is performed for any patient in whom a ruptured aneurysm is suspected.Patients with thoracic aortic aneurysm often have coexisting aneurysms of other aortic segments. A common cause of death after repair of a thoracic aortic aneurysm is rupture of a different aortic aneurysm. Therefore, staged repair of multiple aortic seg-ments often is necessary. As with any major operation, careful pre-operative evaluation for coexisting disease and subsequent medical optimization are important for successful surgical treatment.An alternative to traditional open repair of a descending thoracic aortic aneurysm is endovascular stent grafting. Certain anatomic criteria for use—such as a landing zone that includes at least 2 cm of landing zone of healthy aortic tissue proximal and distal to the targeted aneurysm—are preferable, but not absolutely necessary. Although few data on long-term outcomes have recently been published, endovascular repair of descending thoracic aortic aneurysm has become an accepted practice that produces excellent midterm results.Causes and PathogenesisGeneral Considerations. The normal aorta derives its elastic-ity and tensile strength from the medial layer, which contains approximately 45 to 55 lamellae of elastin, collagen, smooth muscle cells, and ground substance. Elastin content is highest within the ascending aorta, as would be expected because of its compliant nature, and decreases distally into the descending and abdominal aorta. Maintenance of the aortic matrix involves complex interactions among smooth muscle cells, macrophages, proteases, and protease inhibitors. Any alteration in this delicate balance can lead to aortic disease.Thoracic aortic aneurysms have a variety of causes (Table 22-1). Although these disparate pathologic processes differ in biochemical and histologic terms, they share the final common pathway of progressive aortic expansion and eventual rupture.Hemodynamic factors clearly contribute to the process of aortic dilatation. The vicious cycle of increasing diameter and increasing wall tension, as characterized by Laplace’s law  (tension = pressure × radius), is well established. Turbulent Key Points1	Assessing urgency of repair is essential to developing the appropriate management plan. Although emergent repair carries greater operative risk than does elective repair, any inappropriate delay of repair risks death.2	The clinical progression of an aortic aneurysm is continued expansion and eventual dissection or rupture. Hence, regular noninvasive imaging studies, as part of a lifelong surveil-lance plan, are necessary to ensure long-term patient health. Even small asymptomatic aneurysms should be routinely imaged to assess overall size and yearly rate of expansion.3	Endovascular repair devices are approved for the treatment of descending thoracic aortic aneurysms, descending thoracic aortic dissections, aortic trauma, and penetrating aortic ulcer.4	Practice guidelines have been published to help standardize the decision-making process and select an appropriate surgi-cal intervention, as well as to standardize the use of imaging studies for patients with thoracic aortic disease.5	Ascending aortic aneurysms that are symptomatic or  ≥5.5 cm in diameter should be repaired regardless of whether the patient has a bicuspid or tricuspid aortic valve. This threshold is lowered for patients with certain heritable disor-ders affecting the aorta and for patients with additional risk  factors, such as rapid aortic expansion (≥0.5 cm per year) or a family history of dissection.6	Surgical repair involves the development of a patienttailored plan based on careful preoperative medical evalua-tion. When appropriate, optimizing a patient’s health  status—to mitigate existing comorbidities—is important before surgical intervention.7	The development and use of surgical adjuncts like antegrade selective cerebral perfusion and cerebrospinal fluid drainage have significantly reduced the morbidity rates traditionally associated with complex aortic repair.8	Proximal aortic dissection is a life-threatening condition, and immediate operative repair is generally indicated, although definitive aortic repair may be delayed until after severe mal-perfusion has been treated.Brunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   85401/03/19   5:40 PM 855THORACIC ANEURYSMS AND AORTIC DISSECTIONCHAPTER 22Table 22-1Causes of thoracic aortic aneurysmNonspecific medial degenerationAortic dissectionHeritable conditions Marfan syndrome Loeys-Dietz syndrome Ehlers-Danlos syndrome Turner syndrome Familial thoracic aortic aneurysm Aneurysms-osteoarthritis syndrome Congenital bicuspid aortic valve Bovine aortic archPoststenotic dilatationInfectionAortitis Takayasu arteritis Giant cell arteritis Rheumatoid aortitisTrauma (pseudoaneurysm)blood flow also is recognized as a factor. Poststenotic aortic dilatation, for example, occurs in some patients with aortic valve stenosis or coarctation of the descending thoracic aorta. Hemodynamic derangements, however, are only one piece of a complex puzzle.Atherosclerosis is commonly cited as a cause of thoracic aortic aneurysms. However, although atherosclerotic disease often is found in conjunction with aortic aneurysms, the notion that atherosclerosis is a distinct cause of aneurysm formation has been challenged. In most thoracic aortic aneurysms, ath-erosclerosis appears to be a coexisting process, rather than the underlying cause.Research into the pathogenesis of abdominal aortic aneurysms has focused on the molecular mechanisms of aortic wall degeneration and dilatation.3 For example, imbalances between proteolytic enzymes (e.g., matrix metalloproteinases) and their inhibitors contribute to abdominal aortic aneurysm formation. Building on these advances, current investigations are attempting to determine whether similar inflammatory and proteolytic mechanisms are involved in thoracic aortic disease, in hope of identifying potential molecular targets for pharmacologic therapy.Nonspecific Medial Degeneration. Nonspecific medial degeneration is the most common cause of thoracic aortic dis-ease. Histologic findings of mild medial degeneration, includ-ing fragmentation of elastic fibers and loss of smooth muscle cells, are expected in the aging aorta. However, an advanced, accelerated form of medial degeneration leads to progressive weakening of the aortic wall, aneurysm formation, and eventual dissection, rupture, or both. The underlying causes of medial degenerative disease remain poorly understood.Aortic Dissection. An aortic dissection usually begins as a tear in the inner aortic wall, which initiates a progressive sepa-ration of the medial layers and creates two channels within the aorta. This event profoundly weakens the outer wall. As the most common catastrophe involving the aorta, dissection repre-sents a major, distinct cause of thoracic aortic aneurysms and is discussed in detail in the second half of this chapter.Heritable Conditions. Several heritable conditions cause  thoracic aortic aneurysms. To better characterize these disorders, the National Institutes of Health (NIH) sponsored a longitudinal registry for individuals affected by genetically triggered thoracic aortic aneurysms and cardiovascular conditions (GenTAC) more than a decade ago.4 The registry enrollment includes adults and children in 13 clinical categories, including Marfan syndrome, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, Loeys-Dietz syndrome, familial tho-racic aortic aneurysms and dissections, aneurysms-osteoarthritis syndrome, and congenital bicuspid aortic valve.Marfan Syndrome Marfan syndrome is an autosomal domi-nant genetic disorder characterized by a specific connective tissue defect that leads to aneurysm formation. The phenotype of patients with Marfan syndrome typically includes a tall stat-ure, high palate, joint hypermobility, eye lens disorders, mitral valve prolapse, and aortic aneurysms. The aortic wall is weak-ened by fragmentation of elastic fibers and deposition of exten-sive amounts of mucopolysaccharides (a process previously called cystic medial degeneration or cystic medial necrosis). Patients with Marfan syndrome have a mutation in the fibrillin gene located on the long arm of chromosome 15. The tradi-tional view has been that abnormal fibrillin in the extracellular matrix decreases connective tissue strength in the aortic wall and produces abnormal elasticity, which predisposes the aorta to dilatation from wall tension caused by left ventricular ejec-tion impulses.5 More recent evidence, however, shows that the abnormal fibrillin causes degeneration of the aortic wall matrix by increasing the activity of transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β).6 Between 75% and 85% of patients with Marfan syn-drome have dilatation of the ascending aorta and annuloaortic ectasia (dilatation of the aortic sinuses and annulus).7 Marfan syndrome also is frequently associated with aortic dissection, and aortic complications are the most common cause of death among patients with Marfan syndrome.8Loeys-Dietz Syndrome Loeys-Dietz syndrome is phenotypi-cally distinct from Marfan syndrome. It is characterized as an aneurysmal syndrome with widespread systemic involvement. Loeys-Dietz syndrome is an aggressive, autosomal dominant condition that is distinguished by the triad of arterial tortuosity  and aneurysms, hypertelorism (widely spaced eyes), and bifid uvula or cleft palate. It is caused by heterozygous mutations in the genes encoding TGF-β receptors.9,10 Patients with Loeys-Dietz syndrome—including young children—are at increased risk of aortic rupture and aortic dissection; diameter-based thresholds of repair tend to be lower for patients with this  syndrome than for patients with other heritable disorders.Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome Ehlers-Danlos syndrome includes a spectrum of inherited disorders of collagen synthesis. The sub-types represent differing defective steps of collagen production. Vascular type Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is characterized by an autosomal dominant defect in type III collagen synthesis, which can have life-threatening cardiovascular manifestations. Sponta-neous arterial rupture, usually involving the mesenteric vessels, is the most common cause of death in these patients. Thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections are less commonly associated with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, but when they do occur, they pose a particularly challenging surgical problem because of the reduced integrity of the aortic tissue.11 An Ehlers-Danlos variant of periventricular heterotopia associated with joint and skin hyperextensibility and aortic dilation has been described as being caused by mutations in the gene encoding filamin A Brunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   85501/03/19   5:40 PM 856SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II(FLNA), an actin-binding protein that links the smooth muscle cell contractile unit to the cell surface.12Familial Thoracic Aortic Aneurysm and Dissection Fami-lies without the heritable syndromes described earlier also can be affected by genetic conditions that cause thoracic aortic aneurysm. In fact, it is estimated that at least 20% of patients with thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections have a genetic predisposition to them. The involved mutations are characterized by autosomal dominant inheritance with decreased penetrance and variable expression. The number of genes for which mutations have been identified as causes of familial thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection is expanding  rapidly; involved genes include those related to TGF-β receptors (TGFBR1 and TGFBR2), TGF-β ligands (TGFB2 and TGFB3), myosin (MYH11 and MYLK), elastin (ELN), elastin microfibril interfacer 1 (EMLIN1), microfibril-associated glycoprotein 2 (MFAP5), fibrillin-2 (FBN2), fibulin-4 (FBLN4), lysyl oxidase (LOX), and α-smooth muscle cell actin (ACTA2).3,13-16 ACTA2 mutations are present in approximately 14% of families with familial thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections.Aneurysms-Osteoarthritis Syndrome Aneurysmsosteoarthritis syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder char-acterized by aortic and arterial aneurysms, arterial tortuosity, aor-tic dissection, mild craniofacial abnormalities, and early-onset osteoarthritis. Aneurysms-osteoarthritis syndrome is caused by mutations in the gene encoding SMAD3, a transcription factor for TGF-β. Affected patients have a high incidence of aortic  dissection, which often occurs in a mildly dilated aorta and causes sudden death.17Congenital Bicuspid Aortic Valve Bicuspid aortic valve is the most common congenital malformation of the heart or great vessels, affecting up to 2% of Americans.18 Compared to patients with a normal, trileaflet aortic valve, patients with bicuspid aortic valve have an increased incidence of ascending aortic aneurysm formation and, often, a more rapid rate of aortic enlargement.19 The location of the fused leaflet, or raphe, may be predictive of aortic dilation and other abnormalities.20 Fifty to 70% of adults with bicuspid aortic valve, but without significant valve dysfunction, have echocardiographically detectable aortic dilatation.21,22 This dilatation usually is limited to the ascending aorta and root.23 Dilation occasionally is found in the arch and only rarely in the descending or abdominal aorta. In addition, aortic dissection occurs 10 times more often in patients with bicuspid valves than in the general population.24 Recent findings suggest that aneurysms associated with bicuspid aortic valve have a fundamentally different pathobiologic cause than aneu-rysms that occur in patients with trileaflet valves.25Although the exact mechanism responsible for aneu-rysm formation in patients with bicuspid aortic valve remains unclear, evidence suggests that these patients have a congeni-tal connective tissue abnormality that predisposes the aorta to medial degeneration.25-31 For example, fibrillin-1 content is sig-nificantly lower and matrix metalloproteinase activity is signifi-cantly higher in the aortic media in patients with bicuspid aortic valve than in persons with a normal, tricuspid aortic valve.25-27  Further, the process of medial degeneration in patients with bicuspid aortic valve may be exacerbated by the presence of chronic turbulent flow through the deformed valve.Bovine Aortic Arch Bovine aortic arch—a common origin of the innominate and left common carotid arteries—has been con-sidered a normal anatomic variant. Studies from Yale University have identified a higher prevalence of bovine aortic arch in patients with thoracic aortic disease; an association was found between this anomaly and a generalized increase in aortic aneu-rysmal disease (without any predisposition to a particular aortic region). However, bovine aortic arch was not associated dis-tinctly with bicuspid aortic valve or aortic dissection, but with a higher mean aortic growth rate: 0.29 cm per year in patients with bovine aortic arch, compared with 0.09 cm per year in controls. Therefore, bovine aortic arch may be better character-ized as a precursor of aortic aneurysm than as a simple normal anatomic variant.32 Further studies are needed to delineate the underlying mechanism for this association.Infection. Primary infection of the aortic wall resulting in aneurysm formation is rare. Although these lesions are termed mycotic aneurysms, the responsible pathogens usually are bac-teria rather than fungi. Bacterial invasion of the aortic wall may result from bacterial endocarditis, endothelial trauma caused by an aortic jet lesion, or extension from an infected laminar clot within a preexisting aneurysm. The most common causative organisms are Staphylococcus aureus, Staphylococcus epider-midis, Salmonella, and Streptococcus.33,34 Unlike most other causes of thoracic aortic aneurysms, which generally produce fusiform aneurysms, infection often produces saccular aneu-rysms located in areas of aortic tissue destroyed by the infec-tious process.Although syphilis was once the most common cause of ascending aortic aneurysms, the advent of effective antibiotic therapy has made syphilitic aneurysms a rarity in developed nations. In other parts of the world, however, syphilitic aneu-rysms remain a major cause of morbidity and mortality. The spi-rochete Treponema pallidum causes an obliterative endarteritis of the vasa vasorum that results in medial ischemia and loss of the elastic and muscular elements of the aortic wall. The ascend-ing aorta and arch are the most commonly involved areas. The emergence of HIV infection in the 1980s was associated with a substantial increase in the incidence of syphilis in both HIV-positive and HIV-negative patients. Because syphilitic aortitis often presents 10 to 30 years after the primary infection, the inci-dence of associated aneurysms may increase in the near future.Aortitis. In patients with preexisting degenerative thoracic aortic aneurysms, localized transmural inflammation and subse-quent fibrosis can develop. The dense aortic infiltrate responsible for the fibrosis consists of lymphocytes, plasma cells, and giant cells. The cause of the intense inflammatory reaction is unknown. Although the severe inflammation is a superimposed problem rather than a primary cause, its onset within an aneurysm can further weaken the aortic wall and precipitate expansion.Systemic autoimmune disorders also cause thoracic aor-titis. Aortic Takayasu arteritis generally produces obstructive lesions related to severe intimal thickening, but associated medial necrosis can lead to aneurysm formation. In patients with giant cell arteritis (temporal arteritis), granulomatous inflam-mation may develop that involves the entire thickness of the aortic wall, causing intimal thickening and medial destruction. Rheumatoid aortitis is an uncommon systemic disease that is associated with rheumatoid arthritis and ankylosing spondylitis. The resulting medial inflammation and fibrosis can affect the aortic root, causing annular dilatation, aortic valve regurgitation, and ascending aortic aneurysm formation.Pseudoaneurysms. Pseudoaneurysms of the thoracic aorta usually represent chronic leaks that are contained by surrounding Brunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   85601/03/19   5:40 PM 857THORACIC ANEURYSMS AND AORTIC DISSECTIONCHAPTER 22tissue and fibrosis. By definition, the wall of a pseudoaneurysm is not formed by intact aortic tissue; rather, the wall devel-ops from organized thrombus and associated fibrosis. Pseu-doaneurysms can arise from primary defects in the aortic wall  (e.g., after trauma or contained aneurysm rupture) or from anas-tomotic or cannulation site leaks that occur after cardiovascular surgery. Anastomotic pseudoaneurysms can be caused by tech-nical problems or by deterioration of the native aortic tissue, graft material, or suture. Commonly, they occur in patients with Marfan syndrome, Loeys-Dietz syndrome, or other heritable conditions that markedly weaken the vessel wall.35 Tissue dete-rioration usually is related to either progressive degenerative disease or infection. Improvements in sutures, graft materials, and surgical techniques have decreased the incidence of tho-racic aortic pseudoaneurysm. Should thoracic aortic pseudoan-eurysms occur, they typically require expeditious open surgical or catheter-based repair because they are associated with a high incidence of morbidity and rupture.Clinical HistoryTreatment decisions in cases of thoracic aortic aneurysm are guided by our current understanding of the clinical history of these aneurysms, which classically is characterized as progres-sive aortic dilatation and eventual dissection, rupture, or both. An analysis by Elefteriades of data from 1600 patients with thoracic aortic disease has helped quantify these well-recognized risks.36 Average expansion rates were 0.07 cm per year in ascending aortic aneurysms and 0.19 cm per year in descending thoracic aortic aneurysms. As expected, aortic diam-eter was a strong predictor of rupture, dissection, and mortality. For thoracic aortic aneurysms >6 cm in diameter, annual rates of catastrophic complications were 3.6% for rupture, 3.7% for dissection, and 10.8% for death. Critical “hinge-point” diame-ters, at which the incidence of expected complications signifi-cantly increased, were 6.0 cm for aneurysms of the ascending aorta and 7.0 cm for aneurysms of the descending thoracic aorta; the corresponding risks of rupture after reaching these diameters were 31% and 43%, respectively.37Certain types of aneurysms have an elevated propensity for expansion and rupture. For example, aneurysms in patients with Marfan or Loeys-Dietz syndrome tend to dilate at an accelerated rate and rupture or dissect at smaller diameters than sporadic, nonheritable aneurysms. Before the era of surgical treatment for aortic aneurysms, the aggressive form of aortic disease in Marfan patients resulted in an average life expectancy of 32 years, with aortic root complications causing the majority of deaths.38 Saccular aneurysms, which commonly are associated with aortic infection and typically affect only a discrete small section of the aorta, tend to grow more rapidly than fusiform aneurysms, which are associated with more widespread degen-erative changes and generally affect a larger section of the aorta.One common clinical scenario deserves special attention. A moderately dilated ascending aorta (i.e., 4 to 5 cm) often is encountered during aortic valve replacement or coronary artery bypass operations. The clinical history of these ectatic ascend-ing aortas has been defined by several studies. Michel and  colleagues39 studied patients whose ascending aortic diameters were >4 cm at the time of aortic valve replacement; 25% of these patients required reoperation for ascending aortic replacement. Prenger and colleagues40 reported that aortic dissection occurred in 27% of patients who had aortic diameters of >5 cm at the time of aortic valve replacement. Attention has been directed toward whether or not a mildly dilated aortic root should be replaced in patients with bicuspid aortic valve who are undergoing iso-lated valve replacement, and at what threshold to intervene. Although this is a controversial issue, many surgeons believe that the tendency toward late aortic dilatation in these patients war-rants aggressive treatment.41,42 According to a recent guidelines  clarification,43 in patients with bicuspid aortic valve who are undergoing aortic valve replacement or repair, replacing the ascending aorta is reasonable when the diameter of the ascending aorta is greater than 4.5 cm (Class IIa, Level C recommendation).Clinical ManifestationsIn many patients with thoracic aortic aneurysms, the aneurysm is discovered incidentally when imaging studies are performed for unrelated reasons. Therefore, patients often are asymptom-atic at the time of diagnosis. However, thoracic aortic aneurysms that initially go undetected eventually create symptoms and signs that correspond with the segment of aorta that is involved. These aneurysms have a wide variety of manifestations, includ-ing compression or erosion of adjacent structures, aortic valve regurgitation, distal embolism, and rupture.Local Compression and Erosion. Initially, aneurysmal expan-sion and impingement on adjacent structures causes mild, chronic pain. The most common symptom in patients with ascending aor-tic aneurysms is anterior chest discomfort; the pain is frequently precordial in location but may radiate to the neck and jaw, mim-icking angina. Aneurysms of the ascending aorta and transverse aortic arch can cause symptoms related to compression of the superior vena cava, the pulmonary artery, the airway, or the ster-num. Rarely, these aneurysms erode into the superior vena cava or right atrium, causing acute high-output failure. Expansion of the distal aortic arch can stretch the recurrent laryngeal nerve, which results in left vocal cord paralysis and hoarseness. Descending thoracic and thoracoabdominal aneurysms frequently cause back pain localized between the scapulae. When the aneurysm is larg-est in the region of the aortic hiatus, it may cause middle back and epigastric pain. Thoracic or lumbar vertebral body erosion typically causes severe, chronic back pain; extreme cases can present with spinal instability and neurologic deficits from spinal cord compression. Although mycotic aneurysms have a peculiar propensity to destroy vertebral bodies, spinal erosion also occurs with degenerative aneurysms. Descending thoracic aortic aneu-rysms may cause varying degrees of airway obstruction, mani-festing as cough, wheezing, stridor, or pneumonitis. Pulmonary or airway erosion presents as hemoptysis. Compression and ero-sion of the esophagus cause dysphagia and hematemesis, respec-tively. Thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms can cause duodenal obstruction or, if they erode through the bowel wall, gastrointes-tinal bleeding. Jaundice due to compression of the liver or porta hepatis is uncommon. Erosion into the inferior vena cava or iliac vein presents with an abdominal bruit, widened pulse pressure, edema, and heart failure.Aortic Valve Regurgitation. Ascending aortic aneurysms can cause displacement of the aortic valve commissures and annular dilatation. The resulting deformation of the aortic valve leads to progressively worsening aortic valve regurgitation. In response to the volume overload, the heart remodels and becomes increasingly dilated. Patients with this condition may present with progressive heart failure, a widened pulse pressure, and a diastolic murmur.Distal Embolization. Thoracic aortic aneurysms—particularly  those involving the descending and thoracoabdominal aorta—are commonly lined with friable, atheromatous plaque and 1Brunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   85701/03/19   5:40 PM 858SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 22-2. Chest radiographs showing a calcified rim (arrows) in the aortic wall of a thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm.  A. Anteroposterior view. B. Lateral view.mural thrombus. This debris may embolize distally, caus-ing occlusion and thrombosis of the visceral, renal, or lower-extremity branches.Rupture. Patients with ruptured thoracic aortic aneurysms often experience sudden, severe pain in the anterior chest (ascending aorta), upper back or left chest (descending thoracic aorta), or left flank or abdomen (thoracoabdominal aorta). When ascending aortic aneurysms rupture, they usually bleed into the pericardial space, producing acute cardiac tamponade and death. Descending thoracic aortic aneurysms rupture into the pleural cavity, producing a combination of severe hemorrhagic shock and respiratory compromise. External rupture is extremely rare; saccular syphilitic aneurysms have been observed to rupture externally after eroding through the sternum.Diagnostic EvaluationDiagnosis and characterization of thoracic aneurysms require imaging studies, which also provide critical information that guides the selection of treatment options. Although the best choice of imaging technique for the thoracic and thoracoab-dominal aorta is somewhat institution-specific, varying with the availability of imaging equipment and expertise, efforts have been made to standardize key elements of image acquisition and reporting. Recent practice guidelines44 recommend that aortic imaging reports plainly state the location of aortic abnormalities (including calcification and the extent to which abnormalities extend into branch vessels), the maximum external aortic diam-eters (rather than internal, lumen-based diameters), internal fill-ing defects, and any evidence of rupture. Whenever possible, all results should be compared with those of prior imaging studies.Plain Radiography. Plain radiographs of the chest, abdomen, or spine often provide enough information to support the initial diag-nosis of thoracic aortic aneurysm. Ascending aortic aneurysms produce a convex shadow to the right of the cardiac silhouette. The anterior projection of an ascending aneurysm results in the loss of the retrosternal space in the lateral view. An aneurysm may be indistinguishable from elongation and tortuosity.45 Impor-tantly, chest radiographs (CXRs) may appear normal in patients with thoracic aortic disease and thus cannot exclude the diagnosis of aortic aneurysm. Aortic root aneurysms, for example, often are hidden within the cardiac silhouette. Plain CXRs may reveal convexity in the right superior mediastinum, loss of the retroster-nal space, or widening of the descending thoracic aortic shadow, which may be highlighted by a rim of calcification outlining the dilated aneurysmal aortic wall. Aortic calcification also may be seen in the upper abdomen on a standard radiograph made in the anteroposterior or lateral projection (Fig. 22-2). Once a thoracic aortic aneurysm is detected on plain radiographs, additional stud-ies are required to define the extent of aortic involvement.Echocardiography and Abdominal Ultrasonography.  Ascending aortic aneurysms are commonly discovered during echocardiography in patients presenting with symptoms or signs of aortic valve regurgitation. Both transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiography provide excellent visualization of the ascending aorta, including the aortic root.46 Transesophageal echocardiography also allows visualization of the descending thoracic aorta but is not ideal for evaluating the transverse aortic arch (which is obscured by air in the tracheobronchial tree) or the upper abdominal aorta. Effective echocardiography requires considerable technical skill, both in obtaining adequate images and in interpreting them. This imaging modality has the added Brunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   85801/03/19   5:40 PM 859THORACIC ANEURYSMS AND AORTIC DISSECTIONCHAPTER 22Figure 22-3. Current practice guidelines44 seek to standardize the reporting of aortic diameters by indicating key locations of mea-surement. These include (1) the sinuses of Valsalva, (2) the sinotu-bular junction, (3) the mid-ascending aorta, (4) the proximal aortic arch at the origins of the innominate artery, (5) the mid-aortic arch, which is between the left common carotid and left subclavian arter-ies, (6) the proximal descending thoracic aorta, which begins at the isthmus (approximately 2 cm distal to the origins of the left subcla-vian artery), (7) the mid-descending thoracic artery, (8) the aorta at the diaphragm, and (9) the abdominal aorta at the origins of the celiac axis. (Used with permission of Baylor College of Medicine.)benefit of assessing cardiac function and revealing any other abnormalities that may be present. During ultrasound evaluation of a suspected infrarenal abdominal aortic aneurysm, if a definitive neck cannot be identified at the level of the renal arteries, the possibility of thoracoabdominal aortic involvement should be suspected and investigated by using other imaging modalities. Caution should be exercised while interpreting aneurysm dimensions from ultrasound imaging because intraluminal measurements are often reported, whereas external measurements are usually used in other imaging modalities.Computed Tomography. Computed tomographic (CT) scan-ning is widely available, provides visualization of the entire thoracic and abdominal aorta, and permits multiplanar and 3-dimensional aortic reconstructions. Consequently, CT is the most common—and arguably the most useful—imaging modal-ity for evaluating thoracic aortic aneurysms.47 In addition to establishing the diagnosis, CT provides information about an aneurysm’s location, extent, anatomic anomalies, and relation-ship to major branch vessels. CT is particularly useful in deter-mining the absolute diameter of the aorta, especially in the presence of laminated clot, and also detects aortic calcification. Contrast-enhanced CT provides information about the aortic lumen and can detect mural thrombus, aortic dissection, inflam-matory periaortic fibrosis, and mediastinal or retroperitoneal hematoma due to contained aortic rupture. To increase consis-tency and ensure uniform reporting, current practice guidelines suggest that measurements be taken perpendicular to blood flow and at standard anatomic locations44 (Fig. 22-3); this should reduce the likelihood of erroneous measurements, espe-cially during serial imaging surveillance .The major disadvantage of contrast-enhanced CT scanning is the possibility of contrast-induced acute renal failure in patients who are at risk (e.g., patients with preexisting renal disease or diabetes) even though the risk is smaller than was assumed in the past.48,49 If possible, surgery is performed at least 1 day after contrast administration to allow time to observe renal function and to permit diuresis. If renal insufficiency occurs or is worsened, elective surgery is postponed until renal function returns to normal or stabilizes.Magnetic Resonance Angiography. Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) is becoming widely available and can facilitate visualization of the entire aorta. This modality pro-duces aortic images comparable to those produced by contrast-enhanced CT but does not necessitate exposure to ionizing radiation.50 In addition, MRA offers excellent visualization of branch-vessel details, and it is useful in detecting branch-vessel stenosis.51 However, MRA is limited by high expense and a sus-ceptibility to artifacts created by ferromagnetic materials, and gadolinium—the contrast agent for MRA—may be linked to nephrogenic systemic fibrosis and acute renal failure in patients with advanced renal insufficiency.52 Furthermore, the MRA environment is not appropriate for many critically ill patients, and unlike CT imaging, MRA imaging is suboptimal in patients with extensive aortic calcification.Invasive Aortography and Cardiac Catheterization.  Although catheter-based contrast aortography was previously considered the gold standard for evaluating thoracic aortic dis-ease, cross-sectional imaging (i.e., CT and MRA) has largely replaced this modality. Technologic improvements have enabled CT and MRA to provide excellent aortic imaging while causing less morbidity than catheter-based studies do, so CT and 2MRA are now the primary modes for evaluating thoracic aortic disease. Today, the use of invasive aortography in patients with thoracic aortic disease is generally limited to those undergoing endovascular therapies or when other types of studies are con-traindicated or have not provided satisfactory results.Unlike standard aortography, cardiac catheterization con-tinues to play an important role in diagnosis and preoperative planning, especially in patients with ascending aortic involve-ment. Proximal aortography can reveal not only the status of the coronary arteries and left ventricular function but also the degree of aortic valve regurgitation, the extent of aortic root involvement, coronary ostial displacement, and the relationship of the aneurysm to the arch vessels.The value of the information one can obtain from  catheter-based diagnostic studies should be weighed against Brunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   85901/03/19   5:40 PM 860SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIthe established limitations and potential complications of such studies. A key limitation of aortography is that it images only the lumen and may therefore underrepresent the size of large aneurysms that contain laminated thrombus. Manipulation of intraluminal catheters can result in embolization of laminated thrombus or atheromatous debris. Proximal aortography carries a 0.6% to 1.2% risk of stroke. Other risks include allergic reac-tion to the contrast agent, iatrogenic aortic dissection, and bleed-ing at the arterial access site. In addition, the volumes of contrast agent required to adequately fill large aneurysms can cause sig-nificant renal toxicity. To minimize the risk of contrast nephrop-athy, patients receive periprocedural intravenous (IV) fluids for hydration, mannitol for diuresis, and acetylcysteine.53,54  As with contrast-enhanced CT, surgery is performed ≥1 day after angiography whenever possible to ensure that renal func-tion has stabilized or returned to baseline.TreatmentSelecting the Appropriate Treatment. Once a thoracic aor-tic aneurysm is detected, management begins with patient edu-cation, particularly if the patient is asymptomatic, because aortic disease may progress rapidly and unexpectedly in some patients. A detailed medical history is collected, a physical examination is performed, and a systematic review of medical records is car-ried out to clearly assess the presence or absence of pertinent symptoms and signs, despite any initial denial of symptoms by the patient. Signs of heritable conditions such as Marfan syn-drome or Loeys-Dietz syndrome are thoroughly reviewed. If clinical criteria are met for a heritable condition, confirmatory laboratory tests are conducted. Patients with heritable disorders are best treated in a dedicated aortic clinic where they can be appropriately followed up. Surveillance imaging and aggressive blood pressure control are the mainstays of initial management for asymptomatic patients. When patients become symptomatic or their aneurysms grow to meet certain size criteria, the patients become surgical candidates.Endovascular therapy has become an accepted treatment for descending thoracic aortic aneurysm.55,56 Its role in treating proximal aortic disease and thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm remains experimental;55 nonetheless, endoluminal stenting is approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of isolated descending thoracic aortic aneurysm, and several different devices have been approved for the treatment of blunt aortic injury and penetrating aortic ulcer. In practice, however, the off-label application of aortic stent grafts is widespread and accounts for well over half their use57; endovascular approaches may be helpful in emergent aneurysm repair, such as for patients with aortic rupture.58 Endovascular therapy has evolved to include hybrid repairs, which combine open “debranching” techniques (to reroute branching vessels) with endovascular aortic repair.59,60 Despite these advances, for the repair of aneurysms with proximal aortic involvement and of thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms, open procedures remain the gold standard and preferred approach.Determination of the Extent and Severity of Disease.  Cross-sectional imaging with reconstruction is critical when one is evaluating a thoracic aneurysm, determining treatment strategy, and planning necessary procedures. Note that patients with a thoracic aortic aneurysm may also have a second, remote aneurysm.2 In such cases, the more threatening lesion usually is addressed first. In many patients, staged operative procedures are necessary for complete repair of extensive aneurysms involving the ascending aorta, transverse arch, and descending thoracic or thoracoabdominal aorta.61 When the descending segment is not disproportionately large (compared with the proximal aorta) and is not causing symptoms, the proximal aortic repair is carried out first. An important benefit of this approach is that it allows treatment of valvular and coronary artery occlusive disease at the first operation.Proximal aneurysms (proximal to the left subclavian artery) usually are addressed via a sternotomy approach. Aneu-rysms involving the descending thoracic aorta are evaluated in terms of criteria (described in the following section) for poten-tial endovascular repair; those unsuitable for an endovascular approach are repaired with open techniques through a left thora-cotomy. A CT scan can reveal detailed information about aortic calcification and luminal thrombus. These details are important in preventing embolization during surgical manipulation.Indications for Operation Thoracic aortic aneurysms are repaired to prevent fatal rupture. Therefore, on the basis of clini-cal history studies and other data, practice guidelines for tho-racic aortic disease43,44,62 recommend elective operation in asymptomatic patients when the diameter of an ascending aortic aneurysm is >5.5 cm, when the diameter of a descending thoracic aortic aneurysm is >6.0 cm, or when the rate of dilata-tion is >0.5 cm per year. In patients with heritable disorders such as Marfan and Loeys-Dietz syndromes, the threshold for opera-tion is based on a smaller aortic diameter (5.0 cm for the ascend-ing aorta in patients with Marfan syndrome, 4.4 to 4.6 cm for the ascending aorta in patients with Loeys-Dietz syndrome, and <6.0 cm for the descending thoracic aorta in patients with either disorder). For women with heritable disorders who are consider-ing pregnancy, prophylactic aortic root replacement is considered because the risk of aortic dissection or rupture increases at an aortic diameter of 4.0 cm and greater. For patients with ascending aortic aneurysm and bicuspid aortic valve, repair is recommended if aortic diameter is 5.0 cm or greater and additional risk factors are present (e.g., family his-tory of dissection, expansion rate exceeding 0.5 cm per year), if aortic diameter is 5.5 cm or larger and no additional risk factors are present, or if aortic diameter exceeds 4.5 cm and the patient is undergoing aortic valve replacement or repair.43 For low-risk patients with chronic aortic dissection, descending thoracic repair is recommended at an aortic diameter of 5.5 cm or greater.The acuity of presentation is a major factor in decisions about the timing of surgical intervention. Many patients are asymptomatic at the time of presentation, so there is time for thorough preoperative evaluation and improvement of their cur-rent health status, such as through smoking cessation and other optimization programs. In contrast, patients who present with symptoms may need urgent operation. Symptomatic patients are at increased risk of rupture and warrant expe-ditious evaluation. The onset of new pain in patients with known aneurysms is especially concerning because it may herald sig-nificant expansion, leakage, or impending rupture. Emergent intervention is reserved for patients who present with aneurysm rupture or superimposed acute dissection.63Open Repair vs. Endovascular Repair As noted earlier, endo-vascular repair has become the standard approach for patients with isolated degenerative descending thoracic aortic aneurysm; in fact, practice guidelines recommend that endovascular repair be strongly considered for patients with descending thoracic aneurysm at an aortic diameter of 5.5 cm (which is slightly below the 6.0-cm threshold for open repair).44 For endovascular 3456Brunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   86001/03/19   5:40 PM 861THORACIC ANEURYSMS AND AORTIC DISSECTIONCHAPTER 22repairs to produce optimal outcomes, several anatomic criteria must be met. For one, the proximal and distal neck diameters should fall within a range that will allow proper sealing. Also, the proximal and distal landing zones should ideally be at least 20 mm long so that an appropriate seal can be made. Note that the limiting structures proximally and distally are the brachio-cephalic vessels and celiac axis, respectively. Vascular access continues to be one of the most important determinants of suc-cessful deployment of the current endovascular devices. The femoral and iliac arteries have to be wide enough to accommo-date the sheaths used to deploy the stent grafts. As endovascular technology evolves, newer devices are using smaller sheaths (or are “sheathless” self-deployed stent grafts) to accommodate smaller arteries. Tortuosity of the iliac vessels and abdominal aorta can make these procedures technically challenging. Occa-sionally, an 8or 10-mm polyester “side graft” is anastomosed to the iliac artery through a retroperitoneal incision if the femo-ral vessels are too small to access easily.Of note, attempts have been made to extend the use of endovascular therapy to aortic arch aneurysms and thoracoab-dominal aortic aneurysms. Although reports of purely endovas-cular repair of the aortic arch remain limited, Greenberg and colleagues64 have reported their experience with a large series of purely endovascular thoracoabdominal aortic repairs. Addition-ally, there have been numerous reports of small series of off-label, experimental hybrid procedures that involve debranching the aortic arch or the visceral vessels of the abdominal aorta, fol-lowed by endovascular exclusion of the aneurysm. The majority of hybrid approaches involve repairing the aortic arch.59,60 In its simplest form, hybrid arch repair involves an open bypass from the left subclavian to the left common carotid artery, which is followed by deliberate coverage of the origins of the left subcla-vian artery by the stent graft. In its most complex form, hybrid arch repair involves rerouting all of the brachiocephalic vessels, followed by proximal placement of the stent graft in the ascend-ing aorta and extending repair distally into the aortic arch and descending thoracic aorta.The patients who theoretically benefit the most from an endovascular approach are those who are of advanced age or have significant comorbidities, as many of these patients face substantial risks when undergoing traditional open repair.65 For example, with regard to open repair of a descending thoracic aortic aneurysm, significant pulmonary morbidity can occur postoperatively; therefore, patients with borderline pulmonary reserve may better tolerate an endovascular procedure than a standard open repair. Patients with heritable syndromic condi-tions generally are not considered candidates for elective endo-vascular repair except in specific circumstances.66 Endovascular repair in patients with heritable syndromic conditions have pro-duced poor results, which are mainly due to progressive dilata-tion, stent graft migration, and endoleak.67,68Preoperative Assessment and Preparation. Given the impact of comorbid conditions on perioperative complications, a careful preoperative assessment of physiologic reserve is criti-cal in assessing operative risk. Therefore, most patients undergo a thorough evaluation—with emphasis on cardiac, pulmonary, and renal function—before undergoing elective surgery.69,70Cardiac Evaluation Coronary artery disease is common in patients with thoracic aortic aneurysm and is responsible for a substantial proportion of early and late postoperative deaths in such patients. Similarly, valvular disease and myocardial dysfunction have important implications when one is planning anesthetic management and surgical approaches for aortic repair. Transthoracic echocardiography is a satisfactory noninvasive method for evaluating both valvular and biventricular function. Dipyridamole-thallium myocardial scanning identifies regions of myocardium that have reversible ischemia, and this test is more practical than exercise testing in older patients with concomitant lower-extremity peripheral vascular disease. Cardiac catheteriza-tion and coronary arteriography are performed in patients who have evidence of coronary disease—as indicated by either the patient’s history or the results of noninvasive studies—or who have a left ventricular ejection fraction of ≤30%. If significant valvular or coronary artery disease is identified before a proxi-mal aortic operation, the disease can be addressed directly dur-ing the procedure. Patients who have asymptomatic distal aortic aneurysms and severe coronary occlusive disease undergo per-cutaneous transluminal angioplasty or surgical revascularization before the aneurysmal aortic segment is replaced.Pulmonary Evaluation Pulmonary function screening with arterial blood gas measurement and spirometry is routinely per-formed before thoracic aortic operations. Patients with a forced expiratory volume in 1 second of >1.0 L and a partial pressure of carbon dioxide of <45 mmHg are considered appropriate can-didates for open surgical repair. In suitable patients, borderline pulmonary function can be improved by implementing a regi-men that includes smoking cessation, weight loss, exercise, and treatment of bronchitis for a period of 1 to 3 months before surgery. Although surgery is not withheld from patients with symptomatic aortic aneurysms and poor pulmonary function, adjustments in operative technique should be made to maximize these patients’ chances of recovery. In such patients, preserving the left recurrent laryngeal nerve, the phrenic nerves, and dia-phragmatic function is particularly important.Renal Evaluation Renal function is assessed preoperatively by measuring serum electrolyte, blood urea nitrogen, and cre-atinine levels. Information about kidney size and perfusion can be obtained from the imaging studies used to evaluate the aorta.Obtaining accurate information about baseline renal function has important therapeutic and prognostic implications. For exam-ple, perfusion strategies and perioperative medications are adjusted according to renal function. Patients with severely impaired renal function frequently require at least temporary hemodialysis after surgery. These patients also have a mortality rate that is signifi-cantly higher than normal. Patients with thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms and poor renal function secondary to severe proximal renal occlusive disease undergo renal artery endarterectomy, stent-ing, or bypass grafting during the aortic repair.Operative Repair Proximal Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms Open Repair Traditional open operations to repair proximal aortic aneurysms—which involve the ascending aorta, trans-verse aortic arch, or both—are performed through a midsternal incision and require cardiopulmonary bypass. The best choice of aortic replacement technique depends on the extent of the aneurysm and the condition of the aortic valve.71 The spectrum of operations (Fig. 22-4) ranges from simple graft replacement of the tubular portion of the ascending aorta only (Fig. 22-4A) to replacement of the ascending aorta and the proximal aortic arch (Fig. 22-4B) to graft replacement of the entire proximal aorta, including the aortic root, and reattachment of the coronary Brunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   86101/03/19   5:40 PM 862SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIABCEFGHIJDKFigure 22-4. Illustrations of proximal aortic repairs in which the native aortic root is left intact. A. Graft replacement of the tubular portion of the ascending aorta with the aortic arch left intact. B. Hemiarch beveled graft replacement, in which the ascending aorta and a portion of the lesser curvature of the aortic arch are replaced. C. A modified arch with additional graft replacement of the innominate artery. D. Patch repair of the aortic arch. E. Traditional total arch replacement using an island approach to reattach the brachiocephalic vessels. F. The branched graft approach, which replaces the brachiocephalic vessels by following their original anatomic location. G. The elephant trunk approach with a concomitant island brachiocephalic artery reattachment. Contemporary Y-graft arch repairs include (H) the single Y-graft approach, (I) the double Y-graft approach, (J) the elephant trunk approach with a single Y-graft, and (K) the elephant trunk approach with a double Y-graft.Brunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   86201/03/19   5:40 PM 863THORACIC ANEURYSMS AND AORTIC DISSECTIONCHAPTER 22arteries and brachiocephalic branches. The options for treating aortic valve disease, repairing aortic aneurysms, and maintain-ing perfusion during repair procedures each deserve detailed consideration (Table 22-2).Aortic Valve Disease and Root Aneurysms Many patients undergoing proximal aortic operations have aortic valve dis-ease that requires concomitant surgical correction. When such disease is present and the sinus segment is normal, separate repair or replacement of the aortic valve and graft replacement of the tubular segment of the ascending aorta are carried out. In such cases, mild to moderate valve regurgitation with annular dilatation can be addressed by plicating the annulus with mat-tress sutures placed below each commissure, thereby preserving the native valve. In patients with more severe valvular regur-gitation or with valvular stenosis, the valve is replaced with a stented biologic or mechanical prosthesis; mechanical prosthe-ses necessitate following a lifelong anticoagulation regimen. Separate replacement of the aortic valve and ascending aorta is Table 22-2Options for open surgical repair of proximal aortic aneurysmsOptions for treating aortic valve disease Aortic valve annuloplasty (annular plication) Aortic valve replacement (with mechanical or biologic prosthesis) Aortic root replacement  Composite valve graft (with mechanical or biologic valve)  Aortic homograft  Stentless porcine root  Pulmonary autograft (Ross procedure)  Valve-sparing techniquesOptions for graft repair of the aortic aneurysm Patch aortoplasty Ascending replacement only Beveled hemiarch replacement Total arch replacement with reattachment of brachiocephalic branches (island technique)  Elephant trunk technique with island reattachment Total arch replacement with bypass grafts to the brachiocephalic branches (including Y-graft approaches)  Elephant trunk technique with Y-graft approach Hybrid aortic arch repairs (including “frozen elephant trunk technique”)Perfusion options Standard cardiopulmonary bypass Profound hypothermic circulatory arrest without adjuncts Hypothermic circulatory arrest with adjuncts  Retrograde cerebral perfusion  Antegrade cerebral perfusion   Balloon perfusion catheters   Right axillary artery cannulation   Innominate artery cannulationnot performed in patients with Marfan syndrome or Loeys-Dietz syndrome, because progressive dilatation of the remaining sinus segment eventually leads to complications that necessitate reop-eration. Therefore, patients with Marfan syndrome, Loeys-Dietz syndrome, or annuloaortic ectasia require some form of aortic root replacement.72In many cases, the aortic root is replaced with a mechani-cal or biologic graft that has both a valve and an aortic conduit. Currently, the following graft options are commercially avail-able: composite valve grafts with a mechanical valve, which consist of a bileaflet mechanical valve attached to a polyester tube graft; composite valve grafts with a biological valve (avail-able in Europe only at this point); aortic root homografts, which are harvested from cadavers and cryopreserved73; and stentless porcine aortic root grafts.74,75 In the United States, because no biologic composite valve grafts are commercially available, another option for surgeons is to construct a bioprosthetic com-posite valve graft during the operation by suturing a stented tis-sue valve to a polyester tube graft.Although select patients may be offered the Ross  procedure—in which the patient’s pulmonary artery root is excised and placed in the aortic position and then the right ven-tricular outflow tract is reconstructed by using a cryopreserved pulmonary homograft—this option is rarely used. This is largely because it is a technically demanding procedure, and there are concerns about the potential for autograft dilatation in patients with heritable conditions.76An additional option is valve-sparing aortic root replace-ment, which has evolved substantially during the past decade.77,78 The valve-sparing technique that is currently favored is called aortic root reimplantation and involves excising the aortic sinuses, attaching a prosthetic graft to the patient’s annulus (Fig. 22-5), and resuspending the native aortic valve inside the graft. The superior hemodynamics of the native valve and the avoidance of anticoagulation are major advantages of the valve-sparing approach. Long-term results in carefully selected patients have been excellent.79 Although the durability of this procedure in patients with Marfan syndrome has been satisfac-tory in some centers, it remains uncertain whether long-term durability can be reliably achieved with this approach.78 Further, acceptable mid-term outcomes have been reported for patients with bicuspid aortic valve.80 Patients who have structural leaf-let deterioration or excessive annular dilatation are typically deemed unsuitable for valve-sparing repair.Regardless of the type of conduit used, aortic root replace-ment requires reattaching the coronary arteries to openings in the graft. In the original procedure described by Bentall and  De Bono,81 this was accomplished by suturing the intact aortic wall surrounding each coronary artery to the openings in the graft. The aortic wall was then wrapped around the graft to establish hemostasis. However, this technique frequently pro-duced leaks at the coronary reattachment sites that eventually led to pseudoaneurysm formation. Cabrol’s modification, in which a separate, small tube graft is sutured to the coronary ostia and the main aortic graft, achieves tension-free coronary anas-tomoses, and reduces the risk of pseudoaneurysm formation.82 Kouchoukos’s button modification of the Bentall procedure is currently the most widely used technique.83 The aneurysmal aorta is excised, and buttons of aortic wall are left surrounding both coronary arteries, which are then mobilized and sutured to the aortic graft (Fig. 22-6). The coronary suture lines may be reinforced with polytetrafluoroethylene felt or pericardium Brunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   86301/03/19   5:40 PM 864SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIAEIJKLFGHBCDFigure 22-5. Illustration of our current valve-sparing procedure for replacing the aortic root and ascending aorta for treatment of (A) aortic root aneurysm. B. The ascending aorta is opened after cardiopulmonary bypass and cardioplegic arrest are established and the distal ascending aorta is clamped. The diseased aortic tissue (including the sinuses of Valsalva) is excised. Buttons of surrounding tissue are used to mobi-lize the origins of the coronary arteries. C. A synthetic graft is sewn to the distal ascending aorta with continuous suture. D. After the distal anastomosis is completed, six sutures reinforced with Teflon pledgets are placed in the plane immediately below the aortic valve annulus. E. The subannular sutures are placed through the base of a synthetic aortic root graft, which is then is parachuted down around the valve.  F. After the root graft is cut to an appropriate length, the valve commissures and leaflets are positioned within the graft. The annular sutures are then tied. G. Each of the three commissures is then secured near the top of the graft. H. The supra-annular aortic tissue is sewn to the graft in continuous fashion. I. The button surrounding the origin of the left main coronary artery is sewn to an opening cut in the root graft. J. The two aortic grafts are sewn together with continuous suture. K. The button surrounding the origin of the right coronary artery is sewn to an opening cut in the root graft. L. The completed valve-sparing aortic root replacement and graft repair of the ascending aorta are shown. (Used with permission of Baylor College of Medicine.)to enhance hemostasis. When the coronary arteries cannot be mobilized adequately because of extremely large aneurysms or scarring from previous surgery, the Cabrol technique or a related modification can be used. Another option, originally described by Zubiate and Kay,84 is the construction of bypass grafts by using interposition saphenous vein or synthetic grafts.Aortic Arch Aneurysms Several options are also available for handling aneurysms that extend into the transverse aortic arch Brunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   86401/03/19   5:40 PM 865THORACIC ANEURYSMS AND AORTIC DISSECTIONCHAPTER 22Figure 22-6. Illustration of the modified Bentall procedure for replacing the aortic root and ascending aorta. Commonly, the ascending aorta is replaced by a straight “tube” graft, and the aortic root, including the valve apparatus and the sinuses of Valsalva, is replaced by a mechanical composite valve graft with neosinuses to better mimic its native shape. The coronary arteries with buttons of surrounding aortic tissue have been mobilized and are being reat-tached to openings in the aortic graft. Shown at the proximal aspect of the innominate artery, the ligated remnant of an 8-mm graft was used to ease cannulation of the artery, which was used as inflow during cardiopulmonary bypass. (Used with permission of Baylor College of Medicine.)(see Fig. 22-4C-K).65 The surgical approach depends on the extent of involvement and the need for cardiac and cerebral pro-tection. Saccular aneurysms that arise from the lesser curvature of the distal transverse arch and that encompass <50% of the aortic circumference can be treated by patch graft aortoplasty; such aneurysms are particularly well suited for hybrid repair with arch debranching followed by exclusion of the aneurysm with an endovascular graft.85 For fusiform aneurysms, when the distal portion of the arch is a reasonable size, a single, beveled replacement of the lower curvature (hemiarch) is performed. More extensive arch aneurysms require total replacement involving a distal anastomosis to the proximal descending tho-racic aorta and separate reattachment of the brachiocephalic branches. The brachiocephalic vessels can be reattached to one or more openings made in the graft, or if these vessels are aneurysmal, they can be replaced with separate, smaller grafts. Alternatively, a Y-graft approach86,87 can be used to debranch the brachiocephalic vessels and move them forward, thereby permitting the distal anastomosis to be brought forward, which aids in hemostasis. When the aneurysm involves the entire arch and extends into the descending thoracic aorta, it is approached by using Borst’s elephant trunk technique of staged total arch replacement.88 The distal anastomosis is performed such that a portion of the graft is left suspended within the proximal descending thoracic aorta (Fig. 22-7). A collared graft can be used to accommodate any discrepancy in aortic diameter.86  During a subsequent operation, the suspended “trunk” is used to facilitate repair of the remaining descending thoracic or tho-racoabdominal aortic aneurysm by an endovascular technique or by open repair through a thoracotomy incision, depending on the extent of disease and other factors. The elephant trunk technique permits access to the distal portion of the graft during the second operation without the need for dissection around the distal transverse aortic arch; this reduces the risk of injuring the left recurrent laryngeal nerve, esophagus, and pulmonary artery if an open approach is used at the second stage. As described in the section on hybrid repair of arch aneurysms (see later), the elephant trunk can be completed by using a hybrid endovascular approach (Fig. 22-8) in certain settings. A newer technique that is currently under investigation involves using a graft compris-ing a conventional polyester proximal portion and a stent graft distal elephant trunk portion. This “frozen elephant trunk” tech-nique can enable treatment of the entire aortic pathology during a single procedure or can facilitate a subsequent endovascular procedure (Fig. 22-9).89-91Cardiopulmonary Bypass Perfusion Strategies Like the opera-tions themselves, perfusion strategies used during proximal aor-tic surgery depend on the extent of the repair. Aneurysms that are isolated to the ascending segment can be replaced by using standard cardiopulmonary bypass and distal ascending aortic clamping. This provides constant perfusion of the brain and other vital organs during the repair. Aneurysms involving the transverse aortic arch, however, cannot be clamped during the repair, which necessitates the temporary withdrawal of cardio-pulmonary bypass support; this is called circulatory arrest. To protect the brain and other vital organs during the circulatory arrest period, hypothermia must be initiated before pump flow is stopped. However, the deep levels of hypothermia (below 20°C) that have been traditionally used in open arch repair are not without risk, and pure hypothermic circulatory arrest contin-ues to have substantial limitations. Importantly, although brief periods of total circulatory arrest generally are well tolerated at cold temperatures, as the duration of circulatory arrest increases, the well-recognized risks of brain injury and death increase dra-matically. Additionally, deep levels of hypothermia are associ-ated with coagulopathy.Because of the inherent complexity of aortic arch repairs and their general tendency to require longer periods Brunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   86501/03/19   5:41 PM 866SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIADFGECBFigure 22-7. Illustration of a contemporary Y-graft approach to total arch replacement for aortic arch aneurysm. A. The proximal portions of the brachiocephalic arteries are exposed. B. The first two branches of the graft are sewn end-to-end to the transected left subclavian and left common carotid arteries. The proximal ends of the transected brachiocephalic arteries are ligated. C. A balloon-tipped perfusion cannula is placed inside the double Y-graft and used to deliver antegrade cerebral perfusion. After systemic circulatory arrest is initiated, the innominate artery is clamped, transected, and sewn to the distal end of the main graft. D. The proximal aspect of the Y-graft is clamped. This directs flow from the axillary artery to all three brachiocephalic arteries. The arch is then replaced with a collared elephant trunk graft. E. The distal anastomosis between the elephant trunk graft and the aorta is created between the innominate and left common carotid arteries. The collared graft accommodates any discrepancy in aortic diameter. F. The aortic graft is clamped, and a second limb from the arterial inflow tubing of the cardiopulmonary bypass circuit is used to deliver systemic perfusion through a side-branch of the arch graft while the proximal por-tion of the ascending aorta is replaced. Once the proximal aortic anastomosis is completed, the main trunk of the double Y-graft is cut to an appropriate length, and the beveled end is then sewn to an oval opening created in the right anterolateral aspect of the ascending aortic graft, which completes the repair (G). (Modified with permission from LeMaire SA, Price MD, Parenti JL, et al. Early outcomes after aortic arch replacement by using the Y-graft technique, Ann Thorac Surg. 2011 Mar;91(3):700-707.)of hypothermic circulatory arrest, two cerebral perfusion strategies—retrograde cerebral perfusion (RCP) and antegrade cerebral perfusion (ACP)—were developed to supplement this process by delivering cold, oxygenated blood to the brain and further reduce the risks associated with repair. Retrograde cerebral perfusion involves directing blood from the cardio-pulmonary bypass circuit into the brain through the superior vena cava.92 However, RCP is thought to be less beneficial than ACP,93 and although it may be helpful in the retrograde flush-ing of air and debris from the arch, many centers have stopped using RCP.In contrast, ACP delivers blood directly into the brachio-cephalic arteries to maintain cerebral flow. Although its use was cumbersome in the past, contemporary ACP techniques  (Fig. 22-10) have been simplified and commonly involve can-nulating either the right axillary artery or the innominate artery and subsequent connection to the cardiopulmonary bypass  circuit.94-96 Often, a small section of graft is used as a conduit to ease cannulation, but there remains a small procedure-related risk of brachial plexus or vascular injury. Upon initiation, cold blood is delivered into the brain via the right common carotid artery and, if bilateral ACP is desired, the left common carotid artery. Note that, with the unilateral ACP technique, blood flow to the left side of the brain requires collateral circulation, ideally through an intact circle of Willis.Methods to help determine the adequacy of unilateral ACP to deliver cerebral cross-circulation include preoperative imag-ing and intraoperative monitoring. A commonly used method Brunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   86601/03/19   5:41 PM 867THORACIC ANEURYSMS AND AORTIC DISSECTIONCHAPTER 22ABCFigure 22-8. Illustration of Borst’s elephant trunk technique using a contemporary Y-graft approach. A. Stage 1: The proximal repair includes replacing the ascending aorta and entire arch, with Y-graft reattachment of the brachiocephalic vessels. The distal anastomosis is facilitated by using a collared elephant trunk graft to accommodate the larger diameter of the distal aorta. A section of the graft is left sus-pended within the proximal descending thoracic aorta. B. Stage 2: The distal repair uses the floating “trunk” for the proximal anastomosis.  C. An alternate “hybrid” approach may be used in patients with less extensive distal aortic disease. Endovascular stent grafts are placed within the elephant trunk to complete the repair. (Used with permission of Baylor College of Medicine.)ABFigure 22-9. Illustration of a frozen elephant trunk repair, which is a hybrid approach to repair that combines open aortic replacement with endovascular aortic repair. A. Extensive aortic disease affects the proximal and distal aorta. B. Aortic repair is extended into the proximal por-tion of the descending thoracic aorta after the transverse aortic arch is fully replaced. (Used with permission of Baylor College of Medicine.)Brunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   86701/03/19   5:41 PM 868SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 22-10. Illustration of a contemporary technique for deliv-ering antegrade cerebral perfusion during aortic arch repair. A. A graft sewn to the right axillary artery or to the innominate artery (inset) is used to return oxygenated blood from the cardiopulmo-nary bypass circuit. B. After adequate hypothermia is established, the innominate artery is occluded with a tourniquet (inset) so that flow is diverted to the right common carotid artery, which maintains cerebral circulation. (Used with permission from Baylor College of Medicine.)of intraoperative monitoring is brain near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS), which measures cerebral oxygenation. If NIRS moni-toring indicates inadequate perfusion, an additional perfusion catheter can be inserted into the left common carotid artery to provide blood flow to the left side of the brain.Because ACP provides excellent brain protection, many surgeons now use more moderate levels of hypothermia (often between 22°C and 24°C) to decrease the risks associated with deep hypothermia.97 However, some authors have raised the ABconcern that reducing the degree of hypothermia increases the risk of ischemic complications involving the spinal cord, kid-neys, and other organs that are ischemic (without the benefit of deep hypothermia) during the systemic circulatory arrest period.98 Consequently, some groups supplement ACP with additional perfusion strategies that provide flow to the descend-ing aorta during arch repair.99,100Endovascular Repair Experience with purely endovascular treatment of proximal aortic disease remains limited and only investigational.101 The unique anatomy of the aortic arch and the need for uninterrupted cerebral perfusion pose difficult chal-lenges. There are reports of the use of “homemade” grafts to exclude arch aneurysms; however, these grafts are experimen-tal at this time. For example, in 1999, Inoue and colleagues102 reported placing a triple-branched stent graft in a patient with an aneurysm of the aortic arch. The three brachiocephalic branches were positioned by placing percutaneous wires in the right brachial, left carotid, and left brachial arteries. The patient underwent two subsequent procedures: surgical repair of a right brachial pseudoaneurysm and placement of a distal stent graft extension to control a major perigraft leak. Since then, efforts to employ endovascular techniques in the treatment of the proxi-mal aorta have been essentially limited to the use of approved devices for off-label indications, such as the exclusion of pseu-doaneurysms in the ascending aorta.Hybrid Repair In June 1991, the Ukrainian surgeon Nikolay Volodos and his colleagues performed the first hybrid aortic arch repair103,104; 22 years later, Volodos reported that the patient was still alive.105 Unlike purely endovascular approaches, hybrid repairs of the aortic arch have entered the mainstream clinical arena, although they remain controversial. Hybrid arch repairs involve some form of “debranching” of the brachiocephalic vessels (which are not unlike Y-graft approaches), followed by endovascular exclusion of some or all of the aortic arch  (Fig. 22-11). Although this technique has many variants, they often involve sewing a branched graft to the proximal ascend-ing aorta with the use of a partial aortic clamp. The branches of the graft are then sewn to the arch vessels. Once the arch is “debranched,” the arch aneurysm can be excluded with an endograft. Commonly, a zone 0 approach (Fig. 22-12) is under-taken in which the proximal end of the endograft is secured within the ascending aorta. Other hybrid approaches aim to extend repair into the distal arch and descending thoracic aorta (see the following section). The arguments for using a hybrid approach to treat aortic arch aneurysm include the potential to avoid using cardiopulmonary bypass, circulatory arrest, and car-diac ischemia.59,60It is not yet clear whether hybrid repairs are as durable as traditional ones because little midor long-term data have been published, and there are very few comparative studies.65 Procedure-related risks include the risk of embolization and stroke due to wire and device manipulation within the aortic arch (this risk appears to be greatest in zone 0 repairs106), retrograde acute aortic dissection,107 type I endoleak,108 and paraplegia.27 Because iatrogenic retrograde dissection of the ascending aorta is a particularly lethal complication, special considerations, including careful blood pressure management and wire manipulation, are recommended to avoid this problem in patients who are undergoing hybrid arch zone 0 stent deployment.109 Notably, patients with an ascending aortic diameter greater than 4.2 cm may be more susceptible to retrograde dissection. In an effort to Brunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   86801/03/19   5:41 PM 869THORACIC ANEURYSMS AND AORTIC DISSECTIONCHAPTER 22Figure 22-11. Illustration of a “Zone 0” hybrid arch repair. A. A distal arch aneurysm is shown that extends into the proximal aspect of the descending thoracic aorta. B. The brachiocephalic vessels are debranched onto a Y-graft, and a separate graft is used as a conduit for ante-grade endovascular deployment of the stent graft. C. In the completed repair, the proximal landing zone of the endograft is within zone 0.  (Used with permission from Baylor College of Medicine.)reduce the risk of iatrogenic dissection, some centers have begun to replace a small section of the ascending aorta with a standard polyester graft such that the endograft’s proximal landing zone comprises prosthetic material rather than native aortic tissue.107Distal Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms Open Repair In patients with descending thoracic or thoracoab-dominal aortic aneurysms, several aspects of treatment—includ-ing preoperative risk assessment, anesthetic management, choice of incision, and use of protective adjuncts—are dictated by the overall extent of aortic involvement. By definition, descend-ing thoracic aortic aneurysms involve the portion of the aorta between the left subclavian artery and the diaphragm. Thora-coabdominal aneurysms can involve the entire thoracoabdominal aorta, from the origin of the left subclavian artery to the aortic bifurcation. Surgical repair of thoracoabdominal aortic aneu-rysms is categorized by the extent of aortic replacement accord-ing to the Crawford classification scheme (Fig. 22-13). Extent I thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repairs involve most of the descending thoracic aorta, usually beginning near the left sub-clavian artery, and extend down into the suprarenal abdominal aorta. Extent II repairs also begin near the left subclavian artery but extend distally into the infrarenal abdominal aorta, and they often reach the aortic bifurcation. Extent III repairs extend from the lower descending thoracic aorta (below the sixth rib) and into the abdomen. Extent IV repairs begin at the diaphragmatic hiatus and often involve the entire abdominal aorta.Descending thoracic aortic aneurysms not amenable to endovascular therapy are currently repaired through a left thoracotomy. In patients with thoracoabdominal aortic aneu-rysm, the thoracotomy is extended across the costal margin and into the abdomen.110 Using a double-lumen endobronchial tube allows selective ventilation of the right lung and deflation of the left lung. Transperitoneal exposure of the thoracoabdominal aorta is achieved by performing medial visceral rotation and circumferential division of the diaphragm. During a period of aortic clamping, the diseased segment is replaced with a polyes-ter tube graft. Important branch arteries—including intercostal arteries and the celiac, superior mesenteric, and renal arteries—are reattached to openings made in the side of the graft. In patients with Marfan syndrome and other heritable conditions, separate (8and 10-mm) grafts to the visceral branches are often used to prevent subsequent “patch aneurysms” that can develop in residual aortic tissue.111 Visceral and renal artery occlusive dis-ease is commonly encountered during aneurysm repair; options for correcting branch-vessel stenosis include endarterectomy, direct arterial stenting, and bypass grafting.Clamping the descending thoracic aorta causes ischemia of the spinal cord and abdominal viscera. Clinically significant manifestations of hepatic, pancreatic, and bowel ischemia are relatively uncommon. However, both acute renal failure and spinal cord injury resulting in paraplegia or paraparesis remain major causes of morbidity and mortality after these operations. Therefore, several aspects of the operation are devoted to minimizing spinal and renal ischemia (Table 22-3). Our multimodal approach to spinal cord protection includes expeditious repair to minimize aortic clamping time, moderate systemic heparinization (1.0 mg/kg) to prevent small-vessel AB5-FrenchsheathMarked pigtailcatheterDeliverysheathStiffguidewireUndeployedendograftCBrunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   86901/03/19   5:41 PM 870SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 22-13. Illustration of the Crawford classification of thora-coabdominal aortic aneurysm repair, based on the extent of aortic replacement. (Used with permission from Baylor College of Medicine.)Right commoncarotid arteryInnominatearteryLeft commoncarotid arteryLeft subclavianarteryLanding Zone ClassificationsFigure 22-12. Illustration of the Criado landing zones, which are used to describe aortic anatomy during thoracic endovascular repair. The arch is the short segment that includes the origins of the three brachiocephalic arteries—the innominate artery, the left com-mon carotid artery, and the left subclavian artery. Zone 0 includes the ascending aorta and the origin of the innominate artery. Zone 1  includes the origin of the left common carotid artery. Zone 2 includes the left subclavian artery origin. Zone 3 is a short section of the aorta that comprises the 2 cm immediately distal to the origin of the left subclavian artery, and zone 4 begins where zone 3 ends. (Used with permission from Baylor College of Medicine.)Table 22-3Current strategy for spinal cord and visceral protection during repair of distal thoracic aortic aneurysmsAll extents•	Permissive mild hypothermia (32°C–34°C, nasopharyngeal)•	Moderate heparinization (1 mg/kg)•	Aggressive reattachment of segmental arteries, especially between T8 and L1•	Sequential aortic clamping when possible•	Perfusion of renal arteries with 4°C crystalloid solution when possibleCrawford extent I and II thoracoabdominal repairs•	Cerebrospinal fluid drainage•	Left heart bypass during proximal anastomosis•	Selective perfusion of celiac axis and superior mesenteric artery during intercostal and visceral anastomosesthrombosis, mild permissive hypothermia (32°C to 34°C [89.6°F to 93.2°F] nasopharyngeal temperature), and reattachment of segmental intercostal and lumbar arteries. As the aorta is replaced from proximal to distal, the aortic clamp is moved sequentially to lower positions along the graft to restore perfusion to newly reattached branch vessels. During extensive thoracoabdominal aortic repairs (i.e., Crawford extent I and II repairs), cerebrospinal fluid drainage is used to improve spinal perfusion by reducing cerebrospinal fluid pressure. Because the benefits of this adjunct have been confirmed in a randomized clinical trial,112 its use is recommended in current guidelines (Class I, Level B recommendation).44 During cerebral spinal fluid drainage,  the cerebral spinal fluid pressure is closely monitored, and the amount of fluid that is removed is carefully limited to avoid  the devastating complication of intracranial hemorrhage.113 Motor evoked potentials are used by some groups to monitor the spinal cord throughout the operation.114,115 Left heart bypass, which provides perfusion of the distal aorta and its branches during the clamping period, is also used during extensive thoracoabdominal aortic repairs.116-118 Because left heart bypass unloads the heart, it is also useful in patients with poor cardiac reserve. Balloon perfusion cannulas connected to the left heart bypass circuit can be used to deliver blood directly to the celiac axis and superior mesenteric artery during their reattachment. The potential benefits of reducing hepatic and bowel ischemia include reduced risks of postoperative coagulopathy and bacterial translocation, respectively. Whenever possible, renal protection is achieved by perfusing the kidneys with cold (4°C [39.2°F]) crystalloid. In a randomized clinical trial, reduced kidney temperature was found to be associated with renal protection, and the use of cold crystalloid independently predicted preserved renal function.119Hypothermic circulatory arrest can also be used dur-ing descending thoracic or thoracoabdominal aortic repairs.120 At our center, the primary indication for this approach is the inability to clamp the aorta because of rupture, extremely large aneurysm size, or extension of the aneurysm into the distal transverse aortic arch, or because a prior endovascular repair hinders clamping.67As discussed previously, complete repair of extensive aneurysm involving the ascending aorta, transverse arch, and descending thoracic aorta generally requires staged open 7Brunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   87001/03/19   5:41 PM 871THORACIC ANEURYSMS AND AORTIC DISSECTIONCHAPTER 22Figure 22-14. Illustration of the reversed elephant trunk technique using a traditional “island” approach to total aortic arch replacement. A. Stage 1: The distal aorta is repaired through a left thoracoabdominal approach. The aneurysm is opened after the aorta is clamped between the left common carotid artery and the left subclavian artery, which is also clamped. Before the proximal anastomosis is performed, the end of the graft is partly invaginated to leave a “trunk” for the subsequent repair. Proximal intercostal arteries are oversewn. B. After the proximal suture line is completed, the clamps are repositioned to restore blood flow to the left subclavian artery. The repair is completed by reattaching patent intercostal arteries to an opening in the side of the graft and creating a beveled distal anastomosis at the level of the visceral branches. C. Stage 2: The proximal aorta is repaired through a median sternotomy. The aortic arch is opened under hypothermic circulatory arrest. The “trunk” is pulled out and used to replace the aortic arch and ascending aorta. This eliminates the need for a new distal anastomosis and sim-plifies the procedure. Circulatory arrest and operative time, along with their attendant risks, are reduced. D. The completed two-stage repair of the entire thoracic aorta. (Modified with permission from Coselli JS, LeMaire SA, Carter SA, et al: The reversed elephant trunk technique used for treatment of complex aneurysms of the entire thoracic aorta, Ann Thorac Surg. 2005 Dec;80(6):2166-2172.)operations or a hybrid approach. In such procedures, when the descending or thoracoabdominal component is symptomatic (e.g., causes back pain or has ruptured) or is disproportionately large (compared with the ascending aorta), the distal segment is treated during the initial operation, and repair of the ascend-ing aorta and transverse aortic arch is performed as a second procedure. A reversed elephant trunk repair, in which a portion of the proximal end of the aortic graft is inverted down into the lumen, can be performed during the first operation; this tech-nique facilitates the second-stage repair of the ascending aorta and transverse aortic arch (Fig. 22-14).121Although spinal cord ischemia and renal failure receive the most attention, several other complications warrant consid-eration. The most common complication of extensive repairs is pulmonary dysfunction. With aneurysms adjacent to the left subclavian artery, the vagus and left recurrent laryngeal nerves are often adherent to the aortic wall and thus are susceptible to injury. Vocal cord paralysis should be suspected in patients who have postoperative hoarseness, and the presence of nerve damage should be confirmed by endoscopic examination. Vocal cord paralysis can be treated effectively by direct cord medial-ization (type 1 thyroplasty).122 Injury to the esophagus during Brunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   87101/03/19   5:41 PM 872SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 22-15. Illustration of a thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair in a patient with a patent left internal thoracic artery-to-left anterior descending coronary artery graft. The proximal anastomosis is being performed while the aorta is clamped between the left common carotid and subclavian arteries. Myo-cardial perfusion is maintained through the carotid-subclavian bypass graft. (Modifed with permission from Jones MM, Akay M, Murariu D, et al: Safe aortic arch clamping in patients with patent inter-nal thoracic artery grafts. Ann Thorac Surg. 2010 Apr;89(4):e31-e32.)the proximal anastomosis can have catastrophic consequences. Carefully separating the proximal descending thoracic aorta from the underlying esophagus before performing the proximal anastomosis minimizes the risk of a secondary aortoesophageal fistula. In patients who have previously undergone coronary artery bypass with a left internal thoracic artery graft, clamp-ing proximal to the left subclavian artery can precipitate severe myocardial ischemia and cardiac arrest. When the need to clamp at this location is anticipated in these patients, a left common carotid-to-subclavian bypass is performed to prevent cardiac complications (Fig. 22-15).123Endovascular Repair Descending Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms Stent graft repair has become the standard treatment for patients with descending thoracic aortic aneurysm.55,56,124 Although aortic repair with a self-fixing endoprosthesis was reported by Volodos103,104 in the mid 1980s, it was the report by Parodi and associates125 of using endovascular stent grafting to repair abdominal aortic aneurysm that launched widespread interest in developing this approach. Only 3 years after this seminal report was published, Dake and colleagues126 reported performing endovascular descending tho-racic aortic repair with “homemade” stent grafts in 13 patients.Guidelines for the use of endovascular repair in thoracic aortic disease have been published,44 and reporting standards to uniformly describe the endovascular repair process have been established.127 Although endografting was initially approved to treat degenerative descending thoracic aortic aneurysm, newer devices have been approved for use in treating various descending thoracic aortic pathologies, including blunt aortic injury, penetrating aortic ulcer (see following section), coarcta-tion, and dissection. Although the use of stent grafts in cases of aortic infection is not ideal, patients with a fistula or mycotic aneurysm are sometimes treated with endovascular devices as a bridge to open repair.In elderly patients with severe comorbidity and patients who have undergone previous complex thoracic aortic procedures, endovascular repair is a particularly attractive alternative to stan-dard open surgical procedures.128 Patients who undergo endo-vascular repair tend to have a lower incidence of intraoperative complications, a shorter length of stay, and a higher likelihood of being discharged to home than those who undergo open repair.129 As mentioned previously, appropriate patient selection depends on specific measurements taken from preoperative CT angiograms.To protect patients against spinal cord ischemia during endovascular repair of the descending thoracic aorta, the most important maneuver is to keep the mean arterial perfusion pres-sure between 90 and 110 mmHg after the endograft is deployed. In patients who have had previous open or endovascular abdom-inal aortic aneurysm repair, cerebrospinal fluid drainage is rec-ommended.130 The first step in the repair procedure is to obtain appropriate vascular access for the insertion of the thoracic stent graft. If the femoral artery will not accommodate the necessary Brunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   87201/03/19   5:41 PM 873THORACIC ANEURYSMS AND AORTIC DISSECTIONCHAPTER 22sheath, then an iliac artery is exposed. If necessary, a graft can be sewn to the iliac artery in an end-to-side fashion to facilitate the deployment of the endograft. After 5,000 to 10,000 units of heparin are administered, a guidewire and the delivery sheath are typically inserted into the access artery under fluoroscopic guidance; depending on which endovascular device is used, the stent graft can be advanced through a sheath or with no sheath. The endograft is then advanced into the aorta and suitably posi-tioned. Note that the best view of the distal arch and descending thoracic aorta is usually in the left anterior oblique position at an angle of approximately 40° to 50°. The device is then deployed, and the proximal and distal ends can be ballooned for better apposition of the stent graft to the aortic wall. An aortogram is then performed to rule out any endoleak, and protamine is administered. As an alternative to aortography, intravascular ultrasonography (IVUS) can be used to identify the proximal and distal landing zones, and the entire procedure can be per-formed with minimal or no contrast.Although it is not uncommon to cover the left subcla-vian artery with the endograft to lengthen the proximal landing zone,131 findings suggest that the risk of spinal cord complica-tions is heightened when the subclavian artery is covered and not revascularized, presumably because of a loss of collateral circulation to the spinal cord.132 To prevent this complication, a carotid-to-subclavian bypass can be easily constructed to main-tain vertebral artery blood flow and minimize neurologic injury (Fig. 22-16).133,134 In addition, recent studies suggest that revas-cularization of the left subclavian artery is associated with lower stroke risk in patients in whom an endograft was deployed in Zone 2 and covered the left subclavian artery.135 In addition, new generations of stent grafts are being designed with side branches that can be placed within the left subclavian artery. This feature is particularly attractive if the proximal neck is short or if the patient has a patent left internal thoracic artery-to-left anterior descending coronary artery bypass. Indications for left subclavian artery revascularization include previous coro-nary artery bypass with patent internal thoracic artery, dominant left vertebral artery, aneurysm arising from the left subclavian artery, left arm arterio-venous fistula, and coverage of a long segment of the descending thoracic aorta.Elephant Trunk Completion In select patients, elephant trunk completion repairs can be done with an endovascular approach (see Fig. 22-8C), rather than by the traditional open operation through a thoracotomy.136 Recall that an elephant trunk is used when an aortic aneurysm extends from the distal arch to the descending thoracic aorta. An endograft can be deployed at the time of elephant trunk construction or during a separate, subse-quent procedure.97,107,137 When the stent is deployed in a retro-grade manner during a second-stage procedure, the procedure is facilitated by placing radiopaque markers at the end of the elephant trunk during the first-stage procedure. This allows the distal end of the trunk to be identified via fluoroscopy. A guide-wire can then be manipulated into the trunk and advanced into the ascending aorta to stabilize it during stent deployment. Note that advancing a wire in retrograde fashion from the femoral artery into the elephant trunk can be challenging. Occasionally, the wire must be advanced in an antegrade fashion from a bra-chial artery. The frozen elephant trunk technique—in which a short stent graft is delivered antegrade inside the trunk—can be used to perform the entire repair in one stage or to facilitate the second stage.89,90Thoracoabdominal Aortic Aneurysms Although endovascular thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair remains experimental, it has been shown to be feasible in a handful of specialized cen-ters. Endovascular thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repairs are quite complex, because at least one of the visceral arteries is incorporated into the repair. The number of visceral branches that need to be addressed varies with the extent of aortic  coverage.138 The types of stent grafts used include fenestrated grafts, reinforced fenestrated grafts, branched or cuffed grafts, modular combinations of grafts, and multilayer stents.139 Graft fenestrations and branch vessels are typically aligned by using inflatable angioplasty balloons. Procedure time is not insignifi-cant, nor is the amount of contrast medium required to obtain the highly detailed images needed to plan these procedures. In addi-tion, some of the stent grafts used in endovascular thoracoab-dominal aortic aneurysm repair are custom-made in advance and thus may take several weeks to obtain; therefore, their use is limited to cases of elective repair.107 In efforts to hasten repair and utilize off-the-shelf devices, parallel graft approaches, which use a combination of largeand small-diameter stents, have been reported.140 And, although some centers now propose distal coverage of the celiac axis141 for extent I thoracoabdomi-nal aortic aneurysm repairs, this potentially risky approach is not widely used.It should be noted that, like open thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair, endovascular repair carries risks of paraplegia, renal failure, stroke, and death, despite the apparent benefits of its being a less invasive procedure. Notably, reports from centers experienced in endovascular thoracoabdominal aortic repair primarily describe limited extent IV repairs.64 Although the technology is progressing rapidly, at present endovascular thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair should be considered investigational.Hybrid Repair Extensive hybrid thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair142,143 can be a life-saving option in patients at high surgical risk, such as those who have limited physiologic reserve, are of advanced age, or have significant comorbidities. Hybrid procedures use open surgical techniques to reroute blood supply to the visceral arteries so that their aortic origins can be covered by stent grafts without causing visceral ischemia (Fig. 22-17). Endovascular methods are then used (either as part of the same procedure or at a later stage) to repair the aor-tic aneurysm, often with simple tube stent grafts; such devices are more readily available than the customized, modular stent grafts deployed in strictly endovascular repairs. Overall, results for hybrid thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair have been somewhat disappointing.144 However, a handful of centers report acceptable outcomes in high-risk patients, particularly when a staged hybrid approach is used.145Postoperative Considerations Open Procedures Aortic anastomoses are often extremely fragile during the early postoperative period. Even brief episodes of postoperative hypertension can disrupt suture lines and precipitate severe bleeding or pseudoaneurysm formation. Therefore, during the initial 24 to 48 hours, meticulous blood pressure control is maintained to protect the integrity of the anastomoses. Generally, we liberally use IV vasoactive agents to keep the mean arterial blood pressure between 80 and  90 mmHg. In patients with extremely friable aortic tissue, such as those with Marfan syndrome, we lower the target range to 70 to 80 mmHg. It is a delicate balancing act because one must be Brunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   87301/03/19   5:41 PM 874SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 22-16. Illustration of a “Zone 2” hybrid repair of the proximal descending thoracic aorta. A. The preoperative representation of the aneurysm shows that establishing a 2-cm proximal landing zone for a stent graft will require covering the origin of the left subclavian artery. B. Through a supraclavicular approach, a bypass from the left common carotid artery to the left subclavian artery is performed to reroute circulation and create a landing zone for the stent graft. After the bypass is completed, the left subclavian artery is ligated proximal to the graft. C. In the completed hybrid repair, the aneurysm has been excluded successfully by a stent graft that covers the origin of the left subclavian artery, and the proximal landing zone of the endograft is within zone 2. Importantly, blood flow to the left vertebral artery and arm is preserved by the bypass graft. (Reproduced with permission from Bozinovski J, LeMaire SA, Weldon SA: Hybrid Repairs of the Distal Aortic Arch and Proximal Descending Thoracic Aorta, Oper Tech Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2007;12(3):167-177.)VertebralarterySubclavianarteryPhrenicnerveAnterior scalenemuscle (divided)Internal thoracicarterySternocleidomastoidmuscle (divided)Commoncarotid arteryVagusnerveABCBrunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   87401/03/19   5:41 PM 875THORACIC ANEURYSMS AND AORTIC DISSECTIONCHAPTER 22Figure 22-17. Illustration of a “Zone 0” hybrid approach—which combines open and endovascular techniques—for repair of an extensive aortic aneurysm. Debranching the arch and thoracoab-dominal segments allows the use of a series of endovascular stent grafts to exclude the entire aneurysm. Note that the arterial inflow for the debranched visceral arteries comes from the left common iliac artery.Table 22-4Classification of and common treatment strategies for endoleakType I•	Incomplete seal between stent graft and aorta at the proximal landing site (Type Ia), the distal landing site (Type Ib), or branch module, fenestration, or plug (Type Ic)•	Early reintervention to improve seal or conversion to open surgeryType II•	Retrograde perfusion of sac from excluded collateral arteries•	Surveillance; as-needed occlusion with percutaneous or other interventionsType III•	Incomplete seal between overlapping stent graft or module (Type IIIa), or tear in graft fabric (Type IIIb)•	Early reintervention to cover or conversion to open surgeryType IV•	Perfusion of sac due to porosity of material•	Surveillance; as-needed reintervention to reline stent graftType V•	Expansion of sac with no identifiable source•	Surveillance; as-needed reintervention to reline stent graftmindful of spinal cord perfusion and avoid periods of relative hypotension while maintaining these low pressures.Endovascular Procedures Many of the complications are directly related to manipulation of the delivery system within the iliac arteries and aorta.146 Patients with small, calcified, tor-tuous iliofemoral arteries are at particularly high risk for life-threatening iliac artery rupture. Although relatively uncommon, acute iatrogenic retrograde dissection into the aortic arch and ascending aorta is a life-threatening complication that neces-sitates emergency repair of the ascending aorta and aortic arch via sternotomy and cardiopulmonary bypass.109 The most important risk factors for this complication include incautious wire and catheter manipulation, aggressive proximal ballooning  (especially in cases of acute descending thoracic aortic dissection),  and hybrid arch repair in which the native ascending aorta is dilated (more than 4 cm). Retrograde proximal dissection con-verts a localized descending thoracic aortic aneurysm into an acute problem involving the entire thoracic aorta. Of note, ret-rograde aortic dissection may also occur several months after initial repair.147Another significant complication of descending thoracic aortic stent grafting is endoleak. An endoleak occurs when there is a persistent flow of blood (visible on radiologic imaging) into the aneurysm sac, and it may occur during the initial proce-dure or develop over time. Although endoleaks are a relatively common complication,148,149 they are not benign because they lead to continual pressurization of the sac, which can cause expansion or even rupture. These complications are categorized (Table 22-4) according to the site of the leak.127 Although all endoleaks may progress such that they can be considered life-threatening, type I and type III endoleaks generally necessitate early and aggressive intervention. Recently published reporting guidelines aid standardized reporting.127Other complications include stent graft misdeployment, device migration, endograft kinking or infolding, and stent graft infection, including fistula. Although not all complications related to stent grafts are fatal, endovascular repairs should be performed by expert teams qualified to address the variety of problems that may arise; some patients may need to have these devices removed and replaced with polyester grafts.67,68,150,151 Complications of endovascular repair are relatively common, so regularly scheduled radiologic imaging surveillance is of the utmost importance.Brunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   87501/03/19   5:41 PM 876SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIAORTIC DISSECTIONPathology and ClassificationAortic dissection, the most common catastrophic event involving the aorta, is a progressive separation of the aortic wall layers that usually occurs after a tear forms in the intima and inner media. As the separation of the layers of the media propagates, two channels are typically formed (Fig. 22-18): the original lumen, which remains lined by the intima and which is called the true lumen, and the newly formed channel within the layers of the media, which is called the false lumen. The dissecting membrane separates the true and false lumens. Additional tears in the dis-secting membrane that allow communication between the two channels are called reentry sites. Although the separation of lay-ers primarily progresses distally along the length of the aorta, it can also proceed in a proximal direction; this process often is referred to as proximal extension or retrograde dissection.The extensive disruption of the aortic wall has severe anatomic consequences (Fig. 22-19). First, the outer wall of the false lumen is extremely thin, inflamed, and fragile, which makes it prone to expansion or rupture in the face of ongoing hemodynamic stress. Second, the expanding false lumen can compress the true lumen and cause malperfusion syndrome by interfering with blood flow in the aorta or any of its branch vessels, including the coronary, carotid, inter-costal, visceral, renal, and iliac arteries. Finally, when the separation of layers occurs within the aortic root, the aortic valve commissures can become unhinged, which results in acute valvular regurgitation. The clinical consequences of each of these sequelae are addressed in detail in the section on clinical manifestations.Dissection vs. Aneurysm. The relationship between dissec-tion and aneurysmal disease requires clarification. Dissection and aneurysm are separate entities, although they often coexist and are mutual risk factors. In some cases, dissection occurs in patients without aneurysms, and the subsequent progressive dilatation of the weakened outer aortic wall ultimately results in an aneurysm. On the other hand, in patients with degenera-tive aneurysms, the ongoing deterioration of the aortic wall can lead to a superimposed dissection. The overused term dissecting aneurysm should be reserved for this specific situation.Classification. For management purposes, aortic dissec-tions are classified according to their location and chronicity. Improvements in imaging have increasingly revealed variants of aortic dissection that probably represent different forms along the spectrum of this condition.Location To guide treatment, dissections are categorized according to their anatomic location and extent. The two tra-ditional classification schemes that remain in common use are the DeBakey and the Stanford classification systems  (Fig. 22-20).152,153 In their current forms, both of these schemes describe the segments of aorta that are involved in the dissec-tion, rather than the site of the initial intimal tear. The main drawback of the Stanford classification system is that it does not distinguish between patients with isolated ascending aor-tic dissection and patients with dissection involving the entire aorta. Both types of patients would be classified as having type A dissections, despite the fact that their treatment, follow-up, and prognosis are substantially different.Additional classification schemas include that by Borst and associates,154 in which the ascending and descending aorta are considered independently; the recent modification of the DeBakey classification by Tsagakis et al,155 which extends type II  dissection into the aortic arch; and the Penn modification of the Stanford classification,156,157 which expands the classification to include the presence of tissue and global malperfusion. These modifications may help to better streamline the primary surgical intervention.Normal aortaAortic dissectionIntramural hematomaPenetrating aortic ulcerFigure 22-18. Illustration of longitudinal sections of the aortic wall and lumen. Blood flows freely downstream in normal aortic tissue. In classic aortic dissection, blood entering the media through a tear creates a false channel in the wall. Intramural hematomas arise when hemor-rhage from the vasa vasorum causes blood to collect within the media; the intima is intact. Penetrating aortic ulcers are deep atherosclerotic lesions that burrow into the aortic wall and allow blood to enter the media. In each of these conditions, the outer aortic wall is severely weakened and prone to rupture.Brunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   87601/03/19   5:42 PM 877THORACIC ANEURYSMS AND AORTIC DISSECTIONCHAPTER 22Figure 22-19. Illustration of the potential anatomic consequences of aortic dissection, with a mapped diagram of affected regions (inset). A. Ascending aortic rupture and cardiac tamponade. B. Disruption of coronary blood flow. C. Injury to the aortic valve causing regurgitation. D, E, and F. Compromised blood flow to branch vessels, causing ischemic complications. (Adapted with permission from Creager MA,  Dzau VS, Loscalzo J: Vascular Medicine, 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier/Saunders; 2006.)Figure 22-20. Illustration of the classification schemes for aortic dissection based on which portions of the aorta are involved. Dissection can be confined to the ascending aorta (left) or the descending aorta (middle), or it can involve the entire aorta (right). (Used with permission from Baylor College of Medicine.)ABCDEFBrunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   87701/03/19   5:42 PM 878SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIContrast-enhanced CT scanTransfer to operatingroom, intubation,diagnostic TEESuspected acutedissectionAortic dissection?Ascending aorticdissection (Stanford A orDeBakey I or II)?Secondary diagnosticstudy (MRA, TEE, oraortography)Emergency operationEmergency operationTransfer to intensive carefor further stabilizationand diagnostic work-upTransfer to intensive care unitfor blood pressure control,anti-impulse therapy  Emergency endovascular(fenestration, stent) oropen interventionYesYesYesYesYesYesNoNoNoNoNoNoFurther diagnosticwork-upHemodynamicallystable?Anti-impulse therapy(beta blockers),blood pressure controlAortic dissection?Complicated descendingaortic dissection (malperfusion, rupture)?Management of acute aortic dissectionAscending aorticdissection (Stanford A orDeBakey I or II)?Figure 22-21. Algorithm used to facilitate decisions regarding treatment of acute aortic dissection. CT = computed tomography; MRA = magnetic resonance angiography; TEE = transesophageal echocardiography.Regardless of which system is used, patients with isolated ascending aortic dissection usually undergo emergent opera-tion, as do patients with dissection involving both the ascend-ing and descending thoracic segments. Patients with isolated descending thoracic and abdominal aortic dissection are typi-cally treated medically, unless complications requiring surgery develop. Understanding the precise extent of dissection has become increasingly important as some aortic centers consider augmenting traditional ascending aortic repairs with endovascu-lar techniques to treat dissected distal aortic segments.158Chronicity Aortic dissection also is categorized according to the time elapsed since the initial tear. Dissection is considered acute within the first 14 days after the initial tear; after 14 days, the dissection is considered chronic. Although arbitrary, the dis-tinction between acute and chronic dissections has important implications, not only for decision making about perioperative management strategies and operative techniques, but also for evaluating surgical results. Figure 22-21 provides an algorithm for the management of acute aortic dissection. In light of the importance of acuity, Borst and associates154 have proposed a third phase—termed subacute—to describe the transition between the acute and chronic phases. The subacute period encompasses days 15 through 60 after the initial tear. Although this is past the traditional 14-day acute phase, patients with subacute dissection continue to have extremely fragile aortic Brunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   87801/03/19   5:42 PM 879THORACIC ANEURYSMS AND AORTIC DISSECTIONCHAPTER 22tissue, which may complicate operative treatment and increase the risks associated with surgery. Recently, the International Registry of Acute Aortic Dissections (IRAD) investigators pro-posed a new classification system for characterizing the phases of aortic dissection: The period within 24 hours from the onset of symptoms was defined as hyperacute, the period between 2  and 7 days was defined as acute, the period between 8 and  30 days was defined as subacute, and the period beyond 30 days was defined as chronic.159Variants As noted earlier, advancements in noninvasive imag-ing of the aorta have revealed variants of aortic dissection (see Fig. 22-18). The recently introduced term acute aortic syn-drome encompasses classic aortic dissection and its variants. Other aortic syndromes, which were once thought to be rare, include intramural hematoma (IMH) and penetrating aortic ulcer (PAU). Although the issue is somewhat controversial, the current consensus is that, in most cases, these variants of dissec-tion should be treated identically to classic dissection.An IMH is a collection of blood within the aortic wall, without an intimal tear, that is believed to be due to rupture of the vasa vasorum within the media. The accumulation of blood can result in a secondary intimal tear that ultimately leads to a dissection.160 Because IMH and aortic dissection represent a continuum, it is possible that IMH is seen less frequently than aortic dissection because IMH rapidly progresses to true dissec-tion. The prevalence of IMH among patients with acute aortic syndromes is approximately 6%, and 16% progress to full dis-section.161 An IMH can be classified according to its location (i.e., ascending or descending) and should be treated analo-gously to classic dissection.162A PAU is essentially a disrupted atherosclerotic plaque that projects into the aortic wall and is associated with surround-ing hematoma. Eventually, the ulcer can penetrate the aortic wall, which leads to dissection or rupture. The rate of disease progression is higher than that of IMH alone.163Causes and Clinical HistoryAortic dissection is a lethal condition with a reported incidence of 3.5 per 100,000 in the United States.164 Without appropriate mod-ern medical or surgical treatment, most patients (approximately 90%) die within 3 months of dissection, mostly from rupture.165,166Although several risk factors for aortic dissection have been identified, the specific causes remain unknown.  Ultimately, any condition that weakens the aortic wall increases the risk of aortic dissection. Common general cardiovascular risk factors, such as smoking, hypertension, atherosclerosis, and hypercholesterolemia, are associated with aortic dissection. Patients with heritable forms of aortopathy, aortitis, bicuspid aortic valve, or preexisting medial degenerative disease are at risk for dissection, especially if they already have a thoracic aortic aneurysm.24 Aortic injury during cardiac catheterization, surgery, or endovascular aortic repair is a common cause of iatrogenic dissection. Other conditions that are associated with aortic dissection include cocaine and amphetamine abuse,167  as well as severe emotional stress or extreme physical exertion such as during weightlifting.168 Advances in the understanding of the molecular mechanisms behind abdominal aortic aneu-rysms have prompted similar investigations of thoracic aortic dissection.169-171Clinical ManifestationsThe onset of dissection often is associated with severe chest or back pain, classically described as “tearing,” that migrates Table 22-5Anatomic complications of aortic dissection and their associated symptoms and signsANATOMIC MANIFESTATIONSYMPTOMS AND SIGNSAortic valve insufficiencyDyspneaMurmurPulmonary ralesShockCoronary malperfusionChest pain with characteristics of anginaNausea/vomitingShockIschemic changes on electrocardiogramElevated cardiac enzymesPericardial tamponadeDyspneaJugular venous distensionPulsus paradoxusMuffled cardiac tonesShockLow-voltage electrocardiogramSubclavian or iliofemoral artery malperfusionCold, painful extremityExtremity sensory and motor deficitsPeripheral pulse deficitCarotid artery malperfusionSyncopeFocal neurologic deficit (transient or persistent)Carotid pulse deficitComaSpinal malperfusionParaplegiaIncontinenceMesenteric malperfusionNausea/vomitingAbdominal painRenal malperfusionOliguria or anuriaHematuriadistally as the dissection progresses along the length of the aorta. The location of the pain often indicates which aortic segments are involved. Pain in the anterior chest suggests involvement of the ascending aorta, whereas pain in the back and abdomen generally indicates involvement of the descending and thora-coabdominal aorta. Additional clinical sequelae of acute aortic dissection vary substantially and are best considered in terms of the dissection’s potential anatomic manifestations at each level of the aorta (see Fig. 22-19 and Table 22-5). Thus, potential complications of dissection of the aorta (and involved second-ary arteries) may include cardiac ischemia (coronary artery) or tamponade, stroke (brachiocephalic arteries), paraplegia or paraparesis (intercostal arteries), mesenteric ischemia (superior mesenteric artery), kidney failure (renal arteries), and limb isch-emia or loss of motor function (brachial or femoral arteries).Ascending aortic dissection can directly injure the aortic valve, causing regurgitation. The severity of the regurgitation varies with the degree of commissural disruption, which ranges from partial separation of only one commissure, producing mild Brunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   87901/03/19   5:42 PM 880SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIvalvular regurgitation, to full separation of all three commis-sures and complete prolapse of the valve into the left ventricle, producing severe acute heart failure. Patients with acute aortic valve regurgitation may report rapidly worsening dyspnea.Ascending dissections also can extend into the coronary arteries or shear the coronary ostia off of the true lumen, caus-ing acute coronary occlusion; when this occurs, it most often involves the right coronary artery. The sudden disruption of coronary blood flow can cause a myocardial infarction. This presentation of acute myocardial ischemia can mask the pres-ence of aortic dissection, which results in delayed diagnosis and treatment.172The thin and inflamed outer wall of a dissected ascend-ing aorta often produces a serosanguineous pericardial effusion that can accumulate and cause tamponade. Suggestive signs include jugular venous distention, muffled heart tones, pulsus paradoxus, and low-voltage electrocardiogram (ECG) tracings. Free rupture into the pericardial space produces rapid tampon-ade and is generally fatal.As the dissection progresses, any branch vessel from the aorta can become involved, which results in compromised blood flow and ischemic complications (i.e., malperfusion). Therefore, depending on which arteries are involved, the dissection can produce acute stroke, paraplegia, hepatic failure, bowel infarc-tion, renal failure, or a threatened ischemic limb.Diagnostic EvaluationBecause of the variations in severity and the wide variety of potential clinical manifestations, the diagnosis of acute aortic dissection can be challenging.173-175 Only 3 out of every 100,000 patients who present to an emergency department with acute chest, back, or abdominal pain are eventually diagnosed with aortic dissection. Not surprisingly, diagnostic delays are com-mon; delays beyond 24 hours after hospitalization occur in up to 39% of cases. Unfortunately, delays in diagnosis lead to delays in treatment, which can have disastrous consequences. The European Society of Cardiology Task Force on Aortic Dis-section stated, “The main challenge in managing acute aortic dissection is to suspect and thus diagnose the disease as early as possible.”173 A recent study by the IRAD investigators exam-ined the reasons for delayed diagnosis and found that diagnosis lagged in women, as well as in patients with atypical symptoms, such as fever or mild pain (rather than severe pain).172 A high index of suspicion is critical, particularly in younger, atypical patients, who may have heritable disorders or other, less com-mon risk factors.Most patients with acute aortic dissection (80% to 90%) experience severe pain in the chest, back, or abdomen.173-175 The pain usually occurs suddenly, has a sharp or tearing quality, and often migrates distally as the dissection progresses along the aorta. For classification purposes (acute vs. subacute vs. chronic), the onset of pain is generally considered to represent the beginning of the dissection process. Most of the other com-mon symptoms either are nonspecific or are caused by the sec-ondary manifestations of dissection.A discrepancy between the extremities in pulse, blood pressure, or both is the classic physical finding in patients with aortic dissection. It often occurs because of changes in flow in the true and false lumens, and it does not necessarily indi-cate extension into an extremity branch vessel. Involvement of the aortic arch often creates differences between the right and left arms, whereas descending aortic dissection often causes differences between the upper and lower extremities. Like symptoms, most of the physical signs after dissection are related to the secondary manifestations and therefore vary considerably (see Table 22-5). For example, signs of stroke or a threatened ischemic limb may dominate the physical findings in patients with carotid or iliac malperfusion, respectively.Unfortunately, laboratory studies are of little help in diag-nosing acute aortic dissection. There has been continued inter-est in using D-dimer level to aid in making this diagnosis.176 Several reports indicate that D-dimer is an extremely sensitive indicator of acute aortic dissection; elevated levels are found in approximately 97% of affected patients.177 Tests that are com-monly used to detect acute coronary events—including ECG and tests for serum markers of myocardial injury—deserve spe-cial consideration and need to be interpreted carefully. Normal ECGs and serum marker levels in patients with acute chest pain should raise suspicion about the possibility of aortic dissection. It is important to remember that ECG changes and elevated serum marker levels associated with myocardial infarction do not exclude the diagnosis of aortic dissection because dissection can cause coronary malperfusion. Of note, abnormal ECGs have recently been shown to delay the diagnosis of aortic dissection, and the possibility of aortic dissection should not be prema-turely ruled out.172,178 Similarly, although CXRs may show a widened mediastinum or abnormal aortic contour, up to 16% of patients with dissection have a normal-appearing CXR.174 The value of the CXR for detecting aortic dissection is limited, with a sensitivity of 67% and a specificity of 86%.179Once the diagnosis of dissection is considered, the tho-racic aorta should be imaged with CT, MRA, or echocardiogra-phy. The accuracy of these noninvasive imaging tests has all but eliminated the need for diagnostic aortography in most patients with suspected aortic dissection. Currently, the diagnosis of aor-tic dissection is usually established with contrast-enhanced CT, which has a sensitivity of 98% and a specificity of 87%, and, most importantly, acquires images swiftly.180 The classic diag-nostic feature is a double-lumen aorta (Fig. 22-22). In addition, CT scans provide essential information about the segments of the aorta involved; the acuity of the dissection; aortic dilata-tion, including the presence of preexisting degenerative aneu-rysms; and the development of threatening sequelae, including pericardial effusion, early aortic rupture, and branch-vessel compromise. Although MRA also provides excellent imaging (with both a sensitivity and specificity of 98%), the MR suite is not well suited for critically ill patients. In patients who cannot undergo contrast-enhanced CT or MRA, transthoracic echocar-diography can be used to establish the diagnosis.Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) is excellent for detecting dissection, aneurysm, and IMH in the ascending aorta. In appropriate hands, TEE has a demonstrated sensitivity and specificity as high as 98% and 95%, respectively.181 Further-more, TEE offers important information about ventricular func-tion and aortic valve competency. Finally, TEE is the diagnostic modality of choice for hemodynamically unstable patients in whom the diagnosis of ascending dissection is suspected; ide-ally, these patients should be taken to the operating room, where the TEE can be performed and, if the TEE is confirmatory, sur-gery can be started immediately.In selected patients with ascending aortic dissection (i.e., those who have evidence of preexisting coronary artery dis-ease), coronary angiography can be considered before surgery. Specific relative indications in these patients include a history Brunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   88001/03/19   5:42 PM 881THORACIC ANEURYSMS AND AORTIC DISSECTIONCHAPTER 22of angina or myocardial infarction, a recent myocardial per-fusion study with abnormal results, previous coronary artery bypass or angioplasty, and acute ischemic changes on ECG. Contraindications include hemodynamic instability, aortic rupture, and pericardial effusion.182 In our practice, patients with acute aortic dissections rarely undergo coronary angiog-raphy. However, all patients presenting for elective repair of chronic ascending dissections have diagnostic coronary angio-grams taken.Of note, when malperfusion of the renal, visceral, or lower extremity arteries develops, the patient is usually treated in an angiography suite or hybrid operating room.158 Although the dissection usually is diagnosed on CT scan, these patients also undergo aortography, during which the mechanism of the malperfusion is ascertained and, if possible, corrected. Hence, catheter-based aortography may be obsolete as a diagnostic test for dissection, but it remains beneficial for patients with malperfusion.TreatmentInitial Assessment and Management. Regardless of the location of the dissection, the initial treatment is the same for all patients with suspected or confirmed acute aortic dissection (see Fig. 22-21). Furthermore, because of the potential for rup-ture before the diagnosis is confirmed, aggressive pharmaco-logic management is started once there is clinical suspicion of dissection, and this treatment is continued during the diagnostic evaluation. The goals of pharmacologic treatment are to stabi-lize the dissection and prevent rupture.Patients are monitored closely in an intensive care unit. Indwelling radial arterial catheters are used to monitor blood pressure and optimize titration of antihypertensive agents. Blood pressures in a malperfused limb can underrepresent the central aortic pressure; therefore, blood pressure is measured in the arm with the better pulse. Central venous catheters assure reliable IV access for delivering vasoactive medications. Pul-monary artery catheters are reserved for patients with severe cardiopulmonary dysfunction.In addition to confirming the diagnosis of dissection and defining its acuity and extent, the initial evaluation focuses on determining whether any of several life-threatening compli-cations are present. Particular attention is paid to changes in neurologic status, peripheral pulses, and urine output. Serial laboratory studies—including arterial blood gas concentrations, complete blood cell count, prothrombin and partial thrombo-plastin times, and serum levels of electrolytes, creatinine, blood urea nitrogen, and liver enzymes—are useful for detecting organ ischemia and optimizing management.The initial management strategy, commonly described as anti-impulse therapy or blood pressure control, focuses on reducing aortic wall stress, the force of left ventricular ejection, chronotropy, and the rate of change in blood pressure (dP/dT).  Reductions in dP/dT are achieved by lowering both cardiac contractility and blood pressure. The drugs initially used to accomplish these goals include IV b-adrenergic blockers, direct vasodilators, calcium channel blockers, and angiotensinconverting enzyme inhibitors. These agents are used to achieve a heart rate between 60 and 80 bpm, a systolic blood pressure between 100 and 110 mmHg, and a mean arterial blood pres-sure between 60 and 75 mmHg. These hemodynamic targets are maintained as long as urine output remains adequate and neuro-logic function is not impaired. Achieving adequate pain control with IV opiates, such as morphine and fentanyl, is important for maintaining acceptable blood pressure control.b-Antagonists are administered to all patients with acute aortic dissections unless there are strong contraindications, such as severe heart failure, bradyarrhythmia, high-grade atrioven-tricular conduction block, or bronchospastic disease. Esmolol Figure 22-22. Computed tomographic scans showing that the aorta has been separated into two channels—the true (T) and false (F) lumens—in two patients with different phases of aortic dissection. A. An acute DeBakey type I aortic dissection. The dissecting membrane appears wavy (arrows) in the early phase of dissection. Here, the true lumen of the proximal aorta can be seen to be extensively compressed. This may lead to malperfusion of the heart. B. A chronic DeBakey type III aortic dissection. In the chronic phase, the membrane appears straighter and less mobile (arrow) because it has stabilized over time. (Used with permission of Baylor College of Medicine.)Brunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   88101/03/19   5:42 PM 882SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIcan be useful in patients with bronchospastic disease because it is a cardioselective, ultra-fast-acting agent with a short half-life. Labetalol, which causes both nonselective b-blockade and postsynaptic α1-blockade, reduces systemic vascular resistance without impairing cardiac output. Doses of b-antagonists are titrated to achieve a heart rate of 60 to 80 bpm. In patients who cannot receive b-antagonists, calcium channel blockers such as diltiazem are an effective alternative. Nitroprusside, a direct vasodilator, can be administered once b-blockade is adequate. When used alone, however, nitroprusside can cause reflex increases in heart rate and contractility, elevated dP/dT, and pro-gression of aortic dissection. Enalapril and other angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors are useful in patients with renal malperfusion. These drugs inhibit renin release, which may improve renal blood flow.Treatment of Ascending Aortic Dissection Acute Dissection Because of the risk of aortic rupture, acute ascending aortic dissection is usually considered an absolute indication for emergency surgical repair. However, specific patient groups may benefit from nonoperative manage-ment or delayed operation.183 Delayed repair may be con-sidered for patients who (a) present with severe acute stroke or mesenteric ischemia, (b) are elderly and have substantial comor-bidity, (c) are in stable condition and may benefit from transfer to specialized centers, or (d) have undergone a cardiac operation in the remote past. Regarding the last group, it is important that the previous operation not be too recent; dissections that occur during the first 3 weeks after cardiac surgery pose a high risk of rupture and tamponade, and such dissections warrant early operation.184In the absence of the aforementioned circumstances, most patients with acute ascending aortic dissection undergo emer-gent graft replacement of the ascending aorta. Operative repair is similar to that for aneurysm of the transverse aortic arch (pre-viously described) because hypothermic circulatory arrest is commonly used regardless of the extent of repair. Immediately before the operation begins, intraoperative TEE is commonly performed to further assess baseline myocardial and valvular function and, if necessary, to confirm the diagnosis. The opera-tion is performed via a median sternotomy with cardiopulmo-nary bypass and hypothermic circulatory arrest (Fig. 22-23). In preparation for circulatory arrest, cannulas are placed in the right axillary artery (to provide arterial inflow) and in the right atrium (to provide venous drainage).94 The innominate artery is some-times used for arterial inflow if it is not dissected.185 After an appropriate level of cooling has been achieved (approximately 24°C), cardiopulmonary bypass is stopped, and the ascending aorta is opened. The innominate artery is then occluded with a clamp or snare, and flow from the axillary artery cannula is used to provide ACP.186 Currently as a default, we use bilateral ACP with a separate perfusion catheter in the left common carotid artery to ensure perfusion of the left side of the brain. This strat-egy of performing the distal anastomosis during a brief period of circulatory arrest, often termed open distal anastomosis, obvi-ates the need to place a clamp across the fragile aorta, avoiding further aortic damage. Also, it allows the surgeon to carefully inspect the aortic arch for intimal tears. Traditionally, the entire arch is replaced only if a primary intimal tear is located in the arch or if the arch is aneurysmal; most commonly, repair is lim-ited to replacement of the entire ascending aorta or to a bev-eled “hemiarch” repair.187 Conservative repair has been shown 8to increase the likelihood of early survival.188 The distal aortic cuff is prepared by tacking the inner and outer walls together and occasionally using a small amount of surgical adhesive to obliterate the false lumen and strengthen the tissue. A polyester tube graft is sutured to the distal aortic cuff. The anastomosis between the graft and the aorta is fashioned so that blood flow will be directed into the true lumen; this often alleviates distal malperfusion problems that were present preoperatively. After the distal anastomosis has been completed and adequately rein-forced, the graft is deaired and clamped, full cardiopulmonary bypass is resumed, rewarming is initiated, and the proximal por-tion of the repair is started. In the absence of conditions that generally necessitate aortic root replacement (i.e., annuloaortic ectasia or heritable disorders, particularly Marfan and Loeys-Dietz syndromes), aortic valve regurgitation can be corrected by resuspending the commissures onto the outer aortic wall.189 The proximal aortic cuff is prepared with tacking sutures and occasionally a small amount of surgical adhesive before the proximal aortic anastomosis is performed.In the majority of patients who undergo surgical repair of acute ascending dissection, the dissection persists distal to the site of the operative repair; the residually dissected aorta, which generally includes at least a portion of the transverse aortic arch as well as a large portion of the distal aorta, is susceptible to dil-atation over time. Extensive dilatation of the arch or distal aorta develops in 25% to 40% of survivors190,191 and often necessitates further aortic repair. Additionally, long-term survival after acute proximal aortic dissection is generally poor, and rupture of the dilated distal aorta is a common cause of late death in these patients.188,190-192The challenges that survivors of acute proximal aortic dissec-tion commonly face over time have led to the development of alter-nate acute dissection strategies such as total arch replacement193  and hybrid arch strategies to extend proximal aortic repair into the distal aorta. The goal of hybrid arch approaches in acute dis-section is to thrombose the residual false lumen by compressing it with the radial force that is exerted by a stent graft placed in the true lumen, thereby facilitating remodeling and prevent-ing late aneurysm formation.194,195 However, in such repairs, the compressed false lumen may continue to be perfused in a ret-rograde fashion.In Europe, Japan, and elsewhere, one-piece hybrid pros-theses are now available that incorporate a polyester graft for the proximal repair and a stent graft component for the descending aorta. The device enables single-stage “frozen elephant trunk” repair of the ascending aorta, entire aortic arch, and proximal descending thoracic aorta.196 In the United States, such devices are not currently available, so this repair is commonly done by concomitantly deploying a commercially available stent graft in an antegrade fashion after fully replacing the ascending aorta and aortic arch. In some variations of this off-label approach, the stent graft is directly sutured to the distal aspect of the proximal open repair, whereas in others, there may be a gap of native tissue between the open and endovascular repair. Although this technique appears to be extensively used outside the  United States, and with early and mid-term success,194,197-199 only a few U.S. reports describe its use.200-203 Emerging reports describe an enhanced risk of spinal cord ischemia, a risk that is not usually associated with open arch repair. This is prob-ably due to the extensive coverage of the intercostal vessels by the stent graft. Uncertainties in the frozen elephant trunk procedure need to be addressed before it becomes a standard Brunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   88201/03/19   5:42 PM 883THORACIC ANEURYSMS AND AORTIC DISSECTIONCHAPTER 22Figure 22-23. Illustration of proximal aortic repair for acute ascending aortic dissection. A. This repair requires a median sternotomy and cardiopulmonary bypass. The ascending aorta is opened during hypothermic circulatory arrest, while antegrade cerebral perfusion is delivered via an axillary artery graft (shown) or via an innominate artery graft, provided that the innominate artery is not dissected (see Fig. 22-10).  B. The dissecting membrane is removed to expose the true lumen. C. An open distal anastomosis prevents clamp injury of the friable arch tis-sue and allows inspection of the arch lumen. A balloon perfusion catheter in the left common carotid artery ensures bilateral antegrade cerebral perfusion. If the origin of the dissection (i.e., intimal tear or disruption) does not extensively involve the greater curvature of the aortic arch, and if there is no evidence of a preexisting arch aneurysm, a beveled, hemiarch repair is carried out, preserving most of the greater curvature of the arch. The aorta is transected, beginning at the greater curvature immediately proximal to the origin of the innominate artery and extending distally toward the lesser curvature to the level of the left subclavian artery. Consequently, most of the transverse aortic arch, except for the dorsal segment containing the brachiocephalic arteries, is removed. An appropriately sized, sealed (with collagen or gelatin) polyester tube graft is selected, and the beveled distal anastomosis is made with continuous 3-0 or 4-0 monofilament suture; the potential space between  the true and false lumen can be obliterated with a small amount of surgical adhesive or by using a strip of Teflon felt. To improve hemostasis, the distal anastomosis can be reinforced by placing interrupted mattress sutures with felt pledgets. D. After cardiopulmonary bypass is resumed and a cross-clamp is applied to the hemiarch replacement graft, the aortic valve is assessed. Disrupted commissures are resuspended with pledgeted mattress sutures to restore valvular competence. E. The aorta is generally transected at the sinotubular junction, and a very small amount of surgical adhesive can be applied between the true and false lumens, or more commonly, the false lumen within the proximal aortic stump is obliterated by inserting a semicircle of felt within the false lumen of the noncoronary sinus. The trimmed edges are brought together by using 6-0 polypropylene sutures. F. The proximal anastomosis is carried out at the sinotubular junction, incorporating the distal margin of the commissures. G. In patients with residual distal aortic dissection (such as in DeBakey type I aortic dissection), hemiarch repair can be extended with antegrade stent delivery to the descending thoracic aorta. (Used with permission of Baylor College of Medicine.)ACFGDEBBrunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   88301/03/19   5:42 PM 884SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIrecommendation for this subset of patients.204 Another alter-native employs separate grafts: a standard polyester graft to replace the ascending aorta and proximal hemiarch, and a stent graft delivered antegrade into the descending thoracic aorta (Fig. 22-23G). Although this procedure differs from a formal “frozen elephant trunk” repair in that it does not replace the entire arch, it is meant to achieve the same goal: promoting remodeling of the dissected descending aortic segment.Chronic Dissection Occasionally, patients with ascending aor-tic dissection present for repair in the chronic phase. In most respects, the operation is similar to that for acute dissection repair. One notable difference is that the tissue is stronger in chronic dissection than in acute dissection, which makes sutur-ing safer. In addition, the false lumen is not obliterated at the distal anastomosis; instead, the dissecting membrane is fenes-trated into the arch to assure perfusion of both lumens and to prevent postoperative malperfusion complications. Unlike operations for acute dissection, operations for chronic dissec-tion are often aggressive repairs that extend into the arch and root because the tissues are much less fragile.Treatment of Descending Aortic Dissection Nonoperative Management Nonoperative, pharmacologic management of acute descending aortic dissection results in lower morbidity and mortality rates than traditional open surgi-cal treatment does.174 The most common causes of death during nonoperative treatment are aortic rupture and end-organ malp-erfusion. Therefore, patients are continually reassessed for new complications. Serial CT scans are generally obtained during the index hospitalization—usually on day 2 or 3 and on day 8 or 9 of treatment—and compared with the initial scan to rule out significant aortic expansion.Once the patient’s condition has been stabilized, phar-macologic management is gradually shifted from IV to oral medications. Oral therapy, usually including a b-antagonist, is initiated when systolic pressure is consistently between 100 and 110 mmHg and the neurologic, renal, and cardiovascular systems are stable. Many patients can be discharged after their blood pressure is well controlled with oral agents and after serial CT scans confirm the absence of aortic expansion.Long-term pharmacologic therapy is important for patients with chronic aortic dissection. b-Blockers remain the drugs of choice.205 In a 20-year follow-up study, DeBakey and col-leagues206 found that inadequate blood pressure control was associated with late aneurysm formation. Aneurysms developed in only 17% of patients with “good” blood pressure control, compared with 45% of patients with “poor” control.Aggressive imaging follow-up is recommended for all patients with chronic aortic dissection.207 Both contrast-enhanced CT and MRA scans provide excellent aortic imag-ing and facilitate serial comparisons to detect progressive aortic expansion. The first surveillance scan is obtained approximately 6 weeks after the onset of dissection. Subsequent scans are obtained at 3 to 6 months and then at 1 year after onset. If the aorta appears to be stable, imaging is obtained annually there-after. Scans are obtained more frequently in high-risk patients, such as those with Marfan or Loeys-Dietz syndrome, and in those in whom significant aortic expansion is detected. For patients who have undergone graft repair of descending aor-tic dissection, annual CT or MRA scans are also obtained to detect false aneurysm formation or dilatation of unrepaired seg-ments of aorta. Early detection of worrisome changes allows timely, elective intervention before rupture or other complica-tions develop; rupture of the distal aorta is relatively common in patients with chronic aortic dissection and often results in death.192Indications for Open Surgery In the acute phase of descend-ing aortic dissection, open surgery has been traditionally reserved for patients who experience complications.208 Compli-cated acute distal aortic dissections are those with aortic rupture, increasing periaortic or pleural fluid volume, rapidly expanding aortic diameter, uncontrolled hypertension, and persistent pain despite adequate medical therapy and malperfusion. In general terms, emergency open operations were originally intended to prevent or repair rupture and relieve life-threatening ischemic manifestations. However, open operation is associated with high morbidity in such cases; now that stent graft technology is available, endovascular surgical intervention is recommended for patients with complicated acute distal aortic dissection.Acute dissection superimposed on a preexisting aneu-rysm is considered a life-threatening condition and is therefore another indication for operation. Finally, patients who have a history of noncompliance with medical therapy may ultimately benefit more from surgical intervention if they are otherwise reasonable operative candidates.In the chronic phase, the indications for open surgical inter-vention for aortic dissection are similar to those for degenerative thoracic aortic aneurysm, although a slightly lower threshold of repair is now recommended. Guidelines for thoracic aortic disease44 recommend elective operation in otherwise healthy patients when the affected segment has reached a diameter of 5.5 cm, especially in patients with heritable disorders. Rapid aortic enlargement and other factors that increase the likelihood of aortic rupture may also be considered.Endovascular Treatment Malperfusion Syndrome Endovascular therapy is routinely used in patients with descending aortic dissection complicated by visceral malperfusion.209 Abdominal malperfusion syn-drome often is fatal; prompt identification of visceral ischemia and expedited treatment to restore hepatic, gastrointestinal, and renal perfusion are imperative for a positive outcome. As described in a later section, several open surgical techniques can be used to reestablish blood flow to compromised organs. However, in acute cases, open surgery is associated with poor outcomes. Therefore, endovascular intervention is the pre-ferred initial approach in such cases. In one endovascular tech-nique known as endovascular fenestration, a balloon is used to create a tear in the dissection flap, which allows blood to flow in both the true and false lumens. Although endovascular fen-estration was commonly used in the past, its use has declined in recent years as direct aortic and branch-vessel stenting tech-niques have evolved and gained favor. Placing a stent graft in the true lumen of the aorta can resolve a “dynamic” malperfu-sion. Occasionally, a small stent must be placed directly in the lumen of a visceral or renal artery because the dissection has propagated into the branch, resulting in “static” malperfusion at the origin.209Iliofemoral malperfusion causing limb-threatening leg ischemia also can be treated via an endovascular approach. Limb malperfusion usually resolves after the endovascular repair of acute descending thoracic aortic dissection. If the malperfusion does not resolve, then a femoral-to-femoral arterial bypass graft is an effective option.Brunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   88401/03/19   5:42 PM 885THORACIC ANEURYSMS AND AORTIC DISSECTIONCHAPTER 22Acute Dissection  Although surgery has been traditionally recommended for patients with complicated acute descending aortic dissection, many centers have shifted toward using endo-vascular stent grafts as the preferred approach in these cases because of the high morbidity associated with the open opera-tion. Evidence suggests that emergent endovascular repair in patients with true lumen collapse and complications such rupture or dynamic malperfusion may be lifesaving in these difficult-to-treat patients. However, these patients remain at risk of further complication or future reintervention. Although endovascular repair in patients with heritable aortic disorders is generally not recommended, this technique can be used as a bridge to later, definitive repair in such life-threatening circumstances.66Controversy exists regarding the use of endovascular stent grafts to treat uncomplicated acute descending dissection; some encouraging data have been published in the last couple of years.210 The goal of this treatment strategy is to use the stent graft to cover the intimal tear, seal the entry site of the dis-section, and eventually cause thrombosis of the false lumen to aid in aortic remodeling and reduce late aortic expansion. Such procedures take place in a hybrid operating room. After the true lumen is accessed through the femoral arteries, an aor-togram is taken, and the intimal tear is identified. Note that the diameter of the true lumen is measured on the preoperative contrast-enhanced CT scan. The use of IVUS is encouraged to help access the true lumen, verify navigation of the wire inside the true lumen, and confirm measurements. For these cases, a stent graft is selected with a diameter no more than 10% greater than that of the true lumen. Unlike stents deployed to treat most descending thoracic aortic aneurysms, stents deployed to treat descending thoracic aortic dissections must not be ballooned, because ballooning can cause a new intimal tear, retrograde dissection into the ascending aorta, or even aortic rupture. The ideal length of the descending thoracic aorta that should be cov-ered in patients with acute distal descending dissection remains unclear. Close monitoring with serial imaging is necessary after endovascular repair because the false lumen remains at risk for retrograde perfusion or pressurization.Chronic Dissection Endovascular treatment of chronic descend-ing aortic dissection is supported by the 5-year data of the INSTEAD-XL trial, which showed that endovascular repair com-bined with optimal medical treatment was associated with slower disease progression and greater aorta-specific survival than opti-mal medical treatment alone.211 Importantly, patients in the trial had dissections in the early chronic phase, many within 10 to 12 weeks of onset and all within 1 year of onset. Endovascular repair of chronic dissection is particularly challenging because the rela-tive rigidity of the dissecting membrane—which increases over time during the chronic phase—and the presence of multiple reen-try sites make it difficult to exclude the false lumen.Penetrating Aortic Ulcer Patients with PAUs appear to be good candidates for endovascular intervention. Covering the focal ulceration with a stent graft has been shown to be an effec-tive treatment.212 In a recent study by Patel and colleagues,213 endovascular repair of PAU was associated with better early outcomes than open repair. However, when PAU was associ-ated with adjacent hematoma within the aortic wall, rates of subsequent reintervention were increased.Open Repair Acute Dissection In patients with acute aortic dissection, open surgical repair of the descending thoracic or thoracoabdominal aorta has been traditionally associated with high morbidity and mortality.174 Therefore, surgery was generally only performed to prevent fatal rupture or to restore branch-vessel perfusion in patients with complicated dissection.208 With the evolution of endovascular technology, open repair has fallen out of favor in recent years.Malperfusion Syndrome In patients with malperfusion, when an endovascular approach is unavailable or unsuccessful, open surgery is necessary. Lower-extremity ischemia can be readily addressed with surgical extra-anatomic revascularization techniques, such as femoral-to-femoral bypass grafting. In patients with abdominal organ ischemia, flow to the compromised bed must be reestab-lished swiftly. Although they are considered second-line therapies, multiple techniques are available, including graft replacement of the aorta (with flow redirected into the true lumen), open aortic fenestration, and visceral or renal artery bypass.Chronic Dissection A more aggressive replacement usually is performed during elective aortic repairs in patients with chronic dissection. In many regards, the operative approach used in these patients is identical to that used for descending thoracic and tho-racoabdominal aortic aneurysms, as described in the first half of this chapter (Fig. 22-24). One key difference is the need to excise as much dissecting membrane as possible to clearly identify the true and false lumens and to locate all important branch vessels. When the dissection extends into the visceral or renal arteries, the membrane can be fenestrated, or the false lumen can be obliter-ated with sutures or intraluminal stents. Asymmetric expansion of the false lumen can create wide separation of the renal arteries. This problem is addressed by reattaching the mobilized left renal artery to a separate opening in the graft or by performing a left renal artery bypass with a side graft. Wedges of dissecting mem-brane also are excised from the aorta adjacent to the proximal and distal anastomoses, which allows blood to flow through both true and false lumens. When placing the proximal clamp is not technically feasible, hypothermic circulatory arrest can be used to facilitate the proximal portion of the repair.OUTCOMESImprovements in anesthesia, surgical techniques, and periopera-tive care have led to substantial improvements in outcome after thoracic aortic aneurysm repair. When performed in specialized centers, these operations are associated with excellent survival rates and acceptable morbidity rates. The interpretation of out-comes data is complicated by site-specific variables, such as the number of years reported and whether data are taken from single-practice centers or from pooled, multicenter, or national registries, and by patient-specific variables, such as type of enrollment, urgency and extent of repair, concomitant proce-dures performed, and the presence of preexisting risk factors such as advanced age, previous cardiovascular repair, disease of any system or organ, or heritable conditions.Repair of Proximal Aortic AneurysmsRisks associated with the open repair of the proximal aorta vary by extent of repair and are greatest for repairs involving total arch replacement.71,214 All varieties of aortic root replacement have shown acceptable early mortality rates and few complica-tions. Two groups with 20 and 27 years’ experience with com-posite valve graft replacement reported early mortality rates of 5.6% and 1.9%, respectively; the more recent repairs had better outcomes.215,216 Early mortality rates for stentless porcine Brunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   88501/03/19   5:42 PM 886SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 22-24. Illustration of distal aortic repair of a chronic dissection. A. Thoracoabdominal incision. B. Extent II thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm resulting from chronic aortic dissection. The patient has previously undergone composite valve graft replacement of the aortic root and ascending aorta. After left heart bypass is initiated, the proximal portion of the aneurysm is isolated by placing clamps on the left sub-clavian artery, between the left common carotid and left subclavian arteries, and across the middle descending thoracic aorta. C. The isolated segment of aorta is opened by using electrocautery. D. The dissecting membrane is excised, and bleeding intercostal arteries are oversewn. The aorta is prepared for proximal anastomosis by transecting it distal to the proximal clamp and separating this portion from the esophagus (not shown). E. The proximal anastomosis between the aorta and an appropriately sized polyester graft is completed with continuous polypro-pylene suture. F. After left heart bypass has been stopped and the distal aortic cannula has been removed, the proximal clamp is repositioned onto the graft, the other two clamps are removed, and the remainder of the aneurysm is opened. G. The rest of the dissecting membrane is excised, and the openings to the celiac, superior mesenteric, and renal arteries are identified. H. Selective visceral perfusion with oxygenated blood from the bypass circuit is delivered through balloon perfusion catheters placed in the celiac and superior mesenteric arterial ostia. Cold crystalloid is delivered to the renal arteries. The critical intercostal arteries are reattached to an opening cut in the graft. I. To minimize spinal cord ischemia, the proximal clamp is repositioned distal to the intercostal reattachment site. A second oval opening is fashioned in the graft adjacent to the visceral vessels. Selective perfusion of the visceral arteries continues during their reattachment to the graft. A separate anas-tomosis is often required to reattach the left renal artery. J. After the balloon perfusion catheters are removed and the visceral anastomosis is completed, the clamp is again moved distally, restoring blood flow to the celiac, renal, and superior mesenteric arteries. The final anastomosis is created between the graft and the distal aorta. (Reproduced with permission from Creager MA, Dzau VS, Loscalzo J: Vascular Medicine, 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier/Saunders; 2006.)Left heartbypasscircuitCold renalperfusionsystemFalselumenABCDEtissue root replacements are also low, ranging from 3.6% to 6.0%.217-221 Early mortality rates for contemporary valve-sparing approaches to aortic root replacement are quite low (1%–2%) in experienced centers.77,78,80,222,223 Late survival rates after valve-sparing root procedures range from 97% to 99% at 5 years80,222,223 and approach 94% at 10 years.80Repairs incorporating the ascending aorta and aortic arch have acceptable outcomes; risk increases with patient-specific factors such as severe atherosclerosis224 or as larger sections of the aortic arch are incorporated into the repair.225,226 A revised surgical strategy—such as the use of hypothermic circulatory arrest—is often needed to avoid clamping atherosclerotic sections in the “porcelain” aorta. In Zingone and colleagues’ series224 of 64 patients who underwent replacement of atherosclerotic ascend-ing aorta, hypothermic circulatory arrest was used in 61 patients (95%). Even though these patients had substantial comorbidity and 83% underwent concomitant cardiac repairs, acceptable rates of early mortality (11%) and stroke (6%) were obtained. Other Brunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   88601/03/19   5:42 PM 887THORACIC ANEURYSMS AND AORTIC DISSECTIONCHAPTER 22Figure 22-24. (Continued)studies indicate that the enhanced risk of neurocognitive distur-bances in ascending repairs using circulatory arrest are not offset by lower rates of early mortality.227,228 Regarding extended proxi-mal repair, reported early mortality rates after traditional stage 1 elephant trunk repairs (primarily using island reattachment strate-gies) range from 2.3 to 13.9%.229-233Contemporary mortality rates for extensive proximal aortic repair have improved as new strategies and modified adjuncts have been adopted. For example, by adopting contem-porary approaches, we have reduced early mortality for stage 1  elephant trunk repairs from 12% to 2% in our patients.86,230 Similarly, in a report by Kazui and colleagues234 covering 20 years of experience and 472 consecutive patients who under-went aortic arch repair with selective ACP, operative mortality was 16.0% for early repairs and 4.1% for more recent repairs. Other contemporary reports of the use of techniques such as moderate hypothermia and Y-graft approaches235-238 indicate similarly improved outcomes; early mortality ranges from 1% to 7%, stroke rates range from 1% to 6%, and no cases of para-plegia are reported. Although paraplegia has traditionally been an unusual and infrequent complication of aortic arch repair, it has been reported as a complication of “long” elephant trunk approaches239 and frozen elephant trunk approaches.240Because of the heterogeneity of hybrid arch approaches and the tendency to use these approaches in high-risk patients, results of hybrid arch repair are difficult to interpret. In a recent report from our group,65 among 319 consecutive patients who underwent total arch replacement in the last 8.5 years, 274 patients had traditional open repair and 45 patients had hybrid zone 0 exclusion repairs. The rate of permanent adverse outcome (death, persistent neurologic deficit at dis-charge, or persistent hemodialysis at discharge) was not sig-nificantly different between the two groups. A higher overall stroke rate was noticed in the hybrid group, reinforcing the importance of catheter skills and careful wire manipulation. A meta-analysis conducted by Koullias and Wheatley241 of data from 15 studies with 463 patients found an average 30-day mortality rate of 8.3%; stroke, 4.4%; paraplegia, 3.9%; and endoleak, 9.2%. Of note, relatively few repairs (30%) were performed “off-pump,” and the majority of repairs used cardiopulmonary bypass or hypothermic circulatory arrest. Additionally, several reports of small series have documented increased risk of acute retrograde aortic dissection during hybrid arch repairs; rates range from 0% to 7.5%, and these patients face significant mortality risk (ranging from 33% to 100%) should this occur.108,109,242-244Brunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   88701/03/19   5:42 PM 888SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITreatment of Acute Ascending Aortic DissectionThe International Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection (IRAD) provides the most comprehensive data on contemporary out-comes in patients with acute aortic dissection. This registry was established in 1996 and has accumulated data from >7000 patients treated for acute aortic dissection at 51 centers in 12 countries. An IRAD analysis of data from 776 patients who underwent surgical repair of acute ascending aortic dissection revealed an in-hospital mortality rate of 23.8%.245 The investiga-tors identified several preoperative predictors of early mortality, including age >70 years, previous cardiac surgery, hypotension or shock at presentation, abrupt onset of symptoms, migrat-ing pain, cardiac tamponade, preoperative renal failure, pulse deficit, and evidence of myocardial ischemia or infarction on ECG.245,246 In a report from IRAD, in-hospital mortality after surgical treatment had decreased from 25% in 1995 to 18% in 2013.247 The German Registry for Acute Aortic Dissection (GERAADA) has collected data on more than 3300 patients from 56 centers since 2006. 248 In a report of 1436 patients with acute proximal dissection that was surgically repaired using hypothermic circulatory arrest with or without unilateral and bilateral ACP, the early mortality rates ranged from 13.9% to 19.4%; the 628 patients with unilateral ACP had the lowest rate of early death.249 Operative mortality reported by North  American centers varies from 5% to 17%; improvements in out-comes may be related to the implementation of protocol-based management and the assembly of thoracic aortic teams.203Repair of Distal Aortic AneurysmsEndovascular Repair of Descending Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms. In the earliest series of endovascular repairs of descending thoracic aortic aneurysms, mortality and morbidity were difficult to assess. Most of the reported series were small and included a large proportion of high-risk patients with sub-stantial comorbidity.250,251 Subsequent evidence from pivotal, nonrandomized trials that compared patients who underwent endograft exclusion with historical or concurrent patients who underwent open repair252-254 showed that the stent graft groups had significantly less morbidity and early mortality than the open repair groups, although in two of the trials, a nonsig-nificant between-group difference was observed in the rate of stroke.252,254 Five-year comparative data show that the two groups differed significantly in their aneurysm-related mortality rates (2.8% for endovascular patients and 11.7% for open repair patients) but not in their rates of all-cause mortality (which were 32% and 31%, respectively).255 Additional pivotal trial 5-year outcomes256 indicate the growing disparity between aneurysm-related (96.1%) and all-cause survival (58.5%) in patients with endovascular repair, leading some to comment on the possible futility of repair in many patients.257 Among 8967 patients iden-tified in the National Inpatient Sample database (8255 with open repair and 712 with endovascular repair), the odds of death were 46% lower among patients who underwent endovascular repair rather than open repair.56 The endovascular repair group also had lower odds of postoperative neurologic, cardiac, and respi-ratory complications.Open Repair of Descending Thoracic and Thoracoabdominal  Aortic Aneurysms. Contemporary results of open repairs of descending thoracic aortic aneurysms, including those performed in select patients with chronic dissection, indicate that early mor-tality rates range from 4.1% to 8.0%, renal failure rates range from to 4.2% to 7.5%, and paraplegia rates range from 2.3% to 5.7%; stroke rates are generally lower, ranging from 1.8% to 2.1%.258-260  In our series, although the risk of paraplegia increased with the extent of repair, the risk of mortality was greatest for those under-going repair of the proximal two thirds of the descending aorta.258 As expected, stroke rates after distal aortic repairs were highest when the clamp site was near the left subclavian artery.Contemporary series of open thoracoabdominal aortic repairs show acceptable survival. Reported outcome rates range from 5% to 12% for early mortality, 3.8% to 9.5% for paraple-gia, 1.7% to 5.2% for stroke, and 6% to 12% for renal compli-cations.261-265 Many of these series summarize 10 to 20 years of surgical experience,262-265 although some present a shorter but more contemporary experience.261 Even for complex tho-racoabdominal aortic repairs, such as stage 2 elephant trunk repairs, several centers report acceptable early mortality rates ranging from 0% to 10%.229-233 Worse outcomes are also docu-mented, as in a statewide, nonfederal analysis of data from 1010 patients whose early mortality rate was 25%. Of note, 40% of these patients were treated at centers averaging only one tho-racoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair per year.266 Cowan and colleagues,267 who examined the influence of familiarity with the procedure on rates of mortality and morbidity after tho-racoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair, reported that patients treated at low-volume centers fared less well. Replacing the entire thoracoabdominal aorta (i.e., performing an extent II repair) carries the highest risk of death, bleeding, renal failure, and paraplegia.118,262,263 Early survival has been estimated at 79% at 2 years,268 and mid-term survival has been estimated at 63% at 5 years.265 In our recent report of 3309 repairs,269 the overall mortality rate was 7.5%, and the rate of operative death was higher in extent II and III repairs than in extent I and IV. Perma-nent paraplegia and paraparesis occurred in 2.9% and 2.4% of patients, respectively, and the incidence of paraplegia in patients 50 years of age or younger was only 1.1%. Estimated survival after repair was 84% ± 1% at 1 year, 64% ± 1% at 5 years,  37% ± 1% at 10 years, and 18% ± 1% at 15 years.Treatment of Descending Thoracic Aortic DissectionNonoperative Management. The in-hospital mortality rate is 8.7% for patients with acute descending aortic dissection who receive nonoperative treatment247; however, when IRAD stratified patients according to clinical presentation, the mor-tality rate for patients with uncomplicated dissection was less than 4%, whereas the mortality rate for patients with compli-cated dissection was more than 20%.174,270 The primary causes of death during nonoperative management are rupture, malper-fusion, and cardiac failure. Risk factors associated with treat-ment failure—defined as death or need for surgery—include an enlarged aorta, persistent hypertension despite maximal treatment, oliguria, and peripheral ischemia. Among patients who receive nonoperative treatment for descending aortic dis-section and who survive the acute period, approximately 90% remain alive 1 year later, and approximately 76% are alive 3 years later.271Endovascular Treatment. For patients with complicated acute descending thoracic aortic dissection, including rupture and malperfusion of the visceral or renal arteries, an endovas-cular approach is ideal. The Stanford group reported a 93%  technical success rate for endovascular reperfusion of an isch-emic bed.272 Their experience with the use of first-generation stent grafts to treat acute complicated descending dissections Brunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   88801/03/19   5:42 PM 889THORACIC ANEURYSMS AND AORTIC DISSECTIONCHAPTER 22was also encouraging: Complete thrombosis of the false lumen occurred in 79% of patients. The early mortality rate was 16%, comparable to that associated with open techniques.273  A meta-analysis of observational studies of endovascular repair, which included 248 patients with acute descending thoracic aortic dissection, found a 30-day mortality rate of 9.8%.274 When compared with early mortality rates obtained from IRAD data,174 this rate is substantially lower than the rate associated with open surgical treatment and is similar to the rate achieved with nonoperative management. However, patients with com-plicated acute descending dissection remain susceptible to late events; at 1 year, survival is approximately 70%, and reinterven-tion is needed in about 10% of survivors.275The ADSORB trial276 focused on patients with uncom-plicated acute descending thoracic aortic dissection. Patients were randomly assigned to optimal medical therapy alone  (n = 31) or endovascular repair plus optimal medical therapy  (n = 30).277 The 1-year results showed aortic remodeling with false lumen thrombosis and reduced diameter in the group treated with endovascular repair.The INSTEAD-XL trial involved 140 patients with stable, early-chronic descending thoracic aortic dissection who were randomly assigned to either endovascular repair plus opti-mal medical treatment or optimal medical therapy alone.211 The eagerly anticipated 5-year data showed that endovascular repair was associated with greater survival and slower disease progression.CONCLUSIONSAortic aneurysm may present as localized or extensive dis-ease. The availability and development of adjuncts and endo-vascular techniques have supported the constant evolution of surgical strategies to tackle these complex problems. Repair strategies range from isolated, totally endovascular aortic repair for descending thoracic aneurysms to extensive total aortic and staged replacements with a combination of both open and endovascular techniques. Regardless of the difficulty of accu-rately assessing the risks associated with aortic repair, surgical repair of the thoracoabdominal aorta clearly remains the most challenging aortic repair in terms of mortality and morbidity. Accordingly, replacing the entire thoracoabdominal aorta (i.e., performing an extent II repair) carries the highest risk of death, renal failure, and paraplegia.69,70,261,263,269ACKNOWLEDGMENTSThe authors wish to thank Susan Y. Green, MPH, and Stephen N. Palmer, PhD, ELS, for editorial assistance; Scott A. Weldon, MA, CMI, and Carol P. Larson, CMI, for creating the illus-trations; and Kapil Sharma, MD, and Raja Gopaldas, MD, for their substantial contributions to the chapters published in the 9th and 10th editions of this book, on which this updated chapter is based.REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Johnston KW, Rutherford RB, Tilson MD, et al. Suggested standards for reporting on arterial aneurysms. Subcommit-tee on Reporting Standards for Arterial Aneurysms, Ad Hoc  Committee on Reporting Standards, Society for Vascular  Surgery and North American Chapter, International Society for Cardiovascular Surgery. J Vasc Surg. 1991;13(3):452-458.	2.	Bickerstaff LK, Pairolero PC, Hollier LH, et al. Thoracic  aortic aneurysms: a population-based study. Surgery. 1982;92(6):1103-1108.	3.	Shen YH, LeMaire SA. Molecular pathogenesis of genetic and sporadic aortic aneurysms and dissections. Curr Probl Surg. 2017;54(3):95-155. A contemporary, comprehensive review of the pathobiology underlying aortic disease.	4.	Eagle KA, GenTAC Consortium. Rationale and design of the National Registry of Genetically Triggered Thoracic Aor-tic Aneurysms and Cardiovascular Conditions (GenTAC).  Am Heart J. 2009;157(2):319-326.	5.	Segura AM, Luna RE, Horiba K, et al. Immunohistochemistry of matrix metalloproteinases and their inhibitors in thoracic aortic aneurysms and aortic valves of patients with Marfan’s syndrome. Circulation. 1998;98(19 suppl):II331-II337.	6.	Neptune ER, Frischmeyer PA, Arking DE, et al. Dysregula-tion of TGF-β activation contributes to pathogenesis in Marfan syndrome. Nat Genet. 2003;33(3):407-411.	7.	Marsalese DL, Moodie DS, Vacante M, et al. Marfan’s  syndrome: natural history and long-term follow-up of cardio-vascular involvement. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1989;14(2):422-428.	8.	Adams JN, Trent RJ. Aortic complications of Marfan’s syn-drome. Lancet. 1998;352(9142):1722-1723.	9.	LeMaire SA, Pannu H, Tran-Fadulu V, et al. Severe aortic and arterial aneurysms associated with a TGFBR2 mutation.  Nat Clin Pract Cardiovasc Med. 2007;4(3):167-171.	10.	Loeys BL, Schwarze U, Holm T, et al. Aneurysm syndromes caused by mutations in the TGF-β receptor. N Engl J Med. 2006;355(8):788-798.	11.	Oderich GS, Panneton JM, Bower TC, et al. The spectrum, management and clinical outcome of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type IV: a 30-year experience. J Vasc Surg. 2005;42(1):98-106.	12.	Sheen VL, Jansen A, Chen MH, et al. Filamin A mutations cause periventricular heterotopia with Ehlers-Danlos syn-drome. Neurology. 2005;64(2):254-262.	13.	Boileau C, Guo DC, Hanna N, et al. TGFB2 mutations cause familial thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections associated with mild systemic features of Marfan syndrome. Nat Genet. 2012;44(8):916-921.	14.	Guo DC, Pannu H, Tran-Fadulu V, et al. Mutations in smooth muscle alpha-actin (ACTA2) lead to thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections. Nat Genet. 2007;39(12):1488-1493.	15.	Pannu H, Tran-Fadulu V, Papke CL, et al. MYH11 muta-tions result in a distinct vascular pathology driven by insu-lin-like growth factor 1 and angiotensin II. Hum Mol Genet. 2007;16(20):2453-2462.	16.	Brownstein AJ, Ziganshin BA, Kuivaniemi H, et al. Genes asso-ciated with thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection: an update and clinical implications. Aorta (Stamford). 2017;5(1):11-20.	17.	van de Laar IM, Oldenburg RA, Pals G, et al. Mutations in SMAD3 cause a syndromic form of aortic aneurysms and dissections with early-onset osteoarthritis. Nat Genet. 2011;43(2):121-126.	18.	Hoffman JI, Kaplan S. The incidence of congenital heart dis-ease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2002;39(12):1890-1900.	19.	Keane MG, Wiegers SE, Plappert T, et al. Bicuspid aortic valves are associated with aortic dilatation out of proportion to coexistent valvular lesions. Circulation. 2000;102(19 suppl 3):III35-III39.	20.	Jassal DS, Bhagirath KM, Tam JW, et al. Association of bicus-pid aortic valve morphology and aortic root dimensions: a sub-study of the aortic stenosis progression observation measuring effects of rosuvastatin (ASTRONOMER) study. Echocardiog-raphy. 2010;27(2):174-179.	21.	Cecconi M, Manfrin M, Moraca A, et al. Aortic dimensions in patients with bicuspid aortic valve without significant valve dysfunction. Am J Cardiol. 2005;95(2):292-294.	22.	Nistri S, Sorbo MD, Marin M, et al. Aortic root dilatation in young men with normally functioning bicuspid aortic valves. Heart. 1999;82(1):19-22.Brunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   88901/03/19   5:42 PM 890SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	23.	Sabet HY, Edwards WD, Tazelaar HD, Daly RC. Congenitally bicuspid aortic valves: a surgical pathology study of 542 cases (1991 through 1996) and a literature review of 2,715 addi-tional cases. Mayo Clin Proc. 1999;74(1):14-26.	24.	Larson EW, Edwards WD. Risk factors for aortic  dissection: a necropsy study of 161 cases. Am J Cardiol. 1984;53(6):849-855.	25.	LeMaire SA, Wang X, Wilks JA, et al. Matrix metalloprotein-ases in ascending aortic aneurysms: bicuspid versus trileaflet aortic valves. J Surg Res. 2005;123(1):40-48.	26.	Fedak PW, de Sa MP, Verma S, et al. Vascular matrix remod-eling in patients with bicuspid aortic valve malformations: implications for aortic dilatation. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2003;126(3):797-806.	27.	Koullias GJ, Korkolis DP, Ravichandran P, et al. Tissue microarray detection of matrix metalloproteinases, in dis-eased tricuspid and bicuspid aortic valves with or without pathology of the ascending aorta. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2004;26(6):1098-1103.	28.	Martin LJ, Ramachandran V, Cripe LH, et al. Evidence in favor of linkage to human chromosomal regions 18q, 5q and 13q for bicuspid aortic valve and associated cardiovascular malformations. Hum Genet. 2007;121(2):275-284.	29.	McKellar SH, Tester DJ, Yagubyan M, et al. Novel NOTCH1 mutations in patients with bicuspid aortic valve disease and thoracic aortic aneurysms. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2007;134(2):290-296.	30.	Wessels MW, Berger RM, Frohn-Mulder IM, et al. Autosomal dominant inheritance of left ventricular outflow tract obstruc-tion. Am J Med Genet. 2005;134A(2):171-179.	31.	Yasuda H, Nakatani S, Stugaard M, et al. Failure to prevent pro-gressive dilation of ascending aorta by aortic valve replacement in patients with bicuspid aortic valve: comparison with tricuspid aortic valve. Circulation. 2003;108(suppl 1):II291-II294.	32.	Hornick M, Moomiaie R, Mojibian H, et al. ‘Bovine’ aor-tic arch – a marker for thoracic aortic disease. Cardiology. 2012;123(2):116-124.	33.	Brown SL, Busuttil RW, Baker JD, et al. Bacteriologic and surgical determinants of survival in patients with mycotic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg. 1984;1(4):541-547.	34.	Johnson JR, Ledgerwood AM, Lucas CE. Mycotic aneurysm: new concepts in therapy. Arch Surg. 1983;118(5):577-582.	35.	Schwill S, LeMaire SA, Green SY, Bakaeen FG, Coselli JS. Endovascular repair of thoracic aortic pseudoaneurysms and patch aneurysms. J Vasc Surg. 2010;52(4):1034-1037.	36.	Elefteriades JA. Natural history of thoracic aortic aneu-rysms: indications for surgery, and surgical versus non-surgical risks. Ann Thorac Surg. 2002;74(5):S1877-S1880.  This classic longitudinal study identified “hinge points” for complications of ascending and descending thoracic aortic aneurysm, forming the basis for key diameter thresholds for elective repair.	37.	Davies RR, Goldstein LJ, Coady MA, et al. Yearly rupture or dissection rates for thoracic aortic aneurysms: simple predic-tion based on size. Ann Thorac Surg. 2002;73(1):17-27.	38.	Murdoch JL, Walker BA, Halpern BL, Kuzma JW, McKusick VA. Life expectancy and causes of death in the Marfan syn-drome. N Engl J Med. 1972;286(15):804-808.	39.	Michel PL, Acar J, Chomette G, Iung B. Degenerative aortic regurgitation. Eur Heart J. 1991;12(8):875-882.	40.	Prenger K, Pieters F, Cheriex E. Aortic dissection after aortic valve replacement: incidence and consequences for strategy.  J Card Surg. 1994;9(5):495-498.	41.	Bonow RO. Bicuspid aortic valves and dilated aortas: a criti-cal review of the ACC/AHA practice guidelines recommenda-tions. Am J Cardiol. 2008;102(1):111-114.	42.	Girdauskas E, Disha K, Raisin HH, et al. Risk of late aortic events after an isolated aortic valve replacement for bicuspid aortic valve stenosis with concomitant ascending aortic dila-tion. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2012;42(5):832-837.	43.	Hiratzka LF, Creager MA, Isselbacher EM, et al. Sur-gery for aortic dilatation in patients with bicuspid aortic valves: a statement of clarification from the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;67(6):724-731. Important clarification of conflicting guidelines regarding indications for surgical treatment in patients with bicuspid aortic valve.	44.	Hiratzka LF, Bakris GL, Beckman JA, et al. 2010 ACCF/AHA/AATS/ACR/ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVM guide-lines for the diagnosis and management of patients with thoracic aortic disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines, American Associa-tion for Thoracic Surgery, American College of Radiology, American Stroke Association, Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, Society for Cardiovascular Angiogra-phy and Interventions, Society of Interventional Radiol-ogy, Society of Thoracic Surgeons, and Society for Vascular Medicine. Circulation. 2010;121(13):e266-e369. Compre-hensive guidelines regarding a broad range of diagnosis and treatment issues, based on review and ranking of the available evidence in the literature.	45.	Isselbacher EM. Thoracic and abdominal aortic aneurysms. Circulation. 2005;111(6):816-828.	46.	Wiet SP, Pearce WH, McCarthy WJ, et al. Utility of trans-esophageal echocardiography in the diagnosis of disease of the thoracic aorta. J Vasc Surg. 1994;20(4):613-620.	47.	Fillinger MF. Imaging of the thoracic and thoracoabdominal aorta. Semin Vasc Surg. 2000;13(4):247-263.	48.	McDonald JS, McDonald RJ, Lieske JC, et al. Risk of acute kidney injury, dialysis, and mortality in patients with chronic kidney disease after intravenous contrast material exposure. Mayo Clin Proc. 2015;90(8):1046-1053.	49.	Meinel FG, De Cecco CN, Schoepf UJ, Katzberg R. Contrast-induced acute kidney injury: definition, epidemiology, and outcome. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:859328.	50.	Stojanovska J, Rodriguez K, Mueller GC, Agarwal PP. MR imaging of the thoracic aorta. Magn Reson Imaging Clin N Am. 2015;23(2):273-291.	51.	Danias P, Eldeman R, Manning W. Magnetic resonance angi-ography of the great vessels and the coronary arteries. In: Pohost GM, ed. Imaging in Cardiovascular Disease. Phila-delphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2000:449.	52.	Ergun I, Keven K, Uruc I, et al. The safety of gadolinium in patients with stage 3 and 4 renal failure. Nephrol Dial Trans-plant. 2006;21(3):697-700.	53.	Merten GJ, Burgess WP, Gray LV, et al. Prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy with sodium bicarbonate: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2004;291(19):2328-2334.	54.	Tepel M, van der Giet M, Schwarzfeld C, et al. Prevention of radiographic-contrast-agent-induced reductions in renal func-tion by acetylcysteine. N Engl J Med. 2000;343(3):180-184.	55.	Appoo JJ, Tse LW, Pozeg ZI, et al. Thoracic aortic fron-tier: review of current applications and directions of tho-racic endovascular aortic repair (TEVAR). Can J Cardiol. 2014;30(1):52-63.	56.	Hughes K, Guerrier J, Obirieze A, et al. Open versus endo-vascular repair of thoracic aortic aneurysms: a Nationwide  Inpatient Sample study. Vasc Endovascular Surg. 2014;48(5-6): 383-387.	57.	Walker KL, Shuster JJ, Martin TD, et al. Practice patterns for thoracic aneurysms in the stent graft era: health care system implications. Ann Thorac Surg. 2010;90(6):1833-1839.	58.	Gopaldas RR, Dao TK, LeMaire SA, Huh J, Coselli JS. Endovas-cular versus open repair of ruptured descending thoracic aortic Brunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   89001/03/19   5:42 PM 891THORACIC ANEURYSMS AND AORTIC DISSECTIONCHAPTER 22aneurysms: a nationwide risk-adjusted study of 923 patients.  J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2011;142(5):1010-1018.	59.	Preventza O, Aftab M, Coselli JS. Hybrid techniques for com-plex aortic arch surgery. Tex Heart Inst J. 2013;40(5):568-571.	60.	Preventza O, Bakaeen FG, Cervera RD, Coselli JS. Deploy-ment of proximal thoracic endograft in zone 0 of the ascending aorta: treatment options and early outcomes for aortic arch aneurysms in a high-risk population. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2013;44(3):446-452.	61.	Coselli JS, LeMaire SA, Buket S. Marfan syndrome: the vari-ability and outcome of operative management. J Vasc Surg. 1995;21(3):432-443.	62.	Svensson LG, Adams DH, Bonow RO, et al. Aortic valve and ascending aorta guidelines for management and qual-ity measures. Ann Thorac Surg. 2013;95(6 suppl):S1-S66. Comprehensive guidelines regarding the treatment of ascend-ing aortic disease, based on review and ranking of the avail-able evidence in the literature.	63.	LeMaire SA, Rice DC, Schmittling ZC, Coselli JS. Emergency surgery for thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms with acute pre-sentation. J Vasc Surg. 2002;35(6):1171-1178.	64.	Greenberg R, Eagleton M, Mastracci T. Branched endografts for thoracoabdominal aneurysms. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2010;140(6 suppl):S171-S178.	65.	Preventza O, Garcia A, Cooley DA, et al. Total aortic arch replacement: a comparative study of zone 0 hybrid arch exclu-sion versus traditional open repair. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2015;150(6):1591-1600.	66.	Preventza O, Mohammed S, Cheong BY, et al. Endovascular therapy in patients with genetically triggered thoracic aor-tic disease: applications and shortand mid-term outcomes.  Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2014;46(2):248-253.	67.	LeMaire SA, Green SY, Kim JH, et al. Thoracic or thoracoabdomi-nal approaches to endovascular device removal and open aortic repair. Ann Thorac Surg. 2012;93(3):726-732; discussion 733.	68.	Coselli JS, Spiliotopoulos K, Preventza O, et al. Open aortic surgery after thoracic endovascular aortic repair. Gen Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2016;64(8):441-449.	69.	LeMaire SA, Miller CC, III, Conklin LD, Schmittling ZC, Coselli JS. Estimating group mortality and paraplegia rates after thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair. Ann Thorac Surg. 2003;75(2):508-513.	70.	LeMaire SA, Miller CC, III, Conklin LD, et al. A new pre-dictive model for adverse outcomes after elective thora-coabdominal aortic aneurysm repair. Ann Thorac Surg. 2001;71(4):1233-1238.	71.	Preventza O, Coselli JS, Price MD, et al. Elective primary aortic root replacement with and without hemiarch repair in patients with no previous cardiac surgery. J Thorac Cardio-vasc Surg. 2017;153(6):1402-1408.	72.	Gott VL, Cameron DE, Alejo DE, et al. Aortic root replace-ment in 271 Marfan patients: a 24-year experience. Ann Tho-rac Surg. 2002;73(2):438-443.	73.	Preventza O, Mohamed AS, Cooley DA, et al. Homograft use in reoperative aortic root and proximal aortic surgery for endo-carditis: a 12-year experience in high-risk patients. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2014;148(3):989-994.	74.	Carrel TP, Berdat P, Englberger L, et al. Aortic root replace-ment with a new stentless aortic valve xenograft conduit: pre-liminary hemodynamic and clinical results. J Heart Valve Dis. 2003;12(6):752-757.	75.	Deleuze PH, Fromes Y, Khoury W, et al. Eight-year results of Freestyle stentless bioprosthesis in the aortic position: a single-center study of 500 patients. J Heart Valve Dis. 2006;15(2):247-252.	76.	Oury JH. Clinical aspects of the Ross procedure: indica-tions and contraindications. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1996;8(4):328-335.	77.	Coselli JS, Hughes MS, Green SY, et al. Valve-sparing aortic root replacement: early and midterm outcomes in 83 patients. Ann Thorac Surg. 2014;97(4):1267-1273.	78.	Coselli JS, Volguina IV, LeMaire SA, et al. Early and 1-year outcomes of aortic root surgery in patients with Marfan syndrome: a prospective, multicenter, comparative study. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2014;147(6):1758-1766, 1767.e1751-e1754. This report details the early and 1-year outcomes of an international prospective study comparing valve-sparing and valve-replacing root operations in patients with Marfan syndrome. Although patients in both groups had excellent early outcomes, those who underwent valve-sparing procedures had a higher incidence of late aortic valve regur-gitation, raising concerns about long-term durability.	79.	David TE, Ivanov J, Armstrong S, Feindel CM, Webb GD. Aortic valve-sparing operations in patients with aneurysms of the aortic root or ascending aorta. Ann Thorac Surg. 2002;74(5):S1758-S1761.	80.	Kvitting JP, Kari FA, Fischbein MP, et al. David valvesparing aortic root replacement: equivalent mid-term outcome for different valve types with or without connective tissue disorder. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013;145(1):117-126, 127e111-e115.	81.	Bentall H, De Bono A. A technique for complete replacement of the ascending aorta. Thorax. 1968;23(4):338-339.	82.	Cabrol C, Pavie A, Gandjbakhch I, et al. Complete replace-ment of the ascending aorta with reimplantation of the coro-nary arteries: new surgical approach. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1981;81(2):309-315.	83.	Kouchoukos NT, Wareing TH, Murphy SF, Perrillo JB.  Sixteen-year experience with aortic root replacement: results of 172 operations. Ann Surg. 1991;214(3):308-318.	84.	Zubiate P, Kay JH. Surgical treatment of aneurysm of the ascending aorta with aortic insufficiency and marked dis-placement of the coronary ostia. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1976;71(3):415-421.	85.	Preventza O, Coselli JS. Saccular aneurysms of the transverse aortic arch: treatment options available in the endovascular era. Aorta (Stamford). 2015;3(2):61-66.	86.	LeMaire SA, Price MD, Parenti JL, et al. Early outcomes after aortic arch replacement by using the Y-graft technique.  Ann Thorac Surg. 2011;91(3):700-707.	87.	Spielvogel D, Etz CD, Silovitz D, Lansman SL, Griepp RB. Aortic arch replacement with a trifurcated graft. Ann Thorac Surg. 2007;83(2):S791-S795.	88.	Borst HG, Frank G, Schaps D. Treatment of extensive aortic aneurysms by a new multiple-stage approach. J Thorac Car-diovasc Surg. 1988;95(1):11-13.	89.	Preventza O, Al-Najjar R, LeMaire SA, Weldon S, Coselli JS. Total arch replacement with frozen elephant trunk technique. Ann Cardiothorac Surg. 2013;2(5):649-652.	90.	Shrestha M, Martens A, Kaufeld T, et al. Single-centre experi-ence with the frozen elephant trunk technique in 251 patients over 15 years. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2017;52(5):858-866.	91.	Preventza O, Coselli JS, Mayor J, et al. The stent is not to blame: lessons learned with a simplified US version of the frozen elephant trunk. Ann Thorac Surg. 2017;104(5): 1456-1463.	92.	Ueda Y, Miki S, Kusuhara K, et al. Surgical treatment of aneu-rysm or dissection involving the ascending aorta and aortic arch, utilizing circulatory arrest and retrograde cerebral perfu-sion. J Cardiovasc Surg (Torino). 1990;31(5):553-558.	93.	Sundt TM, III, Orszulak TA, Cook DJ, Schaff HV. Improv-ing results of open arch replacement. Ann Thorac Surg. 2008;86(3):787-796.	94.	Wong DR, Coselli JS, Palmero L, et al. Axillary artery can-nulation in surgery for acute or subacute ascending aortic dis-sections. Ann Thorac Surg. 2010;90(3):731-737.Brunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   89101/03/19   5:42 PM 892SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	95.	Preventza O, Bakaeen FG, Stephens EH, et al. Innominate artery cannulation: an alternative to femoral or axillary cannu-lation for arterial inflow in proximal aortic surgery. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013;145(3 suppl):S191-S196.	96.	Preventza O, Coselli JS, Akvan S, et al. The impact of tem-perature in aortic arch surgery patients receiving antegrade cerebral perfusion for >30 minutes: how relevant is it really?  J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2017;153(4):767-776.	97.	Preventza O, Coselli JS, Garcia A, et al. Moderate hypother-mia at warmer temperatures is safe in elective proximal and total arch surgery: results in 665 patients. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2017;153(5):1011-1018.	98.	Svensson LG. Antegrade perfusion during suspended anima-tion? J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2002;124(6):1068-1070.	99.	Della Corte A, Scardone M, Romano G, et al. Aortic arch sur-gery: thoracoabdominal perfusion during antegrade cerebral perfusion may reduce postoperative morbidity. Ann Thorac Surg. 2006;81(4):1358-1364.	100.	Panos A, Myers PO, Kalangos A. Novel technique for aor-tic arch surgery under mild hypothermia. Ann Thorac Surg. 2008;85(1):347-348.	101.	Preventza O, Henry MJ, Cheong BY, Coselli JS. Endovascular repair of the ascending aorta: when and how to implement the current technology. Ann Thorac Surg. 2014;97(5):1555-1560.	102.	Inoue K, Hosokawa H, Iwase T, et al. Aortic arch reconstruc-tion by transluminally placed endovascular branched stent graft. Circulation. 1999;100(19 suppl):II316-II321.	103.	Volodos NL, Karpovich IP, Troyan VI, et al. Clinical experi-ence of the use of self-fixing synthetic prostheses for remote endoprosthetics of the thoracic and the abdominal aorta and iliac arteries through the femoral artery and as intraop-erative endoprosthesis for aorta reconstruction. Vasa Suppl. 1991;33:93-95.	104.	Volodos NL, Shekhanin VE, Karpovich IP, Troian VI, Gur’ev Iu A. A self-fixing synthetic blood vessel endoprosthesis [in Russian]. Vestn Khir Im I I Grek. 1986;137(11):123-125.	105.	Volodos NL. Historical perspective: the first steps in endovas-cular aortic repair: how it all began. J Endovasc Ther. 2013;20 (suppl 1):I3-23.	106.	Melissano G, Tshomba Y, Bertoglio L, Rinaldi E, Chiesa R. Analysis of stroke after TEVAR involving the aortic arch. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2012;43(3):269-275.	107.	Andersen ND, Williams JB, Hanna JM, et al. Results with an algorithmic approach to hybrid repair of the aortic arch. J Vasc Surg. 2013;57(3):655-667.	108.	Lotfi S, Clough RE, Ali T, et al. Hybrid repair of complex thoracic aortic arch pathology: long-term outcomes of extra-anatomic bypass grafting of the supra-aortic trunk. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol. 2013;36(1):46-55.	109.	Preventza O, Garcia A, Moeller K, et al. Retrograde ascend-ing aortic dissection after thoracic endovascular aortic repair for distal aortic dissection or with zone 0 landing: asso-ciation, risk factors, and true incidence. Ann Thorac Surg. 2015;100(2):509-515.	110.	Coselli JS, de la Cruz KI, Preventza O, LeMaire SA, Weldon SA.  Extent II thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair: how I do it. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2016;28(2):221-237.	111.	Ghanta RK, Green SY, Price MD, et al. Midterm survival and quality of life after extent II thoracoabdominal aortic repair in Marfan syndrome. Ann Thorac Surg. 2016;101(4): 1402-1409.	112.	Coselli JS, LeMaire SA, Köksoy C, Schmittling ZC, Curling  PE. Cerebrospinal fluid drainage reduces paraplegia after thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair: results of a ran-domized clinical trial. J Vasc Surg. 2002;35(4):631-639. This randomized clinical trial established the utility of using cerebral spinal fluid drainage to prevent spinal cord injury during exten-sive thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repairs.	113.	Youngblood SC, Tolpin DA, LeMaire SA, et al. Complications of cerebrospinal fluid drainage after thoracic aortic surgery: a review of 504 patients over 5 years. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013;146(1):166-171.	114.	Jacobs MJ, Mess W, Mochtar B, et al. The value of motor evoked potentials in reducing paraplegia during thora-coabdominal aneurysm repair. J Vasc Surg. 2006;43(2): 239-246.	115.	van Dongen EP, Schepens MA, Morshuis WJ, et al.  Thoracic and thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair: use of evoked potential monitoring in 118 patients. J Vasc Surg. 2001;34(6):1035-1040.	116.	Coselli JS. The use of left heart bypass in the repair of thora-coabdominal aortic aneurysms: current techniques and results. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2003;15(4):326-332.	117.	Coselli JS, LeMaire SA. Left heart bypass reduces paraplegia rates after thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair. Ann Tho-rac Surg. 1999;67(6):1931-1934.	118.	Safi HJ, Miller CC, III, Huynh TT, et al. Distal aortic perfu-sion and cerebrospinal fluid drainage for thoracoabdominal and descending thoracic aortic repair: ten years of organ pro-tection. Ann Surg. 2003;238(3):372-380.	119.	Köksoy C, LeMaire SA, Curling PE, et al. Renal perfusion during thoracoabdominal aortic operations: cold crystal-loid is superior to normothermic blood. Ann Thorac Surg. 2002;73(3):730-738.	120.	Kouchoukos NT, Masetti P, Rokkas CK, Murphy SF. Hypo-thermic cardiopulmonary bypass and circulatory arrest for operations on the descending thoracic and thoracoabdominal aorta. Ann Thorac Surg. 2002;74(5):S1885-S1887.	121.	Coselli JS, Oberwalder P. Successful repair of mega aorta using reversed elephant trunk procedure. J Vasc Surg. 1998;27(1):183-188.	122.	Chen DW, Price MD, LeMaire SA, et al. Early versus late inpatient awake transcervical injection laryngoplasty after thoracic aortic repair. Laryngoscope. 2018;128(1): 144-147.	123.	Jones MM, Akay M, Murariu D, LeMaire SA, Coselli JS. Safe aortic arch clamping in patients with patent internal thoracic artery grafts. Ann Thorac Surg. 2010;89(4):e31-e32.	124.	Svensson LG, Kouchoukos NT, Miller DC, et al. Expert con-sensus document on the treatment of descending thoracic aor-tic disease using endovascular stent-grafts. Ann Thorac Surg. 2008;85(1 suppl):S1-S41.	125.	Parodi JC, Palmaz JC, Barone HD. Transfemoral intraluminal graft implantation for abdominal aortic aneurysms. Ann Vasc Surg. 1991;5(6):491-499.	126.	Dake MD, Miller DC, Semba CP, et al. Transluminal placement of endovascular stent-grafts for the treatment of descending thoracic aortic aneurysms. N Engl J Med. 1994;331(26):1729-1734.	127.	Fillinger MF, Greenberg RK, McKinsey JF, Chaikof EL, Society for Vascular Surgery Ad Hoc Committee on TEVAR Reporting Standards. Reporting standards for thoracic endovascular aortic repair (TEVAR). J Vasc Surg. 2010;52(4):1022-1033, 1033 e1015. Essential guidelines for writing and interpreting reports regarding endovascular repair of the thoracic aorta.	128.	Preventza O, Bavaria J, Ramaiah V, et al. Thoracic endograft-ing is a viable option for the octogenarian. Ann Thorac Surg. 2010;90(1):78-82.	129.	Gopaldas RR, Huh J, Dao TK, et al. Superior nationwide outcomes of endovascular versus open repair for isolated descending thoracic aortic aneurysm in 11,669 patients.  J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2010;140(5):1001-1010.	130.	Preventza O, Wheatley GH, 3rd, Williams J, et al. Identifying paraplegia risk associated with thoracic endografting. Asian Cardiovasc Thorac Ann. 2009;17(6):568-572.Brunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   89201/03/19   5:42 PM 893THORACIC ANEURYSMS AND AORTIC DISSECTIONCHAPTER 22	131.	Riesenman PJ, Farber MA, Mendes RR, et al. Coverage of the left subclavian artery during thoracic endovascular aortic repair. J Vasc Surg. 2007;45(1):90-94.	132.	Buth J, Harris PL, Hobo R, et al. Neurologic complica-tions associated with endovascular repair of thoracic aor-tic pathology: incidence and risk factors. A study from the European Collaborators on Stent/Graft Techniques for Aor-tic Aneurysm Repair (EUROSTAR) registry. J Vasc Surg. 2007;46(6):1103-1110.	133.	Bozinovski J, LeMaire SA, Weldon SA, Coselli JS. Hybrid repairs of the distal aortic arch and proximal descend-ing thoracic aorta. Op Tech Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2007;12(3):167-177.	134.	Woo EY, Bavaria JE, Pochettino A, et al. Techniques for pre-serving vertebral artery perfusion during thoracic aortic stent grafting requiring aortic arch landing. Vasc Endovascular Surg. 2006;40(5):367-373.	135.	Bradshaw RJ, Ahanchi SS, Powell O, et al. Left subclavian artery revascularization in zone 2 thoracic endovascular aortic repair is associated with lower stroke risk across all aortic dis-eases. J Vasc Surg. 2017;65(5):1270-1279.	136.	Fann JI, Dake MD, Semba CP, et al. Endovascular stent-graft-ing after arch aneurysm repair using the “elephant trunk.” Ann Thorac Surg. 1995;60(4):1102-1105.	137.	Lin PH, Dardik A, Coselli JS. A simple technique to facili-tate antegrade thoracic endograft deployment using a hybrid elephant trunk procedure under hypothermic circulatory arrest. J Endovasc Ther. 2007;14(5):669-671.	138.	Greenberg RK, West K, Pfaff K, et al. Beyond the aortic bifur-cation: branched endovascular grafts for thoracoabdominal and aortoiliac aneurysms. J Vasc Surg. 2006;43(5):879-886.	139.	Greenberg RK, Qureshi M. Fenestrated and branched devices in the pipeline. J Vasc Surg. 2010;52(4 suppl):15S-21S.	140.	Moulakakis KG, Mylonas SN, Avgerinos E, et al. The chim-ney graft technique for preserving visceral vessels during endovascular treatment of aortic pathologies. J Vasc Surg. 2012;55(5):1497-1503.	141.	Mehta M, Darling RC, III, Taggert JB, et al. Outcomes of planned celiac artery coverage during TEVAR. J Vasc Surg. 2010;52(5):1153-1158.	142.	Black SA, Wolfe JH, Clark M, et al. Complex thoracoabdomi-nal aortic aneurysms: endovascular exclusion with visceral revascularization. J Vasc Surg. 2006;43(6):1081-1089.	143.	Zhou W, Reardon M, Peden EK, Lin PH, Lumsden AB. Hybrid approach to complex thoracic aortic aneurysms in high-risk patients: surgical challenges and clinical outcomes. J Vasc Surg. 2006;44(4):688-693.	144.	Patel R, Conrad MF, Paruchuri V, et al. Thoracoabdominal aneurysm repair: hybrid versus open repair. J Vasc Surg. 2009;50(1):15-22.	145.	Hughes GC, Barfield ME, Shah AA, et al. Staged total abdom-inal debranching and thoracic endovascular aortic repair for thoracoabdominal aneurysm. J Vasc Surg. 2012;56(3):621-629.	146.	Modine T, Lions C, Destrieux-Garnier L, et al. Iatrogenic iliac artery rupture and type A dissection after endovas-cular repair of type B aortic dissection. Ann Thorac Surg. 2004;77(1):317-319.	147.	Tshomba Y, Bertoglio L, Marone EM, et al. Retrograde type A  dissection after endovascular repair of a “zone 0” nondis-secting aortic arch aneurysm. Ann Vasc Surg. 2010;24(7):952 e951-957.	148.	Desai ND, Pochettino A, Szeto WY, et al. Thoracic endovas-cular aortic repair: evolution of therapy, patterns of use, and results in a 10-year experience. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2011;142(3):587-594.	149.	Preventza O, Wheatley GH, 3rd, Ramaiah VG, et al. Management of endoleaks associated with endovascular treatment of descending thoracic aortic diseases. J Vasc Surg. 2008;48(1):69-73. A detailed account of the develop-ment and treatment of endoleak after endovascular repair of aneurysm, dissection, injuries, and several other pathologies involving the descending thoracic aorta.	150.	Dumfarth J, Michel M, Schmidli J, et al. Mechanisms of fail-ure and outcome of secondary surgical interventions after tho-racic endovascular aortic repair (TEVAR). Ann Thorac Surg. 2011;91(4):1141-1146.	151.	Geisbusch P, Hoffmann S, Kotelis D, et al. Reinterventions during midterm follow-up after endovascular treatment of  thoracic aortic disease. J Vasc Surg. 2011;53(6):1528-1533.	152.	Daily PO, Trueblood HW, Stinson EB, Wuerflein RD,  Shumway NE. Management of acute aortic dissections.  Ann Thorac Surg. 1970;10(3):237-247.	153.	DeBakey ME, Henly WS, Cooley DA, et al. Surgical manage-ment of dissecting aneurysms of the aorta. J Thorac Cardio-vasc Surg. 1965;49:130-149.	154.	Borst HG, Heinemann MK, Stone CD. Surgical Treatment of Aortic Dissection. New York: Churchill Livingstone; 1996.	155.	Tsagakis K, Tossios P, Kamler M, et al. The DeBakey classification exactly reflects late outcome and re-interven-tion probability in acute aortic dissection with a slightly mod-ified type II definition. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2011;40(5): 1078-1084.	156.	Augoustides JG, Geirsson A, Szeto WY, et al. Observational study of mortality risk stratification by ischemic presentation in patients with acute type A aortic dissection: the Penn classi-fication. Nat Clin Pract Cardiovasc Med. 2009;6(2):140-146.	157.	Augoustides JG, Szeto WY, Woo EY, et al. The complica-tions of uncomplicated acute type-B dissection: the introduc-tion of the Penn classification. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2012;26(6):1139-1144.	158.	Tsagakis K, Konorza T, Dohle DS, et al. Hybrid operating room concept for combined diagnostics, intervention and surgery in acute type A dissection. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2013;43(2):397-404.	159.	Booher AM, Isselbacher EM, Nienaber CA, et al. The IRAD classification system for characterizing survival after aortic dissection. Am J Med. 2013;126(8):730 e719-e724.	160.	Nienaber CA, Sievers HH. Intramural hematoma in acute aor-tic syndrome: more than one variant of dissection? Circula-tion. 2002;106(3):284-285.	161.	Evangelista A, Mukherjee D, Mehta RH, et al. Acute intramu-ral hematoma of the aorta: a mystery in evolution. Circulation. 2005;111(8):1063-1070.	162.	Maraj R, Rerkpattanapipat P, Jacobs LE, Makornwattana P, Kotler MN. Meta-analysis of 143 reported cases of aortic intramural hematoma. Am J Cardiol. 2000;86(6):664-668.	163.	Ganaha F, Miller DC, Sugimoto K, et al. Prognosis of aortic intramural hematoma with and without penetrating atheroscle-rotic ulcer: a clinical and radiological analysis. Circulation. 2002;106(3):342-348.	164.	Clouse WD, Hallett JW, Jr, Schaff HV, et al. Acute aor-tic dissection: population-based incidence compared with degenerative aortic aneurysm rupture. Mayo Clin Proc. 2004;79(2):176-180.	165.	Anagnostopoulos CE, Prabhakar MJ, Kittle CF. Aor-tic dissections and dissecting aneurysms. Am J Cardiol. 1972;30(3):263-273.	166.	Hirst AE, Jr, Johns VJ, Jr, Kime SW, Jr. Dissecting aneurysm of the aorta: a review of 505 cases. Medicine (Baltimore). 1958;37(3):217-279.	167.	Daniel JC, Huynh TT, Zhou W, et al. Acute aortic dis-section associated with use of cocaine. J Vasc Surg. 2007;46(3):427-433.	168.	Hatzaras IS, Bible JE, Koullias GJ, et al. Role of exertion or emotion as inciting events for acute aortic dissection. Am J Cardiol. 2007;100(9):1470-1472.Brunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   89301/03/19   5:42 PM 894SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	169.	Wang X, LeMaire SA, Chen L, et al. Decreased expression of fibulin-5 correlates with reduced elastin in thoracic aortic dissection. Surgery. 2005;138(2):352-359.	170.	Wang X, LeMaire SA, Chen L, et al. Increased collagen depo-sition and elevated expression of connective tissue growth factor in human thoracic aortic dissection. Circulation. 2006;114(1 suppl):I200-I205.	171.	Shen YH, Zhang L, Ren P, et al. AKT2 confers protec-tion against aortic aneurysms and dissections. Circ Res. 2013;112(4):618-632.	172.	Harris KM, Strauss CE, Eagle KA, et al. Correlates of delayed recognition and treatment of acute type A aortic dissection: the International Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection (IRAD). Circulation. 2011;124(18):1911-1918.	173.	Erbel R, Alfonso F, Boileau C, et al. Diagnosis and man-agement of aortic dissection. Eur Heart J. 2001;22(18): 1642-1681.	174.	Hagan PG, Nienaber CA, Isselbacher EM, et al. The Inter-national Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection (IRAD): new insights into an old disease. JAMA. 2000;283(7):897-903.	175.	Klompas M. Does this patient have an acute thoracic aortic dissection? JAMA. 2002;287(17):2262-2272.	176.	Shimony A, Filion KB, Mottillo S, Dourian T, Eisenberg MJ. Meta-analysis of usefulness of D-dimer to diagnose acute aor-tic dissection. Am J Cardiol. 2011;107(8):1227-1234.	177.	Sodeck G, Domanovits H, Schillinger M, et al. D-dimer in ruling out acute aortic dissection: a systematic review and pro-spective cohort study. Eur Heart J. 2007;28(24):3067-3075.	178.	Rapezzi C, Longhi S, Graziosi M, et al. Risk factors for diagnostic delay in acute aortic dissection. Am J Cardiol. 2008;102(10):1399-1406.	179.	von Kodolitsch Y, Nienaber CA, Dieckmann C, et al. Chest radiography for the diagnosis of acute aortic syndrome. Am J Med. 2004;116(2):73-77.	180.	Nienaber CA, von Kodolitsch Y, Nicolas V, et al. The diagnosis of thoracic aortic dissection by noninvasive imaging proce-dures. N Engl J Med. 1993;328(1):1-9.	181.	Keren A, Kim CB, Hu BS, et al. Accuracy of biplane and multiplane transesophageal echocardiography in diagnosis of typical acute aortic dissection and intramural hematoma. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1996;28(3):627-636.	182.	Miller JS, LeMaire SA, Coselli JS. Evaluating aortic dis-section: when is coronary angiography indicated? Heart. 2000;83(6):615-616.	183.	Scholl FG, Coady MA, Davies R, et al. Interval or permanent nonoperative management of acute type A aortic dissection. Arch Surg. 1999;134(4):402-405.	184.	Gillinov AM, Lytle BW, Kaplon RJ, et al. Dissection of the ascending aorta after previous cardiac surgery: differences in presentation and management. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1999;117(2):252-260.	185.	Preventza O, Garcia A, Tuluca A, et al. Innominate artery cannulation for proximal aortic surgery: outcomes and neu-rological events in 263 patients. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2015;48(6):937-942.	186.	Preventza O, Simpson KH, Cooley DA, et al. Unilateral versus bilateral cerebral perfusion for acute type A aortic dissection. Ann Thorac Surg. 2015;99(1):80-87.	187.	Kirsch M, Soustelle C, Houel R, Hillion ML, Loisance D. Risk factor analysis for proximal and distal reoperations after sur-gery for acute type A aortic dissection. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2002;123(2):318-325.	188.	Crawford ES, Kirklin JW, Naftel DC, et al. Surgery for acute dissection of ascending aorta. Should the arch be included?  J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1992;104(1):46-59.	189.	Westaby S, Saito S, Katsumata T. Acute type A dissection: conservative methods provide consistently low mortality. Ann Thorac Surg. 2002;73(3):707-713.	190.	Geirsson A, Bavaria JE, Swarr D, et al. Fate of the residual distal and proximal aorta after acute type A dissection repair using a contemporary surgical reconstruction algorithm. Ann Thorac Surg. 2007;84(6):1955-1964.	191.	Malvindi PG, van Putte BP, Sonker U, et al. Reoperation after acute type A aortic dissection repair: a series of 104 patients. Ann Thorac Surg. 2013;95(3):922-927.	192.	Glower DD, Speier RH, White WD, et al. Management and long-term outcome of aortic dissection. Ann Surg. 1991;214(1):31-41.	193.	Kazui T, Washiyama N, Muhammad BA, et al. Extended total arch replacement for acute type A aortic dissection: experience with seventy patients. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2000;119(3):558-565.	194.	Hoffman A, Damberg AL, Schalte G, et al. Thoracic stent graft sizing for frozen elephant trunk repair in acute type A dissec-tion. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013;145(4):964-969.	195.	Preventza O, Cervera R, Cooley DA, et al. Acute type I aortic dissection: traditional versus hybrid repair with antegrade stent delivery to the descending thoracic aorta. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2014;148(1):119-125.	196.	Karck M, Chavan A, Khaladj N, et al. The frozen elephant trunk technique for the treatment of extensive thoracic aortic aneurysms: operative results and follow-up. Eur J Cardiotho-rac Surg. 2005;28(2):286-290.	197.	Gorlitzer M, Weiss G, Meinhart J, et al. Fate of the false lumen after combined surgical and endovascular repair treat-ing Stanford type A aortic dissections. Ann Thorac Surg. 2010;89(3):794-799.	198.	Di Bartolomeo R, Di Marco L, Armaro A, et al. Treatment of complex disease of the thoracic aorta: the frozen elephant trunk technique with the E-vita open prosthesis. Eur J Cardio-thorac Surg. 2009;35(4):671-675.	199.	Uchida N, Katayama A, Tamura K, et al. Long-term results of the frozen elephant trunk technique for extended aortic arch disease. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2010;37(6):1338-1345.	200.	Lima B, Roselli EE, Soltesz EG, et al. Modified and “reverse” frozen elephant trunk repairs for extensive disease and com-plications after stent grafting. Ann Thorac Surg. 2012;93(1): 103-109.	201.	Roselli EE, Rafael A, Soltesz EG, Canale L, Lytle BW. Simplified frozen elephant trunk repair for acute DeBakey type I dissection. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013;145 (3 suppl):S197-S201.	202.	Roselli EE, Soltesz EG, Mastracci T, Svensson LG, Lytle BW. Antegrade delivery of stent grafts to treat complex thoracic aortic disease. Ann Thorac Surg. 2010;90(2):539-546.	203.	Preventza O, Coselli JS. Differential aspects of ascending tho-racic aortic dissection and its treatment: the North American experience. Ann Cardiothorac Surg. 2016;5(4):352-359.	204.	Kouchoukos NT. Frozen elephant trunk technique for exten-sive chronic thoracic aortic dissection: is it the final answer? Ann Thorac Surg. 2011;92(5):1557-1558.	205.	Genoni M, Paul M, Jenni R, et al. Chronic beta-blocker ther-apy improves outcome and reduces treatment costs in chronic type B aortic dissection. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2001;19(5): 606-610.	206.	DeBakey ME, McCollum CH, Crawford ES, et al. Dissection and dissecting aneurysms of the aorta: twenty-year follow-up of five hundred twenty-seven patients treated surgically.  Surgery. 1982;92(6):1118-1134.	207.	Fann JI, Smith JA, Miller DC, et al. Surgical management of aortic dissection during a 30-year period. Circulation. 1995;92(9 suppl):II113-II121.	208.	Elefteriades JA, Hartleroad J, Gusberg RJ, et al. Long-term experience with descending aortic dissection: the complicationspecific approach. Ann Thorac Surg. 1992;53(1):11-20.	209.	Barnes DM, Williams DM, Dasika NL, et al. A single-center experience treating renal malperfusion after aortic dissection Brunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   89401/03/19   5:42 PM 895THORACIC ANEURYSMS AND AORTIC DISSECTIONCHAPTER 22with central aortic fenestration and renal artery stenting. J Vasc Surg. 2008;47(5):903-910.	210.	Hughes GC. Management of acute type B aortic dissec-tion; ADSORB trial. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2015;149 (2 suppl):S158-S162.	211.	Nienaber CA, Kische S, Rousseau H, et al. Endovascular repair of type B aortic dissection: long-term results of the randomized investigation of stent grafts in aortic dissec-tion trial. Circ Cardiovasc Interv. 2013;6(4):407-416. The eagerly anticipated report of a randomized trial comparing endovascular repair plus optimal medical treatment with opti-mal medical treatment alone for the treatment of early-chronic descending thoracic aortic dissection.	212.	Demers P, Miller DC, Mitchell RS, et al. Stent-graft repair of penetrating atherosclerotic ulcers in the descending tho-racic aorta: mid-term results. Ann Thorac Surg. 2004;77(1): 81-86.	213.	Patel HJ, Sood V, Williams DM, et al. Late outcomes with repair of penetrating thoracic aortic ulcers: the merits of an endovascular approach. Ann Thorac Surg. 2012;94(2): 516-522.	214.	Preventza O, Coselli JS, Garcia A, et al. Aortic root surgery with circulatory arrest: predictors of prolonged postoperative hospital stay. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2017;153(3):511-518.	215.	Aomi S, Nakajima M, Nonoyama M, et al. Aortic root replace-ment using composite valve graft in patients with aortic valve disease and aneurysm of the ascending aorta: twenty years’ experience of late results. Artif Organs. 2002;26(5):467-473.	216.	Kindo M, Billaud P, Gerelli S, et al. Twenty-seven-year experi-ence with composite valve graft replacement of the aortic root. J Heart Valve Dis. 2007;16(4):370-377.	217.	David TE, Mohr FW, Bavaria JE, et al. Initial experience with the Toronto Root bioprosthesis. J Heart Valve Dis. 2004;13(2):248-251.	218.	Gleason TG, David TE, Coselli JS, Hammon JW, Jr, Bavaria JE. St. Jude Medical Toronto biologic aortic root prosthe-sis: early FDA phase II IDE study results. Ann Thorac Surg. 2004;78(3):786-793.	219.	Kincaid EH, Cordell AR, Hammon JW, Adair SM, Kon ND. Coronary insufficiency after stentless aortic root replacement: risk factors and solutions. Ann Thorac Surg. 2007;83(3):964-968.	220.	Kon ND, Cordell AR, Adair SM, Dobbins JE, Kitzman DW. Aortic root replacement with the freestyle stent-less porcine aortic root bioprosthesis. Ann Thorac Surg. 1999;67(6):1609-1615.	221.	Melina G, De Robertis F, Gaer JA, et al. Mid-term pattern of survival, hemodynamic performance and rate of complica-tions after Medtronic Freestyle versus homograft full aortic root replacement: results from a prospective randomized trial. J Heart Valve Dis. 2004;13(6):972-975.	222.	Badiu CC, Eichinger W, Bleiziffer S, et al. Should root replacement with aortic valve-sparing be offered to patients with bicuspid valves or severe aortic regurgitation? Eur J Car-diothorac Surg. 2010;38(5):515-522.	223.	David TE, Maganti M, Armstrong S. Aortic root aneurysm: principles of repair and long-term follow-up. J Thorac Car-diovasc Surg. 2010;140(6 suppl):S14-S19.	224.	Zingone B, Gatti G, Spina A, et al. Current role and outcomes of ascending aortic replacement for severe nonaneurysmal aor-tic atherosclerosis. Ann Thorac Surg. 2010;89(2):429-434.	225.	Achneck HE, Rizzo JA, Tranquilli M, Elefteriades JA. Safety of thoracic aortic surgery in the present era. Ann Thorac Surg. 2007;84(4):1180-1185.	226.	Estrera AL, Miller CC, III, Madisetty J, et al. Ascending and transverse aortic arch repair: the impact of glomerular filtra-tion rate on mortality. Ann Surg. 2008;247(3):524-529.	227.	Fleck TM, Czerny M, Hutschala D, et al. The inci-dence of transient neurologic dysfunction after ascending aortic replacement with circulatory arrest. Ann Thorac Surg. 2003;76(4):1198-1202.	228.	Immer FF, Barmettler H, Berdat PA, et al. Effects of deep hypo-thermic circulatory arrest on outcome after resection of ascend-ing aortic aneurysm. Ann Thorac Surg. 2002;74(2):422-425.	229.	Heinemann MK, Buehner B, Jurmann MJ, Borst HG. Use of the “elephant trunk technique” in aortic surgery. Ann Thorac Surg. 1995;60(1):2-6.	230.	LeMaire SA, Carter SA, Coselli JS. The elephant trunk tech-nique for staged repair of complex aneurysms of the entire thoracic aorta. Ann Thorac Surg. 2006;81(5):1561-1569.	231.	Safi HJ, Miller CC, III, Estrera AL, et al. Staged repair of extensive aortic aneurysms: long-term experience with the elephant trunk technique. Ann Surg. 2004;240(4):677-684.	232.	Sundt TM, Moon MR, DeOliviera N, et al. Contempo-rary results of total aortic arch replacement. J Card Surg. 2004;19(3):235-239.	233.	Svensson LG, Kim KH, Blackstone EH, et al. Elephant trunk procedure: newer indications and uses. Ann Thorac Surg. 2004;78(1):109-116.	234.	Kazui T, Yamashita K, Washiyama N, et al. Aortic arch replacement using selective cerebral perfusion. Ann Thorac Surg. 2007;83(2):S796-798.	235.	Bischoff MS, Brenner RM, Scheumann J, et al. Long-term outcome after aortic arch replacement with a trifurcated graft. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2010;140(6 suppl):S71-S76.	236.	Iba Y, Minatoya K, Matsuda H, et al. Contemporary open aortic arch repair with selective cerebral perfusion in the era of endovascular aortic repair. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013;145(3 suppl):S72-S77.	237.	Thomas M, Li Z, Cook DJ, Greason KL, Sundt TM. Contem-porary results of open aortic arch surgery. J Thorac Cardio-vasc Surg. 2012;144(4):838-844.	238.	Urbanski PP, Lenos A, Bougioukakis P, et al. Mild-tomoderate hypothermia in aortic arch surgery using circula-tory arrest: a change of paradigm? Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2012;41(1):185-191.	239.	Kondoh H, Taniguchi K, Funatsu T, et al. Total arch replace-ment with long elephant trunk anastomosed at the base of the innominate artery: a single-centre longitudinal experience. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2012;42(5):840-848.	240.	Flores J, Kunihara T, Shiiya N, et al. Extensive deployment of the stented elephant trunk is associated with an increased risk of spinal cord injury. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2006;131(2): 336-342.	241.	Koullias GJ, Wheatley GH, III. State-of-the-art of hybrid pro-cedures for the aortic arch: a meta-analysis. Ann Thorac Surg. 2010;90(2):689-697.	242.	Antoniou GA, Mireskandari M, Bicknell CD, et al. Hybrid repair of the aortic arch in patients with extensive aortic dis-ease. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2010;40(6):715-721.	243.	Geisbusch P, Kotelis D, Muller-Eschner M, Hyhlik-Durr A, Bockler D. Complications after aortic arch hybrid repair.  J Vasc Surg. 2011;53(4):935-941.	244.	Czerny M, Weigang E, Sodeck G, et al. Targeting landing zone 0  by total arch rerouting and TEVAR: midterm results of a trans-continental registry. Ann Thorac Surg. 2012;94(1):84-89.	245.	Trimarchi S, Eagle KA, Nienaber CA, et al. Role of age in acute type A aortic dissection outcome: report from the Inter-national Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection (IRAD). J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2010;140(4):784-789.	246.	Rampoldi V, Trimarchi S, Eagle KA, et al. Simple risk models to predict surgical mortality in acute type A aortic dissection: the International Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection score. Ann Thorac Surg. 2007;83(1):55-61.	247.	Pape LA, Awais M, Woznicki EM, et al. Presentation, diag-nosis, and outcomes of acute aortic dissection: 17-year trends From the International Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection.  Brunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   89501/03/19   5:42 PM 896SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIJ Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;66(4):350-358. A comprehensive analysis of outcomes in patients with acute aortic dissection from the largest existing international registry.	248.	Boening A, Karck M, Conzelmann LO, et al. German Registry for Acute Aortic Dissection Type A: structure, results, and future perspectives. Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2017;65(2):77-84.	249.	Kruger T, Weigang E, Hoffmann I, et al. Cerebral protection during surgery for acute aortic dissection type A: results of  the German Registry for Acute Aortic Dissection Type A (GERAADA). Circulation. 2011;124(4):434-443.	250.	Dake MD, Miller DC, Mitchell RS, et al. The “first genera-tion” of endovascular stent-grafts for patients with aneurysms of the descending thoracic aorta. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1998;116(5):689-703.	251.	Demers P, Miller DC, Mitchell RS, et al. Midterm results of endovascular repair of descending thoracic aortic aneurysms with first-generation stent grafts. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2004;127(3):664-673.	252.	Bavaria JE, Appoo JJ, Makaroun MS, et al. Endovascular stent grafting versus open surgical repair of descending thoracic aortic aneurysms in low-risk patients: a multicenter compara-tive trial. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2007;133(2):369-377.	253.	Fairman RM, Criado F, Farber M, et al. Pivotal results of the Medtronic Vascular Talent Thoracic Stent Graft System: the VALOR trial. J Vasc Surg. 2008;48(3):546-554.	254.	Matsumura JS, Cambria RP, Dake MD, et al. International controlled clinical trial of thoracic endovascular aneurysm repair with the Zenith TX2 endovascular graft: 1-year results. J Vasc Surg. 2008;47(2):247-257.	255.	Makaroun MS, Dillavou ED, Wheatley GH, Cambria RP. Five-year results of endovascular treatment with the Gore TAG device compared with open repair of thoracic aortic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg. 2008;47(5):912-918.	256.	Foley PJ, Criado FJ, Farber MA, et al. Results with the  Talent thoracic stent graft in the VALOR trial. J Vasc Surg. 2012;56(5):1214-1221 e1221.	257.	Miller DC. Through the looking glass: The first 20 years of thoracic aortic stent-grafting. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013;145(3 suppl):S142-S148.	258.	Coselli JS, LeMaire SA, Conklin LD, Adams GJ. Left heart bypass during descending thoracic aortic aneurysm repair does not reduce the incidence of paraplegia. Ann Thorac Surg. 2004;77(4):1298-1303.	259.	Chiesa R, Tshomba Y, Civilini E, et al. Open repair of descend-ing thoracic aneurysms. HSR Proc Intensive Care Cardiovasc Anesth. 2010;2(3):177-190.	260.	Estrera AL, Miller CC, III, Chen EP, et al. Descending thoracic aortic aneurysm repair: 12-year experience using distal aortic perfusion and cerebrospinal fluid drainage. Ann Thorac Surg. 2005;80(4):1290-1296.	261.	LeMaire SA, Price MD, Green SY, Zarda S, Coselli JS. Results of open thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair. Ann Cardiothorac Surg. 2012;1(3):286-292.	262.	Chiesa R, Melissano G, Civilini E, et al. Ten years experience of thoracic and thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm surgical repair: lessons learned. Ann Vasc Surg. 2004;18(5):514-520.	263.	Coselli JS, Bozinovski J, LeMaire SA. Open surgical repair of 2286 thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms. Ann Thorac Surg. 2007;83(2):S862-S864.	264.	Conrad MF, Crawford RS, Davison JK, Cambria RP.  Thoracoabdominal aneurysm repair: a 20-year perspective. Ann Thorac Surg. 2007;83(2):S856-861.	265.	Schepens MA, Kelder JC, Morshuis WJ, et al. Long-term follow-up after thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair. Ann Thorac Surg. 2007;83(2):S851-S855.	266.	Rigberg DA, McGory ML, Zingmond DS, et al. Thirty-day mortality statistics underestimate the risk of repair of thora-coabdominal aortic aneurysms: a statewide experience. J Vasc Surg. 2006;43(2):217-222.	267.	Cowan JA, Jr, Dimick JB, Henke PK, et al. Surgical treatment of intact thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms in the United States: hospital and surgeon volume-related outcomes. J Vasc Surg. 2003;37(6):1169-1174.	268.	Wong DR, Parenti JL, Green SY, et al. Open repair of tho-racoabdominal aortic aneurysm in the modern surgical era: contemporary outcomes in 509 patients. J Am Coll Surg. 2011;212(4):569-579.	269.	Coselli JS, LeMaire SA, Preventza O, et al. Outcomes of 3309 thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repairs.  J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2016;151(5):1323-1337. This report describes the largest experience with open repair of thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm and focuses on factors associated with adverse outcomes.	270.	Trimarchi S, Tolenaar JL, Tsai TT, et al. Influence of clini-cal presentation on the outcome of acute B aortic dissec-tion: evidences from IRAD. J Cardiovasc Surg (Torino). 2012;53(2):161-168.	271.	Tsai TT, Fattori R, Trimarchi S, et al. Long-term survival in patients presenting with type B acute aortic dissection: insights from the International Registry of Acute Aortic  Dissection. Circulation. 2006;114(21):2226-2231.	272.	Slonim SM, Miller DC, Mitchell RS, et al. Percutaneous balloon fenestration and stenting for life-threatening isch-emic complications in patients with acute aortic dissection.  J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1999;117(6):1118-1126.	273.	Dake MD, Kato N, Mitchell RS, et al. Endovascular stent-graft placement for the treatment of acute aortic dissection. N Engl J Med. 1999;340(20):1546-1552.	274.	Eggebrecht H, Nienaber CA, Neuhauser M, et al. Endovascu-lar stent-graft placement in aortic dissection: a meta-analysis. Eur Heart J. 2006;27(4):489-498.	275.	White RA, Miller DC, Criado FJ, et al. Report on the results of thoracic endovascular aortic repair for acute, complicated, type B aortic dissection at 30 days and  1 year from a multidisciplinary subcommittee of the Soci-ety for Vascular Surgery Outcomes Committee. J Vasc Surg. 2011;53(4):1082-1090.	276.	Brunkwall J, Lammer J, Verhoeven E, Taylor P. ADSORB: a study on the efficacy of endovascular grafting in uncom-plicated acute dissection of the descending aorta. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2012;44(1):31-36.	277.	Brunkwall J, Kasprzak P, Verhoeven E, et al. Endovascular repair of acute uncomplicated aortic type B dissection pro-motes aortic remodelling: 1 year results of the ADSORB trial. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2014;48(3):285-291.Brunicardi_Ch22_p0853-p0896.indd   89601/03/19   5:42 PM
# Chunk 8925
Arterial DiseasePeter H. Lin, Carlos F. Bechara, Changyi Chen, and Frank J. Veith 23chapterGeneral Approach to the   Vascular Patient	898The Vascular History / 898The Vascular Physical Examination / 899Noninvasive Diagnostic Evaluation  of the Vascular Patient / 899Radiologic Evaluation of the Vascular Patient / 900Preoperative Cardiac Evaluation / 903Basic Principles of   Endovascular Therapy	903Needles and Access / 904Guidewires / 904Hemostatic Sheaths / 905Catheters / 905Angioplasty Balloons / 905Stents / 905Stent Grafts / 906Carotid Artery Disease	907Epidemiology and Etiology of Carotid Occlusive Disease / 907Clinical Manifestations of Cerebral Ischemia / 907Diagnostic Evaluation / 909Treatment of Carotid Occlusive  Disease / 910Carotid Endarterectomy Versus Angioplasty and Stenting / 911Surgical Techniques of Carotid Endarterectomy / 912Techniques of Carotid Angioplasty and Stenting / 914Nonatherosclerotic Disease of  the Carotid Artery / 916Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm	919Causes and Risk Factors / 919Natural History of Aortic Aneurysm / 920Clinical Manifestations / 920Relevant Anatomy / 920Diagnostic Evaluation / 921Surgical Repair of Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm / 921Endovascular Repair of Abdominal  Aortic Aneurysm / 922Results From Clinical Studies  Comparing Endovascular Versus  Open Repair / 925Classification and Management of Endoleak / 927Mesenteric Artery Disease	928Anatomy and Pathophysiology / 928Types of Mesenteric Artery  Occlusive Disease / 929Clinical Manifestations / 930Diagnostic Evaluation / 930Surgical Repair / 932Endovascular Treatment / 933Clinical Results of Interventions  for Mesenteric Ischemia / 934Renal Artery Disease	935Etiology / 935Clinical Manifestations / 936Diagnostic Evaluation / 936Treatment Indications / 937Surgical Reconstruction / 938Clinical Results of Surgical Repair / 938Endovascular Treatment / 938Clinical Results of Endovascular Interventions / 939Aortoiliac Occlusive Disease	940Diagnostic Evaluation / 941Differential Diagnosis / 941Collateral Arterial Network / 941Disease Classification / 941General Treatment Considerations / 943Surgical Reconstruction of Aortoiliac Occlusive Disease / 944Complications of Surgical Aortoiliac Reconstruction / 946Endovascular Treatment for Aortic  Disease / 947Endovascular Treatment for Iliac  Artery Disease / 948Complications of Endovascular  Aortoiliac Interventions / 949Clinical Results Comparing Surgical  and Endovascular Treatment of Aortoiliac Disease / 949Lower Extremity Arterial Occlusive   Disease	950Epidemiology / 950Diagnostic Evaluation / 950Differential Diagnosis / 951Lower Extremity Occlusive Disease Classification / 951Etiology of Acute Limb Ischemia / 952Clinical Manifestations of Acute  Limb Ischemia / 954Treatment Considerations for Acute Limb Ischemia / 955Endovascular Treatment / 955Surgical Treatment / 956Complications Related to Treatment  for Acute Limb Ischemia / 956Clinical Manifestations of Chronic  Limb Ischemia / 958Treatment Considerations for Chronic Limb Ischemia / 959Endovascular Treatment / 960Complications of Endovascular Interventions / 965Surgical Treatment for Chronic Limb Ischemia due to Femoropopliteal Disease / 966Complications of Surgical  Reconstruction / 966Choice of Conduit for Infrainguinal Bypass Grafting / 967Clinical Results of Surgical and Endovascular Interventions for Femoropopliteal Occlusive Disease / 968Nonatherosclerotic Disorders   of Blood Vessels	969Giant Cell Arteritis  (Temporal Arteritis) / 969Takayasu’s Arteritis / 969Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome / 970Marfan’s Syndrome / 970Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum / 970Kawasaki’s Disease / 971Inflammatory Arteritis and  Vasculitis / 971Behçet’s Disease	/ 971Polyarteritis Nodosa / 971Radiation-Induced Arteritis / 972Raynaud’s Syndrome / 972Fibromuscular Dysplasia / 972Nonatherosclerotic Disease Affecting  the Popliteal Artery Disease / 973Buerger’s Disease (Thromboangiitis Obliterans) / 974Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   89727/02/19   4:13 PM 898Table 23-1Pertinent elements in vascular history• History of stroke or transient ischemic attack• History of coronary artery disease, including previous myocardial infarction and angina• History of peripheral arterial disease• History of diabetes• History of hypertension• History of tobacco use• History of hyperlipidemiaGENERAL APPROACH TO THE  VASCULAR PATIENTSince the vascular system involves every organ system in our body, the symptoms of vascular disease are as varied as those encountered in any medical specialty. Lack of adequate blood supply to target organs typically presents with pain, for exam-ple, calf pain with lower extremity claudication, postprandial abdominal pain from mesenteric ischemia, and arm pain with axillo-subclavian arterial occlusion. In contrast, stroke and tran-sient ischemic attack (TIA) are the presenting symptoms from middle cerebral embolization as a consequence of a stenosed internal carotid artery. The pain syndrome of arterial disease is usually divided clinically into acute and chronic types, with all shades of severity between the two extremes. Sudden onset of pain can indicate complete occlusion of a critical vessel, leading to more severe pain and critical ischemia in the target organ, resulting in lower limb gangrene or intestinal infarction. Chronic pain results from a slower, more progressive atheroscle-rotic occlusion, which can be totally or partially compensated by developing collateral vessels. Acute on chronic is another pain pattern in which a patient most likely has an underlying arterial stenosis that suddenly occludes, for example, the patient with a history of calf claudication who now presents with sudden, severe acute limb-threatening ischemia. The clinician should always try to understand and relate the clinical manifestations to the underlying pathologic process.The Vascular HistoryAppropriate history should be focused based on the present-ing symptoms related to the vascular system (Table 23-1). Of particular importance in the previous medical history is noting prior vascular interventions (endovascular or open surgical), and all vascular patients should have inquiry made about their prior cardiac history and current cardiac symptoms. Approximately 30% of vascular patients will be diabetic. A history of prior and current smoking status should be noted.The patient with carotid disease in most cases is com-pletely asymptomatic, having been referred based on the find-ing of a cervical bruit or duplex finding of stenosis. Symptoms of carotid territory TIAs include transient monocular blindness (amaurosis), contralateral weakness or numbness, and dys-phasia. Symptoms persisting longer than 24 hours constitute a stroke. In contrast, the patient with chronic mesenteric isch-emia is likely to present with postprandial abdominal pain and weight loss. The patient fears eating because of the pain, avoids food, and loses weight. It is very unlikely that a patient with abdominal pain who has not lost weight has chronic mesenteric ischemia.The patient with lower extremity pain on ambulation has intermittent claudication that occurs in certain muscle groups; for example, calf pain upon exercise usually reflects superficial femoral artery disease, while pain in the buttocks reflects iliac disease. In most cases, the pain manifests in one muscle group below the level of the affected artery, occurs only with exercise, and is relieved with rest only to recur at the same location, hence the term “window gazer’s disease.” Rest pain (a manifestation of severe underlying occlusive disease) is constant and occurs in the foot (not the muscle groups), typically at the metatarso-phalangeal junction, and is relieved by dependency. Often the Key Points1	Carotid intervention as a preventive strategy should be per-formed in patients with 60% or greater symptomatic internal carotid artery stenosis and those with 80% or greater asymp-tomatic internal carotid artery stenosis. Carotid intervention for asymptomatic stenosis between 60% and 79% remains controversial. The modality of carotid intervention—carotid endarterectomy versus carotid stenting—remains contro-versial; currently, carotid endarterectomy appears to be associated with lower stroke rate with long term durability, whereas carotid stenting is more suitable under certain chal-lenging anatomic or physiologic conditions.2	Abdominal aortic aneurysms should be repaired when the risk of rupture, determined mainly by aneurysm size, exceeds the risk of death due to perioperative complications or concurrent illness. Endovascular repair is associated with less perioperative morbidity and mortality compared with open reconstruction and is preferred in patients with suitable anatomic morphology for stent-graft placement.3	Treatment objectives for symptomatic mesenteric ischemia are to improve quality of life and prevent bowel infarc-tion. Endovascular intervention with stenting has similar treatment efficacy comparative with less perioperative mor-bidity compared to open mesenteric bypass. Surgical recon-struction has a proven durability and patency rate compared with endovascular intervention.4	Aortoiliac occlusive disease can be treated with either endovascular means or open reconstruction, depending on patient risk stratification, occlusion characteristics, and symptomatology.5	Claudication is a marker of extensive atherosclerosis and is mainly managed with risk factor modification and pharma-cotherapy. Only 5% of patients with claudication will need intervention because of disabling extremity pain. The 5-year mortality of a patient with claudication approaches 30%. Patients with rest pain or tissue loss need expeditious evalu-ation and vascular reconstruction to ameliorate the severe extremity pain and prevent limb loss. Endovascular interven-tion is preferred as the first line of therapy for lower extrem-ity occlusive disease, whereas bypass reconstruction should be considered in failed endovascular therapy or long seg-ment femoropopliteal occlusive disease.Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   89827/02/19   4:13 PM 899ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23Table 23-2Grading scales for peripheral pulsesTRADITIONAL SCALEBASIC SCALE4+Normal2+Normal3+Slightly reduced1+Diminished2+Markedly reduced0Absent1+Barely palpable  patient is prompted to sleep with their foot hanging off one side of the bed to increase the hydrostatic pressure.The Vascular Physical ExaminationSpecific vascular examination should include abdominal aortic palpation, carotid artery examination, and pulse examination of the lower extremity (femoral, popliteal, posterior tibial, and dorsalis pedis arteries). The abdomen should be palpated for an abdominal aortic aneurysm, detected as an expansile pulse above the level of the umbilicus. It should also be examined for the presence of bruits. Because the aorta typically divides at the level of the umbilicus, an aortic aneurysm is most frequently palpable in the epigastrium. In thin individuals, a normal aortic pulsation is palpable, while in obese patients, even large aor-tic aneurysms may not be detectable. Suspicion of a clinically enlarged aorta should lead to the performance of an ultrasound scan for a more accurate definition of aortic diameter.The carotids should be auscultated for the presence of bruits, although there is a higher correlation with coronary artery disease than underlying carotid stenosis. A bruit at the angle of the mandible is a significant finding, leading to follow-up duplex scanning. The differential diagnosis is a transmitted murmur from a sclerotic or stenotic aortic valve. The carotid is palpable deep to the sternocleidomastoid muscle in the neck. Palpation, however, should be gentle and rarely yields clinically useful information.Upper extremity examination is necessary when an arte-riovenous graft is to be inserted in patients who have symptoms of arm pain with exercise. Thoracic outlet syndrome (TOS) can result in occlusion or aneurysm formation of the subclavian artery. Distal embolization is a manifestation of TOS; conse-quently, the fingers should be examined for signs of ischemia and ulceration. The axillary artery enters the limb below the middle of the clavicle, where it can be palpated in thin patients. It is usually easily palpable in the axilla and medial upper arm. The brachial artery is most easily located at the antecubital fossa immediately medial to the biceps tendon. The radial artery is palpable at the wrist anterior to the radius.For lower extremity vascular examination, the femoral pulse is usually palpable midway between the anterior supe-rior iliac spine and the pubic tubercle. The popliteal artery is palpated in the popliteal fossa with the knee flexed to 45° and the foot supported on the examination table to relax the calf muscles. Palpation of the popliteal artery is a bimanual tech-nique. Both thumbs are placed on the tibial tuberosity anteriorly, and the fingers are placed into the popliteal fossa between the two heads of the gastrocnemius muscle. The popliteal artery is palpated by compressing it against the posterior aspect of the tibia just below the knee. The posterior tibial pulse is detected by palpation 2 cm posterior to the medial malleolus. The dorsa-lis pedis is detected 1 cm lateral to the hallucis longus extensor tendon, which dorsiflexes the great toe and is clearly visible on the dorsum of the foot. Pulses can be graded using either the traditional four-point scale or the basic two-point scale system (Table 23-2). The foot should also be carefully examined for pallor on elevation and rubor on dependency, as these findings are indicative of chronic ischemia. Note should also be made of nail changes and loss of hair. Ulceration and other findings specific to disease states are described in relevant sections later in this chapter.After reconstructive vascular surgery, the graft may be available for examination, depending on its type and course. The in situ lower extremity graft runs in the subcutaneous fat and can be palpated along most of its length. A change in pulse quality, aneurysmal enlargement, or a new bruit should be care-fully noted. Axillofemoral grafts, femoral-to-femoral grafts, and arteriovenous access grafts can usually be easily palpated as well.Noninvasive Diagnostic Evaluation  of the Vascular PatientAnkle-Brachial Index. There is increasing interest in the use of the ankle-brachial index (ABI) to evaluate patients at risk for cardiovascular events. An ABI less than 0.9 correlates with increased risk of myocardial infarction and indicates significant, although perhaps asymptomatic, underlying peripheral vascular disease. The ABI is determined in the following ways. Blood pressure is measured in both upper extremities using the high-est systolic blood pressure as the denominator for the ABI. The ankle pressure is determined by placing a blood pressure cuff above the ankle and measuring the return to flow of the posterior tibial and dorsalis pedis arteries using a pencil Doppler probe over each artery. The ratio of the systolic pressure in each ves-sel divided by the highest arm systolic pressure can be used to express the ABI in both the posterior tibial and dorsalis pedis arteries (Fig. 23-1). Normal is more than 1. Patients with clau-dication typically have an ABI in the 0.5 to 0.7 range, and those with rest pain are in the 0.3 to 0.5 range. Those with gangrene have an ABI of less than 0.3. These ranges can vary depending on the degree of compressibility of the vessel. The test is less reliable in patients with heavily calcified vessels. Due to non-compressibility, some patients, such as diabetics and those with end-stage renal disease, may have ABI ≥1.40 and require addi-tional noninvasive diagnostic testing to evaluate for peripheral artery disease. Alternative tests include toe-brachial pressures, pulse volume recordings, transcutaneous oxygen measurements, or vascular imaging (duplex ultrasound).Segmental Limb Pressures. By placing serial blood pressure cuffs down the lower extremity and then measuring the pressure with a Doppler probe as flow returns to the artery below the cuff, it is possible to determine segmental pressures down the leg. This data can then be used to infer the level of the occlu-sion. The systolic pressure at each level is expressed as a ratio, with the highest systolic pressure in the upper extremities as the denominator. Normal segmental pressures commonly show high thigh pressures 20 mmHg or greater in comparison to the brachial artery pressures. The low thigh pressure should be equivalent to brachial pressures. Subsequent pressures should fall by no more than 10 mmHg at each level. A pressure gradient of 20 mmHg between two subsequent levels is usually indica-tive of occlusive disease at that level. The most frequently used index is the ratio of the ankle pressure to the brachial pressure, Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   89927/02/19   4:13 PM 900SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 23-1. Calculating the ankle-brachial index (ABI).Right ABI = ratio ofHigher of the right ankle systolic pressures (posterior tibial or dorsalis pedis)Higher arm systolic pressure (left or right arm)Left ABI = ratio ofHigher of the left ankle systolic pressures (posterior tibial or dorsalis pedis)Higher arm systolic pressure (left or right arm)the ABI. Normally, the ABI is greater than 1.0, and a value of less than 0.9 indicates some degree of arterial obstruction and has been shown to be correlated with an increased risk of coronary heart disease. Limitations of relying on segmental limb pressures include: (a) missing isolated moderate stenoses (usually iliac) that produce little or no pressure gradient at rest; (b) falsely elevated pressures in patients with diabetes and end-stage renal disease; and (c) the inability to differentiate between stenosis and occlusion.1 Patients with diabetes and end-stage renal disease have calcified vessels that are difficult to com-press, thus rendering this method inaccurate, due to recording of falsely elevated pressure readings. Noncompressible arter-ies yield ankle systolic pressures ≥250 mmHg and ABIs >1.40. In this situation, absolute toe and ankle pressures can be mea-sured to gauge critical limb ischemia. Ankle pressures less than  50 mmHg or toe pressures less than 30 mmHg are indica-tive of critical limb ischemia. The toe pressure is normally  30 mmHg less than the ankle pressure, and a toe-brachial index (TBI) <0.70 is abnormal. False-positive results with the TBI are unusual. The main limitation of this technique is that it may be impossible to measure pressures in the first and second toes due to preexisting ulceration.Pulse Volume Recording. In patients with noncompressible vessels, segmental plethysmography can be used to determine underlying arterial occlusive disease. Cuffs placed at different levels on the leg detect changes in blood volume and produce a pulse volume recording (PVR) when connected to a plethysmo-graph (Fig. 23-2). To obtain accurate PVR waveforms, the cuff is inflated to 60 to 65 mmHg, so as to detect volume changes without causing arterial occlusion. Pulse volume tracings are suggestive of proximal disease if the upstroke of the pulse is not brisk, the peak of the wave tracing is rounded, and there is disappearance of the dicrotic notch.Although isolated segmental limb pressures and PVR mea-surements are 85% accurate when compared with angiography in detecting and localizing significant atherosclerotic lesions, when used in combination, accuracy approaches 95%.2 For this reason, it is suggested that these two diagnostic modalities be used in combination when evaluating peripheral artery disease.Radiologic Evaluation of the Vascular PatientUltrasound. Ultrasound examinations are relatively time consuming, require experienced technicians, and may not visu-alize all arterial segments. Doppler waveform analysis can sug-gest atherosclerotic occlusive disease if the waveforms in the insonated arteries are biphasic, monophasic, or asymmetrical. B-mode ultrasonography provides black and white, real-time images. B-mode ultrasonography does not evaluate blood flow; thus, it cannot differentiate between fresh thrombus and flow-ing blood, which have the same echogenicity. Calcification in atherosclerotic plaques will cause acoustic shadowing. B-mode ultrasound probes cannot be sterilized. Use of the B-mode probe intraoperatively requires a sterile covering and gel to maintain an acoustic interface. Experience is needed to obtain and interpret images accurately. Duplex ultrasonography entails performance of B-mode imaging, spectral Doppler scanning, and color-flow duplex scanning. The caveat to performance of duplex ultraso-nography is meticulous technique by a certified vascular ultra-sound technician, so that the appropriate 60° Doppler angle is maintained during insonation with the ultrasound probe. Altera-tion of this angle can markedly alter waveform appearance and subsequent interpretation of velocity measurements. Direct imaging of intra-abdominal vessels with duplex ultrasound is less reliable because of the difficulty in visualizing the vessels through overlying bowel. These disadvantages currently limit the applicability of duplex scanning in the evaluation of aortoil-iac and infrapopliteal disease. A clinical study has shown that duplex ultrasonography had lower sensitivity in the calculation of infrapopliteal vessel stenosis in comparison to conventional digital subtraction or computed tomography angiography.3 Few surgeons rely solely on duplex ultrasonography for preopera-tive planning in lower extremity revascularizations; but with experience, lower extremity arteries can be insonated to deter-mine anatomy, and the functional significance of lesions can be determined by calculation of degree of stenosis from velocity ratios. Duplex scanning is unable to evaluate recently implanted polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) and polyester (Dacron) grafts because they contain air, which prevents ultrasound penetration.Computed Tomography Angiography. Computed tomogra-phy angiography (CTA) is a noninvasive, contrast-dependent method for imaging the arterial system. It depends on intrave-nous infusion of iodine-based contrast agents. The patient is advanced through a rotating gantry, which images serial trans-verse slices. The contrast-filled vessels can be extracted from the slices and rendered in three-dimensional format (Fig. 23-3). Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   90027/02/19   4:13 PM 901ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23Figure 23-2. Typical report of peripheral vascular study with arterial segmental pressure measurement plus Doppler evaluation of the lower extremity.Femoral0.750.500.250.000.25Sup.femoral1.501.000.500.000.50Popliteal1.501.000.500.000.50Posteriortibial1.501.000.500.000.50Dorsalispedis0.750.500.250.000.250.75Femoral0.500.250.000.25Popliteal0.750.500.250.000.25Posteriortibial0.750.500.250.000.25Dorsalispedis0.750.500.250.000.25Sup.femoral0.750.500.250.250.00149Brachial0.66U. thighL. thighCalfAnkle-PTAnkle-DPToe0.770.741.011.051.011.050.700.730.660.620.59Indexes144RightLeftDoppler waveforms1 sec/div15715015710910599PT 98DT 92PT 151DT 11111488ABFigure 23-3. A multidetector computed tomography angiography with three-dimensional reconstruction of the iliofemoral arterial circulation in two patients with lower leg claudication. A. A 50-year-old man with an occluded right superficial femoral artery (single long arrow) with reconstituted superficial femoral artery at the level of mid-thigh. Arterial calcifications (single short arrows) are present in the bilateral distal superficial femoral arteries. B. A 53-year-old man with occluded right common iliac artery (double arrows).The extracted images can also be rotated and viewed from sev-eral different directions during postacquisition image process-ing. This technology has been advanced as a consequence of aortic endografting. CTA provides images for postprocessing that can be used to display the aneurysm in a format that demon-strates thrombus, calcium, lumen, and the outer wall, and allows “fitting” of a proposed endograft into the aneurysm (Fig. 23-4). CTA is increasingly being used to image the carotid bifurca-tion, and as computing power increases, the speed of image acquisition and resolution will continue to increase. The major limitations of multidetector CTA are use of contrast and pres-ence of artifacts caused by calcification and stents. CTA can Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   90127/02/19   4:13 PM 902SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 23-4. Three-dimensional computed tomog-raphy angiogram of an abdominal aortic aneurysm that displays various aneurysm components including thrombus, aortic calcification, blood circulation, and aneurysm wall.Figure 23-5. Magnetic resonance angiogram of aortic arch and carotid arteries. This study can provide a three-dimensional analysis of vascular structure such as aortic arch branches and carotid and vertebral arteries.overestimate the degree of in-stent stenosis, while heavy calci-fication can limit the diagnostic accuracy of the method by caus-ing a “blooming artifact.”4 The artifacts can be overcome with alteration in image acquisition technique. There are no random-ized trials to document the superiority of multidetector CTA over traditional angiography, but there is emerging evidence to support the claim that multidetector CTA has sensitivity, speci-ficity, and accuracy that rival invasive angiography.4Magnetic Resonance Angiography. Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) has the advantage of not requiring iodin-ated contrast agents to provide vessel opacification (Fig. 23-5). Gadolinium is used as a contrast agent for MRA studies, and because it is generally not nephrotoxic, it can be used in patients with elevated creatinine. MRA is contraindicated in patients with pacemakers, defibrillators, spinal cord stimulators, intrace-rebral shunts, cochlear implants, and cranial clips. Patients with claustrophobia may require sedation to be able to complete the test. The presence of metallic stents causes artifacts and signal drop-out; however, these can be dealt with using alternations in image acquisition and processing. Nitinol stents produce mini-mal artifact. Compared to other modalities, MRA is relatively slow and expensive. However, due to its noninvasive nature and decreased nephrotoxicity, MRA is being used more frequently for imaging vasculature in various anatomic distributions.Diagnostic Angiography. Diagnostic angiography is consid-ered the gold standard in vascular imaging. In many centers, its use is rapidly decreasing due to the development of noninvasive imaging modalities such as duplex arterial mapping, CTA, and MRA. Nevertheless, contrast angiography still remains in wide-spread use. The essential aspects of angiography are vascular access and catheter placement in the vascular bed that requires examination. The imaging system and the contrast agent are used to opacify the target vessel. Although in the past this func-tion has largely been delegated to the interventional radiology service, an increasing number of surgeons are performing this procedure and following the diagnostic imaging with immediate surgical or endovascular intervention. There are several consid-erations when relying on angiography for imaging.Approximately 70% of atherosclerotic plaques occur in an eccentric location within the blood vessel; therefore, images can be misleading when trying to evaluate stenoses because angiog-raphy is limited to a uniplanar “lumenogram.” With increased use of intravascular stent deployment, it has also been noted that assessment of stent apposition and stent position in rela-tion to surrounding branches may be inaccurate. Furthermore, angiography exposes the patient to the risks of both ionizing radiation and intravascular contrast. Nevertheless, contrast angi-ography remains the most common invasive method of vascular investigation for both diagnostic and therapeutic intervention. The angiogram usually provides the final information needed to decide whether or not to proceed with operation or endovascular interventions.Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) offers some advan-tages over conventional cut-film angiography such as excellent visualization despite use of lower volumes of contrast media. In particular, when multilevel occlusive lesions limit the amount of contrast reaching distal vessels, supplemental use of digital sub-traction angiographic techniques may enhance visualization and definition of anatomy. Intra-arterial DSA uses a portable, axially Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   90227/02/19   4:13 PM 903ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23Figure 23-6. Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) provides excellent visualization of intravascular circulation with intra-arterial contrast administration. As depicted in this DSA study, multilevel lesions are demonstrated, which include a focal left iliac artery stenosis (large arrow), right superficial femoral occlusion (curved arrows), left superficial femoral stenosis (small arrow), and mul-tiple tibial artery stenoses (arrowheads).rotatable imaging device that can obtain views from different angles. DSA also allows for real-time video replay (Fig. 23-6). An entire extremity can be filmed with DSA using repeated injections of small amounts of contrast agent to obtain sequen-tial angiographic images, the so-called pulse-chase technique.Preoperative Cardiac EvaluationThe most important and most controversial aspect of preopera-tive evaluation in patients with atherosclerotic disease requiring surgical intervention is the detection and subsequent manage-ment of associated coronary artery disease. Several studies have documented the existence of significant coronary artery disease in 40% to 50% or more of patients requiring peripheral vascular reconstructive procedures, 10% to 20% of whom may be relatively asymptomatic largely because of their inability to exercise.5 Myocardial infarction is responsible for the major-ity of both early and late postoperative deaths. Most available screening methods lack sensitivity and specificity to predict postoperative cardiac complications. There have been conflict-ing reports regarding the utility of preoperative dipyridamole-thallium nuclear imaging or dobutamine-echocardiography to stratify vascular patients in terms of perioperative cardiac mor-bidity and mortality. In nearly half of patients, thallium imaging proves to be unnecessary because cardiac risk can be predicted by clinical information alone.6 Even with coronary angiography, it is difficult to relate anatomic findings to functional signifi-cance and, hence, surgical risk. There are no data confirming that percutaneous coronary interventions or surgical revascu-larization prior to vascular surgical procedures impact mortality or incidence of myocardial infarctions. In fact, coronary angi-ography is associated with its own inherent risks, and patients undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting or coronary percuta-neous transluminal angioplasty (PTA) before needed aortoiliac reconstructions are subjected to the risks and complications of both procedures.The Coronary Artery Revascularization Prophylaxis (CARP) trial showed that coronary revascularization in patients with peripheral vascular disease and significant coronary artery disease, who are considered high risk for perioperative com-plications, did not reduce overall mortality or perioperative myocardial infarction.7 Additionally, patients who underwent prophylactic coronary revascularization had significant delays prior to undergoing their vascular procedure and increased limb morbidity compared to patients who did not. Studies do support improvement in cardiovascular and overall prognosis with med-ical optimization of patients.8 Therefore, use of perioperative β-blockade, as well as use of antiplatelet medication, statins, and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, is encouraged in vascular patients.BASIC PRINCIPLES OF ENDOVASCULAR THERAPYCardiovascular disease remains a major cause of mortality in the developed world since the beginning of the 21st century. Although surgical revascularization has played a predominant role in the management of patients with vascular disease, the modern treatment paradigms have evolved significantly with increased emphasis of catheter-based percutaneous interven-tions over the past two decades. The increasing role of this mini-mally invasive vascular intervention is fueled by various factors, including rapid advances in imaging technology, reduced mor-bidity and mortality in endovascular interventions, and faster convalescence following percutaneous therapy when compared to traditional operations. There is little doubt that with continued device development and refined image-guided technology, endo-vascular intervention will provide improved clinical outcomes and play an even greater role in the treatment of vascular disease.The technique of percutaneous access for both the diagnos-tic and therapeutic management of vascular disease has resulted in tremendous changes in the practice of several subspecialties, including interventional radiology, invasive cardiology, and vas-cular surgery. The development of catheter and endoscopic instru-mentation allows the vascular surgeon to operate via an intraor extraluminal route. Endovascular techniques are now able to treat the full spectrum of vascular pathology, including stenoses and occlusions resulting from several etiologies, aneurysmal pathol-ogy, and traumatic lesions. Many of these procedures have only recently been developed and, as such, have not been investigated Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   90327/02/19   4:13 PM 904SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 23-7. A. Antegrade femoral artery access. The needle is inserted just below the inguinal ligament in the common femoral artery whereby the guidewire is inserted in the ipsilateral super-ficial femoral artery. B. Brachial artery approach. The needle is inserted in a retrograde fashion in the brachial artery just above the antecubital fossa, whereby the guidewire is next inserted in the brachial artery.in a manner that would enable an accurate comparison with the more traditional methods of open surgical intervention. Long-term follow-up for these procedures is frequently lacking; how-ever, because of the potential to treat patients with decreased mortality and morbidity, endovascular skills and techniques are being adopted into mainstream vascular surgery.Needles and AccessNeedles are used to achieve percutaneous vascular access. The size of the needle will be dictated by the diameter of the guide-wire used. Most often, an 18-gauge needle is used, as it will accept a 0.035-inch guidewire. A 21-gauge micropuncture nee-dle will accept a 0.018-inch guidewire. The most popular access needle is the Seldinger needle, which can be used for singleand double-wall puncture techniques.Femoral arterial puncture is the most common site for access. The common femoral artery (CFA) is punctured over the medial third of the femoral head, which is landmarked using flu-oroscopy. The single-wall puncture technique requires a sharp, beveled needle tip and no central stylet. The anterior wall of the vessel is punctured with the bevel of the needle pointing up, and pulsatile back-bleeding indicates an intraluminal position. This method is most useful for graft punctures, patients with abnor-mal clotting profiles, or if thrombolytic therapy is anticipated. Once the needle assumes an intraluminal position, verified by pulsatile back-bleeding, the guidewire may be advanced. This is always passed gently and under fluoroscopic guidance to avoid subintimal dissection or plaque disruption. Double-wall puncture techniques are performed with a blunt needle that has a remov-able inner cannula. The introducer needle punctures both walls of the artery and is withdrawn until bleeding is obtained to confirm intraluminal position prior to advancing a guidewire. There can be troublesome bleeding from the posterior arterial wall punc-ture; therefore, single puncture techniques are preferred.Retrograde femoral access is the most common arte-rial access technique (Fig. 23-7). The advantages of this technique include the size and fixed position of the CFA, as well as the relative ease of compression against the femoral head at the end of the procedure. Care should be taken to avoid puncturing the external iliac artery above the inguinal ligament because this can result in retroperitoneal hemor-rhage secondary to ineffective compression of the puncture site. Likewise, puncturing too low, at or below the CFA bifurcation, can result in thrombosis or pseudoaneurysm for-mation of the superficial femoral artery (SFA) or profunda femoris artery (PFA). Antegrade femoral access is more dif-ficult than retrograde femoral access, and there is a greater tendency to puncture the SFA, but it is invaluable when the aortic bifurcation cannot be traversed or when devices are not long enough to reach a lesion from a contralateral femo-ral access approach. Occasionally, when the distal aorta or bilateral iliac arteries are inaccessible because of the extent of atherosclerotic lesions, scarring, or presence of bypass conduits, the brachial artery must be used to obtain access for diagnostic and therapeutic interventions. The left bra-chial artery is punctured because this avoids the origin of the carotid artery and thus decreases the risk of catheter-related emboli to the brain. The artery is accessed with a micropunc-ture needle just proximal to the antecubital crease. The use of brachial access is associated with a higher risk of thrombosis and nerve injuries than femoral access.GuidewiresGuidewires are used to introduce, position, and exchange cath-eters. A guidewire generally has a flexible and stiff end. In general, only the flexible end of the guidewire is placed in the vessel. All guidewires are composed of a stiff inner core and an outer tightly coiled spring that allows a catheter to track over the guidewire. There are five essential characteristics of guidewires: size, length, stiffness, coating, and tip configuration.Guidewires come in different maximum transverse diam-eters, ranging from 0.011 to 0.038 inches. For most aortoiliac procedures, a 0.035-inch wire is most commonly used, whereas the smaller diameter 0.018-inch guidewires are reserved for selective small vessel angiography such as infrageniculate or carotid lesions. In addition to diameter size, guidewires come in varying lengths, usually ranging from 180 to 260 cm in length. Increasing the length of the wire always makes it more difficult to handle and increases the risk of contamination. While per-forming a procedure, it is important to maintain the guidewire across the lesion until the completion arteriogram has been sat-isfactorily completed.The stiffness of the guidewire is also an important charac-teristic. Stiff wires allow for passage of large aortic stent graft devices without kinking. They are also useful when trying to perform sheath or catheter exchanges around a tortuous artery. An example of a stiff guidewire is the Amplatz wire. Hydro-philic coated guidewires, such as the Glidewire, have become invaluable tools for assisting in difficult catheterizations. The coating is primed by bathing the guidewire in saline solution. The slippery nature of this guidewire along with its torque capa-bility significantly facilitate in difficult catheterizations. Guide-wires also come in various tip configurations. Angled tip wires like the angled Glidewire can be steered to manipulate a catheter across a tight stenosis or to select a specific branch of a vessel. The Rosen wire has a soft curled end, which makes it ideal for renal artery stenting. The soft curl of this wire prevents it from perforating small renal branch vessels.Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   90427/02/19   4:13 PM 905ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23Figure 23-8. All percutaneous endovascular procedures are per-formed through an introducer sheath (large arrow), which pro-vides an access conduit from skin to intravascular compartment. The sheath also acts to protect the vessel from injury as guidewires (small arrows) and catheters are introduced.Hemostatic SheathsThe hemostatic sheath is a device through which endovascular procedures are performed. The sheath acts to protect the vessel from injury as wires and catheters are introduced (Fig. 23-8). A one-way valve prevents bleeding through the sheath, and a side-port allows contrast or heparin flushes to be administered during the procedure. Sheaths are sized by their inner diameter. The most commonly used sheaths for percutaneous access have a 5to 9-French inner diameter, but with open surgical exposure of the CFA, sheaths as large as 26 French can be introduced. Sheaths also vary in length, and long sheaths are available so that interventions remote from the site of arterial access can be performed.CathetersA wide variety of catheters exist that differ primarily in the con-figuration of the tip. The multiple shapes permit access to ves-sels of varying dimensions and angulations. Catheters are used to perform angiography and protect the passage of balloons and stents, and they can be used to direct the guidewire through tight stenoses or tortuous vessels.Figure 23-9. A. An artery with luminal narrowing caused by plaque. B. A balloon angioplasty catheter is positioned within the diseased artery, which is inflated to enlarge the intravascular channel. C. The plaque is compressed with widened flow lumen as the result of balloon angioplasty.Angioplasty BalloonsAngioplasty balloons differ primarily in their length and diam-eter, as well as the length of the catheter shaft. As balloon technology has advanced, lower profiles have been manufac-tured (i.e., the size that the balloon assumes upon deflation). Balloons are used to perform angioplasty on vascular stenoses, to deploy stents, and to assist with additional expansion after insertion of self-expanding stents (Fig. 23-9). Besides length and diameter, operators need to be familiar with several other balloon characteristics. Noncompliant and low-compliance balloons tend to be inflated to their preset diameter and offer greater dilating force at the site of stenosis. Low-compliance balloons are the mainstay for peripheral intervention. Lower profile balloons are less likely to get caught during passage through stents and are easier to pull out of sheaths. Under fluoroscopic guidance, balloon inflation is performed until the waist of the atherosclerotic lesion disappears and the balloon is at the full profile. The duration of balloon inflation and pres-sures used for the angioplasty depend on the indication for the intervention and the location and characteristics of the lesion being treated. Frequently, several inflations are required to achieve a full profile of the balloon. Occasionally, a lower pro-file balloon is needed to predilate the tight stenosis so that the selected balloon catheter can cross the lesion. After inflation, most balloons do not regain their preinflation diameter and assume a larger profile. Trackability, pushability, and cross-ability of the balloon should all be considered when choosing a particular balloon. Lastly, shoulder length is an important characteristic to consider when selecting a balloon because of the potential to cause injury during performance of PTA in adjacent arterial segments. There is always risk of causing dis-section or rupture during PTA; thus, a completion angiogram is performed while the wire is still in place. Leaving the wire in place provides access for repeating the procedure, placing a stent or stent graft if warranted.StentsVascular stents are commonly used after an inadequate angio-plasty with dissection or elastic recoil of an arterial stenosis. They serve to buttress collapsible vessels and help prevent atherosclerotic restenosis. Appropriate indications for primary stenting of a lesion without an initial trial of angioplasty alone are evolving in manners that are dependent on the extent and site of the lesion. Stents are manufactured from a variety of metals including stainless steel, tantalum, cobalt-based alloy, Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   90527/02/19   4:13 PM 906SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 23-10. Self-expanding stents are made of tempered stainless steel or nitinol, an alloy of nickel and titanium, and are restrained when folded inside a delivery catheter. After being released from the restraining catheter, the self-expanding stents will expand to a final diameter that is determined by stent geometry, hoop strength, and vessel size.Figure 23-11. In a balloon-expandable stent, the stent is pre-mounted on a balloon catheter. The balloon stretches the stent members beyond their elastic limit. The stent is deployed by full balloon expansion. This type of stent has a higher degree of crush resistance when compared to self-expanding stents, which is ideal for short-segment calcified ostial lesions.and nitinol. Vascular stents are classified into two basic categories: balloon-expandable stents and self-expanding stents.Self-expanding stents (Fig. 23-10) are deployed by retract-ing a restraining sheath and usually consist of Elgiloy (a cobalt, chromium, nickel alloy) or nitinol (a shape memory alloy com-posed of nickel and titanium), the latter of which will contract and assume a heat-treated shape above a transition temperature that depends on the composition of the alloy. Self-expanding stents will expand to a final diameter that is determined by stent geometry, hoop strength, and vessel size. The self-expanding stent is mounted on a central shaft and is placed inside an outer sheath. It relies on a mechanical spring-like action to achieve expansion. With deployment of these stents, there is some degree of foreshortening that has to be taken into account when choosing the area of deployment. In this way, self-expanding stents are more difficult to place with absolute precision. There are several advantages related to self-expanding stents. Self-expanding stents generally come in longer lengths than balloon-expandable stents and are therefore used to treat long and tortuous lesions. Their ability to continually expand after deliv-ery allows them to accommodate adjacent vessels of different size. This makes these stents ideal for placement in the internal carotid artery. These stents are always oversized by 1 to 2 mm relative to the largest diameter of normal vessel adjacent to the lesion in order to prevent immediate migration.Balloon-expandable stents are usually composed of stain-less steel, mounted on an angioplasty balloon, and deployed by balloon inflation (Fig. 23-11). They can be manually placed on a chosen balloon catheter or obtained premounted on a balloon catheter. The capacity of a balloon-expandable stent to shorten in length during deployment depends on both stent geometry and the final diameter to which the balloon is expanded. These stents are more rigid and are associated with a shorter time to complete endothelialization. They are often of limited flexibility and have a higher degree of crush resistance when compared to self-expanding stents. This makes them ideal for short-segment lesions, especially those that involve the ostia such as proximal common iliac or renal artery stenosis.An important area of evolution in endovascular therapy in recent years is the development of drug-eluting stents (DES). These stents are usually composed of nitinol and have vari-ous anti-inflammatory drugs bonded to them. Over time, the stents release the drug into the surrounding arterial wall and help prevent restenosis. Numerous randomized controlled trials have proven their benefit in coronary arteries.9 Clinical studies have similarly proved early efficacy of DES in the treatment of peripheral arterial disease.10Stent GraftsThe combination of a metal stent covered with fabric gave birth to the first stent grafts. Covered stents have been designed with either a surrounding PTFE or polyester fabric and have been used predominantly for treatment of traumatic vascular lesions, including arterial disruption and arteriovenous fistulas  (Fig. 23-12). However, these devices may well find a growing role in treatment of iliac or femoral arterial occlusive disease as well as popliteal aneurysms.Endovascular aneurysm repair using the concept of stent grafts was initiated by Parodi in 1991.11 Since that time, a large number of endografts have been inserted under the auspice of clinical trials initially and now as Food and Drug Administra-tion (FDA)–approved devices. Currently there are more than Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   90627/02/19   4:13 PM 907ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23Figure 23-12. A stent graft is a metal stent covered with fabric that is com-monly used for aneurysm exclusion.eight FDA-approved endovascular devices for abdominal aortic aneurysm repair. In general, majority of these devices require that patients have an infrarenal aneurysm with at least a 15-mm proximal aortic neck below the renal arteries and not greater than 60° of angulation. For those patients with associated com-mon iliac artery aneurysmal disease, endovascular treatment can be achieved by initial coil embolization of the ipsilateral hypogastric artery with extension of the endovascular device into the external iliac artery. Newer generation devices with branched endograft can be deployed in the internal iliac artery while maintain in-line flow from the common iliac to exter-nal iliac artery to exclude the common iliac artery aneurysm. Recent clinical trials have demonstrated clinical efficacy of fenestrated aortic endograft in treating aneurysm involving the visceral segment of the abdominal aorta.12 The FDA has simi-larly approved several thoracic endograft devices for the treat-ment of descending thoracic aortic aneurysm. Clinical studies have similarly demonstrated durability and efficacy of thoracic aortic devices in patients with traumatic aortic transections and aortic dissections.13CAROTID ARTERY DISEASEAtherosclerotic occlusive plaque is by far the most common pathology seen in the carotid artery bifurcation. Thirty percent to 60% of all ischemic strokes are related to atherosclerotic carotid bifurcation occlusive disease. In the following section, we first focus our discussion on the clinical presentation, diagnosis, and management—including medical therapy, surgical carotid end-arterectomy, and stenting—of atherosclerotic carotid occlusive disease. In the second part of the section, we provide a review on other less common nonatherosclerotic diseases involving the extracranial carotid artery, including kink and coil, fibromuscu-lar dysplasia, arterial dissection, aneurysm, radiation arteritis, Takayasu’s arteritis, and carotid body tumor.Epidemiology and Etiology of Carotid Occlusive DiseaseApproximately 700,000 Americans suffer a new or recur-rent stroke each year.14 Eighty-five percent of all strokes are ischemic, and 15% are hemorrhagic. Hemorrhagic strokes are caused by head trauma or spontaneous disruption of intracere-bral blood vessels. Ischemic strokes are due to hypoperfusion from arterial occlusion or, less commonly, to decreased flow resulting from proximal arterial stenosis and poor collateral network. Common causes of ischemic strokes are cardiogenic emboli in 35%, carotid artery disease in 30%, lacunar in 10%, miscellaneous in 10%, and idiopathic in 15%.19 The term cere-brovascular accident is often used interchangeably to refer to an ischemic stroke. A transient ischemic attack (TIA) is defined as a temporary focal cerebral or retinal hypoperfusion state that resolves spontaneously within 24 hours after its onset. However, the majority of TIAs resolve within minutes, and longer-lasting neurologic deficits more likely represent a stroke. Recently, the term brain attack has been coined to refer to an acute stroke or TIA, denoting the condition as a medical emergency requiring immediate attention, similar to a heart attack.Stroke due to carotid bifurcation occlusive disease is usu-ally caused by atheroemboli (Fig. 23-13). The carotid bifurca-tion is an area of low flow velocity and low shear stress. As the blood circulates through the carotid bifurcation, there is separa-tion of flow into the low-resistance internal carotid artery and the high-resistance external carotid artery. Characteristically, atherosclerotic plaque forms in the outer wall opposite to the flow divider (Fig. 23-14). Atherosclerotic plaque formation is complex, beginning with intimal injury, platelet deposition, smooth muscle cell proliferation, and fibroplasia, and leading to subsequent luminal narrowing. With increasing degree of ste-nosis in the internal carotid artery, flow becomes more turbu-lent, and the risk of atheroembolization escalates. The severity of stenosis is commonly divided into three categories accord-ing to the luminal diameter reduction: mild (<50%), moderate (50–69%), and severe (70–99%). Severe carotid stenosis is a strong predictor for stroke.15 In turn, a prior history of neuro-logic symptoms (TIA or stroke) is an important determinant for recurrent ipsilateral stroke. The risk factors for the development of carotid artery bifurcation disease are similar to those causing atherosclerotic occlusive disease in other vascular beds. Increas-ing age, male gender, hypertension, tobacco smoking, diabetes mellitus, homocysteinemia, and hyperlipidemia are well-known predisposing factors for the development of atherosclerotic occlusive disease.Clinical Manifestations of Cerebral IschemiaTIA is a focal loss of neurologic function, lasting for less than  24 hours. Crescendo TIAs refer to a syndrome comprising repeated TIAs within a short period of time that is character-ized by complete neurologic recovery in between. At a minimum, the term should probably be reserved for those with either daily events or multiple resolving attacks within 24 hours. Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   90727/02/19   4:13 PM 908SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 23-14. A. The carotid bifurcation is an area of low flow velocity and low shear stress. As the blood circulates through the carotid bifurcation, there is separation of flow into the low-resistance internal carotid artery and the high-resistance external carotid artery.  B. The carotid atherosclerotic plaque typi-cally forms in the outer wall opposite to the flow divider due in part to the effect of the low shear stress region, which also creates a tran-sient reversal of flow during the cardiac cycle.InternalcarotidarteryEmboliUlcerPlaqueCommoncarotidarteryExternalcarotidarterySuperiorthyroidarteryFigure 23-13. Stroke due to carotid bifurcation occlusive disease is usually caused by atheroemboli arising from the internal carotid artery, which provides the majority of blood flow to the cerebral hemisphere. With increasing degree of stenosis in the carotid artery, flow becomes more turbulent, and the risk of atheroembolization escalates.BASectional viewLow-shearregionHigh-shearregionHemodynamic TIAs represent focal cerebral events that are aggravated by exercise or hemodynamic stress and typically occur after short bursts of physical activity, postprandially, or after getting out of a hot bath. It is implied that these are due to severe extracranial disease and poor intracranial collateral recruitment. Reversible ischemic neurologic deficits refer to ischemic focal neurologic symptoms lasting longer than 24 hours but resolv-ing within 3 weeks. When a neurologic deficit lasts longer than  3 weeks, it is considered a completed stroke. Stroke in evolution refers to progressive worsening of the neurologic deficit, either linearly over a 24-hour period or interspersed with transient periods of stabilization and/or partial clinical improvement.Patients who suffer cerebrovascular accidents typically present with three categories of symptoms including ocular symptoms, sensory/motor deficit, and/or higher cortical dys-function. The common ocular symptoms associated with extra-cranial carotid artery occlusive disease include amaurosis fugax and presence of Hollenhorst plaques. Amaurosis fugax, com-monly referred to as transient monocular blindness, is a tempo-rary loss of vision in one eye that patients typically describe as a window shutter coming down or grey shedding of the vision. This partial blindness usually lasts for a few minutes and then resolves. Most of these phenomena (>90%) are due to embolic occlusion of the main artery or the upper or lower divisions. Monocular blindness progressing over a 20-minute period sug-gests a migrainous etiology. Occasionally, the patient will recall no visual symptoms while the optician notes a yellowish plaque within the retinal vessels, which is also known as Hollenhorst plaque. These plaques are frequently derived from cholesterol embolization from the carotid bifurcation and warrant further investigation. Additionally, several ocular symptoms may be caused by microembolization from extracranial carotid dis-eases including monocular visual loss due to retinal artery or optic nerve ischemia, the ocular ischemia syndrome, and visual field deficits secondary to cortical infarction and ischemia of the optic tracts. Typical motor and/or sensory symptoms asso-ciated with cerebrovascular accidents are lateralized or focal neurologic deficits. Ischemic events tend to have an abrupt onset, with the severity of the insult being apparent from the onset and not usually associated with seizures or paresthesia. In contrast, they represent loss or diminution of neurologic func-tion. Furthermore, motor or sensory deficits can be unilateral or Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   90827/02/19   4:14 PM 909ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23bilateral, with the upper and lower limbs being variably affected depending on the site of the cerebral lesion. The combination of a motor and sensory deficit in the same body territory is sug-gestive of a cortical thromboembolic event as opposed to lacu-nar lesions secondary to small vessel disease of the penetrating arterioles. However, a small proportion of the latter may present with a sensorimotor stroke secondary to small vessel occlusion within the posterior limb of the internal capsule. Pure sensory and pure motor strokes and those strokes where the weakness affects one limb only or does not involve the face are more typically seen with lacunar as opposed to cortical infarction. A number of higher cortical functions, including speech and language disturbances, can be affected by thromboembolic phe-nomena from the carotid artery, with the most important clinical example for the dominant hemisphere being dysphasia or apha-sia and visuospatial neglect being an example of nondominant hemisphere injury.Diagnostic EvaluationDuplex ultrasonography is the most widely used screening tool to evaluate for atherosclerotic plaque and stenosis of the extracranial carotid artery. It is also commonly used to monitor patients serially for progression of disease or after intervention (carotid endarterectomy or angioplasty). Duplex ultrasound of the carotid artery combines B-mode gray-scale imaging and Doppler waveform analysis. Characterization of the carotid plaque on gray-scale imaging provides useful information about its composition. However, there are currently no universal rec-ommendations that can be made based solely on the sonographic appearance of the plaque. On the other hand, criteria have been developed and well refined for grading the degree of carotid ste-nosis based primarily on Doppler-derived velocity waveforms.The external carotid artery has a high-resistance flow pat-tern with a sharp systolic peak and a small amount of flow in diastole. In contrast, a normal internal carotid artery will have a low-resistance flow pattern with a broad systolic peak and a large amount of flow during diastole. The flow pattern in the common carotid artery resembles that in the internal carotid artery, as 80% of the flow is directed to the internal carotid artery, with waveforms that have broad systolic peaks and mod-erate amount of flow during diastole. Conventionally, velocity measurements are recorded in the common, external, carotid bulb, and the proximal, mid, and distal portions of the internal carotid artery. Characteristically, the peak systolic velocity is increased at the site of the vessel stenosis. The end-diastolic velocity is increased with greater degree of stenosis. In addition, stenosis of the internal carotid artery can lead to color shifts with color mosaics indicating a poststenotic turbulence. Dampening of the Doppler velocity waveforms is typically seen in areas distal to severe carotid stenosis where blood flow is reduced. It is well known that occlusion of the ipsilateral internal carotid artery can lead to a “falsely” elevated velocity on the contralat-eral side due to an increase in compensatory blood flow. In the presence of a high-grade stenosis or occlusion of the internal carotid artery, the ipsilateral common carotid artery displays high flow resistance waveforms, similar to those seen in the external carotid artery. If there is a significant stenosis in the proximal common carotid artery, its waveforms may be damp-ened with low velocities.The Doppler grading systems of carotid stenosis were initially established by comparison to angiographic findings of disease. Studies have shown variability in the measurements of the duplex properties by different laboratories, as well as hetero-geneity in the patient population, study design, and techniques. One the most commonly used classifications was established at the University of Washington School of Medicine in Seattle, Washington.16 Diameter reduction of 50% to 79% is defined by peak systolic velocity greater than 125 cm/s with extensive spectral broadening. For stenosis in the range of 80% to 99%, the peak systolic velocity is greater than 125 cm/s, and peak diastolic velocity is greater than 140 cm/s. The ratio of inter-nal carotid to common carotid artery peak systolic velocity has also been part of various ultrasound diagnostic classifications.  A ratio greater than 4 is a great predictor of angiographic ste-nosis of 70% to 99%. A multispecialty consensus panel has developed a set of criteria for grading carotid stenosis by duplex examination (Table 23-3).MRA is increasingly being used to evaluate for athero-sclerotic carotid occlusive disease and intracranial circulation. MRA is noninvasive and does not require iodinated contrast agents. MRA uses phase contrast or time-of-flight, with either two-dimensional or three-dimensional data sets for greater accu-racy. Three-dimensional contrast-enhanced MRA allows data to be obtained in coronal and sagittal planes with improved image qualities due to shorter study time. In addition, the new MRA techniques allow for better reformation of images in vari-ous planes to allow better grading of stenosis. There have been numerous studies comparing the sensitivity and specificity of Table 23-3Carotid duplex ultrasound criteria for grading internal carotid artery stenosisDEGREE OF STENOSIS (%)ICA PSV (CM/S)ICA/CCA PSV RATIOICA EDV (CM/S)PLAQUE ESTIMATE (%)aNormal<125<2.0<40None<50<125<2.0<40<5050–69125–2302.0–4.040–100≥50≥70 to less than near occlusion>230>4.0>100≥50Near occlusionHigh, low, or not detectedVariableVariableVisibleTotal occlusionNot detectedNot applicableNot detectedVisible, no lumenaPlaque estimate (diameter reduction) with gray-scale and color Doppler ultrasound.CCA = common carotid artery; EDV = end-diastolic velocity; ICA = internal carotid artery; PSV = peak systolic velocity.Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   90927/02/19   4:14 PM 910SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 23-15. A. Carotid computed tomography angiography is a valuable imaging modality that can provide a three-dimensional image reconstruction with high image resolution. A carotid artery occlusion is noted in the internal carotid artery B. The entire segment of extracranial carotid artery is visualized from the thoracic compartment to the base of skull.Figure 23-16. A carotid angiogram reveals an ulcerated carotid plaque (arrow) in the proximal internal carotid artery, which also resulted in a high-grade internal carotid artery stenosis.MRA imaging for carotid disease to duplex and selective con-trast angiography.17 Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain is essential in the assessment of acute stroke patients. MRI with diffusion-weighted imaging can differentiate areas of acute ischemia, areas still at risk for ischemia (penumbra), and chronic cerebral ischemic changes. However, computed tomography (CT) imaging remains the most expeditious test in the evaluation of acute stroke patients to rule out intracerebral hemorrhage. Recently, multidetector CTA has gained increasing popularity in the evaluation of carotid disease.18 This imaging modality can provide volume rendering, which allows rotation of the object with accurate anatomic structures from all angles (Fig. 23-15). The advantages of CTA over MRA include faster data acquisition time and better spatial resolution. However, grading of carotid stenosis by CTA requires further validation at the time of this writing before it can be widely applied.Historically, DSA has been the gold standard test to evalu-ate the extraand intracranial circulation (Fig. 23-16). This is an invasive procedure, typically performed via a transfemoral puncture, and involves selective imaging of the carotid and ver-tebral arteries using iodinated contrast. The risk of stroke during cerebral angiography is generally reported at approximately 1% and is typically due to atheroembolization related to wire and catheter manipulation in the arch aorta or proximal branch vessels. Over the last few decades, however, the incidence of neurologic complications following angiography has been reduced, due to the use of improved guidewires and catheters, better resolution digital imaging, and increased experience. Local access compli-cations of angiography are infrequent and include development of hematoma, pseudoaneurysm, distal embolization, and acute vessel thrombosis. Currently, selective angiography is particu-larly used for patients with suspected intracranial disease and for patients in whom percutaneous revascularization is con-sidered. The techniques of carotid angioplasty and stenting for carotid bifurcation occlusive disease are described in detail later in this chapter. We generally use CTA or MRA to get informa-tion about the aortic arch anatomy and presence of concomitant intracranial disease and collateral pathway in planning our strategy for carotid stenting or endarterectomy.Treatment of Carotid Occlusive DiseaseConventionally, patients with carotid bifurcation occlusive dis-ease are divided into two broad categories: patients without prior history of ipsilateral stroke or TIA (asymptomatic) and those with prior or current ipsilateral neurologic symptoms BA(symptomatic). It is estimated that 15% of all strokes are pre-ceded by a TIA. The 90-day risk of a stroke in a patient present-ing with a TIA is 3% to 17%.14 According to the Cardiovascular Health Study, a longitudinal population-based study of coronary artery disease and stroke in men and women, the prevalence of TIA in men was 2.7% for ages of 65 and 69 and 3.6% for ages 75 to 79; the prevalence in women was 1.4% and 4.1%, respectively.24 There have been several studies reporting on the effectiveness of stroke prevention with medical treatment and carotid endarterectomy for symptomatic patients with moderate to severe carotid stenosis. Early and chronic aspirin therapy has been shown to reduce stroke recurrence rate in sev-eral large clinical trials.19Symptomatic Carotid Stenosis. Currently, most stroke neu-rologists prescribe both aspirin and clopidogrel for secondary 1Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   91027/02/19   4:14 PM 911ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23stroke prevention in patients who have experienced a TIA or stroke.19 In patients with symptomatic carotid stenosis, the degree of stenosis appears to be the most important predic-tor in determining risk for an ipsilateral stroke. The risk of a recurrent ipsilateral stroke in patients with severe carotid ste-nosis approaches 40%. Two large multicenter randomized clinical trials, the European Carotid Surgery Trial (ECST) and the North American Symptomatic Carotid Endarterectomy Trial (NASCET), have both shown a significant risk reduction in stroke for patients with symptomatic high-grade stenosis (70–99%) undergoing carotid endarterectomy when compared to medical therapy alone.20,21 Although there has been much discussion regarding the different methodologies used in the measurement of carotid stenosis and calculation of the life-table data between the two studies, both of these studies had similar clinical results. The findings of these two landmark tri-als have also been reanalyzed in many subsequent publications. The main conclusions of the trials remain validated and widely acknowledged. Briefly, the NASCET study showed that for high-grade carotid stenosis, the cumulative risk of ipsilateral stroke was 26% in the medically treated group and 9% in the surgically treated group at 2 years. For patients with moderate carotid artery stenosis (50–69%), the benefit of carotid endar-terectomy is less but still favorable when compared to medical treatment alone; the 5-year fatal or nonfatal ipsilateral stroke rate was 16% in the surgically treated group versus 22% in the medically treated group.22 The risk of stroke was similar for the remaining group of symptomatic patients with less than 50% carotid stenosis, whether they had endarterectomy or medical treatment alone. The ECST reported similar stroke risk reduc-tion for patients with severe symptomatic carotid stenosis and no benefit in patients with mild stenosis when carotid endarter-ectomy was performed versus medical therapy.21The optimal timing of carotid intervention after acute stroke, however, remains debatable. Earlier studies showed an increased rate of postoperative stroke exacerbation and conver-sion of a bland to hemorrhagic infarction when carotid endarter-ectomy was carried out within 5 to 6 weeks after acute stroke. The dismal outcome reported in the early experience was likely related to poor patient selection. The rate of stroke recurrence is not insignificant during the interval period and may be reduced with early intervention for symptomatic carotid stenosis. Con-temporary series have demonstrated acceptable low rates of perioperative complications in patients undergoing carotid end-arterectomy within 4 weeks after acute stroke.22 In a recent ret-rospective series, carotid artery stenting when performed early (<2 weeks) after the acute stroke was associated with higher mortality than when delayed (>2 weeks).23Asymptomatic Carotid Stenosis. Whereas there is univer-sal agreement that carotid revascularization (endarterectomy or stenting) is effective in secondary stroke prevention for patients with symptomatic moderate and severe carotid stenosis, the management of asymptomatic patients remains an important controversy to be resolved. Generally, the detection of carotid stenosis in asymptomatic patients is related to the presence of a cervical bruit or based on screening duplex ultrasound findings. In one of the earlier observational studies, the authors showed that the annual occurrence rate of neurologic symptoms was 4% in a cohort of 167 patients with asymptomatic cervical bruits followed prospectively by serial carotid duplex scan.24 The mean annual rate of carotid stenosis progression to a greater than 50% stenosis was 8%. The presence of or progression to a greater than 80% stenosis correlated highly with either the development of a total occlusion of the internal carotid artery or new symptoms. The major risk factors associated with disease progression were cigarette smoking, diabetes mellitus, and age. This study supported the contention that it is prudent to fol-low a conservative course in the management of asymptomatic patients presenting with a cervical bruit.One of the first randomized clinical trials on the treatment of asymptomatic carotid artery stenosis was the Asymptomatic Carotid Atherosclerosis Study (ACAS), which evaluated the benefits of medical management with antiplatelet therapy versus carotid endarterectomy.25 Over a 5-year period, the risk of ipsi-lateral stroke in individuals with a carotid artery stenosis greater than 60% was 5.1% in the surgical arm. On the other hand, the risk of ipsilateral stroke in patients treated with medical man-agement was 11%. Carotid endarterectomy produced a relative risk reduction of 53% over medical management alone. The results of a larger randomized trial from Europe, the Asymptom-atic Carotid Surgery Trial (ACST), recently confirmed similar beneficial stroke risk reduction for patients with asymptomatic, greater than 70% carotid stenosis undergoing endarterectomy versus medical therapy.26 An important point derived from this latter trial was that even with improved medical therapy, includ-ing the addition of statin drugs and clopidogrel, medical ther-apy was still inferior to endarterectomy in the primary stroke prevention for patients with high-grade carotid artery stenosis. It is generally agreed that asymptomatic patients with severe carotid stenosis (80–99%) are at significantly increased risk for stroke and stand to benefit from either surgical or endovascular revascularization. However, revascularization for asymptomatic patients with a less severe degree of stenosis (60–79%) remains controversial.Carotid Endarterectomy Versus Angioplasty and StentingCurrently, the argument is no longer whether medical therapy alone is inferior to surgical endarterectomy in stroke preven-tion for severe carotid stenosis. Rather, the debate now revolves around whether carotid angioplasty and stenting produce the same benefits demonstrated by carotid endarterectomy. Since carotid artery stenting was approved by the FDA for clinical application in 2004, this percutaneous procedure has become a treatment alternative in patients who are deemed “high risk” for endarterectomy (Table 23-4). In contrast to many endovascular peripheral arterial interventions, percutaneous carotid stent-ing represents a much more challenging procedure, because it requires complex catheter-based skills using the 0.014-inch guidewire system and distal protection device. Moreover, cur-rent carotid stent devices predominantly use the monorail guide-wire system, which requires more technical agility compared with the over-the-wire catheter system that is routinely used in peripheral interventions. This percutaneous intervention often requires balloon angioplasty and stent placement through a long carotid guiding sheath via a groin approach. Poor techni-cal skills can result in devastating treatment complications such as stroke, which can occur in part due to plaque embolization during the balloon angioplasty and stenting of the carotid artery. Because of these various procedural components that require high technical proficiency, many early clinical investigations of carotid artery stenting, which included physicians with little or no carotid stenting experience, resulted in alarmingly poor Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   91127/02/19   4:14 PM 912SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 23-4Conditions qualifying patients as high surgical risk for carotid endarterectomyANATOMIC FACTORSPHYSIOLOGIC FACTORS• High carotid bifurcation (above C2 vertebral body)• Low common carotid artery (below clavicle)• Contralateral carotid occlusion• Restenosis of ipsilateral prior carotid endarterectomy• Previous neck irradiation• Prior radical neck dissection• Contralateral laryngeal nerve palsy• Presence of tracheostomy• Age ≥80 years• Left ventricular ejection fraction ≤30%• New York Heart Association class III/IV congestive heart failure• Unstable angina: Canadian Cardiovascular Society class III/IV angina pectoris• Recent myocardial infarction• Clinically significant cardiac disease (congestive heart failure, abnormal stress test, or need for coronary revascularization)• Severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease• End-stage renal disease on dialysisclinical outcomes. A Cochrane review noted that, before 2006, a total of 1269 patients had been studied in five randomized controlled trials comparing percutaneous carotid intervention and surgical carotid reconstruction.27 Taken together, these trials revealed that carotid artery stenting had a greater procedural risk of stroke and death when compared to carotid endarterectomy (odds ratio, 1.33; 95% confidence interval, 0.86–2.04). Addi-tionally, a greater incidence of carotid restenosis was noted in the stenting group than the endarterectomy cohorts.However, the constant improvement of endovascular devices, procedural techniques, and adjunctive pharmacologic therapy will likely improve the treatment success of percutane-ous carotid intervention. Critical appraisals of several prospec-tive randomized trials comparing the efficacy of carotid stenting versus endarterectomy are available for review.28 Two recently published randomized controlled trial, the Carotid Revascu-larization Endarterectomy Versus Stent Trial (CREST) and the International Carotid Stenting Study (ICSS) have reported somewhat differing results.29 CREST compared the efficacy of carotid endarterectomy and carotid stenting in both symptom-atic and asymptomatic patients.30 Primary end points included 30-day periprocedural composite death, stroke, myocardial infarction, or any ipsilateral stroke up to 4 years. CREST inves-tigators reported no difference between stenting (5.2%) and endarterectomy (4.5%) in terms of primary end point. When each variable was independently analyzed, there was a higher rate of stroke in the stenting group at 30 days (4.1% vs. 2.3%) and a higher rate of myocardial infarction in the endarterectomy group (2.3% vs. 1.1%). The ICSS was a multicenter, interna-tional, randomized controlled trial comparing carotid stenting versus endarterectomy in patients with symptomatic carotid ste-nosis.31 The risk of stroke, death, and myocardial infarction in the stenting group (8.5%) was significantly higher than in the surgical arm (5.2%). The finding that carotid endarterectomy is safer than carotid stenting is also supported by the results of an MRI substudy, which showed significantly more new lesions by diffusion-weighted imaging in the carotid stenting than the carotid endarterectomy patients.All available randomized studies have provided some answers and raised some questions. Some ongoing clinical tri-als will undoubtedly provide more insights on the efficacy of carotid stenting in the near future. Currently, the Society for Vascular Surgeons recommends carotid endarterectomy as first-line treatment for most symptomatic patients with stenosis of 50% to 99% and asymptomatic patients with stenosis of 60% to 99%.32 The perioperative risk of stroke and death in asymp-tomatic patients must be below 3% to ensure benefit for the patient. Carotid artery stenting should be reserved for symptom-atic patients with stenosis of 50% to 99% at high risk for carotid endarterectomy for anatomic or medical reasons. Carotid artery stenting is not recommended for asymptomatic patients at this time. Asymptomatic patients at high risk for intervention or with a life expectancy of less than 3 years should be considered for medical management as the first-line therapy.Surgical Techniques of Carotid EndarterectomyAlthough carotid endarterectomy is one of the earliest vas-cular operations ever described and its techniques have been perfected in the last two decades, surgeons continue to debate many aspects of this procedure. For instance, there is no uni-versal agreement with regard to the best anesthetic of choice, the best intraoperative cerebral monitoring, whether to “rou-tinely” shunt, open versus eversion endarterectomy, and patch versus primary closure. Various anesthetic options are avail-able for patient undergoing carotid endarterectomy including general, local, and regional anesthesia. Typically, the anesthe-sia of choice depends on the preference of the surgeon, anes-thesiologist, and patient. However, depending on the anesthetic given, the surgeon must decide whether intraoperative cerebral monitoring is necessary or intra-arterial carotid shunting will be used. In general, if the patient is awake, then his or her abilities to respond to commands during carotid clamp period determine the adequacy of collateral flow to the ipsilateral hemisphere. On the other hand, intraoperative electroencepha-logram (EEG) or transcranial power Doppler (TCD) has been used to monitor for adequacy of cerebral perfusion during the clamp period for patients undergoing surgery under general anesthesia. Focal ipsilateral decreases in amplitudes and slow-ing of EEG waves are indicative of cerebral ischemia. Simi-larly, a decrease to less than 50% of baseline velocity in the ipsilateral middle cerebral artery is a sign of cerebral ischemia. For patients with poor collateral flow exhibiting signs of cere-bral ischemia, intra-arterial carotid shunting with removal of the clamp will restore cerebral flow for the remaining part of the surgery. Stump pressures have been used to determine the need for intra-arterial carotid shunting. Some surgeons prefer to shunt all patients on a routine basis and do not use intraop-erative cerebral monitoring.Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   91227/02/19   4:14 PM 913ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23Figure 23-17. To perform carotid endarterectomy, the patient’s neck is slightly hyperextended and turned to the contralateral side. An oblique incision is made along the anterior border of the ster-nocleidomastoid muscle centered on top of the carotid bifurcation.The patient’s neck is slightly hyperextended and turned to the contralateral side, with a roll placed between the shoulder blades. An oblique incision is made along the anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle centered on top of the carotid bifurcation (Fig. 23-17). The platysma is divided completely. Typically, tributaries of the anterior jugular vein are ligated and divided. The dissection is carried medial to the sternocleido-mastoid. The superior belly of the omohyoid muscle is usually encountered just anterior to the common carotid artery. This muscle can be divided. The carotid fascia is incised, and the common carotid artery is exposed. The common carotid artery is mobilized cephalad toward the bifurcation. The dissection of the carotid bifurcation can cause reactive bradycardia related to stimulation of the carotid body. This reflex can be blunted with injection of lidocaine 1% into the carotid body or reversed with administration of intravenous atropine. A useful landmark in the dissection of the carotid bifurcation is the common facial vein. This vein can be ligated and divided. Frequently the 12th cranial nerve (hypoglossal nerve) traverses the carotid bifurcation just behind the common facial vein. The external carotid artery is mobilized just enough to get a clamp across. Often, a branch of the external carotid artery crossing to the sternocleidomas-toid can be divided to allow further cephalad mobilization of the internal carotid artery. For high bifurcation, division of the posterior belly of the digastric muscle is helpful in establishing distal exposure of the internal carotid artery.Intravenous heparin sulfate (1 mg/kg) is routinely admin-istered just prior to carotid clamping. The internal carotid artery is clamped first using a soft noncrushing vascular clamp to prevent distal embolization. The external and common carotid arteries are clamped subsequently. A longitudinal arteriotomy is made in the distal common carotid artery and extended into the bulb and past the occlusive plaque into the normal part of the internal carotid artery. Endarterectomy is carried out to remove the occlusive plaque (Fig. 23-18). If necessary, a tem-porary shunt can be inserted from the common carotid artery to the internal carotid artery to maintain continuous antegrade cerebral blood flow (Fig. 23-19). Typically, a plane is teased out from the vessel wall, and the entire plaque is elevated and Figure 23-18. A. During carotid endarterectomy, vascular clamps are applied in the common carotid, external carotid, and internal carotid arteries. Carotid plaque is elevated from the carotid lumen. B. Carotid plaque is removed, and the arteriotomy is closed either primarily or with a patch angioplasty.Figure 23-19. A temporary carotid shunt is inserted from the com-mon carotid artery (long arrow) to the internal carotid artery (short arrow) during carotid endarterectomy to provide continuous ante-grade cerebral blood flow.removed. The distal transition line in the internal carotid artery where the plaque had been removed must be examined care-fully and should be smooth. Tacking sutures are placed when an intimal flap remains in this transition to ensure no obstruction to flow (Fig. 23-20). The occlusive plaque is usually removed from the origin of the external carotid artery using the ever-sion technique. The endarterectomized surface is then irrigated and any debris removed. A patch (autogenous saphenous vein, synthetic such as polyester, PTFE, or biologic material) is sewn to close the arteriotomy (Fig. 23-21). Whether patch closure is necessary in all patients and which patch is the best remain con-troversial. However, most surgeons agree that patch closure is Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   91327/02/19   4:14 PM 914SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 23-20. The distal transition line (left side of the picture) in the internal carotid artery where the plaque had been removed must be examined carefully and should be smooth. Tacking sutures (arrows) are placed when an intimal flap remains in this transition to ensure no obstruction to flow.Figure 23-21. A. An autologous or synthetic patch can be used to close the carotid arteriotomy incision, which maintains the luminal patency. B. A completion closure of carotid endarterectomy incision using a synthetic patch.BAindicated particularly for the small vessel (<7 mm). The ever-sion technique has also been advocated for removing the plaque from the internal carotid artery. In the eversion technique, the internal carotid artery is transected at the bulb, the edges of the divided vessel are everted, and the occluding plaque is “peeled” off the vessel wall. The purported advantages of the eversion technique are no need for patch closure and a clear visualization of the distal transition area. Reported series have not shown a clear superiority of one technique over the others.33 Surgeons will likely continue to use the technique of their choice. Just prior to completion of the anastomosis to close the arteriotomy, we thoroughly flush the vessels of any potential debris. When the arteriotomy is closed, flow is restored to the external carotid artery first and to the internal carotid artery second. Intravenous protamine sulfate can be given to reverse the effect of heparin anticoagulation following carotid endarterectomy. The wound is closed in layers. After surgery, the patient’s neurologic con-dition is asserted in the operating room prior to transfer to the recovery area.Complications of Carotid Endarterectomy. Most patients tolerate carotid endarterectomy very well and typically are discharged home within 24 hours after surgery. Complica-tions after endarterectomy are infrequent but can be poten-tially life-threatening or disabling. Acute ipsilateral stroke is a dreaded complication following carotid endarterectomy. Cerebral ischemia can be due to either intraoperative or post-operative events. Embolizations from the occlusive plaque or prolonged cerebral ischemia are potential causes of intraopera-tive stroke. The most common cause of postoperative stroke is due to embolization. Less frequently, acute carotid artery occlu-sion can cause acute postoperative stroke. This is usually due to carotid artery thrombosis related to closure of the arteriotomy, an occluding intimal flap, or distal carotid dissection. When patients experience acute symptoms of neurologic ischemia after endarterectomy, immediate intervention may be indicated. Carotid duplex scan can be done expeditiously to assess patency of the extracranial internal carotid artery. Reexploration is man-dated for acute carotid artery occlusion. Cerebral angiography can be useful if intracranial revascularization is considered.Local complications related to surgery include excessive bleeding and cranial nerve palsies. Postoperative hematoma in the neck after carotid endarterectomy can lead to devastating airway compromise. Any expanding hematoma should be evac-uated and active bleeding stopped. Securing an airway is critical and can be extremely difficult in patients with large postopera-tive neck hematoma. The reported incidence of postoperative cranial nerve palsies after carotid endarterectomy varies from 1% to 30%.34 Well-recognized injuries involve the marginal mandibular, vagus, hypoglossal, superior laryngeal, and recur-rent laryngeal nerves. Often these are traction injuries but can also be due to severance of the respective nerves.Techniques of Carotid Angioplasty  and StentingPercutaneous carotid artery stenting has become an accepted alternative treatment in the management of patients with carotid bifurcation disease (Fig. 23-22). The perceived advantages of percutaneous carotid revascularization are related to the mini-mal invasiveness of the procedure compared to surgery. There are anatomic conditions based on angiographic evaluation in which carotid artery stenting should be avoided due to increased procedure-related risks (Table 23-5). In preparation for carotid stenting, the patient should be given oral clopidogrel 3 days prior to the intervention if the patient was not already taking the drug. The procedure is done in either the operating room with angiographic capabilities or in a dedicated angiography room. The patient is placed in the supine position. The patient’s blood pressure and cardiac rhythm are closely monitored.To gain access to the carotid artery, a retrograde trans-femoral approach is most commonly used as the access site for carotid intervention. Using the Seldinger technique, we insert a diagnostic 5or 6-French sheath in the CFA. A diagnostic arch Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   91427/02/19   4:14 PM 915ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23BAFigure 23-22. A. Carotid angiogram demonstrating a high-grade stenosis of the left internal carotid artery. B. Com-pletion angiogram demonstrating a sat-isfactory result following a carotid stent placement.Table 23-5Unfavorable carotid angiographic appearance in which carotid stenting should be avoided• Extensive carotid calcification• Polypoid or globular carotid lesions• Severe tortuosity of the common carotid artery• Long-segment stenoses (>2 cm in length)• Carotid artery occlusion• Severe intraluminal thrombus (angiographic defects)• Extensive middle cerebral artery atherosclerosisaortogram is obtained. The carotid artery to be treated is then selected using a 5-French diagnostic catheter, and contrast is injected to show the carotid anatomy. It is important to assess the contralateral carotid artery, vertebrobasilar, and intracranial circulation if these are not known based on the preoperative noninvasive studies. Once the decision is made to proceed with carotid artery stenting, with the tip of the diagnostic catheter still in the common carotid artery, a 0.035-inch, 260-cm long stiff guidewire is placed in the ipsilateral external carotid artery. Anticoagulation with intravenous bivalirudin bolus (0.75 mg/kg) followed by an infusion rate of 2.5 mg/kg per hour for the remain-der of the procedure is routinely administered. Next the diagnos-tic catheter is withdrawn and a 90-cm, 6-French guiding sheath is advanced into the common carotid artery over the stiff glide wire. It is critical not to advance the sheath beyond the occlu-sive plaque in the carotid bulb. The stiff wire is then removed, and preparation is made to deploy the distal embolic protection device (EPD). Several distal EPDs are available (Table 23-6). The EPD device is carefully deployed beyond the target lesion. With regard to the carotid stents, there are several stents that have received approval from the FDA and are commercially Table 23-6Commonly used embolic protection devices (EPDs)MECHANISMNAME OF EPDPORE SIZE (μM)Distal balloon occlusionPercuSurge Guard Wire, Export catheter (Medtronic)NADistal filterAngioguard (Cordis)Accunet (Abbott)Emboshield (Abbott)FilterWire (Boston Scientific)SpiderRx (EV3)100150140110<100Flow reversalaParodi Neuro Protection (Gore)NAaClinical trial (EMPIRE) in United States.NA = not applicable.available for carotid revascularization (Table 23-7). All current carotid stents use the rapid-exchange monorail 0.014-inch plat-form. The size selection is typically based on the size of com-mon carotid artery. Predilatation using a 4-mm balloon may be necessary to allow passage of the stent delivery catheter. Once the stent is deployed across the occlusive plaque, postdilatation is usually performed using a ≤5.5-mm balloon. It is noteworthy that balloon dilation of the carotid bulb may lead to immediate bradycardia due to stimulation of the glossopharyngeal nerve. The EPD is then retrieved and the procedure is completed with removal of the sheath from the femoral artery. The puncture site is closed using available closure device or with manual compression. Throughout the procedure, the patient’s neuro-logic function is closely monitored. The bivalirudin infusion is Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   91527/02/19   4:14 PM 916SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 23-7Currently approved carotid stents in the United StatesNAME OF STENTMANUFACTURERCELL DESIGNTAPERED STENTDELIVERY SYSTEM SIZE (FRENCH)AcculinkAbbottOpenYes6ExactAbbottClosedYes6NexStentBoston ScientificClosedSelf-tapering5Protégé RXEV3OpenYes6Precise RXCordisOpenNo6ExponentMedtronicOpenNo6Figure 23-23. Excessive elongation of the carotid artery can result in carotid kinking (arrow), which can compromise cerebral blood flow and lead to cerebral ischemia.stopped and the patient is kept on clopidogrel (75 mg daily) for at least 1 month and aspirin indefinitely.Complications of Carotid Stenting. Although there have been no randomized trials comparing carotid stenting with and without EPD, the availability of EPDs appears to have reduced the risk of distal embolization and stroke. The results of the various clinical trials and registries of carotid stenting have been reported and compared. It is well known that distal embolization as detected by TCD is much more frequent with carotid stenting even with EPD, when compared with carotid endarterectomy. However, the clinical significance of the distal embolization detected by TCD is not clear because most are asymptomatic. Acute carotid stent thrombosis is rare. The incidence of in-stent carotid restenosis is not well known but is estimated at 10% to 30%. Duplex surveillance shows elevated peak systolic velocities within the stent after carotid stenting not infrequently. However, velocity criteria are being formulated to determine the severity of in-stent restenosis after carotid stenting by ultra-sound duplex.35 It appears that systolic velocities exceeding 300 to 400 cm/s would represent >70% to 80% restenosis. Bradycar-dia and hypotension occur in up to 20% of patients undergoing carotid stenting.36 Systemic administration of atropine is usually effective in reversing the bradycardia. Other technical compli-cations of carotid stenting are infrequent and include carotid artery dissection and access site complications, such as groin hematoma, femoral artery pseudoaneurysm, distal embolization, and acute femoral artery thrombosis.Nonatherosclerotic Disease of the  Carotid ArteryCarotid Coil and Kink. A carotid coil consists of an excessive elongation of the internal carotid artery producing tortuosity of the vessel (Fig. 23-23). Embryologically, the carotid artery is derived from the third aortic arch and dorsal aortic root and is uncoiled as the heart and great vessels descend into the medi-astinum. In children, carotid coils appear to be congenital in origin. In contrast, elongation and kinking of the carotid artery in adults are associated with the loss of elasticity and an abrupt angulation of the vessel. Kinking is more common in women than men. Cerebral ischemic symptoms caused by kinks of the carotid artery are similar to those from atherosclerotic carotid lesions but are more likely due to cerebral hypoperfusion than embolic episodes. Classically, sudden head rotation, flexion, or extension can accentuate the kink and provoke ischemic symp-toms. Most carotid kinks and coils are found incidentally on carotid duplex scan. However, interpretation of the Doppler fre-quency shifts and spectral analysis in tortuous carotid arteries can be difficult because of the uncertain angle of insonation. Cerebral angiography, with multiple views taken in neck flex-ion, extension, and rotation, is useful in the determination of the clinical significance of kinks and coils.Fibromuscular Dysplasia. Fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD) usually involves medium-sized arteries that are long and have few branches (Fig. 23-24). Women in the fourth or fifth decade of life are more commonly affected than men. Hormonal effects on the vessel wall are thought to play a role in the pathogenesis of FMD. FMD of the carotid artery is commonly bilateral, and in about 20% of patients, the vertebral artery is also involved.37 Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   91627/02/19   4:14 PM 917ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23Figure 23-24. A carotid fibromuscular dysplasia with typical characteristics of multiple stenoses with intervening aneurysmal outpouching dilatations. The disease involves the media, with the smooth muscle being replaced by fibrous connective tissue.An intracranial saccular aneurysm of the carotid siphon or mid-dle cerebral artery can be identified in up to 50% of the patients with FMD. Four histologic types of FMD have been described in the literature. The most common type is medial fibroplasia, which may present as a focal stenosis or multiple lesions with intervening aneurysmal outpouchings. The disease involves the media with the smooth muscle being replaced by fibrous con-nective tissue. Commonly, mural dilations and microaneurysms can be seen with this type of FMD. Medial hyperplasia is a rare type of FMD, with the media demonstrating excessive amounts of smooth muscle. Intimal fibroplasia accounts for 5% of all cases and occurs equally in both sexes. The media and adven-titia remain normal, and there is accumulation of subendothe-lial mesenchymal cells with a loose matrix of connective tissue causing a focal stenosis in adults. Finally, premedial dyspla-sia represents a type of FMD with elastic tissue accumulating between the media and adventitia. FMD can also involve the renal and external iliac arteries. It is estimated that approxi-mately 40% of patients with FMD present with a TIA due to embolization of platelet aggregates.37 DSA demonstrates the characteristic “string of beads” pattern, which represents alter-nating segments of stenosis and dilatation. The string of beads can also be shown noninvasively by CTA or MRA. FMD should be suspected when an increased velocity is detected across a stenotic segment without associated atherosclerotic changes on carotid duplex ultrasound. Antiplatelet medication is the gener-ally accepted therapy for asymptomatic lesions. Endovascular treatment is recommended for patients with documented lateral-izing symptoms. Surgical correction is rarely indicated.Carotid Artery Dissection. Dissection of the carotid artery accounts for approximately 20% of strokes in patients younger than 45 years of age. The etiology and pathogenesis of sponta-neous carotid artery dissection remain incompletely understood. Arterial dissection involves hemorrhage within the media, which can extend into the subadventitial and subintimal layers. When the dissection extends into the subadventitial space, there is an increased risk of aneurysm formation. Subintimal dissections can lead to intramural clot or thrombosis. Traumatic dissection is typically a result of hyperextension of the neck during blunt trauma, neck manipulation, strangulation, or penetrating injuries to the neck. Even in supposedly spontaneous cases, a history of preceding unrecognized minor neck trauma is not uncommon. Connective disorders, such as Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, Marfan’s syndrome, α1-antitrypsin deficiency, or FMD, may predispose to carotid artery dissection. Iatrogenic dissections can also occur due to catheter manipulation or balloon angioplasty.Typical clinical features of carotid artery dissection include unilateral neck pain, headache, and ipsilateral Horner’s syndrome in up to 50% of patients, followed by manifestations of the cerebral or ocular ischemia and cranial nerve palsies. Neurologic deficits can result either because of hemodynamic failure (caused by luminal stenosis) or by an artery-to-artery thromboembolism. The ischemia may cause TIAs or infarctions, or both. Catheter angiography has been the method of choice to diagnose arterial dissections, but with the advent of duplex ultra-sonography, MRI/MRA, and CTA, most dissections can now be diagnosed using noninvasive imaging modalities (Fig. 23-25). The dissection typically starts in the internal carotid artery distal to the bulb. Uncommonly, the dissection can start in the com-mon carotid artery or is an extension of a more proximal aortic dissection. Medical therapy has been the accepted primary treat-ment of symptomatic of carotid artery dissection. Anticoagula-tion (heparin and warfarin) and antiplatelet therapy have been commonly used, although there have not been any randomized studies to evaluate their effectiveness. The prognosis depends on the severity of neurologic deficit but is generally good in extracranial dissections. The recurrence rate is low. Therapeutic interventions have been reserved for recurrent TIAs or strokes or failure of medical treatment. Endovascular options include intra-arterial stenting, coiling of associated pseudoaneurysms, or, more recently, deployment of covered stents.Figure 23-25. Carotid ultrasound reveals a patient with a carotid artery dissection in which carotid flow is separated in the true flow lumen (long arrow) from the false lumen (short arrow).Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   91727/02/19   4:14 PM 918SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 23-26. A. An anteroposterior angiogram of the neck revealing a carotid artery aneurysm. B. A lateral projection of the carotid artery aneurysm. C. Following endovascular placement, the carotid artery aneurysm is successfully excluded.Carotid Artery Aneurysms. Carotid artery aneurysms are rare, encountered in less than 1% of all carotid operations (Fig. 23-26). The true carotid artery aneurysm is generally due to atherosclerosis or medial degeneration. The carotid bulb is involved in most carotid aneurysms, and bilaterality is present in 12% of the patients. Patients typically present with a pul-satile neck mass. The available data suggest that, untreated, these aneurysms lead to neurologic symptoms from emboliza-tion. Thrombosis and rupture of the carotid aneurysm are rare. Pseudoaneurysms of the carotid artery can result from injury or infection. Mycotic aneurysms often involved syphilis in the past, but they are now more commonly associated with peri-tonsillar abscesses caused by Staphylococcus aureus infection. FMD and spontaneous dissection of the carotid artery can lead to A                                  B                                         CA                                     BFigure 23-27. A. A carotid body tumor (arrow) located adjacent to the carotid bulb. B. Following periad-ventitial dissection, the carotid body tumor is removed.the formation of true aneurysms or pseudoaneurysms. Whereas conventional surgery has been the primary mode of treatment in the past, carotid aneurysms are currently being treated more commonly using endovascular approaches.38Carotid Body Tumor. The carotid body originates from the third branchial arch and from neuroectodermal-derived neural crest lineage. The normal carotid body is located in the adven-titia or periadventitial tissue at the bifurcation of the common carotid artery (Fig. 23-27). The gland is innervated by the glos-sopharyngeal nerve. Its blood supply is derived predominantly from the external carotid artery but can also come from the ver-tebral artery. Carotid body tumor is a rare lesion of the neuroen-docrine system. Other glands of neural crest origin are seen in Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   91827/02/19   4:14 PM 919ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23the neck, parapharyngeal spaces, mediastinum, retroperitoneum, and adrenal medulla. Tumors involving these structures have been referred to as paraganglioma, glomus tumor, or chemo-dectoma. Approximately 5% to 7% of carotid body tumors are malignant. Although chronic hypoxemia has been invoked as a stimulus for hyperplasia of carotid body, approximately 35% of carotid body tumors are hereditary.39 The risk of malignancy is greatest in young patients with familial tumors.Symptoms related to the endocrine products of the carotid body tumor are rare. Patients usually present between the fifth and seventh decades of life with an asymptomatic lateral neck mass. The diagnosis of carotid body tumor requires confir-mation on imaging studies. Carotid duplex scan can localize the tumor to the carotid bifurcation, but CT or MRI is usually required to further delineate the relationship of the tumor to the adjacent structures. Classically, a carotid body tumor will widen the carotid bifurcation. The Shamblin classification describes the tumor extent: I, tumor is less than 5 cm and relatively free of vessel involvement; II, tumor is intimately involved but does not encase the vessel wall; and III, tumor is intramural and encases the carotid vessels and adjacent nerves.40 With good-resolution CT and MRI, arteriography is usually not required. However, arteriography can provide an assessment of the vessel invasion and intracranial circulation and allows for preoperative embolization of the feeder vessels, which has been reported to reduce intraoperative blood loss. Surgical resection is the rec-ommended treatment for suspected carotid body tumor.Carotid Trauma. Blunt or penetrating trauma to the neck can cause injury to the carotid artery. Notwithstanding the massive bleeding from carotid artery transection, injury to the carotid artery can result in carotid dissection, thrombosis, or pseudoa-neurysm formation. Carotid duplex ultrasound can be useful to locate the site of injury in the cervical segment of the carotid artery. Spiral CTA has become the modality of choice to detect extracranial carotid artery injury. Confirmation of carotid injury by contrast cerebral angiography remains the gold standard diagnostic test. Injuries to the cervical segment of the common and internal carotid arteries can be repaired surgically. Acute carotid artery thrombosis is usually treated medically with anti-coagulation if the patient is asymptomatic. Revascularization should be considered for patients presenting with ongoing cere-bral ischemia related to carotid artery thrombosis. Traumatic carotid artery dissection can cause cerebral ischemia due to thromboembolization, decreased flow, or thrombosis. Com-monly, the dissection involves the distal portion of the cervi-cal and petrous segment of the internal carotid artery. Medical management with antiplatelet or anticoagulation therapy is usu-ally adequate for uncomplicated traumatic carotid dissection. In patients with pseudoaneurysms of the carotid artery that are located in a segment that is out of surgical reach, the use of selective coil embolization of the pseudoaneurysm or exclu-sion of the pseudoaneurysm by a covered stent graft has been reported. Bare metal stent has been used with success in the treatment of traumatic carotid artery dissection.ABDOMINAL AORTIC ANEURYSMDespite more than 50,000 patients undergoing elective repair of abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) each year in the United States, approximately 15,000 patients die annually as a result of ruptured aneurysm, making it the 10th leading cause of death in men in this country.41 The incidence appears to be increasing, and this is due in part to improvements in diagnostic imaging and, more importantly, a growing elderly population. With early diagnosis and timely intervention, aneurysm rupture–related death is largely preventable. Conventional treatment of an AAA involves replacing the aneurysmal segment of the aorta with a prosthetic graft, with the operation performed through a large abdominal incision. Techniques for this open abdominal surgery have been refined, adapted, and extensively studied by vascular surgeons over the past four decades. Despite a well-documented low perioperative mortality rate of 2% to 3% in large academic institutions, the thought of undergoing an open abdominal aortic operation often provokes a sense of anxiety in many patients due in part to the postoperative pain associated with the large abdominal incision as well as the long recovery time needed before the patient can return to normal physical activity.The most common location of aortic aneurysms is the infrarenal aorta. Endovascular stent graft placement represents a revolutionary and minimally invasive treatment for infrarenal AAAs that only requires 1 to 2 days of hospitalization, and the patient can return to normal physical activity within 1 week. The concept of using an endoluminal device in the management of vascular disease was first proposed by Dotter and colleagues, who successfully treated a patient with iliac occlusion using transluminal angioplasty in 1964.42 Nearly two decades later, Parodi and colleagues reported the first successful endovascu-lar repair of AAA using a stent graft device.11 Since then, a variety of stent graft technologies have been developed to treat AAA. The rapid innovation of this new treatment modality has undoubtedly captured the attention of patients with aortic aneu-rysms as well as physicians who practice endovascular therapy. Physicians in general should be knowledgeable regarding avail-able treatment options of AAA in order to provide adequate evaluation and education to patients and their families. The pur-pose of this section is to outline the treatment options for AAAs, including conventional repair and endovascular approach. Advantages and potential complications of these treatments will also be addressed.Causes and Risk FactorsThe pathogenesis of aneurysmal disease of the aorta is complex and multifactorial. A degenerative process in the aortic wall is the most common cause of AAA development.43 Matrix metal-loproteinases (MMP), proteolytic enzymes, are found abun-dantly in the wall of AAA. Atherosclerotic disease, age, male sex, smoking history, family history, hypertension, coronary artery disease, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease are associated with the development of AAA.44 Diabetes and black race have negative association with AAA. Other less common causes include inflammation, infection, and connective tissue disease. Inflammatory AAA accounts for 5% to 10% of all AAAs.43 In contrast to atherosclerotic AAA, the inflammatory variant is characterized pathologically by marked thickening of the aneurysm wall, fibrosis of the adjacent retroperitoneum, and rigid adherence of the adjacent structures to the anterior aneurysm wall. Male sex and smoking are even stronger risk factors in inflammatory AAA.45 Smoking cessation is the first step of medical therapy, followed by surgical repair. Infectious or mycotic AAA is rare but is associated with high mortality. Patients with connective tissue disorders such as Marfan’s syn-drome and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome tend to have more exten-sive and larger aneurysms at a younger age.43Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   91927/02/19   4:14 PM 920SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 23-8Annualized risk of rupture of abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) based on sizeDESCRIPTIONDIAMETER OF AORTA (CM)ESTIMATED ANNUAL RISK OF RUPTURE (%)ESTIMATED 5-YEAR RISK OF RUPTURE (%)aNormal aorta2–300 (unless AAA develops)Small AAA4–515–10Moderate AAA5–62–530–40Large AAA6–73–10>50Very large AAA>7>10Approaching 100aThe estimated 5-year risk is more than five times the estimated annual risk because over that 5 years, the AAA, if left untreated, will continue to grow in size.Natural History of Aortic AneurysmThe natural history of an AAA is to expand and rupture. AAA exhibits a “staccato” pattern of growth, where periods of relative quiescence may alternate with expansion. Therefore, although an individual pattern of growth cannot be predicted, average aggregate growth is approximately 3 to 4 mm/year. There is some evidence to suggest that larger aneurysms may expand faster than smaller aneurysms, but there is significant overlap between the ranges of growth rates at each strata of size.Rupture risk appears to be directly related to aneurysm size as predicted by Laplace’s Law. Although more sophisti-cated methods of assessing rupture risk based on finite element analysis of wall stress are under active investigation, maximum transverse diameter remains the standard method of risk assess-ment for aneurysm rupture. In the past, AAA rupture risk has been overestimated. More recently, two landmark studies have served to better define the natural history of AAA.46,47 Based on best available evidence, the annualized risk of rupture is given in Table 23-8. The rupture risk is quite low below 5.5 cm and begins to rise exponentially thereafter. This size can serve as an appropriate threshold for recommending elective repair provided one’s surgical mortality is below 5%. For each size strata, however, women appear to be at higher risk for rup-ture than men, and a lower threshold of 4.5 to 5.0 cm may be reasonable in good-risk patients. Although data are less compel-ling, a pattern of rapid expansion of >0.5 cm within 6 months can be considered a relative indication for elective repair. Aneu-rysms that fall below these indications may safely be followed with CT or ultrasound at 6-month intervals, with long-term out-comes equivalent to earlier surgical repair. Interestingly, in the Aneurysm Detection and Management (ADAM) study, 80% of all AAAs that were followed in this manner eventually came to repair within 5 years.48Unless symptomatic or ruptured, AAA repair is a pro-phylactic repair. The rationale for recommending repair is predicated on the assumption that the risk of aneurysm rupture exceeds the combined risk of death from all other causes such as cardiopulmonary disease and cancer. On the other hand, our limitation in predicting timing and cause of death is underscored by the observation that over 25% of patients who were deemed unfit for surgical repair because of their comorbidities died from rupture of their aneurysms within 5 years.Clinical ManifestationsMost AAAs are asymptomatic and are usually found inciden-tally during workup for chronic back pain or kidney stones. Physical examination is neither sensitive nor specific except 2in thin patients. Large aneurysms may be missed in the obese, while normal aortic pulsations may be mistaken for an aneurysm in thin individuals. Rarely patients present with back pain and/or abdominal pain with a tender pulsatile mass. Patients with these symptoms must be treated as a rupture until proven otherwise. If the patient is hemodynamically stable and the aneurysm is intact on a CT scan, the patient is admitted for blood pressure control with intravenous antihypertensive agents and undergoes repair usually within 12 to 24 hours or at least during the same hospitalization. In contrast, patients who are hemodynamically unstable with a history of acute back pain and/or syncope and a known unrepaired AAA or a pulsatile abdominal mass should be immediately taken to the operating room with a presumed diagnosis of a ruptured AAA.Overall mortality of AAA rupture is 71% to 77%, which includes all out-of-hospital and in-hospital deaths, as compared with 2% to 6% for elective open surgical repair.49 Nearly half of all patients with ruptured AAA will die before reaching the hospital. For the remainder, surgical mortality is 45% to 50% and has not substantially changed in the last 30 years.50Relevant AnatomyAn AAA is defined as a pathologic focal dilation of the aorta that is greater than 30 mm or 1.5 times the adjacent diameter of the normal aorta (Fig. 23-28). Male aortas tend to be larger than female aortas, and there is generalized growth of the aortic diameter with each decade of life. Ninety percent of AAAs are infrarenal in location and have a fusiform morphology. There is a higher predilection for juxtarenal and suprarenal AAAs in women compared with men. Concomitant common iliac and/or hypogastric artery aneurysms can be found in 20% to 25% of patients. Although the etiology of most aortic aneurysms is ath-erosclerotic, clinically significant peripheral occlusive disease is unusual and present in less than 10% of all cases.Although extravascular anatomy is important for open surgical repair of AAA, intravascular anatomy and aortoiliac morphology are important for endovascular repair. Pertinent anatomic dimensions include the diameter of the proximal non-dilated infrarenal aortic neck, which can range from 18 to 30 mm; common iliac artery, which can range from 8 to 16 mm; and external iliac arteries, which can range from 6 to 10 mm. Mor-phologically, the aortic neck can manifest complex angulation above and below the renal arteries due to combination of elon-gation and anterolateral displacement by the posterior bulge of the aneurysmal aorta. Furthermore, the shape of the proxi-mal neck is rarely tubular, but often is conical, reverse coni-cal, or barrel-shaped. Distally, the iliac arteries can have severe Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   92027/02/19   4:14 PM 921ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23Figure 23-28. An operative view of an infrarenal aortic aneurysm.tortuosity with multiple compound turns. Although significant from hemodynamic standpoint, severe iliac calcifications com-bined with extreme tortuosity can pose a formidable challenge during endovascular repair.Diagnostic EvaluationPreoperative evaluation should include routine history and physical exam with particular attention to (a) any symptoms referable to the aneurysm, which may impact the timing of repair; (b) history of pelvic surgery or radiation, in the event retroperitoneal exposure is required or interruption of hypogas-tric circulation is planned; (c) claudication suggestive of sig-nificant iliac occlusive disease; (d) lower extremity bypass or other femoral reconstructive procedures; and (e) chronic renal insufficiency or contrast allergy.Cross-sectional imaging is required for definitive evalu-ation of AAA. Although ultrasound is safe, widely available, relatively accurate, and inexpensive and thus the screening modality of choice, CT scan remains the gold standard for deter-mination of anatomic eligibility for endovascular repair. Size of AAA may differ up to 1 cm between CT and ultrasound, and during longitudinal follow-up, comparisons should be made between identical modalities. With modern multirow detector scanners, a timed-bolus intravenous contrast-enhanced, 2.5to 3.0-mm slice spiral CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis can be performed in less than 30 seconds with a single breath hold. Extremely high-resolution images are obtained with submilli-meter spatial resolution (Fig. 23-29). Proper window level and width (brightness and contrast) are important for discrimination among aortic wall, calcific plaque, thrombus, and lumen. The only major drawback to CT is the risk of contrast nephropathy in diabetics and in patients with renal insufficiency.The spiral technique further affords the ability for three-dimensional reconstruction. Three-dimensional reconstructions Figure 23-29. High resolution of image displaying an aortic aneu-rysm (arrow) can be achieved with multidetector computed tomog-raphy angiography.can yield important morphologic information that is critical to endovascular therapy. Using third-party software, these images can be viewed and manipulated on one’s desktop computer, and so-called “center-line” (transverse slices perpendicular to the central flow lumen of the aorta) diameter and length measure-ments obtained. Conventional angiography has a minimal role in the current management of AAA. Angiography is invasive with an increased risk of complications. Indications for angiog-raphy are isolated to concomitant iliac occlusive disease (pres-ent in <10% of patients with AAA) and unusual renovascular anatomy.Surgical Repair of Abdominal Aortic AneurysmGeneral anesthesia is necessary when performing a conventional open AAA repair. While a retroperitoneal incision is a well-accepted surgical approach, a midline transabdominal incision remains the more common approach for open aortic aneurysm operation. Since the abdominal incision can lead to significant pain and discomfort, an epidural catheter can be placed prior to the operation for postoperative analgesic infusion to provide pain control. Once the abdominal cavity is opened, the small intestines and transverse colon are retracted to expose the ret-roperitoneum overlying the AAA. The retroperitoneum is next divided, followed by isolation of both proximal and distal seg-ments of the AAA. Intravenous heparin (100 IU/kg) is given followed by clamping of the proximal and distal segments of the aneurysm. The aneurysm sac is open next, and a prosthetic graft is used to reconstruct the aorta. If the aneurysm only involves the abdominal aorta, a tube graft can be used to replace the aorta (Fig. 23-30). If the aneurysm extends distally to the iliac arter-ies, a prosthetic bifurcated graft is used for either an aorto-bi-iliac or aorto-bi-femoral bypass reconstruction (Fig. 23-31). The overlying aneurysm sac and the retroperitoneum are closed to cover the prosthetic bypass graft to minimize potential bowel contact to the graft. Small and large intestines are returned to the abdominal cavity followed by the closure of the abdominal fascia and skin.Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   92127/02/19   4:14 PM 922SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIABFigure 23-30. A. Schematic depiction of an aortic tube graft used to repair an aortic aneurysm. B. Intraoperative image of an aortic tube graft reconstruction.Advantages and Risks of Open Abdominal Aortic Aneu-rysm Repair. The main advantage of a conventional open repair is that the AAA is permanently eliminated because it is entirely replaced by a prosthetic aortic graft. The risk of aneurysm recurrence or delayed rupture no longer exists. As a result, long-term imaging surveillance is not needed with these patients. In contrast, the long-term efficacy of endovascular repair remains unclear. Consequently, long-term imaging sur-veillance is critical to ensure that the aortic aneurysm remains properly sealed by the stent graft. Other potential advantages of open repair include direct assessment of the circulatory integrity of the colon. If signs of colonic ischemia become evident after aortic bypass grafting, a concomitant mesenteric artery bypass can be performed to revascularize the colonic circulation. In addition, open repair permits the surgeons to explore for other abdominal pathologies, such as gastrointestinal tumors, liver mass, or cholelithiasis.As for the risks associated with open repair, cardiac com-plications, in the form of either myocardial infarction or arrhyth-mias, remain the most common morbidity, with an incidence between 2% and 6%.51 Another significant complication is renal failure or transient renal insufficiency as a result of peri-operative hypotension, atheromatous embolization, inadvertent injury to the ureter, preoperative contrast-induced nephropathy, or suprarenal aortic clamping. Although the incidence of renal failure is less than 2% in elective aneurysm repair, it can occur in more than 20% of patients after repair of a ruptured AAA.49Ischemic colitis is a devastating potential complication after open repair. The likelihood of such a complication is highest in those who had a prior colon resection and undergo repair of a ruptured AAA, due to the loss of collateral blood supply to the rectosigmoid colon. It is estimated that 5% of patients who undergo elective aneurysm repair will develop partial-thickness ischemic colitis but without significant clini-cal sequelae.52 However, if the partial-thickness ischemia pro-gresses to full-thickness gangrene and peritonitis, mortality can be as high as 90%.52The incidence of prosthetic graft infection ranges between 1% and 4% after open repair.53 It is more common in those who undergo repair of a ruptured AAA. If the prosthetic graft is not fully covered by the aneurysm sac or retroperitoneum, intestinal adhesion with subsequent bowel erosion may occur, resulting in an aortoenteric fistula. The predominant sign of such a com-plication is massive hematemesis, and it typically occurs years after the operation. Despite these potential complications, how-ever, the majority of patients who undergo successful elective open repair have an uneventful recovery.Endovascular Repair of Abdominal  Aortic AneurysmOver a decade has passed since the first report of human implan-tation of a homemade stent graft for endovascular repair of an AAA by Parodi in 1991.11 Several prospective clinical trials across different devices and analysis of large Medicare adminis-trative databases and meta-analyses of published literature have consistently demonstrated significantly decreased operative time, blood loss, hospital length of stay, and overall periopera-tive morbidity and mortality of endovascular repair compared Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   92227/02/19   4:14 PM 923ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23Figure 23-31. Intraoperative view of a bifurcated graft used to repair an aortic aneurysm.with open surgical repair. For patients who are at increased risk for surgery because of age or comorbidity, endovascular repair is a superior minimally invasive alternative.The principle of endovascular repair of AAA involves the implantation of an aortic stent graft that is fixed proximally and distally to nonaneurysmal aortoiliac segment and thereby endoluminally excluding the aneurysm from the aortic circu-lation (Fig. 23-32). Unlike open surgical repair, the aneurysm BAFigure 23-32. A. An aortogram dem-onstrating a large infrarenal abdominal aortic aneurysm. B. Following endovas-cular stent graft implantation, the aortic aneurysm is successfully excluded.sac is not resected, which is subjected for potential aneurysm expansion or even rupture. Importantly, aortic branches, such as lumbar arteries or the inferior mesenteric artery (IMA), are occluded, which can lead to persistent aneurysm pressurization and aneurysm expansion. Currently, there are more than fifteen different endovascular devices approved for clinical use for infrarenal aortic aneurysm implantation throughout the world. Despite some differences in physical appearance, mechanical properties, and endograft materials, these endovascular devices will be discussed collectively for this chapter. Most of these devices are modular devices consisting of a primary device or main body and one or two iliac limbs that insert into the main body to complete the repair. Depending on the device, there are varying degrees of flexibility in the choice of iliac limbs that can be matched to the main body, which can impact the customiz-ability for a particular anatomy.A severe limitation of the endovascular repair devices is the need for adequate proximal neck to achieve a durable seal-ing zone. Several techniques have been proposed to overcome this limitation. These include fenestrated or branched endografts and the “chimney,” “snorkel,” and “periscope” techniques. The fenestrated stent grafts rely on precise alignment between the fen-estration and the corresponding visceral artery.12,54 Multiple clinical trials using customized fenestrated stent graft for the treatment of short-necked and juxtarenal aortic aneurysm repair have shown promising shortand mid-term results.54,55 How-ever, fenestrated stent graft generally requires device customiza-tion which is accessible only to high volume tertiary institutions, and not widely available to all hospital facilities. Alternatively, some centers have reported good results with intraoperative surgeon-modified endograft to create fenestrations for the treat-ment of complex aortic aneurysms in high-risk patients.56 Fur-ther development of the fenestrated techniques also opens the way for endovascular treatment of suprarenal and thoracoab-dominal aneurysm.57 The review of literature showed that open surgery remains a safe and effective treatment option for good-risk patients with juxtarenal aortic aneurysm.58 Fenestrated endovascular repair is associated with low mortality and com-pares favorably with open surgery in terms of morbidity, espe-cially renal function impairment and cardiac complications.59Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   92327/02/19   4:14 PM 924SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIPatient Selection for Endovascular Aortic Aneurysm Repair. Anatomic eligibility for endovascular repair is mainly based on three areas: the proximal aortic neck, common iliac arteries, and external iliac and common femoral arteries, which relate to the proximal and distal landing zones or fixation sites and the access vessels, respectively. The requirements for the proximal aortic neck are a diameter of 18 to 28 mm and a mini-mum length of 15 mm (Table 23-9). Usually, multiple measure-ments of the diameter are taken along the length of the neck to assess its shape. All diameter measurements are mid-wall to mid-wall of the vessel. Secondary considerations include mural calcifications (<50% circumference), luminal thrombus (<50% circumference), and angulation (<45°). Presence of a significant amount of any one of these secondary features in combination with a relatively short proximal neck may compromise success-ful shortand long-term fixation of the stent graft and exclusion of the aneurysm. The usual distal landing zone is the common iliac artery. The external iliac artery may serve as an alternate site when the ipsilateral common iliac artery is aneurysmal or ectatic. The treatable diameters of common iliac arteries range from 8 to 20 mm, and there should be at least 20 mm of patent artery of uniform diameter to allow adequate fixation. Finally, at least one of two common femoral and external iliac arteries must be at least 7 mm in diameter in order to safely introduce the main delivery sheath. Slightly smaller iliac diameters may be tolerated depending on the specific device and in the absence of severe tortuosity and calcific disease. Difficult access is one of the main causes of increased procedural time and intraopera-tive complications. Using these criteria, approximately 60% of all AAAs are anatomic candidates for endovascular repair.The next step in the preoperative planning is device selec-tion. Typically, the proximal diameter of the main device is oversized by 10% to 20% of the nominal diameter of the aor-tic neck. Distally, the iliac limbs are oversized by 1 to 4 mm depending on the individual device’s instructions for use. The biggest challenge to proper device selection remains determin-ing the optimal length from the renal arteries to the hypogastric arteries. Despite availability of sophisticated three-dimensional reconstructions, the exact path that a device will take from the proximal aortic neck to the distal iliac arteries is difficult to pre-dict. It is dependent on a host of factors related to the mechanical properties of the stent graft and the morphology of the aortoiliac flow lumen. “Plumb-line” measurements of axial CT images can be quite inaccurate, typically grossly underestimating the Table 23-9Ideal characteristics of an aneurysm for endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repairNeck length (mm)>15Neck diameter (mm)>18, <32Aortic Neck angle (degrees)<60Neck mural calcification  (% circumference)<50Neck luminal thrombus  (% circumference)<50Common iliac artery diameter (mm)Between 8 and 20Common iliac artery length (mm)>20External iliac artery diameter (mm)>7length, whereas center-line measurements usually overestimate the length. Angiographic measurements using a marker catheter are invasive, require contrast and radiation exposure, and are also inaccurate because they fail to account for the stiffness of the stent graft. The consequences of not choosing the correct length of the device include inadvertent coverage of the hypo-gastric artery if too long and the need for additional devices if too short.Advantages and Risks of Endovascular Repair. The obvi-ous advantage of an endovascular AAA repair is its minimally invasive nature. Typically, patients who undergo this procedure stay in the hospital for only 1 to 3 days, in contrast to the 5to 10-day stay required after conventional open surgical repair. In our institution, patients who have had an endovascular repair are routinely transferred to a general vascular ward from the post-anesthesia recovery unit, avoiding admission to a more costly intensive care unit.Because an abdominal incision is not necessary in endo-vascular repair, the procedure is particularly beneficial in patients with severe pulmonary disease, such as chronic obstruc-tive pulmonary disease or emphysema. Patients can sustain ade-quate breathing in the postoperative period, avoiding respiratory complications or prolonged mechanical ventilation. Because the abdominal cavity has not been entered, the risk of gastro-intestinal complications, such as ileus, ventral hernia, or bowel obstruction due to intestinal adhesion, is also greatly reduced. Moreover, regional or epidural anesthesia can be used, avoid-ing the risks associated with general anesthesia in patients with severe cardiopulmonary dysfunction.Despite its many advantages, endovascular repair does have potential complications. Since the stent graft device is attached endoluminally within the abdominal aorta, an endoleak due to incomplete stent graft exclusion of the aneurysm can occur. With this type of leak, blood flow persists outside the lumen of the endoluminal graft but within an aneurysm sac. A meta-analysis of 1118 patients who underwent successful endo-vascular repair found an endoleak incidence of 24%.60 Although a small endoleak usually poses little clinical significance because it will typically become thrombosed spontaneously, a large or persistent endoleak may lead to continuous aneurysm perfusion and ultimately to aneurysm rupture. The rupture rate following an endovascular AAA repair has been reported to be less than 0.8%.61Stent graft iliac limb dysfunction resulting in thrombosis has been reported following endovascular repair. One possible cause is aneurysm remodeling, resulting in a shortening in the aortic length, which can cause the stent graft to kink. Alterna-tively, progression of an underlying iliac atherosclerotic lesion may cause compression of the iliac limb and ultimately result in graft-limb occlusion. Treatment options include thrombolysis or graft thrombectomy to determine the underlying cause and possibly additional stent graft placement. Renal artery occlusion may occur due to improper stent graft positioning or migration.62 Graft limb separation or dislocation has also been reported.62In patients with AAA and concurrent iliac artery aneu-rysms who undergo preoperative coil embolization of the inter-nal iliac artery, 20% to 45% experience symptoms of pelvic ischemia.63 These symptoms may include buttock claudication, impotence, gluteal skin sloughing, and colonic ischemia. Other complications pertaining to endovascular repair relate to the access site and include groin hematoma and wound infection. Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   92427/02/19   4:14 PM 925ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23Occasionally, the stent graft device can malfunction by either failing to deploy or dislodging during the deployment proce-dure. If the device cannot be salvaged or rescued endoluminally, open surgical repair of the aneurysm may be necessary.Technical Considerations of Endovascular Aortic Aneu-rysm Repair. Although endovascular AAA repair may be performed in any venue with appropriate digital fluoroscopic imaging capability, due to the need for absolute sterility and aseptic technique, it is most safely performed in a surgical suite. The patient is prepped and draped just as in open AAA repair. Patients with renal insufficiency should be started on periopera-tive oral N-acetylcysteine (Mucomyst) and sodium bicarbonate infusion to reduce the risk of contrast nephropathy. A variety of anesthetic options may be used. Regional anesthesia may be appropriate for patients with pulmonary disease. There are reports of success with local anesthetics alone, as the incisions are typically smaller than a typical open inguinal hernia repair.64Groin access for endovascular aortic aneurysm repair can be achieved by either surgical cutdown for femoral artery expo-sure or percutaneous approach using “preclose” technique with the Perclose suture-mediated vascular closure device (Abbott Perclose, Redwood City, CA). Review of reported series on this percutaneous technique suggest a technical success rate of 95% for medium-size sheaths ranging from 12 to 16 French, and 87% success for 18to 24-French sizes.65 Once femoral artery access is obtained followed by introducer sheath placement, initial soft-tipped starter guidewires are exchanged for stiff guidewires that are advanced to the thoracic arch. Intravenous heparin at 80 IU/kg are administered, and the activated clotting time is maintained at 200 to 250 seconds. These guidewires provide the necessary support for the subsequent introduction of the large-diameter delivery catheters and devices. In the absence of special anatomic considerations, the primary device is inserted through the right side and the contralateral iliac limb is inserted through the left side. After administration of heparin, the deliv-ery catheter or the introducer sheath is advanced to the L1-L2 vertebral space, which typically marks the location of the renal arteries. An angiographic catheter is advanced from the contra-lateral femoral artery to the same level.A road-mapping aortogram is obtained to localize the renal arteries. The primary device is rotated to the desired ori-entation and deployed immediate below the lowest renal artery (Fig. 23-33). The angiographic catheter is replaced with a direc-tional catheter and an angled guidewire, and the opening for the contralateral limb on the main device is cannulated. Intrastent passage of the guidewire is confirmed, and the angled guidewire is replaced with a stiff guidewire. The contralateral iliac limb is inserted into the docking opening of the primary device and deployed. A completion angiogram is performed looking for patency of the renal and hypogastric arteries, the device limbs, proximal and distal fixation, and endoleak. Adjunctive interven-tions including additional devices, balloons, and bare stents are performed as needed. The procedure is concluded with routine repairs of the femoral arteries and closure of the groin incisions. The patients recover in the recovery room for 2 to 4 hours and admitted to the general care floor. Although in the past, patients were admitted to the intensive care unit, this is rarely needed. Most patients can be started on a regular diet that evening and discharged the next morning.Surveillance Following Endovascular Aortic Aneurysm Repair. Life-long follow-up is essential to the long-term ADCBFigure 23-33. A. During an endovascular aortic aneurysm repair, the main endograft device is inserted through a femoral artery approach. B. The device is deployed in the aorta just below the renal arteries. C. A contralateral iliac endograft device is inserted through a contralateral gate opening, which is next deployed.  D. Completion of deployment of the endograft device should fully exclude an aortic aneurysm while preserving flow of the renal and hypogastric arteries.success after endovascular AAA repair. Indeed, one may go so far as to say that absence of appropriate follow-up is tantamount to not having had a repair at all. A triple-phase (noncontrast, contrast, and delayed) spiral CT scan and a four-view (antero-posterior, lateral, and two obliques) abdominal X-ray should be obtained within the first month. Subsequent imaging can be obtained at 6-month intervals in the first 1 to 2 years and yearly thereafter. After the first 6 months, patients who cannot travel easily may obtain their studies locally and submit them for review. The CT scan is for detection of endoleaks, subtle proxi-mal migrations, and changes in aneurysm size. The abdominal X-ray gives a “birds-eye” view of the overall morphology of the stent graft. Subtle changes in conformation of the iliac limbs relative to each other and/or the spine can provide early signs of impending component separation or loss of fixation. Further, stent fractures and/or suture breaks that can compromise long-term device integrity can sometimes only be detected on a plain film and not on a CT scan.Results From Clinical Studies Comparing Endovascular Versus Open RepairThe primary success rate after endovascular repair of AAA has been reported to be as high as 95%.41 The less invasive nature Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   92527/02/19   4:14 PM 926SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIof this procedure is appealing to many physicians and patients. In addition, virtually all reports indicate a decreased blood loss, transfusion requirements, and length of intensive care unit and hospital stay for endovascular repair of AAAs compared with the standard surgical approach.47 With the advent of bifurcated grafts and improved delivery systems in the future, the only real limitation will be cost. When evaluating the literature for results from clinical series, it is important to look at a comparison of endoluminal versus open repair and device-specific outcome and cost analysis studies.Early reports on results with endovascular repair were often flawed due to selection biases. This is because from its inception, endovascular repair has been used mostly in patients who are at higher risk for open repair. At the same time, only patients with favorable anatomy including less tortuosity and the presence of a suitable infrarenal neck were considered for endovascular repair. Randomization is also difficult because most patients who anatomically qualify for endovascular repair would withdraw from the study if randomized to open repair. Consequently, there are very few randomized controlled tri-als that have compared outcomes in patients with similar risk factors and anatomy who are eligible for both types of repair. Two such European trials have recently published short-term outcome data that are unbiased in design.The DREAM trial is a multicenter randomized trial that compared open versus endovascular repair among a group of 345 patients at 28 European centers using multiple different devices including Gore, AneuRx, and Zenith.66 Patients were included only if they were considered to be candidates for both types of repairs. The operative mortality rate was 4.6% in the operative group versus 1.2% in the endoluminal group at  30 days. When looking at the combined rate of operative mor-tality and severe complications, there was an incidence of 9.8% in the open repair group versus 4.7% in the endoluminal group. The difference here was largely due to the higher frequency of pulmonary complications seen in the open group. There was a higher incidence of graft-related complications in the endolu-minal group. There was no difference in the nonvascular local complication rate among the two groups. The Endovascular Repair-1 (EVAR-1) trial is also a multicenter randomized trial that compared open to endoluminal repair.67 This study was con-ducted on 1082 patients at 34 centers in the United Kingdom using all available devices. Short-term mortality at 30 days was 4.7% in the open group and 1.7% in the endoluminal group. The in-hospital mortality rate was also increased in the open when compared to the endoluminal group (6.2% vs. 2.1%). As expected, the secondary intervention rate was higher in the endoluminal group (9.8% vs. 5.8%). Complication rates were not reported in the EVAR-1 trial. Criticisms can be applied to both of these trials. Patients had to be eligible for either type of repair in order to be included in the study. Consequently, these findings cannot be generalized to patients who are too sick to undergo open surgery or to patients whose anatomy precludes them from undergoing endovascular repair.The Open Versus Endovascular Repair (OVER) Veter-ans Affairs Cooperative Study Group randomly assigned 881 patients with asymptomatic AAAs who were candidates for both procedures to either endovascular repair (n = 444) or open repair (n = 437) and followed them for up to 9 years.68 Reduction in perioperative mortality with endovascular repair was sustained at 3 years but not thereafter. There was no difference in pri-mary outcome of all-cause mortality. Endovascular repair and open repair resulted in similar long-term survival. Six aneurysm ruptures were confirmed in the endovascular repair group ver-sus none in the open repair group. Rupture after endovascular repair remains a concern. A significant interaction was observed between age and type of treatment. Endovascular repair led to increased long-term survival among younger patients but not among older patients, for whom a greater benefit from the endo-vascular approach had been expected.Device-Specific Outcome. Matsumura and associates com-pared endoluminal versus open repair using the Excluder device.69 In their review, they demonstrated a 30-day mortality rate of 1% along with endoleak rates of 17% and 20% at 1and 2-year intervals, respectively. The limb narrowing, limb migra-tion, and trunk migration were all 1% at 2 years. There were no deployment failures or early conversions. There was an annual 7% reintervention rate. Aneurysm growth was demonstrated in 14% of patients at 2 years. The Zenith device by Cook has been studied by Greenberg and associates, who compared standard surgical repair with endoluminal repair in low-risk patients and endoluminal repair in high-risk patients.70 They reported a 30-day mortality rate of 3.5%, which was equal to the open group. The endoleak rates were 7.4% and 5.4% at 1and 2-year intervals, respectively. There was a 5.3% migration of 5 mm at 1 year. Freedom from rupture was 100% in the low-risk group and 98.9% in the high-risk endoluminal group at 2 years. Expe-rience with the AneuRx device has been reported by Zarins.71 In this 4-year review, they found a 30-day mortality rate of 2.8%. Endoleak rate at 4 years was 13.9%, aneurysm enlargement was 11.5%, and stent graft migration was 9.5%. Freedom from rup-ture was noted to be 98.4% at 4 years. Criado and associates have reported on their 1-year experience with the Talent LPS device by Medtronic.72 They report a 30-day mortality rate of 0.8%. Endoleak rate was 10%. Three deployment failures were noted, and freedom from rupture was 100%. Aneurysm growth and migration rates were divided into three different neck size groups. Patients with a wide neck (>26 mm) had a 3% growth and migration rate. Narrow-neck patients (<26 mm) had a 1% growth rate and a 2% migration neck. Interestingly, short-neck patients (<15 mm) had no aneurysm growths and a 2% migra-tion rate.Cost Analysis. The current climate of cost containment and limited reimbursement for healthcare services mandates a criti-cal analysis of the economic impact of any new medical technol-ogy on the market. The in-hospital costs for both endovascular and open repair include graft cost, operating room fees, radiol-ogy, pharmacy, ancillary care, intensive care unit charges, and floor charges. Despite the improved morbidity and mortality rates, several early studies have reported no cost benefit with the application of endovascular repair.73,74 The limiting factor appears to be the cost of the device. Despite commercializa-tion of endovascular repair, the device costs are still in the range of $5000 to $6000 with no signs of abating. A report by Angle and associated further corroborates previous studies.75 In their review, despite decreased hospital and intensive care unit stays and utilization of pharmacy and respiratory services, cost of endovascular repair was 1.74 times greater than the stan-dard surgical approach. In addition, these cost analysis stud-ies are centered on in-hospital costs and do not even begin to address secondary costs such as postoperative surveillance that is required with endovascular repair. In the OVER trial, endo-vascular repair was found to be a cost-effective alternative to Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   92627/02/19   4:14 PM 927ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23open repair in the U.S. Veterans Affairs healthcare system for at least the first 2 years.76 The primary outcomes were mean total healthcare cost per life-year and per quality-adjusted life-year. There were no differences found in survival, quality of life, and costs after 2 years between the endovascular and the open group. Although graft costs were higher in the endovas-cular group, length of stay was shorter, resulting in lower cost of AAA repair hospitalization in the endovascular group. Costs remained lower after 2 years in the endovascular group, but the difference was no longer significant.Classification and Management of EndoleakAn endoleak is an extravasation of contrast outside the stent graft and within the aneurysm sac (Fig. 23-34). It can be pres-ent in up to 20% to 30% of all endovascular AAA repairs in the early postoperative period.77,78 In general, over half of these endoleaks will resolve spontaneously during the first 6 months, resulting in a 10% incidence of chronic endoleaks in all cases beyond the first year of follow-up. Endoleaks can be detected using conventional angiography, contrast CT (Fig. 23-35), MRA, and color-flow duplex ultrasound. Although there is no recognized gold standard, in practice, angiography is consid-ered the least sensitive but most specific for characterizing the Type I endoleak                Type II endoleak                 Type III endoleak                  Type IV endoleakFigure 23-34. The four types of endoleak include the following: type I endoleak = attachment site leak; type II endoleak = side branch leak caused by lumbar or side branches; type III endoleak = endograft junctional leak due to overlapping device components; and type IV endoleak = endograft fabric or porosity leak.Figure 23-35. A computed tomography scan demonstrating an endoleak (small arrow) as evidenced by contrast flow outside the aortic endograft (long arrow).source of the endoleak, whereas the CT scan is the most sensi-tive but least specific. Widespread availability and reliability that is relatively independent of technique have made the CT scan the de facto standard imaging modality for postoperative surveillance. Conversely, routine use of duplex ultrasound and MRA has been limited by the lack of proper equipment and local expertise. On the other hand, investigational techniques such as time-resolved MRA may provide greater sensitivity and specificity than either angiography or CT in the future.Four types of endoleaks have been described (Table 23-10). Type I endoleak refers to fixation-related leaks that occur at the proximal or distal attachment sites. These represent less than 5% of all endoleaks and are seen as an early blush of contrast into the aneurysm sac from the proximal or distal ends of the device during completion angiography.77,78 Although seen as marker of poor patient selection or inadequate repair, over 80% of these leaks spontaneously seal in the first 6 months. Persistent type I endoleaks, on the other hand, require prompt treatment. Type II endoleak refers to retrograde flow originating from a lumbar, inferior mesenteric, accessory renal, or hypogastric artery. They are the most common type of endoleak, accounting for 20% to 30% of all cases, and about half resolve spontaneously. On angi-ography, they are seen as a late filling of the aneurysm sac from a branch vessel(s). Type II endoleaks carry a relatively benign natural history and do not merit intervention unless associated with aneurysm growth. Type III endoleaks refer to failure of device integrity or component separation from modular sys-tems. If detected intraoperatively or in the early perioperative period, it is usually from inadequate overlap between two stent Table 23-10Endoleak classificationCLASSIFICATIONDESCRIPTIONType I endoleakAttachment site leakType II endoleakSide branch leak caused by lumbar or inferior mesenteric arteriesType III endoleakJunctional leak (of overlapping endograft components) and graft fabric defectType IV endoleakEndograft fabric porosity leakBrunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   92727/02/19   4:14 PM 928SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIgrafts, whereas in the late period, the endoleak may be from a fabric tear or junctional separation from conformational changes of the aneurysm. Regardless of the etiology or timing, these should be promptly repaired. Finally, type IV endoleak refers to the diffuse, early blush seen during completion angiography due to graft porosity and/or suture holes of some Dacron-based devices. It does not have any clinical significance and usually cannot be seen after 48 hours and heparin reversal. Endoleaks that are initially considered type IV but persist become type III endoleaks by definition because this indicates a more significant material defect than simple porosity or a suture hole.Endotension Following Endovascular Aortic Aneurysm Repair. In approximately 5% of cases after an apparently suc-cessful endovascular repair, the aneurysm continues to grow without any demonstrable endoleak.79,80 This phenomenon has been described as endotension. Although it was initially thought that an endoleak was really present but simply not detected, case have been reported where the aneurysm has been surgically opened and the contents were completely devoid of any blood and no extravasation could be found. The mechanism of con-tinued pressurization of the aneurysm sac following successful exclusion from the arterial circulation remains unsolved at this time. One putative mechanism has been linked to a transuda-tive process related to certain expanded PTFE graft materials.81 More importantly, however, the natural history of these enlarg-ing aneurysms without endoleaks is unknown, but to date, there has been no evidence to suggest that they carry an increased risk of rupture. Conservatively speaking, until further long-term data become available, if the patient is a suitable surgical risk, elec-tive open conversion should be considered.Secondary Interventions Following Endovascular Aortic Aneurysm Repair. There is approximately 10% to 15% per year risk of secondary interventions following endovascular AAA repair.62 These procedures are critical in the long-term success of the primary procedure in prevention of aneurysm rup-ture and aneurysm-related death. These secondary procedures, in order of frequency, include proximal or distal extender place-ment for migrations, highly selective or translumbar emboliza-tion for type II endoleaks, direct surgical or laparoscopic branch vessel ligations, bridging cuffs for component separations, and late open surgical conversions.Multiple large series have reported that an annual rupture rate of approximately 1% to 1.5% per year after endovascular repair.82,83 The EUROSTAR registry reports a rupture rate of 2.3% over 15.4 months in patients with an endoleak, compared with 0.3% in those without.82,83 Various causes of late ruptures have been reported in the literature, although presence of a per-sistent endoleak with aneurysm enlargement remains a com-mon culprit for this complication. It has been shown that even successfully excluded aneurysms can lead to the development of attachment-site leaks and device failure, caused in part by aneurysm remodeling resulting in stent migration or kinking. Mehta and colleagues reported that 63% of delayed AAA rup-tures after endovascular repair were caused by type I endoleaks with endograft migration, 11% by type I without migration, 19% by type II, and the rest of unknown type.84Treatment of rupture may be open conversion or endo-vascular stent graft placement. May and associates reported a mortality rate of 43% in those patients who underwent open conversion.85 Emergent endovascular repair should be consid-ered in these patients since it is potentially much faster and less likely to cause physiologic stress than open conversion. Several reports have shown that endovascular repair can be performed successfully in patients previously treated with endoluminal prostheses.80,86MESENTERIC ARTERY DISEASEVascular occlusive disease of the mesenteric vessels is a rela-tively uncommon but potentially devastating condition that gen-erally presents in patients over 60 years of age, is three times more frequent in women, and has been recognized as an entity since 1936.87 The incidence of such a disease is low and repre-sents 2% of the revascularization operations for atheromatous lesions. The most common cause of mesenteric ischemia is atherosclerotic vascular disease. Autopsy studies have dem-onstrated splanchnic atherosclerosis in 35% to 70% of cases.88 Other etiologies exist and include FMD, panarteritis nodosa, arteritis, and celiac artery compression from a median arcuate ligament, but they are unusual and have an incidence of one in nine compared with that of atherosclerosis.Chronic mesenteric ischemia is related to a lack of blood supply in the splanchnic region and is caused by disease in one or more visceral arteries: the celiac trunk, the superior mesen-teric artery, and the IMA. Mesenteric ischemia is thought to occur when two of the three visceral vessels are affected with severe stenosis or occlusion; however, in as many as 9% of cases, only a single vessel is involved (SMA in 5% and celiac trunk in 4% of cases).89 This disease process may evolve in a chronic fashion, as in the case of progressive luminal oblitera-tion due to atherosclerosis. On the other hand, mesenteric isch-emia can occur suddenly, as in the case of thromboembolism. Despite recent progress in perioperative management and bet-ter understanding of pathophysiology, mesenteric ischemia is considered one of the most catastrophic vascular disorders with mortality rates ranging from 50% to 75%. Delays in diagnosis and treatment are the main contributing factors in its high mor-tality. It is estimated that mesenteric ischemia accounts for 1 in every 1000 hospital admissions in this country. The prevalence is rising due in part to the increased awareness of this disease, the advanced age of the population, and the significant comor-bidity of these elderly patients. Early recognition and prompt treatment before the onset of irreversible intestinal ischemia are essential to improve the outcome.Anatomy and PathophysiologyMesenteric arterial circulation is remarkable for its rich collat-eral network. Three main mesenteric arteries provide the arterial perfusion to the gastrointestinal system: the celiac artery (CA), the superior mesenteric artery (SMA), and the IMA. In gen-eral, the CA provides arterial circulation to the foregut (distal esophagus to duodenum), hepatobiliary system, and spleen; the SMA supplies the midgut (jejunum to mid-colon); and the IMA supplies the hindgut (mid-colon to rectum). The CA and SMA arise from the ventral surface of the infradiaphragmatic supra-renal abdominal aorta, whereas the IMA originates from the left lateral portion of the infrarenal aorta. These anatomic origins in relation to the aorta are important when a mesenteric angio-gram is performed to determine the luminal patency. In order to fully visualize the origins of the CA and SMA, it is necessary to perform both an anteroposterior and a lateral projection of the aorta since most arterial occlusive lesions occur in the proximal segments of these mesenteric trunks.Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   92827/02/19   4:14 PM 929ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23Because of the abundant collateral flow between these mesenteric arteries, progressive diminution of flow in one or even two of the main mesenteric trunks is usually tolerated, provided that uninvolved mesenteric branches can enlarge over time to provide sufficient compensatory collateral flow. In contrast, acute occlusion of a main mesenteric trunk may result in profound ischemia due to lack of sufficient collateral flow. Collateral networks between the CA and the SMA exist primarily through the superior and inferior pancreaticoduodenal arteries. The IMA may provide collateral arterial flow to the SMA through the marginal artery of Drummond, the arc of  Riolan, and other unnamed retroperitoneal collateral vessels termed meandering mesenteric arteries (Fig. 23-36). Lastly, collateral visceral vessels may provide important arterial flow to the IMA and the hindgut through the hypogastric arteries and the hemorrhoidal arterial network.Regulation of mesenteric blood flow is largely modulated by both hormonal and neural stimuli, which characteristically regulate systemic blood flow. In addition, the mesenteric cir-culation responds to the gastrointestinal contents. Hormonal regulation is mediated by splanchnic vasodilators, such as nitric oxide, glucagon, and vasoactive intestinal peptide. Certain intrinsic vasoconstrictors, such as vasopressin, can diminish the mesenteric blood flow. On the other hand, neural regulation is provided by the extensive visceral autonomic innervation.Clinical manifestation of mesenteric ischemia is pre-dominantly postprandial abdominal pain, which signifies that the increased oxygen demand of digestion is not met by the gastrointestinal collateral circulation. The postprandial pain fre-quently occurs in the mid-abdomen, suggesting that the diver-sion of blood flow from the SMA to supply the stomach impairs perfusion to the small bowel. This leads to transient anaerobic metabolism and acidosis. Persistent or profound mesenteric ischemia will lead to mucosal compromise with release of intra-cellular contents and by-products of anaerobic metabolism to Figure 23-36. An aortogram showing a prominent collateral ves-sel, which is the arc of Riolan (arrow) in a patient with an inferior mesenteric artery (IMA) occlusion. This vessel network provides collateral flow between the superior mesenteric artery and IMA.the splanchnic and systemic circulation. Injured bowel mucosa allows unimpeded influx of toxic substances from the bowel lumen with systemic consequences. If full-thickness necrosis occurs in the bowel wall, intestinal perforation ensues, which will lead to peritonitis. Concomitant atherosclerotic disease in cardiac or systemic circulation frequently compounds the diag-nostic and therapeutic complexity of mesenteric ischemia.Types of Mesenteric Artery Occlusive DiseaseThere are three major mechanisms of visceral ischemia involv-ing the mesenteric arteries: (a) acute mesenteric ischemia, which can be either embolic or thrombotic in origin; (b) chronic mes-enteric ischemia; and (c) nonocclusive mesenteric ischemia. Despite the variability of these syndromes, a common anatomic pathology is involved in these processes. The superior mesen-teric artery (SMA) is the most commonly involved vessel in acute mesenteric ischemia. Acute thrombosis occurs in patients with underlying mesenteric atherosclerosis, which typically involves the origin of the mesenteric arteries while sparing the collateral branches. In acute embolic mesenteric ischemia, the emboli typically originate from a cardiac source and frequently occur in patients with atrial fibrillation or following myocar-dial infarction (Figs. 23-37 and 23-38). Nonocclusive mesen-teric ischemia is characterized by a low flow state in otherwise normal mesenteric arteries and most frequently occurs in criti-cally ill patients on vasopressors. Finally, chronic mesenteric ischemia is a functional consequence of a long-standing ath-erosclerotic process that typically involves at least two of the three main mesenteric vessels. The gradual development of the occlusive process allows the development of collateral ves-sels that prevent the manifestations of acute ischemia, but are not sufficient to meet the high postprandial intestinal oxygen requirements, giving rise to the classical symptoms of postpran-dial abdominal pain and the resultant food fear.Several less common syndromes of visceral ischemia involving the mesenteric arteries can also cause serious debili-tation. Chronic mesenteric ischemic symptoms can occur due Figure 23-37. An anteroposterior view of a selective superior mesenteric artery angiogram shows an abrupt cutoff of the middle colic artery, which was caused by emboli (arrow) due to atrial fibrillation.Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   92927/02/19   4:14 PM 930SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 23-38. A lateral mesenteric angiogram showing an abrupt cutoff of the proximal superior mesenteric artery (SMA), which is consistent with SMA embolism (arrow).to extrinsic compression of the celiac artery by the diaphragm, which is termed median arcuate ligament syndrome or celiac artery compression syndrome. Acute visceral ischemia may occur following an aortic operation, due to ligation of the IMA in the absence of adequate collateral vessels. Furthermore, acute visceral ischemia may develop in aortic dissection, which involves the mesenteric arteries, or after coarctation repair. Finally, other unusual causes of ischemia include mesenteric arteritis, radiation arteritis, and cholesterol emboli.Clinical ManifestationsAbdominal pain out of proportion to physical findings is the classic presentation in patients with acute mesenteric ischemia and occurs following an embolic or thrombotic ischemic event of the SMA. Other manifestations include sudden onset of abdominal cramps in patients with underlying cardiac or ath-erosclerotic disease, often associated with bloody diarrhea, as a result of mucosal sloughing secondary to ischemia. Fever, nausea, vomiting, and abdominal distention are some common but nonspecific manifestations. Diffuse abdominal tenderness, rebound, and rigidity are late signs and usually indicate bowel infarction and necrosis.Clinical manifestations of chronic mesenteric ischemia are more subtle due to the extensive collateral development. How-ever, when intestinal blood flow is unable to meet the physio-logic gastrointestinal demands, mesenteric insufficiency ensues. The classical symptoms include postprandial abdominal pain, food fear, and weight loss. Persistent nausea and occasionally diarrhea may coexist. Diagnosis remains challenging, and most of the patients will undergo an extensive and expensive gastro-intestinal tract workup for the above symptoms prior to referral to a vascular service.The typical patient who develops nonocclusive mesenteric ischemia is an elderly patient who has multiple comorbidities, such as congestive heart failure, acute myocardial infarction with cardiogenic shock, hypovolemic or hemorrhagic shock, sepsis, pancreatitis, and administration of digitalis or vasocon-strictor agents such as epinephrine. Abdominal pain is only present in approximately 70% of these patients. When present, the pain is usually severe but may vary in location, character, and intensity. In the absence of abdominal pain, progressive abdominal distention with acidosis may be an early sign of isch-emia and impending bowel infarction.Abdominal pain due to narrowing of the origin of the CA may occur as a result of extrinsic compression or impingement by the median arcuate ligament (Fig. 23-39). This condition is known as celiac artery compression syndrome or median arcuate ligament syndrome. Angiographically, there is CA compression that augments with deep expiration and poststenotic dilatation. The celiac artery compression syndrome has been implicated in some variants of chronic mesenteric ischemia. Most patients are young females between 20 and 40 years of age. Abdominal symptoms are nonspecific, but the pain is localized in the upper abdomen, which may be precipitated by meals.Diagnostic EvaluationThe differential diagnosis of acute mesenteric ischemia includes other causes of severe abdominal pain of acute onset, such as perforated viscus, intestinal obstruction, pancreatitis, cholecys-titis, and nephrolithiasis. Laboratory evaluation is neither sensitive nor specific in distinguishing these various diagnoses. Figure 23-39. A lateral projection of the magnetic resonance angi-ography of the aorta showing a chronic compression of the celiac artery by the median arcuate ligament (arrow).Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   93027/02/19   4:14 PM 931ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23In the setting of mesenteric ischemia, complete blood count may reveal hemoconcentration and leukocytosis. Metabolic acidosis develops as a result of anaerobic metabolism. Elevated serum amylase may indicate a diagnosis of pancreatitis but is also com-mon in the setting of intestinal infarction. Finally, increased lac-tate levels, hyperkalemia, and azotemia may occur in the late stages of mesenteric ischemia.Plain abdominal radiographs may provide helpful infor-mation to exclude other causes of abdominal pain such as intes-tinal obstruction, perforation, or volvulus, which may exhibit symptoms mimicking intestinal ischemia. Pneumoperitoneum, pneumatosis intestinalis, and gas in the portal vein may indicate infarcted bowel. In contrast, radiographic appearance of an ady-namic ileus with a gasless abdomen is the most common finding in patients with acute mesenteric ischemia.Upper endoscopy, colonoscopy, or barium radiogra-phy does not provide any useful information when evaluating acute mesenteric ischemia. Moreover, barium enema is con-traindicated if the diagnosis of mesenteric ischemia is being considered. The intraluminal barium can obscure accurate visu-alization of mesenteric circulation during angiography. In addi-tion, intraperitoneal leakage of barium can occur in the setting of intestinal perforation, which can lead to added therapeutic challenges during mesenteric revascularization.Diagnosis of chronic mesenteric ischemia can be more challenging. Usually prior to the evaluation by a vascular ser-vice, the patients have undergone an extensive workup for the symptoms of chronic abdominal pain, weight loss, and anorexia. Rarely, the vascular surgeon is the first to encounter a patient with the above symptoms. In this situation, it is advisable to keep in mind that mesenteric ischemia is a rare entity and that a full diagnostic workup that should include CT scan of the abdo-men and evaluation by gastroenterologist should be performed. Mesenteric occlusive disease may coexist with malignancy, and symptoms of mesenteric vessel stenosis may be the result of extrinsic compression by a tumor.Duplex ultrasonography is a valuable noninvasive means of assessing the patency of the mesenteric vessels. Moneta and associates evaluated the use of duplex ultrasound in the diag-nosis of mesenteric occlusive disease in a blinded prospective study.90,91 A peak systolic velocity in the SMA >275 cm/s dem-onstrated a sensitivity of 92%, specificity of 96%, and overall accuracy of 96% for detecting >70% stenosis. The same authors found sensitivity and specificity of 87% and 82%, respectively, with an accuracy of 82% in predicting >70% celiac trunk ste-nosis. Duplex has been successfully used for follow-up after open surgical reconstruction or endovascular treatment of the mesenteric vessels to assess recurrence of the disease. Finally, spiral CT with three-dimensional reconstruction (Fig. 23-40) and MRA (Fig. 23-41) have been promising in providing clear radiographic assessment of the mesenteric vessels.The definitive diagnosis of mesenteric vascular disease is made by biplanar mesenteric arteriography, which should be performed promptly in any patient with suspected mesenteric occlusion. It typically shows occlusion or near-occlusion of the CA and SMA at or near their origins from the aorta. In most cases, the IMA has been previously occluded secondary to dif-fuse infrarenal aortic atherosclerosis. The differentiation of the different types of mesenteric arterial occlusion may be sug-gested with biplanar mesenteric arteriogram. Mesenteric emboli typically lodge at the orifice of the middle colic artery, which creates a “meniscus sign” with an abrupt cutoff of a normal Figure 23-40. Computed tomography angiogram of the abdomen with three-dimensional reconstruction provides a clear view of the celiac artery, superior mesenteric artery (SMA), and inferior mes-enteric artery (IMA).Figure 23-41. A cross-sectional view of a magnetic resonance angiogram provides a clear view of the luminal patency of the supe-rior mesenteric artery.proximal SMA several centimeters from its origin on the aorta. Mesenteric thrombosis, in contrast, occurs at the most proximal SMA, which tapers off at 1 to 2 cm from its origin. In the case of chronic mesenteric occlusion, the appearance of collateral circulation is typically present. Nonocclusive mesenteric isch-emia produces an arteriographic image of segmental mesenteric vasospasm with a relatively normal-appearing main SMA trunk (Fig. 23-42).Mesenteric arteriography can also play a therapeutic role. Once the diagnosis of nonocclusive mesenteric ischemia is Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   93127/02/19   4:14 PM 932SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 23-42. Mesenteric arteriogram showing nonocclusive mes-enteric ischemia as evidenced by diffuse spasm of intestinal arcades with poor filling of intramural vessels.made on the arteriogram, an infusion catheter can be placed at the SMA orifice, and vasodilating agents, such as papaverine, can be administered intra-arterially. The papaverine infusion may be continued postoperatively to treat persistent vasospasm, a common occurrence following mesenteric reperfusion. Trans-catheter thrombolytic therapy has little role in the management of thrombotic mesenteric occlusion. Although thrombolytic agents may transiently recannulate the occluded vessels, the underlying occlusive lesions require definitive treatment. Fur-thermore, thrombolytic therapy typically requires a prolonged period of time to restore perfusion, during which the intestinal viability will be difficult to assess.A word of caution would be appropriate here regarding patients with typical history of chronic intestinal angina who present with an acute abdomen and classical findings of peri-toneal irritation. Arteriography is the gold standard for the diagnosis of mesenteric occlusive disease; however, it can be a time-consuming diagnostic modality. In this group of patients, immediate exploration for assessment of intestinal viability and vascular reconstruction is the best choice.Surgical RepairAcute Embolic Mesenteric Ischemia. Initial management of patients with acute mesenteric ischemia includes fluid resus-citation and systemic anticoagulation with heparin to prevent further thrombus propagation. Significant metabolic acidosis not responding to fluid resuscitation should be corrected with sodium bicarbonate. A central venous catheter, peripheral arte-rial catheter, and Foley catheter should be placed for hemody-namic status monitoring. Appropriate antibiotics are given prior to surgical exploration. The operative management of acute mesenteric ischemia is dictated by the cause of the occlusion. It is helpful to obtain a preoperative mesenteric arteriogram to confirm the diagnosis and to plan appropriate treatment options. However, the diagnosis of mesenteric ischemia frequently can-not be established prior to surgical exploration, and therefore, patients in a moribund condition with acute abdominal symp-toms should undergo immediate surgical exploration, avoiding the delay required to perform an arteriogram.The primary goal of surgical treatment in embolic mes-enteric ischemia is to restore arterial perfusion with removal of the embolus from the vessel. The abdomen is explored through a midline incision, which often reveals variable degrees of intestinal ischemia from the mid-jejunum to the ascending or transverse colon. The transverse colon is lifted superiorly, and the small intestine is reflected toward the right upper quad-rant. The SMA is approached at the root of the small bowel mesentery, usually as it emerges from beneath the pancreas to cross over the junction of the third and fourth portions of the duodenum. Alternatively, the SMA can be approached by incising the retroperitoneum lateral to the fourth portion of the duodenum, which is rotated medially to expose the SMA. Once the proximal SMA is identified and controlled with vascular clamps, a transverse arteriotomy is made to extract the embolus, using standard balloon embolectomy catheters. In the event the embolus has lodged more distally, exposure of the distal SMA may be obtained in the root of the small bowel mesentery by isolating individual jejunal and ileal branches to allow a more comprehensive thromboembolectomy. Following the restora-tion of SMA flow, an assessment of intestinal viability must be made, and nonviable bowel must be resected. Several methods have been described to evaluate the viability of the intestine, which include intraoperative intravenous fluorescein injection and inspection with a Wood’s lamp, and Doppler assessment of antimesenteric intestinal arterial pulsations. A second-look pro-cedure should be considered in many patients and is performed 24 to 48 hours following embolectomy. The goal of the proce-dure is reassessment of the extent of bowel viability, which may not be obvious immediately following the initial embolectomy. If nonviable intestine is evident in the second-look procedure, additional bowel resections should be performed at that time.Acute Thrombotic Mesenteric Ischemia. Thrombotic mesenteric ischemia usually involves a severely atheroscle-rotic vessel, typically the proximal CA and SMA. Therefore, these patients require a reconstructive procedure to the SMA to bypass the proximal occlusive lesion and restore adequate mesenteric flow. The saphenous vein is the graft material of choice, and prosthetic materials should be avoided in patients with nonviable bowel, due to the risk of bacterial contamina-tion if resection of necrotic intestine is performed. The bypass graft may originate from either the aorta or iliac artery. Advan-tages from using the supraceliac infradiaphragmatic aorta as opposed to the infrarenal aorta as the inflow vessel include a smoother graft configuration with less chance of kinking and the absence of atherosclerotic disease in the supraceliac aortic segment. Exposure of the supraceliac aorta is technically more challenging and time consuming than that of the iliac artery, which unless calcified is an appropriate inflow. Patency rates are similar regardless of inflow vessel choice.92Chronic Mesenteric Ischemia. The therapeutic goal in patients with chronic mesenteric ischemia is to revascularize mesenteric circulation and prevent the development of bowel infarction. Mesenteric occlusive disease can be treated successfully by either transaortic endarterectomy or mesenteric artery bypass. Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   93227/02/19   4:14 PM 933ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23Transaortic endarterectomy is indicated for ostial lesions of pat-ent CA and SMA. A left medial rotation is performed, and the aorta and the mesenteric branches are exposed. A lat-eral aortotomy is performed encompassing both the CA and SMA orifices. The visceral arteries must be adequately mobi-lized so that the termination site of endarterectomy can be visu-alized. Otherwise, an intimal flap may develop, which can lead to early thrombosis or distal embolization.For occlusive lesions located 1 to 2 cm distal to the mes-enteric origin, mesenteric artery bypass should be performed. Multiple mesenteric arteries are typically involved in chronic mesenteric ischemia, and both the CA and SMA should be revascularized whenever possible. In general, bypass grafting may be performed either antegrade from the supraceliac aorta or retrograde from either the infrarenal aorta or iliac artery. Both autogenous saphenous vein grafts and prosthetic grafts have been used with satisfactory and equivalent success. An antegrade bypass also can be performed using a small-caliber bifurcated graft from the supraceliac aorta to both the CA and SMA, which yields an excellent long-term result.93Celiac Artery Compression Syndrome. The decision to intervene in patients with CA compression syndrome should be based on both an appropriate symptom complex and the finding of celiac artery compression in the absence of other findings to explain the symptoms. The treatment goal is to release the ligamentous structure that compresses the proximal CA and to correct any persistent stricture by bypass grafting. Some sur-geons advocate careful celiac plexus sympathectomy in addition to arcuate ligament decompression to ensure good treatment  outcome.102 The patient should be cautioned that relief of the celiac compression cannot be guaranteed to relieve the symp-toms. In a number of reports on endovascular management of chronic mesenteric ischemia, the presence of CA compres-sion syndrome has been identified as a major factor of techni-cal failure and recurrence. Therefore, angioplasty and stenting should not be undertaken if extrinsic compression of the CA by the median arcuate ligament is suspected based on preop-erative imaging studies. Open surgical treatment should be performed instead. A study that analyzed the outcome of lapa-roscopic and open median arcuate ligament release cases in the literature showed both approaches to be effective in symptom relief (85%), with no difference in late symptom recurrence rate (6.8% in the open group and 5.7% in the laparoscopic group).94Endovascular TreatmentChronic Mesenteric Ischemia. Endovascular treatment of mesenteric artery stenosis or short segment occlusion by bal-loon dilatation or stent placement represents a less invasive therapeutic alternative to open surgical intervention, particu-larly in patients whose medical comorbidities place them at a high operative risk category. Endovascular therapy is also suited in patients with recurrent disease or anastomotic steno-sis following previous open mesenteric revascularization. Pro-phylactic mesenteric revascularization is rarely performed in the asymptomatic patient undergoing an aortic procedure for other indications. However, the natural history of untreated chronic mesenteric ischemia may justify revascularization in some minimally symptomatic or asymptomatic patients if the operative risks are acceptable, since the first clinical presenta-tion may be acute intestinal ischemia in as many as 50% of the patients, with a mortality rate that ranges from 15% to 70%.95 3This is particularly true when the SMA is involved. Mesenteric angioplasty and stenting is particularly suitable for this patient subgroup given its low morbidity and mortality. Because of the limited experience with stent use in mesenteric vessels, appro-priate indications for primary stent placement have not been clearly defined. Guidelines generally include calcified ostial stenoses, high-grade eccentric stenoses, chronic occlusions, and significant residual stenosis >30% or the presence of dissection after angioplasty. Restenosis after PTA is also an indication for stent placement.96Acute Mesenteric Ischemia. Catheter-directed thrombo-lytic therapy is a potentially useful treatment modality for acute mesenteric ischemia, which can be initiated with intra-arterial delivery of thrombolytic agent into the mesenteric thrombus at the time of diagnostic angiography. Various thrombolytic medi-cations, including urokinase (Abbokinase; Abbott Laboratory, North Chicago, IL) or recombinant tissue plasminogen acti-vator (Activase; Genentech, South San Francisco, CA), have been reported to be successful in a small series of case reports. Catheter-directed thrombolytic therapy has a higher probabil-ity of restoring mesenteric blood flow success when performed within 12 hours of symptom onset. Successful resolution of a mesenteric thrombus will facilitate the identification of the underlying mesenteric occlusive disease process. As a result, subsequent operative mesenteric revascularization or mesen-teric balloon angioplasty and stenting may be performed elec-tively to correct the mesenteric stenosis. There are two main drawbacks with regard to thrombolytic therapy in mesenteric ischemia. Percutaneous catheter-directed thrombolysis does not allow the possibility to inspect the potentially ischemic intes-tine following restoration of the mesenteric flow. Additionally, a prolonged period of time may be necessary in order to achieve successful catheter-directed thrombolysis, due in part to serial angiographic surveillance to document thrombus resolution. An incomplete or unsuccessful thrombolysis may lead to delayed operative revascularization, which may further necessitate bowel resection for irreversible intestinal necrosis. Therefore, catheter-directed thrombolytic therapy for acute mesenteric ischemia should only be considered in selected patients under a closely scrutinized clinical protocol.Nonocclusive Mesenteric Ischemia. The treatment of non-occlusive mesenteric ischemia is primarily pharmacologic with selective mesenteric arterial catheterization followed by infu-sion of vasodilatory agents, such as tolazoline or papaverine. Once the diagnosis is made on the mesenteric arteriography (see Fig. 23-42), intra-arterial papaverine is given at a dose of 30 to 60 mg/h. This must be coupled with the cessation of other vaso-constricting agents. Concomitant intravenous heparin should be administered to prevent thrombosis in the cannulated vessels. Treatment strategy thereafter is dependent on the patient’s clini-cal response to the vasodilator therapy. If abdominal symptoms improve, mesenteric arteriography should be repeated to docu-ment the resolution of vasospasm. The patient’s hemodynamic status must be carefully monitored during papaverine infusion as significant hypotension can develop in the event that the infu-sion catheter migrates into the aorta, which can lead to systemic circulation of papaverine. Surgical exploration is indicated if the patient develops signs of continued bowel ischemia or infarction as evidenced by rebound tenderness or involuntary guarding. In these circumstances, papaverine infusion should be contin-ued intraoperatively and postoperatively. The operating room Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   93327/02/19   4:14 PM 934SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIshould be kept as warm as possible, and warm irrigation fluid and laparotomy pads should be used to prevent further intestinal vasoconstriction during exploration.Techniques of Endovascular Interventions. To perform endovascular mesenteric revascularization, intraluminal access is performed via a femoral or brachial artery approach. Once an introducer sheath is placed in the femoral artery, an anteroposte-rior and lateral aortogram just below the level of the diaphragm is obtained with a pigtail catheter to identify the origin of the CA and SMA. Initial catheterization of the mesenteric artery can be performed using a variety of selective angled catheters, which include the RDC, Cobra-2, Simmons I (Boston Scientific/Meditech, Natick, MA), or SOS Omni catheter (Angiodynam-ics, Queensbury, NY). Once the mesenteric artery is cannulated, systemic heparin (5000 IU) is administered intravenously. A selective mesenteric angiogram is then performed to identify the diseased segment, which is followed by the placement of a 0.035-inch or less traumatic 0.014to 0.018-inch guidewire to cross the stenotic lesion. Once the guidewire is placed across the stenosis, the catheter is carefully advanced over the guide-wire across the lesion. In the event that the mesenteric artery is severely angulated as it arises from the aorta, a second stiffer guidewire (Amplatz or Rosen Guidewire, Boston Scientific) may be exchanged through the catheter to facilitate the place-ment of a 6-French guiding sheath (Pinnacle, Boston Scientific).With the image intensifier angled in a lateral position to fully visualize the proximal mesenteric segment, a balloon angioplasty is advanced over the guidewire through the guiding sheath and positioned across the stenosis. The balloon diameter should be chosen based on the vessel size of the adjacent nor-mal mesenteric vessel. Once balloon angioplasty is completed, a postangioplasty angiogram is necessary to document the proce-dural result. Radiographic evidence of either residual stenosis or mesenteric artery dissection constitutes suboptimal angioplasty results that warrants mesenteric stent placement. Moreover, ath-erosclerotic involvement of the proximal mesenteric artery or vessel orifice should be treated with balloon-expandable stent placement. These stents can be placed over a low-profile 0.014or 0.018-inch guidewire system. It is preferable to deliver the balloon-mounted stent through a guiding sheath, which is posi-tioned just proximal to the mesenteric orifice while the balloon-mounted stent is advanced across the stenosis. The stent is next deployed by expanding the angioplasty balloon to its designated inflation pressure. The balloon is then deflated and carefully withdrawn through the guiding sheath.Completion angiogram is performed by hand injecting a small volume of contrast though the guiding sheath. It is criti-cal to maintain the guidewire access until satisfactory comple-tion angiogram is obtained. If the completion angiogram reveals suboptimal radiographic results, such as residual stenosis or dis-section, additional catheter-based intervention can be performed through the same guidewire. These interventions may include repeat balloon angioplasty for residual stenosis or additional stent placement for mesenteric artery dissection. During the procedure, intra-arterial infusion of papaverine or nitroglycerine can be used to decrease vasospasm. Administration of antiplatelet agents is also recommended for at least 6 months or even indefinitely if other risk factors of cardiovascular disease are present.Complications of Endovascular Treatment. Complica-tions are not common and rarely become life threatening. These include access site thrombosis, hematomas, and infection. Dissection can occur during PTA and is managed with place-ment of a stent. Balloon-mounted stents are preferred over the self-expanding ones because of the higher radial force and the more precise placement. Distal embolization has also been reported, but it never resulted in acute intestinal ischemia, likely due to the rich network of collaterals already developed.Clinical Results of Interventions  for Mesenteric IschemiaThe first successful percutaneous angioplasty of the SMA was reported in 1980.97 Since 1995, multiple series and scattered case reports have reported results from endovascular manage-ment of mesenteric occlusive disease.92,96 A literature review by AbuRahma and colleagues in 2003 showed that endovascu-lar intervention had an overall technical success rate of 91%, early and late pain relief rates of 84% and 71%, respectively, and 30-day morbidity and mortality rates of 16.4% and 4.3%, respectively. The average patency was 63% during an average 26-month follow-up.98In our review of the literature from published series since 1995, restenosis developed in 22% of patients during  24.5 months of average follow-up.92 The long-term clinical relief without reintervention was 82%. Among the patients who experienced a technical failure, 15 were ultimately diagnosed with median arcuate ligament syndrome and underwent suc-cessful surgical treatment, an observation that emphasizes the need for careful patient selection. Interestingly, the addition of selective stenting after PTA that was started in 1998, while it slightly increases the technical success rate, is not correlated with any substantial overall clinical benefit or improved long-term patency rates.In contrast to endovascular treatment, open surgical tech-niques have achieved an immediate clinical success rate that approaches 100%, a surgical mortality rate of 0% to 17%, and an operative morbidity rate that ranges from 19% to 54% in a number of different series.89,93,99 AbuRahma and colleagues reported their experience of endovascular interventions of 22 patients with symptomatic mesenteric ischemia due to either SMA or CA stenosis.98 They noted an excellent initial technical and clinical success rates, which were 96% (23 of 24 patients) and 95% (21 of 22 patients), respectively, with no periopera-tive mortality or major morbidity. During a mean follow-up of 26 months (range, 1–54 months), the primary late clinical suc-cess rate was 61%, and freedom from recurrent stenosis was 30%. The freedom from recurrent stenosis rates at 1, 2, 3, and  4 years were 65%, 47%, 39%, and 13%, respectively. The authors concluded that mesenteric stenting, which provides excellent early results, is associated with a relative high inci-dence of late restenosis.Several studies have attempted to compare the endovas-cular with the standard open surgical approach.89,100 The results of the open surgery appear to be more durable, but it tends to be associated with higher morbidity and mortality rates and an overall longer hospital stay. In one study that compared the clin-ical outcome of open revascularization with percutaneous stent-ing for patients with chronic mesenteric ischemia, 28 patients underwent endovascular treatment and 85 patients underwent open mesenteric bypass grafting.99 With both patient cohorts having similar baseline comorbidities and symptom duration, there was no difference in early in-hospital complication or mortality rates. Moreover, both groups had similar 3-year cumu-lative recurrent stenosis and mortality rates. However, patients Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   93427/02/19   4:14 PM 935ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23treated with mesenteric stenting had a significantly higher inci-dence of recurrent symptoms. The authors concluded that opera-tive mesenteric revascularization should be offered to patients with low surgical risk.Based on the above results one could argue that mesen-teric angioplasty and stenting demonstrate an inferior technical and clinical success rate. Long-term patency rates appear to also be superior with the open technique. There is a general con-sensus, however, that the endovascular approach is associated with lower morbidity and mortality rates and is therefore more suitable for high-risk patients. One should also keep in mind that practices representing standard of care for stent placement today were absent in the early era of endovascular experience. These include perioperative heparinization and short-term anti-platelet therapy, use of stents with higher radial force, routine use of postoperative surveillance with arterial duplex and early reintervention to prevent a high-grade stenosis from progressing to occlusion, and placement of drug-eluting stents. One such example is a recent nonrandomized study to compare the out-comes of mesenteric angioplasty using covered stents or bare metal stents in patients undergoing primary or reintervention for chronic mesenteric ischemia. The study showed that covered stents are associated with less restenosis (18% vs. 47%), symp-tom recurrence (18% vs. 50%), and reintervention (9% vs. 44%) at 24 months and better primary patency at 3 years (92% vs. 52%) than bare metal stents in the primary intervention group.101 Similar results were found in the reintervention group as well.RENAL ARTERY DISEASEObstructive lesions of the renal artery can produce hypertension, resulting in a condition known as renovascular hypertension, which is the most common form of hypertension amenable to therapeutic intervention, and affects 5% to 10% of all hyperten-sive patients in the United States.102 Patients with renovascular hypertension are at an increased risk for irreversible end-organ dysfunction, including permanent kidney damage, if inadequate pharmacologic therapies are used to control the blood pressure. The majority of patients with renal artery obstructive disease have vascular lesions of either atherosclerotic disease or fibro-dysplasia involving the renal arteries. The proximal portion of the renal artery represents the most common location for the development of atherosclerotic disease. It is well established that renal artery intervention, either by surgical or endovascular revascularization, provides an effective treatment for controlling renovascular hypertension as well as preserving renal function. The decision for intervention is complex and needs to consider a variety of anatomic, physiologic, and clinical features, unique for the individual patient.EtiologyApproximately 80% of all renal artery occlusive lesions are caused by atherosclerosis, which typically involves a short seg-ment of the renal artery ostia and represents spillover disease from a severely atheromatous aorta (Fig. 23-43).102 Atheroscle-rotic lesions are bilateral in two thirds of patients. Individuals with this disease commonly present during the sixth decade of life. Men are affected twice as frequently as women. Atheroscle-rotic lesions in other territories such as the coronary, mesenteric, cerebrovascular, and peripheral arterial circulation are common. When a unilateral lesion is present, the disease process equally affects the right and left renal arteries.Figure 23-43. Occlusive disease of the renal artery typically involves the renal ostium (arrow) as a spillover plaque extension from aortic atherosclerosis.The second most common cause of renal artery stenosis is FMD, which accounts for 20% of cases and is most frequently encountered in young, often multiparous women. FMD of the renal artery represents a heterogeneous group of lesions that can produce histopathologic changes in the intima, media, or adventitia. The most common variety consists of medial fibro-plasia, in which thickened fibromuscular ridges alternate with attenuated media producing the classic angiographic “string of beads” appearance (Figs. 23-44 and 23-45). The cause of medial fibroplasia remains unclear. Most common theories involve a modification of arterial smooth muscle cells in response to Figure 23-44. Abdominal aortogram reveals a left renal artery fibromuscular dysplasia (arrows) with a characteristic “string of beads” appearance.Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   93527/02/19   4:14 PM 936SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 23-45. Magnetic resonance angiography of the abdominal aorta reveals the presence of a left renal artery fibromuscular dys-plasia (arrows).estrogenic stimuli during the reproductive years, unusual trac-tion forces on affected vessels, and mural ischemia from impair-ment of vasa vasorum blood flow. Fibromuscular hyperplasia usually affects the distal two thirds of the main renal artery, and the right renal artery is affected more frequently than the left. Other less common causes of renal artery stenosis include renal artery aneurysm (compressing the adjacent normal renal artery), arteriovenous malformations, neurofibromatosis, renal artery dissections, renal artery trauma, Takayasu’s arteritis, and renal arteriovenous fistula.Clinical ManifestationsRenovascular hypertension is the most common sequela of renal artery occlusive disease. Its prevalence varies from 2% in patients with diastolic blood pressure greater than 100 mmHg to almost 30% in those with diastolic blood pressure over  125 mmHg.103 Clinical features that may indicate the presence of renovascular hypertension include the following: (a) systolic and diastolic upper abdominal bruits; (b) diastolic hypertension of greater than 115 mmHg; (c) rapid onset of hypertension after the age of 50 years; (d) a sudden worsening of mild to moder-ate essential hypertension; (e) hypertension that is difficult to control with three or more antihypertensives; (f) development of renal insufficiency after angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibi-tors; and (g) development of hypertension during childhood.103All patients with significant hypertension, especially ele-vated diastolic blood pressure, must be considered as suspect for renovascular disease. Young adults with hypertension have a great deal to gain by avoiding lifelong treatment if renovascular hypertension is diagnosed and corrected. Appropriate diagnostic studies and intervention must be timely instituted to detect the possibility of renovascular hypertension in patients with pri-mary hypertension who present for clinical evaluation.Diagnostic EvaluationThe diagnostic requisites for renovascular hypertension include both hypertension and renal artery stenosis. Impairment of the renal function may coexist, although the occurrence of renal insufficiency prior to the development of hypertension is uncommon. Nearly all diagnostic studies for renovascular hypertension evaluate either the anatomic stenosis or renal parenchymal dysfunction attributed to the stenosis. The follow-ing section provides an overview of the strengths and limitations of the most common tests used in the diagnostic evaluation of the patient with suspected renovascular hypertension prior to intervention.Captopril renal scanning is a functional study that assesses renal perfusion before and after administration of the angioten-sin-converting enzyme inhibitor captopril. Captopril inhibits the secretion of angiotensin II. Through this mechanism, it reduces the efferent arteriole vasoconstriction and, as a result, the glo-merular filtration rate (GFR). The test consists of a baseline renal scan and a second renal scan after captopril administra-tion. A positive result indicates that captopril administration (a) increases the time to peak activity to more than 11 minutes or (b) the GFR ratio between sides increases to greater than 1.5:1 compared to a normal baseline scan. Significant parenchymal disease limits the reliability of this study.Renal artery duplex ultrasonography is a noninvasive test of assessing renal artery stenosis both by visualization of the vessel and measurement of the effect of stenosis on blood flow velocity and waveforms. The presence of a severe renal artery stenosis correlates with peak systolic velocities of greater than 180 cm/s and the ratio of these velocities to those in the aorta of greater than 3.5 (Table 23-11). Renal artery duplex is a techni-cally demanding exam, requiring a substantial amount of opera-tor expertise. In addition, the presence of bowel gas and obesity make the exam difficult to perform and interpret. However, in experienced hands and with appropriate patient selection, it can be a high-yield exam and is typically the initial screening test for patients with suspected renal artery occlusive disease.Selective catheterization of the renal vein via a femoral vein approach for assessing renin activity is a more invasive test of detecting the physiologic sequelae of renal artery stenosis. If unilateral disease is present, the affected kidney should secrete high levels of renin while the contralateral kidney should have low renin production. A ratio between the two kidneys, or the renal vein renin ratio (RVRR), of greater than 1.5 is indica-tive of functionally important renovascular hypertension, and it also predicts a favorable response from renovascular revascu-larization. Since this study assesses the ratio between the two kidneys, it is not useful in patients with bilateral disease because both kidneys may secrete abnormally elevated renin levels.The renal:systemic renin index (RSRI) is calculated by subtracting systemic renin activity from individual renal vein renin activity and dividing the remainder by systemic renin activity. This value represents the contribution of each kidney to renin production. In the absence of renal artery stenosis, the Table 23-11Renal duplex diagnostic criteriaRENAL ARTERY  DIAMETER REDUCTIONRENAL ARTERY PSVRARNormal<180 cm/s<3.5<60%≥180 cm/s<3.5≥60%≥180 cm/s≥3.5OcclusionNo signalNo signalPSV = peak systolic velocity; RAR = renal-to-aortic ratio.Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   93627/02/19   4:14 PM 937ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23renal vein renin activity from each kidney is typically 24% or 0.24 higher than the systemic level. As the result, the total of both kidneys’ renin activity is usually 48% greater than the sys-temic activity, a value that represents a steady state of renal renin activity. The RSRI of the affected kidney in patients with renovascular hypertension is greater than 0.24. In the case of unilateral renal artery stenosis with normal contralateral kid-ney, the increase in ipsilateral renin release is normally balanced by suppression of the contralateral kidney renin production, which results in a drop in its RSRI to less than 0.24. Bilateral renal artery disease may negate the contralateral compensatory response, and the autonomous release of renin from both dis-eased kidneys may result in the sum of the individual RSRIs to be considerably greater than 0.48. The prognostic value of RSRI remains limited in that approximately 10% of patients with favorable clinical response following renovascular revas-cularization do not exhibit contralateral renin suppression. As a result, the use of RSRI must be applied with caution in the management of patients with renovascular hypertension.MRA with intravenous gadolinium contrast enhancement has been increasingly used for renal artery imaging because of its ability to provide high-resolution images (Figs. 23-46 and 23-47) while using a minimally nephrotoxic agent. Flow void may be inaccurately interpreted as occlusion or stenosis in MRA. Therefore, unless the quality of the image analysis soft-ware is superior, MRA should be interpreted with caution and used in conjunction with other modalities prior to making plans for operative or endovascular treatment.DSA remains the gold standard to assess renal artery occlusive disease. A flush aortogram is performed first so that any accessory renal arteries can be detected and the origins of all the renal arteries are adequately displayed. The presence of collateral vessels circumventing a renal artery stenosis strongly supports the hemodynamic importance of the stenosis. A pres-sure gradient of 10 mmHg or greater is necessary for collateral Figure 23-46. Magnetic resonance angiography of the abdominal aorta reveals bilateral normal renal arteries.Figure 23-47. Magnetic resonance angiography of the abdominal aorta reveals bilateral ostial renal artery stenosis (arrows).vessel development, which is also associated with activation of the renin-angiotensin cascade.Treatment IndicationsThe therapeutic goals in patients with renovascular disease include: (a) improved blood pressure control, in order to prevent end-organ damage on systems such as the cerebral, coronary, pulmonary, and peripheral circulations; and (b) preservation and possibly improvement of the renal function (Table 23-12).Table 23-12Indications for renal artery revascularizationAngiography Criteria• Documented renal artery stenosis (>70% diameter reduction)• Fibromuscular dysplasia lesion• Pressure gradient >20 mmHg• Affected/unaffected kidney renin ratio >1.5 to 1Clinical Criteria• Refractory or rapidly progressive hypertension• Hypertension associated with flash pulmonary edema without coronary artery disease• Rapidly progressive deterioration in renal function• Intolerance to antihypertensive medications• Chronic renal insufficiency related to bilateral renal artery occlusive disease or stenosis to a solitary functioning kidney• Dialysis-dependent renal failure in a patient with renal artery stenosis but without another definite cause of end-stage renal disease• Recurrent congestive heart failure or flash pulmonary edema not attributable to active coronary ischemiaBrunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   93727/02/19   4:14 PM 938SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIThe indications for endovascular treatment for renal artery occlusive disease include 70% or greater stenosis of one or both renal arteries and at least one of the following clinical criteria:•	Inability to adequately control hypertension despite appropri-ate antihypertensive regimen.•	Chronic renal insufficiency related to bilateral renal artery occlusive disease or stenosis to a solitary functioning kidney.•	Dialysis-dependent renal failure in a patient with renal artery stenosis but without another definite cause of end-stage renal disease.•	Recurrent congestive heart failure or flash pulmonary edema not attributable to active coronary ischemia.Prior to 1990, the most common treatment modality in patients with renal artery occlusive disease is surgical revascu-larization, with either renal artery bypass grafting or renal artery endarterectomy. The advancement of endovascular therapy in the past decade has led to various minimally invasive treatment strategies such as renal artery balloon angioplasty or stenting to control hypertension or to preserve renal function.Surgical ReconstructionThe typical approach for surgical renal artery revasculariza-tion involves a midline xiphoid-to-pubis incision. The posterior peritoneum is incised, and the duodenum is mobilized to the right, starting at the ligament of Treitz. The left renal hilum can be exposed by extending the retroperitoneal dissection to the left along the avascular plane along the inferior border of the pancreas. Mobilization of the left renal vein is essential in these cases and can be achieved by dividing the gonadal, ilio-lumbar, and adrenal veins. The proximal portion of the right renal artery can be exposed through the base of the mesentery by retraction of the left renal vein cephalad and the vena cava to the right. Accessing the most distal portion of the right renal artery requires a Kocher maneuver and duodenal mobiliza-tion. Another approach useful for treating bilateral renal artery lesions involves mobilization of the entire small bowel and the right colon, with a dissection that starts at the ligament of Treitz and proceeds toward the cecum and then along the line of Todd in the right paracolic gutter. Simultaneous dissection along the inferior border of the pancreas provides additional visualization of the left renal artery. Finally, division of the diaphragmatic crura that encircle the suprarenal aorta may sometimes be neces-sary to achieve suprarenal clamping.Types of Surgical Reconstruction. Aortorenal bypass is the most frequently performed reconstruction of ostial occlu-sive renal artery disease. After proximal and distal control is obtained, an elliptical segment of the aorta is excised, and the proximal anastomosis is performed in end-to-side fashion. Autologous vein is the preferred conduit. If the vein is not suit-able, then prosthetic material can be used. An end-to-end anas-tomosis is then performed between the conduit of choice and the renal artery using either a 6-0 or 7-0 polypropylene suture. The length of the arteriotomy needs to be at least three times the diameter of the renal artery to prevent anastomotic restenosis. In the event that the surgeon plans to perform a side-to-side anasto-mosis between the conduit and the renal artery, this is performed first, and the aortic anastomosis follows.Endarterectomy, either transrenal or transaortic, is an alter-native to bypass for short ostial lesions or in patients with mul-tiple renal arteries. The transrenal endarterectomy is performed with a transverse longitudinal incision on the aorta that extends into the diseased renal artery. After plaque removal, the arteri-otomy is closed with a prosthetic patch. Transaortic endarter-ectomy is well suited for patients with multiple renal arteries and short ostial lesions. The aorta is opened longitudinally and aortic sleeve endarterectomy is performed, followed by ever-sion endarterectomy of the renal arteries. Adequate mobiliza-tion of the renal arteries is essential for a safe and complete endarterectomy.Hepatorenal and splenorenal bypass are alternative options of revascularization for patients who might not tolerate aortic clamping or for those with calcified aorta that precludes ade-quate control. For hepatorenal bypass, a right subcostal inci-sion is used, and the hepatic artery is exposed with an incision in the lesser omentum. A Kocher maneuver is performed, the right renal vein is identified and mobilized, and the right renal artery is identified and controlled posteriorly to the vein. Greater saphenous vein is the conduit of choice. The anastomosis is per-formed end-to-side with the common hepatic artery, and end-to-end with the renal artery anterior to the inferior vena cava. The splenorenal bypass is performed via a left subcostal inci-sion. The splenic artery is mobilized from the lesser sac, brought through a retropancreatic plane, and anastomosed end-to-end to the renal artery.Reimplantation of the renal artery is an attractive option of reconstruction in children or in adults with ostial lesions. A redundant renal artery is a prerequisite for the procedure. After mobilization, the artery is transected and spatulated, eversion endarterectomy is performed if necessary, and an end-to-side anastomosis with the aorta is created.Clinical Results of Surgical RepairResults reflect the need for performance of renal artery bypass in high-volume and experienced centers. In a review from a large tertiary center, 92% of the patients with nonatherosclerotic vascular disease had improvement in hypertension, but only 43% were completely cured and taken off antihypertensives.104 Patients younger than age 45 fair better, with a cure rate of 68% and improvement rate of 32%. In patients with atherosclerotic renal artery disease, the cure rate was even smaller (12%), and the overall response to hypertension rate was 85%. The opera-tive mortality rates were 3.1% and 0% in the atherosclerotic and nonatherosclerotic groups, respectively.Renal function improvement occurs within the first week of the operation in approximately two-thirds of patients. A pro-gressive decrease in the GFR is seen after this initial improve-ment, but the rate of decrease is less compared with patients who did not respond at all to operative intervention. Up to three-quarters of patients were permanently removed from dialysis in a large series.105 Favorable response of renal function to revas-cularization improves overall survival.Endovascular TreatmentEndovascular treatment of renal artery occlusive disease was first introduced by Grüntzig who successfully dilated a renal artery stenosis using a balloon catheter technique. This tech-nique requires passage of a guidewire under fluoroscopic control typically from a femoral artery approach to across the stenosis in the renal artery. A balloon dilating catheter is passed over the guidewire and positioned within the area of stenosis and inflated to produce a controlled disruption of the arterial wall. Alternatively, a balloon-mounted expandable stent can be used Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   93827/02/19   4:14 PM 939ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23to primarily dilate the renal artery stenosis. Completion angiog-raphy is usually performed to assess the immediate results. The technical aspect of an endovascular renal artery revasculariza-tion is discussed in the following section.Techniques of Renal Artery Angioplasty and Stenting.  Access to the renal artery for endovascular intervention is typi-cally performed via a femoral artery approach, although a bra-chial artery approach can be considered in the event of severe aortoiliac occlusive disease, aortoiliac aneurysm, or severe cau-dal renal artery angulation. Once an introducer sheath is placed in the femoral artery, an aortogram is performed with a pigtail catheter placed in the suprarenal aorta. Additional oblique views are frequently necessary to more precisely visualize the orifice of the stenosed renal artery and thoroughly assess the presence of accessory renal arteries. Noniodinated contrast agents, such as carbon dioxide and gadolinium, can be used in endovascular renal intervention in patients with renal dysfunction or history of allergic reaction.After systemic heparinization, catheterization of the renal artery can be performed using a variety of selective angled cath-eters, including the RDC, Cobra-2, Simmons I, or SOS Omni catheter. A selective renal angiogram is then performed to con-firm position, and the lesion is crossed with either 0.035-inch or a 0.018to 0.014-inch guidewires. It is important to main-tain the distal wire position without movement in the tertiary renal branches during guiding sheath placement to reduce the possibility of parenchymal perforation and spasm. A guiding sheath or a guiding catheter is then advanced at the orifice of the renal artery and provides a secure access for balloon and stent deployment.Balloon angioplasty is performed with a balloon sized to the diameter of the normal renal artery adjacent to the stenosis. Choosing a balloon with diameter 4 mm is a reasonable first choice. The luminal diameter of the renal artery can be further assessed by comparing it to the fully inflated balloon. Such a comparison may provide a reference guide to determine whether renal artery dilatation with a larger diameter angioplasty balloon is necessary.Once balloon angioplasty of the renal artery is completed, an angiogram is performed to document the procedural result. Radiographic evidence of either residual stenosis or renal artery dissection constitutes suboptimal angioplasty results, which warrants an immediate renal artery stent placement. Moreover, atherosclerotic involvement of the very proximal renal artery that involves the vessel orifice typically requires stent place-ment. A balloon-expandable stent is typically used and is positioned in such a way that it protrudes into the aorta by  1 to 2 mm. The size of the stent is determined by the size of the renal artery, taking into account a desirable 10% to 20% over-sizing. After the stent deployment, the angiogram is repeated, and upon a satisfactory result, the devices are withdrawn. It is critical to maintain the guidewire access across the renal lesion until satisfactory completion angiogram is obtained. Spasm of the branches of the renal artery will usually respond to nitro-glycerin 100 to 200 μg administered through the guiding sheath directly into the renal artery.While endovascular therapy of renal artery occlusive disease is considerably less invasive than conventional renal artery bypass operation, complications relating to this treat-ment modality can occur. In a study in which Guzman and colleagues compared the complications following renal artery angioplasty and surgical revascularization, the authors noted that major complication rates following endovascular and sur-gical treatment were 17% and 31%, respectively.106 In contrast, significantly greater minor complications were associated with the endovascular cohort, with a minor complication rate of 48% compared with 7% in the surgical group. In a prospective randomized study that compared the clinical outcome of renal artery balloon angioplasty versus stenting for renal ostial ath-erosclerotic lesion, comparable complications rates were found in the two groups (39% vs. 43%, respectively). However, the incidence of restenosis at 6 months was significantly higher in the balloon angioplasty cohort than the stenting group (48% vs. 14%, respectively). This study underscores the clinical superior-ity of renal stenting compared to renal balloon angioplasty alone in patients with ostial stenosis.107Deterioration in renal function, albeit transient, is a com-mon complication following endovascular renal artery inter-vention. This is most likely the combined result of the use of iodinated contrast and the occurrence of renal parenchymal embolism due to wire and catheter manipulation. In most cases, this is a temporary problem, as supportive care with adequate fluid hydration is sufficient to reverse the renal dysfunction. However, transient hemodialysis may become necessary in approximately 1% of patients. Other complications include vas-cular access complications (bleeding, hematoma, femoral nerve injury, arteriovenous fistula, and pseudoaneurysm), target ves-sel dissection, perinephric hematoma, early postoperative renal artery thrombosis, and extremity atheroembolism from throm-bus in the aorta or the iliac arteries.Clinical Results of Endovascular InterventionsPercutaneous Transluminal Balloon Angioplasty. FMD of the renal artery is the most common treatment indication for percutaneous transluminal balloon angioplasty. Patients with symptomatic FMD such as hypertension or renal insufficiency usually respond well to renal artery balloon angioplasty alone. In contrast, balloon angioplasty generally is not an effective treat-ment for patients with renal artery stenosis or proximal occlusive disease of the renal artery, due to the high incidence of restenosis with balloon angioplasty alone. In the latter group of patients, primary stent placement is the preferred endovascular treatment. The long-term benefit of renal artery balloon angioplasty in patients with FMD was reported by Surowiec and colleagues.108 They followed 14 patients who underwent 19 interventions on 18 renal artery segments. The technical success rate of balloon angioplasty for FMD was 95%. Primary patency rates were 81%, 69%, 69%, and 69% at 2, 4, 6, and 8 years, respectively. Assisted primary patency rates were 87%, 87%, 87%, and 87% at 2, 4, 6, and 8 years, respectively. The restenosis rate was 25% at  8 years. Clinical benefit, as defined by either improved or cured hypertension, was found in 79% of patients overall, with two-thirds of patients having maintained this benefit at 8 years. The authors concluded that balloon angioplasty is highly effective in symptomatic FMD with excellent durable functional benefits.The utility of balloon angioplasty alone in the treatment of renovascular hypertension appears to be limited. van Jaars-veld and associates performed a prospective study in which patients with renal artery stenosis were randomized to either drug therapy or balloon angioplasty treatment.109 A total of 106 patients with 50% diameter stenosis or greater plus hyperten-sion or renal insufficiency were randomized in the study. At  3 months, there was no difference in the degree to which blood Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   93927/02/19   4:14 PM 940SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIpressure was controlled between the two groups. However, the degree and dose of antihypertensive medications were slightly lowered in the balloon angioplasty group. The above advantage of the angioplasty group completely disappeared at 12 months, making the authors conclude that in the treatment of patients with hypertension and renal artery stenosis, percutaneous trans-luminal balloon angioplasty alone offers minimal advantage over antihypertensive drug therapy.Renal Artery Stenting. Endovascular stent placement is the treatment of choice for patients with symptomatic or high-grade renal artery occlusive disease (Fig. 23-48). This is due in part to the high incidence of restenosis with balloon angioplasty alone, particularly in the setting of ostial stenosis. Renal artery stenting is also indicated for renal artery dissection caused by balloon angioplasty or other catheter-based interventions. Numerous studies have clearly demonstrated the clinical efficacy of renal artery stenting when compared to balloon angioplasty alone in patients with high-grade renal artery stenosis.White and colleagues conducted a study to evaluate the role of renal artery stenting in patients with poorly controlled hyper-tension and renal artery lesions that did not respond well to bal-loon angioplasty alone.110 The technical success of the procedure was 99%. The mean blood pressure values were 173 ± 25/88 ±  17 mmHg prior to stent implantation and 146 ± 20/77 ± 12 mmHg 6 months after renal artery stenting (P <0.01). Angiographic follow-up with 67 patients (mean 8.7 ± 5 months) demonstrated that restenosis, as defined by 50% or greater luminal narrowing, occurred in 15 patients (19%). The study concluded that renal artery stenting is a highly effective treatment for renovascular hypertension, with a low angiographic restenosis rate. In another similar study, Blum and colleagues prospectively performed renal artery stenting in 68 patients (74 lesions) with ostial renal artery stenosis and suboptimal balloon angioplasty.111 Patients were fol-lowed for a mean of 27 months with measurements of blood pres-sure and serum creatinine, duplex sonography, and intra-arterial angiography. Five-year patency was 84.5% (mean follow-up,  27 months). Restenosis occurred in 8 of 74 arteries (11%), but after reintervention, the secondary 5-year patency rate was 92.4%. Hypertension was cured or improved in 78% of patients. The authors concluded that primary stent placement is an effec-tive treatment for renal artery stenosis involving the ostium.BAFigure 23-48. Renal artery stenting. A. Focal lesion in the renal artery (arrow). B. Poststenting angiogram reveals a satisfactory result  following a renal artery stenting placement (arrow).The clinical utility of renal artery stenting in renal func-tion preservation was analyzed by several studies, which mea-sured serial serum creatinine levels to determine the response of renal function following endovascular intervention.112,113 In a study reported by Harden and colleagues who performed 33 renal artery stenting procedures in 32 patients with renal insuf-ficiency, they noted that renal function improved or stabilized in 22 patients (69%).113 In a similar study, Watson and associates evaluated the effect of renal artery stenting on renal function by comparing the slopes of the regression lines derived from the reciprocal of serum creatinine versus time.112 A total of 61 renal stenting procedures were performed in 33 patients, and the authors found that after stent placement, the slopes of the reciprocal of the serum creatinine (1/Scr) were positive in 18 patients and less negative in 7 patients. The study concluded that in patients with chronic renal insufficiency due to obstructive renal artery stenosis, renal artery stenting is effective in improv-ing or stabilizing renal function.The clinical outcome of several large clinical studies of renal artery stenting in the treatment of renovascular hyperten-sion or chronic renal insufficiency is shown in Table 23-13. These studies uniformly demonstrated an excellent technical success rate with low incidence of restenosis or procedural-related complications. A similar analysis was reported by Leer-touwer and colleagues who performed a meta-analysis of 14 studies comparing patients with renal arterial stent placement to those who underwent balloon angioplasty alone for renal arterial stenosis.114 The study found that stent placement proved highly successful, with an initial technical success of 98%. The overall cure rate for hypertension was 20%, whereas hypertension was improved in 49%. Renal function improved in 30% of patients and stabilized in 38% of patients. The restenosis rate at follow-up of 6 to 29 months was 17%. Renal stenting resulted in a higher technical success rate and a lower restenosis rate when compared to balloon angioplasty alone.AORTOILIAC OCCLUSIVE DISEASEThe distal abdominal aorta and the iliac arteries are common sites affected by atherosclerosis. The symptoms and natural history of the atherosclerotic process affecting the aortoiliac Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   94027/02/19   4:14 PM 941ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23arterial segment are influenced by the disease distribution and extent. Atherosclerotic plaques may cause clinical symptoms by restricting blood flow due to luminal obstruction or by embo-lizing atherosclerotic debris to the lower extremity circulation. If the aortoiliac plaques reach sufficient mass and impinge on the arterial lumen, obstruction of blood flow to lower extremi-ties occurs. Various risk factors exist that can lead to the devel-opment of aortoiliac occlusive disease. Recognition of these factors and understanding of this disease entity will enable phy-sicians to prescribe the appropriate treatment strategy, which may alleviate symptoms and improve quality of life.Diagnostic EvaluationOn clinical examination patients often have weakened femoral pulses and a reduced ABI. Verification of iliac occlusive dis-ease is usually made by color duplex scanning, which reveals either a peak systolic velocity ratio ≥2.5 at the site of stenosis and or a monophasic waveform. Noninvasive tests such as pulse volume recordings (PVRs) of the lower extremity with estima-tion of the thigh-brachial pressure index may be suggestive of aortoiliac disease. MRA and multidetector CTA are increasingly being used to determine the extent and type of obstruction. DSA offers the interventionalist the benefit of making a diagnosis and the option of performing an endovascular treatment in a single session. Angiography provides important information regard-ing distal arterial runoff vessels as well as the patency of the PFA. Presence of pelvic and groin collaterals is important to provide crucial collateral flow in maintaining lower limb viabil-ity. It must be emphasized, however, that patients should be subjected to angiography only if their symptoms warrant surgi-cal intervention.Differential DiagnosisDegenerative hip or spine disease, lumbar disk herniation, spinal stenosis, diabetic neuropathy, and other neuromuscular problems can produce symptoms that may be mistaken for vas-cular claudication. Such cases can be distinguished from true claudication by the fact that the discomfort from neuromuscular problems is often relieved by sitting or lying down, as opposed to cessation of ambulation. In addition, complaints that are Table 23-13Clinical outcome of renal artery stent placement in the treatment of renovascular hypertension and renal insufficiencyAUTHORYEARPATIENT NO.TECHNICAL SUCCESS (%)FOLLOW-UP (MONTHS)RENAL INSUFFICIENCY (%)RENOVASCULAR HYPERTENSION (%)COMPLICATION (%)RESTENOSIS (%)STABLEIMPROVEDCUREDIMPROVEDIannone1301996 63 991045364351314Harden1261997 32100 63434N/AN/A 313Blum1241997 6810027N/AN/A1662 011White1231997100 99 6N/A20N/AN/A 219Shannon1321998 21100 92943N/AN/A 90Rundback1311998 45 9417N/AN/AN/AN/A 925Dorros128199816310048N/AN/A35111N/AHenry1291999210 9925N/A291961 39Bush1272001 73 8920213813611216N/A = not applicable.experienced upon standing suggest nonvascular causes. When confusion persists, the use of noninvasive vascular laboratory testing modalities, including treadmill exercise, can help estab-lish the diagnosis.Collateral Arterial NetworkThe principal collateral pathways in severe aortoiliac artery occlusive disease or chronic aortic occlusion that may provide blood flow distal to the aortoiliac lesion include: (a) the superior mesenteric artery to the distal IMA via its superior hemorrhoidal branch to the middle and inferior hemorrhoidals to the internal iliac artery; (b) the lumbar arteries to the superior gluteal artery to the internal iliac system; (c) the lumbar arteries to the lateral and deep circumflex arteries to the CFA; and (d) Winslow’s pathway from the subclavian to the superior epigastric artery to the inferior epigastric artery to the external iliac arteries at the groin (Fig. 23-49). In general, treatment indications for aor-toiliac artery occlusive disease include disabling claudication, ischemic rest pain, nonhealing lower extremity tissue wound, and lower extremity microembolization that arises from aor-toiliac lesions.Disease ClassificationBased on the atherosclerotic disease pattern, aortoiliac occlusive disease can be classified into three types (Fig. 23-50). Type I aortoiliac disease, which occurs in 5% to 10% of patients, is confined to the distal abdominal aorta and common iliac vessels (Fig. 23-51). Due to the localized nature of this type of aortic obstruction and formation of collateral blood flow around the occluded segment, limb-threatening symptoms are rare in the absence of more distal disease (Fig. 23-52). This type of aor-toiliac occlusive disease occurs in a relatively younger group of patients (in their mid-50s), compared with patients who have more femoropopliteal disease. Patients with a type I disease pat-tern have a lower incidence of hypertension and diabetes but a significant frequency of abnormal blood lipid levels, particu-larly type IV hyperlipoproteinemia. Symptoms typically consist of bilateral thigh or buttock claudication and fatigue. Men report diminished penile tumescence and may have complete loss of erectile function. These symptoms in the absence of femoral Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   94127/02/19   4:14 PM 942SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 23-50. Aortoiliac disease can be classified into three types. Type I represents focal disease affecting the distal aorta and proxi-mal common iliac artery. Type II represents diffuse aortoiliac dis-ease above the inguinal ligament. Type III represents multisegment occlusive diseases involving aortoiliac and infrainguinal arterial vessels.Figure 23-51. Type I aortoiliac disease is confined to the distal abdominal aorta (long arrow) or proximal common iliac arteries. Due to the localized nature of this type of aortic obstruction and formation of collateral blood flow around the occluded segment (short arrows), limb-threatening symptoms are rare in the absence of more distal disease.Figure 23-49. Pertinent collateral pathways are developed in the event of chronic severe aortoiliac occlusive disease. As illustrated in this multidetector computed tomography angiography, these col-laterals include epigastric arteries (large white arrows), an enlarged inferior mesenteric artery (arrowhead), and enlarged lumbar arter-ies (black arrows).Type IType IIType IIIpulses constitute Leriche’s syndrome. Rest pain is unusual with isolated aortoiliac disease unless distal disease coexists. Occa-sionally patients report a prolonged history of thigh and buttock claudication that recently becomes more severe. It is likely that this group has underlying aortoiliac disease that has progressed to acute occlusion of the terminal aorta. Others may present with “trash foot,” which represents microembolization into the distal vascular bed (Fig. 23-53). Type II aortoiliac disease rep-resents a more diffuse atherosclerotic progression that involves predominately the abdominal aorta with disease extension into the common iliac artery. This disease pattern affects approxi-mately 25% patients with aortoiliac occlusive disease. Type III aortoiliac occlusive disease, which affects approximately 65% of patients with aortoiliac occlusive disease, is widespread dis-ease that is seen above and below the inguinal ligament (Fig. 23-54). Patients with “multilevel” disease are older, more com-monly male (with a male-to-female ratio of 6:1), and much more likely to have diabetes, hypertension, and associated atheroscle-rotic disease involving cerebral, coronary, and visceral arter-ies. Progression of the occlusive process is more likely in these patients than in those with localized aortoiliac disease. For these reasons, most patients with a type III pattern tend to present with symptoms of advanced ischemia and require revasculariza-tion for limb salvage rather than for claudication. These patients have a decreased 10-year life expectancy when compared to patients with localized aortoiliac disease.The most commonly used classification system of iliac lesions has been set forth by the TransAtlantic Inter-Society Consensus (TASC) group with recommended treatment options. This lesion classification categorizes the extent of atheroscle-rosis and has suggested a therapeutic approach based on this classification (Table 23-14 and Fig. 23-55).1 According to this consensus document, endovascular therapy is the treatment of choice for type A lesions, and surgery is the treatment of choice for type D lesions. Endovascular treatment is the preferred treat-ment for type B lesions, and surgery is the preferred treatment for good-risk patients with type C lesions. In comparison to the 2000 TASC document, the commission has not only made allowances for treatment of more extensive lesions, but it also takes into account the continuing evolution of endovascular technology and the skills of individual interventionalists when stating that the patient’s comorbidities, fully informed patient preference, and the local operator’s long-term success rates Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   94227/02/19   4:14 PM 943ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23Figure 23-52. A. Multidetector computed tomography angiography of the aortoiliac artery circulation in a 63-year-old male with buttock claudication. B. Three-dimensional image reconstruction shows intra-arterial calcification of the aorta (large arrow) and right common iliac artery (small arrow). This is consistent with type I aortoiliac occlusive disease.Figure 23-53. Atherosclerotic disease involving the aortoiliac segment can result in microembolization of the lower leg circulation, resulting in trash foot or digital gangrene of toes.must be considered when making treatment decisions for type B and type C lesions.1,115General Treatment ConsiderationsThere is no effective medical therapy for the management of aortoiliac disease, but control of risk factors may help slow pro-gression of atherosclerosis. Patients should have hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and diabetes mellitus controlled. They should be advised to stop smoking. Most patients are empirically placed on antiplatelet therapy. A graduated exercise program may improve walking efficiency, endothelial function, and metabolic adaptations in skeletal muscle, but, there is usually minimal improvement in patients with aortoiliac disease who are treated with these measures. Failure to respond to exercise and/or drug therapy should prompt consideration for limb revas-cularization. Patients with buttock claudication and reduced or absent femoral pulses who fail to respond to exercise and drug therapy should be considered for revascularization because they are less likely than patients with more distal lesions to improve without concomitant surgical or endovascular intervention.Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   94327/02/19   4:14 PM 944SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 23-54. Type III aortoiliac occlusive disease is a mul-tilevel disease pattern that affects the aortoiliac segment as well as infrainguinal femoropopliteal vessels. Most patients with this disease pattern tend to present with symptoms of advanced isch-emia and require revascularization for limb salvage rather than for claudication.Table 23-14TASC classification of aortoiliac occlusive lesionsType A lesions• Unilateral or bilateral stenoses of CIA• Unilateral or bilateral single short (≤3 cm) stenosis of EIAType B lesions• Short (≤3 cm) stenosis of infrarenal aorta• Unilateral CIA occlusion• Single or multiple stenosis totaling 3–10 cm involving the EIA not extending into the CFA• Unilateral EIA occlusion not involving the origins of internal iliac artery or CFAType C lesions• Bilateral CIA occlusions• Bilateral EIA stenoses 3–10 cm long not extending  into the CFA• Unilateral EIA stenosis extending into the CFA• Unilateral EIA occlusion that involves the origins of internal iliac artery and/or CFA• Heavily calcified unilateral EIA occlusion with or without involvement of origins of internal iliac artery and/or CFAType D lesions• Infrarenal aortoiliac occlusion• Diffuse disease involving the aorta and both iliac arteries requiring treatment• Diffuse multiple stenoses involving the unilateral CIA, EIA, and CFA• Unilateral occlusions of both CIA and EIA• Bilateral occlusions of EIA• Iliac stenoses in patients with AAA requiring treatment and not amenable to endograft placement or other lesions requiring open aortic or iliac surgeryAAA = abdominal aortic aneurysm; CFA = common femoral artery; CIA = common iliac artery; EIA = external iliac artery.Type A lesionsType B lesionsType D lesionsType C lesionsFigure 23-55. Schematic depiction of the TransAtlantic Inter-Society Consensus classification of aortoiliac occlusive lesions.Surgical Reconstruction of Aortoiliac  Occlusive DiseaseAortobifemoral Bypass. Surgical options for treatment of aortoiliac occlusive diseases consist of various configurations of aortobifemoral bypass grafting, various types of extra-anatomic bypass grafts, and aortoiliac endarterectomy. The procedure performed is determined by several factors, including ana-tomic distribution of the disease, clinical condition of the patient, and personal preference of the surgeon.In most cases, aortobifemoral bypass is performed because patients usually have disease in both iliac systems. Although one side may be more severely affected than the other, progression does occur, and bilateral bypass does not complicate the procedure or add to the physiologic stress of the operation. Aortobifemoral bypass reliably relieves symp-toms, has excellent long-term patency (approximately 70–80% at 10 years), and can be completed with a tolerable periopera-tive mortality (2–3%).Technical Considerations for Aortobifemoral Bypass Both femoral arteries are initially exposed to ensure that they are ade-quate for the distal anastomoses. The abdomen is then opened in the midline, the small intestine is retracted to the right, and the posterior peritoneum overlying the aorta is incised. A retro-peritoneal approach may be selected as an alternative in certain situations. This approach involves making a left flank incision and displacing the peritoneum and its contents to the right. Such an approach is contraindicated if the right renal artery is acutely occluded, since visualization from the left flank is very poor. Tunneling of a graft to the right femoral artery is also more 4difficult from a retroperitoneal approach, but can be achieved. The retroperitoneal approach has been reputed to be better toler-ated than midline laparotomy for patients with multiple previ-ous abdominal operations and with severe pulmonary disease. Further proposed advantages of the retroperitoneal approach include less gastrointestinal disturbance, decreased third space Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   94427/02/19   4:14 PM 945ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23fluid losses, and ease with which the pararenal aorta can be accessed. There are randomized reports, however, that support and refute the superiority of this approach. A collagen-impreg-nated, knitted Dacron graft is used to perform the proximal aortic anastomosis, which can then be made in either an end-to-end or end-to-side fashion using 3-0 polypropylene suture. The proximal anastomosis should be made as close as possible to the renal arteries to decrease the incidence of restenosis from pro-gression of the atherosclerotic occlusive process in the future.An end-to-end proximal aortic anastomosis is necessary in patients with an aortic aneurysm or complete aortic occlu-sion extending up to the renal arteries (Fig. 23-56). Although in theory the end-to-end configuration allows for less turbulence and less chance of competitive flow with still patent host iliac vessels, there have not been consistent results to substantiate differences in patency between end-to-end and end-to-side grafts. Relative indications for an end-to-side proximal aortic anastomosis include the presence of large aberrant renal arter-ies, an unusually large IMA with poor back-bleeding suggesting inadequate collateralization, and/or occlusive disease involv-ing bilateral external iliac arteries. Under such circumstances, end-to-end bypass from the proximal aorta to the femoral level devascularizes the pelvic region because there is no antegrade or retrograde flow in the occluded external iliac arteries to supply the hypogastric arteries. As a result of the pelvic devasculariza-tion, there is an increased incidence of impotence, postoperative colon ischemia, buttock ischemia, and paraplegia secondary to spinal cord ischemia despite the presence of excellent femoral and distal pulses.An end-to-side proximal aortic anastomosis can be associ-ated with certain disadvantages, which include the potential for distal embolization when applying a partially occlusive aortic clamp (Fig. 23-57). Furthermore, the distal aorta often pro-ceeds to total occlusion after an end-to-side anastomosis. There Figure 23-56. In an end-to-end proximal aortic anastomosis, the aorta is divided in half. The proximal end of the aorta is anasto-mosed to the end of a prosthetic graft, while the distal divided aortic stump is oversewn.Figure 23-57. In an end-to-side aortic anastomosis, the end of a prosthetic graft is connected to the side of an aortic incision.may also be a higher incidence of aortoenteric fistula follow-ing construction of end-to-side proximal anastomoses because the anterior projection makes subsequent tissue coverage and reperitonealization of the graft more difficult. The limbs of the graft are tunneled through the retroperitoneum to the groin, where an end-to-side anastomosis is fashioned between the graft and the bifurcation of the CFA using 5-0 polypropylene suture. Endarterectomy or patch angioplasty of the profunda femo-ris may be required concurrently. Once the anastomoses have been fashioned and the graft thoroughly flushed, the clamps are removed and the surgeon carefully controls the degree of aortic occlusion until full flow is reestablished. During this period, the patient must be carefully monitored for hypotension. Declamp-ing hypotension is a complication of sudden restoration of aortic flow, particularly following prolonged occlusion. Once flow has been reestablished, the peritoneum is carefully reapproximated over the prosthesis to prevent fistulization into the intestine.Despite the presence of multilevel disease in most patients, a properly performed aortobifemoral operation can provide arterial inflow and alleviate claudication symptoms in 70% to 80% of patients; however, 10% to 15% of patients will require simultaneous outflow reconstruction to address distal ischemia and facilitate limb salvage. The advantage of concomitant distal revascularization is avoidance of reoperation in a scarred groin. As a rule, if the profunda femoris can accept a 4-mm probe and if a No. 3 Fogarty embolectomy catheter can be passed distally for 20 cm or more, the PFA will be sufficient for outflow, and concomitant distal revascularization is not necessary.Aortic Endarterectomy. Aortoiliac endarterectomy is rarely performed because it is associated with greater blood loss and greater sexual dysfunction and is more difficult to perform. Long-term patency is comparable with aortobifemoral grafting, and thus it remains a reasonable option in cases in which the risk of infection of a graft is excessive because it involves no pros-thetic tissue. Aortoiliac endarterectomy was useful when disease was localized to either the aorta or common iliac arteries; how-ever, at present, aortoiliac PTA, stents, and other catheter-based therapies have become first-line treatment in this scenario. End-arterectomy should not be performed if the aorta is aneurysmal because of continued aneurysmal degeneration of the endarter-ectomized segment. If there is total occlusion of the aorta to the level of the renal arteries, aortic transection several centime-ters below the renal arteries with thrombectomy of the aortic cuff followed by graft insertion is easier and more expeditious when compared to endarterectomy. Involvement of the external iliac artery makes aortic endarterectomy more difficult to com-plete because of decreased vessel diameter, increased length, and exposure issues. The ability to establish an appropriate Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   94527/02/19   4:14 PM 946SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIendarterectomy plane is compromised due to the muscular and inherently adherent nature of the media in this location. There is a higher incidence of early thrombosis and late failure with extended aortoiliofemoral endarterectomy when compared to bypass grafting as a result of recurrent stenosis.Axillofemoral Bypass. An axillofemoral bypass is an extra-anatomic reconstruction that derives arterial inflow from the axillary artery to the femoral artery. This is a treatment option for patients with medical comorbidities that prohibit an abdominal vascular reconstruction. It may be performed under local anesthesia and is used for limb salvage. Extra-anatomic bypasses have lower patency when compared to aortobifemo-ral and, therefore, are seldom recommended for claudication. Before performing this operation, the surgeon should check pulses and blood pressure in both arms to ensure that there is no obvious disease affecting flow through the axillary system. Angiography of the axillosubclavian vasculature is not neces-sary, but can be helpful if performed at the time of aortography. The axillary artery is exposed below the clavicle, and a 6to 8-mm externally reinforced PTFE graft is tunneled subcutane-ously down the lateral chest wall and lateral abdomen to the groin. It is anastomosed ipsilaterally at the CFA bifurcation into the SFA and PFA. A femorofemoral crossover graft using a 6to 8-mm externally reinforced PTFE graft is then used to revascularize the opposite extremity if necessary. Reported patency rates over 5 years vary from 30% to 80%.116 Paradoxi-cally, although it is a less complex procedure than aortofemoral grafting, the mortality rate is higher (10%), reflecting the com-promised medical status of these patients.Iliofemoral Bypass. One option for patients with unilateral occlusion of the distal common iliac or external iliac arteries is iliofemoral grafting (Fig. 23-58). Long-term patency is compa-rable to aortounifemoral bypass, and because the procedure can be performed using a retroperitoneal approach without clamping the aorta, the perioperative mortality is less.116Femorofemoral Bypass. A femorofemoral bypass is another option for patients with unilateral stenosis or occlusion of the common or external iliac artery who have rest pain, tissue loss, BAFigure 23-58. A. Skin markings showing the incisions of an ilio-femoral bypass. B. A prosthetic bypass graft is used for an iliofemo-ral artery bypass in which the proximal anastomosis is connected to the common iliac artery (long arrow) while the distal anastomosis is connected to the common femoral artery (short arrow).or intractable claudication. The primary (assisted) patency at 5 years is reported to be 60% to 70%, and although this is inferior when compared to aortofemoral bypass, there are physi-ologic benefits, especially for patients with multiple comorbidi-ties because it is not necessary to cross-clamp the aorta.117 There are no studies supporting the superiority of unsupported or exter-nally supported PTFE over Dacron for choice of conduit. The fear of the recipient extremity stealing blood from the extremity ipsilateral to the donor limb is not realized unless the donor iliac artery and donor outflow arteries are diseased. Depending on the skills of the interventionalist or surgeon, many iliac lesions classified as TASC B, C, or D can now be addressed using an endovascular approach, thus obviating the need to perform a femorofemoral bypass. Additionally, femorofemoral bypass can be used as an adjuvant procedure after iliac inflow has been optimized with endovascular methods.Obturator Bypass. An obturator bypass is used to recon-struct arterial anatomy in patients with groin sepsis resulting from prior prosthetic grafting, intra-arterial drug abuse, groin neoplasm, or damage from prior groin irradiation. This bypass can originate from the common iliac artery, external iliac artery, or uninvolved limb of an aortobifemoral bypass. A conduit of Dacron, PTFE, or autologous vein is tunneled through the anteromedial portion of the obturator membrane to the distal superficial femoral artery or popliteal artery. The obturator membrane must be divided sharply so as avoid injury to adja-cent structures, and care must be taken to identify the obturator artery and nerve that pass posterolaterally. After the bypass is completed and the wounds isolated, the infected area is entered, the involved arteries are debrided to healthy tissue, and vascu-larized muscle flaps are mobilized to cover the ligated ends. There have been varied results in terms of patency and limb salvage for obturator bypass. Some authors have reported 57% 5-year patency and 77% 5-year limb salvage rates, whereas others have shown a high rate of reinfection and low patency requiring reintervention.118,119Thoracofemoral Bypass. The indications for thoracofemoral bypass are (a) multiple prior surgeries with a failed infrarenal aortic reconstruction and (b) infected aortic prosthesis. This pro-cedure is more physiologically demanding than other extra-ana-tomic reconstructions because the patient must not only tolerate clamping the descending thoracic aorta but also performance of a left thoracotomy. The graft is tunneled to the left CFA from the left thorax posterior to the left kidney in the anterior axillary line using a small incision in the periphery of the diaphragm and an incision in the left inguinal ligament to gain access to the extraperitoneal space from below. The right limb is tunneled in the space of Retzius in an attempt to decrease kinking that is more likely to occur with subcutaneous, suprapubic tunneling. Thoracofemoral bypass has long-term patency comparable to aortofemoral bypass.Complications of Surgical Aortoiliac ReconstructionWith current surgical techniques and conduits, early postopera-tive hemorrhage is unusual and occurs in 1% to 2%, which is usually the result of technical oversight or coagulation abnor-mality.120 Acute limb ischemia occurring after aortoiliac surgery may be the result of acute thrombosis or distal thromboembo-lism. The surgeon can prevent thromboembolic events by (a) avoiding excessive manipulation of the aorta, (b) ensuring Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   94627/02/19   4:14 PM 947ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23adequate systemic heparinization, (c) judicious placement of vascular clamps, and (d) thorough flushing prior to restoring blood flow. Acute thrombosis of an aortofemoral graft limb in the early perioperative period occurs in 1% to 3% of patients.120 Thrombectomy of the graft limb is performed through a trans-verse opening in the hood of the graft at the femoral anastomo-sis. With this approach, it is possible to inspect the interior of the anastomosis and pass embolectomy catheters distally to clear the superficial femoral and profunda arteries. Various complica-tions may be encountered following aortoiliac or aortobifemoral reconstruction (Table 23-15).Intestinal ischemia following aortic reconstruction occurs in approximately 2% of cases; however, with colonoscopy mucosal ischemia, which is a milder form, is seen more fre-quently. The surgeon can identify patients who require con-comitant revascularization of the IMA, hypogastric arteries, or mesenteric arteries by examining the preoperative arteriogram for the presence of associated occlusive lesions in the celiac axis, the superior mesenteric arteries, or both. Likewise, patients with a patent and enlarged IMA or a history of prior colonic resections will benefit from IMA reimplantation.In a comprehensive review of 747 patients who had aor-toiliac operations for occlusive disease, secondary operations for late complications such as reocclusion, pseudoaneurysms, and infection were necessary in 21% over a 22-year period.121 The most frequent late complication is graft thrombosis. Limb occlusion occurs in 5% to 10% of patients within 5 years of the index operation and in 15% to 30% of patients ≥10 years after the index operation. Anastomotic pseudoaneurysms occur in 1% and 5% of femoral anastomoses in patients with aortofemo-ral grafts. Predisposing factors to pseudoaneurysm formation Table 23-15Perioperative complications of aortobifemoral bypass graftingMedical Complications• Perioperative myocardial infarction• Respiratory failure• Ischemia-induced renal failure• Bleeding from intravenous heparinization• StrokeProcedure-Related ComplicationsEarly• Declamping shock• Graft thrombosis• Retroperitoneal bleeding• Groin hematoma• Bowel ischemia/infarction• Peripheral embolization• Erectile dysfunction• Lymphatic leak• Chylous ascites• ParaplegiaLate• Graft infection• Anastomotic pseudoaneurysm• Aortoenteric fistula• Aortourinary fistula• Graft thrombosisinclude progression of degenerative changes within the host artery, excessive tension at the anastomosis, and infection.121 Due to the associated risks of thrombosis, distal emboliza-tion, infection, and rupture, anastomotic aneurysms should be repaired expeditiously.Infection following aortoiliac reconstruction is a devastat-ing complication that occurs in 1% of cases. Femoral anastomo-ses of aortofemoral reconstructions and axillofemoral bypasses are prone to infection. Use of prophylactic antibiotics and metic-ulous surgical technique are vital in preventing contamination of the graft at the time of implantation. If infection appears local-ized to a single groin, graft preservation and local measures such as antibiotic irrigation, aggressive debridement, and soft tissue coverage with rotational muscle flaps may prove successful. Most patients with infected aortoiliofemoral reconstructions usually require graft excision and revascularization via remote uncontaminated routes or the use of in situ replacement to clear the infective process and maintain limb viability. Aortoenteric fistula and associated gastrointestinal hemorrhage are devas-tating complications, with a 50% incidence of death or limb loss. The incidence of aortoenteric fistula formation appears to be higher after an end-to-side proximal anastomosis because it is more difficult to cover the prosthesis with viable tissue and avoid contact with the gastrointestinal tract with this configu-ration.121 Treatment of aortoenteric fistula requires resection of all prosthetic material, closure of the infrarenal abdominal aorta, repair of the gastrointestinal tract, and revascularization by means of an extra-anatomic graft.Endovascular Treatment for Aortic DiseaseAlthough aortofemoral bypass surgery has excellent long-term patency and can be performed with low mortality rates, there are patients who are unable to withstand the physiologic stress of longer open procedures performed under general anesthe-sia, which require aortic cross-clamping and which are associ-ated with greater blood loss. These patients are more suited to endovascular interventions despite the decreased durability and requirement for more frequent reinterventions.Focal Aortic Stenosis. The endovascular technique used to treat infrarenal aortic stenoses is similar to that used for iliac artery disease. Bilateral CFA access is established followed by insertion of a 6-French sheath. The lesion is crossed using a hydrophilic wire and a supporting selective catheter and then changed for a stiffer guidewire. A self-expanding nitinol stent or a balloon-expandable stent mounted on a larger-caliber angio-plasty balloon is implanted followed by adequate postdilation. At the physician’s discretion, “kissing” stents, simultaneous bilateral proximal iliac stents, are deployed if the lesion is in the distal aorta in the proximity of the aortic bifurcation. The role of covered stents such as cuffs made for endoluminal AAA repair has not been rigorously studied. The aortic diameter should be sized with a calibrated catheter during the angiography or by preintervention CT scanning to avoid undersizing. Balloon size will range from 12 to 18 mm in most cases. A single stent is generally sufficient in most cases. Concentric aortic stenosis may encroach upon the IMA, and coverage of this vessel may be unavoidable. Care should be taken to use low inflation pres-sures (5 mmHg) to minimize the risk of aortic rupture. Patient complaints of back or abdominal pain during balloon infla-tion should be taken seriously as they may suggest impending rupture. In case of a calcified small-caliber, hypoplastic aorta (≤12 mm, typically in female patients), it is recommended to Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   94727/02/19   4:14 PM 948SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIuse smaller diameter stents. To achieve clinical improvement, these patients can be recanalized to an aortic diameter of 8 or  9 mm. Distal embolization is one of the potential complications of endovascular treatment for aortic stenoses. Full hepariniza-tion, meticulous technique during wire and catheter manipula-tions, and primary stenting reduce the risk of this complication. Since calcified aortic stenoses are prone to rupture during dila-tion, it is recommended to be cognizant of the extent of the calcification with preoperative CT scans. In case of aortic rup-ture, as long as wire access has been maintained, an occlusion balloon can be inflated proximal to the disrupted segment to achieve hemostasis, and the rupture can be covered with a stent graft or repaired with open surgery.Occlusive Lesions of the Aortic Bifurcation. Occlusive lesions are treated with the kissing balloon technique to avoid dislodging aortic plaque. Two angioplasty balloons of equal size are positioned across the ostia of the common iliac arteries, using a retrograde approach, and inflated. Simultaneous bal-loon dilatation at the origins of both common iliac arteries is advocated, even in the presence of unilateral lesion, to protect the contralateral common iliac artery from dissection or plaque embolization. Calcified lesions that typically occur at the aor-tic bifurcation are not amenable to balloon dilatation and fre-quently require that a distal aortic reconstruction be performed using “kissing stents.” Fears that the proximal ends of the stents that extend into the distal aorta will become a nidus for throm-bus formation or cause hemolysis have not been realized. The results are difficult to interpret because these bifurcation lesions are usually included in studies with iliac artery lesions. Patency rates for aortic bifurcation PTA range from 76% to 92% at  3 years. The largest series reported to date includes 79 patients with aortic bifurcation lesions. The cumulative clinical success rate at a mean of 4 years was 93%.122 Stents have also been used to reconstruct the aortic bifurcation with high success rates. The kissing stent technique is well suited for orificial lesions. Technical success with kissing stents at the aortic bifurcation has been reported to be 95% to 100%.123 In the largest series reported, the primary patency at 3 years was 79%.124Endovascular Treatment for Iliac  Artery DiseasePercutaneous Transluminal Angioplasty. PTA is most use-ful in the treatment of isolated iliac stenoses of less than 4 cm in length. When used for stenoses rather than occlusion, a 2-year patency of 86% can be achieved.125 The complication rate is approximately 2%, consisting of distal embolization, medial dissection, and acute thrombosis.Technical Considerations for Iliac Interventions Crossing a high-grade stenosis or occlusion can be challenging in the iliac arteries. It is vital to image the lesion well because multiple views and use of the image intensifier will frequently uncover the anatomic reason for the difficulty. Frequently, the difficulty is the result of vessel tortuosity that cannot be appreciated on the original view. Use of an angled hydrophilic guidewire and an angled catheter can provide steering and add extra support for the wire trying to cross the lesion. Patience, persistence, and periodic reimaging will facilitate the crossing of a lesion in the great majority of cases. Guidewire traversal must be achieved for performance of endovascular iliac intervention. Over 90% of iliac occlusions can be passed with simple guidewire tech-niques. The preferred approach for recanalizing a common iliac artery occlusion is retrograde passage of devices from an ipsi-lateral CFA puncture because, in this manner, distance to the lesion is short and access is straighter. A stenosis is normally crossed using a combination of a soft-tip 0.035-inch guidewire (i.e., Bentson-type wire) or hydrophilic wire and a 5-French straight or selective catheter. One of the hazards of retrograde recanalization is that the guidewire stays in a subintimal loca-tion and cannot be redirected into the true lumen at the aortic bifurcation. There are several approaches that can be used to achieve reentry of total chronic occlusions. Specialized cath-eters allow passage of a needle and guidewire across the intima distal to the occlusion. Intravascular ultrasound can be used for true lumen reentry under fluoroscopic guidance. Another method of achieving true lumen reentry involves performing the recanalization from an antegrade contralateral CFA approach. A 4-French Berenstein catheter (Cordis Corp., Miami Lakes, FL) is used to probe the occlusion. The lesion can be crossed in most instances (5–20% failure rate) with a hydrophilic guidewire or occasionally with its stiffer back end. As soon as the guidewire has crossed the obstruction and lies within the ipsilateral exter-nal iliac artery lumen, it is snared and partially pulled out of the ipsilateral CFA. A short catheter is then inserted in a retrograde fashion over the wire end into the abdominal aorta proximal to the lesion. The hydrophilic guidewire is then exchanged for a stiffer Amplatz (Boston Scientific, Natick, MA) guidewire to facilitate iliac stenting.Obtaining arterial access when there are absent femoral pulsations is aided by the use of ultrasound guidance and “road-map” imaging software, which is available on modern angio-graphic equipment. When the lesion is successfully crossed, balloons of an appropriate size and length are selected for the angioplasty. Most common iliac arteries will accommodate 8to 10-mm diameter balloons, whereas most external iliac arteries will accommodate 6to 8-mm diameter balloons. Inflation is performed with caution, especially if there is heavy calcifica-tion, and should be guided by patient discomfort, pressure gauge readings, and changes in balloon outline.If guidewire traversal is straightforward, consideration should be given to the presence of an acute thrombosis that may benefit from catheter-directed thrombolysis. If guidewire traversal is challenging, it is unlikely that catheter-directed thrombolysis will be beneficial. Stents should be placed after inadequate angioplasty. Stents are warranted when there is a greater than 30% residual stenosis, when there is a flow-limiting dissection, or when there is a pressure gradient of ≥5 mmHg across the treated segment. Placement of stents can precipitate distal embolization in up to 10%, especially if lesions are friable and vulnerable to manipulation. Routine primary stent place-ment is not recommended because it has not been found to be superior to selective stenting in terms of outcomes or cost.Primary Stenting Versus Selective Stenting in Iliac Arteries. Primary stenting rather than selective stenting should be considered for longer iliac lesions and for all TASC C and D lesions. The primary patency rates at 1, 2, and 3 years were 96%, 90%, and 72%, respectively, for longer lesions (>5 cm) that were primarily stented versus 46%, 46%, and 28%, respectively, with selective stenting.126 Primary stenting is generally advocated for chronic iliac artery occlusions, recur-rent stenosis after previous iliac PTA, and complex stenoses with eccentric, calcified, ulcerated plaques or plaques with spontaneous dissection. All of these lesions are prone to distal Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   94827/02/19   4:14 PM 949ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23embolization during manipulation of wires and angioplasty balloons. Distal embolization with isolated PTA is not com-mon for uncomplicated lesions, but can occur in up to 24% of cases, when treating ulcerated plaques, aortoiliac bifurca-tion lesions, or iliac occlusions. It is believed that direct stent placement without predilation significantly reduces the risk of distal embolization by trapping potentially embologenic material between the arterial wall and the stent mesh. While PTA has demonstrated excellent results in focal stenoses of the abdominal aorta and iliacs, primary stenting in these locations is safe, improves patency rates, reduces the degree of resteno-sis when compared with PTA alone, and decreases the risk of distal embolization. Additional potential advantages of direct stenting include shorter procedural time and less radiation exposure. The Dutch Iliac Stent Trial has provided evidence that refutes the superiority of primary stenting over angio-plasty alone.151 Most interventionalists continue to perform angioplasty first and stent selectively for inadequate results. The approach to aortoiliac stenting is intuitive. Individual judgment and experience are important in the decision-making process, and there are lesions with unstable morphology such as long occlusions, ulceration, and dissection that warrant pri-mary stenting.Stent Graft Placement for Aortoiliac Interventions. Stent grafts have been used to treat complex iliac lesions in an attempt to exclude these sources of embolization. A recent report sug-gested that the use of stent grafts was beneficial for TASC C and D lesions.127 Bosiers and colleagues published a series of 91 limbs with diseased iliacs that they treated with 107 stent grafts. They reported successful deployment in all patients with-out distal embolization or vessel rupture and a primary patency rate of 91.1% at 1 year.128 The authors commented about their concerns of causing embolization during placement of the stent grafts and recommended that once an occlusion was traversed with the guidewire, to gently predilate with a 5-mm balloon, followed by smooth stent graft insertion into the newly created channel. The role of stent grafts in aortoiliac occlusive disease has not been fully elucidated yet.Complications of Endovascular Aortoiliac InterventionsIliac artery angioplasty is associated with a 2% to 4% major complication rate and 4% to 15% minor complication rate. Many of these minor complications are related to the arterial puncture site. The most frequent complications relate to access site cannulation. Hemorrhage can range from the more common access site hematoma to the rarer retroperitoneal and intraperi-toneal hemorrhage. Distal embolization occurs in 2% to 10% of iliac PTA and stenting procedures.120 Percutaneous catheter aspiration should be the initial treatment for calf vessel embo-lization, but, for larger emboli, such as those that lodge in the profunda femoris or common femoral arteries, surgical embo-lectomy may be required because the embolic material contains atherosclerotic plaque, which is not amenable to transcatheter aspiration or catheter-directed thrombolysis. The incidence of pseudoaneurysm formation at the puncture site is 0.5%. The treatment of choice for pseudoaneurysms >2 cm in diameter is percutaneous thrombin injection under ultrasound guidance. Arterial rupture may complicate the procedure in 0.3% of cases. Tamponade of the ruptured artery with an occlusion balloon should be performed, and a covered stent should be placed. In case of failure, surgical treatment is required.Clinical Results Comparing Surgical and Endovascular Treatment of Aortoiliac DiseaseThe mortality risk of aortobifemoral bypass in patients with iso-lated, localized aortoiliac disease is relatively low, whereas for patients with concomitant atherosclerosis in coronary, carotid, and visceral vessels, mortality and morbidity are higher. For this reason, the cumulative long-term survival rate for patients receiving aortoiliac reconstruction remains 10 to 15 years less than anticipated for a normal ageand sex-matched population. Twenty-five percent to 30% of patients with concomitant ath-erosclerosis in other vascular distributions are dead within 5 years, and 50% to 60% will have died by 10 years.129Compared with conventional aortobifemoral bypass, common iliac angioplasty was shown to have a 10% to 20% lower overall patency rate. It should be noted that these results were reported in early trials that used older generations of endovascular equipment. With continued progress and newer angioplasty balloons and stenting practices, more comparable outcomes are being reported. Review of the literature confirms that there is an 85% to 90% graft patency rate at 5 years and a 70% to 75% graft patency rate at 10 years after aortobifemo-ral reconstruction.127 Due in part to factors including continued refinements in anesthetic management, intraoperative monitor-ing, and postoperative intensive care, low perioperative mortal-ity rates for aortobifemoral bypass can be achieved commonly in today’s clinical practice. The most recent systematic review and meta-analysis of 5358 patients who underwent direct open bypass or endovascular treatment for aortoiliac occlusive dis-ease demonstrated superior durability for open bypass, although with longer length of stay and increased risk for complications and mortality, when compared to the endovascular approach.130 In this study, poor preoperative runoff was greater in the open bypass group (50.0% vs. 24.6%). Mean length of hospital stay was 13 days for open bypass versus 4 days for endovascular treatment procedures. The open bypass group experienced more complications (18.0% vs. 13.4%) and greater 30-day mortality (2.6% vs. 0.7%). At 1, 3, and 5 years, pooled primary patency rates were greater in the open bypass group (94.8% vs. 86.0%, 86.0% vs. 80.0%, and 82.7% vs. 71.4%, respectively); the same was true for secondary patency (95.7% vs. 90.0%, 91.5% vs. 86.5%, and 91.0% vs. 82.5%, respectively).Despite its lower long-term success, common iliac angio-plasty is a useful procedure in patients with focal disease and mild symptoms in whom a major surgical revascularization is not justified. Angioplasty of the iliac vessels can be a useful adjunct to distal surgical bypass as well, increasing the success of dis-tal revascularization and eliminating the risks associated with aortoiliac bypass. Thus, with long-term patency less than, but comparable to, open surgical bypass, and with more favorable morbidity rates, iliac angioplasty has become a well-accepted modality of treatment for iliac occlusive disease. Ideal iliac angioplasty lesions are nonocclusive and short. Patency after intervention is better when lesions occur in larger diameter ves-sels, when stenoses rather than occlusions are treated, when run-off vessels are patent, and when the indication for intervention is lifestyle-limiting claudication rather than critical limb ischemia.Becker and colleagues estimated a 5-year patency rate of 72% in an analysis of 2697 cases of iliac angioplasty and noted a better patency (79%) in claudicants.131 Less favorable results are obtained with long stenoses, external iliac stenoses, and tan-dem lesions. The reported technical and initial clinical success of balloon angioplasty in iliac artery stenoses exceeds 90% in 5Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   94927/02/19   4:14 PM 950SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IImost series, and the 5-year patency rates range from 54% to 92%. The reported technical and initial clinical success of bal-loon angioplasty in iliac artery occlusions ranges from 78% to 98%, and the 3-year patency rates range from 48% to 85%.131,132Factors reported to affect the patency of aortoiliac endovas-cular interventions adversely include quality of runoff vessels, severity of ischemia, and length of diseased segments treated. Likewise, as vessel diameter and flow rates change, so do suc-cess rates after angioplasty. It was reported in the literature that location of the lesion at the external iliac artery adversely affects both primary and assisted-primary patency. Following angio-plasty of the common iliac artery, patency rates were 81% and 52% at 1 and 6 years, respectively; whereas, after external iliac artery angioplasty, they were 74% and 48% at 1 and 4 years, respectively.133 Although some literature supports location of the lesion in the external iliac artery as a factor that adversely affects both primary and assisted-primary patency, this has not been a universal finding. Female patients are also reported to have lower patency rates than males following iliac PTA, with or without stent placement in the external iliac artery.134Stenting of the iliac arteries provides a durable and curative treatment, with a 3-year patency rate of 41% to 92% for stenosis and a 3-year patency rate of 64% to 85% and 4-year patency rate of 54% to 78% for occlusions.132 A meta-analysis of 2116 patients by Bosch and Hunink showed that aortoiliac stenting resulted in a 39% improvement in long-term patency compared to balloon angioplasty, despite the fact that complication rates and 30-day mortality rates did not differ significantly.135 Park and colleagues presented long-term follow-up results in a cohort of patients with all four TASC types of iliac lesions. The authors presented primary patency rates of 87%, 83%, 61%, and 49% at 3, 5, 7, and 10 years, respectively, after the index intervention.136 Leville and colleagues achieved primary and secondary patency rates of 76% and 90%, respectively, after 3 years, in a cohort of patients who received stents for iliac occlusions.137 The authors postulated that endovascular treatment for iliac occlusive dis-ease should be extended to type C and D lesions, because they observed no detectable differences between the four TASC clas-sifications in terms of primary and secondary patency rates.137 They concluded that presence of TASC C and D lesions should not preclude endovascular treatment and believe that endovas-cular attempts should be exhausted before open surgical repair of iliac occlusions is attempted because of the decreased periop-erative morbidity and good midterm durability.Not all results have been in favor of stenting, and at present, universal primary stenting cannot be recommended. Although stents are often used to improve the outcome of PTA, there is no general consensus that stenting should be mandatory in all iliac lesions. Complex, ulcerated iliac lesions with high embologenic potential or recanalized chronic iliac occlusions may be an exception. In the Dutch Iliac Stent Trial, primary stenting did not prove to be superior to iliac angioplasty and selective stenting.138 The researchers in this prospective ran-domized multicenter study concluded that balloon angioplasty with selective stenting had comparable 2-year patency rates with primary stenting (77% and 78%, respectively). It must be noted, however, that it was necessary to stent 43% of the patients in the PTA treatment group due to unsatisfactory angioplasty results. The 5-year outcomes between the two groups were also similar, with 82% and 80% of the treated iliac segments remaining free of the need for new revascularization procedures after a mean follow-up of 5.6 ± 1.3 years.138LOWER EXTREMITY ARTERIAL OCCLUSIVE DISEASEThe symptoms of lower extremity occlusive disease are classi-fied into two large categories: acute limb ischemia (ALI) and chronic limb ischemia (CLI). Ninety percent of acute ischemia cases are either thrombotic or embolic. Frequently, sudden onset of limb-threatening ischemia may be the result of acute exacerbation of the preexisting atherosclerotic disease. Chronic ischemia is largely due to atherosclerotic changes of the lower extremity that manifest from asymptomatic to limb-threatening gangrene. As the population ages, the prevalence of chronic occlusive disease of the lower extremity is increasing, and it significantly influences lifestyle, morbidity, and mortality. In addition, multiple comorbid conditions increase risks of surgical procedures. Endovascular interventions become an important alternative in treating lower extremity occlusive disease. How-ever, despite rapidly evolving endovascular technology, lower extremity endovascular intervention continues to be one of the most controversial areas of endovascular therapy.EpidemiologyIn a detailed review of the literature, McDaniel and Cronenwett concluded that claudication occurred in 1.8% of patients under 60 years of age, 3.7% of patients between 60 and 70 years of age, and 5.2% of patients over 70 years of age.139 Leng and his colleagues scanned 784 subjects using ultrasound in a random sample of men and women age 56 to 77 years. Of the subjects who were scanned, 64% demonstrated atherosclerotic plaque.140 However, a large number of patients had occlusive disease with-out significant symptoms. In a study by Schroll and Munck, only 19% of patients with peripheral vascular disease were symptomatic.141 Using ABIs, Stoffers and colleagues scanned 3171 individuals between the ages of 45 and 75 and identified that 6.9% of patients had ABIs <0.95, only 22% of whom had symptoms.142 In addition, they demonstrated that concomitant cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases were three to four times higher among the group with asymptomatic peripheral vascular diseases than those without peripheral vascular disease. Furthermore, they confirmed that 68% of all peripheral arterial obstructive diseases were unknown to the primary care physi-cian, and this group mainly represented less advanced cases of atherosclerosis. However, among patients with an ABI ratio <0.75, 42% were unknown to the primary physicians.Diagnostic EvaluationThe diagnosis of lower extremity occlusive disease is often made based on a focused history and physical examination and confirmed by the imaging studies. A well-performed physi-cal examination often reveals the site of lesions by detecting changes in pulses, temperature, and appearances. The bedside ABIs using blood pressure cuff also aid in diagnosis. Various clinical signs and symptoms are useful to differentiate condi-tions of viable, threatened, and irreversible limb ischemia caused by arterial insufficiency (Table 23-16).Noninvasive studies are important in documenting the severity of occlusive disease objectively. Ultrasound Dopplers measuring ABIs and segmental pressures are widely used in North America and Europe. Normal ABI is greater than 1.0. In patients with claudication, ABIs decrease to 0.5 to 0.9 and to even lower levels in patients with rest pain or tissue loss. Seg-mental pressures are helpful in identifying the level of involve-ment. Decrease in segmental pressure between two segments indicates significant disease. Ultrasound duplex scans are used Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   95027/02/19   4:14 PM 951ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23Table 23-16Signs and symptoms of acute limb ischemiaDESCRIPTIONCATEGORYVIABLETHREATENEDIRREVERSIBLEClinical descriptionNot immediately  threatenedSalvageable if promptly  treatedMajor tissue loss, amputation unavoidableCapillary returnIntactIntact, slowAbsent (marbling)Muscle weaknessNoneMild, partialProfound, paralysis (rigor)Sensory lossNoneMild, incompleteProfound anestheticArteriovenous Doppler findingAudibleInaudible or audibleInaudibleto identify the site of lesion by revealing flow disturbance and velocity changes. A meta-analysis of 71 studies by Koelemay and associates confirmed that duplex scanning is accurate for assessing arterial occlusive disease in patients suffering from claudication or critical ischemia with an accumulative sensitiv-ity of 80% and specificity of over 95%.143 Adding an ultrasound contrast agent further increases the sensitivity and specificity of ultrasound technology. Other noninvasive imaging technolo-gies, such as MRA and CTA, are rapidly evolving and gaining popularity in the diagnosis of lower extremity occlusive disease (Figs. 23-59 and 23-60).Contrast angiography remains the gold standard imaging study. Using contrast angiography, interventionists can locate and size the anatomic significant lesions and measure the pres-sure gradient across the lesion, as well as plan for potential inter-vention. Angiography is, however, semi-invasive and should be confined to patients for whom surgical or percutaneous inter-vention is contemplated. Patients with borderline renal function may need to have alternate contrast agents, such as gadolinium or carbon dioxide, to avoid contrast-induced nephrotoxicity.Differential DiagnosisArterial insufficiency frequently leads to muscle ischemic pain involving the lower extremity muscles, particularly during exer-cise. Intermittent claudication is pain affecting the calf and, less commonly, the thigh and buttock that is induced by exercise and relieved by rest. Symptom severity varies from mild to severe. Intermittent claudication occurs as a result of muscle ischemia during exercise caused by obstruction to arterial flow. Regarding the differential diagnosis of intermittent claudication, there are a variety of neurologic, musculoskeletal, and venous conditions that may produce symptoms of calf pain (Table 23-17). Addi-tionally, various nonatherosclerotic conditions can also cause symptoms consistent with intermittent lower extremity claudi-cation (Table 23-18). Nocturnal calf muscle spasms or night cramps are not indicative of arterial disease. They are common but are difficult to diagnose with certainty. Foot ulceration is not always the result of arterial insufficiency. Ischemic ulcers occur on the toes or lateral side of the foot and are painful. By com-parison, venous ulcers, which are also common, occur above the medial malleolus, usually in an area with the skin changes of lipodermatosclerosis, and cause mild discomfort. Neuropathic ulcers are usually found on weight-bearing surfaces, have thick calluses, and are pain free. Ulcers may be the result of more than one etiology. Rest pain must be distinguished from periph-eral neuropathy, which is prevalent in diabetic patients. Patients with diabetic neuropathy tend to have decreased vibration and Figure 23-59. High-resolution computed tomography angiogra-phy of a patient with normal right lower extremity arterial circu-lation. Distal occlusive disease is noted in the left tibial arteries (arrow).position sense and decreased reflexes. Spinal stenosis causes pain that is exacerbated with standing and back extension.Lower Extremity Occlusive Disease ClassificationLower extremity occlusive disease may range from exhibiting no symptoms to limb-threatening gangrene. There are two major classifications developed based on the clinical presentations.Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   95127/02/19   4:15 PM 952SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 23-60. Multidetector computed tomography angiography of a patient with an (A) infrapopliteal arterial circulation and (B) pedal arterial circulation. The high spatial resolution and image quality of these images shows three patent infrapopliteal runoff vessels and patent pedal vessels at the foot level.BAThe Fontaine classification uses four stages: Fontaine I is the stage when patients are asymptomatic; Fontaine II is when they have mild (IIa) or severe (IIb) claudication; Fon-taine III is when they have ischemic rest pain; and Fontaine IV is when patients suffer tissue loss, such as ulceration or gangrene (Table 23-19).144The Rutherford classification has four grades (0–III) and seven categories (0–6). Asymptomatic patients are classi-fied into category 0; claudicants are stratified into grade I and divided into three categories based on the severity of the symp-toms; patients with rest pain belong to grade II and category 4; and patients with tissue loss are classified into grade III and categories 5 and 6 based on the significance of the tissue loss.2 These clinical classifications help to establish uniform standards in evaluating and reporting the results of diagnostic measure-ments and therapeutic interventions (Table 23-19).The most clinically useful classification of lower extrem-ity atherosclerotic disease should be based on the morphologic character of the lesions. The TASC taskforce published a guide-line separating lower extremity arterial diseases into femoropop-liteal and infrapopliteal lesions (Table 23-20). This guideline is particularly useful in determining intervention strategies based on the disease classifications. Based on the guideline, femoro-popliteal lesions are divided into four types: A, B, C, and D. Type A lesions are single focal lesions less than 3 cm in length and do not involve the origins of the SFA or the distal popliteal artery. Type B lesions are single lesions 3 to 5 cm in length not involving the distal popliteal artery or multiple or heavily calci-fied lesions less than 3 cm in length. Type C lesions are multiple stenoses or occlusions greater than 15 cm in length or recurrent stenoses or occlusions that need treatment after two endovascu-lar interventions. Type D lesions are those with complete occlu-sion of CFA, SFA, or popliteal artery.115In a similar fashion, infrapopliteal arterial diseases are classified into four types based on TASC guideline (Fig. 23-61). Type A lesions are single lesions less than 1 cm in length not involving the trifurcation. Type B lesions are multiple lesions less than 1 cm in length or single lesions shorter than 1 cm involving the trifurcation. Type C lesions are lesions that exten-sively involve trifurcation or 1to 4-cm stenotic or 1to 2-cm occlusive lesions. Type D lesions are occlusions longer than  2 cm or diffuse lesions.115Etiology of Acute Limb IschemiaALI is defined as sudden loss of limb perfusion, and the term is applicable up to 2 weeks after an initiating event. While the instances of acute leg ischemia caused by emboli have decreased due to more effective treatment of rheumatic fever and atrial fibrillation, the incidence of thrombotic acute leg ischemia has increased. Even with the extensive use of newer endovascular techniques including thrombolysis, most published series report a 10% to 30% 30-day amputation rate.115 The short-term mortal-ity of patients presenting with acute ischemia is 15% to 20%. The most common etiologies of ALI include embolism, native vessel thrombosis, reconstruction thrombosis, trauma, and com-plications of peripheral aneurysm. Most cases of lower extrem-ity ALI are the result of thrombosis of a prosthetic conduit. This stems from increased use of prosthetic conduits to address CLI.Presenting symptoms in ALI are pain and loss of sensory or motor function. The abruptness and time of onset of the pain, its location and intensity, and change in severity over time should all be taken into consideration. The duration and inten-sity of the pain and presence of motor or sensory changes are very important in clinical decision making and urgency of revas-cularization. Thrombolysis may be less effective for thrombosis of ≥2 weeks in duration compared with acute thrombosis.145Arterial Embolism. The heart is the most common source of distal emboli, which accounts for more than 90% of peripheral arterial embolic events. Atrial fibrillation is the most common source. Sudden cardioversion results in the dilated noncon-tractile atrial appendage regaining contractile activity, which can dislodge the contained thrombus. Other cardiac sources include mural thrombus overlying a myocardial infarction or thrombus forming within a dilated left ventricular aneurysm. Mural thrombi can also develop within a ventricle dilated by Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   95227/02/19   4:15 PM 953ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23Table 23-17Differential diagnosis of intermittent claudicationCONDITIONLOCATION OF PAIN OR DISCOMFORTCHARACTERISTIC DISCOMFORTONSET RELATIVE TO EXERCISEEFFECT OF RESTEFFECT OF BODY POSITIONOTHER CHARACTERISTICSIntermittent claudication (calf)Calf musclesCramping painAfter same degree of exerciseQuickly relievedNoneReproducibleChronic compartment syndromeCalf musclesTight, bursting painAfter much exercise (e.g., jogging)Subsides very slowlyRelief speeded by elevationTypically heavy-muscled athletesVenous claudicationEntire leg, but usually worse in thigh and groinTight, bursting painAfter walkingSubsides slowlyRelief speeded by elevationHistory of iliofemoral deep venous thrombosis, signs of venous congestion, edemaNerve root compression (e.g., herniated disk)Radiates down leg, usually posteriorlySharp lancinating painSoon, if not immediately after onsetNot quickly relieved (also often present at rest)Relief may be aided by adjusting back positionHistory of back problemsSymptomatic Baker’s cystBehind knee, down calfSwelling, soreness, tendernessWith exercisePresent at restNoneNot intermittentIntermittent claudication (hip, thigh, buttock)Hip, thigh, buttocksAching discomfort, weaknessAfter same degree of exerciseQuickly relievedNoneReproducibleHip arthritisHip, thigh, buttocksAching discomfortAfter variable degree of exerciseNot quickly relieved (and may be present at rest)More comfortable sitting, weight taken off legsVariable, may relate to activity level, weather changesSpinal cord compressionHip, thigh, buttocks (follows dermatome)Weakness more than painAfter walking or standing for same length of timeRelieved by stopping only if position changedRelief by lumbar spine flexion (sitting or stooping forward) pressureFrequent history of back problems, provoked by increased intra-abdominal pressureIntermittent claudication (foot)Foot, archSevere deep pain and numbnessAfter same degree of exerciseQuickly relievedNoneReproducibleArthritic, inflammatory processFoot, archAching painAfter variable degree of exerciseNot quickly relieved (and may be present at rest)May be relieved by not bearing weightVariable, may relate to activity levelBrunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   95327/02/19   4:15 PM 954SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 23-18Nonatherosclerotic causes of intermittent claudication• Aortic coarctation• Arterial fibrodysplasia• Iliac syndrome of the cyclist• Peripheral emboli• Persistent sciatic artery• Popliteal aneurysm• Popliteal cyst• Popliteal entrapment• Primary vascular tumors• Pseudoxanthoma elasticum• Remote trauma or radiation injury• Takayasu’s disease• Thromboangiitis obliteransTable 23-19Classification of peripheral arterial disease based on the Fontaine and Rutherford classificationsFONTAINE CLASSIFICATIONRUTHERFORD CLASSIFICATIONSTAGECLINICALGRADECATEGORYCLINICALIAsymptomatic00AsymptomaticIIaMild claudicationI1Mild claudicationIIbModerate to severe claudicationI2Moderate claudication  I3Severe claudicationIIIIschemic rest painII4Ischemic rest painIVUlceration or gangreneIII5Minor tissue loss  III6Major tissue losscardiomyopathy. Emboli that arise from a ventricular aneurysm or from a dilated cardiomyopathy can be very large and can lodge at the aortic bifurcation (saddle embolus), thus rendering both legs ischemic. Diseased valves are another source of distal embolization. Historically, this occurred as a result of rheumatic heart disease. Currently, subacute endocarditis and acute bacte-rial endocarditis are the more common causes. Infected emboli can seed the recipient vessel wall, creating mycotic aneurysms.An electrocardiogram (ECG) will diagnose atrial fibrilla-tion. A transthoracic or transesophageal echocardiogram should be performed looking for a cardiac source. It is important to seek other sources of the embolus using CT scanning of the descending thoracic and abdominal aorta. More unusual sources include mural thrombus from an aortic aneurysm, and occa-sionally, idiopathic arterial-to-arterial thrombus occurs, usually from thrombus that has formed in an atherosclerotic aortic arch or descending thoracic aorta. The presence of mobile plaque on transesophageal echocardiography is suggestive of this source.Paradoxical embolus occurs when a patient has a patent foramen ovale and an embolus from a deep venous thrombosis crosses through the atrial defect into the left side of the heart and passes into the peripheral circulation. This is diagnosed using a bubble echocardiography, in which air bubbles introduced into the venous circulation can be seen traversing the septal defect.Arterial Thrombosis. Thrombosis can occur in native arteries and in arterial reconstructions. Patients with thrombosed arte-rial segments often have an underlying atherosclerotic lesion at the site of thrombosis or aneurysmal degeneration with mural thrombosis. It is important to obtain a history, determine risk factors for atherosclerosis and hypercoagulable status, and examine the contralateral extremity for circulatory problems. Patients with thrombosis of prior arterial reconstructions have limb incisions from previous surgery, and graft occlusion can be confirmed with duplex imaging.Clinical Manifestations of Acute  Limb IschemiaAcute lower extremity ischemia manifests with the “five Ps”: pain, pallor, paresthesias, paralysis, and pulselessness, to which some add a sixth “P”—poikilothermia or “perishing cold.” Pain is the usual symptom that causes a patient to present to the emergency room. The most common location for an embolus to lodge in the leg is at the common femoral bifurcation. Typically, a patient will complain of foot and calf pain. Pulses are absent, and there may be diminution of sensation. Inability to move the affected muscle group is a sign of very severe ischemia and necessitates urgent revascularization. During evaluation of the affected extremity, it is important to compare findings with the contralateral limb. Clinical evaluation is extremely important in determining the etiology and location of the obstruction. One of the most important pieces of information to obtain is whether the patient has had prior vascular procedures or if there is a history of lower extremity claudication. Either of these features suggests preexisting vascular disease, renders revasculariza-tion more complicated, and usually mandates angiography to permit surgical planning. On the contrary, in a patient with no history suggestive of prior vascular disease, the etiology is most likely embolic, and simple thrombectomy is more likely to be successful.Absent bilateral femoral pulses in a patient with bilateral lower extremity ischemia is most likely due to saddle embolus to the aortic bifurcation. A palpable femoral pulse and absent popliteal and distal pulses may either be due to distal common femoral embolus (the pulse being palpable above the level of occlusion) or embolus to the superficial femoral or popliteal arteries. Typically, emboli lodge at arterial bifurcations where they are trapped due to sudden reductions in arterial diameter. A popliteal trifurcation embolus will present with calf ischemia and absent pedal pulses, possibly with a popliteal pulse present. The finding of palpable contralateral pulses and the absence of ipsilateral pulses in the acutely ischemic leg are suggestive of an embolus, irrespective of presence of Doppler signals. Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   95427/02/19   4:15 PM 955ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23Table 23-20TransAtlantic Inter-Society Consensus classification of femoral popliteal occlusive lesionsType A lesions• Single stenosis ≤10 cm in length• Single occlusion ≤5 cm in lengthType B lesions• Multiple lesions (stenoses or occlusions), each ≤5 cm• Single stenosis or occlusion ≤15 cm not involving the infrageniculate popliteal artery• Single or multiple lesions in the absence of continuous tibial vessels to improve inflow for a distal bypass• Heavily calcified occlusion ≤5 cm in length• Single popliteal stenosisType C lesions• Multiple stenoses or occlusions totaling >15 cm with or without heavy calcification• Recurrent stenoses or occlusions that need treatment after two endovascular interventionsType D lesions• Chronic total occlusions of CFA or SFA (>20 cm, involving the popliteal artery)• Chronic total occlusion of popliteal artery and proximal trifurcation vesselsCFA = common femoral artery; SFA = superficial femoral artery.Type A lesionsType B lesionsType C lesionsType D lesionsFigure 23-61. Schematic depiction of TransAtlantic Inter-Society Consensus classification of femoral popliteal occlusive lesions.Arteriography is not mandatory in patients without antecedent history suggestive of vascular disease; nevertheless, all patients should be positioned on the operating room table in such a way that fluoroscopic access to the entire inflow and outflow tract is possible if necessary.The main question to be answered by the history and phys-ical examination is the severity of the ALI, which is the major consideration in early management decisions. Patients with ALI should be evaluated in a fashion that considers the severity and duration of ischemia at the time of presentation. Ideally, all patients with acute ischemia should be investigated with imag-ing, especially if there is an antecedent vascular reconstruction; however, the clinical condition and access to resources must guide further investigations. Unnecessary delays can result in amputation. Arteriography, if it can be performed in a timely fashion, is an excellent modality for localizing obstructions and deciding which type of intervention (endovascular, embolec-tomy, or bypass) patients will benefit more from. One of the goals of treatment for ALI is to prevent thrombus propagation; therefore, expedient anticoagulation with heparin is indicated as soon as the diagnosis is suspected.Treatment Considerations for Acute  Limb IschemiaIn the absence of any significant contraindication, the patient with an ischemic lower extremity should be immediately anti-coagulated. This will prevent propagation of the clot into unaf-fected vascular beds. Intravenous fluid should be started and a Foley catheter inserted to monitor urine output. Baseline labs should be obtained and creatinine levels noted. A hypercoagula-ble workup should be performed prior to initiation of heparin if there is sufficient suspicion. According to results from random-ized trials, there is no clear superiority for thrombolysis over surgery in terms of 30-day limb salvage or mortality. Access to each treatment option is a major issue in the decision-making process, as time is often critical. National registry data from the United States reveal that surgery is used threeto five-fold more frequently than thrombolysis. Three randomized studies have investigated the role of catheter-directed thrombolytic therapy in the treatment of ALI.145Endovascular TreatmentThe potential to reduce mortality and morbidity while achiev-ing limb salvage is the impetus that makes thrombolysis prefer-able to open surgery as first-line treatment in patients with ALI (classes I and IIa). Advantages of thrombolytic therapy over balloon embolectomy include the reduced endothelial trauma and potential for more gradual and complete clot lysis in branch vessels usually too small to access by embolectomy balloons. It is hoped that the more gradual clot dissolution with throm-bolysis may decrease the incidence of reperfusion injury that is encountered after open surgical procedures where rapid return of blood flow may precipitate compartment syndrome. Skeletal muscle tissue appears to be most vulnerable to ischemia. Patho-physiologic studies reveal that irreversible damage to muscle tissue starts after 3 hours of ischemia and is nearly complete at 6 hours. Progressive microvascular damage appears to follow rather than precede skeletal muscle tissue damage. The more severe the cellular damage, the greater are the microvascu-lar changes. When the musculature and microvasculature are severely damaged, amputation rather than attempts at revascu-larization may be the most prudent course to prevent wash-out of toxic by-product from the ischemic limb into the systemic circulation. The mortality rate associated with reperfusion syn-drome is high because of the development of concomitant adult respiratory distress syndrome, shock, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and renal failure.Patients with small-vessel occlusion are poor candidates for surgery because they lack distal target vessels to use for bypass. These patients should be offered a trial of thromboly-sis, unless they have contraindications to thrombolysis or their Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   95527/02/19   4:15 PM 956SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIischemia is so severe that the time needed to achieve adequate lysis is considered too long. The major contraindications of thrombolysis are recent stroke, intracranial primary malignancy, brain metastases, or intracranial surgical intervention. Relative contraindications for performance of thrombolysis include renal insufficiency, allergy to contrast material, cardiac thrombus, diabetic retinopathy, coagulopathy, and recent arterial puncture or surgery (Table 23-21).Advances in clot removal techniques with percutaneous mechanical thrombectomy and thromboaspiration may extend the applicability of this intervention to patients with more advanced degrees of ALI (class IIb) and contraindications to thrombolysis. Several thrombectomy devices have received FDA approval for acute lower extremity arterial thrombosis. The utility of these thrombectomy devices is that they can be used as standalone therapy when there are contraindications for thrombolytic therapy. Additionally, these thrombectomy devices can be used in conjunction with thrombolytic agents, for pharmacomechanical thrombectomy, to enhance clot lysis and to limit the doses and time required for thrombolysis.145Surgical TreatmentEmbolectomy. When a decision is made to proceed with open surgical intervention, the abdomen, contralateral groin, and entire lower extremity are prepped in the field. The groin is opened through a vertical incision, exposing the CFA and its bifurcation. Frequently, the location of the embolus at the femo-ral bifurcation is readily apparent by the presence of a palpable proximal femoral pulse, which disappears distally. The artery is clamped and opened transversely over the bifurcation. Throm-bus is extracted by passing a Fogarty balloon embolectomy catheter. Good back-bleeding and antegrade bleeding suggest that the entire clot has been removed. Embolic material often forms a cast of the vessel and is sent for culture and histologic examination. Completion angiography is advisable to ascertain Table 23-21Contraindications to thrombolytic therapyAbsolute contraindicationsEstablished cerebrovascular events (including transient ischemic attack) within last 2 monthsActive bleeding diathesisRecent (<10 days) gastrointestinal bleedingNeurosurgery (intracranial or spinal) within last 3 monthsIntracranial trauma within last 3 monthsIntracranial malignancy or metastasisRelative major contraindicationsCardiopulmonary resuscitation within last 10 daysMajor nonvascular surgery or trauma within last 10 daysUncontrolled hypertension (>180 mmHg systolic  or >110 mmHg diastolic)Puncture of noncompressible vesselIntracranial tumorRecent eye surgeryMinor contraindicationsHepatic failure, particularly with coagulopathyBacterial endocarditisPregnancyDiabetic hemorrhagic retinopathythe adequacy of clot removal. The artery is then closed and the patient fully anticoagulated.When an embolus lodges in the popliteal artery, in most cases it can be extracted via a femoral incision using the tech-niques previously described. A femoral approach is preferred because the larger diameter of the femoral artery results in decreased likelihood of arterial compromise when the arte-riotomy is closed. The disadvantage with using the femoral approach for embolectomy is the greater difficulty involved in directing the embolectomy catheter into each of the infrapopli-teal arteries. Use of fluoroscopic imaging and an over-the-wire thrombectomy catheter can overcome this problem. Alterna-tively, use of a separate incision to expose the popliteal bifurca-tion may be necessary to achieve a complete thrombectomy.A more complex situation arises when a patient has antecedent peripheral vascular disease and in situ thrombosis develops on top of preexisting atheroma because, frequently, embolectomy catheters will not pass through these occlusions. Similarly, when a bypass graft fails, it is usually due to progres-sion of atheroma proximal or distal to the graft anastomoses or to intrinsic stenoses that develop within a vein graft. In these scenarios, expeditious angiography is useful to determine the extent of the occlusion, to search for inflow and distal outflow vessels, and to decide whether thrombolysis or surgery will be the better intervention. Although the surgeon’s preference tends to dictate the approach selected, the decision is based on the presence or absence of good target vessels and availability of a suitable bypass conduit. If there are good distal vessels and the saphenous vein is suitable, surgical bypass is recommended because it is fast, durable, and reliable. In the absence of a good distal target and saphenous vein, or in a patient at high risk for surgery, lysis is recommended.Bypass Graft Thrombectomy. Bypass thrombectomy is more likely to succeed with prosthetic bypasses. Bypass graft revision or replacement is more appropriate for acute vein graft failures because they are less likely to respond to thrombolysis and require some type of revision, such as valve lysis, interposition, or extension. Thrombectomy of autogenous grafts is prone to failure unless an anatomic cause for failure such as a retained valve or unligated side branch is found and corrected. The per-formance of a fasciotomy to circumvent reperfusion injury/com-partment syndrome is an important consideration.Complications Related to Treatment  for Acute Limb IschemiaAdverse events related to catheter-directed thrombolysis are primarily related to bleeding complications. The overall risk of hemorrhagic stroke from a thrombolysis procedure has been reported to be 1% to 2.3%, with 50% of hemorrhagic compli-cations occurring during the thrombolytic procedure.146 Hema-toma at the vascular puncture site has been reported in 12% to 17% of cases. Gastrointestinal bleeding is reported in 5% to 10% of cases. Hematuria following thrombolysis is uncom-mon and should prompt a search for urinary tumors. Hemor-rhage requiring transfusion can occur in approximately 25% of patients undergoing thrombolysis. Lytic agents are absolutely contraindicated in patients with intracranial surgery, intracra-nial hemorrhage within the last 3 months, or any active bleed-ing. Most bleeding complications occur at the arterial puncture sites, but concealed retroperitoneal bleeding is possible. The most feared complication that patients can sustain is intrace-rebral hemorrhage. Older patients may be more susceptible Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   95627/02/19   4:15 PM 957ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23to this complication, and thus many interventionalists are extremely reticent to use thrombolysis in patients older than 80 years of age.Patients who are treated for acute ischemia are susceptible to two major complications following revascularization: reper-fusion and compartment syndromes. Other procedure-related complications include arterial rethrombosis, recurrent emboli-zation, and arterial injuries secondary to the balloon catheter manipulations.Reperfusion of the ischemic limb is variable in its physi-ologic effects and directly relates to the severity and extent of the ischemia. Patients with a saddle embolus of the aortic bifurcation and severely ischemic limbs may develop the full-blown “reperfusion syndrome,” whereas patients with minimal muscle ischemia who are reperfused in a timely fashion essen-tially develop no effects. Many patients with ALI have severe underlying cardiac disease and are unable to tolerate even short ischemic periods. Complications occurring after revasculariza-tion of the lower extremity and causes of recurrent thrombosis are listed in Table 23-22.Compartment syndrome occurs after prolonged ischemia is followed by reperfusion. The capillaries leak fluid into the interstitial space in the muscles, which are enclosed within a nondistensible fascial envelope. When the pressure inside the compartment exceeds the capillary perfusion pressure, nutrient flow ceases and progressive ischemia occurs, even in the pres-ence of peripheral pulses. Consequently, every patient who has sustained an ischemic event and is reperfused is monitored for compartment syndrome, which is characterized by excessive Table 23-22Complications of arterial revascularizationCompartment syndromeIschemic neuropathyMuscle necrosisRecurrent thrombosisLower leg swellingReperfusion syndrome Hypotension Hyperkalemia Myoglobinuria Renal failureTable 23-23Fascial compartments of the lower leg ANTERIOR COMPARTMENTLATERAL COMPARTMENTSUPERFICIAL POSTERIOR COMPARTMENTDEEP POSTERIOR COMPARTMENTMusclesTibialis anteriorExtensor digitorum longusPeroneus tertiusExtensor hallucis longusExtensor digitorum brevisExtensor hallucis brevisPeroneus longusPeroneus brevisGastrocnemiusPlantarisSoleusTibialis posteriorFlexor digitorum longusFlexor hallucis longusArteryAnterior tibial arteryAnterior and posterior tibial branches of the popliteal arteryPosterior tibial arteryPeroneal arteryNerveDeep peroneal nerveSuperficial peroneal nerve Tibial nervepain in the compartment, pain on passive stretching of the com-partment, and sensory loss due to nerve compression of the nerves coursing through the compartment (Table 23-23 and  Fig. 23-62). The most commonly affected compartment is the anterior compartment in the leg. Numbness in the web space between the first and second toes is diagnostic due to com-pression of the deep peroneal nerve. Compartment pressure is measured by inserting an arterial line into the compartment and recording the pressure. Although controversial, pressures greater than 20 mmHg are an indication for fasciotomy. Com-partment pressures are relieved in the leg by medial and lateral incisions. Through the medial incision, long openings are then made in the fascia of the superficial and deep posterior com-partments. Through the lateral incision, the anterior and pero-neal compartments are opened. Both skin and fascial incisions should be of adequate length to ensure full compartment decom-pression. Laboratory evidence of rhabdomyolysis is seen in 20% of cases. The myoglobin from damaged muscle precipitates in kidney tubules and causes acute tubular necrosis. Alkalinization of urine increases the solubility of myoglobin, thus preventing Tibia   AnteriorcompartmentLateralcompartmentFibulaDeep posteriorcompartmentSuperficial posterior     compartmentFigure 23-62. Schematic illustration of fascial compartments of the lower extremity.Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   95727/02/19   4:15 PM 958SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIit from crystallizing in the tubules. In addition to alkalinization, therapy consists of forced saline diuresis and removal of the source of dead muscle that is releasing the myoglobin.Clinical Manifestations of Chronic  Limb IschemiaThe term CLI is reserved for patients with objectively proven arterial occlusive disease and symptoms lasting for more than 2 weeks. Symptoms include rest pain and tissue loss, such as ulceration or gangrene (Table 23-24). The diagnosis should be corroborated with noninvasive diagnostic tests, such as the ABI, toe pressures, and transcutaneous oxygen measurements. Ischemic rest pain most commonly occurs below an ankle pres-sure of 50 mmHg or a toe pressure less than 30 mmHg. Ulcers are not always of an ischemic etiology (Table 23-25). In many instances, there are other etiologic factors (traumatic, venous, or neuropathic) that are contributory, but it is underlying peripheral arterial disease that may be responsible for delayed or absent healing (Fig. 23-63). Healing of ulcers requires an inflammatory response and greater perfusion than is required to support intact skin and underlying tissues. As a result, the ankle and toe pres-sure levels needed for healing are higher than the pressures seen with ischemic rest pain. For patients with ulcers or gangrene, the presence of CLI is suggested by an ankle pressure less than 70 mmHg or a toe systolic pressure less than 50 mmHg.147 It is important to understand that there is no definite consensus regarding the vascular hemodynamic parameters required to make the diagnosis of CLI.One of the most common sites for occlusive disease is in the distal SFA as it passes deep through the adductor canal. It may be that the entrapment by the adductor hiatus prevents the compensatory dilation that occurs in atherosclerotic vessels. Stenoses, which develop here, progress to occlusion of the dis-tal third of the SFA (Fig. 23-64). When distal SFA occlusion develops slowly, it may be totally asymptomatic because of development of collaterals from the proximal SFA, or the PFA can bypass the occlusion and reconstitute the popliteal artery. Table 23-24Clinical categories of chronic limb ischemiaGRADECATEGORYCLINICAL DESCRIPTIONOBJECTIVE CRITERIA00Asymptomatic—no hemodynamically significant occlusive diseaseNormal treadmill or reactive hyperemia test 1Mild claudicationAble to complete treadmill exercisea; AP after exercise  >50 mmHg but at least 20 mmHg lower than resting valueI2Moderate claudicationBetween categories 1 and 3 3Severe claudicationCannot complete standard treadmill exercisea and AP after exercise <50 mmHgIIb4Ischemic rest painResting AP <40 mmHg, flat or barely pulsatile ankle or metatarsal PVR; TP <30 mmHgIIIb5Minor tissue loss—nonhealing ulcer, focal gangrene with diffuse pedal ischemiaResting AP <60 mmHg, ankle or metatarsal PVR flat or barely pulsatile; TP <40 mmHg 6Major tissue loss—extending above TM level, functional foot no longer salvageableSame as category 5aFive minutes at 2 miles per hour on a 12% incline of treadmill exercise.bGrades II and III, categories 4, 5, and 6, are encompassed by the term chronic critical ischemia.AP = ankle pressure; PVR = pulse volume recording; TM = transmetatarsal; TP = toe pressure.Table 23-25Symptoms and signs of neuropathic ulcer versus ischemic ulcerNEUROPATHIC ULCERISCHEMIC ULCERPainlessPainfulNormal pulsesAbsent pulsesRegular margins, typically punched-out appearanceIrregular marginOften located on plantar surface of footCommonly located on toes, glabrous marginsPresence of callusesCalluses absent or infrequentLoss of sensation, reflexes, and vibrationVariable sensory findingsIncreased in blood flow (arteriovenous shunting)Decreased in blood flowDilated veinsCollapsed veinsDry, warm footCold footBony deformitiesNo bony deformitiesRed or hyperemic in appearancePale and cyanotic in appearanceSymptom development is a function of the extent of occlusion, adequacy of collaterals, and the activity level of the patients.Presenting symptoms of femoropopliteal occlusive dis-ease are broadly classified into two types: limb-threatening and non–limb-threatening ischemia. Claudication is non– limb-threatening, while rest pain, ulceration, and gangrene are limb-threatening and warrant urgent intervention. Occlusive disease of the femoral artery may be isolated or occur in con-junction with multilevel disease that involves both the aortoil-iac segment and the tibial vessels. Symptoms in patients with Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   95827/02/19   4:15 PM 959ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23BAFigure 23-63. A. A neuropathic ulcer is characterized by a punched-out appearance with loss of sensation in the surrounding skin. The foot may be warm to touch, and pulses may be present in the distal pedal arteries. B. An ischemic ulcer is characterized by a gangrenous skin change in the foot or toes. The foot is usually cold to touch with absent pedal pulses. The foot is painful to touch with decreased distal capil-lary refills.Figure 23-64. Computed tomography angiogram of a patient with an occluded left superficial femoral artery (single long arrow) with reconstituted superficial femoral artery at the level of mid-thigh. Diffuse arterial calcifications (double small arrows) are noted in the mid and distal left superficial femoral arteries.multilevel disease are more severe than in those with single-level disease. Pain from isolated SFA and popliteal occlusion typically manifests as calf claudication. Cramping pain develops in the calf on ambulation, occurs at a reproducible distance, and is relieved by rest. Activities such as climbing stairs or going uphill also exacerbate the pain. Many patients report worsen-ing symptoms during cold weather. It is important to evaluate whether the symptoms are progressive or static. In greater than 70% of patients, the disease is stable, particularly with risk fac-tor modification.Progression of the underlying atherosclerotic process is more likely to occur in patients with diabetes, those who con-tinue to smoke, and those who fail to modify their atherosclerotic risk factors. In comparison, rest pain is constant, and usually occurs in the forefoot across the metatarsophalangeal joint. It is worse at night and requires placing the foot in a dependent posi-tion to improve symptoms. Patients may report that they either sleep in a chair or hang the foot off the side of the bed. The pain is severe and relentless, even with narcotics. Ischemic ulcer-ation most commonly involves the toes. Any toe can be affected. Occasionally ulcers develop on the dorsum of the foot. Ulcer-ation can occur in atypical positions in an ischemic foot from trauma such as friction from poorly fitting shoes. Injury to a foot with borderline ischemia can convert an otherwise stable situ-ation into one that is limb-threatening. The initial development of gangrene commonly involves the digits. As with all vascular patients, it is important to evaluate their risk factors, intercurrent cardiac diseases, and any prior vascular interventions.Treatment Considerations for Chronic  Limb IschemiaPatients with vascular diseases frequently have complicated medical comorbidities. Careful patient evaluation and selection should be performed for any peripheral arterial vascular proce-dure. The fundamental principle is to assess not only the surgi-cal risk from the peripheral arterial system but also the global nature of the atherosclerotic process. Full cardiac evaluations are often necessary due to the high incidence of concomitant atherosclerotic coronary artery disease, resulting in a high risk for ischemic events. Hertzer and associates reviewed coronary angiographies on 1000 patients undergoing elective vascu-lar procedure and identified 25% of concomitant correctable coronary artery disease, including 21% in patients undergoing elective peripheral vascular intervention.5 Conte and associates analyzed their 20-year experience in 1642 open lower extremity reconstructive surgeries and concluded that patients requiring lower extremity reconstruction presented an increasingly com-plex medical and surgical challenge compared with the previous decade in a tertiary practice setting.148 With aging of the popu-lation, a growing number of vascular patients have prohibitive medical comorbidities and are deemed high-risk for open sur-gical repair. Endovascular intervention provides an attractive alternative.As for open surgical repair, the clinical indications for endovascular intervention of lower extremity peripheral arte-rial diseases include lifestyle-limiting claudication, ischemic rest pain, and tissue loss or gangrene. Importantly, endovas-cular procedures should be performed by a competent vas-cular interventionist who understands the vascular disease process and is familiar with a variety of endovascular tech-niques. In addition, certain lesions may not be amendable Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   95927/02/19   4:15 PM 960SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIto endovascular treatment or may be associated with poor outcomes, such as long segment occlusion, heavily calcified lesion, orifice lesion, or lesions that cannot be traversed by a guidewire. Proper selection of patients and techniques is criti-cal in achieving good long-term outcome.Endovascular intervention for lower extremity occlusive disease is continuously evolving. Success and patency rates of endovascular intervention are closely related to the anatomic and morphologic characteristics of the treated lesions. The TASC work group made recommendations on the intervention strate-gies of lower extremity arterial diseases based on the morpho-logic characteristics. Based on TASC guidelines, endovascular treatment is recommended for type A lesions, open surgery is recommended for type D lesions, and no recommendations were made for types B and C lesions. However, with rapid advance-ment in endovascular technologies, there are increased numbers of lesions amendable to endovascular interventions.There is less literature support for infrapopliteal endo-vascular intervention due to higher complication and lower success rates. The treatment is restricted for patients with limb-threatening ischemia who lack surgical alternatives. However, with further advancement of endovascular technology and the development of new devices, endovascular intervention is becoming an integral part of treatment (Table 23-26). By itself or combined with open technique, percutaneous intervention plays an important role in therapeutic options for lower extrem-ity occlusive disease. As described by TASC guidelines, four criteria should be measured to evaluate the clinical success of the treatment: improvement in walking distance, symptomatic improvement, quality of life, and overall graft patency. These criteria should all be carefully weighed and evaluated for each individual prior to endovascular therapy.Table 23-26Summary of endovascular treatment strategies using device-based infrapopliteal interventionINTERVENTIONADVANTAGESDISADVANTAGESAngioplasty• Easy to use• Broad range of applications• Failure in long lesions, calcified lesions, and disease at multiple levelsBalloon-expandable stent• Overcomes arterial recoil from angioplasty• Useful in treatment of flow-limiting dissection• Crushability can lead to restenosis• Poor distal runoff can result in stent thrombosis• Limited dataSelf-expanding stent• Vessel conformability and wall apposition prevent kinking and crushing of stent• Limited sizes• Limited data; multicenter trials under wayBioabsorbable stent• Overcomes arterial recoil from angioplasty• Absorbed long term to prevent risk of stent thrombosis• Limited data; multicenter trials under wayCryoplasty• Reduces the risk of flow-limiting dissection, therefore reducing the need for stent implantation• Short-term results of a multicenter trial are promising; however, long-term data are limitedCutting balloon• Useful in anastomotic segments of bypass grafts and in-stent restenosis where “watermelon seeding” can prevent adequate expansion of plaque• Limited dataMechanical atherectomy• Allows for debulking of plaque without the need for stent implantation in most cases• Allows for removal of plaque for histologic analysis• Limited use in areas of heavy calcification• No large, randomized, prospective trial comparing this technique to angioplasty and stentingLaser• Useful in acute thrombotic and chronic total occlusions• Minimal data in infrapopliteal arteries• Need adjunctive treatment with angioplasty, stenting, or atherectomyEndovascular TreatmentTechnical Considerations. A sterile field is required in either an operating room or an angiography suite with image capabil-ity. The most common and safest access site is CFA via either a retrograde or an antegrade approach. For diagnostic angiogra-phy, arterial access should be contralateral to the symptomatic sides. For therapeutic procedures, location of the lesion and the anatomic structures of the arterial tree determine the puncture site. To avoid puncturing the iliac artery or SFA, the femoral head is located under the fluoroscopy and used as the guide for the level of needle entry. In addition, there are several useful techniques to help access a pulseless CFA including ultrasound-guided puncture, using a micropuncture kit, and targeting cal-cification in a calcified vessel. The antegrade approach may be challenging, particularly in obese patients. Meticulous technique is crucial in preventing complications, and a bony landmark can be used as guidance to ensure CFA puncture.Traversing the lesion with a wire is the most critical part of the procedure. Typically, 0.035-inch guidewires are used for femoropopliteal lesions, and 0.014or 0.018-inch guidewires are used for infrapopliteal access. Hydrophilic-coated wires, such as Glidewires, are useful in navigating through tight ste-nosis or occlusion. An angled-tip wire with a torque device may be helpful in crossing an eccentric lesion, and a shaped selective catheter is frequently used to help manipulate the wire across the lesion. The soft and floppy end of the wire is care-fully advanced crossing the lesion under fluoroscopy, and gentle force is applied while manipulating the wire. Once the lesion us traversed, one needs to pay particular attention on the tip of the wire to ensure a secure wire access and avoid vessel wall perforation or dissection.Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   96027/02/19   4:15 PM 961ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23Once the access to the diseased vessel is secured and the wire has successfully traversed the lesion, several treatment modalities can be used either alone or in conjunction with oth-ers, including angioplasty, stent or stent graft placement, and atherectomy. The available angioplasty techniques are balloon angioplasty, cryoplasty, subintimal angioplasty, and cutting bal-loon; the most commonly used atherectomy techniques include percutaneous atherectomy catheter and laser atherectomy device.Systemic anticoagulation should be maintained routinely during lower extremity arterial interventions to minimize the risk of pericatheter thrombosis. Unfractionated heparin is the most commonly used agent, administered using a weight-based formula. We typically use 80 to 100 mg/kg initial bolus for therapeutic procedure to achieve an activated clotting time above 250 seconds upon catheter insertion and administer a sub-sequent 1000 units for each additional hour of the procedure. Newer agents, such as low molecular weight heparin, platelet IIb/IIIa inhibitors, direct thrombin inhibitors, or recombinant hirudin, have been available and can be used either alone or in conjunction with heparin, particularly in patients who are sensi-tive to unfractionated heparin. After the procedure, all patients are placed on antiplatelet therapy, such as aspirin. Additional antiplatelet agents, such as clopidogrel (Plavix), are given to selected patients with stent placement for at least 6 weeks after lower extremity interventions unless otherwise contraindicated.Percutaneous Transluminal Balloon Angioplasty. After the lesion is crossed with a wire, an appropriated balloon angio-plasty catheter is selected and tracked along the wire to traverse the lesion. The length of the selected catheter should be slightly longer than the lesion, and the diameter should be equal to the adjacent normal vessel. The balloon tends to be approximately 10% to 20% oversized. The radiopaque markers of the balloon catheter are placed so that they will straddle the lesion. Then, the balloon is inflated with saline and contrast mixture to allow visualization of the insufflation process under the fluoroscopy (Fig. 23-65). The patient may experience mild pain, which is not uncommon. However, severe pain can be indicative of ves-sel rupture, dissection, or other complications. An angiography is crucial in confirming the intraluminal location of the catheter and absence of contrast extravasation. The inflation is continued until the waist of the atherosclerotic lesion is disappeared and the balloon is at the full profile. Frequently, several inflations are required to achieve a full profile of the balloon (Fig. 23-66). Occasionally, a lower profile balloon is needed to predilate the tight stenosis so that the selected balloon catheter can cross the lesion.Besides length and diameter, the operators need to be familiar with several balloon characters. Noncompliant and low-compliant balloons tend to be inflated to their preset diam-eter and offer greater dilating force at the site of stenosis. Low-compliant balloons are the mainstay for peripheral intervention. A balloon with a low profile is used to minimize complications at the entry site and for crossing the tight lesions. Upon infla-tion, most balloons do not rewrap to their preinflation diameter and assume larger profiles. Furthermore, trackability, pushabil-ity, and crossability of the balloon should be considered when choosing a particular type of balloon. Lastly, shoulder length is an important characteristic when performing PTA to avoid injury to the adjacent arterial segments. After PTA, a comple-tion angiogram is performed while the wire is still in place. Leaving the wire in place provides access for repeating the pro-cedure if the result is unsatisfactory.PTA is an established and effective therapy for select patients with lower extremity occlusive diseases. Studies have shown that PTA of femoropopliteal segment achieved over 90% technical success rate and 38% to 58% 5-year primary patency rates.149,150 However, efficacy of PTA is highly dependent on anatomic selection and patient condition. PTA of lesions longer than 7 to 10 cm offers limited patency, whereas PTA of shorter lesions, such as those less than 3 cm, has fairly good results. Lofberg and associates performed 127 femoropopliteal PTA Figure 23-65. A. Angiogram demonstrating a focal stenosis in the superficial femoral artery (arrow). B. This lesion was treated with a bal-loon angioplasty catheter that inflated a dilating balloon and expanded the flow lumen. C. Completion angiogram demonstrating satisfactory radiographic result.Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   96127/02/19   4:15 PM 962SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 23-66. A. Angiogram demonstrating a segmental occlusion in the distal superficial femoral artery (single arrow). B. This lesion was treated with cryoplasty, which lowered the balloon catheter temperature to a temporary freezing state during the balloon angioplasty procedure (double arrows). C. Completion angiogram demonstrated satisfactory result with no evidence of vessel dissection.procedures and reported a primary 5-year success rate of 12% in limbs with occlusion longer than 5 cm versus 32% in limbs with occlusion less than 5 cm in length.151 Occlusive lesions have much worse initial technical success rates than stenotic lesions. Concentric lesions respond better to PTA than eccentric lesions, and heavy calcifications have a negative impact on success rates. A meta-analysis by Hunink and associates showed that adjusted 5-year primary patencies after angioplasty of femoropopliteal lesions varied from 12% to 68%, with the best results being for patients with claudication and stenotic lesions.152 Distal runoff is another powerful predictor of long-term success. Johnston analyzed 254 consecutive patients who underwent femoral and popliteal PTA and reported a 5-year patency rate of 53% for ste-notic lesions and 36% for occlusive lesions in patients with good runoff versus a 5-year patency rate of 31% for stenotic lesions and 16% for occlusive lesions in patients with poor runoff.149 Literature reviews showed that 5-year patency rates varied from 27% to 67% based on runoff status.152Due to limited success with infrapopliteal PTA, the indi-cation for infrapopliteal PTA is stringent and reserved for limb salvage. Current patency rates from infrapopliteal PTA can be improved further by proper patient selection, ensuring straight-line flow to the foot in at least one tibial vessel, and close patient surveillance for early reintervention. Possible future advances, including the use of drug-eluting stents, cutting balloons, and atherectomy devices, are being investigated to improve clini-cal outcomes following endovascular interventions on the tibial arteries. Varty and associates reported a 1-year limb salvage rate of 77% in patients with critical ischemia who underwent infrapopliteal PTA.153 In patients with favorable anatomies, the 2-year limb salvage rate after infrapopliteal PTA is expected to exceed 80%.Subintimal Angioplasty. The technique of subintimal angio-plasty was first described in 1987 when successful establish-ment of flow was made by accidental creation of a subintimal channel during treatment of a long popliteal artery occlusion. Subintimal angioplasty is recommended for chronic occlusion, long segment of lesion, and heavily calcified lesions. In addi-tion, this technique is applicable for vessels with diffuse dis-ease and for vessels that had previously failed an intraluminal approach, when it is difficult to negotiate the wire across the entire diseased segment without dissection.The principle of this technique is to bypass the occlusion by deliberately creating a subintimal dissection plan commenc-ing proximal to the lesion and continuing in the subintimal space before retry into the true lumen distal to the lesion. The occluded lumen is recanalized through the subintimal plan. Sub-intimal angioplasty can be performed through either an ipsilat-eral antegrade or contralateral retrograde approach using the CFA approach. If selecting contralateral CFA puncture, a long guiding sheath is placed across the aortic bifurcation to provide access for the femoropopliteal and infrapopliteal vessels. The subintimal dissection is initiated at the origin of an occlusion by directing the tip of an angled guide wire, usually an angled hydrophilic wire, such as a Glidewire. A supporting catheter is used to guide the tip of the guidewire away from the impor-tant collaterals. When the wire is advanced, a loop is naturally formed at the tip of the guidewire. Once the subintimal plan is entered, the wire tends to move freely in dissection space. Sub-intimal location of the wire and the catheter can be confirmed by injecting a small amount of diluted contrast. At this point, the wire and the catheter are then advanced along the subintimal plan until the occlusion segment is passed. A loss of resistance is often encountered as the guidewire reenters the true lumen distal to the occlusion. Recanalization is confirmed by advanc-ing the catheter over the guidewire beyond the point of reen-try and obtaining an angiogram. This is followed by a balloon angioplasty. To confirm the patency following balloon dilata-tion, a completion angiogram is performed prior to withdraw-ing the catheter and wire. If flow is impaired, repeat balloon Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   96227/02/19   4:15 PM 963ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23dilatation may be necessary. Frequently, a stent is required to maintain a patent lumen and treat residual stenosis if more than 30% luminal reduction is confirmed on completion angiogram.Multiple studies have demonstrated the efficacy of subin-timal angioplasty. Bolia and colleagues reported their extensive experiences on subintimal angioplasty for treating long-segment occlusions of infrainguinal vessels.154 They achieved a techni-cal success rate of over 80% for both femoropopliteal and tibial arteries. One-year patency rates varied from 53% for infrapopli-teal vessels to 71% for femoropopliteal segments. Limb salvage rates reached over 80% at 12 months. They also reported that the factors influencing patency are smoking, number of runoff vessels, and occlusion length. Studies by other groups showed similar results.155 Treiman and colleagues treated 25 patients with 6to 18-cm femoropopliteal occlusion and achieved a technical success rate of 92% and a 13-month primary patency rate of 92%,156 whereas Lipsitz and associates reported a techni-cal success rate of 87% in 39 treated patients and a 12-month cumulative patency rate of 74%.155 In addition, Ingle and asso-ciates reported a technical success rate of 87% in 67 patients with femoropopliteal lesions and a 36-month limb salvage rate of 94%.157 As demonstrated herein, although technical success rates are similar in most series, the patency rates vary widely in different studies. Patient selection, anatomic character, and lesion locations may account for the wide range of outcomes.Stent Placement. Although suggested by Dotter during the late 1960s, the use of an endoluminal stent was not pursued until the limitations of PTA were widely recognized. There are sev-eral situations where stent placement is appealing. The primary indication is the potential salvage of an unacceptable angio-plasty result. Stent placement is typically used when residual stenosis after PTA is 30% or greater. An endoluminal stent is also used for dissection, perforation, and other PTA complica-tions. Primary stent placement has become a viable alternative for treating ulcerative lesions that may potentially be the source for embolization. Primary stent is also used to treat occlusive lesions that have a tendency for reocclusion and distal emboliza-tion after PTA. In addition, an endoluminal stent is potentially beneficial for early restenosis after PTA. Drug-eluting stents are currently under investigation in the United States and may be promising in decreasing restenosis rates.Although technical success rates are high, published series on femoropopliteal artery stents show that patency rates are comparable to PTA alone, with primary patency rates vary-ing from 18% to 72% at 3 years.158 Gray and associates stented 58 limbs after suboptimal PTA for long SFA lesions and dem-onstrated a 1-year primary patency rate of 22%.159 However, Mewissen treated 137 limbs using self-expanding SMART niti-nol stents in patients with TASC A, B, and C femoropopliteal lesions and reported a 1-year primary patency of 76% and a 24-month primary patency rate of 60%.160 Appropriate patient selection and the anatomic characteristics of the lesions are cru-cial in the success of treatment outcomes. Additionally, stent characteristics may contribute to the patency rate.Several clinical studies have demonstrated the significant improvements of the new generation of nitinol stents for the SFA lesions: the German Multicenter Experience, the Mewis-sen trial, the BLASTER Trial, and the SIROCCO trial.161 The German Multicenter Experience was a retrospective review of 111 SFA stenting procedures and predicted that the 6-month patency rate for SMART stents was 82% versus 37% for the Wallstent. The BLASTER (Bilateral Lower Arterial Stenting Employing Reopro) Trial evaluated the feasibility of using nitinol stents with and without intravenous abciximab for the treatment of femoral artery disease, and the preliminary results showed a 1-year clinical patency rate of 83%.162Furthermore, the drug-eluting stent, which proved effec-tive in decreasing restenosis in coronary intervention, may offer another promising alternative in lower extremity diseases. The drug released over a period of time interferes with smooth mus-cle cell proliferation, the main cellular element and source of extracellular matrix–producing restenosis. The first drug-eluting stent clinical trial used Cordis Cypher SMART stents coated with sirolimus (SIROCCO trial).163 The SIROCCO results showed binary in-lesion restenosis rates of 0% in the sirolimus-eluting group versus 23.5% in the noneluting group at 6-month follow-up angiography. The PaRADISE (Preventing Amputa-tions Using Drug-Eluting Stents) Trial investigated the efficacy and safety of using balloon-expandable drug-eluting stents to prevent amputations in patients with below-the-knee critical limb ischemia.164 One hundred six patients (118 limbs) were treated with drug-eluting stents in this prospective, nonrandom-ized trial. There were 228 drug-eluting stents implanted (83% Cypher [Cordis, Johnson & Johnson, Warren, NJ], 17% Taxus [Boston Scientific, Maple Grove, MN]). The average length treated was 60 mm. The 3-year cumulative incidence of amputa-tion was 6%, the survival rate was 71%, and the amputation-free survival rate was 68%. Only 12% of patients who died had a preceding major amputation. Rutherford category, age, creati-nine level, and dialysis were predictors of death but not amputa-tion. Target limb revascularization occurred in 15% of patients.Stent Graft. The concept of endoluminal bypass using stent graft in treating atherosclerotic SFA disease has been enter-tained. A stent graft is placed percutaneously across a long segment or multiple segments of lesions and is used to create a femoropopliteal bypass. Theoretically, endobypass has the potential of being as successful as surgical bypass graft by relin-ing the vessel wall in its anatomic position without the nega-tive impact of anastomosis. Stent grafts can be divided into two categories: unsupported and fully supported. The unsupported grafts consist of segments of bypass graft, such as PTFE, with an expandable stent at one or both ends. The unsupported grafts are flexible with a low profile, but prone to external compres-sion. The supported stent grafts consist of a metallic skeleton covered with graft fabric. The presence of a dense metal skele-ton promotes an extensive inflammatory response and increases the risk of thrombosis. There is no FDA-approved stent graft for peripheral intervention. However, Viabahn (WL Gore & Associates, Flagstaff, AZ) is the most commonly used device in the United States and is composed of an ultra-thin PTFE graft externally supported by self-expanding nitinol meshwork. The Viabahn device has a specific delivery mechanism by pulling back the attached string, which results in proximal-to-distal delivery of the endoprosthesis.Although it is an intriguing concept, data on endobypass results are limited, and the graft thrombosis rate is high. Addi-tionally, covering major collateral vessels can potentially jeop-ardize the viability of the limb if stent graft occlusion occurs. Bauermeister treated 35 patients with Hemobahn and reported a 28.6% occlusion rate at an average 7-month follow-up.165 Kedora and colleagues recently conducted a prospective, randomized study comparing covered PTFE/nitinol self-expanding stent grafts with prosthetic above-the-knee femoropopliteal bypass. Fifty limbs were randomized into each group. Primary patency Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   96327/02/19   4:15 PM 964SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIat 1 year was approximately 74% for both cohorts, with a mean follow-up of 18 months. The covered nitinol/PTFE stent graft in the SFA had a 1-year patency comparable to surgical bypass, with a significantly shorter hospital stay (0.9 vs. 3.1 days).166 A recent randomized prospective study comparing the treatment of SFA occlusive disease percutaneously with an expanded PTFE (ePTFE)/nitinol self-expanding stent graft (stent graft) versus surgical femoral to above-knee popliteal artery bypass with synthetic graft material showed no difference between the two groups with respect to primary or secondary patency rates at  48 months.167 Mean total lesion length of the treated arterial seg-ment in the stent graft group was 25.6 cm. The stent graft group demonstrated a primary patency of 72%, 63%, 63%, and 59% with a secondary patency of 83%, 74%, 74%, and 74% at 12, 24, 36, and 48 months, respectively. The surgical femoral-popliteal group demonstrated a primary patency of 76%, 63%, 63%, and 58% with a secondary patency of 86%, 76%, 76%, and 71% at 12, 24, 36, and 48 months, respectively. The authors concluded that ePTFE/nitinol self-expanding stent graft placement can be offered as an alternative to treatment of the SFA segment for revascularization when prosthetic bypass is being considered or when autologous conduit is unavailable.Atherectomy. The basic principle of atherectomy is to remove the atheroma from obstructed arterial vessels. The currently available atherectomy devices can be generally categorized into directional, nondirectional, orbital, and rotational types based on their mechanism. A few examples of FDA-approved atherectomy devices are Simpson AtheroCath (DVI, Redwood City, CA), Transluminal Extraction Catheter (Interventional Technologies, San Diego, CA), Thoratec recanalization arterial catheter (Thoratec, Pleasanton, CA), Auth Rotablator (Heart Technologies, Redmond, WA), SilverHawk system (FoxHollow Technologies, Redwood City, CA), Jetstream atherectomy sys-tem (Bayer, Indianola, PA), Diamondback 360° orbital atherec-tomy device (Cardiovascular Systems, Inc, St. Paul, MN), and Rotablator system (Boston Scientific Corporation, Natick, MA). These devices either cut and remove or pulverize the atheroma plaques.The Simpson AtheroCath has a directional cutting ele-ment that is exposed to one-third of the circumference of the arterial wall. The atheroma protruding into the window is excised and pushed into the collection chamber. The Translu-minal Extraction Catheter has an over-the-wire nondirectional cutter mounted on the distal end of a torque tube. The excised atheroma is simultaneously removed by aspiration through the torque tube. The Thoratec recanalization arterial catheter is a nondirectional, noncoaxial, atheroablative device. The rotating cam tip pulverizes the atheromatous lesion into minute particles. The Auth Rotablator is a nondirectional, coaxial, atheroablative device with a metal burr embedded with fine diamond chips. SilverHawk device is a monorail catheter designed to overcome the drawbacks of a directional atherectomy catheter. The work-ing end consists of a hinged housing unit containing a carbide cutting blade. The blade is activated from the motor drive unit, and the catheter is then advanced through the length of the lesion. Once each pass is completed, the cutter then packs the tissue into the distal end of the nosecone to maximize collec-tion capacity. The SilverHawk can then either be removed or torqued to treat a different quadrant in the same lesion or other lesions. Jetstream atherectomy system is a rotating, aspirat-ing catheter with tip sizes of 1.6 and 1.8 mm for tibial arteries, and an expandable catheter with a tip size ranging from 2.1 to  3.4 mm for active removal of atherosclerotic debris and throm-bus. The Diamondback 360° orbital atherectomy device uses a drive shaft with an eccentrically mounted, diamond-coated crown to create an orbital spin. As the speed of the crown increases from centrifugal force, it sands wider spaces, thereby providing variability in its working range. It can create a lumen that is >1.75 times the crossing profile depending on the size of the grit and the eccentricity of the offset. The greater the speed of the crown, the larger is the arc of debulking and, ultimately, the resultant lumen size. A constant flow of saline solution is delivered by a roller pump that lubricates the device and helps to flush the debris. The Rotablator system high-speed rotational device uses calcium ablation to achieve larger lumens. It has been used for more than 20 years to treat challenging, calcified coronary artery disease. The diamond-coated burr is designed to preferentially engage calcium and modify lesion compliance.Despite the promising early technical and clinical success, the midand long-term results have been disappointing due to high incidence of restenosis. A multicenter clinical registry of plaque atherectomy in patients with femoropopliteal occlusive disease showed potential clinical efficacy of this technology, as the 6and 12-month rates of survival free of target lesion revascularization were 90% and 80%, respectively.168 Impor-tantly, nearly three-quarters (73%) of patients treated with plaque excision modality did not require adjunctive endovas-cular therapy as infrainguinal stenting was necessary in only 6.3% of lesions. Results from the TALON registry support the role of plaque excision in selected patients with lower extremity arterial disease.Recent technologic advances have made it possible to increase the spectrum of treatable peripheral arterial lesions with high acute procedure success rates. Recently presented data from multiple registries have shown some promising results in terms of short-term primary patency rates and freedom from unplanned major amputation.169 Randomized clinical trials, which may provide conclusions on the effectiveness of these procedures, are expected.Laser Atherectomy. Since laser atherectomy was reported in the 1960s, a variety of innovative approaches have been devel-oped trying to overcome the limitation of laser angioplasty. Recent developments in Excimer laser technology have led to increased optimism regarding the ability to safely deliver laser energy. Excimer laser atherectomy approved by the FDA for peripheral artery intervention employs precision laser energy control (shallow tissue penetration) and safer wavelengths (ultraviolet as opposed to the infrared spectra in older laser technology), which decrease perforation and thermal injury to the treated vessels.A laser atherectomy catheter, with diameters varying from 0.9 to 2.5 mm, is tracked over the guidewire to the desired tar-get. Once activated, the Excimer laser uses ultraviolet energy to ablate the lesion and create a nonthrombogenic arterial lumen. This lumen is further dilated by an angioplasty balloon. Because the Excimer laser can potentially reduce the rate of distal embo-lization by evaporating the lesion, it may be used as an adjunct tool for ostial lesions and lesions that can be traversed by a wire but not an angioplasty balloon catheter.Several studies regarding the use of Excimer laser atherectomy combined with balloon angioplasty on lower extremity occlusive disease have shown promising clinical outcomes.199,200 The Peripheral Excimer Laser Angioplasty (PELA) trial involved 318 patients with chronic SFA occlusion Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   96427/02/19   4:15 PM 965ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23and achieved a technical success rate of 83.2%, a 1-year pri-mary patency rate of 33.6%, and an assisted-primary patency rate of 65%.170 Steinkamp and colleagues treated 127 patients with long-segment popliteal artery occlusion using laser ather-ectomy followed by balloon angioplasty and reported a 3-year primary patency rate of 22%.171 A multicenter clinical trial, the Laser Angioplasty for Critical Limb Ischemia (LACI) trial, sup-ports the efficacy of this treatment modality in selected patients, with 6-month primary patency and clinical improvement rates of 33% and 89%, respectively.172 The technology and devices continue to evolve. With the TurboBooster and Turbo-Tandem technologies (Spectranetics Corporation, Colorado Springs, CO), the efficacy of plaque reduction was reported to be sig-nificantly improved in the CliRpath Excimer Laser System to Enlarge Lumen Openings (CELLO) study.173 The CELLO study was a single-arm, prospective registry trial conducted at 17 investigational sites in the United States to evaluate the safety and efficacy of a modified laser catheter designed for the endovascular treatment of peripheral artery disease affecting the SFA and proximal popliteal artery. Laser ablation reduced percent diameter stenosis from 77% to 21% after adjunctive therapy with balloon angioplasty or balloon angioplasty with stenting; 12.3% patients did not receive postlaser adjunctive therapy. Patency rates were 59% and 54% at 6 and 12 months, respectively. Target lesion revascularization was not required in 76.9% of CELLO participants within the 1-year follow-up.Complications of Endovascular InterventionsAngioplasty-Related Complications. Complications related to PTA vary widely and include dissection, rupture, emboliza-tion, pseudoaneurysms, restenosis, hematoma, and acute occlu-sion secondary to thrombosis, vasospasm, or intimal injury. Clark and associates analyzed the data from 205 patients in the SCVIR Transluminal Angioplasty and Revascularization (STAR) registry and reported a complication rate of 7.3% for patients undergoing femoropopliteal angioplasty.174 Minor complications accounted for 75% of the cases, including distal emboli (41.7%), puncture site hematomas (41.7%), contained vessel rupture (8.3%), and vagal reactions (8.3%). In another study, Axisa and colleagues reported an overall rate of significant complica-tions for patients undergoing PTA of the lower extremities of 4.2%, including retroperitoneal bleeding (0.2%), false aneurysm (0.2%), ALI (1.5%), and vessel perforation (1.7%).175Complications limiting the application of subintimal angioplasty are parallel to those of PTA. A study investigating the use of subintimal angioplasty in 65 patients with SFA occlu-sion found that complications developed in 15% of patients.176 These complications included significant stenosis (44%), SFA rupture (6%), distal embolization (3%), retroperitoneal hemor-rhage (1.5%), and pseudoaneurysm (1.5%). Additional compli-cations reported included perforation, thrombosis, dissection, and extensions beyond the planned reentry site.177 Importantly, damage to significant collateral vessels may occur in 1% to 1.5% of patients who undergo subintimal angioplasty. If a suc-cessful channel is not achieved in this situation, the patient may have a compromised distal circulation that necessitates dis-tal bypass. Cryoplasty is a modified form of angioplasty, and long-term results on lower extremity intervention are not yet available. Fava and associates treated 15 patients with femo-ropopliteal disease and had a 13% complication rate involving guidewire dissection and PTA-induced dissection of a tandem lesion remote to the cryoplasty zone.178Endoluminal Stent– and Stent Graft–Related Complica-tions. In addition to the aforementioned complications with angioplasty, endoluminal stent is associated with the risk of stent fraction and deformity. The adductor canal has nonlami-nar flow dynamics, especially with walking. The forces exerted on the SFA include torsion, compression, extension, and flex-ion. These forces exert significant stress on the SFA and stents. In addition, the lower extremity is subject to external trauma, which further increases the risk of stent deformity and fracture (Fig. 23-67). The SIROCCO study showed that stent fracture, although not associated with clinical symptoms, occurs in 18.2% of the procedures involving both drug-eluting stents and control stents.163Stent grafts may present the additional complication of covering important collaterals, which results in compromised distal circulation. A prospective study evaluating Hemo-bahn stent grafts in the treatment of femoropopliteal arterial Figure 23-67. Due to various geometric forces, including torsion, compression, extension, and flexion, exerted on the superficial fem-oral artery (SFA), stent fracture (arrows) is a known complication following SFA stent placement.Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   96527/02/19   4:15 PM 966SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIocclusions demonstrated a 23% immediate complication rate including distal embolization (7.7%), groin hematoma (13.5%), and arteriovenous fistula (1.9%).179Atherectomy-Related Complications. Overall complication rates associated with atherectomy range from 15.4% to 42.8%, including spasm, thrombosis, dissection, perforation, distal emboli, no reflow, and hematoma.180,181 Jahnke and associates conducted a prospective study evaluating high-speed rotational atherectomy in 15 patients with infrapopliteal occlusive disease. They yielded a 94% technical success rate, but success was complicated by vessel rupture (5%), distal embolization (5%), and arterial spasm (5%).179 Although Excimer laser atherectomy reduces embolic events by evaporating the lesion, embolization still remains a problematic complication. Studies show that dis-tal embolic events occur in 3% to 4% of procedures and perfora-tion occurs in 2.2% to 4.3% of cases.170,171 Other complications associated with laser atherectomy therapy include acute throm-bosis, vasospasm, direct vessel injury, and dissection.170,171Surgical Treatment for Chronic Limb Ischemia due to Femoropopliteal DiseaseEndarterectomy. Endarterectomy has a limited, albeit impor-tant role in lower extremity occlusive disease. It is most fre-quently used when there is disease in the CFA or involving the PFA. In this procedure, the surgeon opens the diseased segment longitudinally and develops a cleavage plane within the media that is developed proximally and distally. This permits the inner layer containing the atheroma to be excised. Great care must be taken at the distal end of the endarterectomy to either ensure a smooth transition or tack down the distal endpoint to prevent the flow from elevating a potentially occlusive atheromatous flap. Currently, there is essentially no role for long open endar-terectomy in the treatment of SFA stenoses or occlusions. The high incidence of restenosis is what limits utility of endarterec-tomy in this location. Short-segment stenoses are more appro-priately treated with balloon angioplasty. Endarterectomy using a catheter-based approach (e.g., Moll endarterectomy device) supplemented with stent grafting or stenting across the endpoint of the endarterectomy is currently being reevaluated; however, no long-term data are available.Bypass Grafting. Bypass grafting remains the primary inter-vention for lower extremity occlusive disease. The type of bypass and the type of conduit are important variables to con-sider. Patients with occlusive disease limited to the SFA, who have at least 4 cm (ideally 10 cm) of normal popliteal artery reconstituted above the knee joint, and with at least one continu-ous vessel to the foot can be treated with an above-knee femo-ropopliteal bypass graft. Despite the fact that in this above-knee location, the differential patencies between prosthetic (PTFE) and vein graft are comparable, undoubtedly, it remains ideal to use a saphenous vein as the bypass conduit if possible. Saving the vein for future coronary artery bypass or distal leg bypass grafting has been shown to be a flawed argument. One must also consider that the consequences to the vascular outflow after a thrombosed prosthetic are worse than after a thrombosed vein graft.When the disease extends to involve the popliteal artery or the tibial vessels, the surgeon must select an appropriate out-flow vessel to perform a bypass. Suitable outflow vessels are defined as uninterrupted flow channels beyond the anastomosis into the foot. Listed in order of descending preference, they are as follows: above-knee popliteal artery, below-knee popli-teal artery, posterior tibial artery, anterior tibial artery, and peroneal artery. In patients with diabetes, it is frequently the peroneal artery that is spared. Although it has no direct flow into the foot, collateralization to the posterior tibial and anterior tibial arteries makes it an appropriate outflow vessel. There is no objective evidence to preferentially select tibial over peroneal arteries if they are vessels of equal caliber and quality. The dor-salis pedis, which is the continuation of the anterior tibial in the foot, is frequently spared from atherosclerotic disease and can be used as a target for distal bypasses. Patency is affected by the length of the bypass (longer bypasses have reduced patency), quality of the recipient artery, extent of runoff to the foot, and quality of the conduit (saphenous vein/graft). Five-year assisted patency rate for infrapopliteal venous bypasses is 60%. Venous conduits have also been shown to be suitable for bypasses to plantar arteries. In this location, venous conduits have a 3-year limb salvage rate of 84% and a 3-year secondary patency rate of 74%.1 A meta-analysis suggests unsatisfactory results when PTFE-coated grafts are used to bypass to infrapopliteal arteries. In this location, prosthetic grafts have a 5-year primary patency rate of 30.5%.182 Additionally, due to distal embolization and compromise of outflow vessels, prosthetic graft occlusion may have more severe consequences than vein graft occlusion.Two techniques are used for distal bypass grafting: reversed saphenous vein grafting and in situ saphenous vein grafting. There is no difference in outcomes (patency or limb salvage) between these techniques. In the former, the vein is excised in its entirety from the leg using open or endoscopic vein harvest, reversed to render the valves nonfunctional, and tunneled from the CFA inflow to the distal target vessels. End-to-side anastomoses are then created.Several adjunctive techniques have been used to try to improve the patency of bypass grafts to tibial arteries. Cre-ation of an arteriovenous fistula at the distal anastomosis is one option, but it has not been shown to improve patency.183 Another method involves creating varying configurations of vein cuffs or patches at the distal anastomosis in an attempt to streamline the flow and to reduce the likelihood of neointimal hyperplasia. Results with this approach are more promising, especially when done to improve patency of a below-the-knee prosthetic; how-ever, there are no definitive comparative trials that support the superiority of one configuration over another.Amputation. Primary amputation is defined as an amputation that is performed without a prior attempt at surgical or endovas-cular revascularization. It is rarely necessary in patients who, as a result of neglect, present with class III ALI. Primary ampu-tation may play a role in patients with critical limb ischemia who are deemed nonambulatory because of knee contractures, debilitating strokes, or dementia.Complications of Surgical ReconstructionVein Graft Stenoses. Fifteen percent of vein grafts will develop intrinsic stenoses within the first 18 months follow-ing implantation. Consequently, patients with vein grafts were entered into duplex surveillance protocols (scans every 3 months) to detect elevated (>300 cm/s) or abnormally low (<45 cm/s) graft velocities early. Stenoses greater than 50%, especially if associated with changes in ABI, should be repaired to prevent graft thrombosis. Repair usually entails patch angio-plasty or short-segment venous interposition, but PTA/stenting Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   96627/02/19   4:15 PM 967ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23is an option for short, focal lesions. Grafts with stenoses that are identified and repaired prior to thrombosis have assisted-primary patency identical to primary patency, whereas a throm-bosed autogenous bypass has limited longevity resulting from ischemic injury to the vein wall. Secondary patency is mark-edly inferior to primary assisted patency. The recommenda-tion for routine duplex ultrasound surveillance of autogenous infrainguinal bypasses was recently brought into question by a randomized controlled trial that demonstrated no cost benefit or quality-of-life improvement in patients with femoropopliteal venous bypasses after 18 months.184 Many surgeons continue with programs of vein graft surveillance, as has been suggested in older trials, awaiting further confirmation of the findings from the more recent study. When intervening in a failing infraingui-nal bypass, the original indication for surgery is an important consideration. Limb salvage rates for occluded grafts are better if the indication for the original bypass was claudication rather than rest pain or tissue loss. An acutely occluded infrainguinal graft (≤30 postoperative days) has a 25% limb salvage rate.185Limb Swelling. Limb swelling is common following revascu-larization and usually returns to baseline within 2 to 3 months. The etiology is multifactorial with lymphatic interruption, inter-stitial edema, and disruption of venous drainage all contributing. Limb swelling tends to worsen with repeat revascularization (see Table 23-22).Wound Infection. Since the most common inflow vessel for distal bypass is the CFA, groin infection is common and occurs in 7% of cases.186 When an autogenous conduit such as the saphenous vein is used, most infections can be managed with local wound care because the infection involves the subcutane-ous tissue or skin rather than infection of the actual vein. When a prosthetic graft has been used, management of graft infection is a major undertaking. Infection of a lower extremity prosthetic bypass graft is associated with a significant amputation rate because of the tendency for graft thrombosis and anastomotic disruption. Prosthetic graft infections cannot be eradicated with antibiotics and mandate graft excision and complex revascular-ization using a vein if available.Choice of Conduit for Infrainguinal  Bypass GraftingAutogenous Vein. The autogenous vein is superior to pros-thetic conduits for all infrainguinal bypasses, even in the above-knee position. This preference is applicable not only for the initial bypass but also for reoperative cases. For long bypasses, the ipsilateral great saphenous vein, contralateral great saphe-nous vein, small saphenous vein, arm vein, and spliced vein are used in decreasing order of preference. If only a short segment of vein is missing, the SFA can be endarterectomized and the proximal anastomosis performed distally to decrease the length of the conduit and to avoid harvesting and splicing additional vein. When the great saphenous vein is not available and a rela-tively short bypass is necessary, the arm vein or small saphe-nous vein is effective. The small saphenous vein is of particular utility when a posterior approach is used. If a longer bypass with vein is necessary, the arm vein is preferable because it is less awkward to harvest. Another conduit alternative is to har-vest the upper arm basilic, median cubital, and cephalic veins in continuity, while incising valves in the basilic segment and using the cephalic segment in reversed configuration to provide a relatively long, unspliced autogenous conduit.187Cryopreserved Grafts. Cryopreserved grafts are usually cadaveric arteries or veins that have been subjected to rate-controlled freezing with dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and other cryopreservants. Cryopreserved vein grafts are more expensive than prosthetic grafts and are more prone to failure. The endo-thelial lining is lost as part of the freezing process, making these grafts prone to early thrombosis. Cryopreserved grafts are also prone to aneurysmal degeneration. Despite the fact that these grafts have not performed as well as prosthetic bypasses and autogenous vein bypasses in clinical practice, they can still play a role when revascularization is required following removal of infected prosthetic bypass grafts, especially when the autog-enous vein is unavailable to create a new bypass through clean tissue planes.Human Umbilical Vein. Human umbilical vein (HUV) is less commonly used than PTFE because it is thicker and more cum-bersome to handle and because of concerns about aneurysmal degeneration. HUV allografts are stabilized with glutaralde-hyde and do not have viable cells or antigenic reactivity. These grafts have poor handling characteristics and require extra care when suturing because of an outer Dacron mesh wrapping that is used to decrease aneurysmal degeneration. Dardik and col-leagues have reported favorable results after using HUV and an adjunctive distal arteriovenous fistula.188 One trial compar-ing HUV with PTFE and saphenous vein showed that HUV was better than PTFE but worse than saphenous vein in terms of 5-year patency in the above-knee location.189 In a system-atic review, HUV appears to perform better than cryopre-served veins in terms of 1-year graft patency in infrainguinal revascularization.190Prosthetic Conduits and Adjunctive Modifications. If a vein is truly unavailable, PTFE or Dacron is the best option for above-knee bypass. The addition of rings to PTFE did not con-fer benefit in a single prospective, randomized clinical trial.191 For infrageniculate prosthetic bypasses, use of a vein patch, cuff, or other venous anastomotic modification can improve patency (52% patency at 2 years for PTFE with vein cuff vs. 29% for PTFE with no cuff) and also improve limb salvage (84% vs. 62%).192Although prosthetic grafts are quickly available, easy to handle, and do not require extensive dissection to harvest, their propensity to undergo thrombosis and develop neointimal hyperplasia makes them a less favorable alternative when com-pared to vein. In a recent review of vein and prosthetic above-knee femoropopliteal bypasses, the 5-year primary patency rates were reported to be 74% and 39%, respectively.193 Outcomes were even worse for below-knee prosthetic bypasses. Unfortu-nately, the use of autologous venous conduits is not possible in as many as 30% of patients. The great saphenous vein may be unsuitable because of small size and poor quality or unavailable due to prior harvest.Methods to improve prosthetic graft performance have consisted of altering the geometry at the distal anastomosis to get the benefit obtained with vein cuffs (Distaflo; Bard Peripheral Vascular, Tempe, AZ) and covalently bonding agents onto the luminal surface with anticoagulant, anti-inflammatory, and anti-proliferative characteristics (Propaten; Gore, Flagstaff, AZ). One randomized trial that compared precuffed PTFE versus PTFE with a vein cuff enrolled 104 patients at 10 centers. Of 89 patients, 47 were randomized to precuffed PTFE bypasses and 44 were randomized to bypasses with a vein cuff.194 At 1 and  Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   96727/02/19   4:15 PM 968SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II2 years, primary patency rates were 52% and 49% in the pre-cuffed group and 62% and 44% in the vein cuffed group, respec-tively. At 1 and 2 years, the limb salvage rates were 72% and 65% in the precuffed group and 75% and 62% in the vein cuffed group, respectively. Although numbers are small and follow-up short, the midterm analysis revealed that Distaflo precuffed grafts and PTFE grafts with vein cuff had similar results. The authors concluded that a precuffed graft was a reasonable alternative for infragenicular reconstruction in the absence of saphenous vein.194 Other authors have been less optimistic and question whether there is any benefit derived from geometri-cally altering prosthetic conduits.195Another approach for improving outcomes when using prosthetic for bypass grafts involves bonding anticoagulants to the conduit. The Gore Propaten graft has heparin bonded onto the luminal surface of the PTFE graft using Carmeda BioActive Surface (CBAS) technology, which immobilizes the heparin molecule with a single covalent bond that does not alter its anti-coagulant properties.196 The heparin binding does not alter the microstructure and handling characteristics of the PTFE. A pro-spective, randomized trial by Devine and colleagues suggested that heparin-bonded Dacron or PTFE was superior to plain PTFE for above-knee popliteal bypasses. The 3-year primary patency rate for the heparin-bonded grafts was 55% compared with 42% for PTFE (P <0.044). Both of these patency rates are inferior to great saphenous vein grafts; however, if the improved results with heparin bonding continue to be substantiated, then heparin-bonded prosthetic grafts will become the preferred con-duit for above-knee bypass in the absence of suitable vein.197 A recent review of available studies with this graft showed an 80% 1-year patency rate for below-knee bypasses.198 Randomized controlled clinical trials with more patients and longer follow-up are necessary to validate whether the Propaten vascular graft is superior to other prosthetics and whether it is comparable to autogenous vein for below-knee interventions.Clinical Results of Surgical and Endovascular Interventions for Femoropopliteal  Occlusive DiseaseBalloon angioplasty of the femoropopliteal vessels has not enjoyed the degree of success seen with iliac angioplasty. Patency in this region is dependent on whether the patient pres-ents with claudication versus limb-threatening ischemia, the sta-tus of the distal runoff vessels, and lesion morphology. Initial technical success for femoropopliteal angioplasty is seen in 80% to 90% of cases, with failure to cross a lesion occurring in 7% of stenoses and 18% of occlusive lesions. Studies have shown that PTA of the femoropopliteal segment achieved a greater than 90% technical success rate and had a 38% to 58% 5-year pri-mary patency rate.152,199 PTA of lesions longer than 7 to 10 cm results in compromised patency, whereas PTA of shorter lesions (<3 cm) gives fairly good results. Lofberg and colleagues per-formed 127 femoropopliteal PTA procedures and reported a primary patency rate at 5-year follow-up of 12% in limbs with occlusion longer than 5 cm versus 32% in limbs with occlusion less than 5 cm in length.151 Occlusive lesions have much worse initial technical success rates than stenotic lesions. Concentric lesions respond better to PTA than eccentric lesions, and heavy calcifications have a negative impact on success rates. Distal runoff is another powerful predictor of long-term success.Johnston analyzed 254 consecutive patients who under-went femoropopliteal PTA and reported a 5-year patency rate of 53% for stenotic lesions and 36% for occlusive lesions in patients with good runoff versus a 5-year patency rate of 31% for stenotic lesions and 16% for occlusive lesions in patients with poor runoff.149 A meta-analysis by Hunink and colleagues showed that adjusted 5-year primary patencies after angioplasty of femoropopliteal lesions varied from 12% to 68%, with the best results occurring in patients with claudication and stenotic lesions.152 Although the initial technical success is better for stenoses than occlusions, long-term patency rates for stenoses and short occlusions have been variable, and there have been conflicting results regarding the efficacy of stent use. Early pub-lished series that examined efficacy of femoropopliteal artery stents showed patency rates that were comparable to standalone PTA, with primary patency rates varying from 18% to 72% at 3 years.158 Patient selection and the anatomic character of the lesions may play important roles in the outcomes. Additionally, stent characteristics may contribute to the patency rate. Several recent clinical studies have demonstrated significant improve-ments in patency when the newer generations of nitinol stents are used to treat SFA lesions.160,200Mewissen treated 137 lower limbs in 122 patients with CLI, secondary to TASC A (n = 12) or TASC B or C (n = 125) lesions in the SFA. Patients were treated with Cordis SMART self-expanding nitinol stents. Binary restenosis (>50%) was measured by standard duplex velocity criteria at various postint-ervention intervals. Primary stent patency, defined as absence of binary restenosis in this study, was calculated by life-table methods from the time of intervention. The mean lesion length was 12.2 cm (range, 4–28 cm). The technical success was 98%. Mean follow-up was 302 days. The primary stent patency rates were 92%, 76%, 66%, and 60% at 6, 12, 18, and 24 months, respectively.160 Ferreira and colleagues treated 59 patients who had 74 femoropopliteal lesions (60% TASC D) with Zilver nitinol self-expanding stents (Cook, Bloomington, IN). Mean recanalization length was 19 cm (range, 3–53 cm). Mean fol-low-up time was 2.4 years (range, 3 days–4.8 years). Kaplan-Meier estimates for primary patency rates were 90%, 78%, 74%, 69%, and 69% at 1, 2, 3, 4, and 4.8 years, respectively.201There is general agreement that for suboptimal PTA of an SFA lesion, stent placement is indicated, but a recent random-ized trial by Schillinger and associates suggests that primary stenting results in lower restenosis rates than PTA and selective stenting. Restenosis rates at 2 years were 45.7% versus 69.2% in favor of primary stenting compared with PTA and optional secondary stenting using an intent-to-treat analysis (P = 0.031). Consistently, stenting, both primary and selective, was supe-rior to standalone PTA with respect to the occurrence of reste-nosis (49.2% vs. 74.3%; P = 0.028) by a treatment-received analysis.202Nitinol bare metal stents that are designed specifically for below-knee interventions are showing very encouraging results. Bosiers and colleagues reported their 12-month results using the commercially available non–drug-eluting Xpert (Abbott Vascular, Santa Clara, CA) nitinol stent system in below-knee arterial interventions.203 They had a 12-month primary patency rate of 76.3% and a limb salvage rate of 95.9%. They fol-lowed patients for 12 months and performed angiography with quantitative vessel analysis on the 73% of patients available. Angiography revealed a binary restenosis rate (>50%) of only 20.5%, which is comparable to well-accepted coronary drug-eluting stent study outcomes. The authors attributed this opti-mal performance to the maintenance of flow dynamics because Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   96827/02/19   4:15 PM 969ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23the stent was specifically designed for use in small vessels. Kickuth and colleagues also have obtained good results using the Xpert stent. After stent placement, the primary cumulative patency rate at 6 months for the study group of 35 patients was 82%. The sustained clinical improvement rate as evidenced by improved ABI was 80%, and freedom from major amputation was 100% at the 6-month follow-up. The rate of major compli-cations was 17%.204Wolf and colleagues published a multicenter, prospec-tive randomized trial comparing PTA with bypass in 263 men who had iliac, femoral, or popliteal artery obstruction.205 In 56 patients, cumulative 1-year primary patency rate was 43% after PTA and 82% after bypass surgery, demonstrating that for long SFA stenoses or occlusions, surgery is better than PTA. Another recent randomized study (BASIL trial) of 452 patients with CLI demonstrated no difference in amputation-free survival at 6 months between surgery and PTA/stenting.206 The authors com-mented that surgery was somewhat more expensive and rec-ommended that endovascular intervention should be used as first-line therapy especially in medically unfit patients. They did conclude that at the 2-year follow-up, healthy patients with-out medical comorbidities derived greater benefit from surgery because it was associated with decreased need for reintervention and had a decreased hazard ratio in terms of all-cause mortality. The recently published randomized prospective study compar-ing the treatment of SFA occlusive disease percutaneously with an ePTFE/nitinol self-expanding stent graft versus surgical fem-oral to above-knee popliteal artery bypass with synthetic graft material showed no difference between the two groups with respect to primary or secondary patency rate at four years.167 This finding suggests that ePTFE/nitinol self-expanding stent graft placement can be offered as an alternative to treatment of the SFA segment for revascularization when prosthetic bypass is being considered or when autologous conduit is unavailable. Using the 2000 TASC definitions and a Markov state transi-tion model decision analysis, Nolan and colleagues showed that PTA/stenting surpasses bypass efficacy for TASC C lesions if PTA/stenting primary patency is >32% at 5 years, patient age is >80 years, and/or greater saphenous vein bypass operative mortality is >6%.207NONATHEROSCLEROTIC DISORDERS  OF BLOOD VESSELSThe majority of cases of peripheral vascular disease that are seen by vascular surgeons are attributable to underlying athero-sclerosis. Nonatherosclerotic disease states that result in arterial pathology are less commonly encountered, but are nonetheless important, as they are potentially treatable lesions that may mimic atherosclerotic lesions and result in vascular insuffi-ciency (see Table 23-18). A thorough knowledge of these rare disease states is important for the practicing vascular surgeon in order to make medical recommendations and provide appropri-ate surgical treatment.Giant Cell Arteritis (Temporal Arteritis)Giant cell arteritis is also known as temporal arteritis, which is a systemic chronic inflammatory vascular disease with many characteristics similar to those of Takayasu’s disease. The histo-logic and pathologic changes and laboratory findings are similar. Patients tend to be white women over the age of 50 years, with a high incidence in Scandinavia and women of Northern European descent. Genetic factors may play a role in disease pathogenesis, with a human leukocyte antigen (HLA) variant having been identified. Differences exist between Takayasu’s and giant cell arteritis in terms of presentation, disease location, and therapeutic efficacy. The inflammatory process typically involves the aorta and its extracranial branches, of which the superficial temporal artery is specifically affected.The clinical syndrome begins with a prodromal phase of constitutional symptoms, including headache, fever, malaise, and myalgias. The patients may be initially diagnosed with coexisting polymyalgia rheumatica; an HLA-related associa-tion may exist between the two diseases. As a result of vascular narrowing and end-organ ischemia, complications may occur such as visual alterations, including blindness and mural weak-ness, resulting in acute aortic dissection that may be devastating. Ischemic optic neuritis resulting in partial or complete blindness occurs in up to 40% of patients and is considered a medical emergency. Cerebral symptoms occur when the disease process extends to the carotid arteries. Jaw claudication and temporal artery tenderness may be experienced. Aortic lesions are usually asymptomatic until later stages and consist of thoracic aneu-rysms and aortic dissections.The diagnostic gold standard is a temporal artery biopsy, which will show the classic histologic findings of multinucle-ated giant cells with a dense perivascular inflammatory infil-trate. Treatment regimens are centered on corticosteroids, and giant cell arteritis tends to rapidly respond. Remission rates are high, and treatment tends to have a beneficial and preventative effect on the development of subsequent vascular complications.Takayasu’s ArteritisTakayasu’s arteritis is a rare but well-recognized chronic inflam-matory arteritis affecting large vessels, predominantly the aorta and its main branches (Table 23-27). Chronic vessel inflamma-tion leads to wall thickening, fibrosis, stenosis, and thrombus formation. Symptoms are related to end-organ ischemia. The acute inflammation can destroy the arterial media and lead to aneurysm formation. This rare autoimmune disease occurs pre-dominantly in women between the ages of 10 and 40 years who are of Asian descent. Genetic studies have demonstrated a high frequency of HLA haplotypes in patients from Japan and Mexico, suggesting increased susceptibility to developing the disease in patients with certain alleles. However, these associations have not been seen in North America. Vascular inflammation leads Table 23-27Angiographic classification of Takayasu’s arteritisTYPEVESSEL INVOLVEMENTType IBranches from the aortic archType IIaAscending aorta, aortic arch and its branchesType IIbAscending aorta, aortic arch and its branches, thoracic descending aortaType IIIThoracic descending aorta, abdominal aorta, and/or renal arteriesType IVAbdominal aorta and/or renal arteriesType VCombined features of types IIb and IVInvolvement of the coronary or pulmonary arteries is designated as C (+) or P (+), respectively.Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   96927/02/19   4:15 PM 970SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIto arterial wall thickening, stenosis, and eventually, fibrosis and thrombus formation. The pathologic changes produce stenosis, dilation, aneurysm formation, and/or occlusion.The clinical course of Takayasu’s arteritis begins with a “prepulseless” phase in which the patient demonstrates constitu-tional symptoms. These include fever, anorexia, weight loss, gen-eral malaise, arthralgias, and malnutrition. As the inflammation progresses and stenoses develop, more characteristic features of the disease become evident. During the chronic phase, the dis-ease is inactive or “burned out.” It is during this latter stage that patients most frequently present with bruits and vascular insuf-ficiency according to the arterial bed involved. Laboratory data may show elevations in erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, and white blood cell count, or conversely, anemia may predominate. Characteristic clinical features during the second phase vary according to the involved vascular bed and include hypertension reflecting renal artery stenosis, retinopathy, aortic regurgitation, cerebrovascular symptoms, angina and con-gestive heart failure, abdominal pain or gastrointestinal bleeding, pulmonary hypertension, or extremity claudication.The gold standard for diagnosis remains angiography showing narrowing or occlusion of the entire aorta or its pri-mary branches, or focal or segmental changes in large arteries in the upper or lower extremities. Six types of Takayasu’s arteritis exist and are graded in terms of severity: type I, affecting the aorta and arch vessels; type IIa, affecting the ascending aorta, aortic arch, and branches; type IIb, affecting the ascending aorta, aortic arch and branches, and thoracic descending aorta;  type III, affecting the thoracic descending aorta, abdominal aorta, and/or renal arteries; type IV, affecting the abdominal aorta and/or renal arteries; and type V, with combined features of types IIb and IV.208Treatment consists of steroid therapy initially, with cyto-toxic agents used in patients who do not achieve remission. Surgical treatment is performed only in advanced stages, and bypass needs to be delayed during active phases of inflam-mation. There is no role for endarterectomy, and synthetic or autogenous bypass grafts need to be placed onto disease-free segments of vessels. For focal lesions, there have been reports of success with angioplasty.Ehlers-Danlos SyndromeEhlers-Danlos syndrome is one of the more significant inheritable disorders affecting the connective tissue, along with Marfan’s syndrome. This syndrome represents a heterogenous group of connective tissue disorders (types I through IV) that were first described in 1682 by van Meekeren.238 It is an autosomal domi-nant disorder affecting approximately 1 in 5000 persons that is characterized by skin elasticity, joint hypermobility, tissue fragility, multiple ecchymoses, and subcutaneous pseudotu-mors. Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is a disorder of fibrillar collagen metabolism with identifiable, specific defects that have been found in the collagen biosynthetic pathway that produce clini-cally distinct forms of this disease. Ten different phenotypes have been described, each with variable modes of inheritance and biochemical defects. Of the four basic types of collagen found in the body, the predominant type in blood vessels is type III. Within the vessel wall, type III collagen contributes to structural integrity and tensile strength and plays a role in platelet aggregation and thrombus formation.Of the three types of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome that have arterial complications, type IV represents 5% of cases and is the one most likely to be seen by a vascular surgeon. These patients synthesize abnormal type III collagen (mutation COL3A1) and represent 5% of all cases.209 Affected individuals do not show the typical skin and joint manifestations, and thus typically pres-ent for diagnosis when a major vascular catastrophe occurs. In a review of 36 patients with this disorder, Cikrit and colleagues reported a 44% mortality rate from major hemorrhage prior to any surgical intervention.210 In the 20 patients who underwent 29 vascular procedures, there was a 29% mortality rate. Arterial rupture, aneurysm formation, and acute aortic dissection may occur in any major artery, with the most frequent site of rupture being the abdominal cavity. Repair is problematic because the vessel wall is soft and sutures pull through the fragile tissue. Ligation may be the only option in many circumstances.Marfan’s SyndromeAnother heterogeneous heritable disorder of connective tissue, Marfan’s syndrome is characterized by abnormal musculo-skeletal, ocular, and cardiovascular features first described by Antoine Marfan in 1896.211 The inborn error of metabolism in this syndrome has been localized to the long arm of chromo-some 15 (15q21.3). Defects occur in fibrillin, a basic protein in the microfibrillar apparatus that serves as a backbone for elas-tin, which is one of the main extracellular structural proteins in blood vessels. This is an autosomal dominant gene with high penetrance; however, approximately 15% to 20% of cases are secondary to new spontaneous mutations.Classic recognizable features of Marfan’s syndrome include tall stature, long limbs (dolichostenomelia), long fingers (arachnodactyly), joint hyperextensibility, chest wall deformi-ties, and scoliosis. Ocular manifestations are flattened corneas, lens subluxation, and myopia. Ninety-five percent of patients have cardiovascular involvement, which may include ascend-ing aortic dilatation, mitral valve prolapse, valvular regurgita-tion, and aortic dissection. Skin, central nervous system, and pulmonary features may be present as well. Aortic root dilata-tion will generally occur in all patients. This may not be evident on standard chest radiograph until dilatation has resulted in an ascending aortic aneurysm, aortic valve regurgitation, or dis-section. Left untreated, the cardiovascular complications are devastating and reduce the life expectancy to about 40 years for men and slightly higher for women. Death is usually attrib-utable to life-threatening complications of aortic regurgitation, dissection, and rupture after the ascending aorta has dilated to 6 cm or more.Aggressive medical management with β-adrenergic block-ing agents and other blood pressure–lowering regimens is cru-cial to treatment. Surgical intervention entails replacement of the aortic root with a composite valve graft (e.g., Bentall pro-cedure).212 Prophylactic operative repair is indicated for an aneurysm greater than 5.5 cm, with an acceptable perioperative mortality of less than 5%.Pseudoxanthoma ElasticumPseudoxanthoma elasticum is a rare inherited disorder of con-nective tissue that is characterized by an unbalanced elastic fiber metabolism and synthesis, resulting in fragmentation and calci-fication of the fibers. Clinical manifestations occur in the skin, ocular, gastrointestinal, and cardiovascular systems. Character-istic skin lesions are seen in the axilla, antecubital and popliteal fossae, and groin. The yellow, xanthoma-like papules occur in redundant folds of skin and are said to resemble plucked chicken skin. The inheritance pattern includes both autosomal dominant Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   97027/02/19   4:15 PM 971ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23and recessive types and has a prevalence of 1 in 160,000 indi-viduals.213 The ATP-binding cassette subfamily C member 6 (ABCC6) gene has been demonstrated to be responsible, and 43 mutations have been identified, all of which lead to calcification of the internal elastic laminae of medium-sized vessel walls.214Cardiovascular features are common and include prema-ture coronary artery disease, cerebrovascular disease, renovas-cular hypertension, diminished peripheral pulses, and restrictive cardiomyopathy. Symptom onset typically occurs in the second decade of life, with onset at an average age of 13 years. Patients should be counseled to reduce potential contributing factors for atherosclerosis such as tobacco use and high cholesterol levels. Calcium intake should be restricted in adolescents, as a positive correlation has been found between disease severity and cal-cium intake. Surgical management involves standard vascular techniques, with the exception that arterial conduits should not be employed in cardiac bypass.Kawasaki’s DiseaseKawasaki’s disease was first described in 1967, as a mucocu-taneous lymph node syndrome occurring in young children. In most studies, more than half the patients are younger than 2 years of age, with a higher prevalence in boys.215 Although originally described in Japan, the disease is found worldwide. An infec-tious agent may be causative; however, no specific agent has been identified. Immune activation with the contribution of cytokines, elastases, growth factors, and metalloproteinases is believed to be a mechanism for inflammation and aneurysm for-mation. Coronary artery aneurysms, the hallmark of the disease, histologically demonstrate a panarteritis with fibrinoid necro-sis. Coronary arteriography may show occlusions, recanaliza-tion, and localized stenosis, in addition to multiple aneurysms. A variety of constitutional symptoms and signs resulting from systemic vasculitis are present in the acute phase of the illness.Medical therapy for Kawasaki’s disease clearly decreases the manifestations of coronary artery involvement. Intravenous gamma globulin and aspirin therapy are most successful if begun within the first 10 days of illness. Up to 20% of untreated patients will develop coronary arterial lesions. A long-term, low-dose aspirin therapy regimen is usually recommended.Inflammatory Arteritis and VasculitisChronic inflammatory arteritis and vasculitis (i.e., inflamma-tory changes within veins as well as arteries) include a spec-trum of disease processes caused by immunologic mechanisms. These terms signify a necrotizing transmural inflammation of the vessel wall associated with antigen-antibody immune com-plex deposition within the endothelium. These conditions show pronounced cellular infiltration in the adventitia, thickened inti-mal fibrosis, and organized thrombus. These disease processes may clinically mimic atherosclerosis, and most are treated by corticosteroid therapy or chemotherapeutic agents. Even so, it is important to recognize distinguishing characteristics of each disease in order to establish the course of treatment and long-term prognosis. A classification system of systemic vasculitis by vessel size is shown in Table 23-28.Behçet’s DiseaseBehçet’s disease is a rare syndrome characterized by oral and genital ulcerations and ocular inflammation, affecting males in Japan and the Mediterranean. An HLA linkage has been found, indicating a genetic component to the etiology.216 Vascular involvement is seen in 7% to 38% of patients and is localized Table 23-28Classification of vasculitis based on vessel involvementLarge-Vessel VasculitisTakayasu’s arteritisGiant cell arteritisBehçet’s diseaseMedium-Vessel VasculitisPolyarteritis nodosaKawasaki’s diseaseBuerger’s diseaseSmall-Vessel VasculitisHypersensitivity angiitisto the abdominal aorta, femoral artery, and pulmonary artery. Vascular lesions may also include venous complications such as deep venous thrombosis or superficial thrombophlebitis. Arterial aneurysmal degeneration can occur; however, this is an uncommon, albeit potentially devastating, complication. Mul-tiple true aneurysms and pseudoaneurysms may develop, and rupture of an aortic aneurysm is the major cause of death in patients with Behçet’s disease.217Histologically, degeneration of the vasa vasorum with surrounding perivascular lymphocyte infiltration is seen, along with thickening of the elastic laminae around the tunica media. Aneurysm formation is believed to be associated with a loss of the nutrient flow and elastic component of the vessels, lead-ing to progressive dilatation. Multiple aneurysms are relatively common, with a reported occurrence of 36% in affected Japanese patients.218 Furthermore, pseudoaneurysm formation after surgical bypass is common at anastomotic suture lines due to the vascular wall fragility and medial destruction. Systemic therapy with corticosteroids and immunosuppressive agents may diminish symptoms related to the inflammatory process; however, they have no effect on the rate of disease progression and arterial degeneration.Polyarteritis NodosaPolyarteritis nodosa (PAN) is another systemic inflammatory disease process, which is characterized by a necrotizing inflam-mation of medium-sized or small arteries that spares the small-est blood vessels (i.e., arterioles and capillaries). This disease predominantly affects men over women by a 2 to 1 ratio. PAN develops subacutely, with constitutional symptoms that last for weeks to months. Intermittent, low-grade fevers, malaise, weight loss, and myalgias are common presenting symptoms. As medium-sized vessels lie within the deep dermis, cutane-ous manifestations occur in the form of livedo reticularis, nod-ules, ulcerations, and digital ischemia.218 Skin biopsies of these lesions may be sufficient for diagnosis. Inflammation may be seen histologically, with pleomorphic cellular infiltrates and segmental transmural necrosis leading to aneurysm formation.Neuritis from nerve infarction occurs in 60% of patients, and gastrointestinal complications occur in up to 50%.219 Addi-tionally, renal involvement is found in 40% and manifests as microaneurysms within the kidney or segmental infarctions. Cardiac disease is a rare finding except at autopsy, where thickened, diseased coronary arteries may be seen, as well as patchy myocardial necrosis. Patients may succumb to renal fail-ure, intestinal hemorrhage, or perforation. End-organ ischemia from vascular occlusion or aneurysm rupture can be disastrous Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   97127/02/19   4:15 PM 972SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIcomplications with high mortality rates. The mainstay of treat-ment is steroid and cytotoxic agent therapy. Up to 50% of patients with active PAN will experience remission with high dosing.Radiation-Induced ArteritisRadiation-induced arteritis results from progressive stenosis due to endothelial damage that leads to cellular proliferation and fibrosis. These are well-described complications of combined irradiation and chemotherapy for the treatment of head and neck malignancy. Arterial lesions are known complications of radia-tion and are similar to those found in atherosclerotic occlusive disease. A history of therapeutic irradiation to the neck can complicate the management of carotid artery occlusive disease. Radiation-induced damage to blood vessels has been well stud-ied. The small capillaries and sinusoids are most susceptible to radiation effects, as endothelial cells are the most radiosensi-tive cells. The radiation effects on the mediumand large-sized arteries include myointimal proliferation, with or without lipid deposits, and thrombosis. Characteristically, irregular spindle-shaped cells are seen replacing the normal endothelial cells in the healing phase. Occlusive lesions develop in the irradiated carotid arteries and are either the result of vessel wall fibrosis or, more commonly, due to accelerated atherosclerosis. Neuro-logic complications related to radiation-induced carotid artery disease are similar to those due to nonirradiated atherosclerotic occlusive disease.Rupture of the carotid artery has been reported following neck irradiation and is likely related to local wound compli-cation and superimposed infection. The diagnosis of radiation arteritis is based on the clinical history and confirmation of the occlusive lesion by duplex ultrasound, MRA, CTA, or sub-traction angiography. Irradiated lesions can be confined to the irradiated segment of the internal carotid artery with the remain-ing part of the vessel spared of disease. Characteristically, the radiation-induced atherosclerotic lesion does not involve the carotid bulb, unlike the nonradiated atherosclerotic lesions. The indications for intervention in radiation-induced carotid lesions are the same as previously discussed for atherosclerotic carotid occlusive lesions. However, asymptomatic irradiated carotid artery lesions should be considered for intervention because they can be more prone to progression and develop-ment of neurologic complications. Endovascular treatment with carotid angioplasty/stenting has become the treatment of choice for radiation-induced lesions, although surgical endarterectomy and bypass have been shown to be safe. The rate of recurrent stenosis is higher in radiation-induced carotid lesions, whether stented or surgically treated.Raynaud’s SyndromeFirst described in 1862 by Maurice Reynaud, the term Raynaud’s syndrome applies to a heterogeneous symptom array associated with peripheral vasospasm, more commonly occurring in the upper extremities. The characteristically intermittent vasospasm classically follows exposure to various stimuli, including cold temperatures, tobacco, or emotional stress. Formerly, a distinc-tion was made between Raynaud’s “disease” and Raynaud’s “phenomenon” for describing a benign disease occurring in isolation or a more severe disease secondary to another under-lying disorder, respectively. However, many patients develop collagen vascular disorders at some point after the onset of vaso-spastic symptoms; progression to a connective tissue disorder ranges from 11% to 65% in reported series.220 Therefore, the term Raynaud’s syndrome is now used to encompass both the primary and secondary conditions.Characteristic color changes occur in response to the arterio-lar vasospasm, ranging from intense pallor to cyanosis to redness as the vasospasm occurs. The digital vessels then relax, even-tually leading to reactive hyperemia. The majority of patients are young women less than 40 years of age. Up to 70% to 90% of reported patients are women, although many patients with only mild symptoms may never present for treatment.220 Geo-graphic regions with cooler, damp climates such as the Pacific Northwest and Scandinavian countries have a higher reported prevalence of the syndrome. Certain occupational groups, such as those who use vibrating tools, may be more predisposed to Raynaud’s syndrome or digital ischemia. The exact patho-physiologic mechanism behind the development of such severe vasospasm remains elusive, and much attention has focused on increased levels of α2-adrenergic receptors and their hypersen-sitivity in patients with Raynaud’s syndrome, as well as abnor-malities in the thermoregulatory response, which is governed by the sympathetic nervous system.The diagnosis of severe vasospasm may be made using noninvasive measurements in the vascular laboratory. Angiog-raphy is usually reserved for those who have digital ulceration and in whom an embolic or obstructive cause is believed to be present and potentially surgically correctable. Different changes in digital blood pressure will occur in patients with Raynaud’s syndrome. Normal individuals will show only a slight decrease in digital blood pressure in response to external cold stimuli, whereas those with Raynaud’s syndrome will show a similar curve until a critical temperature is reached. It is at this point that arterial closure acutely occurs.There is no cure for Raynaud’s syndrome; thus, all treat-ments mainly palliate symptoms and decrease the severity and perhaps frequency of attacks. Conservative measures predomi-nate, including the wearing of gloves, use of electric or chemi-cally activated hand warmers, avoiding occupational exposure to vibratory tools, abstinence from tobacco, and relocating to a warmer, dryer climate. The majority (90%) of patients will respond to avoidance of cold and other stimuli. The remaining 10% of patients with more persistent or severe syndromes can be treated with a variety of vasodilatory drugs, albeit with only a 30% to 60% response rate. Calcium channel–blocking agents such as diltiazem and nifedipine are the drugs of choice. The selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor fluoxetine has been shown to reduce the frequency and duration of vasospastic episodes. Intravenous infusions of prostaglandins have been reserved for nonresponders with severe symptoms.Surgical therapy is limited to debridement of digital ulcer-ations and amputation of gangrenous digits, which are rare complications. Upper extremity sympathectomy may provide relief in 60% to 70% of patients; however, the results are short-lived with a gradual recurrence of symptoms in 60% of patients within 10 years.221Fibromuscular DysplasiaFMD is a vasculopathy of uncertain etiology that is character-ized by segmental arterial involvement. Histologically, fibrous tissue proliferation, smooth muscle cell hyperplasia, and elastic fiber destruction alternate with mural thinning. The characteris-tic beaded appearance of FMD is due to areas of medial thinning alternating with areas of stenosis. The most commonly affected Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   97227/02/19   4:15 PM 973ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23are medium-sized arteries, including the internal carotid, renal, vertebral, subclavian, mesenteric, and iliac arteries. The inter-nal carotid artery is the second most common site of involve-ment after the renal arteries. FMD occurs most frequently in women (90%) and is recognized at approximately 55 years of age.222 Only 10% of patients with FMD will have complications attributable to the disease. Pathologically, FMD is a heterog-enous group of four distinct types of lesions that are subgrouped based on the predominant site of involvement within the vessel wall. Of the four types (medial fibroplasia, intimal fibroplasia, medial hyperplasia, and perimedial dysplasia), medial fibropla-sia is the most common pathologic type, affecting the internal carotid artery (ICA) and the renal artery, and occurring in 85% of reported cases.223The two main clinical syndromes associated with FMD are TIAs from disease in the internal carotid artery and hyper-tension from renal artery involvement. Symptoms produced by FMD are generally secondary to associated arterial stenosis and are clinically indistinguishable from those caused by atheroscle-rotic disease. Often, asymptomatic disease is found incidentally on conventional angiographic studies being performed for other reasons. Within the internal carotid artery, FMD lesions tend to be located higher in the extracranial segment than with athero-sclerotic lesions and may not be readily demonstrated by duplex scan.Clinically, symptoms are due to encroachment on the ves-sel lumen and a reduction in flow. Additionally, thrombi may form in areas of mural dilatation from a stagnation of flow, lead-ing to distal embolization. Surgical treatment has been favored for symptomatic patients with angiographically proven disease. Due to the distal location of FMD lesions in the extracranial carotid artery, resection and repair are not usually feasible. Instead, graduated luminal dilatation under direct vision has been used successfully in patients, with antiplatelet therapy continued postoperatively. PTA has been used effectively in patients with FMD-induced hypertension. Several series have documented a high technical success rate, with recurrence rates of 8% to 23% at more than 1 year.223 However, the therapeutic effect of blood pressure control may continue to be observed despite restenosis. Surgical reconstruction of the renal arteries for FMD has good long-term results and is recommended for recurrent lesions after angioplasty. Open balloon angioplasty of the ICA has been described, which allows for precise fluo-roscopic guidance, rather than blind dilatation with calibrated metal probes, and back-bleeding after dilatation to eliminate cerebral embolization. Distal neuroprotective devices may allow this procedure to be performed completely percutane-ously, thereby lessening the threat of cerebral emboli.Nonatherosclerotic Disease Affecting  the Popliteal Artery DiseaseThere are three distinct nonatherosclerotic disease entities that may result in lower extremity claudication that predominantly occur in 40to 50-year-old men. Adventitial cystic disease, pop-liteal artery entrapment syndrome, and Buerger’s disease should be considered in any young patients presenting with intermittent claudication.Adventitial Cystic Disease of the Popliteal Artery. The first successful operative repair of popliteal artery occlusion caused by a cyst arising from the adventitia was reported in 1954 by Ejrup and Hierton.224 Adventitial cystic disease is a rare arterial condition occurring at an incidence of 0.1%, usually in the popliteal artery. This disease affects men in a ratio of approximately 5:1 and appears predominantly in the fourth and fifth decades. The incidence is approximately 1 in 1200 cases of claudication or 1 in 1000 peripheral arteriograms. The predominance of reported cases is found in Japan and Europe. However, this disease may affect other vascular sites, such as the femoral, external iliac, radial, ulnar, and brachial arteries. Besides claudication as a symptom, this diagnosis should be considered in young patients who have a mass in a nonaxial ves-sel in proximity to a related joint. These synovial-like, mucin-filled cysts reside in the subadventitial layer of the vessel wall and have a similar macroscopic appearance to ganglion cysts. Despite this similarity and suggestion of a joint origin for these lesions, histochemical markers have failed to link the cystic lin-ing to synovium.Patients presenting at a young age with bilateral lower extremity claudication and minimal risk factors for atheroma formation should be evaluated for adventitial cystic disease, as well as the other two nonatherosclerotic vascular lesions described here. Because of luminal encroachment and com-pression, peripheral pulses may be present in the limb when extended, but then can disappear during knee joint flexion. Noninvasive studies may suggest arterial stenosis with ele-vated velocities. Color-flow duplex scanning followed by T2-weighted MRI now appears to be the best diagnostic choice. Angiography will demonstrate a smooth, well-defined, crescent-shaped filling defect, the classic “scimitar” sign.224 There may be associated calcification in the cyst wall and no other evidence of atherosclerotic occlusive disease.Various therapeutic methods have been described for the treatment of adventitial cystic disease. The recommended treat-ments are excision of the cyst with the cystic wall, enucleation, or simple aspiration when the artery is stenotic. Retention of the cystic lining leads to continued secretion of the cystic fluid and recurrent lesions. In 30% of patients who have an occluded artery, resection of the affected artery, followed by an interposi-tion graft using autogenous saphenous vein, is recommended.Popliteal Artery Entrapment Syndrome. Love and col-leagues first coined the term popliteal artery entrapment in 1965 to describe a syndrome combining muscular involvement with arterial ischemia occurring behind the knee, with the suc-cessful surgical repair having taken place 6 years earlier.225 This is a rare disorder with an estimated prevalence of 0.16% that occurs with a male-to-female ratio of 15:1. Five types of anatomic entrapment have been defined, according to the posi-tion of the medial head of the gastrocnemius muscle, abnormal muscle slips or tendinous bands, or the course of the popliteal artery itself (Table 23-29). Concomitant popliteal vein impinge-ment occurs in up to 30% of cases. Twenty-five percent of cases are bilateral.The typical patient presents with swelling and claudica-tion of isolated calf muscle groups following vigorous physi-cal activity. Various differential diagnoses must be considered when encountering patients with symptoms and signs sugges-tive of popliteal artery entrapment syndrome (Table 23-30). In a large series of 240 patients, the median age for surgical treat-ment was 28.5 years.226 Noninvasive studies with ABIs should be performed with the knee extended and the foot in a neutral, forced plantar, and dorsiflexed position. A drop in pressure of 50% or greater or dampening of the plethysmographic wave-forms in plantar or dorsiflexion is a classic finding. Contraction Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   97327/02/19   4:15 PM 974SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 23-29Classification of popliteal entrapment syndromeTYPEDESCRIPTIONIPopliteal artery is displaced medially around a normal medial head of the gastrocnemiusIIMedial head of gastrocnemius, which arises lateral to popliteal arteryIIIPopliteal artery is compressed by an accessory slip of muscle from medial head of gastrocnemiusIVEntrapment by a deeper popliteus muscleVAny of the above plus popliteal vein entrapmentVIFunctional entrapmentTable 23-30Differential diagnosis for popliteal entrapment syndromeVascular EtiologiesAtherosclerosisBuerger’s diseaseTraumaPopliteal aneurysmAdventitial cystic diseaseExtrinsic compressionCardiac embolismDeep vein thrombosisVenous entrapmentMusculoskeletal EtiologiesGastrocnemius or soleus strainPeriostitisCompartment syndromeStress fracturesTibialis posterior tendonitisMuscular anomaliesGeneral Neurologic EtiologiesSpinal stenosisof the gastrocnemius should compress the entrapped popliteal artery. The sudden onset of signs and symptoms of acute isch-emia with absent distal pulses is consistent with popliteal artery occlusion secondary to entrapment. Other conditions resulting from entrapment are thrombus formation with distal emboli or popliteal aneurysmal degeneration. Although CT and MRI have been employed, angiography remains the most widely used test. Angiography performed with the foot in a neutral position may demonstrate classical medial deviation of the popliteal artery or normal anatomic positioning. Coexisting abnormalities may include stenosis, luminal irregularity, delayed flow, aneurysm, or complete occlusion. Diagnostic accuracy is increased with the use of ankle stress view-active plantar flexion and passive dorsiflexion.The treatment of popliteal artery entrapment consists of surgical decompression of the impinged artery with possible arterial reconstruction. Division of the anomalous musculoten-dinous insertion site with or without saphenous vein interposi-tion grafting to bypass the damaged arterial segment has been described to be the procedure of choice. The natural history of entrapment is progressive arterial degeneration leading to com-plete arterial thrombosis. In such instances, thrombolytic ther-apy is needed with subsequent release of the functional arterial impairment. Lysis will improve distal runoff and may improve limb-salvage and bypass patency rates.Buerger’s Disease (Thromboangiitis Obliterans)Buerger’s disease, also known as thromboangiitis obliterans, is a progressive nonatherosclerotic segmental inflammatory disease that most often affects smalland medium-sized arteries, veins, and nerves of the upper and lower extremities. The clinical and pathologic findings of this disease entity were published in 1908 by Leo Buerger in a description of 11 amputated limbs.227 The typical age range for occurrence is 20 to 50 years, and the dis-order is more frequently found in males who smoke. The upper extremities may be involved, and a migratory superficial phlebi-tis may be present in up to 16% of patients, thus indicating a sys-temic inflammatory response. In young adults presenting to the Mayo Clinic (1953–1981) with lower limb ischemia, Buerger’s disease was diagnosed in 24%.228 Conversely, the diagnosis was made in 9% of patients with ischemic finger ulcerations. The cause of thromboangiitis obliterans is unknown; however, use of or exposure to tobacco is essential to both the diagnosis and progression of the disease.Pathologically, thrombosis occurs in smallto medium-sized arteries and veins with associated dense polymorphonu-clear leukocyte aggregation, microabscesses, and multinucleated giant cells. The chronic phase of the disease shows a decrease in the hypercellularity and frequent recanalization of the vessel lumen. End-stage lesions demonstrate organized thrombus and blood vessel fibrosis. Although the disease is common in Asia, North American males do not appear to have any particular pre-disposition, as the diagnosis is made in less than 1% of patients with severe limb ischemia.Buerger’s disease typically presents in young male smok-ers, with symptoms beginning prior to age 40. Patients initially present with foot, leg, arm, or hand claudication, which may be mistaken for joint or neuromuscular problems. Progression of the disease leads to calf claudication and eventually ischemic rest pain and ulcerations on the toes, feet, or fingers. A complete history should exclude diabetes, hyperlipidemia, or autoimmune disease as possible etiologies for the occlusive lesions. Because it is likely that multiple limbs are involved, angiography should be performed of all four limbs. Even if symptoms are not yet present in a limb, angiographic findings may be demonstrated. Characteristic angiographic findings show disease confinement to the distal circulation, usually infrapopliteal and distal to the brachial artery. The occlusions are segmental and show “skip” lesions with extensive collateralization, the so-called corkscrew collaterals.The treatment of thromboangiitis obliterans revolves around strict smoking cessation. In patients who are able to abstain, disease remission is impressive, and amputation avoid-ance is increased. In the experience reported from the Oregon Health Sciences Center, no disease progression with associated tissue loss occurred after discontinuation of tobacco. The role of surgical intervention is minimal in Buerger’s disease, as there is often no acceptable target vessel for bypass. Furthermore, autog-enous vein conduits are limited secondary to coexisting migra-tory thrombophlebitis. Mills and associates reported their results Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   97427/02/19   4:15 PM 975ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23of 31% limb loss in 26 patients over 15 years, thus authenti-cating the virulence of Buerger’s disease involving the lower extremities.229 In addition, others have described a significant discrepancy in limb loss in patients who continued to smoke versus those who discontinued tobacco use (67% vs. 35%).REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Norgren L, Hiatt WR, Dormandy JA, et al. Inter-society consensus for the management of peripheral arterial disease (TASC II). Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2007;33(suppl 1): S1-S75.	2.	Jones DN, Rutherford RB. Peripheral vascular assessment and its role in predicting wound healing potential. Clin Podiatr Med Surg. 1991;8(4):909-921.	3.	Favaretto E, Pili C, Amato A, et al. Analysis of agreement between Duplex ultrasound scanning and arteriography in patients with lower limb artery disease. J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown). 2007;8(5):337-341.	4.	Jakobs TF, Wintersperger BJ, Becker CR. MDCT-imaging of peripheral arterial disease. Semin Ultrasound CT MR. 2004; 25(2):145-155.	5.	Hertzer NR, Beven EG, Young JR, et al. Coronary artery dis-ease in peripheral vascular patients. A classification of 1000 coronary angiograms and results of surgical management. Ann Surg. 1984;199(2):223-233.	6.	Eagle KA, Coley CM, Newell JB, et al. Combining clini-cal and thallium data optimizes preoperative assessment of cardiac risk before major vascular surgery. Ann Intern Med. 1989;110(11):859-866.	7.	McFalls EO, Ward HB, Moritz TE, et al. Predictors and out-comes of a perioperative myocardial infarction following elective vascular surgery in patients with documented coro-nary artery disease: results of the CARP trial. Eur Heart J. 2008;29(3):394-401.	8.	Landoni G, Pisano A, Lomivorotov V, et al. Randomized evi-dence for reduction of perioperative mortality: an updated consensus process. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2017;31(2): 719-730.	9.	Ali WE, Vaidya SR, Ejeh SU, Okoroafor KU. Meta-analysis study comparing percutaneous coronary intervention/drug eluting stent versus coronary artery bypass surgery of unpro-tected left main coronary artery disease: Clinical outcomes during short-term versus long-term (>1 year) follow-up. Medi-cine (Baltimore). 2018;97(7):e9909.	10.	Altit R, Gray WA. New innovations in drug-eluting stents for peripheral arterial disease. Curr Cardiol Rep. 2017;19(11):117.	11.	Parodi JC, Marin ML, Veith FJ. Transfemoral, endovascular stented graft repair of an abdominal aortic aneurysm. Arch Surg. 1995;130(5):549-552.	12.	Brinster CJ, Milner R. Fenestrated endovascular aortic repair and clinical trial devices for complex abdominal aortic aneu-rysms. J Cardiovasc Surg (Torino). 2018;59(3):342-359.	13.	Ergun O, Canyigit M, Hidiroglu M, et al. Endovascular treat-ment for acute traumatic thoracic aortic transection. Ulus Travma Acil Cerrahi Derg. 2015;21(4):285-290.	14.	Donnan GA, Fisher M, Macleod M, Davis SM. Stroke. Lancet. 2008;371(9624):1612-1623.	15.	Chaer RA, DeRubertis B, Patel S, Lin SC, Kent CK, Faries PL. Current management of extracranial carotid artery disease. Rev Recent Clin Trials. 2006;1(3):293-301.	16.	Grant EG, Benson CB, Moneta GL, et al. Carotid artery stenosis: grayscale and Doppler ultrasound diagnosis--Society of Radi-ologists in Ultrasound consensus conference. Ultrasound Q.  2003;19(4):190-198.	17.	Brinjikji W, Huston J 3rd, Rabinstein AA, Kim GM,  Lerman A, Lanzino G. Contemporary carotid imaging: from degree of stenosis to plaque vulnerability. J Neurosurg. 2016; 124(1):27-42.	18.	Zhao DL, Wan Y, Wang GK, et al. Evaluation of image quality in carotid and cerebrovascular disease: a comparative study between subtraction and routine computed tomography angi-ography. Echocardiography. 2016;33(11):1735-1740.	19.	Cheng SF, Brown MM. Contemporary medical therapies of atherosclerotic carotid artery disease. Semin Vasc Surg. 2017; 30(1):8-16.	20.	Kita MW. Carotid endarterectomy in symptomatic carotid stenosis: NASCET comparative results at 30 months of follow-up. J Insur Med. 1992;24(1):42-46.	21.	Warlow CP. Symptomatic patients: the European Carotid Surgery Trial (ECST). J Mal Vasc. 1993;18(3):198-201.	22.	Rothwell PM, Eliasziw M, Gutnikov SA, et al. Analysis of pooled data from the randomised controlled trials of endar-terectomy for symptomatic carotid stenosis. Lancet. 2003; 361(9352):107-116.	23.	Topakian R, Strasak AM, Sonnberger M, et al. Timing of stent-ing of symptomatic carotid stenosis is predictive of 30-day outcome. Eur J Neurol. 2007;14(6):672-678.	24.	Roederer GO, Langlois YE, Jager KA, et al. The natural his-tory of carotid arterial disease in asymptomatic patients with cervical bruits. Stroke. 1984;15(4):605-613.	25.	Fisher M, Martin A, Cosgrove M, Norris JW. The NASCET-ACAS plaque project. North American Symptomatic Carotid Endarterectomy Trial. Asymptomatic Carotid Atherosclerosis Study. Stroke. 1993;24(12 suppl):I24-25; discussion I31-2.	26.	Halliday A, Mansfield A, Marro J, et al. Prevention of dis-abling and fatal strokes by successful carotid endarterectomy in patients without recent neurological symptoms: randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2004;363(9420):1491-1502.	27.	Coward LJ, Featherstone RL, Brown MM. Safety and efficacy of endovascular treatment of carotid artery stenosis compared with carotid endarterectomy: a Cochrane systematic review of the randomized evidence. Stroke. 2005;36(4):905-911.	28.	Lin PH, Barshes NR, Annambhotla S, Huynh TT. Prospec-tive randomized trials of carotid artery stenting versus carotid endarterectomy: an appraisal of the current literature. Vasc Endovascular Surg. 2008;42(1):5-11.	29.	Berkefeld J, Chaturvedi S. The International Carotid Stent-ing Study and the North American Carotid Revascularization Endarterectomy versus Stenting Trial: fueling the debate about carotid artery stenting. Stroke. 2010;41(11):2714-2715.	30.	Brott TG, Hobson RW 2nd, Howard G, et al. Stenting versus endarterectomy for treatment of carotid-artery stenosis. N Engl J Med. 2010;363(1):11-23.	31.	Bonati LH, Jongen LM, Haller S, et al. New ischaemic brain lesions on MRI after stenting or endarterectomy for symptom-atic carotid stenosis: a substudy of the International Carotid Stenting Study (ICSS). Lancet Neurol. 2010;9(4):353-362.	32.	Ricotta JJ, Aburahma A, Ascher E, et al. Updated Society for Vas-cular Surgery guidelines for management of extracranial carotid disease: executive summary. J Vasc Surg. 2011;54(3)832-836.	33.	Crawford RS, Chung TK, Hodgman T, Pedraza JD, Corey M, Cambria RP. Restenosis after eversion vs patch closure carotid endarterectomy. J Vasc Surg. 2007;46(1):41-48.	34.	Organ N, Walker PJ, Jenkins J, Foster W, Jenkins J. 15 year experience of carotid endarterectomy at the Royal Brisbane and Women’s Hospital: outcomes and changing trends in man-agement. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2008;35(3):273-279.	35.	Zhou W, Felkai DD, Evans M, et al. Ultrasound criteria for severe in-stent restenosis following carotid artery stenting.  J Vasc Surg. 2008;47(1):74-80.	36.	Lin PH, Zhou W, Kougias P, El Sayed HF, Barshes NR, Huynh TT. Factors associated with hypotension and bradycardia after Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   97527/02/19   4:15 PM 976SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIcarotid angioplasty and stenting. J Vasc Surg. 2007;46(5): 846-853; discussion 853-844.	37.	Plouin PF, Perdu J, La Batide-Alanore A, Boutouyrie P, Gimenez-Roqueplo AP, Jeunemaitre X. Fibromuscular dys-plasia. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2007;2:28.	38.	Zhou W, Lin PH, Bush RL, et al. Carotid artery aneurysm: evolution of management over two decades. J Vasc Surg. 2006;43(3):493-496; discussion 497.	39.	Woolen S, Gemmete JJ. Paragangliomas of the head and neck. Neuroimaging Clin N Am. 2016;26(2):259-278.	40.	Khan MM, Khan MI, Ali H, Kazmi T, Iqbal H. Diagnostic, surgical, and postoperative challenges of neuroendocrine tumors of the neck: clinical experience and literature review. Ann Vasc Surg. 2017;45:92-97.	41.	Chandra V, Trang K, Virgin-Downey W, Dalman RL, Mell MW. Long-term outcomes after repair of symptom-atic abdominal aortic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg. 2018. pii: S0741-5214(18)30435-X.	42.	Dotter CT, Judkins MP, Rosch J. Transluminal angioplasty in arteriosclerotic obstruction of the lower extremities. Med Times. 1969;97(7):95-108.	43.	Lin CJ, Lin CY, Stitziel NO. Genetics of the extracellular matrix in aortic aneurysmal diseases. Matrix Biol. 2018. pii: S0945-053X(17)30468-7.	44.	Matthews EO, Rowbotham SE, Moxon JV, Jones RE, Vega de Ceniga M, Golledge J. Meta-analysis of the association between peripheral artery disease and growth of abdominal aortic aneurysms. Br J Surg. 2017;104(13):1765-1774.	45.	Boese A, Chang L, Yin KJ, Chen YE, Lee JP, Hamblin MH. Sex Differences in Abdominal Aortic Aneurysms. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2018.	46.	Fleming C, Whitlock EP, Beil TL, Lederle FA. Screening for abdominal aortic aneurysm: a best-evidence systematic review for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 2005;142(3):203-211.	47.	Lederle FA, Johnson GR, Wilson SE, et al. Yield of repeated screening for abdominal aortic aneurysm after a 4-year inter-val. Aneurysm Detection and Management Veterans Affairs Cooperative Study Investigators. Arch Intern Med. 2000; 160(8):1117-1121.	48.	Patel MS, Brown DA, Wilson SE. Relevance of the ADAM and UK Small Aneurysm trial data in the age of endovascular aneurysm repair. Arch Surg. 2009;144(9):806-810.	49.	Soares Ferreira R, Gomes Oliveira N, Oliveira-Pinto J, et al. Review on management and outcomes of ruptured abdomi-nal aortic aneurysm in women. J Cardiovasc Surg (Torino). 2018;59(2):195-200.	50.	Marques-Rios G, Oliveira-Pinto J, Mansilha A. Predictors of long-term mortality following elective endovascular repair of abdominal aortic aneurysms. Int Angiol. 2018;37(4):277-285.	51.	Yang JH, Kim JW, Choi HC, et al. Comparison of clinical outcomes between surgical repair and endovascular stent for the treatment of abdominal aortic aneurysm. Vasc Specialist Int. 2017;33(4):140-145.	52.	Williams CR, Brooke BS. Effectiveness of open versus endo-vascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair in population set-tings: a systematic review of statewide databases. Surgery. 2017;162(4):707-720.	53.	Joo HC, Lee SH, Chang BC, Lee S, Yoo KJ, Youn YN. Late open conversion after endovascular abdominal aortic repair: a 20 year experience. J Cardiovasc Surg (Torino). 2018.	54.	Spanos K, Antoniou G, Giannoukas AD, et al. Durability of fenestrated endovascular aortic repair for juxta-renal abdomi-nal aortic aneurysm repair. J Cardiovasc Surg (Torino). 2018; 59(2):213-224.	55.	Georgiadis GS, van Herwaarden JA, Saengprakai W, et al. Endovascular treatment of complex abdominal and thoracoabdominal type IV aortic aneurysms with fenestrated technology. J Cardiovasc Surg (Torino). 2017;58(4):574-590.	56.	Cochennec F, Kobeiter H, Gohel M, et al. Early results of physician modified fenestrated stent grafts for the treatment of thoraco-abdominal aortic aneurysms. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2015;50(5):583-592.	57.	Mendes BC, Greiten LE, Oderich GS. Endovascular repair of a thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm with a patient-specific fenestrated-branched stent-graft. J Endovasc Ther. 2017;24(5):665-669.	58.	Sala-Almonacil VA, Zaragoza-Garcia JM, Ramirez-Montoya M, Molina-Nacher V, Martinez-Perello I, Gomez-Palones FJ. Fenestrated and chimney endovascular aneurysm repair versus open surgery for complex abdominal aortic aneurysms. J Car-diovasc Surg (Torino). 2017;58(6):801-813.	59.	Oderich GS, Ribeiro M, Hofer J, et al. Prospective, nonran-domized study to evaluate endovascular repair of pararenal and thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms using fenestrated-branched endografts based on supraceliac sealing zones.  J Vasc Surg. 2017;65(5):1249-1259 e1210.	60.	Schurink GW, Aarts NJ, van Bockel JH. Endoleak after stent-graft treatment of abdominal aortic aneurysm: a meta-analysis of clinical studies. Br J Surg. 1999;86(5):581-587.	61.	Kuziez MS, Sanchez LA, Zayed MA. Abdominal aortic aneu-rysm type II endoleaks. J Cardiovasc Dis Diagn. 2016;4(5). pii: 255.	62.	Zaiem F, Almasri J, Tello M, Prokop LJ, Chaikof EL, Murad MH. A systematic review of surveillance after endovascular aortic repair. J Vasc Surg. 2018;67(1):320-331 e337.	63.	Lin PH, Bush RL, Chaikof EL, et al. A prospective evaluation of hypogastric artery embolization in endovascular aortoiliac aneurysm repair. J Vasc Surg. 2002;36(3):500-506.	64.	Elisha S, Nagelhout J, Heiner J, Gabot M. Anesthesia case management for endovascular aortic aneurysm repair. AANA J.  2014;82(2):145-152.	65.	Nelson PR, Kracjer Z, Kansal N, et al. A multicenter, ran-domized, controlled trial of totally percutaneous access ver-sus open femoral exposure for endovascular aortic aneurysm repair (the PEVAR trial). J Vasc Surg. 2014;59(5):1181-1193.	66.	Prinssen M, Verhoeven EL, Buth J, et al. A randomized trial comparing conventional and endovascular repair of abdominal aortic aneurysms. N Engl J Med. 2004;351(16): 1607-1618.	67.	Greenhalgh RM, Brown LC, Kwong GP, Powell JT, Thomp-son SG. Comparison of endovascular aneurysm repair with open repair in patients with abdominal aortic aneurysm (EVAR trial 1), 30-day operative mortality results: ran-domised controlled trial. Lancet. 2004;364(9437):843-848.	68.	Lederle FA, Freischlag JA, Kyriakides TC, et al. Long-term comparison of endovascular and open repair of abdominal aor-tic aneurysm. N Engl J Med. 2012;367(21):1988-1997.	69.	Matsumura JS, Brewster DC, Makaroun MS, Naftel DC. A multicenter controlled clinical trial of open versus endovas-cular treatment of abdominal aortic aneurysm. J Vasc Surg. 2003;37(2):262-271.	70.	Greenberg RK, Chuter TA, Sternbergh WC 3rd, Fearnot NE. Zenith AAA endovascular graft: intermediate-term results of the US multicenter trial. J Vasc Surg. 2004;39(6):1209-1218.	71.	Zarins CK. The US AneuRx Clinical Trial: 6-year clinical update 2002. J Vasc Surg. 2003;37(4):904-908.	72.	Criado FJ, Clark NS, McKendrick C, Longway J, Domer GS. Update on the talent LPS AAA stent graft: results with “enhanced talent.” Semin Vasc Surg. 2003;16(2): 158-165.	73.	Bertges DJ, Zwolak RM, Deaton DH, et al. Current hospital costs and medicare reimbursement for endovascular abdomi-nal aortic aneurysm repair. J Vasc Surg. 2003;37(2):272-279.Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   97627/02/19   4:15 PM 977ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23	74.	Seiwert AJ, Wolfe J, Whalen RC, Pigott JP, Kritpracha B, Beebe HG. Cost comparison of aortic aneurysm endograft exclusion versus open surgical repair. Am J Surg. 1999;178(2):117-120.	75.	Angle N, Dorafshar AH, Moore WS, et al. Open versus endo-vascular repair of abdominal aortic aneurysms: what does each really cost? Ann Vasc Surg. 2004;18(5):612-618.	76.	Lederle FA, Stroupe KT, Kyriakides TC, Ge L, Freischlag JA, Open vs endovascular repair Veterans Affairs cooperative study G. Long-term cost-effectiveness in the Veterans Affairs open vs endovascular repair study of aortic abdominal aneu-rysm: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Surg. 2016;151(12): 1139-1144.	77.	Abraha I, Luchetta ML, De Florio R, et al. Ultrasonography for endoleak detection after endoluminal abdominal aortic aneu-rysm repair. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017;6:CD010296.	78.	Baum RA, Stavropoulos SW, Fairman RM, Carpenter JP. Endoleaks after endovascular repair of abdominal aortic aneu-rysms. J Vasc Interv Radiol. 2003;14(9 pt 1):1111-1117.	79.	Dubenec SR, White GH, Pasenau J, Tzilalis V, Choy E, Erdelez L. Endotension. A review of current views on pathophysiol-ogy and treatment. J Cardiovasc Surg (Torino). 2003;44(4): 553-557.	80.	Kougias P, Lin PH, Dardik A, Lee WA, El Sayed HF, Zhou W. Successful treatment of endotension and aneurysm sac enlargement with endovascular stent graft reinforcement.  J Vasc Surg. 2007;46(1):124-127.	81.	Lin PH, Bush RL, Katzman JB, et al. Delayed aortic aneurysm enlargement due to endotension after endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair. J Vasc Surg. 2003;38(4):840-842.	82.	Buth J, Harris PL, Van Marrewijk C, Fransen G. Endoleaks during follow-up after endovascular repair of abdominal aortic aneurysm. Are they all dangerous? J Cardiovasc Surg (Torino). 2003;44(4):559-566.	83.	Harris PL, Vallabhaneni SR, Desgranges P, Becquemin JP, van Marrewijk C, Laheij RJ. Incidence and risk factors of late rup-ture, conversion, and death after endovascular repair of infra-renal aortic aneurysms: the EUROSTAR experience. European Collaborators on Stent/graft techniques for aortic aneurysm repair. J Vasc Surg. 2000;32(4):739-749.	84.	Mehta M, Paty PS, Roddy SP, et al. Treatment options for delayed AAA rupture following endovascular repair. J Vasc Surg. 2011;53(1):14-20.	85.	May J, White GH, Yu W, et al. Endoluminal repair of abdomi-nal aortic aneurysms: strengths and weaknesses of various prostheses observed in a 4.5-year experience. J Endovasc Surg. 1997;4(2):147-151.	86.	Teufelsbauer H, Prusa AM, Prager M, et al. Endovascular treatment of a multimorbid patient with late AAA rupture after stent-graft placement: 1-year follow-up. J Endovasc Ther. 2002;9(6):896-900.	87.	Yasuhara H. Acute mesenteric ischemia: the challenge of gas-troenterology. Surg Today. 2005;35(3):185-195.	88.	Zelenock GB, Graham LM, Whitehouse WM Jr, et al. Splanch-nic arteriosclerotic disease and intestinal angina. Arch Surg. 1980;115(4):497-501.	89.	Karwowski J, Arko F. Surgical management of mesenteric ischemia. Tech Vasc Interv Radiol. 2004;7(3):151-154.	90.	Mitchell EL, Moneta GL. Mesenteric duplex scanning. Per-spect Vasc Surg Endovasc Ther. 2006;18(2):175-183.	91.	Moneta GL, Lee RW, Yeager RA, Taylor LM Jr, Porter JM. Mesenteric duplex scanning: a blinded prospective study.  J Vasc Surg. 1993;17(1):79-84; discussion 85-76.	92.	Kougias P, El Sayed HF, Zhou W, Lin PH. Management of chronic mesenteric ischemia. The role of endovascular ther-apy. J Endovasc Ther. 2007;14(3):395-405.	93.	Kougias P, Lau D, El Sayed HF, Zhou W, Huynh TT, Lin PH. Determinants of mortality and treatment outcome following surgical interventions for acute mesenteric ischemia. J Vasc Surg. 2007;46(3):467-474.	94.	Jimenez JC, Harlander-Locke M, Dutson EP. Open and laparo-scopic treatment of median arcuate ligament syndrome. J Vasc Surg. 2012;56(3):869-873.	95.	Park WM, Cherry KJ Jr, Chua HK, et al. Current results of open revascularization for chronic mesenteric ischemia: a standard for comparison. J Vasc Surg. 2002;35(5):853-859.	96.	Silva JA, White CJ, Collins TJ, et al. Endovascular therapy for chronic mesenteric ischemia. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006;47(5): 944-950.	97.	Furrer J, Gruntzig A, Kugelmeier J, Goebel N. Treatment of abdominal angina with percutaneous dilatation of an arteria mesenterica superior stenosis. Preliminary communication. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol. 1980;3(1):43-44.	98.	AbuRahma AF, Stone PA, Bates MC, Welch CA. Angioplasty/stenting of the superior mesenteric artery and celiac trunk: early and late outcomes. J Endovasc Ther. 2003;10(6):1046-1053.	99.	Kasirajan K, O’Hara PJ, Gray BH, et al. Chronic mesenteric ischemia: open surgery versus percutaneous angioplasty and stenting. J Vasc Surg. 2001;33(1):63-71.	100.	Atkins MD, Kwolek CJ, LaMuraglia GM, Brewster DC, Chung TK, Cambria RP. Surgical revascularization versus endovascular therapy for chronic mesenteric ischemia: a com-parative experience. J Vasc Surg. 2007;45(6):1162-1171.	101.	Oderich GS, Erdoes LS, Lesar C, et al. Comparison of covered stents versus bare metal stents for treatment of chronic athero-sclerotic mesenteric arterial disease. J Vasc Surg. 2013;58(5): 1316-1323.	102.	Textor SC. Atherosclerotic renal artery stenosis: overtreated but underrated? J Am Soc Nephrol. 2008;19(4):656-659.	103.	Tafur JD, White CJ. Renal artery stenosis: when to revascular-ize in 2017. Curr Probl Cardiol. 2017;42(4):110-135.	104.	Cherr GS, Hansen KJ, Craven TE, et al. Surgical manage-ment of atherosclerotic renovascular disease. J Vasc Surg. 2002;35(2):236-245.	105.	Hansen KJ, Cherr GS, Craven TE, et al. Management of ischemic nephropathy: dialysis-free survival after surgical repair. J Vasc Surg. 2000;32(3):472-481; discussion 481-482.	106.	Guzman RP, Zierler RE, Isaacson JA, Bergelin RO, Strand-ness DE Jr. Renal atrophy and arterial stenosis. A prospec-tive study with duplex ultrasound. Hypertension. 1994;23(3): 346-350.	107.	van de Ven PJ, Kaatee R, Beutler JJ, et al. Arterial stenting and balloon angioplasty in ostial atherosclerotic renovas-cular disease: a randomised trial. Lancet. 1999;353(9149): 282-286.	108.	Surowiec SM, Sivamurthy N, Rhodes JM, et al. Percutane-ous therapy for renal artery fibromuscular dysplasia. Ann Vasc Surg. 2003;17(6):650-655.	109.	van Jaarsveld BC, Krijnen P. Prospective studies of diagno-sis and intervention: the Dutch experience. Semin Nephrol. 2000;20(5):463-473.	110.	White CJ, Ramee SR, Collins TJ, Jenkins JS, Escobar A, Shaw D. Renal artery stent placement: utility in lesions dif-ficult to treat with balloon angioplasty. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1997;30(6):1445-1450.	111.	Blum U, Krumme B, Flugel P, et al. Treatment of ostial renal-artery stenoses with vascular endoprostheses after unsuccess-ful balloon angioplasty. N Engl J Med. 1997;336(7):459-465.	112.	Watson PS, Hadjipetrou P, Cox SV, Piemonte TC, Eisenhauer AC. Effect of renal artery stenting on renal function and size in patients with atherosclerotic renovascular disease. Circulation. 2000;102(14):1671-1677.	113.	Harden PN, MacLeod MJ, Rodger RS, et al. Effect of renal-artery stenting on progression of renovascular renal failure. Lancet. 1997;349(9059):1133-1136.Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   97727/02/19   4:15 PM 978SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	114.	Leertouwer TC, Gussenhoven EJ, Bosch JL, et al. Stent place-ment for renal arterial stenosis: where do we stand? A meta-analysis. Radiology. 2000;216(1):78-85.	115.	Lyden SP, Smouse HB. TASC II and the endovascular man-agement of infrainguinal disease. J Endovasc Ther. 2009; 16(2 suppl 2):II5-II18.	116.	Martin D, Katz SG. Axillofemoral bypass for aortoiliac occlu-sive disease. Am J Surg. 2000;180(2):100-103.	117.	Criado E, Burnham SJ, Tinsley EA Jr, Johnson G Jr, Keagy BA. Femorofemoral bypass graft: analysis of patency and fac-tors influencing long-term outcome. J Vasc Surg. 1993;18(3): 495-504; discussion 504-495.	118.	Patel A, Taylor SM, Langan EM 3rd, et al. Obturator bypass: a classic approach for the treatment of contemporary groin infection. Am Surg. 2002;68(8):653-658; discussion 658-659.	119.	Sautner T, Niederle B, Herbst F, et al. The value of obturator canal bypass. A review. Arch Surg. 1994;129(7):718-722.	120.	Brewster DC, Cambria RP, Darling RC, et al. Long-term results of combined iliac balloon angioplasty and distal surgi-cal revascularization. Ann Surg. 1989;210(3):324-330; discus-sion 331.	121.	van den Akker PJ, van Schilfgaarde R, Brand R, van Bockel JH, Terpstra JL. Long term success of aortoiliac operation for arteriosclerotic obstructive disease. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1992;174(6):485-496.	122.	Insall RL, Loose HW, Chamberlain J. Long-term results of double-balloon percutaneous transluminal angioplasty of the aorta and iliac arteries. Eur J Vasc Surg. 1993;7(1):31-36.	123.	Mendelsohn FO, Santos RM, Crowley JJ, et al. Kissing stents in the aortic bifurcation. Am Heart J. 1998;136(4 pt 1): 600-605.	124.	Haulon S, Mounier-Vehier C, Gaxotte V, et al. Percutaneous reconstruction of the aortoiliac bifurcation with the “kiss-ing stents” technique: long-term follow-up in 106 patients.  J Endovasc Ther. 2002;9(3):363-368.	125.	Sapoval MR, Long AL, Pagny JY, et al. Outcome of per-cutaneous intervention in iliac artery stents. Radiology. 1996;198(2):481-486.	126.	Mousa AY, Beauford RB, Flores L, Faries PL, Patel P, Fogler R. Endovascular treatment of iliac occlusive disease: review and update. Vascular. 2007;15(1):5-11.	127.	Psacharopulo D, Ferrero E, Ferri M, et al. Increasing efficacy of endovascular recanalization with covered stent graft for TransAtlantic Inter-Society Consensus II D aortoiliac complex occlusion. J Vasc Surg. 2015;62(5):1219-1226.	128.	Bosiers M, Iyer V, Deloose K, Verbist J, Peeters P. Flemish experience using the Advanta V12 stent-graft for the treatment of iliac artery occlusive disease. J Cardiovasc Surg (Torino). 2007;48(1):7-12.	129.	Szilagyi DE, Elliott JP Jr, Smith RF, Reddy DJ, McPharlin M. A thirty-year survey of the reconstructive surgical treatment of aortoiliac occlusive disease. J Vasc Surg. 1986;3(3):421-436.	130.	Indes JE, Pfaff MJ, Farrokhyar F, et al. Clinical outcomes of 5358 patients undergoing direct open bypass or endovascular treatment for aortoiliac occlusive disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Endovasc Ther. 2013;20(4):443-455.	131.	Becker GJ, Cikrit DF, Lalka SG, et al. Early experience with the Palmaz stent in human iliac angioplasty. Indiana Med. 1989;82(4):286-292.	132.	Tsetis D, Uberoi R. Quality improvement guidelines for endo-vascular treatment of iliac artery occlusive disease. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol. 2008;31(2):238-245.	133.	Powell RJ, Fillinger M, Bettmann M, et al. The durability of endovascular treatment of multisegment iliac occlusive dis-ease. J Vasc Surg. 2000;31(6):1178-1184.	134.	Timaran CH, Stevens SL, Grandas OH, Freeman MB, Gold-man MH. Influence of hormone replacement therapy on the outcome of iliac angioplasty and stenting. J Vasc Surg. 2001;33(2 suppl):S85-S92.	135.	Bosch JL, Hunink MG. Meta-analysis of the results of per-cutaneous transluminal angioplasty and stent placement for aortoiliac occlusive disease. Radiology. 1997;204(1):87-96.	136.	Park KB, Do YS, Kim JH, et al. Stent placement for chronic iliac arterial occlusive disease: the results of 10 years experience in a single institution. Korean J Radiol. 2005;6(4):256-266.	137.	Leville CD, Kashyap VS, Clair DG, et al. Endovascular man-agement of iliac artery occlusions: extending treatment to TransAtlantic Inter-Society Consensus class C and D patients. J Vasc Surg. 2006;43(1):32-39.	138.	Tetteroo E, van der Graaf Y, Bosch JL, et al. Randomised com-parison of primary stent placement versus primary angioplasty followed by selective stent placement in patients with iliac-artery occlusive disease. Dutch Iliac Stent Trial Study Group. Lancet. 1998;351(9110):1153-1159.	139.	McDaniel MD, Cronenwett JL. Basic data related to the natu-ral history of intermittent claudication. Ann Vasc Surg. 1989; 3(3):273-277.	140.	Leng GC, Papacosta O, Whincup P, et al. Femoral atheroscle-rosis in an older British population: prevalence and risk fac-tors. Atherosclerosis. 2000;152(1):167-174.	141.	Schroll M, Munck O. Estimation of peripheral arteriosclerotic disease by ankle blood pressure measurements in a population study of 60-year-old men and women. J Chronic Dis. 1981; 34(6):261-269.	142.	Stoffers HE, Rinkens PE, Kester AD, Kaiser V, Knottnerus JA. The prevalence of asymptomatic and unrecognized periph-eral arterial occlusive disease. Int J Epidemiol. 1996;25(2): 282-290.	143.	Koelemay MJ, den Hartog D, Prins MH, Kromhout JG,  Legemate DA, Jacobs MJ. Diagnosis of arterial disease of the lower extremities with duplex ultrasonography. Br J Surg. 1996; 83(3):404-409.	144.	Bah F, Bhimji SS. Peripheral arterial disease. StatPearls. Trea-sure Island (FL); 2018.	145.	Ouriel K. Current status of thrombolysis for peripheral arterial occlusive disease. Ann Vasc Surg. 2002;16(6):797-804.	146.	Ouriel K. Comparison of surgical and thrombolytic treatment of peripheral arterial disease. Rev Cardiovasc Med. 2002; 3(suppl 2):S7-S16.	147.	Mahe G, Jaquinandi V. Diagnosis of lower limb peripheral artery disease [in French]. Presse Med. 2018;47(1):47-55.	148.	Conte MS, Belkin M, Upchurch GR, Mannick JA, Whittemore AD, Donaldson MC. Impact of increasing comorbidity on infrainguinal reconstruction: a 20-year perspective. Ann Surg. 2001;233(3):445-452.	149.	Johnston KW. Femoral and popliteal arteries: reanalysis of results of balloon angioplasty. Radiology. 1992;183(3):767-771.	150.	Kok HK, Asadi H, Sheehan M, McGrath FP, Given MF, Lee MJ. Outcomes of infrapopliteal angioplasty for limb salvage based on the updated TASC II classification. Diagn Interv Radiol. 2017;23(5):360-364.	151.	Lofberg AM, Karacagil S, Ljungman C, et al. Percutaneous transluminal angioplasty of the femoropopliteal arteries in limbs with chronic critical lower limb ischemia. J Vasc Surg. 2001;34(1):114-121.	152.	Hunink MG, Wong JB, Donaldson MC, Meyerovitz MF, Har-rington DP. Patency results of percutaneous and surgical revas-cularization for femoropopliteal arterial disease. Med Decis Making. 1994;14(1):71-81.	153.	Varty K, Bolia A, Naylor AR, Bell PR, London NJ. Infrapopli-teal percutaneous transluminal angioplasty: a safe and success-ful procedure. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 1995;9(3):341-345.	154.	Bolia A, Sayers RD, Thompson MM, Bell PR. Subinti-mal and intraluminal recanalisation of occluded crural Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   97827/02/19   4:15 PM 979ARTERIAL DISEASECHAPTER 23arteries by percutaneous balloon angioplasty. Eur J Vasc Surg. 1994;8(2):214-219.	155.	Lipsitz EC, Ohki T, Veith FJ, et al. Does subintimal angio-plasty have a role in the treatment of severe lower extremity ischemia? J Vasc Surg. 2003;37(2):386-391.	156.	Treiman GS, Whiting JH, Treiman RL, McNamara RM, Ashrafi A. Treatment of limb-threatening ischemia with percu-taneous intentional extraluminal recanalization: a preliminary evaluation. J Vasc Surg. 2003;38(1):29-35.	157.	Ingle H, Nasim A, Bolia A, et al. Subintimal angioplasty of isolated infragenicular vessels in lower limb ischemia: long-term results. J Endovasc Ther. 2002;9(4):411-416.	158.	Becquemin JP, Favre JP, Marzelle J, Nemoz C, Corsin C, Leizorovicz A. Systematic versus selective stent placement after superficial femoral artery balloon angioplasty: a mul-ticenter prospective randomized study. J Vasc Surg. 2003; 37(3):487-494.	159.	Gray BH, Sullivan TM, Childs MB, Young JR, Olin JW. High incidence of restenosis/reocclusion of stents in the percutaneous treatment of long-segment superficial femo-ral artery disease after suboptimal angioplasty. J Vasc Surg. 1997;25(1):74-83.	160.	Mewissen MW. Self-expanding nitinol stents in the femoro-popliteal segment: technique and mid-term results. Tech Vasc Interv Radiol. 2004;7(1):2-5.	161.	Laird JR. Interventional options in SFA. Endovascular Today. 2004;(supp):9-12.	162.	Ansel GM, Silver MJ, Botti CF Jr, et al. Functional and clini-cal outcomes of nitinol stenting with and without abciximab for complex superficial femoral artery disease: a randomized trial. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 2006;67(2):288-297.	163.	Duda SH, Poerner TC, Wiesinger B, et al. Drug-eluting stents: potential applications for peripheral arterial occlusive disease. J Vasc Interv Radiol. 2003;14(3):291-301.	164.	Feiring AJ, Krahn M, Nelson L, Wesolowski A, Eastwood D, Szabo A. Preventing leg amputations in critical limb ischemia with below-the-knee drug-eluting stents: the PaRADISE (PRe-venting Amputations using Drug eluting StEnts) trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010;55(15):1580-1589.	165.	Bauermeister G. Endovascular stent-grafting in the treatment of superficial femoral artery occlusive disease. J Endovasc Ther. 2001;8(3):315-320.	166.	Kedora J, Hohmann S, Garrett W, Munschaur C, Theune B, Gable D. Randomized comparison of percutaneous Viabahn stent grafts vs prosthetic femoral-popliteal bypass in the treat-ment of superficial femoral arterial occlusive disease. J Vasc Surg. 2007;45(1):10-16; discussion 16.	167.	McQuade K, Gable D, Pearl G, Theune B, Black S. Four-year randomized prospective comparison of percutaneous ePTFE/nitinol self-expanding stent graft versus prosthetic femoral-popliteal bypass in the treatment of superficial femoral artery occlusive disease. J Vasc Surg. 2010;52(3):584-590; discus-sion 590-581, 591 e581-591 e587.	168.	Ramaiah V, Gammon R, Kiesz S, et al. Midterm outcomes from the TALON Registry: treating peripherals with SilverHawk: outcomes collection. J Endovasc Ther. 2006;13(5):592-602.	169.	Franzone A, Ferrone M, Carotenuto G, et al. The role of ather-ectomy in the treatment of lower extremity peripheral artery disease. BMC Surg. 2012;12(suppl 1):S13.	170.	Scheinert D, Laird JR Jr, Schroder M, Steinkamp H, Balzer JO, Biamino G. Excimer laser-assisted recanalization of long, chronic superficial femoral artery occlusions. J Endovasc Ther. 2001;8(2):156-166.	171.	Steinkamp HJ, Rademaker J, Wissgott C, et al. Percutane-ous transluminal laser angioplasty versus balloon dilation for treatment of popliteal artery occlusions. J Endovasc Ther. 2002;9(6):882-888.	172.	Laird JR, Reiser C, Biamino G, Zeller T. Excimer laser assisted angioplasty for the treatment of critical limb ischemia. J Car-diovasc Surg (Torino). 2004;45(3):239-248.	173.	Dave RM, Patlola R, Kollmeyer K, et al. Excimer laser recana-lization of femoropopliteal lesions and 1-year patency: results of the CELLO registry. J Endovasc Ther. 2009;16(6):665-675.	174.	Clark TW, Groffsky JL, Soulen MC. Predictors of long-term patency after femoropopliteal angioplasty: results from the STAR registry. J Vasc Interv Radiol. 2001;12(8):923-933.	175.	Axisa B, Fishwick G, Bolia A, et al. Complications follow-ing peripheral angioplasty. Ann R Coll Surg Engl. 2002;84(1): 39-42.	176.	Yilmaz S, Sindel T, Yegin A, Luleci E. Subintimal angioplasty of long superficial femoral artery occlusions. J Vasc Interv Radiol. 2003;14(8):997-1010.	177.	Desgranges P, Boufi M, Lapeyre M, et al. Subintimal angio-plasty: feasible and durable. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2004; 28(2):138-141.	178.	Fava M, Loyola S, Polydorou A, Papapavlou P, Mendiz O, Joye JD. Cryoplasty for femoropopliteal arterial disease: late angiographic results of initial human experience. J Vasc Interv Radiol. 2004;15(11):1239-1243.	179.	Jahnke T, Andresen R, Muller-Hulsbeck S, et al. Hemobahn stent-grafts for treatment of femoropopliteal arterial obstruc-tions: midterm results of a prospective trial. J Vasc Interv Radiol. 2003;14(1):41-51.	180.	Grubnic S, Heenan SD, Buckenham TM, Belli AM. Evalu-ation of the pullback atherectomy catheter in the treatment of lower limb vascular disease. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol. 1996;19(3):152-159.	181.	Savader SJ, Venbrux AC, Mitchell SE, et al. Percutaneous transluminal atherectomy of the superficial femoral and pop-liteal arteries: long-term results in 48 patients. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol. 1994;17(6):312-318.	182.	Albers M, Battistella VM, Romiti M, Rodrigues AA, Pereira CA. Meta-analysis of polytetrafluoroethylene bypass grafts to infrapopliteal arteries. J Vasc Surg. 2003;37(6):1263-1269.	183.	Hamsho A, Nott D, Harris PL. Prospective randomised trial of distal arteriovenous fistula as an adjunct to femoro-infrap-opliteal PTFE bypass. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 1999;17(3): 197-201.	184.	Davies AH, Hawdon AJ, Sydes MR, Thompson SG. Is duplex surveillance of value after leg vein bypass grafting? Princi-pal results of the Vein Graft Surveillance Randomised Trial (VGST). Circulation. 2005;112(13):1985-1991.	185.	Baldwin ZK, Pearce BJ, Curi MA, et al. Limb salvage after infrainguinal bypass graft failure. J Vasc Surg. 2004;39(5): 951-957.	186.	Stone PA, Flaherty SK, Aburahma AF, et al. Factors affect-ing perioperative mortality and wound-related complications following major lower extremity amputations. Ann Vasc Surg. 2006;20(2):209-216.	187.	Holzenbein TJ, Pomposelli FB Jr, Miller A, et al. The upper arm basilic-cephalic loop for distal bypass grafting: techni-cal considerations and follow-up. J Vasc Surg. 1995;21(4): 586-592; discussion 592-594.	188.	Dardik H, Wengerter K, Qin F, et al. Comparative decades of experience with glutaraldehyde-tanned human umbilical cord vein graft for lower limb revascularization: an analysis of 1275 cases. J Vasc Surg. 2002;35(1):64-71.	189.	Johnson WC, Lee KK. A comparative evaluation of polytet-rafluoroethylene, umbilical vein, and saphenous vein bypass grafts for femoral-popliteal above-knee revascularization: a prospective randomized Department of Veterans Affairs coop-erative study. J Vasc Surg. 2000;32(2):268-277.	190.	Fahner PJ, Idu MM, van Gulik TM, Legemate DA. Sys-tematic review of preservation methods and clinical Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   97927/02/19   4:15 PM 980SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIoutcome of infrainguinal vascular allografts. J Vasc Surg. 2006;44(3):518-524.	191.	Gupta SK, Veith FJ, Kram HB, Wengerter KR. Prospective, randomized comparison of ringed and nonringed polytetra-fluoroethylene femoropopliteal bypass grafts: a preliminary report. J Vasc Surg. 1991;13(1):163-172.	192.	Stonebridge PA, Prescott RJ, Ruckley CV. Randomized trial comparing infrainguinal polytetrafluoroethylene bypass graft-ing with and without vein interposition cuff at the distal anas-tomosis. The Joint Vascular Research Group. J Vasc Surg. 1997;26(4):543-550.	193.	Klinkert P, van Dijk PJ, Breslau PJ. Polytetrafluoroethylene femorotibial bypass grafting: 5-year patency and limb salvage. Ann Vasc Surg. 2003;17(5):486-491.	194.	Panneton JM, Hollier LH, Hofer JM. Multicenter randomized prospective trial comparing a pre-cuffed polytetrafluoroethyl-ene graft to a vein cuffed polytetrafluoroethylene graft for infra-genicular arterial bypass. Ann Vasc Surg. 2004;18(2):199-206.	195.	Bellosta R, Luzzani L, Carugati C, Melloni C, Sarcina A. Which distal anastomosis should be used in PTFE femoro-tibial bypass? J Cardiovasc Surg (Torino). 2005;46(5):499-503.	196.	Begovac PC, Thomson RC, Fisher JL, Hughson A, Gallhagen A. Improvements in GORE-TEX vascular graft performance by Carmeda BioActive surface heparin immobilization. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2003;25(5):432-437.	197.	Devine C, Hons B, McCollum C. Heparin-bonded Dacron or polytetrafluoroethylene for femoropopliteal bypass grafting: a multicenter trial. J Vasc Surg. 2001;33(3):533-539.	198.	Walluscheck KP, Bierkandt S, Brandt M, Cremer J. Infrain-guinal ePTFE vascular graft with bioactive surface heparin bonding. First clinical results. J Cardiovasc Surg (Torino). 2005;46(4):425-430.	199.	Hunink MG, Donaldson MC, Meyerovitz MF, et al. Risks and benefits of femoropopliteal percutaneous balloon angioplasty. J Vasc Surg. 1993;17(1):183-192; discussion 192-194.	200.	Dua A, Koprowski S, Upchurch G, Lee CJ, Desai SS. Pro-gressive shortfall in open aneurysm experience for vascular surgery trainees with the impact of fenestrated and branched endovascular technology. J Vasc Surg. 2017;65(1):257-261.	201.	Ferreira M, Lanziotti L, Monteiro M, et al. Superficial femo-ral artery recanalization with self-expanding nitinol stents: long-term follow-up results. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2007; 34(6):702-708.	202.	Schillinger M, Sabeti S, Dick P, et al. Sustained benefit at 2 years of primary femoropopliteal stenting compared with balloon angioplasty with optional stenting. Circulation. 2007;115(21):2745-2749.	203.	Bosiers M, Deloose K, Verbist J, Peeters P. Nitinol stenting for treatment of “below-the-knee” critical limb ischemia: 1-year angiographic outcome after Xpert stent implantation. J Car-diovasc Surg (Torino). 2007;48(4):455-461.	204.	Kickuth R, Keo HH, Triller J, Ludwig K, Do DD. Initial clinical experience with the 4-F self-expanding XPERT stent system for infrapopliteal treatment of patients with severe claudication and critical limb ischemia. J Vasc Interv Radiol. 2007;18(6):703-708.	205.	Wolf GL, Wilson SE, Cross AP, Deupree RH, Stason WB. Sur-gery or balloon angioplasty for peripheral vascular disease: a randomized clinical trial. Principal investigators and their Associates of Veterans Administration Cooperative Study Number 199. J Vasc Interv Radiol. 1993;4(5):639-648.	206.	Adam DJ, Beard JD, Cleveland T, et al. Bypass versus angio-plasty in severe ischaemia of the leg (BASIL): multicentre, ran-domised controlled trial. Lancet. 2005;366(9501):1925-1934.	207.	Nolan B, Finlayson S, Tosteson A, Powell R, Cronenwett J. The treatment of disabling intermittent claudication in patients with superficial femoral artery occlusive disease--decision analysis. J Vasc Surg. 2007;45(6):1179-1184.	208.	Maffei S, Di Renzo M, Bova G, Auteri A, Pasqui AL. Takayasu’s arteritis: a review of the literature. Intern Emerg Med. 2006;1(2):105-112.	209.	Baxter BT. Heritable diseases of the blood vessels. Cardiovasc Pathol. 2005;14(4):185-188.	210.	Cikrit DF, Glover JR, Dalsing MC, Silver D. The Ehlers-Danlos specter revisited. Vasc Endovascular Surg. 2002; 36(3):213-217.	211.	Ho NC, Tran JR, Bektas A. Marfan’s syndrome. Lancet. 2005;366(9501):1978-1981.	212.	Davies JE, Sundt TM. Surgery insight: the dilated ascending aorta—indications for surgical intervention. Nat Clin Pract Cardiovasc Med. 2007;4(6):330-339.	213.	London NJ, Srinivasan R, Naylor AR, et al. Subintimal angio-plasty of femoropopliteal artery occlusions: the long-term results. Eur J Vasc Surg. 1994;8(2):148-155.	214.	Chassaing N, Martin L, Calvas P, Le Bert M, Hovnanian A. Pseudoxanthoma elasticum: a clinical, pathophysiological and genetic update including 11 novel ABCC6 mutations. J Med Genet. 2005;42(12):881-892.	215.	Yeung RS. Pathogenesis and treatment of Kawasaki’s disease. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2005;17(5):617-623.	216.	Greco A, De Virgilio A, Ralli M, et al. Behcet’s disease: new insights into pathophysiology, clinical features and treatment options. Autoimmun Rev. 2018;17(6):567-575.	217.	Uygunoglu U, Siva A. Behcet’s syndrome and nervous system involvement. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2018;18(7):35.	218.	Muhammad JS, Ishaq M, Ahmed K. Genetics and epigenetics pathogenesis of Behcet’s syndrome. Curr Rheumatol Rev. 2018.	219.	Stanton M, Bhimji SS. Polyarteritis nodosa. StatPearls. Trea-sure Island (FL); 2018.	220.	Temprano KK. A review of Raynaud’s disease. Mo Med. 2016; 113(2):123-126.	221.	Hinojosa CA, Anaya-Ayala JE, Bermudez-Serrato K, et al. Surgical interventions for organ and limb ischemia associ-ated with primary and secondary antiphospholipid antibody syndrome with arterial involvement. Vasc Endovascular Surg. 2017;51(8):550-554.	222.	Narula N, Kadian-Dodov D, Olin JW. Fibromuscular dyspla-sia: contemporary concepts and future directions. Prog Car-diovasc Dis. 2018;60(6):580-585.	223.	Baradhi KM, Bream P. Fibromuscular dysplasia. StatPearls. Treasure Island (FL); 2018.	224.	Li S, King BN, Velasco N, Kumar Y, Gupta N. Cystic adven-titial disease-case series and review of literature. Ann Transl Med. 2017;5(16):327.	225.	Lejay A, Ohana M, Lee JT, et al. Popliteal artery entrapment syndrome. J Cardiovasc Surg (Torino). 2014;55(2 suppl 1): 225-237.	226.	Gokkus K, Sagtas E, Bakalim T, Taskaya E, Aydin AT. Pop-liteal entrapment syndrome. A systematic review of the lit-erature and case presentation. Muscles Ligaments Tendons J. 2014;4(2):141-148.	227.	Rivera-Chavarria IJ, Brenes-Gutierrez JD. Thromboangiitis obliterans (Buerger’s disease). Ann Med Surg (Lond). 2016; 7:79-82.	228.	Sugimoto M, Miyachi H, Morimae H, et al. Fate of ischemic limbs in patients with Buerger’s disease based on our 30-year experience: does smoking have a definitive impact on the late loss of limbs? Surg Today. 2015;45(4):466-470.	229.	Mills JL Sr. Buerger’s disease in the 21st century: diagnosis, clinical features, and therapy. Semin Vasc Surg. 2003;16(3): 179-189.Brunicardi_Ch23_p0897-p0980.indd   98027/02/19   4:15 PM
# Chunk 8926
Venous and Lymphatic DiseaseAtish Chopra, Timothy K. Liem,  and Gregory L. Moneta 24chapterVENOUS ANATOMYVeins are part of a dynamic and complex system that returns low-nutrient deoxygenated blood to the heart. Venous blood flow is dependent on multiple factors such as gravity, venous valves, the cardiac and respiratory cycles, blood volume, and the calf muscle and feet pumps. Alterations in the intricate balance of these factors can result in venous pathology.Structure of VeinsVeins are thin-walled, highly distensible, and collapsible. Their structure specifically supports the primary functions of veins to transport blood toward the heart and serve as a reservoir to prevent intravascular volume overload.The venous intima is composed of a nonthrombogenic endothelium with an underlying basement membrane and an elastic lamina. The endothelium produces endothelium-derived relaxing factors such as nitric oxide and prostacy-clin, which help maintain a nonthrombogenic surface through inhibition of platelet aggregation and promotion of platelet disaggregation.1 The capacitance function of veins is facili-tated by circumferential rings of elastic tissue, and smooth muscle located in the media of the vein allows for changes in vein caliber with minimal changes in venous pressure. The adventitia is most prominent in large veins and consists of collagen, elastic fibers, and fibroblasts. When a vein is maxi-mally distended, its diameter may be several times greater than that in the supine position.In the axial veins, unidirectional blood flow is achieved with multiple venous valves. The inferior vena cava (IVC), common iliac veins, portal venous system, and cranial sinuses are valveless. In the axial veins, valves are more numerous distally in the extremities than proximally. Each valve consists of two thin cusps of a fine connective tissue skeleton covered by endothelium. Venous valves close in response to cephalad-to-caudal blood flow at a velocity of at least 30 cm/s.2Lower Extremity VeinsLower extremity veins are divided into superficial, deep, and perforating veins. The superficial venous system lies above the uppermost fascial layer of the leg and thigh and consists of the great saphenous vein (GSV) and small saphenous vein (SSV) and their tributaries. The GSV originates from the dorsal pedal venous arch and courses cephalad and medially, anterior to the medial malleolus, entering the common femoral vein approxi-mately 4 cm inferior and lateral to the pubic tubercle. The saphe-nous nerve accompanies the GSV medially from the ankle to the level of the knee and supplies cutaneous sensation to the medial leg and ankle. The SSV originates laterally from the dorsal pedal venous arch and courses cephalad in the posterior calf. Most often, it penetrates the popliteal fossa, between the medial and lateral heads of the gastrocnemius muscle, to join the popliteal vein. The termination of the SSV may be quite vari-able, however, with a proximal extension of the SSV (the vein of Giacomini) connecting with the deep femoral vein or GSV. The sural nerve accompanies the SSV laterally along its course and supplies cutaneous sensation to the lateral malleolar region.The deep veins follow the course of major arteries in the extremities. In the lower leg, paired veins parallel the course of the anterior tibial, posterior tibial, and peroneal arteries, to join behind the knee forming the popliteal vein. Venous bridges con-nect the paired axial tibial veins in the lower leg. The popliteal vein continues through the adductor hiatus to become the femo-ral vein. In the proximal thigh, the femoral vein joins with the deep femoral vein to form the common femoral vein, becoming the external iliac vein at the inguinal ligament.Multiple perforator veins traverse the deep fascia to connect the superficial and deep venous systems. Potentially clinically important perforator veins are the posterior tibial and paratibial perforators (formerly known as the Cockett and Boyd perforators, respectively). The posterior tibial perforator veins drain the medial lower leg and are relatively constant. They Venous Anatomy981Structure of Veins / 981Lower Extremity Veins / 981Upper Extremity Veins / 982Evaluation of the  Venous System982Clinical Evaluation / 982Venous Thromboembolism984Epidemiology / 984Risk Factors / 984Diagnosis / 986Treatment / 987Prophylaxis / 992Other Venous  Thrombotic Disorders994Superficial Vein Thrombophlebitis / 994Upper Extremity Vein Thrombosis / 995Mesenteric Vein Thrombosis / 996Varicose Veins996Chronic Venous Insufficiency997Evaluation of Venous Insufficiency / 997Lymphedema1001Pathophysiology / 1001Clinical Diagnosis / 1001Radiologic Diagnosis / 1002Management / 1002Summary1003Brunicardi_Ch24_p0981-p1008.indd   98122/02/19   3:00 PM 982connect the posterior accessory GSV (formerly known as the posterior arch vein, a tributary to the GSV) and the posterior tibial vein. They may become varicose or incompetent in venous insufficiency states. The posterior accessory GSV has relevance as it represents a connection of the three ankle perforating veins, which are likely of particular importance in the development of a venous stasis ulcers. The paratibial perforator veins connect the GSV to the deep veins approximately 10 cm below the knee and 1 to 2 cm medial to the tibia. Additional perforators in the thigh are known as the perforators of the femoral canal (also known as Hunter’s and Dodd’s perforators).Venous sinuses are thin-walled, large veins located within the substance of the soleus and gastrocnemius muscles. These sinuses are valveless and are linked by valved, small venous channels that prevent reflux. A large amount of blood can be stored in the venous sinuses before draining into the posterior tibial and peroneal veins. With each contraction of the calf muscle bed, blood is pumped out through the venous channels into the main conduit veins to return to the heart.Upper Extremity VeinsAs in the lower extremity, there are deep and superficial veins in the upper extremity. Deep digital veins form the palmar venous arches of the hand and empty into the paired radial and ulnar veins. These follow the named arteries in the arm and are known as the venae comitantes. They become the brachial veins most often near the antecubital fossa and then combine to contrib-ute to forming the axillary vein. Superficial veins of the upper extremity are the cephalic and basilic veins and their tributaries.  The cephalic vein originates at the lateral wrist and courses over the lateral ventral surface of the forearm. In the upper arm, the cephalic vein terminates in the infraclavicular fossa, piercing the clavipectoral fascia to empty into the axillary vein.  The basilic vein runs medially along the forearm and penetrates the deep fascia as it courses past the elbow in the upper arm. It then joins with the deep brachial veins to become the axil-lary vein, a landmark for identification of the axillary vein. The median antecubital vein joins the cephalic and the basilic veins on the ventral surface of the elbow.The axillary vein becomes the subclavian vein at the lat-eral border of the first rib. At the medial border of the scalenus anterior muscle, the subclavian vein joins with the internal jugu-lar vein to become the brachiocephalic vein, with the subclavian vein coursing anterior to the scalenus anterior muscle. The left and right brachiocephalic veins join to become the superior vena cava, which empties into the right atrium.EVALUATION OF THE VENOUS SYSTEMClinical EvaluationEvaluation of the venous system begins with a detailed history and physical examination. Risk factors for acute and chronic venous disease are identified. They include increased age, his-tory of venous thromboembolism (VTE), malignancy, trauma and spinal cord injury, hospitalization and immobilization, obe-sity, nephrotic syndrome, pregnancy, recent postpartum state, oral contraceptive use or hormone replacement therapy, vari-cose veins, and hypercoagulable states, as well as the postopera-tive state. Venous pathology is often, but not always, associated with visible or palpable signs that can be identified during the physical examination. There is variation among individuals in the prominence of superficial veins when the person is standing (Fig. 24-1). The superficial veins of a lean athletic person, even when normal, will appear large and easily visualized, but these veins will be far less obvious in the obese individual. Signs of superficial venous abnormalities are listed in Table 24-1.  Key Points1	Thrombolytic therapy, surgical thrombectomy, and place-ment of inferior vena cava filters are adjunctive treatments that may be indicated in patients with extensive and compli-cated venous thromboembolism.2	Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism are well-recognized complications after major abdominal and orthopedic procedures. The risk is further increased in patients with malignancy and a history of venous thrombo-embolism. Options for DVT prophylaxis include intermit-tent pneumatic compression, use of graduated compression stockings, and administration of low-dose unfractionated heparin, low molecular weight heparin, fondaparinux, and vitamin K antagonists. Direct thrombin inhibitors and factor Xa inhibitors are approved for prophylactic use only for orthopedic procedures and for recurrent VTE. However, prophylaxis should be stratified based on the patient’s level of risk.3	In patients with established DVT, unfractionated heparin, low molecular weight heparin, fondaparinux, and some factor Xa inhibitors are options for initial antithrombotic therapy. Vitamin-K antagonists, direct thrombin inhibitors, and factor Xa inhibitors are utilized for long-term anticoagulation.  The duration and type of long-term anticoagulation should be stratified based on the provoked or unprovoked nature of the DVT, the location of the DVT, previous occurrence of DVT, and presence of concomitant malignancy.4	High ligation and stripping, endovenous laser, or radiofre-quency ablation and sclerotherapy are effective therapies for patients with saphenous vein valvular insufficiency. Con-comitant varicose veins may be managed with compression therapy, sclerotherapy, and phlebectomy. New nonthermal ablative techniques, including the combination of sclero-therapy with endoluminal mechanical injury as well as injec-tion of cyanoacrylate, show early promising results.5	The mainstay of treatment for chronic venous insufficiency is compression therapy. Sclerotherapy, perforator vein liga-tion, and venous reconstruction or ablative techniques may be indicated in patients in whom conservative management fails or as a means to decrease ulcer recurrence.6	Lymphedema is categorized as congenital, primary (with early or delayed onset), or secondary. The goals of treatment are to minimize edema and prevent infection. Lymphatic massage, sequential pneumatic compression, use of com-pression garments, and limb elevation are effective forms of therapy.Brunicardi_Ch24_p0981-p1008.indd   98222/02/19   3:00 PM 983VENOUS AND LYMPHATIC DISEASECHAPTER 24Figure 24-1. Varicose vein demonstrating evidence of chronic venous insufficiency.Figure 24-2. Characteristic hyperpigmentation of chronic venous insufficiency.Table 24-1Possible signs of superficial venous abnormalitiesTortuosityVaricosityVenous sacculeDistended subdermal venules (corona phlebectatica)Distended intradermal venules (spider angiomata)Warmth, erythema, tenderness (superficial thrombophlebitis)The deep veins cannot be directly assessed clinically, and abnormalities within them can only be inferred indirectly from changes found on clinical examination.Chronic venous insufficiency (CVI) may lead to character-istic changes in the skin and subcutaneous tissues in the affected limb. CVI results from incompetence of venous valves, venous obstruction, or both. Most CVI involves venous reflux, and severe CVI often reflects a combination of reflux and venous obstruction. It is important to remember that although CVI originates with abnormalities of the veins, the target organ of CVI is the skin, and the underlying physiologic and biochemical mechanisms leading to the cutaneous abnormalities associated with CVI are poorly understood. A typical leg affected by CVI will be edematous, with edema increasing over the course of the day. The leg may also be indurated and pigmented with eczema and dermatitis. These changes are associated with excessive proteinaceous capillary exudate. Deposition of a pericapil-lary fibrin cuff may limit nutritional exchange. In addition, an increase in white blood cell trapping within the skin microcir-culation in CVI patients may lead to microvascular congestion and thrombosis. Subsequently, white blood cells may migrate into the interstitium and release necrotizing lysosomal enzymes, potentially leading to tissue destruction and eventual ulceration.Fibrosis can eventually develop from impaired nutrition, chronic inflammation, and fat necrosis (lipodermatosclerosis). Hemosiderin deposition due to the extravasation of red cells and subsequent lysis in the skin contributes to the characteristic  pigmentation of chronic venous disease (Fig. 24-2). Ulceration can develop with longstanding venous hypertension and is associated with alterations in microcirculatory and cutaneous lymphatic anatomy and function. The most common location of venous ulceration is approximately 3 cm proximal to the medial malleolus, frequently referred to the “gaiter” region (Fig. 24-3).Trendelenburg’s test is a clinical test, historically impor-tant but now rarely used, that can help determine whether incompetent valves are present and in which of the three venous systems (superficial, deep, or perforator) the valves are abnormal. There are two components to this test. First, with the patient supine, the leg is elevated 45° to empty the veins, and the GSV is occluded with the examiner’s hand or with a rub-ber tourniquet. Then, with the GSV still occluded, the patient stands, and the superficial veins are observed for blood filling. The compression on the GSV is released, and the superficial veins are observed for filling with blood. A positive result is the sudden filling of veins with standing while the GSV remains occluded, indicating incompetent perforator and deep veins. Additionally, the GSV valves are incompetent if rapid filling is noted following release of compression. A negative result, indicating no clinically relevant venous reflux, is the gradual filling of the veins from arterial inflow. Interpretation of the findings of Trendelenburg’s test is subjective, and therefore, it has largely been supplanted by the more objective noninvasive vascular laboratory tests to localize sites of venous reflux.Noninvasive Evaluation. Before the development of vascu-lar ultrasound, noninvasive techniques to evaluate the venous system were based on plethysmographic techniques. Although a variety of plethysmographic techniques are used in the Brunicardi_Ch24_p0981-p1008.indd   98322/02/19   3:01 PM 984SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 24-3. Venous ulceration located proximal to the medial malleolus.evaluation of both acute and chronic venous disease, they are all based on the detection of volume changes in the limb in response to blood flow.Duplex ultrasonography (DUS) augmented by color flow imaging is now the most important noninvasive diagnos-tic method in the evaluation of the venous system. DUS has become standard for the detection of infrainguinal deep vein thrombosis (DVT), with near 100% sensitivity and specificity in symptomatic patients.3 It is also the preferred method of evalu-ation for upper extremity venous thrombosis and is useful in the evaluation of CVI by documenting the presence of valvular reflux and venous obstruction. Overlying bowel gas and large body habitus many times make DUS less applicable to evalu-ation of intra-abdominal veins. Magnetic resonance venogra-phy (MRV) and computed tomography (CT) venography are alternative noninvasive techniques for evaluation of pelvic and intra-abdominal veins.Invasive Evaluation. Improved accuracy of noninvasive techniques for diagnostic purposes has made the use of invasive procedures more selective. Both venography and intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) are used as adjuncts to percutaneous or open surgical treatment of venous disorders. When planning endo-vascular or open surgical treatment, venography may be used to identify areas of obstruction in infrainguinal, intra-abdominal, and upper extremity veins as well as reflux in intra-abdominal and infrainguinal veins. IVUS, with access generally via the common femoral vein, is used primarily to assess for occlusive lesions of the iliac veins and appears more sensitive than venog-raphy in detecting iliac vein obstruction.4Complications of venography include pain, thrombosis, or hematoma at the puncture site. Pain is lower with nonionic low-osmolality contrast media than with conventional contrast agents (with 18% vs. 44% of patients experiencing discomfort, respectively).5 Systemic effects of iodinated contrast media include allergic reaction and risk of renal failure. Postvenogra-phy venous thrombosis occurs distal to the venous puncture site in 1% to 9% of patients undergoing venography secondary to intimal damage from the intravenous (IV) contrast agent.5 Com-plications and limitations of IVUS are related to complications at the access site and cost of the catheters.VENOUS THROMBOEMBOLISMEpidemiologyDespite increased awareness and use of prophylactic modalities, DVT or pulmonary embolism (PE), venous thromboembolism (VTE), remain important preventable sources of morbidity and mortality, especially in the surgical patient. The incidence of VTE is approximately 100 per 100,000 people per year in the general population, with 20% of the diagnoses made within  3 months of a surgical procedure. Of the symptomatic patients, one-third will present with PE and two-thirds with DVT.6,7 The estimated number of cases of VTE may well be over 600,000 per year in the United States, making it a major U.S. health problem.8 Furthermore, death occurs in 6% of DVT and 12% of PE cases within 1 month of diagnosis, although not all deaths are directly secondary to VTE, with many related to the under-lying problem leading to the VTE event.6 However, not only does VTE pose a veritable threat to life, it also places patients at higher risk for recurrence and post-VTE sequelae such as pul-monary hypertension and postthrombotic syndrome, with 4% and up to 30% incidence, respectively.9-11Risk FactorsThree broadly stated conditions, first described by Rudolf Vir-chow in 1862, contribute to VTE formation: stasis of blood flow, endothelial damage, and hypercoagulability. Of these risk factors, relative hypercoagulability appears most impor-tant in cases of spontaneous VTE, or so-called idiopathic VTE, whereas stasis and endothelial damage likely play a greater role in secondary VTE, or so-called provoked VTE, occurring in association with transient risk factors such as immobiliza-tion, surgical procedures, and trauma. Identifiable risk factors for VTE generally relate to one of the conditions described by Virchow. Often more than one risk factor is present contribut-ing in an exponential, rather than additive, manner. Specific risk factors for VTE are listed in Table 24-2.The more common acquired VTE risk factors include older age (>40 years), hospitalization and immobilization, hor-mone replacement and oral contraceptive therapy, pregnancy and the recently postpartum state, prior VTE, malignancy, major surgery, obesity, nephrotic syndrome, trauma and spinal cord injury, long-haul travel (>6 hours), varicose veins, antiphospho-lipid syndrome, myeloproliferative disorders, and polycythemia. Heritable risk factors include male sex, factor V Leiden muta-tion; prothrombin 20210A gene variant; antithrombin, protein C, and protein S deficiencies; and dysfibrinogenemias. In some patients, the cause of the thrombophilia may have both a heri-table and an acquired component. These mixed causes include homocysteinemia; factors VII, VIII, IX, and XI elevation; hyperfibrinogenemia; and activated protein C resistance in the Brunicardi_Ch24_p0981-p1008.indd   98422/02/19   3:01 PM 985VENOUS AND LYMPHATIC DISEASECHAPTER 24Table 24-2Risk factors for venous thromboembolismAcquiredAdvanced ageHospitalization/immobilizationHormone replacement therapy and oral contraceptive usePregnancy and puerperiumPrior venous thromboembolismMalignancyMajor surgeryObesityNephrotic syndromeTrauma or spinal cord injuryLong-haul travel (>6 hours)Varicose veinsAntiphospholipid antibody syndromeMyeloproliferative diseasePolycythemiaInheritedFactor V LeidenProthrombin 20210AAntithrombin deficiencyProtein C deficiencyProtein S deficiencyFactor XI elevationDysfibrinogenemiaMixed EtiologyHomocysteinemiaFactors VII, VIII, IX, XI elevationHyperfibrinogenemiaActivated protein C resistance without factor V Leidenabsence of factor V Leiden.12 There may be a synergistic effect when particular multiple inherited and acquired risk factors are present in the same patient.Other patient-specific factors associated with venous thrombosis include the traditional cardiovascular risk factors of obesity, hypertension, and diabetes. VTE is more common in whites and African Americans than Asians and Native Americans.13,14 Certain gene variants (single nucleotide polymorphisms) are also associated with a mildly increased risk for VTE, and their presence may interact with other risk factors to increase the overall risk for venous thrombosis.15Anatomic factors may also contribute to development of DVT. At the site where the right iliac artery crosses over the left iliac vein, the left iliac vein may become chronically compressed predisposing to iliofemoral venous thrombosis, so-called May-Thurner syndrome. External compression of major veins by masses of various types can also lead to venous thrombosis.Many cases of VTE are potentially preventable. Accord-ingly, in current clinical practice, preoperative VTE risk assess-ment is becoming increasingly common to identify patients at moderate and high risk. Scoring systems have been developed that take into account the number of VTE risk factors in an individual patient. These risk stratification scores, such as the Rogers score16 and Caprini score,17 provide individual patient risk stratification and recommendations for prophylactic anti-coagulation. The ninth edition of the American College of Chest Physicians (ACCP) Guidelines for Prevention of VTE in Non-Orthopedic Surgical Patients acknowledges both the Rogers and Caprini scores and provides recommendations for VTE prophylaxis (Table 24-3). Orthopedic surgical patients are generally excluded from risk assessment scores because of the disproportionately increased risk of VTE in orthopedic  surgery compared with the general and abdominopelvic  surgery population.Table 24-3Thromboembolism risk and recommended thromboprophylaxis in surgical patientsLEVEL OF RISKAPPROXIMATE DVT RISK WITHOUT THROMBOPROPHYLAXIS (%)SUGGESTED THROMBOPROPHYLAXIS OPTIONSVery low risk General or abdominopelvic surgery<0.5% (Rogers score <7;  Caprini score 0)No specific thromboprophylaxisEarly ambulationLow risk General or abdominopelvic surgery∼1.5% (Rogers score 7–10;  Caprini score 1–2)Mechanical prophylaxisModerate risk General or abdominopelvic surgery∼3.0% (Rogers score >10;  Caprini score 3–4)LMWH (at recommended doses),  LDUH, or mechanical prophylaxisHigh bleeding risk Mechanical prophylaxisHigh risk General or abdominopelvic surgery∼6% (Caprini score ≥5)LMWH (at recommended doses), fondaparinux and mechanical prophylaxisHigh bleeding risk General or abdominopelvic surgery  for cancer Mechanical thromboprophylaxisExtended-duration LMWH (4 weeks)DVT = deep vein thrombosis; INR = international normalized ratio; LDUH = low-dose unfractionated heparin; LMWH = low molecular weight heparin; VTE = venous thromboembolism.Data from Gould MK, Garcia DA, Wren SM, et al: Prevention of VTE in nonorthopedic surgical patients: Antithrombotic Therapy and Prevention of Thrombosis, 9th ed: American College of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines, Chest. 2012 Feb;141(2 Suppl):e227S-e277S.Brunicardi_Ch24_p0981-p1008.indd   98522/02/19   3:01 PM 986SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 24-4. Phlegmasia cerulea dolens of the left leg. Note the bluish discoloration.Figure 24-5. Duplex ultrasound scan of a normal femoral vein with phasic flow signals.DiagnosisClinical Evaluation. Early in the course of DVT development, venous thrombosis is thought to begin in an area of relative stasis,  such as a soleal sinus vein or immediately downstream of the cusps of a venous valve in an axial calf vein. Isolated proxi-mal DVT without tibial vein thrombosis is unusual. Early in the course of a DVT, there may be no or few clinical findings such as pain or swelling. Even extensive DVT may sometimes be present without signs or symptoms if the patient is nonambula-tory or bedbound. History and physical examination are notori-ously unreliable in the diagnosis of DVT. In addition, symptoms and signs often associated with DVT, such as extremity pain and/or swelling, are nonspecific. In large studies, DVT has been found by venography or DUS in ≤50% of patients in whom it was clinically suspected.18,19 Objective studies are therefore required to confirm a diagnosis of VTE or to exclude the pres-ence of VTE.Clinical symptoms may worsen as DVT propagates and involves the major proximal deep veins. Extensive DVT of the major axial deep venous channels of the lower extremity with rel-ative sparing of collateral veins causes a condition called phleg-masia cerulea dolens (Fig. 24-4). This condition is characterized by pain and pitting edema with associated cyanosis. When the thrombosis extends to the collateral veins, massive fluid seques-tration and more significant edema ensue, resulting in a condition known as phlegmasia alba dolens.20 The affected extremity in phlegmasia alba dolens is extremely painful and edematous and pale secondary to arterial insufficiency from dramatically ele-vated below lower knee compartment pressures. Both phlegmasia cerulean dolens and phlegmasia alba dolens can be complicated by venous gangrene and the need for amputation.Vascular Lab and Radiologic Evaluation Duplex Ultrasound DUS is now the most commonly per-formed test for the detection of infrainguinal DVT, both above and below the knee, and has a sensitivity and specificity of >95% in symptomatic patients.3 DUS refers to the combina-tion of real-time B-mode ultrasound with compression and flow augmentation amneuvres combined with pulsed Doppler capa-bility. For VTE detection, color flow imaging is an additional extremely useful adjunct in the evaluation of possible axial calf vein DVT and evaluation of intra-abdominal veins. DUS provides the ability to noninvasively visualize venous anatomy, detect occluded and partially occluded venous segments, and demonstrate physiologic flow characteristics.In the supine patient, normal lower extremity venous flow is phasic (Fig. 24-5), decreasing with inspiration in response to increased intra-abdominal pressure with the descent of the diaphragm and then increasing with expiration as the diaphragm rises and intra-abdominal pressure decreases. When the patient is upright, the decrease in intra-abdominal pressure with expira-tion cannot overcome the hydrostatic column of pressure exist-ing between the right atrium and the calf. Muscular contractions of the calf, along with the one-way venous valves, are then required to promote venous return to the heart. Flow also can be increased by leg elevation or compression and decreased by sud-den elevation of intra-abdominal pressure (Valsalva maneuver).  In a venous DUS examination performed with the patient supine, spontaneous flow, variation of flow with respiration, and response of flow to Valsalva maneuver are all assessed. From the common femoral through the popliteal vein, the primary method of detecting DVT with ultrasound is demonstration of the lack of compressibility of the vein with probe pressure on B-mode imaging. Normally, in transverse section, the vein walls should coapt with pressure. Lack of coaptation indicates throm-bus. Axial calf vein thrombi are often best detected by abnor-malities in color flow imaging as compressibility is difficult in the calf.The examination begins at the ankle and continues proxi-mally to the groin. Each vein is visualized, and the flow signal is assessed with distal and proximal compression. Lower extremity DVT can be diagnosed by any of the following DUS findings: lack of spontaneous flow (Fig. 24-6), inability to compress the vein (Fig. 24-7), absence of color filling of the lumen by color flow DUS, loss of respiratory flow variation, and venous disten-tion. Again, lack of venous compression on B-mode imaging is the primary diagnostic variable. Several studies comparing B-mode ultrasound to venography for the detection of femo-ropopliteal DVT in patients clinically suspected to have DVT report sensitivities of >91% and specificities of >97%.21,22 The ability of DUS to assess isolated calf vein DVT varies greatly, with sensitivities ranging from 50% to 93% and specificities approaching 100%.23,24Impedance Plethysmography Impedance plethysmography (IPG) was the primary noninvasive method of diagnosing DVT before the widespread use of DUS but is infrequently used today. Changes in electrical resistance resulting from lower extremity blood volume changes are quantified. IPG is less accurate than DUS for the detection of proximal DVT, with 83% sensitivity in symptomatic patients. It is a poor detector of calf vein DVT.25Brunicardi_Ch24_p0981-p1008.indd   98622/02/19   3:01 PM 987VENOUS AND LYMPHATIC DISEASECHAPTER 24Figure 24-6. Duplex ultrasound of a femoral vein containing thrombus demonstrating no flow within the femoral vein.No compressionCompressionR  FVPR  FVPFigure 24-7. B-mode ultrasound of the femoral vein in crosssection. The femoral vein does not collapse with external compres-sion (arrows).Figure 24-8. Venogram showing a filling defect in the popliteal vein (arrows).Iodine-125 Fibrinogen Uptake Iodine-125 fibrinogen uptake (FUT) is a seldom-used technique that involves IV administra-tion of radioactive fibrinogen and monitoring for increased uptake in fibrin clots. An increase of 20% or more in one area of a limb indicates an area of thrombus. FUT can detect DVT in the calf, but high background radiation from the pelvis and the urinary tract limits its ability to detect proximal DVT. It also cannot be used in an extremity that has recently undergone surgery or has active inflammation. In a prospective study, FUT had a sensitivity of 73% and specificity of 71% for identification of DVT in a group of symptomatic and asymptomatic patients.26 Currently, FUT is primarily a research tool of historic interest.Venography Venography is the gold standard to which other diagnostic modalities are compared. A small catheter is placed in a dorsal foot vein with injection of a radiopaque contrast agent. Radiographs are obtained in at least two projections. A positive study result is failure to fill the deep system with passage of the contrast medium into the superficial system or demonstration of discrete filling defects (Fig. 24-8). A normal study result virtually excludes the presence of DVT. In a study of 160 patients with a normal venogram followed for 3 months, only two patients (1.3%) subsequently developed DVT, and no patients experienced symptoms of PE.27 Venography is not routinely used in clinical practice because of its invasiveness and complication risk. It is still, however, sometimes used in research studies evaluating DVT prophylaxis.TreatmentOnce the diagnosis of VTE has been made, antithrombotic ther-apy should be initiated promptly. If clinical suspicion for VTE is high, it may be prudent to start treatment before the diagnosis is objectively confirmed. The goals of VTE treatment are the pre-vention of mortality and morbidity associated with PE and the prevention of the postthrombotic syndrome (PTS). Treatment regimens may include antithrombotic therapy, temporary or permanent vena cava filter placement, catheter-directed or systemic thrombolytic therapy, and operative thrombectomy.Antithrombotic Therapy. Most often, antithrombotic therapy for VTE is initiated with IV or subcutaneous (SC) unfraction-ated heparin or SC low molecular weight heparin. Fondaparinux, a synthetic pentasaccharide, is sometimes also used as an alter-native to heparin to initiate therapy. An oral vitamin K antago-nist, usually sodium warfarin, is begun shortly after initiation of IV or SC therapy. Either SC or IV therapy is continued until effective oral anticoagulation with warfarin is achieved as indi-cated by an international normalized ratio (INR) ≥2 for 24 hours. A minimum of 5 days of heparin or fondaparinux therapy is 1Brunicardi_Ch24_p0981-p1008.indd   98722/02/19   3:01 PM 988SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIrecommended.28 Recently, several oral anticoagulants that  function by either directly inhibiting thrombin or inhibit-ing factor Xa have additionally been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for both treatment and prophylaxis for VTE. A principle advantage is they do not require monitoring of laboratory parameters for use.Unfractionated heparin (UFH) binds to antithrombin via a specific 18-saccharide sequence. This increases antithrombin activity over a thousandfold. The antithrombin-heparin complex primarily inhibits factor IIa (thrombin) and factor Xa and, to a lesser degree, factors IXa, XIa, and XIIa of the coagulation cascade. In addition, UFH also binds to tissue factor pathway inhibitor, which inhibits the conversion of factors X to Xa, and factors IX to IXa. Finally, UFH catalyzes the inhibition of thrombin by heparin cofactor II via a mechanism independent of antithrombin.UFH therapy is most commonly administered with an initial IV bolus of 80 units/kg. Weight-based UFH dosages have been shown to be more effective than standard fixed boluses in rapidly achieving therapeutic levels.29 The initial bolus is followed by a continuous IV drip at 18 units/kg per hour. The half-life of IV UFH ranges from 45 to 90 minutes and is dose dependent. The level of antithrombotic therapy should be moni-tored every 6 hours using the activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), with the goal range of 1.5 to 2.5 times control values. This should correspond with plasma heparin anti-Xa activity levels of 0.3 to 0.7 IU/mL.Initial anticoagulation with UFH may also be administered SC, although this route is less commonly used. Adjusted-dose therapeutic SC UFH is initiated with 17,500 units, followed by 250 units/kg twice daily, and dosing is adjusted to an aPTT goal range similar to that for IV UFH. Fixed-dose unmonitored SC UFH is started with a bolus of 333 units/kg, followed by  250 units/kg twice daily.30Hemorrhage is the primary complication of UFH therapy. The rate of major hemorrhage (fatal, intracranial, retroperitoneal, or requiring transfusion of >2 units of packed red blood cells) is approximately 5% in hospitalized patients undergoing UFH therapy (1% in medical patients and 8% in surgical patients).30 For patients with UFH-related bleeding complications, cessation of UFH is required, and anticoagulation may be reversed with protamine sulfate. Protamine sulfate binds to UFH and forms an inactive salt compound. Each milligram of protamine neutral-izes 90 to 115 units of heparin, and the dosage should not exceed 50 mg IV over any 10-minute period. Side effects of protamine sulfate include hypotension, pulmonary edema, and anaphylaxis. Patients with prior exposure to protamine-containing insulin (NPH) and patients with allergy to fish may have an increased risk of hypersensitivity, although no direct relationship has been established. Protamine administration should be performed judi-ciously and terminated if any side effects occur.In addition to hemorrhage, heparin also has other, unique, complications. Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) results from heparin-associated antiplatelet antibodies (HAAbs) directed against platelet factor 4 complexed with heparin.31 HIT occurs in 1% to 5% of patients treated with heparin.32,33 In patients with repeat heparin exposure (such as vascular surgery patients), the incidence of HAAbs may be as high as 21%.34 HIT occurs most frequently in the second week of therapy and may lead to disastrous venous or arterial thrombotic complications. Therefore, platelet counts should be monitored periodically in patients receiving continuous heparin therapy.HIT is diagnosed based on previous exposure to heparin, platelet count less than 100,000, and/or platelet count decline of 50% following exposure. All heparin must be stopped and alter-native anticoagulation initiated immediately to avoid thrombotic complications, which may approach 50% over the subsequent 30 days in affected individuals.35Another complication of prolonged high-dose heparin therapy is osteopenia. Heparin-induced osteopenia results from impairment of bone formation and enhancement of bone resorp-tion by heparin.Low molecular weight heparins (LMWHs) are derived from the depolymerization of porcine UFH. Like UFH, LMWHs bind to antithrombin via a specific pentasaccharide sequence to expose an active site for the neutralization of fac-tor Xa. However, LMWHs have fewer additional saccharide units. This results in less inactivation of thrombin (factor IIa). In comparison to UFH, LMWHs have increased bioavailability (>90% after SC injection), longer half-lives (approximately 4 to 6 hours), and more predictable elimination rates.Most patients treated with weight-based onceor twice-daily SC LMWH injections do not require laboratory monitoring for anticoagulant effect, a distinct advantage over continuous IV infusions of UFH. Patients who do require monitoring include those with significant renal insufficiency, pediatric patients, obese patients greater than 120 kg, and pregnant patients. Moni-toring may be performed using anti-Xa activity assays. The ther-apeutic anti-Xa goal range depends on the type of LMWH and the frequency of dosing. There are numerous LMWHs avail-able, and the various preparations differ in their anti-Xa and anti-IIa activities. Treatment dosing for one LMWH, therefore, cannot be extrapolated for use with another. The anticoagulant effect of LMWHs may be partially reversed (approximately 60%) with protamine sulfate.Numerous well-designed trials comparing SC LMWH with IV and SC UFH for the treatment of DVT have been critically evaluated in several meta-analyses and demonstrate a decrease in thrombotic complications, bleeding, and mortality with LMWHs.36-38 LMWHs also are associated with a decreased rate of HAAb formation and HIT (<2%) compared with UFH (at least in prophylactic doses).30 However, patients with estab-lished HIT also should not receive LMWHs because there is cross-reactivity between the drugs.39A major benefit of LMWHs is that it allows outpatient treatment of VTE.40,41 In a randomized study comparing IV UFH and the LMWH nadroparin calcium,40 there was no sig-nificant difference in recurrent thromboembolism (8.6% for UFH vs. 6.9% for LMWH) or major bleeding complications (2.0% for UFH vs. 0.5% for LMWH). There was, however, a 67% reduction in mean days in the hospital for the LMWH group.Fondaparinux currently is a synthetic pentasaccharide that has been approved by the FDA for the initial treatment of DVT and PE. Its five-polysaccharide sequence binds and activates antithrombin, causing specific inhibition of factor Xa. In two large noninferiority trials, fondaparinux was compared with the LMWH enoxaparin for the initial treatment of DVT and with IV UFH for the initial treatment of PE.42,43 The rates of recurrent VTE ranged from 3.8% to 5%, with rates of major bleeding of 2% to 2.6%, for all treatment arms. The drug is administered SC once daily with a weight-based dosing protocol: 5 mg, 7.5 mg, or 10 mg for patients weighing <50 kg, 50 to 100 kg, or >100 kg,  respectively. The half-life of fondaparinux is approximately  2Brunicardi_Ch24_p0981-p1008.indd   98822/02/19   3:01 PM 989VENOUS AND LYMPHATIC DISEASECHAPTER 2417 hours in patients with normal renal function. There are rare case reports of fondaparinux-induced thrombocytopenia.44Direct thrombin inhibitors (DTIs) include parental forms with recombinant hirudin, argatroban, and bivalirudin, as well as an oral agent, dabigatran. These antithrombotic agents bind to thrombin, inhibiting the conversion of fibrinogen to fibrin as well as thrombin-induced platelet activation. These actions are independent of antithrombin. The parental DTIs should be reserved for (a) patients in whom there is a high clinical suspi-cion or confirmation of HIT, and (b) patients who have a his-tory of HIT or test positive for heparin-associated antibodies whereas dabigatran can be used as an alternative to Warfarin when INR monitoring is difficult or impractical. In patients with established HIT, DTIs should be administered for at least 7 days, or until the platelet count normalizes. Warfarin may then be introduced slowly, overlapping therapy with a DTI for at least 5 days, or dabigatran may be continued instead of Warfarin.45Bivalirudin is approved primarily for patients with or without HIT who undergo percutaneous coronary intervention and is rarely used outside of that setting.Argatroban is indicated for the prophylaxis and treatment of thrombosis in HIT. It also is approved for patients with, or at risk for, HIT undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention. Antithrombotic prophylaxis and therapy are initiated with a con-tinuous IV infusion of 2 µg/kg per minute, without the need for a bolus. The half-life ranges from 39 to 51 minutes, and the dosage is adjusted to maintain an aPTT of 1.5 to 3 times normal. Large ini-tial boluses and higher rates of continuous infusion are reserved for patients with coronary artery thrombosis and myocardial infarc-tion. In these patients, therapy is monitored using the activated clotting time. Argatroban is metabolized and excreted by the liver; therefore, dosage adjustments are needed in patients with hepatic impairment. There is no reversal agent for argatroban.The oral agent, dabigatran, is US FDA-approved since 2014 for the treatment of VTE and prophylaxis for recurrent VTE. Additionally, limited approval was obtained in 2015 for prophylaxis of VTE after hip replacement surgery. It is admin-istered as a prodrug, dabigatran etexilate, that is converted to the active form, dabigatran, in the liver. The half-life ranges from 12 to 17 hours; it is therefore administered once daily for prophylaxis and twice daily for VTE therapy. Absorption is not dietary dependent, and no drug level monitoring is required. Dabigatran is metabolized in the kidney, and dose adjustment is required for renal insufficiency. Data on use in obese patients is limited; therefore, use is not recommended for patients with a body mass index ≥40 kg/m2 or ≥120 kg.46 Dyspepsia is a com-mon side effect that may limit use in some patients.47 Dabigatran may be reversed with idarucizumab in emergent situations.48 It is contraindicated in patients with mechanical heart valves.Direct factor Xa inhibitors, which are comprised of the oral agents rivaroxaban, apixiban, and edoxaban, are FDA approved for treatment in VTE and prophylaxis for recurrent VTE. Additionally, rivaroxoban and apixiban are approved by the FDA for VTE prophylaxis following knee and hip replace-ment surgery. These medications function by inactivating cir-culating and thrombus-bound factor Xa. They are metabolized  in the kidney (25–35%) and in the liver; therefore, use is not rec-ommended in patients with renal insufficiency (creatinine clear-ance <30 mL/min for rivaroxaban, or <15 mL/min for apixiban and edoxaban) or severe hepatic insufficiency. As with the oral DTI, dabigatran, data on use in obese patients is limited; there-fore, use is not recommended in these patients. Additionally, these agents are contraindicated in pregnancy. There are no specific reversal agents available for direct factor Xa inhibi-tors. For severe cases of hemorrhage, indirect partial reversal may be achieved with use of prothrombin complex concentrate administration.49Rixaroxaban has a half-life of 7 to 17 hours. Therapy does not require monitoring. Prophylactic dosing is 10 mg once daily, and therapeutic dosing is 15 mg twice daily for 21 days, fol-lowed by 20 mg once daily thereafter.Apixiban has a half-life of 5 to 9 hours. Therapy does not require monitoring, and there are no dietary restrictions. If monitoring is desired in situations of bleeding or concern for subor supratherapeutic dosing, serum anti-Xa levels can be obtained. Prophylactic dosing is 2.5 mg twice daily, and thera-peutic dosing is 10 mg daily for 7 days, followed by 5 mg twice daily thereafter.Edoxaban has a half-life of 10 to 14 hours. Therapy does not require monitoring. Typical dosing is 60 mg once daily, and 30 mg once daily if creatinine clearance ranges from 15 to  50 mL/min, or body weight ≤60 kg.Vitamin K antagonists, which include warfarin and other coumarin derivatives, are the traditional mainstay of long-term antithrombotic therapy in patients with VTE. Warfarin inhib-its the γ-carboxylation of vitamin K–dependent procoagulants  (factors II, VII, IX, and X) and anticoagulants (proteins C and S),  resulting in formation of less functional proteins. Warfarin usu-ally requires several days to achieve full effect because normal circulating coagulation proteins must first undergo their normal degradation. Factors X and II have the longest half-lives, in the range of 36 and 72 hours, respectively. A steady-state concen-tration of warfarin is usually not reached for 4 to 5 days.Warfarin therapy is monitored by measuring the INR, calculated using the following equation:INR = (patient prothrombin time/laboratorynormal prothrombin time)ISIwhere ISI is the international sensitivity index. The ISI describes the strength of the thromboplastin that is added to activate the extrinsic coagulation pathway. The therapeutic target INR range is usually 2.0 to 3.0, but the response to warfarin is variable and depends on liver function, diet, age, and concomitant medica-tions. In patients receiving anticoagulation therapy without con-comitant thrombolysis or venous thrombectomy, the vitamin K  antagonist may be started on the same day as the initial paren-teral anticoagulant, usually at doses ranging from 5 to 10 mg. Smaller initial doses may be needed in older and malnourished patients, in those with liver disease or congestive heart failure, and in those who have recently undergone major surgery.49The recommended duration of warfarin antithrombotic therapy is stratified based on whether the DVT was provoked or unprovoked, whether it was the first or a recurrent episode, where the DVT is located, and whether malignancy or thrombophilia is present. Current ACCP recommendations for duration of warfarin therapy are summarized in Table 24-4.In patients with proximal DVT, several randomized clini-cal trials have demonstrated that shorter-term antithrombotic therapy (4 to 6 weeks) is associated with a higher rate of VTE recurrence than 3 to 6 months of anticoagulation.50-52 In these trials, most of the patients with transient risk factors had a low rate of recurrent VTE, and most recurrences were in patients with continuing risk factors. The ACCP recommendation, there-fore, is that 3 months of anticoagulation are sufficient to prevent 3Brunicardi_Ch24_p0981-p1008.indd   98922/02/19   3:01 PM 990SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 24-4Summary of American College of Chest Physicians recommendations regarding duration of long-term antithrombotic therapy for deep vein thrombosis (DVT)CLINICAL SUBGROUPANTITHROMBOTIC TREATMENT DURATIONFirst episode DVT/transient risk/surgeryVKA or LMWH for 3 monthsFirst episode DVT/unprovokedVKA or LMWH for 3 monthsConsider for long-term therapy if:•	Proximal DVT•	Minimal bleeding risk•	Stable coagulation monitoringDistal DVT/unprovoked•	Symptomatic•	Asymptomatic and no risk factors for progressionVKA for 3 monthsSerial imaging in 2 weeks,  if progression VKA for  3 monthsSecond episode DVT/unprovokedDVT and cancerVKA for extended therapyLMWH for extended therapy over VKALMWH = low molecular weight heparin; VKA = vitamin K antagonist.Data from Kearon C, Akl EA, Comerota AJ, et al: Antithrombotic therapy for VTE disease: Antithrombotic Therapy and Prevention of Thrombosis, 9th ed: American College of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines, Chest. 2012 Feb;141(2 Suppl): e419S-e496S.recurrent VTE in patients with DVT occurring around the time of a transient risk factor (e.g., hospitalization or orthopedic or major general surgery).In contrast to patients with thrombosis related to transient risk factors, patients with unprovoked VTE are much more likely to develop recurrence (rates as high as 40% at 10 years). In this latter group of patients, numerous clinical trials have compared 3 to 6 months of anticoagulation therapy with extended-duration warfarin therapy, both at low intensity (INR of 1.5 to 2.0) and at conventional intensity (INR of 2.0 to 3.0).53-55 In patients with idiopathic DVT, extended-duration antithrombotic therapy is associated with a relative reduction in the rate of recurrent VTE by 75% to >90%. In addition, conventional-intensity warfarin reduces the risk even further compared with low-intensity war-farin (0.7 events per 100 person-years vs. 1.9 events per 100 person-years) without an increase in bleeding complications.56In patients with VTE in association with a hypercoagulable condition, the optimal duration of anticoagulation therapy is influ-enced more by the clinical circumstances at the time of the VTE (idiopathic vs. secondary) than by the actual presence or absence of the more common thrombophilic conditions. In patients with VTE related to malignancy, increasing evidence suggests that longer-term therapy with LMWH (up to 6 months) is associated with a lower VTE recurrence than treatment using conventional vitamin K antagonists.57,58 The primary complication of warfarin therapy is hemorrhage, and the risk is related to the magnitude of INR prolongation. Depending on the INR and the presence of bleeding, warfarin anticoagulation may be reversed by (a) omit-ting or decreasing subsequent dosages, (b) administering oral or parenteral vitamin K, or (c) administering fresh frozen plasma, prothrombin complex concentrate, or recombinant factor VIIa.49Warfarin therapy rarely may be associated with the devel-opment of skin necrosis and limb gangrene. These conditions occur more commonly in women (4:1), and the most commonly affected areas are the breast, buttocks, and thighs. This com-plication, which usually occurs in the first days of therapy, is occasionally, but not exclusively, associated with protein C or S deficiency and malignancy. Patients who require continued anticoagulation may restart low-dose warfarin (2 mg) while receiving concomitant therapeutic heparin. The warfarin dosage is then gradually increased over a 1to 2-week period.49Systemic and Catheter-Directed Thrombolysis. Patients with extensive proximal, iliofemoral DVT may benefit from systemic thrombolysis or catheter-directed thrombolysis (CDT). CDT appears to be more effective (see later in chapter) and potentially reduces acute congestive lower extremity symp-toms more rapidly than anticoagulation alone and decreases the development of PTS.Several thrombolytic agents are available, including strep-tokinase, urokinase, alteplase (recombinant tissue plasminogen activator), reteplase, and tenecteplase. All share the ability to con-vert plasminogen to plasmin, which leads to the degradation of fibrin. They differ with regard to their half-lives, their potential for inducing fibrinogenolysis (generalized lytic state), their poten-tial for antigenicity, and their FDA-approved indications for use.Streptokinase is purified from β-hemolytic Streptococcus and is approved for the treatment of acute myocardial infarction, PE, DVT, arterial thromboembolism, and occluded central lines and arteriovenous shunts. It is not specific for fibrin-bound plas-minogen, however, and its use is limited by its significant rates of antigenicity. Fevers and shivering occur in 1% to 4% of patients.Urokinase is derived from human neonatal kidney cells grown in tissue culture. Currently, it is only approved for lysis of massive PE or PE associated with unstable hemodynamics.Alteplase, reteplase, and tenecteplase all are recombinant variants of tissue plasminogen activator. Alteplase is indicated for the treatment of acute myocardial infarction, acute ischemic stroke, and acute massive PE. However, it often is used for CDT of DVT. Reteplase and tenecteplase are indicated only for the treatment of acute myocardial infarction.Systemic thrombolysis was evaluated in numerous older prospective and randomized clinical trials, and its efficacy was summarized in a recent Cochrane Review.59 In 12 studies involving over 700 patients, systemic thrombolysis was associ-ated with significantly more clot lysis (relative risk [RR] 0.24 to 0.37) and significantly less PTS (RR 0.66). However, venous function was not significantly improved. In addition, more bleeding complications occurred (RR 1.73).In an effort to minimize bleeding complications and increase efficacy, CDT techniques were developed for the treat-ment of symptomatic primarily iliofemoral DVT. With catheterdirected therapy, venous access may be achieved through percutaneous catheterization of the ipsilateral popliteal vein, retrograde catheterization through the contralateral femoral vein, or retrograde cannulation from the internal jugular vein.  Multi–side-hole infusion catheters, with or without infusion wires, are used to deliver the lytic agent directly into the throm-bus. Lytic agents may be administered alone or, now more commonly, in combination with catheter-based methods to Brunicardi_Ch24_p0981-p1008.indd   99022/02/19   3:01 PM 991VENOUS AND LYMPHATIC DISEASECHAPTER 24ABFigure 24-9. Preoperative computed tomography imaging and intraoperative photo demonstrating erosion of IVC filter through the IVC wall.physically break up the clot—so-called pharmacomechanical thrombolysis. One commonly used device to perform phar-macomechanical thrombolysis is the AngioJet, which utilizes pulsed injection of thrombolytic via a percutaneously inserted catheter followed by active aspiration to remove the thrombus.The efficacy of CDT for the treatment of symptomatic iliofemoral DVT has been reported previously in a large, multi-center, randomized control trial. Two-hundred and nine patients with proximal DVT identified within 21 days of onset of symp-toms were assigned to conventional anticoagulant therapy vs. conventional anticoagulant therapy plus CDT. In the CDT group, placement of a venous stent was permitted for any identified iliac vein stenotic lesion. At 6 months, iliac vein patency was signifi-cantly improved in the thrombolysis group (65.9% vs. 47.4%). At 2 years, in the CDT group, there was an absolute risk reduc-tion of nearly 15% for development of PTS, translating to a num-ber needed to treat of seven patients to prevent one case of PTS.60 However, these results were, in part, contradictory to the results reported the more recent Acute Venous Thrombosis: Throm-bus Removal with Adjunctive Catheter-Directed Thrombolysis (ATTRACT) trial, a prospective, randomized, multicenter trial evaluating nearly 700 patients comparing anticoagulant use with CDT in patients with acute femoropopliteal, and/or iliac vein DVT.61 However, the purpose of this trial was to see if indica-tions for CDT should be extended for isolated femoropopliteal DVT (43% of the patients in this study) and therefore, was under-powered to compare treatment efficacy for iliofemoral DVT, which  known to have a higher risk of PTS. The study found that PTS occurred with equal frequency in the two groups (47% vs. 48%, P = NS), but patients who were treated with pharmacom-echanical CDT plus anticoagulation were less likely to develop moderate-to-severe PTS than those treated with anticoagulation alone (18% vs. 24%, P = .003). There was no difference between the two groups in quality of life. There was an increase in both overall hemorrhage (4.5% vs. 1.7%) and major hemorrhage (1.7% vs 0.3%) with CDT but no fatal or intracranial hemor-rhage in either cohort. Taken in combination, the findings from these trials support selective use of CDT with anticoagulation in young patients with acute iliofemoral DVT and anticoagulation alone in the remaining patient with DVT.There are contraindications to thrombolytic therapy. Absolute contraindications include prior history of ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke within 3 months, head trauma within 3 months, neurologic surgery within 6 months, known intra-cranial neoplasm, internal bleeding within 6 weeks, active or known bleeding disorder, traumatic cardiopulmonary resuscita-tion within 3 weeks or suspected aortic dissection. Fortunately, serious remote bleeding is uncommon, and intracranial hem-orrhage rarely occurs. The majority of bleeding complications are limited to the venous access site. Symptomatic pulmonary embolism occurs uncommonly and is very rarely fatal.Inferior Vena Caval Filters. Since the introduction of the Kimray-Greenfield filter in the United States in 1973, numerous vena caval filters have been developed. Although the designs are variable, they all are designed to prevent pulmonary emboli, while allowing continuation of venous blood flow through the IVC. Early filters were placed surgically through the femoral vein. Currently, less invasive techniques allow percutaneous filter placement through a femoral vein, internal jugular vein, or a peripheral vein under fluoroscopic or ultrasound guidance.Placement of an IVC filter is indicated for patients who have manifestations of lower extremity VTE and absolute contraindications to anticoagulation, those that have a bleeding complication from anticoagulation therapy of acute VTE, or those who develop recurrent DVT or PE despite adequate anticoagula-tion therapy and for patients with severe pulmonary hypertension.When possible, anticoagulation therapy should be contin-ued in patients with vena cava filters. The duration of antico-agulation is determined by the underlying VTE and not by the presence of the IVC filter itself. Practically speaking, however, many patients who require an IVC filter for recurrent VTE are the same ones who would benefit most from indefinite antico-agulation. In patients who are not able to receive anticoagulants due to recent surgery or trauma, the clinician should continually reassess if anticoagulation may be started safely at a later date.Placement of permanent IVC filters has been evaluated as an adjunct to routine anticoagulation in patients with proximal DVT.62 Routine IVC filter placement has not been shown to prolong early or late survival in patients with proximal DVT but did decrease the rate of PE (HR, 0.22; 95% CI, 0.05–0.90); however, there is an increased rate of recurrent DVT in patients with IVC filters (HR, 1.87; 95% CI, 1.10–3.20).IVC filters are associated with acute and late complica-tions. Acute complications include thrombosis or bleeding at the insertion site and misplacement of the filter. Late complications include thrombosis of the IVC, DVT, breaking, migration, or ero-sion of the filter through the IVC (Fig. 24-9). The rate of fatal complications is <0.12%.63 As a result of the increasing number Brunicardi_Ch24_p0981-p1008.indd   99122/02/19   3:01 PM 992SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 24-10. Autopsy specimen showing a massive pulmonary embolism.of reported complications with IVC filters, the FDA issued a warning in 2010 recommending removal of IVC filters as soon as they are no longer needed.64 This was followed by an update in 2014 where the recommendation was made to remove IVC filters within 29 and 54 days after implantation based upon a mathemati-cal model that suggested an increased risk-to-benefit ratio at this time point.65In some patients, the need for an IVC filter may be self-limited. Such patients can be treated with so-called removable IVC filters. Depending on the device, removable IVC filters are potentially removable by percutaneous endovascular tech-niques for up to several months after their initial implantation, assuming the filter is no longer required and does not have large amounts of trapped thrombi. IVC filters that have been in place for an extended period of time may require adjunctive techniques, including laser-assisted removal or open surgical removal when they are embedded within the vena cava. All tem-porary IVC filters are approved for permanent implantation, and many so-called temporary filters end up as permanent devices with all the potential complications of permanent IVC filters.Operative Venous Thrombectomy. In patients with acute iliofemoral DVT, surgical therapy is generally reserved for patients who worsen with anticoagulation therapy and those with phlegmasia cerulea dolens and impending venous gan-grene. If the patient has phlegmasia cerulea dolens, a fasciotomy of the calf compartments is first performed. In iliofemoral DVT, a longitudinal venotomy is made in the common femoral vein, and a venous balloon embolectomy catheter is passed through the thrombus into the IVC and pulled back several times until no further thrombus can be extracted. The distal thrombus in the leg is removed by manual pressure beginning in the foot. This is accomplished by application of a tight rubber elastic wrap beginning at the foot and extending to the thigh. If the thrombus in the femoral vein is old and cannot be extracted, the vein may be ligated. For a thrombus that extends into the IVC, the IVC is exposed transperitoneally and controlled below the renal veins. The IVC is opened, and the thrombus is removed by gentle mas-sage. An intraoperative completion venogram determines if any residual thrombus or stenosis is present. If a residual iliac vein stenosis is present, intraoperative angioplasty and stenting can be performed. In most cases, an arteriovenous fistula is then created by anastomosing the great saphenous vein (GSV) end to side with the superficial femoral artery in an effort to main-tain patency of the thrombectomized iliofemoral venous seg-ment. Heparin is administered postoperatively for several days. Warfarin anticoagulation is maintained for at least 6 months after thrombectomy. Complications of iliofemoral thrombec-tomy include PE in up to 20% of patients67 and death in <1% of patients.68One study followed 77 limbs for a mean of 8.5 years after thrombectomy for acute iliofemoral DVT. In limbs with suc-cessful thrombectomy, valvular competence in the thrombecto-mized venous segment was 80% at 5 years and 56% at 10 years. More than 90% of patients had minimal or no symptoms of PTS. There were 12 (16%) early thrombectomy failures. Patients were required to wear compression stockings for at least 1 year after thrombectomy.69Survival rates for surgical pulmonary embolectomy have improved over the past 20 years with the addition of cardio-pulmonary bypass. Emergency pulmonary embolectomy for acute PE is rarely indicated. Patients with preterminal massive PE (Fig. 24-10) for whom thrombolysis has failed or who have contraindications to thrombolytics may be candidates for this procedure. Open pulmonary artery embolectomy is performed through a posterolateral thoracotomy with direct visualization of the pulmonary arteries. Mortality rates range between 20% and 40%.70-72Percutaneous catheter-based techniques for removal of a PE involve mechanical thrombus fragmentation or embolec-tomy using suction devices. Mechanical clot fragmentation is followed by CDT. Results of catheter-based fragmentation are based on small case series. In a study in which a fragmentation device was used in 10 patients with acute massive PE, frag-mentation was successful in 7 patients with a mortality rate of 20%.73 Transvenous catheter pulmonary suction embolectomy has also been performed for acute massive PE with a reported 76% successful extraction rate and a 30-day survival of 70%.74ProphylaxisPatients who undergo major general surgical, gynecologic, urologic, and neurosurgical procedures without thrombopro-phylaxis have a significant incidence of perioperative DVT. An estimated one-third of the 150,000 to 200,000 VTE-related deaths per year in the United States occur following surgery.75 The goal of prophylaxis is to reduce the mortality and morbidity associated with VTE. The first manifestation of VTE may be a life-threatening PE (Fig. 24-11), and as indicated earlier, clinical evaluation to detect DVT before PE is unreliable.Effective methods of VTE prophylaxis involve the use of one or more pharmacologic or mechanical modalities. Cur-rently available pharmacologic agents include low-dose UFH, LMWH, synthetic pentasaccharides, and vitamin K antago-nists. Mechanical methods include intermittent pneumatic com-pression (IPC) and graduated compression stockings. There is insufficient evidence to consider aspirin alone as adequate DVT prophylaxis. Methods of prophylaxis vary with regard to efficacy, and the 2012 ACCP Clinical Practice Guidelines strat-ify their uses according to the patient’s level of VTE risk, bleed-ing risk, and the values and preferences of individual patients (see Table 24-3).Venous Thromboembolism Prophylaxis in Nonorthopedic Surgery. The risk for VTE associated with a surgical procedure depends on the type of operation, type of anesthesia, duration of surgery, and other risk factors, such as patient age, presence of cancer, prior VTE, obesity, presence of infection, and known thrombophilic disorders. VTE risk can be stratified according to Brunicardi_Ch24_p0981-p1008.indd   99222/02/19   3:01 PM 993VENOUS AND LYMPHATIC DISEASECHAPTER 24Figure 24-11. Computed tomography angiogram showing mul-tiple pulmonary embolisms (arrows). (Used with permission from Dr. Scott Ambruster.)Table 24-5Risk assessment model from the Patient Safety in Surgery StudyRISK FACTORRISK SCORE POINTSOperation type other than endocrine Respiratory and hernia Thoracoabdominal aneurysm, embolectomy/thrombectomy, venous reconstruction, and endovascular repair Aneurysm Mouth, palate Stomach, intestines Integument Hernia9744432ASA, physical status classification 3,4, or 5 2 Female sex211Work RVU >17 10–1732Two points for each of these conditions Disseminated cancer Chemotherapy for malignancy within 30 days of operation Preoperative serum sodium  >145 mmol/L Transfusion >4 units packed RBCs  in 72 hours before operation Ventilator dependent2One point for each of these conditions Wound class (clean/contaminated) Preoperative hematocrit ≤38% Preoperative bilirubin >1 mg/dL Dyspnea Albumin ≤3.5 mg/dL Emergency1Zero points for each of these conditions ASA physical class of 1 Work RVU <10 Male sex0ASA = American Society of Anesthesiologists; RBCs = red blood cells; RVU = relative value unit.Reproduced with permission from Rogers SO Jr, Kilaru RK, Hosokawa P, et al: Multivariable predictors of postoperative venous thromboembolic events after general and vascular surgery: results from the patient safety in surgery study, J Am Coll Surg. 2007 Jun;204(6):1211-1221.the previously mentioned risk assessment models, the Caprini score and Rogers score. These risk assessment models are included in the prophylaxis guidelines for nonorthopedic sur-gery (Tables 24-5 and 24-6). A composite score is created using assigned values for each risk factor. The cumulative score for each patient is then used to predict thrombosis risk and provide recommendations regarding VTE prophylaxis.Patients at very low risk (<0.5%; Rogers score <7; Caprini score 0) who undergo general or abdominopelvic procedures do not require pharmacologic or mechanical pro-phylaxis; however, early ambulation is required. Patients at low risk (<1.5%; Rogers score 7–10; Caprini score 1–2) should receive mechanical prophylaxis. Patients at moderate risk (3%; Rogers score >10; Caprini score 3–4) should receive LMWH at recommended doses, low-dose UFH, or mechanical pro-phylaxis. Patients at high risk (6%; Caprini score ≥5) should receive LMWH at recommended doses or low-dose UFH and mechanical prophylaxis. Thromboprophylaxis should con-tinue until discharge, except in select high-risk patients with malignancy in whom extended-duration prophylaxis (up to 4–6 weeks) may be beneficial. Patients with significant risk for bleeding should receive mechanical prophylaxis until this risk subsides.75Overall, low-dose UFH and LMWH reduce the risk for symptomatic and asymptomatic VTE by 60% to 70%. The risks for bleeding differ, depending on the dosage. Lower dosages of LMWH appear to be associated with less bleeding risk than low-dose UFH, but the latter produces less bleeding risk than higher prophylactic dosages of LMWH.76 Other advantages of LMWH include once-daily dosing protocols and a lower rate of heparin-associated antibody formation.Fondaparinux has been compared with the LMWH dalte-parin in patients who undergo high-risk major abdominal sur-gery. It also has been compared with IPC alone in patients undergoing non–high-risk abdominal surgery.77,78 Fondaparinux demonstrated rates of VTE prevention, bleeding complications, and mortality similar to those of LMWH. It was more beneficial than IPC alone in reducing VTE but with a higher rate of bleed-ing (1.6% vs. 0.2%).Prophylactic insertion of IVC filters has been suggested for VTE prophylaxis in high-risk trauma patients, bariatric surgical patients, and some patients with malignancy who have contraindications for LMWH therapy.79 A 5-year study of prophylactic IVC filter placement in 132 trauma patients at high risk of PE (head injury, spinal cord injury, pelvic or Brunicardi_Ch24_p0981-p1008.indd   99322/02/19   3:01 PM 994SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 24-6Caprini risk assessment model1 POINT2 POINTS3 POINTS5 POINTSAge 41–60Age 61–74Age ≥75Stroke (<1 month)Minor surgeryArthroscopic surgeryHistory of VTEElective arthroplastyBMI >25 kg/m2Major open surgery  (> 45 minutes)Family history of VTEHip, pelvis, or leg fractureSwollen legsLaparoscopic surgery  (> 45 minutes)Factor V LeidenAcute spinal cord injury  (<1 month)Varicose veinsMalignancyProthrombin 20210A Pregnancy or postpartumConfined to bed (>72 hours)Lupus anticoagulant History of unexplained or recurrent spontaneous abortionImmobilizing plaster castAnticardiolipin antibody Oral contraceptives of hormone replacementCentral venous accessElevated serum homocysteine Sepsis (<1 month) Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia Serious lung disease, including pneumonia (<1 month) Other congenital or acquired thrombophilia Abnormal pulmonary  function test   Acute myocardial infarction   Congestive heart failure   History of inflammatory  bowel disease   Medical patient at bed rest   BMI = body mass index; VTE = venous thromboembolism.Data from Bahl V, Hu HM, Henke PK, et al: A validation study of retrospective venous thromboembolism risk scoring method, Ann Surg. 2010 Feb; 251(2):344-350.long bone fractures) reported a 0% incidence of symptom-atic PE in patients with a correctly positioned IVC filter.80 In  47 patients with a malpositioned IVC filter (strut malposition or filter tilt), there was a 6.3% incidence of symptomatic PE with three deaths. DVT occurred at the insertion site in 3.1% of the patients. IVC patency was 97.1% at 3 years.Fatal and nonfatal PE can still occur in patients with vena cava interruption. As noted earlier, long-term complications associated with permanent IVC filters include IVC thrombo-sis and DVT. Currently, the ACCP recommends IVC filters be placed only if a proximal DVT is present and anticoagula-tion therapy is contraindicated. Placement of an IVC filter in the setting of severe pulmonary embolism development while anticoagulated remains controversial. IVC filter insertion is not recommended for primary prophylaxis.75Removable IVC filters may be placed in patients with a temporarily increased risk of PE.81 The best patient groups for retrievable filter placement may include young trauma patients with transient immobility, patients undergoing surgi-cal procedures associated with a high risk of PE, and patients with hypercoagulable states who cannot receive anticoagula-tion therapy for a short period of time. Careful follow-up is required to assure all potentially removable filters are in fact removed.OTHER VENOUS THROMBOTIC DISORDERSSuperficial Vein ThrombophlebitisSuperficial vein thrombophlebitis (SVT) most commonly occurs in varicose veins but can occur in normal veins. When SVT recurs at variable sites in normal superficial veins,  thrombophlebitis migrans, it may signify a hidden visceral malignancy or a systemic disorder such as a blood dyscrasia and/or a collagen vascular disease. SVT also frequently occurs as a complication of indwelling catheters, with or without asso-ciated extravasation of injected material. Upper extremity vein thrombosis has been reported to occur in 38% of patients with peripherally inserted central catheters; 57% of these developed in the cephalic vein (Fig. 24-12).82 Suppurative SVT may occur in veins with indwelling catheters and may be associated with generalized sepsis.Clinical signs of SVT include redness, warmth, and ten-derness along the distribution of the affected veins, often asso-ciated with a palpable cord. Patients with suppurative SVT may have fever and leukocytosis. DUS should be performed in patients with signs and symptoms of acute SVT to confirm the diagnosis and to determine if any associated DVT is present.  Concomitant lower extremity DVT may be present in 5% to 40% of patients with SVT; most occur in patients with greater Brunicardi_Ch24_p0981-p1008.indd   99422/02/19   3:01 PM 995VENOUS AND LYMPHATIC DISEASECHAPTER 24Figure 24-12. Duplex ultrasound of a brachial vein containing thrombus and percutaneously inserted central catheter (PICC).Figure 24-13. Upper extremity venogram showing stenosis of the right subclavian vein at the first rib (arrow).saphenous vein SVT within 1 cm of the saphenofemoral  junction. A follow-up DUS should be performed in 5 to 7 days in patients with SVT in the proximal GSV but without deep vein involvement. Approximately 10% to 20% of patients with SVT involving the proximal GSV experience progression to deep venous involvement within 1 week.83,84Treatment of SVT is quite variable. A Cochrane Review reported that LMWHs and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs both reduce the rate of SVT extension or recurrence.85 Addi-tionally, a multicenter, randomized, blinded trial comparing use of fondaparinux to placebo in lower extremity SVT found use of fondaparinux reduced the rate of VTE formation by 85%, though the incidence of VTE formation was low in both groups (0.2% vs. 1.3%, P <.001). The number needed to treat to prevent one episode of VTE was 88 patients. There was no difference in mortality between the two arms of the trial.85Topical medications appear to improve local symptoms. Surgical treatment, combined with the use of graduated com-pression stockings, is associated with a lower rate of VTE and SVT progression.86 The treatment is individualized and depends on the location of the thrombus and the severity of symptoms. In patients with SVT not within 1 cm of the saphenofemoral junction, treatment consists of compression and administra-tion of an anti-inflammatory medication such as indomethacin. In patients with suppurative SVT, antibiotics and removal of any existing indwelling catheters are mandatory. Excision of the vein may be necessary but is usually reserved for patients with systemic symptoms or when excision of the involved vein is straightforward. If the SVT extends proximally to within  1 cm of the saphenofemoral junction, extension into the com-mon femoral vein is more likely to occur. In these patients, anticoagulation therapy for 6 weeks and GSV ligation appear equally effective in preventing thrombus extension into the deep venous system.87,88Upper Extremity Vein ThrombosisAxillary-subclavian venous thrombosis (ASVT) is classified into two forms. Primary ASVT occurs in only a small minority of all patients with ASVT. In the primary form, no clear cause for the thrombosis is readily identifiable at initial evaluation. Patients with primary ASVT often give a history of performing prolonged, repetitive motion activities, which results in damage to the subclavian vein, usually where it passes between the head of the clavicle and the first rib in association with the subclavius muscle. This condition is also known as venous thoracic outlet syndrome, effort thrombosis, and Paget-Schroetter syndrome. Secondary ASVT is more common and is associated with an easily identified cause such as an indwelling catheter or a hyper-coagulable state. Over 30% of patients with tunneled subclavian vein access devices develop ASVT.89A patient with ASVT may be asymptomatic or may pres-ent with varying degrees of upper extremity edema, tenderness, and conspicuous superficial venous enlargement. DUS can be performed initially to confirm the diagnosis, but limitations to the exam by the clavicle and collateralization can lead to a false-negative study. Venography is recommended when there is nonconcordance between the duplex study and clinical suspi-cion. Anticoagulation therapy should be initiated once ASVT is diagnosed to prevent PE and decrease symptoms.Treatment of patients with primary upper extremity venous thrombosis is controversial because the natural history of the disease may vary from minimal to no symptoms to significant symptoms with vigorous upper extremity activities. In recent years, patients presenting with acute symptomatic primary ASVT are often considered candidates for CDT therapy with the goal of minimizing long-term symptoms of venous congestion. Venography is performed through a catheter placed using an ultrasound-guided percutaneous basilic vein approach to docu-ment the extent of the thrombus (Fig. 24-13). A guidewire is traversed through the thrombus, and a catheter is placed within the thrombus. Typically, tissue plasminogen activator is admin-istered through a multi–side-hole infusion catheter. Various catheter-based mechanical techniques may also be employed to speed thrombus removal. Heparin is administered concurrently with the thrombolytic infusion. After completion of thrombo-lytic therapy, a follow-up venogram is obtained. Correctable anatomic abnormalities may then be considered for treatment. Adjuvant procedures after thrombolytic therapy may include Brunicardi_Ch24_p0981-p1008.indd   99522/02/19   3:01 PM 996SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIcervical or first rib resection for thoracic outlet abnormalities, scalenectomy, surgical venous reconstruction, and balloon angioplasty of residual venous stenosis.90 The ACCP guidelines recommend the same intensity and duration of anticoagulant therapy in patients who undergo thrombolysis as in patients who are treated with anticoagulation alone.Mesenteric Vein ThrombosisFive percent to 15% of cases of acute mesenteric ischemia occur as a result of mesenteric vein thrombosis (MVT). Mortality rates in patients with MVT may approach 50%.91 The usual present-ing symptom is nonspecific abdominal pain and distention, often accompanied by nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea.92 Perito-neal signs, suggesting intestinal infarction, are present in fewer than half of MVT patients. MVT is more common in patients with a hypercoagulable states, malignancy, and cirrhosis. MVT also occurs as a rare complication of laparoscopic surgery.92,93Most cases of MVT are diagnosed with contrast-enhanced CT scanning or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in the course of an evaluation for abdominal pain. The sensitivity and speci-ficity for CT and MRI approach 100% and 98%, respectively.94 Ultrasound can also be used and has reported sensitivity and specificity of 93% and 99%, respectively.Patients with MVT are treated with fluid resuscitation, heparin anticoagulation, and bowel rest. Once the patient’s clinical status improves, oral intake can be carefully started. The patient is transitioned to oral anticoagulation over 3 to 4 days and, depending on the etiology of the MVT, continued for 3 to 6 months or indefinitely. Most patients with MVT can be treated nonoperatively, but urgent laparotomy is indicated in patients with peritoneal findings. Broad-spectrum antibiotics are admin-istered perioperatively. Operative findings consist of edema and cyanotic discoloration of the mesentery and bowel wall. In more advanced cases, thrombus involves the distal mesenteric veins. The arterial supply to the involved bowel is usually intact. Nonviable bowel is resected, and primary anastomosis can be performed. If the viability of the remaining bowel is in question, a second-look operation is performed within 24 to 48 hours.VARICOSE VEINSVaricose veins are common and are present in at least 10% of the general population.95 The findings of varicose veins may include dilated and tortuous veins, telangiectasias, and fine reticular varicosities. Risk factors for varicose veins include obesity, female sex, inactivity, and family history.96 Varicose veins can be classified as primary or secondary. Primary vari-cose veins result from intrinsic abnormalities of the venous wall, whereas secondary varicose veins are associated with deep and/or superficial venous insufficiency.Patients with varicose veins may complain of unsightly appearance, aching, heaviness, pruritus, and early fatigue of the affected leg. These symptoms worsen with prolonged standing and sitting and are relieved by elevation of the leg above the level of the heart. A mild amount of edema is often present. More severe signs include thrombophlebitis, hyperpigmentation, lipodermato-sclerosis, ulceration, and bleeding from attenuated vein clusters.An important component of treatment for patients with vari-cose veins is the use of elastic compression stockings. Patients may be prescribed elastic stockings with compression ranging from 20 to 30, 30 to 40, or even 40 to 50 mmHg. Stockings range in length from knee high to waist high, and they should cover the symptomatic varices. Elastic compression provides sufficient relief of symptoms in many symptomatic patients.Cosmetic concerns may lead to intervention. Addition-ally, interventions are warranted in patients whose symptoms worsen or are unrelieved despite compression therapy or who have lipodermatosclerosis or venous ulcer. Randomized trials of symptomatic patients with varicose veins have demonstrated improved quality of life with interventional treatment. Interven-tional management includes injection sclerotherapy, thermal ablation, surgical therapy, or a combination of these techniques. Injection sclerotherapy alone can be successful in varicose veins and in telangiectatic vessels. A recent multicenter, randomized trial compared foam sclerotherapy versus placebo for symp-tomatic varicose veins found significant symptom relief and improved cosmetic appearance with sclerotherapy.97 Sclero-therapy acts by destroying the venous endothelium. Scleros-ing agents include hypertonic saline, sodium tetradecyl sulfate, and polidocanol. Concentrations of 11.7% to 23.4% hypertonic saline, 0.125% to 0.250% sodium tetradecyl sulfate, and 0.5% polidocanol are used for telangiectasias. Larger varicose veins require higher concentrations: 23.4% hypertonic saline, 0.50% to 1% sodium tetradecyl sulfate, and 0.75% to 1.0% polidocanol.92  Elastic bandages are wrapped around the leg after injection and worn continuously for 3 to 5 days to produce apposition of the inflamed vein walls and prevent thrombus formation. After the bandages are removed, elastic compression stockings should be worn for a minimum of 2 weeks. Complications from sclero-therapy include allergic reaction, local hyperpigmentation, thrombophlebitis, DVT, and possible skin necrosis.Newer devices combine sclerotherapy with catheter-based mechanical endoluminal injury to achieve nonthermal ablation.98 Additional nonthermal, nonsclerosant ablative techniques using proprietary adhesive formulations with cyanoacrylate are current being evaluated and have demonstrated promising early results.99Patients with symptomatic GSV or SSV reflux may be treated with endovenous ablation techniques or surgical removal of the affected vein. Endovenous laser and radiofrequency abla-tion (RFA) techniques have gained in popularity in the past several years. Such techniques are generally associ-ated with equally effective but more rapid postprocedure recov-ery than traditional open surgical stripping of the GSV.With either endoluminal technique, the distal thigh or proximal calf GSV is punctured with a 21-gauge needle under ultrasound guidance. A sheath is placed over a guidewire, and the laser fiber or RFA catheter is advanced until it is near to, but not at, the saphenofemoral junction. Tumescent anesthetic is administered around the GSV, and the vein is treated as the catheter is withdrawn. Endovenous laser treatment and RFA result in durable ablation of the GSV, with rates of varicose vein recurrence and clinical severity scores comparable to those seen with open surgery.100,101 Risks of endovenous ablation include DVT, ecchymosis, and saphenous nerve injury.Saphenous vein ligation and stripping may still be the pre-ferred therapy for patients with GSVs of very large diameter  (>2 cm). Surgical removal of the GSV usually is performed via small incisions placed medially in the groin and just below the knee. The GSV is removed using a blunt tip catheter or an invagi-nation pin stripper. Complications associated with GSV stripping include ecchymosis, hematoma, lymphocele, DVT, infection, and saphenous nerve injury. GSV stripping is associated with a lower rate of recurrence of varicose veins and a better quality of life than saphenofemoral junction ligation alone.4Brunicardi_Ch24_p0981-p1008.indd   99622/02/19   3:01 PM 997VENOUS AND LYMPHATIC DISEASECHAPTER 24Figure 24-14. Removal of varicose veins via stab avulsions.Larger varicose veins are best treated by surgical exci-sion using the “stab avulsion” technique. Stab avulsions are performed by making 2-mm incisions directly over branch varicosities, and the varicosity is dissected from the surrounding subcutaneous tissue as far proximally and distally as possible through the small incisions (Fig. 24-14). In most cases the vein is simply avulsed with no attempt at ligation. Bleeding is easily controlled with leg elevation, manual compression, and prepro-cedure tumescent anesthesia.CHRONIC VENOUS INSUFFICIENCYChronic venous insufficiency (CVI) affects an estimated 600,000 people in the United States.102 Patients complain of leg fatigue, discomfort, and heaviness. Signs of CVI may include varicose veins, pigmentation, lipodermatosclerosis, and venous ulceration. Importantly, severe CVI is not necessarily associ-ated with varicose veins. Chronic venous ulcers carry significant negative physical, financial, and psychological implications. A quality-of-life study reported that 65% of patients with chronic leg ulcers had severe pain, 81% had decreased mobility, and 100% experienced a negative impact of their disease on their work capacity.103 The socioeconomic impact of chronic venous leg ulcers is staggering, with an estimated 2 million workdays lost per year.102 The annual healthcare cost in the United States to treat CVI is estimated at $1 billion.105CVI can be primary or secondary. Primary CVI results from intrinsic abnormalities of the vein wall, whereas second-ary CVI, so-called postthrombotic syndrome (PTS), occurs as a result of DVT. The signs and symptoms of CVI can therefore be attributed to venous reflux, venous obstruction, calf muscle pump dysfunction, or a combination of these factors, as well as loss of venous wall elasticity.106 In the majority of patients with CVI, the most important factor appears to be venous reflux, although most severe cases tend to have an obstructive etiology as well. Venous reflux results from abnormalities of the venous valve. Primary valvular reflux or incompetence is diagnosed when there is no known underlying cause of valvular dysfunction. Secondary valvular reflux is diagnosed when an identifiable cause is present. The most frequent secondary cause is DVT.Evaluation of Venous InsufficiencyEarly diagnostic studies to evaluate CVI required invasive mea-surements of ambulatory venous pressure (AVP) and venous recovery time (VRT). To measure AVP and VRT, a needle is inserted into a dorsal foot vein and connected to a pressure transducer. The patient is asked to perform 10 tiptoe exercises. Initially there is often a slight upward deflection of pressure with the onset of exercise followed by a decline in pressure with each subsequent tiptoe maneuver. After approximately 10 tiptoes, the measured pressure stabilizes and reflects a bal-ance of venous inflow and outflow. The pressure at this point is the AVP, which is measured in millimeters of mercury. The patient is then asked to stop exercising to allow the vein to fill with return of the venous pressure to baseline. The time required for the venous pressure to return from the AVP level to 90% of baseline pressure is referred to as the VRT. A normal VRT typically ranges from 20 to 60 seconds. Values less than  20 seconds indicate significant reflux with increasing severity. To distinguish between superficial and deep venous reflux, a thigh tourniquet can be placed inflated to 50 mmHg to eliminate influence of the superficial venous. A VRT that remains below 20 seconds after tourniquet inflation suggests both superficial and deep venous reflux. Elevations of AVP indicate venous hypertension. The magnitude of AVP reflects the severity of CVI. There is an 80% incidence of venous ulceration in patients with an AVP of >80 mmHg.107Plethysmography. Noninvasive plethysmography has been used to evaluate CVI. Venous photoplethysmography indirectly evaluates venous function through the use of infrared light. A light-emitting diode is placed just above the medial malleolus, and the patient then performs a series of tiptoe maneuvers. Pho-toplethysmography provides a measurement of VRT. In limbs with CVI, VRT is shortened compared with that in a normal limb. AVP and VRT are only measures of the overall venous function of a lower extremity venous system. They cannot local-ize the site of reflux or evaluate the function of the calf pump.Air plethysmography is a theoretically attractive but not widely used method to assess calf pump function, venous reflux, and overall lower extremity venous function.108 An air-filled plastic pressure bladder is placed on the calf to detect volume changes in the leg during a standard set of maneuvers. The patient is first supine, and then the leg is elevated and the minimum volume of venous blood recorded. The patient is then asked to assume an upright position with the examined leg non-weight bearing. The venous volume of the examined leg is determined when the volume curve flattens. The venous fill-ing index (VFI), a measure of reflux, is calculated by dividing the maximum venous volume by the time required to achieve maximum venous volume. Next, the patient performs a single tiptoe maneuver, and the ejection fraction (EF) is determined. The EF is the volume change between the recorded volume before and after the tiptoe maneuver and is a measure of calf pump function. At this point, the veins of the leg are allowed to refill. The patient then performs 10 tiptoe maneuvers, and the residual volume fraction is calculated by dividing the venous volume in the leg after 10 tiptoe exercises by the venous volume present before the exercises. The residual volume fraction is a reflection of overall venous function. Theoretically, patients with increased VFIs and normal EFs (indicating the presence of reflux with normal calf pump function) would benefit from anti-reflux surgery, whereas patients with normal VFIs and dimin-ished EFs would not.Venous Duplex Ultrasound. Venous DUS has become the gold standard for evaluation of venous function largely supplanting venographic and plethysmographic techniques.  Brunicardi_Ch24_p0981-p1008.indd   99722/02/19   3:01 PM 998SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 24-15. Evaluation of a patient with chronic venous insuf-ficiency with duplex ultrasonography.Figure 24-16. Multilayered dressing for treatment of chronic venous insufficiency.The principle advantage of DUS is that it can be used to evalu-ate reflux in individual venous segments targeting abnormal areas for treatment. The examination has been validated when performed with the patient in the standing position and the examined leg non-weight bearing. Pneumatic pressure cuffs of appropriate size are placed around the thigh, calf, and fore-foot. The ultrasound transducer is positioned over the venous segment to be examined, just proximal to the pneumatic cuff (Fig. 24-15). The cuff is then inflated to a standard pressure for 3 seconds and then rapidly deflated. Ninety-five percent of normal venous valves close within 0.5 second.109 The presence of reflux for >0.5 second is considered abnormal. Typically, the common femoral, femoral, popliteal, and posterior tibial veins, as well as the GSV and SSV, are evaluated in a complete examination.Nonoperative Treatment of Chronic Venous Insufficiency Compression Therapy. Compression therapy is the mainstay of CVI management. Compression can be achieved using a vari-ety of techniques, including elastic compression stockings, paste gauze boots (Unna’s boots), multilayer elastic wraps or dressings (Fig. 24-16), and pneumatic compression devices. Nonelastic compression bandages generally achieve higher and more prolonged degrees of compression than elastic compression bandages. The exact mechanism by which compression therapy can improve CVI remains uncertain. An improvement in skin and 5subcutaneous tissue microcirculatory hemodynamics as well as a direct effect on subcutaneous pressure have been hypothesized as the mechanisms of efficacy of compression therapy.110 Addition-ally, compression therapy has demonstrated quantifiable differ-ences in ulcer healing with decreases in matrix metalloproteins and inflammatory cytokines.111,112 Clinically, routine use of elastic and nonelastic bandages reduces lower extremity edema in patients with CVI. In addition, supine perimalleolar subcutaneous pressure has been demonstrated to increase with elastic compression.111 With edema reduction, cutaneous metabolism may improve due to enhanced diffusion of oxygen and other nutrients to the cellular elements of skin and subcutaneous tissues. Increases in subcutaneous tissue pressure with elastic compres-sion bandages may counteract transcapillary Starling forces, which favor leakage of fluid out of the capillary.Before the initiation of therapy for CVI, patients must be educated about their chronic disease and the need to comply with their treatment plan to heal ulcers and prevent recurrence. A definitive diagnosis of venous ulceration must be made before treatment is initiated. A detailed history should be obtained from a patient presenting with lower extremity ulcerations, includ-ing medications used and associated medical conditions that may promote lower extremity ulceration. Arterial insufficiency is assessed by physical examination or noninvasive studies. In addition, systemic conditions that affect wound healing and leg edema, such as diabetes mellitus, immunosuppression, mal-nutrition, and congestive heart failure, should be improved as much as possible.Compression therapy is most commonly achieved with graduated elastic compression stockings. Elastic compression stockings are available in various compositions, strengths, and lengths, and can be customized for a particular patient. The ben-efits of elastic compression stocking therapy for the treatment of CVI and healing of ulcerations have been well documented.114-117 In a retrospective study involving 113 venous ulcer patients,115 the use of below-knee, 30to 40-mmHg elastic compression stockings, after edema and cellulitis were first resolved if pres-ent, resulted in 93% healing. Complete ulcer healing occurred in 99 of 102 patients (97%) who were compliant with stocking use vs. 6 of 11 patients (55%) who were noncompliant (P <.0001). The mean time to ulcer healing was 5 months. The rate of ulcer recurrence was lower in patients who were compliant with their compression therapy. By life table analysis, ulcer recurrence was 29% at 5 years for compliant patients and 100% at 3 years for noncompliant patients.In addition to promoting ulcer healing, elastic compres-sion therapy can also improve quality of life in patients with CVI. In one prospective study,118 112 patients with CVI docu-mented by DUS were administered a questionnaire to quantify the symptoms of swelling, pain, skin discoloration, cosmesis, activity tolerance, depression, and sleep alterations. Patients were treated with 30to 40-mmHg elastic compression stock-ings. There were overall improvements in symptom severity scores at 1 month after initiation of treatment. Further improve-ments were noted at 16 months after treatment.Patient compliance with compression therapy is crucial in treating CVI and especially venous leg ulcers. Many patients are initially intolerant of compression in areas of hypersensitiv-ity adjacent to an active ulcer or at sites of previously healed ulcers. They may also have difficulty applying elastic stockings. To improve compliance, patients should be instructed to wear their stockings initially only as long as it is easily tolerated and Brunicardi_Ch24_p0981-p1008.indd   99822/02/19   3:01 PM 999VENOUS AND LYMPHATIC DISEASECHAPTER 24Figure 24-17. Elastic compression device with Velcro to facilitate treatment of chronic venous insufficiency.then gradually to increase the amount of time the stockings are worn. Alternatively, patients can be fitted with lower-strength stockings initially followed by introduction of higher-strength stockings over a period of several weeks. Many commercially available devices, such as silk inner toe liners, adjustable elas-tic compression with Velcro, stockings with zippered sides (Fig. 24-17), and metal fitting aids (Fig. 24-18), are available to assist patients in applying elastic stockings. However, despite all these available adjuncts, many patients remain noncompliant with elastic compression therapy.Another method of compression was developed by the German dermatologist Paul Gerson Unna. Unna’s boot has been used for many years to treat venous ulcers and is available in many versions. A typical Unna’s boot consists of a three-layer dressing and requires application by trained personnel. A rolled gauze bandage impregnated with calamine, zinc oxide, glyc-erin, sorbitol, gelatin, and magnesium aluminum silicate is first applied with graded compression from the forefoot to just below the knee. The next layer consists of a 10-cm-wide continuous gauze dressing followed by an outer layer of elastic wrap, also applied with graded compression. The bandage becomes stiff after drying, and the rigidity may aid in preventing edema for-mation. Unna’s boot is changed weekly or sooner if the patient experiences significant drainage and soiling of the dressing.Once applied, Unna’s boot requires minimal patient involvement and provides continuous compression and topical therapy. However, Unna’s boot has several disadvantages. It Figure 24-18. Metal fitting aid to assist in placement of elastic compression stockings.is bulky and can be uncomfortable, which may affect patient compliance. In addition, the ulcer cannot be monitored after the boot is applied, the technique is labor intensive, and the degree of compression provided is operator dependent. Occasionally, patients may also develop contact dermatitis to the components of Unna’s boot.The efficacy of Unna’s dressing has been studied. A ret-rospective 15-year survey encompassing 998 patients with one or more venous ulcers treated weekly with Unna’s dressing119 reported that 73% of ulcers healed in patients who returned for more than one treatment. The median time to healing for individual ulcers was 9 weeks. Unna’s dressing has been com-pared to other forms of treatment. A randomized, prospective study comparing Unna’s boot to polyurethane foam dressing in 36 patients with venous ulcers demonstrated superior healing over 12 months in patients treated with Unna’s boot (94.7% vs. 41.2%).120 A recent Cochrane Review of 39 randomized controlled trials demonstrated that compression increases ulcer healing rates compared with no compression, multicomponent systems are more effective than single-component systems, and multicomponent systems that include an elastic bandage are more effective than those composed mainly of inelastic constituents.121Other forms of compression dressing available to treat CVI include multilayered dressings and legging orthoses. The purported advantages of multilayered dressings include main-tenance of compression for a longer period of time, more even distribution of compression, and better absorption of wound Brunicardi_Ch24_p0981-p1008.indd   99922/02/19   3:01 PM 1000SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 24-19. Apligraf skin graft material supplied as a disk on an agarose gel nutrient medium.Figure 24-20. Trocar placement for subfascial endoscopic perfo-rator vein surgery. (Used with permission from Dr. Pankaj Patel.)exudates. However, the efficacy of multilayered dressings depends on the wrapping technique of healthcare personnel. A commercially available legging orthosis consisting of multiple adjustable loop-and-hook closure compression bands provides compression similar to that of Unna’s boot and can be applied daily by the patient.122Skin Substitutes. Several types of skin substitutes are com-mercially available or under clinical study in the United States.105 Bioengineered skin ranges in composition from acellular skin substitutes to partial living skin substitutes. Their mechanism of action in healing venous ulcers is uncertain; however, they may serve as delivery vehicles for various growth factors and cytokines important in wound healing.Apligraf is a commercially available bilayered living skin construct that closely approximates human skin for use in the treatment of venous ulcers. It contains a protective stratum corneum and a keratinocyte-containing epidermis overlying a dermis consisting of dermal fibroblasts in a collagen matrix.122 Apligraf is between 0.5 mm and 1.0 mm thick and is supplied as a disk of living tissue on an agarose gel nutrient medium. It must be used within 5 days of release from the manufacturer123 (Fig. 24-19). The disk is easily handled and applied and con-forms to irregularly contoured ulcer beds though it is very costly.A prospective randomized study comparing multilayer compression therapy alone to treatment with Apligraf in addi-tion to multilayered compression therapy has been performed to assess the efficacy of Apligraf in the treatment of venous ulcers.118 More patients treated with Apligraf had ulcer healing at 6 months (63% vs. 49%, P = .02). The median time to com-plete ulcer closure was significantly shorter in patients treated with Apligraf (61 days vs. 181 days, P = .003). The ulcers that showed the greatest benefit with the living skin construct were ones that were large and deep (>1000 mm2) or were longstand-ing (>6 months). No evidence of rejection or sensitization has been reported in response to Apligraf application.Surgical/Interventional Treatment of Chronic Venous Insufficiency Perforator Vein Ligation. Incompetence of the perforating veins connecting the superficial and deep venous systems of the lower extremities has been implicated in the development of venous ulcers. The classic open tech-nique described by Linton in 1938 for perforator vein ligation has a high incidence of wound complications and has largely been abandoned.124 A minimally invasive technique termed subfascial endoscopic perforator vein surgery (SEPS) evolved with improvement of endoscopic equipment.DUS is performed preoperatively in patients undergoing SEPS to document deep venous competence and to identify per-forating veins in the posterior compartment. The patient is posi-tioned on the operating table with the affected leg elevated at 45° to 60°. An Esmarch bandage and a thigh tourniquet are used to exsanguinate the limb. The knee is then flexed, and two small incisions are made in the proximal medial leg away from areas of maximal induration at the ankle. Laparoscopic trocars are then positioned, and the subfascial dissection is performed with a combination of blunt and sharp dissection. Carbon dioxide is then used to insufflate the subfascial space. The thigh tourni-quet is inflated to prevent air embolism. The perforators are then identified and doubly clipped and divided. After completion of the procedure, the leg is wrapped in a compression bandage for 5 days postoperatively.The efficacy of SEPS as a stand-alone procedure in treatment of venous insufficiency is controversial and unproven. In a report from a large North American registry of 146 patients undergoing SEPS125 (Fig. 24-20), healing was achieved in 88% of ulcers (75 of 85) at 1 year. Adjunctive procedures, primarily superficial vein stripping, were performed in 72% of patients. Ulcer recurrence was predicted to be 16% at 1 year and 28% at 2 years by life table analysis. These results are similar to those achieved in some studies with compression therapy alone.  A review of several studies from 2003 to 2011 demonstrated, when taken in aggregate, that 2059 limbs with 896 ulcers underwent SEPS and concomitant saphenous vein ablation (70%) with a 0% to 16% complication rate and achieved ulcer healing in 90% of patients.126 There has been a multicenter, prospective, European trial performed in patients with venous ulcers to evaluate the efficacy of SEPS. Post hoc analysis suggested possible benefit for SEPS in certain categories of patients with venous ulcer. Overall, however, primary analysis of the study’s end points indicated no advantage to SEPS in addition to superficial venous surgery and compression in the healing of venous ulcers.127 The technique appears to have fallen out of favor in most institutions with injection sclerotherapy preferred due to ease of use.Superficial Venous Surgery. Currently it is accepted that superficial venous surgery in addition to compression therapy has a role in the treatment of patients with venous ulcer. The ESCHAR trial was a randomized prospective trial performed in the United Kingdom to evaluate the combination of superficial Brunicardi_Ch24_p0981-p1008.indd   100022/02/19   3:01 PM 1001VENOUS AND LYMPHATIC DISEASECHAPTER 24Figure 24-21. Patient with severe longstanding lymphedema.venous surgery and compression vs. compression alone in the treatment of venous ulcer. Superficial venous surgery had no additive effect to compression alone in the healing of a venous ulcer but significantly reduced venous ulcer recurrence at  4 years. Based on the results of this trial, it is reasonable to offer ablation or removal of the GSV in addition to compression therapy in patients with abnormal saphenous veins and signs and/or symptoms of severe CVI.128Deep Venous Valvular Reconstruction. In the absence of sig-nificant deep vein valvular incompetence, saphenous vein stripping and possibly perforator vein ligation can be effective in the treat-ment of CVI. However, in patients with a combination of superfi-cial and deep vein valvular incompetence, the addition of deep vein valvular reconstruction theoretically may improve ulcer healing.130  Numerous techniques of deep vein valve correction have been reported. These techniques consist of repair of existing valves, transplant of venous segments from the arm, transposition of an incompetent vein onto an adjacent competent vein, and implanta-tion of cryopreserved vein segments including competent valves.Successful long-term outcomes of 60% to 80% have been reported for venous valve reconstructions by internal suture repair.129,130 However, among patients who initially had ulcer-ation, 40% to 50% still had persistence or recurrence of ulcers in the long term.127,129Valve transplantation involves replacement of a segment of incompetent femoral vein or popliteal vein with a segment of axillary or brachial vein with competent valves. Early results are similar to those for venous valve reconstruction.129,130 How-ever, in the long term, the transplanted venous segments tend to develop incompetence, intimal hyperplasia, and cusp sinus thrombosis with long-term outcomes that are poorer than those for venous valve reconstructions. The outcomes for venous transposition are similar to those for valve transplantation.Currently, reconstruction techniques for deep venous insufficiency and associated CVI are rarely performed.Venous Stenting. Currently there is great interest in the role of venous stents in the treatment of CVI. Stenotic lesions of the iliac veins, primarily documented with IVUS, are being reported in a very high percentage of patients with edema, lipo-dermatosclerosis, or ulceration secondary to venous disease. It appears possible to percutaneously place stents in the iliac veins with near 100% technical success and excellent patency of the stent out to 4 years. Retrospective case series suggest favorable effects on ulcer healing, symptoms of CVI, and quality of life in patients with CVI. The role of venous stenting as an indepen-dent procedure in the treatment of patients with CVI remains an area of active investigation.131LYMPHEDEMAPathophysiologyLymphedema is extremity swelling that results from a reduction in lymphatic transport and accumulation of lymph within the interstitial space. It is caused by anatomic and or physiologic abnormalities such as lymphatic hypoplasia, functional insuf-ficiency, or absence of lymphatic valves.The original classification system, described by Allen, is based on the cause of the lymphedema. Primary lymphedema is further subdivided into congenital lymphedema, lymph-edema praecox, and lymphedema tarda. Congenital lymph-edema may involve a single lower extremity, multiple limbs, the genitalia, or the face. The edema typically develops before 2 years 6of age and may be associated with specific hereditary syndromes (Turner syndrome, Milroy syndrome, Klippel-Trénaunay-Weber syndrome). Lymphedema praecox is the most common form of primary lymphedema, accounting for 94% of cases. Lymphedema praecox is far more common in women, with the gender ratio favoring women 10:1. The onset is during childhood or the teen-age years, and the swelling involves the foot and calf. Lymph-edema tarda is uncommon, accounting for <10% of cases of primary lymphedema. The onset of edema is after 35 years of age.Secondary lymphedema is far more common than primary lymphedema. Secondary lymphedema develops as a result of lymphatic obstruction or disruption. Axillary node dissection leading to lymphedema of the arm is the most common cause of secondary lymphedema in the United States. Other causes of secondary lymphedema include radiation therapy, trauma, infection, and malignancy. Globally, filariasis (an infection caused by Wuchereria bancrofti, Brugia malayi, and Brugia timori) and environmental exposure to minerals in volcanic soil resulting in podoconiosis in barefoot populations are the most common causes of secondary lymphedema.Clinical DiagnosisIn most patients, the diagnosis of lymphedema can be made based on the history and physical examination alone. Patients commonly complain of heaviness and fatigue in the affected extremity. The limb size increases throughout the day and decreases to some extent, usually minimally, over the course of the night when the patient is recumbent. The limb, however, never completely nor-malizes. In the lower extremity, the swelling classically involves the dorsum of the foot, and the toes have a squared-off appear-ance. In advanced cases, hyperkeratosis of the skin develops, and fluid weeps from lymph-filled vesicles (Fig. 24-21).Brunicardi_Ch24_p0981-p1008.indd   100122/02/19   3:01 PM 1002SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 24-22. Lymphoscintigraphy of the lower extremity.Figure 24-23. Normal lymphangiogram of the pelvis.Recurrent cellulitis is a common complication of lymph-edema. Repeated infection results in further lymphatic damage, worsening existing disease. The clinical presentation of cellu-litis ranges from subtle erythema and worsening of edema to a rapidly progressive soft tissue infection with systemic toxicity.Many medical conditions can cause edema. If the symp-toms are mild, distinguishing lymphedema from other causes of leg swelling can be difficult. Venous insufficiency is often confused with lymphedema. However, patients with advanced venous insufficiency typically have lipodermatosclerosis in the gaiter region, skin ulceration, and/or varicose veins. Bilateral pitting edema is typically associated with congestive heart fail-ure, renal failure, or a hypoproteinemic state.Radiologic DiagnosisDuplex Ultrasound. When a patient is evaluated for edema, it is often difficult to distinguish the early stages of lymphedema from venous insufficiency. DUS of the venous system can determine if there is concomitant venous thrombosis or venous reflux, perhaps contributing to extremity edema. The diagnostic modalities discussed in the following sections have limited use in clinical practice. They are invasive and tedious and rarely change the management of a patient with lymphedema. Most physicians rely on the patient’s history and physical examina-tion alone to make the diagnosis of lymphedema.Lymphoscintigraphy. Lymphoscintigraphy has become the most commonly, but still overall uncommonly, used diagnostic test to identify lymphatic abnormalities. It has largely replaced lymphangiography. A radiolabeled sulfur colloid (technetium 99 m sulfur colloid) is injected into the subdermal, interdigital region of the affected limb. The lymphatic transport is moni-tored with a whole-body gamma camera, and major lymphatics and nodes can be visualized (Fig. 24-22). In normal individu-als, tracer activity may be detected in the inguinal region within 15 to 60 minutes. Within 3 hours, uptake should be present in the pelvic and abdominal lymph nodes. In patients with lymph-edema, various patterns may be seen on lymphoscintigraphy. There may be delayed or absent transport to the inguinal nodes. Increased cutaneous collaterals may be seen with obstruction of the primary axial channels. There may also be localized regions of reduced uptake in patients with prior node dissection or radia-tion therapy.Lymphangiography. Radiologic lymphangiography is per-formed by first visualizing the lymphatics by injecting colored dye into the hand or foot. The visualized lymphatic segment is exposed through a small incision and cannulated with a 27to 30-gauge needle. An oil-based dye is then injected slowly into the lymphatics over several hours. The lym-phatic channels and nodes are then visualized with traditional radiographs (Figs. 24-23 and 24-24). Lymphangiography is reserved for patients with lymphangiectasia or lymphatic fis-tulas, and patients who are being considered for microvascular reconstruction.ManagementAn important aspect of the management of lymphedema is patient understanding that there is no cure for lymphedema. The primary goals of treatment are to minimize swelling and to prevent recurrent infections. Controlling the chronic limb swelling can improve discomfort, heaviness, and tightness, and potentially reduce the progression of disease.132Brunicardi_Ch24_p0981-p1008.indd   100222/02/19   3:01 PM 1003VENOUS AND LYMPHATIC DISEASECHAPTER 24Figure 24-24. Normal lymphangiogram of the thigh and lower leg.Compression Garments. Graded compression stockings are widely used in the treatment of lymphedema. The stockings reduce the amount of swelling in the involved extremity by decreasing edema accumulation while the extremity is dependent. When worn daily, compression stockings have been associated with long-term maintenance of reduced limb circumference.134 They may also protect the tissues against chronically elevated intrinsic pressures, which lead to thickening of the skin and sub-cutaneous tissue.135 Compression stockings also offer a degree of protection against external trauma that may lead to cellulitis.The amount of compression required for controlling lymphedema ranges from 20 to 60 mmHg and varies among patients. The stockings can be custom made or prefabricated and are available in aboveand below-knee lengths. The stock-ings should be worn during waking hours. The garments should be replaced approximately every 6 months when they lose elasticity.Bedrest and Leg Elevation. Elevation is an important aspect of controlling lower extremity swelling and is often the first recommended intervention. However, continuous elevation throughout the day can interfere with quality of life more than lymphedema itself. Elevation is an adjunct to lymphedema ther-apy but is not the mainstay of treatment.Intermittent Pneumatic Compression Therapy. The use of IPC with a single-chamber or multichamber pump temporar-ily reduces edema and provides another adjunct to the use of compression stockings. These devices have been shown to be effective in reducing limb volume; however, use of compres-sion stockings is necessary to maintain the volume reduction when the patient is no longer supine because fluid transport is not associated with the transport of macromolecules (proteins) from the tissue. Typically, IPC is used for 4 to 6 hours per day at home when the patient is supine, with pressure ranges between 30 and 60 mmHg demonstrated to be most effective.135Lymphatic Massage. Manual lymphatic drainage is a form of massage developed by Vodder136 that is directed at reduc-ing edema. In combination with the use of compression stock-ings, manual lymphatic drainage is associated with a long-term reduction in edema and fewer infections per patient per year.137Antibiotic Therapy. Patients with lymphedema are at increased risk of developing cellulitis in the affected extremity due to microscopic breakdown in the skin barrier either second-ary to swelling or unrecognized and untreated tinea pedis. Recur-rent infection can damage the lymphatics, aggravating the edema and increasing the risk for subsequent infection. Staphylococcus and β-hemolytic Streptococcus are the most common organisms causing soft tissue infection. Aggressive antibiotic therapy and elevation with compression are recommended at the earliest signs or symptoms of cellulitis. The drug of choice is penicil-lin or a cephalosporin active against Streptococcus for 5 days. In patients with recurrent cellulitis despite methods to reduced edema, treatment with monthly intramuscular injections of ben-zathine penicillin 1.2 MU, twice-daily erythromycin 250 mg, or penicillin V 1 g daily has proven effective at suppression.138Surgery. A variety of surgical procedures have been devised for the treatment of lymphedema. Surgical treatment involves either excision of extra tissue139 or anastomosis of a lymphatic vessel to another lymphatic or vein.140 In excisional procedures, part or all of the edematous tissue is removed. This does not improve lymphatic drainage but debulks redundant tissue. The microsurgical procedures involve the creation of a lymphati-colymphatic or lymphaticovenous anastomosis, which theo-retically improves lymphatic drainage. No long-term follow-up data are available for these interventions, and therefore opera-tive therapy for lymphedema is not well accepted worldwide. Furthermore, operative intervention has the potential to further obliterate lymphatic channels, worsening the edema.141SUMMARYLymphedema is a chronic condition caused by ineffective lymphatic transport, which results in edema and skin damage. Lymphedema is not curable, but the symptoms and long-term effects can be controlled with a combination of elastic com-pression stockings, limb elevation, pneumatic compression, and massage. Controlling the edema protects the skin and potentially prevents cellulitis.REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Moncada S, Radomski MW, Palmer RM. Endothelium-derived relaxing factor. Identification as nitric oxide and role in the control of vascular tone and platelet function. Biochem Pharmacol. 1988;37:2495-2501.	2.	van Bemmelen PS, Beach K, Bedford G, et al. The mecha-nism of venous valve closure. Its relationship to the velocity of reverse flow. Arch Surg. 1990;125:617-619.	3.	Moneta GL, Strandness DE, Jr. Basic data concerning nonin-vasive vascular testing. Ann Vasc Surg. 1989;3:190-193.	4.	Neglen P, Berry MA, Raju S. Endovascular surgery in the treatment of chronic primary and post-thrombotic iliac vein obstruction. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2000;20(6):560-571.	5.	Bettman MA, Robbins A, Braun SD, et al. Contrast venogra-phy of the leg: diagnostic efficacy, tolerance, and complica-tion rates with ionic and nonionic contrast media. Radiology. 1987;165:113-116.Brunicardi_Ch24_p0981-p1008.indd   100322/02/19   3:01 PM 1004SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	6.	White R. The epidemiology of venous thromboembolism.  Circulation. 2003;107:I4-I8.	7.	Spyropoulos AC, Hussein M, Lin J, et al. Rates of symptom-atic venous thromboembolism in US surgical patients: a ret-rospective administrative database. J Thromb Thrombolysis. 2009;28:458-464.	8.	Heit JA, Cohen AT, Anderson FA. Estimated annual number of incident and recurrent, non-fatal and fatal venous thromboem-bolism (VTE) events in the US. Blood. 2005;106:910.	9.	Pengo V, Lensing AWA, Prins MH, et al. Incidence of chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension after pulmonary embolism. N Engl J Med. 2004;350:2257-2264.	10.	Kahn SR, Ginsberg JS. The post-thrombotic syndrome: current knowledge, controversies and directions for future research. Blood Rev. 2002;16:155-165.	11.	Mohr DN, Silverstein MD, Heit JA, et al. The venous sta-sis syndrome after deep venous thrombosis or pulmonary embolism: a population-based study. Mayo Clin Proc. 2000;75:1249-1256.	12.	Rosendaal FR. Risk factors for venous thrombotic disease. Thromb Haemost. 1999;82:610.	13.	Ageno W, Becattini C, Brighton T, et al. Cardiovascular risk factors and venous thromboembolism: a meta-analysis.  Circulation. 2008;117:93-102.	14.	White R, Zhou H, Romano P. Incidence of idiopathic deep venous thrombosis and secondary thromboembo-lism among ethnic groups in California. Ann Intern Med. 1998;128:737-740.	15.	Bezemer ID, Bare LA, Doggen CJM, et al. Gene variants asso-ciated with deep vein thrombosis. JAMA. 2008;299:1306-1314.	16.	Rogers SO, Jr, Kilaru RK, Hosokawa P, et al. Multivariable predictors of postoperative venous thromboembolic events after general and vascular surgery: results from the Patient Safety in Surgery Study. J Am Coll Surg. 2007;204:1211-1221.	17.	Bahl V, Hu HM, Henke PK, Wakefield TW, Campbell DA, Jr, Caprini JA. A validation study of retrospective venous thromboembolism risk scoring method. Ann Surg. 2010;251:344-350.	18.	Markel A, Manzo RA, Bergelin RO, et al. Pattern and dis-tribution of thrombi in acute venous thrombosis. Arch Surg. 1992;127:305-309.	19.	Nicolaides AN, Kakkar VV, Field ES, et al. The origin of deep vein thrombosis: a venographic study. Br J Radiol. 1971;44:653-663.	20.	Brockman SK, Vasko JS. The pathologic physiology of phleg-masia cerulea dolens. Surgery. 1966;59:997-1007.	21.	Lensing AW, Prandoni P, Brandjes D, et al. Detection of deep-vein thrombosis by real-time B-mode ultrasonography. N Engl J Med. 1989;320:342-345.	22.	O’Leary DH, Kane RA, Chase BM. A prospective study of the efficacy of B-scan sonography in the detection of deep venous thrombosis in the lower extremities. J Clin Ultrasound. 1988;16:1-8.	23.	Mussurakis S, Papaioannou S, Voros D, et al. Compression ultrasonography as a reliable imaging monitor in deep venous thrombosis. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1990;171:233-239.	24.	Habscheid W, Hohmann M, Wilhelm T, et al. Real-time ultra-sound in the diagnosis of acute deep venous thrombosis of the lower extremity. Angiology. 1990;41:599-608.	25.	Comerota AJ, Katz ML, Grossi RJ, et al. The comparative value of noninvasive testing for diagnosis and surveillance of deep vein thrombosis. J Vasc Surg. 1988;7:40-49.	26.	Gomes AS, Webber MM, Buffkin D. Contrast venography vs. radionuclide venography: a study of discrepancies and their possible significance. Radiology. 1982;142:719-728.	27.	Hull R, Hirsh J, Sackett DL, et al. Clinical validity of a nega-tive venogram in patients with clinically suspected venous thrombosis. Circulation. 1981;64:622-625.	28.	Kearon C, Akl E, Comerota A, et al. Antithrombotic ther-apy for venous thromboembolic disease: antithrombotic therapy and prevention of thrombosis. American College of Chest Physicians evidence-based clinical practice guidelines  (9th edition). Chest. 2012;141(2 suppl):e419S-e496S. The most recent American College of Chest Physicians clinical practice guidelines on antithrombotic therapy for venous thromboembolic disease. These recommendations cover multimodality therapies and are based upon an exhaustive review of the literature, including randomized clinical trials.	29.	Raschke RA, Reilly BM, Guidry JR, et al. The weight-based heparin dosing nomogram compared with a standard care nomogram. A randomized controlled trial. Ann Intern Med. 1993;119:874-881.	30.	Hylek EM, Regan S, Henault LE, et al. Challenges to the effective use of unfractionated heparin in the hospital-ized management of acute thrombosis. Arch Intern Med. 2003;163:621-627.	31.	Amiral J, Bridey F, Dreyfus M, et al. Platelet factor 4 com-plexed to heparin is the target for antibodies generated in heparin-induced thrombocytopenia. Thromb Haemost. 1992;68:95-96.	32.	Warkentin TE, Levine MN, Hirsh J, et al. Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia in patients treated with low-molecular-weight heparin or unfractionated heparin. N Engl J Med. 1995;332:1330-1335.	33.	Warkentin TE, Kelton JG. Heparin and platelets. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 1990;4:243-264.	34.	Calaitges JG, Liem TK, Spadone D, et al. The role of heparin-associated antiplatelet antibodies in the outcome of arterial reconstruction. J Vasc Surg. 1999;29:779-786.	35.	Warkentin TE, Kelton JG. A 14-year study of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia. Am J Med. 1996;101:502-507.	36.	Gould MK, Dembitzer AD, Doyle RL, et al. Low-molecular-weight heparins compared with unfractionated heparin for treatment of acute deep venous thrombosis: a meta-anal-ysis of randomized, controlled trials. Ann Intern Med. 1999;130:800-809.	37.	Dolovich LR, Ginsberg JS, Douketis JD, et al. A meta-analysis comparing low-molecular-weight heparins with unfraction-ated heparin in the treatment of venous thromboembolism: examining some unanswered questions regarding location of treatment, product type, and dosing frequency. Arch Intern Med. 2000;160:181-188.	38.	Van Dongen CJJ, van der Belt AGM, Prins MH, et al. Fixed dose subcutaneous low molecular weight heparins versus adjusted dose unfractionated heparin for venous thromboem-bolism. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2004;4:CD001100.	39.	Kikta MJ, Keller MP, Humphrey PW, et al. Can low molecular weight heparins and heparinoids be safely given to patients with heparin-induced thrombocytopenia syndrome? Surgery. 1993;114:705-710.	40.	Koopman MM, Prandoni P, Piovella F, et al. Treatment of venous thrombosis with intravenous unfractionated heparin administered in the hospital as compared with subcutaneous low-molecular-weight heparin administered at home. The Tas-man Study Group. N Engl J Med. 1996;334:682-687.	41.	Levine M, Gent M, Hirsh J, et al. A comparison of low-molecularweight heparin administered primarily at home with unfraction-ated heparin administered in the hospital for proximal deep-vein thrombosis. N Engl J Med. 1996;334:677-681.	42.	Büller HR, Davidson BL, Decousus H, et al. Fondaparinux or enoxaparin for the initial treatment of symptomatic deep venous thrombosis: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. 2004;140:867-873.	43.	The Matisse Investigators. Subcutaneous fondaparinux versus intravenous unfractionated heparin in the initial treatment of pulmonary embolism. N Engl J Med. 2003;349:1695-1702.Brunicardi_Ch24_p0981-p1008.indd   100422/02/19   3:01 PM 1005VENOUS AND LYMPHATIC DISEASECHAPTER 24	44.	Warkentin TE, Maurer BT, Aster RH. Heparin-induced throm-bocytopenia associated with fondaparinux. N Engl J Med. 2007;356:2653-2655.	45.	Kelton JG. The pathophysiology of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia: biological basis for treatment. Chest. 2005;127:9S-20S.	46.	Martin K, Beyer-Westendorf J, Davidson BL, Huisman MV, Sandset PM, Moll S. Use of the direct oral anticoagulants in obese patients: guidance from the SSC of the ISTH. J Thromb Haemost. 2016;14(6):1308-1313.	47.	Schulman S, Shortt B, Robinson M, Eikelboom JW. Adher-ence to anticoagulant treatment with dabigatran in a real-world setting. J Thromb Haemost. 2013;11(7):1295-1299.	48.	Pollack CV, Jr, Reilly PA, Eikelboom J, et al. Idarucizumab for Dabigatran Reversal. N Engl J Med. 2015;373(6):511-520.	49.	Eerenberg ES, Kamphuisen PW, Sijpkens MK, Meijers JC, Buller HR, Levi M. Reversal of rivaroxaban and dabigatran by prothrombin complex concentrate: a randomized, placebo-controlled, crossover study in healthy subjects. Circulation. 2011;124(14):1573-1579.	50.	Holbrook A, Schulman S, Witt DM, et al. Evidence based management of anticoagulant therapy. American College of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guide-lines, 9th ed. Chest. 2012;114:e152S-e184S.	51.	Schulman S, Rhedin A-S, Lindmarker P, et al. A comparison of six weeks with six months of oral anticoagulant therapy after a first episode of venous thromboembolism. N Engl J Med. 1995;332:1661-1665.	52.	Research Committee of the British Thoracic Society. Optimal duration of anticoagulation for deep vein thrombosis and pul-monary embolism. Lancet. 1992;340:873-876.	53.	Levine MN, Hirsh J, Gent M, et al. Optimal duration of oral anticoagulant therapy: a randomized trial comparing four weeks with three months of warfarin in patients with proximal deep vein thrombosis. Thromb Haemost. 1995;74:606-611.	54.	Kearon C, Gent M, Hirsh J, et al. A comparison of three months of anticoagulation with extended anticoagulation for a first episode of idiopathic venous thromboembolism. N Engl J Med. 1999;340:901-907.	55.	Agnelli G, Prandoni P, Santamaria MG, et al. Three months versus one year of oral anticoagulant therapy for idiopathic deep venous thrombosis. N Engl J Med. 2001;345:165-169.	56.	Ridker PM, Goldhaber SZ, Danielson E, et al. Long-term, low-intensity warfarin therapy for the prevention of recurrent venous thromboembolism. N Engl J Med. 2003;348:1425.	57.	Kearon C, Ginsber JS, Kovacs MJ, et al. Comparison of low-intensity warfarin therapy with conventional-intensity warfarin therapy for long-term prevention of recurrent venous thrombo-embolism. N Engl J Med. 2003;349:631-639.	58.	Lee AYY, Levine MN, Baker RI, et al. Low-molecular-weight heparin versus a coumarin for the prevention of recurrent venous thromboembolism in patients with cancer. N Engl J Med. 2003;349:146-153.	59.	Akl EA, Barba M, Rohilla S, et al. Anticoagulation for the long term treatment of venous thromboembolism in patients with cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008;2:CD006650.	60.	Watson LI, Armon MP. Thrombolysis for treatment of acute deep vein thrombosis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2004;4:CD002783.	61.	Vedantham S, Goldhaber S, Julian J, et al. Pharmacomechanical Catheter-Directed Thrombolysis for Deep-Vein Thrombosis. N Engl J Med. 2017;377:2240-2252.	62.	Vedantham S, Goldhaber S, Julian, J, et al. Interventional ther-apy for prevention of the post-thrombotic syndrome: results of the NHLBI-sponsored ATTRACT trial. 2017. Unpublished manuscript.	63.	Decousus H, Leizorovicz A, Parent F, et al. A clinical trial of vena caval filters in the prevention of pulmonary embolism in patients with proximal deep-vein thrombosis. Prévention du Risque d’Embolie Pulmonaire par Interruption Cave Study Group. N Engl J Med. 1998;338:409-415.	64.	Becker DM, Philbrick JT, Selby JB. Inferior vena cava filters. Indications, safety, effectiveness. Arch Intern Med. 1992;152:1985-1994.	65.	Morales JP, Li X, Irony TZ, Ibrahim NG, Moynahan M,  Cavanaugh KJ Jr. Decision analysis of retrievable inferior vena cava filters in patients without pulmonary embolism. J Vasc Surg Venous Lymphat Disord. 2013;1(4):376-384.	66.	Morales JP, Li X, Irony TZ, Ibrahim NG, Moynahan M, Cava-naugh KJ, Jr. Decision analysis of retrievable inferior vena cava filters in patients without pulmonary embolism. J Vasc Surg Venous Lymphat Disord. 2013;1(4):376-384.	67.	Plate G, Ohlin P, Eklof B. Pulmonary embolism in acute ilio-femoral venous thrombosis. Br J Surg. 1985;72:912-915.	68.	Eklof B, Kistner RL, Masuda EM. Surgical treatment of acute iliofemoral deep venous thrombosis. In: Gloviczki P, Yao JST, eds. Handbook of Venous Disorders. New York: Arnold; 2001:202. This chapter reviews outcomes following surgical treatment for acute iliofemoral deep venous thrombo-sis in addition to an illustrative review of surgical technique.	69.	Juhan CM, Alimi YS, Barthelemy PJ, et al. Late results of ilio-femoral venous thrombectomy. J Vasc Surg. 1997;25:417-422.	70.	Schmid C, Zietlow S, Wagner TO, et al. Fulminant pulmonary embolism: symptoms, diagnostics, operative technique, and results. Ann Thorac Surg. 1991;52:1102-1105.	71.	Kieny R, Charpentier A, Kieny MT. What is the place of pulmonary embolectomy today? J Cardiovasc Surg. 1991;32:549-554.	72.	Gulba DC, Schmid C, Borst HG, et al. Medical compared with surgical treatment for massive pulmonary embolism. Lancet. 1994;343:576-577.	73.	Schmitz-Rode T, Janssens U, Schild HH, et al. Fragmentation of massive pulmonary embolism using a pigtail rotation cath-eter. Chest. 1998;114:1427-1436.	74.	Greenfield LJ, Proctor MC, Williams DM, et al. Long-term experience with transvenous catheter pulmonary embolec-tomy. J Vasc Surg. 1993;18:450-457.	75.	Gould MK, Garcia DA, Wren SM, et al. Prevention  of VTE in nonorthopedic surgical patients: antithrombotic therapy and prevention of thrombosis, 9th ed: American College of Chest Physicians evidence-based clinical practice guidelines. Chest. 2012;141(2 suppl): e227S-e277S. The most recent American College of Chest Physicians clinical practice guidelines on prevention of venous thromboembolism in nonorthopedic surgical patients. These recommendations review evidence-based literature regarding perioperative venous thromboembolism prophylaxis.	76.	Mismetti P, Laporte S, Darmon JY, et al. Meta-analysis of low molecular weight heparin in the prevention of venous throm-boembolism in general surgery. Br J Surg. 2001;88:913-930.	77.	Agnelli G, Bergqvist D, Cohen AT, et al. Randomized clinical trial of postoperative fondaparinux versus perioperative dalte-parin for prevention of venous thromboembolism in high-risk abdominal surgery. Br J Surg. 2005;92:1212-1220.	78.	Turpie AG, Bauer KA, Caprini JA, et al. Fondaparinux combined with intermittent pneumatic compression versus intermittent pneumatic compression alone for prevention of venous thrombo-embolism after abdominal surgery: a randomized, double-blind comparison. J Thromb Haemost. 2007;5:1854-1861.	79.	Rogers FB, Shackford SR, Ricci MA, et al. Routine prophy-lactic vena cava filter insertion in severely injured trauma patients decreases the incidence of pulmonary embolism.  J Am Coll Surg. 1995;180:641-647.	80.	Rogers FB, Strindberg G, Shackford SR, et al. Five-year follow-up of prophylactic vena cava filters in high-risk trauma patients. Arch Surg. 1998;133:406-411.Brunicardi_Ch24_p0981-p1008.indd   100522/02/19   3:01 PM 1006SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	81.	Millward SF, Oliva VL, Bell SD, et al. Gunther tulip retriev-able vena cava filter: results from the Registry of the Canadian Interventional Radiology Association. J Vasc Intervent Radiol. 2001;12:1053-1058.	82.	Allen AW, Megargell JL, Brown DB, et al. Venous thrombosis associated with the placement of peripherally inserted central catheters. J Vasc Intervent Radiol. 2000;11:1309-1314.	83.	Chengelis DL, Bendick PJ, Glover JL, et al. Progression of superficial venous thrombosis to deep vein thrombosis. J Vasc Surg. 1996;24:745-749.	84.	Lutter KS, Kerr TM, Roedersheimer LR, et al. Superficial thrombophlebitis diagnosed by duplex scanning. Surgery. 1991;110:42-46.	85.	Di Nisio M, Wichers IM, Middeldorp S. Treatment for superfi-cial thrombophlebitis of the leg. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013(4):CD004982.	86.	Decousus H, Prandoni P, Mismetti P, et al. Fondaparinux for the treatment of superficial-vein thrombosis in the legs. N Engl J Med. 2010;363(13):1222-1232.	87.	Lohr JM, McDevitt DT, Lutter KS, et al. Operative manage-ment of greater saphenous thrombophlebitis involving the saphenofemoral junction. Am J Surg. 1992;164:269-275.	88.	Ascer E, Lorensen E, Pollina RM, et al. Preliminary results of a nonoperative approach to saphenofemoral junction thrombo-phlebitis. J Vasc Surg. 1995;22:616-621.	89.	Horne MK III, May DJ, Alexander HR, et al. Venographic surveillance of tunneled venous access devices in adult oncol-ogy patients. Ann Surg Oncol. 1995;2:174-178.	90.	Landry GL, Liem TK. Endovascular management of Paget-Schroetter syndrome. Vascular. 2007;15:290-296.	91.	Rhee RY, Gloviczki P, Jost C, et al. Acute mesenteric venous thrombosis. In: Gloviczki P, Yao JST, eds. Handbook of Venous Disorders. New York: Arnold; 2001:244.	92.	Morasch MD, Ebaugh JL, Chiou AC, et al. Mesenteric venous thrombosis: a changing clinical entity. J Vasc Surg. 2001;34:680-684.	93.	James AW, Rabl C, Westphalen AC, et al. Portomesenteric venous thrombosis after laparoscopic surgery: a systematic literature review. Arch Surg. 2009;144:520-526.	94.	Bach AM, Hann LE, Brown KT, et al. Portal vein evaluation with US: comparison to angiography combined with CT arte-rial portography. Radiology. 1996;201:149-154.	95.	Burkitt DP. Varicose veins, deep vein thrombosis, and haem-orrhoids: epidemiology and suggested aetiology. Br Med J. 1972;2:556-561.	96.	Brand FN, Dannenberg AL, Abbott RD, et al. The epidemiol-ogy of varicose veins: the Framingham Study. Am J Prev Med. 1988;4:96-101.	97.	Gibson K, Kabnick L, Varithena 013 Investigator G. A mul-ticenter, randomized, placebo-controlled study to evaluate the efficacy and safety of Varithena(R) (polidocanol endove-nous microfoam 1%) for symptomatic, visible varicose veins with saphenofemoral junction incompetence. Phlebology. 2017;32(3):185-193.	98.	Witte ME, Reijnen MM, de Vries JP, Zeebregts CJ. Mechano-chemical Endovenous Occlusion of Varicose Veins Using the ClariVein(R) Device. Surg Technol Int. 2015;26:219-225.	99.	Proebstle TM, Alm J, Dimitri S, et al. The European multi-center cohort study on cyanoacrylate embolization of refluxing great saphenous veins. J Vasc Surg Venous Lymphat Disord. 2015;3(1):2-7.	100.	Lurie F, Creton D, Eklof B, et al. Prospective randomized study of endovenous radiofrequency obliteration (closure) versus ligation and vein stripping (EVOLVeS): two-year follow-up.  Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2005;29:67-73.	101.	Darwood RJ, Theivacumar N, Dellagrammaticas D, et al. Ran-domized clinical trial comparing endovenous laser ablation with surgery for the treatment of primary great saphenous varicose veins. Br J Surg. 2008;95:294-301.	102.	Falanga V. Venous ulceration. J Dermatol Surg Oncol. 1993;19:764-771.	103.	Phillips T, Stanton B, Provan A, et al. A study of the impact of leg ulcers on quality of life: financial, social, and psychologic implications. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1994;31:49-53.	104.	Skin Substitute Consensus Development Panel. Nonoperative management of venous ulcers: evolving role of skin substi-tutes. Vasc Surg. 1999;33:197.	105.	Abenhaim L, Kurz X. The VEINES study (VEnous Insuffi-ciency Epidemiologic and Economic Study): an international cohort study on chronic venous disorders of the leg. VEINES Group. Angiology. 1997;48:59-66.	106.	Clarke H, Smith SR, Vasdekis SN, et al. Role of venous elasticity in the development of varicose veins. Br J Surg. 1989;76:577-580.	107.	Nicolaides AN, Hussein MK, Szendro G, et al. The relation of venous ulceration with ambulatory venous pressure measure-ments. J Vasc Surg. 1993;17:414-419.	108.	Christopoulos DG, Nicolaides AN, Szendro G, et al. Air-pleth-ysmography and the effect of elastic compression on venous hemodynamics of the leg. J Vasc Surg. 1987;5:148-159.	109.	van Bemmelen PS, Bedford G, Beach K, et al. Quantitative segmental evaluation of venous valvular reflux with duplex ultrasound scanning. J Vasc Surg. 1989;10:425-431.	110.	Nehler MR, Porter JM. The lower extremity venous system. Part II: the pathophysiology of chronic venous insufficiency. Perspect Vasc Surg. 1992;5:81-97.	111.	Beidler SK, Douillet CD, Berndt DF, et al. Multiplexed analy-sis of matrix metalloproteinases in leg ulcer tissue of patients with chronic venous insufficiency before and after compres-sion therapy. Wound Repair Regen. 2008;16:642-648.	112.	Beidler SK, Douillet CD, Berndt DF, et al. Inflammatory cyto-kine levels in chronic venous insufficiency ulcer tissue before and after compression therapy. J Vasc Surg. 2009;49:1013-1020.	113.	Nehler MR, Moneta GL, Woodard DM, et al. Perimalleolar subcutaneous tissue pressure effects of elastic compression stockings. J Vasc Surg. 1993;18:783-788.	114.	Dinn E. Treatment of venous ulceration by injection sclero-therapy and compression hosiery: a 5-year study. Phlebology. 1992;7:23-26.	115.	Mayberry JC, Moneta GL, Taylor LM, Jr, et al. Fifteen-year  results of ambulatory compression therapy for chronic venous ulcers. Surgery. 1991;109(5):575-581. This review highlights the impact of compression therapy in venous ulcer therapy.	116.	Falanga V, Margolis D, Alvarez O, et al. Rapid healing of venous ulcers and lack of clinical rejection with an allergenic cultured human skin equivalent. Human Skin Equivalent Investigators Group. Arch Dermatol. 1998;134:293-300.	117.	Phillips TJ. New skin for old: developments in biological skin substitutes [editorial; comment]. Arch Dermatol. 1998;134:344.	118.	Motykie GD, Caprini JA, Arcelus JI, et al. Evaluation of therapeutic compression stockings in the treatment of chronic venous insufficiency. Dermatol Surg. 1999;25:116-120.	119.	Lippmann HI, Fishman LM, Farrar RH, et al. Edema control in the management of disabling chronic venous insufficiency. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 1994;75:436-441.	120.	Rubin JR, Alexander J, Plecha EJ, et al. Unna’s boot vs. polyurethane foam dressings for the treatment of venous ulceration. A randomized prospective study. Arch Surg. 1990;125:489-490.	121.	O’Meara S, Cullum NA, Nelson EA. Compression for venous leg ulcers. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009;1:CD000265.	122.	Vernick SH, Shapiro D, Shaw FD. Legging orthosis for venous and lymphatic insufficiency. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 1987;68:459-461.Brunicardi_Ch24_p0981-p1008.indd   100622/02/19   3:01 PM 1007VENOUS AND LYMPHATIC DISEASECHAPTER 24	123.	Sibbald RG. Apligraf living skin equivalent for healing venous and chronic wounds. J Cutan Med Surg. 1998;3(suppl 1): S1-24-8.	124.	Linton R. The communicating veins of the lower leg and the operative technique for their ligation. Ann Surg. 1938;107:582-593.	125.	Gloviczki P, Bergan JJ, Rhodes JM, Canton LG, Harmsen S, Ilstrup DM. Mid-term results of endoscopic perforator vein interruption for chronic venous insufficiency: lessons learned from the North American Subfascial Endoscopic Perforator Surgery Registry. The North American Study Group. J Vasc Surg. 1999;29(3):489-502. This study reviews registry outcomes following subfacial endoscopic perforator surgery performed across 17 centers in North America.	126.	Vashist MG, Malik V, Singhal N. Role of subfascial endo-scopic perforator surgery (SEPS) in management of perfora-tor incompetence in varicose veins: a prospective randomized study. India J Surg. 2014;76(2):117-123.	127.	van Gent WB, Hop WC, van Praag MC, et al. Conservative versus surgical treatment of venous leg ulcers: a prospective randomized, multicenter trial. J Vasc Surg. 2006;44:563-571.	128.	Gohel MS, Barwell JR, Taylor M, et al. Long term results of compression therapy alone versus compression plus surgery in chronic venous ulceration (ESCHAR): randomized controlled trial. BMJ. 2007;335:83.	129.	Sottiurai VS. Surgical correction of recurrent venous ulcer.  J Cardiovasc Surg. 1991;32:104-109.	130.	Raju S, Fredericks R. Valve reconstruction procedures for non-obstructive venous insufficiency: rationale, techniques, and results in 107 procedures with twoto eight-year follow-up.  J Vasc Surg. 1988;7:301-310.	131.	Raju S, Darcey R, Neglen P. Unexpected major role for venous stenting in deep reflux disease. J Vasc Surg. 2010;51:401-408.	132.	Masuda EM, Kistner RL. Long-term results of venous valve reconstruction: a fourto twenty-one-year follow-up. J Vasc Surg. 1994;19:391-403.	133.	Rockson SG, Miller LT, Senie R, et al. American Cancer Soci-ety Lymphedema Workshop. Workgroup III: diagnosis and management of lymphedema. Cancer. 1998;83:2882-2885.	134.	Yasuhara H, Shigematsu H, Muto T. A study of the advan-tages of elastic stockings for leg lymphedema. Int Angiol. 1996;15:272-277.	135.	Feldman JL, Stout NL, Wanchai A, et al. Intermittent pneu-matic compression therapy: a systematic review. Lymphology. 2012;45:13-25.	136.	Vodder E. Le Drainage Lymphatique, une Novelle Méthode Thérapeutique. Paris: Santé pour tous; 1936.	137.	Ko DS, Lerner R, Klose G, et al. Effective treatment of lymph-edema of the extremities. Arch Surg. 1998;133:452-458.	138.	Stevens DL, Bisno AL, Chambers HF, et al. Practice guide-lines for the diagnosis and management of skin and soft tissue infections. Clin Infect Dis. 2005;41:1373-1406.	139.	Miller TA, Wyatt LE, Rudkin GH. Staged skin and subcutane-ous excision for lymphedema: a favorable report of long-term results. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1998;102:1486-1501.	140.	Baumeister RG, Siuda S. Treatment of lymphedema by micro-surgical lymphatic grafting: what is proved? Plast Reconstr Surg. 1990;85:64-74.	141.	Bernas MJ, Witte CL, Witte MH. The diagnosis and treatment of peripheral lymphedema: draft revision of the 1995 Con-sensus Document of the International Society of Lymphology Executive Committee for discussion at the September 3–7, 2001, XVIII International Congress of Lymphology in Genoa, Italy. Lymphology. 2001;34:84-91.Brunicardi_Ch24_p0981-p1008.indd   100722/02/19   3:01 PM
# Chunk 8927
Brunicardi_Ch24_p0981-p1008.indd   100822/02/19   3:01 PMThis page intentionally left blank

SURGICAL ANATOMYThe esophagus is a muscular tube that starts as the continu-ation of the pharynx and ends as the cardia of the stomach. When the head is in a normal anatomic position, the transi-tion from pharynx to esophagus occurs at the lower border of the sixth cervical vertebra. Topographically this corresponds to the cricoid cartilage anteriorly and the palpable transverse process of the sixth cervical vertebra laterally (Fig. 25-1). The esophagus is firmly attached at its upper end to the cricoid cartilage and at its lower end to the diaphragm; during swal-lowing, the proximal points of fixation move craniad the dis-tance of one cervical vertebral body.The esophagus lies in the midline, with a deviation to the left in the lower portion of the neck and upper portion of the thorax, and returns to the midline in the midportion of the tho-rax near the bifurcation of the trachea (Fig. 25-2). In the lower portion of the thorax, the esophagus again deviates to the left and anteriorly to pass through the diaphragmatic hiatus.Esophagus and Diaphragmatic HerniaBlair A. Jobe, John G. Hunter, and David I. Watson 25chapterSurgical Anatomy1009Physiology1015Swallowing Mechanism / 1015Physiologic Reflux / 1017Assessment of Esophageal  Function1018Tests to Detect Structural  Abnormalities / 1018Tests to Detect Functional  Abnormalities / 1019Videoand Cineradiography / 1028Tests to Detect Increased  Exposure to Gastric Juice / 1028Tests of Duodenogastric Function / 1030Gastroesophageal Reflux  Disease1031The Human Antireflux Mechanism  and the Pathophysiology of Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease / 1032Complications Associated With Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease / 1033Metaplastic (Barrett’s Esophagus) and Neoplastic (Adenocarcinoma) Complications / 1035Respiratory Complications / 1035Surgical Therapy for Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease / 1038Primary Antireflux Repairs / 1040Giant Diaphragmatic  (Hiatal) Hernias1045Incidence and Etiology / 1045Clinical Manifestations / 1047Diagnosis / 1047Pathophysiology / 1048Treatment / 1048Diaphragmatic Repair / 1048The Short Esophagus and PEH / 1049Results / 1049Schatzki’s Ring1049Scleroderma1050Eosinophilic Esophagitis1051Symptoms / 1051Signs / 1051Pathology / 1051Treatment / 1051Motility Disorders of the  Pharynx and Esophagus1052Clinical Manifestations / 1052Motility Disorders of the Pharynx and Upper Esophagus—Transit  Dysphagia / 1052Diagnostic Assessment of the Cricopharyngeal Segment / 1052Motility Disorders of the Esophageal  Body and Lower Esophageal  Sphincter / 1055Operations for Esophageal Motor Disorders and Diverticula1060Long Esophageal Myotomy for Motor Disorders of the Esophageal Body / 1060Myotomy of the Lower Esophageal Sphincter (Heller Myotomy) / 1063Open Esophageal Myotomy / 1065Laparoscopic Cardiomyotomy / 1065Per Oral Endoscopic  Myotomy (POEM) / 1065Outcome Assessment of the Therapy for Achalasia / 1065Esophageal Resection for End-Stage Motor Disorders of the Esophagus / 1068Carcinoma of the Esophagus1068Clinical Manifestations / 1068General Approach to  Esophageal Cancer / 1069Staging of Esophageal Cancer / 1069Clinical Approach to Carcinoma of the Esophagus and Cardia / 1070Palliation of Esophageal Cancer / 1074Surgical Treatment / 1074Comparative Studies of Esophagectomy Technique / 1077Alternative Therapies / 1077Sarcoma of the Esophagus1078Benign Tumors and Cysts1080Leiomyoma / 1081Esophageal Cyst / 1083Esophageal Perforation1083Diagnosis / 1083Management / 1084Mallory-Weiss Syndrome1085Caustic Injury1086Pathology / 1086Clinical Manifestations / 1086Treatment / 1086Acquired Fistula1088Techniques of Esophageal Reconstruction1089Partial Esophageal Resection / 1089Reconstruction After Total  Esophagectomy / 1089Composite Reconstruction / 1090Vagal Sparing Esophagectomy  With Colon Interposition / 1090Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   100901/03/19   6:01 PM 1010abcdeA  BKey Points1	Benign esophageal disease is common and is best evaluated with thorough physiologic testing (high resolution esopha-geal motility, 24-hour ambulatory pH measurement, and/or esophageal impedance testing) and anatomic testing (esoph-agoscopy, video esophagography, and/or computed tomog-raphy [CT] scanning).2	Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is the most com-mon disease of the gastrointestinal tract for which patients seek medical therapy. When GERD symptoms (heartburn, regurgitation, chest pain, and/or supraesophageal symptoms) are troublesome despite adequately dosed PPI, surgical cor-rection may be indicated.3	Barrett’s esophagus is the transformation of the distal esoph-ageal epithelium from squamous to a specialized columnar epithelium capable of further neoplastic progression. The detection of Barrett’s esophagus on endoscopy and biopsy increases the future risk of cancer by >40x compared to indi-viduals without Barrett’s esophagus.4	Giant hiatal hernia, otherwise known as paraesophageal her-nia, should be repaired when symptomatic or associated with iron deficiency anemia. Laparoscopic hiatal hernia repair with fundoplication is the most common approach to repair.5	Achalasia is the most common primary esophageal motor disorder. It is characterized by an absence of peristalsis and a hypertensive nonrelaxing lower esophageal sphincter. It is best treated with laparoscopic Heller myotomy and partial fundoplication.6	Most esophageal cancer presents with dysphagia, at which time it has invaded the muscularis of the esophagus and is often associated with lymph node metastases. The preferred treatment at this stage is multimodality therapy with chemo-radiation therapy followed by open or minimally invasive esophagectomy.Figure 25-1. A. Topographic relationships of the cervical esophagus: (a) hyoid bone, (b) thyroid cartilage, (c) cricoid cartilage, (d) thyroid gland, (e) sternoclavicular.  B. Lateral radio-graphic appearance with landmarks identified as labeled in A. The location of C6 is also included (f). (Reproduced with permission from Shields TW: General Thoracic Surgery, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger; 1989.)Three normal areas of esophageal narrowing are evident on the barium esophagogram or during esophagoscopy. The uppermost narrowing is located at the entrance into the esopha-gus and is caused by the cricopharyngeal muscle. Its luminal diameter is 1.5 cm, and it is the narrowest point of the esopha-gus. The middle narrowing is due to an indentation of the ante-rior and left lateral esophageal wall caused by the crossing of the left main stem bronchus and aortic arch. The luminal diameter at this point is 1.6 cm. The lowermost narrowing is at the hiatus of the diaphragm and is caused by the gastroesophageal sphincter mechanism. The luminal diameter at this point varies somewhat, depending on the distention of the esophagus by the passage of food, but has been measured at 1.6 to 1.9 cm. These normal constrictions tend to hold up swallowed foreign objects, and the overlying mucosa is subject to injury by swallowed corrosive liquids due to their slow passage through these areas.Figure 25-3 shows the average distance in centimeters measured during endoscopic examination between the incisor teeth and the cricopharyngeus, aortic arch, and cardia of the stomach. Manometrically, the length of the esophagus between the lower border of the cricopharyngeus and upper border of the lower sphincter varies according to the height of the individual.Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   101001/03/19   6:01 PM 1011ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25ABFigure 25-2. Barium esophagogram. A. Posterior-anterior view. White arrow shows deviation to left. Black arrow shows return to midline. B. Lateral view. Black arrow shows anterior deviation. (Reproduced with permission from Shields TW: General Thoracic Surgery, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger; 1989.)Pharynx24–26cmUpper sphincter(C6)40cm38cmLower sphincter(T11)15cm14cmAortic arch(T4)25cm 23cmIncisor teethFigure 25-3. Important clinical endoscopic measurements of the esophagus in adults. (Reproduced with permission from Shields TW: General Thoracic Surgery, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger; 1989.) Superior pharyngeal constrictor m.Middle pharyngeal constrictor m.Inferior pharyngeal constrictor m.Cricopharyngeus m.EsophagusBAFigure 25-4. External muscles of the pharynx. A. Posterolateral view. B. Posterior view. Dotted line represents usual site of myotomy. (Reproduced with permission from Shields TW: General Thoracic Surgery, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger; 1989.)The pharyngeal musculature consists of three broad, flat, overlapping fan-shaped constrictors (Fig. 25-4). The opening of the esophagus is collared by the cricopharyngeal muscle, which arises from both sides of the cricoid cartilage of the lar-ynx and forms a continuous transverse muscle band without an interruption by a median raphe. The fibers of this muscle Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   101101/03/19   6:02 PM 1012SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIblend inseparably with those of the inferior pharyngeal constric-tor above and the inner circular muscle fibers of the esophagus below. Some investigators believe that the cricopharyngeus is part of the inferior constrictor; that is, that the inferior constric-tor has two parts, an upper or retrothyroid portion having diago-nal fibers, and a lower or retrocricoid portion having transverse fibers. Keith in 1910 showed that these two parts of the same muscle serve totally different functions. The retrocricoid portion serves as the upper sphincter of the esophagus and relaxes when the retrothyroid portion contracts, to force the swallowed bolus from the pharynx into the esophagus.The cervical portion of the esophagus is approximately 5 cm long and descends between the trachea and the vertebral column, from the level of the sixth cervical vertebra to the level of the interspace between the first and second thoracic verte-brae posteriorly, or the level of the suprasternal notch anteriorly. The recurrent laryngeal nerves lie in the right and left grooves between the trachea and the esophagus. The left recurrent nerve lies somewhat closer to the esophagus than the right, owing to the slight deviation of the esophagus to the left, and the more lateral course of the right recurrent nerve around the right sub-clavian artery. Laterally, on the left and right sides of the cervi-cal esophagus are the carotid sheaths and the lobes of the thyroid gland.The thoracic portion of the esophagus is approximately  20 cm long. It starts at the thoracic inlet. In the upper portion of the thorax, it is in intimate relationship with the posterior wall of the trachea and the prevertebral fascia. Just above the tracheal bifurcation, the esophagus passes to the right of the aorta. This anatomic positioning can cause a notch indentation in its left lateral wall on a barium swallow radiogram. Immediately below this notch, the esophagus crosses both the bifurcation of the trachea and the left main stem bronchus, owing to the slight deviation of the terminal portion of the trachea to the right by the aorta (Fig. 25-5). From there down, the esophagus passes over the posterior surface of the subcarinal lymph nodes (LNs), and then descends over the pericardium of the left atrium to reach the diaphragmatic hiatus (Fig. 25-6). From the bifurcation of the trachea downward, both the vagal nerves and the esophageal nerve plexus lie on the muscular wall of the esophagus.Dorsally, the thoracic esophagus follows the curvature of the spine and remains in close contact with the vertebral bod-ies. From the eighth thoracic vertebra downward, the esopha-gus moves vertically away from the spine to pass through the hiatus of the diaphragm. The thoracic duct passes through the hiatus of the diaphragm on the anterior surface of the verte-bral column behind the aorta and under the right crus. In the thorax, the thoracic duct lies dorsal to the esophagus between the azygos vein on the right and the descending thoracic aorta on the left.The abdominal portion of the esophagus is approximately 2 cm long and includes a portion of the lower esophageal sphincter (LES). It starts as the esophagus passes through the diaphragmatic hiatus and is surrounded by the phrenoesopha-geal membrane, a fibroelastic ligament arising from the subdia-phragmatic fascia as a continuation of the transversalis fascia lining the abdomen (Fig. 25-7). The upper leaf of the membrane attaches itself in a circumferential fashion around the esopha-gus, about 1 to 2 cm above the level of the hiatus. These fibers blend in with the elastic-containing adventitia of the abdominal esophagus and the cardia of the stomach. This portion of the esophagus is subjected to the positive-pressure environment of the abdomen.The musculature of the esophagus can be divided into an outer longitudinal and an inner circular layer. The upper 2 to  6 cm of the esophagus contains only striated muscle fibers. From then on, smooth muscle fibers gradually become more abundant. Most clinically significant esophageal motility dis-orders involve only the smooth muscle in the lower two-thirds of the esophagus. When a long surgical esophageal myotomy is indicated, the incision needs to extend only this distance.The longitudinal muscle fibers originate from a crico-esophageal tendon arising from the dorsal upper edge of the anteriorly located cricoid cartilage. The two bundles of mus-cle diverge and meet in the midline on the posterior wall of the esophagus about 3 cm below the cricoid (see Fig. 25-4). From this point on, the entire circumference of the esophagus is cAThymusPericardiumSuperior vena cavaTracheal carinaRight main stembronchusEsophagusAscending aortaLeft main stem bronchusBottom of aortic archDescendingaortaIVBaebdFigure 25-5. A. Cross-section of the thorax at the level of the tracheal bifurcation. B. Computed tomographic scan at same level viewed from above: (a) ascending aorta, (b) descending aorta, (c) tracheal carina, (d) esophagus, (e) pulmonary artery. (Reproduced with permission from Shields TW: General Thoracic Surgery, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger; 1989.)Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   101201/03/19   6:02 PM 1013ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25BAPericardiumRight ventricleRight atriumPericardiumPleuraVIIPleuraAortaEsophagusLeft atriumLeft ventriclefdecabgFigure 25-6. A. Cross-section of the thorax at the midleft atrial level. B. Computed tomographic scan at same level viewed from above: (a) aorta, (b) esophagus, (c) left atrium, (d) right atrium, (e) left ventricle, (f) right ventricle, (g) pulmonary vein. (Reproduced with permission from Shields TW: General Thoracic Surgery, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger; 1989.)Phreno-esophageal membrane(Ascending leaf)ParietalperitoneumVisceralperitoneumDiaphragmPara-esophageal fat padPhreno-esophageal membrane(Descending leaf)Figure 25-7. Attachments and structure of the phrenoesophageal membrane. Transversalis fascia lies just above the parietal peri-toneum. (Reproduced with permission from Shields TW: General Thoracic Surgery, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger; 1989.)covered by a layer of longitudinal muscle fibers. This configura-tion of the longitudinal muscle fibers around the most proximal part of the esophagus leaves a V-shaped area in the posterior wall covered only with circular muscle fibers. Contraction of the longitudinal muscle fibers shortens the esophagus. The cir-cular muscle layer of the esophagus is thicker than the outer longitudinal layer. In situ, the geometry of the circular muscle is helical and makes the peristalsis of the esophagus assume a wormlike drive, as opposed to segmental and sequential squeez-ing. As a consequence, severe motor abnormalities of the esoph-agus assume a corkscrew-like pattern on the barium swallow radiogram.The cervical portion of the esophagus receives its main blood supply from the inferior thyroid artery. The thoracic por-tion receives its blood supply from the bronchial arteries, with 75% of individuals having one right-sided and two left-sided branches. Two esophageal branches arise directly from the aorta. The abdominal portion of the esophagus receives its blood supply from the ascending branch of the left gastric artery and from inferior phrenic arteries (Fig. 25-8). On entering the wall of the esophagus, the arteries assume a T-shaped division to form a longitudinal plexus, giving rise to an intramural vascular network in the muscular and submucosal layers. As a conse-quence, the esophagus can be mobilized from the stomach to the level of the aortic arch without fear of devascularization and ischemic necrosis. Caution, however, should be exercised as to the extent of esophageal mobilization in patients who have had a previous thyroidectomy with ligation of the inferior thyroid arteries proximal to the origin of the esophageal branches.Blood from the capillaries of the esophagus flows into a submucosal venous plexus, and then into a periesophageal Left gastric arteryRight bronchialartery         Inferior thyroid arterySuperior leftbronchial arteryInferior leftbronchial arteryAortic esophagealarteriesAscending branches ofleft gastric artery   Esophageal branchFigure 25-8. Arterial blood supply of the esophagus. (Reproduced with permission from Shields TW: General Thoracic Surgery, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger; 1989.)Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   101301/03/19   6:02 PM 1014SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIInferior thyroid veinsAccessory azygous veinHemiazygous veinShort       gastric  veinsSplenic veinSuperior mesenteric vein                   Portal vein Coronary vein  Azygous vein  Figure 25-9. Venous drainage of the esophagus. (Reproduced with permission from Shields TW: General Thoracic Surgery, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger; 1989.)Left vagus nerveLeft recurrentlaryngeal nerveThoracic chainLeft or anteriorvagal trunkRight or posterior vagal trunkAnterior esophagealplexusRight recurrentlaryngeal nerveRight vagus nerveRecurrent laryngealnervesFigure 25-10. Innervation of the esophagus. (Reproduced with permission from Shields TW: General Thoracic Surgery, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger; 1989.)Internal jugularnodesParatrachealnodesSubcarinal nodesInferior paraesophagealnodesParahiatal nodes    Splenic arterynodesCeliac artery nodes  Hepatic artery  nodesLeft gastric artery nodesPulmonary hilarnodesSuperiorparaesophageal nodesFigure 25-11. Lymphatic drainage of the esophagus. (Reproduced with permission from DeMeester TR, Barlow AP. Surgery and cur-rent management for cancer of the esophagus and cardia: Part I, Curr Probl Surg. 1988 Jul;25(7):475-531.)venous plexus from which the esophageal veins originate. In the cervical region, the esophageal veins empty into the inferior thy-roid vein; in the thoracic region, they empty into the bronchial, azygos, or hemiazygos veins; and in the abdominal region, they empty into the coronary vein (Fig. 25-9). The submucosal venous networks of the esophagus and stomach are in continuity with each other, and, in patients with portal venous obstruction, this communication functions as a collateral pathway for portal blood to enter the superior vena cava via the azygos vein.The parasympathetic innervation of the pharynx and esophagus is provided mainly by the vagus nerves. The con-strictor muscles of the pharynx receive branches from the pharyngeal plexus, which is on the posterior lateral surface of the middle constrictor muscle, and is formed by pharyngeal branches of the vagus nerves with a small contribution from cra-nial nerves IX and XI (Fig. 25-10). The cricopharyngeal sphinc-ter and the cervical portion of the esophagus receive branches from both recurrent laryngeal nerves, which originate from the vagus nerves—the right recurrent nerve at the lower margin of the subclavian artery and the left at the lower margin of the aortic arch. They are slung dorsally around these vessels and ascend in the groove between the esophagus and trachea, giving branches to each. Damage to these nerves interferes not only with the function of the vocal cords but also with the function of the cricopharyngeal sphincter and the motility of the cervical esophagus, predisposing the individual to pulmonary aspiration on swallowing.Afferent visceral sensory pain fibers from the esophagus end without synapse in the first four segments of the thoracic spinal cord, using a combination of sympathetic and vagal path-ways. These pathways are also occupied by afferent visceral sensory fibers from the heart; hence, both organs have similar symptomatology.The lymphatics located in the submucosa of the esopha-gus are so dense and interconnected that they constitute a single plexus (Fig. 25-11). There are more lymph vessels than blood capillaries in the submucosa. Lymph flow in the submucosal plexus runs in a longitudinal direction, and, on injection of a contrast medium, the longitudinal spread is seen to be about six times that of the transverse spread. In the upper two-thirds of the esophagus, the lymphatic flow is mostly cephalad, and, in the lower third, caudad. In the thoracic portion of the esophagus, Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   101401/03/19   6:02 PM 1015ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25the submucosal lymph plexus extends over a long distance in a longitudinal direction before penetrating the muscle layer to enter lymph vessels in the adventitia. As a consequence of this nonsegmental lymph drainage, a primary tumor can extend for a considerable length superiorly or inferiorly in the submucosal plexus. Consequently, free tumor cells can follow the submu-cosal lymphatic plexus in either direction for a long distance before they pass through the muscularis and on into the regional LNs. The cervical esophagus has more direct segmental lymph drainage into the regional nodes, and, as a result, lesions in this portion of the esophagus have less submucosal extension and a more regionalized lymphatic spread.The efferent lymphatics from the cervical esophagus drain into the paratracheal and deep cervical LNs, and those from the upper thoracic esophagus empty mainly into the paratracheal LNs. Efferent lymphatics from the lower thoracic esophagus drain into the subcarinal nodes and nodes in the inferior pulmo-nary ligaments. The superior gastric nodes receive lymph not only from the abdominal portion of the esophagus, but also from the adjacent lower thoracic segment.PHYSIOLOGYSwallowing MechanismThe act of alimentation requires the passage of food and drink from the mouth into the stomach. One-third of this distance con-sists of the mouth and hypopharynx, and two-thirds is made up by the esophagus. To comprehend the mechanics of alimenta-tion, it is useful to visualize the gullet as a mechanical model in which the tongue and pharynx function as a piston pump with three valves, and the body of the esophagus and cardia function as a worm-drive pump with a single valve. The three valves in the pharyngeal cylinder are the soft palate, epiglottis, and cricopharyngeus. The valve of the esophageal pump is the LES. Failure of the valves or the pumps leads to abnormali-ties in swallowing—that is, difficulty in food propulsion from mouth to stomach—or regurgitation of gastric contents into the esophagus or pharynx.Food is taken into the mouth in a variety of bite sizes, where it is broken up, mixed with saliva, and lubricated. Once initiated, swallowing is entirely a reflex act. When food is ready for swallowing, the tongue, acting like a piston, moves the bolus into the posterior oropharynx and forces it into the hypopharynx (Fig. 25-12). Concomitantly with the posterior movement of the tongue, the soft palate is elevated, thereby closing the passage between the oropharynx and nasopharynx. This partitioning prevents pressure generated in the oropharynx from being dissipated through the nose. When the soft palate is paralyzed, for example, after a cerebrovascular accident, food is commonly regurgitated into the nasopharynx. During swal-lowing, the hyoid bone moves upward and anteriorly, elevating the larynx and opening the retrolaryngeal space, bringing the epiglottis under the tongue (see Fig. 25-12). The backward tilt of the epiglottis covers the opening of the larynx to prevent aspi-ration. The entire pharyngeal part of swallowing occurs within 1.5 seconds.During swallowing, the pressure in the hypopharynx rises abruptly, to at least 60 mmHg, due to the backward movement of the tongue and contraction of the posterior pharyngeal con-strictors. A sizable pressure difference develops between the hypopharyngeal pressure and the less-than-atmospheric mid-esophageal or intrathoracic pressure (Fig. 25-13). This pressure 1. Elevation of tongue2. Posterior movement of tongue3. Elevation of soft palate4. Elevation of hyoid5. Elevation of larynx6. Tilting of epiglottis123456Figure 25-12. Sequence of events during the oropharyngeal phase of swallowing. (Reproduced with permission from Zuidema GD, Orringer MB: Shackelford’s Surgery of the Alimentary Tract, 3rd ed. Vol 1. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier/Saunders; 1991.)gradient speeds the movement of food from the hypopharynx into the esophagus when the cricopharyngeus or upper esopha-geal sphincter relaxes. The bolus is both propelled by peristaltic contraction of the posterior pharyngeal constrictors and sucked into the thoracic esophagus. Critical to receiving the bolus is the compliance of the cervical esophagus; when compliance is lost due to muscle pathology, dysphagia can result. The upper esophageal sphincter closes within 0.5 seconds of the initiation of the swallow, with the immediate closing pressure reaching Pressure (mm Hg)% Esophagus length100–10–505101520253035408060Upright position40200DESGECPAirFigure 25-13. Resting pressure profile of the foregut showing the pressure differential between the atmospheric pharyngeal pressure (P) and the less-than-atmospheric midesophageal pressure (E) and greater-than-atmospheric intragastric pressure (G), with the inter-posed high-pressure zones of the cricopharyngeus (C) and distal esophageal sphincter (DES). The necessity for relaxation of the cri-copharyngeus and DES pressure to move a bolus into the stomach is apparent. Esophageal work occurs when a bolus is pushed from the midesophageal area (E), with a pressure less than atmospheric, into the stomach, which has a pressure greater than atmospheric (G). (Reproduced with permission from Waters PF, DeMeester TR: Foregut motor disorders and their surgical managemen, Med Clin North Am. 1981 Nov;65(6):1235-1268.)Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   101501/03/19   6:02 PM 1016SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II0102030405060mmHgSwallowSeconds01020304050SecondsSeconds01020304050Seconds01020304050Seconds01020304050StomachHigh pressure zoneEsophageal bodyCricopharyngeusPharynxFigure 25-14. Intraluminal esophageal pressures in response to swallowing. (Reproduced with permission from Waters PF, DeMeester TR: Foregut motor disorders and their surgical man-agemen, Med Clin North Am. 1981 Nov;65(6):1235-1268.)approximately twice the resting level of 30 mmHg. The postre-laxation contraction continues down the esophagus as a peri-staltic wave (Fig. 25-14). The high closing pressure and the initiation of the peristaltic wave prevents reflux of the bolus from the esophagus back into the pharynx. After the peristaltic wave has passed farther down the esophagus, the pressure in the upper esophageal sphincter returns to its resting level.Swallowing can be started at will, or it can be reflexively elicited by the stimulation of areas in the mouth and pharynx, among them the anterior and posterior tonsillar pillars or the posterior lateral walls of the hypopharynx. The afferent sen-sory nerves of the pharynx are the glossopharyngeal nerves and the superior laryngeal branches of the vagus nerves. Once aroused by stimuli entering via these nerves, the swallowing center in the medulla coordinates the complete act of swallow-ing by discharging impulses through cranial nerves V, VII, X, XI, and XII, as well as the motor neurons of C1 to C3. Dis-charges through these nerves occur in a rather specific pattern and last for approximately 0.5 seconds. Little is known about the organization of the swallowing center, except that it can trigger swallowing after a variety of different inputs, but the response is always a rigidly ordered pattern of outflow. Following a cere-brovascular accident, this coordinated outflow may be altered, causing mild to severe abnormalities of swallowing. In more severe injury, swallowing can be grossly disrupted, leading to repetitive aspiration.The striated muscles of the cricopharyngeus and the upper one-third of the esophagus are activated by efferent motor fibers distributed through the vagus nerve and its recurrent laryngeal branches. The integrity of innervation is required for the cri-copharyngeus to relax in coordination with the pharyngeal contraction, and resume its resting tone once a bolus has entered the upper esophagus. Operative damage to the innervation can interfere with laryngeal, cricopharyngeal, and upper esophageal function, and predispose the patient to aspiration.The pharyngeal activity in swallowing initiates the esoph-ageal phase. The body of the esophagus functions as a worm-drive propulsive pump due to the helical arrangement of its circular muscles, and it is responsible for transferring a bolus of food into the stomach. The esophageal phases of swallow-ing represent esophageal work done during alimentation, in that food is moved into the stomach from a negative-pressure environment of –6 mmHg intrathoracic pressure, to a positive-pressure environment of 6 mmHg intra-abdominal pressure, or over a gradient of 12 mmHg (see Fig. 25-13). Effective and coordinated smooth muscle function in the lower one-third of the esophagus is therefore important in pumping the food across this gradient.The peristaltic wave generates an occlusive pressure vary-ing from 30 to 120 mmHg (see Fig. 25-14). The wave rises to a peak in 1 second, lasts at the peak for about 0.5 seconds, and then subsides in about 1.5 seconds. The whole course of the rise and fall of occlusive pressure may occupy one point in the esophagus for 3 to 5 seconds. The peak of a primary peri-staltic contraction initiated by a swallow (primary peristalsis) moves down the esophagus at 2 to 4 cm/s and reaches the distal esophagus about 9 seconds after swallowing starts. Consecutive swallows produce similar primary peristaltic waves, but when the act of swallowing is rapidly repeated, the esophagus remains relaxed and the peristaltic wave occurs only after the last move-ment of the pharynx. Progress of the wave in the esophagus is caused by sequential activation of its muscles, initiated by effer-ent vagal nerve fibers arising in the swallowing center.Continuity of the esophageal muscle is not necessary for sequential activation if the nerves are intact. If the muscles, but not the nerves, are cut across, the pressure wave begins dis-tally below the cut as it dies out at the proximal end above the cut. This allows a sleeve resection of the esophagus to be done without destroying its normal function. Afferent impulses from receptors within the esophageal wall are not essential for prog-ress of the coordinated wave. Afferent nerves, however, do go to the swallowing center from the esophagus because if the esoph-agus is distended at any point, a contraction wave begins with a forceful closure of the upper esophageal sphincter and sweeps down the esophagus. This secondary contraction occurs without any movements of the mouth or pharynx. Secondary peristalsis can occur as an independent local reflex to clear the esophagus of ingested material left behind after the passage of the primary wave. Current studies suggest that secondary peristalsis is not as common as once thought.Despite the powerful occlusive pressure, the propulsive force of the esophagus is relatively feeble. If a subject attempts to swallow a bolus attached by a string to a counterweight, the maximum weight that can be overcome is 5 to 10 g. Orderly contractions of the muscular wall and anchoring of the esopha-gus at its inferior end are necessary for efficient aboral propul-sion to occur. Loss of the inferior anchor, as occurs with a large hiatal hernia, can lead to inefficient propulsion.The LES provides a pressure barrier between the esopha-gus and stomach and acts as the valve on the worm-drive pump of the esophageal body. Although an anatomically distinct LES has been difficult to identify, microdissection studies show that, in humans, the sphincter-like function is related to the Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   101601/03/19   6:02 PM 1017ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25Gastro-esophagealmuscular ringObliquefibersGreater curvaturewall thicknessLesser curvaturewall thicknessAnterior wall thicknessPhreno-esophagealmembraneSemi-circularfibers50-0-20--50-0 mm-20-50-0 mm-20Figure 25-15. Wall thickness and orientation of fibers on micro-dissection of the cardia. At the junction of the esophageal tube and gastric pouch, there is an oblique muscular ring composed of an increased muscle mass inside the inner muscular layer. On the lesser curve side of the cardia, the muscle fibers of the inner layer are oriented transversely and form semicircular muscle clasps. On the greater curve side of the cardia, these muscle fibers form oblique loops that encircle the distal end of the cardia and gastric fundus. Both the semicircular muscle clasps and the oblique fibers of the fundus contract in a circular manner to close the cardia. (Reproduced with permission from Glenn WWL: Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, 4th ed. Norwalk, CT: Appleton-Century-Crofts; 1983.)architecture of the muscle fibers at the junction of the esoph-ageal tube with the gastric pouch (Fig. 25-15). The sphincter actively remains closed to prevent reflux of gastric contents into the esophagus and opens by a relaxation that coincides with a pharyngeal swallow (see Fig. 25-14). The LES pressure returns to its resting level after the peristaltic wave has passed through the esophagus. Consequently, reflux of gastric juice that may occur through the open valve during a swallow is cleared back into the stomach.If the pharyngeal swallow does not initiate a peristaltic con-traction, then the coincident relaxation of the LES is unguarded and reflux of gastric juice can occur. This may be an explanation for the observation of spontaneous lower esophageal relaxation, thought by some to be a causative factor in gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). The power of the worm-drive pump of the esophageal body is insufficient to force open a valve that does not relax. In dogs, a bilateral cervical parasympathetic blockade abolishes the relaxation of the LES that occurs with pharyngeal swallowing or distention of the esophagus. Conse-quently, vagal function appears to be important in coordinating the relaxation of the LES with esophageal contraction.The antireflux mechanism in human beings is composed of three components: a mechanically effective LES, efficient esophageal clearance, and an adequately functioning gastric reservoir. A defect of any one of these three components can lead to increased esophageal exposure to gastric juice and the development of mucosal injury.Physiologic RefluxOn 24-hour esophageal pH monitoring, healthy individuals have occasional episodes of gastroesophageal reflux. This physi-ologic reflux is more common when awake and in the upright position than during sleep in the supine position. When reflux of gastric juice occurs, normal subjects rapidly clear the acid gastric juice from the esophagus regardless of their position.There are several explanations for the observation that physiologic reflux in normal subjects is more common when they are awake and in the upright position than during sleep in the supine position. First, reflux episodes occur in healthy vol-unteers primarily during transient losses of the gastroesophageal barrier, which may be due to a relaxation of the LES or intra-gastric pressure overcoming sphincter pressure. Gastric juice can also reflux when a swallow-induced relaxation of the LES is not protected by an oncoming peristaltic wave. The average frequency of these “unguarded moments” or of transient losses of the gastroesophageal barrier is far less while asleep and in the supine position than while awake and in the upright posi-tion. Consequently, there are fewer opportunities for reflux to occur in the supine position. Second, in the upright position, there is a 12-mmHg pressure gradient between the resting, posi-tive intra-abdominal pressure measured in the stomach and the most negative intrathoracic pressure measured in the esophagus at midthoracic level. This gradient favors the flow of gastric juice up into the thoracic esophagus when upright. The gradi-ent diminishes in the supine position. Third, the LES pressure in normal subjects is significantly higher in the supine posi-tion than in the upright position. This is due to the apposition of the hydrostatic pressure of the abdomen to the abdominal portion of the sphincter when supine. In the upright position, the abdominal pressure surrounding the sphincter is negative compared with atmospheric pressure, and, as expected, the abdominal pressure gradually increases the more caudally it is measured. This pressure gradient tends to move the gastric con-tents toward the cardia and encourages the occurrence of reflux into the esophagus when the individual is upright. In contrast, in the supine position, the gastroesophageal pressure gradient diminishes, and the abdominal hydrostatic pressure under the diaphragm increases, causing an increase in sphincter pressure and a more competent cardia.The LES has intrinsic myogenic tone, which is modu-lated by neural and hormonal mechanisms. α-Adrenergic neu-rotransmitters or β-blockers stimulate the LES, and α-blockers and β-stimulants decrease its pressure. It is not clear to what extent cholinergic nerve activity controls LES pressure. The vagus nerve carries both excitatory and inhibitory fibers to the esophagus and sphincter. The hormones gastrin and motilin have been shown to increase LES pressure; and cholecystokinin, estrogen, glucagon, progesterone, somatostatin, and secretin decrease LES pressure. The peptides bombesin, l-enkephalin, and substance P increase LES pressure; and calcitonin gene-related peptide, gastric inhibitory peptide, neuropeptide Y, and vasoactive intestinal polypeptide decrease LES pressure. Some pharmacologic agents such as antacids, cholinergics, agonists, domperidone, metoclopramide, and prostaglandin F2 are known to increase LES pressure; and anticholinergics, barbiturates, cal-cium channel blockers, caffeine, diazepam, dopamine, meperi-dine, prostaglandin E1 and E2, and theophylline decrease LES pressure. Peppermint, chocolate, coffee, ethanol, and fat are all associated with decreased LES pressure and may be responsible for esophageal symptoms after a sumptuous meal.Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   101701/03/19   6:02 PM 1018SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIASSESSMENT OF ESOPHAGEAL FUNCTIONA thorough understanding of the patient’s underlying anatomic and functional deficits before making therapeutic decisions is fundamental to the successful treatment of esophageal disease. The diagnostic tests, as presently used, may be divided into four broad groups: (a) tests to detect structural abnormalities of the esophagus; (b) tests to detect functional abnormalities of the esophagus; (c) tests to detect increased esophageal expo-sure to gastric juice; and (d) tests of duodenogastric function as they relate to esophageal disease.Tests to Detect Structural AbnormalitiesEndoscopic Evaluation. The first diagnostic test in patients with suspected esophageal disease is usually upper gastrointesti-nal endoscopy. This allows assessment and biopsy of the mucosa of the stomach and the esophagus, as well as the diagnosis and assessment of obstructing lesions in the upper gastrointestinal tract. In any patient complaining of dysphagia, esophagoscopy is indicated, even in the face of a normal radiographic study.For the initial endoscopic assessment, the flexible fiber-optic esophagoscope is the instrument of choice because of its technical ease, patient acceptance, and the ability to simultane-ously assess the stomach and duodenum. Rigid endoscopy is now only rarely required, mainly for the disimpaction of diffi-cult foreign bodies impacted in the esophagus, and few individ-uals now have the skill set and experience to use this equipment.When GERD is the suspected diagnosis, particular atten-tion should be paid to detecting the presence of esophagitis and Barrett’s columnar-lined esophagus (CLE). When endoscopic esophagitis is seen, severity and the length of esophagitis involved are recorded. Whilst many different grading systems have been proposed, the commonest system now in use is the Los Angeles (LA) grading system. In this system, mild esopha-gitis is classified LA grade A or B—one or more erosions lim-ited to the mucosal fold(s) and either less than or greater than 5 mm in longitudinal extent respectively (Fig. 25-16). More severe esophagitis is classified LA grade C or D. In grade C, erosions extend over the mucosal folds but over less than three-quarters of the esophageal circumference; in grade D, confluent erosions extend across more than three-quarters of the esopha-geal circumference. In addition to these grades, more severe damage can lead to the formation of a stricture. A stricture’s severity can be assessed by the ease of passing a standard endo-scope. When a stricture is observed, the severity of the esopha-gitis above it should be recorded. The absence of esophagitis above a stricture suggests the possibility of a chemical-induced injury or a neoplasm as a cause. The latter should always be considered and is ruled out only by evaluation of a tissue biopsy of adequate size. It should be remembered that gastroesophageal reflux is not always associated with visible mucosal abnormali-ties, and patients can experience significant reflux symptoms, despite an apparently normal endoscopy examination.Barrett’s esophagus (BE) is a condition in which the tubu-lar esophagus is lined with columnar epithelium, as opposed to the normal squamous epithelium (see Fig. 25-16). Histologi-cally, it appears as intestinal metaplasia (IM). It is suspected at endoscopy when there is difficulty in visualizing the squamoco-lumnar junction at its normal location, and by the appearance of a redder, salmon-colored mucosa in the lower esophagus, with a clearly visible line of demarcation at the top of the Barrett’s esophagus segment. Its presence is confirmed by biopsy. Mul-tiple biopsy specimens should be taken in a cephalad direction to confirm the presence of IM, and to evaluate the Barrett’s epi-thelium for dysplastic changes. BE is susceptible to ulceration, bleeding, stricture formation, and, most important, malignant degeneration. The earliest sign of the latter is high grade dys-plasia or intramucosal adenocarcinoma (see Fig. 25-16). These dysplastic changes have a patchy distribution, so a minimum of four biopsy samples spaced 2 cm apart should be taken from the Barrett’s-lined portion of the esophagus. Changes seen in one biopsy are significant. Nishimaki has determined that the tumors occur in an area of specialized columnar epithelium near the squamocolumnar junction in 85% of patients, and within 2 cm of the squamocolumnar junction in virtually all patients. Particular attention should be focused on this area in patients suspected of harboring a carcinoma.Abnormalities of the gastroesophageal flap valve can be visualized by retroflexion of the endoscope. Hill has graded the appearance of the gastroesophageal valve from I to IV according to the degree of unfolding or deterioration of the normal valve architecture (Fig. 25-17). The appearance of the valve correlates with the presence of increased esophageal acid exposure, occur-ring predominantly in patients with grade III and IV valves.A hiatal hernia is endoscopically confirmed by finding a pouch lined with gastric rugal folds lying 2 cm or more above the margins of the diaphragmatic crura, identified by having the patient sniff. A hernia is best demonstrated with the stomach fully insufflated and the gastroesophageal junction observed with a retroflexed endoscope. A prominent sliding hiatal hernia frequently is associated with increased esophageal exposure to gastric juice. When a paraesophageal hernia (PEH) is observed, particular attention is taken to exclude gastric (Cameron’s) ulcers or gastritis within the pouch. The intragastric retroflex or J maneuver is important in evaluating the full circumference of the mucosal lining of the herniated stomach.When an esophageal diverticulum is seen, it should be carefully explored with the flexible endoscope to exclude ulceration or neoplasia. When a submucosal mass is identified, biopsy specimens are usually not performed. At the time of sur-gical resection, a submucosal leiomyoma or reduplication cyst can generally be dissected away from the intact mucosa, but if a biopsy sample is taken, the mucosa may become fixed to the underlying abnormality. This complicates the surgical dissec-tion by increasing the risk of mucosal perforation. Endoscopic ultrasound provides a better method for evaluating these lesions.Radiographic Evaluation. Barium swallow evaluation is under-taken selectively to assess anatomy and motility. The anatomy of large hiatal hernias is more clearly demonstrated by contrast radi-ology than endoscopy, and the presence of coordinated esopha-geal peristalsis can be determined by observing several individual swallows of barium traversing the entire length of the organ, with the patient in the horizontal position. Hiatal hernias are best demonstrated with the patient prone because the increased intra-abdominal pressure produced in this position promotes displace-ment of the esophagogastric junction above the diaphragm. To detect lower esophageal narrowing, such as rings and strictures, fully distended views of the esophagogastric region are crucial. The density of the barium used to study the esophagus can poten-tially affect the accuracy of the examination. Esophageal disorders shown clearly by a full-column technique include circumferential carcinomas, peptic strictures, large esophageal ulcers, and hia-tal hernias. A small hiatal hernia is usually not associated with significant symptoms or illness, and its presence is an irrelevant finding unless the hiatal hernia is large (Fig. 25-18) or the hernia 1Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   101801/03/19   6:02 PM 1019ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25Figure 25-16. Complications of reflux disease as seen on endoscopy. A. Linear erosions of LA grade B esophagitis. B. Uncomplicated  Barrett’s mucosa. C. High-grade dysplasia in Barrett’s mucosa. D. Early adenocarcinoma arising in Barrett’s mucosa.is of the paraesophageal variety. Lesions extrinsic but adjacent to the esophagus can be reliably detected by the full-column tech-nique if they contact the distended esophageal wall. Conversely, a number of important disorders may go undetected if this is the sole technique used to examine the esophagus. These include small esophageal neoplasms, mild esophagitis, and esophageal varices. Thus, the full-column technique should be supplemented with mucosal relief or double-contrast films to enhance detection of these smaller or more subtle lesions.Motion-recording techniques greatly aid in evaluating functional disorders of the pharyngoesophageal and esophageal phases of swallowing. The technique and indications for cineand videoradiography will be discussed in the section entitled “Videoand Cineradiography,” as they are more useful to evalu-ate function and seldom used to detect structural abnormalities.The radiographic assessment of the esophagus is not com-plete unless the entire stomach and duodenum have been examined. A gastric or duodenal ulcer, partially obstructing gastric neoplasm, or scarred duodenum and pylorus may contribute significantly to symptoms otherwise attributable to an esophageal abnormality.When a patient’s complaints include dysphagia and no obstructing lesion is seen on the barium swallow, it is useful to have the patient swallow a barium-impregnated marshmallow, a barium-soaked piece of bread, or a hamburger mixed with bar-ium. This test may bring out a functional disturbance in esopha-geal transport that can be missed when liquid barium is used.Tests to Detect Functional AbnormalitiesIn many patients with symptoms of an esophageal disorder, standard radiographic and endoscopic evaluation fails to dem-onstrate a structural abnormality. In these situations, esophageal function tests are necessary to identify a functional disorder.Esophageal Motility. Esophageal motility is a widely used technique to examine the motor function of the esophagus and ABCDBrunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   101901/03/19   6:02 PM 1020SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIBACFigure 25-17. A. Grade I flap valve appearance. Note the ridge of tissue that is closely approximated to the shaft of the retroflexed endoscope. It extends 3 to 4 cm along the lesser curve. B. Grade II flap valve appearance. The ridge is slightly less well defined than in grade I and it opens rarely with respiration and closes promptly. C. Grade III flap valve appearance. The ridge is barely present, and there is often failure to close around the endoscope. It is nearly always accompanied by a hiatal hernia. D. Grade IV flap valve appearance. There is no muscular ridge at all. The gastroesophageal valve stays open all the time, and squamous epithelium can often be seen from the retroflexed position. A hiatal hernia is always present. (Reproduced with permission from Hill LD, Kozarek RA, Kraemer SJ, et al: The gastroesophageal flap valve: in vitro and in vivo observations, Gastrointest Endosc. 1996 Nov;44(5):541-547.)Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   102001/03/19   6:02 PM 1021ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25Figure 25-18. Radiogram of an intrathoracic stomach. This is the end stage of a large hiatal hernia, regardless of its initial classification.RIP = Respiratory inversion pointRIP43424140393837 cmOverall lengthPressure10 secEsophagealbaselinepressureAbdominal lengthGastricbaselinepressureFigure 25-19. Manometric pressure profile of the lower esophageal sphincter. The distances are measured from the nares. (Reproduced with permission from Zaninotto G, DeMeester TR, Schwizer W, et al: The lower esophageal sphincter in health and disease, Am J Surg. 1988 Jan;155(1):104-11.)DFigure 25-17. (Continued )its sphincters. The esophageal motility study (EMS) is indicated whenever a motor abnormality of the esophagus is suspected on the basis of complaints of dysphagia, odynophagia, or noncar-diac chest pain, and the barium swallow or endoscopy does not show a clear structural abnormality. EMS is particularly neces-sary to confirm the diagnosis of specific primary esophageal motility disorders (i.e., achalasia, diffuse esophageal spasm [DES], nutcracker esophagus, and hypertensive LES). It also identifies nonspecific esophageal motility abnormalities and motility disorders secondary to systemic disease such as sclero-derma, dermatomyositis, polymyositis, or mixed connective tis-sue disease. In patients with symptomatic GERD, manometry of the esophageal body can identify a mechanically defective LES and evaluate the adequacy of esophageal peristalsis and contraction amplitude. EMS has become an essential tool in the preoperative evaluation of patients before antireflux surgery, guiding selection of the appropriate procedure based upon the patient’s underlying esophageal function and excluding patients with achalasia who can be misdiagnosed with gastroesophageal reflux when clinical and endoscopic parameters alone are used for diagnosis.EMS is performed using electronic, pressure-sensitive transducers located within the catheter, or water-perfused cath-eters with lateral side holes attached to transducers outside the body. The traditional water perfused catheter has largely been replaced by high resolution motility (HRM), but knowledge of traditional methods of assessing esophageal motility is helpful for understanding esophageal physiology.As the pressure-sensitive station is brought across the gas-troesophageal junction (GEJ), a rise in pressure above the gas-tric baseline signals the beginning of the LES. The respiratory inversion point is identified when the positive excursions that occur in the abdominal cavity with breathing change to negative deflections in the thorax. The respiratory inversion point serves as a reference point at which the amplitude of LES pressure and the length of the sphincter exposed to abdominal pressure are measured. As the pressure-sensitive station is withdrawn into the body of the esophagus, the upper border of the LES is identified by the drop in pressure to the esophageal baseline. From these measurements, the pressure, abdominal length, and overall length of the sphincter are determined (Fig. 25-19). To Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   102101/03/19   6:02 PM 1022SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IILALPLPARPRRA25050Figure 25-20. Radial configuration of the lower esophageal sphincter. A = anterior; L = left; LA = left anterior; LP = left pos-terior; P = posterior; R = right; RA = right anterior; RP = right pos-terior. (Reproduced with permission from Winans CS: Manometric asymmetry of the lower-esophageal high-pressure zone, Am J Dig Dis. 1977 Apr;22(4):348-354.)Table 25-1Normal manometric values of the distal esophageal sphincter, n = 50  MEDIAN PERCENTILE2.597.5Pressure (mmHg)135.827.7Overall length (cm)3.62.15.6Abdominal  length (cm)20.94.7 MEANMEAN – 2 SDMEAN + 2 SDPressure (mmHg)13.8 ± 4.64.623.0Overall length (cm)3.7 ± 0.82.15.3Abdominal  length (cm)2.2 ± 0.80.63.8SD = standard deviation.Reproduced with permission from Moody FG, Carey LC, Jones RS,  et al: Surgical Treatment of Digestive Disease. Chicago, IL: Year Book Medical; 1990.account for the asymmetry of the sphincter (Fig. 25-20), the pressure profile is repeated with each of the five radially ori-ented transducers, and the average values for sphincter pressure above gastric baseline, overall sphincter length, and abdominal length of the sphincter are calculated.Table 25-1 shows the values for these parameters in 50 normal volunteers without subjective or objective evidence of a foregut disorder. A mechanically defective sphincter is identified by having one or more of the following characteristics: an average LES pressure of <6 mmHg, an average length exposed to the positive-pressure environment in the abdomen of 1 cm or less, and/or an average overall sphincter length of 2 cm or less.High-Resolution Manometry. Esophageal manometry was introduced into clinical practice in the 1970s and, until recently, has changed little. In 1991, Ray Clouse introduced the concept of improving conventional manometry by increasing the number of recording sites and adding a three-dimensional assessment. This “high-resolution manometry” is a variant of the conventional manometry in which multiple, circumferential recording sites are used, in essence creating a “map” of the esophagus and its sphincters. High-resolution catheters contain 36 miniaturized pressure sensors positioned every centimeter along the length of the catheter. The vast amount of data generated by these sensors is then processed and presented in traditional linear plots or as a visually enhanced spatiotemporal video tracing that is readily interpreted. The function of the esophageal body is assessed with 10 to 15 wet swallows. Amplitude, duration, and morphology of contractions following each swallow are visually displayed (Fig. 25-21).The relationship of the esophageal contractions following a swallow is classified as peristaltic or simultaneous. The data are used to identify motor disorders of the esophagus.The position, length, and function of the lower esopha-geal sphincter (LES) are demonstrated by a high-pressure zone that should relax at the inception of swallowing and contract after the water or solid bolus passes through the LES. Simul-taneous acquisition of data for the upper esophageal sphinc-ter, esophageal body, LES, and gastric pressure minimizes the movement artifacts and study time associated with conven-tional esophageal manometry. This technology significantly enhances esophageal diagnostics, bringing it into the realm of “image”-based studies. High-resolution manometry may allow the identification of focal motor abnormalities previ-ously overlooked. It has enhanced the ability to predict bolus propagation and increased sensitivity in the measurement of pressure gradients.Esophageal Impedance. Newer technology introduced into the clinical realm a decade ago allows measurement of esophageal function and gastroesophageal reflux in a way that was previously not possible. An intraluminal electrical imped-ance catheter is used to measure GI function. Impedance is the ratio of voltage to current, and is a measure of the electrical conductivity of a hollow organ and its contents. Intraluminal electrical impedance is inversely proportional to the electrical conductivity of the luminal contents and the cross-sectional area of the lumen. Air has a very low electrical conductivity and, therefore, high impedance. Saliva and food cause an imped-ance decrease because of their increased conductivity. Luminal dilatation results in a decrease in impedance, whereas luminal contraction yields an impedance increase. Investigators have established the impedance waveform characteristics that define esophageal bolus transport. This allows for the characterization of both esophageal function, via quantification of bolus trans-port, and gastroesophageal reflux (Fig. 25-22). The probe mea-sures impedance between adjacent electrodes, with measuring segments located at 2, 4, 6, 8, 14, and 16 cm from the distal tip. An extremely low electric current of 0.00025 μW is transmitted across the electrodes at a frequency of 1 to 2 kHz and is limited Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   102201/03/19   6:02 PM 1023ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25Figure 25-21A. Normal high-resolution manometry motility study. Pressure measurements are recorded with color coding (red = high; blue = low). LES = lower esophageal sphincter; PIP = pressure inversion point; UES = upper esophageal sphincter.UES19.0LES41.840.343.7Gastric 46.2PIP42.3EsophagusPharynxStomachBrunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   102301/03/19   6:02 PM 1024SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 25-21B. High-resolution manometry motility study in patient with mechanically defective lower esophageal sphincter. Note the absence of lower esophageal sphincter tone. Pressure measure-ments are recorded with color coding (red = high; blue = low). LES = lower esophageal sphincter; PIP = pressure inversion point; UES = upper esophageal sphincter.EsophagusStomachPharynxUES20.8LES41.9PIP41.841.342.7Gastric 50.3Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   102401/03/19   6:02 PM 1025ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25Figure 25-21C. High-resolution manometry motility study in patient with deficient esophageal body peristalsis. Note the very weak peristalsis in the lower two-thirds of the esophagus. Pressure measurements are recorded with color coding (red = high; blue = low). LES = lower esophageal sphincter; PIP = pressure inversion point; UES = upper esophageal sphincter.EsophagusPharynxUES18.740.944.6Gastric 47.5LES42.2PIP42.3StomachBrunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   102501/03/19   6:02 PM 1026SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 25-21D. High-resolution manometry motility study in patient with achalasia. Note the complete absence of esophageal body peristalsis, and the lack of relaxation of the lower esophageal sphincter. Pressure measurements are recorded with color coding (red = high; blue = low). LES = lower esophageal sphincter; PIP = pressure inversion point; UES = upper esophageal sphincter.EsophagusUES18.0Gastric 48.542.745.7LES43.8PIP44.1StomachPharynxBrunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   102601/03/19   6:03 PM 1027ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25Figure 25-21E. High-resolution manometry motility study in patient with diffuse esophageal spasm. Note the very high amplitude contractions in the esophageal body. Pressure measurements are recorded with color coding (red = high; blue = low). LES = lower esophageal sphincter; PIP = pressure inversion point; UES = upper esophageal sphincter.Gastric 51.745.6PharynxEsophagusLES47.4PIP47.1UES20.349.7StomachBrunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   102701/03/19   6:03 PM 1028SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIpH siteImpedence site17cm15cm9cm7cm5cmDistance above LESDistance above LES5cmLES3cmFigure 25-22. Esophageal impedance probe measures electrical resistance between evenly spaced electrodes. LES = lower esopha-geal sphincter.to 8 μA. This is below the stimulation threshold for nerves and muscles and is three orders of magnitude below the thresh-old of cardiac stimulation. A standard pH electrode is located  5 cm from the distal tip so that the acidic or nonacidic nature of refluxate can be correlated with the number of reflux events.Esophageal impedance has been validated as an appropri-ate method for the evaluation of GI function and is used selec-tively for the diagnosis of gastroesophageal reflux. It has been compared to cineradiography showing that impedance waves correspond well with actual bolus transport illustrated by radi-ography. Bolus entry, transit, and exit can be clearly identified by impedance changes in the corresponding measuring seg-ments. Studies comparing standard esophageal manometry with impedance measurements in healthy volunteers have shown that esophageal impedance correlates with peristaltic wave progres-sion and bolus length.Twenty-four-hour pH monitoring, the historical gold stan-dard for diagnosing and quantifying gastroesophageal reflux, has some significant limitations. With 24-hour ambulatory pH testing, reflux is defined as a drop in the pH below 4, which effectively “blinds” the test to reflux occurring at higher pH values. Furthermore, in patients with persistent symptoms on proton pump inhibitor (PPI) therapy, pH monitoring has lim-ited use as it can only detect abnormal acid reflux (pH <4), the occurrence of which has been altered by the antisecretory medi-cation. Given that PPI antisecretory therapy is highly effective in neutralizing gastric acid, the question of whether persistent symptoms are a result of persistent acid reflux, nonacid reflux, or are not reflux related becomes a key issue in surgical decision making. Until recently, this differentiation could not be made. Detection of both acid and nonacid reflux has potential to define these populations of patients and thus improve patient selection for antireflux surgery. Multichannel intraluminal impedance technology allows the measurement of both acid and nonacid reflux, with potential to enhance diagnostic accuracy.Using this technology, Balaji and colleagues showed that most gastroesophageal reflux remains despite acid suppression. Impedance pH may be particularly useful in evaluating patients with persistent symptoms despite PPI treatment, patients with respiratory symptoms, and postoperative patients who are hav-ing symptoms that are elusive to diagnosis.Esophageal Transit Scintigraphy. The esophageal transit of a 10-mL water bolus containing technetium-99m (99mTc) sulfur colloid can be recorded with a gamma camera. Using this tech-nique, delayed bolus transit has been shown in patients with a variety of esophageal motor disorders, including achalasia, scleroderma, DES, and nutcracker esophagus.Videoand CineradiographyHigh-speed cinematic or video recording of radiographic studies allows re-evaluation by reviewing the studies at various speeds. This technique is more useful than manometry in the evaluation of the pharyngeal phase of swallowing. Observations suggesting oropharyngeal or cricopharyngeal dysfunction include misdirec-tion of barium into the trachea or nasopharynx, prominence of the cricopharyngeal muscle, a Zenker’s diverticulum, a narrow pharyngoesophageal segment, and stasis of the contrast medium in the valleculae or hypopharyngeal recesses (Fig. 25-23). These findings are usually not specific, but rather common manifesta-tions of neuromuscular disorders affecting the pharyngoesoph-ageal area. Studies using liquid barium, barium-impregnated solids, or radiopaque pills aid the evaluation of normal and abnormal motility in the esophageal body. Loss of the normal stripping wave or segmentation of the barium column with the patient in the recumbent position correlates with abnormal motility of the esophageal body. In addition, structural abnor-malities such as small diverticula, webs, and minimal extrin-sic impressions of the esophagus may be recognized only with motion-recording techniques. The simultaneous computerized capture of videofluoroscopic images and manometric tracings is now available and is referred to as manofluorography. Mano-fluorographic studies allow precise correlation of the anatomic events, such as opening of the upper esophageal sphincter, with manometric observations, such as sphincter relaxation. Mano-fluorography, although not widely available, is presently the best means available to evaluate complex functional abnormalities.Tests to Detect Increased Exposure to  Gastric JuiceTwenty-Four-Hour Ambulatory pH Monitoring. The most direct method of measuring increased esophageal exposure to gas-tric juice is by an indwelling pH electrode, or, more recently, via a radiotelemetric pH monitoring capsule that can be clipped to the esophageal mucosa. The latter consists of an antimony pH elec-trode fitted inside a small, capsule-shaped device accompanied by a battery and electronics that allow 48-hour monitoring and transmission of the pH data via transcutaneous radio telemetry to a waist-mounted data logger. The device can be introduced either transorally or transnasally, and it can be clipped to the esophageal mucosa using endoscopic fastening techniques. It passes sponta-neously within 1 to 2 weeks. Prolonged monitoring of esophageal pH is performed by placing the pH probe or telemetry capsule  5 cm above the manometrically measured upper border of the dis-tal sphincter for 24 hours. It measures the actual time the esopha-geal mucosa is exposed to gastric juice, measures the ability of the esophagus to clear refluxed acid, and correlates esophageal acid exposure with the patient’s symptoms. A 24to 48-hour period is necessary so that measurements can be made over one or two complete circadian cycles. This allows measuring the effect of physiologic activity, such as eating or sleeping, on the reflux of gastric juice into the esophagus (Fig. 25-24).Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   102801/03/19   6:03 PM 1029ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25mpmppH8642mppH8642pH8642sp06:0000:0022:0002:0004:0022:0016:0014:0018:0020:0014:0008:0006:0010:0012:00Figure 25-24. Strip chart display of a 24-hour esophageal pH monitoring study in a patient with increased esophageal acid expo-sure. mp = meal period; sp = supine period. (Reproduced with per-mission from Zuidema GD, Orringer MB: Shackelford’s Surgery of the Alimentary Tract, 3rd ed. Vol 1. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier/Saunders; 1991.)BATable 25-2Normal values for esophageal exposure to pH <4 (n = 50)COMPONENTMEANSD95%Total time1.511.364.45Upright time2.342.348.42Supine time0.631.03.45No. of episodes19.0012.7646.90No. >5 min0.841.183.45Longest episode6.747.8519.80SD = standard deviation.Reproduced with permission from Moody FG, Carey LC, Jones RS,  et al: Surgical Treatment of Digestive Disease. Chicago, IL: Year Book Medical; 1990.Figure 25-23. Esophagograms from a patient with cricopharyngeal achalasia. A. Anteropos-terior film showing retention of the contrast medium at the level of the vallecula and piriform recesses, with no barium passing into the esopha-gus. B. Lateral film, taken opposite the C5–C6 vertebrae, showing posterior indentation of the cricopharyngeus, retention in the hypopharynx, and tracheal aspiration. (Reproduced with per-mission from DeMeester TR, Matthews H: Inter-national Trends in General Thoracic Surgery. Vol 3. Benign Esophageal Disease. St. Louis, Mo: Mosby; 1987.)The 24-hour esophageal pH monitoring should not be con-sidered a test for reflux, but rather a measurement of the esopha-geal exposure to gastric juice. The measurement is expressed by the time the esophageal pH was below a given threshold during the 24-hour period (Table 25-3). This single assess-ment, although concise, does not reflect how the exposure has occurred; that is, did it occur in a few long episodes or several short episodes? Consequently, two other assessments are neces-sary: the frequency of the reflux episodes and their duration.The units used to express esophageal exposure to gastric juice are: (a) cumulative time the esophageal pH is below a cho-sen threshold, expressed as the percentage of the total, upright, and supine monitored time; (b) frequency of reflux episodes below a chosen threshold, expressed as number of episodes per 24 hours; and (c) duration of the episodes, expressed as the number of episodes >5 minutes per 24 hours, and the time in minutes of the longest episode recorded. Table 25-2 shows the normal values for these components of the 24-hour record at the whole-number pH threshold derived from 50 normal asymptom-atic subjects. The upper limits of normal were established at the 95th percentile. Most centers use pH 4 as the threshold.Based on these studies and extensive clinical experience, 48-hour esophageal pH monitoring is considered to be the gold standard for the diagnosis of GERD.The Bravo pH Capsule (Medtronics, Minneapolis, MN) measures pH levels in the esophagus and transmits continuous Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   102901/03/19   6:03 PM 1030SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II210:0012:0014:0016:0018:0047pH218:0020:0022:0000:0002:0047202:0004:0006:0008:0010:0047pH probe5 cmabove5 cmbelowBACombined 24-hourgastric and esophagealpH monitoringFigure 25-25. A. Combined esophageal and gastric pH monitoring showing position of probes in relation to the lower esophageal sphincter. B. Combined ambulatory esophageal (upper tracing) and gastric (lower tracing) pH monitoring showing duodenogastric reflux (arrows) with propagation of the alkaline juice into the esophagus of a patient with complicated Barrett’s esophagus. The gastric tracing (lower) is taken from a probe lying 5 cm below the upper esophageal sphincter. The esophageal tracing (upper) is taken from a probe lying 5 cm above the lower esophageal sphincter. Note that in only a small proportion of time does duodenogastric reflux move the pH of the esophagus above the threshold of 7, causing the iceberg effect. (Reproduced with permission from Zuidema GD, Orringer MB: Shackelford’s Surgery of the Alimentary Tract, 3rd ed. Vol 1. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier/Saunders; 1991.)Table 25-3Normal composite score for various pH thresholds:  upper level of normal valuepH THRESHOLD95TH PERCENTILE<114.2<217.37<314.10<414.72<515.76<612.76>714.90>88.50Reproduced with permission from Moody FG, Carey LC, Jones RS,  et al: Surgical Treatment of Digestive Disease. Chicago, IL: Year Book Medical; 1990.esophageal pH readings to a receiver worn on the patient’s belt or waistband (Fig. 25-25). Symptoms that the patient experi-ences are recorded in a diary and/or by pressing buttons on the receiver unit. Generally, 48 hours of pH data are measured with this probe. A recent study has shown that the addition of a second day of pH monitoring increased the sensitivity of pH measurement by 22%. The capsule eventually detaches and passes through the digestive tract in 5 to 7 days.Radiographic Detection of Gastroesophageal Reflux. The definition of radiographic gastroesophageal reflux varies depend-ing on whether reflux is spontaneous or induced by various maneu-vers. In only about 40% of patients with classic symptoms of GERD is spontaneous reflux (i.e., reflux of barium from the stom-ach into the esophagus with the patient in the upright position) observed by the radiologist. In most patients who show spon-taneous reflux on radiography, the diagnosis of increased esophageal acid exposure is confirmed by 24-hour esophageal pH monitoring. Therefore, the radiographic demonstration of sponta-neous regurgitation of barium into the esophagus in the upright position is a reliable indicator that reflux is present. However, fail-ure to see this does not indicate the absence of disease, and for this reason this test is rarely used for clinical diagnosis.Tests of Duodenogastric FunctionEsophageal disorders are frequently associated with abnormali-ties of duodenogastric function. Abnormalities of the gastric res-ervoir or increased gastric acid secretion can be responsible for increased esophageal exposure to gastric juice. Reflux of alka-line duodenal juice, including bile salts, pancreatic enzymes, and bicarbonate, is thought to have a role in the pathogenesis of esophagitis and complicated Barrett’s esophagus. Furthermore, functional disorders of the esophagus are often not confined to 2Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   103001/03/19   6:03 PM 1031ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25the esophagus alone, but are associated with functional disor-ders of the rest of the foregut (i.e., stomach and duodenum). Tests of duodenogastric function that are helpful to investigate esophageal symptoms include gastric emptying studies, gastric acid analysis, and cholescintigraphy (for the diagnosis of patho-logic duodenogastric and/or duodenogastroesophageal reflux).Gastric Emptying Study. Gastric emptying studies are performed with radionuclide-labeled meals. Emptying of solids and liquids can be assessed simultaneously when both phases are marked with different tracers. After ingestion of a labeled standard meal, gamma camera images of the stomach are obtained at 5to 15-minute inter-vals for 2 to 4 hours. After correction for decay, the counts in the gastric area are plotted as the percentage of total counts at the start of the imaging. The resulting emptying curve can be compared with data obtained in normal volunteers. In general, normal subjects will empty 59% of a meal within 90 minutes. Although delayed gas-tric emptying is often associated with gastroesophageal reflux, in general delayed emptying does not correlate with a poorer clinical outcome after antireflux surgery, and it should not be considered a contraindication to surgical treatment.GASTROESOPHAGEAL REFLUX DISEASEGERD was not recognized as a significant clinical problem until the mid-1930s and was not identified as a precipitating cause for esophagitis until after World War II. In the early 21st century, it has grown to be a very common problem and now accounts for a majority of esophageal pathology. It is recognized as a chronic disease, and when medical therapy is required, it is often lifelong treatment. Recent efforts at the development of various endoscopic antireflux interventions, although innovative, have not been successful in consistently controlling gastroesophageal reflux. Antireflux surgery is an effective and long-term therapy and is the only treatment that is able to restore the gastroesopha-geal barrier. Despite the common prevalence of GERD, it can be one of the most challenging diagnostic and therapeutic problems in clinical medicine. A contributing factor to this is the lack of a universally accepted definition of the disease.The most simplistic approach is to define the disease by its symptoms. However, symptoms thought to be indicative of GERD, such as heartburn or acid regurgitation, are very com-mon in the general population and many individuals consider them to be normal and do not seek medical attention. Even when excessive, these symptoms are not specific for gastroesophageal reflux. They can be caused by other diseases such as achalasia, DES, esophageal carcinoma, pyloric stenosis, cholelithiasis, gastritis, gastric or duodenal ulcer, and coronary artery disease.A thorough, structured evaluation of the patient’s symptoms is essential before any therapy, particularly any form of esopha-geal surgery. The presence and severity of both typical symp-toms of heartburn, regurgitation, and dysphagia, and atypical symptoms of cough, hoarseness, chest pain, asthma, and aspira-tion should be discussed with the patient in detail. Many of these atypical symptoms may not be esophageal related and hence will not improve and may even worsen with antireflux surgery.Heartburn is generally defined as a substernal burning-type discomfort, beginning in the epigastrium and radiating upward. It is often aggravated by meals, spicy or fatty foods, chocolate, alcohol, and coffee and can be worse in the supine position. It is commonly, although not universally, relieved by antacid or antisecretory medications. Epidemiologic studies have shown that heartburn occurs monthly in as many as 40% Table 25-4American Gastroenterologic Association Gallup poll on nighttime gastroesophageal reflux disease symptoms•	50 million Americans have nighttime heartburn at least 1/wk•	80% of heartburn sufferers had nocturnal symptoms—65% both day & night•	63% report that it affects their ability to sleep and impacts their work the next day•	72% are on prescription medications•	Nearly half (45%) report that current remedies do not relieve all symptomsto 50% of the Western population. The occurrence of heartburn at night and its effect on quality of life have recently been high-lighted by a Gallup poll conducted by the American Gastroen-terologic Society (Table 25-4).Regurgitation, the effortless return of acid or bitter gastric contents into the chest, pharynx, or mouth, is highly suggestive of foregut pathology. It is often particularly severe at night when supine or when bending over and can be secondary to either an incompetent or obstructed GEJ. With the latter, as in achalasia, the regurgitant is often bland, as if food was put into a blender. When questioned, most patients can distinguish the two. It is the regurgitation of gastric contents that may result in associated pulmonary symptoms, including cough, hoarseness, asthma, and recurrent pneumonia. Bronchospasm can be precipitated by esophageal acidification and cough by either acid stimulation or distention of the esophagus.Dysphagia, or difficulty swallowing, is a relatively non-specific term but arguably the most specific symptom of foregut disease. It can be a sign of underlying malignancy and should be aggressively investigated until a diagnosis is established. Dyspha-gia refers to the sensation of difficulty in the passage of food from the mouth to the stomach and can be divided into oropharyngeal and esophageal etiologies. Oropharyngeal dysphagia is charac-terized by difficulty transferring food out of the mouth into the esophagus, nasal regurgitation, and/or aspiration. Esophageal dys-phagia refers to the sensation of food sticking in the lower chest or epigastrium. This may or may not be accompanied by pain (ody-nophagia) that will be relieved by the passage of the bolus.Chest pain, although commonly and appropriately attrib-uted to cardiac disease, is frequently secondary to esophageal pathology as well. Nearly 50% of patients with severe chest pain, normal cardiac function, and normal coronary arterio-grams have positive 24-hour pH studies, implicating gastro-esophageal reflux as the underlying etiology. Exercise-induced gastroesophageal reflux is well known to occur, and may result in exertional chest pain similar to angina. It can be quite diffi-cult, if not impossible, to distinguish between the two etiologies, particularly on clinical grounds alone. Nevens and colleagues evaluated the ability of experienced cardiologists to differentiate pain of cardiac vs. esophageal origin. Of 248 patients initially seen by cardiologists, 185 were thought to have typical angina, and 63 were thought to have atypical chest pain. Forty-eight (26%) of those thought to have classic angina had normal coro-nary angiograms, and 16 of the 63 with atypical pain had abnor-mal angiogram. Thus, the cardiologists’ clinical impression was wrong 25% of the time. Finally, Pope and associates investi-gated the ultimate diagnosis in 10,689 patients presenting to an Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   103101/03/19   6:03 PM 1032SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 25-5Normal manometric values of the distal esophageal sphincter, n = 50PARAMETERMEDIAN VALUE2.5TH PERCENTILE97.5TH PERCENTILEPressure (mmHg)135.827.7Overall length (cm)3.62.15.6Abdominal length (cm)20.94.7emergency department with acute chest pain. Approximately 17% were found to have acute ischemia, 6% had stable angina, 21% had other cardiac causes, and 55% had noncardiac causes. The investigators concluded that the majority of people present-ing to the emergency department with chest pain do not have an underlying cardiac etiology for their symptoms. Chest pain pre-cipitated by meals, occurring at night while supine, nonradiat-ing, responsive to antacid medication, or accompanied by other symptoms suggesting esophageal disease such as dysphagia or regurgitation should trigger the thought of possible esophageal origin. Furthermore, the distinction between heartburn and chest pain is also difficult and largely dependent upon the individual patient. One person’s heartburn is another’s chest pain.The precise mechanisms accounting for the generation of symptoms secondary to esophageal pathology remain unclear. Considerable insight has been acquired, however. Investiga-tions into the effect of luminal content, esophageal distention and muscular function, neural pathways, and brain localization have provided a basic understanding of the stimuli responsible for symptom generation. It is also clear that the visceroneural pathways of the foregut are complexly intertwined with that of the tracheobronchial tree and heart. This fact accounts for the common overlap of clinical presentations with diverse disease processes in upper GI, cardiac, and pulmonary systems.The Human Antireflux Mechanism and the Pathophysiology of Gastroesophageal Reflux DiseaseThere is a high-pressure zone located at the esophagogastric junc-tion in humans. Although this is typically referred to as the lower esophageal “sphincter,” there are no distinct anatomical land-marks that define its beginning and end. Architecturally speak-ing, there is a specialized thickening in this region that is made up of the collar sling musculature and the clasp fibers. The collar sling is located on the greater curvature side of the junction, and the clasp fibers are located on the lesser curvature side. These muscles remain in tonic opposition until the act of swallowing, whereupon receptive relaxation occurs allowing passage of a food bolus into the stomach. In addition, the LES will also open when the gastric fundus is distended with gas and liquid, thus resulting in an unfolding of the valve and enabling venting of gas (a belch). Whether physiologic or pathologic, the common denominator for most episodes of gastroesophageal reflux is the loss of the high-pressure zone and thus a decrease in the resistance it imparts to the retrograde flow of gastric juice into the esophageal body.The Lower Esophageal Sphincter. As defined by esophageal manometry, there are three characteristics of the LES that work in unison to maintain its barrier function. These characteristics include the resting LES pressure, its overall length, and the intra-abdominal length that is exposed to the positive pressure environment of the abdomen (Table 25-5). The resistance to gastroesophageal reflux is a function of both the resting LES pressure and length over which this pressure is exerted. Thus, as the sphincter becomes shorter, a higher pressure will be required in order to prevent a given amount of reflux (Fig. 25-26). Much like the neck of a balloon as it is inflated, as the stomach fills and distends, sphincter length decreases. Therefore, if the over-all length of the sphincter is permanently short from repeated distention of the fundus secondary to large volume meals, then with minimal episodes of gastric distention and pressure, there will be insufficient sphincter length for the barrier to remain competent, and reflux will occur.LES length (cm)LES pressure (mmHg)60012CompetentIncompetent345121824Figure 25-26. As the esophageal sphincter becomes shorter, increased pressure is necessary to maintain competence. LES = lower esophageal sphincter.A third characteristic of the LES that impacts its ability to prevent reflux is its position about the diaphragm. It is important that a portion of the total length of the LES be exposed to the effects of an intra-abdominal pressure. That is, during periods of elevated intra-abdominal pressure, the resistance of the barrier would be overcome if pressure were not applied equally to both the LES and stomach simultaneously. Thus, in the presence of a hiatal hernia, the sphincter resides entirely within the chest cavity and cannot respond to an increase in intra-abdominal pressure because the pinch valve mechanism is lost and gastro-esophageal reflux is more liable to occur.Therefore, a permanently defective sphincter is defined by one or more of the following characteristics: an LES with a mean resting pressure of less than 6 mmHg, an overall sphincter  length of <2 cm, and intra-abdominal sphincter length of  <1 cm. Compared to normal subjects without GERD these values are below the 2.5 percentile for each parameter. The most com-mon cause of a defective sphincter is an inadequate abdominal  length.Once the sphincter is permanently defective, this condi-tion is irreversible, and although esophageal mucosal injury may be healed with antisecretory medication, reflux will continue to occur. Additionally, the presence of a defective LES may be associated with reduced esophageal body function and thus decrease clearance times of refluxed material. In addition, the progressive loss of effective esophageal clearance may predis-pose the patient to severe mucosal injury, volume regurgitation, aspiration, and pulmonary injury. Reflux may occur in the face of a normal LES resting pressure. This condition is usually due to a functional problem of gastric emptying or excessive air swallowing. These conditions may lead to gastric disten-tion, increased intra-gastric pressure, a resultant shortening or Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   103201/03/19   6:03 PM 1033ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25Table 25-6Complications of gastroesophageal reflux disease: 150 consecutive cases with proven gastroesophageal reflux disease (24-hour esophageal pH monitoring endoscopy, and motility)COMPLICATIONNO.STRUCTURALLY NORMAL SPHINCTER (%)STRUCTURALLY DEFECTIVE SPHINCTER (%)None595842Erosive  esophagitis472377aStricture191189Barrett’s  esophagus250100Total150  aGrade more severe with defective cardia.Reproduced with permission from Moody FG, Carey LC, Jones RS,  et al: Surgical Treatment of Digestive Disease. Chicago, IL: Year Book Medical; 1990.unfolding of the LES, and subsequent reflux. The mechanism by which gastric distention contributes to LES unfolding pro-vides a mechanical explanation for “transient LES relaxation.” It is thought that with repeated gastric distention secondary to large meal volume or chronic air swallowing, there is repeated unfolding of the LES and subsequent attenuation of the collar sling musculature. It is at this point that the physiologic and nor-mal mechanism of gastric venting is replaced with pathologic and severe postprandial reflux disease. In addition, patients with GERD will increase the frequency of swallowing in an effort to neutralize the refluxed acid with their saliva (pH 7.0). This phe-nomenon leads to increased air swallowing and further gastric distention, thus compounding the problem. Therefore, GERD may have its origins in the stomach secondary to gastric disten-tion due to overeating/drinking, air swallowing, or consump-tion of carbonated liquids, and this may be further compounded by the ingestion of fatty meals, which result in delayed gastric emptying.Relationship Between Hiatal Hernia and Gastroesopha-geal Reflux Disease. As the collar sling musculature and clasp fibers become attenuated with repeated gastric distention, the esophagogastric junction begins to assume an “upside down funnel” appearance, with progressive opening of the acute angle of His. This in turn may result in attenuation and stretching of the phrenoesophageal ligament, with subsequent enlargement of the hiatal opening and axial herniation. There is a high degree of correlation between reflux threshold and the degree of hiatal herniation (Fig. 25-27).Summary. It is believed that GERD has its origins within the stomach. Distention of the fundus occurs because of overeat-ing and delayed gastric emptying secondary to a high-fat diet. The resultant distention causes “unrolling” of the sphincter by the expanding fundus, and this subsequently exposes the squa-mous epithelium in the region of the distal LES to gastric juice. Repeated exposure results in inflammation and the development of columnar epithelium at the cardia. This is the initial step of the development of carditis and explains why in early disease esophagitis is mild and commonly limited to the very distal aspect of the esophagus. The patient attempts to compensate for Yield pressure (mmHg)04No hernia< 3 cm hernia3 cm hernia81216202428323640Figure 25-27. Yield pressure of the lower esophageal sphincter decreases as hiatal hernia size increases.this by increased swallowing, allowing the saliva to neutralize the refluxed gastric juice and thus, alleviate the discomfort induced by the reflux event. The increased swallowing results in aeropha-gia, bloating, and belching. This in turn creates a vicious cycle of increased gastric distention and thus further exposure and repeti-tive injury to the distal esophagus. The development of carditis explains the complaint of epigastric pain often experienced by patients with early reflux disease. Additionally, this process can lead to a fibrotic mucosal ring located at the squamocolumnar junction, which is termed a “Schatzki ring” and which may result in dysphagia. This inflammatory process may extend into muscu-laris propria and thus result in a progressive loss in the length and pressure of the LES. This explanation for the pathophysiology of GERD is supported by the observation that severe esophagitis is almost always associated with a defective LES.Complications Associated With Gastroesophageal Reflux DiseaseThe complications of gastroesophageal reflux disease may result from the direct injurious effects of gastric fluid on the mucosa, larynx, or respiratory epithelium. Complications due to repetitive reflux are esophagitis, stricture, and BE; repetitive aspiration may lead to progressive pulmonary fibrosis. The severity of the complications is directly related to the prevalence of a structurally defective sphincter (Table 25-6). The observation that a structurally defective sphincter occurs in 42% of patients without complications (most of whom have one or two components failed) suggests that disease may be confined to the sphincter due to compensation by a vigorously contracting esophageal body. Eventually, all three components of the sphincter fail, allowing unrestricted reflux of gastric juice into the esophagus and overwhelming its normal clearance mechanisms. This leads to esophageal mucosal injury with progressive deterioration of esophageal contractility, as is commonly seen in patients with strictures and BE. The loss of esophageal clearance increases the potential for regurgitation into the pharynx with aspiration.Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   103301/03/19   6:03 PM 1034SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II70Prevalence%Gastric reflux(n = 22)Mixed reflux(n = 31)6050403020100A20151050% TimepH<4BpH4–7pH>7Figure 25-29. A. Prevalence of reflux types in 53 patients with gastroesophageal reflux disease. B. Esophageal luminal pH dur-ing bilirubin exposure. (Reproduced with permission from Kauer WK, Peters JH, DeMeester TR, etal: Mixed reflux of gastric and duodenal juices is more harmful to the esophagus than gastric juice alone. The need for surgical therapy re-emphasized, Ann Surg. 1995 Oct;222(4):525-531.)350300250200150100500123pH4567891018:00Time06:00Bile acid conc. umol/l0Figure 25-28. Sample bile acid concentration and esophageal pH plotted against time to obtain detailed profiles; in this case showing both significant bile acid (vertical bars) and acid (linear plot) reflux. (Reproduced with permission from Nehra D, Watt P, Pye JK, et al. Automated oesophageal reflux sampler: a new device used to moni-tor bile acid reflux in patients with gastroesophageal reflux disease, J Med Eng Technol. 1997 Jan-Feb;21(1):1-9.)The potential injurious components that reflux into the esophagus include gastric secretions such as acid and pepsin, as well as biliary and pancreatic secretions that regurgitate from the duodenum into the stomach. There is a considerable body of experimental evidence to indicate that maximal epithelial injury occurs during exposure to bile salts combined with acid and pepsin. These studies have shown that while acid alone does minimal damage to the esophageal mucosa, the combination of acid and pepsin is highly deleterious. Similarly, the reflux of duodenal juice alone does little damage to the mucosa, although the combination of duodenal juice and gastric acid is particu-larly noxious.Complications of gastroesophageal reflux such as esopha-gitis, stricture, and Barrett’s metaplasia occur in the presence of two predisposing factors: a mechanically defective LES and an increased esophageal exposure to fluid containing duodenal content that includes bile and pancreatic juice. The duodenal origin of esophageal contents in patients with an increased exposure to a pH >7 has previously been confirmed by esopha-geal aspiration studies (Fig. 25-28). Studies have clarified and expanded these observations by measuring esophageal bilirubin exposure over a 24-hour period as a marker for the presence of duodenal juice. Direct measurement of esophageal bilirubin exposure as a marker for duodenal juice has shown that 58% of patients with GERD have increased esophageal exposure to duodenal juice and that this exposure occurs most commonly when the esophageal pH is between 4 and 7 (Fig. 25-29). These earlier studies have been confirmed by other studies that mea-sure volume reflux using impedance technology (Fig. 25-30).If reflux of gastric juice is allowed to persist and sustained or repetitive esophageal injury occurs, two sequelae can result. First, a luminal stricture can develop from submucosal and even-tually intramural fibrosis. Second, the tubular esophagus may become replaced with columnar epithelium. The columnar epi-thelium is resistant to acid and is associated with the alleviation of the complaint of heartburn. This columnar epithelium often becomes intestinalized, identified histologically by the presence 100Prevalence of patients with increased bilirubin806040200Normalsubjectsn = 25No mucosalinjuryn = 16Erosiveesophagitisn = 10Barrett’sesophagusn = 27Figure 25-30. Prevalence of abnormal esophageal bilirubin expo-sure in healthy subjects and in patients with gastroesophageal reflux disease with varied degrees of mucosal injury. (*P <.03 vs. all other groups; **P <.03 vs. healthy subjects.) (Reproduced with permis-sion from Kauer WK, Peters JH, DeMeester TR, et al: Mixed reflux of gastric and duodenal juices is more harmful to the esophagus than gastric juice alone. The need for surgical therapy re-emphasized, Ann Surg. 1995 Oct;222(4):525-531.)Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   103401/03/19   6:03 PM 1035ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25of goblet cells. This specialized IM is currently required for the diagnosis of BE. Endoscopically, BE can be quiescent or associ-ated with complications of esophagitis, stricture, Barrett’s ulcer-ation, and dysplasia. The complications associated with BE may be due to the continuous irritation from refluxed duodenogastric juice. This continued injury is pH dependent and may be modi-fied by medical therapy. The incidence of metaplastic Barrett’s epithelium becoming dysplastic and progressing to adenocarci-noma is approximately 0.2% to 0.5% per year.An esophageal stricture can be associated with severe esophagitis or BE. In the latter situation, it occurs at the site of maximal inflammatory injury (i.e., the columnar-squamous epi-thelial interface). Patients who have a stricture in the absence of Barrett’s esophagus should have the presence of gastroesopha-geal reflux documented before the presence of the stricture is ascribed to reflux esophagitis. In patients with normal acid exposure and no endoscopic or CT evidence of cancer, the stric-ture may be a result of a drug-induced chemical injury, the latter resulting from the lodgment of a capsule or tablet in the distal esophagus. In such patients, dilation usually corrects the prob-lem of dysphagia. It is also possible for drug-induced injuries to occur in patients who have underlying esophagitis and a distal esophageal stricture secondary to gastroesophageal reflux. In this situation, a long, string-like stricture progressively devel-ops as a result of repetitive caustic injury from capsule or tablet lodgment on top of an initial reflux stricture. These strictures are often resistant to dilation. The incidence of this problem has lessened since the introduction of proton pump inhibitor medication.Metaplastic (Barrett’s Esophagus) and Neoplastic (Adenocarcinoma) ComplicationsThe condition whereby the tubular esophagus is lined with columnar epithelium rather than squamous epithelium was first described by Norman Barrett in 1950. He incorrectly believed it to be congenital in origin. It is now realized that it is an acquired abnormality, occurs in 10% to 15% of patients with GERD, and represents the end stage of the natural history of this disease. It is also distinctly different from the congenital condition in which islands of gastric fundic epithelium are found in the upper half of the esophagus.The definition of BE has evolved considerably over the past decade. Traditionally, BE was identified by the presence of columnar mucosa extending at least 3 cm into the esophagus.  It is now recognized that the specialized, intestinal-type epi-thelium, or intestinal metaplasia (IM) found in the Barrett’s mucosa, is the only tissue predisposed to malignant degenera-tion. Consequently, the diagnosis of BE is presently made given any length of endoscopically identifiable columnar mucosa that proves, on biopsy, to show IM. Although long segments of columnar mucosa without IM do occur, they are uncommon and might be congenital in origin.The hallmark of IM is the presence of intestinal goblet cells. There is a high prevalence of biopsy-demonstrated IM at the cardia, on the gastric side of the squamocolumnar junction, in the absence of endoscopic evidence of a CLE. Evidence is accumulating that these patches of what appears to be Barrett’s in the cardia have a similar malignant potential as in the longer segments, and are precursors for carcinoma of the cardia.The long-term relief of symptoms remains the primary rea-son for performing antireflux surgery in patients with BE. Heal-ing of esophageal mucosal injury and the prevention of disease progression are important secondary goals. In this regard, patients with BE are no different than the broader population of patients with gastroesophageal reflux. They should be con-sidered for antireflux surgery when patient data suggest severe disease or predict the need for long-term medical management. Most patients with BE are symptomatic. Although it has been argued that some patients with BE may not have symptoms, careful history taking will reveal the presence of symptoms in most, if not all, patients.Patients with BE have a spectrum of disease ranging from visually identifiable but short segments, to long segments of classic BE. In general, however, they represent a relatively severe stage of gastroesophageal reflux, usually with markedly increased esophageal acid exposure, deficient LES characteris-tics, poor esophageal body function, and a high prevalence of duodenogastroesophageal reflux. Gastric hypersecretion occurs in 44% of patients. Most will require long-term PPI therapy for relief of symptoms and control of coexistent esophageal muco-sal injury. Given such profound deficits in esophageal physi-ology, antireflux surgery is an excellent means of long-term control of reflux symptoms for most patients with BE.The typical complications in BE include ulceration in the columnar-lined segment, stricture formation, and a dysplasia-cancer sequence. Barrett’s ulceration is unlike the erosive ulceration of reflux esophagitis in that it more closely resem-bles peptic ulceration in the stomach or duodenum, and has the same propensity to bleed, penetrate, or perforate. Fortunately, this complication occurs very rarely. The strictures found in BE occur at the squamocolumnar junction, and they are typically higher than peptic strictures in the absence of BE. Ulceration and stricture in association with BE were commonly reported before 1975, but with the advent of potent acid suppression medication, they have become less common. In contrast, the complication of adenocarcinoma developing in Barrett’s mucosa has become more common. Adenocarcinoma developing in Bar-rett’s mucosa was considered a rare tumor before 1975. Today, it occurs at approximately 0.2% to 0.5% per year of follow-up, which represents a risk 40 times that of the general popula-tion. Most, if not all, cases of adenocarcinoma of the esophagus arise in Barrett’s epithelium (Fig. 25-31). About one-third of all patients with BE present with malignancy.The long-term risk of progression to dysplasia and ade-nocarcinoma, although not the driving force behind the deci-sion to perform antireflux surgery, is a significant concern for both patient and physician. Although to date, there have been no prospective randomized studies documenting that antireflux surgery has an effect on the risk of progression to dysplasia and carcinoma, complete control of reflux of gastric juice into the esophagus is clearly a desirable goal.Respiratory ComplicationsA significant proportion of patients with GERD will have associated respiratory symptoms. These patients may have laryngopharyngeal reflux-type symptoms, adult-onset asthma, or even idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. These symptoms and organ injury may occur in isolation or in conjunction with typi-cal reflux symptoms such as heartburn and regurgitation. Sev-eral studies have demonstrated that up to 50% of patients with asthma have either endoscopically evident esophagitis or abnor-mal distal esophageal acid exposure. These findings support a causal relationship between GERD and aerodigestive symptoms and complications in a proportion of patients.3Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   103501/03/19   6:03 PM 1036SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIABFigure 25-31. Photomicrographs. A. Barrett’s epithelium with severe dysplasia. (×200.) Note nuclear irregularity, stratification, and loss of polarity. B. Barrett’s epithelium with intramucosal carcinoma. (×66.) Note malignant cells in the mucosa (upper arrow), but not invading the muscularis mucosae (bottom arrow). (Reproduced with permission from Zuidema GD, Orringer MB: Shackelford’s Surgery of the Alimentary Tract, 3rd ed. Vol 1. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier/Saunders; 1991.)Etiology of Reflux-Induced Respiratory Symptoms. There are two mechanisms that have been proposed as the cause of reflux-induced respiratory symptoms. The reflux theory sug-gests that these symptoms are the direct result of laryngopha-ryngeal exposure and aspiration of gastric contents. The reflex theory suggests that the vagal-mediated afferent fibers result in bronchoconstriction during episodes of distal esophageal acidification. The evidence supporting a mechanism of direct exposure to the aerodigestive system is based in clinical studies that have documented a strong correlation between idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and hiatal hernia. In addition, the presence of GERD was demonstrated to be highly associated with several pulmonary diseases in a recent Department of Veteran Affairs multivariate analysis. Next, with ambulatory pH testing, acid exposure within the proximal esophagus is more frequently identified in patients with gastroesophageal reflux and respi-ratory symptoms than in patients who have gastroesophageal reflux symptoms alone. These findings are supported by scinti-graphic studies, which have demonstrated aspiration of ingested radioisotope in patients with both gastroesophageal reflux and pulmonary symptoms. In animal studies, tracheal instillation of acid has been demonstrated to profoundly increase airway resis-tance. Finally, in patients who have undergone multichannel intraluminal impedance testing with a catheter configured to detect laryngopharyngeal reflux, a correlation between proxi-mal fluid movement and laryngopharyngeal symptoms, such as cough, can be demonstrated.The reflex mechanism is supported by the bronchocon-striction that occurs with the infusion of acid into the distal esophagus. There is a shared embryologic origin of the tracheo-esophageal tract and vagus nerve, and this reflex is thought to be an afferent fiber–mediated reflex that protects the aerodigestive system from the aspiration of refluxate. In patients with respira-tory symptoms and documented gastroesophageal reflux with-out proximal esophageal acid exposure, pulmonary symptoms will often times significantly improve or completely resolve after undergoing laparoscopic fundoplication. It is likely that both of the proposed mechanisms work simultaneously to cause these symptoms in the face of GERD.The most difficult clinical challenge in formulating a treat-ment plan for reflux-associated respiratory symptoms resides in establishing the diagnosis. Although the diagnosis may be straightforward in patients with predominately typical reflux symptoms and secondary respiratory complaints, a substan-tial number of patients will have respiratory symptoms that dominate the clinical scenario. Typical gastroesophageal reflux Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   103601/03/19   6:03 PM 1037ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25symptoms, such as heartburn and regurgitation, may often be completely absent only to be uncovered with objective esopha-geal physiology testing. Traditionally, the diagnosis of reflux-induced respiratory injury is established using ambulatory dual probe pH monitoring, with one probe positioned within the dis-tal esophagus and the other at a proximal location. Proximal probe positioning has included multiple locations such as the trachea, pharynx, and proximal esophagus. Although ambu-latory esophageal pH monitoring allows a direct correlation between esophageal acidification and respiratory symptoms, sensitivity of this testing modality is poor, and the temporal rela-tionship between laryngeal or pulmonary symptoms and reflux events is complex. In addition, as the refluxed gastric fluid trav-els proximally, it may be neutralized by saliva and therefore go undetected with pH monitoring. Impedance testing may also be used to detect the movement of fluid throughout the entire esophageal column regardless of pH content.Treatment. Once the diagnosis is established, treatment may be initiated with either PPI therapy or antireflux surgery. A trial of high-dose PPI therapy may help establish that reflux is partly or completely responsible for the respiratory symptoms. It is important to note that the persistence of symptoms in the face of aggressive PPI treatment does not necessarily rule out reflux as a possible cofactor or sole etiology.Although there is probably some element of a placebo effect, relief of respiratory symptoms can be anticipated in up to 50% of patients with reflux-induced asthma treated with anti-secretory medications. However, when examined objectively, <15% of patients can be expected to have improvement in their pulmonary function with medical therapy. In properly selected patients, antireflux surgery improves respiratory symptoms in nearly 90% of children and 70% of adults with asthma and reflux disease. Improvements in pulmonary function can be demonstrated in around 30% of patients. Uncontrolled studies of the two forms of therapy (PPI and surgery) and the evidence from the two randomized controlled trials of medical vs. sur-gical therapy indicate that surgical valve reconstruction is the most effective therapy for reflux-induced asthma. The superi-ority of the surgery over PPI is most noticeable in the supine position, which corresponds with the nadir of PPI blood levels and resultant acid breakthrough and is the time in the circadian cycle when asthma symptoms are at their worst.In asthmatic patients with an esophageal motility disorder, performing an antireflux operation will not prevent the regur-gitation and possible aspiration of swallowed liquid or food “upstream” to the valve reconstruction. It is critical that esopha-geal body function be considered prior to surgical intervention in this patient population.Medical Therapy for Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease.  With the widespread availability of over-the-counter antisecre-tory medications, most patients with mild or moderate symp-toms will carry self-medication. When initially identified with mild symptoms of uncomplicated GERD, patients can be placed on 12 weeks of simple antacids before diagnostic testing is initi-ated. This approach may successfully and completely resolve the symptoms. Patients should be counseled to elevate the head of the bed; avoid tight-fitting clothing; eat small, frequent meals; avoid eating the nighttime meal immediately prior to bedtime; and avoid alcohol, coffee, chocolate, and peppermint, which are known to reduce resting LES pressure and may aggravate symptoms.Used in combination with simple antacids, alginic acid may augment the relief of symptoms by creating a physical bar-rier to reflux, as well as by acid reduction. Alginic acid reacts with sodium bicarbonate in the presence of saliva to form a highly viscous solution that floats like a raft on the surface of the gastric contents. When reflux occurs, this protective layer is refluxed into the esophagus, and acts as a protective barrier against the noxious gastric contents. Medications to promote gastric emptying, such as metoclopramide or domperidone, are beneficial in early disease but of little value in more severe disease.In patients with persistent symptoms, the mainstay of medical therapy is acid suppression. High-dosage regimens of hydrogen potassium PPIs, such as omeprazole (up to 40 mg/d), can reduce gastric acidity by as much as 80% to 90%. This usu-ally heals mild esophagitis. In severe esophagitis, healing may occur in only one-half of the patients. In patients who reflux a combination of gastric and duodenal juice, acid-suppression therapy may give relief of symptoms, while still allowing mixed reflux to occur. This can allow persistent mucosal damage in an asymptomatic patient. Unfortunately, within 6 months of discontinuation of any form of medical therapy for GERD, 80% of patients have a recurrence of symptoms, and 40% of individuals with daily GERD eventually develop symptoms that “breakthrough” adequately dosed PPIs. Once initiated, most patients with GERD will require lifelong treatment with PPIs, both to relieve symptoms and to control any coexistent esophagitis or stricture. Although control of symptoms has his-torically served as the endpoint of therapy, the wisdom of this approach has recently been questioned, particularly in patients with BE. Evidence suggesting that reflux control may prevent the development of adenocarcinoma and lead to regression of dysplastic and nondysplastic Barrett’s segments has led many to consider control of reflux, and not symptom control, a better therapeutic endpoint. However, this hypothesis remains contro-versial. It should be noted that complete control of reflux using PPIs can be difficult, as has been highlighted by studies of acid breakthrough while on PPI therapy and of persistent reflux fol-lowing antireflux surgery. Castell, Triadafilopoulos, and others have shown that 40% to 80% of patients with BE continue to have abnormal esophageal acid exposure despite up to 20 mg twice daily of PPIs. Ablation trials have shown that mean doses of 56 mg of omeprazole were necessary to normalize 24-hour esophageal pH studies. It is likely that antireflux surgery results in more reproducible and reliable elimination of reflux of both acid and duodenal contents, although long-term outcome studies suggest that as many as 25% of postfundoplication patients will have persistent pathologic esophageal acid exposure confirmed by positive 24-hour pH studies.Suggested Therapeutic Approach. Traditionally a stepwise approach is used for the treatment of GERD. First-line therapy entails antisecretory medication, usually PPIs, in most patients. Failure of medication to adequately control GERD symptoms suggests either that the patient may have relatively severe dis-ease or a non-GERD cause for his or her symptoms. Endoscopic examination at this stage of the patient’s evaluation is recom-mended and will provide the opportunity to assess the degree of mucosal injury and presence of BE. Treatment options for these patients entails either long term PPI use vs. antireflux surgery. Laparoscopic antireflux surgery in these patients achieves long-term control of symptoms in 85% to 90%. The measurement Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   103701/03/19   6:03 PM 1038SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIof esophageal acid exposure via 24-hour pH should be under-taken when patients are considered for surgery. The status of the LES and esophageal body function with esophageal manom-etry should also be performed at this stage. These studies will serve to establish the diagnosis and assess esophageal body dysfunction.Surgical Therapy for Gastroesophageal  Reflux DiseaseSelection of Patients for Surgery. Studies of the natural history of GERD indicate that most patients have a relatively benign form of the disease that is responsive to lifestyle changes and dietary and medical therapy and do not need surgical treat-ment. Approximately 25% to 50% of the patients with GERD have persistent or progressive disease, and it is this patient pop-ulation that is best suited to surgical therapy. In the past, the presence of esophagitis and a structurally defective LES were the primary indications for surgical treatment, and many inter-nists and surgeons were reluctant to recommend operative pro-cedures in their absence. However, one should not be deterred from considering antireflux surgery in a symptomatic patient with or without esophagitis or a defective sphincter, provided the disease process has been objectively documented by 24-hour pH monitoring. This is particularly true in patients who have become dependent upon therapy with PPIs, or require increasing doses to control their symptoms. It is important to note that a good response to medical therapy in this group of patients pre-dicts an excellent outcome following antireflux surgery.In general, the key indications for antireflux surgery are (a) objectively proven gastroesophageal reflux disease, and (b) typical symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux disease (heartburn and/or regurgitation) despite adequate medical management, or (c) a younger patient unwilling to take lifelong medication. In addition, a structurally defective LES can also predict which patients are more likely to fail with medical therapy. Patients with normal sphincter pressures tend to remain well controlled with medical therapy, whereas patients with a structurally defec-tive LES may not respond as well to medical therapy, and often develop recurrent symptoms within 1 to 2 years of beginning therapy. Such patients should be considered for an antireflux operation, regardless of the presence or absence of endoscopic esophagitis.Young patients with documented reflux disease with or without a defective LES are also excellent candidates for anti-reflux surgery. They usually will require long-term medical therapy for control of their symptoms, and some will go on to develop complications of the disease. An analysis of the cost of therapy based on data from the Veterans Administration Coop-erative trial indicates that surgery has a cost advantage over medical therapy in patients <49 years of age.Severe endoscopic esophagitis in a symptomatic patient with a structurally defective LES is also an indication for early surgical therapy. These patients are prone to breakthrough of their symptoms while receiving medical therapy. Symptoms and mucosal injury can be controlled in such patients, but careful monitoring is required, and increasing dosages of PPIs are nec-essary. In everyday clinical practice, however, such treatment can be both difficult and impractical, and, in such cases, antire-flux surgery can be considered early, especially if PPI therapy is problematic.The development of a stricture in a patient represents a fail-ure of medical therapy, and it is also an indication for a surgical antireflux procedure. In addition, strictures are often associated with a structurally defective sphincter and loss of esophageal contractility. Before proceeding with surgical treatment, malig-nancy and a drug-related etiology of the stricture should be excluded, and the stricture should be progressively dilated up to a 50 to 60F bougie. When the stricture is fully dilated, the relief of dysphagia is evaluated, and esophageal manometry is performed to determine the adequacy of peristalsis in the distal esophagus. If dysphagia is relieved and the amplitude of esopha-geal contractions is adequate, an antireflux procedure should be performed; if there is a global loss of esophageal contractility, caution should be exercised in performing an antireflux proce-dure with a complete fundoplication, and a partial fundoplica-tion should be considered.Barrett’s CLE is commonly associated with a severe structural defect of the LES and often poor contractility of the esophageal body. Patients with BE are at risk of the development of an adenocarcinoma. Whilst surgeons would like to think that an antireflux procedure can reduce the risk of progression to cancer,  the evidence supporting this is relatively weak, and for now Barrett’s esophagus should be considered to be evidence that the patient has gastroesophageal reflux, and progression to antireflux surgery is indicated for the treatment of reflux symptoms, not cancer progression. If, however, high grade dysplasia or intramucosal carcinoma is found on mucosal biopsy specimens, treatment should then be directed at the BE and the lesion, using either evaluation endoscopic ablation, endoscopic resection, or esophageal resection.The majority of patients requiring treatment for reflux have a relatively mild form of disease and will respond to antise-cretory medications. Patients with more severe forms of disease, particularly those who develop persistent or progressive disease, should be considered for definitive therapy. Laparoscopic fun-doplication will provide a long-term cure in the majority of these patients, with minimal discomfort and an early return to normal activity.Preoperative Evaluation. Before proceeding with an antire-flux operation, several factors should be evaluated. The clinical symptoms should be consistent with the diagnosis of gastro-esophageal reflux. Patients presenting with the typical symp-toms of heartburn and/or regurgitation which have responded, at least partly, to PPI therapy, will generally do well following surgery, whereas patients with atypical symptoms have a less predictable response. Reflux should also be objectively con-firmed by either the presence of ulcerative esophagitis or an abnormal 24-hour pH study.The propulsive force of the body of the esophagus should be evaluated by esophageal manometry to determine if it has sufficient power to propel a bolus of food through a newly reconstructed valve. Patients with normal peristaltic contrac-tions can be considered for a 360° Nissen fundoplication or a partial fundoplication, depending on patient and surgeon pref-erences. When peristalsis is absent, a partial fundoplication is probably the procedure of choice, but only if achalasia has been ruled out.Hiatal anatomy should also be assessed. In patients with smaller hiatal hernias, endoscopy evaluation usually provides sufficient information. However, when patients present with a very large hiatus hernia or for revision surgery after previous antireflux surgery, contrast radiology provides better anatomical information. The concept of anatomic shortening of the esoph-agus is controversial, with divergent opinions held about how Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   103801/03/19   6:03 PM 1039ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25DistentionFigure 25-32. A graphic illustration of the shortening of the lower esophageal sphincter that occurs as the sphincter is “taken up” by the cardia as the stomach distends.common this problem is. Believers claim that anatomic short-ening of the esophagus compromises the ability of the surgeon to perform an adequate repair without tension and that this can lead to an increased incidence of breakdown or thoracic displace-ment of the repair. Some of those who hold this view claim that esophageal shortening is present when a barium swallow X-ray identifies a sliding hiatal hernia that will not reduce in the upright position or that measures more than 5 cm in length at endoscopy. When such identification is made, these surgeons usually add a gastroplasty to the antireflux procedure. Others claim that esoph-ageal shortening is overdiagnosed and rarely seen, and that the morbidity of adding a gastroplasty outweighs any benefits. These surgeons would recommend a standard antireflux procedure in all patients undergoing primary surgery.Principles of Surgical Therapy. The primary goal of anti-reflux surgery is to safely create a new antireflux valve at the gastroesophageal junction, while preserving the patient’s abil-ity to swallow normally and to belch to relieve gaseous disten-tion. Regardless of the choice of the procedure, this goal can be achieved if attention is paid to some basic principles when reconstructing the antireflux mechanism. First, the operation should create a flap valve which prevents regurgitation of gas-tric contents into the esophagus. This will result in an increase in the pressure of the distal esophageal sphincter region. Follow-ing a Nissen fundoplication the expected increase is to a level twice the resting gastric pressure (i.e., 12 mmHg for a gastric pressure of 6 mmHg). The extent of the pressure rise is often less following a partial fundoplication, although with all types of fundoplication the length of the reconstructed valve should be at least 3 cm. This not only augments sphincter characteristics in patients in whom they are reduced before surgery but also prevents unfolding of a normal sphincter in response to gastric distention (Fig. 25-32). Preoperative and postoperative esopha-geal manometry measurements have shown that the resting sphincter pressure and the overall sphincter length can be surgi-cally augmented over preoperative values, and that the change in the former is a function of the degree of gastric wrap around the esophagus (Fig. 25-33). However, the aim of any fundopli-cation is to create a loose wrap and to maintain the position of the gastric fundus close to the distal intra-abdominal esophagus, in a flap valve arrangement. The efficacy of this relies on the close relationship between the fundus and the esophagus, not the “tightness” of the wrap.Second, the operation should place an adequate length of the distal esophageal sphincter in the positive-pressure 051015˜ P mmHg 20240Degree of wrapY = 4.63 + .023 (x)P < .01BelseyHillN=15NissenN=15N=15360Figure 25-33. The relationship between the augmentation of sphincter pressure over preoperative pressure (ΔP) and the degree of gastric fundic wrap in three different antireflux procedures. (Repro-duced with permission from O’Sullivan GC, DeMeester TR, Joels-son BE, et al: Interaction of lower esophageal sphincter pressure and length of sphincter in the abdomen as determinants of gastro-esophageal competence, Am J Surg. 1982 Jan;143(1):40-47.)environment of the abdomen by a method that ensures its response to changes in intra-abdominal pressure. The permanent restoration of 2 or more cm of abdominal esophagus ensures the preservation of the relationship between the fundus and the esophagus. All of the popular antireflux procedures increase the length of the sphincter exposed to abdominal pressure by an average of at least 1 cm.Third, the operation should allow the reconstructed car-dia to relax on deglutition. In normal swallowing, a vagally mediated relaxation of the distal esophageal sphincter and the gastric fundus occurs. The relaxation lasts for approximately 10 seconds and is followed by a rapid recovery to the former tonicity. To ensure relaxation of the sphincter, three factors are important: (a) Only the fundus of the stomach should be used to buttress the sphincter, because it is known to relax in con-cert with the sphincter; (b) the gastric wrap should be properly placed around the sphincter and not incorporate a portion of the stomach or be placed around the stomach itself, because the body of the stomach does not relax with swallowing; and (c) damage to the vagal nerves during dissection of the thoracic esophagus should be avoided because it may result in failure of the sphincter to relax.Fourth, the fundoplication should not increase the resis-tance of the relaxed sphincter to a level that exceeds the peri-staltic power of the body of the esophagus. The resistance of the relaxed sphincter depends on the degree, length, and diameter of the gastric fundic wrap, and on the variation in intra-abdominal pressure. A 360° gastric wrap should be no longer than 2 cm and constructed over a large (50 to 60F) bougie. This will ensure that the relaxed sphincter will have an adequate diameter with minimal resistance. A bougie is not necessary when construct-ing a partial wrap.Fifth, the operation should ensure that the fundoplication can be placed in the abdomen without undue tension and main-tained there by approximating the crura of the diaphragm above the repair. Leaving the fundoplication in the thorax converts a sliding hernia into a PEH, with all the complications associ-ated with that condition. Maintaining the repair in the abdomen Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   103901/03/19   6:03 PM 1040SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIunder tension predisposes to an increased incidence of recur-rence. How common this problem is encountered is disputed, with some surgeons advocating lengthening the esophagus by gastroplasty and constructing a partial fundoplication, and oth-ers claiming that this issue is now rarely encountered.Procedure Selection. A laparoscopic approach is now used routinely in all patients undergoing primary antireflux surgery. Some surgeons advocate the use of a single antireflux procedure for all patients, whereas others advocate a tailored approach. Advocates of the laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication as the pro-cedure of choice for a primary antireflux repair would generally apply this procedure in all patients with normal or near normal esophageal motility, and they would reserve a partial fundopli-cation for use in individuals with poor esophageal body motility. Others, based on the good longer-term outcomes now reported following partial fundoplication procedures, advocate the rou-tine application of a partial fundoplication procedure, thereby avoiding any concerns about constructing a fundoplication in individuals with poor esophageal motility.Experience and randomized studies have shown that both the Nissen fundoplication and various partial fundoplication procedures are all effective and durable antireflux repairs that generate an excellent outcome in approximately 90% of patients at longer-term follow-up.Primary Antireflux RepairsNissen Fundoplication. The most common antireflux proce-dure is the Nissen fundoplication. In the past, this procedure has been performed through an open abdominal or a chest incision, but with the development of laparoscopic approaches primary antireflux surgery is now routinely undertaken using the laparo-scope. Rudolph Nissen described this procedure as a 360° fun-doplication around the lower esophagus for a distance of 4 to  5 cm, without division of the short gastric blood vessels. Although this provided good control of reflux, it was associated with a number of side effects that have encouraged modifica-tions of the procedure as originally described. These include using only the gastric fundus to envelop the esophagus in a fash-ion analogous to a Witzel jejunostomy, sizing the fundoplication with a large (50 to 60F) bougie, limiting the length of the fun-doplication to 1 to 2 cm, and dividing the short gastric vessels. The essential elements necessary for the performance of a trans-abdominal fundoplication are common to both the laparoscopic and open procedures and include the following:1.	Hiatal dissection and preservation of both vagi along their entire length2.	Circumferential esophageal mobilization3.	Hiatal closure, usually posterior to the esophagus4.	Creation of a short and floppy fundoplication over an esoph-ageal dilatorIn addition, many surgeons also routinely divide the short gastric blood vessels, although this step is not universally applied, and the results of several randomized trials have failed to show that this step yields any benefit.The laparoscopic approach to fundoplication has now replaced the open abdominal Nissen fundoplication as the pro-cedure of choice. Five ports are usually used (Fig. 25-34), and dissection is begun by incising the gastrohepatic omentum above and below the hepatic branch of the anterior vagus nerve, which is usually preserved. The circumference of the diaphragmatic  L  R Figure 25-34. Patient positioning and trocar placement for lap-aroscopic antireflux surgery. The patient is placed with the head elevated approximately 30° in the modified lithotomy position. The surgeon stands between the patient’s legs, and the procedure is completed using five abdominal access ports.hiatus is dissected and the esophagus is mobilized by careful dis-section of the anterior and posterior soft tissues within the hiatus. The esophagus is held anterior and to the left and the hiatal pillars are approximated with interrupted nonabsorbable sutures, starting posteriorly and working anteriorly. A tension-free fundoplication should be constructed. This can usually be achieved either with or without division of the short gastric blood vessels, accord-ing to surgeon preference. If the vessels are divided, the upper one-third of the greater curvature is mobilized by sequentially dissecting and dividing these vessels, commencing distally and working proximally. Following complete fundal mobilization, the posterior wall of the fundus is brought behind the esophagus to the right side, and the anterior wall of the fundus is brought anterior to the esophagus. The fundic lips are manipulated to allow the fundus to envelop the esophagus without twisting. A 50 to 60F bougie is passed to properly size the fundoplication, and it is sutured using nonabsorbable sutures. Some surgeons use a single U-stitch of 2-0 polypropylene buttressed with felt pledgets (Fig. 25-35), and others use 2-4 interrupted sutures.Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   104001/03/19   6:03 PM 1041ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25Posterior Partial Fundoplication. Partial fundoplications were developed as an alternative to the Nissen procedure in an attempt to minimize the risk of postfundoplication side effects, such as dysphagia, inability to belch, and flatulence. The commonest approach has been a posterior partial or Toupet fundoplication. Some surgeons use this type of procedure for all patients present-ing for antireflux surgery, whereas others apply a tailored approach in which a partial fundoplication is constructed in patients with impaired esophageal motility, in which the propulsive force of the esophagus is thought to be insufficient to overcome the outflow obstruction of a complete fundoplication. The Toupet posterior partial fundoplication consists of a 270° gastric fundoplication around the distal 4 cm of esophagus (Fig. 25-36). It is usually stabilized by anchoring the wrap posteriorly to the hiatal rim.Anterior Partial Fundoplication. An alternative approach to partial fundoplication is to construct an anterior partial fundopli-cation. Following posterior hiatal repair, the anterior fundus is rolled over the front of the esophagus and sutured to the hiatal rim and the esophageal wall. Division of the short gastric vessels Figure 25-35. A. Laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication is performed with a five-trocar technique. B. The liver retractor is affixed to a mechani-cal arm to hold it in place throughout the operation. C. After division of the gastrohepatic omentum above the hepatic branch of the vagus (pars flaccida), the surgeon places a blunt atraumatic grasper beneath the phrenoesophageal ligament. D. After completion of the crural closure, an atraumatic grasper is placed right to left behind the gastroesophageal junction. The grasper is withdrawn, pulling the posterior aspect of the gastric fundus behind the esophagus. E. Once the suture positions are chosen, the first stitch (2-0 silk, 20 cm long) is introduced through the 10-mm trocar, and the needle is passed first through the left limb of the fundus, then the esophagus (2.5 cm above the gastroesophageal junction), then through the right limb of the fundus. F. Final position of the fundoplication.Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   104101/03/19   6:03 PM 1042SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 25-36. Completed laparoscopic posterior partial (Toupet) fundoplication. The fundoplication does not cover the anterior sur-face of the esophagus, and it is stabilized by suturing the fundus to the side of the esophagus, and posteriorly to the right hiatal pillar.is never needed when constructing this type of fundoplication. Various degrees of anterior partial fundoplication have been described—90°, 120°, 180°. The anterior 180° partial fundopli-cation (Fig. 25-37) provides a more robust fundoplication and achieves an excellent longer-term outcome in approximately 90% of patients at follow-up of at least 10 years. With this procedure, the fundus and esophagus are sutured to the right side of the hiatal rim to create a flap valve at the gastroesophageal junction and to stabilize a 3 to 4 cm length of intra-abdominal esophagus.Collis Gastroplasty. When a shortened esophagus is encoun-tered, many surgeons choose to add an esophageal lengthening procedure before fundoplication, to reduce the tension on the gastroesophageal junction, believing this will minimize the risk of failure due to postoperative hiatus hernia. The commonest approach to this is the Collis gastroplasty. This entails using a stapler to divide the cardia and upper stomach, parallel to the lesser curvature of Figure 25-37. Completed laparoscopic anterior 180° partial fun-doplication. The fundoplication fully covers the anterior surface of the esophagus, and it is stabilized by suturing the fundus to the right side of the esophagus, and to the right hiatal pillar. Unlike the Nissen procedure, the fundus is not pulled behind the esophagus.the stomach, thereby creating a gastric tube in continuity with the esophagus, and effectively lengthening the esophagus by several centimeters. Laparoscopic techniques for Collis gastroplasty have been described (Fig. 25-38). Following gastroplasty a fundoplica-tion is constructed, with the highest suture is placed on the native esophagus when constructing a Nissen fundoplication. Not all sur-geons choose to undertake a Collis procedure, however, as there is controversy about the actual incidence of the shortened esophagus and widely divergent views are held about how often this prob-lem is encountered. In addition, some surgeons have questioned the wisdom of creating an amotile tube of gastric wall, which can secrete acid, and then placing a Nissen fundoplication below this.Outcome After Fundoplication. Studies of long-term outcome following both open and laparoscopic fundoplication document the ability of laparoscopic fundoplication to relieve typical reflux symptoms (heartburn, regurgitation, and dysphagia) in more than Figure 25-35. (Continued )Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   104201/03/19   6:03 PM 1043ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25Figure 25-38. A. After removal of the fat pad and release of tension on the Penrose drain, the gastroesophageal junction (GES) retracts to the level of the hiatus. The interior end of the staple line is marked 2/5 cm below the angle of His. B. The first horizontal firing of the stapler occurs by maximally articulating the stapler to the left, aiming toward the previously marked spot adjacent to the dilator. C. The vertical staple line is created by a single firing of the GIA placed parallel and flush against the 48F dilator. D. The highest Nissen fundoplication suture is placed on the native esophagus, and the second suture tucks in the apex of the staple line.90% of patients at follow-up intervals averaging 2 to 3 years and 80% to 90% of patients 5 years or more following surgery. This includes evidence-based reviews of antireflux surgery, pro-spective randomized trials comparing antireflux surgery to PPI therapy and open to laparoscopic fundoplication and analysis of U.S. national trends in use and outcomes. Postoperative pH stud-ies indicate that more than 90% of patients will normalize their pH tracings. The results of laparoscopic fundoplication compare favorably with those of the “modern” era of open fundoplica-tion. They also indicate the less predictable outcome of atypical reflux symptoms (cough, asthma, laryngitis) after surgery, being relieved in only two-thirds of patients.The goal of surgical treatment for GERD is to relieve the symptoms of reflux by reestablishing the gastroesophageal barrier. The challenge is to accomplish this without inducing dysphagia or other untoward side effects. Dysphagia, existing before surgery, usually improves following laparoscopic fun-doplication. Temporary dysphagia is common after surgery and generally resolves within 3 months, but it can take up to  12 months in some individuals, and dysphagia sufficient to require ongoing dietary modification persists in up to 5% of individuals following Nissen fundoplication. Other side effects common to antireflux surgery include the inability to belch and vomit and increased flatulence. Most patients cannot vomit through an intact wrap, though this is rarely clinically relevant. Most patients are unable to belch gas from the stomach in the first 3 to 6 months after fundoplication, but 80% to 90% regain the ability to belch normally beyond the first 12 months of fol-low-up. Hyperflatulence is a common and noticeable problem, likely related to increased air swallowing that is present in most patients with reflux disease, aggravated by the inability to belch in some patients.Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   104301/03/19   6:03 PM 1044SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIRandomized Controlled Trials Addressing Surgical Technique Division of the Short Gastric Blood Vessels Originally, Nissen’s description of a total fundoplication entailed a 360° fundoplication during which the short gastric blood vessels were left intact. However, with reports of troublesome postoperative dysphagia, division of these vessels—to achieve full fundal mobilization and thereby ensure a loose fundoplication—was promoted and has entered common practice. The evidence sup-porting dividing these vessels has been based on the outcomes from uncontrolled case series of patients undergoing Nissen fundoplication either with vs. without division of the short gas-tric vessels. However, the results from these studies have been conflicting, with different proponents reporting good results irrespective of whether these vessels have been divided or not. To address this issue, six randomized trials that enrolled a total of 438 patients have been reported. None of these trials demon-strated any differences for the postoperative dysphagia or recur-rent gastro-esophageal reflux. However, in the three largest of the six trials an increased incidence of flatulence and bloating symptoms, as well as greater difficulty with belching, was seen in patients in whom the short gastric vessels were divided.A recent meta-analysis from Engstrom et al, generated by combining the raw data from Australian and Swedish trials, eval-uated a larger cohort of 201 patients, with 12 years of follow-up in 170, and also confirmed equivalent reflux control but found more abdominal bloating after division of the short gastric ves-sels. Overall, these trials fail to support the belief that dividing the short gastric vessels improves any outcome following Nissen fun-doplication. The trials actually suggest that dividing the vessels increases the complexity of the procedure and leads to a poorer outcome due to the increase in bloating symptoms.Nissen vs. Posterior Partial Fundoplication Eleven  randomized trials have compared Nissen vs. posterior partial fundoplication. Some of the trials contributed little to the pool of evidence, as they are either small or underpowered, and failed to show significant outcome differences. The larger trials, however, have consistently demonstrated equivalent reflux control, but they also show a reduced incidence of wind-related side-effects (flatulence, bloating, and inability to belch) following posterior partial fundoplication procedures, although less dysphagia fol-lowing a posterior fundoplication was only demonstrated in 2 of the 11 trials. Lundell et al reported the outcomes of Nissen vs. Toupet partial fundoplication in a trial that enrolled 137 patients with reported follow-up to 18 years. Reflux control and dyspha-gia symptoms were similar, but flatulence was commoner after Nissen fundoplication at some medium-term follow-up time points, and revision surgery was more common following Nissen fundoplication, mainly to correct postoperative paraoesophageal herniation. At 18 years follow-up, success rates of more than 80% were reported for both procedures, as well as no significant differences in the incidence of side effects. The data from this trial suggested that the mechanical side effects following Nis-sen fundoplication progressively improve with very long-term follow-up. Strate et al reported 2-year follow-up in a trial that enrolled 200 patients. Approximately 85% of each group was satisfied with the clinical outcome, but dysphagia was signifi-cantly more common following Nissen fundoplication (19 vs. 8 patients).Other trials (Guérin et al–140 patients, Booth et al–127, Khan et al–121, Shaw et al–100) also report similar reflux control within the first few years of follow-up. Only Booth et al demonstrated less dysphagia following posterior fundoplica-tion. Subgroup analysis in 3 trials (Booth, Shaw, Zornig) did not reveal differences between patients with vs. without poor pre-operative oesophageal motility. Overall these trials suggest that some side-effects, mainly wind-related issues, are less common following posterior partial fundoplication. However, the hypoth-esis that dysphagia is less of a problem following posterior par-tial fundoplication has only been substantiated in 2 of 11 trials.Nissen vs. Anterior Fundoplication Six trials have evaluated Nissen vs. anterior partial fundoplication variants. Four have assessed Nissen vs. anterior 180° partial fundoplication (Watson et al–107 patients, Baigrie et al–161, Cao et al–100, Raue et al–64). These trials all demonstrated equivalent reflux control, but less dysphagia and less wind-related side effects after anterior 180° partial fundoplication at up to 5 years follow-up. Only the study from Watson et al has reported follow-up to 10 years, and at late follow-up in their trial there were no significant outcome differences for the two procedures, with equivalent control of reflux, and no differences for side effects due to a progressive decline in dysphagia as follow-up extended beyond 5 years.Two trials compared laparoscopic anterior 90° partial fundoplication vs. Nissen fundoplication (Watson et al–112 patients, Spence et al–79). In both of these trials, side-effects were less common following anterior 90° fundoplication, but this was offset by a slightly higher incidence of recurrent reflux at up to 5 years follow-up. Satisfaction with the overall outcome was similar for both fundoplication variants.Anterior vs. Posterior Partial Fundoplication Two ran-domized trials have directly compared anterior vs. posterior partial fundoplication. Hagedorn et al randomized 95 patients to undergo either Toupet vs. anterior 120° partial fundoplica-tion, and Khan et al enrolled 103 patients to anterior 180° vs. posterior partial fundoplication. Both studies demonstrated bet-ter reflux control, offset by more side effects following posterior partial fundoplication. The anterior 120° partial fundoplication performed by Hagedorn et al was similar to the anterior 90° vari-ant described above. However, the outcomes following this pro-cedure were much worse in this trial than the outcomes in other studies, with the average exposure time to acid (pH <4%–5.6%)  following anterior fundoplication in their study unusually high compared to other studies. Khan et al only reported 6 months follow-up, and longer-term outcomes are awaited before draw-ing firm conclusions. The overall results from all eight trials that included an anterior fundoplication variant suggest that this type of fundoplication achieves satisfactory reflux control, with less dysphagia and other side-effects, yielding a good overall outcome. However, the reduced incidence of troublesome side-effects is traded off against a higher risk of recurrent reflux.Outcome of Antireflux Surgery in Patients With Barrett’s  Esophagus. Few studies have focused on the alleviation of symp-toms after antireflux surgery in patients with BE (Table 25-7). Those that are available document excellent to good results in 72% to 95% of patients at 5 years following surgery. Several nonrandomized studies have compared medical and surgical therapy and report better outcomes after antireflux surgery. Par-rilla and colleagues reported the only randomized trial to evaluate this issue. They enrolled 101 patients over 18 years, and median follow-up was 6 years. Medical therapy consisted of 20 mg  of omeprazole (PPI) twice daily since 1992 in all medically treated patients, and surgical therapy consisted of an open Nissen Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   104401/03/19   6:03 PM 1045ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25Table 25-7Symptomatic outcome of surgical therapy for Barrett’s esophagusAUTHORYEARNO. OF PATIENTS% EXCELLENT TO GOOD RESPONSEMEAN FOLLOW-UP, YEARSStarnes19848752Williamson199037923DeMeester199035773McDonald199611382.26.5Ortiz19963290.65fundoplication. The symptomatic outcome in the two groups was nearly identical, although esophagitis and/or stricture persisted in 20% of the medically treated patients, compared to only 3% to 7% of patients following antireflux surgery. About 15% of patients had abnormal acid exposure after surgery. Although pH data were not routinely collected in patients on PPI therapy, in the subgroup of 12 patients that did have 24-hour monitoring on treat-ment, 3 of 12 (25%) had persistently high esophageal acid expo-sure, and most (75%) had persistently high bilirubin exposure.The common belief that Barrett’s epithelium cannot be reversed by antireflux surgery may not be correct. Within the control arm of a randomized trial of ablation vs. surveillance, Bright and associates identified approximately 50% regression in the length of Barrett’s esophagus in 20 patients within the control arm of a randomized trial of ablation vs. surveillance.Current data indicate that patients with BE should remain in an endoscopic surveillance program following antireflux surgery. Biopsy specimens should be reviewed by a patholo-gist with expertise in the field. If low-grade dysplasia is con-firmed, biopsy specimens should be repeated after 12 weeks of high-dose acid suppression therapy. If high-grade dysplasia or intramucosal cancer is evident on more than one biopsy speci-men, then treatment is escalated. Treatment options include endoscopic mucosal resection, endoscopic ablation of the BE, or esophageal resection. Esophageal resection is advisable when an invasive cancer (stage T1b or deeper) is present, or for mul-tifocal long segment BE in younger and fit patients in whom endoscopic treatments are unlikely to be adequate. Endoscopic mucosal resection allows smaller intramucosal tumors to be removed with clear pathology margins, and it can be used as a “big biopsy” to obtain better pathological staging, and even to excise shorter segments of BE in a piecemeal fashion. Ablation, commonly using radiofrequency ablation, has been shown at short-term follow-up in a randomized trial to reduce the rate of progression from high grade dysplasia to invasive cancer by approximately 50%. However, following any endoscopic treatment, patients need to continue with close endoscopic sur-veillance as recurrence can occur and the longer-term outcome following these treatments remains uncertain. Early detection and treatment have been shown to decrease the mortality rate from esophageal cancer in these patients.If the dysplasia is reported as lower grade or indetermi-nant, then inflammatory change that is often confused with dysplasia should be suppressed by a course of acid suppression therapy in high doses for 2 to 3 months, followed by rebiopsy of the Barrett’s segment.Reoperation for Failed Antireflux Repairs. Failure of an antireflux procedure occurs when, after the repair, the patient is unable to swallow normally, experiences upper abdominal dis-comfort during and after meals, or has recurrence or persistence of reflux symptoms. The assessment of these symptoms and the selection of patients who need further surgery are challenging problems. Functional assessment of patients who have recur-rent, persistent, or emergent new symptoms following a primary antireflux repair is critical to identifying the cause of the failure. Analysis of patients requiring reoperation after a previous anti-reflux procedure shows that placement of the wrap around the stomach is the most frequent cause for failure after open proce-dures, while herniation of the repair into the chest is the most frequent cause of failure after a laparoscopic procedure. Partial or complete breakdown of the fundoplication and construction of a too-tight a fundoplication or overnarrowing the esophageal hiatus occurs with both open and closed procedures.Patients who have recurrence of heartburn and regurgitation without dysphagia and have good esophageal motility are most amenable to reoperation, and they can be expected to have an excellent outcome. When dysphagia is the cause of failure, the sit-uation can be more difficult to manage. If the dysphagia occurred immediately following the repair, it is usually due to a technical failure, most commonly a misplaced fundoplication around the upper stomach, or overnarrowing of the esophageal diaphragmatic hiatus and reoperation is usually satisfactory. When dysphagia is associated with poor motility and multiple previous repairs, fur-ther revision fundoplication is unlikely to be successful, and in otherwise fit patients it is appropriate to seriously consider esopha-geal resection. With each reoperation, the esophagus is damaged further, and the chance of preserving function is decreased. Also, blood supply is reduced, and ischemic necrosis of the esophagus can occur after several previous mobilizations.GIANT DIAPHRAGMATIC (HIATAL) HERNIASWith the advent of clinical radiology, it became evident that a diaphragmatic hernia was a relatively common abnormality and was not always accompanied by symptoms. Three types of esophageal hiatal hernia were identified: (a) the sliding hernia, type I, characterized by an upward dislocation of the cardia in the posterior mediastinum (Fig. 25-39A); (b) the roll-ing or PEH, type II, characterized by an upward dislocation of the gastric fundus alongside a normally positioned cardia (Fig. 25-39B); and (c) the combined sliding-rolling or mixed hernia, type III, characterized by an upward dislocation of both the cardia and the gastric fundus (Fig. 25-39C). The end stage of type I and type II hernias occurs when the whole stomach migrates up into the chest by rotating 180° around its longitu-dinal axis, with the cardia and pylorus as fixed points. In this situation, the abnormality is usually referred to as an intratho-racic stomach (Fig. 25-39D). In some taxonomies, a type IV  hiatal hernia is declared when an additional organ, usually the colon, herniates as well. Types II–IV hiatal hernias are also referred to as paraesophageal hernia (PEH), as a portion of the stomach is situated adjacent to the esophagus, above the gastroesophageal junction.Incidence and EtiologyThe true incidence of a hiatal hernia is difficult to determine because of the absence of symptoms in a large number of patients who are subsequently shown to have a hernia. When radiographic examinations are done in response to GI symptoms, Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   104501/03/19   6:03 PM 1046SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IICDBAFigure 25-39. A. Radiogram of a type I (sliding) hiatal hernia. B. Radiogram of a type II (rolling or paraesophageal) hernia. C. Radiogram of a type III (combined sliding-rolling or mixed) hernia. D. Radiogram of an intrathoracic stomach. This is the end stage of a large hiatal hernia regardless of its initial classification. Note that the stomach has rotated 180° around its longitudinal axis, with the cardia and pylorus as fixed points. (Reproduced with permission from Nyhus LM, Condon RE: Hernia, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1989.)Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   104601/03/19   6:03 PM 1047ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25the incidence of a sliding hiatal hernia is seven times higher than that of a PEH. The PEH is also known as the giant hiatal hernia. Over time the pressure gradient between the abdomen and chest enlarges the hiatal hernia. In many cases the type 1 sliding hernia will evolve into a type III mixed hernia. Type II hernias are quite rare. The age distribution of patients with PEHs is significantly different from that observed in sliding hiatal hernias. The median age of the former is 61 years old; of the latter, 48 years old. PEHs are more likely to occur in women by a ratio of 4:1.Structural deterioration of the phrenoesophageal mem-brane over time may explain the higher incidence of hiatal her-nias in the older age group. These changes involve thinning of the upper fascial layer of the phrenoesophageal membrane (i.e., the supradiaphragmatic continuation of the endothoracic fascia) and loss of elasticity in the lower fascial layer (i.e., the infra-diaphragmatic continuation of the transversalis fascia). Conse-quently, the phrenoesophageal membrane yields to stretching in the cranial direction due to the persistent intra-abdominal pres-sure and the tug of esophageal shortening on swallowing. Inter-estingly, the stretching and thinning occurs more anteriorly and posteriorly, with fixation of the left crus of the diaphragm to the stomach at the 3 o’clock position, as viewed from the foot. This creates an anterior and posterior hernia sac, the latter of which is often filled with epiphrenic and retroperitoneal fat. These obser-vations point to the conclusion that the development of a hiatal hernia is an age-related phenomenon secondary to repetitive upward stretching of the phrenoesophageal membrane.Clinical ManifestationsThe clinical presentation of a giant hiatal (paraesophageal) her-nia differs from that of a sliding hernia. There is usually a higher prevalence of symptoms of dysphagia and postprandial fullness with PEHs, but the typical symptoms of heartburn and regurgi-tation present in sliding hiatal hernias can also occur. Both are caused by gastroesophageal reflux secondary to an underlying mechanical deficiency of the cardia. The symptoms of dysphagia and postprandial fullness in patients with a PEH are explained by the compression of the adjacent esophagus by a distended cardia, or twisting of the GEJ by the torsion of the stomach that occurs as it becomes progressively displaced in the chest. The postprandial fullness or retrosternal chest pain is a thought to be a result of distension of the stomach with gas or food in the hiatal hernia. Many patients with sliding hernias and reflux symptoms will lose the reflux symptoms when the hernia evolves into the paraesophageal variety. This can be explained by the recreation of the cardiophrenic angle when the stomach herniates along-side the GEJ or becomes twisted in the sac. Repair of the hernia without addressing the reflux can create extremely bothersome heartburn. Respiratory complications are frequently associated with a PEH and consist of dyspnea and recurrent pneumonia from aspiration. New research demonstrates that the cause of dyspnea in the presence of a giant PEH is more likely to be left atrial compression, decreasing cardiac output, than a restrictive pulmonary effect, as has been hypothesized for many years.Approximately one-third of patients with a PEH are found to be anemic, which is due to recurrent bleeding from ulceration of the gastric mucosa in the herniated portion of the stomach, even if ulcerations are not detected at the time of endoscopy. The association of anemia and PEH is best proven by fixing the hernia. Anemia is corrected in >90% of patients with this condition. With time, more and more stomach migrates into the chest and can cause intermittent foregut obstruction due to the rotation that has occurred. In contrast, many patients with PEH are asymptomatic or complain of minor symptoms. However, the presence of a PEH can be life-threatening in that the hernia can lead to sudden catastrophic events, such as excessive bleed-ing or volvulus with acute gastric obstruction or infarction. With mild dilatation of the stomach, the gastric blood supply can be markedly reduced, causing gastric ischemia, ulceration, perfora-tion, and sepsis. The probability of incarceration/strangulation is not well known, although recent studies suggest that the lifetime risk is less than 5%, making this concern an insufficient concern for routine repair of the asymptomatic PEH.The symptoms of sliding hiatal hernias are usually due to functional abnormalities associated with gastroesophageal reflux and include heartburn, regurgitation, and dysphagia. These patients have a mechanically defective LES, giving rise to the reflux of gastric juice into the esophagus and the symp-toms of heartburn and regurgitation. The symptom of dysphagia occurs from the presence of mucosal edema, Schatzki’s ring, stricture, or the inability to organize peristaltic activity in the body of the esophagus as a consequence of the disease.There is a group of patients with sliding hiatal hernias not associated with reflux disease who have dysphagia without any obvious endoscopic or manometric explanation. Video barium radiograms have shown that the cause of dysphagia in these patients is an obstruction of the swallowed bolus by diaphrag-matic impingement on the herniated stomach. Manometrically, this is reflected by a double-humped high-pressure zone at the GEJ. The first pressure rise is due to diaphragmatic impinge-ment on the herniated stomach, and the second is due to the true distal esophageal sphincter. These patients usually have a mechanically competent sphincter, but the impingement of the diaphragm on the stomach can result in propelling the contents of the supradiaphragmatic portion of the stomach up into the esophagus and pharynx, resulting in complaints of pharyngeal regurgitation and aspiration. Consequently, this abnormality is often confused with typical GERD. Surgical reduction of the hernia results in relief of the dysphagia in 91% of patients.DiagnosisA chest X-ray with the patient in the upright position can diag-nose a hiatal hernia if it shows an air-fluid level behind the car-diac shadow. This is usually caused by a PEH or an intrathoracic stomach. The accuracy of the upper GI barium study in detect-ing a paraesophageal hiatal hernia is greater than for a sliding hernia because the latter can often spontaneously reduce. The paraesophageal hiatal hernia is a permanent herniation of the stomach into the thoracic cavity, so a barium swallow provides the diagnosis in virtually every case. Attention should be focused on the position of the GEJ, when seen, to differentiate it from a type II hernia (see Fig. 25-39B and C). Fiber-optic esophagos-copy is useful in the diagnosis and classification of a hiatal hernia because the scope can be retroflexed. In this position, a sliding hiatal hernia can be identified by noting a gastric pouch lined with rugal folds extending above the impression caused by the crura of the diaphragm, or measuring at least 2 cm between the crura, identified by having the patient sniff, and the squamoco-lumnar junction on withdrawal of the scope (Fig. 25-40). A PEH is identified on retroversion of the scope by noting a separate orifice adjacent to the GEJ into which gastric rugal folds ascend. A sliding-rolling or mixed hernia can be identified by noting a gastric pouch lined with rugal folds above the diaphragm, with the GEJ entering about midway up the side of the pouch.Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   104701/03/19   6:03 PM 1048SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 25-40. Endoscopic view through a retroflexed fiber-optic gastroscope showing the shaft of the scope (arrow) coming down through a sliding hernia. Note the gastric rugal folds extending above the impression caused by the crura of the diaphragm. (Repro-duced with permission from Nyhus LM, Condon RE: Hernia, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1989.)PathophysiologyPhysiologic testing with 24-hour esophageal pH monitoring has shown increased esophageal exposure to acid gastric juice in 60% of the patients with a paraesophageal hiatal hernia, com-pared with the observed 71% incidence in patients with a sliding hiatal hernia. It is now recognized that paraesophageal hiatal her-nia can be associated with pathologic gastroesophageal reflux.Physiologic studies have also shown that the competency of the cardia depends on an interrelationship between distal esophageal sphincter pressure, the length of the sphincter that is exposed to the positive-pressure environment of the abdomen, and the overall length of the sphincter. A deficiency in any one of these manometric characteristics of the sphincter is associated with incompetency of the cardia regardless of whether a hernia is present. Patients with a PEH who have an incompetent cardia have been shown to have a distal esophageal sphincter with nor-mal pressure, but a shortened overall length and displacement outside the positive-pressure environment of the abdomen. One might expect esophageal body function to be diminished with the esophagus “accordioned” up into the chest. Surprisingly, esophageal peristalsis in patients with PEH is normal in 88%.TreatmentThe treatment of paraesophageal hiatal hernia is largely surgi-cal. Controversial aspects include: (a) indications for repair, (b) diaphragmatic repair, (c) role of fundoplication, and (d) exis-tence and treatment of the short esophagus.Indications and Surgical Approach. The presence of a paraesophageal hiatal hernia has traditionally been consid-ered an indication for surgical repair. This recommendation is largely based upon two clinical observations. First, retrospec-tive studies have shown a significant incidence of catastrophic, life-threatening complications of bleeding, infarction, and per-foration in patients being followed with known paraesophageal herniation. Second, emergency repair carries a high mortality. In the classic report of Skinner and Belsey, six of 21 patients with a PEH, treated medically because of minimal symptoms, died from the complications of strangulation, perforation, exsangui-nating hemorrhage, or acute dilatation of the herniated intratho-racic stomach. For the most part, these catastrophes occurred without warning. Others have reported similar findings.Recent studies suggest that catastrophic complications may be somewhat less common. Allen and colleagues followed 23 patients for a median of 78 months with only four patients pro-gressively worsening. There was a single mortality secondary to aspiration that occurred during a barium swallow examination to investigate progressive symptoms. Although emergency repairs had a median hospital stay of 48 days compared to a stay of  9 days in those having elective repair, there were only three cases of gastric strangulation in 735 patient-years of follow-up.If surgery is delayed and repair is done on an emergency basis, operative mortality is high, compared to <1% for an elec-tive repair. With this in mind, patients with a PEH are generally counseled to have elective repair of their hernia, particularly if they are symptomatic. Watchful waiting of asymptomatic PEHs may be an acceptable option.The surgical approach to repair of a paraesophageal hiatal hernia may be either transabdominal (laparoscopic or open) or transthoracic. Each has its advantages and disadvantages. A transthoracic approach facilitates complete esophageal mobi-lization but is rarely used because the access trauma and postopera-tive pain are significantly greater than a laparoscopic approach.The transabdominal approach facilitates reduction of the volvulus that is often associated with PEHs. Although some degree of esophageal mobilization can be accomplished tran-shiatally, complete mobilization to the aortic arch is difficult or impossible without risk of injury to the vagal nerves.Laparoscopic repair of PEH would appear to have become the standard approach. Laparoscopic repair of a pure type II, or mixed type III PEH is an order of magnitude more difficult than a standard laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication. Most would rec-ommend that these procedures are best avoided until the surgeon has accumulated considerable experience with laparoscopic antireflux surgery. There are several reasons for this. First, the vertical and horizontal volvulus of the stomach often associated with PEHs makes identification of the anatomy, in particular the location of the esophagus, difficult. Second, dissection of a large PEH sac may result in significant bleeding if the surgeon deviates from the correct plane of dissection between the peri-toneal sac and the endothoracic fascia. Finally, redundant tissue present at the GEJ following dissection of the sac frustrates the creation of a fundoplication. This tissue, which includes the epi-phrenic fat pad and hernia sac should be removed at the time of PEH repair. Mindful of these difficulties, and given appropriate experience, patients with PEH may be approached laparoscopi-cally, with expectation of success in the majority.Diaphragmatic RepairIt has been shown that PEH repair has a relatively high incidence of recurrence (10–40%) when the crura is closed primarily with permanent suture. Techniques to reduce hernia recurrence con-tinue to evolve. Most surgeons believe that recurrence may be reduced with the use of synthetic or biologic mesh to reinforce the standard crural closure. Randomized controlled studies have 4Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   104801/03/19   6:04 PM 1049ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25demonstrated a reduction in PEH recurrence rate when mesh was used. Nonabsorbable synthetic mesh must be used carefully and not in a keyhole fashion at the hiatus because of a potential risk of esophagus or gastric erosion and mesh infection. Bio-logic mesh (acellular porcine dermis, acellular human dermis, porcine small intestinal submucosa) has become more widely used, but these meshes are significantly more expensive than synthetic mesh, and the only randomized study supporting bio-logic mesh usage failed to demonstrate superiority over suture alone after 5 years of rigorous follow-up.Role of Fundoplication in Giant Hiatal Hernia Repair.  Controversy remains as to whether to perform an antireflux procedure at all, in selected cases only, or in all patients. Most advocate the routine addition of an antireflux procedure follow-ing repair of the hernia defect. There are several reasons for this. Physiologic testing with 24-hour esophageal pH monitoring has shown increased esophageal exposure to acid gastric juice in 60% to 70% of patients with a paraesophageal hiatal hernia, nearly identical to the observed 71% incidence in patients with a sliding hiatal hernia. Furthermore, there is no relation between the symptoms experienced by the patient with a PEH and the competency of the cardia. Finally, dissection of the gastro-esophageal esophagus may lead to postoperative reflux despite a negative preoperative pH score.The Short Esophagus and PEHGiant PEH can be associated with a short esophagus in up to 5% to 20% of patients as a result of chronic cephalad displacement of the GEJ. The presence of a short esophagus increases the dif-ficulty of laparoscopic PEH repair. Approximately 10% to 20% of surgical failures with PEH repair is due to the lack of recogni-tion of a short esophagus. Preoperative results of barium swallow and esophagogastroduodenoscopy may provide an indication of short esophagus, but no combination of preoperative clinical vari-ables reliably predict the presence of short esophagus, defined as the failure to achieve 2.5 cm of intra-abdominal esophagus with standard mediastinal dissection techniques. Hence, the diagno-sis of this entity continues to be made definitively only in the operating room. Collis gastroplasty achieves esophageal length-ening by creation of a neoesophagus using the gastric cardia. The totally laparoscopic approach to the short esophagus has evolved from a method using an end-to-end anastomosis circular stapler to the current approach that uses a linear stapler creating a sta-pled wedge gastroplasty. Elements of importance in fashioning the fundoplication after Collis gastroplasty include placement of the initial suture of the fundoplication on the esophagus, immedi-ately above the GEJ to ensure that acid-secreting (gastric) mucosa does not reside above the fundoplication. A second element that ensures safety and avoids wrap deformation is to place the gastric portion of the staple line against the neoesophagus, such that the tip of the gastric staple line sits adjacent to the middle suture of the fundoplication on the right side of the esophagus.ResultsMost outcome studies report relief of symptoms following sur-gical repair of PEHs in more than 90% of patients. The current literature suggests that laparoscopic repair of a paraesophageal hiatal hernia can be successful. Most authors report symptom-atic improvement in 80% to 90% of patients, and <10% to 15% prevalence of recurrent symptomatic hernia. However, the problem of recurrent asymptomatic or minimally symp-tomatic hernia following PEH repair, open or laparoscopic, is Figure 25-41. Barium esophagogram showing Schatzki’s ring (i.e., a thin circumferential ring in the distal esophagus at the squa-mocolumnar junction). Below the ring is a hiatal hernia.becoming increasingly appreciated. Recurrent hiatal hernia is the most common cause of anatomic failure following laparoscopic  Nissen fundoplication done for GERD (5–10%), but this risk is compounded for the giant hernia where radiologic recurrence is detected in 25% to 40% of patients. It appears that optimal results with open or laparoscopic giant hiatal hernia repair should include options for mesh buttressing of hiatal closure and selec-tive esophageal lengthening with one of the many techniques developed for the creation of a Collis gastroplasty. Despite this high incidence of radiologic recurrence, and the surgical pursuit of a remedy, it must be reinforced that asymptomatic recurrent hernias, like primary PEH, do not need to be repaired. The risk of incarceration, strangulation, or obstruction is minimal.SCHATZKI’S RINGSchatzki’s ring is a thin submucosal circumferential ring in the lower esophagus at the squamocolumnar junction, often associ-ated with a hiatal hernia. Its significance and pathogenesis are unclear (Fig. 25-41). The ring was first noted by Templeton, but Schatzki and Gary defined it as a distinct entity in 1953. Its prevalence varies from 0.2% to 14% in the general population, depending on the technique of diagnosis and the criteria used. Stiennon believed the ring to be a pleat of mucosa formed by infolding of redundant esophageal mucosa due to shortening of the esophagus. Others believe the ring to be congenital, and still others suggest it is an early stricture resulting from inflamma-tion of the esophageal mucosa caused by chronic reflux.Schatzki’s ring is a distinct clinical entity having different symptoms, upper GI function studies, and response to treatment compared with patients with a hiatal hernia, but without a ring. Twenty-four-hour esophageal pH monitoring has shown that patients with a Schatzki’s ring have a lower incidence of reflux than hiatal hernia controls. They also have better LES function. This, together with the presence of a ring, could represent a pro-tective mechanism to prevent gastroesophageal reflux.Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   104901/03/19   6:04 PM 1050SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IISymptoms associated with Schatzki’s ring are brief epi-sodes of dysphagia during hurried ingestion of solid foods. Its treatment has varied from dilation alone to dilation with antire-flux measures, antireflux procedure alone, incision, and even excision of the ring. Little is known about the natural progres-sion of Schatzki’s rings. Using radiologic techniques, Chen and colleagues showed progressive stenosis of rings in 59% of patients, whereas Schatzki found that the rings decreased in diameter in 29% of patients and remained unchanged in the rest.Symptoms in patients with a ring are caused more by the presence of the ring than by gastroesophageal reflux. Most patients with a ring but without proven reflux respond to one dilation, while most patients with proven reflux require repeated dilations. In this regard, the majority of Schatzki’s ring patients without proven reflux have a history of ingestion of drugs known to be damaging to the esophageal mucosa. Bonavina and associates have suggested drug-induced injury as the cause of stenosis in patients with a ring, but without a history of reflux. Because rings also occur in patients with proven reflux, it is likely that gastroesophageal reflux also plays a part. This is supported by the fact that there is less drug ingestion in the history of these patients. Schatzki’s ring is prob-ably an acquired lesion that can lead to stenosis from chemical-induced injury by pill lodgment in the distal esophagus, or from reflux-induced injury to the lower esophageal mucosa.The best form of treatment of a symptomatic Schatzki’s ring in patients who do not have reflux consists of esophageal dilation for relief of the obstructive symptoms. In patients with a ring who have proven reflux and a mechanically defective sphincter, an antireflux procedure is necessary to obtain relief and avoid repeated dilation.SCLERODERMAScleroderma is a systemic disease accompanied by esophageal abnormalities in approximately 80% of patients. In most, the disease follows a prolonged course. Renal involvement occurs in a small percentage of patients and signals a poor prognosis. The onset of the disease is usually in the third or fourth decade of life, occurring twice as frequently in women as in men.Small vessel inflammation appears to be an initiating event, with subsequent perivascular deposition of normal col-lagen, which may lead to vascular compromise. In the GI tract, the predominant feature is smooth muscle atrophy. Whether the atrophy in the esophageal musculature is a primary effect or occurs secondary to a neurogenic disorder is unknown. The results of pharmacologic and hormonal manipulation, with agents that act either indirectly via neural mechanisms or directly on the muscle, suggest that scleroderma is a pri-mary neurogenic disorder. Methacholine, which acts directly on smooth muscle receptors, causes a similar increase in LES pressure in normal controls and in patients with scleroderma. Edrophonium, a cholinesterase inhibitor that enhances the effect of acetylcholine when given to patients with sclero-derma, causes an increase in LES pressure that is less marked in these patients than in normal controls, suggesting a neurogenic rather than myogenic etiology. Muscle ischemia due to peri-vascular compression has been suggested as a possible mecha-nism for the motility abnormality in scleroderma. Others have observed that in the early stage of the disease, the manomet-ric abnormalities may be reversed by reserpine, an agent that depletes catecholamines from the adrenergic system. This sug-gests that, in early scleroderma, an adrenergic overactivity may be present that causes a parasympathetic inhibition, supporting SclerodermammHg35 –0Esophagus25 cmEsophagus30 cmEsophagus35 cmSSSS35 –0035 –Figure 25-42. Esophageal motility record in a patient with sclero-derma showing aperistalsis in the distal two-thirds of the esopha-geal body with peristalsis in the proximal portion. (Reproduced with permission from Waters PF, DeMeester TR: Foregut motor disorders and their surgical management, Med Clin North Am. 1981 Nov;65(6):1235-1268.)a neurogenic mechanism for the disease. In advanced disease manifested by smooth muscle atrophy and collagen deposition, reserpine no longer produces this reversal. Consequently, from a clinical perspective, the patient can be described as having a poor esophageal pump and a poor valve.The diagnosis of scleroderma can be made manometrically by the observation of normal peristalsis in the proximal striated esophagus, with absent peristalsis in the distal smooth muscle por-tion (Fig. 25-42). The LES pressure is progressively weakened as the disease advances. Because many of the systemic sequelae of the disease may be nondiagnostic, the motility pattern is fre-quently used as a specific diagnostic indicator. Gastroesophageal reflux commonly occurs in patients with scleroderma because they have both hypotensive sphincters and poor esophageal clearance. This combined defect can lead to severe esophagitis and stricture formation. The typical barium swallow shows a dilated, barium-filled esophagus, stomach, and duodenum, or a hiatal hernia with distal esophageal stricture and proximal dilatation (Fig. 25-43).Traditionally, esophageal symptoms have been treated with PPIs, antacids, elevation of the head of the bed, and multiple dilations for strictures, with generally unsatisfac-tory results. The degree of esophagitis is usually severe and may lead to marked esophageal shortening as well as stric-ture. Scleroderma patients have frequently had numerous dilations before they are referred to the surgeon. The surgi-cal management is somewhat controversial, but the major-ity of opinion suggests that a partial fundoplication (anterior or posterior) performed laparoscopically is the procedure of choice. The need for a partial fundoplication is dictated by the likelihood of severe dysphagia if a total fundoplication is performed in the presence of aperistalsis. Esophageal short-ening may require a Collis gastroplasty in combination with a partial fundoplication. Surgery reduces esophageal acid exposure but does not return it to normal because of the poor Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   105001/03/19   6:04 PM 1051ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25Figure 25-43. Barium esophagogram of a patient with sclero-derma and stricture. Note the markedly dilated esophagus and retained food material. (Reproduced with permission from Waters PF, DeMeester TR: Foregut motor disorders and their surgical management, Med Clin North Am. 1981 Nov;65(6):1235-1268.)Figure 25-44. The esophagus on the left shows a stacking of rings, demonstrating eosinophilic esophagus. The esophagus on the right is a normal barium swallow.EOSINOPHILIC ESOPHAGITISEosinophilic esophagitis (EE) was first described in 1977, but it has become well known only in the last two decades. The condi-tion is characterized by a constellation of symptoms, endoscopic and radiologic findings, and distinctive pathology. The etiology of eosinophilic esophagitis is not entirely known but its simi-larities, immunologically, to asthma suggest that it is a form of “allergic esophagitis.”SymptomsThe presentation of eosinophilic esophagitis is chest pain (often postprandial) and dysphagia. Dysphagia may occur with liquids or solids, but solid food dysphagia is most common. Because dysphagia and chest pain are characteristic of GERD, EE is often confused with GERD; however, EE does not respond to proton pump inhibitors. The evaluation of the patient with EE and dysphagia and chest pain with esophagram and endoscopy usually reveals the diagnosis.SignsA barium swallow should be the first test obtained in the patient with dysphagia. EE has a characteristic finding often called the “ringed esophagus” or the “feline esophagus,” as the esophageal rings are felt to look like the stripes on a housecat (Fig. 25-44). The endoscopic appearance of EE is also characteristic, and also appears as a series of rings (Fig. 25-45).PathologyEndoscopic biopsy specimens should be taken when eosin-ophilic esophagus is suspected. To make the diagnosis of  EE, the pathologist should see a minimum of 15 eosinophils per high powered field, usually at the base of the epithelium (Fig. 25-46).TreatmentThe treatment of EE is largely symptomatic and includes test-ing for food allergies and elimination of identified items from the diet. Second-line therapy includes inhaled or ingested cor-ticosteroids, as would be used to treat asthma. If dysphagia is not relieved with steroids, it may be necessary to dilate the clearance function of the body of the esophagus. Only 50% of the patients have a good-to-excellent result. If the esopha-gitis is severe, or there has been a previous failed antireflux procedure and the disease is associated with delayed gastric emptying, a gastric resection with Roux-en-Y gastrojejunos-tomy has proved the best option.Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   105101/03/19   6:04 PM 1052SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 25-46. A cluster of eosinophils are visualized in the esophageal epithelium in a patient with EE.Figure 25-45. The endoscopic appearance of eosinophilic esopha-gitis is characteristically a series of stacked mucosal rings.esophagus. Because of the length of esophageal involvement, rigid dilators (Maloney or Savary) are often used. Great care must be exercised, as the inflamed EE is quite friable. The mucosal tears easily, and esophageal perforation (full thickness laceration) has been reported with EE dilation.MOTILITY DISORDERS OF THE PHARYNX AND ESOPHAGUSClinical ManifestationsDysphagia (i.e., difficulty in swallowing) is the primary symp-tom of esophageal motor disorders. Its perception by the patient is a balance between the severity of the underlying abnormality causing the dysphagia and the adjustment made by the patient in altering eating habits. Consequently, any complaint of dyspha-gia must include an assessment of the patient’s dietary history. It must be known whether the patient experiences pain, chokes, or vomits with eating; whether the patient requires liquids with the meal, is the last to finish, or is forced to interrupt or avoid a social meal; and whether he or she has been admitted to the hos-pital for food impaction. These assessments, plus an evaluation of the patient’s nutritional status, help to determine how severe the dysphagia is and judge the need for surgical intervention, rather than more conservative methods of treating dysphagia.Motility Disorders of the Pharynx and Upper Esophagus—Transit DysphagiaDisorders of the pharyngeal phase of swallowing result from a discoordination of the neuromuscular events involved in chew-ing, initiation of swallowing, and propulsion of the material from the oropharynx into the cervical esophagus. They can be categorized into one or a combination of the following abnor-malities: (a) inadequate oropharyngeal bolus transport; (b) inability to pressurize the pharynx; (c) inability to elevate the larynx; (d) discoordination of pharyngeal contraction and cri-copharyngeal relaxation; and (e) decreased compliance of the pharyngoesophageal segment secondary to neuromuscular dis-ease. The latter may result in incomplete relaxation of the crico-pharyngeus and cervical esophagus during swallowing. Taken together, these disorders are termed transit dysphagia by many.Transit dysphagia is usually congenital or results from acquired disease involving the central and peripheral nervous system. This includes cerebrovascular accidents, brain stem tumors, poliomyelitis, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson’s disease, pseudobulbar palsy, peripheral neuropathy, and operative dam-age to the cranial nerves involved in swallowing. Pure muscular diseases such as radiation-induced myopathy, dermatomyositis, myotonic dystrophy, and myasthenia gravis are less common causes. Rarely, extrinsic compression of the cervical esophagus by thyromegaly, lymphadenopathy, or hyperostosis of the cervi-cal spine can cause transit dysphagia.Diagnostic Assessment of the Cricopharyngeal SegmentTransit dysphagia difficult to assess with standard manometric techniques because of the rapidity of the oropharyngeal phase of swallowing, the elevation of the larynx, and the asymmetry of the cricopharyngeus. Videoor cineradiography is currently the Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   105201/03/19   6:04 PM 1053ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25ABFigure 25-47. A. Zenker’s diverticulum, initially discovered  15 years ago and left untreated. B. Note its marked enlargement and evidence of laryngeal inlet aspiration on recent esophagogram. (Reproduced with permission from Waters PF, DeMeester TR: Foregut motor disorders and their surgical management, Med Clin North Am. 1981 Nov;65(6):1235-1268.)Time 0Peak pharyngealpressureAtmosphericpressureABBolus pressureinitialMaximum residual(MaxR)contractionB0finalMinimum Residual(MinR)Subatomic pressureFigure 25-48. A. Schematic drawing of a pharyngeal pressure wave indicating the presence of the bolus pressure. B. Schematic drawing of the manometric recording typically seen during crico-pharyngeal sphincter relaxation.most objective test to evaluate oropharyngeal bolus transport, pharyngeal compression, relaxation of the pharyngoesophageal segment, and the dynamics of airway protection during swal-lowing. It readily identifies a diverticulum (Fig. 25-47), stasis of the contrast medium in the valleculae, a cricopharyngeal bar, and/or narrowing of the pharyngoesophageal segment. These are anatomic manifestations of neuromuscular disease, and they result from the loss of muscle compliance in portions of the pharynx and esophagus composed of skeletal muscle.Careful analysis of videoor cineradiographic studies com-bined with manometry using specially designed catheters can identify the cause of a pharyngoesophageal dysfunction in most sit-uations (Fig. 25-48). Motility studies may demonstrate inadequate pharyngeal pressurization, insufficient or lack of cricopharyngeal relaxation, marked discoordination of pharyngeal pressurization, cricopharyngeal relaxation and cervical esophageal contraction, or a hypopharyngeal bolus pressure suggesting decreased compli-ance of the skeletal portion of the cervical esophagus.In many patients with cricopharyngeal dysfunction, including those with Zenker’s diverticulum, it has been difficult to consistently demonstrate a motility abnormality or discoor-dination of pharyngoesophageal events. The abnormality most apt to be present is a loss of compliance in the pharyngoesopha-geal segment manifested by an increased bolus pressure. Cook and colleagues have demonstrated an increased resistance to the movement of a bolus through what appears on manometry to be a completely relaxed cricopharyngeal sphincter. Using simulta-neous manometry and videofluoroscopy, they showed that, in these patients, the cricopharyngeus is only partially relaxed; that is, the sphincter is relaxed enough to allow a drop of its pressure to esophageal baseline on manometry, but insufficiently relaxed to allow unimpaired passage of the bolus into the esophagus. This incomplete relaxation is due to a loss of compliance of the muscle in the pharyngoesophageal segment, and may be associ-ated with a cricopharyngeal bar or Zenker’s diverticulum. This decreased compliance of the cricopharyngeal sphincter can be recognized on esophageal manometry by a “shoulder” on the pharyngeal pressure wave, the amplitude of which correlates directly with the degree of outflow obstruction (Fig. 25-49). Increasing the diameter of this noncompliant segment reduces the resistance imposed on the passage of a bolus. Consequently, patients with low pharyngeal pressure (i.e., poor piston function of the pharynx), or patients with increased resistance of the pha-ryngocervical esophageal segment from loss of skeletal muscle compliance, are improved by a cricopharyngeal myotomy. This enlarges the pharyngoesophageal segment and reduces outflow resistance. Esophageal muscle biopsy specimens from patients with Zenker’s diverticulum have shown histologic evidence of the restrictive myopathy in the cricophayngeous muscle. These findings correlate well with the observation of a decreased com-pliance of the upper esophagus demonstrated by videoradiog-raphy and the findings on detailed manometric studies of the pharynx and cervical esophagus. They suggest that the diver-ticulum develops as a consequence of the outflow resistance to bolus transport through the noncompliant muscle of the pharyn-goesophageal segment.The requirements for a successful pharyngoesophageal myotomy are (a) adequate oropharyngeal bolus transport; (b) the presence of an intact swallowing reflex; (c) reasonable coordi-nation of pharyngeal pressurization with cricopharyngeal relax-ation; and (d) a cricopharyngeal bar, Zenker’s diverticulum, or a narrowed pharyngoesophageal segment on videoesophagogram and/or the presence of excessive pharyngoesophageal shoulder pressure on motility study.Zenker’s Diverticulum. In the past, the most common recog-nized sign of cricopharyngeal dysfunction was the presence of a Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   105301/03/19   6:04 PM 1054SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIZenker’s diverticulum, originally described by Ludlow in 1769. The eponym resulted from Zenker’s classic clinicopathologic descriptions of 34 cases published in 1878. Pharyngoesophageal diverticula have been reported to occur in 1 of 1000 routine barium examinations, and classically occur in elderly, white males. Zenker’s diverticula tend to enlarge progressively with time due to the decreased compliance of the skeletal portion of the cervical esophagus that occurs with aging.Presenting symptoms include dysphagia associated with the spontaneous regurgitation of undigested, bland material, often interrupting eating or drinking. On occasion, the dyspha-gia can be severe enough to cause debilitation and significant weight loss. Chronic aspiration and repetitive respiratory infec-tion are common associated complaints. Once suspected, the diagnosis is established by a barium swallow. Endoscopy is usually difficult in the presence of a cricopharyngeal diverticu-lum, and potentially dangerous, owing to obstruction of the true esophageal lumen by the diverticulum and the attendant risk of diverticular perforation.Cricopharyngeal Myotomy. The low morbidity and mor-tality associated with cricopharyngeal and upper esophageal myotomy have encouraged a liberal approach toward its use for almost any problem in the oropharyngeal phase of swallowing. This attitude has resulted in an overall success rate in the relief of symptoms of only 64%. When patients are selected for sur-gery using radiographic or motility markers of disease, a much higher proportion will benefit. Two methods of cricopharyngo-esophageal myotomy are in common use, one using traditional surgical approaches, and one using rigid laryngoscopy and a linear cutting stapler.Open Cricopharyngeal Myotomy, Diverticulopexy, and Diverticulectomy. The myotomy can be performed under local or general anesthesia through an incision along the anterior border of the left sternocleidomastoid muscle. The pharynx and cervi-cal esophagus are exposed by retracting the sternocleidomastoid muscle and carotid sheath laterally and the thyroid, trachea, and larynx medially (Fig. 25-50). When a pharyngoesophageal diverticulum is present, localization of the pharyngoesophageal segment is easy. The diverticulum is carefully freed from the overlying areolar tissue to expose its neck, just below the inferior pharyngeal constrictor and above the cricopharyngeus muscle. It can be difficult to identify the cricopharyngeus muscle in the absence of a diverticulum. A benefit of local anesthesia is that the patient can swallow and demonstrate an area of persistent nar-rowing at the pharyngoesophageal junction. Furthermore, before closing the incision, gelatin can be fed to the patient to ascertain whether the symptoms have been relieved, and to inspect the opening of the previously narrowed pharyngoesophageal seg-ment. Under general anesthesia, and in the absence of a diver-ticulum, the placement of a nasogastric tube to the level of the manometrically determined cricopharyngeal sphincter helps in localization of the structures. The myotomy is extended cephalad by dividing 1 to 2 cm of inferior constrictor muscle of the phar-ynx, and caudad by dividing the cricopharyngeal muscle and the cervical esophagus for a length of 4 to 5 cm. The cervical wound is closed only when all oozing of blood has ceased because a hematoma after this procedure is common and is often associated with temporary dysphagia while the hematoma absorbs. Oral ali-mentation is started the day after surgery. The patient is usually discharged on the first or second postoperative day.mm Hg40–0102030400HypopharynxCricopharyngeusFigure 25-50. Cross-section of the neck at the level of the thyroid isthmus that shows the sur-gical approach to the hypopharynx and cervical esophagus. (Reproduced with permission from Waters PF, DeMeester TR: Foregut motor dis-orders and their surgical management, Med Clin North Am. 1981 Nov;65(6):1235-1268.)Swallow volume010Pharyngeal shoulderpressure mmHgControlsZenker’s2030405101520200150100UES area mm25005101520Zenker’sControlsFigure 25-49. Pharyngeal shoulder pressures and diameter of the pharyngoesophageal segment in controls and patients with Zenker’s diverticulum. UES = upper esophageal sphincter. (Data from Cook IJ, et al. Zenker’s diverticu-lum: evidence for a restrictive cricopharyngeal myopathy. Gastroenterology. 1989;96:A98.)Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   105401/03/19   6:04 PM 1055ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25Prevertebral         fascia MyotomyZenker’sdiverticulumFigure 25-51. Posterior of the anatomy of the pharynx and cervical esophagus showing pharyngoesophageal myotomy and pexing of the diverticulum to the prevertebral fascia.If a diverticulum is present and is large enough to persist after a myotomy, it may be sutured in the inverted position to the prevertebral fascia using a permanent suture (i.e., diverticu-lopexy) (Fig. 25-51). If the diverticulum is excessively large so that it would be redundant if suspended, or if its walls are thick-ened, a diverticulectomy should be performed. This is best per-formed under general anesthesia by placing a Maloney dilator (48F) in the esophagus, after controlling the neck of the diver-ticulum and after myotomy. A linear stapler is placed across the neck of the diverticulum, and the diverticulum is excised distal to the staple line. The security of this staple line and effective-ness of the myotomy may be tested before hospital discharge with a water-soluble contrast esophagogram. Postoperative complications include fistula formation, abscess, hematoma, recurrent nerve paralysis, difficulties in phonation, and Horner’s syndrome. The incidence of the first two can be reduced by per-forming a diverticulopexy rather than diverticulectomy.Endoscopic Cricopharyngotomy. Endoscopic stapled crico-pharyngotomy and diverticulotomy recently has been described. This procedure is most effective for larger diverticula (>2 cm) and may be impossible to perform for the small diverticulum. The procedure uses a specialized “diverticuloscope” with two retractable valves passed into the hypopharynx. The lips of the diverticuloscope are positioned so that one lip lies in the esopha-geal lumen and the other in the diverticular lumen. The valves of the diverticuloscope are retracted appropriately so as to visu-alize the septum interposed between the diverticulum and the esophagus. An endoscopic linear stapler is introduced into the diverticuloscope and positioned against the common septum with the anvil in the diverticulum and the cartridge in the esoph-ageal lumen. Firing of the stapler divides the common septum between the posterior esophageal and the diverticular wall over a length of 30 mm, placing three rows of staples on each side. More than one stapler application may be needed, depending on the size of the diverticulum (Fig. 25-52). The patient is allowed to resume liquid feeds immediately and is usually discharged the day after surgery. Complications are rare and may include perforation at the apex of the diverticulum and failure to relieve dysphagia resulting from incomplete myotomy. The former complication can usually be treated with antibiotics, but it may, rarely, require neck drainage.Recurrence of a Zenker’s diverticulum may occur with long follow-up and is more common after diverticulectomy without myotomy, presumably due to persistence of the under-lying loss of compliance of the cervical esophagus when a myot-omy is not performed. After endoscopic cricopharyngotomy Figure 25-52. The technique for transoral cricopharyngotomy and Zenker’s diverticulotomy.lateral residual “pouches” may be seen on radiographs, but they are rarely responsible for residual or recurrent symptoms if the myotomy has been complete.Postoperative motility studies have shown that the peak pharyngeal pressure generated on swallowing is not affected, the resting cricopharyngeal pressure is reduced but not elimi-nated, and the cricopharyngeal sphincter length is shortened. Consequently, after myotomy, there is protection against esoph-agopharyngeal regurgitation.Motility Disorders of the Esophageal Body and Lower Esophageal SphincterDisorders of the esophageal phase of swallowing result from abnormalities in the propulsive pump action of the esophageal body or the relaxation of the LES. These disorders result from either primary esophageal abnormalities, or from generalized neural, muscular, or collagen vascular disease (Table 25-8). The use of standard and high-resolution esophageal manometry techniques has allowed specific primary esophageal motility disorders to be identified out of a pool of nonspecific motil-ity abnormalities. Primary esophageal motor disorders include achalasia, DES, nutcracker esophagus, and the hypertensive LES. The manometric characteristics of these disorders are shown in Table 25-9.The boundaries between the primary esophageal motor disorders are vague, and intermediate types exist, some of which may combine more than one type of motility pattern. These findings indicate that esophageal motility disorders should be looked at as a spectrum of abnormalities that reflects various stages of destruction of esophageal motor function.Achalasia. The best known and best understood primary motil-ity disorder of the esophagus is achalasia, with an incidence of six Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   105501/03/19   6:04 PM 1056SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 25-9Manometric characteristics of the primary esophageal motility disordersAchalasiaIncomplete lower esophageal sphincter (LES) relaxation (<75% relaxation)Aperistalsis in the esophageal bodyElevated LES pressure ≤26 mmHgIncreased intraesophageal baseline pressures relative to gastric baselineDiffuse esophageal spasm (DES)Simultaneous (nonperistaltic contractions) (>20% of wet swallows)Repetitive and multipeaked contractionsSpontaneous contractionsIntermittent normal peristalsisContractions may be of increased amplitude and durationNutcracker esophagusMean peristaltic amplitude (10 wet swallows) in distal esophagus ≥180 mmHgIncreased mean duration of contractions (>7.0 s)Normal peristaltic sequenceHypertensive lower esophageal sphincterElevated LES pressure (≥26 mmHg)Normal LES relaxationNormal peristalsis in the esophageal bodyIneffective esophageal motility disordersDecreased or absent amplitude of esophageal peristalsis  (<30 mmHg)Increased number of nontransmitted contractionsReproduced with permission from Zuidema GD, Orringer MB: Shackelford’s Surgery of the Alimentary Tract, 3rd ed. Vol 1. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier/Saunders; 1991.Simultaneous esophageal waves develop as a result of the increased resistance to esophageal emptying caused by the nonre-laxing LES. This conclusion is supported by experimental studies in which a band placed loosely around the GEJ in experimental models did not change sphincter pressures but resulted in impaired relaxation of the LES and outflow resistance. This led to a mark-edly increased frequency of simultaneous waveforms and a decrease in contraction amplitude. The changes were associated with radiographic dilation of the esophagus and were reversible after removal of the band. Observations in patients with pseudo-achalasia due to tumor infiltration, a tight stricture in the distal esophagus, or an antireflux procedure that is too tight also provide evidence that dysfunction of the esophageal body can be caused by the increased outflow obstruction of a nonrelaxing LES. The observation that esophageal peristalsis can return in patients with classic achalasia following dilation or myotomy provides further support that achalasia is a primary disease of the LES.The pathogenesis of achalasia is presumed to be a neuro-genic degeneration, which is either idiopathic or due to infec-tion. In experimental animals, the disease has been reproduced by destruction of the nucleus ambiguus and the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus nerve. In patients with the disease, degenerative changes have been shown in the vagus nerve and in the ganglia in the myenteric plexus of the esophagus itself. This degeneration results in hypertension of the LES, a failure of the sphincter to relax on swallowing, elevation of intraluminal esophageal pres-sure, esophageal dilatation, and a subsequent loss of progressive peristalsis in the body of the esophagus. The esophageal dilatation results from the combination of a nonrelaxing sphincter, which causes a functional retention of ingested material in the esopha-gus, and elevation of intraluminal pressure from repetitive pha-ryngeal air swallowing (Fig. 25-53). With time, the functional disorder results in anatomic alterations seen on radiographic stud-ies, such as a dilated esophagus with a tapering, “bird’s beak”-like narrowing of the distal end (Fig. 25-54). There is usually an air-fluid level in the esophagus from the retained food and saliva, the height of which reflects the degree of resistance imposed by the nonrelaxing sphincter. As the disease progresses, the esophagus becomes massively dilated and tortuous.A subgroup of patients with otherwise typical features of classic achalasia has simultaneous contractions of their esopha-geal body that can be of high amplitude. This manometric pattern has been termed vigorous achalasia, and chest pain episodes are a common finding in these patients. Since the development of high resolution esophageal manometry technology, the term vigorous  achalasia has been replaced with Chicago type 3 achalasia. Dif-ferentiation of type 3 achalasia from DES can be difficult. In both diseases, videoradiographic examination may show a cork-screw deformity of the esophagus and diverticulum formation.Diffuse and Segmental Esophageal Spasm. DES is charac-terized by substernal chest pain and/or dysphagia. DES differs from classic achalasia in that it is primarily a disease of the esophageal body, produces a lesser degree of dysphagia, causes more chest pain, and has less effect on the patient’s general con-dition. Nonetheless, it is impossible to differentiate achalasia from DES on the basis of symptoms alone. Esophagogram and esophageal manometry are required to distinguish these two entities. True symptomatic DES is a rare condition, occurring about five times less frequently than achalasia.The causation and neuromuscular pathophysiology of DES are unclear. The basic motor abnormality is rapid wave progression down the esophagus secondary to an abnormality in Table 25-8Esophageal motility disordersPrimary esophageal motility disordersAchalasia, “vigorous” achalasiaDiffuse and segmental esophageal spasmNutcracker esophagusHypertensive lower esophageal sphincterNonspecific esophageal motility disordersSecondary esophageal motility disordersCollagen vascular diseases: progressive systemic sclerosis, polymyositis and dermatomyositis, mixed connective tissue disease, systemic lupus erythematosus, etc.Chronic idiopathic intestinal pseudoobstructionNeuromuscular diseasesEndocrine and metastatic disordersper 100,000 population per year. Although complete absence of peristalsis in the esophageal body has been proposed as the major abnormality, present evidence indicates achalasia is a primary disorder of the LES. This is based on 24-hour outpatient esophageal motility monitoring, which shows that, even in advanced disease, up to 5% of contractions can be peristaltic. 5Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   105601/03/19   6:04 PM 1057ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25A34140120100806050403020100–10–2056*60453525159–5–15–25–3550403020100–10–206040200–20100 mmHg10 mins10 secs100 mmHgB3*4*1501401201008060402001501401201008060402005*1501401201008060402006*1451251051008565455–15MealFigure 25-53. Pressurization of esophagus: ambulatory motility tracing of a patient with achalasia. A. Before esophageal myotomy. B. After esophageal myotomy. The tracings have been compressed to exaggerate the motility spikes and baseline elevations. Note the rise in esophageal baseline pressure during a meal represented by the rise off the baseline to the left of panel A. No such rise occurs postmyotomy (B).Figure 25-54. Barium esophagogram showing a markedly dilated esophagus and characteristic “bird’s beak” in achalasia. (Repro-duced with permission from Waters PF, DeMeester TR: Foregut motor disorders and their surgical management, Med Clin North Am. 1981 Nov;65(6):1235-1268.)the latency gradient. Hypertrophy of the muscular layer of the esophageal wall and degeneration of the esophageal branches of the vagus nerve have been observed in this disease, although these are not constant findings. Manometric abnormalities in DES may be present over the total length of the esophageal body but usually are confined to the distal two-thirds. In segmental esophageal spasm, the manometric abnormalities are confined to a short segment of the esophagus.The classic manometric findings in these patients are characterized by the frequent occurrence of simultaneous wave-forms and multipeaked esophageal contractions, which may be of abnormally high amplitude or long duration. Key to the diag-nosis of DES is that there remain some peristaltic waveforms in excess of those seen in achalasia. A criterion of 30% or more peristaltic waveforms out of 10 wet swallows has been used to differentiate DES from vigorous achalasia. However, this figure is arbitrary and often debated.The LES in patients with DES usually shows a normal resting pressure and relaxation on swallowing. A hypertensive sphincter with poor relaxation may also be present. In patients with advanced disease, the radiographic appearance of tertiary contractions appears helical and has been termed corkscrew esophagus or pseudodiverticulosis (Fig. 25-55). Patients with segmental or diffuse esophageal spasm can compartmentalize the esophagus and develop an epiphrenic or midesophageal diverticulum between two areas of high pressure occurring simultaneously (Fig. 25-56).Nutcracker Esophagus. The disorder, termed nutcracker or supersqueezeresophagus, was recognized in the late 1970s. Other terms used to describe this entity are hypertensive peri-stalsis or high-amplitude peristaltic contractions. It is the most common of the primary esophageal motility disorders. By definition the so-called nutcracker esophagus is a manomet-ric abnormality in patients who are characterized by peristal-tic esophageal contractions with peak amplitudes greater than two SDs above the normal values in individual laboratories. Contraction amplitudes in these patients can easily be above  400 mmHg. At the lower end of peak pressure, it is unclear whether nutcracker esophagus causes any symptoms. In fact, chest pain symptoms in nutcracker esophagus patients may be related to GERD rather than intraluminal hypertension. Treatment in these patients should be aimed at the treatment of GERD. At the high end (peak pressures >300 mmHg) chest pain may be the result of the nutcracker physiology, as treatment directed at reducing intraluminal pressure is more effective than when used for those with lower peak pressures.Hypertensive Lower Esophageal Sphincter. Hyperten-sive lower esophageal sphincter (LES) in patients with chest pain or dysphagia was first described as a separate entity by Code and associates. This disorder is characterized by an ele-vated basal pressure of the LES with normal relaxation and Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   105701/03/19   6:04 PM 1058SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 25-56. Barium esophagogram showing a high epiphrenic diverticulum in a patient with diffuse esophageal spasm. (Repro-duced with permission from Castell DO: The Esophagus. Boston, MA: Little, Brown; 1992.)normal propulsion in the esophageal body. About one-half of these patients, however, have associated motility disorders of the esophageal body, particularly hypertensive peristalsis and simultaneous waveforms. In the remainder, the disorder exists as an isolated abnormality. Dysphagia in these patients may be caused by a lack of compliance of the sphincter, even in its relaxed state. Myotomy of the LES may be indicated in patients not responding to medical therapy or dilation. When the symp-tom contribution of the hypertensive sphincter is in doubt, it is possible to inject the LES with botulinum toxin, endoscopically. If symptoms are relieved (temporarily) with this technique, then it is likely that myotomy will provide more permanent benefit.Secondary Esophageal Motility Disorders. Connective tissue disease, particularly scleroderma and the CREST syn-drome, exhibits severe esophageal motility disorders. Addi-tionally, patients treated as infants for esophageal atresia will often develop secondary motility disorders manifest later in life. Symptoms of these disorders are heartburn and dysphagia. The latter may be a result of a peptic stricture rather than the esophageal dysmotility. An esophageal motility study will usu-ally show severely reduced or absent peristalsis with severely reduced or absent LES pressure. The role of antireflux surgery under these conditions is controversial but, if performed, should be limited to partial fundoplication, as full (Nissen) fundoplica-tion may result in severe dysphagia.Nonspecific Esophageal Motor Disorders and Ineffective  Esophageal Motility. Many patients complaining of dys-phagia or chest pain of noncardiac origin demonstrate a vari-ety of wave patterns and contraction amplitudes on esophageal manometry that are clearly out of the normal range, but do not meet the criteria of a primary esophageal motility disor-der. Esophageal motility in these patients frequently shows an increased number of multipeaked or repetitive contractions, contractions of prolonged duration, nontransmitted contrac-tions, an interruption of a peristaltic wave at various levels of the esophagus, or contractions of low amplitude. These motility abnormalities have been termed nonspecific esophageal motility disorders. Their significance in the causation of chest pain or dysphagia is still unclear. Surgery plays no role in the treatment of these disorders unless there is an associated diverticulum.A clear distinction between primary esophageal motility disorders and nonspecific esophageal motility disorders is often not possible. Patients diagnosed as having nonspecific esophageal motility abnormalities on repeated studies will occasionally show abnormalities consistent with nutcracker esophagus. Similarly, progression from a nonspecific esophageal motility disorder to classic DES has been demonstrated. Therefore, the finding of a nonspecific esophageal motility disorder may represent only a manometric marker of an intermittent, more severe esophageal motor abnormality. Combined ambulatory 24-hour esophageal pH and motility monitoring has shown that an increased esopha-geal exposure to gastric juice is common in patients diagnosed as having a nonspecific esophageal motility disorder. In some situ-ations, the motor abnormalities may be induced by the irritation of refluxed gastric juice; in other situations, it may be a primary event unrelated to the presence of reflux. High-amplitude peristal-sis (nutcracker esophagus) and low-amplitude peristalsis (ineffec-tive esophageal motility) are frequently associated with GERD.Diverticula of the Esophageal Body. Diverticula of the esophagus may be characterized by their location in the esoph-agus (proximal, mid-, or distal esophagus), or by the nature of Figure 25-55. Barium esophagogram of patient with diffuse spasm showing the corkscrew deformity.Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   105801/03/19   6:04 PM 1059ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25Figure 25-57. Barium esophagogram showing a midesophageal diverticulum. Despite the anatomic distortion, the patient was asymptomatic. (Reproduced with permission from Waters PF, DeMeester TR: Foregut motor disorders and their surgical man-agement, Med Clin North Am. 1981 Nov;65(6):1235-1268.)InflamednodesTraction diverticulumFigure 25-58. Illustration of the pathophysiology of midesopha-geal diverticulum showing traction on the esophageal wall from adhesions to inflamed subcarinal lymph nodes.concomitant pathology. Diverticula associated with motor dis-orders are termed pulsion diverticula and those associated with inflammatory conditions are termed traction diverticula. Pulsion diverticula occur most commonly with nonspecific motility disor-ders, but they can occur with all of the primary motility disorders. In the latter situation, the motility disorder is usually diagnosed before the development of the diverticulum. When associated with achalasia, the development of a diverticulum may temporar-ily alleviate the symptom of dysphagia by becoming a receptacle for ingested food and substitute the symptom of dysphagia for postprandial pain and regurgitation of undigested food. If a motil-ity abnormality of the esophageal body or LES cannot be identi-fied, a traction or congenital cause for the diverticulum should be considered.Because development in radiology preceded develop-ment in motility monitoring, diverticula of the esophagus were considered historically to be a primary abnormality, the cause, rather than the consequence, of motility disorders. Conse-quently, earlier texts focused on them as specific entities based upon their location.Epiphrenic diverticula arise from the terminal third of the thoracic esophagus and are usually found adjacent to the diaphragm. They have been associated with distal esophageal muscular hypertrophy, esophageal motility abnormalities, and increased luminal pressure. They are “pulsion” diverticula, and they are associated with diffuse spasm, achalasia, or nonspecific motor abnormalities in the body of the esophagus.Whether the diverticulum should be surgically resected or suspended depends on its size and proximity to the vertebral body. When diverticula are associated with esophageal motility disorders, esophageal myotomy from the proximal extent of the diverticulum to the stomach should be combined with diverticu-lectomy. If diverticulectomy alone is performed, one can expect a high incidence of suture line rupture due to the same intralu-minal pressure that initially gave rise to the diverticulum. If the diverticulum is suspended to the prevertebral fascia of the tho-racic vertebra, a myotomy is begun at the neck of the diverticu-lum and extended across the LES. If the diverticulum is excised by dividing the neck, the muscle is closed over the excision site, and a myotomy is performed on the opposite esophageal wall, starting just above the level of the diverticulum or at the proximal extent of the spastic segment of the esophagus if high resolution motility is used. If complete, the myotomy will cross the LES, reducing distal esophageal peak pressure, and it will increase the likelihood that dysphagia will be replaced with GERD symp-toms. Increasingly, partial fundoplication (anterior or posterior) is performed after LES myotomy to decrease the frequency of disabling GERD developing after myotomy and diverticulec-tomy. When a large diverticulum is associated with a hiatal her-nia, then hiatal hernia repair is added. All these procedures may be performed with traditional or minimally invasive techniques.Midesophageal or traction diverticula were first described in the 19th century (Fig. 25-57). At that time, they were fre-quently noted in patients who had mediastinal LN involve-ment with tuberculosis. It was theorized that adhesions formed between the inflamed mediastinal nodes and the esophagus. By contraction, the adhesions exerted traction on the esophageal wall and led to a localized diverticulum (Fig. 25-58). This theory was based on the findings of early dissections, where adhesions between diverticula and LNs were commonly found. Other con-ditions associated with mediastinal lymphadenopathy, such as pulmonary fungal infections (e.g., aspergillosis), lymphoma, or sarcoid, may create traction esophageal diverticula after success-ful treatment. Rarely, when no underlying inflammatory pathol-ogy is identified, a motility disorder may be identified.Most midesophageal diverticula are asymptomatic and incidentally discovered during investigation for nonesophageal complaints. In such patients, the radiologic abnormality may Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   105901/03/19   6:04 PM 1060SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II100%80%60%40%20%Normal volunteersPat, no dysphagiaPat, dysphagia0%Figure 25-59. Prevalence of effective contractions (i.e., peristaltic contractions with an amplitude >30 mmHg) during meal periods in individual normal volunteers, patients (Pat) without dysphagia, and patients with nonobstructive dysphagia.100%% Symptomatic10 cm5 cm0 cm80%60%40%20%0%Pre Rx17NEso. diameter% Retention0–24mo1725–48mo1649–72mo1473–120mo12Figure 25-60. Esophageal (Eso.) diameter, dysphagia, and esoph-ageal retention in patients with achalasia treated with myotomy and Nissen fundoplication, 10 years after treatment (Rx). (Data from Topart P, Deschamps C, Taillefer R, et al: Long-term effect of total fundoplication on the myotomized esophagus, Ann Thorac Surg. 1992 Dec;54(6):1046-1051.)be ignored. Patients with symptoms of dysphagia, regurgita-tion, chest pain, or aspiration, in whom a diverticulum is dis-covered, should be thoroughly investigated for an esophageal motor abnormality. Occasionally, a patient will present with a bronchoesophageal fistula manifested by a chronic cough on ingestion of meals. The diverticulum in such patients is most likely to have an inflammatory etiology.The indication for surgical intervention is dictated by the degree of symptomatic disability. Usually, midesophageal diverticula can be suspended due to their proximity to the spine. If a motor abnormality is documented, a myotomy should be performed as described for an epiphrenic diverticulum.OPERATIONS FOR ESOPHAGEAL MOTOR DISORDERS AND DIVERTICULALong Esophageal Myotomy for Motor Disorders of the Esophageal BodyA long esophageal myotomy is indicated for dysphagia caused by any motor disorder characterized by segmental or general-ized simultaneous waveforms in a patient whose symptoms are not relieved by medical therapy. Such disorders include diffuse and segmental esophageal spasm, vigorous or type 3 achalasia, and nonspecific motility disorders associated with a midor epiphrenic esophageal diverticulum. However, the decision to operate must be made by a balanced evaluation of the patient’s symptoms, diet, lifestyle adjustments, and nutritional status, with the most important factor being the possibility of improv-ing the patient’s swallowing disability. The symptom of chest pain alone is not an indication for a surgical procedure.The identification of patients with symptoms of dyspha-gia and chest pain who might benefit from a surgical myotomy is difficult. Ambulatory motility studies have shown that when the prevalence of “effective contractions” (i.e., peristaltic waveforms consisting of contractions with an amplitude above  30 mmHg) drops below 50% during meals, the patient is likely to experience dysphagia (Fig. 25-59). This would suggest that relief from the symptom can be expected with an improvement of esophageal contraction amplitude or amelioration of non-peristaltic waveforms. Prokinetic agents may increase esopha-geal contraction amplitude, but they do not alter the prevalence of simultaneous waveforms. Patients in whom the efficacy of esophageal propulsion is severely compromised because of a high prevalence of simultaneous waveforms usually receive little benefit from medical therapy. In these patients, a surgi-cal myotomy of the esophageal body can improve the patients’ dysphagia, provided the loss of contraction amplitude in the remaining peristaltic waveforms, caused by the myotomy, has less effect on swallowing function than the presence of the excessive simultaneous contractions. This situation is reached when the prevalence of effective waveforms during meals drops below 30% (i.e., 70% of esophageal waveforms are ineffective).In patients selected for surgery, preoperative high-resolution manometry is essential to determine the proximal extent of the esophageal myotomy. Most surgeons extend the myotomy distally across the LES to reduce outflow resistance. Consequently, some form of antireflux protection is needed to avoid gastroesophageal reflux if there has been extensive dissection of the cardia. In this situation, most authors prefer a partial, rather than a full, fundoplication, in order not to add back-resistance that will further interfere with the ability of the myotomized esophagus to empty (Fig. 25-60). If the symptoms of reflux are present preoperatively, 24-hour pH monitoring is required to confirm its presence.The procedure may be performed either open or via thoracoscopy. The open technique is performed through a left thoracotomy in the sixth intercostal space (Fig. 25-61). An incision is made in the posterior mediastinal pleura over the esophagus, and the left lateral wall of the esophagus is exposed. The esophagus is not circumferentially dissected unless necessary. A 2-cm incision is made into the abdomen through the parietal peritoneum at the midportion of the left crus. A tongue of gastric fundus is pulled into the chest. This exposes the GEJ and its associated fat pad. The latter is excised to give a clear view of the junction. A myotomy is performed through all muscle layers, extending distally over the stomach 1 to 2 cm below the GEJ, and proximally on the esophagus over the distance of the manometric abnormality. The muscle layer is dissected from the mucosa laterally for a distance of 1 cm. Care is taken to divide all minute muscle bands, particularly in the area of the GEJ. The gastric fundic tongue is sutured to the margins of the myotomy over a distance of 3 to 4 cm and replaced into the abdomen. This maintains separation of the muscle and acts as a partial fundoplication to prevent reflux.Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   106001/03/19   6:04 PM 1061ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25Figure 25-61. Technique of long myotomy: A. Exposure of the lower esophagus through the left sixth intercostal space and incision of the mediastinal pleura in preparation for surgical myotomy. B. Location of a 2-cm incision made through the phrenoesophageal mem-brane into the abdomen along the midlateral border of the left crus. C. Retraction of tongue of gastric fundus into the chest through the previously made incision. D. Removal of the gastroesophageal fat pad to expose the gastroesophageal junction. E. A myotomy down to the mucosa is started on the esophageal body. F. Completed myotomy extending over the stomach for 1 cm. G. Reconstruction of the cardia after a myotomy, illustrating the position of the sutures used to stitch the gastric fundic flap to the margins of the myotomy. H. Reconstruction of the cardia after a myotomy, illustrating the intra-abdominal position of the gastric tongue covering the distal  4 cm of the myotomy.Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   106101/03/19   6:04 PM 1062SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIIf an epiphrenic diverticulum is present, it is excised by dividing the neck with a stapler sized for the thickness of the diverticulum (2.0to 4.8-mm staple leg length) followed by a closure of the muscle over the staple line, when possible. The myotomy is then performed on the opposite esophageal wall. If a midesophageal diverticulum is present, the myotomy is made so that it includes the muscle around the neck, and the diver-ticulum is suspended by attaching it to the paravertebral fascia of the thoracic vertebra above the level of the diverticular neck. Before performing any operation for an esophageal diverticu-lum, it is wise to endoscope the patient to wash all food and other debris from the diverticulum.The results of myotomy for motor disorders of the esopha-geal body have improved in parallel with the improved preop-erative diagnosis afforded by manometry. Previous published series report between 40% and 92% improvement of symptoms, but interpretation is difficult due to the small number of patients involved and the varying criteria for diagnosis of the primary motor abnormality. When myotomy is accurately done, 93% of the patients have effective palliation of dysphagia after a mean follow-up of 5 years, and 89% would have the procedure again, if it was necessary. Most patients gain or maintain rather than lose weight after the operation. Postoperative motility studies show that the myotomy reduces the amplitude of esophageal contractions to near zero and eliminates simultaneous peristaltic waves. If the benefit of obliterating the simultaneous waves exceeds the adverse effect on bolus propulsion caused by the loss of peristaltic waveforms, the patient’s dysphagia is likely to be improved by the procedure. If not, the patient is likely to continue to complain of dysphagia and to have little improvement as a result of the operation.The thoracoscopic technique may be performed through the left or right chest. There has been little experience gained with doing adequate operations (as described previously with the open exposure) through left thoracoscopy, so most surgeons will combine a right thoracoscopic long myotomy with an abdominal approach for Heller myotomy and partial fundopli-cation. These two procedures may be done at the same setting, by double positioning the patient, or they may be done at two operations. If this is the case, it is best to do the abdominal com-ponent first, as the esophageal outflow obstruction is the source of most of the symptoms. Performing abdominal myotomy (and diverticulectomy, if present) may be all that is required.Figure 25-61. (Continued )A new procedure, peroral endoscopic myotomy (POEM) allows a long myotomy to be performed from the lumen of the esophagus with an endoscope. This procedure is attractive for, at a minimum, those with type 3 achalasia (vigorous achalasia), where it is necessary to divide esopha-gogastric circular muscle on both sides of the diaphragm to the extent that might not be possible with laparoscopy or thoracoscopy alone. The POEM procedure is started by open-ing the esophageal mucosa several centimeters above the spastic segment with a needle–knife electrosurgery device passed through an endoscope. A long submucosal plane is developed with the endoscope, down to and below the LES. The circular muscle of the LES and the esophagus is divided with endoscopic electrosurgery all the way back until normal (nonspastic) esophagus is reached. The submucosal entry site in the esophagus is then closed with endoscopic clips. While the results of POEM are still accumulating, the procedure is attractive because it is extremely minimally invasive and can be done on an outpatient basis.Epiphrenic diverticula cannot be treated with POEM and are most frequently addressed with laparoscopic access, in combination with a laparoscopic division of the LES (Heller myotomy) (Fig. 25-62). If the diverticulum can be completely mobilized through the hiatus, it may be safely excised from below. The neck of the diverticulum is transected with a GIA stapler after passage of a 48F dilator. Not infrequently, the diverticulum is sufficiently large that access to the neck of the diverticulum across the hiatus is quite difficult. Addi-tionally, the inflammatory reaction to the diverticulum may further make the transhiatal dissection difficult. Under these circumstances, it is safer to perform the diverticulectomy through a right thoracoscopic approach either at the time of the initial procedure or at a later date, depending upon the frailty of the patient. Following diverticulectomy, it is critical that the esophageal staple line be treated with a great deal of care. Closure of the muscle over the staple line is preferable. Additionally, the patient is kept NPO or on clear liquids for  5 to 7 days, and a contrast study is obtained before advancing to a full liquid or “mushy food” diet. Solid foods are withheld for 2 weeks to decrease the likelihood of staple line leak. But-tressing or sealing the staple line with fibrin glue is also an attractive option.Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   106201/03/19   6:04 PM 1063ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25Figure 25-62. A. Epiphrenic diverticula are situated above the lower esophageal sphincter on right side of esophagus. B. Stapler amputates neck of diverticulum. C. Muscle reapproximated over staple line, and Heller myotomy is performed.Myotomy of the Lower Esophageal Sphincter (Heller Myotomy)Second only to reflux disease, achalasia is the most common functional disorder of the esophagus to require surgical intervention. The goal of treatment is to relieve the functional outflow obstruction secondary to the loss of relaxation and compliance of the LES. This requires disrupting the LES muscle. When performed adequately (i.e., reducing sphincter pressure to <10 mmHg), and done early in the course of disease, LES myotomy results in symptomatic improvement with the occasional return of esophageal peristalsis. Reduction in LES resistance can be accomplished intraluminally by hydrostatic balloon dilation, which ruptures the sphincter muscle, by botulinum toxin injection, or by a surgical myotomy that cuts the sphincter. The difference between these three methods appears to be the greater likelihood of reducing sphincter pressure to <10 mmHg by surgical myotomy compared with hydrostatic balloon dilation. However, patients whose sphincter pressure has been reduced by hydrostatic balloon dilation to <10 mmHg have an outcome similar to those after surgical myotomy (Fig. 25-63). Botulinum toxin injection may achieve similar results, but it has a longer duration of action that may be measured in weeks or months, rather than years. Botulinum toxin injection may best be used as a diagnostic tool, when it is not clear whether a hypertensive LES is the primary cause of dysphagia. Responsiveness to botulinum toxin injection may predict a good response to Heller myotomy.The therapeutic decisions regarding the treatment of patients with achalasia center on four issues. The first issue is the question of whether newly diagnosed patients should be treated with pneumatic dilation or a surgical myotomy. Long-term follow-up studies have shown that pneumatic dilation Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   106301/03/19   6:05 PM 1064SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II10.80.60.40.200122426LES < 10 mmHg0.530.23LES > 10 mmHg48Months% in remission60728496Figure 25-63. Prevalence of clinical remission in 122 patients stratified according to postdilatation lower esophageal sphincter (LES) pressures greater than or <10 mmHg. (Reproduced with per-mission from Ponce J, Garrigues V, Pertejo V, et al: Individual pre-diction of response to pneumatic dilation in patients with achalasia, Dig Dis Sci. 1996 Nov;41(11):2135-2141.)achieves adequate relief of dysphagia and pharyngeal regurgi-tation in 50% to 60% of patients (Fig. 25-64). Close follow-up is required, and if dilation fails, myotomy is indicated. For those patients who have a dilated and tortuous esophagus or an associ-ated hiatal hernia, balloon dilation is dangerous and surgery is the better option. The outcome of the one controlled random-ized study (38 patients) comparing the two modes of therapy suggests that surgical myotomy as a primary treatment gives better long-term results. Several randomized trials comparing laparoscopic cardiomyotomy with balloon dilation or botuli-num toxin injection have favored the surgical approach as well. 100908070605040%302010001234567Years89101112131415Pneumatic dilatation n = 122Pneumatic dilatation n = 54Myotomy + antireflux n = 22Myotomy n = 65Myotomy n = 81Figure 25-64. Summary of long-term studies reporting the proportion of patients with complete relief or minimal dysphagia (Stage 0–1) stratified according to type of treatment. (Data from: Ellis FH, Jr. Oesophagomyotomy for achalasia: a 22-year experience. Br J Surg. 1993;80:882; Goulbourne IA, Walbaum PR. Long-term results of Heller’s operation for achalasia. J Royal Coll Surg. 1985;30:101; Malthaner RA, Todd TR, Miller L, et al. Long-term results in surgically managed esophageal achalasia. Ann Thorac Surg. 1994;58:1343; Ponce J, Garrigues V, Pertejo V, et al. Individual prediction of response to pneumatic dilation in patients with achalasia. Dig Dis Sci. 1996;41:2135; Eckardt V, Aignherr C, Bernhard G. Predictors of outcome in patients with achalasia treated by pneumatic dilation. Gastroenterology. 1992;103:1732.)Although it has been reported that a myotomy after previous balloon dilation is more difficult, this has not been the experi-ence of these authors unless the cardia has been ruptured in a sawtooth manner. In this situation, operative intervention, either immediately or after healing has occurred, can be difficult. Sim-ilarly, myotomy after botulinum toxin injection has reported to be more difficult, but this is largely a function of the submucosal inflammatory response, which may be a bit unpredictable, and is most intense in the first 6 to 12 weeks after injection. It is impor-tant to wait at least 3 months after botulinum toxin injection to perform cardiomyotomy to minimize the risk of encountering dense inflammation.The second issue is the question of whether a surgical myotomy should be performed through the abdomen or the chest. Myotomy of the LES can be accomplished via either an abdominal or thoracic approach. In the absence of a previous upper abdominal surgery, most surgeons prefer the abdominal approach to LES myotomy as laparoscopy results in less pain and a shorter length of stay than thoracoscopy. In addition, it is a bit easier to ensure a long gastric myotomy when the approach is transabdominal.The third issue—and one that has been long debated—is the question of whether an antireflux procedure should be added to a surgical myotomy. Excellent results have been reported fol-lowing meticulously performed myotomy without an antireflux component. Retrospective studies, with long-term follow-up of large cohorts of patients undergoing Heller myotomy demon-strated that, after 10 years, more than 50% of patients had reflux symptoms without a fundoplication. In a recent randomized clin-ical trial, 7% of patients undergoing Dor fundoplication follow-ing LES myotomy had abnormal 24-hour pH probes, and 42% of patients with a myotomy only had abnormal reflux profiles. If an antireflux procedure is used as an adjunct to esophageal myotomy, a complete 360° fundoplication should be avoided. Rather, a 270° Belsey fundoplication, a Toupet posterior 180° fundoplication, or a Dor anterior 180° fundoplication should be used to avoid the long-term esophageal dysfunction secondary to the outflow obstruction afforded by the fundoplication itself.The fourth issue centers on whether or not a cure of this disease is achievable. Long-term follow-up studies after surgical myotomy have shown that late deterioration in results occurs after this procedure, regardless of whether an antireflux pro-cedure is done, and also after balloon dilation, even when the sphincter pressure is reduced to below 10 mmHg. It may be that, even though a myotomy or balloon rupture of the LES muscle reduces the outflow obstruction at the cardia, the underlying motor disorder in the body of the esophagus persists and dete-riorates further with the passage of time, leading to increased impairment of esophageal emptying. The earlier an effective reduction in outflow resistance can be accomplished, the better the outcome will be, and the more likely some esophageal body function can be restored.In performing a surgical myotomy of the LES, there are four important principles: (a) complete division of all circular and collar-sling muscle fibers, (b) adequate distal myotomy to reduce outflow resistance, (c) “undermining” of the muscularis to allow wide separation of the esophageal muscle, and (d) pre-vention of postoperative reflux. In the past, the drawback of a surgical myotomy was the need for an open procedure, which often deterred patients from choosing the best treatment option for achalasia. With the advent of minimally invasive surgi-cal techniques two decades ago, laparoscopic cardiomyotomy Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   106401/03/19   6:05 PM 1065ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25(Heller myotomy) has become the treatment of choice for most patients with achalasia.Open Esophageal MyotomyOpen techniques of distal esophageal myotomy are rarely used outside reoperations. In fact, primary procedures can almost always be successfully completed via laparoscopy. A modified Heller myotomy can be performed through a left thoracotomy incision in the sixth intercostal space along the upper border of the seventh rib. The esophagus and a tongue of gastric fun-dus are exposed as described for a long myotomy. A myotomy through all muscle layers is performed, extending distally over the stomach to 1 to 2 cm below the junction, and proximally on the esophagus for 4 to 5 cm. The cardia is reconstructed by suturing the tongue of gastric fundus to the margins of the myotomy to prevent rehealing of the myotomy site and to pro-vide reflux protection in the area of the divided sphincter. If an extensive dissection of the cardia has been done, a more for-mal Belsey repair is performed. The tongue of gastric fundus is allowed to retract into the abdomen. Traditionally, nasogastric drainage is maintained for 6 days to prevent distention of the stomach during healing. An oral diet is resumed on the seventh day, after a barium swallow study shows unobstructed passage of the bolus into the stomach without extravasation.In a randomized, long-term follow-up by Csendes and colleagues of 81 patients treated for achalasia, either by forceful dilation or by surgical myotomy, myotomy was associated with a significant increase in the diameter at the GEJ and a decrease in the diameter at the middle third of the esophagus on follow-up radiographic studies. There was a greater reduction in sphincter pressure and improvement in the amplitude of esophageal contractions after myotomy. After dilation, 13% of patients regained some peristalsis, compared with 28% after surgery. These findings were shown to persist over a 5-year follow-up period, at which time 95% of those treated with surgical myotomy were doing well. Of those who were treated with dilation, only 54% were doing well, while 16% required redilation, and 22% eventually required surgical myotomy to obtain relief.If simultaneous esophageal contractions are associated with the sphincter abnormality, the so-called vigorous achala-sia, then the myotomy should extend over the distance of the abnormal motility as mapped by the preoperative motility study. Failure to do this will result in continuing dysphagia and a dis-satisfied patient. The best objective evaluation of improvement in the patient following either balloon dilation or myotomy is a scintigraphic measurement of esophageal emptying time. A good therapeutic response improves esophageal emptying toward normal. However, some degree of dysphagia may per-sist despite improved esophageal emptying, due to disturbances in esophageal body function. When an antireflux procedure is added to the myotomy, it should be a partial fundoplication. A 360° fundoplication is associated with progressive retention of swallowed food, regurgitation, and aspiration to a degree that exceeds the patient’s preoperative symptoms.Laparoscopic CardiomyotomyMore commonly known as a laparoscopic Heller myotomy, after Ernst Heller, a German surgeon who described a “dou-ble myotomy” in 1913, the laparoscopic approach is similar to the Nissen fundoplication in terms of the trocar placement and exposure and dissection of the esophageal hiatus (Fig. 25-65). The procedure begins by division of the short gastric vessels in preparation for fundoplication. Exposure of the GEJ via removal of the gastroesophageal fat pad follows. The anterior vagus nerve is swept right laterally along with the fat pad. Once completed, the GEJ and distal 4 to 5 cm of esophagus should be bared of any overlying tissue, and generally follows dissection of the GEJ. A distal esophageal myotomy is performed. It is generally easiest to begin the myotomy 1 to 2 cm above the GEJ, in an area above that of previous botulinum toxin injections or balloon dilation. Either scissors or a hook-type electrocautery can be used to initiate the incision in the longitudinal and circu-lar muscle. Distally, the myotomy is carried across the GEJ and onto the proximal stomach for approximately 2 to 3 cm. After completion, the muscle edges are separated bluntly from the esophageal mucosa for approximately 50% of the esophageal circumference. An antireflux procedure follows completion of the myotomy. Either an anterior hemifundoplication augment-ing the angle of His (Dor) or posterior partial fundoplication (Toupet) can be performed. The Dor type fundoplication is slightly easier to perform, and it does not require disruption of the normal posterior gastroesophageal attachments (a theoretical advantage in preventing postoperative reflux).Per Oral Endoscopic Myotomy (POEM)The POEM procedure was developed in Japan. It is the ultimate minimally invasive myotomy as it requires no incisions through the skin. With the POEM procedure, a very effective myotomy is performed entirely from the lumen of the esophagus. The POEM procedure is started by opening the esophageal mucosa 10 cm above the lower esophageal sphincter with a needle–knife electrosurgery device passed through an endoscope. A long submucosal plane is developed with the endoscope, down to and below the LES. The circular muscle of the LES, above and below the gastroesophageal junction, is divided with endoscopic electrosurgery. The submucosal entry site in the esophagus is then closed with endoscopic clips. While the results of POEM are still accumulating, the procedure is attractive because it is extremely minimally invasive, and can be done on an outpatient basis. The major downside of POEM is that an effective antire-flux valve cannot be created, exposing the patient to a 40% to 50% risk of GERD post procedure.Outcome Assessment of the Therapy  for AchalasiaCritical analysis of the results of therapy for motor disor-ders of the esophagus requires objective measurement. The use of symptoms alone as an endpoint to evaluate therapy for achalasia may be misleading. The propensity for patients to unconsciously modify their diet to avoid difficulty swallowing is underestimated, making an assessment of results based on symptoms unreliable. Insufficient reduction in outflow resis-tance may allow progressive esophageal dilation to develop slowly, giving the impression of improvement because the volume of food able to be ingested with comfort increases.  A variety of objective measurements may be used to assess success, including LES pressure, esophageal baseline pressure, and scintigraphic assessment of esophageal emptying time. Esophageal baseline pressure is usually negative compared to gastric pressure. Given that the goal of therapy is to eliminate the outflow resistance of a nonrelaxing sphincter, measure-ments of improvements in esophageal baseline pressure and scintigraphic transit time may be better indicators of success, but these are rarely reported.Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   106501/03/19   6:05 PM 1066SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 25-65. A. Longitudinal muscle is divided. B. Mechanical disruption of lower esophageal sphincter muscle fibers. C. Myotomy must be carried across gastroesophageal junction. D. Gastric extension should equal 2 to 3 cm. E. Anterior (Dor) fundoplication is sutured to the diaphragmatic arch. F. Posterior (Toupet) fundoplication is sutured to cut edges of myotomy. EG jct = esophagogastric junction.Eckardt and associates investigated whether the outcome of pneumatic dilation in patients with achalasia could be pre-dicted on the basis of objective measurements. Postdilation LES pressure was the most valuable measurement for predict-ing long-term clinical response. A postdilatation sphincter pres-sure <10 mmHg predicted a good response. Approximately 50% of the patients studied had postdilatation sphincter pressures between 10 and 20 mmHg, with a 2-year remission rate of 71%. More important, 16 of 46 patients were left with a postdilatation sphincter pressure of >20 mmHg and had an unacceptable out-come. Overall, only 30% of patients dilated remained in symp-tomatic remission at 5 years.Bonavina and colleagues reported good to excellent results with transabdominal myotomy and Dor fundoplication in 94% of patients after a mean follow-up of 5.4 years. No operative mortality occurred in either of these series, attesting to the safety of the procedure. Malthaner and Pearson reported the long-term clinical results in 35 patients with achalasia, having a minimum follow-up of 10 years (Table 25-10). Twenty-two of these patients underwent primary esophageal myotomy and Belsey hemifundoplication at the Toronto General Hospital. Excellent to good results were noted in 95% of patients at  1 year, declining to 68%, 69%, and 67% at 10, 15, and 20 years, respectively. Two patients underwent early reoperation for an incomplete myotomy, and three underwent an esophagectomy for progressive disease. They concluded that there was a deterioration of the initially good results after surgical myotomy and hiatal repair for achalasia, which is due to late complications of gastroesophageal reflux.Ellis reported his lifetime experience with transthoracic short esophageal myotomy without an antireflux procedure. One hundred seventy-nine patients were analyzed at a mean follow-up of 9 years, ranging from 6 months to 20 years. Overall, 89% of patients were improved at the 9-year mark. He also observed that the level of improvement deteriorated with time, with excel-lent results (patients continuing to be symptom free) decreasing from 54% at 10 years to 32% at 20 years. He concluded that a short transthoracic myotomy without an antireflux procedure provides excellent long-term relief of dysphagia, and, contrary to Malthaner and Pearson’s experience, does not result in com-plications of gastroesophageal reflux. Both studies document nearly identical results 10 to 15 years following the procedure, and both report deterioration over time, probably due to progres-sion of the underlying disease. The addition of an antireflux procedure if the operation is performed transthoracically has no significant effect on the outcome.Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   106601/03/19   6:05 PM 1067ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25Figure 25-65. (Continued )Table 25-10Reasons for failure of esophageal myotomyREASONAUTHOR, PROCEDURE (N)ELLIS, MYOTOMY  ONLY (N = 81)GOULBOURNE, MYOTOMY  ONLY (N = 65)MALTHANER, MYOTOMY + ANTIREFLUX (N = 22)Reflux4%5%18%Inadequate myotomy2%—9%Megaesophagus2%——Poor emptying4%3%—Persistent chest pain1%——Data from Malthaner RA, et al. Long-term results in surgically managed esophageal achalasia. Ann Thorac Surg. 1994;58:1343; Ellis FH, Jr. Oesophagomyotomy for achalasia: a 22-year experience. Br J Surg. 1993;80:882; and Goulbourne IA, et al. Long-term results of Heller’s operation for achalasia. J R Coll Surg Edinb. 1985;30:101.Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   106701/03/19   6:05 PM 1068SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIThe outcome of laparoscopic myotomy and hemifun-doplication has been well documented. Two reports of over 100 patients have documented relief of dysphagia in 93% of patients. Richter and coworkers reviewed published reports to date, including 254 patients with an average success rate of 93% at 2.5 years. Conversion to an open procedure occurs in 0% to 5% of patients. Complications are uncommon, occurring in <5% of patients. Intraoperative complications consist largely of mucosal perforation, and have been more likely to occur after botulinum toxin injection. The incidence of objective reflux dis-ease as evidenced by abnormal acid exposure is <10%.A number of randomized clinical trials in the past decade have compared the outcomes of laparoscopic Heller myotomy to pneumatic dilation and to botulinum toxin injection. In each of these trials, laparoscopic Heller myotomy and partial fun-doplication was superior to the alternative treatment. Lastly, a randomized clinical trial examining the need for fundoplica-tion following Heller myotomy demonstrated a great deal more reflux in patients without fundoplication, and no better swallow-ing in the Heller-only group. The best treatment for achalasia is a laparoscopic Heller myotomy and partial fundoplication. The role of POEM in the management of classic (nonspastic) achalasia is yet to be established.Esophageal Resection for End-Stage Motor Disorders of the EsophagusPatients with dysphagia and long-standing benign disease, whose esophageal function has been destroyed by the disease process or multiple previous surgical procedures, are best man-aged by esophagectomy. Fibrosis of the esophagus and cardia can result in weak contractions and failure of the distal esopha-geal sphincter to relax. The loss of esophageal contractions can result in the stasis of food, esophageal dilatation, regurgitation, and aspiration. The presence of these abnormalities signals end-stage motor disease. In these situations, esophageal replace-ment is usually required to establish normal alimentation. Before proceeding with esophageal resection for patients with end-stage benign disease, the choice of the organ to substitute for the esophagus (i.e., stomach, jejunum, or colon) should be considered. The choice of replacement is affected by a num-ber of factors, as described later in “Techniques of Esophageal Reconstruction.” If minimally invasive esophagectomy is to be performed, thoracoscopic dissection should be combined with abdominal dissection. Attempts at MIS transhiatal esophagec-tomy for the massively dilated esophagus may result in large volume bleeding from mediastinal vessels that become enlarged with esophageal dilation, and such bleeding must be directly controlled for hemostasis to be adequate and the operation to be safe.CARCINOMA OF THE ESOPHAGUSSquamous carcinoma accounts for the majority of esophageal carcinomas worldwide. Its incidence is highly variable, ranging from approximately 20 per 100,000 in the United States and Britain, to 160 per 100,000 in certain parts of South Africa and the Henan Province of China, and even 540 per 100,000 in the Guriev district of Kazakhstan. The environmental factors responsible for these localized high-incidence areas have not been conclusively identified, though additives to local foodstuffs (nitroso compounds in pickled vegetables and smoked meats) and mineral deficiencies (zinc and molybdenum) have been suggested. In Western societies, smoking and alcohol consumption are strongly linked with squamous carcinoma. Other definite associations link squamous carcinoma with long-standing achalasia, lye strictures, tylosis (an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by hyperkeratosis of the palms and soles), and human papillomavirus.Adenocarcinoma of the esophagus, once an unusual malig-nancy, is diagnosed with increasing frequency (Fig. 25-66) and now accounts for more than 50% of esophageal cancer in most Western countries. The shift in the epidemiology of esophageal cancer from predominantly squamous carcinoma seen in associ-ation with smoking and alcohol to adenocarcinoma in the setting of BE is one of the most dramatic changes that has occurred in the history of human neoplasia. Although esophageal carcinoma is a relatively uncommon malignancy, its prevalence is explod-ing, largely secondary to the well-established association among gastroesophageal reflux, BE, and esophageal adenocarcinoma. Although BE was once a nearly uniformly lethal disease, sur-vival has improved slightly because of advances in the under-standing of its molecular biology, screening and surveillance practices, improved staging, minimally invasive surgical tech-niques, and neoadjuvant therapy.Furthermore, the clinical picture of esophageal adenocar-cinoma is changing. It now occurs not only considerably more frequently but also in younger patients, and it is often detected at an earlier stage. These facts support rethinking the traditional approach of assuming palliation is appropriate in all patients. The historical focus on palliation of dysphagia in an elderly patient with comorbidities should change when dealing with a young patient with dependent children and a productive life ahead. The potential for cure becomes of paramount importance.The gross appearance resembles that of squamous cell car-cinoma. Microscopically, adenocarcinoma almost always origi-nates in Barrett’s mucosa and resembles gastric cancer. Rarely, it arises in the submucosal glands and forms intramural growths that resemble the mucoepidermal and adenoid cystic carcinomas of the salivary glands.The most important etiologic factor in the development of primary adenocarcinoma of the esophagus is a metaplastic columnar-lined or Barrett’s esophagus, which occurs in approxi-mately 10% to 15% of patients with GERD. When studied pro-spectively, the incidence of adenocarcinoma in a patient with BE is one in 100 to 200 patient-years of follow-up (i.e., for every 100 patients with BE followed for 1 year, one will develop adenocarcinoma). Although this risk appears to be small, it is at least 40 to 60 times that expected for a similar population without BE. This risk is similar to the risk for developing lung cancer in a person with a 20-pack-per-year history of smoking. Endoscopic surveillance for patients with BE is recommended for two reasons: (a) at present there is no reliable evidence that medical therapy removes the risk of neoplastic transformation, and (b) malignancy in BE is curable if detected at an early stage.Clinical ManifestationsEsophageal cancer generally presents with dysphagia, although increasing numbers of relatively asymptomatic patients are now identified on surveillance endoscopy, or present with nonspecific upper GI symptoms and undergo screening endoscopy. Extension of the primary tumor into the tracheobronchial tree can occur primarily with squamous cell carcinoma and can cause stridor, tracheoesophageal fistula, and resultant coughing, choking, and aspiration 6Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   106801/03/19   6:05 PM 1069ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25U.S. esophageal cancer incidence19851993199720012005Incidence per 100,00002520151051989NCI esophageal cancer research investment$21.8M$21.7M$21.6M srallod fo snoilliMilliBo snolod fsralFiscal year020032004200520062007252015105054321Esophageal cancer funding Total NCI budget $22.3M$4.8B$4.7B$4.7B$4.6B$4.8B$22.7MU.S. esophageal cancer mortalityMortality per 100,000198519931997200120050252015105White malesOverall rateAfrican American malesWhite femalesAfrican American females1989Figure 25-66. Incidence and mortality rate trends for esophageal cancer. NCI = National Cancer Institute. (Reproduced with permis-sion from the National Cancer Institute. Last updated September, 2008.)pneumonia. Rarely, severe bleeding from the primary tumor or from erosion into the aorta or pulmonary vessels occurs. Either vocal cord may be invaded, causing paralysis, but most commonly, paralysis is caused by invasion of the left recurrent laryngeal nerve by the primary tumor or LN metastasis. Systemic organ metastases are usually manifested by jaundice or bone pain. The situation is different in high-incidence areas where screening is practiced. In these communities, the most prominent early symptom is pain on swallowing rough or dry food. In patients that present with back pain at the time of esophageal cancer diagnosis, there is usually distant metastasis or celiac encasement.Dysphagia usually presents late in the natural history of the disease because the lack of a serosal layer on the esopha-gus allows the smooth muscle to dilate with ease. As a result, the dysphagia becomes severe enough for the patient to seek medical advice only when more than 60% of the esophageal circumference is infiltrated with cancer. Consequently, the dis-ease is usually advanced if symptoms herald its presence. Tra-cheoesophageal fistula may be present in some patients on their first visit to the hospital, and more than 40% will have evidence of distant metastases. With tumors of the cardia, anorexia and weight loss usually precede the onset of dysphagia. The physical signs of esophageal tumors are those associated with the pres-ence of distant metastases.General Approach to Esophageal CancerTherapy of esophageal cancer is dictated by the stage of the can-cer at the time of diagnosis. Put simply, one needs to determine if the disease is confined to the esophagus, (T1–T2, N0), locally advanced (T1–3, N1), or disseminated (any T, any N, M1). If cancer is confined to the esophagus, removal of the tumor with adjacent lymph nodes may be curative. Very early tumors con-fined to the mucosa (T in situ, T1a, intramucosal cancer) may be addressed with endoscopic treatment. When the tumor is locally aggressive, modern therapy dictates a multimodality approach in a surgically fit patient. Multimodality therapy is either che-motherapy followed by surgery or radiation and chemotherapy followed by surgery. When given before surgery, these treat-ments are referred to as neoadjuvant or induction therapy. For disseminated cancer, treatment is aimed at palliation of symp-toms. If the patient has dysphagia, as many do, the most rapid form of palliation is the endoscopic placement of an expandable esophageal stent. For palliation of GEJ cancer, radiation may be the first choice, as stents placed across the GEJ create a great deal of gastroesophageal reflux.Staging of Esophageal CancerChoosing the best therapy for an individual patient requires accurate staging. Staging starts with the history and physical. LN disease remote from the tumor, particularly in the cervi-cal region, may be palpable on neck examination and generally indicates cancer dissemination. This is often referred to as M1a disease, indicating that these patients should not be treated with therapy directed toward locally advanced cancer. Other meta-static LNs are rarely palpable but are equally ominous, espe-cially the umbilical LN in GEJ cancer.Computed tomographic (CT) scanning of the chest, abdo-men, and pelvis provides information on local invasion of the primary cancer, LN involvement, or disseminated disease. The most common sites of esophageal cancer metastases are lung, liver, and peritoneal surfaces, including the omentum and small bowel mesentery. If masses are identified that are Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   106901/03/19   6:05 PM 1070SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IInot characteristic for cancer or are in a location that precludes resection with the cancer specimen, positron emission tomogra-phy (PET) scanning may be able to tell whether the masses are metabolically active (likely to be cancer) or not. A PET active focus corresponding to a mass on CT scan outside of the field of esophageal resection should be biopsied before resection is performed.The introduction of endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) has made it possible to identify patients who are potentially curable before surgical therapy. Using an endoscope, the depth of the wall penetration by the tumor and the presence of LN metasta-ses can be determined with 80% accuracy. A curative resection should be encouraged if EUS indicates that the tumor has not invaded adjacent organs (T4b), and/or fewer than six enlarged LNs are imaged. Thoracoscopic and laparoscopic staging of esophageal cancer may add benefit when the nature of enlarged LNs remote from the cancer cannot be determined or when advanced imaging systems (PET and high-resolution spiral CT) are not available.Occasionally, diagnostic laparoscopy and jejunostomy tube placement may precede induction chemoradiation in the patient with severe dysphagia and weight loss from a locally advanced cancer. In summary, esophageal cancer is diagnosed with endoscopic biopsy and is staged with CT scanning of the chest and abdomen, EUS, and PET scan for all patients with CT or EUS evidence of advanced disease (T2 or greater, N1-2 or NX).  Experience with esophageal resection in patients with early stage disease has identified characteristics of esophageal cancer that are associated with improved survival. A number of studies suggest that only metastasis to LNs and tumor penetration of the esophageal wall have a significant and independent influence on prognosis. Factors known to be important in the survival of patients with advanced disease, such as cell type, degree of cellular differentiation, or location of tumor in the esophagus, have no effect on survival of patients who have undergone resection for early disease. Studies also showed that patients having five or fewer LN metastases have a better outcome. Using these data, Skinner developed the wall penetration, LN, and distant organ metastases system for staging.The wall penetration, LN, and distant organ metastases system differed somewhat from the previous efforts to develop a satisfactory staging criteria for carcinoma of the esophagus. Most surgeons agreed that the 1983 tumor, nodes, and metastasis system left much to be desired. In the third edition of the manual for Staging of Cancer of the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) in 1988, an effort was made to provide a finer discrimination between stages than had been contained in the previous edition in 1983. In 2016, further refinements of the staging system of esophageal cancer were approved by the AJCC, recognizing the difference in survival afforded by resection of limited LN disease adjacent to the tumor, compared to multilevel LN disease and positive LNs remote from the primary. Table 25-11 shows the AJCC definitions for the primary tumor, lymph nodes, distant metastasis, and overall staging schema for both squamous cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma.Clinical Approach to Carcinoma of the Esophagus and CardiaThe selection of a curative vs. a palliative operation for cancer of the esophagus is based on the location of the tumor, the patient’s age and health, the extent of the disease, and preoperative stag-ing. Figure 25-67 shows an algorithm of the clinical decisions important in the selection of curative or palliative therapy.Tumor Location. The selection of surgical therapy for patients with carcinoma of the esophagus depends not only on the ana-tomic stage of the disease and an assessment of the swallowing capacity of the patient but also on the location of the primary tumor.It is estimated that 8% of the primary malignant tumors of the esophagus occur in the cervical portion (Fig. 25-68). They are almost always squamous cell cancer, with a rare adenocar-cinoma arising from a congenital inlet patch of columnar lining. These tumors, particularly those in the postcricoid area, repre-sent a separate pathologic entity for two reasons: (a) they are more common in females and appear to be a unique entity in this regard; and (b) the efferent lymphatics from the cervical esophagus drain completely differently from those of the tho-racic esophagus. The latter drain directly into the paratracheal and deep cervical or internal jugular LNs with minimal flow in a longitudinal direction. Except in advanced disease, it is unusual for intrathoracic LNs to be involved.Cervical esophageal cancer is frequently unresectable because of early invasion of the larynx, great vessels, or trachea. Radical surgery, including esophagolaryngectomy may occa-sionally be performed for these lesions, but the ensuing mor-bidity makes this a less than desirable approach in the face of uncertain cure. Thus, for most patients with cervical esophageal cancer, stereotactic radiation with concomitant chemotherapy is the most desirable treatment.Tumors that arise within the middle third of the esopha-gus are squamous carcinomas most commonly and are fre-quently associated with LN metastasis, which are usually in the thorax but may be in the neck or abdomen, and may skip areas in between. Although it is generally felt that individu-als with midthoracic cancer and abdominal LN metastases are incurable with surgery, there are some emerging data that suggest that cervical LN metastases, if isolated, can be resected with benefit. Generally, T1 and T2 cancers with-out LN metastases are treated with resection only, but there is more and more data to suggest that LN involvement or transmural cancer (T3) warrants treatment with neoadjuvant chemoradiation therapy followed by resection. Although some surgeons prefer a transhiatal esophagectomy for all tumor locations, most surgeons believe that resection of mid-esophageal cancer should be performed under direct vision with either thoracoscopy (video-assisted thoracic surgery [VATS]) or with thoracotomy.Tumors of the lower esophagus and cardia are usually adenocarcinomas. Unless preoperative and intraoperative stag-ing clearly demonstrate an incurable lesion, resection in con-tinuity with a LN dissection should be performed. Because of the propensity of GI tumors to spread for long distances sub-mucosally, long lengths of grossly normal GI tract should be resected. The longitudinal lymph flow in the esophagus can result in skip areas, with small foci of tumor above the primary lesion, which underscores the importance of a wide resection of esophageal tumors. Wong has shown that local recurrence at the anastomosis can be prevented by obtaining a 10-cm margin of normal esophagus above the tumor. Anatomic studies have also shown that there is no submucosal lymphatic barrier between the esophagus and the stomach at the cardia, and Wong has Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   107001/03/19   6:05 PM 1071ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25Table 25-11American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) Staging Schema for Esophageal CancerTXT0TisT1T1aT1bT2T3T4T4aT4bNXN0N1N2N3M0M1Primary tumor cannot be assessed.No evidence of primary tumor.High-grade dysplasia.Tumor invades lamina propria, muscularis mucosae, or submucosa.Tumor invades lamina propria or muscularis mucosae.Tumor invades submucosa.Tumor invades muscularis propria.Tumor invades adventitia.Tumor invades adjacent structures.Resectable tumor invading pleura, pericardium, or diaphragm.Unresectable tumor invading other adjacent structures, such as aorta, vertebral body, trachea, etc.Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed.No regional lymph node metastasis.Metastases in 1–2 regional lymph nodes.Metastases in 3–6 regional lymph nodes.Metastases in ≥7 regional lymph nodes.No distant metastasis.Distant metastasis.SQUAMOUS CELL CARCINOMA  Pathological (pTNM)When 	And 	And 	And 	And 	Then the stagepT is...	pN is...	M is...	G is...	location is...	group is...Tis	N0	M0	N/A	Any	0T1a	N0	M0	G1	Any	IAT1a	N0	M0	G2–3	Any	IBT1a	N0	M0	GX	Any	IAT1b	N0	M0	G1–3	Any	IBT1b	N0	M0	GX	Any	IBT2		N0	M0	G1	Any	IBT2		N0	M0	G2–3	Any 	IIAT2		N0	M0	GX	Any	IIAT3		N0	M0	G1–3	Lower	IIAT3		N0	M0	G1	Upper/middle	IIAT3		N0	M0	G2–3	Upper/middle	IIBClinical (cTNM)When 	And 	And 	Then the cT is...	cN is...	M is...	stage group is...Tis	N0	M0	0T1	N0–1	M0	IT2	N0–1	M0	IIT3	N0	M0	IIT3	N1	M0	IIIT1–3	N2	M0	IIIT4	N0–2	M0	IVAAny T	N3	M0	IVAAny T	Any N	M1	IVBPostneoadjuvant Therapy (ypTNM)When yp 	And yp	And 	Then the stageT is...	N is...	M is...	group is...T0–2	N0	M0	IT3	N0	M0	IIT0–2	N1	M0	IIIAT3	N1	M0	IIIBT0–3	N2	M0	IIIBT4a	N0	M0	IIIBT4a	N1–2	M0	IVAT4a	NX	M0	IVAT4b	N0–2	M0	IVAAny T	N3	M0	IVAAny T	Any N	M1	IVBClinical (cTNM)When 	And 	And 	Then the cT is...	cN is...	M is...	stage group is...Tis	N0	M0	0T1	N0	M0	IT1	N1	M0	IIAT2	N0	M0	IIBT3		N0	M0	GX	Lower/upper/middle	IIBT3		N0	M0	Any	Location X	IIBT1		N1	M0	Any	Any	IIBT1		N2	M0	Any	Any	IIIAT2		N1	M0	Any	Any	IIIAT2		N2	M0	Any	Any	IIIBT3		N1–2	M0	Any	Any	IIIBT4a	N0–1	M0	Any	Any	IIIBT4a	N2	M0	Any	Any	IVAT4b	N0–2	M0	Any	Any	IVAAny T	N3	M0	Any	Any	IVAAny T	Any N	M1	Any	Any	IVB(Continued)ADENOCARCINOMAT2	N1	M0	IIIT3	N0–1	M0	IIIT4a	N0–1	M0	IIIT1–4a	N2	M0	IVAT4b	N0–2	M0	IVAAny T	N3	M0	IVAAny T	Any N	M1	IVBBrunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   107101/03/19   6:05 PM 1072SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 25-11American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) Staging Schema for Esophageal CancerPostneoadjuvant Therapy (ypTNM)When yp 	And yp 	And 	Then the stage T is...	N is...	M is...	group is...T0–2	N0	M0	IT3	N0	M0	IIT0–2	N1	M0	IIIAT3	N1	M0	IIIBT0–3	N2	M0	IIIBT4a	N0	M0	IIIBT4a	N1–2	M0	IVAT4a	NX	M0	IVAT4b	N0–2	M0	IVAAny T	N3	M0	IVAAny T	Any N	M1	IVBUsed with the permission of the American College of Surgeons. Amin MB, Edge SB, Greene FL, et al. (Eds.) AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, 8th Ed. Springer New York, 2017.Pathological (pTNM)When 	And 	And 	And 	Then the stage  pT is...	pN is...	M is...	G is...	group is...Tis	N0	M0	N/A	0T1a	N0	M0	G1	IAT1a	N0	M0	GX	IAT1a	N0	M0	G2	IBT1b	N0	M0	G1–2	IBT1b	N0	M0	GX	IBT1	N0	M0	G3	ICT2	N0	M0	G1–2	ICT2	N0	M0	G3	IIAT2	N0	M0	GX	IIAT1	N1	M0	Any	IIBT3	N0	M0	Any	IIBT1	N2	M0	Any	IIIAT2	N1	M0	Any	IIIAT2	N2	M0	Any	IIIBT3	N1–2	M0	Any	IIIBT4a	N0–1	M0	Any	IIIBT4a	N2	M0	Any	IVAT4b	N0–2	M0	Any	IVAAny T	N3	M0	Any	IVAAny T	Any N	M1	Any	IVB*Could include combined Rx and chemo neoadjuvant therapyprior to resection to increase resectability and potentialsurvival in patients 75 or under.Curative enbloc resectionIntraoperativestagingAgePhysiologicfitnessClinical stagingEndoscopicultrasoundPalliation75 yearsPalliation FEV1 1.25 Ejection fraction 40%PalliationRecurrent nerve paralysisHorner's syndromePersistent spinal painParalysis of diaphragmFistula formationMalignant pleural effusionEndoscopic tumor length 9 cmAbnormal esophageal axisMultiple enlarged nodes or distantorgan metastasis on CTMore than 20% weight lossLoss of appetite (relative)PalliationTransmural tumors     with 4enlarged nodesPalliationUnresectable primaryCavitary spreadDistant metastasisExtension through mediastinal wallMultiple gross lymph node metastasesMicroscopic nodal metastasis at margins ofthe en bloc dissectionPalliative symptomsDysphagiaObstructionPain of ulcerationBleedingInfectionAnxietyRequirements for   palliative transhiatal   resection*   Free of distant organ         metastases   Complete excision of         primary tumor possibleNonsurgicalpalliationFigure 25-67. Algorithm for the evaluation of esophageal cancer patients to select the proper therapy: curative en bloc resection, palliative transhiatal resection, or nonsurgical palliation. CT = computed tomography; FEV1 = forced expiratory volume in 1 second. (Reproduced with permission from DeMeester TR: Esophageal carcinoma: current controversies, Semin Surg Oncol. 1997 Jul-Aug;13(4):217-233.)shown that 50% of the local recurrences in patients with esopha-geal cancer who are resected for cure occur in the intrathoracic stomach along the line of the gastric resection. Considering that the length of the esophagus ranges from 17 to 25 cm, and the length of the lesser curvature of the stomach is approximately 12 cm, a curative resection requires a cervical division of the esophagus and a >50% proximal gastrectomy in most patients with carcinoma of the distal esophagus or cardia.Age. Resection for cure of carcinoma of the esophagus in a patient older than 80 years is rarely indicated because of the additional operative risk and the shorter life expectancy. Despite this general guideline, octogenarians with a high-performance status and excellent cardiopulmonary reserve may be consid-ered candidates for esophagectomy, and recent case series have established its success in highly selected patients. It is in this group of patients that the lesser physiologic impact of minimally (Continued)Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   107201/03/19   6:05 PM 1073ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25LocationIncidenceCervicalUpperthoracicMiddlethoracicLowerthoracicCardia8%3%32%25%32%Figure 25-68. Incidence of carcinoma of the esophagus and cardia based on tumor location.induction chemoradiation therapy, more pronounced dysphagia and associated malnutrition should be addressed before the initiation of chemoradiation. A laparoscopic jejunostomy tube can be placed prior to induction therapy or at the time of esophagectomy. There are emerging data that 5 days’ pretreatment with immune-enhancing nutrition, rich in fish oils, decreases cardiac and other complications, following esophagectomy.Clinical Staging. Clinical factors that indicate an advanced stage of carcinoma and exclude surgery with curative intent are recurrent nerve paralysis, Horner’s syndrome, persistent spinal pain, paralysis of the diaphragm, fistula formation, and malig-nant pleural effusion. Factors that make surgical cure unlikely include a tumor >8 cm in length, abnormal axis of the esopha-gus on a barium radiogram, more than four enlarged LNs on CT, a weight loss more than 20%, and loss of appetite. Stud-ies indicate that there are several favorable parameters associ-ated with tumors <4 cm in length, there are fewer with tumors between 4 and 8 cm, and there are no favorable criteria for tumors >8 cm in length. Consequently, the finding of a tumor >8 cm in length should exclude curative resection; the finding of a smaller tumor should encourage an aggressive approach.Preoperative Staging With Advanced Imaging. For years, clinical staging, contrast radiography, endoscopy, and CT scan-ning formed the backbone of esophageal cancer staging. More recently, preoperative decision making is guided by endoscopic ultrasonography and PET scanning.EUS provides the most reliable method of determining depth of cancer invasion. In the absence of enlarged LNs, the degree of wall invasion dictates surgical therapy. If a small focus of esophageal cancer is confined to the mucosa, endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR) is a preferable option. If the tumor invades into the submucosa, without visible lymph node involvement, most individuals would suggest esophagectomy with LN dissection, as positive nodes can be found in 20% to 25% of those with cancer limited to the mucosa and submucosa. If EUS demonstrates spread through the wall of the esophagus, especially if LNs are enlarged, then induction chemoradiation therapy (neoadjuvant therapy) should be strongly considered. Lastly, when the EUS demonstrates invasion of the trachea, bronchus, aorta, or spine, then surgical resection is rarely indicated. If there is invasion into the pleura (T4a), then surgical resection can be considered in the absence of a malignant effusion. Thus, it can be seen that the therapy of esophageal cancer is largely driven by the findings of an endoscopic ultrasonography. It is difficult to provide modern treatment of esophageal cancer without access to this modality.PET scanning, usually combined with an axial CT scan  (CTPET), usually is performed on patients with locally advanced cancer or questionable lesions on CT scan to deter-mine whether metastases are present. The PET scan uses the injection of radiolabeled deoxyglucose, which is taken up in metabolically active tissues such as cancer. PET-positive areas must be correlated with the CT scan findings to assess the sig-nificance of “hot spots.” CTPET scanning has been especially useful before the initiation of chemoradiation therapy. An early response to chemoradiotherapy, by PET scan, improves the prognosis whether or not resection is ultimately performed. Conversely, if a PET-avid tumor shows no change in metabolic activity after 2 weeks of induction chemoradiation therapy, it is unlikely that further chemoor radiation therapy will be of invasive surgery may reduce the morbidity and mortality associ-ated with open twoor three-field esophagectomy.Cardiopulmonary Reserve. Patients undergoing esophageal resection should have sufficient cardiopulmonary reserve to tol-erate the proposed procedure. The respiratory function is best assessed with the forced expiratory volume in 1 second, which ideally should be 2 L or more. Any patient with a forced expi-ratory volume in 1 second of <1.25 L is a poor candidate for thoracotomy because he or she has a 40% risk of dying from respiratory insufficiency within 4 years. In patients with poor pulmonary reserve, the transhiatal esophagectomy should be considered, as the pulmonary morbidity of this operation is less than is seen following thoracotomy. Clinical evaluation and electrocardiogram are not sufficient indicators of cardiac reserve. Echocardiography and dipyridamole thallium imaging provide accurate information on wall motion, ejection fraction, and myocardial blood flow. A defect on thallium imaging may require further evaluation with preoperative coronary angiogra-phy. A resting ejection fraction of <40%, particularly if there is no increase with exercise, is an ominous sign. In the absence of invasive testing, observed stair-climbing is an economical (albeit not quantitative) method of assessing cardiopulmonary reserve. Most individuals who can climb three flights of stairs without stopping will do well with two-field open esophagectomy, espe-cially if an epidural catheter is used for postoperative pain relief.Nutritional Status. The factor most predictive of postoperative complication is the nutritional status of the patient. Profound weight loss, more than 20 lb, associated with hypoalbuminemia (albumin <3.5 g/dL) is associated with a much higher rate of complications and mortality than patients who enter curative surgery in better nutritional condition. Because malnourished patients generally have locally advanced esophageal cancer, if not metastatic disease, one should consider the placement of a feeding tube before the beginning of induction chemoradiation therapy. Although mild amounts of dysphagia are improved by Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   107301/03/19   6:05 PM 1074SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIany benefit. These patients have a worse prognosis and may be referred for resection or palliation without incurring the morbid-ity or expense of a full course of chemoand radiation therapy.Palliation of Esophageal CancerPalliation of esophageal cancer is indicated for individuals with metastatic esophageal cancer or cancer invading adjacent organs (T4b) who are unable to swallow, or individuals with fistulae into the tracheobronchial tree. Aortic esophageal fistulas are extremely rare and nearly 100% lethal. Dysphagia as a result of esophageal cancer can be graded from grade I, eating normally, to grade VI, unable to swallow saliva (Table 25-12). Grades I to III often can be managed with radiation therapy, usually in combination with chemotherapy. When surgical resection is not anticipated in the future, this is termed definitive chemoradia-tion therapy and usually is palliative. Radiation dose is increased from 45 Gy to 60 Gy administered over 8 weeks, rather than the 4 weeks given for chemoradiation induction therapy. In 20% of patients, a complete response to chemoradiation therapy will not only palliate the symptoms but will also leave the patient with undetectable cancer of the esophagus. Although some of these patients are truly cured, cancer will recur in many either locally or systemically 1 to 5 years following definitive chemo-radiation. In a few patients, definitive chemoradiation will be successful in all sites but the esophagus. After a 12-month wait from initial treatment and no other sites of tumor detectable except the esophagus, some of these patients may be candidates for salvage esophagectomy.For individuals with dysphagia grades IV and higher, addi-tional treatment generally is necessary. The mainstay of therapy is in-dwelling esophageal stents. Covered removable stents may be used to seal fistulae or when stent removal becomes desir-able in the future. When large, locally invasive tumors or meta-static esophageal cancer precludes any future hope of resection, uncovered expandable metal stents are the treatment of choice. The major limitations to stenting exist in cancers at the GEJ. A stent placed across the GEJ will result in severe gastroesopha-geal reflux and heartburn that can be quite disabling. In cancers at this level, radiation therapy alone may be preferable. If feed-ing access is desirable, a laparoscopic jejunostomy is usually the procedure of choice.Surgical TreatmentThe surgical treatment of esophageal cancer is dependent upon the location of the cancer, the depth of invasion, LN metastases, the fitness of the patient for operation, and the culture and beliefs of the individuals and institutions in which the treatment is performed. In an ideal world, there would be a single, stage-specific method of treating esophageal cancer because the evidence would be unassailable and noncontroversial. Randomized clinical trials and meta-analyses would prove beyond a shadow of a doubt the value of surgery vs. nonoperative therapy and would dictate the type and extent of surgery that would optimally balance immediate morbidity and mortality with duration and quality of life conferred by the procedure and the perioperative management of the esophagectomy patient. Despite many noble attempts to establish this high level of evidence, many questions relating to the appropriate therapy of esophageal cancer remain. About the only area of complete agreement is that esophagectomy should not be performed if an R0 resection is not possible. In other words, if the surgeon does not believe he or she can remove all LNs invaded by cancer and provide a tumor-free radial margin and esophagus and stomach margins that are tumor free, then a resection should not be performed.Mucosally Based Cancer. In patients with BE, and especially those with high-grade dysplasia, subcentimeter nodules are frequently discovered. Nodules should be resected in entirety, as they often harbor adenocarcinoma. Five years ago, such resection was performed with a transhiatal esophagectomy, but more recently EMR offers another method for removing intramucosal cancer. In this clinical situation, EMR is typi-cally combined with EUS to rule out more invasive disease. EUS, however, is unable to differentiate between cancer that is  confined to the mucosa (T1a) and that which invades the submu-cosa (T1b). Tumors invading the submucosa are not amenable to endoscopic mucosal resection because of the high-frequency (20–25%) concurrent finding of positive LNs, which cannot be removed without esophagectomy. On the other hand, intramu-cosal cancers have little risk of spreading to regional LNs. The current approach used involves performing EMR on all nodules identified in a field of Barrett’s esophagus, and then T staging is performed by histologic analysis. This approach dictates the need for future therapy such as esophagectomy.For this reason, small intramucosal carcinomas may be removed with EMR in the following manner. The area beneath the nodule is infiltrated with saline through a sclerotherapy needle. A specialized suction cap is mounted on the end of the endoscope, and the nodule is drawn up into the cap; a snare is then applied to resect the tissue. Alternatively, a rubber band can be delivered, and the snare can be used to resect above the level of the rubber band. This specimen is then removed and sent to pathology. As long as the tumor is found to be confined to the mucosa and all margins are negative, the resection is complete. A positive margin or involvement of the submucosa warrants esophagectomy. Most importantly, these patients are at high risk for developing small nodular carcinomas elsewhere in their Barrett’s segment, and routine surveillance on a 3to 6-month basis must be continued indefinitely. Alternatively, one can consider radiofrequency ablation of the remainder of the high-grade dysplasia after careful surveillance biopsy specimens demonstrate no further sign of cancer. This approach to the early esophageal cancer Table 25-12Functional grades of dysphagiaGRADEDEFINITIONINCIDENCE AT DIAGNOSIS (%)IEating normally11IIRequires liquids with meals21IIIAble to take semisolids but unable to take any solid food30IVAble to take liquids only40VUnable to take liquids, but able to swallow saliva7VIUnable to swallow saliva12Data from Takita H, Vincent RG, Caicedo V, et al. Squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus: a study of 153 cases, J Surg Oncol. 1977;9(6):547-554.Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   107401/03/19   6:05 PM 1075ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25should not be used when there is any suspicion of mediastinal or abdominal lymphadenopathy. Although it is currently rare that EMR provides definitive therapy of small nodular esophageal cancers, this may become more of the norm as greater surveillance reveals earlier cancers and proficiency of the technique by surgeons and gastroenterologists increases.Minimally Invasive Transhiatal Esophagectomy.  Minimally invasive transhiatal esophagectomy is an increasingly popular procedure; however, the number of these operations performed around the world remains small. Mini-invasive surgery (MIS) transhiatal esophagectomy was first performed by Aureo DePaula in Brazil and has been modified and adopted by many individuals around the world. This operation combines the advantages of transhiatal esophagectomy at minimizing pulmonary complications with the advantages of laparoscopy (less pain, quicker rehabilitation). Several variations of MIS transhiatal esophagectomy have been developed. For the earliest lesions, such as high-grade dysplasia or intramucosal carcinoma, a vagal sparing procedure can be entertained. In such a procedure, the vagal trunks are separated from the esophagus at the level of the diaphragm and the lesser curvature dissection of the stomach allows the vagus and left gastric pedicle to remain intact. Clearly, this dissection, which hugs the stomach and esophagus, provides no LN staging and is thus inadequate for all high-grade dysplasia and intramucosal cancer.MIS transhiatal esophagectomy is usually performed through five or six small incisions in the upper abdomen and a transverse cervical incision for removing the specimen and performing the cervical esophagogastrostomy. To remove the esophagus from the posterior mediastinum, especially the area behind the pulmonary vessels and the tracheal bifurcation, which cannot be visualized even with a long laparoscope placed in the posterior mediastinum, it is preferred to use a vein stripping “inversion” technique (Fig. 25-69A). The details of this operation are too lengthy to include in this text, but include the laparoscopic creation of a neo-esophagus (gastric conduit) along the greater curvature of the stomach using the right gastroepiploic artery as the primary vascular pedicle. The conduit can be created through a mini-laparotomy or laparoscopically. A Kocher maneuver releases the duodenum, and a pyloroplasty may be performed (optional). Retrograde esophageal stripping is performed by dividing the esophagus below the GEJ and sliding a vein stripper from the neck down into the abdomen followed by an inversion of the esophagus in the posterior mediastinum and removal through the neck (Fig. 25-69B). This technique is reserved for patients with high-grade dysplasia. For small cancers at the GEJ, the esophagus can be stripped in an antegrade fashion by sliding the vein stripper down from the cervical incision and out the tail of the lesser curvature (Fig. 25-69C). The tail of the lesser curvature is pulled out a port site high in the epigastrium while the esophagus is inverted into itself. For GEJ cancers, a wide celiac access LN dissection, splenic artery, hepatic artery, and posterior mediastinal LN dissection can be performed as well or better than through a laparotomy. The gastric conduit is pulled up to the neck with a chest tube and anastomosed to the cervical esophagus in an end-to-side fashion using a surgical stapler or with a handsewn anastomosis. Complications of this technique are primarily limited to leak from the esophagogastric anastomosis, which is self-limited and usually heals within 1 to 3 weeks, spontaneously.Figure 25-69. A. Laparoscopic retrograde inversion. B. Laparo-scopic antegrade inversion. A silk suture holds the tunnel after the esophagus is removed. C. The esophageal conduit is returned to the neck after passing a chest tube down the tunnel and suturing the conduit to the chest tube.Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   107501/03/19   6:05 PM 1076SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIOpen Transhiatal Esophagectomy. Transhiatal esophagec-tomy, also known as blunt esophagectomy or esophagectomy without a thoracotomy, was first performed in 1933 by a British surgeon, but was popularized in the last quarter of the 20th century by Mark Orringer from the University of Michigan. Although this operation may violate many of the principles of cancer resec-tion, including extended radical LN dissection, this operation has performed as well as any of the more radical procedures in randomized trials, and in large database analyses. With transhia-tal esophagectomy, the elements of dissection are similar to that described in the section entitled Minimally Invasive Transhiatal Esophagectomy, including the creation of the gastric tube and the posterior mediastinal dissection through the hiatus. Because this dissection is performed with the fingertips rather than under direct vision with surgical instruments, it requires an enlargement of the diaphragmatic hiatus. The lower mediastinal LN basins can be resected as can the upper abdominal LNs, making this an attrac-tive option for GEJ cancers. The mediastinal LNs above the infe-rior pulmonary vein are not removed with this technique, but they rarely result in a point of isolated cancer recurrence.Of all procedures for esophageal cancer, this operation is the quickest to perform in experienced hands and lies in an intermedi-ate position between minimally invasive esophagectomy and the Ivor Lewis procedure with respect to complications and recovery.Minimally Invasive Twoand Three-Field Esophagectomy.  After a rocky start, minimally invasive esophagectomy using a thoracic dissection through VATS has become reasonably popular. In general, this operation is performed with an anastomosis created in the neck (three-field), but it may be performed with the anastomosis stapled in the high thorax (two-field). Both procedures will be described.With a minimally invasive three-field esophagectomy, the patient is placed in the left lateral decubitus position. Double lumen intubation is required. Videoscopic access to the thorax is obtained in the midaxillary line in the ninth intercostal space and an angled telescope illuminates the chest superiorly. A mini-thoracotomy at about the sixth intercostal space anteriorly allows introduction of conventional surgical instruments, and a high trocar allows retraction of the lung away from the esophagus. In a three-field approach, the esophagus is dissected along its length to include division of the azygos vein and harvesting of the LNs in the upper, middle, and lower posterior mediastinum. Hilar, and posterior mediastinal nodes are all removed and sent with the specimen or individually. The thoracic duct is divided at the level of the diaphragm and removed with the specimen.Following complete intrathoracic dissection, the patient is placed in the supine position and five laparoscopic ports are placed as with the MIS transhiatal esophagectomy. The abdominal portions of the operation are identical to those described previously in the section entitled “Minimally Invasive Transhiatal Esophagectomy,” and the gastric conduit is then sewn to the tip of the fully mobilized GEJ and lesser curvature sleeve. A feeding tube is placed, and the pyloroplasty may be performed laparoscopically. A transverse cervical incision and dissection between the sternocleidomastoid and the anterior strap muscles allows access to the cervical esophagus. Great care is made to avoid stretching the recurrent laryngeal nerve. The esophagus and proximal stomach is then pulled up into the neck with the gastric conduit following. Cervical anastomosis is then performed.The MIS transthoracic two-field esophagectomy is slightly different. In this operation, the abdominal portions of the operation are done first, including placement of the feeding tube, the creation of the conduit, and the sewing of the tip of the conduit to the fully dissected GEJ. The patient is then rolled into the left lateral decubitus position and, through right thoracoscopy, the esophagus is dissected and divided 10 cm above the tumor. Once freed, the specimen is pulled out through the mini-thoracotomy, and an end-to-end anastomosis stapler is introduced through the high corner of the gastric conduit and out a stab wound along the greater curvature. The anvil of the stapler is placed in the proximal esophagus and held with a purse-string, the stapler is docked, the anastomosis is created, and a gastrotomy is then closed with another firing of the GIA stapler. The three-field esophagectomy has the advantage of placing the anastomosis in the neck where leakage is unlikely to create a severe systemic consequence. On the other hand, placement of the anastomosis in the high chest minimizes the risks of injury to structures in the neck, particularly the recurrent laryngeal nerve. Although the leak of the intrathoracic anastomosis may be more likely to bear septic consequences, the incidence of leak is diminished. Other complications of this approach relate to pulmonary and cardiac status. In many series, the most common complication is pneumonia, the second is atrial fibrillation, and the third is anastomotic leak.Ivor Lewis (En Bloc) Esophagectomy. The theory behind radical transthoracic esophagectomy is that greater removal of LNs and periesophageal tissues diminishes the chance of a posi-tive radial margin and LN recurrence. Although there are no ran-domized data demonstrating this to be superior to other forms of esophagectomy, there are many retrospective data demonstrat-ing improved survival with greater numbers of LNs harvested. A recent study from Sloan-Kettering demonstrates a direct rela-tionship between the number of negative nodes harvested and long-term survival. Although such a survival advantage may be related to the completeness of resection, extended radical resec-tions may also be a surrogate for experienced surgeons working in great institutions. As a time-honored operation, there is no doubt that en bloc esophagectomy is the standard to which less radical techniques must be compared.Generally, this operation is started in the abdomen with an upper midline laparotomy and extensive LN dissection in and about the celiac access and its branches, extending into the porta hepatis and along the splenic artery to the tail of the pan-creas. All LNs are removed en bloc with the lesser curvature of the stomach. Unless the tumor extends into the stomach, recon-struction is performed with a greater curvature gastric tube. For GEJ cancers extending significantly into the gastric cardia or fundus, the proximal stomach is removed, and reconstruction is performed with an isoperistaltic section of left colon between the upper esophagus and the remnant stomach, or the colon is connected to a Roux-en-Y limb of jejunum, if total gastrectomy is necessary. In the majority of cases, colon interposition is unnecessary, and a gastric conduit is used.Following closure of the abdominal incision, the patient is placed in the left lateral decubitus position and an anterolateral thoracotomy is performed through the sixth intercostal space. The azygos vein is divided and the posterior mediastinum is entirely cleaned out to include the thoracic duct, all periaor-tic tissues, and all tissue in the upper mediastinum along the course of the current laryngeal nerves and in the peribronchial, Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   107601/03/19   6:05 PM 1077ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25hilar, and tracheal LN stations. The proximal stomach is pulled up into the thorax where a conduit is created (if not performed previously) and a handsewn or stapled anastomosis is made between the upper thoracic esophagus and the gastric conduit or transverse colon. Chest tubes are placed, and the patient is taken to the intensive care unit.Because this is the most radical of dissections, com-plications are most common, including pneumonia, respira-tory failure, atrial fibrillation, chylothorax, anastomotic leak, conduit necrosis, gastrocutaneous fistula, and, if dissection is too near the recurrent laryngeal nerves, hoarseness will occur with an increased risk of aspiration. Tracheobronchial injury resulting in fistulas between the bronchus and conduit may also occur, however rarely. Although this procedure and three-field esophagectomy are fraught with the highest complica-tion rate, the long-term outcome of this procedure provides the greatest survival in many single-center series and retrospective reviews.Three-Field Open Esophagectomy. Three-field open esoph-agectomy is very similar to a minimally invasive three-field except that all access is through open incisions. This proce-dure is preferred by certain Japanese surgeons and LN counts achieved through this kind of operation may run from 45 to 60 LNs. Most Western surgeons question the benefit of such radical surgery when it is hard to define a survival advantage. Nonetheless, high intrathoracic cancers probably deserve such an aggressive approach if cure is the goal.Salvage Esophagectomy. Salvage esophagectomy is the nomenclature applied to esophagectomy performed after failure of definitive radiation and chemotherapy. The most frequent scenario is one in which distant disease (bone, lung, brain, or wide LN metastases) renders the patient nonoperable at initial presentation. Then, systemic chemotherapy, usually with radiation of the primary tumor, destroys all foci of metastasis, as demonstrated by CT and CT-PET, but the primary remains present and symptomatic. Following a period of observation, to make sure no new disease will become evident, salvage esophagectomy is performed, usually with an open two-field approach. Surprisingly, the cure rate of salvage esophagectomy is not inconsequential. One in four patients undergoing this operation will be disease free 5 years later, despite the presence of residual cancer in the operative specimen. Because of the dense scarring created by radiation treatment, this procedure is the most technically challenging of all esophagectomy techniques.Comparative Studies of Esophagectomy TechniqueTransthoracic vs. Transhiatal Esophagectomy. There has been a great debate as to whether en bloc esophagectomy will provide a greater long-term benefit and cure rate in esophageal cancer than transhiatal esophagectomy. In a recent 7-year fol-low-up of a Dutch study addressing GEJ and lower esophageal cancers, there does not appear to be any benefit to the more extensive dissection despite higher morbidity and mortality. In a subgroup analysis of those with one to eight positive LNs, it did appear that the en bloc transthoracic resection may add to longevity. In another large database analysis of the Surveil-lance, Epidemiology, and End Results database, transthoracic and transhiatal esophagectomy were compared. In this study, the transhiatal esophagectomy had a greater long-term survival, but when adjusted by cancer stage, this survival benefit disap-peared. The mortality and morbidity after transhiatal esopha-gectomy appeared to be less. Suffice it to say that this debate over the best procedure for esophagectomy remains an open question.The role of the minimally invasive surgical procedures for a cancer cure will require further study and longer follow-up. It would appear from preliminary analysis that the transhiatal esophagectomy, like its open cousin, may be performed with less morbidity and mortality than the VATS procedure. Long-term survival analyses will require careful follow-up for at least 5 to 10 years after cancer treatment. A recent European multi-center randomized trial comparing open and minimally invasive approaches revealed a highly significant reduction in pulmo-nary complications in the patients who underwent the minimally invasive approach. There was no difference in procedure-related mortality between the approaches.Alternative TherapiesRadiation Therapy. Primary treatment with radiation ther-apy does not produce results comparable with those obtained with surgery. Currently, the use of radiotherapy is restricted to patients who are not candidates for surgery, and it is usually combined with chemotherapy. Radiation alone is used for pal-liation of dysphagia, but the benefit is short lived, lasting only 2 to 3 months. Furthermore, the length and course of treatment are difficult to justify in patients with a limited life expectancy. Radiation is effective in patients who have hemorrhage from the primary tumor.Adjuvant Chemotherapy. The proposal to use adjuvant che-motherapy in the treatment of esophageal cancer began when it became evident that most patients develop postoperative sys-temic metastasis without local recurrence. This observation led to the hypothesis that undetected systemic micrometasta-sis had been present at the time of diagnosis, and if effective systemic therapy was added to local regional therapy, survival should improve.Recently, this hypothesis has been supported by the obser-vation of epithelial tumor cells in the bone marrow in 37% of patients with esophageal cancer who were resected for cure. These patients had a greater prevalence of relapse at 9 months after surgery compared to those patients without such cells. Such studies emphasize that hematogenous dissemination of viable malignant cells occurs early in the disease, and that sys-temic chemotherapy may be helpful if the cells are sensitive to the agent. On the other hand, systemic chemotherapy may be a hindrance, because of its immunosuppressive properties, if the cells are resistant. Unfortunately, current technology is not able to test tumor cell sensitivity to chemotherapeutic drugs. This requires that the choice of drugs be made solely on the basis of their clinical effectiveness against grossly similar tumors.The decision to use preoperative rather than postopera-tive chemotherapy was based on the ineffectiveness of chemo-therapeutic agents when used after surgery, and animal studies suggesting that agents given before surgery were more effec-tive. The claim that patients who receive chemotherapy before resection are less likely to develop resistance to the drugs is unsupported by hard evidence. The claim that drug delivery is enhanced because blood flow is more robust before patients undergo surgical dissection is similarly flawed, due to the fact that if enough blood reaches the operative site to heal the wound or anastomosis, then the flow should be sufficient to Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   107701/03/19   6:05 PM 1078SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIdeliver chemotherapeutic drugs. There are, however, data sup-porting the claim that preoperative chemotherapy in patients with esophageal carcinoma can, if effective, facilitate surgical resection by reducing the size of the tumor. This is particularly beneficial in the case of squamous cell tumors above the level of the carina. Reducing the size of the tumor may provide a safer margin between the tumor and the trachea and allow an anastomosis to a tumor-free cervical esophagus just below the cricopharyngeus. Involved margin at this level usually requires a laryngectomy to prevent subsequent local recurrence.Preoperative Chemotherapy. Eight randomized prospec-tive studies of neoadjuvant chemotherapy vs. surgery alone have demonstrated mixed results. For adenocarcinomas of the distal esophagus and proximal stomach, preoperative neoadju-vant 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and cisplatin chemotherapy has been shown to provide a survival advantage over surgery alone in a well-powered study from the United Kingdom (MRC trial). This trial is one of the few to include enough patients (800) to detect small differences. The trial had a 10% absolute survival benefit at 2 years for the neoadjuvant chemotherapy group. In a second trial from the United Kingdom (MAGIC trial) of distal esopha-geal and proximal gastric adenocarcinomas, the use of epirubi-cin in combination with cisplatin and 5-FU also demonstrated a survival advantage for the induction chemotherapy arm with  4 years median follow-up. As a result of these two trials, stan-dard treatment of locally advanced adenocarcinoma in Europe calls for neoadjuvant chemotherapy with one of these two regi-mens. Most failures are due to distant metastatic disease, under-scoring the need for improved systemic therapy. Postoperative septic and respiratory complications may be more common in patients receiving chemotherapy.Preoperative Combination Chemoand Radiotherapy.  Preoperative chemoradiotherapy using cisplatin and 5-FU in combination with radiotherapy has been reported by several investigators to be beneficial in both adenocarcinoma and squa-mous cell carcinoma of the esophagus. There have been 10 randomized prospective studies (Table 25-13). A recent meta-analysis of these trials demonstrates a 13% survival advantage for neoadjuvant chemoradiation therapy, which is more pro-nounced for patients with adenocarcinoma than for those with squamous carcinoma (Table 25-14). It was also observed that the benefit for chemotherapy alone (7%) was not as dramatic as for chemoradiotherapy used in the neoadjuvant setting. Addi-tionally, other work has demonstrated the importance of obtain-ing an R0 (tumor-free) resection as the most important variable determining long-term survival. Although there are no direct, randomized comparisons between chemotherapy and chemora-diation therapy, it appears that the addition of radiation may improve local response of the tumor and may allow a greater opportunity for the surgeon to obtain an R0 resection.The timing of surgery after chemoradiation induction is generally felt to be optimal between 6 and 8 weeks following the completion of induction therapy. Earlier than this time, active inflammation may make the resection hazardous, and the patients have not had time to recover fully from the chemoradia-tion. After 8 weeks, edema in the periesophageal tissue starts to turn to scar tissue, making dissection more difficult.With chemoradiation, the complete response rates for ade-nocarcinoma range from 17% to 24% (Table 25-15). No tumor is detected in the specimen after esophagectomy. Patients dem-onstrating a complete response to chemoradiation have a better survival rate than those without complete response, but distant failure remains common.At present, the strongest predictors of outcome of patients with esophageal cancer are the anatomic extent of the tumor at diagnosis and the completeness of tumor removal by surgical resection. After incomplete resection of an esophageal cancer, the 5-year survival rates are 0% to 5%. In contrast, after com-plete resection, independent of stage of disease, 5-year sur-vival ranges from 15% to 40%, according to selection criteria and stage distribution. The importance of early recognition  and adequate surgical resection cannot be overemphasized. Figure 25-70 is a global algorithm for the management of esophageal carcinoma.SARCOMA OF THE ESOPHAGUSSarcomas and carcinosarcomas are rare neoplasms, account-ing for approximately 0.1% to 1.5% of all esophageal tumors. They present with the symptom of dysphagia, which does not differ from the dysphagia associated with the more common epithelial carcinoma. Tumors located within the cervical or high thoracic esophagus can cause symptoms of pulmonary aspiration secondary to esophageal obstruction. Large tumors originating at the level of the tracheal bifurcation can produce symptoms of airway obstruction and syncope by direct com-pression of the tracheobronchial tree and heart (Fig. 25-71). The duration of dysphagia and age of the patients affected with these tumors are similar to those with carcinoma of the esophagus.A barium swallow usually shows a large polypoid intralu-minal esophageal mass, causing partial obstruction and dilata-tion of the esophagus proximal to the tumor (Fig. 25-72). The smooth polypoid nature of the lesion, although not diagnostic, is distinctive enough to suggest the presence of a sarcoma rather than the more common ulcerating, stenosing carcinoma.Esophagoscopy commonly shows an intraluminal necrotic mass. When biopsy is attempted, it is important to remove the necrotic tissue until bleeding is seen on the tumor’s surface. When this is not done, the biopsy specimen will show only tis-sue necrosis. Even when viable tumor is obtained on biopsy, it has been these authors’ experience that it cannot be defini-tively identified as carcinoma, sarcoma, or carcinosarcoma on the basis of the histology of the portion biopsied. Biopsy results cannot be totally relied on to identify the presence of sarcoma, and it is often the polypoid nature of the lesion that arouses sus-picion that it may be something other than carcinoma.Polypoid sarcomas of the esophagus, in contrast to infil-trating carcinomas, remain superficial to the muscularis propria and are less likely to metastasize to regional LNs. In one series of 14 patients, local extension or tumor metastasis would have prevented a potentially curative resection in only five. Thus, the presence of a large polypoid tumor should not deter the surgeon from resecting the lesion.Sarcomatous lesions of the esophagus can be divided into epidermoid carcinomas with spindle cell features, such as car-cinosarcoma, and true sarcomas that arise from mesenchymal tissue, such as leiomyosarcoma, fibrosarcoma, and rhabdo-myosarcoma. Based on current histologic criteria for diagno-sis, fibrosarcoma and rhabdomyosarcoma of the esophagus are extremely rare lesions.Surgical resection of polypoid sarcoma of the esophagus is the treatment of choice because radiation therapy has little Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   107801/03/19   6:05 PM 1079ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25Table 25-13Randomized trials of neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy vs. surgery, or neoadjuvant chemotherapy vs. surgeryYEAR  ACTIVATEDTREATMENT SCHEDULE (RADIOTHERAPY)TREATMENT SCHEDULE (CHEMOTHERAPY)CONCURRENT OR SEQUENTIALTUMOR TYPESAMPLE SIZEMEDIAN  FOLLOWUP (MO)Chemoradiotherapy198335 Gy, 1.75 Gy/fraction over 4 wkTwo cycles: cisplatin 20 mg/m2 d 1–5; bleomycin 5 mg/m2 d 1–5SequentialSCC7818a198640 Gy, 2 Gy/fraction over 4 wkTwo cycles: cisplatin 100 mg/m2 d 1; 5-fluorouracil 1000 mg/m2 d 1–4ConcurrentSCC6912a198820 Gy, 2 Gy/fraction over 12 dTwo cycles: cisplatin 100 mg/m2 d 1; 5-fluorouracil 600 mg/m2 d 2–5, 22–25SequentialSCC8612a198945 Gy, 1.5 Gy/fraction over 3 wkTwo cycles: cisplatin 20 mg/m2 d 1–5; 5-fluorouracil 300 mg/m2 d 1–21; vinblastine 1 mg/m2 d 1–4ConcurrentSCC and adenocarcinoma10098198937 Gy, 3.7 Gy/fraction over 2 wkTwo cycles: cisplatin 80 mg/m2 d 0–2SequentialSCC29355199040 Gy, 2.7 Gy/fraction over 3 wkTwo cycles: cisplatin 75 mg/m2 d 7; 5-fluorouracil 15 mg/kg d 1–5ConcurrentAdenocarcinoma11324199040 Gy, 2.7 Gy/fraction over 3 wkTwo cycles: cisplatin 75 mg/m2 d 7; 5-fluorouracil 15 mg/kg d 1–5ConcurrentSCC6110199435 Gy, 2.3 Gy/fraction over 3 wkOne cycle: cisplatin 80 mg/m2 d 1; 5-fluorouracil 800 mg/m2 d 2–5ConcurrentSCC and adenocarcinoma25665200650.4 Gy, 1.8 Gy/fraction over 5.6 wkTwo cycles: cisplatin 60 mg/m2 d 1; 5-fluorouracil 1000 mg/m2 d 3–5ConcurrentSCC and adenocarcinoma5660199945.6 Gy, 1.2 Gy/fraction over 28 dTwo cycles: cisplatin 60 mg/m2 d 1; 5-fluorouracil 1000 mg/m2 d 3–5ConcurrentSCC10125Chemotherapy1982—Two cycles: cisplatin 120 mg/m2 d 1; vindesine 3 mg/m2 d 1, 8; bleomycin 10 U/m2 d 3–6—SCC39201983—Two cycles: cisplatin 20 mg/m2 d 1–5; bleomycin 5 mg/m2 d 1–5—SCC10618a1988c—Three cycles: cisplatin 20 mg/m2 d 1–5; 5-fluorouracil 1000 mg/m2 d 1–5—SCC46751988—Two cycles: cisplatin 100 mg/m2 d 1;  bleomycin 10 mg/m2 d 3–8; vinblastine 3 mg/m2 d 1, 8—SCC4617a1989—Two cycles: cisplatin 100 mg/m2 d 1; 5-fluorouracil 1000 mg/m2 d 1–5—SCC147171990—Two cycles: cisplatin 80 mg/m2 d 1; etoposide 200 mg/m2 d 1–5—SCC16019a1990—Three cycles: cisplatin 100 mg/m2 1; 5-fluorouracil 1000 mg/m2 days 1–5—SCC and adeno-carcinoma467561992—Two cycles: cisplatin 100 mg/m2 d 1; 5-fluorouracil 1000 mg/m2 d 1–5—SCC96241992—Two cycles: cisplatin 80 mg/m2 d 1; 5-fluorouracil 1000 mg/m2 d 1–4—SCC and adeno-carcinoma80237aEstimated as median survival.bUnpublished thesis.cYear of activation not reported, but imputed.dOnly available as an abstract.SCC = squamous cell carcinoma.Reproduced with permission from Gebski V, Burmeister B, Smithers BM, et al: Survival benefits from neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy or chemotherapy in oesophageal carcinoma: a meta-analysis, Lancet Oncol. 2007 Mar;8(3):226-234.Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   107901/03/19   6:05 PM 1080SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 25-14Results of the meta-analysis applied to effects of preoperative chemoradiotherapy and chemotherapy on 2-y survival for patients with various levels of riskRISK GROUP2-Y SURVIVAL RATE (%)EXPECTED 2-Y MORTALITYCONTROL  (%)TREATEDa  (%)ARR  (%)NNTChemoradiotherapyHigh208064.815.27Medium356552.712.38Low505040.59.510ChemotherapyHigh208072.012.08Medium356558.56.515Low505045.05.020aBased on a 19% relative mortality reduction for those receiving concurrent chemoradiotherapy and a 10% relative mortality reduction for those receiving chemotherapy.ARR = absolute risk reduction; NNT = number needed to treat to prevent one death.Reproduced with permission from Gebski V, Burmeister B, Smithers BM, et al: Survival benefits from neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy or chemotherapy in oesophageal carcinoma: a meta-analysis, Lancet Oncol. 2007 Mar;8(3):226-234.success and the tumors remain superficial, with local invasion or distant metastases occurring late in the course of the disease. As with carcinoma, the absence of both wall penetration and LN metastases is necessary for curative treatment, and surgi-cal resection is consequently responsible for the majority of the reported 5-year survivals. Resection also provides an excellent means of palliating the patient’s symptoms. The surgical tech-nique for resection and the subsequent restoration of the GI con-tinuity is similar to that described for carcinoma.In these authors’ experience, four of the eight patients with carcinosarcoma survived for 5 years or longer. Even though this number is small, it suggests that resection produces better Table 25-15Results of neoadjuvant therapy in adenocarcinoma of the esophagusINSTITUTIONYEARNO. OF PATIENTSREGIMENCOMPLETE PATHOLOGIC  RESPONSE (%)SURVIVALMD Anderson199035P, E, 5-FU342% at 3 ySLMC199218P, 5-FU, RT1740% at 3 yVanderbilt199339P, E, 5-FU, RT1947% at 4 yMichigan199321P, VBL, 5-FU, RT2434% at 5 yMGH199416P, 5-FU042% at 4 yMGH199422E, A, P558% at 2 yA = doxorubicin; E = etoposide; 5-FU = 5-fluorouracil; MGH = Massachusetts General Hospital; P = cisplatin; RT = radiation therapy; SLMC = St. Louis University Medical Center; VBL = vinblastine.Reproduced with permission from Wright CD, Mathisen DJ, Wain JC, et al: Evolution of treatment strategies for adenocarcinoma of the esophagus and gastroesophageal junction, Ann Thorac Surg. 1994 Dec;58(6):1574-1578.results in epithelial carcinoma with spindle cell features than in squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus. Similarly, with leiomyosarcoma of the esophagus, the same scattered reports exist with little information on survival. Of seven patients with leiomyosarcoma, two died from their disease—one in 3 months and the other 4 years and 7 months after resection. The other five patients were reported to have survived more than 5 years.It is difficult to evaluate the benefits of resection for leio-myoblastoma of the esophagus because of the small number of reported patients with tumors in this location. Most leiomyo-blastomas occur in the stomach, and 38% of these patients suc-cumb to the cancer in 3 years. Fifty-five percent of patients with extragastric leiomyoblastoma also die from the disease, within an average of 3 years. Consequently, leiomyoblastoma should be considered a malignant lesion and apt to behave like a leiomyosarcoma. The presence of nuclear hyperchromatism, increased mitotic figures (more than one per high-power field), tumor size larger than 10 cm, and clinical symptoms of longer than 6 months’ duration are associated with a poor prognosis.BENIGN TUMORS AND CYSTSBenign tumors and cysts of the esophagus are relatively uncom-mon. From the perspectives of both the clinician and the patholo-gist, benign tumors may be divided into those that are within the muscular wall and those that are within the lumen of the esophagus.Intramural lesions are either solid tumors or cysts, and the vast majority are leiomyomas. They are made up of varying por-tions of smooth muscle and fibrous tissue. Fibromas, myomas, fibromyomas, and lipomyomas are closely related and occur rarely. Other histologic types of solid intramural tumors have been described, such as lipomas, neurofibromas, hemangiomas, osteochondromas, granular cell myoblastomas, and glomus tumors, but they are medical curiosities.Intraluminal lesions are polypoid or pedunculated growths that usually originate in the submucosa, develop mainly into the lumen, and are covered with normal stratified squamous epi-thelium. The majority of these tumors are composed of fibrous tissue of varying degrees of compactness with a rich vascular supply. Some are loose and myxoid (e.g., myxoma and myxo-fibroma), some are more collagenous (e.g., fibroma), and some contain adipose tissue (e.g., fibrolipoma). These different types of tumor are frequently collectively designated fibrovascular Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   108001/03/19   6:05 PM 1081ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25Barium swallow, endoscopyTumor staging(CT chest and abdomen,endoscopic ultrasonography)Late disease orsignificant comorbidityDistant organ metastasisImminent cardiac pulmonary or hepatic failureSevere debilityAdvanced diseaseSupportive careCurativeen bloc resectionPalliative surgeryLocal recurrenceNo metastasesComplete excisionpossibleUnresectable proximalor bleeding tumorLaser ablative therapyStentAirway fistula orunresectable primarytumor or localrecurrenceChemotherapyEarly diseaseTumor suspected notto be through the wall and/or less than8 lymph nodes involvedThrough the wall and multiplelymph node metastasisAdvanced diseaseChemoradiationPreoperative chemoradiation followed by en bloc resectionClinical evaluationTreatment failure orrecurrenceDistant metastasisNo local recurrenceFigure 25-70. Suggested global algorithm for the management of carcinoma of the esophagus. CT = computed tomography.polyps, or simply as polyps. Pedunculated intraluminal tumors should be removed. If the lesion is not too large, endoscopic removal with a snare is feasible.LeiomyomaLeiomyomas constitute more than 50% of benign esophageal tumors. The average age at presentation is 38, which is in sharp contrast to that seen with esophageal carcinoma. Leiomyomas are twice as common in males. Because they originate in smooth muscle, 90% are located in the lower two-thirds of the esophagus. They are usually solitary, but multiple tumors have been found on occasion. They vary greatly in size and shape. Actually, tumors as small as 1 cm in diameter and as large as  10 lb have been removed.Typically, leiomyomas are oval. During their growth, they remain intramural, having the bulk of their mass protruding toward the outer wall of the esophagus. The overlying mucosa is freely movable and normal in appearance. Dysphagia and pain are the most common complaints, the two symptoms occurring more frequently together than separately. Bleeding directly related to the tumor is rare, and when hematemesis or melena occur in a patient with an esophageal leiomyoma, other causes should be investigated.A barium swallow is the most useful method to demon-strate a leiomyoma of the esophagus (Fig. 25-73). In profile, the tumor appears as a smooth, semilunar, or crescent-shaped filling defect that moves with swallowing, is sharply demarcated, and is covered and surrounded by normal mucosa. Esophagoscopy should be performed to exclude the reported observation of a coexistence with carcinoma. The freely movable mass, which bulges into the lumen, should not be biopsied because of an increased chance of mucosal perforation at the time of surgical enucleation. Endoscopic ultrasound is also a useful adjunct in the workup of leiomyoma and provides detail related to the ana-tomic extent and relationship to surrounding structures.Despite their slow growth and limited potential for malig-nant degeneration, leiomyomas should be removed unless there are specific contraindications. The majority can be removed by simple enucleation. If, during removal, the mucosa is inadver-tently entered, the defect can be repaired primarily. After tumor removal, the outer esophageal wall should be reconstructed by closure of the muscle layer. The location of the lesion and the Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   108101/03/19   6:05 PM 1082SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIABFigure 25-71. A. Computed tomographic scan of a leiomyosarcoma (black arrow) that caused compression of the heart and symptoms of syncope. B. Surgical specimen of leiomyosarcoma shown in A with a pedunculated luminal lesion (white arrow) and a large extraesophageal component (black arrow). There was no evidence of lymph node metastasis at the time of operation.ABFigure 25-72. A. Barium swallow showing a large polypoid intraluminal esophageal mass causing partial obstruction and dilation of the proximal esophagus. B. Operative specimen showing 9-cm polypoid leiomyoblastoma.Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   108201/03/19   6:05 PM 1083ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25extent of surgery required will dictate the approach. Lesions of the proximal and middle esophagus require a right thoracotomy, whereas distal esophageal lesions require a left thoracotomy. Vid-eothoracoscopic and laparoscopic approaches are now frequently used. The mortality rate associated with enucleation is low, and success in relieving the dysphagia is near 100%. Large lesions or those involving the GEJ may require esophageal resection.Esophageal CystCysts may be congenital or acquired. Congenital cysts are lined wholly or partly by columnar ciliated epithelium of the respiratory type, by glandular epithelium of the gastric type, by squamous epithelium, or by transitional epithelium. In some, epithelial lining cells may be absent. Confusion over the embry-ologic origin of congenital cysts has led to a variety of names, such as enteric, bronchogenic, duplication, and mediastinal cysts. Acquired retention cysts also occur, probably as a result of obstruction of the excretory ducts of the esophageal glands.Enteric and bronchogenic cysts are the most common, and they arise as a result of developmental abnormalities dur-ing the formation and differentiation of the lower respiratory tract, esophagus, and stomach from the foregut. During its embryologic development, the esophagus is lined successively with simple columnar, pseudostratified ciliated columnar, and, finally, stratified squamous epithelium. This sequence probably accounts for the fact that the lining epithelium may be any or a combination of these; the presence of cilia does not necessarily indicate a respiratory origin.Cysts vary in size from small to very large, and they are usually located intramurally in the middleto lower-third of the esophagus. Their symptoms are similar to those of a leio-myoma. The diagnosis similarly depends on radiographic, endoscopic, and endosonographic findings. Surgical excision by enucleation is the preferred treatment. During removal, a fistulous tract connecting the cysts to the airways should be sought, particularly in patients who have had repetitive bron-chopulmonary infections.ESOPHAGEAL PERFORATIONPerforation of the esophagus constitutes a true emergency. It most commonly occurs following diagnostic or therapeutic pro-cedures. Spontaneous perforation, referred to as Boerhaave’s syndrome, accounts for only 15% of cases of esophageal per-foration, foreign bodies for 14%, and trauma for 10%. Pain is a striking and consistent symptom and strongly suggests that an esophageal rupture has occurred, particularly if located in the cervical area following instrumentation of the esophagus, or sub-sternally in a patient with a history of resisting vomiting. If sub-cutaneous emphysema is present, the diagnosis is almost certain.Spontaneous rupture of the esophagus is associated with a high mortality rate because of the delay in recognition and treat-ment. Although there usually is a history of resisting vomiting, in a small number of patients, the injury occurs silently, without any antecedent history. When the chest radiogram of a patient with an esophageal perforation shows air or an effusion in the pleural space, the condition is often misdiagnosed as a pneumo-thorax or pancreatitis. An elevated pleural amylase caused by the extrusion of saliva through the perforation may fix the diag-nosis of pancreatitis in the mind of an unwary physician. If the chest radiogram is normal, a mistaken diagnosis of myocardial infarction or dissecting aneurysm is often made.Spontaneous rupture usually occurs into the left pleural cavity or just above the GEJ. About 50% of patients have concomitant GERD, suggesting that minimal resistance to the transmission of abdominal pressure into the thoracic esophagus is a factor in the pathophysiology of the lesion. During vomiting, high peaks of intragastric pressure can be recorded, frequently exceeding 200 mmHg, but because extragastric pressure remains almost equal to intragastric pressure, stretching of the gastric wall is minimal. The amount of pressure transmitted to the esophagus varies considerably, depending on the position of the GEJ. When it is in the abdomen and exposed to intra-abdominal pressure, the pressure transmitted to the esophagus is much less than when it is exposed to the negative thoracic pressure. In the latter situation, the pressure in the lower esophagus will frequently equal intragastric pressure if the glottis remains closed. Cadaver studies have shown that when this pressure exceeds 150 mmHg, rupture of the esophagus is apt to occur. When a hiatal hernia is present and the sphincter remains exposed to abdominal pressure, the lesion produced is usually a Mallory-Weiss mucosal tear, and bleeding rather than perforation is the problem. This is due to the stretching of the supradiaphragmatic portion of the gastric wall. In this situation, the hernia sac represents an extension of the abdominal cavity, and the GEJ remains exposed to abdominal pressure.DiagnosisAbnormalities on the chest radiogram can be variable and should not be depended upon to make the diagnosis. This is because the abnormalities are dependent on three factors: (a) the time interval between the perforation and the radiographic examination, (b) the site of perforation, and (c) the integrity of the mediastinal pleura. Mediastinal emphysema, a strong indica-tor of perforation, takes at least 1 hour to be demonstrated and is present in only 40% of patients. Mediastinal widening second-ary to edema may not occur for several hours. The site of perfo-ration also can influence the radiographic findings. In cervical perforation, cervical emphysema is common and mediastinal emphysema rare; the converse is true for thoracic perforations. Figure 25-73. Barium esophagogram showing a classical, smooth, contoured, punched-out defect of a leiomyoma.Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   108301/03/19   6:05 PM 1084SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFrequently, air will be visible in the erector spinae muscles on a neck radiogram before it can be palpated or seen on a chest radiogram (Fig. 25-74). The integrity of the mediastinal pleura influences the radiographic abnormality in that rupture of the pleura results in a pneumothorax, a finding that is seen in 77% of patients. In two-thirds of patients, the perforation is on the left side; in one-fifth, it is on the right side; and in one-tenth, it is bilateral. If pleural integrity is maintained, mediastinal emphy-sema (rather than a pneumothorax) appears rapidly. A pleural effusion secondary to inflammation of the mediastinum occurs late. In 9% of patients, the chest radiogram is normal.The diagnosis is confirmed with a contrast esophagram, which will demonstrate extravasation in 90% of patients. The use of a water-soluble medium such as Gastrografin is preferred. Of concern is that there is a 10% false-negative rate. This may be due to obtaining the radiographic study with the patient in the upright position. When the patient is upright, the passage of water-soluble contrast material can be too rapid to demonstrate a small perforation. The studies should be done with the patient in the right lateral decubitus position (Fig. 25-75). In this, the contrast material fills the entire length of the esophagus, allow-ing the actual site of perforation and its interconnecting cavities to be visualized in almost all patients.ManagementThe key to optimum management is early diagnosis. The most favorable outcome is obtained following primary closure of the perforation within 24 hours, resulting in 80% to 90% survival. Figure 25-76 is an operative photograph taken through a left thoracotomy of an esophageal rupture following a pneumatic dilation for achalasia. The most common location for the injury is the left lateral wall of the esophagus, just above the GEJ. Figure 25-74. Chest radiogram showing air in the deep muscles of the neck following perforation of the esophagus (arrow). This is often the earliest sign of perforation and can be present without evidence of air in the mediastinum.Figure 25-75. Radiographic study of a patient with a perforation of the esophagus using water-soluble contrast material. The patient is placed in the lateral decubitus position with the left side up to allow complete filling of the esophagus and demonstration of the defect.Figure 25-76. Left thoracotomy in a patient with an esophageal rupture at the gastroesophageal junction following forceful dila-tion of the lower esophagus for achalasia (the surgical clamp is on the stomach, and the Penrose drain encircles the esophagus). The injury consists of a mucosal perforation and extensive splitting of the esophageal muscle from just below the Penrose drain to the stomach.To get adequate exposure of the injury, a dissection similar to that described for esophageal myotomy is performed. A flap of stomach is pulled up and the soiled fat pad at the GEJ is removed. The edges of the injury are trimmed and closed pri-marily (Fig. 25-77). The closure is reinforced with the use of a pleural patch or construction of a Nissen fundoplication.Mortality associated with immediate closure varies between 8% and 20%. After 24 hours, survival decreases to <50%, and is not influenced by the type of operative therapy (i.e., drainage alone or drainage plus closure of the perforation). If the time delay before closing a perforation approaches 24 hours and the tissues are inflamed, division of the cardia and resection of the diseased portion of the esophagus are recommended. The remainder of the esophagus is mobilized, and as much normal esophagus as pos-sible is saved and brought out as an end cervical esophagostomy. In some situations, the retained esophagus may be so long that Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   108401/03/19   6:05 PM 1085ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25it loops down into the chest. The contaminated mediastinum is drained and a feeding jejunostomy tube is inserted. The recov-ery from sepsis is often immediate, dramatic, and reflected by a marked improvement in the patient’s condition over a 24-hour period. On recovery from the sepsis, the patient is discharged and returns on a subsequent date for reconstruction with a substernal colon interposition. Failure to apply this aggressive therapy can result in a mortality rate in excess of 50% in patients in whom the diagnosis has been delayed.Nonoperative management of esophageal perforation has been advocated in select situations. The choice of conserva-tive therapy requires skillful judgment and necessitates care-ful radiographic examination of the esophagus. This course of management usually follows an injury occurring during dila-tion of esophageal strictures or pneumatic dilations of achalasia. Conservative management should not be used in patients who have free perforations into the pleural space. Cameron proposed three criteria for the nonoperative management of esophageal perforation: (a) the esophagram must show the perforation to be contained within the mediastinum and drain well back into the esophagus (Fig. 25-78), (b) symptoms should be mild, and (c) there should be minimal evidence of clinical sepsis. If these Figure 25-77. The technique of closure of an esophageal perfora-tion through a left thoracotomy. A. A tongue of stomach is pulled up through the esophageal hiatus, and the gastroesophageal fat pad is removed; the edges of the mucosal injury are trimmed and closed using interrupted modified Gambee stitches. B. Reinforcement of the closure with a parietal pleural patch.conditions are met, it is reasonable to treat the patient with hyper-alimentation, antibiotics, and cimetidine to decrease acid secre-tion and diminish pepsin activity. Oral intake is resumed in 7 to  14 days, dependent on subsequent radiographic examinations.MALLORY-WEISS SYNDROMEIn 1929, Mallory and Weiss described four patients with acute upper GI bleeding who were found at autopsy to have mucosal tears at the GEJ. This syndrome, characterized by acute upper GI bleeding following vomiting, is considered to be the cause of up to 15% of all severe upper GI bleeds. The mechanism is similar to spontaneous esophageal perforation: an acute increase in intra-abdominal pressure against a closed glottis in a patient with a hiatal hernia.Mallory-Weiss tears are characterized by arterial bleeding, which may be massive. Vomiting is not an obligatory factor, as there may be other causes of an acute increase in intra-abdominal pressure, such as paroxysmal coughing, seizures, and retching. The diagnosis requires a high index of suspicion, par-ticularly in the patient who develops upper GI bleeding follow-ing prolonged vomiting or retching. Upper endoscopy confirms the suspicion by identifying one or more longitudinal fissures in the mucosa of the herniated stomach as the source of bleeding.In the majority of patients, the bleeding will stop sponta-neously with nonoperative management. In addition to blood replacement, the stomach should be decompressed and anti-emetics administered, as a distended stomach and continued vomiting aggravate further bleeding. A Sengstaken-Blakemore tube will not stop the bleeding, as the pressure in the balloon is not sufficient to overcome arterial pressure. Endoscopic injec-tion of epinephrine may be therapeutic if bleeding does not stop spontaneously. Only occasionally will surgery be required to stop blood loss. The procedure consists of laparotomy and high gastrotomy with oversewing of the linear tear. Mortality is uncommon, and recurrence is rare.Figure 25-78. Barium esophagogram showing a stricture and a contained perforation following dilation. The injury meets Cameron criteria: It is contained within the mediastinum and drawn back into the esophagus, the patient had mild symptoms, and there was no evidence of clinical sepsis. Nonoperative management was successful.Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   108501/03/19   6:05 PM 1086SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 25-16Endoscopic grading of corrosive esophageal and  gastric burnsFirst degree: Mucosal hyperemia and edemaSecond degree: Limited hemorrhage, exudate ulceration, and pseudomembrane formationThird degree: Sloughing of mucosa, deep ulcers, massive hemorrhage, complete obstruction of lumen by edema, charring, and perforationTable 25-17Location of caustic injury (n = 62)Pharynx10%Esophagus70% Upper15% Middle65% Lower2% Whole18%Stomach20% Antral91% Whole9%Both stomach and esophagus14%CAUSTIC INJURYAccidental caustic lesions occur mainly in children, and, in general, rather small quantities of caustics are taken. In adults or teenagers, the swallowing of caustic liquids is usually deliberate, during a suicide attempt, and greater quantities are swallowed. Alkalis are more frequently swallowed accidentally than acids, because strong acids cause an immediate burning pain in the mouth.PathologyThe swallowing of caustic substances causes an acute and a chronic injury. During the acute phase, care focuses on con-trolling the immediate tissue injury and the potential for per-foration. During the chronic phase, the focus is on treatment of strictures and disturbances in pharyngeal swallowing. In the acute phase, the degree and extent of the lesion are dependent on several factors: the nature of the caustic substance, its con-centration, the quantity swallowed, and the time the substance is in contact with the tissues.Acids and alkalis affect tissue in different ways. Alkalis dissolve tissue, and therefore penetrate more deeply, while acids cause a coagulative necrosis that limits their penetration. Animal experiments have shown that there is a correlation between the depth of the lesion and the concentration of sodium hydroxide solution. When a solution of 3.8% comes into contact with the esophagus for 10 seconds, it causes necrosis of the mucosa and the submucosa but spares the muscular layer. A concentration of 22.5% penetrates the whole esophageal wall and into the periesophageal tissues. Cleansing products can contain up to 90% sodium hydroxide. The strength of esophageal contractions varies according to the level of the esophagus, being weakest at the striated muscle–smooth muscle interface. Consequently, clearance from this area may be somewhat slower, allowing caustic substances to remain in contact with the mucosa longer. This explains why the esophagus is preferentially and more severely affected at this level than in the lower portions.The lesions caused by lye injury occur in three phases. First is the acute necrotic phase, lasting 1 to 4 days after injury. During this period, coagulation of intracellular proteins results in cell necrosis, and the living tissue surrounding the area of necrosis develops an intense inflammatory reaction. Second is the ulcer-ation and granulation phase, starting 3 to 5 days after injury. During this period, the superficial necrotic tissue sloughs, leav-ing an ulcerated, acutely inflamed base, and granulation tissue fills the defect left by the sloughed mucosa. This phase lasts 10 to 12 days, and it is during this period that the esophagus is the weakest. Third is the phase of cicatrization and scarring, which begins the third week following injury. During this period, the previously formed connective tissue begins to contract, result-ing in narrowing of the esophagus. Adhesions between granulat-ing areas occur, resulting in pockets and bands. It is during this period that efforts must be made to reduce stricture formation.Clinical ManifestationsThe clinical picture of an esophageal burn is determined by the degree and extent of the lesion. In the initial phase, complaints consist of pain in the mouth and substernal region, hypersali-vation, pain on swallowing, and dysphagia. The presence of fever is strongly correlated with the presence of an esopha-geal lesion. Bleeding can occur, and, frequently, the patient vomits. These initial complaints disappear during the quiescent period of ulceration and granulation. During the cicatrization and scarring phase, the complaint of dysphagia reappears and is due to fibrosis and retraction, resulting in narrowing of the esophagus. Of the patients who develop strictures, 60% do so within 1 month, and 80% within 2 months. If dysphagia does not develop within 8 months, it is unlikely that a stricture will occur. Serious systemic reactions such as hypovolemia and acidosis resulting in renal damage can occur in cases in which the burns have been caused by strong acids. Respiratory com-plications such as laryngospasm, laryngoedema, and occasion-ally pulmonary edema can occur, especially when strong acids are aspirated.Inspection of the oral cavity and pharynx can indicate that caustic substances were swallowed, but does not reveal that the esophagus has been burned. Conversely, esophageal burns can be present without apparent oral injuries. Because of this poor correlation, early esophagoscopy is advocated to establish the presence of an esophageal injury. To lessen the chance of perfo-ration, the scope should not be introduced beyond the proximal esophageal lesion. The degree of injury can be graded according to the criteria listed in Table 25-16. Even if the esophagoscopy is normal, strictures may appear later. Radiographic examina-tion is not a reliable means to identify the presence of early esophageal injury, but it is important in later follow-up to iden-tify strictures. The most common locations of caustic injuries are shown in Table 25-17.TreatmentTreatment of a caustic lesion of the esophagus is directed toward management of both the immediate and late consequences of the injury. The immediate treatment consists of limiting the burn by administering neutralizing agents. To be effective, this must be done within the first hour. Lye or other alkali can be neutralized with half-strength vinegar, lemon juice, or orange juice. Acid can be neutralized with milk, egg white, or antacids. Sodium bicarbonate is not used because it generates carbon dioxide, Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   108601/03/19   6:05 PM 1087ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25which might increase the danger of perforation. Emetics are contraindicated because vomiting renews the contact of the caustic substance with the esophagus and can contribute to perforation if too forceful. Hypovolemia is corrected, and broad-spectrum antibiotics are administered to lessen the inflammatory reaction and prevent infectious complications. If necessary, a feeding jejunostomy tube is inserted to provide nutrition. Oral feeding can be started when the dysphagia of the initial phase has regressed.In the past, surgeons waited until the appearance of a stric-ture before starting treatment. Currently, dilations are started the first day after the injury, with the aim of preserving the esophageal lumen by removing the adhesions that occurred in the injured segments. However, this approach is controversial in that dilations can traumatize the esophagus, causing bleed-ing, and perforation, and there are data indicating that exces-sive dilations cause increased fibrosis secondary to the added trauma. The use of steroids to limit fibrosis has been shown to be effective in animals, but their effectiveness in human beings has not been established.Extensive necrosis of the esophagus frequently leads to perforation, and it is best managed by resection. When there is extensive gastric involvement, the esophagus is nearly always necrotic or severely burned, and total gastrectomy and near-total esophagectomy are necessary. The presence of air in the esopha-geal wall is a sign of muscle necrosis and impending perforation and is a strong indication for esophagectomy.Management of acute injury is summarized in the algo-rithm in Fig. 25-79. Some authors have advocated the use of an intraluminal esophageal stent (Fig. 25-80) in patients who are operated on and found to have no evidence of extensive esophagogastric necrosis. In these patients, a biopsy of the posterior gastric wall should be performed to exclude occult injury. If, histologically, there is a question of viability, a second-look operation should be done within 36 hours. If a stent is inserted, it should be kept in position for 21 days, and removed after a satisfactory barium esophagogram. Esopha-goscopy should be done, and if strictures are present, dilations initiated.Once the acute phase has passed, attention is turned to the prevention and management of strictures. Both antegrade dilation with a Hurst or Maloney bougie and retrograde dila-tion with a Tucker bougie have been satisfactory. In a series of 1079 patients, early dilations started during the acute phase gave excellent results in 78%, good results in 13%, and poor results in 2%. During the treatment, 55 patients died. In contrast, of 333 patients whose strictures were dilated when they became symptomatic, only 21% had excellent results, 46% good, and 6% poor, with three dying during the process. The length of time the surgeon should persist with dilation before consideration of esophageal resection is problematic. An adequate lumen should be re-established within 6 months to 1 year, with progressively longer intervals between dilations. If, during the course of treat-ment, an adequate lumen cannot be established or maintained (i.e., smaller bougies must be used), operative intervention should be considered. Surgical intervention is indicated when there is (a) complete stenosis in which all attempts from above and below have failed to establish a lumen, (b) marked irregu-larity and pocketing on barium swallow, (c) the development of a severe periesophageal reaction or mediastinitis with dilatation, (d) a fistula, (e) the inability to dilate or maintain the lumen above a 40F bougie, or (f) a patient who is unwilling or unable to undergo prolonged periods of dilation.Ingestion of caustic agentObservation24–48 hoursExploratorylaparotomySecond lookat 36 hoursIntraluminal esophageal stentPosterior gastric wall biopsyJejunostomy1° burn2° & 3° burnEsophagogastric resectionCervical esophagostomyJejunostomyResection of adjacent involved organsFull thicknessnecrosisof esophagusand stomachViableesophagusandstomachQuestionableesophagusandstomach Esophagoscopy(Within 12 hours)Figure 25-79. Algorithm summarizing the management of acute caustic injury.Figure 25-80. The use of an esophageal stent to prevent stricture. The stent is constructed from a chest tube and placed in the esopha-gus at the time of an exploratory laparotomy. A Penrose drain is placed over the distal end as a flap valve to prevent reflux. The stent is supported at its upper end by attaching it to a suction catheter that is secured to the nares. Continuous suction removes saliva and mucus trapped in the pharynx and upper esophagus.Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   108701/03/19   6:05 PM 1088SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIThe variety of abnormalities seen requires that creativity be used when considering esophageal reconstruction. Skin tube esophagoplasties are now used much less frequently than they were in the past, and are mainly of historical interest. Currently, the stomach, jejunum, and colon are the organs used to replace the esophagus, through either the posterior mediastinum or the retrosternal route. A retrosternal route is chosen when there has been a previous esophagectomy or there is extensive fibrosis in the posterior mediastinum. When all factors are considered, the order of preference for an esophageal substitute is (a) colon, (b) stomach, and (c) jejunum. Free jejunal grafts based on the supe-rior thyroid artery have provided excellent results. Whatever method is selected, it must be emphasized that these procedures cannot be taken lightly; minor errors of judgment or technique may lead to serious or even fatal complications.Critical in the planning of the operation is the selection of cervical esophagus, pyriform sinus, or posterior pharynx as the site for proximal anastomosis. The site of the upper anastomosis depends on the extent of the pharyngeal and cervical esophageal damage encountered. When the cervical esophagus is destroyed and a pyriform sinus remains open the anastomosis can be made to the hypopharynx (Fig. 25-81). When the pyriform sinuses are completely stenosed, a transglottic approach is used to perform an anastomosis to the posterior oropharyngeal wall (Fig. 25-82). This allows excision of supraglottic strictures and elevation and anterior tilting of the larynx. In both of these situations, the patient must relearn to swallow. Recovery is long and difficult and may require several endoscopic dilations—and often reop-erations. Sleeve resections of short strictures are not successful because the extent of damage to the wall of the esophagus can be greater than realized, and almost invariably the anastomosis is carried out in a diseased area.The management of a bypassed damaged esophagus after injury is problematic. If the esophagus is left in place, ulcer-ation from gastroesophageal reflux or the development of carcinoma must be considered. The extensive dissection neces-sary to remove the esophagus, particularly in the presence of marked periesophagitis, is associated with significant morbidity. Leaving the esophagus in place preserves the function of the Figure 25-82. Anastomosis of the bowel to the posterior orophar-ynx. The anastomosis is done through an inverted trapezoid incision above the thyroid cartilage (dotted line). A triangle-shaped piece of the upper half of the cartilage is resected. Closure of the oropharynx is done so that the larynx is pulled up (sagittal section).Figure 25-81. Anastomosis of the bowel to a preserved pyriform sinus. To identify the site, a finger is inserted into the free pyriform sinus through a suprahyoid incision (dotted line). This requires removing the lateral inferior portion of the thyroid cartilage as shown in cross-section.vagus nerves, and, in turn, the function of the stomach. On the other hand, leaving a damaged esophagus in place can result in multiple blind sacs and subsequent development of medias-tinal abscesses years later. Most experienced surgeons recom-mend that the esophagus be removed unless the operative risk is unduly high.ACQUIRED FISTULAThe esophagus lies in close contact with the membranous por-tion of the trachea and left bronchus, predisposing to the for-mation of fistula to these structures. Most acquired esophageal fistulas are to the tracheobronchial tree and secondary to either esophageal or pulmonary malignancy. Traumatic fistulas and those associated with esophageal diverticula account for the remainder. Fistulas associated with traction diverticula are usu-ally due to mediastinal inflammatory disease, and traumatic fistulas usually occur secondary to penetrating wounds, lye ingestion, or iatrogenic injury.These fistulas are characterized by paroxysmal cough-ing following the ingestion of liquids, and by recurrent or chronic pulmonary infections. The onset of cough immediately after swallowing suggests aspiration, whereas a brief delay  (30–60 seconds) suggests a fistula.Spontaneous closure is rare, owing to the presence of malignancy or a recurrent infectious process. Surgical treat-ment of benign fistulas consists of division of the fistulous tract, resection of irreversibly damaged lung tissue, and closure of the esophageal defect. To prevent recurrence, a pleural flap should be interposed. Treatment of malignant fistulas is difficult, par-ticularly in the presence of prior irradiation. Generally, only palliative treatment is indicated. This can best be done by using a specially designed esophageal endoprosthesis that bridges and occludes the fistula, allowing the patient to eat. A salivary tube is also a good option for proximal esophageal fistulas. This tube has a proximal “lip” that rests on the cricopharyngeal muscle and thereby directs the saliva into the tube and past the fis-tula. Rarely, esophageal diversion, coupled with placement of a feeding jejunostomy, can be used as a last resort.Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   108801/03/19   6:05 PM 1089ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25of the internal mammary artery and the internal mammary or innominate vein. Removal of the sternoclavicular joint aids in performing the vascular and distal esophageal anastomosis (Fig. 25-83).Reconstruction After Total EsophagectomyNeither the intrathoracic stomach nor the intrathoracic colon functions as well as the native esophagus after an esophagogas-trectomy. The choice between these organs will be influenced by several factors, such as the adequacy of their blood supply and the length of resected esophagus that they are capable of bridging. If the stomach shows evidence of disease, or has been contracted or reduced by previous gastric surgery, the length available for esophageal replacement may not be adequate. The presence of diverticular disease, unrecognized carcinoma, or colitis prohibits the use of the colon. The blood supply of the colon is more affected by vascular disease than the blood supply of the stomach, which may prevent its use. Of the two, the colon provides the longest graft. The stomach can usually reach to the neck if the amount of lesser curvature resected does not interfere with the blood supply to the fundus. Gastric interposition has the advantage that only one anastomosis is required. On the other hand, there is greater potential for aspiration of gastric juice or stricture of the cervical anastomosis from chronic reflux when stomach is used for replacement.Following an esophagogastrectomy, patients may have discomfort during or shortly after eating. The most common symptom is a postprandial pressure sensation or a feeling of being full, which probably results from the loss of the gastric reservoir. This symptom is less common when the colon is used as an esophageal substitute, probably because the distal third of the stomach is retained in the abdomen and the interposed colon provides an additional reservoir function.King and Hölscher have reported a 40% and 50% inci-dence of dysphagia after reestablishing GI continuity with the stomach following esophagogastrectomy. This incidence is similar to Orringer’s results after using the stomach to replace the esophagus in patients with benign disease. More than one-half of the patients experienced dysphagia postoperatively; TECHNIQUES OF ESOPHAGEAL RECONSTRUCTIONOptions for esophageal substitution include gastric advance-ment, colonic interposition, and either jejunal free transfer or advancement into the chest. Rarely, combinations of these grafts will be the only possible option. The indications for esopha-geal resection and substitution include malignant and end-stage benign disease. The latter includes refluxor drug-induced stricture formation that cannot be dilated without damage to the esophagus, a dilated and tortuous esophagus secondary to severe motility disorders, lye-induced strictures, and multiple previous antireflux procedures. The choice of esophageal substitution has significant impact upon the technical difficulty of the procedure and influences the long-term outcome.Partial Esophageal ResectionDistal benign lesions, with preserved proximal esophageal func-tion, are best treated with the interposition of a segment of prox-imal jejunum into the chest and primary anastomosis. A jejunal interposition can reach to the inferior border of the pulmonary hilum with ease, but the architecture of its blood supply rarely allows the use of the jejunum proximal to this point. Because the anastomosis is within the chest, a thoracotomy is necessary.The jejunum is a dynamic graft and contributes to bolus transport, whereas the stomach and colon function more as a conduit. The stomach is a poor choice in this circumstance because of the propensity for the reflux of gastric contents into the proximal remaining esophagus following an intratho-racic esophagogastrostomy. It is now well recognized that this occurs and can lead to incapacitating symptoms and esophageal destruction in some patients. Short segments of colon, on the other hand, lack significant motility and have a propensity for the development of esophagitis proximal to the anastomosis.Replacement of the cervical portion of the esophagus, while preserving the distal portion, is occasionally indicated in cervical esophageal or head and neck malignancy, and follow-ing the ingestion of lye. Free transfer of a portion of jejunum to the neck has become a viable option and is successful in the majority of cases. Revascularization is achieved via use Figure 25-83. A. The portion of the thoracic inlet to be resected to provide space for a free jejunal graft and access to the internal mammary artery (shaded area). B. Cross-section showing the space available after resection of the sternoclavicular joint and one-half of the manubrium. (Reproduced with permission from Shields TW: General Thoracic Surgery, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger; 1989.)Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   108901/03/19   6:06 PM 1090SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IItwo-thirds of this group required postoperative dilation, and one-fourth had persistent dysphagia and required home dilation. In contrast, dysphagia is uncommon, and the need for dilation is rare following a colonic interposition. Isolauri reported on 248 patients with colonic interpositions and noted a 24% incidence of dysphagia 12 months after the operation. When it occurred, the most common cause was recurrent mediastinal tumor. The high incidence of dysphagia with the use of the stomach is prob-ably related to the esophagogastric anastomosis in the neck and the resulting difficulty of passing a swallowed bolus.Another consequence of the transposition of the stomach into the chest is the development of postoperative duodenogastric reflux, probably due to pyloric denervation, and adding a pyloroplasty may worsen this problem. Following gastric advancement, the pylorus lies at the level of the esophageal hiatus, and a distinct pressure differential develops between the intrathoracic gastric and intra-abdominal duodenal lumina. Unless the pyloric valve is extremely efficient, the pressure differential will encourage reflux of duodenal contents into the stomach. Duodenogastric reflux is less likely to occur following colonic interposition because there is sufficient intra-abdominal colon to be compressed by the abdominal pressure and the pylorus and duodenum remain in their normal intra-abdominal position.Although there is general acceptance of the concept that an esophagogastric anastomosis in the neck results in less post-operative esophagitis and stricture than one at a lower level, reflux esophagitis following a cervical anastomosis does occur, albeit at a lower rate than when the anastomosis is at a lower level. Most patients undergo cervical esophagogastrostomy for malignancy; thus, the long-term sequelae of an esophagogastric anastomosis in the neck are not of concern. However, patients who have had a cervical esophagogastrostomy for benign dis-ease may develop problems associated with the anastomosis in the fourth or fifth postoperative year that are severe enough to require anastomotic revision. This is less likely in patients who have had a colonic interposition for esophageal replace-ment. Consequently, in patients who have a benign process or a potentially curable carcinoma of the esophagus or cardia, a colonic interposition is used to obviate the late problems associ-ated with a cervical esophagogastrostomy. Colonic interposition for esophageal substitution is a more complex procedure than gastric advancement, with the potential for greater perioperative morbidity, particularly in inexperienced hands.Composite ReconstructionOccasionally, a combination of colon, jejunum, and stomach is the only reconstructive option available. This situation may arise when there has been previous gastric or colonic resection, when dysphagia has recurred after a previous esophageal resec-tion, or following postoperative complications such as ischemia of an esophageal substitute. Although not ideal, combinations of colon, jejunum, and stomach used to restore GI continuity function surprisingly well and allow alimentary reconstruction in an otherwise impossible situation.Vagal Sparing Esophagectomy With Colon InterpositionTraditional esophagectomy typically results in bilateral vagot-omy and its attendant consequences. It is likely that symptoms such as dumping, diarrhea, early satiety, and weight loss seen in 15% to 20% of patients postesophagectomy are at least in part, if not completely, due to vagal interruption. The technique of vagal sparing esophagectomy with colon interposition has been described in an effort to avoid the morbidities associated with standard esophagectomy.Through an upper midline abdominal incision, the right and left vagal nerves are identified, circled with a tape, and retracted to the right. A limited, highly selective proximal gas-tric vagotomy is performed along the cephalad 4 cm of the lesser curvature. The stomach is divided with an Endo-GIA stapler just below the GEJ. The colon is prepared to provide an interposed segment as previously described. A neck incision is made along the anterior border of the left sternocleidomastoid muscle, and the strap muscles are exposed. The omohyoid muscle is divided at its pulley, and the sternohyoid and sternothyroid muscles are divided at their manubrial insertion. The left carotid sheath is retracted laterally and the thyroid and trachea medially. The left inferior thyroid artery is ligated laterally as it passes under the left common carotid artery. The left recurrent laryngeal nerve is identified and protected. The esophagus is dissected circumfer-entially in an inferior direction, from the left neck to the apex of the right chest, to avoid injury to the right recurrent laryngeal nerve. The esophagus is divided at the level of the thoracic inlet, leaving about 3 to 4 cm of cervical esophagus. The proximal esophagus is retracted anteriorly and to the right with the use of two sutures to keep saliva and oral contents from contaminating the neck wound.Returning to the abdomen, the proximal staple line of the gastric division is opened, and the esophagus is flushed with povidone-iodine solution. A vein stripper is passed up the esophagus into the neck wound. The distal portion of the esophagus in the neck is secured tightly around the stripping cable with “endoloops” and an umbilical tape for a trailer. The tip of the stripper is exchanged for a mushroom head, and the stripper is pulled back into the abdomen, inverting the esopha-gus as it transverses the posterior mediastinum. This maneuver strips the branches of the esophageal plexus off the longitudi-nal muscle of the esophagus, preserving the esophageal plexus along with the proximal vagal nerves and the distal vagal nerve trunks. In patients with end-stage achalasia, only the mucosa is secured around the stripping cable, so that it alone is stripped and the dilated muscular wall of the esophagus, with its enriched blood supply, remains. The resulting medi-astinal tunnel, or in the case of achalasia the muscular tube, is dilated with a Foley catheter containing 90 mL of fluid in the balloon. The previously prepared interposed portion of the transverse colon is passed behind the stomach and up through the mediastinal tunnel into the neck. An end-to-end anastomo-sis is performed to the cervical esophagus using a single layer technique. The colon is pulled taut and secured to the left crus with four or five interrupted sutures. Five centimeters below the crura an opening is made in the mesentery adjacent to the colon along its mesenteric border, through which an Endo-GIA stapler is passed and the colon is divided. The proximal end, which is the distal end of the interposed colon, is anasto-mosed high on the posterior fundic wall of the stomach, using a triangular stapling anastomotic technique. This is done by stapling longitudinally the stomach and colon together with a 75-mm Endo-GIA stapler, spreading the base of the incision apart, and closing it with a T-55 stapler. Colonic continuity is reestablished by bringing the proximal right colon to the dis-tal staple line in the left colon and performing an end-to-end anastomosis using a double-layer technique.Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   109001/03/19   6:06 PM 1091ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25Although conceptually appealing, preservation of vagal nerve integrity or the gastric reservoir function after vagal spar-ing esophagectomy only recently has been validated. Banki and associates compared patients undergoing vagal sparing esopha-gectomy to those with conventional esophagectomy and colon or gastric interposition. This study showed that vagal sparing esophagectomy preserved gastric secretion, gastric emptying, meal capacity, and body mass index, compared to esophagogas-trectomy with colon interposition or standard esophagectomy with gastric pull-up. Vagal sparing esophagectomy patients functioned, for the most part, similarly to normal subjects, allowing them to eat a normal meal, free of dumping or diarrhea. These results indicate that the vagal-sparing esophagectomy procedure does indeed preserve the vagal nerves, and it may be considered in the treatment of benign and early malignant lesions requiring esophagectomy.BIBLIOGRAPHYEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.General ReferencesBalaji B, Peters JH. Minimally invasive surgery for esophageal motor disorders. Surg Clin North Am. 2002;82:763-782.Bremner CG, DeMeester TR, Bremner RM. Esophageal Motility  Testing Made Easy. St. Louis: Quality Medical Publishing, 2001.Castel DW, Richter J, eds. The Esophagus. Boston: Little, Brown & Co., 1999.DeMeester SR, Peters JH, DeMeester TR. Barrett’s esophagus. Curr Probl Surg. 2001;38:549-640.Demeester SR, ed. Barrett’s esophagus. Problems in General  Surgery. Vol. 18, no. 2. Hagerstown, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2001.DeMeester TR, Peters JH, Bremner CG, et al. Biology of gastro-esophageal reflux disease; pathophysiology relating to medical and surgical treatment. Annu Rev Med. 1999;50:469-506.Hunter JG, Pellagrini CA. Surgery of the esophagus. Surg Clin North Am. 1997;77:959-970.McFadyen BV, Arregui ME, Eubanks S, et al. Laparoscopic  Surgery of the Abdomen. New York: Springer, 2003.Surgical AnatomyDaffner RH, Halber MD, Postlethwait RW, et al. CT of the esopha-gus. II. Carcinoma. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 1979;133:1051-1055.Gray SW, Rowe JS Jr, Skandalakis JE. Surgical anatomy of the gastroesophageal junction. Am Surg. 1979;45:575-587.Liebermann-Meffert D. The pharyngoesophageal segment: anat-omy and innervation. Dis Esophagus. 1995;8:242-251.Liebermann-Meffert D, Siewert JR. Arterial anatomy of the esopha-gus: a review of the literature with brief comments on clinical aspects. Gullet. 1992;2:3-10.Liebermann-Meffert DM, Meier R, Siewert JR. Vascular anat-omy of the gastric tube used for esophageal reconstruction. Ann Thorac Surg. 1992;54(6):1110-1115.Liebermann-Meffert DM, Walbrun B, Hiebert CA, et al. Recurrent and superior laryngeal nerves: a new look with implications for the esophageal surgeon. Ann Thorac Surg. 1999;67:217-223.PhysiologyBarlow AP, DeMeester TR, Ball CS, et al. The significance of the gastric secretory state in gastroesophageal reflux disease. Arch Surg. 1989;124:937-940.DeMeester TR, Lafontaine E, Joelsson BE, et al. The relation-ship of a hiatal hernia to the function of the body of the esophagus and the gastroesophageal junction. J Thorac Car-diovasc Surg. 1981;82(4):547-558.Helm JF, Dodds WJ, Pelc LR, Palmer DW, Hogan WJ, Teeter BC. Effect of esophageal emptying and saliva on clearance of acid from the esophagus. N Engl J Med. 1984;310:284-288.Joelsson BE, DeMeester TR, Skinner DB, LaFontaine E, Waters PF, O’Sullivan GC. The role of the esophageal body in the antire-flux mechanism. Surgery. 1982;92:417-424.Johnson LF, DeMeester TR. Evaluation of elevation of the head of the bed, bethanechol, and antacid foam tablets on gastroesopha-geal reflux. Dig Dis Sci. 1981;26:673-680.Kahrilas PJ, Dodds WJ, Hogan WJ. Effect of peristaltic dysfunc-tion on esophageal volume clearance. Gastroenterology. 1988;94:73-80.McCallum RW, Berkowitz DM, Lerner E. Gastric emptying in patients with gastroesophageal reflux. Gastroenterology. 1981;80:285-291.Mittal RK, Lange RC, McCallum RW. Identification and mecha-nism of delayed esophageal acid clearance in subjects with  hiatus hernia. Gastroenterology. 1987;92:130-135.Rao SSC, Madipalli RS, Mujica VR, et al. Effects of age and gender on esophageal biomechanical properties and sensation. Am J Gastroenterol. 2003;98:1688-1695.Tseng D, Rizvi AZ, Fennerty MB, et al. Forty-eight-hour pH moni-toring increases sensitivity in detecting abnormal esophageal acid exposure. J Gastrointest Surg. 2005;9:1043-1051; discussion 1051.Zaninotto G, DeMeester TR, Schwizer W, et al. The lower esophageal sphincter in health and disease. Am J Surg. 1988;155:104-111.Assessment of Esophageal FunctionAdamek RJ, Wegener M, Weinbeck M, Gielen B. Long-term esoph-ageal manometry in healthy subjects: evaluation of normal  values and influence of age. Dig Dis Sci. 1994;39:2069-2073.Barish CF, Castell DO, Richter JE. Graded esophageal balloon distention: a new provocative test for non-cardiac chest pain.  Dig Dis Sci. 1986;31:1292-1298.Battle WS, Nyhus LM, Bombeck CT. Gastroesophageal reflux: diagnosis and treatment. Ann Surg. 1973;177:560-565.Bernstein IM, Baker CA. A clinical test for esophagitis. Gastroen-terology. 1958;34:760-781.DeMeester TR, Johnson LF, Joseph GJ, Toscano MS, Hall AW, Skinner DB. Patterns of gastroesophageal reflux in health and disease. Ann Surg. 1976;184(4):459-470.DeMeester TR, Wang CI, Wernly JA, et al. Technique, indications and clinical use of 24-hour esophageal pH monitoring. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1980;79:656-670.Dodds WJ. Current concepts of esophageal motor function: clinical implications for radiology. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 1977;128:549-561.Fein M, Fuchs KH, Bohrer T, et al. Fiberoptic technique for 24-hour bile reflux monitoring. Standards and normal values for gastric monitoring. Dig Dis Sci. 1996;41:216-225.Fuchs KH, DeMeester TR, Albertucci M. Specificity and sensitiv-ity of objective diagnosis of gastroesophageal reflux disease. Surgery. 1987;102:575-580.Iascone C, DeMeester TR, et al. Barrett’s esophagus: functional assessment, proposed pathogenesis, and surgical therapy. Arch Surg. 1983;118:543-549.Johnson LF, DeMeester TR. Development of 24-hour intra-esophageal pH monitoring composite scoring. J Clin  Gastroenterol. 1986;8(suppl 1):52-58.Johnson LF, DeMeester TR. Twenty-four-hour pH monitoring of the distal esophagus: a quantitative measure of gastroesopha-geal reflux. Am J Gastroenterol. 1974;62(4):325-332.Kauer WK, Burdiles P, Ireland A, et al. Does duodenal juice reflux into the esophagus in patients with complicated GERD? Evaluation of a fiberoptic sensor for bilirubin. Am J Surg. 1995;169:98-103.Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   109101/03/19   6:06 PM 1092SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIKramer P, Hollander W. Comparison of experimental esopha-geal pain with clinical pain of angina pectoris and esophageal  disease. Gastroenterology. 1955;29:719-743.Pandolfino JE, Richter JE, Ours T, et al. Ambulatory esophageal pH monitoring using a wireless system. Am J Gastroenterol. 2003;98:740-749.Reid BJ, Weinstein WM, Lewin KJ, et al. Endoscopic biopsy can detect high-grade dysplasia or early adenocarcinoma in Barrett’s esophagus without grossly recognizable neoplastic lesions. Gastroenterology. 1988;94(1):81-90.Schwizer W, Hinder RA, DeMeester TR. Does delayed gastric emp-tying contribute to gastroesophageal reflux disease? Am J Surg. 1989;157:74-81.Stein HJ, DeMeester TR, et al. Three-dimensional imaging of the LES in gastroesophageal reflux disease. Ann Surg. 1991;214:374-384.Tutuian R, Vela MF, Balaji NS, et al. Esophageal function test-ing with combined multichannel intraluminal impedance and manometry; multicenter study in healthy volunteers. Clin  Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2003;1:174-183.Wickremesinghe PC, Bayrit PQ, Manfredi OL, et al. Quantitative evaluation of bile diversion surgery utilizing 99mTc HIDA scin-tigraphy. Gastroenterology. 1983;84:354-363.Gastroesophageal Reflux DiseaseAllison PR. Hiatus hernia: a 20 year retrospective survey. Ann Surg. 1973;178:273-276.Allison PR. Peptic ulcer of the esophagus. J Thorac Surg. 1946;15:308-317.Allison PR. Reflux esophagitis, sliding hiatus hernia and the anat-omy of repair. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1951;92:419-431.Barlow AP, DeMeester TR, Ball CS, et al. The significance of the gastric secretory state in gastroesophageal reflux disease. Arch Surg. 1989;124:937-940.Bonavina L, DeMeester TR, McChesney L, Schwizer W, Albertucci M, Bailey RT. Drug-induced esophageal strictures. Ann Surg. 1987;206:173-183.Bremner RM, DeMeester TR, Crookes PF, et al. The effect of symp-toms and non-specific motility abnormalities on surgical therapy for gastroesophageal reflux disease. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1994;107:1244-1250.Castell DO. Nocturnal acid breakthrough in perspective: let’s not throw out the baby with the bathwater. Am J Gastroenterol. 2003;98:517-518.Chandrasoma P, Barrett N. So close, yet 50 years from the truth.  J Gastrointest Surg. 1999;3:7-14.Clark GW, Ireland AP, Peters JH, Chandrasoma P, DeMeester TR, Bremner CG. Short segments of Barrett’s esophagus: a prevalent complication of gastroesophageal reflux disease with malignant potential. J Gastrointest Surg. 1997;1(2):113-122.DeMeester SR, Campos GM, DeMeester TR, et al. The impact of an antireflux procedure on intestinal metaplasia of the cardia. Ann Surg. 1998;228:547-556.DeMeester TR, Bonavina L, Albertucci M. Nissen fundoplication for gastroesophageal reflux disease: Evaluation of primary repair in 100 consecutive patients. Ann Surg. 1986;204:9-20.DeMeester TR, Bonavina L, Iascone C, Courtney JV, Skinner DB. Chronic respiratory symptoms and occult gastroesophageal reflux. Ann Surg. 1990;211:337-345.DeMeester SR, DeMeester TR. Columnar mucosa and intesti-nal metaplasia of the esophagus: Fifty years of controversy. Ann Surg. 2000;231:303-321.DeMeester TR, Johansson KE, Franze I, et al. Indications, surgical technique, and long-term functional results of colon interposi-tion or bypass. Ann Surg. 1988;208:460-474.Desai KM, Klingensmith ME, Winslow ER, et al. Symptomatic out-comes of laparoscopic antireflux surgery in patients eligible for endoluminal therapies. Surg Endosc. 2002;16:1669-1673.Donahue PE, Samelson S, Nyhus LM, et al. The floppy Nissen fun-doplication: effective long-term control of pathologic reflux. Arch Surg. 1985;120:663-668.Farrell TM, Richardson WS, Halkar R, et al. Nissen fundoplication improves gastric motility in patients with delayed gastric emp-tying. Surg Endosc. 2001;15:271-274.Farrell TM, Richardson WS, Trus TL, et al. Response of atypical symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux antireflux  surgery. Br J Surg. 2001;88:1649-1652.Farrell TM, Smith CD, Metreveli RE, et al. Fundoplication provides effective and durable symptom relief in patients with Barrett’s esophagus. Am J Surg. 1999;178:18-21.Fass R. Epidemiology and pathophysiology of symptomatic  gastroesophageal reflux disease. Am J Gastroenterol. 2003;98 (3 suppl):S2-S7.Fiorucci S, Santucci L, Chiucchiú, Morelli A. Gastric acidity and gastroesophageal reflux patterns in patients with esophagitis. Gastroenterology. 1992;103:855-861.Fletcher J, Wirz A, Young J, et al. Unbuffered highly acidic gas-tric juice exists at the gastroesophageal junction after a meal.  Gastroenterology. 2001;121:775-783.Fuchs KH, DeMeester TR, Hinder RA, et al. Computerized iden-tification of pathologic duodenogastric reflux using 24-hour gastric pH monitoring. Ann Surg. 1991;213:13-20.Gerson LB, Shetler K, Triadafilopoulos G. Prevalence of Barrett’s esophagus in asymptomatic individuals. Gastroenterology. 2002;123:461-467.Gillen P, Keeling P, Byrne PJ, et al. Implication of duodenogastric reflux in the pathogenesis of Barrett’s oesophagus. Br J Surg. 1988;75:540-543.Graham DY. The changing epidemiology of GERD: geography and Helicobacter pylori. Am J Gastroenterol. 2003;98:1462-1470.Gurski RR, Peters JH, Hagen JA, et al. Barrett’s esophagus can  and does regress following antireflux surgery: a study of prevalence and predictive features. J Am Coll Surg. 2003;196:706-712.Henderson RD, Henderson RF, Marryatt GV. Surgical management of 100 consecutive esophageal strictures. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1990;99:1-7.Hill LD, Kozarek RA, Kraemer SJ, et al. The gastroesophageal flap valve. In vitro and in vivo observations. Gastrointest Endosc. 1996;44(5):541-547.Hinder RA, Stein HJ, Bremner CG, et al. Relationship of a satisfac-tory outcome to normalization of delayed gastric emptying after Nissen fundoplication. Ann Surg. 1989;210:458-465.Hirota WK, Loughney TM, Lazas DJ, et al. Specialized intestinal metaplasia, dysplasia and cancer of the esophagus and esopha-gogastric junction: prevalence and clinical data. Gastroenterol-ogy. 1999;116(2):277-285.Hofstetter WA, Peters JH, DeMeester TR, et al. Long-term  outcome of antireflux surgery in patients with Barrett’s esophagus. Ann Surg. 2001;234(4):532-538.Ireland AP, Clark GWB, DeMeester TR. Barrett’s esophagus: the significance of p53 in clinical practice. Ann Surg. 1997;225: 17-30.Isolauri J, Luostarinen M, Viljakka M, et al. Long-term compari-son of antireflux surgery versus conservative therapy for reflux esophagitis. Ann Surg. 1997;225:295-299.Jamieson JR, Hinder RA, DeMeester TR, et al. Analysis of 32 patients with Schatzki’s ring. Am J Surg. 1989;158:563-566.Johnson WE, Hagen JA, DeMeester TR, et al. Outcome of respira-tory symptoms after antireflux surgery on patients with gastro-esophageal reflux disease. Arch Surg. 1996;131:489-492.Kahrilas PJ. Diagnosis of symptomatic gastroesophageal reflux dis-ease. Am J Gastroenterol. 2003;98:S15-S23.Kahrilas PJ. Radiofrequency therapy of the lower esophageal sphincter for treatment of GERD. Gastrointest Endosc. 2003;57:723-731.Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   109201/03/19   6:06 PM 1093ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25Kaul BK, DeMeester TR, Oka M, et al. The cause of dysphagia in uncomplicated sliding hiatal hernia and its relief by hiatal her-niorrhaphy: a roentgenographic, manometric, and clinical study. Ann Surg. 1990;211:406-410.Khaitan L, Ray WA, Holzman MD, et al. Health care utilization after medical and surgical therapy for gastroesophageal reflux disease. Arch Surg. 2003;138:1356-1361.Labenz J, Tillenburg B, Peitz U, et al. Helicobacter pylori augments the pH-increasing effect of omeprazole in patients with duode-nal ulcer. Gastroenterology. 1996;110:725-732.Lin KM, Ueda RK, Hinder RA, et al. Etiology and importance of alkaline esophageal reflux. Am J Surg. 1991;162:553-557.Little AG, Ferguson MK, Skinner DB. Reoperation for failed anti-reflux operations. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1986;91:511-517.Liu JY, Finlayson SRG, Laycock WS, et al. Determining the appro-priate threshold for referral to surgery for gastroesophageal reflux disease. Surgery. 2003;133:5-12.Lundell L, Miettinen P, Myrvold HE, et al. Long-term management of gastrooesophageal reflux disease with omeprazole or open antireflux surgery: results of a prospective randomized trial.  Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2000;12:879-887.Marshall RE, Anggiansah A, Owen WJ. Bile in the esopha-gus: clinical relevance and ambulatory detection. Br J Surg. 1997;84:21-28.Morgenthal CB, Shane MD, Stival A, et al. The durability of laparo-scopic Nissen fundoplication: 11-year outcomes. J Gastrointest Surg. 2007;11:693-700.Narayani RI, Burton MP, Young GS. Utility of esophageal biopsy in the diagnosis of non-erosive reflux disease. Dis Esophagus. 2003;16:187-192.Nissen R. Eine einfache operation zur beeinflussung der refluxo-esophagitis. Schweiz Med Wochenschr. 1956;86:590-592.Nissen R. Gastropexy and fundoplication in surgical treatment of hiatus hernia. Am J Dig Dis. 1961;6:954-961.Oberg S, Johansson H, Wenner J, et al. Endoscopic surveillance of columnar lined esophagus: frequency of intestinal meta-plasia detection and impact of antireflux surgery. Ann Surg. 2001;234:619-626.Orlando RC. The pathogenesis of gastroesophageal reflux disease: the relationship between epithelial defense, dysmotility, and acid exposure. Am J Gastroenterol. 1997;92:3S-5S.Orringer MB, Skinner DB, Belsey RHR. Long-term results of the Mark IV operation for hiatal hernia and analyses of recur-rences and their treatment. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1972;63: 25-33.Parrilla P, Martinez de Haro LF, Ortiz A, et al. Long term results of a randomized prospective study comparing medical and sur-gical treatment in Barrett’s esophagus. Ann Surg. 2003;237: 291-298.Patti MG, Debas HT, Pellegrini CA. Esophageal manometry and 24-hour pH monitoring in the diagnosis of pulmonary aspiration secondary to gastroesophageal reflux. Am J Surg. 1992;163:401-406.Pearson FG, Cooper JD, Patterson GA, Ramirez J, Todd TR. Gastroplasty and fundoplication for complex reflux prob-lems. Ann Surg. 1987;206:473-481.Pelligrini CA, DeMeester TR, Johnson LF, et al. Gastroesophageal reflux and pulmonary aspiration: Incidence, functional abnor-mality, and results of surgical therapy. Surgery. 1979;86:110-119.Peters JH, Heimbucher J, Incarbone R, et al. Clinical and physi-ologic comparison of laparoscopic and open Nissen fundoplica-tion. J Am Coll Surg. 1995;180:385-393.Provenzale D, Kemp JA, Arora S, et al. A guide for surveillance of patients with Barrett’s esophagus. Am J Gastroenterol. 1994;89:670-680.Richter JE. Long-term management of gastroesophageal reflux disease and its complications. Am J Gastroenterol. 1997;92:30S-34S.Romagnuolo J, Meier MA, Sadowski DC. Medical or surgical ther-apy for erosive reflux esophagitis: Cost utility analysis using a Markov model. Ann Surg. 2002;236:191-202.Schwizer W, Hinder RA, DeMeester TR. Does delayed gastric emp-tying contribute to gastroesophageal reflux disease? Am J Surg. 1989;157:74-81.Shaker R, Castell DO, Schoenfeld PS, Spechler SJ. Nighttime heart-burn is an underappreciated clinical problem that impacts sleep and daytime function: the results of a Gallup survey conducted on behalf of the American Gastroenterologic Association. Am J Gastroenterol. 2003;98:1487-1493.Siewert JR, Isolauri J, Feussuer M. Reoperation following failed fundoplication. World J Surg. 1989;13:791-796.Smith CD, McClusky DA, Rajhad MA, Lederman AB, Hunter JG. When fundoplication fails: redo? Ann Surg. 2005;241(6):861-871.Sontag SJ, O’Connell S, Khandelwal S, et al. Asthmatics with gastroesophageal reflux: long term results of a randomized trial of medical and surgical antireflux therapies. Am J  Gastroenterol. 2003;98(5):987-999.Spechler SJ, Department of Veterans Affairs Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease Study Group. Comparison of medical and sur-gical therapy for complicated gastroesophageal reflux disease in veterans. N Engl J Med. 1992;326:786-792.Spechler SJ, Lee E, Ahmen D. Long term outcome of medical and surgical therapies for gastroesophageal reflux disease: follow-up of a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2001;285: 2331-2338.Spivak H, Farrell TM, Trus TL, et al. Laparoscopic fundoplication for dysphagia and peptic esophageal stricture. J Gastrointest Surg. 1998;2:555-560.Stein HJ, Barlow AP, DeMeester TR, Hinder RA. Complications of gastroesophageal reflux disease: role of the LES, esopha-geal acid and acid/alkaline exposure, and duodenogastric reflux. Ann Surg. 1992;216(1):35-43.Stein HJ, Bremner RM, Jamieson J, DeMeester TR. Effect of  Nissen fundoplication on esophageal motor function. Arch Surg. 1992;127:788-791.Terry M, Smith CD, Branum GD, et al. Outcomes of laparoscopic fundoplication for gastroesophageal reflux disease and parae-sophageal hernia: experience with 1000 consecutive cases. Surg Endosc. 2001;15:691-699.Terry ML, Vernon A, Hunter JG. Stapled-wedge Collis gastroplasty for the shortened esophagus. Am J Surg. 2004;188:195-199.Trus TL, Laycock WS, Waring JP, Branum GD, Hunter  JG. Improvement in quality of life measures after laparo-scopic antireflux surgery. Ann Surg. 1999;229(3):331-336.Tseng D, Rizvi AZ, Fennerty MB, et al. Forty-eight-hour pH moni-toring increases sensitivity in detecting abnormal esophageal acid exposure. J Gastrointest Surg. 2005;9:1043-1052.Van Den Boom G, Go PM, Hameeetman W, et al. Cost effectiveness of medical versus surgical treatment in patients with severe or refractory gastroesophageal reflux disease in the Netherlands. Scand J Gastroenterol. 1996;31:1-9.Watson DI, Baigrie RJ, Jamieson GG. A learning curve for laparo-scopic fundoplication. Definable, avoidable, or a waste of time? Ann Surg. 1996;224:198-203.Wattchow DA, Jamieson GG, et al. Distribution of peptide-containing nerve fibers in the gastric musculature of patients undergoing sur-gery for gastroesophageal reflux. Ann Surg. 1992;290:153.Weston AP, Krmpotich P, Makdisi WF, et al. Short segment  Barrett’s esophagus: clinical and histological features, associ-ated endoscopic findings, and association with gastric intestinal metaplasia. Am J Gastroenterol. 1996;91:981-986.Williamson WA, Ellis FH Jr, Gibb SP, et al. Effect of antireflux oper-ation on Barrett’s mucosa. Ann Thorac Surg. 1990;49:537-541.Wright TA. High-grade dysplasia in Barrett’s oesophagus.  Br J Surg. 1997;84:760-766.Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   109301/03/19   6:06 PM 1094SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIZaninotto G, DeMeester TR, Bremner CG, Smyrk TC, Cheng Shih-Chuan. Esophageal function in patients with reflux-induced strictures and its relevance to surgical treatment. Ann Thorac Surg. 1989;47:362-370.Diaphragmatic HerniasBombeck TC, Dillard DH, Nyhus LM. Muscular anatomy of the gastroesophageal junction and role of the phrenoesophageal ligament. Ann Surg. 1966;164:643-654.Casbella F, Sinanan M, Horgan S, Pellegrini CA. Systematic use of gastric fundoplication in laparoscopic repair of paraesophageal hernias. Am J Surg. 1996;171:485-489.Dalgaard JB. Volvulus of the stomach. Acta Chir Scand. 1952;103:131-153.DeMeester TR, Lafontaine E, Joelsson BE, et al. The relation-ship of a hiatal hernia to the function of the body of the esophagus and the gastroesophageal junction. J Thorac Car-diovasc Surg. 1981;82:547-558.Eliska O. Phreno-oesophageal membrane and its role in the devel-opment of hiatal hernia. Acta Anat. 1973;86:137-150.Frantzides CT, Madan AK, Carlson MA, et al. A prospective, ran-domized trial of laparoscopic polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) patch repair vs simple cruroplasty for large hiatal hernia. Arch Surg. 2002;137:649-652.Fuller CB, Hagen JA, DeMeester TR, et al. The role of fundoplica-tion in the treatment of type II paraesophageal hernia. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1996;111:655-661.Gangopadhyay N, Perrone JM, Soper NJ, et al. Outcomes of lapa-roscopic paraesophageal hernia repair in elderly and high-risk patients. Surgery. 2006;140:491-498; discussion 498.Granderath FA, Schweiger UM, Kamolz T, Asche KU, Pointner R.  Laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication with prosthetic hiatal clo-sure reduces postoperative intrathoracic wrap herniation: pre-liminary results of a prospective randomized functional and clinical study. Arch Surg. 2005;140:40-48.Hashemi M, Peters JH, DeMeester TR, et al. Laparoscopic repair of large type III hiatal hernia: objective follow-up reveals high recurrence rate. J Am Coll Surg. 2000;190:539-560.Kahrilas PJ, Wu S, Lin S, Pouderoux P. Attenuation of esopha-geal shortening during peristalsis with hiatus hernia. Gastro-enterology. 1995;109(6):1818-1825.Kleitsch WP. Embryology of congenital diaphragmatic hernia.  I. Esophageal hiatus hernia. Arch Surg. 1958;76:868-873.Mattar SG, Bowers SP, Galloway KD, et al. Long-term outcome of laparoscopic repair of paraesophageal hernia. Surg Endosc. 2002;16:745-749.Menguy R. Surgical management of large paraesophageal hernia with complete intrathoracic stomach. World J Surg. 1988;12:415-422.Myers GA, Harms BA, Sarling JR. Management of paraesopha-geal hernia with a selective approach to antireflux surgery. Am J Surg. 1995;170:375-380.Oddsdottir M, Franco AL, Laycock WS, et al. Laparoscopic repair of paraesophageal hernia: New access, old technique. Surg Endosc. 1995;9:164-168.Oelschlager BK, Pellegrini CA, Hunter J, et al. Biologic pros-thesis reduces recurrence after laparoscopic paraesophageal hernia repair: a multicenter, prospective, randomized trial. Ann Surg. 2006;244(4):481-490.Patti MG, Goldberg HI, Arcerito M, Bortolasi L, Tong J, Way LW. Hiatal hernia size affects LES function, esophageal acid exposure, and the degree of mucosal injury. Am J Surg. 1996;171(1):182-186.Pierre AF, Luketich JD, Fernando HC, et al. Results of laparo-scopic repair of giant paraesophageal hernias: 200 consecutive patients. Ann Thorac Surg. 2002;74:1909-1915.Skinner DB, Belsey RH. Surgical management of esophageal reflux and hiatus hernia: long-term results with 1030 patients. J Thorac  Cardiovasc Surg. 1967;53:33-54.Stylopoulos N, Gazelle GS, Ratner DW. Paraesophageal hernias: operation or observation. Ann Surg. 2002;236:492-500.Trus TL, Bax T, Richardson WS, et al. Complications of lapa-roscopic paraesophageal hernia repair. J Gastrointest Surg. 1997;1(3):221-227; discussion 228.Wo JM, Branum GD, Hunter JG, et al. Clinical features of  type III (mixed) paraesophageal hernia. Am J Gastroenterol. 1996;91:914-916.Miscellaneous Esophageal LesionsBurdick JS, Venu RP, Hogan WJ. Cutting the defiant lower esopha-geal ring. Gastrointest Endosc. 1993;39:616-619.Burt M, Diehl W, Martini N, et al. Malignant esophagorespiratory fistula: management options and survival. Ann Thorac Surg. 1991;52:1222-1228.Chen MYM, Ott DJ, Donati DL. Correlation of lower esophageal mucosal ring and LES pressure. Dig Dis Sci. 1994;39:766-769.D’Haens G, Rutgeerts P, Geboes K, et al. The natural history of esophageal Crohn’s disease. Three patterns of evolution.  Gastrointest Endosc. 1994;40:296-300.Eckhardt VF, Kanzler G, Willems D. Single dilation of symptom-atic Schatzki rings. A prospective evaluation of its effectiveness. Dig Dis Sci. 1992;37:577-582.Klein HA, Wald A, Graham TO, et al. Comparative studies of esophageal function in systemic sclerosis. Gastroenterology. 1992;102:1551-1556.Mathisen DJ, Grillo HC, Wain JC, et al. Management of acquired nonmalignant tracheoesophageal fistula. Ann Thorac Surg. 1991;52:759-765.Poirier NC, Taillefer R, Topart P, Duranceau A. Antireflux opera-tions in patients with scleroderma. Ann Thorac Surg. 1994; 58:66-72.Soudah HC, Hasler WL, Owyang C. Effect of octreotide on intesti-nal motility and bacterial overgrowth in scleroderma. N Engl J Med. 1991;325:1461-1467.Toskes PP. Hope for the treatment of intestinal scleroderma (Letter to the Editor). N Engl J Med. 1991;325:1508.Wilcox CM, Straub RF. Prospective endoscopic characterization of cytomegalovirus esophagitis in AIDS. Gastrointest Endosc. 1994;40:481-484.Motility Disorders of the Pharynx and EsophagusAchem SR, Crittenden J, Kolts B, et al. Long-term clinical and manometric follow-up of patients with nonspecific esophageal motor disorders. Am J Gastroenterol. 1992;87:825-830.Andreollo NA, Earlam RJ. Heller’s myotomy for achalasia: is an added antireflux procedure necessary? Br J Surg. 1987;74:765-769.Anselmino M, Perdikis G, Hinder RA, et al. Heller myotomy is superior to dilatation for the treatment of early achalasia. Arch Surg. 1997;132:233-240.Bianco A, Cagossi M, Scrimieri D, et al. Appearance of esopha-geal peristalsis in treated idiopathic achalasia. Dig Dis Sci. 1986;90:978-983.Bonavina L, Nosadinia A, Bardini R, Baessato M, Peracchia A.  Primary treatment of esophageal achalasia: long-term results of myotomy and Dor fundoplication. Arch Surg. 1992;127:222-226.Chen LQ, Chughtau T, Sideris L, et al. Long term effects of myotomy and partial fundoplication for esophageal achalasia.  Dis Esophagus. 2002;15:171-179.Code CF, Schlegel JF, Kelley ML, et al. Hypertensive gastroesopha-geal sphincter. Mayo Clin Proc. 1960;35:391-399.Cook IJ, Blumbergs P, Cash K, Jamieson GG, Shearman DJ. Struc-tural abnormalities of the cricopharyngeus muscle in patients with pharyngeal (Zenker’s) diverticulum. J Gastroenterol  Hepatol. 1992;7:556-562.Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   109401/03/19   6:06 PM 1095ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25Cook IJ, Gabb M, Panagopoulos V, et al. Pharyngeal (Zenker’s) diverticulum is a disorder of upper esophageal sphincter open-ing. Gastroenterology. 1992;103:1229-1235.Csendes A, Braghetto I, Henríquez A, Cortés C. Late results of a prospective randomized study comparing forceful dilata-tion and oesophagomyotomy in patients with achalasia. Gut. 1989;30(3):299-304.DeMeester TR, Johansson KE, Franze I, et al. Indications, surgical technique, and long-term functional results of colon interposi-tion or bypass. Ann Surg. 1988;208:460-474.DeMeester TR, Lafontaine E, et al. The relationship of a hia-tal hernia to the function of the body of the esophagus and the gastroesophageal junction. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1981;82:547-558.Eckardt V, Aignherr C, Bernhard G. Predictors of outcome in patients with achalasia treated by pneumatic dilation.  Gastroenterology. 1992;103(6):1732-1738.Ekberg O, Wahlgren L. Dysfunction of pharyngeal swallowing: a cineradiographic investigation in 854 dysphagial patients. Acta Radiol Diagn. 1985;26:389-395.Ellis FH. Long esophagomyotomy for diffuse esophageal spasm and related disorders: An historical overview. Dis Esophagus. 1998;11:210-214.Ellis FH Jr. Oesophagomyotomy for achalasia: a 22-year experi-ence. Br J Surg. 1993;80:882-885.Evander A, Little AG, et al. Diverticula of the mid and lower esoph-agus. World J Surg. 1986;10:820-828.Ferguson TB, Woodbury JD, Roper CL. Giant muscular hypertro-phy of the esophagus. Ann Thorac Surg. 1969;8:209-218.Foker JE, Ring WE, Varco RL. Technique of jejunal interposi-tion for esophageal replacement. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1982;83:928-933.Gutschow CA, Hamoir M, Rombaux P, et al. Management of pha-ryngoesophageal (Zenker’s) diverticulum: which technique? Ann Thorac Surg. 2002;74:1677-1682.Hirano I, Tatum RP, Shi G, et al. Manometric heterogene-ity in patients with idiopathic achalasia. Gastroenterology. 2001;120:789-798.Jeansonne LO, White BC, Pilger KE, et al. Ten-year follow-up of laparoscopic Heller myotomy for achalasia shows durability. Surg Endosc. 2007;21:1498-1502.Jobe BA, Kim CY, Minjarez RC, et al. Simplifying minimally invasive transhiatal esophagectomy with the inversion approach: Lessons learned from the first 20 cases. Arch Surg. 2006;141:857-865; discussion 865.Kahrilas PJ, Logemann JA, Lin S, Ergun GA. Pharyngeal clearance during swallowing: a combined manometric and videofluoro-scopic study. Gastroenterology. 1992;103(1):128-136.Kostic S, Kjellin A, Ruth M, et al. Pneumatic dilation or laparo-scopic cardiomyotomy in the management of newly diagnosed idiopathic achalasia. Results of a randomized controlled trial. World J Surg. 2007;31:470-478.Lam HG, Dekker W, Kan G, et al. Acute noncardiac chest pain in a coronary care unit. Gastroenterology. 1992;102:453-460.Mellow MH. Return of esophageal peristalsis in idiopathic achala-sia. Gastroenterology. 1976;70:1148-1151.Meshkinpour H, Haghighat P, Meshkinpour A. Quality of life among patients treated for achalasia. Dig Dis Sci. 1996;41(2):352-356.Migliore M, Payne H, Jeyasingham K. Pathophysiologic basis for operation on Zenker’s diverticulum. Ann Thorac Surg. 1994;57:1616-1621.Moser G, Vacariu-Granser GV, Schneider C, et al. High incidence of esophageal motor disorders in consecutive patients with glo-bus sensation. Gastroenterology. 1991;101:1512-1521.Moses PL, Ellis LM, Anees MR, et al. Antineural antibodies in idiopathic achalasia and gastro-oesophageal reflux disease.  Gut. 2003;52:629-636.Nehra D, Lord RV, DeMeester TR, et al. Physiologic basis for the treatment of epiphrenic diverticulum. Ann Surg. 2002;235: 346-354.Oelschlager BK, Chang L, Pellegrini CA. Improved outcome after extended gastric myotomy for achalasia. Arch Surg. 2003;138(5):490-495.O’Rourke RW, Seltman AK, Chang EY, et al. A model for gastric banding in the treatment of morbid obesity: the effect of chronic partial gastric outlet obstruction on esophageal physiology. Ann Surg. 2006;244:723-733.Patti MG, Fisichella PM, Peretta S, et al. Impact of minimally invasive surgery on the treatment of esophageal achalasia: a decade of change. J Am Coll Surg. 2003;196:698-703.Pellegrini C, Wetter LA, Patti M, et al. Thoracoscopic esophagomy-otomy: initial experience with a new approach for the treatment of achalasia. Ann Surg. 1992;216:291-299.Peters JH. An antireflux procedure is critical to the long-term out-come of esophageal myotomy for achalasia. J Gastrointest Surg. 2001;5:17-20.Peters JH, Kauer WK, Ireland AP, et al. Esophageal resection with colon interposition for end-stage achalasia. Arch Surg. 1995;130:632-636.Ponce J, Garrigues V, Pertejo V, et al. Individual prediction of response to pneumatic dilation in patients with achalasia. Dig Dis Sci. 1996;41:2135-2141.Richards WO, Torquati A, Holzman MD, et al. Heller myotomy versus Heller myotomy with Dor fundoplication for acha-lasia: a prospective randomized double-blind clinical trial. Ann Surg. 2004;240(3):405-412; discussion 412-415.Shoenut J, Duerksen D. A prospective assessment of gastroesoph-ageal reflux before and after treatment of achalasia patients: pneumatic dilation versus transthoracic limited myotomy. Am J Gastroenterol. 1997;92:1109-1112.Spechler S, Castell DO. Classification of oesophageal motility abnormalities. Gut. 2001;49:145-151.Streitz JM, Jr, Glick ME, Ellis FH, Jr. Selective use of myotomy for treatment of epiphrenic diverticula: manometric and clinical analysis. Arch Surg. 1992;127:585-588.Vaezi MF, Baker ME, Achkar E, et al. Timed barium oesophogram: better predictor of long term success after pneumatic dilation in achalasia than symptom assessment. Gut. 2002;50:765-770.Verne G, Sallustio JE, Eaker EY. Anti-myenteric neuronal antibod-ies in patients with achalasia: a prospective study. Dig Dis Sci. 1997;42:307-313.Williams RB, Grehan MJ, Andre J, et al. Biomechanics, diagnosis, and treatment outcome in inflammatory myopathy presenting as oropharyngeal dysphagia. Gut. 2003;52:471-478.Zaninotto G, Annese V, Costantini M, et al. Randomized controlled trial of botulinum toxin versus laparoscopic Heller myotomy for esophageal achalasia. Ann Surg. 2004;239:364-370.Zhao X, Pasricha PJ. Botulinum toxin for spastic GI disorders: a systematic review. Gastrointest Endosc. 2003;57:219-235.Carcinoma of the EsophagusAkiyama H. Surgery for carcinoma of the esophagus. Curr Probl Surg. 1980;17:53-120.Akiyama H, Tsurumaru M. Radical lymph node dissection for  cancer of the thoracic esophagus. Ann Surg. 1994;220(3):364-372.Altorki N, Skinner D. Should en-bloc esophagectomy be the standard of care for esophageal carcinoma? Ann Surg. 2001;234:581-587.Badwe RA, Sharma V, Bhansali MS, et al. The quality of swallow-ing for patients with operable esophageal carcinoma: a ran-domized trial comparing surgery with radiotherapy. Cancer. 1999;85:763-768.Baker JW, Jr, Schechter GL. Management of paraesophageal cancer by blunt resection without thoracotomy and reconstruction with stomach. Ann Surg. 1986;203:491-499.Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   109501/03/19   6:06 PM 1096SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIBiere SS, van Berge Henegouwen MI, Maas KW, et al. Minimally invasive open oesophagectomy for patient with oesophageal cancer: a multicenter, open-label, randomized controlled trial. Lancet. 2012;19:1887-1892.Blazeby JM, Williams MH, et al. Quality of life measurement in patients with oesophageal cancer. Gut. 1995;37:505-508.Borrie J. Sarcoma of esophagus: surgical treatment. J Thorac Surg. 1959;37:413-426.Cameron AJ, Ott BJ, Payne WS. The incidence of adenocarci-noma in columnar-lined (Barrett’s) esophagus. N Engl J Med. 1985;313:857-859.Chang AC, Ji H, Birkmeyer NJ, et al. Outcomes after transhiatal and transthoracic esophagectomy for cancer. Ann Thorac Surg. 2008;85:424-429.Chang EY, Morris CD, Seltman AK, et al. The effect of antireflux surgery on esophageal carcinogenesis in patients with Barrett’s esophagus: a systematic review. Ann Surg. 2007;246:11-21.Clark GWB, Peters JH, Hagen JA, et al. Nodal metastases and recurrence patterns after en-bloc esophagectomy for adenocar-cinoma. Ann Thorac Surg. 1994;58:646-654.Clark GW, Smyrk TC, Burdiles P, et al. Is Barrett’s metapla-sia the source of adenocarcinomas of the cardia? Arch Surg. 1994;129:609-614.Collin CF, Spiro RH. Carcinoma of the cervical esophagus: chang-ing therapeutic trends. Am J Surg. 1984;148:460-466.Corley DA, Kerlikowske K, Verma R, et al. Protective association of aspirin/NSAIDs and esophageal cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Gastroenterology. 2003;124:47-56.Cunningham D, Allum WH, Stenning SP, et al. Perioperative chemotherapy versus surgery alone for resectable gastro-esophageal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2006;6;355(1):11-20.Dallal HJ, Smith GD, Grieve DC, et al. A randomized trial of thermal ablative therapy versus expandable metal stents in the palliative treatment of patients with esophageal carcinoma. Gastrointest Endosc. 2001;54:549-557.DeMeester TR, Skinner DB. Polypoid sarcomas of the esophagus. Ann Thorac Surg. 1975;20:405-417.Duhaylongsod FG, Wolfe WG. Barrett’s esophagus and adenocarci-noma of the esophagus and gastroesophageal junction. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1991;102:36-42.Ell C, May A, Gossner L, et al. Endoscopic mucosal resection of early cancer and high grade dysplasia in Barrett’s esophagus. Gastroenterology. 2001;118:670-677.Ellis FH, Heatley GJ, Krosna MJ, et al. Esophagogastrectomy for carcinoma of the esophagus and cardia: a comparison of find-ings and results after standard resection in three consecutive 8 year time intervals, using improved staging criteria. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1997;113:836.Frenken M. Best palliation in esophageal cancer; surgery, stenting, radiation, or what? Dis Esophagus. 2001;14:120-123.Fujita H, Kakegawa T, Yamana H, et al. Mortality and morbidity rates, postoperative course, quality of life, and prognosis after extended radical lymphadenectomy for esophageal cancer. Ann Surg. 1995;222:654-662.Gebski V, Burmeister B, Smithers BM, et al. Survival benefits from neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy or chemotherapy in oesophageal carcinoma: a meta-analysis. Lancet. 2007;8(3): 226-234.Greenstein AJ, Litle VR, Swanson SJ, et al. Effect of the num-ber of lymph nodes sampled on postoperative survival of lymph node-negative esophageal cancer. Cancer. 2008;112: 1239-1246.Hagen JA, DeMeester SR, Peters JH, Chandrasoma P, DeMeester TR. Curative resection for esophageal adenocarcinoma analy-sis of 100 en bloc esophagectomies. Ann Surg. 2001;234(4): 520-531.Hofstetter W, Swisher SG, Correa AM, et al. Treatment outcomes of resected esophageal cancer. Ann Surg. 2002;236:376-385.Hulscher JB, Van Sandick JW, de Boer AG, et al. Extended transthoracic resection compared with limited transhiatal resection for adenocarcinoma of the esophagus. N Engl J Med. 2002;347(21):1662-1669.Iijima K, Henrey E, Moriya A, et al. Dietary nitrate generates poten-tially mutagenic concentrations of nitric oxide at the gastro-esophageal junction. Gastroenterology. 2002;122:1248-1257.Ikeda M, Natsugoe S, Ueno S, et al. Significant host and tumor related factors for predicting prognosis in patients with esopha-geal carcinoma. Ann Surg. 2003;238:197-202.Jankowski JA, Wight NA, Meltzer SJ, et al. Molecular evolution of the metaplasia-dysplasia-adenocarcinoma sequence in the esophagus. Am J Pathol. 1999;154:965-973.Jobe BA, Kim CY, Minjarez RC, et al. Simplifying minimally invasive transhiatal esophagectomy with the inversion approach: lessons learned from the first 20 cases. Arch Surg. 2006;141:857-865; discussion 865.Johansson J, DeMeester TR, Hoger JA, et al. En bloc is supe-rior to transhiatal esophagectomy for T3 N1 adenocarci-noma of the distal esophagus and GE junction. Arch Surg. 2004;139:627-633.Kaklamanos IG, Walker GR, Ferry K, et al. Neoadjuvant treatment for resectable cancer of the esophagus and the gastroesophageal junction: a meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. Ann Surg Oncol. 2003;10:754-761.Kelsen DP, Winter KA, Gunderson LL, et al. Long-term results of RTOG trial 8911 (USA Intergroup 113): a random assign-ment trial comparison of chemotherapy followed by surgery compared with surgery alone for esophageal cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25(24):3719-3725.Krasna MJ, Reed CE, Nedzwiecki D, et al. CALBG 9380: a prospec-tive trial of the feasibility of thoracoscopy/laparoscopy in stag-ing esophageal cancer. Ann Thorac Surg. 2001;71:1073-1079.Kirby JD. Quality of life after esophagectomy: the patients’ per-spective. Dis Esophagus. 1999;12:168-171.Lagergren J, Bergstrom R, Lindgren A, Nyrén O. Symptomatic gastroesophageal reflux as a risk factor for esophageal  adenocarcinoma. N Engl J Med. 1999;340(11):825-831.Lavin P, Hajdu SI, Foote FW, Jr. Gastric and extragastric leiomyo-blastomas. Cancer. 1972;29:305-311.Law SYK, Fok M, Wong J. Pattern of recurrence after oesopha-geal resection for cancer: clinical implications. Br J Surg. 1996;83(1):107-111.Law SYK, Fok M, et al. A comparison of outcomes after resec-tion for squamous cell carcinomas and adenocarcinomas of the esophagus and cardia. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1992;175:107-112.Law S, Kwong DL, Kwok KF, et al. Improvement in treatment results and long term survival of patients with esophageal cancer: impact of chemoradiation and change in treatment strategy. Ann Surg. 2003;238:339-347.Lerut T, Coosemans W, Van Raemdonck D, et al. Surgical treat-ment of Barrett’s carcinoma. Correlations between morpho-logic findings and prognosis. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1994;107:1059-1066.Leuketich JD, Alvelo-Rivera M, Buenaventura PO, et al. Mini-mally invasive esophagectomy: outcomes in 222 patients. Ann Surg. 2003;238(4):486-494.Levine DS, Reid BJ. Endoscopic diagnosis of esophageal neo-plasms. Gastrointest Clin North Am. 1992;2:395-413.Lewis I. The surgical treatment of carcinoma of the esophagus with special reference to a new operation for the growths of the mid-dle third. Br J Surg. 1946;34:18-31.Logan A. The surgical treatment of carcinoma of the esophagus and cardia. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1963;46:150-161.Manner H, May A, Pech O, et al. Early Barrett’s carcinoma with “low-risk” submucosal invasion: long-term results of endo-scopic resection with a curative intent. Am J Gastroenterol. 2008;103:2589-2597.Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   109601/03/19   6:06 PM 1097ESOPHAGUS AND DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIACHAPTER 25McCort JJ. Esophageal carcinosarcoma and pseudosarcoma.  Radiology. 1972;102:519-524.Medical Research Council Oesophageal Working Party. Surgi-cal resection with or without preoperative chemotherapy in oesophageal cancer: a randomized controlled trial. Lancet. 2002;359:1727-1733.Naunheim KS, Petruska PJ, et al. Preoperative chemotherapy and radiotherapy for esophageal carcinoma. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1992;103:887-893.Nicks R. Colonic replacement of the esophagus. Br J Surg. 1967; 54:124-128.Nigro JJ, Hagen JA, DeMeester TR, et al. Occult esophageal ade-nocarcinoma: extent of disease and implications for effective therapy. Ann Surg. 1999;230:433-438.Omloo JM, Lagarde SM, Hulscher JB, et al. Extended transtho-racic resection compared with limited transhiatal resection for adenocarcinoma of the mid/distal esophagus: Five year survival of a randomized clinical trial. Ann Surg. 2007;246(6):992-1000.Orringer MB, Marshall B, Iannettoni MD. Transhiatal esopha-gectomy: clinical experience and refinements. Ann Surg. 1999;230:392.Orringer MB, Marshall B, Chang AC, et al. Two thousand tran-shiatal esophagectomies: changing trends, lessons learned. Ann Surg. 2007;246(3):363-372; discussion 372-374.Ott K, Herrmann K, Lordick F, et al. Early metabolic response evaluation by fluorine-18 fluorodeoxyglucose positron emis-sion tomography allows in vivo testing of chemosensitivity in gastric cancer: long-term results of a prospective study. Clin Cancer Res. 2008;14:2012-2018.Pacifico RJ, Wang KK, Wongkeesong LM, et al. Combined endo-scopic mucosal resection and photodynamic therapy versus esophagectomy for management of early adenocarcinoma of the esophagus. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2003;1:252-257.Pera M, Cameron AJ, Trastek VF, Carpenter HA, Zinsmeister  AR. Increasing incidence of adenocarcinoma of the esoph-agus and esophagogastric junction. Gastroenterology. 1993;104(2):510-513.Pera M, Trastek VF, Carpenter HA, Allen MS, Deschamps C, Pairolero PC. Barrett’s esophagus with high-grade dysplasia:  an indication for esophagectomy? Ann Thorac Surg. 1992;54:199-204.Pera M, Trastek VF, Carpenter HA, et al. Influence of pancreatic and biliary reflux on the development of esophageal carcinoma. Ann Thorac Surg. 1993;55:1386-1392.Peters JH, Clark GWB, Ireland AP, Chandrasoma P, Smyrk TC, DeMeester TR. Outcome of adenocarcinoma arising in Barrett’s  esophagus in endoscopically surveyed and non-surveyed patients. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1994;108(5):813-821.Peters JH, Hoeft SF, Heimbucher J, et al. Selection of patients for cura-tive or palliative resection of esophageal cancer based on preopera-tive endoscopic ultrasound. Arch Surg. 1994;129:534-539.Peters JH. Surgical treatment of esophageal adenocarcinoma: con-cepts in evolution. J Gastrointest Surg. 2002;6:518.Rasanen JV, Sihvo EIT, Knuuti J, et al. Prospective analysis of accuracy of proton emission tomography, computed tomogra-phy and endoscopic ultrasonography in staging of adenocarci-noma of the esophagus and esophagogastric junction. Ann Surg Oncol. 2003;10:954-960.Ravitch M. A Century of Surgery. Philadelphia: Lippincott; 1981:56.Reed CE. Comparison of different treatments for unresectable esophageal cancer. World J Surg. 1995;19:828.Reid BJ, Weinstein WM, Kewin KJ, et al. Endoscopic biopsy can detect high-grade dysplasia or early adenocarcinoma in Barrett’s esophagus without grossly recognizable neoplastic lesions. Gastroenterology. 1988;94(1):81-90.Ribeiro U, Jr, Posner MC, Safatle-Ribeiro AV, Reynolds JC. Risk factors for squamous cell carcinoma of the oesophagus.  Br J Surg. 1996;83:1174-1185.Rice TW, Boyce GA, Sivall MV. Esophageal ultrasound and the preoperative staging of carcinoma of the esophagus. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1991;101:536-543.Rice TW, Rusch VW, Ishwaran H, et al. Cancer of the esopha-gus and esophagogastric junction: data-driven staging for the seventh edition of the American Joint Committee on Cancer/International Union Against Cancer Cancer Staging Manuals. Cancer. 2010;15:3763-3773.Robertson CS, Mayberry JF, Nicholson JA. Value of endoscopic surveillance in the detection of neoplastic changes in Barrett’s esophagus. Br J Surg. 1988;75:760-763.Rösch T, Lorenz R, et al. Endosonographic diagnosis of submuco-sal upper gastrointestinal tract tumors. Scand J Gastroenterol. 1992;27:1-8.Rosenberg JC, Budev H, Edwards RC. Analysis of adenocarci-noma in Barrett’s esophagus utilizing a staging system. Cancer. 1985;55:1353-1360.Ruol A, Portale G, Castoro C, et al. Effects of neoadjuvant ther-apy on perioperative morbidity in elderly patients undergo-ing esophagectomy for esophageal cancer. Ann Surg Oncol. 2007;14:3243-3250.Skinner DB, Dowlatshahi KD, DeMeester TR. Potentially curable carcinoma of the esophagus. Cancer. 1982;50:2571-2575.Skinner DB, Little AG, Ferguson MK, Soriano A, Staszak VM. Selection of operation for esophageal cancer based on staging. Ann Surg. 1986;204:391-401.Smithers BM, Cullinan M, Thomas JM, et al. Outcomes from salvage esophagectomy post definitive chemoradiotherapy compared with resection following preoperative neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy. Dis Esophagus. 2007;20:471-477.Sonnenberg A, Fennerty MB. Medical decision analysis of chemo-prevention against esophageal adenocarcinoma. Gastroenterol-ogy. 2003;124:1758-1766.Streitz JM, Jr, Ellis FH, Jr, Gibb SP, et al. Adenocarcinoma in  Barrett’s esophagus. Ann Surg. 1991;213:122-125.Turnbull AD, Rosen P, Goodner JT, et al. Primary malignant tumors of the esophagus other than typical epidermoid carcinoma.  Ann Thorac Surg. 1973;15:463-473.Urschel JD, Ashiku S, Thurer R, et al. Salvage or planned esophagectomy after chemoradiation for locally advanced esophageal cancer: a review. Dis Esophagus. 2003;16:60-65.Vigneswaran WT, Trastek VK, Pairolero PC, et al. Extended esoph-agectomy in the management of carcinoma of the upper tho-racic esophagus. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1994;107:901-907.Walsh TN, Noonan N, Hollywood D, Kelly A, Keeling N,  Hennessy TP. A comparison of multimodal therapy and surgery for esophageal adenocarcinoma. N Engl J Med. 1996;335:462-467.Watson WP, Pool L. Cancer of the cervical esophagus. Surgery. 1948;23:893.Benign Tumors and CystsBardini R, Segalin A, Ruol A, et al. Videothoracoscopic enucleation of esophageal leiomyoma. Am Thorac Surg. 1992;54:576-577.Bonavina L, Segalin A, Rosati R, Pavanello M, Peracchia A. Surgical therapy of esophageal leiomyoma. J Am Coll Surg. 1995;181:257-262.Esophageal PerforationBrewer LA III, Carter R, Mulder GA, Stiles QR. Options in the management of perforations of the esophagus. Am J Surg. 1986;152:62-69.Bufkin BL, Miller JI, Jr, Mansour KA. Esophageal perfora-tion. Emphasis on management. Ann Thorac Surg. 1996;61: 1447-1451.Chang C-H, Lin PJ, Chang JP, et al. One-stage operation for treat-ment after delayed diagnosis of thoracic esophageal perforation. Ann Thorac Surg. 1992;53:617-620.Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   109701/03/19   6:06 PM 1098SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIEngum SA, Grosfeld JL, West KW, et al. Improved survival in chil-dren with esophageal perforation. Arch Surg. 1996;131:604-611.Gouge TH, Depan HJ, Spencer FC. Experience with the Grillo pleural wrap procedure in 18 patients with perforation of the thoracic esophagus. Ann Surg. 1989;209:612-617.Jones WG II, Ginsberg RJ. Esophageal perforation: a continuing challenge. Ann Thorac Surg. 1992;53:534-543.Pate JW, Walker WA, Cole FH, Jr, Owen EW, Johnson WH. Spontaneous rupture of the esophagus: a 30-year experience.  Ann Thorac Surg. 1989;47:689-692.Reeder LB, DeFilippi VJ, Ferguson MK. Current results of therapy for esophageal perforation. Am J Surg. 1995;169:615-617.Salo JA, Isolauri JO, Heikkilä LJ, et al. Management of delayed esophageal perforation with mediastinal sepsis. Esopha-gectomy or primary repair? J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1993;106:1088-1091.Sawyer R, Phillips C, Vakil N. Shortand long-term outcome of esophageal perforation. Gastrointest Endosc. 1995;41:130-134.Segalin A, Bonavina L, Lazzerini M, De Ruberto F, Faranda C, Peracchia A. Endoscopic management of inveterate esophageal perforations and leaks. Surg Endosc. 1996;10:928-932.Weiman DS, Walker WA, Brosnan KM, Pate JW, Fabian TC. Noniat-rogenic esophageal trauma. Ann Thorac Surg. 1995;59:845-849.Whyte RI, Iannettoni MD, Orringer MB. Intrathoracic esophageal perforation. The merit of primary repair. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1995;109:140-144.Caustic InjuryAnderson KD, Rouse TM, Randolph JG. A controlled trial of cor-ticosteroids in children with corrosive injury of the esophagus.  N Engl J Med. 1990;323:637-640.Ferguson MK, Migliore M, Staszak VM, Little AG. Early evaluation and therapy for caustic esophageal injury.  Am J Surg. 1989;157:116-120.Lahoti D, Broor SL, Basu PP, Gupta A, Sharma R, Pant CS. Corro-sive esophageal strictures. Predictors of response to endoscopic dilation. Gastrointest Endosc. 1995;41:196-200.Popovici Z. About reconstruction of the pharynx with colon in extensive corrosive strictures. Kurume Med J. 1989;36:41-47.Sugawa C, Lucas CE. Caustic injury of the upper gastrointesti-nal tract in adults: a clinical and endoscopic study. Surgery. 1989;106:802-806.Wu M-H, Lai W-W. Surgical management of extensive corro-sive injuries of the alimentary tract. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1993;177:12-16.Zargar SA, Kochhar R, Mehta S, Mehta SK. The role of fiberoptic endoscopy in the management of corrosive ingestion and modi-fied endoscopic classification of burns. Gastrointest Endosc. 1991;37:165-169.Techniques of Esophageal ReconstructionAkiyama H. Esophageal reconstruction. Entire stomach as esopha-geal substitute. Dis Esophagus. 1995;8:7-9.Banki F, Mason RJ, DeMeester SR, et al. Vagal sparing esopha-gectomy: a more physiologic alternative. Ann Surg. 2002; 236:324-336.Burt M, Scott A, Williard WC, et al. Erythromycin stimu-lates gastric emptying after esophagectomy with gastric replacement. A randomized clinical trial. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1996;111:649-654.Cheng W, Heitmiller RF, Jones BJ. Subacute ischemia of the colon esophageal interposition. Ann Thorac Surg. 1994;57:899-903.DeMeester TR, Johansson KE, Franze I, Eypasch E, Lu CT, McGill JE, Zaninotto G. Indications, surgical technique, and long-term functional results of colon interposition or bypass. Ann Surg. 1988(4);208:460-474.DeMeester TR, Kauer WK. Esophageal reconstruction. The colon as an esophageal substitute. Dis Esophagus. 1995;8:20-29.Dexter SPL, Martin IG, McMahon MJ. Radical thoracoscopic esophagectomy for cancer. Surg Endosc. 1996;10:147-151.Ellis FH, Jr, Gibb SP. Esophageal reconstruction for complex benign esophageal disease. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1990; 99:192-199.Finley RJ, Lamy A, Clifton J, et al. Gastrointestinal function fol-lowing esophagectomy for malignancy. Am J Surg. 1995; 169:471-475.Fok M, Cheng SW, Wong J. Pyloroplasty versus no drainage in gas-tric replacement of the esophagus. Am J Surg. 1991;162:447-452.Gossot D, Cattan P, Fritsch S. Can the morbidity of esophagec-tomy be reduced by the thoracoscopic approach? Surg Endosc. 1995;9:1113-1115.Honkoop P, Siersema PD, Tilanus HW, Stassen LP, Hop WC,  van Blankenstein M. Benign anastomotic strictures after tran-shiatal esophagectomy and cervical esophagogastrostomy. Risk factors and management. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1996;111(6):1141-1148.Liebermann-Meffert DMI, Meier R, Siewert JR. Vascular anatomy  of the gastric tube used for esophageal reconstruction.  Ann Thorac Surg. 1992;54:1110-1115.Maier G, Jehle EC, Becker HD. Functional outcome following oesophagectomy for oesophageal cancer. A prospective mano-metric study. Dis Esophagus. 1995;8:64-69.Naunheim KS, Hanosh J, Zwischenberger J, et al. Esophagectomy in the septuagenarian. Ann Thorac Surg. 1993;56(4):880-884.Nishihra T, Oe H, Sugawara K, et al. Esophageal reconstruction. Reconstruction of the thoracic esophagus with jejunal pedicled segments for cancer of the thoracic esophagus. Dis Esophagus. 1995;8:30-39.Peters JH, Kronson J, Bremner CG, et al. Arterial anatomic con-siderations in colon interposition for esophageal replacement.  Arch Surg. 1995;130:858-863.Stark SP, Romberg MS, Pierce GE, et al. Transhiatal versus trans-thoracic esophagectomy for adenocarcinoma of the distal esophagus and cardia. Am J Surg. 1996;172:478-482.Valverde A, Hay JM, Fingerhut A, et al. Manual versus mechani-cal esophagogastric anastomosis after resection for carcinoma. A controlled trial. French Associations for Surgical Research. Surgery. 1996;120:476-483.Watson T, DeMeester TR, Kauer WK, Peters JH, Hagen JA. Esoph-agectomy for end stage benign esophageal disease. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1998;115(6):1241-1247.Wu M-H, Lai W-W. Esophageal reconstruction for esophageal strictures or resection after corrosive injury. Ann Thorac Surg. 1992;53:798-802.Brunicardi_Ch25_p1009-p1098.indd   109801/03/19   6:06 PM
# Chunk 8928
StomachRobert E. Roses and Daniel T. Dempsey 26chapterThe stomach stores and facilitates the digestion and absorption of ingested food and helps regulate appetite. Treatable dis-eases of the stomach are common, and it is accessible and rela-tively forgiving of surgical manipulation. To provide accurate diagnosis and rational treatment, the physician must under-stand gastric anatomy, physiology, and pathophysiology; this includes a sound understanding of the mechanical, secretory, and endocrine processes by which the stomach accomplishes its important functions and a familiarity with the common benign and malignant gastric disorders. Important historical milestones1-6 that influenced the contemporary understand-ing of gastric disease and surgical therapy are summarized in Table 26-1.ANATOMYAnatomic Relationships and Gross MorphologyThe stomach is the most proximal abdominal organ of the diges-tive tract (Fig. 26-1).7 The part of the stomach attached to the esophagus is called the cardia. Just proximal to the cardia at the gastroesophageal (GE) junction is the anatomically indistinct but physiologically demonstrable lower esophageal sphincter. At the distal end, the readily apparent pyloric sphincter con-nects the stomach to the proximal duodenum. The stomach is relatively fixed at these points, but the majority of the stomach is quite mobile with the shorter lesser curvature on the right and the longer greater curvature on the left.The superior-most part of the stomach is the distensible fundus, bounded superiorly by the diaphragm and laterally by the spleen. The angle of His is where the fundus meets the left side of the GE junction. Generally, the inferior extent of the fun-dus is considered to be the horizontal plane of the GE junction, where the body (corpus) of the stomach begins. The body of the stomach contains most of the parietal (oxyntic) cells, some of which are also present in the cardia and fundus. At the angularis incisura, the lesser curvature turns rather abruptly to the right, marking the anatomic beginning of the antrum, which comprises the distal 25% to 30% of the stomach.Anatomy	1099Anatomic Relationships and Gross Morphology / 1099Arterial and Venous Blood Supply / 1100Lymphatic Drainage / 1100Innervation  / 1101Histology / 1102Physiology	1105Acid Secretion / 1105Pepsinogen Secretion / 1108Intrinsic Factor / 1108Gastric Mucosal Barrier / 1109Gastric Hormones / 1109Gastric Motility and Emptying / 1110Diagnosis of Gastric Disease	1115Signs and Symptoms / 1115Diagnostic Tests / 1115Helicobacter Pylori Infection	1117Peptic Ulcer Disease	1120Pathophysiology and Etiology / 1121Clinical Manifestations / 1123Diagnosis / 1123Complications / 1124Medical Treatment of Peptic  Ulcer Disease / 1125Surgical Treatment of Peptic  Ulcer Disease / 1127Bleeding Peptic Ulcer / 1131Operation for Bleeding Peptic  Ulcer / 1133Perforated Peptic Ulcer / 1134Obstructing Peptic Ulcer / 1136Intractable or Nonhealing  Peptic Ulcer / 1136Zollinger-Ellison Syndrome / 1136Stress Gastritis and Stress Ulcer	1137Atrophic Gastritis	1138Malignant Neoplasms of   the Stomach	1139Adenocarcinoma / 1139Pathology / 1143Gastric Lymphoma / 1149Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumor / 1149Gastric Neuroendocrine Tumors / 1151Benign Gastric Neoplasms	1152Leiomyoma / 1152Lipoma / 1152Gastroparesis / 1152Massive Upper Gastrointestinal  Bleeding / 1152Isolated Gastric Varices / 1153Hypertrophic Gastropathy  (Ménétrier’s Disease) / 1153Watermelon Stomach (Gastric Antral  Vascular Ectasia) / 1154Dieulafoy’s Lesion / 1154Bezoars/Diverticula / 1154Foreign Bodies / 1154Mallory-Weiss Syndrome / 1155Volvulus / 1155Gastrostomy	1155Postgastrectomy Problems	1156Dumping Syndrome / 1156Diarrhea / 1157Gastric Stasis / 1157Bile Reflux Gastritis and  Esophagitis / 1158Roux Syndrome / 1158Gallstones / 1159Weight Loss / 1159Anemia / 1159Bone Disease / 1159Laparoscopic Gastric   Operations	1159Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   109901/03/19   7:11 PM 1100The liver, colon, spleen, pancreas, and occasionally the kidney, abut the stomach (Fig. 26-2). The left lateral segment of the liver usually obscures part of the anterior stomach. Infe-riorly, the stomach is attached to the transverse colon by the gastrocolic omentum. The lesser curvature is tethered to the liver by the hepatogastric ligament, also referred to as the lesser omentum or pars flaccida. Posterior to the stomach is the lesser omental bursa and the pancreas.Arterial and Venous Blood SupplyThe stomach is the most richly vascularized portion of the ali-mentary tube with ample blood flow and a dense intramural vascular anastomotic network. The large majority of the gastric blood supply is from the celiac axis via four named arteries (Fig. 26-3). The left and right gastric arteries form an anasto-motic arcade along the lesser gastric curvature, and the right and left gastroepiploic arteries form an arcade along the greater gastric curvature. The left gastric artery is consistently the larg-est artery to the stomach and usually arises directly from the celiac trunk and divides into an ascending and descending branch along the lesser gastric curvature. Approximately 20% of the time, the left gastric artery supplies an aberrant vessel that travels in the gastrohepatic ligament (lesser omentum) to the left side of the liver. Rarely, this is the only arterial blood supply to this part of the liver (replaced left hepatic artery), and inadvertent ligation may lead to clinically significant hepatic ischemia. The more common smaller accessory left hepatic artery may be ligated without significant consequences.The second largest artery to the stomach is the right gas-troepiploic artery, which consistently arises from the gastro-duodenal artery behind the first portion of the duodenum. The left gastroepiploic artery arises from the splenic artery, and, together with the right gastroepiploic artery, forms the rich gastroepiploic arcade along the greater curvature. The right gastric artery usually arises from the hepatic artery near the pylorus and hepatoduodenal ligament and runs proximally along the distal stomach. In the fundus along the proximal greater curvature, the short gastric arteries and veins arise from the splenic circulation. There also may be additional vascular branches to the proximal stomach from the phrenic and splenic circulation.The veins draining the stomach generally parallel the arteries. The left gastric (coronary vein) and right gastric veins usually drain into the portal vein, though occasionally the coro-nary vein drains into the splenic vein. The right gastroepiploic vein drains into the superior mesenteric vein near the inferior border of the pancreatic neck, and the left gastroepiploic vein drains into the splenic vein.The richness of the gastric blood supply and its many anastomotic connections have important clinical implications. At least two of the four named gastric arteries may be occluded or ligated without inducing gastric ischemia. This is done rou-tinely when the stomach is mobilized and pedicled on the right gastric and right gastroepiploic vessels to reach into the neck as an esophageal replacement (see Chapter 25) or during sleeve gastrectomy for weight loss when the gastroepiploic arcade is interrupted proximally and distally prior to gastric resection (see Chapter 27). Following radical subtotal gastrectomy dur-ing which the right and left gastric arteries and both gastroepi-ploic arteries are all ligated, the gastric remnant is adequately supplied by short gastric arteries as long as the splenic artery is patent and intact. Angiographic control of gastric bleeding from a deep ulcer or tumor often requires embolization of more than one feeding artery. Because of the rich venous interconnections in the stomach, a transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPSS) can effectively decompress esophagogastric varices in patients with portal hypertension.8,9Lymphatic DrainageGenerally speaking, the gastric lymphatics parallel the blood vessels (Fig. 26-4).10 The cardia and medial half of the corpus commonly drain to nodes along the left gastric and celiac axis. The lesser curvature side of the antrum usually drains to the right gastric and pyloric nodes, while the greater curvature half of the distal stomach drains to the nodes along the right gas-troepiploic chain. The proximal greater curvature side of the stomach usually drains into nodes along the left gastroepiploic or splenic hilum. The nodes along both the greater and lesser Key Points1	Whenever testing suggests Helicobacter pylori infec-tion, treatment should be initiated and eradication  confirmed.2	Lifelong acid suppression should be considered in any patient admitted to a hospital because of peptic ulcer dis-ease. Acid suppressive medication may be equivalent to sur-gical vagotomy in preventing recurrent peptic ulcer or ulcer complications.3	If possible, gastric resection for peptic ulcer is avoided in the asthenic or high-risk patient.4	Though less common in the United States, gastric cancer is a major cause of cancer-related morbidity and mortality worldwide.5	Diagnostic laparoscopy with peritoneal lavage should be considered in the evaluation of clinical stage 2 and 3 patients with gastric cancer.6	Multimodality therapy for gastric cancer, including resec-tion in combination with perioperative chemotherapy or adjuvant chemoradiotherapy is associated with a survival advantage compared to surgery alone.7	Most patients with primary gastric lymphoma can be treated without gastric resection.8	Localized gastrointestinal stromal tumors of the stomach are treated with full thickness excision. Adjuvant (or neo-adjuvant) imatinib is indicated for higher-risk lesions.9	Gastric neuroendocrine tumors may arise in the presence (types 1 and 2) or absence (type 3) of hypergastrinemia. Type 3 gastric neuroendocrine tumors should usually be treated with subtotal gastrectomy and regional lymphadenectomy.10	Roux-en-Y gastrojejunostomy with a large (>50%) proxi-mal gastric remnant should be avoided because marginal ulceration and/or gastric stasis (Roux syndrome) may become problematic.Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   110001/03/19   7:11 PM 1101STOMACHCHAPTER 26curvature commonly drain into the celiac nodal basin. There is a rich anastomotic network of lymphatics that drain the stomach, often in a somewhat unpredictable fashion. Thus, a tumor aris-ing in the distal stomach may give rise to positive lymph nodes in the splenic hilum. The rich intramural plexus of lymphatics and veins accounts for the fact that there can be microscopic evi-dence of malignant cells in the gastric wall at a resection margin that is several centimeters away from palpable malignant tumor. It also helps explain the not infrequent finding of positive lymph nodes, which may be many centimeters away from the primary tumor, with closer nodes that are uninvolved.Not surprisingly, extensive and meticulous lymphadenec-tomy is considered by many surgeons to be an important part of an operation for gastric cancer. Surgeons and pathologists have numbered the primary and secondary lymph node groups to which the stomach drains (see Fig. 26-4).11,12Innervation13The vagus nerves provide the extrinsic parasympathetic innerva-tion to the stomach, and acetylcholine is the most important neu-rotransmitter. From the vagal nucleus in the floor of the fourth cerebral ventricle, the vagus traverses the neck in the carotid sheath and enters the mediastinum, where it gives off the recur-rent laryngeal nerve and divides into several branches around the esophagus. These branches come together again above the esophageal hiatus and form the left (anterior) and right Table 26-1Historic milestones in gastric surgeryDATEEVENTDATEEVENT350 b.c.–  201 a.d. 1363 1586 1600–1700 16881737 1833   1869   1875 1879  1880 1880   1881  1884  1885Existence of gastric ulceration was acknowledged by Diocles of Carystos (350 b.c.), Celsus, and Galen (131–201 a.d.).Guy de Chauliac describes closure of gastric wound.Marcellus Donatus of Mantua describes gastric ulcer at autopsy.Reports of surgeons cutting stomach to remove foreign bodies.Muralto describes duodenal ulcer at autopsy.Morgagni describes both gastric and duodenal ulcer at autopsy.William Beaumont reports data recorded during his care of Alexis St. Martin who developed a gastric fistula from a left upper quadrant musket wound.Maury reportedly performs feeding gastrostomy to palliate esophageal stricture following consultation with Samuel D. Gross.Sidney Jones in London publishes the first successful gastrostomy for feeding.Paen performed distal gastrectomy and gastroduodenostomy. The patient died 5 d later.Rydygier resected a distal gastric cancer, and the patient died 12 h later.Billroth resects distal gastric cancer and performs gastroduodenostomy (Billroth I). Patient Therese Heller recovers and survives 4 mo.Anton Wolfler performs loop gastrojejunostomy to palliate an obstructing distal gastric cancer.Rydygier reports an unsuccessful gastrojejunostomy for benign gastric outlet obstruction.Billroth performs a successful distal gastrectomy and gastrojejunostomy (Billroth II) for gastric cancer.1886188818921902 1891–1913  1920–1950  1943       1952  1953  1955 1957  1980–2000   1990–current 1995–current2000–currentHeineke performs pyloroplasty.Mikulicz performs similar operation.Jaboulay describes bypassing the intact pylorus with gastroduodenostomy.Finney from Baltimore describes pyloroplasty technique.Different techniques of gastrostomy are described by Witzel (1891), Stamm (1894), and Janeway (1913).Subtotal gastrectomy grows popular as an operation for peptic ulcer. Von Haberer and Finsterer proponents.Dragstedt and Owen describe transthoracic truncal vagotomy to treat peptic ulcer disease. By the early 1950s, it is well recognized that some patients developed gastric stasis after this procedure, and transabdominal truncal vagotomy and drainage (pyloroplasty or gastrojejunostomy) become a standard ulcer operation.Farmer and Smithwick describe good results with truncal vagotomy and hemigastrectomy for peptic ulcer.Edwards and Herrington (Nashville) describe truncal vagotomy and antrectomy for peptic ulcer.Zollinger and Ellison describe the eponymous syndrome.Griffith and Harkins (Seattle) describe parietal cell vagotomy (highly selective vagotomy) for the elective treatment of peptic ulcer disease.Japanese surgeons and other surgical groups from East Asia demonstrate that more aggressive lymphadenectomy may improve survival in patients with gastric cancer.Evolving role of laparoscopic techniques in the treatment of surgical gastric disease.Dramatic increase in bariatric operations.Development of natural orifice translumenal endoscopic surgery, such as transgastric appendectomy and peroral pyloromyotomy.Development of robotic gastrectomy.Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   110101/03/19   7:11 PM 1102SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS     PART II(posterior) vagal trunks (mnemonic LARP). Near the GE junc-tion the anterior vagus sends a branch (or branches) to the liver in the gastrohepatic ligament, and continues along the lesser curvature as the anterior nerve of Latarjet (Fig. 26-5). Simi-larly, the posterior vagus sends branches to the celiac plexus and continues along the posterior lesser curvature. The nerves of Latarjet send segmental branches to the body of the stomach before they terminate near the angularis incisura as the “crow’s foot,” sending branches to the antropyloric region. There may be additional branches to the distal stomach and pylorus that travel near the right gastric and/or gastroepiploic arteries. In 50% of patients, there are more than two vagal nerves at the esophageal hiatus. The branch that the posterior vagus sends to the posterior fundus is termed the criminal nerve of Grassi. This branch typically arises above the esophageal hiatus and is easily missed during truncal or highly selective vagotomy (HSV). Vagal fibers originating in the brain synapse with neu-rons in Auerbach’s myenteric plexus and Meissner’s submu-cosal plexus. In the stomach, the vagus nerves affect secretion (including acid), motor function, and mucosal bloodflow and cytoprotection. They also play a role in appetite control and per-haps even mucosal immunity and inflammation.14,15 Most of the axons contained in the vagal trunks are afferent (i.e., carrying stimuli from the viscera to the brain).The extrinsic sympathetic nerve supply to the stomach originates at spinal levels T5 through T10 and travels in the splanchnic nerves to the celiac ganglion. Postganglionic sympa-thetic nerves then travel from the celiac ganglion to the stomach along the blood vessels.Neurons in the myenteric and submucosal plexuses consti-tute the intrinsic nervous system of the stomach. There may be more intrinsic gastric neurons than extrinsic neurons, but their function is poorly understood.The characterization of the vagus as the cholinergic system and the sympathetic system as the adrenergic system of innerva-tion is a misleading oversimplification. Although acetylcholine is an important neurotransmitter mediating vagal function, and epinephrine is important in the sympathetic nerves, both sys-tems (as well as the intrinsic neurons) have various and diverse neurotransmitters, including cholinergic, adrenergic, and pepti-dergic (e.g., substance P and somatostatin).HistologyThere are four distinct layers of the gastric wall: mucosa, sub-mucosa, muscularis propria, and serosa (Fig. 26-6).7 The inner layer of the stomach is the mucosa, which is lined with colum-nar epithelial cells of various types. Beneath the basement mem-brane of the epithelial cells is the lamina propria, which contains connective tissue, blood vessels, nerve fibers, and inflammatory cells. Beneath the lamina propria is a thin muscle layer called the muscularis mucosa, the deep boundary of the mucosal layer of the gut. The epithelium, lamina propria, and muscularis mucosa constitute the mucosa (Fig. 26-7).16 The epithelium of the gastric mucosa is columnar glandular. Scanning electron micrographs show a smooth mucosal carpet punctuated by the openings of the gastric glands or units. The gastric glands are lined with different types of epithelial cells, depending upon their loca-tion in the stomach (Fig. 26-8 and Table 26-2).17,18 There are also endocrine cells present in the gastric glands. Progenitor or stem cells in the isthmus and base of the glands differentiate and BodyFundusEsophagusCardiaPylorusDuodenumPyloric antrum  Lessercurvature GreatercurvatureFigure 26-1. Anatomic regions of the stomach. (Reproduced with permission from Zuidema GD, Yeo CJ: Shackelford’s Surgery of the Alimentary Tract, 5th ed. Vol. II. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier/Saunders; 2002.)Figure 26-2. Anatomic relationships of the stomach. (Reproduced with permission from Zuidema GD, Yeo CJ: Shackelford’s Surgery of the Alimentary Tract, 5th ed. Vol. II. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier/Saunders; 2002.)Liver (left lobe)         Celiac trunk(splenic, gastric, hepatic)Gastrohepatic    omentum    Stomach(posterior wall)SpleenPancreasTransverse    colonLesser omental        spaceGastrocolic   ligamentRight kidneyHepatoduodenal      ligamentGallbladderT lictBrunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   110201/03/19   7:11 PM 1103STOMACHCHAPTER 26replenish sloughed cells on a regular basis. Genetic studies show that there are several different subpopulations of stem cells in the gastric glands and that during conditions of stress even chief cells exhibit the plasticity required to regenerate other types of gastric epithelial cells.19 Throughout the stomach, the luminal carpet consists primarily of mucus-secreting surface epithelial cells (SECs) that extend down into the gland pits for variable distances. These cells also secrete bicarbonate and play an important role in protecting the stomach from injury due to acid, pepsin, and/or ingested irritants. In fact, all epithelial cells of the stomach (except the endocrine cells) contain carbonic anhydrase and are capable of producing bicarbonate.In the cardia, the gastric glands are branched and secrete primarily mucus and bicarbonate, and little acid. In the fundus and body, the glands are more tubular, and the pits are deep. Parietal and chief cells are common in these glands (Fig. 26-9). Histamine-secreting enterochromaffin-like (ECL) cells and somatostatin-secreting D cells are also found. Parietal cells Figure 26-3. Arterial blood supply to the stomach. a. = artery; v. = vein. (Reproduced with permission from Zuidema GD, Yeo CJ: Shackelford’s Surgery of the Alimentary Tract, 5th ed. Vol. II. Philadelphia, PA:  Elsevier/Saunders; 2002.)StomachCeliac a.Short gastric    arteries(vasa brevia)SpleenDescending colonPancreasDuodenumTransverse colonPylorusSup. pancreatic   duodenal a.Abdominal    AortaInferior pancreatic     duodenal a.Hepatic a.Left gastric a.Branchesto greateromentumSplenic a. & v.L. gastroepiploic a.    Sup. mesenteric   a. & v.    Inferior mesenteric a.Ileocolic a.Jejunum21534a4b6128971011Figure 26-4. Lymph node stations draining the stomach according to the Japanese Research Society for Gastric Cancer. Stations 3 to 6 are commonly removed with D1 gastrectomy. Stations 1, 2, and 7 to 12 are commonly removed with D2 gastrectomy. (Reproduced with permis-sion from Hermanek P, Hutter RVP, Sobin LH, et al: TNM Atlas: Illustrated Guide to the TNM/pTNM Classification of Malignant Tumours, 4th ed. Berlin: Springer-Verlag; 1997.)Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   110301/03/19   7:11 PM 1104SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS     PART IIRight vagus n.Hepatic br. left vagusCeliac br. rt. vagusNerve of LaterjetPyloric br.Left vagus n.Figure 26-5. Vagal innervation of the stomach. br. = branch; n. = nerve; rt. = right. (Reproduced with permission from Menguy R: Surgery of Peptic Ulcer. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier/Saunders; 1976.)Surface epitheliumGastric pitsLymphoid noduleLamina propria mucosaSubmucosaSmooth muscle layersSerosaMuscularis mucosaeFigure 26-6. Layers of the gastric wall. (Reproduced with permis-sion from Fawcett DW: Bloom and Fawcett’s Textbook of Histology, 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier/Saunders; 1986.)Figure 26-7. Gastric mucosa. (Used with permission from Emma Furth, MD.)Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   110401/03/19   7:11 PM 1105STOMACHCHAPTER 26secrete acid and intrinsic factor into the gastric lumen, and bicarbonate into the intercellular space. They have a character-istic ultrastructural appearance with secretory canaliculi (deep invaginations of the surface membrane) and cytoplasmic tubulo-vesicles containing the acid-producing apparatus H+/K+-ATPase (proton pump) (see Fig. 26-9). There are numerous mitochon-dria; in fact, the parietal cell is the most mitochondria-rich cell in the body. When the parietal cell is stimulated, the cytoplasmic tubulovesicles fuse with the membrane of the secretory cana-liculus; when acid production ceases, the process is reversed. Arguably, parietal cells produce the only truly essential sub-stance made by the stomach (i.e., intrinsic factor). Parietal cells tend to occupy the midportion of the gastric glands found in the corpus of the stomach.Chief cells (also called zymogenic cells) secrete pep-sinogen I, which is maximally activated at a pH of 2.5. They tend to be clustered toward the base of the gastric glands and have a low columnar shape. Ultrastructurally, chief cells have the characteristics of protein-synthesizing cells: basal granular endoplasmic reticulum, supranuclear Golgi apparatus, and api-cal zymogen granules (Fig. 26-10). When stimulated, the chief cells produce two immunologically distinct proenzyme forms of pepsinogen: predominantly pepsinogen I and some pepsinogen II, most of which is produced by SECs. These proenzymes are activated in an acidic luminal environment.In the antrum, the gastric glands are again more branched and shallow, parietal cells are rare, and gastrin-secreting G cells and somatostatin-secreting D cells are present. A variety of hormone-secreting cells are present in various proportions throughout the gastric mucosa (Fig. 26-11).20 Histologic analy-sis suggests that in the normal stomach, 13% of the epithelial cells are oxyntic (parietal) cells, 44% are chief (zymogenic) cells, 40% are mucous cells, and 3% are endocrine cells. In gen-eral, the antrum produces gastrin but not acid, and the proximal stomach produces acid but not gastrin. The border between the corpus and antrum migrates proximally with age (especially on the lesser curvature side of the stomach).Deep to the muscularis mucosa is the submucosa, which is rich in branching blood vessels, lymphatics, collagen, vari-ous inflammatory cells, and nerve fibers and ganglion cells of Meissner’s autonomic submucosal plexus. The collagen-rich submucosa gives strength to GI anastomoses. The mucosa and submucosa are folded into the grossly visible gastric rugae, which tend to flatten out as the stomach becomes distended.Below the submucosa is the thick muscularis propria (also referred to as the muscularis externa), which consists of an incomplete inner oblique layer, a complete middle circular layer (continuous with the esophageal circular muscle and the circular muscle of the pylorus), and a complete outer longitudinal layer (continuous with the longitudinal layer of the esophagus and duodenum). Within the muscularis propria is the rich network of autonomic ganglia and nerves that make up Auerbach’s myen-teric plexus. Specialized pacemaker cells, the interstitial cells of Cajal (ICC), also are present.The outer layer of the stomach is the serosa, also known as the visceral peritoneum. This layer provides significant tensile strength to gastric anastomoses. When tumors originating in the mucosa penetrate and breach the serosa, microscopic or gross peritoneal metastases are common, presumably from shedding of tumor cells that would not have occurred if the serosa had not been penetrated. In this way, the serosa may be thought of as an outer envelope of the stomach.PHYSIOLOGYThe stomach stores food and facilitates digestion through a variety of secretory and motor functions. Important secretory functions include the production of acid, pepsin, intrinsic factor, mucus, and a variety of GI hormones. Important motor func-tions include food storage (receptive relaxation and accommo-dation), grinding and mixing, controlled emptying of ingested food, and periodic interprandial “housekeeping.”Acid SecretionHydrochloric acid in the stomach hastens both the physical and (with pepsin) the biochemical breakdown of ingested food. In an acidic environment, pepsin and acid facilitate proteolysis. Gastric acid also inhibits the proliferation of ingested patho-gens, which protects against both infectious gastroenteritis and intestinal bacterial overgrowth and helps to maintain a healthy gastrointestinal microbiome.21 Long-term acid suppression with proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) has been associated with an Surface mucous cellsParietal cellsMucous neck cellsArgentaffin cellChief cellsGastric pitIsthmusNeckBaseFigure 26-8. Mammalian gastric gland from the body of the stom-ach. (Reproduced with permission from Ito S, Winchester RJ: The fine structure of the gastric mucosa in the bat, J Cell Biol. 1963 Mar;16(3):541-577.)Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   110501/03/19   7:11 PM 1106SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS     PART IIincreased risk of community-acquired Clostridium difficile coli-tis and other gastroenteritis, presumably because of the absence of this protective germicidal barrier.22,23Parietal Cell. The parietal cell is stimulated to secrete acid (Fig. 26-12) when one or more of three membrane receptor types is stimulated by acetylcholine (from vagally stimulated enteric neurons), gastrin (from G cells), or histamine (from ECL cells).7,24,25 The enzyme H+/K+-ATPase is the parietal cell proton pump. It is stored within the intracellular tubulovesicles and is the final common pathway for gastric acid secretion. When the parietal cell is stimulated, there is a cytoskeletal rearrangement and fusion of the tubulovesicles with the apical membrane of the secretory canaliculus. The heterodimer assembly of the enzyme subunits into the microvilli of the secretory canalicu-lus results in acid secretion, with extracellular potassium being exchanged for cytosolic hydrogen. Although electroneutral, this is an energy-requiring process because the hydrogen is secreted against a gradient of at least 1 million-fold, which explains why the parietal cell is packed with energy producing mito-chondria. During acid production, potassium and chloride are also secreted into the apical secretory canaliculus through sepa-rate channels, providing potassium to exchange for H+ via the  H+/K+-ATPase, and chloride to accompany the secreted hydrogen. At the basolateral membrane, the combined activity of various SCMTVFigure 26-9. Ultrastructural features of the parietal (oxyntic) cell. SC = secretory canaliculus; M = mitochondria; TV = tubulovesicle. (Reproduced with permission from Ming S-C, Goldman H: Pathol-ogy of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 2nd ed. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins; 1998.)ZGGAGERFigure 26-10. Ultrastructural features of the chief (zymogenic) cell. GA = Golgi apparatus; GER = granular endoplasmic reticu-lum; ZG = zymogen granule. (Reproduced with permission from Ming S-C, Goldman H: Pathology of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 2nd ed. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins; 1998.)Table 26-2Epithelial cells of the stomachCELL TYPEDISTINCTIVE ULTRASTRUCTURAL FEATURESMAJOR FUNCTIONSSurface-foveolar mucous cellsApical stippled granules up to 1 μm in diameterProduction of neutral glycoprotein and bicarbonate to form a gel on the gastric luminal surface; neutralization of hydrochloric acidaMucous neck cellHeterogeneous granules 1–2 μm in diameter dispersed throughout the cytoplasmProgenitor cell for all other gastric epithelial cells; glycoprotein production; production of pepsinogens I and IIOxyntic (parietal) cellSurface membrane invaginations (canaliculi); tubulovesicle structures; numerous mitochondriaProduction of hydrochloric acid; production of intrinsic factor; production of bicarbonateChief cellModerately dense apical granules up to 2 μm in diameter; prominent supranuclear Golgi apparatus; extensive basolateral granular endoplasmic reticulumProduction of pepsinogens I and II, and of lipaseCardiopyloric mucous cellMixture of granules like those in mucous neck and chief cells; extensive basolateral granular endoplasmic reticulumProduction of glycoprotein; production of pepsinogen IIEndocrine cellsSee Figure 26-11 aBicarbonate is probably produced by other gastric epithelial cells in addition to surface-foveolar mucous cells.Reproduced with permission from Ming S-C, Goldman H: Pathology of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 2nd ed. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins; 1998.Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   110601/03/19   7:11 PM 1107STOMACHCHAPTER 26cotransporters and ion exchangers accomplishes intracellular pH regulation and electrolyte homeostasis.24The normal human stomach contains approximately 1 billion parietal cells, and total gastric acid production is pro-portional to parietal cell mass. Almost all of the parietal cells are in the proximal 2/3 stomach, though there are some parietal cells found in gastric antral glands. The potent acid-suppressing PPI drugs irreversibly interfere with the function of the H+/K+-ATPase molecule. These agents must be incorporated into the activated enzyme to be effective and thus work best when taken before or during a meal (when the parietal cell is stimulated). When PPI therapy is stopped, acid secretory capability gradu-ally returns (within days) as new H+/K+-ATPase is synthesized.Gastrin, acetylcholine, and histamine stimulate the parietal cell to secrete hydrochloric acid (see Fig. 26-12). Gastrin binds to type B cholecystokinin (CCK2) receptors on ECL cells and stimulates ECL cell histamine release, which binds to H2 recep-tors on the parietal cell. This stimulates adenylatecyclase (via a G-protein–linked mechanism) and increases cAMP which acti-vates protein kinases, leading to increased levels of phospho-proteins and activation of the proton pump. Gastrin also binds to CCK2 receptors on the parietal cell, but this is less important for acid secretion than the gastrin effect on ECL cells. Acetyl-choline from intrinsic neurons binds to M3 muscarinic recep-tors on the parietal cell, which (like gastrin binding to CCK2 receptors) stimulates phospholipase C via a G-protein–linked mechanism leading to increased production of inositol trispho-sphate from membrane bound phospholipids. Inositol trisphos-phate stimulates the release of calcium from intracellular stores, which leads to activation of protein kinases and activation of  H+/K+-ATPase. Somatostatin released from mucosal D cells in the antral and oxcyntic mucosa in response to luminal acid binds to SSTR2 receptors on parietal cells and inhibits acid release directly. Somatostatin also inhibits acid secretion in a paracrine fashion, binding to nearby ECL cells in the oxcyntic mucosa and decreasing histamine release, and binding to nearby antral G cells to inhibit gastrin release.26Physiologic Acid Secretion.27 Food ingestion is the physi-ologic stimulus for acid secretion (Fig. 26-13). The acid secre-tory response that occurs after a meal is traditionally described Oxyntic mucosaOther3%D19%G49%EC29%Other14%D26%EC25%ECL35%Pyloric mucosaFigure 26-11. Endocrine cells of the stomach—proportion by site. D = d cell (somatostatin); EC = enterochromaffin cell; ECL =  enterochromaffin-like cell (histamine); G = g cell (gastrin). (Repro-duced with permission from Feldman M, Friedman LS, Sleisenger MH, et al: Sleisenger and Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease, 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier/Saunders; 2002.)Adenylate cyclaseATPHistamineInterstitiumLumenSomatostatinGi proteinGs proteinIP3PIP2Ca++K+ channelK+ClchannelCl-H+K+CCK8 receptorM3 receptorH+/K+-ATPaseGs proteinActivation ofother kinasescAMPActivatesprotein kinasesGastrinAcetylcholinePLCSomatostatinreceptorH2 receptorGs proteinFigure 26-12. Control of acid secretion in the parietal cell. ATP = adenosine triphosphate; cAMP = cyclic adenosine monophosphate; CCK = cholecystokinin; H2 = histamine 2; IP3 = inositol trisphosphate; PIP2 = phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate; PLC = phospholipase C. (Reproduced with permission from Zuidema GD, Yeo CJ: Shackelford’s Surgery of the Alimentary Tract, 5th ed. Vol. II. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier/Saunders; 2002.)Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   110701/03/19   7:11 PM 1108SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS     PART IIin three phases: cephalic, gastric, and intestinal.28,29 The cephalic or vagal phase begins with the thought, sight, smell, and/or taste of food. These stimuli activate several cortical and hypotha-lamic sites (e.g., tractus solitarius, dorsal motor nucleus, and dorsal vagal complex), and signals are transmitted to the stom-ach by the vagal nerves which stimulate enteric submucosal neurons. Acetylcholine is released, leading to stimulation acid secretion from parietal cells. Vagal stimulation also leads to gas-trin release from antral G cells via CGRP, and sensitizes ECL cells to gastrin.30,31 Although the acid secreted per unit of time in the cephalic phase is greater than in the other two phases, the cephalic phase is shorter. Thus, the cephalic phase accounts for no more than 30% of total acid secretion in response to a meal. Sham feeding (chewing and spitting) stimulates gastric acid secretion only via the cephalic phase, and it results in acid secretion that is about half of that seen in response to IV penta-gastrin or histamine.When food reaches the stomach, the gastric phase of acid secretion begins. This phase lasts until the stomach is empty and accounts for about 60% of the total acid secretion in response to a meal. The gastric phase of acid secretion has several compo-nents. Amino acids and small peptides directly stimulate antral G cells to secrete gastrin, which is carried in the bloodstream to the ECL and parietal cells, stimulating acid secretion in an endo-crine fashion. In addition, proximal gastric distention stimulates acid secretion via a vagovagal reflex arc, which is mitigated by truncal or highly selective vagotomy (HSV). Antral disten-tion also stimulates antral gastrin secretion. Finally, ongoing cephalic vagal input stimulates gastrin release, which in turn stimulates histamine release from ECL cells and acid secretion.The intestinal phase of gastric secretion is poorly under-stood. It is thought to be mediated by a hormone released from the proximal small bowel mucosa in response to luminal chyme. This phase starts when gastric emptying of ingested food begins, and it continues as long as nutrients remain in the proximal small intestine. It accounts for about 10% of meal-induced acid secretion.Interprandial basal acid secretion is 2 to 5 mEq hydrochlo-ric acid per hour, about 10% of maximal acid output (MAO), and it is greater at night. Basal acid secretion probably contrib-utes to the relatively low bacterial counts found in the stomach. Basal acid secretion is reduced 75% to 90% by vagotomy or continuous H2-receptor blockade.The pivotal role that ECL cells play in the regulation of gastric acid secretion is emphasized in Fig. 26-13. The acid stimulatory effect of gastrin is largely mediated by histamine released from mucosal ECL cells. H2-receptor knockout mice do not secrete acid in response to gastrin.24 This explains why the H2-receptor antagonists (H2RAs) are effective inhibitors of acid secretion, even though histamine is only one of three parietal cell stimulants. The mucosal D cell, which releases somatosta-tin, is also an important regulator of acid secretion. Somatostatin inhibits histamine release from ECL cells and gastrin release from antral G cells. The function of D cells can be inhibited by Helicobacter pylori infection, resulting in an exaggerated acid secretory response (see “Helicobacter pylori Infection”).Proton pump inhibitors are potent suppressors of gastric acid secretion. This results in hypergastrinemia and conse-quent ECL stimulation. In patients on long-term PPI (median 5.5 years), the degree of hypergastrinemia does not appear to correlate with the length of treatment.32 Chronic PPI use has been associated with ECL hyperplasia and type 1 gastric neuro-endocrine tumor, but so far there has been no evidence linking these agents to malignant gastric epithelial or neuroendocrine tumors. Gastrin levels return to normal within a few days of PPI cessation, but during this time, some patients may experience gastric hyperacidity and dyspeptic symptoms, which may lead to difficulty in getting patients off the medication.33,34 This is less likely to occur with short-term PPI use and may be amelio-rated by PPI dose tapering and/or initiation of H2 blockers prior to PPI cessation.Pepsinogen SecretionThe most potent physiologic stimulus for pepsinogen secre-tion from chief cells is food ingestion; acetylcholine is the most important mediator. Somatostatin inhibits pepsinogen secre-tion. Pepsinogen I is produced by chief cells in acid producing glands, whereas pepsinogen II is produced by chief cells and by SECs in both acid producing and gastrin producing (i.e., antral) glands. Pepsinogen is cleaved to the active pepsin enzyme in an acidic environment and is maximally active at pH 2.5, and inactive at pH >5, although pepsinogen II may be activated over a wider pH range than pepsinogen I. Pepsin catalyzes the hydro-lysis of proteins and is denatured at alkaline pH. Serum levels of pepsinogen I and II are increased in helicobacter gastritis, so elevated pepsinogen I and II levels and positive helicobacter serology are presumptive evidence of active helicobacter infec-tion. Longstanding helicobacter infection may lead to atrophic gastritis, suggested by decreased pepsinogen I/II ratio (from chief cell loss) and hypergastriemia (from parietal cell loss and hypochlorhydria).35Intrinsic FactorActivated parietal cells secrete intrinsic factor in addition to hydrochloric acid. Presumably the stimulants are similar, but MealVagusD-cellECLcellParietal cellGastrinSomatostatinHistamine++++–––++++AcetylcholineG-cellFigure 26-13. Physiologic control of acid secretion. ECL = enterochromaffin-like. (Reproduced with permission from Zuidema GD, Yeo CJ: Shackelford’s Surgery of the Alimentary Tract, 5th ed. Vol. II. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier/Saunders; 2002.)Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   110801/03/19   7:11 PM 1109STOMACHCHAPTER 26acid secretion and intrinsic factor secretion may not be linked. Intrinsic factor binds to luminal vitamin B12, and the complex is absorbed in the terminal ileum via mucosal receptors. Vitamin B12 deficiency can be life threatening, and patients with total gastrectomy or pernicious anemia (i.e., patients with no pari-etal cells) require B12 supplementation by a nonenteric route. Some patients develop vitamin B12 deficiency following gastric bypass, presumably because there is insufficient intrinsic fac-tor present in the small proximal gastric pouch and oral B12 intake may be decreased. Under normal conditions, a signifi-cant excess of intrinsic factor is secreted, and acid-suppressive medication does not appear to inhibit intrinsic factor production and release.Gastric Mucosal BarrierThe stomach’s durable resistance to autodigestion by caustic hydrochloric acid and active pepsin is intriguing. Some of the important elements of gastric barrier function and cytoprotection are listed in Table 26-3.36,37 When these defenses break down, ulceration occurs. A variety of factors are important in maintain-ing an intact gastric mucosal layer.38 The mucus and bicarbonate secreted by SECs form an unstirred mucous gel with a favorable pH gradient. Cell membranes and tight junctions prevent hydro-gen ions from gaining access to the interstitial space. Hydrogen ions that do break through are buffered by the alkaline tide cre-ated by basolateral bicarbonate secretion from stimulated pari-etal cells. Any sloughed or denuded SECs are rapidly replaced by migration of adjacent cells, a process known as restitution. Mucosal blood flow plays a crucial role in maintaining a healthy mucosa, providing nutrients and oxygen for the cellular func-tions involved in cytoprotection. During acid secretion, there is a tremendous gradient favoring the movement of hydrogen ions from the lumen to the interstitium. This “back-diffused” hydrogen is buffered and rapidly removed by the rich blood supply. When “barrier breakers” such as bile or aspirin lead to increased back-diffusion of hydrogen ions from the lumen into the lamina propria and submucosa, there is a protective increase in mucosal blood flow. If this protective response is blocked, gross ulceration can occur. Important mediators of these protec-tive mechanisms include prostaglandins, nitric oxide, intrinsic nerves, and peptides (e.g., calcitonin gene-related peptide, gas-trin-releasing peptide [GRP], gastrin, and heat shock proteins). Sucralfate acts locally to enhance mucosal defenses. Protec-tive reflexes involve afferent sensory neurons, and they can be blocked by the application of topical anesthetics to the gastric mucosa, or the experimental destruction of the afferent sensory nerves. In addition to these local defenses, there are important protective factors in saliva, duodenal secretions, and pancreatic or biliary secretions.Gastric Hormones13,39The stomach is quite an elegant endocrine organ. It is the source of important peptides which work in an autocrine (EGF and surface epithelial cells, TGF and parietal cells), paracrine (somatostatin), endocrine (gastrin), and/or neurocrine (ghrelin) fashion.Gastrin. Gastrin is produced by antral G cells and is the major hormonal stimulant of acid secretion during the gastric phase predominantly via an endocrine effect on histamine generating ECL cells and to a lesser extent via a direct effect on parietal cells. A variety of molecular forms exist: big gastrin (34 amino acids; G34), little gastrin (17 amino acids; G17), and mini-gastrin (14 amino acids; G14). The large majority of gastrin released by the human antrum is G17. The biologically active pentapeptide sequence at the C-terminal end of gastrin is identical to that of CCK. Luminal peptides and amino acids are the most potent stimulants of gastrin release, and luminal acid is the most potent inhibitor of gastrin secretion. The latter effect is predominantly mediated in a paracrine fashion by somatostatin released from antral D cells. Gastrin-stimulated acid secretion is significantly blocked by H2 antagonists, suggesting that the principal media-tor of gastrin-stimulated acid production is histamine from mucosal ECL cells and not direct stimulation of parietal cells by gastrin (see Fig. 26-13). In fact, chronic hypergastrinemia is associated with hyperplasia of gastric ECL cells and, rarely, gastric type I gastric neuroendocrine tumors (type I gastric car-cinoid). Gastrin is trophic to gastric parietal cells and to other GI mucosal cells including gastric stem cells. It also is a regulator of gastric cellular proliferation, migration, invasion, apoptosis and angiogenesis.40 Mucosal biopsies of the gastric body from patients with gastrinoma show a thick mucosa with excess pari-etal cells, while similar biopsies in patients years after antrec-tomy (i.e., low gastrin state) show thin mucosa and decreased parietal cells. In animal studies, gastrin administration has been shown to stimulate the growth of established colon cancers and to cause pancreatic acinar cell hyperplasia.41 Important causes of hypergastrinemia include pernicious anemia, acid-suppressive medication, gastrinoma, retained antrum following distal gas-trectomy and Billroth II surgery, and vagotomy.42,43Ghrelin. Ghrelin, first described in 1999, is a small peptide that is produced mainly in the stomach.44,45 It is produced by specialized P/D1 endocrine cells in gastric oxyntic glands. Ninety percent of the body’s ghrelin stores are in the stomach and duodenum. Ghrelin is a potent secretagogue of pituitary growth hormone and a weak secretogogue for ACTH and pro-lactin. It appears to be a major orexigenic regulator of appetite. Ghrelin crosses the blood brain barrier and stimulates appetite via hypothalamic receptors. It also stimulates appetite periph-erally by stimulating vagal afferent fibers in the gastric wall. Table 26-3Important components and mediators of mucosal defenses in the stomachComponentsMucous barrierBicarbonate secretionEpithelial barrier Hydrophobic phospholipids Tight junctions RestitutionMicrocirculation (reactive hyperemia)Afferent sensory neuronsMediatorsProstaglandinsNitric oxideEpidermal growth factorCalcitonin gene-related peptideHepatocyte growth factorHistamineGastrin-releasing peptideBrunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   110901/03/19   7:11 PM 1110SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS     PART IIWhen ghrelin is elevated, appetite is stimulated, and when it is suppressed, appetite is decreased. Typically, ghrelin levels are elevated before a meal and decreased postprandially. Levels are high during starvation and decreased during hyperglycemia. Obesity and insulin resistance is associated with low ghrelin levels, but resection of the primary source of this hormone (i.e., the stomach) may partly account for the anorexia and weight loss seen in some patients following gastric resection including sleeve gastrectomy (Fig. 26-14).46-48 The effect of RYGBP on ghrelin physiology is controversial. This very effective weight loss procedure has been shown by some investigators to be asso-ciated with suppression of plasma ghrelin levels (and appetite) in humans (Fig. 26-15A).49,50Other groups have failed to show a significant decrease in ghrelin levels following gastric bypass but have found such decreases following sleeve gastrectomy, another effective weight loss operation (Fig. 26-15B).50 Possibly, subtle differ-ences in operative technique, patient selection, or experimental (including assay) conditions account for the disparate results of studies on the effect of bariatric surgery on ghrelin levels in obese patients. Interestingly the two common metabolites of ghrelin have different physiologic effects: acyl-ghrelin increases gastric emptying and appetite while deacyl ghrelin decreases gastric emptying and induces satiety.51 Obviously appetite con-trol is complex with redundant and overlapping orexigenic and anorexigenic pathways and signals.39,52Somatostatin. Somatostatin is produced by D cells located throughout the gastric mucosa. The predominant form in humans is somatostatin 14, though somatostatin 28 is present as well. The major stimulus for somatostatin release is antral acidification; acetylcholine from vagal nerve fibers inhibits its release. Somatostatin inhibits acid secretion from parietal cells and gastrin release from G cells. It also decreases histamine release from ECL cells. The proximity of the D cells to these target cells suggests that the primary effect of somatostatin is mediated in a paracrine fashion, but an endocrine (i.e., blood-stream) effect also is possible.Gastrin-Releasing Peptide. GRP is the mammalian equiva-lent of bombesin, a hormone discovered more than two decades ago in an extract of skin from a frog. In the antrum, GRP stimu-lates both gastrin and somatostatin release by binding to recep-tors on the G and D cells. There are nerve terminals ending near the mucosa in the gastric body and antrum, which are rich in GRP immunoreactivity. When GRP is given peripherally, it stimulates acid secretion, but when it is given centrally into the cerebral ventricles of animals, it inhibits acid secretion, appar-ently via a pathway involving the sympathetic nervous system.Leptin. Leptin is a protein primarily synthesized in adipocytes. It is also made by chief cells in the stomach, the main source of leptin in the GI tract.39,53 Leptin works at least in part via vagally mediated pathways to decrease food intake in animals. Not surprisingly, leptin, a satiety signal hormone, and ghrelin, a hunger signal hormone, are both synthesized in the stomach, an organ increasingly recognized as central to the mechanisms of appetite control.39,52Autocrine Proteins. Gastric surface epithelial cells secrete a variety of proteins that are important regulators of SEC health, including trefoil factor family proteins and heat shock pro-teins.38 Parietal cells may also be influenced by molecules they secrete including transforming growth factor-α.Gastric Motility and EmptyingGastric motor function has several purposes.43,54-56 Interprandial motor activity clears the stomach of undigested debris, sloughed cells, and mucus. When feeding begins, the stomach relaxes to accommodate the meal. Regulated motor activity then breaks down the food into small particles and controls the output into the duodenum. The stomach accomplishes these functions by coordinated smooth muscle relaxation and contraction of the various gastric segments (proximal, distal, and pyloric). Smooth muscle myoelectric potentials are translated into muscular activity, which is modulated by extrinsic and intrinsic innerva-tion and hormones. The mechanisms by which gastric distention is translated into a neurohormonal satiety signal have only been partially elucidated.39,52Intrinsic Gastric Innervation. The extrinsic parasympa-thetic and sympathetic gastric innervation was discussed pre-viously in “Innervation.” The intrinsic innervation consists of ganglia and nerves that constitute the enteric nervous system (Fig. 26-16).57 There are a variety of neurotransmitters that effect gastric smooth muscle; these are generally grouped as excitatory (augment muscular activity) and inhibitory (decrease muscular activity). Important excitatory neurotransmitters include acetylcholine, the tachykinins, substance P, and neu-rokinin A. Important inhibitory neurotransmitters include nitric oxide (NO) and vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP). Serotonin has been shown to modulate both contraction and relaxation. A variety of other molecules affect motility, including GRP, hista-mine, neuropeptide Y, norepinephrine, and endogenous opioids.Specialized cells in the muscularis propria also are impor-tant modulators of GI motility. These cells, called interstitial cells of Cajal, are distinguishable histologically from neurons and myocytes and appear to amplify both cholinergic excitatory 300200Plasma ghrelin (fmol/mL)100NormalcontrolsGastrectomizedpatients0*Figure 26-14. Ghrelin levels are decreased after gastrectomy. (Reproduced with permission from Ariyasu H, Takaya K, Tagami T, et al: Stomach is a major source of circulating ghrelin, and feed-ing state determines plasma ghrelin-like immunoreactivity levels in humans, J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Oct;86(10):4753-4758.)Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   111001/03/19   7:11 PM 1111STOMACHCHAPTER 26Figure 26-15. A and B. Ghrelin secretion after bariatric surgery. Some investigators have suggested that ghrelin secretion is dramatically decreased after gastric bypass. Other groups have shown statistically insig-nificant changes in ghrelin levels after gastric bypass, (RYGBP) but significant decreases after sleeve gastrectomy (SG). A. green = gastric bypass; blue = obese controls; red = normal weight controls; B. blue = fasting; pink = postprandial. B. Top = RYGBP; B bottom = SG. (A, Repro-duced with permission from Cummings DE, Weigle DS, Frayo RS, et al: Plasma ghre-lin levels after diet-induced weight loss or gastric bypass surgery, N Engl J Med. 2002 May 23;346(21):1623-1630. B, Reproduced with permission from Karamanakos SN, Vagenas K, Kalfarentzos F, et al: Weight loss, appetite suppression, and changes in fasting and postprandial ghrelin and peptide-YY levels after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass and sleeve gastrectomy: A prospec-tive, double blind study, Ann Surg. 2008 Mar;247(3):401-407.)Plasma ghrelin level (pg/mL)Detection limitTime6 a.m.8 a.m.10 a.m.noon2 p.m.4 p.m.6 p.m.8 p.m.10 p.m.080100200300400500600700800BreakfastLunchDinnerA1200P = 0.06P = 0.15P = 0.16P = 0.13P = 0.01P = 0.03P = 0.01P = 0.0310008006004002000PreGhrelin (pg/mL)Ghrelin (pg/mL)3Time (months)Time (months)612Pre36129008007006005004003002001000Band nitrergic inhibitory input to the smooth muscle of the stom-ach and intestine.58 They are thought to be the cell of origin for gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs), which are the most common mesenchymal neoplasms in the GI tract.Segmental Gastric Motility.13,58,59 In general, the proximal stomach serves a short-term food storage function and helps regulate basal intragastric tone, and the distal stomach mixes and grinds the food. The pylorus helps the latter process when Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   111101/03/19   7:11 PM 1112SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS     PART IIclosed, facilitating retropulsion of the solid food bolus back into the body of the stomach for additional breakdown. The pylorus opens intermittently to allow metered emptying of liquids and small solid particles into the duodenum.Most of the motor activity of the proximal stomach con-sists of slow tonic contractions and relaxations, lasting up to  5 minutes. This activity is the main determinant of basal intra-gastric pressure, an important determinant of liquid empty-ing. Rapid phasic contractions may be superimposed on the slower tonic motor activity. When food is ingested, intragastric pressure falls as the proximal stomach relaxes. This proximal relaxation is mediated by two important vagovagal reflexes: receptive relaxation and gastric accommodation. Receptive relaxation refers to the reduction in gastric tone associated with the act of swallowing. This occurs before the food reaches the stomach and can be reproduced by mechanical stimulation of the pharynx or esophagus. Gastric accommodation refers to the proximal gastric relaxation associated with distention of the stomach.60 Accommodation is mediated through stretch recep-tors in the gastric wall and does not require esophageal or pha-ryngeal stimulation. Initially, as the meal enters the stomach, there is a drop in intragastric pressure mediated by nitric oxide. As the meal progresses, the intragastric pressure rises, parallel with the onset of satiety. Interestingly, satiety does not seem to be associated with any specific level of intragastric pressure. Obese patients have a delayed onset of satiety, so an obvious hypothesis to be tested is that a pharmacologic-induced increase in gastric tone leads to increased satiety and decreased food intake in this patient group.60 Because receptive relaxation and accommodation are mediated by afferent and efferent vagal fibers, they are significantly altered by truncal and highly selec-tive vagotomy. Both these operations result in decreased gastric compliance, shifting the volume/pressure curve to the left. Pre-sumably for any given amount of food ingested, the intragastric pressure is higher, and perhaps in some patients the onset of satiety is sooner. This may be one explanation for weight loss associated with vagotomy,61 and it also helps explain acceler-ated liquid gastric emptying postvagotomy, which likely con-tributes to dumping symptoms in some patients.NO and VIP are the principal mediators of proximal gas-tric relaxation. But a variety of other agents increase proximal gastric relaxation and compliance, including dopamine, gastrin, CCK, secretin, GRP, and glucagon. Proximal gastric tone also is decreased by duodenal distention, colonic distention, and ileal perfusion with glucose (ileal brake).The distal stomach breaks up solid food and is the main determinant of gastric emptying of solids. Slow waves of myo-electric depolarization sweep down the distal stomach at a rate of about three per minute. These waves originate from the proxi-mal gastric pacemaker, high on the greater curvature.62 The pac-ing cells appear to be the interstitial cells of Cajal, which have been shown to have a similar function in the small intestine and colon. Most of these myoelectric waves are below the thresh-old for smooth muscle contraction in the quiescent state and thus are associated with negligible changes in pressure. Neural and/or hormonal input, which increases the plateau phase of the action potential, can trigger muscle contraction, resulting in a peristaltic wave associated with the electrical slow wave and of the same frequency (three per minute) (Fig. 26-17). There are measurable abnormalities in gastric slow wave activity in disor-ders of gastric motility such as gastroparesis, but reliable elec-trogastrogaphy to aid in the diagnosis and management of these problems is not yet a clinical reality. It is likely that implantable gastric pacemakers benefit some patients with gastroparesis by favorably impacting this myoelectric coupling, normalizing gas-tric slow wave patterns.During fasting, distal gastric motor activity is controlled by the migrating motor complex (MMC), the “gastrointesti-nal housekeeper” (Fig. 26-18). The purported function of the MMC is to sweep along any undigested food, debris, sloughed cells, and mucus after the fed phase of digestion is complete. The MMC lasts approximately 100 minutes (longer at night, shorter during daytime) and is divided into four phases. Phase I (about half the length of the entire cycle) is a period of relative motor inactivity. High-amplitude muscular contractions do not occur in phase I of the MMC. Phase II (about 25% of the entire MMC cycle) consists of some irregular, high-amplitude, gener-ally nonpropulsive contractions. Phase III, a period of intense, Figure 26-16. Enteric nervous sys-tem. (Reproduced with permission from Friedman SL, McQuaid KR, Grendell JH: Current Diagnosis and Treatment in Gastroenterology, 2nd ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Education; 2003.)Parasympathetic  (vagal) nerveMesenteryPerivascular  sympathic    nerveMuscularis externa    (longitudinal)Muscularis externa       (circular)Subepethelial     plexusMuscularis  mucosaSubmucosaVillusIntestinal  lumenDeep muscularis        plexusSerosaTertiary branchSecondary   branchGanglionSubmucosal      plexusMyenteric   plexusBrunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   111201/03/19   7:11 PM 1113STOMACHCHAPTER 26regular (about three per minute), propulsive contractions, only lasts about 5 to 10 minutes. Most phase III complexes of the GI MMC begin in the stomach, and the frequency approximates that of the myoelectric gastric slow wave. Phase IV is a transi-tion period.Neurohormonal control of the MMC is poorly understood, but it appears that different phases are regulated by different mechanisms. For example, vagotomy abolishes phase II of the gastric MMC but has little influence on phase III that persists even in the autotransplanted stomach, totally devoid of extrinsic neural input. This suggests that phase III is regulated by intrin-sic nerves and/or hormones. Indeed, the initiation of phase III of the MMC in the distal stomach corresponds temporally to elevation in serum levels of motilin, a hormone produced in the duodenal mucosa. Resection of the duodenum abolishes dis-tal gastric phase III in dogs, and resection of the duodenum in humans (e.g., with pancreaticoduodenectomy, the Whipple pro-cedure) commonly results in early postoperative delayed gastric emptying. There are clearly motilin receptors on gastric smooth muscle and nerves. Other modulators of gastric MMC activ-ity include NO, endogenous opioids, intrinsic cholinergic and adrenergic nerves, and duodenal pH. The onset of MMC phase III  signals the return of hunger in humans, but oddly ghrelin, a major orexigenic hormone, appears to have little to do with phase III.63Feeding abolishes the MMC and leads to the fed motor pattern. The fed motor pattern of gastric activity starts within 10 minutes of food ingestion and persists until all the food has left the stomach. The neurohormonal initiator of this change is unknown, but CCK and the vagus appear to play some role since sham feeding transiently induces antral motor activity resembling the fed motor pattern which is blocked by the CCK receptor antagonist loxiglumide. Gastric motility during the fed pattern resembles phase II of the MMC, with irregular but con-tinuous phasic contractions of the distal stomach. During the fed state, about half of the myoelectric slow waves are associated with strong higher frequency distal gastric contractions. Some are prograde and some are retrograde, serving to mix and grind the solid components of the meal. The magnitude of gastric con-tractions and the duration of the pattern are influenced by the consistency and composition of the meal.The pylorus functions as an effective regulator of gastric emptying and an effective barrier to duodenogastric reflux. Bypass, transection, or resection of the pylorus may lead to uncontrolled gastric emptying of food and the dumping syn-drome (see “Postgastrectomy Problems”). Pyloric dysfunction IntracellularrecordingTensionQuiescentStimulated0 mv0 5 g -70 1122Figure 26-17. The relationship between intracellular electrical activity and muscle cell contraction. Note that contractile activity is always associated with electrical activity, but the converse is not so. During mechanical quiescence, there are regular depolarizations that do not reach threshold. In the stimulated state, the threshold for contraction is reached, and motor activity is demonstrable. (Reproduced with permission from Kim CH, Malagelada JR: Electrical activity of the stomach: clinical implications, Mayo Clin Proc. 1986 Mar;61(3):205-210.)Figure 26-18. Migrating motor complex, the fasting pattern of GI activity. During phase III of the migrating motor complex, effective peri-staltic waves progress from the stomach to the distal small intestine. (Reproduced with permis-sion from Rees WD, Malagelada JR, Miller LJ,  et al: Human interdigestive and postprandial gas-trointestinal motor and gastrointestinal hormone patterns, Dig Dis Sci. 1982 Apr;27(4):321-329.)AntrumProximal duodenumDistal duodenumJejunum1 min100 mm   Hg100 mm   Hg100 mm   Hg100 mm   HgPhase IIPhase IIIPhase IVPhase IBrunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   111301/03/19   7:11 PM 1114SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS     PART IIor disruption may also result in uncontrolled entry of duode-nal contents into the stomach. Perfusion of the duodenum with lipids, glucose, amino acids, hypertonic saline, or hydrochloric acid results in closure of the pylorus and decreased transpylo-ric flow. Ileal perfusion with fat has the same effect. A variety of neurohumoral pathways are involved with these physiologic responses, and there is evidence that different pathways may be involved for different stimuli.The pylorus is readily apparent grossly as a thick ring of muscle and connective tissue. The density of nerve tissue in the pyloric smooth muscle is several folds higher than in the antrum, with increased numbers of neurons staining positive for substance P, neuropeptide Y, VIP, and galanin. Interstitial cells of Cajal are closely associated with pyloric myocytes, and the myoelectric slow wave of the pylorus has the same frequency as that seen in the distal stomach. The motor activity of the pylo-rus is both tonic and phasic. During phase III of the MMC, the pylorus is open as gastric contents are swept into the duodenum. During the fed phase, the pylorus is closed most of the time. It relaxes intermittently, usually in synchronization with lower-amplitude, minor antral contractions. The higher-amplitude, more major antral contractions are usually met with a closed pylorus, facilitating retropulsion and further grinding of food.Modulation of pyloric motor activity is complex. There is evidence for both inhibitory and excitatory vagal pathways. Some contractile vagal effects are mediated by opioid pathways because they are blocked by naloxone. Electrical stimulation of the duodenum causes the pylorus to contract, whereas electrical stimulation of the antrum causes pyloric relaxation. Nitric oxide is an important mediator of pyloric relaxation. Other molecules that may play a physiologic role in controlling pyloric smooth muscle include serotonin, VIP, prostaglandin E1, and galanin (pyloric relaxation); and histamine, CCK, and secretin (pyloric contraction).Gastric Emptying.13 The control of gastric emptying is com-plex. In general, liquid emptying is faster than solid emptying. Osmolarity, acidity, caloric content, nutrient composition, and particle size are important modulators of gastric emptying. Stimulation of duodenal osmoreceptors, glucoreceptors, and pH receptors clearly inhibits gastric emptying by a variety of neurohumoral mechanisms. CCK has been consistently shown to inhibit gastric emptying at physiologic doses (Fig. 26-19). Recently, it has been noted that the anorexigenic hormone leptin, secreted largely by fat but also by gastric mucosa, inhib-its gastric emptying, perhaps through the same pathway as CCK (which also has properties of a satiety hormone). The orexigenic hormone ghrelin has the opposite effect.Liquid Emptying. The gastric emptying of water or isotonic saline follows first-order kinetics, with a half emptying time around 12 minutes. Thus, if one drinks 200 mL of water, about 100 mL enters the duodenum by 12 minutes, whereas if one drinks 400 mL of water, about 200 mL enters the duodenum by 12 minutes. This emptying pattern of liquids is modified consid-erably as the caloric density, osmolarity, and nutrient composi-tion of the liquid changes (Fig. 26-20). Up to an osmolarity of about 1 M, liquid emptying occurs at a rate of about 200 kcal per hour. Duodenal osmoreceptors and hormones (e.g., secretin and VIP) are important modulators of liquid gastric emptying. Generally, liquid emptying is delayed in the supine position.Traditionally, liquid emptying has been attributed to the activity of the proximal stomach, but it is probably more complicated than previously thought. Clearly, receptive relax-ation and gastric accommodation play a role in gastric empty-ing of liquids. Patients with a denervated (e.g., vagotomized), resected, or plicated (e.g., fundoplication) proximal stomach have decreased gastric compliance and may show accelerated gastric emptying of liquids.Some observations suggest an active role for the distal stomach in liquid emptying. For instance, even if the proximal intragastric pressure is lower than duodenal pressure, normal gastric emptying of liquids can occur. Also, diabetic patients CCK (µg/kg)0.25Low-fat dietHight-fat diet0102030405060700.51.02.0% Suppression of gastric emptyingFigure 26-19. Cholecystokinin (CCK) inhibits gastric emptying. (Reproduced with permission from Covasa M, Ritter RC: Adapta-tion to high-fat diet reduces inhibition of gastric emptying by CCK and intestinal oleate, Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2000 Jan;278(1):R166-R170.)7006005004003001002000Residual gastric volume (mL)Time (min)806040200Figure 26-20. Nutrient composition and caloric density affect liquid gastric emptying. Glucose solution (purple circles), the least calorically dense, emptied the fastest. Other more calorically dense solutions, such as milk protein (green triangles) and pep-tide hydrolysates (red circles and blue triangles), emptied slower. (Reproduced with permission from Calbet JA, MacLean DA. Role of caloric content on gastric emptying in humans, J Physiol. 1997 Jan 15;498 (Pt 2):553-559.)Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   111401/03/19   7:11 PM 1115STOMACHCHAPTER 26may have normal proximal gastric motor function and pro-foundly delayed gastric emptying of liquids. Indeed, antral contractile activity does correlate with liquid gastric emptying, and this distal gastric activity appears to vary with the nutrient composition and caloric content of the liquid meal. Depend-ing on the circumstances, distal gastric motor activity can pro-mote or inhibit gastric emptying of liquids. Distal gastrectomy and pyloric stenting both obviously interfere with distal gastric motor activity, and both accelerate the initial rapid phase of liq-uid gastric emptying.Solid Emptying. Normally, the half-time of solid gastric emp-tying is less than 2 hours. Unlike liquids, which display an initial rapid phase followed by a slower linear phase of emptying, sol-ids have an initial lag phase during which little emptying of sol-ids occurs. It is during this phase that much of the grinding and mixing occurs. A linear emptying phase follows, during which the smaller particles are metered out to the duodenum. Solid gastric emptying is a function of meal particle size, caloric con-tent, and composition (especially fat). When liquids and solids are ingested together, the liquids empty first. Solids are stored in the fundus and delivered to the distal stomach at constant rates for grinding. Liquids also are sequestered in the fundus, but they appear to be readily delivered to the distal stomach for early emptying. The larger the solid component of the meal, the slower the liquid emptying. Patients bothered by dumping syn-drome are advised to limit the amount of liquid consumed with the solid meal, taking advantage of this effect. Three prokinetic (metoclopramide, erythromycin, domperidone) may be used to treat delayed gastric emptying. Typical doses and mechanism of action are shown in Table 26-4.DIAGNOSIS OF GASTRIC DISEASESigns and SymptomsThe most common symptoms of gastric disease are pain, weight loss, early satiety, and anorexia. Nausea, vomiting, bloating, and anemia also are frequent complaints. Several of these symptoms (pain, bloating, nausea, and early satiety) are often described by physicians as dyspepsia, synonymous with the common nonmedical term indigestion. Common causes of dyspepsia include gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), helicobacter gastritis, and other disorders of the stomach, gallbladder, and pancreas. Although none of the aforementioned symptoms alone is specific for gastric disease, when elicited in the con-text of a careful history and physical examination, they point to a differential diagnosis, which can be refined with certain tests. Early endoscopy should be considered in patients present-ing with recent onset of alarm symptoms (weight loss, anemia, dysphagia, vomiting) particularly those over 55 years of age (Table 26-5).Diagnostic TestsEsophagogastroduodenoscopy. Esophagogastroduodenos-copy (EGD) is a safe and accurate outpatient procedure per-formed under conscious sedation.64 Smaller flexible scopes with excellent optics and a working channel are easily passed trans-nasally in the unsedated patient. Following an 8-hour fast, the flexible scope is advanced under direct vision into the esopha-gus, stomach, and duodenum. The fundus and GE junction are inspected by retroflexing the scope. To rule out cancer with a high degree of accuracy, all patients with gastric ulcer diag-nosed on upper GI series or found at EGD should have multiple biopsy specimens of the base and rim of the lesion. Brush cytol-ogy also should be considered. Gastritis should be biopsied both for histologic examination and assessment (see discussion on gastritis in “Helicobacter Pylori Infection”) and for a tissue ure-ase test and histologic evaluation to rule out the presence of H pylori. If Helicobacter infection is detected, it should be treated because of the etiologic association with peptic ulcers, mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT), and gastric cancer; in addition, eradication may ameliorate symp-toms. The most serious complications of EGD are perforation (which is rare, but can occur anywhere from the cervical esoph-agus to the duodenum), aspiration, and respiratory depression from excessive sedation. Although EGD is a more sensitive test than double-contrast upper GI series, these modalities should be considered complementary rather than mutually exclusive.Barium Upper GI Study. Plain abdominal X-rays may be helpful in the diagnosis of gastric perforation (pneumoperi-toneum) or delayed gastric emptying (large air-fluid level). Double-contrast upper GI series may be better than EGD at elucidating gastric diverticula, fistula, tortuosity, stricture loca-tion, and size or morphology of hiatal hernia.65 Although there are radiologic characteristics of ulcers that suggest the pres-ence or absence of malignancy, gastric ulcers always require adequate biopsy.Computed Tomographic Scanning and Magnetic Resonance Imaging. Usually, significant gastric disease can be diag-nosed without these sophisticated imaging studies. However, one or the other should be part of the routine staging work-up for patients with a malignant gastric tumor. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may prove clinically useful as a quantitative test for gastric emptying, and it may even hold some promise for the 1Table 26-4Drugs that accelerate gastric emptyingAGENTTYPICAL ADULT DOSEMECHANISM OF ACTIONMetoclopramide10 mg PO four times a dayDopamine antagonistErythromycin250 mg PO four times a dayMotilin agonistDomperidone10 mg PO four times a dayDopamine antagonistTable 26-5Alarm symptoms that indicate the need for upper endoscopyAge >55 years with new onset dyspepsiaUnintentional weight lossPersistent or recurrent vomitingProgressive dysphagiaRecent onset odynophagiaUnexplained iron deficiency anemia or GI bleedingPalpable abdominal mass or lymphadenopathyFamily history of upper gastrointestinal cancerBrunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   111501/03/19   7:11 PM 1116SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS     PART IIanalysis of myoelectric derangements in patients with gastropa-resis. Virtual gastroscopy using multi detector CT scan or MRI is not yet widely used, but these techniques may prove useful for screening and staging of gastric disease66-68 (Fig. 26-21). CTA or MRA is useful in evaluating the blood supply to the stomach after endovascular treatment of aortic and/or visceral arterial disease or in patients with previous upper abdominal operation in whom gastric conduit construction is contemplated, e.g., with esophagectomy.Arteriography can be helpful in the occasional poor-risk patient with exsanguinating gastric hemorrhage, in the patient with occult gastric bleeding, or when CTA or MRA is inconclu-sive in delineating vascular anatomy.Endoscopic Ultrasound. Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) is useful in the evaluation and management of gastric mass lesions.69-71 Local staging of gastric adenocarcinoma with EUS is quite accurate, and this modality can be used to plan therapy. At many centers, patients with transmural and/or node positive adenocarcinoma of the stomach are considered for preoperative (neoadjuvant) chemoradiation therapy. EUS is the best way to clinically stage these patients locoregion-ally. Suspicious nodes can be sampled with EUS-guided endoscopic needle biopsy. Malignant tumors that are confined to the mucosa on EUS may be amenable to endoscopic muco-sal resection (EMR). EUS also can be used to assess tumor response to chemotherapy. Submucosal masses are commonly discovered during routine EGD. Large submucosal masses should be resected unless benign pathology is a certainty, but observation may be appropriate for some small submucosal masses (e.g., lipoma or leiomyoma). There are endoscopic characteristics of benign and malignant mesenchymal tumors, and thus, EUS can provide reassurance, but no guarantee, that small lesions under observation are probably benign. Thus, EUS-guided needle biopsy should be considered. Submucosal varices also can be assessed by EUS.Gastric Secretory Analysis. Analysis of gastric acid output requires gastric intubation, and it is performed infrequently nowadays. This test may be useful in the evaluation of patients with hypergastrinemia, including the Zollinger-Ellison syn-drome (ZES), patients with refractory ulcer or GERD, and patients with recurrent ulcer after operation. Historically, gas-tric analysis was performed most commonly to test for the ade-quacy of vagotomy in postoperative patients with recurrent or persistent ulcer. Now this can be done by assessing peripheral ABCDFigure 26-21. Conventional double-contrast barium study (A) shows a focal protruding mass (arrow) on the gastric fundus. Axial com-puted tomographic scan (B) also shows a protruding polyp (arrow). The three-dimensional computed tomographic gastrographic images in the transparent (C) mode shows an elevated lesion on the gastric fundus (arrow). Photograph of the total gastrectomy specimen (D) shows a well-demarcated polypoid mass (arrow); this lesion was confirmed as early gastric carcinoma type I on microscopic examination (not shown). (Reproduced with permission from Shin KS, Kim SH, Han JK, et al: Three-dimensional MDCT gastrography compared with axial CT for the detection of early gastric cancer, J Comput Assist Tomogr. 2007 Sep-Oct;31(5):741-749.)Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   111601/03/19   7:11 PM 1117STOMACHCHAPTER 26pancreatic polypeptide levels in response to sham feeding.72 A 50% increase in pancreatic polypeptide within 30 minutes of sham feeding suggests intact vagal function.Normal basal acid output (BAO) is greater than 5 mEq/h. MAO is the average of the two final stimulated 15-minute periods and is usually 10 to 15 mEq/h. Peak acid output is defined as the highest of the four stimulated periods. Patients with a gastrinoma commonly have a high BAO, often above 30 mEq/h, but consistently above 15 mEq/h unless there has been previous vagotomy or gastric resection. In patients with gastrinoma, the ratio of BAO to MAO exceeds 0.6. Normal acid output in the patient prescribed acid-suppressive medica-tion usually means that the patient is noncompliant. To assess acid-secretory capacity in the absence of medication effect,  H2 blockers and PPIs should be withheld for several days before gastric analysis.Scintigraphy. The standard scintigraphic evaluation of gastric emptying involves the ingestion of a test meal with one or two isotopes and scanning the patient under a gamma camera. A curve for gastric emptying is plotted, and the half-time is calcu-lated. Normal standards exist at each facility. Duodenogastric reflux can be quantitated by the IV administration of hepato-biliary iminodiacetic acid (HIDA scan), which is concentrated and excreted by the liver into the duodenum. Software allows a semiquantitative assessment of how much of the isotope refluxes into the stomach. Positron emission tomography (PET) scan or CT/PET scan is useful in staging certain patients with gastric malignancy.Tests for Helicobacter pylori. A variety of tests can help the clinician to determine whether the patient has active H pylori infection.73 The predictive value (positive and negative) of any of these tests when used as a screening tool depends on the prevalence of H pylori infection in the screened population. A positive test is quite accurate in predicting H pylori infection, but a negative test can be unreliable. Thus, in the appropriate clinical setting, treatment for H pylori should be initiated on the basis of a positive test, but not necessarily withheld if the test is negative. Helicobacter infection should be treated when the diagnosis is made and eradication is confirmed.A positive serologic test is presumptive evidence of active infection if the patient has never been treated for H pylori. Histologic examination of gastric mucosal biopsy using special stains is the gold standard test for helicobacter infection. Other sensitive tests include commercially available rapid urease tests, which assay for the presence of urease in mucosal biopsy speci-mens (strong presumptive evidence of infection). Urease is an omnipresent enzyme in H pylori strains that colonize the gas-tric mucosa. The carbon labeled urea breath test has become the standard test to confirm eradication of H pylori following appropriate treatment.74 In this test, the patient ingests urea labeled with nonradioactive 13C or 14C. The labeled urea is acted upon by the urease present in the H pylori and converted into ammonia and carbon dioxide. The radiolabeled carbon dioxide is excreted from the lungs and can be detected in the expired air (Fig. 26-22). It also can be detected in a blood sample. The fecal antigen test also is quite sensitive and specific for active H pylori infection and may also be used to confirm cure after treatment. Helicobacter culture may be useful to assess antimi-crobial resistance in persistently recalcitrant cases.Antroduodenal Motility Testing and Electrogastrography.  Antroduodenal motility testing and electrogastrography (EGG) are performed in specialized centers and may be useful in the evaluation of the occasional patient with dyspeptic symptoms. EGG consists of the transcutaneous recording of gastric myo-electric activity. Antroduodenal motility testing is done with a tube placed transnasally or transorally into the distal duodenum. There are pressure-recording sensors extending from the stom-ach to the distal duodenum. The combination of these two tests together with scintigraphy provides a thorough assessment of gastric motility.HELICOBACTER PYLORI INFECTIONOver 50% of people worldwide are infected with Helicobacter pylori.75,76 Infection with H pylori is a chronic disease and does not resolve spontaneously without specific treatment. World-wide, H pylori–induced gastritis accounts for 80% to 90% of all gastritis. Chronic gastritis associated with H pylori is the most important risk factor for peptic ulcer and gastric adeno-carcinoma. Successful H pylori treatment largely eliminates recurrent peptic ulcer in infected patients, and eradication of H pylori worldwide would eliminate most cases of gastric Figure 26-22. Labeled urea breath test to detect Helicobacter infection. (Repro-duced with permission from Walsh JH, Peterson WL. The treatment of Helico-bacter pylori infection in the management of peptic ulcer disease, N Engl J Med. 1995 Oct 12;333(15):984-991.)[13C] urea13CO2 (µmol)Positive breathurea testUreaseBloodHours1213CO2 in breathNH2NH22NH3+CO2H2O + 13C = 0Negative breathurea testBrunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   111701/03/19   7:11 PM 1118SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS     PART IIadenocarcinoma, a major cause of cancer death worldwide.77 Helicobacter pylori infection is also associated with MALT lymphoma, dyspepsia, hyperplastic gastric polyps, and even immune thrombocytopenic purpura.Human beings are the only reservoir for H pylori. Infection is presumed to occur by oral ingestion of the bacterium, which dramatically alters the gastric microbiome.78 In helicobacter-infected individuals, 90% of gastric bacteria are helicobacter, whereas in helicobacter-negative patients 90% of gastric bac-teria are a combination of firmicutes, actinobacteria, bacte-roidetes, proteobacteria, and fusobacteria. The prevalence of H pylori infection varies among populations and is strongly cor-related with socioeconomic conditions. In developing countries, H pylori infection usually occurs in childhood, and over 80% of adults are infected. Reinfection after curative treatment is common. Infection rates are lower in industrialized countries, and the prevalence of infection in the United States has been declining since the second half of the 19th century as hygiene and sanitation have improved. Nonetheless, H pylori infection is predicted to remain endemic in the United States for the next century. Family members of infected individuals and healthcare workers are at increased risk of infection.With specialized flagella and a rich supply of urease, H pylori is uniquely equipped for survival in the hostile envi-ronment of the stomach.[79-81] Helicobacter strains that lack either flagella or urease are nonpathogenic. The pathogenesis of helicobacter infection involves survival in the acidic gastric lumen, flagellated movement from the lumen across the mucus layer to the surface epithelial cell, adhesion to the surface epi-thelial cell, and toxin production. Up to 15% of the protein in a Helicobacter organism is composed of cytoplasmic urease that converts periplasmic urea into CO2 and ammonia. This buffers the surrounding acid, allowing the bacteria to survive the inimical luminal environment until it can burrow deeply into the surface mucus, propelled by its flagella (Fig. 26-23). H pylori typically does not invade the surface epithelial cell layer. Rather, it triggers a host immune response by attach-ing to gastric epithelial cells. Important Helicobacter adhesins mediating surface cell injury include neutrophil activating pro-tein A, heat shock protein 60, and sialic acid–binding adhesin. Helicobacter-produced toxins include vacuolating cytotoxin A and cag A (cytotoxin-associated gene A). The initial inflammatory response to Helicobacter infection is characterized by recruit-ment of neutrophils, followed sequentially by T and B lympho-cytes, plasma cells, and macrophages (Fig. 26-24). The resultant chronic gastric inflammation in affected individuals is charac-terized by enhanced mucosal expression of multiple cytokines and the presence of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species, and  long-term infection is associated with mucosal cell DNA  damage and chromosomal instability and increased apopto-sis (Fig. 26-25).80,81 The net effect is a weakening of mucosal defenses. The mechanism by which the helicobacter organism avoids recognition and destruction by the mucosal immune sys-tem is a topic of interest and active research.82Acute H pylori infection causes a nonerosive pangastritis that is invariably followed by the development of chronic gastritis. Chronic antral gastritis with sparing of the proximal stomach occurs in about 10% of infected patients, and this pre-disposes to peptic ulcer disease (PUD). The other 90% of Heli-cobacter-infected patients develop chronic inflammation of the proximal stomach (corpus dominant gastritis), which can lead to gastric cancer in about 1% to 3% of this group.Figure 26-23. Helicobacter pylori closely adherent to the cell membrane (top), and spiral-shaped H pylori attached to epithelial surface and surrounding microvilli (bottom). In the image on the bottom, the bacterial flagella can be seen arising from the upper pole of the bacterium. (Reproduced with permission from Mertz HR, Walsh JH: Peptic ulcer pathophysiology, Med Clin North Am. 1991 Jul;75(4):799-814.)H pylori infection is the major cause of peptic ulceration. Patients with H pylori infection and antral gastritis are three and one-half times more likely to develop PUD than patients without H pylori infection. Up to 90% of patients with duode-nal ulcers, and at least 70% of patients with gastric ulcers, have H pylori infection. It is clear from multiple randomized prospec-tive studies that curing H pylori infection dramatically alters the natural history of PUD, decreasing the recurrent ulcer rate from more than 75% in patients treated with a course of acid-suppressive therapy alone (in whom H pylori is not eradicated) to less than 20% in patients treated with a course of antibacterial therapy (Fig. 26-26).83In patients with duodenal ulcer caused by helicobacter, the associated antral gastritis leads to relative hypergastrinemia by depleting antral somatostatin, the primary inhibitor of antral gastrin release. H pylori infection is associated with decreased Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   111801/03/19   7:11 PM 1119STOMACHCHAPTER 26levels of somatostatin, decreased somatostatin messenger RNA production, and fewer somatostatin-producing D cells. The mechanism of decreased antral somatostatin synthesis and release may be related to (a) antral alkalinization due to heli-cobacter urease (acid in the antrum releases somatostatin); (b) toxic cytokine effect on antral D cells; and/or (c) Helicobacter production of N-α-methylhistamine, an H3 receptor agonist, which binds H3 receptors on the antral D cell and decreases somatostatin release.84 Since the gastritis does not involve the oxcyntic mucosa, hypergastrinemia leads to hyperacidity and parietal cell hyperplasia. The acid hypersecretion and the antral gastritis are thought to lead to antral epithelial metaplasia in the postpyloric duodenum. This duodenal metaplasia allows H pylori to colonize the duodenal mucosa, and this is where the duodenal ulcer occurs. In fact, in patients with gastric metapla-sia of the duodenum, the risk of developing a duodenal ulcer increases 50-fold. When H pylori colonizes the duodenum, there is a significant decrease in acid-stimulated duodenal bicarbonate release. When H pylori infection is successfully treated, acid secretory physiology tends to normalize. Relapse of duodenal ulcer after eradication of H pylori may signal reinfection of the gastric mucosa by the organism.Many patients with antral dominant helicobacter gastritis never develop duodenal ulcer, and some patients with peptic ulcer do not have Helicobacter. This obviously suggests that there are other important pathogenetic factors involved in peptic ulcer. And even in the presence of active H pylori infection, strong acid suppression usually heals peptic ulcer, an observa-tion consistent with the old dictum “no acid, no ulcer.” But suc-cessful helicobacter treatment eliminates ulcer recurrence and the need for long-term PPI. And long-term PPI in patients with active Helicobacter infection may lead to corpus predominant gastritis, which leads to atrophic gastritis and increases the risk of gastric cancer. Thus, Helicobacter infection should be treated and eradication confirmed.Testing for H pylori infection should be performed in patients with peptic ulcer, gastritis, significant dyspepsia, MALT lymphoma, and early gastric cancer.85 Noninvasive methods for diagnosis of H pylori infection include the urea breath test, serology, and detection of stool antigen. The urea breath test has a sensitivity and specificity of greater than 90% and is useful for initial diagnosis of infection and for follow-up after eradication therapy since it is positive only in the presence of active infection. The stool antigen test is another noninvasive test to detect active H pylori infection, but it is recommended that only locally validated tests be used.86 Because H pylori induces a strong immunologic response, serological testing is useful but may not be as accurate as the urea breath test or the stool antigen test, and a positive serology persists after eradica-tion of H pylori infection, so serology is not useful to confirm successful treatment of Helicobacter infection. H pylori infec-tion can also be diagnosed by histologic evaluation of gastric biopsies and/or the rapid urease test on fresh biopsies. Culture of H pylori is not routine and is usually reserved for recurrent infection and for antibiotic sensitivity testing when second-line therapy has failed. All tests for H pylori have a false negative rate. Empiric Helicobacter treatment can be considered despite negative tests if clinical likelihood of infection is high, e.g., a compliant nonsmoking, non–NSAID-consuming patient facing operation for nonhealing peptic ulcer or a patient with unex-plained gastritis.Patients with a positive test should be treated and eradi-cation confirmed. Spontaneous cure without treatment is very rare. It is important to note that none of the therapeutic regimens reported to date cure H pylori infection in 100% of patients. To be effective, antimicrobial drugs must be combined with gas-tric acid secretion inhibitors or bismuth salts. The Maastricht  V/Florence Consensus Report87 provides current recommenda-tions for diagnosis and treatment of H pylori infection in various clinical scenarios, including recommendations for areas with high metronidazole and clarithromycin resistance.87,88 Ideally, a treatment regimen is chosen with 90% effectiveness. Treat-ment failure requires an alternative course of therapy. Failure to eradicate infection after two tries should prompt Helicobacter culture and sensitivity testing and referral to a specialist. With assiduous treatment, Helicobacter eradication can be achieved in nearly every patient. Patients with atrophic gastritis require endoscopic surveillance (see discussion of gastritis later in this Figure 26-24. Model of Helico-bacter effects on duodenal ulcer pathogenesis. (Reproduced with per-mission from Feldman M, Friedman LS, Sleisenger MH, et al: Sleisenger and Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease, 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier/Saunders; 2002.)Multiple factors (smoking, ageat acquisition of infection)Somatostatin/gastrindysregulationAcquisition of H pyloriDuodenum ulcerationIncreased acidsecretionGastric metaplasiain duodenumDuodenum bicarbonate secretionInflammation (Duodenitis)Chronic H pyloriinfection in stomachH pylori colonization in duodenumBrunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   111901/03/19   7:11 PM 1120SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS     PART IIchapter) because the same sequence of inflammation to meta-plasia to dysplasia to carcinoma, that is well known to occur in the esophagus from reflux-induced inflammation (and in the colon from inflammatory bowel disease), is now increasingly well recognized to occur in the stomach with Helicobacter-induced gastritis. Helicobacter also clearly has an etiologic role in the development of gastric lymphoma.PEPTIC ULCER DISEASEPeptic ulcers are focal defects in the gastric or duodenal mucosa that extend into the submucosa or deeper. They may be acute or chronic and, ultimately, are caused by an imbalance between mucosal defenses and acid/peptic injury (Fig. 26-27).89,90 Peptic ulcer remains a common outpatient diagnosis, but the number of Figure 26-25. Pathogen-host interactions in the pathogenesis of Helicobacter pylori infection. ICAM = intercellular adhesion molecule-1; IFN-γ = interferon-γ; LPS = lipopolysaccharide; NF-κB = nuclear factor κB; PAI = pathogenicity island; PMN = polymorphonuclear neutrophil; TNF-α = tumor necrosis factor-α; VCAM = vascular cell adhesion molecule. (Used with permission from Manuel Amieva, Stanford University.)cag+H pyloristraincag-PAI-encodedsecretoryapparatusMultiple adhesions:BabA (binds tolewis B), AIpA,AlpB, HopZPhospholipaseA2Alterationsin mucousglycoproteinsGastricepithelialcellFlagellaMucusActinpolymerizationCagAphosphorylationVacAApoptosisDisruption of epithelialbarrierFasexpressionUreaseLPSPorinsInterleukin-8CagAMacrophageInterleukin-12Th 1 cellTh 2 cellB cellCytokine-inducedchanges in gastric physiologyTh 0 cellICAM and VCAMexpressionPMN recruitmentInterleukin-8Chemotacticinterleukin-8 gradienton proteoglycanscaffoldingNeutrophilT cellB cellBlood vesselNF-˜ B              AP-1              GRO-°ENA-78T-cell and B-cellextravasationINF-˛   TNF-°Interleukin-1˙MHC II, B7-1,and B7-2expressionAnti-H+/K+-ATPaseantibodiesBrunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   112001/03/19   7:11 PM 1121STOMACHCHAPTER 26physician visits, hospital admissions, and elective operations for PUD has decreased steadily and dramatically over the past four decades. Interestingly, the start of these trends all predated the widespread use of acid suppression, or highly selective vagot-omy. The incidence of emergency surgery and the death rate associated with peptic ulcers has not decreased nearly so dra-matically. These epidemiologic changes probably represent the net effect of several factors, including (beneficially) decreased prevalence of H pylori infection, better medical therapy, and increased outpatient management and (detrimentally) the use of NSAIDs and aspirin (with and without ulcer prophylaxis) in an aging population with multiple risk factors.Figure 26-26. Helicobacter treatment dramatically decreases the recurrence rate of duodenal and gastric ulcer. (Reproduced with permission from Peek RM, Blaser MJL: Pathophysiology of Helico-bacter pylori-induced gastritis and peptic ulcer disease, Am J Med. 1997 Feb;102(2):200-207.)Figure 26-27. Balance of aggressive and defensive factors in the gastric mucosa. (Reproduced with permission from Suerbaum S, Michetti P: Helicobacter pylori infection, N Engl J Med. 2002 Oct 10;347(15):1175-1186.)PUD is one of the most common GI disorders in the United States with a prevalence of about 2%, and a lifetime cumulative prevalence of about 10%, peaking around age 70 years.91 The costs of PUD, including lost work time and productivity, are estimated to be above $8 billion per year in the United States. In 1998, approximately 1.5% of all Medicare hospital costs were spent treating PUD, and the crude mortal-ity rate for peptic ulcer was 1.7 per 100,000 individuals. Using the National Inpatient Sample, it can be estimated that the mortality rate in patients hospitalized in 2006 with duodenal ulcer was 3.7% compared to 2.1% for gastric ulcer,92 and the age adjusted hospitalization rate was 56.5 per 100,000, down 21% from the previous decade. Recent studies have shown an increase in the rates of hospitalization and mortality in elderly patients for the peptic ulcer complications of bleeding and perforation.93 This may be due in part to the increasingly com-mon use of NSAIDs and aspirin in this elderly cohort, many of whom also have H pylori infection.Pathophysiology and EtiologyA variety of factors may contribute to the development of PUD. Although it is now recognized that the large majority of duode-nal and gastric ulcers are caused by H pylori infection (see previ-ous discussion on H pylori) and/or NSAID use20,94 (Fig. 26-28), the final common pathway to ulcer formation is acid-peptic injury of the gastroduodenal mucosal barrier. Acid suppression heals both duodenal and gastric ulcers and prevents recurrence if continued. In general, H pylori predisposes to ulceration, both by acid hypersecretion and by compromise of mucosal defense mechanisms. NSAID use causes ulcers predominantly by com-promise of mucosal defenses. Duodenal ulcer was traditionally viewed as a disease of increased acid-peptic action on the duo-denal mucosa, whereas gastric ulcer was viewed as a disease of weakened mucosal defenses. An increased understanding of peptic ulcer pathophysiology has blurred this overly simplistic distinction. Clearly, weakened mucosal defenses play a role in both duodenal and gastric ulcers, and acid hypersecretion may result in a duodenal or gastric ulcer in the setting of normal mucosal defenses.Elimination of H pylori infection or NSAID use is important for optimal ulcer healing, and perhaps is even more important in preventing ulcer recurrence and/or complications. A variety of other diseases are known to cause peptic ulcer, including ZES (gastrinoma), antral G-cell hyperfunction and/or hyperplasia, systemic mastocytosis, trauma, burns, and major physiologic stress. Other causative agents include drugs (all NSAIDs, aspirin, and cocaine), smoking, and psychologic stress. In the United States, probably more than 90% of serious peptic ulcer complications can be attributed to H pylori infec-tion, NSAID use, and/or cigarette smoking.Acid Secretion and Peptic Ulcer. A variety of abnormalities related to mucosal acid exposure have been described in patients with duodenal ulcer (Fig. 26-29).95 Although duodenal ulcer patients as a group have a higher mean BAO and mean MAO compared to normal controls, many duodenal ulcer patients have basal and peak acid outputs in the normal range, and there is no correlation between acid secretion and the severity of the ulcer disease. As a group, duodenal ulcer patients produce more acid than normal controls in response to any known acid secre-tory stimulus. Although they usually have normal fasting serum gastrin levels, DU patients often produce more gastric acid at AcidPepsinNSAIDsH pyloriAggressionDefenseRepairBicarbonateBlood flowMucusCell junctionsApical resistanceRestitutionMucoid capProliferationGrowth factors0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100%Duodenal ulcerrecurrenceGastric ulcerrecurrenceRanitidine +antibioticsRanitidine aloneBrunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   112101/03/19   7:11 PM 1122SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS     PART IIany given dose of gastrin than controls. Considering that many duodenal ulcer patients do produce excessive gastric acid, it has been argued that a “normal” fasting gastrin level in these patients is inappropriately high, and that there is an impaired feedback mechanism, especially in light of the apparently increased sensitivity of the parietal cell mass to gastrin. Many of these long-standing observations now seem reasonable in light of recently gained understanding of the perturbations in acid and gastrin secretion associated with H pylori infection. Some patients with duodenal ulcer also have increased rates of gastric emptying that deliver an increased acid load per unit of time to the duodenum. Finally, the buffering capacity of the duodenum in many patients with duodenal ulcer is compromised due to decreased duodenal bicarbonate secretion and duodenal gastric metaplasia.In patients with gastric ulcer, acid secretion is vari-able. Currently, five types of gastric ulcer are described, although the original Johnson classification contained three types (Fig. 26-30).96 The most common, Johnson type I gas-tric ulcer, is typically located near the angularis incisura on the lesser curvature, close to the border between antral and corpus mucosa. Patients with type I gastric ulcer usually have normal or decreased acid secretion. Type II gastric ulcer is associ-ated with active or quiescent duodenal ulcer disease, and type III gastric ulcer is prepyloric ulcer disease. Both type II and type III gastric ulcers are associated with normal or increased gastric acid secretion and surgically are treated similar to duode-nal ulcer. Type IV gastric ulcers occur near the GE junction, and acid secretion is normal or below normal. Type V gastric ulcers are medication induced and may occur anywhere in the stomach. Patients with gastric ulcers may have weak mucosal defenses that permit an abnormal amount of injurious acid back-diffusion into the mucosa. Duodenogastric reflux may play a role in weakening the gastric mucosal defenses, and a variety of components in duodenal juice, including bile, lysolecithin, and pancreatic juice, have been shown to cause injury and inflam-mation in the gastric mucosa. NSAIDs and aspirin have similar effects. Although chronic gastric ulcer usually is associated with surrounding gastritis, it is unproven that the latter leads to the former.Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs in Peptic Ulcer Disease. Chronic use of NSAIDs (including aspirin) increases the risk of peptic ulcer disease about fivefold and upper GI bleeding at least twofold.97-100 Complications of PUD (specifi-cally hemorrhage and perforation) are much more common in patients taking NSAIDs. More than half of patients who present with peptic ulcer hemorrhage or perforation report the recent use of NSAIDs, including aspirin. Many of these patients remain asymptomatic until they develop these life-threatening complications.Figure 26-29. Frequency of physiologic abnormali-ties in patients with duodenal ulcer (DU). HCO3 =  bicarbonate; MAO = maximal acid output. (Reproduced with permission from Yamada T, Alpers DH, Laine L, et al: Textbook of Gastroenterology, 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2003.)2550751000Approximate % of DU patientsPathophysiologic abnormalities in DUvary in frequencyNocturnal acid secretionpH inhibition of gastrin releaseGastric emptyingPentagastrin-stimulated MAODaytime acid secretionDuodenal acid loadDuodenal HCO3 secretionFigure 26-28. “Causes” of peptic ulcer disease. Z.E. = Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. (Data from Graham DY, Lew GM, Klein PD, et al. Effect of treatment of Helicobacter pylori infec-tion on the long-term recurrence of gas-tric or duodenal ulcer. A randomized, controlled study, Ann Intern Med. 1992 May 1;116(9):705-708.)Conditions associated with peptic ulcerNSAIDuseNone knownZ.E., otherH. pyloriinfectionNSAIDuseNone knownZ.E., otherH. pyloriinfectionDuodenalGastricBrunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   112201/03/19   7:12 PM 1123STOMACHCHAPTER 26The overall risk of significant serious adverse GI events in patients taking NSAIDs is more than three times that of con-trols (Table 26-6). This risk increases to five times in patients more than age 60 years old. In elderly patients taking NSAIDs, the likelihood that they will require an operation related to a GI complication is 10 times that of the control group, and the risk that they will die from a GI cause is about four and one-half times higher. This problem is put into perspective when one realizes that approximately 20 million patients in the United States take NSAIDs on a regular basis; perhaps even more regularly take aspirin. Persons who take NSAIDs also have a higher hospitalization rate for serious GI events than those who do not.Factors that clearly put patients at increased risk for NSAID-induced GI complications include age >60, prior GI event, high NSAID dose, concurrent steroid intake, and con-current anticoagulant intake. Proton pump inhibitors have been shown to significantly decrease upper GI bleeding risk in patients on chronic warfarin, low dose aspirin, and/or antiplate-let agents.101-103 ANY patient taking NSAIDs or aspirin who has one or more of these risk factors should receive concomitant acid suppressive medication,104 preferably PPI (Table 26-7). High-dose H2 blockers have been shown to be somewhat less effective than PPIs in preventing GI complications in these high-risk patients on antiplatelet therapy, but clearly, they are better than no acid suppression.105Smoking, Stress, and Other Factors. Epidemiologic studies suggest that smokers are about twice as likely to develop PUD as nonsmokers. Smoking increases gastric acid secretion and duodenogastric reflux. Smoking decreases both gastroduodenal prostaglandin production and pancreaticoduodenal bicarbonate production. These observations may be related, and any or all could explain the observed association between smoking and PUD.Although difficult to measure, both physiologic and psy-chologic stress undoubtedly play a role in the development of peptic ulcer in some patients.106 In 1842, Curling described duodenal ulcer and/or duodenitis in burn patients. Decades later, Cushing described the appearance of acute peptic ulcer-ation in patients with head trauma (Cushing’s ulcer). Even the ancients recognized the undeniable links between PUD and stress. Patients still present with ulcer complications (bleeding, perforation, and obstruction) that are seemingly exacerbated by stressful life events. The use of crack cocaine has been linked to juxtapyloric peptic ulcers with a propensity to perforate. Alco-hol is commonly mentioned as a risk factor for PUD, but con-firmatory data are lacking.Clinical ManifestationsMore than 90% of patients with PUD complain of abdominal pain. The pain is typically nonradiating, burning in quality, and located in the epigastrium. The mechanism of the pain is unclear. Patients with duodenal ulcer often experience pain 2 to 3 hours after a meal and at night. Two-thirds of patients with duodenal ulcers will complain of pain that awakens them from sleep. The pain of gastric ulcer more commonly occurs with eating and is less likely to awaken the patient at night. A history of PUD, use of NSAIDs, over-the-counter antacids, or antisecretory drugs is suggestive of the diagnosis. Other signs and symptoms include nausea, bloating, weight loss, stool positive for occult blood, and anemia. Duodenal ulcer is about twice as common in men compared to women, but the incidence of gastric ulcer is similar in men and women. On average, gastric ulcer patients are older than duodenal ulcer patients, and the incidence is increasing in the elderly, perhaps because of increasing NSAID and aspirin.DiagnosisIn the young patient with dyspepsia and without alarm symp-toms, it may be appropriate to initiate empirical PPI therapy for PUD without upper endoscopy or upper GI series. NSAIDs and aspirin should be stopped if the patient is taking these drugs, and Helicobacter should be ruled out with testing and treated if pres-ent. It is prudent to discuss with the patient the small possibility of an alternative diagnosis, including malignancy, even if symp-toms improve with the initiation of empiric therapy. Patients with persistent dyspepsia, and those who cannot stop NSAIDs or aspirin for health reasons should have an upper endoscopy, and all patients, regardless of age, should have this study if any alarm symptoms (see Table 26-5) are present. A double-contrast upper GI X-ray study may be useful. Once an ulcer has been confirmed endoscopically or radiologically, obvious possible causes (Helicobacter, NSAIDs, gastrinoma, cancer) should always be considered. All gastric ulcers should be adequately biopsied, and any sites of gastritis should be biopsied to rule out H pylori, and for histologic evaluation. Additional testing for H pylori may be indicated. It is reasonable to test all peptic IIIIIIIVVNSAID-inducedAcid hypersecretionFigure 26-30. Modified Johnson classification for gastric ulcer. I. Lesser curve, incisura. II. Body of stomach, incisura + duodenal ulcer (active or healed). III. Prepyloric. IV. High on lesser curve, near gastroesophageal junction. V. Medication-induced (NSAID/acetylsalicylic acid), anywhere in stomach. (Reproduced with permission from Cameron JL: Current Surgical Therapy, 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier/Mosby; 2008.)Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   112301/03/19   7:12 PM 1124SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS     PART IIulcer patients and those with nonulcer dyspepsia for H pylori (Table 26-8). A baseline serum gastrin level to rule out gastri-noma should be considered if the peptic ulcer is unusual (distal duodenal or jejunal) or if the patient is Helicobacter and NSAID negative.ComplicationsThe three most common complications of PUD, in decreas-ing order of frequency, are bleeding, perforation, and obstruction.92,94,107 Most peptic ulcer–related deaths in the United States are due to bleeding. Inhospital mortality and length of stay can be predicted by the AIMS65 score,108 with a score of 0 predicting negligible mortality and a score of 5 predicting a 30% inhospital mortality. Bleeding peptic ulcers are by far the most common cause of upper GI bleeding in patients admitted to a hospital (Fig. 26-31).109,110 Patients with a bleeding peptic ulcer typically present with melena and/or hematemesis. Naso-gastric aspiration is usually confirmatory of upper GI bleeding. Abdominal pain is quite uncommon. Shock may be present, necessitating aggressive resuscitation and blood transfusion. Table 26-7Patients taking NSAIDs or aspirin need concomitant acid suppressing medication if any of the following risk factors are present•	Age over 60 years•	History of acid/peptic disease•	Concurrent steroid intake•	Concurrent anticoagulant intake•	High-dose or chronic NSAID use•	High-dose or chronic aspirin use >325 mg/dayTable 26-8Indications for diagnosis and treatment of Helicobacter pyloriEstablished•	Active peptic ulcer disease (gastric or duodenal ulcer)•	Confirmed history of peptic ulcer disease (not previously treated for H pylori)•	Gastric mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma (low grade)•	After endoscopic resection of early gastric cancer•	Uninvestigated dyspepsia (depending on H pylori prevalence)Controversial•	Nonulcer dyspepsia•	Gastroesophageal reflux disease•	Persons using NSAIDs•	Unexplained iron deficiency anemia•	Populations at higher risk for gastric cancerReproduced with permission from Chey WD, Wong BC; Practice Parameters Committee of the American College of Gastroenterology: American College of Gastroenterology guideline on the management of Helicobacter pylori infection, Am J Gastroenterol. 2007 Aug;102(8):1808-1825.Table 26-6Hospitalization rates for GI events with and without NSAID use in selected large populationsANNUALIZED INCIDENCEb THERAPIES USEDCLINICAL UPPER GI EVENTScCOMPLICATED UPPER GI EVENTSdSTUDYaNSAID CONTROLSTUDY DRUGSCONTROLSTUDY DRUGCONTROLSTUDY DRUGMUCOSANSAIDs (n = 4439)Misoprostol 200 μg four times a day + NSAID (n = 4404)3.1%1.6%1.5%0.7%CLASSIbuprofen 800 mg three times a day, diclofenac 75 mg twice a day  (n = 3987)Celecoxib 400 mg twice a day  (n = 3995)3.5%2.1%1.5%0.8%   (No aspirine: 2.9%)1.4%1.3%0.4%VIGORNaproxen 500 mg twice a day (n = 4047)Rofecoxib 50 mg  four times a day  (n = 4029)4.5%2.1%1.4%0.6%aMUCOSA and VIGOR trials included only rheumatoid arthritis patients; CLASS trial included osteoarthritis (73%) and rheumatoid arthritis (27%).bIncidence for MUCOSA trial represents doubling of results provided at 6 months (although median follow-up was <6 months). Incidences for VIGOR and CLASS trials represent rates per 100 patient-years, although VIGOR median follow-up was 9 months, and CLASS data include only the first 6 months of the study.cIncludes perforations, obstructions, bleeding, and uncomplicated ulcers discovered on clinically indicated work-up.dIncludes perforation, obstruction, bleeding (documented due to ulcer or erosions in MUCOSA and CLASS; major bleeding in VIGOR).e21% of patients in CLASS study were taking low-dose aspirin.Note: All differences between controls and study drugs were significant except clinical upper GI events in overall CLASS study (P = .09).Reproduced with permission from Laine L: Approaches to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug use in the high-risk patient, Gastroenterology 2001 Feb;120(3):594-606.Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   112401/03/19   7:12 PM 1125STOMACHCHAPTER 26Early endoscopy is important to diagnose the cause of the bleed-ing and to assess the need for hemostatic therapy.Three-fourths of the patients who come to the hospital with bleeding peptic ulcer will stop bleeding if given acid sup-pression and nothing by mouth. However, one fourth will con-tinue to bleed or will rebleed after an initial quiescent period, and virtually all the mortalities (and all the operations for bleeding) occur in this group. This group can be fairly well delineated based on clinical factors related to the magnitude of the hemorrhage, comorbidities, age, and endoscopic find-ings. Shock, hematemesis, transfusion requirement exceeding four units in 24 hours, and certain endoscopic stigmata (active bleeding or visible vessel) define this high-risk group. Risk stratification tools have proven useful in predicting rebleed-ing and death, and in identifying a low risk cohort. As can be seen in Table 26-9, the maximal Blatchford score is 23, and the maximal Rockall score is 11. The former does not use endoscopic criteria and may be better in identifying the low-risk cohort. Studies have shown that a Blatchford score of 1 or less, or a Rockall score of 2 or less, identifies patients who are very unlikely to be suffering from life-threatening upper GI bleeding. The shorter modified Blatchford score may be just as useful (BUN, Hgb, pulse, BP; maximal score 16).111 High-risk patients benefit from endoscopic therapy to stop the bleeding, while low-risk patients with low-risk lesions can be promptly discharged and treated as outpatients. The most common endoscopic hemostatic modalities used are injection with epinephrine and electrocautery. In a case with exposed vessel, mechanical hemostasis using clips is useful to control the bleeding.112 Biopsy should be performed to evaluate for H pylori infection. Persistent bleeding or rebleeding after endo-scopic therapy is an indication for repeat endoscopic treatment. Surgery should be considered after two endoscopic failures. Elderly patients and patients with multiple comorbidities do not tolerate repeated episodes of hemodynamically significant hemorrhage, and they may benefit from early elective opera-tion after initially successful endoscopic treatment, especially if they have a high-risk ulcer.Planned surgery under controlled circumstances often yields better outcomes than emergent surgery. Deep bleeding ulcers on the posterior duodenal bulb or lesser gastric curvature are high-risk lesions because they often erode large arteries less amenable to nonoperative treatment, and early operation should be considered.Perforated peptic ulcer usually presents as an acute abdo-men. The patient can often give the exact time of onset of the excruciating abdominal pain. Initially, a chemical peritonitis develops from the gastric and/or duodenal secretions, but within hours a bacterial peritonitis supervenes. The patient is in obvi-ous distress, and the abdominal examination shows peritoneal signs. Usually, marked involuntary guarding and rebound ten-derness is evoked by a gentle examination. Upright chest X-ray shows free air in about 80% of patients (Fig. 26-32). Once the diagnosis has been made, the patient is given analgesia and antibiotics, resuscitated with isotonic fluid, and taken to the operating room. Fluid sequestration into the third space of the inflamed peritoneum can be impressive, so preoperative fluid resuscitation is mandatory. Sometimes, the perforation has sealed spontaneously by the time of presentation, and surgery can be avoided if the patient is doing well. Nonoperative man-agement is appropriate only if there is objective evidence that the leak has sealed (i.e., radiologic contrast study), and in the absence of clinical peritonitis.Gastric outlet obstruction occurs in no more than 5% of patients with PUD. It is usually due to duodenal or prepyloric ulcer disease, and it may be acute (from inflammatory swelling and peristaltic dysfunction) or chronic (from cicatrix). Patients typically present with nonbilious vomiting and may have pro-found hypokalemic hypochloremic metabolic alkalosis and dehydration. Pain or discomfort is common. Weight loss may be prominent, depending on the duration of symptoms. A succus-sion splash may be audible with stethoscope placed in the epi-gastrium. Initial treatment is nasogastric suction, IV hydration and electrolyte repletion, and acid suppression. The diagnosis is confirmed by endoscopy. Most patients admitted to the hospital nowadays with obstructing ulcer disease require intervention, either balloon dilation or operation. Cancer must be ruled out because most patients who present with the symptoms of gastric outlet obstruction will have a pancreatic, gastric, or duodenal malignancy.Medical Treatment of Peptic Ulcer DiseasePPIs are the mainstay of medical therapy for PUD, but high-dose H2RAs and sucralfate are also quite effective. Patients hospitalized for ulcer complications should receive high-dose intravenous PPI and, when discharged, should be considered for lifelong PPIs unless the definitive cause is eliminated or a definitive operation performed. Peptic ulcer patients should stop smoking and avoid alcohol and NSAIDs (including aspirin). Patients who require NSAIDs or aspirin to treat other medical conditions should always take concomi-tant PPIs or high dose H2 receptor blockers. Testing for  H pylori infection is performed, and if it is found, it should be treated with one of several acceptable regimens (Table 26-10).113 If initial H pylori testing is negative and ulcer symptoms per-sist, an empirical trial of anti–H pylori therapy is reasonable since false-negative H pylori tests are not uncommon. Gener-ally, acid suppression can be stopped after 3 months if the ulcerogenic stimulus (e.g., H pylori, NSAIDs, or aspirin) has been removed. However, long-term maintenance PPI therapy should be considered in all patients admitted to hospital with ulcer complications, all high-risk patients on NSAIDs or aspi-rin (the elderly or debilitated), and all patients requiring anti-coagulation or antiplatelet agents or those with a history of recurrent ulcer or bleeding. Consideration should also be given to maintenance PPI therapy in refractory smokers with a history of peptic ulcer. Sucralfate acts locally on mucosal defects and is well tolerated, and occasionally it is useful as a supplement to acid suppression.2Peptic ulcer40%24%6%4%6%5%10%5%No obvious causeOtherNeoplasmErosive diseaseMallory-Weiss syndromeOesophagitisVaricesFigure 26-31. Causes of upper GI bleeding. (Reproduced with permission from Dallal HJ, Palmer KR: ABC of the upper gastro-intestinal tract: Upper gastrointestinal haemorrhage, BMJ. 2001 Nov 10;323(7321):1115-1117.)Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   112501/03/19   7:12 PM 1126SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS     PART IITable 26-9Risk-stratification tools for upper gastrointestinal hemorrhageaA. BLATCHFORD SCORE AT PRESENTATIONPOINTS Systolic blood pressure   100–109 mmHg1  90–99 mmHg2  <90 mmHg3 Blood urea nitrogen   6.5–7.9 mmol/L2  8.0–9.9 mmol/L3  10.0–24.9 mmol/L4  ≥25 mmol/L6 Hemoglobin for men   12.0–12.9 g/dL1  10.0–11.9 g/dL3  <10.0 g/dL6 Hemoglobin for women   10.0–11.9 g/dL1  <10.0 g/dL6 Other variables at presentation   Pulse ≥100 beats/min1  Melena1  Syncope2  Hepatic disease2  Cardiac failure2 B. ROCKALL SCOREVARIABLEPOINTSAge <60 y 60–79 y ≥80 y012Shock Heart rate >100 beats/min Systolic blood pressure <100 mmHg12Coexisting illness Ischemic heart disease, congestive heart failure, other major illness Renal failure, hepatic failure, metastatic cancer23Endoscopic diagnosis No lesions observed, Mallory-Weiss syndrome Peptic ulcer, erosive disease, esophagitis Cancer of the upper GI tract012Endoscopic stigmata of recent hemorrhage Clean base ulcer, flat pigmented spot Blood in upper GI tract, active bleeding, visible vessel, clot02aPanel A shows the values used in the Blatchford risk-stratification score, which ranges from 0 to 23, with higher scores indicating higher risk. Panel B shows the Rockall score, with point values assigned for each of three clinical variables (age and the presence of shock and coexisting illnesses) and two endoscopic variables (diagnosis and stigmata of recent hemorrhage). The complete Rockall score ranges from 0 to 11, with higher scores indicating higher risk. Patients with a clinical Rockall score (Age + Shock + Coexisting illness) of 0 or a complete Rockall score of 2 or less are considered to be at low risk for rebleeding or death.Reproduced with permission from Gralnek IM, Barkun AN, Bardou M: Management of acute bleeding from a peptic ulcer, N Engl J Med. 2008 Aug 28;359(9):928-937.COMPLETE ROCKALL SCORECLINICAL ROCKALL SCOREBrunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   112601/03/19   7:12 PM 1127STOMACHCHAPTER 26Surgical Treatment of Peptic Ulcer DiseaseThe indications for surgery in PUD are (in order of decreasing frequency) perforation, obstruction, bleeding, and intractabil-ity or nonhealing.114,115 Gastric cancer must always be consid-ered in patients with gastric ulcer or gastric outlet obstruction. Today, most patients undergoing emergent operation have simple patch of a perforated ulcer or oversewing of a bleed-ing ulcer.[92] Simultaneous performance of vagotomy either truncal or highly selective is increasingly uncommon, probably due to surgeon unfamiliarity with the procedure and reliance on postoperative PPIs to decrease acid secretion. But even in the current era, vagotomy may improve outcomes in emergency ulcer surgery.116-118 Before denying the stable low-risk patient a highly selective vagotomy or truncal vagotomy and drainage as an adjunct to simple patch or oversew, the surgeon should con-sider that many patients having emergency operation for peptic ulcer will not take long-term PPI, do not have Helicobacter, or will continue to smoke or take NSAIDs.Unfortunately, the data from many excellent randomized clinical trials evaluating elective operation for peptic ulcer over the last several decades may be irrelevant to most patients pre-senting for ulcer surgery today.114 The large majority of these excellent studies were done in the pre-PPI, pre-Helicobacter, pre-NSAID era, and focused on elective operation for intracta-ble disease, an unusual indication for operation nowadays. Thus, today’s surgeon should take great care in applying this literature to inform surgical decision making.Traditionally, the vast majority of peptic ulcers were treated by a variant of one of the three basic operations: parietal cell vagotomy, also called highly selective vagotomy (HSV) or proximal gastric vagotomy, vagotomy and drainage (V+D), and vagotomy and distal gastrectomy. Recurrence rates are lowest but morbidity highest with the latter procedure, while the oppo-site is true for HSV (Table 26-11).114,115HSV severs the vagal nerve supply to the proximal two-thirds of the stomach, where essentially all the parietal cells are located, and preserves the vagal innervation to the antrum and pylorus and the remaining abdominal viscera (Fig. 26-33). Thus, the operation decreases total gastric acid secretion by about 75%, and GI side effects are rare. Elective HSV has largely been supplanted by long-term PPI treatment, but the operation, which has a learning curve, may still be useful in the patient (elective or emergent) who is noncompliant with, intolerant of, or cannot afford medical treatment. Historically, HSV has not performed particularly well for type II (gastric and duodenal) and type III (prepyloric) gastric ulcer, perhaps because of hypergastrinemia caused by gastric outlet obstruction and persistent antral stasis. Figure 26-32. Pneumoperitoneum on upright chest X-ray in patient with perforated ulcer.Table 26-10Helicobacter pylori therapies (10–14 days)Clarithromycin triple therapy standard or double dose PPI twice a day clarithromycin 500 mg twice a day amoxicillin 1 g twice a day; or metronidazole 500 mg three times a dayMetronidazole triple therapy standard or double dose PPI twice a day metronidazole 500 mg twice a day amoxicillin 1 g twice a dayLevofloxacin triple therapy standard dose PPI twice a day amoxicillin 1 g twice a day levofloxacin 500 mg dailySequential therapy standard or double dose PPI (10–14 days) amoxicillin 1 g twice a day (5–7 days); then clarithromycin 500 mg twice a day and metronidazole 500 mg twice a day (5–7 days)Bismuth quadruple therapy (commonly used when above regimens fail to eradicate H pylori) standard dose PPI twice a day bismuth subsalicylate 300 mg four times a day tetracycline 500 mg four times a day metronidazole 250 mg four times a dayPPI = proton pump inhibitor.Table 26-11Clinical results of surgery for duodenal ulcer PARIETAL CELL VAGOTOMYTRUNCAL VAGOTOMY AND PYLOROPLASTYTRUNCAL VAGOTOMY AND ANTRECTOMYOperative mortality rate (%)0<11Ulcer recurrence rate (%)5–155–15<2Dumping (%) Mild<51010–15 Severe011–2Diarrhea (%) Mild<52520 Severe021–2Reproduced with permission from Mulholland MW, Debas HT: Chronic duodenal and gastric ulcer, Surg Clin North Am. 1987 Jun;67(3):489-507.Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   112701/03/19   7:12 PM 1128SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS     PART IIThe Taylor procedure, a straightforward laparoscopic operation, consists of a posterior truncal vagotomy and anterior seromy-otomy (but anterior HSV is probably equivalent), and it is an attractive and simple alternative to HSV with similar results.Truncal vagotomy and pyloroplasty, and truncal vagot-omy and gastrojejunostomy are the paradigmatic vagotomy and drainage procedures. HSV may be substituted for truncal vagotomy. The advantage of V + D is that it can be performed safely and quickly by the experienced surgeon. The main dis-advantages are the side effect profile (10% of patients have significant dumping and/or diarrhea). During truncal vagotomy (Fig. 26-34), care must be taken not to perforate the esophagus, a potentially lethal complication. Intraoperative frozen sec-tion confirmation of at least two vagal trunks is prudent; addi-tional vagal trunks are common. Unlike HSV, V + D is widely accepted as a successful definitive operation for complicated PUD. It has been described as a useful part of the operative treatment for bleeding duodenal and gastric ulcer, perforated duodenal and gastric ulcer, and obstructing duodenal and gastric (types II and III) ulcer. When applied to gastric ulcer, the ulcer should be excised or biopsied.Truncal vagotomy denervates the antropyloric mechanism, and therefore, some sort of procedure is necessary to ablate or bypass the pylorus. Gastrojejunostomy is a good choice in patients with gastric outlet obstruction or a severely diseased proximal duodenum. The anastomosis is done between the proximal jejunum and the most dependent portion of the greater gastric curvature, in either an antecolic or retrocolic fashion (Fig. 26-35). Marginal ulceration is a potential complication. 6–8cm    7cmFigure 26-33. Highly selective vagotomy. (Reproduced with per-mission from Zinner MJ Schwartz SI, Ellis H: Maingot’s Abdominal Operations, 10th ed. Vol. I. Stamford, CT: Appleton & Lange; 1997.)Resected segmentResected segmentCeliac branchHepatic branchFigure 26-34. Truncal vagotomy. (Reproduced with permission from Zollinger RM Jr, Zollinger RM Sr: Zollinger’s Atlas of Surgi-cal Operations, 8th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Education; 2003.)Figure 26-35. Retrocolic gastrojejunostomy. Note meso-colon sutured to stomach (b, c, d). (Reproduced with per-mission from Zuidema GD, Yeo CJ: Shackelford’s Surgery of the Alimentary Tract, 5th ed. Vol. II. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier/Saunders; 2002.)Suture reinforcing the angleMesocolonbcdStomachJejunumBrunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   112801/03/19   7:12 PM 1129STOMACHCHAPTER 26Mechanical complications are also possible such as afferent or efferent loop obstruction, internal hernia, and intussusception. Pyloroplasty is useful in patients who require a pyloroduo-denotomy to deal with the ulcer complication (e.g., posterior bleeding duodenal ulcer), in those with limited or focal scarring in the pyloric region, or when gastrojejunostomy is technically difficult. The most commonly performed pyloroplasty is the Heineke-Mikulicz type (Fig. 26-36). Other occasionally use-ful techniques include the Finney (Fig. 26-37) and the Jaboulay pyloroplasties (Fig. 26-38). These more extensive pyloroplasty techniques may make subsequent distal gastric resection more difficult and/or hazardous.Although vagotomy and antrectomy (V + A) is associated with a very low ulcer recurrence rate and is applicable to many patients with complicated PUD (e.g., bleeding duodenal and gastric ulcer, obstructing peptic ulcer, nonhealing gastric ulcer, and recurrent ulcer), V + A has a higher operative mortality risk (compared with HSV or V + D), and is irreversible. Fol-lowing antrectomy, GI continuity may be reestablished with a Billroth I gastroduodenostomy (Fig. 26-39) or a Billroth II loop gastrojejunostomy (Fig. 26-40). Since antrectomy routinely leaves a 60% to 70% gastric remnant, routine reconstruction as a Roux-en-Y gastrojejunostomy should be avoided (Fig. 26-41). Although the Roux-en-Y operation is an excellent procedure for keeping duodenal contents out of the stomach and esophagus, in the presence of a large gastric remnant, this reconstruction will predispose to marginal ulceration and/or gastric stasis.V + A should be avoided in hemodynamically unsta-ble patients, and in patients with extensive inflammation and/or scarring of the proximal duodenum, because secure MucosaPylorusAntrumGambee stitchCBDAFigure 26-36. A through D. Heineke-Mikulicz pyloroplasty. (Reproduced with permission from Zinner MJ: Atlas of Gastric Surgery. New York, NY: Elsevier/Churchill Livingstone; 1992.)Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   112901/03/19   7:12 PM 1130SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS     PART IIanastomosis (Billroth I) or duodenal closure (Billroth II) may be difficult.Distal gastrectomy without vagotomy (usually about a 50% gastrectomy to include the ulcer) has traditionally been the procedure of choice for type I gastric ulcer. The addition of vagotomy should be considered for type II and III gastric ulcers (because the pathophysiology is more analogous to duodenal ulcer), or if the patient is believed to be at increased risk for recurrent ulcer, or perhaps even if Billroth II reconstruction is contemplated (to decrease the chance of marginal ulcer). Subto-tal gastrectomy (75% distal gastrectomy) without vagotomy is rarely used to treat PUD today, although it was the most popular ulcer operation at the middle of the last century.Pylorus preserving gastrectomy (PPG) was first reported as a surgical option for gastric ulcer that could minimize both dumping and duodenogastric reflux. Though not widely adopted for this indication, in some centers PPG is considered a good minimally invasive surgical option for early gastric cancer.119,120Choice of Operation for Peptic Ulcer. The choice of opera-tion for the individual patient with PUD depends on a variety of factors, including the type of ulcer (duodenal, gastric, recurrent, or marginal), the indication for operation, and the condition of the patient. Other important considerations are intra-abdominal factors (duodenal scarring/inflammation, adhesions, or difficult exposure), the ulcer diathesis status of the patient, the surgeon’s experience and personal preference, whether H pylori infection is present, the need for NSAID therapy, previous treatment, and the likelihood of future compliance with treatment. Table 26-12 shows the surgical options for managing various aspects of PUD.   Stomach  Stom.AB DC Approximation suture   PylorusInvertedincisionGallbladderDuodenumConnellthrough & throughsuture (1st ant. tier)Duod.Cushingseromuscularsuture (2nd ant. tier)Posteriorthrough &through sutureFigure 26-37. A through D. Finney pyloroplasty. ant. = anterior; Duod. = duodenum; Stom. = stomach. (Reproduced with permission from Zuidema GD: Shackelford’s Surgery of the Alimentary Tract, 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier/Saunders; 1996.)Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   113001/03/19   7:12 PM 1131STOMACHCHAPTER 26In general, resective procedures have a lower ulcer recurrence rate, but a higher morbidity and mortality rate (see Table 26-11) compared to nonresective ulcer operations. Because ulcer recur-rence often is related to H pylori and/or NSAIDs, it is usually managed adequately without reoperation. Thus, gastric resection to minimize recurrence in duodenal ulcer disease is usually not justified; resection for gastric ulcer remains the standard because of the risk of cancer. Clearly, the modern trend in peptic ulcer operation could be described as “less is more.”121,122Bleeding Peptic UlcerBleeding is the most common cause of ulcer-related death, but only rarely do patients with bleeding gastric or duodenal ulcer require operation today. The success of endoscopic treatment and medical therapy for bleeding PUD has resulted in the selec-tion of a small subgroup of high-risk patients for today’s sur-geon. It is likely that patients currently coming to operation for bleeding PUD are at higher risk for a poor outcome than ever before. The surgical options for treating bleeding PUD include suture ligation of the bleeder; suture ligation and definitive non-resective ulcer operation (HSV or V + D); and gastric resection (usually, including vagotomy and ulcer excision). Gastric ulcer requires biopsy if not resected.The management of bleeding peptic ulcer is summarized in the algorithm provided in Fig. 26-42. All patients admitted to the hospital with bleeding peptic ulcer should be adequately   Stomach  Stom.AB DCPylorusInvertedincisionGallbladderDuodenumConnellthrough & throughsuture (1st ant. tier)Duod.Cushingseromuscularsuture (2nd ant. tier)Posteriorthrough &through sutureFigure 26-38. A through D. Jaboulay pyloroplasty. ant. = anterior; Duod. = duodenum; Stom. = stomach. (Reproduced with permission from Zuidema GD: Shackelford’s Surgery of the Alimentary Tract, 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier/Saunders; 1996.)Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   113101/03/19   7:12 PM 1132SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS     PART IIresuscitated and started on IV PPI.125 Most patients will stop bleeding with these measures alone, but about 25% will continue to bleed or will rebleed in hospital. It is important to identify this high-risk group early with clinical and endoscopic parameters because, essentially, all the deaths from bleeding ulcer occur in this group. Surgical consultation is mandatory, and endoscopic hemostatic therapy (cautery, epinephrine injection, clipping) is indicated and usually successful in these high-risk patients.126 Indications for operation include massive hemorrhage unre-sponsive to initial endoscopic control, recurrent hemorrhage ABCFigure 26-40. A through C. Billroth II antecolic gastrojejunostomy. (Reproduced with permission from Zinner MJ Schwartz SI, Ellis H: Maingot’s Abdominal Operations, 10th ed. Vol. I. Stamford, CT: Appleton & Lange; 1997.)Figure 26-39. A and B. Billroth I gastroduo-denostomy. (Reproduced with permission from Zinner MJ: Atlas of Gastric Surgery. New York, NY: Elsevier/Churchill Livingstone; 1992.)ABBrunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   113201/03/19   7:12 PM 1133STOMACHCHAPTER 26requiring multiple transfusions after two attempts at endoscopic control, ongoing hemorrhage and transfusion with limited availability of blood for transfusion or lack of availability of a therapeutic endoscopist, early rehospitalization for bleeding ulcer, and concurrent indications for surgery such as perforation or obstruction. Patients with massive bleeding from high-risk lesions (e.g., posterior duodenal ulcer with erosion of gastroduo-denalartery, or lesser curvature gastric ulcer with erosion of left gastric artery or branch) should be considered for operation as should those presenting in shock, those requiring more than four units of blood in 24 hours or eight units of blood in 48 hours, and those with ulcers >2 cm in diameter. The mortality rate for surgery for bleeding peptic ulcer is around 20%. Angiography and embolization may be useful in some patients.Operation for Bleeding Peptic Ulcer (Fig. 26-43)The two operations most commonly used for bleeding duode-nal ulcer are oversewing of the ulcer with or without vagotomy and drainage,121 or V + A. Oversewing alone results in a higher rebleeding rate but a lower operative mortality rate than defini-tive operation. When the mortality for reoperation for rebleed-ing is considered, the overall mortality is probably comparable for the two approaches. Patients who are in shock or medically unstable should not have gastric resection.An initial pyloromyotomy incision allows access to the bleeding posterior duodenal ulcer, and an expeditious Kocher maneuver allows the surgeon to control the hemorrhage with the left hand if necessary. Heavy suture material on a stout needle is used to place figure-of-eight sutures or a U-stitch to secure the bleeding vessel at the base of the posterior duodenal ulcer. Multiple sutures are usually necessary. Once the surgeon is unequivocally convinced that hemostasis is secure, a pyloro-plasty can be performed. If the patient is stable, vagotomy may be considered if the surgeon is experienced and the vagotomy straightforward. If the patient is not a high operative risk and V + A is selected, smaller duodenal ulcers are resected with the specimen; larger bleeding duodenal ulcers must often be left behind in the duodenal stump. In this situation, suture hemo-stasis must be attained and a secure duodenal closure accom-plished. The anterior wall of the open duodenum can be sutured to either the proximal or distal lip of the posterior ulcer once the bleeding vessel has been sutured. The duodenal closure can be buttressed with omentum and the duodenum should be decompressed, either with a lateral duodenostomy or retrograde tube via the proximal jejunum or well secured nasogastric tube secured with tip well into afferent limb. Right upper quadrant closed suction peritoneal drainage is important. Use of a feed-ing jejunostomy is also considered. A Billroth II anastomosis reestablishes gastrointestinal continuity.The initial management of bleeding gastric ulcers and the indications for operation are similar to those for bleeding duodenal ulcer. These lesions tend to occur in older and/or medically complicated patients, and this fact may increase the operative risk. However, experience shows that planned surgery in a resuscitated patient results in a better operative survival rate than emergent operation in a patient who has rebled and is in shock. Distal gastric resection to include the bleeding ulcer is the procedure of choice for bleeding gastric ulcer. Second best is V + D with oversewing and biopsy of the ulcer to rule out cancer. Oversewing of the bleeder and biopsy followed by long-term acid suppression is a reasonable alternative in high-risk or unstable patients.50 to 60 cm< 50% gastricremnantFigure 26-41. Roux-en-Y gastrojejunostomy. (Reproduced with permission from Ritchie WP, Steele G, Dean RH: General Surgery. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1995.)Table 26-12Surgical options in the treatment of duodenal and gastric ulcerINDICATIONDUODENALGASTRICBleeding1.	Oversewa2.	Oversew, V + D3.	V + A1.	Oversew and biopsya2.	Oversew, biopsy, V + D3.	Distal gastrectomybPerforation1.	Patcha2.	Patch, HSV3.	Patch, V + D1.	Biopsy and patcha2.	Wedge excision, V + D3.	Distal gastrectomybObstruction1.	HSV + GJ2.	V + A1.	Biopsy; HSV + GJ2.	Distal gastrectomybIntractability/nonhealing1.	HSVb2.	V + D3.	V + A1.	HSV and wedge excision2.	Distal gastrectomyaUnless the patient is in shock or moribund, a definitive procedure should be considered.bOperation of choice in low-risk patient.GJ = gastrojejunostomy; HSV = highly selective vagotomy; V + A = vagotomy and antrectomy; V + D = vagotomy and drainage.Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   113301/03/19   7:12 PM 1134SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS     PART IIPerforated Peptic Ulcer (Fig. 26-44)Perforation is the second most common complication of peptic ulcer, but nowadays it is a much more common indication for operation than bleeding. As with bleeding ulcer, NSAID and/or aspirin use have been inextricably linked with perforated PUD, especially in the elderly population.61 Surgery is almost always indicated for ulcer perforation, although occasionally nonsurgi-cal treatment can be used in the stable patient without peritoni-tis in whom radiologic studies document a sealed perforation. Patients with acute perforation and GI blood loss (either chronic or acute) should be suspected of having a second ulcer or a GI cancer.The options for surgical treatment of perforated duode-nal ulcer are simple patch closure, patch closure and HSV, or patch closure and V + D. Simple patch closure, currently the most commonly performed operation for perforated peptic ulcer, is the procedure of choice in patients with hemodynamic instability and/or exudative peritonitis signifying a perforation >24 hours old. In stable patients without longstanding perfo-ration, particularly those with chronic symptoms or failure of medical treatment, the addition of HSV should be considered. Vagotomy and drainage is also an acceptable definitive opera-tion for perforated duodenal ulcer, but occasionally side effects are disabling, and if gastrojejunostomy has been performed, Hospital admissionBleeding peptic ulcerBleeding recursin hospitalO.R.20% high risk80% Low riskBleeding stopsDischargeBleeding recursBleeding persists>4 PRBC transfused/24hDeep ulcer eroding big vesselHemodynamic instabilityHemostatic Rx unavailableEndoscopic hemostatic RxConsult surgeonResuscitateContinuous IV PPI dripEGDLifelong acid suppressionTest + Rx H. pyloriAvoid NSAIDs/ASA if possibleYesShock?NoYesTransfusion?NoYesActive bleeding on EGD?NoYesVisible vessel on EGD?NoYesAbnormal PT, PTT, or platelets?NoFigure 26-42. Algorithm for the treatment of bleeding peptic ulcer. ASA = acetylsalicylic acid; EGD = esophagogastroduodenoscopy; O.R. = operating room; PPI = proton pump inhibitor; PRBC = unit of packed red blood cells; PT = prothrombin time; PTT = partial throm-boplastin time; Rx = treatment.Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   113401/03/19   7:12 PM 1135STOMACHCHAPTER 26Operation for bleeding peptic ulcerYesYesNoGastric ulcerDuodenal ulcerType 1,2,3Distal gastrectomy**Hemodynamically unstable?OrHigh operative risk?Csendes procPauchet procKelling-Madlener proc(see text)*Add lifelong PPI**Add TV for type 2 + 3Oversew + TV/DOversew + TV/ABMI < 21? ordifficult duodenum?Type 4RebleedRebleedDuodenal ulcer*Gastric ulcer*1) Bx and oversew2) Wedge resectionOversewNoFigure 26-43. Algorithm for operation for bleeding peptic ulcer. BMI = body mass index; Bx = biopsy; PPI = proton pump inhibitor; proc = procedure; TV = truncal vagotomy; TV/A = truncal vagotomy and antrectomy; TV/D = truncal vagotomy and drainage.Operation for Perforated Peptic UlcerYesPatch + HSV,orPatch + TV/DWedge resection and TV/D or HSVOrDistal gastrectomy including perforation*** Duodenal ulcer*  Gastric ulcer* PatchBx +  PatchOrWedge resectionChronic ulcer HX?OrPerforation on RX?OrNSAIDs/ASA necessary? Gastric ulcer*  Duodenal ulcer* Hemodynamically unstable?OrHigh operative risk?OrPerforation >24 hours * In all patients, test and treat for H pylori, and if vagotomy not performed (most patients today)  consider lifelong PPI. ** Avoid truncal vagotomy and avoid gastrectomy if BMI<21 *** Consider adding vagotomy for type II and type III gastric ulcerNoNoYes**Figure 26-44. Algorithm for operation for perforated peptic ulcer. ASA = acetylsalicylic acid; BMI = body mass index; Bx = biopsy; HSV = highly selective vagotomy; Hx = history; PPI = proton pump inhibitor; Rx = treatment; TV/D = truncal vagotomy and drainage.Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   113501/03/19   7:12 PM 1136SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS     PART IImarginal ulcer can be life-threatening. In the United States and Western Europe, there is clearly a trend away from definitive operation for perforated duodenal ulcer.92,121In the stable patient without multiple operative risk fac-tors, perforated gastric ulcers are best treated by distal gastric resection. Vagotomy is usually added for type II and III gastric ulcers. Patch closure with biopsy; or local excision and closure; or biopsy, closure, truncal vagotomy, and drainage are alter-native operations in the unstable or high-risk patient, or in the patient with a perforation in an inopportune location. All perfo-rated gastric ulcers, even those in the prepyloric position, should be biopsied if they are not removed at surgery.Obstructing Peptic UlcerAcute ulcers associated with obstruction due to edema and/or motor dysfunction may respond to intensive antisecretory ther-apy and nasogastric suction. But most patients with significant obstruction from chronic ulceration will require some sort of more substantial intervention. Endoscopic balloon dilation can often transiently improve obstructive symptoms, but many of these patients ultimately fail and come to operation.123The standard operation for obstructing PUD is vagotomy and antrectomy. Alternatively, vagotomy and gastrojejunos-tomy should be considered if a difficult duodenal stump is anticipated with resection. HSV and gastrojejunostomy may be comparable to V + A for obstructing ulcer disease,124 and this procedure is appealing because it can be done laparoscopically and does not complicate future resection, if needed. However, potentially curable gastric or duodenal cancers can be missed with this approach.Intractable or Nonhealing Peptic UlcerIntractability should be an unusual indication for peptic ulcer operation nowadays. The patient referred for surgical evaluation because of intractable PUD should raise red flags for the sur-geon: Maybe the patient has a missed cancer; maybe the patient is noncompliant (not taking prescribed PPI, still taking NSAIDs, still smoking); maybe the patient has Helicobacter despite the presence of a negative test or previous treatment. Because acid secretion can be totally blocked and H pylori eradicated with modern medication, the question remains: “Why does the patient have a persistent ulcer diathesis?” The surgeon should review the differential diagnosis of nonhealing ulcer before any consideration of operative treatment (Table 26-13).Surgical treatment should be considered in patients with nonhealing or intractable PUD who have multiple recurrences, large ulcers (>2 cm), complications (obstruction, perforation, or hemorrhage), or suspected malignancy. Definitive operation, particularly gastric resection, should be considered most cau-tiously in the thin or marginally nourished individual.It is important that the surgeon not fall into the trap of per-forming a large, irreversible operation on these patients, based on the unproven theory that if all other methods have failed to heal the ulcer, a large operation is required. Although there are good data in the surgical literature suggesting that the major-ity of patients do well after the larger elective ulcer operations, most of these data are several decades old and may not be par-ticularly relevant to the modern patient.114 Candidates for ulcer operation today are different than those of 30 to 50 years ago. One might argue that current medical care has healed the typical peptic ulcers, and that patients presenting with true intractabil-ity or nonhealing will be more difficult to treat and are likely to have chronic problems after a major ulcer operation.If surgery is necessary, a lesser operation may be preferable. It is prudent to avoid truncal vagotomy and/or distal gastrectomy as the initial elective operation for intractable peptic ulcer in the thin or asthenic patient. Alternatives for intractable duo-denal ulcer include HSV with or without gastrojejunostomy (reversible drainage operation). In patients with nonhealing gas-tric ulcer, wedge resection with HSV should be considered in thin or frail patients. Otherwise, distal gastrectomy (to include the ulcer) is recommended. It is unnecessary to add a vagotomy in patients with type I or type IV (juxta-esophageal) gastric ulcers because they are usually associated with acid hyposecretion. Type IV gastric ulcers may be difficult to resect as part of a distal gas-trectomy, and a variety of surgical techniques have been described to treat these more proximal lesions (Fig. 26-45).Zollinger-Ellison Syndrome127-129ZES is caused by the hypersecretion of gastrin, typically by a duodenal or pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor (i.e., gastrinoma). Most cases (80%) are sporadic, but 20% are inherited. The inherited or familial form of gastrinoma is associated with mul-tiple endocrine neoplasia type I (MEN I), which is characterized by parathyroid, pituitary, and pancreatic (or duodenal) tumors. Gastrinoma is the most common islet cell tumor in patients with MEN I. Patients with MEN I usually have multiple gastrinomas, and surgical cure is usually not achievable; sporadic gastrino-mas are more often solitary and are more often amenable to surgical cure. About 50% to 60% of gastrinomas are malignant, with lymph node, liver, or other distant metastases at operation. Five-year survival in patients presenting with metastatic disease is approximately 40%. More than 90% of patients with sporadic, completely resected gastrinoma will be cured.The most common symptoms of ZES are epigastric pain, GERD, and diarrhea. More than 90% of patients with gastri-noma have peptic ulcers. Most ulcers are in a typical location (proximal duodenum), but atypical ulcer location (distal duo-denum, jejunum, or multiple ulcers) should prompt an evalu-ation for gastrinoma. Gastrinoma also should be considered in the differential diagnosis of recurrent or refractory peptic ulcer, secretory diarrhea, gastric rugal hypertrophy, esophagi-tis with stricture, bleeding or perforated ulcer, familial ulcer, peptic ulcer with hypercalcemia, and gastric neuroendocrine tumor (carcinoid). The majority of patients with ZES have been symptomatic for several years before definitive diagnosis and, 3Table 26-13Differential diagnosis of intractability or nonhealing peptic ulcer diseaseCancer Gastric Pancreatic DuodenalPersistent Helicobacter pylori infection Tests may be false-negative Consider empiric treatmentNoncompliant patient Failure to take prescribed medication Surreptitious use of NSAIDsMotility disorderZollinger-Ellison syndromeBrunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   113601/03/19   7:12 PM 1137STOMACHCHAPTER 26in general, patients with ZES and MEN1 are diagnosed in their 20s and 30s, while those with sporadic ZES more typically are diagnosed in their 40s and 50s.ZES is an important element in the differential diagnosis of hypergastrinemia (Fig. 26-46). All patients with gastrinoma have an elevated gastrin level, and hypergastrinemia in the pres-ence of elevated BAO strongly suggests gastrinoma. Patients with gastrinoma usually have a BAO >15 mEq/h or >5 mEq/h if they have had a previous procedure for peptic ulcer. Acid secre-tory medications should be held for several days before gastrin measurement, because acid suppression may falsely elevate gas-trin levels. Causes of hypergastrinemia can be divided into those associated with hyperacidity and those associated with hypo-acidity (see Fig. 26-46). The diagnosis of ZES is confirmed by the secretin stimulation test. An IV bolus of secretin (2 U/kg) is given, and gastrin levels are checked before and after injection. An increase in serum gastrin of 200 pg/mL or greater suggests the presence of gastrinoma. Patients with gastrinoma should have serum calcium and parathyroid hormone levels determined to rule out MEN1 and, if present, parathyroidectomy should be considered before resection of gastrinoma.About 80% of primary tumors are found in the gastrinoma triangle (Fig. 26-47), and many tumors are small (<1 cm), mak-ing preoperative localization difficult. Transabdominal ultra-sound is quite specific, but not very sensitive. CT will detect most lesions >2 cm in size, and MRI is comparable. EUS is more sensitive than noninvasive imaging tests, but it still misses many smaller lesions or lesions in inaccessible locations (e.g., the pan-creatic tail). Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy (the octreotide scan) or Gallium-68 dotatate PET/CT are sensitive and specific when the pretest probability of gastrinoma is high and may iden-tify sites of regional or distant metastatic disease (Fig. 26-48). Angiographic localization studies are infrequently performed for gastrinoma. Both diagnostic angiography and transhepatic selective venous sampling of the portal system have been sup-planted by selective arterial secretin infusion, which helps to localize the tumor as inside or outside the gastrinoma triangle. This study too, is rarely performed given increasing availability of endoscopic ultrasonography and accurate nuclear medicine imaging.All patients with sporadic (nonfamilial) gastrinoma should be considered for surgical exploration. The lesions can be located in over 90% of patients, and a majority are cured by extirpation of the gastrinoma.130,131 A thorough intraoperative exploration of the gastrinoma triangle and pancreas is essential, but other sites (i.e., liver, stomach, small bowel, mesentery, and pelvis) should be evaluated as part of a thorough intra-abdom-inal evaluation to find the primary tumor, which is most often solitary and often in the duodenal wall. The duodenum and pan-creatic head should be extensively mobilized and intraoperative ultrasound should be utilized. Intraoperative EGD with transil-lumination may be considered. If the tumor cannot be located, longitudinal duodenotomy with inspection and palpation of the duodenal wall is performed. Lymph nodes from the portal, peri-pancreatic, and celiac drainage basins should be removed. Abla-tion or resection of hepatic metastases when identified should be considered.The management of gastrinoma in patients with MEN I is controversial because patients are infrequently cured by opera-tion. Acid hypersecretion in patients with gastrinoma can always be managed with high-dose PPIs. Highly selective vagotomy may make management easier in some patients and should be considered in those with surgically untreatable or unresectable gastrinoma. Gastrectomy for ZES is not indicated.STRESS GASTRITIS AND STRESS ULCERStress gastritis is a peculiar entity that has all but disappeared from the clinical (if not endoscopic) lexicon, largely due to bet-ter critical care and acid suppression or cytoprotective agents (e.g., sucralfate) in the intensive care unit (ICU). Stress gastritis and stress ulcer are probably due to inadequate gastric mucosal Figure 26-45. Operations for gastric ulcer. (Reproduced with permission from Feldman M, Sharschmidt BF, Sleisenger MH: Slei-senger and Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease: Pathophysiology/Diagnosis/ Management 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier/Saunders; 1998.)Ulcer excisionAntrectomyPauchet procedureKelling-MadlenerprocedureCsendes procedure(Roux reconstruction)Csendes procedureBrunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   113701/03/19   7:12 PM 1138SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS     PART IIblood flow during periods of intense physiologic stress. Ade-quate mucosal blood flow is important to maintain the mucosal barrier and to buffer any back-diffused hydrogen ions. When blood flow is inadequate, these processes fail and mucosal breakdown occurs. Modern intensive care, with emphasis on adequate tissue perfusion and oxygenation, has undoubtedly decreased the severity of gastric mucosal injury seen in the ICU today. Although it is still common to see small mucosal ero-sions when performing upper endoscopy in the ICU, it is rare for these lesions to coalesce into the larger bleeding erosions that plagued the ICU patient 30 to 50 years ago. The rationale for routine acid suppression in the ICU, supported by excellent data from clinical trials and the laboratory, is that less mucosal injury will be caused in the potentially weakened gastric mucosa if there is less luminal acid.132 There are some studies suggest-ing that routine acid suppression leads to overgrowth of gastric bacteria, which increases the incidence and/or severity of aspira-tion pneumonia in the ICU.133,134 Nevertheless, acid suppression, particularly in the severely ill patient, remains an important part of clinical pathways in most ICUs.135 In the extraordinarily rare patient requiring operation today for hemorrhagic stress gastri-tis, the surgical options include V + D with oversewing of the major bleeding lesions, or near total gastrectomy. Angiographic embolization and endoscopic hemostatic treatment should be considered as well.ATROPHIC GASTRITISAtrophic gastritis is characterized by atrophy or disappearance of gastric glands and loss of parietal and chief cells. The most common cause is chronic H pylori infection, particularly in the corporal distribution (as opposed to the antral distribution which is more typically associated with peptic ulcer disease). Auto-immune destruction of cells (pernicious anemia) and chemical irritation (e.g., bile reflux) can also result in atrophic gastritis. Some patients with atrophic gastritis develop intestinal meta-plasia in the gastric mucosa that may progress to dysplasia and then to gastric cancer. Numerous cofactors have been impli-cated, including diet, altered gastric microbiome, genetics, and hypergastrinemia. Patients with atrophic gastritis are at risk for Elevated serum gastrin(off PPI + H2RA)Measure BAO and gastric pHSecretin stimulation testBAO > 10 mEq/hpH <2BAO lowpH > 2Previous GI surgery•  Vagotomy?•  Massive SB resectionAtrophicgastritisPerniciousanemiaRenal insuffNoYesConfirm with EGD/Bxtest/treat H pylorigive B12Significant elevation in serumgastrin in response to IV secretin?G-cell +/or ECLcell hyperplasiaLoop GJ with antralalkalinizationTakedown GJOrTV and AConsider TV+ antrectomyRetained antrum on“duodenal stump”Resect retained antrumOrConvert B2 to B1AntralstasisS/P  gastrectomy B2Confirm with EGD + BxConsider resectionZollinger-EllisonsyndromeOctreotide scanR/O MEN-1Figure 26-46. Algorithm for diagnosis and management of hypergastrinemia. BAO = basal acid output; B1 = Billroth 1; B2 = Billroth 2; Bx = biopsy; ECL = enterochromaffin-like; EGD = esophagogastroduodenoscopy; GJ = gastrojejunostomy; H2RA = histamine 2 receptor antagonist; insuff = insufficiency; MEN1 = multiple endocrine neoplasia type I; PPI = proton pump inhibitor; R/O = rule out; SB = small bowel; S/P = status post; TV = truncal vagotomy; TV and A = truncal vagotomy and antrectomy.Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   113801/03/19   7:12 PM 1139STOMACHCHAPTER 26gastric cancer and should undergo periodic endoscopic surveil-lance. Metaplastic atrophic gastritis and dysplastic atrophic gastritis in particular, are markers of increased risk for gastric cancer. Patients with high grade dysplasia may benefit from gas-trectomy. Cancer risk is related to the extent of the atrophic gas-tritis and intestinal metaplasia, and grading systems have been developed to stratify cancer risk based on endoscopic findings. Two such systems are the operative link on gastritis assessment (OLGA) and the operative link on gastric intestinal metaplasia (OLGIM) assessment.136,137 These systems define the severity (“stage”) of atrophic gastritis based on the histologic grading of at least five gastric biopsies (lesser and greater curve antrum; Figure 26-47. Gastrinoma triangle. (Reproduced with permission from Ritchie WP, Steele G, Dean RH: General Surgery. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1995.)Figure 26-48. Positive gallium-68 dotatate scan in patient with gastrinoma.Table 26-14Types of gastric tumorsMalignant tumors Carcinoma Lymphoma Gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) Neuroendocrine tumorBenign tumors Hyperplastic polyp Adenomatous polyp Leiomyoma Lipoma Schwannoma Hetrotopic pancreaslesser and greater curve corpus; angularis incisura). Since pathol-ogists are more likely to agree on the histological diagnosis of intestinal metaplasia than they are on atrophic gastritis, the latter tool (OLGIM) may be more useful in stratifying gastric cancer risk. Patients stratified as stage 3 or 4 gastritis and those with pernicious anemia may benefit from surveillance endoscopy every 3 years. Serum markers are also useful in helping to iden-tify patients with atrophic gastritis who usually have increased serum gastrin and iron deficiency due to parietal cell loss and hypochlorhydria or achlorhydria; decreased pepsinogen I levels due to chief cell loss; and B12 deficiency due to parietal cell loss and concomitant loss of intrinsic factor.MALIGNANT NEOPLASMS OF THE STOMACHThe most common primary malignant gastric neoplasm is adeno-carcinoma (95%); lymphoma and GIST account for most of the remaining cases (Table 26-14). Other rare primary malignancies include neuroendocrine tumor, angiosarcoma, carcinosarcoma, and squamous cell carcinoma. Occasionally the stomach is a site of hematogenous metastasis from other sites (e.g., melanoma or breast cancer). Malignant tumors from adjacent organs may also invade the stomach by direct extension (e.g., colon or pancreas) or by peritoneal dissemination (e.g., ovary or appendiceal).AdenocarcinomaEpidemiology. Gastric cancer is the fourth most common can-cer type and the second leading cause of cancer death world-wide. Over the past century, there has been a dramatic decrease in the incidence of gastric cancer in most Western industrialized countries (Fig. 26-49). This decrease has been largely in the so-called intestinal form rather than in the diffuse form of gastric cancer. In Asia and Eastern Europe, gastric cancer remains a leading cause of cancer death. In 2017 in the United States, approximately 28,000 new cases of stomach cancer were diagnosed (17,750 in men and 10,250 in women), and 10,960 deaths will be attributed to this disease (6720 in men and 4240 in women).138 The estimated 5-year survival rate is 27%, up from about 15% in 1975.In general, gastric cancer is a disease of the elderly, and it is twice as common in blacks as in whites. In younger patients, tumors are more often of the diffuse variety and tend to be large, aggressive, and poorly differentiated, sometimes involving the entire stomach (linitis plastic). Gastric cancer has a higher inci-dence in groups of lower socioeconomic status.4Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   113901/03/19   7:12 PM 1140SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS     PART IIEtiology. Gastric cancer is more common in patients with per-nicious anemia, blood group A, or a family history of gastric cancer. When patients migrate from a high-incidence region to a low-incidence region, the risk of gastric cancer decreases in the subsequent generations born in the new region. This strongly suggests an environmental influence on the development of gas-tric cancer. Environmental factors appear to be more important in the pathogenesis of the intestinal form of gastric cancer com-pared to the diffuse form. The commonly accepted risk factors for gastric cancer are listed in Table 26-15.Diet and Drugs A diet high in pickled, salted, or smoked food is found in many regions of high gastric cancer risk. Dietary nitrates have been implicated as a possible cause of gastric cancer. Gastric bacteria (more abundant in the achlorhydric stomach of patients with atrophic gastritis, a risk factor for gastric cancer) convert nitrate into nitrite, a known carcinogen.  A diet high in fresh fruits and vegetables and rich in vitamin C and E has been shown to decrease the risk of gastric cancer. The reduced consumption of nitrate-rich preserved foods seen with the widespread availability of refrigeration has been sug-gested as a cause of the dramatic decrease in gastric cancer seen in North America and Western Europe over the last century. Eastern AsiaCentral and Eastern EuropeLess developed regionsWorldMore developed regionsSouth AmericaWestern AsiaCentral AmericaSouthern EuropePolynesiaSouth-Central AsiaCaribbeanWestern EuropeMelanesiaSouth-Eastern AsiaNorthern EuropeSouthern AfricaAustralia/New ZealandEastern AfricaNorthern AmericaMiddle AfricaNorthern AfricaWestern AfricaMicronesia40302010010203040FemaleMaleIncidenceMortalityFigure 26-49. Gastric cancer incidence and death rates per 100,000 population in men and women, in different regions and countries. (Reproduced with permission from The Global Cancer Observatory All Rights Reserved, September, 2018.)Table 26-15Factors increasing or decreasing the risk of gastric cancerIncrease risk Family history Diet (high in nitrates, salt, fat) Familial polyposis Gastric adenomas Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer Helicobacter pylori infection  Atrophic gastritis, intestinal metaplasia, dysplasia Previous gastrectomy or gastrojejunostomy (>10 y ago) Tobacco use Ménétrier’s diseaseDecrease risk Aspirin Diet (high fresh fruit and vegetable intake) Vitamin CBrunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   114001/03/19   7:12 PM 1141STOMACHCHAPTER 26Tobacco use probably increases the risk of stomach cancer, and alcohol use probably has no effect. Regular aspirin use may be protective.Helicobacter pylori80,139 The risk of gastric cancer in patients with chronic H pylori infection is increased about threefold. Compared to uninfected patients, patients with a history of gas-tric ulcers are more likely to develop gastric cancer (incidence ratio 1.8, 95% confidence interval 1.6–2.0), and patients with a history of duodenal ulcers are at decreased risk for gastric can-cer (incidence ratio 0.6, 95% confidence interval 0.4–0.7). This may be due to the fact that some patients develop antral-pre-dominant disease (predisposing to duodenal ulcer and somehow protecting against gastric cancer), while other patients develop corpus-predominant gastritis, resulting in hypochlorhydria and somehow predisposing to gastric ulcer and gastric cancer (Fig. 26-50).10 The theoretical sequence for development of gas-tric adenocarcinoma is diagrammed in Fig. 26-51.10,80 Recently, it has been demonstrated that bone marrow-derived stem cells play a key role in the pathogenesis of gastric adenocarcinoma in patients with chronic H pylori infection.80 However, it must be recognized that gastric adenocarcinoma is a multifactorial dis-ease. Not all patients with gastric cancer have H pylori, and there are some geographic areas with a high prevalence of chronic H pylori infection and a low prevalence of gastric cancer (the “African enigma”). Finally, H pylori–infected patients seem to be at decreased risk for the development of adenocarcinoma of the distal esophagus and cardia region.140 Perhaps corporeal gas-tritis decreases acid secretion, creating a less damaging refluxate and thus reducing the risk for Barrett’s esophagus, the precursor lesion for these tumors.Epstein-Barr Virus About 10% of gastric adenocarcinomas carry the EBV virus. Recently it has been suggested that EBV infection is a late step in gastric carcinogenesis, since EBV tran-scripts are present in cancer cells but not in the metaplastic cells of precursor epithelium.141Genetic Factors A variety of genetic abnormalities have been described in gastric cancer (Table 26-16). Most gastric can-cers are aneuploid. The most common genetic abnormalities in sporadic gastric cancer affect the p53 and COX-2 genes. Over two-thirds of gastric cancers have deletion or suppression of the important tumor-suppressor gene p53. Additionally, approxi-mately the same proportion have overexpression of COX-2. In the colon, tumors with upregulation of this gene have suppressed apoptosis, more angiogenesis, and higher metastatic potential. Gastric tumors that overexpress COX-2 are more aggressive. Recently, a germline mutation in the CDH1 gene encoding E-cadherin was shown to be associated with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. Prophylactic total gastrectomy should be consid-ered in patients with these mutations.142Premalignant Conditions of the Stomach Figure 26-52 shows the prevalence of some premalignant conditions associated with the development of early gastric cancer in a series of 1900 cases from Tokyo. By far the most common precancerous lesion is atrophic gastritis. There is a growing appreciation of the impor-tant influence of the chronic inflammatory milieu on the genome of mucosal cells. Chronic inflammation leads to both genetic Acute pangastritisChronic pangastritisDecreased acidGastric cancerChronic antral gastritisDecreased SSTIncreased gastrinIncreased acidDUFigure 26-50. Helicobacter, gastritis, and the pathogenesis of duo-denal ulcer (DU) or gastric cancer.Figure 26-51. Gastric carcinogenesis. (Reproduced with permission from Yamada T, Alpers DH, Laine L, et al: Textbook of Gastroenterology, 4th ed.  Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2003.)NormalDysplasiaCancerIntestinal metaplasiaAtrophic gastritisChronic superficial gastritisH pyloriDiet low in vitamin C, EHigh-salt dietBrunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   114101/03/19   7:12 PM 1142SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS     PART IIand epigenetic changes in mucosal cells, which in the stomach leads to the development of gastritis-associated cancer.143,144Polyps Benign gastric polyps are classified as neoplastic (ade-noma and fundic gland polyps) or nonneoplastic (hyperplastic polyp, inflammatory polyp, hamartomatous polyp).145 In general, inflammatory and hamartomatous polyps have little or no malig-nant potential. Fundic gland polyps, commonly seen in patients on long-term PPI therapy, are not premalignant, but in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), dysplasia in these lesions is not uncommon, and there are numerous reports of gas-tric cancer arising in a background of fundic gland polyposis in this setting. Hyperplastic polyps usually occur in the setting of chronic inflammation. Large hyperplastic polyps (>2 cm) may harbor dysplasia or carcinoma in situ, and gastric cancer may develop remote from the hyperplastic polyp in an area of associ-ated chronic inflammation. Gastric adenomas are premalignant. Patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) have a high prevalence of gastric adenomatous polyps (about 50%), and are 10 times more likely to develop adenocarcinoma of the stomach than the general population.146 Screening EGD is indicated in these families. Patients with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer may also be at risk for gastric cancer.147Atrophic Gastritis Chronic atrophic gastritis (Fig. 26-53) is by far the most common precursor for gastric cancer, particularly the intestinal subtype (see Fig. 26-52). The prevalence of atro-phic gastritis is higher in older age groups, but it is also com-mon in younger people in areas with a high incidence of gastric cancer. In many patients, H pylori is critical in the pathogenesis of atrophic gastritis. Correa described three distinct patterns of chronic atrophic gastritis: autoimmune (involves the acid-secreting proximal stomach), hypersecretory (involving the distal stomach), and environmental (involving multiple random areas at the junction of the oxyntic and antral mucosa).139Intestinal Metaplasia Gastric carcinoma often occurs in an area of intestinal metaplasia, and the risk of gastric cancer is proportional to the extent of intestinal metaplasia of the gastric mucosa. These observations suggest that intestinal metaplasia is a precursor lesion to gastric cancer. There are different pathologic subtypes of intestinal metaplasia in the stomach, based upon the histologic and biochemical characteristics of the changed muco-sal glands. In the complete type of intestinal metaplasia, the glands are lined with goblet cells and intestinal absorptive cells Table 26-16Genetic abnormalities in gastric cancerABNORMALITIESGENEAPPROXIMATE FREQUENCY %Deletion/suppressionp53FHITAPCDCCE-cadherin60–70605050<5Amplification/overexpressionCOX-2HGF/SFVEGFc-metAIB-1β-catenink-samrasc-erb B-27060504540252010–155–7Microsatellite instability 25–40DNA aneuploidy 60–75Reproduced with permission from Feldman M, Friedman LS, Sleisenger MH, et al: Sleisenger and Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease, 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier/Saunders; 2002.1900 CasesPrecancerouslesionNumber of casesHyperplasticpolypAdenomaChronic ulcerAtrophicgastritisVerrucousgastritisStomachremnantAberrantpancreas10471318022620Total 19000.532.470.6894.841.370.110100%Figure 26-52. Precancerous lesions of the stomach.Figure 26-53. Chronic atrophic gastritis. (Used with permission from Kristen Stashek, MD.)Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   114201/03/19   7:12 PM 1143STOMACHCHAPTER 26(Fig. 26-54). These cells are indistinguishable histologically and biochemically from their small bowel counterparts. There is evi-dence that eradication of H pylori infection leads to significant regression of intestinal metaplasia and improvement in atrophic gastritis. Treatment of H pylori is mandatory for patients with these pathologic findings and H pylori infection.Benign Gastric Ulcer Although once considered a premalig-nant condition, it is likely that the older literature addressing gastric ulcers was confounded by the inclusion of inadequately biopsied ulcers s as “benign,” when, in fact, they were malig-nant. Regardless, all gastric ulcers should be viewed as malig-nant until proven otherwise with adequate biopsy and follow-up.Gastric Remnant Cancer It has long been recognized that stomach cancer can develop in the gastric remnant following subtotal gastrectomy. The extent of risk is controversial, but the phenomenon is real. Most tumors develop >10 years follow-ing the initial operation, and they usually arise in an area of chronic gastritis, metaplasia, and dysplasia. This is often near the anastomosis, but many of these tumors are quite large at pre-sentation. Bile or alkali reflux gastritis has been implicated as a precursor, and the greatest number of cases have been reported following Billroth II gastroenterostomy where some transit of pancreatic and biliary secretions through the stomach is obli-gate. Although Roux-en-Y anastomosis has been suggested to be protective, this hypothesis remains unproven. Stage for stage, the prognosis for gastric stump cancer is similar to that of other proximal gastric cancers.148Other Premalignant States Mutations in the E-cadherin gene (CDH1) are associated with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC). HDGC is an autosomal dominant trait with a high degree of penetrance. Indeed, the lifetime risk of gastric cancer in individuals with pathogenic germline mutations is 70% (in men) and 56% (in women).149 CDH1 is a tumor-suppressor gene and a second somatic hit is required for tumorigenesis. The median age at diagnosis of gastric cancer is 38 years. Presentation with clini-cally significant gastric cancer in this setting is associated with a grave prognosis. Increasing recognition of HDGC has afforded the opportunity for early recognition of pathogenic mutations in relatives of individuals with index cases and utilization of prophy-lactic or early total gastrectomy.142 Multifocal intramucosal carci-noma is a frequent finding on putative prophylactic gastrectomy specimens, even in patients without a preoperative diagnosis of carcinoma, affirming the role of early intervention. Surgery should be conducted with the aim of complete extirpation of the stomach to squamous lined esophagus proximally and normal duodenal mucosa distally. Mutation-carrying females are also at increased risk of breast cancer, most often lobular carcinomas, and should be carefully monitored.Up to 10% of gastric cancer cases appear to be familial without a clear-cut genetic diagnosis. First-degree relatives of patients with gastric cancer have a twoto threefold increased risk of developing the disease. Patients with hereditary nonpol-yposis colorectal cancer have a 10% risk of developing gastric cancer, predominantly the intestinal subtype. The mucous cell hyperplasia of Ménétrier’s disease is generally considered to carry a 5% to 10% risk of adenocarcinoma. Periodic surveil-lance EGD is prudent in all the aforementioned conditions. The glandular hyperplasia associated with gastrinoma is not prema-lignant, but ECL hyperplasia and/or carcinoid tumors can occur.PathologyDysplasia It is generally accepted that gastric dysplasia is the universal precursor to gastric adenocarcinoma. Patients with severe dysplasia should be considered for gastric resection if the abnormality is widespread or multifocal, or EMR if the severe dysplasia is localized. Patients with mild dysplasia should be followed with endoscopic biopsy surveillance, and Helicobacter eradication.Early Gastric Cancer Early gastric cancer is defined as adeno-carcinoma limited to the mucosa (T1a) and submucosa (T1b) of the stomach. The entity is common in Asia, where the higher frequency of gastric cancer justified adoption of aggressive surveillance programs. Approximately 10% of patients clini-cally staged with early gastric cancer will have lymph node metastases. There are several subtypes of early gastric cancer (Table 26-17 and Fig. 26-55). Approximately 70% of early gas-tric cancers are well differentiated, and 30% are poorly differen-tiated. The overall cure rate with adequate gastric resection and lymphadenectomy is 95%. In some Japanese centers, 50% of the gastric cancers treated are early stage (compared to less than 20% of resected gastric adenocarcinomas in the United States). Selected patients with early gastric cancer can be treated with endoscopic resection.150Table 26-17Macroscopic types of superficial gastric cancerType 0-I (protruding)aPolypoid tumorsType 0-II (superficial)Tumors with or without minimal elevation or depression relative to the surrounding mucosa Type 0-IIaSlightly elevated tumors (superficial elevated) Type 0-IIbTumors without elevation or depression (superficial flat) Type 0-IIcSlightly depressed tumors (superficial depressed)Type 0-III (excavated)Tumors with deep depressionaTumors with less than 3-mm elevation are usually classified as–IIa, with more elevated tumors being classified as 0-I.Figure 26-54. Complete intestinal metaplasia of the stomach. Note intestinal type crypts lined with goblet cells and intestinal absorptive cells. (Used with permission from Kristen Stashek, MD.)Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   114301/03/19   7:12 PM 1144SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS     PART IIGross Morphology and Histologic Subtypes Gastric cancer has been subdivided into four morphologic subtypes: polypoid, fungating, ulcerative, and scirrhous. The first two are character-ized by a largely intraluminal mass. Polypoid tumors are not ulcerated; fungating tumors are predominantly intraluminal with ulceration. In the latter two gross subtypes, the bulk of the tumor mass is confined to the wall of the stomach. Ulcerative tumors are self-descriptive. Scirrhous tumors infiltrate the entire thickness of the stomach and cover a very large surface area, commonly involve the entire stomach and have a particularly poor prognosis. Although these latter lesions may be technically resectable with total gastrectomy, it is common for both the esophageal and duodenal margins of resection to show micro-scopic evidence of tumor infiltration; distant metastasis, overt or occult, is frequent and death from recurrent disease within 6 months is common. Palliative chemotherapy may prolong median survival.151The location of the primary tumor in the stomach is essen-tial in planning an operation. Several decades ago, the large majority of gastric cancers were in the distal stomach. Recently, there has been a proximal migration of tumors, so currently, the distribution is closer to 40% distal, 30% middle, and 30% proximal.Histology The most important prognostic indicators in gastric cancer are both histologic: lymph node involvement and depth of tumor invasion. Tumor grade (degree of differentiation: well, moderately, or poorly) is also important prognostically.There are several histologic classifications of gastric cancer. The World Health Organization recognizes several histologic types (Table 26-18). The Japanese classification is similar but more detailed. The commonly used Lauren classifi-cation separates gastric cancers into intestinal type (53%), dif-fuse type (33%), and unclassified (14%). The intestinal type is associated with chronic atrophic gastritis, severe intestinal meta-plasia, and dysplasia, and tends to be less aggressive than the diffuse type. The diffuse type of gastric cancer is more likely to be poorly differentiated and is associated with younger patients and proximal tumors. The Ming classification also is useful and easy to remember, with only two types—expanding (67%) and infiltrative (33%).Recently, the significance of human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER2) was reported in patients with gastric cancer. In breast cancer, overexpression of HER2 has been reported in 15% to 25% of cases, and it is well recognized as an unfavorable prognostic factor. The development of molecular targeted agents such as trastuzumab has improved the survival of HER2-positive patients. Likewise, in gastric cancer, HER2 overexpression has been reported in 13% to 30% of patients. HER2 targeting with trastuzumab resulted in improved survival in patients with stage IV gastric cancer, and immunohistochem-istry (IHC) staining for HER2 should be performed in recurrent or metastatic cases.152 Expression of other growth receptors in gastric cancer have been characterized as well, including HER1 (epidermal growth factor rector) and HER3. The latter is associ-ated with poor prognosis, but efforts to target these receptors for therapeutic benefit are still exploratory.153Pathologic Staging Ultimately, prognosis is related to patho-logic stage. The most widespread system for staging of gastric cancer is the tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) staging system based on depth of tumor invasion, extent of lymph node metastases, and presence of distant metastases. This system was developed by the American Joint Committee on Cancer and the International Union Against Cancer, and it has under gone several modifications since it was originally conceived (Table 26-19).Clinical Manifestations. Most patients who are diagnosed with gastric cancer in the United States have advanced stage III or IV disease at the time of diagnosis. The most common symp-toms are weight loss and decreased food intake due to anorexia and early satiety. Abdominal pain (usually not severe and often ignored) is also common. Other symptoms include nausea, vomit-ing, and bloating. Acute GI bleeding is somewhat unusual (5%), but chronic occult blood loss is common and manifests as iron Type IIaType IType IIBType IIcType IIIExcavatedDepressedFlatElevatedProtrudedFigure 26-55. Pathologic types of early gastric cancer. (Repro-duced with permission from Fenoglio-Preiser CM, Noffsinger AE, Belli J, et al: Pathologic and phenotypic features of gastric cancer, Semin Oncol. 1996 Jun;23(3):292-306.)Table 26-18World Health Organization histologic typing of gastric cancerAdenocarcinoma Papillary adenocarcinoma Tubular adenocarcinoma Mucinous adenocarcinoma Signet-ring cell carcinomaAdenosquamous carcinomaSquamous cell carcinomaSmall cell carcinomaUndifferentiated carcinomaOthersReproduced with permission from Ming S-C, Goldman H: Pathology of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 2nd ed. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins; 1998.Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   114401/03/19   7:12 PM 1145STOMACHCHAPTER 26deficiency anemia and heme-positive stool. Dysphagia is com-mon if the tumor involves the cardia of the stomach. Paraneoplas-tic syndromes such as Trousseau’s syndrome (thrombophlebitis), acanthosis nigricans (hyperpigmentation of the axilla and groin), or peripheral neuropathy are rarely present.Physical examination typically is normal. Other than signs of weight loss, specific positive physical findings usually indi-cate incurability. A focused examination in a patient in whom gastric cancer is a likely part of the differential diagnosis should include an examination of the neck, chest, abdomen, and rectum.  Cervical, supraclavicular (on the left referred to as Virchow’s node), and axillary lymph nodes may be enlarged, and can be sampled with fine-needle aspiration cytology. Malignant pleural effusions or ascites, or aspiration pneumonitis may be present. An abdominal mass may indicate a large (usually T4) primary tumor, liver metastases, or carcinomatosis (including Kruken-berg’s tumor of the ovary). A palpable umbilical nodule (Sister Joseph’s nodule) is pathognomonic of advanced disease. Rec-tal exam may reveal heme-positive stool and hard nodularity extraluminally and anteriorly, indicating so-called drop metas-tases, or rectal shelf of Blumer in the pouch of Douglas.Diagnostic Evaluation. Distinguishing between peptic ulcer and gastric cancer on clinical grounds alone can be difficult. Patients over the age of 55 years who have new-onset dyspep-sia as well as all patients with dyspepsia and alarm symptoms (weight loss, recurrent vomiting, dysphagia, evidence of GI bleeding, or anemia) or with a family history of gastric cancer should undergo prompt upper endoscopy and biopsy if a muco-sal lesion is noted. Essentially, all patients in whom gastric can-cer is part of the differential diagnosis should have endoscopy and biopsy. If suspicion for cancer is high and the biopsy is negative, the patient should be reendoscoped and more aggres-sively biopsied. In some patients with gastric tumors, upper GI series can be helpful in planning treatment. Although a good double-contrast barium upper GI examination is sensitive for gastric tumors (up to 75% sensitive), in most centers, endos-copy has become the gold standard for the diagnosis of gastric malignancy. In addition, recent advances in endoscopy have contributed to the earlier diagnosis of gastric cancer. Magnify-ing endoscopy with narrow-band imaging (NBI) has undergone technological improvements and can observe the microvascu-lar architecture of the mucosa and microsurface pattern of the lesion. Magnifying endoscopy with NBI has been reported to be accurate and reliable in the diagnosis of early gastric cancer.154Preoperative staging of gastric cancer is best accomplished with abdominal/pelvic CT scanning with IV and oral contrast. MRI is probably comparable. The best way to stage the tumor locally is via EUS, which gives fairly accurate (80%) informa-tion about the depth of tumor penetration into the gastric wall, and can usually show enlarged (>5 mm) perigastric and celiac lymph nodes. However, there are limitations to tumor staging with EUS. It is highly operator dependent and may underes-timate lymph node involvement because normal-sized nodes (<5 mm) can harbor metastases. EUS is most accurate in distin-guishing early gastric cancer (T1) from more advanced tumors.Positron Emission Tomography Scanning Whole-body PET scanning derives its power from the preferential accumulation of positron-emitting 18F-fluorodeoxy glucose in tumor com-pared to nontumor cells. It is most useful in the evaluation of distant metastasis in gastric cancer, but it can also be useful in locoregional staging. PET scan is accurate when combined with spiral CT (PET-CT)155 and should be considered before major surgery in patients with particularly high-risk or locally advanced tumors.Staging Laparoscopy and Peritoneal Cytology Laparoscopy has emerged as a valuable adjunct to gastric cancer staging, par-ticularly in patients with more substantial tumors. This modality allows for rapid identification of macrosopic peritoneal metas-tases. Peritoneal lavage identifies an additional subset of patients with microscopic dissemination. The prognostic 5Table 26-19AJCC Staging Classification for 8th EditionsAJCC 8TH EDITIONSTAGETNMIAT1N0M0IBT2N0M0T1N1M0IIAT3N0M0T2N1M0T1N2M0IIBT4aN0M0T3N1M0T2N2M0T1N3aM0IIIAT4bN1M0T4aN1M0T4aN2M0T3N2M0T2N3aM0IIIBT4bN1M0T4bN2M0T4aN3aM0T3N3aM0T2N3bM0T1N3bM0IIICT4bN3aM0T4bN3bM0T4aN3bM0T3N3bM0IVAny TAny NM1T1 Tumor invades lamina propria, muscularis mucosa, or submucosa, T2 Tumor invades muscularis propria, T3 Tumor penetrates subserosal connective tissue without invasion of visceral peritoneum or adjacent structures, T4a Tumor invades serosa (visceral peritoneum), T4b: Tumor invades adjacent structures, N0 No regional lymph node metastasis, N1 Metastasis in 1-2 regional lymph nodes, N2: Metastasis in 3-6 regional lymph nodes, N3: Metastasis in 7 or more regional lymph nodes,  N3a: Metastasis in 7-15 regional lymph nodes N3b: Metastasis in 16 or  more regional lymph nodes, M0 No distant metastasis, M1 Distant metastasis.Used with the permission of the American College of Surgeons. Amin MB, Edge SB, Greene FL, et al. (Eds.) AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, 8th Ed. Springer New York, 2017.Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   114501/03/19   7:12 PM 1146SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS     PART IIsignificance of the latter has been established by several investigators.156,157 Gastrectomy should be deferred in patients with positive peritoneal cytology without obvious peritoneal metastases. Patients with gastric cancer who undergo R0 resec-tion (i.e., no gross residual disease) and are found to have posi-tive peritoneal cytology (no gross carcinomatosis) have a much poorer prognosis than those with negative cytology (median survival 14.8 months vs. 98.5 months).156 Stand-alone laparos-copy may influence management in up to 36% of cases and is increasingly advocated to allow appropriate initial treatment selection. The yield is likely highest in patients with T3 or T4 tumors, proximal tumors, or evidence of regional nodal involve-ment158; such patients may benefit from neoadjuvant therapy, and laparoscopy should be offered prior to initiation of treat-ment. Systemic therapy is the cornerstone of therapy for patients with Stage IV disease and surgery is generally reserved for pal-liation of symptoms (e.g., an obstructing distal tumor) in patients with metastases identified during laparoscopy.Treatment. Surgical resection is the only potentially curative treatment for gastric cancer,159 and most patients with clini-cally resectable locoregional disease should undergo gastrec-tomy. The goals of curative surgical treatment are resection of all tumor (i.e., R0 resection and adequate lymphadenectomy to afford accurate staging and provide locoregional control. Gener-ally, the surgeon strives for a grossly negative margin of at least 5 cm, although an evidence base for this is lacking and recent retrospective analyses have suggested that more conservative resections may be adequate.160 Conversely, complete resection of diffuse tumors sometimes proves challenging, and wider gross margins guided by frozen section are sometimes appro-priate. Prior to extending the resection on the basis of a positive frozen section margin, the surgeon should determine whether the microscopic tumor cells are within the wall or on the serosal. The latter may indicate incurable disseminated disease, render-ing additional resection proximally or distally moot, particularly when it makes the anastomosis or stump closure more difficult or hazardous.More than 15 resected lymph nodes are required for ade-quate staging, a relevant marker of quality of care.161,162 Thera-peutic nihilism should be avoided, and in the low-risk patient, an aggressive attempt to resect all tumor should be made. The primary tumor may be resected en bloc with adjacent involved organs (e.g., distal pancreas, transverse colon, or spleen) during the course of curative gastrectomy. Palliative gastrectomy may be indicated in the rare patient with incurable disease, but most patients presenting with stage IV gastric cancer can be managed without major operation.163Extent of Gastrectomy The standard operation for gastric cancer is radical subtotal gastrectomy. Unless required for R0 resection, total gastrectomy confers no additional survival ben-efit and may have adverse nutritional or quality-of-life conse-quences and higher perioperative morbidity and mortality.164 Subtotal gastric resection typically entails ligation of the left and right gastric and gastroepiploic arteries at their origins, as well as the en bloc removal of the distal 2/3 of the stomach, includ-ing the pylorus and 2 cm of duodenum, the greater and lesser omentum, and all associated lymphatic tissue (Fig. 26-56). In the absence of involvement by direct extension, the spleen and pancreatic tail are not removed.Reconstruction is usually by Billroth II gastrojejunostomy or Roux-en-Y gastrojejunostomy. The former is associated with shorter operative time and precludes roux limb stasis. The lat-ter mitigates bile reflux and, therefore, may be associated with better quality of life long term. In East Asia, especially Japan, Billroth-I gastroduodenostomy is frequently performed after distal gastrectomy. Billroth-I gastroduodenostomy consists of one anastomosis (which is usually straightforward and keeps the duodenum in the food stream). In the United States, traditional surgical teaching eschews gastroduodenostomy following gas-tric cancer resection because of the possibility of anastomotic recurrence and obstruction. A risk of remnant carcinoma attrib-uted to bile reflux has been invoked in support of Roux-en-Y reconstruction over Billroth II or I. Strong evidence linking reconstruction approach to long-term oncologic outcome is lacking.Total gastrectomy with Roux-en-Y esophagojejunostomy may be required for R0 resection (Fig. 26-57) and is frequently the optimal operation for patients with proximal gastric adeno-carcinoma. The construction of a jejunal pouch is associated with superior nutritional recovery in some but not all reports, and is a consideration.102 Proximal subtotal gastric resection, Gastroepiploicvs.ABDuodenumTransverse colonTumorLiverStomachStomachJejunumTransverse colonPancreasFigure 26-56. A and B. Radical subtotal gastrectomy. vs. = vessels. (Reproduced with permission from Daly JM, Cady B, Low DW: Atlas of Surgical Oncology. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier/Mosby-Year Book; 1993.)Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   114601/03/19   7:13 PM 1147STOMACHCHAPTER 26a technically feasible alternative to total gastrectomy for some proximal gastric tumors, requires esophagogastrostomy to a denervated distal gastric remnant, and functional outcomes are generally poor.165 Pyloroplasty in this setting virtually guar-antees bile esophagitis, and if the pylorus is left intact, gastric emptying may be problematic. An isoperistaltic jejunal intero-sition (Henley loop) between the esophagus and antrum may mitigate some of the adverse symptoms associated with this operation but adds additional complexity.Extent of Lymphadenectomy The 3rd edition of Japanese classification of gastric carcinoma defines lymph node sta-tions on the basis of anatomic landmarks. Lymph node stations  1 to 12 and 14V are classified as regional and metastasis to any other lymph nodal stations constitute distant disease (M1) (see Fig. 26-4). So-called D1 lymphadenectomy in distal gastrec-tomy requires the dissection of stations 1, 3, 4sb, 4d, 5, 6, and 7. Additional resection of stations 8a, 9, 11p, and 12a constitute D2 lymphadenectomy. D1 lymphadenectomy in total gastrec-tomy requires dissection of stations 1 through 7; D2 lymph-adenectomy includes stations 8a to 12a as well. The operation most commonly performed in the United States for gastric cancer is a D1 resection and involves removal of the primary tumor with perigastric nodes. The standard operation for gastric cancer in Asia and specialized U.S. centers is D2 gastrectomy, which involves a more extensive lymphadenectomy (removal of the D1 and D2 nodes). In addition to the tissue removed in a D1 resection, D2 gastrectomy includes the superior peritoneum overlying the mesocolon and, selectively, the pancreas, as well as nodes along the common hepatic and splenic arteries, and the celiac axis. Splenectomy and distal pancreatectomy are not routinely performed because this has been shown to increase the morbidity and mortality of the operation.166,167The purported survival advantage of D2 gastrectomy in gastric cancer is illustrated in Table 26-20, which shows the 5-year survival rates for gastric cancer stratified by pathologic stage for the United States and Japan. Randomized prospective trials have not confirmed this survival advantage. Two stud-ies showed increased operative mortality with D2 gastrectomy, but the most recent study did not (Table 26-21).166,168,169 With extended lymphadenectomy, much of the morbidity and mor-tality is attributable to performance of splenectomy and distal pancreatectomy, which are no longer routinely included as part of the D2 gastrectomy. Because D2 lymphadenectomy in total gastrectomy requires the dissection of station 10 (i.e., splenic hilar lymph nodes) splenectomy is still selectively performed, particularly for locally advanced fundic tumors.Longer-term follow-up from the Dutch lymphdenectomy trial demonstrating a disease-specific survival advantage with D2 dissection170 as well as recognition that pancreas and spleen preserving dissection can be performed with low morbidity169 have provided momentum for increased utilization of D2 gas-trectomy at high-volume centers in the United States and Europe. Some experts have argued that the D2 operation affords better staging and informs more rational decision-making regarding multimodality therapy. Without question, D2 provides a bet-ter yield of evaluable nodes. Given the frequent inadequacy of lymph node evaluation with gastrectomy in the United States and the association with poorer outcomes, greater attention to the conduct of the operation and pathologic specimen evaluation is clearly desirable. Whether better outcomes after more exten-sive dissection are an epiphenomenon of improved pathologic staging, or a function of therapeutic benefit, remains unclear.Chemotherapy and Radiation for Gastric Cancer The actu-arial 5-year survival rates for resected gastric adenocarcinoma stages I, II, and III in the United States are approximately 75%, 50%, and 25%, respectively. Because most surgical patients have stage II disease or greater, adjuvant therapy is indicated in the majority of patients who undergo initial resection. Adjuvant chemotherapy alone has not proven effective, at least in studies from Europe and the United States.171 Several studies from Table 26-20Gastric cancer 5-year survival and operative mortality in the United States and Japan MARUYAMA (JAPAN), 1971–1985AMERICAN COLLEGE OF SURGEONS, 1982–1987MEMORIAL SLOAN KETTERING, 1985–1994No. patients317618,365675Stage I91%50%84%Stage II72%29%61%Stage III44%13%29%Stage IV9%3%25%Operative mortality1%7%3%60 cmFigure 26-57. Reconstruction after total gastrectomy. Jejunal pouch (not shown here) should be considered. (Reproduced with permission from Zinner MJ: Atlas of Gastric Surgery. New York, NY: Elsevier/Churchill Livingstone; 1992.)Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   114701/03/19   7:13 PM 1148SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS     PART IIJapan and Korea have indicated a survival advantage with adju-vant chemotherapy after D2 gastrectomy.172-174 The discordance between outcomes in Asia and those from the United States and Europe have been attributed to differences in disease biology or treatment approaches. Proponents of the latter suggest that D2 lymphadenectomy provides sufficient locoregional control and that chemotherapy alone has efficacy after optimal surgery. A preferred adjuvant approach in the United States incorpo-rates chemotherapy and radiation based on the results of the Intergroup trial. This prospective randomized study of adju-vant treatment with chemotherapy (5-fluorouracil and leucovo-rin) and radiation (4500 cGy) demonstrated a survival benefit in resected patients with stage II and III adenocarcinoma of the stomach.175 Only 10% of patients entered in the study actually had D2 gastrectomy, and most (54%) had less than an adequate D1 gastrectomy. Because adequacy of lymphadenectomy has been correlated with survival, particularly in patients with stage III gastric cancer, it has been suggested that the benefits of adjuvant chemoradiation shown in this study would be vitiated by a more extensive operation.Neoadjuvant chemotherapy has emerged as a viable alter-native to adjuvant chemoradiotherapy in Europe and the United States. Theoretical advantages of this approach include more consistent completion of multimodality therapy, downstaging, earlier treatment of micrometastatic disease, and the ability to gauge response at the in situ tumor. The MAGIC trial, a random-ized controlled trial comparing perioperative epirubicin, cispla-tin, and 5-flourouracil to surgery alone demonstrated a survival advantage and supported this approach in patients with at least stage II disease.176 A subset of patients with very symptomatic tumors may not be eligible for this approach, and the perception that systemic therapy is an ineffective detour for patients who require locoregional control with surgery is sometimes hard to overcome. Regardless, neoadjuvant approaches are increasingly utilized, and even more rigorous regimens incorporating radio-therapy or targeted agents have been explored, sometimes with promising outcomes.177Recent clinical trials from Asia suggest the potential ben-efit of adjuvant chemotherapy after D2 lymphadenectomy in patients with advanced gastric cancer. These trials compared surgery alone and surgery plus adjuvant chemotherapy including oral fluoropyrimidines in resected advanced gastric cancer.172,173 A study from the Japan Clinical Oncology Group showed a 69% overall 5-year survival rate in patients with clinically curable T2b, T3, and T4 gastric cancer, treated with D2 gastrectomy alone.178 A subsequent trial from Korea demonstrated a survival advantage with adjuvant capecitabine and oxaliplatin after D2 gastrectomy compared to D2 gastrectomy alone.173 It is uncer-tain whether this approach can be translated to patients in the United States.Although the prognosis of metastatic or recurrent gastric cancer is poor, systemic chemotherapy provides a significant survival benefit over the best supportive care.179,180 Agents that have shown activity against gastric cancer include 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), cisplatin, doxorubicin, methotrexate, taxanes, and camptothecin. Until recently, 5-FU–based chemotherapy, especially in combination with platinums, played a key role in the treatment for the unresectable gastric cancer as well as several types of cancer, such as colon and lung. In the 1990s, the introduction of novel anticancer agents such as camptoth-ecin, taxanes, third-generation platinums, and new oral fluo-ropyrimidines, improved the prognosis of unresectable gastric cancer.179,180It is likely that targeted molecular agents will have an increasing role in treating gastric cancer. Recently, Trastu-zumab, a humanized molecular antibody reactive against the extracellular domain of HER2, increased the effectiveness of cytotoxic chemotherapy in patients with HER2 over-expressing advanced gastric cancer.152 Other large trials are ongoing. Deter-mination of HER2 gene amplification status may have prognos-tic significance.181Endoscopic Resection182 The shortand long-term morbidity associated with gastrectomy and the relatively infrequent dis-semination of superficial (i.e., T1) tumors to regional nodes have compelled exploration of endoscopic resection for selected lesions. Numerous East Asian centers have demonstrated that some patients with early gastric cancer are adequately treated with endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR). EMR is most appro-priate for patients in whom the probability of lymph node metas-tasis is low. According to the Japanese treatment guidelines for gastric cancer, EMR is a standard treatment for well differenti-ated gastric cancer confined to the mucosa (T1a), measuring less than 2 cm and without signs of ulceration. Such lesions are associated with a negligible risk of lymph node metastasis. 6Table 26-21Randomized trials comparing D1 and D2 gastrectomy for gastric cancerAUTHORSNUMBER OF PATIENTSTYPE OF SURGERYPOSTOPERATIVE COMPLICATIONSPOSTOPERATIVE MORTALITY5 YEAR SURVIVALBonenkamp et al.711D125445  D2431047Cuschieri et al.400D1286.535  D2461333Degiuli et al.267D1123   D217.92.2 Data from Bonenkamp JJ, Hermans J, Sasako M, et al. Extended lymph node dissection for gastric cancer. N Engl J Med. 1999;340:908; Cuschieri A, Fayers P, Fielding J, et al. Postoperative morbidity and mortality after D1 and D2 resections for gastric cancer: preliminary results of the MRC randomized controlled surgical trial. The Surgical Cooperative Group. Lancet. 1996;347:995; and Degiuli M, Sasako M, Ponti A, et al. Morbidity and mortality in the Italian Gastric Cancer Study Group randomized clinical trial of D1 versus D2 resection for gastric cancer. Br J Surg. 2010;97:5.Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   114801/03/19   7:13 PM 1149STOMACHCHAPTER 26En bloc resection is required to evaluate margins for confirma-tion of complete resection. The development of endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) allows en bloc resection of larger tumors. This has increased the feasibility of endoscopic resec-tion of larger lesions (<3 cm) at experienced centers. If patho-logic evaluation of the resected specimen does not demonstrate ulceration, penetration of the muscularis mucosae, or lymphatic invasion, the risk of lymph node metastases is less than 1%. Even the occasional patient with higher risk stigmata may be managed endoscopically, particularly in the presence of comor-bidities that preclude safe operation.Screening for Gastric Cancer. In Japan, it clearly has been shown that patients participating in gastric cancer screening pro-grams have a significantly decreased risk of dying from gastric cancer. Thus, screening is effective in a high-risk population. Screening the general population in the United States (a low-risk country) is probably not justified, but patients clearly at risk for gastric cancer probably should have periodic endoscopy and biopsy. This includes patients with familial adenomatous polyposis, hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer, gastric adenomas, Ménétrier’s disease, intestinal metaplasia or dyspla-sia, and remote gastrectomy or gastrojejunostomy.Gastric LymphomaGastric lymphomas generally account for about 4% of gastric malignancies. Over half of patients with non-Hodgkin’s lym-phoma have involvement of the GI tract. The stomach is the most common site of primary GI lymphoma, and over 95% are non-Hodgkin’s type. Most are B-cell type, thought to arise in mucosa associated lymphoid tissue (MALT), although most high-grade gastric lymphomas are without any characteristics of the low-grade MALT neoplasm.183 About half of gastric lym-phomas are histologically low grade, and about half are high grade. Interestingly, the normal stomach is relatively devoid of lymphoid tissue. However, in the setting of chronic gastritis, the stomach acquires MALT, which can undergo malignant degen-eration. Again, H pylori is thought to be the culprit. In popula-tions with a high incidence of gastric lymphoma, there is a high incidence of H pylori infection; patients with gastric lymphoma also usually have H pylori infection.184Low-grade MALT lymphoma, essentially a monoclonal proliferation of B cells, presumably arises from a background of chronic gastritis associated with H pylori. These relatively innocuous tumors then undergo degeneration to high-grade lymphoma, which is the usual variety seen by the surgeon. Remarkably, when the H pylori is eradicated and the gastritis improves, the low-grade MALT lymphoma often disappears. Thus, low-grade MALT lymphoma is not a surgical lesion. Careful follow-up is necessary particularly in those lesions with a t(11:18) translocation, thought to be a risk factor for a more aggressive MALT lesion. If low-grade lymphoma per-sists after H pylori eradication, radiation should be consid-ered for disease clinically confined to the stomach (stage I), while chemotherapy with or without radiation is used for more advanced lesions (Fig. 26-58).Patients with high-grade gastric lymphoma require aggres-sive oncologic treatment for cure and present with many of the same symptoms as gastric cancer patients. However, systemic symptoms such as fever, weight loss, and night sweats occur in about 50% of patients with gastric lymphoma. The tumors may bleed and/or obstruct. Lymphadenopathy and/or organomegaly suggest systemic disease. Diagnosis is by endoscopy and biopsy. Much of the tumor may be submucosal, and an assiduous attempt at biopsy is necessary. Primary lymphoma is usually nodular with enlarged gastric folds. A diffusely infiltrative pro-cess akin to linitis plastica is more suggestive of secondary gas-tric involvement by lymphoma. A diligent search for extragastric disease is necessary before the diagnosis of localized primary gastric lymphoma is made. This includes EUS; CT scanning of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis; and bone marrow biopsy. Most patients with high-grade gastric lymphoma are currently treated with chemotherapy and radiation, without surgical resection. Treatment-related perforation or bleeding is an unusual but recognized complication. For disease limited to the stomach and regional nodes, radical subtotal D2 gastrectomy may be performed, especially for bulky tumors with bleeding and/or obstruction. Palliative gastrectomy for tumor complica-tions also has a role. Certainly, a multidisciplinary team should be involved in managing patients with primary gastric lymphoma.Gastrointestinal Stromal TumorGISTs arise from interstitial cells of Cajal (ICC) and are dis-tinct from leiomyoma and leiomyosarcoma, which arise from smooth muscle.185,186 Prognosis in patients with GIST tumors depends on tumor size, location, and mitotic count. Metasta-sis, when it occurs, is typically by the hematogenous route. Virtually all GISTs should be resected along with a margin of normal tissue. Most GISTs (and almost no smooth muscle tumors) express c-KIT (CD117) or the related PDGF receptor A,  as well as CD34; almost all smooth muscle tumors (and almost no GISTs) express actin and desmin. These markers can often be detected on specimens obtained by fine-needle aspiration187 and are useful in differentiating between GIST and smooth muscle tumor histopathologically. Lesions that are definitively leiomyoma by histopathologic criteria can be observed if small and asymptomatic. Larger or symptomatic gastric leiomyomas are adequately treated by enucleation or wedge resection. Lesions that are definitively GIST or leio-myosarcoma are best treated by resection with negative mar-gins. Most equivocal lesions should be resected provided that the patient has a reasonable operative risk.Two-thirds of all GISTs occur in the stomach and have a more favorable prognosis than do GISTs occurring in other locations. Epithelial cell stromal GIST is the most common cell type arising in the stomach, and cellular spindle type is the next most common. The glomus tumor type is seen only in the stom-ach. Smaller lesions are usually found incidentally, although they occasionally may ulcerate and cause bleeding. Larger lesions may produce symptoms of weight loss, abdominal pain, fullness, early satiety, and bleeding. An abdominal mass may be palpable. Metastasis is by the hematogenous route, most often to liver.Diagnosis is by endoscopy and biopsy, although the inter-pretation of the latter may be problematic. When performed, a transluminal (i.e., endoscopic) approach to biopsy is preferred to a percutaneous one, to avoid to the potential for fragmenta-tion and peritoneal seeding. A nondiagnostic biopsy does not preclude resection of a suspicious appearing lesion. Metastatic workup entails CT of the abdomen, and pelvis (chest X-ray suf-fices in lieu of CT of the chest for most patients). Most GISTs are solitary. Local resection with clear margins is adequate sur-gical treatment but is sometimes impractical for larger prepy-loric or pyloric channel tumors, or those near the GE junction. 7Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   114901/03/19   7:13 PM 1150SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS     PART IITrue invasion of adjacent structures by the primary tumor is occasionally seen with larger more aggressive lesions. If safe, en bloc resection of involved surrounding organs is appropriate to remove all tumor.The risk of tumor recurrence or metastasis behavior has been stratified into four groups according to the tumor size and mitotic count.110 Very low risk is defined by size <2 cm and <5 mitoses/50 HPF (high-power field). Low risk is defined by size 2 to 5 cm and <5 mitoses/50 cm. Intermediate risk is defined by size <5 cm and 6 to 10 mitoses/50 HPF or size 5 to 10 cm and >5 mitoses/50 HPF. High risk is defined by size >5 cm and >5 mitoses/50HPF, size >10 cm regardless of mitotic rate or >10 mitoses/50 HPF regardless of size. As mentioned, stomach lesions are associated with lower risk than are tumors in other locations. Classification based on tumor location, size, and mitotic rate have been proposed to evaluate the risk of recurrence and metastasis and role for adjuvant therapy.188 In an effort to further refine risk stratification, a number of nomo-grams have been introduced incorporating tumor features. These tools draw upon and are subject to the limitations of the institu-tional data from which they are derived, but they are sometimes helpful in counseling patients.Mutations in the oncodriver c-kit and PDGFRA are pres-ent in a majority of GISTs. This has been exploited through the use of imatinib (Gleevec), a tyrosine kinase inhibitor. Sev-eral clinical trials in a metastatic disease setting demonstrated marked improvements in median survival from 9 months to greater than 5 years.189 These striking results not only estab-lished imatinib as the primary therapy for metastatic GIST, but they also compelled broader efforts to target solid tumors with small molecule inhibitors. Notably, up to 50% of treated patients develop resistance to imatinib by 2 years, and several Low-grade (indolent) MALTLymphoma persistsStage IIChemo** + XRT*Stage IXRT**XRT: external beam radiation therapy, approximately 30 Gy with 10 Gy boost**Chemo: chemotherapy regimens include chlorambucil, fludarabinel,and cyclosphosphamide, vincristine, prednisone (COP) +/– rituximabClose follow-upNo residual diseaseResidual diseaseFurther chemotherapy*Chemo: chemotherapy regimen usually cyclophosphamide,doxorobicin, vincristine, prednisone (CHOP) +/– rituximab**XRT: external beam radiation, approximately 30 Gy with 10 Gy boostFollow-upLymphoma regressionHigh-grade (aggressive)SurgeryStage IVChemo* +/– XRT**Stage I, II, IIIChemo* + XRT**Stage III or IVLymph node involvementt(11:18) translocationConfined to gastric wallNo t(11:18) translocationH pylori eradication therapyand chemo** +/– XRT*H pylori eradication therapyRe-evaluate at 3–6 monthsH pylori eradication therapyRe-evaluate at 12 monthsFigure 26-58. Algorithm for the treatment of gastric lymphoma. MALT = mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue. (Reproduced with permission from Yoon SS, Coit DG, Portlock CS, et al. The diminishing role of surgery in the treatment of gastric lymphoma, Ann Surg. 2004 Jul;240(1):28-37.)Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   115001/03/19   7:13 PM 1151STOMACHCHAPTER 26second-line agents have been utilized for patients with refrac-tory disease, most notable sunitinib.The efficacy of imatinib as adjuvant therapy for high risk GIST has been demonstrated in two randomized clinical trials, ACOSOG Z9001 and SSG XVIII.190,191 The former trial randomized patients to 1 year of adjuvant imatinib or pla-cebo and showed an improvement in recurrence-free survival with imatinib. The latter trial demonstrated an overall survival advantage with 3 years compared to 1 year of therapy. Imatinib is now recommended in high risk groups as an adjuvant therapy, for three years or longer. Preoperative therapy with imatinib may be indicated in selected patients with larger lesions that may be more difficult to completely resect or require multivis-ceral resection.Molecular profiling has been embraced with growing rec-ognition that specific tumor subtypes are insensitive to imatinib. Patients with PDGFRA D842V mutations, for example, do not respond to imatinib.192 Management of metastatic GIST is prin-cipally medical, but surgery has a selected role. An algorithm for the treatment of patients with metastatic GIST is shown in Fig. 26-59.Gastric Neuroendocrine Tumors193,194Compared to neuroendocrine tumors of the midgut and hind-gut, neuroendcorine tumors of the stomach are rare. Gastric neuroendocrine tumors comprise about 1% of all neuroen-docrine tumors and less than 2% of gastric neoplasms. They arise from gastric enterochromaffin-like (ECL) cells and may have malignant potential. The apparent incidence of gastric neuroendocrine tumors is increasing, perhaps related to increased detection or the increasing use of acid suppres-sive medication. The latter may cause hypergastrinemia, and gastrin has a recognized trophic effect on gastric ECL cells. Nomenclature remains a point of confusion; carcinoid and well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumor (NET) are synony-mous according to WHO classification.Gastric neuroendocrine tumors are classified into one of three different types. Type I is the most common, account-ing for about 75% of cases. Type I lesions occur in patients with chronic hypergastrinemia secondary to pernicious anemia or atrophic gastritis. These lesions occur more frequently in women, are often multiple and small, and have low malignant potential (<5% metastasize). The role of long-term acid sup-pression with resultant hypergastrinemia in the pathogenesis of type I gastric carcinoids is unclear. Type II gastric neuroendo-crine tumors are associated with MEN1 and ZES. These lesions also tend to be small and multiple, but they have a somewhat higher malignant potential than type I lesions (10% metasta-size). Type II lesions are more common in the setting of MEN1; they are quite uncommon in patients with sporadic ZES. The constellation of gastric acidity, hypergastrinemia, and gastric neuroendocrine tumors suggests gastrinoma until proven other-wise. Type III gastric neuroendocrine tumors are sporadic. They are most often solitary (usually >2 cm) and occur more com-monly in men. They are not associated with hypergastrinemia. Most patients have regional nodal or distant metastases at the time of diagnosis, and some present with symptoms of carcinoid syndrome.Gastric neuroendocrine tumors are usually diagnosed with endoscopy and biopsy. The type can be determined based upon clinical context, patient history, the presence or absence of atro-phic gastric mucosa, gastric pH and gastrin level. Some tumors are submucosal and may be quite small. They are often confused with heterotopic pancreas or small leiomyomas. Biopsy may be difficult because of the submucosal location, and EUS can be helpful in defining the size and depth of the lesion. Plasma 8Metastatic or recurrent GISTRepeat imaging in 1 to 3 monthsResponsive/Stable diseaseResectableConsidersurgeryContinueimatinibUnresectableConsidersurgeryDose escalation toimatinib 400 mg bidSunitinibRegorafenibClinical trialUnifocalMultifocalProgressive diseaseImatinib 400 mg four times a day in all KIT, non-D842V PDGFRA mutations,and WT GIST Consider 400 mg twice a day in exon 9 KIT mutationsConsider clinical trial in PDGFRA D842V mutationsFigure 26-59. Algorithm for the treatment of malignant gastrointestinal stromal tumor. (Reproduced with permission from Balachandran VP, DeMatteo RP: Gastrointestinal stromal tumors: who should get imatinib and for how long? Adv Surg. 2014;48:165-183.)Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   115101/03/19   7:13 PM 1152SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS     PART IIchromogranin A levels are frequently elevated. CT scan and octreotide or gallium dotatate scans are useful for staging.Type I and II patients with numerous diminutive lesions can be followed with serial endoscopy. Small lesions con-fined to the mucosa (typically type I or type II lesions) less than 1 cm may be treated endoscopically with EMR if there are only a few lesions (<5). Occasionally a slightly larger lesion (1–2 cm) necessitate local surgical excision. Larger lesions and type III lesions should be removed by D1 or D2 gastrectomy. Antrectomy to mitigate gastric secretion in type I patients with refractory growing lesions was invoked as a viable treatment strategy in the past, but it is rarely indicated.Survival is excellent for node-negative patients (>90% 5-year survival); node-positive patients have a 50% 5-year sur-vival. Gastrinoma should be resected if located in patients with type II carcinoid. The 5-year survival for patients with type I gastric carcinoid is close to 100%; for patients with type III lesions, the 5-year survival is less than 50%. Somatostatin ana-logue therapy may delay progression of metastatic disease. Sur-gical debulking may have a role in selected patients with limited metastatic disease.BENIGN GASTRIC NEOPLASMSLeiomyomaThe typical leiomyoma is submucosal and firm. If ulcerated, it has an umbilicated appearance and may bleed. Histologically, these lesions appear to be of smooth muscle origin. Lesions <2 cm are usually asymptomatic and benign. Larger lesions may cause symptoms such as bleeding, obstruction, or pain. Asymp-tomatic lesions <2 cm may be carefully observed or enucleated if fine-needle aspiration and immune markers confirm smooth muscle tumor; larger lesions and symptomatic lesions should be removed by wedge resection (often possible laparoscopically). When lesions thought to be leiomyoma are observed rather than resected, the patient should be made aware of their presence and the small possibility for malignancy.LipomaLipomas are benign submucosal fatty tumors that are usually asymptomatic, found incidentally on upper GI series or EGD. Endoscopically, they have a characteristic appearance; there also is a characteristic appearance on EUS. Excision is unnec-essary unless the patient is symptomatic.GastroparesisGastric motility disorders include delayed gastric emptying (gastroparesis), rapid gastric emptying, and motor and sensory abnormalities (e.g., functional dyspepsia). Surgically relevant secondary disorders of gastric motility (e.g., dumping, gastric stasis, and Roux syndrome) are discussed under Postgastrec-tomy Problems. Gastroparesis is the most surgically relevant primary disorder of gastric motility.195,196Most patients with primary gastroparesis present with nausea, vomiting, bloating, early satiety, and/or abdominal pain. Eighty percent of these patients are women; some are diabetic. Postprandial vomiting significantly complicates the management of blood glucose in the latter group, predispos-ing to hypoglycemia following preprandial insulin. In patients with gastroparesis, it is important to rule out mechanical gastric outlet obstruction, and small-bowel obstruction. An upper GI series may suggest slow gastric emptying and relative atony, 9or it may be normal. EGD may show bezoars or retained food but is frequently normal. Gastric emptying scintigraphy shows delayed solid emptying, and often delayed liquid emptying. Gastroparesis can be a manifestation of a variety of problems (Table 26-22). Medical treatment includes promotility agents, antiemetics, and, perhaps, botulinum injection into the pylorus.If the diabetic gastroparetic patient is not a candidate for pancreas transplant, both gastrostomy (for decompression) and jejunostomy tubes (for feeding and prevention of hypo-glycemia) can be helpful in managing these patients. Other surgical options include implantation of a gastric pacemaker, pyloroplasty or peroral endoscopic pyloromyotmy (particularly in patients responsive to pyloric Botox injection), and gastric resection.197 Generally, gastric resection should be done only after other therapeutic options have been exhausted.Massive Upper Gastrointestinal BleedingAlthough there are arbitrary definitions of “massive” upper GI bleeding put forth, perhaps the most practical definition in the current era would be acute GI bleeding proximal to the ligament of Treitz, which requires blood transfusion. In multiple series, the stomach and proximal duodenum are by far the most com-mon sources of pathology associated with this diagnosis.109,198 Table 26-22Etiology of gastroparesisIdiopathicEndocrine or metabolic Diabetes mellitus Thyroid disease Renal insufficiencyAfter gastric surgery After resection After vagotomyCentral nervous system disorders Brain stem lesions Parkinson’s diseasePeripheral neuromuscular disorders Myotonia dystrophica Duchenne muscular dystrophyConnective tissue disorders Scleroderma Polymyositis/dermatomyositisInfiltrative disorders Lymphoma AmyloidosisDiffuse gastrointestinal motility disorder Chronic intestinal pseudo-obstructionMedication-inducedElectrolyte imbalance Potassium, calcium, magnesiumMiscellaneous conditions Infections (especially viral) Paraneoplastic syndrome Ischemic conditions Gastric ulcerReproduced with permission from Parkman HP, Harris AD, Krevsky B, et al: Gastroduodenal motility and dysmotility: an update on techniques available for evaluation, Am J Gastroenterol. 1995 Jun;90(6):869-892.Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   115201/03/19   7:13 PM 1153STOMACHCHAPTER 26The most common causes of acute upper GI bleeding in emer-gency department or hospitalized patients are peptic ulcer, gastri-tis, Mallory-Weiss syndrome, and esophagogastric varices. Less common causes include benign or malignant neoplasm, angio-dysplasia, Dieulafoy’s lesion, portal gastropathy, Ménétrier’s disease, and watermelon stomach. Arterioenteric fistula should always be considered in the patient who has an aortic graft or who has undergone repair of a visceral artery aneurysm.The most important issues in the early hospital manage-ment of patients with acute upper GI bleeding are resuscita-tion and risk stratification. Large-bore IV access and Foley catheterization is accomplished, and nasogastric intubation is considered. Risk stratification is essentially accomplished by answering the following questions:a.	What is the magnitude and acuity of the hemorrhage? Hy-potension, tachycardia, oliguria, low hematocrit, pallor, al-tered mentation, and/or hematemesis suggest a large blood loss that has occurred over a short period of time. This is a high-risk situation.b.	Does the patient have significant chronic disease, particu-larly lung, liver, kidney, and/or heart disease, which com-promises physiologic reserve? If yes, this is a high-risk situation.c.	Is the patient anticoagulated, or immunosuppressed? If yes, this is a high-risk situation.d.	On endoscopy, is the patient bleeding from varices, or is there active bleeding, or is there a visible vessel, or is there a deep ulcer overlying a large vessel (e.g., posterior duode-nal ulcer overlying the gastroduodenal artery)? Could the patient be bleeding from an arterio-enteric fistula? If yes, this is a high-risk situation.When judged to be low risk, most patients will stop bleed-ing with supportive treatment and IV PPI. Selected patients may be discharged from the emergency department and managed on an outpatient basis.If the patient is deemed to be high risk based on one or more of the aforementioned questions, then the following should be done immediately:1.	Type and cross-match for transfusion of blood products.2.	Admit to ICU or monitored bed in specialized unit.3.	Consult surgeon.4.	Consult gastroenterologist.5.	Start intravenous PPI.6.	Perform upper endoscopy within 12 hours, after resuscita-tion and correction of coagulopathy. Endoscopic hemosta-sis should be considered in most high-risk patients with acute upper GI bleeding.Although the surgeon should be involved early in the hos-pital course of all high-risk patients with acute upper GI bleed-ing, most of these patients will be adequately managed without operation. Mucosal lesions can usually be controlled with endo-scopic hemotherapy and medical management. Occasionally, arteriography can be helpful.199 Operation for bleeding ulcer is discussed previously (see “Operation for Bleeding Peptic Ulcer” and Fig. 26-43).Isolated Gastric VaricesIsolated gastric varices are those that occur in the absence of esophageal varices and are classified as type I (fundic) or type II (distal to fundus including proximal duodenum).200  The presence of isolated gastric varices is usually associated with portal hyper-tension or splenic vein thrombosis. Although there is a significant bleeding risk from isolated gastric varices on long-term follow-up, there is no indication for the routine application of prophylactic measures.Patients with acute upper GI bleeding from isolated gas-tric varices should be considered high risk. Although data are limited, octreotide and/or vasopressin infusion may decease bleeding, if tolerated. Balloon tamponade with a Sengstaken-Blakemore tube may provide temporary control of exsanguinat-ing hemorrhage from type isolated gastric varices, but if this is used, endotracheal intubation for airway protection is prudent. Endoscopic treatment with sclerotherapy or varix ligation is less successful than in esophageal varices but should be con-sidered. Interventional radiology should be consulted and bal-loon-occluded retrograde transvenous obliteration considered. A transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPSS) may be useful if there is nonsegmental portal hypertension. If the patient has splenic vein thrombosis and left-sided (sinistral) or segmental portal hypertension, splenectomy is quite effective in controlling bleeding from isolated gastric varices. The operative mortality is 5%. Liver transplantation should always be consid-ered in the cirrhotic patient.Hypertrophic Gastropathy  (Ménétrier’s Disease)There are two clinical syndromes characterized by epithelial hyperplasia and giant gastric folds: ZES and Ménétrier’s dis-ease. The latter is characteristically associated with protein-losing gastropathy and hypochlorhydria. There are large rugal folds in the proximal stomach, and the antrum is usu-ally spared. Mucosal biopsy shows diffuse hyperplasia of the surface mucus-secreting cells and usually decreased parietal cells (Fig. 26-60). It has recently been suggested that Méné-trier’s disease is caused by local overexpression of transform-ing growth factor-α in the gastric mucosa, which stimulates the epidermal growth factor receptor, a receptor tyrosine kinase, on gastric SECs. This results in the selective expan-sion of surface mucous cells in the gastric body and fundus.  A few patients with this unusual disease have been successfully Figure 26-60. Mucosal biopsy in Ménétrier’s disease. (Repro-duced with permission from Ming S-C, Goldman H: Pathology of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 2nd ed. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins; 1998.)Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   115301/03/19   7:13 PM 1154SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS     PART IItreated with the epidermal growth factor receptor blocking monoclonal antibody cetuximab.201Most patients with Ménétrier’s disease are middle-aged men who present with epigastric pain, weight loss, diarrhea, and hypoproteinemia. There may be an increased risk of gastric cancer. Sometimes, the disease regresses spontaneously. Occa-sionally it is associated with H pylori infection, and the disease improves with helicobacter eradication. Total gastrectomy may be indicated for bleeding, severe hypoproteinemia, or cancer.Watermelon Stomach (Gastric Antral  Vascular Ectasia)The parallel red stripes atop the mucosal folds of the distal stomach give this rare entity its sobriquet. Histologically, gas-tric antral vascular ectasia (GAVE) is characterized by dilated mucosal blood vessels that often contain thrombi, in the lamina propria. Mucosal fibromuscular hyperplasia and hyalinization often are present (Fig. 26-61). The histologic appearance can resemble portal hypertensive gastropathy, but the latter usually affects the proximal stomach, whereas watermelon stomach pre-dominantly affects the distal stomach. β-Blockers and nitrates, useful in the treatment of portal hypertensive gastropathy, are ineffective in patients with gastric antral vascular ectasia. Patients with GAVE are usually elderly women with chronic GI blood loss requiring transfusion. Most have an associated autoimmune connective tissue disorder, and at least 25% have chronic liver disease. Nonsurgical treatment options include estrogen and progesterone, and endoscopic treatment with the neodymium yttrium-aluminum garnet (Nd:YAG) laser or argon plasma coagulator.202 Antrectomy may be required to control blood loss, and this operation is quite effective but carries increased morbidity in this elderly patient group. Patients with portal hypertension and antral vascular ectasia should be consid-ered for transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPSS).Dieulafoy’s LesionDieulafoy’s lesion is a congenital arteriovenous malformation characterized by an unusually large tortuous submucosal artery. If this artery is eroded, impressive pulsatile bleeding may occur. To the endoscopist or surgeon, this appears as a stream of arte-rial blood emanating from what appears grossly to be a normal gastric mucosa. The lesion typically occurs in middle-aged or elderly men and may be more common in patients with liver disease.203 Patients typically present with upper GI bleeding, which may be intermittent, and endoscopy can miss the lesion if it is not actively bleeding. Treatment options include endoscopic hemostatic therapy, angiographic embolization, or operation. At surgery, the lesion may be oversewn or resected.Bezoars/DiverticulaBezoars are concretions of indigestible matter that accumulate in the stomach. Trichobezoars are composed of swallowed hair (Fig. 26-62). Phytobezoars are composed of vegetable matter and, in the United States, are usually seen in association with gastroparesis or gastric outlet obstruction. They also are asso-ciated with persimmon ingestion. Most commonly, bezoars produce obstructive symptoms, but they may cause ulceration and bleeding. Diagnosis is suggested by upper GI series and confirmed by endoscopy. Treatment options include enzyme therapy (papain, cellulase, or acetylcysteine), endoscopic dis-ruption and removal, or surgical removal.Gastric diverticula are usually solitary and may be con-genital or acquired. Congenital diverticula are true diverticula and contain a full coat of muscularis propria, whereas acquired diverticula (perhaps caused by pulsion) usually have a negli-gible outer muscle layer. Most gastric diverticula occur in the posterior cardia or fundus (Fig. 26-63) and are usually asymp-tomatic. However, they can become inflamed and may produce pain or bleeding. Perforation is rare. Asymptomatic diverticula do not require treatment, but symptomatic lesions should be removed. This can often be done laparoscopically.Foreign BodiesIngested foreign bodies are usually asymptomatic. Small coins usually pass through the GI tract without difficulty. Sharp or Figure 26-62. Trichobezoar forming cast of stomach and duode-num; removed from 15-year-old girl. (Reproduced with permission from DeBakey M, Ochsner A: Bezoars and concretions, Surgery. 1938;Dec;4:934.)Figure 26-61. Gastric antral vascular ectasia (watermelon stom-ach). (Reproduced with permission from Godlman H, Hayek J, Federman M: Gastrointestinal Mucosal Biopsy. New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone; 1996.)Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   115401/03/19   7:13 PM 1155STOMACHCHAPTER 26large objects in the stomach should be removed. This can usu-ally be done endoscopically, with an overtube technique. Rec-ognized dangers include aspiration of the foreign body during removal and rupture of drug-containing bags in “body packers.” Both complications can be fatal. Surgical removal is recom-mended in body packers who ingest drug parcels for smuggling and in patients with large jagged objects that cannot be safely removed endoscopically. Corrosive objects (i.e., batteries) should be removed promptly usually endoscopically. Ingested magnets should be removed unless they are small and singular and without other ingested metal objects.Mallory-Weiss SyndromeThe Mallory-Weiss lesion is a longitudinal tear in the mucosa of the GE junction.204 It is presumably caused by forceful vom-iting and/or retching, and it is commonly seen in alcoholics. It presents with upper GI bleeding, often with hematemesis. Endoscopy confirms the diagnosis and may be useful in con-trolling the bleeding, but 90% of patients stop bleeding sponta-neously. Other options to control the bleeding include balloon tamponade, angiographic embolization, or selective infusion of vasopressin, systemic vasopressin, and operation. Surgical treat-ment consists of oversewing the bleeding lesion through a long gastrotomy.VolvulusGastric volvulus is a twist of the stomach that usually occurs in association with a large hiatal hernia. It also can occur in patients with an unusually mobile stomach without hiatal hernia. Typically, the stomach twists along its long axis (organoaxial volvulus), and the greater curvature flips up (Fig. 26-64C). If the stomach twists around the transverse axis, it is called mesentero-axial rotation (Fig. 26-64A and Fig. 26-64B). Often, volvulus is a chronic condition that can be surprisingly asymptomatic. In these instances, expectant nonoperative management is typi-cally advised, especially in the elderly. The risk of strangulation and infarction has been overestimated in asymptomatic patients. Symptomatic patients should be considered for operation, espe-cially if the symptoms are severe and/or progressive. Patients may present with symptoms of pain and pressure related to the intermittently distending and poorly emptying twisted stomach. Pressure on the lung may produce dyspnea, pressure on the peri-cardium may produce palpitations, and pressure on the esopha-gus may produce dysphagia. Symptoms are often relieved with vomiting or passage of a nasogastric tube. Gastric infarction is a surgical emergency, and the patient can be moribund. Gastric necrosis may be extensive or focal. Elective operation for gas-tric volvulus usually involves reduction of the stomach and gas-tropexy with or without repair of hiatal hernia. Gastropexy alone should be considered for high-risk patients since it can nearly always be performed laparoscopically and may be surprisingly effective in relieving mechanical symptoms.GASTROSTOMYA gastrostomy is performed either for alimentation or for gastric drainage/decompression. Gastrostomy may be done percutane-ously, laparoscopically, or via open technique.205,206 Currently, percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy is the most common method used. The open techniques include the Stamm method (Fig. 26-65), the Witzel method (Fig. 26-66), and the Janeway method. The Janeway gastrostomy, designed to create a per-manent nondraining gastric stoma that can be intermittently intubated, is more complicated than the other open techniques, and is rarely necessary. By far the most common surgical tech-nique is the Stamm gastrostomy, which can be performed open or laparoscopically.Complications of gastrostomy include infection, dis-lodgment, leakage with peritonitis, and aspiration pneumonia. Although gastrostomy tubes usually do prevent tense gastric dil-atation, they may not adequately drain the stomach, especially when the patient is bedridden, and they cannot always be relied upon to prevent pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents.ABCFigure 26-64. A through C. Gastric volvulus. (Reproduced with permission from Buchanan J: Volvulus of the stomach, Br J Surg. 1930;July;18(69):99-112.)Figure 26-63. Upper GI contrast study showing a diverticulum of the stomach. (Used with permission from Marc Levine, MD.)Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   115501/03/19   7:13 PM 1156SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS     PART IIPOSTGASTRECTOMY PROBLEMS207Dumping SyndromeDumping is a phenomenon caused by the destruction or bypass of the pyloric sphincter.208 However, other factors undoubtedly play a role because dumping can occur after operations that pre-serve the pylorus, such as parietal cell vagotomy. Also, an appro-priate stimulus may provoke dumping symptoms, even in some patients who have not undergone surgery. Clinically significant dumping occurs in 5% to 10% of patients after pyloroplasty, pyloromyotomy, or gastrectomy, and consists of a constellation of postprandial symptoms ranging in severity from annoying to disabling. The symptoms are thought to be the result of the abrupt delivery of a hyperosmolar load into the small bowel due to ablation of the pylorus or decreased gastric compliance. Typi-cally, 15 to 30 minutes after a meal, the patient becomes dia-phoretic, weak, light-headed, and tachycardic. These symptoms may be ameliorated by recumbence or saline infusion. Crampy abdominal pain is not uncommon, and diarrhea often follows. This is referred to as early dumping and should be distinguished from postprandial (reactive) hypoglycemia, also called late dumping, which usually occurs later (2–3 hours following a meal) and is relieved by the administration of sugar. A variety Figure 26-65. Stamm gastrostomy. (Reproduced with permission from Zuidema GD, Yeo CJ: Shackelford’s Surgery of the Alimentary Tract, 5th ed. Vol. II. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier/Saunders; 2002.)Figure 26-66. A through F. Witzel gastros-tomy. (Reproduced with permission from Zuidema GD, Yeo CJ: Shackelford’s Sur-gery of the Alimentary Tract, 5th ed. Vol. II.  Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier/Saunders; 2002.)Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   115601/03/19   7:13 PM 1157STOMACHCHAPTER 26of hormonal aberrations have been observed in early dumping, including increased serum levels of VIP, CCK, neurotensin, peripheral hormone peptide YY, renin-angiotensin-aldosterone, and decreased atrial natriuretic peptide. Late dumping is associ-ated with hypoglycemia and hyperinsulinemia.Medical therapy for the dumping syndrome consists of dietary modification and somatostatin analogue (octreotide). Often, symptoms improve if the patient avoids liquids during meals. Hyperosmolar liquids (e.g., milk shakes) may be particu-larly troublesome. There is some evidence that adding dietary fiber compounds at mealtime may improve the syndrome. If dietary manipulation fails, the patient is started on octreotide, 100 μg subcutaneously twice daily. This can be increased up to 500 μg twice daily if necessary. The long-acting depot octreo-tide preparation is useful. Octreotide not only ameliorates the abnormal hormonal pattern seen in patients with dumping symptoms, but it also promotes restoration of a fasting motility pattern in the small intestine (i.e., restoration of the MMC). The α-glucosidase inhibitor acarbose may be particularly helpful in ameliorating the symptoms of late dumping.Only a very small percentage of patients with dumping symptoms ultimately require surgery. Most patients improve with time (months and even years), dietary management, and medication. Therefore, the surgeon should not rush to reoper-ate on the patient with dumping symptoms. Multidisciplinary nonsurgical management must be optimized first. Before reop-eration, a period of inhospital observation is useful to define the severity of the patient’s symptoms and patient compliance with prescribed dietary and medical therapy.The results of remedial operation for dumping are variable and unpredictable. There are a variety of surgical approaches, none of which work consistently well. Addition-ally, there is not a great deal of experience reported in the literature with any of these methods and long-term follow-up is rare. Patients with disabling refractory dumping after gas-trojejunostomy can be considered for simple takedown of this anastomosis provided that the pyloric channel is patent. The reversed intestinal segment is rarely used today—and rightly so. This operation interposes a 10-cm reversed segment of intestine between the stomach and the proximal small bowel. This slows gastric emptying, but often leads to obstruction, requiring reoperation. Isoperistaltic interposition (Henley loop) has not been successful in ameliorating severe dumping over the long term. The Roux-en-Y gastrojejunostomy is asso-ciated with delayed gastric emptying, probably on the basis of disordered motility in the Roux limb. Taking advantage of this disordered physiology, surgeons have used this operation successfully in the management of the dumping syndrome. Although this is probably the procedure of choice in the small group of patients requiring operation for severe dumping fol-lowing gastric resection, gastric stasis may result, particularly if a large gastric remnant is left. In the presence of significant gastric acid secretion, marginal ulceration is common after both jejunal interposition and Roux-en-Y procedures; thus, concomitant vagotomy and hemigastrectomy should be con-sidered. The theoretical possibility of treating postpyloroplasty dumping with a Roux-en-Y to the proximal duodenum (the duodenal switch, a potentially reversible operation) has not yet been reported (Fig. 26-67). Because pyloric ablation seems to be the dominant factor in the etiology of dumping, it is not sur-prising that conversion of Billroth II to Billroth I anastomosis has not been successful in the treatment of dumping.DiarrheaDiarrhea following gastric surgery may be the result of trun-cal vagotomy, dumping, or malabsorption. Truncal vagotomy is associated with clinically significant diarrhea in 5% to 10% of patients. It occurs soon after surgery and usually is not associ-ated with other symptoms, a fact that helps to distinguish it from dumping. The diarrhea may be a daily occurrence, or there may be significant periods of relatively normal bowel function. The symptoms tend to improve over the months and years after the index operation. The cause of postvagotomy diarrhea is unclear. Possible mechanisms include intestinal dysmotility and accel-erated transit, bile acid malabsorption, rapid gastric emptying, and bacterial overgrowth. The latter problem is facilitated by decreased gastric acid secretion and (even small) blind loops. Although bacterial overgrowth can be confirmed with the hydrogen breath test, a simpler test is an empirical trial of oral antibiotics. Some patients with postvagotomy diarrhea respond to cholestyramine, while in others codeine or loperamide may be useful. Octreotide should also be tried. Another theoretical cause of diarrhea following gastric surgery is fat malabsorption due to acid inactivation of pancreatic enzymes or poorly coor-dinated mixing of food and digestive juices. This can be con-firmed with a qualitative test for fecal fat and treated with acid suppression. Postvagotomy diarrhea usually does not respond to treatment with pancreatic enzymes. In the rare patient who is debilitated by postvagotomy diarrhea unresponsive to medical management, operation might be considered, but outcomes can be problematic. The operation of choice is probably a 10-cm reversed jejunal interposition placed in continuity 100 cm distal to the ligament of Treitz. Another option is the onlay antiperi-staltic distal ileal graft. Both operations can cause obstructive symptoms and/or bacterial overgrowth.209Gastric Stasis210,211Gastric stasis following surgery on the stomach may be due to a problem with gastric motor function or caused by an obstruc-tion. The gastric motility abnormality could have been preexist-ing and unrecognized by the operating surgeon. Alternatively, Figure 26-67. Duodenal switch operation. (Reproduced with per-mission from Hinder RA: Duodenal switch: a new form of pancreati-cobiliary diversion, Surg Clin North Am. 1992 Apr;72(2):487-499.)Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   115701/03/19   7:13 PM 1158SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS     PART IIit may be secondary to deliberate or unintentional vagotomy, or resection of the dominant gastric pacemaker. An obstruction may be mechanical (e.g., anastomotic stricture, efferent limb kink from adhesions or constricting mesocolon, or a proximal small-bowel obstruction) or functional (e.g., retrograde peristal-sis in a Roux limb). Gastric stasis presents with vomiting (often of undigested food), bloating, epigastric pain, and weight loss.The evaluation of a patient with suspected postoperative gastric stasis includes EGD, upper GI and small bowel series, gastric emptying scan, and gastric motor testing. Endoscopy shows gastritis and retained food or bezoar. The anastomosis and efferent limb should be evaluated for stricture or narrow-ing. A dilated efferent limb suggests chronic stasis, either from a motor abnormality (e.g., Roux syndrome) or mechanical small bowel obstruction (e.g., chronic adhesion). If the problem is thought to be primarily a disorder of intrinsic motor func-tion, newer techniques such as EGG and GI manometry should be considered, but chronic distal mechanical obstruction may result in disordered motility in the proximal organ confounding interpretation.Once mechanical obstruction has been ruled out, medi-cal treatment is successful in most cases of motor dysfunction following previous gastric surgery. This consists of dietary modification and promotility agents. Intermittent oral antibiotic therapy may be helpful in treating bacterial overgrowth, with its attendant symptoms of bloating, flatulence, and diarrhea.Gastroparesis following V + D may be treated with subto-tal gastrectomy but simple loop gastrojejunoctomy (GJ) should be tried if previous drainage was pyloroplasty. Billroth II anas-tomosis with Braun enteroenterostomy may be preferable to Roux-en-Y reconstruction after subtotal gastrectomy for gas-tric stasis, but bile reflux can still occur. Initial operation for gastric stasis is often associated with persistent gastric empty-ing problems that may subsequently require near-total or total gastrectomy, a nutritionally unattractive option. Delayed gastric emptying following ulcer surgery (V + D or V + A) may rep-resent an anastomotic stricture (often due to recurrent ulcer) or proximal small bowel obstruction. Recurrent ulcer may respond to medical therapy with PPI and abstinence from NSAIDs, aspi-rin, and smoking. And if necessary, endoscopic dilation is occa-sionally helpful. However, when associated with symptomatic gastric stasis, reoperation is often necessary. Gastroparesis fol-lowing subtotal gastric resection is best treated with near-total (95%) or total gastric resection and Roux-en-Y reconstruction. If total gastrectomy is performed, a jejunal reservoir should be considered. Gastric pacing is promising, but it has not achieved widespread clinical usefulness in the treatment of postoperative gastric atony.Bile Reflux Gastritis and EsophagitisMost patients who have undergone ablation or resection of the pylorus have bile in the stomach on endoscopic examination, along with some degree of gross or microscopic gastric inflam-mation. Therefore, attributing postoperative symptoms to bile reflux is problematic because most asymptomatic patients have bile reflux too. However, it is generally accepted that a small subset of patients have bile reflux gastritis syndrome. These patients present with nausea, bilious vomiting, and epigastric pain, and quantitative evidence of excess enterogastric reflux. Curiously, symptoms often develop months or years after the index operation. The differential diagnosis includes afferent or efferent loop obstruction, gastric stasis, and small-bowel obstruction. Plain abdominal X-rays, upper endoscopy, upper GI series, abdominal CT scan, and gastric emptying scans are helpful in evaluating these possibilities.Bile reflux may be quantified with gastric analysis or esophageal impedance testing or with scintigraphy (bile reflux scan). Typically, enterogastric reflux is greatest after Billroth II gastrectomy or gastrojejunostomy, and least after vagotomy and pyloroplasty, with Billroth I gastrectomy giving intermediate values. Patients who are well into the abnormal range of bile reflux may be considered for remedial surgery if symptoms are severe. Remedial surgery will eliminate the bile from the vomi-tus and may improve the patient’s pain, but it is quite unusual to render these patients completely asymptomatic, especially if they are narcotic dependent.Bile reflux gastritis after distal gastric resection may be treated by one of the following options: Roux-en-Y gastroje-junostomy; interposition of a 40-cm isoperistaltic jejunal loop between the gastric remnant and the duodenum (Henley loop); Billroth II gastro jejunostomy with Braun enteroenterostomy; total gastrectomy with Roux esophagojejunostomy. To mini-mize reflux of bile into the stomach or the esophagus, the Roux limb should be at least 45 cm long (preferably 60 cm). The Braun enteroenterostomy should be placed at a similar distance from the stomach. Excessively long limbs may be associated with obstruction or malabsorption. All of these operations can result in marginal ulceration on the jejunal side of the gastrojeju-nostomy and thus are combined with a generous distal gastrec-tomy. If this has already been done at a previous operation, the Roux or Braun operations may be attractively simple. Whether truncal vagotomy should be considered to decrease the risk of marginal ulceration is controversial because acid-suppressing medications may be equally effective. In addition, the benefits of decreased acid secretion following vagotomy may be out-weighed by problems with vagotomy-associated dysmotility in the gastric remnant. The Roux operation may be associated with an increased risk of emptying problems compared to the other two options, but controlled data are lacking. Patients with debilitating bile reflux after gastrojejunostomy can be consid-ered for simple takedown of this anastomosis provided that the pyloric channel is open.Primary bile reflux gastritis (i.e., no previous operation) is rare, and may be treated with the duodenal switch operation, essentially an end-to-end Roux-en-Y to the proximal duodenum (see Fig. 26-68). The Achilles’ heel of this operation is, not sur-prisingly, marginal ulceration. Thus, it should be combined with highly selective vagotomy, and/or long-term acid suppressive medication.Bile gastritis or esophagitis is a recognized complication after esophagogastrectomy with or without pyloroplasty. This can be effectively treated by division of the duodenum immedi-ately distal to the pylorus with drainage of the prepyloric antrum into a Roux limb. Preservation of the right gastroepiploic pedi-cal is important. Proximal subtotal gastrectomy with esophago-antral anastomosis should be avoided, but when performed, the pylorus should be left intact.Roux SyndromeA subset of patients who have had distal gastrectomy and Roux-en-Y gastrojejunostomy will have great difficulty with gastric emptying in the absence of mechanical obstruc-tion. These patients present with vomiting, epigastric pain, and weight loss. This clinical scenario has been labeled the  Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   115801/03/19   7:13 PM 1159STOMACHCHAPTER 26Roux syndrome. Endoscopy may show retained food or bezoars, dilation of the gastric remnant, and/or dilation of the Roux limb. Anastomotic inflammation and stricture from mar-ginal ulceration is a confounding finding. An upper GI series confirms these findings and may show delayed gastric empty-ing. This is better quantified by a gastric emptying scan, which always shows delayed solid emptying and may show delayed liquid emptying as well.GI motility testing shows abnormal motility in the Roux limb, with much of the propulsive activity toward, rather than away from, the stomach.212 Gastric motility also may be abnor-mal. Presumably, the disordered motility in the Roux limb occurs in all patients with this operation. Why only a subset develops the Roux syndrome is unclear. Perhaps patients with disordered gastric motility are at most risk. The disorder seems to be more common in patients with a generous gastric remnant. Truncal vagotomy also has been implicated.Medical treatment consists of promotility agents. Surgi-cal treatment consists of paring down the gastric remnant. Care should be taken to preserve adequate blood supply to the new gastric pouch. If the left gastric artery is intact, a vertically ori-ented lesser curvature based pouch (similar to gastric bypass) with excision of the fundus can be considered. If gastric motility is severely disordered, 95% gastrectomy or total gastrectomy should be considered. The Roux limb should be resected if it is dilated and flaccid, unless doing so puts the patient at risk for short bowel.GallstonesGallstone formation following gastric surgery generally is thought to be secondary to vagal denervation of the gallblad-der with attendant gallbladder dysmotility and stasis. Although prophylactic cholecystectomy is not justified with most gas-tric surgery, it should be considered if the gallbladder appears abnormal, especially if subsequent cholecystectomy is likely to be difficult. If preoperative evaluation reveals sludge or gall-stones, or if intraoperative evaluation reveals stones, incidental cholecystectomy should be considered.Weight LossWeight loss is common in patients who have had a vagotomy and/or gastric resection. The degree of weight loss tends to par-allel the magnitude of the operation. It may be insignificant in the obese but devastating in the asthenic patient. The surgeon should always consider the possible nutritional consequences before performing a gastric resection for benign disease in a thin patient. The causes of weight loss after gastric surgery generally fall into one of two categories: altered dietary intake or malabsorption. If a stool stain for fecal fat is negative, it is likely that decreased caloric intake is the cause. This is the most common cause of weight loss after gastric surgery, and it may be due to small stomach syndrome, postoperative gastroparesis, anorexia due to loss of ghrelin, or self-imposed dietary modifi-cation because of dumping and/or diarrhea. Consultation with an experienced dietitian may prove invaluable.AnemiaIron absorption takes place primarily in the proximal GI tract, and it is facilitated by an acidic environment. Intrinsic factor, essential for the enteric absorption of vitamin B12, is made by the parietal cells of the stomach. Vitamin B12 bioavailability also is facilitated by an acidic environment. Folate-rich vegetables may be poorly tolerated if gastric emptying is delayed or if 10gastric capacity is limited. Since iron, B12, and folate play vital roles in hematopoiesis, it is easy to understand why patients who have had a gastric operation are at risk for anemia. Ane-mia is the most common metabolic side effect in patients who have had a gastric bypass for morbid obesity. It also occurs in up to one-third of patients who have had a vagotomy and/or gastric resection. Iron deficiency is the most common cause, but  vitamin B12 or folate deficiency also occurs, even in patients who have not had total gastrectomy. Of course, patients who have had a total gastrectomy will all develop B12 deficiency with-out some type of regular nonenteral vitamin B12 administration. Gastric bypass patients should be given oral iron supplements and monitored for iron, B12, and folate deficiency. Patients who have had a vagotomy and/or gastrectomy should be similarly monitored with periodic determination of hematocrit, red blood cell indices, iron and transferrin levels, B12, and folate levels. Marginal nutrient status should be corrected with oral and/or parenteral supplementation.Bone DiseaseGastric surgery sometimes disturbs calcium and vitamin D metabolism. Calcium absorption occurs primarily in the duo-denum, which is bypassed with gastrojejunostomy. Fat mal-absorption may occur because of blind loop syndrome and bacterial overgrowth or because of inefficient mixing of food and digestive enzymes. This can significantly affect the absorp-tion of vitamin D, a fat-soluble vitamin. Both abnormalities of calcium and vitamin D metabolism can contribute to metabolic bone disease in patients following gastric surgery. The prob-lems usually manifest as pain and/or fractures many years after the index operation. Musculoskeletal symptoms should prompt a study of bone density. Dietary supplementation of calcium and vitamin D may be useful in preventing these complications. Routine skeletal monitoring of patients at high-risk (e.g., elderly males and females and postmenopausal females) may prove useful in identifying skeletal deterioration that may be slowed or stopped with appropriate treatment after gastric surgery.LAPAROSCOPIC GASTRIC OPERATIONSThe most common laparoscopic gastric operations performed today are for GERD and obesity. However, all conventional gastric operations can be performed with minimal access techniques.213 Some are more technically challenging (e.g., partial or total gastric resection) are of debatable advantage over conventional open approaches. Certainly, highly selective vagotomy, vagotomy and gastrojejunostomy, and gastrostomy lend themselves to a minimal access approach. Laparoscopic local excision is often feasible for GI stromal tumors, leiomyo-mas, or gastric diverticula. Difficult to access lesions near the GE junction or pylorus may be removed through an anterior gastrotomy; more recent approaches utilizing transgastric ports or combined laparoscopic and endoscopic approaches show promise in allowing removal of practically any small gastric lesion with limited incisions.In Japan and Korea, laparoscopic and robotic assisted approaches have been applied increasingly in the manage-ment of gastric cancer.214,215 Indeed, laparoscopic subtotal gas-trectomy has supplanted the traditional open operation as the preferred operation for patients with earlier stage tumors, and laparocopic total gastrectomy for proximal tumors is performed with regularity and excellent outcomes. The Asian experience Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   115901/03/19   7:13 PM 1160SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS     PART IIhas firmly established the feasibility of safe laparoscopic D2 gastrectomy. Translation of this experience to the United States, however, is not easily accomplished. Studies from Asia suggest that expertise in the laparoscopic approach require upwards of 40 cases, a challenging baseline given the much lower incidence of gastric cancer in the United States.216-219 A more advanced spectrum of disease and higher mean BMI in Western coun-tries are additional barriers to widespread implementation of laparoscopic resection for gastric cancer. Notwithstanding, several high volume centers in the United States have reported excellent outcomes after laparoscopic gastrectomy. As robotic technology that facilitates dissection and anastomosis with articulated instrumentation and enhanced visualization becomes increasingly ubiquitous, the pendulum will likely swing toward increasing utilization of minimal access approaches for all gas-tric operations.220REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Beaumont W. Experiments and Observations on the Gastric Juice and the Physiology of Digestion. Plattsburgh: PP Allen; 1833.	2.	Wangensteen OH, Wangensteen SD. Gastric surgery. In: The Rise of Surgery. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press; 1978.	3.	Herrington JL. Historical aspects of gastric surgery. In: Scott HW, Jr, Sawyers JL, eds. Surgery of the Stomach, Duodenum, and Small Intestine. 2nd ed. Boston: Blackwell; 1992.	4.	Dragstedt LR. Vagotomy for the gastroduodenal ulcer. Ann Surg. 1945;122:973-989.	5.	Zollinger RM, Ellison EH. Primary peptic ulcerations of the jejunum associated with islet cell tumors of the pancreas. Ann Surg. 1955;142:709-728.	6.	Flora ED, Wilson TG, Martin IJ, et al. A review of natural orifice translumenal endoscopic surgery (NOTES) for intraab-dominal surgery: experimental models, techniques, and appli-cability to the clinical setting. Ann Surg. 2008;247:583-602.	7.	Mercer DW, Liu TH, Castaneda A. Anatomy and physiology of the stomach. In: Zuidema GD, Yeo CJ, eds. Shackelford’s Surgery of the Alimentary Tract. 5th ed. Vol 2. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2002:3.	8.	Warren WD, Zeppa R, Fomon JJ. Selective trans-splenic decompression of gastroesophageal varices by distal spleno-renal shunt. Ann Surg. 1967;166:437-455.	9.	Orringer MB, Marshall B, Chang AC, et al. Two thousand transhiatal esophagectomies: changing trends, lessons learned. Ann Surg. 2007;246:363-372.	10.	Leung WK, et al. Tumors of the stomach. In: Yamada T, et al, eds. Textbook of Gastroenterology. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Lip-pincott, Williams & Wilkins; 2003:1416.	11.	Japanese Gastric Cancer Association. Japanese classifications of gastric carcinoma: 3rd English edition. Gastric Cancer. 2011;14:101-112.	12.	Jansen EPM, Boot H, Verheij M, van de Velde CJ. Opti-mal locoregional treatment in gastric cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2005:23:4509-4517.	13.	Johnson LR, ed. Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract. 5th ed. New York: Elsevier; 2012.	14.	Browning KN, Verheijden S, Boeckxstaens GE. The vagus nerve in appetite regulation, mood, and intestinal inflamma-tion. Gastroenterology. 2017;152(4):730-744.	15.	Matteoli G, Boeckxstaens GE. The vagal innervation of the gut and immune homeostasis. Gut. 2013;62(8):1214-1222.	16.	Fawcett DW, Jensh R. In: Bloom and Fawcett: Concise Histol-ogy. 2nd ed. Oxford University Press: London.	17.	Ashley SW, Evoy D, Daly JM. Stomach. In: Schwartz SI, ed. Principles of Surgery. 7nd ed. New York:McGraw-Hill; 1999:1181.	18.	Antonioli DA, Madara JL. Functional anatomy of the gas-trointestinal tract. In: Ming S-C, Goldman H, eds. Pathology of the Gastrointestinal Tract. 2nd ed. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; 1998:13.	19.	Aloia L, McKie MA, Huch M. Cellular plasticity in the adult liver and stomach. J Physiol. 2016;594(17):4815-4825.	20.	Feldman M. Gastric secretion. In: Feldman M, ed. Sleisenger and Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease. 7nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2002;715.	21.	Minalyan A, Gabrielyan L, Scott D, Jacobs J, Pisegna JR. The gastric and intestinal microbiome: role of proton pump inhibi-tors. Curr Gastroenterol Rep. 2017;19(8):42.	22.	Loo VG, Bourgault AM, Poirier L, et al. Host and pathogen factors for Clostridium Difficile infection and colonization. N Engl J Med. 2011;365:1693-1703.	23.	Canani RB, Terrin G. Gastric acidity inhibitors and the risk of intestinal infections. Curr Opin Gastroenterol. 2010;26:31-35.	24.	Kopic S, Murek M, Geibel JP. Revisiting the parietal cell. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2010;298:C1-C10.	25.	Wolfe MM, Soll AH. The physiology of gastric acid secretion. N Engl J Med. 1988;319:1707-1715.	26.	Schubert ML. Physiologic, pathophysiologic, and pharmaco-logic regulation of gastric acid secretion. Curr Opin Gastro-enterol. 2017;33(6): pp. 430-438.	27.	Schubert ML, Peura DA. Control of gastric acid secretion in health and disease. Gastroenterology. 2008;134(7):1842-1860.	28.	Lloyd KCK, Debas HT. Hormonal and neural regulation of gastric acid secretion. In: Johnson LR, ed. Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract. 3rd ed. New York: Raven; 1993.	29.	Del Valle J, Todisco A. Gastric secretion. In: Yamada T, et al, eds. Textbook of Gastroenterology. 4nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins; 2003:266.	30.	Norlén P, Ericsson P, Kitano M, Ekelund M, Håkanson R. The vagus regulates histamine mobilization from rat stomach ECL cells by controlling their sensitivity to gastrin. J Physiol. 2005;564(pt 3):895-905.	31.	Holst JJ, Knuhtsen S, Orskov C, et al. GRP nerves in pig antrum: role of GRP in vagal control of gastrin secretion. Am J Physiol. 1987;253(5 pt 1):G643-G649.	32.	Helgadottir H, Metz DC, Yang YX, Rhim AD, Björnsson ES. The effects of long-term therapy with proton pump inhibitors on meal stimulated gastrin. Dig Liver Dis. 2014;46(2):125-130.	33.	Lodrup AB, Reimer C, Bytzer P. Systematic review: symptoms of rebound acid hypersecretion following proton pump inhibi-tor treatment. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2013;48(5):515-522.	34.	Boyce M, et al. Randomised trial of the effect of a gastrin/CCK2 receptor antagonist on esomeprazole-induced hyper-gastrinaemia: evidence against rebound hyperacidity. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2017;73(2):129-139.	35.	Agreus L, et al. Rationale in diagnosis and screening of atro-phic gastritis with stomach-specific plasma biomarkers. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2012;47(2):136-147.	36.	Wallace JL. Prostaglandins, NSAIDs, and gastric mucosal pro-tection: why doesn’t the stomach digest itself? Physiol Rev. 2008;88:1547-1565.	37.	Choi SR, Lee SA, Kim YJ, et al. Role of heat shock proteins in gastric inflammation and ulcer healing. J Physiol Pharmacol. 2009;60:5-17.	38.	Yandrapu H, Sarosiek J. Protective factors of the gastric and duodenal mucosa: an overview. Curr Gastroenterol Rep. 2015;17(6):24.	39.	Cummings DE, Overduin J. Gastrointestinal regulation of food intake. J Clin Invest. 2007;117(1):13-23.	40.	Dimaline R, Varro A. Novel roles of gastrin. J Physiol. 2014;592(14):2951-2958.Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   116001/03/19   7:13 PM 1161STOMACHCHAPTER 26	41.	Bartfeld S, et al. In vitro expansion of human gastric epithelial stem cells and their responses to bacterial infection. Gastroen-terology. 2015;148(1):126-136 e6.	42.	Winsett OE, et al. Gastrin stimulates growth of colon cancer. Surgery. 1986;99(3):302-307.	43.	Johnson LR. The trophic action of gastrointestinal hormones. Gastroenterology. 1976;70(2):278-288.	44.	Murray CD, Kamm MA, Bloom SR, et al. Ghrelin for the gastroenterologist: history and potential. Gastroenterology. 2003;125:1492-1502.	45.	Muller TD, et al. Ghrelin. Mol Metab. 2015;4(6):437-460.	46.	Ariyasu H, Takaya K, Tagami T, et al. Stomach is a major source of circulating ghrelin, and feeding state determines plasma ghrelin-like immuno reactivity levels in humans. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001;86:4753-4758.	47.	Anderson B, et al. The impact of laparoscopic sleeve gastrec-tomy on plasma ghrelin levels: a systematic review. Obes Surg. 2013;23(9):1476-1480.	48.	Steinert RE, et al. Ghrelin, CCK, GLP-1, and PYY(3-36): secretory controls and physiological roles in eating and glycemia in health, obesity, and after RYGB. Physiol Rev. 2017;97(1):411-463.	49.	Cummings DE, Weigle DS, Frayo RS, et al. Plasma ghrelin levels after diet-induced weight loss or gastric bypass surgery. N Engl J Med. 2002;346:1623-1630.	50.	Karamanakos SN, Vagenas K, Kalfarentzos F, et al. Weight loss, appetite suppression, and changes in fasting and post-prandial ghrelin and peptide-YY levels after Roux-en-Y gas-tric bypass and sleeve gastrectomy: a prospective, double blind study. Ann Surg. 2008;247:401.	51.	Delhanty PJ, Neggers SJ, and van der Lely AJ. Mechanisms in endocrinology: ghrelin: the differences between acyland des-acyl ghrelin. Eur J Endocrinol. 2012;167(5):601-608.	52.	Badman MK, Flier JS. The gut and energy balance: visceral allies in the obesity wars. Science. 2005;307(5717):1909-1914.	53.	Bado A, et al. The stomach is a source of leptin. Nature. 1998;394(6695):790-793.	54.	Sanjeevi A. Gastric motility. Curr Opin Gastroenterol. 2007;23:625.	55.	Parkman HP, Jones MP. Tests of gastric neuromuscular func-tion. Gastroenterology. 2009;136:1526-1543.	56.	Hasler WL. Physiology of gastric motility and gastric empty-ing. In: Yamada T, et al, eds. Textbook of Gastroenterology. 4nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins; 2003:195.	57.	Chial HJ, Camilleri M. Motility disorders of the stomach and small intestine. In: Friedman SL, McQuaid KR, Grendell JH, eds. Current Diagnosis and Treatment in Gastroenterology. 2nd ed. New York:McGraw-Hill; 2003:355.	58.	Sanders KM, Koh SD, Ro S, Ward SM. Regulation of gastro-intestinal motility—insights from smooth muscle biology. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2012;9:633-645.	59.	Deloose E, Janssen P, Depoortere I, Tack J. The migrating motor complex—control mechanisms and its role in health and disease. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2012;9:271-285.	60.	Vanden Berghe P, et al. Contribution of different triggers to the gastric accommodation reflex in humans. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2009;297(5):G902-G906.	61.	Berthoud HR. The vagus nerve, food intake and obesity. Regul Pept. 2008;149(1-3):15-25.	62.	Cheng LK. Slow wave conduction patterns in the stomach: from Waller’s foundations to current challenges. Acta Physiol (Oxf). 2015;213(2):384-393.	63.	Tack J, et al. Motilin-induced gastric contractions signal hun-ger in man. Gut. 2016;65(2):214-224.	64.	Marks JM, Ponsky JL. Diagnostic and therapeutic endoscopy of the stomach and small bowel. In: Yeo CJ, et al, eds. Shack-elford’s Surgery of the Alimentary Tract. 6nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2007.	65.	Levine MS, Rubesin SE, Laufer I. Barium studies in modern radiology: do they have a role? Radiology. 2009;250(1):18-22.	66.	Furukawa K, Miyahara R, Itoh A, et al. Diagnosis of the inva-sion depth of gastric cancer using MDCT with virtual gastros-copy: comparison with staging with endoscopic ultrasound. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2011;197:867-875.	67.	Chen CY, Hsu JS, Wu DC, et al. Gastric cancer: preopera-tive local staging with 3D multidetector row CT—correlation with surgical and histopathologic results. Radiology. 2007; 242:472-482.	68.	Shin KS, Kim SH, Han JK, et al. Three-dimensional MDCT gastrography compared with axial CT for the detection of early gastric cancer. J Comput Assist Tomogr. 2007;31: 741-749.	69.	Caddy GR, Chen RY. Current clinical applications of endo-scopic ultrasound. ANZ J Surg. 2007;77:101-111.	70.	Power DG, Schattner MA, Gerdes H, et al. Endoscopic ultrasound can improve the selection for laparoscopy in patients with localized gastric cancer. J Am Coll Surg. 2009;208:173-178.	71.	Jones DB. Role of endoscopic ultrasound in staging upper gastrointestinal cancers. ANZ J Surg. 2007;77:166-172.	72.	Balaji NS, Crookes PF, Banki F, et al. A safe and noninvasive test for vagal integrity revisited. Arch Surg. 2002;137:954-958.	73.	Vaira D, Gatta L, Ricci C, Miglioli M. Review article: diagno-sis of Helicobacter pylori infection. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2002;16:105-113.	74.	Walsh JH, Peterson WL. The treatment of Helicobacter pylori infection in the management of peptic ulcer disease. N Engl J Med. 1995;333:984-991.	75.	Kao CY, Sheu BS, Wu JJ. Helicobacter pylori infection: an overview of bacterial virulence factors and pathogenesis. Biomed J. 2016;39(1):14-23.	76.	Hooi JKY, et al. Global prevalence of Helicobacter pylori infection: systematic review and meta-analysis. Gastroenter-ology. 2017;153(2):420-429.	77.	Graham DY. Helicobacter pylori update: gastric cancer, reliable therapy, and possible benefits. Gastroenterology. 2015;148(4):719-731 e3.	78.	Noto JM, Peek RM, Jr. The gastric microbiome, its interaction with Helicobacter pylori, and its potential role in the progres-sion to stomach cancer. PLoS Pathog. 2017;13(10):e1006573.	79.	Blaser MJ, Atherton JC. Helicobacter pylori persistence: biol-ogy and disease. J Clin Invest. 2004;113:321-333.	80.	Fox JG, Wang TC. Inflammation, atrophy, and gastric cancer. J Clin Invest. 2007;117(1):60-69.	81.	McColl KE. Clinical practice. Helicobacter pylori infection. N Engl J Med. 2010;362:1597-1604.	82.	Bedoui S, Kupz A, Wijberg OL, et al. Different bacterial pathogens, different strategies, yet the aim is the same: eva-sion of intestinal dendritic cell recognition. J Immunol. 2010;184:2237-2242.	83.	Graham DY, Lew GM, Klein PD, et al. Effect of treatment of Helicobacter pylori infection on the long-term recurrence of gastric or duodenal ulcer: arandomized controlled study. Ann Intern Med. 1992;116:705-708.	84.	McColl K, et al. Symptomatic benefit from eradicating Heli-cobacter pylori infection in patients with nonulcer dyspepsia. N Engl J Med. 1998;339(26):1869-1874.	85.	Atkinson NS, Braden B. Helicobacter pylori infection: diag-nostic strategies in primary diagnosis and after therapy. Dig Dis Sci. 2016;61(1):19-24.	86.	Burucoa C, et al. Comparative evaluation of 29 commer-cial Helicobacter pylori serological kits. Helicobacter. 2013;18(3):169-179.	87.	Malfertheiner P, et al. Management of Helicobacter pylori infection—the Maastricht V/Florence Consensus Report. Gut. 2017;66(1):6-30.Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   116101/03/19   7:13 PM 1162SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS     PART II	88.	Shiota S, et al. Antibiotic resistance of Helicobacter pylori among male United States veterans. Clin Gastroenterol Hepa-tol. 2015;13(9):1616-1624.	89.	Holle GE. Pathophysiology and modern treatment of ulcer dis-ease. Int J Mol Med. 2010;25(4):483-491.	90.	Leong RW. Differences in peptic ulcer between the East and the West. Gastroenterol Clin North Am. 2009;38(2):363-379.	91.	Brock J, Sauaia A, Ahnen D, et al. Process of care and out-comes for elderly patients hospitalized with peptic ulcer disease: results from a quality improvement project. JAMA. 286:1985-1993.	92.	Yang YR, Richter JE, Dempsey DT. Trends and outcomes of hospitalizations for peptic ulcer disease in the United States 1993-2006. Ann Surg. 2010;251:51-58.	93.	Feinstein LB, et al. Trends in hospitalizations for peptic ulcer disease, United States, 1998-2005. Emerg Infect Dis. 2010;16(9):1410-1418.	94.	Spechler SJ. Peptic ulcer disease and its complications. In: Feldman M, ed. Sleisinger and Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease. 7nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2002.	95.	Del Valle J, Chey WD, Scheiman JM. Acid peptic disorders. In: Yamada T, et al, eds. Textbook of Gastroenterology. 4nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins; 2003:1321.	96.	Fisher WE, Brunicardi FC. Benign gastric ulcer. In: Cameron JL, ed. Current Surgical Therapy. 9nd ed. Philadelphia: Mosby Elsevier; 2008:81.	97.	Laine L. Approaches to nonsteroidal anti-inflamma-tory drug use in the high-risk patient. Gastroenterology. 2001;120:594-606.	98.	Lanas A. A review of the gastrointestinal safety data—a gastroenterologist’s perspective. Rheumatology. 2010;49: ii3-ii10.	99.	Kawasaki K, et al. Low-dose aspirin and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs increase the risk of bleeding in patients with gastroduodenal ulcer. Dig Dis Sci. 2015;60(4):1010-1015.	100.	Mora S, Manson JE. Aspirin for primary prevention of ath-erosclerotic cardiovascular disease: advances in diagnosis and treatment. JAMA Intern Med. 2016;176(8):1195-1204.	101.	Vaduganathan M, et al. Proton-pump inhibitors reduce gas-trointestinal events regardless of aspirin dose in patients requiring dual antiplatelet therapy. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;67(14):1661-1671.	102.	Vaduganathan M, et al. Efficacy and safety of proton-pump inhibitors in high-risk cardiovascular subsets of the COGENT trial. Am J Med. 2016;129(9):1002-1005.	103.	Ray WA, et al. Association of proton pump inhibitors with reduced risk of warfarin-related serious upper gastrointestinal bleeding. Gastroenterology. 2016;151(6):1105-1112 e10.	104.	Abraham NS, Hlatky MA, Antman EM, et al: ACCF/ACG/AHA Expert consensus document on the concomitant use of proton pump inhibitors and thienopyridines: a focused update of the ACCF/ACG/AHA 2008 consensus document on reduc-ing the gastrointestinal risks of antiplatet therapy and NSAID use. Circulation. 2010;122:2619-2633.	105.	Chan FK, et al. Similar efficacy of proton-pump inhibitors vs H2-receptor antagonists in reducing risk of upper gastrointes-tinal bleeding or ulcers in high-risk users of low-dose aspirin. Gastroenterology. 2017;152(1):105-110 e1.	106.	Hsu CC, et al. Depression and the risk of peptic ulcer disease: a nationwide population-based study. Medicine (Baltimore). 2015;94(51):e2333.	107.	Blatchford O, Murray WR. A risk score to predict need for treatment for upper gastrointestinal hemorrhage. Lancet. 2000;356:1318-1321.	108.	Saltzman JR, et al. A simple risk score accurately predicts in-hospital mortality, length of stay, and cost in acute upper GI bleeding. Gastrointest Endosc. 2011;74(6):1215-1224.	109.	Dallal HJ, Palmer KR. ABC of the upper gastrointes-tinal tract: upper gastrointestinal haemorrhage. BMJ. 2001;323:1115-1117.	110.	Laine L. Upper gastrointestinal bleeding due to a peptic ulcer. N Engl J Med. 2016;375(12):1197-1198.	111.	Cheng DW, et al. A modified Glasgow Blatchford Score improves risk stratification in upper gastrointestinal bleed: a prospective comparison of scoring systems. Aliment Pharma-col Ther. 2012;36(8):782-789.	112.	Lo CC, et al. Comparison of hemostatic efficacy for epineph-rine injection alone and injection combined with hemoclip therapy in treating high-risk bleeding ulcers. Gastrointest Endosc. 2006;63(6):767-773.	113.	Chey WD, Wong BCY. Practice Parameters Committee of the American College of Gastroenterology. American College of Gastroenterology guideline on the management of Helicobacter pylori infection. Am J Gastroenterol. 2007;102: 1808-1825.	114.	Harbison SP, Dempsey DT. Peptic ulcer disease. Curr Probl Surg. 2005;42(6):346-454.	115.	Mulholland MW, Debas HT. Chronic duodenal and gastric ulcer. Surg Clin North Am. 1987;67:489-507.	116.	Schroder VT, et al. Vagotomy/drainage is superior to local oversew in patients who require emergency surgery for bleed-ing peptic ulcers. Ann Surg. 2014;259(6):1111-1118.	117.	Wu SC, et al. Acid-reducing vagotomy is associated with reduced risk of subsequent ischemic heart disease in com-plicated peptic ulcer: An Asian population study. Medicine  (Baltimore). 2016;95(50):e5651.	118.	Lagoo J, Pappas TN, Perez A. A relic or still relevant: the nar-rowing role for vagotomy in the treatment of peptic ulcer dis-ease. Am J Surg. 2014;207(1):120-126.	119.	Maki T, Shiratoti T, Hatafuku T, et al. Pyrolus-preserving gas-trectomy as an improved operation for gastric ulcer. Surgery. 1967;61:838-842.	120.	Morita S, Katai H, Saka T, et al. Outcome of pyrolus-pre-serving gastrectomy for early gastric cancer. Br J Surg. 2008;95:1131-1135.	121.	Gilliam AD, Speake WJ, Lobo DN, et al. Current practice of emergency vagotomy and Helicobacter pylori eradication for complicated peptic ulcer in the United Kingdom. Br J Surg. 2003;90:88-90.	122.	Reuben BC, Neumayer LA. Variations reported in sur-gical practice for bleeding duodenal ulcers. Am J Surg. 2006;192:e42-e45.	123.	Yusuf TE, Brugge WR. Endoscopic therapy of benign pyloric stenosis and gastric outlet obstruction. Curr Opin Gastroen-terol. 2006;22:570-573.	124.	Csendes A, Maluenda F, Braghetto I, et al. Prospective ran-domized study comparing three surgical techniques for the treatment of gastric outlet obstruction secondary to duodenal ulcer. Am J Surg. 1993;166:45-49.	125.	Lau JYW, Sung JJY, Lee KKC, et al. Effect of intravenous omeprazole on recurrent bleeding after endoscopic treatment of bleeding peptic ulcers. N Engl J Med. 2000;343:310-316.	126.	Lau JY, Sung JJ, Lam YH, et al. Endoscopic retreatment com-pared with surgery in patients with recurrent bleeding after initial endoscopic control of bleeding ulcers. N Engl J Med. 1999;340:751-756.	127.	Fendrich V, Langer P, Waldmann J, et al. Management of spo-radic and multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 gastrinomas. Br J Surg. 2007;94:1331-1341.	128.	Dolan JP, Norton JA: Zollinger-Ellison Syndrome, in Yeo CJ, et al (eds). Shackelford’s Surgery of the Alimentary Tract, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders/Elsevier, 2007, p. 862.	129.	Orlando LA, Lenard L, Orlando RC: Chronic hypergastrinemia: causes and consequences. Dig Dis Sci. 2007;52:2482-2489.Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   116201/03/19   7:13 PM 1163STOMACHCHAPTER 26	130.	Fraker DL, et al. Surgery in Zollinger-Ellison syndrome alters the natural history of gastrinoma. Ann Surg. 1994;220(3): 320-328; discussion 328-330.	131.	Norton JA, et al. Surgery increases survival in patients with gastrinoma. Ann Surg. 2006;244(3):410-419.	132.	Alhazzani W, Alenezi F, Jaeschke RZ, et al. Proton pump inhibitors versus histamine 2 receptor antagonists for stress ulcer prophylaxis in critically ill patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Crit Care Med. 2013;41:693-705.	133.	Sasabuchi Y, et al. Risks and benefits of stress ulcer pro-phylaxis for patients with severe sepsis. Crit Care Med. 2016;44(7):e464-e469.	134.	Barletta JF, et al. Stress ulcer prophylaxis. Crit Care Med. 2016;44(7):1395-1405.	135.	Marik PE, Vasu T, Hirani A, et al. Stress ulcer prophylaxis in the new millennium: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Crit Care Med. 2010;38:2222-2228.	136.	Isajevs S, et al. Gastritis staging: interobserver agreement by applying OLGA and OLGIM systems. Virchows Arch. 2014;464(4):403-407.	137.	Nam JH, et al. OLGA and OLGIM stage distribution accord-ing to age and Helicobacter pylori status in the Korean popula-tion. Helicobacter. 2014;19(2):81-89.	138.	The American Cancer Society. Cancer Facts and Figures 2017; pg 4, Table 1. Cancer.org. https://www.cancer.org/content/dam/cancer-org/research/cancer-facts-and-statistics/annual-cancer-facts-and-figures/2017/cancer-facts-and-figures-2017 .pdf Accessed 1-1-2018.	139.	Correa P, Houghton J. Carcinogenesis of Helicobacter pylori. Gastroenterology. 2007;133(2):659-672.	140.	McColl KE, Watabe H, Derakhshan MH. Role of gastric atrophy in mediating negative association between Heli-cobacter pylori infection and reflux oesophagitis, Barrett’s oesophagus and oesophageal adenocarcinoma. Gut. 2008;57: 721-723.	141.	ZurHausen A, van Rees BP, van Beek J, et al. Epstein-Barr virus in gastric carcinomas and gastric stump carci-nomas: alate event in gastric carcinogenesis. J Clin Pathol. 2004;57:487-491.	142.	Norton JA, Ham CM, Dam JV, et al. CDH1 truncating muta-tions in the E-cadherin gene: an indication for total gastrec-tomy to treat hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. Ann Surg. 2007;245:873-879.	143.	Chiba T, et al. Chronic inflammation and gastric cancer devel-opment (in Japanese). Nihon Rinsho. 2012;70(10):1694-1698.	144.	Chiba T, Marusawa H, Ushijima T. Inflammation-associated cancer development in digestive organs: mechanisms and roles for genetic and epigenetic modulation. Gastroenterol-ogy. 2012;143(3):550-563.	145.	Park DY, Lauwers GY. Gastric polyps: classification and man-agement. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2008;132(4):633-640.	146.	Shimoyama S, Aoki F, Kawahara M, et al. Early gastric cancer development in a familial adenomatous polyposis patient. Dig Dis Sci. 2004;49(2):260-265.	147.	Gylling A, Abdel-Rahman WM, Juhola M, et al. Is gastric cancer part of the tumour spectrum of hereditary non-pol-yposis colorectal cancer? A molecular genetic study. Gut. 2007;56:926-933.	148.	Schaefer N, Sinning C, Standop J, et al. Treatment and prog-nosis of gastric stump carcinoma in comparison with primary proximal gastric cancer. Am J Surg. 2007;194:63-67.	149.	van der Post RS, et al. Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer: updated clinical guidelines with an emphasis on germline CDH1 mutation carriers. J Med Genet. 2015;52(6):361-374.	150.	Ono H. Early gastric cancer: diagnosis, pathology, treatment techniques, and treatment outcomes. Eur J Gastroenterol Hep-atol. 2006;18:863-866.	151.	Pyrhonen S, Kuitunen T, Nyandoto P, Kouri M. Randomised comparison of fluorouracil, epidoxorubicin, and methotrex-ate (FEMTX) plus supportive care with supportive care alone in patients with non-resectable gastric cancer. Br J Cancer. 1995;71:587-591.	152.	Bang YJ, Van Cutsem E, Feyereislova A, et al. Transtuzumab in combination with chemotherapy versus chemotherapy alone for treatment of HER2-positive advanced gastric or gas-troesophageal junction cancer (TOGA): a phase 3 open label randomized controlled trial. Lancet. 2010;376:687-697.	153.	Begnami MD, Fuduka E, Fregnani JH, et al. Prognostic impli-cations of altered human epidermal growth factor receptors (HERs) in gastric carcinomas: HER2 and HER3 are predictors of poor outcome. J Clin Oncol. 2011;29(22):3030-3036.	154.	Li HY, Dai J, Xue HB, et al. Application of magnifying endoscopy with narrow band imaging in diagnosing gas-tric lesions: a prospective study. Gastrointestinal Endosc. 2012;76:1124-1132.	155.	Chen J, Cheong JH, Yun MJ, et al. Improvement in preopera-tive staging of gastric adenocarcinoma with positron emission tomography. Cancer. 2005;103:2383-2390,2005.	156.	Wong J, Coit D. Detection of gastric cancer peritoneal metas-tases by peritoneal lavage: current limitations and future per-spectives. Surgery. 2012;152:1-4.	157.	Ikoma N, Blum M, Chiang YJ, et al. Yield of staging lapa-roscopy and lavage cytology for radiologically occult peri-toneal carcinomatosis of gastric cancer. Ann Surg Oncol. 2016;23(13):4332-4337.	158.	Sarela AI, Lefkowitz R, Brennan MF, et al. Selection of patients with gastric adenocarcinoma for laparoscopic stag-ing. Am J Surg. 2006;191:134-138.	159.	Dicken BJ, Bigam DL, Cass C, Mackey JR, Joy AA, Hamilton SM. Gastric adenocarcinoma: review and considerations for future directions. Ann Surg. 2005;241(1):27-39.	160.	Squires MH 3rd, Kooby DA, Poultsides GA, et al. Is it time to abandon the 5-cm margin rule during resection of distal gastric adenocarcinoma? A multi-institution study of the U.S. Gastric Cancer Collaborative. Ann Surg Oncol. 2015;22(4):1243-1251.	161.	Coburn NG, Swallow CJ Kiss A, Law C. Significant regional variation in adequacy of lymph node assessment and survival in gastric cancer. Cancer. 2006;107(9):2143-2151.	162.	Datta J, Lewis RS, Jr, Mamtni R, et al. Implications of inad-equate lymph node staging in resectable gastric cancer: a contemporary analysis using the National Cancer Data Base. Cancer. 2014;120(18):2855-2865.	163.	Saidi RF, ReMine SG, Dudrick PS, et al. Is there a role for palliative gastrectomy in patients with stage IV gastric cancer? World J Surg. 2006;30:21-27.	164.	Bozzetti F, Marubini E, Bonfantai G, Gennari L. Subtotal versus total gastrectomy for gastric cancer: five-year survival rates in a multicenter randomized Italian trial. Italian Gastroin-testinal Tumor Study Group. Ann Surg. 1999;230(2):170-178.	165.	Karanicolas PJ, Graham D, Gönen DM, Strong VE, Ben-nan MF, Coit DG. Quality of life after gastrectomy for adenocarcinoma: a prospective cohort study. Ann Surg. 2013;257(6):1039-1046.	166.	Bonenkamp JJ, Hermans J, Sasako M, et al. Extended lymph node dissection for gastric cancer. N Engl J Med. 1999;340:908-914.	167.	Bartlett EK, Roses RE, Kelz RR, Drebin JA, Fraker DL, Karakousis GC. Morbidity and mortality after total gastrec-tomy for gastric malignancy using the American College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement Program database. Surgery. 2014;156(2):298-304.	168.	Cuschieri A, Fayers P, Fielding J, et al. Postoperative morbid-ity and mortality after D1 and D2 resections for gastric can-cer: preliminary results of the MRC randomised controlled Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   116301/03/19   7:13 PM 1164SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS     PART IIsurgical trial. The Surgical Cooperative Group. Lancet. 1996;347:995-999.	169.	Degiuli M, Sasako M, Ponti A, et al. Randomized clinical trial comparing survival after D1 or D2 gastrectomy for gastric can-cer. Br J Surg. 2014;101(2):23-31.	170.	Songun I, Putter H, Kranenbarg EM, Sasako M, van de Velde CJ. Surgical treatment of gastric cancer: 15-year follow-up results of the randomised nationwide Dutch D1D2 trial. Lan-cet Oncol. 2010;11(5):439-449.	171.	GASTRIC (Global Advanced/Adjuvant Stomach Tumor Research International Collaboration) Group; Paoletti X, Oba K, Burzykowski T, et al. Benefit of adjuvant chemo-therapy for resectable gastric cancer: a meta-analysis. JAMA. 2010;303(17):1729-1737.	172.	Sasako M, et al. Five-year outcomes of a randomized phase III trial comparing adjuvant chemotherapy with S-1 versus surgery alone in stage II or III gastric cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2011;29:4387-4393.	173.	Noh SH, Adjuvant capecitabine plus oxaliplatin for gastric cancer after D2 gastrectomy (CLASSIC): 5-year follow-up of an open-label, randomised phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2014;15(12):1389-1396.	174.	Park SH, Sohn TS, Lee J, et al. Phase III trial to compare adjuvant chemotherapy with capecitabine and cisplatin ver-sus concurrent chemoradiotherapy in gastric cancer: final report of the adjuvant chemoradiotherapy in stomach tumors trial, including survival and subset analyses. J Clin Oncol. 2015;33(28):3130-3136.	175.	Macdonald JS, Smalley SR, Benedetti J, et al. Chemoradio-therapy after surgery compared with surgery alone for adeno-carcinoma of the stomach or gastroesophageal junction.  N Engl J Med. 2001;345:725-730.	176.	Cunningham D, Allum WH, Stenning SP, et al. Perioperative chemotherapy versus surgery alone for resectable gastroesoph-ageal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2006;355(1):11-20.	177.	Ajani JA, Winter K, Okawara GS, et al. Phase II trial of preoperative chemoradiation in patients with localized gas-tric adenocarcinoma (RTOG 9904): quality of combined modality therapy and pathologic response. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24(24):3953-3958.	178.	Sasako M, Sano T, Yamamoto S, et al. D2 lymphadenectomy alone or with para-aortic nodal dissection for gastric cancer. N Engl J Med. 2008;359:453-462.	179.	VanCutsem E, Moiseyenko VM, Tjulandin S, et al. Phase III study of docetaxel and cisplatin plus fluorouracil compared with cisplatin and fluorouracil as first-line chemotherapy for advanced gastric cancer: areport of the V325 study group.  J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:4991-4997.	180.	Cunningham D, Starling N, Rao S, et al. Capecitabine and oxaliplatin for advanced esophagogastric cancer. N Engl  J Med. 2008;358(1):36-46.	181.	Gomez-Martin C, Garralda E, Echerri MJ. HER2/neu testing for anti-HER2 based therapies in patients with unresectable and/or metastatic gastric cancer. J Clin Path. 2012;65:751-757.	182.	Baptista V, Singh A, Wassef W. Early gastric cancer: an update on endoscopic management. Curr Opin Gastroenterol. 2012;28(6):629-635.	183.	Yoon SS, Coit DG, Portlock CS, et al. The diminishing role of surgery in the treatment of gastric lymphoma. Ann Surg. 2004;240:28-37.	184.	Farinha P, Gascoyne RD. Helicobacter pylori and MALT lym-phoma. Gastroenterology. 2005;128:1579-1605.	185.	Gold JS, DeMatteo RP. Combined surgical and molecular therapy: the gastrointestinal stromal tumor model. Ann Surg. 2006;244(2):176-184.	186.	Rubin BP, Heinrich MC, Corless CL. Gastrointestinal stromal tumour. Lancet. 2007;369:1731-1741.	187.	Stelow EB, Murad FM, Debol SM, et al. A limited immuno-cytochemical panel for the distinction of subepithelial gastro-intestinal mesenchymal neoplasms sampled by endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration. Am J Clin Pathol. 2008;129:219-225.	188.	Miettinen M, Lasota J. Gastrointestinal stromal tumors: Pathology and prognosis at different sites. Semin Diagn Pathol. 2006;23:70-83.	189.	Heinrich MC. Kinase mutations and imatinib response in patients with metastatic gastrointestinal stromal tumor. J Clin Oncol. 2003;21(23):4342-4349.	190.	Dematteo RP, Ballman KV, Antonescu CR, et al. Adjuvant imatinib mesylate after resection of localised, primary gas-trointestinal stromal tumour: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2009;373(9669):1097-1104.	191.	Joensuu H, Eriksson M, Sunby Hall K, et al. One vs three years of adjuvant imatinib for operable gastrointestinal stromal tumor: a randomized trial. JAMA. 2012;307(12):1265-1272.	192.	Balachandran VP, DeMatteo RP. Adjuvant imatinib for GIST: the pie is shrinking. Ann Surg Oncol. 2014;21(11):3365-3366.	193.	Raut CP, Kulke MH, Glickman JN, et al. Carcinoid tumors. Curr Probl Surg. 2006;43:383-450.	194.	Perren A, Couvelard A, Scoazec JY, et al. ENETS consensus guidelines for the standards of care in neuroendocrine tumors: pathology: diagnosis and prognostic stratification. Neuroendo-crinology. 2017;105(3):196-200.	195.	Parkman HP, Hasler WL, Fisher RS. American Gastroen-terological Association technical review on the diagnosis and treatment of gastroparesis. Gastroenterology. 2004;127: 1592-1622.	196.	Yin J, Chen JD. Implantable gastric electrical stimulation: ready for prime time? Gastroenterology. 2008;134:665-667.	197.	Zehetner J, Ravari F, Ayazi S, et al. Minimally invasive surgi-cal approach for the treatment of gastroparesis. Surg Endosc. 2013;27(1):61-66.	198.	Cappell MS, Friedel D. Initial management of acute upper gas-trointestinal bleeding-from initial evaluation to gastrointestinal endoscopy. Med Clin North Am. 2008;92:491-509.	199.	Dempsey DT, Burke DR, Reilly RS, McLean GK, Rosato EF. Angiography in poor-risk patients with massive nonvariceal upper gastrointestinal bleeding. Am J Surg. 1990;159:282-286.	200.	Zaman A. Portal hypertension related bleeding-management of difficult cases. Clin Liver Dis. 2006;10:353-370.	201.	Coffey RJ, Washington MK, Corless CL, et al. Ménétrier dis-ease and gastrointestinal stromal tumors: hyperproliferative disorders of the stomach. J Clin Invest. 2007;117:70.	202.	Sebastian S, O’Morain CA, Buckley MJ. Current therapeutic options for gastric antral vascular ectasia. Aliment Pharmacol-Ther. 2003;18:157-165.	203.	Akhras J, Patel P, Tobi M. Dieulafoy’s lesion-like bleeding: an under-recognized cause of upper gastrointestinal hemor-rhage in patients with advanced liver disease. Dig Dis Sci. 2007;52:722-726.	204.	Harbison SP, Dempsey DT. Mallory-Weiss syndrome, in Cam-eron JL, ed. Current Surgical Therapy. 9nd ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2008.	205.	Schrag SP, Sharma R, Jaik NP, et al. Complications related to percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tubes. A comprehensive clinical review. J Gastrointestin Liver Dis. 2007;16:407-418.	206.	McClave SA. Critical care nutrition: getting involved as a gastrointestinal endoscopist. J Clin Gastroenterol. 2006;40:870-890.	207.	Dempsey DT. Reoperative gastric surgery and postgastrec-tomy syndromes. In: Zuidema GD, Yeo CJ, eds. Shackelford’s Surgery of the Alimentary Tract. 5nd ed. Vol 2. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2002:161.Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   116401/03/19   7:13 PM 1165STOMACHCHAPTER 26	208.	Ukleja A. Dumping syndrome: pathophysiology and treat-ment. Nutr Clin Pract. 2005;20:517-525.	209.	Cuschieri A. Postvagotomy diarrhea: is there a place for surgi-cal management? Gut. 1990;31:245-246.	210.	Forster-Barthell AW, Murr MM, Nitecki S, et al. Near-total completion gastrectomy for severe postvagotomy gastric stasis: analysis of early and long-term results in 62 patients. J Gastrointest Surg. 1999;3:15-21.	211.	Jones MP, Maganti K. A systematic review of surgical therapy for gastroparesis. Am J Gastroenterol. 2003;98: 2122-2129.	212.	Van der Milje HC, Kleibeuker JH, Limburg AJ, et al. Mano-metric and scintigraphic studies of the relation between motility disturbances in the Roux limb and the Roux-en-Y syndrome. Am J Surg. 1993;166:11-17.	213.	Farrell TM, Hunter JG. Laparoscopic surgery of the stomach and duodenum. In: Zuidema GD, Yeo CJ, eds. Shackelford’s Surgery of the Alimentary Tract. 5nd ed. Vol 2. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2002:202.	214.	Lee J, Kim W. Clinical experience of 528 laparoscopic gas-trectomies on gastric cancer in a single institution. Surgery. 2013;153(5):611-618.	215.	Zeng YK, Yang ZL, Peng JS, et al. Laparoscopy-assisted ver-sus open distal gastrectomy for early gastric cancer. Ann Surg. 2012;256:39-52.	216.	Kim HG, Park JH, Jeong SH, et al. Totally laparoscopic distal gastrectomy after learning curve completion: comparison with laparoscopy-assisted distal gastrectomy. J Gastric Cancer. 2013;13(1):26-33.	217.	Moon JS, et al. Lessons learned from a comparative analy-sis of surgical outcomes of and learning curves for lap-aroscopy-assisted distal gastrectomy. J Gastric Cancer. 2015;15(1):29-38.	218.	Kim HH, Han SU, Kim MC, et al. Long-term results of laparo-scopic gastrectomy for gastric cancer: a large-scale case-con-trol and case-matched Korean multicenter study. J Clin Oncol. 2014;32(7):627-633.	219.	Jung DH, Son SY, Park YS, et al. The learning curve asso-ciated with laparoscopic total gastrectomy. Gastric Cancer. 2016;19(1):264-272.	220.	Suda K, Uyama I, Kitagawa Y. Technology beats the cur-rent standard: is robotic gastrectomy becoming the standard treatment option for gastric cancer? : “Surgical outcomes after open, laparoscopic, and robotic gastrectomy for gas-tric cancer,” by Kim, Hyuong-Il, et al. Ann Surg Oncol. 2017;24(7):1755-1757.Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   116501/03/19   7:13 PM
# Chunk 8929
Brunicardi_Ch26_p1099-p1166.indd   116601/03/19   7:13 PMThis page intentionally left blank

The Surgical Management of ObesityAnita P. Courcoulas and Philip R. Schauer 27chapterINTRODUCTIONDespite the global pandemic of obesity, there has been little progress in nonsurgical treatment approaches, especially among patients with severe obesity. In addition, the evidence base for bariatric procedures has grown rapidly over the last 10 years, yielding important shortand long-term data on the safety and efficacy of the surgical treatment for obesity and related metabolic disorders. Therefore, the approach for patients con-sidering bariatric and metabolic surgery has now shifted to a well-informed and shared decision-making process as there are significant tradeoffs between the potential risks and benefits of these procedures.1HistoryDuring the 1950s, operations were first performed to treat severe hyperlipidemia with associated obesity.2 These were ileocolic bypass operations to limit absorption and were associated with severe nutritional complications and liver failure postopera-tively. A more modest jejunoileal bypass was performed next, also a malabsorptive operation, but it bypassed only a portion of the small intestine. Complications after this procedure included severe diarrhea, electrolyte disturbances, protein-calorie malnu-trition, renal stones, and liver failure.In 1969, Mason and Ito performed the first gastric bypass, describing a loop of jejunum connected to a transverse proximal gastric pouch.3 Bile reflux esophagitis was severe postopera-tively, causing Griffin and colleagues to describe the Roux-en-Y modification of the gastric bypass in 1977.4 The gastric pouch was also altered from transverse to vertical using the upper lesser curvature at this time (Fig. 27-1).In 1980, Mason5 first performed the vertical banded gastroplasty (VBG), which was a restrictive procedure using a stapled proximal gastric pouch of the upper lesser curvature of the stomach with a restrictive band for its outlet to the rest of the stomach. This operation produced excellent initial weight loss (50% of excess weight or more) with low mor-bidity and mortality. It rapidly became the most commonly performed bariatric operation in the United States during the 1980s. However, by the early 1990s, it became clear that patients who underwent VBG modified their diets to high-calorie soft foods and liquids and some regained weight.6 A significant incidence of stenosis at the cuff and staple line Introduction1167History / 1167State of the Field / 1169The Disease of Obesity1169Overview / 1169U.S. Prevalence of Obesity / 1170Causes of Obesity / 1170Concurrent Medical and  Social Problems / 1170Medical Management of Obesity1171Lifestyle Intervention / 1171Pharmacotherapy / 1172Barriers to Treatment / 1173Candidates for Bariatric Surgery1173Indications / 1173Contraindications / 1173Mechanism of Action of Bariatric  and Metabolic Surgery1175Overview / 1175Mechanisms of Bariatric Surgery  (Weight Loss) / 1175Mechanisms of Metabolic Surgery (Diabetes Improvement) / 1177Preoperative Issues1177Preoperative Preparation / 1177Anesthesiology Issues / 1179Enhanced Recovery After Surgery / 1179Special Equipment and  Infrastructure / 1180Bariatric Surgical Procedures1180Laparoscopic Roux-en-Y  Gastric Bypass / 1180Laparoscopic Sleeve Gastrectomy / 1185Laparoscopic Adjustable  Gastric Banding / 1187Biliopancreatic Diversion and Duodenal Switch / 1189Investigational Bariatric Procedures / 1190Follow-Up and  Postoperative Care1191Results of Bariatric Surgery1192Short-Term Outcomes / 1192Effectiveness of Bariatric Surgery Compared to Nonsurgical  Treatment / 1193Longer-Term Studies / 1193Other Studies / 1198Comparisons Between Procedures / 1199Resolution of Specific Comorbid Conditions / 1199Results of Surgery for Diabetes  (Metabolic Surgery) / 1200Complications of  Bariatric Surgery1203Surgical Complications / 1203Nonsurgical Complications / 1204Reoperative (Revision and Conversion) Bariatric Surgery1205Introduction / 1205Principles and Preoperative  Evaluation / 1205Treatment for Insufficient Weight Loss or Weight Regain / 1206Treatment of Surgical Complications / 1206Special Issues in  Bariatric Surgery1207Bariatric Procedures in Adolescents / 1207Cost Effectiveness / 1207Quality Assurance / 1207Plastic Surgery After Weight Loss / 1208Future Important Questions1209Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   116723/02/19   2:20 PM 1168JejunoilealBypassGastricBypassHorizontalGastroplastyAdjustable GastricBandingVertical BandedGastroplastyRoux-en-Y gastricBypassBPD with DuodenalSwitchBiliopancreaticDiversionSleeveGastrectomyMalabsorptiveRestrictiveBoth50s60s70s80s90sdisruptions was also problematic.7 Long-term weight loss was poor,8 and by the 1990s in the United States, Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB) became the procedure of choice for bariatric surgery.In the meantime, in Italy Scopinaro had developed and pop-ularized the biliopancreatic diversion (BPD) in the early 1980s.9 This procedure was also modified to include duodenal switch (DS),10 the only major malabsorptive operation currently in use.The laparoscopic approach to bariatric surgery became available in the 1990s, and Belachew performed the first laparo-scopic adjustable gastric banding (LAGB) operation in 1994.11 Wittgrove and Clark performed the first laparoscopic RYGB the same year.12 LAGB was commonly performed in Europe and Australia during the late 1990s, and in 2001 it was approved for use in the United States. Sleeve gastrectomy (SG) as a primary bariatric operation has grown rapidly in use since 2008.Figure 27-1. History of bariatric surgery. (Reproduced with permission from Arterburn DE, Courcoulas AP: Bariatric surgery for obesity and metabolic condi-tions in adults, BMJ. 2014 Aug 27;349:g3961.)Key Points1	Sixty-five percent of the world’s population live in countries where overweight and obesity are linked to more deaths than underweight and malnutrition. Obesity is the second leading cause of preventable death in adults in the United States.2	There is an ongoing major shift in procedure utilization with the sleeve gastrectomy and Roux-en-Y gastric bypass being the two most common procedures, worldwide.3	The former classification of bariatric operations as either “restrictive” or “malabsorptive” is being replaced by knowl-edge from investigation into the more basic physiologic and metabolic mechanisms responsible for the effects of bariatric surgery.4	Patients who develop a bowel obstruction after laparoscopic gastric bypass require surgical and not conservative therapy due to the high incidence of internal hernias and the potential for bowel infarction.5	Malabsorptive operations are highly effective in producing durable weight loss and metabolic improvements but have higher surgical complication rates and considerable nutri-tional side effects. Patients undergoing such procedures require complete follow-up and appropriate nutritional supplements.6	Large, longer-term observational studies of bariatric surgery have shown durable weight loss, diabetes remission, lipid improvements, and improved survival with bariatric surgery. Still unclear are specific preand postoperative predictors of those outcomes, long-term complications, microvascular and macrovascular events, mental health outcomes, and costs.7	High quality data have clearly established that bariatric pro-cedures are more effective than medical or lifestyle interven-tions for inducing weight loss and initial remission of type 2 diabetes, even in less obese patients. Randomized clinical trials showed greater weight loss and type 2 diabetes mellitus remission following bariatric surgery compared with nonsur-gical treatments.8	The incidence of complications after bariatric surgery varies from 4% to over 25% and depends on the duration of follow-up, the definition of complication used, the type of bariatric procedure performed, and individual patient characteristics.9	Emerging areas in bariatric surgery include the use of inter-mediate weight loss devices, adolescent bariatric surgery, and the increase in the need for revision and conversion bar-iatric procedures.Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   116823/02/19   2:20 PM 1169THE SURGICAL MANAGEMENT OF OBESITYCHAPTER 2780p < 0.0017060Relative Procedure Utilization (%)504030201002006200720082009Year of Procedure2010201120122013Adjustable Gastric BandingRoux-en-Y Gastric BypassSleeve GastrectomyDuodenal SwitchFigure 27-2. Changes in bariatric procedure utilization. (Reproduced with permission from Reames BN, Finks JF, Bacal D, et al: Changes in bariatric surgery procedure use in Michigan, 2006-2013, JAMA. 2014 Sep 3;312(9):959-961.)State of the FieldThere has been an ongoing major shift in bariatric procedures both in the United States and worldwide13 with the rapid adop-tion of the laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy and the simultane-ous decreasing utilization of the laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding procedure (Fig. 27-2). International trends in the utiliza-tion of bariatric surgical procedures have also been published. These show that the total number of bariatric surgical procedures performed in 2014 was 579,517. The three most commonly per-formed procedures in the world were SG at 46%, followed by RYGB (40%), and LAGB (7%). The annual percentage changes from 2013 show an increased utilization of SG and a decreased use of RYGB in the United States, Canada, Europe, and Asia and Pacific countries. In Central and South America, however, the use of SG decreased, and RYGB was most commonly used.14Extension of the indication from bariatric surgery for weight loss to metabolic surgery to treat type 2 diabetes (T2DM) even in patients with less than severe obesity has been another more recent development, driven by the availability of more level 1 data.15,16Also, considerable effort is now being devoted to the study of the basic physiologic mechanisms underlying weight loss and, perhaps more importantly, the resolution of comorbid medical problems associated with obesity. Despite the classic “restric-tive” and “malabsorptive” anatomic conceptualizations of bar-iatric surgical procedures (see Fig. 27-1), there is much ongoing research in animal and human models towards understanding the specific underlying mechanisms of action, which may be more physiologic in nature.17 Some of the potential candidates for the mechanisms of action of bariatric procedures include alterations in ghrelin, leptin, glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1), cholecystokinin, peptide YY (PYY), gut microbiota, and bile acids. In the future, bariatric procedures will not be described by anatomic surgical similarities but by how they affect key physiological variables, which will provide greater mechanistic insight into how the procedures actually work.THE DISEASE OF OBESITYOverviewWorldwide obesity has more than doubled since 1980. In 2014, 39% of adults age 18 years and over (38% of men and 40% of women) were overweight, and 13% of the world’s adult population (11% of men and 15% of women) were obese. In 2014, an estimated 41 million children under the age of 5 years were overweight or obese.18 Overweight and obesity are now on the rise in lowand middle-income countries, particularly in urban settings. Currently, 65% of the world’s population live in countries where overweight and obesity are linked to more deaths than underweight and malnutrition. Obesity is the second leading cause of preventable death in adults in the United States, after tobacco use.19The degrees of obesity are defined by body mass index (BMI = weight [kg]/height [m]2), which correlates body weight with height. The World Health Organization international clas-sification of overweight and obesity is shown in Table 27-1. It should be noted that for Asian populations, classifications remain the same as the international classification, but the pub-lic health action points for interventions are set at a lower BMI threshold. For children, age needs to be considered when defin-ing overweight and obesity, so for children age 5 to 19 years, 1Table 27-1The international classification of adult overweight and obesity according to body mass index (BMI)CLASSIFICATIONBMI (kg/m2)PRINCIPAL CUTOFF POINTSADDITIONAL CUTOFF POINTSaNormal range 18.50–24.99 18.50–22.9923.00–24.99Overweight≥25.00≥25.00 Preobese 25.00–29.99 25.00–27.4927.50–29.99 Obese≥30.00≥30.00  Obese class I 30.00–34.99 30.00–32.4932.50–34.99  Obese class II 35.00–39.99 35.00–37.4937.50–39.99  Obese class III≥40.00≥40.00aFor Asian populations, classifications remain the same as the international classification, but public health action points for interventions are set at 23, 27.5, 32.5, and 37.5 kg/m.2Data from WHO, 1995, WHO, 2000 and WHO 2004.Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   116923/02/19   2:20 PM 1170SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIoverweight is BMI-for-age greater than 1 standard deviation above the World Health Organization (WHO) growth reference median, and obesity is greater than 2 standard deviations above the WHO growth reference median.The fundamental cause of obesity and overweight is an energy imbalance between calories consumed and calories expended. Globally, there has been an increased intake of energy-dense foods that are high in fat and a decrease in physi-cal inactivity due to the increasingly sedentary nature of many forms of work, changing modes of transportation, and increas-ing urbanization. These changes in dietary and physical activ-ity patterns are the result of both societal and environmental changes associated with development. There is also a dearth of supportive policies to counteract these forces in sectors such as health, agriculture, transport, urban planning, environment, food processing, marketing, and education. Obesity as a disease was recognized by the American Medical Association in 2013. It is multifactorial in its etiology, and the components of the disease likely include a combination of both environmental and genetic factors.U.S. Prevalence of ObesityAccording to the 2013–2014 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) data, in the United States the overall age-adjusted prevalence of obesity was 37.7% (95% confidence interval [CI], 35.8–39.7%); among men, it was 35.0% (95% CI, 32.8–37.3%); and among women, it was 40.4% (95% CI, 37.6–43.3%). The corresponding prevalence of class III obesity overall was 7.7% (95% CI, 6.2–9.3%); among men, it was 5.5% (95% CI, 4.0–7.2%); and among women, it was 9.9% (95% CI, 7.5–12.3%). Changes over the decade from 2005 through 2014, adjusted for age, race, smoking status, and education, showed significantly increas-ing trends among women for overall obesity and for class III obesity, but not among men.20For children in the United States, obesity is defined as a BMI at or above the sex-specific 95th percentile, and extreme obesity is defined as a BMI at or above 120% of the sexspecific 95th percentile on the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) BMI-for-age growth charts. In the most recent NHANES study of U.S. children and adolescents age 2 to  19 years, the prevalence of obesity from 2011 to 2014 was 17.0%, and extreme obesity was 5.8%.21Causes of ObesityBoth genetic and environmental factors contribute to the devel-opment of obesity. Not everyone exposed to the prevailing envi-ronment becomes obese, suggesting that genetic mechanisms are operating at the individual level. Estimates vary, but twin, family, and adoption studies show that the rate of heritability of BMI is high, ranging from 40% to 70%.22,23 Eleven rare and monogenic forms of obesity are now recognized, including a deficiency of the leptin and melanocortin-4 receptors, which are expressed in the hypothalamus and are involved in regulating energy homeostasis.24 Heterozygous mutations in the melano-cortin-4 receptor gene are currently the most common cause of monogenic obesity, causative in 2% to 5% of children with severe obesity.Genes and environment interact in a complex process that regulates energy balance and weight. Reducing food intake or increasing physical activity leads to a negative energy bal-ance and a cascade of compensatory adaptive mechanisms that preserve vital functions and are associated with reductions in resting energy expenditure, food preoccupation, and many other changes that depend on the amount and duration of caloric restriction. There is also a counterregulatory increase in appetite and food intake that limits the degree of expected weight loss that is associated with interventions such as exercise programs.22Individuals with obesity have excessive adipose cells, both in size and number. The number of such cells often is deter-mined early in life; adult-onset obesity is largely a product of increase in adipose cell size. Weight gain results from increase in both adipose cell size and number. Adipose tissue may  be deposited in large quantities in the subcutaneous layer of the abdominal wall or the viscera. Generally, males tend to have central visceral fat distribution, whereas females more often have a peripheral fat distribution. Central or visceral fat distri-bution is associated with metabolic diseases such as diabetes, hypertension, and the metabolic syndrome.Concurrent Medical and Social ProblemsRaised BMI is a major risk factor for diseases such as cardio-vascular disease (mainly heart disease and stroke), which were the leading cause of death in 2012, diabetes, osteoarthritis, some cancers (including endometrial, breast, ovarian, prostate, liver, gallbladder, kidney, and colon).18 The risk for these conditions increases with increases in BMI. Childhood obesity is asso-ciated with a higher chance of obesity, premature death, and disability in adulthood. In addition to increased future risks, children with obesity experience sleep apnea, increased risk of fractures, hypertension, early markers of cardiovascular disease, insulin resistance, and psychological effects.The severely obese patient typically presents with multiple chronic and weight-related problems or comorbidities/comorbid conditions. These include degenerative joint disease, low back pain, hypertension, obstructive sleep apnea, gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), cholelithiasis, T2DM, dyslipidemia, asthma, hypoventilation syndrome of obesity, right-sided heart failure, migraine headaches, pseudotumor cerebri, venous stasis ulcers, deep venous thrombosis (DVT), fungal skin rashes, skin abscesses, stress urinary incontinence, infertility, dysmenorrhea, depression, and large abdominal wall hernias.There are anatomical, metabolic, and physiological effects of obesity through which this excess adiposity leads to disease risk factors and chronic diseases themselves (Fig. 27-3).22 Subcu-taneous adipose tissue holds most of the stored lipid at a variety of anatomical sites while visceral adipose tissue is a smaller storage compartment with omental and mesenteric fat mechanistically linked to some of the metabolic disturbances and adverse con-sequences outcomes associated with obesity.25,26 Adipose tissue surrounds and compresses the renal parenchyma and may contrib-ute to the hypertension frequently observed in patients who are obese.27 Obesity is frequently accompanied by an increase in pha-ryngeal soft tissues, which can lead to obstructive sleep apnea.28 Excess adiposity also imposes a significant mechanical load on joints, making it a risk factor for the development of osteoarthri-tis.29 An increase in intraabdominal pressure likely accounts for the elevated risks of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), Barrett’s esophagus, and esophageal adenocarcinoma among those with obesity.30 Chronic overactivity of the sympathetic ner-vous system is present in some patients with obesity and may contribute to pathophysiological processes, including high blood pressure.27 Obesity is also associated with an increased preva-lence of mood, anxiety, and other psychiatric disorders, especially Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   117023/02/19   2:20 PM 1171THE SURGICAL MANAGEMENT OF OBESITYCHAPTER 27ä Adiposity˜ Lipid production˜ Activity ofthe sympatheticnervous system˜ Activity of therenin–angiotensin–aldosterone systemMechanical stress˜ Adipokine synthesis˜ Adipose tissuemacrophages and otherinflammatory cells˜ Proinflammatorycytokines˜ Pharyngealsoft tissue˜ Mechanicalload on joints˜ Intraabdominalpressure˜ InsulinType 2 diabetesNonalcoholicfatty liver diseaseSteatohepatitisCirrhosisCoronaryartery diseaseObstructivesleep apneaOsteoarthritisGastroesophagealreflux diseaseBarrett’s esophagusEsophagealadenocarcinomaCongestive heart failureStrokeChronic kidney diseaseImpaired insulinsignaling and˜ insulin resistanceLipotoxicityDyslipidemiaSystemic andpulmonaryhypertensionRenalcompressionHydrolysis oftriglyceridesRelease offree fatty acidsFigure 27-3. Pathways through which obesity leads to major risk factors and common chronic diseases. Common chronic diseases are shown in red boxes. The dashed arrows indicate an indirect association. (Reproduced with permission from Heymsfield SB, Wadden TA: Mechanisms, Pathophysiology, and Management of Obesity, N Engl J Med. 2017 Jan 19;376(3):254-266.)among persons with severe obesity and in those seeking bariatric surgery.31-33 Decreased quality of life also results due to severe obesity. Most patients seeking surgical treatment of severe obe-sity do so because of the medical issues they face from comorbid conditions or the decreased quality of life they are experiencing as a result of severe obesity.MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF OBESITYTreatments should be aligned with the severity of obesity, asso-ciated comorbid conditions, and the individual’s functional limitations. There are guidelines available to evaluate an indi-vidual’s health risks and potential treatment options.34,35 Three main treatment options exist with sufficient evidence-based support: lifestyle intervention, pharmacotherapy, and bariatric surgery.Lifestyle InterventionLifestyle interventions designed to modify eating behaviors and physical activity are the first option for weight manage-ment, given their low cost and low risk.35 Behavioral therapy, the core of any lifestyle intervention, provides patients with techniques for adopting dietary and activity recommendations. Among these recommendations are regular recording of food intake, physical activity, and weight. Patients review their progress approximately weekly with a trained interventionist Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   117123/02/19   2:20 PM 1172SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II01020304050Percentage of Participants6070809010010%5%High-lntensityLifestyleInterventionPharmacotherapyInterventionLook AHEADDPPTeixeira, et aI.PlaceboOrlistatLorcaserinLiraglutidePhentermine-topiramateNaltrexone-bupropionFigure 27-4. 22Percent weight loss at 1 year with intensive lifestyle interventions or pharmacotherapy combined with lower level lifestyle. Shown are the percentages of participants in randomized, controlled trials who had weight loss of at least 5% or at least 10% of their initial weight at 1 year after intensive lifestyle intervention or pharmacotherapy that typically was combined with lower-intensity lifestyle. Percentages shown are cumulative; the percentage of participants who lost at least 5% of their initial weight includes the percentage who lost at least 10%. Additional data on the percentage of participants with weight loss at 1 year of at least 15% of their initial weight were available for the Look AHEAD36 study (16%), the DPP39 trial (11%), liraglutide40 (14%), phentermine–topiramate (32%), and naltrexone–bupropion (14%). (Reproduced with permis-sion from Heymsfield SB, Wadden TA: Mechanisms, Pathophysiology, and Management of Obesity, N Engl J Med. 2017 Jan 19;376(3):254-266.)who provides support and encouragement, help setting goals, and problem-solving instructions.35 This type of comprehen-sive program results in a mean weight loss of 5% to 8%, and approximately 60% to 65% of patients lose 5% or more of initial weight. The Look AHEAD study randomized 5145 adults with obesity to either an intensive lifestyle intervention (ILI) or to a diabetes support group and education group (DSE) to assess the impact on weight loss, T2DM, and cardiovascular outcomes. At 1 year, the intensive intervention group lost an average of 8.6% initial weight compared to 0.7% in the support and educa-tion group. As shown in Fig. 27-4, 68% of participants in the Look AHEAD study lost at least 5% of their initial weight, and 37% of these participants lost at least 10%. Also at 1 year, par-ticipants undergoing the more intensive program experienced improved cardiovascular risk factors and glycemic control.36At 4 years, participants in the intensive intervention group experienced more weight loss (−6.15% ILI compared to −0.88% DSE), better glycemic control, fitness, and an improvement in cardiovascular risk factors.37 Nevertheless, the beneficial clinical effects of the improved weight loss achieved with intensive lifestyle intervention did not reduce morbidity and mortality associated with cardiovascular disease after 9.6 years when the Look AHEAD study was stopped due to futility for that primary endpoint.38  Figure 27-4 shows a comparison of several lifestyle intervention trials (Look AHEAD, the Diabetes Prevention Program [DPP] trial,39 and the trial reported by Teixeira et al40) for >5% and >10% weight loss outcomes. These trials, specifically, were selected because they were judged to be good quality by the Guidelines (2013) for the Management of Overweight and Obesity in Adults and because the trial data were reported as categorical weight loss. Categorical weight loss data from the DPP trial were provided by the DPP Research Group to the authors of the review.22In summary, multidisciplinary lifestyle intervention and weight-management programs are viable and potentially cost-effective treatment options in overweight or obese patients with or without T2DM. Such approaches, however, often fail to achieve durable weight loss of more than 5% to 10%, so they are not effective enough for the severely obese. Importantly, lifestyle and medical approaches do not appear to improve car-diovascular outcomes in studies so far. Thus, further research is needed to evaluate the role for current medical and lifestyle therapeutic regimens for obesity and T2DM, including compari-sons to surgical interventions. Certainly, and at the very least, these approaches are important adjuncts to bariatric surgery.PharmacotherapyMedications may be considered as an adjunct to lifestyle modi-fication in adults who have a BMI of 30 or higher or a BMI of 27 to 29 with at least one obesity-related condition.41 Phar-macotherapy and lifestyle intervention together lead to addi-tive weight losses and should be used together and may also be helpful in facilitating the maintenance of reduced weight.34,41,42 Phentermine, the most widely prescribed weight-management medication in the United States, is a sympathomimetic amine that was approved by the FDA in 1959 for short-term use of fewer than 3 months long.41 There are now five newer FDA-approved medications for long-term weight management that include three single drugs and two combination drugs. In 1-year pivotal trials, total weight losses for the three single therapies (orlistat, lorcaserin, and liraglutide), the effects of which are mediated by different mechanisms, ranged from 5.8% to 8.8% of initial body weight.41,43-45 The two combination medications (phentermine–topiramate and naltrexone–bupropion) include drugs that act on neural weight-loss mechanisms.46,47 In 1-year pivotal trials, total weight loss for these combination drugs ranged from 6.4% to 9.8% of initial body weight.These medications, when prescribed with lifestyle inter-ventions, produce additional weight loss relative to placebo ranging from approximately 3% of initial weight for orlistat and lorcaserin to 9% for the higher-dose phentermine plus topi-ramate–extended release at 1 year. The proportion of patients achieving clinically meaningful (at least 5%) weight loss ranges from 37% to 47% for lorcaserin, 35% to 73% for orlistat, and 67% to 70% for higher-dose phentermine plus topiramate–extended release. All three of these medications produce greater improvements in cardiometabolic risk factors than placebo, Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   117223/02/19   2:20 PM 1173THE SURGICAL MANAGEMENT OF OBESITYCHAPTER 27but none has been shown to reduce cardiovascular morbid-ity or mortality. There is limited data for the long-term safety and efficacy of these medications, and some of these drugs may increase heart rate43 or attenuate expected blood pressure reductions.47 In addition, completed trials of hard cardiovascular disease outcomes (heart attack and stroke) in patients treated with these medications have yet to be published, except in the case of liraglutide.43 Figure 27-4 shows a comparison of weight loss outcomes for these medications. The median percentages of participants who had a weight loss of at least 5% or 10% with each of five medications approved for long-term weight man-agement are from a meta-analysis by Khera et al.48In summary, medications approved for long-term obesity treatment, when used as an adjunct to lifestyle intervention, lead to greater mean weight loss and an increased likelihood of achieving clinically meaningful 1-year weight loss compared to placebo.42 Yet weight loss medications are underutilized, likely due to several factors. First, patients are often disappointed by moderate weight loss. Second, there are requirements to pay a substantial portion of costs, which may lead to short-term rather than longer-term use. Third, there remain concerns about medi-cation safety. Finally, weight regain is common after termina-tion of drug treatment, which is discouraging to both patients and their providers.22,42Barriers to TreatmentOnly a small fraction of patients for whom these medical treat-ments or bariatric surgery are indicated actually pursue and receive them. Past studies have estimated that 1% or fewer of those people with severe obesity who could consider bariatric surgery ever do so. Barriers to general obesity care include the slow recognition among providers that obesity requires long-term management, inadequate physician training in nutrition and obesity, limited reimbursement for the full range of treat-ments, lack of more effective and accessible lifestyle programs, and limited referrals of patients with severe obesity to expe-rienced surgeons.22 Lack of knowledge about the more recent outcomes of bariatric surgery may also play a contributing role.CANDIDATES FOR BARIATRIC SURGERYIndicationsThere has been significant procedure evolution over the last several years indicating an ongoing major shift in bariatric procedures both in the United States and worldwide13 (Fig. 27-5). According to a 2016 report from the American Society of Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery (ASMBS), the two most common procedures in the United States are RYGB and SG, accounting for approximately 25% to 30% and 50% to 60%, respectively, of annual cases.49,50 The utilization of LAGB has declined dramatically to under 10% of cases, and the malabsorptive procedure BPD with or without DS is utilized in less than 1% to 2% of cases (see Fig. 27-2). All of these procedures were defined by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) as standard approved procedures, noting that SG coverage is based on the discretion of regional carriers throughout the United States.The indications for performing bariatric surgery in class II  and class III obesity still remain as described in the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Consensus Conference of 1991, and a summary of the broad selection criteria are shown in Table 27-2.51 In 2016, the second Diabetes Surgery Summit (DSS-II) published guidelines indicating that metabolic surgery 2should also be considered for patients with T2DM and BMI of 30 to 34.9 kg/m2 (class I obesity) if blood sugar is inadequately controlled despite optimal medication treatment.16 In addition,  these guidelines recommended that the BMI threshold for  metabolic surgery (surgery for diabetes as the indication) should be reduced by 2.5 kg/m2 for Asian populations at risk.The NIH criteria for bariatric surgery do not set guidelines or limits for age, and surgical practice varies widely. The pediatric obesity epidemic is both increasing and also driving the adult epidemic, and a growing proportion of younger patients are potentially eligible for bariatric surgery. For young patients, there are concerns about assent to surgery and compliance with and adherence to postoperative lifestyle changes, but there are also some emerging data that suggest intervening earlier in the disease process may lead to improved reversal of comorbid conditions compared to adults.52 In addition, there is a longer period of postoperative benefit in terms of improved quality of life and prevention of or reduction in the emotional, social, and physical consequences of obesity (see “Bariatric Procedures in Adolescents”). Alternatively, older patients are more likely to have more numerous and debilitating comorbid conditions and thus have an immediate benefit in quality of life but not necessarily enhanced longevity. There is also some concern that recovery from potential complications is impaired in patients over the age of 65. Most studies in older patients have focused on RYGB and older restrictive procedures with limited follow-up. The results of more recent studies in older patients are generally equivocal in terms of any increased risk of morbidity and mortality or any difference in weight outcomes compared to younger adults.53-55 One study has shown that the older patient population, especially those few patients older than age 70 undergoing bariatric surgery, did have an increased risk of mortality and morbidity after RYGB.56 Also, a 2016 study from the Utah Obesity group found that RYGB is protective against mortality even for older patients and also reduces the age-related increase in mortality observed in severely obese individuals not undergoing surgery.57ContraindicationsMedical issues that preclude patients from being good surgi-cal candidates include American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) class IV disease of a nature that makes surgical therapy extraordinarily high risk. Psychological instability or the inabil-ity to understand the implications of the proposed operation and what changes will result from it in terms of the patient’s life-style are also contraindications. Known and documented active drug or alcohol addiction is a contraindication to surgery (see Table 27-2). Tobacco use should be completely avoided by bar-iatric patients at all times, and smoking cessation should occur  6 weeks prior to surgery. After surgery smoking increases risks of poor wound healing, anastomotic ulcers, and impaired health.58 A poorly controlled eating disorder, especially bulimia, is also a contraindication to surgery. Nonambulatory status is a relative contraindication to surgery and is associated with increased sur-gical risk,59 especially if the obesity is so severe that the patient cannot normally do self-care or would not likely be able to do so after surgery. In addition to excessive morbidity, the placement of these individuals in care facilities postoperatively for recovery is often impossible due to their size and limitations of physical ability. Finally, lack of sufficient social support or an extremely poor or unsupportive home environment can be contraindications to surgical care, since such environmental factors are important to optimize outcomes once discharged from the hospital.Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   117323/02/19   2:20 PM 1174SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIABCDEFGHFigure 27-5. Bariatric surgery procedure evolution. A. Horizontal gastroplasty; B. vertical banded gastroplasty; C. Roux-en-Y gastric bypass; D. transected Roux-en-Y gastric bypass; E. laparoscopic adjustable gastric band; F. biliopancreatic diversion; G. biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch; H. vertical sleeve gastrectomy. (Modified with permission from Arterburn DE, Courcoulas AP: Bariatric surgery for obesity and metabolic conditions in adults, BMJ. 2014 Aug 27;349:g3961.)Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   117423/02/19   2:20 PM 1175THE SURGICAL MANAGEMENT OF OBESITYCHAPTER 27Table 27-2Patient selection criteria for bariatric surgeryFACTORCRITERIAWeight (adults)BMI ≥40 kg/m2 with no comorbid conditionsBMI ≥35 kg/m2 with obesity-associated comorbidityWeight loss historyFailure of previous nonsurgical attempts at weight reduction, including nonprofessional programsCommitmentExpectation that patient will adhere to postoperative careFollow-up visits with physician(s) and team membersRecommended medical management, including use of dietary supplementsInstructions regarding any recommended procedures or testsContraindications/exclusionsProhibitive surgical risk, ASA IVReversible endocrine or other disorders that can cause obesityCurrent drug or alcohol misuseUncontrolled, severe psychiatric illnessUncontrolled, severe bulimiaLack of comprehension of risks, benefits, expected outcomes, alternatives, and lifestyle changesData from Mechanick JI, Youdim A, Jones DB, et al: Clinical practice guidelines for the perioperative nutritional, metabolic, and nonsurgical support of the bariatric surgery patient—2013 update: cosponsored by American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists, The Obesity Society, and American Society for Metabolic & Bariatric Surgery, Obesity (Silver Spring). 2013 Mar;21 Suppl 1:S1-S27.MECHANISM OF ACTION OF BARIATRIC AND METABOLIC SURGERYOverviewThere is not yet a clear understanding as to how various bariatric procedures exert their effects on weight loss, metabolism, and glycemic control. Much effort is currently being devoted to gaining a better understanding of these specific mechanisms. A review of what is known from published animal and human studies about mechanisms related the three most common surgical proce-dures is shown in Fig. 27-6.17 A few interim, summary statements can be drawn from this available data. First, neither LRYGB nor SG can be thought of as primarily “restrictive procedures,” and there are changes in behavior and physiology that likely help to maintain the new reduced body weight that are not observed after nonsurgically induced weight loss. LAGB appears to be more dependent on gastric restriction as both the behavioral changes and changes in gut hormone secretion are much less dramatic. Second, both LRYGB and SG are associated with metabolic improvements that are different from those that are caused by weight loss alone, and these mechanisms remain under current active study. For LAGB, the metabolic effects are mostly due to the impact of the resulting weight loss. This growing understanding of the physiol-ogy of these procedures points away from the older, classic 3anatomic classifications of “restrictive” versus “malabsorptive” procedures. This new conceptual approach has important implica-tions for future studies of how bariatric surgery exerts its effects. Earlier hypotheses for the mechanism of action of LRYGB have been classified into either the “foregut hypothesis” or “hindgut hypothesis.”60 The foregut hypothesis states that improvements after LRYGB come from the bypassing of the upper small intestine that results in the reduction of nutrient-dependent hormonal actions that would normally impair glucose tolerance.61 The hindgut hypothesis states instead that the key events are the result of more rapid delivery of nutrients to the distal small intestine causing effects such as increased GLP-1/PYY secretion and the ileal brake.62 Now, the more recently recognized and common metabolic effects of SG and LRYGB may indicate directions for study away from this foregut/hindgut distinction, as the SG does not bypass the foregut or induce nutrients further down in the intestine.Mechanisms of Bariatric Surgery (Weight Loss)Certainly, one component mechanism by which RYGB pro-duces weight loss is related to reduced caloric intake and malab-sorption brought about by a smaller gastric volume and bypass of the proximal small bowel, so weight loss following LAGB and SG may be explained, at least in part and early on, by gas-tric restriction63 and resulting reduced food intake. Aside from anatomic changes induced by surgery, there are also changes in physiology that may affect food preferences and energy expen-diture. Gastric emptying and insulin sensitivity increases follow-ing RYGB and SG.63 Functional magnetic resonance imaging has demonstrated a decreased neuronal activation of the food reward-related centers in response to high-calorie foods follow-ing RYGB.64 Neural signaling may be altered and stretch sensi-tive vagal endings in the new pouch and Roux limb, resulting in a feeling of early satiety.65 Hormonal changes are also evi-dent, and in a number of studies looking at the effect of RYGB on ghrelin levels, results are conflicting. Changes in intestinal microbiota is another area of active study.66 Individuals with obesity have different gut flora compared to nonobese subjects. The Firmicutes (mainly Lactobacillus and Clostridium species) to Bacteroidetes ratio (Bacteroides or Prevotella species) is elevated in obese subjects. Following gastric bypass, the Fir-micutes group decrease while Bacteroides/Prevotella increase at 3 and 6 months intervals.67 Bacteria transplant provides some of the benefits of gastric bypass surgery without the surgery.68 It has also been shown that administering oral lactobacillus post-RYGB leads to increased weight loss; this indicates benefits of changing gut microbiota to induce weight loss.69Serum bile acid levels also increase following gastric bypass.70 Gastric bypass diverts undiluted bile acids to the distal bowel. Bile acids activate protein-coupled receptor TGR5 pres-ent in L cells responsible for GLP-1 secretion. They also activate FXR (farsenoid-X receptor) in the jejunum, which regulates lipid and glucose metabolism.71 Furthermore, bile acids lead to rapid clearance of triglycerides.72 Bariatric surgery alters bile acid enterohepatic circulation in favor of weight loss and resolution of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH).73 Ryan et al demonstrated in a study on mice that the therapeutic value of SG is not limited to mechanical restriction but to an increase in circulating bile acids and associated changes to gut microbiota.74 Hollanda et al studied two cohorts of patients: those who lost more than 50% of their excess weight compared to those who did not. This group suggested that ghrelin and GLP-1 may be mediators of success-ful weight loss as those levels increased, while PYY and GLP-2, Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   117523/02/19   2:20 PM 1176SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IILRYGBLAGBSGLipidElevated HDLReduced triglyceridesReduced total cholesterol, LDLElevated HDLReduction in triglycerides not as dramatic as LRYGB or SGElevated HDLReduced triglyceridesGlucose homeostasisImproved fasting blood glucose and insulin sensitivity, prior to weight lossImprovements are slower and not as dramatic as after SG or LRYGBImproved fasting blood glucose and insulin sensitivity, prior to weight lossRole of gastric restrictionHas not yet been directly testedFailure of band leads to less gastric restriction and less weight lossGastric restriction is not the critical factor preventing hyperphagiaGastric emptyingFew published studiesNo overall change in gastric emptying rate; Emptying rate of proximal pouch created by band is enhancedMost papers show increaseEnergy expenditureControversialNot reportedUnchanged, but only reported in one studyLeptinCirculating leptin levels lower than expected for body weightChanges to leptin sensitivity not testedPlasma leptin reduced, as expected for body weight; Changes to leptin sensitivity not testedCirculating leptin levels lower than expected for body weight; Body weight changes not driven by changes to leptin sensitivityGhrelinReduced total ghrelin; Controversial, but no change in acyl-ghrelin levelsIncreased circulating ghrelinReduced total ghrelin; Contro-versial, but no change in acyl-ghrelin levelsCCKNo changeNo changeNot measuredGLP=1 (postprandial)Weight loss-independent postprandial increaseIncreased circulating GLP-1 but much less than RYGB or SGWeight loss-independent increase comparable to LRYGBPYY (postprandial)Increased postprandial PYY levels; Reduced body weight loss in PYY knockout miceNo changeIncreased postprandial PYY levels, comparable to levels after LRYGBBile acidsIncreased plasma bile acidsNot reportedIncreased plasma bile acidsDiet changeDecreased fat intake, more fruits and vegetablesDecrease bread intake and increase in caloric liquids; Greater fat intake and fewer fruits/vegetables than RYGBDecreased fat intake, similar to LRYGBFood IntoleranceSome dumping syndrome, usually well-tolerated More persistent and problematic than LRYGB; Mainly vomitingLittle or noneFigure 27-6. Mechanisms of effect: comparison of LRYGB, LAGB, and SG. (Reproduced with permission from Stefater MA, Wilson-Pérez HE, Chambers AP, et al: All bariatric surgeries are not created equal: insights from mechanistic comparisons, Endocr Rev. 2012 Aug;33(4):595-622.)Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   117623/02/19   2:20 PM 1177THE SURGICAL MANAGEMENT OF OBESITYCHAPTER 27gut mass and hypertrophy (citrulline), and the bile acid effect on fibroblast growth factor-19 (FGF-19) appear to have no effect on weight loss.75 In summary, there exists a complex relationship between dietary changes, bile flow changes, altered hormonal milieu and the gut microbiota that is not yet completely well characterized as it relates to weight loss after bariatric surgery.Mechanisms of Metabolic Surgery  (Diabetes Improvement)Understanding the basic mechanism(s) of diabetes improvement following bariatric surgery is an important area of intensive study. Recently published data on worldwide trends in diabetes indicate that the number of adults with diabetes has increased from 108 million in 1980 to 422 million in 2014,76 the major-ity with T2DM. In the United States, diabetes is the number two cause of hospitalizations in adults age 18 years or older, accounting for approximately 11% of all hospital admissions. With no medical cure, the natural course of diabetes is charac-terized by progressive β-cell failure and development of micro-vascular and macrovascular complications, leading to renal failure, blindness, amputation, and death due to cardiovascular disease (CVD). Bariatric surgery has been renamed metabolic surgery for T2DM treatment and has emerged as an effective tool for control of hyperglycemia.77-86More than 20 years ago Pories et al found that bariatric surgery rapidly normalized blood glucose levels in people with obesity and T2DM, and 10 years later the majority remained dis-ease free.87 He suggested that caloric restriction played a role but that there were likely other factors such as proximal intestinal nutrient exclusion, rapid distal gut nutrient delivery, and the role of gut hormones that would require further investigation. The findings of T2DM improvement and remission after bariatric surgery have now been widely replicated by others, and there is evidence that bariatric surgery prevents or delays incident cases of T2DM. Much work has been done to investigate these spe-cific physiological mechanisms underlying the beneficial gly-cemic effects of bariatric surgery, but they remain incompletely understood. Candidate hypotheses include changes in bile acid metabolism, nutrient sensing and glucose utilization, intestinal adaptation, incretins, possible anti-incretin(s), and the intestinal microbiome. These physiologic and molecular changes lead to reduced hepatic glucose production, increased glucose uptake in tissues, improved insulin sensitivity, and enhanced β-cell func-tion. A schematic of these potential mechanisms of improved glycemic control is shown in Fig. 27-7.It is likely that several of these individual factors, acting together and with different impact based on the specific surgical pro-cedure, are responsible for postoperative glycemic improvement. Work in this area is actively ongoing, and genomic, metabolomic, and gut microbiome studies will likely enhance the understanding of these changes. This may potentially lead to identifying novel pathways and potential therapeutic targets to replace bariatric pro-cedures by equally effective, but less invasive, new treatments for obesity-related T2DM. In other words, understanding mechanisms of glycemic improvement after bariatric surgery may allow for the development of treatments to “bypass the bypass.”88PREOPERATIVE ISSUESPreoperative PreparationPatient selection for surgery should be based on a multidisci-plinary team approach. All patients should undergo preoperative evaluation for obesity-related comorbidities and causes of obe-sity, with special attention directed to factors that could affect candidacy for bariatric surgery89 (Table 27-3).The preoperative assessment of the patient for bariatric surgery must include input from the nutritionist as an important independent evaluation. Careful assessment of the patient’s eat-ing habits, knowledge, self-awareness, and insight are important. An estimation of the patient’s motivation to change eating habits is important. The nutritionist should have at least one assessment session with the patient and an educational session preoperatively once the decision to proceed with surgery has been determined. The operation to be performed requires specific nutritional counseling and education. Psychological assessment is required by most programs and many insurance carriers with a goal of identifying potential contraindications to surgical intervention, such as poorly controlled psychiatric illness or active substance abuse, and identifying strategies to help with long-term weight management.90 There are published recommendations regarding the content of a mental health evaluation for bariatric surgery,91-93 but no consensus guidelines have been published. These evalua-tions are carried out by interview and questionnaires, which rely on clinical interviews including tests of personality or psycho-pathological conditions.94 More comprehensive evaluations also assess bariatric surgery knowledge, weight history, lifestyle hab-its, and potential barriers.91,92 Psychological assessment in clinical practice may be inaccurate compared to independent evaluations for research purposes, as patients present themselves in the most favorable light in order to gain access to surgery.95Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is prevalent in over 90% of bariatric surgery candidates with approximately one-third undiagnosed.96-101 The Epworth Sleepiness Scale, a standard set of questions evaluating daytime sleepiness, is often used as a screening tool for OSA.38 As OSA is associated with increased risk of mortality102 (and in bariatric surgery patients, with adverse outcomes),59 routine preoperative screening with polysomnog-raphy should be considered.103 In addition, standard preopera-tive management of obese patients with OSA using continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) is recommended.104 Asthma and hypoventilation syndrome of obesity are other significant pulmonary diseases often requiring preoperative management. Hypoventilation syndrome of obesity is defined as resting arte-rial partial pressure of oxygen less than 55 mmHg and partial pressure of carbon dioxide greater than 47 mmHg, with accom-panying pulmonary hypertension and polycythemia. Pulmonary consultation is indicated for patients with hypoventilation syn-drome. Postoperative intensive care unit hospitalization, rarely used after bariatric surgery, may be indicated for these patients.Preoperative weight loss can reduce liver volume/size and may help improve the technical aspects of surgery in those people with extreme central obesity and an enlarged liver, and it is sometimes utilized as a practice-specific recommendation or requirement. Ten percent total body weight loss (TBWL) with energy-restricted diets has been associated with a reduction in hepatic volume,105 variable perceived and measured improved facility in operative technique,106,107 variable effects on short-term108-112 complication rates, and weight loss. Cirrhosis113 has been associated with poor outcomes following bariatric surgery, including progression to liver transplantation.114Preoperative glycemic control should be optimized using diet, physical activity, and medications, as needed. Reasonable targets for preoperative glycemic control include a hemoglo-bin A1c value of 6.5% to 7.0% or less, a fasting blood glucose Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   117723/02/19   2:20 PM 1178SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIlevel of ≤110 mg/dL, and a 2-hour postprandial blood glucose concentration of ≤140 mg/dL.115 More liberal preoperative targets with higher A1c should be considered in patients with advanced comorbid conditions or long-standing diabetes where lower targets are not attainable. For patients with active GERD on medication, a preoperative screening upper endoscopy to rule out Barrett’s esophagus and to rule out intrinsic lesions of the stomach or duodenum is recommended. This is especially true for patients planning LRYGB, where the distal stomach and duodenum will be precluded from easy inspection postop-eratively. In addition, the presence of Barrett’s esophagus is a contraindication to SG, which is a reflux-inducing operation. The presence of a hiatal hernia detected on preoperative esoph-agogastroduodenoscopy will alert the surgeon for the need to perform intraoperative repair.Patients with a history of DVT or cor pulmonale should undergo a diagnostic evaluation for DVT. A prophylactic vena caval filter may present a greater risk than benefit in patients A Immediate impact of surgeryB Potential mediators/mechanismsC Effect on glucose homeostasisCaloric restritctionImproved ˜-cell function/functional ˜-cell massAltered bile acid/ FGF-19 signalingReduced hepatic and pancreatic triglyceridesRYGBRYGBSGReduced hepatic glucose productionIncreased glucose utilizationIncreased glucose effectivenessImproved insulin sensitivityAltered microbiomeReduced glucotoxicityWeight lossAltered GI nutrient-sensingAltered gut hormonesAltered neural signalingRapid emptying of nutrients into the small intestineIntestinal adaptation/Reprogramming of intestinal glucoseRYGBSGEnhanced nutrient/bile delivery to the mid/distal jejunum and ileumRYGBSGSGExclusion of the duodenum and proximal jejunum and ileumRYGBRemoval of the stomach fundusSGFigure 27-7. Schematic of potential mechanisms of improved glycemic control after LRYGB and SG. A. Immediate effects of RYGB and SG due to anatomical changes. B. Potential mediators/mechanisms involved. Cross talk occurs among these factors. C. Effects on glucose homeostasis. (Reproduced with permission from Batterham RL, Cummings DE: Mechanisms of Diabetes Improvement Following Bariatric/Metabolic Surgery, Diabetes Care. 2016 Jun;39(6):893-901.)Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   117823/02/19   2:20 PM 1179THE SURGICAL MANAGEMENT OF OBESITYCHAPTER 27with a history of prior pulmonary embolism (PE) or DVT given the risks of filter-related complications including thrombosis. The overall risk of venous thromboembolism (VTE) after sur-gery is 0.42%, and over 70% of these events occur after hospital  discharge, most within 30 days after surgery.116 The risk of VTE is greater in patients undergoing RYGB than in those undergoing LAGB and is more frequent following open surgery. Patients with a VTE event tend to be male, older, and have higher BMIs; they are also more likely to have a history of VTE.116 The risk of VTE is greater in patients with an inferior vena cava filter (hazard ratio [HR] 7.66, 95% CI 4.55–12.91),116 and there is evidence suggest-ing that prophylactic inferior vena caval (IVC) filter placement before bariatric surgery does not prevent PE and may lead to addi-tional morbidity, which may outweigh its use.117,118Candidates for bariatric surgery should avoid pregnancy preoperatively and for 12 to 18 months postoperatively and Table 27-3Preoperative checklist for bariatric surgery•	Complete for History & Physical (H&P) (obesity-related comorbidities, causes of obesity, weight/BMI, weight loss history, commitment, and exclusions related to surgical risk)•	Routine labs (including fasting blood glucose and lipid panel, kidney function, liver profile, lipid profile, urine analysis, prothrombin time/INR, blood type, CBC)•	Nutrient screening with iron studies, B12 and folic acid (RBC folate, homocysteine, methylmalonic acid optional), and 25-vitamin D (vitamins A and E optional); consider more extensive testing in patients undergoing malabsorptive procedures based on symptoms and risks•	Cardiopulmonary evaluation with sleep apnea screening (ECG, CXR, echocardiography if cardiac disease or pulmonary hypertension suspected; DVT evaluation if clinically indicated)•	GI evaluation (H pylori screening in high-prevalence areas; gallbladder evaluation and upper endoscopy if clinically indicated)•	Endocrine evaluation (A1c with suspected or diagnosed prediabetes or diabetes); TSH with symptoms or increased risk of thyroid disease; androgens with PCOS suspicion (total/bioavailable testosterone, DHEAS, D4-androstenedione); screening for Cushing’s syndrome if clinically suspected (1 mg overnight dexamethasone test, 24-hour urinary free cortisol, 11 PM salivary cortisol)•	Clinical nutrition evaluation by registered dietician•	Psychosocial-behavioral evaluation•	Document medical necessity for bariatric surgery•	Informed consent•	Provide relevant financial information•	Continue efforts for preoperative weight loss•	Optimize glycemic control•	Pregnancy counseling•	Smoking cessation counseling•	Verify cancer screening by primary care physicianReproduced with permission from Mechanick JI, Youdim A, Jones DB, et al: Clinical practice guidelines for the perioperative nutritional, metabolic, and nonsurgical support of the bariatric surgery patient—2013 update: cosponsored by American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists, The Obesity Society, and American Society for Metabolic & Bariatric Surgery, Obesity (Silver Spring). 2013 Mar;21 Suppl 1:S1-S27.women who become pregnant after bariatric surgery should be counseled and monitored for appropriate weight gain, nutri-tional supplementation, and for fetal health.119 All women of reproductive age should be counseled on contraceptive choices following bariatric surgery as utilization, absorption, and effec-tiveness are inconsistent.120,121 Patients should be provided with educational materials and access to preoperative educational sessions. Multimedia tools for patient education and consent show promise for improving understanding.122-124 There should be a thorough and dynamic consent discussion regarding the risks and benefits, procedural options, and the need for long-term follow-up and vitamin supplementation (including costs required to maintain appropriate follow-up). Consent should include the experience of the surgeon with the specific proce-dure and whether the program participates in national quality improvement initiatives and certification.Anesthesiology IssuesTwo major challenges that face the anesthesiologist when per-forming a general anesthetic for the severely obese patient are vascular access and airway management. Fiberoptic laryngos-copy is often used for the most difficult class IV or even class III airways should standard laryngoscopy be determined to provide an inadequate view. Videotelescopic intubation systems are suc-cessfully used as well. Significant preoxygenation for 3 minutes or longer prior to intubation is used for the severely obese patient to provide a longer safe duration for intubation should difficul-ties be encountered. However, desaturation must be immediately addressed with reestablishment of oxygenated ventilation because this patient group does not tolerate any prolonged desaturation without potential adverse cardiopulmonary consequences.The anesthesiologist must also manage alterations in car-diopulmonary function from the use of a pneumoperitoneum during laparoscopic bariatric procedures. These include the effects of carbon dioxide absorption on required minute venti-lation, the potential for bradyarrhythmias, and the potential for decreased systemic pH with longer procedures in patients with preexisting cardiopulmonary disease. Arterial monitoring of the latter group of patients may be necessary by the anesthesiology team, and a radial arterial line is standard for such patients.125 Drug pharmacokinetics differ in severely obese patients as well. Changes in volume of distribution include smaller-than-normal fraction of total body water, greater adipose tissue content, altered protein binding, and increased blood volume. Possible changes in renal function and hepatic function must be consid-ered when administering drugs. Specific anesthetic drug meta-bolic alterations in the severely obese include a larger volume distribution of thiopentone, resulting in a prolonged effect of the drug. Calculation of the dosage should be done by lean body weight. Benzodiazepines also exhibit a prolonged elimination phase, causing prolongation of their effects. Increased pseudo-cholinesterase activity is present in the severely obese patient, requiring increased dosages of pancuronium. Enflurane metab-olism is increased over the average-sized person, requiring a lower dosage of this agent.Enhanced Recovery After SurgeryEnhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) protocols have been initiated in bariatric surgery and have demonstrated promise to decrease surgical morbidity. Additionally, a recent meta-analy-sis has identified a significant decrease in length of stay (stan-dard mean difference = −2.40 [−33.89, −0.89], P = 0.002).126 In 2016, the ERAS Society published evidence-based guidelines Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   117923/02/19   2:20 PM 1180SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIfor perioperative care in bariatric surgery.127 The guidelines include recommendations in preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative care. These include shorter acting and lower absorption anesthetic agents and opioid minimization as impor-tant intraoperative recommendations.Special Equipment and InfrastructureThe special needs of the bariatric patient and program extend from the entry to the hospital and clinic, to the operating room, and throughout the inpatient and outpatient experience. The program needs infrastructure and support at all levels including support staff, physicians and surgeons, administrators, program directors, psychologists, and nutritionists. The physical plant needs to include extra-wide doorways, special seating, a scale that weighs up to 800 lb (363 kg), larger patient gowns, large blood pressure cuffs, and floor-mounted toilets. In the operat-ing room, the table must accommodate 600 to 800 lb (272 to 363 kg) and must position in steep reverse Trendelenburg posi-tion. Larger lower extremity compression devices, extra padding, safety belts, and a footboard are required. An angled (30° or 45°) telescope, extra-long graspers and staplers, and a liver retractor system are all standard equipment. Staff sensitivity training for the care of the obese as well as regular education about the com-plications of bariatric surgery are program requirements.BARIATRIC SURGICAL PROCEDURESVBG shown in Figs. 27-1 and 27-5, although still listed as one of the approved operations for the surgical treatment of severe obesity based on the NIH Consensus Conference of 1991,51 is not currently performed due to poor long-term weight loss and technical complications, so it is of historic interest only, and the surgical technique will not be described here.8 The other procedures described in this section will be articulated using a laparoscopic approach as that is the dominant method. RYGB, BPD, and DS may still be performed by some surgeons using an open approach, but this has now become the exception. In this text LRYGB will refer specifically to RYGB performed by the laparoscopic approach, while RYGB will indicate proce-dures performed by the open approach or by both approaches as is the case for many studies of outcomes. Minimization of the morbidity of the open incision, especially incisional hernias and wound complications, as well as earlier hospital discharge and lower 30-day complication rates have all been clearly shown to favor using a laparoscopic approach when feasible.128-130 Lapa-roscopy begins with the safe creation of a pneumoperitoneum, often a difficult step in the bariatric patient. A tracheostomy hook can be inserted through a trocar-sized incision to elevate the fascia in the left subcostal region to facilitate the insertion of a Veress needle into an appropriate location for pneumoperi-toneum creation. The use of a Hasson approach for creating a pneumoperitoneum in the bariatric population may be limited by the thick body wall. In the patient with an extremely thick body wall, extra-long trocar ports can be used for laparoscopic surgery. The pneumoperitoneum pressure that is used when per-forming bariatric surgical procedures is generally in the 15 to  18 mmHg range. A high-flow insufflator is mandatory to main-tain the pneumoperitoneum for adequate and safe visualization.When an open surgical approach is used for any of these procedures, an upper midline incision with table mounted retrac-tors is the most commonly used approach. The robotic approach to bariatric procedures is also now utilized with purported Figure 27-8. Configuration of laparoscopic gastric bypass. (Reprinted with permission from Cleveland Clinic Center for Medi-cal Art & Photography © 2005-2009. All Rights Reserved.)advantages of reduction of the use of the open technique, improved surgical, length of stay, cost outcomes, and potentially improving ergonomics and resultant surgeon fatigue and injury. A meta-analysis involving 27 studies and over 25,000 patients concluded that there were no significant differences between robotic bariatric surgery and laparoscopic bariatric surgery with respect to overall complications, length of stay, reoperation, conversion, and mortality.131 Another study utilizing Univer-sity Consortium data demonstrated no difference in hospital mortality, major complications, readmissions, or length of stay between the robotic and laparoscopic approach.132 In both stud-ies, robotic surgery did increase significantly operative time and hospital costs (>20%) compared to laparoscopic approaches. As yet, larger prospective cohort studies and/or randomized trials have not yet been published, so the role of this technique is still to be defined and further studies are needed.133,134Laparoscopic Roux-en-Y Gastric BypassBackground and Patient Selection. Figure 27-8 depicts the configuration of the LRYGB. It is an appropriate operation for consideration for most patients eligible for bariatric surgery. Relative contraindications specifically for LRYGB include pre-vious gastric surgery, previous antireflux surgery, severe iron deficiency anemia, distal gastric or duodenal lesions that require ongoing future surveillance, and Barrett’s esophagus with severe Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   118023/02/19   2:20 PM 1181THE SURGICAL MANAGEMENT OF OBESITYCHAPTER 275mm5mm12mm12mm5mm5mmFigure 27-9. Port scheme for laparoscopic gastric bypass. (Reprinted with permission from Cleveland Clinic Center for Medi-cal Art & Photography © 2005-2009. All Rights Reserved.)dysplasia. The major feature of the operation is a proximal gas-tric pouch of small size (<20 mL) that is totally separated from the distal residual stomach. A Roux limb of proximal jejunum is brought up and anastomosed to the pouch. The pathway of that limb can be anterior to the colon and stomach, posterior to both, or posterior to the colon and anterior to the stomach. The length of the biliopancreatic limb from the ligament of Treitz to the distal enteroenterostomy is 20 to 50 cm, and the length of the Roux limb is 75 to 150 cm.Creating the proximal gastric pouch by totally dividing it from the distal stomach is superior to simply stapling and par-titioning the stomach, since the latter is associated with a high incidence of staple line breakdown.135 The size of the proximal gastric pouch must be small to create adequate restriction and should be based on the lesser curvature of the stomach to pre-vent dilation over time. Length of the Roux limb was associated with higher short-term weight loss for longer length limbs,136 but this difference becomes less meaningful on long-term follow-up and has not been demonstrated in more recent studies.137 Gastric pouch size and caliber of the gastrojejunostomy have not, in any studies, been shown to be related to weight loss. The gas-trojejunal anastomosis can be constructed in a variety of ways, including hand sewn techniques and linear and circular staplers. Smaller diameter circular staplers are associated with a higher incidence of postoperative stenosis, and linear stapling is asso-ciated with a lower incidence of stenosis compared to circular stapling.138,139Technique. The operation generally is performed using five ports plus a liver retractor as shown in Fig. 27-9. Both the sur-geon, who stands on the patient’s right, and the first assistant, who stands on the patient’s left, have two ports for instruments. The telescope requires a port, usually in the supraumbilical region. The assistant’s ports are in the left subcostal and flank areas, while the surgeon may have both ports in the right upper quadrant or one on each side of the camera. Division of the proximal jejunum at 40 to 50 cm distal to the ligament of Tre-itz is performed with the linear stapler, using a vascular stapler cartridge. Further division of the mesentery at that location is performed either with the stapler or harmonic scalpel, such that adequate mobilization of the Roux limb is achieved. A Pen-rose drain or a marking suture is placed on the proximal Roux limb for identification and facilitation of advancement to the Figure 27-10. Creating Roux limb during laparoscopic gastric bypass.gastric pouch (Fig. 27-10). The length of the Roux limb (usually 100–150 cm) to be created is measured. A jejunojejunostomy is then created to the proximal end of the biliopancreatic limb at the previously determined location along the Roux limb. A side-to-side stapled anastomosis is performed (Fig. 27-11). Either singleor double-fired staple technique (the latter using a stapler Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   118123/02/19   2:20 PM 1182SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 27-12. Passage of Roux limb. (Reprinted with permission from Cleveland Clinic Center for Medical Art & Photography © 2005-2009. All Rights Reserved.)321Figure 27-13. Creation of gastric pouch for laparoscopic Roux-en-Y  gastric bypass. (Reprinted with permission from Cleveland Clinic Center for Medical Art & Photography © 2005-2009. All Rights Reserved.)Figure 27-11. Enteroenterostomy of lapa-roscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass.fired in each direction) is used. The stapler defect is optimally closed with sutures but can be closed with a stapler if great care is taken not to narrow the lumen of the alimentary tract at this location. Once the stapler defect is closed, the mesenteric defect is then also closed with running permanent suture.Passage of the Roux limb toward the stomach is now per-formed. If an antecolic route is to be used, the end of the Roux limb is brought up so as to confirm its ability to reach the stom-ach (Fig. 27-12). If a retrocolic route is to be used, a defect is made in the transverse colon mesentery just to the left and slightly above the ligament of Treitz. The proximal end of the Roux limb is placed into the retrogastric space. The left lobe of the liver is now retracted using any one of several retractor types. The patient is moved to a reverse Trendelenburg posi-tion. The harmonic scalpel divides the peritoneum in the area of the angle of His, and then it is used to open an area along the lesser curvature of the stomach approximately 3 cm down from the gastroesophageal junction. Another approach for creating access to the lesser curvature of the stomach is to use a white or gray load (vascular load) of the stapler and divide the lesser curvature vessels up to the surface of the stomach. Then a blue load of the stapler is fired one time transversely from the lesser curvature side partially across the stomach, followed by mul-tiple subsequent firings of the stapler upward in the direction of the angle of His, to completely separate the proximal gastric pouch from the remainder of the stomach (Fig. 27-13). Option-ally, use of an Ewald tube passed by the anesthesiologist and maneuvered to lie against the lesser curvature of the proximal stomach can help calibrate the pouch size.Once the pouch is created, the Roux limb is brought up  to the proximal gastric pouch. For the linear stapled anastomosis, the proximal end of the Roux limb is aligned with the distal gastric  pouch end, and the sides of the organs are sutured together to maintain their side-by-side position. A stapler is introduced through a gastrotomy and an enterotomy for the two legs of the stapler, and the anastomosis is created (Fig. 27-14). The stapler defect is closed with sutures and often reinforced with a second Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   118223/02/19   2:21 PM 1183THE SURGICAL MANAGEMENT OF OBESITYCHAPTER 27Figure 27-14. Gastrojejunostomy in laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. (Reprinted with permission from Cleveland Clinic Center for Medical Art & Photography © 2005-2009. All Rights Reserved.)Figure 27-15. Oral passage of EEA circular stapler to create gastrojejunostomy for laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. (Reprinted with permission from Cleveland Clinic Center for Medical Art & Photography © 2005-2009. All Rights Reserved.)step of the operation involves suture closure of all mesenteric defects using permanent suture.Alternatively, a completely hand-sewn gastrojejunostomy can be created using two layers of absorbable suture to anasto-mose an approximately 1-cm gastrotomy and enterotomy. The circular anastomosis technique is another approach to complete the gastrojejunostomy and is also a particularly useful technique for “salvage” anastomosis if the gastric pouch is very small and/or high. This is done through placement of the anvil of the sta-pler through the anterior wall of the proximal gastric pouch. This is accomplished by pulling the anvil transorally via an endoscopically placed guidewire (Fig. 27-15), making a gas-trotomy in the pouch that is later closed, or making a gastrotomy in the lower stomach before completing gastric division to cre-ate the pouch, allowing the anvil to be placed into the lumen of the stomach and then be brought through the anterior stomach in an area that is subsequently included in the proximal gastric pouch (Fig. 27-16).Procedure-Specific Complications. Mortality after LRYGB is now consistently less than 0.5% in most large reported series. Data from several national data sets/studies find a mortal-ity rate of approximately 0.3%, 0.14%, and 0.2% at 30 days overall.59,140 Overall morbidity after LRYGB has also been low. In the Longitudinal Assessment of Bariatric Surgery (LABS) study, a composite endpoint including death, deep-vein throm-bosis or venous thromboembolism, reintervention, or failure to be discharged by 30 days after surgery occurred in 4.8% of those who had undergone LRYGB.59 In the national database of the ASMBS, morbidity alone was 14.87% for 30,864 gas-tric bypass procedures.141 Complications that do occur after LRYGB include a 0.3% incidence of anastomotic leak,142 0.33% layer of sutures. The gastrojejunostomy may be tested for secu-rity by using either methylene blue injected under pressure through the Ewald tube or a flexible upper endoscopy intraop-eratively to test for air leakage from the anastomosis. The final Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   118323/02/19   2:21 PM 1184SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 27-16. Transgastric passage of circular EEA stapler to create gastrojejunostomy for laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. (Reproduced with permission from Schauer PR, Schirmer BD, Brethauer S: Minimally Invasive Bariatric Surgery. New York, NY: Springer; 2007.)Figure 27-17. Obstruction of contrast at enteroenterostomy with small bowel obstruction from internal hernia after laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass.incidence of venous thromboembolism,143 a 3% to 5% incidence of wound infections or problems,140 a 3% to 15% incidence of marginal ulcers,144 an approximately 7% incidence of bowel obstruction,145 a 4% incidence of postoperative transfusion,146 and a 1% to 19% incidence of anastomotic stenosis,139 based on the type of anastomosis created. Postoperative nutritional complications after LRYGB include a 66% incidence of iron deficiency, a 5% incidence of iron deficiency anemia, a 50% incidence of vitamin B12 deficiency,147 and an at least 15% incidence of vitamin D deficiency,148 which usually is pres-ent preoperatively. Both early and late dumping occur in an unspecified number of postoperative cases, as the symptoms are difficult to document and overlap with other problems such as hypoglycemia.Several complications that are specific to LRYGB must be emphasized. One of the most important is small bowel obstruction. This complication must be treated differently than in the average general surgery patient, whose complication is usually from adhesions and often will resolve with conserva-tive, nonoperative therapy. Patients who have had LRYGB who present with obstructive symptoms generally require surgical therapy on an emergent basis. This is because the etiology of the bowel obstruction after LRYGB is often an internal hernia from inadequate or nonclosure of the mesenteric defects by the sur-geon at the time of operation. Thus, treatment for these patients differs from most patients with small bowel obstruction. One of the most important points of this chapter is to emphasize to gen-eral surgeons to be aware of the need to emergently operate on patients after LRYGB who present with small bowel obstruc-tion. Currently, centers that perform small bowel transplantation are seeing patient referral for that procedure after small bowel obstruction after LRYGB, where patients developed infarction of most of the bowel from an internal hernia and have short gut syndrome.149 Other patients, for whom surgery is delayed and the bowel infarcts, do not survive. When the surgeon does encounter bowel obstruction after LRYGB, he or she can expect to see proximally dilated bowel. Cutoff of passage of contrast on CT scan at the enteroenterostomy is particularly suggestive of this diagnosis (Fig. 27-17). The surgical treatment of this particular problem can, if addressed early in the course of the obstruction, be treated laparoscopically. The surgeon must place a trocar for the telescope low enough in the abdomen to ade-quately survey most of the small intestine. The cecum and ter-minal ileum are identified, and the bowel is followed retrograde from the terminal ileum to determine the anatomy. Often much of the small bowel is herniated through a mesenteric defect, and only this technique allows the surgeon to reliably identify the bowel and decompress it appropriately. If the bowel is viable, 4Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   118423/02/19   2:21 PM 1185THE SURGICAL MANAGEMENT OF OBESITYCHAPTER 27suturing the mesenteric defect is all that is needed for treatment. It should be emphasized that either an antecolic or retrocolic placement of the Roux limb can result in this complication, as internal hernias can arise from either approach.Marginal ulcers are another complication relatively specific to LRYGB. The patient presents with pain in the epigastric region that is not altered by eating. Diagnosis is by endoscopy. Treatment is medical with proton pump inhibitors, which are effective in 90% of cases. Only those with a gastrogastric fistula to the distal stomach, severe stenosis of the lumen of the gastrojejunostomy, or acute perforation require surgical therapy. Treatment of a perforated marginal ulcer is a laparoscopic Graham patch. Stenosis of the gastrojejunostomy has been reduced by the use of the linear stapling technique.138 Stenosis symptoms usually appear from 6 to 12 weeks postoperatively, but less commonly can occur later. Diagnosis is by upper endoscopy. Treatment is circumferential balloon dilatation. Resolution normally occurs with one to two treatments. Less than 10% of patients require reoperation, and those are almost always associated with concurrent marginal ulcers.150In the immediate postoperative period, anastomotic leak is the single serious complication after RYGB, either open or laparoscopic. Careful vigilance and a high index of suspicion for this problem are important since its presentation may be insidi-ous and the patient’s demise, if untreated, may be sudden and complete. Tachycardia, tachypnea, fever, and oliguria are the most common symptoms that should arouse suspicion for this problem. The treatment is surgical, except in rare circumstances where a drain is already in place, no hemodynamic or clinical deterioration is present, and the leak is contained.151 Usual surgi-cal treatment involves repair as feasible, drainage, and creation of a reliable feeding access through a distal Stamm gastrostomy.In the first few hours or day after surgery, hematemesis indicates bleeding from the gastrojejunostomy unless proven otherwise. The dangers to the patient include aspiration, life-threatening hemorrhage, or more commonly intraluminal hematoma of the Roux limb and enteroenterostomy, which then causes an obstruction of the biliopancreatic limb leading to distal gastric staple line rupture.152 In fact, any obstructive symptoms in the first few weeks after surgery or any signs of obstruction of the biliopancreatic limb on postoperative swallow studies due to stenosis of the enteroenterostomy require imme-diate surgical intervention to prevent rupture of the distal gastric staple line. Some reports show that percutaneous decompres-sion of the distal stomach can help to ameliorate the problem,153 but operative therapy to decompress the stomach and treat the obstruction is first-line therapy.Laparoscopic Sleeve GastrectomyBackground and Patient Selection. SG was originally introduced as the first of a two-stage operative treatment for patients with super obesity (BMI >60 kg/m2).154,155 Its currently utilization is as a primary single-stage operation, but the pos-sibility of a second-stage treatment remains, especially for the super obese patients, depending on the effectiveness of it as the primary operation. In addition, patients who have longstanding severe GERD may not be good candidates for SG as GERD is worsened by the anatomical configuration of the SG. Barrett’s esophagus is also a contraindication for performing SG, since the potential for future esophageal dysplasia and the need for an available intact stomach for esophageal reconstruction outweigh the potential advantages of the procedure.Figure 27-18. Port scheme for laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy.Technique. The patient is positioned supine, with foot sup-port to allow reverse Trendelenburg positioning. The surgeon stands to the patient’s right along with the camera driver, while the assistant stands to the patient’s left. Port placement may vary, but a recommended port placement schema is shown in Fig. 27-18. The 15-mm port, helpful for removal of the stomach, is located in either the camera (just to the patient’s left of the umbilicus) or surgeon’s right hand (right upper quadrant near the midline) location. The other of these ports is a 12-mm port. The assistant has two 5-mm ports available in the left upper quadrant laterally, and the surgeon’s left-hand port is a 5-mm port more lateral and superior in the right upper quadrant. A liver retractor is placed in the epigastric region.The operation begins by devascularizing the greater curva-ture of the stomach, beginning 3 to 5 cm proximal to the pylorus.  The division of all vessels adjacent to the greater curvature is continued up to the left crus of the diaphragm. A complete mobilization of the fundus in this area and division of posterior fibrous attachments to the antrum and body of the stomach are then performed such that the stomach is attached solely by the lesser curvature blood supply and the pyloric and esophageal regions. Stapled division of the stomach now follows. The first firing of the stapler occurs from the point of devascularization of the greater curvature at an angle pointing toward a point about 2 cm lateral to the incisura. The antrum of the stomach is at its thickest here, and so it is important to be certain the stapler load used is sufficiently large enough to allow good approximation and closure of the divided stomach. Two staple firings are performed, which takes the gastric division to past the incisura. After the first staple firing, some surgeons will engage the anesthesiologist to pass a 32to 40-French bougie and position it along the lesser curvature of the stomach. This bougie then serves as a guide for further gastric division. Alter-natively, some surgeons will insert the endoscope instead of the bougie as a guide for gastric division. It can also be used to test for air leaks, bleeding, or obstruction as it is withdrawn after gastric division. Dividing the stomach adjacent to the bougie or endoscope will produce the desired diameter of the gastric sleeve. It is most important not to narrow the stomach lumen at the incisura. During the second and third firing of the stapler to divide the stomach, it is critical to confirm by visualization of both the anterior and posterior surfaces of the stomach that the incisura area is not narrowed. By the third firing of the stapler, usually the angle of the gastric division is now pointed directly toward the angle of His, parallel to the bougie (Fig. 27-19). Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   118523/02/19   2:21 PM 1186SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 27-20. Completed sleeve gastrectomy. (Reprinted with permission from Cleveland Clinic Center for Medical Art & Photography © 2005-2009. All Rights Reserved.)Figure 27-19. Performing sleeve gastrectomy. (Reprinted with permission from Cleveland Clinic Center for Medical Art & Photography © 2005-2009. All Rights Reserved.)At this point, changing staple loads to lower staple height is advisable.Once the stomach is completely divided up to the angle of His, the staple line is inspected for hemostasis and integ-rity. Some surgeons will reinforce the staple line with a but-tress material, while others will invaginate the staple line with a running serosa to serosa suture. Some surgeons will exchange the bougie at this point for a 32-French Ewald tube and per-form a methylene blue leak test. Alternatively, if an endoscope is used, it is withdrawn with insufflation, and the staple line is inspected for air leaks while submerged in saline. The speci-men is removed through the 15-mm trocar site, usually with only slight enlargement of the site. Figure 27-20 shows the com-pleted operation. Controversy still exists as to the optimal size of the bougie used during the procedure and the relative utility of methods used to oversew or reinforce the staple line.Procedure-Specific Complications. The major factor unique to SG is that it creates a high-pressure gastric tube. This increased intraluminal pressure places the staple line at risk for leakage and increased risk for GERD. As noted previ-ously, controversy exists about both bougie size and staple line reinforcement/oversew as they relate to clinical outcomes. One summary of the literature shows that the stenosis rate is lower if a 40-French bougie is used, and the leak rate may also be lower without compromising weight loss.156 However, individual insti-tutional experiences with smaller-sized bougies have shown the potential for good weight loss and no increased incidence of stenosis.157 Another controversial area is that of staple line rein-forcement with staple buttressing material or reinforcement with oversewing.158 The overall bleeding rate for the staple line after SG is generally cited as about 2% in collected series.159 There have been no studies that have shown a definitive decrease in this bleeding rate with the use of buttress materials; however, a panel of experts has voiced support for a decreased incidence of bleeding from the staple line if buttress material is used.158 One meta-analysis did show that there is evidence to suggest buttress materials may decrease the staple line leak rate.160 Other prospective randomized studies have failed to show a benefit of buttress materials for leak prevention.161 A more recent study of over 180,000 SG procedures in the Metabolic and Bariat-ric Surgery Accreditation and Quality Improvement Program (MBSAQIP) national database showed that staple line rein-forcement cases were associated with higher leak rates (0.96% vs. 0.65%, odds ratio [OR] 1.20 95% CI 1.00–1.43) and lower bleeding rates (0.75% vs. 1.00%, OR 0.74 95% CI 0.63–0.86) compared to no reinforcement, at the patient level.162 At this time, there is no preponderance of data to support one approach as being superior to others for both staple line bleeding or leak rates. Given this state of the literature, a surgeon should con-sider the risks, benefits, and costs of these surgical techniques and utilize those that, in their hands, minimize morbidity while maximizing clinical outcomes.If there is a relative obstruction or stenosis of the sleeve, which most often occurs at the incisura because of narrowing there during formation of the sleeve, pressure above the level of the obstruction will be even more elevated and create an increased risk for staple line leak. Leaks of the proximal staple line are the most frequent type seen after SG and often are felt to be related to increased intraluminal pressure distally. They may also be related to stapling too close to the angle of His, with resultant instability of the tissue directly adjacent to the esophagus in this area. It is important not to staple too close to the angle of His during the final stapling division portion of the stomach so as to not further weaken the staple line in this area. Proximal staple line leaks may also present as late leaks, 6 weeks to months following the procedure. Late leaks are rare Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   118623/02/19   2:21 PM 1187THE SURGICAL MANAGEMENT OF OBESITYCHAPTER 27Figure 27-21. Laparoscopic adjustable band overall scheme. (Reprinted with permission from Cleveland Clinic Center for Medi-cal Art & Photography © 2005-2009. All Rights Reserved.)following other bariatric procedures, but are seen with SG, and index of suspicion should remain high.Distal staple line leaks are different from proximal staple line leaks and are usually associated with earlier presentation and related to mechanical failure of the staple line to securely approximate the thicker distal gastric tissue. These leaks are more amenable to successful repair with a reoperation, whereas proximal leaks may not improve with oversewing at a reopera-tion unless the mechanics of the relative distal obstruction and high intraluminal pressure of the sleeve are also treated. Endo-scopic intervention to dilate stenotic areas as well may be bene-ficial in the setting of a stenosis with or without a proximal leak. Care must be taken by the endoscopist to not excessively dilate the tract beyond the original size of the bougie used. Another factor that may influence stenosis at the incisura is that there may be a relative twisting of the stomach at this location, with the antrum being partially twisted away from the upper por-tion of the sleeve. Endoscopic treatment can help straighten and markedly alleviate the obstruction in such cases. Thus, relatively early endoscopic intervention is appropriate in the patient with a stenosis at the incisura. One study has shown that endoscopic dilation is usually successful in treating stenosis after SG, with a mean of 1.6 dilatations being done an average of 48 days postoperatively.163The patient with the proximal gastric staple line leak because of mechanical factors may experience persistence of the leak for months. Nonsurgical treatment with drainage and stenting can be used initially. Some now advocate for conver-sion of the patient with a longstanding leak after SG to a RYGB to provide a low-pressure anastomosis above the site of the ste-nosis.164,165 Similarly, persistent stenosis of the sleeve despite conservative therapy and endoscopic dilatation also is an indica-tion for conversion to RYGB.Laparoscopic Adjustable Gastric BandingBackground and Patient Selection. LAGB involves place-ment of an inflatable silicone ring around the proximal stom-ach. The band is attached to a reservoir system that allows adjustment of the tightness of the band. This reservoir system is accessed through a subcutaneously placed port, similar in concept to ports used for chemotherapy via central venous catheters. Figure 27-21 shows the LAGB apparatus in place. Patients who have had previous upper gastric surgery, such as a Nissen fundoplication, and those with severe GERD are rela-tively poor candidates for LAGB due to altered proximal gastric anatomy interfering with proper band placement or worsening of GERD symptoms. Two major types of bands have been used for this procedure. The original Lap-Band has been used most frequently. The Swedish Band, remarketed as the Realize Band in the United States, is slightly wider and larger in circumfer-ence than the Lap-Band but is no longer being manufactured. The port systems have differences as to profile and methods of attachment to the fascia.Technique. Port placement for LAGB has varied among sur-geons. Usually some combination of two ports for the surgeon’s hands, one or two for the assistant, a port for the telescope, and a liver retractor site are needed. With the patient placed in reverse Trendelenburg position, the procedure begins with division of the peritoneum at the angle of His and then division of the gas-trohepatic ligament in its avascular area (the pars flaccida) to expose the base of the right crus of the diaphragm. If a hia-tal hernia is present, it must be repaired at this point, using a Figure 27-22. Grasper being passed through under stomach to grasp tubing during placement. (Reprinted with permission from Cleveland Clinic Center for Medical Art & Photography © 2005-2009. All Rights Reserved.)standard posterior esophageal dissection to expose the crura and perform suture repair. A grasper is inserted along the base of the anterior surface of the diaphragmatic crura, from right to left, emerging at the angle of His in the area of the divided peri-toneum (Fig. 27-22). The device is then used to pull the band Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   118723/02/19   2:21 PM 1188SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIABunderneath the posterior surface of the gastroesophageal junc-tion. This technique, by passing the band through some fibrous tissue in this plane, serves to anchor the band more securely posteriorly. During the initial years of band placement, a ret-rogastric location of the posterior half of the band in the free space of the lesser sac caused an unacceptably high incidence of slippage and prolapse of the band. The adoption of the pars flaccida technique decreased the incidence of such slippage.166Once the band is passed around the proximal stomach, it is locked into its ring configuration through its own self-locking mechanism. This involves the tubing end being passed through the orifice of the buckle for the Lap-Band and the suture on the end of the flanged end of the band site being passed through for the Realize Band. Once the band is securely locked in place, the buckle portion of the band is located on the lesser curvature of the stomach (Fig. 27-23A,B). Now the anterior surface of the fundus and proximal stomach is imbricated over the band using several sutures (Fig. 27-24). The tubing of the band system is brought out through the desired site for placement of the port portion of the system. Usually this is a trocar site near the upper abdomen or xiphoid region to place the port most superficially such that it can be palpated postoperatively. The port is secured Figure 27-23. A. Lap-Band in place around stomach. (Reprinted with permission from Cleveland Clinic Center for Medical Art & Photography © 2005-2009. All Rights Reserved.) B. RealizeT (Swedish) Band around stomach.to the anterior abdominal wall fascia. Access to the port for subsequent addition of fluid to the band system is percutane-ously achieved using a Huber or noncutting type needle. The band is initially placed empty of fluid, except priming, in most circumstances.Procedure-Specific Complications. The complications that may occur after LAGB include gastric prolapse, band slippage, band erosion, and port and tubing complications. In addition, failure to lose clinically significant weight is more common fol-lowing this procedure compared to others. Acute gastric pro-lapse is the most common emergent complication that requires reoperation after LAGB. Acute, severe pain with immediate dysphagia, vomiting, and inability to take oral food or liquid is the typical presentation. Vomiting may predispose or exac-erbate this problem. Either anterior or posterior prolapse may occur.167 The initial evaluation for prolapse involves obtaining a plain film radiograph. If the band is in a horizontal position instead of its normal oblique position, prolapse must be strongly suspected. Initial treatment for an acute or chronic prolapse is to remove all the fluid from the system. This often allows reduc-tion of the prolapse and resolution of symptoms. If symptoms do not resolve after this, an upper gastrointestinal (UGI) series Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   118823/02/19   2:21 PM 1189THE SURGICAL MANAGEMENT OF OBESITYCHAPTER 27Figure 27-24. Stomach imbricated over band.is indicated, and if prolapse persists, then reoperation laparo-scopically to reduce the prolapse and resuture the band in place is indicated. Chronic gastric prolapse is more subtle. The band retains its normal oblique angle, but there is symmetric dilation of the gastric pouch above the band. These are initially managed with fluid removal and monitoring of symptoms. Follow-up evaluation can be performed in 4 to 8 weeks, and if the chronic prolapse resolves on UGI, slow refilling of the band may begin.Band erosion is uncommon, reported in 1% to 2% of most series. The patient usually develops either a port site infection or systemic fever and a low-grade abdominal inflammatory sepsis. Endoscopy can be diagnostic, visualizing the white band mate-rial within the stomach. The presence of otherwise unexplained free air on computed tomography (CT) scan should alert the surgeon to this diagnosis as well. Laparoscopic removal of the band is indicated, with repair of the gastric perforation. Often the perforation is already sealed by an inflammatory process, but if not, appropriate management of a gastric perforation must be followed.167Port and tubing problems occur in at least 5% to 15% of patients undergoing LAGB. These require revision of the port/tubing system due to perforation, leaking, or kinking of the tub-ing or turning of the port such that access to the surface of the port for adding fluid is precluded. Usually a procedure under local anesthesia is all that is required to repair or realign the tub-ing or port. The incidence of band removal for patient dissatisfac-tion or lack of weight loss has been difficult to assess completely, but this number is increasing annually. Angrisani et al168 reported a 40.9% incidence of band removal after 10-year follow-up. In the Longitudinal Assessment of Bariatric Surgery (LABS) study, 18 subsequent reoperations occurred for every 100 participants with LAGB who were followed up for 3 years.169 Overall, these numbers are expected to increase as follow-up increases.Biliopancreatic Diversion and Duodenal SwitchBackground and Patient Selection. BPD was first described by, and remains championed by, Scopinaro in Italy.9 The operation, which is shown in Fig. 27-25, involves resection of the distal half to two-thirds of the stomach and creation of an alimentary tract of the most distal 200 cm of ileum, which is anastomosed to the stomach. The biliopancreatic limb is anastomosed to the alimentary tract at approximately 100 cm proximal to the ileocecal valve. This operation is limited in its utilization due to both technical difficulty and the significant percentage of nutritional complications that arise postoperatively.One early problem with BPD was the development of a high incidence of marginal ulcers postoperatively. Hess and Figure 27-25. Diagram of biliopancreatic diversion. (Reprinted with permission from Cleveland Clinic Center for Medical Art & Photography © 2005-2009. All Rights Reserved.)Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   118923/02/19   2:21 PM 1190SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIHess10 and Marceau and colleagues170 separately described the adaptation of the DS operation, originally proposed by DeMeester and colleagues171 for treatment of bile reflux gastri-tis, to replace the gastric portion of the BPD. This procedure was originally called BPD with DS. For ease of description, it is now simply called the duodenal switch (DS) (Fig. 27-26). Currently, BPD and DS represent together less than 1% to 2% of bariatric operations performed in the United States. Patients who undergo either BPD or DS must be prepared for the consequences of a malabsorptive operation. Frequent and large-quantity bowel movement after any large amount of oral intake is common. Also, patients must agree to close follow-up and a large number of vitamin and mineral supplements to avoid nutritional prob-lems. Given the increased incidence of postoperative nutritional and other complications, BPD and DS usually are recommended only for patients who have higher BMIs or for patients who have failed another operation for weight loss or metabolic control. Contraindications to the procedure include geographic distance from the surgeon, lack of financial means to afford supplements, and preexisting calcium, iron, or other nutrient deficiencies.Technique. The technique for BPD and DS is the same for the open and the laparoscopic approach, and they are very techni-cally challenging operations.172 The BPD operation begins with performance of a distal subtotal gastrectomy with a residual  200-mL gastric pouch. The terminal ileum is identified and divided 250 cm proximal to the ileocecal valve. The distal end of that divided ileum is then anastomosed to the stom-ach, creating a 2to 3-cm stoma. The proximal end of the ileum is then anastomosed side-to-side to the terminal ileum Figure 27-26. Diagram of duodenal switch. (Reprinted with permission from Cleveland Clinic Center for Medical Art & Photography © 2005-2009. All Rights Reserved.)approximately 100 cm proximal to the ileocecal valve. Prophy-lactic cholecystectomy is performed due to the high incidence of  gallstone formation with the malabsorption of bile salts.The DS procedure differs from the BPD procedure only in the proximal gut portion of the operation. Instead of a distal gas-trectomy, resection of all the stomach except for a narrow lesser curvature tube of the stomach (SG) is performed. The diam-eter of this tube is calibrated with a bougie of 32to 40-French size. The duodenum is them divided in its first portion, leaving an approximately 2-cm length of duodenum intact beyond the pylorus. This end of the duodenum is then anastomosed to the distal 250 cm of ileum. This anastomosis is often done in an end-to-end fashion with a circular stapler. This is the most dif-ficult portion of the DS procedure, and leak rates are slightly higher than with other anastomoses. The distal bowel configura-tion and cholecystectomy are similar to BPD.Procedure-Specific Complications. Complications that occur after BPD include those seen after RYGB, where intestinal anastomoses and gastric division create potential problems with bleeding and leakage. Scopinaro and col-leagues173 reported GI obstruction in 1.2%, wound infections in 1.2%, and marginal ulcers in 2.8% of patients. However, others found the incidence of marginal ulcer to be higher after BPD, leading to the adoption of the DS. Preservation of the pylorus reduces the incidence of dumping (poorly quantitated in most series) after BPD. The duodenoileostomy of DS also has a very low rate of stomal ulcer, unlike the gastroileostomy of BPD.Nutritional complications are by far the most frequent and concerning after both of these operations, particularly on long-term follow-up. Scopinaro and colleagues173 reported a protein malnutrition rate of 7%, iron deficiency anemia rate of less than 5%, and bone demineralization at 5 years of 53%. Other prob-lems that may arise include alopecia from inadequate protein absorption, night blindness from a lack of vitamin A, and gall-stones if the gallbladder is not removed. However, of all these nutritional complications, protein-calorie malnutrition is the most severe and life-threatening. When it is diagnosed, the treat-ment is parenteral nutrition. Two episodes of required parenteral nutrition are usually considered adequate indication to lengthen the “common channel” of ileum—the ileum between the ileo-ileostomy of the biliopancreatic limb to the alimentary tract and the ileocecal valve. The amount of length that the surgeon should increase the common channel is poorly documented.Investigational Bariatric ProceduresThere is continuous evolution of the approaches to and proce-dures for bariatric surgery. The goals of this dynamic process are to minimize risk, reduce invasiveness, and maximize clini-cal effectiveness. This same benefit-risk approach/paradigm has also been adopted by the FDA for the design of clinical trials for obesity devices to help facilitate product development and approval.174 In the past, a variety of medical devices to assist with weight reduction have been studied, but only a few have been commercially available. In 2012, to address the need for more intermediate treatment options with devices, the FDA initiated a new paradigm based on a benefit-risk determina-tion to suggest appropriate levels of benefit for devices with different risk levels. In other words, it became more feasible to trial less invasive obesity treatment devices, as the threshold for weight loss was lower if the risk of the device or procedure was lower as well. Since that time, several new devices have been approved. These intermediate devices are intended to provide 5Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   119023/02/19   2:21 PM 1191THE SURGICAL MANAGEMENT OF OBESITYCHAPTER 27tools in the middle of the spectrum of care between lifestyle modification and bariatric surgery and are offered to people with BMIs between 30 and 40 kg/m2.The vagus nerve is known to play a role in satiety, metabo-lism, and autonomic control in the upper gastrointestinal tract. Studies have been conducted to determine the efficacy of vagal nerve block therapy with a treatment device that consistently delivers at least 12 hours of therapy a day and a sham control device that has no possibility of delivering therapy. A laparo-scopic abdominal procedure is performed to attach two elec-trodes to the anterior and posterior vagal trunks at the level of the gastroesophageal junction. Customized electrodes are placed around the nerves and then secured with sutures. These electrodes are then connected to a transcutaneously recharge-able neuroregulator placed in a subcutaneous pocket on the thoracic side wall. Published results show modest weight loss in the vagal nerve blockade group of 9.2% compared to 6.0% TBWL in the sham group at 12 months and 8.8% and 3.8% TBWL in vagal nerve blockade and sham groups, respectively, at 18 months.175,176 More weight loss was sustained through  18 months in the vagal blockade group, and the device was shown to be safe, as there was a low rate of serious complications.Endoscopically placed intragastric balloons (IGBs) are once again an option for overweight and obese patients with a BMI greater than 27 kg/m2. The original Garren-Edwards bub-ble (GEB) from the late 1980s was an endoscopically placed and removed balloon filled with 220 mL of air that was left in the stomach for 3 months. Adverse events related to the GEB reported in the medical literature included small-bowel obstruc-tion secondary to unplanned deflation, gastric ulcers with GI hemorrhage, and gastric perforation, so its use was abandoned. A multidisciplinary conference that followed recommended that future IGBs should (a) be effective at promoting weight loss, (b) be filled with liquid (not air), (c) be capable of adjustment to various sizes, (d) have a smooth surface with low ulcerogenic and obstructive potential, (e) contain a radiopaque marker, and (f) be constructed of durable materials.177Newer IGBs have undergone evaluation and approval by the FDA. These include both a single and a double lumen bal-loon, both placed endoscopically and filled with saline.178,179 Results from these two pivotal trials show weight losses of 7.6% and 10.2% TBWL at 6 months in the device group that exceeded weight loss in the control or sham groups. There were some early removals in 9% to 18% of subjects for failure to tolerate symptoms, early deflations without migration in 6%, and gastric ulcers in 10%. The precise role for these devices is yet to be determined, and they must be paired with a diet and exercise plan to maximize effectiveness. Repeat or sequential balloon therapy may be effective in enhancing and sustaining weight loss, and it is being studied in Europe. Finally, ensuring proper follow-up is important to reduce adverse events related to ulcers, spontaneous deflation, or migration of the balloon.An endoscopically placed percutaneous gastrostomy tube is approved for weight loss. It facilitates drainage of approxi-mately 30% of the calories consumed in a meal, in conjunction with lifestyle counseling. In a randomized trial, participants lost 12.1% ± 9.6% TBWL compared to 3.5% ± 6.0% TBWL in the lifestyle-only control group. The most frequent complication was abdominal pain and discomfort in the perioperative period and peristomal granulation tissue and peristomal irritation in the postoperative period. Serious adverse events were reported in 3.6% of participants in the device group.180A duodenal-jejunal bypass liner is an endoscopic device that mimics the duodenal-jejunal exclusion component of an RYGB and is undergoing trials in the United States. Prior studies assessing the efficacy of the DJBL have shown modest weight loss and improvements in glycemic control. There are associated adverse events of migration, obstruction, and epigas-tric pain. One study demonstrated a high (29%) early device removal rate due to these events.181 A more recent meta-analy-sis showed that the DJBL was associated with significant mean differences in TBWL for the device (12.6%) compared with lifestyle modification. The mean differences in glycated hemo-globin and fasting plasma glucose among subjects with T2DM in this meta-analysis did not reach statistical significance.182Various endoscopic and endoluminal procedures are also being utilized as less invasive approaches for bariatric surgi-cal procedures. These include procedures to decrease gastric pouch size and to limit gastrojejunostomy anastomotic size after “failed” LRYGB.183 Overall, reports have been disappointing for effectiveness. Gastric plication is also being approached both laparoscopically and endoscopically to mimic results of an SG but without requiring stapling or gastric resection. Fur-ther studies with long-term safety and efficacy data are required before these investigational procedures can be considered for routine clinical use.FOLLOW-UP AND POSTOPERATIVE CAREPostoperative follow-up is required following bariatric surgery to detect and treat postoperative shortand longer-term complications. Weight regain, internal hernias, ulcerations, and important nutrient deficiencies can occur years after bariatric surgery. These specific problems are detailed in the “Procedure-Specific Complications” and overall “Complications” sections. The frequency of follow-up varies by surgical procedure and to some extent by surgical practice, but continues, hopefully, for life. Postoperative follow-up is defined as short-term  (0–2 years), medium (2–5 years), and long term (≥5 years). Recommendations are that at least 75% of patients are followed for 5 years for LAGB, SG, and LRYGB operations, and 90% are followed closely for 5 years and longer if they have malabsorptive operations (BPD and DS). Although a clinical follow-up system may be in place, it still requires patient compliance, which is generally low for long-term follow-up. In a systematic review, Puzziferri et al also identified that less than 3% of bariatric studies included >80% long-term follow-up.184 Vigorous efforts can help to improve follow-up, but these require significant staffing and funding. In the NIH-funded prospective, longitudinal bariatric study, more complete follow-up data and weight measurements were obtained for 79% of RYGB patients in the longer term with the use of these resources.169The goals of short-term follow-up are to maximize care of the patient in the postoperative period; assist in adjustment to new eating, exercise, and lifestyle patterns; be on the alert for and treat postoperative complications; and recommend measures to limit such complications. The goals of long-term follow-up are similar, but focus more on weight regain, the man-agement of comorbid condition relapse, and the emergence of recurrent depression, substance and alcohol misuse, and nutri-tional complications. Vitamin and mineral supplements must be taken regularly for life, including oral supplements for iron, calcium, and vitamin B12 and a multivitamin. Evidence indicates that vitamin and mineral deficiencies, including deficiencies of Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   119123/02/19   2:21 PM 1192SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 27-4Recommended postoperative nutritional monitoringRECOMMENDATIONLAGBSGLRYGBBPD/DSBone density (DXA)a at 2 yearsYesYesYesYes24 hour urinary calcium excretion at 6 months and annuallyYesYesYesYesVitamin B12 annually (methylmalonic acid and homocysteine optional) then every 3–6 months if supplementedYesYesYesYesFolic acid (red blood cell folic acid optional),  iron studies, vitamin D,  intact parathyroid hormoneNoNoYesYesVitamin A initially and every 6–12 months thereafterNoNoOptionalYesCopper, zinc, and selenium evaluation with specific findingsNoNoYesYesThiamine evaluation with specific findingsYesYesYesYesaDXA = dual energy X-ray absorptiometry; LAGB = laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding; SG = sleeve gastrectomy; LRYGB = laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass; BPD/DS = biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch.Data from Mechanick JI, Youdim A, Jones DB, et al: Clinical practice guidelines for the perioperative nutritional, metabolic, and nonsurgical support of the bariatric surgery patient—2013 update: cosponsored by American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists, The Obesity Society, and American Society for Metabolic & Bariatric Surgery, Obesity (Silver Spring). 2013 Mar;21 Suppl 1:S1-S27.calcium, vitamin D, iron, zinc, and copper, are common after bariatric surgery.185 Guidelines suggest screening patients for iron, vitamin B12, folic acid, and vitamin D deficiencies preop-eratively, as well.89 Patients should also be given daily nutri-tional supplementation postoperatively, including two adult multivitamin plus mineral supplements (each containing 18 mg of iron, 400 to 800 µg of folic acid, and 50 mg of thiamine), 1200 to 1500 mg of elemental calcium (1800 to 2400 mg for BPD/DS), at least 3000 IU of vitamin D, and vitamin B12, the dose of which varies by route of administration. In addition, all patients should undergo annual screening for specific deficien-cies (Table 27-4).Objective data that should be obtained after all bariatric operations include weight loss, change in BMI, resolution or improvement in medical comorbidities, and any complications that occur. Assessment of quality of life can help gauge effi-cacy as well, with the Short Form-36 (SF36) questionnaire being one frequently used example. In a retrospective review based on the bariatric outcomes longitudinal database (BOLD) dataset by Spaniolas et al, the effect of postoperative follow-up on 12-month weight loss was studied in 51,081 patients. Com-plete follow-up was independently associated with excess weight loss ≥50% and total weight loss ≥30%.186 To identify the relationship between regular follow-up and resolution of comorbidities, the same group studied a cohort of 46,381 patients (31% RYGB patients) who had minimum of 12-month follow-up. After adjusting for baseline characteristics, the group determined that complete follow-up in the first year after RYGB was independently associated with a higher rate of improvement or remission of comorbid conditions (T2DM, hypertension, and dyslipidemia).187 Frequent and protocolized band adjustments and postoperative support individual/group sessions were shown to be important for longer-term outcomes following LAGB.188 Finally, the 12-month postoperative visit, which coincides with the plateauing of weight loss for most procedures, presents an opportunity to intervene while bariat-ric surgery patients are still engaged. Engaging patients and the use of technology to maintain contact with a medical pro-vider are important tools to maintain follow-up after bariatric surgery.RESULTS OF BARIATRIC SURGERYShort-Term OutcomesThe short-term (1–2 year) outcomes for bariatric surgical pro-cedures are shown in Table 27-5, which summarizes of the majority of the literature from 2009 to 2017. Average 30-day mortality is low (<1.0%) for all procedures except BPD/DS. Mortality after LRYGB is now consistently less than 0.3% to 0.5% in most large reported series.59,140 Morbidity varies by procedure, but it is the lowest for LAGB, followed by SG and then LRYGB, and highest for the malabsorptive procedure BPD/DS. In the Longitudinal Assessment of Bariatric Sur-gery (LABS) study, a composite endpoint including death, deep-vein thrombosis or venous thromboembolism, reinter-vention, or failure to be discharged by 30 days after surgery occurred in 4.8% of those who had undergone LRYGB.59 Short-term results of the SG have been reported from large national databases. These data show that SG is positioned between LAGB and LRYGB for efficacy of weight loss and resolution of comorbid medical problems and for morbidity and mortality.140 Few longer-term results with SG have been published.189,190In the past, large institutional series of LAGB results have been published from centers in Europe and Australia, showing better results for weight loss than those that have been observed in the United States (13–22% TBWL) (see Table 27-5). Weight loss results with BPD or DS are both excellent and comparable but come with higher surgical morbidity. The results from malabsorptive procedures are also very durable for the small percentage of people who undergo them. One 18-year follow-up study after BPD showed a mean excess weight loss of 70% persisting for that duration of time.173 Although most of the results of BPD or DS are after open operations, one report of laparoscopic DS at an experienced center showed that for  40 patients with an average BMI of 60 kg/m2 the mean hospital stay was 4 days, average operation room time was 3.5 hours, and mean excess weight loss at 9 months was 58%.191 Buchwald and colleagues showed that the average weight loss after BPD and DS in the literature was over 70%, with a mortality rate of 1.1%, a complication rate of 27% to 33%, and a nutritional complication rate of 40% to 77%192 (see Table 27-5).Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   119223/02/19   2:21 PM 1193THE SURGICAL MANAGEMENT OF OBESITYCHAPTER 27Table 27-5Short-term bariatric surgical outcomes OUTCOMEa ALLSURGICAL PROCEDURELRYGBSGLAGBBPD/DS% Mortality 30-day<1.0%0.3–0.5%0.11%0.05%1.1%% Morbidity 30-dayNA, depends on procedure12–21%3–6%2–4%27–33%% Total body weight loss (TBWL)NA, depends on procedure31–36%25–30%13–22%36–38%% Excess body weight loss (EBWL)NA, depends on procedure48–77%(mean, 68%)49–81%29–50%>70%% Diabetes remission77%60–80%60%35%75%% Dyslipidemiab remission70%63–91%72–82%78%80%% Hypertension remission62%61–81%60–92%43%60%, few reports% Sleep apnea remissionc84%80%80%68%80%aOutcomes are the averages found in the literature at 1 to 2 years postoperatively, unless otherwise noted.bDenotes any component lipid remission.cDenotes clinical remission as repeat sleep studies are uncommonly performed.Further detail on surgical morbidity for each procedure is addressed in both the “Procedure-Specific Complications” and overall “Complications” sections.Effectiveness of Bariatric Surgery Compared to Nonsurgical TreatmentThe following section summarizes important findings of studies that compare bariatric procedures with nonsurgical management of obesity. The results of these studies concerning remission from T2DM will be discussed in more detail in “Results of Surgery for Diabetes.” A systematic review and meta-analysis by Gloy summarized all randomized controlled trials (RCTs) that compared bariatric surgery with nonsurgical treatments for obesity.193 The review analyzed 11 trials comprising nearly 800 people with a BMI of 30 to 52. These studies generally focused on cohorts with T2DM and 1 to 2 years of follow-up. They pro-vided good evidence of the effectiveness of bariatric procedures, including LRYGB,78-80 LAGB,77,194 BPD,79 and SG.78 These pro-cedures resulted in greater short-term (1–2 years) weight loss (mean difference −26 kg; 95% CI −31 to −21; P <0.001) and greater remission of T2DM (complete case analysis relative risk of remission: 22.1, 3.2–154.3; P = 0.002; conservative analysis: 5.3, 1.8–15.8; P = 0.003) compared with various nonsurgical treatments.77-80,194 After this meta-analysis, two additional RCTs were published that show similar short-term results for both weight loss and T2DM.83,84In addition, serum triglycerides and high-density lipoproteins were significantly reduced by bariatric procedures, but blood pressure and other lipoproteins were not (although some studies showed reduced medication use for these conditions).193 The Gloy review also noted a lack of evidence from RCTs beyond  2 years for mortality, cardiovascular diseases, and adverse events. Another systematic review by Maggard-Gibbons focused on weight loss and glycemic control in class I obese (BMI 30–34.9) adults with T2DM and identified three RCTs with results similar to those seen in class II (BMI 35–39.9) and severely obese populations. However, the review also noted a lack of longer-term studies in people with class I obesity.195Longer-Term StudiesA summary of studies with long-term outcomes are shown in Table 27-6. The following section describes these studies and other larger studies that have contributed data to the growing body of evidence with respect to some short-term and now much longer-term outcomes.Swedish Obese Subjects Study. Much of what is currently known about the long-term results of bariatric surgery come from the Swedish Obese Subjects (SOS) study, which was initi-ated in 1987 as a prospective trial of 2010 subjects undergo-ing bariatric surgery compared to a usual care control group  (n = 2037) that were matched on 18 clinical and demographic variables. The most common bariatric procedure performed in SOS was the VBG (68%), followed by gastric banding (19%), and RYGB (13%). Follow-up rates are high and reported at 99% for some endpoints (including mortality). The SOS investiga-tors have published widely on health outcomes beyond 10 years and up to 20 years, including: weight loss, mortality, T2DM remission and incidence, cardiovascular events, incident cancer, psychosocial outcomes, and health care use and costs. Weight loss among surgical subjects in SOS was greater than in con-trol subjects (mean changes in body weight at 2, 10, 15, and 20 years were −23%, −17%, −16%, and −18% in the surgery group and 0%, 1%, −1%, and −1% in the control group). After 15 years, the mean percent weight loss by procedure type was 27 + 12% for RYGB, 18 + 11% for VBG, and 13 + 14% for gastric banding.The SOS study also showed major improvements in obesityrelated comorbidities. In the surgical group, there was a 72% remission of T2DM after 2 years (OR for remission: 8.4) and 36% durable remission after 10 years (OR for remission: 3.5).  In spite of the considerable relapse of T2DM over time, bariatric surgery was associated with a lower incidence of myocardial infarction and other T2DM complications. The SOS study dem-onstrated that bariatric surgery also reduced the risk of incident T2DM by 96%, 84%, and 78% after 2, 10, and 15 years among subjects without the condition at baseline. The SOS study also 6Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   119323/02/19   2:21 PM 1194SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 27-6Long-term studies of bariatric surgery outcomesaAUTHORSTUDY DESIGNPOPULATIONS AND PROCEDURESFOLLOW-UP DURATIONPUBLISHED OUTCOMESMORTALITY AND SURVIVALLIMITATIONSSjöström et al,196-201  2004, 2007,  2009, and 2012  (Swedish Obese Subjects study [SOS])Prospective observational with matched controls2010 Surgical cases  (13% RYGB;  19% banding; 68% VBG) and 2037 matched controls10–20 years, depending  on the reportSurgery was associated with: greater weight loss at 2 years (–23% vs. 0%) and at 20 y (–18% vs. –1%)16;  greater remission of T2DM after 2 y (OR for remission, 8.4; P <.001) and  10 y (OR, 3.5; P <.001); lower incidence of T2DM (HR, 0.17;  P <.001)Bariatric surgery treatment: 16 years, 29% lower risk of death  from any cause (hazard ratio 0.71, 0.54 to 0.92; P = 0.01)  vs. usual care; common causes  of death: myocardial infarction  (HR, 0.71; P = .02), stroke  (HR, 0.66; P = .008), and  cancer (in women only; HR,  0.58; P <.001)Not randomized; includes mostly procedures (87%) that are no longer in use; involves patients from a single country with little racial/ethnic diversityAdams et al,202 2007 (Utah Mortality study)Retrospective observational with matched controls7925 RYGB cases and 7925 weight-matched controlsMean,  7.1 yearsOnly mortality outcomes reportedBariatric surgery treatment:  average 7.1 years post treatment, 40% reduction in all cause mortality (hazard ratio HR 0.60, 0.45 to 0.67; P <0.001), 49% (HR 0.51, 0.36 to 0.73; P <0.001), and 92% (HR 0.08, 0.01 to 0.47; P = 0.005), cardiovascular mortality, and T2DM mortality, respectivelyNot randomized; matching based on self-reported height and weight from driver’s license database; includes only RYGB procedures; patients from a single stateAdams et al,203,204  2012, 2017 (Utah Obesity study)Prospective observational with two matched control groups418 RYGB cases; 417 bariatric-surgery seekers who did not  undergo operation (control 1);  321 population-based matched controls  (control 2)6 years,  12 years6 years: RYGB group lost 27.7%  body weight compared with 0.2% weight gain in control group 1 and 0% change in control group 2; T2DM remission in 62% of RYGB patients and 8% and 6% in each of the control groups (P <.001); incident T2DM was observed in 2% of RYGB patients but 17% and 15% of each of the control groups at 6 years (P <.001); surgery associated with greater improvements  in blood pressure, cholesterol, and quality of life (P <.01)Deaths at 6 years: 12 (2.8%), 14 (3.3%), and 3 (0.93%) for bariatric surgery, control 1, and control 2, respectivelyNot randomized; includes only RYGB procedures; patients from a single stateBrunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   119423/02/19   2:21 PM 1195THE SURGICAL MANAGEMENT OF OBESITYCHAPTER 2712 years: RYGB 26.9% body weight loss, 2.0% and 0.9% in control groups 1, 2, respectively; T2DM remission in 51% RYGB group; odds ratio for the incidence T2DM 0.08 (95% CI, 0.03 to 0.24) for RYGB vs. control group 1 and 0.09 (95% CI, 0.03 to 0.29) RYGB vs. control group 2 (P <0.001 for both comparisons); RYGB group had higher remission rates and lower incidence rates of hypertension and dyslipidemia than did control group 1 (P <0.05 for all comparisons).Maciejewski  et al,205-208 2011, 2012, 2015, 2016 (Department of Veterans Affairs)Retrospective observational with matched controls847 to 1787 to  2500 surgical cases and their matched controls6.7 yearsPatients undergoing RYGB lost 28.6% (95% CI, 19.5%–37.6%) of their baseline weight at 10 years, whereas nonsurgical matches lost 7.3% (95% CI, 1.4%–13.3%) of their baseline weight at 10 years. Patients undergoing RYGB lost 21% (95% CI,  11%–31%) more of their baseline weight at 10 years than nonsurgical matches. A total of 405 of 564 patients undergoing RYGB (71.8%) had more than 20% body weight loss and 224 of 564 (39.7%) had more than 30% estimated weight loss at  10 years.At 4 years, patients undergoing LRYGB lost 27.5% (95% CI, 23.8%–31.2%) of their baseline weight, patients undergoing LAGB lost 10.6%  (95% CI, 0.6%–20.6%), and patients undergoing SG lost 17.8% (95% CI, 9.7%–25.9%).Surgery was not significantly associated with lower health expenditures 3 years after the procedure, in first study.First study, in 2011, bariatric surgery not significantly associated with reduced mortality.Later study, at the end of 14 years, 263 deaths in the surgical group (mean follow-up, 6.9 years) and 1277 deaths in control group (mean follow-up, 6.6 years). Mortality rates were 2.4% at 1 year, 6.4% at 5 years, and 13.8% at 10 years for surgical patients; for matched control patients, 1.7% at 1 year, 10.4% at 5 years, and 23.9% at 10 years. Significantly lower mortality after 1 to 5 years (HR, 0.45 [95% CI, 0.36–0.56]) and 5 to 14 years (HR, 0.47 [95% CI, 0.39–0.58]).Not randomized; includes older (mean age,  55 years), primarily male (74%) veterans; mortality studies mostly RYGB procedures(Continued)Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   119523/02/19   2:21 PM 1196SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IICourcoulas et al,59,169 2009, 2013, 2017 (Longitudinal Assessment of Bariatric Surgery [LABS])Prospective observational4776 in LABS-1, 30 day safety study and 2458 in LABS-2, effectiveness study (70.7% RYGB; 24.8% LAGB; and 5% other procedures)30 days, 3 years,  7 years3 year: 31.5% for RYGB and 15.9% for LAGB; T2DM remission in 67.5% of RYGB cases and 28.6% for LAGB; incidence of T2DM was 0.9% after RYGB and 3.2% after LAGB. Dyslipidemia remission in 61.9% RYGB cases and 27.1% AGB cases; HTN remission in 38.2% RYGB cases and 17.4% AGB cases; other procedures’ results not reported7 year: 28.4% for RYGB and 14.9% for LAGB; T2DM remission in 60.2% of RYGB cases and 20.3% for LAGB30 days: 0.3% overall; 0% LAGB, 0.2% LRYGB, and 2.1% open RYGB.3 years: 0.9 per 300 person-years for TYGB and 0.8 per 300 person-years for LAGB, i.e., number of events if 100 people were followed for 3 years7 years: 3.7 per 700 person-years for RYGB and 2.7 per 700 person years for LAGB, i.e., number of events if 100 people were followed for 7 yearsNot randomized; lacks nonsurgical control population; primarily RYGB and LAGB procedures; high follow-up rates (>80% for weight) but some not in-personArterburn  et al,212,213 2013 (HMO Research Network)1. Retrospective observational2. Retrospective observational with matched controls4434 RYGB cases with T2DM1395 cases; 72% RYGB, 2% SG, 4% LAGB, 13% otherMedian,  3.1 years2 years68% of patients (95% CI, 66–70) experienced an initial T2DM remission within 5 years after RYGB; among these, 35.1% (95% CI, 32–38) redeveloped T2DM within 5 years; median duration of T2DM remission, 8.3 yearsBariatric cases higher T2DM remission rates [73.7% (95% CI: 70.6, 76.5)] vs. controls [6.9% (95%CI: 6.9, 7.1)]. Bariatric cases lower relapse rates T2DM than controls (adjusted HR: 0.19; 95% CI: 0.15–0.23)Not reportedNo higher risk of death in control vs. bariatric within 2 years (adjusted HR = 0.54; 95% CI: 0.22 to 1.23).1. Not randomized; lacks nonsurgical control population; only RYGB procedures2. Not randomized, electronic medical record data, small number SGCarlin et al,215 2013 (Michigan Bariatric Surgery Collaborative)Prospective observational8847 to 35,477, varies depending on publication30 days to  3 years, varies depending on publicationComplication rates for SG (6.3%) were significantly lower than for RYGB (10.0%; P <.001) but higher than LAGB (2.4%; P <.001). Excess body weight loss at 1 year was 13% lower for SG (60%) than for RYGB (69%; P <.001) but was 77% higher for SG than for LAGB (34%; P <.001).Not reportedNot randomized; lacks nonsurgical control; patients from a single stateaData from Courcoulas AP, Yanovski SZ2, Bonds D, et al: Long-term outcomes of bariatric surgery: a National Institutes of Health symposium, JAMA Surg. 2014 Dec;149(12):1323-1329.Table 27-6Long-term studies of bariatric surgery outcomesa (Continued)AUTHORSTUDY DESIGNPOPULATIONS AND PROCEDURESFOLLOW-UP DURATIONPUBLISHED OUTCOMESMORTALITY AND SURVIVALLIMITATIONSBrunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   119623/02/19   2:21 PM 1197THE SURGICAL MANAGEMENT OF OBESITYCHAPTER 27found that bariatric surgery was associated with a reduced inci-dence of fatal or nonfatal cancer among women but not in men. Finally, at 16 years follow-up, surgery was associated with a 29% lower risk of death (the primary endpoint of the study) from any cause compared to usual care, with the most common causes of death being cancer and myocardial infarction196-201 (see Table 27-6).Utah Obesity Studies. Another important long-term obser-vational study performed in Utah from 1984 to 2002 included 7925 people who had undergone RYGB and 7925 weight, age, and sex matched controls. This study showed a 40% reduction in all-cause mortality (hazard ratio 0.60, 0.45 to 0.67; P <0.001) and a 49% (0.51, 0.36 to 0.73; P <0.001) and 92% (0.08, 0.01 to 0.47; P = 0.005) reduction in death from cardiovascular  disease and death related to T2DM, respectively, at an average of  7.1 years later.202A separate ongoing prospective Utah Obesity Study involving over 400 RYGB cases and two nonrandomized, matched control groups—each with over 400 and 300 severely obese subjects (one group were people seeking surgery that did not undergo operation; the other was a population-based severely obese control group)—has found that the surgery group lost 27.7% of their initial body weight compared to 0.2% weight gain in control group 1 (surgery seekers), and 0% change in control group 2 (population-based control) at 6 years. Diabetes  was in remission in 62% of RYGB patients and only 8% and 6% in each of the control groups, while incident T2DM was observed in 2% of RYGB patients and in 17% and 15% of the control groups at 6 years.203 The 12-year follow-up results were also recently published and showed long-term durability of weight loss and effective remission and prevention of T2DM, hypertension, and dyslipidemia after RYGB.204 Follow-up rates in this study were high at over 90% at 12 years. The mean per-cent change from baseline in body weight in the RYGB group was −26.9% at 12 years compared to −2.0% and 0.9% in each of the two control groups. There was remission of T2DM in 43 of 84 patients (51%) at 12 years. The OR for the incidence of T2DM at 12 years was 0.08 (95% CI, 0.03–0.24) for the RYGB group versus control group 1 and 0.09 (95% CI, 0.03–0.29) for the RYGB group versus control group 2 (P <0.001 for both comparisons). The RYGB group had higher remission rates and lower incidence rates of hypertension and dyslipidemia than did control group 1 (P <0.05 for all comparisons) (see Table 27-6).Veteran’s Administration Study. A retrospective obser-vational study involving 847 U.S. veterans who were older and more high risk than in typical bariatric studies, found no significant association between bariatric surgery and survival compared to usual care at mean 6.7 years follow-up.205 When matched to control subjects, the outpatient, inpatient, and total expenditures were higher for bariatric surgical cases in the 3 years leading up to the procedure and then went back to the lower cost levels of nonsurgical controls in 3 years after the procedure. The conclusion from this study was that bariatric surgery did not appear to be associated with reduced health care expenditures 3 years after the procedure.206In a follow-up retrospective cohort study, 2500 U.S.  veterans (74% men) who underwent bariatric surgery (74% gastric bypass, 15% sleeve gastrectomy, 10% adjustable gastric banding, and 1% other) were matched to 7462 control patients. The primary outcome was all-cause mortality. In this study, surgical patients (n = 2500) had a mean age of 52 years and a mean BMI of 47. Matched control patients (n = 7462) had a mean age of 53 years and a mean BMI of 46. At the end of the 14-year study period, there were a total of 263 deaths in the surgical group (mean follow-up, 6.9 years) and 1277 deaths in the matched control group (mean follow-up, 6.6 years). Mor-tality rates were 2.4% at 1 year, 6.4% at 5 years, and 13.8% at  10 years for surgical patients; for matched control patients, 1.7% at 1 year, 10.4% at 5 years, and 23.9% at 10 years. So, in this later study, there was significantly lower all-cause mortal-ity at longer follow-up. 207Ten-year weight change in 1787 veterans who underwent RYGB compared to controls, and separately, 4-year weight change in veterans who underwent RYGB (n = 1785), SG  (n = 379), and AGB (n = 246) were reported. Patients undergo-ing RYGB lost 21% more of their baseline weight at 10 years than nonsurgical matches. A total of 405 of 564 patients under-going RYGB (71.8%) had more than 20% weight loss, and 224 of 564 (39.7%) had more than 30% weight loss at 10 years com-pared with 134 of 1247 (10.8%) and 48 of 1247 (3.9%), respec-tively, for nonsurgical matches. At 4 years, patients undergoing LRYGB lost 27.5% of their baseline weight, patients undergo-ing LAGB lost 10.6%, and patients undergoing SG lost 17.8%. Patients undergoing RYGB lost 16.9% more of their baseline weight than patients undergoing AGB and 9.7% more than patients undergoing SG208 (see Table 27-6).The Longitudinal Assessment of Bariatric Surgery Study. The Longitudinal Assessment of Bariatric Surgery (LABS-1) study, a multicenter observational surgical cohort, prospectively assessed 30-day safety among 4776 severely obese patients who underwent a first bariatric surgical procedure (25% AGB, 62% laparoscopic RYGB, 9% open RYGB, and 3% another procedure) between 2005 and 2007.59 The 30-day mortality in the LABS study was 0.3% for all procedures with a major adverse outcome rate (a predefined composite endpoint that included death, venous thromboembolism, reintervention [percutaneous, endoscopic, or operative], or failure to be discharged from the hospital in 30 days) of 4.1%. These results did vary by procedure and approach, with no mortality in the 1198 patients who had undergone LAGB, 0.2% of the  2975 patients who had undergone LRYGB, and 2.1% of the 437 patients who had undergone open RYGB. Similarly, the rate of adverse outcomes (morbidity) occurred in 4.1% of patients overall; 1.0% for LAGB, 4.8% for LRYGB, and 7.8% for open RYGB.59 The Longitudinal Assessment of Bariatric Surgery (LABS-2) study is another large prospective multicenter observational bariatric cohort study that was not randomized and did not include a nonsurgical control group. LABS-2 assessed weight change and comorbid conditions in 2458 participants (1738 RYGB—both open and laparoscopic, 610 LAGB, and 110 other procedures) recruited between 2005 and 2009 who were followed for 7 years.169,209 At baseline, 33% had diabetes, 63% had dyslipidemia, and 68% had hypertension. In the LABS-2 cohort, median weight change was 31.5% for RYGB and 15.9% for adjustable gastric banding after 3 years, with much variability in response to each surgical treatment. Remission of T2DM was noted in 67% and 28% of those who had undergone RYGB and LAGB, respectively. The incidence T2DM was 0.9% and 3.2%, respectively, over the 3 years169 (see Table 27-6). LABS-2 looked at both preand postoperative predictors of weight change and found that very few of many baseline variables studied (Black race, T2DM) were associated Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   119723/02/19   2:21 PM 1198SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIwith 3-year weight change, and the effects were small overall. Postoperatively, for RYGB only, three behaviors explained most of the variability (16%) in 3-year weight change: weekly self-weighing, continuing to eat when feeling full more than once a week, and eating continuously during the day. If a person started weekly self-weighing, stopped eating when feeling full, and stopped eating continuously during the day, they lost 14% more weight than those who made no positive changes (38.8% vs. 24.6% TBWL).210,211At 7 years of follow-up, in LABS, data completeness for weight was high (83%), and the median weight change was 28.4% for RYGB and 14.9% for LAGB. Weight regain between years 3 and 7 was 3.9% of baseline weight for RYGB and 1.4% for LAGB, but 75% of RYGB participants maintained at least 20% total body weight loss, and 50% of LAGB participants maintained at least 16% through 7 years. Remission of T2DM was reported in 60.2% of RYGB cases and 20.3% for LAGB. Mortality was reported as 3.7 per 700 person-years for RYGB and 2.7 per 700 person years for LAGB, i.e., number of events if 100 people were followed for 7 years. Reoperations were also much more common after LAGB compared to RYGB at 7 years (see Table 27-6).HMO Research Network. Arterburn and colleagues have leveraged the integrated health network system to study bariatric outcomes using the electronic health/medical record. They studied clinical predictors of diabetes remission and relapse among patients undergoing gastric bypass. Theirs was a retrospective cohort study of adults with uncontrolled or medication-controlled T2DM who underwent gastric bypass in three integrated health care delivery systems in the United States.  Remission and relapse events were defined by diabetes medication use and clinical laboratory measures of glycemic control. Of 4434 adults with T2DM who underwent RYGB, 68.2% (95% CI, 66% and 70%) experienced an initial complete diabetes remission within 5 years after surgery. Among these, 35.1% (95% CI, 32% and 38%) relapsed back to T2DM within 5 years. The median duration of their remission was 8.3 years. Predictors of incomplete remission and relapse were poor preoperative glycemic control, insulin use, and longer diabetes duration212 (see Table 27-6).In a second study, they compared rates of diabetes remission, relapse, and all-cause mortality at 2 years between severely obese adults with T2DM who underwent bariatric surgery or received usual medical care. There were 1395 adults with T2DM who had bariatric surgery and 62,322 who did not. Most procedures were RYGB (72.0% laparoscopic; 8.2% open); 4.4% were gastric banding, 2.4% were sleeve gastrectomy, and 13.2% were other procedures. At 2 years, bariatric subjects experienced significantly higher diabetes remission rates (73.7% [95% CI: 70.6, 76.5]) compared to nonsurgical subjects (6.9% [95% CI: 6.9, 7.1]). Age, site, duration of diabetes, hemoglobin A1c level, and intensity of diabetes medication treatment were significantly associated with remission. Bariatric subjects also experienced lower relapse rates than nonsurgical subjects (adjusted HR: 0.19; 95% CI: 0.15–0.23) with no higher risk of death (adjusted HR: 0.54; 95% CI: 0.22–1.30) (see Table 27-6).213 This group also studied short-term comparative effectiveness outcomes between procedures (LRYGB and LAGB) and found that LRYGB resulted in much greater weight loss than LAGB but had a higher risk of short-term complications and long-term subsequent hospitalizations.214Michigan Bariatric Surgery Collaborative. The Michigan Bariatric Surgery Collaborative is a statewide consortium of hospitals and surgeons that maintains an externally audited prospective clinical registry. The comparative effectiveness of SG, LRYGB, and LAGB procedures was studied in this data-set. Nearly 3000 SG patients with equal numbers of RYGB and LAGB patients were matched on 23 baseline characteristics. Outcomes assessed included 30-day complications, weight loss, quality of life, and comorbid remission up to 3 years after bar-iatric surgery. Overall complication rates for SG (6.3%) were significantly lower than for RYGB (10%) but higher than for LAGB (2.4%). Serious complication rates were similar for SG (2.4%) and LRYGB (2.5%) but higher than for LAGB (1.0%). Excess body weight loss at 1 year was 13% lower for SG (60%) than for RYGB (69%), but was 77% higher for SG than for LAGB (34%). Remission of comorbid conditions was similar between SG and LRYGB215 (see Table 27-6).This group also developed a risk prediction model for seri-ous 30-day complications after bariatric surgery. Overall, 2.5% of patients experienced a serious complication. Significant risk factors included prior venous thromboembolism (OR 1.90, CI 1.41–2.54); mobility limitations (OR 1.61, CI 1.23–2.13); coro-nary artery disease (OR 1.53, CI 1.17–2.02); age over 50 (OR 1.38, CI 1.18–1.61); pulmonary disease (OR 1.37, CI 1.15–1.64); male gender (OR 1.26, CI 1.06–1.50); smoking history (OR 1.20, CI 1.02–1.40); and procedure type.216 Further, to assess the rela-tionship between IVC filter insertion and complications while controlling for differences in baseline patient characteristics and medical venous thromboembolism prophylaxis, this group pub-lished an additional study, and 35,477 patients from 32 hospitals  in Michigan were included. Patients receiving IVC filters had higher rates of pulmonary embolism, deep vein thrombosis, venous thromboembolism, serious complications, and death.217Recently, this group has also been evaluating the effect of surgical skill and operative technique on complications follow-ing bariatric surgery.218,219Other StudiesMetabolic and Bariatric Surgery Quality Improvement Pro-gram (MBASQIP). This is a prospective, multi-institutional, national database that has been used to compare SG to RYGB and LAGB. The study from 2011 was short term and compared 30-day, 6-month, and 1-year outcomes including morbidity and mortality, readmissions, and reoperations as well as reduction in BMI and weight-related comorbid conditions. The findings were that SG has higher risk-adjusted morbidity, readmission and reop-eration/intervention rates compared to LAGB, but lower reopera-tion/intervention rates compared to RYGB either laparoscopic or open. There were no differences in mortality. Reduction in BMI and most of the weight-related comorbidities after SG was also between LAGB and RYGB rates.140A later study addressed the impact of various SG techniques on short-term (30-day) outcomes. Using the MBSAQIP data reg-istry, 189,477 SG operations that were performed at over 700 cen-ters in the United States were analyzed. Cases in which staple line reinforcement was used were associated with higher leak rates and lower bleeding rates. Bougie size ≥38 French was associated with significantly lower leak rates compared to <38 French.162 Longer-term data will eventually be available from this national dataset, but the completeness of follow-up has not yet been determined.Geisinger Health System. This is an electronic medical record database in a large rural integrated health system. They Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   119823/02/19   2:21 PM 1199THE SURGICAL MANAGEMENT OF OBESITYCHAPTER 27have published long-term results (7–12 years) of the percent-age of TBWL and preoperative predictors for LRYGB in approximately 700 patients. Over 200 preoperative clinical fac-tors were studied. At a median of 9.3 postoperative years fol-lowing surgery, the mean (SD) percentage TBWL was 22.5% (13.1%). Preoperative insulin use, history of smoking, and use of 12 or more medications before surgery were associated with greater long-term weight loss; 6.8%, 2.8%, and 3.1%, respec-tively. Preoperative hyperlipidemia, older age, and higher body mass index were associated with poorer long-term weight loss (−2.8%, −8.8%, and −4.1%, respectively). Again, there were only a few preoperative clinical factors associated with differ-ences in long-term weight loss after RYGB.220This group also developed a method to predict the probability of T2DM remission after RYGB surgery on the basis of preop-erative clinical criteria in a retrospective cohort study. Over 200 clinical variables were used to identify independent predictors of remission within 5 years and to produce a score (DiaRem) to assess this likelihood. Records were available for 690 patients in the pri-mary cohort, of whom 463 (63%) had achieved partial or com-plete T2DM remission. Four preoperative clinical variables were included in the final model: insulin use, age, HbA1c concentration, and type of antidiabetic drugs. The DiaRem score was developed from that, and it ranges from 0 to 22 with the proportion of patients achieving remission being highest for the lowest scores.221Comparisons Between ProceduresThere have been many systematic reviews of bariatric surgery attempting to summarize and quantify differences in the efficacy and safety of the different surgical procedures. A major challenge in summarizing this literature from the last 10 years is the fact that no single randomized trial has included all of the most com-mon procedures (RYGB, LAGB, SG, and BPD/DS), so infer-ence must be made through pooled analysis of data from many disparate randomized and non-randomized studies of bariatric surgery with different lengths and completeness of follow-up.  There are also no studies that have examined differences in long-term survival, incident cardiovascular events, and quality of life across bariatric procedures.1 Still one of the most compre-hensive systematic reviews by Buchwald included 136 studies and a total of 22,094 bariatric patients. Only 5 of the included studies were randomized trials (28 non-RCTs and 101 uncon-trolled case series) and the review did not include any data on the SG procedure, so will need to be updated. This review found a strong trend towards different weight loss outcomes across procedures: weighted mean percentage of excess weight loss (%EWL) 50% for LAGB; 68% for RYGB; 69% for VBG; and 72% for BPD/DS. The rate of T2DM remission also appeared to differ across procedures: 48% for LAGB; 84% for RYGB; 72% for VBG; and 99% for BPD/DS. A similar pattern of dis-ease remission was observed for dyslipidemia, hypertension, and obstructive sleep apnea, with the greatest rates of remission observed among BPD/DS patients, followed by RYGB patients, with the least disease remission among LAGB patients.192There is still ongoing debate regarding the comparative effectiveness of the three most common procedures currently in use: LRYGB, SG, and LAGB. Several other systematic reviews have concluded that LRYGB is more effective for weight loss than LAGB; however, there have been only two small RCTs with follow-up at 4 and 5 years addressing this issue specifically.65,222,223 There is evolving data from a number of smaller RCTs to examine differences between LRYGB, LAGB, and SG for comorbidity improvement (addressed in “Results of Surgery for Diabetes”), but systematic reviews of nonrandomized studies indicate greater remission of T2DM, dyslipidemia, hypertension, and sleep apnea with LRYGB compared to LAGB. Two recent systematic reviews have compared the outcomes of the SG with other procedures.224,225 One review identified 15 RCTs involving 1191 patients. The percent excess body weight loss (%EBWL) ranged from 49% to 81% for SG, from 62% to 94% for LRYGB, and from 29% to 48% for LAGB, with a follow-up ranging from 6 months to 3 years. The T2DM remission rate ranged from 27% to 75% for SG vs. 42% to 93% for RYGB. The second review only compared SG to RYGB and identified 6 RCTs and two nonrandomized controlled studies with follow-up ranging from 3 months to 2 years. They found that LRYGB achieved significantly greater improvement in BMI than SG (1.8 kg/m2) and greater improvements in metabolic factors. Longer-term comparative effectiveness data on SG are still needed, but the effectiveness of the SG procedure, again, appears to be positioned between the LRYGB and LAGB procedures.Resolution of Specific Comorbid ConditionsBariatric surgery can improve and induce remission of many obesity-related comorbid conditions. Nevertheless, the remis-sion rates can decline over time due to relapse of disease, and as follow-up lengthens, complete and more longer-term follow-up data is needed in some areas.Cardiovascular Disease. A recent systematic review of long-term cardiovascular risk factor reduction after bariatric surgery involved 73 studies and 19,543 subjects with a mean age of 42 years; 76% of subjects were female, and 44%, 24%, and 44% had baseline hypertension, diabetes, and hyperlipidemia, respectively.226 At a mean follow-up of 57.8 months, the aver-age excess weight loss for all bariatric procedures was 54%, and remission/improvement was 63% for hypertension, 73% for T2DM, and 65% for hyperlipidemia. Echocardiographic results from 713 subjects showed statistically significant improve-ments in hemodynamics. There are no long-term RCTs com-paring bariatric surgery with nonsurgical medical treatment of obesity that specifically evaluate cardiovascular endpoints and cardiovascular mortality. However, 12 cohort-matched studies comparing bariatric surgery with nonsurgical controls have been reviewed.227 Collectively, all but two of these studies support a reduced cardiovascular event rate and all-cause mortality rate conferred by bariatric surgery. Of these studies, the Swedish Obesity Subjects (SOS) study still has the longest outcomes.Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease. Patients with obesity and GERD have a higher chance of failing to obtain symptomatic relief from standard antireflux surgery. The recurrence of symp-toms is higher, likely due to a higher incidence of wrap hernia-tion into the mediastinum and other mechanical failure of the fundoplication, which in turn is likely affected by the increased intra-abdominal pressure of the obese condition. The patient with a BMI over 35 kg/m2 who has GERD has a better chance of symptom improvement by undergoing LRYGB, which is effective for the treatment of GERD.228,229 LRYGB creates such a small gastric pouch that it has a very limited volume for acid production. LAGB may worsen or may improve GERD but to a considerably lesser extent than RYGB. A prospective analysis of 558 consecutive SG (n = 200) and LRYGB (n = 358) patients demonstrated significantly improved subjective GERD symp-toms in the bypass cohort when compared to the SG patients at Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   119923/02/19   2:21 PM 1200SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II1 year.230 Studies show that SG can increase GERD symptoms postoperatively.Obstructive Sleep Apnea. A systematic review of 13,900 patients (69 studies) showed significant improvement or reso-lution of sleep apnea in more than 75% of bariatric surgery patients.231 Comparison of outcomes between procedures dem-onstrated the most benefit with BPD and RYGB and the least with LAGB. However, a randomized control trial comparing the effect of medical and surgical weight loss (LAGB) on sleep apnea found no significant difference in apnea events despite major differences in weight loss. The findings suggested that much of the improvement achieved was in the mild to moderate weight loss range, with little benefit of further weight loss.232Asthma. Another pulmonary symptom that commonly occurs in severely obese patients is asthma. Dixon and colleagues233 studied 23 asthmatic patients who underwent bariatric surgery and found a significant improvement in asthma control (e.g., forced expiratory volume in 1 second, forced vital capacity), asthma-related quality of life, and responsiveness to methacholine. Boulet and colleagues234 found similar results in their cohort of 12 patients with asthma who experienced significant weight loss after bariatric surgery.Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease.  Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease (NAFLD) is a metabolically related problem associated with obesity. The disease is a spectrum of liver abnormalities including steatosis, steatohepatitis, fibrosis, and cirrhosis of the liver. It is estimated that 20% of U.S. adults have NAFLD, largely because of the high incidence of obesity. NAFLD is present in an estimated 85% of patients with severe obesity.235 Although further research is needed to accurately assess the role of bariatric surgery as a potential treatment for NAFLD, there are some reports that support its use. A systematic review of the available literature found many retrospective and prospective observational cohort studies, but no RCTs or case-control series.236Musculoskeletal Disease. Degenerative joint disease and low back pain are among the most common complaints and asso-ciated comorbid problems in the severely obese population. A prospective cohort of 50 obese females age 20 to 74 years were followed for 1 year after LRYGB using the timed-get-up-and-go (TGUG) and health survey SF-36.237 The results showed a significant improvement in musculoskeletal function and likely enhanced ability to progress in rehabilitation. Patients with osteoarthritis of the neck, shoulder, spine, hip, knee, ankle, wrist, and hand have been shown to have improved or resolved joint pain after bariatric surgery. Reduction in BMI values of 6.2 to 14.7 kg/m2 has corresponded with back and knee pain resolution in 5% to 100% of patients, whereas pain severity was reduced in 31% to 94% of patients depending on the joint and study.238The LABS-2 Study published data on pain and physical function in over 2200 participants. At year 1, clinically mean-ingful improvements were shown in 57.6% of participants for bodily pain, 76.5% for physical function, and 59.5% for walk time. Additionally, among participants with severe knee or dis-ability (633), or hip pain or disability (500) at baseline, approxi-mately three-fourths experienced joint-specific improvements in knee pain (77.1%) and in hip function (79.2%). But between year 1 and year 3, rates of improvement significantly decreased for both bodily pain and for physical function.239Quality of Life. Few long-term studies have assessed the impact of bariatric surgery on overall quality of life. However, three studies of 6 to 10 years’ duration suggest that bariatric pro-cedures are associated with greater improvements in overall and obesity specific measures of quality of life compared to medical treatment or care.240-242 Physical functioning aspects of quality of life seem to be more responsive to bariatric procedures than mental health domains, although more research is needed, espe-cially in patients with less severe (class 1) obesity.Results of Surgery for Diabetes  (Metabolic Surgery)Based on an abundance of recent observational studies and RCTs, bariatric surgery is increasingly used with the primary intent to treat T2DM or metabolic disease, hence the term meta-bolic surgery.243 Observational, nonrandomized studies first demonstrated profound improvements in hyperglycemia and other cardiovascular risk factors following metabolic surgery that were followed by RCTs. Resolution or remission of T2DM is typically defined as becoming “nondiabetic” with normal HbA1c, without medications. One meta-analysis (2009) of 19 mostly observational studies (n = 4,070 patients) reported an overall T2DM remission rate of 78% after bariatric surgery with 1 to 3 years follow-up.244 The patients all had BMI >35 and gen-erally early/mild T2DM that likely increased remission rates. In the Swedish Obese Subjects study, the remission rate follow-ing surgery was 72% at 2 years and 36% at 10 years compared with 21% and 13%, respectively, for the nonsurgical controls  (P <.001).201 Metabolic surgery was also significantly more effective than nonsurgical treatment in preventing new onset cases of T2DM, with a relative risk reduction of 78%.A more recent systematic review (2012) evaluated long-term cardiovascular risk reduction after bariatric surgery in 73 studies and 19,543 patients.226 At a mean follow-up of  57.8 months, the average excess weight loss for all procedures was 54%, and rates of remission or improvement were 63% for hyper-tension, 73% for T2DM, and 65% for hyperlipidemia. Results from 12 cohort-matched, nonrandomized studies comparing bariatric surgery vs. nonsurgical controls demonstrated reduced cardiovascular events and death (30–88% reduction) in patients with and without T2DM.227 One of these studies involving male veterans, who were mostly at high cardiovascular risk, reported a 42% reduction in mortality at 10 years compared with medical therapy.207 Similarly, in the Swedish Obese Subjects study, the mortality rate from cardiovascular disease in the bariatric surgical group was lower than for control patients (adjusted hazard ratio, 0.47; P = .002).201 For patients with T2DM in this study, surgery was associated with a 50% reduction in microvascular complica-tions (41.8 per 1000 person-years for control patients and 20.6 per 1000 person-years in the surgery group; hazard ratio, 0.44; P <.001).245 These observational, nonrandomized studies provide evidence that metabolic surgery is superior to medical manage-ment alone in improving glycemic control, reducing cardiovascu-lar risk factors, and lowering long-term morbidity and mortality of T2DM, yet supporting RCTs have been lacking until recently.During the past 10 years, 11 such RCTs have been published including 794 patients in total (Table 27-7).16,77-83,85,86,246-253 These RCTs included obese patients with T2DM (n = 794; range 38–150 patients per study) with follow-up from 6 months to 5 years (Fig. 27-27). All common metabolic surgical procedures were represented including LRYGB (9 studies), LAGB  (5 studies), SG (2 studies), and BPD (1 study). T2DM severity varied significantly from mild (mean HbA1c 7.7%, <2-year onset, no insulin)253,77 to severe (mean HbA1c 9.3%, duration 8.3 years, 48% on insulin).78 The BMI ranged from 25 to 53 kg/m2, with 11 of 12 studies including patients with BMI <35 kg/m2, also called class 1 obesity. Age, sex, and ethnic background were similar, 7Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   120023/02/19   2:21 PM 1201THE SURGICAL MANAGEMENT OF OBESITYCHAPTER 27Table 27-7Metabolic surgery randomized controlled trials for type 2 diabetes (n = 794)aSTUDYBMI (kg/m2), % OF PATIENTSDESIGNNO. OF PATIENTS RANDOMIZEDFOLLOW-UP (MONTHS)REMISSION CRITERIA*OUTCOME (REMISSION OR CHANGE IN  HbA1C)Dixon77<35, 22%LAGB vs. control6024HbA1c <6.2%73% vs. 13%,  P <0.001Schauer78,246,252<35, 36%RYGB vs. SG vs.  control15060HbA1c ≤6.0%22% vs. 15% vs. 0, P<0.05Mingrone79,82>35, 100%RYGB vs. BPD  vs. control6060HbA1c ≤6.5%42% vs. 68% vs. 0, P = 0.003Ikramuddin 80,247<35, 59%RYGB vs. control12024HbA1c <6%44% vs. 9%,  P <0.001Liang248<35, 100%RYGB vs. control10112HbA1c <6.5%**90% vs. 0 vs. 0,  P <0.0001Halperin83<35, 34%RYGB vs. control3812HbA1c <6.5%58% vs. 16%,  P = 0.03Courcoulas84,86<35, 43%RYGB vs. LAGB  vs. control6936HbA1c <6.5%40% vs. 29% vs. 0,  P = 0.004Wentworth250≤30, 100%LAGB vs. control5124Fasting blood  glucose  <7.0 mmol/L52% vs. 8%,  P = 0.001Parikh251<35, 100%Bariatric surgery  (RYGB, LAGB,  SG) vs. control576HbA1c <6.5%65% vs. 0,  P = 0.0001Ding85<35, 34%LAGB vs. control4512HbA1c  <6.5%***33% vs. 23%,  P = 0.46Cummings81<35, 25%RYGB vs. control4312HbA1c <6.0%60% vs. 5.9%,  P = 0.002*Remission defined as reaching HbA1c value without medication, unless otherwise specified**Remission not precisely defined, extrapolated***On or off medicationsReproduced with permission from Schauer PR, Mingrone G2, Ikramuddin S, et al: Clinical Outcomes of Metabolic Surgery: Efficacy of Glycemic Control, Weight Loss, and Remission of Diabetes, Diabetes Care. 2016 Jun;39(6):902-911.although three studies80,247,248 included a significant number of Asian patients. For most studies, the primary endpoint was remission, defined as an HbA1c target at or below 6.0% to 6.5% without use of diabetes medications.Overall, these RCTs showed that surgery was signifi-cantly more effective than medical treatment in reaching remission and glycemic control (P <.05) (Fig. 27-27). The one exception showing no superiority of surgery involved gastric banding and resulted in a diabetes remission for LAGB vs. medical treatment of 33% and 23%, respectively (P >0.05).85 Overall, surgery decreased HbA1c by 2% to 3.5%, whereas medical treatment lowered it by 1% to 1.5%, as seen in  Fig. 27-28. Most of these studies also showed superiority of surgery over medical treatment in achieving secondary endpoints such as weight loss, remission of metabolic syn-drome, reduction in diabetes and cardiovascular medications, and improvement in triglycerides, lipids, and quality of life. Results were mixed in terms of improvements in systolic and diastolic blood pressure or low-density lipoproteins after sur-gery vs. medical treatment, but many studies did show a cor-responding reduction in medication usage.Although previous guidelines and payer coverage policies had limited metabolic surgery to severely obese patients (BMI ≥35 kg/m2), nearly all RCTs showed that the surgical procedures, especially LRYGB and SG, were equally effective in patients with BMI 30 to 35 kg/m2. This is particularly important given that many patients with T2DM have a BMI <35 kg/m2. The effect of surgery in these patients with a lower class of obesity is also durable out to at least 5 years.243,252None of these RCTs were sufficiently powered to detect differences in macrovascular or microvascular complications or death, especially at the relatively short follow-up, and no such differences have been detected thus far. Four of the RCTs from Pittsburgh, Seattle, Boston, and Cleveland have combined their patient populations in a pooled study to assess 10-year out-comes. This study, Alliance of Randomized Trials of Medicine vs. Metabolic Surgery (ARMMS), aims to identify long-term risks and benefits of metabolic surgery.The evidence, as previously summarized, was the basis for newly established international guidelines on the role of metabolic surgery in treating T2DM. In 2015, the 2nd Diabetes  Surgery Summit (DSS-II) Consensus Conference generated Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   120123/02/19   2:21 PM 1202SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIParikh 2014 (RYGB/LAGB/SG) [6 mo; 6.5% off meds] (18)Courcoulas 2014 (RYGB/LAGB) [12 mo; 6.5% off meds] (14)Ding 2015 (LAGB) [12 mo; 6.5%] (22)Halperin 2014 (RYGB) [12 mo; 6.5% off meds] (15)Ikramuddin 2013 (RYGB) [12 mo; 7.0%] (13)Liang 2013 (RYGB) [12 mo; 7.0% off meds] (16)Schauer 2012 (RYGB/SG) [12 mo; 6.0%] (12)Cummings 2016 (RYGB) [12 mo; 6.5% off meds] (23)Dixon 2008 (LAGB) [24 mo; 6.2% off meds] (10)Ikramuddin 2015 (RYGB) [24 mo; 7.0%] (21)Mingrone 2012 (RYGB/BPD) [24 mo; 6.5% off meds] (11)Wentworth 2014 (LAGB) [24 mo; 7.0%] (17)Courcoulas 2015 (RYGB/LAGB) [36 mo; 6.5% off meds] (24)Schauer 2014 (RYGB/SG) [36 mo; 6.0%] (19)Mingrone 2015 (RYGB/BPD) [60 mo; 6.5% off meds] (20)Fixed-Effects ModelStudy (Operation) [Follow-Up; HbA1c end point]WeightPeto, Fixed, 95% CIPolo Odds Ratios131861128283492226341214271920411819573199152960402337973862400531100148020002417221957704117265920251440154664.5%5.1%3.9%4.4%12.5%8.4%10.4%3.4%6.7%11.8%6.4%4.9%4.0%8.7%4.9%100.0%21.15 [5.85, 76.51]7.51 [2.24, 25.21]1.68 [0.42, 6.66]5.82 [1.59, 21.39]3.72 [1.72, 8.04]86.76 [33.89, 222.08]6.39 [2.74, 14.88]11.48 [2.63, 50.13]10.83 [3 .79, 30.96]4.25 [1.92, 9.38]30.08 [10.28, 88.06]8.11 [2.37, 27.84]6.44 [1.65, 25.21]5.73 [2.28, 14.42]8.44 [2.46, 29.01]8.45 [6.44, 11.10]SurgeryGlyc. Endp.   NMedical/LifestyleGlyc. Endp.   NHeterogeneity: Chi2 = 45 .43, df = 14 (P < 0.0001); I2 = 69%Test for overall effect: Z = 15.36 (P < 0.00001)FavorsMedical/Lifestyle0.0010.11011000FavorsSurgeryIncreasing Length of Follow-UpFigure 27-27. Glycemic endpoints of RCTs by length of follow-up. Forest plot of Peto odds ratios (ORs) of main glycemic end points, as defined in each trial, from published RCTs of bariatric/metabolic surgery compared with medical/lifestyle treatments for diabetes with data arranged in order of increasing length of follow-up. (Reproduced with permission from Cummings DE, Cohen RV: Bariatric/Metabolic Surgery to Treat Type 2 Diabetes in Patients With a BMI <35 kg/m2, Diabetes Care. 2016 Jun;39(6):924-933.)Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   120223/02/19   2:21 PM 1203THE SURGICAL MANAGEMENT OF OBESITYCHAPTER 27Patients WithType 2 DiabetesObeseBMI ˙30 kg/m2or ˙27.5 for AsiansNonobeseBMI <30 kg/m2or <27.5 for AsiansClass III ObeseBMI ˙40 kg/m2or ˙37.5 for AsiansClass II ObeseBMI 35.0–39.9 kg/m2or 32.5–37.4 for AsiansClass I ObeseBMI 30.0–34.9 kg/m2or 27.5–32.4 for AsiansClass II ObeseWith PoorGlycemic ControlRecommendMetabolic SurgeryConsiderMetabolic SurgeryNonsurgicalTreatmentClass II ObeseWith AdequateGlycemic ControlClass I ObeseWith PoorGlycemic ControlClass I ObeseWith AdequateGlycemic ControlExpedited Assessment for Metabolic SurgeryOptimal Lifestyle and Medical RxOptimal Lifestyle and Medical Rx (including injectable meds and insulin)Figure 27-29. Algorithm for the treatment of type 2 diabetes as recommended by the 2nd Diabetes Surgery Summit. (Reproduced with permission from Rubino F, Nathan DM, Eckel RH, et al: Metabolic Surgery in the Treatment Algorithm for Type 2 Diabetes: A Joint Statement by International Diabetes Organizations, Diabetes Care. 2016 Jun;39(6):861-877.)20–2–4–6Change in HbA1cMean baselineBMI 35 kg/m2Mean baselineBMI >35 kg/m2Wentworth 2014Liang 2013Parikh 2014Ikramuddin 2013Courcoulas 2014Courcoulas 2014Halperin 2014Ding 2015Dixon 2008Schauer 2012Schauer 2012Cummings 2016Mingrone 2012Mingrone 2012SurgeryMedical/LifestyleFigure 27-28. Change in baseline HbA1c in each of the 11 RCTs. (Reproduced with permission from Rubino F, Nathan DM, Eckel RH, et al: Metabolic Surgery in the Treatment Algorithm for Type 2 Diabetes: A Joint Statement by International Diabetes Organiza-tions, Diabetes Care. 2016 Jun;39(6):861-877.)guidelines that were endorsed by more than 50 diabetes and medical organizations.16 The recommendations include patient selection, preoperative evaluation, choice of procedure, postop-erative follow-up, and indications for surgery. According to the DSS-II guidelines, metabolic surgery should be recommended to treat T2DM in patients with class III obesity (BMI ≥40 kg/m2)  regardless of glycemic control and in those with class II obesity (BMI 35.0–39.9 kg/m2) when hyperglycemia is inad-equately controlled by lifestyle and optimal medical therapy (Fig. 27-29). Surgery should also be considered for patients with T2DM and BMI 30.0 to 34.9 kg/m2 if hyperglycemia is inadequately controlled despite optimal treatment with either oral or injectable medications. These BMI thresholds should be reduced by 2.5 kg/m2 for Asian patients. The new treatment algorithm from DSS-II incorporates appropriate use of all three treatment modalities: lifestyle intervention, drug therapy, and surgery (see Fig. 27-29).16 The 2017 Standards of Care for Dia-betes from the American Diabetes Association include those key indications in its recommendations for metabolic surgery, as well.COMPLICATIONS OF BARIATRIC SURGERYSurgical ComplicationsNone of the surgical procedures are without risks. The periop-erative mortality for the average patient is low (<0.5%) and declining, but can vary significantly across sub-groups with perioperative mortality rates of 2.0% or higher in some patient populations.1 The incidence of complications after the various surgical procedures varies from 4% to over 25% and depends on the definition of complication used, the type of bariatric procedure performed, and patient characteristics216,254,255 (see Table 27-5).8Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   120323/02/19   2:21 PM 1204SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIIn the 11 RCTs (794 patients) that have compared bariatric surgery to nonsurgical treatment, rates of adverse events were higher among surgical subjects, with follow-up up to 5 years for two of the studies and up to 2 to 3 years for others.82,252,256 There were very few cardiovascular events or deaths in either the surgical or the nonsurgical groups, and the most common adverse events after surgery were iron deficiency anemia (15% with intestinal bypass operations) and reoperations (8%). These RCTs were not large enough to compare safety between pro-cedure types, and most of the comparative data on procedure-to-procedure complications has and will come from larger observational studies.The 30-day mortality in the LABS Study was 0.3% for all procedures with a major adverse outcome rate (a predefined composite endpoint that included; death, venous thromboembo-lism, reintervention [percutaneous, endoscopic, or operative], or failure to be discharged from the hospital in 30 days) of 4.1%.59 Major predictors of an increased risk of complications in LABS were a history of venous thromboembolism, a diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea, impaired functional status defined as inability to walk 300 feet (91 m), extreme BMI, and undergo-ing an RYGB by the open technique. Other large observational studies, such as SOS, have shown higher rates of complications, with 14.5% having at least one nonfatal complication over the first 90 days, including pulmonary complications, vomiting, wound infection, hemorrhage, and anastomotic leak. However, the SOS included mostly open and VBG procedures, which are rarely performed today. Despite these older procedures and tech-niques, the 90-day mortality rate in SOS was low at 0.25%.196In a 2007 meta-analysis of 361 studies, mostly nonran-domized observational studies involving over 85,000 patients, Buchwald and colleagues reported important differences in ≤30-day mortality across different laparoscopic bariatric pro-cedures: 0.06% for LAGB; 0.21% for VBG; 0.16% for RYGB; and 1.11% for BPD/DS.257 This review also found significantly higher mortality for open procedures compared with those per-formed laparoscopically. A U.S. study of over 300,000 patients in 12 states examined in-hospital complications before and after implementation of the CMS national policy restricting insurance coverage for bariatric surgery to “centers of excellence.” The study found no significant differences in complications before and after the policy was implemented, and overall complication rates were 7% to 8% with 3.3% to 3.6% being serious, including a 1% reoperation rate during both time periods.1,258 A clinically useful prognostic risk score was also developed and validated in 9382 patients to predict 90-day mortality after LRYGB surgery using five clinical characteristics: BMI ≥50 kg/m2, male sex, hypertension, known risk factor for pulmonary embolism, and age ≥45 years. Patients with 4 to 5 of these characteristics are at much higher risk of death (4.3%) by 90 days than those with 0 to 1 characteristics (0.26%).259-261 A systematic review of 15 RCTs of SG found no deaths in just under 800 patients but a 9.2% mean complication rate (range 0–18%).224 In the American College of Surgeons Bariatric Surgery Network database, mor-tality 30 days after SG was 0.11%, positioning its overall com-plication profile between that for LAGB (0.05%) and RYGB (0.14%). The 30-day complication rate was similarly positioned at 5.6% for SG, 1.4% LAGB, and 5.9% for RYGB.140An established problem now is the frequent rate of reop-eration, particularly among LAGB patients. In O’Brien and col-leagues’ prospective cohort of 3227 LAGB patients, revisional procedures occurred in 1116 (35%) and were performed for the following reasons: proximal enlargement (26%), port and tubing problems (21%), and erosion (3.4%). The need for revision due to proximal enlargement decreased dramatically over a 17-year period from 40% to 6.4% as the surgical technique evolved; however, the band was ultimately removed in 5.6% of all indi-viduals.262 Other long-term cohorts suggest that LAGB removal rates may be as high as 50%. The O’Brien systematic review of long-term studies indicates that the rate of revisional surgery for LRYGB may be similar to LAGB (22% revision for LRYGB, range 8% to 38%; 26% revision for LAGB, range of 8% to 60%). However, in the LABS Study, there was a higher rate of revision and reoperation for LAGB as compared to RYGB at both 3 and 7 years of follow-up.169 In general, more long-term data with more complete follow-up with standardized defini-tions and reporting of complications are needed to compare reoperation and complication rates of all bariatric procedures.Nonsurgical ComplicationsPostgastric bypass hypoglycemia (PGBH) in a relatively uncommon but particularly challenging problem that affects an unknown number of patients in the longer term. Prevalence rates in the literature vary from 1% to 11%, depending on the defini-tion.263,264 Hypoglycemia is characterized by documentation of Whipple’s triad (including both autonomic and neuroglycopenic symptoms or signs), at the time of a plasma glucose concentration <55 mg/dL with resolution of symptoms and signs after glucose administration. During these episodes, plasma insulin levels are inappropriately high, indicating dysregulation of β-cell function. When it was initially described in patients who had undergone partial pancreatectomy, nesidioblastosis was found in the speci-mens that are characterized by hyperplasia and/or dysplasia of the pancreatic islets.265 It was initially thought to be endogenous hyperinsulinemia from increased β-cell mass hyperfunctioning islet cells; however, the current thinking is that the recalcitrant symptoms of hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia after RYGB are related to the anatomic and physiologic changes and not from an inherent change in β-cell mass. One candidate mediator of increased insulin secretion in PGBH is GLP-1, a peptide released from intestinal neuroendocrine L-cells in response to meals. Consistent with this hypothesis, postprandial GLP-1 levels  are increased by over tenfold in post-RYGB patients, are higher in those with hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia and neuroglyco-penia, and correlate inversely with postprandial glucose lev-els.266 PGBH needs to be distinguished from other forms of hypoglycemia such as other functional β-cell disorders such as noninsulinoma pancreatogenous hypoglycemia, insulinoma, reactive hypoglycemia, or early or late dumping syndrome. It is possible that PGBH is a spectrum of hypoglycemia with late dumping being on the end of the spectrum that is more respon-sive to dietary changes alone while more severe PGBH can be associated with severe symptoms.263 First-line therapeutic approaches to PGBH include medical nutrition therapy aimed at reducing intake of high glycemic index carbohydrates and premeal treatment with acarbose. Additional therapies that may be considered include octreotide, diazoxide, calcium channel blockers, GLP-1 receptor antagonists, and providing nutrition solely through a gastrostomy tube placed into the bypassed duo-denum. Reversal of gastric bypass is not uniformly successful, suggesting the importance of underlying genetics and/or com-pensatory mechanisms that may persist after surgical reversal.266 Finally, although pancreatic resection was initially employed for patients with life-threatening hypoglycemia, this procedure Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   120423/02/19   2:21 PM 1205THE SURGICAL MANAGEMENT OF OBESITYCHAPTER 27is not uniformly successful in remitting hypoglycemia and should not be considered for the majority of patients, who can experience improvement in their symptoms with a combination of medical approaches. A 2017 American Society of Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery (ASMBS) position statement provides a comprehensive summary of this topic and also recommends this multimodal medical approach.267There is data to suggest that babies born to women follow-ing bariatric surgery are at risk for certain complications. In a Swedish study, bariatric surgery was originally associated with reduced risks of gestational diabetes and excessive fetal growth, shorter gestation, and an increased risk of small-for-gestational-age infants. In a later follow-up report, this same group reported a significant association between a history of bariatric surgery and an increased risk of preterm birth and spontaneous preterm birth, in particular.119,268There is also emerging data from observational studies that some bariatric procedures may be associated with a greater long-term risk of substance and alcohol use disorders, suicide, and nutritional deficiencies. Pharmacokinetic studies indicate that after LRYGB and SG, the anatomic changes lead to very rapid absorption of alcohol and marked increases in blood alco-hol concentrations for a single small.269,270 In the SOS study, RYGB was associated with increased alcohol consumption and an increase in alcohol abuse events (HR: 4.9) over 20 years.196 Similarly in the LABS study, alcohol use disorders were found to be more common in the second postoperative year (9.6%) in those undergoing RYGB compared to before surgery (7.6%). Risk factors for alcohol use disorders included male gender, younger age, and preoperative smoking or alcohol use.271 At 7-year follow-up in LABS, there was a progressive and sig-nificant increase over time in the prevalence of regular alcohol consumption for both RYGB and LAGB. In addition, alcohol use disorders, illicit drug use, and treatment for substance use disorders, increased over the 7-year period for RYGB only.272 Overall, these rates were high, with 20% of RYGB participants reporting incident alcohol use disorder symptoms within 5 years of surgery.In addition, there may be an increased risk for suicide273-275 following bariatric surgery, although the etiology is unclear and the data is varied and complex to interpret.276 The Utah mortality study showed a 58% increase in all non–disease-related causes of death in the RYGB group compared to the matched control population, including a small but significant increase in suicides, accidents, and intentional poisonings.202 Similar findings were observed in the second Utah Obesity Study.203 An observational study using Pennsylvania state data found that suicide rates were 13.7 per 10,000 among men and 5.2 per 10,000 among women among postbariatric surgery patients in Pennsylvania over 10 years, which were both significantly higher than age and sex-matched rates in the United States. In addition, the majority (70%) of these deaths occurred in the first 3 years following surgery when clinical follow-up is incomplete.277Finally, there is evidence that vitamin and micronutrient deficiencies are common following bariatric surgery including calcium, vitamin D, iron, zinc, and copper, and others. Guide-lines suggest that all patients should be screened for deficiencies preoperatively as some deficiencies predate the surgical pro-cedure (see “Follow-Up Postoperative Care”). After surgery, patients must be provided daily nutritional supplementation and undergo routine long-term monitoring for deficiencies (see Table 27-4). Data continue to suggest that the prevalence of micronutrient deficiencies is increasing, while monitoring is decreasing. Aside from these recommendations, there is insuf-ficient evidence currently regarding optimal dietary and nutri-tional management following bariatric procedures, including how to treat some of the specific complications of bariatric operations such as chronic nausea and vomiting, hypoglyce-mic episodes, failed weight loss, and anastomotic ulcers and strictures.1,278-280REOPERATIVE (REVISION AND CONVERSION) BARIATRIC SURGERYIntroductionSurgical treatments for chronic diseases such as obesity often require additional or revisional surgical procedures when the primary procedure did not sufficiently treat the underly-ing disease. This is true in joint replacements when treating osteo-arthritis, coronary-artery bypass graft surgeries when treating coronary artery disease, and bariatric surgery in the treatment of obesity.281 Additionally, we suspect that obesity is a heteroge-neous disorder282 and is therefore being treated with a variety of procedures with different mechanisms of action.63 Given this, it is not surprising that some patients are “treatment failures” with respect to improvements in weight, comorbidities, and quality of life. Also, older bariatric surgical procedures such as the jejunal-ileal bypass, the VBG, and early gastric bypass procedures (which utilized a horizontal and/or partitioned stomach) require revision because of a higher complication rate.283,284 Initial bariatric sur-gery cases have averaged greater than 150,000 cases per year for the last 15 years.285 For these reasons, reoperative bariatric sur-gery has become increasingly prevalent over the last decade. Despite its increasing prevalence, there are challenges in assess-ing the frequency and effectiveness of these procedures. Reopera-tive bariatric surgery has been difficult to categorize meaningfully and to quantify due to the multiple procedure codes, many with little specificity. Reports in the literature range from 5% to 50% depending on the primary procedure.283Multiple retrospective, as well as case-matched and case-controlled studies of revisional bariatric surgery, demonstrate they are effective with benefits to weight loss and overall health,281,283 although this is not without some controversy. The literature supports reoperative bariatric surgery in two situa-tions: treatments of insufficient weight loss or weight regain and the treatment of acute and chronic complications.281,285 There are many revisional procedures and approaches that are effective. There is no data-driven evidence to guide in the selection of which patient will benefit most from revisional bariatric surgery.  Additionally, there is no evidence-based consensus as to which revisional surgical approach is most optimal in any given situa-tion.283 Currently, there is also little evidence as to which bariat-ric surgical procedure will be efficacious for any specific given patient.286,287Principles and Preoperative EvaluationAs with any other decisions for surgery, revisional or addi-tional bariatric surgery requires evaluating the risks and the benefits of the procedure for specific patient situations. It has been observed that the weight loss following revisional pro-cedures is less than with a primary procedure.288 Reoperations in general are associated with morbidity and mortality that is  higher than with primary bariatric procedures281,288,289 but are acceptably low if careful selection of patients is coupled with 9Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   120523/02/19   2:21 PM 1206SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIadequate surgeon experience.281,290 Reoperative bariatric surgery should be undertaken by experienced bariatric surgeons in cen-ters with the wide range of medical resources to manage these complex patients.281 In some situations, it is reasonable to con-sider a two-stage or an open vs. laparoscopic approach.285 When evaluating a patient for revisional bariatric surgery, it is most important to establish clearly the reason for revision.283,291 Is the issue a surgical complication, insufficient weight loss, or weight regain? Is there a discernable anatomic cause for the patient’s symptoms (e.g., abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, heartburn or reflux, nutritional deficiency)? In situations of noninitial weight loss or weight regain, what is the best justification that can be made? Are there behavioral, or other nonsurgical modifications that might significantly help to attain further weight loss? Will the patient be able to set into place the behavioral modification required of the revisional surgical approach? With consideration for revision, it is reasonable to place less emphasis on absolute weight loss and focus on the comorbidity and quality of life states. A comprehensive preoperative evaluation is required to fully answer these and other questions.The preoperative evaluation for bariatric surgical revision should include•	Review of the initial surgical operative note to understand the exact initial procedure•	Anatomic evaluation of the GI track utilizing upper gastroin-testinal endoscopy and radiology to identify known bariatric surgical complications•	An extensive nutritional evaluation•	A behavioral health evaluation with a focus on the adaption to the initial bariatric procedure and potential adaptation to a revisional procedure•	A full medical evaluation to determine the patient’s suitability to undergo anesthesia and a surgical procedure288,291The results from these evaluations are used to formulate a hypothesis to explain the patient’s symptoms and outcome from the initial procedure and to assess their suitability for and the potential benefits from the potential revisional surgical options. It will come down to a risk-benefit discussion between the sur-geon, other members of the multidisciplinary support team, and the patient.281Treatment for Insufficient Weight Loss or Weight RegainVertical Banded Gastroplasty. Reversal of VBG is associ-ated with significant weight gain. Revision of the VBG to a re-VBG was associated with poor outcomes.292 VBGs have been safely converted with open and laparoscopic approaches to RYGB and SG.293-295 Conversion of VBG to BPD/DS pro-cedures has limited data with higher leak rate and mortality.296Adjustable Gastric Band. There are increasing reports of LAGB failure and disappointing weight loss over the last decade.289,297,298 Removal of the band without an additional bar-iatric procedure has been associated with significant weight regain.289 Repositioning or replacement of the band is techni-cally possible; however, the long-term weight loss outcomes are mixed.299-301 When converting an LAGB to another bariatric pro-cedure, there is some evidence to suggest possibly fewer com-plications with a two-step approach when significant adhesions or a thick gastric capsule are present. This two-step approach would include removal of the band, allowing 3 to 6 months for gastric tissue healing, and then completing the conver-sion.302,303 However, one-stage conversions have been reported with acceptable outcomes.297 Good outcomes have been dem-onstrated with conversion of LAGBs to SG, RYGB, and BPD/DS.285,297 Several investigators advocate that a failed restrictive bariatric surgery due to poor weight loss should include a revi-sion option with a malabsorptive component.285Sleeve Gastrectomy. Approximately 5% to 10% of primary SG procedures have been reported to require revision for poor weight loss outcomes.304,305 The literature supports conversion to RYGB and BPD/DS.306 There is controversy regarding resleeve gastrectomy.307,308Roux-en-Y Gastric Bypass. Approximately, 10% to 20 % of patients after a primary RYGB will have inadequate weight loss or weight regain at 2 years, and a subset of these will require a revisional surgical procedure.309 Options for revision include banding over the Roux-en-Y bypass, gastric pouch and gas-trojejunal revisions, RYGB limb lengthening, and conversion to a duodenal switch.281,285 Each of these options has strengths and weaknesses in specific situations. Endoscopic revisions to reduce the gastric pouch and/or gastrojejunal stomal size have been shown to arrest weight gain with short-term weight loss, but the studies have been small and are noncontrolled.Treatment of Surgical ComplicationsVertical Banded Gastroplasty. Several complications have been indications for revision/conversion of VBGs: wide outlet, pouch dilation, staple line erosion, stoma stenosis, band erosion, band dehiscence, and GERD. Most often conversion is under-taken, and VBGs have been safely converted to RYGB.281,285Adjustable Gastric Band. The following LAGB complica-tions may require additional or revisional surgery: early band obstruction, severe or chronic gastric prolapse or symmetrical gastroesophageal dilatation, band erosion, port and tubing prob-lems, severe or persistent esophageal dysmotility, or psycho-logical intolerance to restriction of band. The literature supports repair of tubing and port problems and revision of LAGB to SG, RYGB, BPD/DS in oneor two-stage revisional operations.285,297Sleeve Gastrectomy. Complications that may require a revi-sional procedure after sleeve gastrectomy are staple line leaks, sleeve stricture and sleeve dilatation, and gastroesophageal reflux. Obstruction due to stricture usually at the angularis inci-sura will require first-line treatment of endoscopic dilation and may require a revision to a RYGB. Staple line leaks are ini-tially controlled with endoscopic stenting or drainage. Acute and chronic leaks may develop into fistulous disease and require conversion to RYGB. Persistent gastroesophageal reflux may also require conversion to RYGB.281,285Roux-en-Y Gastric Bypass. Several complications after pri-mary RYGB have been demonstrated as indications for revi-sional surgery: gastric pouch dilatation, gastrojejunostomy dilation/stricture, marginal ulcers, bowel loss due to internal hernia or volvulus, roux stasis syndrome, gastrogastric fistu-las, anastomotic structures or ulcers, and metabolic/endocrine derangements. These require a revision focused on the mecha-nism of the complication. Reversal of an RYGB is reserved for severe instances of intractable nausea/vomiting, extreme weight loss and malnutrition, metabolic abnormalities, nonhealing ulceration or leaks, and patient choice. It has been performed rarely, and case reports indicate successful resolution of endo-crine, metabolic, and nutritional abnormalities with improved Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   120623/02/19   2:21 PM 1207THE SURGICAL MANAGEMENT OF OBESITYCHAPTER 27metabolic parameters. However, 50% to 88% of patients have been reported to regain significant weight.281,285Biliopancreatic Diversion With Duodenal Switch. Acute complications are similar to RYGB and treated the same. The most severe chronic complication is protein-calorie malnutri-tion, and incidence ranges from 1% to 6%. Management is meticulous nutritional evaluation and nutritional and pancreatic enzyme support, with surgery as a fall back if weight and pro-tein stores are not stabilized. Surgery would entail lengthening the common channel and is rarely necessary.281SPECIAL ISSUES IN BARIATRIC SURGERYBariatric Procedures in AdolescentsThe major controversy with regard to adolescents undergoing bariatric surgery includes the general aversion to subjecting an adolescent to surgery as well as the concern for the second-ary side effects of bariatric surgery on remaining growth and development. Clearly the younger the patient, the more relevant the latter concern becomes. Bariatric surgery in adolescents has been performed more frequently, with only 800 cases a year in 2003 increasing to 1600 cases in 2009, but overall rates are much lower than in adults.310,311 Much of the clinical outcomes data have been extrapolated from the adult literature, and more evidence is needed to demonstrate whether weight loss is dura-ble over time, the impact on obesity-related conditions such as T2DM, hypertension, and others, and how often patients experi-ence shortand longer-term complications.A meta-analysis involving 131 adolescents undergoing bariatric surgery demonstrated a 17.8 to 22.3 kg/m2 decrease in BMI after RYGB.312 They also observed improvement of hyper-tension in more than half the patients and sleep apnea resolution in all 131 patients. There were four mortalities in this cohort, but only one of them was potentially associated with the pro-cedure (Clostridium difficile colitis 9 months after operation). Morbidity in the adolescent literature ranges from 0% to 38%. The most common complication in the meta-analysis was nutri-ent deficiencies. The ASMBS pediatric guidelines suggest using BMI criteria similar to the adult population but with some modi-fications to comorbidity thresholds.313 They recommend con-sidering surgery in patients with a BMI of 35 kg/m2 or greater with major comorbidities (e.g., T2DM, severe nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, OSA) or a BMI of ≥40 kg/m2 or greater with minor comorbidities (e.g., hypertension, dyslipidemia, insulin resistance). One more recent multicenter, prospective study of bariatric surgery in adolescents, the Teen-Longitudinal Assess-ment of Bariatric Surgery (Teen-LABS) study, is following 242 adolescent patients for at least 10 years, who underwent bariatric surgery at 5 academic centers.314 Fifty-one percent of adolescents had four or more major comorbid conditions before surgery. LRYGB, SG, and LAGB were performed in 66%, 28%, and 6% of patients, respectively. There were no deaths during the initial hospitalization or within 30 days of operation; major complications such as reoperation were reported in 19 patients (8%). Minor complications such as dehydration were reported in 15%. All reoperations and 85% of readmissions in the 30-day period were related to the bariatric surgery.315 Three-year  follow-up data on the Teen-LABS cohort reported a mean weight loss of 28% for LRYGB and 26% for SG. Remission of T2DM occurred in 95% of participants who had had the con-dition before surgery, remission of abnormal kidney function occurred in 86%, remission of prediabetes in 76%, remission of elevated blood pressure in 74%, and remission of dyslipidemia in 66%. Rates of improvements in comorbid conditions, includ-ing T2DM, occurred at higher rates than in adults. Hypofer-ritinemia was found in 57% of the participants, and 13% of the participants had undergone one or more additional intraabdomi-nal procedures at 3 years.52 So despite the clinically significant improvements in weight, diabetes, cardiometabolic health, and weight-related quality of life that were observed at 3 years fol-lowing surgery, the reoperation and micronutrient risks warrant longer observation and further study.Cost EffectivenessIn a Canadian study, including five systematic reviews, two eco-nomic evaluations, two reviews of guidelines, and six primary evidence-based guidelines, the cost effectiveness for the use of bariatric surgery in adolescents was reviewed.316 The limited available evidence suggested superior weight loss, resolution of comorbidities compared to nonsurgical interventions, and potential superior weight loss with RYGB compared to other procedures. Cost-effectiveness data was lacking, but limited evidence suggested that bariatric surgery was cost effective several years after intervention, but not immediately.316 A U.S. cost-effectiveness analysis of bariatric surgery in adolescents has been published. In addition to the cost of the surgery, peri-operative mortality, complications, and quality of life improve-ment were included in the modelled analysis. By the fifth year of follow-up, bariatric surgery was found to be cost effective in adolescent patients when compared to a cohort of patients with obesity who had not undergone surgery.317For adults, the overall impact of bariatric surgery to reduce expenditures sufficiently to achieve cost savings continues to be debated. In a Canadian matched cohort study prior to the laparoscopic era, it was shown that bariatric surgery decreases long-term direct healthcare costs and the initial costs of surgery can be amortized over 3.5 years.318 In two observational studies, bariatric surgery was shown to be cost saving over a relatively short period of time.319,320 In more recent observational studies, including the large SOS study and another an analysis of 30,000 single payor enrollees in the United States, show no evidence of overall cost savings.206,321,322In general, review of the evidence to date suggests that outpatient costs, including pharmacy costs, are significantly reduced after bariatric surgery. However, long-term inpatient hospital costs are increased or unchanged in those who have undergone bariatric surgery compared with matched nonsurgi-cal patients, so no long-term net cost benefit is achieved. Other modeled cost effectiveness studies are consistent with these results as well.323,324 So it is likely that bariatric procedures are cost effective, but do not produce cost savings, compared with nonsurgical treatments.Quality AssuranceBetween 1998 and 2003, with emergence of the laparoscopic technique for bariatric surgery, there was rapid increase in the number bariatric surgical procedures performed. With bariatric surgeons becoming accustomed to laparoscopic techniques and laparoscopic surgeons learning bariatric procedures and patient care, there were realistic concerns regarding the safety of bar-iatric surgery.325 In 2004, ASMBS utilized the volume-outcome concept of centers of excellence and developed the first bar-iatric surgical accreditation program, ASMBS-Center of Excel-lence (COE). In 2005, the American College of Surgeons (ACS) initiated the ACS Bariatric Surgery Center Network (BSCN).  Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   120723/02/19   2:21 PM 1208SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIThese accreditation programs verified that bariatric surgery centers had the infrastructure and equipment to care for the morbidly obese, experienced and qualified surgeons and staff, appropriate preand postoperative processes in place, and reported outcome data on all surgical cases.325In 2012, these two bariatric surgical accreditations merged into a single unified program, the Metabolic and Bar-iatric Surgery Accreditation and Quality Improvement Program (MBSAQIP). The MBSAQIP has continued to grant accredita-tion only after a rigorous review process during which a center proves that it can maintain certain physical resources, human resources, and standards of practice.326 Additionally, prospec-tive outcome data is collected at the clinical center and validated based on standardized definitions and submitted to the quality improvement program. Centers receive back risk-stratified anal-ysis of their data as a means to compare with the national statis-tics/standards and are then required to utilize the data in quality improvement projects at their center. This newer focus on qual-ity improvement over centers of excellence will likely continue to improve the quality of bariatric surgery in the United States. Recently, in a systematic review, bariatric facility accreditation by this program has been associated with improved outcomes (length of stay, mortality, morbidity).327Plastic Surgery After Weight LossPatients who have undergone bariatric surgery are often left with skin and subcutaneous tissue deformities. Additional prob-lems include skin rashes and maceration under folds in the pan-nus, thighs, and breasts; body odor; and poorly fitting clothes. Excess skin can also be a limiting factor in exercise and sexual activity. Plastic and reconstructive surgery is now a part of the continuum of care for bariatric surgery patients. Reconstructive surgery requires careful preoperative planning and is based on the patient’s deformities and priorities. Timing of plastic and reconstructive surgery is typically deferred until weight sta-bility at approximately 1 to 2 years postoperatively to ensure improved healing. Excess tissue of the lower torso is the most common area for which patients undergo surgical intervention and a standard abdominoplasty is typically performed. More radical body contouring can include a circumferential abdomi-noplasty and lower body lift.328,329 This procedure involves excision of tissue from the buttocks and lateral thighs, with skin undermining down the thighs. Circumferential abdomino-plasty removes redundant skin of the lower abdomen, flattens the abdomen, and incorporates the lower body lift. It requires central undermining to the xiphoid and minimal lateral under-mining of the superior flap. The central abdominal fascia often requires imbrication. If simultaneous abdominal hernia repair is performed, this performs the function of fascial imbrication by creating a repair with some degree of fascial tension. The closure of the superior flap to the inferior skin edge incorporates lateral tension to narrow the waist and advance the anterolateral thighs. Medial thighplasty also may be needed for patients with significant excess medial thigh skin.Mid-back and epigastric deformity, along with sagging breasts, are corrected with an upper body lift. The upper body lift is a reverse abdominoplasty, removal of mid-torso excessive skin, and reshaping of the breasts. For highly selected individu-als, and with a well-organized team, a single-stage total body lift, which includes a circumferential abdominoplasty, lower body lift, medial thighplasty, an upper body lift, and breast reshap-ing, can be performed safely in under 8 hours (Figs. 27-30 and  27-31).330 Increasing numbers of patients are seeking these cor-rective procedures, and data about the results is evolving. There Figure 27-30. Preoperative frontal, right lateral, and left anterior oblique views of a 36-year-old, 150-lb (68-kg) 5'6" woman who lost  120 lb (54 kg) 2 years after laparoscopic Roux-en-Y bypass procedure. She desired a one-stage total body lift and bilateral brachioplasties, which were performed in the manner described in the text. (Used with permission from Dennis Hurwitz, MD, Clinical Professor of Plastic Surgery, University of Pittsburgh.)Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   120823/02/19   2:21 PM 1209THE SURGICAL MANAGEMENT OF OBESITYCHAPTER 27Figure 27-31. Frontal, right lateral, and left anterior oblique views 6 weeks after surgery for the woman in Fig. 27-24. The scars indicate the circumferential abdominoplasty, lower body lift, upper body lift, breast reshaping, and autoaugmentation through a keyhole pattern and bilateral brachioplasties. All redundant skin has been removed, leaving well-positioned scars and feminine features. (Used with permission from Dennis Hurwitz, MD, Clinical Professor of Plastic Surgery, University of Pittsburgh.)is a hypothesis that if body image is improved with corrective surgery, that weight maintenance in the longer-term may also be positively affected. Several matched controlled studies suggest that plastic surgery after bariatric surgery may improve long-term weight loss results.328,331FUTURE IMPORTANT QUESTIONSThe volume and quality of literature in the field of bariatric sur-gery has grown tremendously in the last 10 years. High-quality evidence now shows that bariatric surgical procedures result in greater weight loss than nonsurgical treatments, improved sur-vival, and are more effective at inducing remission of T2DM in people with obesity. More information is still needed about the long-term durability of comorbid health improvements and long-term complications after each of the different bar-iatric surgical procedures. In addition, the underlying specific mechanism(s) of action for both bariatric and metabolic surgery is still incompletely understood. Future knowledge will come from translational human studies, the ongoing longer-term stud-ies and data registries, randomized studies comparing surgical to nonsurgical treatments, integrated health care systems data, and national “big data” networks. The following are some of the high-priority questions that future research will address.•	What are the specific mechanisms of action responsible for weight loss and the T2DM response to bariatric surgical procedures?•	What patient level factors can predict success with weight loss, health improvements, and cost savings after bariatric surgical procedures? Understanding preand postsurgery predictors will help to tailor an individual’s treatment.•	Is bariatric surgery more effective than nonsurgical care for the longer-term treatment of T2DM in people with less severe obesity (class 1 obesity, BMI <35)?•	With more standardized reporting of complications across bariatric studies, what are the long-term complication rates after different bariatric procedures?•	What is the effect of bariatric surgery on long-term microvas-cular and macrovascular event rates?•	What are the reproductive and mental health outcomes includ-ing risk for self-harm and suicide, alcohol use disorders, sub-stance abuse, and other risk-taking behaviors?REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Arterburn DE, Courcoulas AP. Bariatric surgery for obesity and metabolic conditions in adults. BMJ. 2014;349:g3961.	2.	Kremen AJ, Linner JH, Nelson CH. An experimental evalua-tion of the nutritional importance of proximal and distal small intestine. Ann Surg. 1954;140(3):439-448.	3.	Mason EE, Ito C. Gastric bypass. Ann Surg. 1969;170(3): 329-339.	4.	Griffen WO Jr, Young VL, Stevenson CC. A prospective comparison of gastric and jejunoileal bypass procedures for morbid obesity. Ann Surg. 1977;186(4):500-509.	5.	Mason EE. Vertical banded gastroplasty for obesity. Arch Surg. 1982;117(5):701-706.	6.	Brolin RE, Robertson LB, Kenler HA, Cody RP. Weight loss and dietary intake after vertical banded gastroplasty and  Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. Ann Surg. 1994;220(6):782-790.	7.	Waaddegaard P, Clemmesen T, Jess P. Vertical gastric banding for morbid obesity: a long-term follow-up study. Eur J Surg. 2002;168(4):220-222.Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   120923/02/19   2:21 PM 1210SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	8.	Balsiger BM, Poggio JL, Mai J, Kelly KA, Sarr MG. Ten and more years after vertical banded gastroplasty as pri-mary operation for morbid obesity. J Gastrointest Surg. 2000;4(6):598-605.	9.	Scopinaro N, Gianetta E, Civalleri D, Bonalumi U, Bachi V. Bilio-pancreatic bypass for obesity: II. Initial experience in man. Br J Surg. 1979;66(9):618-620.	10.	Hess DS, Hess DW. Biliopancreatic diversion with a duodenal switch. Obes Surg. 1998;8(3):267-282.	11.	Belachew M, Legrand MJ, Defechereux TH, Burtheret MP,  Jacquet N. Laparoscopic adjustable silicone gastric band-ing in the treatment of morbid obesity. A preliminary report.  Surg Endosc. 1994;8(11):1354-1356.	12.	Wittgrove AC, Clark GW, Tremblay LJ. Laparoscopic gastric bypass, Roux-en-Y: preliminary report of five cases. Obes Surg. 1994;4(4):353-357.	13.	Reames BN, Finks JF, Bacal D, Carlin AM, Dimick JB. Changes in bariatric surgery procedure use in Michigan,  2006-2013. JAMA. 2014;312(9):959-961.	14.	Angrisani L, Santonicola A, Iovino P, et al. Bariatric surgery and endoluminal procedures: IFSO worldwide survey 2014. Obes Surg. 2017;27(9):2279-2289.	15.	Shimizu H, Timratana P, Schauer PR, Rogula T. Review of metabolic surgery for type 2 diabetes in patients with a BMI <35 kg/m2. J Obes. 2012;2012:147256.	16.	Rubino F, Nathan DM, Eckel RH, et al. Metabolic surgery in the treatment algorithm for type 2 diabetes: a joint statement by international diabetes organizations. Diabet Care. 2016;39(6):861-877. This paper summarizes the most recent Diabetes Surgery Summit (DSS-II) conclusions for which three rounds of Delphi-like questionnaires were used to measure consensus for 32 data-based conclusions. Based on the evidence, bariatric/metabolic surgery was recommended to treat Type 2 diabetes in patients with Class III obesity (BMI≥40 kg/m2) and in those with Class II obesity (BMI 35.0-39.9 kg/m2) when hyperglycemia is inadequately controlled by lifestyle and optimal medical therapy. Surgery should also be considered for patients with T2D and BMI 30.0-34.9 kg/m2 (Class I obesity) if hyperglycemia is inadequately controlled despite optimal medical treatment.	17.	Stefater MA, Wilson-Perez HE, Chambers AP, Sandoval  DA, Seeley RJ. All bariatric surgeries are not created equal: insights from mechanistic comparisons. Endocr Rev.  2012;33(4):595-622. This paper is a review of what is known from published animal and human studies about the underlying basic mechanisms of effect of each of  3 most common surgical procedures. This review forms the basis of why research has shifted away from anatomic characterizations of the bariatric procedures as either “restrictive” or “malabsorptive” in nature, towards the physiology of common metabolic changes.	18.	World Health Organization. Obesity and overweight. Avail-able at: http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs311/en/. Accessed June 13, 2018.	19.	Mokdad AH, Marks JS, Stroup DF, Gerberding JL. Actual causes of death in the United States, 2000. JAMA. 2004;291(10):1238-1245.	20.	Flegal KM, Kruszon-Moran D, Carroll MD, Fryar CD, Ogden CL. Trends in obesity among adults in the United States, 2005 to 2014. JAMA. 2016;315(21):2284-2291.	21.	Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Lawman HG, et al. Trends in obesity prevalence among children and adolescents in the United States, 1988-1994 through 2013-2014. JAMA. 2016;315(21):2292-2299.	22.	Heymsfield SB, Wadden TA. Mechanisms, pathophysiology, and management of obesity. N Engl J Med. 2017;376(3):254-266.	23.	Bray MS LR, McCaffery JM, et al. NIH working group report—using genomic information to guide weight management: from universal to precision treatment. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2016;24(1):14-22.	24.	Pigeyre M, Yazdi FT, Kaur Y, Meyre D. Recent progress in genetics, epigenetics and metagenomics unveils the pathophysiology of human obesity. Clin Sci. 2016;130(12): 943-986.	25.	Shen W, Wang Z, Punyanita M, et al. Adipose tissue quanti-fication by imaging methods: a proposed classification. Obes Res. 2003;11(1):5-16.	26.	Tchkonia T, Thomou T, Zhu Y, et al. Mechanisms and meta-bolic implications of regional differences among fat depots. Cell Metab. 2013;17(5):644-656.	27.	Hall JE, da Silva AA, do Carmo JM, et al. Obesity-induced hypertension: role of sympathetic nervous system, leptin, and melanocortins. J Biol Chem. 2010;285(23):17271-17276.	28.	Ashrafian H, Toma T, Rowland SP, et al. Bariatric surgery  or non-surgical weight loss for obstructive sleep apnoea?  A systematic review and comparison of meta-analyses.  Obes Surg. 2015;25(7):1239-1250.	29.	Goldring MB, Otero M. Inflammation in osteoarthritis.  Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2011;23(5):471-478.	30.	Hampel H, Abraham NS, El-Serag HB. Meta-analysis: obesity and the risk for gastroesophageal reflux disease and its com-plications. Ann Intern Med. 2005;143(3):199-211.	31.	Berkowitz RI, Fabricatore AN. Obesity, psychiatric status, and psychiatric medications. Psychiatr Clin North Amer. 2011;34(4):747-764.	32.	Mitchell JE, Selzer F, Kalarchian MA, et al. Psychopathology before surgery in the longitudinal assessment of bariatric surgery-3 (LABS-3) psychosocial study. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2012;8(5):533-541.	33.	Wadden TA, Sarwer DB. Behavioral assessment of candidates for bariatric surgery: a patient-oriented approach. Obesity. 2006;14(suppl 2):53S-62S.	34.	Garvey WT, Mechanick JI, Brett EM, et al. American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists and American College of Endocrinology comprehensive clinical practice guidelines for medical care of patients with obesity. Endocr Pract.  2016;22(suppl 3):1-203.	35.	American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on practice guidelines OEP. Expert panel report: guidelines (2013) for the management of overweight and  obesity in adults. Obesity. 2014;22(suppl 2):S41-S410.	36.	Look ARG, Pi-Sunyer X, Blackburn G, et al. Reduction in weight and cardiovascular disease risk factors in individuals with type 2 diabetes: one-year results of the look AHEAD trial. Diabet Care. 2007;30(6):1374-1383.	37.	Look ARG, Wing RR. Long-term effects of a lifestyle intervention on weight and cardiovascular risk factors in individuals with type 2 diabetes mellitus: four-year results of the Look AHEAD trial. Arch Intern Med. 2010;170(17): 1566-1575.	38.	Look ARG, Wing RR, Bolin P, et al. Cardiovascular effects of intensive lifestyle intervention in type 2 diabetes. N England J Med. 2013;369(2):145-154.	39.	Knowler WC, Barrett-Connor E, Fowler SE, et al. Reduction in the incidence of type 2 diabetes with lifestyle intervention or metformin. N England J Med. 2002;346(6):393-403.	40.	Teixeira PJ, Silva MN, Coutinho SR, et al. Mediators of weight loss and weight loss maintenance in middle-aged women. Obesity. 2010;18(4):725-735.	41.	Apovian CM, Aronne LJ, Bessesen DH, et al. Pharmacological  management of obesity: an Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015;100(2): 342-362.	42.	Yanovski SZ, Yanovski JA. Long-term drug treatment for obesity: a systematic and clinical review. JAMA. 2014; 311(1):74-86.Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   121023/02/19   2:21 PM 1211THE SURGICAL MANAGEMENT OF OBESITYCHAPTER 27	43.	Pi-Sunyer X, Astrup A, Fujioka K, et al. A randomized, controlled trial of 3.0 mg of liraglutide in weight management.  N England J Med. 2015;373(1):11-22.	44.	Davidson MH, Hauptman J, DiGirolamo M, et al. Weight control and risk factor reduction in obese subjects treated for 2 years with orlistat: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 1999;281(3):235-242.	45.	Smith SR, Weissman NJ, Anderson CM, et al. Multicenter, placebo-controlled trial of lorcaserin for weight management. N England J Med. 2010;363(3):245-256.	46.	Gadde KM, Allison DB, Ryan DH, et al. Effects of low-dose, controlled-release, phentermine plus topiramate combination on weight and associated comorbidities in overweight and obese adults (CONQUER): a randomised, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2011;377(9774):1341-1352.	47.	Apovian CM, Aronne L, Rubino D, et al. A randomized, phase 3 trial of naltrexone SR/bupropion SR on weight and obesity-related risk factors (COR-II). Obesity. 2013;21(5):935-943.	48.	Khera R, Murad MH, Chandar AK, et al. Association of pharmacological treatments for obesity with weight loss and adverse events: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA. 2016;315(22):2424-2434.	49.	ASMBS. Estimate of bariatric surgery numbers, 2011-2016. Available at: https://asmbs.org/resources/estimate-of-bariatric-surgery-numbers. Accessed June 13, 2018.	50.	Ponce J, DeMaria EJ, Nguyen NT, Hutter M, Sudan R, Morton JM. American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery estimation of bariatric surgery procedures in 2015 and surgeon workforce in the United States. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2016;12(9):1637-1639.	51.	NIH conference. Gastrointestinal surgery for severe obesity. Consensus Development Conference Panel. Ann Intern Med. 1991;115(12):956-961.	52.	Inge TH, Courcoulas AP, Jenkins TM, et al. Weight loss and health status 3 years after bariatric surgery in adolescents.  N England J Med. 2016;374(2):113-123.	53.	Giordano S, Victorzon M. Laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass is effective and safe in over 55-year-old patients:  a comparative analysis. World J Surg. 2014;38(5):1121-1126.	54.	Giordano S, Victorzon M. Bariatric surgery in elderly patients: a systematic review. Clin Interv Aging. 2015;10:1627-1635.	55.	Casillas RA, Kim B, Fischer H, Zelada Getty JL, Um SS,  Coleman KJ. Comparative effectiveness of sleeve gastrectomy versus Roux-en-Y gastric bypass for weight loss and safety outcomes in older adults. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2017; 13(9):1476-1483.	56.	Flum DR, Salem L, Elrod JA, Dellinger EP, Cheadle A, Chan L.  Early mortality among Medicare beneficiaries undergoing bar-iatric surgical procedures. JAMA. 2005;294(15):1903-1908.	57.	Davidson LE, Adams TD, Kim J, et al. Association of patient age at gastric bypass surgery with long-term all-cause and cause-specific mortality. JAMA. 2016;151(7):631-637.	58.	Mechanick JI, Youdim A, Jones DB, et al. Clinical practice guidelines for the perioperative nutritional, metabolic, and nonsurgical support of the bariatric surgery patient—2013 update: cosponsored by American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists, the Obesity Society, and American Soci-ety for Metabolic & Bariatric Surgery. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2013;9(2):159-191.	59.	Flum DR, Belle SH, King WC, et al. Perioperative safety in the longitudinal assessment of bariatric surgery.  N England J Med. 2009;361(5):445-454. This is a 30 day safety paper from the Longitudinal Assessment of Bariatric Surgery (LABS-1) study. It is a definitive paper on the morbidity and mortality of bariatric surgery from a multi-center and carefully studied cohort of patients undergoing bariatric surgery. The 30-day mortality was 0.3% for all procedures with a major adverse outcome rate [a pre-defined composite endpoint that included; death, venous thromboembolism, re-intervention (percutaneous, endoscopic, or operative), or failure to be discharged from the hospital in 30 days] of 4.1%.	60.	Cummings BP, Strader AD, Stanhope KL, et al. Ileal inter-position surgery improves glucose and lipid metabolism and delays diabetes onset in the UCD-T2DM rat. Gastroenterology.  2010;138(7):2437-2446, 2446 e2431.	61.	Rubino F, Gagner M, Gentileschi P, et al. The early effect of the Roux-en-Y gastric bypass on hormones involved in body weight regulation and glucose metabolism. Ann Surg. 2004;240(2):236-242.	62.	Strader AD, Vahl TP, Jandacek RJ, Woods SC, D’Alessio DA, Seeley RJ. Weight loss through ileal transposition is accompa-nied by increased ileal hormone secretion and synthesis in rats. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2005;288(2):E447-E453.	63.	Madsbad S, Dirksen C, Holst JJ. Mechanisms of changes in glucose metabolism and bodyweight after bariatric surgery. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2014;2(2):152-164.	64.	Ochner CN, Stice E, Hutchins E, et al. Relation between changes in neural responsivity and reductions in desire to  eat high-calorie foods following gastric bypass surgery.  Neuroscience. 2012;209:128-135.	65.	Chakravarty PD, McLaughlin E, Whittaker D, et al. Compari-son of laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding (LAGB) with other bariatric procedures; a systematic review of the ran-domised controlled trials. Surgeon. 2012;10(3):172-182.	66.	Liou AP, Paziuk M, Luevano JM, Jr., Machineni S, Turnbaugh PJ, Kaplan LM. Conserved shifts in the gut microbiota due to gastric bypass reduce host weight and adiposity. Sci Transl Med. 2013;5(178):178ra141.	67.	Sweeney TE, Morton JM. The human gut microbiome: a review of the effect of obesity and surgically induced weight loss. JAMA Surg. 2013;148(6):563-569.	68.	Jones N. Gut-microbe swap helps mice shed weight. Bacte-ria transplant provides some of the benefits of gastric bypass surgery without the surgery. Nature. 2013 Mar. doi:10.1038/nature.2013.12688. JNG-mshmswBtpsotbogbswtsNM.	69.	Woodard GA, Encarnacion B, Downey JR, et al. Probiotics improve outcomes after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass surgery: a prospective randomized trial. J Gastro Surg. 2009;13(7):1198-1204.	70.	Kohli R, Bradley D, Setchell KD, Eagon JC, Abumrad N, Klein S. Weight loss induced by Roux-en-Y gastric bypass but not laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding increases  circulating bile acids. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013;98(4): E708-E712.	71.	Porez G, Prawitt J, Gross B, Staels B. Bile acid receptors as targets for the treatment of dyslipidemia and cardiovascular disease. J Lipid Res. 2012;53(9):1723-1737.	72.	De Giorgi S, Campos V, Egli L, et al. Long-term effects of Roux-en-Y gastric bypass on postprandial plasma lipid and bile acids kinetics in female non diabetic subjects: a cross-sectional pilot study. Clin Nutr. 2015;34(5):911-917.	73.	Kohli R, Myronovych A, Tan BK, et al. Bile acid signaling: mechanism for bariatric surgery, cure for NASH? Digest Dis. 2015;33(3):440-446.	74.	Ryan KK, Tremaroli V, Clemmensen C, et al. FXR is a molecular target for the effects of vertical sleeve gastrectomy. Nature. 2014;509(7499):183-188.	75.	Hollanda A et al. Variability of weight loss results with Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, Editorial comment. Surgery for Obesity and Related Diseases. 2014; 10: 814-821..	76.	Collaboration NCDRF. Worldwide trends in diabetes since 1980: a pooled analysis of 751 population-based studies with 4.4 million participants. Lancet. 2016;387(10027): 1513-1530.	77.	Dixon JB, O’Brien PE, Playfair J, et al. Adjustable gastric banding and conventional therapy for type 2 diabetes:  a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2008;299(3):316-323.Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   121123/02/19   2:21 PM 1212SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	78.	Schauer PR, Kashyap SR, Wolski K, et al. Bariatric surgery versus intensive medical therapy in obese patients with diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2012;366(17):1567-1576.	79.	Mingrone G, Panunzi S, De Gaetano A, et al. Bariatric surgery versus conventional medical therapy for type 2 diabetes.  N Engl J Med. 2012;366(17):1577-1585.	80.	Ikramuddin S, Korner J, Lee WJ, et al. Roux-en-Y gastric bypass vs intensive medical management for the control of type 2 diabetes, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia: the Diabetes Surgery Study randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2013;309(21):2240-2249.	81.	Cummings DE, Arterburn DE, Westbrook EO, et al. Gastric bypass surgery vs intensive lifestyle and medical intervention for type 2 diabetes: the CROSSROADS randomised controlled trial. Diabetologia. 2016;59(5):945-953.	82.	Mingrone G, Panunzi S, De Gaetano A, et al. Bariatric-metabolic surgery versus conventional medical treatment in obese patients with type 2 diabetes: 5 year follow-up of an open-label, single-centre, randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2015;386(9997):964-973. This is a randomized clinical trial comparing gastric bypass, biliopancreatic diversion, and medical treatment for the treatment of type 2 diabetes in people with obesity. It is only one of 2 randomized studies addressing this question with 5 year follow up, at this time.	83.	Halperin F, Ding SA, Simonson DC, et al. Roux-en-Y gastric bypass surgery or lifestyle with intensive medical management in patients with type 2 diabetes: feasibility and 1-year results of a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Surg. 2014;149(7): 716-726.	84.	Courcoulas AP, Goodpaster BH, Eagleton JK, et al. Surgical vs medical treatments for type 2 diabetes mellitus: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Surg. 2014;149(7):707-715.	85.	Ding SA, Simonson DC, Wewalka M, et al. Adjustable gastric band surgery or medical management in patients with type  2 diabetes: a randomized clinical trial. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015;100(7):2546-2556.	86.	Courcoulas AP, Belle SH, Neiberg RH, et al. Three-year outcomes of bariatric surgery vs lifestyle intervention for type 2 diabetes mellitus treatment: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Surg. 2015;150(10):931-940.	87.	Pories WJ, Swanson MS, MacDonald KG, et al. Who would have thought it? An operation proves to be the most effective therapy for adult-onset diabetes mellitus. Ann Surg. 1995;222(3):339-350; discussion 350-332.	88.	Saeidi N, Meoli L, Nestoridi E, et al. Reprogramming of intes-tinal glucose metabolism and glycemic control in rats after gastric bypass. Science. 2013;341(6144):406-410.	89.	Mechanick JI, Youdim A, Jones DB, et al. Clinical practice guidelines for the perioperative nutritional, metabolic, and nonsurgical support of the bariatric surgery patient—2013 update: cosponsored by American Association of Clini-cal Endocrinologists, The Obesity Society, and American  Society for Metabolic & Bariatric Surgery. Obesity. 2013;21(suppl 1):S1-S27. This is a comprehensive set of guidelines for the perioperative care of the bariatric surgery patient with references to much of the current literature sup-porting these recommendations.	90.	Pull CB. Current psychological assessment practices in obesity surgery programs: what to assess and why. Curr Opin Psychiatry. 2010;23(1):30-36.	91.	Heinberg LJ, Ashton K, Windover A. Moving beyond dichotomous psychological evaluation: the Cleveland Clinic Behavioral Rating System for weight loss surgery. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2010;6(2):185-190.	92.	Greenberg I, Sogg S, F MP. Behavioral and psychological care in weight loss surgery: best practice update. Obesity. 2009;17(5):880-884.	93.	Mahony D. Psychological assessments of bariatric sur-gery patients. Development, reliability, and exploratory factor analysis of the PsyBari. Obes Surg. 2011;21(9): 1395-1406.	94.	Fabricatore AN, Crerand CE, Wadden TA, Sarwer DB, Krasucki JL. How do mental health professionals evaluate candidates for bariatric surgery? Survey results. Obes Surg. 2006;16(5):567-573.	95.	Mitchell JE, Steffen KJ, de Zwaan M, Ertelt TW, Marino JM, Mueller A. Congruence between clinical and research-based psychiatric assessment in bariatric surgical candidates. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2010;6(6):628-634.	96.	Rasmussen JJ, Fuller WD, Ali MR. Sleep apnea syndrome is significantly underdiagnosed in bariatric surgical patients. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2012;8(5):569-573.	97.	Kolotkin RL, LaMonte MJ, Walker JM, Cloward TV, Davidson LE, Crosby RD. Predicting sleep apnea in bariatric surgery patients. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2011;7(5):605-610.	98.	Daltro C, Gregorio PB, Alves E, et al. Prevalence and severity of sleep apnea in a group of morbidly obese patients. Obes Surg. 2007;17(6):809-814.	99.	Palla A, Digiorgio M, Carpene N, et al. Sleep apnea in mor-bidly obese patients: prevalence and clinical predictivity.  Respiration. 2009;78(2):134-140.	100.	Sareli AE, Cantor CR, Williams NN, et al. Obstructive sleep apnea in patients undergoing bariatric surgery—a tertiary cen-ter experience. Obes Surg. 2011;21(3):316-327.	101.	Lee YH, Johan A, Wong KK, Edwards N, Sullivan C. Prevalence and risk factors for obstructive sleep apnea in a multiethnic population of patients presenting for bariatric surgery in Singapore. Sleep Med. 2009;10(2):226-232.	102.	Marshall NS, Wong KK, Liu PY, Cullen SR, Knuiman MW, Grunstein RR. Sleep apnea as an independent risk factor for all-cause mortality: the Busselton Health Study. Sleep. 2008;31(8):1079-1085.	103.	Schumann R, Jones SB, Cooper B, et al. Update on best practice recommendations for anesthetic perioperative care and pain management in weight loss surgery, 2004-2007. Obesity. 2009;17(5):889-894.	104.	Fritscher LG, Mottin CC, Canani S, Chatkin JM. Obesity and obstructive sleep apnea-hypopnea syndrome: the impact of bariatric surgery. Obes Surg. 2007;17(1):95-99.	105.	Fris RJ. Preoperative low energy diet diminishes liver size. Obes Surg. 2004;14(9):1165-1170.	106.	Edholm D, Kullberg J, Haenni A, et al. Preoperative 4-week low-calorie diet reduces liver volume and intrahepatic fat, and facilitates laparoscopic gastric bypass in morbidly obese. Obes Surg. 2011;21(3):345-350.	107.	Van Nieuwenhove Y, Dambrauskas Z, Campillo-Soto A, et al. Preoperative very low-calorie diet and operative outcome after laparoscopic gastric bypass: a randomized multicenter study. Arch Surg. 2011;146(11):1300-1305.	108.	Alvarado R, Alami RS, Hsu G, et al. The impact of preoperative weight loss in patients undergoing laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. Obes Surg. 2005;15(9):1282-1286.	109.	Alami RS, Morton JM, Schuster R, et al. Is there a benefit to preoperative weight loss in gastric bypass patients? A prospective randomized trial. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2007;3(2): 141-145; discussion 145-146.	110.	Frutos MD, Morales MD, Lujan J, Hernandez Q, Valero G, Parrilla P. Intragastric balloon reduces liver volume in super-obese patients, facilitating subsequent laparoscopic gastric bypass. Obes Surg. 2007;17(2):150-154.	111.	Collins J, McCloskey C, Titchner R, et al. Preoperative weight loss in high-risk superobese bariatric patients: a computed tomography-based analysis. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2011;7(4):480-485.Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   121223/02/19   2:21 PM 1213THE SURGICAL MANAGEMENT OF OBESITYCHAPTER 27	112.	Becouarn G, Topart P, Ritz P. Weight loss prior to bariatric surgery is not a pre-requisite of excess weight loss outcomes in obese patients. Obes Surg. 2010;20(5):574-577.	113.	Mosko JD, Nguyen GC. Increased perioperative mortality following bariatric surgery among patients with cirrhosis.  Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2011;9(10):897-901.	114.	Geerts A, Darius T, Chapelle T, et al. The multicenter Belgian survey on liver transplantation for hepatocellular failure after bariatric surgery. Transplant Proc. 2010;42(10):4395-4398.	115.	Handelsman Y, Bloomgarden ZT, Grunberger G, et al. American association of clinical endocrinologists and American college of endocrinology—clinical practice guidelines for developing a diabetes mellitus comprehensive care plan—2015. Endocr Pract. 2015;21(suppl 1):1-87.	116.	Winegar DA, Sherif B, Pate V, DeMaria EJ. Venous thromboembolism after bariatric surgery performed by Bariatric Surgery Center of Excellence Participants: analysis of the Bariatric Outcomes Longitudinal Database. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2011;7(2):181-188.	117.	Birkmeyer NJ, Share D, Baser O, et al. Preoperative placement of inferior vena cava filters and outcomes after gastric bypass surgery. Ann Surg. 2010;252(2):313-318.	118.	Rowland SP, Dharmarajah B, Moore HM, et al. Inferior vena cava filters for prevention of venous thromboembolism in obese patients undergoing bariatric surgery: a systematic review. Ann Surg. 2015;261(1):35-45.	119.	Johansson K, Cnattingius S, Naslund I, et al. Outcomes of pregnancy after bariatric surgery. N Engl J Med. 2015;372(9): 814-824.	120.	Kominiarek MA, Jungheim ES, Hoeger KM, Rogers AM, Kahan S, Kim JJ. American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery position statement on the impact of obesity and obesity treatment on fertility and fertility therapy Endorsed by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and the Obesity Society. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2017;13(5):750-757.	121.	Gosman GG, King WC, Schrope B, et al. Reproductive health of women electing bariatric surgery. Fertil Steril. 2010;94(4):1426-1431.	122.	Eggers C, Obliers R, Koerfer A, et al. A multimedia tool for the informed consent of patients prior to gastric banding.  Obesity. 2007;15(11):2866-2873.	123.	Arterburn DE, Westbrook EO, Bogart TA, Sepucha KR, Bock SN, Weppner WG. Randomized trial of a video-based patient decision aid for bariatric surgery. Obesity. 2011;19(8):1669-1675.	124.	Arterburn D, Flum DR, Westbrook EO, et al. A population-based, shared decision-making approach to recruit for a ran-domized trial of bariatric surgery versus lifestyle for type  2 diabetes. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2013;9(6):837-844.	125.	Sutton D, Spiekermann BF, Bogdonoff DL, Leisure GS, Mathes DD, eds. Perioperative Care: Anesthesia, Medicine and Surgery. 1st ed. St. Louis: Mosby; 1998:547-558.	126.	Pisarska M, Malczak P, Major P, Wysocki M, Budzynski A, Pedziwiatr M. Enhanced recovery after surgery protocol in oesophageal cancer surgery: systematic review and meta-analysis. PloS One. 2017;12(3):e0174382.	127.	Thorell A, MacCormick AD, Awad S, et al. Guidelines for perioperative care in bariatric surgery: enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) society recommendations. World J Surg. 2016;40(9):2065-2083.	128.	Nguyen NT, Goldman C, Rosenquist CJ, et al. Laparoscopic versus open gastric bypass: a randomized study of outcomes, quality of life, and costs. Ann Surg. 2001;234(3):279-289; discussion 289-291.	129.	Hutter MM, Randall S, Khuri SF, Henderson WG, Abbott WM, Warshaw AL. Laparoscopic versus open gastric bypass for morbid obesity: a multicenter, prospective, risk-adjusted analysis from the National Surgical Quality Improvement Program. Ann Surg. 2006;243(5):657-662; discussion 662-656.	130.	Lujan JA, Frutos MD, Hernandez Q, et al. Laparoscopic versus open gastric bypass in the treatment of morbid obesity: a ran-domized prospective study. Ann Surg. 2004;239(4):433-437.	131.	Li K, Zou J, Tang J, Di J, Han X, Zhang P. Robotic versus laparoscopic bariatric surgery: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obes Surg. 2016;26(12):3031-3044.	132.	Villamere J, Gebhart A, Vu S, Nguyen NT. Utilization and outcome of laparoscopic versus robotic general and bariatric surgical procedures at academic medical centers. Surg Endosc. 2015;29(7):1729-1736.	133.	Ayloo SM, Addeo P, Buchs NC, Shah G, Giulianotti PC. Robot-assisted versus laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass: is there a difference in outcomes? World J Surg. 2011;35(3):637-642.	134.	Economopoulos KP, Theocharidis V, McKenzie TJ, Sergentanis TN, Psaltopoulou T. Robotic vs. laparoscopic roux-en-y gastric bypass: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obes Surg. 2015;25(11):2180-2189.	135.	MacLean LD, Rhode BM, Nohr CW. Late outcome of isolated gastric bypass. Ann Surg. 2000;231(4):524-528.	136.	Brolin RE, Kenler HA, Gorman JH, Cody RP. Long-limb gas-tric bypass in the superobese. A prospective randomized study. Ann Surg. 1992;215(4):387-395.	137.	Choban PS, Flancbaum L. The effect of Roux limb lengths on outcome after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass: a prospective, ran-domized clinical trial. Obes Surg. 2002;12(4):540-545.	138.	Schirmer BD Lee SK, Northup CJ, et al. Gastrojejunal anastomosis stenosis is lower using linear rather than circular stapling during Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. Presented at SAGES 2006 scientific session, April 2006.	139.	Gonzalez R, Lin E, Venkatesh KR, Bowers SP, Smith CD. Gastrojejunostomy during laparoscopic gastric bypass: analy-sis of 3 techniques. Arch Surg. 2003;138(2):181-184.	140.	Hutter MM, Schirmer BD, Jones DB, et al. First report from the American College of Surgeons Bariatric Surgery Center Network: laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy has morbidity and effectiveness positioned between the band and the bypass.  Ann Surg. 2011;254(3):410-420; discussion 420-412.	141.	DeMaria EJ, Pate V, Warthen M, Winegar DA. Baseline data from American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery— designated Bariatric Surgery Centers of Excellence using the Bariatric Outcomes Longitudinal Database. Surg Obes Relat Dis.  2010;6(4):347-355.	142.	Masoomi H, Kim H, Reavis KM, Mills S, Stamos MJ, Nguyen NT. Analysis of factors predictive of gastrointestinal tract leak in laparoscopic and open gastric bypass. Arch Surg. 2011;146(9):1048-1051.	143.	Finks JF, English WJ, Carlin AM, et al. Predicting risk for venous thromboembolism with bariatric surgery: results from the Michigan Bariatric Surgery Collaborative. Ann Surg. 2012;255(6):1100-1104.	144.	Gumbs AA, Duffy AJ, Bell RL. Incidence and management of marginal ulceration after laparoscopic Roux-Y gastric bypass. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2006;2(4):460-463.	145.	Parakh S, Soto E, Merola S. Diagnosis and management of internal hernias after laparoscopic gastric bypass. Obes Surg. 2007;17(11):1498-1502.	146.	Nguyen NT, Rivers R, Wolfe BM. Early gastrointestinal hemorrhage after laparoscopic gastric bypass. Obes Surg. 2003;13(1):62-65.	147.	Aarts EO, van Wageningen B, Janssen IM, Berends FJ. Prevalence of anemia and related deficiencies in the first year following laparoscopic gastric bypass for morbid obesity.  J Obes. 2012;2012:193705.	148.	Clements RH, Yellumahanthi K, Wesley M, Ballem N, Bland KI. Hyperparathyroidism and vitamin D deficiency after Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   121323/02/19   2:21 PM 1214SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIlaparoscopic gastric bypass. Am Surg. 2008;74(6):469-474; discussion 474-465.	149.	Abu-Elmagd KM, Costa G, McMichael D, et al. Autologous reconstruction and visceral transplantation for management of patients with gut failure after bariatric surgery: 20 years of experience. Ann Surg. 2015;262(4):586-601.	150.	Vance PL, de Lange EE, Shaffer HA, Jr., Schirmer B. Gastric outlet obstruction following surgery for morbid obesity: efficacy of fluoroscopically guided balloon dilation. Radiology. 2002;222(1):70-72.	151.	Thodiyil PA, Yenumula P, Rogula T, et al. Selective nonoperative management of leaks after gastric bypass: lessons learned from 2675 consecutive patients. Ann Surg. 2008;248(5):782-792.	152.	Awais O, Raftopoulos I, Luketich JD, Courcoulas A. Acute, complete proximal small bowel obstruction after laparoscopic gastric bypass due to intraluminal blood clot formation.  Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2005;1(4):418-422; discussion 422-413.	153.	Hamoui N, Crookes PF, Kaufman HS. Percutaneous gastric drainage as a treatment for small bowel obstruction after gastric bypass. Obes Surg. 2007;17(10):1411-1412.	154.	Gumbs AA, Gagner M, Dakin G, Pomp A. Sleeve gastrectomy for morbid obesity. Obes Surg. 2007;17(7):962-969.	155.	Almogy G, Crookes PF, Anthone GJ. Longitudinal gastrectomy as a treatment for the high-risk super-obese patient. Obes Surg. 2004;14(4):492-497.	156.	Parikh M, Issa R, McCrillis A, Saunders JK, Ude-Welcome A, Gagner M. Surgical strategies that may decrease leak after laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy: a systematic review and meta-analysis of 9991 cases. Ann Surg. 2013;257(2):231-237.	157.	Rawlins L, Rawlins MP, Brown CC, Schumacher DL. Sleeve gastrectomy: 5-year outcomes of a single institution. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2013;9(1):21-25.	158.	Rosenthal RJ, International Sleeve Gastrectomy Expert Panel, Diaz AA, et al. International Sleeve Gastrectomy Expert Panel consensus statement: best practice guidelines based on experience of >12,000 cases. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2012;8(1):8-19.	159.	Brethauer SA, Hammel JP, Schauer PR. Systematic review of sleeve gastrectomy as staging and primary bariatric procedure. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2009;5(4):469-475.	160.	Choi YY, Bae J, Hur KY, Choi D, Kim YJ. Reinforcing the staple line during laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy: does it have advantages? A meta-analysis. Obes Surg. 2012;22(8):1206-1213.	161.	Albanopoulos K, Alevizos L, Flessas J, et al. Reinforcing the staple line during laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy: prospective randomized clinical study comparing two different techniques. Preliminary results. Obes Surg. 2012;22(1):42-46.	162.	Berger ER, Clements RH, Morton JM, et al. The impact of different surgical techniques on outcomes in laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomies: the first report from the Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery Accreditation and Quality Improvement Program (MBSAQIP). Ann Surg. 2016;264(3):464-473.	163.	Parikh A, Alley JB, Peterson RM, et al. Management options for symptomatic stenosis after laparoscopic vertical sleeve gastrectomy in the morbidly obese. Surg Endosc. 2012;26(3):738-746.	164.	Carter CO, Fernandez AZ, McNatt SS, Powell MS. Conversion from gastric bypass to sleeve gastrectomy for complications of gastric bypass. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2016;12(3):572-576.	165.	Praveenraj P, Gomes RM, Kumar S, et al. Management of gastric leaks after laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy for morbid obesity: a tertiary care experience and design of a management algorithm. J Minim Access Surg. 2016;12(4):342-349.	166.	Dargent J. Laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding: lessons from the first 500 patients in a single institution. Obes Surg. 1999;9(5):446-452.	167.	Allen JW, Lagardere AO, Schirmer BD, Brethauer SA, eds. Minimally Invasive Bariatric Surgery. New York: Springer; 2007:205-212.	168.	Angrisani L, Cutolo PP, Formisano G, Nosso G, Vitolo G. Laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding versus Roux-en-Y gastric bypass: 10-year results of a prospective, randomized trial. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2013;9(3):405-413.	169.	Courcoulas AP, Christian NJ, Belle SH, et al. Weight change and health outcomes at 3 years after bariatric surgery among individuals with severe obesity. JAMA. 2013;310(22):2416-2425. This is a 3-year outcomes paper from the Longitudinal Assessment of Bariatric Surgery (LABS-2) effectiveness study. This is a multi-center, longitudinal study of over 2500 people undergoing both gastric bypass and laparoscopic gastric banding. Results in this report are 3-year weight and health (including type 2 diabetes) outcomes. This paper highlights the variable weight trajectories following bariatric surgery.	170.	Marceau P, Hould FS, Simard S, et al. Biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch. World J Surg. 1998;22(9):947-954.	171.	DeMeester TR, Fuchs KH, Ball CS, Albertucci M, Smyrk TC, Marcus JN. Experimental and clinical results with proximal end-to-end duodenojejunostomy for pathologic duodenogastric reflux. Ann Surg. 1987;206(4):414-426.	172.	Sudan R, Bennett KM, Jacobs DO, Sudan DL. Multifactorial analysis of the learning curve for robot-assisted laparoscopic biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch. Ann Surg. 2012;255(5):940-945.	173.	Scopinaro N, Gianetta E, Adami GF, et al. Biliopancreatic diversion for obesity at eighteen years. Surgery. 1996;119(3): 261-268.	174.	Lerner H, Whang J, Nipper R. Benefit-risk paradigm for clinical trial design of obesity devices: FDA proposal. Surg Endosc. 2013;27(3):702-707.	175.	Ikramuddin S, Blackstone RP, Brancatisano A, et al. Effect of reversible intermittent intra-abdominal vagal nerve blockade on morbid obesity: the ReCharge randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2014;312(9):915-922.	176.	Shikora SA, Wolfe BM, Apovian CM, et al. Sustained weight loss with vagal nerve blockade but not with sham: 18-month results of the ReCharge trial. J Obes. 2015;2015:365604.	177.	Schapiro M, Benjamin S, Blackburn G, et al. Obesity and the gastric balloon: a comprehensive workshop. Tarpon Springs, Florida, March 19-21, 1987. Gastrointest Endosc. 1987;33(4):323-327.	178.	Courcoulas A, Abu Dayyeh BK, Eaton L, et al. Intragastric balloon as an adjunct to lifestyle intervention: a randomized controlled trial. Int J Obes. 2017;41(3):427-433.	179.	Ponce J, Woodman G, Swain J, et al. The REDUCE pivotal trial: a prospective, randomized controlled pivotal trial of a dual intragastric balloon for the treatment of obesity. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2015;11(4):874-881.	180.	Thompson CC, Abu Dayyeh BK, Kushner R, et al. Percutaneous gastrostomy device for the treatment of class II and class III obesity: results of a randomized controlled trial. Am J Gastroenterol. 2017;112(3):447-457.	181.	Quezada N, Munoz R, Morelli C, et al. Safety and efficacy of the endoscopic duodenal-jejunal bypass liner prototype in severe or morbidly obese subjects implanted for up to 3 years. Surg Endosc. 2018;32(1):260-267.	182.	Rohde U, Hedback N, Gluud LL, Vilsboll T, Knop FK.  Effect of the EndoBarrier Gastrointestinal Liner on obesity and type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabet Obes Metab. 2016;18(3):300-305.	183.	Eid GM, McCloskey CA, Eagleton JK, Lee LB, Courcoulas AP. StomaphyX vs a sham procedure for revisional surgery to reduce regained weight in Roux-en-Y gastric bypass patients: Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   121423/02/19   2:21 PM 1215THE SURGICAL MANAGEMENT OF OBESITYCHAPTER 27a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Surg. 2014;149(4): 372-379.	184.	Puzziferri N, Roshek TB, 3rd, Mayo HG, Gallagher R, Belle SH, Livingston EH. Long-term follow-up after bariatric surgery: a systematic review. JAMA. 2014;312(9):934-942.	185.	Gletsu-Miller N, Wright BN. Mineral malnutrition following bariatric surgery. Adv Nutr. 2013;4(5):506-517.	186.	Spaniolas K, Kasten KR, Celio A, Burruss MB, Pories WJ. Postoperative follow-up after bariatric surgery: effect on weight loss. Obes Surg. 2016;26(4):900-903.	187.	Schwoerer A, Kasten K, Celio A, Pories W, Spaniolas K. The effect of close postoperative follow-up on co-morbidity improvement after bariatric surgery. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2017;13(8):1347-1352.	188.	Weichman K, Ren C, Kurian M, et al. The effectiveness of adjustable gastric banding: a retrospective 6-year U.S. follow-up study. Surg Endosc. 2011;25(2):397-403.	189.	Ignat M, Vix M, Imad I, et al. Randomized trial of Roux-en-Y gastric bypass versus sleeve gastrectomy in achieving excess weight loss. Br J Surg. 2017;104(3):248-256.	190.	Peterli R, Wolnerhanssen BK, Vetter D, et al. Laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy versus roux-y-gastric bypass for morbid obesity-3-year outcomes of the prospective randomized Swiss Multicenter Bypass Or Sleeve Study (SM-BOSS). Ann Surg. 2017;265(3):466-473.	191.	Ren CJ, Patterson E, Gagner M. Early results of laparoscopic biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch: a case series of 40 consecutive patients. Obes Surg. 2000;10(6):514-523; discussion 524.	192.	Buchwald H, Avidor Y, Braunwald E, et al. Bariatric surgery: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA. 2004;292(14):1724-1737.	193.	Gloy VL, Briel M, Bhatt DL, et al. Bariatric surgery versus non-surgical treatment for obesity: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. BMJ. 2013;347:f5934.	194.	O’Brien PE, Dixon JB, Laurie C, et al. Treatment of mild to moderate obesity with laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding or an intensive medical program: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. 2006;144(9):625-633.	195.	Maggard-Gibbons M, Maglione M, Livhits M, et al. Bariatric surgery for weight loss and glycemic control in nonmorbidly obese adults with diabetes: a systematic review. JAMA. 2013;309(21):2250-2261.	196.	Sjostrom L. Review of the key results from the Swedish Obese Subjects (SOS) trial—a prospective controlled intervention study of bariatric surgery. J Intern Med. 2013;273(3): 219-234.	197.	Carlsson LM, Peltonen M, Ahlin S, et al. Bariatric surgery and prevention of type 2 diabetes in Swedish obese subjects. N Engl J Med. 2012;367(8):695-704. This is a very long term outcome paper from the Swedish Obese Subjects (SOS) study, that addresses very long term outcomes of bariatric surgery for the treatment and prevention of type 2 diabetes.	198.	Sjostrom L, Peltonen M, Jacobson P, et al. Bariatric surgery and long-term cardiovascular events. JAMA. 2012;307(1):56-65.	199.	Sjostrom L, Gummesson A, Sjostrom CD, et al. Effects of bariatric surgery on cancer incidence in obese patients in Sweden (Swedish Obese Subjects Study): a prospective, controlled intervention trial. Lancet Oncol. 2009;10(7):653-662.	200.	Sjostrom L, Narbro K, Sjostrom CD, et al. Effects of bariatric surgery on mortality in Swedish obese subjects. N Engl J Med. 2007;357(8):741-752.	201.	Sjostrom L, Lindroos AK, Peltonen M, et al. Lifestyle, diabetes, and cardiovascular risk factors 10 years after bariatric surgery. N Engl J Med. 2004;351(26):2683-2693.	202.	Adams TD, Gress RE, Smith SC, et al. Long-term mortality after gastric bypass surgery. N Engl J Med. 2007;357(8): 753-761.	203.	Adams TD, Davidson LE, Litwin SE, et al. Health benefits of gastric bypass surgery after 6 years. JAMA. 2012;308(11): 1122-1131.	204.	Adams TD, Davidson LE, Litwin SE, et al. Weight and metabolic outcomes 12 years after gastric bypass. N Engl J Med. 2017;377(12):1143-1155. This is the longest term paper to date from the Utah Obesity study which compares gastric bypass to 2 different control groups for weight and health outcomes, including type 2 diabetes.	205.	Maciejewski ML, Livingston EH, Smith VA, et al. Survival among high-risk patients after bariatric surgery. JAMA. 2011;305(23):2419-2426.	206.	Maciejewski ML, Livingston EH, Smith VA, Kahwati LC, Henderson WG, Arterburn DE. Health expenditures among high-risk patients after gastric bypass and matched controls. Arch Surg. 2012;147(7):633-640.	207.	Arterburn DE, Olsen MK, Smith VA, et al. Association between bariatric surgery and long-term survival. JAMA. 2015;313(1):62-70.	208.	Maciejewski ML, Arterburn DE, Van Scoyoc L, et al. Bariatric surgery and long-term durability of weight loss. JAMA Surg. 2016;151(11):1046-1055.	209.	Belle SH, Berk PD, Chapman WH, et al. Baseline characteristics of participants in the Longitudinal Assessment of Bariatric Surgery-2 (LABS-2) study. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2013;9(6):926-935.	210.	Courcoulas AP, Christian NJ, O’Rourke RW, et al. Preoperative factors and 3-year weight change in the Longitudinal Assessment of Bariatric Surgery (LABS) consortium. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2015;11(5):1109-1118.	211.	Mitchell JE, Christian NJ, Flum DR, et al. Postoperative behavioral variables and weight change 3 years after bariatric surgery. JAMA Surg. 2016;151(8):752-757.	212.	Arterburn DE, Bogart A, Sherwood NE, et al. A multisite study of long-term remission and relapse of type 2 diabetes mellitus following gastric bypass. Obes Surg. 2013;23(1): 93-102.	213.	Arterburn D, Bogart A, Coleman KJ, et al. Comparative effectiveness of bariatric surgery vs. nonsurgical treatment of type 2 diabetes among severely obese adults. Obes Res Clin Pract. 2013;7(4):e258-268.	214.	Arterburn D, Powers JD, Toh S, et al. Comparative effectiveness of laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding vs laparoscopic gastric bypass. JAMA Surg. 2014;149(12):1279-1287.	215.	Carlin AM, Zeni TM, English WJ, et al. The comparative effectiveness of sleeve gastrectomy, gastric bypass, and adjustable gastric banding procedures for the treatment of morbid obesity. Ann Surg. 2013;257(5):791-797. This is data from a statewide clinical registry, where outcomes of the 3 most common procedures; gastric bypass, sleeve gastrectomy, and laparoscopic adjustable banding are compared. It showed that rates for both short term weight loss and overall complications for the sleeve gastrectomy were positioned between gastric bypass and laparoscopic adjustable banding. 	216.	Finks JF, Kole KL, Yenumula PR, et al. Predicting risk for serious complications with bariatric surgery: results from the Michigan Bariatric Surgery Collaborative. Ann Surg. 2011;254(4):633-640.	217.	Birkmeyer NJ, Finks JF, English WJ, et al. Risks and benefits of prophylactic inferior vena cava filters in patients undergoing bariatric surgery. J Hosp Med. 2013;8(4):173-177.	218.	Varban OA, Sheetz KH, Cassidy RB, et al. Evaluating the effect of operative technique on leaks after laparoscopic Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   121523/02/19   2:21 PM 1216SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIsleeve gastrectomy: a case-control study. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2017;13(4):560-567.	219.	Birkmeyer JD, Finks JF, O’Reilly A, et al. Surgical skill and complication rates after bariatric surgery. N Engl J Med. 2013;369(15):1434-1442.	220.	Wood GC, Benotti PN, Lee CJ, et al. Evaluation of the association between preoperative clinical factors and long-term weight loss after roux-en-y gastric bypass. JAMA Surg. 2016;151(11):1056-1062.	221.	Still CD, Wood GC, Benotti P, et al. Preoperative prediction of type 2 diabetes remission after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass surgery: a retrospective cohort study. Lancet Diabet Endocrinol. 2014;2(1):38-45.	222.	Tice JA, Karliner L, Walsh J, Petersen AJ, Feldman MD. Gastric banding or bypass? A systematic review comparing the two most popular bariatric procedures. Am J Med. 2008;121(10):885-893.	223.	Padwal R, Klarenbach S, Wiebe N, et al. Bariatric surgery: a systematic review and network meta-analysis of randomized trials. Obes Res. 2011;12(8):602-621.	224.	Trastulli S, Desiderio J, Guarino S, et al. Laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy compared with other bariatric surgical procedures: a systematic review of randomized trials. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2013;9(5):816-829.	225.	Yang X, Yang G, Wang W, Chen G, Yang H. A meta-analysis: to compare the clinical results between gastric bypass and sleeve gastrectomy for the obese patients. Obes Surg. 2013;23(7):1001-1010.	226.	Vest AR, Heneghan HM, Agarwal S, Schauer PR, Young JB. Bariatric surgery and cardiovascular outcomes: a systematic review. Heart. 2012;98(24):1763-1777.	227.	Vest AR, Heneghan HM, Schauer PR, Young JB. Surgical management of obesity and the relationship to cardiovascular disease. Circulation. 2013;127(8):945-959.	228.	Frezza EE, Ikramuddin S, Gourash W, et al. Symptomatic improvement in gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) following laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. Surg Endosc. 2002;16(7):1027-1031.	229.	Perry Y, Courcoulas AP, Fernando HC, Buenaventura PO, McCaughan JS, Luketich JD. Laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass for recalcitrant gastroesophageal reflux disease in morbidly obese patients. JSLS. 2004;8(1):19-23.	230.	Zhang N, Maffei A, Cerabona T, Pahuja A, Omana J, Kaul A. Reduction in obesity-related comorbidities: is gastric bypass better than sleeve gastrectomy? Surg Endosc. 2013;27(4):1273-1280.	231.	Sarkhosh K, Switzer NJ, El-Hadi M, Birch DW, Shi X, Karmali S. The impact of bariatric surgery on obstructive sleep apnea: a systematic review. Obes Surg. 2013;23(3):414-423.	232.	Dixon JB, Schachter LM, O’Brien PE, et al. Surgical vs conventional therapy for weight loss treatment of obstructive sleep apnea: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2012;308(11):1142-1149.	233.	Dixon AE, Pratley RE, Forgione PM, et al. Effects of obesity and bariatric surgery on airway hyperresponsiveness, asthma control, and inflammation. J Allerg Clin Immunol. 2011;128(3):508-515 e501-502.	234.	Boulet LP, Turcotte H, Martin J, Poirier P. Effect of bariatric surgery on airway response and lung function in obese subjects with asthma. Respirat Med. 2012;106(5):651-660.	235.	Beymer C, Kowdley KV, Larson A, Edmonson P, Dellinger EP, Flum DR. Prevalence and predictors of asymptomatic liver disease in patients undergoing gastric bypass surgery. Arch Surg. 2003;138(11):1240-1244.	236.	Rabl C, Campos GM. The impact of bariatric surgery on nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. Semin Liver Dis. 2012;32(1): 80-91.	237.	Iossi MF, Konstantakos EK, Teel DD, 2nd, et al. Musculoskeletal function following bariatric surgery. Obesity. 2013;21(6):1104-1110.	238.	Vincent HK, Heywood K, Connelly J, Hurley RW. Obesity and weight loss in the treatment and prevention of osteoarthritis. PM R. 2012;4(5 suppl):S59-S67.	239.	King WC, Chen JY, Belle SH, et al. Change in pain and physical function following bariatric surgery for severe obesity. JAMA. 2016;315(13):1362-1371.	240.	Karlsson J, Taft C, Ryden A, Sjostrom L, Sullivan M.  Ten-year trends in health-related quality of life after surgical and conventional treatment for severe obesity: the SOS intervention study. Int J Obes. 2007;31(8):1248-1261.	241.	Kolotkin RL, Davidson LE, Crosby RD, Hunt SC, Adams TD. Six-year changes in health-related quality of life in gastric bypass patients versus obese comparison groups. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2012;8(5):625-633.	242.	Nickel MK, Loew TH, Bachler E. Change in mental symptoms in extreme obesity patients after gastric banding, part II:  six-year follow up. Int J Psychiatry Med. 2007;37(1):69-79.	243.	Schauer PR, Nor Hanipah Z, Rubino F. Metabolic surgery for treating type 2 diabetes mellitus: now supported by the world’s leading diabetes organizations. Cleve Clin J Med. 2017;84 (7 suppl 1):S47-S56.	244.	Buchwald H, Estok R, Fahrbach K, et al. Weight and type 2 diabetes after bariatric surgery: systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Med. 2009;122(3):248-256 e245.	245.	Sjostrom L, Peltonen M, Jacobson P, et al. Association of bariatric surgery with long-term remission of type 2 diabetes and with microvascular and macrovascular complications. JAMA. 2014;311(22):2297-2304.	246.	Schauer PR, Bhatt DL, Kirwan JP, et al. Bariatric surgery versus intensive medical therapy for diabetes—3-year outcomes. N Engl J Med. 2014;370(21):2002-2013.	247.	Ikramuddin S, Billington CJ, Lee WJ, et al. Roux-en-Y gastric bypass for diabetes (the Diabetes Surgery Study): 2-year outcomes of a 5-year, randomised, controlled trial. Lancet Diabet Endocrinol. 2015;3(6):413-422.	248.	Liang Z, Wu Q, Chen B, Yu P, Zhao H, Ouyang X. Effect of laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass surgery on type  2 diabetes mellitus with hypertension: a randomized controlled trial. Diabet Clin Res Pract. 2013;101(1):50-56.	249.	Courcoulas AP, Yanovski SZ, Bonds D, et al. Long-term outcomes of bariatric surgery: a National Institutes of Health symposium. JAMA Surg. 2014;149(12):1323-1329.	250.	Wentworth JM, Playfair J, Laurie C, et al. Multidisciplinary diabetes care with and without bariatric surgery in overweight people: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet Diabet Endocrinol. 2014;2(7):545-552.	251.	Parikh M, Chung M, Sheth S, et al. Randomized pilot trial of bariatric surgery versus intensive medical weight management on diabetes remission in type 2 diabetic patients who do NOT meet NIH criteria for surgery and the role of soluble RAGE as a novel biomarker of success. Ann Surg. 2014;260(4):617-622; discussion 622-614.	252.	Schauer PR, Bhatt DL, Kirwan JP, et al. Bariatric surgery versus intensive medical therapy for diabetes—5-year  outcomes. N Engl J Med. 2017;376(7):641-651. This is a randomized clinical trial comparing gastric bypass, gastric sleeve, and intensive medical management for the treatment of type 2 diabetes in people with obesity. It is only one of 2 randomized studies with 5 year follow up, at this time. It shows that surgical treatments are superior to intensive medical treatment for glycemic control.	253.	Shah SS Todkar J, Phadake U, et al. Gastric bypass vs. medical/lifestyle care for type 2 diabetes in South Asians with BMI 25-40 kg/m2: the COSMID randomized trial Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   121623/02/19   2:21 PM 1217THE SURGICAL MANAGEMENT OF OBESITYCHAPTER 27[261-OR]. Presented at the American Diabetes Association’s 76th Scientific Session; June 10-14, 2016; New Orleans, LA.	254.	Encinosa WE, Bernard DM, Du D, Steiner CA. Recent improvements in bariatric surgery outcomes. Med Care. 2009; 47(5):531-535.	255.	Birkmeyer NJ, Dimick JB, Share D, et al. Hospital complication rates with bariatric surgery in Michigan. JAMA. 2010;304(4):435-442.	256.	Rubino F, Kaplan LM, Schauer PR, Cummings DE. The Diabetes Surgery Summit consensus conference: recommendations for the evaluation and use of gastrointestinal surgery to treat type 2 diabetes mellitus. Ann Surg. 2010;251(3):399-405.	257.	Buchwald H, Estok R, Fahrbach K, Banel D, Sledge I. Trends in mortality in bariatric surgery: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Surgery. 2007;142(4):621-632; discussion 632-625.	258.	Dimick JB, Nicholas LH, Ryan AM, Thumma JR, Birkmeyer JD. Bariatric surgery complications before vs after implementation of a national policy restricting coverage to centers of excellence. JAMA. 2013;309(8):792-799.	259.	DeMaria EJ, Murr M, Byrne TK, et al. Validation of the obesity surgery mortality risk score in a multicenter study proves it stratifies mortality risk in patients undergoing gastric bypass for morbid obesity. Ann Surg. 2007;246(4):578-582; discussion 583-574.	260.	DeMaria EJ, Portenier D, Wolfe L. Obesity surgery mortality risk score: proposal for a clinically useful score to predict mortality risk in patients undergoing gastric bypass. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2007;3(2):134-140.	261.	Thomas H, Agrawal S. Systematic review of obesity surgery mortality risk score—preoperative risk stratification in bariatric surgery. Obes Surg. 2012;22(7):1135-1140.	262.	O’Brien PE, MacDonald L, Anderson M, Brennan L, Brown WA. Long-term outcomes after bariatric surgery: fifteen-year follow-up of adjustable gastric banding and a systematic review of the bariatric surgical literature. Ann Surg. 2013;257(1):87-94.	263.	Rariy CM, Rometo D, Korytkowski M. Post-gastric bypass hypoglycemia. Curr Diabet Rep. 2016;16(2):19.	264.	Goldfine AB, Patti ME. How common is hypoglycemia after gastric bypass? Obesity. 2016;24(6):1210-1211.	265.	Service GJ, Thompson GB, Service FJ, Andrews JC, Collazo-Clavell ML, Lloyd RV. Hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia with nesidioblastosis after gastric-bypass surgery. N Engl J Med. 2005;353(3):249-254.	266.	Patti ME, Goldfine AB. Hypoglycemia after gastric bypass: the dark side of GLP-1. Gastroenterology. 2014;146(3):605-608.	267.	Eisenberg D, Azagury DE, Ghiassi S, Grover BT, Kim JJ. ASMBS position statement on postprandial hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia after bariatric surgery. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2017;13(3):371-378.	268.	Stephansson O, Johansson K, Naslund I, Neovius M. Bariatric Surgery and Preterm Birth. N Engl J Med. 2016;375(8):805-806.	269.	Maluenda F, Csendes A, De Aretxabala X, et al. Alcohol absorption modification after a laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy due to obesity. Obes Surg. 2010;20(6):744-748.	270.	Steffen KJ, Engel SG, Pollert GA, Li C, Mitchell JE. Blood alcohol concentrations rise rapidly and dramatically after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2013;9(3): 470-473.	271.	King WC, Chen JY, Mitchell JE, et al. Prevalence of alcohol use disorders before and after bariatric surgery. JAMA. 2012;307(23):2516-2525.	272.	King WC, Chen JY, Courcoulas AP, et al. Alcohol and other substance use after bariatric surgery: prospective evidence from a U.S. multicenter cohort study. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2017;13(8):1392-1402.	273.	Peterhansel C, Petroff D, Klinitzke G, Kersting A, Wagner B. Risk of completed suicide after bariatric surgery: a systematic review. Obes Rev. 2013;14(5):369-382.	274.	Gribsholt SB, Thomsen RW, Svensson E, Richelsen B. Overall and cause-specific mortality after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass surgery: a nationwide cohort study. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2017;13(4):581-587.	275.	Bhatti JA, Nathens AB, Thiruchelvam D, Grantcharov T, Goldstein BI, Redelmeier DA. Self-harm emergencies after bariatric surgery: a population-based cohort study. JAMA Surg. 2016;151(3):226-232.	276.	Courcoulas A. Who, why, and how? Suicide and harmful behaviors after bariatric surgery. Ann Surg. 2017;265(2): 253-254.	277.	Tindle HA, Omalu B, Courcoulas A, Marcus M, Hammers J, Kuller LH. Risk of suicide after long-term follow-up from bariatric surgery. Am J Med. 2010;123(11):1036-1042.	278.	Parrott J, Frank L, Rabena R, Craggs-Dino L, Isom KA, Greiman L. American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery integrated health nutritional guidelines for the surgical weight loss patient 2016 update: micronutrients. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2017;13(5):727-741.	279.	Dogan K, Homan J, Aarts EO, de Boer H, van Laarhoven CJ, Berends FJ. Long-term nutritional status in patients following Roux-en-Y gastric bypass surgery. Clin Nutr. 2018;37(2):612-617.	280.	Pellitero S, Martinez E, Puig R, et al. Evaluation of vitamin and trace element requirements after sleeve gastrectomy at long term. Obes Surg. 2017;27(7):1674-1682.	281.	Brethauer SA, Kothari S, Sudan R, et al. Systematic review on reoperative bariatric surgery: American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery Revision Task Force. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2014;10(5):952-972.	282.	Field AE, Camargo CA Jr, Ogino S. The merits of subtyping obesity: one size does not fit all. JAMA. 2013; 310(20):2147-2148.	283.	Kellogg TA. Revisional bariatric surgery. Surg Clin North Am. 2011;91(6):1353-1371, x.	284.	Moshiri M, Osman S, Robinson TJ, Khandelwal S, Bhargava P, Rohrmann CA. Evolution of bariatric surgery: a historical perspective. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2013;201(1):W40-W48.	285.	Switzer NJ, Karmali S, Gill RS, Sherman V. Revisional bariatric surgery. Surg Clin North Am. 2016;96(4):827-842.	286.	Ikramuddin S, Livingston EH. New insights on bariatric surgery outcomes. JAMA. 2013;310(22):2401-2402.	287.	Kral JG. Selection of patients for anti-obesity surgery.  Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. 2001;25(suppl 1):S107-S112.	288.	Zundel N, Hernandez JD. Revisional surgery after restrictive procedures for morbid obesity. Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech. 2010;20(5):338-343.	289.	Fulton C, Sheppard C, Birch D, Karmali S, de Gara C.  A comparison of revisional and primary bariatric surgery.  Can J Surg. 2017;60(3):205-211.	290.	Hallowell PT, Stellato TA, Yao DA, Robinson A, Schuster MM, Graf KN. Should bariatric revisional surgery be avoided secondary to increased morbidity and mortality? Am J Surg. 2009;197(3):391-396.	291.	Sarr MG. Reoperative bariatric surgery. Surg Endosc. 2007;21(11):1909-1913.	292.	van Gemert WG, van Wersch MM, Greve JW, Soeters PB. Revisional surgery after failed vertical banded gastroplasty: restoration of vertical banded gastroplasty or conversion to gastric bypass. Obes Surg. 1998;8(1):21-28.	293.	Gagne DJ, Dovec E, Urbandt JE. Laparoscopic revision of vertical banded gastroplasty to Roux-en-Y gastric bypass: outcomes of 105 patients. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2011;7(4):493-499.Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   121723/02/19   2:21 PM 1218SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	294.	Schouten R, Wiryasaputra DC, van Dielen FM, van Gemert WG, Greve JW. Influence of reoperations on long-term quality of life after restrictive procedures: a prospective study.  Obes Surg. 2011;21(7):871-879.	295.	Foletto M, Prevedello L, Bernante P, et al. Sleeve gastrectomy as revisional procedure for failed gastric banding or gastroplasty. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2010;6(2):146-151.	296.	Dapri G, Cadiere GB, Himpens J. Laparoscopic conversion of adjustable gastric banding and vertical banded gastroplasty to duodenal switch. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2009;5(6):678-683.	297.	Coblijn UK, Verveld CJ, van Wagensveld BA, Lagarde SM. Laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass or laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy as revisional procedure after adjustable gastric band--a systematic review. Obes Surg. 2013;23(11):1899-1914.	298.	Aarts EO, Dogan K, Koehestanie P, Janssen IM, Berends FJ. What happens after gastric band removal without additional bariatric surgery? Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2014;10(6):1092-1096.	299.	Ardestani A, Lautz DB, Tavakkolizadeh A. Band revision versus Roux-en-Y gastric bypass conversion as salvage operation after laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding.  Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2011;7(1):33-37.	300.	Lanthaler M, Mittermair R, Erne B, Weiss H, Aigner F, Nehoda H. Laparoscopic gastric re-banding versus laparoscopic gastric bypass as a rescue operation for patients with pouch dilatation. Obes Surg. 2006;16(4):484-487.	301.	Muller MK, Attigah N, Wildi S, et al. High secondary failure rate of rebanding after failed gastric banding. Surg Endosc. 2008;22(2):448-453.	302.	Obeid NR, Schwack BF, Kurian MS, Ren-Fielding CJ, Fielding GA. Single-stage versus 2-stage sleeve gastrectomy as a conversion after failed adjustable gastric banding: 30-day outcomes. Surg Endosc. 2014;28(11):3186-3192.	303.	Van Nieuwenhove Y, Ceelen W, Van Renterghem K,  Van de Putte D, Henckens T, Pattyn P. Conversion from band to bypass in two steps reduces the risk for anastomotic strictures. Obes Surg. 2011;21(4):501-505.	304.	Switzer NJ & Karmali S. The sleeve gastrectomy and how and why it can fail? Surg Curr Res 2014;4:180. 2014;4:180. SNKSTsgahawicfSCR.	305.	Eid GM, Brethauer S, Mattar SG, Titchner RL, Gourash W, Schauer PR. Laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy for super obese patients: forty-eight percent excess weight loss after 6 to  8 years with 93% follow-up. Ann Surg. 2012;256(2):262-265.	306.	Carmeli I, Golomb I, Sadot E, Kashtan H, Keidar A. Laparoscopic conversion of sleeve gastrectomy to a biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch or a Roux-en-Y gastric bypass due to weight loss failure: our algorithm. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2015;11(1):79-85.	307.	Cheung D, Switzer NJ, Gill RS, Shi X, Karmali S. Revisional bariatric surgery following failed primary laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy: a systematic review. Obes Surg. 2014; 24(10):1757-1763.	308.	Nedelcu M, Noel P, Iannelli A, Gagner M. Revised sleeve gastrectomy (re-sleeve). Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2015;11(6): 1282-1288.	309.	Dykstra M SN, et al. Roux-en-Y gastric bypass: how and why it fails? Surg Curr Res. 2014;4:165.	310.	Tsai WS, Inge TH, Burd RS. Bariatric surgery in adolescents: recent national trends in use and in-hospital outcome. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2007;161(3):217-221.	311.	Zwintscher NP, Azarow KS, Horton JD, Newton CR, Martin MJ. The increasing incidence of adolescent bariatric surgery. J Pediatr Surg. 2013;48(12):2401-2407.	312.	Treadwell JR, Sun F, Schoelles K. Systematic review and meta-analysis of bariatric surgery for pediatric obesity.  Ann Surg. 2008;248(5):763-776.	313.	Michalsky M, Reichard K, Inge T, et al. ASMBS pediatric committee best practice guidelines. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2012;8(1):1-7.	314.	Inge TH, Zeller M, Harmon C, et al. Teen-Longitudinal Assessment of Bariatric Surgery: methodological features of the first prospective multicenter study of adolescent bariatric surgery. J Pediatr Surg. 2007;42(11):1969-1971.	315.	Inge TH, Zeller MH, Jenkins TM, et al. Perioperative outcomes of adolescents undergoing bariatric surgery:  the Teen-Longitudinal Assessment of Bariatric Surgery  (Teen-LABS) study. JAMA Pediatr. 2014;168(1):47-53.	316.	Bariatric Surgery for Adolescents and Young Adults: A Review of Comparative Clinical Effec-tiveness, Cost-Effectiveness, and Evidence-Based Guidelines [Internet]. Ottawa (ON): Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health; 2016 Aug 3.	317.	Klebanoff MJ, Chhatwal J, Nudel JD, Corey KE, Kaplan LM, Hur C. Cost-effectiveness of bariatric surgery in adolescents with obesity. JAMA Surg. 2017;152(2):136-141.	318.	Sampalis JS, Liberman M, Auger S, Christou NV. The impact of weight reduction surgery on health-care costs in morbidly obese patients. Obes Surg. 2004;14(7):939-947.	319.	Cremieux PY, Buchwald H, Shikora SA, Ghosh A, Yang HE, Buessing M. A study on the economic impact of bariatric surgery. Am J Manag Care. 2008;14(9):589-596.	320.	Finkelstein EA, Allaire BT, Burgess SM, Hale BC. Financial implications of coverage for laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2011;7(3):295-303.	321.	Neovius M, Narbro K, Keating C, et al. Health care use during 20 years following bariatric surgery. JAMA. 2012;308(11):1132-1141.	322.	Weiner JP, Goodwin SM, Chang HY, et al. Impact of bariatric surgery on health care costs of obese persons: a 6-year follow-up of surgical and comparison cohorts using health plan data. JAMA Surg. 2013;148(6):555-562.	323.	Picot J, Jones J, Colquitt JL, et al. The clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of bariatric (weight loss) surgery for obesity: a systematic review and economic evaluation. Health Technol Assess. 2009;13(41):1-190, 215-357, iii-iv.	324.	Padwal R, Klarenbach S, Wiebe N, et al. Bariatric surgery: a systematic review of the clinical and economic evidence.  J Gen Intern Med. 2011;26(10):1183-1194.	325.	Blondet JJ, Morton JM, Nguyen NT. Hospital accreditation and bariatric surgery: is it important? Adv Surg. 2015;49:123-129.	326.	Surgery, A. C. o. S. a. A. S. f. M. a. B. (2016). Standards Manual V2.0: Resources for Optimal Care of the Metabolic and bariatric Surgery patient 2016 (pp. 1-62). https://www.facs.org/quality-programs/mbsaqip: American College of Surgery.	327.	Azagury D, Morton JM. Bariatric surgery outcomes in us accredited vs non-accredited centers: a systematic review.  J Am Coll Surg. 2016;223(3):469-477.	328.	Froylich D, Corcelles R, Daigle CR, et al. Weight loss is higher among patients who undergo body contouring procedures after bariatric surgery. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2016;12(9):1731-1736.	329.	Hurwitz DJ. Body contouring surgery in the bariatric surgical patient. In: Operative Techniques in Plastic Surgery and Reconstructive Surgery. New York: Elsevier; 2002:87.	330.	Hurwitz DJ. Single-staged total body lift after massive weight loss. Ann Plast Surg. 2004;52(5):435-441; discussion 441.	331.	Balague N, Combescure C, Huber O, Pittet-Cuenod B, Modarressi A. Plastic surgery improves long-term weight control after bariatric surgery. Plast Reconstruct Surg. 2013;132(4):826-833.Brunicardi_Ch27_p1167-p1218.indd   121823/02/19   2:21 PM
# Chunk 8930
Small IntestineAli Tavakkoli, Stanley W. Ashley, and  Michael J. Zinner 28chapterINTRODUCTORY COMMENTSThe small intestine is a remarkable and complex organ that is not only the principle site of nutrient digestion and absorption but also contains the body’s largest reservoir of immunologi-cally active and hormone-producing cells. Hence, it can be con-ceptualized as the largest organ of the immune and endocrine systems.1 It achieves this diversity of action through unique anatomical features, which provide it with a massive sur-face area, a diversity of cell types, and a complex neural network to coordinate these functions.Despite the size and importance of the small intestine, diseases of this organ are relatively infrequent and can present diagnostic and therapeutic challenges. Despite introduction of novel imaging techniques such as capsule endoscopy and dou-ble balloon endoscopy, diagnostic tests lack sufficient ability to reliably assess the small bowel. Furthermore, few high-quality, controlled data on the efficacy of surgical therapies for small bowel diseases are available.1Therefore, sound clinical judgment and a thorough under-standing of anatomy, physiology, and pathophysiology remain essential to the care of patients with suspected small bowel disorders.GROSS ANATOMYThe small intestine is a tubular structure that extends from the pylorus to the cecum. The estimated length varies depending on whether radiologic, surgical, or autopsy measurements are made. In the living, it is thought to measure 4 to 6 meters.2 The small intestine consists of three segments lying in series: the duodenum, the jejunum, and the ileum. The duodenum, the most proximal segment, lies in the retroperitoneum immediately adja-cent to the head and inferior border of the body of the pancreas. The duodenum is demarcated from the stomach by the pylorus and from the jejunum by the ligament of Treitz. The jejunum and ileum lie within the peritoneal cavity and are tethered to the Introductory Comments1219Gross Anatomy1219Histology1220Development1221Physiology1222Digestion and Absorption / 1222Barrier and Immune Function / 1225Motility / 1226Endocrine Function / 1227Intestinal Adaptation / 1228Small Bowel Obstruction1228Epidemiology / 1228Pathophysiology / 1229Clinical Presentation / 1229Diagnosis / 1229Therapy / 1231Outcomes / 1232Prevention / 1233Other Causes of Small  Bowel Obstruction / 1233Ileus and Other Disorders of Intestinal Motility1233Pathophysiology / 1233Clinical Presentation / 1234Diagnosis / 1234Therapy / 1234Crohn’s Disease1235Pathophysiology / 1235Clinical Presentation / 1236Diagnosis / 1237Therapy / 1238Outcomes / 1240Intestinal Fistulas1240Pathophysiology / 1240Clinical Presentation / 1240Diagnosis / 1240Therapy / 1241Outcomes / 1241Small Bowel Neoplasms1241Pathophysiology / 1242Clinical Presentation / 1243Diagnosis / 1243Therapy / 1244Outcomes / 1245Radiation Enteritis1245Pathophysiology / 1245Clinical Presentation / 1245Diagnosis / 1245Therapy / 1246Outcomes / 1246Prevention / 1246Meckel’s Diverticula1246Pathophysiology / 1246Clinical Presentation / 1247Diagnosis / 1247Therapy / 1248Acquired Diverticula1248Pathophysiology / 1249Clinical Presentation / 1250Diagnosis / 1250Therapy / 1250Mesenteric Ischemia1250Miscellaneous Conditions1250Obscure GI Bleeding / 1250Small Bowel Perforation / 1251Chylous Ascites / 1252Intussusception / 1253Pneumatosis Intestinalis / 1253Short Bowel Syndrome1254Pathophysiology / 1254Therapy / 1255Outcomes / 1255Brunicardi_Ch28_p1219-p1258.indd   121923/02/19   2:24 PM 1220JejunumIleumKey Points1	The small intestine performs a diverse set of functions.2	Small bowel obstruction is one of the most common surgical diagnoses.3	Most cases of small bowel obstruction are due to adhe-sions from previous surgery and resolve with conservative management.4	Tumors and malignancies of the small bowel are rare and difficult to diagnose. 5	If following surgical resection less than 200 cm of small bowel remains, patients are at risk of developing short bowel syndrome.retroperitoneum by a broad-based mesentery. No distinct ana-tomical landmark demarcates the jejunum from the ileum; the proximal 40% of the jejunoileal segment is arbitrarily defined as the jejunum and the distal 60% as the ileum. The ileum is demarcated from the cecum by the ileocecal valve.The small intestine contains internal mucosal folds known as plicae circulares or valvulae conniventes that are visible upon gross inspection. These folds are also visible radiographically and help in the distinction between small intestine and colon, which does not contain them, on abdominal radiographs. These folds are more prominent in the proximal intestine than in the distal small intestine. Other features evident on gross inspection that are more characteristic of the proximal than distal small intestine include larger circumference, thicker wall, less fatty mesentery, and longer vasa recta (Fig. 28-1). Gross examination of the small-intestinal mucosa also reveals aggregates of lymphoid follicles. Those follicles, located in the ileum, are the most prominent and are designated Peyer’s patches.Most of the duodenum derives its arterial blood from branches of both the celiac and the superior mesenteric arteries. The distal duodenum, the jejunum, and the ileum derive their arterial blood from the superior mesenteric artery. Their venous drainage occurs via the superior mesenteric vein. Lymph drain-age occurs through lymphatic vessels coursing parallel to corre-sponding arteries. This lymph drains through mesenteric lymph nodes to the cisterna chyli, then through the thoracic duct, and ultimately into the left subclavian vein. The parasympathetic and sympathetic innervation of the small intestine is derived from the vagus and splanchnic nerves, respectively.HISTOLOGYThe wall of the small intestine consists of four distinct layers: mucosa, submucosa, muscularis propria, and serosa (Fig. 28-2).The mucosa is the innermost layer and it consists of  three layers: epithelium, lamina propria, and muscularis mucosae. The epithelium is exposed to the intestinal lumen and is the surface through which absorption from and secretion into the lumen occurs. The lamina propria is located immediately external to the epithelium and consists of connective tissue and a heterogeneous population of cells. It is demarcated from the more external submucosa by the muscularis mucosae, a thin sheet of smooth muscle cells.The mucosa is organized into villi and crypts (crypts of Lieberkuhn). Villi are finger-like projections of epithelium and underlying lamina propria that contain blood and lymphatic (lacteals) vessels that extend into the intestinal lumen. Intes-tinal, epithelial cellular proliferation is confined to the crypts, each of which carries 250 to 300 cells. All epithelial cells in each crypt are derived from an unknown number of multipotent stem cells located at or near the crypt’s base. Our understanding of these crypt cells is rapidly expanding. It appears that there are two subgroups of intestinal stem cells, with specific cell markers. Bmi1-positive cells are usually quiescent, radiation-resistant cells that are induced by injury, while LGR5-positive cells facilitate homeostatic vs. injury-induced regeneration and are radiation sensitive.3The stem cells can differentiate along one of four path-ways that ultimately yield enterocytes and goblet, enteroendo-crine, and Paneth cells. Except for Paneth cells, these lineages complete their terminal differentiation during an upward migra-tion from each crypt to adjacent villi. The journey from the crypt to the villus tip is completed in 2 to 5 days and terminates with cells being removed by apoptosis and/or exfoliation. Thus, the small-intestinal epithelium undergoes continuous renewal, mak-ing it one of the body’s most dynamic tissues. The high cellular turnover rate contributes to mucosal resiliency but also makes the intestine uniquely susceptible to certain forms of injury such as that induced by radiation and chemotherapy.Figure 28-1. Gross features of jejunum contrasted with those of ileum. Relative to the ileum, the jejunum has a larger diameter, a thicker wall, more prominent plicae circulares, a less fatty mesentery, and longer vasa recta.Brunicardi_Ch28_p1219-p1258.indd   122023/02/19   2:24 PM 1221SMALL INTESTINECHAPTER 284. MucosaCircular layerLongitudinallayer2. Muscularis propriaSubserous layer1. SerosaVascular network,longisection of villusSimple columnar epitheliumwith mucous cellsLamina propria,smooth muscle cells, blood vesselsCentral lymph capillary (lacteal)Muscularis mucosae3. Submucosa4321Opening of crypts (of Lieberkühn)Figure 28-2. Layers of wall of the small intestine. The individual layers and their prominent features are repre-sented schematically.Enterocytes are the predominant absorptive cell of the intestinal epithelium. Their apical (lumen-facing) cell mem-brane contains specialized digestive enzymes, transporter mechanisms, and microvilli that are estimated to increase the absorptive surface area of the small intestine by up to 40-fold. Goblet cells produce mucin believed to play a role in mucosal defense against pathogens. Enteroendocrine cells are charac-terized by secretory granules containing regulatory agents and are discussed in greater detail in the “Endocrine Function” section. Paneth cells are located at the base of the crypt and contain secretory granules containing growth factors, diges-tive enzymes, and antimicrobial peptides, through which they control the host-microbe interaction and influence the intestinal  microbiome. In addition, the intestinal epithelium contains  M cells and intraepithelial lymphocytes. These two components of the immune system are discussed in this chapter.The submucosa consists of dense connective tissue and a heterogeneous population of cells, including leukocytes and fibroblasts. The submucosa also contains an extensive network of vascular and lymphatic vessels, nerve fibers, and ganglion cells of the submucosal (Meissner’s) plexus.The muscularis propria consists of an outer, longitudinally-oriented layer and an inner, circularly-oriented layer of smooth muscle fibers. Located at the interface between these two layers are ganglion cells of the myenteric (Auerbach’s) plexus.The serosa consists of a single layer of mesothelial cells and is a component of the visceral peritoneum.DEVELOPMENTThe first recognizable precursor of the small intestine is the embryonic gut tube, formed from the endoderm during the fourth week of gestation. The gut tube is divided into forgut, midgut, and hindgut. Other than the duodenum, which is a forgut structure, the rest of the small intestine is derived from the midgut. The gut tube initially communicates with the yolk sac; however, the communication between these two struc-tures narrows by the sixth week to form the vitelline duct. The yolk sac and vitelline duct usually undergo obliteration by the end of gestation. Incomplete obliteration of the vitelline duct results in the spectrum of defects associated with Meckel’s diverticuli.Also during the fourth week of gestation, the mesoderm of the embryo splits. The portion of mesoderm that adheres to the endoderm forms the visceral peritoneum, while the portion that adheres to the ectoderm forms the parietal peritoneum. This mesodermal division results in the formation of a coelomic cav-ity that is the precursor of the peritoneal cavity.At approximately the fifth week of gestation, the bowel begins to lengthen to an extent greater than that which can be accommodated by the developing abdominal cavity, resulting in the extracoelomic herniation of the developing bowel. The bowel continues to lengthen during the subsequent weeks and is retracted back into the abdominal cavity during the tenth week of gestation. Subsequently, the duodenum becomes a retroperitoneal structure. Coincident with extrusion and retraction, the bowel undergoes a 270° counterclockwise rotation relative to the posterior abdominal wall. This rotation accounts for the usual locations of the cecum in the right lower quadrant and the duodenojejunal junction to the left of midline (Fig. 28-3).The celiac and superior mesenteric arteries and veins are derived from the vitelline vascular system, which in turn is derived from blood vessels formed within the splanchnopleuric mesoderm during the third week of gestation. Neurons found in the small intestine are derived from neural crest cells that begin to migrate away from the neural tube during the third week of gestation. These neural crest cells enter the mesenchyme of the primitive foregut and subsequently migrate to the remainder of the bowel.During the sixth week of gestation, the lumen of the developing bowel becomes obliterated as bowel epithelial proliferation accelerates. Vacuoles form within the bowel substance during the subsequent weeks and coalesce to form the intestinal lumen by the ninth week of gestation. Errors in this recanalization may account for defects such as intestinal webs and stenoses. Most intestinal atresias, however, are believed to be related to ischemic episodes occurring after organogenesis has been completed rather than to errors in recanalization.During the ninth week of gestation, the intestinal epithe-lium develops intestine-specific features such as crypt-villus architecture. Organogenesis is complete by approximately the twelfth week of gestation.Brunicardi_Ch28_p1219-p1258.indd   122123/02/19   2:24 PM 1222SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIStomachDuodenumProximal limb of prim.intestinal loopVitelline ductDistal limb of prim. intestinal loopSuperiormesentericarteryStomachTransverse colonCecal budVitelline ductAscending colonJejunoileal loopsACDuodenumCecal budTransverse colonSmall intestineHepatic flextureAppendixTransversecolonDescending colonSigmoidcolonCecumBDFigure 28-3. Developmental rotation of the intestine. A. During the fifth week of gestation, the developing intestine herniates out of the coelomic cavity and begins to undergo a counterclockwise rotation about the axis of the superior mesenteric artery. B and C. Intestinal rotation continues, as the developing transverse colon passes anterior to the developing duodenum. D. Final positions of the small intestine and colon resulting from a 270° counterclockwise rotation of the developing intestine and its return into the abdominal cavity.• Oral intake 2000 mL• Saliva 1500 mL• Gastric secretions 2500• Bile 500 mL• Pancreatic   secretions 1500 mL• Small intestinal   secretions 1000 mL• Small intestinal  absorption 7500 mL•1500 mL to colonFigure 28-4. Small intestinal fluid fluxes. Typical quantities  (in volume per day) of fluid entering and leaving the small intestinal lumen in a healthy adult are shown.PHYSIOLOGYDigestion and AbsorptionThe intestinal epithelium is the interface through which absorp-tion and secretion occur. It has features characteristic of absorp-tive epithelia in general, including epithelial cells with cellular membranes possessing distinct apical (luminal) and basolateral (serosal) domains demarcated by intercellular tight junctions and an asymmetric distribution of transmembrane transporter mechanisms that promotes vectorial transport of solutes across the epithelium.Solutes can traverse the epithelium by active or passive transport. Passive transport of solutes occurs through diffusion or convection and is driven by existing electrochemical gradi-ents. Active transport is the energy-dependent net transfer of solutes in the absence of or against an electrochemical gradient.Active transport occurs through transcellular pathways (through the cell), whereas passive transport can occur through either transcellular or paracellular pathways (between cells through the tight junctions). Transcellular transport requires solutes to traverse the cell membranes through specialized membrane proteins, such as channels, carriers, and pumps. The molecular characterization of transporter proteins is evolving rapidly, with different transporter families, each containing many individual genes encoding specific transporters, now identified. Similarly, understanding of the paracellular pathway is evolving. In contrast to what was once believed, it is becoming apparent that paracellular permeability is substrate-specific, dynamic, and subject to regulation by specific tight junction proteins.Water and Electrolyte Absorption and Secretion. Eight to 9 L of fluid enter the small intestine daily. Most of this volume consists of salivary, gastric, biliary, pancreatic, and intestinal secretions. Under normal conditions, the small intestine absorbs over 80 percent of this fluid, leaving approximately 1.5 L  that enters the colon (Fig. 28-4). Small-intestinal absorption and secretion are tightly regulated; derangements in water and electrolyte homeostasis characteristic of many of the disorders discussed in this chapter play an important role in contributing to their associated clinical features.Gut epithelia have two pathways for water transport: (a) the paracellular route, which involves transport through the spaces between cells, (b) the transcellular route, through apical and the basolateral cell membranes, with most occurring through Brunicardi_Ch28_p1219-p1258.indd   122223/02/19   2:24 PM 1223SMALL INTESTINECHAPTER 28the transcellular pathway.4 The specific transport mechanisms mediating this transcellular transport are not completely char-acterized, and they may involve passive diffusion through the phospholipid bilayer, cotransport with other ions and nutrients, or diffusion through water channels called aquaporins. Many different types of aquaporins have been identified; however, their contribution to overall intestinal water absorption appears to be relatively minor.5The prevailing model for intestinal epithelial Na+ absorp-tion is shown in Fig. 28-5. Activity of the Na+/K+ ATPase enzyme, which is located in the basolateral membrane and exchanges three intracellular Na+ for every two extracellular K+ in an energy-dependent process, generates the electrochemi-cal gradient that drives the transport of Na+ from the intestinal lumen into the cytoplasm of enterocytes. Na+ ions traverse the apical membrane through several distinct transporter mecha-nisms, including nutrient-coupled sodium transport (e.g., sodium glucose cotransporter-1, SGLT1), sodium channels, and sodium-hydrogen exchangers (NHEs). Absorbed Na+ ions are then extruded from enterocytes through the Na+/K+ ATPase located in the basolateral membrane. Similar mechanistic mod-els that account for the transport of other common ions such as K+ and HCO3also exist.Substantial heterogeneity, with respect to both crypt-villus and craniocaudal axes, exists for intestinal epithelial transport mechanisms. This spatial distribution pattern is consistent with a model in which absorptive function resides primarily in the villus and secretory function in the crypt.Intestinal absorption and secretion are subject to modu-lation under physiologic and pathophysiologic conditions by a wide array of hormonal, neural, and immune regulatory media-tors (Table 28-1).Carbohydrate Digestion and Absorption. Approximately 45% of energy consumption in the average Western diet con-sists of carbohydrates, approximately one-half of which is in the form of starch (linear or branched polymers of glucose) derived from cereals and plants. Other major sources of dietary carbo-hydrates include sugars derived from milk (lactose), fruits and LUMEN –BLOOD +Na+GlucoseNa+K+Na+Na+H+Figure 28-5. Model of transepithelial Na+ absorption. Na+ traverses the apical membrane of enterocytes through a variety mechanisms, including nutrient-coupled Na+ transport, Na+/H+ exchange, and Na+ channels. Activity of the Na+/K+ATPase located on the basolateral membrane generates the electrochemical gradient that provides the driving force for Na+ absorption.Table 28-1Regulation of intestinal absorption and secretionAgents that stimulate absorption or inhibit secretion of water Aldosterone Glucocorticoids Angiotensin Norepineprhine Epinephrine Dopamine Somatostatin Neuropeptide Y Peptide YY EnkephalinAgents that simulate secretion or inhibit absorption of water Secretin Bradykinin Prostaglandins Acetylcholine Atrial natriuretic factor Vasopressin Vasoactive intestinal peptide Bombesin Substance P Serotonin Neurotensin Histaminevegetables (fructose, glucose, and sucrose), or purified from sugar cane or beets (sucrose). Processed foods contain a vari-ety of sugars including fructose, oligosaccharides, and polysac-charides. Glycogen derived from meat contributes only a small fraction of dietary carbohydrate.Pancreatic amylase is the major enzyme of starch diges-tion, although salivary amylase initiates the process. The ter-minal products of amylase-mediated starch digestion are oligosaccharides, maltotriose, maltose, and alpha-limit dextrins (Fig. 28-6). These products, as well as the major disaccharides in the diet (sucrose and lactose), are unable to undergo absorp-tion in this form. They must first undergo hydrolytic cleavage into their constituent monosaccharides; these hydrolytic reac-tions are catalyzed by specific brush border membrane hydro-lases that are expressed most abundantly in the villi of the duodenum and jejunum. The three major monosaccharides that represent the terminal products of carbohydrate digestion are glucose, galactose, and fructose.Under physiologic conditions, most of these sugars are absorbed through the epithelium via the transcellular route. Glucose and galactose are transported through the enterocyte brush border membrane via intestinal Na+–glucose cotrans-porter, SGLT1 (Fig. 28-7). Fructose is transported through the brush border membrane by facilitated diffusion via GLUT5 (a member of the facilitative glucose transporter family). All three monosaccharides are extruded through the basolateral membrane by facilitated diffusion using GLUT2 and five trans-porters. Extruded monosaccharides diffuse into venules and ulti-mately enter the portal venous system.There is evidence of overexpression of hexose transport-ers, specifically SGLT1, in disease states such as diabetes.6 Several approaches aimed at downregulation of small intestinal Brunicardi_Ch28_p1219-p1258.indd   122323/02/19   2:24 PM 1224SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIGlucose, galactose, fructoseAbsorptionDietary starchSalivary amylasePancreatic amylaseBrush-border hydrolasesOligosaccharidesMaltotrioseMaltosea-limit dextransSucrose and lactoseFigure 28-6. Carbohydrate digestion. Dietary carbohydrates, including starch and the disaccharides sucrose and lactose, must undergo hydrolysis into constituent monosaccharides glucose, galactose, and fructose before being absorbed by the intestinal  epithelium. These hydrolytic reactions are catalyzed by salivary and pancreatic amylase and by enterocyte brush border hydrolases.LUMENTight junctionTight junctionBLOOD SGLT1GLUT5GLUT5GLUT2FructoseFructoseNa+GlucoseGalactoseGlucoseGalactoseNa+Figure 28-7. Hexose transporters. Glucose and galactose enter the enterocyte through secondary active transport via the sodium-glucose cotransporter (SGLT1) located on the apical (brush border) membrane. Fructose enters through facilitated diffusion via glucose transporter 5 (GLUT5). Glucose and galactose are extruded basolaterally through facilitated diffusion via glucose transporter 2 (GLUT2). Fructose is extruded basolaterally via GLUT5.Dipeptides + Tripeptides + Amino acidsAbsorptionDietary proteinsPolypeptidesAmino acidsTrypsinChymotrypsinElastaseCarboxypeptidase ACarboxypeptidase BOligopeptidesBrush-borderpeptidasesAmino acids++PepsinFigure 28-8. Protein digestion. Dietary proteins must undergo hydrolysis into constituent single amino acids and diand tri-peptides before being absorbed by the intestinal epithelium. These hydrolytic reactions are catalyzed by pancreatic peptidases  (e.g., trypsin) and by enterocyte brush border peptidases.glucose transporter are being investigated as a novel therapy for disease states such as diabetes and obesity. In fact, recent con-sensus statements have recognized the small bowel as a thera-peutic target for treatment of diabetes.7Protein Digestion and Absorption. Ten percent to 15% of energy consumption in the average Western diet consists of pro-teins. In addition to dietary proteins, approximately one-half of the protein load that enters the small intestine is derived from endogenous sources, including salivary and gastrointestinal secretions and desquamated intestinal epithelial cells. Protein digestion begins in the stomach with action of pepsins. This is not, however, an essential step because surgical patients who are acholorhydric, or have lost part or all their stomach, are still able to successfully digest proteins. Digestion continues in the duodenum with the actions of a variety of pancreatic peptidases. These enzymes are secreted as inactive proenzymes. This con-trasts with pancreatic amylase and lipase, which are secreted in their active forms. In response to the presence of bile acids, enterokinase is liberated from the intestinal brush border mem-brane to catalyze the conversion of trypsinogen to active tryp-sin; trypsin in turn activates itself and other proteases. The final products of intraluminal protein digestion consist of neutral and basic amino acids and peptides two to six amino acids in length (Fig. 28-8). Additional digestion occurs through the actions of peptidases that exist in the enterocyte brush border and cyto-plasm. Epithelial absorption occurs for both single amino acids and dior tripeptides via specific membrane-bound transporters. Absorbed amino acids and peptides then enter the portal venous circulation.Of all amino acids, glutamine appears to be a unique, major source of energy for enterocytes. Active glutamine uptake into enterocytes occurs through both apical and basolateral transport mechanisms.Fat Digestion and Absorption. Approximately 40% of the average Western diet consists of fat. Over 95% of dietary fat is in the form of long-chain triglycerides; the remainder includes phospholipids such as lecithin, fatty acids, cholesterol, and Brunicardi_Ch28_p1219-p1258.indd   122423/02/19   2:24 PM 1225SMALL INTESTINECHAPTER 28Dietary long-chaintriglyceridesShort& medium-chaintriglyceridesLong-chain fatty acidsand monoglyceridesTriglyceridesresynthesizedin enterocytesGastric lipasePancreatic lipaseChyle (lymphatics)Portal venous bloodAbsorbedAbsorbedFigure 28-9. Fat digestion. Long-chain triglycerides, which constitute the majority of dietary fats, must undergo lipolysis into constituent log-chain fatty acids and monoglycerides before being absorbed by the intestinal epithelium. These reactions are catalyzed by gastric and pancreatic lipases. The products of lipolysis are transported in the form of mixed micelles to enterocytes, where they are resynthesized into triglycerides, which are then packaged in the form of chylomicrons that are secreted into the intestinal lymph (chyle). Triglycerides composed of shortand medium-chain fatty acids are absorbed by the intestinal epithelium directly, without undergoing lipolysis, and are secreted into the portal venous circulation.fat-soluble vitamins. Over 94% of the ingested fats are absorbed in the proximal jejunum.Since fats are normally water insoluble, key to success-ful digestion of ingested fats is solubalization of them into an emulsion by the mechanical actions of mastication and antral peristalsis. Although lipolysis of triglycerides to form fatty acids and monoglyciderides is initiated in the stomach by gastric lipase, its principal site is the proximal intestine, where pancre-atic lipase is the catalyst (Fig. 28-9).Bile acids act as detergents that help in solubalization of the lipolysis by forming mixed micelles. These micelles are polymolecular aggregates with a hydrophobic core of fat and a hydrophillic surface that act as shuttles, delivering the products of lipolysis to the enterocyte brush border membrane, where they are absorbed. The bile salts, however, remain in the bowel lumen and travel to the terminal ileum, where they are actively resorbed. They enter the portal circulation and are resecreted into bile, thus completing the enterohepatic circulation.Dissociation of lipids from the micelles occurs in a thin layer of water (50 to 500 μm thick) with an acidic microenvi-ronment immediately adjacent to the brush border called the unstirred water layer. Most lipids are absorbed in the proxi-mal jejunum, whereas bile salts are absorbed in the distal ileum through an active process. Fatty acid binding proteins (FABP) are a family of proteins located on the brush border membrane, facilitating diffusion of long-chain fatty acids across the brush border membrane. Cholesterol crosses the brush border mem-brane through an active process that is yet to be completely characterized. Within the enterocytes, triglycerides are resyn-thesized and incorporated into chylomicrons that are secreted into the intestinal lymphatics and ultimately enter the thoracic duct. In these chylomicrons, lipoproteins serve a detergent-like role similar to that served by bile salts in the mixed micelles.The aforementioned steps are required for the digestion and absorption of triglycerides containing long-chain fatty acids. However, triglycerides containing shortand medium-chain fatty acids are more hydrophilic and are absorbed without undergoing intralumenal hydrolysis, micellular solubilization, mucosal reesterification, and chylomicron formation. Instead, they are directly absorbed and enter the portal venous circula-tion rather than the lymphatics. This information provides the rationale for administering nutritional supplements containing medium-chain triglycerides to patients with gastrointestinal dis-eases associated with impaired digestion and/or malabsorption of long-chain triglycerides.Vitamin and Mineral Absorption. Vitamin B12 (cobalamin) malabsorption can result from a variety of surgical manipula-tions. The vitamin is initially bound by saliva-derived R protein. In the duodenum, R protein is hydrolyzed by pancreatic enzymes, allowing free cobalamin to bind to gastric parietal cell-derived intrinsic factor. The cobalamin-intrinsic factor complex can escape hydrolysis by pancreatic enzymes, allowing it to reach the terminal ileum, which expresses specific receptors for intrin-sic factor. Subsequent events in cobalamin absorption are poorly characterized, but the intact complex probably enters enterocytes through translocation. Because each of these steps is necessary for cobalamin assimilation, gastric resection, gastric bypass, and ileal resection can each result in vitamin B12 insufficiency.Other water-soluble vitamins for which specific carrier-mediated transport processes have been characterized include ascorbic acid, folate, thiamine, riboflavin, pantothenic acid, and biotin. Fat-soluble vitamins A, D, and E appear to be absorbed through passive diffusion. Vitamin K appears to be absorbed through both passive diffusion and carrier-mediated uptake.Calcium is absorbed through both transcellular transport and paracellular diffusion. The duodenum is the major site for transcellular transport; paracellular transport occurs throughout the small intestine. A key step in transcellular calcium transport is mediated by calbindin, a calcium-binding protein located in the cytoplasm of enterocytes. Regulation of calbindin synthesis is the principle mechanism by which vitamin D regulates intes-tinal calcium absorption. Abnormal calcium levels are increas-ingly seen in surgical patients who have undergone a gastric bypass. Although usual calcium supplementation is often in the form of calcium carbonate, which is cheap, in such patients with low acid exposure, calcium citrate is a better formulation for supplemental therapy.Iron and magnesium are each absorbed through both tran-scellular and paracellular routes. A divalent metal transporter capable of transporting Fe2+, Zn2+, Mn2+, Co2+, Cd2+, Cu2+, Ni2+, and Pb2+ that has been localized to the intestinal brush border may account for at least a portion of the transcellular absorption of these ions.8Barrier and Immune FunctionAlthough the intestinal epithelium allows for the efficient absorption of dietary nutrients, it must discriminate between pathogens and harmless antigens such as food proteins and com-mensal bacteria, and it must resist invasion by pathogens. Fac-tors contributing to epithelial defense include immunoglobulin A (IgA), mucins, and the relative impermeability of the brush border membrane and tight junctions to macromolecules and Brunicardi_Ch28_p1219-p1258.indd   122523/02/19   2:24 PM 1226SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIIntestinal lumenPeyer’s patchLamina propriaFAESEDDCGCIgAPlasmacellM cellBVillusTTbacteria. Other factors likely to play important roles in intesti-nal mucosal defense include antimicrobial peptides such as the defensins.9 The intestinal component of the immune system, known as the gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT), contains over 70% of the body’s immune cells.The GALT is conceptually divided into inductive and effector sites.10 Inductive sites include Peyer’s patches, mesenteric lymph nodes, and smaller isolated lymphoid follicles scattered throughout the small intestine (Fig. 28-10). Peyer’s patches are macroscopic aggregates of B-cell follicles and intervening T-cell areas found in the lamina propria of the small intestine, primarily the distal ileum. Overlying Peyer’s patches is a specialized epithelium containing microfold (M) cells. These cells possess an apical membrane with microfolds rather than microvilli, which is characteristic of most intestinal epithelial cells. Using transepithelial vesicular transport, M cells transfer microbes to underlying professional antigen presenting cells (APCs), such as dendritic cells. Dendritic cells, in addition, may sample luminal antigens directly through their dendrite-like processes that extend through epithelial tight junctions. APCs interact with and prime naive lymphocytes, which then exit through the draining lymphatics to enter the mesenteric lymph nodes, where they undergo differentiation. These lymphocytes then migrate into the systemic circulation via the thoracic duct and ultimately accumulate in the intestinal mucosa at effector sites. Alternative induction mechanisms, such as antigen presentation within mesenteric lymph nodes, are also likely to exist.Effector lymphocytes are distributed into distinct compart-ments. IgA-producing plasma cells are derived from B cells and are located in the lamina propria. CD4+ T cells are also located in the lamina propria. CD8+ T cells migrate preferentially to the epithelium, but they are also found in the lamina propria. These T cells are central to immune regulation; in addition, the CD8+ T cells have potent cytotoxic (CTL) activity. IgA is transported through the intestinal epithelial cells into the lumen, where it exists in the form of a dimer complexed with a secretory component. This configuration renders IgA resistant to proteolysis by diges-tive enzymes. IgA is believed to both help prevent the entry of microbes through the epithelium and to promote excretion of anti-gens or microbes that have already penetrated the laminal propria.It has been increasingly recognized that the gastrointestinal tract is colonized with many bacteria that are essential for health. Communication between the microbiota and the host defense allows for protective immune responses against pathogens while preventing adverse inflammatory responses to harmless com-mensal microbes, which could lead to chronic inflammatory dis-orders such as celiac disease and Crohn’s disease.11MotilityMyocytes of the intestinal muscle layers are electrically and mechanically coordinated in the form of syncytia. Contractions of the muscularis propria are responsible for small-intestinal peri-stalsis. Contraction of the outer longitudinal muscle layer results in bowel shortening; contraction of the inner circular layer results in luminal narrowing. Contractions of the muscularis mucosa contribute to mucosal or villus motility, but not to peristalsis.Several distinctive patterns of muscularis propria activity have been observed to occur in the small intestine. These patterns include ascending excitation and descending inhibition in which muscular contraction occurs proximal to a stimulus, such as the presence of a bolus of ingested food, and muscular relaxation occurs distal to the stimulus (Fig. 28-11). These two reflexes are present even in the absence of any extrinsic innervation to the small intestine and contribute to peristalsis when they are propagated in a coordinated fashion along the length of the intestine. The fed or postprandial pattern begins within 10 to 20 minutes of meal ingestion and abates 4 to 6 hours afterwards. Rhythmic segmentations or pressure waves traveling only short distances also are observed. This segmenting pattern is hypothesized to assist in mixing intraluminal contents and in facilitating their contact with the absorptive mucosal surface. The fasting pattern or interdigestive motor cycle (IDMC) consists of three phases. Phase 1 is characterized by motor quiescence, phase 2 by seemingly disorganized pressure waves occurring at submaximal rates, and phase 3 by sustained pressure waves occurring at maximal rates. This pattern is hypothesized to expel residual debris and bacteria from the small intestine. The median duration of the IDMC ranges from 90 to 120 minutes. At any given time, different portions of the small intestine can be in different phases of the IDMC.Figure 28-10. Gut-associated lymphoid tissue. Select components of the gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT) are schematically represented. Peyer’s patches consist of a specialized follicle-associated epithelium (FAE) containing M cells, a subepithelial dome (SED) rich in dendritic cells (DC), and B-cell follicle containing germinal centers (GC). Plasma cells in the lamina propria produce IgA, which is transported to the intestinal lumen where serves as the first line of defense against pathogens. Other components of the GALT include isolated lymphoid follicles, mesenteric lymph nodes, and regulatory and effector lymphocytes.Brunicardi_Ch28_p1219-p1258.indd   122623/02/19   2:24 PM 1227SMALL INTESTINECHAPTER 28EMNSNIMNProximalDistalFigure 28-11. Ascending excitation and descending inhibition. The presence of a food bolus within the intestinal lumen is sensed by a sensory neuron (SN) that relays signals to (a) excitatory motor neurons (EMN) that have projections to intestinal muscle cells located proximal to the food bolus and (b) inhibitory motor neu-rons (IMN) that have projections to intestinal muscle cells located distal to the food bolus. This stereotypical motor reflex is controlled by the enteric nervous system and occurs in the absence of extra-intestinal innervations. It contributes to peristalsis.The regulatory mechanisms driving small-intestinal motil-ity consist of both pacemakers intrinsic to the small intestine and external neurohumoral modulatory signals. The interstitial cells of Cajal are pleomorphic mesenchymal cells located within the muscularis propria of the intestine that generate the electrical slow wave (basic electrical rhythm or pacesetter potential) that plays a pacemaker role in setting the fundamental rhythmicity of small-intestinal contractions. The frequency of the slow wave varies along the longitudinal axis of the intestine: it ranges from 12 waves per minute in the duodenum to 7 waves per minute in the distal ileum. Smooth muscle contraction occurs only when an electrical action potential (spike burst) is superimposed on the slow wave. Thus, the slow wave determines the maximum frequency of contractions; however, not every slow wave is associated with a contraction.This intrinsic contractile mechanism is subject to neural and hormonal regulation. The enteric motor system (ENS) pro-vides both inhibitory and excitatory stimuli. The predominant excitatory transmitters are acetylcholine and substance P, and the inhibitory transmitters include nitric oxide, vasoactive intes-tinal peptide, and adenosine triphosphate. In general, the sympa-thetic motor supply is inhibitory to the ENS; therefore, increased sympathetic input into the intestine leads to decreased intestinal smooth muscle activity. The parasympathetic motor supply is more complex, with projections to both inhibitory and excitatory ENS motor neurons. Correspondingly, the effects of parasympa-thetic inputs into intestinal motility are more difficult to predict.Endocrine FunctionEndocrinology as a discipline was born with the discovery of secretin, an intestinal regulatory peptide that was the first hormone to be identified. Our improving understanding of the physiology of the small intestine has led to identification of many additional intestinal-derived hormones, which make this the largest hormone-producing organ in the body. Over 30 peptide hormone genes have been identified as being expressed in the gastrointestinal tract. Because of differential posttranscriptional and posttranslational processing, over 100 distinct regulatory peptides are produced. In addition, monoamines, such as histamine and dopamine, and eicosanoids with hormone-like activities are produced in the intestine.“Gut hormones” were previously conceptualized as pep-tides produced by the enteroendocrine cells of the intestinal mucosa that are released into the systemic circulation to reach receptors in target sites in the gastrointestinal tract. Now it is clear that “gut hormone” genes are widely expressed through-out the body, not only in endocrine cells but also in central and peripheral neurons. The products of these genes are general intercellular messengers that can act as endocrine, paracrine, autocrine, or neurocrine mediators. Thus, they may act as true blood-borne hormones as well as through local effects.There are notable homology patterns among individual regulatory peptides found in the gastrointestinal tract. Based on these homologies, approximately one-half of the known regulatory peptides can be classified into families.12 For example, the secretin family includes secretin, glucagon, and glucagon-like peptides, glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptide, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide, peptide histidine isoleucine, growth hormone releasing hormone, and pituitary adenylyl cyclase-activating peptide. Other peptide families include those named for insulin, epidermal growth factor, gastrin, pancreatic polypeptide, tachykinin, and somatostatin.Receptor subtype multiplicity and cell-specific expres-sion patterns for these receptor subtypes that are characteristic of these regulatory mediators makes definition of their actions complex. Detailed description of these actions is beyond the scope of this chapter; however, examples of regulatory pep-tides produced by enteroendocrine cells of the small-intestinal epithelium and their most commonly ascribed functions are summarized in Table 28-2. Some of these peptides, or their analogues, are used in routine clinical practice. For example, Table 28-2Representative regulatory peptides produced in the small intestineHORMONESOURCEaACTIONSSomatostatinD cellInhibits gastrointestinal secretion, motility, and splanchnic perfusionSecretinS cellStimulates exocrine pancreatic secretion, stimulates intestinal secretionCholecystokininI cellSimulates pancreatic exocrine secretion, simulates gallbladder emptying, inhibits sphincter of Oddi contractionMotilinM cellSimulates intestinal motilityPeptide YYL cellInhibits intestinal motility and secretionGlucagon-like Peptide 2L cellStimulates intestinal epithelial proliferationNeurotensinN cellStimulates pancreatic and biliary secretion, inhibits small bowel motility, stimulates intestinal mucosal growthaThis table indicates which enteroendocrine cell types located in the intestinal epithelium produce these peptides. These peptides are also widely expressed in nonintestinal tissues.Brunicardi_Ch28_p1219-p1258.indd   122723/02/19   2:24 PM 1228SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 28-3Small bowel obstruction: common etiologiesAdhesionsNeoplasms Primary small bowel neoplasms Secondary small bowel cancer (e.g., melanomaderived metastasis) Local invasion by intra-abdominal malignancy  (e.g., Desmoid tumors) CarcinomatosisHernias External (e.g., inguinal and femoral) Internal (e.g., following Roux-en-Y gastric bypass surgery)Crohn’s diseaseVolvulusIntussusceptionRadiation-induced stricturePostischemic strictureForeign bodyGallstone ileusDiverticulitisMeckel’s diverticulumHematomaCongenital abnormalities (e.g., webs, duplications,  and malrotation)therapeutic applications of octreotide, a long-acting analogue of somatostatin, include the amelioration of symptoms associ-ated with neuroendocrine tumors (e.g., carcinoid syndrome), postgastrectomy dumping syndrome, enterocutaneous fis-tulas, and the initial treatment of acute hemorrhage due to esophageal varices. The gastrin secretory response to secretin administration forms the basis for the standard test used to establish the diagnosis of Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Chole-cystokinin is used in evaluations of gallbladder ejection frac-tion, a parameter that may have utility in patients who have symptoms of biliary colic but are not found to have gallstones. Of the peptides listed in Table 28-2, glucagon-like peptide 2 (GLP-2) has been identified as a specific and potent intestino-trophic hormone and is currently under clinical evaluation as an intestinotrophic agent in patients suffering from the short bowel syndrome, as discussed in the “Short Bowel Syndrome” section.Intestinal AdaptationThe small intestine has the capacity to adapt in response to vary-ing demands imposed by physiologic and pathologic conditions. Of relevance to many of the diseases discussed in this chapter is the adaptation that occurs in the remnant intestine following surgical resection of a large portion of the small intestine (mas-sive small bowel resection). Postresection intestinal adaptation has been studied extensively using animal models. Within a few hours after bowel resection, the remnant small intestine displays evidence of epithelial cellular hyperplasia. With additional time, villi lengthen, intestinal absorptive surface area increases, and digestive and absorptive functions improve. Postresection intes-tinal adaptation in human patients is less well studied, but it seems to follow similar steps as that seen in experimental mod-els, and it takes 1 to 2 years to complete.13The mechanisms responsible for inducing postresection intestinal adaptation are under active investigation. Several classes of effectors that stimulate intestinal growth include spe-cific nutrients, peptide hormones and growth factors, pancreatic secretions, and some cytokines. Nutritional components with intestinal growth-stimulating effects include fiber, fatty acids, triglycerides, glutamine, polyamines, and lectins.Postresection adaptation serves to compensate for the function of intestine that has been resected. Jejunal resection is generally better tolerated, as ileum shows better capacity to compensate. However, the magnitude of this response is limited. If enough small intestine is resected, a devastating condition known as the short bowel syndrome results. This condition is discussed in the “Short Bowel Syndrome” section at the end of this chapter.SMALL BOWEL OBSTRUCTIONEpidemiologyMechanical small bowel obstruction is the most frequently encountered surgical disorder of the small intestine. Although a wide range of etiologies for this condition exist, the obstructing lesion can be conceptualized according to its anatomical relationship to the intestinal wall as:1.	intraluminal (e.g., foreign bodies, gallstones, or meconium)2.	intramural (e.g., tumors, Crohn’s disease–associated inflam-matory strictures)3.	extrinsic (e.g., adhesions, hernias, or carcinomatosis)2Intra-abdominal adhesions related to prior abdominal sur-gery account for up to 75% of cases of small bowel obstruction. Over 300,000 patients are estimated to undergo surgery to treat adhesion-induced small bowel obstruction in the United States annually. A 20-year trend analysis between 1988 and 2007 has documented no decrease in this rate during this period, highlighting the ongoing problem of this “old” disease.14 In fact, small bowel resection and lysis of adhesions account for two of the seven procedures that were responsible for 80% of the emergency surgeries in the United States between 2008 and 2011.15Less prevalent etiologies for small bowel obstruction include hernias, malignant bowel obstruction, and Crohn’s dis-ease. The frequency with which obstruction related to these con-ditions is encountered varies according to the patient population and practice setting. Cancer-related small bowel obstructions are commonly due to extrinsic compression or invasion by advanced malignancies arising in organs other than the small bowel; few are due to primary small bowel tumors. The most commonly encountered etiologies of small bowel obstruction are summarized in Table 28-3. Although congenital abnormali-ties capable of causing small bowel obstruction usually become evident during childhood, they sometimes elude detection and are diagnosed for the first time in adult patients presenting with abdominal symptoms. For example, intestinal malrotation and midgut volvulus should not be forgotten when considering the differential diagnosis of adult patients with acute or chronic symptoms of small bowel obstruction, espe-cially those without a history of prior abdominal surgery. A rare etiology of obstruction is the superior mesenteric artery syn-drome, characterized by compression of the third portion of the duodenum by the superior mesenteric artery as it crosses over this portion of the duodenum. This condition should be 34Brunicardi_Ch28_p1219-p1258.indd   122823/02/19   2:24 PM 1229SMALL INTESTINECHAPTER 28considered in young asthenic individuals who have chronic symptoms suggestive of proximal small bowel obstruction.PathophysiologyWith onset of obstruction, gas and fluid accumulate within the intestinal lumen proximal to the site of obstruction. The intestinal activity increases to overcome the obstruction, accounting for the colicky pain and the diarrhea that some experience even in the presence of complete bowel obstruction. Most of the gas that accumulates originates from swallowed air, although some is produced within the intestine. The fluid consists of swallowed liquids and gastrointestinal secretions (obstruction stimulates intestinal epithelial water secretion). With ongoing gas and fluid accumulation, the bowel distends and intraluminal and intramural pressures rise. The intestinal motility is eventually reduced with fewer contractions. With obstruction, the luminal flora of the small bowel, which is usually sterile, changes and a variety of organisms have been cultured from the contents. Translocation of these bacteria to regional lymph nodes has been demonstrated, although the significance of this process is not well understood. If the intramural pressure becomes high enough, intestinal microvascular perfusion is impaired leading to intestinal ischemia, and, ultimately, necrosis. This condition is termed strangulated bowel obstruction.With partial small bowel obstruction, only a portion of the intestinal lumen is occluded, allowing passage of some gas and fluid. The progression of pathophysiologic events described previously tends to occur more slowly than with complete small bowel obstruction, and development of strangulation is less likely.A particularly dangerous form of bowel obstruction is closed loop obstruction in which a segment of intestine is obstructed both proximally and distally (e.g., with volvulus). In such cases, the accumulating gas and fluid cannot escape either proximally or distally from the obstructed segment, lead-ing to a rapid rise in luminal pressure and a rapid progression to strangulation.Clinical PresentationThe symptoms of small bowel obstruction are colicky abdomi-nal pain, nausea, vomiting, and obstipation. Vomiting is a more prominent symptom with proximal obstructions than distal. Character of vomitus is important as with bacterial overgrowth, the vomitus is more feculent, suggesting a more established obstruction. Continued passage of flatus and/or stool beyond 6 to 12 hours after onset of symptoms is characteristic of par-tial rather than complete obstruction. The signs of small bowel obstruction include abdominal distention, which is most pro-nounced if the site of obstruction is in the distal ileum and may be absent if the site of obstruction is in the proximal small intestine. Bowel sounds may be hyperactive initially, but in late stages of bowel obstruction, minimal bowel sounds may be heard. Laboratory findings reflect intravascular volume deple-tion and consist of hemoconcentration and electrolyte abnor-malities. Mild leukocytosis is common.Features of strangulated obstruction include abdominal pain often disproportionate to the degree of abdominal findings, suggestive of intestinal ischemia. Patients often have tachycar-dia, localized abdominal tenderness, fever, marked leukocyto-sis, and acidosis. Any of these findings should alert the clinician to the possibility of strangulation and the need for early surgical intervention.DiagnosisThe diagnostic evaluation should focus on the following goals: (a) distinguish mechanical obstruction from ileus, (b) determine the etiology of the obstruction, (c) discriminate partial from complete obstruction, and (d) discriminate simple from stran-gulating obstruction.Important elements to obtain on history include prior abdominal operations (suggesting the presence of adhesions) and the presence of abdominal disorders (e.g., intra-abdominal cancer or inflammatory bowel disease) that may provide insights into the etiology of obstruction. Upon examination, a meticulous search for hernias (particularly in the inguinal and femoral regions) should be conducted.The diagnosis of small bowel obstruction is usually con-firmed with radiographic examination. The abdominal series consists of (a) a radiograph of the abdomen with the patient in a supine position, (b) a radiograph of the abdomen with the patient in an upright position, and (c) a radiograph of the chest with the patient in an upright position. The finding most specific for small bowel obstruction is the triad of dilated small bowel loops (>3 cm in diameter), air-fluid levels seen on upright films, and a paucity of air in the colon. The sensitivity of abdominal radiographs in the detection of small bowel obstruction ranges from 70% to 80%. Specificity is low because ileus and colonic obstruction can be associated with findings that mimic those observed with small bowel obstruction. False-negative findings on radiographs can result when the site of obstruction is in the proximal small bowel and when the bowel lumen is filled with fluid but no gas, thereby preventing visualization of air-fluid levels or bowel distention. The latter situation is associated with closed-loop obstruction. Despite these limitations, abdominal radiographs remain an important study in patients with sus-pected small bowel obstruction because of their widespread availability and low cost (Fig. 28-12).Computed tomographic (CT) scanning is becoming increasingly the imaging test of choice for patients with small bowel obstruction, and it is ideally done with oral contrast. CT is 80% to 90% sensitive and 70% to 90% specific in the detec-tion of small bowel obstruction. The findings of small bowel obstruction include a discrete transition zone with dilation of bowel proximally, decompression of bowel distally, intralumi-nal contrast that does not pass beyond the transition zone, and a colon containing little gas or fluid (Figs. 28-13 and 28-14). CT scanning may also provide evidence for the presence of closed-loop obstruction and strangulation. Closed-loop obstruction is suggested by the presence of a U-shaped or C-shaped dilated bowel loop associated with a radial distribution of mesenteric vessels converging toward a torsion point. Strangulation is sug-gested by thickening of the bowel wall, pneumatosis intestinalis (air in the bowel wall), portal venous gas, mesenteric haziness, and poor uptake of intravenous contrast into the wall of the affected bowel (Fig. 28-15). CT scanning also offers a global evaluation of the abdomen and may therefore reveal the etiol-ogy of obstruction. This feature is important in the acute setting when intestinal obstruction represents only one of many diag-noses in patients presenting with acute abdominal conditions.The CT scan is usually performed after administration of oral water-soluble contrast or diluted barium. The water-soluble contrast has been shown to have prognostic and therapeutic val-ues too. Several studies and several subsequent meta-analysis have shown that water-soluble contrast could in fact have ther-apeutic and prognostic value. The appearance of the contrast Brunicardi_Ch28_p1219-p1258.indd   122923/02/19   2:24 PM 1230SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 28-12. Small bowel obstruction. Plain radiographs (A) supine, which show dilated loops of small bowel in the right upper quadrant; (B) erect, which confirm the presence of airfluid level in the loops of small bowel as well as the stomach, consistant with small bowel obstruction.Figure 28-13. Small bowel obstruction. A CT scan of a patient presenting with signs and symptoms of bowel obstruction. Image shows grossly dilated loops of small bowel, with decompressed terminal ileum (I) and ascending colon (C), suggesting a complete distal small bowel obstruction. At laparotomy, adhesive bands from a previous surgery were identified and divided.Figure 28-14. Chronic partial small bowel obstruction. This patient presented with a several months history of chronic abdominal pain and intermittent vomiting. The coronal CT image shows grossly dilated loops of proximal small bowel on the left side (wide arrow), with decompressed loops of small bowel on the right side (narrow arrow). The dilated segment shows evidence of feculization of bowel contents, consistent with the chronic nature of the obstruction. Patient’s vomitus had characteristic feculent smell and quality. At exploratory laparotomy, adhesive bands were identified and divided.in the colon within 24 hours of administration is predictive of nonsurgical resolution of bowel obstruction with a sensitivity of 92% and a specificity of 93%.16A limitation of CT scanning is its low sensitivity (<50%) in the detection of low-grade or partial small bowel obstruction. A subtle transition zone may be difficult to identify in the axial images obtained during CT scanning. In such cases, contrast examinations of the small bowel, either small bowel series (small bowel follow-through) or enteroclysis, can be helpful. For standard small bowel series, contrast is swallowed or instilled into the stomach through a nasogastric tube. Abdominal radiographs are then taken serially as the contrast travels distally in the intestine. Although barium can be used, water-soluble contrast agents, such as gastrograffin, should be used if the possibility of intestinal perforation exists. These examinations are more labor-intensive and less rapidly performed than CT scanning but may offer greater sensitivity in the detection of luminal and mural etiologies of obstruction, such as primary intestinal tumors. For enteroclysis, 200 to 250 mL of barium followed by 1 to 2 L of a solution of methylcellulose in water is instilled into the proximal jejunum via a long nasoenteric catheter. The double-contrast technique used in enterocolysis Brunicardi_Ch28_p1219-p1258.indd   123023/02/19   2:24 PM 1231SMALL INTESTINECHAPTER 28Figure 28-15. Intestinal pneumatosis. This CT scan shows intestinal pneumatosis (arrow). The cause of this radiological finding was intestinal ischemia. Patient was taken emergently to the operating room and underwent resection of an infarcted segment of small bowel.permits a better assessment of mucosal surface and detection of relatively small lesions, even through overlapping small bowel loops. Enterocolysis is rarely performed in the acute setting but offers greater sensitivity than small bowel series in the detection of lesions that may be causing partial small bowel obstruction. Recently, CT enterocolysis has been used, and it was reported to be superior to plain X-ray small bowel contrast studies.TherapySmall bowel obstruction is usually associated with a marked depletion of intravascular volume due to decreased oral intake, vomiting, and sequestration of fluid in bowel lumen and wall. Therefore, fluid resuscitation is integral to treatment. Isotonic fluid should be given intravenously, and an indwelling bladder catheter may be placed to monitor urine output. Central-venous or pulmonary-artery catheter monitoring are not generally indi-cated unless the patient has underlying cardiac disease and severe dehydration. Broad-spectrum antibiotics are not indi-cated unless there is concern for bowel ischemia and surgery is planned.The stomach should be continuously evacuated of air and fluid using a nasogastric (NG) tube. Effective gastric decom-pression decreases nausea, distention, and the risk of vomiting and aspiration. Longer nasoenteric tubes, with tips placed into the jejunum or ileum, were favored in the past but are rarely used today, as they are associated with higher complication rates than NG tubes, with no proven greater efficacy in several studies.While a period of close observation and nonoperative management has been the mainstay of treatment for partial bowel obstruction, the standard therapy for complete small bowel obstruction has generally been expeditious surgery, with the dictum that “the sun should never rise and set on a complete bowel obstruction.” The rationale for favoring early surgical intervention is to minimize the risk for bowel strangu-lation, which is associated with an increased risk for morbidity and mortality. Clinical signs and currently available laboratory tests and imaging studies do not reliably permit the distinction between patients with simple obstruction and those with stran-gulated obstruction prior to the onset of irreversible ischemia. Therefore, the goal is to operate before the onset of irreversible ischemia. This treatment approach has, however, undergone significant reassessment in recent years, with many advocating for nonoperative approaches in management of these patients, providing closed-loop obstruction is ruled out and there is no evidence of intestinal ischemia. In a study of 145 patients with CT-diagnosed high-grade compete small bowel obstruction, 46% of the overall cohort were managed nonoperatively. More specifically, of the 104 patients who did not meet criteria for immediate surgery, 66 patients were successfully managed nonoperatively.17Thus, conservative therapy in the form of NG decompres-sion and fluid resuscitation is now commonly recommended in the initial management of nonischemic bowel obstruction. Non-operative management has been documented to be successful in 65% to 81% of patients with partial small bowel obstruction. Of those successfully treated nonoperatively, only 5% to 15% have been reported to have symptoms that were not substantially improved within 48 hours after initiation of therapy. Therefore, most patients with partial small obstruction whose symptoms do not improve within 48 hours after initiation of nonopera-tive therapy should be considered for surgery. In a study using the National Inpatient Sample, this principle was further high-lighted. The authors concluded that a 2-day limit of watchful waiting before surgery is not associated with an increase in mortality or postoperative morbidity, although inpatient costs were higher.18The observation that administration of water-soluble oral contrast has not only diagnostic but also therapeutic and prog-nostic value has led to the creation of several protocols and path-ways for management of patients presenting with small bowel obstruction. An example of such a pathway that is utilized at our institution is outlined in Fig. 28-16. Several studies and subsequent meta-analyses have shown that use of water-soluble contrast not only predicts likelihood of success of nonoperative management but also reduces the need for surgery (odds ratio 0.44), length of stay by about 2 days, and time to resolution by about 28 hours, without an increase in morbidity or mortality.16The operative procedure performed for small bowel obstruction varies according to the etiology of the obstruc-tion. For example, adhesions are lysed, tumors are resected, and hernias are reduced and repaired. Regardless of the etiol-ogy, the affected intestine should be examined, and nonviable bowel should be resected. Criteria suggesting viability are nor-mal color, peristalsis, and marginal arterial pulsations. Usu-ally, visual inspection alone is adequate in judging viability. In borderline cases, a Doppler probe may be used to check for pulsatile flow to the bowel, and arterial perfusion can be veri-fied by visualizing intravenously administered fluorescein dye in the bowel wall under ultraviolet illumination. Neither tech-nique has, however, been found to be superior to clinical judg-ment. In general, if the patient is hemodynamically stable, short lengths of bowel of questionable viability should be resected, and primary anastomosis of the remaining intestine should be performed. However, if the viability of a large proportion of the intestine is in question, a concerted effort to preserve intestinal tissue should be made. In such situations, the bowel of uncertain viability should be left intact and the patient reexplored in 24 to 48 hours in a “second-look” operation. At that time, definitive resection of nonviable bowel is completed.Brunicardi_Ch28_p1219-p1258.indd   123123/02/19   2:24 PM 1232SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IINoNoYesYesAdhesive smallbowel obstructionSigns and symptomsof strangulation andintestinal ischemia?Operating roomfor explorationNPOIVFNG tubeSerial abdominal exam100 mL of water-solublecontrast through NGKUB after 8 hoursHas contrastreached colon?High likelihood for nonoperativeresolution of bowel obstructionRemove NGStart sipsRepeat KUBafter 24 hoursHas contrastreached colon?Strongly consider surgerywithin 72 hours of admissionYesFigure 28-16. Management of small bowel obstruction.Successful laparoscopic surgery for bowel obstruction is being reported with greater frequency. In a propensity score-matched study of patients who underwent adhesiolysis for small bowel obstruction, the laparoscopic approach was associated with significantly lower rates of overall complications, surgical site infections, and a shorter length of hospital stay (4 vs. 10 days).19 Since distended loops of bowel can interfere with adequate visualization, early cases of proximal small bowel obstruction that are likely due to a single adhesive band are best suited for this approach. Presence of bowel distention and multiple adhesions can cause these procedures to be difficult, with a reported conversion rate of 17% to 33%. One of the major concerns with the laparoscopic approach has been the risk of iatrogenic bowel injury. A pooled analysis of 11 nonrandomized comparative studies has, however, shown that the risk of bowel injury and reoperation were not different between the two procedures, although the laparoscopic approach was associated with greater surgical time.20OutcomesThe perioperative mortality rate associated with surgery for nonstrangulating small bowel obstruction is less than 5%, with most deaths occurring in elderly patients with significant comorbidities. Mortality rates associated with surgery for stran-gulated obstruction is higher, highlighting the need for prompt intervention in this group. Long-term prognosis is related to the etiology of obstruction. Many patients who are treated conser-vatively for adhesive small bowel obstruction do not require future readmissions; less than 20% of such patients will have a readmission over the subsequent 5 years with another episode of bowel obstruction.In a study of 286 patients who had undergone surgical intervention for adhesive small bowel obstruction, the risk of recurrent obstruction was 5.5% at 1 year, 11.3% at 3 years, and 13.5% at 5 years. The risk of reoperation for recurrent obstruction was 3.7% at 1 year, 4.8% at 3 years, and 5.8% at 5 years.21 Considering the frequency of small bowel obstruction and the varied degree of clinical severity and presentation, there is often variation in the care of patients admitted with bowel obstruction. Studies have shown that a standard hospital-wide policy can help improve care of patients with bowel obstruction, reducing their time to surgery and shortening their length of hospital stay.22Brunicardi_Ch28_p1219-p1258.indd   123223/02/19   2:24 PM 1233SMALL INTESTINECHAPTER 28PreventionWith adhesive small bowel obstruction representing a large therapeutic burden, prevention of postoperative adhesions has become an area of great interest. Good surgical technique, careful handling of tissue, and minimal use and exposure of peritoneum to foreign bodies, forms the cornerstone of adhe-sion prevention. These measures alone are often inadequate. In patients undergoing colorectal or pelvic surgery, hospital read-mission rates of greater than 30% over the subsequent 10 years have been reported for adhesive small bowel obstruction.23Use of laparoscopic surgery, when possible, has been strongly promoted. A recent study using the Swedish National Inpatient Register has shown that, compared to laparoscopy, open surgery is associated with a fourfold increase in risk of small bowel obstruction within 5 years of the index procedure, even after accounting for other risk factors such as age, comor-bidity, and previous abdominal surgery.24In those undergoing open surgery, several strategies for adhesion prevention have been tried; however, the only therapy that has shown some success has been the use of hyaluronan-based agents, such as Sperafilm. The use of this barrier has been clearly shown to reduce the incidence of postoperative bowel adhesions; however, their effect in actually reducing the inci-dence of small bowel obstruction remains less well defined.25 The use of these products is often left to the discretion of the surgeon and the clinical context. Wrapping of an intestinal anas-tomosis with the material may be associated with increased leak rates and is generally discouraged.26Other Causes of Small Bowel ObstructionEarly postoperative bowel obstruction, as defined by signs, symptoms, and radiographic signs of SBO occurring within  30 days following surgery, been reported to occur in 0.7% to 9% of patients, with a higher rate in patients undergoing pelvic sur-gery, especially colorectal procedures.27 CT scanning or small bowel series is often required to make the diagnosis. Obstruc-tion that occurs in the early postoperative period is usually par-tial and only rarely is associated with strangulation. Therefore, a period of extended nonoperative therapy (2–3 weeks) consist-ing of bowel rest, hydration, and TPN administration is usually warranted. However, if complete obstruction is demonstrated or if signs suggestive of peritonitis are detected, expeditious reop-eration should be undertaken without delay. In a series of 180 patients undergoing anterior resection for rectal cancer, 12.8% developed early postoperative bowel obstruction on the median postoperative day 5, with 4 requiring surgical exploration at a median interval of 2 weeks from the index case.27Crohn’s disease as a cause of small bowel obstruction is discussed in more detail later in this chapter in the “Crohn’s Disease” section.Malignant small bowel obstruction can be a challenging problem. Although it often indicates advanced disease with poor prognosis, 25% to 33% of patients with a history of cancer who present with small bowel obstruction have adhesions as the etiol-ogy of their obstruction and therefore should not be denied appro-priate therapy. Even in cases in which the obstruction is related to recurrent malignancy, palliative resection or bypass can be performed, and in select cases these procedures lead to improved quality of life. In a series of 81 patients with small bowel obstruc-tion, palliation was achieved in over 80% of patients, with over 70% able to reestablish oral intake. In this series, the surgical mor-bidity was high, with 7% developing an enterocutaneous fistula/Table 28-4Ileus: common etiologiesAbdominal surgeryInfection Sepsis Intra-abdominal abscess Peritonitis PneumoniaElectrolyte abnormalities Hypokalemia Hypomagnesemia Hypermagnesemia HyponatremiaMedications Anticholinergics Opiates Phenothiazines Calcium channel blockers Tricyclic antidepressantsHypothyroidismUreteral colicRetroperitoneal hemorrhageSpinal cord injuryMyocardial infarctionMesenteric ischemiaanastomotic leak and a 30-day mortality rate of 6%.28 Patients with obvious carcinomatosis and multifocal obstruction pose a difficult challenge, given their limited prognosis. Thus, management must be tailored to an individual patient’s prognosis and desires. At the time of surgery, relief of the obstruction may be best achieved by a bypass procedure, avoiding a potentially difficult bowel resection, and even if that is not feasible, a palliative gastrostomy tube can be considered to help resolve nausea and vomiting.ILEUS AND OTHER DISORDERS OF  INTESTINAL MOTILITYIleus and intestinal pseudo-obstruction are clinical syndromes caused by impaired intestinal motility and are characterized by symptoms and signs of intestinal obstruction in the absence of a lesion-causing mechanical obstruction. Ileus is a temporary motility disorder that is reversed with time as the inciting factor is corrected. In contrast, chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction comprises a spectrum of specific disorders associated with irre-versible intestinal dysmotility.Ileus is a major cause of morbidity in hospitalized patients. A degree of intestinal ileus is a normal physiological response to abdominal surgery, which often resolves quickly without any long-term sequela. However, when postoperative ileus is pro-longed, it can cause significant morbidity and cost. Prolonged postoperative ileus is the most frequently implicated cause of delayed discharge following abdominal operations, and its eco-nomic impact has been estimated to be between $750 million and $1 billion annually in the United States.29PathophysiologyNumerous factors capable of impairing intestinal motility, and thus inciting ileus, have been described (Table 28-4). The most Brunicardi_Ch28_p1219-p1258.indd   123323/02/19   2:24 PM 1234SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIfrequently encountered factors are abdominal operations, infec-tion and inflammation, electrolyte abnormalities, and drugs.Following most abdominal operations or injuries, the motility of the gastrointestinal tract is transiently impaired. Among the proposed mechanisms responsible for this dysmotility are surgical stress-induced sympathetic reflexes, inflammatory response mediator release, and anesthetic/analgesic side effects; each of which can inhibit intestinal motility. The return of normal motility generally follows a characteristic temporal sequence, with small-intestinal motility returning to normal within the first  24 hours after laparotomy and gastric and colonic motility returning to normal by 48 hours and 2 to 5 days, respectively. Since small bowel motility is returned before colonic and gastric motility, listening for bowel sounds is not a reliable indicator that ileus has fully resolved. Functional evidence of coordinated gastrointestinal motility in the form of passing flatus or bowel movement is a more useful indicator. Resolution of ileus may be delayed in the presence of other factors capable of inciting ileus such as the presence of intra-abdominal abscesses or electrolyte abnormalities.Chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction can be caused by a large number of specific abnormalities affecting intestinal smooth muscle, the myenteric plexus, or the extraintestinal nervous system (Table 28-5). Visceral myopathies constitute a group of diseases characterized by degeneration and fibro-sis of the intestinal muscularis propria. Visceral neuropathies encompass a variety of degenerative disorders of the myenteric and submucosal plexuses. Both sporadic and familial forms of visceral myopathies and neuropathies exist. Systemic disor-ders involving the smooth muscle such as progressive systemic sclerosis and progressive muscular dystrophy, and neurologi-cal diseases such as Parkinson’s disease, can also be compli-cated by chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction. In addition, viral infections, such as those associated with cytomegalovirus and Epstein-Barr virus, can cause intestinal pseudo-obstruction.Table 28-5Chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction: etiologiesPrimary CausesFamilial types Familial visceral myopathies (types I, II, and III) Familial visceral neuropathies (types I and II) Childhood visceral myopathies (types I and II)Sporadic types Visceral myopathies Visceral neuropathiesSecondary CausesSmooth muscle disorders Collagen vascular diseases (e.g., scleroderma) Muscular dystrophies (e.g., myotonic dystrophy) AmyloidosisNeurological disorders Chagas disease, Parkinson’s disease, spinal cord injuryEndocrine disorders Diabetes, hypothyroidism, hypoparathyroidismMiscellaneous disorders Radiation enteritisPharmacological causes E.g., phenothiazines and tricyclic antidepressantsViral infectionsClinical PresentationThe clinical presentation of ileus resembles that of small bowel obstruction. Inability to tolerate liquids and solids by mouth, nausea, and lack of flatus or bowel movements are the most common symptoms. Vomiting and abdominal distension may occur. Although bowel sound characteristics are not diagnostic, they are usually diminished or absent, in contrast to the hyper-active bowel sounds that usually accompany mechanical small bowel obstruction. The clinical manifestations of chronic intes-tinal pseudo-obstruction include variable degrees of nausea and vomiting and abdominal pain and distention.DiagnosisRoutine postoperative ileus should be expected and requires no diagnostic evaluation. Definition of prolonged postoperative ileus has been varied but generally diagnosed if ileus persists beyond 5 days postoperatively. A recent global survey synthesized the results of the data to define postoperative ileus as “interval from surgery until passage of flatus/stool AND tolerance of an oral diet,” with prolonged postoperative ileus being defined as “two or more of nausea/vomiting, inability to tolerate oral diet over 24 h, absence of flatus over 24 h, distension, radiologic confirmation occurring on or after day 4 postoperatively without prior resolu-tion of postoperative ileus.”30 Prolonged ileus is reported to occur in 10% to 15% of patients undergoing intestinal surgery.31Once suspected, diagnostic evaluation to detect specific underlying factors capable of inciting ileus and to rule out the presence of mechanical obstruction is warranted.Patient medication lists should be reviewed for the pres-ence of drugs, especially opiates, known to be associated with impaired intestinal motility. Measurement of serum electrolytes may demonstrate electrolyte abnormalities commonly associ-ated with ileus. Abdominal radiographs are often obtained, but the distinction between ileus and mechanical obstruction may be difficult based on this test alone. In the postoperative setting, CT scanning is the test of choice as it can demonstrate the presence of an intra-abdominal abscess or other evidence of peritoneal sepsis that may be causing ileus and can exclude the presence of complete mechanical obstruction. Distinction of postoperative ileus from early postoperative obstruction can be difficult but is helpful in developing the appropriate management plan.The diagnosis of chronic pseudo-obstruction is suggested by clinical features and confirmed by radiographic and mano-metric studies. Diagnostic laparotomy or laparoscopy with full-thickness biopsy of the small intestine may be required to establish the specific underlying cause in cases of suspected neural disorder.TherapyThe management of ileus consists of limiting oral intake and correcting the underlying inciting factor. If vomiting or abdom-inal distention are prominent, the stomach should be decom-pressed using a nasogastric tube. Fluid and electrolytes should be administered intravenously until ileus resolves. If the dura-tion of ileus is prolonged, total parental nutrition (TPN) may be required.Given the frequency of postoperative ileus and its financial impact, many strategies have been tested to reduce its duration. The administration of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs such as ketorolac and concomitant reductions in opioid dosing have been shown to reduce the duration of ileus in most studies. Similarly, the use of perioperative thoracic epidural anesthesia/analgesia with Brunicardi_Ch28_p1219-p1258.indd   123423/02/19   2:24 PM 1235SMALL INTESTINECHAPTER 28regimens containing local anesthetics combined with limitation or elimination of systemically administered opioids has been shown to reduce duration of postoperative ileus, although they have not reduced the overall length of hospital stay.32 Many studies have also suggested that limiting intraand postoperative fluid administration can also result in reduction of postoperative ileus and shortened hospital stay.33 Furthermore, studies have shown that early postoperative feeding after GI surgery is generally well tolerated and can lead to reduced postoperative ileus and a shorter hospital stay. Table 28-6 summarizes some of the measures used to minimize postoperative ileus. Such data have generated significant interest in Early Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) pathways, which are a collection of steps taken to expedite postoperative recovery in general. ERAS protocols typically involve 15 to 20 steps that involve the pre-, intraand postoperative phases of care and form a multimodal pathway. Although the contribution of each element to the overall outcome has not been well studied, the bundle of steps leads to reduced length of stay and surgical complications. In cases of GI surgery, many of these steps are targeted towards reducing postoperative ileus, which is often the barrier to early discharge.Although prokinetic agents have been tried to pro-mote return of GI motility, they are associated with efficacytoxicity profiles that are too unfavorable to warrant routine use. Recently, administration of alvimopan, a novel, peripherally active mu-opioid receptor antagonist with limited oral absorp-tion, has been shown to reduce duration of postoperative ileus, hospital stay, and rate of readmissions in several prospective, randomized, placebo-controlled trials and the subsequent meta-analysis.34 Any cost savings associated with the use of this drug outside of a clinical trial has, however, been debated.35The therapy of patients with chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction focuses on palliation of symptoms as well as fluid, electrolyte, and nutritional management. Surgery should be avoided if possible. No standard therapies are curative or delay the natural history of any of the specific disorders causing intes-tinal pseudo-obstruction. Prokinetic agents, such as metoclo-promide and erythromycin, are associated with poor efficacy. Cisapride has been associated with palliation of symptoms; however, because of cardiac toxicity and reported deaths, this agent is restricted to compassionate use in the United States.Patients with refractory disease may require strict limitation of oral intake and long-term TPN administration. Despite these measures, some patients will continue to have severe abdomi-nal pain or such copious intestinal secretions that vomiting and fluid and electrolyte losses remain substantial. These patients may require a decompressive gastrostomy or an extended small bowel Table 28-6Measures to reduce postoperative ileusIntraoperative measures Minimalize handling of the bowel Laparoscopic approach, if possible Restricted intraoperative fluid administrationPostoperative measures Avoid nasogastric tubes Early enteral feeding Epidural anesthesia, if indicated Restricted IV fluid administration Correct electrolyte abnormalities Consider mu-opiod antagonistsresection to remove abnormal intestine. Small-intestinal trans-plantation has been applied in these patients with increasing fre-quency; the ultimate role of this modality remains to be defined.CROHN’S DISEASECrohn’s disease is a chronic, idiopathic transmural inflamma-tory disease with skip lesions that may affect any part of the alimentary tract, although there is propensity to affect the dis-tal small bowel. Nearly 80% of patients with Crohn’s disease have small bowel involvement, with 30% having terminal ileitis exclusively. Recent studies suggest a prevalence of about 241 cases per 100,000 in the United States.36 The rates of Crohn’s and ulcerative colitis have been increasing globally over the past several decades with substantial regional variations in inci-dence. The highest incidences are reported in western nations and those in northern latitudes, with Canada having the highest reported rates.37 In countries such as China, the prevalence of Crohn’s disease is substantially below that seen in the West, but rates have been rapidly increasing recently.38 The incidence of Crohn’s disease varies among ethnic groups within the same geographic region. For example, members of Eastern European Ashkenazi Jewish population are at a twoto fourfold higher risk of developing Crohn’s disease than members of other popu-lations living in the same location.Most studies suggest that Crohn’s disease is slightly more prevalent in females than in males. The mean age at which patients are diagnosed with Crohn’s disease falls in the third decade of life years, with a second smaller peak in the sixth decade of life, giv-ing it a bimodal distribution. The age at diagnosis can, however, range from early childhood through the entire lifespan.Both genetic and environmental factors appear to influ-ence the risk for developing Crohn’s disease. The relative risk among first-degree relatives of patients with Crohn’s disease is 14 to 15 times higher than that of the general population, with about 20% of patients reporting a family history. The concor-dance rate among monozygotic twins is as high as 67%; how-ever, Crohn’s disease is not associated with simple Mendelian inheritance patterns. Although there is a tendency within fami-lies for either ulcerative colitis or Crohn’s disease to be present exclusively, mixed kindreds also occur, suggesting the presence of some shared genetic traits as a basis for both diseases.Higher socioeconomic status is associated with an increased risk of Crohn’s disease. Most studies have found breastfeeding to be protective against the development of Crohn’s disease. Crohn’s disease is more prevalent among smokers. Furthermore, smoking is associated with the increased risk for both the need for surgery and the risk of relapse after surgery for Crohn’s disease.PathophysiologyCrohn’s disease is characterized by sustained inflammation. Whether this inflammation represents an appropriate response to a yet unrecognized pathogen or an inappropriate response to a normally innocuous stimulus is unknown. Various hypotheses on the roles of environmental and genetic factors in the patho-genesis of Crohn’s disease have been proposed. Many infec-tious agents have been suggested to be the causative organism of Crohn’s disease; however, there has been no conclusive evidence to confirm any. Studies using animal models suggest that in a genetically susceptible host, a nonpathogenic gut microbiome is sufficient to induce a chronic inflammatory response resembling Brunicardi_Ch28_p1219-p1258.indd   123523/02/19   2:24 PM 1236SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIthat associated with Crohn’s disease. In these models, the sus-tained intestinal inflammation is the result of either abnormal epithelial barrier function or immune dysregulation. A full dis-cussion of the role of gut immune system and microbiome in the development of Crohn’s disease is beyond the scope of this work, but it is an area of great interest and under investigation. In general, poor barrier function is hypothesized to permit inap-propriate exposure of lamina propria lymphocytes to antigenic stimuli derived from the intestinal lumen. In addition, a variety of defects in immune regulatory mechanisms, e.g., overrespon-siveness of mucosal T cells to enteric flora-derived antigens, can lead to defective immune tolerance and sustained inflammation.Specific genetic defects associated with Crohn’s disease in human patients are beginning to be defined. For example, the presence of a locus on chromosome 16 (the so-called IBD1 locus) has been linked to Crohn’s disease. The IBD1 locus has been identified as the NOD2 gene. Persons with allelic variants on both chromosomes have a 40-fold relative risk of Crohn’s disease com-pared to those without variant NOD2 genes. The relevance of this gene to the pathogenesis of Crohn’s disease is biologically plau-sible, as the protein product of the NOD2 gene mediates the innate immune response to microbial pathogens. Other putative IBD loci have been identified on other chromosomes (IBD2 on chromose 12q, and IBD3 on chromose 6), and are under investigation.Although appendectomy has been shown to lower the risk of subsequent development of ulcerative colitis, it was suspected that the surgery may increase the risk of developing Crohn’s disease. A meta-analysis has, however, suggested that the observed increased risk of Crohn’s disease in the first few years after an appendectomy may in fact reflect diagnostic dif-ficulty in a group of patients with incipient Crohn’s.39Although the pathological hallmark of Crohn’s disease is focal, transmural inflammation of the intestine, a spectrum of pathological lesions can be present. The earliest lesion characteristic of Crohn’s disease is the aphthous ulcer. These superficial ulcers are up to 3 mm in diameter and are surrounded by a halo of erythema. In the small intestine, aphthous ulcers typically arise over lymphoid aggregates. Granulomas are highly characteristic of Crohn’s disease and are reported to be present in up to 70% of intestinal specimens obtained during surgical resection. These granulomas are noncaseating and can be found in both areas of active disease and apparently normal intestine, in any layer of the bowel wall, and in mesenteric lymph nodes.As disease progresses, aphthae coalesce into larger, stellateshaped ulcers. Linear or serpiginous ulcers may form when  multiple ulcers fuse in a direction parallel to the longitudinal axis of the intestine. With transverse coalescence of ulcers, a cobblestoned appearance of the mucosa may arise.With advanced disease, inflammation can be transmural. Serosal involvement results in adhesion of the inflamed bowel to other loops of bowel or other adjacent organs. Transmural inflammation can also result in fibrosis with stricture formation, intra-abdominal abscesses, fistulas, and, rarely, free perforation. Inflammation in Crohn’s disease can affect discontinuous por-tions of intestine, so-called skip lesions that are separated by intervening normal-appearing intestine.A feature of Crohn’s disease that is grossly evident and helpful in identifying affected segments of intestine during sur-gery is the presence of fat wrapping, which represents encroach-ment of mesenteric fat onto the serosal surface of the bowel (Fig. 28-17). This finding is virtually pathognomonic of Crohn’s Figure 28-17. Crohn’s disease. This intraoperative photograph demonstrates encroachment of mesenteric fat onto the serosal surface of the intestine (“fat wrapping”) that is characteristic of intestinal segments affected by active Crohn’s’ disease.disease. The presence of fat wrapping correlates well with the presence of underlying acute and chronic inflammation.Features that allow for differentiation between Crohn’s dis-ease of the colon and ulcerative colitis include the layers of the bowel wall affected (inflammation in ulcerative colitis is limited to the mucosa and submucosa but may involve the full-thickness of the bowel wall in Crohn’s disease) and the longitudinal extent of inflammation (inflammation is continuous and characteristi-cally affects the rectum in ulcerative colitis but may be discon-tinuous and spare the rectum in Crohn’s disease). In the absence of full expression of features of advanced disease, Crohn’s colitis can sometimes be difficult to distinguish from ulcerative colitis. It is also important to remember that although ulcerative colitis is a disease of the colon, it can be associated with inflammatory changes in the distal ileum (backwash ileitis).Clinical PresentationThe most common symptoms of Crohn’s disease are abdominal pain, diarrhea, and weight loss. However, the clinical features are highly variable among individual patients and depend on which segment(s) of the gastrointestinal tract is (are) predomi-nantly affected, the intensity of inflammation, and the presence or absence of specific complications. In fact, some patients with Crohn’s disease may have been initially misdiagnosed as having irritable bowel syndrome or celiac disease.Patients can be classified by their predominant clinical manifestation as having primarily (a) fibrostenotic disease, (b) fistulizing disease, and (c) aggressive inflammatory disease. There is substantial overlap among these disease patterns in individual patients, however. The onset of symptoms is insidious, and once present, their severity follows a waxing and waning course. Constitutional symptoms, particularly weight loss and fever, or growth retardation in children, may also be prominent and are occasionally the sole presenting features of Crohn’s disease.The disease affects the small bowel in 80% of cases and colon alone in 20%. In those with small bowel disease, the major-ity have ileocecal disease. Isolated perineal and anorectal disease occurs in 5% to 10% of affected patients. Uncommon sites of involvement include the esophagus, stomach, and duodenum.An estimated one-fourth of all patients with Crohn’s disease will have an extraintestinal manifestation of their disease. One Brunicardi_Ch28_p1219-p1258.indd   123623/02/19   2:24 PM 1237SMALL INTESTINECHAPTER 28fourth of those affected will have more than one manifestation. Many of these complications can be seen with both Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis, although they are more prevalent among patients with Crohn’s disease. The most common extraintestinal manifestations are listed in Table 28-7. The clinical severity of some of these manifestations, such as erythema nodosum and peripheral arthritis, are correlated with the severity of intestinal inflammation. The severity of other manifestations, such as pyoderma gangrenosum and ankylosing spondylitis, bear no apparent relationship to the severity of intestinal inflammation.DiagnosisThe diagnosis is usually established with endoscopic findings in a patient with a compatible clinical history. The diagnosis should be considered in those presenting with acute or chronic abdominal pain, especially when localized to the right lower quadrant, chronic diarrhea, evidence of intestinal inflammation on radiography or endoscopy, the discovery of a bowel stricture or fistula arising from the bowel, and evidence of inflamma-tion or granulomas on intestinal histology. Disorders associated with clinical presentations that resemble those of Crohn’s dis-ease include ulcerative colitis, functional bowel disorders such as irritable bowel syndrome, mesenteric ischemia, collagen vascular diseases, carcinoma and lymphoma, diverticular dis-ease, and infectious enteritides. Infectious enteritides are most frequently diagnosed in immunocompromised patients, but they can also occur in patients with normal immune function. Acute ileitis caused by Campylobacter and Yersinia species can be difficult to distinguish from that caused by an acute presenta-tion of Crohn’s disease. Typhoid enteritis caused by Salmonella Table 28-7Extraintestinal manifestations of Crohn’s diseaseDermatologic Erythema nodosum Pyoderma gangrenosumRheumatologic Peripheral arthritis Ankylosing spondylitis SacroiliitisOcular Conjunctivitis Uveitis/iritis EpiscleritisHepatobiliary Hepatic steatosis Cholelithiasis Primary sclerosing cholangitis PericholangitisUrologic Nephrolithiasis Ureteral obstructionMiscellaneous Thromboembolic disease Vasculitis Osteoporosis Endocarditis, myocarditis, pleuropericarditis Interstitial lung disease Amyloidosis Pancreatitistyphosa can lead to overt intestinal bleeding and perforation, most often affecting the terminal ileum. The distal ileum and cecum are the most common sites of intestinal involvement by infection due to Mycobacterium tuberculosis. This condi-tion can result in intestinal inflammation, strictures, and fistula formation, like those seen in Crohn’s disease. Cytomegalovirus (CMV) can cause intestinal ulcers, bleeding, and perforation.No single symptom, sign, or diagnostic test establishes the diagnosis of Crohn’s disease. Instead, the diagnosis is based on a complete assessment of the clinical presentation with confirmatory findings derived from radiographic, endoscopic, and in most cases, pathologic tests. Patients presenting with a history of Crohn’s disease should have their full blood count, electrolytes and renal function, liver function, iron, B12, ESR, and CRP levels checked. The results may be abnormal, show-ing anemia, but these results are nondiagnostic. Colonoscopy with intubation of terminal ileum is the main diagnostic tool and can reveal focal ulcerations adjacent to areas of normal appear-ing mucosa along with polypoid mucosal changes that give a “cobblestone appearance.” Skip areas of involvement are typical with segments of normal-appearing bowel interrupted by large areas of obvious disease; this pattern is different from the con-tinuous involvement in ulcerative colitis. Pseudopolyps, as seen in ulcerative colitis, are also often present. Barium small bowel follow-through, CT enterography, or MR enterography may be used as contrast examinations of the small bowel to reveal strictures or networks of ulcers and fissures. CT scanning may reveal intra-abdominal abscesses and is useful in acute presenta-tions to rule out the presence of other intra-abdominal disorders. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) is done for disease of the proximal alimentary tract. Because Crohn’s disease often affects the small bowel, which is difficult to image, capsule endoscopy has been increasing used to make this diagnosis (Fig. 28-18).40Figure 28-18. Crohn’s disease. This image was captured by a wireless capsule endoscope as it was traveling through the small intestine. It demonstrates a superficial ulceration in the small bowel consistent with Crohn’s disease. (Used with permission from Anne T. Wolf, M.D., Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA.)Brunicardi_Ch28_p1219-p1258.indd   123723/02/19   2:24 PM 1238SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IISeveral antibodies have also been identified in patients with inflammatory bowel disease, which may have diagnostic value. The most commonly tested antibodies are antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (pANCA) and antisaccharmyces cerevi-siae antibody (ASCA). ASCA+/pANCA–, is associated with a diagnosis of Crohn’s disease, while ASCA–/pANCA+, corre-lates with ulcerative colitis. Although these antibody tests have high specificity, their use has been hampered by low test sensi-tivities. There is ongoing interest in developing other antibody tests to diagnose inflammatory bowel disease and help differ-entiate Crohn’s disease from ulcerative colitis. There have been attempts to develop stool tests to diagnose inflammatory bowel disease, and although fecal calprotectin or lactoferrin can iden-tify patients with intestinal inflammation, they are not routinely done in clinical practice.Because of the insidious, and often nonspecific, presenta-tion of Crohn’s disease, a diagnosis of Crohn’s is typically made only after symptoms have been present for several years. How-ever, in acute presentations, the diagnosis is sometimes made intraoperatively or during surgical evaluation. The initial mani-festation of Crohn’s disease can consist of right lower quadrant abdominal mimicking the presentation of acute appendicitis. In patients with this presentation, Crohn’s disease can be discov-ered for the first time during laparotomy or laparoscopy per-formed for presumed appendicitis. In some patients, the initial manifestation of Crohn’s disease is an acute abdomen related to small bowel obstruction, intra-abdominal abscess, or free intestinal perforation. In other patients, perianal abscesses and fistulas requiring surgical therapy may be the first manifestation of Crohn’s disease.TherapyBecause no curative therapies are available for Crohn’s dis-ease, the goal of treatment is to palliate symptoms rather than to achieve cure. Medical therapy is used to induce and maintain disease remission. Surgery is reserved for specific indications described later in this chapter. In addition, nutritional support in the form of aggressive enteral regimens or, if necessary, paren-teral nutrition, is used to manage the malnutrition that is com-mon in patients with Crohn’s disease.Medical Therapy. Pharmacologic agents used to treat Crohn’s disease include antibiotics, aminosalicylates, corticosteroids, immunomodulators, and biologic therapies. Antibiotics have an adjunctive role in the treatment of infectious complications associated with Crohn’s disease. They are also used to treat patients with perianal disease, enterocutaneous fistulas, and active colonic disease.Crohn’s disease activity is assessed using the Crohn’s dis-ease Activity Index or Harvey-Bradshaw Index, and depending on the scores, it can be categorized as asymptomatic, mild, mod-erate, or severe disease to guide therapy. While patients with mild and moderate disease can be managed on an outpatient basis, those with severe or fulminant disease often require hospitaliza-tion for treatment, bowel rest, and possible nutritional support. There are two general approaches to treating Crohn’s disease: top-down (which starts with the most potent agents to achieve remission with a subsequent decrease in medication) or step-up (starts with less potent and often safer drugs, and if symptoms fail to improve advances to the next group of medications).The use of oral 5-aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA) drugs (e.g., mesalamine) is somewhat controversial with mixed results from several randomized studies and meta-analyses. Aminosalicylates are associated with minimal toxicity and are available in a variety of formulations that allow for their delivery to specific regions of the alimentary tract. Thus, many continue to recommend use of mesalamine as an initial step in management of mild symptoms in patients with small bowel Crohn’s disease.Orally administered glucocorticoids are used to treat patients with mild disease that does not respond to aminosalicy-lates, or as initial treatment of patients with moderate disease. Patients with severe active disease usually require intravenous administration of glucocorticoids. Although glucocorticoids are effective in inducing remission, they are ineffective in prevent-ing relapse, and their adverse side-effect profile makes long-term use hazardous. Therefore, they should be tapered once remis-sion is achieved. Some patients are unable to undergo glucocor-ticoid tapering without suffering recurrence of symptoms. Such patients are said to have steroid dependence. These patients, along with those who do not respond to steroids at all (steroid resistant), should be considered for immune modulator therapies. Controlled ileal-released budesonide is an oral steroid with high first-pass hepatic metabolism and few systemic effects that can be tried in those with ileal and colonic Crohn’s disease.For those with severe disease, the thiopurine antimetabo-lites azathioprine and its active metabolite, 6-mercaptopurine, have demonstrated efficacy in inducing remission, maintaining remission, and allowing for glucocorticoid tapering in gluco-corticoid-dependent patients. A response to these medications is usually observed in 3 to 6 months, during which patients may need to continue with steroids. There is also some evidence that they decrease the risk of relapse after intestinal resection for Crohn’s disease. These agents are relatively safe but can induce bone marrow suppression and promote infectious complications. For patients who do not respond to the thiopurines, methotrexate is an alternative that is usually initially given intramuscularly before switching to oral form after achieving symptomatic con-trol. There is little role for cyclosporine in Crohn’s disease; its efficacy/toxicity profile in this disease is poor.The successful introduction of infliximab (Remicade), an anti-TNFα antibody, heralded the era of biological therapies for inflammatory bowel disease. Infliximab is a chimeric monoclo-nal antitumor necrosis-factor alpha (TNFα) antibody that has been shown to have efficacy in inducing remission and in pro-moting closure of enterocutaneous fistulae. There are two other anti-TNFα antibodies, with no randomized studies comparing efficacy of the drugs head to head. In general, it is thought that there is no significant difference in efficacy between them. While infliximab is a mouse-human chimeric antibody, adalimumab (Humira) is a fully human antibody. Certolizumab pegol (Cimzia) is a PEGylated Fab fragment of a humanized TNF inhibitor mono-clonal antibody. These agents are generally used for patients who are resistant to standard therapy, to help taper steroid dosage. They are generally well tolerated, but they should not be used in patients with ongoing septic processes, such as undrained intra-abdomi-nal abscesses. Antibodies against other targets in this inflamma-tory pathway have also been developed, including vedolizumab (Entyvio), a humanized anti–α4β7 integrin monoclonal antibody, with more specific anti-inflammatory effect in the intestine.For patients with perianal disease, antibiotic therapy with metronidazole or ciprofloxacin is the primary step. Two to  4 weeks of therapy is needed before improvements are seen, and often long-term therapy is required to prevent relapse. In cases of relapse, azathioprine can be considered. In patients with fis-tulas, infliximab and azathiprine are drugs of choice.Brunicardi_Ch28_p1219-p1258.indd   123823/02/19   2:24 PM 1239SMALL INTESTINECHAPTER 28Surgical Therapy. With introduction of new treatments, the need for surgery for Crohn’s disease has decreased steadily over the past few decades. Recent meta-analysis estimated the risk of surgery to be 16.3%, 33.3%, and 46.6% at 1, 5, and 10 years respectively.41 Surgery is generally reserved for patients whose disease is unresponsive to aggressive medical therapy or who develop complications of their disease (Table 28-8). Failure of medical management may be the indication for surgery if symp-toms persist despite aggressive therapy for several months or if symptoms recur whenever aggressive therapy is tapered. Sur-gery should be considered if medication-induced complications arise, specifically corticosteroid-related complications, such as cushingoid features, cataracts, glaucoma, systemic hyperten-sion, compression fractures, or aseptic necrosis of the femoral head. Growth retardation constitutes an indication for surgery in 30% of children with Crohn’s disease.One of the most common indications for surgical interven-tion is intestinal obstruction. Abscesses and fistulas are frequently encountered during operations performed for intestinal obstruc-tion in these patients, but they are rarely the only indication for surgery. Most abscesses are amenable to percutaneous drain-age, and fistulas, unless associated with symptoms or metabolic derangements, do not require surgical intervention. Less common complications that require surgical intervention are acute gastro-intestinal hemorrhage, perforations, and development of cancer.Although surgery for Crohn’s disease is usually planned, an uncommon, but not rare, scenario is the intraoperative dis-covery of inflammation limited to the terminal ileum during operations performed for presumed appendicitis. This scenario can result from an acute presentation of Crohn’s disease or from acute ileitis caused by bacteria such as Yersinia or Campylo-bacter. Both conditions should be treated medically; ileal resec-tion is not generally indicated. However, the appendix, even if normal appearing, should be removed (unless the cecum is inflamed, increasing the potential morbidity of this procedure) to eliminate appendicitis from the differential diagnosis of abdominal pain in these patients, particularly those with Crohn’s disease who may be destined to have recurring symptoms.When the diagnosis of Crohn’s disease is known and sur-gery is planned, a thorough examination of the entire intestine should be performed. The presence of active disease is suggested by thickening of the bowel wall, narrowing of the lumen, serosal inflammation and coverage by creeping fat, and thickening of Table 28-8Indications for surgical intervention in Crohn’s diseaseAcute onset of severe disease: Crohn’s colitis +/− toxic megacolon (rare)Failure of medical therapy: Persistent symptoms despite long-term steroid use Recurrence of symptoms when high-dose steroids are tapered Drug-induced complications (Cushing’s disease, hypertension)Development of disease complications: Obstruction Perforation Complicated fistulas Hemorrhage Malignancy riskthe mesentery. Skip lesions are present in approximately 20% of cases and should be sought. The length of uninvolved small intestine should be noted.Segmental intestinal resection of grossly evident disease followed by primary anastomosis is the usual procedure of choice. Microscopic evidence of Crohn’s disease at the resection margins does not compromise a safe anastomosis, and frozen section analysis of resection margins is unnecessary. In a ran-domized prospective trial, the effects of achieving 2-cm resec-tion margins beyond grossly evident disease were compared with achieving 12-cm resection margins.42 There were no evident dif-ferences with respect to clinical recurrence rates or anastomotic recurrences. Recurrence rates were similar whether margins were histologically free of or involved with Crohn’s disease. An area of controversy in surgical management of Crohn’s disease has been the ideal anastomotic technique for the bowel after intestinal resection. This issue was addressed in a randomized study of 139 patients undergoing an ileocolic resection for Crohn’s disease, with a mean follow-up of 11.9 months. There were no differ-ences in endoscopic or symptomatic disease recurrence between the groups reconstructed using end-to-end sutured (2-0 PDS) anastomosis versus those with side-to-side staples anastomosis.43An alternative to segmental resection for obstructing lesions is stricturoplasty (Fig. 28-19). This technique allows for preservation of intestinal surface area and is especially well suited to patients with extensive disease and fibrotic stric-tures who may have undergone previous resection and are at risk for developing short bowel syndrome. In this technique, the bowel is opened longitudinally to expose the lumen. Any ABFigure 28-19. Stricturoplasty. The wall of the strictured bowel is incised longitudinally. Reconstruction is performed by closing the defect transversely in a manner similar to the Heinecke-Mickulicz pyloroplasty for short strictures (A), or the Finney pyloroplasty for longer strictures (B).Brunicardi_Ch28_p1219-p1258.indd   123923/02/19   2:24 PM 1240SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIintraluminal ulcerations should be biopsied to rule out the pres-ence of neoplasia. Depending on the length of the stricture, the reconstruction can be fashioned in a manner similar to the Heinecke-Mickulicz pyloroplasty (for strictures less than 12 cm in length) or the Finney pyloroplasty (for longer strictures as much as 25 cm in length). For longer strictures, variations on the standard stricturoplasty, namely the side-to-side isoperistaltic enteroenterostomy, have been advocated and used for strictures with mean lengths of 50 cm.44 Stricturoplasty sites should be marked with metallic clips to facilitate their identification on radiographs and during subsequent operations. Stricturoplasty is associated with recurrence rates that are no different from those associated with segmental resection. Because the affected bowel is left in situ rather than resected, there is the potential for cancer developing at the stricturoplasty site. However, as data on this complication are limited to anecdotes, this risk remains a theo-retical one. Stricturoplasty is contraindicated in patients with intra-abdominal abscesses or intestinal fistulas. The presence of a solitary stricture relatively close to a segment for which resection is planned is a relative contraindication. In general, stricturoplasty is performed in cases where single or multiple strictures are identified in diffusely involved segments of bowel, or where previous resections have been performed and mainte-nance of intestinal length is of great importance.Intestinal bypass procedures are sometimes required in the presence of intramesenteric abscesses or if the diseased bowel is coalesced in the form of a dense inflammatory mass, making its mobilization unsafe. Bypass procedures (gastrojejunostomy) are also used in the presence of duodenal strictures, for which stric-turoplasty and segmental resection can be technically difficult.Since the 1990s, laparoscopic surgical techniques have been applied to patients with Crohn’s disease. The inflamma-tory changes associated with Crohn’s disease such as thickened and for eshortened mesentery, obliterated tissue planes, and fri-able tissues with engorged vasculature can make laparoscopic approach challenging. Randomized studies and a meta-analysis have confirmed that laparoscopic surgery for Crohn’s disease is associated with less postoperative pain, shorter duration of ileus, and a shorter hospital stay. The rates of disease recurrence were similar between the two groups.45OutcomesOverall complication rates following surgery for Crohn’s dis-ease range from 15% to 30%. Wound infections, postoperative intra-abdominal abscesses, and anastomotic leaks account for most of these complications.Surgery is not a curative intervention in Crohn’s disease, and many patients develop recurrence. If recurrence is defined endoscopically, 70% recur within 1 year of a bowel resection and 85% by 3 years.46 Clinical recurrence, defined as the return of symptoms confirmed as being due to Crohn’s disease, affects 60% of patients by 5 years and 94% by 15 years after intestinal resection. Reoperation becomes necessary in approximately one-third of patients by 5 years after the initial operation, with a median time to reoperation of 7 to 10 years.47 Of patient-modifying factors, smoking is a strong risk factor for disease recurrence.INTESTINAL FISTULASA fistula is defined as an abnormal communication between two epithelialized surfaces. The communication occurs between two parts of the gastrointestinal tract or adjacent organs in an internal fistula (e.g., enterocolonic fistula or colovesicular fistula). An external fistula (e.g., enterocutaneous fistula or rectovaginal fistula) involves the skin or another external surface epithelium. Enterocutaneous fistulas that drain less than 200 mL of fluid per day are known as low-output fistulas, whereas those that drain more than 500 mL of fluid per day are known as high-output fistulas.Over 80% of enterocutaneous fistulas represent iatrogenic complications that occur as the result of enterotomies or intes-tinal anastomotic dehiscences. Fistulas that arise spontaneously without antecedent iatrogenic injury are usually manifestations of progression of underlying Crohn’s disease or cancer.PathophysiologyThe manifestations of fistulas depend on which structures are involved. Low-resistance enteroenteric fistulas, which allow luminal contents to bypass a significant proportion of the small intestine, may result in clinically-significant malabsorption. Enterovesicular fistulas often cause recurrent urinary tract infec-tions. The drainage emanating from enterocutaneous fistulas are irritating to the skin and cause excoriation. The loss of enteric luminal contents, particularly from high-output fistulas originat-ing from the proximal small intestine, results in dehydration, electrolyte abnormalities, and malnutrition.Fistulas have the potential to close spontaneously. Factors inhibiting spontaneous closure, however, include malnutrition, sepsis, inflammatory bowel disease, cancer, radiation, obstruc-tion of the intestine distal to the origin of the fistula, foreign bodies, high output, short fistulous tract (<2 cm) and epitheli-alization of the fistula tract (Table 28-9).Clinical PresentationIatrogenic enterocutaneous fistulas usually become clinically evident between the fifth and tenth postoperative days. Fever, leukocytosis, prolonged ileus, abdominal tenderness, and wound infection are the initial signs. The diagnosis becomes obvious when drainage of enteric material through the abdominal wound or through existing drains occurs. These fistulas are often asso-ciated with intra-abdominal abscesses.DiagnosisCT scanning following the administration of enteral contrast is the most useful initial test. Leakage of contrast material from the intestinal lumen can be observed. Intra-abdominal abscesses Table 28-9Factors negatively impacting enteric fistula closurePatient factors Poor nutrition Medications such as steroidsEtiological factors Malignant fistula Fistula related to Crohn’s disease Fistula in radiated fieldsFistula site Gastric DuodenalLocal Factors Persistence of local inflammation and sepsis Presence of a foreign body (e.g., meshes or sutures) Epithelialization of fistula tract Fistula tract <2 cm Distal obstruction to the fistula siteBrunicardi_Ch28_p1219-p1258.indd   124023/02/19   2:24 PM 1241SMALL INTESTINECHAPTER 28should be sought and drained percutaneously. If the anatomy of the fistula is not clear on CT scanning, a small bowel series or enteroclysis examination can be obtained to demonstrate the fistula’s site of origin in the bowel. This study is also useful to rule out the presence of intestinal obstruction distal to the site of origin. Occasionally, contrast administered into the intestine does not demonstrate the fistula tract. A fistulogram, in which contrast is injected under pressure through a catheter placed per-cutaneously into the fistula tract, may offer greater sensitivity in localizing the fistula origin.TherapyThe treatment of enterocutaneous fistulas should proceed through an orderly sequence of steps48:1.	Stabilization. Fluid and electrolyte resuscitation is begun. Nutrition is provided, usually through the parenteral route initially. Sepsis is controlled with antibiotics and drainage of abscesses. The skin is protected from the fistula effluent with ostomy appliances or fistula drains.2.	Investigation. The anatomy of the fistula is defined using the aforementioned studies.3.	Decision. The available treatment options are considered, and a time line for conservative measures is determined.4.	Definitive Management. This entails the surgical procedure and requires appropriate preoperative planning and surgical experience.5.	Rehabilitation.The overall objectives are to increase the probability of spontaneous closure. Nutrition and time are the key components of this approach. Most patients will require TPN; however, a trial of oral or enteral nutrition should be attempted in patients with low-output fistulas originating from the distal intestine. The somatostatin analogue octreotide is a useful adjunct, par-ticularly in patients with high-output fistulas. A meta-analysis of several randomized studies confirmed that somatostatin treatment reduced length of hospital stay and time to closure of fistulas; however, its administration did not lead to a significant differ-ence in fistula closure rates.49 Use of negative pressure wound therapy has increased in management of enterocutaneous fistulas. The system can allow better management of the fistula output. In a study of 91 patients with enterocutaneous fistulas, 40% of fis-tulae reached minimal output within a week, and with an average follow-up of 90 days, spontaneous closure rate was 46%.50Timing of Surgical Intervention. Most surgeons would pur-sue 2 to 3 months of conservative therapy before considering surgical intervention. This approach is based on evidence that 90% of fistulas that are going to close do so within 5 weeks and that surgical intervention after this period is associated with bet-ter outcomes and lower morbidity.51If the fistula fails to resolve during this period, surgery may be required, during which the fistula tract, together with the segment of intestine from which it originates, should be resected. Simple closure of the opening in the intestine from which the fistula originates is associated with high recurrence rates. Patients with intestinal fistulas typically have extensive and dense intra-abdominal adhesions. Thus, operations per-formed for nonhealing fistulas can present formidable chal-lenges. Successful applications of alternative therapies to close intestinal fistulas such as the use of biologic sealants have been reported. The indications for their use remain to be defined.OutcomesOver 50% of intestinal fistulas close spontaneously. A useful mnemonic designates factors that inhibit spontaneous closure of intestinal fistulas: “FRIEND” (Foreign body within the fistula tract, Radiation enteritis, Infection/Inflammation at the fistula origin, Epithelialization of the fistula tract, Neoplasm at the fis-tula origin, Distal obstruction of the intestine).In a 23-year old retrospective review of 153 cases of enterocutaneous fistulas that were treated surgically, most fis-tulas were found to originate from the small bowel and be iat-rogenic in nature, with patients having undergone five or more previous abdominal surgeries. Operative repair was associated with a 30-day mortality of approximately 4% and a 1-year mor-tality of 15%. Morbidity was over 80%. First attempt at surgical repair was successful in 70% of cases, with an overall closure rate of 84% and some patients requiring up to 3 attempts at surgical repair. The authors identified closure of the abdominal fascia as an important factor in reducing rates of refistulization and postoperative mortality.52 In another similar study, fistula recurrence rates of 30% were documented and were indepen-dently associated with high output fistulas and the type of surgi-cal treatment: operations not involving resection of the fistula had a much higher rate of recurrence.53SMALL BOWEL NEOPLASMSAdenomas are the most common benign neoplasm of the small intestine. Other benign tumors include fibromas, lipomas, hemangiomas, lymphangiomas, and neurofibromas. The prevalence of small bowel tumors identified at autopsy is 0.2% to 0.3%, which is significantly higher than the rate of operation for small bowel tumors. This suggests that majority of small bowel tumors are asymptomatic. These lesions are most frequently encountered in the duodenum as incidental findings during esophagogastroduodenoscopic (EGD) examinations (Fig. 28-20). The reported prevalence of Figure 28-20. Duodenal polyp. This polyp was incidentally encountered during EGD. It was biopsied and found to be an adenoma.Brunicardi_Ch28_p1219-p1258.indd   124123/02/19   2:24 PM 1242SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIduodenal polyps, as detected during EGD performed for other reasons, range from 0.3% to 4.6%.Benign neoplasms account for 30% to 50% of small bowel tumors and include adenomas, lipomas, hematomas, and hemangiomas. Primary small bowel cancers are rare but have been increasing in incidence, with an estimated incidence of 10,190 cases in 2017 in the United States. Among small bowel cancers, adenocarcinomas comprise 35% to 50% of all cases, carcinoid tumors comprise 20% to 40%, and lymphomas comprise approximately 10% to 15%. In a retrospective review of a large U.S. database (SEER) between 1992 and 2006, of a total number of 10,945 small intestine cancers, 4315 were neuroendocrine in origin, 3412 were carcinomas, 2023 were lymphomas, and 1084 were sarcomas.54 Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) are the most common mesenchymal tumors arising in the small intestine and comprise the vast majority of tumors that were formerly classified as leiomyomas, leiomyosarcomas, and smooth muscle tumors of the intestine. The small intestine is frequently affected by metastases from or local invasion by cancers originating at other sites. Melanoma, in particular, is associated with a propensity for metastasis to the small intestine.Most patients with small-intestinal cancers are in their fifth or sixth decade of life. Reported risk factors for developing small-intestinal cancers include consumption of red meat, inges-tion of smoked or cured foods, Crohn’s disease, celiac sprue, hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC), familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), and Peutz-Jeghers syndrome.PathophysiologyThe small intestine contains over 90% of the mucosal surface area of the gastrointestinal tract but only 1.1% to 2.4% of all gastrointestinal malignancies. Proposed explanations for the low frequency of small-intestinal neoplasms include (a) dilu-tion of environmental carcinogens in the liquid chyme present in the small-intestinal lumen; (b) rapid transit of chyme, limiting the contact time between carcinogens and the intestinal mucosa; (c) a relatively low concentration of bacteria in small-intestinal chyme and, therefore, a relatively low concentration of carcino-genic products of bacterial metabolism; (d) mucosal protection by secretory IgA and hydrolases such as benzpyrene hydroxy-lase that may render carcinogens less active; and (e) efficient epithelial cellular apoptotic mechanisms that serve to eliminate clones harboring genetic mutations.Recent advances have begun to clarify the molecular pathogenesis of small-intestinal adenocarcinomas and GISTs; there has been less progress with respect to the pathogen-esis of the other small-intestinal malignancies (Table 28-10). Small-intestinal adenocarcinomas are believed to arise from Table 28-10Features of small intestinal malignanciesTUMOR TYPECELL OF ORIGINFREQUENCYaPREDOMINANT SITEAdenocarcinomaEpithelial cell35–50%DuodenumCarcinoidEnterochromaffin cell20–40%IleumLymphomaLymphocyte10–15%IleumGISTInterstitial cell of Cajal10–15%–aFrequencies given as percentages of small intestinal malignancies comprised by each of the tumor types. Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) display no regional variation in prevalence within the small intestine.preexisting adenomas through a sequential accumulation of genetic abnormalities in a model like that described for the pathogenesis of colorectal cancer. Adenomas are histologi-cally classified as tubular, villous, and tubulovillous. Tubular adenomas have the least aggressive features. Villous adenomas have the most aggressive features and tend to be large, sessile, and located in the second portion of the duodenum. Malignant degeneration has been reported to be present in up to 45% of vil-lous adenomas by the time of diagnosis. Patients with FAP have a nearly 100% cumulative lifetime risk of developing duodenal adenomas that have the potential to undergo malignant trans-formation. The risk of duodenal cancer in these patients is over 100-fold greater than in the general population. Indeed, duode-nal cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related death among patients with FAP who have undergone colectomy. Patients with Peutz-Jeghers syndrome develop hamartomatous polyps; however, these polyps can contain adenomatous foci that can undergo malignant transformation (Fig. 28-21).A defining feature of GISTs is their gain of function mutation of proto-oncogene KIT, a receptor tyrosine kinase. Figure 28-21. Small bowel polyp in Peutz-Jeghers syndrome. This image was captured by a wireless capsule endoscope as it was traveling through the small intestine. (Used with permission from Anne T. Wolf, M.D., Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA.)Brunicardi_Ch28_p1219-p1258.indd   124223/02/19   2:24 PM 1243SMALL INTESTINECHAPTER 28Pathological KIT signal transduction is believed to be a cen-tral event in GIST pathogenesis. The majority of GISTs have activating mutations in the c-kit proto-oncogene, which cause KIT to become constitutively activated, presumably leading to persistence of cellular growth or survival signals. Because the interstitial cells of Cajal normally express KIT, these cells have been implicated as the cell of origin for GISTs. KIT expression is assessed by staining the tissues for CD117 antigen, which is part of the KIT receptor and is present in 95% of GISTs.Clinical PresentationMost small-intestinal neoplasms are asymptomatic until they become large. Partial small bowel obstruction, with associ-ated symptoms of crampy abdominal pain and distention, nau-sea, and vomiting, is the most common mode of presentation. Obstruction can be the result of either luminal narrowing by the tumor itself or intussusception, with the tumor serving as the lead point. Hemorrhage, usually indolent, is the second most common mode of presentation.Physical examination may be unrevealing, but it also may reveal a palpable abdominal mass in those with large tumors. Findings of intestinal obstruction may be present in some patients. A fecal occult blood test may be positive. Jaundice secondary to biliary obstruction or hepatic metastasis may be present. Cachexia, hepatomegaly, and ascites may be present with advanced disease.Although the clinical presentation is usually not specific for tumor type, some general comments are appropriate. Adeno-carcinomas, as well as adenomas (from which most are believed to arise), are most commonly found in the duodenum, except in patients with Crohn’s disease, in whom most are found in the ileum. Lesions in the periampullary location can cause obstruc-tive jaundice or pancreatitis. Adenocarcinomas located in the duodenum tend to be diagnosed earlier in their progression than those located in the jejunum or ileum, which are rarely diagnosed prior to the onset of locally advanced or metastatic disease.Carcinoid tumors of the small intestine are also usually diagnosed after the development of metastatic disease. These tumors are associated with a more aggressive behavior than the more common appendiceal carcinoid tumors. Approximately 25% to 50% of patients with carcinoid tumor-derived liver metastases will develop manifestations of the carcinoid syn-drome. These manifestations include diarrhea, flushing, hypo-tension, tachycardia, and fibrosis of the endocardium and valves the right heart. Candidate tumor-derived mediators of the car-cinoid syndrome such as serotonin, bradykinin, and substance P undergo nearly complete metabolism during the first passage through the liver. As a result, symptoms of carcinoid syndrome are rare in the absence of liver metastases.Lymphoma may involve the small intestine primarily or as a manifestation of disseminated systemic disease. Primary small-intestinal lymphomas are most commonly located in the ileum, which contains the highest concentration of lymphoid tissue in the intestine. Although partial small bowel obstruction is the most common mode of presentation, 10% of patients with small-intestinal lymphoma present with bowel perforation.The small intestine is the second most common site of GIST tumors after the stomach, containing 25% to 35% of GISTs. There appears to be no regional variation in the preva-lence of GISTs within the small intestine. GISTs have a greater propensity to be associated with overt hemorrhage than the other small-intestinal malignancies (Fig. 28-22).Metastatic tumors involving the small intestine can induce intestinal obstruction and bleeding.DiagnosisBecause of the absent or nonspecific symptoms associated with most small-intestinal neoplasms, these lesions are rarely diagnosed preoperatively. Laboratory tests are nonspecific, except for elevated urinary 5-hydroxyindole acetic acid (5-HIAA) and serum chromogranin A (CgA) levels in patients with carcinoid syndrome, both of which have low sensitivity. Elevated carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) levels are associated with small-intestinal adenocarcinomas, but only in the presence of liver metastases.Contrast radiography of the small intestine may demon-strate benign and malignant lesions. Enterocolysis is reported to have a sensitivity of over 90% in the detection of small bowel tumors and is the test of choice, particularly for tumors located in the distal small bowel. Upper GI with small bowel follow-through examinations have reported sensitivities ranging from only 30% to 44% (Fig. 28-23). CT scanning can detect abnor-malities in 70% to 80% of cases with small bowel tumor and assess for metastatic spread. Tumors associated with significant bleeding can be localized with angiography or radioisotope-tagged red blood cell (RBC) scans.Tumors located in the duodenum can be visualized and biopsied on EGD. In addition, endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) can offer additional information such as the layers of the intestinal wall involved by the lesion. Occasionally, the distal ileum can suc-cessfully be visualized during colonoscopy. Intraoperative enter-oscopy can be used to directly visualize small-intestinal tumors beyond the reach of standard endoscopic techniques. For more distal small bowel lesions, capsule endoscopy and double-balloon Figure 28-22. Jejunal gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST). This patient presented with overt obscure GI bleeding and was found to have a 7-cm jejunal GIST. The picture represents the laparo-scopic view of the mass (black arrow), arising from the antimesenteric side of the small bowel (*). He underwent a successful laparoscopic resection.Brunicardi_Ch28_p1219-p1258.indd   124323/02/19   2:24 PM 1244SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 28-23. Small bowel lesion identified during a small bowel follow-through (arrow). This patient had previously had a metastatic renal lesion to his duodenum requiring a Whipple procedure. During follow-up imaging 3 years later, he was found to have this new lesion in his jejunum. He underwent a laparoscopic small bowel resection. Pathology revealed a benign jejunal sessile polyp.endoscopy have been used to evaluate small bowel. CT and MR enterography are also increasing utilized as noninvasive tests to look for small bowel masses. PET scans can also help assess metabolic activity of lesions and risk of malignancy.TherapyBenign neoplasms of the small intestine that are symptomatic should be surgically resected or removed endoscopically, if fea-sible. Tumors located in the duodenum, including asymptomatic lesions incidentally found during EGD, can pose the great-est therapeutic challenges. These lesions should be biopsied; symptomatic tumors and adenomas, because of their malignant potential, should be removed. In general, duodenal tumors less than 1 cm in diameter are amenable to endoscopic polypectomy. Lesions greater than 2 cm in diameter are technically difficult to remove endoscopically and may need to be removed surgi-cally. Surgical options include transduodenal polypectomy and segmental duodenal resection. Tumors located in the second portion of the duodenum near the ampulla of Vater may require pancreaticoduodenectomy. EUS may offer utility for duodenal tumors ranging in size between 1 and 2 cm in diameter, with those limited to the mucosa being amenable to endoscopic pol-ypectomy. Endoscopic resection of biopsy-proven benign duo-denal periampullary adenomas leads to equivalent efficacy to surgery but with lower morbidity. Adenomas can recur; there-fore, surveillance endoscopy is required after these procedures.55Duodenal adenomas occurring in the setting of FAP require an especially aggressive approach to management. Patients with FAP should undergo screening EGD starting sometime during their second or third decade of life. Adenomas detected should be removed endoscopically, if possible, followed by surveillance endoscopy in 6 months and yearly thereafter, in the absence of recurrence. If surgery is required, pancreaticoduodenectomy is generally necessary because adenomas in patients with FAP tend to be multiple and sessile, with a predilection for the peri-ampullary region. Further, localized resections are complicated by high recurrence rates. Given the potential for recurrences in the duodenal remnant following pylorus-preserving pancreati-coduodenectomy, there is rationale for recommending the appli-cation of standard pancreaticoduodenectomy in these patients. However, recurrences have been reported even following this procedure; therefore, continuing surveillance is necessary. For most adenocarcinomas of the duodenum, except those in the third or fourth portion of the duodenum where a local resection could be considered, pancreaticoduodenectomy is required.The surgical therapy of jejunal and ileal malignancies usually consists of wide-local resection of the intestine harboring the lesion. For adenocarcinomas, a wide excision of corresponding mesentery is done to achieve regional lymphadenectomy, as is done for adenocarcinomas of the colon. In the presence of locally-advanced or metastatic disease, palliative intestinal resection or bypass is performed. Chemotherapy has no proven efficacy in the adjuvant or palliative treatment of small-intestinal adenocarcinomas.The goal of surgical therapy for carcinoids is resection of all visible disease. Localized small-intestinal carcinoid tumors should be treated with segmental intestinal resection and regional lymphadenectomy. Nodal metastases are unusual with tumors less than 1 cm in diameter, but they are present with 75% to 90% of tumors larger than 3 cm in diameter. In approximately 30% of cases, multiple small-intestinal carcinoid tumors are present (Fig. 28-24). Therefore, the entire small intestine should Figure 28-24. Small bowel carcinoid tumor. This patient pre-sented with history of abdominal pain and on CT was found to have a circumferentially thickened loop of distal small bowel with associated mesenteric stranding and lymphadenopathy. An octreotide scan demonstrated abnormal activity in the area, concerning for a carcinoid tumor. He underwent an open small bowel resection. Pathology revealed a multifocal carcinoid tumor with 50 distinct nodules and metastasis to mesenteric lymph nodes.Brunicardi_Ch28_p1219-p1258.indd   124423/02/19   2:24 PM 1245SMALL INTESTINECHAPTER 28be examined before planning extent of resection. In the presence of metastatic disease, tumor debulking should be conducted as it can be associated with long-term survival and amelioration of symptoms of the carcinoid syndrome. Response rates of 30% to 50% have been reported to chemotherapy regimens based on agents such as doxorubicin, 5-fluorouracil, and streptozocin. However, none of these regimens is associated with a clearly demonstrable impact on the natural history of disease. Octreo-tide is the most effective pharmacologic agent for management of symptoms of carcinoid syndrome.Localized small-intestinal lymphoma should be treated with segmental resection of the involved intestine and adjacent mesentery. If the small intestine is diffusely affected by lym-phoma, chemotherapy rather than surgical resection should be the primary therapy. The value to adjuvant chemotherapy after resection of localized lymphoma is controversial.Small-intestinal GISTs should be treated with segmental intestinal resection. If the diagnosis is known prior to resec-tion, wide lymphadenectomy can be avoided as GISTs are rarely associated with lymph node metastases. GISTs are resistant to conventional chemotherapy agents. Imatinib (Gleevec) is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor with potent activity against tyrosine kinase KIT, and it is used in those with metastatic disease. Clini-cal trials have shown that 80% of patients with unresectable or metastatic GISTs derive clinical benefit from the administra-tion of Imatinib, with 50% to 60% having objective evidence of reduction in tumor volume.56 Imatinib has shown great promise as a neoadjuvant and adjuvant therapy for GISTs. Studies have emphasized the potential for development of tumor resistance to this agent. In this setting, an alternative tyrosine kinas inhibitor, sunitinib, has been used with good results.Metastatic cancers affecting the small intestine that are symptomatic should be treated with palliative resection or bypass except in the most advanced cases. Systemic therapy may be offered if effective chemotherapy exists for the primary cancer.OutcomesComplete resection of duodenal adenocarcinomas is associ-ated with postoperative 5-year survival rates ranging from 50% to 60%. Complete resection of adenocarcinomas located in the jejunum or ileum is associated with 5-year survival rates of 20% to 30%.57 Five-year survival rates of 75% to 95% fol-lowing resection of localized small-intestinal carcinoid tumors have been reported. In the presence of carcinoid tumor-derived liver metastases, 5-year survival rates of 19% to 54% have been reported. The overall 5-year survival rate for patients diagnosed with intestinal lymphoma ranges from 20% to 40%. For patients with localized lymphoma amenable to surgical resection, the 5-year survival rate is 60%.The recurrence rate following resection of GISTs aver-ages 35%. The 5-year survival rate following surgical resection has been reported to range from 35% to 60%. Both tumor size and mitotic index are independently correlated with prognosis. Low-grade tumors (mitotic index <10 per high-power field) measuring less than 5 cm in diameter are associated with excel-lent prognosis.RADIATION ENTERITISRadiation therapy is a component of multi-modality therapy for many intra-abdominal and pelvic cancers such as those of the cervix, endometrium, ovary, bladder, prostate, and rectum. An undesired side effect of radiation therapy is radiation-induced injury to the small intestine, which can present clinically as two distinct syndromes: acute and chronic radiation enteritis. Acute radiation enteritis is a transient condition that occurs in approximately 75% of patients undergoing radiation therapy for abdominal and pelvic cancers. Chronic radiation is enteritis is inexorable and develops in approximately 5% to 15% of these patients.PathophysiologyRadiation induces cellular injury directly and through the gen-eration of free radicals. The principal mechanism of radiation-induced cell death is believed to be apoptosis resulting from free-radical–induced breaks in double-stranded DNA. Because radiation has its greatest impact on rapidly proliferating cells, the small-intestinal epithelium is acutely susceptible to radiationinduced injury. Pathological correlates of this acute injury include villus blunting and a dense infiltrate of leukocytes and plasma cells within the crypts. With severe cases, mucosal sloughing, ulceration, and hemorrhage are observed. The inten-sity of injury is related to the dose of radiation administered, with most cases occurring in patients who have received at least 4500 cGy. Risk factors for acute radiation enteritis include con-ditions that may limit splanchnic perfusion such as hyperten-sion, diabetes mellitus, coronary artery disease, and restricted mobility of the small intestine due to adhesions. Injury is potentiated by concomitant administration of chemotherapeutic agents, such as doxorubicin, 5-fluorouracil, actinomycin D, and methotrexate, that act as radiation-sensitizers. Because of the intestinal epithelium’s capacity for regeneration, the mucosal injury that is characteristic of acute radiation enteritis resolves after the cessation of radiation therapy.In contrast, chronic radiation enteritis is characterized by a progressive occlusive vasculitis that leads to chronic ischemia and fibrosis that affects all layers of the intestinal wall, rather than the mucosa alone. These changes can lead to strictures, abscesses, and fistulas, which are responsible for the clinical manifestations of chronic radiation enteritis.Clinical PresentationThe most common manifestations of acute radiation enteritis are nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and crampy abdominal pain. Symptoms are generally transient and subside after the discon-tinuation of radiation therapy. Because the diagnosis is usually obvious, given the clinical context, no specific diagnostic tests are required. However, if patients develop signs suggestive of peritonitis, CT scanning should be performed to rule out the presence of other conditions capable of causing acute abdominal syndromes.The clinical manifestations of chronic radiation enteritis usually become evident within 2 years of radiation administra-tion, although they can begin as early as several months or as late as decades afterwards. The most common clinical presenta-tions are diarrhea or one of partial small bowel obstruction with nausea, vomiting, intermittent abdominal distention, crampy abdominal pain, and weight loss. The terminal ileum is the most frequently affected segment. Other manifestations of chronic radiation enteritis include complete bowel obstruction, acute or chronic intestinal hemorrhage, and abscess or fistula formation.DiagnosisEvaluation of patients suspected of having chronic radia-tion enteritis should include review of the records of their Brunicardi_Ch28_p1219-p1258.indd   124523/02/19   2:24 PM 1246SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIradiation treatments for information on total radiation dose administered, fractionation, and volume of treatment. Areas that received high doses should be noted, as lesions subse-quently found in imaging studies usually localize to areas that had received high radiation doses. Enterocolysis is the most accurate imaging test for diagnosing chronic radiation enteri-tis, with reported sensitivities and specificities of over 90% (Fig. 28-25). CT scan findings are neither very sensitive nor specific for chronic radiation enteritis. However, CT scanning should be obtained to rule out the presence of recurrent can-cer since its clinical manifestations may overlap with those of chronic radiation enteritis.TherapyMost cases of acute radiation enteritis are self-limited. Support-ive therapy, including the administration of antiemetics, is usu-ally sufficient. Patients with diarrhea-induced dehydration may require hospital admission and parenteral fluid administration. Rarely are symptoms severe enough to necessitate reduction in or cessation of radiation therapy.In contrast, the treatment of chronic radiation enteritis represents a formidable challenge. Antidiarrheal agents may have a role in the management of diarrhea while, in those with obstructive symptoms, a low residue diet may be tried. Surgery for this condition is difficult, is associated with high morbidity rates, and should be avoided in the absence of specific indica-tions such as high-grade obstruction, perforation, hemorrhage, intra-abdominal abscesses, and fistulas. The goal of surgery is limited resection of diseased intestine with primary anastomosis Figure 28-25. Radiation enteritis. This contrast radiograph reveals widely separated loops of small bowel with luminal narrowing, loss of mucosal folds, and ulceration. This patient had received radiation therapy for a pelvic malignancy 8 years before this examination.between healthy bowel segments. However, the characteristi-cally diffuse nature of fibrosis and dense adhesions among bowel segments can make limited resection difficult to achieve. Further, it is difficult to distinguish between normal and irra-diated intestine intraoperatively by either gross inspection or even frozen section analysis. This distinction is important as anastomoses between irradiated segments of intestine have been associated with leak rates as high as 50%.58 If limited resec-tion is not achievable, an intestinal bypass procedure may be an option, except in cases for which hemorrhage is the surgical indication. There remain cases in which resections extensive enough to cause short bowel syndrome are unavoidable. This condition is discussed in detail below in the “Short Bowel Syn-drome” section.OutcomesAcute radiation injury to the intestine is self-limited; its sever-ity is not correlated with the probability of chronic radiation enteritis developing. Surgery for chronic radiation enteritis is associated with high morbidity rates and reported mortality rates averaging 10%.PreventionIn view of significant morbidity associated with radiation enteri-tis, groups have studies possible measures to reduce or prevent such side effects. Keeping radiation exposure to below 5000 cGy  is associated with minimal long-term side effects and is recom-mended where clinically possible.Uses of multibeam radiation techniques to minimize the area of maximal radiation exposure, as well as tilt tables to move the bowel out of the pelvic during radiation, are increasingly utilized. Few small studies have suggested that oral sulphasala-zine may help reduce the incidence of acute radiation-induced enteritis.59In patients undergoing pelvic surgery that are likely to require postoperative radiation therapy, surgical techniques that keep the small bowel out of the pelvic have been recommended. These measures include use of absorbable mesh sling to sepa-rate the pelvic from the true abdominal cavity and prevent the small bowel from being exposed to pelvic radiation.60MECKEL’S DIVERTICULAMeckel’s diverticulum is the most prevalent congenital anom-aly of the gastrointestinal tract, affecting approximately 2% of the general population. Meckel’s diverticuli are designated true diverticuli because their walls contain all the layers found in normal small intestine. Their location varies among individual patients, but they are usually found in the ileum within 100 cm  of the ileocecal valve (Fig. 28-26). Approximately 60% of Meckel’s diverticuli contain heterotopic mucosa, of which  over 60% consist of gastric mucosa. Pancreatic acini are the next most common; others include Brunner’s glands, pancre-atic islets, colonic mucosa, endometriosis, and hepatobiliary tissues. A useful, although crude, mnemonic describing Meck-el’s diverticuli is the “rule of twos”: 2% prevalence, 2:1 male predominance, location 2 feet proximal to the ileocecal valve in adults, and half of those who are symptomatic are under 2 years of age.PathophysiologyDuring the eighth week of gestation, the omphalomesenteric (vitelline) duct normally undergoes obliteration. Failure or Brunicardi_Ch28_p1219-p1258.indd   124623/02/19   2:24 PM 1247SMALL INTESTINECHAPTER 28Figure 28-26. Meckel’s diverticulum. This intraoperative  photograph shows Meckel’s diverticulum in ileum that has been eviscerated.incomplete vitelline duct obliteration results in a spectrum of abnormalities, the most common of which is Meckel’s divertic-ulum. Other abnormalities include omphalomesenteric fistula, enterocyst, and a fibrous band connecting the intestine to the umbilicus. A remnant of the left vitelline artery can persist to form a mesodiverticular band tethering a Meckel’s diverticulum to the ileal mesentery.Bleeding associated with Meckel’s diverticulum is usu-ally the result of ileal mucosal ulceration that occurs adjacent to acid-producing, heterotopic gastric mucosa located within the diverticulum. Intestinal obstruction associated with Meckel’s diverticulum can result from several mechanisms:1.	Volvulus of the intestine around the fibrous band attaching the diverticulum to the umbilicus2.	Entrapment of intestine by a mesodiverticular band  (Fig. 28-27)3.	Intussusception with the diverticulum acting as a lead point4.	Stricture secondary to chronic diverticulitisMeckel’s diverticuli can be found in inguinal or femoral hernia sacs (known as Littre’s hernia). These hernias, when incarcerated, can cause intestinal obstruction.Figure 28-27. Meckel’s diverticulum with mesodiverticular band (A). One mechanism by which Meckel’s diverticuli can cause small bowel obstruction is entrapment of the intestine by a mesodiverticular band (B).Clinical PresentationMeckel’s diverticuli are asymptomatic unless associated com-plications arise. The lifetime incidence rate of complications arising in patients with Meckel’s diverticuli has been estimated to be approximately 4% to 6%.61,62 Although initial data had suggested that the risk of developing a complication related to Meckel’s diverticulum decreases with age, this has been ques-tioned. In a population-based reviews at Olmsted County, Cullen and colleagues suggested that the risk of developing Meckel’s diverticulum–related complications does not change with age.62The most common presentations associated with symp-tomatic Meckel’s diverticuli are bleeding, intestinal obstruction, and diverticulitis. Bleeding is the most common presentation in children with Meckel’s diverticuli, representing over 50% of Meckel’s diverticulum-related complications among patients less than 18 years of age. Bleeding associated with Meckel’s diverticuli is rare among patients older than 30 years of age.Intestinal obstruction is the most common presentation in adults with Meckel’s diverticuli. Diverticulitis, present in 20% of patients with symptomatic Meckel’s diverticuli, is associated with a clinical syndrome that is indistinguishable from acute appendicitis. Neoplasms, most commonly carcinoid tumors, are present in 0.5% to 3.2% of symptomatic Meckel’s diverticuli that are resected.DiagnosisMost Meckel’s diverticuli are discovered incidentally on radio-graphic imaging, during endoscopy, or at the time of surgery. In the absence of bleeding, Meckel’s diverticuli rarely are diag-nosed prior to the time of surgical intervention. For those pre-senting with symptoms suggestive of a Meckel’s diverticulum, confirmatory imaging can be challenging. The sensitivity of CT scanning for the detection of Meckel’s diverticuli is too low to be clinically useful. Enterocolysis is associated with an accuracy of 75% but is usually not applicable during acute presentations of complications related to Meckel’s diverticuli. Radionuclide scans (99MTc–pertechnetate) can be helpful in the diagnosis of Meckel’s diverticulum; this test is, however, positive only when the diverticulum contains associated ectopic gastric mucosa that is capable of uptake of the tracer (Fig. 28-28). The accuracy of radionuclide scanning is reported to be 90% in pediatric patients but less than 50% in adults. Angiography can localize the site of bleeding during acute hemorrhage related to Meckel’s diverticuli.Brunicardi_Ch28_p1219-p1258.indd   124723/02/19   2:24 PM 1248SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 28-28. Meckel’s diverticulum with ectopic gastric tissue. The diagnosis was made in this patient using 99MTc–pertechnetate scintig-raphy. The study revealed an abnormal focus of radiotracer accumulation in the right lower quadrant (arrow).TherapyThe surgical treatment of symptomatic Meckel’s diverticuli should consist of diverticulectomy with removal of associated bands connecting the diverticulum to the abdominal wall or intestinal mesentery. If the indication for diverticulectomy is bleeding, segmental resection of ileum that includes both the diverticulum and the adjacent ileal peptic ulcer should be per-formed. Segmental ileal resection may also be necessary if the diverticulum contains a tumor or if the base of the diverticulum is inflamed or perforated.The management of incidentally found (asymptomatic) Meckel’s diverticuli is controversial. Until recently, most authors recommended against prophylactic removal of asymptomatic Meckel’s diverticuli, given the low lifetime incidence of com-plications. Supporting this approach, a meta-analysis has shown that 758 prophylactic diverticulectomies needed to be performed to prevent one Meckel’s-related death.63 Others have had greater enthusiasm for prophylactic diverticulectomy has appeared in the literature.64 Proponents of this approach cite the minimal mor-bidity associated with removing Meckel’s diverticuli and the possibility that previous estimates of the lifetime incidence of complications related to Meckel’s diverticuli may be erroneously low. Many have advocated a selective approach, with a recom-mendation to remove diverticuli in patients younger than 50 years of age, or those with band attachments, those with ectopic tissue, or those >2 cm in length on the assumption that these diverticuli are more likely to develop complications. No controlled data sup-porting or refuting these recommendations exist.ACQUIRED DIVERTICULAAcquired diverticuli are designated false diverticuli because their walls consist of mucosa and submucosa but lack a com-plete muscularis. Acquired diverticuli are more common in the duodenum, and tend to be located near the ampulla; such diverticuli are known as periampullary, juxtapapillary, and perivaterian diverticuli. Approximately 75% of juxtapapillary diverticuli arise on the medial wall of the duodenum. Acquired diverticuli in the jejunum or ileum are known as jejunoileal diverticuli. Eighty percent of jejunoileal diverticuli are localized to the jejunum, 15% to the ileum, and 5% to both jejunum and ileum. Diverticuli in the jejunum tend to be large and accom-panied by multiple other diverticuli, whereas those in the ileum tend to be small and solitary.The prevalence of duodenal diverticuli, as detected on upper GI examinations (Fig. 28-29), has been reported to range from 0.16% to 6%.65 Their prevalence, as detected during ERCP examinations, has been reported to range from 5% to 27%. A 23% prevalence rate has been reported in an autopsy series. The prevalence of duodenal diverticuli increases with age; they are Brunicardi_Ch28_p1219-p1258.indd   124823/02/19   2:24 PM 1249SMALL INTESTINECHAPTER 28Figure 28-29. Duodenal diverticulum. This contrast radiograph demonstrates a duodenal diverticulum (arrows) that extends medially into the substance of the head of the pancreas.Figure 28-30. Jejunoileal diverticuli. This picture demonstrates incidental jejunal diverticuli identified during a laparoscopic cholecystectomy. The diverticuli are typically located on the mesenteric aspect of the jejunum. Resection was not indicated as the diverticuli were asymptomatic.rare in patients under the age of 40 years. The mean age of diagnosis ranges from 56 to 76 years.The prevalence of jejunoileal diverticuli (Fig. 28-30) has been estimated to range from 1% to 5%.66 Their prevalence increases with age; most patients diagnosed with these diver-ticuli are in the sixth and seventh decades of life.PathophysiologyThe pathogenesis of acquired diverticuli is hypothesized to be related to acquired abnormalities of intestinal smooth muscle or dysregulated motility, leading to herniation of mucosa and submucosa through weakened areas of muscularis.Acquired diverticuli can be associated with bacterial over-growth, leading to vitamin B12 deficiency, megaloblastic anemia, malabsorption, and steatorrhea. Periampullary duodenal diver-ticuli have been described to become distended with intralumi-nal debris and to compress the common bile duct or pancreatic duct, thus causing obstructive jaundice or pancreatitis, respec-tively. Jejunoileal diverticuli can also cause intestinal obstruction through intussusception or compression of adjacent bowel.Brunicardi_Ch28_p1219-p1258.indd   124923/02/19   2:25 PM 1250SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIClinical PresentationAcquired diverticuli are asymptomatic unless associated com-plications arise. Such complications are estimated to occur in 6% to 10% of patients with acquired diverticuli and include intestinal obstruction, diverticulitis, hemorrhage, perforation, and malabsorption. Periampullary duodenal diverticuli may be associated with choledocholithiasis, cholangitis, recurrent pan-creatitis, and sphincter of Oddi dysfunction. However, a clear link between the presence of the diverticuli and the development of these conditions has not been demonstrated. Symptoms such as intermittent abdominal pain, flatulence, diarrhea, and consti-pation are reported to be present in 10% to 30% of patients with jejunoileal diverticuli. The relationship between these symp-toms and the presence of the diverticuli is similarly unclear.DiagnosisMost acquired diverticuli are discovered incidentally on radiographic imaging, during endoscopy, or at the time of surgery. On ultrasound and CT scanning, duodenal diverticuli may be mistaken for pancreatic pseudocysts and fluid collections, biliary cysts, and periampullary neoplasms. These lesions can be missed on endoscopy, particularly with forward-viewing endoscopes, and are best diagnosed on upper gastrointestinal radiographs. Enterocolysis is the most sensitive test for detecting jejunoileal diverticuli.TherapyAsymptomatic-acquired diverticuli should be left alone. Bacte-rial overgrowth associated with acquired diverticuli is treated with antibiotics. Other complications, such as bleeding and diverticulitis, are treated with segmental intestinal resection for diverticuli located in the jejunum or ileum.Bleeding and obstruction related to lateral duodenal diverticuli are generally treated with diverticulectomy alone. Treatment of such complications in medial duodenal diverticuli that penetrate the substance of the pancreas can be very challenging. Complications related to these medial duodenal diverticuli should be managed nonoperatively if possible, using endoscopy. In emergent situations, bleeding related to medial duodenal diverticuli can be controlled using a lateral duodenotomy and oversewing of the bleeding vessel. Similarly, perforation can be managed with wide drainage rather than complex surgery. Whether diverticulectomy should be done in patients with biliary or pancreatic symptoms is controversial and is not routinely recommended.MESENTERIC ISCHEMIAMesenteric ischemia can present as one of two distinct clinical syndromes: acute mesenteric ischemia and chronic mesenteric ischemia.Four distinct pathophysiologic mechanisms can lead to acute mesenteric ischemia:1.	Arterial embolus2.	Arterial thrombosis3.	Vasospasm (also known as nonocclusive mesenteric isch-emia or NOMI)4.	Venous thrombosisEmbolus is the most common cause of acute mesen-teric ischemia and is responsible for over 50% of cases. The embolic source is usually in the heart, most often the left atrial or ventricular thrombi or valvular lesions. Indeed, up to 95% of patients with acute mesenteric ischemia due to emboli will have a documented history of cardiac disease. Embolism to the superior mesenteric artery accounts for 50% of cases; most of these emboli become wedged and cause occlusion at branch points in the midto distal superior mesenteric artery, usually distal to the origin of the middle colic artery. In contrast, acute occlusions due to thrombosis tend to occur in the proximal mes-enteric arteries, near their origins. Acute thrombosis is usually superimposed on preexisting atherosclerotic lesions at these sites. NOMI is the result of vasospasm and is usually diagnosed in critically ill patients receiving vasopressor agents.Mesenteric venous thrombosis accounts for 5% to 15% of cases of acute mesenteric ischemia and involves the supe-rior mesenteric vein in 95% of cases.67 The inferior mesenteric vein is only rarely involved. Mesenteric venous thrombosis is classified as primary if no etiologic factor is identifiable, or as secondary if an etiologic factor, such as heritable or acquired coagulation disorders, is identified.Regardless of the pathophysiologic mechanism, acute mes-enteric ischemia can lead to intestinal mucosal sloughing within  3 hours of onset and full-thickness intestinal infarction by 6 hours.In contrast, chronic mesenteric ischemia develops insidi-ously, allowing for development of collateral circulation, and, therefore, rarely leads to intestinal infarction. Chronic mesen-teric arterial ischemia results from atherosclerotic lesions in the main splanchnic arteries (celiac, superior mesenteric, and inferior mesenteric arteries). In most patients with symptoms attributable to chronic mesenteric ischemia, at least two of these arteries are either occluded or severely stenosed. A chronic form of mesenteric venous thrombosis can involve the portal or splenic veins and may lead to portal hypertension, with result-ing esophagogastric varices, splenomegaly, and hypersplenism.Severe abdominal pain, out of proportion to the degree of tenderness on examination is the hallmark of acute mesenteric ischemia, regardless of the pathophysiologic mechanism. The pain is typically perceived to be colicky and most severe in the mid-abdomen. Associated symptoms can include nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. Physical findings are characteristically absent early in the course of ischemia. With the onset of bowel infarction, abdominal distension, peritonitis, and passage of bloody stools occur.Chronic mesenteric ischemia presents insidiously. Post-prandial abdominal pain is the most prevalent symptom, produc-ing a characteristic aversion to food (“food fear”) and weight loss. These patients are often thought to have a malignancy and suffer a prolonged period of symptoms before the correct diag-nosis is made.Most patients with chronic mesenteric venous thrombosis are asymptomatic because of the presence of extensive collat-eral venous drainage routes; this condition is usually discovered as an incidental finding on imaging studies. However, some patients with chronic mesenteric venous thrombosis present with bleeding from esophagogastric varices.The diagnosis and management of these disorders, which are of primary vascular origin, are discussed in the section on “Mesen-teric Artery Occlusive Disease” in Chapter 23 “Arterial Disease.”MISCELLANEOUS CONDITIONSObscure GI BleedingUp to 90% of lesions responsible for GI bleeding are within the reach of EGD and colonoscopy. Obscure GI bleeding refers to gastrointestinal bleeding for which no source has been identified by routine endoscopic studies (EGD and colonoscopy). Overt Brunicardi_Ch28_p1219-p1258.indd   125023/02/19   2:25 PM 1251SMALL INTESTINECHAPTER 28GI bleeding refers to the presence of hematemesis, melena, or hematochezia. In contrast, occult GI bleeding occurs in the absence of overt bleeding and is identified on laboratory tests (e.g., iron-deficiency anemia) or examination of the stool (e.g., positive guaiac test). Obscure GI bleeding is occult in 20% of cases.68Obscure bleeding can be frustrating for both the patient and the clinician, and this is particularly true for obscure-overt bleeding, which cannot be localized despite aggressive diag-nostic measures. Most of the small bowel is beyond the reach of these examinations and, hence, contains most lesions respon-sible for obscure GI bleeding. Small intestinal angiodysplasias account for approximately 75% of cases in adults, and neo-plasms account for approximately 10%. Meckel’s diverticulum is the most common etiology of obscure GI bleeding in children. Other etiologies of obscure GI bleeding include Crohn’s dis-ease, infectious enteritides, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID)-induced ulcers and erosions, vasculitis, ischemia, var-ices, diverticuli, and intussusception.The diagnostic evaluation of patients with obscure GI bleeding should be tailored to the severity to bleeding and to the availability of technology and expertise. Enteroscopy is playing an increasingly important role. Several endoscopic techniques for visualizing the small intestine are available: push enteros-copy, sonde enteroscopy, intraoperative enteroscopy, double balloon endoscopy, and wireless capsule enteroscopy.Push enteroscopy entails advancing a long endoscope (such as a pediatric or adult colonoscope or a specialized instru-ment) beyond the ligament of Treitz into the proximal jejunum. This procedure can allow for visualization of approximately  60 cm of the proximal jejunum. Diagnostic yield in patients with obscure GI bleeding ranges from 3% to 65%. In addition to diagnosis, push enteroscopy allows for cauterization of bleed-ing sites.In Sonde enteroscopy, a long, thin fiberoptic instrument is propelled through the intestine by peristalsis following infla-tion of a balloon at the instrument’s tip. Visualization is done during instrument withdrawal; approximately 50% to 75% of the small intestinal mucosa can be examined. However, this instrument lacks biopsy or therapeutic capability. Further, it lacks tip deflection capability, limiting complete mucosal visu-alization, and has therefore been abandoned in favor of capsule endoscopy.Wireless capsule enteroscopy is an excellent tool in the patient who is hemodynamically stable but continues to bleed. This technique has reported success rates as high as 90% in identifying a small bowel pathology. In a randomized study of patients with obscure GI bleeding, evaluation with capsule endoscopy vs. small bowel contrast study had a much higher diagnostic yield (30% vs. 7%, respectively); however, this did not translate into an improvement in outcomes. The rates of rebleeding, hospitalization, need for blood transfusion, and therapeutic interventions were similar between the two arms.The inability to perform biopsies or carry out any thera-peutic interventions of capsule endoscope likely prevents the improved diagnostic yield of the test from translating into improved patient outcomes and highlights the continuing chal-lenge with evaluation of the small bowel.69For patients in whom bleeding from an obscure GI source has apparently stopped, push enteroscopy or capsule enteroscopy is a reasonable initial study. If these examinations do not reveal a potential source of bleeding, then enterocolysis should be performed. Standard small bowel follow-through examinations are associated with a low diagnostic yield in this setting and should be avoided. 99MTc–pertechnetate scintigraphy to diagnose Meckel’s diverticulum should be considered, although its yield in patients older than 40 years of age is extremely low. If still no diagnosis has been made, a “watch-and-wait” approach is reasonable, although angiography should be considered if the episode of bleeding was overt. Angiography can reveal angiodysplasia and vascular tumors in the small intestine even in the absence of ongoing bleeding. In many instances, however, angiography is done in patients with persistent bleeding from an obscure GI source, and it is also often performed after a 99MTc-labeled RBC scan, which, if positive, is followed by angiography to localize the source of bleeding. Patients who remain undiagnosed but continue to bleed and those with recurrent episodic bleeding significant enough to require blood transfusions should then undergo exploratory laparoscopy or laparotomy with intraoperative enteroscopy. An endoscope (usually a colonoscope) is inserted into the small bowel through peroral intubation or through an enterotomy made in the small bowel or cecum. The endoscope is advanced by successively telescoping short segments of intestine onto the end to the instrument. In addition to the endoscopic image, the transilluminated bowel should be examined externally with  the operating room lights dimmed, as this maneuver may facilitate the identification of angiodysplasias. Identified lesions should be marked with a suture placed on the serosal surface of the bowel; these lesions can be resected after completion of endoscopy. Examination should be performed during instrument insertion rather than withdrawal because instrument-induced mucosal trauma can be confused with angiodysplasias.Figure 28-31 provides a diagnostic and management algo-rithm for patients with obscure GI bleeding.Small Bowel PerforationPrior to the 1980s, duodenal perforation due to peptic ulcer dis-ease was the most common form of small bowel perforation. Today, iatrogenic injury incurred during gastrointestinal endos-copy is the most common cause of small bowel perforation. Other etiologies of small bowel perforation include infections (especially tuberculosis, typhoid, and CMV), Crohn’s disease, ischemia, drugs (e.g., potassiumand NSAID-induced ulcers), radiation-induced injury, Meckel’s and acquired diverticuli, neoplasms (especially lymphoma, adenocarcinoma, and mela-noma), and foreign bodies.Among iatrogenic injuries, duodenal perforation dur-ing endoscopic retrograde cholangiography (ERCP) with endoscopic sphincterotomy (ES) is the most common. With improved technique and technology, the incidence of this is decreasing but remains at around 0.5%.70 The Stapfer classifi-cation is commonly used to categorize different types of ERCP-related perforations. These are:•	Type I: Free bowel wall perforation•	Type II: Retroperitoneal duodenal perforation secondary to periampullary injury•	Type III: Perforation of the pancreatic or bile duct•	Type IV: Retroperitoneal air aloneType II (retroperitoneal duodenal injuries) are the most common and can often be managed nonsurgically. Manifesta-tions of such contained duodenal perforation following ERCP can resemble those of ERCP-induced pancreatitis, including hyperamylasemia.Brunicardi_Ch28_p1219-p1258.indd   125123/02/19   2:25 PM 1252SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IICT scanning is the most sensitive test for diagnosing duo-denal perforations; positive findings include pneumoperitoneum for free perforations, but more commonly retroperitoneal air, contrast extravasation, and paraduodenal fluid collections. If all patients undergoing a therapeutic ERCP are imaged with a  CT scan following the procedure, up to 30% will have evidence of air in the retroperitoneum, but the majority are asymptomatic. These patients do not require any specific therapy.71True cases of retroperitoneal perforations of the duodenum can be managed nonoperatively in the absence of progression and sepsis. However, intraoperitoneal duodenal perforations require surgical repair with pyloric exclusion and gastrojeju-nostomy or tube duodenostomy. Iatrogenic small bowel perfora-tion incurred during endoscopy, if immediately recognized, can sometimes be repaired using endoscopic techniques.Perforation of the jejunum and ileum occurs into the peri-toneal cavity and usually causes overt symptoms and signs, such as abdominal pain, tenderness, and distention accompa-nied by fever and tachycardia. Plain abdominal radiographs may reveal free intraperitoneal air if intraperitoneal perforation has occurred. If perforation is suspected but not clinically obvious, CT scanning should be performed. Jejunal and ileal perforations require surgical repair or segmental resection.Chylous AscitesChylous ascites refers to the accumulation of triglyceride-rich peritoneal fluid with a milky or creamy appearing, caused by the presence of intestinal lymph in the peritoneal cavity. Chy-lomicrons, produced by the intestine and secreted into lymph during the absorption of long-chain fatty acids, account for the characteristic appearance and triglyceride content of chyle.The most common etiologies of chylous ascites in Western countries are abdominal malignancies and cirrhosis. In Eastern and developing countries, infectious etiologies, such as tuber-culosis and filariasis, account for most cases. Chylous ascites can also develop as a complication of abdominal and thoracic operations and trauma. Operations particularly associated with this complication include abdominal aortic aneurysm repair, retroperitoneal lymph node dissection, inferior vena cava resec-tion, and liver transplantation. Other etiologies of chylous asci-tes include congenital lymphatic abnormalities (e.g., primary lymphatic hypoplasia), radiation, pancreatitis, and right-sided heart failure.Three mechanisms have been postulated to cause chylous ascites: (a) exudation of chyle from dilated lymphatics on the wall of the bowel and in the mesentery caused by obstruction of lymphatic vessels at the base of the mesentery or the cisterna chili (e.g., by malignancies), (b) direct leakage of chyle through a lymphoperitoneal fistula (e.g., those that develop as a result of trauma or surgery), and (c) exudation of chyle through the wall of dilated retroperitoneal lymphatic vessels (e.g., in congenital lymphangiectasia or thoracic duct obstruction).Patients with chylous ascites develop abdominal distention over a period of weeks to months. Postoperative chylous ascites can present acutely during the first postoperative week. Delayed presentations following surgery can occur if the mechanism of ascites formation is adhesion-induced lymphatic obstruction rather than lymphatic vessel disruption.Obscure gastrointestinal bleedingRule out upper and lower GIbleeding;EGD and colonoscopyMinor bleeding(intermittent)Major bleeding(persistent)Initiate appropriatetherapyRepeat EGD/Colonoscopy ifrebleedsTreat source, e.g.,small bowelresectionLocalize bleeding:Serial clamping or intraoperativeenteroscopy followed by resectionPositivePositiveNegativeUnstableStableTaggedRBC scanNegativeandpatient stableSource ofbleeding identifiedSourceuncertainAngiographyand treatmentOperatingroomEnteroclysisEnteroscopyCapsuleendoscopyFigure 28-31. Diagnostic and management algorithm for obscure gastrointestinal bleeding.Brunicardi_Ch28_p1219-p1258.indd   125223/02/19   2:25 PM 1253SMALL INTESTINECHAPTER 28Paracentesis is the most important diagnostic test. Chyle typically has a cloudy and turbid appearance; however, it may be clear in fasting patients (such as those in the immediate postoperative period). Fluid triglyceride concentrations above 110 mg/dL are diagnostic. CT scanning may be useful in identifying pathological intraabdominal lymph nodes and masses and in identifying extent and localization of fluid. Lymphangiography and lymphoscintigraphy may help localize lymph leaks and obstruction; this information is particularly useful for surgical planning.There is little data on optimal management of patients with chylous ascites. The general approach is to focus on evaluating and treating the underlying causes, especially for patients with infec-tious, inflammatory, or hemodynamic etiologies for this condition.Most patients respond to administration of a high-protein and low-fat diet supplemented with medium-chain triglycerides. This regimen is designed to minimize chyle production and flow. Medium-chain triglycerides are absorbed by the intestinal epithelium and are transported to liver through the portal vein; they do not contribute to chylomicron formation.Patients who do not respond to this approach should be fasted and placed on TPN. Octreotide can further decrease lymph flow. Paracentesis is indicated for respiratory difficul-ties related to abdominal distention. Overall, two-thirds of patients will respond to conservative therapy. However, one-third of patients will require surgical therapy for chylous ascites.  In general, postoperative and trauma-related cases that fail to respond to initial nonoperative therapy are best managed by surgical repair. Lymphatic leaks are localized and repaired with fine nonabsorbable sutures. If extravasation of chyle is localized to the periphery of the small bowel mesentery, then a limited small bowel resection can be performed instead. For patients who are poor surgical candidates and who do not respond to prolonged conservative therapy, peritoneovenous shunting may be an option. However, these shunts are associated with high rates of complications, including sepsis and disseminated intra-vascular coagulation. Because of the viscosity of chyle, these shunts are associated with a high occlusion rate.IntussusceptionIntussusception refers to a condition where one segment of the intestine becomes drawn in to the lumen of the distal segment of the bowel. It is usually seen in the pediatric population, where the ileum intussuscepts into the cecum (ileocolic intussuscep-tion). In children, it is often an idiopathic condition and treated nonsurgically by radiological reduction.Intussusceptions are far less common and usually have a distinct pathologic lead point, which can be malignant in up to one-half of cases.72 They commonly present with a history of intermittent abdominal pain and signs and symptoms of bowel obstruction. CT scan is the investigation of choice, where a “tar-get sign” may be seen (Fig. 28-32). Treatment is surgical resec-tion of the involved segment and the lead point, which needs to undergo pathological evaluation to rule out an underlying malignancy.With increasing use of CT imaging, target signs are some-times seen on CT scans of patients who do not have a clinical presentation indicative of bowel obstruction. In such cases, the finding is of little clinical significance and is probably related to normal peristalsis.In patients who have undergone a Roux-en-Y gastric bypass surgery, an atypical form of intussusception has been increasingly described. In these cases, the distal bowel is drawn in to the lumen of the proximal bowel (retrograde intussuscep-tion). These intussusceptions are usually not associated with a lead point and may represent a motility disorder of the bowel following the Roux-en-Y reconstruction. Surgical reductions without resection have been successfully reported in these patients.73Pneumatosis IntestinalisPneumatosis intestinalis indicates the presence of gas within the bowel wall. It may affect any region of the GI tract, but it is most commonly seen in the jejunum. Pneumatosis intestinalis is not a disease but merely a sign that can be idiopathic or associated with many intestinal or nonintestinal disorders, such as obstruc-tive pulmonary disease and asthma. Most cases of pneumatosis intestinalis are secondary to an identifiable cause, and 15% are idiopathic. The pathogenesis of pneumatosis intestinalis is not fully understood.The surgical interest in this finding is the association of it with bowel ischemia and infarction, both of which necessitate emergent surgical intervention (Fig. 28-33). Thus, patients with this radiological finding need to be fully evaluated and moni-tored closely to rule out such intraabdominal catastrophes.ABFigure 28-32. Small bowel intussusception. A. Target sign seen on CT scans in patients with small bowel intussusception (arrow).  B. The distal bowel is clearly within the lumen of the proximal bowel (arrow).Brunicardi_Ch28_p1219-p1258.indd   125323/02/19   2:25 PM 1254SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IISHORT BOWEL SYNDROMEIntestinal resection is performed for many of the diseases dis-cussed in this chapter and generally is associated with minimal morbidity. However, when extent of resection is great enough, a devastating condition known as short bowel syndrome may result. Although the best definition of short bowel syndrome is likely a functional one, reflecting a state of significant malabsorption of both macronutrients and micronutrients, some have used a more anatomical definition with it being arbi-trarily defined as the presence of less than 200 cm of residual small bowel in adult patients.74In adults, the most common etiologies of short bowel syn-drome are acute mesenteric ischemia, malignancy, and Crohn’s disease. Seventy-five percent of cases result from resection of a large amount of small bowel at a single operation. Twenty-five percent of cases result from the cumulative effects of multiple operations during which small intestine is resected. This latter pattern is typical of patients with Crohn’s disease who develop short bowel syndrome; the former is typical of patients with acute mesenteric ischemia who develop intestinal infarction. In pediat-ric patients, intestinal atresias, volvulus, and necrotizing entero-colitis are the most common etiologies of short bowel syndrome.The prevalence of short bowel syndrome is hard to esti-mate due to its multifactorial nature and wide spectrum of presentation and treatment, which may include home total par-enteral nutrition (TPN).PathophysiologyResection of less than 50% of the small intestine is generally well tolerated. However, clinically significant malabsorption occurs when greater than 50% to 80% of the small intestine has been resected. Among adult patients who lack a functional colon, lifelong TPN dependence is likely to persist if there is less than 100 cm of residual small intestine. Among adult patients who have an intact and functional colon, lifelong TPN dependence is likely to persist if there is less than 60 cm of residual small intestine. Among infants with short bowel syn-drome, weaning from TPN-dependence has been achieved with as little as 10 cm of residual small intestine.Residual bowel length is not the only factor predictive of achieving independence from TPN (enteral autonomy), 5Figure 28-33. STEP procedure. This illustration depicts the serial transverse enteroplasty (STEP) procedure. Lengthening of dilated small intestine is accomplished by serial applications of an intestinal stapling device, with firings oriented perpendicular to the long axis of the intestine. (Used with permission from Patrick Javid, M.D. and Tom Jaksic, M.D., Department of Surgery, Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA.)Table 28-11Risk factors for development of short bowel syndrome after massive small bowel resectionSmall bowel length <200 cmAbsence of ileocecal valveAbsence of colonDiseased remaining bowel (e.g., Crohn’s disease)Ileal resectionhowever. Other determinants of the severity of malabsorption include the presence or absence of an intact colon, as indicated previously. The colon has the capacity to absorb large fluid and electrolyte loads. In addition, the colon can play an important, albeit small, role in nutrient assimilation by absorbing short chain fatty acids. Second, an intact ileocecal valve is believed to be associated with decreased malabsorption. The ileocecal valve delays transit of chyme from the small intestine into the colon, thereby prolonging the contact time between nutrients and the small-intestinal absorptive mucosa. Third, healthy, rather than diseased, residual small intestine is associated with decreased severity of malabsorption. Fourth, resection of jejunum is better tolerated than resection of ileum, as the capacity for bile salt and vitamin B12 absorption is specific to the ileum (Table 28-11).During the first 1 to 2 years following massive small bowel resection, the remaining intestine undergoes compensa-tory adaptation, as discussed previously. Clinically, the period of adaptation is associated with reductions in volume and fre-quency of bowel movements, increases in the capacity for enteral nutrient assimilation, and reductions in TPN requirements. As this process completes, some patients are successfully weaned off TPN. Understanding the mechanisms mediating intestinal adaptation may suggest strategies for enhancing adaptation in patients with short bowel syndrome who are unable to achieve independence from TPN. To date, the phenomenon of intestinal adaptation in patients remains poorly understood.13Malabsorption in patients who have undergone mas-sive small bowel resection is exacerbated by a characteristic hypergastrinemia-associated gastric acid hypersecretion that persists for 1 to 2 years postoperatively. The increased acid Brunicardi_Ch28_p1219-p1258.indd   125423/02/19   2:25 PM 1255SMALL INTESTINECHAPTER 28load delivered to the duodenum inhibits absorption by a variety of mechanisms, including the inhibition of digestive enzymes, most of which function optimally under alkaline conditions.TherapyMedical Therapy. For patients after massive small bowel resection, the initial treatment priorities include management of the primary condition precipitating the intestinal resection and the repletion of fluid and electrolytes lost in the severe diarrhea that characteristically occurs. Most patients will require TPN, at least initially. Enteral nutrition should be gradually introduced, once ileus has resolved. High-dose histamine-2 receptor antago-nists or proton pump inhibitors should be administered to reduce gastric acid secretion. Antimotility agents, such as loperamide hydrochloride or diphenoxylate, may be administered to delay small-intestinal transit. Octreotide can be administered to reduce the volume of gastrointestinal secretions, although, in animal models, its use is associated with an inhibition of intestinal adaptation.During the period of adaptation, generally lasting 1 to  2 years postoperatively, TPN and enteral nutrition are titrated to allow for independence from TPN. Patients who remain dependent on TPN face substantial TPN-associated morbidities including catheter sepsis, venous thrombosis, liver and kidney failure, and osteoporosis. Liver failure is a significant source of morbidity and often leads to liver transplantation (always in combination with small bowel transplantation). Due to these complications, patients with short bowel syndrome on TPN have a reduced life expectancy, with 5-year survival rates of 50% to 75%.Nontransplant Surgical Therapy. Among patients with sto-mas, restoration of intestinal continuity should be performed whenever possible, to capitalize on the absorptive capacity of all residual intestine. Other forms of nontransplant surgery designed to improve intestinal absorption are associated with unclear efficacy and/or substantial morbidities and therefore should not be applied routinely.The goal of these operations is to increase nutrient and fluid absorption by either slowing intestinal transit or increasing intestinal length. Operations designed to slow intestinal transit include segmental reversal of the small bowel, interposition of a segment of colon between segments of small bowel, construc-tion of small-intestinal valves, and electrical pacing of the small intestine. Reported experience with these procedures is limited to case reports or series of a few cases. Objective evidence of increased absorption is lacking; further, these procedures are frequently associated with intestinal obstruction.The intestinal lengthening operation for which has the lon-gest history is the longitudinal intestinal lengthening and tailor-ing (LILT) procedure, first described by Bianchi in 1980.75 The procedure entails separation of the dual vasculature of the small intestine, followed by longitudinal division of the bowel with subsequent isoperistaltic end-to-end anastomosis. This proce-dure has the potential to double the length of small intestine to which it is applied. This procedure has generally been used for pediatric patients with dilated residual small bowel.An alternative surgical approach to lengthening the small bowel is the serial transverse enteroplasty procedure (STEP) has been described. This procedure is designed to accom-plish lengthening of dilated small intestine without the need for separating its dual vasculature (Fig. 28-33). A report from an international registry of 111 patients showed that 47% of patients achieved enteral autonomy at a median follow-up of 21 months.76Intestinal Transplantation. This complex procedure is being increasingly performed to treat patients with short bowel syn-drome. The currently accepted indication for intestinal trans-plantation is the presence of life-threatening complications attributable to intestinal failure and/or long-term TPN therapy. Specific complications for which intestinal transplantation is indicated include (a) impending or overt liver failure, (b) throm-bosis of major central veins, (c) frequent episodes of catheter-related sepsis, and (d) frequent episodes of severe dehydration.Of the transplants involving the intestine, 37% were intestine-alone transplants, 30% included intestine, liver, and pancreas, and 24% were intestine and liver.77Isolated intestinal transplantation is used for patients with intestinal failure who have no significant liver disease or failure of other organs. Combined intestine/liver transplantation is used for patients with both intestinal and liver failure. Multivisceral transplantation has been used for patients with giant desmoid tumors involving the vascular supply of the liver and pancreas as well as that of the intestine, for diffuse gastrointestinal motil-ity disturbances, and for diffuse splanchnic thrombosis.Nearly 80% of survivors have full intestinal graft function with no need for TPN. However, morbidities associated with intestinal transplantation are substantial and include acute and chronic rejection, CMV infection, and posttransplant lymphop-roliferative disease.Alternative Therapies. Pharmacologic and biologic thera-pies designed to expand intestinal mucosal surface area or to enhance the efficiency of intestinal absorption are beginning to undergo clinical evaluation. Promising regimens include GLP-2 and the combination of glutamine and growth hormone with a modified, high-carbohydrate diet.OutcomesApproximately 50% to 70% of patients with short bowel syn-drome who initially require TPN are ultimately able to achieve independence from TPN.73 Prognosis for achieving enteral autonomy is better among pediatric patients than among adults.Information on survival among patients with short bowel syndrome is limited. In a recently reported study of 124 adults with short bowel syndrome due to nonmalignant etiologies, the survival rates at 2 and 5 years of follow up were 86% and 45%, respectively.77 Patients with end-enterostomies and those hav-ing less than 50 cm of residual small intestine had significantly worse survivals than those without these features.No randomized trials comparing intestinal transplanta-tion to chronic TPN administration among patients with short bowel syndrome have been reported. One-, 5-, and 10-year graft survival rates of intestine-alone recipients were 80%, 44%, and 26%; while those for intestine and liver and intestine, liver, and pancreas were 62%, 45%, 36% and 69%, 48%, 33%, respectively.78REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Tavakkolizadeh A, Whang EE, Ashley SW, Zinner MJ. Small intestine. In: Brunicardi F, Andersen D, Billiar T, et al, eds. Principles of Surgery. 9th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2004:28-1 to 28-32.	2.	McMinn RMH. Last’s Anatomy: Regional and Applied. 9th ed. Singapore: Churchill Livingstone; 1994:337.Brunicardi_Ch28_p1219-p1258.indd   125523/02/19   2:25 PM 1256SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	3.	Yan KS, Chia LA, Li X, et al. The intestinal stem cell markers Bmi1 and Lgr5 identify two functionally distinct populations. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012;109:466-471.	4.	Thomson ABR, Keelan M, Thiesen A, et al. Small bowel  review: normal physiology part 2. Dig Dis Sci. 2001;46: 2567-2587.	5.	Laforenza U. Water channel proteins in the gastrointestinal tract. Mol Aspects Med. 2012;33:642-650.	6.	Dyer J, Wood IS, Palejwala A, Ellis A, Shirazi-Beechy SP. Expression of monosaccharide transporters in intestine of diabetic humans. Am J Physiol. 2002;282:G241-G248.	7.	Rubino F, Nathan DM, Eckel RH, et al; Delegates of the 2nd Diabetes Surgery Summit. Metabolic surgery in the treatment algorithm for type 2 diabetes: a joint statement by international diabetes organizations. Diabetes Care. 2016; 39(6):861-877.	8.	Rolfs A, Hediger MA. Intestinal metal ion absorption: an update. Curr Opin Gastroenterol. 2001;17:177-183.	9.	Nagler-Anderson C. Man the barrier! Strategic defenses in the intestinal mucosa. Nat Rev Immunol. 2001;1:59-67.	10.	Mowat AM. Anatomical basis of tolerance and immunity to intestinal antigens. Nat Rev Immunol. 2003;3:331-341.	11.	Jarchum I, Pamer EG. Regulation of innate and adaptive immunity by the commensal microbiota. Curr Opin Immunol. 2011;23:353-360.	12.	Rehfeld JF. The new biology of gastrointestinal hormones. Physiol Rev. 1998;78(4):1087-1108.	13.	Tavakkolizadeh A, Whang EE. Understanding and augmenting human intestinal adaptation: a call for more clinical research. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 2002;26:251-255.	14.	Scott FI, Osterman MT, Mahmoud NN, Lewis JD. Secular trends in small-bowel obstruction and adhesiolysis in the United States: 1988-2007. Am J Surg. 2012;204(3):315-320.	15.	Scott JW, Olufajo OA, Brat GA, et al. Use of national burden to define operative emergency general surgery. JAMA Surg. 2016;151(6):e160480.	16.	Ceresoli M, Coccolini F, Catena F, et al. Water-soluble contrast agent in adhesive small bowel obstruction: a systematic review and meta-analysis of diagnostic and therapeutic value. Am J Surg. 2016;211(6):1114-1125.	17.	Rocha FG, Theman TA, Matros E, Ledbetter SM, Zinner MJ, Ferzoco SJ. Nonoperative management of patients with a diagnosis of high-grade small bowel obstruction by computed tomography. Arch Surg. 2009;144(11):1000-1004.	18.	Chu DI, Gainsbury ML, Howard LA, Stucchi AF, Becker JM. Early versus late adhesiolysis for adhesive-related intestinal obstruction: a nationwide analysis of inpatient outcomes.  J Gastrointest Surg. 2013;17:288-297.	19.	Lombardo S, Baum K, Filho JD, Nirula R. Should adhesive small bowel obstruction be managed laparoscopically?  A National Surgical Quality Improvement Program propensity score analysis. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2014;76(3):696-703.	20.	Wiggins T, Markar SR, Harris A. Laparoscopic adhesiolysis for acute small bowel obstruction: systematic review and pooled analysis. Surg Endosc. 2015;29(12):3432-3442.	21.	Duron J, Jourdan-Da Silva N, Tezenas du Montcel S, et al. Adhesive postoperative small bowel obstruction: incidence and risk factors of recurrence after surgical treatment: a multicenter prospective study. Ann Surg. 2006;244(5):750-757.	22.	Wahl WL, Wong SL, Sonnenday CJ, et al. Implementation of a small bowel obstruction guideline improves hospital efficiency. Surgery. 2012;152:626-632.	23.	Ellis H, Moran BJ, Thompson JN, et al. Adhesion-related hospital readmissions after abdominal and pelvic surgery:  a retrospective cohort study. Lancet. 1999;353:1476-1480.	24.	Angenete E, Jacobsson A, Gellerstedt M, Haglind E. Effect of laparoscopy on the risk of small-bowel obstruction: a population-based register study. Arch Surg. 2012;147(4):359-365.	25.	Fazio VW, Cohen Z, Fleshman JW, et al. Reduction in adhesive small-bowel obstruction by Seprafilm adhesion barrier after intestinal resection. Dis Colon Rectum. 2006; 49(1):1-11.	26.	Kumar S, Wong PF, Leaper DJ. Intra-peritoneal prophylactic agents for preventing adhesions and adhesive intestinal obstruction after non-gynaecological abdominal surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009;(1):CD005080.	27.	Suwa K, Ushigome T, Ohtsu M, et al. Risk factors for early postoperative small bowel obstruction after anterior resection for rectal cancer. World J Surg. 2018;42(1):233-238.	28.	Dalal KM, Gollub MJ, Miner TJ, et al. Management of patients with malignant bowel obstruction and stage IV colorectal cancer. J Palliat Med. 2011;14(7):822-828.	29.	Doorly MG, Senagore AJ. Pathogenesis and clinical and economic consequences of postoperative ileus. Surg Clin North Am. 2012;92(2):259-272.	30.	Vather R, Trivedi S, Bissett I. Defining postoperative ileus: results of a systematic review and global survey. J Gastrointest Surg. 2013;17(5):962-972. 	31.	Wolff BG, Viscusi ER, Delaney CP, Du W, Techner L. Patterns of gastrointestinal recovery after bowel resection and total abdominal hysterectomy: pooled results from the placebo arms of alvimopan phase III North American clinical trials. Am Coll Surg. 2007;205(1):43-51.	32.	Gendall KA, Kennedy RR, Watson AJ, Frizelle FA. The effect of epidural analgesia on postoperative outcome after colorectal surgery. Colorectal Dis. 2007;9(7):584-598.	33.	Noblett SE, Snowden CP, Shenton BK, Horgan AF. Randomized clinical trial assessing the effect of Doppler-optimized fluid management on outcome after elective colorectal resection.  Br J Surg. 2006;93:1069-1076.	34.	Tan EK, Cornish J, Darzi AW, Tekkis PP. Meta-analysis: alvimopan vs. placebo in the treatment of post-operative ileus. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2007;25(1):47-57. 	35.	Gaines SL, Giroux K, Thomas S, Gregory JS. Real world efficacy of alvimopan on elective bowel resection patients: an analysis of statistical versus clinical significance. Am J Surg. 2012;203(3):308-311.	36.	Kappelman MD, Moore KR, Allen JK, Cook SF. Recent trends in the prevalence of Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis in a commercially insured US population. Dig Dis Sci. 2013;58(2):519-525. 	37.	Molodecky NA, Soon IS, Rabi DM, et al. Increasing incidence and prevalence of the inflammatory bowel diseases with time, based on systematic review. Gastroenterology. 2012;142(1):46-54.	38.	Zheng JJ, Zhu XS, Huangfu Z, Gao ZX, Guo ZR, Wang Z. Crohn’s disease in mainland China: a systematic analysis of  50 years of research. Chin J Dig Dis. 2005;6(4):175-181.	39.	Kaplan GG, Jackson T, Sands BE, Frisch M, Andersson RE, Korzenik J. The risk of developing Crohn’s disease after an appendectomy: a meta-analysis. Am J Gastroenterol. 2008;103(11):2925-2931.	40.	Nikolaaus S, Schreiber S. Diagnosis of inflammatory bowel disease. Gastroenterology. 2007;133(5):1670-1689.	41.	Frolkis AD, Dykeman J, Negrón ME, et al. Risk of surgery for inflammatory bowel diseases has decreased over time: a systematic review and meta-analysis of population-based studies. Gastroenterology. 2013;145(5):996-1006.	42.	Fazio VW, Marchetti F, Church JM, et al. Effect of resection margins on the recurrence of Crohn’s disease of the small bowel. Ann Surg. 1996;224(4):563-571.	43.	McLeod RS, Wolff BG, Ross S, Parkes R, McKenzie M. Recurrence of Crohn’s disease after ileocolic resection is not affected by anastomotic type: results of a multicenter, randomized, controlled trial. Dis Colon Rectum. 2009;52(5): 919-927.Brunicardi_Ch28_p1219-p1258.indd   125623/02/19   2:25 PM 1257SMALL INTESTINECHAPTER 28	44.	Michelassi F, Upadhyay GA. Side-to-side isoperistaltic strictureplasty in the treatment of extensive Crohn’s disease.  J Surg Res. 2004;117(1):71-78.	45.	Tan JJ, Tjandra JJ. Laparoscopic surgery for Crohn’s disease: a meta-analysis. Dis Colon Rectum. 2007;50(5):576-585.	46.	Delaney CP, Fazio VW. Crohn’s disease of the small bowel. Surg Clin North Am. 2001;81:137-158.	47.	Penner RM, Madsen KL, Fedorak RN. Postoperative Crohn’s disease. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2005;11:765-777.	48.	Evenson AR, Shrikhande G, Fischer JE. Abdominal abscess and enteric fistula. In: Zinner MJ, Ashley SW, eds. Maingot’s Abdominal Operations. 11th ed. New York: McGraw Hill; 2007:184.	49.	Coughlin S, Roth L, Lurati G, Faulhaber M. Somatostatin analogues for the treatment of enterocutaneous fistulas: a systematic review and meta-analysis. World J Surg. 2012;36(5):1016-1029.	50.	Wainstein DE, Fernandez E, Gonzalez D, Chara O, Berkowski D. Treatment of high-output enterocutaneous fistulas with a vacuum-compaction device. A ten-year experience. World J Surg.  2008;32(3):430-435.	51.	Fazio VW, Coutsoftides T, Steiger E. Factors influencing  the outcome of treatment of small bowel cutaneous fistula.  World J Surg. 1983;7:481-488.	52.	Owen RM, Love TP, Perez SD, et al. Definitive surgical treatment of enterocutaneous fistula: outcomes of a 23-year experience. JAMA Surg. 2013;148(2):118-126.	53.	Martinez JL, Luque-de-Leon E, Ballinas-Oseguera G, Mendez JD, Juarez-Oropeza MA, Roman-Ramos R. Factors predictive of recurrence and mortality after surgical repair of enterocutaneous fistula. J Gastrointest Surg. 2012;16(1):156-163.	54.	Qubaiah O, Devesa SS, Platz CE, Huycke MM, Dores GM. Small intestinal cancer: a population-based study of incidence and survival patterns in the United States, 1992 to 2006. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2010;19:1908-1918. 	55.	Ceppa EP, Burbridge RA, Rialon KL, et al. Endoscopic versus surgical ampullectomy: an algorithm to treat disease of the ampulla of Vater. Ann Surg. 2013;257(2):315-322.	56.	Judson I, Demetri G. Advances in the treatment of gastrointestinal stromal tumors. Ann Oncol. 2007;18:S20-S24.	57.	Agrawal S, McCarron EC, Gibbs JF, Nava HR, Wilding GE, Rajput A. Surgical management and outcome in primary adenocarcinoma of the small bowel. Ann Surg Onc. 2007;14:2263-2269. 	58.	Girvent M, Carlson GL, Anderson I, et al. Intestinal failure after surgery for complicated radiation enteritis. Ann R Coll Surg Engl. 2000;82:198-201.	59.	Kiliç D, Egehan I, Ozenirler S, Dursun A. Double-blinded, randomized, placebo-controlled study to evaluate the effectiveness of sulphasalazine in preventing acute gastrointestinal complications due to radiotherapy. Radiother Oncol.  2000;57:125-129.	60.	Waddell BE, Lee RJ, Rodriguez-Bigas MA, Weber TK, Petrelli NJ. Absorbable mesh sling prevents radiation-induced bowel injury during “sandwich” chemoradiation for rectal cancer. Arch Surg. 2000;135:1212-1217. 	61.	Yahchouchy EK, Marano AF, Etienne JC, et al. Meckel’s diverticulum. J Am Coll Surg. 2001;192(5):654-662.	62.	Cullen JJ, Kelly KA, Moir CR, et al. Surgical management of Meckel’s diverticulum. An epidemiologic, population-based study. Ann Surg. 1994;220(4):564-568.	63.	Zani A, Eaton S, Rees CM, et al. Incidentally detected Meckel diverticulum: to resect or not to resect? Ann Surg. 2008;247:276-281.	64.	Park JJ, Wolff BG, Tollefson MK, Walsh EE, Larson DR. Meckel diverticulum: the Mayo Clinic experience with 1476 patients (1950-2002). Ann Surg. 2005;241(3):529-533.	65.	Lobo DN, Balfour TW, Iftikhar SY, et al. Periampullary diverticula and pancreaticobiliary disease. Br J Surg. 1999; 86:588-597.	66.	Chow DC, Babaian M, Taubin HL. Jejunoileal diverticula. Gastroenterologist. 1997;5:78-84.	67.	Kumar S, Sarr MG, Kamath PS: Mesenteric venous thrombosis. N Engl J Med. 2001;345:1683-1688. 	68.	Gralnek IM. Obscure-overt gastrointestinal bleeding. Gastroenterology. 2005;128:1424-1430. 	69.	Laine L, Sahota A, Shah A. Does capsule endoscopy improve outcomes in obscure gastrointestinal bleeding? Randomized trial versus dedicated small bowel radiography. Gastroenterology. 2010;138(5):1673-1680.	70.	Andriulli A, Loperfido S, Napolitano G, et al. Incidence rates of post-ERCP complications: a systematic survey of prospective studies. Am J Gastroenterol. 2007;102(8):1781-1788.	71.	Genzlinger JL, McPhee MS, Fisher JK, et al. Significance of retroperitoneal air after endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography with sphincterotomy. Am J Gastroenterol. 1999;94(5):1267-1270.	72.	Varban O, Ardestani A, Azagury D, Kis B, Brooks DC, Tavakkoli A. Contemporary management of adult intussusception: who needs a resection? World J Surg. 2013;37(8):1872-1877.	73.	Varban O, Ardestani A, Azagury D, et al. Resection or reduction? The dilemma of managing retrograde intussusception after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2013;9(5): 725-730.	74.	Buchman AL, Solapio J, Fryer J. AGA technical review on short bowel syndrome and intestinal transplantation. Gastroenterology. 2003;124(4):1111-1134.	75.	Bianchi A. Intestinal loop lengthening—a technique for increasing small-intestinal length. J Pediatr Surg. 1980;15(2): 145-151.	76.	Jones BA, Hull MA, Potanos KM, et al. Report of 111 consecutive patients enrolled in the International Serial Transverse Enteroplasty (STEP) data registry: a retrospective observational study. J Am Coll Surg. 2013;216(3):438-446.	77.	Messing B, Crenn P, Beau P, Boutron-Ruault MC, Rambaud JC, Matuchansky C. Long-term survival and parenteral nutrition dependence in adult patients with short bowel syndrome. Gastroenterology. 1999;117(5):1043-1050.	78.	Cai J. Intestine and multivisceral transplantation in the United States: a report of 20-year national registry data (1990-2009). Clin Transpl. 2009;83-101.Brunicardi_Ch28_p1219-p1258.indd   125723/02/19   2:25 PM
# Chunk 8931
Brunicardi_Ch28_p1219-p1258.indd   125823/02/19   2:25 PMThis page intentionally left blank

Colon, Rectum, and AnusMary R. Kwaan, David B. Stewart Sr, and  Kelli Bullard Dunn 29chapterEMBRYOLOGY AND ANATOMYEmbryologyThe embryonic gastrointestinal tract begins developing during the fourth week of gestation. The primitive gut is derived from the endoderm and divided into three segments: foregut, midgut, and hindgut. Both midgut and hindgut contribute to the colon, rec-tum, and anus.The midgut develops into the small intestine, ascending colon, and proximal transverse colon, and receives blood supply from the superior mesenteric artery. During the sixth week of gestation, the midgut herniates out of the abdominal cavity and then rotates 270° counterclockwise around the superior mesen-teric artery to return to its final position inside the abdominal cavity during the tenth week of gestation. The hindgut develops into the distal transverse colon, descending colon, rectum, and Embryology and Anatomy	1259Embryology / 1259Anatomy / 1260Congenital Anomalies / 1263Normal Physiology	1263Fluid and Electrolyte Exchanges / 1263Short-Chain Fatty Acids / 1263Colonic Microflora and Intestinal Gas / 1263Motility, Defecation, and  Continence / 1263Clinical Evaluation	1264Clinical Assessment / 1264Endoscopy / 1264Imaging / 1265Physiologic and Pelvic Floor Investigations / 1266Laboratory Studies / 1266Evaluation of Common Symptoms / 1267General Surgical Considerations	1270Resections / 1270Anastomoses / 1274Ostomies and Preoperative Stoma Planning / 1275Functional Results / 1278Anesthesia Considerations / 1278Operative Preliminaries / 1279Inflammatory Bowel Disease	1279General Considerations / 1279Ulcerative Colitis / 1282Operative Management / 1283Crohn’s Disease	 / 1283Indeterminate Colitis / 1286Diverticular Disease	1286Inflammatory Complications (Diverticulitis)	 / 1286Hemorrhage / 1288Giant Colonic Diverticulum / 1288Right-Sided Diverticula / 1288Adenocarcinoma and Polyps	1288Incidence / 1288Epidemiology (Risk Factors) / 1288Pathogenesis of Colorectal  Cancer / 1289Polyps / 1290Inherited Colorectal Carcinoma / 1291Prevention: Screening and  Surveillance / 1293Routes of Spread and Natural  History / 1295Staging and Preoperative  Evaluation / 1295Therapy for Colonic Carcinoma / 1296Therapy for Rectal Carcinoma / 1299Follow-Up and Surveillance / 1302Treatment of Recurrent Colorectal Carcinoma / 1302Minimally Invasive Techniques for Resection / 1302Other Neoplasms	1303Rare Colorectal Tumors / 1303Retrorectal/Presacral Tumors / 1304Anal Canal and Perianal Tumors / 1304Other Benign Colorectal   Conditions	1305Rectal Prolapse and Solitary Rectal  Ulcer Syndrome / 1305Volvulus / 1306Megacolon / 1308Colonic Pseudo-Obstruction  (Ogilvie’s Syndrome) / 1308Ischemic Colitis / 1309Infectious Colitis / 1309Anorectal Diseases	1310Hemorrhoids / 1310Anal Fissure / 1313Anorectal Sepsis and Cryptoglandular Abscess / 1313Perianal Abscess	 / 1314Ischiorectal Abscess	 / 1314Intersphincteric Abscess / 1314Supralevator Abscess / 1316Perianal Sepsis in the Immunocompromised Patient / 1316Necrotizing Soft Tissue Infection of the Perineum / 1316Fistula In Ano / 1317Rectovaginal Fistula / 1317Perianal Dermatitis / 1319Sexually Transmitted Diseases / 1320Pilonidal Disease / 1320Hidradenitis Suppurativa / 1320Trauma	1321Penetrating Colorectal Injury / 1321Blunt Colorectal Injury / 1321Iatrogenic Injury / 1321Anal Sphincter Injury and  Incontinence / 1322Foreign Body / 1323The Immunocompromised   Patient	1323Human Immunodeficiency Virus / 1323Immunosuppression for   Transplantation	1323The Neutropenic Patient	1323Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   125923/02/19   2:28 PM 1260proximal anus, all of which receive their blood supply from the inferior mesenteric artery. During the sixth week of gestation, the distal-most end of the hindgut, the cloaca, is divided by the urorectal septum into the urogenital sinus and the rectum.The distal anal canal is derived from ectoderm and receives its blood supply from the internal pudendal artery. The dentate line divides the endodermal hindgut from the ectodermal distal anal canal.AnatomyThe large intestine extends from the ileocecal valve to the anus. It is divided anatomically and functionally into the colon, rectum, and anal canal. The wall of the colon and rectum comprise four distinct layers: mucosa, submucosa, muscularis propria (inner circular muscle, outer longitudinal muscle), and serosa. In the colon, the outer longitudinal muscle is separated into three teniae coli, which converge proximally at the appendix and dis-tally at the rectum, where the outer longitudinal muscle layer is circumferential. In the distal rectum, the inner smooth muscle layer coalesces to form the internal anal sphincter. The intraperi-toneal colon and proximal one-third of the rectum are covered by serosa; the mid and lower rectum lack serosa.Colon Landmarks. The colon begins at the junction of the terminal ileum and cecum and extends approximately 150 cm (3 to 5 feet) to the rectum. The rectosigmoid junction is found at approximately the level of the sacral promontory and is arbitrarily described as the point at which the three teniae coli coalesce to form the outer longitudinal smooth muscle layer of the rectum. The cecum is the widest diameter portion of the colon (normally 7.5–8.5 cm) and has the thinnest muscular wall. As a result, the cecum is most vulnerable to perforation and least vulnerable to obstruction. The ascending colon is usu-ally fixed to the retroperitoneum. The hepatic flexure marks the transition to the transverse colon. The transverse colon is relatively mobile, but it is tethered by the gastrocolic ligament and colonic mesentery. The greater omentum is attached to the anterior/superior edge of the transverse colon. These attach-ments explain the characteristic triangular appearance of the transverse colon observed during colonoscopy. The splenic flexure marks the transition from the transverse colon to the descending colon. The attachments between the splenic flexure and the spleen (the lienocolic ligament) can be short and dense, making mobilization of this flexure during colectomy challeng-ing. The descending colon is relatively fixed to the retroperi-toneum. The sigmoid colon is the narrowest part of the large intestine and is extremely mobile. Although the sigmoid colon is usually located in the left lower quadrant, redundancy and mobility can result in a portion of the sigmoid colon residing in the right lower quadrant. This mobility explains why volvulus is most common in the sigmoid colon and why diseases affect-ing the sigmoid colon, such as diverticulitis, may occasionally present as right-sided abdominal pain. The narrow caliber of the sigmoid colon makes this segment of the large intestine the most vulnerable to obstruction.Colon Vascular Supply. The arterial supply to the colon is highly variable (Fig. 29-1). In general, the superior mesenteric artery branches into the ileocolic artery (absent in up to 20% of people), which supplies blood flow to the terminal ileum and proximal ascending colon; the right colic artery, which supplies the ascending colon; and the middle colic artery, which supplies the transverse colon. The inferior mesenteric artery branches into the left colic artery, which supplies the descending colon; several sigmoidal branches, which supply the sigmoid colon; and the superior rectal artery, which supplies the proximal rec-tum. The terminal branches of each artery form anastomoses with the terminal branches of the adjacent artery and communi-cate via the marginal artery of Drummond. This arcade is com-plete in only 15% to 20% of people.Key Points1	Resection principles: The mesenteric clearance technique dictates the extent of resection and is determined by the nature of the primary pathology, the intent of resection, the location of the lesion, and the condition of the mesentery.2	Function after resection: Bowel function is often com-promised after colorectal resection, especially after low anterior resection. For this reason, it is important to obtain a history of prior anorectal trauma and/or incontinence before considering a low anastomosis.3	Ostomies/Stomas: Preoperative marking for a planned stoma is critical for a patient’s quality of life. Ideally, a stoma should be located within the rectus muscle, in a location where the patient can easily see and manipulate the appliance, and away from previous scars, bony promi-nences, or abdominal creases.4	Inflammatory bowel disease: Both Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis are associated with an increased risk of colorectal carcinoma. Risk depends on the amount of colon involved and the duration of disease.5	Pathogenesis of colorectal cancer: A variety of mutations have been identified in colorectal cancer. Mutations may cause activation of oncogenes (K-ras) and/or inactivation of tumor suppressor genes (adenomatous polyposis coli [APC], deleted in colorectal carcinoma [DCC], p53).6	Minimally invasive resection: Laparoscopy and HAL have been shown to be both safe and efficacious for colorec-tal resection. Robotic surgery increasingly has been used, especially for rectal/pelvic dissection.7	Anal epidermoid carcinoma: Unlike rectal adenocarci-noma, anal epidermoid carcinoma is treated primarily with chemoradiation. Surgery is reserved for patients with persistent or recurrent disease.8	Rectal prolapse: Rectal prolapse occurs most commonly in elderly women. Transabdominal repair (rectopexy with or without resection) offers more durability than perineal proctosigmoidectomy, but it carries greater operative risk.9	Hemorrhoids: Hemorrhoids are cushions of submucosal tissue containing venules, arterioles, and smooth muscle fibers. They are thought to play a role in maintaining continence. Resection is only indicated for refractory symptoms.10	Fistula in ano: Treatment of fistula in ano depends on the location of the fistula, amount of anal sphincter involved in the fistula, and the underlying disease process.Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   126023/02/19   2:28 PM 1261COLON, RECTUM, AND ANUSCHAPTER 29Except for the inferior mesenteric vein, the veins of the colon parallel their corresponding arteries and bear the same terminology (Fig. 29-2). The inferior mesenteric vein ascends in the retroperitoneal plane over the psoas muscle and continues posterior to the pancreas to join the splenic vein. During a col-ectomy, this vein is often mobilized independently and ligated at the inferior edge of the pancreas.Colon Lymphatic Drainage. The lymphatic drainage of the colon originates in a network of lymphatics in the muscula-ris mucosa. Lymphatic vessels and lymph nodes follow the regional arteries. Lymph nodes are found on the bowel wall (epicolic), along the inner margin of the bowel adjacent to the arterial arcades (paracolic), around the named mesenteric ves-sels (intermediate), and at the origin of the superior and inferior mesenteric arteries (main).Colon Nerve Supply. The colon is innervated by both  sympathetic (inhibitory) and parasympathetic (stimulatory) nerves, which parallel the course of the arteries. Sympathetic nerves arise from T6–T12 and L1–L3. The parasympathetic innervation to the right and transverse colon is from the vagus nerve; the parasympathetic nerves to the left colon arise from sacral nerves S2–S4 to form the nervi erigentes.Anorectal Landmarks. The rectum is approximately 12 to 15 cm in length. Three distinct submucosal folds, the valves of Houston, extend into the rectal lumen. Posteriorly, the presecral fascia separates the rectum from the presacral venous plexus and the pelvic nerves. At S4, the rectosacral fascia (Waldeyer’s fascia) extends anteriorly and caudally and attaches to the fas-cia propria at the anorectal junction. Anteriorly, Denonvilliers’  fascia separates the rectum from the prostate and seminal ves-icles in men and from the vagina in women. The lateral liga-ments support the lower rectum.The anatomic anal canal extends from the dentate or pectinate line to the anal verge. The dentate or pectinate line marks the transition point between columnar rectal mucosa and squamous anoderm. The anal transition zone includes mucosa proximal to the dentate line that shares histologic characteris-tics of columnar, cuboidal, and squamous epithelium. Although the anal transition zone was long thought to extend only 1 to  2 cm proximal to the dentate line, it is known that the proxi-mal extent of this zone is highly variable and can be as far as  15 cm proximal to the dentate line. The dentate line is sur-rounded by longitudinal mucosal folds, known as the columns of Morgagni, into which the anal crypts empty. These crypts are the source of cryptoglandular abscesses (Fig. 29-3). In contrast to the anatomic anal canal, the surgical anal canal begins at the Middlecolic a.Rightcolic a.Leftcolic a.Ileocolic a.Superiormesenteric a.Superiorrectal a.Sigmoidal a.Inferiormesenteric a.Figure 29-1. Arterial blood supply to the colon. a. = artery.Inferiormesenteric v.Middlecolic v.Rightcolic v.Superiormesenteric v.Portal v.Leftcolic v.Sigmoidal v.Superiorrectal v.Ileocolic v.Figure 29-2. Venous drainage of the colon. v. = vein. (Reproduced with permission from Bell RH, Rikkers LF, Mulholland M: Diges-tive Tract Surgery: A Text and Atlas. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1996.)Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   126123/02/19   2:28 PM 1262SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIanorectal junction and terminates at the anal verge. The surgical anal canal measures 2 to 4 cm in length and is generally longer in men than in women. It begins at the anorectal junction and terminates at the anal verge.In the distal rectum, the inner smooth muscle is thickened and comprises the internal anal sphincter that is surrounded by the subcutaneous, superficial, and deep external sphincter. The deep external anal sphincter is an extension of the puborectalis  muscle. The puborectalis, iliococcygeus, and pubococcygeus muscles form the levator ani muscle of the pelvic floor (Fig. 29-4).Anorectal Vascular Supply. The superior rectal artery arises from the terminal branch of the inferior mesenteric artery and supplies the upper rectum. The middle rectal artery arises from the internal iliac; the presence and size of these arteries are highly variable. The inferior rectal artery arises from the inter-nal pudendal artery, which is a branch of the internal iliac artery. A rich network of collaterals connects the terminal arterioles of each of these arteries, thus making the rectum relatively resis-tant to ischemia (Fig. 29-5).The venous drainage of the rectum parallels the arterial supply. The superior rectal vein drains into the portal system via the inferior mesenteric vein. The middle rectal vein drains into the internal iliac vein. The inferior rectal vein drains into the internal pudendal vein, and subsequently into the internal iliac vein. A submucosal plexus deep to the columns of Morgagni forms the hemorrhoidal plexus and drains into all three veins.Anorectal Lymphatic Drainage. Lymphatic drainage of the rectum parallels the vascular supply. Lymphatic channels in the upper and middle rectum drain superiorly into the inferior mes-enteric lymph nodes. Lymphatic channels in the lower rectum drain both superiorly into the inferior mesenteric lymph nodes and laterally into the internal iliac lymph nodes. The anal canal has a more complex pattern of lymphatic drainage. Proximal to the dentate line, lymph drains into both the inferior mesen-teric lymph nodes and the internal iliac lymph nodes. Distal to the dentate line, lymph primarily drains into the inguinal lymph nodes, but can also drain into the inferior mesenteric lymph nodes and internal iliac lymph nodes.AnalcanalColumn of MorgagniDentate lineAnal cryptAnal glandAnodermTransitionzoneFigure 29-3. The lining of the anal canal. (Reproduced with permission from Goldberg SM, Gordon PH, Nivatvongs S: Essentials of Anorectal Surgery. Philadelphia, PA: JB Lippincott Company; 1980.)Deep external sphincterand puborectalis mm.Conjoinedlongitudinal m.Superficial externalsphincter m.Subcutaneous externalsphincter m.Valve of HoustonInternal rectalplexusMuscularis submucosa ani m.Transverse septumof ischiorectal fossaExternal rectalplexusInternalsphincter m.Figure 29-4. The distal rectum and anal canal. m. = muscle.Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   126223/02/19   2:28 PM 1263COLON, RECTUM, AND ANUSCHAPTER 29Anorectal Nerve Supply. Both sympathetic and parasym-pathetic nerves innervate the anorectum. Sympathetic nerve fibers are derived from L1–L3 and join the preaortic plexus. The preaortic nerve fibers then extend below the aorta to form the hypogastric plexus, which subsequently joins the para-sympathetic fibers to form the pelvic plexus. Parasympathetic nerve fibers are known as the nervi erigentes and originate from  S2–S4. These fibers join the sympathetic fibers to form the pel-vic plexus. Sympathetic and parasympathetic fibers then supply the anorectum and adjacent urogenital organs.The internal anal sphincter is innervated by sympathetic and parasympathetic nerve fibers; both types of fibers inhibit sphincter contraction. The external anal sphincter and puborec-talis muscles are innervated by the inferior rectal branch of the internal pudendal nerve. The levator ani receives innervation from both the internal pudendal nerve and direct branches of S3 to S5. Sensory innervation to the anal canal is provided by the inferior rectal branch of the pudendal nerve. While the rec-tum is relatively insensate, the anal canal below the dentate line receives somatic innervation.Congenital AnomaliesPerturbation of the embryologic development of the midgut and hindgut may result in anatomic abnormalities of the colon, rec-tum, and anus. Failure of the midgut to rotate and return to the abdominal cavity during the tenth week of gestation results in varying degrees of intestinal malrotation and colonic nonfix-ation. Failure of canalization of the primitive gut can result in colonic duplication. Incomplete descent of the urogenital sep-tum may result in imperforate anus and associated fistulas to the genitourinary tract. Many infants with congenital anomalies of the hindgut have associated abnormalities in the genitourinary tract.NORMAL PHYSIOLOGYFluid and Electrolyte ExchangesWater, Sodium, Potassium, Chloride, Bicarbonate, and Ammonia. The colon is a major site for water absorption and electrolyte exchange. Under normal circumstances, approxi-mately 90% of the water contained in ileal fluid is absorbed in the colon (1000–2000 mL/d), but up to 5000 mL of fluid can be absorbed daily. Sodium is absorbed actively via sodiumpotassium (Na+/K+) ATPase. The colon can absorb up to 400 mEq of sodium per day. Water accompanies the transported sodium and is absorbed passively along an osmotic gradient. Potassium is actively secreted into the colonic lumen and absorbed by passive diffusion. Chloride is absorbed actively via a chloride-bicarbonate exchange.Bacterial degradation of protein and urea produces ammo-nia. Ammonia is subsequently absorbed and transported to the liver. Absorption of ammonia depends in part on intraluminal pH. A decrease in colonic bacteria (e.g., due to broad-spectrum antibiotic use) and/or a decrease in intraluminal pH (e.g., due to lactulose administration) will decrease ammonia absorption.Short-Chain Fatty AcidsShort-chain fatty acids (acetate, butyrate, and propionate) are produced by bacterial fermentation of dietary carbohydrates. Short-chain fatty acids are an important source of energy for the colonic mucosa, and metabolism by colonocytes provides energy for processes such as active transport of sodium. Lack of a dietary source for production of short-chain fatty acids, or diversion of the fecal stream by an ileostomy or colostomy, may result in mucosal atrophy and inflammation, the latter termed “diversion colitis.”Colonic Microflora and Intestinal GasApproximately 30% of fecal dry weight is composed of bacteria (1011–1012 bacteria/g of feces). Anaerobes are the predominant class of microorganism, and Bacteroides species are the most common (1011–1012 organisms/mL). Escherichia coli are the most numerous aerobes (108–1010 organisms/mL). Endogenous microflora are crucial for the breakdown of carbohydrates and proteins in the colon and participate in the metabolism of biliru-bin, bile acids, estrogen, and cholesterol. Colonic bacteria also are necessary for production of vitamin K. Endogenous bacteria also are thought to suppress the emergence of pathogenic micro-organisms, such as Clostridium difficile, a phenomenon termed “colonization resistance.” However, the high bacterial load of the large intestine may contribute to sepsis in critically ill patients and may contribute to intra-abdominal sepsis, abscess, and wound infection following colectomy. Burgeoning research on the human gut microbiome offers new concepts of bacterial community structure and its impact on gastrointestinal disease. Use of 16S ribosomal RNA, universally present in bacteria, allows for a more complete understanding of colonic samples, without the use of stool cultures.Intestinal gas arises from swallowed air, diffusion from the blood, and intraluminal production. Nitrogen, oxygen, car-bon dioxide, hydrogen, and methane are the major components of intestinal gas. Nitrogen and oxygen are largely derived from swallowed air. Carbon dioxide is produced by the reaction of bicarbonate and hydrogen ions and by the digestion of triglyc-erides to fatty acids. Hydrogen and methane are produced by colonic bacteria. The production of methane is highly variable. The gastrointestinal tract usually contains between 100 and  200 mL of gas, and 400 to 1200 mL/d are released as flatus, depending on the type of food ingested.Motility, Defecation, and ContinenceMotility. Unlike the small intestine, the large intestine does not demonstrate cyclic motor activity characteristic of the migra-tory motor complex. Instead, the colon displays intermittent Internaliliac arterySuperiorrectal arteryMiddlerectal arteryInferiorrectal arteryInferiormesenteric arteryMiddlesacral arteryLevatorani muscleFigure 29-5. Arterial supply to the rectum and anal canal.Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   126323/02/19   2:28 PM 1264SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIcontractions of either low or high amplitude. Low-amplitude, short-duration contractions occur in bursts and appear to move the colonic contents both antegrade and retrograde. It is thought that these bursts of motor activity delay colonic transit and thus increase the time available for absorption of water and exchange of electrolytes. High-amplitude, prolonged duration, propagated contractions (HAPCs) occur in a more coordinated fashion and create “mass movements,” four to ten times per day, mostly after meals and awakening. Bursts of “rectal motor complexes” also have been described. In general, cholinergic activation increases colonic motility.Defecation. Defecation is a complex, coordinated mechanism involving colonic mass movement, increased intra-abdominal and rectal pressure, and relaxation of the pelvic floor. Disten-tion of the rectum causes a reflex relaxation of the internal anal sphincter (the rectoanal inhibitory reflex) that allows the contents to make contact with the anal canal. This “sampling reflex” allows the sensory epithelium to distinguish solid stool from liquid stool and gas. If defecation does not occur, the rec-tum relaxes and the urge to defecate passes (accommodation response). Defecation proceeds by coordinating increasing intra-abdominal pressure via a Valsalva maneuver with rectal contraction, relaxation of the puborectalis muscle, and opening of the anal canal.Continence. The maintenance of fecal continence is at least as complex as the mechanism of defecation. Continence requires adequate rectal wall compliance to accommodate the fecal bolus, appropriate neurogenic control of the pelvic floor and sphincter mechanism, and functional internal and exter-nal sphincter muscles. At rest, the puborectalis muscle creates a “sling” around the distal rectum, forming a relatively acute angle that distributes intra-abdominal forces onto the pelvic floor. With defecation, this angle straightens, allowing down-ward force to be applied along the axis of the rectum and anal canal. The internal and external sphincters are tonically active at rest. The internal sphincter is responsible for most of the rest-ing, involuntary sphincter tone (resting pressure). The external sphincter is responsible for most of the voluntary sphincter tone (squeeze pressure). Branches of the pudendal nerve innervate both the internal and external sphincter. The hemorrhoidal cush-ions may contribute to continence by mechanically blocking the anal canal. Finally, liquid stools exacerbate abnormalities with these anatomic and physiologic mechanisms, so a formed stool contributes to maintaining continence. Thus, impaired con-tinence may result from poor rectal compliance, injury to the internal and/or external sphincter or puborectalis, or neuropathy.CLINICAL EVALUATIONClinical AssessmentObtaining a complete history and performing a physical exami-nation are the starting points for evaluating any patient with suspected disease of the colon, rectum, or anus. Special atten-tion should be paid to the patient’s past medical and surgical history to detect underlying conditions that might contribute to a gastrointestinal problem. If patients have had prior intes-tinal surgery, it is essential that one understand the resultant gastrointestinal anatomy. A history of anorectal surgery may be critical for patients with either abdominal or anorectal com-plaints. The obstetrical history in women is essential to detect occult pelvic floor and/or anal sphincter damage. Identifying a family history of colorectal disease, especially inflammatory bowel disease, polyps, and colorectal cancer, is crucial. In addi-tion to a family history of colorectal disease, a history of other malignancies may suggest the presence of a genetic syndrome. Medication use must be detailed as many drugs cause gastroin-testinal symptoms. Before recommending operative interven-tion, the adequacy of medical treatment must be ascertained. In addition to examining the abdomen, visual inspection of the anus and perineum and careful digital rectal exam are essential.EndoscopyAnoscopy. The anoscope is a useful instrument for examina-tion of the anal canal. Anoscopes are made in a variety of sizes and measure approximately 8 cm in length. A larger anoscope provides better exposure for anal procedures such as rubber band ligation or sclerotherapy of hemorrhoids. The anoscope, with obturator in place, should be adequately lubricated and gently inserted into the anal canal. The obturator is withdrawn, inspec-tion of the visualized anal canal is done, and the anoscope should then be withdrawn. It is rotated 90° and reinserted to allow visual-ization of all four quadrants of the canal. If the patient complains of severe perianal pain and cannot tolerate a digital rectal exami-nation, anoscopy should not be attempted without anesthesia.Proctoscopy. The rigid proctoscope is useful for examination of the rectum and distal sigmoid colon and is occasionally used therapeutically. The standard proctoscope is 25 cm in length and available in various diameters. Most often, a 15or 19-mm diameter proctoscope is used for diagnostic examinations. A smaller “pediatric” proctoscope (11-mm diameter) is better tol-erated by patients with anal stricture. Suction is necessary for an adequate proctoscopic examination. An operating platform for transanal surgery known as transanal endoscopic microsurgery (TEM) has a much wider diameter and can be used for exci-sions of large polyps and tumors. Transanal minimally invasive surgery (TAMIS) can achieve similar resections to TEM, but it does not utilize a proctoscope and instead depends on insuf-flation to create a working space in the rectum while utilizing a circular wound protector to open the anus.Flexible Sigmoidoscopy and Colonoscopy. Video or fiber-optic flexible sigmoidoscopy and colonoscopy provide excellent visualization of the colon and rectum. Sigmoidoscopes measure 60 cm in length. Full depth of insertion may allow visualiza-tion as high as the splenic flexure, although the mobility and redundancy of the sigmoid colon often limit the extent of the examination. Partial preparation with enemas is usually adequate for sigmoidoscopy, and most patients can tolerate this proce-dure without sedation. Colonoscopes measure 100 to 160 cm in length and are capable of examining the entire colon and terminal ileum. A complete oral bowel preparation is usually necessary for colonoscopy, and the duration and discomfort of the procedure usually require conscious sedation. Both sigmoid-oscopy and colonoscopy can be used diagnostically and thera-peutically. Electrocautery should generally not be used in the absence of a complete bowel preparation because of the risk of explosion of intestinal methane or hydrogen gases. Diagnostic colonoscopes possess a single channel through which instru-ments such as snares, biopsy forceps, or electrocautery can be passed; this channel also provides suction and irrigation capa-bility. Therapeutic colonoscopes possess two channels to allow simultaneous suction/irrigation and the use of snares, biopsy forceps, or electrocautery.Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   126423/02/19   2:28 PM 1265COLON, RECTUM, AND ANUSCHAPTER 29Capsule Endoscopy. Capsule endoscopy uses a small ingest-ible camera. After swallowing the camera, images of the mucosa of the gastrointestinal tract are captured, transmitted by radiofre-quency to a belt-held receiver, and then downloaded to a com-puter for viewing and analysis. Capsule endoscopy largely has been used to detect small bowel lesions. Recent advances in the development of maneuverable capsules may improve the sensi-tivity of this procedure.1 Finally, concern over the possibility of an acute obstruction has led to the development of a dissolvable capsule that can detect obstruction lesions. Although this tech-nology is promising, the ultimate utility of capsule endoscopy remains unknown.ImagingPlain X-Rays and Contrast Studies. Despite advanced radio-logic techniques, plain X-rays and contrast studies continue to play an important role in the evaluation of patients with sus-pected colon and rectal diseases. Plain X-rays of the abdomen (supine, upright, and diaphragmatic views) are useful for detect-ing free intra-abdominal air, bowel gas patterns suggestive of small or large bowel obstruction, and volvulus. Contrast studies are useful for evaluating obstructive symptoms, delineating fis-tulous tracts, and diagnosing small perforations or anastomotic leaks. Although Gastrografin cannot provide the mucosal detail provided by barium, this water-soluble contrast agent is rec-ommended if perforation or leak is suspected. Double-contrast barium enema (use of barium followed by the insufflation of air into the colon) has been reported to be 70% to 90% sensitive for the detection of mass lesions greater than 1 cm in diameter. Detection of small lesions can be extremely difficult, especially in a patient with extensive diverticulosis. For this reason, a colo-noscopy is preferred for evaluating nonobstructing mass lesions in the colon. Double-contrast barium enema has been used as a back-up examination if colonoscopy is incomplete.Computed Tomography. Computed tomography (CT) com-monly is employed in the evaluation of patients with abdominal complaints. Its utility is primarily in the detection of extralu-minal disease, such as intra-abdominal abscesses and pericolic inflammation, and in staging colorectal carcinoma because of its sensitivity in detection of hepatic metastases.Extravasation of oral or rectal contrast may also confirm the diagnosis of perforation or anastomotic leak. Nonspecific findings such as bowel wall thickening or mesenteric strand-ing may suggest inflammatory bowel disease, enteritis/colitis, or ischemia. A standard CT scan is relatively insensitive for the detection of intraluminal lesions.Computed Tomography Colonography. CT colonography (virtual colonoscopy) is a radiologic technique that is designed to overcome some of the limitations of traditional CT scan-ning. This technology uses helical CT and three-dimensional reconstruction to detect intraluminal colonic lesions. Oral bowel preparation, oral and rectal contrast, and colon insufflation have been used to maximize sensitivity. Experience with this technol-ogy has shown a sensitivity and specificity for detecting 1 cm or larger polyps of 85% to 90% in most studies, making it compa-rable to traditional colonoscopy. Although this technology has yet to be widely adopted, it remains an alternative to traditional colonoscopy for select patients.2Magnetic Resonance Imaging. The main use of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in colorectal disorders is in evaluation of pelvic lesions. MRI is more sensitive than CT for detecting bony involvement or pelvic sidewall extension of rectal tumors. MRI accurately determines the extent of spread of rectal cancer into the adjacent mesorectum and can reliably predict diffi-culty achieving radial margin clearance of a rectal cancer by surgery alone. When the radial margin is threatened, neoadju-vant chemoradiation is indicated. MRI also can be helpful in the detection and delineation of complex fistulas in ano. The use of an endorectal coil may increase sensitivity.Positron Emission Tomography. Positron emission tomog-raphy (PET) is used for imaging tissues with high levels of anaerobic glycolysis, such as malignant tumors. 13F-fluorode-oxyglucose (FDG) is injected as a tracer; metabolism of this molecule then results in positron emission. PET has been used as an adjunct to CT in the staging of colorectal cancer and may prove useful in discriminating recurrent cancer from fibrosis. By combining PET and CT technology (PET/CT), anatomic correlation between regions of high isotope accumulation (“hot spots”) on PET and abnormalities on CT can be determined. PET/CT increasingly is used to diagnose recurrent and/or meta-static colorectal cancer. However, the efficacy and utility of this technology remains unproven.Scintigraphy to Assess Gastrointestinal Bleeding. Scin-tigraphy to assess for gastrointestinal bleeding (technetium-99-tagged red blood cell [RBC] scan; “tagged RBC scan”) is a nuclear medicine test that uses 99mTc-erythrocytes and dynamic images to localize a bleeding source. Patients must be actively bleeding at the time of imaging, and a normal distribution of 99mTc-erythrocytes in vasculature, liver, spleen, penile circula-tion with mild uptake in kidneys and bladder can interfere with localization in bowel segments near those structures. Patients must be stable enough to tolerate imaging intervals of up to  4 hours, but slow bleeding at a rate of 0.05 to 0.2 mL/minute can be detected.3Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography (SPECT/CT). Radiolabeled erythrocytes are also used for SPECT/CT, but cross-sectional images provide a more specific localization of the bleeding source, which can be very helpful for surgical planning, especially if direct visualization via endoscopy has not been successful.4Angiography. Angiography is occasionally used for the detec-tion of bleeding within the colon or small bowel. To visual-ize hemorrhage angiographically, bleeding must be relatively brisk (approximately 0.5 to 1.0 mL per minute). If extravasa-tion of contrast is identified, infusion of vasopressin or angio-graphic embolization can be therapeutic. If surgical resection is required, the angiographic catheter can be left in place to assist with identification of the bleeding site intraoperatively.CT and magnetic resonance angiography are also useful for assessing patency of visceral vessels. This technique uses three-dimensional reconstruction to detect vascular lesions. If an abnormality is found, more traditional techniques (angiography, surgery) may then be used to further define and/or correct the problem.Endorectal and Endoanal Ultrasound. Endorectal ultra-sound is primarily used to evaluate the depth of invasion of neoplastic lesions in the rectum. The normal rectal wall appears as a five-layer structure (Fig. 29-6). Ultrasound can reliably dif-ferentiate most benign polyps from invasive tumors based on the integrity of the submucosal layer. Ultrasound can also dif-ferentiate superficial T1-T2 from deeper T3-T4 tumors. Overall, Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   126523/02/19   2:28 PM 1266SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIthe accuracy of ultrasound in detecting depth of mural invasion ranges between 81% and 94%. This modality also can detect enlarged perirectal lymph nodes, which may suggest nodal metastases; accuracy of detection of pathologically positive lymph nodes is 58% to 83%. Ultrasound may also prove useful for early detection of local recurrence after surgery.5Endoanal ultrasound is used to evaluate the layers of the anal canal. Internal anal sphincter, external anal sphincter, and puborectalis muscle can be differentiated. Endoanal ultrasound is particularly useful for detecting sphincter defects and for out-lining complex anal fistulas. MRI has also proven to be helpful in delineating the anatomy of fistulae, especially in complex cases. This modality increasingly is utilized for the evaluation of anal fistulae.Physiologic and Pelvic Floor InvestigationsAnorectal physiologic testing uses a variety of techniques to investigate the function of the pelvic floor. These techniques are useful in the evaluation of patients with incontinence, constipa-tion, rectal prolapse, obstructed defecation, and other functional disorders of the pelvic floor.Manometry. Anorectal manometry is performed by placing a pressure-sensitive catheter in the lower rectum. The catheter is then withdrawn through the anal canal and pressures recorded. A balloon attached to the tip of the catheter also can be used to test anorectal sensation. The resting pressure in the anal canal reflects the function of the internal anal sphincter (nor-mal 40–80 mmHg), whereas the squeeze pressure, defined as the maximum voluntary contraction pressure minus the resting pressure, reflects function of the external anal sphincter (normal 40–80 mmHg above resting pressure). The high-pressure zone estimates the length of the anal canal (normal 2.0–4.0 cm). The rectoanal inhibitory reflex can be detected by inflating a balloon in the distal rectum; absence of this reflex is characteristic of Hirschsprung’s disease.Neurophysiology. Neurophysiologic testing assesses func-tion of the pudendal nerves and recruitment of puborectalis muscle fibers. Pudendal nerve terminal motor latency mea-sures the speed of transmission of a nerve impulse through the distal pudendal nerve fibers (normal 1.8–2.2 ms); prolonged latency suggests the presence of neuropathy. Electromyographic (EMG) recruitment assesses the contraction and relaxation of the puborectalis muscle during attempted defecation. Normally, recruitment increases when a patient is instructed to “squeeze” and decreases when a patient is instructed to “push.” Inappro-priate recruitment is an indication of paradoxical contraction (nonrelaxation of the puborectalis). Needle EMG has been used to map both the pudendal nerves and the anatomy of the internal and external sphincters. However, this examination is painful and poorly tolerated by most patients. Needle EMG has largely been replaced by pudendal nerve motor latency testing to assess pudendal nerve function and endoanal ultrasound to map the sphincters.Rectal Evacuation Studies. Rectal evacuation studies include the balloon expulsion test and video defecography. Balloon expulsion assesses a patient’s ability to expel an intrarectal bal-loon. Video defecography provides a more detailed assessment of defecation. In this test, barium paste is placed in the rectum, and defecation is then recorded fluoroscopically. Defecography is used to help diagnose obstructed defecation from nonrelax-ation of the puborectalis muscle or anal sphincter dyssynergy, increased perineal descent, rectal prolapse and intussusception, rectocele, and enterocele. The addition of vaginal contrast and intraperitoneal contrast is useful in delineating complex disor-ders of the pelvic floor.Laboratory StudiesFecal Occult Blood Testing and Fecal Immunohistochemical  Testing. Fecal occult blood testing (FOBT) has been used as a screening test for colonic neoplasms in asymptomatic, average-risk individuals. The efficacy of this test is based on serial test-ing because the majority of colorectal malignancies will bleed intermittently. FOBT has been a nonspecific test for peroxidase contained in hemoglobin; consequently, occult bleeding from any gastrointestinal source will produce a positive result. Simi-larly, many foods (red meat, some fruits and vegetables, and vitamin C) will produce a false-positive result. Increased speci-ficity for cancer detection is possible by using fecal immuno-chemical test (FIT). Reported sensitivity of 79% and specificity Mucosal surfaceMucosa/Muscularis mucosaSubmucosaMuscularis propriaSerosa/Perirectal fatBAFigure 29-6. A. Schematic of the layers of the rectal wall observed on endorectal ultrasonography. B. Normal endorectal ultrasonog-raphy. (A. Used with permission from Charles O. Finne III, MD,  Minneapolis, MN.)Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   126623/02/19   2:28 PM 1267COLON, RECTUM, AND ANUSCHAPTER 29of 94% has led to widespread use of FIT in current population-based screening approaches. These tests rely on monoclonal or polyclonal antibodies to react with the intact globin portion of human hemoglobin and are more specific for identifying occult bleeding from the colon or rectum. Any positive FOBT or FIT mandates further investigation, usually by colonoscopy.6 More recently, stool DNA testing has been proposed for early detec-tion of colorectal cancer.7Stool Studies. Stool studies are often helpful in evaluating the etiology of diarrhea. Wet-mount examination reveals the pres-ence of fecal leukocytes, which may suggest colonic inflamma-tion or the presence of an invasive organism such as invasive E coli or Shigella species. Stool cultures can detect pathogenic bacteria, ova, and/or parasites. C difficile colitis is diagnosed by detecting bacterial toxin in the stool. Steatorrhea may be diag-nosed by adding Sudan red stain to a stool sample.Tumor Markers. Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) may be elevated in 60% to 90% of patients with colorectal cancer. Preoperative CEA level has recently been suggested to be a prognostic indicator.8 Despite this, CEA is not an effective screening tool for this malignancy. Many practitioners follow serial CEA levels after curative-intent surgery in order to detect early recurrence of colorectal cancer. However, this tumor marker is nonspecific, and no survival benefit associated with its serial measurements has yet been proven. It is also important to note that CEA may be mildly elevated in patients who smoke tobacco. Other biochemical markers (ornithine decarboxylase, urokinase) have been proposed, but none has yet proven sensi-tive or specific for detection, staging, or predicting prognosis of colorectal carcinoma.Genetic Testing. Although familial colorectal cancer syn-dromes, such as familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) and hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer (HNPCC) are rare, infor-mation about the specific genetic abnormalities underlying these disorders has led to significant interest in the role of genetic testing for colorectal cancer.9Tests for mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene responsible for FAP and in mismatch repair genes responsible for HNPCC are commercially available and extremely accurate in families with known mutations. However, in the absence of an identified mutation, a negative result is uninformative. For individuals from high-risk families without an identified mutation, increased surveillance is recommended.10 Although many of these mutations are also present in sporadic colorectal cancer, the accuracy of genetic testing in average-risk individuals is considerably lower, and these tests are not recommended for screening. Due to the potential psychosocial implications of genetic testing, it is strongly recommended that professional genetic counselors be involved in the care of any patient considering these tests.Evaluation of Common SymptomsPain Abdominal Pain Abdominal pain is a nonspecific symptom with myriad causes. Abdominal pain related to the colon and rectum can result from obstruction (either inflammatory or neo-plastic), inflammation, perforation, or ischemia. Plain X-rays and judicious use of contrast studies and/or a CT scan can often confirm the diagnosis. Gentle retrograde contrast studies (Gastrografin enema) may be useful in delineating the degree of colonic obstruction. Sigmoidoscopy and/or colonoscopy performed by an experienced endoscopist can assist in the diagnosis of ischemic colitis, infectious colitis, and inflamma-tory bowel disease. However, if perforation or near complete obstruction is suspected, colonoscopy and/or sigmoidoscopy are generally contraindicated. Evaluation and treatment of abdomi-nal pain from a colorectal source should follow the usual surgi-cal principles of a thorough history and physical examination, appropriate diagnostic tests, resuscitation, and appropriately timed surgical intervention.Pelvic Pain Pelvic pain can originate from the distal colon and rectum or from adjacent urogenital structures. Tenesmus may result from proctitis or from a rectal or retrorectal mass, or fecal impaction in a constipated patient. Cyclical pain associated with menses, especially when accompanied by rectal bleeding, suggests a diagnosis of endometriosis. Pelvic inflammatory dis-ease also can produce significant abdominal and pelvic pain. The extension of a peridiverticular abscess or periappendiceal abscess into the pelvis may also cause pain. CT scan and/or MRI may be useful in differentiating these diseases. Proctoscopy (if tolerated) also can be helpful. Occasionally, laparoscopy will yield a diagnosis, although with access to high-quality imaging, indications for diagnostic surgery should be rare.Anorectal Pain. Anorectal pain is most often secondary to an anal fissure, perirectal abscess and/or fistula, or a throm-bosed hemorrhoid. Physical examination can usually differenti-ate these conditions. Other, less common causes of anorectal pain include anal canal neoplasms, perianal skin infection, and dermatologic conditions. Proctalgia fugax results from levator spasm and may present without any other anorectal findings. Physical exam is critical in evaluating patients with anorec-tal pain. If a patient is too tender to examine in the office, an examination under anesthesia is necessary. MRI or other imag-ing studies may be helpful in select cases where the etiology of pain is elusive.Lower Gastrointestinal Bleeding. The first goal in evaluat-ing and treating a patient with gastrointestinal hemorrhage is adequate resuscitation. The second goal is to identify the source of hemorrhage. Because the most common source of gastroin-testinal hemorrhage is esophageal, gastric, or duodenal, naso-gastric aspiration should always be performed; return of bile suggests that the source of bleeding is distal to the ligament of Treitz. If aspiration reveals blood or nonbile secretions, or if symptoms suggest an upper intestinal source, esophagogastro-duodenoscopy should be performed. Anoscopy and/or limited proctoscopy can identify hemorrhoidal bleeding. A techne-tium-99 (99mTc)-tagged red blood cell (tagged RBC scan) scan is extremely sensitive and is able to detect as little as 0.1 mL/h of bleeding; however, localization is imprecise. If the 99mTc-tagged RBC scan is positive, angiography can then be both diagnostic and potentially therapeutic. If the patient is hemodynamically stable, a rapid bowel preparation (over 4–6 hours) can be per-formed to allow colonoscopy. Colonoscopy may identify the cause of the bleeding, and cautery or injection/application of epinephrine into the bleeding site may be used to control hem-orrhage. A SPECT/CT may be helpful if other modalities have not achieved localization, particularly in distinguishing between small intestinal and colon sources. Colectomy may be required if bleeding persists despite interventions. Intraoperative colo-noscopy and/or enteroscopy may assist in localizing bleeding. If colectomy is required, a segmental resection is preferred if the bleeding source can be localized. “Blind” subtotal colectomy Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   126723/02/19   2:28 PM 1268SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIvery rarely may be required in a patient who is hemodynami-cally unstable with ongoing colonic hemorrhage of an unknown source. In this setting, just prior to proceeding with a “blind” subtotal colectomy, it is crucial to irrigate the rectosigmoid and reexamine the mucosa of the anal canal and rectum by anoscopy and proctoscopy to ensure the source of ongoing bleeding is not distal to the planned resection margin (Fig. 29-7).Occult blood loss from the gastrointestinal tract may mani-fest as iron-deficiency anemia or may be detected with FOBT or FIT. Because colon neoplasms bleed intermittently and rarely present with rapid hemorrhage, the presence of occult fecal blood should always prompt a colonoscopy. Unexplained iron-deficiency anemia is also an indication for colonoscopy.Hematochezia is commonly caused by hemorrhoids or a fissure. Sharp, knife-like pain and bright red rectal bleeding with bowel movements suggest the diagnosis of fissure. Pain-less, bright red rectal bleeding with bowel movements is often secondary to a friable internal hemorrhoid that is easily detected by anoscopy. In the absence of a painful, obvious fissure, any patient with rectal bleeding should undergo a careful digital rectal examination, anoscopy, and proctosigmoidoscopy. Fail-ure to diagnose a source in the distal anorectum should prompt colonoscopy.Constipation and Obstructed Defecation. Constipation is an extremely common complaint, affecting more than 4 million people in the United States. Despite the prevalence of this prob-lem, there is lack of agreement about an appropriate definition of constipation. Patients may describe infrequent bowel move-ments, hard stools, or excessive straining. A careful history of these symptoms often clarifies the nature of the problem.Constipation has many causes. Underlying metabolic, pharmacologic, endocrine, psychological, and neurologic causes often contribute to the problem. A stricture or mass lesion should be excluded by colonoscopy, barium enema, or CT colonography. After these causes have been excluded, eval-uation focuses on differentiating slow-transit constipation from outlet obstruction. Transit studies, in which radiopaque markers are swallowed and then followed radiographically, are useful for diagnosing slow-transit constipation. In this study, patients ingest radiopaque studies and are followed radiographically for 5 days. Retention of 20% or greater of these markers in the colon demonstrated slow transit. If these markers are congregated in the rectosigmoid colon and rectum, obstructed defecation/outlet obstruction is suggested. Anorectal manometry and EMG can detect nonrelaxation of the puborectalis, which contributes to outlet obstruction. The absence of an anorectal inhibitory reflex Massive life-threatening bleedingPositiveRebleedingRebleedingModerate bleedingcontinuedBleeding stopped or slowed downPositivePositivePositivePositivePositivePositivePositivePositiveNegativeNegativeNegativeNegativeNegativeNegativeNegativeNegativeNegativeFailFailorAcute colonic bleedingVolume resuscitationplus blood transfusionNG aspiratenegativeNG aspiratepositiveProctoscopyRule out anorectal bleedingGastroduodenoscopy+ endoscopic treatmentElective colonoscopyMesenteric arteriographyMesenteric arteriographyUrgent colonoscopy99MTc RBC scintigraphyColonoscopic treatmentor explore, segmentalresectionEndoscopictreatmentVasopressinor emboliVasopressinor emboliExplore, intraoperativeendoscopyExplore, intraoperativeendoscopyExplore, intraoperativeendoscopyExplore, intraoperativeendoscopyObserveSegmentalresectionTotalcolectomyTotalcolectomyTotalcolectomyTotalcolectomySegmentalresectionSegmentalresectionSegmentalresectionSegmentalresectionSegmentalresectionSegmentalresectionSee moderate bleedingor massive bleedingFigure 29-7. Algorithm for treatment of colorectal hemorrhage. NG = nasogastric; 99mTc = technetium-99; RBC = red blood cell. (Repro-duced with permission of Gordon PH, Nivatvongs S: Principles and Practice of Surgery for the Colon, Rectum, and Anus, 2nd ed. New York, NY: Marcel Dekker, Inc; 1999.)Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   126823/02/19   2:28 PM 1269COLON, RECTUM, AND ANUSCHAPTER 29suggests Hirschsprung’s disease and may prompt a rectal muco-sal biopsy. Defecography can identify rectal prolapse, intussus-ception, rectocele, or enterocele.Medical management is the mainstay of therapy for consti-pation and includes fiber, increased fluid intake, and laxatives. Outlet obstruction from nonrelaxation of the puborectalis or anal sphincter dyssynergy often responds to biofeedback. Surgery to correct rectocele and rectal prolapse (with or without sigmoid resection) has a variable effect on symptoms of constipation but can be successful in selected patients. Subtotal colectomy is considered only for patients with severe slow-transit consti-pation (colonic inertia) refractory to maximal medical inter-ventions. While this operation almost always increases bowel movement frequency, complaints of diarrhea, incontinence, and abdominal pain are not infrequent, and patients should be care-fully selected and counseled.11Diarrhea and Irritable Bowel Syndrome. Diarrhea is also a common complaint and is usually a self-limited symptom of infectious gastroenteritis. If diarrhea is chronic or is accom-panied by bleeding or abdominal pain, further investigation is warranted. Bloody diarrhea and pain are characteristic of colitis; etiology can be an infection (invasive E coli, Shigella,  Salmonella, Campylobacter, Entamoeba histolytica, or C difficile), inflammatory bowel disease (ulcerative colitis or Crohn’s coli-tis), or ischemia. Stool wet-mount and culture can often diag-nose infection. Sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy can be helpful in diagnosing inflammatory bowel disease or ischemia. However, if the patient has abdominal tenderness, particularly with peri-toneal signs, or any other evidence of perforation, endoscopy is contraindicated.Chronic diarrhea may present a more difficult diagnos-tic dilemma. Chronic ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s colitis, infec-tion, malabsorption, and short gut syndrome can cause chronic diarrhea. Rarely, carcinoid syndrome and islet cell tumors (vasoactive intestinal peptide–secreting tumor [VIPoma], somatostatinoma, gastrinoma) present with this symptom. Large villous lesions may cause secretory diarrhea. Collagenous colitis can cause diarrhea without any obvious mucosal abnor-mality. Along with stool cultures, tests for malabsorption, and metabolic investigations, colonoscopy can be invaluable in dif-ferentiating these causes. Biopsies should be taken even if the colonic mucosa appears grossly normal.Irritable bowel syndrome is a particularly troubling con-stellation of symptoms consisting of crampy abdominal pain, bloating, constipation, and urgent diarrhea. Workup reveals no underlying anatomic or physiologic abnormality. Once other disorders have been excluded, dietary restrictions and avoid-ance of caffeine, alcohol, and tobacco may help to alleviate symptoms. Antispasmodics and bulking agents may be helpful.Incontinence. The true incidence of fecal incontinence is unknown, but has been estimated to occur in 10 to 13 individu-als per 1000 people older than age 65 years. Incontinence ranges in severity from occasional leakage of gas and/or liquid stool to daily loss of solid stool. The underlying cause of incontinence is often multifactorial, and diarrhea is often contributory. In gen-eral, causes of incontinence can be classified as neurogenic or anatomic. Neurogenic causes include diseases of the central ner-vous system and spinal cord along with pudendal nerve injury. Anatomic causes include congenital abnormalities, procidentia (rectal prolapse), overflow incontinence secondary to impac-tion or an obstructing neoplasm, and trauma. The most common Figure 29-8. A. Endoanal ultrasonography showing the normal layers of the anal canal. B. Endoanal ultrasonography with anterior sphincter defect from birthing injury. EAS = external anal sphincter; IAS = internal anal sphincter. (Used with permission from Charles O. Finne III, MD, Minneapolis, MN.)ABtraumatic cause of incontinence is injury to the anal sphincter during vaginal delivery. Other causes include anorectal surgery, impalement, and pelvic fracture.After a thorough medical evaluation to detect underly-ing conditions that might contribute to incontinence, evalua-tion focuses on assessment of the anal sphincter and pudendal nerves. Pudendal nerve terminal motor latency testing may detect neuropathy. Anal manometry can detect low resting and squeeze pressures. Physical examination and defecography can detect rectal prolapse. Endoanal ultrasound is invaluable in diagnosing sphincter defects (Fig. 29-8).Therapy depends on the underlying abnormality. Diarrhea should be treated medically (fiber, antidiarrheal agents). Even in the absence of frank diarrhea, the addition of dietary fiber may improve continence. Some patients may respond to bio-feedback and this approach may be considered in patients who fail dietary modification. Many patients with a sphincter defect are candidates for an overlapping sphincteroplasty. Sacral nerve Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   126923/02/19   2:28 PM 1270SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIstimulation been shown to decrease episodes of fecal incon-tinence and has proven durability in the long term (5 years). The artificial bowel sphincter may be useful in patients who fail other interventions. Other options include radiofrequency energy to the anal canal (SECCA procedure), magnetic anal sphincter, and injectable submucosal bulking agents, but long-term efficacy has not yet been proven.12-14 Finally, a stoma can provide relief for severely incontinent patients who have failed or are not candidates for other interventions.GENERAL SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONSColorectal resections are performed for a wide variety of condi-tions, including neoplasms (benign and malignant), inflamma-tory bowel diseases, and other benign conditions. Although the indication and urgency for surgery will alter some of the tech-nical details, the operative principles of colorectal resections, anastomoses, and use of ostomies are well established.ResectionsThe mesenteric clearance technique dictates the extent of colonic resection and is determined by the nature of the primary pathology (malignant or benign), the intent of the resection (curative or palliative), the precise location(s) of the primary pathology, and the condition of the mesentery (thin and soft or thick and indurated). In general, a proximal mesenteric ligation will eliminate the blood supply to a greater length of colon and require a more extensive “colectomy.” Curative resection of a colorectal cancer is usually best accomplished by performing a proximal mesenteric vessel ligation and radical mesenteric clearance of the lymphatic drainage basin of the tumor site (Fig. 29-9). Resection of a benign process does not require wide mesenteric clearance.Emergency Resection. Emergency resection may be required because of obstruction, perforation, or hemorrhage. In this set-ting, the bowel is almost always unprepared and the patient may be unstable. The surgical principles described earlier apply, and an attempt should be made to resect the involved segment along with its lymphovascular supply. If the resection involves the right colon or proximal transverse colon (right or extended right colectomy), a primary ileocolonic anastomosis can usually be performed safely as long as the remaining bowel appears healthy and the patient is stable. For left-sided tumors, the traditional approach has involved resection of the involved bowel and end colostomy, with or without a mucus fistula. However, there is an increasing body of data to suggest that a primary anasto-mosis without a bowel preparation or with an on-table lavage, with or without a diverting ileostomy, may be equally safe in this setting. If the proximal colon appears unhealthy (vascular compromise, serosal tears, perforation), a subtotal colectomy can be performed with a small bowel to rectosigmoid anastomo-sis. Resection and diversion (ileostomy or colostomy) remain safe and appropriate if the bowel appears compromised or if the patient is unstable, malnourished, or immunosuppressed.Minimally Invasive Techniques of Resection. With advances in minimally invasive technology, many proce-dures that previously have required laparotomy can now be performed laparoscopically, with hand-assisted laparoscopy (HAL), or robotically.15,16 Potential advantages of minimally invasive surgery include improved cosmetic result, decreased postoperative pain, and earlier return of bowel function. More-over, some experimental data suggest that minimally invasive 1operations have less immunosuppressive impact on the patient and thus might improve postoperative outcome and even long-term survival. To date, most studies have demonstrated equiva-lence between laparoscopic, HAL, and open resection in terms of extent of resection. Return of bowel function and length of hospital stay are highly variable. Long-term outcome has yet to be determined; however, short-term quality of life appears to be improved by laparoscopy.17,18 Laparoscopic total mesorec-tal excision for rectal cancer, however, may not be appropriate. The most recent advances in minimally invasive surgery involve use of robotics and telemanipulation in which the surgeon oper-ates from a console remote from the patient. These procedures have been rapidly gaining in popularity, especially for pelvic and rectal resections. Early studies suggest equivalence between robotic resections and laparoscopic/HAL resections.19In addition, some proponents have suggested that robotic procedures may be easier to learn (a shorter “learning curve”) and that robotic surgery may be ergonomically better for the operating surgeon. Nevertheless, long-term superiority, or even equivalence, has yet to be demonstrated, and these advanced technologies are likely to be associated with significant cost.Colectomy. A variety of terms are used to describe different types of colectomy (Fig. 29-10).Ileocolic Resection An ileocolic resection describes a limited resection of the terminal ileum, cecum, and appendix. It is used to remove disease involving these segments of the intestine (e.g., ileocecal Crohn’s disease) and benign lesions or incur-able cancers arising in the terminal ileum, cecum, and, occa-sionally, the appendix. If curable malignancy is suspected, more radical resections, such as a right hemicolectomy, are gener-ally indicated. The ileocolic vessels are ligated and divided. A variable length of small intestine may be resected depending on the disease process. A primary anastomosis is created between the distal small bowel and the ascending colon. It is technically difficult to perform an anastomosis at or just proximal to the ileocecal valve; therefore, if the most distal ileum needs to be resected, the cecum is generally also removed.Right Colectomy A right colectomy is used to remove lesions or disease in the right colon and is oncologically the most appro-priate operation for curative intent resection of proximal colon carcinoma. The ileocolic vessels, right colic vessels, and right branches of the middle colic vessels are ligated and divided. Approximately 10 cm of terminal ileum are usually included in the resection. A primary ileal-transverse colon anastomosis is almost always possible.Extended Right Colectomy An extended right colectomy may be used for curative intent resection of lesions located at the hepatic flexure or proximal transverse colon. A standard right colectomy is extended to include ligation of the middle colic vessels at their base. The right colon and proximal trans-verse colon are resected, and a primary anastomosis is created between the distal ileum and distal transverse colon. Such an anastomosis relies on the marginal artery of Drummond. If the blood supply to the distal transverse colon is questionable, the resection is extended distally beyond the splenic flexure to well-perfused descending colon where the ileocolic anastomosis can be performed safely.Transverse Colectomy Lesions in the mid and distal trans-verse colon may be resected by ligating the middle colic vessels and resecting the transverse colon, followed by a colocolonic anastomosis. However, an extended right colectomy with an Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   127023/02/19   2:28 PM 1271COLON, RECTUM, AND ANUSCHAPTER 29anastomosis between the terminal ileum and descending colon may be a safer anastomosis with an equivalent functional result.Left Colectomy For lesions or disease states confined to the distal transverse colon, splenic flexure, or descending colon, a left colectomy is performed. The left branches of the middle colic vessels, the left colic vessels, and the first branches of the sigmoid vessels are ligated. A colocolonic anastomosis can usually be performed.Extended Left Colectomy An extended left colectomy is an option for removing lesions in the distal transverse colon. In this operation, the left colectomy is extended proximally to include the right branches of the middle colic vessels.Sigmoid Colectomy Lesions in the sigmoid colon require ligation and division of the sigmoid branches of the inferior mesenteric artery. In general, the entire sigmoid colon should be resected to the level of the peritoneal reflection and an BADCFEFigure 29-9. Extent of resection for carcinoma of the colon. A. Cecal cancer. B. Hepatic flexure cancer. C. Transverse colon cancer.  D. Splenic flexure cancer. E. Descending colon cancer. F. Sigmoid colon cancer.Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   127123/02/19   2:28 PM 1272SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIanastomosis created between the descending colon and upper rectum. Full mobilization of the splenic flexure is often required to create a tension-free anastomosis.Total and Subtotal Colectomy Total or subtotal colectomy is occasionally required for patients with fulminant colitis, attenu-ated FAP, or synchronous colon carcinomas. In this procedure, the ileocolic vessels, right colic vessels, middle colic vessels, and left colic vessels are ligated and divided. The superior rectal vessels are preserved. If it is desired to preserve the sigmoid, the distal sigmoid vessels are left intact, and an anastomosis is created between the ileum and distal sigmoid colon (subtotal colectomy with ileosigmoid anastomosis). If the sigmoid is to be resected, the sigmoidal vessels are ligated and divided, and the ileum is anastomosed to the upper rectum (total abdominal colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis). If an anastomosis is contraindicated, an end ileostomy is created, and the remain-ing sigmoid or rectum is managed either as a mucus fistula or a Hartmann’s pouch.Proctocolectomy Total Proctocolectomy In this procedure, the entire colon, rectum, and anus are removed, and the ileum is brought to the skin as a Brooke ileostomy.Restorative Proctocolectomy (Ileal Pouch–Anal Anasto-mosis) The entire colon and rectum are resected, but the anal sphincter muscles and a variable portion of the distal anal canal are preserved. Bowel continuity is restored by anastomosis of an ileal reservoir to the anal canal. The original technique included a transanal mucosectomy and hand-sewn ileoanal anastomosis. Proponents of this technique argue that mucosectomy guarantees removal of all of the diseased mucosa, including the anal transi-tion zone, and therefore decreases the risk of ongoing disease, dysplasia, and carcinoma. Opponents cite the increased risk of incontinence after mucosectomy and argue that even meticulous technique invariably leaves behind mucosal “islands” that are subsequently hidden under the anastomosis. However, persistent or recurrent dysplasia in the anal transition zone is uncommon (4.5%), and cancers occur even more rarely.19 Moreover, the “double-staple” technique using the circular stapling devices is considerably simpler than mucosectomy and a hand-sewn anas-tomosis and may be associated with a better functional outcome (Fig. 29-11).20-22 Regardless of the anastomotic technique, many surgeons recommend that patients undergo annual surveillance of the anastomosis and/or anal transition zone by digital rectal exam and anoscopy or proctoscopy.The neorectum is made by anastomosis of the terminal ileum aligned in a “J,” “S,” or “W” configuration. Because func-tional outcomes are similar and because the J-pouch is the sim-plest to construct, it has become the most used configuration. ABCDEFGHIJKLFigure 29-10. Terminology of types of colorectal resections: A→C Ileocecectomy; + A + B→D Ascending colectomy; + A + B→F Right hemicolectomy; + A + B→G Extended right hemi-colectomy; + E + F→G + H Transverse colectomy; G→I Left hemicolectomy; F→I Extended left hemicolectomy; J + K Sigmoid colectomy; + A + B→J Subtotal colectomy; + A + B→K Total col-ectomy; + A + B→L Total proctocolectomy. (Reproduced with per-mission from Fielding LP, Goldberg SM: Rob & Smith’s Operative: Surgery of the Colon, Rectum, and Anus. London: Elsevier; 1993.)BCAFigure 29-11. After a total colectomy and resection of the rec-tum (A), the anal canal with a short cuff of transitional mucosa and sphincter muscles is preserved (B). An ileal J-pouch has been constructed and is anastomosed to the anal canal using a double-staple technique (C). (Reproduced with permission from Bell RH,  Rikkers LF, Mulholland M: Digestive Tract Surgery: A Text and Atlas. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1996.)Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   127223/02/19   2:29 PM 1273COLON, RECTUM, AND ANUSCHAPTER 29With increasing experience in laparoscopic and robotic colec-tomy, some centers have begun performing total proctocolec-tomy with ileal pouch–anal reconstruction using minimally invasive surgical techniques.15 Most surgeons perform a proxi-mal ileostomy to divert succus from the newly created pouch in an attempt to minimize the consequences of leak and sepsis, especially in patients who are malnourished or immunosup-pressed (Fig. 29-12). The ileostomy is then closed 6 to 12 weeks later, after a contrast study confirms the integrity of the pouch. In low-risk patients, however, there are reports of successful creation of an ileoanal pouch without a diverting stoma.Anterior Resection. Anterior resection is the general term used to describe resection of the rectum from an abdominal approach to the pelvis with no need for a perineal, sacral, or other incision. Three types of anterior resection have been described.High Anterior Resection A high anterior resection is the term used to describe resection of the distal sigmoid colon and upper rectum and is the appropriate operation for benign lesions and disease at the rectosigmoid junction such as diverticulitis. The upper rectum is mobilized, but the pelvic peritoneum is not divided and the rectum is not mobilized fully from the concavity of the sacrum. The inferior mesenteric artery is ligated at its base, and the inferior mesenteric vein, which follows a different course than the artery, is ligated separately. A primary anasto-mosis (usually end-to-end) between the colon and rectal stump with a short cuff of peritoneum surrounding its anterior two thirds generally can be performed.Low Anterior Resection. A low anterior resection is used to remove lesions in the upper and mid rectum. The rectosigmoid is mobilized, the pelvic peritoneum is opened, and the inferior mesenteric artery is ligated and divided either at its origin from the aorta or just distal to the takeoff of the left colic artery. The rectum is mobilized from the sacrum by sharp dissection under direct view within the endopelvic fascial plane. The dissec-tion may be performed distally to the anorectal ring, extend-ing posteriorly through the rectosacral fascia to the coccyx and anteriorly through Denonvilliers’ fascia to the vagina in women or the seminal vesicles and prostate in men. The rectum and accompanying mesorectum are divided at the appropriate level, depending on the nature of the lesion. A low rectal anastomosis usually requires mobilization of the splenic flexure and ligation and division of the inferior mesenteric vein just inferior to the pancreas. Circular stapling devices have greatly facilitated the conduct and improved the safety of the colon to extraperitoneal rectal anastomosis.Extended Low Anterior Resection An extended low anterior resection is necessary to remove lesions located in the distal rectum, but several centimeters above the sphincter. The rectum is fully mobilized to the level of the levator ani muscle just as for a low anterior resection, but the anterior dissection is extended along the rectovaginal septum in women and distal to the semi-nal vesicles and prostate in men. After resection at this level, a coloanal anastomosis can be created using one of a variety of techniques. An end-to-end stapled or hand-sewn anastomo-sis has traditionally been the procedure of choice. However, the functional consequences of a “straight” anastomosis have led to consideration for creation of a colon J-pouch to increase the capacity of the neorectal reservoir. A side-to-end anastomosis can be constructed by placing the anvil of an EEA stapler 3 to  4 cm away from the stapled end of the proximal colon, with simi-lar functional outcomes to the colon J-pouch reconstruction.20-22 Because the risk of an anastomotic leak and subsequent sepsis is higher when an anastomosis is created in the distal rectum or anal canal, creation of a temporary ileostomy should be consid-ered in this setting, especially if the patient has received neoad-juvant radiation.23Although an anastomosis may be technically feasible very low in the rectum or anal canal, it is important to note that post-operative function may be poor. Because the descending colon lacks the distensibility of the rectum, the reservoir function may be compromised. Pelvic radiation, prior anorectal surgery, and obstetrical trauma may cause unsuspected sphincter damage. Finally, a very low anastomosis may involve and compromise the upper sphincter. Creation of a colon J-pouch or transverse coloplasty may improve function, but few long-term studies have addressed this issue.20-22A history of sphincter damage or any degree of inconti-nence is a relative contraindication for a coloanal anastomosis. In such patients, an end colostomy may be a more satisfac-tory option.Hartmann’s Procedure and Mucus Fistula. Hartmann’s procedure refers to a colon or rectal resection without an 2Figure 29-12. Ileal S-pouch anal anastomosis with temporary loop ileostomy. (Reproduced with permission from Bell RH, Rikkers  LF, Mulholland M: Digestive Tract Surgery: A Text and Atlas. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1996.)Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   127323/02/19   2:29 PM 1274SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIanastomosis in which a colostomy or ileostomy is created and the distal colon or rectum is left as a blind pouch. The term is typically used when the left or sigmoid colon is resected and the closed off rectum is left in the pelvis. If the distal colon is long enough to reach the abdominal wall, a mucus fistula can be created by opening the defunctioned bowel and suturing the open lumen to the skin.Abdominoperineal Resection. An abdominoperineal resec-tion (APR) involves removal of the entire rectum, anal canal, and anus with construction of a permanent colostomy from the descending or sigmoid colon. The abdominal-pelvic portion of this operation proceeds in the same fashion as described for an extended low anterior resection. The perineal dissection can be performed with the patient in lithotomy position (often by a second surgeon) or in the prone position after closure of the abdomen and creation of the colostomy. For cancer, the perineal dissection is designed to excise the anal canal with a wide cir-cumferential margin including a cylindrical cuff of the levator muscle. A deliberate resection of the levator muscles near their bony attachments, in order to avoid opening the space between the tumor and the levator ani, is known as the extralevator abdomi-noperineal resection (ELAPE). ELAPE is useful for low, locally advanced rectal cancers, but routine use for all rectal cancer has not been shown to improve cancer outcomes.24 Primary wound closure is usually successful, but a large perineal defect, espe-cially if preoperative radiation has been used, may require a vascularized flap closure in some patients.25 For benign disease, proctectomy may be performed using an intersphincteric dissec-tion between the internal and external sphincters. This approach minimizes the perineal wound, making it easier to close because the levator muscle remains intact.AnastomosesAnastomoses may be created between two segments of bowel in a multitude of ways. The geometry of the anastomosis may be end-to-end, end-to-side, side-to-end, or side-to-side. The anas-tomotic technique may be hand-sewn or stapled (Fig. 29-13). The submucosal layer of the intestine provides the strength of the bowel wall and must be incorporated in the anastomosis to assure healing. The choice of anastomosis depends on the opera-tive anatomy and surgeon preference. Although many surgeons advocate one method over another, none has been proven to be superior. Accurate approximation of two well-vascularized, healthy limbs of bowel without tension in a normotensive, well-nourished patient almost always results in a good outcome. Anastomoses at highest risk of leak or stricture are those that are in the distal rectal or anal canal, involve irradiated or dis-eased intestine including perforation with peritoneal soilage, are inadvertently fashioned above a partial distal obstruction, or are performed in malnourished, immunosuppressed, or ill patient.Anastomotic Configuration End-to-End An end-to-end anastomosis can be performed when two segments of bowel are roughly the same caliber. This technique is most often employed in rectal resections, but may be used for colocolostomy or small bowel anastomoses.End-to-Side An end-to-side configuration is useful when one limb of bowel is larger than the other. This most commonly occurs in the setting of chronic obstruction.Side-to-End A side-to-end anastomosis is used when the proxi-mal bowel is of smaller caliber than the distal bowel. Ileorectal anastomoses commonly make use of this configuration. A side-to-end anastomosis may have a less tenuous blood supply than an end-to-end anastomosis.Side-to-Side A side-to-side anastomosis allows a large, well-vascularized connection to be created on the antimesenteric side of two segments of intestine. This technique is commonly used in ileocolic and small bowel anastomoses.Anastomotic Technique Hand-Sutured Technique Any of the configurations described earlier may be created using a hand-sutured or stapled technique. Hand-sutured anastomoses may be single layer, using either running or interrupted stitches, or double layer. A double-layer anastomosis usually consists of a continuous inner layer and an interrupted outer layer. Suture material may be either perma-nent or absorbable. After distal rectal or anal canal resection, a transanal, hand-sewn coloanal anastomosis may be necessary to restore bowel continuity. This can be done in conjunction with an anal canal mucosectomy to allow the anastomosis to be cre-ated at the dentate line.Stapled Techniques Linear cutting/stapling devices are used to divide the bowel and to create side-to-side anastomoses. The anastomosis may be reinforced with interrupted sutures if desired. Circular cutting/stapling devices can create end-to-end, end-to-side, or side-to-end anastomoses. These instruments are particularly useful for creating low rectal or anal canal anas-tomoses where the anatomy of the pelvis makes a hand-sewn anastomosis technically difficult or impossible.Following resection of the colorectum, a stapled end-to-end colorectal, coloanal canal, or ileal pouch–anal canal anasto-mosis may be created by one of two techniques. With the open purse-string technique, the distal rectal stump purse-string is placed by hand, and the assembled circular stapler is inserted into the anus and guided up to the rectal purse-string. The sta-pler is opened, and the distal purse-string is tied. A purse-string is placed in the distal end of the proximal colon; the proximal colon is placed over the anvil and the purse-string tightened. The stapler is closed and fired (Fig. 29-14). With the alterna-tive double-staple technique, the distal rectum or anal canal is closed with a transverse staple line. The circular stapler is inserted through the anus without its anvil until the cartridge effaces the transverse staple line. The stapler is opened, causing the trocar to perforate through the rectal stump adjacent to the transverse staple line. The anastomosis in then completed as described earlier (see Fig. 29-11). If the stapler cannot advance to the end of the rectal stump, further dissection of the stump may be necessary to optimize tissue apposition. After firing and removing the stapler, the resulting anastomotic rings should be inspected to ensure that they are full-thickness and concentric, and in cases of rectal cancer, the distal anastomotic ring should be sent to pathology as a specimen (true distal margin). A gap in an anastomotic ring suggests that the circular staple line is incomplete and the anastomosis should be reinforced with suture circumferentially, if technically feasible. A temporary proximal ileostomy may be indicated as well. Most surgeons will also leak test an anastomosis by instilling water or saline into the pelvis and insufflating the rectum with air via a proc-toscope to looking or alternatively instilling methylene blue or betadine into the rectum to look for extravasation. A leak test strongly suggests a defect and/or disruption of the anastomosis. As such, the suture should line reinforced and sometimes may require reanastomosis.23Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   127423/02/19   2:29 PM 1275COLON, RECTUM, AND ANUSCHAPTER 29Ostomies and Preoperative Stoma PlanningDepending on the clinical situation, a stoma may be temporary or permanent. It may be end-on or a loop. However, regardless of the indication for a stoma, placement and construction are crucial for function.The preoperative preparation of a patient who is expected to require a stoma should include a consultation with an enter-ostomal therapy (ET) nurse. ET nurses are specially trained and credentialed by the Wound, Ostomy, and Continence Nurses Society. Preoperative planning includes counseling, education, and stoma siting. Postoperatively, the ET nurse assists with local skin care and pouching. Other considerations in stoma planning include evaluation of other medical conditions that may impact on a patient’s ability to manage a stoma (e.g., eyesight, manual dexterity). Family or other caregivers can prove invaluable in caring for these patients.Preoperative stoma siting is crucial for a patient’s postop-erative function and quality of life. A poorly placed stoma can result in leakage and skin breakdown. Ideally, a stoma should be placed in a location that the patient can easily see and manipulate, within the rectus muscle, and below the belt line (Fig. 29-15). Because the abdominal landmarks in a supine, anesthetized patient may be dramatically different from those in an awake, standing, or sitting patient, the stoma site should always be marked with a tattoo, skin scratch, or permanent marker preoperatively, if possible. In an emergency operation where the stoma site has not been marked, an attempt should be made to place a stoma within the rectus muscle and away from 3BCAFigure 29-13. A. Sutured end-to-end colocolic anastomosis. B. Sutured end-to-side ileocolic anastomosis. C. Stapled side-to-side, functional end-to-end ileocolic anastomosis. (Reproduced with permission from Bell RH, Rikkers LF, Mulholland M: Digestive Tract Surgery: A Text and Atlas. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1996.)Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   127523/02/19   2:29 PM 1276SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIboth the costal margin and iliac crest. In emergencies, placement high on the abdominal wall is preferred to a more caudal site.For all stomas, a circular skin incision is created, and the subcutaneous tissue is dissected to the level of the anterior rec-tus sheath. The anterior rectus sheath is incised in a cruciate fashion, the muscle fibers separated bluntly, and the posterior sheath identified and incised. Care should be taken to avoid injuring and causing bleeding from the inferior epigastric artery and vein. The size of the defect depends on the size of the bowel used to create the stoma, but it should be as small as possible without compromising the intestinal blood supply (usually the width of two to three fingers). The bowel is then brought through the defect and secured with sutures. The abdominal incision is usually closed and dressed prior to maturing the stoma to avoid contaminating the wound. In order to make appliance use easier, a protruding nipple is fashioned by everting the bowel. Three or four interrupted absorbable sutures are placed through the edge of the bowel, then through the serosa, approximately 2 cm proximal to the edge, and then through the dermis (Brooke tech-nique). After the stoma is everted, the mucocutaneous junction is sutured circumferentially with interrupted absorbable suture (Fig. 29-16).Ileostomy Temporary Ileostomy A temporary ileostomy is often used to “protect” an anastomosis that is at risk for leakage (low in the rectum, in an irradiated field, in an immunocompromised or malnourished patient, and during some emergency operations). In this setting, the stoma is often constructed as a loop ileostomy (see Fig. 29-12). A segment of distal ileum is brought through the defect in the abdominal wall as a loop. An enterotomy is created and the stoma matured as described earlier. The loop may be secured with or without an underlying rod. A divided loop may also be created by firing a linear cutting/stapler across the distal limb of the loop flush with the skin followed by mat-uration of the proximal limb of the loop. This technique pre-vents incomplete diversion that occasionally occurs with a loop ileostomy.The advantage of a loop or divided loop ileostomy is that subsequent closure can often be accomplished without a formal laparotomy. An elliptical incision is created around the stoma and the bowel gently dissected free of the subcutaneous tissues and fascia. A hand-sewn or stapled anastomosis can then be created and the intestine returned to the peritoneal cavity. This ABDCEFigure 29-14. Technique of end-to-end colorectal anastomosis using a circular stapler. A. The patient is in modified lithotomy position.  B. After resection of the rectosigmoid and placement of purse-string sutures proximally and distally, the stapler is inserted into the anal canal and opened. C. Rectal purse-string suture is tied to secure the rectal stump to the rod of the stapler, and the colonic purse-string is tied to secure the colon to the anvil of the stapler. D. The stapler is closed and fired. E. The stapler is removed, leaving a circular stapled end-to-end anastomosis.Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   127623/02/19   2:29 PM 1277COLON, RECTUM, AND ANUSCHAPTER 29avoids a long laparotomy incision and generally is well toler-ated. The timing of ileostomy closure should take into account anastomotic healing as well as the patient’s overall condition. A flexible endoscopy exam and a contrast enema (Gastrografin) are recommended prior to closure to ensure that the anastomosis has not leaked and is patent. A patient’s nutritional status should be optimized. Because the timing of adjuvant chemotherapy effects survival, cancer patients receiving adjuvant chemother-apy usually should defer ileostomy closure until completion of treatment.Permanent Ileostomy A permanent ileostomy is sometimes required after total proctocolectomy or in patients with obstruc-tion. An end ileostomy is the preferred configuration for a per-manent ileostomy because a symmetric protruding nipple can be fashioned more easily than with a loop ileostomy (see Fig. 29-16). The end of the small intestine is brought through the abdominal wall defect and matured. Stitches are often used to secure the bowel to the posterior fascia.Complications of Ileostomy Stoma necrosis may occur in the early postoperative period and is usually caused by skel-etonizing the distal small bowel and/or creating an overly tight fascial defect. Limited mucosal necrosis above the fascia may be treated expectantly, but necrosis below the level of the fascia requires surgical revision. Stoma retraction may occur early or late and may be exacerbated by obesity. Local revision may be necessary. The creation of an ileostomy bypasses the fluid-absorbing capability of the colon, and dehydration with fluid and electrolyte abnormalities is not uncommon. Ideally, ileos-tomy output should be maintained at less than 1500 mL/d to avoid this problem. Bulk agents and opioids (Lomotil, Imodium, tincture of opium) are useful. The somatostatin analogue, octreotide, has been used with varying success in this setting. Skin irritation can also occur, especially if the stoma appliance fits poorly. Skin-protecting agents and custom pouches can help to solve this problem. Obstruction may occur intra-abdominally or at the site where the stoma exits the fascia. Parastomal hernia is less common after an ileostomy than after a colostomy but can cause poor appliance fitting, pain, obstruction, or strangulation. In general, symptomatic parastomal hernias should be repaired. A variety of techniques to repair these hernias have been described, including local repair (either with or without mesh), laparoscopic repair, and stoma resiting. Prolapse is a rare, late complication and is often associated with a parastomal hernia.Colostomy. Most colostomies are created as end colostomies rather than loop colostomies (Fig. 29-17). The bulkiness of the colon makes a loop colostomy awkward for use of an appliance, and prolapse is more likely with this configuration. Most colos-tomies are created on the left side of the colon. An abdominal wall defect is created and the end of the colon mobilized through it. Because a protruding stoma is considerably easier to pouch, colostomies should also be matured in a Brooke fashion. The distal bowel may be brought through the abdominal wall as a mucus fistula or left intra-abdominally as a Hartmann’s pouch. Tacking the distal end of the colon to the abdominal wall or tagging it with permanent suture can make identification of the stump easier if the colostomy is closed at a later date. Closure of an end colostomy has traditionally required a laparotomy, but increasingly minimally invasive techniques have been adopted. The stoma is dissected free of the abdominal wall and the distal bowel identified. An end-to-end anastomosis is then created.MidlineincisionStoma siteLateral edgeof rectus sheathWaistlineHiplineFigure 29-15. Marking of an ideal site for ileostomy. (Reproduced with permission from Bell RH, Rikkers LF, Mulholland M: Diges-tive Tract Surgery: A Text and Atlas. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1996.)BACFigure 29-16. Brooke ileostomy. A. Four sutures incorporating the cut end of the ileum, the seromuscular layer at the level of the anterior rectus fascia, and the subcuticular edge of the skin are placed at 90° to each other. B. The sutures are tied to produce sto-mal eversion, and (C) simple sutures from the cut edge of the bowel to the subcuticular tissue complete the maturation of the ileostomy. (Reproduced with permission from Bell RH, Rikkers LF, Mulhol-land M: Digestive Tract Surgery: A Text and Atlas. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1996.)Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   127723/02/19   2:29 PM 1278SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIComplications of Colostomy Colostomy necrosis may occur in the early postoperative period and results from an impaired vascular supply (skeletonization of the distal colon or a tight fas-cial defect). Like ileostomy necrosis, limited suprafascial necro-sis may be followed expectantly, but necrosis below the fascia requires surgery. Retraction may also occur but is less problem-atic with a colostomy than with an ileostomy because the stool is less irritating to the skin than succus entericus. Obstruction is unusual, but may also occur. Parastomal hernia is the most common late complication of a colostomy and requires repair if it is symptomatic. Prolapse occurs rarely, but is more com-mon with a loop colostomy. Interestingly, it is almost always the efferent limb of the loop that prolapses. Dehydration is rare after colostomy, and skin irritation is less common than with ileostomy.Functional ResultsFunction following segmental colonic resection and primary anastomosis is generally excellent. A small percentage of patients following subtotal or total colectomy and ileosigmoid or ileorectal anastomosis may experience diarrhea and bowel frequency. This is especially true if the patient is elderly, if sig-nificant length of small bowel has been resected, and if residual proctocolitis is poorly controlled. In general, the more distal the anastomosis, the greater is the risk of troublesome diarrhea and frequency. However, some patients develop significant diarrhea after right colectomy due to malabsorption of bile acids; in these cases, bile acid binding resins (e.g., cholestyramine) sometimes can be helpful.Function following anterior resection is highly dependent on the level of anastomosis, the use of preor postoperative  pelvic radiation, and underlying sphincter function. Following low anterior or extended low anterior resection, some surgeons prefer to construct a short (5-cm) colon J-pouch to anastomose to the distal rectum or anal canal in order to increase the capacity of the neorectum. The reservoirs are thought to lessen urgency, frequency, and incontinence, but some patients have difficulty initiating defecation, and long-term superiority over a “straight” anastomosis has yet to be proven. In addition, these reservoirs can be technically difficult, especially in an obese male with a narrow pelvis.20-22The physical and psychological problems associated with a permanent Brooke ileostomy led to development of the con-tinent Kock pouch ileostomy. Unfortunately, complications, especially complications related to valve slippage, are common. Despite variations of technique designed to improve the func-tion of the continent ileostomy, most surgeons have abandoned this operation and instead perform restorative proctocolectomy with ileal pouch–anal anastomosis.Although ileal pouch–anal reconstruction is anatomically appealing, functional outcome is far from perfect.26,27 Patients should be counseled to expect 8 to 10 bowel movements per day. Up to 50% have some degree of nocturnal incontinence. Pouchitis (see the following paragraph) occurs in nearly 50% of patients who undergo the operation for chronic ulcerative colitis, and small bowel obstruction is not uncommon. Other less com-mon complications include difficulties with pouch evacuation, pouch-perineal and/or pouch-vaginal fistula, and anal stricture. Pouch failure rate averages 5% to 10%. Patients who are sub-sequently diagnosed with Crohn’s disease have a considerably higher pouch failure rate (approximately 50%), whereas patients with indeterminate colitis have an intermediate pouch failure rate (15–20%). Despite these drawbacks, the vast majority of patients are satisfied and prefer ileal pouch–anal reconstruction to permanent ileostomy.26,27Pouchitis is an inflammatory condition that affects both ileoanal pouches and continent ileostomy reservoirs. The inci-dence of pouchitis ranges from 30% to 55%. Symptoms include increased diarrhea, hematochezia, abdominal pain, fever, and malaise. Diagnosis is made endoscopically with biopsies. Dif-ferential diagnosis includes infection and undiagnosed Crohn’s disease. The etiology of pouchitis is unknown. Some believe pouchitis results from fecal stasis within the pouch, but empty-ing studies are not confirmatory. Antibiotics (metronidazole ± ciprofloxacin) are the mainstays of therapy, and most patients will respond rapidly to either oral preparations or enemas. Some patients develop chronic pouchitis that necessitates ongoing suppressive antibiotic therapy. Salicylate and corticosteroid enemas have also been used with some success.28-31 Biologic agents targeting TNFa (infliximab, vedulizumab, ustekinumab) are also being studied.32-34 Reintroduction of normal flora by ingestion of probiotics and/or an elemental diet have been sug-gested as a possible treatment in refractory cases. Occasionally, pouch excision is necessary to control the symptoms of chronic pouchitis.30Anesthesia ConsiderationsLocal Anesthesia. Many anorectal procedures can be per-formed with local anesthetic alone. Intravenous sedation is often provided to calm the patient. Injection of 0.5% lidocaine (short acting) and 0.25% bupivacaine (long acting) into the perianal skin, sphincter, and area around the pudendal nerves usually provides an adequate block. The addition of dilute epinephrine decreases bleeding and prolongs the anesthetic effect.Regional Anesthesia. Epidural, spinal, and caudal anesthetics can be used for anorectal procedures and transanal resections. In patients with severe medical comorbidity, regional anesthesia may occasionally be used for laparotomy and colectomy. Post-operative epidural anesthesia provides excellent pain relief and improves pulmonary function especially after an open operation.General Anesthesia. General anesthesia is required for the vast majority of intra-abdominal procedures. Patients should Figure 29-17. Intraperitoneal end colostomy.Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   127823/02/19   2:29 PM 1279COLON, RECTUM, AND ANUSCHAPTER 29undergo a thorough preoperative cardiovascular evaluation. In patients with significant comorbid disease, an anesthesia con-sultation may be appropriate.Positioning. Most abdominal colectomies can be performed in the supine position. Anterior resection and APR require lithotomy positioning to facilitate the pelvic dissection and mobilization of the splenic flexure. Adequate padding should be provided for the patient’s sacrum, and care should be taken to avoid stirrup pressure on the peroneal nerves.Anorectal procedures may be performed in lithotomy or in the prone jackknife position. Some surgeons prefer the prone jackknife position because exposure may be better, espe-cially for anterior lesions. Distal posterior lesions can usually be accessed from either position, but more proximal posterior lesions are better accessed in the prone position.Operative PreliminariesBowel Preparation. The rationale for bowel preparation is that decreasing the bacterial load in the colon and rectum will decrease the incidence of postoperative infection. Mechanical bowel preparation uses cathartics to rid the colon of solid stool the night before surgery. The most commonly used regimens include polyethylene glycol (PEG) solutions or magnesium citrate. PEG solutions require patients to drink a large volume of fluid and may cause bloating and nausea. Magnesium citrate solutions are generally better tolerated but are more likely to cause fluid and electrolyte abnormalities. Both are equally efficacious in bowel cleansing. Preparatory formulations have been recently introduced in tablet form in an attempt to improve tolerance. However, these methods of bowel cleansing require ingestion of 40 or more tablets with water over several hours. To date, these formulations have not been proven to be superior to the more traditional products. Antibiotic prophylaxis also is recommended. The addition of oral antibiotics to the preopera-tive mechanical bowel preparation has been thought to decrease postoperative infection by further decreasing the bacterial load of the colon. A recent analysis of the Surgical Care Improve-ment Project-1 (SCIP-1) suggests that oral antibiotics reduce postoperative wound infection, especially if a mechanical bowel preparation is not used.35-37Longstanding, convincing data support the efficacy of parenteral antibiotic prophylaxis at the time of surgery. Broad-spectrum parenteral antibiotic(s) with activity against aerobic and anaerobic enteric pathogens should be administered just prior to the skin incision and redosed as needed depending on the length of the operation. There is no proven benefit to using antibiotics postoperatively after an uncomplicated colectomy.Despite widespread use of mechanical bowel prepara-tion, the necessity of bowel cleansing prior to colectomy has been questioned. European surgeons in particular have advo-cated abandoning this practice. Arguments against mechani-cal bowel preparation include dehydration and electrolyte abnormalities that often result from bowel cleansing, as well as the risk of spillage of liquid stool left over from the “prep.” Arguments in favor of mechanical bowel preparation included easier manipulation of an “empty” colon (especially in mini-mally invasive procedures) and avoidance of a “stool column” above an anastomosis, especially in the pelvis. Interestingly, a recent meta-analysis of 14 randomized controlled trials sug-gested that mechanical bowel preparation does not prevent sur-gical site infection and should be abandoned in clinical practice. However, these studies did not include the use of oral antibiotics in the mechanical preparation groups, and further studies will be needed to determine the optimal preparation regimen.35-37Ureteral Stents. Ureteral stents may be useful for identify-ing the ureters intraoperatively and are placed via cystoscopy after the induction of general anesthesia and removed at the end of the operation. Stents can be invaluable during reopera-tive pelvic surgery or when there is significant retroperitoneal inflammation (such as complicated diverticulitis), as well as in obese patients. Lighted stents may be helpful in laparoscopic and robotic resections. Patients often have transient hematuria postoperatively, but major complications are rare.Multidisciplinary Teams. Patients with complex colorectal disease often benefit from a multidisciplinary approach to their care. Patients with pelvic floor disorders (especially inconti-nence) often require evaluation by both a colorectal surgeon and a urologist or urogynecologist. Preoperative evaluation of cancer patients by a medical oncologist and/or radiation oncolo-gist is crucial for planning either neoadjuvant or adjuvant ther-apy. Intraoperatively, complex pelvic resections often require the involvement of not only a colorectal surgeon but also a urologist, gynecologic oncologist, neurosurgeon, and/or plastic surgeon. Radiation oncologists should be involved in the opera-tion if brachytherapy catheters are to be placed for intracavi-tary radiation or if intraoperative radiation therapy is planned. Rarely, psychiatric disorders may manifest as colorectal prob-lems (especially functional disorders and chronic pain), and involvement of a psychiatrist or psychologist may be beneficial.INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASEGeneral ConsiderationsEpidemiology. Inflammatory bowel disease includes ulcer-ative colitis, Crohn’s disease, and indeterminate colitis. Ulcerative colitis occurs in 8 to 15 people per 100,000 in the United States and Northern Europe. The incidence is consid-erably lower in Asia, Africa, and South America, and among the nonwhite population in the United States. Ulcerative coli-tis incidence peaks during the third decade of life and again in the seventh decade of life. The incidence of Crohn’s disease is slightly lower, 1 to 5 people per 100,000. Crohn’s disease also affects Northern European and Caucasian populations dispro-portionately. Crohn’s disease has a similar bimodal incidence, with most cases occurring between ages 15 to 30 years and ages 60 to 70 years.38 In 15% of patients with inflammatory bowel disease, differentiation between ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s colitis is impossible; these patients are classified as having  indeterminate colitis.Etiology. Inflammatory bowel disease is a multifactorial con-dition that includes environmental, genetic, and immune causal elements; the variation in disease distributions and severity, as well as the differential responses to medical therapy, reflect a complex pathophysiology that is not reducible to a single cause. Nonetheless, there are several consistent observations among IBD populations that allow some degree of generalization. The consistent differences in IBD incidence between different geographic regions strongly suggest that environmental factors such as diet and exposure to microorganisms have a causal role. Alcohol and oral contraceptive use have also been implicated, as has tobacco use, in the etiology and exacerbation of Crohn’s disease.Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   127923/02/19   2:29 PM 1280SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIIBD is a genetic disease, though one that is polygenic, explaining why IBD frequently affects multiple family mem-bers across more than one generation, while also explaining the large number of genes implicated in the development of IBD. Most of the data on the genetics of IBD focus on Crohn’s disease. Although ulcerative colitis has an association with at least 20 genetic loci based on genome-wide association studies (GWAS), this form of IBD has a weaker genetic link than does Crohn’s disease. Approximately 10% to 30% of IBD patients will have at least one other family member also affected by IBD.39,40 Additionally, there is 50% disease concordance among monozygotic twins and a 10% disease concordance among dizy-gotic twins.41Many of the genetic variants most consistently associated with IBD involve loci involved in innate immune function. These include NOD2 (nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-containing protein 2), which is located on chromosome 16 and which is responsible for coordinating the function of several genes leading to the production of proinflammatory cytokines in response to gut microbes. This genetic variant is arguably the most strongly associated with IBD, being strongly connected with Crohn’s disease, although it is also associated with severe pouchitis in patients with a history of ulcerative colitis.42,43The ATG16L1 gene is located on chromosome 2, and its product is involved in the immune response to muramyl dipep-tide, a component of both gram-positive and gram-negative bac-teria that is recognized by the immune system. A related gene, IRGM, is located on chromosome 5, and its product is pivotal in the interferon-gamma–mediated clearance of intracellular pathogens. Variants in this gene are associated with a higher incidence of ileocolic resections in Crohn’s disease patients.42-44Patients with IBD appear to have a chronic immune dys-regulation, which may lead to an interplay with gut microbes which are also present in non-IBD patients, but which elicit pathologic immune responses in the IBD population leading to chronic, idiopathic inflammation of the alimentary tract. Bacteria such as Mycobacterium paratuberculosis and Liste-ria monocytogenes, as well as viruses such as paramyxovirus and measles virus, have been suggested as having a role in the development of Crohn’s disease. With the decreased cost of sequencing and with the expansion of reference databases for identification of organisms, microbiome studies have been applied to the study of IBD patients, both to learn about the pathogenesis of IBD as well as for disease prognostication. Recent studies have identified an abundance of Serratia marc-escens, E coli, and Candida tropicalis in the guts of patients with Crohn’s disease. In a study of 543 stool samples, patients with ulcerative colitis and primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) demonstrated a distinct bacterial community structure, with an enrichment of bacteria belonging to the Veillonella genus, which is associated with several diseases characterized by inflammation and fibrosis.45-49A defect in the gut mucosal barrier, which increases exposure to intestinal microbes as well as proinflammatory substances, is a potential etiologic factor related to immune dys-regulation. An autoimmune mechanism has also been postulated. Although there is no clear evidence linking an immunologic disorder to inflammatory bowel disease, the similarity of many of the extraintestinal manifestations to rheumatologic disorders has made this theory attractive. In summary, IBD is primarily characterized by intestinal inflammation, and medical therapy is focused on reducing or preventing that inflammation.45-49Pathology and Differential Diagnosis. Although ulcer-ative colitis and Crohn’s colitis share many pathologic and clinical similarities, these conditions can be differentiated in 85% of patients. Ulcerative colitis is a mucosal process in which the colonic mucosa and submucosa are infiltrated with inflammatory cells. The mucosa may be atrophic, and crypt abscesses are common. Endoscopically, the mucosa is fre-quently friable and may possess multiple inflammatory pseu-dopolyps. In long-standing ulcerative colitis, the colon may be foreshortened and the mucosa replaced by scar. In quies-cent ulcerative colitis, the colonic mucosa may appear normal both endoscopically and microscopically. Ulcerative colitis may affect the rectum (proctitis), rectum and sigmoid colon (proctosigmoiditis), rectum and left colon (left-sided colitis), or the rectum and varying lengths of colon extending proxi-mal to the splenic flexure (pancolitis). Ulcerative colitis does not primarily affect the small intestine, but the terminal ileum may demonstrate inflammatory changes (“backwash ileitis”). A key feature of ulcerative colitis is the continuous involve-ment of the rectum and colon; rectal sparing or skip lesions suggest a diagnosis of Crohn’s disease. Symptoms are related to the degree of mucosal inflammation and the extent of coli-tis. Patients typically complain of bloody diarrhea and crampy abdominal pain. Proctitis may produce tenesmus. Severe abdominal pain and fever raise the concern of fulminant coli-tis or toxic megacolon. Physical findings are nonspecific and range from minimal abdominal tenderness and distention to frank peritonitis. In the nonemergent setting, the diagnosis is typically made by colonoscopy and mucosal biopsy.In contrast to ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s disease is a trans-mural inflammatory process that can affect any part of the gas-trointestinal tract from mouth to anus. Mucosal ulcerations, an inflammatory cell infiltrate, and noncaseating granulomas are characteristic pathologic findings. Chronic inflammation may ultimately result in fibrosis, strictures, and fistulas in either the colon or small intestine. The endoscopic appearance of Crohn’s colitis is characterized by deep serpiginous ulcers and a “cob-blestone” appearance. Skip lesions and rectal sparing are com-mon. Symptoms of Crohn’s disease depend on the severity of inflammation and/or fibrosis and the location of inflammation in the gastrointestinal tract. Acute inflammation may produce diarrhea, crampy abdominal pain, and fever. Strictures may pro-duce symptoms of obstruction. Weight loss is common, both because of obstruction and from protein loss. Perianal Crohn’s disease may present with pain, swelling, and drainage from fis-tulas or abscesses. Physical findings are also related to the site and severity of disease.In 15% of patients with colitis from inflammatory bowel disease, differentiation of ulcerative colitis from Crohn’s colitis is impossible either grossly or microscopically (indeterminate colitis).50 These patients typically present with symptoms similar to ulcerative colitis. Endoscopic and pathologic findings usually include features common to both diseases. Increasingly, sero-logic markers have been employed to differentiate ulcerative colitis from Crohn’s disease. The anti-Saccharomyces cerevi-siae antibody (ASCA) and perinuclear anticytoplasmic antibody (pANCA) may be useful in differentiating these two processes but require prospective study.50 Further differential diagnoses include infectious colitides, especially cytomegalovirus (CMV), Campylobacter jejuni, Entamoeba histolytica, toxigenic E Coli, C difficile, Neisseria gonorrhoeae, Salmonella, and Shigella species.Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   128023/02/19   2:29 PM 1281COLON, RECTUM, AND ANUSCHAPTER 29Extraintestinal Manifestations. The liver is a common site of extracolonic disease in inflammatory bowel disease. Fatty infiltration of the liver is present in 40% to 50% of patients, and cirrhosis is found in 2% to 5%. Fatty infiltration may be reversed by medical or surgical treatment of colonic disease, but cirrhosis is irreversible. Primary sclerosing cholangitis is a progressive disease characterized by intraand extrahepatic bile duct stric-tures. Forty percent to 60% of patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis have ulcerative colitis. Colectomy will not reverse this disease, and the only effective therapy is liver transplanta-tion. Pericholangitis is also associated with inflammatory bowel disease and may be diagnosed with a liver biopsy. Bile duct carcinoma is a rare complication of long-standing inflamma-tory bowel disease. Patients who develop bile duct carcinoma in the presence of inflammatory bowel disease are, on average, 20 years younger than other patients with bile duct carcinoma.51Arthritis also is a common extracolonic manifesta-tion of inflammatory bowel disease, and the incidence is 20 times greater than in the general population. Arthritis usually improves with treatment of the colonic disease. Sacroiliitis and ankylosing spondylitis are associated with inflammatory bowel disease, although the relationship is poorly understood. Medical and surgical treatment of the colonic disease does not impact symptoms.51Erythema nodosum is seen in 5% to 15% of patients with inflammatory bowel disease and usually coincides with clini-cal disease activity. Women are affected three to four times more frequently than men. The characteristic lesions are raised, red, and predominantly on the lower legs. Pyoderma gangreno-sum is an uncommon but serious condition that occurs almost exclusively in patients with inflammatory bowel disease. The lesion begins as an erythematous plaque, papule, or bleb, usu-ally located on the pretibial region of the leg and occasionally near a stoma. The lesions progress and ulcerate, leading to a painful, necrotic wound. Pyoderma gangrenosum may respond to resection of the affected bowel in some patients. In others, this disorder is unaffected by treatment of the underlying bowel disease. One of the challenges in managing pyoderma is that this manifestation of IBD exhibits pathergy, where the disease will manifest and have its severity exacerbated by the creation of surgical-sites. Depending on the circumstances, a history or the presence of pyoderma should prompt consideration for avoid-ance of a stoma.51Up to 10% of patients with inflammatory bowel dis-ease will develop ocular lesions. These include uveitis, iritis, episcleritis, and conjunctivitis, as well as macular degenerative, hyperpigmented pigmented epithelium (CHRPE). They usu-ally develop during an acute exacerbation of the inflammatory bowel disease. The etiology is unknown.51Principles of Nonoperative Management. Medical therapy for inflammatory bowel disease focuses on decreasing inflam-mation and alleviating symptoms, and many of the agents used are the same for both ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease. In general, mild to moderate flares may be treated in the outpatient setting. More severe signs and symptoms mandate hospitaliza-tion. Pancolitis generally requires more aggressive therapy than limited disease. Because ulcerative proctitis and proctosigmoid-itis are limited to the distal large intestine, topical therapy with salicylate and/or corticosteroid suppositories and enemas can be extremely effective. Systemic therapy is rarely required in these patients.Salicylates Sulfasalazine (Azulfidine), 5-acetyl salicylic acid (5-ASA), and related compounds are first-line agents in the medical treatment of mild to moderate inflammatory bowel dis-ease. These compounds decrease inflammation by inhibition of cyclooxygenase and 5-lipoxygenase in the gut mucosa. They require direct contact with affected mucosa for efficacy. Mul-tiple preparations are available for administration to different sites in the small intestine and colon (sulfasalazine, mesalamine [Pentasa, Asacol, Rowasa]).Antibiotics Antibiotics are often used to decrease the intra-luminal bacterial load in Crohn’s disease. Metronidazole has been reported to improve Crohn’s colitis and perianal disease, but the evidence is weak. Fluoroquinolones may also be effec-tive in some cases. In the absence of fulminant colitis or toxic megacolon, antibiotics are not used to treat ulcerative colitis.Corticosteroids Corticosteroids (either oral or parenteral) are a key component of treatment for an acute exacerbation of either ulcerative colitis or Crohn’s disease. Corticosteroids are nonspecific inhibitors of the immune system, and 75% to 90% of patients will improve with the administration of these drugs. However, corticosteroids have a number of serious side effects, and use of these agents should be limited to the short-est course possible. In addition, corticosteroids should be used judiciously in children because of the potential adverse effect on growth. Failure to wean corticosteroids is a relative indication for surgery.Because of the systemic effects of corticosteroids, an effort has been made to develop drugs that act locally and have limited systemic absorption. Agents such as budesonide, beclomethasone dipropionate, and tixocortol pivalate undergo rapid hepatic degradation that significantly decreases systemic toxicity. Budesonide is available as an oral preparation. Corti-costeroid enemas provide effective local therapy for proctitis and proctosigmoiditis and have fewer side effects than systemic corticosteroids.Immunomodulating Agents Azathioprine and 6-mercatopu-rine (6-MP) are antimetabolite drugs that interfere with nucleic acid synthesis and thus decrease proliferation of inflammatory cells. These agents are useful for treating ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease in patients who have failed salicylate therapy or who are dependent on, or refractory to, corticosteroids. It is important to note, however, that the onset of action of these drugs takes 6 to 12 weeks, and concomitant use of corticoste-roids almost always is required.Cyclosporine is an immunosuppressive agent that inter-feres with T-lymphocyte function. While cyclosporine is not routinely used to treat inflammatory bowel disease, up to 80% of patients with an acute flare of ulcerative colitis will improve with its use. However, the majority of these patients will ulti-mately require colectomy. Cyclosporine is also occasionally used to treat exacerbations of Crohn’s disease, and approxi-mately two-thirds of patients will note some improvement. Improvement is generally apparent within 2 weeks of beginning cyclosporine therapy. Long-term use of cyclosporine is limited by its significant toxicities (e.g., nephrotoxicity, hirsutism, gum hypertrophy).Methotrexate is a folate antagonist that also has been used to treat inflammatory bowel disease. Although the efficacy of this agent is unproven, there are reports that more than 50% of patients will improve with administration of this drug.52Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   128123/02/19   2:29 PM 1282SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIBiologic Agents In an effort to improve treatment for steroid-refractory inflammatory bowel disease, a class of agents has been developed based on inhibition of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α). Intravenous infusion of these agents decreases inflammation systemically. Infliximab is a monoclonal antibody directed against TNF-α and was the first biologic agent used to treat Crohn’s disease. More than 50% of patients with moderate to severe Crohn’s disease will improve with infliximab therapy. Infliximab is a chimeric monoclonal antibody directed against TNF-α and it was the first biologic agent used to treat Crohn’s disease. Based on the ACCENT I and II trials, infliximab was associated with a greater incidence of clinical remission, the ability to discontinue corticosteroids, and a longer length of remission compared to placebo.53,54 There are also multiple studies demonstrating an improvement in fistulizing perianal Crohn’s disease, although studies define “improvement” in a variety of ways, some of which do not require fistula to com-pletely involute.53-56Because infliximab is a chimera partially consisting of mouse antibody, human antibodies directed against infliximab can mitigate the efficacy of this drug. For this reason, adali-mumab and certolizumab, that have no nonhuman component, were developed. These two drugs can be administered by sub-cutaneous injection, allowing patients to self-administer these therapies and to avoid the cost and inconvenience of presenting to an infusion center. The ultimate goal of biologic agents, just as with other medical therapies for IBD, is mucosal healing.The use of biologic agents for the treatment of ulcerative colitis is an area where opinions between gastroenterologists and surgeons are more divergent. Unlike in the case of Crohn’s dis-ease, there is a putative surgical cure for ulcerative colitis, which casts the risks of long-term immunosuppression in a different light than in the setting of Crohn’s where there is no curative therapy available. For patients with moderate to severe ulcer-ative colitis not responding to other medical therapies, there is evidence supporting the use of infliximab (UC SUCCESS) and adalimumab (ULTRA I AND II). The use of infliximab as rescue therapy for inpatients with severe, steroid-dependent ulcerative colitis has more recently been investigated. Though gastroen-terologists may view this intervention as maintenance therapy that begins in an inpatient setting only to be continued following hospital discharge, it is still unclear whether inpatient infliximab is even a reliable bridge to elective surgery. Many of the stud-ies supporting inpatient rescue therapy with infliximab did not focus their analyses on patients with extensive (pan) colitis, the group at highest risk for requiring an unplanned admission due to a disease flare, and the subgroup of ulcerative colitis patients most likely to fail rescue therapy and to require colectomy.57-62Whether the preoperative use of biologics is associated with a higher incidence of postoperative complications is a matter of contention. There are individual studies demonstrat-ing a higher incidence of postoperative sepsis, intra-abdominal abscess and readmissions for patients undergoing ileocolectomy for Crohn’s disease who also received preoperative infliximab within three months of surgery. Systematic reviews on this topic, primarily focusing on Crohn’s disease, have concluded that perioperative infliximab may or may not be associated with a higher incidence of postoperative complications, with most of these complications being infectious in nature.63Nutrition Patients with inflammatory bowel disease are often malnourished. Abdominal pain and obstructive symptoms may decrease oral intake. Diarrhea can cause significant protein loss. Ongoing inflammation produces a catabolic physiologic state. Parenteral nutrition should be strongly considered early in the course of therapy for either Crohn’s disease or ulcerative colitis. The nutritional status of the patient also should be considered when planning operative intervention, and nutritional param-eters such as serum albumin, prealbumin, and transferrin should be assessed. In extremely malnourished patients, especially those who are also being treated with corticosteroids, creation of a stoma is often safer than a primary anastomosis.Ulcerative ColitisUlcerative colitis is a dynamic disease characterized by remis-sions and exacerbations. The clinical spectrum ranges from an inactive or quiescent phase to low-grade active disease to ful-minant disease. The onset of ulcerative colitis may be insidi-ous, with minimal bloody stools, or the onset can be abrupt, with severe diarrhea and bleeding, tenesmus, abdominal pain, and fever. The severity of symptoms depends on the degree and extent of inflammation. Although anemia is common, massive hemorrhage is rare. Physical findings are often nonspecific.The diagnosis of ulcerative colitis is almost always made endoscopically. Because the rectum is invariably involved, proctoscopy may be adequate to establish the diagnosis. The earliest manifestation is mucosal edema, which results in a loss of the normal vascular pattern. In more advanced disease, char-acteristic findings include mucosal friability and ulceration. Pus and mucus may also be present. While mucosal biopsy is often diagnostic in the chronic phase of ulcerative colitis, biopsy in the acute phase will often reveal only nonspecific inflammation. Evaluation with colonoscopy or barium enema during an acute flare is contraindicated because of the risk of perforation.Barium enema has been used to diagnose chronic ulcer-ative colitis and to determine the extent of disease. However, this modality is less sensitive than colonoscopy and may not detect early disease. In long-standing ulcerative colitis, the colon is foreshortened and lacks haustral markings (“lead pipe” colon). Because the inflammation in ulcerative colitis is purely mucosal, strictures are highly uncommon. Any stricture diag-nosed in a patient with ulcerative colitis must be presumed to be malignant until proven otherwise.Indications for Surgery. Indications for surgery in ulcer-ative colitis may be emergent or elective. Emergency surgery is required for patients with massive life-threatening hemorrhage, toxic megacolon, or fulminant colitis who fail to respond rap-idly to medical therapy. Patients with signs and symptoms of fulminant colitis should be treated aggressively with bowel rest, hydration, broad-spectrum antibiotics, and parenteral corticoste-roids. Colonoscopy and barium enema are contraindicated, and antidiarrheal agents should be avoided. Deterioration in clinical condition or failure to improve within 24 to 48 hours mandates surgery.Indications for elective surgery include intractability despite maximal medical therapy and high-risk development of major complications of medical therapy such as aseptic necrosis of joints secondary to chronic steroid use. Elective surgery also is indicated in patients at significant risk of developing colorec-tal carcinoma. The risk of malignancy increases with pancolonic disease and the duration of symptoms and is approximately 2% after 10 years, 8% after 20 years, and 18% after 30 years. Unlike sporadic colorectal cancers, carcinoma developing in the con-text of ulcerative colitis is more likely to arise from areas of  Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   128223/02/19   2:29 PM 1283COLON, RECTUM, AND ANUSCHAPTER 29flat dysplasia and may be difficult to diagnose at an early stage. For this reason, it is recommended that patients with longstanding ulcerative colitis undergo colonoscopic surveillance with multiple (40–50), random biopsies to identify dysplasia before invasive malignancy develops. However, the adequacy of this type of screening is controversial. Recently, magnifying chro-moendoscopy has been used to improve sensitivity. This tech-nique uses topical dyes that are applied to the colonic mucosa at the time of endoscopy (Lugol’s solution, methylene blue, indigo carmine, and others). These dyes highlight contrast between normal and dysplastic epithelium, allowing more precise biopsy of suspicious areas.64,65 Surveillance is recommended annu-ally after 8 years in patients with pancolitis, and annually after  15 years in patients with left-sided colitis. Although low-grade dysplasia was long thought to represent minimal risk, more recent studies show that invasive cancer may be present in up to 20% of patients with low-grade dysplasia. For this rea-son, any patient with dysplasia should be advised to undergo proctocolectomy. Controversy exists over whether prophylac-tic proctocolectomy should be recommended for patients who have had chronic ulcerative colitis for greater than 10 years in the absence of dysplasia. Proponents of this approach note that surveillance colonoscopy with multiple biopsies samples only a small fraction of the colonic mucosa, and dysplasia and carci-noma are often missed. Opponents cite the relatively low risk of progression to carcinoma (approximately 2.4%) if all biopsies lack dysplasia. Neither approach has been shown definitively to decrease mortality from colorectal cancer.Operative ManagementEmergent Operation In a patient with fulminant colitis or toxic megacolon, total abdominal colectomy with end ileostomy (with or without a mucus fistula), rather than total proctocolectomy, is recommended. Although the rectum is invariably diseased, most patients improve dramatically after an abdominal colectomy, and this operation avoids a difficult and time-consuming pelvic dissection in a critically ill patient. Rarely, a loop ileostomy and decompressing colostomy may be necessary if the patient is too unstable to withstand colectomy. Definitive surgery may then be undertaken at a later date once the patient has recovered. Complex techniques, such as an ileal pouch–anal reconstruction, generally are contraindicated in the emergent setting. However, massive hemorrhage that includes bleeding from the rectum may necessitate proctectomy and creation of either a permanent ileostomy or an ileal pouch–anal anastomosis.Elective Operation Elective resection for ulcerative colitis usually is performed for refractory inflammation and/or the risk of malignancy (dysplasia). Because of the risk of ongo-ing inflammation, the risk of malignancy, and the availability of restorative proctocolectomy, most surgeons recommend operations that include resection of the rectum. Total procto-colectomy with end ileostomy has been the “gold standard” for treating patients with chronic ulcerative colitis. This operation removes the entire affected intestine and avoids the functional disturbances associated with ileal pouch–anal reconstruction. Most patients function well physically and psychologically after this operation. Total proctocolectomy with continent ileostomy (Kock’s pouch) was developed to improve function and quality of life after total proctocolectomy, but morbidity is significant, and restorative proctocolectomy is generally preferred today. Since its introduction in 1980, restorative proctocolectomy with ileal pouch–anal anastomosis has become the procedure of choice for most patients who require total proctocolectomy but wish to avoid a permanent ileostomy (see Figs. 29-11 and 29-12).66 Abdominal colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis may be appropriate for a patient with indeterminate colitis and rectal sparing.Crohn’s DiseaseSimilar to ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s disease is characterized by exacerbations and remissions. Crohn’s disease, however, may affect any portion of the intestinal tract, from mouth to anus. Diagnosis may be made by colonoscopy or esophagogastroduo-denoscopy or by barium small bowel study or enema, depending on which part of the intestine is most affected. The presence of skip lesions is key in differentiating Crohn’s colitis from ulcer-ative colitis, and rectal sparing occurs in approximately 40% of patients. The most common site of involvement of Crohn’s dis-ease is the terminal ileum and cecum (ileocolic Crohn’s disease), followed by the small bowel, and then by the colon and rectum. Perianal and anal canal Crohn’s disease manifest by complex anal fistulae and/or abscesses, anal ulcers, and large skin tags may be the initial site of presentation in up to 4% of cases.Indications for Surgery. Because Crohn’s disease is cur-rently incurable and because it can affect any part of the gas-trointestinal tract, the therapeutic rationale is fundamentally different from that of ulcerative colitis. Ulcerative colitis may be cured by removal of the affected intestinal segment (the colon and rectum). In Crohn’s disease, it is impossible to remove all the at-risk intestine; therefore, surgical therapy is reserved for complications of the disease.Crohn’s disease may present as an acute inflammatory process or as a chronic fibrotic process. During the acute inflam-matory phase, patients may present with intestinal inflamma-tion complicated by fistulae and/or intra-abdominal abscesses. Maximal medical therapy should be instituted, including antiinflammatory medications, bowel rest, and antibiotics. Parenteral nutrition should be considered if the patient is malnourished. Most intra-abdominal abscesses can be drained percutaneously with the use of CT scan guidance. Although the majority of these patients will ultimately require surgery to remove the dis-eased segment of bowel, these interventions allow the patient’s condition to stabilize, nutrition to be optimized, and inflamma-tion to decrease prior to embarking on a surgical resection. Once an operation is undertaken, fistulae generally require resection of the segment of bowel with active Crohn’s disease; the sec-ondary sites of the fistula are often otherwise normal and do not generally require resection after division of the fistula. Simple closure of the secondary fistula site usually suffices.Chronic fibrosis may result in strictures in any part of the gastrointestinal tract. Because the fibrotic process is gradual, free perforation proximal to the obstructing stricture is rare. Chronic strictures almost never improve with medical therapy. Strictures may be treated with resection or stricturoplasty. Distal ileal strictures are sometimes amenable to colonoscopic balloon dilatation. Optimal timing for surgery should take into account the patient’s underlying medical and nutritional status.Once an operation is undertaken for Crohn’s disease, sev-eral principles should guide intraoperative decision making. In general, a laparotomy for Crohn’s disease should be performed through a midline incision because of the possible need for a stoma. Laparoscopy is also increasingly used in this setting. Because many patients with Crohn’s disease often will require multiple operations, the length of bowel removed should be Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   128323/02/19   2:29 PM 1284SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIminimized. Bowel should be resected to an area with grossly nor-mal margins; frozen sections are not necessary. Finally, a primary anastomosis may be created safely if the patient is medically stable, nutritionally replete, and taking few immunosuppressive medications. Creation of a stoma should be strongly considered in any patient who is hemodynamically unstable, septic, malnour-ished, or receiving high-dose immunosuppressive therapy and among patients with extensive intra-abdominal contamination.Ileocolic and Small Bowel Crohn’s Disease. The terminal ileum and cecum are involved in Crohn’s disease in up to 41% of patients; the small intestine is involved in up to 35% of patients. The most common indications for surgery are internal fistula or abscess (30–38% of patients) and obstruction (35–37% of patients). Psoas abscess may result from ileocolic Crohn’s dis-ease. Sepsis should be controlled with percutaneous drainage of abscess(es) and antibiotics, if possible. Parenteral nutrition may be necessary in patients with chronic obstruction. The extent of resection depends on the amount of involved intestine. Short segments of inflamed small intestine and right colon should be resected and a primary anastomosis created if the patient is sta-ble, nutrition is adequate, and immunosuppression is minimal. Isolated chronic strictures should also be resected. In patients with multiple fibrotic strictures that would require extensive small bowel resection, stricturoplasty is a safe and effective alternative to resection. Short strictures are amenable to a trans-verse stricturoplasty, while longer strictures may be treated with a side-to-side small bowel anastomosis (Fig. 29-18).ABCDEFigure 29-18. Alternative stricturoplasty techniques. A. A short stricture is opened along the antimesenteric surface of the bowel wall. B. The enterotomy is closed transversely. C. A long stricture is opened along the antimesenteric surface of the bowel wall. D. The bowel is folded into an inverted “U.” E. A side-to-side anastomosis is made. (Reproduced with permission from Corman ML. Colon & Rectal Surgery, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1989.)Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   128423/02/19   2:29 PM 1285COLON, RECTUM, AND ANUSCHAPTER 29Risk of recurrence after resection for ileocolic and small bowel Crohn’s disease is high. More than 50% of patients will experience a recurrence within 10 years, and the majority of these will require a second operation.Crohn’s Colitis. Crohn’s disease of the large intestine may present as fulminant colitis or toxic megacolon. In this set-ting, treatment is identical to treatment of fulminant colitis and toxic megacolon secondary to ulcerative colitis. Resuscitation and medical therapy with bowel rest, broad-spectrum antibiot-ics, and parenteral corticosteroids should be instituted. If the patient’s condition worsens or fails to rapidly improve, total abdominal colectomy with end ileostomy is recommended. An elective proctectomy may be required if the patient has refrac-tory Crohn’s proctitis. Alternatively, if the rectum is spared, an ileorectal anastomosis may be appropriate once the patient has recovered.Other indications for surgery in chronic Crohn’s colitis are intractability, complications of medical therapy, and risk of or development of malignancy. Unlike ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s colitis may be segmental, and rectal sparing is often observed. A segmental colectomy may be appropriate if the remaining colon and/or rectum appear normal. An isolated colonic stricture may also be treated by segmental colectomy. Although it was long thought that Crohn’s disease did not increase the risk of colorectal carcinoma, it is now recognized that Crohn’s colitis (especially pancolitis) carries nearly the same risk for cancer as ulcerative colitis. Annual surveillance colonoscopy with multiple biopsies is recommended for patients with long-standing Crohn’s colitis (>7 years in duration). As in ulcerative colitis, dysplasia is an indication for total proctocolectomy. Ileal pouch–anal reconstruction is not recommended in these patients because of the risk for development of Crohn’s disease within the pouch and the high risk of complications, such as fistula, abscess, stricture, pouch dysfunction, and pouch failure.Anal and Perianal Crohn’s Disease. Anal and perianal mani-festations of Crohn’s disease are very common and occur in 35% of all patients with Crohn’s disease. Isolated anal Crohn’s disease is uncommon, affecting only 3% to 4% of patients. Detection of anal Crohn’s disease, therefore, should prompt evaluation of the remainder of the gastrointestinal tract.The most common perianal lesions in Crohn’s disease are skin tags that are minimally symptomatic. Fissures are also common. Typically, a fissure from Crohn’s disease is partic-ularly deep or broad and perhaps better described as an anal ulcer. These fissures are often multiple and located in a lateral position rather than anterior or posterior midline as seen in an idiopathic fissure in ano. A classic-appearing fissure in ano located laterally should raise the suspicion of Crohn’s disease. Perianal abscess and fistulas are common and can be particu-larly challenging. Fistulas tend to be complex and often have multiple tracts (Fig. 29-19). Hemorrhoids are not more common in patients with Crohn’s disease than in the general population, although many patients tend to attribute any anal or perianal symptom to “hemorrhoids.”Treatment of anal and perianal Crohn’s disease focuses on alleviation of symptoms. Perianal skin irritation from diarrhea often responds to medical therapy directed at small bowel or colonic disease. In general, skin tags and hemorrhoids should not be excised unless they are extremely symptomatic because of the risk of creating chronic, nonhealing wounds. Fissures may respond to local or systemic therapy; sphincterotomy is relatively contraindicated because of the risk of creating a chronic, nonhealing wound and because of the increased risk of incontinence in a patient with diarrhea from underlying colitis or small bowel disease. Anal ulcers associated with Crohn’s dis-ease are usually not very painful unless there is an underlying abscess. Thus, in patients with significant anal pain, an exami-nation under anesthesia is indicated to exclude an underlying abscess or fistula and to assess the rectal mucosa. In the absence of active Crohn’s proctitis, one can proceed cautiously with a partial internal sphincterotomy if the examination under anes-thesia reveals a classic-appearing posterior or anterior fissure and anal stenosis.Recurrent abscess(es) or complex anal fistulae should raise the possibility of Crohn’s disease. Treatment focuses on control of infection, delineation of complex anatomy, treat-ment of underlying mucosal disease, and sphincter preserva-tion. Abscesses often can be drained locally, and mushroom catheters are useful for maintaining drainage. Endoanal ultra-sound and pelvic MRI are useful for mapping complex fistulous tracts. Liberal use of setons can control many fistulas and avoid division of the sphincter. Many patients with anal Crohn’s dis-ease function well with multiple setons left in place for years. Endoanal advancement flaps may be considered for definitive therapy if the rectal mucosa is uninvolved but will not heal due to rectal inflammation. In 10% to 15% of cases, intractable peri-anal sepsis requires proctectomy.Rectovaginal fistula can be a particularly difficult problem in these patients. A rectal or vaginal mucosal advancement flap may be used if the rectal mucosa appears healthy and scarring of the rectovaginal septum is minimal. Occasionally, proctec-tomy is the best option for women with highly symptomatic rectovaginal fistulae. Although proximal diversion is often employed to protect complex perianal reconstruction, there is no evidence that diversion alone increases healing of anal and perianal Crohn’s disease.Medical treatment of underlying proctitis with salicylate and/or corticosteroid enemas may be helpful; however, control of infection is the primary goal of therapy. Metronidazole has been used with some success in this setting. Anti-TNF-α agents (infliximab and adalimumab) have shown some efficacy in heal-ing chronic fistulas secondary to Crohn’s disease. The success of these agents has led to a concerted effort to identify other 4Figure 29-19. Photograph of a patient with multiple perianal  fistulas secondary to Crohn’s disease.Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   128523/02/19   2:29 PM 1286SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIimmunomodulators that might prove useful. Proinflammatory cytokines such as interleukin-12 and interferon-γ are potential targets. Inhibition of immune cell migration has also been sug-gested as an approach. However, it is of paramount importance to drain any and all abscesses before initiating immunosuppres-sive therapy such as corticosteroids or anti-TNF-α monoclonal antibodies.54-55Indeterminate ColitisApproximately 15% of patients with inflammatory bowel dis-ease manifest clinical and pathologic characteristics of both ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease. Endoscopy, barium enema, and biopsy may be unable to differentiate ulcerative colitis from Crohn’s colitis in this setting. The indications for surgery are the same as those for ulcerative colitis: intracta-bility, complications of medical therapy, and risk of or devel-opment of malignancy. In the setting of indeterminate colitis in a patient who prefers a sphincter-sparing operation, a total abdominal colectomy with end ileostomy may be the best initial procedure. Pathologic examination of the entire colon may then allow a more accurate diagnosis. If the diagnosis suggests ulcer-ative colitis, an ileal pouch–anal anastomosis procedure can be performed. If the diagnosis remains in question, the safest surgi-cal option is completion proctectomy with end ileostomy (simi-lar to Crohn’s colitis). Ileal pouch–anal reconstruction may also be considered with the understanding that the pouch failure rate is between 15% and 20%.50DIVERTICULAR DISEASEDiverticular disease is a clinical term used to describe the pres-ence of symptomatic diverticula. Diverticulosis refers to the presence of diverticula without inflammation. Diverticulitis refers to inflammation and infection associated with diverticula. The majority of colonic diverticula are false diverticula in which the mucosa and muscularis mucosa have herniated through the colonic wall. These diverticula occur between the teniae coli, at points where nutrient arterial blood vessels penetrate the colonic wall (presumably creating an area of relative weakness in the colonic muscle). They are thought to be pulsion diverticula resulting from high intraluminal pressure. Diverticular bleeding  can be massive but usually is self-limited. True diverticula, which comprise all layers of the bowel wall, are rare and are usually congenital in origin.Diverticulosis is extremely common in the United States and Europe. It is estimated that half of the population older than age 50 years has colonic diverticula. The sigmoid colon is the most common site of diverticulosis (Fig. 29-20). Diverticulosis is thought to be an acquired disorder, but the etiology is poorly understood. The most accepted theory is that a lack of dietary fiber results in smaller stool volume, requiring high intraluminal pressure and high colonic wall tension for propulsion. Chronic contraction then results in muscular hypertrophy and develop-ment of the process of segmentation in which the colon acts like separate segments instead of functioning as a continuous tube. As segmentation progresses, the high pressures are directed radi-ally toward the colon wall rather than to development of propul-sive waves that move stool distally. The high radial pressures directed against the bowel wall create pulsion diverticula. A loss of tensile strength and a decrease in elasticity of the bowel wall with age have also been proposed etiologies. Although none of these theories has been proven, a high-fiber diet does appear to decrease the incidence of diverticulosis. Although diverticulosis is common, most cases are asymptomatic, and complications occur in the minority of people with this condition.Inflammatory Complications (Diverticulitis)Diverticulitis refers to inflammation and infection associated with a diverticulum and is estimated to occur in 10% to 25% of people with diverticulosis. Peridiverticular and pericolic infection results from a perforation (either macroscopic or microscopic) of a diverticulum, which leads to contamination, inflammation, and infection. The spectrum of disease ranges from mild, uncomplicated diverticulitis that can be treated in the outpatient setting, to free perforation and diffuse peritonitis that requires emergency laparotomy. Most patients present with left-sided abdominal pain, with or without fever, and leukocytosis. A mass may be present. Plain radiographs are useful for detect-ing free intra-abdominal air. CT scan is extremely useful for defining pericolic inflammation, phlegmon, or abscess. Contrast enemas and/or endoscopy are relatively contraindicated because of the risk of perforation. The differential diagnosis includes malignancy, ischemic colitis, infectious colitis, and inflamma-tory bowel disease.Uncomplicated Diverticulitis. Uncomplicated diverticulitis is characterized by left lower quadrant pain and tenderness. CT findings include pericolic soft tissue stranding, colonic wall thickening, and/or phlegmon. Most patients with uncomplicated diverticulitis will respond to outpatient therapy with broadspectrum oral antibiotics and a low-residue diet. Antibiotics should be continued for 7 to 10 days. About 10% to 20% of patients with more severe pain, tenderness, fever, and leuko-cytosis are treated in the hospital with parenteral antibiotics Figure 29-20. Diverticulosis of sigmoid colon on barium enema. (Reproduced with permission from James EC, Corry RJ, Perry JCF: Basic Surgical Practice. Philadelphia, PA: Hanley & Belfus; 1987.)Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   128623/02/19   2:29 PM 1287COLON, RECTUM, AND ANUSCHAPTER 29and bowel rest. Most patients improve within 48 to 72 hours. Failure to improve may suggest abscess formation. CT can be extremely useful in this setting, and many pericolic abscesses can be drained percutaneously. Deterioration in a patient’s clini-cal condition and the development of peritonitis are indications for laparotomy.Most patients with uncomplicated diverticulitis will recover without surgery, and 50% to 70% will have no further episodes. It has long been believed that the risk of complications increases with recurrent disease. For this reason, elective sig-moid colectomy has often been recommended after the second episode of diverticulitis, especially if the patient has required hospitalization. Resection has often been recommended after the first episode in very young patients and is often recommended after the first episode of complicated diverticulitis. These gen-eral guidelines have been questioned in recent years, and more recent studies suggest that the risk of complications and/or need for emergent resection does not increase with recurrent disease. Moreover, the rate of complications is rare after elective sur-gery and recurrences do not increase the rate of complications. As such, the rate of resection in all patients, including young patients and those with complicated disease, has decreased.67-71Many surgeons now will not advise colectomy even after two documented episodes of diverticulitis assuming the patient is completely asymptomatic and that carcinoma has been excluded by colonoscopy. Immunosuppressed patients are gen-erally still advised to undergo colectomy after a single episode of documented diverticulitis. Medical comorbidities should be considered when evaluating a patient for elective resection, and the risks of recurrent disease should be weighed against the risks of the operation.69,70 Because colon carcinoma may present in an identical fashion to diverticulitis (either complicated or uncom-plicated), all patients must be evaluated for malignancy after resolution of the acute episode. Colonoscopy is recommended 4 to 6 weeks after recovery. Inability to exclude malignancy is another indication for resection.In the elective setting, a sigmoid colectomy with a primary anastomosis is the procedure of choice. The resection should always be extended to the rectum distally because the risk of recurrence is high if a segment of sigmoid colon is retained. The proximal extent of the resection should include all thick-ened or inflamed bowel; however, resection of all diverticula is unnecessary. Increasingly, laparoscopy is being used for elec-tive sigmoid colectomy for diverticular disease.Complicated Diverticulitis. Complicated diverticulitis includes diverticulitis with abscess, obstruction, diffuse peri-tonitis (free perforation), or fistulas between the colon and adjacent structures. Colovesical, colovaginal, and coloenteric fistulas are long-term sequelae of complicated diverticulitis. The Hinchey staging system is often used to describe the severity of complicated diverticulitis: Stage I includes colonic inflam-mation with an associated pericolic abscess; stage II includes colonic inflammation with a retroperitoneal or pelvic abscess; stage III is associated with purulent peritonitis; and stage IV is associated with fecal peritonitis. Treatment depends on the patient’s overall clinical condition and the degree of peritoneal contamination and infection. Small abscesses (<2 cm in diame-ter) may be treated with parenteral antibiotics. Larger abscesses are best treated with CT-guided percutaneous drainage (Fig. 29-21) and antibiotics.72 Many of these patients will ultimately require resection, but percutaneous drainage may allow a one-stage, elective procedure and may obviate the need for colec-tomy if full recovery follows the drainage.Urgent or emergent laparotomy may be required if an abscess is inaccessible to percutaneous drainage, if the patient’s condition deteriorates or fails to improve, or if the patient pres-ents with free intra-abdominal air or peritonitis. In almost all cases, an attempt should be made to resect the affected seg-ment of bowel. Patients with small, localized pericolic or pel-vic abscesses (Hinchey stages I and II) may be candidates for a sigmoid colectomy with a primary anastomosis (a one-stage operation). Among patients with larger abscesses, peritoneal soiling, or peritonitis, sigmoid colectomy with end colostomy and Hartmann’s pouch is the most commonly used procedure.71 Success also has been reported after sigmoid colectomy, pri-mary anastomosis, with or without on-table lavage, and proxi-mal diversion (loop ileostomy). This option may be appropriate in stable patients and offers the great advantage that the subse-quent operation to restore bowel continuity is simpler than is BAFigure 29-21. A. Computed tomography scan demonstrating pelvic abscess from perforated diverticular disease. B. Posterolateral computed tomography–guided drainage of abdominal abscess from perforated diverticular disease. (Used with permission from Charles O. Finne III, MD, Minneapolis, MN.)Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   128723/02/19   2:29 PM 1288SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IItakedown of a Hartmann’s pouch. The presence of inflammation and phlegmon may increase the risk of ureteral damage during mobilization of the sigmoid colon, and preoperative placement of ureteral catheters can be invaluable. In extremely unstable patients, or in the presence of such severe inflammation that resection would harm adjacent organs, proximal diversion and local drainage have been employed. However, this approach is generally avoided because of high morbidity and mortality rates, along with the requirement for multiple operations. More recently, several studies have suggested that laparoscopic lavage and drainage without bowel resection may be safe and effective even in the presence of free perforation. However, a 20% risk of surgical reoperation can be expected.73,74Obstructive symptoms occur in approximately 67% of patients who develop acute diverticulitis, and complete obstruc-tion occurs in 10%. Patients with incomplete obstruction often respond to fluid resuscitation, nasogastric suction, and gentle, low-volume water or Gastrografin enemas. Relief of obstruction allows full bowel preparation and elective resection. A high-volume oral bowel preparation is contraindicated in the pres-ence of obstructive symptoms. Obstruction that does not rapidly respond to medical management mandates laparotomy. Sigmoid colectomy with end colostomy is the safest procedure to per-form in this setting. However, colectomy and primary anasto-mosis, with or without on-table lavage (depending on extent of fecal load in the proximal colon), and proximal diversion may be appropriate if the patient is stable and the proximal and distal bowel appear healthy.Approximately 5% of patients with complicated diverticu-litis develop fistulas between the colon and an adjacent organ.  Colovesical fistulas are most common, followed by colovaginal and coloenteric fistulas. Colocutaneous fistulas are a rare com-plication of diverticulitis. Two key points in the evaluation of fistulas are to define the anatomy of the fistula and exclude other diagnoses. Contrast enema and/or small bowel stud-ies are extremely useful in defining the course of the fistula.  CT scan can identify associated abscesses or masses. The dif-ferential diagnosis includes malignancy, Crohn’s disease, and radiation-induced fistulas. While Crohn’s disease and radiation injury may be suspected based on the patient’s medical history, colonoscopy or sigmoidoscopy usually is required to rule out malignancy. In addition, in a patient who has received radia-tion therapy, a fistula must be considered to be recurrent cancer until proven otherwise. Once the anatomy of the fistula has been defined and other diagnoses excluded, operative management should include resection of the affected segment of the colon involved with diverticulitis (usually with a primary anastomo-sis) and simple repair of the secondarily involved organ. Sus-picion of carcinoma may mandate a wider, en bloc resection.HemorrhageBleeding from a diverticulum results from erosion of the peri-diverticular arteriole and may result in massive hemorrhage. Most significant lower gastrointestinal hemorrhage occurs in elderly patients in whom both diverticulosis and angiodyspla-sia are common. Consequently, the exact bleeding source may be difficult to identify. Fortunately, in 80% of patients, bleed-ing stops spontaneously. Clinical management should focus on resuscitation and localization of the bleeding site as described for lower gastrointestinal hemorrhage. Colonoscopy may occa-sionally identify a bleeding diverticulum that may then be treated with epinephrine injection or cautery. Angiography may be diagnostic and therapeutic in this setting. In the rare instance in which diverticular hemorrhage persists or recurs, laparotomy and segmental colectomy may be required.Giant Colonic DiverticulumGiant colonic diverticula are extremely rare. Most occur on the antimesenteric side of the sigmoid colon. Patients may be asymptomatic or may present with vague abdominal com-plaints such as pain, nausea, or constipation. Plain radiographs may suggest the diagnosis. Barium enema is usually diagnos-tic. Complications of a giant diverticulum include perforation, obstruction, and volvulus. Resection of the involved colon and diverticulum is recommended.Right-Sided DiverticulaThe cecum and ascending colon infrequently are involved in diverticulosis coli. Even more uncommon is a true solitary diverticulum, which contains all layers of the bowel wall and is thought to be congenital in origin. Right-sided diverticula occur more often in younger patients than do left-sided diver-ticula and are more common in people of Asian descent than in other populations. Most patients with right-sided diverticula are asymptomatic. However, diverticulitis does occur occasionally. Because patients are young and present with right lower quad-rant pain, they are often thought to suffer from acute appendici-tis, and the diagnosis of right-sided diverticulitis is subsequently made in the operating room. If there is a single large diverticu-lum and minimal inflammation, a diverticulectomy may be performed, but an ileocecal resection is usually the preferred operation in this setting. Hemorrhage rarely occurs and should be treated in the same fashion as hemorrhage from a left-sided diverticulum.ADENOCARCINOMA AND POLYPSIncidenceColorectal carcinoma is the most common malignancy of the gastrointestinal tract. Over 130,000 new cases are diagnosed annually in the United States, and more than 50,000 patients die of this disease each year, making colorectal cancer the third most lethal cancer in the United States.75The incidence is similar in men and women and has remained fairly constant over the past 20 years; however, the widespread adoption of current national screening programs is gradually decreasing the incidence of this common and lethal disease in people over 50 years of age. However, people younger than 50 have been experiencing and increase incidence and worse mortality.75 Early detection and improvements in medical and surgical care are thought to be responsible for the decreasing mortality of colorectal cancer observed in recent years.Epidemiology (Risk Factors)Identification of risk factors for development of colorectal can-cer is essential to establish screening and surveillance programs in appropriately targeted populations.Aging. Aging is the dominant risk factor for colorectal cancer, with incidence rising steadily after age 50 years. More than 90% of cases diagnosed are in people older than age 50 years. This is the rationale for initiating screening tests of asymptomatic patients at average risk of developing colorectal cancer at age  50 years. However, individuals of any age can develop colorec-tal cancer, so symptoms such as a significant change in bowel Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   128823/02/19   2:29 PM 1289COLON, RECTUM, AND ANUSCHAPTER 29habits, rectal bleeding, melena, unexplained anemia, or weight loss require a thorough evaluation.Hereditary Risk Factors. Approximately 80% of colorectal cancers occur sporadically, while 20% arise in patients with a known family history of colorectal cancer. Advances in the understanding of these familial disorders have led to interest in early diagnosis using genetic testing. Because of the medical, legal, and ethical considerations that are involved in this type of testing, all patients should be offered genetic counseling if a familial syndrome is suspected.Environmental and Dietary Factors. The observation that colorectal carcinoma occurs more commonly in populations that consume diets high in animal fat and low in fiber has led to the hypothesis that dietary factors contribute to carcinogenesis. A diet high in saturated or polyunsaturated fats increases risk of colorectal cancer, while a diet high in oleic acid (olive oil, coco-nut oil, fish oil) does not increase risk. Animal studies suggest that fats may be directly toxic to the colonic mucosa and thus may induce early malignant changes. In contrast, a diet high in vegetable fiber appears to be protective. A correlation between alcohol intake and incidence of colorectal carcinoma has also been suggested. Ingestion of calcium; selenium; vitamins A, C, and E; carotenoids; and plant phenols may decrease the risk of developing colorectal cancer. Obesity and sedentary lifestyle dramatically increase cancer-related mortality in a number of malignancies, including colorectal carcinoma. This knowl-edge is the basis for primary prevention strategies to eliminate colorectal cancer by altering diet and lifestyle.76Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Patients with long-standing colitis from inflammatory bowel disease are at increased risk for the development of colorectal cancer. It is hypothesized that chronic inflammation predisposes the mucosa to malignant changes, and there is some evidence that degree of inflamma-tion influences risk. In general, the duration and extent of colitis correlate with risk. Other factors thought to increase risk include the presence of primary sclerosing cholangitis and family his-tory of colorectal cancer.Other Risk Factors. Cigarette smoking is associated with an increased risk of colonic adenomas, especially after more than 35 years of use. Patients with ureterosigmoidostomy may also be at increased risk for both adenoma and carcinoma formation.77Acromegaly, which is associated with increased levels of circulating human growth hormone and insulin-like growth factor-1, increases risk as well. Pelvic irradiation may increase the risk of developing rectal carcinoma. However, it is unclear whether this represents a direct effect of radiation damage or is instead a correlation between the development of rectal cancer and a history of another pelvic malignancy; for example, among patients who develop prostate cancer and are treated with radia-tion, the risk of rectal cancer increases significantly.78Pathogenesis of Colorectal CancerGenetic Defects. An intense research effort has focused on elucidating the genetic defects and molecular abnormalities asso-ciated with the development and progression of colorectal adeno-mas and carcinoma. Mutations may cause activation of oncogenes (K-ras) and/or inactivation of tumor suppressor genes (APC, deleted in colorectal carcinoma [DCC], p53). Colorectal carcinoma is thought to develop from adenomatous polyps by accumulation of these mutations in what has come to be known as the adenoma-carcinoma sequence (Fig. 29-22).9,79Defects in the APC gene were first described in patients with Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP). By investigating these families, characteristic mutations in the APC gene were identified. They are now known to be present in 80% of spo-radic colorectal cancers as well.The APC gene is a tumor suppressor gene. Mutations in both alleles are necessary to initiate polyp formation. The majority of mutations are premature stop codons, which result in a truncated APC protein. In FAP, the site of mutation correlates with the clinical severity of the disease. For example, mutations in either the 3′ or 5′ end of the gene result in attenuated forms of FAP (AFAP), whereas mutations in the center of the gene result in more virulent disease. Thus, knowledge of the specific mutation in a family may help guide clinical decision-making.10APC inactivation alone does not result in a carcinoma. Instead, this mutation sets the stage for the accumulation of genetic damage that results in malignancy. Additional mutations may include activation or inactivation of a variety of genes.One of the most commonly involved genes in colorectal cancer is K-ras. K-ras, a signaling molecule in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) pathway, is classified as a proto-oncogene because mutation of only one allele will perturb the cell cycle. The K-ras gene product is a G-protein involved in intracellular signal transduction. When active, K-ras binds gua-nosine triphosphate (GTP); hydrolysis of GTP to guanosine diphosphate (GDP) then inactivates the G-protein. Mutation of KRAS results in an inability to hydrolyze GTP, thus leaving the G-protein permanently in the active form. It is thought that this then leads to uncontrolled cell division. Because K-ras muta-tion results in uncontrolled downstream signaling, anti-EGFR agents are ineffective in treating K-ras mutant tumors. As such, K-ras mutation status is important in deciding when to utilize anti-EGFR therapies. Other EGFR signaling molecules such as BRAF have also been implicated in colorectal cancer patho-genesis and progression, and ongoing research is focusing on elucidating their roles in this disease.5NormalepitheliumDysplasticepitheliumEarlyadenomaIntermediateadenomaLateadenomaCarcinomaMetastasisAPCK-RASDCC/DPC4/JV18?p53Other changesFigure 29-22. Schematic showing progression from normal colonic epithelium to carcinoma of the colon.Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   128923/02/19   2:29 PM 1290SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIAnother common mutation occurs in the MYH gene on chromosome 1p. MYH is a base excision repair gene, and bial-lelic deletion results in changes in other downstream molecules. Since its discovery, MYH mutations have been associated with an AFAP phenotype in addition to sporadic cancers. Unlike APC gene mutations that are expressed in an autosomal domi-nant pattern, the requirement for biallelic mutation in MYH results in an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance.80,81The tumor suppressor gene p53 has been well character-ized in a number of malignancies. The p53 protein appears to be crucial for initiating apoptosis in cells with irreparable genetic damage. Mutations in p53 are present in 75% of colorectal cancers.Deletion of the tumor suppressor phosphatase and ten-sin homolog (PTEN) appears to be involved in a number of hamartomatous polyposis syndromes. Deletions in PTEN have been identified in juvenile polyposis, Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, Cowden’s syndrome, and PTEN hamartoma syndrome, in addi-tion to multiple endocrine neoplasia type IIB. Peutz-Jeghers syndrome is also associated with mutation in STK11, a serine-threonin kinase gene. The genetic changes that underlie serratis polyposis syndrome(s) are currently poorly understood.9Genetic Pathways. The mutations involved in colorectal cancer pathogenesis and progression are now recognized to accumulate via one of three major genetic pathways: the loss of heterozygosity (LOH; chromosomal instability) pathway, the microsatellite instability (MSI) pathway, and the CpG island methylation (CIMP; serrated methylated) pathway.The Loss of Heterozygosity Pathway The LOH pathway is characterized by chromosomal deletions and tumor aneu-ploidy. Eighty percent of colorectal carcinomas appear to arise from mutations in the LOH pathway. This pathway was first described in patients with FAP in whom mutations of the APC gene were found to be inherited.Another example of LOH occurs in the region of chromo-some 18q. This region has been found to be deleted in up to 70% of colorectal cancers. Two tumor suppressor genes, DCC and SMAD4, are located in this region, and as such, deletion of 18q may result in the loss of one or both of these genes. DCC is a tumor suppressor gene, and loss of both alleles is required for malignant degeneration. The main role of this molecule appears to be in the central nervous system, where it is involved in neural differentiation and axonal migration. This observa-tion has led to the hypothesis that DCC may be involved in differentiation and cellular adhesion in colorectal cancer, but this theory remains unproven. DCC mutations are present in more than 70% of colorectal carcinomas and may negatively impact prognosis. SMAD4 functions in the signaling cascade of transforming growth factor beta and beta-catenin (also a down-stream effector of the APC gene). Loss of either of these genes is thought to promote cancer progression.82The Microsatellite Instability Pathway. Many of the remain-ing colorectal carcinomas are thought to arise from mutations in the MSI pathway, which is characterized by errors in mismatch repair during DNA replication. These errors in mismatch repair were first described in Hereditary Nonpolyposis Colon Cancer (HNPCC; Lynch syndrome) Lynch 9, but are now recognized to be present in many sporadic tumors as well. A number of genes have been identified that appear to be crucial for recognizing and repairing DNA replication errors. These mismatch repair genes include MSH2, MLH1, PMS1, PMS2, and MSH6/GTBP. A mutation in one of these genes predisposes a cell to mutations, which may occur in proto-oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes. Accumulation of these errors then leads to genomic instability and ultimately to carcinogenesis.Microsatellites are regions of the genome in which short base-pair segments are repeated several times, regions that are particularly prone to replication error. Consequently, a mutation in a mismatch repair gene produces variable lengths of these repetitive sequences, a finding that has been described as MSI.Tumors associated with MSI appear to have different bio-logic characteristics than do tumors that result from the LOH pathway. Tumors with MSI are more likely to be in the right colon and possess diploid DNA and are associated with a better prognosis than tumors that arise from the LOH pathway that are microsatellite stable. Tumors arising from the LOH pathway tend to occur in the more distal colon, often have chromosomal aneuploidy, and are associated with a poorer prognosis.CpG Island Methylation Pathway In the CIMP pathway, genes do not accumulate mutations (deletions or insertions of bases), but instead are activated or inactivated by methylation. This process has been called epigenetic alteration to differenti-ate it from the more traditional genetic alterations or true muta-tions. In normal cells, methylation is critical for regulation of gene expression. In cancer, aberrant methylation (either hyperor hypomethylation), usually of a promoter region, results in abnormal activation or inactivation of genes. This gene silenc-ing or, alternatively, activation results in a phenotype similar to that present with a true gene mutation. This pathway has also been called the serrated methylated pathway because of the observation that serrated polyps often harbor aberrant meth-ylation in contrast to adenomatous polyps that are more often associated with mutations in the APC gene (LOH pathway).83Although these classifications are useful for understanding the mechanisms underlying carcinogenesis, they are not mutu-ally exclusive. For example, a mismatch repair gene may be inactivated by methylation. Errors in mismatch repair may then allow mutations to inactivate a tumor suppressor gene. In addi-tion, there is considerable interest in targeting molecules in each of these pathways in order to design better anticancer agents. Finally, ongoing research is focusing on the utility of molecular profiling in predicting prognosis and/or response to treatment.10PolypsIt is now well accepted that the majority of colorectal carcino-mas evolve from adenomatous polyps; this sequence of events is the adenoma-carcinoma sequence. Polyp is a nonspecific clini-cal term that describes any projection from the surface of the intestinal mucosa regardless of its histologic nature. Colorec-tal polyps may be classified as neoplastic (tubular adenoma,  villous adenoma, tubulovillous adenomas, serrated adenomas/polyps), hyperplastic, hamartomatous (juvenile, Peutz-Jeghers, Cronkite-Canada), or inflammatory (pseudopolyp, benign  lymphoid polyp).Neoplastic Polyps. Adenomatous polyps are common, occur-ring in up to 25% of the population older than 50 years of age in the United States. By definition, these lesions are dysplas-tic. The risk of malignant degeneration is related to both the size and type of polyp. Tubular adenomas are associated with malignancy in only 5% of cases, whereas villous adenomas may harbor cancer in up to 40%. Tubulovillous adenomas are at intermediate risk (22%). Invasive carcinomas are rare in Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   129023/02/19   2:29 PM 1291COLON, RECTUM, AND ANUSCHAPTER 29polyps smaller than 1 cm; the incidence of invasive carcinoma increases with size. The risk of carcinoma in a polyp larger than 2 cm is 35% to 50%. Although most neoplastic polyps do not evolve to cancer, most colorectal cancers originate as a polyp. It is this fact that forms the basis for secondary prevention strate-gies to eliminate colorectal cancer by targeting the neoplastic polyp for removal before malignancy develops.Polyps may be pedunculated or sessile. Most pedunculated polyps are amenable to colonoscopic snare excision. Removal of sessile polyps is often more challenging. Special colonoscopic techniques, including saline lift, piecemeal snare excision, and endoscopic mucosal resection facilitate successful removal of many sessile polyps. For rectal sessile polyps, transanal opera-tive excision is preferred because it produces an intact, single pathology specimen that can be used to determine the need for further therapy. Interpretation of the precise depth of invasion of a cancer arising in a sessile polyp after piecemeal excision is often impossible. The site of sessile polypectomies should be marked by tattoo marking to guide subsequent endoscopic sur-veillance and to facilitate identification of the involved bowel segment should operative resection be necessary.84 Colectomy is reserved for cases in which colonoscopic removal is impos-sible, such as large, flat lesions, or if a focus of invasive cancer is confirmed in the specimen.Complications of polypectomy include perforation and bleeding. A small perforation (microperforation) in a fully pre-pared, stable patient may be managed with bowel rest, broad-spectrum antibiotics, and close observation. Signs of sepsis, peritonitis, or deterioration in clinical condition are indications for laparotomy. Bleeding may occur immediately after polypec-tomy or may be delayed. The bleeding will usually stop sponta-neously, but colonoscopy may be required to apply endoscopic clips, resnare a bleeding stalk, cauterize the lesion, or inject/apply epinephrine. Occasionally angiography and infusion of vasopressin may be necessary. Rarely, colectomy is required.Hyperplastic Polyps. Hyperplastic polyps are extremely com-mon in the colon. These polyps are usually small (<5 mm) and show histologic characteristics of hyperplasia without any dys-plasia. They are not considered premalignant, but they cannot be distinguished from adenomatous polyps colonoscopically and are therefore often removed. In contrast, large hyperplas-tic polyps (>2 cm) may have a risk of malignant degeneration. Hyperplastic polyposis is a rare disorder in which multiple large hyperplastic polyps occur in young adults. These patients are at increased risk for the development of colorectal cancer.Serrated Polyps. Serrated polyps, including sessile serrated adenomas and traditional serrated adenomas, are a recently recognized, histologically distinct group of neoplastic polyps. Endoscopically they are flat lesions and frequently difficult to visualize. These lesions were long thought to be similar to hyperplastic polyps with minimal malignant potential. How-ever, it has become clear that some of these polyps will develop into invasive cancers. In addition, a familial serrated polyposis syndrome has been described. Serrated polyps should be treated like adenomatous polyps.85Hamartomatous Polyps (Juvenile Polyps). In contrast to adenomatous and serrated polyps, hamartomatous polyps (juve-nile polyps) usually are not premalignant. These lesions are the characteristic polyps of childhood but may occur at any age. Bleeding is a common symptom, and intussusception and/or obstruction may occur. Because the gross appearance of these polyps is identical to adenomatous polyps, these lesions should also be treated by polypectomy. In contrast to adenomatous pol-yposis syndromes, these conditions are often associated with mutation in BMPR1A and SMAD4.Familial juvenile polyposis is an autosomal dominant dis-order in which patients develop hundreds of polyps in the colon and rectum. Unlike solitary juvenile polyps, these lesions may degenerate into adenomas and eventually carcinoma. Annual screening should begin between the ages of 10 and 12 years. Treatment is surgical and depends in part on the degree of rectal involvement. If the rectum is relatively spared, a total abdomi-nal colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis may be performed with subsequent close surveillance of the retained rectum. If the rectum is carpeted with polyps, total proctocolectomy is the more appropriate operation. These patients are candidates for ileal pouch–anal reconstruction to avoid a permanent stoma.Peutz-Jeghers syndrome is characterized by polyposis of the small intestine and, to a lesser extent, polyposis of the colon and rectum. Characteristic melanin spots are often noted on the buccal mucosa and lips of these patients. The polyps of Peutz-Jeghers syndrome are generally considered to be hamar-tomas and are not thought to be at significant risk for malignant degeneration. However, carcinoma may occasionally develop. Because the entire length of the gastrointestinal tract may be affected, surgery is reserved for symptoms such as obstruction or bleeding or for patients in whom polyps develop adenoma-tous features. Screening consists of a baseline colonoscopy and upper endoscopy at age 20 years, followed by annual flexible sigmoidoscopy thereafter. Clinicians should ensure patients are screened for associated extraintestinal malignancies (breast, upper gastrointestinal tract, pancreas, cervix, ovaries, and testicles).Cronkite-Canada syndrome is a disorder in which patients develop gastrointestinal polyposis in association with alopecia, cutaneous pigmentation, and atrophy of the fingernails and toenails. Diarrhea is a prominent symptom, and vomiting, mal-absorption, and protein-losing enteropathy may occur. Most patients die of this disease despite maximal medical therapy, and surgery is reserved for complications of polyposis such as obstruction.Cowden’s syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder with hamartomas of all three embryonal cell layers. Facial trich-ilemmomas, breast cancer, thyroid disease, and gastrointestinal polyps are typical of the syndrome. Patients should be screened for cancers. Treatment is otherwise based on symptoms.Inflammatory Polyps (Pseudopolyps). Inflammatory pol-yps occur most commonly in the context of inflammatory bowel disease, but they may also occur after amebic colitis, ischemic colitis, and schistosomal colitis. These lesions are not premalig-nant, but they cannot be distinguished from adenomatous polyps based on gross appearance and therefore should be removed. Microscopic examination shows islands of normal, regenerat-ing mucosa (the polyp) surrounded by areas of mucosal loss. Polyposis may be extensive, especially in patients with severe colitis, and may mimic FAP.Inherited Colorectal CarcinomaMany of the genetic defects originally described in hereditary cancers have subsequently been found in sporadic tumors. Although the majority of colorectal cancer is sporadic, several hereditary syndromes provide paradigms for the study of this disease. Insight gained from studying inherited colorectal cancer Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   129123/02/19   2:29 PM 1292SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIsyndromes has led to better understanding of the genetics of colorectal carcinoma.Familial Adenomatous Polyposis. This rare autosomal dominant condition accounts for only about 1% of all colorec-tal adenocarcinomas. Nevertheless, this syndrome has provided tremendous insight into the molecular mechanisms underlying colorectal carcinogenesis. The genetic abnormality in FAP is a mutation in the APC gene, located on chromosome 5q. Of patients with FAP, APC mutation testing is positive in 75% of cases. While most patients with FAP will have a known family history of the disease, up to 25% present without other affected family members. Clinically, patients develop hundreds to thou-sands of adenomatous polyps shortly after puberty. The lifetime risk of colorectal cancer in FAP patients approaches 100% by age 50 years.Flexible sigmoidoscopy of first-degree relatives of FAP patients beginning at age 10 to 15 years has been the traditional mainstay of screening. Today, following genetic counseling, APC gene testing may be used to screen family members, pro-viding an APC mutation has been identified. If APC testing is positive in a relative of a patient with a known APC mutation, annual flexible sigmoidoscopy beginning at age 10 to 15 years is done until polyps are identified. If APC testing is negative, the relative can be screened starting at age 50 years per average-risk guidelines. If APC testing is refused or unavailable, or if a mutation cannot be identified, annual flexible sigmoidoscopy beginning at age 10 to 15 years is performed until age 24 years. Screening flexible sigmoidoscopy is then done every 2 years until age 34 years, every 3 years until age 44 years, and then every 3 to 5 years.FAP patients are also at risk for the development of adeno-mas anywhere in the gastrointestinal tract, particularly in the duodenum. Periampullary carcinoma is a particular concern. Upper endoscopy is therefore recommended for surveillance every 1 to 3 years beginning at age 25 to 30 years.Once the diagnosis of FAP has been made and polyps are developing, treatment is surgical. Four factors affect the choice of operation: age of the patient; presence and severity of symp-toms; extent of rectal polyposis; and presence and location of cancer or desmoid tumors. Three operative procedures can be considered: total proctocolectomy with an end (Brooke) ileos-tomy; total abdominal colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis; and restorative proctocolectomy with ileal pouch–anal anas-tomosis (IPAA) with or without a temporary ileostomy. Most patients elect to have an ileal pouch–anal anastomosis in the absence of a distal rectal cancer, a mesenteric desmoid tumor that prevents the ileum from reaching the anus, or poor sphinc-ter function. Mucosectomy has been advocated in patients with FAP undergoing ileal pouch–anal anastomosis because of the risk of neoplasia in the anal transition zone, but the requirement for this procedure remains controversial.86,87 Although patient satisfaction with IPAA remains high, function may not be ideal, and up to 50% of patients experience some degree of incon-tinence. Total abdominal colectomy with an ileorectal anasto-mosis is also an option in these patients, but requires vigilant surveillance of the retained rectum for development of rectal cancer. There is increasing data suggesting that the administra-tion of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors (celecoxib, sulin-dac) may slow or prevent the development of polyps.88,89FAP may be associated with extraintestinal manifesta-tions such as congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigmented epithelium, desmoid tumors, epidermoid cysts, mandibular osteomas (Gardner’s syndrome), and central nervous system tumors (Turcot’s syndrome). Although they arise in a minority of FAP patients, desmoid tumors in particular can make surgi-cal management difficult and are a source of major morbidity and mortality in these patients. These lesions arise from fibro-blasts, and although technically benign, can be highly locally invasive. These tumors often involve the bowel mesentery, pel-vis, and abdominal wall. In some cases, surgery is thought to be the “trigger.” Local recurrence after attempted resection is common; therefore, surgery is to be avoided if at all possible. Desmoid tumors are often hormone responsive, and growth may be inhibited in some patients with tamoxifen. COX-2 inhibitors and nonsteroidal, anti-inflammatory drugs may also be benefi-cial in this setting. A recent report suggests that imatinib may also be effective.90,91Attenuated Familial Adenomatous Polyposis. AFAP is a recognized variant of FAP. Patients present later in life with fewer polyps (usually 10–100) predominantly located in the right colon, when compared to classic FAP. Colorectal carci-noma develops in more than 50% of these patients, but occurs later (average age, 55 years). Patients are also at risk for duo-denal polyposis. However, in contrast to FAP, APC gene muta-tions are present in only about 30% of patients with AFAP. When present, these mutations are expressed in an autosomal dominant pattern.Mutations in MYH also result in the AFAP phenotype but are expressed in an autosomal recessive pattern. It has been sug-gested that MYH mutations may be responsible for AFAP in patients who do not have a detectable APC gene mutation.80,81Genetic testing is often offered to patients with suspected AFAP. When positive, genetic counseling and testing may be used to screen at-risk family members. If the family mutation is unknown, screening colonoscopy is recommended beginning at age 13 to 15 years, then every 4 years to age 28 years, and then every 3 years. These patients are often candidates for a total abdominal colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis because the limited polyposis in the rectum can usually be treated by colo-noscopic snare excision.92 Prophylaxis with COX-2 inhibitors also may be appropriate. Because of the more subtle phenotype in these patients, it is important to rule out other familial syn-dromes such as HNPCC (Lynch syndrome) and the more com-mon familial colorectal cancer.Lynch Syndrome (Hereditary Nonpolyposis Colon Cancer; HNPCC). Lynch syndrome is more common than FAP, but it is still extremely rare (1–3% of all colon cancers). The genetic defects associated with Lynch syndrome arise from errors in mismatch repair, the phenotypic result being MSI. Lynch syn-drome is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern and is char-acterized by the development of colorectal carcinoma at an early age (average age, 40–45 years). Approximately 70% of affected individuals will develop colorectal cancer. Cancers appear in the proximal colon more often than in sporadic colorectal cancer and have a better prognosis regardless of stage. The risk of syn-chronous or metachronous colorectal carcinoma is 40%. Lynch syndrome may also be associated with extracolonic malignan-cies, including endometrial carcinoma, which is most com-mon in women, and ovarian, pancreas, stomach, small bowel, biliary, and urinary tract carcinomas. The diagnosis is made based on family history. The Amsterdam I criteria for clini-cal diagnosis of Lynch syndrome are three affected relatives Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   129223/02/19   2:29 PM 1293COLON, RECTUM, AND ANUSCHAPTER 29with histologically verified adenocarcinoma of the large bowel (one must be a first-degree relative of one of the others) in two successive generations of a family with one patient diagnosed before age 50 years. The presence of other related carcinomas should raise the suspicion of this syndrome. Revised criteria Amsterdam II requires three or more relatives with an HNPCC related malignancy in which at least one is a first degree relative of the others, two generations are affected, at least one cancer occurred before age 50, FAP has been excluded, and pathology of the tumors has been reviewed and confirmed. In a patient with an established diagnosis of colorectal cancer, tumor testing for presence of mismatch repair gene products (immunohisto-chemistry) and/or MSI can sometimes serve as screening for this syndrome.10,93,94Lynch syndrome results from mutations in mismatch repair genes, and like FAP, specific mutations are associated with different phenotypes. For example, mutations in PMS2 or MSH6 result in a more attenuated form of Lynch syndrome when compared to mutations in other genes. MSH6 inactivation also appears to be associated with a higher risk for endometrial cancer. Further significance of these specific mutations remains to be determined.Screening colonoscopy is recommended annually for at-risk patients beginning at either age 20 to 25 years or 10 years younger than the youngest age at diagnosis in the family, which-ever comes first. Because of the high risk of endometrial carci-noma, transvaginal ultrasound or endometrial aspiration biopsy is also recommended annually after age 25 to 35 years. Because there is a 40% risk of developing a second colon cancer, total colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis is recommended once adenomas or a colon carcinoma is diagnosed. Annual proctos-copy is necessary because the risk of developing rectal cancer remains high. Similarly, prophylactic hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy should be considered in women who have completed childbearing.93-95Familial Colorectal Cancer. Nonsyndromic familial colorec-tal cancer accounts for 10% to 15% of patients with colorec-tal cancer. The lifetime risk of developing colorectal cancer increases with a family history of the disease. The lifetime risk of colorectal cancer in a patient with no family history of this disease (average-risk population) is approximately 6%, but rises to 12% if one first-degree relative is affected and to 35% if two first-degree relatives are affected. Age of onset also impacts risk, and a diagnosis before the age of 50 years is associated with a higher incidence in family members. Screening colonoscopy is recommended every 5 years beginning at age 40 years or begin-ning 10 years before the age of the earliest diagnosed patient in the pedigree. While there are no specific genetic abnormalities that are associated with familial colorectal cancer, any of the defects found in either the LOH pathway or MSI pathway may be present in these patients.Prevention: Screening and SurveillanceBecause the majority of colorectal cancers are thought to arise from adenomatous polyps, preventive measures focus on identi-fication and removal of these premalignant lesions. In addition, many cancers are asymptomatic, and screening may detect these tumors at an early and curable stage (Table 29-1). Although screening for colorectal cancer decreases the incidence of can-cer and cancer-related mortality, the optimal method of screen-ing remains controversial. Screening guidelines are meant for asymptomatic patients.95-98 Any patient with a gastrointestinal complaint (bleeding, change in bowel habits, pain, etc) requires a complete evaluation, usually by colonoscopy.Fecal Occult Blood Testing and Fecal Immunohistochemical Testing. FOBT is known to reduce colorectal cancer mortality by 33% and metastatic disease by 50%. However, FOBT is rela-tively insensitive, missing up to 50% of cancers and the majority of adenomas. Its specificity is low because 90% of patients with positive tests do not have colorectal cancer. FIT is more sensitive and specific for cancer. Mortality benefits for its use are inferred from FOBT literature. Compliance with annual testing is low and costs are significant if one includes the colonoscopy examina-tions done to evaluate patients with positive FOBT/FIT. Nonethe-less, the direct evidence that FOBT screening is efficacious and decreases both the incidence and mortality of colorectal cancer is so strong that national guidelines recommend annual FOBT/FIT screening for asymptomatic, average-risk Americans older than 50 years of age as one of several accepted strategies. A positive FOBT/FIT should be followed by colonoscopy.97-100Stool DNA. Neoplastic lesions of the colon shed cells into the lumen posing an opportunity for detection via DNA testing. A commercially available multitarget stool DNA test evaluates stool samples for mutant KRAS, methylated BMP3 and the pro-moter region of NDRG4. In a large North American prospective study, this test has recently been found to be 92% sensitive for detection of colorectal cancer. Compared to FIT, stool DNA testing has a lower specificity (74%) raising concerns about how to manage stool DNA-positive patients who have a negative colonoscopic evaluation. Sensitivity for advanced precancerous lesions was 42%.100,101 This test, in combination with FIT, is supported as a screening modality every 1 to 3 years by the U.S. Preventative Task Force, and every 3-year utilization is sup-ported by NCCN guidelines.100 Nevertheless, additional studies will be necessary to determine if these tests are comparable or superior to more traditional methods has been techniques.Flexible Sigmoidoscopy. Screening by flexible sigmoidos-copy every 5 years may lead to a 60% to 70% reduction in mor-tality from colorectal cancer, chiefly by identifying high-risk individuals with adenomas. However, it is important to recog-nize that lesions in the proximal colon cannot be identified, and for this reason, flexible sigmoidoscopy has often been paired with air-contrast barium enema to detect transverse and right colon lesions. Patients found to have a polyp, cancer, or other lesion on flexible sigmoidoscopy will require colonoscopy.101-102Fecal Occult Blood Testing and Flexible Sigmoidoscopy.  Several trials have shown that FOBT screening is least effec-tive at detecting rectosigmoid cancers.97-99 This is precisely the area screened by flexible sigmoidoscopy; thus, the combination of the two tests has been suggested as a reasonable screening strategy. Winawer and colleagues, in a study of 12,479 subjects, showed that the combination of FOBT annually with flexible sigmoidoscopy every 5 years resulted in lower mortality from colorectal cancer and better survival in patients with colorectal cancer.99 A similar benefit was confirmed in long-term (11-year) follow-up from the Norwegian Colorectal Cancer Prevention Trial. Such data led to the American Cancer Society recommen-dations that one of the acceptable screening regimens for aver-age-risk Americans is the combination of FOBT/FIT annually and flexible sigmoidoscopy every 5 years; this combination was preferred over either test alone. Recent NCCN guidelines offer the option of flexible sigmoidoscopy with stool-based testing Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   129323/02/19   2:29 PM 1294SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIevery 10 years. The addition of air-contrast barium enema to assess the proximal colon may improve sensitivity as well.96Colonoscopy. Colonoscopy is currently the most accurate and most complete method for examining the large bowel. This procedure is highly sensitive for detecting even small polyps  (<1 cm) and allows biopsy, polypectomy, control of hemor-rhage, and dilation of strictures. However, colonoscopy does require mechanical bowel preparation, and the discomfort asso-ciated with the procedure requires conscious sedation in most patients. Colonoscopy is also considerably more expensive than other screening modalities and requires a well-trained endos-copist. The risk of a major complication after colonoscopy (perforation and hemorrhage) is extremely low (0.2–0.3%). Nevertheless, deaths have been reported.Air-Contrast Barium Enema. Air-contrast barium enema is also highly sensitive for detecting polyps greater than 1 cm in diameter (90% sensitivity). Unfortunately, there are no studies proving its efficacy for screening large populations. Accuracy is greatest in the proximal colon but may be compromised in the sigmoid colon if there is significant diverticulosis. The major disadvantages of barium enema are the need for mechanical bowel preparation and the requirement for colonoscopy if a lesion is discovered.Computed Tomography Colonography (Virtual Colonos-copy). Advances in imaging technology have created a num-ber of less invasive, but highly accurate tools for screening. CT colonography makes use of helical CT technology and three-dimensional reconstruction to image the intraluminal colon. At present, patients require a mechanical bowel preparation. The colon is then insufflated with air, a spiral CT is performed, and both two-dimensional and three-dimensional images are gener-ated. In the hands of a qualified radiologist, sensitivity appears to be as good as colonoscopy for colorectal cancers and polyps greater than 1 cm in size.103 Colonoscopy is required if a lesion is identified. CT colonography has also been used for imag-ing the proximal colon in cases of obstruction or if a colonos-copy cannot be completed in selected patients. Limitations of this technique include false-positive results from retained stool, diverticular disease, haustral folds, motion artifacts, and an inability to detect flat adenomas.Guidelines for Screening. Current American Cancer Society guidelines advocate screening for the average-risk population (asymptomatic, no family history of colorectal carcinoma, no personal history of polyps or colorectal carcinoma, no familial syndrome) beginning at age 50 years. Recommended proce-dures include yearly FOBT/FIT, flexible sigmoidoscopy every Table 29-1Advantages and disadvantages of screening modalities for asymptomatic individuals ADVANTAGESDISADVANTAGESFecal occult blood testing (FOBT)Ease of use and noninvasiveLow costGood sensitivity with repeat testingMay not detect most polypsLow specificityColonoscopy required for positive resultPoor compliance with serial testingThree successive stools requiredFecal immunohistochemical test (FIT)Ease of use and noninvasiveLow costMore sensitive and specific than FOBTOnly one stool sample requiredMay not detect most polypsColonoscopy required for positive resultMultitarget stool DNAEase of use and noninvasiveMore sensitive than FITMay not detect most polypsColonoscopy required for positive resultLess specific than FITSigmoidoscopyExamines colon most at riskVery sensitive for polyp detection in left colonDoes not require full bowel preparation (enemas only)InvasiveUncomfortableSlight risk of perforation or bleedingMay miss proximal lesionsColonoscopy required if polyp identifiedColonoscopyExamines entire colonHighly sensitive and specificTherapeuticMost invasiveUncomfortable and requires sedativeRequires bowel preparationRisk of perforation or bleedingCostlyDouble-contrast barium enemaExamines entire colonGood sensitivity for polyps >1 cmExamines entire colonRequires bowel preparationLess sensitivity for polyps <1 cmMay miss lesions in the sigmoid colonColonoscopy required for positive resultComputed tomography colonography (virtual colonoscopy)NoninvasiveSensitivity may be as good as colonoscopyRequires bowel preparationInsensitive for small polypsMinimal experience and dataColonoscopy required for positive resultBrunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   129423/02/19   2:29 PM 1295COLON, RECTUM, AND ANUSCHAPTER 295 years, FOBT/FIT and flexible sigmoidoscopy in combination, air-contrast barium enema every 5 years, or colonoscopy every 10 years. Patients with other risk factors should be screened earlier and more frequently (Table 29-2).93-96,104,105Routes of Spread and Natural HistoryCarcinoma of the colon and rectum arises in the mucosa. The tumor subsequently invades the bowel wall and eventually adja-cent tissues and other viscera. Tumors may become bulky and circumferential, leading to colon obstruction. Local invasion (especially in the rectum or sigmoid colon) may occasionally cause obstruction of other organs such as the ureter.Regional lymph node involvement is the most common form of spread of colorectal carcinoma and usually precedes distant metastasis or the development of carcinomatosis. The likelihood of nodal metastasis increases with tumor size, poorly differentiated histology, lymphovascular invasion, and depth of invasion. The T stage (depth of invasion) is the single most significant predictor of lymph node spread. Carcinoma in situ (Tis) in which there is no penetration of the muscularis mucosa (basement membrane) has also been called high-grade dysplasia  and should carry no risk of lymph node metastasis. Small lesions confined to the bowel wall (T1 and T2) are associated with lymph node metastasis in 5% to 20% of cases, whereas larger tumors that invade through the bowel wall or into adja-cent organs (T3 and T4) are likely to have lymph node metas-tasis in more than 50% of cases. The number of lymph nodes with metastases correlates with the presence of distant disease and inversely with survival. Four or more involved lymph nodes (N2 disease) predict a poor prognosis. In colon cancer, lym-phatic spread usually follows the major venous outflow from the involved segment of the colon. Lymphatic spread from the rectum follows two routes. In the upper rectum, drainage ascends along the superior rectal vessels to the inferior mesen-teric nodes. In the lower rectum, lymphatic drainage may course along the middle rectal vessels. Nodal spread along the inferior rectal vessels to the internal iliac nodes or groin is rare unless the tumor involves the anal canal or the proximal lymphatics are blocked with tumor (Fig. 29-23).The most common site of distant metastasis from colorec-tal cancer is the liver. These metastases arise from hematog-enous spread via the portal venous system. Like lymph node metastasis, the risk of hepatic metastasis increases with tumor size and tumor grade. However, even small tumors may pro-duce distant metastasis. The lung is also a site of hematogenous spread, but this rarely occurs in isolation. Carcinomatosis (dif-fuse peritoneal metastases) occurs by peritoneal seeding and has a dismal prognosis.Staging and Preoperative EvaluationClinical Presentation. Symptoms of colon and rectal can-cers are nonspecific and generally develop when the cancer is locally advanced. The classic first symptoms are a change in bowel habits and rectal bleeding. Abdominal pain, bloating, and other signs of obstruction typically occur with larger tumors and Table 29-2Screening guidelines for colorectal cancerPOPULATIONINITIAL AGERECOMMENDED SCREENING TESTAverage risk50 yAnnual FOBT orFlexible sigmoidoscopy every 5 y orAnnual FOBT and flexible sigmoidoscopy every 5 y orAir-contrast barium enema every 5 y orColonoscopy every 10 yAdenomatous polyps50 yColonoscopy at first detection; then colonoscopy in 3 yIf no further polyps, colonoscopy every 5 yIf polyps, colonoscopy every 3 yAnnual colonoscopy for >5 adenomasColorectal cancerAt diagnosisPretreatment colonoscopy; then at 12 mo after curative resection; then colonoscopy after 3 y; then colonoscopy every 5 y, if no new lesionsUlcerative colitis, Crohn’s colitisAt diagnosis; then after 8 y for pancolitis, after 15 y for left-sided colitisColonoscopy with multiple biopsies every 1–2 yFAP10–12 yAnnual flexible sigmoidoscopyUpper endoscopy every 1–3 y after polyps appearAttenuated FAP20 yAnnual flexible sigmoidoscopyUpper endoscopy every 1–3 y after polyps appearHNPCC20–25 yColonoscopy every 1–2 yEndometrial aspiration biopsy every 1–2 yFamilial colorectal cancer first-degree relative40 y or 10 y before the age of the youngest affected relativeColonoscopy every 5 yIncrease frequency if multiple family members are affected, especially before 50 yFAP = familial adenomatous polyposis; FOBT = fecal occult blood testing; HNPCC = hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer.Data from Smith et al,79 Pignone et al,97 and Levin et al.67Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   129523/02/19   2:29 PM 1296SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIsuggest more advanced disease. Because of the caliber of the bowel and the consistency of the stool, left-sided tumors are more likely to cause obstruction than are right-sided tumors. Rectal tumors may cause bleeding, tenesmus, and pain. How-ever, it is important to note that many patients may be asymp-tomatic and/or present with unexplained anemia, weight loss, or poor appetite.Staging. Colorectal cancer staging is based on tumor depth and the presence or absence of nodal or distant metastases. Older staging systems, such as the Dukes’ Classification and its Astler-Coller modification, have been replaced by the tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) staging system described by the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC). The AJCC TNM classification has recently been updated to reflect sur-vival outcomes based upon the Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) registry (Table 29-3).106-109 Stage I disease includes adenocarcinomas that are invasive through the muscu-laris mucosa but are confined to the submucosa (T1) or the mus-cularis propria (T2) in the absence of nodal metastases. Stage II disease consists of tumors that invade through the bowel wall into the subserosa or nonperitonealized pericolic or perirectal tissues (T3) or into other organs or tissues or through the vis-ceral peritoneum (T4) without nodal metastases. Stage III dis-ease includes any T stage with nodal metastases, and stage IV disease denotes distant metastases.The preoperative imaging evaluation usually identifies stage IV disease. In colon cancer, differentiating stages I, II, and III depends on histologic examination of the resected specimen. In rectal cancer, endorectal ultrasound or MRI may predict the stage (ultrasound stage, uTxNx) preoperatively, but the final determination depends on pathologic examination of the resected tumor and adjacent lymph nodes (pathologic stage, pTxNx). Dis-ease stage correlates with 5-year survival. Patients with stages I and II disease can expect excellent survival rates. The pres-ence of nodal metastases (stage III) decreases survival. In rectal cancer, staging has been further refined, and outcomes suggest that subgroups of patients within each stage may have very dif-ferent prognoses. If the mesorectum around a rectal cancer is involved or threatened (only 1–2 mm of clearance), there is a very high likelihood of local recurrence and a poor prognosis. This circumferential or radial margin is probably best assessed preoperatively by MRI. Although nodal involvement is the sin-gle most important prognostic factor in colorectal carcinoma, tumor characteristics, such as degree of differentiation, muci-nous or signet-ring cell histology, vascular invasion, and DNA aneuploidy, also adversely affect prognosis. Preoperative CEA also has been suggested to be a prognostic indicator.8 Molecular profiling is currently being studied in an effort to further improve prognostic indicators.110 The 5-year survival rate with stage IV disease is low. However, in well-selected patients, metastasec-tomy, especially of isolated liver or lung lesions, can result in cure. In these patients, the involvement of a multidisciplinary team and/or tumor board is highly recommended (Fig. 29-24).Preoperative Evaluation. Once a colon or rectal carcinoma has been diagnosed, a staging evaluation should be undertaken. The colon must be evaluated for synchronous tumors, usually by colonoscopy. Synchronous disease will be present in up to 5% of patients. For rectal cancers, digital rectal examination and rigid or flexible proctoscopy with biopsy should be performed to assess tumor size, location, morphology, histology, and fixa-tion. Endorectal ultrasound or MRI can be invaluable in staging rectal cancer and is used to classify the ultrasound T and N stage of rectal cancers (see Fig. 29-24). A chest/abdominal/pelvic  CT scan should be obtained to evaluate for distant metastases. Pelvic CT scan, and sometimes MRI, can be useful in large rec-tal tumors and in recurrent disease to determine the extent of local invasion. Among patients with obstructive symptoms, a water-soluble contrast study (Gastrografin enema) may be use-ful for delineating the degree of obstruction. It is important to avoid mechanical bowel preparation (for either colonoscopy or surgery) in a patient who appears to be obstructed. PET scan may be useful in evaluating lesions seen on CT scan and in patients in whom a risky or highly morbid operation is planned (pelvic exenteration, sacrectomy). Preoperative CEA is often obtained and may be useful for postoperative follow-up.Therapy for Colonic CarcinomaPrinciples of Resection. The objective in treatment of car-cinoma of the colon is to remove the primary tumor along with its lymphovascular supply. Because the lymphatics of the colon accompany the main arterial supply, the length of bowel resected depends on which vessels are supplying the segment involved with the cancer. Any adjacent organ or tissue, such as the omentum, that has been invaded should be resected en bloc with the tumor. If all of the tumor cannot be removed, a palliative procedure should be considered, although it impor-tant to note that “debulking” is rarely effective in colorectal adenocarcinoma.The presence of synchronous cancers or adenomas or a strong family history of colorectal neoplasms suggests that the entire colon is at risk for carcinoma (often called a field defect), and a subtotal or total colectomy should be considered. Meta-chronous tumors (a second primary colon cancer) identified during follow-up studies should be treated similarly. However, the surgeon must be aware of which mesenteric vessels have been ligated at the initial colectomy because that may influence the viability of the remaining colon and the choice of procedure.The number of lymph nodes recovered in the surgical specimen has long served as a proxy for the oncologic adequacy of resection. A number of studies previously have suggested that Inferiormesenteric a.Superiorrectal a.Middlerectal a.Inferiorrectal a.Common iliac a.Figure 29-23. Lymphatic drainage of the rectum. a. = artery.Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   129623/02/19   2:29 PM 1297COLON, RECTUM, AND ANUSCHAPTER 29STAGETNM0TisN0M0IT1, T2N0M0IIAT3N0M0IIBT4aN0M0IICT4bN0M0IIIAT1–T2N1/N1cM0IIIAT1N2aM0IIIBT3–T4aN1/N1cM0IIIBT2–T3N2aM0IIIBT1–T2N2bM0IIICT4aN2aM0IIICT3–T4aN2bM0IIICT4bN1–N2M0IVAAny TAny NM1aIVBAny TAny NM1bIVCAny TAny NM1cUsed with the permission of the American College of Surgeons. Amin MB, Edge SB, Greene FL, et al. (Eds.) AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, 8th Ed. Springer New York, 2017.Table 29-3TNM Staging of colorectal carcinoma DEFINITIONTumor Stage (T)TXPrimary tumor cannot be assessedT0No evidence of primary tumorTisCarcinoma in situ,  intramucosal carcinoma (involvement of lamina propria with no extension through muscularis mucosae)T1Tumor invades the submucosa (through the muscularis mucosa but not into the muscularis propria)T2Tumor invades the muscularis propriaT3Tumor invades through the muscularis propria into pericolorectal tissuesT4Tumor invades the visceral peritoneum or invades or adheres to adjacent organ or structure T4aTumor invades through the visceral peritoneum (including gross perforation of the bowel through tumor and continuous invasion of tumor through areas of inflammation to the surface of the visceral peritoneum) T4bTumor directly invades or adheres to adjacent organs or structuresNodal Stage (N)NXRegional lymph nodes cannot be assessedN0No regional lymph node metastasisN1One to three regional lymph nodes are positive (tumor in lymph nodes measuring ≥0.2 mm), or any number of tumor deposits are present and all identifiable lymph nodes are negative N1aOne regional lymph node is positive N1bTwo or three regional lymph nodes are positive N1cNo regional lymph nodes are positive, but there are tumor deposits in the• subserosa• mesentery• or nonperitonealized pericolic, or perirectal/mesorectal tissues.N2Four or more regional nodes are positive N2aFour to six regional lymph nodes are positive N2bSeven or more regional lymph nodes are positiveDistant Metastasis (M)M0No distant metastasis by imaging, etc.; no evidence of tumor in distant sites or organs (This category is not assigned by pathologists.)M1Metastasis to one or more distant sites or organs or peritoneal metastasis is identified M1aMetastasis to one site or organ is identified without peritoneal metastasis M1bMetastasis to two or more sites or organs is identified without peritoneal metastasis M1cMetastasis to the peritoneal surface is identified alone or with other site or organ metastasesBrunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   129723/02/19   2:29 PM 1298SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 29-24. A. Endorectal ultrasonography showing a T3 rectal carcinoma. The dotted line is being used to measure the diameter of the lesion. B. Rectal cancer MRI. (A, Used with permission from Charles O. Finne III, MD, Minneapolis, MN.) a minimum of 12 lymph nodes in the resected specimen are nec-essary for adequate staging. In addition, patients in whom more nodes are harvested have better long-term outcome. As such, a 12-node minimum has been suggested as an appropriate bench-mark for assessing quality of care. However, several investi-gators recently have called this into question, noting that the number of lymph nodes examined does not correlate with stag-ing, use of adjuvant chemotherapy, or patient survival. Others have suggested that the number of negative lymph nodes and/or the lymph node ratio (positive lymph nodes to total lymph nodes) may further improve staging.106,111-114If unexpected metastatic disease is encountered at the time of a laparotomy, the decision about whether to proceed with resection of the primary tumor depends on the volume of dis-tant disease, location and size of the primary tumor, the opera-tion required to remove the primary tumor, and the operative approach. If the metastatic disease is low volume (isolated or potentially resectable liver lesions) and the resection of the primary tumor is straightforward (segmental abdominal colec-tomy), it is probably reasonable to proceed with resection. On the other hand, if the metastatic disease is high volume (carci-nomatosis), especially if the primary tumor is minimally symp-tomatic, the operation should be aborted in order to facilitate early systemic chemotherapy. Some centers favor starting the operation with a diagnostic laparoscopy in cases where risk of discovering metastasis is high in order to minimize the magni-tude of the operation should surgery be aborted. With recent advances in chemotherapy, many of these patients will never develop a complication from the primary tumor requiring surgi-cal intervention. Other palliative approaches include a bypass or proximal stoma for obstructing lesions.115,116Stage-Specific Therapy Stage 0 (Tis, N0, M0) Polyps containing carcinoma in situ (high-grade dysplasia) carry no risk of lymph node metastasis. However, the presence of high-grade dysplasia increases the risk of finding an invasive carcinoma within the polyp. For this reason, these polyps should be excised completely, and patho-logic margins should be free of dysplasia. Most pedunculated polyps and many sessile polyps may be completely removed endoscopically. These patients should be followed with fre-quent colonoscopy to ensure that the polyp has not recurred and that an invasive carcinoma has not developed. In cases where the polyp cannot be removed entirely, a segmental resection is recommended.Stage I: The Malignant Polyp (T1, N0, M0) Occasionally a polyp that was thought to be benign will be found to harbor invasive carcinoma after polypectomy. Treatment of a malig-nant polyp is based on the risk of local recurrence and the risk of lymph node metastasis.59 The risk of lymph node metastases depends primarily on the depth of invasion. Invasive carcinoma in the head of a pedunculated polyp with no stalk involvement carries a low risk of metastasis (<1%) and may be completely resected endoscopically. For sessile polyps, the depth of inva-sion predicts risk of lymphovascular spread. A recent classifica-tion stratifies risk by depth of submucosal spread. Superficial lesions (submucosa 1; Sm1) are low risk, whereas Sm2 and Sm3 are intermediate and high risk.117 Lymphovascular inva-sion, poorly differentiated histology, tumor budding, or tumor within 1 mm of the resection margin greatly increases the risk of local recurrence and metastatic spread. Segmental colectomy is then indicated. Invasive carcinoma arising in a sessile polyp extending into the submucosa and is usually best treated with segmental colectomy (Fig. 29-25).Stages I and II: Localized Colon Carcinoma (T1-3, N0, M0)  The majority of patients with stages I and II colon cancer will be cured with surgical resection. Few patients with completely resected stage I disease will develop either local or distant recur-rence, and adjuvant chemotherapy does not improve survival in these patients.117 However, up to 46% of patients with com-pletely resected stage II disease will ultimately die from colon cancer. For this reason, adjuvant chemotherapy has been sug-gested for selected patients with stage II disease (young patients, tumors with “high-risk” histologic findings). It remains contro-versial as to whether chemotherapy improves survival rates in these patients. In some cases, molecular profiling may predict prognosis, although it is important to note that these tools have not been shown to predict response to therapy. At present, Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   129823/02/19   2:29 PM 1299COLON, RECTUM, AND ANUSCHAPTER 29molecular profiling for selecting patients to receive chemother-apy remains unproven.Stage III: Lymph Node Metastasis (Tany, N1, M0) Patients with lymph node involvement are at significant risk for both local and distant recurrence, and adjuvant chemotherapy has been recommended routinely in these patients. 5-Fluorouracil–based regimens (with leucovorin) and oxaliplatin (FOLFOX) reduce recurrences and improve survival in this patient popula-tion. It is important to note, however, that a subgroup of patients with stage III disease will do well without chemotherapy. MSI status in particular predicts good prognosis. Subset analysis from the CRYSTAL trial has shown that patients with MSI-high stage III disease do not benefit from 5-fluorouracil–based chemotherapy. Molecular profiling, therefore, may be helpful in determining which stage III patients can safely avoid systemic chemotherapy.118Stage IV: Distant Metastasis (Tany, Nany, M1) Survival is extremely limited in stage IV colon carcinoma. Systemic che-motherapy is recommended in almost all cases of distant spread. However, unlike many other malignancies, highly selected patients with isolated, resectable metastases may benefit from resection (metastasectomy). The most common site of metasta-sis is the liver. Of patients with systemic disease, approximately 15% will have metastases limited to the liver. Of these, 20% are potentially resectable for cure. Survival is improved in these patients (20–40% 5-year survival) when compared to patients who do not undergo resection. Hepatic resection of synchronous metastases from colorectal carcinoma may be performed as a combined procedure or in two stages. The second most com-mon site of metastasis is the lung, occurring in approximately 20% of patients with colorectal carcinoma. Although very few of these patients will be potentially resectable, among those who are (about 1–2% of all colorectal cancer patients), long-term survival benefit is approximately 30% to 40%. There are limited reports of successful resection of metastases in other sites (ovary and retroperitoneum are most common). Cytore-ductive surgery and intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC) has been suggested for patients with carcinomatosis, but remains unproven for colorectal cancer and carries high morbidity.119,120The remainder of patients with stage IV disease cannot be cured surgically, and therefore, the focus of treatment should be palliation. Methods such as colonic stenting for obstruct-ing lesions of the left colon also provide good palliation. More limited surgical intervention such as a diverting stoma or bypass procedure may be appropriate in patients with stage IV disease who develop obstruction. Hemorrhage in an unresectable tumor can sometimes be controlled with angiographic embolization. External beam radiation also has been used for palliation. The involvement of a palliative care team in the management of these patients is critical.116Therapy for Rectal CarcinomaPrinciples of Resection. The biology of rectal adenocarci-noma is thought to be similar to the biology of colonic adeno-carcinoma, and the operative principles of complete resection of the primary tumor, its lymphatic bed, and any other involved organ apply to surgical resection of rectal carcinoma. However, the anatomy of the pelvis and proximity of other structures (ureters, bladder, prostate, vagina, iliac vessels, and sacrum) make resection more challenging and often require a different approach than for colonic adenocarcinoma. Moreover, it is more difficult to achieve negative radial margins in rectal cancers that extend through the bowel wall because of the anatomic limita-tions of the pelvis. Therefore, local recurrence is higher than with similar stage colon cancers. However, unlike the intraperi-toneal colon, the relative paucity of small bowel and other radi-ation-sensitive structures in the pelvis makes it easier to treat rectal tumors with radiation. Therapeutic decisions, therefore, are based on the location and depth of the tumor and its relation-ship to other structures in the pelvis.Local Therapy. The distal 10 cm of the rectum are accessible transanally. For this reason, several local approaches have been proposed for treating rectal neoplasms. Transanal excision (full thickness or mucosal) is an excellent approach for noncircum-ferential, benign, villous adenomas of the rectum. Transanal endoscopic microsurgery (TEM) and transanal minimally  invasive surgery (TAMIS) make use of a specially designed proctoscope, magnifying system, and instruments similar to those used in laparoscopy to allow local excision of lesions higher in the rectum (up to 15 cm). Although this technique has been used for selected T1, and some T2, carcinomas, local excision does not allow pathologic examination of the lymph nodes and might therefore understage patients. Moreover, local recurrence rates are high after transanal excision, and salvage surgery, while often curative, has been reported to be associ-ated with poorer survival than with initial radical surgery. Cur-rent recommendation is to limit local excision of T1 lesions to patients with well to moderately differentiated small lesions  (<3 cm) and/or in patients medically unfit for radical resection. In general, local excision of any rectal neoplasm should be con-sidered an excisional biopsy because final pathologic examina-tion of the specimen may reveal an invasive carcinoma that then mandates more radical therapy.120,121Ablative techniques, such as electrocautery or endocavi-tary radiation, also have been used. The disadvantage of these techniques is that no pathologic specimen is retrieved to confirm the tumor stage. Fulguration is generally reserved for extremely high-risk, symptomatic patients with a limited life span who cannot tolerate more radical surgery.120Radical Resection. Radical resection is preferred to local therapy for most rectal carcinomas. Radical resection involves removal of the involved segment of the rectum along with its lymphovascular supply. Although any microscopically nega-tive margin has been suggested to be adequate, most surgeons Pedunculated polypInvasive caSessile polypStalkNeckMuscularismucosaFigure 29-25. Levels of invasive carcinoma in pedunculated and sessile polyps. ca = carcinoma.Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   129923/02/19   2:29 PM 1300SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIstill attempt to obtain a 2-cm distal mural margin for curative resections.Total mesorectal excision (TME) is a technique that uses sharp dissection along anatomic planes to ensure complete resection of the rectal mesentery during low and extended low anterior resections. For upper rectal or rectosigmoid resections, a partial mesorectal excision of at least 5 cm distal to the tumor appears adequate. TME both decreases local recurrence rates and improves long-term survival rates. Moreover, this tech-nique is associated with less blood loss and less risk to the pel-vic nerves and presacral plexus than is blunt dissection. The principles of TME should be applied to all radical resections for rectal cancer.Recurrence of rectal cancer generally has a poor prog-nosis. Extensive involvement of other pelvic organs (usually occurring in the setting of tumor recurrence) may require a  pelvic exenteration. The rectal and perineal portions of this operation are similar to an APR, but en bloc resection of the ureters, bladder, and prostate or uterus and vagina are also per-formed. A permanent colostomy and an ileal conduit to drain the urinary tract may be necessary. The sacrum may also be resected if necessary (sacrectomy) up to the level of the S2-S3 junction. These operations are best performed in tertiary centers with multidisciplinary teams consisting of a colon and rectal surgeon, urologist, neurosurgeon, and plastic surgeon.Stage-Specific Therapy (Fig. 29-26). Pretreatment staging of rectal carcinoma often relies on endorectal ultrasound or MRI to determine the T and N status of a rectal cancer. Ultrasound is highly accurate at assessing tumor depth, but it is less accurate in diagnosing nodal involvement. Ultrasound evaluation can guide choice of therapy in most patients. MRI is useful to assess mesorectal involvement. When the radial margin is threatened or involved, neoadjuvant chemoradiation is recommended.122Stage 0 (Tis, N0, M0) Villous adenomas harboring carci-noma in situ (high-grade dysplasia) are ideally treated with local excision. A 1-cm margin should be obtained. Rarely, radical resection will be necessary if transanal excision is not techni-cally possible (large circumferential lesions).Stage I: Localized Rectal Carcinoma (T1-2, N0, M0)  Although local excision has been used for small, favorable ses-sile uT1N0 and uT2N0 rectal cancers, local recurrence rates may be as high as 20% and 40%, respectively. Local excision increasingly is offered to patients with small, low-risk lesions, but it does not allow physicians to assess regional lymph nodes. For this reason, radical resection is recommended in all good-risk patients. Lesions with unfavorable histologic characteristics and those located in the distal third of the rectum, in particular, are prone to recurrence. In high-risk patients and in patients who refuse radical surgery because of the risk of need for a permanent colostomy, local excision may be adequate, but strong consideration should be given to adjuvant or neoadju-vant chemoradiation to improve local control. The efficacy of adjuvant or neoadjuvant chemoradiation followed by transanal excision in patients who can tolerate radical surgery has been High risk orrefuses radicalresectionTransanalexcision +/–neoadjuvant oradjuvantchemoradiationRadicalresectionRadicalresectionRadicalresectionContinuechemotherapyConsiderresectionChemoradiationvs. palliativeprocedurestent, laserablation, stoma,resectionLow risk andaccepts radicalresectionNeoadjuvantchemoradiationNeoadjuvantchemoradiationAsymptomaticSymptomaticRestageRestageUnresectable/multiplemetastaticsitesResectable/singlemetastatic siteChemotherapyNo metastasesNo metastasesRectal adenocarcinomaStage II(T3-4, N0, M0)Stage III(Tany, N1-3, M0)Staging evaluationCT chest/abdomen/pelvisEndorectal U/S+/– MRIColonoscopy/CT colonography (if possible)Stage IV(Tany, Nany, M1)Stage I(T1-2, N0, M0)RestageFigure 29-26. Diagnostic algorithm for rectal cancer. CT = computed tomography; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging; U/S = ultrasound.Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   130023/02/19   2:29 PM 1301COLON, RECTUM, AND ANUSCHAPTER 29controversial. Early results from ACOSOG Z6041, in which patients with T2 rectal cancers received neoadjuvant chemo-radiation followed by transanal excision, showed a pathologic complete response rate of 44%.123 At 3 years, disease-free sur-vival was 88%, which is comparable to cancer outcomes after a formal resection. However, population-based data suggests that survival after local excision for rectal cancer is suboptimal and should not be offered as a matter of routine.124Locally Advanced Rectal Cancer (Stages II and III) Stage II: Localized Rectal Carcinoma (T3-4, N0, M0). Larger rectal tumors, especially if located in the distal rectum, are more likely to recur locally. There are two schools of thought, each differing in their approach, concerning how to control local recurrences. Advocates of total mesorectal resection sug-gest that optimization of operative technique will obviate the need for any adjuvant chemoradiation to control local recur-rence after resection of stages I, II, and III rectal cancers. The opposing school suggests that stages II and III rectal cancers will benefit from chemoradiation. They argue that such therapy reduces local recurrences and prolongs survival whether given preoperatively or postoperatively. The advantages of preopera-tive chemoradiation include tumor shrinkage, increased likeli-hood of resection and of a sphincter-sparing procedure, tumor downstaging by treating locally involved lymph nodes, and decreased risk to the small intestine. Disadvantages include possible overtreatment of early-stage tumors, impaired wound healing, and pelvic fibrosis increasing the risk of operative com-plications. Postoperative radiation allows accurate pathologic staging of the resected tumor and lymph nodes and avoids the wound healing problems associated with preoperative radiation. However, bulky tumors, tumors involving adjacent organs, and very low rectal tumors may be much more difficult to resect without preoperative radiation and may require a more exten-sive operation.124-127Stage III: Lymph Node Metastasis (Tany, N1, M0). Many surgeons now recommend chemotherapy and radiation either preor postoperatively for node-positive rectal cancers. The advantages and disadvantages are similar to those listed for stage II disease, except that the likelihood of overtreating an early-stage lesion is considerably less.Over the past two decades, a wide variety of studies have addressed the issue of adjuvant and neoadjuvant therapy for locally advanced rectal cancer. Many of these studies demon-strated both improved local control and prolonged survival and resulted in the 1990 National Institutes of Health (NIH) con-sensus conference recommendation for postoperative chemo-radiation therapy in these patients. There is little controversy regarding chemoradiation therapy for stage III (node-positive) disease. However, advances in surgical technique, such as TME, for locally advanced node-negative cancers (T3-4, N0; stage II) have improved local control with surgery alone, prompting some to abandon adjuvant chemoradiation in these patients, especially for those with cancers in the proximal rectum. Although the data from these studies are intriguing, other reports have shown that chemoradiation improves local control and survival even in patients who undergo TME. Thus, most colorectal surgeons in the United States continue to recommend adjuvant or neo-adjuvant therapy for patients with locally advanced disease. Many European surgeons now rely heavily on MRI staging to determine the need for neoadjuvant chemoradiation. They use neoadjuvant chemoradiation if the radial margin is threatened or involved by the cancer or if anal sphincter or other local organ invasion is present. In the United States, chemoradia-tion therapy is still recommended for all patients with stage III disease and the majority of patients with stage II disease. In select patients with T3 tumors, favorable histology, and nega-tive radial margins, chemoradiation may not be necessary, but larger prospective studies are required before this approach can be recommended.125-127Appropriate timing of chemoradiation for locally advanced rectal cancer has been debated. Historically, preopera-tive chemoradiation has been advocated based on tumor shrink-age/downstaging, improved resectability, and the possibility of performing a sphincter-sparing operation in some patients. In addition, the absence of small bowel adhesions in the pelvis may decrease toxicity. However, preoperative radiation therapy may increase operative complications and impairs wound heal-ing. Although preoperative endorectal ultrasound and MRI have improved our ability to stage rectal cancer, clinical “overstag-ing” can be problematic, and neoadjuvant therapy may there-fore overtreat patients with pT1-2, N0 tumors. Advocates of postoperative radiation therapy cite more accurate pathologic staging and fewer operative/postoperative complications. How-ever, large, bulky tumors may be unresectable or require a more extensive operation (APR, pelvic exenteration) without preop-erative therapy. In addition, postoperative pelvic radiation may compromise function of the neorectum.Comparisons of perioperative toxicity and oncologic out-come have been addressed by the German CAO/ARO/AIO-94 trial. In this study, preand postoperative chemoradiation were associated with equivalent acute toxicity and equivalent post-operative complication rates. Postoperative chemoradiation, however, doubled the risk of postoperative stricture forma-tion. In addition, preoperative chemoradiation halved the risk of local recurrence (6% vs. 12%). Based on these data, most surgeons consider preoperative chemoradiation to be the most appropriate therapy for locally advanced rectal cancer.126 In the  United States, this generally consists of 5-FU based chemother-apy and 5 to 6 weeks of external beam radiation (“long course”) followed by surgery 6 to 8 weeks later. It is important to note, however, that many European centers utilize a “short course” preoperative radiation regimen consisting of 5 days of radia-tion followed by surgery within 1 to 2 weeks. At present, these modalities have not been compared in any randomized, prospec-tive trial.125,127With advances in chemoradiation, an increasing number pf patients with locally advanced rectal cancer will have com-plete shrinkage of their tumor (a clinical complete response; cCR). In light of the potential morbidity of proctectomy, it has been suggested that select patients can be managed nonopera-tively (“watch and wait”). However, data from current stud-ies are contradictory and concern remains about the ability to predict which patients with clinical complete response actually have a pathologic complete response.128 Patients selected for nonoperative management must be examined by a surgeon at a frequent intervals. Additional adjuvant chemotherapy adminis-tered after the decision for a nonoperative approach is another important consideration.128,129 At present, this approach is not recommended outside of a specialty center and/or clinical trial.Stage IV: Distant Metastasis (Tany, Nany, M1) Like stage IV colon carcinoma, survival is limited in patients with distant metastasis from rectal carcinoma. Isolated hepatic  Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   130123/02/19   2:29 PM 1302SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIand/or pulmonary metastases are rare, but when present may be resected for cure in selected patients.119,120 Some patients will require palliative procedures. Radical resection may be required to control pain, bleeding, or tenesmus, but highly morbid pro-cedures such as pelvic exenteration and sacrectomy should generally be avoided in this setting. Local therapy using cau-tery, endocavitary radiation, or laser ablation may be adequate to control bleeding or prevent obstruction. Intraluminal stents may be useful in the uppermost rectum but often cause pain and tenesmus lower in the rectum. Occasionally, a proximal divert-ing colostomy will be required to alleviate obstruction. A mucus fistula should be created if possible to vent the distal colon. It is critical that the morbidity of any procedure be realistically weighed against potential benefit in these patients with limited life expectancy. The assistance of a palliative care team can be invaluable in this setting.116Follow-Up and SurveillancePatients who have been treated for one colorectal cancer are at risk for the development of recurrent disease (either locally or systemically) or metachronous disease (a second primary tumor). In theory, metachronous cancers should be preventable by using surveillance colonoscopy to detect and remove polyps before they progress to invasive cancer. For most patients, a colonoscopy should be performed within 12 months after the diagnosis of the original cancer (or sooner if the colon was not examined in its entirety prior to the original resection). If that study is normal, colonoscopy should be repeated every 3 to  5 years thereafter.The optimal method of following patients for recurrent cancer remains controversial. The goal of close follow-up observation is to detect resectable recurrence and to improve survival. Re-resection of local recurrence and resection of dis-tant metastasis to liver, lung, or other sites are often technically challenging and highly morbid, with only a limited chance of achieving long-term survival. Thus, only selected patients who would tolerate such an approach should be followed intensively. Because most recurrences occur within 2 years of the original diagnosis, surveillance focuses on this time period. Patients who have undergone local resection of rectal tumors also should be followed with frequent endoscopic examinations (every  3–6 months for 3 years, then every 6 months for 2 years). CEA is often followed every 3 to 6 months for 2 years. CT scans are often performed annually for 5 years, but there are few data to support this practice. More intensive surveillance is appro-priate in high-risk patients such as those with possible Lynch syndrome or T3, N+ cancers. Although intensive surveillance improves detection of resectable recurrences, it is important to note that a survival benefit has never been proven. Therefore, the risks and benefits of intensive surveillance must be weighed and treatment individualized.Treatment of Recurrent Colorectal CarcinomaBetween 20% and 40% of patients who have undergone cura-tive intent surgery for colorectal carcinoma will eventually develop recurrent disease. Most recurrences occur within the first 2 years after the initial diagnosis, but preoperative chemo-radiation therapy may delay recurrence. While most of these patients will present with distant metastases, a small propor-tion will have isolated local recurrence and may be considered for salvage surgery. Recurrence after colon cancer resection usually occurs at the local site within the abdomen or in the liver or lungs. Resection of other involved organs may be nec-essary. Recurrence of rectal cancer can be considerably more difficult to manage because of the proximity of other pelvic structures. If the patient has not received chemotherapy and radiation, then adjuvant therapy should be administered prior to salvage surgery. Radical resection may require extensive resection of pelvic organs (pelvic exenteration with or without sacrectomy). Ideally, the aim of a salvage operation should be to resect all of the tumor with negative margins. However, if the ability to achieve a negative margin is in question, the addi-tion of intraoperative radiation therapy (usually brachytherapy) can help improve local control. Pelvic MRI is useful for identi-fying tumor extension that would prevent successful resection (extension of tumor into the pelvic sidewall, involvement of the iliac vessels or bilateral sacral nerves, sacral invasion above the S2-S3 junction). Patients should also undergo a thorough pre-operative evaluation to identify distant metastases (CT of chest, abdomen, and pelvis, and PET scan) before undergoing such an extensive procedure. Nevertheless, radical salvage surgery can prolong survival in selected patients.Minimally Invasive Techniques for ResectionLaparoscopic colectomy for cancer has been controversial. Early reports of high port site recurrence dampened enthusiasm for this technique.130 The ability to perform an adequate onco-logic resection for cancer has also been questioned. Several tri-als have laid to rest many of these fears. The Clinical Outcomes of Surgical Therapy (COST) Study Group, the Colon Car-cinoma Laparoscopic or Open Resection (COLOR) trial, and the United Kingdom Medical Research Council Conventional versus Laparoscopic-Assisted Surgery in Colorectal Cancer (CLASSICC) trial all have shown oncologic equivalence between open and laparoscopic techniques. In these multi-institutional studies, the rates of cancer recurrence, survival, and quality of life were similar, suggesting that, in the hands of an appropriately trained surgeon, laparoscopic colectomy is appropriate for colon cancer.131-136 The recent introduction of robotic surgery offers an additional minimally invasive approach. Early studies suggest that robotic surgery may be the oncologic equivalent to laparo-scopic surgery for colon cancer.137Laparoscopic surgery for rectal cancer has been more controversial. Multiple studies of laparoscopic total mesorectal excision for rectal cancer have demonstrated decreased blood loss, earlier return of bowel function and shorter length of stay compared with open TME. While a laparoscopic approach to mobilization of the left colon and splenic flexure can be used in rectal resection procedures, laparoscopic TME refers to comple-tion of the pelvic dissection laparoscopically and not through the abdominal extraction site. Technical challenges in the retraction of the rectum and surrounding soft tissues and transection of the distal rectum mandate careful evaluation oncologic outcomes. Two recent randomized controlled trials from the United States (ACOSOG Z6051)138 and Australia and New Zealand (ALaC-aRT: Australasian Laparoscopic Cancer of the Rectum Trial)139 have shown that laparoscopic surgery is not superior to open surgery in this regard. When the totality of evidence from nine randomized trials is evaluated, CRM was positive in 7.9% of laparoscopic and 6.1% of open rectal resections, a difference that was not statistically significant.17 In trials that reported the completeness of mesorectal excision (n = 5), inadequate TME was significantly more likely in laparoscopic (13.2%) com-pared with open (10.4%) resections. Long-term recurrence and 6Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   130223/02/19   2:29 PM 1303COLON, RECTUM, AND ANUSCHAPTER 29survival data from ACOSOG and ALaCaRT studies will be needed to determine what role laparoscopy should play in rectal cancer surgery. Two earlier trials, COLOR (COlon cancer Lapa-roscopic or Open Resection) II134 and COREAN (Comparison of Open versus laparoscopic surgery for mid and low Rectal cancer After Neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy),135 have shown equivalent 3-year recurrence and survival. It is possible that spe-cific subsets of patients are more appropriate for open surgery. For example, ALaCaRT authors thought laparoscopic surgery may be less successful in patients who had neoadjuvant therapy, larger T3 tumors, or higher BMIs, but their study was under-powered to make definitive conclusions in these patients. A laparoscopic approach should not be considered for T4 tumors.The inferior quality of laparoscopic rectal cancer surgery suggested by recent randomized trials is attributed to techni-cal limitations, leading to the suggestion that robotic surgery, with its wristed instruments, fixed platform, and potentially improved visualization could offer an improvement. The results of the ROLARR (Robotic vs Laparoscopic Resection for Rectal Cancer) randomized trial will offer more data on the quality of TME and margins after robotic surgery; however, a trial com-paring open to robotic dissection will also be important.141OTHER NEOPLASMSRare Colorectal TumorsNeuroendocrine Tumors. Neuroendocrine tumors occur most commonly in the gastrointestinal tract, and up to 25% of these tumors are found in the rectum. Well-differentiated neuroendo-crine tumors (also known as carcinoid tumors) are commonly identified on colonoscopy as small (<1 cm) nodules and have a benign clinical course, with overall survival is greater than 80%. However, the risk of malignancy increases with size, and more than 60% of tumors greater than 2 cm in diameter are associated with distant metastases. Rectal neuroendocrine tumors appear to be less likely to secrete vasoactive substances than carcinoids in other locations, and carcinoid syndrome is uncommon in the absence of hepatic metastases. Small carcinoids can be locally resected transanally. Larger tumors, poorly differentiated tumors (such as small cell or large cell neuroendocrine carcinomas), and those with obvious invasion into the muscularis require more radical surgery. Neuroendocrine tumors in the proximal colon are less common and are more likely to be malignant. Size also correlates with risk of malignancy, and tumors less than 2 cm in diameter rarely metastasize. However, the majority of neuroendocrine tumors in the proximal colon present as bulky lesions, and up to two-thirds of patients will have metastatic spread at the time of diagnosis. These tumors should usually be treated with radical resection. Because well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumors are typically slow growing, patients with distant metastases may expect reasonably long survival. Symptoms of carcinoid syndrome can often be alleviated with somatostatin analogues (octreotide) and/or interferon-α. Tumor debulking can offer effective palliation in selected patients.142-144Mixed Adenoneuroendocrine Carcinomas. Mixed adeno-neuroendocrine carcinomas, also known as composite carcinoid carcinomas, adenocarcinoids tumors, amphicrine or collision tumors, have histologic features of both neuroendocrine tumors and adenocarcinomas. The natural history of these tumors more closely parallels that of adenocarcinomas than neuroendocrine tumors, and regional and systemic metastases are common. Carcinoid carcinoma of the colon and rectum should be treated according to the same oncologic principles as followed for man-agement of adenocarcinoma.Lipomas. Lipomas are benign lesions that occur most com-monly in the submucosa of the colon and rectum. The major-ity of lipomas are asymptomatic and discovered incidentally. Small asymptomatic lesions do not require resection. However, larger lesions may occasionally cause bleeding, obstruction, or intussusception, especially when greater than 2 cm in diameter. Larger lipomas should be resected by colonoscopic techniques or by a colotomy and enucleation or limited colectomy.144Lymphoma. Gastrointestinal lymphoma may be primary or generalized/secondary. Primary GI lymphomas occur most fre-quently in the terminal ileum and cecum. Lymphoma involv-ing the colon and rectum is rare, but it accounts for about 10% of all gastrointestinal lymphomas. Presentation, treatment and prognosis differ between patients with lymphoma occurring as a localized entity in the colon and rectum versus those inoccur-ing in patients who have generalized lymphoma with colorectal involvement. Symptoms in isolated rectal lymphoma include bleeding, obstruction, and pain, and these tumors may be clini-cally indistinguishable from adenocarcinomas. The cecum is most often involved, probably as a result of spread from the terminal ileum. Symptoms include bleeding and obstruction. Bowel resec-tion is the treatment of choice for isolated colorectal lymphoma. Adjuvant therapy may be given based on the stage of disease.144Leiomyoma and Leiomyosarcoma. Leiomyomas are benign tumors of the smooth muscle of the bowel wall and occur most commonly in the upper gastrointestinal tract. Most patients are asymptomatic, and lesions are often diagnosed inciden-tally when a mass is seen on endoscopy or felt on digital rec-tal examination. However, large lesions can cause bleeding or obstruction. Because it is difficult to differentiate a benign leio-myoma from a malignant leiomyosarcoma, these lesions should be resected. Recurrence is common after local resection, but most small leiomyomas can be adequately treated with limited resection. Lesions larger than 5 cm should be treated with radi-cal resection because the risk of malignancy is high.Leiomyosarcoma is rare in the gastrointestinal tract. When this malignancy occurs in the large intestine, the rectum is the most common site. Leiomyosarcoma of the rectum is usually low grade, and, as such, can be difficult to differentiate from leiomyoma. Definitive diagnosis is usually made after resection. Symptoms, when they occur, are usually bleeding or obstruc-tion. A radical resection is indicated for most of these tumors. Despite complete resection, recurrence is not uncommon, and prognosis is generally poor.144Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumor (GIST). Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumors (GIST) are most common in the proximal GI tract but do occasionally occur in the colorectum (5–10%) and may be mistaken for leiomyomas. GISTs are mesenchy-mal tumors that arise from the interstitial cells of Cajal. The vast majority (>95%) of GISTs express CD117 (KIT), and as such, are sensitive to tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), such as imatinib mesylate and sunitinib malate. Risk stratification is based on tumor size and mitotic activity, and 30% to 50% are malignant. Although small GISTs may be asymptomatic and discovered incidentally, larger lesions can cause bleeding, obstruction, or abdominal pain. Treatment of choice is surgi-cal resection (either local excision or radical resection) with Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   130323/02/19   2:29 PM 1304SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IImicroscopically negative margins, if possible; however, local recurrence is common. For larger marginally resectable tumors, TKIs (imatinib) can be used to shrink the tumor. These agents can also be considered for adjuvant therapy after resection and are useful for treating metastatic disease.144Retrorectal/Presacral TumorsTumors occurring in the retrorectal space are rare. This region lies between the upper two-thirds of the rectum and the sacrum above the rectosacral fascia. It is bound by the rectum anteri-orly, the presacral fascia posteriorly, and the endopelvic fascia laterally (lateral ligaments). The retrorectal space contains mul-tiple embryologic remnants derived from a variety of tissues (neuroectoderm, notochord, and hindgut). As such, tumors that develop in this space are often heterogeneous.Congenital lesions are most common, comprising almost two-thirds of retrorectal lesions. The remainder are classified as neurogenic, osseous, inflammatory, or miscellaneous lesions. Malignancy is more common in the pediatric population than in adults, and solid lesions are more likely to be malignant than are cystic lesions. Inflammatory lesions may be solid or cystic (abscess) and usually represent extensions of infection either in the perirectal space or in the abdomen.Developmental cysts constitute the majority of congenital lesions and may arise from all three germ cell layers. Dermoid and epidermoid cysts are benign lesions that arise from the ecto-derm. Enterogenous cysts arise from the primitive gut. Anterior meningocele and myelomeningocele arise from herniation of the dural sac through a defect in the anterior sacrum. A “scimitar sign” (sacrum with a rounded, concave border without any bony destruction) is the pathognomonic radiographic appearance of this condition.Solid lesions include teratomas, chordomas, neurologic tumors, or osseous lesions. Teratomas are true neoplasms and contain tissue from each germ cell layer. They often contain both cystic and solid components. Teratomas are more com-mon in children than in adults, but when found in adults, 30% are malignant. Chordomas arise from the notochord and are the most common malignant tumor in this region. These are slow-growing, invasive cancers that show characteristic bony destruc-tion. Neurogenic tumors include neurofibromas and sarcomas, neurilemomas, ependymomas, and ganglioneuromas. Osseous lesions include osteomas and bone cysts, as well as neoplasms such as osteogenic sarcoma, Ewing’s tumor, chondromyxosar-coma, and giant cell tumors.Patients may present with pain (lower back, pelvic, or lower extremity), gastrointestinal symptoms, or urinary tract symptoms. Most lesions are palpable on digital rectal examina-tion. While plain X-rays and CT scans often are used to evalu-ate these lesions, pelvic MRI is the most sensitive and specific imaging study. Myelogram is occasionally necessary if there is central nervous system involvement. Treatment is almost always surgical resection. The approach depends in part on the nature of the lesion and its location. Lesions high in the pelvis may be approached via a transabdominal route, whereas low lesions may be resected transsacrally. Intermediate lesions may require a combined abdominal and sacral operation. Although survival is excellent after resection of benign lesions, local recurrence is not uncommon. Prognosis after resection of malignant lesions is highly variable and reflects the biology of the underlying tumor.The role of biopsy in this setting has been controversial. Historically, the recommendation was to avoid biopsy because of the risk of infection or needle tract seeding. This recommen-dation has recently been challenged, especially for large and/or unusual tumors that would be better treated with multimodality neoadjuvant therapy (GIST, sarcoma, metastatic adenocarci-noma). A recent study confirmed the utility of needle biopsy of solid lesions and refuted concerns about needle tract seeding. As such, most solid lesions should be biopsied regardless of resectability. Biopsy or aspiration of cystic lesions, especially meningoceles, should still be avoided because of the risk of infection.144-147Anal Canal and Perianal TumorsCancers of the anal canal are uncommon and account for approx-imately 2% of all colorectal malignancies. Neoplasms of the anal canal have traditionally been divided into those affecting the anal margin (distal to the dentate line) and those affecting the anal canal (proximal to the dentate line) based on lymphatic drainage patterns. Lymphatics from the anal canal proximal to the dentate line drain cephalad via the superior rectal lymphat-ics to the inferior mesenteric nodes and laterally along both the middle rectal vessels and inferior rectal vessels through the ischiorectal fossa to the internal iliac nodes. Lymph from the anal canal distal to the dentate line usually drains to the inguinal nodes. It can also drain to the superior rectal lymph nodes or along the inferior rectal lymphatics to the ischiorectal fossa if primary drainage routes are blocked with tumor (Fig. 29-27).A more clinically useful classification divides anal lesions into those that are perianal (can be completely visualized with gentle eversion of the buttocks) and those that are intra-anal (cannot be completely visualized with gentle eversion of the buttocks). In many cases, therapy depends on whether the tumor is perianal or intra-anal.Squamous Intraepithelial Lesions. Anal canal and peri-anal dysplasia have long had a potpourri of nomenclature. Anal intraepithelial neoplasia (AIN), Bowen’s disease, and carci-noma in situ all refer to human papillomavirus (HPV)–induced Inferiormesenteric a.Superiorrectal a.Middlerectal a.Inferiorrectal a.Common iliac a.Figure 29-27. Lymphatic drainage of the anal canal. a. = artery.Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   130423/02/19   2:29 PM 1305COLON, RECTUM, AND ANUSCHAPTER 29dysplasia. Because these entities are pathologically identical, there has been an effort to standardize nomenclature. High-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions (HSIL) include highand intermediate-grade dysplasia, AINII and AINIII, Bowen’s disease, and carcinoma in situ. Low-grade squamous intraepi-thelial lesions (LSIL) includes low-grade dysplasia and AINI. Recently, the terms High-grade AIN (HGAIN; AINIII) and low-grade AIN (LGAIN; AIN I/II) have been suggested.146-148 Both highand low-grade lesions are associated with infection with HPV, especially types 16 and 18.High-grade lesions are precursors to invasive squamous cell carcinoma (epidermoid carcinoma) and may appear as a plaque or may only be apparent with high-resolution anoscopy and application of acetic acid and/or Lugol’s iodine solution. The incidence of both squamous intraepithelial lesions and epidermoid carcinoma of the anus has increased dramatically among human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)–positive men who have sex with men. This increase is thought to result from increased rates of HPV infection along with HIV-induced immu-nosuppression. Treatment of high-grade dysplasia is ablation.  Because of a high recurrence and/or reinfection rate, these patients require close surveillance. High-risk patients should be followed with frequent anal Papanicolaou (Pap) smears every 3 to 6 months. An abnormal Pap smear should be followed by an examination under anesthesia and anal mapping using high-resolution anoscopy. High-resolution anoscopy shows areas with abnormal telangiectasias that are consistent with high-grade dysplasia. Many centers now consider this technique for repeated ablation of high-grade lesions to be the optimal method for following these patients.148-150 It should be noted, however, that the practice has not been universally adopted, and it is unclear whether close surveillance in lower-risk (nonimmu-nosuppressed) patients is necessary. Rarely, extensive disease may require resection with flap closure. Medical therapy for HPV has also been proposed. Topical immunomodulators such as imiquimod (Aldara) have been shown to induce regression in some series.151 Topical 5-fluorouracil has also been used in this setting. Finally, the introduction of a vaccine against HPV may help decrease the incidence of this disease in the future.Epidermoid Carcinoma. Epidermoid carcinoma of the anus includes squamous cell carcinoma, cloacogenic carcinoma, tran-sitional carcinoma, and basaloid carcinoma. The clinical behav-ior and natural history of these tumors are similar. Epidermoid carcinoma is a slow-growing tumor and usually presents as an intra-anal or perianal mass. Pain and bleeding may be present. Perianal epidermoid carcinoma may be treated in a similar fash-ion as squamous cell carcinoma of the skin in other locations because wide local excision can usually be achieved without resecting the anal sphincter. Intra-anal epidermoid carcinoma cannot be excised locally, and first-line therapy relies on chemo-therapy and radiation (the Nigro protocol: 5-fluorouracil, mitomycin C, and 30 Gy of external beam radiation). This regimen cures 70% to 80% of these tumors. It is important to note that epidermoid carcinomas continue to respond after com-pletion of chemoradiation. Lesions that persist greater than 3 to 6 months after therapy may represent persistent disease and should be biopsied. Recurrence usually requires radical resec-tion (APR). Metastasis to inguinal lymph nodes is a poor prog-nostic sign.148Verrucous Carcinoma (Buschke-Lowenstein Tumor, Giant Condyloma Acuminata). Verrucous carcinoma is a locally aggressive form of condyloma acuminata. Although these lesions do not metastasize, they can cause extensive local tissue destruction and may be grossly indistinguishable from epider-moid carcinoma. Wide local excision is the treatment of choice when possible, but radical resection may sometimes be required. Topical immunomodulators such as imiquimod (Aldara) may shrink some tumors, but they are almost never curative.151 Very large lesions may respond to external beam radiation, but resec-tion is almost always required.Basal Cell Carcinoma. Basal cell carcinoma of the anus is rare and resembles basal cell carcinoma elsewhere on the skin (raised, pearly edges with central ulceration). This is a slow-growing tumor that rarely metastasizes. Wide local excision is the treatment of choice, but recurrence occurs in up to 30% of patients. Radical resection and/or radiation therapy may be required for large lesions.Adenocarcinoma. Adenocarcinoma of the anus is extremely rare and usually represents downward spread of a low rectal ade-nocarcinoma. Adenocarcinoma may occasionally arise from the anal glands or may develop in a chronic fistula. Radical resection, usually after neoadjuvant chemoradiation, is usually required.Extramammary perianal Paget’s disease is adenocarci-noma in situ arising from the apocrine glands of the perianal area. The lesion is typically plaque-like and may be indistin-guishable from high-grade intraepithelial lesions. Characteristic Paget’s cells are seen histologically. These tumors are often associated with a synchronous gastrointestinal adenocarcinoma, so a complete evaluation of the intestinal tract should be per-formed. Wide local excision is usually adequate treatment for perianal Paget’s disease.Melanoma. Anorectal melanoma is rare, comprising less than 1% of all anorectal malignancies and 1% to 2% of melanomas. Diagnosis is often delayed, and symptoms are attributed to hem-orrhoidal disease. Despite many advances in the treatment of cutaneous melanoma, prognosis for patients with anorectal dis-ease remains poor. Overall 5-year survival is less than 10%, and many patients present with systemic metastasis and/or deeply invasive tumors at the time of diagnosis. A few patients with anorectal melanoma, however, present with isolated local or locoregional disease that is potentially resectable for cure, and both radical resection (APR) and wide local excision have been advocated. Recurrence is common and usually occurs systemi-cally regardless of the initial surgical procedure. Local resection with free margins does not increase the risk of local or regional recurrence, and APR offers no survival advantage over local excision. Because of the morbidity associated with APR, wide local excision is recommended for initial treatment of localized anal melanoma. In some patients, wide local excision may not be technically feasible, and APR may be required if the tumor involves a significant portion of the anal sphincter or is circum-ferential. The addition of adjuvant chemotherapy, biochemo-therapy, vaccines, or radiotherapy may be of benefit in some patients, but efficacy remains unproven.152,153OTHER BENIGN COLORECTAL CONDITIONSRectal Prolapse and Solitary Rectal Ulcer SyndromeRectal Prolapse. Rectal prolapse refers to a circumferential, full-thickness protrusion of the rectum through the anus and has also been called “first-degree” prolapse, “complete” prolapse, or 7Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   130523/02/19   2:29 PM 1306SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIprocidentia. Internal prolapse occurs when the rectal wall intus-suscepts but does not protrude and is probably more accurately described as internal intussusception. Mucosal prolapse is a  partial-thickness protrusion often associated with hemorrhoidal disease and is usually treated with banding or hemorrhoidectomy.In adults, this condition is far more common among women, with a female-to-male ratio of 6:1. Prolapse becomes more prevalent with age in women and peaks in the sev-enth decade of life. In men, prevalence is unrelated to age. Symptoms include tenesmus, a sensation of tissue protruding from the anus that may or may not spontaneously reduce, and a sensation of incomplete evacuation. Mucus discharge and leak-age may accompany the protrusion. Patients also present with a myriad of functional complaints, from incontinence and diar-rhea to constipation and outlet obstruction.A thorough preoperative evaluation, including colonic transit studies, anorectal manometry, tests of pudendal nerve terminal motor latency, EMG, and cinedefecography, may be useful. The colon should be evaluated by colonoscopy, aircontrast barium enema, or CT colonography to exclude neo-plasms or diverticular disease. Cardiopulmonary condition should be thoroughly evaluated because comorbidities may influence the choice of surgical procedure.The primary therapy for rectal prolapse is surgery, and more than 100 different procedures have been described to treat this condition. Operations can be categorized as either abdominal  or perineal. Abdominal operations have taken three major approaches: (a) reduction of the perineal hernia and closure of the cul-de-sac (Moschowitz repair); (b) fixation of the rectum, either with a prosthetic mesh or fascia lata sling (Ripstein and Wells rectopexy; ventral rectopexy) or by suture rectopexy; or (c) resection of redundant sigmoid colon (Fig. 29-28). In some cases, resection is combined with rectal fixation (resection  rectopexy). The recently described ventral rectopexy involves dissection of the anterior rectum down to the pelvic floor. Mesh is sutured to the anterior rectum at one end and anchored to the sacral promontory at the other end.154 Abdominal procedures for rectal prolapse are increasingly performed laparoscopically or robotically. Perineal approaches have focused on tightening the anus with a variety of prosthetic materials, reefing the rectal mucosa (Delorme procedure), or resecting the prolapsed bowel from the perineum (perineal rectosigmoidectomy or Altemeier procedure) (Fig. 29-29).Because rectal prolapse occurs most commonly in elderly women, the choice of operation depends in part on the patient’s overall medical condition. Abdominal rectopexy (with or with-out sigmoid resection) offers the most durable repair, with recurrence occurring in less than 10% of patients. Perineal rectosigmoidectomy avoids an abdominal operation and may be preferable in high-risk patients but is associated with a higher recurrence rate. Reefing the rectal mucosa is effective for patients with limited prolapse. Anal encirclement procedures generally have been abandoned.Solitary Rectal Ulcer Syndrome. Solitary rectal ulcer syn-drome and colitis cystica profunda are commonly associated with internal intussusception. Patients may complain of pain, bleeding, mucus discharge, or outlet obstruction. In solitary rec-tal ulcer syndrome, one or more ulcers are present in the distal rectum, usually on the anterior wall. In colitis cystica profunda, nodules or a mass may be found in a similar location. Evalu-ation should include anorectal manometry, defecography, and either colonoscopy or barium enema to exclude other diagnoses. Biopsy of an ulcer or mass is mandatory to exclude malignancy or infection due to cytomegalovirus (CMV) in an immunosup-pressed patient. Nonoperative therapy (high-fiber diet, def-ecation training to avoid straining, and laxatives or enemas) is effective in the majority of patients. Biofeedback has also been reported to be effective in some patients. Surgery (either abdominal or perineal repair of prolapse as described earlier) is reserved for highly symptomatic patients who have failed all medical interventions.VolvulusVolvulus occurs when an air-filled segment of the colon twists about its mesentery. The sigmoid colon is involved in up to 90% of cases, but volvulus can involve the cecum (<20%) or trans-verse colon. A volvulus may reduce spontaneously, but more commonly produces bowel obstruction, which can progress to strangulation, gangrene, and perforation. Chronic constipation may produce a large, redundant colon (chronic megacolon) that predisposes to volvulus, especially if the mesenteric base is narrow.The symptoms of volvulus are those of acute bowel obstruction. Patients present with abdominal distention, nau-sea, and vomiting. Symptoms rapidly progress to generalized abdominal pain and tenderness. Fever and leukocytosis are her-alds of gangrene and/or perforation. Occasionally, patients will report a long history of intermittent obstructive symptoms and distention, suggesting intermittent chronic volvulus.Sigmoid Volvulus. Sigmoid volvulus can often be differenti-ated from cecal or transverse colon volvulus by the appearance of plain X-rays of the abdomen. Sigmoid volvulus produces a characteristic bent inner tube or coffee bean appearance, with the convexity of the loop lying in the right upper quadrant (opposite the site of obstruction). Gastrografin enema shows a 8Figure 29-28. Transabdominal proctopexy for rectal prolapse. The fully mobilized rectum is sutured to the presacral fascia. A. Anterior view. B. Lateral view. If desired, a sigmoid colectomy can be performed con-comitantly to resect the redundant colon.BABrunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   130623/02/19   2:29 PM 1307COLON, RECTUM, AND ANUSCHAPTER 29narrowing at the site of the volvulus and a pathognomonic bird’s beak (Fig. 29-30).Unless there are obvious signs of gangrene or peritoni-tis, the initial management of sigmoid volvulus is resuscitation followed by endoscopic detorsion. Detorsion is usually most easily accomplished by using a rigid proctoscope, but a flexible sigmoidoscope or colonoscope may also be effective. A rec-tal tube may be inserted to maintain decompression. Although these techniques are successful in reducing sigmoid volvulus in the majority of patients, the risk of recurrence is high (up to 40%). For this reason, an elective sigmoid colectomy should be performed after the patient has been stabilized and undergone an adequate bowel preparation.Clinical evidence of gangrene or perforation mandates immediate surgical exploration without an attempt at endoscopic decompression. Similarly, the presence of necrotic mucosa, ulcer-ation, or dark blood noted on endoscopy examination suggests strangulation and is an indication for operation. If dead bowel is present at laparotomy, a sigmoid colectomy with end colostomy (Hartmann’s procedure) may be the safest operation to perform.Cecal Volvulus. Cecal volvulus results from nonfixation of the right colon. In the majority of cases, rotation occurs around the ileocolic blood vessels and vascular impairment occurs early, although 10% to 30% of the cecum folds upon itself (cecal bascule). Plain X-rays of the abdomen show a characteristic kidney-shaped, air-filled structure in the left upper quadrant (opposite the site of obstruction), and a Gastrografin enema confirms obstruction at the level of the volvulus.Unlike sigmoid volvulus, cecal volvulus can almost never be detorsed endoscopically. Moreover, because vascular com-promise occurs early in the course of cecal volvulus, surgical exploration is necessary when the diagnosis is made. Right hemicolectomy with a primary ileocolic anastomosis can usu-ally be performed safely and prevents recurrence. Simple detor-sion or detorsion and cecopexy are associated with a high rate of recurrence.Transverse Colon Volvulus. Transverse colon volvulus is extremely rare. Nonfixation of the colon and chronic consti-pation with megacolon may predispose to transverse colon AFCEDBFigure 29-29. Perineal rectosigmoidectomy shown in lithotomy position. A. A circular incision is made 2 cm proximal to the dentate line. B. The anterior peritoneal reflection is opened. C. The mesentery is divided and ligated. D. The peritoneum may be sutured to the bowel wall. E. The bowel is resected. F. A hand-sewn anastomosis is performed.Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   130723/02/19   2:29 PM 1308SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIvolvulus. The radiographic appearance of transverse colon volvulus resembles sigmoid volvulus, but Gastrografin enema will reveal a more proximal obstruction. Although colonoscopic detorsion is occasionally successful in this setting, most patients require emergent exploration and resection.MegacolonMegacolon describes a chronically dilated, elongated, hypertro-phied large bowel. Megacolon may be congenital or acquired and is usually related to chronic mechanical or functional obstruction. In general, the degree of megacolon is related to the duration of obstruction. Evaluation must always include examination of the colon and rectum (either endoscopically or radiographically) to exclude a surgically correctable mechanical obstruction.Congenital megacolon caused by Hirschsprung’s disease results from the failure of migration of neural crest cells to the distal large intestine. The resulting absence of ganglion cells in the distal colon results in a failure of relaxation and causes a functional obstruction. The proximal, healthy bowel becomes progressively dilated. Surgical resection of the aganglionic seg-ment is curative. Although Hirschsprung’s disease primarily is a disease of infants and children, it occasionally presents later in adulthood, especially if an extremely short segment of the bowel is affected (ultrashort-segment Hirschsprung’s disease).Acquired megacolon may result from infection or chronic constipation. Infection with the protozoan Trypanosoma cruzi (Chagas’ disease) destroys ganglion cells and produces both megacolon and megaesophagus. Chronic constipation from slow transit or secondary to medications (especially anticholinergic medications) or neurologic disorders (paraplegia, poliomyelitis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, multiple sclerosis) may produce progressive colonic dilatation. Diverting ileostomy or subtotal colectomy with an ileorectal anastomosis is occasionally neces-sary in these patients.Colonic Pseudo-Obstruction  (Ogilvie’s Syndrome)Colonic pseudo-obstruction (Ogilvie’s syndrome) is a func-tional disorder in which the colon becomes massively dilated in the absence of mechanical obstruction. Pseudo-obstruction most commonly occurs in hospitalized patients and is associated with the use of narcotics, bed rest, and comorbid disease. Pseudo-obstruction is thought to result from autonomic dysfunction and severe adynamic ileus. The diagnosis is made based on the pres-ence of massive dilatation of the colon (usually predominantly the right and transverse colon) in the absence of a mechanical obstruction. Initial treatment consists of cessation of narcotics, anticholinergics, or other medications that may contribute to ileus. Strict bowel rest and intravenous hydration are crucial. Most patients will respond to these measures. In patients who fail to improve, colonoscopic decompression often is effective. However, this procedure is technically challenging, and great care must be taken to avoid causing perforation. Up to 40% of patients recur. Intravenous neostigmine (an acetylcholines-terase inhibitor), administered as a single 2 mg dose, also is extremely effective in decompressing the dilated colon and is associated with a low rate of recurrence (20%).155 However, neostigmine may produce transient but profound bradycardia and may be inappropriate in patients with cardiopulmonary ABFigure 29-30. Sigmoid volvulus: (A) Illustration and (B) Gastrografin enema showing “bird-beak” sign (arrow). (B. Reproduced with per-mission from James EC, Corry RJ, Perry JCF: Basic Surgical Practice. Philadelphia, PA: Hanley & Belfus; 1987.)Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   130823/02/19   2:29 PM 1309COLON, RECTUM, AND ANUSCHAPTER 29disease. Because the colonic dilatation is typically greatest in the proximal colon, placement of a rectal tube is rarely effective. It is crucial to exclude mechanical obstruction (usually with a Gastrografin enema) prior to medical or endoscopic treatment.Ischemic ColitisIntestinal ischemia occurs most commonly in the colon. Unlike small bowel ischemia, colonic ischemia rarely is associated with major arterial or venous occlusion. Instead, most colonic isch-emia appears to result from low flow and/or small vessel occlu-sion. Risk factors include vascular disease, diabetes mellitus, vasculitis, hypotension, and tobacco use. In addition, ligation of the inferior mesenteric artery during aortic surgery predisposes to colonic ischemia. Occasionally, thrombosis or embolism may cause ischemia. Although the splenic flexure is the most com-mon site of ischemic colitis, any segment of the colon may be affected. The rectum is relatively spared because of its rich col-lateral circulation.Signs and symptoms of ischemic colitis reflect the extent of bowel ischemia. In mild cases, patients may have diarrhea (usually bloody) without abdominal pain. With more severe ischemia, intense abdominal pain (often out of proportion to the clinical examination), tenderness, fever, and leukocytosis are present. Peritonitis and/or systemic toxicity are signs of full-thickness necrosis and perforation.The diagnosis of ischemic colitis is often based on the clinical history and physical examination. Plain films may reveal thumb printing, which results from mucosal edema and submucosal hemorrhage. CT often shows nonspecific colonic wall thickening and pericolic fat stranding. Angiography is usually not helpful because major arterial occlusion is rare. While sigmoidoscopy may reveal characteristic dark, hemor-rhagic mucosa, the risk of precipitating perforation is high. For this reason, sigmoidoscopy is relatively contraindicated in any patient with significant abdominal tenderness. Contrast studies (Gastrografin or barium enema) are similarly contraindicated during the acute phase of ischemic colitis.Treatment of ischemic colitis depends on clinical severity. Unlike ischemia of the small bowel, the majority of patients with ischemic colitis can be treated medically. Bowel rest and broad-spectrum antibiotics are the mainstay of therapy, and 80% of patients will recover with this regimen. Hemodynamic parameters should be optimized, especially if hypotension and low flow appear to be the inciting cause. Long-term sequelae include stricture (10–15%) and chronic segmental ischemia (15–20%). Colonoscopy should be performed after recovery to evaluate strictures and to rule out other diagnoses such as inflammatory bowel disease or malignancy. Failure to improve after 2 to 3 days of medical management, progression of symp-toms, and deterioration in clinical condition are indications for surgical exploration. In this setting, all necrotic bowel should be resected. Primary anastomosis should be avoided. Occasion-ally, repeated exploration (a second-look operation) may be necessary.Infectious ColitisPseudomembranous Colitis (Clostridium difficile Colitis).  Pseudomembranous colitis is caused by C difficile, a gram-positive anaerobic bacillus. Clostridium difficile colitis is extremely common and is the leading cause of nosocomially acquired diarrhea. The spectrum of disease ranges from watery diarrhea to fulminant, life-threatening colitis. Clostridium dif-ficile is carried in the large intestine of many healthy adults. Colitis is thought to result from overgrowth of this organism after depletion of the normal commensal flora of the gut with the use of antibiotics. Although clindamycin was the first anti-microbial agent associated with C difficile colitis, almost any antibiotic may cause this disease. Moreover, although the risk of C difficile colitis increases with prolonged antibiotic use, even a single dose of an antibiotic may cause the disease. Immunosup-pression, medical comorbidities, prolonged hospitalization or nursing home residence, and bowel surgery increase the risk.The pathogenic changes associated with C difficile colitis result from production of two toxins: toxin A (an enterotoxin) and toxin B (a cytotoxin). Diagnosis of this disease was tradition-ally made by culturing the organism from the stool. Detection of one or both toxins (either by cytotoxic assays or by immuno-assays) has proven to be more rapid, sensitive, and specific.156 The diagnosis may also be made endoscopically by detection of characteristic ulcers, plaques, and pseudomembranes.157Management should include immediate cessation of the offending antimicrobial agent. Patients with mild disease (diar-rhea but no fever or abdominal pain) may be treated as outpatients with a 10-day course of oral metronidazole. Oral vancomycin is a second-line agent used in patients allergic to metronidazole or in patients with recurrent disease. More severe diarrhea associ-ated with dehydration and/or fever and abdominal pain is best treated with bowel rest, intravenous hydration, and oral met-ronidazole or vancomycin. Proctosigmoiditis may respond to vancomycin enemas. Recurrent colitis occurs in up to 20% of patients and may be treated by a longer course of oral vanco-mycin (up to 1 month) or rifaximin (a rapamycin derivative).  Reintroduction of normal flora by ingestion of probiotics or stool transplantation has been suggested as a possible treatment for recurrent or refractory disease. Fulminant colitis, characterized by septicemia and/or evidence of perforation, requires emergent laparotomy. A total abdominal colectomy with end ileostomy may be lifesaving. Over the past decade, C difficile colitis has increased in prevalence, and new, more virulent strains have appeared, making this disease increasingly challenging to treat.157,158Other Infectious Colitides. A variety of other infections with bacteria, parasites, fungi, or viruses may cause colonic inflammation. Common bacterial infections include enterotoxic E coli, C jejuni, Yersinia enterocolitica, S typhi, Shigella, and N gonorrhoeae. Less commonly, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, M bovis, Actinomycosis israelii, or Treponema pallidum (syphi-lis) may cause colitis or proctitis. Parasitic infections such as amebiasis, cryptosporidiosis, and giardiasis are also relatively common. Fungal infections (Candida species, histoplasmosis) are extremely rare in otherwise healthy individuals. The most common viral infections that produce colitic symptoms are HIV, herpes simplex viruses, and CMV.Most symptoms are nonspecific and consist of diarrhea (with or without bleeding), crampy abdominal pain, and mal-aise. A thorough history may offer clues to the etiology (other medical conditions, especially immunosuppression; recent travel or exposures; and ingestions). Diagnosis is usually made by identification of a pathogen in the stool, either by microscopy or culture. Serum immunoassays may also be useful (amebia-sis, HIV, CMV). Occasionally, endoscopy with biopsy may be required. Treatment is tailored to the infection.Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   130923/02/19   2:29 PM 1310SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIANORECTAL DISEASESAny patient with anal/perianal symptoms requires a careful his-tory and physical, including a digital rectal examination. Other studies such as defecography, manometry, CT scan, MRI, con-trast enema, endoscopy, endoanal ultrasound, or exam under anesthesia may be required to arrive at an accurate diagnosis.HemorrhoidsHemorrhoids are cushions of submucosal tissue containing venules, arterioles, and smooth muscle fibers that are located in the anal canal (see Fig. 29-4). Three hemorrhoidal cushions are found in the left lateral, right anterior, and right poste-rior positions. Hemorrhoids are thought to function as part of the continence mechanism and aid in complete closure of the anal canal at rest. Because hemorrhoids are a normal part of anorectal anatomy, treatment is only indicated if they become symptom-atic. Excessive straining, increased abdominal pressure, and hard stools increase venous engorgement of the hemorrhoidal plexus and cause prolapse of hemorrhoidal tissue. Bleeding, thrombo-sis, and symptomatic hemorrhoidal prolapse may result.External hemorrhoids are located distal to the dentate line and are covered with anoderm. Because the anoderm is richly innervated, thrombosis of an external hemorrhoid may cause significant pain. It is for this reason that external hemorrhoids should not be ligated or excised without adequate local anes-thetic. A skin tag is redundant fibrotic skin at the anal verge, often persisting as the residua of a thrombosed external hemor-rhoid. Skin tags are often confused with symptomatic hemor-rhoids. External hemorrhoids and skin tags may cause itching and difficulty with hygiene if they are large. Treatment of exter-nal hemorrhoids and skin tags is only indicated for symptomatic relief.Internal hemorrhoids are located proximal to the dentate line and covered by insensate anorectal mucosa. Internal hem-orrhoids may prolapse or bleed, but they rarely become painful unless they develop thrombosis and necrosis (usually related to severe prolapse, incarceration, and/or strangulation). Inter-nal hemorrhoids are graded according to the extent of prolapse. First-degree hemorrhoids bulge into the anal canal and may prolapse beyond the dentate line on straining. Second-degree  hemorrhoids prolapse through the anus but reduce spontane-ously. Third-degree hemorrhoids prolapse through the anal canal and require manual reduction. Fourth-degree hemorrhoids prolapse but cannot be reduced and are at risk for strangulation.Combined internal and external hemorrhoids straddle the dentate line and have characteristics of both internal and external hemorrhoids. Hemorrhoidectomy is often required for large, symptomatic, combined hemorrhoids. Postpartum  hemorrhoids result from straining during labor, which results in edema, thrombosis, and/or strangulation. Hemorrhoidectomy is often the treatment of choice, especially if the patient has had chronic hemorrhoidal symptoms. Portal hypertension was long thought to increase the risk of hemorrhoidal bleeding because of the anastomoses between the portal venous system (middle and upper hemorrhoidal plexuses) and the systemic venous system (inferior rectal plexuses). It is now understood that hemorrhoidal disease is no more common in patients with portal hypertension than in the normal population. Rectal varices, however, may occur and may cause hemorrhage in these patients. In general, rectal varices are best treated by lowering portal venous pres-sure. Rarely, suture ligation may be necessary if massive bleed-ing persists. Surgical hemorrhoidectomy should be avoided in these patients because of the risk of massive, difficult-to-control variceal bleeding.Treatment Medical Therapy Bleeding from firstand second-degree hem-orrhoids often improves with the addition of dietary fiber, stool softeners, increased fluid intake, and avoidance of straining. Associated pruritus often may improve with improved hygiene. Many over-the-counter topical medications are desiccants and are relatively ineffective for treating hemorrhoidal symptoms.Rubber Band Ligation Persistent bleeding from first-, sec-ond-, and selected third-degree hemorrhoids may be treated by rubber band ligation.Mucosa located 1 to 2 cm proximal to the dentate line is grasped and pulled into a rubber band applier. After firing the ligator, the rubber band strangulates the underlying tissue, causing scarring and preventing further bleeding or prolapse (Fig. 29-31). In general, only one or two quadrants are banded per visit. Severe pain will occur if the rubber band is placed at or distal to the dentate line where sensory nerves are located. Other complications of rubber band ligation include urinary retention, infection, and bleeding. Urinary retention occurs in approximately 1% of patients and is more likely if the ligation has inadvertently included a portion of the internal sphincter. Necrotizing infection is an uncommon, but life-threatening complication. Severe pain, fever, and urinary retention are early signs of infection and should prompt immediate evaluation of the patient usually with an exam under anesthesia. Treatment includes debridement of necrotic tissue, drainage of associated abscesses, and broad-spectrum antibiotics. Bleeding may occur approximately 7 to 10 days after rubber band ligation, at the time when the ligated pedicle necroses and sloughs. Bleeding is usually self-limited, but persistent hemorrhage may require exam under anesthesia and suture ligation of the pedicle.Infrared Photocoagulation Infrared photocoagulation is an effective office treatment for small firstand second-degree hemorrhoids. The instrument is applied to the apex of each hem-orrhoid to coagulate the underlying plexus. All three quadrants may be treated during the same visit. Larger hemorrhoids and hemorrhoids with a significant amount of prolapse are not effec-tively treated with this technique.Sclerotherapy The injection of bleeding internal hemorrhoids with sclerosing agents is another effective office technique for treatment of first-, second-, and some third-degree hemorrhoids. One to 3 mL of a sclerosing solution (phenol in olive oil, sodium morrhuate, or quinine urea) is injected into the submucosa of each hemorrhoid. Few complications are associated with sclero-therapy, but infection and fibrosis have been reported.Excision of Thrombosed External Hemorrhoids Acutely thrombosed external hemorrhoids generally cause intense pain and a palpable perianal mass during the first 24 to 72 hours after thrombosis. The thrombosis can be effectively treated with an elliptical excision performed in the office under local anesthe-sia. Because the clot is usually loculated, simple incision and drainage is rarely effective. After 72 hours, the clot begins to resorb, and the pain resolves spontaneously. Excision is unnec-essary, but sitz baths and analgesics are often helpful.Operative Hemorrhoidectomy A number of surgical proce-dures have been described for elective resection of symptomatic hemorrhoids. All are based on decreasing blood flow to the hem-orrhoidal plexuses and excising redundant anoderm and mucosa.9Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   131023/02/19   2:29 PM 1311COLON, RECTUM, AND ANUSCHAPTER 29Closed Submucosal Hemorrhoidectomy The Parks or Fer-guson hemorrhoidectomy involves resection of hemorrhoidal tissue and closure of the wounds with absorbable suture. The procedure may be performed in the prone or lithotomy position under local, regional, or general anesthesia. The anal canal is examined and an anal speculum inserted. The hemorrhoid cush-ions and associated redundant mucosa are identified and excised using an elliptical incision starting just distal to the anal verge and extending proximally to the anorectal ring. It is crucial to identify the fibers of the internal sphincter and carefully brush these away from the dissection in order to avoid injury to the sphincter. The apex of the hemorrhoidal plexus is then ligated and the hemorrhoid excised. The wound is then closed with a running absorbable suture. All three hemorrhoidal cushions may be removed using this technique; however, care should be taken to avoid resecting a large area of perianal skin in order to avoid postoperative anal stenosis (Fig. 29-32).Open Hemorrhoidectomy This technique, often called the Milligan and Morgan hemorrhoidectomy, follows the same principles of excision described earlier, but the wounds are left open and allowed to heal by secondary intention.Whitehead’s Hemorrhoidectomy Whitehead’s hemorrhoid-ectomy involves circumferential excision of the hemorrhoidal cushions just proximal to the dentate line. After excision, the rectal mucosa is then advanced and sutured to the dentate line. While some surgeons still use Whitehead’s hemorrhoidectomy, most have abandoned this approach because of the risk of ectro-pion (Whitehead’s deformity).Procedure for Prolapse and Hemorrhoids/Stapled Hemor-rhoidectomy Procedure for prolapse and hemorrhoids (PPH) is also referred to as a stapled hemorrhoidopexy. Best suited for patients with secondand third-degree hemorrhoids, this out-patient procedure uses a stapling device similar in appearance and mechanism of action to an end-to-end anastomotic (EEA) stapling device used for rectal surgery. Just as with an EEA sta-pler, proximal and distal tissue donuts, in this case consisting of mucosa and submucosa, are generated by the PPH stapler though the primary means by which this procedure provides relief for internal hemorrhoids is by pexying the redundant hemorrhoidal tissue, ligating the venules feeding the hemorrhoidal plexus and fixing redundant mucosa proximal to the dentate line. Several studies suggest that this procedure is safe and effective, that it is associated with less postoperative pain and disability, and that it has an equivalent risk of postoperative complications when compared to excisional hemorrhoidectomy. Complications associated with this procedure include chronic anal pain, bac-teremia, rectovaginal fistula, formation of an obstructing rectal stricture and even rectal perforation. In at least one systematic review comparing outcomes between PPH and excisional hem-orrhoidectomy, overall incidence of complications was similar, ElasticbandsElasticbandsElasticbandsFigure 29-31. Rubber band ligation of internal hemorrhoids. The mucosa just proximal to the internal hemorrhoids is banded.Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   131123/02/19   2:29 PM 1312SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIthough the incidence of recurrent hemorrhoids was lower fol-lowing excisional hemorrhoidectomy.159,160Doppler-Guided Hemorrhoidal Artery Ligation Another recent approach to treating symptomatic hemorrhoids is  Doppler-guided hemorrhoidal artery ligation (also called trans-anal hemorrhoidal dearterialization). In this procedure, a Dop-pler probe is used to identify the artery or arteries feeding the hemorrhoidal plexus. These vessels are then ligated. Early reports have shown promise, but long-term durability remains to be determined.161Complications of Hemorrhoidectomy. Postoperative pain following excisional hemorrhoidectomy requires analgesia usually with oral narcotics. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, muscle relaxants, topical analgesics, and comfort mea-sures, including sitz baths, are often useful as well. Urinary retention is a common complication following hemorrhoidec-tomy and has been reported to be as high as 10% to 50% in some series. The risk of urinary retention can be minimized by limiting intraoperative and perioperative intravenous flu-ids and by providing adequate analgesia. Pain can also lead to fecal impaction. Risk of impaction may be decreased by pre-operative enemas or a limited mechanical bowel preparation, liberal use of laxatives postoperatively, and adequate pain con-trol. While a small amount of bleeding, especially with bowel movements, is to be expected, massive hemorrhage can occur after hemorrhoidectomy. Bleeding may occur in the immediate postoperative period (often in the recovery room) as a result of inadequate ligation of the vascular pedicle. This type of hemorrhage mandates an urgent return to the operating room where suture ligation of the bleeding vessel will often solve the problem. Bleeding may also occur 7 to 10 days after hemor-rhoidectomy when the necrotic mucosa overlying the vascular pedicle sloughs. While some of these patients may be safely observed, others will require an exam under anesthesia to ligate the bleeding vessel or to oversew the wounds if no specific site of bleeding is identified. Infection is uncommon after hemor-rhoidectomy; however, necrotizing soft tissue infection can occur with devastating consequences. Severe pain, fever, and urinary retention may be early signs of infection. If infection is suspected, emergent examination under anesthesia, drainage of abscess, and/or debridement of all necrotic tissue are required.Long-term sequelae of hemorrhoidectomy include incon-tinence, anal stenosis, and ectropion (Whitehead’s deformity). Many patients experience transient incontinence to flatus, but these symptoms are usually short-lived, and few patients have ABCDEFFigure 29-32. Technique of closed submucosal hemorrhoidectomy. A. The patient is in prone jackknife position. B. A Fansler anoscope is used for exposure. C. A narrow ellipse of anoderm is excised. D. A submucosal dissection of the hemorrhoidal plexus from the underlying anal sphincter is performed. E. Redundant mucosa is anchored to the proximal anal canal, and the wound is closed with a running absorbable suture. F. Additional quadrants are excised to complete the procedure.Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   131223/02/19   2:29 PM 1313COLON, RECTUM, AND ANUSCHAPTER 29permanent fecal incontinence. Anal stenosis may result from scarring after extensive resection of perianal skin. Ectropion may occur after Whitehead’s hemorrhoidectomy.Anal FissureA fissure in ano is a tear in the anoderm distal to the dentate line. The pathophysiology of anal fissure is thought to be related to trauma from either the passage of hard stool or prolonged diarrhea. A tear in the anoderm causes spasm of the internal anal sphincter, which results in pain, increased tearing, and decreased blood supply to the anoderm. This cycle of pain, spasm, and ischemia contributes to development of a poorly healing wound that becomes a chronic fissure. The vast major-ity of anal fissures occur in the posterior midline. Ten percent to 15% occur in the anterior midline. Less than 1% of fissures occur off midline.Symptoms and Findings. Anal fissure is extremely common. Characteristic symptoms include tearing pain with defecation and hematochezia (usually described as blood on the toilet paper). Patients may also complain of a sensation of intense and painful anal spasm lasting for several hours after a bowel move-ment. On physical examination, the fissure can often be seen in the anoderm by gently separating the buttocks. Patients are often too tender to tolerate digital rectal examination, anoscopy, or proctoscopy. An acute fissure is a superficial tear of the distal anoderm and almost always heals with medical management. Chronic fissures develop ulceration and heaped-up edges with the white fibers of the internal anal sphincter visible at the base of the ulcer. There often is an associated external skin tag and/or a hypertrophied anal papilla internally. These fissures are more challenging to treat and may require surgery. A lateral loca-tion of a chronic anal fissure may be evidence of an underlying disease such as Crohn’s disease, HIV, syphilis, tuberculosis, or leukemia. If the diagnosis is in doubt or there is suspicion of another cause for the perianal pain such as abscess or fistula, an examination under anesthesia may be necessary.Treatment. Therapy focuses on breaking the cycle of pain, spasm, and ischemia thought to be responsible for development of fissure in ano. First-line therapy to minimize anal trauma includes bulk agents, stool softeners, and warm sitz baths. The addition of 2% lidocaine jelly or other analgesic creams can provide additional symptomatic relief. Nitroglycerin ointment has been used locally to improve blood flow but often causes severe headaches. Both oral and topical calcium channel block-ers (diltiazem and nifedipine) have also been used to heal fis-sures and may have fewer side effects than topical nitrates.162 Newer agents, such as arginine (a nitric oxide donor) and topical bethanechol (a muscarinic agonist), have also been used to treat fissures. Medical therapy is effective in most acute fissures, but it will heal only approximately 50% of chronic fissures.162Botulinum toxin (Botox) causes temporary muscle paraly-sis by preventing acetylcholine release from presynaptic nerve terminals. Injection of botulinum toxin is used in some centers as an alternative to surgical sphincterotomy for chronic fissure. Although there are few long-term complications from the use of botulinum toxin, healing appears to be equivalent to other medical therapies.163,164Surgical therapy has traditionally been recommended for chronic fissures that have failed medical therapy, and lateral internal sphincterotomy is the procedure of choice. The aim of this procedure is to decrease spasm of the internal sphincter by dividing a portion of the muscle. Approximately 30% of the internal sphincter fibers are divided laterally by using either an open (Fig. 29-33) or closed (Fig. 29-34) technique. Healing is achieved in more than 95% of patients using this technique, and most patients experience immediate pain relief. Recurrence occurs in less than 10% of patients, and the risk of incontinence (usually to flatus) ranges from 5% to 15%. Advancement flaps (VY) with or without sphincterotomy have also been reported to successfully treat chronic fissures.Anorectal Sepsis and Cryptoglandular AbscessRelevant Anatomy. The majority of anorectal suppurative disease results from infections of the anal glands (cryptoglan-dular infection) found in the intersphincteric plane. Their ducts traverse the internal sphincter and empty into the anal crypts at the level of the dentate line. Infection of an anal gland results in the formation of an abscess that enlarges and spreads along one of several planes in the perianal and perirectal spaces. The  perianal space surrounds the anus and laterally becomes con-tinuous with the fat of the buttocks. The intersphincteric space separates the internal and external anal sphincters. It is continu-ous with the perianal space distally and extends cephalad into the rectal wall. The ischiorectal space (ischiorectal fossa) is located lateral and posterior to the anus and is bounded medially by the external sphincter, laterally by the ischium, superiorly by the levator ani, and inferiorly by the transverse septum. The ischiorectal space contains the inferior rectal vessels and lym-phatics. The two ischiorectal spaces connect posteriorly above the anococcygeal ligament but below the levator ani muscle, forming the deep postanal space. The supralevator spaces lie above the levator ani on either side of the rectum and commu-nicate posteriorly. The anatomy of these spaces influences the location and spread of cryptoglandular infection (Fig. 29-35).As an abscess enlarges, it spreads in one of several direc-tions. A perianal abscess is the most common manifestation and appears as a painful swelling at the anal verge. Spread through the external sphincter below the level of the puborectalis pro-duces an ischiorectal abscess. These abscesses may become extremely large and may not be visible in the perianal region. ClosureInternal sphincterincisedExternalsphincter m.Internalsphincter m.FissureFissure-in-anoADCBFigure 29-33. A through D. Open lateral internal sphincterotomy for fissure in ano. m = muscle.Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   131323/02/19   2:29 PM 1314SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIDigital rectal exam will reveal a painful swelling laterally in the ischiorectal fossa. Intersphincteric abscesses occur in the inter-sphincteric space and are notoriously difficult to diagnose, often requiring an examination under anesthesia. Pelvic and supralevator abscesses are uncommon and may result from extension of an intersphincteric or ischiorectal abscess upward or extension of an intraperitoneal abscess downward (Fig. 29-36).Diagnosis. Severe anal pain is the most common presenting complaint. A palpable mass is often detected by inspection of the perianal area or by digital rectal examination. Occasion-ally, patients will present with fever, urinary retention, or lifethreatening sepsis. The diagnosis of a perianal or ischiorectal abscess can usually be made with physical exam alone (either in the office or in the operating room). However, complex or atypical presentations may require imaging studies such as CT or MRI to fully delineate the anatomy of the abscess.Treatment. Anorectal abscesses should be treated by drain-age as soon as the diagnosis is established. If the diagnosis is in question, an examination and drainage under anesthesia are often the most expeditious ways both to confirm the diagnosis and to treat the problem. Delayed or inadequate treatment may occasionally cause extensive and life-threatening suppuration with massive tissue necrosis and septicemia. Antibiotics are only indicated if there is extensive overlying cellulitis or if the patient is immunocompromised, has diabetes mellitus, or has valvular heart disease. Antibiotics alone are ineffective at treat-ing perianal or perirectal infection.Perianal AbscessMost perianal abscesses can be drained under local anesthesia in the office, clinic, or emergency department. Larger, more com-plicated abscesses may require drainage in the operating room. A skin incision is created, and a disk of skin excised to prevent premature closure. No packing is necessary, and sitz baths are started the next day (Fig. 29-37).Ischiorectal AbscessAn ischiorectal abscess causes diffuse swelling in the ischiorectal fossa that may involve one or both sides, forming a “horseshoe” abscess. Simple ischiorectal abscesses are drained through an incision in the overlying skin. Horseshoe abscesses require drainage of the deep postanal space and often require counterin-cisions over one or both ischiorectal spaces (Fig. 29-38).Intersphincteric AbscessIntersphincteric abscesses are notoriously difficult to diagnose because they produce little swelling and few perianal signs of infection. Pain is typically described as being deep and “up inside” the anal area and is usually exacerbated by coughing or sneezing. The pain is so intense that it usually precludes a digital rectal examination. The diagnosis is made based on a high index of suspicion and usually requires an examination Anal fissureSentinel pileADCBFigure 29-34. A through D. Closed lateral internal sphincterotomy for fissure in ano.Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   131423/02/19   2:29 PM 1315COLON, RECTUM, AND ANUSCHAPTER 29Levator ani m.Internal sphincter m.Puborectalis anddeep external sphincter m.Superficial externalsphincter m.Subcutaneousexternal sphincter m.PeritoneumUreterSupralevator spaceIschiorectal spacePerianal spacePeritoneumRectorectal spaceRectosacral fasciaSupralevator spaceLevator ani m.Deep postanal spaceSuperficialpostanal spaceABFigure 29-35. Anatomy of perianorectal spaces. (A) Anterior view and (B) lateral view. m = muscle.Internalsphincter m.Perianal spaceabscessLevatorani m.Externalsphincter m.Longitudinal m.Pelvirectal spaceabscessIntersphincteric spaceabscessIschiorectal fossaabscessABFigure 29-36. A and B. Pathways of anorectal infection in perianal spaces. m = muscle.Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   131523/02/19   2:29 PM 1316SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIunder anesthesia. Once identified, an intersphincteric abscess can be drained through a limited, usually posterior, internal sphincterotomy.Supralevator AbscessThis type of abscess is uncommon and can be difficult to diag-nose. Because of its proximity to the peritoneal cavity, supral-evator abscesses can mimic intra-abdominal conditions. Digital rectal examination may reveal an indurated, bulging mass above the anorectal ring. It is essential to identify the origin of a supralevator abscess prior to treatment. If the abscess is sec-ondary to an upward extension of an intersphincteric abscess, it should be drained through the rectum. If it is drained through the ischiorectal fossa, a complicated, suprasphincteric fistula may result. If a supralevator abscess arises from the upward extension of an ischiorectal abscess, it should be drained through the ischiorectal fossa. Drainage of this type of abscess through the rectum may result in an extrasphincteric fistula. If the abscess is secondary to intra-abdominal disease, the pri-mary process requires treatment and the abscess is drained via the most direct route (transabdominally, rectally, or through the ischiorectal fossa).Perianal Sepsis in the Immunocompromised PatientThe immunocompromised patient with perianal pain presents a diagnostic dilemma. Because of leukopenia, these patients may develop serious perianal infection without any of the cardinal signs of inflammation. While broad-spectrum antibiotics may cure some of these patients, an exam under anesthesia should not be delayed because of neutropenia. An increase in pain or fever and/or clinical deterioration mandates an exam under anesthesia. Any indurated area should be incised and drained, biopsied to exclude a leukemic infiltrate, and cultured to aid in the selection of antimicrobial agents.165Necrotizing Soft Tissue Infection of the PerineumNecrotizing soft tissue infection of the perineum is a rare, but lethal, condition. Most of these infections are polymicrobial and synergistic. The source of sepsis is commonly an undrained or inadequately drained cryptoglandular abscess or a urogenital infection. Occasionally, these infections may be encountered postoperatively (e.g., after hemorrhoidectomy). Immunocom-promised patients and diabetic patients are at increased risk.Physical examination may reveal necrotic skin, bullae, or crepitus. Patients often have signs of systemic toxicity and may be hemodynamically unstable. A high index of suspicion is necessary because perineal signs of severe infection may be minimal and prompt surgical intervention can be lifesaving.Surgical debridement of all nonviable tissue is required to treat all necrotizing soft tissue infections. Multiple operations may be necessary to ensure that all necrotic tissue has been resected. Broad-spectrum antibiotics are frequently employed, but adequate surgical debridement remains the mainstay of ther-apy. Colostomy may be required if extensive resection of the sphincter is required or if stool contamination of the perineum makes wound management difficult. Despite early recognition and adequate surgical therapy, the mortality of necrotizing peri-neal soft tissue infections remains approximately 50%.ABCFigure 29-37. A through C. Technique of drainage of perianal abscess.Figure 29-38. Drainage of horseshoe abscess. The deep postanal space is entered, incising the anococcygeal ligament. Counter drain-age incisions are made for each limb of the ischiorectal space.Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   131623/02/19   2:30 PM 1317COLON, RECTUM, AND ANUSCHAPTER 29surgical treatment is dictated by the location of the internal and external openings and the course of the fistula. The exter-nal opening is usually visible as a red elevation of granu-lation tissue with or without concurrent drainage. The internal opening may be more difficult to identify. Injection of hydrogen peroxide or dilute methylene blue may be helpful. Care must be taken to avoid creating an artificial internal opening (thus often converting a simple fistula into a complex fistula).Simple intersphincteric fistulas can often be treated by  fistulotomy (opening the fistulous tract), curettage, and healing by secondary intention (see Fig. 29-40A). “Horseshoe” fistulas usu-ally have an internal opening in the posterior midline and extend anteriorly and laterally to one or both ischiorectal spaces by way of the deep postanal space. Treatment of a transsphincteric fistula depends on its location in the sphincter complex. Fistulas that include less than 30% of the sphincter muscles can often be treated by sphincterotomy without significant risk of major incontinence (see Fig. 29-40B). High transsphincteric fistulas, which encircle a greater amount of muscle, are more safely treated by initial place-ment of a seton. Similarly, suprasphincteric fistulas are usually treated with seton placement (see Fig. 29-40C). Extrasphincteric fistulas are rare, and treatment depends on both the anatomy of the fistula and its etiology. In general, the portion of the fistula outside the sphincter should be opened and drained. A primary tract at the level of the dentate line may also be opened if pres-ent. Complex fistulas with multiple tracts may require numerous procedures to control sepsis and facilitate healing. Liberal use of drains and setons is helpful. Failure to heal may ultimately require fecal diversion (see Fig. 29-40D). Complex and/or non-healing fistulas may result from Crohn’s disease, malignancy, radiation proctitis, or unusual infection. Proctoscopy should be performed in all cases of complex and/or nonhealing fistulas to assess the health of the rectal mucosa. Biopsies of the fistula tract should be taken to rule out malignancy.A seton is a drain placed through a fistula to maintain drain-age and/or induce fibrosis. Cutting setons consist of a suture or a rubber band that is placed through the fistula and intermittently tightened in the office. Tightening the seton results in fibrosis and gradual division of the sphincter, thus eliminating the fis-tula while maintaining continuity of the sphincter. A noncutting seton is a soft plastic drain (often a vessel loop) placed in the fistula to maintain drainage. The fistula tract may subsequently be laid open with less risk of incontinence because scarring pre-vents retraction of the sphincter. Alternatively, the seton may be left in place for chronic drainage. Higher fistulas may be treated by an endorectal advancement flap. Fibrin glue and a variety of collagen-based plugs also have been used to treat persistent fistulas with variable results. A more recent technique, ligation of the intersphincteric fistula tract (LIFT), also shows promise. In this procedure, the fistula is identified in the intersphincteric plane (usually by placement of a lacrimal probe), divided, and the two ends ligated. Early reports have shown success with this technique, but long-term outcome is not yet known.166-168Rectovaginal FistulaA rectovaginal fistula is a connection between the vagina and the rectum or anal canal proximal to the dentate line. Recto-vaginal fistulas are classified as low (rectal opening close to the dentate line and vaginal opening in the fourchette), middle (vaginal opening between the fourchette and cervix), or high (vaginal opening near the cervix). Low rectovaginal fistulas are 10Posterior(curved tracts)Transverse          Anal LineAnterior(straight tracts)3 cmExceptionFigure 29-39. Goodsall’s rule to identify the internal opening of fistulas in ano.Fistula In AnoDrainage of an anorectal abscess results in cure for about 50% of patients. The remaining 50% develop a persistent fistula in ano. The fistula usually originates in the infected crypt (internal opening) and tracks to the external opening, usually the site of prior drainage. The course of the fistula can often be predicted by the anatomy of the previous abscess.While the majority of fistulas are cryptoglandular in ori-gin, trauma, Crohn’s disease, malignancy, radiation, or unusual infections (tuberculosis, actinomycosis, and chlamydia) may also produce fistulas. A complex, recurrent, or nonhealing fis-tula should raise the suspicion of one of these diagnoses.Diagnosis. Patients present with persistent drainage from the internal and/or external openings. An indurated tract is often palpable. Although the external opening is often easily identifi-able, identification of the internal opening may be more chal-lenging. Goodsall’s rule can be used as a guide in determining the location of the internal opening (Fig. 29-39). In general, fis-tulas with an external opening anteriorly connect to the internal opening by a short, radial tract. Fistulas with an external open-ing posteriorly track in a curvilinear fashion to the posterior midline. However, exceptions to this rule often occur if an ante-rior external opening is greater than 3 cm from the anal margin. Such fistulas usually track to the posterior midline.Fistulas are categorized based on their relationship to the anal sphincter complex, and treatment options are based on these classifications. An intersphincteric fistula tracks through the distal internal sphincter and intersphincteric space to an external opening near the anal verge (Fig. 29-40A). A trans-sphincteric fistula often results from an ischiorectal abscess and extends through both the internal and external sphincters (Fig. 29-40B). A suprasphincteric fistula originates in the inter-sphincteric plane and tracks up and around the entire external sphincter (Fig. 29-40C). An extrasphincteric fistula originates in the rectal wall and tracks around both sphincters to exit later-ally, usually in the ischiorectal fossa (Fig. 29-40D).Treatment. The goal of treatment of fistula in ano is eradica-tion of sepsis without sacrificing continence. Because fistulous tracks encircle variable amounts of the sphincter complex, Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   131723/02/19   2:30 PM 1318SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIcommonly caused by obstetric injuries or trauma from a foreign body. Mid-rectovaginal fistulas may result from more severe obstetric injury, but they also occur after surgical resection of a mid-rectal neoplasm, radiation injury, or extension of an und-rained abscess. High rectovaginal fistulas result from operative or radiation injury. Complicated diverticulitis may cause a colo-vaginal fistula. Crohn’s disease can cause rectovaginal fistulas at all levels, as well as colovaginal and enterovaginal fistulas.Diagnosis. Patients describe symptoms varying from the sen-sation of passing flatus from the vagina to the passage of solid stool from the vagina. Most patients experience some degree of fecal incontinence. Contamination may result in vaginitis. Large fistulas may be obvious on anoscopic and/or vaginal speculum examination, but smaller fistulas may be difficult to locate. Occasionally, a barium enema or vaginogram may identify these fistulas. Endorectal ultrasound may also be useful. With the patient in the prone position, installation of methylene blue into the rectum while a tampon is in the vagina may confirm the presence of a small fistula.Treatment. The treatment of rectovaginal fistula depends on the size, location, etiology, and condition of surrounding tis-sues. Because up to 50% of fistulas caused by obstetric injury heal spontaneously, it is prudent to wait 3 to 6 months before embarking on surgical repair in these patients. If the fistula was caused by a cryptoglandular abscess, drainage of the abscess may allow spontaneous closure.Low and mid-rectovaginal fistulas are usually best treated with an endorectal advancement flap. The principle of this procedure is based on the advancement of healthy mucosa, submucosa, and circular muscle over the rectal opening (the high-pressure side of the fistula) to promote healing (Fig. 29-41). If a sphincter injury is present, an overlapping sphincteroplasty ABCDFigure 29-40. The four major categories of fistula in ano (left side of drawings) and the usual operative procedure to correct the fistula (right side of drawings). A. Intersphincteric fistula with simple low tract. B. Uncomplicated transsphincteric fistula. C. Uncomplicated suprasphinc-teric fistula. D. Extrasphincteric fistula secondary to anal fistula.Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   131823/02/19   2:30 PM 1319COLON, RECTUM, AND ANUSCHAPTER 29should be performed concurrently. Fecal diversion is rarely required. High rectovaginal, colovaginal, and enterovaginal fis-tulas are usually best treated via a transabdominal approach. The diseased tissue, which caused the fistula (upper rectum, sigmoid colon, or small bowel), is resected and the hole in the vagina closed. Healthy tissue, such as omentum or muscle, frequently is interposed between the bowel anastomosis and the vagina to prevent recurrence.Rectovaginal fistulas caused by Crohn’s disease, radia-tion injury, or malignancy almost never heal spontaneously. In Crohn’s disease, treatment is based on adequate drainage of perianal sepsis and nutritional support. An endorectal advance-ment flap may be performed if the rectum is spared from active Crohn’s disease. Fistulas resulting from radiation damage are not amenable to local repair with an advancement flap because of damage to the surrounding rectal and vaginal tissues. Such midand high rectovaginal fistulas are occasionally repaired successfully with a transabdominal approach in which healthy tissue (omentum, muscle, or nonradiated bowel) is interposed between the damaged rectum and vagina. Fistulas caused by malignancy should be treated with resection of the tumor. Because differentiating radiation damage from malignancy can be extremely difficult, all fistulas resulting from radiation should be biopsied to rule out the presence of cancer.Perianal DermatitisPruritus Ani. Pruritus ani (severe perianal itching) is a com-mon problem with a multitude of etiologies. Surgically cor-rectable (anatomic) causes include prolapsing hemorrhoids, ectropion, fissure, fistula, and neoplasms. Perianal infection may also present with pruritus ani. Infections may be caused by fungus (Candida species and Epidermophyton organisms), parasites (Enterobius vermicularis [pinworms], Pediculus pubis [a louse], and Sarcoptes scabiei [scabies]), bacteria Probe inrectovaginalfistulaRectal mucosa andinternal sphinctermuscle incisedAttenuatedrectovaginalseptumExcess flap ofmucosa excisedInternal sphinctermuscle mobilizedInternal sphinctermuscle approximatedFlap of mucosaand internalsphincter muscleFigure 29-41. Endorectal advancement flap for rectovaginal fistula. (Reproduced with permission from Gordon PH, Nivatvongs S: Principles and Practice of Surgery for the Colon, Rectum, and Anus, 2nd ed. New York, NY: Marcel Dekker, Inc; 1999.)Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   131923/02/19   2:30 PM 1320SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II(Corynebacterium minutissimum [erythrasma] and T pallidum [syphilis]), or viruses (HPV [condyloma acuminata]). Antibi-otic use may also cause itching, usually by precipitating fungal infection. Noninfectious dermatologic causes include seborrhea, psoriasis, and contact dermatitis. Contact dermatitis can be par-ticularly troublesome because many over-the-counter topical agents used by patients to relieve itching may exacerbate the problem. Occasionally, systemic diseases such as jaundice and diabetes may present with pruritus ani.Despite the myriad of causes, the majority of pruritus ani is idiopathic and probably related to local hygiene, neurogenic, or psychogenic causes. Treatment focuses on removal of irritants, improving perianal hygiene, dietary adjustments, and avoiding scratching. Biopsy and/or culture may be required to rule out an infectious or dermatologic cause. Hydrocortisone ointment 0.5% to 1.0% can provide symptomatic relief but should not be used for prolonged periods of time because of the risk of dermal atrophy. Skin barriers such as Calmoseptine can also provide relief. Systemic antihistamines or tricyclic antidepressants have also been used with some success.Nonpruritic Lesions. Several perianal skin conditions may present with perianal skin changes. Leprosy, amebiasis, actino-mycosis, and lymphogranuloma venereum produce characteris-tic perianal lesions. Neoplasms such as squamous intraepithelial lesions, Paget’s disease, and invasive carcinomas may also appear first in the perianal skin. Biopsy can usually distinguish these diagnoses.Sexually Transmitted DiseasesBacterial Infections. Proctitis is a common symptom of ano-rectal bacterial infection. Neisseria  gonorrhoeae is the most common bacterial cause of proctitis and causes pain, tenes-mus, rectal bleeding, and mucus discharge. Chlamydia tracho-matis infection may be asymptomatic or may produce similar symptoms. Treponema pallidum, the microbe causing syphilis, causes a chancre at the site of inoculation, which may be asymp-tomatic or may present as an atypical fissure (primary syphilis). Condyloma lata are characteristic of secondary syphilis. Chan-croid, caused by Haemophilus ducreyi, is a disease manifested by multiple painful, bleeding lesions. Inguinal lymphadenopathy and fluctuant, draining lymph nodes are characteristic. Donova-nia granulomatis infection produces shiny, red masses on the perineum (granuloma inguinale). Diarrheal illnesses caused by organisms such as Campylobacter or Shigella may also be sexually transmitted. Treatment consists of antimicrobial agents directed against the infecting organism.Parasitic Infections. Entamoeba histolytica is an increas-ingly common sexually transmitted disease. Amebas produce ulcerations in the gastrointestinal mucosa and can infect any part of the gut. Symptoms include diarrhea, abdominal pain, and tenesmus. Giardia lamblia is also common and produces diarrhea, abdominal pain, and malaise.Viral Infections Herpes Simplex Virus Herpes proctitis is extremely common. Proctitis is usually caused by type 2 herpes simplex virus and less commonly by type 1 herpes simplex virus. Patients complain of severe, intractable perianal pain and tenesmus. Pain often precedes the development of characteristic vesicles, and these patients may require an examination under anesthesia to exclude another diagnosis such as an intersphincteric abscess. Diagnosis is confirmed by viral culture of tissue or vesicular fluid.Human Papillomavirus HPV causes condyloma acuminata (anogenital warts) and is associated with squamous intraepithe-lial lesions and squamous cell carcinoma (see previous section, “Anal Canal and Perianal Tumors”). Condylomas occur in the perianal area or in the squamous epithelium of the anal canal. Occasionally, the mucosa of the lower rectum may be affected. There are approximately 30 serotypes of HPV. As previously mentioned, HPV types 16 and 18, in particular, appear to pre-dispose to malignancy and often cause flat dysplasia in skin unaffected by warts. In contrast, HPV types 6 and 11 commonly cause warts, but do not appear to cause malignant degeneration.Treatment of anal condyloma depends on the location and extent of disease. Small warts on the perianal skin and distal anal canal may be treated in the office with topical application of bichloracetic acid or podophyllin. Although 60% to 80% of patients will respond to these agents, recurrence and reinfection are common. Imiquimod (Aldara) is an immunomodulator that was recently introduced for topical treatment of several viral infections, including anogenital condyloma.100 Initial reports suggest that this agent is highly effective in treating condyloma located on the perianal skin and distal anal canal. Larger and/or more numerous warts require excision and/or fulguration in the operating room. Excised warts should be sent for pathologic examination to rule out dysplasia or malignancy. It is impor-tant to note that prior use of podophyllin may induce histologic changes that mimic dysplasia. The recent introduction of a vaccine against HPV holds promise for preventing anogenital condylomas.169,170Human Immunodeficiency Virus See later section, “The Immunocompromised Patient.”Pilonidal DiseasePilonidal disease (cyst, infection) consists of a hair-containing sinus or abscess occurring in the intergluteal cleft. Although the etiology is unknown, it is speculated that the cleft creates a suction that draws hair into the midline pits when a patient sits. These ingrown hairs may then become infected and pres-ent acutely as an abscess in the sacrococcygeal region. Once an acute episode has resolved, recurrence is common.An acute abscess should be incised and drained as soon as the diagnosis is made. Because these abscesses are usually very superficial, this procedure can often be performed in the office, clinic, or emergency department under local anesthetic. Because midline wounds in the region heal poorly, some sur-geons recommend using an incision lateral to the intergluteal cleft. A number of procedures have been proposed to treat a chronic pilonidal sinus. The simplest method involves unroof-ing the tract, curetting the base, and marsupializing the wound. The wound must then be kept clean and free of hair until heal-ing is complete (often requiring weekly office visits for wound care). Alternatively, a small lateral incision can be created and the pit excised. This method is effective for most primary pilo-nidal sinuses. In general, extensive resection should be avoided. Complex and/or recurrent sinus tracts may require more exten-sive resection and closure with a Z-plasty, advancement flap, or rotational flap.Hidradenitis SuppurativaHidradenitis suppurativa is an infection of the cutaneous apo-crine sweat glands. Infected glands rupture and form subcutane-ous sinus tracts. The infection may mimic complex anal fistula disease, but stops at the anal verge because there are no apocrine Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   132023/02/19   2:30 PM 1321COLON, RECTUM, AND ANUSCHAPTER 29glands in the anal canal. Treatment involves incision and drain-age of acute abscesses and unroofing of all chronically inflamed fistulas and debridement of granulation tissue. Radical excision and skin grafting are almost never necessary.TRAUMAPenetrating Colorectal InjuryColorectal injury is common following penetrating trauma to the abdomen and has historically been associated with high mortality. In the first half of the 20th century, the mortality rate from colorectal injury was as high as 90%. The introduction of exteriorization of colonic injuries and fecal diversion during World War II dramatically decreased mortality, and this princi-ple has governed the management of large bowel injury for over 50 years. Recently, however, this practice was challenged, and trauma surgeons are increasingly performing primary repairs in selected patients.Management of colonic injury depends on the mechanism of injury, the delay between the injury and surgery, the over-all condition and stability of the patient, the degree of perito-neal contamination, and the condition of the injured colon. A primary repair may be considered in hemodynamically stable patients with few additional injuries and minimal contamination if the colon appears otherwise healthy. Contraindications to pri-mary repair include shock, injury to more than two other organs, mesenteric vascular damage, and extensive fecal contamina-tion. A delay of greater than 6 hours between the injury and the operation also is associated with increased morbidity and mor-tality and is a relative contraindication to primary repair. Inju-ries caused by high-velocity gunshot wounds or blast injuries are often associated with multiple intra-abdominal injuries and tissue loss and therefore are usually treated by fecal diversion after debridement of all nonviable tissue. Patient factors, such as medical comorbidities, advanced age, and the presence of tumor or radiation injury, must also be considered (Table 29-4).Like injuries to the intraperitoneal colon, penetrating trauma to the rectum traditionally has been associated with high morbidity and mortality. Primary repair of the rectum is more difficult than primary repair of the colon, however, and most rectal injuries are associated with significant contamination. For that reason, the majority of penetrating rectal injuries should be treated with proximal fecal diversion. Distal washout (copious irrigation of the rectum) and presacral drains are not routinely recommended.158 Small, clean rectal injuries may be closed pri-marily without fecal diversion in an otherwise stable patient. Intractable rectal bleeding may require angiographic emboliza-tion. Very rarely, hemorrhage or extensive tissue loss (espe-cially if the anal sphincter is severely damaged) may require an emergent APR. However, this operation should be avoided, if at all possible, because of the morbidity associated with an extensive pelvic dissection in a severely injured patient.171Blunt Colorectal InjuryBlunt injury to the colon and rectum is considerably less com-mon than penetrating injury. Nevertheless, blunt trauma can cause colon perforation, and shear injury to the mesentery can devascularize the intestine. Management of these injuries should follow the same principles outlined for management of penetrat-ing injuries. Small perforations with little contamination in a stable patient may be closed primarily; more extensive injury requires fecal diversion. A serosal hematoma alone does not Table 29-4Criteria for use of an ostomyInjuring agent factors High-velocity bullet wounds Shotgun wounds Explosive blast wounds Crush injuryPatient factors Presence of tumor Radiated tissue Medical condition Advanced ageInjury factors Inflamed tissue Advanced infection Distal obstruction Local foreign body Impaired blood supply Mesenteric vascular damage Shock with blood pressure <80/60 mmHg Hemorrhage >1000 mL More than two organs (especially kidney) injured Interval to operation >6 h (pancreatic, splenic, hepatic) Extensive injury requiring resection Major abdominal wall loss Thoracoabdominal penetrationReproduced with permission from Gordon PH, Nivatvongs S: Principles and Practice of Surgery for the Colon, Rectum, and Anus, 2nd ed.  New York, NY: Marcel Dekker, Inc; 1999.mandate resection, but the bowel should be carefully inspected to ensure that there is not an associated perforation or significant bowel ischemia.Blunt injury to the rectum may result from significant trauma, such as a pelvic crush injury, or may result from local trauma caused by an enema or foreign body. Crush injuries, especially with an associated pelvic fracture, are often associ-ated with significant rectal damage and contamination. These patients require debridement of all nonviable tissue, proximal fecal diversion, and a distal rectal washout, with or without drain placement. Blunt trauma from an enema or foreign body may produce a mucosal hematoma, which requires no surgical treatment if the mucosa is intact. Small mucosal tears may be closed primarily if the bowel is relatively clean and there is little contamination.Iatrogenic InjuryIntraoperative Injury. The colon and rectum are at risk for inadvertent injury during other procedures, especially during pelvic operations. The key to managing these injuries is early recognition. The vast majority of iatrogenic colorectal injuries may be closed primarily if there is little contamination and if the patient is otherwise stable. Delayed recognition of colorectal injuries may result in significant peritonitis and life-threatening sepsis. In these cases, fecal diversion is almost always required, and the patient may need repeated exploration for drainage of abscesses.Injury From Barium Enema. Colorectal injury from a bar-ium enema is an extremely rare complication associated with a high rate of morbidity and mortality. Perforation with spillage Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   132123/02/19   2:30 PM 1322SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIof barium, especially above the peritoneal reflection, may result in profound peritonitis, sepsis, and a systemic inflam-matory response. If the perforation is recognized early, it may be closed primarily and the abdomen irrigated to remove stool and barium. However, if the patient has developed sepsis, fecal diversion (with or without bowel resection) is almost always required. Rarely, a small mucosal injury to the extraperitoneal rectum may be managed with bowel rest, broad-spectrum anti-biotics, and close observation.Colonoscopic Perforation. Perforation is the most common major complication after either diagnostic or therapeutic colo-noscopy. Fortunately, this complication is rare and occurs in less than 1% of procedures. Perforation may result from trauma from the tip of the instrument, from shear forces related to the formation of a “loop” in the colonoscope, or from barotrauma from insufflation. Biopsy or fulguration can also cause perfo-ration. Polypectomy using electrocautery may produce a full-thickness burn, resulting in postpolypectomy syndrome in which a patient develops abdominal pain, fever, and leukocytosis with-out evidence of diffuse peritonitis.Management of colonoscopic perforation depends on the size of the perforation, the duration of time since the injury, the overall condition of the patient, and the underlying diagnosis. A large perforation recognized during the procedure requires surgical exploration. Because the bowel has almost always been prepared prior to the colonoscopy, there is usually little contamination associated with these injuries, and most can be repaired primarily. If there is significant contamination, if there has been a delay in diagnosis with resulting peritonitis, or if the patient is hemodynamically unstable, proximal diversion with or without resection is the safest approach. It is also important to know the indication for and findings at the time of colonos-copy. If the patient has an underlying neoplasm and is stable, definitive resection is best. Occasionally, a patient will develop abdominal pain and localized signs of perforation after what was thought to be an uneventful colonoscopy. Many of these patients will have a “microperforation,” which will resolve with bowel rest, broad-spectrum antibiotics, and close observation. Evidence of peritonitis or any deterioration in clinical condition mandates exploration. Similarly, free retroperitoneal or intra-peritoneal air may be discovered incidentally after colonoscopy. In a completely asymptomatic patient, this finding is thought to result from barotrauma and dissection of air through tissue planes without a free perforation. Many of these patients can be successfully treated with bowel rest and broad-spectrum antibi-otics. Surgical exploration is indicated if any clinical deteriora-tion occurs.Anal Sphincter Injury and IncontinenceThe most common cause of anal sphincter injury is obstetric trauma during vaginal delivery. The risk of sphincter injury is increased by a laceration that extends into the rectum (fourth-degree tear), infection of an episiotomy or laceration repair, prolonged labor, and possibly by use of a midline episiotomy. Sphincter damage may also result from hemorrhoidectomy, sphincterotomy, abscess drainage, or fistulotomy. Patients with incontinence and a suspected sphincter injury can be evaluated with anal manometry, EMG, pudendal nerve motor latency, and endoanal ultrasound. Mild incontinence, even in the presence of a sphincter defect, may respond to dietary changes and/or biofeedback. More severe incontinence may require surgical repair.The anal sphincter can also be injured by penetrating or blunt mechanisms (impalement, blast injury, crush injuries of the pelvis). Because damage to the anal sphincter is not life-threatening, definitive repair of the sphincter is often deferred until other injuries have been repaired and the patient’s clinical condition is stable. Isolated sphincter injuries that do not involve the rectum may be repaired primarily. Rectal injury accompa-nied by sphincter injury should be treated with fecal diversion and distal rectal washout, with or without drain placement. Sig-nificant perineal tissue loss may require extensive debridement and a diverting colostomy.Surgical Repairs. The most common method of repair of the anal sphincter is a wrap-around sphincteroplasty (Fig. 29-42).172 The procedure involves mobilization of the divided sphincter muscle and reapproximation without tension. The internal and external sphincters may be overlapped together or separately. Postanal intersphincteric levatorplasty is less commonly used to repair sphincter defects but may be useful for incontinence caused by prolapse and/or loss of the anorectal angle (see  “Continence”). The approach is via the intersphincteric plane posteriorly. It may be performed concomitantly with a perineal repair of rectal prolapse. The levator ani muscle is approximated to restore the anorectal angle, and the puborectalis and external sphincter muscles are tightened with sutures. These elective pro-cedures usually do not require a diverting colostomy.In cases where there has been significant loss of sphincter muscle or in which prior repairs have failed, more complex tech-niques, such as gracilis muscle transposition with or without Inferior rectal nervePudendal nerveFibrotic portion ofexternal sphincterTransverse superficialperineal muscleABCDFigure 29-42. Overlapping sphincteroplasty for incontinence from sphincter disruption. A. The external sphincter muscle with scar at site of injury is mobilized. B. The muscle edges are aligned in an overlapping fashion. C. Mattress sutures are used to approximate the muscle. D. The completed operation.Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   132223/02/19   2:30 PM 1323COLON, RECTUM, AND ANUSCHAPTER 29chronic, low-frequency electrostimulation, have been used with some success.173 In this procedure, the gracilis muscle is mobi-lized from the thigh, detached from its insertion on the tibial tuberosity, tunneled through the perineum, and wrapped around the anal canal. Another alternative in patients who have failed other repairs is the artificial anal sphincter. This device consists of an inflatable silastic cuff, a pressure-regulating balloon, and a control pump. Patients deflate the cuff manually to open the anal canal; the cuff then reinflates spontaneously to maintain clo-sure of the anal canal. Frequent infections and erosion can lead to device loss.173,174 Sacral nerve stimulation via an implanted pulse generator is a technique used for neurogenic incontinence when the sphincter is intact.12-14 In some patients, an end stoma provides the best relief for intractable incontinence.176Foreign BodyForeign body entrapment in the rectum is not uncommon. Depending on the level of entrapment, a foreign body may cause damage to the rectum, rectosigmoid, or descending colon.  Generalized abdominal pain suggests intraperitoneal perfo-ration. Evaluation of the patient includes inspection of the perineum and a careful abdominal examination to detect any evidence of perforation. Plain films of the abdomen are manda-tory to detect free intra-abdominal air.Foreign bodies lodged low in the rectum may often be removed under conscious sedation with or without a local anes-thetic block. Objects impacted higher in the rectum may require regional or general anesthesia for removal. Only rarely will a laparotomy be required to remove the object, either through manual manipulation of the object to expel from the anus, or via colotomy. After removal of the foreign body, it is crucial to evaluate the rectum and sigmoid colon for injury. Proctos-copy and/or flexible sigmoidoscopy should be performed. A hematoma without evidence of perforation requires no surgical treatment. Perforation of the rectum or sigmoid colon should be managed as described in the preceding sections.THE IMMUNOCOMPROMISED PATIENTHuman Immunodeficiency VirusPatients infected with HIV may present with a myriad of gastro-intestinal symptoms. Diarrhea, in particular, is extremely com-mon. The severity of gastrointestinal disease depends in part on the degree of immunosuppression; however, both ordinary and opportunistic pathogens may affect patients at any stage of the disease. Opportunistic infections with bacteria (Salmonella, Shi-gella, Campylobacter, Chlamydia, and Mycobacterium species),  fungi (histoplasmosis, coccidiosis, Cryptococcus), protozoa (toxoplasmosis, cryptosporidiosis, isosporiasis), and viruses (CMV, herpes simplex virus) can cause diarrhea, abdominal pain, and weight loss. CMV in particular may cause severe enterocolitis and is the most common infectious cause of emer-gency laparotomy in acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) patients. Clostridium difficile colitis is a major concern in these patients, especially because many patients are main-tained on suppressive antibiotic therapy. The incidence of gas-trointestinal malignancy is also increased in patients with HIV infection.177 Kaposi’s sarcoma is the most common malignancy in AIDS patients and can affect any part of the gastrointestinal tract. Patients may be asymptomatic or may develop bleeding or obstruction. Gastrointestinal lymphoma (usually non-Hodg-kin’s lymphoma) is also common. The incidence of colorectal carcinoma may also be increased in this population, although definitive data are lacking.Perianal disease is extremely common in patients with HIV infection. Because HIV is sexually transmitted, it is com-mon to find concomitant infection with other sexually trans-mitted diseases such as Chlamydia, herpes simplex virus, and HPV (anal condyloma). Anal condyloma in particular are very common, and the incidence of dysplasia (HGAIN) is high in the HIV-infected population.105 Abscesses and fistulas may be more difficult to diagnose in these patients and may be com-plex. Many patients require an examination under anesthesia with biopsy and cultures to determine the etiology of many of these perianal problems. The introduction of highly active anti-retroviral therapy (HAART) has changed the natural history of HIV infection, but it remains to be seen how these medications will affect the incidence and outcome of colorectal disease in this patient population.177IMMUNOSUPPRESSION FOR TRANSPLANTATIONThe gastrointestinal tract is a common site for posttransplanta-tion complications that are responsible for significant morbid-ity and mortality. In these patients, infection and medication are the most common causes of diarrhea. Immunosuppressant medications, in particular, may cause diarrhea. CMV infection is common and may be severe. Clostridium difficile colitis also occurs commonly. Diverticulitis appears to be more common in some populations of transplant patients and may be more likely to present with abscess or free perforation. Elective resection after recovery from one episode of confirmed diverticulitis may be indicated in the transplant population.178 Graft-versus-host disease is unique to transplant patients and often requires endoscopy and biopsy to diagnose gastrointestinal involvement. Patients are subject to the same opportunistic infections outlined earlier; however, sexually transmitted infections and Kaposi’s sarcoma are somewhat less prevalent. Perianal disease is some-what less common in the transplant population than in patients infected with HIV; however, similar infections may occur, and immunosuppression often makes diagnosis and treatment challenging.With increasing long-term survival among transplant recipients, the development of posttransplant malignancy has become a major concern. Posttransplant lymphoprolifera-tive disease is increasingly common and may occur anywhere in the gastrointestinal tract. The risk of colorectal carcinoma is increased in patients with predisposing conditions such as ulcerative colitis. However, immunosuppression alone does not appear to increase the incidence of colorectal cancer, and current screening recommendations are similar to those for the average risk population. In contrast, the incidence of anal squamous cell carcinoma is dramatically increased in transplant patients, and patients with known HPV infection should undergo more vigor-ous screening.THE NEUTROPENIC PATIENTNeutropenic enterocolitis (typhlitis) is a life-threatening prob-lem with a mortality rate of greater than 50%. This syndrome is characterized by abdominal pain and distention, fever, diarrhea (often bloody), nausea, and vomiting in a patient with fewer than 1000 neutrophils/μL blood from any cause (bone marrow transplantation, solid-organ transplantation, or chemotherapy). Its etiology is poorly understood. Histologic features can be Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   132323/02/19   2:30 PM 1324SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIseen on biopsy or surgical resection and include a paucity of inflammatory and leukemic infiltrates but with mucosal and submucosal edema, villous sloughing, stromal hemorrhage, and patchy-to-complete epithelial necrosis. CT scan of the abdomen often shows a dilated cecum with pericolic stranding. However, a normal-appearing CT scan does not exclude the diagnosis. Some patients will respond to bowel rest, broad-spectrum anti-biotics, parenteral nutrition, and granulocyte infusion or col-ony-stimulating factors.179 Evidence of perforation, generalized peritonitis, and deterioration in clinical condition are indications for operation.Neutropenic patients often develop perianal pain, and diagnosis may be difficult because of a lack of inflammatory response to infection. While broad-spectrum antibiotics may cure some of these patients, an examination under anesthesia should not be delayed because of neutropenia. An increase in pain or fever and/or clinical deterioration mandates an exam under anesthesia. Any indurated area should be incised and drained, biopsied to exclude a leukemic infiltrate, and cultured to aid in the selection of antimicrobial agents.REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Keller J, Fibbe C, Rosien U, et al. Recent advances in capsule endoscopy: development of maneuverable capsules. Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2012;6:561-566.	2.	Mang T, Bogoni L, Salganicoff M, et al. Computer-aided detection of colorectal polyps in CT colonography with and without fecal tagging: a stand-alone evaluation. Invest Radiol. 2012;47:99-108.	3.	Grady E. Gastrointestinal bleeding scintigraphy in the early 21st Century. J Nucl Med. 2016;57:252-259.	4.	Allen TW, Tulchinsky M. Nuclear medicine tests for acute gastrointestinal conditions. Semin Nucl Med. 2013;43:88-101.	5.	Garcia-Aguilar J, Pollack J, Lee SH, et al. Accuracy of endorectal ultrasonography in preoperative staging of rectal tumors. Dis Colon Rectum. 2002;45:10-15.	6.	Lee JK, Liles EG, Bent S, Levin TR, Corley DA. Accuracy of fecal immunochemical tests for colorectal cancer: systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med. 2014;160:171.	7.	Imperiale TF, Ransohoff DF, Itzkowitz SH, et al. Multitarget stool DNA testing for colorectal-cancer screening. N Engl J Med. 2014;370(14):1287-1297.	8.	Thirunavukarasu P, Talati C, Munjal S, Attwood K, Edge SB, Francescutti V. Effect of incorporation of pretreatment serum carcinoembryonic antigen levels into AJCC staging for colon cancer on 5-year survival. JAMA Surg. 2015;150(8):747-755. doi: 10.1001/jamasurg.2015.0871. PMID: 26083632.	9.	Offit K. Genetic prognostic markers for colorectal cancer.  N Engl J Med. 2000;342:124-125.	10.	Lynch HT, Lynch JF, Lynch PM, et al. Hereditary colorectal cancer syndromes: molecular genetics, genetic counseling, diagnosis and management. Fam Cancer. 2008;7:27-39. This reference is included in an issue of Familial Cancer that is devoted to discussion of hereditary forms of colorectal can-cer. The paper summarizes the evaluation of patients suspected to have familial colorectal cancer with a special emphasis on HNPCC (Lynch Syndrome) and FAP. Recommendations are provided for genetic testing, surveillance strategies, and treatment.	11.	FitzHarris GP, Garcia-Aguilar J, Parker SC, et al. Quality of life after subtotal colectomy for slow-transit constipa-tion: both quality and quantity count. Dis Colon Rectum. 2003;46:433-440.	12.	Paquette IM, Varma MG, Kaiser AM, Steele SR, Raf-ferty JF. The American Society of Colon and Rectal Sur-geons’ clinical practice guideline for the treatment of fecal incontinence. Dis Colon Rectum. 2015;58:623-636. The Standards Task Force of the American Society of Colon and Rectal Surgeons evaluated existing data on treatment of fecal incontinence based upon quality. The guidelines provided in this manuscript represent evidence based management of this condition. 	13.	Ganio E, Ratto C, Masin A, et al. Neuromodulation for fecal incontinence: outcome in 16 patients with definitive implant. The initial Italian Sacral Neurostimulation Group (GINS) experience. Dis Colon Rectum, 2001;44:965-970.	14.	Forte ML1, Andrade KE, Lowry AC, Butler M, Bliss DZ, Kane RL. Systematic review of surgical treatments for fecal incontinence. Dis Colon Rectum. 2016;59(5):443-469. doi: 10.1097/DCR.0000000000000594	15.	Ky AJ, Sonoda T, Milsom JW. One-stage laparoscopic restor-ative proctocolectomy: an alternative to the conventional approach? Dis Colon Rectum. 2002;45:207-210.	16.	Lezoche E, Feliciotti F, Paganini AM, et al. Laparoscopic colonic resections versus open surgery: a prospective non-randomized study on 310 unselected cases. Hepatogastroen-terology. 2000;47:697-708.	17.	Martinez-Perez A, Cara MC, Brunetti F, de’Angelis N. Patho-logic outcomes of laparoscopic vs. open mesorectal excision for rectal cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Surg. 2017;8:165665. doi:10.1001/jamasurg.20165665	18.	Weeks JC, Nelson H, Gelber S, et al. Short-term quality-of-life outcomes following laparoscopic-assisted colectomy vs. open colectomy for colon cancer: a randomized trial. JAMA. 2002;287:321-328.	19.	deSouza AL, Prasad LM, Ricci J, et al. A comparison of open and robotic total mesorectal excision for rectal adenocarci-noma. Dis Colon Rectum. 2011;54:275-282.	20.	Biondo S, Frago R, Codina Cazador A, et al. Long-term func-tional results from a randomized clinical study of transverse coloplasty compared with colon J-pouch after low anterior resection for rectal cancer. Surgery. 2013;153:383-392.	21.	Heah SM, Seow-Choen F, Eu KW, et al. Prospective, random-ized trial comparing sigmoid vs. descending colonic J-pouch after total rectal excision. Dis Colon Rectum. 2002;45: 322-328.	22.	Machado M, Nygren J, Goldman S, et al. Similar outcome after colonic pouch and side-to-end anastomosis in low ante-rior resection for rectal cancer: a prospective randomized trial. Ann Surg. 2003;238:214-220.	23.	Ricciardi R, Roberts PL, Marcello PW, Hall JF, Read TE, Schoetz DJ. Anastomotic leak testing after colo-rectal resec-tion: what are the data? Arch Surg. 2009;144(5):407-411.	24.	Prytz M, Angenete E, Bock D, Haglind E. Extralevator abdom-inoperineal excision for low rectal cancer—extensive surgery to be used with discretion based on 3 year local recurrence results. Ann Surg. 2016;263(3):516-521.	25.	Holm T, Ljung A, Haggmark T, Jurell G, Lagergren J. Extended abdominoperineal resection with gluteus maximus flap reconstruction of the pelvic floor for rectal cancer. Br J Surg. 2007;94:232-238.	26.	Farouk R, Pemberton JH, Wolff BG, et al. Functional out-comes after ileal pouch-anal anastomosis for chronic ulcer-ative colitis. Ann Surg. 2000;231:919-926.	27.	Bullard KM, Madoff RD, Gemlo BT. Is ileoanal pouch func-tion stable with time? Results of a prospective audit. Dis Colon Rectum. 2002;45:299-304.	28.	Segal JP, Ding NS, Worley G, et al. Systematic review with meta-analysis: the management of chronic refractory pouchitis with an evidence-based treatment algorithm. Aliment Pharma-col Ther. 2017;45(5):581-592. doi:10.1111/apt.13905.Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   132423/02/19   2:30 PM 1325COLON, RECTUM, AND ANUSCHAPTER 29	29.	Sandborn W, McLeod R, Jewell D. Pharmacotherapy for inducing and maintaining remission in pouchitis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2000;2:CD001176.	30.	Stocchi L, Pemberton JH. Pouch and pouchitis. Gastroenterol Clin North Am. 2001;30:223-241.	31.	Sandborn W, McLeod R, Jewell D. Pharmacotherapy for inducing and maintaining remission in pouchitis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2000;2:CD001176.	32.	Tran-Minh ML, Allez M, Gornet JM. Successful treatment with ustekinumab for chronic refractory pouchitis. J Crohns Colitis. 2017;11(9):1156. doi:10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjx018. 	33.	Kelly OB, Rosenberg M, Tyler AD, et al. Infliximab to treat refractory inflammation after pelvic pouch surgery for ulcer-ative colitis. J Crohns Colitis. 2016;10(4):410-417. doi: 10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjv225	34.	Schmid M, Frick JS, Malek N, Goetz M. Successful treat-ment of pouchitis with Vedolizumab, but not fecal micro-biota transfer (FMT), after proctocolectomy in ulcerative colitis. Int J Colorectal Dis. 2017;32(4):597-598. doi: 10.1007/s00384-017-2761-4	35.	Cannon JA, Altom LK, Deierhoi RJ, et al. Preoperative oral antibiotics reduce surgical site infection following elective colorectal resections. Dis Colon Rectum. 2012;55:1160-1166.	36.	Scarborough JE, Mantyh CR, Sun Z, Migaly J. Com-bined mechanical and oral antibiotic bowel preparation reduces incisional surgical site infection and anastomotic leak rates after elective colorectal resection. Ann Surg. 2015;262(2):331-337. This study assessed the effect of com-bined mechanical and oral antibiotic bowel preparation (prep) and 30-day outcomes after colorectal resection using data from the 2012 Colectomy-Targeted American College of Sur-geons National Surgical Quality Improvement (ACS NSQIP) data (4999 patients). The combination of oral and mechani-cal bowel preparation decreased the incidence of surgical site infection, anastomotic leak, and hospital readmission when compared to mechanical prep alone, oral antibiotic prep alone, or no prep.	37.	Cao F, Li J, Li F. Mechanical bowel preparation for elective colorectal surgery: updated systematic review and meta-anal-ysis. Int J Colorectal Dis. 2012;27:803-810.	38.	Hadithi M, Cazemier M, Meijer GA, et al. Retrospective anal-ysis of old-age colitis in the Dutch inflammatory bowel dis-ease population. World J Gastroenterol. 2008;14:3183-3187.	39.	Bonen DK, Cho JH. The genetics of inflammatory bowel dis-ease. Gastroenterology. 2003;124:521-536.	40.	Yamamoto-Furusho JK. Genetic factors associated with the development of inflammatory bowel disease. World J Gastro-enterol. 2007;13:5594-5597.	41.	Halme L, Paavola-Sakki P, Turunen U, et al. Family and twin studies in inflammatory bowel disease. World J Gastroenterol. 2006;12:3668-3672.	42.	Hugot JP, Chamaillard M, Zouali H, et al. Association of NOD2 leucine-rich repeat variants with susceptibility to Crohn’s disease. Nature. 2001;411:599-603.	43.	Sehgal R, Berg A, Hegarty JP, et al. NOD2/CARD15 muta-tions correlate with severe pouchitis after ileal pouch-anal anastomosis. Dis Colon Rectum. 2010;53(11):1487-1494.	44.	Sehgal R, Berg A, Polinski JI, et al. Mutations in IRGM are associated with more frequent need for surgery in patients with ileocolonic Crohn’s disease. Dis Colon Rectum. 2012;55(2):115-121.	45.	Hoarau G, Mukherjee PK, Gower-Rousseau C, et al. Bac-teriome and mycobiome interactions underscore microbial dysbiosis in familial Crohn’s disease. mBio. 2016;7(5). pii: e01250-16.	46.	Strisciuglio C, Duijvestein M, Verhaar AP, et al. Impaired autophagy leads to abnormal dendritic cell-epithelial cell interactions. J Crohns Colitis. 2013;7(7):534-541.	47.	Brinar M, Vermeire S, Cleynen I, et al. Genetic variants in autophagy-related genes and granuloma formation in a cohort of surgically treated Crohn’s disease patients. J Crohns Colitis. 2012;6(1):43-50.	48.	Strisciuglio C, Duijvestein M, Verhaar AP, et al. Impaired autophagy leads to abnormal dendritic cell-epithelial cell interactions. J Crohns Colitis. 2013;7(7):534-541.	49.	Brinar M, Vermeire S, Cleynen I, et al. Genetic variants in autophagy-related genes and granuloma formation in a cohort of surgically treated Crohn’s disease patients. J Crohns Colitis. 2012;6(1):43-50.	50.	Tremaine WJ. Is indeterminate colitis determinable? Curr Gastroenterol Rep. 2012;14:162-165.	51.	Lakatos PL, Lakatos L, Kiss LS, et al. Treatment of extraintes-tinal manifestations in inflammatory bowel disease. Digestion. 2012;86(suppl 1):28-35.	52.	Alfadhli AA, McDonald JW, Feagan BG. Methotrexate for induction of remission in refractory Crohn’s disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2005;1:CD003459.	53.	Hanauer SB, Feagan BG, Lichtenstein GR, et al. Main-tenance infliximab for Crohn’s disease: the ACCENT I randomised trial. Lancet. 2002;359:1541-1549. This study reports a randomized, controlled trial to assess main-tenance therapy with infliximab for Crohn’s Disease. In this trial, 573 patients were treated with intravenous inf-liximab (single dose) and then randomized to repeat infu-sions of infliximab versus placebo. The investigators found that patients who responded to the first infusion of inflix-imab were more likely to stay in remission and discon-tinue corticosteroids when maintained on infliximab every  8 weeks. 	54.	Sands BE, Blank MA, Patel K, van Deventer SJ; ACCENT II Study. Long-term treatment of rectovaginal fistulas in Crohn’s disease: response to infliximab in the ACCENT II Study. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2004;2:912-920.	55.	Yarur AJ, Kanagala V, Stein DJ, et al. Higher infliximab trough levels are associated with perianal fistula healing in patients with Crohn’s disease. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2017;45(7):933-940.	56.	Bamias G, Cominelli F. Novel strategies to attenuate immune activation in Crohn’s disease. Curr Opin Pharmacol. 2006;6:401-407.	57.	Panaccione R, Ghosh S, Middleton S, et al. Combination therapy with infliximab and azathioprine is superior to mono-therapy with either agent in ulcerative colitis. Gastroenterology. 2014;146(2):392-400.e3.	58.	Reinisch W, Sandborn WJ, Hommes DW, et al. Adalimumab for induction of clinical remission in moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis: results of a randomised controlled trial. Gut. 2011;60(6):780-787.	59.	Sandborn WJ, van Assche G, Reinisch W, et al. Adalim-umab induces and maintains clinical remission in patients with moderate-to-severe ulcerative colitis. Gastroenterology. 2012;142(2):257-265.e1-e3.	60.	Sjöberg M, Magnuson A, Björk J, et al; Swedish Organiza-tion for the Study of Inflammatory Bowel Disease (SOIBD). Infliximab as rescue therapy in hospitalised patients with steroid-refractory acute ulcerative colitis: a long-term fol-low-up of 211 Swedish patients. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2013;38(4):377-387.	61.	Su C, Lewis JD, Deren JJ, et al. Efficacy of anti-tumor necrosis factor therapy in patients with ulcerative colitis. Am J Gastro-enterol. 2002;97:2577-2584.	62.	Actis GC, Bruno M, Pinna-Pintor M, et al. Infliximab for treat-ment of steroid-refractory ulcerative colitis. Dig Liver Dis. 2002;34:631-634.	63.	Appau KA, Fazio VW, Shen B, et al. Use of infliximab within 3 months of ileocolonic resection is associated with adverse Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   132523/02/19   2:30 PM 1326SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIpostoperative outcomes in Crohn’s patients. J Gastrointest Surg. 2008;12(10):1738-1744.	64.	Matsumoto T, Iwao Y, Igarashi M, et al. Endoscopic and chro-moendoscopic atlas featuring dysplastic lesions in surveillance colonoscopy for patients with long-standing ulcerative colitis. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2008;14:259-264.	65.	Wong Kee Song LM, Adler DG, Chand B, et al. Chromoen-doscopy. Gastrointest Endosc. 2007;66:639-649.	66.	Heuschen UA, Hinz U, Allemeyer EH, et al. Oneor two-stage procedure for restorative proctocolectomy: ratio-nale for a surgical strategy in ulcerative colitis. Ann Surg. 2001;234:788-794.	67.	Hall JF, Roberts PL, Ricciardi R, et al. Long-term follow-up after an initial episode of diverticulitis: what are the predictors of recurrence? Dis Colon Rectum. 2011;54:283-288.	68.	Daniels L, de Korte N, Winter D, et al. Overtreatment of sig-moid diverticulitis: plea for a less aggressive approach. Dig Dis. 2012;30:86-91.	69.	Li D, Baxter NN, McLeod R, Nathans AB. The decline of elective colectomy following diverticulitis: a population based analysis. Dis Colon Rectum. 2016;4:332-339.	70.	Li D, Baxter NN, McLeod RS, Moineddin R, Wilton AS, Nathens AB. Evolving practice patterns in the acute manage-ment of acute colonic diverticulitis: a population-based analysis. Dis Colon Rectum. 2014;57(12):1397-1405.	71.	Morris AM, Regebogen SE, Hardima KM. Surgery for diver-ticulitis: a systematic review. JAMA. 2014;311:902-302.	72.	Bernini A, Spencer MP, Wong WD, et al. Computed tomog-raphy-guided percutaneous abscess drainage in intestinal disease: factors associated with outcome. Dis Colon Rectum. 1997;40:1009-1013.	73.	Schultz JK, Yaqub S, Wallon C, et al. Laparoscopic lavage versus primary resection for acute perforated diverticulitis: the SCANDIV randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2015;314 (13):1364-1375.	74.	Vennix S, Musters GD, Mulder IM, et al. Laparoscopic perito-neal lavage or sigmoidectomy for perforated diverticulitis with purulent peritonitis: a multicenter parallel group randomised open label trial. Lancet. 2015;386:1269-1277.	75.	Siegel RL, Miller KD, Fedewa SA, et al. Colorectal cancer statistics, 2017. CA Cancer J Clin. 2017;67(3):177-193.	76.	Calle EE, Rodriguez C, Walker-Thurmond K, et al. Overweight, obesity, and mortality from cancer in a prospectively studied cohort of U.S. adults. N Engl J Med. 2003;348:1625-1638.	77.	Woodhouse CR. Guidelines for monitoring of patients with ureterosigmoidostomy. Gut. 2002;51(suppl 5):V15-V16.	78.	Baxter NN, Tepper JE, Durham SB, et al. Increased risk of rectal cancer after prostate radiation: a population-based study. Gastroenterology. 2005;128:819-824.	79.	Smith RA, von Eschenbach AC, Wender R, et al. American Cancer Society guidelines for the early detection of cancer: update of early detection guidelines for prostate, colorec-tal, and endometrial cancers. CA Cancer J Clin. 2001;51: 38-75.	80.	Al-Tassan N, Chmiel NH, Maynard J, et al. Inherited vari-ants of MYH associated with somatic G:C–>T:A mutations in colorectal tumors. Nat Genet. 2002;30:227-232.	81.	Lefevre JH, Rodrigue CM, Mourra N, et al. Implication of MYH in colorectal polyposis. Ann Surg. 2006;244: 874-879. MYH is a base excision repair gene that removes adenines from DNA that have been mispaired with a nucle-otide product of oxidative reaction (8oxoG). Without MYH, mispaired adenines will lead to somatic transversions G:C→ T:A in genes such as APC or K-ras. The authors reviewed 433 patients who underwent prophylactic surgery for colorectal polyposis over a 25-year time frame and evaluated 31 patients who did not have APC, finding biallelic MYH mutations in 6 patients. They conclude that MYH is a new gene responsible for approximately 1.4% of all adenomatous polyposis and 20% of polyposis without an APC mutation identified.	82.	Martin M, Simon-Assmann P, Kedinger M, et al. DCC regu-lates cell adhesion in human colon cancer derived HT-29 cells and associates with ezrin. Eur J Cell Biol. 2006;85: 769-783.	83.	Lao VV, Grady WM. Epigenetics and colorectal cancer. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2011;8:686-700.	84.	Ferlitsch M, Moss A, Hassan C, et al. Colorectal polypectomy and endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR): European Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ESGE) clinical guideline. Endoscopy. 2017;49(3):270-297. doi:10.1055/s-0043-102569.	85.	Rex DK, Ahnen DJ, Baron JA, et al. Serrated lesions of the colorectum: review and recommendations from an expert panel. Am J Gastroenterol. 2012;107:1315-1329. An expert panel provide their recommendation after a thorough literature review and 2-day conference. Hyperplastic polyps, sessile ser-rated adenomas/polyps, and traditional serrated adenomas are all included in the category of serrated lesions of the colon. This review outlines the histologic features of these lesions. Sessile serrated adenomas are predominantly flat, often with indistinct borders, right sided. They are associated with inter-val colon adenocarcinomas and are thought to progress to cancer, possibly through a promotor CpG island hypermeth-ylation pathway. The panel recommends that these lesions are completely excised and points to the variability in detection rates between endoscopists, hypothesizing that difficulty in endoscopic detection is related to the high rate of subsequent cancer diagnosis in these patients.	86.	Regimbeau JM, Panis Y, Pocard M, et al. Handsewn ileal pouch-anal anastomosis on the dentate line after total proc-tectomy: technique to avoid incomplete mucosectomy and the need for long-term follow-up of the anal transition zone. Dis Colon Rectum. 2001;44:43-50.	87.	Remzi F, Fazio VW, Delaney CP, et al. Dysplasia of the anal transitional zone after ileal pouch-anal anastomosis: results of prospective evaluation after a minimum of ten years. Dis Colon Rectum. 2003;46:6-13.	88.	Janne PA, Mayer RJ. Chemoprevention of colorectal cancer.  N Engl J Med. 2000;342:1960-1968.	89.	Steinbach G, Lynch PM, Phillips RK, et al. The effect of cele-coxib, a cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor, in familial adenomatous polyposis. N Engl J Med. 2000;342:1946-1952.	90.	Kasper B, Gruenwald V, Reichardt P, et al. Imatinib induces sustained progression arrest in RECIST progressive desmoid tumours: Final results of a phase II study of the German Inter-disciplinary Sarcoma Group (GISG). Eur J Cancer. 2017;76: 60-67. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2017.02.001.	91.	Church J, Xhaja X, LaGuardia L, O’Mally M, Burke C,  Kalady M. Desmoids and genotype in familial adenomatous polyposis. Dis Colon Rectum. 2015;58(4):444-448.	92.	Bulow C, Vasen H, Järvinen H, et al. Ileorectal anastomosis is appropriate for a subset of patients with familial adenomatous polyposis. Gastroenterology. 2000;119:1454-1460.	93.	Hampel H, Panescu J, Lockman J, et al. Screening for the Lynch syndrome (hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer). N Engl J Med. 2005;352:1851-1860.	94.	Jarvinen HJ, Aarnio M, Mustonen H, et al. Controlled 15-year trial on screening for colorectal cancer in families with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. Gastroenterology. 2000;118:829-834.	95.	National Quality Forum. Appendix A: Specifications of the National Voluntary Consensus Standards for Breast and Colon Cancer. Available at: https://www.qualityforum.org/Publica-tions/2009/05/National_Voluntary_Consensus_Standards_for_Quality_of_Cancer_Care.aspx. Accessed July 23, 2018.	96.	Lieberman DA, Weiss DG, Bond JH, et al. Use of colonos-copy to screen asymptomatic adults for colorectal cancer. Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   132623/02/19   2:30 PM 1327COLON, RECTUM, AND ANUSCHAPTER 29Veterans Affairs Cooperative Study Group 380. N Engl J Med. 2000;343:162-168.	97.	Pignone M, Rich M, Teutsch SM, et al. Screening for colorec-tal cancer in adults at average risk: a summary of the evidence for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 2002;137:132-141.	98.	U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, Bibbins-Domingo K, Grossman DC, et al. Screening for colorectal cancer: US Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. JAMA. 2016;315:2564-2575.	99.	Mandel JS, Church TR, Bond JH, et al. The effect of fecal occult-blood screening on the incidence of colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2000;343:1603-1607.	100.	Hardcastle JD, Armitage NC, Chamberlain J, et al. Fecal occult blood screening for colorectal cancer in the general popula-tion. Results of a controlled trial. Cancer. 1986;58:397-403.	101.	Winawer SJ, Flehinger BJ, Schottenfeld D, et al. Screening for colorectal cancer with fecal occult blood testing and sigmoid-oscopy. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1993;85:1311-1318.	102.	Levin B, Brooks D, Smith RA, et al. Emerging technologies in screening for colorectal cancer: CT colonography, immu-nochemical fecal occult blood tests, and stool screening using molecular markers. CA Cancer J Clin. 2003;53:44-55.	103.	Yee J, Akerkar GA, Hung RK, et al. Colorectal neoplasia: per-formance characteristics of CT colonography for detection in 300 patients. Radiology. 2001;219:685-692.	104.	Imperiale TF, Wagner DR, Lin CY, et al. Risk of advanced proximal neoplasms in asymptomatic adults according to the distal colorectal findings. N Engl J Med. 2000;343:169-174.	105.	Holme O, Løberg M, Kalager M, et al. Effect of flexible sig-moidoscopy screening on colorectal cancer incidence and mor-tality: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2014;312:606-615.	106.	Greene FL, Fleming PD, Fleming ID, et al. AJCC Cancer Staging Manual. Springer: New York; 2002.	107.	Chang GJ, Kaiser AM, Mills S, Rafferty JE, Buie WD, on behalf of the Standards Practice Task Force of the American Society of Colon and Rectal Surgeons. Practice parameters for the management of colon cancer. Dis Colon Rectum. 2012;55:831-843.	108.	Gunderson LL, Sargent DJ, Tepper JE, et al. Impact of T and N substage on survival and disease relapse in adjuvant rec-tal cancer: a pooled analysis. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2002;54:386-396.	109.	Monson JRT, Weiser MR, Buie WD, Chang GJ, Rafferty JF; Prepared by the Standards practice Task Force of the American Society of Colon and Rectal Surgeons. Practice parameters for the management of rectal cancer (revised). Dis Colon Rectum. 2013;56:535-550.	110.	Qiu H, Sirivongs P, Rothenberger M, et al. Molecular prognos-tic factors in rectal cancer treated by radiation and surgery. Dis Colon Rectum. 2000;43:451-459.	111.	Johnson PM, Porter GA, Ricciardi R, et al. Increasing negative lymph node count is independently associated with improved long-term survival in stage IIIB and IIIC colon cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:3570-3575.	112.	Chang GJ, Rodriguez-Bigas MA, Skibber JM, et al. Lymph node evaluation and survival after curative resec-tion of colon cancer: systematic review. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2007;99:433-441.	113.	Ricciardi R, Madoff RD, Rothenberger DA, et al. Population-based analyses of lymph node metastases in colorectal cancer. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2006;4:1522-1527.	114.	Ricciardi R, Baxter NN. Association versus causation versus quality improvement: setting benchmarks for lymph node eval-uation in colon cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2007;99:414-415.	115.	Puthillath A, Dunn KB, Rajput A, et al. Safety and efficacy of first-line chemotherapy in unresected metastatic colorectal cancer. Clin Colorectal Cancer. 2007;6:710-715.	116.	Francescutti V, Miller A, Satchidanand Y, Alvarez-Perez A, Dunn KB. Management of bowel obstruction in patients with stage IV cancer: predictors of outcome after surgery. Ann Surg Oncol. 2013;20(3):707-714. doi: 10.1245/s10434-012-2662-2.	117.	Kashida H, Kudo SE. Early colorectal cancer: concept, diag-nosis, and management. Int J Clin Oncol. 2006;11(1):1-8.	118.	Sargent DJ, Marsoni S, Monges G, et al. Defective mismatch repair as a predictive marker for lack of efficacy of fluoro-uracil-based adjuvant therapy in colon cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28:3219-3226.	119.	Mahmoud N, Bullard Dunn K. Metastasectomy for stage IV colorectal cancer. Dis Colon Rectum. 2010;53:1080-1092.	120.	Demmy TL, Dunn KB. Surgical and nonsurgical therapy for lung metastasis: indications and outcomes. Surg Oncol Clin N Am. 2007;16:579-605.	121.	Stitzenberg KB, Sanoff HK, Penn DC, Meyers MO, Tepper JE. Practice patterns and long-term survival for early-stage rectal cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31(34):4276-4282.	122.	Taylor FGM, Quirke P, Heald RJ, et al. Preoperative high-res-olution magnetic resonance imaging can identify good prog-nosis stage I, II and III rectal cancer best managed by surgery alone. Ann Surg. 2011;253:711-719.	123.	Garcia-Aguilar J, Shi Q, Thomas CR, Jr, et al. A phase II trial of neoadjuvant chemoradiation and local excision for T2N0 rectal cancer: preliminary results of the ACOSOG Z6041 trial. Ann Surg Oncol. 2012;19:384-391.	124.	Garcia-Aguilar J, Renfro LA, Chow OS, et al. Organ preserva-tion for clinical T2N0 distal rectal cancer using neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy and local excision (ACOSOG Z6041): results of an open-label, single-arm, multi-institutional, phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2015;16(15):1537-1546.	125.	Sun Z, Adam MA, Kim J, et al. Determining the optimal timing for initiation of adjuvant chemotherapy after resec-tion for Stage II and III colon cancer. Dis Colon Rectum. 2016;59(2):87-93.	126.	Sauer R, Liersch T, Merkel S, et al. Preoperative versus postoperative chemoradiotherapy for rectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2004;351:1731-1740. The German Rectal Cancer Study Group randomized patients with clinical stage II and III rectal cancer to preoperative or postoperative long-course chemoradiation. The study occurred between 1994 and 2002 and, of note, the approach to staging did not include MRI. Among the 799 patients who were analyzed, fewer local recurrences were seen in patients assigned to preoperative chemoradiation compared with patients assigned to postopera-tive chemoradiation (6% vs. 13%; P = 0.006) at 5 years. The authors also found that in the long term, 72% of local recur-rences were associated with distant metastases. A subgroup analysis showed that the strongest difference in hazard ratios between preoperative and postoperative chemoradiation were in the patients who had intersphincteric or abdominoperineal resections (hazard ratio 2.24; P = 0.03).	127.	Cercek A, Garcia-Aguilar J. Rectal cancer: neoadjuvant ther-apy. In: Steele SR, Hull TL, Read TE, Saclarides TJ, Senagore AJ, Whitlow CB, eds. The ASCRS Textbook of Colon and  Rectal Surgery. 3rd ed. New York: Springer; 2016:481-494.	128.	Smith FM, Wiland H, Mace A, Pai RK, Kalady MF. Clinical criteria underestimate complete pathological response in rec-tal cancer treated with neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy. Dis Colon Rectum. 2014;57(3):311-315.	129.	Sammour T, Price BA, Krause KJ, Chang GJ. Nonoperative management of “watch and wait” for rectal cancer with com-plete clinical response after neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy: a critical appraisal. Ann Surg Oncol. 2017;24:1904-1915. doi: 10.1245/s10434-017-5841-3.	130.	Berends FJ, Kazemier G, Bonjer HJ, et al. Subcutaneous metastases after laparoscopic colectomy. Lancet. 1994; 344:58.Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   132723/02/19   2:30 PM 1328SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	131.	Jayne DG, Guillou PJ, Thorpe H, et al. Randomized trial of laparoscopic-assisted resection of colorectal carcinoma: 3-year results of the UK MRC CLASICC Trial Group. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:3061-3068.	132.	Jayne DG, Thorpe HC, Copeland J, Quirke P, Brown JM, Guillou PJ. Five-year follow-up of the Medical Research Council CLASICC trial of laparoscopically assisted versus open surgery for colorectal cancer. Br J Surg. 2010;97(11):1638-1645. doi: 10.1002/bjs.7160. This study presents 5-year follow-up from the UK Medical Research Council CLASSIC Trial comparing the safety and efficacy of laparoscopic vs. open surgery for colorectal cancer. Outcomes included overall and disease free survival and local, distant, and port site recurrences. The investigators found no differ-ences between the two groups. They conclude, therefore, that long-term outcomes are not compromised by a laparoscopic approach.	133.	Nelson H, Sargent D, Wieand HS, et al; for the Clinical Out-comes of Surgical Therapy Study Group. Laparoscopically assisted colectomy is as safe and effective as open colectomy in people with colon cancer. Abstracted from: A comparison of laparoscopically assisted and open colectomy for colon cancer.  N Engl J Med. 2004;350:2050-2059. Cancer Treat Rev. 2004;30(8):707-709.	134.	Hazebroek EJ. COLOR: a randomized clinical trial compar-ing laparoscopic and open resection for colon cancer. Surg Endosc. 2002;16:949-953.	135.	Jeong SY, Park JW, Nam BH, et al. Open versus laparoscopic surgery for mid-rectal or low-rectal cancer after neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy (COREAN trial): survival outcomes of an open-label, non-inferiority, randomised controlled trial. Lancet Oncol. 2014;15(7):767-774.	136.	Martínez-Pérez A, Carra MC, Brunetti F, de’Angelis N. Pathologic outcomes of laparoscopic vs open mesorectal excision for rectal cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Surg. 2017;152(4):e165665. doi: 10.1001/jamasurg.2016.5665.	137.	Collinson FJ, Jayne DG, Pigazzi A, et al. An international, multicentre, prospective, randomised, controlled, unblinded, parallel-group trial of robotic-assisted versus standard laparo-scopic surgery for the curative treatment of rectal cancer. Int J Colorectal Dis. 2012; 27:233-241.	138.	Fleshman J, Branda M, Sargent DJ, et al. Effect of laparo-scopic-assisted resection vs open resection of stage II or III rectal cancer on pathologic outcomes: the ACOSOG Z6051 randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2015;314(13):1346-1355.	139.	Stevenson AR, Solomon MJ, Lumley JW, et al; ALaCaRT Investigators. Effect of laparoscopic-assisted resection vs open resection on pathological outcomes in rectal cancer: the ALaCaRT randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2015;314(13): 1356-1363.	140.	Bonjer HJ, Deijen CL, Abis GA, et al. A randomized trial of laparoscopic versus open surgery for rectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2015;372(14):1324-1332.	141.	Collinson FJ, Jayne DG, Pigazzi A, et al. An international, multicentre, prospective, randomised, controlled, unblinded, parallel-group trial of robotic-assisted versus standard laparo-scopic surgery for the curative treatment of rectal cancer. Int J Colorectal Dis. 2012;27(2):233-241.	142.	Rindi G, Arnold R, Bosman FT. Nomenclature and classifica-tion of neuroendocrine neoplasms of the digestive system. In Bosman FT, Carneiro F, Hruban RH, Theise ND, eds. WHO Classification of Tumors of Digestive System. Lyon, France: International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) Press; 2010:13-14.	143.	Volkan Adsay N, Klimstra DS. Neuroendocrine tumors of the gastrointestinal and pancreatobiliary tracts. In: Odze RD, Goldblum JR, eds. Odze and Goldblum Surgical Pathology of the GI Tract, Liver, Biliary Tract and Pancreas. 3rd ed.  Philadelphia: Saunders/Elsevier; 2015.	144.	Bullard Dunn KM. Other rectal neoplasms. In: Beck DE, Steele SR, Wexner SD, eds. Fundamentals of Anorectal  Surgery. 3rd ed. New York: Springer; 2018.	145.	Merchea AL, Hubner M, Wenger D, Rose P, Dozois E. The value of preoperative biopsy in the management of solid pre-sacral tumors. Dis Colon Rectum. 2013;56:756-760.	146.	Merchea A, Dozois EJ. Lesions originating within the retrorec-tal space. J Gastrointest Surg. 2014;18(12):2232-2233.	147.	Dozois EJ, Jacofsky DJ, Billings BJ, et al. In: Wards CY,  Larson DW. Surgical approach and oncologic outcomes fol-lowing multidisciplinary management of retrorectal sarcomas. Ann Surg Oncol. 2011;18(4):983-988.	148.	Steele SR, Varma MG, Melton GB, Ross HM, Rafferty JF, Buie WD. Practice parameters for anal squamous neoplasms. Dis Colon Rectum. 2012;55:735-749.	149.	Darragh TM, Colgan TJ, Cox JT, et al. The lower anogenital squamous terminology standardization project for HPV-asso-ciated lesions: background and consensus recommendations from the College of American Pathologists and the American Society for Colposcopy and Cervical Pathology. J Low Genit Tract Dis. 2012;16:205-242.	150.	Messick CA, Rodriguez-Bigas. Anal dysplasia. Surg Oncol Clin North Am. 2017;26:33-43. The authors review the litera-ture on anal dysplasia with a focus on the natural history and the impact of ablative techniques with high resolution anos-copy on recurrence rates. High-risk patients are categorized as HIV-positive, immunosuppressed transplant recipients, and men who have sex with men. The authors emphasize the lack of literature in patients who are not non–high risk and overall emphasize close follow-up in all patients with high grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (HSIL)/high grade anal intraepithelial neoplasia (HGAIN).	151.	Stanley MA. Imiquimod and the imidazoquinolones: mecha-nism of action and therapeutic potential. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2002;27:571-577.	152.	Chen H, Cai Y, Liu Y, et al. Incidence, surgical treatment, and prognosis of anorectal melanoma from 1973 to 2011: a population based SEER analysis. Medicine (Baltimore). 2016;95:e2770.	153.	Bullard KM, Tuttle TM, Rothenberger DA, et al. Surgi-cal therapy for anorectal melanoma. J Amer Coll Surg. 2003;196:206-211.	154.	D’Hoore A, Penninckx F. Laparoscopic ventral recto(colpo)pexy for rectal prolapse: surgical technique and outcome for 109 patients. Surg Endosc. 2006;20:1919-1923.	155.	Ponec RJ, Saunders MD, Kimmey MB. Neostigmine for the treatment of acute colonic pseudo-obstruction. N Engl J Med. 1999;341:137-141.	156.	Turgeon DK, Novicki TJ, Quick J, et al. Six rapid tests for direct detection of Clostridium difficile and its toxins in fecal samples compared with the fibroblast cytotoxicity assay.  J Clin Microbiol. 2003;41:667-670.	157.	Bagdasarian N, Rao K, Malani PN. Diagnosis and treatment of Clostridium difficile in adults: a systematic review. JAMA. 2015;313(4):398-408.	158.	Cecil JA. Clostridium difficile: changing epidemiology, treat-ment and infection prevention measures. Curr Infect Dis Rep. 2012;14:612-619.	159.	Manfredelli S, Montalto G, Leonetti G, et al. Conventional (CH) vs. stapled hemorrhoidectomy (SH) in surgical treat-ment of hemorrhoids. Ten years experience. Ann Ital Chir. 2012;83:129-134.	160.	Shao WJ, Li GC, Zhang ZH, Yang BL, Sun GD, Chen YQ. Systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   132823/02/19   2:30 PM 1329COLON, RECTUM, AND ANUSCHAPTER 29controlled trials comparing stapled haemorrhoidopexy with conventional haemorrhoidectomy. Br J Surg. 2008;95: 147-160.	161.	Schuurman JP, Borel Rinkes IH, Go PM. Hemorrhoidal artery ligation procedure with or without Doppler transducer in  grade II and III hemorrhoidal disease: a blinded randomized clinical trial. Ann Surg. 2012;255:840-845.	162.	Jonas M, Speake W, Scholefield J. Diltiazem heals glyceryl trinitrate-resistant chronic anal fissures: a prospective study. Dis Colon Rectum. 2002;45:1091-1095.	163.	Mentes BB, Irkörücü O, Akin M, et al. Comparison of botu-linum toxin injection and lateral internal sphincterotomy for the treatment of chronic anal fissure. Dis Colon Rectum. 2003;46:232-237.	164.	Nelson RL, Thomas K, Morgan J, et al. Nonsurgical therapy for anal fissure. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;2:CD003431.	165.	North JH, Jr, Weber TK, Rodriguez-Bigas MA, et al. The management of infectious and noninfectious anorectal complications in patients with leukemia. J Am Coll Surg. 1996;183:322-328.	166.	Jacob TJ, Perakath B, Keighley MR. Surgical interven-tion for anorectal fistula. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010;5:CD006319. This meta-analysis evaluated 10 random-ized trials on outcomes after anorectal fistula procedures, with the ideal procedure stated to be associated with low recurrence rates, minimal incontinence, and good quality of life. Evalu-ated surgical interventions included: fistulotomy, fistulectomy, myo-mucosal advancement flap, fibrin glue, and cutting or loose setons. There were no differences in the procedures compared, except that fibrin glue had more recurrences. Trial sample sizes were noted to be small, and more recently dis-cussed procedures such as the anal fistula plug and Ligation of Intersphincteric Fistula Tract (LIFT) were not evaluated in this review.	167.	De Groof EJ, Cabral VN, Buskens CJ, et al. Systematic review of the evidence and consensus on perianal fistula: an analy-sis of national and international guidelines. Colorectal Dis. 2016;18(4):O119-O134.	168.	Shanwani A, Nor AM, Amri N. Ligation of the intersphincteric fistula tract (LIFT): a sphincter-saving technique for fistula-in-ano. Dis Colon Rectum. 2010;53:39-42.	169.	Gunter J. Genital and perianal warts: new treatment opportuni-ties for human papillomavirus infection. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2003;189(3 suppl):S3-S11.	170.	Palefsky JM. Anal squamous intraepithelial lesions: relation to HIV and human papillomavirus infection. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 1999;21(suppl 1):S42-S48.	171.	Bosarge PL, Como JJ, Fox N, et al. Management of penetrat-ing extraperitoneal rectal injuries: an Eastern Association for the Surgery of Trauma practice management guideline.  J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2016;80(3):546-551.	172.	Buie WD, Lowry AC, Rothenberger DA, et al. Clinical rather than laboratory assessment predicts continence after anterior sphincteroplasty. Dis Colon Rectum. 2001;44:1255-1260.	173.	Baeten CG, Bailey HR, Bakka A, et al. Safety and efficacy of dynamic graciloplasty for fecal incontinence: report of a prospective, multicenter trial. Dynamic Graciloplasty Therapy Study Group. Dis Colon Rectum. 2000;43:743-751.	174.	Hussain ZI, Lim M, Stojkovic SG. Systematic review of peri-anal implants in the treatment of faecal incontinence. Br J Surg. 2011;98:1526-1536.	175.	Vaizey CJ, Kamm MA, Roy AJ, et al. Double-blind crossover study of sacral nerve stimulation for fecal incontinence. Dis Colon Rectum. 2000;43:298-302.	176.	Tan EK, Vaizey C, Cornish J, et al. Surgical strategies for faecal incontinence—a decision analysis between dynamic gracilo-plasty, artificial bowel sphincter, and end stoma. Colorectal Dis. 2008;10:577-586.	177.	Cooksley CD, Hwang LY, Waller DK, et al. HIV-related malig-nancies: community-based study using linkage of cancer reg-istry and HIV registry data. Int J STD AIDS. 1999;10:795-802.	178.	Goldberg H, Baxter NN, Hertz M, Madoff RD, Ricciardi R, Bullard KM. Colon and rectal complications in heart and lung transplant patients. J Am Coll Surg. 2006;202:55-61.	179.	Ullery BW, Pieracci FM, Rodney JRM, Barie PS. Neutropenic enterocolitis. Surg Infect (Larchmt). 2009;10(3):307-314.Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   132923/02/19   2:30 PM
# Chunk 8932
Brunicardi_Ch29_p1259-p1330.indd   133023/02/19   2:30 PMThis page intentionally left blank

The AppendixFadi S. Dahdaleh, David Heidt, and Kiran K. Turaga 30chapterHISTORYAlthough anatomists such as Vesalius and Leonardo Da Vinci had written about the appendix, Claudius Amyand in the early 18th century was the first surgeon to describe a successful appendectomy.1 In subsequent centuries, significant progress was made in the diagnosis and management of appendicitis, especially after Chester McBurney advocated for early appen-dectomy in his 1889 publication.2 Famously, the magician Harry Houdini died of a ruptured appendix after suffering a blow to his abdomen. Following the introduction and widespread use of antibiotics in the 1940s, mortality rates improved further. In 1982, Kurt Semm, a gynecologist, reported on the first laparo-scopic appendectomy, which is now the most widely adopted technique.EMBRYOLOGY, ANATOMY, AND HISTOLOGYPreviously considered a vestigial organ, the appendix is now linked to the development and preservation of gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT) and to the maintenance of intestinal flora. It has been suggested that appendectomy is associated with increased Clostridium difficile infections and increased subse-quent cancer (colon, esophageal) as a result of microbial altera-tion, although this is currently unproven.3 The protective effect of an early appendectomy against development of ulcerative colitis has been proposed to be mechanistically linked to the release of dimeric forms of IgA from plasma B cells and the Th2 response mediated by IL-13–producing natural killer T cells.4The appendix, along with the ileum and the colon, devel-ops from the midgut and first appears at 8 weeks of gestation. As the gut rotates medially, the cecum becomes fixed in the right lower quadrant, thus determining the final position of the appendix. The appendix is a true diverticulum of the cecum as it contains all the histological layers of the colon, although cer-tain differences in the irregularity of crypts remain. The average appendix measures 6 to 9 cm and derives its blood supply from the appendicular branch of the ileocolic artery. Visceral innerva-tion occurs along the superior mesenteric plexus (T10-L1) and the vagus nerves. The appendix is intraperitoneal and retrocecal in location, but it can be pelvic (30%) and retroperitoneal (7%).5 Grossly, the appendiceal base can be identified by tracing the convergence of the cecal taeneia.ACUTE APPENDICITISInflammation of the appendix is a significant public health prob-lem with a lifetime incidence of 8.6% in men and 6.7% in women, with the highest incidence occurring in the second and third decade of life.6 While the rate of appendectomy in developed countries has decreased over the last several decades, it remains one of the most frequent emergent abdominal operations.7The etiology of appendicitis is perhaps due to luminal obstruction that occurs as a result of lymphoid hyperplasia in pediatric populations; in adults, it may be due to fecaliths, fibro-sis, foreign bodies (food, parasites, calculi), or neoplasia.5,8-10 Early obstruction leads to bacterial overgrowth of aerobic organisms in the early period, and subsequently, it leads to mixed flora. Obstruction generally leads to increased intralumi-nal pressure and referred visceral pain to the periumbilical region.10 It is postulated that this leads to impaired venous drain-age, mucosal ischemia leading to bacterial translocation, and subsequent gangrene and intraperitoneal infection. Escherichia coli and Bacteroides fragilis are the most common aerobic and anaerobic bacteria isolated in perforated appendicitis.11,12 1History	1331Embryology, Anatomy,   and Histology	1331Acute Appendicitis	1331Clinical Diagnosis	1332History / 1332Physical Examination / 1332Laboratory Findings / 1332Imaging / 1332Differential Diagnosis / 1335Management of Appendicitis	1335Uncomplicated Appendicitis / 1332Complicated Appendicitis / 1335Operative Intervention	1335Preoperative Preparation / 1335Operative Technique / 1336Novel Techniques / 1336Negative Exploration / 1336Incidental Appendectomy / 1336Special Circumstances	1337Appendicitis in Children / 1337Appendicitis in Older Adults / 1338Appendicitis in Pregnancy / 1338Chronic or Recurrent Appendicitis / 1338Outcomes and Postoperative   Course	1338Stump Appendicitis / 1338Appendiceal Neoplasms / 1338Gastroenteropancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumors (GEP-NETs or Carcinoid) / 1338Goblet Cell Carcinomas / 1339Lymphomas / 1339Adenocarcinoma / 1339Appendiceal Mucoceles and Mucinous Neoplasms of the Appendix / 1339Pseudomyxoma Peritonei  Syndrome / 1340Brunicardi_Ch30_p1331-p1344.indd   133101/03/19   7:05 PM 1332Key Points1	Inflammation of the appendix is a significant public health problem with a lifetime incidence of 8.6% in men and 6.7% in women, with the highest incidence in the second and third decade of life.6 While the rate of appendectomy in devel-oped countries has decreased over the last several decades, it remains one of the most frequent emergent abdominal operations.2	The natural history of appendicitis is unclear, but it appears that progression to perforation is not predictable and that spontaneous resolution is common, suggesting that nonper-forated and perforated appendicitis may, in fact, be different diseases.3	C-reactive protein, bilirubin, Il-6, and procalcitonin have all been suggested to be helpful in the diagnosis of appendicitis, specifically in predicting perforated appendicitis.4	Perforated appendicitis can be managed either operatively or nonoperatively. Immediate surgery is necessary in patients that appear septic, but this is usually associated with higher complications, including abscesses and enterocutaneous fis-tulae, due to dense adhesions and inflammation.5	Single incision appendectomy has not been shown to improve outcomes, including cosmetic outcomes, in prospective randomized studies and has been suggested to have a higher incisional hernia rate.6	While there is no evidence clearly evaluating long-term out-comes of patients undergoing incidental appendectomy with an asymptomatic appendix, the risk of adhesions and future complications after an appendectomy has been suggested to be higher than the risk of future appendicitis and increased economic costs. An incidental appendectomy is currently not advocated.7	Older adult patients are at a higher risk for complications due to their premorbid conditions, and it is prudent to obtain definitive diagnostic imaging prior to taking patients to the operating room.8	Patients with uncomplicated appendicitis do not require fur-ther antibiotics after an appendectomy, while patients with perforated appendicitis are treated with 3 to 7 days of antibiotics.9	The most common mode of presentation for appendiceal car-cinoma is that of acute appendicitis. Patients also may pres-ent with ascites or a palpable mass, or the neoplasm may be discovered during an operative procedure for an unrelated cause.This sequence is not inevitable, however, and some episodes of acute appendicitis may resolve spontaneously. Due to differ-ences in epidemiology, nonperforated and perforated appendicitis are considered different diseases.13 Addition-ally, since not all nonperforated appendicitis progresses to per-forations, it is suggested that the pathogenesis of the two conditions may be different.CLINICAL DIAGNOSISHistoryIt is important to elicit an accurate history from the patient and/or family, in the case of pediatric patients. Inflammation of the visceral peritoneum usually progresses to the parietal perito-neum, presenting with migratory pain, which is a classic sign of appendicitis (likelihood ratio+, 2.06 [1.63–2.60]).14 Inflam-mation can often result in anorexia, nausea, vomiting, and fever (Table 30-1). Regional inflammation can also present with an ileus, diarrhea, small bowel obstruction, and hematuria. Perti-nent negative history (including menstrual) must be obtained to rule out other etiologies of abdominal pain.Physical ExaminationMost patients lay quite still due to parietal peritonitis. Patients are generally warm to the touch (with a low-grade fever, ∼38.0°C [100.4°F]) and demonstrate focal tenderness with guarding. McBurney’s point, which is found one-third of the distance between the anterior superior iliac spine and the umbili-cus, is often the point of maximal tenderness in a patient with an anatomically normal appendix. Certain physical signs with their respective eponyms can be helpful in discerning the location of the appendix: Rovsing’s sign, pain in the right lower quad-rant after release of gentle pressure on left lower quadrant (nor-mal position); Dunphy’s sign, pain with coughing (retrocecal 2appendix); obturator sign, pain with internal rotation of the hip (pelvic appendix); iliopsoas sign, pain with flexion of the hip (retrocecal appendix). In addition, pain with rectal or cervical examinations is also suggestive of pelvic appendicitis.Laboratory FindingsPatients with appendicitis usually have leukocytosis of 10,000 cells/mm3, with a higher leukocytosis associated with gangrenous and perforated appendicitis (∼17,000 cells/mm3). C-reactive pro-tein, bilirubin, Il-6, and procalcitonin have all been sug-gested to help in the diagnosis of appendicitis, specifically in predicting perforated appendicitis.14,15 The authors believe that a white blood cell (WBC) count and a C-reactive protein are two appropriate lab tests to obtain in the initial work up of appendicitis; a pregnancy test is also essential in women of childbearing age. Lastly, a urinalysis can be valuable in ruling out nephrolithiasis or pyelonephritis.ImagingImaging is often utilized to confirm a diagnosis of appendici-tis because a negative operation rate is acceptable in <10% of male patients and <20% of female patients. Routine use of crosssectional imaging somewhat reduces the rate of negative laparot-omies. Imaging studies are most appropriate for patients in whom a diagnosis of appendicitis is unclear or who are at high risk from operative intervention and general anesthesia, such as pregnant patients or patients with multiple comorbidities. Commonly utilized imaging modalities include computerized tomography (CT), ultrasound (US), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).CT Scan. A contrast-enhanced CT scan has a sensitivity of 0.96 (95% confidence interval [CI] 0.95–0.97) and specificity of 0.96 (95% CI 0.93–0.97) in diagnosing acute appendicitis.16,17  Features on a CT scan that suggest appendicitis include enlarged lumen and double wall thickness (greater than 6 mm),  3Brunicardi_Ch30_p1331-p1344.indd   133201/03/19   7:05 PM 1333THE APPENDIXCHAPTER 30Table 30-1Signs and symptoms of appendicitis TRUE POSITIVE LIKELIHOOD RATIO95% CONFIDENCE INTERVALTRUE NEGATIVE LIKELIHOOD RATIO95% CONFIDENCE INTERVALDuration of symptoms (hours) >9 >12 >24 >481.010.960.650.490.97–1.050.90–1.040.47–0.900.36–0.670.941.191.471.200.62–1.420.87–1.631.14–1.901.08–1.34Fever1.640.89–3.010.610.49–0.77Gastrointestinal dysfunction Anorexia Nausea Vomiting1.271.151.631.14–1.411.04–1.361.45–1.840.590.720.750.45–0.770.57–0.910.69–0.80Pain Pain migration Pain progression Direct tenderness Indirect tenderness Psoas sign Rebound Percussion tenderness Guarding Rigidity2.061.391.292.472.311.992.862.482.961.63–2.601.29–1.501.06–1.571.38–4.431.36–3.911.61–2.451.95–4.211.60–3.842.43–3.590.520.460.250.710.850.390.490.570.860.40–0.690.27–0.770.12–0.530.65–0.770.76–0.950.32–0.480.37–0.630.48–0.680.72–1.02Temperature (degrees centigrade) >37.7 >38.51.571.870.90–2.760.66–5.320.650.890.31–1.360.71–1.12White blood cells (109/L) ≥10 ≥154.207.202.11–8.354.31–12.000.200.660.10–0.410.56–0.78C-reactive protein (mg/L) >10 >201.972.391.58–2.451.67–3.410.320.470.20–0.510.28–0.81Conclusions: Individually, disease history, clinical findings, and laboratory tests are weak. But when combined, they yield high discriminatory power.Data from Andersson RE: Meta-analysis of the clinical and laboratory diagnosis of appendicitis, Br J Surg. 2004 Jan;91(1):28-37.wall thickening (greater than 2 mm), periappendiceal fat stranding, appendiceal wall thickening, and/or an appendicolith (Fig. 30-1). While there remains a concern of ionizing radia-tion exposure with a CT scan, typical low-dose CT scans result in exposure of 2 to 4 mSv, which is not significantly higher than background radiation (3.1 mSv).18 Recent trials have also suggested that although low-dose CT scans of 2 mSv do not generate high-resolution images, using these lower resolution images does not affect clinical outcomes.19 Intravenous contrast is generally preferred in these studies, but it can be avoided in patients with allergies or low estimated glomerular filtration rate (less than 30 mL/minute for 1.73 m2). Several meta-analyses have suggested that CT scan is more sensitive and specific than ultrasound in diagnosing appendicitis.Ultrasound. Ultrasonography has a sensitivity of 0.85 (95% CI 0.79–0.90) and a specificity of 0.90 (95% CI 0.83–0.95).20 Graded compression ultrasonography is used to identify the anteroposterior diameter of the appendix. An easily compressible appendix <5 mm in diameter generally rules out appendicitis. Features on an ultrasound that suggest appendicitis include a diameter of greater than 6 mm, pain with compression, presence of an appendicolith, increased echogenicity of the fat, and periappendiceal fluid.21 Ultrasound is cheaper and more readily available than CT scan, and it does not expose patients to ionizing radiation, but it is user-dependent and has limited util-ity in obese patients. In addition, graded compression is usually Figure 30-1. McBurney’s point. 1 = anterior superior iliac spine; 2 = umbilicus; x = McBurney’s point.Brunicardi_Ch30_p1331-p1344.indd   133301/03/19   7:05 PM 1334SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 30-2Meta-analyses comparing CT scan and US outcomes    AUTHORSUMMARYTERASAWAWESTONDORIAAL-KHAYALVAN RANDENYear 20042005200620072008 No. of studies 222157256 No. of patientsCTUSTotal117215162688NRNR5039NRNR13697NRNR13046NRNR671 SensitivityCTUS94% (CI: 91%–95%)86% (CI: 83%–88%)97% (CI: 95%–98%)87% (CI: 85%–89%)94% (CI: 92%–97%)88% (CI: 86%–90%)93% (CI: 92%–95%)84% (CI: 82%–85%)91% (CI: 84%–95%)78% (CI: 67%–86%)CT more sensitive than US in five of five meta-analysesSpecificityCTUS95% (CI: 93%–96%)81% (CI: 78%–84%)95% (CI: 93%–96%)93% (CI: 92%–94%)94% (CI: 94%–96%)93% (CI: 90%–96%)93 (CI: 92%–94%)96 (CI: 95%–96%)90% (CI: 85%–94%)83% (CI: 76%–88%)CT more specific than US in four of five meta-analysesPositive predictive valueCTUSNRNR94% (CI: 92%–95%)89% (CI: 87%–90%)NRNR90% (CI: 89%–92%)90% (CI: 89%–91%)NRNRCT has superior positive predictive value in one of two meta-analysesNegative predictive valueCTUSNRNR97% (CI: 96%–98%)92% (CI:91%–93%)NRNR96% (CI: 95%–97%)93% (CI: 92%–94%)NRNRCT has superior negative predictive value in both meta-analysesAccuracyCTUSNRNRNRNRNRNR94% (CI: 93%–94%)92% (CI: 92%–96%)NRNRCT is more accurate in the one study reporting resultsCI = confidence interval; CT = computed tomography; NR = not reported; US = ultrasonography.Brunicardi_Ch30_p1331-p1344.indd   133401/03/19   7:05 PM 1335THE APPENDIXCHAPTER 30painful for patients with peritonitis. A comparison of the effi-cacy of ultrasound v. CT scan is found in Table 30-2.MRI. MRI of the abdomen has a sensitivity of 0.95 (95% CI 0.88–0.98) and specificity of 0.92 (95% CI 0.87–0.95) for iden-tification of acute appendicitis.22 MRI is an expensive test that requires significant expertise to perform and interpret and is usually recommended in patients for whom the risk of ionizing radiation outweighs the relative ease of obtaining a contrast  CT scan, i.e., pregnant or pediatric patients.Differential DiagnosisCauses of acute abdominal pain that are often confused with acute appendicitis include acute mesenteric adenitis, cecal diverticulitis, Meckel’s diverticulitis, acute ileitis, Crohn’s dis-ease, acute pelvic inflammatory disease, torsion of ovarian cyst or graafian follicle, and acute gastroenteritis. Frequently, no organic pathology is identified. Obtaining an antecedent history of a viral infection (mesenteric adenitis or gastroenteritis) and a cervical exam in women (exquisite tenderness with motion in pelvic inflammatory disease) are essential before planning any intervention. Detailed menstrual history can distinguish mittel-schmerz (no fever or leukocytosis, mid-menstrual cycle pain) and ectopic pregnancies.MANAGEMENT OF APPENDICITISUncomplicated AppendicitisThe preferred approach to manage patients with uncomplicated appendicitis is an appendectomy. Several recent randomized trials and cohort studies have examined the role of nonopera-tive management of adult patients with appendicitis.23,24,25 In each of these well-designed studies with noninferiority as the endpoint, patients were randomized to either receiving antibiot-ics or undergoing an appendectomy, which was frequently per-formed open. A majority of the patients in the nonoperative arm received intravenous antibiotics for a short course followed by a course of a fluoroquinolone and metronidazole, or oral amoxi-cillin/clavulanic acid.23,26,27 Meta-analysis of the published data found that 26.5% of patients in the nonoperative group required an appendectomy within 1 year. In addition, the rate of adverse events following antibiotics therapy was higher (relative risk [RR] 3.18, 95% CI 1.63–6.21, P = 0.0007), and patients who recurred presented more frequently with complicated appen-dicitis (RR 2.52, 95% CI 1.17–5.43, P = 0.02).28,29 Currently, conservative management can be offered to informed patients using techniques of shared decision-making, but it is not the standard modality of management of appendicitis, except in patients with significant phobia of surgery.30 Societal costs and long-term implications of the conservative strategy have not yet been completely evaluated.Timing of Surgery. Emergent surgery is often performed in patients with appendicitis, but studies have evaluated the perfor-mance of urgent surgery (waiting less than 12 hours) in a semi-elective setting after administering antibiotics upon admission. The studies did not reveal any significant difference in outcomes, except for a slightly longer hospital stay in those undergoing urgent surgery.31-33 Currently, delaying surgery less than 12 hours is acceptable in patients with short duration of symptoms (less than 48 hours) and in nonperforated, nongangrenous appendicitis.Approach of Surgery. Numerous meta-analyses comparing laparoscopic to open appendectomy have demonstrated relative equivalence of the techniques, with laparoscopic appendec-tomy resulting in a shorter length of stay (LOS), faster return to work, and lower superficial wound infection rates, especially in obese patients.34,35 Open appendectomy results in shorter operative times and lower intra-abdominal infection rates.36 Costs of the two techniques are relatively similar because of the offset of costs in laparoscopic techniques by shorter LOS. In the United States, laparoscopic appendectomies are increas-ingly utilized.37Complicated AppendicitisPerforated and gangrenous appendicitis and appendicitis with abscess or phlegmon formation are considered complicated conditions. Patients with perforated appendicitis usually pres-ent after 24 hours of onset, although 20% of patients present within 24 hours. Such patients are often acutely ill and dehy-drated and require resuscitation. Usually, the perforated abscess is walled off in the right lower quadrant, although retroperito-neal abscesses including psoas abscess, liver abscesses, fistu-las, and pylephlebitis (portal vein inflammation) can also occur when left untreated.Perforated appendicitis can be managed either operatively or nonoperatively. Immediate surgery is necessary in patients that appear septic, but this is usually associated with higher complications, including abscesses and enterocuta-neous fistulae due to dense adhesions and inflammation. The management of long-duration, complicated appendici-tis is often staged.38,39 Patients are resuscitated and treated with  IV antibiotics.40,41 Patients with longstanding perforation are better treated with adequate percutaneous image-guided drain-age.42 This strategy is successful in 79% of patients who achieve complete resolution, which occurs more often in lower-grade abscesses, transgluteal drainage, and with CT(vs. ultrasound-) guided drainage43 Operative intervention is performed in patients who fail conservative management and in patients with free intra-peritoneal perforation.Interval Appendectomy. The majority of patients with perfo-rated appendicitis (80%) have resolution of their symptoms with drainage and antibiotics. There remains debate about the value of performing an interval appendectomy 6 to 8 weeks after the original inflammatory episode.44-46 Proponents of this approach cite the incidence of recurrent appendicitis (7.4%–8.8%) and the presence of appendiceal neoplasms detected on the appendec-tomy (relevant benign lesions 0.7%, malignant lesions 1.3%).47 Opponents cite the high incidence of no future events after a median follow-up of 34 months in 91% of patients. Currently, shared decision-making is necessary before proceeding with an interval appendectomy.39OPERATIVE INTERVENTIONPreoperative PreparationOnce the decision to proceed with surgical intervention is made, patients can be taken to the operating room rather expeditiously. While resuscitative efforts are important in patients who pres-ent with significant dehydration or in a compromised host, the majority of patients can be taken to the operating room within a short interval. Placement of a Foley catheter is optional but not necessary while performing an appendectomy. Preopera-tive antibiotics must be administered at least 30 to 60 minutes prior to skin incision. The choice of antibiotics include cefoxi-tin, ampicillin/sulbactam, and cefazolin plus metronidazole for 4Brunicardi_Ch30_p1331-p1344.indd   133501/03/19   7:05 PM 1336SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIuncomplicated appendicitis. Patients with ß-lactam allergies can be given clindamycin in combination with a fluoroquinolone, gentamicin, or aztreonam. Postoperative antibiotics are usually not necessary.In patients with perforated appendicitis undergoing opera-tive intervention, preoperative antibiotics are necessary to cover gram-negative bacteria and anaerobes. Monotherapy with piper-acillin/tazobactam or combination of cephalosporin with metro-nidazole are reasonable choices. The duration of postoperative antibiotics is generally less than 4 days once complete source control has been achieved (STOP-IT trial).48 Patients with incomplete drainage, persistent catheters, complications from surgery, and uncertain resolution of inflammation might need a longer duration of antibiotics.49Operative TechniqueOpen Appendectomy. An open appendectomy is usually per-formed under general anesthesia, although regional anesthesia can be used. After wide prep and drape, an incision is usually made on McBurney’s point either in an oblique fashion (McBur-ney’s incision) or transverse incision (Rocky-Davis incision). A lower midline laparotomy incision is more appropriate for perforated appendicitis with a phlegmon. A muscle-splitting approach can be utilized to access the peritoneum in patients that are well paralyzed. The bed is positioned in Trendelen-burg’s with the left side down. The appendix is usually readily identified, but if necessary, it can be found by tracing the ante-rior taenia (taenia Liberia) of the cecum distally. We generally ligate the mesentery early to allow better exposure. If the base of the appendix is viable, ligating the appendix is acceptable. This can be imbricated with a Z-stitch or purse string configura-tion, or alternatively the mucosa can be fulgurated. In the event of retraction of the appendiceal artery or unexpected bleeding,  the incision can be extended medially (Fowler extension).  Skin closure is usually performed in a layered fashion, but in cases with significant abscess or contamination, closure by sec-ondary intention or delayed primary closure has been consid-ered. Recent trials have suggested no difference in surgical site infection rates between primary and delayed primary closure.50 Placement of surgical drains has not been proven to be benefi-cial in multiple clinical trials for either complicated or uncom-plicated appendicitis.51,52Laparoscopic Appendectomy. Patients undergoing laparo-scopic appendectomy are positioned supine with the left arm tucked for better access. Monitors and assistants are positioned appropriately. Access to the peritoneum can be obtained using either the Hasson technique in a periumbilical fashion or with a Verees or optical trocar in the left upper quadrant 3 cm below the costal margin in the midclavicular line. Five-mm ports are usually placed in the suprapubic and left lower quadrant areas. It is also technically feasible to place the third port in the right upper quadrant. The bed is positioned in Trendelenburg, with the left side down to sweep the bowel away. The appendix is grasped and elevated upwards to identify the window between the mesoappendix and the cecum (Fig. 30-2). Occasionally, it is essential to release the mesenteric attachments of the cecum to mobilize a retrocecal or pelvic appendix to obtain this view. Using a Maryland grasper, the window is created, and the mesoappendix is divided with cautery, clip, or a bipolar energy source. The base of the appendix is divided either with an endoscopic stapler or after placing an endoloop. In the case of a nonviable appendix base, a staple line through the cecum that avoids the ileocecal valve might be sufficient, unless sig-nificant inflammation is present. The appendix is retrieved through the midline port in a specimen bag, especially if an appendiceal lesion is suspected. If a periappendiceal phlegmon is encountered or if the operation is being performed for perfo-rated appendicitis, careful sweeping of the bowel with a blunt dissector can release the appendix. It is important to carefully separate adjacent bowel, which can be friable in such settings. Conversion to open surgery should be considered for failure to progress. Typically, once the base of the appendix is identified, it is generally more helpful to divide the stump first. An endo-scopic stapler or endoloop can be used for the base, provided the base is viable. Occasionally, an ileocecectomy is necessary when resection of the base of the appendix or cecum is likely to impinge on the ileocecal valve. The mesoappendix is similarly divided with either a stapler with thin leg length staples, a clip, cautery, or energy device.Novel TechniquesThree novel techniques have been investigated in the performance of an appendectomy: single incision appendectomy, natural orifice transluminal endoscopic surgery (NOTES), and robotic appendec-tomy. Single incision appendectomy has not been shown to improve outcomes, including cosmetic outcomes, in pro-spective randomized studies and has been suggested to have a higher incisional hernia rate.53 NOTES surgery has been shown to have better cosmetic outcome and less postoperative pain in a meta-analysis of NOTES procedures including appendectomies, although only 40 patients were included in the analysis.54 The risk of luminal contamination and closure of enteral or vaginal mucosa remain suboptimal; for this reason, there has not been widespread dissemination of this technique.55 Robotic appendectomy allows flexible motions of intraperitoneal instruments and is therefore superior in ergonomics for the surgeon.56 However, it is extremely expensive and requires larger ports based on most of the current platforms; thus, this technique is also not utilized widely.Negative ExplorationUpon performing a laparoscopy or laparotomy for suspected appendicitis, if one finds no evidence of appendicitis, a thor-ough exploration of the peritoneum must be performed to rule out contributing pathology. A normal appendix is often removed to reduce future diagnostic dilemma.57 Management of incidentally found common conditions is summarized in Table 30-3.Incidental AppendectomyThe practice of prophylactic appendectomy has been considered during other operations to prevent the future risk of appendici-tis.6,58 It is routinely performed in children undergoing chemo-therapy, compromised hosts with an unclear physical exam, patients with Crohn’s disease with a normal cecum, patients traveling to remote places with no urgent care, and in patients undergoing cytoreductive operations for ovarian malignancies.59 While there is no evidence clearly evaluating long-term out-comes of patients undergoing incidental appendectomy with an asymptomatic appendix, the risk of adhesions and future complications after an appendectomy has been suggested to be higher than the risk of future appendicitis and increased economic costs. For these reasons, an incidental appendectomy is currently not advocated. 56Brunicardi_Ch30_p1331-p1344.indd   133601/03/19   7:05 PM 1337THE APPENDIXCHAPTER 30SurgeonAssistantAnesthesiologistFigure 30-2. Operating room setup.SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCESAppendicitis in ChildrenAlmost 1 in 8 children undergo a workup for the diagnosis of appendicitis.60,61 Of these, infants and young children are most likely to present with perforated disease (51%–100%), while school-age children have lower rates of perforation.62,63,64 While most age groups demonstrate the same symptoms previously described in adults, neonates can also present with abdominal distension and lethargy or irritability. The Pediatric Appendici-tis Score has components similar to the Alvarado Score and is scored of 10 points, with maximum weight (2 points each) for right lower quadrant tenderness and pain with cough, percussion or hopping. A score of 7 or greater indicates that the patient has a high chance of having appendicitis (78%–96% percent).65In the pediatric population, special considerations must be made to exclude relevant differential diagnoses such as intus-susception (currant jelly stools, abdominal mass), gastroenteritis (often no luekocytosis), malrotation (pain out of proportion), pregnancy (ectopic), mesenteric adenitis, torsion of the omen-tum, and ovarian or testicular torsion.Table 30-3Management of Intraoperative Findings Mimicking AppendicitisOvarian TorsionConservative  management with detorsion and oophoropexyCrohn’s terminal ileitisAppendectomy if base uninflamedMeckel’s diverticulitisSegmental small bowel resection and primary anastomosisAppendiceal MassLaparoscopic appendectomy/ileocecectomy without capsular disruption or spillage and retrieval in a bagBrunicardi_Ch30_p1331-p1344.indd   133701/03/19   7:05 PM 1338SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIWith regard to the management of children with appen-dicitis, early appendicitis is treated preferably with a laparo-scopic appendectomy, which has better outcomes than open appendectomies in children.66,67 For patients with complicated appendicitis, urgent appendectomy is advocated in the setting of no abscess or mass. Laparoscopic appendectomy appears to retain its benefits in this setting as well.68,69 In the setting of a perforation, antibiotics are continued after surgery for at least 3 days, and preferably 5 days (APSA guidelines).70,71 Manage-ment of perforated appendicitis with abscess is similar to adults, although no adverse effects of an early laparoscopic appendec-tomy have been seen even in this setting.39,72,73,74Nonoperative management of appendicitis has also been studied in children.75-77 It may be safe for children with early presentation (less than 48 hours), limited inflammation (WBC less than 18,000/cu.ml), appendicoliths, and no evidence of rup-ture on imaging.78 Patients are usually administered IV antibi-otics until inflammation reduces and then transitioned to oral antibiotics.79 This is usually effective in reducing inflammation (88%–92%), but has a recurrence rate of 22% at 1 year and increased resource utilization.80Appendicitis in Older AdultsOlder adult patients can have diminished inflammation and thus present with perforation or abscess more frequently.81,82 Such patients are at a higher risk for complications because of their premorbid conditions, and it is more prudent to obtain definitive diagnostic imaging prior to taking patients to the operating room. Laparoscopic appendectomy is safe and might allow patients to reduce pain and their hospital stay.83 Appendicitis in PregnancyAppendicitis occurs in 1 in 800 to 1 in 1000 pregnancies, mostly in the first and second trimesters. Its incidence is rare in the antepartum state, and it can occur in the postpartum state in geriatric pregnancies (maternal age greater than 35 years).84 While the majority of the clinical features are similar, patients can also present with heartburn, bowel irregularity, flatulence, or a change in bowel habits. The point of maximum tender-ness is usually displaced on physical exam. Ultrasonography is the preferred imaging modality, although nonvisualization can occur. Sensitivity can vary from 67% to 100%, and specificity varies from 93% to 96%.39 An alternative imaging modality is MRI, with a sensitivity of 94% and specificity of 97%.85 While CT can be performed in pregnancy, the risk of fetal irradiation leads many practitioners to avoid it unless other modalities are inconclusive.86 When discussing options with the patient and the patient’s family, it is important to note that the risk of fetal loss is up to 36% if appendiceal perforation occurs.87 Therefore, there remains a lower threshold to operate on such patients, with an acceptable negative exploration rate of as high as 30%. Lapa-roscopic appendectomies can be safely performed in pregnant patients, although studies suggest a variable but reproducible higher rate of fetal loss (around 7% vs. 3%) than open tech-niques. Lower intra-abdominal pressures (10–12 mmHg) during insufflation have been suggested to reduce early labor. Nonoper-ative management has also been proposed for pregnant patients, but treatment failure rates have been reported as high as 25%.Chronic or Recurrent AppendicitisPatients with recurrent right lower quadrant abdominal pain not associated with a febrile illness with imaging findings sugges-tive of an appendicolith or dilated appendix are classified as having chronic appendicitis.88 Patients often report resolution of symptoms with an appendectomy. In the absence of imaging abnormalities, prophylactic appendectomy is not encouraged.45OUTCOMES AND POSTOPERATIVE COURSEAppendectomy is a relatively safe procedure with an extremely low mortality rate (less than 1%). The commonest adverse events include soft tissue infections, either superficial or deep (including abscesses). Patients with uncomplicated appendicitis do not require further antibiotics after an appendec-tomy, while patients with perforated appendicitis are treated with 3 to 7 days of antibiotics (4 days from the STOP-IT trial).89 Patients with wound infections can be managed with simple wound opening and packing, and delayed primary closure has not been shown to be beneficial.90 In laparoscopic cases, these are usually the periumbilical ports.91 Patients with deep space abscesses are managed with percutaneous drainage and antibiot-ics. Fistulas (appendicocutaneous or appendicovesicular) are managed conservatively as the first step. Bowel obstructions and infertility are infrequent but reported.Stump AppendicitisAn uncommon complication after surgery is the development of appendicitis in an incompletely excised appendiceal stump (greater than 0.5 cm stump length). Optimal management requires reexcision of the appendiceal base, but diagnosis can be difficult and requires careful assessment of the patient’s history, physical exam, and imaging studies.92 Use of the “appendiceal critical view” (appendix placed at 10 o’clock, taenia coli/libera at 3 o’clock, and terminal ileum at 6 o’clock) and identification of where the taeniae coli merge and disappear is paramount to identifying and ligating the base of the appendix during the ini-tial operation (Fig. 30-3). In patients who have had prior appen-dectomy, a low index of suspicion is important to prevent delay in diagnosis and complications. Prior appendectomy should not be an absolute criterion in ruling out acute appendicitis.Appendiceal NeoplasmsThe incidence of appendiceal neoplasms is estimated at around 1% of all appendectomy specimens, although the true incidence of appendiceal neoplasms is not known.93 Neoplasms that occur in the appendix are predominantly gastroenteropancreatic neu-roendocrine tumors (or GEP-NETs, previously called carci-noids), mucinous neoplasms, or adenocarcinomas.94-96 Almost one-third of the neoplasms of the appendix present with acute appendicitis, while the others are often incidentally detected or are detected after regional spread of disease.97Gastroenteropancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumors (GEP-NETs or Carcinoid)Appendiceal carcinoid tumors are submucosal rubbery masses that are detected incidentally on the appendix.98 Carcinoid tumors of the appendix are relatively indolent but can develop nodal or hepatic metastases.99 Infrequently, these can be associ-ated with a carcinoid syndrome if there are hepatic metastases (2.9%).100 Upon incidental findings of a suspected carcinoid, the surgeon must evaluate the nodal basin along the ileocolic ped-icle and also examine the liver for any signs of metastases. For lesions that are less than 1 cm (95% of all lesions), a negative margin appendectomy is adequate. For tumors 2 cm or larger, a right hemicolectomy is recommended. For lesions 1 to 2 cm in size, there is no consensus on a completion colectomy. A right colectomy is often performed for mesenteric invasion, enlarged 78Brunicardi_Ch30_p1331-p1344.indd   133801/03/19   7:05 PM 1339THE APPENDIXCHAPTER 30Figure 30-3. A and B. Appendiceal critical view.ABnodes, or positive or unclear margins. Measurement of serum chromogranin A is recommended.Goblet Cell CarcinomasThese lesions were mistakenly called goblet cell carcinoids, implying a rather indolent biology, while goblet cell carcinomas are adenocarcinoid with both adenocarcinoma and neuroendocrine features.101,102 Such lesions carry a worse prognosis than carcinoids but slightly better than adenocarcinomas. There is a high risk of peritoneal recurrence in such cases. For incidentally detected lesions, a systematic surveillance of the peritoneum must be per-formed, and a peritoneal cancer index score must be documented if disease is present.103 In the absence of metastatic disease, a right hemicolectomy is generally appropriate, although some advocate for a right colectomy only for tumors 2 cm or larger.104LymphomasAppendiceal lymphomas are rare (1%–3% of lymphomas, usu-ally non-Hodgkin’s) and difficult to diagnose preoperatively (appendiceal diameter can be 2.5 cm or larger).105,106 Manage-ment includes an appendectomy in most cases.AdenocarcinomaPrimary adenocarcinoma of the appendix is a rare neoplasm with three major histologic subtypes: mucinous adenocarcinoma, colonic adenocarcinoma, and adenocarcinoid. The most common mode of presentation for appendiceal carcinoma is acute appendicitis. Patients also may present with ascites or a palpable mass, or the neoplasm may be discovered during an operative procedure for an unrelated cause. The recommended treatment for all patients with adenocarcinoma of the appendix is a formal right hemicolectomy. Appendiceal adenocarcinomas have a propensity for early perforation, although they are not clearly associated with a worsened prognosis. Overall 5-year sur-vival is 55% and varies with stage and grade. Patients with appendiceal adenocarcinoma are at significant risk for both syn-chronous and metachronous neoplasms, approximately half of which will originate from the gastrointestinal tract.Appendiceal Mucoceles and Mucinous Neoplasms of the AppendixThe term appendiceal mucocele broadly describes a mucus-filled appendix that could be secondary to neoplastic or nonneoplastic 9pathologies (mucosal hyperplasia, simple or retention cysts, mucinous cystadenomas, mucinous cystadenocarcinoma). The most common form of presentation is incidental; however, pre-sentation with appendicitis occurs in a third of cases.107,108 On cross-sectional imaging, a low attenuation, round, well encapsu-lated cystic mass in the right or quadrant is often encountered, and features such as wall irregularity and soft tissue thickening are suggestive of a neoplastic process. It is important to carefully assess for the presence of ascites, peritoneal disease, and scal-loping of the liver surface on imaging upon initial evaluation. A reliable diagnosis cannot be established using imaging alone, and it is recommended that surgical excision without capsular disruption is undertaken.109 The importance of careful handling of a mucocele and the avoidance of rupture cannot be overem-phasized because the intraperitoneal spread of neoplastic cells at subsequent development of pseudomyxoma peritonei are nearly certain in cases of adenocarcinoma.110,111 When suspecting a mucinous neoplasm of the appendix, it is imperative to systemat-ically examine the peritoneum and document a peritoneal cancer index score if mucin is present. Biopsies to examine the content of epithelial cell, neoplastic cells, and mucin can be helpful.In cases where a homogeneous cyst without nodularity or signs of dissemination is encountered, laparoscopic excision is acceptable, provided that a stapler is fired across the base of the cecum to avoid a positive margin. The specimen should be placed in a plastic bag and carefully removed through a small incision. In the absence of mesenteric or peritoneal involvement, an appendectomy with concurrent appendiceal lymphadenec-tomy is sufficient, as the chances of lymph node involvement are quite low. If peritoneal spread is evident upon exploration, it is important to obtain biopsies and document the peritoneal dis-ease burden. An appendectomy is acceptable if the patient has acute appendicitis, but suboptimal debulking is discouraged. In addition, colorectal, ovarian, and endometrial cancers can coex-ist in the setting of appendiceal mucoceles, and careful examina-tion of intra-abdominal structures is important.When there is discordance between the primary lesion histology and the peritoneum, the peritoneal histology is usu-ally given priority. For instance, if patients had a neoplasm in the appendix but adenocarcinoma in the peritoneum, the patient would be considered as having adenocarcinoma (AJCC M1b) disease. The recent AJCC 8th edition and the PSOGI 2016 Brunicardi_Ch30_p1331-p1344.indd   133901/03/19   7:05 PM 1340SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 30-4AJCC 8th edition and the PSOGI 2016 classification consensus of mucinous neoplasia of the appendixLESIONPERITONEAL DISEASE AT DIAGNOSISPROGNOSISTREATMENTLow-grade appendiceal mucinous neoplasm (LAMN)Confined to the appendixExcellent-curativeNegative margin appendectomy, rarely need ileocecectomyLAMNPeri-appendiceal Acellular mucin dissecting through the wall (t4a) or adjacent organs (t4b)Excellent-low risk of recurrenceNegative margin appendectomy, resection of acellular mucinLAMNPeri-appendiceal Epithelial cells dissecting through the wall (t4a) or adjacent organs (t4b)Excellent-high risk of recurrenceNegative margin appendectomy, peritoneal surveillance with second look laparoscopy vs. HIPECLAMNDistant epithelial cells or acellular mucin (M1a)Low grade mucinous carcinoma peritoneiExcellent-high risk of recurrenceNegative margin appendectomy, omentectomy, HIPECHigh-grade appendiceal mucinous neoplasm (HAMN-rare)Management is identical to a LAMN with risk stratification as shown above but slightly worse prognosis.Mucinous adenocarcinomaConfined to the appendixVery GoodRight hemicolectomyMucinous adenocarcinomaPeritoneal DisseminationHigh grade mucinous carcinoma peritonei with or without signet ring cellsWell Differentiated-Very goodModerately differentiated –GoodPoorly differentiated/signet ring cell histology:10 year survival of 10-20%Cytoreductive surgery and HIPEC, with systemic chemotherapy for high grade histologiesAdenocarcinoma (non-mucinous, including goblet cell histology)Management identical to the mucinous histologies, with more extensive use of systemic chemotherapySerrated Adenoma (rare)Confined to appendixExcellent-curativeAppendectomyAdenoma (rare)Confined to appendixExcellent-curativeAppendectomyData from American College of Surgeons. Amin MB, Edge SB, Greene FL, et al. (Eds.) AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, 8th Ed. Springer New York, 2017 and Carr NJ, Cecil TD, Mohamed F, et al: A Consensus for Classification and Pathologic Reporting of Pseudomyxoma Peritonei and Associated Appendiceal Neoplasia: The Results of the Peritoneal Surface Oncology Group International (PSOGI) Modified Delphi Process, Am J Surg Pathol.  2016 Jan;40(1):14-26.classification consensus has resulted in a therapy-directed clas-sification of mucinous neoplasms of the appendix, summarized in Table 30-4.112Pseudomyxoma Peritonei SyndromePatients with appendiceal mucinous neoplasms develop perito-neal dissemination leading to pseudomyxoma peritonei (PMP) syndrome. This can occur in gastric, ovarian, pancreatic, and colorectal primary tumors as well.111 Patients with this syn-drome can have varied prognosis ranging from curative to pal-liative. Cytoreductive surgery and hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC) are considered the standard of care for patients with PMP syndrome from appendiceal primaries.113-115Early detection and management of limited peritoneal dis-ease is favorable and preferred as opposed to extensive intra-peritoneal mucin development. The surgical technique involves parietal and visceral peritonectomies, and intraperitoneal administration of heated (42oC [108oF]) chemotherapy (usually mitomycin) in the abdomen. Previously considered a morbid surgery, high volume centers and standardized practices have made the morbidity and mortality similar to any major open GI procedure. This technique can also be performed laparoscopi-cally when the disease is detected early and is low volume.REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Amyand C. Of an inguinal rupture, with a pin in the appendix coeci, incrusted with stone; and some observations on wounds in the guts. Phil Trans. 1735;39:329-342.	2.	McBurney C. Experience with early operative interference in cases of disease of the vermiform appendix. N Y State Med J. 1889;50:6 and Clostridium difficile colitis: relationships revealed by clinical observations and immunology. World J Gastroenterol. 2013;19:5607-5614.	3.	Mohammadi, M, Song, H, Cao, Y: Risk of lymphoid neo-plasms in a Swedish population-based cohort of 337,437 patients undergoing appendectomy. Scand J Gastroenterol 2016;51:583–589.	4.	Sahami S, Kooij IA, Meijer SL, Van den Brink GR, Buskens CJ, Te Velde AA. The link between the appendix and ulcerative Brunicardi_Ch30_p1331-p1344.indd   134001/03/19   7:05 PM 1341THE APPENDIXCHAPTER 30colitis: clinical relevance and potential immunological mecha-nisms. Am J Gastroenterol. 2016;111(2):163-169.	5.	Prystowsky JB, Pugh CM, Nagle AP. Current problems in sur-gery. Appendicitis. Curr Probl Surg. 2005;42:688-742.	6.	Addiss DG, Shaffer N, Fowler BS, Tauxe RV. The epidemiol-ogy of appendicitis and appendectomy in the United States. Am J Epidemiol. 1990;132(5):910-925.	7.	Song H, Abnet CC, Andrén-Sandberg A, Chaturvedi AK, Ye W. Risk of gastrointestinal cancers among patients with appendectomy: a large-scale Swedish register-based cohort study during 1970-2009. PLoS One. 2016;11(3):e0151262.	8.	Birnbaum BA, Wilson SR. Appendicitis at the millennium. Radiology. 2000;215(2):337-348.	9.	Burkitt DP. The aetiology of appendicitis. Br J Surg. 1971;58(9): 695-699.	10.	Arnbjornsson E, Bengmark S. Obstruction of the appendix lumen in relation to pathogenesis of acute appendicitis. Acta Chir Scand. 1983;149(8):789-791.	11.	Lau WY, Teoh-Chan CH, Fan ST, Yam WC, Lau KF, Wong SH. The bacteriology and septic complication of patients with appendicitis. Ann Surg. 1984;200(5):576-581.	12.	Bennion RS, Baron EJ, Thompson JE Jr, et al. The bacteri-ology of gangrenous and perforated appendicitis—revisited. Ann Surg. 1990;211(2):165-171.	13.	Andersson R, Hugander A, Thulin A, Nyström, Olaison G. Indications for operation in suspected appendicitis and inci-dence of perforation. BMJ. 1994;308(6921):107-110.	14.	Andersson RE. Meta-analysis of the clinical and laboratory diagnosis of appendicitis. Br J Surg. 2004;91(1):28-37.	15.	Acharya A, Markar SR, Ni M, Hanna GB. Biomarkers of acute appendicitis: systematic review and cost-benefit trade-off analysis. Surg Endosc. 2017;31(3):1022-1031.	16.	Anderson SW, Soto JA, Lucey BC, et al. Abdominal 64-MDCT for suspected appendicitis: the use of oral and IV contrast material versus IV contrast material only. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2009;193(5):1282-1288.	17.	Smith MP, Katz DS, Lalani T, et al. ACR Appropriateness Criteria right lower quadrant pain—suspected appendicitis. Ultrasound Q. 2015;31(2):85-91.	18.	Yun SJ, Ryu CW, Choi NY, Kim HC, Oh JY, Yang DM. Com-parison of lowand standard-dose CT for the diagnosis of acute appendicitis: a meta-analysis. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2017;208(6):W198-W207.	19.	LOCAT Group. Low-dose CT for the diagnosis of appendi-citis in adolescents and young adults (LOCAT): a pragmatic, multicentre, randomised controlled non-inferiority trial. Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2017;2(11):793-804.	20.	Keyzer C, Zalcman M, De Maertelaer V, et al. Com-parison of US and unenhanced multi-detector row CT in patients suspected of having acute appendicitis. Radiology. 2005;236(2):527-534.	21.	Kessler N, Cyteval C, Gallix B, et al. Appendicitis: evalu-ation of sensitivity, specificity, and predictive values of US, Doppler US, and laboratory findings. Radiology. 2004;230(2):472-478.	22.	Barger RL Jr, Nandalur KR. Diagnostic performance of mag-netic resonance imaging in the detection of appendicitis in adults: a meta-analysis. Acad Radiol. 2010;17(10):1211-1216.	23.	Vons C, Barry C, Maitre S, et al. Amoxicillin plus clavulanic acid versus appendicectomy for treatment of acute uncom-plicated appendicitis: an open-label, non-inferiority, ran-domised controlled trial. Lancet. 2011;377(9777):1573-1579.	24.	Hansson J, Korner U, Khorram-Manesh A, Solberg A, Lundholm K. Randomized clinical trial of antibiotic therapy versus appendicectomy as primary treatment of acute appen-dicitis in unselected patients. Br J Surg. 2009;96(5):473-481.	25.	Styrud J, Eriksson S, Nilsson I, et al. Appendectomy versus antibiotic treatment in acute appendicitis. a prospective multicenter randomized controlled trial. World J Surg. 2006;30(6):1033-1037.	26.	Di Saverio S, Sibilio A, Giorgini E, et al. The NOTA Study (Non Operative Treatment for Acute Appendicitis): prospec-tive study on the efficacy and safety of antibiotics (amoxi-cillin and clavulanic acid) for treating patients with right lower quadrant abdominal pain and long-term follow-up of conservatively treated suspected appendicitis. Ann Surg. 2014;260(1):109-117.	27.	Salminen P, Paajanen H, Rautio T, et al. Antibiotic therapy vs appendectomy for treatment of uncomplicated acute appendicitis: the APPAC randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2015;313(23):2340-2348.	28.	Harnoss JC, Zelienka I, Probst P, et al. Antibiotics versus surgical therapy for uncomplicated appendicitis: system-atic review and meta-analysis of controlled trials (PROS-PERO 2015: CRD42015016882). Ann Surg. 2017;265(5): 889-900.	29.	Varadhan KK, Neal KR, Lobo DN. Safety and efficacy of antibiotics compared with appendicectomy for treatment of uncomplicated acute appendicitis: meta-analysis of ran-domised controlled trials. BMJ. 2012;344:e2156.	30.	Sartelli M, Viale P, Catena F, et al. 2013 WSES guidelines for management of intra-abdominal infections. World J Emerg Surg. 2013;8(1):3.	31.	Ingraham AM, Cohen ME, Bilimoria KY, et al. Effect of delay to operation on outcomes in adults with acute appendicitis. Arch Surg. 2010;145(9):886-892.	32.	Abou-Nukta F, Bakhos C, Arroyo K, et al. Effects of delaying appendectomy for acute appendicitis for 12 to 24 hours. Arch Surg. 2006;141(5):504-506; discussion 506-507.	33.	Stahlfeld K, Hower J, Homitsky S, Madden J. Is acute appen-dicitis a surgical emergency? Am Surg. 2007;73(6):626-629; discussion 629-630.	34.	Katkhouda N, Mason RJ, Towfigh S, et al. Laparoscopic versus open appendectomy: a prospective randomized dou-ble-blind study. Ann Surg. 2005;242(3):439-448; discussion 448-450.	35.	Enochsson L, Hellberg A, Rudberg C, et al. Laparoscopic vs open appendectomy in overweight patients. Surg Endosc. 2001;15(4):387-392.	36.	Wei HB, Huang JL, Zheng ZH, et al. Laparoscopic versus open appendectomy: a prospective randomized comparison. Surg Endosc. 2010;24(2):266-2699.	37.	Nguyen NT, Zainabadi K, Mavandadi S, et al. Trends in uti-lization and outcomes of laparoscopic versus open appendec-tomy. Am J Surg. 2004;188(6):813-820.	38.	Simillis C, Symeonides P, Shorthouse AJ, Tekkis PP. A meta-analysis comparing conservative treatment versus acute appendectomy for complicated appendicitis (abscess or phleg-mon). Surgery. 2010;147(6):818-829.	39.	Andersson RE, Petzold MG. Nonsurgical treatment of appen-diceal abscess or phlegmon: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Surg. 2007;246(5):741-748.	40.	Ciftci AO, Tanyel FC, Büyükpamukçu N, Hicsonmez A. Com-parative trial of four antibiotic combinations for perforated appendicitis in children. Eur J Surg. 1997;163(8):591-596.	41.	Schropp KP, Kaplan S, Golladay ES, et al. A randomized clinical trial of ampicillin, gentamicin and clindamycin versus cefotaxime and clindamycin in children with ruptured appen-dicitis. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1991;172(5):351-356.	42.	Andersson RE. The natural history and traditional manage-ment of appendicitis revisited: spontaneous resolution and predominance of prehospital perforations imply that a correct diagnosis is more important than an early diagnosis. World J Surg. 2007;31(1):86-92.	43.	St Peter SD, Aguayo P, Fraser JD, et al. Initial laparoscopic appendectomy versus initial nonoperative management Brunicardi_Ch30_p1331-p1344.indd   134101/03/19   7:05 PM 1342SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIand interval appendectomy for perforated appendicitis with abscess: a prospective, randomized trial. J Pediatr Surg. 2010;45(1):236-240.	44.	Dixon MR, Haukoos JS, Park IU, et al. An assessment of the severity of recurrent appendicitis. Am J Surg. 2003;186: 718-722; discussion 722.	45.	Lai HW, Loong CC, Chiu JH, Chau GY, Wu CW, Lui WY. Interval appendectomy after conservative treatment of an appendiceal mass. World J Surg. 2006;30(3):352-357.	46.	Rashid A, Nazir S, Kakroo SM, Chalkoo MA, Razvi SA, Wani AA. Laparoscopic interval appendectomy versus open interval appendectomy: a prospective randomized controlled trial. Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech. 2013;23(1):93-96.	47.	Wright GP, Mater ME, Carroll JT, Choy JS, Chung MH. Is there truly an oncologic indication for interval appendectomy? Am J Surg. 2015;209(3):442-446.	48.	Sawyer RG, Claridge JA, Nathens AB, et al. Trial of short-course antimicrobial therapy for intraabdominal infection. N Engl J Med. 2015;372(21):1996-2005.	49.	Solomkin JS, Mazuski JE, Bradley JS, et al. Diagnosis and management of complicated intra-abdominal infection in adults and children: guidelines by the Surgical Infection Society and the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis. 2010;50(2):133-164.	50.	Siribumrungwong B, Chantip A, Noorit P, et al. Comparison of superficial surgical site infection between delayed primary versus primary wound closure in complicated appendicitis: a randomized controlled trial. Ann Surg. 2017;267(4):631-637.	51.	Tander B, Pektas O, Bulut M. The utility of peritoneal drains in children with uncomplicated perforated appendicitis. Pediatr Surg Int. 2003;19:548-550.	52.	Toki A, Ogura K, Horimi T, et al. Peritoneal lavage versus drainage for perforated appendicitis in children. Surg Today. 1995;25(3):207-210.	53.	Ceci F, Orsini S, Tudisco A, et al. Single-incision laparoscopic appendectomy is comparable to conventional laparoscopic and laparotomic appendectomy: our single center single sur-geon experience. G Chir. 2013;34(7-8):216-219.	54.	Coomber RS, Sodergren MH, Clark J, Teare J, Yang GZ, Darzi A. Natural orifice translumenal endoscopic surgery applications in clinical practice. World J Gastrointest Endosc. 2012;4(3):65-74.	55.	Strickland AD, Norwood MG, Behnia-Willison F, Olakkengil SA, Hewett PJ. Transvaginal natural orifice translumenal endoscopic surgery (NOTES): a survey of women’s views on a new technique. Surg Endosc. 2010;24(10):2424-2431.	56.	Akl MN, Magrina JF, Kho RM, Magtibay PM. Robotic appen-dectomy in gynaecological surgery: technique and pathologi-cal findings. Int J Med Robot. 2008;4(3):210-213.	57.	Chiarugi M, Buccianti P, Decanini L, et al. “What you see is not what you get.” A plea to remove a ‘normal’ appendix during diagnostic laparoscopy. Acta Chir Belg. 2001;101(5):243-245.	58.	Wang HT, Sax HC. Incidental appendectomy in the era of managed care and laparoscopy. J Am Coll Surg. 2001;192(2): 182-188.	59.	Fisher KS, Ross DS. Guidelines for therapeutic deci-sion in incidental appendectomy. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1990;171(1):95-98.	60.	Scholer SJ, Pituch K, Orr DP, Dittus RS. Clinical outcomes of children with acute abdominal pain. Pediatrics. 1996;98(4 pt 1): 680-685.	61.	Reynolds SL, Jaffe DM. Diagnosing abdominal pain in a pediatric emergency department. Pediatr Emerg Care. 1992;8(3):126-128.	62.	Lee SL, Stark R, Yaghoubian A, Shekherdimian S, Kaji A. Does age affect the outcomes and management of pediatric appendicitis? J Pediatr Surg. 2011;46(12):2342-2345.	63.	Rothrock SG, Pagane J. Acute appendicitis in children: emer-gency department diagnosis and management. Ann Emerg Med. 2000;36(1):39-51.	64.	Colvin JM, Bachur R, Kharbanda A. The presentation of appendicitis in preadolescent children. Pediatr Emerg Care. 2007;23(12):849-855.	65.	Bundy DG, Byerley JS, Liles EA, Perrin EM, Katznel-son J, Rice HE. Does this child have appendicitis? JAMA. 2007;298(4):438-451.	66.	Bickell NA, Aufses AH Jr, Rojas M, Bodian C. How time affects the risk of rupture in appendicitis. J Am Coll Surg. 2006;202(3):401-406.	67.	Nomura O, Ishiguro A, Maekawa T, Nagai A, Kuroda T, Sakai H. Antibiotic administration can be an independent risk factor for therapeutic delay of pediatric acute appendicitis. Pediatr Emerg Care. 2012;28(8):792-795.	68.	Aziz O, Athanasiou T, Tekkis PP, et al. Laparoscopic versus open appendectomy in children: a meta-analysis. Ann Surg. 2006;243(1):17-27.	69.	Sauerland S, Jaschinski T, Neugebauer EA. Laparoscopic ver-sus open surgery for suspected appendicitis. Cochrane Data-base Syst Rev. 2010;(10):CD001546.	70.	Lee SL, Islam S, Cassidy LD, et al. Antibiotics and appendici-tis in the pediatric population: an American Pediatric Surgical Association Outcomes and Clinical Trials Committee system-atic review. J Pediatr Surg. 2010;45(11):2181-2185.	71.	Chen C, Botelho C, Cooper A, Hibberd P, Parsons SK. Current practice patterns in the treatment of perforated appendicitis in children. J Am Coll Surg. 2003;196(2):212-221.	72.	Bufo AJ, Shah RS, Li MH, et al. Interval appendectomy for perforated appendicitis in children. J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A. 1998;8(4):209-214.	73.	Weber TR, Keller MA, Bower RJ, Spinner G, Vierling K. Is delayed operative treatment worth the trouble with perforated appendicitis in children? Am J Surg. 2003;186(6):685-658; discussion 688-689.	74.	Nadler EP, Reblock KK, Vaughan KG, Meza MP, Ford HR, Gaines BA. Predictors of outcome for children with perfo-rated appendicitis initially treated with non-operative manage-ment. Surg Infect (Larchmt). 2004;5(4):349-356.	75.	Svensson JF, Patkova B, Almström M, et al. Nonoperative treatment with antibiotics versus surgery for acute nonperfo-rated appendicitis in children: a pilot randomized controlled trial. Ann Surg. 2015;261(1):67-71.	76.	Ein SH, Langer JC, Daneman A. Nonoperative management of pediatric ruptured appendix with inflammatory mass or abscess: presence of an appendicolith predicts recurrent appendicitis. J Pediatr Surg. 2005;40(10):1612-1615.	77.	Lopez ME, Wesson DE. Medical treatment of pediatric appen-dicitis: are we there yet? JAMA Pediatr. 2017;171(5):419-420.	78.	Minneci PC, Mahida JB, Lodwick DL, et al. Effectiveness of patient choice in nonoperative vs surgical management of pediatric uncomplicated acute appendicitis. JAMA Surg. 2016;151(5):408-415.	79.	Tanaka Y, Uchida H, Kawashima H, et al. Long-term out-comes of operative versus nonoperative treatment for uncom-plicated appendicitis. J Pediatr Surg. 2015;50(11):1893-1897.	80.	Steiner Z, Buklan G, Stackievicz R, et al. Conservative treat-ment in uncomplicated acute appendicitis: reassessment of practice safety. Eur J Pediatr. 2017;176(4):521-527.	81.	Sheu BF, Chiu TF, Chen JC, Tung MS, Chang MW, Young YR. Risk factors associated with perforated appendicitis in elderly patients presenting with signs and symptoms of acute appendicitis. ANZ J Surg. 2007;77(8):662-666.	82.	Young YR, Chiu TF, Chen JC, et al. Acute appendicitis in the octogenarians and beyond: a comparison with younger geri-atric patients. Am J Med Sci. 2007;334(4):255-259.Brunicardi_Ch30_p1331-p1344.indd   134201/03/19   7:05 PM 1343THE APPENDIXCHAPTER 30	83.	Harrell AG, Lincourt AE, Novitsky YW, et al. Advantages of laparoscopic appendectomy in the elderly. Am Surg. 2006;72(6):474-480.	84.	Andersen B, Nielsen TF. Appendicitis in pregnancy: diag-nosis, management and complications. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 1999;78(9):758-762.	85.	Bree RL, Ralls PW, Balfe DM, et al. Evaluation of patients with acute right upper quadrant pain. American College of Radiology. ACR Appropriateness Criteria. Radiology. 2000;215(suppl):153-157.	86.	McGory ML, Zingmond DS, Tillou A, Hiatt JR, Ko CY, Cryer HM. Negative appendectomy in pregnant women is associ-ated with a substantial risk of fetal loss. J Am Coll Surg. 2007;205(4):534-540.	87.	Cohen-Kerem R, Railton C, Oren D, Lishner M, Koren G. Pregnancy outcome following non-obstetric surgical interven-tion. Am J Surg. 2005;190(3):467-473.	88.	Giuliano V, Giuliano C, Pinto F, Scaglione M. Chronic appen-dicitis “syndrome” manifested by an appendicolith and thick-ened appendix presenting as chronic right lower abdominal pain in adults. Emerg Radiol. 2006;12(3):96-98.	89.	Andersen BR, Kallehave FL, Andersen HK. Antibiotics versus placebo for prevention of postoperative infection after appen-dicectomy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2003;(2):CD001439.	90.	Rucinski J, Fabian T, Panagopoulos G, Schein M, Wise L. Gangrenous and perforated appendicitis: a meta-analytic study of 2532 patients indicates that the incision should be closed primarily. Surgery. 2000;127(2):136-141.	91.	Fleming FJ, Kim MJ, Messing S, Gunzler D, Salloum R, Monson JR. Balancing the risk of postoperative surgical infec-tions: a multivariate analysis of factors associated with lapa-roscopic appendectomy from the NSQIP database. Ann Surg. 2010;252(6):895-900.	92.	Liang MK, Lo HG, Marks JL. Stump appendicitis: a compre-hensive review of literature. Am Surg. 2006;72(2):162-166.	93.	Connor SJ, Hanna GB, Frizelle FA. Appendiceal tumors: retrospective clinicopathologic analysis of appendiceal tumors from 7,970 appendectomies. Dis Colon Rectum. 1998;41(1):75-80.	94.	Turaga KK, Pappas SG, Gamblin T. Importance of histologic subtype in the staging of appendiceal tumors. Ann Surg Oncol. 2012;19(5):1379-1385.	95.	McGory ML, Maggard MA, Kang H, O’Connell JB, Ko CY. Malignancies of the appendix: beyond case series reports. Dis Colon Rectum. 2005;48(12):2264-2271.	96.	Deans GT, Spence RA. Neoplastic lesions of the appendix. Br J Surg. 1995;82(3):299-306.	97.	Rutledge RH, Alexander JW. Primary appendiceal malignan-cies: rare but important. Surgery. 1992;111(3):244-250.	98.	Moertel CG, Dockerty MB, Judd ES. Carcinoid tumors of the vermiform appendix. Cancer. 1968;21(2):270-278.	99.	Rorstad O. Prognostic indicators for carcinoid neuroen-docrine tumors of the gastrointestinal tract. J Surg Oncol. 2005;89(3):151-160.	100.	Carr NJ, Sobin LH. Neuroendocrine tumors of the appendix. Semin Diagn Pathol. 2004;21(2):108-119.	101.	Tang LH, Shia J, Soslow RA, et al. Pathologic classifi-cation and clinical behavior of the spectrum of goblet cell carcinoid tumors of the appendix. Am J Surg Pathol. 2008;32(10):1429-1443.	102.	Pham TH, Wolff B, Abraham SC, Drelichman E. Surgical and chemotherapy treatment outcomes of goblet cell carci-noid: a tertiary cancer center experience. Ann Surg Oncol. 2006;13(3):370-376.	103.	Yan TD, Brun EA, Sugarbaker PH. Discordant histology of primary appendiceal adenocarcinoid neoplasms with perito-neal dissemination. Ann Surg Oncol. 2008;15(5):1440-1446.	104.	Varisco B, McAlvin B, Dias J, Franga D. Adenocarci-noid of the appendix: is right hemicolectomy necessary? A meta-analysis of retrospective chart reviews. Am Surg. 2004;70(7):593-599.	105.	Crump M, Gospodarowicz M, Shepherd FA. Lymphoma of the gastrointestinal tract. Semin Oncol. 1999;26(3):324-337.	106.	Pickhardt PJ, Levy AD, Rohrmann CA Jr, et al. Non-Hodg-kin’s lymphoma of the appendix: clinical and CT find-ings with pathologic correlation. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2002;178(5):1123-1127.	107.	Raijman I, Leong S, Hassaram S, Marcon NE. Appen-diceal mucocele: endoscopic appearance. Endoscopy. 1994;26(3):326-328.	108.	Hamilton DL, Stormont JM. The volcano sign of appendiceal mucocele. Gastrointest Endosc. 1989;35(5):453-456.	109.	Stocchi L, Wolff BG, Larson DR, Harrington JR. Sur-gical treatment of appendiceal mucocele. Arch Surg. 2003;138(6):585-589; discussion 589-590.	110.	Smith JW, Kemeny N, Caldwell C, Banner P, Sigurdson E, Huvos A. Pseudomyxoma peritonei of appendiceal origin. The Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center experience. Cancer. 1992;70(2):396-401.	111.	Hinson FL, Ambrose NS. Pseudomyxoma peritonei. Br J Surg. 1998;85(10):1332-1339.	112.	Carr NJ, Cecil TD, Mohamed F, et al. A consensus for classi-fication and pathologic reporting of pseudomyxoma peritonei and associated appendiceal neoplasia: the results of the Peri-toneal Surface Oncology Group International (PSOGI) Modi-fied Delphi Process. Am J Surg Pathol. 2016;40(1):14-26.	113.	Gough DB, Donohue JH, Schutt AJ, et al. Pseudomyxoma peritonei. Long-term patient survival with an aggressive regional approach. Ann Surg. 1994;219(2):112-119.	114.	Stewart JHt, Shen P, Russell GB, et al. Appendiceal neoplasms with peritoneal dissemination: outcomes after cytoreductive surgery and intraperitoneal hyperthermic chemotherapy. Ann Surg Oncol. 2006;13(5):624-634.	115.	Sugarbaker PH. New standard of care for appendiceal epi-thelial neoplasms and pseudomyxoma peritonei syndrome? Lancet Oncol. 2006;7(1):69-76.Brunicardi_Ch30_p1331-p1344.indd   134301/03/19   7:05 PM
# Chunk 8933
Brunicardi_Ch30_p1331-p1344.indd   134401/03/19   7:05 PMThis page intentionally left blank

LiverDavid A. Geller, John A. Goss, Ronald W. Busuttil, and Allan Tsung 31chapterHistory of Liver Surgery	1346Liver Anatomy	1346Segmental Anatomy / 1346Hepatic Artery / 1348Portal Vein / 1348Hepatic Veins and Inferior  Vena Cava / 1349Bile Duct and Hepatic Ducts / 1350Neural Innervation and Lymphatic Drainage / 1350Liver Physiology	1351Bilirubin Metabolism / 1352Formation of Bile / 1352Drug Metabolism / 1352Liver Function Tests / 1352Hepatocellular Injury / 1353Abnormal Synthetic Function / 1353Cholestasis / 1353Jaundice / 1353Molecular Signaling Pathways   in the Liver	1354Acute Phase Reaction / 1354LPS Signaling / 1355Nitric Oxide / 1355Heme Oxygenase System / 1356Toll-Like Receptors / 1357Radiologic Evaluation of   the Liver	1357Ultrasound / 1357Computed Tomography / 1358Magnetic Resonance Imaging / 1359Positron Emission Tomography / 1360Acute Liver Failure	1360Etiology / 1361Clinical Presentation / 1361Diagnosis and Clinical  Management / 1361Prognosis / 1362Liver Transplantation / 1362Emerging Technologies / 1362Cirrhosis and Portal   Hypertension	1362Morphologic Classification  of Cirrhosis / 1362Etiology of Cirrhosis / 1363Clinical Manifestations of  Cirrhosis / 1364Laboratory Findings Associated  With Cirrhosis / 1364Liver Biopsy / 1364Hepatic Reserve and Assessment  of Surgical Risk in the Cirrhotic  Patient / 1365Child-Turcotte-Pugh Score / 1365Model for End-Stage Liver Disease  Scoring System / 1365Portal Hypertension / 1365Imaging of the Portal Venous System  and Measurement of Portal Venous Pressure / 1366Etiology and Clinical Features of  Portal Hypertension / 1366Management of Gastroesophageal  Varices / 1367Prevention of Variceal Bleeding / 1367Management of Acute Variceal Hemorrhage / 1367Luminal Tamponade / 1367Transjugular Intrahepatic Portosystemic Shunt / 1367Balloon-Occluded Retrograde  Transvenous Obliteration / 1367Surgical Shunting / 1367Nonshunt Surgical Management of  Refractory Variceal Bleeding / 1368Hepatic Transplantation / 1368Budd-Chiari Syndrome / 1368Infections of the Liver	1369Pyogenic Liver Abscesses / 1369Amebic Abscesses / 1369Hydatid Disease / 1370Ascariasis / 1371Schistosomiasis / 1371Viral Hepatitis / 1371Evaluation of an Incidental   Liver Mass	1372Hepatic Cysts	1373Congenital Cysts / 1373Biliary Cystadenoma / 1373Polycystic Liver Disease / 1373Caroli’s Disease / 1374Benign Liver Lesions	1374Cyst / 1374Hemangioma / 1375Adenoma / 1375Focal Nodular Hyperplasia / 1376Bile Duct Hamartoma / 1376Malignant Liver Tumors	1376Hepatocellular Carcinoma / 1376Cholangiocarcinoma / 1377Gallbladder Cancer / 1378Metastatic Colorectal Cancer / 1378Neuroendocrine Tumors / 1379Other Metastatic Tumors / 1379Treatment Options for   Liver Cancer	1379Hepatic Resection / 1379Liver Transplantation / 1380Radiofrequency Ablation / 1380Ethanol Ablation, Cryosurgery,  and Microwave Ablation / 1380Chemoembolization and Hepatic Artery  Pump Chemoperfusion / 1381Yttrium-90 Microspheres / 1381Stereotactic Radiosurgery and  Intensity-Modulated Radiation  Therapy / 1381Downstaging / 1381Systemic Chemotherapy / 1381Hepatic Resection Surgical   Techniques	1381Nomenclature / 1381Techniques and Devices for Dividing the Hepatic Parenchyma / 1382Steps in Commonly Performed  Hepatic Resections / 1383Pringle and Ischemic  Preconditioning / 1385Preoperative Portal Vein  Embolization / 1385Staged Hepatectomy, ALPPS, and  Repeat Hepatic Resection for  Recurrent Liver Cancer / 1386Laparoscopic Liver Resection	1386Brunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   134520/02/19   2:36 PM 1346HISTORY OF LIVER SURGERYThe ancient Greek myth of Prometheus reminds us that the liver is the only organ that regenerates. According to Greek  mythology, Zeus was furious with the Titan Prometheus because he gave fire to mortals. In return, Zeus chained Prometheus to Mount Caucasus and sent his giant eagle to eat his liver during the day, only to have it regenerate at night. Although this is folk-lore, the principles are correct that after hepatic resection, the remnant liver will hypertrophy over weeks to months to regain most of its original liver mass. It is interesting to note that the ancient Greeks seem to have been aware of this fact, because the Greek word for the liver, h¯epar, derives from the verb h¯epaomai, which means “mend” or “repair.” Hence h¯epar roughly translates as “repairable.”1 The importance of the liver dates back to even biblical times, for the Babylonians (c. 2000 b.c.) considered the liver to be the seat of the soul. There are scattered reports of liver surgery for battlefield injuries, but the first recorded elec-tive hepatic resection was done in 1888 in Germany by Langen-buch. There followed reports of liver resections in the United States (Tiffany, 1890) and Europe (Lucke, 1891), as well as the first large series of hepatic resections by Keen in 1899.2,3 In 1908, Pringle described in Annals of Surgery the “arrest of hepatic hemorrhage due to trauma” by compression of the porta hepatis, a maneuver that now bears his name.4 Possibly due to the potential for massive hemorrhage during liver surgery, very little progress in surgical techniques was recorded for the next half-century. Work by Rex, Cantlie, and others laid the groundwork for experimental and clinical reports in the 1950s by Couinaud, Hjortsjo, Healey, Lortat-Jacob, and Starzl.5,6 These seminal contributions paved the way for the modern era of hepatic resection surgery.LIVER ANATOMYThe liver is the largest organ in the body, weighing approxi-mately 1500 g. It resides in the right upper abdominal cavity beneath the diaphragm and is protected by the rib cage. It is reddish brown and is surrounded by a fibrous sheath known as  Glisson’s capsule. The liver is held in place by several ligaments (Fig. 31-1). The round ligament is the remnant of the obliterated umbilical vein and enters the left liver hilum at the front edge of the falciform ligament. The falciform ligament separates the left lateral and left medial segments along the umbilical fissure and anchors the liver to the anterior abdominal wall. Deep in  the plane between the caudate lobe and the left lateral segment is the fibrous ligamentum venosum (Arantius’ ligament), which is the obliterated ductus venosus and is covered by the plate of Arantius. The left and right triangular ligaments secure the two sides of the liver to the diaphragm. Extending from the trian-gular ligaments anteriorly on the liver are the coronary liga-ments. The right coronary ligament also extends from the right undersurface of the liver to the peritoneum overlying the right kidney, thereby anchoring the liver to the right retroperitoneum. These ligaments (round, falciform, triangular, and coronary) can be divided in a bloodless plane to fully mobilize the liver to facilitate hepatic resection. Centrally and just to the left of the gallbladder fossa, the liver attaches via the hepatoduodenal and the gastrohepatic ligaments (Fig. 31-2). The hepatoduodenal ligament is known as the porta hepatis and contains the com-mon bile duct, the hepatic artery, and the portal vein. From the right side and deep (dorsal) to the porta hepatis is the foramen of Winslow, also known as the epiploic foramen (see Fig. 31-2). This passage connects directly to the lesser sac and allows com-plete vascular inflow control to the liver when the hepatoduode-nal ligament is clamped using the Pringle maneuver.Segmental AnatomyThe liver is grossly separated into the right and left lobes by the plane from the gallbladder fossa to the inferior vena cava (IVC), known as Cantlie’s line.5 The right lobe typically accounts for 60% to 70% of the liver mass, with the left lobe (and caudate lobe) making up the remainder. The caudate lobe lies to the left and anterior of the IVC and contains three subsegments: Key Points1	When operating on the liver, gallbladder, pancreas, or adjacent organs, recognition of the normal or variant vas-cular and biliary anatomy is essential to avoiding surgical complications.2	The liver is the largest gland in the body and performs a diverse spectrum of functions.3	Computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging with contrast enhancement constitute the mainstays for the radiologic evaluation of the liver.4	Acute liver failure rapidly progresses to hepatic coma and death even with maximal medical therapy. The only defin-itive treatment is orthotopic liver transplantation.5	Acute variceal bleeding should be managed with aggres-sive resuscitation and prompt endoscopic diagnosis with hemorrhage control. The transjugular intrahepatic por-tosystemic shunt procedure can be considered for cases refractory to medical treatment.6	Common benign lesions of the liver include cysts, hem-angiomas, focal nodular hyperplasia, and hepatocellular adenomas. In most instances, these lesions can be reliably diagnosed by their characteristic features on imaging.7	Many options exist for the treatment of hepatocellular car-cinomas, and these cases are best managed by a multidis-ciplinary liver transplant team.8	Surgical resection is the treatment of choice for hilar chol-angiocarcinoma. Under a protocol with strict eligibility criteria, patients with unresectable tumors can be con-sidered for liver transplantation following neoadjuvant chemoradiation, with survival rates that compare favorably with the rates for resection.9	The resectability of colorectal cancer metastases to the liver is primarily determined by the volume of the future liver remnant and the health of the background liver and not actual tumor number.10	Laparoscopic liver resections can be performed safely by experienced surgeons in selected patients and have been shown to produce short-term patient benefits with com-parable long-term oncologic results compared to open hepatic resections.Brunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   134620/02/19   2:36 PM 1347LIVERCHAPTER 31Figure 31-1. Hepatic ligaments suspending the liver to the diaphragm and anterior abdominal wall.Liver in situForamen ofWinslowGastrohepaticligamentOpen hepato-duodenal ligamentFigure 31-2. In situ liver hilar anatomy with hepatoduodenal and gastrohepatic ligaments. Foramen of Winslow is depicted.Right lobeLeft lobeRight lobeLeft lobeVIIIIVaIVbIIIIIVVIIVIIVCCaudate lobeIIIIVVIIVIIIIVbFigure 31-3. Couinaud’s liver segments (I through VIII) num-bered in a clockwise manner. The left lobe includes segments II to IV, the right lobe includes segments V to VIII, and the caudate lobe is segment I. IVC = inferior vena cava.the Spiegel lobe, the paracaval portion, and the caudate  process.7 The falciform ligament does not separate the right and left lobes, but rather it divides the left lateral segment from the left medial segment. The left lateral and left medial segments also are referred to as sections as defined in the Brisbane 2000 terminology, which is outlined later in the section titled “Hepatic Resection.” A significant advance in our understanding of liver anatomy came from the cast work studies of the French surgeon and anatomist Couinaud in the early 1950s. Couinaud divided the liver into eight segments, numbering them in a clockwise direc-tion beginning with the caudate lobe as segment I.6 Segments II and III comprise the left lateral segment, and segment IV is the left medial segment (Fig. 31-3). Thus, the left lobe is made up of the left lateral segment (Couinaud’s segments II and III) and the left medial segment (segment IV). Segment IV can be subdivided into segment IVA and segment IVB. Segment IVA is cepha-lad and just below the diaphragm, spanning from segment VIII to the falciform ligament adjacent to segment II. Segment IVB is caudad and adjacent to the gallbladder fossa. Many anatomy textbooks also refer to segment IV as the quadrate lobe. Quadrate lobe is an outdated term, and the preferred term is segment IV or left medial segment. Most surgeons still refer to segment I as the DiaphragmRight triangularligamentLeft triangularligamentFalciformligamentRoundligamentcaudate lobe, rather than segment I. The right lobe is comprised of segments V, VI, VII, and VIII, with segments V and VIII mak-ing up the right anterior lobe and segments VI and VII making up the right posterior lobe.Brunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   134720/02/19   2:36 PM 1348SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIAdditional functional anatomy was highlighted by Bis-muth based on the distribution of the hepatic veins. The three hepatic veins run in corresponding scissura (fissures) and divide the liver into four sectors.8 The right hepatic vein runs along the right scissura and separates the right posterolateral sector from the right anterolateral sector. The main scissura contains the middle hepatic vein and separates the right and left livers. The left scissura contains the course of the left hepatic vein and separates the left posterior and left anterior sectors.Hepatic ArteryThe liver has a dual blood supply consisting of the hepatic artery and the portal vein. The hepatic artery delivers approximately 25% of the blood supply, and the portal vein approximately 75%. The hepatic artery arises from the celiac axis (trunk), which gives off the left gastric, splenic, and common hepatic arteries (Fig. 31-4). The common hepatic artery then divides into the gastroduodenal artery and the hepatic artery proper. The right gastric artery typically originates off of the hepatic artery proper, but this is variable. The hepatic artery proper divides into the right and left hepatic arteries. This “classic” or standard arterial anatomy is present in only approximately 76% of cases, with the remaining 24% having variable anatomy. It is critical to understand the arterial (and biliary) anatomic variants to avoid surgical complications when operating on the liver, gallbladder, pancreas, or adjacent organs.The most common hepatic arterial variants are shown in  Fig. 31-5. Approximately 10% to 15% of the time there is a replaced or accessory right hepatic artery arising from the supe-rior mesenteric artery (SMA). When there is a replacement or accessory right hepatic artery, it travels posterior to the por-tal vein and then takes up a right lateral position before diving into the liver parenchyma. This can be recognized visually on a preoperative computed tomography (CT) or magnetic reso-nance imaging (MRI) scan and confirmed by palpation in the hilum where a separate right posterior pulsation is felt distinct from that of the hepatic artery proper that lies anteriorly in the hepatoduodenal ligament to the left of the common bile duct. In approximately 3% to 10% of cases, there exists a replace-ment (or accessory) left hepatic artery coming off of the left gastric artery and running obliquely in the gastrohepatic liga-ment anterior to the caudate lobe before entering the hilar plate at the base of the umbilical fissure. Other less common variants (approximately 1–2% each) are the presence of both replaced right and replaced left hepatic arteries, as well as a completely replaced common hepatic artery coming off the SMA (see  Fig. 31-5). Although not well demonstrated in the illustration, the clue for a completely replaced common hepatic artery com-ing off the SMA is the presence of a strong arterial pulsation to the right of and posterior to the common bile duct, rather than the left side and anterior, in the porta hepatis. Another important point is that the right hepatic artery passes deep and posterior to the common bile duct approximately 88% of the time but crosses anterior to the common bile duct in approximately 12% of cases. The cystic artery feeding the gallbladder usually arises from the right hepatic artery in Calot’s triangle.Portal VeinThe portal vein is formed by the confluence of the splenic vein and the superior mesenteric vein. The inferior mesenteric vein usually drains into the splenic vein upstream from the conflu-ence (Fig. 31-6). The main portal vein traverses the porta hepa-tis before dividing into the left and right portal vein branches. The left portal vein typically branches from the main portal vein outside of the liver with a sharp bend to the left and consists of the transverse portion followed by a 90° turn at the base of the umbilical fissure to become the umbilical portion before enter-ing the liver parenchyma (Fig. 31-7). The left portal vein then divides to give off the segment II and III branches to the left lat-eral segment, as well as the segment IV branches that supply the left medial segment. The left portal vein also provides the domi-nant inflow branch to the caudate lobe (although branches can arise from the main and right portal veins also), usually close to the bend between the transverse and umbilical portions. The division of the right portal vein is usually higher in the hilum and may be close to (or inside) the liver parenchyma at the hilar plate. Twenty percent to 35% of individuals have aberrant por-tal venous anatomy, with portal vein trifurcation or an aberrant branch from the left portal vein supplying the right anterior lobe being the most frequent.The portal vein drains the splanchnic blood from the stom-ach, pancreas, spleen, small intestine, and majority of the colon to the liver before returning to the systemic circulation. The portal vein pressure in an individual with normal physiology is low at 3 to 5 mmHg. The portal vein is valveless, however, and in the setting of portal hypertension, the pressure can be 1Figure 31-4. Arterial anatomy of the upper abdomen and liver, including the celiac trunk and hepatic artery branches. a. = artery; LHA =  left hepatic artery; RHA = right hepatic artery.RHALHAHepatic arteryproperRight gastricarteryCommon hepatic arteryLeft gastricarteryCeliac trunkSplenic arteryGastroduodenal arteryBrunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   134820/02/19   2:36 PM 1349LIVERCHAPTER 31quite high (20 to 30 mmHg). This results in decompression of the systemic circulation through portocaval anastomoses, most commonly via the coronary (left gastric) vein, which produces esophageal and gastric varices with a propensity for major hem-orrhage. Another branch of the main portal vein is the superior pancreaticoduodenal vein (which comes off low in an anterior lateral position and is divided during pancreaticoduodenec-tomy). Closer to the liver, the main portal vein typically gives off a short branch (posterior lateral) to the caudate process on the right side. It is important to identify this branch and ligate it during hilar dissection for anatomic right hemihepatectomy to avoid avulsion.Hepatic Veins and Inferior Vena CavaThere are three hepatic veins (right, middle, and left) that pass obliquely through the liver to drain the blood to the suprahe-patic IVC and eventually the right atrium (Fig. 31-8). The right hepatic vein drains segments V through VIII; the middle hepatic vein drains segment IV as well as segments V and VIII; and the left hepatic vein drains segments II and III. The caudate lobe Replaced right hepaticartery from SMA (10%–15%)Replaced left hepatic artery from left gastric artery (3%–10%)Replaced right and replaced left hepatic arteries (1%–2%)Completely replaced commonhepatic artery from SMA (1%–2%)Figure 31-5. Common hepatic artery anatomic variants. SMA = superior mesenteric artery.Coronary v.Portal v.Superior mesenteric v.Inferiormesenteric v.Splenic v.Figure 31-6. Portal vein anatomy. The portal vein is formed by the confluence of the splenic and superior mesenteric veins. The inferior mesenteric vein drains into the splenic vein. The coronary (left gastric) vein drains into the portal vein in the vicinity of the confluence. v. = vein.Main portal veinRightportal veinLeftportal veinUmbilicalportion LPVIIIIIIIVAIVBVVIVIIVIIIVIIITransverseportion LPVFigure 31-7. Anatomy of the left portal vein (LPV). Note the transverse and umbilical portions of the LPV.Brunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   134920/02/19   2:36 PM 1350SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIis unique because its venous drainage feeds directly into the IVC. In addition, the liver usually has a few small, variable short hepatic veins that directly enter the IVC from the undersurface of the liver. The left and middle hepatic veins form a common trunk approximately 95% of the time before entering the IVC, whereas the right hepatic vein inserts separately (in an oblique orientation) into the IVC. There is a large inferior accessory right hepatic vein in 15% to 20% of cases that runs in the hepa-tocaval ligament. This can be a source of torrential bleeding if control of it is lost during right hepatectomy. The hepatic vein branches bisect the portal branches inside the liver parenchyma (i.e., the right hepatic vein runs between the right anterior and posterior portal veins; the middle hepatic vein passes between the right anterior and left portal vein; and the left hepatic vein crosses between the segment II and III branches of the left  portal vein).Bile Duct and Hepatic DuctsWithin the hepatoduodenal ligament, the common bile duct lies anteriorly and to the right. It gives off the cystic duct to the gallbladder and becomes the common hepatic duct before divid-ing into the right and left hepatic ducts. In general, the hepatic ducts follow the arterial branching pattern inside the liver. The right anterior hepatic duct usually enters the liver above the hilar plate, whereas the right posterior duct dives behind the right portal vein and can be found on the surface of the caudate pro-cess before entering the liver. The left hepatic duct typically has a longer extrahepatic course before giving off segmental branches behind the left portal vein at the base of the umbilical fissure. Considerable variation exists, and in 30% to 40% of cases, there is a nonstandard hepatic duct confluence with acces-sory or aberrant ducts (Fig. 31-9). The cystic duct itself also has a variable pattern of drainage into the common bile duct. This can lead to potential injury or postoperative bile leakage during cholecystectomy or hepatic resection, and the surgeon needs to expect these variants. The gallbladder sits adherent to hepatic segments IVB (left lobe) and V (right lobe).Neural Innervation and Lymphatic DrainageThe parasympathetic innervation of the liver comes from the left vagus, which gives off the anterior hepatic branch, and  the right vagus, which gives off the posterior hepatic branch. The sympathetic innervation involves the greater thoracic splanchnic nerves and the celiac ganglia, although the function of these nerves is poorly understood. The denervated liver after hepatic transplantation seems to function with normal capacity. A common source of referred pain to the right shoulder and scapula as well as the right side or back is the right phrenic Right lobePosteriorsegmentstructuresMiddlehepaticv.Anterior segmentstructuresGall bladderPortal v.Hepatic a.FalciformligamentLeft lobeMedialsegmentstructuresLateralsegmentstructuresMiddle HVRight HVLeft HVIVC and 3 HVsIVC Figure 31-8. Confluence of the three hepatic veins (HVs) and the inferior vena cava (IVC). Note that the middle and left HVs drain into a common trunk before entering the IVC. a. = artery; v. = vein. (Adapted with permission from Cameron JL: Atlas of Surgery. Vol. I, Gallbladder and Biliary Tract, the Liver, Portasystemic Shunts, the Pancreas. Toronto: BC Decker; 1990.)Brunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   135020/02/19   2:36 PM 1351LIVERCHAPTER 31nerve, which is stimulated by tumors that stretch Glisson’s cap-sule or by diaphragmatic irritation.Lymph is produced within the liver and drains via the perisinusoidal space of Disse and periportal clefts of Mall to larger lymphatics that drain to the hilar cystic duct lymph node (Calot’s triangle node), as well as the common bile duct, hepatic artery, and retropancreatic and celiac lymph nodes. This is par-ticularly important for resection of hilar cholangiocarcinoma, which has a high incidence of lymph node metastases. The hepatic lymph also drains cephalad to the cardiophrenic lymph nodes, and the latter can be pathologically identified on a stag-ing CT or MRI scan.LIVER PHYSIOLOGYThe liver is the largest gland in the body and has an extraordi-nary spectrum of functions. These include processes such as storage, metabolism, production, and secretion. One crucial role is the processing of absorbed nutrients through the metabolism of glucose, lipids, and proteins. The liver maintains glucose con-centrations in a normal range over both short and long periods by performing several important roles in carbohydrate metabo-lism. In the fasting state, the liver ensures a sufficient supply of glucose to the central nervous system. The liver can produce glucose by breaking down glycogen through glycogenolysis and by de novo synthesis of glucose through gluconeogenesis from noncarbohydrate precursors such as lactate, amino acids, and glycerol. In the postprandial state, excess circulating glucose is removed by glycogen synthesis or glycolysis and lipogenesis. The liver also plays a central role in lipid metabolism through the formation of bile and the production of cholesterol and fatty acids. Protein metabolism occurs in the liver through amino acid deamination, resulting in the production of ammonia as well as the production of a variety of amino acids. In addition to rpA: Normal bifurcation 57%B: Trifurcation of 3 ducts 12%C: R anterior (C1, 16%) or R posterior     (C2, 4%) duct draining into CHDD: R posterior (D1, 5%) or R anterior     duct (D2, 1%) draining into the left     hepatic ductE: Absence of hepatic duct    confluence 3%F: Drainage of R posterior duct into     cystic duct 2%rprprprprprprprplhlhlhlhlhlhlhrararararararararaIVIVIIIIIIIIIIIIF2%E3%D6%C20%A57%B12%4%1%1%2%5%16%C2C1D2E2E1D1Figure 31-9. Main variations of hepatic duct confluence. As described by Couinaud in 1957, the bifurcation of the hepatic ducts has a vari-able pattern in approximately 40% of cases. CHD = common hepatic duct; lh = left hepatic; R = right; ra = right anterior; rp = right posterior. (Reproduced with permission from Blumgart LH, Fong Y: Surgery of the Liver and Biliary Tract, 3rd ed, Vol. I. London: Elsevier; 2000.)Brunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   135120/02/19   2:36 PM 1352SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IImetabolism, the liver also is responsible for the synthesis of most circulating plasma proteins. Among these proteins are albumin, factors of the coagulation and fibrinolytic systems, and compounds of the complement cascade. Furthermore, the detoxification of many substances through drug metabo-lism occurs in the liver, as do immunologic responses through the many immune cells found in its reticuloendothelial system.9Bilirubin MetabolismBilirubin is the breakdown product of normal heme catabolism. Bilirubin is bound to albumin in the circulation and sent to the liver. In the liver, it is conjugated to glucuronic acid to form bilirubin diglucuronide in a reaction catalyzed by the enzyme glucuronyl transferase, making it water soluble. This glucuro-nide is then excreted into the bile canaliculi. A small amount dissolves in the blood and is then excreted in the urine. The majority of conjugated bilirubin is excreted in the intestine as waste because the intestinal mucosa is relatively impermeable to conjugated bilirubin. However, it is permeable to unconjugated bilirubin and urobilinogens, a series of bilirubin derivatives formed by the action of bacteria. Thus, some of the bilirubin and urobilinogens are reabsorbed in the portal circulation; they are again excreted by the liver or enter the circulation and are excreted in the urine.10Formation of BileBile is a complex fluid containing organic and inorganic sub-stances dissolved in an alkaline solution that flows from the liver through the biliary system and into the small intestine. The main components of bile are water, electrolytes, and a variety of organic molecules including bile pigments, bile salts, phospho-lipids (e.g., lecithin), and cholesterol. The two fundamental roles of bile are to aid in the digestion and absorption of lipids and lipid-soluble vitamins and to eliminate waste products (bilirubin and cholesterol) through secretion into bile and elimination in feces. Bile is produced by hepatocytes and secreted through the biliary system. In between meals, bile is stored in the gallblad-der and concentrated through the absorption of water and elec-trolytes. Upon entry of food into the duodenum, bile is released from the gallbladder to aid in digestion. The human liver can produce about 1 L of bile daily.Bile salts, in conjunction with phospholipids, are respon-sible for the digestion and absorption of lipids in the small intestine. Bile salts are sodium and potassium salts of bile acids conjugated to amino acids. The bile acids are derivatives of cho-lesterol synthesized in hepatocytes. Cholesterol, ingested from the diet or derived from hepatic synthesis, is converted into the bile acids cholic acid and chenodeoxycholic acid. These bile acids are conjugated to either glycine or taurine before secre-tion into the biliary system. Bacteria in the intestine can remove glycine and taurine from bile salts. They can also convert some of the primary bile acids into secondary bile acids by removing a hydroxyl group, producing deoxycholic acid from cholic acid and lithocholic acid from chenodeoxycholic acid.Bile salts secreted into the intestine are efficiently reab-sorbed and reused. Approximately 90% to 95% of the bile salts are absorbed from the small intestine at the terminal ileum. The remaining 5% to 10% enter the colon and are converted to the secondary salts, deoxycholic acid and lithocholic acid. The mixture of primary and secondary bile salts and bile acids is absorbed primarily by active transport in the terminal ileum. The absorbed bile salts are transported back to the liver in the portal vein and reexcreted in the bile. Those lost in the stool are replaced by synthesis in the liver. The continuous process of secretion of bile salts in the bile, their passage through the intestine, and their subsequent return to the liver is termed the enterohepatic circulation.10Drug MetabolismThe liver plays an important role in providing mechanisms for ridding the body of foreign molecules (xenobiotics) that are absorbed from the environment. In most cases, a drug is relatively lipophilic to ensure good absorption. The liver par-ticipates in the elimination of these lipid-soluble drugs by trans-forming them into more readily excreted hydrophilic products. There are two main reactions important for drug metabolism. Phase 1 reactions include oxidation, reduction, and hydrolysis of molecules. These result in metabolites that are more hydro-philic than the original chemicals. The cytochrome P450 system is a family of hemoproteins important for oxidative reactions involving drugs and toxic substances. Phase 2 reactions, also known as conjugation reactions, are synthetic reactions that involve addition of subgroups to the drug molecule. These sub-groups include glucuronate, acetate, glutathione, glycine, sul-fate, and methyl groups. These drug reactions occur mainly in the smooth endoplasmic reticulum of hepatocytes.Many factors can affect drug metabolism in the liver. When the rate of metabolism of a drug is increased (i.e., enzyme induction), the duration of the drug action will decrease. How-ever, when the metabolism of a drug is decreased (i.e., enzyme inhibition), then the drug will circulate for a longer period of time. It is important to note that some drugs may be converted to active products by metabolism in the liver. An example is acetaminophen when taken in larger doses. Normally, acet-aminophen is conjugated by the liver to harmless glucuronide and sulfate metabolites that are water soluble and eliminated in the urine. During an overdose, the normal metabolic path-ways are overwhelmed, and some of the drug is converted to a reactive and toxic intermediate by the cytochrome P450 system. Glutathione normally reacts with this intermediate, leading to the production and subsequent excretion of a harmless prod-uct. However, as glutathione stores are diminished, the reactive intermediate cannot be detoxified and it combines with lipid membranes of hepatocytes, which results in cellular necrosis. Thus, treatment of acetaminophen overdoses consists of replen-ishing glutathione stores by supplementing with sulfhydryl compounds such as acetylcysteine.Liver Function TestsLiver function tests is a term frequently used to refer to mea-surement of the levels of a group of serum markers for evalu-ation of liver dysfunction. Most commonly, levels of aspartate transaminase (AST), alanine transaminase (ALT), alkaline phosphatase (AP), γ-glutamyltranspeptidase (GGT), and biliru-bin are included in this panel. This term is a misnomer, how-ever, because most of these tests measure not liver function but rather cell damage. More accurate measurement of the liver’s synthetic function is provided by serum albumin levels and pro-thrombin time (PT). Although measuring liver enzyme levels is important in the assessment of a patient’s liver disease, these test results can be nonspecific. Thus, evaluation of patients with suspected liver disease should always involve careful interpreta-tion of abnormalities in these liver test results in the context of a thorough history and physical examination. The approach to 2Brunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   135220/02/19   2:36 PM 1353LIVERCHAPTER 31evaluating abnormal laboratory values also can be simplified by categorizing the type of abnormality that predominates (hepa-tocellular damage, abnormal synthetic function, or cholestasis).Hepatocellular InjuryHepatocellular injury of the liver is usually indicated by abnor-malities in levels of the liver aminotransferases AST and ALT. These enzymes participate in gluconeogenesis by catalyz-ing the transfer of amino groups from aspartic acid or alanine to ketoglutaric acid to produce oxaloacetic acid and pyruvic acid, respectively (these enzymes are also referred to as serum  glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase [SGOT] and serum glutamic-pyruvic transaminase [SGPT]). AST is found in liver, cardiac muscle, skeletal muscle, kidney, brain, pancreas, lungs, and red blood cells and thus is less specific for disorders of the liver. ALT is predominately found in the liver and thus is more specific for liver disease. Hepatocellular injury is the trigger for release of these enzymes into the circulation. Common causes of elevated aminotransferase levels include viral hepatitis, alcohol abuse, medications, genetic disorders (Wilson’s disease, hemochroma-tosis, α1-antitrypsin deficiency), and autoimmune diseases.The extent of serum aminotransferase elevations can sug-gest certain etiologies of the liver injury. However, the levels of the enzymes in these tests correlate poorly with the severity of hepatocellular necrosis because they may not be significantly elevated in conditions of hepatic fibrosis or cirrhosis. In alco-holic liver disease, an AST to ALT ratio of >2:1 is common. Mild elevations of transaminase levels can be found in nonal-coholic fatty liver disease, chronic viral infection, or medica-tion-induced injury. Moderate increases in the levels of these enzymes are common in acute viral hepatitis. In conditions of ischemic insults, toxin ingestions (i.e., acetaminophen), and ful-minant hepatitis, AST and ALT levels can be elevated to the thousands.Abnormal Synthetic FunctionAlbumin synthesis is an important function of the liver and thus can be measured to evaluate the liver’s synthetic function. The liver produces approximately 10 g of albumin per day. How-ever, albumin levels are dependent on a number of factors such as nutritional status, renal dysfunction, protein-losing enteropa-thies, and hormonal disturbances. In addition, level of albumin is not a marker of acute hepatic dysfunction due to albumin’s long half-life of 15 to 20 days.Most clotting factors (except factor VIII) are synthesized exclusively in the liver, and thus their levels can also be used as a measure of hepatic synthetic function. Measurements of the pro-thrombin time (PT) and international normalized ratio (INR) are some of the best tests of hepatic synthetic function. PT measures the rate of conversion of prothrombin to thrombin. To standard-ize the reporting of PT and avoid interlaboratory variability, the INR was developed. The INR is the ratio of the patient’s PT to the mean control PT. Because vitamin K is involved in the γ-carboxylation of factors used to measure PT (factors II, VII, IX, and X), values also may be prolonged in other conditions such as vitamin K deficiency and warfarin therapy.CholestasisCholestasis is a condition in which bile flow from the liver to the duodenum is impaired. Disturbances in bile flow may be due to intrahepatic causes (hepatocellular dysfunction) or extrahepatic causes (biliary tree obstruction). Cholestasis often results in the release of certain enzymes and thus can be detected by measur-ing the serum levels of bilirubin, AP, and GGT. Bilirubin is a breakdown product of hemoglobin metabolism. Unconjugated bilirubin is insoluble and thus is transported to the liver bound to albumin. In the liver, it is conjugated to allow excretion in bile. Measured total bilirubin levels can be normal or high in patients with significant liver disease because of the liver’s abil-ity to conjugate significant amounts of bilirubin. Thus, to help aid in the diagnosis of hyperbilirubinemia, fractionation of total bilirubin is usually performed to distinguish between conjugated (direct) and unconjugated (indirect) bilirubin. Indirect bilirubin is a term frequently used to refer to unconjugated bilirubin in the circulation because the addition of another chemical is nec-essary to differentiate this fraction from the whole. Normally, >90% of serum bilirubin is unconjugated. The testing process for conjugated bilirubin, in contrast, is direct without the addi-tion of other agents. The direct bilirubin test measures the lev-els of conjugated bilirubin and δ bilirubin (conjugated bilirubin bound to albumin).The patterns of elevation of the different fractions of bili-rubin provide important diagnostic clues as to the cause of cho-lestasis. In general, an elevated indirect bilirubin level suggests intrahepatic cholestasis, and an elevated direct bilirubin level suggests extrahepatic obstruction. Mechanisms that can result in increases in unconjugated bilirubin levels include increased bilirubin production (hemolytic disorders and resorption of hematomas) or defects (inherited or acquired) in hepatic uptake or conjugation. The rate-limiting step in bilirubin metabolism is the excretion of bilirubin from hepatocytes, so conjugated hyperbilirubinemia can be seen in inherited or acquired dis-orders of intrahepatic excretion or extrahepatic obstruction. Conjugated bilirubin that cannot be excreted accumulates in hepatocytes, which results in its secretion into the circulation. Because conjugated bilirubin is water soluble, it can be found in the urine of patients with jaundice.AP is an enzyme with a wide tissue distribution but is found primarily in the liver and bones. In the liver, it is expressed by the bile duct epithelium. In conditions of biliary obstruction, levels rise as a result of increased synthesis and release into the serum. Because the half-life of serum AP is approximately  7 days, it may take several days for levels to normalize even after resolution of the biliary obstruction.GGT is another enzyme found in hepatocytes and released from the bile duct epithelium. Elevation of GGT is an early marker and also a sensitive test for hepatobiliary disease. Like AP elevation, however, it is nonspecific and can be produced by a variety of disorders in the absence of liver disease. Increased levels of GGT can be induced by certain medications, alcohol abuse, pancreatic disease, myocardial infarction, renal failure, and obstructive pulmonary disease. For this reason, elevated GGT levels are often interpreted in conjunction with other enzyme abnormalities. For example, a raised GGT level with increased AP level supports a liver source.JaundiceJaundice refers to the yellowish staining of the skin, sclera, and mucous membranes with the pigment bilirubin. Hyperbilirubi-nemia usually is detectable as jaundice when blood levels rise above 2.5 to 3 mg/dL. Jaundice can be caused by a wide range of benign and malignant disorders. However, when present, it may indicate a serious condition, and thus knowledge of the differential diagnosis of jaundice and a systematic approach to Brunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   135320/02/19   2:36 PM 1354SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIthe workup of the patient is necessary. Workup of a patient with jaundice is simplified by organizing the possible causes of the disorder into groups based on the location of bilirubin metabo-lism. As mentioned previously, bilirubin metabolism can take place in three phases: prehepatic, intrahepatic, and posthepatic. The prehepatic phase includes the production of bilirubin from the breakdown of heme products and its transport to the liver. The majority of the heme results from red blood cell metabolism and the rest from other heme-containing organic compounds such as myoglobin and cytochromes. In the liver, the insoluble unconjugated bilirubin is then conjugated to glucuronic acid to allow for solubility in bile and excretion. The posthepatic phase of bilirubin metabolism consists of excretion of soluble bilirubin through the biliary system into the duodenum. Dysfunction in any of these phases can lead to jaundice.10Prehepatic. Jaundice as a result of elevated levels of uncon-jugated bilirubin occurs from faulty prehepatic metabolism and usually arises from conditions that interfere with proper conju-gation of bilirubin in the hepatocyte. Insufficient conjugation is often seen in processes that result in excessive heme metabolism. Subsequently, the conjugation system is overwhelmed, which results in unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia. Causes of hemoly-sis include inherited and acquired hemolytic anemias. Inherited hemolytic anemias include genetic disorders of the red blood cell membrane (hereditary spherocytosis and eliptocytosis), enzyme defects (glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency), and defects in hemoglobin structure (sickle cell anemia and thalas-semias). Hemolytic anemias can also be acquired, and these can be further divided into those with immune-mediated and those with non–immune-mediated causes. Immune-mediated hemo-lytic anemias result in a positive finding on a direct Coombs test and have a variety of autoimmune and drug-induced causes. In contrast, direct Coombs test results are negative in nonimmune hemolytic anemias. The causes in this latter category are varied and include drugs and toxins that directly damage red blood cells, mechanical trauma (heart valves), microangiopathy, and infections. Prehepatic dysfunction of bilirubin metabolism also can result from failure in the transport of unconjugated bilirubin to the liver by albumin in any condition that leads to plasma protein loss. A poor nutritional state or excess protein loss as seen in burn patients can lead to elevated levels of unconjugated bilirubin in the circulation and jaundice.Intrahepatic. Intrahepatic causes of jaundice involve the intracellular mechanisms for conjugation and excretion of bile from the hepatocyte. The enzymatic processes in hepatocytes can be affected by any condition that impairs hepatic blood flow and subsequent function of the liver (ischemic or hypoxic events). Furthermore, there are multiple inherited disorders of enzyme metabolism that can result in either unconjugated or conjugated hyperbilirubinemia. Gilbert’s syndrome is a genetic variant characterized by diminished activity of the enzyme glucuronyltransferase, which results in decreased conjugation of bilirubin to glucuronide. It is a benign condition that affects approximately 4% to 7% of the population. Typically, the dis-ease results in transient mild increases in unconjugated bilirubin levels and jaundice during episodes of fasting, stress, or illness. These episodes are self-limited and usually do not require fur-ther treatment. Another inherited disorder of bilirubin conjuga-tion is Crigler-Najjar syndrome. It is a rare disease found in neonates and can result in neurotoxic sequelae from bilirubin encephalopathy.In addition to defects in conjugation, disorders in bilirubin excretion in hepatocytes can also lead to jaundice. Rotor’s syn-drome and Dubin-Johnson syndrome are two uncommon genetic disorders that disrupt secretion of conjugated bilirubin from the hepatocyte into the bile and result in conjugated hyperbilirubi-nemia. There are also multiple acquired conditions that result in inflammation and intrahepatic cholestasis by affecting hepato-cyte mechanisms for conjugation and excretion of bile. Viruses, alcohol abuse, sepsis, and autoimmune disorders all can result in inflammation in the liver with subsequent disruption of bilirubin transport in the liver. In addition, jaundice can also occur from the cytotoxic effects of many medications, including acetamino-phen, oral contraceptives, and anabolic steroids.Posthepatic. Posthepatic causes of jaundice are usually the result of intrinsic or extrinsic obstruction of the biliary duct sys-tem that prevents the flow of bile into the duodenum. There is a wide spectrum of pathologies that may present with obstructive jaundice. Intrinsic obstruction can occur from biliary diseases, including cholelithiasis, choledocholithiasis, benign and malig-nant biliary strictures, cholangiocarcinoma, cholangitis, and disorders of the papilla of Vater. Extrinsic compression of the biliary tree is commonly due to pancreatic disorders. Patients with pancreatitis, pseudocysts, and malignancies can present with jaundice due to external compression of the biliary system. Finally, with the growing armamentarium of endoscopic tools and minimally invasive surgical approaches, surgical complica-tions are becoming more frequent causes of extrahepatic cho-lestasis. Misadventures with surgical clips, retained stones, and inadvertent ischemic insults to the biliary system can result in obstructive jaundice recognized at any time from immediately postoperatively to many years later.MOLECULAR SIGNALING PATHWAYS  IN THE LIVERAcute Phase ReactionThe liver is the site of synthesis of acute phase proteins that consists of a group of plasma proteins that are rapidly released in response to inflammatory conditions elsewhere in the body. The synthesis of these proteins in the liver is mediated by a num-ber of inflammatory mediators. Cytokines such as tumor necro-sis factor alpha (TNF-α), interferon-γ (IFN-γ), interleukin-1  (IL-1), interleukin-6 (IL-6), and interleukin-8 (IL-8) are released by inflammatory cells into the circulation at sites of injury and modulate the acute phase response. In response to these cyto-kines, the liver increases synthesis and release of a wide vari-ety of proteins including ceruloplasmin, complement factors, C-reactive protein (CRP), d-dimer protein, alpha 1-antitrysin, and serum amyloid A. There are proteins, such as serum albu-min and transferrin, that also decrease (negative acute phase proteins) in response to inflammation.The acute phase response of the liver can be initiated in response to infection, trauma, or malignancy. The purpose of the release of these proteins from the liver is to contain infectious processes, prevent further tissue damage and to begin repara-tive and regeneration processes to restore body homeostasis. For example, products of the complement pathways can attach to microbes to allow for phagocytosis and act as chemoattractants to the areas of inflammation. CRP is an important acute phase protein that is also involved in the clearance of microorganisms by binding to their membranes and functioning as an opsonin to Brunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   135420/02/19   2:36 PM 1355LIVERCHAPTER 31facilitate phagocytosis. Other proteins such as α1-antitrypsin are protease inhibitors and restrict the protease activity of enzymes of inflammatory cells. Thus, the secretion of acute phase pro-teins from the liver during the acute phase response is an early defense measure against harmful stimuli prior to the full activa-tion of the immune response.11LPS SignalingThe liver is a complex organ with an important function in immune surveillance and clearance of bacteria and their prod-ucts. This function is facilitated by the fact that the liver receives all the drainage of the gastrointestinal tract via the portal blood flow, making it the last barrier preventing bacteria and their toxins from reaching the systemic circulation. The importance of preventing bacteria and their products from reaching the systemic blood stream is evident in patients who are infected with gram-negative bacteria. Gram-negative bacteria infection produces an acute inflammatory reaction that can lead to septic shock and multiple organ failure. The complications of gram-negative sepsis are initiated by endotoxin (lipopolysaccharide [LPS]). LPS is a glycolipid constituent of gram-negative bacte-ria outer membranes composed of a hydrophilic polysaccharide portion and a hydrophobic domain called lipid A. The lipid A structure is the LPS component responsible for the biological effects of LPS. Mere nanogram amounts of LPS injected into humans are needed to result in the manifestations of septic shock. The profound effects of LPS are caused not only by the direct effect of LPS itself but also by the activation of LPS-sensitive cells, resulting in the excessive release of cytokines and other inflammatory mediators.Since sepsis from gram-negative bacterial infection con-tinues to be a major cause of morbidity and mortality, significant efforts have been made to identify the molecules involved in LPS-binding and signaling. Lipopolysaccharide binding protein (LBP), CD14, MD2, and Toll-like receptors have all been iden-tified as important mediators in the pathway of LPS stimulation. LBP is an acute-phase protein synthesized by hepatocytes that binds the lipid A moiety of LPS and forms a soluble LBP-LPS complex. This LBP-LPS complex then interacts with CD14, a receptor identified as important in LPS recognition, resulting in the release of inflammatory cytokines and mediators. Studies have shown that although LBP is important, it is not required for LPS to interact with CD14; however, its presence markedly decreases the concentration of LPS necessary for cellular acti-vation. This may be important especially at the low concentra-tions of LPS found under physiological conditions. CD14 exists in two forms, membrane (mCD14) and soluble (sCD14) form. The interaction of LPS with membrane CD14 or soluble CD14 is important in host clearance of LPS. This interaction is also responsible for the toxic effects of LPS seen in the liver and systemic circulation after the release of inflammatory cytokines and mediators. While membrane CD14 is a membrane protein found on the surface of myeloid lineage and mediates the activa-tion of these cells by LPS, soluble CD14 is found in the serum and enables responses to LPS by cells that do not express CD14. In addition to its important role in the release of LBP as an acute phase reactant during LPS-mediated inflammatory insults, the liver is also one of the major sources of soluble CD14 into the circulation.The binding of the LBP-LPS complex to CD14 is not enough to transduce an intracellular LPS signal. Membrane CD14 is a glycosyl phosphatidylinositol-anchored protein without a membrane-spanning domain. Thus, signaling fur-ther downstream of LPS requires additional elements. In stud-ies using chemically modified, radioiodinated LPS capable of cross-linking to nearby proteins, LPS has been shown to cross-link specifically to two other molecules, TLR4 and MD-2. TLR4 is a member of the family of proteins called Toll-like receptors and has been identified as the transmembrane corecep-tor to CD14. TLR4 was originally identified as the molecular sensor for bacterial LPS when studies demonstrated that muta-tions in the tlr4 gene were responsible for defective LPS sig-naling in mutant mice. Thus, initiation of LPS signal cascade requires the interaction of LPS directly with the heteromeric receptor complex of CD14, TLR4, and MD-2. Activation of this complex senses the presence of bacterial LPS at the cell sur-face and then transmits a signal into the cytoplasm through two distinct pathways. One pathway is dependent upon an adaptor known as myeloid differentiation factor 88 (MyD88). The other pathway is MyD88-independent and relies on an adaptor known as Toll/IL-1 receptor domain-containing adaptor-inducing IFNβ (TRIF).The liver is the main organ involved in the clearance of LPS from the bloodstream and so plays a critical role in the identification and processing of LPS. Kupffer cells are the resident macrophages of the liver and have been shown to par-ticipate in LPS clearance. Studies have demonstrated that the majority of radiolabelled LPS injected intravenously is quickly cleared from the circulation and found in the liver, primarily localized to the Kupffer cells. Kupffer cells also contribute to the inflammatory cascade by producing cytokines in response to LPS. Interestingly, hepatocytes, the parenchymal cells of the liver, also have all the components required for LPS recognition and signaling and can participate in the response to LPS and process LPS for clearance.Although the liver is essential in the host response to gram-negative bacteria infection by contributing to LPS clearance and to the LPS-induced inflammatory reaction, evidence reveals that LPS may actually have a reciprocal role in the pathogenesis of liver disorders. The relationship between LPS and liver disease is not a novel concept. Early studies have shown the correlation between the presence or absence of gut-derived LPS and the development of liver injury. Attempts to eliminate gut-derived LPS have had protective effects in various animal models of liver injury, including alcohol-induced liver disease. Other stud-ies have shown the synergism between LPS and hepatotoxins in worsening liver injury.In summary, the liver is essential in the clearance of LPS, but it can also contribute to the negative systemic effects seen in gram-negative bacterial sepsis by excessive activation of the LPS signaling pathway. In addition, there is evidence that this signaling pathway may participate in the pathogenesis of a vari-ety of liver disease. An understanding and characterization of the LPS pathway within the liver is an important step to under-standing the molecular basis for the lethal effect of LPS during sepsis and liver disorders.12,13Nitric OxideNitric oxide (NO) is a diffusible, free radical gas that was first identified in 1980 as endothelium-derived relaxing factor. Its physiologic and pathophysiologic importance was first discov-ered in the cardiovascular system with its vital role as a vaso-dilator. However, its mediation in a variety of other diverse biological activities has since been discovered. In the liver, the Brunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   135520/02/19   2:36 PM 1356SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIinfluence of NO on normal physiology as well as in states of disease has been extensively studied. The activation of inflam-matory cascades in the liver almost universally includes the upregulation of the inducible or inflammatory isoform of nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) and subsequent NO production. The functions of iNOS and NO in the liver is complex, and a clear dichotomy of their roles in liver dysfunction, whether being pro-tective or detrimental, has been demonstrated.Nitric oxide can be produced by one of three NO synthases: (NOS)-neuronal NOS (nNOS), inducible or inflammatory NOS (iNOS), and endothelial NOS (eNOS). These enzymes catalyze the conversion of l-arginine to NO and l-citrulline. Neuronal and endothelial NOS are constitutively expressed in a wide range of tissues. The activity of iNOS and eNOS are primarily controlled by calcium-mediated signaling that results in transient activation of these enzymes to produce small amounts of NO. Inducible NOS, as the name implies, is not normally expressed in rest-ing states in most tissues but is upregulated by gene transcrip-tion under conditions of stress. In contrast to nNOS and eNOS, the amount of NO produced by iNOS is large and sustained. Although first identified in macrophages, the expression of iNOS has been shown in most cell types if appropriately stimulated. Interestingly, studies on the liver with hepatocytes provided the first evidence that parenchymal cells could express iNOS. It is now known that iNOS can be expressed in all cell types of the liver, but hepatocyte expression appears to be the most promi-nent. Studies have shown that many inflammatory mediators, including cytokines, microbial products, and oxidative stress, are all capable of stimulating iNOS expression in the liver.The chemical action of NO in biological systems has been difficult to study due to its short-lived nature. NO is highly reac-tive with other molecules due to its one unpaired electron. These interactions can either result in nitrosation or oxidation with subsequent varied effects on cellular processes. Nitric oxide can also signal through cyclic nucleotides by activating the soluble isoform of guanylyl cyclase, increasing levels of cGMP. The functions of cGMP include acting as second messengers that transmit signals by activating downstream kinases or through the activation of cyclic nucleotide-gated channels. In addition to cGMP signaling, NO has also been found to modulate the expression of many genes.The role of NO in inflammatory states of the liver is complex and is at times conflicting. Under physiologic condi-tions, NO is important in maintaining hepatic perfusion. How-ever, in inflammatory conditions, such as ischemia/reperfusion (I/R), nitric oxide can play either a protective or harmful role depending on the enzymatic source (inducible versus endothe-lial nitric oxide synthase) and the type of ischemia reperfusion (cold vs. warm). It appears that the low level of constitutively expressed eNOS-derived NO is primarily beneficial in models of I/R injury with vasodilation and subsequent improvement in hepatic microcirculation as the proposed mechanism of protec-tion. Interestingly, activation of iNOS in similar models sug-gests a potentially harmful role for iNOS. Nitric oxide, through its reaction with reactive nitrogen and oxygen intermediates generated in the course of reperfusion injury, can contribute to much of the hepatocellular damage depending on the intracellu-lar ratio of these intermediates to nitric oxide. The production of iNOS and NO are also closely tied to multiple other inflamma-tory mediators in the liver, and activation of these downstream signals may explain some of the detrimental effects of NO in I/R injury of the liver. Thus, given its diverse biological effects as a signaling molecule, it is not surprising that NO plays both pro-tective and potentially harmful role in the setting of hepatic I/R injury. The final effect of NO varies in different liver diseases and depends on the overall hepatic environment. The potential use of NO pharmacologic manipulation to treat hepatic disease will require careful balance of the risks and benefits of this sim-ple, yet extremely complicated, molecule.14,15Heme Oxygenase SystemThe heme oxygenase (HO) is the rate-limiting enzyme in the degradation of heme to yield biliverdin, carbon monoxide (CO), and free iron. The HO system, which is activated in response to multiple cellular stresses, has been shown to be an endogenous cytoprotectant in a variety of inflammatory conditions. There are currently three heme oxygenase isozymes identified. HO-1 is the inducible form of heme oxygenase, while HO-2 and HO-3 are constitutively expressed. The function of HO in heme deg-radation is essential due to the potentially toxic effects of heme. An excess of heme can cause cellular damage from oxidative stress due to its production of reactive oxygen species. Thus, the HO system is an important defense mechanism against free heme-mediated oxidative stress.HO-1 has been shown to be induced in a variety of organs during diverse conditions such as hypoxia, endotoxemia, ischemia/reperfusion (I/R), hyperthermia, and radiation. It is thought that HO-1 is involved in maintaining redox homeostasis during cellular stress. In the liver, HO-1 is thought to normally modulate hepatic microvasculature tone through its generation of CO and, like nitric oxide, its activation of guanylyl cyclase. This important role is demonstrated in animal models of por-tal hypertension where inhibition of HO-1 exacerbates hyper-tension. Since HO-1 is induced as a protective mechanism in response to various stimuli, targeted induction of HO-1 has been studied as a therapeutic strategy for protection against inflam-matory processes. HO-1 overexpression exerts hepatoprotective effects in models of I/R injury, hemorrhagic shock and resus-citation, acetaminophen-induced hepatonecrosis, and sepsis-mediated liver injury.Although HO-1 has been shown to provide protective effects in a variety of inflammatory states, the specific mecha-nisms by which HO-1 mediates its protective effects are remains to be fully elucidated. Originally thought to be only potentially toxic waste, the byproducts generated during heme catabolism now appear to play important roles against cellular stress. The well-known hazardous effects of high doses of CO are attribut-able to its ability to bind hemoglobin and myoglobin, preventing the release of oxygen to tissues. However, only recently have the physiological and beneficial roles of CO been identified. CO is produced in injured tissues via induction of HO-1 and contrib-utes to the attenuation of proinflammatory processes. Similar to NO, CO plays an important role in maintaining the micro-circulation though its activation of soluble guanylyl cyclase and subsequent elevation of intracellular cyclic 3’5’-guanosine monophosphate (cGMP). The signaling activities of cGMP lead to smooth muscle relaxation and inhibition and platelet aggre-gation. In addition, CO has also been shown to inhibit proin-flammatory cytokines (TNF-α, IL-1) and chemokines while simultaneously inducing anti-inflammatory cytokines (IL-10). Exogenous low-dose CO has been shown to protect the liver from I/R injury and endotoxemia.Biliverdin and bilirubin are other metabolites of heme that are also recognized as possible mediators of HO-1’s protective Brunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   135620/02/19   2:36 PM 1357LIVERCHAPTER 31function. The cytosolic enzyme biliverdin reductase catalyzes the reduction of biliverdin to bilirubin. Both biliverdin and bilirubin have important endogenous antioxidant properties. Free iron, the third byproduct of heme oxidation is known to be cytotoxic by catalyzing the production of hydroxyl radicals. However, HO-1 induction is associated with increased levels of ferritin, the free iron sequestering protein. Thus, the increase in ferritin with the subsequent decrease in intracellular concentra-tions of free iron results in a net antioxidant effect. Importantly, both bilirubin and ferritin have been shown to protect against liver injury in a variety of I/R models.In summary, HO-1 is upregulated and protective in mul-tiple conditions of hepatic stress. Until recently, the degradation products of the HO system were thought to only be potentially toxic waste. It now appears that CO, biliverdin/bilirubin, ferritin are important in the maintenance of cellular redox homeostasis and may play a role in the mechanism of hepatoprotection in disease. Studies involving induction of HO-1 expression and use of its metabolic products hold therapeutic promises for novel protective agents against disorders of hepatic inflammation.16,17Toll-Like ReceptorsThe liver is a central regulator of the systemic immune response following acute insults to the body. Not only does it play a cru-cial role in modulating the systemic inflammatory response to infection or injury, it is also subject to injury and dysfunc-tion from these same processes. Recent advances in the study of mechanisms for the activation of the innate immune system have pointed to the Toll-like receptors (TLRs) as a common pathway for immune recognition of microbial invasion and tis-sue injury. By recognizing either microbial products or endog-enous molecules released from damaged sites, the TLR system is capable of alerting the host of danger by activating the innate immune system. Initially, this is manifested by the production of inflammatory mediators and the rapid uptake of invading microbes and their products. When excessive, this inflamma-tory response can contribute to organ damage and dysfunction.To date, 13 TLRs have been described in mice, and 11 in humans. TLRs are a family of proteins that are mammalian homologues to the Drosophila Toll, a protein that functions in development and immunity. The cytoplasmic portion of Toll-like receptors is similar to that of the IL-1 receptor (IL-1R) fam-ily and is called the Toll/IL-1 receptor (TIR) domain. Unlike the IL-1 receptor extracellular portion that consists of an immuno-globulin-like domain, the Toll-like receptors have leucine-rich repeats in their extracellular portion. The TLR receptors have many structural similarities both extracellularly and intracel-lularly, but they differ from each other in ligand specificities, expression patterns, and with some variability in the signaling pathways they activate.The TLR receptors were initially identified as compo-nents of the innate immune system that acted as a front-line defense mechanism against infections. Their recognition of patterns on pathogens, such as microbial peptides, lipopolysac-charide, lipoteichoic acids, bacterial DNA, and single-stranded RNA, resulted in the activation of an inflammatory response meant for controlling the invading organisms. In situations of noninfectious inflammation such as seen in trauma, clinicians have long recognized similar activation of the same inflamma-tory pathways and systemic manifestations. This observation, among others, led to the hypothesis that the immune system is designed to recognize any threats, whether from pathogens or tissue damage, that may lead to disruption of homeostasis. In conditions of sterile inflammation, the activation of immune cells is through the release of endogenous danger molecules, normal cell constituents released by damage or dying cells or components of the extracellular matrix, released by the action of proteases at the site of tissue damage. Recent observations show that both microbial products and endogenous danger molecules can be recognized through the TLR system.Perhaps more than any of the other TLR family members, TLR4 sits at the interface of microbial and sterile inflammation. Whereas the role of TLR4 in the recognition of lipopolysac-charide (LPS) is well established, only recently has it become apparent that TLR4 also participates in the recognition of endogenous danger molecules. In vivo evidence for TLR4-mediated danger signaling comes from studies of acute tissue injury in hemorrhagic shock, trauma, and I/R models. In each case, TLR4-mutant animals exhibited reduced injury or inflam-mation compared to wild-type controls. In efforts to identify the ligands responsible for TLR4-dependent signaling in noninfec-tious insults, multiple molecules have been suggested. These include heat shock proteins, fibrinogen, hyaluronic acid, hepa-ran sulfate, and high mobility group box-1. Although a central role for TLR4 in recognizing tissue injury is building, studies are beginning to suggest that other TLR family members may also participate in the recognition of endogenous molecules released by tissue injury. The very recent realization that certain TLR family members also respond to endogenous molecules released from stressed or damaged tissues points to a molecular basis for a shared mechanism of innate immune activation by infection and injury.18-20RADIOLOGIC EVALUATION OF THE LIVERUltrasoundAbdominal ultrasound is a commonly applied imaging modal-ity used to evaluate abdominal symptoms. Ultrasound tech-nology is based on the pulse-echo principle. The ultrasound transducer converts electrical energy to high-frequency sound energy that is transmitted into tissue. Although some of the ultrasound waves are transmitted through the tissue, some  are reflected back, and the ultrasound image is produced when the ultrasound receiver detects those reflected waves. This real-time gray-scale (B-mode) imaging is augmented by Doppler flow imaging. Doppler ultrasound not only can detect the pres-ence of blood vessels but also can determine the direction and velocity of blood flow. Ultrasonography is a useful initial imag-ing test of the liver because it is inexpensive, widely available, involves no radiation exposure, and is well tolerated by patients. It is excellent for diagnosing biliary pathology and focal liver lesions. In addition, liver injury can be evaluated in trauma patients using the focused abdominal sonography for trauma examination. Limitations of ultrasound include incomplete imaging of the liver, most often at the dome or beneath ribs on the surface, and incomplete visualization of lesion boundaries. Moreover, obesity and overlying bowel gas also can interfere with image quality. Thus, ultrasonographically detected masses usually require further evaluation by other imaging modalities due to the lower sensitivity and specificity of ultrasound com-pared with CT and MRI.The advent of contrast-enhanced ultrasound has improved the ability of this modality to differentiate among benign and malignant lesions. The injection of gas microbubble agents can Brunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   135720/02/19   2:36 PM 1358SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIincrease the sensitivity and specificity of ultrasound in detect-ing and diagnosing liver lesions. Microbubbles are <10 μm and, when given intravenously, allow for more effective echo enhancement. Contrast-enhanced ultrasound imaging of the liver improves delineation of liver lesions through identifica-tion of dynamic enhancement patterns and the vascular mor-phology of the lesion. In addition, some agents exhibit a late liver-specific phase in which the bubbles are taken up by cells in the reticuloendothelial system and accumulate in normal liver parenchyma after the vascular enhancement has faded.The use of intraoperative ultrasound of the liver has rap-idly expanded over the years with the increasing number and complexity of hepatic resections being performed.21 It has the ability to provide the surgeon with real-time accurate informa-tion useful for surgical planning. Intraoperative ultrasound is considered the gold standard for detecting liver lesions, and studies have shown that it can identify 20% to 30% more lesions than other preoperative imaging modalities. Impor-tantly, it has been shown to influence surgical management in almost 50% of planned liver resections for malignancies. Applications for intraoperative ultrasound of the liver include tumor staging, visualization of intrahepatic vascular structures (Fig. 31-10), and guidance of resection plane by assessment of the relationship of a mass to the vessels. In addition, biopsy of lesions and ablation of tumors can be guided by intraoperative ultrasound.Ultrasound elastography, also referred to as transient elastography, can be used to assess the degree of fibrosis or cirrhosis in the liver. Low-frequency vibrations transmitted through the liver induce an elastic shear wave that is detected by pulse-echo ultrasonography as the wave propagates through the liver. The velocity of the wave correlates with the stiffness of the organ—the wave travels faster through fibrotic or cirrhotic  tissues. Ultrasound elastography has been found in large cohorts of individuals to have a sensitivity of 87% and a specificity of 91% for the diagnosis of cirrhosis when compared with liver biopsy.22 Unlike liver biopsy, ultrasound elastography is non-invasive and can be repeated often without additional risk to the patient. Furthermore, this rapid test can acquire information from a larger area of the tissue relative to needle biopsy, provid-ing a better understanding of the entire hepatic parenchyma and reducing sampling error.Computed TomographyCT produces a digitally processed cross-sectional image of the  body from a large series of X-ray images. The introduction of helical (spiral) CT has improved the imaging capabilities of this technique compared to earlier conventional axial CT by combining a continuous patient-table motion with continuous rotation of the CT gantry and allowing rapid acquisition of a volume of data within a single breath hold. With the recent advent of multidetector row CT scanners, high-resolution images can be obtained in submillimeter section thickness within a short scan time, with virtually no penalty in increased radiation dose. Together, these technologic advances have led to reduced motion artifacts due to variations in inspiration, facili-tated optimal contrast delivery, and allowed for the capability to generate high-resolution reformations in any desired plane. In a single examination, modern-day CT scans provide detailed morphologic information on the number, size, distribution, and vascularity of liver lesions, all of which are vital in guiding the clinical management and therapeutic plan.Contrast medium is routinely used in CT evaluation of the liver because of the similar densities of most pathologic liver masses and normal hepatic parenchyma. A CT scan with a dualor triple-phase bolus of intravenous contrast agent is performed to achieve the greatest enhancement of contrast between nor-mal and pathologic tissues.23 Ideally, contrast media should be selectively delivered to either the tumor or the liver, but not both. Radiologists use the dual blood supply of the liver and the hemodynamics of hepatic tumors to achieve this goal. The liver is unique in that it has a dual blood supply. As previously noted, the portal vein supplies approximately 75% of the blood Figure 31-10. Intraoperative liver ultrasound images of the portal veins, hepatic veins, and inferior vena cava (IVC). Upper panel shows the portal vein bifurcation with echogenic Glissonian sheath. The confluence of the three hepatic veins (right hepatic vein [RHV], middle hepatic vein [MHV], and left hepatic vein [LHV]) and the IVC is shown in the middle panel. An accessory LHV is present in this patient. Lower panel is a color Doppler image showing flow.Brunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   135820/02/19   2:36 PM 1359LIVERCHAPTER 31flow and the hepatic artery the remaining 25%. However, many liver tumors receive the majority of their blood supply from the hepatic artery. After injection of the contrast agent, the rapid scan time of helical CT allows for CT sections through the liver in both the arterial dominant phase (20 to 30 seconds after the beginning of contrast delivery) and venous or por-tal dominant phase (60 to 70 seconds after contrast injection)  (Fig. 31-11). Thus, many hepatic tumors that derive the major-ity of their blood supply from the hepatic artery as well as other hypervascular lesions are well delineated in the arterial phase. On the other hand, the portal phase provides optimal enhance-ment of the normal liver parenchyma because the majority of its blood supply is derived from the portal vein. This allows for detection of hypovascular lesions because they will appear hypoattenuated in relation to the brighter normal liver paren-chyma. Furthermore, the arterial and portal phase images allow for noninvasive mapping of the hepatic arterial and venous anat-omy, information that is crucial in the preoperative planning for patients undergoing liver surgery.CT cholangiography has emerged as a new imaging modal-ity for biliary disease. This technique usually involves the use of contrast agents, which are excreted by hepatocytes into the bile ducts. CT cholangiography, therefore, provides information on hepatocyte function and bile flow, in addition to high-resolution depiction of the biliary tree. It has compared well to endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) in identifying obstructive biliary disease.24 One of the major advantages of CT cholangiography over other imaging modalities is the abil-ity to depict small nondilated peripheral biliary radicals. This technique may be useful in the context of live liver donation or complex biliary surgery to aid in the preoperative depiction of biliary anatomy. It also may be applicable in the postopera-tive setting for the detection of biliary leakage or obstruction. A limitation of CT cholangiography is that the biliary tree may not be well visualized in patients with excessively dilated bile ducts or in those with hyperbilirubinemia, as bilirubin excretion is impaired in these cases.Magnetic Resonance ImagingMRI is a technique that produces images based on magnetic fields and radio waves. The MRI scanner creates a powerful magnetic field that aligns the hydrogen atoms in the body, and radio waves are used to alter the alignment of this magnetiza-tion. Different tissues absorb and release radio wave energy at different rates, and this information is used to construct an image of the body. Most tissues can be differentiated by differ-ences in their characteristic T1 and T2 relaxation times. T1 is a measure of how quickly a tissue can become magnetized, and T2 measures how quickly it loses its magnetization. As with CT technology, advances in MRI now provide the opportunity to perform single-breath T1-weighted imaging and respiration-triggered T2-weighted imaging. The development of breath-hold imaging techniques has eliminated many of the motion artifacts that previously limited the sensitivity and application of MRI for imaging of the liver. Compared with CT scanning, the major advantages of MRI pertain to higher soft tissue contrast resolution and excellent depiction of fluid-containing structures, while obviating the need for ionizing radiation.As with the iodinated contrast media use in CT scanning, multiple contrast agents have been developed for MRI to increase the difference in signal intensity between normal liver and pathologic lesions. Various gadolinium-based compounds have been used as MRI contrast agents that behave in a manner very similar to iodine in CT. Liver-specific MRI contrast agents also have been developed that rely either on excretion by Kupffer cells, such as ferumoxide (Feridex, Advanced Magnet-ics, Cambridge, MA), or on secretion in bile by hepatocytes, including gadoxetate (Eovist or Primovist, Bayer-Schering,  Berlin, Germany). These agents combine the information obtained during a standard MRI with additional functional data, which in turn yields improved detection and characteriza-tion of lesions within the liver.25Just as ultrasound elastography is useful in the diagno-sis of hepatic fibrosis and cirrhosis, magnetic resonance (MR) elastography appears promising as an imaging modality in 3Figure 31-11. Computed tomographic (CT) images of hepatic veins and Couinaud’s liver segments. The images show the three hepatic veins and inferior vena cava (IVC) (upper panel), as well as Couinaud’s liver segments (lower panels). LHV = left hepatic vein; MHV = middle hepatic vein; RHV = right hepatic vein.Brunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   135920/02/19   2:36 PM 1360SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIreducing the need for liver biopsy. In this technique, a vibration device is used to induce a shear wave in the liver. A modified MRI machine detects the shear wave, then generates a color-coded image that depicts the wave velocity, and hence stiffness, throughout the organ. Although preliminary studies have shown that MR elastography can detect cirrhosis with a high degree of accuracy, the clinical utility of this modality, especially given its relatively high cost, remains to be determined.Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) enables rapid, noninvasive depiction of both the biliary tree and the pancreatic duct without the use of ionizing radiation or intravenous contrast media. One of the most common clinical indications for MRCP is biliary obstruction. MRCP provides visualization of dilated bile ducts, and the high spatial and con-trast resolution often enables accurate assessment of the level of occlusion in the biliary tree. MRCP also can be enhanced with liver-specific MRI contrast agents that are actively secreted into the bile, but the clinical indications for such studies are still a matter of intensive investigation.26Positron Emission TomographyPositron emission tomography (PET) is a nuclear medicine test that produces images of metabolic activity in tissues by detect-ing gamma rays emitted by a radioisotope incorporated into a metabolically active molecule. Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) is the most common metabolic molecule used in PET imaging. Although traditional imaging such as CT, ultrasound, and MRI provide anatomic information, PET offers functional imaging of tissues with high metabolic activity, including most types of metastatic tumors. PET imaging increasingly is used as a tool in the diagnostic evaluation of a patient with potentially resectable hepatic disease. In nonrandomized trials, PET demonstrated bet-ter sensitivity and specificity than CT scanning for the detec-tion of both intrahepatic and extrahepatic disease.27 Integrated PET/CT improves diagnostic accuracy over standard PET or CT alone and has been shown to be sensitive in the detection of liver metastases derived from a wide range of cancers, including colorectal (Fig. 31-12), breast, or lung primaries.27More than 20% of patients with colorectal cancer ini-tially present with hepatic metastasis, and a large percentage of patients undergoing resection for their primary colorectal cancer eventually experience disease recurrence in the liver.  The role of FDG-PET/CT in colorectal cancers lies predomi-nantly in tumor staging and follow-up, particularly in the detec-tion of occult intrahepatic metastases or extrahepatic disease. Although hepatic resection of colorectal metastases provides survival rates nearing 50%, the presence of extrahepatic dis-ease is a poor prognosticator and usually precludes aggressive surgical intervention. Thus, accurate information regarding the extent of the disease is necessary for management of patients with colorectal metastases. PET/CT has also been shown to be more accurate than contrast-enhanced CT in tumor surveillance after radiofrequency ablation.28 The sensitivity of FDG-PET, however, is lowered by neoadjuvant chemotherapy, most likely secondary to reduced metabolic activity within the tumor.Although the role of PET/CT in the clinical management of liver metastases has been well-established, its utility in the diagnostic workup of primary liver tumors is still debated. In hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), FDG uptake correlates with the degree of differentiation—high-grade HCC lesions have increased FDG uptake compared to low-grade HCCs. As a result, the overall sensitivity of FDG-PET/CT in the detection of HCCs is reported to be only 50% to 65%, rendering this modality insufficient when used alone in the diagnosis of primary HCCs. For this reason, dual-tracer PET has been introduced to improve sensitivity in detecting all HCC. This modality combines the use of FDG, which accumulates in poorly differentiated tumors, with 11C-acetate, a tracer preferentially accumulated by well-differentiated HCC lesions. Although the clinical benefits of dual-tracer PET/CT have yet to be fully established, this com-bined modality has the potential to become a valuable tool in the diagnosis and staging of HCC. In cholangiocarcinoma tumors, FDG avidity depends on the morphologic characteristics and location of the lesion. Therefore, FDG-PET and FDG-PET/CT have not been shown to be highly beneficial in the diagnosis of primary cholangiocarcinoma, but they may be beneficial in the detection of regional and distal metastases, which can affect clinical decision making and patient management.ACUTE LIVER FAILUREAcute liver failure (ALF) occurs when the rate and extent of hepatocyte death exceeds the liver’s regenerative capabilities. It was initially described as a specific disease entity in the 1950s. Figure 31-12. Computed tomography (CT)–positron emission tomography (PET) scans before and after resection of liver metastasis from colorectal cancer in a 54-year-old patient. CT scan shows large 10-cm right lobe liver metastasis (left panel), and PET scan findings are strongly positive (middle panel). Two years after right hepatectomy, the patient has no evidence of recurrence and significant hypertrophy of the left lobe (right panel).Brunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   136020/02/19   2:36 PM 1361LIVERCHAPTER 31It also has been referred to as fulminant hepatic failure. ALF is a rare disorder affecting approximately 2000 patients annually in the United States. ALF is defined by the development of hepatic encephalopathy occurring within 26 weeks of severe liver injury in a patient without a history of previous liver dis-ease or portal hypertension.29 The manifestations of ALF may include cerebral edema, hemodynamic instability, increased sus-ceptibility to bacterial and fungal infections, renal failure, coag-ulopathy, and metabolic disturbances. Even with current medical care, ALF can progress rapidly to hepatic coma and death. The most common cause of death is intracranial hypertension due to cerebral edema, followed by sepsis and multisystem organ failure. The causes of ALF, which are the most important variables in determining outcome, are numerous and can include viral infection as well as drug overdose, reaction, and toxicity. It has been determined that the etiologic factor leading to ALF varies according to geographic location.30 Before the introduc-tion of orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT), the chance for survival was <20%. Currently, most series report 5-year survival rates of >70% for affected patients.31EtiologyDifferences in etiology, management, and patient outcomes have been described for various regions of the globe. In the East and developing portions of the world, the most common causes of ALF are viral infections, primarily hepatitis B, A, and E.20 In these areas, there are a relatively small number of drug-induced cases. In contrast, 65% of cases of ALF in the West are thought to be due to drugs and toxins, with acetaminophen (paracetamol) being the most common etiologic agent in the United States, Australia, United Kingdom, and most of Europe. In France and Spain, where acetaminophen sales are restricted, the rate of acetaminophen-induced ALF is quite low.32  Acetaminophen-induced ALF is also uncommon in South America. The U.S. Acute Liver Failure Study Group identified several other causes of ALF, including autoimmune hepatitis, hypoperfusion of the liver (in cardiomyopathy or cardiogenic shock), pregnancy-related conditions, and Wilson’s disease.33 Even with exhaustive efforts to identify a cause, approximately 20% of all cases of ALF remain indeterminate in origin.Clinical PresentationIn a multicenter study involving 17 tertiary care centers and 308 patients in the United States, 73% of all patients with ALF were female, with a median age of 38 years.34 The most common ethnic group affected was whites (74%), followed by Hispanics (9%) and African Americans (3%). Patients were ill for a median of 6 days before the onset of encephalopathy and had a median of 2 days between the onset of jaundice and the development of encephalopathy. Hepatic coma grade at presentation was approximately equally distributed across grades I to IV. Eighty-four percent of the patients in the study were referred from outside hospitals, 40% had a serum creatinine level exceeding  2.0 mg/dL, and 14% had an arterial pH of <7.30. In addition, 44% of the patients acquired a culture-proven infection.Diagnosis and Clinical ManagementWhen the medical history is obtained, it is important to address the possibility of exposure to viral infections, medications, and other possible toxins. The possibility of previous liver disease needs to be explored. The physical examination must assess and document the patient’s mental status as well as attempt to identify findings of chronic liver disease. The initial laboratory examination must evaluate the severity of the ALF as well as attempt to identify the cause (Table 31-1). A liver biopsy should be performed if certain disease entities such as autoimmune hepatitis or lymphoma are a possibility. Because of the asso-ciated coagulopathy, if a liver biopsy is needed, it is usually safest to obtain the tissue via a transjugular approach. Patients with ALF should be admitted to the hospital and monitored fre-quently. Due to the rapidity with which this disease process may progress, a liver transplant center should be contacted, and the affected patient should be transferred to the center early in the evaluation period.If acetaminophen overdose is suspected to have occurred within a few hours of presentation, administration of activated charcoal may be useful to reduce the volume of acetamino-phen present in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. N-acetylcysteine (NAC), the clinically effective antidote for acetaminophen over-dose, should be administered as early as possible to any patient with suspected acetaminophen-associated ALF.35 NAC also should be administered to patients with ALF of unclear etiol-ogy because replenishing glutathione may be beneficial in this patient population as well.36 NAC can be administered either orally (140 mg/kg initial dose, followed by 70 mg/kg every  4 hours × 17 doses) or via the intravenous route (loading dose of 150 mg/kg, followed by a maintenance dose of 50 mg/kg every 4 hours × 12 doses). For patients who are suspected of having drug-induced hepatotoxicity, it is important to obtain details regarding all prescription and nonprescription drugs, herbs, and dietary supplements that may have been taken in the previous year. Most instances of drug-induced hepatotoxicity occur in the first 6 months after drug initiation. Any suspected offending agent must be discontinued, and an attempt should be made to administer only essential medications.The majority of patients with ALF need to be monitored in the intensive care unit (ICU) setting, and specific attention needs to be given to fluid management, ulcer prophylaxis, hemody-namic monitoring, electrolyte management, and surveillance for and treatment of infection. Surveillance cultures should be performed to identify bacterial and fungal infections as early as possible. Serum phosphorus levels need to be monitored. 4Table 31-1Acute liver failure laboratory evaluationComplete blood countComplete metabolic panelAmylase and lipase levelsLiver function testsProthrombin time/international normalized ratioFactor V levelFactor VII levelArterial blood gas concentrationsArterial serum ammonia levelABO typingAcute hepatitis panelAutoimmune marker levelsCeruloplasmin levelToxicology screeningAcetaminophen levelHIV screeningPregnancy test (females)HIV = human immunodeficiency virus.Brunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   136120/02/19   2:36 PM 1362SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIHypophosphatemia, a sign of hepatic regeneration, may indi-cate a higher likelihood of spontaneous recovery and needs to be corrected via intravenous (IV) administration of phosphate. Sedation should be avoided, and the head of the bed should be elevated at least 30°. Neurologic examinations should be per-formed frequently. Intracranial pressure monitoring is reserved for patients in whom a neurologic examination is no longer reli-able. CT scans of the head should be performed to rule out mass lesion or hemorrhage, but they provide only limited informa-tion regarding increased intracranial pressure. The administra-tion of blood products for thrombocytopenia and prolonged PT is recommended only in the setting of hemorrhage or before invasive procedures. Acute renal failure is a frequent complica-tion in patients with ALF, and efforts should be made to protect renal function by maintaining sufficient perfusion and avoid-ing nephrotoxic medications. Should renal replacement therapy become necessary, continuous venovenous hemodialysis should be used rather than intermittent hemodialysis because continu-ous venovenous hemodialysis provides better hemodynamic and intracranial pressure stability. The most severely affected patients have a poor prognosis with medical management alone and require liver transplantation. Identifying these patients early in the clinical course is important both to maximize the time available to obtain a donor liver allograft for those in need and to avoid transplant in those who will recover without it.PrognosisAccurate identification of ALF patients who will recover spon-taneously is important because of the severe shortage of donor liver allografts and the potential complications of lifelong non-specific immunosuppression. The most widely applied prognos-tic scoring system is the King’s College Hospital ALF criteria.37 This scoring system has separate criteria predicting a poor medical management outcome for acetaminophen-related and non–acetaminophen-related forms of ALF (Table 31-2). Many other prognostic models exist such as the Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation II (APACHE II) score, the Clichy criteria,38 and actin-free Gc-globulin serum concentration.39  Overall, prognostic scoring systems have proven to have acceptable specificity but low sensitivity in determining patient outcome and therefore should not replace the judgment of an experienced clinician.40Liver TransplantationDespite advances in medical management, OLT remains the only definitive therapy for patients unable to regenerate sufficient hepatocyte mass in a timely manner. The advent of OLT has coincided with a rise in overall ALF survival rates from approxi-mately 20% in the pretransplantation era to >70% at the pres-ent time. One-year posttransplantation survival for patients with ALF has been reported to be as high as 80% to 90%.31 Although these improvements in survival rates are impressive, it should be noted that 10% of patients still die while awaiting OLT, which confirms that the potential for improved patient outcome still has not been realized because of the ongoing liver allograft shortage.Emerging TechnologiesAs mentioned earlier, patient survival could be improved if additional time could be gained for the patient while awaiting liver replacement or hepatocyte regeneration. The development of a support device to replace the acutely failing liver has been a highly sought after (and elusive) goal. Several systems have been tested without definitive evidence of efficacy. Transient improvement in hepatic encephalopathy has been observed in several trials, but improvement in hepatocyte function and long-term benefit have not been realized.41 Liver support trials are dif-ficult to perform due to access to liver replacement, the rarity of affected patients, and the heterogeneous causes and varying levels of disease severity. Therefore, additional data are necessary, and liver support systems should be used only as part of an approved clinical trial. Focus has now shifted toward xenotransplantation,42 organ engineering, and cell transplantation.43 In the meantime, living donation and auxiliary liver transplantation can help over-come the organ shortage.44CIRRHOSIS AND PORTAL HYPERTENSIONCirrhosis, the final sequela of chronic hepatic insult, is char-acterized by the presence of fibrous septa throughout the liver subdividing the parenchyma into hepatocellular nodules  (Fig. 31-13).45 Cirrhosis is the consequence of sustained wound healing in response to chronic liver injury. Approximately 40% of cirrhotic patients are asymptomatic, but progressive deteriora-tion leading to the need for liver transplantation or death is typi-cal after the development of end-stage liver disease (ESLD). The complications of ESLD include progressive hyperbilirubinemia, malnutrition, decreased synthetic function of the liver, coagu-lopathy, portal hypertension (i.e., ascites and variceal bleeding), hepatic encephalopathy, and life-limiting fatigue. ESLD car-ries a 5-year mortality of 50%, with 70% of deaths due to liver  failure.46 In the United States, cirrhosis accounts for 30,000 deaths per year and is the most common nonneoplastic cause of death among patients with hepatobiliary and digestive diseases. An additional 10,000 to 12,000 deaths occur annually due to HCC, the most rapidly increasing neoplasm in the United States.46Morphologic Classification of CirrhosisMorphologically, cirrhosis can be described as micronodular, macronodular, or mixed. Micronodular cirrhosis is characterized Table 31-2King’s College selection criteria for liver transplantation in acute liver failureCAUSESELECTION CRITERIAAcetaminophenArterial pH < 7.30 irrespective of hepatic coma gradeOrProthrombin time >100 s + serum creatinine level >3.4 mg/dL +  grade III or IV hepatic comaNot acetaminophenProthrombin time >100 s irrespective of hepatic coma gradeOrAny three of the following, irrespective of hepatic coma grade: Cryptogenic or drug-induced hepatitis Jaundice to coma interval >7 d Prothrombin time >50 s Serum bilirubin level >17.5 mg/dL Age < 10 y or > 40 yBrunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   136220/02/19   2:36 PM 1363LIVERCHAPTER 31by thick regular septa, small uniform regenerative nodules, and involvement of virtually every hepatic lobule. Macronodular cirrhosis frequently has septa and regenerative nodules of vary-ing sizes. The regenerative nodules consist of irregularly sized hepatocytes with large nuclei and cell plates of varying thick-ness. Mixed cirrhosis is present when regeneration is occurring in a micronodular liver and over time converts to a macronodu-lar pattern. This morphologic categorization is limited, and cir-rhosis is a dynamic process in which nodule size varies over time. The three patterns correlate poorly with etiology, and the same pattern can result from a variety of disease processes. Conversely, a single disease process can demonstrate several morphologic patterns. Irrespective of etiology and morphologic pattern, the cirrhotic liver frequently demonstrates right hepatic lobe atrophy, caudate lobe and left lateral segment hypertrophy, recanalization of the umbilical vein, a nodular surface contour, dilatation of the portal vein, gastroesophageal varices, and sple-nomegaly on radiographic evaluation.Etiology of CirrhosisCirrhosis can result from a wide range of disease processes, including viral, autoimmune, drug-induced, alcohol-induced, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, and metabolic diseases  (Table 31-3). In the diagnosis of alcoholic liver disease, docu-mentation of chronic alcohol abuse is imperative. Liver biopsy will reveal the typical findings of alcoholic hepatitis, including hepatocyte necrosis, Mallory bodies, neutrophil infiltration, and perivenular inflammation.Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) covers a wide spectrum of disorders including simple fatty liver, nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), fibrosis/cirrhosis and NASH-associated hepatocellular carcinoma.47 NAFLD is now the most common chronic liver disease worldwide48 and NASH is a progressive form of NAFLD characterized by steatosis with hepatocellular injury and chronic inflammation.49 NASH affects 3% to 5% of the population, and approximately 1 in 10 NASH patients will progress to cirrhosis, thereby placing them at risk for the well-described consequences of cirrhosis, including hepatocellular carcinoma.50 Although hepatocellular carcinoma arises less fre-quently in patients with NASH compared to other liver diseases (e.g., hepatitis C viral infection), the overall higher prevalence and more rapidly increasing incidence of NASH relative to other chronic liver diseases mean that the majority of HCC will arise in the setting of NAFLD in the near future.51,52Patients with nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) often endorse a history of diabetes mellitus or metabolic syndrome. The diagnosis of NASH requires the demonstration of steato-hepatitis on biopsy, the lack of a history of significant alcohol consumption, and exclusion of other causes of hepatic steatosis. Although cryptogenic cirrhosis, or cirrhosis without an apparent cause, accounted for a third of all cases in the past, this propor-tion has declined over time as it becomes increasingly appar-ent that many of such patients may actually have unrecognized NASH.Due to the high prevalence of fatty liver disease, many patients considered for hepatic surgery will have background hepatic steatosis or steatohepatitis. In addition, chemotherapy treatment (e.g., irinotecan) for colorectal cancer liver metasta-ses induces steatosis and steatohepatitis in the nontumor-bearing liver.53 This has important implications as fatty liver disease can increase morbidity after liver resection.54,55 Thus, under-standing the deleterious effects of steatosis and steatohepatitis Figure 31-13. Histology of cirrhotic liver with regenerating mac-ronodules. Upper panel: Grossly cirrhotic liver. Lower panel: Regenerative nodules and bridging fibrosis representative of cir-rhosis seen on standard light microscopy (hematoxylin and eosin stain).Table 31-3Etiology of cirrhosisViral hepatitis (hepatitis B, C, and D)CryptogenicAlcohol abuseMetabolic abnormalities Iron overload (hemochromatosis) Copper overload (Wilson’s disease) α1-Antitrypsin deficiency Glycogen storage disease (types IA, III, and IV) Tyrosinemia GalactosemiaNonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH)Hepatic vein outflow abnormalities Budd-Chiari syndrome Cardiac failureAutoimmune hepatitisToxins and drugsBrunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   136320/02/19   2:36 PM 1364SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIis crucial for the multidisciplinary care of patients undergoing liver surgery.Chronic hepatitis C infection is the most common cause of chronic liver disease and the most frequent indication for liver transplantation in the United States. The identification of chronic hepatitis C infection is facilitated by serologic assays that detect antibody to hepatitis C and molecular assays that quantify hepatitis C viral RNA. Chronic hepatitis B, on the other hand, can be diagnosed based on the detection of hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) more than 4 to 6 months after initial infection. Additional tests of hepatitis B viral replication, such as the hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg) and hepatitis B viral DNA, can be used to confirm ongoing infection and to guide appropri-ate antiviral therapy.Autoimmune causes of cirrhosis include primary bili-ary cirrhosis, primary sclerosing cholangitis, and autoimmune hepatitis. Patients with primary biliary cirrhosis may be asymp-tomatic or may present with a history of fatigue, pruritus, and skin hyperpigmentation that is not related to jaundice. Anti-mitochondrial antibodies will test positive in the vast majority of cases. Affected patients also may have marked elevations in serum cholesterol, while hyperbilirubinemia is seen late in the course of the disease. Primary sclerosing cholangitis is a chronic cholestatic disease of the liver associated with ulcer-ative colitis and Crohn’s disease. The clinical presentation can include pruritus, steatorrhea, fat-soluble vitamin deficiencies, and metabolic bone disease. The diagnosis is often established by imaging of the biliary tree, which reveals a characteristic picture of diffuse, multifocal strictures with focal dilation of the bile ducts resulting in a beaded appearance. Complications are common and can include biliary strictures, cholangitis, choleli-thiasis, and cholangiocarcinoma. Autoimmune hepatitis is often accompanied by an elevation in serum globulins, particularly gamma globulins. Liver biopsy will show nonspecific changes such as a portal mononuclear cell infiltrate with the character-istic presence of plasma cells. Many patients with autoimmune hepatitis will respond to treatment with prednisone with or with-out azathioprine.Hereditary hemochromatosis is the most common meta-bolic disorder causing cirrhosis. This entity should be suspected if the patient’s clinical presentation includes skin hyperpigmen-tation, diabetes mellitus, pseudogout, cardiomyopathy, or a fam-ily history of cirrhosis. Elevated plasma ferritin and increased iron saturation levels suggest the presence of iron overload, but these findings also can be seen in other diseases of the liver. Confirmatory testing can be achieved by means of genetic test-ing, liver biopsy, or by assessing the response to phlebotomy. Other uncommon metabolic disorders leading to cirrhosis include Wilson’s disease and α1-antitrypsin deficiency.Clinical Manifestations of CirrhosisThe clinical history associated with cirrhosis can include fatigue, anorexia, weight loss, jaundice, abdominal pain, peripheral edema, ascites, GI bleeding, and hepatic encephalopathy. On physical examination, a number of findings have been described in patients with cirrhosis. Spider angiomata and palmar ery-thema are believed to be caused by alterations in sex hormone metabolism. Finger clubbing may be a consequence of hypo-albuminemia, while the pathogenesis of white nail beds and Dupuytren’s contractures are less well understood. Males may develop features of feminization such as gynecomastia, loss of chest and axillary hair, and testicular atrophy. Splenomegaly is common, whereas the cirrhotic liver itself may be enlarged, nor-mal sized, or small. Ascites and pleural effusion can be seen with fluid accumulation. Portal hypertension can manifest as caput medusae and/or the presence of the Cruveilhier-Baumgarten murmur, a venous hum that can be auscultated in the epigas-trium resulting from collaterals between the portal system and the remnant of the umbilical vein. Jaundice usually does not appear until the bilirubin rises above 2 to 3 mg/dL. Asterixis can be detected in patients with hepatic encephalopathy. Other manifestations include fetor hepaticus, as well as features sug-gestive of malnutrition such as weakness, weight loss, and tem-poral muscle wasting.Although fat stores and muscle mass are reduced, rest-ing energy expenditure is increased. Muscle cramps occur frequently in the cirrhotic patient and are felt to correlate with ascites, low mean arterial pressure, and plasma renin activity. Abdominal hernias are common with ascites and should be electively repaired only in patients with well-compensated cir-rhosis; otherwise, the hernia should be repaired at the time of or after hepatic transplantation. HCC can occur in all forms of cirrhosis, and every cirrhotic patient should undergo screening for the development of HCC every 6 months via imaging and measurement of a serum α-fetoprotein (AFP) level. Cirrhosis is associated with increased cardiac output and heart rate as well as decreased systemic vascular resistance and blood pres-sure. Patients with cirrhosis are more prone to infections due to impaired phagocytic activity of the reticuloendothelial system. Bacterial infections, often of intestinal origin, are common and must be suspected in a patient with unexplained pyrexia or clini-cal deterioration. Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis also is seen in cases of cirrhosis with ascites. Intrinsic drug metabolism is reduced in the cirrhotic liver, and this fact needs to be recog-nized when prescribing medications.Laboratory Findings Associated With CirrhosisLaboratory findings vary in the cirrhotic patient depending on the degree of compensation; however, in general, a number of trends are seen. The cirrhotic patient usually has a mild normo-cytic normochromic anemia. The white blood cell and platelet counts are reduced, and the bone marrow is macronormoblastic. The PT is prolonged and does not respond to vitamin K therapy, and the serum albumin level is depressed. Urobilinogen is pres-ent and urinary sodium excretion is diminished in the presence of ascites. The serum levels of bilirubin, transaminases, and alkaline phosphatase may all be elevated. However, normal liver function test results do not eliminate the possibility of cirrhosis.Liver BiopsyThe diagnosis of cirrhosis can be made in many cases from a constellation of clinical features, laboratory values, and radio-graphic findings. Histopathologic examination of liver tissue is occasionally needed to confirm the diagnosis of cirrhosis and in determining disease etiology, activity, and progression. Liver biopsy can be performed via a percutaneous, transjugular, or laparoscopic approach. If needed, ultrasound or CT guidance can be helpful in obtaining an adequate sample and avoiding other viscera.Various serologic markers of hepatic fibrosis are currently being investigated to help predict the presence of cirrhosis with-out the need for liver biopsy. However, no currently available marker is sufficiently accurate for clinical use. Ultrasound elas-tography, which measures the stiffness of the liver by inducing Brunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   136420/02/19   2:36 PM 1365LIVERCHAPTER 31an elastic shear wave that propagates through the tissue, shows promise as a noninvasive test in identifying patients with advanced fibrosis and cirrhosis. (See earlier section, “Radio-logic Evaluation of the Liver.”)Hepatic Reserve and Assessment of Surgical Risk in the Cirrhotic PatientAssessing the hepatic reserve of the cirrhotic patient is impor-tant because cirrhosis and portal hypertension can have a negative impact on the outcome of nontransplant surgical pro-cedures. Patients with liver disease undergoing surgery are at increased risk for surgical and anesthesia-related complications. The actual risk depends on the type of anesthetic used, the spe-cific surgical procedure performed, and the severity of liver disease. Previous studies have demonstrated that emergency operations, cardiac surgery, hepatic resections, and abdominal surgery, particularly cholecystectomy, gastric resection, and colectomy, generate the highest operative risk among cirrhotic patients. Additionally, preoperative patient characteristics such as anemia, ascites, encephalopathy, malnutrition, hypoalbumin-emia, hypoxemia, infection, jaundice, portal hypertension, and prolonged PT have also been associated with inferior outcomes after surgery. Nontransplant surgical procedures are contraindi-cated in patients with acute fulminant hepatitis and those with severe decompensated chronic hepatitis.A number of laboratory tests have been used to assess hepatic reserve in patients with cirrhosis. Tests of indocyanine green, sorbitol, and galactose elimination capacity as well as the carbon-13 galactose breath test and carbon-13 aminopyrine breath test have all been disappointing clinically due to their dependence on flow to the liver as well as the unavailability and complexity of the tests. The monoethylglycinexylidide (MEGX) test, which measures MEGX formation after the administration of lidocaine, has been shown to be approximately 80% sensitive and specific in diagnosing cirrhosis. However, this test loses both sensitivity and specificity as the serum bilirubin level rises and interferes with the fluorescent readout system.Child-Turcotte-Pugh ScoreThe Child-Turcotte-Pugh (CTP) score was originally developed to evaluate the risk of portocaval shunt procedures performed for portal hypertension and subsequently has been shown to be useful in predicting surgical risks of other intra-abdominal operations on cirrhotic patients (Table 31-4). Numerous studies have demonstrated overall surgical mortality rates of 10% for patients with class A cirrhosis, 30% for those with class B cir-rhosis, and 75% to 80% for those with class C cirrhosis.56 The CTP score is derived from five variables as shown in Table 31-4. The problems with the CTP score are the presence of subjective variables (encephalopathy and ascites), its narrow range (5 to 15 points), and the equal weighting given to each variable. Multiple retrospective studies have demonstrated that perioperative mor-tality and morbidity rates correlate well with the CTP score, and for over 30 years, this measure had been used as the principal predictor of operative risk.Model for End-Stage Liver Disease  Scoring SystemThe Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) is a linear regression model based on three objective laboratory values (INR, bilirubin level, and creatinine level). It was originally developed as a tool to predict mortality after transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) but has been validated and used as the sole method of liver transplant allocation in the United States since 2002. The MELD formula is as follows:MELD Score = 9.57 Ln(SCr) + 3.78 Ln(Tbil)  + 11.2 Ln(INR) + 6.43where Ln represents natural logarithm, SCr is serum creatinine level (in milligrams per deciliter), and Tbil is serum bilirubin level (in milligrams per deciliter).A number of studies have examined the relative values of MELD and CTP scores in predicting postoperative mortality in cirrhotic patients undergoing nontransplant surgical procedures. Northup and colleagues demonstrated that MELD score was the only statistically significant predictor of 30-day mortality.57 In this study, mortality increased by approximately 1% for each MELD point up to a score of 20 and by 2% for each MELD point above 20. A comparison of the MELD model with the CTP classification showed good correlation between the two measures in predicting mortality, especially in the setting of emergency surgery.58 In these studies, the relative risk of mortal-ity increased by 14% for each 1-point increase in MELD score. As a result, it has been proposed that patients with a MELD score below 10 can safely undergo elective surgery, those with MELD between 10 and 15 may undergo surgery with caution, while those with MELD scores in excess of 15 should not be subjected to elective surgical procedures.59Portal HypertensionThe portal venous system contributes approximately 75% of the blood and 72% of the oxygen supplied to the liver. In the average adult, 1000 to 1500 mL/min of portal venous blood is supplied to the liver. However, this amount can be significantly increased in the cirrhotic patient. The portal venous system is without valves and drains blood from the spleen, pancreas, gallbladder, and abdominal portion of the alimentary tract into the liver. Tributaries of the portal vein communicate with veins draining directly into the systemic circulation. These collateral communications occur at the gastroesophageal junction, anal canal, falciform ligament, splenic venous bed and left renal vein, and retroperitoneum (Fig. 31-14). The normal portal venous pressure is 5 to 10 mmHg, and at this pressure, very little blood is shunted from the portal venous system into the systemic circulation. As portal venous pressure increases, however, the Table 31-4Child-Turcotte-Pugh (CTP) scoreVARIABLE1 POINT2 POINTS3 POINTSBilirubin level< 2 mg/dL2–3 mg/dL> 3 mg/dLAlbumin level> 3.5 g/dL2.8– 3.5 g/dL< 2.8 g/dLInternational normalized ratio< 1.71.7–2.2> 2.2EncephalopathyNoneControlledUncontrolledAscitesNoneControlledUncontrolledChild-Turcotte-Pugh class Class A = 5–6 points Class B = 7–9 points Class C = 10–15 pointsBrunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   136520/02/19   2:36 PM 1366SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIcollateral communications with the systemic circulation dilate, and a large amount of blood may be shunted around the liver and into the systemic circulation.Imaging of the Portal Venous System and Measurement of Portal Venous PressureThe patency of the portal vein and the nature of the collateral circulation should be established. An understanding of portal vein patency and anatomy is crucial before undertaking porto-systemic shunts, hepatic resection, or hepatic transplantation. The simplest initial investigation is abdominal ultrasonography. A large portal vein suggests portal hypertension but is not diag-nostic. Doppler ultrasound is capable of outlining the anatomy of the portal vein, excluding the presence of thrombosis, and identifying the direction of portal venous blood flow. Doppler ultrasound also is useful in evaluating blood flow through sur-gical shunts and TIPS. Abdominal CT and magnetic resonance angiography both are capable of revealing portal vein anatomy as well as patency. Visceral angiography and portal venography are reserved for cases that cannot be evaluated satisfactorily by noninvasive methods and require further clarification of portal patency or anatomy.The most accurate method of determining portal hyperten-sion is hepatic venography. The most commonly used procedure involves placing a balloon catheter directly into the hepatic vein and measuring the free hepatic venous pressure (FHVP) with the balloon deflated and the wedged hepatic venous pressure (WHVP) with the balloon inflated to occlude the hepatic vein. The hepatic venous pressure gradient (HVPG) is then calcu-lated by subtracting the free from the wedged venous pressure (HVPG = WHVP – FHVP). The HVPG represents the pressure in the hepatic sinusoids and portal vein and is a measure of por-tal venous pressure. Clinically significant portal hypertension is evident when HVPG exceeds 10 mmHg.Etiology and Clinical Features of  Portal HypertensionThe causes of portal hypertension can be divided into three major groups: presinusoidal, sinusoidal, and postsinusoidal.60 Although multiple disease processes can result in portal hyper-tension (Table 31-5), in the United States, the most common cause of portal hypertension is usually an intrahepatic one, namely, cirrhosis. The most significant clinical finding asso-ciated with portal hypertension is the development of gastro-esophageal varices, which are mainly supplied by the anterior branch of the left gastric (coronary) vein.a1aFGE1ABbD24cde 3C5Figure 31-14. Intra-abdominal venous flow pathways leading to engorged veins (varices) from portal hypertension. 1, Coro-nary vein; 2, superior hemorrhoidal veins; 3, paraumbilical veins;  4, Retzius’ veins; 5, veins of Sappey; A, portal vein; B, splenic vein; C, superior mesenteric vein; D, inferior mesenteric vein; E, inferior vena cava; F, superior vena cava; G, hepatic veins; a, esophageal veins; a1, azygos system; b, vasa brevia; c, middle and inferior hem-orrhoidal veins; d, intestinal; e, epigastric veins.Table 31-5Etiology of portal hypertensionPresinusoidal Sinistral/extrahepatic  Splenic vein thrombosis  Splenomegaly  Splenic arteriovenous fistula Intrahepatic  Schistosomiasis  Congenital hepatic fibrosis  Nodular regenerative hyperplasia  Idiopathic portal fibrosis  Myeloproliferative disorder  Sarcoid  Graft-versus-host diseaseSinusoidal Intrahepatic  Cirrhosis   Viral infection   Alcohol abuse   Primary biliary cirrhosis   Autoimmune hepatitis   Primary sclerosing cholangitis   Metabolic abnormalityPostsinusoidal Intrahepatic  Vascular occlusive disease Posthepatic  Budd-Chiari syndrome  Congestive heart failure  Inferior vena caval web  Constrictive pericarditisBrunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   136620/02/19   2:36 PM 1367LIVERCHAPTER 31Portal hypertension also results in splenomegaly with enlarged, tortuous, and even aneurysmal splenic vessels. Spleno-megaly is frequently associated with functional hypersplenism, causing leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, and anemia. Ascites occurs in the setting of severe portal hypertension in combina-tion with hepatocyte dysfunction. The umbilical vein may recan-nulate and dilate, leading to visible collaterals on the abdominal wall. Anorectal varices are present in approximately 45% of cirrhotic patients and must be distinguished from hemorrhoids, which do not communicate with the portal system and are not present at increased incidence in patients with portal hyperten-sion. Large spontaneous venous shunts may form between the portal venous system and the left renal vein or the IVC, but these shunts are ineffective in reducing portal venous pressures and preventing bleeding from gastroesophageal varices.Management of Gastroesophageal VaricesThe most significant manifestation and the leading cause of mor-bidity and mortality related to portal hypertension is variceal bleeding. Approximately 30% of patients with compensated cir-rhosis and 60% of patients with decompensated cirrhosis have esophageal varices. One third of all patients with varices will experience variceal bleeding. Each episode of bleeding is associ-ated with a 20% to 30% risk of mortality. If left untreated, 70% of patients who survive the initial bleed will experience recurrent variceal hemorrhage within 2 years of the index hemorrhage.Prevention of Variceal BleedingCurrent measures aimed at preventing variceal bleeding include the administration of nonselective β-blockers and prophylac-tic endoscopic surveillance with variceal band ligation. Meta-analyses have demonstrated that nonselective β-blockers such as propranolol and nadolol reduce the index variceal bleed by approximately 45% and decrease bleeding mortality by 50%.61 However, approximately 20% of patients do not respond to β-blockade, and another 20% cannot tolerate β-blockade due to medication side effects. Endoscopic surveillance with prophy-lactic variceal band ligation has been associated with a lower incidence of a first variceal bleed.62 Variceal band ligation is rec-ommended for patients with medium to large varices, performed every 1 to 2 weeks until obliteration, followed by esophagogas-troduodenoscopy (EGD) 1 to 3 months later and surveillance EGD every 6 months to monitor for recurrence of varices.Management of Acute Variceal HemorrhagePatients with acute variceal hemorrhage should be admitted to an ICU for resuscitation and management. Blood resuscitation should be performed carefully to reach a hemoglobin level of approxi-mately 8 g/dL. Overzealous replacement of blood products and administration of saline can lead to both rebleeding and increased mortality. Administration of fresh frozen plasma and platelets can be considered in patients with severe coagulopathy. Use of recom-binant factor VIIa has not been shown to be more beneficial than standard therapy and therefore is not recommended at this time. Cirrhotic patients with variceal bleeding have a high risk of devel-oping bacterial infections, which are associated with increased risks of rebleeding and mortality. Spontaneous bacterial peritoni-tis accounts for approximately half of these infections, with uri-nary tract infections and pneumonias comprising the remainder. The use of short-term prophylactic antibiotics (e.g., ceftriaxone 1 g/d intravenously) has been shown both to decrease the rate of bacterial infections and to increase survival.Vasoactive medications decrease blood flow to the gastro-esophageal varices and can be initiated as soon as the diagnosis of variceal bleeding is made. Although vasopressin is the most potent available vasoconstrictor, its use is limited by its systemic vasoconstrictive effects that can produce hypertension, myocar-dial ischemia, arrhythmias, ischemic abdominal pain, and limb gangrene. Octreotide, a somatostatin analog, has the advantage that it can be administered for 5 days or longer, and it is currently the preferred pharmacologic agent for initial management of acute variceal bleeding. In addition to pharmacologic therapy, endos-copy with variceal band ligation should be carried out as soon as possible. This combination of pharmacologic and endoscopic therapy has been shown both to improve the initial control of bleeding and to increase the 5-day hemostasis rate.62Luminal TamponadeWhen medical and endoscopic measures fail to control variceal hemorrhage, balloon tamponade using a Sengstaken-Blakemore tube will control refractory bleeding in up to 90% of patients. However, its application is limited due to the potential for com-plications, which include aspiration, airway obstruction, and esophageal perforation due to overinflation or pressure necro-sis. Therefore, the use of a Sengstaken-Blakemore tube should not exceed 36 hours to avoid tissue necrosis, and this treatment modality should only be considered a temporary bridge to more definitive measures of variceal hemorrhage control.Transjugular Intrahepatic Portosystemic ShuntThe TIPS procedure involves implantation of a metallic stent between an intrahepatic branch of the portal vein and a hepatic vein radicle. The needle track is dilated until a portal pressure gradient of ≤12 mmHg is achieved. TIPS can be performed in 95% of patients by an experienced interventional radiolo-gist, controls variceal bleeding in >90% of cases refractory to medical treatment, and should not affect subsequent hepatic transplantation. Possible complications include bleeding either intra-abdominally or via the biliary tree, infections, renal failure, decreased hepatic function, and hepatic encephalopathy, which occur in 25% to 30% of patients after the TIPS procedure. A high rate of thrombosis is seen and can be attributed to inti-mal hyperplasia of the metallic stent. Frequent follow-up with repeated interventions such as dilation or restenting often are needed to maintain TIPS patency.Balloon-Occluded Retrograde  Transvenous ObliterationThe balloon-occluded retrograde transvenous obliteration (BRTO) procedure has been used for the specific manage-ment of bleeding gastric varices in patients with spontaneous gastrorenal or splenorenal shunts shown on contrast-enhanced cross-sectional imaging. Using a transjugular or transfemoral approach, a balloon-occlusion catheter is directed through the left renal vein into the spontaneous shunt, which is then obliter-ated with the use of a sclerosing agent. BRTO effectively con-trols hemorrhage from gastric varices and preserves portal flow to the liver, thereby reducing the risk of hepatic encephalopathy relative to TIPS. The occlusion of spontaneous shunts, how-ever, can theoretically exacerbate portal hypertension, precipi-tate hemorrhage from esophageal varices, and exacerbate the accumulation of ascites.Surgical ShuntingThe need for surgical shunts has been reduced since the intro-duction of the TIPS procedure and hepatic transplantation. At this time, the recommendation is that surgical shunts be consid-ered only in patients who have MELD scores of <15, who are 5Brunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   136720/02/19   2:36 PM 1368SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IInot candidates for hepatic transplantation, or who have limited access to TIPS therapy and the necessary follow-up. The aim of the surgical shunt is to reduce portal venous pressure, maintain total hepatic and portal blood flow, and avoid the high inci-dence of complicating hepatic encephalopathy. Patient survival is determined by hepatic reserve.The portacaval shunt, as first described by Eck in 1877, either joins the portal vein to the IVC in an end-to-side fashion and completely disrupts portal vein flow to the liver, or joins it in a side-to-side fashion and thereby maintains partial por-tal venous flow to the liver. Currently this shunt is rarely per-formed due to the high incidence of hepatic encephalopathy and decreased liver function resulting from the reduction of portal perfusion. The Eck fistula also makes subsequent hepatic trans-plantation much more technically difficult.The mesocaval shunt uses an 8or 10-mm polytetrafluo-roethylene (PTFE) graft to connect the superior mesenteric vein to the IVC. The mesocaval shunt is technically easier to perform and can be easily ligated during subsequent hepatic transplan-tation. The smaller caliber of the shunt avoids the deleterious effects of portal blood flow deprivation on hepatic function. Small-diameter portosystemic shunts have been reported to reduce the incidence of encephalopathy but at the expense of increased risks of shunt thrombosis and rebleeding.The surgical shunt currently used most often is the distal splenorenal or Warren shunt (Fig. 31-15). This shunt is techni-cally the most difficult to perform. It requires division of the gastroesophageal collaterals and allows venous drainage of the stomach and lower esophagus through the short gastrosplenic veins into the spleen, and ultimately decompresses the left upper quadrant by allowing the splenic vein to drain directly into the left renal vein via an end-to-side splenic to left renal vein anas-tomosis. This shunt has the advantages of being associated with a lower rate of hepatic encephalopathy and decompensation and not interfering with subsequent liver transplantation.Nonshunt Surgical Management of  Refractory Variceal BleedingIn the patient with extrahepatic portal vein thrombosis and refractory variceal bleeding, the Sugiura procedure may be considered. The Sugiura procedure consists of extensive devas-cularization of the stomach and distal esophagus along with tran-section of the esophagus, splenectomy, truncal vagotomy, and pyloroplasty. As with performance of surgical shunts, patient survival is dependent on hepatic reserve at the time of the sur-gical procedure. Experience in Western countries is somewhat limited, and a number of modifications have been made to the original Sugiura procedure over time.Hepatic TransplantationPatients with cirrhosis, portal hypertension, and variceal bleed-ing usually die as a result of hepatic failure and not acute blood loss. Therefore, hepatic transplantation must be considered in the patient with ESLD because it represents the patient’s only chance for definitive therapy and long-term survival. Hepatic transplantation also can be considered for the patient with vari-ceal bleeding refractory to all other forms of management. Sur-vival after hepatic transplantation is not affected adversely by the previous performance of endoscopic variceal band ligation, TIPS, or splenorenal or mesocaval shunts. Previous creation of an Eck fistula, however, does make hepatic transplantation much more technically difficult, and therefore this procedure should be avoided in the transplant candidate. In addition to sav-ing the patient’s life, hepatic transplantation reverses most of the hemodynamic and humoral changes associated with cirrhosis.Budd-Chiari SyndromeBudd-Chiari syndrome (BCS) is an uncommon congestive hepatopathy characterized by the obstruction of hepatic venous outflow. The incidence of BCS is 1 in 100,000 of the general population worldwide.63 Patients may present with acute signs and symptoms of abdominal pain, ascites, and hepatomegaly or more chronic symptoms related to long-standing portal hyper-tension. BCS is defined as primary when the obstructive process involves an endoluminal venous thrombosis. BCS is consid-ered as a secondary process when the veins are compressed or invaded by a neighboring lesion originating outside the vein.A thorough evaluation demonstrates one or more throm-botic risk factors in approximately 75% to 90% of patients with primary BCS.63 Primary myeloproliferative disorders, such as Figure 31-15. Surgical shunts for portal hyper-tension. Types of portacaval anastomoses. A. Nor-mal anatomy. B. Side-to-side portacaval shunt.  C. End-to-side portacaval shunt. D. Mesocaval shunt.  E. Distal splenorenal (Warren) shunt. (Reproduced with permission from Doherty GM, Way LW: Current Surgical Diagnosis and Treatment, 12th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Education; 2006.)ABCDEBrunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   136820/02/19   2:36 PM 1369LIVERCHAPTER 31essential thrombocythemia or polycythemia rubra, account for approximately 35% to 50% of the primary cases of BCS. All known inherited thrombophilias also have been implicated in the development of BCS. Activated protein C resistance, generally related to factor V Leiden mutation, is present in approximately 25% of patients. Anticardiolipin antibodies, hyperhomocystein-emia, and oral contraceptive use all have been shown to be risk factors for BCS.63Clinically significant BCS is usually the result of obstruc-tion of two or more of the major hepatic veins. The obstruction results in hepatomegaly, liver congestion, and right upper quad-rant pain. In addition, liver perfusion via the portal vein may be decreased, and 70% of affected patients have noninflammatory centrilobular necrosis on biopsy. Although ALF is rare, most patients will go on to develop chronic portal hypertension and ascites. Caudate lobe hypertrophy occurs in approximately 50% of cases and is due to the fact that the caudate lobe has direct venous drainage into the IVC. This caudate lobe hypertrophy, in turn, can result in further obstruction of the IVC.Abdominal ultrasonography is the initial investigation of choice and can demonstrate the absence of hepatic vein flow, spider web hepatic veins, and collateral hepatic veins.64 CT or MRI of the abdomen also is capable of demonstrating hepatic vein thrombosis and evaluating the IVC but is limited in that it cannot show direction of blood flow. The definitive radio-graphic study to evaluate BCS is hepatic venography to deter-mine the presence and extent of hepatic vein thrombus as well as measure IVC pressures.Initial treatment consists of diagnosing and medically managing the underlying disease process and preventing exten-sion of the hepatic vein thrombosis through systemic anticoagu-lation. The BCS-associated portal hypertension and ascites can be medically managed in a manner similar to that in most cir-rhotic patients. Radiologic and surgical intervention should be reserved for patients whose condition is nonresponsive to medi-cal therapy. Percutaneous angioplasty and TIPS, in combination with thrombolytic therapy, are the preferred strategies to restore the outflow of blood from the liver. Thrombolytic therapy alone may be attempted for acute thrombosis. Surgical shunting, namely with the side-to-side portacaval shunt, essentially turns the portal vein into a hepatic outflow tract. Most patients with a portacaval shunt show improvement in hepatic function and fibrosis at 1 year without significant hepatic encephalopathy.64 However, the enthusiasm for this procedure has been curbed due to the relatively high rate of operative mortality and shunt dysfunction. Patients with progressive BCS and manifestations of ESLD will ultimately require hepatic transplantation.INFECTIONS OF THE LIVERThe liver contains the largest portion of the reticuloendothelial system in the human body and is therefore able to handle the continuous low-level exposure to enteric bacteria that it receives through the portal venous system. Due to the high level of retic-uloendothelial cells in the liver, nonviral infections are unusual.Pyogenic Liver AbscessesPyogenic liver abscesses are the most common liver abscesses seen in the United States. They may be single or multiple and are more frequently found in the right lobe of the liver.65 The abscess cavities are variable in size and, when multiple, may coalesce to give a honeycomb appearance. Approximately 40% of abscesses are monomicrobial, an additional 40% are polymicrobial, and 20% are culture-negative. The most com-mon infecting agents are gram-negative bacteria. Escherichia coli is found in two thirds of cases, and other common organ-isms include Streptococcus faecalis, Klebsiella, and Proteus vulgaris. Anaerobic organisms such as Bacteroides fragilis also are seen frequently. In patients with endocarditis and infected indwelling catheters, Staphylococcus and Streptococcus species are more commonly found.In the past, pyogenic liver abscesses often resulted from infections of the intestinal tract such as acute appendicitis and diverticulitis, which then spread to the liver via the portal circu-lation. With improved imaging modalities and earlier diagnosis of these intra-abdominal infections, this particular etiology of pyogenic liver abscesses has become less common. Pyogenic liver abscesses also occur as a result of impaired biliary drain-age, subacute bacterial endocarditis, infected indwelling cath-eters, dental work, or the direct extension of infections such as diverticulitis or Crohn’s disease into the liver. There appears to be an increasing incidence due to infection by opportunis-tic organisms among immunosuppressed patients, including transplant and chemotherapy recipients as well as patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS).Patients commonly present with right upper quadrant pain and fever. Jaundice occurs in up to one-third of affected patients. A thorough history and physical examination are usually helpful in identifying the underlying cause of the liver abscess. Leuko-cytosis, an elevated sedimentation rate, and an elevated AP level are the most common laboratory findings. Significant abnor-malities in the results of the remaining liver function tests are unusual. Blood cultures will only reveal the causative organism in approximately 50% of cases. Ultrasound examination of the liver reveals pyogenic abscesses as round or oval hypoechoic lesions with well-defined borders and a variable number of internal echoes. CT scan is highly sensitive in the localization of pyogenic liver abscesses, which appear hypodense with periph-eral enhancement and may contain air-fluid levels indicating a gas-producing infectious organism (Fig. 31-16). MRI of the abdomen can also detect pyogenic abscesses with a high level of sensitivity but plays a limited role because of its inability to be used for image-guided diagnosis and therapy.The current cornerstones of treatment include correction of the underlying cause and IV antibiotic therapy. Empiric antibiotic therapy should cover gram-negative and anaerobic organisms; percutaneous needle aspiration and culture of the aspirate may be useful in guiding subsequent antibiotic therapy. IV antibiotic therapy should be continued for at least 8 weeks and can be expected to be effective in 80% to 90% of patients. Placement of a percutaneous drainage catheter is beneficial only for a minority of patients, as most pyogenic abscesses are quite viscous and catheter drainage is often ineffective.Surgical drainage either via the laparoscopic or open approach may become necessary if initial therapies fail. Ana-tomic surgical resection can be performed in patients with recalcitrant abscesses. It must be kept in mind throughout the evaluation and treatment of the presumed pyogenic abscess that a necrotic hepatic malignancy must not be mistaken for a hepatic abscess. Therefore, early diagnosis and progression to surgical resection should be advocated for patients who do not respond to initial antibiotic therapy.Amebic AbscessesEntamoeba histolytica is a parasite that is endemic world-wide, infecting approximately 10% of the world’s population. Brunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   136920/02/19   2:36 PM 1370SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIAmebiasis is most common in subtropical climates, especially in areas with poor sanitation. E histolytica exists as cysts in a vegetative form that are capable of surviving outside the human body. The cystic form passes through the stomach and small bowel unharmed and then transforms into a trophozoite in the colon. Here it invades the colonic mucosa forming typical flask-shaped ulcers, enters the portal venous system, and is carried to the liver. Occasionally, the trophozoite will pass through the hepatic sinusoid and into the systemic circulation, which results in lung and brain abscesses.Amebae multiply and block small intrahepatic portal radi-cles with consequent focal infarction of hepatocytes. They con-tain a proteolytic enzyme that also destroys liver parenchyma. The abscesses formed are variable in size and can be single or multiple. The amebic abscess is most commonly located in the superior-anterior aspect of the right lobe of the liver near the diaphragm and has a necrotic central portion that contains a thick, reddish brown, pus-like material. This material has been likened to anchovy paste or chocolate sauce. Amebic abscesses are the most common type of liver abscesses worldwide.Amebiasis should be considered in patients who have trav-eled to an endemic area and present with right upper quadrant pain, fever, hepatomegaly, and hepatic abscess.46 Leukocytosis is common, whereas elevated transaminase levels and jaundice are unusual. The most common biochemical abnormality is a mildly elevated AP level. Even though this disease process is secondary to a colonic infection, the presence of diarrhea is unusual. Most patients have a positive fluorescent antibody test for E histo-lytica, and test results can remain positive for some time after a clinical cure. This serologic test has a high sensitivity, and therefore amebiasis is unlikely if the test results are negative.Ultrasound and CT scanning of the abdomen are both very sensitive but nonspecific for the detection of amebic abscesses.65 Amebic abscesses usually appear on CT as well-defined low-density round lesions that have enhancement of the wall, some-what ragged in appearance with a peripheral zone of edema. The central cavity may have septations as well as fluid levels. CT scanning is also useful in the detection of extrahepatic involvement.Metronidazole 750 mg three times a day for 7 to 10 days is the treatment of choice and is successful in 95% of cases. Defervescence usually occurs in 3 to 5 days, but the time nec-essary for the abscess to resolve depends on the initial size at presentation and varies from 30 to 300 days.65 Both ultrasound and CT of the liver can be used as follow-up after the initiation of medical therapy. Aspiration of the abscess rarely is needed and should be reserved for patients with large abscesses, those who do not respond to medical therapy, or those who appear to be superinfected. Furthermore, abscesses of the left lobe of the liver at risk for rupture into the pericardium should be treated with aspiration and drainage.Hydatid DiseaseHydatid disease is due to infection by the tapeworm Echinococ-cus granulosus in its larval or cyst stage.66 The tapeworm lives in canids, which are infected by eating the viscera of sheep that contain hydatid cysts. Scolices, contained in the cysts, adhere to the small intestine of dogs and become adult taenia, which attach to the intestinal wall. Each worm sheds approximately 500 ova into the bowel. The infected ova-containing feces of dogs contaminate grass and farmland, and the ova are ingested by intermediate hosts such as sheep, cattle, pigs, and humans. The ova have chitinous envelopes that are dissolved by gastric juice. The liberated ovum then burrows through the intestinal mucosa and is carried by the portal vein to the liver, where it develops into an adult cyst. Most cysts are caught in the hepatic sinusoids, and therefore 70% of hydatid cysts form in the liver. A few ova pass through the liver and are held up in the pul-monary capillary bed or enter the systemic circulation, forming cysts in the lung, spleen, brain, or bones.Hydatid disease is most common in sheep-raising areas, where dogs have access to infected offal. These include South Australia, New Zealand, Africa, Greece, Spain, and the Middle East. Hydatid cysts commonly involve the right lobe of the liver, usually the anterior-inferior or posterior-inferior segments. The uncomplicated cyst may be silent and found only incidentally or at autopsy. Occasionally, the affected patient presents with symptoms such as dull right upper quadrant pain or abdomi-nal distention. Cysts may become secondarily infected, involve other organs, or even rupture, which leads to an allergic or ana-phylactic reaction.The diagnosis of hydatid disease is based on the findings of an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for echino-coccal antigens, and results are positive in approximately 85% of infected patients.66 The ELISA results may be negative in an infected patient if the cyst has not leaked or does not contain scolices or if the parasite is no longer viable. Eosinophilia is seen in approximately 30% of infected patients. Ultrasonography and CT scanning of the abdomen are both quite sensitive for detecting hydatid cysts. The appearance of the cysts on images depends on the stage of cyst development. Typically, hydatid cysts are well-defined hypodense lesions with a distinct wall. Ring-like cal-cifications of the pericysts are present in 20% to 30% of cases. As healing occurs, the entire cyst calcifies densely, and a lesion with this appearance is usually dead or inactive. Daughter cysts generally occur in a peripheral location within the main cyst and are typically slightly hypodense compared with the mother cyst. MRI of the abdomen may be useful to evaluate the pericyst, cyst matrix, and daughter cyst characteristics.Unless the cysts are small or the patient is not a suitable candidate for surgical resection, the treatment of hydatid disease Figure 31-16. Computed tomographic scan of pyogenic liver abscesses. Multiple hepatic abscesses are seen in a patient after an episode of diverticulitis. Note the loculated large central abscess as well as the left lateral segment abscess.Brunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   137020/02/19   2:36 PM 1371LIVERCHAPTER 31is surgically based because of the high risk of secondary infec-tion and rupture. Medical treatment with albendazole relies on drug diffusion through the cyst membrane. The concentration of drug achieved in the cyst is uncertain but is better than that of mebendazole, and albendazole can be used as initial treat-ment for small, asymptomatic cysts. For most cysts, surgical resection involving laparoscopic or open complete cyst removal with instillation of a scolicidal agent is preferred and usually is curative. If complete cystectomy is not possible, then formal anatomic liver resection can be undertaken. During surgical resection, caution must be exercised to avoid rupture of the cyst with release of protoscolices into the peritoneal cavity. Perito-neal contamination can result in an acute anaphylactic reaction or peritoneal implantation of scolices with daughter cyst forma-tion and inevitable recurrence.Echinococcus multilocularis occurs in the Northern Hemisphere and can infect the liver in a fashion similar to that described earlier, although the cysts are multilocular. Infection of the lung also is common (alveolar echinococcosis). Canine species such as wolves, foxes, and dogs ingest infected vis-cera of an intermediate host (e.g., rodents, moose) and become infected; humans become infected incidentally by ingesting contaminated food or water. Treatment consists of albendazole; however, infection in the lung produces a more generalized granulomatous reaction, can present in a manner similar to that of a malignancy, and often requires resection.AscariasisAscaris infection is particularly common in the Far East, India, and South Africa. Ova of the roundworm Ascaris lumbricoides arrive in the liver by retrograde locomotion in the bile ducts from the GI tract. The adult worm is 10 to 20 cm long and may lodge in the common bile duct, causing partial bile duct obstruction and secondary cholangitic abscesses. The Ascaris may serve as a nidus for the development of intrahepatic gallstones. The clini-cal presentation in an affected patient may include biliary colic, acute cholecystitis, acute pancreatitis, or hepatic abscesses.67 Plain abdominal radiographs, abdominal ultrasound, and ERCP can demonstrate the Ascaris as linear filling defects within the bile ducts. Occasionally, worms can be seen moving into and out of the biliary tree from the duodenum. Treatment consists of the administration of piperazine citrate, mebendazole, or alben-dazole in combination with endoscopic extraction of the worms. Surgical intervention may become necessary if the Ascaris can-not be removed via ERCP.SchistosomiasisSchistosomiasis affects >200 million people in 74 countries. Hepatic schistosomiasis occurs when emboli of the ova in the intestines reach the liver via the mesenteric venous system. Eggs excreted in the feces hatch in water to release free-swimming embryos, which enter snails and develop into fork-tailed cercar-iae. They then reenter human skin during contact with infected water. They burrow down to the capillary bed and enter the bloodstream, leading to widespread hematogenous dissemina-tion. Those entering the intrahepatic portal system grow rapidly, resulting in a granulomatous reaction. The degree of consequent portal fibrosis is related to the adult worm load.Schistosomiasis has three stages of clinical symptomatol-ogy: the first includes itching after the entry of cercariae through the skin; the second includes fever, urticaria, and eosinophilia; and the third involves hepatic fibrosis followed by presinusoidal portal hypertension. During this third phase, the liver shrinks, the spleen enlarges, and the patient may develop complications of portal hypertension while hepatic function is maintained. Active infection is detected by stool examination. Serologic tests indicate past exposure but do not provide information regarding the timing of infection. A negative serologic test result excludes the presence of schistosomal infection. Serum levels of transaminases are usually normal, but the AP level may be mildly elevated. A decreased serum albumin level is usually the result of frequent GI bleeds and malnutrition.Medical treatment of schistosomiasis includes education on hygiene and the avoidance of infected water. Treatment with praziquantel 40 to 75 mg/kg as a single dose is the treatment of choice for all forms of schistosomiasis and produces few side effects. GI bleeding usually is controlled by endoscopic variceal ligation. However, in a patient with refractory GI portal hyper-tensive bleeding, distal splenorenal shunt or gastric devascular-ization and splenectomy may be considered.Viral HepatitisThe role of the surgeon in the management of viral hepatitis is somewhat limited. However, the disease entities of hepatitis A, B, and C need to be kept in mind during any evaluation for liver disease. Hepatitis A usually results in an acute self-limited ill-ness and only rarely leads to fulminant hepatic failure. Patients can present with fatigue, malaise, nausea, vomiting, anorexic fever, and right upper quadrant abdominal pain. The most com-mon physical findings are jaundice and hepatomegaly. Because the disease is self-limited, the treatment is usually supportive. Patients who develop fulminant infection require aggressive therapy and should be transferred to a center capable of per-forming liver transplantation.Hepatitis B and C, on the other hand, can both lead to chronic liver disease, cirrhosis, and HCC. The prevalence of chronic hepatitis B infection in the U.S. population is estimated to be 0.27%, but hepatitis B remains a major burden in resource-limited countries, accounting for 30% of cirrhosis and 53% of HCC cases. The ultimate goal of treatment for chronic hepati-tis B is viral suppression, thereby preventing the development of clinical outcomes such as cirrhosis, liver failure, and HCC. The cornerstone of current antiviral therapy includes pegylated interferon and nucleoside analogs such as tenofovir or entecavir.68 These agents have been proven to reduce complications of cirrho-sis and HCC and perhaps reverse previous damage to the liver. Interferon therapy produces various side effects including fatigue, flu-like symptoms, mood changes, bone marrow suppression, and stimulation of autoimmunity. On the other hand, the nucleoside analogs are generally well-tolerated by patients. Compared with lamivudine, the nucleoside analogs are less likely to produce resistance and are more likely to be clinically effective. Despite its high rate of viral resistance, lamivudine may be the preferred treatment in some countries because of its relatively low cost.Acute hepatitis C viral (HCV) infection typically devel-ops 2 to 26 weeks after exposure to the virus, and presenting symptoms can include jaundice, nausea, dark urine, and right upper quadrant abdominal pain. Diagnosis is confirmed by testing for the presence of HCV RNA and anti-HCV antibod-ies in the serum; viral RNA is first detectable in the serum by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) within days to weeks follow-ing the exposure, whereas antibodies will not appear until 2 to  6 months after. If the diagnosis of acute hepatitis is established and the virus is not spontaneously cleared within 12 weeks, patients should generally be treated with pegylated interferon Brunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   137120/02/19   2:36 PM 1372SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IImonotherapy. High rates of sustained viral response, in excess of 80%, have been achieved with the early treatment of acute HCV infection.69 Unfortunately, patients with acute HCV infec-tion are typically asymptomatic, and the vast majority of cases go undetected. Untreated, most of these patients will eventually develop chronic infection.Chronic HCV infection often follows a progressive course over many years and can ultimately result in cirrhosis, HCC, and the need for liver transplantation. Cirrhosis secondary to hepa-titis C remains the leading indication for liver transplantation in the United States, Europe, and Japan. The decision to treat a patient with chronic HCV infection is complex and involves consideration of multiple factors including the natural history of the disease, stage of fibrosis, and the efficacy and adverse effects related to the treatment regimen. Patients with genotype 1  are now treated with triple-agent therapy including pegylated interferon, ribavirin, and a protease inhibitor. The protease inhibitors telaprevir and boceprevir were recently approved for the treatment of chronic HCV genotype 1 infection, and their addition to the treatment regimen has been shown to increase the rate of sustained viral response from 40% to 70%. These prote-ase inhibitors do no exhibit significant antiviral activity against other HCV genotypes, and therefore genotypes 2, 3, and 4 are treated with interferon and ribavirin alone. Genotypes 2 and 3 are generally more responsive to treatment than genotypes 1 and 4, but the therapeutic response also is dependent on other factors such as baseline viral load, ethnicity, and the patient’s genetic background and compliance with the regimen.EVALUATION OF AN INCIDENTAL LIVER MASSA liver mass often is identified incidentally during a radio-logic imaging procedure performed for another indication. For example, a liver mass may be discovered during evaluation for gallbladder disease or kidney stones. In addition, with advances in imaging technology, previously undetected lesions not infre-quently are now identified. Although many of these lesions are benign and will require no further treatment, the concern for malignancy requires a thorough evaluation. Thus, an orderly approach should be taken to the workup of an incidental liver lesion to minimize unnecessary testing.70The evaluation of an incidental liver mass begins with a history and physical examination (Fig. 31-17). The patient should be asked about abdominal pain, weight loss, previous Figure 31-17. Algorithm for diagnostic workup of an incidental liver lesion. The evaluation includes history and physical examination, blood work, imaging studies, and liver biopsy (if needed). AFP =  α-fetoprotein; BUN = blood urea nitrogen; CA 19-9 =  cancer antigen 19-9; CBC = complete blood count; CEA = carcinoembryonic antigen; creat = creatinine; CT = computed tomography; EGD = esophagogas-troduodenoscopy; glu = glucose; Gyn = gynecologic; HTN = hypertension; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging; OCP = oral contraceptive pill; PAP =  Papanicolaou; US = ultrasound.DiagnosisAbdominal pain/weight lossLiver disease/cirrhosis/alcohol useHepatitis/blood transfusion/tattoosOCP/hormone use/cancer historyJaundice/scleral icterusPalpable mass/hepatomegalyStigmata of portal HTNCBC, platelet countLytes/BUN/creat/glu/albuminLiver function tests/ammoniaCoagulation studiesHepatitis screenTumor markers (CEA, AFP, CA 19-9)USCT or MRI scanNuclear med.AngiogramOccult primary eval.EGDColonoscopyMammogramGyn/PAP smear(Percutaneous or laparoscopic)Liver biopsy (if needed)Additional imaging studiesLaboratory testsHistory and physical examMass identified incidentally by US or CTBrunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   137220/02/19   2:36 PM 1373LIVERCHAPTER 31liver disease, cirrhosis, alcohol use, viral hepatitis, blood trans-fusions, tattoos, oral contraceptive use (in women), and personal or family history of cancer. On physical examination, jaundice, scleral icterus, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, palpable mass, or stigmata of portal hypertension should be noted. After comple-tion of the history and physical examination, blood work should be performed, including complete blood count; platelet count; measurement of levels of electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, glucose, and albumin; liver function tests; serum ammonia level; coagulation studies; hepatitis screen; and mea-surement of levels of the tumor markers carcinoembryonic anti-gen, AFP, and cancer antigen 19-9.The differential diagnosis for an incidental liver mass includes cysts, benign solid lesions, and primary or metastatic cancers (Table 31-6). Ultrasound or CT is commonly performed to evaluate respiratory or abdominal symptoms, and these imag-ing studies usually lead to the discovery of an incidental liver lesion. Further radiologic evaluation by dualor triple-phase CT scan or MRI is often necessary to fully characterize the extent and nature of the lesion. Different types of liver masses have distinct appearances and patterns of contrast enhancement on these studies, facilitating the clinician in the diagnosis and for-mulation of the treatment plan. The use of liver-specific contrast agents in MRI provides information on hepatocyte function in combination with the structural data obtained during a standard MRI, and yields improved detection and characterization of liver lesions. CT cholangiography or MRCP can be obtained, par-ticularly when visualization of the biliary tract is desired. These modalities may be useful in the depiction of benign or malignant strictures resulting in biliary obstruction. In the evaluation of metastases to the liver from a variety of primary cancers, FDG-PET/CT has emerged as an indispensable tool in disease staging and in the follow-up after treatment. The techniques available for imaging of liver lesions are described in detail earlier in the section “Radiologic Evaluation of the Liver.”Liver biopsy is indicated when biochemical analysis and diagnostic imaging fail to lead to a definitive diagnosis. Percu-taneous liver biopsy with ultrasound or CT guidance is the sim-plest, fastest, and most commonly performed approach to obtain hepatic tissue for histologic examination. Absolute contraindi-cations to percutaneous liver biopsy include significant coagu-lopathy (as in patients with decompensated cirrhosis), biliary Table 31-6Classification of liver lesionsBenign Cyst Hemangioma Focal nodular hyperplasia Adenoma Biliary hamartoma AbscessMalignant Hepatocellular carcinoma Cholangiocarcinoma (bile duct cancer) Gallbladder cancer Metastatic colorectal cancer Metastatic neuroendocrine cancer (carcinoid) Other metastatic cancersdilatation, and suspicion for hemangioma or echinococcal cyst. Obesity and the presence of ascites are relative contraindica-tions that can present a challenge to the percutaneous approach. In these patients, laparoscopic liver biopsy can be considered. The laparoscopic technique is likely to have a higher diagnos-tic yield in cirrhotic patients with ascites and/or coagulopathy, in whom bleeding risk is excessive by the percutaneous route. Laparoscopy also offers the opportunity to stage the extent of disease in patients with various intra-abdominal malignancies.HEPATIC CYSTSCongenital CystsThe majority of hepatic cysts are asymptomatic. Hepatic cysts are usually identified incidentally and can occur at any time throughout life. The most common benign lesion found in the liver is the congenital or simple cyst. The exact prevalence of simple hepatic cysts in the U.S. population is not known, but the female to male ratio is approximately 4:1, and the prevalence is approximately 2.8% to 3.6%.71 Simple cysts are the result of excluded hyperplastic bile duct rests. Simple cysts usually are identified in hepatic imaging studies as thin-walled, homoge-neous, fluid-filled structures with few to no septations. The cyst epithelium is cuboidal and secretes a clear nonbilious serous fluid. With the exception of large cysts, simple cysts are usually asymptomatic. Large simple cysts may cause abdominal pain, epigastric fullness, and early satiety. Occasionally the affected patient presents with an abdominal mass.Asymptomatic simple cysts are best managed conserva-tively. The preferred treatment for symptomatic cysts is ultra-soundor CT-guided percutaneous cyst aspiration followed by sclerotherapy. This approach is approximately 90% effective in controlling symptoms and ablating the cyst cavity. If percu-taneous treatment is unavailable or ineffective, treatment may include either laparoscopic or open surgical cyst fenestration. The laparoscopic approach is being used more frequently and is 90% effective. The excised cyst wall is sent for pathologic analysis to exclude the presence of carcinoma, and the remain-ing cyst wall must be carefully inspected for evidence of neo-plastic change. If such change is present, complete resection is required, either by enucleation or formal hepatic resection.Biliary CystadenomaBiliary cystadenomas are slow-growing, unusual, benign lesions that most commonly present as large lesions in the right lobe of the liver. Although these lesions are usually benign, they can undergo malignant transformation. Patients with biliary cystad-enomas commonly present with abdominal pain. An abdominal mass occasionally can be identified on physical examination. In contrast to simple cysts, biliary cystadenomas have walls that appear thicker with soft tissue nodules and septations that usu-ally enhance. The protein content of the fluid can be variable and can affect the radiographic images on CT and MRI. Surgical resection is the preferred mode of treatment.Polycystic Liver DiseaseAdult polycystic liver disease (PCLD) occurs as an autosomal dominant disease and usually presents in the third decade of life. Approximately 44% to 76% of affected families are found to have mutations of PKD1, and approximately 75% have muta-tions of PKD2.72 The prevalence and number of hepatic cysts Brunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   137320/02/19   2:36 PM 1374SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIare higher in females and increase with advancing age and with increasing severity of renal cystic disease and renal dysfunc-tion. Patients with a small number of cysts or with small cysts (<2 cm) usually remain asymptomatic. In contrast, patients who develop many or large cysts, with a cyst-to-parenchymal vol-ume ratio of >1, usually develop clinical symptoms, including abdominal pain, distension, shortness of breath, and early satiety. Disease progression often results in renal failure and the need  for hemodialysis. In most patients, the liver parenchymal vol-ume and synthetic function are preserved despite extensive cystic disease. Hepatic decompensation, variceal hemorrhage, ascites, and encephalopathy develop rarely in patients with PCLD and only in those with massive cystic disease. The most common liver-specific complications associated with PCLD are intracystic hemorrhage, infection, and posttraumatic rup-ture. The most common abnormal biochemical test finding is a modestly elevated γ-glutamyltransferase level, and the most useful imaging tests are CT or MRI of the abdomen, which will demonstrate the characteristic polycystic appearance. Other conditions that may be associated with PCLD include cerebral aneurysm, diverticulosis, mitral valve prolapse, and inguinal hernia.The principal aim of treatment for PCLD is to ameliorate symptoms by decreasing liver volume. Medical therapy options for PCLD remain experimental at this time. Somatostatin ana-logs such as octreotide and lanreotide have been shown to modestly reduce liver volume and are generally well tolerated. Sirolimus and other mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitors possess antiproliferative effects and thus have been postulated to slow disease progression. The effectiveness of these medical measures in relieving symptoms among patients with PCLD, however, remains to be proven.73Cyst aspiration and sclerotherapy entail puncture of a cyst with an aspiration needle followed by injection of a scleros-ing agent that causes destruction of the epithelial lining thereby inhibiting fluid production. Common agents used for sclerosis include ethanol, minocycline, and tetracycline. This technique may be considered if the patient has one or a few dominant cysts, each measuring over 5 cm. Appropriate candidates for sclerotherapy can experience a complete resolution of symp-toms, but patients with numerous cysts often do not improve when this technique is used. This procedure is generally well tolerated, with the most common complication being pain from the instillation of ethanol.Cyst fenestration, or surgical unroofing of the cyst, can be performed via an open or laparoscopic approach in symptomatic patients.74 This approach allows multiple cysts to be treated dur-ing a single procedure, but carries the risk of potential surgical complications, including ascites, pleural effusion, hemorrhage, and biliary leakage. Immediate symptom relief can be achieved in up to 92% of cases, but 22% of patients eventually develop recurrence of their symptoms.Hepatic resection can be considered for PCLD patients with massive hepatomegaly, when fenestration alone is unlikely to significantly reduce liver volume. Appropriate candidates are those with portions of liver that harbor numerous cysts, but have at least one spared segment with predominantly normal liver parenchyma. Because the intrahepatic vascular and biliary anat-omy can be distorted by the cysts, PCLD patients undergoing hepatic resection are at increased risk for hemorrhagic and bili-ary complications. Furthermore, adhesion formation after liver resection can increase the technical complexity of future OLT. Significant symptom relief has been reported in up to 86% of PCLD patients following hepatic resection.OLT represents the only definitive therapy for patients with symptomatic PCLD. This therapeutic option is indicated in patients with severely disabling symptoms that lead to a poor quality of life or in those who have developed untreatable com-plications such as portal hypertension and nutritional depriva-tion. If the patient has severe renal insufficiency from polycystic kidney disease, consideration should be given to combined liver-kidney transplantation. Because of the genetic basis of PCLD, living-donor transplantation should be considered only if the presence of PCLD in the donor can be ruled out.Caroli’s DiseaseCaroli’s disease is a syndrome of congenital ductal plate mal-formations of the intrahepatic bile ducts and is characterized by segmental cystic dilatation of the intrahepatic biliary radicals.74 Caroli’s disease also is associated with an increased incidence of biliary lithiasis, cholangitis, and biliary abscess formation. Caroli’s disease usually occurs in the absence of cirrhosis and is associated with cystic renal disease.75 The most common presenting symptoms include fever, chills, and abdominal pain. Most patients present by the age of 30 years, and males and females are affected equally. Rarely, patients can present later in life with complications secondary to portal hyperten-sion. Approximately 33% of affected patients develop biliary lithiasis, and 7% develop cholangiocarcinoma. The diagnosis of Caroli’s disease is made based on imaging studies. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography, ERCP, and percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography provide more detailed imaging of the biliary tree and confirm communication of the intrahepatic cysts with the biliary tree, which is necessary to solidify the diagnosis. Treatment consists of biliary drainage, with ERCP and percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography serving as first-line therapeutic modalities. If the disease is limited to a single lobe of the liver, hepatic resection can be beneficial. Liver resec-tion can be considered in the patient with hepatic decompensa-tion or unresponsive recurrent cholangitis and possibly in the patient with a small (T1 or T2) cholangiocarcinoma.BENIGN LIVER LESIONSThe liver is an organ that is commonly involved either primarily or secondarily with vascular, metabolic, infectious, and malig-nant processes. Many classification schemes are used to help narrow the differential diagnosis of liver lesions: solid or cystic, single or multiple, cell of origin (hepatocellular, cholangiocel-lular, or mesenchymal), and benign or malignant. Benign liver lesions occur in up to 20% of the general population and are much more common than malignant tumors. The most common benign lesions are cysts, hemangiomas, focal nodular hyperplasia (FNH), and hepatocellular adenomas (see Table 31-6). Many of these lesions have typical features in imaging studies that help confirm the diagnosis.CystHepatic cysts are the most frequently encountered liver lesion overall and are described in detail in the section “Hepatic Cysts.” Cystic lesions of the liver can arise primarily (congeni-tal) or secondarily from trauma (seroma or biloma), infection (pyogenic or parasitic), or neoplastic disease. Congenital cysts are usually simple cysts containing thin serous fluid and are 6Brunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   137420/02/19   2:36 PM 1375LIVERCHAPTER 31reported to occur in 5% to 14% of the population, with higher prevalence in women. In most cases, congenital cysts are differ-entiated from secondary cysts (infectious or neoplastic origin) in that they have a well-defined thin wall and no solid component and are filled with homogeneous, clear fluid. For benign solid liver lesions, the differential diagnosis includes hemangioma, adenoma, FNH, and bile duct hamartoma.HemangiomaHemangiomas (also referred to as hemangiomata) are the most common solid benign masses that occur in the liver. They con-sist of large endothelial-lined vascular spaces and represent congenital vascular lesions that contain fibrous tissue and small blood vessels that eventually grow. They are predominantly seen in women and occur in 2% to 20% of the population. They can range from small (≤1 cm) to giant cavernous hemangiomas (10 to 25 cm). Most hemangiomas are discovered incidentally with little clinical consequence. However, large lesions can cause symptoms as a result of compression of adjacent organs or intermittent thrombosis, which in turn results in further expan-sion of the lesion. Spontaneous rupture (bleeding) is rare, but surgical resection can be considered if the patient is symptom-atic. Resection can be accomplished by enucleation or formal hepatic resection, depending on the location and involvement of intrahepatic vascular structures and hepatic ducts.The majority of hemangiomas can be diagnosed by liver imaging studies. On biphasic contrast CT scan, large hemangio-mas show asymmetrical nodular peripheral enhancement that is isodense with large vessels and exhibit progressive centripetal enhancement fill-in over time (Fig. 31-18). On MRI, hemangio-mas are hypointense on T1-weighted images and hyperintense on T2-weighted images.76 With gadolinium enhancement, hem-angiomas show a pattern of peripheral nodular enhancement similar to that seen on contrast CT scans. Caution should be exercised in ordering a liver biopsy if the suspected diagnosis is hemangioma because of the risk of bleeding from the biopsy site, especially if the lesion is at the edge of the liver.AdenomaHepatic adenomas are benign solid neoplasms of the liver. They are most commonly seen in premenopausal women older than 30 years of age and are typically solitary, although multiple adenomas also can occur. Prior or current use of estrogens (oral contraceptives) is a clear risk factor for development of liver adenomas, although they can occur even in the absence of oral contraceptive use. On gross examination, they appear soft and encapsulated and are tan to light brown. Histologically, adeno-mas lack bile duct glands and Kupffer cells, have no true lobules, and contain hepatocytes that appear congested or vacuolated due to glycogen deposition. On CT scan, adenomas usually have Figure 31-18. Computed tomographic scans showing classic appearance of benign liver lesions. Focal nodular hyperplasia (FNH) is hyper-vascular on arterial phase, isodense to liver on venous phase, and has a central scar (upper panels). Adenoma is hypovascular (lower left panel). Hemangioma shows asymmetrical peripheral enhancement (lower right panel).Brunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   137520/02/19   2:36 PM 1376SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIsharply defined borders and can be confused with metastatic tumors. With venous phase contrast, they can look hypodense or isodense in comparison with background liver, whereas on arterial phase contrast, subtle hypervascular enhancement often is seen (see Fig. 31-18). On MRI scans, adenomas are hyper-intense on T1-weighted images and enhance early after gado-linium injection. With the use of liver-specific MRI contrast agents such as gadoxetate (Eovist or Primovist, Bayer-Schering, Berlin, Germany), hepatic adenomas can be better distinguished from FNH by their enhancement characteristics during the hepa-tobiliary phase of imaging. The new MRI contrast agent, gado-benate dimeglumine (MultiHance, Bracco Diagnostics, Milan, Italy), is eliminated through both renal and biliary excretion. Therefore, liver lesions that contain hepatocytes with intact bili-ary excretion mechanism will take up this contrast agent and be easily distinguished from lesions that do not. This contrast agent has improved our ability to differentiate hepatic adenoma from FNH with a high degree of accuracy.Hepatic adenomas carry a significant risk of spontaneous rupture with intraperitoneal bleeding. The clinical presentation may be abdominal pain, and in 10% to 25% of cases, hepatic adenomas present with spontaneous intraperitoneal hemorrhage. Hepatic adenomas also have a risk of malignant transformation to a well-differentiated HCC. Therefore, it usually is recom-mended that large hepatic adenomas (>4–5 cm) be surgically resected.Focal Nodular HyperplasiaFNH is a solid, benign lesion of the liver believed to be a hyper-plastic response to an anomalous artery. Similar to adenomas, they are more common in women of childbearing age, although the link to oral contraceptive use is not as clear as with adeno-mas. A good-quality biphasic CT scan usually is diagnostic of FNH, on which such lesions appear well circumscribed with a typical central scar (see Fig. 31-18). They show intense homo-geneous enhancement on arterial phase contrast images and are often isodense or invisible compared with background liver on the venous phase. On MRI scans, FNH lesions are hypoin-tense on T1-weighted images and isointense to hyperintense on T2-weighted images. After gadolinium administration, lesions are hyperintense but become isointense on delayed images. The fibrous septa extending from the central scar are also more readily seen with MRI. Unlike adenomas, FNH lesions usually do not rupture spontaneously and have no significant risk of malignant transformation. Therefore, the management of FNH is usually reassurance and prospective observation irrespective of size. Surgical resection can be recommended, however, when patients are symptomatic or when hepatic adenoma or HCC can-not be definitively excluded. Oral contraceptive or estrogen use should be stopped when either FNH or adenoma is diagnosed.Bile Duct HamartomaBile duct hamartomas are typically small liver lesions, 2 to 4 mm in size, visualized on the surface of the liver at laparotomy. They are firm, smooth, and whitish yellow in appearance. They can be difficult to differentiate from small metastatic lesions, and excisional biopsy often is required to establish the diagnosis.MALIGNANT LIVER TUMORSMalignant tumors in the liver can be classified as primary (cancers that originate in the liver) or metastatic (cancers that spread to the liver from an extrahepatic primary site) (see Table 31-6). Primary cancers in the liver that originate from hepato-cytes are known as hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs or hepa-tomas), whereas cancers arising in the bile ducts are known as cholangiocarcinomas.In the United States, approximately 150,000 new cases of colorectal cancer are diagnosed each year, and the majority of patients (approximately 60%) will develop hepatic metas-tases over their lifetime. Hence, the most common tumor seen in the liver is metastatic colorectal cancer. This compares with approximately 30,000 new cases of HCC diagnosed annually in the United States. Interestingly, in a Western series of 1000 con-secutive new liver cancer patients seen at a university medical center, 47% had HCC, 17% had colorectal cancer metastases, 11% had cholangiocarcinomas, 7% had neuroendocrine metas-tases, and 18% had other tumors.77 Although these figures do not reflect the incidence or prevalence of these liver cancers, they are indicative of referral patterns in a tertiary academic medical center with a large liver transplantation team and active hepatology clinic.Hepatocellular CarcinomaHCC is the fifth most common malignancy worldwide, with an estimated 750,000 new cases diagnosed annually. Because of its high fatality, it is the third most common cause of cancer death worldwide.78 Major risk factors are viral hepatitis (B or C),  alcoholic cirrhosis, hemochromatosis, and NASH. In Asia, the risk is as high as 35 to 117 per 100,000 persons per year, whereas in the United States, the risk is only 7 per 100,000 per-sons per year.78 Although cirrhosis is not present in all cases, it has been estimated to be present 70% to 90% of the time. In a person with cirrhosis, the annual conversion rate to HCC is 2% to 6%.79 In patients with chronic HCV infection, cirrhosis usually is present before the HCC develops; however, in cases of hepatitis B virus infection, HCC tumors can occur before the onset of cirrhosis. HCCs are typically hypervascular with blood supplied predominantly from the hepatic artery. Thus, the lesion often appears hypervascular during the arterial phase of CT studies (Fig. 31-19) and relatively hypodense during the delayed phases due to early washout of the contrast medium by the arterial blood. MRI imaging also is effective in character-izing HCC. HCC is variable on T1-weighted images and usu-ally hyperintense on T2-weighted images. As with contrast CT, HCC enhances in the arterial phase after gadolinium injection because of its hypervascularity and becomes hypointense in the delayed phases due to contrast washout. HCC has a tendency to invade the portal vein, and the presence of an enhancing portal vein thrombus is highly suggestive of HCC.The treatment of HCC is complex and is best managed by a multidisciplinary liver transplant team. A complete algorithm for the evaluation and management of HCC is shown  in Fig. 31-20. For patients without cirrhosis who develop HCC, resection is the treatment of choice. For patients with Child’s class A cirrhosis with preserved liver function and no portal hypertension, resection also is considered. If resection is not possible because of poor liver function and the HCC meets transplant criteria (discussed later), liver transplantation is the treatment of choice.80,81The Barcelona-Clinic Liver Cancer Group has refined its HCC management strategy and has developed the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases Practice Guidelines.82  Management guidelines vary slightly in Asia, Europe, the 7Brunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   137620/02/19   2:36 PM 1377LIVERCHAPTER 31United States, and other countries based in part on availability of organ donors for liver transplantation. Living donor liver trans-plantation also is an alternative for patients with HCC awaiting transplantation to avoid dropout as a candidate for cadaveric donor liver transplantation due to tumor progression.81 Specific treatment options are described in the next section.CholangiocarcinomaCholangiocarcinoma, or bile duct cancer, is the second most common primary malignancy of the liver. Cholangiocarcinoma is an adenocarcinoma of the bile ducts; it forms in the biliary epithelial cells and can be subclassified into peripheral (intra-hepatic) bile duct cancer and central (extrahepatic) bile duct cancer. Extrahepatic bile duct cancer can be located distally or proximally. When proximal, it is referred to as a hilar chol-angiocarcinoma (Klatskin’s tumor). Hilar cholangiocarcinoma originates in the wall of the bile duct at the hepatic duct conflu-ence and usually presents with obstructive jaundice rather than an actual liver mass. In contrast, a peripheral (or intrahepatic) cholangiocarcinoma represents a tumor mass within a hepatic lobe or at the periphery of the liver. A biopsy specimen from the cholangiocarcinoma will show adenocarcinoma, but patholo-gists are often unable to differentiate metastatic adenocarcinoma to the liver from primary bile duct adenocarcinoma. Therefore, a search for a primary site should be undertaken in cases in which an incidentally discovered liver lesion is proven to be an adenocarcinoma on biopsy.Hilar cholangiocarcinoma is difficult to diagnose and typi-cally presents as a stricture of the proximal hepatic duct causing painless jaundice. It preferentially grows along the length of the bile ducts, often involving the periductal lymphatics with frequent lymph node metastases. Surgical resection offers the only chance for cure of cholangiocarcinoma.83 The location and extent of tumor dictate the operative approach. In one series of 225 patients with hilar cholangiocarcinoma, 65 (29%) were deemed to have unresectable tumors by initial imaging.84 Of the remaining 160 patients who underwent exploratory surgery with curative intent, 80 (50%) were found to have inoperable tumors. Histologically negative margins, concomitant hepatic resection, and well-differentiated tumor histology were associ-ated with improved outcome after resection. In another series of 61 patients undergoing surgical exploration for hilar cholangio-carcinoma, the 5-year actuarial survival rates for an R0 or R1 resection were 45% and 26%, respectively.85 In a large series reported by Nagino and colleagues, 132 patients with hilar chol-angiocarcinoma underwent extended hepatectomy with resec-tion of the caudate lobe and extrahepatic bile duct, and/or portal vein resection (n = 63) after portal vein embolization.86 The 3and 5-year survival rates were 41.7% and 26.8%, respectively.In the absence of associated primary sclerosing cholangi-tis (PSC), surgical resection is the treatment of choice for hilar cholangiocarcinoma. However, approximately 10% of patients with cholangiocarcinoma have PSC.87 Furthermore, cholangio-carcinoma in the setting of PSC is frequently multicentric and often is associated with underlying liver disease, with eventual cirrhosis and portal hypertension. As a result, experience has shown that resection of cholangiocarcinoma in patients with PSC yields dismal results. This led transplant centers to con-sider OLT for patients with hilar cholangiocarcinoma. The ini-tial results of transplantation were disappointing, however, with high recurrence and overall 3-year survival rates of <30%.88Because the growth of hilar cholangiocarcinoma indicates that this disease spreads in a locoregional manner, a rationale for the use of neoadjuvant chemoradiation was developed by the transplant team at the University of Nebraska in the late 1980s. This was adapted in 1993 by the transplant team at the Mayo Clinic, which led to the current Mayo Clinic protocol.89 The pretransplant Mayo protocol consists of external-beam radiation therapy plus a protracted course of intravenous 5-fluorouracil followed by iridium-192 brachytherapy.90 Patients then undergo an abdominal exploration with staging. If findings are negative, patients are given capecitabine for 2 of every 3 weeks until transplantation. Even after restaging with CT/MRI and endo-scopic ultrasonography, approximately 15% to 20% of patients will have positive findings for tumor on abdominal Figure 31-19. Computed tomographic (CT) images of hepato-cellular carcinoma (HCC) and peripheral cholangiocarcinoma.  CT scans reveal a large (upper panel) and small (middle panel) hypervascular HCC. A hypovascular left lobe peripheral cholangio-carcinoma (CholangioCA) is also shown (lower panel).Brunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   137720/02/19   2:36 PM 1378SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIexploration.87,90 The 5-year survival rate for those undergoing transplantation for cholangiocarcinoma at the Mayo Clinic is approximately 70% and compares favorably with the rate for resection.87,90 Current eligibility criteria for this Mayo Clinic protocol include unresectable hilar cholangiocarcinoma or hilar cholangiocarcinoma with PSC. The tumor must have a radial dimension of ≤3 cm with no intrahepatic or extrahepatic metastases, and the patient must not have undergone prior radiation therapy or transperitoneal biopsy.90 Many centers have adopted similar protocols with comparable results.91Peripheral, or intrahepatic, cholangiocarcinoma is less common than hilar cholangiocarcinoma. In a series of  53 patients at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center who underwent surgical exploration for a diagnosis of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, 33 (62%) were found to have resectable tumors.92 Actuarial 3-year survival for patients undergoing resection was 55%. Factors predictive of poor survival included vascular invasion, histologically positive margins, and multiple tumors. In a large series in Taiwan, 373 patients with peripheral cholangiocarcinoma underwent surgical treatment from 1977 to 2001. Absence of mucobilia, nonpapillary tumor type, tumor of advanced stage, nonhepatectomy, and lack of postoperative chemotherapy were five independent prognostic factors that adversely affected overall survival.93 Liver transplantation has been performed for peripheral cholangiocarcinoma94; however, currently all but one center in the United States have eschewed this approach because of organ shortages and relatively high recurrence rates.Gallbladder CancerGallbladder cancer is a rare aggressive tumor with a very poor prognosis. Over 90% of patients have associated cholelithia-sis. In one study examining the mode of presentation over a 10-year period from 1990 to 2000 in 44 patients diagnosed with gallbladder cancer, the diagnosis was found to be made preoperatively in 57%, intraoperatively in 11%, and inciden-tally after cholecystectomy in 32%.95 Surgical approaches can be classified into (a) reoperation for an incidental finding of gallbladder cancer after cholecystectomy, and (b) radical resec-tion in patients with advanced disease. The results are dismal for radical resection in patients with advanced disease and positive hilar lymph nodes.96,97 For incidental gallbladder can-cer beyond stage T1, reoperation with central liver resection, hilar lymphadenectomy, and evaluation of cystic duct stump is most commonly performed.98,99 The role of formal lobectomy or extended lobectomy as well as common bile duct resection is more controversial. In a single-center study of 23 patients undergoing attempted curative treatment by surgical resec-tion, survival was 85% at 1 year, 63% at 2 years, and 55% at  3 years.99 In a multicenter study encompassing 115 patients with incidentally discovered gallbladder cancer who underwent  re-resection,98 residual disease in the liver was identified in 46% of patients (0% of those with stage T1 disease, 10% of those with T2 tumors, and 36% of those with T3 disease). T stage also was associated with the risk of metastasis to locoregional lymph nodes (lymph node metastasis for T1 of 13%; for T2, 31%; and for T3, 46%). In another study, a German registry of incidental gallbladder cancer identified 439 patients. Patients with tumors staged as T2 or T3 after cholecystectomy had better survival if they underwent reoperation than if they were managed with observation.100 Hence, reoperation should be considered for all patients who have T2 or T3 tumors or for whom the accuracy of staging is in question.Metastatic Colorectal CancerOver 50% to 60% of patients diagnosed with colorectal cancer will develop hepatic metastases during their lifetime. Resection for hepatic metastases has been a routine part of treatment for 8ResectionNoncirrhotic/Child’s ASingle lesionNo metastasisOLTx evaluation1 lesion ˜5 cm3 lesions ˜3 cmChild’s A/B/CNo gross vasc. invasionNo metastasisNot Tx candidateComorbid factors°4 lesionsGross vasc. invasionLN (+) or metastasisLDLT ?Suitable donorPalliative careChild’s CBili °3 HCC IdentifiedResection candidate?Transplant candidate?YesYesNoSorafenibYesYesNoOLTxClinicaltrialsNeoadjuvant therapyRFA/TACE/90 YttriumUNOS list (cadaver)MELD score (? >3 mos)Perc/lap. RFASingle lesion<5 cmChild’s A/BTace/90 YttriumMulti-focal >5 cmChild’s A/B/CBili <3NewagentsFigure 31-20. Algorithm for the management of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The treatment algorithm for HCC begins with determining whether the patient is a resection candidate or liver transplant candidate. Bili = bilirubin level (in milligrams per deciliter); Child’s = Child-Turcotte-Pugh class; lap = laparoscopic; LDLT = living-donor liver transplantation; LN = lymph node; MELD = Model for End-Stage Liver Disease; OLTx = orthotopic liver transplantation; Perc = percutaneous; RFA = radiofrequency ablation; TACE = transarterial chemoemboli-zation; Tx = transplantation; UNOS = United Network for Organ Sharing; vasc. = vascular.Brunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   137820/02/19   2:36 PM 1379LIVERCHAPTER 31colorectal cancer since the publication of a large single-center experience demonstrating its safety and efficacy.101 Predictors of poor outcome in that study included node-positive primary, disease-free interval <12 months, more than one tumor, tumor size >5 cm, and carcinoembryonic antigen level >200 ng/mL. Traditional teaching suggested that hepatic resection for meta-static colorectal cancer to the liver, if technically feasible, should be performed only for fewer than four metastases.102 However, later studies challenged this paradigm. In a series of 235 patients who underwent hepatic resection for metastatic colorectal cancer, the 10-year survival rate of patients with four or more nodules was 29%, nearly comparable to the 32% sur-vival rate of patients with only a solitary tumor metastasis.103 In the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center series of  98 patients with four or more colorectal hepatic metastases who underwent resection between 1998 and 2002, the 5-year actu-arial survival was 33%.104 Furthermore, improved chemothera-peutic regimens and surgical techniques have produced aggressive strategies for the management of this disease. Many groups now consider volume of future liver remnant and the health of the background liver, and not actual tumor number, as the primary determinants in selection for an operative approach.105,106 Hence, resectability is no longer defined by what is actually removed, but indications for hepatic resection now center on what will remain after resection.107 Use of neo-adjuvant chemotherapy, portal vein embolization, two-stage hepatectomy, simultaneous ablation, and resection of extrahepatic tumor in select patients have increased the number of patients eligible for a surgical approach.108,109Neuroendocrine TumorsHepatic metastases from neuroendocrine tumors have a protracted natural history and commonly are associated with debilitating endocrinopathies. Several groups have advocated an aggressive surgical approach of debulking surgery, both to control symp-toms and to extend survival.110,111 In a series of 170 patients undergoing resection of hepatic metastases from neuroendocrine tumors between 1977 and 1998 at the Mayo Clinic, overall sur-vival was 61% and 35% at 5 and 10 years, respectively.112 There was no difference in survival between patients with carcinoid tumors and those with islet cell tumors. Major hepatectomy was performed in 91 patients (54%), and recurrence rate was 84% at 5 years. Belghiti’s group has described a two-stage strategy used in 41 patients with a primary neuroendocrine tumor and synchronous bilobar liver metastases.113 In the first stage, the primary tumor is resected and limited resection of metastases in the left hemiliver, combined with right portal vein ligation, is performed. After 8 weeks of hypertrophy, a right hepatec-tomy or extended right hepatectomy (also referred to as a right trisectionectomy; resection of Couinaud’s segments IV, V, VI, VII, and VIII of the liver) is performed.113 In patients treated using this strategy, the 2-, 5-, and 8-year Kaplan-Meier over-all survival rates were 94%, 94%, and 79%, respectively, and disease-free survival rates were 85%, 50%, and 26%, respec-tively. Because systemic therapy has had little success in the treatment of advanced tumors, a broader approach using multi-modal therapy has been used to increase survival and improve hormone-related symptoms. These therapies include radiofre-quency or microwave ablation and intra-arterial therapy with chemoembolization or radioembolization (yttrium-90). Some centers perform liver transplantation for selected patients (carci-noid histology; primary tumor removed with curative resection; primary tumor drained by portal system; ≤50% hepatic paren-chyma involved; good response or stable disease for at least 6 months during pretransplantation period; and age 55 years or younger), although this is not routine.114Other Metastatic TumorsNearly every cancer has the propensity to metastasize to the liver. Historically, enthusiasm was low for resecting metastases other than those from a colorectal cancer primary. This was due in part to the recognition that many other primary cancers (such as breast cancer) represent a systemic disease when liver metas-tases are present. However, more recent studies have shown acceptable 5-year survival rates in the 20% to 40% range for resection of hepatic metastases from breast, renal, and other GI tumors.115,116 In a large study of hepatic resection for non-colorectal, nonendocrine liver metastases in 1452 patients, neg-ative prognostic factors were nonbreast origin, age >60 years, disease-free interval of <12 months, need for major hepatec-tomy, performance of R2 resection, and presence of extrahe-patic metastases.115TREATMENT OPTIONS FOR LIVER CANCERIn general, the major treatment options for liver cancer can be categorized as shown in Table 31-7. The decision making for any given patient is complex and is best managed by a multidis-ciplinary liver tumor board. The treatments listed in Table 31-7 are not mutually exclusive; the important point is to select the most appropriate initial treatment after a complete evaluation. In general, surveillance imaging (CT or MRI) is performed every 3 to 4 months during the first year after diagnosis to observe for response, progression, or recurrence. The treatment plan is indi-vidualized and modified according to the response of the patient.Hepatic ResectionFor primary liver cancers or hepatic metastases, hepatic resection is the gold standard and treatment of choice. Although there are anecdotal reports of long-term survival after ablation and other regional liver therapies, liver resection remains the only real option for cure. For HCC in the setting of cirrhosis, liver trans-plantation also offers the potential for long-term survival, albeit with the consequences of immunosuppression. Hepatic resection 9Table 31-7Treatment options for liver cancerHepatic resectionLiver transplantationAblation techniquesRadiofrequency ablation• Ethanol ablation• Cryoablation• Microwave ablationRegional liver therapies• Chemoembolization/embolization• Hepatic artery pump chemoperfusion• Internal radiation therapy (yttrium-90 internal radiation)External-beam radiation therapy• Stereotactic radiosurgery (CyberKnife, Trilogy, Synergy)• Intensity-modulated radiation therapySystemic chemotherapyMultimodality approachBrunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   137920/02/19   2:36 PM 1380SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIalso has been advocated for HCC in select patients with cirrho-sis before secondary liver transplantation, although not without some controversy.117 Many large series of patients undergoing major hepatectomy now report mortality rates of <5%.118-121 Pre-viously, a 1-cm tumor margin was considered desirable; how-ever, recent studies have reported comparable survival rates with smaller margins.122-124 Technical innovation in liver surgery and a better understanding of perioperative care have even allowed surgeons to perform resections in cases with IVC involvement with extracorporeal liver surgery.125 The technical aspects of anatomic hepatic lobectomies are described later.Liver TransplantationThe rationale supporting OLT for HCC includes the fact that most HCCs (>80%) arise in the setting of cirrhosis.88,126 The cirrhotic liver often does not have enough reserve to tolerate a formal resection. Also, HCC tumors are commonly multifo-cal and are underestimated by current CT or MRI imaging.127 Furthermore, recurrence rates are high at 5 years after resec-tion (>50%). Hence, OLT is an appealing treatment because it removes both the cancer and the cirrhotic liver that leads to can-cer. More than 7000 liver transplantations are performed each year in the United States, with 1-year survival rates approaching 90%. In May 2017, approximately 14,463 patients were on the waiting list for liver transplantation.128Initial series of OLT for HCC reported in the 1990s included advanced cases of HCC, and the 5-year survival rates were only 20% to 50%.88 This compared poorly with overall 5-year survival rates of 70% to 75% for OLT in the Organ Pro-curement and Transplantation Network/United Network for Organ Sharing (OPTN/UNOS) database. Mazzaferro and col-leagues at Milan subsequently showed that survival rates were markedly improved when OLT was limited to patients with early-stage HCC (stage I or stage II) with one tumor ≤5 cm, or up to three tumors no larger than 3 cm, along with the absence of gross vascular invasion or extrahepatic spread.129 Multiple studies have validated these findings, and many groups have proposed an expansion of the Milan criteria.81As noted previously, the 6to 40-point MELD score was adopted by OPTN/UNOS in 2002 for allocation of deceased donor liver organs in the United States. In an attempt to pri-oritize patients with preserved liver function and progressive HCC, patients with stage II HCC are allocated exception points (currently 28 MELD points which activates 6 months after liver transplant listing, increasing every 3 months and capping at 34 points as long as they continue to meet transplant criteria). This allocation has had a positive effect for HCC liver transplant can-didates, leading to decreased waiting list dropout and increased transplant rates with excellent long-term outcomes.130 The goal is to better equate death rates on the liver transplant waiting list for patients with stage I or stage II HCC with rates for patients with chronic liver disease without HCC. Although indications for liver transplantation have increased, the supply of donor liv-ers has failed to keep pace with the numbers of potential recipi-ents. A partial solution has been the use of living donor grafts. This is especially true in Asia where the incidence of HCC is high and the rate of cadaveric donation is low. Living donor grafts include right and left lobes, as well as dual grafts from separate donors to provide adequate hepatic mass to the recipi-ent. The use of living donor grafts also allows for transplant programs to push the boundaries by accepting patients beyond the Milan criteria with good results.112Radiofrequency AblationIn 1891, d’Arsonval discovered that radiofrequency (RF) waves delivered as an alternating electric current (>10 kHz) could pass through living tissue without causing pain or neuromuscular excitation. The resistance of the tissue to the rapidly alternating current produced heat. This discovery contributed to the devel-opment of the surgical application of electrocautery. In 1908, Beer used RF coagulation to destroy urinary bladder tumors. Cushing and Bovie later applied RF ablation to intracranial tumors. In 1961, Lounsberry studied the histologic changes of the liver after RF ablation (RFA) in animal models. He found that RF caused local tissue destruction with uniform necrosis. In the early 1990s, two groups proposed that RFA can be an effective method for destroying unresectable malignant liver tumors.132,133 Both groups found that RFA produced lesions with well-demarcated areas of necrosis without viable tumor cells present. Clinical reports after short-term follow-up sug-gested that RFA was safe and effective in the treatment of liver tumors.134-136 However, Abdalla and colleagues exam-ined data for 358 consecutive patients with colorectal liver metastases treated with curative intent over a 10-year period (1992 to 2002).137 Liver-only recurrence after RFA was four times the rate after resection (44% vs. 11% of patients), and RFA alone or in combination with resection did not provide survival rates comparable to those with resection alone. None-theless, RFA remains a common procedure that can be per-formed by a percutaneous, minimally invasive laparoscopic, or open approach.138,139 It also has been used successfully to ablate small HCCs as a bridge to liver transplantation.140 Results were reported for the first randomized clinical trial involving RFA treatment for HCC in 291 Chinese patients with three or fewer HCC tumors ranging in size from 3 to 7.5 cm.141 Patients were randomly assigned to treatment arms of RFA alone (n = 100), transarterial chemoembolization (TACE) alone (n = 95), or combined TACE plus RFA (n = 96). At a median follow-up of 28.5 months, median survival was 22 months in the RFA group, 24 months in the TACE group, and 37 months in the TACE plus RFA group. Patients treated with TACE plus RFA had sig-nificantly better overall survival than those treated with TACE alone (P <.001) or RFA alone (P <.001). Sucandy and col-leagues examined long-term 5and 10-year overall survival in 320 patients that had hepatic RFA for HCC or colorectal cancer liver metastases (CLM).142 The majority of patients (71%) had a single tumor ablation. Minimum 5-year follow-up was available in 89% patients, with a median follow-up of 115.3 months. In the HCC group, the 5and 10-year overall survivals were 38.5% and 23.4%, respectively, while in the CLM group, the 5and 10-year overall survivals were 27.6% and 15%, respectively.Ethanol Ablation, Cryosurgery,  and Microwave AblationPercutaneous ethanol injection has been shown to be a safe and effective treatment for small HCCs.136 The ethanol usually is delivered by percutaneous injection under ultrasound or CT guidance. Percutaneous ethanol injection also is used to treat small HCC tumors as a bridge to liver transplantation in some centers to avoid patient dropout.80 Although cryosurgery was used in the late 1980s and 1990s for ablation of liver tumors, many have abandoned this approach in favor of RFA because of the latter’s fewer side effects and ease of use. Microwave ablation is a thermal ablative technique used in the management of unresectable liver tumors to produce a coagulation necrosis. Brunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   138020/02/19   2:36 PM 1381LIVERCHAPTER 31In a multicenter phase 2 U.S. trial using a 915-MHz micro-wave generator, 87 patients underwent 94 ablation procedures for 224 hepatic tumors.143 Forty-five percent of the procedures were performed using an open approach, 7% laparoscopically, and 48% percutaneously. The average tumor size was 3.6 cm (range, 0.5 to 9.0 cm). At a mean follow-up of 19 months, 47% of the patients were alive with no evidence of disease. Local recurrence at the ablation site occurred in 2.7% of tumors, and regional recurrence occurred in 43% of patients. There were no procedure-related deaths. Further studies are required to define the role of this technology in relation to the other abla-tion options available.Chemoembolization and Hepatic Artery  Pump ChemoperfusionChemoembolization is the process of injecting chemotherapeu-tic drugs combined with embolization particles into the hepatic artery that supplies the liver tumor using a percutaneous, trans-femoral approach. It is most commonly used for treatment of unresectable HCC. Three randomized trials and a meta-analysis have shown a survival benefit with chemoembolization.144-147 In a study by Lo and colleagues, 80 Asian patients were randomly assigned to receive either chemoembolization with cisplatin in lipiodol or symptomatic treatment only.144 Chemoembolization resulted in a marked tumor response, and the actuarial survival was significantly better in the chemoembolization group (1and 3-year survival of 57% and 26%, respectively) than in the con-trol group (1and 3-year survival of 32% and 3%, respectively). In another randomized trial, a Barcelona group compared chemoembolization with doxorubicin versus supportive care and showed that chemoembolization significantly improved  survival.145 Finally, in a large prospective cohort study of 8510 patients with unresectable HCC in Japan who received trans-catheter arterial lipiodol chemoembolization, the 5-year survival rate was 26% and median survival time was 34 months.146 The TACE-related mortality rate after the initial therapy was 0.5%. Complications of TACE include liver dysfunction or liver fail-ure, hepatic abscess, and hepatic artery thrombosis. Multiple studies also have shown promising results for chemoemboliza-tion with drug-eluting beads in treatment of HCC.148In the 1990s, hepatic artery pump chemoperfusion with floxuridine for colorectal cancer metastases to the liver was used both for treatment of inoperable disease and in the adjuvant setting.149 However, in the modern era of improved chemothera-peutic options, this treatment modality is seldom used outside of a clinical trial.Yttrium-90 MicrospheresSelective internal radioembolization or transarterial radioem-bolization (TARE) is a promising new treatment modality for patients with inoperable primary or metastatic liver tumors. The treatment is a minimally invasive transcatheter therapy in which radioactive microspheres are infused into the hepatic arteries via a transfemoral percutaneous approach. The yttrium-90 micro-spheres are directly injected into the hepatic artery branches that supply the tumor. Once infused, the microspheres deliver doses of high-energy, low-penetration radiation selectively to the tumor. The main indications are inoperable HCC150 and colorec-tal cancer hepatic metastases for which systemic chemotherapy has failed.151,152 In a study involving 137 patients with unresect-able chemorefractory liver metastases treated with radioembo-lization, there was a response rate of 42.8% (2.1% complete response, 40.7% partial response) according to World Health Organization criteria.152 One-year survival rate was 47.8%, and 2-year survival rate was 30.9%. Median survival was 457 days for patients with colorectal tumor metastases, 776 days for those with neuroendocrine tumor metastases, and 207 days for those with noncolorectal, nonneuroendocrine tumor metastases. The two products available in the United States are SIR-Spheres (Sirtex, Sydney, Australia) and TheraSphere (Nordian, Ottawa, Canada).Stereotactic Radiosurgery and Intensity-Modulated Radiation TherapyAlthough stereotactic radiosurgery (with CyberKnife and other systems) is in widespread use for brain and spinal tumors, body application to HCC or metastatic liver tumors has only recently occurred. In a phase 1 study, 31 patients with unresectable HCCs and 10 with unresectable cholangiocarcinomas completed a six-fraction course of stereotactic body radiotherapy.153 The treat-ment was well tolerated, and median survival was 11.7 and 15.0 months for the two groups, respectively. A similar safety profile was observed in a study in the Netherlands.154 Further clinical trials are required to define the future role of stereo-tactic radiosurgery in treatment of HCC and metastatic tumors. Intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) is another tech-nologic advancement that facilitates the targeted delivery of external-beam radiation. Early clinical data suggested favorable outcomes with IMRT for the treatment of patients with unre-sectable HCC, and ongoing trials are further examining the role of IMRT for these locally advanced tumors.DownstagingIn more advanced-stage patients not eligible for MELD excep-tion points, hepatic-directed therapy including TACE and tumor ablation with radiofrequency, microwave, and ethanol ablation have been found to be effective in shrinking tumors to meet Milan criteria (downstaging). Multiple centers have used down-staging to allow for OLT in patients whose tumors responded and shrank to meet eligibility criteria.155,156Systemic ChemotherapyChemotherapy has not demonstrated great efficacy in patients with HCC, especially in patients with significant cirrhosis. For treatment of HCC, the multikinase inhibitor sorafenib has shown some efficacy in a phase 3 randomized international multicenter trial. The SHARP trial (Sorafenib HCC Assessment Random-ized Protocol) enrolled 602 patients with Child’s class A cir-rhosis and inoperable HCC. At interim analysis, the trial was discontinued because a survival benefit was found in the treat-ment group. The median overall survival for patients receiv-ing sorafenib was 10.7 months versus 7.9 months for patients in the control arm. Based on these findings, sorafenib received accelerated Food and Drug Administration approval for the treatment of advanced unresectable HCC.157 Future studies will likely examine the role of other molecularly targeted agents and combinations of sorafenib with other treatment modalities.HEPATIC RESECTION SURGICAL TECHNIQUESNomenclatureDue to the confusion in language with regard to anatomic descrip-tions of hepatic resections, a common nomenclature was intro-duced at the International Hepato-Pancreato-Biliary Association Brunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   138120/02/19   2:36 PM 1382SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IImeeting in Brisbane, Australia, in 2000 (Table 31-8).158,159 The goal was to provide universal terminology for liver anatomy and hepatic resections because there was much overlap among the designations for hepatic lobes, sections, sectors, and segments used by surgeons worldwide (Fig. 31-21). The most common or prevailing anatomic pattern was used as the basis for naming liver anatomy, and the surgical procedure nomenclature adopted for hepatic resections was based on the assigned anatomic ter-minology.160 Adoption of a common language should enable hepatic surgeons to better understand and interpret liver surgery publications from different continents and disseminate their knowledge to the next generation of hepatobiliary surgeons. Nonetheless, even today, the literature is full of both old and new liver resection terminology, so the surgeon in training must be familiar with all the various classifications.Techniques and Devices for Dividing the Hepatic ParenchymaHepatic resection surgery has evolved over the past 50 years. A better understanding of liver anatomy and physiology, coupled with improved anesthesia techniques and widespread use of intraoperative ultrasound, has led to virtually “bloodless” liver surgery in the modern era (the year 2000 to the present). Innova-tions in technology have expanded the list of liver parenchymal transection devices161-163 and hemostatic agents (Table 31-9). Use of each device or agent has a learning curve, and undoubt-edly every experienced hepatic surgeon has his or her personal preferences.One major trend has been the application of vascular sta-pling devices for division of the hepatic and portal veins.164-166 Based on early reports of successful stapling of extrahepatic Table 31-8Brisbane 2000 liver terminologyOLDER HEPATIC RESECTION TERMINOLOGYBRISBANE 2000 HEPATIC RESECTION TERMINOLOGY Right hepatic lobectomy Left hepatic lobectomy Right hepatic trisegmentectomy Left hepatic trisegmentectomy Left lateral segmentectomy Right posterior lobectomy Caudate lobectomy Right hepatectomy or right hemihepatectomy (V, VI, VII, VIII) Left hepatectomy or left hemihepatectomy (II, III, IV) Right trisectionectomy or extended right hepatectomy (or hemihepatectomy, IV, V, VI, VII, VIII) Left trisectionectomy or extended left hepatectomy (or hemihepatectomy, II, III, IV, V, VIII) Left lateral sectionectomy or bisegmentectomy (II, III) Right posterior sectionectomy (VI, VII) Caudate lobectomy or segmentectomy (I)ALTERNATIVE “SECTOR” TERMINOLOGY Right anterior sectorectomy Right posterior sectorectomy or right lateral sectorectomy Left medial sectorectomy or left paramedian sectorectomy (bisegmentectomy,  III, IV) Left lateral sectorectomy (segmentectomy, II)IVCRHVMHVVIIVIIIIVaIIVIVIVbIIIFalciform lig.Portal veinIVCLHVIFigure 31-21. Hepatic anatomy. Hepatic segments removed in the formal major hepatic resections are indicated. IVC = inferior vena cava; LHV = left hepatic vein; MHV = middle hepatic vein;  RHV = right hepatic vein.Table 31-9Techniques and devices for dividing liver parenchyma and achieving hemostasisBlunt fracture and clipsMonopolar cautery (Bovie)Bipolar cauteryArgon beam coagulatorCUSA ultrasonic dissectorHydro-Jet water-jet dissectorHarmonic Scalpel, AutoSonix ultrasonic transector-coagulatorLigaSure tissue fusion systemSurgRx EnSeal tissue sealing and transection systemGyrus PK cutting forcepsEndovascular staplersTissueLink sealing devicesHabib 4X Laparoscopic sealerInLine bipolar linear coagulatorTopical agents (fibrin glues, Surgicel, Gelfoam, Avitene, Tisseel, Floseal, Crosseal)Brunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   138220/02/19   2:36 PM 1383LIVERCHAPTER 31vessels, stapling devices are now being used in the parenchymal transection phase, which remains a source of potential blood loss due to back bleeding from the middle hepatic vein.167,168 One advantage of the stapling technique is the speed with which the transection can be performed, which minimizes surface bleeding and period of ischemia for the remnant liver. How-ever, a major disadvantage of the stapling technique is the cost of multiple stapler cartridges. This is balanced by the decreased expenses reported with avoidance of ICU admission and blood transfusion, as well as shortened operating room time. Another consideration in the use of staplers for parenchymal transec-tion is the potential for bile leaks. However, in a large series of 101 consecutive right hemihepatectomies performed using the stapling technique, there was only one reported bile leak (1%), which sealed after ERCP.168Steps in Commonly Performed  Hepatic ResectionsA fundamental understanding of hepatic anatomy is vital for any surgeon with the desire to perform hepatobiliary surgery. Each hepatic resection surgery can be broken down into a series of orderly steps. The key to being a proficient hepatic surgeon is not to operate swiftly but rather to accomplish the operation by completing the steps in an orchestrated fashion. Mastery of the operative steps coupled with knowledge of liver anatomy and the common anatomic variants provides the foundation for safe hepatic surgery. There are many different techniques and sequences for accomplishing each of the anatomic (and nonana-tomic) hepatic operations. The authors present their preferred approach in a stepwise fashion for right hepatic lobectomy (right hemihepatectomy), left hepatic lobectomy (left hemihepa-tectomy), and left lateral segmentectomy (left lateral sectionec-tomy). Provision of a detailed approach for every type of liver resection is beyond the scope of this chapter, and readers are referred to several excellent descriptions.169Steps Common to All Open Major Hepatic Resections 1.	Make the skin incision—right subcostal with or without a partial or complete left subcostal extension across the mid-line, depending on the patient’s habitus and liver/tumor anatomy.2.	Open and explore the abdomen, and place a fixed table retractor (e.g., Thompson or Bookwalter).3.	Examine the liver with bimanual palpation. Perform liver ultrasound, and confirm the operation to be performed.4.	Take down the round and falciform ligaments, and expose the anterior surface of the hepatic veins.5.	For a left hepatectomy, divide the left triangular ligament; for a right hepatectomy, mobilize the right lobe from the right coronary and triangular ligaments.6.	Open the gastrohepatic ligament, palpate the porta hepatis, and assess for accessory or replaced hepatic arteries.7.	Perform a cholecystectomy; leave the gallbladder with the cystic duct intact if the gallbladder is involved by the tumor.Right Hepatic Lobectomy (Right Hepatectomy or Hemihepatectomy) 8.	Mobilize the liver from the anterior aspect of the IVC in “piggyback” fashion; ligate the short hepatic veins up to the right hepatic vein (RHV).9.	Perform a right hilar dissection—gently lower the hilar plate, then doubly ligate and divide the right hepatic artery (RHA), superior to the right side of the common bile duct.10.	Doubly ligate and divide a replaced or accessory RHA if present.11.	Expose the portal vein, identifying its right and left branches. There is a small lateral portal vein branch off the right portal vein (RPV) to the caudate lobe that should be controlled and ligated to allow the exposure of additional length on the RPV. Divide the RPV either with a vascular stapler or between vascular clamps.12.	Dissect the avascular tissue along the suprahepatic vena cava between the right and middle hepatic veins. Pass a silastic tube of a Jackson-Pratt drain through this gap.13.	Notch or divide the caudate process crossing to the right hepatic lobe, and bring the drain up and through this notch.14.	Hang the liver over the drain by pulling up as you divide through the liver parenchyma.15.	Repeat ultrasound and confirm the transection plane, staying just to the right of the middle hepatic vein (MHV) unless the tumor extends over it.16.	Cauterize approximately 1 cm into the liver parenchyma, then switch to a hydro-jet dissection device in combination with Bovie electrocautery and suture ligation.17.	Continue parenchymal division until the RHV is encoun-tered. During this division, identification, control, ligation, and transection of the right hepatic duct (RHD) are obtained late in the parenchymal transection process.18.	Divide the RHV between vascular clamps and suture ligate the RHV.19.	Examine the transected liver edge for bleeding; place a figure-of-eight ligating vascular suture if bleeding is encountered.20.	Ensure hemostasis of the transected liver edge with an argon beam coagulator and suture ligation.21.	Inspect the transection surface for bile leaks. These should be clipped or suture ligated. Applying a dilute solution of hydro-gen peroxide can facilitate the visualization of bile leaks.22.	Inspect the IVC and right retroperitoneal space for hemostasis.23.	Perform completion ultrasound to confirm left portal vein (LPV) inflow and outflow in the remaining hepatic veins.24.	Fix the proximal falciform ligament back to the diaphragm side with figure-of-eight sutures.25.	Apply tissue sealant to the cut surface of the liver, and place a Jackson-Pratt drain in the right subphrenic space and close the abdomen (Fig. 31-22).Comments Although some liver surgeons advocate a one-step division of the entire intrahepatic Glissonian pedicle as described by Launois and Jamieson,170 it is the authors’ prefer-ence to divide the RHA, RHD, and RPV in an extrahepatic fash-ion. As for the transection plane, the key is to perform accurate ultrasound visualization and mapping of the MHV and to stay just to the right of it. Weaving in and out or bisecting the MHV can leading to torrential back bleeding. Also, for bulky right lobe tumors adherent to the diaphragm or retroperitoneum, an anterior approach with division of the parenchyma can be per-formed before right lobe mobilization.152,153Left Hepatic Lobectomy (Left Hepatectomy or Hemihepatectomy)  8. Widely open the gastrohepatic ligament flush with the undersurface of the left lateral section and the caudate lobe. 9. Doubly ligate and divide a replaced or accessory left hepatic artery (LHA) if present.Brunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   138320/02/19   2:36 PM 1384SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II10. Clamp the round ligament (ligament teres) and pull it ante-riorly as a handle to expose the left hilum.11. Divide any existing parenchymal bridge between segments III and IVB.12. Dissect the left hilum at the base of the umbilical fissure and lower the hilar plate anterior to the left portal pedicle.13. Incise the peritoneum overlying the hilum from the left side, and doubly ligate the LHA (after test clamping and confirming a palpable pulse in the RHA).14. Dissect the portal vein at the base of the umbilical fissure (it will take a nearly 90° bend from the transverse to the umbilical portion).15. Expose the portal vein, identifying the right and left branches. Control the small portal vein branch off the LPV to the caudate lobe to allow the exposure of additional length. Divide the LPV either with a vascular stapler or between vascular clamps.16. Ligate and divide the ligamentum venosum caudally.17. Identify the long extrahepatic course of the left hepatic duct (LHD) behind the portal vein. Ligate and divide the LHD at the umbilical fissure.18. Fold the left lateral segment up and back to the right, expos-ing the window at the base of the left hepatic vein (LHV) as it enters the IVC. This is facilitated by dividing any loose areolar tissue overlying the ligamentum venosum, which is divided proximally.19. Pass a large, blunt right-angle clamp in the window between the RHV and the MHV, and hug the back of the MHV, aim-ing for the deep edge of the LHV. Do not force it or perfo-rate the IVC or MHV.20. Pass the silastic tube of a Jackson-Pratt drain through this window.21. Notch or divide the caudate process crossing to the left hepatic lobe and bring the drain up and through this notch.22. Hang the liver over the drain by pulling up as you divide through the liver parenchyma.23. Repeat ultrasound and confirm the transection plane on the anterior surface, staying close to the demarcated line. Do not bisect the MHV as it passes tangentially from the left to the right lobe.24. Cauterize down approximately 1 cm in the liver paren-chyma, then switch to a hydro-jet dissection device in com-bination with Bovie electrocautery and suture ligation.25. Continue parenchymal division until the left/middle hepatic veins are encountered.26. Divide the LHV and MHV between vascular clamps and suture the ligate the LHV/MHV.27. Check the transected edge of the liver for surgical bleed-ing; ensure hemostasis of the transected edge with an argon beam coagulator and suture ligation.28. Inspect the transection surface for bile leaks. These should be clipped or suture ligated. Apply dilute solution of hydro-gen peroxide to facilitate the visualization of bile leaks.29. Perform completion ultrasound to confirm RPV inflow and RHV outflow.30. Apply tissue sealant to the transected surface of the liver. Place a Jackson-Pratt drain in the left subphrenic space and close the abdomen (Fig. 31-23).Comments Because the right posterior duct arises from the left hepatic duct (LHD) in approximately 20% of cases (see  Fig. 31-9) and the right anterior duct comes off the LHD in approximately 5% of cases,6 it is vital to divide the LHD at the base of the umbilical fissure and not more centrally in the hilum as it bifurcates. If the LHD were divided as it appears to bifurcate from the right hepatic duct, then approximately 20% to Figure 31-22. Completed right hepatic lobectomy (right hepa-tectomy) with the right portal vein, right hepatic artery, and right bile duct ligated and divided. The right hepatic vein is ligated and divided. Middle hepatic vein branches inside the liver are divided.Figure 31-23. Completed left hepatic lobectomy (left hepatec-tomy) resecting segments II, III, and IV.Brunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   138420/02/19   2:37 PM 1385LIVERCHAPTER 3125% of the time, either the right posterior or right anterior duct would be transected. After the LHD is divided as described ear-lier (Step 17), the liver parenchyma is scored and divided hori-zontally approximately 1 cm above the left hilum; the surgeon thus assumes that an aberrant right anterior or posterior duct is coming off the LHD in the hilum and preserves it. Then as the parenchymal transection reaches the left side of the gallblad-der fossa, the transection plane turns vertical to run parallel to Cantlie’s line (or the left edge of the gallbladder bed). The left lobe of the liver will be well demarcated at this point (after the vascular inflow has been divided), which guides the transection plane on the anterior surface. In general, the transection plane should be close to the demarcation line to minimize the amount of devascularized liver remaining. When dividing the LHV and MHV, the surgeon should keep in mind that they have a com-mon trunk approximately 90% of the time. If it is not easy to open the window deep to the MHV and LHV, then division of the MHV and LHV can be accomplished after the parenchymal transection.Left Lateral Segmentectomy (Left Lateral Sectionectomy)  8. Widely open the gastrohepatic ligament flush with the undersurface of the left lateral section and the caudate lobe. 9. Doubly ligate and divide a replaced or accessory LHA if present.10. Clamp the round ligament and pull it anteriorly as a handle to expose the left hilum.11. Divide any existing parenchymal bridge between segments III and IVB.12. Carry the dissection down from the end of the round liga-ment, and the segment III pedicle will be encountered.13. Incise the peritoneal reflection on the left side of the round ligament as it inserts into the umbilical fissure. This will facilitate encircling the segment III and II pedicles, which can be divided separately. When encircling the segment II pedicle, take care to avoid injury to the caudate inflow ves-sels coming off the LPV.14. Divide the liver parenchyma, staying flush on the left side of the falciform ligament using Bovie electrocautery.15. Divide the LHV as the parenchymal transection is complete.16. A Pringle maneuver usually is not required for a left lateral sectionectomy because complete devascularization occurs before transection and little back bleeding is encountered.Comments If the segment III and II LHA branches are large, they can be individually ligated in the left hilum before the pedicles (with portal vein and hepatic duct branches) are taken. If the tumor is more peripheral in the left lateral segment, then the segment III and II pedicles can be divided with a vascular stapler inside the liver during the parenchymal transection.Pringle and Ischemic PreconditioningPringle described clamping of the portal triad a century ago in the landmark paper “Notes on the Arrest of Hepatic Hemorrhage Due to Trauma.”4 Although the Pringle maneuver was initially described for controlling bleeding due to traumatic liver injury, it is commonly used during elective hepatic resections.173,174 The goal is to minimize blood loss and hypotension, which add sig-nificant morbidity to the operation. Furthermore, intraoperative blood transfusion has been shown to be an independent risk fac-tor for increased postoperative infection as well as worse patient survival in some studies. Therefore, all efforts should be made to minimize blood loss during hepatic resection.Although the liver has been shown to tolerate up to 1 hour of warm ischemia, some technical variations of the Pringle maneuver include intermittent vascular occlusion with cycles of approximately 15 minutes on and 5 minutes off. Experimental and clinical studies have demonstrated the efficacy of intermit-tent vascular occlusion in decreasing ischemia/reperfusion injury compared with continuous vascular occlusion, with less eleva-tion of postoperative liver enzyme levels.175 Another variation is selective hemihepatic vascular occlusion, which can reduce the severity of visceral congestion and total liver ischemia. In one prospective trial of total versus selective portal triad clamping, both techniques of inflow clamping were found to be equally effective for patients with normal livers, but greater liver dam-age was observed with total inflow occlusion in patients with cirrhotic livers.176In an attempt to decrease the ischemic damage associated with inflow occlusion, some hepatic surgeons have advocated the use of ischemic preconditioning.177 Ischemic precondition-ing refers to the brief interruption of blood flow to an organ, fol-lowed by a short reperfusion period, and then a more prolonged period of ischemia. In a randomized clinical trial involving 100 patients undergoing major hepatic resection, Clavien and col-leagues reported significantly less liver injury in the group who received ischemic preconditioning with a 10-minute clamp, a 10-minute reperfusion, and then a 30-minute clamp than in those who received a 30-minute clamp alone.178 Patients with steatosis also were especially protected by ischemic preconditioning, and the mechanism was shown to be related in part to preservation of the adenosine triphosphate content of liver tissue.Preoperative Portal Vein EmbolizationThe observation that tumor thrombosis of a major portal vein branch induced ipsilateral lobar atrophy and contralateral lobe hypertrophy led to the concept of intentional preoperative portal vein embolization (PVE) to induce compensatory hypertrophy of the remnant liver. This procedure was first described in the 1980s and is accomplished via a percutaneous, transhepatic route.160,161 Numerous studies have subsequently confirmed that PVE is effective in inducing hypertrophy of nonembolized hepatic segments.86,181 PVE usually is performed in the setting of a planned right trisectionectomy or extended left hepatec-tomy (also referred to as a left trisectionectomy; resection of Couinaud’s segments II, III, IV, V, and VIII of the liver) or extended hepatic lobectomy when it is thought that the patient’s remnant liver will be too small to support liver function. The future liver remnant volume (e.g., the volume of segments II, III, and I) in a patient undergoing a planned right trisectionec-tomy can be directly measured by helical CT and then divided by the total estimated liver volume to calculate the percentage of the future liver remnant. If the future liver remnant is thought to be too small, then PVE should be considered to increase the size of the future liver remnant.182 In general, surgery is planned approximately 4 weeks after PVE to allow adequate time for hypertrophy.There is no universal agreement on what constitutes a future liver remnant adequate to avoid postoperative liver fail-ure. It is thought that 25% to 30% of the total liver volume is ade-quate in patients with a normal liver.183 Vauthey and associates reported that major postoperative complications were increased when the estimated future liver remnant was <25%.184 Farges and colleagues conducted a prospective study to assess the benefits of PVE before right hepatectomy. They demonstrated Brunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   138520/02/19   2:37 PM 1386SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIthat PVE had no beneficial effect on the postoperative course in patients with normal livers but significantly reduced postop-erative complications in patients with chronic liver diseases.185 A larger remnant may be necessary even in patients with nor-mal livers when a complex hepatectomy is planned or when the background liver is steatotic.186 This is especially relevant with the increased incidence of fatty liver disease. A larger remnant may also be needed when patients have received pre-operative chemotherapy. Some have suggested that 40% of the total hepatic volume should remain to minimize postoperative complications in patients who have underlying liver disease or who have received preoperative chemotherapy for colorectal cancer metastases.187,188 In a recent study encompassing 112 patients who underwent PVE, major complications, hepatic insufficiency, length of hospital stay, and 90-day mortality rate were significantly greater in patients with a standardized future liver remnant of ≤20% or a degree of hypertrophy of <5% than in patients with higher values.189 In another study, the authors performed PVE during neoadjuvant chemotherapy for colorec-tal cancer metastases. After a median wait of 30 days after PVE, patients receiving neoadjuvant chemotherapy showed median liver growth of 22% in the contralateral (nonembolized) lobe compared with 26% for those not receiving chemotherapy (not a statistically significant difference), which indicated that liver growth occurs after PVE even when cytotoxic chemotherapy is administered.190 PVE-related complications occur at a relatively low rate and include bleeding, hemobilia, liver abscess, incom-plete embolization, and small bowel obstruction. To augment the ability to increase liver function reserve in patients who have undergone PVE, some groups have added ipsilateral hepatic artery embolization and ipsilateral hepatic vein embolization.191Staged Hepatectomy, ALPPS, and Repeat Hepatic Resection for Recurrent Liver CancerA two-stage hepatectomy is a sequential resection strategy to remove all metastatic liver tumors when it is impossible to resect all disease in a single operative procedure. The first-stage hepatectomy usually consists of clearance of the left hemiliver by nonanatomic resection, followed by right portal vein ligation or embolization to induce left lobe hypertrophy.192,193 This is fol-lowed by a second-stage major right hepatectomy or extended right hepatectomy to resect the right liver metastases. This approach is most commonly used in cases of initially unresect-able colorectal hepatic metastases and has yielded very good results.193Another technique to increase future liver remnant to avoid post-hepatectomy liver failure is known as “Associating Liver Partition and Portal Vein Ligation for Staged Hepatec-tomy (ALPPS)” and was described in 2012. This technique consists of operative portal vein ligation with in situ liver tran-section along the future line of resection leaving the arterial and hepatic vein branches intact.194 There have been several techni-cal modifications to the original description, and this remains a hot topic that is actively debated (ALPPS vs. PVE) at the current liver surgery meetings.The majority of patients undergoing hepatic resection for colorectal cancer metastases experience a recurrence. For those with limited disease recurrence confined to the liver, repeat hepatectomy is a reasonable option and can be performed with low morbidity and mortality in experienced hands.195 In one study, 126 patients who underwent a second liver resection for colorectal cancer metastases had 1-, 3-, and 5-year survival rates of 86%, 51%, and 34%, respectively. By multivariate analysis, the presence of more than one lesion and a tumor size of >5 cm were independent prognostic indicators of reduced survival.196 In another study, 40 patients underwent a second hepatectomy for liver metastases from colorectal cancer and experienced a survival benefit similar to that from the first hepatectomy; how-ever, the results suggested that this approach should be limited to those patients who do not have extrahepatic disease and for whom >1 year has elapsed since the first operation.197 A meta-analysis of 21 studies examining clinical outcomes after first and second liver resections for colorectal cancer metastases showed that repeat hepatectomy was safe and provided a sur-vival benefit equal to that from the first liver resection.198Repeat hepatectomy also has been performed in patients with HCC. Nakajima and colleagues reported on follow-up of 94 patients who underwent curative liver resection for HCC from 1991 to 1996.199 Of these, 57 patients had isolated recur-rent disease in the liver. Twelve of these 57 patients underwent repeat hepatic resection, whereas the other 45 patients received ablation therapy. The overall survival rate in those undergoing a second hepatectomy was 90% at 2 years; however, the disease-free survival rate was only 31% at 2 years, significantly lower than the 62% rate after initial hepatectomy. Likewise, in another group of 84 patients who underwent second hepatectomy for recurrent HCC, the overall 5-year survival rate was 50%, but the recurrence-free survival rate was only 10%.200 In a report of 67 patients undergoing a second resection for HCC, over-all 1-, 3-, and 5-year survival rates were 93%, 70%, and 56%, respectively.201 Multivariate analysis showed that absence of portal invasion at the second resection, single HCC at primary hepatectomy, and disease-free interval of ≥1 year after primary hepatectomy were independent prognostic factors after the sec-ond resection.LAPAROSCOPIC LIVER RESECTIONCherqui and colleagues first reported in 2000 that laparoscopic hepatic surgery was feasible.202 Since this initial report, laparo-scopic liver surgery has expanded from the simple unroofing of hepatic cysts to resection of peripheral benign lesions to formal anatomic lobectomies for malignancy and laparoscopic hepa-tectomy for living donor liver transplantation. While minimally invasive approaches have been widely adopted in other areas of abdominal surgery, there was initial apprehension regarding laparoscopic liver resection (LLR), hampering its widespread adoption.203 Great strides have been made in the past decade with techniques of laparoscopic liver resection,204,205 and two International Laparoscopic Liver Resection Consensus Confer-ences have been convened in Louisville (2008) and Morioko (2014).206,207 Indications for liver resection should not be altered by the availability of minimally invasive liver resection tech-niques. Currently, over 9500 cases of laparoscopic liver resec-tion have been reported worldwide, with over 50% of the cases being done for malignancy.208Pure laparoscopic and hand-assisted laparoscopic liver resection are the two most commonly used techniques for mini-mally invasive liver resection surgery,209,210 while robotic liver resection is being used by several groups.211 Advantages of the hand-port include tactile feedback, facilitation of liver mobiliza-tion, and ease of ability to control bleeding. Also, when doing a large parenchymal resection, the hand-port can be comparable in size to the extraction port utilized in the purely laparoscopic Brunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   138620/02/19   2:37 PM 1387LIVERCHAPTER 31approach. The hand-assisted approach can be ideal for surgeons beginning the transition to laparoscopic liver resection and for more experienced laparoscopic HPB surgeons doing laparo-scopic major hepatectomies or as an alternative to conversion to open surgery.Benefits of laparoscopic liver resection include less blood loss, decreased morbidity, decreased postoperative pain and narcotic requirements, faster return of bowel function, and shorter length of hospital stay compared to open hepatic  resection.212 Long-term oncologic outcomes for HCC and CLM have been shown to be comparable for laparoscopic vs. open liver resection using propensity score matching and meta-analysis  studies.213-215 The learning curve for laparoscopic liver resection has been reported to be around 60 cases,216 although this may be greater for laparoscopic major hepatectomy.217-219 Cost analy-sis has shown that laparoscopic liver resection is cost effective compared to open liver resection, where the added cost of the operating room disposables are more than offset by the savings associated with ∼50% reduction in the hospital length of stay.221,222Initial experience with laparoscopic living-donor hepatec-tomy for transplantation was with left lateral segmentectomy during liver allograft procurement for pediatric transplants.222 With continued advances in laparoscopic liver surgery, LLR has been applied to adult-to-adult donor right hepatectomy,223,224 although this approach remains controversial.In summary, laparoscopic liver resection can now be per-formed safely by experienced surgeons in selected patients. Compared to open hepatic resection, the laparoscopic approach has benefits of less blood loss, reduced postoperative pain, and a shorter length of hospital stay, with  similar oncologic out-comes for resection of HCC and limited colorectal liver metastases.REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Wikipedia. Prometheus. Available at: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prometheus. Accessed July 26, 2018.	2.	Keen WW IV. Report of a case of resection of the liver for the removal of a neoplasm, with a table of seventy-six cases of resection of the liver for hepatic tumors. Ann Surg. 1899;30(3):267-283.	3.	Fortner JG, Blumgart LH. A historic perspective of liver sur-gery for tumors at the end of the millennium. J Am Coll Surg. 2001;193(2):210-222.	4.	Pringle JH V. Notes on the arrest of hepatic hemorrhage due to trauma. Ann Surg. 1908;48(4):541-549.	5.	Cantlie J. On a new arrangement of the right and left lobes of the liver. Proc Anat Soc Great Britain Ireland. 1897;32:4-9.	6.	Couinaud C. Lobes de segments hepatiques: notes sur l’architecture anatomique et chirurgical de foie. Presse Med. 1954;62(33):709-712.	7.	Abdalla EK, Vauthey JN, Couinaud C. The caudate lobe of the liver: implications of embryology and anatomy for surgery. Surg Oncol Clin N Am. 2002;11(4):835-848.	8.	Bismuth H. Surgical anatomy and anatomical surgery of the liver. World J Surg. 1982;6(1):3-9.	9.	Nordlie RC, Foster JD, Lange AJ. Regulation of glucose pro-duction by the liver. Annu Rev Nutr. 1999;19:379-406.	10.	Merriman R. Approach to the patient with jaundice. In: Yamada T, ed. Textbook of Gastroenterology. 4th ed. Philadelphia:  Lippincott Williams & Williams; 2003:911.	11.	Ramadori G, Christ B. Cytokines and the hepatic acute-phase response. Semin Liver Dis 1999;19(2):141-155.	12.	Tsung A, Geller DA. CD14 and Toll Receptor. In: Dufour JF, Clavien PA, eds. Signaling Pathways in Liver Diseases.  Berlin: Springer; 2005:165-171.	13.	Su GL. Lipopolysaccharides in liver injury: molecular mecha-nisms of Kupffer cell activation. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2002;283:G256-G265.	14.	Geller DA, Billiar TR. Molecular biology of nitric oxide syn-thases. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 1998;17:7-23.	15.	Prince JM, Billiar TR. Nitric Oxide. In: Dufour JF, Clavien PA, eds. Signaling Pathways in Liver Diseases. Berlin: Springer; 2005:299-310.	16.	Tsuchihashi S, Busuttil RW, Kupiec-Weglinski JW. Heme Oxygenase System. In: Dufour JF, Clavien PA, eds. Sig-naling Pathways in Liver Diseases. Berlin: Springer; 2005: 291-298.	17.	Zuckerbraun BS, Billiar TR. Heme oxygenase-1: a cellular Hercules. Hepatology. 2003;37:742-744.	18.	Akira S, Takeda K. Toll-like receptor signalling. Nat Rev Immunol. 2004;4:499-511.	19.	Mollen KP, Anand RJ, Tsung A, Prince JM, Levy RM, Billiar TR. Emerging paradigm: toll-like receptor 4-sentinel for the detection of tissue damage. Shock 2006;26:430-437.	20.	Farombi EO, Surh YJ. Heme oxygenase-1 as a potential therapeutic target for hepatoprotection. J Biochem Mol Biol 2006;39:479-491.	21.	Kruskal JB, Kane RA. Intraoperative US of the liver: techniques and clinical applications. Radiographics. 2006;26(4):1067-1084.	22.	Martinez SM, Crespo G, Navasa M, Forns X. Noninvasive assessment of liver fibrosis. Hepatology. 2011;53(1):325-335.	23.	Federle MP, Blachar A. CT evaluation of the liver: principles and techniques. Semin Liver Dis. 2001;21(2):135-145.	24.	Hyodo T, Kumano S, Kushihata F, et al. CT and MR cholan-giography: advantages and pitfalls in perioperative evaluation of biliary tree. Br J Radiol. 2012;85(1015):887-896.	25.	Ros PR, Davis GL. The incidental focal liver lesion: photon, proton, or needle? Hepatology. 1998;27(5):1183-1190.	26.	Wald C, Scholz FJ, Pinkus E, Wise RE, Flacke S. An update on biliary imaging. Surg Clin North Am. 2008;88(6):1195-1220.	27.	Wiering B, Krabbe PF, Jager GJ, Oyen WJ, Ruers TJ. The impact of fluor-18-deoxyglucose-positron emission tomogra-phy in the management of colorectal liver metastases. Cancer. 2005;104(12):2658-2670.	28.	Sacks A, Peller PJ, Surasi DS, Chatburn L, Mercier G, Sub-ramaniam RM. Value of PET/CT in the management of liver metastases, part 1. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2011;197(2): W256-W259.	29.	Bernal W, Auzinger G, Dhawan A, Wendon J. Acute liver failure. Lancet. 2010;376(9736):190-201. An outstanding review of pathophysiology, treatment, and evidence based outcomes for patients with acute liver failure.	30.	Polson J, Lee WM. Etiologies of acute liver failure: location, location, location! Liver Transpl. 2007;13(10):1362.	31.	Agopian V, Petrowsky H, Kaldas FM, et al. The evolution of liver transplantation during three decades: analysis of 5347 consecutive liver transplants at a single center. Ann Surg. 2013;258(3):409-421.	32.	Escorsell A, Mas A, de la Mata M, Spanish Group for the Study of Acute Liver F. Acute liver failure in Spain: analysis of 267 cases. Liver Transpl. 2007;13(10):1389-1395.	33.	Larson AM, Polson J, Fontana RJ, et al. Acetaminophen-induced acute liver failure: results of a United States multi-center, prospective study. Hepatology. 2005;42(6):1364-1372.	34.	Ostapowicz G, Fontana RJ, Schiodt FV, et al. Results of a pro-spective study of acute liver failure at 17 tertiary care centers in the United States. Ann Intern Med. 2002;137(12):947-954.	35.	Hodgman MJ, Garrard AR. A review of acetaminophen poi-soning. Crit Care Clin. 2012;28(4):499-516.10Brunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   138720/02/19   2:37 PM 1388SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	36.	Kortsalioudaki C, Taylor RM, Cheeseman P, Bansal S, Mieli-Vergani G, Dhawan A. Safety and efficacy of N-acetylcysteine in children with non-acetaminophen-induced acute liver fail-ure. Liver Transpl. 2008;14(1):25-30.	37.	O’Grady JG, Alexander GJ, Hayllar KM, Williams R. Early indicators of prognosis in fulminant hepatic failure. Gastroen-terology. 1989;97(2):439-445.	38.	Bismuth H, Samuel D, Castaing D, et al. Orthotopic liver transplantation in fulminant and subfulminant hepatitis. The Paul Brousse experience. Ann Surg. 1995;222(2):109-119.	39.	Antoniades CG, Berry PA, Bruce M, et al. Actin-free Gc globulin: a rapidly assessed biomarker of organ dysfunc-tion in acute liver failure and cirrhosis. Liver Transpl. 2007;13(9):1254-1261.	40.	Renner EL. How to decide when to list a patient with acute liver failure for liver transplantation? Clichy or King’s College criteria, or something else? J Hepatol. 2007;46(4):554-557.	41.	Faybik P, Krenn CG. Extracorporeal liver support. Curr Opin Crit Care. 2013;19(2):149-153.	42.	Ekser B, Gridelli B, Tector AJ, Cooper DK. Pig liver xenotrans-plantation as a bridge to allotransplantation: which patients might benefit? Transplantation. 2009;88(9):1041-1049.	43.	Yu Y, Fisher JE, Lillegard JB, Rodysill B, Amiot B, Nyberg SL. Cell therapies for liver diseases. Liver Transpl. 2012;18(1):9-21.	44.	Faraj W, Dar F, Bartlett A, et al. Auxiliary liver trans-plantation for acute liver failure in children. Ann Surg. 2010;251(2):351-356.	45.	Wanless IR, Nakashima E, Sherman M. Regression of human cirrhosis. Morphologic features and the gen-esis of incomplete septal cirrhosis. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2000;124(11):1599-1607.	46.	Fattovich G, Giustina G, Degos F, et al. Morbidity and mortal-ity in compensated cirrhosis type C: a retrospective follow-up study of 384 patients. Gastroenterology. 1997;112(2):463-472.	47.	Rinella ME, Sanyal AJ. Management of NAFLD: a stage-based approach. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2016:13:196-205.	48.	Loomba R, Sanyal AJ. The global NAFLD epidemic. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2013;10:686-690.	49.	Michelotti GA, Machado MV, Diehl AM. NAFLD, NASH and liver cancer. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2013;10:656-665.	50.	Schuppan D, Afdhal NH. Liver cirrhosis. Lancet. 2008;371:838-851.	51.	Bhala N, Angulo P, van der Poorten D, et al. The natural his-tory of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease with advanced fibrosis or cirrhosis: an international collaborative study. Hepatology. 2011;54:1208-1216.	52.	Sanyal AJ, Banas C, Sargeant C, et al. Similarities and differ-ences in outcomes of cirrhosis due to nonalcoholic steatohepa-titis and hepatitis C. Hepatology. 2006;43:682-689.	53.	Lehmann K, Rickenbacher A, Weber A, et al. Chemotherapy before liver resection of colorectal metastases: friend or foe? Ann Surg. 2012;255:237-247.	54.	Vetelainen R, van Vliet A, Gouma DJ, van Gulik TM. Steatosis as a risk factor in liver surgery. Ann Surg. 2007;245:20-30.	55.	Reddy SK, Marsh JW, Varley PR, et al. Underlying steato-hepatitis, but not simple hepatic steatosis, increased morbid-ity after liver resection: a case-control study. Hepatology. 2012;56(6):221-230.	56.	Doberneck RC, Sterling WA, Jr, Allison DC. Morbidity and mortality after operation in nonbleeding cirrhotic patients. Am J Surg. 1983;146(3):306-309.	57.	Northup PG, Wanamaker RC, Lee VD, Adams RB, Berg CL. Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) predicts non-transplant surgical mortality in patients with cirrhosis. Ann Surg. 2005;242(2):244-251.	58.	Farnsworth N, Fagan SP, Berger DH, Awad SS. ChildTurcotte-Pugh versus MELD score as a predictor of outcome after elective and emergent surgery in cirrhotic patients. Am J Surg. 2004;188(5):580-583.	59.	Hanje AJ, Patel T. Preoperative evaluation of patients with liver disease. Nat Clin Pract Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2007;4(5):266-276.	60.	Shah V. Cellular and molecular basis of portal hypertension. Clin Liver Dis. 2001;5(3):629-644.	61.	Poynard T, Cales P, Pasta L, et al. Beta-adrenergic-antagonist drugs in the prevention of gastrointestinal bleeding in patients with cirrhosis and esophageal varices. An analysis of data and prognostic factors in 589 patients from four randomized clini-cal trials. Franco-Italian Multicenter Study Group. N Engl J Med. 1991;324(22):1532-1538.	62.	Garcia-Pagan JC, Bosch J. Endoscopic band ligation in the treatment of portal hypertension. Nat Clin Pract Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2005;2(11):526-535.	63.	Valla DC. The diagnosis and management of the Budd-Chiari syndrome: consensus and controversies. Hepatology. 2003;38(4):793-803.	64.	Henderson JM, Warren WD, Millikan WJ, Jr, et al. Surgical options, hematologic evaluation, and pathologic changes in Budd-Chiari syndrome. Am J Surg. 1990;159(1):41-50.	65.	Barnes PF, De Cock KM, Reynolds TN, Ralls PW. A com-parison of amebic and pyogenic abscess of the liver. Medicine (Baltimore). 1987;66(6):472-483.	66.	Pedrosa I, Saiz A, Arrazola J, Ferreiros J, Pedrosa CS. Hydatid disease: radiologic and pathologic features and complications. Radiographics. 2000;20(3):795-817.	67.	Khuroo MS, Zargar SA, Mahajan R. Hepatobiliary and pan-creatic ascariasis in India. Lancet. 1990;335(8704):1503-1506.	68.	Scaglione SJ, Lok AS. Effectiveness of hepatitis B treatment in clinical practice. Gastroenterology. 2012;142(6):1360-1368.	69.	Corey KE, Mendez-Navarro J, Gorospe EC, Zheng H, Chung RT. Early treatment improves outcomes in acute hepatitis C virus infection: a meta-analysis. J Viral Hepat. 2010;17(3):201-207.	70.	Tsung A, Geller DA. Workup of the incidental liver lesion. Adv Surg. 2005;39:331-341.	71.	Caremani M, Vincenti A, Benci A, Sassoli S, Tacconi D. Eco-graphic epidemiology of non-parasitic hepatic cysts. J Clin Ultrasound. 1993;21(2):115-118.	72.	Tahvanainen P, Tahvanainen E, Reijonen H, Halme L, Kaari-ainen H, Hockerstedt K. Polycystic liver disease is genetically heterogeneous: clinical and linkage studies in eight Finnish families. J Hepatol. 2003;38(1):39-43.	73.	Drenth JP, Chrispijn M, Nagorney DM, Kamath PS, Torres VE. Medical and surgical treatment options for polycystic liver disease. Hepatology. 2010;52(6):2223-2230.	74.	Robinson TN, Stiegmann GV, Everson GT. Laparo-scopic palliation of polycystic liver disease. Surg Endosc. 2005;19(1):130-132.	75.	Caroli J. Disease of the intrahepatic biliary tree. Clin Gastro-enterol. 1972;2:147-161.	76.	Yoon SS, Charny CK, Fong Y, et al. Diagnosis, management, and outcomes of 115 patients with hepatic hemangioma. J Am Coll Surg. 2003;197(3):392-402.	77.	Geller DA, Tsung A, Marsh JW, Dvorchik I, Gamblin TC, Carr BI. Outcome of 1000 liver cancer patients evaluated at the UPMC Liver Cancer Center. J Gastrointest Surg. 2006;10(1):63-68.	78.	International Agency for Research on Cancer. GLOBOCAN 2008. Available at: http://globocan.iarc.fr/. Accessed July 26, 2018.	79.	Liaw YF, Tai DI, Chu CM, et al. Early detection of hepatocel-lular carcinoma in patients with chronic type B hepatitis. A prospective study. Gastroenterology. 1986;90(2):263-267.	80.	Schwartz M, Roayaie S, Uva P. Treatment of HCC in patients awaiting liver transplantation. Am J Transplant. 2007;7(8):1875-1881.Brunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   138820/02/19   2:37 PM 1389LIVERCHAPTER 31	81.	Zarrinpar A, Kaldas F, Busuttil RW. Liver transplantation for hepatocellular carcinoma: an update. Hepatobiliary Pancreat Dis Int. 2011;10(3):234-242.	82.	Bruix J, Sherman M, American Association for the Study of Liver Disease. Management of hepatocellular carcinoma: an update. Hepatology. 2011;53(3):1020-1022. BCLC algo-rithm for management of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).	83.	DeOliveira ML, Kambakamba P, Clavien PA. Advances in liver surgery for cholangiocarcinoma. Curr Opin Gastroen-terol. 2013;29(3):293-298.	84.	Jarnagin WR, Fong Y, DeMatteo RP, et al. Staging, resect-ability, and outcome in 225 patients with hilar cholangiocarci-noma. Ann Surg. 2001;234(4):507-519.	85.	Hidalgo E, Asthana S, Nishio H, et al. Surgery for hilar chol-angiocarcinoma: the Leeds experience. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2008;34(7):787-794.	86.	Nagino M, Kamiya J, Nishio H, Ebata T, Arai T, Nimura Y. Two hundred forty consecutive portal vein embolizations before extended hepatectomy for biliary cancer: surgical outcome and long-term follow-up. Ann Surg. 2006;243(3): 364-372.	87.	Gores GJ, Nagorney DM, Rosen CB. Cholangiocarci-noma: is transplantation an option? For whom? J Hepatol. 2007;47(4):455-459.	88.	Marsh JW, Geller DA, Finkelstein SD, Donaldson JB, Dvor-chik I. Role of liver transplantation for hepatobiliary malignant disorders. Lancet Oncol. 2004;5(8):480-488.	89.	Rea DJ, Heimbach JK, Rosen CB, et al. Liver transplanta-tion with neoadjuvant chemoradiation is more effective than resection for hilar cholangiocarcinoma. Ann Surg. 2005;242(3):451-461.	90.	Hassoun Z, Gores GJ, Rosen CB. Preliminary experience with liver transplantation in selected patients with unre-sectable hilar cholangiocarcinoma. Surg Oncol Clin N Am. 2002;11(4):909-921.	91.	Darwish Murad S, Kim WR, Harnois DM, et al. Efficacy of neoadjuvant chemoradiation, followed by liver transplanta-tion, for perihilar cholangiocarcinoma at 12 US centers. Gas-troenterology. 2012;143(1):88-98.	92.	Weber SM, Jarnagin WR, Klimstra D, DeMatteo RP, Fong Y,  Blumgart LH. Intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma: resect-ability, recurrence pattern, and outcomes. J Am Coll Surg. 2001;193(4):384-391.	93.	Jan YY, Yeh CN, Yeh TS, Chen TC. Prognostic analysis of surgical treatment of peripheral cholangiocarcinoma: two decades of experience at Chang Gung Memorial Hospital. World J Gastroenterol. 2005;11(12):1779-1784.	94.	Hong JC, Jones CM, Duffy JP, et al. Comparative analysis of resection and liver transplantation for intrahepatic and hilar cholangiocarcinoma: a 24-year experience in a single center. Arch Surg. 2011;146(6):683-689.	95.	Smith GC, Parks RW, Madhavan KK, Garden OJ. A 10-year experience in the management of gallbladder cancer. HPB (Oxford). 2003;5(3):159-166.	96.	Bartlett DL, Fong Y, Fortner JG, Brennan MF, Blumgart LH. Long-term results after resection for gallbladder can-cer. Implications for staging and management. Ann Surg. 1996;224(5):639-646.	97.	Shoup M, Fong Y. Surgical indications and extent of resection in gallbladder cancer. Surg Oncol Clin N Am. 2002;11(4):985-994.	98.	Pawlik TM, Gleisner AL, Vigano L, et al. Incidence of finding residual disease for incidental gallbladder carci-noma: implications for re-resection. J Gastrointest Surg. 2007;11(11):1478-1486.	99.	Chan SY, Poon RT, Lo CM, Ng KK, Fan ST. Management of carcinoma of the gallbladder: a single-institution experience in 16 years. J Surg Oncol. 2008;97(2):156-164.	100.	Goetze TO, Paolucci V. Benefits of reoperation of T2 and more advanced incidental gallbladder carcinoma: analysis of the German registry. Ann Surg. 2008;247(1):104-108.	101.	Fong Y, Fortner J, Sun RL, Brennan MF, Blumgart LH. Clini-cal score for predicting recurrence after hepatic resection for metastatic colorectal cancer: analysis of 1001 consecutive cases. Ann Surg. 1999;230(3):309-318.	102.	Poston G, Adam R, Vauthey JN. Downstaging or downsizing: time for a new staging system in advanced colorectal cancer? J Clin Oncol. 2006;24(18):2702-2706.	103.	Minagawa M, Makuuchi M, Torzilli G, et al. Extension of the frontiers of surgical indications in the treatment of liver metastases from colorectal cancer: long-term results. Ann Surg. 2000;231(4):487-499.	104.	Kornprat P, Jarnagin WR, Gonen M, et al. Outcome after hepatectomy for multiple (four or more) colorectal metas-tases in the era of effective chemotherapy. Ann Surg Oncol. 2007;14(3):1151-1160.	105.	Charnsangavej C, Clary B, Fong Y, Grothey A, Pawlik TM, Choti MA. Selection of patients for resection of hepatic colorectal metastases: expert consensus statement. Ann Surg Oncol. 2006;13(10):1261-1268.	106.	Abdalla EK, Adam R, Bilchik AJ, Jaeck D, Vauthey JN, Mahvi D. Improving resectability of hepatic colorectal metastases: expert consensus statement. Ann Surg Oncol. 2006;13(10):1271-1280.	107.	Pawlik TM, Schulick RD, Choti MA. Expanding criteria for resectability of colorectal liver metastases. Oncologist. 2008;13(1):51-64. Summary of the paradigm shift for resection of colorectal cancer liver metastases based on adequate liver remnant rather than actual number of liver tumors.	108.	Clavien PA, Petrowsky H, DeOliveira ML, Graf R. Strategies for safer liver surgery and partial liver transplantation. N Engl J Med. 2007;356(15):1545-1559.	109.	Adam R, Wicherts DA, de Haas RJ, et al. Patients with initially unresectable colorectal liver metastases: is there a possibility of cure? J Clin Oncol. 2009;27(11):1829-1835.	110.	Que FG, Nagorney DM, Batts KP, Linz LJ, Kvols LK. Hepatic resection for metastatic neuroendocrine carcinomas. Am J Surg. 1995;169(1):36-42.	111.	Touzios JG, Kiely JM, Pitt SC, et al. Neuroendocrine hepatic metastases: does aggressive management improve survival? Ann Surg. 2005;241(5):776-783.	112.	Sarmiento JM, Heywood G, Rubin J, Ilstrup DM, Nagorney DM, Que FG. Surgical treatment of neuroendocrine metasta-ses to the liver: a plea for resection to increase survival. J Am Coll Surg. 2003;197(1):29-37.	113.	Kianmanesh R, Sauvanet A, Hentic O, et al. Two-step surgery for synchronous bilobar liver metastases from digestive endo-crine tumors: a safe approach for radical resection. Ann Surg. 2008;247(4):659-665.	114.	Mazzaferro V, Pulvirenti A, Coppa J. Neuroendocrine tumors metastatic to the liver: how to select patients for liver trans-plantation? J Hepatol. 2007;47(4):460-466.	115.	Adam R, Aloia T, Krissat J, et al. Is liver resection justified for patients with hepatic metastases from breast cancer? Ann Surg. 2006;244(6):897-907.	116.	Abbott DE, Brouquet A, Mittendorf EA, et al. Resection of liver metastases from breast cancer: estrogen receptor status and response to chemotherapy before metastasectomy define outcome. Surgery. 2012;151(5):710-716.	117.	Jarnagin W, Chapman WC, Curley S, et al. Surgical treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma: expert consensus statement. HPB (Oxford). 2010;12(5):302-310.	118.	Belghiti J, Hiramatsu K, Benoist S, Massault P, Sauvanet A, Farges O. Seven hundred forty-seven hepatectomies in the 1990s: an update to evaluate the actual risk of liver resection. J Am Coll Surg. 2000;191(1):38-46.Brunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   138920/02/19   2:37 PM 1390SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	119.	Jarnagin WR, Gonen M, Fong Y, et al. Improvement in perioperative outcome after hepatic resection: analysis of 1,803 consecutive cases over the past decade. Ann Surg. 2002;236(4):397-406.	120.	Imamura H, Seyama Y, Kokudo N, et al. One thousand fifty-six hepatectomies without mortality in 8 years. Arch Surg. 2003;138(11):1198-1206.	121.	Mullen JT, Ribero D, Reddy SK, et al. Hepatic insufficiency and mortality in 1,059 noncirrhotic patients undergoing major hepatectomy. J Am Coll Surg. 2007;204(5):854-862.	122.	Hamady ZZ, Cameron IC, Wyatt J, Prasad RK, Toogood GJ, Lodge JP. Resection margin in patients undergoing hepatec-tomy for colorectal liver metastasis: a critical appraisal of the 1 cm rule. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2006;32(5):557-563.	123.	Pawlik TM, Vauthey JN. Surgical margins during hepatic sur-gery for colorectal liver metastases: complete resection not mil-limeters defines outcome. Ann Surg Oncol. 2008;15(3):677-679.	124.	Andreou A, Aloia TA, Brouquet A, et al. Margin status remains an important determinant of survival after surgical resection of colorectal liver metastases in the era of modern chemotherapy. Ann Surg. 2013;257(6):1079-1088.	125.	Hemming AW, Mekeel KL, Zendejas I, Kim RD, Sicklick JK, Reed AI. Resection of the liver and inferior vena cava for hepatic malignancy. J Am Coll Surg. 2013;217:115-124.	126.	Schwartz M, Roayaie S, Konstadoulakis M. Strategies for the management of hepatocellular carcinoma. Nat Clin Pract Oncol. 2007;4(7):424-432. Excellent summary of the current strategies for multi-disciplinary management of hepa-tocellular carcinoma (HCC).	127.	Duffy JP, Vardanian A, Benjamin E, et al. Liver transplanta-tion criteria for hepatocellular carcinoma should be expanded: a 22-year experience with 467 patients at UCLA. Ann Surg. 2007;246(3):502-509.	128.	Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network. Available at: http://www.optn.org. Accessed May 6, 2017.	129.	Mazzaferro V, Regalia E, Doci R, et al. Liver transplanta-tion for the treatment of small hepatocellular carcinomas in patients with cirrhosis. N Engl J Med. 1996;334(11): 693-699. Landmark article showing excellent outcomes of liver transplantation for small HCC that established the size and tumor number criteria that was adopted by the MELD system and is now widely accepted.	130.	Wiesner RH, Freeman RB, Mulligan DC. Liver transplantation for hepatocellular cancer: the impact of the MELD allocation policy. Gastroenterology. 2004;127(5 suppl 1):S261-S267.	131.	de Villa V, Lo CM. Liver transplantation for hepatocellular carcinoma in Asia. Oncologist. 2007;12(11):1321-1331.	132.	McGahan JP, Browning PD, Brock JM, Tesluk H. Hepatic ablation using radiofrequency electrocautery. Invest Radiol. 1990;25(3):267-270.	133.	Rossi S, Fornari F, Pathies C, Buscarini L. Thermal lesions induced by 480 KHz localized current field in guinea pig and pig liver. Tumori. 1990;76(1):54-57.	134.	Curley SA, Izzo F, Delrio P, et al. Radiofrequency ablation of unresectable primary and metastatic hepatic malignancies: results in 123 patients. Ann Surg. 1999;230(1):1-8.	135.	Bilchik AJ, Wood TF, Allegra D, et al. Cryosurgical abla-tion and radiofrequency ablation for unresectable hepatic malignant neoplasms: a proposed algorithm. Arch Surg. 2000;135(6):657-662.	136.	Poon RT, Ng KK, Lam CM, et al. Learning curve for radio-frequency ablation of liver tumors: prospective analysis of initial 100 patients in a tertiary institution. Ann Surg. 2004;239(4):441-449.	137.	Abdalla EK, Vauthey JN, Ellis LM, et al. Recurrence and out-comes following hepatic resection, radiofrequency ablation, and combined resection/ablation for colorectal liver metasta-ses. Ann Surg. 2004;239(6):818-825.	138.	Sutherland LM, Williams JA, Padbury RT, Gotley DC,  Stokes B, Maddern GJ. Radiofrequency ablation of liver tumors: a systematic review. Arch Surg. 2006;141(2):181-190.	139.	Berber E, Siperstein AE. Perioperative outcome after laparo-scopic radiofrequency ablation of liver tumors: an analysis of 521 cases. Surg Endosc. 2007;21(4):613-618.	140.	Martin AP, Goldstein RM, Dempster J, et al. Radiofrequency thermal ablation of hepatocellular carcinoma before liver transplantation—a clinical and histological examination. Clin Transplant. 2006;20(6):695-705.	141.	Cheng BQ, Jia CQ, Liu CT, et al. Chemoembolization com-bined with radiofrequency ablation for patients with hepato-cellular carcinoma larger than 3 cm: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2008;299(14):1669-1677.	142.	Sucandy I, Cheek S, Golas BJ, Tsung A, Geller DA, Marsh JW. Longterm survival outcomes of patients undergoing treatment with radiofrequency ablation for hepatocellular carcinoma and metastatic colorectal cancer liver tumors. HPB (Oxford). 2016;18:756-763.	143.	Iannitti DA, Martin RC, Simon CJ, et al. Hepatic tumor abla-tion with clustered microwave antennae: the US Phase II trial. HPB (Oxford). 2007;9(2):120-124.	144.	Lo CM, Ngan H, Tso WK, et al. Randomized controlled trial of transarterial lipiodol chemoembolization for unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology. 2002;35(5):1164-1171.	145.	Llovet JM, Real MI, Montana X, et al. Arterial embolisation or chemoembolisation versus symptomatic treatment in patients with unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2002;359(9319):1734-1739.	146.	Takayasu K, Arii S, Ikai I, et al. Prospective cohort study of transarterial chemoembolization for unresectable hepa-tocellular carcinoma in 8510 patients. Gastroenterology. 2006;131(2):461-469.	147.	Sotiropoulos GC, Druhe N, Sgourakis G, et al. Liver transplan-tation, liver resection, and transarterial chemoembolization for hepatocellular carcinoma in cirrhosis: which is the best onco-logical approach? Dig Dis Sci. 2009;54(10):2264-2273.	148.	Lewandowski RJ, Geschwind JF, Liapi E, Salem R. Transcath-eter intraarterial therapies: rationale and overview. Radiology. 2011;259(3):641-657.	149.	Kemeny N, Huang Y, Cohen AM, et al. Hepatic arterial infusion of chemotherapy after resection of hepatic metastases from colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 1999;341(27):2039-2048.	150.	Ibrahim SM, Lewandowski RJ, Sato KT, et al. Radioem-bolization for the treatment of unresectable hepatocellu-lar carcinoma: a clinical review. World J Gastroenterol. 2008;14(11):1664-1669.	151.	Gulec SA, Fong Y. Yttrium 90 microsphere selective inter-nal radiation treatment of hepatic colorectal metastases. Arch Surg. 2007;142(7):675-682.	152.	Sato KT, Lewandowski RJ, Mulcahy MF, et al. Unresectable chemorefractory liver metastases: radioembolization with 90Y microspheres—safety, efficacy, and survival. Radiology. 2008;247(2):507-515.	153.	Tse RV, Hawkins M, Lockwood G, et al. Phase I study of indi-vidualized stereotactic body radiotherapy for hepatocellular carcinoma and intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26(4):657-664.	154.	Mendez Romero A, Wunderink W, Hussain SM, et al. Ste-reotactic body radiation therapy for primary and metastatic liver tumors: a single institution phase I-II study. Acta Oncol. 2006;45(7):831-837.	155.	Chapman WC, Majella Doyle MB, Stuart JE, et al. Outcomes of neoadjuvant transarterial chemoembolization to downstage hepatocellular carcinoma before liver transplantation. Ann Surg. 2008;248(4):617-625.	156.	Yao FY, Kerlan RK, Jr, Hirose R, et al. Excellent outcome following down-staging of hepatocellular carcinoma prior to Brunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   139020/02/19   2:37 PM 1391LIVERCHAPTER 31liver transplantation: an intention-to-treat analysis. Hepatology. 2008;48(3):819-827.	157.	Llovet JM, Ricci S, Mazzaferro V, et al. Sorafenib in advanced hepatocellular carcinoma. N Engl J Med. 2008;359(4):378-390. Randomized clinical trial that showed benefits of Sorafenib compared to placebo in advanced HCC and led to FDA drug approval.	158.	American Hepato-Pancreato-Biliary Association. IHPBA Brisbane liver terminology. Available at: http://www.ahpba.org/resources/liver.asp. Accessed June 4, 2013.	159.	Pang YY. The Brisbane 2000 terminology of liver anatomy and resections. HPB (Oxford). 2002;4(2):99-100; author reply 99.	160.	Strasberg SM. Nomenclature of hepatic anatomy and resec-tions: a review of the Brisbane 2000 system. J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Surg. 2005;12(5):351-355.	161.	Weber JC, Navarra G, Jiao LR, Nicholls JP, Jensen SL, Habib NA. New technique for liver resection using heat coagulative necrosis. Ann Surg. 2002;236(5):560-563.	162.	Geller DA, Tsung A, Maheshwari V, Rutstein LA, Fung JJ, Marsh JW. Hepatic resection in 170 patients using saline-cooled radiofrequency coagulation. HPB (Oxford). 2005;7(3): 208-213.	163.	Saiura A, Yamamoto J, Koga R, et al. Usefulness of LigaSure for liver resection: analysis by randomized clinical trial. Am J Surg. 2006;192(1):41-45.	164.	McEntee GP, Nagorney DM. Use of vascular staplers in major hepatic resections. Br J Surg. 1991;78(1):40-41.	165.	Jurim O, Colonna JO II, Colquhoun SD, Shaked A,  Busuttil RW. A stapling technique for hepatic resection. J Am Coll Surg. 1994;178(5):510-511.	166.	Kaneko H, Otsuka Y, Takagi S, Tsuchiya M, Tamura A, Shiba T. Hepatic resection using stapling devices. Am J Surg. 2004;187(2):280-284.	167.	Schemmer P, Friess H, Hinz U, et al. Stapler hepatectomy is a safe dissection technique: analysis of 300 patients. World  J Surg. 2006;30(3):419-430.	168.	Balaa FK, Gamblin TC, Tsung A, Marsh JW, Geller DA. Right hepatic lobectomy using the staple technique in 101 patients.  J Gastrointest Surg. 2008;12(2):338-343.	169.	Blumgart L. Liver resection for benign disease and for liver and biliary disease. In: Blumgart L, ed. Surgery of the Liver and Biliary Tract. 3rd ed. London: WB Saunders; 2000:1639.	170.	Launois B, Jamieson GG. The importance of Glisson’s capsule and its sheaths in the intrahepatic approach to resection of the liver. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1992;174(1):7-10.	171.	Azoulay D, Marin-Hargreaves G, Castaing D, Adam R, Savier E, Bismuth H. The anterior approach: the right way for right massive hepatectomy. J Am Coll Surg. 2001;192(3):412-417.	172.	Liu CL, Fan ST, Cheung ST, Lo CM, Ng IO, Wong J. Anterior approach versus conventional approach right hepatic resection for large hepatocellular carcinoma: a prospective randomized controlled study. Ann Surg. 2006;244(2):194-203.	173.	Makuuchi M, Mori T, Gunven P, Yamazaki S, Hasegawa H. Safety of hemihepatic vascular occlusion during resection of the liver. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1987;164(2):155-158.	174.	Man K, Fan ST, Ng IO, Lo CM, Liu CL, Wong J. Prospective evaluation of Pringle maneuver in hepatectomy for liver tumors by a randomized study. Ann Surg. 1997;226(6):704-711.	175.	Belghiti J, Noun R, Malafosse R, et al. Continuous versus intermittent portal triad clamping for liver resection: a con-trolled study. Ann Surg. 1999;229(3):369-375.	176.	Figueras J, Llado L, Ruiz D, et al. Complete versus selective portal triad clamping for minor liver resections: a prospective randomized trial. Ann Surg. 2005;241(4):582-590.	177.	Clavien PA, Yadav S, Sindram D, Bentley RC. Protec-tive effects of ischemic preconditioning for liver resection performed under inflow occlusion in humans. Ann Surg. 2000;232(2):155-162.	178.	Clavien PA, Selzner M, Rudiger HA, et al. A prospective ran-domized study in 100 consecutive patients undergoing major liver resection with versus without ischemic preconditioning. Ann Surg. 2003;238(6):843-850.	179.	Kinoshita H, Sakai K, Hirohashi K, Igawa S, Yamasaki O, Kubo S. Preoperative portal vein embolization for hepatocel-lular carcinoma. World J Surg. 1986;10(5):803-808.	180.	Makuuchi M, Thai BL, Takayasu K, et al. Preoperative por-tal embolization to increase safety of major hepatectomy for hilar bile duct carcinoma: a preliminary report. Surgery. 1990;107(5):521-527.	181.	Abdalla EK, Hicks ME, Vauthey JN. Portal vein emboliza-tion: rationale, technique and future prospects. Br J Surg. 2001;88(2):165-175.	182.	Chun YS, Ribero D, Abdalla EK, et al. Comparison of two methods of future liver remnant volume measurement. J Gas-trointest Surg. 2008;12(1):123-128.	183.	Abdalla EK, Barnett CC, Doherty D, Curley SA, Vauthey JN. Extended hepatectomy in patients with hepatobiliary malig-nancies with and without preoperative portal vein emboliza-tion. Arch Surg. 2002;137(6):675-680.	184.	Vauthey JN, Chaoui A, Do KA, et al. Standardized mea-surement of the future liver remnant prior to extended liver resection: methodology and clinical associations. Surgery. 2000;127(5):512-519.	185.	Farges O, Belghiti J, Kianmanesh R, et al. Portal vein emboli-zation before right hepatectomy: prospective clinical trial. Ann Surg. 2003;237(2):208-217.	186.	Hemming AW, Reed AI, Howard RJ, et al. Preoperative por-tal vein embolization for extended hepatectomy. Ann Surg. 2003;237(5):686-691.	187.	Azoulay D, Castaing D, Smail A, et al. Resection of nonre-sectable liver metastases from colorectal cancer after percu-taneous portal vein embolization. Ann Surg. 2000;231(4): 480-486.	188.	Kubota K, Makuuchi M, Kusaka K, et al. Measurement of liver volume and hepatic functional reserve as a guide to decision-making in resectional surgery for hepatic tumors. Hepatology. 1997;26(5):1176-1181.	189.	Ribero D, Abdalla EK, Madoff DC, Donadon M, Loyer EM, Vauthey JN. Portal vein embolization before major hepatec-tomy and its effects on regeneration, resectability and out-come. Br J Surg. 2007;94(11):1386-1394.	190.	Covey AM, Brown KT, Jarnagin WR, et al. Combined portal vein embolization and neoadjuvant chemotherapy as a treat-ment strategy for resectable hepatic colorectal metastases. Ann Surg. 2008;247(3):451-455.	191.	Hwang S, Lee SG, Ko GY, et al. Sequential preoperative ipsi-lateral hepatic vein embolization after portal vein embolization to induce further liver regeneration in patients with hepatobili-ary malignancy. Ann Surg. 2009;249(4):608-616.	192.	Jaeck D, Oussoultzoglou E, Rosso E, Greget M, Weber JC, Bachellier P. A two-stage hepatectomy procedure combined with portal vein embolization to achieve curative resection for initially unresectable multiple and bilobar colorectal liver metastases. Ann Surg. 2004;240(6):1037-1049.	193.	Adam R, Miller R, Pitombo M, et al. Two-stage hepatec-tomy approach for initially unresectable colorectal hepatic metastases. Surg Oncol Clin North Am. 2007;16(3):525-536. Very useful summary of the two-stage hepatectomy approach for resection of hepatic colorectal cancer metastases.	194.	Schnitzbauer AA, Lang SA, Goessmann H, et al. Right portal vein ligation combined with in situ splitting induces rapid left lateral liver lobe hypertrophy enabling 2-staged extended right hepatic resection in small-for-size settings. Ann Surg. 2012;255(3):405-414. Initial paper describing the ALPPS technique to induce massive future liver remnant hypertrophy and outcomes.Brunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   139120/02/19   2:37 PM 1392SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	195.	Adam R, Bismuth H, Castaing D, et al. Repeat hepatectomy for colorectal liver metastases. Ann Surg. 1997;225(1):51-60.	196.	Petrowsky H, Gonen M, Jarnagin W, et al. Second liver resec-tions are safe and effective treatment for recurrent hepatic metastases from colorectal cancer: a bi-institutional analysis. Ann Surg. 2002;235(6):863-871.	197.	Sa Cunha A, Laurent C, Rault A, Couderc P, Rullier E, Saric J.  A second liver resection due to recurrent colorectal liver metastases. Arch Surg. 2007;142(12):1144-1149.	198.	Antoniou A, Lovegrove RE, Tilney HS, et al. Meta-analysis of clinical outcome after first and second liver resection for colorectal metastases. Surgery. 2007;141(1):9-18.	199.	Nakajima Y, Ko S, Kanamura T, et al. Repeat liver resec-tion for hepatocellular carcinoma. J Am Coll Surg. 2001;192(3):339-344.	200.	Itamoto T, Nakahara H, Amano H, et al. Repeat hepatec-tomy for recurrent hepatocellular carcinoma. Surgery. 2007;141(5):589-597.	201.	Minagawa M, Makuuchi M, Takayama T, Kokudo N. Selec-tion criteria for repeat hepatectomy in patients with recurrent hepatocellular carcinoma. Ann Surg. 2003;238(5):703-710.	202.	Cherqui D, Husson E, Hammoud R, et al. Laparoscopic liver resections: a feasibility study in 30 patients. Ann Surg. 2000;232(6):753-762.	203.	Reddy SK, Tsung A, Geller DA. Laparoscopic liver resection. World J Surg. 2011;35(7):1478-1486.	204.	Nguyen KT, Gamblin TC, Geller DA. World review of laparoscopic liver resection – 2,804 patients. Ann Surg, 2009;250:831-841. Comprehensive review of the indications, techniques, benefits, and outcomes of laparoscopic liver resection.	205.	Koffron AJ, Auffenberg G, Kung R, Abecassis M. Evaluation of 300 minimally invasive liver resections at a single institu-tion: less is more. Ann Surg. 2007;246(3):385-392.	206.	Buell JF, Cherqui D, Geller DA, et al. The international posi-tion on laparoscopic liver surgery: the Louisville statement, 2008. Ann Surg. 2009;250:825-830.	207.	Wakabayashi G, Cherqui D, Geller DA, et al. Recommen-dations for laparoscopic liver resection: a report from the second international consensus conference held in Morioka. Ann Surg. 2015;261:619-629. Up-to-date recommendations from the second international consensus conference consist-ing of a 9-member jury and an expert panel that addressed 17 questions for laparoscopic liver resection.	208.	Ciria R, Cherqui D, Geller DA, Briceno J, Wakabayashi G. Comparative short term benefits of laparoscopic liver resec-tion: 9,000 cases and climbing. Ann Surg. 2016;263:761-777.	209.	Cardinal JS, Reddy SK, Tsung A, Marsh JW, Geller DA. Lap-aroscopic major hepatectomy: pure laparoscopic approach versus hand-assisted technique. J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Sci. 2013;20:114-119.	210.	Cheek SM, Sucandy I, Geller DA. Hand-assisted laparoscopic left hepatectomy: how I do it. J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Sci. 2016;23(12):E30-E32.	211.	Tsung A, Geller DA, Sukato DC, et al. Robotic versus lapa-roscopic hepatectomy: a matched comparison. Ann Surg. 2014;259:549-555.	212.	Nguyen KT, Marsh JW, Tsung A, Steel JL, Gamblin TC, Geller DA. Comparative benefits of laparoscopic versus open hepatic resection: a critical appraisal. Arch Surg. 2011;146:348-356.	213.	Takahara T, Wakabayashi G, Beppu T, et al. Long-term and perioperative outcomes of laparoscopic versus open liver resection for hepatocellular carcinoma with propensity score matching: a multi-institutional Japanese study. J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Sci. 2015;22:721-727.	214.	Zhou YM, Shao WY, Zhao YF, Xu DH, Li B. Meta-analysis of laparoscopic versus open resection for hepatocellular carci-noma. Dig Dis Sci. 2011;56(7):1937-1943.	215.	Schiffman SC, Kim KH, Tsung A, Marsh JW, Geller DA. Laparoscopic versus open liver resection for metastatic colorectal cancer: a meta-analysis of 610 patients. Surgery. 2015;157:211-222.	216.	Vigano L, Laurent A, Tayar C, et al. The learning curve in laparoscopic liver resection: improved feasibility and repro-ducibility. Ann Surg 2009;250:772-782.	217.	Brown KM, Geller DA. What is the learning curve for laparoscopic major hepatectomy? J Gastrointest Surg. 2016;20:1065-1071.	218.	Dagher I, O’Rourke N, Geller DA, et al. Laparoscopic major hepatectomy: an evolution in standard of care. Ann Surg. 2009;250:856-860.	219.	Lin NC, Nitta H, Wakabayashi G. Laparoscopic major hepa-tectomy: a systematic literature review and comparison of 3 techniques. Ann Surg. 2013;257:205-213.	220.	Vanounou T, Steel JL, Nguyen KT, Tsung A, Marsh JW, Geller DA, Gamblin TC. Comparing the clinical and economic impact of laparoscopic versus open liver resection. Ann Surg Oncol. 2010;17:998-1009.	221.	Cleary SP, Han HS, Yamamoto M, Wakabayashi G, Asbun HJ.  The comparative costs of laparoscopic and open liver resec-tion: a report for the 2nd International Consensus Con-ference on Laparoscopic Liver Resection. Surg Endosc. 2016;30(11):4691-4696.	222.	Cherqui D, Soubrane O, Husson E, et al. Laparoscopic living donor hepatectomy for liver transplantation in children. Lancet 2002;359:392-396.	223.	Koffron AJ, Kung R, Baker T, Fryer J, Clark L, Abecassis M. Laparoscopic-assisted right lobe donor hepatectomy. Am J Transplant. 2006;6:2522-2525.	224.	Soubrane O, Perdigao Cotta F, Scatton O. Pure laparo-scopic right hepatectomy in a living donor. Am J Transplant. 2013;13:2467-2471.Brunicardi_Ch31_p1345-p1392.indd   139220/02/19   2:37 PM
# Chunk 8934
Gallbladder and the Extrahepatic Biliary SystemKelly R. Haisley and John G. Hunter 32chapterANATOMYGallbladderThe gallbladder is a pear-shaped sac that measures around 7 to 10 cm long, with an average capacity of 30 to 50 mL. When obstructed, the gallbladder can distend markedly and contain up to 300 mL of fluid. The gallbladder is located in an anatomic fossa on the inferior surface of the liver. Cantle’s line, a vertical plane running from the gallbladder fossa anteriorly to the infe-rior vena cava (IVC) posteriorly divides the liver into right and left lobes. The gallbladder itself is divided into four anatomic areas: the fundus, the body, the infundibulum, and the neck. The fundus is the rounded, blind end that normally extends 1 to 2 cm beyond the liver’s margin and contains most of the smooth muscle of the organ. The body functions as the main storage area and contains most of the elastic tissue allowing for disten-tion. As the body tapers towards the neck of the gallbladder, a mucosal outpouching is present at the junction of the neck and the cystic duct, known as the infundibulum or Hartmann’s pouch. Beyond this, the neck of the gallbladder lies in the deep-est part of the gallbladder fossa and can extend slightly into the free portion of the hepatoduodenal ligament, where it connects with the cystic duct (Fig. 32-1).1The same peritoneal lining that covers the liver extends to cover the fundus and the inferior surface of the gallblad-der. Occasionally, part or all of the gallbladder is embedded deep inside the liver parenchyma (an intrahepatic gallbladder). Rarely, the gallbladder has a complete peritoneal covering on all sides and is suspended in a mesentery off the inferior surface of the liver.The mucosal lining of the gallbladder is formed by a single, highly redundant, simple columnar epithelium that contains cholesterol and fat globules. The mucus secreted into the gall-bladder originates in tubuloalveolar glands that are found in the mucosal lining of the infundibulum and neck of the gallbladder, but are absent from the body and fundus. The epithelial lining of the gallbladder is supported by a lamina propria. The gallblad-der differs histologically from the rest of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract in that it lacks a muscularis mucosa and submucosa. The muscular layer has circular, longitudinal, and oblique fibers, but without well-defined layers. The adventitia contains connective tissue, nerves, vessels, lymphatics, and adipocytes. The gallbladder is covered by serosa except where the gallblad-der is embedded in the liver.The cystic artery that supplies the gallbladder is usually a branch of the right hepatic artery (>90% of the time). The course of the cystic artery may vary, but it nearly always is found within the hepatocystic triangle (triangle of Calot), the area bound by the cystic duct, common hepatic duct, and the inferior edge of the liver. When the cystic artery reaches the neck of the gall-bladder, it divides into anterior and posterior divisions. Venous return is carried either through small veins that enter directly into the liver or, rarely, to a large cystic vein that carries blood back to the portal vein. Gallbladder lymphatics drain into nodes Anatomy	1393Gallbladder / 1393Bile Ducts / 1394Anatomic Variants / 1396Physiology	1396Bile Formation and Composition / 1396Gallbladder Function / 1397Sphincter of Oddi / 1397Diagnostic Studies	1398Blood Tests / 1398Transabdominal Ultrasonography / 1398Computed Tomography / 1398Hepatobiliary Scintigraphy / 1399Magnetic Resonance Imaging / 1399Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography / 1400Endoscopic Choledochoscopy / 1400Endoscopic Ultrasound / 1401Percutaneous Transhepatic Cholangiography / 1401Gallstone Disease	1401Prevalence and Incidence / 1401Natural History / 1401Gallstone Formation / 1402Symptomatic Gallstones / 1404Cholangiohepatitis / 1410Procedural Interventions  for Gallstone Disease	1410Percutaneous Transhepatic Cholecystostomy Tubes / 1410Endoscopic Interventions / 1410Cholecystectomy / 1410Common Bile Duct Exploration / 1413Common Bile Duct Drainage  Procedures / 1414Other Benign Diseases  and Lesions	1414Biliary Dyskinesia and Sphincter  of Oddi Dysfunction / 1414Acalculous Cholecystitis / 1415Choledochal (Biliary) Cysts / 1417Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis / 1417Bile Duct Strictures / 1418Injury to the Biliary Tract	1419Gallbladder / 1419Extrahepatic Bile Ducts / 1419Tumors	1421Carcinoma of the Gallbladder / 1421Cholangiocarcinoma / 1423Brunicardi_Ch32_p1393-p1428.indd   139311/02/19   2:42 PM 1394at the neck of the gallbladder. Frequently, a visible lymph node (Lund’s or Mascagni’s node, often referred to as Calot’s node) overlies the insertion of the cystic artery into the gallbladder wall. The gallbladder receives parasympathetic, sympathetic and sensory innervation through nerve fibers running largely through the gastro hepatic ligament. Parasympathetic (cholinergic) fibers arise from the hepatic branches of the vagus nerve to stimulate activity in the gallbladder, bile ducts, and liver. These vagal branches also have peptide-containing nerves contain-ing agents such as substance P, somatostatin, enkephalins, and vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP).2 The sympathetic and sensory braches of the gallbladder, liver, and bile ducts pass through the celiac plexus and control gallbladder relaxation and mediate the pain of biliary colic.Bile DuctsThe extrahepatic biliary tree consists of the right and left hepatic ducts, the common hepatic duct, the cystic duct, and the com-mon bile duct. Exiting the liver, the left hepatic duct is longer than the right and has a greater propensity for dilatation as a consequence of distal obstruction. The two ducts join close to their emergence from the liver to form the common hepatic duct. The common hepatic duct typically extends 1 to 4 cm, has a diameter of approximately 4 mm, and lies anterior to the portal vein and to the right of the hepatic artery.The cystic duct exits the gallbladder and joins the common hepatic duct at an acute angle to form the common bile duct. The segment of the cystic duct immediately adjacent to the gall-bladder neck bears a variable number of mucosal folds called the spiral valves of Heister. While they do not have any valvular function, they can make cannulation of the cystic duct difficult. The length and course of the cystic duct can be quite variable. It may be short or absent and have a high union with the hepatic duct, or it may be long and running parallel to, behind, or spiral-ing around to the common hepatic duct before joining it, some-times as far distally as at the duodenum. Variations of the cystic duct and its point of union with the common hepatic duct are surgically important and misidentification can lead to bile duct injuries (Fig. 32-2).The union of the cystic duct and the common hepatic duct marks the start of the common bile duct. This segment is typi-cally about 7 to 11 cm in length and 5 to 10 mm in diameter, ijoklmabdefgchqrptnsFigure 32-1. Anterior aspect of the biliary anatomy. a = right hepatic duct; b = left hepatic duct; c = common hepatic duct; d = portal vein; e = proper hepatic artery; f = gastroduodenal artery; g = right gastro-epiploic artery; h = common bile duct; i = fundus of the gallbladder;  j = body of gallbladder; k = infundibulum of the gallbladder; l = cystic  duct; m = cystic artery; n = superior pancreaticoduodenal artery;  o = neck of the gallbladder; p = pancreatic duct; q = common hepatic artery; r = right gastric artery; s = ampulla of Vater; t = supraduodenal artery. Note the situation of the hepatic bile duct confluence anterior to the right branch of the portal vein, and the posterior course of the right hepatic artery behind the common hepatic duct.Key Points1	The physiology of the gallbladder, biliary tree, and sphincter of Oddi are regulated by a complex interplay of hormones and neuronal inputs designed to coordinate bile release with food consumption. Dysfunctions related to this activity are linked to the development of gallbladder pathologies as de-scribed in this chapter.2	In Western countries, the most common type of gallstones are cholesterol stones. The pathogenesis of these stones relates to supersaturation of bile with cholesterol and sub-sequent precipitation.3	Laparoscopic cholecystectomy has been demonstrated to be safe and effective, and it has become the treatment of choice for symptomatic gallstones. Knowledge of the various ana-tomic anomalies of the cystic duct and artery is critical in guiding the dissection of these structures and avoiding injury to the common bile duct during cholecystectomy.4	Common bile duct injuries, although uncommon, can be devastating to patients. Proper exposure of the hepatocystic (Calot’s) triangle to obtain the critical view of safety and careful identification of the anatomic structures are keys to avoiding these injuries. Once a bile duct injury is diag-nosed, the best outcomes are seen at large referral centers with experienced biliary surgeons, and patient transfer may be required.5	The main risk factor for gallbladder disease in Western coun-tries is cholelithiasis. The main complications include cho-lecystitis, choledocholithiasis, cholangitis, and biliary pancreatitis. Cholelithiasis is also the major risk factor for the development of gallbladder cancer.6	Carcinomas of the gallbladder or bile ducts generally have a poor prognosis because patients usually present late in the disease process and have poor response to chemotherapy and radiation. Surgery offers the best chance for survival and has good long-term outcomes in patients with early-stage disease.Brunicardi_Ch32_p1393-p1428.indd   139411/02/19   2:42 PM 1395GALLBLADDER AND THE EXTRAHEPATIC BILIARY SYSTEMCHAPTER 32though its diameter can increase slightly with age and follow-ing cholecystectomy. The upper third (supraduodenal portion) passes downward in the free edge of the hepatoduodenal liga-ment, to the right of the hepatic artery and anterior to the portal vein. The middle third (retroduodenal portion) of the common bile duct curves behind the first portion of the duodenum and diverges laterally from the portal vein and the hepatic arteries. The lower third (pancreatic portion) can curve behind the head of the pancreas in a groove, or traverse through it to enter the wall of the second portion of the duodenum. The duct then runs obliquely downward within the wall of the duodenum for 1 to 2 cm before opening on a papilla of mucous membrane (ampulla of Vater), about 10 cm distal to the pylorus.The union of the common bile duct and the main pan-creatic duct follows one of three configurations. In about 70% of people, these ducts unite outside the duodenal wall and tra-verse the duodenal wall as a single duct. In about 20%, they join within the duodenal wall and have a short or no common duct, but open through the same opening into the duodenum. In about 10%, they exit via separate openings into the duodenum, termed pancreas divisum. The sphincter of Oddi, a thick coat of circular smooth muscle, surrounds the common bile duct at the ampulla of Vater (Fig. 32-3). It controls the flow of bile, and in some cases pancreatic juice, into the duodenum.The extrahepatic bile ducts are lined by a columnar mucosa with numerous mucous glands that are concentrated in the com-mon bile duct. A fibro areolar tissue containing scant smooth muscle cells surrounds the mucosa. A distinct muscle layer is not present in the human common bile duct. The arterial supply to the bile ducts is derived from the gastroduodenal and the right hepatic arteries, with major trunks running along the medial and lateral walls of the common duct (sometimes referred to as 3 o’clock and 9 o’clock). The nerve supply to the common bile duct is the same as for the gallbladder, with the density of nerve fibers and ganglia increasing near the sphincter of Oddi.1,2ABCDEFGHFigure 32-2. Variations of the cystic duct anatomy. A. Low junction between the cystic duct and common hepatic duct. B. Cystic duct adher-ent to the common hepatic duct. C. High junction between the cystic and the common hepatic duct. D. Cystic duct drains into right hepatic duct. E. Long cystic duct that joins common hepatic duct behind the duodenum. F. Absence of cystic duct. G. Cystic duct crosses posterior to common hepatic duct and joins it anteriorly. H. Cystic duct courses anterior to common hepatic duct and joins it posteriorly.Pancreatic ductCommonbile duct Sphincterof OddiDuodenumAmpulla ofVaterDuodenal wallFigure 32-3. The sphincter of Oddi.Brunicardi_Ch32_p1393-p1428.indd   139511/02/19   2:43 PM 1396SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIABCDEFFigure 32-5. Variations in the arterial supply to the gallbladder. A. Cystic artery from right hepatic artery, about 80% to 90%. B. Cystic artery off the right hepatic artery arising from the superior mesenteric artery (accessory or replaced), about 10%. C. Two cystic arteries, one from the right hepatic, the other from the common hepatic artery, rare. D. Two cystic arteries, one from the right hepatic, the other from the left hepatic artery, rare. E. The cystic artery branching from the right hepatic artery and running anterior to the common hepatic duct, rare. F. Two cystic arteries arising from the right hepatic artery, rare.Anatomic VariantsThe classic description of the extrahepatic biliary tree and its arteries applies only in about one-third of patients.3 The gall-bladder may have abnormal positions, be intrahepatic, be rudi-mentary (a small, nonfunctional hypoplastic remnant), or have anomalous forms or duplications. A partially or completely intrahepatic gallbladder is associated with an increased inci-dence of cholelithiasis, and may be encountered at the time of cholecystectomy. Isolated congenital absence of the gallblad-der is very rare, with a reported incidence of 0.03%. Before the diagnosis is made, the presence of an intrahepatic gallbladder or anomalous position must first be ruled out. Duplication of the gallbladder with two separate cavities and two separate cystic ducts has an incidence of about one in every 4000 persons. This occurs in two major varieties: the more common form in which each gallbladder has its own cystic duct that empties indepen-dently into the same or different parts of the extrahepatic biliary tree, and the less common variant in which the two cystic ducts merge before they enter the common bile duct. Duplication is only clinically important when some pathologic process affects one or both organs. Even rarer variants include a left-sided gallbladder (often with a cystic duct that empties into the left hepatic or common bile duct), retrodisplacement of the gall-bladder at the posterior-inferior surface of the liver, transverse positioning of the gallbladder, or a floating gallbladder in which the gallbladder is hanging by a mesentery (Fig. 32-4).Additional small bile ducts (of Luschka) may drain directly from the liver fossa into the body of the gallbladder. If present, but not recognized at the time of a cholecystectomy, a bile leak and subsequent accumulation of bile (biloma) may occur in the abdomen. An accessory right hepatic duct occurs in about 5% of cases. Variations in how the common bile duct enters the duode-num are described earlier, in the “Bile Ducts” section.Anomalies of the hepatic artery and the cystic artery are quite common, occurring in as many as 50% of cases. While the right hepatic artery usually originates from the proper hepatic branch of the celiac trunk, up to 20% of patients will have a replaced right hepatic artery coming off the superior mesenteric artery. In about 5% of cases, there are two right hepatic arteries, one from the proper hepatic artery and the other from the superior mesenteric artery (accessory right hepatic artery). While the right hepatic artery typically runs posterior to the bile ducts, variations may allow it to course anterior to the common duct, making it vulnerable during surgical procedures, particularly if it runs par-allel to the cystic duct or in the mesentery of the gallbladder. The cystic artery arises from the right hepatic artery in about 90% of cases, but it may arise from the left hepatic, common hepatic, gastroduodenal, or superior mesenteric arteries (Fig. 32-5).3Figure 32-4. Floating gallbladder suspended on mesenteryPHYSIOLOGYBile Formation and CompositionThe liver produces bile continuously and excretes it into the bile canaliculi. Bile leaves the liver through the right and left hepatic ducts, into the common hepatic duct and then the com-mon bile duct. With an intact sphincter of Oddi, tonic contrac-tion diverts bile flow into the gallbladder for storage, while mealtime stimulation allows for its passage into the duode-num. The normal adult consuming an average diet produces 500 to 1000 mL of bile a day. The secretion of bile is respon-sive to neurogenic, hormonal, and chemical stimuli. Parasym-pathetic stimulation from the hepatic branches of the vagus nerve increases secretion of bile, whereas sympathetic nerve stimulation via the celiac plexus results in decreased bile flow. Hydrochloric acid, partly digested proteins, and fatty acids entering the duodenum from the stomach after a meal stimulate the release of secretin from the S-cells of the duodenum, and increases bile production and flow.Bile is mainly composed of water, mixed with bile salts and acids, cholesterol, phospholipids (lecithin), proteins, and bilirubin. It also contains several minor components such as Brunicardi_Ch32_p1393-p1428.indd   139611/02/19   2:43 PM 1397GALLBLADDER AND THE EXTRAHEPATIC BILIARY SYSTEMCHAPTER 32electrolytes and vitamins. Sodium, potassium, calcium, and chlorine have the same concentration in bile as in plasma or extracellular fluid. The pH of hepatic bile is usually neutral or slightly alkaline, though a high protein diet will shift the bile to a more acidic ph. The primary bile salts, cholate and che-nodeoxycholate, are synthesized in the liver from cholesterol metabolism. They are conjugated there with taurine and glycine and act within the bile as anions (bile acids) that are balanced by sodium. These bile acids are then excreted into the bile by hepatocytes and aid in the digestion and absorption of fats in the intestines.4 About 80% of the secreted conjugated bile acids are reabsorbed in the terminal ileum. The remainder is dehydroxyl-ated (deconjugated) by gut bacteria, forming the secondary bile acids deoxycholate and lithocholate. These are absorbed in the colon and can then be transported back to the liver. Eventu-ally, about 95% of the bile acid pool is reabsorbed, the so-called enterohepatic circulation. Only a small amount (5%) is excreted in the stool, allowing the relatively small quantity of bile acids produced to have maximal effect.The color of the bile is due to the presence of the pigment bilirubin (orange or yellow) and its oxidized form, biliverdin (green), which are the metabolic products of the breakdown of hemoglobin, and are present in bile in concentrations 100 times greater than in plasma. Bilirubin conjugated in the liver can be excreted through the urine as urobilinogen (yellow). Remaining excess bile pigment passes into the intestines where bacteria con-vert it into stercobilinogen (brown), which is excreted through the stool.Gallbladder FunctionThe gallbladder, bile ducts, and the sphincter of Oddi act together to store and regulate the flow of bile. The main function of the gallbladder is to concentrate and store hepatic bile in order to deliver it in a coordinated fashion to the duode-num in response to a meal. Absorption and Secretion. In the fasting state, approxi-mately 80% of the bile secreted by the liver is stored in the gallbladder. This storage is made possible by the fact that the gallbladder mucosa has the greatest absorptive power per unit area of any structure in the body. It rapidly absorbs sodium, chloride, and water against significant gradients, concentrating the bile as much as 10-fold and leading to a marked change in bile composition. This rapid absorptive capacity is one of the protective mechanisms that prevent a potentially dangerous rise in pressure within the biliary system as bile is produced and stored. In addition, gradual relaxation of the gallbladder as well as routine emptying of the gallbladder’s excess bile stores during the fasting period also play a role in maintaining a low resting intraluminal pressure in the biliary tree.The mucosal cells of the gallbladder itself secrete at least two important products into the gallbladder lumen: glycopro-teins and hydrogen ions. The mucosal glands in the infundibu-lum and the neck of the gallbladder secrete mucus glycoproteins that are believed to protect the mucosa from the corrosive action of bile and to facilitate the passage of bile through the cystic duct. This same mucus creates the colorless “white bile” seen in hydrops of the gallbladder as a result of cystic duct obstruction blocking the entry of bile pigments into the gallbladder. The transport of hydrogen ions by the gallbladder epithelium also plays an important role in decreasing the pH of stored bile. This acidification helps prevent the precipitation of calcium salts, which can act as a nidus for stone formation.4Motor Activity. Normal gallbladder filling is facilitated by tonic contraction of the sphincter of Oddi, which creates a small but effective pressure gradient between the bile ducts and the gallbladder. In association with phase II of the interdigestive migrating myenteric motor complex (MMC) in the gut, the gallbladder repeatedly empties small volumes of bile into the duodenum. This process is mediated at least in part by the hormone motilin. In response to a meal, the gallbladder delivers larger volumes to the intestine by a combination of gallbladder contraction and synchronized sphincter of Oddi relaxation. One of the main stimuli to this coordinated effort of gallbladder emp-tying is the hormone cholecystokinin (CCK). CCK is released endogenously from the enteroendocrine cells in the duodenum in response to a meal.5 When stimulated by eating, the gallbladder empties 50% to 70% of its contents within 30 to 40 minutes. Over the following 60 to 90 minutes, the gallbladder gradually refills as CCK levels drop. Other minor hormonal and neural pathways also are involved in the coordinated action of the gall-bladder and the sphincter of Oddi. Defects in the motor activity of the gallbladder that inhibit correct emptying are thought to play a role in cholesterol nucleation and gallstone formation.Neurohormonal Regulation. Neurally mediated reflexes are very important in maintaining the functions of the gallbladder, sphincter of Oddi, stomach, and duodenum to coordinate the flow of bile into the intestines at the correct times. The vagus nerve stimulates contraction of the gallbladder by parasympa-thetic innervation while splanchnic sympathetic nerves from the celiac plexus are inhibitory to its motor activity. For this reason, parasympathomimetic or cholinergic drugs, including nicotine and caffeine, contract the gallbladder. Conversely, anticholiner-gic drugs such as atropine lead to gallbladder relaxation. Antral distention of the stomach causes both gallbladder contraction and relaxation of the sphincter of Oddi.In addition to neural inputs, hormonal receptors are located on the smooth muscles, vessels, nerves, and epithelium of the gallbladder and biliary tree. CCK is a peptide that comes from the enteroendocrine cells of the duodenum and proximal jejunum. CCK is released into the bloodstream in response to the presence of hydrochloric acid, fat, and amino acids in the duodenum.6 CCK has a plasma half-life of 2 to 3 minutes and is metabolized by both the liver and the kidneys. CCK acts directly on smooth muscle receptors of the gallbladder and stimulates gallbladder contraction. It also relaxes the terminal bile duct, the sphincter of Oddi, and the duodenum to allow forward bile flow. CCK stimulation of the gallbladder and biliary tree is also mediated by cholinergic vagal neurons. For this reason, patients who have had a vagotomy may have a diminished response to CCK stimulation, resulting in an increase in the size and volume of the gallbladder.Hormones such as vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP) and somatostatin are potent inhibitors of gallbladder contrac-tion. Patients treated with somatostatin analogues and those with somatostatinomas have a high incidence of gallstones, presum-ably due to the inhibition of gallbladder contraction and empty-ing. Other hormones such as substance P and enkephalin affect gallbladder motility, but their exact physiologic role is less clear.5Sphincter of OddiThe sphincter of Oddi regulates the flow of bile and pancre-atic juice into the duodenum, prevents the regurgitation of duodenal contents into the biliary tree, and diverts bile into 1Brunicardi_Ch32_p1393-p1428.indd   139711/02/19   2:43 PM 1398SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIthe gallbladder. It is a complex structure that is functionally independent from the duodenal musculature and creates a high-pressure zone between the bile duct and the duodenum. The sphincter of Oddi spans approximately 4 to 6 mm in length and has a basal resting pressure of about 13 mmHg above the duodenal pressure. On manometry, the sphincter shows pha-sic contractions with a frequency of about four per minute and amplitude of 12 to 140 mmHg. The spontaneous motility of the sphincter of Oddi is regulated by the interstitial cells of Cajal through intrinsic and extrinsic inputs from hormones and neu-rons acting on the smooth muscle cells.7 Relaxation occurs in response to raising levels of the gastrointestinal hormones CCK, glucagon, and secretin. This leads to diminished amplitude of phasic contractions and reduced basal pressure of the sphinc-ter, allowing increased flow of bile into the duodenum. During fasting, the sphincter of Oddi activity is coordinated with the periodic partial gallbladder emptying that occurs during phase II of the migrating myoelectric motor complexes.8 Pharmacologic administration of certain gastrointestinal hormones, such as glucagon, can temporarily decrease sphincter of Oddi baseline pressure and facilitate diagnostic studies.7DIAGNOSTIC STUDIESA variety of diagnostic modalities are available for the patient with suspected disease of the gallbladder or bile ducts. In 1924, the diagnosis of gallstones was revolutionized by the intro-duction of oral cholecystography by Graham and Cole. For decades, it was the mainstay of investigation for gallstones. It involved oral administration of a radiopaque compound that is absorbed, excreted by the liver, and passed into the gallblad-der. Stones are noted on a film as filling defects in a visualized, pacified gallbladder. In the later half of the 20th century, bili-ary imaging improved dramatically with the development of hepatobiliary scintigraphy (radionucleotide scanning), as well as transhepatic and endoscopic retrograde cholangiography (ERCP), which allowed for more detailed imaging of the bili-ary tree. Later, ultrasonography, computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) would further improve the ability to image the biliary tract.Blood TestsWhen patients with suspected diseases of the gallbladder or the extrahepatic biliary tree are evaluated, a complete blood count and liver function tests are routinely requested. An elevated white blood cell (WBC) count may indicate or raise suspicion of acute cholecystitis (infection within the gallbladder). If asso-ciated with an elevation of bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, and transaminases, cholangitis (infection within the biliary tree) should be suspected. Cholestasis (an obstruction to bile flow) is generally characterized by an elevation of conjugated bilirubin and a rise in alkaline phosphatase, but it may have no transa-minitis. Such a pattern may suggest choledocholithiasis (stones in the common bile duct) or an obstructing lesion such as a stricture or cholangiocarcinoma. In patients with simple symp-tomatic cholelithiasis, biliary colic, or chronic cholecystitis  (a chronic inflammatory state of the gallbladder without infec-tion), blood tests will often be normal.Transabdominal UltrasonographyTransabdominal ultrasound is the initial investigation of any patient suspected to have disease of the biliary tree.9 It is non-invasive, painless, does not submit the patient to radiation, and can be performed on critically ill patients. Adjacent organs can also frequently be examined at the same time. However, its reliability and interpretation are dependent upon the skills and experience of the operator. In addition, obese patients, patients with ascites, and patients with distended bowel may be difficult to examine with ultrasound as the quality of the images obtained in these situations can be poor.Ultrasound will show stones in the gallbladder with sen-sitivity and specificity of >90%, and can also reliably detect other pathologies of the biliary tree. Stones are acoustically dense and reflect the ultrasound waves back to the ultrasonic transducer. Because stones block the passage of sound waves to the region behind them, they also produce an acoustic shadow (Fig. 32-6). Stones move with changes in position. Polyps, on the other hand, may be calcified and reflect shadows, but they do not move with change in posture. Some stones form a layer in the gallbladder; others a form sediment or sludge. A thickened gallbladder wall, pericholecystic fluid, and local tenderness with direct pressure by the ultrasound probe over the fundus of the gallbladder (sonographic Murphy’s sign) may indicate acute cholecystitis. When a stone obstructs the neck of the gallbladder, the gallbladder may become very large, but thin walled. A contracted, thick-walled gallbladder can be indicative of chronic cholecystitis.The extrahepatic bile ducts are also well visualized by transabdominal ultrasound, with the exception of the retro-duodenal portion. Dilation of the biliary tree in a patient with jaundice suggests an extrahepatic obstruction as the cause for the jaundice. Frequently, the site and, sometimes, the cause of the obstruction can be determined by ultrasound. Small stones in the common bile duct frequently get lodged at the distal end of it, behind the duodenum, and are, therefore, difficult to detect. A dilated common bile duct on ultrasound, small stones in the gallbladder, and a classic clinical presentation allows one to assume that a stone or stones are causing the obstruction. Peri-ampullary tumors can be difficult to diagnose on ultrasound, but above the retroduodenal portion, the level of obstruction and the cause may be visualized quite well. Ultrasound can also be helpful in evaluating tumor invasion and flow in the portal vein, an important guideline for resectability of periampullary tumors.10Computed TomographyAbdominal CT scans are frequently used in the workup of undif-ferentiated abdominal pain and thus often diagnose gallbladder Figure 32-6. An ultrasonography of the gallbladder. White arrows indicate stones within the gallbladder; black arrowheads show acoustic shadows from stones.Brunicardi_Ch32_p1393-p1428.indd   139811/02/19   2:43 PM 1399GALLBLADDER AND THE EXTRAHEPATIC BILIARY SYSTEMCHAPTER 32disease. CT scanning is inferior to ultrasonography in diagnos-ing gallstones but is similar in sensitivity for acute cholecystitis. The major application of CT scan, however, is to define the course and status of the extrahepatic biliary tree and adjacent structures, and to evaluate for alternate causes of a patients clini-cal presentation.11 CT is also the initial test of choice in evaluat-ing patients with suspected malignancy of the gallbladder, the extrahepatic biliary system, or nearby organs such as the head of the pancreas. Use of CT scan is an integral part of the dif-ferential diagnosis of obstructive jaundice of unknown origin (Fig. 32-7).Hepatobiliary ScintigraphyHepatobiliary scintigraphy, or hepatobiliary iminodiace-tic acid (HIDA) scanning, is another option for noninvasive evaluation of the liver, gallbladder, bile ducts, and duode-num that provides both anatomic and functional information. 99mTechnetium-labeled derivatives of iminodiacetic acid are injected intravenously, taken up by the Kupffer cells in the liver, and excreted in the bile. Uptake by the liver is usually detected within 10 minutes, and the gallbladder, bile ducts, and duodenum are typically visualized within 60 minutes in fasting subjects. The primary use of biliary scintigraphy is in the diag-nosis of acute cholecystitis, which appears as a nonvisualized gallbladder, with prompt filling of the common bile duct and duodenum. The lack of gallbladder filling is due to inflamma-tory closure of the cystic duct preventing bile backflow into the gallbladder (Fig. 32-8). Evidence of cystic duct obstruction on biliary scintigraphy is highly diagnostic for acute cholecys-titis. The sensitivity and specificity for the diagnosis are about 95% each. False-positive results can occur in patients in the nonfasting state, those receiving parenteral nutrition, or in the setting of gallbladder stasis, recent narcotic use, or alcoholism. Filling of the gallbladder and common bile duct with delayed or absent filling of the duodenum indicates an obstruction at the ampulla. Biliary leaks as a complication of surgery of the gallbladder or the biliary tree can be confirmed and frequently localized by biliary scintigraphy.12 HIDA scanning with evalu-ation of the gallbladder ejection fraction with or without CCK provocation may also be helpful in diagnosing chronic bili-ary dyskinesia in patients with atypical symptoms. While an ejection fraction of <35% is considered abnormal, the exact interpretations and clinical implications of this finding remain a matter of some debate.13Magnetic Resonance ImagingAvailable since the mid-1990s, MRI provides anatomic details of the liver, gallbladder, and pancreas similar to those obtained from CT. Many MRI techniques (i.e., heavily T2-weighted sequences, pulse sequences with or without contrast materials) can generate high-resolution anatomic images of the biliary tree and the pancreatic duct. MRI with magnetic resonance chol-angiopancreatography (MRCP) offers a focused, noninvasive test for the diagnosis of biliary tract and pancreatic disease (Fig. 32-9).14 It has a sensitivity and specificity of 95% and 89%, respectively, for detecting choledocholithiasis.15 In many centers, MRCP is the preferred imaging modality for precise evaluation of biliary and pancreatic duct pathology, reserving endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) for therapeutic purposes only.Figure 32-7. Computed tomography scan of the upper abdomen from a patient with cancer of the distal common bile duct. The cancer obstructs the common bile duct as well as the pancreatic duct. 1 = the portal vein; 2 = a dilated intrahepatic bile duct; 3 = dilated cystic duct and the neck of the gallbladder; 4 = dilated common hepatic duct; 5 = the bifurcation of the common hepatic artery into the gastroduodenal artery and the proper hepatic artery; 6 = dilated pancreatic duct; 7 = the splenic vein.ABFigure 32-8. HIDA scanning. A. Normal HIDA scan showing filling of the extrahepatic biliary tree and gallbladder (white arrow). B. HIDA san in a patient with acute cholecystitis showing no filling of the gallbladder.Brunicardi_Ch32_p1393-p1428.indd   139911/02/19   2:43 PM 1400SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIEndoscopic Retrograde CholangiopancreatographyWhile the use of endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancrea-tography (ERCP) in biliary disease is particularly valuable for its therapeutic capabilities, its diagnostic role should not be overlooked. Using a side-viewing endoscope, the common bile duct can be cannulated through the ampulla of Vater and a cholangiogram performed using fluoroscopy (Fig. 32-10). The procedure requires at least intravenous (IV) sedation and in some cases general anesthesia. The advantages of ERCP include direct visualization of the ampullary region and direct access to the distal common bile duct for cholangiography or choledochoscopy. The test is rarely needed for uncomplicated gallstone disease. However, for cases of choledocholithiasis, obstructive jaundice, biliary strictures, or cholangitis, ERCP has the advantage of being both diagnostic and therapeutic. If ductal stones are identified on the endoscopic cholangiogram, biliary sphincterotomy and stone extraction can be performed, clearing the common bile duct of stones. If another etiology such as a biliary stricture is found, diagnostic brushings can be obtained at the time of the procedure. In the hands of experts, the success rate of common bile duct cannulation and cholan-giography is >90%. Notable complications of diagnostic ERCP include pancreatitis, which occurs in approximately 3.5% of patients, as well as rare occurrences of bleeding, perforation, or infection (cholangitis).16,17Endoscopic CholedochoscopyThe development of small fiber-optic cameras that can be threaded through endoscopes used for endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) has facilitated the develop-ment of intraductal endoscopy. By providing direct visualiza-tion of the biliary and pancreatic ducts, this technology has been shown to increase the effectiveness of ERCP in the diag-nosis of certain biliary diseases.18 Intraductal endoscopy has been shown to have therapeutic applications that include bili-ary stone lithotripsy and directed stone extraction in high-risk surgical patients.19 It can also allow for direct visualization and sampling of concerning lesions in order to evaluate for malig-nancy (Fig. 32-11). Studies have thus far shown intraductal endoscopy to be safe and effective, though complications such as bile duct perforation, minor bleeding, and cholangitis have Figure 32-9. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography. This view shows the course of the extrahepatic bile ducts (arrow) and the pancreatic duct (arrowheads).BAFigure 32-10. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiography. A. A schematic picture showing the side-viewing endoscope in the duodenum and a catheter in the common bile duct. B. An endoscopic cholangiogram showing stones in the common bile duct. The catheter has been placed through the ampulla of Vater into the distal common bile duct (arrow). Note the duodenal shadow indicated with arrowheads.Brunicardi_Ch32_p1393-p1428.indd   140011/02/19   2:43 PM 1401GALLBLADDER AND THE EXTRAHEPATIC BILIARY SYSTEMCHAPTER 32been described.20 Further refinement of this technology will likely enhance ERCP as a diagnostic and therapeutic tool.Endoscopic UltrasoundEndoscopic ultrasound (EUS) has improved significantly in recent years and offers additional diagnostic utility to the workup of biliary disease. It requires a specialized 30° endo-scope with either a radial or linear ultrasound transducer at its tip. The results are operator dependent and require a skilled endoscopist but offer noninvasive imaging of the bile ducts and adjacent structures. Endoscopic ultrasound can also be used to identify choledocholithiasis. It is useful for evaluation of the retroduodenal potion of the bile duct, which is difficult to visu-alize with transabdominal ultrasonography. Although EUS is less sensitive than ERCP for biliary stones, the technique is less invasive as it does not require cannulation of the sphincter of Oddi. EUS is also of particular value in the evaluation of tumors near or behind the duodenum and their resectability. Using a linear EUS scope that has a biopsy channel, fine-needle aspira-tion (FNA) of tumors or lymph nodes, therapeutic injections, or drainage procedures under direct ultrasonic guidance can be performed.21Percutaneous Transhepatic CholangiographyIn settings in which the biliary tree cannot be accessed endo-scopically, antegrade cholangiography can be performed by accessing the intrahepatic bile ducts percutaneously with a small needle under fluoroscopic guidance. Once the position in a bile duct has been confirmed, a guidewire is inserted and a catheter is passed over the wire (Fig. 32-12). Through the catheter, an antegrade cholangiogram can be obtained and therapeutic inter-ventions such as tissue sampling, biliary drain insertions, or stent placements performed. Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiog-raphy (PTC) can also be performed through previously placed percutaneous biliary drainage tubes, if present. PTC has little role in the management of patients with uncomplicated gallstone disease but can be useful in patients with bile duct strictures or tumors, as it can define the anatomy of the biliary tree proximal to the affected segment. As with any invasive procedure, there are potential risks. For PTC, these are mainly bleeding, cholan-gitis, bile leak, and other catheter-related problems.12GALLSTONE DISEASEPrevalence and IncidenceGallstone disease (cholelithiasis) is one of the most common afflictions of the digestive tract. Autopsy reports show that gallstones are present in between 10% and 15% of adults.22 The prevalence of gallstones is related to many factors, including diet, age, gender, BMI, and ethnic background with increased prevalence in patients of Native American and Latin American descent. Certain conditions also predispose to the development of gallstones including pregnancy, non-HDL hyperlipidemia, Crohn’s disease, and certain blood disorders such as heredi-tary spherocytosis, sickle cell disease, and thalassemia. Sur-geries that alter the normal neural or hormonal regulation of the biliary tree including terminal ileal resection and gastric or duodenal surgery increase the risk of cholelithiasis. Rapid weight loss following bariatric surgery or lifestyle changes can also precipitate gallstone formation by creating an imbal-ance in bile composition. Medications such as somatostatin analogues and estrogen-containing oral contraceptives are also associated with an increased risk of developing gallstones.22 Women are three times more likely to develop gallstones than men, and first-degree relatives of patients with gallstones have a twofold greater prevalence, possibly indicating a genetic predisposition.23Natural HistoryDespite the high prevalence of cholelithiasis, most patients will remain asymptomatic from their gallstones throughout life. For unknown reasons, some patients progress to a symptom-atic stage, with typical symptoms of postprandial right upper quadrant pain (biliary colic) caused by a stone obstructing the cystic duct. In addition to pain, gallstones may progress to cause complications such as acute cholecystitis, choledocholithiasis, cholangitis, gallstone pancreatitis, gallstone ileus, and gallblad-der cancer. Rarely, one of these complications of gallstones may be the initial presenting picture.Gallstones in patients without biliary symptoms are com-monly diagnosed incidentally during unrelated abdominal imag-ing or at the time of surgery for an unrelated diagnosis. Several studies have examined the likelihood of developing biliary colic or developing significant complications of gallstone disease after incidental diagnosis in the asymptomatic patient. About 80% of these patients will remain symptom free.24 However, 2% to 3% will become symptomatic per year (i.e., develop biliary colic). Once symptomatic, patients tend to have recurring bouts of biliary colic. Complicated gallstone disease (cholecystitis, choledocholithiasis, gallstone pancreatitis, etc.) develops in 3% to 5% of symptomatic patients per year.25Because few patients develop complications without previ-ous biliary symptoms, prophylactic cholecystectomy in asymp-tomatic persons with gallstones is rarely indicated.24 Exceptions exist for individuals who will be isolated from medical care for extended periods of time, or in populations with increased risk of gallbladder cancer, in which case a prophylactic cholecys-tectomy may be advisable. The presence of porcelain gallblad-der, marked by significant calcifications thought to be related to Figure 32-11. A view from the choledochoscope showing cholangiocarcinoma.Brunicardi_Ch32_p1393-p1428.indd   140111/02/19   2:43 PM 1402SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIgallstones, is a rare premalignant condition and is an absolute indication for cholecystectomy, even when asymptomatic.Gallstone FormationGallstones form as a result of solids settling out of solution. The major organic solutes in bile are bilirubin, bile salts, phospho-lipids, and cholesterol. Gallstones are classified by their choles-terol content as either cholesterol stones or pigment stones. Pigment stones can be further classified as either black or brown. In Western countries, about 80% of gallstones are cholesterol stones and about 15% to 20% are black pigment stones.22 Brown pigment stones account for only a small percentage. Both types of pigment stones are more common in Asia.Cholesterol Stones. Pure cholesterol stones are uncommon and account for <10% of all stones. They usually occur as a sin-gle large stone with a smooth surface. The majority of choles-terol stones are mixed but are at least 70% cholesterol by weight in addition to variable amounts of bile pigments and calcium. These stones are usually multiple, of variable size, and may be 2SafetywireinsertedExternaldrainagecatheter21-guageneedleBileducttumorGuidewire insertedthrough introducerDrainagecatheterABCDEFFigure 32-12. Schematic diagram of percutaneous transhepatic cholangiogram and drainage for obstructing proximal cholangiocarcinoma. A. Dilated intrahepatic bile duct is entered percutaneously with a fine needle. B. Small guidewire is passed through the needle into the duct. C. A plastic catheter has been passed over the wire, and the wire is subsequently removed. A cholangiogram can be performed through the catheter. D. An external drainage catheter in place. E. Long wire placed via the catheter and advanced past the tumor and into the duodenum. F. Internal stent has been placed through the tumor.Brunicardi_Ch32_p1393-p1428.indd   140211/02/19   2:43 PM 1403GALLBLADDER AND THE EXTRAHEPATIC BILIARY SYSTEMCHAPTER 32Figure 32-13. Gallbladder with cholesterol stones. A. Stones of multiple shapes and sizes. B. Solitary large stone. C. Multiple stones of varying composition. (Reproduced with permission from Slesinger MH, Fordtran JS: Gastrointestinal Diseases. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier/Saunders; 1989.)100100Moles % Bile salts100808080606060Moles % CholesterolMoles % LecithinMicellarliquidMetastablesupersaturatedzone4040402020200002 or morephasesFigure 32-14. The three major components of bile plotted on triangular coordinates, cholesterol, bile salts and phospholipids (lecithin). A given point represents the relative molar ratios of each. The area labeled “micellar liquid” shows the range of concentrations in which cholesterol is fully solubilized. The shaded area directly above this region corresponds to a metastable zone, supersaturated with cholesterol. Above the shaded area, bile has exceeded the solubilization capacity of cholesterol and precipitation of cholesterol crystals and stones occurs.hard and faceted or irregular, multilobed, and soft (Fig. 32-13). Colors range from whitish yellow to green or black. Most cho-lesterol stones (>90%) are radiolucent, though some have a high calcium carbonate component and become radioopaque.The primary event in the formation of cholesterol stones is supersaturation of bile with cholesterol. Cholesterol is highly nonpolar and its solubility in water and bile depends on the relative concentration of cholesterol, bile salts, and lecithin (the main phospholipid in bile). Cholesterol is secreted into bile and is surrounded by bile salts and phospholipids to form a soluble vesicle complex. When cholesterol hypersecretion is present, either through increased intake or dysfunctional processing, supersaturation occurs. When cholesterol concentrations exceed the ability of the bile salts and phospholipid to maintain solu-bility, the cholesterol precipitates out of solution into a solid, forming a cholesterol stone (Fig. 32-14).26 Cholesterol hyperse-cretion is almost always the cause of supersaturation rather than reduced secretion of phospholipid or bile salts.2Pigmented Stones. Pigmented stones contain <20% choles-terol and are dark because of the presence of calcium bilirubi-nate. Black and brown pigment stones have little in common and should be considered as separate entities.Black pigment stones are usually small, brittle, dark, and sometimes spiculated. They are formed by supersaturation of unconjugated bilirubin within the bile. Deconjugation of bili-rubin occurs normally in bile at a slow rate. Thus, excessive levels of conjugated bilirubin excretion, as occurs in hemolytic disorders like hereditary spherocytosis and sickle cell disease will lead to an increased rate of production of unconjugated bilirubin. Cirrhosis and hepatic dysfunction may also lead to increased secretion of unconjugated bilirubin directly from the liver. The insoluble unconjugated bilirubin will then precipitate with calcium as insoluble calcium bilirubinate, forming a pig-ment stone. Due to their high calcium content, pigment stones are often radiopaque. Like cholesterol stones, they almost always form in the gallbladder. In Asian countries such as Japan, black stones account for a much higher percentage of gallstones than in the Western hemisphere.Brown stones are usually <1 cm in diameter, brownish-yel-low, soft, and often mushy. They may form either in the gallblad-der or in the bile ducts secondary to bacterial infection and bile stasis. Bacteria such as Escherichia coli secrete β-glucuronidase that enzymatically cleaves conjugated bilirubin to produce the insoluble unconjugated bilirubin. This unconjugated bilirubin then precipitates with calcium, and along with dead bacterial cell bodies, forms soft brown stones in the biliary tree. Brown stones are typically found in Asian populations and are associated with stasis secondary to parasite infection with Ascaris lumbricoides BCABrunicardi_Ch32_p1393-p1428.indd   140311/02/19   2:43 PM 1404SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II(roundworm) or Clonorchis sinensis (liver fluke). In Western populations, brown stones most often occur as primary bile duct stones in patients with biliary strictures or other common bile duct stones that cause stasis and bacterial contamination.2,27Symptomatic GallstonesSymptomatic Cholelithiasis. Patients with symptomatic gall-stone disease typically present with recurrent attacks of pain. The pain develops when a stone obstructs the cystic duct, resulting in a progressive increase of tension in the gallbladder wall as it contracts in response to a meal. This postprandial right upper quadrant or epigastric pain is often referred to as biliary colic. If untreated, about two-thirds of these patients will develop chronic noninfectious inflammation of the gallbladder wall, termed chronic cholecystitis. The pathologic changes, which often do not correlate well with symptoms, vary from an apparently nor-mal gallbladder with minor chronic inflammation in the mucosa, to a shrunken, nonfunctioning gallbladder with transmural fibro-sis and adhesions to nearby structures. The mucosa is initially normal or hypertrophied but later becomes atrophied, with the epithelium protruding into the muscle coat, leading to the forma-tion of the so-called Aschoff-Rokitansky sinuses.Clinical Manifestations The chief symptom associated with symptomatic cholelithiasis is pain (biliary colic). The pain is con-stant and increases in severity over the first half hour or so after a meal and can last 1 to 5 hours. It is located in the epigastrium or right upper quadrant and frequently radiates to the right upper back or between the scapulae (Fig. 32-15). The pain is severe and comes on abruptly, typically during the night or after a fatty meal. It often is associated with nausea and sometimes vomiting. Patients generally suffer discrete, recurrent attacks of pain, between which they feel well. Physical examination may reveal mild right upper quadrant tenderness during an episode of pain. If the patient is pain free, the physical examination is usually unremarkable. Labora-tory values, such as WBC count and liver function tests, are usu-ally normal in patients with uncomplicated gallstones.Atypical presentations of gallstone disease are common and a high index of suspicion for biliary disease must be main-tained when evaluating patients with abdominal complaints. Association with meals is present in only about 50% of patients. Some patients report milder attacks of pain but relate it to meals. The pain may be located primarily in the back or the left upper or right lower quadrant. Bloating and belching may be present and associated with the attacks of pain. In patients with atypi-cal presentations, other conditions that may be causing upper abdominal pain should be ruled out, even in the presence of gallstones. These include but are not limited to peptic ulcer dis-ease, gastroesophageal reflux disease, herpes zoster, abdominal wall hernias, inflammatory bowel disease, diverticular disease, pancreatitis, liver disease, renal calculi, pleuritic pain, and car-diac pain.When the pain lasts >24 hours without resolving, an impacted stone in the cystic duct or acute cholecystitis (see later “Acute Cholecystitis” section) should be suspected. An impacted stone without cholecystitis will result in what is called hydrops of the gallbladder. Bile will be unable to enter the gall-bladder due to the obstructed cystic duct, but the gallbladder epithelium will continue to secrete mucus, and the gallbladder will become distended with clear-white mucinous material. The gallbladder may be palpable but usually is not tender. Hydrops of the gallbladder may result in edema of the gallbladder wall, inflammation, infection, and perforation. Although hydrops may persist with few consequences, early cholecystectomy is generally indicated to avoid complications.Diagnosis The diagnosis of symptomatic cholelithiasis or chronic cholecystitis depends on the presence of typical symp-toms and the demonstration of stones on diagnostic imaging. An abdominal ultrasound is the standard diagnostic test for gallstones as it is noninvasive and highly sensitive (see earlier “Ultrasonography” section).28 Gallstones are occasionally iden-tified on abdominal CT scans that were obtained as part of a broader workup of abdominal pain. In these cases, if the patient has typical symptoms, it is reasonable to proceed with interven-tion. Stones diagnosed incidentally on CT or plain radiographs in patients without symptoms should be left in place. Occasion-ally, patients with typical attacks of biliary pain have no evi-dence of stones on ultrasound but have evidence of sludge in the gallbladder. If a patient has attacks of typical biliary pain and sludge is detected, cholecystectomy is warranted.In addition to sludge and stones, cholesterolosis and adeno-myomatosis of the gallbladder may cause typical biliary symp-toms and may be detected on ultrasound or CT. Cholesterolosis is caused by the accumulation of cholesterol in macrophages in the 221514764501352441429614396322151911252311353323ABFigure 32-15. A. Sites of the most severe pain during an episode of biliary colic in 107 patients with gallstones (% values add up to >100% because of multiple responses). The subxiphoid and right subcostal areas were the most common sites; note that the left sub-costal area was not an unusual site of pain. B. Sites of pain radiation (%) during an episode of biliary colic in the same group of patients.Brunicardi_Ch32_p1393-p1428.indd   140411/02/19   2:43 PM 1405GALLBLADDER AND THE EXTRAHEPATIC BILIARY SYSTEMCHAPTER 32gallbladder lamina propria, either locally or as polyps. It produces the classic studded macroscopic appearance of a “strawberry gallbladder.” Adenomyomatosis (cholecystitis glandularis prolif-erans) is characterized on microscopy by hypertrophic smooth muscle bundles and by the ingrowths of mucosal glands into the muscle layer (epithelial sinus formation). Granulomatous polyps develop in the lumen at the fundus, and the gallbladder wall is thickened. Septae or strictures may be seen within the gallblad-der. In symptomatic patients, cholecystectomy is the treatment of choice for patients with these conditions.29Treatment Nonsurgical management of gallstone disease using medications or lithotripsy has had disappointing long-term results. These modalities are not considered to be part of the primary treatment algorithm for gallstone disease.30 Surgi-cal cholecystectomy offers the best long-term results for patients with symptomatic gallstones. About 90% of patients with typical biliary symptoms and stones are rendered symp-tom free after cholecystectomy. For patients with atypical symptoms such as dyspepsia, flatulence, belching, bloating, and dietary fat intolerance, the results are not as favorable. The laparoscopic approach has been proven to be safe and effective and has become the standard of care for symptomatic gallstone disease, replacing open cholecystectomy in routine cases.29,31 3Due to the possibility of developing complications related to gallstone disease, patients with symptomatic choleli-thiasis should be offered elective cholecystectomy. While wait-ing for surgery, or if surgery has to be postponed, the patient should be advised to avoid dietary fats and large meals. Dia-betic patients with symptomatic gallstones should be encour-aged to have a cholecystectomy promptly, as they are more prone to developing severe acute cholecystitis. Pregnant women with symptomatic gallstones who cannot be managed expectantly with diet modifications can safely undergo laparo-scopic cholecystectomy. The operation should be performed during the second trimester if possible.Acute Cholecystitis. Acute cholecystitis, or infection of the gallbladder, is associated with gallstones in 90% to 95% of cases. Rarely, acalculous cholecystitis can occur, usually in patients with other acute systemic diseases (see later “Acalculous Chole-cystitis” section). Obstruction of the cystic duct by a gall-stone is the initiating event that leads to gallbladder distention, inflammation, and edema of the gallbladder wall. In <1% of acute cholecystitis, the cause is a tumor obstructing the cystic duct. Why inflammation develops only occasionally with cystic duct obstruction is unknown, but it is probably related to the duration of obstruction. Initially, acute cholecystitis is an inflammatory process, probably mediated by the mucosal toxin lysolecithin, a product of lecithin, as well as bile salts and platelet-activat-ing factor. An increase in prostaglandin synthesis amplifies the inflammatory response. In acute cholecystitis, the gallbladder wall becomes grossly thickened and reddish with subserosal hemorrhages. Pericholecystic fluid often is present. The mucosa may show hyperemia and patchy necrosis. In severe cases, about 5% to 10%, the inflammatory process progresses and leads to ischemia and necrosis of the gallbladder wall. More frequently, the gallstone is dislodged and the inflammation resolves.Not all episodes of uncomplicated acute cholecystitis involve infection. Secondary bacterial contamination is thought to occur in only 15% to 30% of patients. With some severe infections, gangrenous cholecystitis can develop, and an abscess or perforation may occur. When they happen, perforations are usually contained in the subhepatic space by the omentum and adjacent organs. However, free perforation with peritonitis, intrahepatic perforation with intrahepatic abscesses, and per-foration into adjacent organs (duodenum or colon) with cho-lecystoenteric fistula have been described. When gas-forming organisms are part of the secondary bacterial infection, gas may be seen in the gallbladder lumen and in the wall of the gallblad-der on abdominal radiographs and CT scans, an entity called emphysematous cholecystitis.Clinical Manifestations About 80% of patients with acute cholecystitis give a history compatible with chronic cholecysti-tis. Acute cholecystitis often begins as an attack of biliary colic with relapsing and remitting pain in the right upper quadrant or epigastrium that may radiate to the right back or interscapular area. In contrast to biliary colic, the pain of acute cholecystitis does not subside. It is unremitting, may persist for several days, and is usually more severe than the pain associated with uncom-plicated gallstone disease. The patient is often febrile, complains of anorexia, nausea, and vomiting, and may be reluctant to move as the inflammatory process creates focal peritonitis. On physi-cal examination, tenderness and guarding are usually present in the right upper quadrant. A mass, the gallbladder and adherent omentum, is occasionally palpable; however, guarding may pre-vent identification of this. Murphy’s sign, an inspiratory arrest with deep palpation in the right subcostal area, is characteristic of acute cholecystitis.Laboratory evaluation commonly reveals a mild to mod-erate leukocytosis (12,000–15,000 cells/mm3). However, a normal WBC does not rule out the diagnosis. An unusually high WBC count (>20,000 cells/mm3) suggests a complicated form of cholecystitis such as gangrenous cholecystitis, perfo-ration, or associated cholangitis. In uncomplicated acute cho-lecystitis, serum liver chemistries are usually normal, but a mild elevation of serum bilirubin (<4 mg/mL) may be present along with mild elevation of alkaline phosphatase, transami-nases, and amylase.28 Severe jaundice is suggestive of obstruc-tion of the bile ducts. This can be a result of common bile duct stones or severe pericholecystic inflammation secondary to impaction of a stone in the infundibulum of the gallblad-der that mechanically obstructs the bile duct, known as Mir-izzi’s syndrome (Fig. 32-16). In elderly patients and in those with diabetes mellitus, acute cholecystitis may have a subtle Figure 32-16. Mirizzi’s syndrome. Impaction of a large stone in the neck of the gallbladder causing obstruction at the level of the confluence of the cystic duct and common hepatic duct.Brunicardi_Ch32_p1393-p1428.indd   140511/02/19   2:43 PM 1406SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIpresentation resulting in a delay in diagnosis. These patients may also have higher rates of treatment related morbidity com-pared to younger and healthier patients.The differential diagnosis for acute cholecystitis includes but is not limited to peptic ulcer disease, pancreatitis, appen-dicitis, hepatitis, perihepatitis (Fitz-Hugh–Curtis syndrome), myocardial ischemia, pneumonia, pleuritis, and herpes zoster involving the intercostal nerve.Diagnosis Ultrasonography is considered the most useful ini-tial radiologic test for diagnosing acute cholecystitis, with a sen-sitivity and specificity of 70% to 90%. Ultrasound is effective at documenting the presence or absence of stones, and it can show gallbladder wall thickening and pericholecystic fluid, both of which are highly suggestive of acute cholecystitis (Fig. 32-17). Focal tenderness over the gallbladder when compressed by the sonographic probe (sonographic Murphy’s sign) also supports the diagnosis of acute cholecystitis. Biliary scintigraphy (HIDA scanning) may be of help in atypical cases if the diagnosis remains in question after initial workup. Lack of filling of the gallbladder after 4 hours indicates an obstructed cystic duct and, in the clinical setting of suspected acute cholecystitis, confirms the diagnosis with a reported sensitivity above 90%.32 Con-versely, a normal HIDA scan with clear filling of the gallblad-der rules out the diagnosis of acute cholecystitis. CT scans are frequently performed on patients with acute abdominal pain of unknown etiology, as they can evaluate for a number of poten-tial pathologic processes at once. In patients with acute chole-cystitis, a CT scan can demonstrate thickening of the gallbladder wall, pericholecystic fluid, and the presence of gallstones, but it is somewhat less sensitive than ultrasonography.Treatment Patients who present with acute cholecystitis should receive IV fluids, broad-spectrum antibiotics, and anal-gesia. The antibiotics should cover gram-negative enteric organ-isms as well as anaerobes. Although the inflammation in acute cholecystitis may be sterile in some patients, it is difficult to know who is secondarily infected. Therefore, antibiotics have become a standard part of the initial management of acute cho-lecystitis in most centers.Cholecystectomy is the definitive treatment for acute cho-lecystitis. In the past, the timing of cholecystectomy has been a matter of debate. Early cholecystectomy performed within 72 hours of the onset of the illness is preferred over delayed cholecystectomy that is performed 6 to 10 weeks after initial medical treatment and recuperation. Several studies have shown that unless the patient is unfit for surgery, early cholecystectomy should be recommended as soon as possible, as it offers the patient a definitive solution in one hospital admission, quicker recovery times, similar complication rates, and an earlier return to work.33,34Laparoscopic cholecystectomy is the procedure of choice for acute cholecystitis. The conversion rate to an open cholecys-tectomy has fallen in recent years to less than 5% as laparoscopic equipment and experience has improved.35 While laparoscopic cholecystectomy for acute cholecystitis may be more tedious and take longer than an elective cholecystectomy for symp-tomatic cholelithiasis, the laparoscopic approach remains safe and effective, even in the setting of acute and sometimes severe inflammation. Open cholecystectomy must remain an option in particularly difficult cases, or in patients suspected of having prohibitive intraabdominal adhesions, but it is rarely the primary treatment choice.When patients are medically unfit for surgery due to the severity of their illness or medical comorbidities, they can be treated with antibiotics and biliary decompression with cho-lecystostomy tube placement, which is usually effective in stabilizing the patient.36 For those who do recover after chole-cystostomy, the tube can be removed once the track is mature (approximately 4 weeks) and cholangiography through it shows a patent cystic duct. Elective laparoscopic cholecystectomy can be scheduled within approximately 6 to 8 weeks, assum-ing their medical fitness recovers.37 Failure to improve after cholecystostomy may be due to gangrene of the gallbladder or perforation, in which case, damage control surgery may be unavoidable.Choledocholithiasis. Common bile duct (CBD) stones may be small or large, single or multiple, and are found in 6% to 12% of patients with stones in the gallbladder. The incidence increases with age. About 20% to 25% of patients above the age of 60 with symptomatic gallstones have stones in the common bile duct as well as in the gallbladder.38 The vast majority of ductal stones in Figure 32-17. Ultrasonography from a patient with acute cholecystitis. The white arrowheads indicate the thickened gallbladder wall. There are several stones in the gallbladder (white arrows) throwing acoustic shadows (black arrowheads). Trace pericholecystic fluid can be seen surrounding the gallbladder (black arrows).Brunicardi_Ch32_p1393-p1428.indd   140611/02/19   2:43 PM 1407GALLBLADDER AND THE EXTRAHEPATIC BILIARY SYSTEMCHAPTER 32Western countries are formed within the gallbladder and migrate down the cystic duct into the common bile duct. These are clas-sified as secondary CBD stones, in contrast to the primary CBD stones that form in the bile duct itself. Secondary stones are usu-ally cholesterol stones, whereas primary stones are usually of the brown pigment type. The primary stones are associated with biliary stasis and infection, and they are more commonly seen in Asian populations. Biliary stasis leading to the development of primary CBD stones can be caused by biliary strictures, papillary stenosis, tumors, or other (secondary) stones.Clinical Manifestations Choledochal stones may be silent and often are discovered incidentally. They may cause complete or incomplete obstruction, or they may manifest with cholangitis or gallstone pancreatitis. The typical pain caused by a stone in the bile duct is very similar to that of biliary colic caused by impaction of a stone in the cystic duct. Nausea and vomiting are common. Physical examination may be normal, but mild epigas-tric or right upper quadrant tenderness as well as mild icterus are common. The symptoms may also be intermittent, such as pain and transient jaundice caused by a stone that temporar-ily impacts the ampulla but subsequently moves away, acting as a ball valve. A small stone may pass through the ampulla spontaneously with resolution of symptoms. Finally, the stones may become completely impacted, causing severe progressive jaundice. Elevation of serum bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, and transaminases are commonly seen in patients with bile duct stones. However, in about one-third of patients with common bile duct stones, the liver chemistries are normal, particularly if the obstruction is incomplete or intermittent.Diagnosis Ultrasonography is useful for documenting stones in the gallbladder (if still present), as well as determining the size of the common bile duct. As stones in the bile ducts tend to move down to the distal part of the common duct behind the duodenum, bowel gas can preclude their detection on ultraso-nography. A dilated common bile duct (>8 mm in diameter) on ultrasonography in a patient with gallstones, jaundice, and bili-ary pain is highly suggestive of common bile duct stones. If the presence of bile duct stones is in question, magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) provides excellent anatomic detail and has a sensitivity and specificity of 95% and 89%, respectively, for detecting choledocholithiasis.14 Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) is highly effec-tive at diagnosing choledocholithiasis and in experienced hands, cannulation of the ampulla of Vater and diagnostic cholangiog-raphy are achieved in >90% of cases. However, due to the risks associated with the procedure, it is rarely used as a purely diag-nostic modality, rather being reserved for cases in which a thera-peutic intervention such as stone extraction or sphincterotomy is planned. Endoscopic ultrasound has been demonstrated to be as good as ERCP for detecting common bile duct stones (sensitivity of 95% and specificity of 97%). However, EUS has fewer thera-peutic capabilities and requires endoscopic expertise, making it less desirable except in specific clinical senarios.39 Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography (PTC) is rarely needed in patients with common bile duct stones but can be performed for both diagnostic and therapeutic reasons in patients with contraindica-tions to endoscopic or surgical approaches.Treatment For patients with symptomatic gallstones and sus-pected common bile duct stones, bile duct clearance and cho-lecystectomy are indicated. This may be safely achieved either with preoperative ERCP followed by surgery or by going directly to surgery with intraoperative cholangiogram and common bile duct exploration to address retained stones. Both approaches are considered safe and effective, and no formal recommendation exists to definitively support one over the other.40,41If upfront laparoscopic cholecystectomy is pursued, the surgery should include an intraoperative cholangiogram to doc-ument the presence or absence of bile duct stones. If stones are identified, laparoscopic common bile duct exploration via the cystic duct or with formal choledochotomy allows the stones to be retrieved in the same setting (see “Choledochal Explora-tion” section). If the expertise and/or instrumentation for lapa-roscopic common bile duct exploration are not available, the patient can be awoken and scheduled for ERCP with sphincter-otomy the following day. An open common bile duct explora-tion is an option if the endoscopic and laparoscopic methods are not feasible. If a choledochotomy is performed, primary repair can be considered in large ducts, while smaller ducts should be repaired over a T-tube. To do this, a standard T-tube should be modified by cutting the ends short enough to allow placement within the duct and dividing the T longitudinally to facilitate easy removal from the duct later on (Fig. 32-18). If a common Figure 32-18. T-tube placement. A. A standard T-tube that has been cut and modified for use in the biliary tract. B. The T-tube is placed through a ductotomy in the common bile duct with the defect closed over the tube. The opposite end is brought out through the abdominal wall for decompression of the bile ducts.ABBrunicardi_Ch32_p1393-p1428.indd   140711/02/19   2:43 PM 1408SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIbile duct exploration was performed and a T tube left in place, a T-tube cholangiogram should be obtained before its removal, at least several weeks after its placement.In very severe cases, stones impacted in the ampulla may be unable to be cleared by endoscopic approaches or common bile duct exploration (open or laparoscopic). In these cases, transduodenal sphincterotomy can be considered. If one is entirely unable to disimpact the duct, choledochoduodenostomy or Roux-en-Y choledochojejunostomy may be the only option to restore biliary continuity.42If the stones were left in place at the time of surgery or diagnosed shortly after the cholecystectomy, they are classified as retained. Those diagnosed months or years later are termed recurrent (Fig. 32-19). Retained or recurrent stones following cholecystectomy are best treated endoscopically. A generous sphincterotomy will allow for stone retrieval as well as spon-taneous passage of stones. Alternately, retained stones can be cleared via a mature T-tube tract (4 weeks) if one was placed at the time of surgery. To do this, the T-tube is removed and a catheter passed through the tract into the common bile duct. Under fluoroscopic guidance, the stones can be retrieved with baskets or balloons. A similar approach will allow for stone clearance by percutaneous transhepatic cholecystostomy (PTC) if there is no other way to reach the duct. Repeat surgery should be a last resort if other interventions have failed.Cholangitis. Cholangitis is one of the main complications of choledochal stones. Acute cholangitis is an ascending bac-terial infection associated with partial or complete obstruc-tion of the bile ducts.43 Hepatic bile is sterile, and bile in the bile ducts is kept sterile by continuous antegrade bile flow and by the presence of antibacterial substances in bile, such as immunoglobulin. Mechanical hindrance to bile flow facilitates ascending bacterial contamination from the bowel. Positive bile cultures are common in the presence of bile duct stones as well as with other causes of obstruction. Biliary bacterial contamination alone does not lead to clinical cholangitis; the combination of both significant bacterial contamination and biliary obstruction is required for its development. Gallstones are the most common cause of obstruction in cholangitis. Other causes include primary sclerosing cholangitis, benign and malignant strictures, parasites, instrumentation of the ducts, and indwelling stents, as well as partially obstructed biliary-enteric anastomoses. The most common organisms cultured from bile in patients with cholangitis include E coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Streptococcus faecalis, Enterobacter, and Bacteroides fragilis.43Clinical Manifestations Cholangitis may present as anything from a mild, self-limited episode to a fulminant, potentially life-threatening septicemia. Patients with gallstone-induced cholangitis are most commonly older and female. The most common presentation is fever, epigastric or right upper quad-rant pain, and jaundice. These classic symptoms, known as Charcot’s triad, are present in about two-thirds of patients. The illness can progress rapidly with the development of shock and altered mental status, known as Reynolds’ pentad (e.g., fever, jaundice, right upper quadrant pain, septic shock, and mental status changes). However, the presentation may be atypical, with little if any fever, jaundice, or pain. This occurs most commonly in the elderly, who may have unremarkable symptoms until the process is already quite advanced. Patients with indwelling stents are at particularly high risk for cholan-gitis, though rarely become jaundiced as a patent stent will prevent the obstruction of bile flow. On abdominal examina-tion, the findings are indistinguishable from those of acute cholecystitis.44Diagnosis Leukocytosis, hyperbilirubinemia, and elevation of alkaline phosphatase and transaminases are common and, when present, support the clinical diagnosis of cholangitis. Ultraso-nography is helpful, as it will document the presence of gall-bladder stones, demonstrate dilated ducts, and possibly pinpoint a site of obstruction. CT scanning and MRI can show pancreatic and periampullary masses, if present, in addition to the ductal dilatation. However, abdominal imaging will rarely elucidate the exact cause of cholangitis, and the initial diagnosis is gener-ally made clinically.Treatment The initial treatment of patients with cholangi-tis includes broad-spectrum IV antibiotics to cover enteric organisms and anaerobes, fluid resuscitation, and rapid biliary ABFigure 32-19. Retained common bile duct stones. The patient pre-sented 3 weeks after laparoscopic cholecystectomy. A. An ultra-sound shows a normal or mildly dilated common bile duct with a stone. Note the location of the right hepatic artery anterior to the common hepatic duct (an anatomic variation). B. An endoscopic retrograde cholangiography from the same patient shows multiple stones in the common bile duct. Only the top one showed on ultra-sound as the other stones lie in the distal common bile duct behind the duodenum.Brunicardi_Ch32_p1393-p1428.indd   140811/02/19   2:43 PM 1409GALLBLADDER AND THE EXTRAHEPATIC BILIARY SYSTEMCHAPTER 32decompression. This is most often accomplished through ERCP and sphincterotomy. ERCP will show the level and the reason for the obstruction, allow for culture of the bile, permit the removal of stones if present, and accomplish drainage of the bile ducts. Placement of drainage catheters or stents can  also be performed if needed. In cases in which ERCP is not available, PTC, EUS, or surgical drainage can be utilized. The selection of the appropriate approach will depend on the type and location of the suspected obstruction as well as the avail-ability of local resources and expertise. Cholecystostomy tubes are not indicated in the acute management of cholangitis as the primary source of the infection is extrinsic to the gallbladder.Patients with cholangitis can deteriorate rapidly and may require intensive care unit monitoring and vasopressor support. However, most patients will respond to biliary decompression and supportive measures. In the current era, acute cholangitis is associated with an overall mortality rate of approximately 5%. When associated with renal failure, cardiac impairment, hepatic abscesses, and malignancies, the morbidity and mortal-ity rates are much higher. Patients who have suffered an episode of acute cholangitis related to gallstone disease should be rec-ommended to undergo elective cholecystectomy approximately 6 weeks after the resolution of their cholangitis.45 Those whose cholangitis was related to another cause of biliary obstruction should be followed and treated for the specific etiology of their obstruction but do not necessarily require cholecystectomy if gallstones were not the causative etiology of their cholangitis. Patients with indwelling stents and cholangitis usually require repeated imaging and stent exchange to mitigate the risk of recurrent infections.Gallstone Pancreatitis. Gallstones in the common bile duct can provoke attacks of acute pancreatitis through transient or persistent obstruction of the pancreatic duct by a stone passing through or impacted in the ampulla. The exact mechanism by which obstruction of the pancreatic duct leads to pancreatitis is unclear, but it may be related to increased ductal pressures causing leakage of pancreatic enzymes into the glandular tissue. The initial management of gallstone pancreatitis is supportive, including admission for bowel rest, IV hydration, and pain control. Antibiotics are not indicated in the absence of signs of infected pancreatic necrosis. Imaging of the biliary tree with ultrasound, CT, or MRCP is essential to confirm the diagnosis. When gallstones are present and the pancreatitis is mild and self-limited, the stone has probably passed. For these patients, a cholecystectomy with intraoperative cholangiogram is indi-cated as soon as the pancreatitis has clinically resolved. It is strongly recommended that cholecystectomy be performed dur-ing the same admission whenever possible due to the high rate of recurrence and increased morbidity of subsequent attacks of pancreatitis.46 If gallstones are present obstructing the duct and the pancreatitis is severe, an ERCP with sphincterotomy and stone extraction may be necessary. This must be balanced with the risk of ERCP-induced pancreatitis and thus is usually only employed if supportive measures are failing.Gallstone Ileus. Gallstone ileus can occur when a large gall-stone erodes through the wall of the gallbladder directly into the intestine via a choledochoenteric fistula (Fig. 32-20A). These stones can then pass through the intestinal tract until they reach an area of fixed obstruction. Proximal stones can become impacted in the pylorus or proximal duodenum causing gastric outlet obstruction (Bouveret syndrome). Those that travel dis-tally may become lodged at surgical anastomoses or the ileoce-cal valve, where they can become impacted and cause small bowel obstruction. Gallstone ileus is responsible for less than 1% of all intestinal obstructions.47 These patients present with symptoms of obstipation, nausea, and abdominal pain. Plain films may show an obstructive bowel gas pattern but may fail to identify a radiolucent stone. Ultrasound evaluation may be lim-ited by extensive bowel gas. CT is highly sensitive and specific for gallstone ileus and will help to determine the location of the obstruction. Management of gallstone ileus focuses on relieving the intestinal obstruction and removing the stone. In cases of very proximal obstructions in the stomach or duodenum, endo-scopic retrieval can be effective. For more distal stones, surgical enterolithotomy can be accomplished either laparoscopically or open. This procedure entails the removal of the stone through ABFigure 32-20. Gallstone Ileus. A. A choledochoenteric fistula has formed between the gallbladder and the duodenum, allowing a gallstone to pass into the intestinal tract. B. Intraoperative photo showing a longitudinal enterotomy and extraction of an impacted stone from the distal small bowel.Brunicardi_Ch32_p1393-p1428.indd   140911/02/19   2:43 PM 1410SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIan enterotomy that is then either repaired or resected depend-ing on its size (Fig. 32-20B). Stones that have successfully traversed the ileocecal valve are likely to pass without further intervention. The role of pursuing cholecystectomy and/or cho-ledochoenteric fistula closure at the time of enterolithotomy or addressing it at a later time remains a topic of debate, but it should be considered to reduce the risk of recurrence.47CholangiohepatitisCholangiohepatitis, also known as recurrent pyogenic cholan-gitis, is endemic to the Orient. It also has been encountered in Asian population in the United States, Europe, and Australia. It affects both sexes equally and occurs most frequently in the third and fourth decades of life. Cholangiohepatitis is caused by bacterial contamination (commonly E coli, Klebsiella spe-cies, Bacteroides species, or Enterococcus faecalis) of the bili-ary tree, and often it is associated with biliary parasites such as Clonorchis sinensis, Opisthorchis viverrini, and A lumbri-coides. Bacterial enzymes cause deconjugation of bilirubin, which precipitates as bile sludge. The sludge and dead bacterial cell bodies form brown pigment stones, the nucleus of which may contain an adult Clonorchis worm, an ovum, or an ascarid. These stones can form throughout the biliary tree and cause par-tial obstructions that contribute to repeated bouts of cholangi-tis, biliary strictures, further stone formation, infection, hepatic abscesses, or liver failure (secondary biliary cirrhosis).48Patients with cholangiohepatitis usually present with pain in the right upper quadrant or epigastrium, fever, and jaundice. Relapsing symptoms are one of the most characteristic features of the disease. The episodes may vary in severity but, without intervention, will gradually lead to malnutrition and hepatic insufficiency. An ultrasound may detect stones in the biliary tree, pneumobilia from infection by gas-forming organisms, liver abscesses, and, occasionally, strictures. The gallbladder may be thickened and inflamed in about 20% of patients but rarely contains gallstones. ERCP or MRCP can be utilized for biliary imaging for cholangiohepatitis. They can detect obstruc-tions and define strictures and stones. ERCP (or PTC if nec-essary) has the additional benefit of allowing for emergent decompression of the biliary tree in the septic patient. Hepatic abscesses may be drained percutaneously. The long-term goal of therapy is to extract stones and debris and relieve strictures. It may take several procedures, and in severe, refractory cases in which stones and strictures cannot be relieved, it may require a hepaticojejunostomy to reestablish biliary–enteric continuity. Occasionally, resection of involved areas of the liver may offer the best form of treatment. Recurrences are common, and the prognosis is poor once hepatic insufficiency has developed.49PROCEDURAL INTERVENTIONS FOR  GALLSTONE DISEASEPercutaneous Transhepatic  Cholecystostomy TubesIn cases in which a patient with cholecystitis is deemed to be too ill to safely undergo cholecystectomy, a cholecystostomy tube may be placed into the gallbladder to decompress and drain a distended, inflamed, hydropic, or purulent gallbladder.36 Surgi-cal cholecystostomy with a large catheter placed under local anesthesia is rarely required today. Rather, percutaneous tran-shepatic cholecystostomy (PTC) tubes are most often pigtail catheters inserted percutaneously under ultrasound guidance.50 The catheter is inserted over a guidewire that has been passed through the abdominal wall, the liver, and into the gallblad-der (Fig. 32-21). By passing the catheter through the liver, the risk of uncontrolled bile leak around the catheter and into the peritoneal cavity is minimized. The catheter can be removed when the inflammation has resolved and the patient’s condition has improved. A patent cystic duct should be confirmed by a tube cholangiogram prior to its removal. Interval cholecystec-tomy should be considered if the patient’s fitness has improved, particularly in individuals whose etiology of cholecystitis was gallstones.Endoscopic InterventionsEndoscopic advances in the last few decades have made endos-copy and ERCP a valuable therapeutic tool in the management of gallstone disease, particularly in the setting of common bile duct stones or abnormalities. Using a 90-degree side-viewing endoscope, the duodenum can be entered and the ampulla of Vater on the medial wall of the second portion of the duode-num visualized. This can then be cannulated to allow wire and catheter access to the biliary tree, facilitating retrograde chol-angiogram, diagnostic brushings, stenting, dilations, or fluoro-scopically guided basket or balloon retrieval of common bile duct stones. When CBD stones are present, endoscopic sphinc-terotomy should be performed, which will allow for passage of larger stones both at the time of bile duct clearance and in the case of any ongoing choledocholithiasis (Fig. 32-22). In the hands of experts, ERCP has high rates of successful cannulation and bile duct clearance, and it is a safe and tolerable procedure. Debate remains when comparing ERCP to surgical common bile duct exploration in terms of timing and outcomes for choledo-cholithiasis, but both are considered acceptable treatments.41 In special cases, such as the presence of Roux-en-Y anatomy or a previous hepaticojejunostomy, ERCP can be difficult. How-ever, such anatomy does not preclude the option for endoscopic intervention. Laparoscopic-assisted ERCP (in which the rem-nant stomach is accessed surgically and the endoscope passed into the duodenum) or double-balloon ERCP can be utilized to reach the biliary tree.CholecystectomyCholecystectomy is one of the most common abdominal sur-geries performed in Western countries, with over 750,000 Figure 32-21. Percutaneous cholecystostomy. A pigtail catheter has been placed through the abdominal wall, the right lobe of the liver, and into the gallbladder.Brunicardi_Ch32_p1393-p1428.indd   141011/02/19   2:43 PM 1411GALLBLADDER AND THE EXTRAHEPATIC BILIARY SYSTEMCHAPTER 32being performed each year in the United States alone.51 Carl Langenbuch performed the first successful open cholecystectomy in 1882, and for >100 years, it was the standard treatment for symptomatic gallbladder stones. In 1987, laparoscopic chole-cystectomy was introduced by Philippe Mouret in France and quickly revolutionized the treatment of gallstone disease. It not only supplanted open cholecystectomy, but it also more or less ended attempts for noninvasive management of gallstones (such as extracorporeal shock wave or cholangioscopic lithotripsy) or medical therapies (such as bile salts). Laparoscopic cholecystec-tomy offers a cure for gallstones with a minimally invasive pro-cedure, minor pain and scarring, and early return to full activity. Today, laparoscopic cholecystectomy is the treatment of choice for symptomatic gallstones and the complications of gallstone disease.Few absolute contraindications exist to laparoscopic cholecystectomy, but they include hemodynamic instability, uncontrolled coagulopathy, or frank peritonitis. In addition, patients with severe obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) or congestive heart failure (e.g., cardiac ejection fraction <20%) might not tolerate the increased intraabdominal pressures of pneumoperitoneum with carbon dioxide and may require open cholecystectomy. Conditions formerly believed to be relative contraindications such as acute cholecystitis, gangrene and empyema of the gallbladder, biliary-enteric fistulae, obesity, pregnancy, ventriculoperitoneal shunts, cirrhosis, and previous upper abdominal procedures are now considered risk factors for a potentially difficult cholecystectomy, but they do not preclude an attempt at laparoscopy. While laparoscopic outcomes have steadily improved and laparoscopic cholecystectomy has been shown multiple times to be safe and feasible, conversion to an open operation should always remain an option, and it is not a failure. Conversion to open may be necessary if the patient is unable to tolerate pneumoperitoneum, a complication occurs that cannot be fixed laparoscopically, important anatomic struc-tures cannot be clearly identified, or when no progress is made over a set period of time. In the elective setting, conversion to an open procedure is needed in about 5% of patients.51 Emer-gent procedures or patients with complicated gallstone disease can be more challenging, and the incidence of conversion has been reported to be between 10% and 30%. The possibility of conversion to open should always be discussed with the patient preoperatively.Serious complications of cholecystectomy are rare. The mortality rate for laparoscopic cholecystectomy is about 0.1%. Wound infection and cardiopulmonary complication rates are considerably lower following laparoscopic cholecystectomy than are those for an open procedure.52 While laparoscopic cho-lecystectomy has historically been associated with a higher rate of injury to the bile ducts than the open approach, modern data appears to show this trend disappearing as familiarity with lapa-roscopic techniques and technologies have improved.53Patients undergoing cholecystectomy should have a complete blood count and liver function tests preoperatively. Prophylaxis against deep venous thrombosis with either low molecular weight heparin or compression stockings is indicated. ABCFigure 32-22. An endoscopic sphincterotomy. A. The sphincterotome in place. B. Completed sphincterotomy. C. Endoscopic picture of ampulla before and after sphincterotomy.Brunicardi_Ch32_p1393-p1428.indd   141111/02/19   2:43 PM 1412SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIThe patient should be instructed to empty their bladder before coming to the operating room to avoid the need for urinary cath-eterization. An orogastric tube can be placed if the stomach is distended with gas, but it is generally removed at the end of the operation.Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy. The patient is typically positioned supine with the operating surgeon standing at the patient’s left side. Split-leg positioning with the surgeon stand-ing between the patient’s legs can also provide ergonomic access to the right upper quadrant. Tucking one arm can be helpful if a cholangiogram is planned to allow easier maneu-vering of the fluoroscopy machine around the patient. Pneu-moperitoneum is established with carbon dioxide gas, either with an open technique (Hasson), optical viewing trocar, or closed-needle technique (Veress). Typical access is at the supra-umbilical region, though in the case of previous surgery or scars, alternate access sites should be considered. Once an adequate pneumoperitoneum is established, a 5or 10-mm trocar is inserted through the supraumbilical incision, through which a 5or 10-mm 30° laparoscope is introduced. Traditionally, three additional ports are then placed with a 10or 12-mm port in the epigastrium, a 5-mm port in the right midclavicular line, and a 5-mm port in the right flank (Fig. 32-23). Additional ports may be placed as needed to aid with retraction in difficult cases.Through the lateral-most port, the assistant uses a locking instrument to grasp the gallbladder fundus and retract it over the liver edge and upward towards the patient’s right shoulder. This will help visualize the body of the gallbladder and the hilar area. Exposure may be facilitated by placing the patient ABFCEDFigure 32-23. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy. A. The trocar placement. B. The fundus has been grasped and retracted cephalad to expose the proximal gallbladder and the hepatoduodenal ligament. Another grasper retracts the gallbladder infundibulum posterolaterally to better expose the triangle of Calot (hepatocystic triangle bound by the common hepatic duct, cystic duct, and liver margin). C. Intraoperative photo of the critical view of safety. The hepatocystic triangle has been cleared of fat and fibrous tissue, the lower one-third of the gallbladder is separated from the liver to expose the cystic plate, and two and only two structures are seen entering the gallbladder. D. A clip is being placed on the cystic duct–gallbladder junction. E. A small opening has been made in the cystic duct, and a cholangiogram catheter is being inserted. F. Additional clips have been placed, the cystic duct has been divided, and the cystic artery is being divided.Brunicardi_Ch32_p1393-p1428.indd   141211/02/19   2:43 PM 1413GALLBLADDER AND THE EXTRAHEPATIC BILIARY SYSTEMCHAPTER 32in reverse Trendelenburg position with slight tilting of the table to bring the right side up. Through the midclavicular port, the surgeon uses a grasper in the left hand to retract the gallbladder infundibulum laterally and expose the neck of the gallbladder and hepatoduodenal ligament. It may be necessary to take down any adhesions between the omentum, duodenum, or colon to the gallbladder in order to reach the infundibulum. The majority of the dissection can then be performed with the right hand through the epigastric port, utilizing a combination of electrocautery and sharp and blunt dissection.Dissection starts at the infundibulum of the gallbladder, just above the takeoff of the cystic duct. The peritoneum, fat, and loose areolar tissue around the gallbladder and the cystic duct–gallbladder junction is dissected off and reflected inferi-orly toward the bile duct. This is continued until the gallbladder neck and the proximal cystic duct are clearly identified. The next step is the identification of the cystic artery, which usually runs parallel to and somewhat behind the cystic duct, and often lies behind a prominent lymph node (Lund’s node, often called Calot’s node). At this point, a critical view of safety should be obtained. This requires that the hepatocystic triangle is cleared of fat and fibrous tissue, the lower third of the gallbladder is separated from the liver to expose the cystic plate, and two and only two structures (cystic duct and cystic artery) are going into the gallbladder (see Fig. 32-19).54 At this point, an intraopera-tive cholangiogram can be performed if indicated (see “Intraop-erative Cholangiogram” section).With a critical view of safety obtained, the cystic duct and artery are clipped with two clips at the base and one clip on the gallbladder side. They can then be safely divided. Sometimes, a very dilated cystic duct may be too large for clips. Such ducts can be successfully managed by ligation with an endoloop, lapa-roscopic stapler, or suture closure. Finally, the gallbladder is dissected off the liver bed using electrocautery while watching for potential abnormal posterior branches of ducts or arteries. Before the gallbladder is completely removed from the liver edge, it can be used as a retractor for a final evaluation of the operative field. The surgeon should be sure to evaluate for bleed-ing points or bile staining, and confirm placement of the clips on the cystic duct and artery. The gallbladder is then divided from its final attachments and removed either through the epigastric or umbilical incision, often with the aid of a retrieval bag. The fascial defect and skin incision may need to be enlarged in order to remove the specimen, particularly if the stones are large or the gallbladder is very inflamed. Any bile or blood that has accumulated during the procedure should be cleaned away, and if stones were spilled, they should be retrieved and removed. If the gallbladder was severely inflamed or gangrenous, or if any bile or blood is expected to accumulate, a closed-suction drain can be placed through one of the 5-mm ports and left underneath the right liver lobe close to the gallbladder fossa, though this is not routinely required.Open Cholecystectomy. The same surgical principles apply for laparoscopic and open cholecystectomies. Open cholecystec-tomy has become an uncommon procedure, usually performed either as a conversion from laparoscopic cholecystectomy or as a second procedure in patients who require laparotomy for another reason. The approach can either be through a midline laparotomy, or more commonly through a right subcostal inci-sion. The gallbladder is dissected free from the liver bed, usu-ally starting at the fundus and working proximally toward the hepatocystic triangle. Once the cystic artery and cystic duct have been dissected and clearly identified, they are ligated and divided, and the gallbladder is removed. In particularly difficult cases, in which the gallbladder is partially obliterated or ductal or arterial anatomy cannot be identified, a partial cholecystec-tomy may be performed. This includes removal of as much gall-bladder mucosa as possible and attempted closure of the cystic duct stump with wide drainage of the area.Intraoperative Cholangiogram. Intraoperative cholangio-gram is an optional but valuable tool for evaluating the extra-hepatic bile ducts, identifying common bile duct stones, or clarifying aberrant ductal anatomy. The use of routine versus selective cholangiography remains a topic of debate with a lack of definitive evidence on either side.55-57 However, routine intra-operative cholangiography will detect stones in approximately 7% of patients, and it assists with outlining anatomy and detect-ing injury.58 Selective intraoperative cholangiogram should be performed when the patient has a history of abnormal liver func-tion tests, pancreatitis, jaundice, a large duct and small stones, a dilated duct on preoperative ultrasonography, or if preoperative endoscopic cholangiography for the aforementioned reasons was unsuccessful. Although there is no consensus recommenda-tion on the use of routine versus selective cholangiography, all surgeons performing cholecystectomy should be familiar with the procedure. If a cholangiogram is to be performed, a clip is placed on the proximal cystic duct, and a small incision is made on its anterior surface, just inferior to the clip. A cholangiogram catheter is passed into the cystic duct and secured with a clamp or clip. The fluoroscopy machine is then positioned over the patient and a cholangiogram performed by injection of contrast through the cholangiocatheter during live fluoroscopic dynamic imaging. An ideal cholangiogram includes filling of the right and left hepatic ducts, emptying into the duodenum, and no visualized filling defects (Fig. 32-24). Care must be taken not to introduce air bubbles into the system during contrast injec-tion as these will appear as filling defects on the cholangiogram images. If no contrast is visualized in the duodenum, a dose of glucagon can be utilized to relax the sphincter of Oddi and facilitate contrast flow. Once the cholangiogram is completed, the catheter is removed. Laparoscopic ultrasonography is as accurate as intraoperative cholangiography in detecting com-mon bile duct stones, and it is less invasive. However, it requires more skill to perform and interpret and is not always readily available.59Common Bile Duct ExplorationCommon bile duct stones that are detected preor intraopera-tively may be managed with common bile duct exploration (CBDE) at the time of the cholecystectomy. While preopera-tive ERCP is also an appropriate option for known bile duct stones, laparoscopic CBDE can be used as a primary approach to choledocholithiasis safely and with good outcomes, even in higher risk populations such as the elderly.60 If stones in the duct are small, they may sometimes be simply flushed into the duo-denum with saline irrigation via the cholangiography catheter. This can be facilitated by the administration of IV glucagon to relax the sphincter of Oddi. If irrigation is unsuccessful, several options exist to clear the duct, including fluoroscopic or endo-scopic approaches.With access to the cystic duct by a small ductotomy, a bal-loon catheter is used to dilate the cystic duct, and a wire basket can be passed down the common bile duct under fluoroscopic Brunicardi_Ch32_p1393-p1428.indd   141311/02/19   2:43 PM 1414SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIguidance to catch and remove the stones (Fig. 32-25). Alter-nately, endoscopic evaluation with a flexible choledocho-scope will allow for direct visualization and retrieval of the stones within the common duct. To do this, reliable catheter access must be obtained with an introducer sheath placed either through one of the laparoscopic ports or a new stab incision in the anterior abdominal wall. The cystic duct should first be dilated with a small balloon catheter to allow for passage of the introducer and scope and for effective retrieval of larger stones. Once the scope is within the common bile duct, irrigation is used to distend the lumen. Stones may then be caught in a wire basket under direct visualization or simply pushed into the duo-denum. Once the common bile duct has been cleared of stones, the cystic duct is ligated below the level of the ductotomy and divided, and the cholecystectomy is completed.While the cystic duct is the preferred route of access for common bile duct exploration, occasionally an incision into the common bile duct itself (choledochotomy) is necessary. The flexible choledochoscope is then passed into the duct for visu-alization and clearance of stones. The choledochotomy can be closed primarily of the duct is very large, or over a T-tube. If available, common bile duct exploration can be highly advan-tageous as it provides the opportunity to treat the entirety of the disease in a single event, rather that subjecting patients to multiple procedures. However, the procedure can be techni-cally challenging to perform and requires the availability of the proper equipment and surgical expertise.61Common Bile Duct Drainage ProceduresIn very rare cases in which stones or obstructions cannot be cleared by either ERCP with sphincterotomy or CBDE, and the patient is suffering clinical effects from their common duct stones, an additional choledochal drainage procedure may become necessary. In the case of an open operation, transduodenal sphincterotomy can be attempted by incising the duodenum transversely and cutting the sphincter of Oddi at the 11 o’clock position, taking care to avoid injury to the pancreatic duct. The impacted stones can then be manually removed or simply allowed to pass through the sphincterotomy.Bypass procedures can also be used to restore continu-ity of bile flow in the setting of irretrievable impacted stones. For short distance bypasses, a Choledochoduodenostomy is performed by mobilizing the second part of the duodenum (a Kocher maneuver) and anastomosing it side to side with the common bile duct (Fig. 32-26A-C). If the distance is too great to safely complete a choledochoduodenostomy without ten-sion, a choledochojejunostomy can be done by bringing up a roughly 45-cm limb of jejunum and anastomosing it end to side to the common bile duct (Fig. 32-26D-E). If the entirety of the extrahepatic biliary tree must be bypassed, hepaticojejunostomy allows for drainage of the hepatic ducts directly a loop of jeju-num (Fig. 32-26F-G). These choledochal drainage procedures can also be used to manage common bile duct strictures or as a palliative procedure for malignant obstruction in the periampul-lary region.OTHER BENIGN DISEASES AND LESIONSBiliary Dyskinesia and Sphincter of Oddi DysfunctionBiliary dyskinesia is an umbrella term that refers to disorders affecting the normal motility and function of the gallbladder and sphincter of Oddi. These disorders are becoming increas-ingly recognized as improvements in imaging allow for more detailed evaluations of biliary tract function. Patients with bili-ary dyskinesia may present with typical biliary type symptoms, but without evidence of stones or sludge on abdominal imaging. ABFigure 32-24. A. An intraoperative cholangiogram. The bile ducts are of normal size, with no intraluminal filling defects. The left and the right hepatic ducts are visualized, the distal common bile duct tapers down, and the contrast empties into the duodenum. Cholangiography grasper that holds the catheter and the cystic duct stump partly projects over the common hepatic duct. B. An intraoperative cholangiogram showing a common bile duct stone (arrow) with very little contrast passing into the duodenum.Brunicardi_Ch32_p1393-p1428.indd   141411/02/19   2:43 PM 1415GALLBLADDER AND THE EXTRAHEPATIC BILIARY SYSTEMCHAPTER 32A decreased gallbladder ejection fraction on HIDA scanning (EF <35%) is considered diagnostic of biliary dyskinesia. In these patients, studies suggest that symptoms will be improved or resolved by cholecystectomy in up to 90% of cases.62Sphincter of Oddi dysfunction can occur as a primary pre-sentation of episodic biliary type pain with abnormal liver func-tion tests or as recurrent biliary type pain after cholecystectomy. More severe cases may present with recurrent jaundice or pan-creatitis. If other causes are ruled out, such as retained stones, strictures or periampullary tumors, a stenotic or dyskinetic sphincter of Oddi should be suspected. A benign stenosis of the outlet of the common bile duct is usually associated with inflam-mation, fibrosis, or muscular hypertrophy. The pathogenesis is unclear, but trauma from the passage of stones, sphincter motil-ity disorders, and congenital anomalies have been suggested. A dilated common bile duct that is difficult to cannulate during ERCP or delayed emptying of contrast from the biliary tree after ERCP are useful diagnostic features. Ampullary manometry and specific provocation tests are available in specialized units to aid in the diagnosis. Once identified, sphincterotomy will typi-cally yield good results.63Acalculous CholecystitisAcalculous cholecystitis is an acute inflammation of the gall-bladder that occurs in the absence of gallstones. It is a rare entity that typically develops in critically ill patients in the intensive care unit.64 Patients on parenteral nutrition, with extensive burns, sepsis, major operations, multiple trauma, or prolonged illness with multiple organ system failure are at risk for developing acalculous cholecystitis. The cause is unknown, but gallblad-der distention, bile stasis, and ischemia have been implicated as causative factors. After resection, pathologic examination of the gallbladder wall after an episode of acalculous cholecystitis reveals edema of the serosa and muscular layers, with patchy thrombosis of arterioles and venules.65The ability to recognize the symptoms and signs of acalculous cholecystitis can depend on the condition and mental status of the patient, but acalculous cholecystitis can be similar to acute calculous cholecystitis, with right upper quadrant pain and tenderness, fever, and leukocytosis. In the sedated or unconscious patient, the clinical features are often masked, but fever and elevated WBC count, as well as eleva-tion of alkaline phosphatase and bilirubin, are indications for AIIIIIIEBFGCDFigure 32-25. Laparoscopic common bile duct exploration. I. Transcystic basket retrieval using fluoroscopy. A. The basket has been advanced past the stone and opened. B. The stone has been entrapped in the basket, and together, they are removed from the cystic duct. II. Transcystic choledochoscopy and stone removal. C. The basket has been passed through the working channel of the scope, and the stone is entrapped under direct vision. D. Entrapped stone. E. A view from the choledochoscope with stone captured in basket. III. Choledochotomy and stone removal. F. A small incision is made in the common bile duct. G. The common bile duct is cleared of stones.Brunicardi_Ch32_p1393-p1428.indd   141511/02/19   2:43 PM 1416SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIAIIIIIIBCDEFGFigure 32-26. Biliary enteric anastomoses. There are three types. I. Choledochoduodenostomy. A. The distal common bile duct is opened longitudinally, as is the duodenum. B. Interrupted sutures are placed between the common bile duct and the duodenum. C. Completed cho-ledochoduodenostomy. II. Choledochojejunostomy. D. The common bile duct and small bowel are divided. E. A limb of jejunum is brought up in a Roux-en-Y configuration and anastomosed to the bile duct. III. Hepaticojejunostomy. F. The entire extrahepatic biliary tree has been resected and the reconstruction completed with a Roux-en-Y limb of jejunum. G. Percutaneous transhepatic stents are placed across hepati-cojejunostomy (optional).Brunicardi_Ch32_p1393-p1428.indd   141611/02/19   2:43 PM 1417GALLBLADDER AND THE EXTRAHEPATIC BILIARY SYSTEMCHAPTER 32further investigation. Ultrasonography is usually the diagnos-tic test of choice, as it can be done bedside in the intensive care unit. It can demonstrate the distended gallbladder with thickened wall, biliary sludge, pericholecystic fluid, and the presence or absence of abscess formation. CT scanning can aid in the diagnosis of acalculous cholecystitis and addition-ally allows a more general evaluation of the abdomen and chest to rule out other sources of infection. A HIDA scan can also be useful if it shows nonvisualization of the gallblad-der, but it is less sensitive and can have higher false-positive rates in patients who are in a prolonged fasting state, on total parenteral nutrition, or have liver disease. Once the diagnosis is confirmed, acalculous cholecystitis requires urgent inter-vention as rapid deterioration can occur. This should include early broad-spectrum antibiotics and fluid resuscitation. If the patient is stable to undergo an abdominal operation, lapa-roscopic cholecystectomy is the most definitive treatment, and it can be safely performed even in the setting of severe acute inflammation.64 However, if patients are critically ill and unfit for surgery, percutaneous cholecystostomy is the best treatment choice (see Fig. 32-18). About 90% of patients will improve with a percutaneous cholecystostomy tube. Interval cholecystectomy can be discussed with the patient after they have recovered from their acute illness, but it is not strictly required in the absence of gallstone or other identi-fied gallbladder pathology.Choledochal (Biliary) CystsCholedochal cysts are congenital cystic dilatations of the extra-hepatic and/or intrahepatic biliary tree. They are rare, with an incidence of between 1:100,000 and 1:150,000 in populations of Western countries, but are more common in populations of Eastern countries occurring in as many as 1:1000 individuals. Choledochal cysts affect females three to eight times more often than males. Although frequently found in infancy or childhood, nearly one-half are diagnosed in adults. The cause is unknown, but it is believed that weakness of the bile duct wall and increased pressure secondary to partial biliary obstruction can contribute to biliary cyst formation. More than 90% of patients have an anomalous pancreaticobiliary duct junction, with the pancreatic duct joining the common bile duct outside the duode-nal wall, creating a long common channel (>1.5 cm). This may allow free reflux of pancreatic secretions into the biliary tract, leading to inflammatory changes, increased biliary pressure, and cyst formation. The cysts are lined with cuboidal epithelium and can vary in size from small dilations to giant cystic masses. The typical clinical triad of biliary cysts includes abdominal pain, jaundice, and a palpable mass, though this constellation is seen in less than one-half of patients. Adults may present with chol-angitis. Blood tests will often be normal though elevations of transaminases can be seen in cases of infection or obstruction. Ultrasonography or CT scanning will confirm the diagnosis, but ERCP or MRCP are essential to formally assess the biliary anatomy and to plan the appropriate surgical treatment. The risk of cholangiocarcinoma in patients with choledochal cysts is 20to 30-fold higher than in the general population and varies with the patient’s age and type of cyst. For this reason, excision is recommended whenever possible when high-risk choledochal cysts are diagnosed.Choledochal cysts are classified into five types depend-ing on the location and structure of the cysts. The subcatego-ries of choledochal cysts are defined in Fig. 32-27. Type I cysts (fusiform CBD dilations) are the most common form, account-ing for approximately 50% of cases, and have the highest risk of malignancy (>60%). For types I and II (saccular diverticula of the common bile duct), excision of the cystic dilations in the extrahepatic biliary tree, including cholecystectomy, with either simple cyst excision or duct resection with Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy is ideal. Type III cysts (intraduodenal) cre-ate a treatment challenge as full resection would require pan-creaticoduodenectomy. Given that type III cyst are associated with the lowest malignancy risk of any choledochal cyst (~2%), sphincterotomy and surveillance is generally recommended over formal excision.66 In Type IV (multiple cysts), excision of all cystic tissue and reconstruction is again recommended. For type IVa, which is characterized by multiple cysts with intrahe-patic involvement, additional segmental resection of the liver may be required if intrahepatic stones, strictures, or abscesses are present. Type V choledochal cysts (Caroli disease) are very rare and account for less than 1% of patients with choledochal cysts. These cysts are multiple and can affect the entire liver. In advanced stages, this may result in cirrhosis and liver failure necessitating liver transplantation.Primary Sclerosing CholangitisPrimary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) is an uncommon disease characterized by inflammatory strictures involving the intrahe-patic and extrahepatic biliary tree. It is a progressive disease that eventually results in secondary biliary cirrhosis. Sometimes, biliary strictures are clearly secondary to bile duct stones, acute cholangitis, previous biliary surgery, or toxic agents, and are termed secondary sclerosing cholangitis. However, primary sclerosing cholangitis is a disease entity of its own, with no clear attributing cause. Autoimmune reaction, chronic low-grade bac-terial or viral infection, toxic reaction, and genetic factors have all been suggested to play a role in its pathogenesis. PSC is commonly associated with other autoimmune diseases includ-ing ulcerative colitis in about two-thirds of patients, Riedel’s thyroiditis, and retroperitoneal fibrosis. The human leukocyte antigen haplotypes HLA-B8, DR3, DQ2, and DRw52A, com-monly found in patients with autoimmune diseases, also are more frequently seen in patients with primary sclerosing chol-angitis than in controls. The mean age of presentation for PSC is 30 to 45 years, and men are affected twice as often as women. Most patients are symptomatic when diagnosed, and may com-plain of intermittent jaundice, fatigue, weight loss, pruritus, or abdominal pain. Initial presentation with acute cholangitis is rare without preceding biliary tract intervention or surgery. A minority of patients are diagnosed incidentally by elevated liver function tests, particular when found in a patient with ulcerative colitis. While the clinical presentation and laboratory results may suggest the PSC, ERCP revealing multiple dilatations and strictures (beading) of the intraand extrahepatic biliary tree confirms the diagnosis. The hepatic duct bifurcation is often the most severely affected segment. A liver biopsy may not be diagnostic, but it is important to determine the degree of hepatic fibrosis and the presence of cirrhosis.The clinical course in sclerosing cholangitis is highly vari-able, but cyclic remissions and exacerbations are typical. Some patients will remain asymptomatic for years, while others prog-ress rapidly with the obliterative inflammatory changes leading to secondary biliary cirrhosis and liver failure. In patients with associated ulcerative colitis, the course of each disease seems independent of the other and colectomy has no effect on the Brunicardi_Ch32_p1393-p1428.indd   141711/02/19   2:43 PM 1418SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIcourse of primary sclerosing cholangitis. Of the patients with sclerosing cholangitis, 10% to 15% will develop cholangio-carcinoma, which can present at any time during the disease process and does not necessarily correlate with the extent of the sclerosing cholangitis or the development of liver failure.67 Cholangiocarcinoma in the setting of PSC frequently follows an aggressive course. Patients need to be followed by serial ERCP and liver biopsies to evaluate for the development of complica-tions such as strictures, cancers, or cirrhosis.There is no known curative treatment for primary scleros-ing cholangitis and medical management is largely supportive. Corticosteroids, immunosuppressants, ursodeoxycholic acid, and antibiotics have been attempted with disappointing results. If biliary strictures occur, they can be dilated and stented either endoscopically or percutaneously. These measures have given short-term improvements in symptoms and serum bilirubin lev-els but provide long-term results in less than half of patients. Surgical management with resection of the extrahepatic biliary tree and hepaticojejunostomy has produced reasonable results in patients with extrahepatic and bifurcation strictures, but without cirrhosis or significant hepatic fibrosis.68 In patients with pri-mary sclerosing cholangitis and advanced liver disease, liver transplantation is the only option. It offers excellent results, with overall 5-year survival as high as 85%. Unfortunately, recur-rence of PSC can occur in 10% to 20% of patients and may require retransplantation.68Bile Duct StricturesBenign bile duct strictures can have numerous causes. However, the vast majority are related to operative injury, most commonly during cholecystectomy. Other causes include fibrosis due to chronic pancreatitis, common bile duct stones, acute cholan-gitis, biliary obstruction due to cholecystolithiasis (Mirizzi’s syndrome), sclerosing cholangitis, cholangiohepatitis, and stric-tures of a biliary-enteric anastomosis. Bile duct strictures that go unrecognized or are improperly managed can lead to severe complications such as recurrent cholangitis, secondary biliary cirrhosis, and portal hypertension.69Bile duct strictures most commonly result in recurrent episodes of cholangitis but may present with isolated jaundice without infection. Liver function tests usually show evidence of cholestasis with elevations of bilirubin and alkaline  phosphatase. Imaging with ultrasound or CT can show dilated bile ducts proximal to the stricture, as well as provide informa-tion about the level of the stenosis. MRCP gives more detailed anatomic information about the location and the degree of dilatation. If the diagnosis remains in question, cholangiog-raphy (endoscopic or more rarely percutaneous) will outline the biliary tree, define the stricture and its location, and allow for therapeutic interventions (Fig. 32-28). The treatment of biliary strictures depends on the location and the cause of the stricture. Percutaneous or endoscopic dilatation and/or stent placement will provide good results in more than one half of Type IIIType IIType IType VType IVbType IVaFigure 32-27. Classification of choledochal cysts. Type I, fusiform or cystic dilations of the extrahepatic biliary tree, is the most common type, making up >50% of the choledochal cysts. Type II, saccular diverticulum of an extrahepatic bile duct. Rare, <5% of choledochal cysts. Type III, bile duct dilatation within the duodenal wall (choledochoceles), makes up about 5% of choledochal cysts. Types IVa and IVb, mul-tiple cysts, make up 5% to 10% of choledochal cysts. Type IVa affects both extrahepatic and intrahepatic bile ducts, whereas type IVb cysts affect the extrahepatic bile ducts only. Type V (Caroli disease), intrahepatic biliary cysts, is very rare and makes up 1% of choledochal cysts.Brunicardi_Ch32_p1393-p1428.indd   141811/02/19   2:44 PM 1419GALLBLADDER AND THE EXTRAHEPATIC BILIARY SYSTEMCHAPTER 32patients. For persistent or complex strictures, surgical resec-tion and reconstruction with Roux-en-Y choledochojejunos-tomy or hepaticojejunostomy may be necessary and will result in good or excellent outcomes in 80% to 90% of patients.70 Choledochoduodenostomy may be a choice for strictures in the distal-most part of the common bile duct if a tension free repair can be achieved.INJURY TO THE BILIARY TRACTGallbladderInjuries to the gallbladder itself are uncommon but can occur in the setting of penetrating trauma (gunshot or stab wounds) or medical procedures (liver biopsy or surgery). Nonpenetrating trauma to the gallbladder is extremely rare but can cause con-tusion, avulsion, laceration, rupture, or traumatic cholecystitis. Regardless of the etiology of gallbladder injury, the treatment of choice is cholecystectomy. The prognosis is typically good but depends on the extent of related injury, as damage to nearby organs is not uncommon.Extrahepatic Bile DuctsRarely, penetrating trauma to the extrahepatic bile ducts does occur, and it is usually associated with trauma to other  viscera. The vast majority of injuries to the extrahepatic bili-ary system, however, are iatrogenic, usually occurring during cholecystectomy. These injuries are among the most feared and litigated complications in surgery, and can result in sig-nificant morbidity.71,72 Biliary tract injury can also occur during common bile duct exploration, division or mobilization of the duodenum during gastrectomy, or dissection of the hepatic hilum during liver resections.The incidence of bile duct injury during cholecystectomy is estimated to be relatively low (about 0.2%).73 While ini-tial experience with laparoscopic cholecystectomy appeared to show a higher rate of injury to the bile ducts compared to the open approach, these trends appear to be disappearing as lapa-roscopic technology and familiarity with the techniques of the procedure have improved.53 A number of different factors are thought to be associated with bile duct injury during laparo-scopic cholecystectomy. These include acute or chronic inflam-mation, obesity, anatomic variations, and surgical technique. Inadequate exposure or failure to correctly identify structures before ligating or dividing them are the most common causes of significant biliary injury (see “Anatomic Variants” section). Excessive cephalad retraction of the gallbladder may align the cystic duct with the common bile duct, and the latter may then be mistakenly clipped and divided. Careless use of electrocau-tery can lead to thermal injury. Dissection deep into the liver parenchyma may cause injury to intrahepatic ducts, and poor clip placement close to the hilar area or to structures not well visualized can result in a clip across a bile duct.74,75Techniques to avoid injury to the bile ducts during chole-cystectomy are important to understand. The use of an angled, 30° or 45° laparoscope instead of an end-viewing camera will help visualize the anatomic structures, in particular those around the triangle of Calot. An angled scope also will aid in the proper placement of clips. The routine use of intraoperative cholangi-ography during every cholecystectomy as a method to prevent bile duct injury remains controversial.55 Nonetheless, the fre-quency of bile duct injuries is cut by 50% when an intraop-erative cholangiogram is performed. Critical to the successful use of cholangiography is accurate interpretation of the imag-ing. It is important to check that the whole biliary system fills with contrast, including both major ducts on the right and the left hepatic duct, and that there is no extravasation of contrast. While routine use may reduce or limit the extent of injury, or help identify it early, it does not seem to prevent it entirely.76 No consensus recommendation exists on the use of selective versus routine cholangiography.Perhaps the most universally agreed upon method for mitigating the risk of bile duct injury during laparoscopic cholecystectomy is obtaining the critical view of safety. This requires that the hepatocystic triangle is dissected free of fat and fibrous tissue, the lower third of the gallbladder is sepa-rated from the cystic plate, and there are two and only two structures running into the gallbladder, the cystic duct, and the cystic artery (see Fig. 32-23).54 Newer technologies such as fluorescence cholangiography to help identify biliary anatomy intraoperatively have shown promising early results, though large-scale applications remain to be seen.77Diagnosis. Only about 25% of major bile duct injuries (com-mon bile duct or hepatic duct) are recognized at the time of surgery. In these cases, intraoperative bile leakage, recognition of the correct anatomy, or an abnormal cholangiogram led to the diagnosis of a bile duct injury. In those that go unrecognized at the time of surgery, more than half will re-present within the first month postoperatively, though some can present months or years later with strictures, cholangitis, or cirrhosis from a remote bile duct injury.4Figure 32-28. An endoscopic retrograde cholangiography show-ing stricture of the common hepatic duct (arrow). The patient had recently had a laparoscopic cholecystectomy; clips from the opera-tion can be seen projected over the common bile duct.Brunicardi_Ch32_p1393-p1428.indd   141911/02/19   2:44 PM 1420SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIBile duct injuries typically result in either leaks or obstruc-tions related to strictures. Bile leak, most commonly from the cystic duct stump, a transected aberrant right hepatic duct, or a lateral injury to the main bile duct, usually presents with abdom-inal pain, fever, and a mild elevation of liver function tests. If a drain was placed at the time of surgery, bilious fluid may be seen. A CT scan or ultrasound can show either a fluid collection in the gallbladder fossa (biloma), or free fluid (bile) in the peri-toneum (Fig. 32-29A). ERCP (Fig. 32-29B) or HIDA scan can be utilized to better localize the site of the bile leak.Obstruction or stricture should be suspected in patients with progressive elevations of liver function tests or jaundice after cholecystectomy. CT scan or ultrasound can demonstrate the dilated part of the biliary tree, and may identify the level of the bile duct obstruction. MRI cholangiography, if available, provides an excellent, noninvasive delineation of the biliary anatomy both proximal and distal to the injury. Endoscopic or percutaneous cholangiography may also be helpful to confirm the diagnosis, depending on the location and type of injury.Management. The management of bile duct injuries depends on the type, extent, and level of the injury, as well as the tim-ing of its diagnosis. Initial proper treatment of bile duct injury can avoid the development of further complications or bile duct strictures. If an injury is discovered that exceeds the capacity of the available surgical expertise, the patient should be transferred to a tertiary care center. In these situations, drains should be placed in the surgical bed and antibiotics initiated. If a complete obstructive transection has occurred, it may also be necessary to place a percutaneous transhepatic drainage catheter to decom-press the biliary tree prior to transfer.If identified at the time of surgery, bile leaks from small bile ducts (<3 mm) or those draining a single hepatic segment can safely be ligated. If the injured duct is ≥4 mm, however, it is likely to drain multiple segments or an entire lobe and thus needs to be repaired or reimplanted. Minor injuries to the com-mon bile duct or the common hepatic duct are traditionally managed with placement of a T-tube that has been modified by cutting the ends to allow for its placement in and removal from the bile duct (see Fig. 32-18). If the injury is small, the T-tube may be placed through it as if it were a formal choledochotomy. In more extensive injuries, the T-tube should be placed through a separate choledochotomy and the injury closed over the T-tube end to minimize the risk of subsequent stricture formation.Major bile duct injuries identified intraoperatively such as complete transection of the common hepatic or common bile duct are best managed at the time of injury. In many of these major injuries, the bile duct has not only been transected, but a variable length of the duct may have been removed with the surgical specimen. This injury usually requires reconstruction with a biliary-enteric anastomosis, and is best performed as soon as possible following the injury. If there is no or minimal loss of ductal length, a duct-to-duct repair may be done over a T-tube that is placed through a separate incision. In any repair that is chosen, it is critical to perform a tension-free anastomosis to minimize the high risk of postoperative stricture formation.Bile leaks identified postoperatively can usually be man-aged with percutaneous drainage of intra-abdominal fluid col-lections followed by endoscopic biliary stenting. With most leaks, regardless of the location, stenting of the common bile duct will provide a low resistance route for bile flow into the duodenum, decreasing flow through the leak and allowing it to heal. This is particularly effective for leaks from the cystic duct stump. Rarely, surgery is required to repair a large leak if endoscopic interventions have failed or peritonitis is present.Major bile duct injuries diagnosed in the later postopera-tive period may not be amenable to immediate reconstruction due to acute inflammation. They may need to be managed with transhepatic biliary catheter placement for biliary decompres-sion as well as percutaneous drainage of intra-abdominal bile collections, if any. When the acute inflammation has resolved 6 to 8 weeks later, operative repair is performed.Patients with bile duct stricture from an injury or as a sequela of previous repair usually present with either progres-sive elevation of liver function tests or cholangitis. The initial management usually includes endoscopic attempts at dilation or stenting. Balloon dilatation of a stricture usually requires multiple procedures and rarely provides long-term relief. Self-expanding metal or plastic stents can provide temporary or, in the high-risk patient, permanent drainage of the biliary tree. If the stricture is unable to be addressed endoscopically, ABFigure 32-29. A. Computed tomographic scan of a patient with bile leak after cholecystectomy. The short arrows indicate the intraperitoneal collections. Both air and bile are seen in the gallbladder bed (long arrow) as well as a surgical clip. B. An endoscopic retrograde cholangi-ography from the same patient showing contrast extravasation from the cystic duct stump (arrow). Note the filling of the pancreatic duct.Brunicardi_Ch32_p1393-p1428.indd   142011/02/19   2:44 PM 1421GALLBLADDER AND THE EXTRAHEPATIC BILIARY SYSTEMCHAPTER 32percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage catheter placement may be necessary for decompression, and to define the anat-omy, location and extent of the damage. Definitive treatment of refractory biliary strictures entails resection of the affected segment and reconstruction with a biliary-enteric anastomosis.Outcome. Good results can be expected in the majority of patients with bile duct injuries, with the best results coming when the injury is recognized immediately and repaired by an experienced biliary tract surgeon.78 The perioperative mortality rate is reported to be less than 10%, but common morbidities associated with bile duct repairs include cholangitis, external biliary fistula, bile leak, subhepatic and subphrenic abscesses, and hemobilia. Restenosis of a biliary enteric anastomosis occurs in about 10% of patients, and typically presents within 2 years, but can manifest up to 20 years after the initial procedure. In general, treatment of proximal strictures is associated with a lower success rate than distal ones. The worst results are seen in patients with many operative revisions and in those who have evidence of liver failure or portal hypertension. However, previ-ous repair does not preclude a successful outcome, particularly in patients with good liver function. In the most severe cases, patients with refractory strictures and deteriorating liver func-tion may become candidates for liver transplant.TUMORSCarcinoma of the GallbladderCancer of the gallbladder is a rare malignancy that occurs pre-dominantly in the elderly. It is an aggressive tumor, with a poor prognosis that is usually not diagnosed until it has become advanced and is causing symptoms. The median survival for gallbladder cancer is around 6 months with a reported 5-year survival rate of 5%.79 In a minority of cases, early cancers are identified incidentally following cholecystectomy for cho-lelithiasis, in which case, 5-year survival is over 80%.80Incidence. Gallbladder cancer is the sixth most common GI malignancy in Western countries.80 It accounts for 2% to 4% of all malignant GI tumors, with about 4000 new cases diagnosed annually in the United States. It is two to six times more com-mon in females than males, and the peak incidence is in the seventh decade of life. Its occurrence in random autopsy series is about 0.4%, but 0.3% to 3% of patients undergoing chole-cystectomy for gallstone disease are found incidentally to have gallbladder cancer.80 There are also significant ethnic variations in the incidence of gallbladder cancer, with rates being particu-larly high in native populations of the United States, Mexico, and Chile. The overall incidence of gallbladder cancer in the United States is approximately 1.5 cases per 100,000 residents. For Native American females with gallstones, the incidence is around 7.1 per 100,000. For women in the native populations of Chile, gallbladder cancer occurs in 27.3 per 100,000 individu-als. Asian populations, particularly those of Korean descent, are also at increased risk of developing gallbladder cancer.80Etiology. The pathogenesis of gallbladder cancer has not been fully defined but is likely related to a combination of chronic inflammation, infection, genetics, and environmental exposures such as heavy metals and tobacco. Cholelithiasis is the most important risk factor for gallbladder carcinoma, and up to 85% of patients with carcinoma of the gallbladder have gallstones. However, <3% of patients with gallstones have gallbladder cancer, and the 20-year risk of developing cancer remains low; <0.5% for the overall population and 1.5% for high-risk groups. Larger stones (>3 cm) are associated with a 10-fold increased risk of cancer.81 The risk of developing cancer of the gallblad-der is higher in patients with symptomatic than asymptomatic gallstones, and it is more commonly seen in the setting of cho-lesterol stones.Polypoid lesions of the gallbladder, which are present in as many as 5% of adults, are also associated with increased risk of cancer. This is particularly true for polyps measuring  >10 mm, which carry a 25% risk of malignancy.82 Solitary or sessile polys, or those showing rapid growth on serial imaging, particularly if in the presence of gallstones or age >50 are also concerning for malignancy. When such findings are identified, the patient should have their gallbladder removed, even if they are asymptomatic. Polyps that are not removed should be monitored on serial imaging. The finding of a “Porcelain” gallbladder, or dense circumferential calcifications of the gallbladder wall, is associated with an approximately 10% risk of gallbladder car-cinoma. While this condition was previously considered to be an absolute indication for cholecystectomy, more recent studies suggest that given the low rate of malignancy, observation is safe and acceptable. Nevertheless, resection remains a reason-able option, particularly if the patient is symptomatic, and the decision should ultimately be made only after discussing risks and benefits of each approach with the patient.97 Patients with certain types of choledochal cysts also have an increased risk of developing cancer anywhere in the biliary tree, but the inci-dence is highest in the gallbladder and cholecystectomy should be performed with any surgical intervention on the choledochal cyst. Primary sclerosing cholangitis, anomalous pancreatico-biliary duct junction, and exposure to carcinogens (azotoluene, nitrosamines) also are associated with cancer of the gallbladder, and screening with abdominal ultrasound should be considered in these patients.Pathology. Between 80% and 90% of gallbladder cancers are adenocarcinomas. Squamous cell, adenosquamous, oat cell, and other anaplastic lesions rarely occur. The histologic subtypes of gallbladder adenocarcinomas include papillary, nodular, and tubular. Less than 10% are of the papillary type, but these are associated with an overall better outcome, as they are most com-monly diagnosed while localized to the gallbladder. Cancer of the gallbladder can spread through lymphatics, venous drainage, or by direct invasion into the liver parenchyma. Lymphatic flow from the gallbladder drains first to the cystic duct node (Lund’s node or Calot’s node), then pericholedochal and hilar nodes, and finally to the peripancreatic, duodenal, periportal, celiac, and superior mes-enteric artery nodes. The gallbladder veins drain directly into the adjacent liver, usually segments IVb and V, where tumor inva-sion is common (Fig. 32-30). The gallbladder wall differs histo-logically from the intestines in that it lacks a muscularis mucosa and submucosa. Lymphatics are present in the subserosal layer only. Therefore, cancers that have not grown through the muscu-lar layer have minimal risk of nodal disease. Unfortunately, only a small portion of gallbladder cancers (10–25%) are identified while they are still localized to the gallbladder. The majority will already have nodal involvement, extension into adjacent liver, or distant metastasis at the time of diagnosis.80,83Clinical Manifestations and Diagnosis. Signs and symp-toms of carcinoma of the gallbladder are generally indistinguish-able from those associated with cholecystitis and cholelithiasis, and this can lead to delays in treatment or misdiagnosis. These include abdominal discomfort, right upper quadrant pain, nau-sea, and vomiting. Jaundice, weight loss, anorexia, ascites, 5Brunicardi_Ch32_p1393-p1428.indd   142111/02/19   2:44 PM 1422SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIand abdominal masses are less common presenting symptoms. Common misdiagnoses include chronic cholecystitis, acute cho-lecystitis, choledocholithiasis, hydrops of the gallbladder, and pancreatic cancer. Laboratory findings, if abnormal, are most often consistent with biliary obstruction. Ultrasonography often reveals a thickened, irregular gallbladder wall (>3mm) with hypervascularity or a mass replacing the gallbladder. It may also visualize tumor invasion of the liver, lymphadenopathy, or a dilated biliary tree. The sensitivity of ultrasonography in detect-ing gallbladder cancer ranges from 70% to 100%. A CT scan may be helpful in identifying a gallbladder mass and evaluating for nodal spread or local invasion into adjacent organs or vascu-lature. If questions about local invasion remain, MRCP allows for complete assessment of biliary, vascular, nodal, hepatic, and adjacent organ involvement.84 Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) can be a useful tool in staging and evaluating for local invasion, as well as obtaining tissue diagnosis through fine needle aspiration (FNA). Tissue diagnosis can also be obtained by CT or ultra-sound-guided biopsy of the tumor, though this is not required prior to cholecystectomy if the tumor appears resectable on imaging. In jaundiced patients, a percutaneous transhepatic or endoscopic cholangiogram may be helpful to delineate the extent of biliary tree involvement. The role of PET scanning in gallbladder cancer is yet to be fully defined but can be utilized in both staging and surveillance.Treatment. Surgical resection remains the only curative option for gallbladder cancer. While most patients are unresectable at the time of diagnosis, if preoperative staging suggests a potentially resectable tumor, exploration for tissue diagno-sis, formal pathologic staging, and possible curative resection are warranted.Tumors limited to the lamina propria or muscular layer of the gallbladder (T1) are usually identified incidentally, after laparoscopic cholecystectomy for gallstone disease. There is near universal agreement that simple laparoscopic cholecys-tectomy is an adequate treatment for T1 lesions and results in a near 100% overall 5-year survival rate. When the tumor invades the perimuscular connective tissue without extension beyond the serosa or into the liver (T2 tumors), an extended cholecystectomy should be performed.85 This includes addi-tional resection of liver segments IVb and V, as well as lymph-adenectomy of the cystic duct and pericholedochal, portal, right celiac, and posterior pancreatoduodenal lymph nodes. Given the extent of this operation, an open approach is stan-dard. One-half of patients with T2 tumors are found to have nodal disease on pathologic examination, highlighting the importance of regional lymphadenectomy as part of surgery for T2 cancers.86 For tumors that grow beyond the serosa, or invade the liver or other adjacent organs (T3), there is a higher likelihood of intraperitoneal or distant spread. However, if no peritoneal or nodal involvement is found, complete tumor excision with an extended right hepatectomy and possible cau-date lobectomy with lymphadenectomy must be performed for adequate tumor clearance. In addition, if a T2 or T3 tumor is identified incidentally after laparoscopic cholecystectomy, and the patient is returning to the OR for liver resection and lymph-adenectomy, the previous laparoscopic port sites must also be excised due to the high risk of recurrence in these locations. T4 tumors are those that have grown into major blood vessels or two or more structures outside the liver, and they are typically considered unresectable.Due to the high frequency of late diagnosis, palliative procedures for unresectable cancer, jaundice, or duodenal obstructions remain the most frequently performed surgery for gallbladder cancers. Today, patients with obstructive jaundice can frequently be managed with either endoscopic or percutane-ously placed biliary stents. Various regimens of neoadjuvant, adjuvant, and definitive chemoradiotherapy have been trialed in gallbladder cancer. Overall, benefits have been marginal, but treatment may improve survival time by several months. These therapies can be offered to patients in conjunction with resec-tion for curative intent or as definitive therapy, but no standard recommendation exists for their use.85-87Prognosis. Most patients with gallbladder cancer have unre-sectable disease at the time of diagnosis. The overall 5-year sur-vival rate of all patients with gallbladder cancer is <5%, with a median survival of 6 months.87 However, patients with T1 dis-ease treated with cholecystectomy have an excellent prognosis (85–100% 5-year survival rate). The 5-year survival rate for T2 lesions treated with an extended cholecystectomy (liver segment IVb/V resection) and lymphadenectomy is >70% compared to 25% to 40% for T2 patients treated with simple cholecystec-tomy. Patients with advanced (T3 or T4) but resectable gallblad-der cancer are reported to have 5-year survival rates of 20% to 50%, supporting aggressive resection in those patients who can tolerate surgery. The median survival for patients with distant metastasis at the time of presentation is only 1 to 3 months.Recurrence after resection of gallbladder cancer occurs most commonly in the liver or in the celiac or retropancreatic nodes. The prognosis for recurrent disease is very poor, and the main goal of follow-up is to provide palliative care. The most common problems are pruritus and cholangitis associated with obstructive jaundice, bowel obstruction secondary to carcino-matosis, and pain. Death occurs most commonly secondary to biliary sepsis or liver failure.6Figure 32-30. Computed tomography scan of a patient with gall-bladder cancer. The image shown is at the level of the liver hilum. The portal vein is bifurcating into the left and right portal branch. The tumor has invaded segment IV of the liver (arrowheads) and obstructed the common hepatic duct, resulting in intrahepatic ductal dilatation (arrows).Brunicardi_Ch32_p1393-p1428.indd   142211/02/19   2:44 PM 1423GALLBLADDER AND THE EXTRAHEPATIC BILIARY SYSTEMCHAPTER 32CholangiocarcinomaCholangiocarcinoma is a rare tumor arising from the biliary epithelium and may occur anywhere along the biliary tree. About half are located at the hepatic duct bifurcation (Klatskin tumors), with 40% occurring more distally and 10% being intrahepatic.88 Surgical resection offers the only chance for cure, but unfortunately many patients have advanced disease at the time of diagnosis. Therefore, palliative procedures aimed to provide biliary drainage and prevent liver failure and cholangitis are often the only therapeutic possibilities available.Incidence. The autopsy incidence of bile duct carcinoma is about 0.3%. The overall incidence of cholangiocarcinoma in the United States is about 1 per 100,000 people per year, with approximately 2500 new cases diagnosed annually. The disease has a slight male predominance and an average age of presenta-tion between 50 and 70 years.88Etiology. Most cases of extrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma develop de novo with no identifiable risk factors. However, there is an increased risk of cholangiocarcinoma in patients with choledochal cysts, ulcerative colitis, hepatolithiasis, biliary-enteric anastomoses, hepatitis B and C, cirrhosis, bili-ary tract infections with Clonorchis (liver flukes), and chronic typhoid carriers. Exposure to dietary nitrosamines, Thorotrast, or dioxin also puts patients at increased risk for cholangiocar-cinoma.88 Patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis have a 5% to 10% lifetime risk of developing cholangiocarcinoma with typical disease onset in their 40s. For this reason, these patients require regular screening.67 Features common to most risk factors include biliary stasis, bile duct stones, and infection.Pathology. Over 95% of bile duct cancers are ductal adeno-carcinomas with the vast majority occurring in the extrahepatic biliary tree. Morphologically, they are divided into nodular (the most common type), scirrhous, diffusely infiltrating, or pap-illary. Anatomically, they are divided into distal, perihilar or intrahepatic tumors. Intrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas make up approximately 10% of cases and are typically treated like hepatocellular carcinoma, with hepatectomy when possible and transplant when unresectable. About half of all cholangiocar-cinomas are located in the perihilar region with the remaining 40% occurring more distally in the common bile duct.Perihilar cholangiocarcinomas, also referred to as Klatskin tumors, are further classified based on anatomic loca-tion by the Bismuth-Corlette classification (Fig. 32-31). Type I tumors are confined to the common hepatic duct, but type II tumors involve the bifurcation without involvement of the secondary intrahepatic ducts. Type IIIa and IIIb tumors extend into the right and left secondary intrahepatic ducts, respec-tively. Type IV tumors involve both the right and left secondary intrahepatic ducts.Clinical Manifestations and Diagnosis. Painless jaundice is the most common initial presentation in patients with cholangio-carcinoma. Pruritus, mild right upper quadrant pain, anorexia, fatigue, and weight loss may also be present. Cholangitis is the presenting symptom in about 10% of patients. Except for jaundice, physical examination is usually normal in patients with cholangiocarcinoma. Occasionally, asymptomatic patients are found to have cholangiocarcinoma while being evaluated for elevated liver function tests. Tumor markers, such as CA 125 and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), can be elevated in cholangiocarcinoma but tend to be nonspecific because they also increase in other GI and gynecologic malignancies. The tumor marker most commonly used to aid the diagnosis of chol-angiocarcinoma is CA 19-9, which has a sensitivity of 79% and specificity of 98% if the serum value is >129 U/mL.89 How-ever, mild elevations in CA 19-9 can also be seen in cholangitis, biliary obstruction, other GI and gynecologic neoplasms, and patients who lack the Lewis blood type antigen.90The initial workup for suspected cholangiocarcinoma includes abdominal imaging with ultrasound or CT scanning. Perihilar tumors will cause dilatation of the intrahepatic bili-ary tree, but a normal or collapsed gallbladder and extrahepatic bile ducts distal to the tumor. Distal bile duct cancer will lead to dilatation of the extraand intrahepatic bile ducts as well as the gallbladder. Initial imaging is important to determine the level of obstruction and to rule out the presence of bile duct stones as the cause of the obstructive jaundice (Fig. 32-32). It is usually difficult to visualize the tumor itself on ultrasound, CT, or even MRCP, but any of these modalities can provide an outline of biliary anatomy, an estimate of the level of obstruc-tion, evaluation of portal vein patency, and screening for nearby lymphadenopathy. Detailed evaluation of the biliary anatomy and tumor itself is best completed through cholangiography. ERCP is generally adequate, but in cases where the proximal extent of the tumor remains in question, PTC may be required to determine resectability.Tissue diagnosis may be difficult to obtain. Current diag-nostic techniques including fine-needle aspiration (percutaneous or endoscopic), and biliary brushings have been shown to have a low sensitivity in detecting malignancy, anywhere between 15% and 60%. Choledochoscopy with direct visualization and sam-pling of intraluminal masses may be able to improve diagnosis rates but is only available in specialized centers (see Fig. 32-10). Patients with potentially resectable disease should, therefore, be offered surgical exploration based on radiographic findings and clinical suspicion.91Type IIIbType IIType IType IVType IIIaFigure 32-31. Bismuth-Corlette classification of perihilar bile duct tumors (Klatskin tumors).Brunicardi_Ch32_p1393-p1428.indd   142311/02/19   2:44 PM 1424SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITreatment. Surgical excision is the only potentially cura-tive treatment for cholangiocarcinoma. In the past one to two decades, improvements in surgical techniques have resulted in lower mortality and better outcomes for patients undergoing aggressive surgical excision for cholangiocarcinoma.92Despite improvements in ultrasonography, CT scanning, and MRI, more than one-half of patients who are explored are found to have peritoneal implants, nodal or hepatic metastasis, or locally advanced disease that precludes resection. Patients suspected of having resectable disease should first undergo diagnostic laparoscopy. Those who are found to have previously unidentified metastatic disease should undergo cholecystectomy and surgical bypass for biliary decompression.93For curative resection, the location and local exten-sion of the tumor dictates the extent of the surgery required. Distal bile duct tumors are often resectable but may require pancreaticoduodenectomy (Whipple procedure). For patients with distal bile duct cancer found to be unresectable on sur-gical exploration, Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy, chole-cystectomy, and gastrojejunostomy to prevent gastric outlet obstruction should be performed. Perihilar tumors involving the bifurcation or proximal common hepatic duct (Bismuth-Corlette type I or II) with no signs of vascular involvement are candidates for local tumor excision with portal lymphadenec-tomy, cholecystectomy, common bile duct excision, and bilat-eral Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomies. If the tumor involves the right or left hepatic duct (Bismuth-Corlette type IIIa or IIIb), right or left hepatic lobectomy, respectively, should also be performed. Frequently, resection of the adjacent caudate lobe is required because of direct extension into caudate bili-ary radicals or parenchyma.91 Type IV Klatskin tumors, those with more extensive involvement of both hepatic ducts and intrahepatic spread, are often considered unresectable or only treatable with liver transplantation.The best outcomes in perihilar cholangiocarcinoma are seen in patients who undergo neoadjuvant chemoradiation followed by liver transplantation. However, there are very strict inclusion criteria for transplantation, and few patients qualify.88 Patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis who develop chol-angiocarcinoma should be treated with liver transplant when-ever possible.Nonoperative biliary decompression can be performed for patients with unresectable disease on initial presentation. Endoscopic placement of expandable metal stents is often the preferred approach. For very proximal or intrahepatic tumors, percutaneous drainage catheters may be necessary to fully decompress the biliary tree (see Fig. 32-12). There is a sig-nificantly higher risk of cholangitis in patients with drainage catheters or stents compared to those with surgical bypasses. In addition, stent occlusion is not uncommon. Nevertheless, operative intervention is not warranted in patients with meta-static disease.94There is no proven role for adjuvant chemotherapy in the treatment of cholangiocarcinoma. Adjuvant radiation therapy has also not been shown to increase either quality of life or survival in resected patients. Patients with unresect-able disease can be offered palliative chemotherapy, typically with gemcitabine and cisplatin, but the response rates are low  (10–20%), and the survival benefit is marginal. The combina-tion of radiation and chemotherapy may be more effective than either treatment alone for unresectable disease, but no data from randomized trials are available. Giving chemoradiation to these patients can be difficult because of the high incidence of cholangitis. External-beam radiation has not been shown to be an effective treatment for unresected disease. The use of interstitial (intraoperative) radiation, brachytherapy with iridium-192 via percutaneous or endoscopic stents, and com-bined interstitial and external-beam radiation for unresectable cholangiocarcinoma has been reported with some encouraging results. However, no randomized, prospective trials have been reported.91 Photodynamic therapy has been proposed as a  palliative measure for patients with unresectable disease and ABFigure 32-32. A. An endoscopic retrograde cholangiogram in a patient with cancer of the common hepatic duct (arrowheads). The common bile duct is of normal size, as is the cystic duct (arrow), but the proximal biliary tree is dilated. The gallbladder is not visualized because of tumor obstructing its neck. B. An ultrasound from the same patient showing dilated ducts and tumor obstructing the common hepatic duct (arrow). The walls of the bile ducts adjacent to the obstruction are thickened by tumor infiltration (arrowheads).Brunicardi_Ch32_p1393-p1428.indd   142411/02/19   2:44 PM 1425GALLBLADDER AND THE EXTRAHEPATIC BILIARY SYSTEMCHAPTER 32has been found to prolong survival and improve quality of life in patients with biliary stents.95,96Prognosis. Most patients with perihilar cholangiocarcinoma present with advanced, unresectable disease. Median survival in this population is between 5 and 8 months. The most common causes of death are hepatic failure and cholangitis. The overall 5-year survival rate for patients with resectable perihilar cholan-giocarcinoma is between 10% and 30%, but for patients with neg-ative margins, it may be as high as 40%. The operative mortality for perihilar cholangiocarcinoma is 6% to 8%. Patients with distal cholangiocarcinoma are more likely to have resectable disease and improved prognosis compared to perihilar cholangiocarci-noma. The overall 5-year survival rate for resectable distal dis-ease is 30% to 50%, and the median survival is 32 to 38 months. Patients who receive liver transplantation for cholangiocarcinoma can experience 5-year disease free survival rates as high as 68%.The greatest risk factors for recurrence after resection are the presence of positive margins and lymph node–positive tumors. Therapy for recurrent disease concentrates on palliation of symptoms and additional surgery is not recommended for patients with recurrent disease.REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Clemente CD. Gray’s Anatomy. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger; 1985:132.	2.	Klein AS, Lillemoe KD, Yeo CJ, et al. Liver, biliary tract, and pancreas. In: O’Leary JP, ed. Physiologic Basis of Surgery. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; 1996:441.	3.	Molmenti EP, Pinto PA, Klein J, et al. Normal and variant arte-rial supply of the liver and gallbladder. Pediatr Transplant. 2003;7:80-82.	4.	Boyer J. Bile secretion—models, mechanisms, and malfunc-tions. A perspective on the development of modern cellular and molecular concepts of bile secretion and cholestasis. J Gastro-enterol. 1996;31:475-481.	5.	Geoghegan J, Pappas TN. Clinical uses of gut peptides. Ann Surg. 1997;225:145-154.	6.	McDonnell CO, Bailey I, Stumpf T, et al. The effect of cho-lecystectomy on plasma cholecystokinin. Am J Gastroenterol. 2002;97:2189-2192.	7.	Woods CM, Mawe GM, Toule J, Saccone GTP. The sphinc-ter of Oddi: understanding its control and function. Neuro-gastroenterol Motil. 2005;17(supp 1):31-40.	8.	Yokohata K, Tanaka M. Cyclic motility of the sphincter of Oddi. J Hepato-Biliary-Pancreatic Surg. 2000;7:178-182.	9.	Lee HJ, Choi BI, Han JK, et al. Three-dimensional ultraso-nography using the minimum transparent mode in obstruc-tive biliary diseases: early experience. J Ultrasound Med. 2002;21:443-453.	10.	Ralls PW, Jeffrey RB, Jr, Kane RA, et al. Ultrasonography.  Gastroenterol Clin North Am. 2002;31:801-825.	11.	O’Connor OJ, Maher MM. Imaging in cholecystitis. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2011;196:W367-W374.	12.	Wexler RS, Greene GS, Scott M. Left hepatic and common hepatic ductal bile leaks demonstrated by Tc-99m HIDA scan and percutaneous transhepatic cholangiogram. Clin Nucl Med. 1994;19:59-60.	13.	Richmond BK, DiBaise J, Ziessman H. Utilization of cholecys-tokinin cholescintigraphy in clinical practice. J Am Coll Surg. 2013;217(2):317-323.	14.	Magnuson TH, Bender JS, Duncan MD, et al. Utility of mag-netic resonance cholangiography in the evaluation of biliary obstruction. J Am Coll Surg. 1999;189:63-72.	15.	Liu TH, Consorti ET, Kawashima A, et al. Patient evaluation and management with selective use of magnetic resonance cholangiography and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopan-creatography before laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Ann Surg. 2001;234:33-40.	16.	Glomsaker T, Hoff G, KvalØy JT, et al. Patterns and predictive factors of complications after endoscopic retrograde cholangio-pancreatography. Br J Surg. 2013;100(3):373-380.	17.	Dumonceau JM, Andriulli A, Elmunzer BJ, et al. Prophylaxis of post-ERCP pancreatitis: European Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ESGE) Guideline—updated June 2014. Endoscopy. 2014;46(9):799-815.	18.	Tischendorf JJ, Kruger M, Trautwein C, et al. Cholangioscopic characterization of dominant bile duct stenoses in patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis. Endoscopy. 2006;38:665-669.	19.	Hui CK, Lai KC, Ng M, et al. Retained common bile duct stones: a comparison between biliary stenting and complete clearance of stones by electrohydraulic lithotripsy. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2003;17:289-296.	20.	Tsuyuguchi T, Saisho H, Ishihara T, et al. Long-term follow-up after treatment of Mirizzi syndrome by peroral cholangioscopy. Gastrointest Endosc. 2000;52:639-644.	21.	Fabbri C, Luigiano C, Lisotti A, et al. Endoscopic ultrasound-guided treatments: are we getting evidence based—a systematic review. World J Gastroenterol. 2014;20(26):8424-8448.	22.	Stinton LM, Shaffer EA. Epidemiology of gallbladder disease: cholelithiasis and cancer. Gut Liver. 2012;6(2):172-187.	23.	Nakeeb A, Comuzzie AG, Martin L, et al. Gallstones: genetics versus environment. Ann Surg. 2002;235:842-849.	24.	Sakorafas GH, Milingos D, Peros G. Asymptomatic choleli-thiasis: is cholecystectomy really needed? A critical reappraisal 15 years after the introduction of laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Dig Dis Sci. 2007;52:1313-1325.	25.	Attili AF, De Santis A, Capri R, et al. The natural history of gallstones: the GREPCO experience. The GREPCO Group. Hepatology. 1995;21:655-660.	26.	Strasberg SM. The pathogenesis of cholesterol gallstones a review. J Gastrointest Surg. 1998;2:109-125.	27.	Stewart L, Oesterle AL, Erdan I, et al. Pathogenesis of pigment gallstones in Western societies: the central role of bacteria.  J Gastrointest Surg. 2002;6:891-903.	28.	Trowbridge RL, Rutkowski NK, Shojania KG. Does this patient have acute cholecystitis? JAMA. 2003;289:80-86.	29.	Duncan CB, Riall TS. Evidence-based current surgical prac-tice: calculous gallbladder disease. J Gastrointest Surg. 2012;16(11):2011-2025.	30.	Menzo EL, Schnall R, Von Rueden D. Lithotripsy in the laparo-scopic era. JSLS. 2005;9(3):358-361.	31.	Weber DM. Laparoscopic surgery: an excellent approach in elderly patients. Arch Surg. 2003;138:1083-1088.	32.	Kaoutzanis C, Davies E, Leichtle SW, et al. Abdominal ultra-sound versus hepato-imino diacetic acid scan in diagnos-ing acute cholecystitis—what is the real benefit? J Surg Res. 2014:1;188(1):44-52.	33.	Hunter JG. Acute cholecystitis revisited: get it while it’s hot. Ann Surg. 1998;227(4):468-469.	34.	Ansaloni L, Pisano M, Coccolini F, et al. 2016 WSES guidelines on acute calculous cholecystitis. World J Emerg Surg. 2016;11:25.	35.	Sakpal SV, Bindra SS, Chamberlain RS. Laparoscopic cho-lecystectomy conversion rates two decades later. JSLS. 2010;14(4):476-483.	36.	Cherng N, Witkowski E, Sneider EB, et al. Use of cholecystos-tomy tubes in the management of patients with primary diagno-sis of acute cholecystitis. JACS. 2012;214:196-201.	37.	Chikamori F, Kuniyoshi N, Shibuya S, et al. Early scheduled laparoscopic cholecystectomy following percutaneous transhe-patic gallbladder drainage for patients with acute cholecystitis. Surg Endosc. 2002;16:1704-1707.Brunicardi_Ch32_p1393-p1428.indd   142511/02/19   2:44 PM 1426SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	38.	Ko C, Lee S. Epidemiology and natural history of common bile duct stones and prediction of disease. Gastrointest Endosc. 2002;56:S165-169.	39.	Giljaca V, Gurusamy KS, Takwoingi Y, et al. Endoscopic ultra-sound versus magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography for common bile duct stones. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015:26;(2):CD011549.	40.	Tranter S, Thompson M. Comparison of endoscopic sphincter-otomy and laparoscopic exploration of the common bile duct. Br J Surg. 2002;89:1495-1504.	41.	Dasari BV, Tan CJ, Gurusamy KS, et al. Surgical versus endo-scopic treatment of bile duct stones. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;(12):CD003327.	42.	Lilly MC, Arregui ME. A balanced approach to choledocholi-thiasis. Surg Endosc. 2001;15:467-472.	43.	Lipsett PA, Pitt HA. Acute cholangitis. Front Biosci. 2003;8:S1229-S1239.	44.	Lillemoe KD. Surgical treatment of biliary tract infections. Am Surg. 2000;66:138-144.	45.	Li VK, Yum JL, Yeung YP. Optimal timing of elective lapa-roscopic cholecystectomy after acute cholangitis and sub-sequent clearance of choledocholithiasis. Am J Surg. 2010;200(4):483-488.	46.	Johnstone M, Marriott P, Royle TJ, et al. The impact of timing of cholecystectomy following gallstone pancreatitis. Surgeon. 2014;12(3):134-140.	47.	Nuño-Guzmán CM, Marín-Contreras ME, Figueroa-Sánchez M, Corona JL. Gallstone ileus, clinical presentation, diag-nostic and treatment approach. World J Gastrointest Surg. 2016;8(1):65-76.	48.	Sperling RM, Koch J, Sandhu JS, et al. Recurrent pyogenic chol-angitis in Asian immigrants to the United States: natural history and role of therapeutic ERCP. Dig Dis Sci. 1997;42:865-871.	49.	Thinh NC, Breda Y, Faucompret S, et al. Oriental biliary lithia-sis. Retrospective study of 690 patients treated surgically over 8 years at Hospital 108 in Hanoi (Vietnam). Med Trop (Mars). 2001;61:509-511.	50.	Akhan O, Akinci D, Ozmen MN. Percutaneous cholecystos-tomy. Eur J Radiol. 2002;43:229-236.	51.	Khaitan L, Apelgren K, Hunter J, et al. A report on the Society of American Gastrointestinal Endoscopic Surgeons (SAGES) Outcomes Initiative: what have we learned and what is its potential? Surg Endosc. 2003;17:365-370.	52.	Richards C, Edwards J, Culver D, et al. Does using a laparo-scopic approach to cholecystectomy decrease the risk of surgi-cal site infection? Ann Surg. 2003;237:358-362.	53.	Halbert C, Pagkratis S, Yang J, et al. Beyond the learning curve: incidence of bile duct injuries following laparoscopic cholecys-tectomy normalize to open in the modern era. Surg Endosc. 2016;30(6):2239-2243.	54.	The SAGES Safe Cholecystectomy Program. Strategies for minimizing bile duct injuries: adopting a universal culture of safety in cholecystectomy. Available at:https://www.sages.org/safe-cholecystectomy-program/. Accessed July 28, 2018.	55.	Ford JA, Soop M, Du J, Loveday BP, Rodgers M. Systematic review of intraoperative cholangiography in cholecystectomy. Br J Surg. 2012;99(2):160-167.	56.	Biffl W, Moore E, Offner P, et al. Routine intraoperative ultra-sonography with selective cholangiography reduces bile duct complications during laparoscopic cholecystectomy. J Am Coll Surg. 2001;193:272-280.	57.	Ragulin-Coyne E, Witkowski ER, Chau Z, et al. Is routine intra-operative cholangiogram necessary in the twenty-first century? A national view. J Gastrointest Surg. 2013;17(3):434-442.	58.	Flum DR, Dellinger EP, Cheadle A, et al. Intraoperative chol-angiography and risk of common bile duct injury during chole-cystectomy. JAMA. 2003;289:1639-1644.	59.	Halpin VJ, Dunnegan D, Soper NJ. Laparoscopic intracorporeal ultrasound versus fluoroscopic intraoperative cholangiography: after the learning curve. Surg Endosc. 2002;16:336-341.	60.	Zheng C, Huang Y, Xie E, Xie D, Peng Y, Wang X. Laparo-scopic common bile duct exploration: a safe and definitive treat-ment for elderly patients. Surg Endosc. 2017;31(6):2541-2547.	61.	Petelin JB. Laparoscopic common bile duct exploration. Surg Endosc. 2003:Nov;17(11):1705-1715.	62.	George J, Baillie J. Biliary and gallbladder dyskinesia. Curr Treat Options Gastroenterol. 2007;10(4):322-327.	63.	Linder JD, Klapow JC, Linder SD, et al. Incomplete response to endoscopic sphincterotomy in patients with sphincter of Oddi dysfunction: evidence for a chronic pain disorder. Am J Gastro-enterol. 2003;98:1738-1743.	64.	Huffman JL, Schenker S. Acute acalculous cholecystitis: a review. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010;8(1):15-22.	65.	Ryu JK, Ryu KH, Kim KH. Clinical features of acute acalcu-lous cholecystitis. J Clin Gastroenterol. 2003;36:166-169.	66.	Lipsett PA, Pitt HA. Surgical treatment of choledochal cysts. J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Surg. 2003;10:352-359.	67.	Hirschfield GM, Karlsen TH, Lindor KD, Adams DH. Primary sclerosing cholangitis. Lancet. 2013;382(9904):1587-1599.	68.	Michales A, Levy C. Endoscopic and surgical manage-ment of primary sclerosing cholangitis. Medscape J Med. 2008;10(10):242.	69.	Lillemoe KD, Melton GB, Cameron JL, et al. Postoperative bile duct strictures: Management and outcome in the 1990s. Ann Surg. 2000;232:430-431.	70.	Melton GB, Lillemoe KD. The current management of postop-erative bile duct strictures. Adv Surg. 2002;36:193-221.	71.	Archer SB, Brown DW, Smith CD, et al. Bile duct injury during laparoscopic cholecystectomy: results of a national survey. Ann Surg. 2001;234:549-558.	72.	Halbert C, Altieri MS, Yang J, et al. Long-term outcomes of patients with common bile duct injury following laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Surg Endosc. 2016;30(10):4294-4299.	73.	Barrett M, Asbun HJ, Chien HL, Brunt LM, Telem DA. Bile duct injury and morbidity following cholecystectomy: a need for improvement. Surg Endosc. 2017. Available at: https://doi .org/10.1007/s00464-017-5847-8. Accessed July 28, 2018.	74.	Strasberg SM. Avoidance of biliary injury during laparoscopic cholecystectomy. J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Surg. 2002;9: 543-547.	75.	Way LW, Stewart L, Gantert W, et al. Causes and preven-tion of laparoscopic bile duct injuries: analysis of 252 cases from a human factors and cognitive psychology perspective  [Comment]. Ann Surg. 2003;237(4):460-469.	76.	Halawani HM, Tamim H, Khalifeh F, Mailhac A, Jamali FR. Impact of intraoperative cholangiography on postoperative mor-bidity and readmission: analysis of the NSQIP database. Surg Endosc. 2016;30(12):5395-5403.	77.	van den Bos J, Schols RM, Luyer MD, et al. Near-infrared fluorescence cholangiography assisted laparoscopic cholecys-tectomy versus conventional laparoscopic cholecystectomy (FALCON trial): study protocol for a multicentre randomised controlled trial. BMJ Open. 2016;26;6(8):e011668.	78.	Melton GB, Lillemoe KD, Cameron JL, et al. Major bile duct injuries associated with laparoscopic cholecystectomy: effect of surgical repair on quality of life. Ann Surg. 2002;235:888-895.	79.	Grobmyer SR, Lieberman MD, Daly JM. Gallbladder cancer in the twentieth century: single institution’s experience. World J Surg. 2004;28:47-49.	80.	Hundal R, Shaffer EA. Gallbladder cancer: epidemiology and outcome. Clin Epidemiol. 2014;6:99-109.	81.	Lowenfels AB, Walker AM, Althaus DP, et al. Gallstone growth, size, and risk of gallbladder cancer: an interracial study. Int J Epidemiol. 1998;18:50-54.Brunicardi_Ch32_p1393-p1428.indd   142611/02/19   2:44 PM 1427GALLBLADDER AND THE EXTRAHEPATIC BILIARY SYSTEMCHAPTER 32	82.	Csendes A, Burgos AM, Csendes P, et al. Late follow-up of polypoid lesions of the gallbladder smaller than 10 mm. Ann Surg. 2001;234:657-660.	83.	Wagholikar G, Behari A, Krishnani N, et al. Early gallbladder cancer. J Am Coll Surg. 2002;194:137-141.	84.	Kim JH, Kim TK, Eun HW. Preoperative evaluation of gall-bladder carcinoma: efficacy of combined use of MR imag-ing, MR cholangiography, and contrast-enhanced dual phase three dimensional MR angiography. J Magn Reson Imaging. 2002;16:676-684.	85.	Bartlett DL, Fong Y, Fortner JG, et al. Long-term results after resection for gallbladder cancer. Implications for staging and management. Ann Surg. 1996;224:639-646.	86.	Wakai T, Shirai Y, Hatakeyama K. Radical second resection provides survival benefit for patients with T2 gallbladder car-cinoma first discovered after laparoscopic cholecystectomy. World J Surg. 2002;26:867-871.	87.	Noshiro H, Chijiiwa K, Yamaguchi K, et al. Factors affecting surgical outcome for gallbladder carcinoma. Hepatogastroen-terology. 2003;50:939-944.	88.	Razumilava N, Gores GJ. Cholangiocarcinoma. Lancet. 2014;383(9935):2168-2179.	89.	Nehls O, Gregor M, Klump B. Serum and bile markers for chol-angiocarcinoma. Semin Liver Dis. 2004;24:139-154.	90.	Siqueira E, Schoen RE, Silverman W, et al. Detecting cholan-giocarcinoma in patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis. Gastrointest Endosc. 2005;56:40-47.	91.	Lillemoe KD, Cameron JL. Surgery for hilar cholangiocarci-noma: the Johns Hopkins approach. J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Surg. 2000;7:115-121.	92.	Mulholland MW, Yahanda A, Yeo CJ. Multidisciplinary management of perihilar bile duct cancer. J Am Coll Surg. 2001;193(4):440-447.	93.	Vollmer CM, Drebin JA, Middleton WD, et al. Utility of staging laparoscopy in subsets of peripancreatic and biliary malignan-cies [Comment]. Ann Surg. 2002;235:1-7.	94.	Strasberg SM. ERCP and surgical intervention in pancre-atic and biliary malignancies. Gastrointest Endosc. 2002;56: S213-S217.	95.	Ortner ME, Caca K, Berr F, et al. Successful photodynamic therapy for nonresectable cholangiocarcinoma: a randomized prospective study. Gastroenterology. 2003;125:1355-1363.	96.	Cheon YK, Lee TY, Lee SM, Yoon JY, Shim CS. Longterm out-come of photodynamic therapy compared with biliary stenting alone in patients with advanced hilar cholangiocarcinoma. HPB (Oxford). 2012;14(3):185-193.97.	DesJardins H, Duy L, Scheirey C, Schnelldorfer T. Porcelain Gallbladder: Is Observation a Safe Option in Select Popula-tions? J Am Coll Surg. 2018 Jun;226(6):1064–1069.Brunicardi_Ch32_p1393-p1428.indd   142711/02/19   2:44 PM
# Chunk 8935
Brunicardi_Ch32_p1393-p1428.indd   142811/02/19   2:44 PMThis page intentionally left blank

PancreasWilliam E. Fisher, Dana K. Andersen,  John A. Windsor, Vikas Dudeja,  and F. Charles Brunicardi 33chapterANATOMYThe pancreas is perhaps the most unforgiving organ in the human body, leading most surgeons to avoid even palpating it unless necessary. Situated deep in the center of the abdomen, the pancreas is surrounded by numerous important structures and major blood vessels. Seemingly minor trauma to the pan-creas can result in the release of pancreatic enzymes and cause life-threatening pancreatitis. Therefore, knowledge of the rela-tionships of the pancreas to surrounding structures is critically important for all surgeons to ensure that pancreatic injury is avoided during abdominal surgery.Gross AnatomyThe pancreas is a retroperitoneal organ that lies in an oblique position, sloping upward from the C-loop of the duodenum to the splenic hilum (Fig. 33-1). In an adult, the pancreas weighs 75 to 100 g and is about 15 to 20 cm long. The fact that the pan-creas is situated so deeply in the abdomen and is sealed in the retroperitoneum explains the poorly localized and sometimes ill-defined nature with which pancreatic pathology presents. Patients with pancreatic cancer without bile duct obstruction usually present after months of vague upper abdominal discom-fort, or no antecedent symptoms at all. Due to its retroperitoneal location, pain associated with pancreatitis often is characterized as penetrating through to the back.Regions of the PancreasSurgeons typically describe the location of pathology within the pancreas in relation to four regions: the head, neck, body, and tail. The head of the pancreas is nestled in the C-loop of the duodenum and is posterior to the transverse mesocolon. Just pos-terior to the head of the pancreas lie the vena cava, the right renal artery, and both renal veins. The neck of the pancreas lies directly anterior to the portal vein. At the inferior border of the neck of the pancreas, the superior mesenteric vein joins the splenic vein and then continues toward the porta hepatis as the portal vein. The inferior mesenteric vein often joins the splenic vein near Anatomy1429Gross Anatomy / 1429Regions of the Pancreas / 1429Pancreatic Duct Anatomy / 1432Vascular and Lymphatic Anatomy / 1433Neuroanatomy / 1435Histology and Physiology1435Exocrine Pancreas / 1435Endocrine Pancreas / 1437Islet Distribution / 1439Acute Pancreatitis1439Definition, Incidence, and  Epidemiology / 1439Etiology / 1440Gallstones / 1440Alcohol / 1440Iatrogenic / 1441Hereditary Pancreatitis / 1441Tumors / 1441Hyperlipidemia / 1441Drugs / 1441Pathophysiology / 1441Precipitating Events / 1441Intrapancreatic Events / 1442Systemic Events / 1443Management of Acute Pancreatitis / 1443Diagnosis / 1444Pain Management / 1444Predicting Severity / 1444Classification of Severity / 1445Determining Etiology / 1446Fluid Resuscitation / 1446Nutritional Support / 1446Cross-Sectional Imaging / 1446Therapeutic Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography / 1447Antibiotics / 1447Managing Local Complications / 1447Managing Organ Failure / 1448Cholecystectomy / 1449Diabetes / 1449Chronic Pancreatitis1450Definition, Incidence, and  Prevalence / 1450Etiology / 1450Genetic Causes / 1450Alcohol / 1451Hyperparathyroidism / 1452Hyperlipidemia / 1452Classification / 1452Chronic Calcific (Lithogenic)  Pancreatitis / 1452Chronic Obstructive Pancreatitis / 1453Chronic Inflammatory Pancreatitis / 1454Tropical (Nutritional) Pancreatitis / 1455Asymptomatic Pancreatic Fibrosis / 1455Idiopathic Pancreatitis / 1455Pathology / 1456Presentation, Natural History,  and Complications / 1460Complications / 1465Treatment / 1468Pancreatic Neoplasms1480Neoplasms of the Endocrine  Pancreas / 1480Insulinoma / 1480Noninsulinoma Hyperinsulinemia Hypoglycemia Syndrome / 1481Gastrinoma / 1481Vasoactive Intestinal  Peptide-Secreting Tumor / 1482Glucagonoma / 1482Somatostatinoma / 1483Nonfunctioning Pancreatic  Endocrine Tumors / 1483Neoplasms of the Exocrine Pancreas / 1484Workup of Asymptomatic Pancreatic  Cystic Neoplasms / 1504Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   142901/03/19   6:44 PM 1430Key Points1	Incomplete fusion of the dorsal and ventral pancreatic ducts results in pancreas divisum, but a variety of ductal anomalies can be seen. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography as well as endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography can identify these ductal anomalies, and clarification of the ductal pattern of the pancreas is important before attempts at interventions.2	The “replaced right hepatic artery” occurs in 15% of patients and needs to be identified preoperatively to prevent inadvertent injury with resulting hepatic necrosis. Anomalous hepatic arterial anatomy can result in hepatic ischemia during dissection of the porta hepatis as well. “Thin cut” multidetector computed tomographic images are usually able to identify the relevant arterial and venous patterns around the pancreas.3	Regardless of the etiology, the management of the early phase of acute pancreatitis is critical to achieve a success-ful outcome. Aggressive fluid resuscitation and early enteral feeding both reduce the risk of complications. It is no longer considered appropriate to “rest the pancreas” if the patient can tolerate enteral nutrients.4	Surgical intervention in acute pancreatitis is reserved for patients with infected collections or infected necrosis only, or to relieve an impacted gallstone in the ampulla if endo-scopic or radiologic treatments are unsuccessful. Infection is usually confirmed by a pattern of air in the retroperitoneum on computed tomographic scan or by documentation of bac-teria on Gram’s stain or culture from fine-needle aspiration of a suspected infected fluid collection. Fine-needle aspira-tion of suspicious fluid collections should not be converted to percutaneous drainage unless infection is confirmed and the consensus decision has been made that percutaneous drainage is appropriate for the individual patient.5	The appearance of chronic pancreatitis on computed tomo-graphic scan varies dramatically, and multiple diagnostic studies are usually needed to establish the extent of disease. Calcific pancreatitis is not a marker of alcoholic pancreati-tis alone, and it rarely indicates autoimmune pancreatitis. Endoscopic ultrasound provides a better assessment of the disease than computed tomography and is useful to disclose indolent or unsuspected cancer, which can occur in up to 10% of patients.6	The nidus of inflammation in chronic pancreatitis due to any cause is the head of the gland. Therefore, treatment approaches that address the disease in the head have the best long-term results. The Whipple procedure, the Beger procedure, and the Frey procedure, with or without longitu-dinal duct drainage, are the best surgical options, as all three approaches remove all or most of the disease in the head of the gland. Although the limited pancreatic procedures (Beger/Frey) have a lower initial rate of endocrine dysfunc-tion, the long-term risk of diabetes is more related to the progression of the underlying disease than to the effects of operation. Level 1 studies confirm that the duodenum pre-serving options are associated with a lower immediate mor-bidity and mortality and therefore, in the absence of a mass or concerns about cancer, are better options than a Whipple procedure for chronic pancreatitis.7	The precursor lesion that probably leads to most cases of ductular adenocarcinoma is the ductal epithelial hyperplasia/dysplasia process described by the pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia classification system. Pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia 2 and pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia 3 lesions may be associated with other, nonspecific changes in pancre-atic morphology seen on imaging studies, or they may only be seen histologically. Resection margins for pancreatic neo-plasms should be examined for advanced pancreatic intraep-ithelial neoplasia stage patterns of ductal hyperplasia to ensure adequate resection status.8	A low threshold for ordering a computed tomography scan with “pancreatic protocol” should be maintained for older adult patients with unexplained, persistent, although vague, abdominal pain. New-onset diabetes in an older adult patient, especially if combined with vague abdominal pain, should prompt a search for pancreatic cancer.9	Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms are small macro-scopic polypoid or plaque-like adenomas that develop in the main pancreatic duct or in side-branch ducts, and secrete mucin. They are often silent symptomatically but cause char-acteristic appearances of small cyst-like collections of mucus or diffuse dilatation of the main pancreatic duct with mucus. These premalignant lesions may be multifocal or single and can evolve into invasive adenocarcinoma in a similar pattern as with other adenomatous polypoid lesions of the gastroin-testinal tract. They have been diagnosed with increasing fre-quency and account for more than one-third of pancreatic resections at some centers. Main-duct intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms are an indication for resection; side-branch intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms have a lower incidence of malignancy and are sometimes followed with serial imaging surveillance.its junction with the portal vein. Sometimes, the inferior mesen-teric vein joins the superior mesenteric vein or merges with the superior mesenteric portal venous junction to form a trifurca-tion (Fig. 33-2). The superior mesenteric artery lies parallel to and just to the left of the superior mesenteric vein. The uncinate process and the head of the pancreas wrap around the right side of the portal vein and end posteriorly near the space between the superior mesenteric vein and superior mesenteric artery. Venous branches draining the pancreatic head and uncinate process enter along the right lateral and posterior sides of the portal vein. There are usually no anterior venous tributaries, and a plane can usually be developed between the neck of the pancreas and the portal and superior mesenteric veins during pancreatic resection, unless the tumor is invading the vein anteriorly. The common bile duct runs in a deep groove on the posterior aspect of the pancreatic head until it passes through the pancreatic parenchyma to join the main pancreatic duct at the ampulla of Vater. The body and tail of the pancreas lie just anterior to the splenic artery and vein. The vein runs in a groove on the back of the pancreas and is fed by multiple fragile venous branches from the pancreatic paren-chyma. These branches must be divided to perform a spleen-sparing distal pancreatectomy. The splenic artery runs parallel and just superior to the vein along the posterior superior edge of the body and tail of the pancreas. The splenic artery often is Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   143001/03/19   6:44 PM 1431PANCREASCHAPTER 33Body of pancreasTail of pancreasNeck of pancreasStomachLiverPortal veinSplenic veinGallbladderDuodenumHead of pancreasUncinate processof pancreasLeft kidneyVena cavaDuodenumAortaStomachHead of pancreasLeft kidneySMASMADuodenumJejunum4th portionof duodenumHead of pancreasPortal veinIMVSMVHead of pancreasDuodenumJejunumTail of pancreasStomachLiverPortal veinHead of pancreasDuodenumSMVFigure 33-1. Pancreatic anatomy as seen on computed tomography. Knowledge of the relationship of the pancreas with surrounding structures is important to ensure that injury is avoided during abdominal surgery. IMV = inferior mesenteric vein; SMA = superior mesenteric artery; SMV = superior mesenteric vein.PortalveinSplenicveinInferiormesentericveinSuperiormesentericveinSuperiormesentericveinSuperiormesentericveinInferiormesentericveinInferiormesentericveinSplenicveinSplenicveinPortalveinPortalveinFigure 33-2. Variations in portal venous anatomy. The superior mesenteric vein joins the splenic vein and then continues toward the porta hepatis as the portal vein. The inferior mesenteric vein often joins the splenic vein near its junction with the portal vein, but sometimes joins the superior mesenteric vein; or the three veins merge as a trifurcation to form the portal vein.Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   143101/03/19   6:44 PM 1432SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIBlindaccessory duct30%60%Minor papilla10%Dorsal anlageVentral anlageVentral budLiver budLesser oraccessorypapillaGreaterpapillaFusion oftwo ductsBile ductDorsal budDuct ofsantoriniDuct ofwirsungFigure 33-3. Embryology of pancreas and duct variations. The duct of Wirsung from the ventral bud connects to the bile duct, while the duct of Santorini from the larger dorsal bud connects to the duodenum. With gut rotation, the two ducts fuse in most cases such that the majority of the pancreas drains through the duct of Wirsung to the major papilla. The duct of Santorini can persist as a blind accessory duct or drain through the lesser papilla. In a minority of patients, the ducts remain separate, and the majority of the pancreas drains through the duct of Santorini, a condition referred to as pancreas divisum.tortuous. The anterior surface of the body of the pancreas is cov-ered by peritoneum. Once the gastrocolic omentum is divided, the body and tail of the pancreas can be seen along the floor of the lesser sac, just posterior to the stomach.Pancreatic pseudocysts commonly develop in this area, and the posterior aspect of the stomach can form the anterior wall of the pseudocyst, allowing drainage into the stomach. The base of the transverse mesocolon attaches to the inferior margin of the body and tail of the pancreas. The transverse mesoco-lon often forms the inferior wall of pancreatic pseudocysts or inflammatory processes, allowing surgical drainage through the transverse mesocolon. The body of the pancreas is anterior to the aorta at the origin of the superior mesenteric artery. The neck of the pancreas is anterior to the vertebral body of L1 and L2, and blunt anteroposterior trauma can compress the neck of the pancreas against the spine, causing parenchymal and, sometimes, ductal injury. The neck divides the pancreas into approximately two equal halves. The small portion of the pan-creas anterior to the left kidney is referred to as the tail and is nestled in the hilum of the spleen near the splenic flexure of the left colon. Awareness of these anatomic relationships is impor-tant to avoid injury to the pancreatic tail during left colectomy or splenectomy.Pancreatic Duct AnatomyAn understanding of embryology is required to appreciate the common variations in pancreatic duct anatomy. The pancreas is formed by the fusion of a ventral and dorsal bud (Fig. 33-3). The duct from the smaller ventral bud, which arises from the hepatic diverticulum, connects directly to the common bile duct. The duct from the larger dorsal bud, which arises from the duodenum, drains directly into the duodenum. The duct of the ventral anlage becomes the duct of Wirsung, and the duct from the dorsal anlage becomes the duct of Santorini. With gut rotation, the ventral anlage rotates to the right and around the posterior side of the duodenum to fuse with the dorsal bud. The ventral anlage becomes the inferior portion of the pancreatic head and the unci-nate process, while the dorsal anlage becomes the body and tail of the pancreas. The ducts from each anlage usually fuse together in the pancreatic head such that most of the pancreas drains through the duct of Wirsung, or main pancreatic duct, into the common channel formed from the bile duct and pancreatic duct. The length of the common channel is variable. In about one-third of patients, the bile duct and pancreatic duct remain distinct to the end of the papilla, the two ducts merge at the end of the papilla in another one-third, and in the remaining one-third, a true common channel is present for a distance of several millimeters. Commonly, the duct from the dorsal anlage, the duct of Santorini, persists as the lesser pancreatic duct, and sometimes drains directly into the duo-denum through the lesser papilla just proximal to the major papilla. In approximately 30% of patients, the duct of Santorini ends as a blind accessory duct and does not empty into the duodenum. In 10% of patients, the ducts of Wirsung and Santorini fail to fuse.1 This results in the majority of the pancreas draining through the duct of Santorini and the lesser papilla, while the inferior portion of the pancreatic head and uncinate process drains through the duct of Wirsung and major papilla. This nor-mal anatomic variant, which occurs in one out of 10 patients, is referred to as pancreas divisum (see Fig. 33-3). In a minority of these patients, the minor papilla can be inadequate to handle the flow of pancreatic juices from the majority of the gland. This rela-tive outflow obstruction can result in pancreatitis and is some-times treated by sphincteroplasty of the minor papilla.The main pancreatic duct is usually only 2 to 3 mm in diameter and runs midway between the superior and inferior borders of the pancreas, usually closer to the posterior than to the anterior surface. Pressure inside the pancreatic duct is about twice that in the common bile duct, which is thought to prevent reflux of bile into the pancreatic duct. The main pancreatic duct joins with the common bile duct and empties at the ampulla of Vater or major papilla, which is located on the medial aspect of the second portion of the duodenum. The muscle fibers around the ampulla form the sphincter of Oddi, which controls the flow of pancreatic and biliary secretions into the duodenum. Contrac-tion and relaxation of the sphincter is regulated by complex neu-ral and hormonal factors. When the accessory pancreatic duct or lesser duct drains into the duodenum, a lesser papilla can be identified approximately 2 cm proximal to the ampulla of Vater.1Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   143201/03/19   6:44 PM 1433PANCREASCHAPTER 33BileductPortalveinAbdominal aortaCeliac trunkSplenic arteryDorsalpancreatic arteryGreatpancreaticarteryCaudalarteryInferiorpancreatic arteryAnterior inferiorpancreaticoduodenal arteryAnterior superiorpancreatico-duodenalarteryPosterior inferiorpancreaticoduodenal arteryPosterior superiorpancreatico-duodenalarteryGastroduodenalarteryHepatic arteryproperCommon hepaticarterySuperiormesenteric arterySpleenDuodenumFigure 33-4. Arterial supply to the pancreas. Multiple arcades in the head and body of the pancreas provide a rich blood supply. The head of the pancreas cannot be resected without devascularizing the duodenum unless a rim of pancreas containing the pancreaticoduodenal arcade is preserved.Vascular and Lymphatic AnatomyThe blood supply to the pancreas comes from multiple branches from the celiac and superior mesenteric arteries (Fig. 33-4). The common hepatic artery gives rise to the gastroduodenal artery before continuing toward the porta hepatis as the proper hepatic artery. The right gastric artery branches off the gastroduodenal artery just superior to the duodenum. The gastroduodenal artery also supplies the superior pancreaticoduodenal artery which divides into the anterior and superior pancreaticoduodenal arteries. These travel inferiorly within the pancreaticoduodenal groove giving off small branches to the duodenum and head of the pancreas. The superior pancreaticoduodenal arteries join the inferior pancreaticoduodenal arteries to complete the arcade. The inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery is a branch off the supe-rior mesenteric artery. Therefore, it is impossible to resect the head of the pancreas without devascularizing the duodenum, unless a rim of pancreas containing the pancreaticoduodenal arcade is preserved. The inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery needs to be controlled when dissecting the head of the pancreas off the SMA during a Whipple procedure. The gastroduodenal artery travels inferiorly anterior to the neck of the pancreas and posterior to the duodenal bulb. A posterior ulcer in the duodenal bulb can erode into the gastroduodenal artery in this location. At the inferior border of the duodenum, the gastroduodenal artery then gives rise to the right gastroepiploic artery then can con-tinue on to join the inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery.Variations in the arterial anatomy occur in one out of five patients. The right hepatic artery, common hepatic artery, or gas-troduodenal arteries can arise from the superior mesenteric artery. In 15% to 20% of patients, the right hepatic artery will arise from the superior mesenteric artery and travel upwards toward the liver along the posterior aspect of the head of the pancreas (referred to as a replaced right hepatic artery). It is important to look for this variation on preoperative com-puted tomographic (CT) scans and in the operating room so the 2replaced hepatic artery is recognized and injury is avoided. The body and tail of the pancreas are supplied by multiple branches of the splenic artery. The splenic artery arises from the celiac trunk and travels along the posterior-superior border of the body and tail of the pancreas toward the spleen. The inferior pancreatic artery usually arises from the superior mesenteric artery and runs to the left along the inferior border of the body and tail of the pancreas, parallel to the splenic artery. Three vessels run perpen-dicular to the long axis of the pancreatic body and tail and con-nect the splenic artery and inferior pancreatic artery. They are, from medial to lateral, the dorsal, great, and caudal pancreatic arteries. These arteries form arcades within the body and tail of the pancreas and account for the rich blood supply of the organ.The venous drainage of the pancreas follows a pattern similar to that of the arterial supply (Fig. 33-5). The veins are usually superficial to the arteries within the parenchyma of the pancreas. There is an anterior and posterior venous arcade within the head of the pancreas. Typically, the superior vein drains directly into the portal vein just above the neck of the pancreas and is often a larger branch of the portal vein which is divided during the Whipple procedure. The posterior infe-rior arcade drains directly into the inferior mesenteric vein at the inferior border of the neck of the pancreas and this is also divided during a Whipple procedure. The anterior inferior pan-creaticoduodenal vein joins the right gastroepiploic vein and the middle colic vein to form a common venous trunk, which enters into the superior mesenteric vein. Traction on the trans-verse colon during colectomy can tear these fragile veins, which then retract into the parenchyma of the pancreas, making control tedious. There also are numerous small venous branches com-ing from the pancreatic parenchyma directly into the lateral and posterior aspect of the portal vein. Venous return from the body and tail of the pancreas drains into the splenic vein.The lymphatic drainage from the pancreas is diffuse and widespread (Fig. 33-6). The profuse network of lymphatic Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   143301/03/19   6:44 PM 1434SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIBileductPortal veinLeft gastric veinSplenic veinInferior mesenteric veinMiddle colic veinAnteroinferiorpancreatico-duodenalveinAnterosuperiorpancreatico-duodenalveinPosterosuperiorpancreatico-duodenalveinRightgastroepiploicveinSuperior mesenteric veinAbdominalaortaSpleenFigure 33-5. Venous drainage from the pancreas. The venous drainage of the pancreas follows a pattern similar to the arterial supply, with the veins usually superficial to the arteries. Anterior traction on the transverse colon can tear fragile branches along the inferior border of the pancreas, which then retract into the parenchyma of the pancreas. Venous branches draining the pancreatic head and uncinate process enter along the right lateral and posterior sides of the portal vein. There are usually no anterior venous tributaries, and a plane can usually be developed between the neck of the pancreas and the portal and superior mesenteric veins.Celiaclymph nodeHepaticlymph nodePyloriclymph nodeAnteriorpancreatico-duodenallymph nodePosteriorpancreaticoduodenallymph nodeSuperior mesentericlymph nodeInferiorbodySuperior body Splenic lymphnodeDuodenumSpleenFigure 33-6. Lymphatic supply to the pancreas. The lymphatic drainage from the pancreas is diffuse and widespread, which explains the high incidence of lymph node metastases and local recurrence of pancreatic cancer. The pancreatic lymphatics also communicate with lymph nodes in the transverse mesocolon and mesentery of the proximal jejunum. Tumors in the body and tail of the pancreas are often unresect-able because they metastasize to these lymph nodes. (Reproduced with permission from Bell RH, Rikkers LF, Mulholland M: Digestive Tract Surgery: A Text and Atlas. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1996.)Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   143401/03/19   6:44 PM 1435PANCREASCHAPTER 33SpleenPancreasEsophagusCeliac ganglionRight vagus nerveLeft vagus nerveSplanchnic nervesDuodenumAbdominal aortaFigure 33-7. Innervation of the pancreas. The pancreas has a rich supply of afferent sensory fibers that travel superiorly to the celiac ganglia. Interruption of these somatic fibers with a celiac plexus block can interfere with transmission of pancreatic pain. (Reproduced with permission from Bell RH, Rikkers LF, Mulholland M: Digestive Tract Surgery: A Text and Atlas. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1996.)vessels and lymph nodes draining the pancreas provides egress to tumor cells arising from the pancreas. This diffuse lymphatic drainage contributes to the fact that pancreatic cancer often presents with positive lymph nodes and a high incidence of local recurrence after resection. Lymph nodes can be palpated along the distal bile duct and posterior aspect of the head of the pan-creas in the pancreaticoduodenal groove, where the mesenteric vein passes under the neck of the pancreas, along the inferior border of the body, at the celiac axis and along the hepatic artery ascending into the porta hepatis, and along the splenic artery and vein. The pancreatic lymphatics also communicate with lymph nodes in the transverse mesocolon and mesentery of the proxi-mal jejunum. Tumors in the body and tail of the pancreas often metastasize to these nodes and lymph nodes along the splenic vein and in the hilum of the spleen.NeuroanatomyThe pancreas is innervated by the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems. The acinar cells responsible for exocrine secretion, the islet cells responsible for endocrine secretion, and the islet vasculature are innervated by both systems. The parasympathetic system stimulates endocrine and exocrine secretion and the sympathetic system inhibits secretion.2 The pancreas is also innervated by neurons that secrete amines and peptides, such as somatostatin, vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP), calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), and galanin. The exact role of these neurons in pancreatic physiology is uncertain, but they do appear to affect both exocrine and endocrine function. The pancreas also has a rich supply of afferent sensory fibers, which are responsible for the intense pain associated with advanced pancreatic cancer, as well as acute and chronic pancreatitis. These somatic fibers travel superiorly to the celiac ganglia (Fig. 33-7). Interruption of these somatic fibers with a celiac plexus block can stop transmission of pain sensation.HISTOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGYThe exocrine pancreas accounts for about 85% of the pancreatic mass; 10% of the gland is accounted for by extracellular matrix, and 4% by blood vessels and the major ducts, whereas only 2% of the gland is comprised of endocrine tissue. The endocrine and exocrine pancreas are sometimes thought of as function-ally separate, but these different components of the organ are coordinated to allow an elegant regulatory feedback system for digestive enzyme and hormone secretion. This complex system regulates the type of digestion, its rate, and the processing and distribution of absorbed nutrients. This coordination is facili-tated by the physical approximation of the islets and the exo-crine pancreas, the presence of specific islet hormone receptors on the plasma membranes of pancreatic acinar cells, and the existence of an islet-acinar portal blood system.Although patients can live without a pancreas when insu-lin and digestive enzyme replacement are administered, the loss of this islet-acinar coordination leads to impairments in diges-tive function. Although only approximately 20% of the normal pancreas is required to prevent insufficiency, in many patients undergoing pancreatic resection, the remaining pancreas is not normal, and pancreatic endocrine and exocrine insufficiency can develop with removal of smaller portions of the gland.Exocrine PancreasThe pancreas secretes approximately 500 to 800 mL per day of colorless, odorless, alkaline, isosmotic pancreatic juice. Pan-creatic juice is a combination of acinar cell and duct cell secre-tions. The acinar cells secrete amylase, proteases, and lipases, enzymes responsible for the digestion of all three food types: carbohydrate, protein, and fat. The acinar cells are pyramid-shaped, with their apices facing the lumen of the acinus. Near the apex of each cell are numerous enzyme-containing zymogen Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   143501/03/19   6:44 PM 1436SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIAcinar cellsCentroacinar cellsIntercalated ductFigure 33-8. Acinar cell. Zymogen granules fuse with the apical membrane and release multiple enzymes to digest carbohydrates, proteins, and fat. (Reproduced with permission from Bloom W, Fawcett DW: A Textbook of Histology, 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 1975.)granules that fuse with the apical cell membrane (Fig. 33-8). Unlike the endocrine pancreas, where islet cells specialize in the secretion of one hormone type, individual acinar cells secrete all types of enzymes. However, the ratio of the different enzymes released is adjusted to the composition of digested food through nonparallel regulation of secretion.Pancreatic amylase is secreted in its active form and com-pletes the digestive process already begun by salivary amylase. Amylase is the only pancreatic enzyme secreted in its active form, and it hydrolyzes starch and glycogen to glucose, malt-ose, maltotriose, and dextrins. These simple sugars are trans-ported across the brush border of the intestinal epithelial cells by active transport mechanisms. Gastric hydrolysis of protein yields peptides that enter the intestine and stimulate intestinal endocrine cells to release cholecystokinin (CCK)-releasing pep-tide, CCK, and secretin, which then stimulate the pancreas to secrete enzymes and bicarbonate into the intestine.The proteolytic enzymes are secreted as proenzymes that require activation. Trypsinogen is converted to its active form, trypsin, by another enzyme, enterokinase, which is produced by the duodenal mucosal cells. Trypsin, in turn, activates the other proteolytic enzymes. Trypsinogen activation within the pancreas is prevented by the presence of inhibitors that are also secreted by the acinar cells. A failure to express a normal tryp-sinogen inhibitor, pancreatic secretory trypsin inhibitor (PSTI), also known as serine protease inhibitor Kazal type 1 (SPINK1), is a cause of familial pancreatitis. Inhibition of trypsinogen activation ensures that the enzymes within the pancreas remain in an inactive precursor state and are activated only within the duodenum. Trypsinogen is expressed in several isoforms, and a missense mutation on the cationic trypsinogen, or PRSS1, results in premature, intrapancreatic activation of trypsinogen. This accounts for about two-thirds of cases of hereditary pan-creatitis. Chymotrypsinogen is activated to form chymotrypsin. Elastase, carboxypeptidase A and B, and phospholipase are also activated by trypsin. Trypsin, chymotrypsin, and elastase cleave bonds between amino acids within a target peptide chain, and carboxypeptidase A and B cleave amino acids at the end of peptide chains. Individual amino acids and small dipeptides are then actively transported into the intestinal epithelial cells. Pancreatic lipase hydrolyzes triglycerides to 2-monoglyceride and fatty acid. Pancreatic lipase is secreted in an active form. Colipase is also secreted by the pancreas and binds to lipase, changing its molecular configuration and increasing its activity. Phospholipase A2 is secreted by the pancreas as a proenzyme that becomes activated by trypsin. Phospholipase A2 hydrolyzes phospholipids and, as with all lipases, requires bile salts for its action. Carboxylic ester hydrolase and cholesterol esterase hydrolyze neutral lipid substrates like esters of cholesterol, fat-soluble vitamins, and triglycerides. The hydrolyzed fat is then packaged into micelles for transport into the intestinal epithelial cells, where the fatty acids are reassembled and packaged inside chylomicrons for transport through the lymphatic system into the bloodstream (Table 33-1).The centroacinar and intercalated duct cells secrete the water and electrolytes present in the pancreatic juice. About 40 acinar cells are arranged into a spherical unit called an acinus.  Centroacinar cells are located near the center of the acinus and are responsible for fluid and electrolyte secretion. These cells contain the enzyme carbonic anhydrase, which is needed for bicarbonate secretion. The amount of bicarbonate secreted varies with the pancreatic secretory rate, with greater concen-trations of bicarbonate being secreted as the pancreatic secre-tory rate increases. Chloride secretion varies inversely with bicarbonate secretion such that the sum of these two remains constant. In contrast, sodium and potassium concentrations are kept constant throughout the spectrum of secretory rates3  (Fig. 33-9). The hormone secretin is released from cells in the duodenal mucosa in response to acidic chyme passing through the pylorus into the duodenum. Secretin is the major stimulant for bicarbonate secretion, which buffers the acidic fluid entering the duodenum from the stomach. CCK also stimulates bicarbon-ate secretion, but to a much lesser extent than secretin. CCK potentiates secretin-stimulated bicarbonate secretion. Gastrin and acetylcholine, both stimulants of gastric acid secretion, are also weak stimulants of pancreatic bicarbonate secretion.4 Truncal vagotomy produces a myriad of complex effects on the downstream digestive tract, but the sum effect on the exocrine pancreas is a reduction in bicarbonate and fluid secretion.5 The endocrine pancreas also influences the adjacent exocrine pan-creatic secretions. Somatostatin, pancreatic polypeptide (PP), and glucagon are all thought to inhibit exocrine secretion.The acinar cells release pancreatic enzymes from their zymogen granules into the lumen of the acinus, and these pro-teins combine with the water and bicarbonate secretions of the centroacinar cells. The pancreatic juice then travels into small intercalated ducts. Several small intercalated ducts join to form an interlobular duct. Cells in the interlobular ducts contribute fluid and electrolytes to adjust the final concentrations of the pancreatic fluid. Interlobular ducts then join to form about 20 secondary ducts that empty into the main pancreatic duct. Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   143601/03/19   6:44 PM 1437PANCREASCHAPTER 33Table 33-1Pancreatic enzymesENZYMESUBSTRATEPRODUCTCarbohydrate Amylase (active)Starch, glycogenGlucose, maltose, maltotriose,  dextrinsProtein Endopeptidases  Trypsinogen (inactive) Enterokinase Trypsin (active)  Chymotrypsinogen (inactive) EnterokinaseTrypsin Chymotrypsin (active)  Proelastase (inactive) EnterokinaseTrypsin Elastase (active) Exopeptidases  Procarboxy peptidase A&B (inactive) Enterokinase Carboxypeptidase A&B (active)Cleave bonds between amino acidsCleave amino acids from end  of peptide chainsAmino acids, dipeptides—Fat Pancreatic lipase (active) Phospholipase A2 (inactive) Trypsin Phospholipase A2 (active) Cholesterol esteraseTriglyceridesPhospholipaseNeutral lipids2-Monoglycerides, fatty acids——Concentration (mEq/L)18016014012010080604020  000.40.81.21.6Secretory rate (mL/min)Pancreatic juice180160140120100806040200PlasmaNaHCO3ClKNa=151.5HCO3=26.0Cl=110.0K=5.38Figure 33-9. Composition of pancreatic exocrine secretions. Greater concentrations of bicarbonate are secreted at higher secretory rates, and chloride secretion varies inversely with bicarbonate secretion. In contrast, sodium and potassium concentrations are independent of the secretory rate. (Reproduced with permission from Bro-Rasmussen F, Killmann SA, Thaysen JH: The composition of pancreatic juice as compared to sweat, parotid saliva and tears, Acta Physiol Scand. 1956 Sep 26;37(2-3):97-113.)Table 33-2Pancreatic Islet Peptide ProductsHORMONESISLET CELLFUNCTIONSInsulinBetaDecreases gluconeogenesis, glycogenolysis, fatty acid breakdown, and ketogenesisIncreased glycogenesis, protein synthesis and glucose uptakeGlucagonAlphaOpposite effects of insulin; increases hepatic glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesisSomatostatinDeltaInhibits secretion and action of all pancreatic and gut peptides, inhibits cell growthPancreatic PolypeptidePP or FInhibits pancreatic exocrine secretion and facilitates hepatic action of insulinAmylin (IAPP)BetaCounter-regulates insulin secretion and functionPancreastatinBetaDecreases insulin and somatostatin secretion, increases glucagon secretion, decreases exocrine secretionGhrelinEpsilonDecreases insulin secretion and actionPeptide YY (PYY)not knownIncreases insulin secretion and beta cell growthDestruction of the branching ductal tree from recurrent inflam-mation, scarring, and deposition of stones in chronic pancreatitis eventually contributes to destruction of the exocrine pancreas and exocrine pancreatic insufficiency.Endocrine PancreasThere are nearly 1 million islets of Langerhans in the normal adult pancreas. They vary greatly in size from 40 to 900 μm. Larger islets are located closer to the major arterioles and smaller islets are embedded more deeply in the parenchyma of the pancreas. Most islets contain 3000 to 4000 cells of five major types: alpha cells that secrete glucagon, beta-cells that secrete insulin, delta cells that secrete somatostatin, epsilon cells that secrete ghrelin, and PP cells that secrete PP (Table 33-2).Insulin is the best-studied pancreatic hormone. The discovery of insulin in 1920 by Frederick Banting, an orthopedic Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   143701/03/19   6:44 PM 1438SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIsurgeon, and Charles Best, a medical student, was recognized with the awarding of the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. They produced diabetes in dogs by performing total pancreatectomy and then treated them with crude pancreatic extracts from dog and calf pancreata using techniques to prevent the breakdown of insulin by the proteolytic enzymes of the exocrine pancreas. Insulin was subsequently purified and found to be a 56-amino acid peptide with two chains, an alpha and a beta chain, joined by two disulfide bridges and a connecting peptide, or C-peptide. Proinsulin is made in the endoplasmic reticulum and then is transported to the Golgi complex, where it is packaged into granules and the C-peptide is cleaved off. There are two phases of insulin secretion. In the first phase, stored insulin is released. This phase lasts about 5 minutes after a glucose challenge. The second phase of insulin secretion is a longer, sustained release due to ongoing production of new insulin. beta-cell synthesis of insulin is regulated by plasma glucose levels, neural signals, and the paracrine influence of other islet cells. The diagnosis of diabetes is made by using oral and intravenous (IV) glucose tolerance tests. Oral glucose not only enters the bloodstream but also stimulates the release of enteric hormones such as gastric inhibitory peptide (also known as glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide or GIP), glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1), and CCK that augment the secretion of insulin and are therefore referred to as incretins. As a result, oral glucose is a more vigorous stimulus to insulin secretion than IV glucose. In the oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT), the patient is fasted overnight, and a basal glucose value is determined. Forty g/m2 or 75 g of glucose is given orally over 10 minutes. Blood samples are taken every 30 minutes for 2 hours. Normal values and criteria for diabetes vary by age, but essentially all values should be <200 mg/dL, and the 120-minute value should be <140 mg/dL.Insulin secretion by the beta-cell is also influenced by plasma levels of amino acids such as arginine, lysine, leucine, and free fatty acids. Glucagon, GIP, GLP-1, and CCK stimulate insulin release, while somatostatin, amylin, and pancreastatin inhibit insulin release.6 Cholinergic fibers and alpha-sympa-thetic fibers stimulate insulin release, while beta-sympathetic fibers inhibit insulin secretion.Insulin’s glucoregulatory function is to inhibit endogenous (hepatic) glucose production and to facilitate glucose transport into cells, thus lowering plasma glucose levels. Insulin also inhibits glycogenolysis, fatty acid breakdown, and ketone formation, and stimulates protein synthesis. There is a considerable amount of functional reserve in insulin secretory capacity. If the remaining portion of the pancreas is healthy, about 80% of the pancreas can be resected without the patient becoming diabetic.7 In patients with chronic pancreatitis, or other conditions in which much of the gland is diseased, resection of a smaller fraction of the pancreas can result in pancreatogenic, or type 3c diabetes (Table 33-3).Insulin receptors are dimeric, tyrosine kinase–containing transmembrane proteins that are located on all cells. Insulin defi-ciency (seen in type 1 and type 3c diabetes) results in an overex-pression or upregulation of insulin receptors, which causes an enhanced sensitivity to insulin in muscle and adipocytes (and therefore increases the risk of insulin-induced hypoglycemia). Type 2 diabetes is associated with a downregulation of insulin receptors and relative hyperinsulinemia, with resulting insulin resistance. Some forms of diabetes are associated with selected impairments of hepatic or peripheral insulin receptors, such as pancreatogenic or type 3c diabetes (T3cDM) or maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY).Glucagon is a 29-amino-acid, single-chain peptide that promotes hepatic glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis and counteracts the effects of insulin through its hyperglycemic action. Glucose is the primary regulator of glucagon secretion, as it is with insulin, but it has an inhibitory rather than stimulatory effect. Glucagon release is stimulated by hypoglycemia and by the amino acids arginine and alanine. GLP-1 inhibits glucagon secretion in vivo, and insulin and somatostatin inhibit glucagon Table 33-3Clinical and laboratory findings in types of diabetes mellitusPARAMETERTYPE 1TYPE 2TYPE 3C IDDMNIDDMPancreatogenicKetoacidosisCommonRareRareHyperglycemiaSevereUsually mildMildHypoglycemiaCommonRareCommonPeripheral insulin sensitivityNormal or increasedDecreasedIncreasedHepatic insulin sensitivityNormalNormal or decreasedDecreasedInsulin levelsLowHighLowGlucagon levelsNormal or highNormal or highLowPP levelsNormal or low (late)HighLowGIP levelsNormal or lowNormal or highLowGLP-1 levelsNormalNormal or highNormal or highTypical age of onsetChildhood or adolescenceAdulthoodAnyAbbreviations: IDDM = insulin dependent diabetes mellitus; NIDDM = non–insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus; PP = pancreatic polypeptide;  GIP = glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide; GLP-1 = glucagon-like peptide 1.Reproduced with permission from Slezak LA, Andersen DK: Pancreatic resection: effects on glucose metabolism, World J Surg. 2001 Apr;25(4):452-460.Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   143801/03/19   6:44 PM 1439PANCREASCHAPTER 33secretion in a paracrine fashion within the islet. The same neural impulses that regulate insulin secretion also regulate glucagon secretion, so that the two hormones work together in a balance of actions to maintain glucose levels. Cholinergic and alpha-sympathetic fibers stimulate glucagon release, while beta-sympathetic fibers inhibit glucagon release.8 In pancreatogenic or type 3c diabetes, glucagon responsiveness to a fall in blood glucose is lost, thereby increasing the risk for hypoglycemia.Although originally isolated from the hypothalamus, somatostatin is a peptide that is now known to have a wide ana-tomic distribution, not only in neurons but also in the pancreas, gut, and other tissues. It is a highly conserved peptide hormone, as it is found in lower vertebrates, and is now realized to be of fundamental importance in regulatory processes throughout the body. One gene encodes for a common precursor that is dif-ferentially processed to generate tissue-specific amounts of two bioactive products, somatostatin-14, and somatostatin-28. These peptides inhibit endocrine and exocrine secretion and affect neurotransmission, GI and biliary motility, intestinal absorption, vascular tone, and cell proliferation.Five different somatostatin receptors (SSTRs) have been cloned and the biologic properties of each are different.9 The hexapeptide and octapeptide analogues such as octreotide bind only to SSTR2, SSTR3, and SSTR5. These analogues have a longer serum half-life, and their potent inhibitory effect has been used clinically to treat both endocrine and exocrine disor-ders. For example, octreotide has been shown to decrease fistula output and speed the time it takes for enteric and pancreatic fistulas to close.10Endocrine release of somatostatin occurs during a meal. The major stimulant is probably intraluminal fat. Acidification of the gastric and duodenal mucosa also releases somatostatin in isolated perfused organ preparations. Acetylcholine from the cholinergic neurons inhibits somatostatin release.Pancreatic polypeptide (PP) is a 36-amino-acid, straight-chain peptide discovered by Kimmel in 1968 during the process of insulin purification. Protein is the most potent enteral stimu-lator of PP release, closely followed by fat, whereas glucose has a weaker effect.11 Hypoglycemia, whether or not it is insulin induced, strongly stimulates PP secretion through cholinergic stimulation.12 Phenylalanine, tryptophan, and fatty acids in the duodenum stimulate PP release, probably by inducing CCK, GIP, and secretin release. Vagal stimulation of the pancreas is the most important regulator of PP secretion. In fact, vagotomy eliminates the rise in PP levels usually seen after a meal. This can be used as a test for the completeness of a surgical vagot-omy or for the presence of diabetic autonomic neuropathy.PP has been shown to inhibit choleresis (bile secretion), gallbladder contraction, and secretion by the exocrine pan-creas. However, PP’s most important role is in glucose regu-lation through its regulation of hepatic insulin receptor gene expression. A deficiency in PP secretion due to proximal pan-createctomy, severe chronic pancreatitis, or cystic fibrosis, is associated with diminished hepatic insulin sensitivity due to reduced hepatic insulin receptor availability.13 This effect is reversed by PP administration.14Recent studies have shown that a fifth islet peptide, ghre-lin, is secreted from a distinct population of islet cells, called epsilon cells.15,16 Ghrelin also is present in the gastric fundus in large amounts and stimulates growth hormone secretion via growth hormone releasing hormone release from the pituitary. It is an orexigenic, or appetite-stimulating, peptide the plasma levels of which are increased in obesity. Ghrelin has also been shown to block insulin effects on the liver, and inhibits the beta-cell response to incretin hormones and glucose.17 Therefore, ghrelin secretion from and within the islet may modulate the responses of other islet cells to nutrient and hormonal stimuli.In addition to the five main peptides secreted by the pan-creas, there are a number of other peptide products of the islet cells, including amylin, peptide YY (PYY), and pancreastatin, as well as neuropeptides such as VIP, galanin, and serotonin. Amylin or islet amyloid polypeptide (IAPP) is a 37-amino-acid polypeptide that is predominantly expressed by the pancreatic beta-cells, where it is stored along with insulin in secretory granules.18 The function of IAPP seems to be the modulation or counterregulation of insulin secretion and function. Pancre-astatin is a recently discovered pancreatic islet peptide prod-uct that inhibits insulin, and possibly somatostatin release, and augments glucagon release.19,20 In addition to this effect on the endocrine pancreas, pancreastatin inhibits pancreatic exocrine secretion.21 PYY is structurally related to PP and was initially found in hormone-secreting “L” cells of the small intestine, where it colocalizes with GLP-1. Recently, PYY has been local-ized to the islets22 where it appears to regulate insulin secretion through an autocrine mechanism.Islet DistributionThe beta-cells are generally located in the central portion of each islet and make up about 70% of the total islet cell mass. The other cell types are located predominantly in the periphery. The delta cells are least plentiful, making up only 5%; the 〈-cells make up 10%, and the PP cells make up 15%.23 In contrast to the acinar cells that secrete the full gamut of exocrine enzymes, the islet cells seem to specialize in the secretion of predominantly one hormone. However, individual islet cells can secrete mul-tiple hormones. For example, the beta-cells secrete both insulin and amylin, which counter regulates the actions of insulin. In reality, more than 20 different hormones are secreted by the islets, and the exact functions of this milieu are very complex. There is diversity among the islets depending on their location within the pancreas. The beta and delta cells are evenly distrib-uted throughout the pancreas, but islets in the head and uncinate process (ventral anlage) have a higher percentage of PP cells and fewer alpha cells, whereas islets in the body and tail (dorsal anlage) contain the majority of alpha cells and few PP cells. This is clinically significant because pancreatoduodenectomy removes 95% of the PP cells in the pancreas. This may partially explain the higher incidence of glucose intolerance after the Whipple procedure compared to a distal pancreatectomy with an equivalent amount of tissue resected. In addition, chronic pan-creatitis, which disproportionately affects the pancreatic head, is associated with PP deficiency and pancreatogenic diabetes.24 The relative preponderance of alpha cells in the body and tail of the pancreas explains the typical location of glucagonomas.ACUTE PANCREATITISDefinition, Incidence, and EpidemiologyAcute pancreatitis is an inflammatory disorder of the pancreas that is characterized by edema and, when severe, necrosis. It is a common and challenging disease that can develop local and systemic complications. As such, it ranges from a mild, self-limiting inflammation of the pancreas to severe and critical disease characterized by infected pancreatic necrosis, multiple Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   143901/03/19   6:44 PM 1440SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 33-4Etiologies of acute pancreatitisAlcoholBiliary tract diseaseHyperlipidemiaHereditaryHypercalcemiaTrauma External Surgical Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatographyIschemia Hypoperfusion Atheroembolic VasculitisPancreatic duct obstruction Neoplasms Pancreas divisum Ampullary and duodenal lesionsInfectionsVenomDrugsIdiopathicReproduced with permission from Townsend CM, Sabiston DC: Sabiston’s Textbook of Surgery: the biological basis of modern surgical practice, 16th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders/Elsevier; 2000.organ failure, and a high mortality.25 The traditional view is that acute pancreatitis completely resolves with no morphological, functional, or symptomatic sequelae. But necrotizing pancreati-tis can leave significant scarring, strictures, and impairment of exocrine and endocrine pancreatic function. The overall clinical outcome has improved over recent decades, even in the absence of specific treatments that target outcome-determining patho-physiology, probably because of a more standardized approach to diagnosis, monitoring, and management.Acute pancreatitis is the most common inpatient princi-pal gastrointestinal discharge diagnosis in the United States (274,119 in 2009), with an increasing incidence (30% since 2000) and is associated with the highest aggregate inpatient costs at 2.6 billion dollars per year.26 The crude mortality rate of 1 per 100,000 population ranks it as the 14th most common overall and the 9th most common noncancer cause of gastrointestinal deaths. Worldwide, the incidence of acute pancreatitis ranges from 5 to 80 per 100,000 population, with the highest incidence recorded in Finland and the United States.27 The incidence of acute pancreatitis also shows significant variation related to the prevalence of etiological factors and ethnicity. The annual inci-dence of acute pancreatitis in Native Americans is 4 per 100,000 population; in whites, it is 5.7; and in blacks it is 20.7.28 Smok-ing is an independent risk factor for acute pancreatitis.29EtiologyMany factors are causally related to the onset of acute pan-creatitis, but the mechanism is often poorly understood. The most common causes are gallstones and alcohol (Table 33-4), accounting for up to 80% of cases, but it is not uncommon to diagnose acute pancreatitis in the absence of these etiological factors (“idiopathic acute pancreatitis”), and it is important that a systematic approach is taken to the identification of other, less common and potentially modifiable factors. The median age at index presentation of acute pancreatitis varies with etiology: with alcoholand drug-induced pancreatitis presenting in the third or fourth decade compared with gallstone and trauma in the sixth decade. The gender difference is probably more related to etiology: in males alcohol is more often the cause while in females it is gallstones.GallstonesEvidence that passage of a gallstone is related to the onset of acute pancreatitis comes from the characteristic transient derangement of liver function tests and the high retrieval rate of gallstones from feces within 10 days of an attack of acute pancreatitis compared with those without acute pancreatitis (88% vs. 11%).30 The mechanism by which small gallstones cause acute pancreatitis in migrating through to the duodenum is not clear. Opie made the seminal observation of a gallstone impacted in the sphincter of Oddi in two fatal cases of acute pancreatitis, which lead to the “common channel” hypothesis. It was proposed that this allowed bile to reflux into the pancre-atic duct, but this cannot be reliably reproduced in experimen-tal models. Another proposal was that transient incompetence caused by the passage of a stone through the sphincter might allow duodenal fluid and bile to reflux into the pancreatic duct, but this is not supported by the failure of this to commonly occur after endoscopic sphincterotomy. A third possibility is that acute pancreatitis is due to the gallstone obstructing the pancreatic duct and leading to ductal hypertension. It has been postulated that this backpressure might lead to minor ductal dis-ruption, extravasation of pancreatic juice into the less alkaline interstitium of the pancreas, and promotion of enzyme activa-tion. When gallstones and other etiological factors cannot be identified, there is still the possibility of finding microlithiasis, seen as birefringent crystals, on bile microscopy.31 This occult microlithiasis is probably responsible for up to half of those with idiopathic acute pancreatitis.AlcoholAlcohol ingestion is associated with acute pancreatitis, and sus-tained alcohol ingestion is associated with recurrent acute pan-creatitis and development of chronic pancreatitis in susceptible individuals who have been drinking for more than a decade. The type of alcohol consumed is less important than the amount consumed (typically 100–150 grams per day) and the pattern of drinking. It is common for patients with alcohol-associated acute pancreatitis to have a history of excess alcohol consumption prior to the first attack. There are several mechanisms by which ethanol causes acute pancreatitis by acting on the acinar and stellate cells.32 The acinar cell metabolizes ethanol by oxidative and nonoxidative pathways, and exhibits changes that predis-pose the cell to autodigestive injury, necroinflammation, and cell death. The stellate cells are activated on exposure to ethanol to a myofibroblast phenotype, stimulating synthesis of proinflam-matory mediators and cytokines. Ethanol causes a brief secretory increase followed by inhibition. The secretory burst coupled with ethanol induced spasm of the sphincter of Oddi probably incites acute pancreatitis. Ethanol also induces ductal permeability, which allows prematurely activated enzymes to cause damage to the pancreatic parenchyma. Ethanol also increases the protein content of pancreatic juice and decreases bicarbonate levels and trypsin inhibitor concentration. The formation of protein plugs may also contribute by causing an obstructive element to pancre-atic outflow, more often seen in chronic pancreatitis.Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   144001/03/19   6:44 PM 1441PANCREASCHAPTER 33Figure 33-10. Schema of key loco-regional pathophysiological events in the pancreas and intestine and how they interact to drive the severity and outcome of acute pancreatitis. (Adapted with permission from Flint RS, Windsor JA: The role of the intestine in the pathophysiology and management of severe acute pancreatitis, HPB (Oxford). 2003;5(2):69-85.)IatrogenicAcute pancreatitis can occur due to trauma to the ducts or parenchyma after surgical procedures, including biopsy, bile duct exploration, distal gastrectomy, and splenectomy. As the pancreas is susceptible to ischemia, it can also occur second-ary to splanchnic hypoperfusion with cardiopulmonary bypass, cardiac transplant, hemorrhagic shock, and major trauma. The most common iatrogenic cause is ERCP in which acute pancre-atitis occurs after about 5% to 10% of procedures, and in many series, it is the third most common identified etiological fac-tor. The risk of post-ERCP acute pancreatitis is increased if the contrast agent is infused repeatedly under high pressure by the endoscopist and in patients with sphincter of Oddi dysfunction. Recent evidence demonstrates that the risk can be decreased with prophylactic rectal nonsteroidal drugs,33 and this may be a better strategy than prophylactic pancreatic duct stenting.34Hereditary PancreatitisHereditary pancreatitis is an autosomal dominant disorder usually related to mutations of the cationic trypsinogen gene (PRSS1). Mutations in this gene cause premature activation of trypsinogen to trypsin and causes abnormalities of ductal secre-tion, both of which promote acute pancreatitis. Mutations in the SPINK1 protein, which blocks the active binding site of trypsin, is likely to also have a role in predisposing to acute pancreatitis. Variations in penetration and phenotype are common, and there are many other mutations that have become implicated. Mutant enzymes activated within acinar cells can overwhelm the first line of defense (pancreatic secretory trypsin inhibitor) and resist backup defenses (e.g., proteolytic degradation, enzyme Y, and trypsin itself) allowing activated mutant cationic trypsin to trig-ger the entire zymogen activation cascade.35TumorsA pancreatic or periampullary tumor should be considered in patients with idiopathic acute pancreatitis, especially in those over 50 years old. Approximately 1% to 2% of patients with acute pancreatitis have a pancreatic tumor, and an episode of acute pancreatitis can be the first clinical indicator. Cross-sectional imaging after the resolution of the acute pancreatitis is required.HyperlipidemiaPatients with types I and V hyperlipoproteinemia can experience episodes of abdominal pain, and these often occur in association with marked hypertriglyceridaemia. Lipase is thought to liberate toxic fatty acids into the pancreatic microcirculation, leading to microcirculatory impairment and ischemia. Dietary modifica-tions and drug treatment are used to lower triglycerides.DrugsIsolated cases of acute pancreatitis have been associated with exposure to certain drugs, such as thiazide diuretics, furosemide, estrogen replacement therapy, and steroid therapy in children. In addition, certain chemotherapy agents and anti-immune drugs have been associated with acute pancreatitis, and lipid-based drugs or solutions, such as propofol, have been shown to cause acute pancreatitis.PathophysiologyAcute pancreatitis occurs in various degrees of severity, the determinants of which are multifactorial. The generally prevalent belief today is that pancreatitis begins with the activation of diges-tive zymogens inside acinar cells, which cause acinar cell injury. Studies suggest that the ultimate severity of the resulting pancre-atitis may be determined by the events that occur subsequent to acinar cell injury.36 These include inflammatory cell recruitment and activation, as well as generation and release of cytokines and other chemical mediators that cause systemic inflammation and multiple organ dysfunction/failure (Figure 33-10).Precipitating EventsIn 1896, Chiari proposed that pancreatitis was due to the premature, intrapancreatic activation of digestive enzymes, resulting in “auto-digestion” of the organ. Since then the Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   144101/03/19   6:44 PM 1442SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 33-11. Schematic representation of the acinar cell events in acute pancreatitis. When acinar cells are pathologically stimulated, their lysosomal (L) and zymogen (Z) contents colocalize, and consequently trypsinogen is activated to trypsin by cathepsin B. Increased cytosolic calcium is required for colocalization. Once trypsin has permeabilized the contents of the cytosol, cathepsin B and other contents of these colocalized organelles are released. Once in the cytosol, cathepsin B activates apoptosis by causing cytochrome c to be released from the mitochondria. Activation of PKC results in a sudden activation of nuclear factor kappa beta (NFκβ), which in turn triggers the release of cytokines that attract inflammatory response cells that mediate local and systemic inflammation cascades.intra-acinar activation of zymogens has been demonstrated consistently in multiple animal models of acute pancreatitis and is considered a key precipitating event.37,38 The key role of trypsin activation in acute pancreatitis has gained additional support from recent studies showing that mice lacking trypsinogen-7 (the isoform of trypsinogen that is activated during acute pancreatitis in mice) have significantly less pancreatic injury during acute pancreatitis39 and that intra-acinar expression of active trypsin causes pancreatitis in mice.40 The role of trypsin activation in the pathophysiology of acute pancreatitis has also been suggested by clinical studies. Hereditary pancreatitis is associated with mutations that lead to elevated intracellular trypsin activation,41 and activation of trypsinogen causes clinical pancreatitis.42Significant progress has been made in understanding the mechanisms by which injurious stimuli lead to intra-acinar activation of trypsinogen and autodigestion of the gland  (Figure 33-11). Under physiologic conditions, several protective mechanisms have evolved to prevent autodigestion of the pancreas by these enzymes. This includes synthesis of enzymes as inactive precursors, separation of the site of production, and activation of the enzymes and presence of trypsin inhibitors in the pancreas. It is thought that acute pancreatitis occurs when these protective mechanisms are overwhelmed with erroneously activated enzymes, causing injury. It has been shown that intra-acinar activation of trypsinogen goes hand-in-hand with inhibition of acinar secretion.43,44 Furthermore, with injurious stimuli the zymogens responsible for initiating the disease are not secreted outside, but colocalize with cytoplasmic vacuoles that contain lysosomal enzymes such as cathepsin B45 that activate trypsinogen. Thus, inhibition of cathepsin B by pharmacological inhibitors46 or by genetic deletion of cathepsin B eliminates trypsin activation and decreases the severity of pancreatitis in animal models.47 What leads to the colocalization of zymogens and lysosomal hydrolases is unclear, but injurious stimuli leading to sustained cytosolic calcium increase have been indicted. Blocking this calcium increase prevents colocalization and activation of trypsin, and it decreases injury due to pancreatitis.48 Based on these data, pre-ERCP supplementation of magnesium, a natural antagonist of calcium, is currently being evaluated as a strategy to decrease post-ERCP pancreatitis.49 Recent work has led to the novel hypothesis that the lysosomal hydrolase cathepsin B activates trypsinogen to trypsin within the colocalization vacuoles. Trypsin then permeabilizes these colocalization vacuoles causing the release of cathepsin B into the cytosol. Once in the cytosol, cathepsin B initiates apoptotic cell death by permeabilizing mitochondrial membranes, which allows cytochrome C to be released into the cytosol. This initiates the apoptotic cascade and results in the apoptotic death of the acinar cells50 (see Figure 33-11).Intrapancreatic EventsAlthough intra-acinar events initiate acute pancreatitis, events occurring subsequent to acinar cell injury determine the severity of pancreatitis. Activated neutrophils are attracted and activated in the pancreas releasing superoxide (the respiratory burst) and proteolytic enzymes (cathepsins, elastase, and collagenase) that cause further pancreatic injury. In addition, macrophages release cytokines (including tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α)  and interleukins (IL-1, IL-2, IL-6, and IL-8) that mediate local and systemic inflammation.38These inflammatory mediators cause an increased pancre-atic vascular permeability, leading to hemorrhage, edema, and Acinar cell deathTo pancreatic ductTrypsinogenCathepsin BActive trypsinEarly stagesLeaky colocalizedorganellesColocalizationSustainedRise in Ca2+PKC activationInsultSystemic in‘ammationRelease of cytokinesand chemokinesRecruitment ofin‘ammatory cellsLater stagesNF–KBactivationLocal injury: PancreatitisZLBrunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   144201/03/19   6:44 PM 1443PANCREASCHAPTER 33Figure 33-12. Computed tomography scan showing well perfused interstitial edematous acute pancreatitis of the neck and tail of the pancreas with a confluent area of necrosis of the pancreatic body. The pancreas is surrounded by fluid, inflammation, and possible peripancreatic fat necrosis.Table 33-5Local complications of acute pancreatitisCONTENT ACUTE (<4 WEEKS, NO DEFINED WALL)CHRONIC (>4 WEEKS, DEFINED WALL)NO INFECTIONINFECTIONNO INFECTIONINFECTIONFluidAcute pancreatic fluid collection (APFC)Infected APFCPseudocystInfected pseudocystSolid ± fluidAcute necrotic collection (ANC)Infected ANCWalled off necrosis (WON)Infected WONReproduced with permission from Windsor JA, Petrov MS: Acute pancreatitis reclassified, Gut. 2013 Jan;62(1):4-5.microthrombi. Fluid may collect in and around the pancreas. The failure of the pancreatic microcirculation, a feature of more severe acute pancreatitis, results in pancreatic hypoperfusion and necrosis. Acute inflammation of the pancreatic parenchyma and peripancreatic tissues, but with no recognizable necrosis, is termed interstitial edematous pancreatitis.25 When necrosis is present, as evidenced by pancreatic hypoperfusion with contrast CT, it is termed necrotizing pancreatitis (Figure 33-12). The updated morphological definitions and the contrast enhanced CT criteria for the diagnosis of the local complications of acute pancreatitis are in the revised Atlanta statement51 and summa-rized in Table 33-5.52Systemic EventsAn important aspect of the pathophysiology of acute pancre-atitis is the mechanism by which events occurring in the pan-creas induce systemic inflammation and multiorgan failure. The NFκB-dependent inflammatory pathway is an important mechanism (see Figure 33-11). Activation of NFκB parallels trypsin activation in acute pancreatitis but appears to be inde-pendent of it, as it occurs in trypsin knockout mice.39 Sustained calcium increase, which leads to trypsinogen activation, is criti-cal for NFκB activation since attenuation of cytosolic calcium abrogates NFκB activation.53 Once activated, NFκB regulates synthesis of multiple cytokines and chemokines, leading to recruitment of various inflammatory cells that then magnify and propagate systemic inflammation.54 The infiltrating neutrophils can also further augment the pancreatic injury.55,56 Inhibition of many of these cytokines have led to reduced local and systemic injury in animal models of acute pancreatitis. But these results did not translate to clinical improvement.57 New strategies are required to reduce the systemic inflammatory response.58-60Organ failure can develop at any stage of acute pancreati-tis, associated with an overwhelming proinflammatory response early, or later secondary to the development of infected local complications. The drivers of the systemic response are poorly understood, although factors include the elaboration of proin-flammatory cytokines, and it appears that mesenteric lymph, bypassing the liver and containing these constituents, may con-tribute to the development of organ failure61 (see Figure 33-10). The development of pancreatic necrosis, the breakdown of the intestinal barrier, and the suppression of the immune response through the compensatory inflammatory response contribute to the development of infected pancreatic necrosis, the incidence of which peaks in the third to fourth week. This is usually asso-ciated with deterioration in the patient’s condition and may be associated with the late development of the systemic inflam-matory response syndrome (SIRS) and multiorgan dysfunction syndrome/failure (MODS/F).Organ failure is scored using the Marshall or Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) systems (Table 33-6). The three organ systems most frequently involved are cardiovas-cular, respiratory, and renal. Multiple organ failure is defined as two or more organs registering two or more points on these scoring systems.51 Monitoring organ failure over time and in response to treatment is important in the care and timing of intervention in these patients.Management of Acute PancreatitisGeneral Considerations. The management of acute pancre-atitis covers a wide spectrum of severity. All patients with sus-pected acute pancreatitis should be admitted to hospital. Those with mild acute pancreatitis usually remain in hospital for less than a week, while those with severe and critical acute pan-creatitis may require many weeks or months of intensive treat-ment. The risk of mortality reflects this spectrum of severity. The risk is less than 1% for those with mild disease, increasing to around 10% for those with moderate disease, but for severe (20–40%) and critical (>50%) disease the mortality risk is much higher. The earlier identification of these high-risk categories and their transfer to specialized centers is an important priority of management.62The management of acute pancreatitis is multidisciplinary, and it is important that this is coordinated care plan is carefully supervised.63 The essential requirements for the management Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   144301/03/19   6:44 PM 1444SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 33-6Sequential organ failure assessment (SOFA) score in acute pancreatitis 01234Respiration     (PaO2FIO2) (mmHg)>400≤400≤300≤200 with respiratory support≤100 with respiratory supportCoagulation     Platelets (xl01 per μL)>150≤150≤100≤50≤20Liver     Bilirubin (μmol/L)<2020–3233–101102–204>204Cardiovascular     HypotensionNo hypotensionMAP <70 mmHgDopamine ≤5 or dobutamine (any dose)aDopamine >5 or epi ≤0.1a or norepi ≤0.1aDopamine >15 or epi >0.1a or norepi >0.1aCentral nervous system     Glasgow coma score1513–1410–126–9<6Kidney     Creatinine (μmol/L) or urine output<110110–170171–299300–440 or  <500 mL/day>440 or <200 mL/dayaAdrenergic agents administered for at least 1 h (doses given in μg/kg per min). A score of 2 or more in any two systems indicates the presence of multiple organ failure.Abbreviations: MAP = mean arterial pressure; Epi = epineptvine; Norepi = norepinephrine.of acute pancreatitis are accurate diagnosis, appropriate triage, high-quality supportive care, and monitoring for and treatment of complications.64DiagnosisThe diagnosis of acute pancreatitis requires the patient to pres-ent with abdominal pain consistent with acute pancreatitis (acute onset of a severe constant epigastric pain that often radiates through to the mid back) and the elevation of serum amylase or lipase (>3 times upper limit of normal). Imaging (usually by contrast-enhanced CT scanning) is only required for the diagnosis of acute pancreatitis when these diagnostic criteria are not met.51 Because of the many causes of hyperamylasemia, it is important to use either the pancreatic isoenzyme of amylase or lipase.63The serum amylase concentration increases almost imme-diately with the onset of disease and peaks within several hours and remains elevated for 3 to 5 days.64 There is no correlation between the extent of serum amylase elevation and severity of pancreatitis; in fact, a milder form of acute pancreatitis is often associated with higher levels of serum amylase compared with that in a more severe form of the disease. It is important to note that hyperamylasemia can also occur in association with other diseases. For example, it can occur in a patient with small bowel obstruction, perforated duodenal ulcer, or other intra-abdominal inflammatory conditions. In contrast, a patient with acute pancreatitis can have a normal serum amylase level, for several different reasons. In patients with hyperlipidemia, values might appear to be normal because of interference with chemical determination of serum amylase by lipids. In some cases, urinary clearance of pancreatic enzymes from the circu-lation increases during pancreatitis, meaning that urinary levels may be more sensitive than serum levels. For these reasons, it is recommended that amylase concentrations also be measured in the urine. Urinary amylase levels usually remain elevated for several days after serum levels have returned to normal. In patients with severe pancreatitis associated with significant necrosis, the pancreas may not have the capacity to release large amounts of enzymes into the circulation. With more severe dis-ease, there is also hemoconcentration from third space fluid loss, and this can affect the serum concentration of amylase.The clinical signs of acute pancreatitis include abdominal tenderness, often with signs of peritonitis in the upper abdomen. Rarely, pancreatic fluid and bleeding from the pancreas into the retroperitoneum may result in a bruise-like discoloration around the umbilicus (Cullen’s sign) or in the flanks (Grey Turner’s sign). Another rare sign is tetany as a result of hypocalcaemia. In addition to hemoconcentration, patients with acute pancreati-tis often have azotemia with elevated blood urea nitrogen and creatinine levels, hyperglycemia, and hypoalbuminemia.Pain ManagementPain is the cardinal symptom of acute pancreatitis, and its relief is a clinical priority. There is a lack of high-quality evidence to guide the choice of analgesic. Because of unpredictable absorption, analgesia should be administered intravenously, at least at the outset and before oral intake has been established. Those with mild pain can usually be managed with a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (e.g., metamizole 2 g/8 h IV), while those with more severe pain are best managed with opioid analgesia (e.g., buprenorphine 0.3 mg/4 h IV). Administration of buprenorphine, pentazocine, procaine hydrochloride, and meperidine are all of value in controlling abdominal pain. Morphine is to be avoided because of its potential to cause sphincter of Oddi spasm.Predicting SeverityWhereas classification relates to the present or past severity of acute pancreatitis, prediction is about the future and ultimate severity and outcome of the patient. Accurately predicting acute Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   144401/03/19   6:44 PM 1445PANCREASCHAPTER 33Table 33-7Ranson’s prognostic signs of pancreatitisCriteria for acute pancreatitis not due to gallstonesAt admissionDuring the initial 48 h Age >55 y Hematocrit fall >10 points WBC >16,000/mm3 BUN elevation >5 mg/dL Blood glucose >200 mg/dL Serum calcium <8 mg/dL Serum LDH >350 IU/L Arterial PO2 <60 mmHg Serum AST >250 U/dL Base deficit >4 mEq/L  Estimated fluid sequestration >6 LCriteria for acute gallstone pancreatitisAt admissionDuring the initial 48 h Age >70 y Hematocrit fall >10 points WBC >18,000/mm3 BUN elevation >2 mg/dL Blood glucose >220 mg/dL Serum calcium <8 mg/dL Serum LDH >400 IU/L Base deficit >5 mEq/L Serum AST >250 U/dL Estimated fluid sequestration >4 LNote: Fewer than three positive criteria predict mild, uncomplicated disease, whereas more than six positive criteria predict severe disease with a mortality risk of 50%.Abbreviations: AST = aspartate transaminase; BUN = blood urea nitrogen; LDH = lactate dehydrogenase; PO2 = partial pressure of oxygen; WBC = white blood cell count.Data from Ranson JHC. Etiological and prognostic factors in human acute pancreatitis: a review. Am J Gastroenterol. 1982;77:633 and from Ranson JH, Rifkind KM, Roses DF, et al. Prognostic signs and the role of operative management in acute pancreatitis. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1974;139:69.pancreatitis severity is important in making triage decisions about whether a patient should be transferred to a tertiary hospital or an intensive care unit and in making decisions about fluid therapy and whether an ERCP is indicated, as well as other issues.65 There is a very long history of attempts to find prognostic or predictive markers that accurately stratify the risk, with the most widely used being the Ranson’s criteria (Table 33-7) or modified Glasgow criteria. Both use clinical and biochemical parameters scored over the first 48 hours of admission. When there are three or more positive criteria, the disease is considered “predicted severe.” There are many other approaches to predicting severity. At 24 hours after admission an APACHE II score of 8 or more or a serum C-reactive protein level of >150 mg/dL has a similar accuracy in predicting severity as Ranson’s criteria.66 The more recently proposed Bedside Index for Severity of Acute Pancreatitis (BISAP) is calculated from blood urea nitrogen (> 25 mg/dL), impaired mental status (GCS <15), presence of systemic inflammatory response syndrome, age >60 years, and pleural effusion. Although it has the advantage of simplicity and can be performed within the first 24 hours of admission, it performed no better than other predictors.67 The presence of SIRS also has prognostic significance.68 There remains some controversy as to how important obesity is as a risk factor for severe and critical acute pancreatitis.69 Another approach has been taken in seeking to predict those with the “harmless acute pancreatitis score”70 using three factors that can be determined on admission: absence of rebound tenderness or guarding, normal hematocrit, and normal serum creatinine. The accuracy of this approach appears to be over 90% and triages most patients away from intensive care.Unfortunately, these and many other single and combined predictors of severity have an accuracy of around 70%66. This means that there is misclassification error of 30% that limits the value in predicting the severity of acute pancreatitis in indi-vidual patients. In the absence of any new biomarkers of pancre-atitis severity, making better use of existing predictors through sequencing tests, combining tests, or using artificial neural network methodologies has shown some promise.71 Scoring systems should augment clinical judgment, but not replace it.64 Over the first 2 to 3 days the clinician must be alert to patients with an elevated BUN or creatinine and/or persistent SIRS after adequate fluid resuscitation because these patients are at risk of developing severe acute pancreatitis.64Classification of SeverityAccurately classifying or staging acute pancreatitis severity is important for clinical decision-making, communication, and enrolment into trials. The wide spectrum of pancreatitis severity was not captured in the previous binary classifica-tions (mild or severe). The key determinants of severity are local complications (absent, sterile, or infected) and systemic complications (absent, transient organ failure, persistent organ failure).25,72 Two classification systems have recently been proposed: the three grades (mild, moderately severe, and severe) of the Revised Atlanta Criteria (RAC)51 and the four categories (mild, moderate, severe, critical) of the Determi-nants Based Classification (DBC)73 (Table 33-8). The DBC Table 33-8Definitions for the classification of acute pancreatitis severity according to Revised Atlanta Classification11 and the Determinants Based Classification14. (Transient organ failure has a duration of <48 hours, persistent organ failure has duration of >48 hours.)Determinant Based Classification (2012)Revised Atlanta Classification (2013)MildNo local complicationNo systemic complicationNo local complicationNo systemic complicationModerateSterile local complication  and/orTransient organ failureLocal or systemic complications without persistent organ failureorexacerbation of preexisting comorbiditySevereinfected local complicationorPersistent organ failurePersistent organ failure  (single or multiple)CriticalInfected local complication and Persistent organ failure-Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   144501/03/19   6:44 PM 1446SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 33-9The Modified Determinant Based Classification (MDBC) (Acevedo) of acute pancreatitis severity compared with the Revised Atlanta Classification (RAC) and Determinants Based Classification (DBC). Note that the DBC has a narrower definition for local complications than RAC, leading to a slightly broader range of mild acute pancreatitis in this table.RACMild(No OF, No LC)Moderately severe(TOF and/or LC)Severe(POF)DBCMild(No OF, No LC)Moderate(TOF and/or SN)Severe(POF or IN)Critical(POF and IN)MDBC ExcludedGroup 1(TOF and/or SN)Group 2(IN without POF)Group 3(POF without IN)Group 4(POF and IN)Abbreviations: OF = organ failure; LC = local complication; TOF = transient organ failure; POF = persistent organ failure; SN = sterile necrosis; IN = infected necrosis.was developed on the principle of casual inference, derived by meta-analysis, and refined by an international multidis-ciplinary process,73 and both classifications have been inde-pendently validated, which suggests that they are broadly equivalent. More recently a prospective multicenter study has modified the DBC to address the ongoing issue that patients considered to have severe acute pancreatitis represent several subgroups with different morbidity, mortality, and interven-tion profiles74 (Table 33-9).The classification of patient severity is helpful in tracking the clinical trajectory of a patient, and it can be applied on a daily or more frequent basis. It can also be used in retrospect for audit purposes.Determining EtiologyThe history of alcohol ingestion must be ascertained and preferably confirmed with blood ethanol levels. Gallstones should be investigated by ultrasonography. A gallstone etiology is more likely in females over the age of 50 with an elevation of alkaline phosphatase (>300 iu/L), alanine transferase  (>100 iu/L), and amylase (>4000 iu/L). In the absence of gallstones and alcohol, a systematic approach to the identification of another factor will include taking a history of drugs, trauma, ERCP, infection, and measuring serum triglycerides, calcium, and others (see Table 33-4).Fluid ResuscitationFluid therapy to restore and maintain circulating blood volume is the most important intervention in the early management of acute pancreatitis75. However, a recent systematic review has shown that the evidence base for fluid therapy is scant,76 and most recommendations are based on expert opinion.64 It is not known which fluid to give, how aggressively to adminis-ter it, or what goal to use to guide and monitor the response to it. While there are proponents for vigorous fluid therapy (5–10 mL per kilogram per hour), especially in the first  24 hours, and for specific resuscitation goals,77 it is prob-ably best to resuscitate with a balanced crystalloid and aim to restore normal blood volume, blood pressure, and urine output. In one study, lactated Ringer’s solution was supe-rior to normal saline in reducing the systemic inflammatory response.78 Caution needs to be exercised in those with car-diac and renal disease and in the elderly, where the risks of over-resuscitation are greater.Nutritional SupportIn contrast to analgesia and fluid therapy, there is a sound evidence base for nutritional support in acute pancreatitis. It is no longer acceptable to “rest the pancreas” by avoiding enteral nutrition, now the mainstay of nutritional support.79 Parenteral nutrition is now known to be more expensive, riskier, and not more effective than enteral nutrition and should only be offered if the patient’s calculated nutritional requirements cannot be achieved by the enteral route. Early initiation of enteral nutrition (within the first 24 hours of admission) is not superior to delaying an oral diet until 72 hours.80 If this is not tolerated over 48 to 72 hours, then nasogastric tube feedings can be started and increased in step-wise fashion over 2 to 3 days.81 The tube can be advanced to the jejunum, by endoscopy or fluoroscopy, if there is evidence of feeding intolerance. A delay in commencing enteral nutrition may contribute to the development of intestinal ileus and feeding intolerance, but aggressive early enteral feeding, particularly before adequate resuscitation, may put the patient at risk of nonocclusive mesenteric ischemia. There is no evidence to support the use of elemental or immune-enhancing formulas over standard polymeric formulas.82 In predicted mild acute pancreatitis the  recommencement of oral fluids and then food was delayed until resolution of abdominal pain and normalization of serum levels of amylase, but it appears safe to allow patients to resume intake ad libitum (i.e., patient-controlled nutrition). If after 3 to 5 days there is evidence of feeding intolerance, tube feeding should be commenced.Cross-Sectional ImagingIt may be necessary to perform a CT scan to diagnose acute pancreatitis in patients who are severely ill or in those presenting with undifferentiated abdominal pain. But there is no advantage in using CT scanning to predict the severity of acute pancreatitis.51,63 The primary purpose of cross-sectional imaging is the diagnosis of local complications; in particular, the development and extent of pancreatic necrosis and the different collections (see Table 33-5). CT scanning is also important to guide the insertion of percutaneous drains, now assuming a greater role in the management of the local complications (discussed later). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is superior to CT scanning in detecting any solid content within collections (Figure 33-13). And when a bleed is suspected, in association with a local complication, an arterial phase CT scan (CTa) is useful in detecting a pseudoaneurysm, active bleeding, and/or hematoma.3Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   144601/03/19   6:44 PM 1447PANCREASCHAPTER 33ABFigure 33-13. Corresponding computed tomography (CT) (A) and MR (B) images of a patient with a symptomatic pseudocyst. CT image reveals a well circumscribed homogenous collection (arrows) exerting mass effect on antrum of stomach. The T2-weighted MR image clearly distinguishes necrotic pancreas (black arrows) from fluid (white arrows). (Reproduced with permission from Bollen TL: Imaging of acute pancreatitis: update of the revised Atlanta classification, Radiol Clin North Am. 2012 May;50(3):429-445.)Therapeutic Endoscopic Retrograde CholangiopancreatographyRandomized trials have demonstrated that early ERCP (within 24 or 48 hours of admission) reduce complications, but not mortality, in patients with predicted severe gallstone associated acute pancreatitis. While the benefits of this inva-sive modality are clear (e.g., treatment of cholangitis and release of impacted stone), this can be offset by the risks of increasing the severity of pancreatitis, bleeding, cholan-gitis, and perforation. More recent evidence has suggested that early ERCP confers no benefit in the absence of con-comitant cholangitis,83 as the offending common duct stone usually passes before ERCP can be performed. This may be evidenced by improvement in the liver function tests over the first 2 to 3 days. If there is persistent cholestasis, an MRCP can be used to detect a common duct stone and can be used as a prerequisite for attempting an ERCP.84 Persistent cholesta-sis without cholangitis may require an ERCP but not usually in the acute setting.AntibioticsAlthough the use of broad-spectrum antibiotics to treat estab-lished infection in acute pancreatitis is a well-established prac-tice, there has been considerable controversy surrounding the use of prophylactic antibiotics.63 The overuse of antibiotics has been associated with a documented rise in fungal infec-tions and resistant organisms. Overall, it appears that the most recent and generally better designed studies do not support the use of prophylactic antibiotics to reduce the frequency of pancreatic infectious complications, surgical intervention, and death.85Managing Local ComplicationsVigilance is required for the timely and accurate diagnosis of local complications. The decisions regarding how and when to intervene are often difficult. While guided by the information gained by cross-sectional imaging, the decision to intervene is based on the clinical status and trajectory of the patient and the poor response to maximal intensive care support. This means close monitoring of the patient by serial examination, supplemented by regular measurement of inflammatory markers (e.g., C-reactive protein) and a pancreatic protocol CT scan if a local complication is suspected and intervention considered warranted. In practice, intervention is delayed in order to allow demarcation and to reduce the risk of bleeding, disseminated infection, and collateral damage to adjacent organs by an intervention (Figure 33-14). Appreciation of this has resulted in a notable trend toward delayed Figure 33-14. Operative view of infected acute pancreatitis. Peripancreatic infection, characterized by mucopurulent exu-date, extends far beyond the boundaries of the pancreas in the retroperitoneum.Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   144701/03/19   6:44 PM 1448SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIStomachPeritoneal spacePeripancreaticfluid collectionwith necrotic tissueEndoscope(with balloon dilatation)PancreasRPOSTERIORLATERAL VIEWNecrotic tissuein snareLStomachSpleenPeripancreaticfluid collectionwith necrotic tissueAccess toretroperitonealspaceCostal marginPancreasPancreasLiverNecrotictissueLong graspingforcepsLaparoscopeStomachSpleenPeripancreaticfluid collectionwith necrotic tissueEndoscopeStomach wallFluid collectionAortaPOSTERIORFigure 33-15. Two minimally invasive interventions for local complications of acute pancreatitis: A. video-assisted retroperitoneal debridement and B. endoscopic transgastric necrosectomy. (Reproduced with permission from Bakker OJ, van Santvoort HC, van Brunschot S, et al: Endoscopic transgastric vs surgical necrosectomy for infected necrotizing pancreatitis: a randomized trial, JAMA. 2012 Mar 14; 307(10):1053-1061.)intervention, now uncommon before 3 to 4 weeks from the onset of symptoms. An important emerging approach is the increasing use of percutaneous catheter drainage in patients with suspected infected collections.86 Fine-needle aspiration is now rarely used to confirm infection because the insertion of a needle at the time of planned drainage allows confirmation of the suspected infection. Preemptive drainage with one or more catheters often produces improvement or stabilization of the patient’s overall clinical status.87 In this way, drainage “buys time” and allows the lesion to become more walled off and safer to treat. Recent data suggests that primary percutaneous catheter drainage may be the only intervention required in a third to a half of patients and that this proportion might increase further if there were a policy of regular catheter exchange, upsizing, and irrigation.87 A proportion of patients do, however, require further treatment when they fail to respond and there is a wide array of minimally invasive options to choose from88 (Figure 33-15). These interventions can be classified on the basis of the method of visualization, route taken to the lesion, and the purpose of the intervention.89 In practice, the approach taken will depend on local expertise and equipment as well as the location and type of the specific local complication. A large Dutch randomized trial has shown that open surgical techniques should only be considered in those who fail to respond to the step-up approach, that is, prior percutaneous drainage and minimally invasive intervention.90 The exception is to be found in the rare situation where an abdominal compartment syndrome requires open decompression, but this is usually earlier than the optimal time to intervene for local complications. A recent landmark randomized trial has compared two minimally invasive techniques, endoscopic transgastric drainage, and the videoscope-assisted retroperitoneal debridement through a flank incision (see Figure 33-15). The data shows that the former approach is superior, although the latter has a role when the walled-off necrosis is remote from the stomach or duodenum, as in the left flank.91The management of an acute noninfected pseudocyst is usually conservative, as about half of these will resolve sponta-neously. When symptoms of pain or the inability to eat persist or infection occurs, intervention is required. The indications for intervention are therefore no longer based on size and duration alone. Pseudocysts persist because of communication with the main pancreatic duct and/or distal ductal stenosis. Percutaneous drainage should be avoided in this situation because of the risk of external pancreatic fistula.92 EUS-guided internal drainage into stomach or duodenum or transpapillary stenting is the pre-ferred approach.Managing Organ FailureThe specific management of multiple organ failure is beyond the scope of this chapter. The early identification of organ dysfunc-tion and failure is important because it is a key determinant of severity and outcome and to facilitate the timely transfer of the patient to an intensive care unit to optimize management, pro-vide organ support and allow more intensive monitoring. The severity of organ failure can be scored (see Table 33-6). The responsiveness of organ failure to resuscitation over the first  48 hours is an important prognostic clue; those that respond have transient organ failure and have a better outlook than those who do not respond and have persistent organ failure.93 Organ failure that develops later in the disease course is usually Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   144801/03/19   6:44 PM 1449PANCREASCHAPTER 33Table 33-10Algorithm for the evaluation and management of acute pancreatitis	1.	Diagnosis	•	History of abdominal pain consistent with acute pancreatitis	•	>3x elevation of pancreatic enzymes	•	CT scan if required to confirm diagnosis	2.	Initial assessment/management (first 4 hrs)	•	Analgesia	•	Fluid resuscitation	•	Predict severity of pancreatitis	•	Ranson’s criteria	•	HAPS score	•	Assess systemic response	•	SIRS score	•	SOFA (organ failure)	3.	Reassessment/management (4 to 6 hrs)	•	Assess response to fluid resuscitation	•	mean arterial pressure	•	heart rate	•	urine output	•	hematocrit	•	Determine etiology	•	Ultrasound for gallstones/sludge	•	History of alcohol consumption	•	Laboratory evaluation of other causes	•	MRCP and/or Urgent ERCP if concomitant cholangitis is present	•	not for cholestasis or predicted severe disease per se	•	Transfer to ICU or specialist center as needed	•	Deterioration or failure to respond to initial  management	•	Intensive support for persistent organ failure	•	Commence enteral nutrition	•	Once normovolemia restored (usually after  6 hours)	•	Commence via NG tube if no gastric stasis	•	No prophylactic antibiotics or probiotics	4.	Conservative management and monitoring (at least daily)	•	Clinical evaluation	•	Assess cardiovascular, respiratory, and renal function	•	Detect peritonitis and abdominal compartment syndrome	•	Daily C-reactive protein	•	Classify severity (mild, moderate, severe, critical)	•	Detect intolerance of NG EN	•	Advance tube for NJ feeding if needed	•	Consider supplemental parenteral nutrition by day 4	5.	Indications for “pancreatic protocol CT scan” (rarely in  first week)	•	For significant clinical deterioration and elevated CRP	•	For suspicion of local pancreatic complications	•	For suspected bowel ischemia	•	For acute bleeding (CTa) (if stable enough and consider embolization)	•	For abdominal compartment syndrome	6.	Invasive intervention	•	For deteriorating patient with suspected infected local complication	•	“Step up approach” with initial drain guided by current  CT scan (percutaneous or endoscopic drainage)	•	Delay for 3 to 4 weeks with intensive care support, if possible	•	If failure to respond or secondary deterioration, repeat  CT scan, and select appropriate minimally invasive technique based on available expertise and equipment	•	Video-assisted retroperitoneal debridement or percutaneous nephroscopic debridement	•	Endoscopic transluminal debridement	•	Ongoing large bore drainage and irrigation	7.	Indication for laparotomy	•	Failed “step-up approach” for further debridement/drainage	•	Acute abdomen (perforation or ischemia)	•	Severe abdominal compartment syndrome (rarely)secondary to infection of a local complication and should be managed accordingly (see Figure 33-9).CholecystectomyWhile it is widely accepted that cholecystectomy is essential to prevent recurrent gallstone associated pancreatitis, the ques-tion relates to the timing of it. Index cholecystectomy, done in the same admission and prior to discharge, appears safe and can almost always be accomplished laparoscopically.94 But index cholecystectomy is not suitable for all patients, particu-larly some who have had local pancreatic complications, which includes a large inflammatory mass that extends into the porta hepatis. These patients may require an interval cholecystec-tomy after resolution of the inflammatory process. If surgery is required for the management of local complications, then a cholecystectomy is often performed at that time.DiabetesRecent evidence indicates that prediabetes and diabetes are com-mon after acute pancreatitis and occur in nearly 40% of patients after hospital discharge.95 The prevalence of newly diagnosed diabetes is much higher after acute pancreatitis (23%) than the prevalence of diabetes in the general population (4–9%). The risk of diabetes increases by at least twofold after 5 years as compared with 12 months. Interestingly, the severity of acute pancreatitis appears to have minimal effect on risk of diabetes.95 The implica-tion is that patients recovered from an attack of acute pancreatitis may need follow-up and screening for glucose intolerance.The management of acute pancreatitis remains a formidable challenge (Table 33-10) due to the variety and severity of the many associated complications (Table 33-11), and continues to evolve. Although specific treatments for acute pancreatitis remain elusive, progress has been made in the management of pain, fluid resuscitation, antibiotic prophylaxis, enteral nutrition, therapeutic ERCP, and cholecystectomy. Progress has also been made in the intensive care  management of systemic complications and in the development of less invasive interventions for the treatment of local complications, particularly infected pancreatic necrosis.4Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   144901/03/19   6:44 PM 1450SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 33-11Complications of acute pancreatitis	I.	Local	A.	Pancreatic phlegmon	B.	Pancreatic abscess	C.	Pancreatic pseudocyst	D.	Pancreatic ascites	E.	Involvement of adjacent organs, with hemorrhage, thrombosis, bowel infarction, obstructive jaundice, fistula formation, or mechanical obstruction	II.	Systemic	A.	Pulmonary	1.	Pneumonia, atelectasis	2.	Acute respiratory distress syndrome	3.	Pleural effusion	B.	Cardiovascular	1.	Hypotension	2.	Hypovolemia	3.	Sudden death	4.	Nonspecific ST-T wave changes	5.	Pericardial effusion	C.	Hematologic	1.	Hemoconcentration	2.	Disseminated intravascular coagulopathy	D.	GI hemorrhage	1.	Peptic ulcer	2.	Erosive gastritis	3.	Portal vein or splenic vein thrombosis with varices	E.	Renal	1.	Oliguria	2.	Azotemia	3.	Renal artery/vein thrombosis	F.	Metabolic	1.	Hyperglycemia	2.	Hypocalcemia	3.	Hypertriglyceridemia	4.	Encephalopathy	5.	Sudden blindness (Purtscher’s retinopathy)	G.	Central nervous system	1.	Psychosis	2.	Fat emboli	3.	Alcohol withdrawal syndrome	H.	Fat necrosis	1.	Intra-abdominal saponification	2.	Subcutaneous tissue necrosisReproduced with permission from Isselbacher KJ:  Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 13th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Education; 1994.CHRONIC PANCREATITISDefinition, Incidence, and PrevalenceChronic pancreatitis is an incurable, chronic inflammatory con-dition that is multifactorial in its etiology, highly variable in its presentation, and a challenge to treat successfully. Autopsy studies indicate that evidence of chronic inflammation, such as fibrosis, duct ectasia, and acinar atrophy is seen in up to 5% of the population,96 although these data are difficult to interpret because many of these changes are also present in asymptomatic elderly patients.97 Population studies suggest a prevalence that ranges from 5 to 40 persons per 100,000 population, with con-siderable geographic variation.98 Differences in diagnostic crite-ria, regional nutrition, alcohol consumption, and medical access account for variations in the frequency of the diagnosis, but the overall incidence of the disease has risen progressively over the past 50 years.EtiologyThere are multiple etiologies of chronic pancreatitis, includ-ing genetic mutations, alcohol exposure, duct obstruction due to trauma, gallstones, and tumors, metabolic diseases such as hyperlipidemia and hyperparathyroidism, and auto-immune dis-ease. In addition, nutritional causes include so-called tropical pancreatitis, which has been thought to result from ingestion of certain starches. A significant number of patients have no discernible cause of the disease despite extensive testing, and are said to have “idiopathic” chronic pancreatitis.Genetic CausesIn 1952, Comfort and Steinberg reported a kindred of “heredi-tary chronic relapsing pancreatitis” after treating the proband, a 24-year-old woman, at the Mayo Clinic.99 Subsequently, familial patterns of chronic, nonalcoholic pancreatitis have been described worldwide, and a familiar pattern has emerged. Typically, patients first present in childhood or adolescence with abdominal pain and are found to have chronic calcific pan-creatitis on imaging studies. Progressive pancreatic dysfunction is common, and many patients present with symptoms due to pancreatic duct obstruction. The risk of subsequent carcinoma formation is increased, reaching a prevalence, in some series, of 40%, but the age of onset for carcinoma is typically >50 years old.100 The disorder is characterized by an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance, with 80% penetrance and variable expres-sion. The incidence is equal in both sexes.Whitcomb and colleagues,101 and separately LeBodic and associates,102 performed gene-linkage analysis and identified a linkage for hereditary pancreatitis to chromosome 7q35. Subse-quently, the region was sequenced and revealed eight trypsino-gen genes. Mutational analysis revealed a missense mutation resulting in an Arg-to-His substitution at position 117 of the cat-ionic trypsinogen gene, or PRSS1, one of the primary sites for proteolysis of trypsin. This gain-of-function mutation results in an excess production of trypsinogen, which results in persistent and uncontrolled proteolytic activity and autodestruction within the pancreas.103 The position 117 mutation of PRSS1 and an addi-tional mutation, now known collectively as the R122H and N291 mutations of PRSS1, account for about two-thirds of cases of hereditary pancreatitis. Masson and associates described a gain-of-function mutation in the anionic trypsinogen gene, PRSS2, that is also present in some cases.104Similarly, SPINK1, an inflammation-induced trypsin inhibitor secreted in acinar cells, has been found to have a role in hereditary pancreatitis. SPINK1 specifically inhibits trypsin action by competitively blocking the active site of the enzyme. Witt and colleagues investigated96 unrelated children with chronic pancreatitis in Germany and found a variety of SPINK1 mutations in 23% of the patients.105 Several studies have now confirmed an association of loss-of-function SPINK1 mutations with familial and idiopathic forms of chronic pancreatitis, as well as so-called tropical pancreatitis.106,107 SPINK1 mutations Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   145001/03/19   6:44 PM 1451PANCREASCHAPTER 33BasolateralmembraneAcinar callKeyZymogensClaudin-2CFTRCalcium regulationCAZymogens: Including;trypsinogens (PRSS1, PRSS2)chymotrypsin C (CTRC)(SPINK1 in“ammation-induced trypsin inhibitor)Calcium sensing receptor (CASR)CFTRDuodenumZymogensecretionAbnormalclaudin-2localizationDuct cellBicarbonateSodiumWaterTrypsinogenZymogensEKTrypsinActive digestiveenzymesCASRFigure 33-16. Schematic model of genetic causes of chronic pan-creatitis. A pancreatic acinus is portrayed showing the pathway for digestive enzymes (zymogens) to be secreted by the acinar cell into the ductal system where water, sodium, and bicarbonate are secreted by the duct and centroacinar (CA) cells. Mutations in at least five genes have been identified as risk factors for chronic pancreatitis: gain-of function mutations in the cationic trypsinogen genes (PRSS1, PRSS2) cause hereditary pancreatitis. Cationic and anionic trypsinogen are normally active in the duodenum by entero-kinase (EK). Premature activation of the trypsin in the acinar cell leads to zymogen activation, local cellular injury, and inflamma-tion. Mutations of the trypsin inhibitors SPINK1 or chymotrypsin C  (CTRC), or of the calcium sensing receptor CASR, result in pre-mature activation of trypsinogen. Mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane receptor CFTR results in trypsinogen stasis within the ducts due to insufficient secretion by duct cells. A mutation in claudin-2 (CLDN2) results in abnormal expression in acinar cells, instead of its normal location between duct cells, and is associated with the accelerated development of chronic pancreatitis in alcohol abusers. (Modified with permission from Solomon S, Whitcomb DC: Genetics of pancreatitis: an update for clinicians and genetic coun-selors, Curr Gastroenterol Rep. 2012 Apr;14(2):112-711.)are common in the general population as well, and the frequency of these mutations varies in different cohorts of idiopathic chronic pancreatitis, from 6.4% in France108 to 25.8% in the United States.109 Thus, hereditary pancreatitis results from one or more mutational defects that incapacitate an auto-protective process that normally prevents proteolysis within the pancreas.Cystic fibrosis, originally termed cystic fibrosis of the pancreas, results from a variety of mutations of the cystic fibro-sis transmembrane receptor (CFTR). The CFTR is present in pancreatic duct cells and controls the amount of chloride and bicarbonate secreted into the normally alkaline pancreatic juice. The CFTR gene contains over 4300 nucleotides, divided into 24 exons, which encode a 1480-amino acid protein. Over 1000 polymorphisms have been reported, and many are common. The CFTR mutation associated with the classic pulmonary dis-ease, F508, is rarely observed in chronic pancreatitis. But other CFTR mutations have been noted to be associated with chronic idiopathic pancreatitis, auto-immune pancreatitis, and pancreas divisum, in which the pulmonary, intestinal, and cutaneous manifestations of the disease are silent.110Many studies have been undertaken to determine whether specific genetic abnormalities are associated with alcoholic chronic pancreatitis and which might confer susceptibility to the disease.105 In 2012, a landmark study by Whitcomb and associates demonstrated a likely genetic cause of the predisposition to alcohol-induced chronic pancreatitis in men.111 In a genome-wide association study of more than 2000 patients, these researchers discovered that a common DNA variant on the X chromosome is present in 26% of men without pancreatitis, but jumps to nearly 50% of men diagnosed with alcoholic pancreatitis. The variant involves the claudin 2 (CLDN2) gene, which encodes a tight junction protein normally present in ductal cells. In cases of chronic pancreatitis, the CLDN2 protein is abnormally expressed in acinar cells and may alter the secretory dynamics of enzyme release. The abnormality does not appear to cause pancreatitis, but if pancreatitis occurs for any reason in a person with the CLDN2 variant, it is more likely that the person will develop chronic pancreatitis; the risk is increased even further among alcohol users. Only 10% of women have the X chromosome–linked variant on both X chromosomes, and most women with the CLDN2 variant on one X chromosome appear to be protected from alcoholic chronic pancreatitis by the other X chromosome, if it is normal. Men, with only one X chromosome, have no protection if they inherit a CLDN2 mutation. This helps to explain the high prevalence of alcoholic chronic pancreatitis among men, although the mechanism remains unclear. This study does not demonstrate a genetic cause for all cases of alcohol-related chronic pancreatitis, but it shows that a genetic element contributes to many patients with the disease (Fig. 33-16).AlcoholIn 1878, Friedreich proposed that “a general chronic interstitial pancreatitis may result from excessive alcoholism (drunkard’s pancreas).”112 Since that observation, numerous studies have shown that a causal relationship exists between alcohol and chronic pancreatitis, but the prevalence of alcohol as the etiol-ogy of the disease in Western countries ranges widely, from 38% to 94%113 (Fig. 33-17).There is a linear relationship between exposure to alcohol and the development of chronic pancreatitis.114 The risk of dis-ease is present in patients with even a low or occasional expo-sure to alcohol (1 to 20 g/d), perhaps due to the CLDN2 gene mutation described previously, so there is no threshold level of alcohol exposure below which there is no risk of develop-ing chronic pancreatitis. Furthermore, although the risk of dis-ease is dose related and highest in heavy (>150 g/d, or about 11 1 oz shots, or 12 beers per day) drinkers, the prevalence of chronic pancreatitis among confirmed alcohol abusers is only 5% to 15%.115 However, the duration of alcohol consumption is definitely associated with the development of pancreatic dis-ease. The onset of disease typically occurs between ages 35 to 40 years, after 16 to 20 years of heavy alcohol consumption. Recurrent episodes of acute pancreatitis are typically followed by chronic symptoms after 4 or 5 years.116In their 1946 classic study, Comfort, Gambrill, and Baggenstoss proposed that chronic pancreatitis was the result of multiple episodes of acute inflammation, with residual and Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   145101/03/19   6:44 PM 1452SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITimeDegree of pancreatic damage= Episode of acute pancreatitisNecrosis-fibrosis sequenceFigure 33-18. “Multiple hit” theory of the etiology of chronic pancreatitis. Multiple episodes of acute pancreatitis cause progres-sively more organized inflammatory changes that ultimately result in chronic inflammation and scarring. (Reproduced with permission from Apte MV, Wilson JS: Alcohol-induced pancreatic injury, Best Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol. 2003 Aug;17(4):593-612.)Very heavy drinking (15%)Alcohol + genetic (3%)Idiopathic(42%)Genetic(24%)CFTR(14%)CFTR +SPINK1(3%)SPINK1(4%)PRSS1(3%)Hyperlipidemia,Autoimmune,Other (4%)Obstructive(9%)Gallstone /severe AP(3%)Figure 33-17. Etiologies of chronic pancreatitis. (Reproduced with permission from Whitcomb DC: Going MAD: development of a “matrix academic division” to facilitate translating research to personalized medicine, Acad Med. 2011 Nov;86(11):1353-1359.)progressively increasing chronic inflammation.117 Subsequently, Kondo and associates showed that other, additional factors were necessary for repeated exposure to alcohol to cause chronic pancreatitis.118 Regardless of the requirement for other predisposing or facilitative factors, the concept that multiple episodes (or a prolonged course) of pancreatic injury ultimately leads to chronic disease is widely accepted as the pathophysiologic sequence119 (Fig. 33-18).Although direct alcohol exposure to the pancreatic ductal system, or elevated levels of alcohol in the bloodstream, has been shown to alter the integrity and function of pancreatic ducts and acini directly,120 most investigators believe that alco-hol metabolites such as acetaldehyde, combined with oxidant injury, result in local parenchymal injury that is preferentially targeted to the pancreas in predisposed individuals. Repeated or severe episodes of toxin-induced injury activate a cascade of cytokines, which, in turn, induces pancreatic stellate cells (PSCs) to produce collagen and cause fibrosis (Fig. 33-19).A high-protein, low-bicarbonate, low-volume secretory output is seen after chronic alcohol exposure, which may con-tribute to the precipitation of proteins in secondary ducts in the early stages of chronic pancreatitis.121 Calcium is complexed to protein plugs in small ductules, secondary ducts, and, eventu-ally, in the main ductal system, which causes ductal cell injury and obstruction of the secretory system, which further promotes an inflammatory response.Cigarette smoking has been strongly associated with chronic pancreatitis,122 but until recently it was unclear whether this was a causative risk factor. Studies have now shown that smoking actually accelerates the development of alcoholic pancreatitis,123 and the risk of cancer in chronic pancreatitis is increased significantly by smoking. In hereditary pancreatitis, smoking has been found to lower the age of onset of carcinoma by about 20 years.124 Smoking therefore appears to be an inde-pendent risk factor for the late complications of alcoholic pan-creatitis, if not an early cofactor for the development of fibrosis.HyperparathyroidismHypercalcemia is a known cause of pancreatic hypersecretion,125 and  chronic hypercalcemia caused by untreated hyperparathyroidism is associated with chronic calcific pancreatitis.126 Hypercalcemia is also a stimulant for pancreatic calcium secretion, which contributes to calculus formation and obstructive pancreatopathy. The treatment is correction of the hyperparathyroidism and assessment of any additional endocrinopathies.HyperlipidemiaIn addition to the risk of acute pancreatitis, hyperlipidemia and hypertriglyceridemia predispose women to chronic pancreatitis when they receive estrogen replacement therapy.127 Fasting tri-glyceride levels <300 mg/dL are below the threshold for this to occur, and the mechanism of estrogen potentiation of hyperlip-idemia-induced chronic pancreatitis is unknown. It is assumed that chronic changes occur after repeated subclinical episodes of acute inflammation. Aggressive therapy of hyperlipidemia is therefore important in perior postmenopausal patients who are candidates for estrogen therapy.ClassificationA major impediment to a better understanding of the etiology, frequency, and severity of chronic pancreatitis has been the dif-ficulty with which investigators and clinicians have struggled to identify a useful classification system. Multiple classification systems have been proposed. The TIGAR-O scheme catego-rizes chronic pancreatitis according to risk factors and etiolo-gies, such as (a) toxic-metabolic, (b) idiopathic, (c) genetic, (d) autoimmune, (e) recurrent and severe acute pancreatitis, or (f) obstructive.128 A recent classification system based on his-topathology as well as etiology was delineated by Singer and Chari.129Chronic Calcific (Lithogenic) PancreatitisThis type is the largest subgroup in the classification scheme proposed by Singer and Chari and includes patients with calcific pancreatitis of most etiologies. Although the majority of patients with calcific pancreatitis have a history of alcohol abuse, stone formation and parenchymal calcification can develop in a variety of etiologic subgroups; hereditary pancreatitis and tropical pan-creatitis are particularly noteworthy for the formation of stone disease. The clinician should therefore avoid the assumption that calcific pancreatitis confirms the diagnosis of alcohol abuse.Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   145201/03/19   6:44 PM 1453PANCREASCHAPTER 33Normal pancreasAlcoholMetabolic / oxidative stressSentinel eventAcinar cell injury(+ / – Necrosis)Inflammatory response:proinflammatory(Early)Anti-inflammatory (Later)Alcoholmetabolic/oxidative stressRecurrent acute pancreatitis(RAP)Anti-inflammatoryFibrosisHealedStressRAPNormal (Recovered):Normal:Stellate cells(Inactive)CytokinesChronicpancreatitis:FibrosisEarly acutepancreatitis: NeutrophilLymphocyteMacrophageStellate cell(Active)Collagen, etc.Late acutepancreatitis:M(Anti-inflam-matory)Necrosis = Stress, ETOHxxxxxxxxxxxxxFigure 33-19. The sentinel acute pancreatitis event (SAPE) hypothesis for the development of chronic pancreatitis. A critical episode of acute pancreatitis activates cytokine-induced transformation of pancreatic stellate cells, which results in collagen production and fibrosis. ETOH = ethyl alcohol. (Adapted with permission from Schneider A, Whitcomb DC: Hereditary pancreatitis: a model for inflammatory diseases of the pancreas, Best Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol. 2002 Jun;16(3):347-363.)Chronic Obstructive PancreatitisThis refers to chronic inflammatory changes that are caused by the compression or occlusion of the proximal ductal system by tumor, gallstone, posttraumatic scar, or inadequate duct caliber (as in pancreas divisum). Obstruction of the main pancreatic duct by inflammatory (posttraumatic) or neoplastic processes can result in diffuse fibrosis, dilated main and secondary pan-creatic ducts, and acinar atrophy. The patient may have little in Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   145301/03/19   6:44 PM 1454SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IINormal pancreasAbsence of duct of SantoriniNormal pancreaswith duct of SantoriniPancreas divisumSmall ductof WirsungPancreas divisumNo duct of WirsungABCDFigure 33-20. Pancreas divisum. Normal pancreatic duct anatomy and the variations of partial or complete pancreas divisum are shown. (Reproduced with permission from Beger HG: The pancreas: an integrated textbook of basic science, medicine, and surgery. London: Blackwell-Science; 1998.)the way of pain symptoms or may present with signs of exo-crine insufficiency. Intraductal stone formation is rare, and both functional and structural abnormalities may improve when the obstructive process is relieved or removed. Trauma to the pan-creas frequently results in duct injury and leakage, which may result in pseudocyst formation as well as local scar formation. Inadequately treated pancreatic trauma may result in persistent inflammatory changes in the distal gland.130Pancreas divisum represents a special case of obstruc-tive pancreatitis. It is the most common congenital anomaly involving the pancreas and occurs in up to 10% of children. It is thought to predispose the pancreas to recurrent acute pan-creatitis and chronic pancreatitis, due to functional obstruction of a diminutive duct of Santorini that fails to communicate with Wirsung’s duct (Fig. 33-20). However, the classic pic-ture of obstructive pancreatopathy with a dilated dorsal duct is unusual in pancreas divisum, so a decompressive opera-tion or a lesser papilla sphincteroplasty is frequently not fea-sible or unsuccessful. Endoscopic stenting through the lesser papilla may result in temporary relief of symptoms, and this response would increase the possibility that a permanent sur-gical or endoscopic intervention will be successful. Although some authors emphasize the pathologic implications of pan-creas divisum,131 others express skepticism that it represents a true risk to pancreatic secretory capacity or contributes to the development of chronic pancreatitis.132,133A recent French study reveals that pancreas divisum is equally prevalent among patients with idiopathic chronic pancreatitis and normal con-trols (7%), and is minimally increased in patients with PRSS1 and SPINK1 mutations. It is accompanied by CFTR mutations in 47% of patients, however, suggesting that the presence of pancreas divisum together with mutational events may increase the susceptibility to pancreatitis.134Chronic Inflammatory PancreatitisChronic inflammatory pancreatitis is characterized by diffuse fibrosis and a loss of acinar elements with a predominant mono-nuclear cell infiltration throughout the gland.A variant of chronic pancreatitis is a nonobstructive, diffusely infiltrative disease associated with fibrosis, a mono-nuclear cell (lymphocyte, plasma cell, or eosinophil) infiltrate, and an increased titer of one or more autoantibodies.135 This type, referred to as autoimmune pancreatitis (AIP), is associated with a variety of illnesses with suspected or proven autoimmune etiology, such as Sjögren’s syndrome, rheumatoid arthritis, and type 1 diabetes mellitus. AIP has been characterized as either type I, with accompanying systemic or multiorgan dysfunction, or type II, which is restricted to the pancreas.Compressive stenosis of the intrapancreatic portion of the common bile duct is frequently seen in both types of AIP, along with symptoms of obstructive jaundice. Increased levels of serum β-globulin or immunoglobulin G4 are also present. Steroid therapy is uniformly successful in ameliorating the dis-ease, including any associated bile duct compression.136 CFTR mutations that result in dislocation of the transmembrane pro-tein have been found in AIP, and steroid therapy results in a nor-malization of the CFTR localization and a resumption of normal chloride and bicarbonate secretion.137 The differential diagnosis includes lymphoma, plasmacytoma (“pseudotumor” of the pan-creas) and diffuse infiltrative carcinoma. Although the diagnosis is confirmed on pancreatic biopsy, presumptive treatment with steroids is usually undertaken, especially when clinical and lab-oratory findings, such as an elevation in IgG4 levels, support the diagnosis. Failure to obtain a cytologic specimen may lead to an unnecessary resectional procedure, and an untreated inflam-matory component may cause sclerosis of the extrahepatic or intrahepatic bile ducts, with eventual liver failure.138Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   145401/03/19   6:44 PM 1455PANCREASCHAPTER 33Tropical (Nutritional) PancreatitisChronic pancreatitis is highly prevalent among adolescents and young adults in Indonesia, southern India, and tropical Africa. Abdominal pain develops in adolescence, followed by the development of a brittle form of pancreatogenic diabetes. Parenchymal and intraductal calcifications are seen, and the pancreatic duct stones may be quite large.139 Many of the patients appear malnourished, some present with extreme emaciation, and a characteristic cyanotic coloration of the lips may be seen.140 In addition to protein-caloric malnutrition, toxic products of some indigenous foodstuffs have also been thought to contribute to the disease. Because of the geographic concentration of this early-onset form of chronic pancreatitis, it has been termed tropical pancreatitis, although the exact etiology remains unclear.Clinically, tropical pancreatitis presents much like heredi-tary pancreatitis, and a familial pattern among cases is not unusual. SPINK1 mutations have been documented in 20% to 55% of patients with tropical pancreatitis, and CFTR mutations have been reported as well.106,107 The accelerated deteriora-tion of endocrine and exocrine function, the chronic pain due to obstructive disease, and the recurrence of symptoms despite decompressive procedures characterize the course of disease. As immigrants from the tropical regions increasingly find their way to all parts of the world, an awareness of this severe form of chronic pancreatitis is helpful for those who treat patients with pancreatic disease.Asymptomatic Pancreatic FibrosisPancreatic fibrosis is seen in some asymptomatic elderly patients, in tropical populations, or in asymptomatic alcohol users. There is diffuse perilobar fibrosis and a loss of acinar cell mass, but there is not a main ductular component. In addition, the presence of fibrosis and decreased exocrine function in patients with diabetes has raised the question of whether long-standing diabetes is a cause of chronic pancreatitis.141 Patients with this entity are usually asymptomatic in terms of typical pancreatic pain, and a recent histopathologic study of patients with typi-cal chronic pancreatitis and “diabetic exocrine pancreatopathy” reveals significant differences in morphology, including a virtual absence of duct distortion or obstruction (Fig. 33-21).142 It remains unknown whether this form of chronic inflammation precedes or contributes to the roughly twofold increase in the risk of pancreatic cancer in patients with long-standing diabetes.Idiopathic PancreatitisWhen a definable cause for chronic pancreatitis is lacking, the term idiopathic is used to categorize the illness. Classically, the idiopathic group includes young adults and adolescents who lack a family history of pancreatitis but who may represent indi-viduals with spontaneous gene mutations encoding regulatory proteins in the pancreas. A variable percentage of SPINK1 and CFTR mutations have been described in various studies. In addi-tion, the idiopathic group has included a large number of older patients for whom no obvious cause of recurrent or chronic pan-creatitis can be found.143 However, because the prevalence of biliary calculi increases steadily with age, it is not surprising that, as methods of biliary stone detection have improved, many elderly “idiopathic” pancreatitis patients are found to have bili-ary tract disease.144An increasing number of mutations of the SPINK1 and CFTR genes have been identified in association with various forms of chronic pancreatitis. However, the role of genetic analysis in the management of these patients remains unclear, as guidelines have yet to be developed to allow physicians to use the data consistently. Although the clinical management of patients who harbor a minor CFTR mutation and chronic pan-creatitis, for example, is still dictated by the clinical manifesta-tions of the pancreatitis, recent data suggest that the etiology of chronic pancreatitis, rather than the morphology, may determine the response to surgical treatment.145A shortcoming of these clinical classification systems is the lack of histologic criteria of chronic inflammation due to the usual absence of a biopsy specimen. The differentiation of recurrent acute pancreatitis from chronic pancreatitis with exac-erbations of pain can be difficult to establish and is not facili-tated by the current system. Similarly, cystic fibrosis is known to cause fibrosis and acinar dysfunction but is not included in the classification despite increasing evidence for its possible role in idiopathic chronic pancreatitis.146 Therefore, further refinements in the classification system for chronic pancreatitis Interacinarfibrosis0102030405060708090100AcinaratrophyInterlobularfibrosisStromalinflammationDuctaldistortionDuctalepithelialattenuationIslet amyloidCPDEPFigure 33-21. Comparative frequencies of key histolopathologic features of chronic pancreatitis (CP n = 7) and diabetic exocrine pancrea-topathy (DEP n = 9) (Reproduced with permission from Majumder S, Zhang L, Philip N, et al. Exocrine Pancreatopathy (EP) Associated With Diabetes Mellitus (DM) Is Histologically Distinct From Chronic Pancreatitis (CP): An International Multi-Reader Blinded Study, Gastroenterol 2016 April;150(4) Suppl 1: S191 (abstr).)Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   145501/03/19   6:44 PM 1456SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 33-22. Histology of early chronic pancreatitis. High-power microscopic (40x) histology of chronic pancreatitis shows an infil-tration of mononuclear inflammatory cells throughout the inter-stitium of the pancreas, with little fibrosis. (Used with permission from Rhonda Yantiss, Weill Cornell Medical College.)Figure 33-23. Gross appearance of chronic pancreatitis. Areas of fibrosis and scarring are seen adjacent to other areas within the gland in which the lobar architecture is grossly preserved. A dilated pancreatic duct indicates the presence of downstream obstruction in this specimen removed from a patient with chronic pancreatitis. (Used with permis-sion from Rhonda Yantiss, Weill Cornell Medical College.)Figure 33-24. Histology of severe chronic pancreatitis. High-power microscopic (40x) histologic appearance of advanced chronic pancre-atitis shows extensive sheets of fibrosis and loss of acinar tissue, with preservation of islet tissue in scattered areas. (Used with permission from Rhonda Yantiss, Weill Cornell Medical College.)are needed to allow a better prediction of its clinical course and a more accurate diagnosis of a likely etiologic agent.PathologyHistology. In early chronic pancreatitis, the histologic changes are unevenly distributed and are characterized by induration, nodular scarring, and lobular regions of fibrosis (Fig. 33-22). As the disease progresses, there is a loss of normal lobulation, with thicker sheets of fibrosis surrounding a reduced acinar cell mass and dilatation of ductular structures (Fig. 33-23). The ductular epithelium is usually atypical and may display features of dysplasia, as evidenced by cuboidal cells with hyperplastic features, accompanied by areas of mononuclear cell infiltrates or patchy areas of necrosis. Cystic changes may be seen, but areas of relatively intact acinar elements and normal-appearing islets persist. In severe chronic pancreatitis, there is considerable replacement of acinar tissue by broad, coalescing areas of fibrosis, and the islet size and number are reduced (Fig. 33-24). Small arteries appear thickened, and neural trunks become prominent.147Tropical pancreatitis and hereditary pancreatitis are histo-logically indistinguishable from chronic alcoholic pancreatitis. In obstructive chronic pancreatitis, calculi are absent, although periacinar fibrosis and dilated ductular structures are prominent. In pancreatic lobular fibrosis seen in elderly subjects, small ducts are dilated, sometimes with small calculi trapped within. Hypertrophy of ductular epithelia is thought to cause this small-duct disease, which is accompanied by perilobular fibrosis.148Fibrosis. A common feature of all forms of chronic pancreatitis is the perilobular fibrosis that forms surrounding individual acini, then propagates to surround small lobules, and eventually coalesces to replace larger areas of acinar tissue. The pathogenesis of this process involves the activation of pancreatic stellate cells (PSCs) that are found adjacent to acini and small arteries.149 The extended cytoplasmic processes of PSCs encircle the acini but appear quiescent in the normal gland, where they contain lipid vacuoles and cytoskeletal proteins. In response to pancreatic injury, the PSCs become activated and proliferate (similarly to hepatic stellate cells), lose their lipid vesicles, and transform into myofibroblast-like cells. These cells respond to proliferative factors such as transforming growth factor ®, platelet-derived growth factor, and proinflammatory cytokines that synthesize and secrete type I and III collagen and fibronectin. Studies indicate that vitamin A metabolites, similar to those present in quiescent PSCs, can inhibit the collagen production of activated cultured PSCs.150 This raises the possibility that early intervention may be possible to interrupt or prevent the fibrosis resulting from ongoing activation of PSCs.The overall pathogenic sequence proposed by Schneider and Whitcomb151 whereby alcohol induces acute pancreati-tis and, with ongoing exposure, promotes the development of chronic fibrosis, is summarized in Fig. 33-19. PSCs surround-ing the acinus are activated in acute pancreatitis but may be inactivated by anti-inflammatory cytokines and, in the absence of further injury, may revert to a quiescent state. The role of proinflammatory macrophages, cytokines, and PSCs in models of acute and chronic pancreatitis represents an important area of current research.Stone Formation. Pancreatic stones are composed largely of calcium carbonate crystals trapped in a matrix of fibrillar and other material. The fibrillar center of most stones contains no Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   145601/03/19   6:44 PM 1457PANCREASCHAPTER 33calcium but rather a mixture of other metals. This suggests that stones form from an initial noncalcified protein precipitate, which serves as a focus for layered calcium carbonate precipita-tion. The same low molecular weight protein is present in stones and protein plugs and was initially named pancreatic stone pro-tein, or PSP.152 PSP was found to be a potent inhibitor of calcium carbonate crystal growth and has subsequently been renamed lithostathine.153 Independently, a 15-kDa fibrillar protein iso-lated from the pancreas was named pancreatic thread protein, and it has been shown to be homologous with lithostathine. Finally, a protein product of the reg gene, so named because it is expressed in association with regenerating islets in models of pancreatic injury, was isolated and called reg protein and was subsequently found to be homologous with lithostathine.154 The PSP/pancreatic thread protein/reg/lithostathine gene encodes for a 166-amino acid product that undergoes posttranslational modification to produce isoforms present in pancreatic juice. The protein is expressed in all rodents and mammals, both in the pancreas as well as in brain tissue, where it is found in particu-larly high concentrations in pyramidal neurons in Alzheimer’s  disease and Down syndrome. It is also found in the renal tubules, which is consistent with its biologic action of prevent-ing calcium carbonate precipitation.Calcium and bicarbonate ions are normally present in pan-creatic juice in high concentrations, and the solubility product of calcium carbonate is greatly exceeded under normal condi-tions. Microcrystals of calcium carbonate can be seen in normal pancreatic juice but are usually clinically silent. Lithostathine is a potent inhibitor of calcium carbonate crystal formation, at a concentration of only 0.1 μmol/L. However, lithostathine con-centrations in normal pancreatic juice are in the range of 20 to 25 μmol/L, so a constant suppression of calcium carbonate crystal formation is present in the normal pancreas.In alcoholics and in patients with alcoholic chronic pan-creatitis, lithostathine expression and secretion are dramati-cally inhibited155 (Fig. 33-25). In addition, elevated levels of precipitated lithostathine in the duct fluid in chronic pancreati-tis patients suggests that the availability of the protein may be further reduced by the action of increased proteases and other proteins present in the duct fluid of alcoholic patients. Increased pancreatic juice protein levels in alcoholic men are reversible by abstinence from alcohol,156 so the availability and effectiveness of lithostathine may be restored in patients with early-stage dis-ease by timely intervention. Nevertheless, calcific stone forma-tion represents an advanced stage of disease, which can further promote injury or symptoms due to mechanical damage to duct epithelium or obstruction of the ductular network.Duct Distortion. Although calcific stone disease is normally a marker for an advanced stage of disease, parenchymal and ductular calcifications do not always correlate with symptoms. Obstructing main duct stones are commonly observed and are thought to be an indication for endoscopic or surgical removal. The ball-valve effect of a stone in a secreting system produces inevitable episodes of duct obstruction, usually accompanied by pain. But some patients with complete duct obstruction have prolonged periods of painlessness. Ductular hypertension has been documented in patients with proximal stenosis of the main pancreatic duct, and prolonged ductular distention after secre-tin administration is taken as a sign of ductular obstruction.157 Although calculus disease and duct enlargement appear together as late stages of chronic pancreatitis, controversy persists over whether they are associated, are independent events, or are caus-ally related.Radiology. Radiologic imaging of chronic pancreatitis assists in four areas: (a) diagnosis, (b) the evaluation of severity of disease, (c) detection of complications, and (d) assistance in determining treatment options.158 With the advent of cross-sectional imaging techniques such as CT and MRI, the contour, content, ductal pattern, calcifications, calculi, and cystic disease of the pancreas are all readily discernible. Transabdominal ultrasonography is frequently used as a screening method for patients with abdominal symptoms or trauma, and the extension of ultrasonic imaging to include endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) and laparoscopic US have resulted in the highest-resolution images that are capable of detecting very small (<1 cm) abnormalities in the pancreas. EUS is now frequently used as a preliminary step in the evaluation of patients with pancreatic disease, and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) is increasingly being used to select patients who are candidates for the most invasive imaging method, ERCP. The staging of disease is important in the care of patients, and a combination of imaging methods is usually used (Table 33-12).Ultrasonography is frequently used as an initial imaging method in patients with abdominal symptoms, and changes con-sistent with pancreatic duct dilatation, intraductal filling defects, cystic changes, and a heterogeneous texture are seen in chronic pancreatitis (Fig. 33-26). The sensitivity of transabdominal ultrasonography ranges from 48% to 96%, and it is operator dependent.159 However, the contour, texture, and ductal pattern are usually quite discernible, and it is a reliable method for peri-odic reexamination to determine the efficacy of treatment.EUS has heavily impacted the evaluation and manage-ment of patients with chronic pancreatitis. Although it is more operator dependent than transabdominal ultrasonography, EUS provides not only imaging capability but also adds the capac-ity to obtain cytologic and chemical samples of tissue and fluid aspirated with linear array monitoring (Fig. 33-27). EUS images obtained through a high-frequency (7.5to 12.5-mHz) transducer are able to evaluate subtle changes in 2to 3-mm 50102030µg lithostathine/mg total proteinCCPAlc.OPDControlsFigure 33-25. Lithostathine levels in chronic calcific pancreatitis (CCP) patients, patients with alcohol abuse (Alc.), patients with other pancreatic disease (OPD), and controls. (Reproduced with permis-sion from Beger HG: The pancreas: an integrated textbook of basic science, medicine, and surgery. London: Blackwell-Science; 1998.)Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   145701/03/19   6:44 PM 1458SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 33-12Cambridge classification of pancreatic morphology in chronic pancreatitisCLASSIFICATIONERCP FINDINGSCT AND US FINDINGSNormalNo abnormal SBDsNormal gland size, shape; homogeneous parenchymaEquivocalMPD normalOne of the following: less than three abnormal SBDs; MPD 2–4 mm; gland enlarged more than two times normal size; heterogeneous parenchymaMildMPD normalTwo or more of the following: less than three abnormal SBDs; MPD 2–4 mm; slight gland enlargement; heterogeneous parenchymaModerate MPD changesSmall cysts <10 mm; MPD irregularitySBD changesFocal acute pancreatitis; increased echogenicity of MPD walls; gland-contour irregularitySevereAny of the above changes plus one or more of the following: cysts <10 mm; intraductal filling defects; calculi; MPD obstruction or stricture; severe MPD irregularity; contiguous organ invasion—Abbreviations: CT = computed tomography; ERCP = endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography; MPD = main pancreatic duct; SBD = side-branch duct; US = ultrasound.Reproduced with permission from Beger HG: The Pancreas. London: Blackwell-Science; 1998.Figure 33-26. Sonography in chronic pancreatitis. Transabdomi-nal sonogram of patient with chronic pancreatitis demonstrates het-erogeneity of the pancreatic parenchyma, dilated ductal systems, and cyst formation. (Reproduced with permission from Bolondi L, Li Bassi S, Gaiani S, et al: Sonography of chronic pancreatitis, Radiol Clin North Am. 1989 Jul;27(4):815-833.)Figure 33-27. Endoscopic ultrasound of chronic pancreatitis. The endoscopic ultrasound appearance of the parenchyma is heteroge-neous, and dilated ducts are seen, indicating early obstructive pan-creatopathy. (Used with permission from Mark Topazian, Division of Digestive Diseases, Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic.)structures within the pancreas and can detect indolent neoplasms in the setting of chronic inflammation. Small intraductal lesions, intraductal mucus, cystic lesions, and subtle ductular abnormali-ties are recognizable by EUS (Table 33-13). This allows ERCP to be reserved for these patients who require therapeutic maneu-vers, or for the evaluation of more complex problems. EUS is comparable to ERCP in the detection of advanced changes in chronic pancreatitis and may be more sensitive than ERCP in the detection of mild disease.160CT scanning has affected the diagnosis of pancreatic dis-ease more broadly than any other method. With the advent of faster helical CT scanning and CT angiography, visualization of the nature, extent, location, and relative relationships of pancre-atic structures and lesions is possible with great clarity. Duct dil-atation, calculous disease, cystic changes, inflammatory events, and anomalies are all detectable with a resolution of 3 to 4 mm (Fig. 33-28). CT scanning has a false-negative rate of <10% for chronic pancreatitis, but early or mild chronic disease may go undetected by CT imaging. The earliest changes are dilatation of secondary ducts and heterogeneous parenchymal changes, which are detectable by EUS and ERCP. Another drawback of CT scanning is its lower sensitivity for detecting small neo-plasms, which are seen with increased frequency in chronic pancreatitis and may be invisible to all modalities except EUS.An MRI, in both the cross-sectional mode and the coro-nally oriented heavily weighted T2 or high spin ratio imaging Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   145801/03/19   6:44 PM 1459PANCREASCHAPTER 33Table 33-13Endoscopic ultrasound features of chronic pancreatitisENDOSCOPIC ULTRASOUND FEATUREIMPLICATIONDuctal changes  Duct size >3 mmDuctal dilation Tortuous pancreatic ductDuctal irregularity Intraductal echogenic fociStones or calcification Echogenic duct wallDuctal fibrosis Side-branch ectasiaPeriductal fibrosisParenchymal changes  Inhomogeneous echo patternEdema Reduced echogenic foci  (1–3 mm)Edema Enhanced echogenic fociCalcifications Prominent interlobular septaeFibrosis Lobular outer gland marginFibrosis, glandular atrophy Large, echo-poor cavities  (>5 mm)PseudocystReproduced with permission from Catalano MF, Lahoti S, Geenen JE, et al. Prospective evaluation of endoscopic ultrasonography, endoscopic retrograde pancreatography, and secretin test in the diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis, Gastrointest Endosc. 1998 Jul;48(1):11-17.(MRCP) that can disclose fluid-filled ducts and cystic lesions, has added greatly to the imaging options for chronic pancreatitis (Fig. 33-29). The resolution of cross-sectional MRI scanning is now approaching that of CT scanning, although the availability of MRI scanners and the complexity of the images produced have limited their large-scale use for routine imaging of the pancreas. MRCP has been shown to be an effective screening technique for disclosing ductal abnormalities that correlates closely with the contrast-filled ducts imaged by ERCP.161 The advantages of MRCP include its noninvasive methodology and Figure 33-28. Computed tomographic imaging of chronic pancre-atitis. A dilated pancreatic duct is seen, with evidence of intraductal stones and parenchymal calcification. (Reproduced with permission from Forsmark CE: Management of chronic pancreatitis, Gastroen-terology. 2013 Jun;144(6):1282-1291.)Figure 33-29. Coronal T2-weighted magnetic resonance image showing evidence of chronic pancreatitis, including a pancreatic duct dilatation and side-branch clubbing. (Used with permission from Mellena Bridges, MD, Mayo Clinic Jacksonville, Department of Radiology.)its ability to image obstructed ducts that are not opacified by ERCP injection. It is therefore a useful screening study to detect duct abnormalities and to confirm the need for interventional procedures. Oral, IV, and intraductal contrast are unnecessary for MRCP, and its lack of ionizing radiation makes this the saf-est method to image the ductal system in high-risk patients.For the diagnosis and staging of chronic pancreatitis, ERCP is considered to be the gold standard. It also serves as a vehicle that enables other diagnostic and therapeutic maneu-vers, such as biopsy or brushing for cytology, or the use of stents to relieve obstruction or drain a pseudocyst (Fig. 33-30). Figure 33-30. Pancreatic duct stenting. At endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography, a stent is placed in the proximal pan-creatic duct to relieve obstruction and reduce symptoms of pain. Pancreatic duct stents are left in place for only a limited time to avoid further inflammation.Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   145901/03/19   6:44 PM 1460SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 33-31. Pain location in chronic pancreatitis. (Reproduced with permission from Greenfield LJ, Mulholland MW, Oldham KT, et al: Surgery, Scientific Principles and Practice, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2001.)Unfortunately, ERCP also carries a risk of procedure-induced pancreatitis that occurs in approximately 5% of patients.161 Patients at increased risk include those with sphincter of Oddi dysfunction and those with a previous history of post-ERCP pancreatitis. Post-ERCP pancreatitis occurs after uncompli-cated procedures, as well as after those that require prolonged manipulation. Severe pancreatitis and deaths have occurred after ERCP. It should be reserved for patients in whom the diagnosis is unclear despite the use of other imaging methods, or in whom a diagnostic or therapeutic maneuver is specifically indicated.Presentation, Natural History, and ComplicationsPresenting Signs and Symptoms. Pain is the most common symptom of chronic pancreatitis. It is usually midepigastric in location but may localize or involve either the left or right upper quadrant of the abdomen. Occasionally, it is perceived in the lower midabdomen but is frequently described as penetrating through to the back (Fig. 33-31). The pain is typically steady and boring, but not colicky. It persists for hours or days and may be chronic with exacerbations caused by eating or drink-ing alcohol. Chronic alcoholics also describe a steady, constant pain that is temporarily relieved by alcohol, followed by a more severe recurrence hours later.Patients with chronic pancreatic pain typically flex their abdomen and either sit or lie with their hips flexed, or lie on their side in a fetal position. Unlike ureteral stone pain or biliary colic, the pain causes the patient to be still. Nausea or vomit-ing may accompany the pain, but anorexia is the most common associated symptom.Pain from chronic pancreatitis has been ascribed to multiple etiologies. Ductal hypertension, due to strictures or stones, may predispose to pain that is initiated or exacerbated by eating. Chronic pain without exacerbation may be related to parenchymal disease or retroperitoneal inflammation with per-sistent neural involvement. Acute exacerbations of pain in the setting of chronic pain may be due to acute increases in duct pressure or recurrent episodes of acute inflammation in the set-ting of chronic parenchymal disease. Nealon and Matin have described these various pain syndromes as being predictive of the response to various surgical procedures.162 Pain that is found in association with ductal hypertension is most readily relieved by pancreatic duct decompression, through endoscopic stenting or surgical decompression.The surgical relief of pain due to obstructive pancreatopa-thy may be dependent on the degree of underlying fibrosis and the etiology of the disease rather than the presence of ductal obstruction, per se, according to a recent studies from Johns Hopkins. Cooper et al studied 35 patients with chronic pain associated with evidence of duct obstruction who were treated with local resection of the pancreatic head and longitudinal pan-creaticojejunostomy (LR-LPJ), or Frey procedure.163 The degree of pain resolution after surgery was compared to the degree of underlying parenchymal fibrosis. After a follow-up that averaged 22 months, patients with more than 80% fibrosis had 100% pain relief, whereas only 60% patients with less than 10% fibrosis experienced substantial or complete pain relief. Subsequently, this group studied 60 patients who had undergone either the Frey procedure or the Whipple procedure for refractory pain due to chronic pancreatitis.145 In addition to histopathologic findings, they also analyzed the etiology of the disease. Of patients with “toxic” etiologies of acquired disease (i.e., a history of alcohol or tobacco abuse), 89% experienced prolonged pain relief, whereas only 39% of those with hereditary or idiopathic disease achieved this result. Further, these results were independent of the degree of pancreatic fibrosis. These findings suggest that the etiology of the disease may be the most important predictor of the ben-efit of a resectional or hybrid procedure, and that patients with idiopathic or hereditary disease might be considered for an alter-native approach, such as total pancreatectomy with islet auto-transplantation (see following section).The pain of chronic pancreatitis may decrease or disappear completely over a period of years, as symptoms of exocrine and endocrine deficiency become apparent.164 This is referred to as burned out pancreatitis and correlates with the progression of disease from a mild or moderate stage to severe destruction of the pancreas. Although this evolution of painful to nonpainful disease is sometimes used as a justification to avoid intervention in painful chronic pancreatitis, noninterventional approaches to the treatment of chronic pancreatitis are inevitably accompanied by the development of narcotic addiction, inability to work, and the sequelae of chronic illness.Although increased ductal pressure, and therefore paren-chymal pressure, has been thought to be the cause of pain in chronic obstructive pancreatitis, the role of chronic inflamma-tion per se, and the development of actual nerve damage in the diseased gland, are also thought to contribute to pain.165 Chronic inflammation results in the infiltration of tissue by macrophages, which secrete prostaglandins and other nociceptive agents that cause chronic stimulation of afferent neural fibers. Inflamma-tory damage to the perineurial layers surrounding the unmyelin-ated pancreatic nerves and a focal infiltration of inflammatory cells around nerves suggest that neural fibers are a target for the cellular response to inflammation in the pancreas.166Strategies to relieve pain are therefore based on three approaches: (a) reducing secretion and/or decompress the secre-tory compartment, (b) resecting the focus of chronic inflamma-tory change, or (c) interrupting the transmission of afferent neural impulses through neural ablative procedures. A trial of antisecre-tory therapy or endoscopic duct drainage may select those patients who will benefit preferentially from a decompressive procedure.Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   146001/03/19   6:45 PM 1461PANCREASCHAPTER 33Central Nervous System Abnormalities• Functional reorganization• Central sensitization  (cortical)Central NervousSystem Abnormalities• Central sensitization (spinal)Obstructive Abnormalities• Pancreatic duct  hypertension• Pancreatic parenchymal  hypertension• Pancreas morphologyPancreatic and extrapancreatic complications• Pseudocysts• Duodenal or/and bile  duct obstruction• Peptic ulcer• Splenic vein thrombosisAdditional causes• CCK elevation• Increased norepinephrine  levels• Mesenteric ischemia  (Type 3c diabetes)• Diabetic neuropathy  (Type 3c diabetes)Peripheral NervousSystem Abnormalities• Pancreatic nociception• Pancreatic neuropathy  and neuroplasticityAdverse effects to treatment• Opioid induced bowel  dysfunction• Complications to surgery  and endoscopic therapy• Bacterial overgrowth due to  changed bowel motilityCentral Nervous System Abnormalities• Impaired inhibitory  pain modulationFigure 33-32. Pain mechanisms in chronic pancreatitis. (Reproduced with permission from Demir IE, Tieftrunk E, Maak M, et al: Pain mechanisms in chronic pancreatitis: of a master and his fire, Langenbecks Arch Surg. 2011 Feb;396(2):151-160.)Patients with chronic pain due to chronic pancreatitis are often treated for years with escalating doses of narcotics, which imposes the additional problem of opioid dependency on this population. Further, it is now apparent that the pain pattern of many patients may be described as being either “visceral pain,” caused by inflammation in and around the pancreas, or “central sensitization of pain,” which is a syndrome of increased pain perception and sensitivity caused by the prolonged presence of pain167 (Fig. 33-32). Recent studies have suggested a method to differentiate these pain processes and further suggest that drugs that decrease or ameliorate the central sensitization of pain, such as pregabalin and tramadol, may be especially useful in chronic pancreatitis patients.168 These methods of differential diagnosis of pain syndromes now appear to offer the means by which it is possible to further identify and predict which patients will ben-efit from a surgical approach to chronic pancreatitis.169Malabsorption and Weight Loss. When pancreatic exocrine capacity falls below 10% of normal, diarrhea and steatorrhea develop170 (Fig. 33-33). Patients describe a bulky, foul-smelling, loose (but not watery) stool that may be pale in color and float on the surface of toilet water. Frequently, patients will describe a greasy or oily appearance to the stool, or may describe an “oil slick” on the water’s surface. In severe steatorrhea, an orange, 6040207010255075Fecal fat excretion (g/day)Normal lipase output (%)Figure 33-33. Relationship of lipase output to fat malabsorption. Excess fecal fat appears when the pancreatic lipase output falls below 10% of normal secretory values. (Data from DiMagno EP, Go VL, Summerskill WH. Relations between pancreatic enzyme out-puts and malabsorption in severe pancreatic insufficiency, N Engl J Med. 1973 Apr 19;288(16):813-815.)Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   146101/03/19   6:45 PM 1462SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIoily stool is often reported. As exocrine deficiency increases, symptoms of steatorrhea are often accompanied by weight loss. Patients may describe a good appetite despite weight loss or diminished food intake due to abdominal pain.In severe symptomatic chronic pancreatitis, anorexia or nausea may occur with or separate from abdominal pain. The combination of decreased food intake and malabsorption of nutrients usually results in chronic weight loss. As a result, many patients with severe chronic pancreatitis are below ideal body weight.Lipase deficiency tends to manifest itself before trypsin deficiency, so the presence of steatorrhea may be the first func-tional sign of pancreatic insufficiency.171 As pancreatic exocrine function deteriorates further, the secretion of bicarbonate into the duodenum is reduced, which causes duodenal acidification and further impairs nutrient absorption.172 Pancreatic exocrine insufficiency is frequently asymptomatic, however, and pancre-atic exocrine function is difficult to measure, so a diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis is sufficient to justify a trial of pancreatic enzyme supplements. Each meal should be followed by 90,000 United States Pharmacopeia units of lipase, and the metabolic and symptomatic status of the patients should be followed.173Pancreatogenic Diabetes. The islets comprise only 2% of the mass of the pancreas, but they are preferentially conserved when pancreatic inflammation occurs. In chronic pancreatitis, acinar tissue loss and replacement by fibrosis is greater than the degree of loss of islet tissue. Islets are typically smaller than normal and may be isolated from their surrounding vascular network by the fibrosis. With progressive destruction of the gland, endocrine insufficiency commonly occurs. Frank diabetes is seen initially in about 20% of patients with chronic pancreatitis, and impaired glucose metabolism can be detected in up to 70% of patients. In a study of 500 patients with predominantly alcoholic chronic pancreatitis, diabetes developed in 83% within 25 years of the clinical onset of chronic pancreatitis, and more than half of the diabetic patients required insulin treatment.174 Ketoacidosis and diabetic nephropathy are relatively uncommon in pancreato-genic diabetes (see Table 33-3), but retinopathy and neuropathy are seen to occur with a similar frequency as in type 1 and type 2  diabetes.175Pancreatogenic diabetes is most common in cases of chronic pancreatitis, and it is often seen after surgical resec-tion for benign or malignant disease176,177 (Fig. 33-34). Distal Hemochromatosis8%Cystic ÿbrosis4%Pancreatic resection3%Chronic pancreatitis76%Pancreaticneoplasia9%A Distribution of T1DM, T2DM and T3cDMB Distribution of causes of T3cDMT3cDM8%T1DM12%T2DM80%Figure 33-34. Distribution of types of diabetes (A) and causes of type 3c (pancreatogenic) diabetes (B) based on studies of 1922 diabetic patients referred to an academic medical center as reported by Hardt et al. (Data from Hardt PD, Brendel MD, Kloer HU et al: Is pancreatic diabetes (type 3c diabetes) underdiagnosed and misdiagnosed? Diabetes Care. 2008 Feb;31 Suppl 2:S165-S169.)pancreatectomy and Whipple procedures have a higher inci-dence of diabetes than do drainage procedures, and the severity of diabetes is usually worse after subtotal or total pancreatec-tomy. Pancreatogenic, or type 3c diabetes (T3cDM), is seen in cystic fibrosis, in association with pancreatic cancer, and in cases of severe hemochromatosis.178The etiology and pathophysiology of pancreatogenic diabetes is distinct from that of either autoimmune (type 1) or obesity-related (type 2) diabetes. In type 3c diabetes, the loss of functioning pancreatic tissue by disease or surgical removal results in a global deficiency of all three glucoregulatory islet cell hormones: insulin, glucagon, and PP. In addition, there is a paradoxical combination of enhanced peripheral sensitivity to insulin and decreased hepatic sensitivity to insulin.178,179 As a result, insulin therapy is frequently difficult; patients are hyper-glycemic when insulin replacement is insufficient (due to unsup-pressed hepatic glucose production) or hypoglycemic when insulin replacement is barely excessive (due to enhanced periph-eral insulin sensitivity and a deficiency of pancreatic glucagon secretion to counteract the hypoglycemia). This form of diabetes is referred to as brittle diabetes and requires special attention.PP deficiency correlates with the severity of chronic pan-creatitis, and impairments in the hepatic action of insulin are reversed in PP-deficient chronic pancreatitis patients by admin-istration of PP.180 In addition, a study of type 1 and type 3c diabetic patients treated with insulin pump therapy revealed that the addition of a continuous subcutaneous infusion of PP reduced the insulin requirements needed for glycemic control.181 Studies are currently underway to identify a clinically suitable PP analog or PP receptor agonist.Laboratory Studies. The diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis depends on the clinical presentation, a limited number of indirect measurements that correlate with pancreatic function, and selected imaging studies (Table 33-14). The direct measurement of pancreatic enzymes (e.g., lipase and amylase) by blood test is highly sensitive and fairly specific in acute pancreatitis but is seldom helpful in the diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis. The pancreatic endocrine product that correlates most strongly with chronic pancreatitis is the PP response to a test meal (Fig. 33-35). Severe chronic pancreatitis is associated with a blunted or absent PP response to feeding but, as with many other tests, a normal PP response does not rule out the presence of early disease.14Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   146201/03/19   6:45 PM 1463PANCREASCHAPTER 33The measurement of pancreatic exocrine secretion requires aspiration of pancreatic juice from the duodenum after nutrient (Lundh test meal) or hormonal (CCK or secretin) stimulation.182,183 Direct aspiration of pancreatic juice by endoscopic cannulation of the duct is performed in some centers, but it is not risk free, comfortable for the patient, or more sensitive than luminal intubation methods.184Indirect tests of pancreatic exocrine function are based on the measurement of metabolites of compounds that are altered (“digested”) by pancreatic exocrine products and can be quantified by serum or urine measurements. A commonly used indirect test is the bentiromide test, in which N-benzoyl-Ltyrosyl-p-aminobenzoic acid is ingested by the subject, and the urinary excretion of the proteolytic metabolite p-aminobenzoic Table 33-14Tests for chronic pancreatitis	              I.	Measurement of pancreatic products in blood	A.	Enzymes	B.	Pancreatic polypeptide	   II.	Measurement of pancreatic exocrine secretion	A.	Direct measurements	1.	Enzymes	2.	Bicarbonate	B.	Indirect measurement	1.	Bentiromide test	2.	Schilling test	3.	Fecal fat, chymotrypsin, or elastase concentration	4.	[14C]-olein absorption	III.	Imaging techniques	A.	Plain film radiography of abdomen	B.	Ultrasonography	C.	Computed tomography	D.	Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography	E.	Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography	F.	Endoscopic ultrasonography04080120160Time (min)206010014018004080120160200–40IR-pancreatic polypeptide (pmol/L)NLCPFigure 33-35. Pancreatic polypeptide (PP) response to a test meal. Immunoreactive PP (IR-PP) responses in control subjects (NL,  n = 6) and patients with severe chronic pancreatitis (CP) accom-panied by PP deficiency (CP, n = 5) are shown. A test meal was administered at 0 minutes. Means ± standard error of the mean are shown. (Reproduced with permission from Brunicardi FC, Chaiken RL, Ryan AS, et al. Pancreatic polypeptide administration improves abnormal glucose metabolism in patients with chronic pancreatitis, J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1996 Oct;81(10):3566-3572.)acid (PABA) is measured.185 Although the sensitivity of the test is as high as 100% in patients with severe chronic pancreati-tis, it identifies only 40% to 50% of patients with mild disease, and reduced PABA excretion is found in patients with a variety of other GI, hepatic, and renal diseases. The quantification of stool fat has also been used as a measure of pancreatic lipase secretion, either through the direct measurement of total fecal fat levels while the subject consumes a diet of known fat con-tent, or by the measurement of exhaled 14CO2 after ingestion of [14C]-triolein or [14C]-olein. This so-called triolein breath test is less cumbersome than intubation methods and avoids the necessity of stool collections and analysis, but it also has a high false-negative rate.186Fecal levels of chymotrypsin187 and elastase188 have been proposed as simpler, less expensive tests of exocrine function and correlate well with loss of pancreatic function. As with other test methods, however, these tests lose their sensitivity in patients with mild to moderate chronic pancreatitis and may be more sensitive for other causes of pancreatic dysfunction, including cystic fibrosis. Fecal elastase C1 measurements have become widespread in their use, and levels above 200 μg/g are considered normal, whereas levels below 100 μg/g are indica-tive of pancreatic exocrine insufficiency.189 The sensitivity and specificity of fecal elastase C1 measurements fall short of those needed for definitive diagnosis of pancreatic exocrine insuffi-ciency, however.190Radiologic imaging has become the principal method of diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis, with the codification of clas-sification systems that correlate with proven disease. ERCP has been considered the most sensitive radiologic test for the diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis, with specific ERCP findings that are highly correlative with the degree or stage of chronic disease191 (Table 33-15). CT scanning is sensitive for the diag-nosis of chronic pancreatitis when calcification, duct dilata-tion, or cystic disease is present, but it is not accurate in the absence of these findings. CT is helpful as a screening study to guide interventional therapy or other diagnostic modalities,158 although EUS has become the preferred method for the diagno-sis of pancreatic disease and offers the advantage of very-high-resolution images of the pancreatic parenchyma, the main and secondary ductal systems, cystic lesions, and calcific changes. Table 33-15Cambridge classification of chronic pancreatitis by endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatographyGRADEMAIN PANCREATIC DUCTSIDE BRANCHESNormalNormalNormalSuggestiveNormal<3 AbnormalMildNormal≥3 AbnormalModerateAbnormal>3 AbnormalSevereAbnormal plus at least one of the following: large cavity, duct obstruction, dilation or duct irregularity, intraductal filing defects Reproduced with permission from Axon AT, Classen M, Cotton PB,  et al: Pancreatography in chronic pancreatitis: international definitions, Gut. 1984 Oct;25(10):1107-1112.Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   146301/03/19   6:45 PM 1464SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II246810060NonalcoholicsPancreatico-duodenectomyalcoholicsAlcoholics; 40–80%distal pancreatectomyAlcoholics; 80–95%distal pancreatectomyYears after surgical procedurePercent surviving1214708090100Figure 33-36. Effect of alcohol use on survival after surgical procedures. The cumulative survival of patients with chronic pancreatitis fol-lowing pancreaticoduodenectomy or distal pancreatectomy is shown for nonalcoholic and alcoholic patients. (Reproduced with permission from Frey CF, Child CG, Fry W. Pancreatectomy for chronic pancreatitis, Ann Surg. 1976 Oct;184(4):403-413.)EUS findings may be inconclusive in mild or “minimal change” pancreatitis, however, and improved criteria for an EUS-based diagnosis are still a work in progress.192 Most importantly, EUS is highly reliable in ruling out pancreatic carcinoma when CT findings are normal or equivocal.Prognosis and Natural History. The prognosis for patients with chronic pancreatitis is dependent on the etiology of the disease, the development of complications, and on the age and socioeconomic status of the patient. The influence of treat-ment is less evident in long-term studies, although the general absence of randomized, prospective trials clouds the issue of whether specific forms of therapy alter the long-term outlook for patients with the disease.Several studies have demonstrated that, although symp-toms of pain decrease over time in about half of the patients, this decline is also accompanied by a progression of exocrine and endocrine insufficiency.193 In general, the likelihood of eventual pain relief is dependent upon the stage of disease at diagnosis, and the persistence of alcohol use in patients with alcoholic chronic pancreatitis. Miyake and colleagues found that pain relief was achieved in 60% of alcoholic patients who suc-cessfully discontinued drinking, but in only 26% who did not.194The long-term survival of patients with chronic pancreatitis is less than for patients without pancreatitis. In an international multicenter study of >2000 patients, Lowenfels and colleagues found that the 10and 20-year survival rates for patients with chronic pancreatitis were 70% and 45%, respectively, compared to 93% and 65% for patients without pancreatitis.195 The mortality risk was found to be 1.6-fold higher in patients who continued to abuse alcohol, compared to those who did not. Continued alcohol abuse has a similar effect on the response to surgical treatment (Fig. 33-36), and results in a twofold increase in mortality over a 10to 14-year follow-up period.195In addition to progressive endocrine and exocrine dysfunc-tion, and the risk of the specific complications outlined here and in Table 33-16, the other significant long-term risk for the patient with chronic pancreatitis is the development of pancre-atic carcinoma.196 There is a progressive, cumulative increased risk of carcinoma development in patients with chronic pancre-atitis, which continues throughout the subsequent lifetime of the patient (Fig. 33-37). The incidence of carcinoma in patients with chronic pancreatitis ranges from 1.5% to 6%,196 which is at least 10-fold greater than that of patients of similar age seen in a hospital setting. In patients with chronic pancreatitis accom-panied by diabetes, the risk of carcinoma has been found to be increased 12to 33-fold compared to healthy, comparably aged controls.197,198 In patients with advanced chronic pancreatitis referred for surgical therapy, indolent, undiagnosed carcinoma can be seen in as many as 10% of patients.199The development of carcinoma in the setting of chronic pancreatitis is no doubt related to the dysregulation of cellu-lar proliferation and tissue repair processes in the setting of chronic inflammation, as is seen throughout the alimentary tract and elsewhere. In the setting of chronic pancreatitis, car-cinoma development can be especially cryptic, and the diagno-sis of early-stage tumors is particularly difficult. Awareness of this risk justifies close surveillance for cancer in patients with chronic pancreatitis. Periodic measurement of tumor markers such as CA19-9, and periodic imaging of the pancreas with CT scan and EUS seem logical in order to detect the development Table 33-16Complications of chronic pancreatitisIntrapancreatic complications Pseudocysts  Duodenal or gastric obstruction  Thrombosis of splenic vein  Abscess  Perforation  Erosion into visceral artery Inflammatory mass in head of pancreas  Bile duct stenosis  Portal vein thrombosis  Duodenal obstruction Duct strictures and/or stones  Ductal hypertension and dilatation Pancreatic carcinomaExtrapancreatic complications Pancreatic duct leak with ascites or fistula Pseudocyst extension beyond lesser sac into mediastinum, retroperitoneum, lateral pericolic spaces, pelvis, or adjacent visceraBrunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   146401/03/19   6:45 PM 1465PANCREASCHAPTER 33Table 33-17Definitions of pancreatic fluid collectionsTERMDEFINITIONPeripancreatic fluid collectionA collection of enzyme-rich pancreatic juice that occurs early in the course of acute pancreatitis, or that forms after a pancreatic duct leak; located in or near the pancreas; it lacks a well-organized wall of granulation or fibrous tissueEarly pancreatic (sterile) necrosisA focal or diffuse area of nonviable pancreatic parenchyma, typically occupying >30% of the gland and containing liquefied debris and fluidLate pancreatic (sterile) necrosisAn organized collection of sterile necrotic debris and fluid with a well-defined margin or wall within the normal domain of the pancreasAcute pseudocystA collection of pancreatic juice enclosed within a perimeter of early granulation tissue, usually as a consequence of acute pancreatitis that has occurred within the preceding 3–4 wkChronic pseudocystA collection of pancreatic fluid surrounded by a wall of normal granulation and fibrous tissue, usually persisting for  >6 wkPancreatic abscessAny of the above in which gross purulence (pus) is present, with bacterial or fungal organisms documented to be presentModified with permission from Baron TH, Harewood GC, Morgan DE, et al. Outcome differences after endoscopic drainage of pancreatic necrosis, acute pancreatic pseudocysts, and chronic pancreatic pseudocysts, Gastrointest Endosc. 2002 Jul;56(1):7-17.Years after diagnosis of pancreatitisCumulative incidence of pancreatic cancer (%)12345605101520(1160)(599)(244)(64)Figure 33-37. Cumulative risk of pancreatic cancer in patients with chronic pancreatitis. The number of patients evaluated at different time intervals is shown in parentheses. (Reproduced with permis-sion from Lowenfels AB, Maisonneuve P, Cavallini G, et al. Pancre-atitis and the risk of pancreatic cancer. International Pancreatitis Study Group, N Engl J Med. 1993 May 20;328(20):1433-1437.)of carcinoma in the patient with chronic pancreatitis, although no evidence exists to indicate that this alters the outcome of patients who develop pancreatic cancer. Surgical procedures, particularly drainage procedures performed for presumed chronic pancreatitis, should always include biopsy of the tissue to exclude the diagnosis of malignancy.ComplicationsPseudocyst. A chronic collection of pancreatic fluid surrounded by a nonepithelialized wall of granulation tissue and fibrosis is referred to as a pseudocyst. Pseudocysts occur in up to 10% of patients with acute pancreatitis, and in 20% to 38% of patients with chronic pancreatitis, and thus, they comprise the most com-mon complication of chronic pancreatitis.200-202 The identification and treatment of pseudocysts requires definition of the various forms of pancreatic fluid collections that occur (Table 33-17). In chronic pancreatitis, a pancreatic duct leak with extravasa-tion of pancreatic juice results in a peripancreatic fluid collection (PPFC). Over a period of 3 to 4 weeks, the PPFC is sealed by an inflammatory reaction that leads to development of a wall of acute granulation tissue without much fibrosis. This is referred to as an acute pseudocyst. Acute pseudocysts may resolve spontane-ously in up to 50% of cases, over a course of 6 weeks or longer.203 Pseudocysts >6 cm resolve less frequently than smaller ones but may regress over a period of weeks to months. Pseudocysts are multiple in 17% of patients,202 or they may be multilobulated. They may occur intrapancreatically or extend beyond the region of the pancreas into other cavities or compartments (Fig. 33-38).Pseudocysts may become secondarily infected, in which case they become abscesses. They can compress or obstruct adjacent organs or structures, leading to superior mesenteric-portal vein thrombosis or splenic vein thrombosis.204 They can erode into visceral arteries and cause intracystic hemorrhage or pseudoaneurysms (Fig. 33-39). They also can perforate and cause peritonitis or intraperitoneal bleeding.205Figure 33-38. Extensive pseudocyst disease. A computed tomo-graphic scan in a patient with alcoholic chronic pancreatitis dem-onstrates multiloculated pseudocyst disease.Pseudocysts usually cause symptoms of pain, fullness, or early satiety. Asymptomatic pseudocysts can be managed expectantly and may resolve spontaneously or persist without complication.201,203 Symptomatic or enlarging pseudocysts require treatment, and any presumed pseudocyst without a documented antecedent episode of acute pancreatitis requires investigation to determine the etiology Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   146501/03/19   6:45 PM 1466SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 33-39. Pseudoaneurysm of the gastroduodenal artery. A pseudocyst can erode into an adjacent artery, which results in contained hemorrhage otherwise known as a pseudoaneurysm. A contrast-injected computed tomographic scan reveals active bleed-ing (area marked B) into a pseudocyst (arrows) as a result of this process. (Reproduced with permission from Balthazar EJ: CT diagnosis and staging of acute pancreatitis, Radiol Clin North Am. 1989 Jan;27(1):19-37.)of the lesion, including a cystic neoplasm.205 Although pseudocysts comprise roughly two-thirds of all pancreatic cystic lesions, they resemble cystadenomas and cystadenocarcinoma radiographically. An incidentally discovered cystic lesion should be examined by EUS and aspirated to determine whether it is a true pancreatic cystic neoplasm or a pseudocyst.The timing and method of treatment requires careful con-sideration. Pitfalls in the management of pseudocysts result from the incorrect (presumptive) diagnosis of a cystic neoplasm masquerading as a pseudocyst, a failure to appreciate the solid or debris-filled contents of a pseudocyst that appears to be fluid filled on CT scan, and a failure to document true adherence with an adjacent portion of the stomach before attempting transgas-tric internal drainage.If the pseudocyst has failed to resolve with conserva-tive therapy and symptoms persist, internal drainage is usu-ally preferred to external drainage to avoid the complication of a pancreaticocutaneous fistula. Pseudocysts communicate with the pancreatic ductal system in up to 80% of cases,206 so external drainage creates a pathway for pancreatic duct leak-age to and through the catheter exit site. Internal drainage may be performed with either endoscopic methods (transgastric or transduodenal puncture and multiple stent placements, with or without a nasocystic irrigation catheter), or surgical methods (a true cystoenterostomy, biopsy of cyst wall, and evacuation of all debris and contents). Surgical options include a cystogastros-tomy (Fig. 33-40), a Roux-en-Y cystojejunostomy, or a cysto-duodenostomy. Cystojejunostomy is the most versatile method, and it can be applied to pseudocysts that penetrate into the trans-verse mesocolon, the paracolic gutters, or the lesser sac. Cys-togastrostomy can be performed endoscopically207 (Fig. 33-41), laparoscopically,208 or by a combined laparoscopic-endoscopic method.209Because pseudocysts often communicate with the pan-creatic ductal system, two newer approaches to pseudocyst management are based on main duct drainage, rather than pseu-docyst drainage per se. Transpapillary stents inserted at the time Figure 33-40. Cystogastrostomy drainage of a retrogastric pancre-atic pseudocyst. A larger opening is made through the common wall of a retrogastric pseudocyst, and a portion of the pseudocyst wall is submitted for histologic confirmation of the diagnosis. Suture reinforcement of the communication is performed to avoid the com-plication of bleeding. (Reproduced with permission from Bell RH, Rikkers LF, Mulholland M: Digestive Tract Surgery: A Text and Atlas. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1996.)StomachFNAneedlePseudocystDuodenumPancreasLiverPseudocystDoublepigtailedstentsPancreasStomachEUSscopeABFigure 33-41. Technique of endoluminal cystogastrostomy. A. Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS)-guided transgastric puncture of pancreatic pseudocyst. B. Transgastric stents placed across fused posterior wall of stomach and anterior wall of pseudocyst. (Repro-duced with permission from Chauhan SS, Forsmark CE. Evidence-based treatment of pancreatic pseudocysts, Gastroenterology. 2013 Sep;145(3):511-5113.)Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   146601/03/19   6:45 PM 1467PANCREASCHAPTER 33ABFigure 33-42. Transpapillary drainage of a pancreatic pseudocyst. A. Endoscopic passage of a flexible wire through the major papilla, through the pancreatic duct, and into a communicating pseudocyst. B. Placement of a stent over the wire into the pseudocyst with transpapillary drainage. (Reproduced with permission from Kozarek RA, Brayko CM, Harlan J, et al. Endoscopic drainage of pancreatic pseudocysts, Gastrointest Endosc. 1985 Oct;31(5):322-327.)of ERCP may be directed into a pseudocyst through the ductal communication itself (Fig. 33-42), or they can be left across the area of suspected duct leakage to facilitate decompression and cyst drainage, analogous to the use of common bile duct stents in the setting of a cystic duct leak.206 In a surgical series of patients with chronic pancreatitis, ductal dilatation, and a coex-isting pseudocyst, Nealon and Walser showed that duct drainage alone, without a separate cystoenteric anastomosis, was as suc-cessful as a combined drainage procedure.92 Furthermore, the “duct drainage only” group enjoyed a shorter hospital stay and fewer complications than the group who underwent a separate cystoenterostomy. These observations suggest that transductal drainage may be a safe and effective approach to the manage-ment of pseudocystic disease.The complications of endoscopic drainage of pseudocysts often require surgical intervention. Bleeding from the cystoenterostomy and inoculation of a pseudocyst with failure of resolution and persistence of infection may require surgical treatment. Bleeding risks may be lessened by the routine use of EUS in the selection of the site for transluminal stent placement.210 Endoscopic treatment of pseudocysts requires large-bore catheters or multiple stents and an aggressive approach to management for success to be achieved. Failure of nonsurgical therapy, with subsequent salvage procedures to remove infected debris and establish complete drainage, is associated with increased risks for complications and death.211,212 The most experienced therapeutic endoscopists report a complication rate of 17% to 19% for the treatment of sterile pseudocysts, and deaths as a result of endoscopic therapy have occurred.212 Therefore, the use of endoscopic methods to treat sterile or infected pancreatic necrosis has a higher complication rate and is limited to specialized centers.Resection of a pseudocyst is sometimes indicated for cysts located in the pancreatic tail or when a midpancreatic duct disruption has resulted in a distally located pseudocyst. Distal pancreatectomy for removal of a pseudocyst, with or without splenectomy, can be a challenging procedure in the setting of prior pancreatitis. An internal drainage procedure of the com-municating duct or of the pseudocyst itself should be considered when distal resection is being contemplated.Pancreatic Ascites. When a disrupted pancreatic duct leads to pancreatic fluid extravasation that does not become sequestered as a pseudocyst, but drains freely into the peritoneal cavity, pan-creatic ascites occurs. Occasionally, the pancreatic fluid tracks superiorly into the thorax, and a pancreatic pleural effusion occurs. Referred to as internal pancreatic fistulae, both compli-cations are seen more often in patients with chronic pancreatitis rather than after acute pancreatitis. Pancreatic ascites and pleu-ral effusion occur together in 14% of patients, and 18% have a pancreatic pleural effusion alone.213Patients demonstrate the general demographics of chronic pancreatitis and usually present with a subacute or recent his-tory of progressive abdominal swelling despite weight loss. Pain and nausea are rarely present. The abdominal CT scan discloses ascites and the presence of chronic pancreatitis or a partially collapsed pseudocyst (Fig. 33-43). Paracentesis or thoracente-sis reveals noninfected fluid with a protein level >25 g/L and a markedly elevated amylase level. Serum amylase may also be elevated, presumably from reabsorption across the parietal membrane. Serum albumin may be low, and patients may have Figure 33-43. Pancreatic ascites. Computed tomographic scan of a patient with a ruptured pancreatic pseudocyst resulting in intra-peritoneal pancreatic fluid. (Reproduced with permission from Cameron JL, Cameron AM: Current Surgical Therapy, 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2014.)Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   146701/03/19   6:45 PM 1468SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 33-44. Internal drainage for leaking pancreatic duct. A Roux-en-Y pancreaticojejunostomy is performed at the site of duct rupture to accomplish internal drainage of the pancreatic duct leak. (Reproduced with permission from Beger HG: The Pancreas. London: Blackwell-Science; 1998.)coexisting liver disease. Paracentesis is therefore critical to dif-ferentiate pancreatic from hepatic ascites.ERCP is most helpful to delineate the location of the pan-creatic duct leak and to elucidate the underlying pancreatic duc-tal anatomy. Pancreatic duct stenting may be considered at the time of ERCP, but if nonsurgical therapy is undertaken and then abandoned, repeat imaging of the pancreatic duct is appropriate to guide surgical treatment.Antisecretory therapy with the somatostatin analogue octreotide acetate, together with bowel rest and parenteral nutrition, is successful in more than half of patients.214,215 Reap-position of serosal surfaces to facilitate closure of the leak is considered a part of therapy, and this is accomplished by com-plete paracentesis. For pleural effusions, a period of chest tube drainage may facilitate closure of the internal fistula.214 Surgi-cal therapy is reserved for those who fail to respond to medical treatment. If the leak originates from the central region of the pancreas, a Roux-en-Y pancreaticojejunostomy is performed to the site of duct leakage215 (Fig. 33-44). If the leak is in the tail, a distal pancreatectomy may be considered, or an internal drainage procedure can be performed. The results of surgical treatment are usually favorable if the ductal anatomy has been carefully delineated preoperatively.Pancreatic-Enteric Fistula. The erosion of a pancreatic pseu-docyst into an adjacent hollow viscus can result in a pancreatic-enteric fistula. The most common site of communication is the transverse colon or splenic flexure. The fistula usually presents with evidence of GI or colonic bleeding and sepsis. If the fis-tula communicates with the stomach or duodenum, it may close spontaneously or persist as a pancreatic-enteric fistula. When the fistula involves the colon, operative correction is usually required.215Head-of-Pancreas Mass. In up to 30% of patients with advanced chronic pancreatitis, an inflammatory mass develops in the head of the pancreas.216 The clinical presentation includes severe pain and frequently includes stenosis of the distal common bile duct, duodenal stenosis, compression of the portal vein, and stenosis of the proximal main pancreatic duct (Table 33-18). Mutations and polymorphisms of p53 have been found in these patients, and a focus of ductular carcinoma was found in 3.7% of patients with pancreatic head enlargement in one series.217 It was concluded that an accelerated transformation from hyperplasia to dysplasia exists in patients with pancreatic head enlargement, although the etiology for this process remains unclear.Splenic and Portal Vein Thrombosis. Vascular complications of chronic pancreatitis are fortunately infrequent because they are difficult to treat successfully. Portal vein compression and occlusion can occur as a consequence of an inflammatory mass in the head of the pancreas, and splenic vein thrombosis occurs in association with chronic pancreatitis in 4% to 8% of cases.218 Variceal formation can occur as a consequence of either portal or splenic venous occlusion, and splenic vein thrombosis with gas-tric variceal formation is referred to as left-sided or sinistral por-tal hypertension. Although bleeding complications are infrequent, the mortality risk of bleeding is >20%. When gastroesophageal varices are caused by splenic vein thrombosis, the addition of splenectomy to prevent variceal hemorrhage is prudent when sur-gery is otherwise indicated to correct other problems.TreatmentMedical Therapy. The medical treatment of chronic or recurrent pain in chronic pancreatitis requires the use of analgesics, a cessation of alcohol use, oral enzyme therapy, and the selective use of antisecretory therapy. Interventional procedures to block visceral afferent nerve conduction or to treat obstructions of the main pancreatic duct are also an adjunct to medical treatment.Analgesia. Oral analgesics are prescribed as needed, alone or with analgesia-enhancing agents such as gabapentin.168 Ade-quate pain control usually requires the use of narcotics, but these should be titrated to achieve pain relief with the lowest effective dose. Opioid addiction is common, and the use of long-acting analgesics by transdermal patch together with oral agents for pain exacerbations slightly reduces the sedative effects of high-dose oral narcotics.Table 33-18Signs and symptoms of chronic pancreatitis with and without a pancreatic head massSIGNS AND  SYMPTOMSWITH HEAD ENLARGEMENT  (n = 138) (%)WITHOUT HEAD ENLARGEMENT  (n = 141) (%)Daily severe pain6740Cholestasis4611Duodenal obstruction307Diabetes mellitus1830Vascular involvement158Reproduced with permission from Beger HG: The pancreas: an integrated textbook of basic science, medicine, and surgery. London: Blackwell-Science; 1998.Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   146801/03/19   6:45 PM 1469PANCREASCHAPTER 33It is essential for patients to abstain from alcohol. In addition to removing the causative agent, alcohol abstention results in pain reduction or relief in 60% to 75% of patients with chronic pancreatitis.219 Despite this benefit, roughly half of alcoholic chronic pancreatitis patients continue to abuse alcohol.Enzyme Therapy. Pancreatic enzyme administration serves to reverse the effects of pancreatic exocrine insufficiency. Adequate pancreatic enzyme replacement reverses the exo-crine insufficiency seen in most patients, and it prevents sec-ondary complications such as metabolic bone disease due to inadequate absorption of the fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E, and K. In addition, pancreatic enzyme replacement may reduce or alleviate the pain experienced by patients. The choice of enzyme supplement and the dose should be selected based on whether malabsorption or pain (or both) are the indica-tions for therapy220 (Table 33-19). Conventional (nonen-teric-coated) enzyme preparations are partially degraded by gastric acid but are available within the duodenal and jejunal regions to bind to CCK-releasing peptide and downregulate the release of CCK. This theoretically reduces the enteric sig-nal for pancreatic exocrine secretion, which reduces the pres-sure within a partially or completely obstructed pancreatic duct.221 Enteric-coated preparations result in little to no pain relief, presumably due to their reduced bioavailability in the proximal gut. Due to the loss of pancreatic enzymes by acid hydrolysis and proteolysis, relatively large doses are required to achieve effective levels of enzyme within the proximal small bowel. Enteric-coated preparations are protected from acid degradation but are presumably not released in the criti-cal proximal gut in sufficient quantity to inhibit the stimulus for endogenous pancreatic enzyme secretion. Nonalcoholic patients may experience more effective pain relief than alco-holic patients, but it is recommended that all patients with chronic pancreatitis pain begin a trial of nonenteric-coated enzyme supplements together with an acid-suppressive medi-cation for 1 month. If pain relief is achieved, therapy is con-tinued. If enzyme therapy fails, further investigation of the pancreatic ductal system by ERCP guides the therapy based on specific anatomical findings (Fig. 33-45).Antisecretory Therapy. Somatostatin administration has been shown to inhibit pancreatic exocrine secretion and CCK Table 33-19Pancreatic enzyme preparationsPRODUCTFORMULATIONMANUFACTURERLIPASE CONTENT (USP)/PILL OR CAPSULEZenpepEnteric-coated porcineAptalis3000, 5000, 10,000, 15,000, 20,000CreonEnteric-coated porcineAbbott3000, 6000, 12,000, 24,000PancreazeEnteric-coated porcineOrtho-McNeil-Janssen4200, 10,500, 16,800, 21,000PertzyeEnteric-coated porcine mixed with bicarbonate granulesDigestive Care8000, 16,000UltresaEnteric-coated porcineAptalis13,800, 20,700, 23,000ViokaceTablet non-enteric-coated porcineAptalis10,440, 20,880Note: USP = United States Pharmacopeia, the standard for lipase content in the United States. An average meal requires roughly 90,000 USP units of lipase for fat digestion. Enzyme therapy of exocrine deficiency typically begins with a dose of 50,000 USP units per meal with subsequent adjustment.Reproduced with permission from Forsmark CE: Management of chronic pancreatitis, Gastroenterology. 2013 Jun;144(6):1282-1291.release.222 The somatostatin analogue octreotide acetate has therefore been investigated for pain relief in patients with chronic pancreatitis. In a double-blind, prospective, randomized 4-week trial, 65% of patients who received 200 μg of octreotide acetate subcutaneously three times daily reported pain relief, compared with 35% of placebo-treated subjects.223 Patients who had the best results were patients with chronic abdominal pain, suggestive of obstructive pancreatopathy. However, in another trial that used a 3-day duration of treatment, no significant pain relief was observed.224 Anecdotal reports suggest that severe pain exacerbations in chronic pancreatitis can benefit from a combination of octreotide therapy and TPN, and a pilot study of the effectiveness of the sustained-release form of octreotide suggested that it was as effective as three-times-per-day admin-istration of the short-acting form of the drug.225Neurolytic Therapy. Celiac plexus neurolysis with alcohol injection has been an effective form of analgesic treatment in patients with pancreatic carcinoma. However, the use of radio-logically or endoscopically guided celiac plexus blockade in chronic pancreatitis has been disappointing. Due to the risk of alcohol injury and the need for repeated injections, celiac plexus blockade in chronic pancreatitis has used short-acting analgesics or other drugs rather than 50% alcohol. A trial of EUS-guided celiac plexus blockade revealed successful pain relief in 55% of patients, but the benefit lasted beyond 6 months in only 10% of patients.226 The procedure therefore appears safe, but the effect is short lived in those patients who obtain pain relief.Endoscopic Management. The techniques of endoscopic treat-ment of pancreatic duct obstruction, stone disease, pseudocyst formation, pancreatic duct leak, and for the diagnosis and man-agement of associated pancreatic tumors have expanded greatly over the past 20 years. Newer endoscopes with expanded thera-peutic capabilities have been introduced, and the role of EUS and EUS-guided needle and catheter insertion has expanded the abil-ity of the therapeutic endoscopist in the diagnosis and treatment of chronic pancreatitis and its complications.227Pancreatic duct stenting is used for treatment of proxi-mal pancreatic duct stenosis, decompression of a pancreatic duct leak, and for drainage of pancreatic pseudocysts that can be catheterized through the main pancreatic duct. Pancreatic duct stents can induce an inflammatory response within the Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   146901/03/19   6:45 PM 1470SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIMake a correct diagnosis • Appropriate history • Corroborating imaging tests  • MRI/MRCP  • EUS  • CT • Functional tests if imaging tests equivocal  • Tube-based secretin test  • Endoscopic-based secretin test • Assess for alternative diseases and complications and treat if present  • Pancreatic cancer or IPMN  • Pseudocyst  • Bile duct obstruction  • Duodenal obstructionMedical therapy • Measure pain severity, character, and impact on QOL • Refer for formal structured smoking and alcohol cessation    programs • Counsel on good nutrition and initiate supplementation    with vitamin D and calcium   • Baseline bone mineral density tasting • Provide information on local and national support groups • Initiate analgesics (starting with Tramadol)   • Increase dose and potenay slowly as required • Initiate adjunctive agents in those with persistent pain or requiring higher dosages or potency of narcotics   • Pregabalin, Gabapentin   • SSRI   • SSNRI   • Tricyclic antidepressants • Assess for evidence of coexistent exocrine or endocrine insufficiency and treat if present   • Fecal elastase or serum trypsin   • HgB A1C or GTT • Initiate steroids if autoimmune pancreatitisInflammatory mass in pancreatic head • With or without dilated pancreatic duct • With or without duodenal or biliary   obstructionSurgical therapy in ÿt patients • DPPHR  • Berger operation  • Frey operation  • Berne operation • Whipple operationDiscuss options with patient, includingthat data supports superiority of surgery.Surgery remains an option for failure ofendoscopic therapy • Endoscopic therapy  • Pancreatic and biliary    sphincterotomy  • Stricture dilation and stenting  • Lithotripsy  • Stone extraction • Surgical therapy  • Modified Puestow or Frey operation• Continued medical therapy• Surgical therapy  • “V-plasty”  • Total pancreatectomy, with islet    cell autotransplantationDilated pancreatic duct (° 6 mm)Small duct disease (pancreatic duct˛ 6 mm)Treatment effective?Continue treatment with periodicreassessmentYesNoAssess anatomy of pancreas andpancreatic ductFigure 33-45. Management algorithm for chronic pancreatitis. IPMN = intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm; QOL = quality of life; SSRI = selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor; SSNRI = selective serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor; GTT = glucose tolerance test. (Reproduced with permission from Forsmark CE: Management of chronic pancreatitis, Gastroenterology. 2013 Jun;144(6):1282-1291.)Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   147001/03/19   6:45 PM 1471PANCREASCHAPTER 33duct, so prolonged stenting is usually avoided. Patients with sphincter of Oddi dyskinesia are at high risk for developing post-ERCP pancreatitis after biliary sphincterotomy, and the prophylactic placement of a pancreatic duct stent or the admin-istration of rectal indomethacin reduces the amylase level and development of pancreatitis after biliary sphincterotomy.33,228 Pancreatic duct leaks are seen in 37% of patients with acute pancreatitis, and pancreatic duct stenting appears to facilitate the resolution of the leak.229 Similarly, pancreatic duct stenting has been used to treat postsurgical pancreatic duct leaks and posttraumatic leaks.229-231Pancreas divisum (see Fig. 33-3) is thought to cause pain and chronic pancreatitis due to functional or mechanical obstruc-tion of the dorsal duct draining exclusively, or predominantly, through the lesser papilla. A study from Marseille reported good long-term results in 24 patients after minor papilla sphinc-terotomy and dorsal duct stenting.232 The number of patients with chronic pain decreased from 83% before stenting to 29% after stenting, but pancreatitis or recurrent papillary stenosis occurred in 38%. Patients that responded best were those with intermittent pain, and this subset may be preferentially treated with endoscopic therapy. Patients with recurrent pain and a dilated dorsal duct may be candidates for internal drainage of the obstructed duct with either an extended Puestow procedure or a Frey procedure (see later in this section).Idiopathic pancreatitis patients have been treated with endoscopic stenting, pancreatic duct sphincterotomy, and endo-scopic stone removal with good results. In a prospective ran-domized trial, 53% of idiopathic recurrent pancreatitis patients in the control group experienced continued episodes of pancre-atitis, although only 11% of the treated patients had continued symptoms.233Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL) has been used for pancreatic duct stones, together with endoscopic stent-ing and stone removal.234 A single ESWL session was used in  35 patients with pancreatic duct stones, together with 86 ERCP sessions to complete the stone removal process. After 2.4 years, 80% of patients had significant relief of symptoms (Fig. 33-46). Also, endoscopic intraductal lithotripsy can now be performed in some specialized centers. However, due to the tendency for recurrent stone formation, the use of ESWL or endoscopic litho-tripsy for long-term management of calcific pancreatitis remains uncertain.Surgical Therapy Indications and History The traditional approach to surgi-cal treatment of chronic pancreatitis and its complications has maintained that surgery should be considered only when the medical therapy of symptoms has failed. Nealon and Thomp-son published a landmark study in 1993, however, that showed that the progression of chronic obstructive pancreatitis could be delayed or prevented by pancreatic duct decompression.235 No other therapy has been shown to prevent the progression of chronic pancreatitis, and this study demonstrated the role of surgery in the early management of the disease (Table 33-20). Small-duct disease or “minimal change chronic pancreatitis” are causes for uncertainty over the choice of operation, however. Major resections have a high complication rate, both early and late, in chronic alcoholic pancreatitis, and lesser procedures often result in symptomatic recurrence. Therefore, the choice of operation and the timing of surgery are based on each patient’s pancreatic anatomy, the likelihood (or lack thereof) that further ABFigure 33-46. Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy treatment of pancreatic duct stones. The endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancrea-tography images are shown (A) before and (B) after extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy therapy of pancreatic duct obstruction due to calculus formation. (Reproduced with permission from Kozarek RA, Brandabur JJ, Ball TJ, et al. Clinical outcomes in patients who undergo extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy for chronic calcific pancreatitis, Gastrointest Endosc. 2002 Oct;56(4):496-500.)Table 33-20Effect of surgical drainage on progression of chronic pancreatitisTREATMENT GROUP24-MONTH EVALUATIONOperated (n = 47)Mild to moderate 48 (87%);  severe 6 (13%)Nonoperated (n = 36)Mild to moderate 8 (22%);  severe 28 (78%)Eighty-three patients with chronic pancreatitis were evaluated by exocrine, endocrine, nutritional, and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography studies, and all had mild to moderate disease and dilated pancreatic ducts. A Puestow-type duct decompression procedure was performed in 47 patients, and all subjects were restaged by the same methods 24 months later.Reproduced with permission from Nealon WH, Thompson JC. Progressive loss of pancreatic function in chronic pancreatitis is delayed by main pancreatic duct decompression. A longitudinal prospective analysis of the modified puestow procedure, Ann Surg. 1993 May;217(5):458-466.Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   147101/03/19   6:45 PM 1472SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 33-47. Head-of-pancreas mass after Puestow procedure. The computed tomographic appearance of an inflammatory mass occupying the head of the pancreas, which developed 2 years after Puestow decompression of the body and tail of pancreas.medical and endoscopic therapy will halt the symptoms of the disease, and the chance that a good result will be obtained with the lowest risk of morbidity and mortality. Finally, preparation for surgery should include restoration of protein-caloric homeo-stasis, abstinence from alcohol and tobacco, and a detailed review of the risks and likely outcomes to establish a bond of trust and commitment between the patient and the surgeon.Historically, the surgery for chronic pancreatitis before the second half of the 20th century was a true demonstration of trial and error.236 Obtaining good surgical outcomes before the avail-ability of CT scans and ERCP was either the result of serendip-ity or due to the skill and creativity of the surgeon. In 1911, Link described an operation he devised on the spot, when a laparot-omy in a young woman with abdominal pain revealed a fluctu-ant, obstructed pancreatic duct. After performing a dochotomy and evacuating multiple stones, he inserted a rubber tube, and exteriorized the pancreatostomy just above her navel.237 He later described the operation as having been a success for the next  30 years of the patient’s life, during which the patient managed the care of the drainage tube without apparent problems.238With the demonstration in 1942 by Priestley that total pancreatectomy was technically feasible,239 and the report in 1946 by Whipple that proximal pancreatic resection was ben-eficial in (three) patients with chronic pancreatitis,240 the option of surgical resection as treatment for chronic pancreatitis was established. By the mid 1950s, however, growing disappoint-ment with the high risk of resection and the lack of long-term benefit overshadowed the surgical treatment of chronic pancre-atitis. The choice of resection vs. drainage was largely based on surgeon preference until the 1970s, when the widespread adoption of ERCP and CT scans provided the ability to pre-operatively diagnose obstructive and sclerotic disease, and this resulted in the rational selection of operative procedures. During this period, the major drawbacks to surgical therapy remained the recurrence of symptoms despite surgery, the correspond-ing development of an inflammatory (or malignant) mass in the undrained pancreatic head (Fig. 33-47), or the high morbidity and mortality of major resectional procedures that predisposed patients to a cascade of metabolic problems.241Sphincteroplasty The sphincter of Oddi and the pancreatic duct sphincter serve as gatekeepers for the passage of pancreatic juice into the duodenum (Fig. 33-48). Stenosis of either sphincter (scle-rosing papillitis), due to scarring from pancreatitis or from the passage of gallstones, may result in obstruction of the pancreatic duct and chronic pain.242 As gallstone pancreatitis became a popu-lar diagnosis in the 1940s and 1950s, attention was focused on the ampullary region as a possible cause of chronic symptoms, and surgical sphincteroplasty was advocated. Although endoscopic techniques are now used routinely to perform sphincterotomy of either the common bile duct or pancreatic duct, a true (permanent) PancreasCommon  bile ductDuodenal wallMajor papillaSphincter of ampullaMucosaSubmucosa Sphincter of pancreatic duct Pancreatic ductSphincter of  common bile ductLongitudinal muscleof duodenal wallCircular muscle of duodenal wallFigure 33-48. Schematic diagram of the ampullary, biliary, and pancreatic duct sphincters. The point of merger of the bile duct and pancreatic duct is highly variable, and a true sphincter of the pancreatic duct may be poorly developed. (Reproduced with permission from Yamada T, Alpers DH, Kalloo AN, et al: Textbook of Gastroenterology, 5th ed. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell; 2009.)Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   147201/03/19   6:45 PM 1473PANCREASCHAPTER 33Figure 33-49. Operative sphincteroplasty of the biliary and pan-creatic duct. The ampullary and bile duct sphincters are divided, as is the pancreatic duct sphincter, with suture apposition of the mucosal edges of the incision. sphincteroplasty can only be performed surgically. Transduode-nal sphincteroplasty with incision of the septum between the pan-creatic duct and common bile duct may offer significant relief for the rare patient with a focal obstruction and inflammation isolated to this region (Fig. 33-49).Drainage Procedures After the early reports of success with pancreatostomy for the relief of symptoms of chronic pancreatitis,238 Cattell described pancreaticojejunostomy for relief of pain in unresectable pancreatic carcinoma.243 Shortly thereafter, Duval244 and, separately, Zollinger and associates245 described the caudal Roux-en-Y pancreaticojejunostomy for the treatment of chronic pancreatitis in 1954 (Fig. 33-50). The so-called Duval procedure was used for decades by some surgeons, but it almost invariably failed due to restenosis and segmental obstruction of the pancreas due to progressive scarring. In 1958, Puestow and Gillesby described these segmental narrowings and dilatations of the ductal system as a “chain of lakes,” and proposed a longitudinal decompression of the body and tail of the pancreas into a Roux limb of jejunum246 (Fig. 33-51). Four of Puestow and Gillesby’s 21 initial cases were side-to-side anastomoses, and 2 years after their report, Partington and Rochelle described a much simpler version of the longitudinal, or side-to-side Roux-en-Y pancreaticojejunostomy that became universally known as the Puestow procedure247 (Fig. 33-52).Successful pain relief after the Puestow-type decompres-sion procedure has been reported in 75% to 85% of patients for the first few years after surgery, but pain recurs in >20% of patients after 5 years due to progressive disease even in patients who are abstinent from alcohol.164Figure 33-50. Duval’s caudal pancreaticojejunostomy. (Reproduced with permission from Greenlee HB: The role of surgery for chronic pancreatitis and its complications, Surg Annu. 1983;15:283-305.)Figure 33-51. Puestow and Gillesby’s longitudinal pancreatico-jejunostomy. Originally described as an invaginating anastomosis that drained the entire body and tail, the anastomosis was created after amputating the tail of the gland and opening the duct along the long axis of the gland. (Reproduced with permission from Greenlee HB: The role of surgery for chronic pancreatitis and its complica-tions, Surg Annu. 1983;15:283-305.)With the advent of therapeutic endoscopy and techniques for transluminal stone removal and lithotripsy, multiple series have reported the successful endoscopic treatment of pancreatic duct calculi, although the long-term outcomes of these efforts has been uneven.248-251 Endoscopic removal of pancreatic duct stones is usually coupled to prolonged pancreatic duct stenting, Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   147301/03/19   6:45 PM 1474SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIABFigure 33-52. Longitudinal dochotomy in obstructing calcific pancreatitis. A longitudinal pancreatotomy typically discloses seg-mental stenosis of the pancreatic duct and the presence of intra-ductal calculi in a patient with chronic calcific pancreatitis (A). Following mobilization of a Roux limb of jejunum, a longitudinal pancreaticojejunostomy is performed to permit extensive drainage of the pancreatic duct system (B). This technique, described by  Partington and Rochelle, is the typical method used for the Puestow procedure. which carries the risk of further inflammation.252,253 Despite the risk of perioperative complications, the surgical management of pancreatic duct stones and stenosis has been shown to be superior to endoscopic treatment in randomized clinical trials in which the long, side-to-side technique of pancreaticojejunos-tomy is used.254-256Resectional Procedures Distal Pancreatectomy For patients with focal inflammatory changes localized to the body and tail, or in whom no significant ductal dilatation exists, the technique of partial (40–80%) dis-tal pancreatectomy has been advocated (Fig. 33-53). Although distal pancreatectomy is less morbid than more extensive resec-tional procedures, the operation leaves untreated a major portion of the gland, and is therefore associated with a significant risk of symptomatic recurrence. It has been a more popular operation in British centers, where its success seems to be greater, perhaps due to the lower incidence of alcoholic chronic pancreatitis.257 However, long-term outcomes reveal good pain relief in only 60% of patients, with completion pancreatectomy required for pain relief in 13% of patients.Laparoscopic distal pancreatectomy has been shown to be feasible for the removal of focal lesions of the distal pancreas,258 but it is more difficult in the setting of chronic pancreatitis.Ninety-Five Percent Distal Pancreatectomy In 1965, Fry and Child proposed the more radical 95% distal pancreatectomy, which was intended for patients with sclerotic (small duct) disease and which attempted to avoid the morbidity of total pancreatectomy by preserving the rim of pancreas in the pancreaticoduodenal groove, along with its associated blood vessels and distal common bile duct.241 The operation was found to be associated with pain relief in 60% to 77% of patients long term, but it is accompanied by a high risk of brittle diabetes, hypoglycemic coma, and malnutrition. Although the operation was the first attempt to resect the pancreatic head while preserving the duodenum and distal bile duct, the extensive degree of metabolic complications led to its failure as viable treatment for the symptoms of pancreatic sclerosis.Proximal Pancreatectomy In 1946, Whipple reported a series of five patients treated with either pancreaticoduodenectomy or total pancreatectomy for symptomatic chronic pancreatitis, with one operative death.240 Subsequently, proximal pancreatectomy or pancreaticoduodenectomy, with or without pylorus preser-vation (Fig. 33-54), has been widely used for the treatment of chronic pancreatitis.259 In the three largest modern (circa 2000) series of the treatment of chronic pancreatitis by the Whipple Splenic arteryFigure 33-53. Distal (spleen-sparing) pancreatectomy. A distal pancreatectomy for chronic pancreatitis is usually performed with en bloc splenectomy, using either an open or laparoscopic tech-nique. In the presence of minimal inflammation, a spleen-sparing version can be performed, as shown here.Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   147401/03/19   6:45 PM 1475PANCREASCHAPTER 33procedure, pain relief 4 to 6 years after operation was found in 71% to 89% of patients. However, mortality ranged from 1.5% to 3%, and major complications occurred in 25% to 38% of patients at the Johns Hopkins Hospital,260 the Mayo Clinic,261 and the Massachusetts General Hospital.262 In follow-up, 25% to 48% of patients developed diabetes, and about the same per-centage required exocrine therapy. Advocates of the Whipple procedure as treatment for chronic pancreatitis suggest that the high rate of symptomatic relief outweighs the metabolic conse-quences and the mortality risk of the procedure, but increasingly this approach is being reserved for those patients with suspected occult malignancy.Total Pancreatectomy Priestley and associates first described successful total pancreatectomy in 1944 in a patient with hyperinsulinism,239 and two of Whipple’s original five cases of chronic pancreatitis reported in 1946 were treated with total pancreatectomy.240 Subsequently, surgeons who used total pancreatectomy found that the operation produces no better pain relief for their patients than pancreaticoduodenectomy (about 80–85%). Moreover, the metabolic consequences of total pancreatectomy in the absence of islet cell transplantation can be profound and life-threatening. The patients have a “brittle” form of diabetes in which avoidance of hyperand hypoglycemia is problematic.263 In addition, lethal episodes of hypoglycemia are common in severe apancreatic diabetes. These are due to hypoglycemic unresponsiveness, due to the absence of pancreatic glucagon, and to hypoglycemia unawareness, despite an ongoing need to treat with exogenous insulin.177 In a series of >100 patients treated with total pancreatectomy, Gall and colleagues showed that half of all the late deaths after this operation were due to (iatrogenic) hypoglycemia.264 Despite newer forms of insulin, insulin delivery systems, and continuous blood glucose monitoring systems, severe pancreatogenic diabetes remains an adverse outcome, as complete prevention of the physiologic consequences of total pancreatectomy remains an unfulfilled goal. Even with the growing acceptance of islet auto-transplantation as an adjunct to the procedure (see later in CholedochojejunostomyGastrojejunostomyPancreaticojejunostomyCholedochojejunostomyDuodenojejunostomyPancreaticojejunostomyABFigure 33-54. The pancreaticoduodenectomy (Whipple procedure) can be performed either with the standard technique, which includes distal gastrectomy (A), or with preservation of the pylorus (B). The pylorus-sparing version of the procedure is used most commonly. (Repro-duced from Wu GY, Aziz K, Whalen GF: An Internist’s Illustrated Guide to Gastrointestinal Surgery. Totowa: Humana Press; 2003.)this section), total pancreatectomy itself is now used only rarely for the treatment of refractory chronic pancreatitis.Hybrid Procedures In 1980, Beger and associates described the Duodenum-preserving Pancreatic Head Resection or DPPHR265 (Fig. 33-55), and they published long-term results with DPPHR for the treatment of chronic pancreatitis in 1985266 and again in 1999.267 In 388 patients who were followed for an average of 6 years after DPPHR, pain relief was reportedly maintained in 91%, mortality was <1%, and diabetes developed in 21%, with 11% demonstrating a reversal of their preoperative diabetic sta-tus. These authors also compared the DPPHR procedure with the pylorus-sparing Whipple procedure in a randomized trial of 40 patients with chronic pancreatitis.268 The mortality was reportedly zero in both groups, and the morbidity was also com-parable. Pain relief (over 6 months) was seen in 94% of DPPHR patients, but in only 67% of Whipple patients. Furthermore, the insulin secretory capacity and glucose tolerance were noted to deteriorate in the Whipple group, but they actually improved in the DPPHR patients.The DPPHR requires the careful dissection of the gas-troduodenal artery and the creation of two anastomoses  (Fig. 33-56), and it carries a similar complication risk as the Whipple procedure due to the risk of pancreatic leakage and intra-abdominal fluid collections.In 1987, Frey and Smith described the local resection of the pancreatic head with longitudinal pancreaticojejunostomy (LR-LPJ), which included excavation of the pancreatic head, including the ductal structures in continuity with a long dochot-omy of the dorsal duct269 (Fig. 33-57). The Frey procedure pro-vides thorough decompression of the pancreatic head as well as the body and tail of the gland, and a long-term follow-up suggested that improved outcomes are associated with this more extensive decompressive procedure. Frey and Amikura reported their results in 50 patients followed for >7 years, and they found complete or substantial pain relief in 87% of patients. There was no operative mortality, but 22% of patients developed postop-erative complications.270Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   147501/03/19   6:45 PM 1476SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IICommonbile ductPancreaticductPancreaticremnantABFigure 33-55. The duodenum-preserving pancreatic head resection described by Beger and colleagues. A. The completed resection after transection of the pancreatic neck, and subtotal removal of the pan-creatic head, with preservation of the distal common bile duct and duodenum. B. Completion of the reconstruction with anastomosis to the distal pancreas and to the proximal pancreatic rim by the same Roux limb of jejunum. (Reproduced with permission from Bell RH, Rikkers LF, Mulholland M: Digestive Tract Surgery: A Text and Atlas. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1996.)Figure 33-56. Intraoperative view of the Beger procedure. The gastroduodenal artery is encircled by a vessel loop. Just below, the intrapancreatic portion of the common bile duct is exposed as it courses toward the ampulla. A rim of well-vascularized pancreatic tissue remains in the duodenal C-loop. Preservation of the posterior branch of the gastroduodenal artery is essential to preserve viability of these structures.Key steps in the performance of the LR-LPJ include pres-ervation of the pancreatic neck as well as the capsule of the posterior pancreatic head. In the pancreaticoduodenectomy and the DPPHR, the pancreatic neck is freed up from the portal and superior mesenteric vein confluence and divided. In the LR-LPJ, the neck of the pancreas is preserved intact as are the body and tail of the pancreas. Not having to divide the pancreatic neck, as in the pancreaticoduodenectomy or DPPHR, reduces the risk of the operation because it avoids intraoperative prob-lems with the venous structures lying posterior to the gland. To reduce the risk of penetrating the posterior capsule of the head, Frey recommended in his 1994 report that the posterior limit of resection be the back wall of the opened duct of Wirsung and duct to the uncinate (Fig. 33-58).Subsequent to Frey’s own modification of the technique, other surgeons have described modifications of the extent or technique of the LR-LPJ. Andersen and Topazian advocated performing the LR-LPJ as it was originally described, in which the entirety of the ducts are excised from the head (Fig. 33-59), and described the use of the ultrasonic aspirator and dissector for this purpose.271 This device permits precise removal of the ducts and adjacent tissue with good visualization and without complications. There is little pancreatic tissue behind these ducts, and the pancreatic capsule is continuously palpated as the dissection proceeds to ensure a safe margin of resection. The intrapancreatic portion of the common bile duct is usually exposed, and avoiding injury to it is enhanced by the ultrasonic aspirator. The majority of the parenchyma of the uncinate pro-cess is spared, and the excavation of the pancreatic head is made contiguous with a generous dochotomy of the dorsal duct. Whether merely unroofing as opposed to removal of the proximal ducts contributes to better pain relief is not known and awaits a randomized trial to compare the two versions of the LR-LPJ. Izbicki and colleagues at the University of Hamburg also recommend a more extensive excavation of the pancreatic head, and they use a technique that they refer to as the Hamburg modification of the LR-LPJ272 (Fig. 33-60). This wider excavation of the pancreatic head is created in continu-ity with the dorsal dochotomy, and it is followed by a single, side-to-side pancreaticojejunostomy.In 2001, Ho and Frey subsequently described merely exca-vating the core of the pancreatic head and draining the exca-vation with a Roux-en-Y pancreaticojejunostomy, but without any effort to include the dorsal duct273,274 (Fig. 33-61). In 2003, Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   147601/03/19   6:45 PM 1477PANCREASCHAPTER 33Figure 33-57. Frey procedure. The local resection of the pancreatic head with longitudinal pancreaticojejunostomy (LR-LPJ) provides complete decompression of the entire pancreatic ductal system. Reconstruction is performed with a side-to-side Roux-en-Y pan-creaticojejunostomy. (Reproduced with permission from Bell RH,  Rikkers LF, Mulholland M: Digestive Tract Surgery: A Text and Atlas. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1996.)Figure 33-58. Operative view of excavated head of the pancreas during the Frey procedure. The main pancreatic duct is opened widely down to the level of the ampulla, and the head of the pan-creas is excavated in a conical fashion so as to allow complete decompression of the chronically obstructed and inflamed pancre-atic ducts. (Reproduced with permission from Aspelund G et al. Improved outcomes for benign disease with limited pancreatic head resection, J Gastrointest Surg. 2005 Mar;9(3):400-409.)Figure 33-59. Complete excavation of the pancreatic head and distal pancreatic dochotomy. A true excavation and removal of the proximal ductal system is combined with a distal pancreatic dochotomy. Reconstruction is performed with a single side-to-side Roux-en-Y pancreaticojejunostomy. (Reproduced with permission from Andersen DK, Topazian MD. Pancreatic head excavation: a variation on the theme of duodenum-preserving pancreatic head resection, Arch Surg. 2004 Apr;139(4):375-379.)Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   147701/03/19   6:46 PM 1478SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 33-60. The Hamburg modification of the local resection of the pancreatic head with longitudinal pancreaticojejunostomy. (Reproduced with permission from Shackelford RT, Yeo CJ, Peters JH: Shackelford’s Surgery of the Alimentary Tract. New York, NY: Saunders/Elsevier; 2007.)Farkas and colleagues described a similar excavation of the cen-tral portion of the pancreatic head without any effort to include the duct of the body in the lateral pancreaticojejunostomy,275 and they reported excellent results with what they termed an organ-preserving pancreatic head resection (OPPHR) in a ran-domized comparison to the pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduo-denectomy (PPPD).276This approach was advocated by Gloor and associates in Bern as an alternative to the DPPHR procedure in patients with portal hypertension277 and was described as the Berne modifica-tion of the DPPHR (Fig. 33-62). Köninger and colleagues in Heidelberg subsequently published a randomized, controlled trial of the “Berne” version of the excavation method compared to the “classic” Beger procedure.278 Operative times and length of stay were shorter in the group undergoing excavation of the pancreatic head, while long-term outcomes and quality-of-life scores were identical over 2 years postoperatively.The common element of these variations on the theme of LR-LPJ remains the excavation or “coring out” of the central portion of the pancreatic head. It remains uncertain, however, whether and to what degree the dochotomy needs to be extended into the body and tail. The logical conclusion of all of these efforts is that the head of the pancreas is the nidus of the chronic inflammatory process in chronic pancreatitis and that removal of the central portion of the head of the gland is the key to the successful resolution of pain in the long term.Complications Initial and long-term results of the LR-LPJ demonstrate pain relief that is equivalent to that of pancreati-coduodenectomy and the DPPHR.279,280 The observed mortal-ity rate has been virtually zero, and therefore, less than with the Whipple procedure. Major complications were less with the LR-LPJ (16%) than with pancreaticoduodenectomy (40%) or DPPHR (25%) in one single-site series, and the incidence of new postoperative diabetes after LR-LPJ was 8% with an aver-age follow-up of 3 years.1996Line of enterotomyJejunal limbsecured with 1strow of suturesNormal pancreatic ductPancreatic head cored outABFigure 33-61. Excavation of pancreatic head without longitudinal pancreaticojejunostomy. Comparisons of the Three Operative Procedures: Pancre-aticoduodenectomy (Whipple procedure), DPPHR (Beger procedure), and LR-LPJ (Frey procedure). There has been considerable interest to apply evidence-based methods to the study of the three operations currently advocated for the treat-ment of chronic pancreatitis. The best studies, or level 1 data by the Strength of Recommendation Taxonomy, are prospective, randomized controlled trials comparing two or more operations from a single or multi-institutional study. Retrospective, cohort-based studies are regarded as level 2 data by the Strength of Recommendation Taxonomy criteria.To date, ten published level 1 studies268,276,278-285 and three level 2 studies199,286,287 have examined various comparisons between these three operations. In the level 1 study of Klempa and colleagues281 and that of Buchler et al,288 DPPHR patients had a shorter hospital stay, greater weight gain, less postopera-tive diabetes, and exocrine dysfunction than standard Whipple patients over a 3to 5-year follow-up. Pain control was similar between the two procedures. Similar results were observed in a Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   147801/03/19   6:46 PM 1479PANCREASCHAPTER 33Figure 33-62. The Berne modification of the local resection of the pancreatic head with longitudinal pancreaticojejunostomy.recent level 2 retrospective study of 123 patients287 and in the level 1 study by Keck et al.287In a level 1 study of 61 patients randomized to PPPD or LR-LPJ, Izbicki and colleagues found a lower postoperative complication rate associated with the Frey procedure (19%) compared to the PPPD group (53%), and better global quality-of-life scores (71% vs. 43%, respectively).279 Both operations were equally effective in controlling pain over a 2-year follow-up. Similar results were seen in the study by Farkas and associates276 who employed a similar method of excavation of the pancreatic head that their group described as an organ-preserving pancreatic head resection (OPPHR) and found that OPPHR was associated with a shorter operating time, less postoperative morbidity, shorter hospital stay, and better quality of life than PPPD. The superior outcomes of the Frey procedure were found to be durable in a 15-year follow-up study by Bachmann et al285 who found that survival and function were superior after the Frey procedure.Late Morbidity and Mortality In 2005, Izbicki’s group reported on a level 1 study of 74 patients randomized to the DPPHR or LR-LPJ who were then followed for an average of 8.5 years.286 There were no significant differences between the groups with regard to global quality of life, pain scores, late mortality, and exocrine or endocrine insufficiency. The level 1 study by Köninger, which compared the classic DPPHR with excavation of the pancreatic head, showed identical outcomes at 2 years after an initial reduction in morbidity associated with the excavation procedure.278 These results were echoed in the level 2 study by Aspelund and associates, which demonstrated fewer complications with both the DPPHR and LR-LPJ proce-dures compared to pancreaticoduodenectomy, a lower incidence of new diabetes (8%) for both DPPHR and LR-LPJ compared to the Whipple procedure (25%), but no significant differences in outcomes or pain relief between DPPHR and LR-LPJ.199 Finally, level 2 data support the efficacy of both DPPHR and LR-LPJ in patients with dilated as well as nondilated ducts.286,289,290Long-term exocrine and/or endocrine insufficiency in chronic pancreatitis patients treated surgically is a product of the surgical intervention as well as the progression of the underlying disease. Although the short-term (3-year) incidence of new diabe-tes after operation appears less with the LR-LPJ and DPPHR than with the PPPD, the late incidence of diabetes appears similar in all groups. After an average of 7 years of follow-up after LR-LPJ or PPPD, survival, pain relief, and pancreatic function were similar in both groups. The rate of diabetes was slightly lower after LR-LPJ (61%) than after PPPD (65%), but these had both more than doubled from their preoperative status.275-281 Therefore, although the limited pancreatic procedures of DPPHR and LR-LPJ have a lower initial rate of endocrine dysfunction, the long-term risk of diabetes is more related to the progression of the underlying disease than to the effects of operation.The level 1 studies confirm that the duodenum preserving options are associated with a lower immediate morbidity and mortality and therefore, in the absence of a mass or concerns about cancer, are better options than a Whipple procedure for chronic pancreatitis. The choice of LR-LPJ, DPPHR, or OPPHR depends largely on surgeon experience, and the LR-LPJ is most common in the United States.Total Pancreatectomy With Islet Auto-Transplantation Islet cell transplantation for the treatment of diabetes is an attractive adjunct to pancreatic surgery in the treatment of benign pancre-atic disease. Despite the difficulties in recovering islets from a chronically inflamed gland, Najarian and associates demonstrated the utility of autotransplantation of islets in patients with chronic pancreatitis in 1980.291 Subsequently, through refinements in the methods of harvesting and gland preservation, and through standardization of the methods by which islets are infused into the portal venous circuit for intrahepatic engraftment, the suc-cess of total pancreatectomy combined with islet autotransplan-tation has steadily increased to achieve insulin independence in the majority of patients treated in recent series.292,293 Although 2 to 3 million islets are required for successful engraftment in an allogeneic recipient, the auto-transplant recipient can usually achieve long-term, insulin-independent status after engraftment of only 300,000 to 400,000 islets (about one-third to one-half of the number of islets in the normal pancreas).294The ability to recover a sufficient quantity of islets from a sclerotic gland is dependent on the degree of fibrotic dis-ease present, so the selection of patients as candidates for autologous islet transplantation is important. The impressive improvement in quality of life measures and pain relief seen after total pancreatectomy with islet auto-transplantation (TP-IAT) indicate that it is a highly successful form of therapy for some patients (Fig. 33-63).295 The outcomes of TP-IAT are sig-nificantly better in pediatric patients than in adults, largely due to the prevalence of hereditary and idiopathic causes of chronic pancreatitis in pediatric patients.296 These studies suggest that further definition is needed regarding criteria for considering TP-IAT vs. hybrid or resectional procedures for patients with persistent symptoms. With the emerging evidence that hybrid procedures seem to offer better outcomes in patients with toxic etiologies of chronic pancreatitis, and that TP-IAT appears to Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   147901/03/19   6:46 PM 1480SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II001224364860MonthsEffectNum DF1131252842994299Den DF0.26268.294.840.608<0.001<0.001F statisticP valueAgeTimeAge x TimePrevalence of narcotic use (%)72849610812020406080100Pediatric patientAdultFigure 33-63. Prevalence of narcotic use after total pancreatectomy with islet auto-transplantation (TP-IAT) in adult and pediatric patients. (Reproduced with permission from Chinnakotla S, Beilman GJ, Dunn TB, et al. Factors Predicting Outcomes After a Total Pancreatectomy and Islet Autotransplantation Lessons Learned From Over 500 Cases, Ann Surg. 2015 Oct;262(4):610-622.)preferentially benefit patients with hereditary and idiopathic forms of the disease, the importance of the careful definition of the etiology of chronic pancreatitis, including genetic testing, is steadily increasing.PANCREATIC NEOPLASMSNeoplasms of the Endocrine PancreasNeoplasms of the endocrine pancreas are relatively uncommon but do occur with enough frequency (five cases per million population) that most surgeons will encounter them in an urban practice. The cells of the endocrine pancreas, or islet cells, origi-nate from neural crest cells, also referred to as amine precursor uptake and decarboxylation cells. Multiple endocrine neopla-sia (MEN) syndromes occur when these cells cause tumors in multiple sites. The MEN1 syndrome involves pituitary tumors, parathyroid hyperplasia, and pancreatic neoplasms. Although most pancreatic endocrine tumors are nonfunctional, some are functional, secreting peptide products that produce interesting clinical presentations. Neoplasms of the endocrine pancreas that are not associated with excess hormone levels and a recogniz-able clinical syndrome are considered nonfunctional. Special immunohistochemical stains allow pathologists to confirm the peptide products being produced within the cells of a pancre-atic endocrine tumor. However, the histologic characteristics of these neoplasms do not predict their clinical behavior, and malignancy is usually determined by the presence of local inva-sion and lymph node or hepatic metastases. Unfortunately, most pancreatic endocrine tumors are malignant, but the course of the disease is far more favorable than that seen with pancreatic exo-crine cancer. The key to diagnosing these rare tumors is recogni-tion of the classic clinical syndrome; confirmation is achieved by measuring serum levels of the elevated hormone. Localiza-tion of the tumor can be a challenging step, but once accom-plished, the surgery is relatively straightforward. The goals of surgery range from complete resection, often accomplished with insulinomas, to controlling symptoms with debulking proce-dures. Unresectable disease in the liver is often addressed with chemoembolization.As with pancreatic exocrine tumors, the initial diagnos-tic imaging test of choice for pancreatic endocrine tumors is a multidetector CT scan with four phases of contrast and fine cuts through the pancreas and liver. Neuroendocrine tumors of the pancreas often enhance with contrast. EUS can be superior to CT in localizing these tumors, which can produce dramatic symptoms despite their small (<1 cm) size. In contrast to pan-creatic exocrine tumors, many of the endocrine tumors have somatostatin receptors (SSTRs) that allow them to be detected by a radiolabeled octreotide scan. A radioactive somatostatin analogue is injected intravenously, followed by whole-body radionuclide scanning (Fig. 33-64). The success of this modal-ity in localizing tumors and detecting metastases has decreased the use of older techniques such as angiography and selective venous sampling.InsulinomaInsulinomas are the most common functional pancreatic endocrine neoplasms and present with a typical clinical Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   148001/03/19   6:46 PM 1481PANCREASCHAPTER 33syndrome known as Whipple’s triad. The triad consists of symptomatic fasting hypoglycemia, a documented serum glucose level <50 mg/dL, and relief of symptoms with the administration of glucose. Patients can present with a profound syncopal episode or less severe symptoms that are averted by frequent eating. Common symptoms include palpitations, trembling, diaphoresis, confusion or obtundation, and seizure, and family members may report that the patient has undergone a personality change.Routine laboratory studies will uncover a low blood sugar, the cause of all of these symptoms. Serum insulin levels are elevated. C-peptide levels should also be elevated and rule out the unusual case of surreptitious administration of insulin or oral hypoglycemic agents because excess endogenous insulin pro-duction leads to excess C-peptide. The diagnosis can be clinched with a monitored fast in which blood is sampled every 4 to  6 hours for glucose and insulin levels until the patient becomes symptomatic. However, this can be dangerous and must be done with close supervision.Insulinomas are usually localized with CT scanning and EUS. Technical advances in EUS have led to preoperative identification of >90% of insulinomas.297 Visceral angiography with venous sampling is rarely required to accurately localize the tumor. Insulinomas are evenly distributed throughout the head, body, and tail of the pancreas.298 Unlike most endocrine pancreatic tumors, the majority (90%) of insulinomas are benign Figure 33-64. Radioactive octreotide scan demonstrating pancre-atic endocrine tumor in the body of the pancreas (arrow).and solitary, and only 10% are malignant. They are typically cured by simple enucleation. However, tumors located close to the main pancreatic duct and large (>2 cm) tumors may require a distal pancreatectomy or pancreaticoduodenectomy. Intraop-erative US is useful to determine the tumor’s relation to the main pancreatic duct and guides intraoperative decision making. Approximately 90% of insulinomas are sporadic, and 10% are associated with the MEN1 syndrome. Insulinomas associated with the MEN1 syndrome are more likely to be multifocal and have a higher rate of recurrence.Noninsulinoma Hyperinsulinemia Hypoglycemia SyndromeA syndrome of noninsulinoma pancreatogenous hypoglycemia was described by Service et al in 1999.299 The syndrome is asso-ciated with beta-cell hypertrophy, islet hyperplasia and increased beta-cell mass. When these findings are accompanied by ectopic islet tissue, multilobulated islets, and ductuloinsular complexes, the definition of nesideoblastosis is met. Nesideoblastosis accompanied by hyperinsulinism was previously considered a disease of neonates, where subtotal or total pancreatectomy was required to correct potentially fatal neonatal hyperinsulinism. However, dozens of cases of nesideoblastosis associated with hyperinsulinism have now been reported in patients 2 to 5 years after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass for obesity.300 Many of these patients have undergone partial or total pancreatectomy to prevent potentially fatal hypoglycemia. The illness in former bariatric surgery patients appears to result from an idiosyncraticallyprolonged hypersecretion of the incretin hormones GIP and GLP-1 after the gastric bypass. GLP-1 is a potent stimulant of the expression of the transcription factor PDX-1, which nor-mally regulates beta-cell development and growth. The correct treatment of this condition to prevent episodes of hypoglycemia is conversion of the gastric bypass to a form of bariatric proce-dure that restores normal intestinal flow of nutrients, such as the gastric sleeve, or the addition of a restriction element such as an adjustable gastric band. Pancreatic resection without conversion of the Roux-en-Y gastric bypass is not appropriate because this allows the abnormal enteroinsular relationship to continue and hyperinsulinemia persists or recurs after partial pancreatectomy.GastrinomaZollinger-Ellison syndrome (ZES) is caused by a gastrinoma, an endocrine tumor that secretes gastrin, leading to acid hyper-secretion and peptic ulceration. Many patients with ZES present with abdominal pain, peptic ulcer disease, and severe esopha-gitis. However, in the era of effective antacid therapy, the pre-sentation can be less dramatic. Although most of the ulcers are solitary, multiple ulcers in atypical locations that fail to respond to antacids should raise suspicion for ZES and prompt a work-up. At the time of diagnosis, 21% of patients with gastrinoma have diarrhea.The diagnosis of ZES is made by measuring the serum gastrin level. It is important that patients stop taking proton pump inhibitors for this test. In most patients with gastrinomas, the level is >1000 pg/mL. Gastrin levels can be elevated under conditions other than ZES. Common causes of hypergastrin-emia include pernicious anemia, treatment with proton pump inhibitors, renal failure, G-cell hyperplasia, atrophic gastritis, retained or excluded antrum, and gastric outlet obstruction. In equivocal cases, when the gastrin level is not markedly elevated, a secretin stimulation test is helpful.Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   148101/03/19   6:46 PM 1482SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIIn 70% to 90% of patients, the primary gastrinoma is found in Passaro’s triangle, an area defined by a triangle with points located at the junction of the cystic duct and common bile duct, the second and third portion of the duodenum, and the neck and body of the pancreas (Fig. 33-65). However, because gastri-nomas can be found almost anywhere, whole-body imaging is required. The test of choice is SSTR (octreotide) scintigraphy in combination with CT. The octreotide scan is more sensitive than CT, locating about 85% of gastrinomas and detecting tumors  <1 cm. With the octreotide scan, the need for tedious and techni-cally demanding selective angiography and measurement of gas-trin gradients has declined. EUS is another modality that assists in the preoperative localization of gastrinomas. It is particularly helpful in localizing tumors in the pancreatic head or duodenal wall, where gastrinomas are usually <1 cm in size. A combina-tion of octreotide scan and EUS detects >90% of gastrinomas.It is important to rule out MEN1 syndrome by checking serum calcium levels before surgery because resection of the gastrinoma(s) in these patients rarely results in normalization of serum gastrin concentrations or a prolongation of survival. Only one-fourth of gastrinomas occur in association with the MEN1 syndrome. One-half of patients with gastrinomas will have soli-tary tumors while the remainder will have multiple gastrino-mas. Multiple tumors are more common in patients with MEN1 syndrome. Aggressive surgical treatment is justified in patients with sporadic gastrinomas. If patients have MEN1 syndrome, the parathyroid hyperplasia is addressed with total parathyroid-ectomy and implantation of parathyroid tissue in the forearm.Approximately 50% of gastrinomas metastasize to lymph nodes or the liver and are therefore considered malignant. Patients who meet criteria for operability should undergo exploration for possible removal of the tumor. Although the tumors are submu-cosal, a full-thickness excision of the duodenal wall is performed if a duodenal gastrinoma is found. All lymph nodes in Passaro’s triangle are excised for pathologic analysis. If the gastrinoma is found in the pancreas and does not involve the main pancreatic duct, it is enucleated. Pancreatic resection is justified for solitary Figure 33-65. Passaro’s triangle. The typical location of a gastrinoma is described by this anatomic region, including the head of the pancreas, duodenum, and the lymphatic bed posterior and superior to the duodenum, as originally described by E. Passaro. (Reproduced with permission from Stable BE, Morrow DJ, Passaro E: The gastrinoma triangle: operative implications, Am J Surg. 1984 Jan;147(1):25-31.)gastrinomas with no metastases. A highly selective vagotomy can be performed if unresectable disease is identified or if the gastrinoma cannot be localized. This may reduce the amount of expensive proton pump inhibitors required. In cases in which hepatic metastases are identified, resection is justified if the pri-mary gastrinoma is controlled and the metastases can be safely and completely removed. Debulking or incomplete removal of multiple hepatic metastases is probably not helpful, especially in the setting of MEN1. The application of new modalities such as radiofrequency ablation seems reasonable, but data to sup-port this approach are limited.301 Postoperatively, patients are followed with fasting serum gastrin levels, secretin stimulation tests, octreotide scans, and CT scans. In patients found to have inoperable disease, chemotherapy with streptozocin, doxorubi-cin, and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) is used. Other approaches such as somatostatin analogues, interferon, and chemoembolization also have been used in gastrinoma with some success.Unfortunately, a biochemical cure is achieved in only about one-third of the patients operated on for ZES. Despite the lack of success, long-term survival rates are good, even in patients with liver metastases. The 15-year survival rate for patients without liver metastases is about 80%, while the 5-year survival rate for patients with liver metastases is 20% to 50%. Pancreatic tumors are usually larger than tumors arising in the duodenum, and more often they have lymph node metastases. In gastrinomas, liver metastases decrease survival rates, but lymph node metastases do not. The best results are seen after complete excision of small sporadic tumors originating in the duodenum. Large tumors associated with liver metastases, located outside of Passaro’s triangle, have the worst prognosis.Vasoactive Intestinal Peptide-Secreting TumorIn 1958, Verner and Morrison first described the syndrome associated with a pancreatic neoplasm secreting VIP. The clas-sic clinical syndrome associated with this pancreatic endocrine neoplasm consists of severe intermittent watery diarrhea leading to dehydration, and weakness from fluid and electrolyte losses. Large amounts of potassium are lost in the stool. The vasoac-tive intestinal peptide-secreting tumor (VIPoma) syndrome is also called WDHA syndrome due to the presence of watery diarrhea, hypokalemia, and achlorhydria. The massive (5 L/d) and episodic nature of the diarrhea associated with the appropriate electrolyte abnormalities should raise suspicion of the diagnosis. Serum VIP levels must be measured on multiple occasions because the excess secretion of VIP is episodic and single measurements might be normal and misleading. A CT scan localizes most VIPomas, although as with all islet cell tumors, EUS is the most sensitive imaging method. Electrolyte and fluid balance is sometimes dif-ficult to correct preoperatively and must be pursued aggressively. Somatostatin analogues are helpful in controlling the diarrhea and allowing replacement of fluid and electrolytes. VIPomas are more commonly located in the distal pancreas and most have spread outside the pancreas. Palliative debulking operations can some-times improve symptoms for a period, along with somatostatin analogues. Hepatic artery embolization also has been reported as a potentially beneficial treatment.302GlucagonomaDiabetes in association with dermatitis should raise the suspi-cion of a glucagonoma. The diabetes usually is mild. The classic necrolytic migratory erythema manifests as cyclic migrations of lesions with spreading margins and healing centers typically on Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   148201/03/19   6:46 PM 1483PANCREASCHAPTER 33the lower abdomen, perineum, perioral area, and feet. Patients also complain of an enlarged, sensitive tongue. The diagnosis is confirmed by measuring serum glucagon levels, which are usu-ally >500 pg/mL. Glucagon is a catabolic hormone, and most patients present with malnutrition. The rash associated with glucagonoma is thought to be caused by low levels of amino acids. Preoperative treatment usually includes control of the dia-betes, parenteral nutrition, and octreotide. Like VIPomas, glu-cagonomas are more often in the body and tail of the pancreas and tend to be large tumors with metastases. Again, debulking operations are recommended in good operative candidates to relieve symptoms.SomatostatinomaBecause somatostatin inhibits pancreatic and biliary secretions, patients with a somatostatinoma present with gallstones due to bile stasis, diabetes due to inhibition of insulin secretion, and steatorrhea due to inhibition of pancreatic exocrine secretion and bile secretion. Most somatostatinomas originate in the proximal pancreas or the pancreatoduodenal groove, with the ampulla and periampullary area as the most common site (60%). The most common presentations are abdominal pain (25%), jaundice (25%), and cholelithiasis (19%).303 This rare type of pancreatic endocrine tumor is diagnosed by confirming elevated serum somatostatin levels, which are usually >10 ng/mL.  Although most reported cases of somatostatinoma involve metastatic disease, an attempt at complete excision of the tumor and cholecystectomy is warranted in fit patients.Nonfunctioning Pancreatic Endocrine TumorsAlthough some pancreatic endocrine neoplasms secrete one or more hormones and are associated with interesting characteristic clinical syndromes, most are not associated with elevated serum hormone levels that cause symptoms. Pancreatic endocrine tumors are considered functional if they are associated with a clinical syndrome and nonfunctioning if not associated with clinical symptoms. The majority of pancreatic endocrine tumors (PET), also called pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (pNET), are malignant because they have the potential for uncontrolled growth and metastasis. Immunohistochemical markers such as synaptophysin, chromogranin A (CgA), and neuron-specific enolase can be helpful in the diagnosis, but the gross histology is not a reliable predictor of biologic behavior. CgA is used by some as a serum marker to monitor patients for disease recur-rence or response to treatment, but the test performs poorly for this purpose. Patients often present similar to patients with pancreatic adenocarcinoma with vague pain or weight loss, but pNETs are increasingly discovered incidentally when imaging is performed for another reason. The tumor frequently enhances with arterial contrast (Fig. 33-66). Sometimes a cystic compo-nent is seen due to central necrosis. Octreoscan (somatostatin receptor scintigraphy) can be helpful to stage the disease. Sur-gical resection is typically recommended in fit patients in the absence of metastatic disease. For patients with tumors in the body and tail of the pancreas, this typically includes splenec-tomy. Enucleation and splenic preservation, although tempting in small tumors, fails to remove regional lymph nodes.With advances in imaging, small indolent pNETs are being discovered with increasing frequency, and some surgeons are considering observation in these cases.304 There are several argu-ments in favor of observation of small (<2 cm) nonfunctional pNETs, particularly in MEN-1 patients. Pancreatic resection has significant morbidity and mortality. In the setting of MEN-1, resection is rarely curative, and most patients require reopera-tion. Also, the survival of these patients, even with metastatic dis-ease, is generally excellent at least compared to pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. However, the 5-year survival with metastatic pNET is only 16% and radical surgery with curative intent is the standard of care, particularly in sporadic cases that are fit surgical candidates where the primary tumor can be completely excised.Adjuvant treatment after resection is withheld in the absence of radiographically demonstrable metastatic disease even if CgA levels remain elevated. Although these tumors have a slow growth pattern compared to pancreatic ductal adenocar-cinoma, many patients with pNETs will die of their disease even after an apparent complete resection, making surveillance after complete resection important. CT scan and or octreotide scan is recommended annually for 5 years after resection.ABCFigure 33-66. Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor (PNET) demonstrating enhancement during arterial phase of computed tomography scan. Pancreatic head PNET seen in (left) sagital, (middle) coronal, and (right) lateral views of the abdomen.Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   148301/03/19   6:46 PM 1484SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIIncomplete resection (debulking) for locally advanced or metastatic pNETs of the pancreas is controversial because of the favorable survival duration of patients without surgery. How-ever, in carefully selected fit patients with a pNET in the head of the pancreas and minimal disease in the liver, a pancreaticoduo-denectomy with wedge resection of the liver metastasis might be appropriate because this avoids the morbidity of gastroin-testinal hemorrhage and biliary and gastric outlet obstruction before death from the metastatic disease. The role of cytoreduc-tive surgery in metastatic pNET is controversial, but consensus guidelines agree that aggressive resection of the primary tumor, regional lymph nodes, and liver/distant metastases should be pursued if greater than 90% of the tumor burden can be resected, which is the case in only about 10% of patients with metastatic disease.Treatment of metastatic pancreatic neuroendocrine cancer requires a multidisciplinary approach often including a com-bination of cytoreductive surgery when appropriate, directed therapy for the treatment of liver metastases when possible, and systemic medical therapy. Local ablative therapies include radiofrequency ablation (RFA), cryotherapy, microwave coagu-lation, and ethanol injection, although RFA is the most popular and widely studied. These therapies can be performed percuta-neously or during surgery via laparotomy or laparoscopy, can be repeated, and have been shown to complement resection of the primary tumor and amenable liver metastases; making pallia-tive surgery possible for patients that would otherwise not meet criteria. This approach often improves symptoms and 5-year survival is improved to 48%.305Transarterial chemoembolization (TACE) can be employed as palliative therapy in patients with liver metastases not amenable to surgical resection and/or ablation. It relies on the principle that metastatic tumor cells derive the majority of their oxygen supply from the hepatic artery as opposed to hepa-tocytes, which receive oxygen primarily from the portal vein. Performed via angiography, embolization may be performed alone (bland embolization) or in combination with chemothera-peutic agents (chemoembolization). Radioembolization, the selective distribution of radioactive yttrium-90 microspheres into the peritumoral vasculature via branches of the hepatic artery, is another alternative.Somatostatin analogs can inhibit release of hormones from functional pNETS and reduce diarrhea in patients with VIPo-mas, glucagonomas, and somatostatinomas, and it can also help the rash of glucagonomas. Somatostatin analogs such as octreotide (Sandostatin LAR Depot), lanreotide (Somatuline Depot), and a new analog pasireotide (Sifnifor LAR) are also used to slow the growth of some functional and nonfunctional pNETS. Disease seen on an octreotide scan has somatostatin receptors and would be expected to respond. Patients with unre-sectable disease are often treated with somatostatin analogs first before targeted therapy and cytotoxic chemotherapy are utilized because the side effects are minimal.Some targeted drugs can be helpful in treating advanced pNETs that progress despite somatostatin analogs. Sunitinib (Sutent) attacks new blood vessel growth and other targets that help cancer cells grow. Everolimus (Afinitor) works by block-ing a cell protein known as mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) and the VEGF pathway, which normally helps cells grow and divide. These targeted agents induce stabilization much more frequently than response, but they tend to carry fewer side effects than traditional cytotoxic chemotherapy. Cytotoxic chemotherapy for pNETS is usually reserved for large tumors or quickly growing tumors that are causing symptoms, or tumors that progressed despite somatostatin analogs and targeted ther-apy. Platinum-based chemotherapy does, however, remain the standard of care for high-grade (poorly differentiated) pNET, yielding high response rates but typically short-lived benefit. The newer cytotoxic combination of capecitabine and temozolo-mide has shown activity in well-differentiated pNET.306Neoplasms of the Exocrine PancreasEpidemiology and Risk Factors. It is estimated that in 2017, 53,670 Americans will be diagnosed with pancreatic cancer and 43,090 will die from the disease. Overall, pancreatic cancer has the worst prognosis of all malignancies with a 5-year survival rate of only 7.2%.307 The incidence of pancreatic cancer continues to increase, perhaps related to the increased incidence of risk factors such as obesity and diabetes, and as a result, it is predicted that pancreatic cancer will become the leading cause of cancer deaths in the United States by 2050. Pancreatic cancer recently surpassed breast cancer and is now the third leading cause of cancer death behind lung and colorectal cancer. Despite its ubiquity, this dis-ease is extremely difficult to treat, and its exact cause is unknown. However, epidemiologic studies linking various environmental and host factors provide some clues. Recent discoveries using modern molecular biologic techniques have also improved our understanding of the causes of pancreatic cancer. The etiology of pancreatic cancer likely involves a complex interaction of genetic and environmental factors. These factors will become more fully understood as DNA sequencing is used to screen populations at risk for developing pancreatic cancer.Pancreatic cancer is more common in older adults with most patients being 75 to 84 years old. Pancreatic cancer is more common in African Americans and slightly more com-mon in men than women. The risk of developing pancreatic cancer is two to three times higher if a parent or sibling had the disease. Another risk factor that is consistently linked to pan-creatic cancer is cigarette smoking. Smoking increases the risk of developing pancreatic cancer by at least twofold due to the carcinogens in cigarette smoke.308 Coffee and alcohol consump-tion have been investigated as possible risk factors, but the data are inconsistent. As in other GI cancers, diets high in fat and low in fiber, fruits, and vegetables are thought to be associated with an increased risk of pancreatic cancer.Diabetes has been known to be associated with pancreatic cancer for many years. In fact, glucose intolerance is present in 80% of patients with pancreatic cancer, and approximately 20% have overt diabetes, a much greater incidence than would be expected to occur by chance. Preexisting type 2 diabetes increases the risk for development of pancreatic cancer by about  twofold.309 The new onset of diabetes also can be an early mani-festation of otherwise occult pancreatic cancer. Thus, the new onset of diabetes, or a sudden increase in insulin requirement in an older adult patient with preexisting diabetes, should provoke concern for the presence of pancreatic cancer.Recent epidemiologic studies have confirmed the fact that patients with chronic pancreatitis, especially familial pan-creatitis, have an increased risk of developing pancreatic can-cer.124,196-198 Large, retrospective cohort studies of patients with pancreatitis have revealed up to a 20-fold increase in risk for pancreatic cancer. This increased risk seems to be independent of the type of pancreatitis, a finding consistent with the fact that most studies have shown little effect of alcohol ingestion per se Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   148401/03/19   6:46 PM 1485PANCREASCHAPTER 33on the risk of pancreatic carcinoma. The mechanisms involved in carcinogenesis in patients with preexisting pancreatitis are unknown. However, the mutated K-ras oncogene, which is pres-ent in most cases of pancreatic cancer, has been detected in the ductal epithelium of some patients with chronic pancreatitis.Genetics of Pancreatic Cancer. Pancreatic carcinogenesis probably involves multiple mutations that are inherited and acquired throughout aging. The K-ras oncogene is currently thought to be the most commonly mutated gene in pancreatic cancer, with approximately 90% of tumors having a mutation.310 This prevalent mutation is present in precursor lesions and is therefore thought to occur early and be essential to pancre-atic cancer development. K-ras mutations can be detected in DNA from serum, stool, pancreatic juice, and tissue aspirates of patients with pancreatic cancer, suggesting that the presence of this mutation or others may provide the basis for diagnostic testing in select individuals. The HER2/neu oncogene, homolo-gous to the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFr), is over-expressed in pancreatic cancers.310 This receptor is involved in signal transduction pathways that lead to cellular proliferation. Multiple tumor-suppressor genes are deleted and/or mutated in pancreatic cancer, including p53, p16, and DPC4 (Smad 4), and in a minority of cases, BRCA2.311 Most pancreatic cancers have three or more of the aforementioned mutations.The genetic landscape of pancreatic adenocarcinoma has recently been investigated using exome capture technol-ogy combined with the SOLiD or Illumina next generation sequencing platforms and copy number analysis. Detailed analysis of 99 tumors reaffirmed the importance of the already known mutations such as KRAS, TP53, CDKN2A, SMAD4, MLL3, TGFBR2, ARID1A, and SF3B1 in pancreatic cancer and identified eight novel significantly mutated genes involved in chromatin modification (EPC1 and ARID2), DNA dam-age repair (ATM) and other mechanisms (ZIM2, MAP2K4, NALCN, SLC16A4, and MAGEA6). Pathway-based analysis of recurrently altered genes also revealed the involvement of axon-guidance genes, particularly SLIT/ROBO signaling, in pancreatic carcinogenesis.312 Rapid and sensitive sequencing techniques will hopefully lead to better diagnostic and thera-peutic approaches for pancreatic cancer.It is estimated that up to 10% of pancreatic cancers occur as a result of an inherited genetic predisposition. A family his-tory of pancreatic cancer in a first-degree relative increases the risk of pancreatic cancer by about twofold. Rare familial cancer syndromes that are associated with an increased risk of pancreatic cancer include BRCA2, the familial atypical multiple mole–melanoma syndrome, hereditary pancreati-tis, familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer, Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, and ataxia-telangiectasia.311Pathology. Pancreatic cancer probably arises through a stepwise progression of cellular changes, just as colon cancer progresses by stages from hyperplastic polyp to invasive cancer. Systematic histologic evaluation of areas surrounding pancreatic cancers has revealed the presence of precursor lesions that have been named pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (Fig. 33-67). Three stages of pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia have been defined. These lesions demonstrate the same oncogene mutations and loss of tumor-suppressor genes found in invasive cancers, the frequency of these abnormalities increasing with progressive cellular atypia and architectural disarray.313 The ability to detect these precursor lesions in humans at a stage where the cancer can still be prevented or cured is an important goal of current pancreatic cancer research.About two-thirds of pancreatic adenocarcinomas arise within the head or uncinate process of the pancreas; 15% are in the body, and 10% are in the tail, with the remaining tumors demonstrating diffuse involvement of the gland. Tumors in the pancreatic body and tail are generally larger at the time of diagnosis, and therefore, less commonly resectable. Tumors in the head of the pancreas are typically diagnosed earlier because they cause obstructive jaundice. Ampullary carci-nomas, carcinomas of the distal bile duct, and periampullary duodenal adenocarcinomas present in a similar fashion to pan-creatic head cancer but have a slightly better prognosis, prob-ably because early obstruction of the bile duct and jaundice leads to the diagnosis.In addition to ductal adenocarcinoma, which makes up about 75% of nonendocrine cancers of the pancreas, there are a variety of less common types of pancreatic cancer. Adenosquamous carcinoma is a variant that has both glandular and squamous differentiation. The biologic behavior of this lesion is unfortunately no better than the typical ductal adenocarcinoma.314 Acinar cell carcinoma is an uncommon type of pancreatic cancer that usually presents as a large tumor, often 10 cm in diameter or more, but the prognosis of patients with these tumors may be better than with ductal cancer.Diagnosis and Staging. Exact pathologic staging of pancre-atic cancer is important because it allows accurate quantitative assessment of results and comparisons between institutions. The tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) staging of pancreatic cancer was updated by the American Joint Committee on Cancer in 2017 (AJCC) (Table 33-21).The important changes in the staging include more stratification for tumor size and stratification for number of lymph nodes involved. In the new system, tumors ≤2 cm remain as T1 lesions but are subcategorized as T1a (≤0.5 cm), T1b (>0.5–>1 cm), and T1c (1–2 cm). Tumors that are >2–≤4 cm  are categorized as T2, and tumors >4 cm are categorized as T3. Tumors that involve the celiac axis, superior mesenteric artery, and/or common hepatic artery are still categorized as T4 regardless of size. Metastasis in one to three regional lymph nodes is considered N1 disease, and involvement of ≥4 regional lymph nodes is N2. Patients without nodal involvement (N0) are stages IA, IB, and IIA based on tumor size (T1–T3, respectively). Patients with one to three regional lymph nodes involved (N2) are stage IIB regardless of tumor size. All patients with N2 disease without distant metastases are considered stage III regardless of tumor size. Patients with vascular involvement (T4) are stage III regardless of nodal involvement, and patients with distant metastases are, of course, stage IV.Ten percent of pancreas cancer cases are diagnosed while the cancer is still confined to the primary site (localized stage); 29% are diagnosed after the cancer has spread to regional lymph nodes or directly beyond the primary site; 52% are diagnosed after the cancer has already metastasized (distant stage); and for the remaining 9%, the staging information was unknown. The corresponding 5-year relative survival rates were 31.5% for localized, 11.5% for regional, 2.7% for distant, and 5.1% for unstaged. The overall 5-year relative survival rate for patients with pancreatic cancer for 2007 to 2013 from Surveillance,  Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) was 8.2%.3077Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   148501/03/19   6:46 PM 1486SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IINormalPanIN-1APanIN-1BPanIN-2KI-67, Topo˜˜°, 14-3-3˛p53, DPC4, BRCA2Cyclin D1MesothelinMucin 1Mucin 1p16PSCA, Mucin5, FascinTelomere    K-rasshorteningPanIN-3InvasionABCDFigure 33-67. Pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN). Histology (top panel) showing grades PanIN-1A (A), PanIN-1B (B), PanIN-2 (C), and PanIN-3 (D), and schema of correlation of histology with mutational events (bottom panel) showing cumulative abnormalities of tumor-promoter and tumor suppressor factors such as kRAS, p53, etc, and their corresponding cellular phenotype. (Reproduced with permis-sion from Hruban RH, Takaori K, Klimstra DS, et al: An illustrated consensus on the classification of pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia and intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms, Am J Surg Pathol. 2004 Aug;28(8):977-987.)The most critical deficit in the ability to treat pancreatic cancer effectively is the lack of tools for early diagnosis. The pancreas is situated deep within the abdomen, and the early symptoms of pancreatic cancer often are too vague to raise sus-picion of the disease. Ultimately, the majority of patients present with pain and jaundice. On physical examination, weight loss is evident and the skin is icteric; a distended gallbladder is palpa-ble in about one-fourth of patients. More fortunate patients have tumors situated such that biliary obstruction and jaundice occurs early and prompts diagnostic tests. Unfortunately, however, the vast majority of patients are not diagnosed until weight loss has occurred—a sign of advanced disease.Although it is often taught that carcinoma of the pancreas presents with painless jaundice (to help distinguish it from cho-ledocholithiasis), this aphorism is not accurate. Most patients do experience pain as part of the symptom complex of pancreatic cancer, and it is often the first symptom. Therefore, awareness of the way pancreatic pain is perceived may help clinicians sus-pect pancreatic cancer. The pain associated with pancreatic can-cer is usually perceived in the epigastrium but can occur in any Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   148601/03/19   6:46 PM 1487PANCREASCHAPTER 33the serum of patients with pancreatic cancer. Serum levels are elevated in about 75% of patients with pancreatic cancer. How-ever, CA19-9 is also elevated in about 10% of patients with benign diseases of the pancreas, liver, and bile ducts.15 CA19-9 is thus neither sufficiently sensitive nor specific to allow an early diagnosis of pancreatic cancer. Despite the fact that many tumor markers such as CA19-9 have been studied, there are still no effective screening tests for pancreatic cancer. Research tak-ing advantage of recent advances in genomics, gene expression analysis, and proteomics has demonstrated thousands of genes and corresponding proteins that are differentially expressed in pancreatic tumors that have potential for early detection of pan-creatic cancer.316 Some of these proteins would be expected to be expressed at the cell surface or in pancreatic juice and may become useful as biomarkers for pancreatic cancer in the future.In patients presenting with jaundice, a reasonable first diagnostic imaging study is abdominal ultrasound. If bile duct dilation is not seen, hepatocellular disease is likely. Demonstra-tion of cholelithiasis and bile duct dilation suggests a diagnosis of choledocholithiasis, and the next logical step would be ERCP to clear the bile duct. In the absence of gallstones, malignant obstruction of the bile duct is likely, and a CT scan rather than ERCP would be the next logical step. For patients suspected of having pancreatic cancer who present without jaundice, a CT scan should be the first test.The current diagnostic and staging test of choice for pan-creatic cancer is a multidetector, dynamic, contrast-enhanced CT scan, and the techniques for obtaining high-quality images are constantly improving (Fig. 33-68). The accuracy of CT scan-ning for predicting unresectable disease is about 90% to 95%.317 In contrast, CT scanning is less accurate in predicting resect-able disease. CT scanning will miss small liver metastases, and predicting arterial involvement is sometimes difficult. CT find-ings that indicate a tumor is unresectable include involvement of ≥180° of the celiac axis, hepatic or superior mesenteric artery, enlarged lymph nodes outside the boundaries of resection, asci-tes, and distant metastases (e.g., liver). Invasion of the superior mesenteric vein or portal vein is not in itself a contraindication to resection as long as the veins are patent. Tumors are consid-ered “borderline resectable” if there is abutment of ≤180 degrees of the circumference of the SMA, celiac axis, or hepatic artery or if there is a short segment of vein occlusion. Also, patients with CT findings suspicious for metastatic disease, like 1 mm liver lesions too small to characterize or biopsy, are considered “borderline resectable” as are patients with multiple comorbidi-ties or marginal performance status. There is growing consensus that neoadjuvant treatment should be considered in all patients with any radiographic evidence of extension to adjacent vascu-lar structures.Currently, multidetector CT is probably the single most versatile and cost-effective tool for the diagnosis and staging of pancreatic cancer. Abdominal MRI provides essentially the same information as CT scanning. Positron emission tomog-raphy scanning in locally advanced lesions may help rule out distant metastases. EUS can be used to detect small pancreatic masses that could be missed by CT scanning and is commonly used when there is a high suspicion for pancreatic cancer but no mass is identified by the CT scan. EUS has the added advan-tage of providing the opportunity for transluminal biopsy of pancreatic masses, although a tissue diagnosis before pancreati-coduodenectomy is not required. However, in specific patients a histologic diagnosis may be necessary such as for those in a part of the abdomen, and often, but not always, penetrates to the back. When questioned in retrospect, patients often recall mild and vague pain for many months before diagnosis. A low thresh-old for ordering a CT scan with “pancreatic protocol” should be maintained for elderly patients with unex-plained, persistent, although vague, abdominal pain. As men-tioned previously, new-onset diabetes in an elderly patient, especially if combined with vague abdominal pain, should prompt a search for pancreatic cancer.Unfortunately, at this time there is no sensitive and spe-cific serum marker to assist in the timely diagnosis of pan-creatic cancer. With jaundice, direct hyperbilirubinemia and elevated alkaline phosphatase are expected but do not serve much of a diagnostic role other than to confirm the obvious. With long-standing biliary obstruction, the prothrombin time will be prolonged due to a depletion of vitamin K, a fat-soluble vitamin dependent on bile flow for absorption. CA19-9 is a mucin-associated carbohydrate antigen that can be detected in 8Table 33-21Staging of pancreatic cancerTumor (T)TXTumor cannot be assessedT1Tumor limited to the pancreas,* <2 cmT2Tumor limited to the pancreas,* 2–4 cmT3Tumor limited to the pancreas,* >4 cm; or tumor invading the duodenum or common bile ductT4Tumor invading adjacent organs (stomach, spleen, colon, adrenal gland) or the wall of large vessels (celiac axis or the superior mesenteric artery)Regional Lymph Node (N)NXRegional lymph nodes cannot be assessedN0No regional lymph node involvementN1Regional lymph node involvementDistant Metastasis (M)M0No distant metastasisM1Distant metastasis M1aMetastasis confined to liver M1bMetastases in at least one extrahepatic site (e.g., lung, ovary, nonregional lymph node, peritoneum, bone) M1cBoth hepatic and extrahepatic  metastasesTUMORNODEMETASTASISSTAGET1N0M0IT2N0M0IIT3N0M0IIT4N0M0IIIAny TN1M0IIIAny TAny NM1IVUsed with the permission of the American College of Surgeons. Amin MB, Edge SB, Greene FL, et al. (Eds.) AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, 8th Ed. Springer New York, 2017.Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   148701/03/19   6:46 PM 1488SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIPortal veinStomachHepaticarteryCeliac axisSplenic veinDilated pancreatic ductin body of pancreasGallbladderPortal veinPortal veinVena cavaDilated bile ductwith stentBody of pancreasGallbladderSplenoportalconfluenceDuodenumMass in headof pancreasMass in head,uncinate processof pancreasSMASMASMADuodenumBile duct stentFat plane between massin head of pancreasand portal veinFigure 33-68. Computed tomography scan demonstrating resectable pancreatic cancer. SMA = superior mesenteric artery.neoadjuvant clinical trial or before chemotherapy in advanced tumors. EUS is a sensitive test for portal/superior mesenteric vein invasion, although it is somewhat less effective at detect-ing superior mesenteric artery invasion. When all of the current staging modalities are used, their accuracy in predicting resect-ability has improved.As imaging continuously improves and high-quality imag-ing is always obtained before surgery, the chance of bringing a patient to the operating room with the intent of a curative resec-tion and finding upon exploration that the patient has unresect-able disease is becoming increasingly uncommon.In an attempt to avoid such futile laparotomies, prelimi-nary laparoscopy has been advocated for patients with disease felt to be resectable by CT imaging (Fig. 33-69). Diagnostic laparoscopy with the use of US is reported to improve the accu-racy of predicting resectability to about 98%.318 The technique involves more than simple visualization with the scope and requires the placement of multiple ports and manipulation of the tissues. A general exploration of the peritoneal surfaces is carried out. The ligament of Treitz and the base of the transverse mesocolon are examined for tumor. The gastrocolic ligament is incised, and the lesser sac is examined. The ultrasound probe is used to examine the liver, porta hepatis and the portal vein, the celiac axis, and the superior mesenteric artery.The percentage of patients in whom a positive laparoscopy helps avoid a nontherapeutic laparotomy varies from 10% to 30% in carcinoma of the head of the pancreas, but it may be as high as 50% in patients with tumors in the body and tail of the gland. Resection for pancreatic cancer is being approached laparoscopically, particularly for tumors in the body and tail of the pancreas thus eliminating the need for any separate stag-ing laparoscopy procedure. Also, as the quality of CT scanning has improved, the value of routine diagnostic laparoscopy has decreased. The morbidity of diagnostic laparoscopy is less than that of laparotomy, and the procedure can be performed on an outpatient basis. Patients who are found to have unresectable disease recover more rapidly from a laparoscopy than a lapa-rotomy and can receive palliative chemotherapy and radiation sooner. The potential immunosuppressive effects of a major surgical procedure also are avoided, as well as the negative psy-chologic impact of a major painful operation with little benefit.Biliary obstruction can be relieved with an endoscopic approach in almost all cases. When large (10F) plastic stents are used, most patients do not require replacement for about 3 months. Metallic wall stents last about 5 months on average and usually fail only with tumor ingrowth.319 Keeping in mind that patients with unresectable pancreatic cancer usually live  <1 year, the requirement for numerous stent changes is unlikely.Diagnostic laparoscopy is possibly best applied to patients with pancreatic cancer on a selective basis. Diagnostic laparos-copy will have a higher yield in patients with large tumors (T3, Figure 33-69. Liver metastases identified at diagnostic laparoscopy.Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   148801/03/19   6:46 PM 1489PANCREASCHAPTER 33>4 cm), tumors located in the body or tail, patients with equivo-cal findings of metastasis or ascites on CT scan, and patients with other indications of advanced disease such as marked weight loss or markedly elevated CA19-9 (>1000 U/mL). An algorithm for the diagnosis, staging, and treatment of pan-creatic cancer is shown in Fig. 33-70. In practice, many of these patients are selected for neoadjuvant chemotherapy and then undergo restaging CT and staging laparoscopy prior to surgery.Palliative Surgery and Endoscopy. Most patients with pan-creatic cancer (85–90%) have disease that clearly precludes surgical resection. For these patients, appropriate and effective palliative treatment is critical to the quality of their remaining life. Because of the poor prognosis of the disease, it is not appro-priate to use invasive, toxic, and expensive regimens in patients with extremely advanced disease and poor performance status. When patients do desire antineoplastic therapy, it is important to encourage them to enroll in clinical trials so that therapeutic advances can be made. In general, there are three clinical prob-lems in advanced pancreatic cancer that require palliation: pain, jaundice, and duodenal obstruction. The mainstay of pain con-trol is oral narcotics. Sustained-release preparations of morphine sulfate are frequently used. Invasion of retroperitoneal nerve trunks accounts for the severe pain experienced by patients with advanced pancreatic cancer. A celiac plexus nerve block can control pain effectively for a period of months, although the procedure sometimes needs to be repeated.320Jaundice is present in the majority of patients with pan-creatic cancer, and the most troublesome aspect for the patient is the accompanying pruritus. Biliary obstruction may also lead to cholangitis, coagulopathy, digestive symptoms, and hepato-cellular failure. In the past, surgeons traditionally performed a biliary and enteric bypass when unresectable disease was found at laparotomy. This is an increasingly uncommon situation for the surgeon because locally advanced unresectable disease is now detected by high-quality preoperative imaging. Metastatic disease is also more reliably predicted by preoperative imaging and, in select cases, staging laparoscopy.In current practice, jaundice is usually palliated by an endoscopic biliary stent, often prior to surgical referral. Duo-denal obstruction is usually a late event in pancreatic cancer and occurs in only about 20% of patients.321 In cases of biliary and duodenal obstruction, several options need to be consid-ered. Endoscopic metallic duodenal stents are an option, but the patient’s poor prognosis, the cost, and the fact that duodenal stents often do not result in ideal palliation has to be considered. The results of three RCTs examining endoscopic metallic stent-ing for malignant gastric outlet obstruction demonstrated that major and minor complications were comparable to gastrojeju-nostomy but time to tolerating oral intake and hospital stay was shorter.322 Robot-assisted laparoscopic biliary-enteric bypass is now available at many centers. Although this should result in similar palliation as an open bypass and may be associated with more rapid recovery, the potential complications, the patient’s life expectancy, and cost of this procedure must be considered. As many patients today already have a bile duct stent in place by the time of referral to a surgeon, it is not clear that operative biliary bypass is required. In patients with extensive metastases, an alternative short-term palliative option to consider in patients with gastric outlet obstruction is a percutaneous endoscopic gas-trostomy tube or gastrojejunal feeding tube that allows decom-pression of the stomach and feeding into the jejunum.If an operative bypass is performed, choledochojejunos-tomy is the preferred approach. Although an easy procedure to perform, choledochoduodenostomy is felt to be unwise because of the proximity of the duodenum to tumor. Some have discour-aged the use of the gallbladder for biliary bypass; however, it CT scanQuad phaseMultidetectorFine cutsUnresectablemassCT or EUSguided biopsyClinicaltrialResectable massNo mass butsuspicion remainsClinical trialDiagnosticlaparoscopy(selective)EUS biopsydiagnosticlaparoscopyNeoadjuvantclinicaltrialERCP / EUSObserve/reimageWhippleprocedureFigure 33-70. Diagnostic and treatment algorithm for pancreatic cancer. If computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrates a potentially resectable tumor, patients are offered participation in a clinical trial after histologic confirmation by CT or endoscopic ultrasound (EUS)-guided biopsy. If CT scan demonstrates resectable disease, diagnostic laparoscopy is used selectively in patients with tumors in the body/tail, equivocal findings of metastasis or CT scan, ascites, high CA19-9, or marked weight loss. Patients also have diagnostic laparoscopy if they elect to participate in a neoadjuvant clinical trial. In cases where no mass is demonstrated on CT scan, but suspicion of cancer remains, EUS or endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) with brushings are performed, and the CT may be repeated after an interval of observation.Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   148901/03/19   6:46 PM 1490SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIis suitable as long as the cystic duct clearly enters the common duct well above the tumor. The jejunum is brought anterior to the colon, if possible, rather than retrocolic, where the tumor potentially would invade the bowel sooner. Some surgeons use a loop of jejunum with a jejunojejunostomy to divert the enteric stream away from the biliary-enteric anastomosis. Others use a Roux-en-Y limb with the gastrojejunostomy located 50 cm downstream from the hepaticojejunostomy (Fig. 33-71). Poten-tial advantages of the defunctionalized Roux-en-Y limb include the ease with which it will reach up to the hepatic hilum, prob-able decreased risk of cholangitis, and easier management of biliary anastomotic leaks. If a gastrojejunostomy is performed, it should be placed dependently and posterior along the greater Figure 33-71. Biliary-enteric bypass to palliate unresectable pan-creatic cancer. (Reproduced with permission from Bell RH, Rikkers LF, Mulholland M: Digestive Tract Surgery: A Text and Atlas. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1996.)Figure 33-72. Expandable metallic biliary stent. After ERCP cannulation of the distal bile duct (left) the stent is advanced over the cannula and placed across the obstruction in the distal bile duct (right).curvature to improve gastric emptying, and a vagotomy should not be performed. Endoscopic stents are definitely not as dura-ble as a surgical bypass. Recurrent obstruction and cholangitis is more common with stents and results in inferior palliation. However, the endoscopic approach is associated with consider-ably less initial morbidity and mortality than surgical bypass. Expandable metallic wall stents have superior patency and pro-vide better palliation than plastic stents (Fig. 33-72).If an initial diagnostic laparoscopy reveals a contraindica-tion to the Whipple procedure, such as liver metastases, it is not appropriate to perform a laparotomy simply to create a biliary bypass. In such a patient, it is better to place an endoscopic stent. In contrast, in the uncommon scenario where a laparotomy has already been performed as part of the assessment of resectability and the Whipple procedure is not possible, a surgical bypass is usually performed. However, if the patient has a functioning endoscopic stent already in place, it may be reasonable to forego surgical bypass.Chemotherapy and Radiation for Locally Advanced/ Metastatic Disease. Patients with locally advanced unresectable disease are treated with chemotherapy and possibly radiation, and patients with stage IV metastatic disease are treated with systemic chemotherapy. The role of RT in unresectable, locoregionally advanced pancreas cancer remains controversial. RT may slow the progression of local disease and possibly alleviate or prevent symptoms including pain, biliary obstruction, bleeding, and bowel obstruction. However, the likelihood of micrometastatic distant disease is high, treatment is not expected to be curative, and radiation can result in toxicity. Stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) has been used to limit toxicity by targeting high-dose short-course radiation to enhance local response prior to surgery. In a phase 2 multi-institutional trial evaluating gemcitabine and SBRT in patients with locally advanced unresectable pancreatic cancer, 10% of patients with locally advanced disease who would not have been candidates for initial surgery were deemed to have resectable tumors following therapy, and 8% ultimately underwent R0 and node-negative resection.323 A number of chemotherapy regimens are available for pancreatic cancer, but the results are not impressive. Gemcitabine (Gemzar) was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use in pancreatic cancer in 1996. In patients with unresectable pancreatic cancer, gemcitabine results in symptomatic Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   149001/03/19   6:46 PM 1491PANCREASCHAPTER 33improvement, improved pain control and performance status, and weight gain.324 However, survival is improved by only 1 to 2 months. Prior to gemcitabine, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) was used as the standard treatment for unresectable pancreatic cancer. Both of these drugs are still used today. 5-FU or capecitabine (Xeloda), a similar but orally administered drug, are frequently used as a radiosensitizer during radiation therapy. Single-agent gemcitabine is still commonly used in patients with a poor performance status.Erlotinib (Tarceva) was approved in 2005 based on very minimal improvement in overall survival in combination with gemcitabine.325 The study showed that erlotinib in combination with gemcitabine results in a statistically significant improve-ment in overall survival in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer in the first-line setting. Although the absolute benefit in overall survival was modest with a median survival difference between the two arms of only 2 weeks.FOLFIRINOX, a combination of three chemotherapy drugs (5-FU/leucovorin, irinotecan, and oxaliplatin) is now commonly used as first-line treatment for metastatic pancreatic adenocarcinoma in patients with a relatively good performance status. In 2010, a Phase 3 clinical trial showed positive results for patients treated with FOLFIRINOX.326 The objective response rate was improved from 9% to 32%, and median overall survival of patients with metastatic pancreatic cancer improved from 7 to 11 months, but the improvement was associated with increased toxicity, so patient selection is important. Patients treated with FOLFIRINOX may experience more severe side effects than those treated with gemcitabine alone, so this combination is usu-ally reserved for patients with a good performance status.In 2013, another combination therapy was approved as first-line treatment for metastatic pancreatic adenocarcinoma.327 Albumin-bound paclitaxel (Abraxane) was approved to be used in combination with gemcitabine (Gemzar). The median overall survival was improved to 8.5 months in the nabpaclitaxel–gemcitabine group as compared with 6.7 months in the gemcitabine group. Progression-free survival and the response rate were also improved. Rates of peripheral neuropathy and myelosuppression were increased, but this regimen is less toxic than FOLFIRINOX.In 2015, Irinotecan (ONIVYDE), in combination with 5-FU (fluorouracil) and leucovorin, was approved as treatment for met-astatic pancreatic adenocarcinoma that has progressed following treatment with a gemcitabine based therapy.328 The median over-all survival in patients assigned to nanoliposomal irinotecan plus fluorouracil and folinic acid was 6.1 months vs. 4.2 months with fluorouracil and folinic acid. Common side effects for this second-line therapy were neutropenia, diarrhea, vomiting, and fatigue.These results may warrant treatment in patients who understand the benefits and risks. However, the lack of signifi-cant survival advantage should encourage physicians to refer motivated patients for experimental protocols because it is only through continued clinical research that more meaningful treat-ments for pancreatic cancer will be developed.Ablation for Locally Advanced Unresectable Disease.  Persistent arterial vascular encasement after neoadjuvant therapy contraindicates resection. Irreversible electroporation utilizes delivery of high-voltage millisecond electrical pulses resulting in permanent disruption of the cellular membranes and subsequent apoptosis. This process leads to cell death, but does not injure the extracellular matrix, thus allowing cellular tumor ablation while preserving structural components of tissues. Collagen-based structures such as vessels or the pancreatic duct are not disrupted. Furthermore, because IRE is not based on thermal damage of cancer cells, the heat-sink phenomenon is not a concern, and even lesions abutting large vessels can be ablated with radical intent. Irreversible electroporation using the Nanoknife is reported to enable treatment of pancreatic tumors abutting vascular structures without compromise of the vessels or concern for the heat sink effect of nearby blood flow.329 Martin has created a registry and accumulated multi-institutional data on 200 patients with locally advanced pancreatic cancer showing OS of 28.3 months for patients with borderline resectable pancreatic cancer and 23.2 months in patients with unresectable pancreatic cancer. Those numbers compare favorably with the survival of patients treated with chemoradiation alone, which is 13 months in historical controls.330 This modality is new, but these early reports indicate it may be safe in combination with chemotherapy and are of particular interest because of the potential to down stage and offer surgery to patients initially diagnosed with locally advanced unresectable disease. It is also important to understand that a significant learning curve exists to achieve safety and optimization of the technique. Proper patient selection, technical ability with intraoperative ultrasound to allow precise IRE electrode bracketing, and standardization of the IRE energy delivery is important. Randomized prospective trials are needed before adoption of this technique can be expanded.Surgical Resection: Pancreaticoduodenectomy. In a patient with appropriate clinical and/or imaging indications of pancreatic cancer, a tissue diagnosis before performing a pancreaticoduo-denectomy is not essential. Although percutaneous CT-guided biopsy is usually safe, complications such as hemorrhage, pan-creatitis, fistula, and abscess can occur. Tumor seeding along the subcutaneous tract of the needle is uncommon. Likewise, FNA under EUS guidance is safe and well tolerated. The prob-lem with preoperative or even intraoperative biopsy is that many pancreatic cancers are not very cellular and contain a significant amount of fibrous tissue, so a biopsy may be misinterpreted as showing chronic pancreatitis if it does not contain malignant glandular cells. In the face of clinical and radiologic preoperative indications of pancreatic cancer, a negative biopsy should not preclude resection. In patients who are not candidates for resec-tion because of metastatic disease, biopsy for a tissue diagnosis becomes important because these patients may be candidates for palliative chemotherapy trials. It is especially important to make an aggressive attempt at tissue diagnosis before surgery in patients whose clinical presentation and imaging studies are more suggestive of alternative diagnoses such as pancreatic lym-phoma or pancreatic islet cell tumors. These patients might avoid surgery altogether in the case of lymphoma or warrant an aggres-sive approach in the case of islet cell carcinoma.Pancreaticoduodenectomy can be performed through a midline incision from xiphoid to umbilicus or through a bilat-eral subcostal incision. The initial portion of the procedure is an assessment of resectability. The liver and visceral and parietal peritoneal surfaces are thoroughly assessed. The gastrohepatic omentum is opened, and the celiac axis area is examined for enlarged lymph nodes. The base of the transverse mesocolon is examined for tumor involvement.The ascending and hepatic flexure of the colon are mobi-lized off the duodenum and head of the pancreas and reflected medially. A Kocher maneuver is performed by dissecting behind Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   149101/03/19   6:46 PM 1492SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIthe head of the pancreas. The superior mesenteric vein is identi-fied early in the case and dissected up toward the inferior border of the neck of the pancreas. The gastroepiploic vein and artery are ligated to prevent any traction injury. Often, the middle colic vein and right gastroepiploic vein share a common trunk before entering into the superior mesenteric vein. Knowledge of this anatomy helps reduce injury to the veins and unnecessary blood loss. The relation of the tumor to the superior mesenteric vein and artery cannot be accurately assessed by palpation at this point and is not completely determined until later in the opera-tion when the neck of the pancreas is divided and the surgeon is committed to resection. Mesenteric vascular involvement is best determined by a high quality preoperative CT scan.It is important to assess for an aberrant right hepatic artery, which is present in 20% of patients. The aberrant artery com-monly arises from the superior mesenteric artery posterior to the pancreas and ascends parallel and adjacent to the superior mesenteric and portal veins. The presence of an aberrant right hepatic artery should be apparent on the preoperative CT scan and can be identified intraoperatively by palpation on the back side of the hepatoduodenal ligament, where a prominent pulse will be felt posterior and to the right of the portal vein.The porta hepatis is examined. Enlarged or firm lymph nodes that can be swept down toward the head of the pancreas with the specimen do not preclude resection. If the assessment phase reveals no contraindications to the Whipple procedure (Table 33-22), the resection phase commences.If the pylorus is to be preserved, the stomach and proximal duodenum are mobilized off the pancreas, preserving the gastroepiploic vessels down to the pylorus. The proximal hepatic artery is identified usually by removing a lymph node that commonly lies just anterior to the artery. The hepatic artery is dissected and traced toward the porta hepatis. The gastroduodenal branch of the hepatic artery is identified. A test clamping is performed to ensure that a strong pulse remains in the proper hepatic artery before division of the gastroduodenal artery. In cases of celiac occlusion, flow comes from the superior mesenteric artery and retrograde through the gastroduodenal artery to the proper hepatic artery. Ligation of the gastroduodenal in this case would be equivalent to hepatic artery ligation. A bypass to the hepatic artery would be required. Once the test clamping is negative and the gastroduodenal artery is divided, the hepatic artery is retracted medially, and the common bile duct is retracted laterally to reveal the anterior surface of the portal vein behind them. Dissection is performed only on the anterior surface of the vein. If there is no tumor involvement, the neck of the Table 33-22Findings at explorationFindings contraindicating resection Liver metastases (any size) Celiac lymph node involvement Peritoneal implants Hepatic hilar lymph node involvementFindings not contraindicating resection Invasion at duodenum or distal stomach Involved peripancreatic lymph nodes Involved lymph nodes along the porta hepatis that can be swept down with the specimenpancreas will separate from the vein easily. A large, blunt-tipped clamp is a safe instrument to use for this dissection. The tunnel under the neck of the pancreas can then be completed mostly under direct vision from inferior and superior.The gallbladder is then mobilized from the liver, the  cystic duct and artery are ligated, and the gallbladder is removed. The common hepatic duct is circumferentially dissected. Either the duodenum is divided 2 cm distal to the pylorus (which defines the procedure as a pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy, or PPPD) or the antrum is divided, as classically described by Whipple. The jejunum is divided beyond the ligament of Treitz, and the mesentery is ligated until the jejunum can be delivered posterior to the superior mesenteric vessels from left to right.The common hepatic duct is then divided usually just above the entrance of the cystic duct, and the bile duct is dis-sected down to the superior margin of the duodenum. Inferior traction on the distal bile duct opens the plane to make visible the anterior portion of the portal vein. The pancreatic neck is divided anterior to the portal vein (Fig. 33-73). The use of cau-tery is avoided in the area of the pancreatic duct. The pancreatic head and uncinate process then are dissected off of the right lateral aspect of the superior mesenteric vein, ligating the fragile branches draining the head and uncinate process into the portal vein (Fig. 33-74). The uncinate process is then dissected off of the posterior and lateral aspect of the superior mesenteric artery. This can be the most tedious portion of the operation, Figure 33-73. Division of the pancreatic neck. The pancreatic neck is separated from the anterior surface of the portal vein and then divided. If there is no tumor involvement, the neck of the pan-creas will separate from the vein easily. A large, blunt-tipped clamp is a safe instrument to use for this dissection. (Reproduced with per-mission from Bell RH, Rikkers LF, Mulholland M: Digestive Tract Surgery: A Text and Atlas. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1996.)Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   149201/03/19   6:46 PM 1493PANCREASCHAPTER 33Figure 33-74. Dissection of the pancreatic head and uncinate pro-cess. The pancreatic head and uncinate process are dissected off of the right lateral aspect of the superior mesenteric vein and portal vein by ligating the fragile venous branches. (Reproduced with per-mission from Bell RH, Rikkers LF, Mulholland M: Digestive Tract Surgery: A Text and Atlas. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1996.)but thoroughly clearing all tissue from the mesenteric vessels helps avoid incomplete resection. The wound is irrigated and meticulous hemostasis is assured at this point because the view of the portal vein area and retroperitoneum is more difficult after the reconstruction phase is completed.The reconstruction involves anastomoses of the pancreas first, then the bile duct, and, finally, the duodenum or stomach. There are various techniques for the pancreatic anastomoses. After the pancreatic anastomosis is completed, the choledocho-jejunostomy is performed about 10 cm down the jejunal limb from the pancreatic anastomosis. This is usually performed in an end-to-side fashion with one layer of interrupted sutures. The duodenojejunostomy or gastrojejunostomy is performed another 10 to 15 cm downstream from the biliary anastomosis, using a two-layer technique.Pancreaticoduodenectomy With Vascular Resection.  Accurate staging of pancreatic cancer with a high-quality pre-operative CT scan is extremely important. Involvement of the superior mesenteric artery, the celiac axis, or hepatic artery indicate a T4/stage 3 tumor that is locally advanced and unre-sectable. However, involvement of the portal vein or superior mesenteric vein does not necessarily preclude resection as long as there is a patent superior mesenteric vein-portal vein conflu-ence. Reconstruction can often be accomplished with a primary anastomosis of the vein. When resection of more than 2 cm of vein is required, an interposition graft such as the internal jugu-lar vein can be used for a tension-free reconstruction.In a systematic review of 28 retrospective studies from high-volume pancreas centers, the morbidity, mortality, and survival outcome after undertaking extended pancreaticoduodenectomy with vascular resection for pancreatic cancer with venous involvement and/or limited arterial involvement was acceptable.331 Another more recent report from five teaching hospitals demonstrated that the Whipple procedure combined with vascular resection and reconstruction could achieve complete removal of tumors without significantly increasing the mortality rate, and the median survival time was higher than that of patients who underwent palliative treatment.332 However, contrary to the findings of analyses from expert pancreas centers, a retrospective cohort analysis using the National Surgical Quality Improvement Program data from 2005 to 2009 demonstrated increased 30-day postoperative morbidity and mortality in pancreaticoduodenectomy with vein resection when compared with pancreaticoduodenectomy alone.333 These data indicate that pancreaticoduodenectomy with vascular resection is only a reasonable option when it is performed after neoadjuvant therapy and at very-high-volume centers where the morbidity of the operation can be kept to a minimum.Minimally Invasive Pancreatectomy. Laparoscopic distal pancreatectomy has been proven to be safe and is appropriate for essentially all indications for pancreatectomy. This approach is associated with decreased blood loss and quicker recovery. Centrally located lesions near the splenoportal confluence must be approached laparoscopically with caution. Robotic technology may make dissection and control of major vessels in this area easier and perhaps safer. Interest in laparoscopic pancreaticoduodenectomy is increasing throughout the  United States with some early adopters reporting excellent outcomes comparable to the open procedure.334 Early results indicate this technique is feasible, but considerable expertise is required in both open pancreatic resection as well as advanced laparoscopic techniques to achieve these outcomes. Whether the advantages seen in other areas of minimally invasive surgery apply to the Whipple procedure is an area of current investigation.Variations and Controversies. The preservation of the pylorus has several theoretical advantages, including preven-tion of reflux of pancreaticobiliary secretions into the stomach, decreased incidence of marginal ulceration, normal gastric acid secretion and hormone release, and improved gastric function. Patients with pylorus-preserving resections have appeared to regain weight better than historic controls in some studies. Return of gastric emptying in the immediate postoperative period may take longer after the pylorus-preserving operation, and it is controversial whether there is any significant improve-ment in long-term quality of life with pyloric preservation.335-336Techniques for the pancreaticojejunostomy include end-to-side or end-to-end and duct-to-mucosa sutures or invagination (Fig. 33-75). Pancreaticogastrostomy has also been investigated.Some surgeons use stents, glue to seal the anastomosis, or octreotide to decrease pancreatic secretions. No matter what com-bination of these techniques is used, the clinically significant pan-creatic leakage rate is always about 10%. Therefore, the choice of techniques depends more on the surgeon’s personal experience.Traditionally, most surgeons place drains around the pan-creatic and biliary anastomoses because disruption of the pan-creaticojejunostomy cannot be avoided in one out of 10 patients. Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   149301/03/19   6:46 PM 1494SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIThis complication can lead to the development of an upper abdominal abscess or can present as an external pancreatic fis-tula. Usually, a pure pancreatic leak is controlled by the drains and will eventually seal spontaneously. Combined pancreatic and biliary leaks are cause for concern because bile will activate the pancreatic enzymes. In its most virulent form, disruption leads to necrotizing retroperitoneal infection, which can erode major arteries and veins of the upper abdomen, including the exposed portal vein and its branches or the stump of the gastro-duodenal artery. Impending catastrophe is often preceded by a small herald bleed from the drain site. Depending on the clinical situation, such an event is an indication to perform an angio-gram or return the patient to the operating room to widely drain the pancreaticojejunostomy and to repair the involved blood vessel. Open packing may be necessary to control diffuse necro-sis and infection. Some studies have questioned the practice of routine drain placement after pancreatectomy with reliance on postoperative percutaneous drainage when leaks occur.337 How-ever, a randomized, controlled, multicenter trial showed that patients who develop a leak after pancreaticoduodenectomy are ABCDEFigure 33-75. Techniques for pancreaticojejunostomy. A to D. Duct-to-mucosa, end-to-side E. Intraoperative photographs of end-to-side pancreaticojejunostomy. F to J. End-to-end invagination. K to O. End-to-side invagination.Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   149401/03/19   6:46 PM 1495PANCREASCHAPTER 33FGHIJFigure 33-75. (Continued)at a substantially increased risk of mortality if a drain was not placed at the time of resection.337 In contrast, the outcome does not seem to be as dramatically affected by drain placement in the setting of distal pancreatectomy.338 In the absence of a fis-tula, drains should be removed early in the postoperative period, preferably by postoperative day 5.339Many patients with pancreatic cancer are malnourished preoperatively and suffer from gastroparesis in the immedi-ate postoperative period. Routine placement of a feeding jeju-nostomy tube and gastrostomy tube has become less common, and most surgeons use these tubes selectively. Gastrostomy tubes may decrease the length of stay in patients who might Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   149501/03/19   6:46 PM 1496SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIKLNOMFigure 33-75. (Continued)be predicted to have severe gastroparesis. Jejunostomy tubes are certainly not benign and can result in leaks and intestinal obstruction. However, parenteral nutrition is also associated with serious complications such as line sepsis, loss of gut muco-sal integrity, and hepatic dysfunction. Enteric tubes should be considered in patients at risk such as malnourished patients who have received neoadjuvant chemotherapy.Because of the high incidence of direct retroperitoneal invasion and regional lymph node metastasis at the time of surgery, trails of more extended resections including extension of the pancreatic resection to the middle body of the pancreas, segmental resection of the portal vein, if necessary, resection of retroperitoneal tissue along the right perinephric area, and lymphadenectomy to the region of the celiac plexus were exam-ined. In the hands of experienced surgeons, these techniques are associated with greater blood loss but no increase in mortality. However, improved survival has not been demonstrated. Total pancreatectomy has also been considered in the past. Although pancreatic leaks are eliminated, major morbidity from brittle diabetes and exocrine insufficiency outweigh any theoretical benefit.Pancreatic cancer can recur locally after pancreaticoduo-denectomy. Intraoperative radiotherapy (IORT) delivers radia-tion to the operative bed at the time of resection. Radiation to Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   149601/03/19   6:46 PM 1497PANCREASCHAPTER 33surrounding normal areas is minimized, but the radiation is delivered all in one setting, rather than in fractionated doses over time. Favorable results were recently reported among a series of patients with locally advanced unresectable or border-line-resectable PDAC who received intensive neoadjuvant treat-ment followed by exploratory laparotomy and IORT.340Complications of Pancreaticoduodenectomy. The operative mortality rate for pancreaticoduodenectomy has decreased to <5% in high-volume centers (where individual surgeons perform more than 15 cases per year), suggesting that patients in rural areas would benefit from referral to large urban centers.341-342 The most common causes of death  are sepsis, hemorrhage, and cardiovascular events. Postoperative complications are unfortunately still very common and include delayed gastric emptying, pancreatic fistula, and hemorrhage.Delayed gastric emptying is common after pancreatico-duodenectomy and is treated conservatively as long as complete gastric outlet obstruction is ruled out by a contrast study. In the acute phase, intravenous erythromycin may help, but the prob-lem usually improves with time.Considerable attention has been focused on the preven-tion of pancreatic leak after pancreas resection. Modifications of the anastomotic technique (end-to-side or end-to-end, duct-to-mucosa, or invaginated), the use of jejunum or the stomach for drainage, the use of pancreatic duct stents, the use of octreotide, and various sealants have all been evaluated.Long-acting synthetic analogues of somatostatin have been evaluated as a pharmacologic therapy to reduce pancreatic secretion and the rate of pancreatic fistula after pancreatic resec-tion. Some European studies supported benefit particularly in selected higher risk patients, while previous North American tri-als concluded there was no benefit.343-349 A recent single-center, randomized trial with pasireotide (a newer analog) suggested potential benefit.350Many technical modifications to the classic pancreaticodu-odenectomy have been described. However, numerous technical variations to the pancreaticoenteric anastomosis have not clearly demonstrated an objective method to consistently decrease the rate of clinically significant postoperative pancreatic fistula, which in most series is about 10%. Yeo compared the incidence of pancreatic fistula in patients who had a pancreaticoduode-nectomy with reconstruction via a pancreaticogastrostomy or pancreaticojejunostomy.351 There was no significant difference between the two techniques in the incidence of pancreatic fis-tula. A recent meta-analysis summarized the results of 16 trials comparing pancreaticogastrostomy to pancreaticojejunostomy. All of the observational clinical studies reported superiority of pancreaticogastrostomy over pancreaticojejunostomy, most likely influenced by publication bias. In contrast, all random-ized prospective trials failed to show advantage of a particular technique, suggesting both techniques provide equally good results.352Other options to consider when performing the pancre-atic anastomosis are the duct-to-mucosa vs. the invagination techniques. Some surgeons choose the technique at the time of operation, depending on the size of the pancreatic duct and the texture of pancreas favoring invagination when the duct is small and the pancreatic texture is soft.353 Other surgeons use the same technique every time. The duct-to-mucosa anastomosis results in a low pancreatic fistula rate, particularly in patients with a large pancreatic duct and a fibrotic pancreas.354Use of a pancreatic duct stent across the anastomosis has been suggested as a means of preventing a pancreatic leak and as an aid in technical precision. Both internal stenting as well as external stenting have been practiced. A recent Cochrane analysis of eight randomized, controlled trials failed to iden-tify any convincing evidence of benefit with internal or external pancreatic duct stents.355 Some previous studies indicated that stents might be harmful. A recent multicenter randomized trial comparing external to internal pancreatic duct stents during pan-creaticoduodenectomy showed a lower rate of pancreatic fistula with internal stents, so this controversy is likely to continue.356Reconstruction with an isolated Roux-en-Y pancreatico-enteric anastomosis has been suggested as a method do decrease postoperative pancreatic leak.357-358 The logic behind this tech-nical modification is that the use of separate Roux-en-Y limbs for biliary and pancreatic secretions may protect the pancreatic anastomosis from activated pancreatic enzymes. However, data is limited, and this is not a common practice.Avoiding the pancreatic anastomosis altogether by ductal ligation or occlusion has also been evaluated as a potential technique to reduce the rate of postoperative pancreatic fistula.359-360 Ductal occlusion with neoprene or prolamine, which are nonresorbable glues, has been abandoned due to pancreatic atrophy and loss of exocrine function. Duct occlusion in pancreaticojejunostomy significantly increases the risk of endocrine insufficiency without a decrease in the postoperative complication rate. To avoid long-term loss of function, absorbable glues, such as fibrin glue, have been evaluated to limit the action of pancreatic enzymes until the anastomosis is healed. Fibrin glue has been used for both duct occlusion and has also been applied to the surface of the pancreatic stump and anastomotic site without clear improvement in pancreatic fistula rate. The effect of BioGlue applied to the anastomotic surface after the Whipple procedure and pancreatic stump after distal pancreatectomy was evaluated in a retrospective cohort study. There were no statistically significant differences in the incidence or severity grades of postoperative pancreatic fistulas.361 A randomized prospective trial of application of fibrin glue to the surface of the pancreaticojejunostomy in high-risk patients did not reduce the incidence of pancreatic fistula or total complications after pancreaticoduodenectomy.362If not combined with a biliary leak, pancreatic fistula, although serious, can usually be managed conservatively. In about 95% of cases, reoperation is not indicated, and prolonged drainage, using drains placed in the original operation or percu-taneously after resection, results in spontaneous closure of the fistula.363Hemorrhage can occur either intraoperatively or postop-eratively. Intraoperative hemorrhage typically occurs during the dissection of the portal vein. A major laceration of the portal vein can occur at a point in the operation at which the portal vein is not yet exposed. Temporary control of hemorrhage is gener-ally possible in this situation by compressing the portal vein and superior mesenteric vein against the tumor with the surgeon’s left hand behind the head of the pancreas. An experienced assis-tant is needed to divide the neck of the pancreas to the left of the portal vein and achieve proximal and distal control. Sometimes, the vein can be sutured closed with minimal narrowing. Other times, a segmental resection and interposition graft (internal jugular vein) may be needed.Postoperative hemorrhage can occur from inadequate liga-ture of any one of numerous blood vessels during the procedure. Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   149701/03/19   6:46 PM 1498SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIHemorrhage can also occur due to digestion of retroperitoneal blood vessels due to a combined biliary-pancreatic leak. Uncom-monly, a stress ulcer, or later, a marginal ulcer, can result in GI hemorrhage. Typically, a vagotomy is not performed when pan-creaticoduodenectomy is performed for pancreatic cancer, but patients are placed on proton pump inhibitors.Outcome and Value of Pancreaticoduodenectomy for Cancer. Survival figures indicate that perhaps few patients are cured indefinitely of pancreatic cancer with pancreaticoduode-nectomy. This has led to a nihilistic view toward patients with this disease which has further contributed to poor outcomes. Using the National Cancer Data Base (1995–2004), Bilimoria reported on 9559 patients with early stage potentially resect-able tumors (pretreatment clinical Stage I: T1N0M0 and T2N0M0).364 Multivariate models were employed to identify factors predicting failure to undergo surgery and assess the impact of pancreatectomy on survival. This study identified a striking underuse of pancreatectomy in the United States. Of clinical stage I patients, 71.4% (6823/9559) did not undergo surgery; 6.4% (616/9559) were excluded due to comorbidi-ties; 4.2% (403/9559) refused surgery; 9.1% (869/9559) were excluded due to age; and 38.2% (3644/9559) with potentially resectable cancers were not offered surgery. Patients were less likely to undergo surgery if they were older than 65 years, were black, were on Medicare or Medicaid, had pancreatic head lesions, earned lower annual incomes, or had less education. Patients were less likely to receive surgery at low-volume and community centers. Patients who were not offered surgery had worse survival than patients who underwent resection. Over-all survival from PDAC would significantly increase if more patients with stage I tumors were identified and offered surgery at high-volume centers (Fig. 33-76).Although pancreaticoduodenectomy may be performed with the hope of the rare cure in mind, the operation more importantly provides better palliation than any other treatment, and it is the only modality that offers any meaningful improve-ment in survival. If the procedure is performed without major complications, many months of palliation are usually achieved. However, it is the surgeon’s duty to make sure patients and their families have a realistic understanding of the true goals of pan-creaticoduodenectomy in the setting of pancreatic cancer.Adjuvant Chemotherapy and Radiation. Small studies in the 1980s suggested that adjuvant chemotherapy with 5-FU combined with radiation improves survival by about 9 months after pancreatic resection for pancreatic adenocarcinoma.365 Subsequent, noncontrolled studies have reinforced that concept; however, the data have been criticized due to the low number of patients and low dose of radiation therapy that was given. In addition, gemcitabine has replaced 5-FU as standard therapy in pancreatic cancer but is thought to be too toxic when given with radiotherapy without dose reduction. A recent large European multicenter trial concluded that there was no value to chemo-radiotherapy, although the study suggested the possibility that chemotherapy alone might have survival benefit.366 Random-ized trials have failed to resolve the debate regarding the role of adjuvant radiation therapy in resectable pancreas cancer. A reasonable consideration in a disease with high rates of distant metastases is to begin with adjuvant chemotherapy, followed by radiation therapy in patients who do not progress, particularly in patients where there may be increased concern about local recurrence such as in patients with close margins.Remarkable results in adjuvant therapy were reported by the Virginia Mason Clinic with combination 5-FU, cisplatinum, interferon-〈, and external beam radiation.367 Although the toxic-ity was high (42% hospitalized for GI toxicity), the promising results prompted larger confirmatory studies. Unfortunately, one such study was stopped due to toxicity, and this protocol has not been widely adopted. More recent results with FOLFIRINOX in the setting of metastatic disease have encouraged clinical tri-als using this regimen in the adjuvant setting, which are cur-rently underway (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT02172976). Nevertheless, pending further study, it is typical in the United States for patients with acceptable functional status to receive some form of adjuvant chemotherapy and sometimes chemora-diotherapy after surgery.Neoadjuvant Treatment. There are several potential advan-tages to the use of chemotherapy or chemoradiation before an attempt at surgical resection. For example, it avoids the risk that adjuvant treatment is delayed by complications of surgery. Neoadjuvant treatment also may decrease the tumor burden at operation, increasing the rate of resectability and killing some tumor cells before they can be spread intraoperatively. Another potential advantage is that it allows patients with occult meta-static disease to avoid the morbidity of pancreatic resection. As many as 20% of patients treated with neoadjuvant chemoradia-tion develop metastatic disease detected by restaging CT and do not go on to surgery. This approach may separate patients into a subset likely to benefit from resection and a subset in whom sur-gery would be unlikely to provide clinical benefit. Preoperative chemoradiation has been shown not to increase the periopera-tive morbidity or mortality of pancreaticoduodenectomy. It may even decrease the incidence of pancreatic fistula. Prospective randomized trials investigating this concept are ongoing but are difficult to complete due to the high number of patients who fail to complete or receive a full course of either therapy. Studies have shown that neoadjuvant therapy is associated with a lower rate of lymph node positivity and improved survival is achieved among the patients who do not develop disease progression dur-ing neoadjuvant therapy and go on to resection. Neoadjuvant therapy should be considered an acceptable alternative to sur-gery first followed by adjuvant therapy for resectable pancre-atic cancer. Patients should be encouraged to consider available 000.20.40.6Cause-specific survival0.81.0Performed, med. survival = 36 months (N = 724)Refused,    med. survival =   7 months (N = 82)1020304050Months60708090Figure 33-76. Effect of surgery on survival in early stage pan-creas cancer. Survival comparison for cases (combined stages IA and IB) for which resection was recommended, and resection was either performed or refused. (Reproduced with permission from Chiari ST, Kelly K, Hollingsworth MA, et al. Early detection of sporadic pancreatic cancer: summative review, Pancreas. 2015 Jul;44(5):693-712.)Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   149801/03/19   6:46 PM 1499PANCREASCHAPTER 33clinical trials of neoadjuvant therapy for resectable pancreatic cancer.368 Unfortunately, a recent trial attempting to random-ize patients with resectable pancreatic cancer to neoadjuvant versus adjuvant therapy failed to demonstrate an advantage for the neoadjuvant approach. However, the study was inconclu-sive because it was stopped after 73 of a planned 254 patients due to slow accrual, with only 66 eligible for analysis. Other trials are ongoing. The NEOPA trial (ClinicalTrials.gov iden-tifier: NCT01900327) is a prospectively randomized phase 3 trial of patients receiving neoadjuvant chemoradiation followed by curative surgery vs. primary surgery followed by adjuvant therapy with a primary endpoint of 3-year overall survival.369Most pancreatic surgeons agree that neoadjuvant chemo-therapy, and perhaps chemoradiotherapy, should be offered to patients with locally advanced but resectable disease (vein involvement) and to patients with “borderline resectable dis-ease” (abutment of ≤180 degrees of the circumference of the SMA, celiac axis, or hepatic artery or if there is a short segment of vein occlusion, CT findings suspicious for metastatic disease, like 1 mm liver lesions too small to characterize or biopsy, and patients with multiple comorbidities or marginal performance status). This strategy acknowledges the fact that these patients are at high risk of early distant recurrence and/or R1 resection with early local recurrence. Neoadjuvant treatment helps select the right patients for surgery and may reduce the incidence of a margin positive resection.Postoperative Surveillance. Recurrence after successful resection usually manifests as hepatic metastases. Adjuvant che-motherapy with or without radiation is usually administered for 6 months. During this time period, patients are monitored with frequent physical examinations and laboratory tests, including CA19-9. CT scans are typically ordered every 3 months in the first 2 years after resection or when a rising CA19-9 or new symptoms suggest recurrence. Surgical therapy for recurrent disease is usually reserved only for select patients with lim-ited disease who remain reasonable operative candidates who develop symptomatic gastric outlet or bowel obstruction.Ampullary and Periampullary Cancer. Ampullary  cancers need to be distinguished from periampullary cancers. The ampulla is the junction of the biliary and pancreatic ducts within the duodenum. Periampullary cancer includes tumors arising from the distal bile duct, duodenal mucosa, or pancreas just adjacent to the ampulla, and the ampulla can be overgrown by cancers that arise from these adjacent areas, making it impos-sible to determine the true site of origin. Clinically, the term periampullary cancer is, therefore, a nonspecific term used to refer to a variety of tumors arising at the intersection of these four sites. The term ampullary cancer is more specific and is reserved for tumors that arise at the ampulla. Based on their location, ampullary cancers are usually detected relatively early due to the appearance of jaundice and have a more favorable prognosis. The ampulla of Vater is lined by an epithelial layer that transitions from pancreatic and biliary ductal epithelium to duodenal mucosal epithelium. Ampullary adenocarcinomas can therefore have an intestinal and/or pancreaticobiliary his-tologic morphology, with the former having a better progno-sis. Patients with ampullary cancer have a 10-year survival of about 35%, which is a much better prognosis than patients with pancreatic adenocarcinoma. The difference in survival is not entirely explained by an earlier presentation and lower inci-dence of lymph node metastases. There are biologic, particularly molecular, differences between ampullary and pancreatic adenocarcinoma of the pancreas.370 Intestinal type ampullary cancers have a lower incidence of EGFr and mutant p53 over-expression, and fewer activating K-ras mutations. These tumors are more likely to have genetic changes similar to colon cancer such as microsatellite instability and adenomatous polyposis coli mutations.Management of Periampullary Adenomas. Benign tumors such as ampullary adenomas can also originate at the ampulla. The accuracy of endoscopic biopsy in distinguishing ampullary cancer from benign adenoma is poor, with false-negative rates from 25% to 56% even if sphincterotomy precedes the biopsy. However, benign villous adenomas of the ampullary region can be excised locally. This technique is applicable only for small tumors (approximately 2 cm or less) with no evidence of malig-nancy upon biopsy. EUS may help to accurately determine if there is invasion into the duodenal wall. In the absence of inva-sion, adenomas may be amenable to an endoscopic or trans-duodenal excision. A longitudinal duodenotomy is made and the tumor is excised with a 2to 3-mm margin of normal duo-denal mucosa. In some centers, small periampullary adenomas can also be removed endoscopically. A preoperative diagnosis of cancer is a contraindication to transduodenal excision, and pancreaticoduodenectomy should be performed. Likewise, if final pathologic examination of a locally excised tumor reveals invasive cancer, the patient should be returned to the operat-ing room for a pancreaticoduodenectomy. An important sub-set of patients are those with FAP who develop periampullary or duodenal adenomas. These lesions have a high incidence of harboring carcinoma and frequently recur unless the mucosa at risk is resected. A standard (not pylorus-sparing) Whipple is the procedure of choice in FAP patients with periampullary lesions.Cystic Neoplasms of the Pancreas. A cystic neoplasm needs to be considered when a patient presents with a fluid-containing pancreatic lesion. Asymptomatic cystic neoplasms of the pancreas may be more frequent than previously recognized and are being identified with increasing frequency as the use of abdominal CT scanning and MRI has increased. Pancreatic cysts are now thought to be present in about 9% of the popula-tion age 80 and older.371 When symptoms are clearly attributable to a pancreatic cyst, resection is indicated in patients who are fit candidates for surgery. However, management of asymp-tomatic pancreatic cysts is nuanced and can trigger significant anxiety for patients and their surgeons. Invasive surveillance and aggressive surgical intervention can cause harm, decrease quality of life, and increase costs. While the overall risk that an incidental pancreatic cyst is malignant is very low (about 1 in 10,000), the risks of surgery are very significant with a 2% to 5% mortality and 30% to 40% morbidity. However, some of these neoplasms slowly undergo malignant transformation and thus represent an opportunity for surgical cure, which is uncom-mon after transformation to invasive pancreatic adenocarci-noma. The dilemma for the surgeon is to identify the minority of cysts that pose a significant risk and provide individual patients with an accurate assessment of their unique risk-benefit ratio of resection vs. surveillance.Surveillance programs are of questionable value in patients who are not candidates for surgery due to age and or multiple comorbidities and limited life expectancy. Surgeons also need to clearly explain to the patient the risks and benefits of surveil-lance itself. MRI is the preferred surveillance imaging modality Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   149901/03/19   6:46 PM 1500SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIover computed tomography because MRI does not expose the patient to radiation and better demonstrates the structural rela-tionship between the pancreatic duct and associated cyst. Also, MRI is less invasive than EUS. EUS is therefore reserved for further evaluation of higher risk cysts. Another problem to con-front is when to stop surveillance in a cyst that has been stable during observation. Some clinicians stop following after 5 years but data is lacking to guide this decision. In addition, patients who have undergone resection of a pancreatic cystic neoplasm with high grade dysplasia may warrant continued surveillance after surgery particularly when there is a possible field effect such as in IPMN or concern that all of the disease has not been resected. Individualized decision-making and multidisciplinary input is ideal.372Pseudocysts. The most common cystic lesion of the pancreas is the pseudocyst, which, of course, has no epithelial lining and is a nonneoplastic complication of pancreatitis or pancreatic duct injury. As discussed in “Complications of Chronic Pancreatitis,” the diagnosis is usually straightforward from the clinical history. Although not usually necessary, analysis of pseudocyst fluid would reveal a high amylase content. The danger comes in mistaking a cystic pancreatic neoplasm for a pseudocyst and incorrectly draining a cystic neoplasm into the GI tract rather than resecting the neoplasm. For this reason, biopsy of the pseudocyst wall is a requirement in the management of pancreatic pseudocysts.Cystadenoma. Serous cystadenomas are essentially considered benign tumors without malignant potential. Serous cystadenocarcinoma has been reported very rarely (<1%). Therefore, malignant potential should not be used as an argument for surgical resection, and the majority of these lesions can be safely observed in the absence of symptoms due to mass effect or rapid growth. The average rate of growth is about  0.5 cm per year. About 50% of cystadenomas are asymptomatic and detected as an incidental finding. Most symptomatic patients have mild upper abdominal pain, epigastric fullness, or moderate weight loss. Occasionally, cystadenomas can grow to a size capable of producing jaundice or GI obstruction due to mass effect (Fig. 33-77). For symptomatic patients with serous cystadenoma, surgical resection is indicated. For lesions in the tail, splenectomy is not necessary, given the benign nature of the tumor. In appropriate candidates, a laparoscopic approach to distal pancreatectomy with or without splenic preservation can be considered. These cysts are frequently found in older women in which pancreatic resection for a benign neoplasm should be avoided in the absence of significant symptoms. All regions of the pancreas are affected, with half in the head/uncinate process, and half in the neck, body, or tail of the pancreas. They have a spongy appearance, and multiple small cysts (microcystic) are more common than larger cysts (macrocystic or oligocystic). These lesions contain thin serous fluid that does not stain positive for mucin and is low in CEA (<200 ng/mL). Typical imaging characteristics include a well-circumscribed cystic mass, small septations, fluid close to water density, and sometimes, a central scar with calcification. If a conservative management is adopted, it is important to be sure of the diagnosis. EUS-FNA should yield nonviscous fluid with low CEA and amylase levels, and if cells are obtained, which is rare, they are cuboidal and have a clear cytoplasm.Mucinous Cystadenoma and Cystadenocarcinoma. Muci-nous cystic neoplasms (MCNs) encompass a spectrum ranging from benign but potentially malignant to carcinoma with a very aggressive behavior (Table 33-23). There is often heterogene-ity within the lesions with benign and malignant-appearing regions, making it impossible to exclude malignancy with biopsy. MCNs are commonly seen in perimenopausal women, and about two-thirds are located in the body or tail of the pan-creas. Like cystadenomas, most MCNs are now incidental find-ings identified during imaging performed for other reasons. When symptoms are present, they are usually nonspecific and include upper abdominal discomfort or pain, early satiety, and weight loss. On imaging studies, the cysts have thick walls and do not communicate with the main pancreatic duct (Fig. 33-78). There may be nodules or calcifications within the wall of the cyst. The cysts are lined by tall columnar epithelium that fills the cyst with viscous mucin. The submucosal layer consists of a highly cellular stroma of spindle cells with elongated nuclei similar to the “ovarian stroma,” which is a key pathologic feature distinguishing these lesions. Elevated CEA levels in the fluid  (≥200 ng/mL) are consistent with mucinous lesions and may suggest malignant transformation.373 Solid areas may con-tain atypical cells or invasive cancer, and extensive sampling of the specimen is necessary to accurately predict prognosis.  Figure 33-77. Mucinous cystic neoplasm in tail of pancreas.Table 33-23World Health Organization classification of primary tumors of the exocrine pancreas	A.	Benign	1.	Serous cystadenoma (16%)	2.	Mucinous cystadenoma (45%)	3.	Intraductal papillary-mucinous adenoma (32%)	4.	Mature cystic teratoma	B.	Borderline	1.	Mucinous cystic tumor with moderate dysplasia	2.	Intraductal papillary mucinous tumor with moderate dysplasia	3.	Solid pseudopapillary tumor	C.	Malignant	1.	Ductal adenocarcinoma	2.	Serous/mucinous cystadenocarcinoma (29%)	3.	Intraductal mucinous papillary tumorBrunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   150001/03/19   6:46 PM 1501PANCREASCHAPTER 33NoYes<1 cm1–2 cm2–3 cm>3 cmNoNoa. Pancreatitis may be an indication for surgery for relief of symptoms.b. Differential diagnosis includes mucin. Mucin can move with change in patient position, may be dislodged oncyst lavage and does not have Doppler ’ow. Features of true tumor nodule include lack of mobility, presence ofDoppler ’ow and FNA of nodule showing tumor tissuec. Presence of any one of thickened walls, intraductal mucin or mural nodules is suggestive of main ductinvolvement. In their absence main duct involvement is inconclusive.d. Studies from Japan suggest that on follow-up of subjects with suspected BD-IPMN there is increased incidenceof pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma unrelated to malignant transformation of the BD-IPMN(s) being followed.However, it is unclear if imaging surveillance can detect early ductal adenocarcinoma, and, if so, at what intervalsurveillance imaging should be performed.Are any of the following high-risk stigmata of malignancy present?i) obstructive jaundice in a patient with cystic lesion of the head of the pancreas,ii) enhancing solid component within cyst, iii) main pancreatic duct ‰10 mm in sizeAre any of the following worrisome features present?Clinical: PancreatitisaImaging: i) cyst ‰3 cm, ii) thickened/enhancing cyst walls, iii) main duct size 5–9 mm, iii) non-enhancingmural nodule iv) abrupt change in caliber of pancreatic duct with distal pancreatic atrophy.What is the size of largest cyst?InconclusiveIf yes, perform endoscopic ultrasoundConsidersurgery,if clinicallyappropriateAre any of these features present?i) Deÿnite mural nodule(s)bii) Main duct features suspicious for involvementciii) Cytology: suspicious or positive for malignancyCT/MRIin 2–3 yearsdCT/MRIyearly × 2 years,then lengthenintervalif no changedEUS in 3–6 months, thenlengthen interval alternating MRIwith EUS as appropriate.dConsider surgery in young,ÿt patients with need forprolonged surveillanceClose surveillance alternatingMRI with EUS every 3–6 months.Strongly consider surgery in young,ÿt patientsYesFigure 33-78. Algorithm for management of pancreatic cystic neoplasms. CEA = carcinoembryonic antigen; CT = computed tomography; ERCP = endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography; EUS = endoscopic ultrasound; FNA = fine-needle aspiration; Hx = history;  IPMN = intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm of the pancreas; MCN = mucinous cystic neoplasm; MRCP = magnetic resonance  cholangiopancreatography. (Reproduced with permission from Tanaka M, Adsay V, Chari S, et al. International consensus guidelines 2012 for the management of IPMN and MCN of the pancreas, Pancreatology. 2012 May-Jun;12(3):183-197.)Resection is the treatment of choice for most mucin-producing cystic tumors. Malignancy cannot be ruled out without removal and extensive sampling of the entire tumor. Malignancy has been reported in 6% to 36% of MCNs. Current thinking is that all of these tumors will eventually evolve into cancer if left untreated. However, for individual patients, the surgeon is often faced with a difficult decision. The risk of pancreas surgery in an older patient with multiple comorbidities and a relatively short life expectancy regardless of their pancreatic cyst is frequently weighed against the potential future risk that the cyst, particularly a small cyst, will transform into an incurable invasive cancer.The utility of detailed DNA analysis of pancreatic cyst fluid to diagnose mucinous and malignant cysts has been evalu-ated in the PANDA study.374 The study concluded that cyst fluid K-ras mutation was helpful in the diagnosis of mucinous cysts with a 96% specificity. Components of DNA analysis detect-ing malignant cysts included allelic loss amplitude over 82% and high DNA amount. The criteria of high amplitude K-ras mutation followed by allelic loss showed maximum specificity (96%) for malignancy. However, this test lacks sensitivity. In clinical practice, the surgeon must take all of these complemen-tary factors into consideration when determining the malignant potential of a pancreatic cystic neoplasm.Because most MCNs are located in the body and tail of the pancreas, distal pancreatectomy is the most common treatment. For small lesions, it may be appropriate to preserve the spleen, but splenectomy ensures removal of the lymph node basin that can potentially be involved. It is very important not to rupture the cyst during resection, and the tumor should be removed intact, not morselized. Therefore, a laparoscopic approach may not be appropriate for larger lesions. Completely resected MCNs without atypia are usually cured especially if small  (<3 cm). Even patients with moderate dysplasia or carcinoma in situ are usually cured by complete resection. Noninvasive MCNs require no surveillance after resection. For MCNs with an associated invasive carcinoma, prognosis depends on the extent of the invasive component, tumor stage, and resectability. The 2-year survival rate and 5-year survival rate of patients with Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   150101/03/19   6:46 PM 1502SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIresected MCN with an associated invasive carcinoma are about 67% and 50%, respectively.375Intraductal Papillary Mucinous Neoplasm. Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMNs) usually occur within the head of the pancreas and arise within the pancreatic ducts. The ductal epithelium forms a papillary projection into the duct, and mucin production causes intraluminal cystic dilation of the pancreatic ducts (Fig. 33-79). Imaging studies demonstrate diffuse dilation of the pancreatic duct, and the pancreatic parenchyma is often atrophic due to chronic duct obstruction. However, classic features of chronic pancreatitis, such as calcification and a beaded appearance of the duct, are not present. At ERCP, mucin can be seen extruding from the ampulla of Vater, a so-called fish-eye lesion that is virtually diagnostic of IPMN (Fig. 33-80). Initial reports suggested a male predominance, but more recent series indicate an equal distribution. Patients are usually in their seventh to eighth decade of life and present with abdominal pain or recurrent pancreatitis, thought to be caused by obstruction of the pancreatic duct by thick mucin. Some patients 9Figure 33-79. Computed tomography appearance of massive mul-tiseptated serous cystadenoma in head of pancreas with central stel-late scar (left) and resected specimen (right).Figure 33-80. Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm histology. Papillary projections of ductal epithelium resemble villous morphology and contain mucin-filled vesicles. (Reproduced with permission from Asiyanbola B, Andersen DK. IPMN. Editorial Update. accesssurgery.com McGraw-Hill Education; 2008.)(5–10%) have steatorrhea, diabetes, and weight loss secondary to pancreatic insufficiency.Some IPMNs primarily involve the main pancreatic duct, while others involve the branch ducts. The mean fre-quency of malignancy in main duct IPMN (MD-IPMN) is 62%  (Fig. 33-81). Considering this high incidence of malignant lesions and the low 5-year survival rates (31–54%), interna-tional consensus guidelines recommend resection for all surgi-cally fit patients with MD-IPMN.372 If the margin is positive for  high-grade dysplasia, additional resection should be attempted to obtain at least moderate-grade dysplasia at the surgical margin.The surgical management of IPMNs is complicated by the fact that the lesion itself is small and preoperative imaging stud-ies show a dilated pancreatic duct but not necessarily the mass. Mucus can dilate the duct proximal and distal to the lesion. Fur-thermore, these lesions can spread microscopically along the duct, and there can be skip areas of normal duct between the diseased portions. Therefore, thorough preoperative imaging including EUS, MRCP, or ERCP, and sometimes pancreatic ductoscopy, which can also be repeated intraoperatively, is use-ful (see Fig. 33-80). The surgeon needs to be prepared to extend the resection, if necessary, based on intraoperative findings and frozen section of the margin. Extending the resection to the point of total pancreatectomy is controversial due to the mor-bidity of this operation. Like MCNs, the IPMNs require careful histologic examination of the entire specimen for an invasive cancer (Fig. 33-82).Survival of patients with IPMN, even when malignant and invasive, can be quite good. As with MCN, patients with bor-derline tumors or carcinoma in situ are usually cured. For this reason, if recurrence occurs in the remaining pancreas, further resection is warranted because several series have shown that some of these cases are salvageable. Patients with IPMN are also at risk for other malignancies and should undergo colonos-copy and close surveillance.Branch-duct type IPMNs (BD-IPMN) are often found in the uncinate process, are sometimes asymptomatic, and are less frequently associated with malignant transformation (6–46%). Asymptomatic, small suspected BD-IPMNs are frequently Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   150201/03/19   6:47 PM 1503PANCREASCHAPTER 33ABCFigure 33-81. Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN). A. Examples of “fish-eye deformity” of IPMN. Mucin is seen extruding from the ampulla. B. Mucin coming from pancreatic duct when neck of pancreas is transected during Whipple procedure (left). Intraoperative pancreatic ductoscopy to assess the pancreatic tail (right). C. Views of pancreatic duct during ductoscopy; normal (left) and IPMN (right).Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   150301/03/19   6:47 PM 1504SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIobserved with serial imaging. High-risk features such as mural nodules, a dilated main duct, positive cytology or cyst fluid CEA >200 need to be ruled out. In the absence of these fea-tures, continued observation with serial imaging is appropriate, especially in patients who are not ideal operative candidates. The mean frequency of invasive cancer in resected BD-IPMN is 18%. BD-IPMN mostly occurs in elderly patients, and the annual malignancy rate is only 2% to 3%. These factors support conservative management with follow-up in patients who do not have any symptoms or risk factors predicting malignancy such as mural nodule, rapidly increasing cyst size, and high-grade atypia in cytology. There is insufficient data to support immediate resection for all BD-IPMNs <3 cm without “high-risk stigmata” and “worrisome features.” Branch-duct IPMNs ≥3 cm should be resected.372Four histologic subtypes of IPMNs have been character-ized: gastric, intestinal, pancreatobiliary, and oncocytic. Most of BD-IPMNs are composed of gastric-type epithelium. However, intestinal type is more common in MD-IPMN. In a recent report, the four subtypes of IPMNs were associated with significant dif-ferences in survival.376 Patients with gastric-type IPMN had the best prognosis, whereas those with intestinal and pancreatobili-ary type had a bad prognosis.Workup of Asymptomatic Pancreatic Cystic NeoplasmsIncidentally discovered asymptomatic pancreatic cystic neo-plasms are evaluated by MRI with MRCP to check for “high-risk stigmata or worrisome features.” An enhancing solid component or main pancreatic duct (MPD) dilation ≥10 mm are considered “high-risk stigmata.” Cysts ≥3 cm, thickened enhancing cyst walls, nonenhancing mural nodules, MPD size of 5 to 9 mm, abrupt change in the MPD caliber with distal pancreatic atrophy, and lymphadenopathy are considered “worrisome features.” All cysts with high risk stigmata are resected. All cysts with wor-risome features and cysts > 3 cm without worrisome features are further evaluated with EUS. If EUS shows a definite mural nodule, main duct features suspicious for involvement or the cytology is positive or suspicious for malignancy, then resection is recommended. In the absence of worrisome features, no fur-ther initial work-up is recommended, but surveillance is still required.The interval between surveillance imaging is based on the size of the cyst with a lengthening of the interval once sta-bility is established. Patients with noninvasive MCNs require no surveillance after resection, but patients with IPMNs need surveillance after resection. In the absence of residual lesions, repeat MRI at 2 and 5 years may be reasonable. If there is low or moderate-grade dysplasia at the margin, MRI every 6 months is recommended.Resection is indicated in all surgically fit patients with MD-IPMN, and additional resection is indicated if there is high-grade dysplasia at the margin. Resection is also indicated in all surgically fit patients with MCN. BD-IPMN <3 cm without wor-risome features or high-risk stigmata can undergo surveillance.When patients are deemed unacceptable for resection due to comorbidities, ablation of the cyst can be considered. How-ever, at this time, cyst ablation is considered experimental and should be done as part of a clinical trial. Gastroenterologists have limited experience with injection of a cytotoxic agent into the cyst in an attempt to ablate the cyst epithelium. Ethanol has been used and more recently this has been combined with paclitaxel. The combination of ethanol and paclitaxel injection resulted in elimination of the cysts, as determined by CT scan-ning, in 29 out of 47 (62%) of patients in a median follow-up period of 21.7 months.377Recently, the American Gastroenterological Association (AGA) published guidelines for asymptomatic mucinous cysts (http://www.gastro.org/guidelines/pancreatic-cysts) that are different from all previously published guidelines in the following areas: 2-year interval for cyst of any size undergoing surveillance, stopping surveillance after 5 years if no change, surgery only if more than one concerning feature on MRI confirmed on EUS and only in centers with high volumes of pancreatic surgery, and no surveillance after surgery if no invasive cancer or dysplasia. Although based on extensive literature review and synthesis, these recommendations have resulted in significant controversy because, in an effort to reduce the costs of health care delivery and perhaps decrease inadvertent harm to patients, they advocate less frequent follow-up and a higher threshold before offering EUS and/or surgery.Solid-Pseudopapillary Tumor. Solid-pseudopapillary tumors are rare and typically occur in young women. Previous names for this entity include, solid and cystic, solid and papillary, cystic and papillary, and papillary-cystic tumor. They are typically well circumscribed on CT (Fig. 33-83). The cysts are not true epithelial-lined cysts but rather represent a necrotic/degenerative process. Histology may be similar to neuroendocrine tumors, but they do not stain positive for neuroendocrine markers such as chromogranin. Most are cured by resection, but liver and peritoneal metastases have been reported.Other Cystic Neoplasms. Rarely, typical ductal adenocarci-noma of the pancreas may undergo cystic degeneration due to central necrosis. Occasionally, this will create difficulty in the proper preoperative diagnosis and should be kept in mind when deciding to conservatively follow a cystic pancreatic neoplasm. It is more common, 5% to 10%, for neuroendocrine tumors of the pancreas to contain cysts. These cysts are filled with sero-sanguineous fluid rather than necrotic debris. Lymphoepithelial Figure 33-82. Operative specimen of pancreas with multifocal intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (black arrow) and a focus of invasive adenocarcinoma (white arrow). (Reproduced with permission from Asiyanbola B, Andersen DK. IPMN. Editorial Update. accesssurgery.com McGraw-Hill Education; 2008.)Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   150401/03/19   6:47 PM 1505PANCREASCHAPTER 33Figure 33-83. Abdominal computed tomographic scan of a 25-year-old woman demonstrating a well-circumscribed cystic lesion with septation in body/tail of pancreas. At surgery, the tumor was adherent to the splenic artery. Pathologic diagnosis was solid-pseudopapillary carcinoma.cysts of the pancreas usually occur in men in their fifth to sixth decade. These benign lesions may be unilocular or multilocular and vary widely in size. The contents of the cyst are also vari-able and may be thin serous fluid or cheesy/caseous material if there is increased keratin formation. A substantial number of patients with von Hippel-Lindau syndrome develop pancreatic cysts that resemble serous cystadenomas. There may be mul-tiple lesions scattered throughout the pancreas. Patients with polycystic kidney and hepatic disease may also develop benign pancreatic cysts (cystadenomas). With all of these rare cystic neoplasms, careful clinical history, high-quality pancreatic imaging, and sampling of the cyst fluid for analysis will guide proper treatment.Pancreatic Lymphoma. Lymphoma can affect the pancreas. Primary involvement of the pancreas with no disease outside the pancreas also occurs. The clinical presentation often is similar to pancreatic adenocarcinoma, with vague abdominal pain and weight loss. Identification of a large mass often involving the head and body of the pancreas should raise suspicion. Percuta-neous or EUS-guided biopsy will confirm the diagnosis in most cases. If the diagnosis cannot be confirmed preoperatively, lapa-roscopic exploration and biopsy are indicated.378 There is no role for resection in the management of pancreatic lymphoma. Endoscopic stenting to relieve jaundice followed by chemo-therapy is the standard treatment, and long-term remission is often achieved.REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Silen W. Surgical anatomy of the pancreas. Surg Clin North Am. 1964;44:1253.	2.	Havel PJ, Taborsky GJ, Jr. The contribution of the autonomic nervous system to changes of glucagon and insulin secretion during hypoglycemic stress. Endocr Rev. 1989;10:332-350.	3.	Davenport HW. Pancreatic secretion. In: Davenport HN, ed. Physiology of the Digestive Tract. 5th ed. Chicago: Year Book Medical Publishers; 1982:143.	4.	Valenzuela JE, Weiner K, Saad C. Cholinergic stimulation of human pancreatic secretion. Dig Dis Sci. 1986;31:615-619.	5.	Konturek SJ, Becker HD, Thompson JC. Effect of vagotomy on hormones stimulating pancreatic secretion. Arch Surg. 1974;108:704-708.	6.	Ebert R, Creutzfeldt W. Gastrointestinal peptides and insulin secretion. Diabetes Metab Rev. 1987;3:1-26.	7.	Leahy JL, Bonner-Weir S, Weir GC. Abnormal glucose regulation of insulin secretion in models of reduced B-cell mass. Diabetes. 1984; 33:667-673.	8.	Brunicardi FC, Sun YS, Druck P, et al. Splanchnic neural regulation of insulin and glucagon secretion in the isolated perfused human pancreas. Am J Surg. 1987;153:34-40.	9.	Yamada Y, Post SR, Wang K, et al. Cloning and functional characterization of a family of human and mouse somatostatin receptors expressed in brain, gastrointestinal tract, and kidney. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992;89:251-255.	10.	Voss M, Pappas T. Pancreatic fistula. Curr Treat Options Gastroenterol. 2002;5:345-353.	11.	Floyd JC, Jr, Fajans SS, Pek S. Regulation in healthy subjects of the secretion of human pancreatic polypeptide, a newly recognized pancreatic islet polypeptide. Trans Assoc Am Physicians. 1976;89:146-158.	12.	Adrian TE, Bloom SR, Besterman HS, et al. Mechanism of pancreatic polypeptide release in man. Lancet. 1977;1:161-163.Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   150501/03/19   6:47 PM 1506SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	13.	Kono T, Wang XP, Fisher WE, Andersen DK, Brunicardi FC. Pancreatic Polypeptide (PP). In: L Martini, ed. Encyclopedia of Endocrine Diseases. Volume 3. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2004:488-496.	         14.	Andersen DK. Mechanisms and emerging treatments of the metabolic complications of chronic pancreatitis. Pancreas. 2007;35:1-5.	15.	Wierup N, Svensson H, Mulder H, Sundler F. The ghrelin cell: anovel developmentally regulated islet cell in the human pancreas. Regul Pept. 2002;107:63-69.	16.	Prado CL, Pugh-Bernard AE, Elghazi L, Sosa-Pineda B, Sussel L. Ghrelin cells replace insulin-producing beta cells in two mouse models of pancreas development. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004;101:2924-2429.	17.	Sun Y, Asnicar M, Saha PK, Chan L, Smith RG. Ablation of ghrelin improves the diabetic but not obese phenotype of ob/ob mice. Cell Metab. 2006;3:379-386.	18.	Westermark P, Wilander E, Westermark GT, et al. Islet amyloid polypeptide-like-immunoreactivity in the islet B-cells of type 2 (non-insulin-dependent) diabetic and non-diabetic individuals. Diabetologia. 1987;30:887-892.	19.	Tatemoto K, Efendic S, Mutt V, Makk G, Feistner GJ, Barchas JD. Pancreastatin, a novel pancreatic peptide that inhibits insulin secretion. Nature. 1986;324:476-478.	20.	Efendic S, Tatemoto K, Mutt V, Quan C, Chang D, Ostenson CG. Pancreastatin and islet hormone release. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1987:84:7257-7260.	21.	Funakoshi A, Miyasaka K, Nakamura R, Kitani K, Tatemoto K.  Inhibitory effect of pancreastatin on pancreatic exocrine secretion in the conscious rat. Reg Peptides. 1989;25: 157-166.	22.	Bottcher G, Sjoberg J, Ekman R, et al. PYY in the mammalian pancreas: Immunocytochemical localization and immunochemical characterization. Regul Pept. 1993; 43:115-130.	23.	Gorelick FS, Jamieson JD. Structure-function relationship of the pancreas. In: Johnson LR, ed. Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract. New York: Raven Press; 1981:773.	24.	Kennedy FP. Pathophysiology of pancreatic polypeptide secretion in human diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Nutr Metab. 1990;2:155.	25.	Petrov MS, Shanbhag S, Chakraborty M, Phillips AR, Windsor JA. Organ failure and infection of pancreatic necrosis as determinants of mortality in patients with acute pancreatitis. Gastroenterology. 2010;139:813-820.	26.	Peery AF, Dellon ES, Lund J, et al. Burden of gastrointestinal disease in the United States: 2012 update. Gastroenterology. 2012;143(5):1179-1187.	27.	Banks PA. Epidemiology, natural history, and predictors of disease outcome in acute and chronic pancreatitis. Gastrointesi Endosc. 2002;56(6 suppl):S226-S230.	28.	Akhtar AJ, Shaheen M. Extrapancreatic manifestations of acute pancreatitis in African-American and Hispanic patients. Pancreas. 2004;29(4):291-297.	29.	Lowenfels AB, Maisonneuve P. Acute pancreatitis: is smoking a risk factor for acute pancreatitis. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2011;8(11):603-604.	30.	Acosta JM, Ledesma CL. Gallstone migration as a cause of acute pancreatitis. N Engl J Med. 1974;290(9):484-487.	31.	Lee SP, Nicholls JF, Park HZ. Biliary sludge as a cause of acute pancreatitis. N Engl J Med. 1992;326(9):589-593.	32.	Lankisch PG, Apte M, Banks PA. Acute pancreatitis. Lancet. 2015;386(9988):85-96.	33.	Elmunzer BJ, Scheiman JM, Lehman GA, et al. A randomized trial of rectal indomethacin to prevent post-ERCP pancreatitis. N Engl J Med. 2012; 66:1414-1422.	34.	Akbar A, Abu Dayyeh BK, Baron TH, Wang Z, Altayar O, Murad MH. Rectal non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are superior to pancreatic duct stentsin preventing pancreatitis after endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography: a network meta-analysis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2013;13: 778-783.	35.	Whitcomb DC. Genetics of alcoholic and nonalcoholic pancreatitis. Curr Opin Gastroenterol. 2012;28(5):501-506.	36.	Saluja A, Steer M. Pathophysiology of pancreatitis. Role of cytokines and other mediators of inflammation. Digestion. 1999;60:27-33.	37.	Hofbauer B, Saluja AK, Lerch MM, et al. Intra-acinar cell activation of trypsinogen during caerulein-induced pancreatitis in rats. Am J Physiol. 1998;275(2 pt 1):G352-G362.	38.	Saluja AK, Lerch MM, Phillips PA, Dudeja V. Why does pancreatic overstimulation cause pancreatitis? Annu Rev Physiol. 2007;69:249-269.	39.	Dawra R, Sah RP, Dudeja V, et al. Intra-acinar trypsinogen activation mediates early stages of pancreatic injury but not inflammation in mice with acute pancreatitis. Gastroenterol. 2011;141(6):2210-2217 e2212.	40.	Gaiser S, Daniluk J, Liu Y, et al. Intracellular activation of trypsinogen in transgenic mice induces acute but not chronic pancreatitis. Gut. 2011;60(10):1379-1388.	41.	Whitcomb DC, Gorry MC, Preston RA, et al. Hereditary pancreatitis is caused by a mutation in the cationic trypsinogen gene. Nat Genet. 1996;14(2):141-145.	42.	Kloppel G, Dreyer T, Willemer S, et al. Human acute pancreatitis: its pathogenesis in the light of immunocytochemical and ultrastructural findings in acinar cells. Virchows Arch A Pathol Anat Histopathol. 1986;409(6):791-803.	43.	Saluja A, Saluja M, Villa A, et al. Pancreatic duct obstruction in rabbits causes digestive zymogen and lysosomal enzyme colocalization. J Clin Invest. 1989;84(4):1260-1266.	44.	Saluja AK, Saluja M, Printz H, Zavertnik A, Sengupta A, Steer ML. Experimental pancreatitis is mediated by low-affinity cholecystokinin receptors that inhibit digestive enzyme secretion. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 1989;86(22):8968-8971.	45.	Saluja A, Hashimoto S, Saluja M, et al. Subcellular redistribution of lysosomal enzymes during caerulein-induced pancreatitis. Am J Physiol. 1987;253(4 pt 1):G508-G516.	46.	Van Acker GJ, Saluja AK, Bhagat L, et al. Cathepsin B inhibition prevents trypsinogen activation and reduces pancreatitis severity. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2002;283(3):G794-G800.	47.	Halangk W, Lerch MM, Brandt-Nedelev B, et al. Role of cathepsin B in intracellular trypsinogen activation and the onset of acute pancreatitis. J Clin Invest. 2000;106(6):773-781.	48.	Saluja AK, Bhagat L, Lee HS, et al. Secretagogue-induced digestive enzyme activation and cell injury in rat pancreatic acini. Am J Physiol. 1999;276(4 pt 1):G835-G842.	49.	Fluhr G, Mayerle J, Weber E, et al. Pre-study protocol Mag-PEP: a multicentre randomized controlled trial of magnesium sulphate in the prevention of post-ERCP pancreatitis. BMC Gastroenterol. 2013;13(1):11.	50.	Talukdar R, Sareen A, Zhu H, et al. Release of cathepsin B in cytosol causes cell death in acute pancreatitis. Gastroenterology. 2016;151(4):747-758.	51.	Banks PA, Bollen TL, Dervenis C, et al. Classification of acute pancreatitis—2012: revision of the Atlanta classification and definitions by international consensus. Gut. 2013;62(1): 102-111.	52.	Windsor JA, Petrov MS. Acute pancreatitis reclassified. Commentary. Gut. 2013;62(1):4-5.	53.	Hietaranta AJ, Singh VP, Bhagat L, et al. Water immersion stress prevents caerulein-induced pancreatic acinar cell nf-kappa b activation by attenuating caerulein-induced intracellular Ca2+ changes. J Biol Chem. 2001;276(22):18742-18747.	54.	Hofbauer B, Saluja AK, Bhatia M, et al. Effect of recombinant platelet-activating factor acetylhydrolase on two models Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   150601/03/19   6:47 PM 1507PANCREASCHAPTER 33of experimental acute pancreatitis. Gastroenterology. 1998;115:1238-1247.	55.	Korhonen JT, Dudeja V, Dawra R, Kubes P, Saluja A. Neutrophil extracellular traps provide a grip on the enigmatic pathogenesis of acute pancreatitis. Gastroenterology. 2015;149(7):1682-1685.	56.	Merza M, Hartman H, Rahman M, et al. Neutrophil extracellular traps induce trypsin activation, inflammation, and tissue damage in mice with severe acute pancreatitis. Gastroenterology. 2015;149(7):1920-1931.	57.	Abu-Zidan FM, Windsor JA. Lexipafant and acute pancreatitis: a critical appraisal of the clinical trials. European Journal of Surgery. 2002;168:215-219.	58.	George J, Dixit A, Sareen A, et al. Therapeutic ADAM 10 and 17 inhibition reduces local and systemic inflammation in acute pancreatitis. Pancreas. 2016;45(10):1506-1507.	59.	Dixit A, George J, Ryu Y, Cheema H, Dudeja V, Dawra R, Saluja AK. 2016. Blocking P2 receptor by suramin reduces the severity of acute pancreatitis. Pancreas. 2016;45(10): 1502-1503.	60.	Windsor JA, Escott A, Brown L, Phillips AJP. Novel strategies for the treatment of acute pancreatitis based on the determinants of severity. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2017;32(11):1796-1803.	61.	Fanous MYZ, Phillips AJP, Windsor JA. Mesenteric lymph: the bridge to future management of critical illness. J Pancreas. 2007;8(4):374-399.	62.	Working Party of British Society of Gastroenterology, Association of Surgeons of Great Britain and Ireland, Pancreatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland, Association of Upper GI Surgeons of Great Britain and Ireland. UK guidelines for the management of acute pancreatitis. Gut. 2005;54(suppl 3):iii1-iii9.	63.	IAP/APA evidence-based guidelines for the management of acute pancreatitis. Pancreatology. 2013;13(4 suppl 2): e1-e15.	64.	Forsmark CE, Vege SS, Wilcox CM. Acute pancreatitis.  N Engl J Med. 2016;375(20):1972-1981.	65.	Windsor JA, Johnson CD, Petrov MS, Layer P, Garg PK, Papachristou GI. Classifying the severity of acute pancreatitis: towards a way forward. Pancreatology. 2015;15(2): 101-104.	66.	Whitcomb DC. Acute pancreatitis. N Engl J Med. 2006; 354:2142-2150.	67.	Papachristou GI, Muddana V, Yadav D, et al. Comparison of BISAP, Ranson’s APACHE II, and CTSI scores in predicting organ failure, complications and mortality in acute pancreatitis. Am J Gastroenterol. 2010;105(2):435-441.	68.	Mofidi R, Duff MD, Wigmore SJ, et al. Association between early systemic inflammatory response, severity of multiorgan dysfunction and death in acute pancreatitis. Br J Surg. 2006;93:738-744.	69.	Chen SM, Xiong GS, Wu SM. Is obesity an indicator of complications and mortality in acute pancreatitis? An updated meta-analysis. J Dig Dis. 2012;13:244-251.	70.	Lankisch PG, Weber-Dany B, Hebel K, Maisonneuve P, Lowenfels AB. The Harmless Acute Pancreatitis Score: a clinical algorithm for rapid initial stratification of non-severe disease. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2009;7:702-705.	71.	Windsor JA. Assessment of the severity of acute pancreatitis: no room for complacency. Pancreatology. 2008;8(2): 105-109.	72.	Petrov MS, Windsor JA. Classification of the severity of acute pancreatitis: how many categories make sense? Am J Gastroenterol. 2010;105(1):74-77.	73.	Dellinger EP, Forsmark CE, Layer P, et al. Determinants-based classification of acute pancreatitis severity: an international multidisciplinary consultation. Ann Surg. 2012;256: 875-880.	74.	Acevedo-Piedra NG, Moya-Hoyo N, Rey-Riveiro M, et al. Validation of the determinant-based classification and revision of the Atlanta classification systems for acute pancreatitis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2014;12:311-316.	75.	Gardner TB, Vege, SS, Pearson RK, Chari ST. Fluid resuscitation in acute pancreatitis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2008;6:1070-1076.	76.	Haydock M, Mittal A, Petrov M, Windsor JA. Fluid therapy in acute pancreatitis—anybody’s guess. Ann Surg. 2013; 257(2):182-188. doi: 10.1097/SLA.0b013e31827773ff	77.	Wilms H, Mittal A, Haydock MD, van den Heever M, Devaud M, Windsor JA. A systematic review of goal directed fluid therapy: rating of evidence for goals and monitoring methods. J Crit Care. 2014;29(2):204-209.	78.	Wu BU, Hwang JQ, Gardner TB, et al. Lactated Ringer’s solution reduces systemic inflammation compared with saline in patients with acute pancreatitis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2011;9(8):710-717.	79.	Al-Omran M, Albalawi ZH, Tashkandi MF, Al-Ansary LA. Enteral versus parenteral nutrition for acute pancreatitis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010;20(1):CD002837.  doi: 10.1002/14651858	80.	Bakker OJ, van Brunschot S, van Santvoort HC, et al. Early versus on-demand nasoenteric tube feeding in acute pancreatitis. N Engl J Med. 2014;371:1983-1993.	81.	Singh N, Sharma B, Sharma M, et al. Evaluation of early enteral feeding through nasogastric and nasojejunal tube in severe acute pancreatitis: a noninferiority randomized controlled trial. Pancreas. 2012;41(1):153-159.	82.	Petrov MS, Loveday BP, Pylypchuk RD, McIlroy K, Phillips AR, Windsor JA. Systematic review and meta-analysis of enteral nutrition formulations in acute pancreatitis. Br J Surg. 2009;96:1243-1252.	83.	Petrov MS, van Santvoort HC, Besselink MG, et al. Early endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography versus conservative management in acute biliary pancreatitis without cholangitis: a meta-analysis of randomized trials. Ann Surg. 2008;247(2):250-257.	84.	Kraft M, Lerch MM. Gallstone pancreatitis: when is endoscopicretrograde cholangiopancreatography truly necessary? Curr Gastroenterol Rep. 2003;5:125-132.	85.	Wittau M, Mayer B, Scheele J, et al. Systematic review and meta-analysis of antibiotic prophylaxis in severe acute pancreatitis. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2011;46(3): 261-270.	86.	Windsor JA. Infected pancreatic necrosis: drain first, but do it better. HPB (Oxford). 2011;13(6):367-368.	87.	Van Baal MC, van Santvoort HC, Bollen TL, et al. Systematic review of percutaneous catheter drainage as primary treatment for necrotizing pancreatitis. Br J Surg. 2011;98(1):18-27.	88.	Freeman M, Werner J, van Santvoort HC, et al. Interventions for necrotizing pancreatitis: summary of a multidisciplinary consensus conference. Pancreas. 2012;41:1176-1194.	89.	Loveday BP, Petrov MS, Connor S, et al. A comprehensive classification of invasive procedures for treating the local complications of acute pancreatitis based on visualization, route and purpose. Pancreatology. 2011;11(4):406-413.	90.	Van Santvoort HC, Besselink MG, Bakker OJ, et al. A step-up approach or open necrosectomy for necrotizing pancreatitis.  N Engl J Med. 2010;362(16):1491-1502.	91.	Bakker OJ, van Santvoort HC, van Brunschot S, et al. Endoscopic transgastric versus surgical necrosectomy for infected necrotizing pancreatitis: a randomized trial. JAMA. 2012;307:1053-1061.	92.	Nealon WH, Walser E. Main pancreatic ductal anatomy can direct choice of modality for treating pancreatic pseudocysts (surgery versus percutaneous drainage). Ann Surg. 2002;235(6): 751-758.Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   150701/03/19   6:47 PM 1508SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	93.	Johnson CD, Abu-Hilal M. Persistent organ failure during the first week as a marker of fatal outcome in acute pancreatitis. Gut. 2004;53:1340-1344.	94.	Van Baal MC, Besselink MG, Bakker OJ, et al. Timing of cholecystectomy after mild biliary pancreatitis: a systematic review. Ann Surg. 2012;255(5):860-866.	95.	Das SLM, Singh PP, Phillips ARJ, Murphy R, Windsor JA, Petrov MS. Newly diagnosed diabetes mellitus after acute pancreatitis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Gut. 2014;63(5):818-831.	96.	Skyhoj J, Olsen T. The incidence and clinical relevance of chronic inflammation in the pancreas in autopsy material. Acta Pathol Microbiol Scand. 1978;86:361-365.	97.	Zdankiewicz PD, Andersen DK. Pancreatitis in the elderly. In: Rosenthal R, Katlic M, Zenilman ME, eds. Principles and Practice of Geriatric Surgery. New York: Springer-Verlag; 2001:740.	98.	Worning H. Incidence and prevalence of chronic pancreatitis. In: Beger HG, Buchler M, Ditschuneit H, eds. Chronic Pancreatitis. Berlin: Springer-Verlag; 1990:8.	99.	Comfort MW, Steinberg AG. Pedigree of a family with hereditary chronic relapsing pancreatitis. Gastroenterol. 1952;21:54-63.	100.	Tomsik H, Gress T, Adler G. Hereditary pancreatitis. In: Beger HG, et al, eds. The Pancreas. London: Blackwell-Science; 1998:355.	101.	Whitcomb DC, Preston RA, Aston CE, et al. A gene for hereditary pancreatitis maps to chromosome 7q35. Gastroenterology. 1996;110:1975-1980.	102.	Le Bodic L, Bignon JD, Raguenes O, et al. The hereditary pancreatitis gene maps to long arm of chromosome 7. Hum Mol Genet. 1996;5:549-554.	103.	Whitcomb DC. Hereditary diseases of the pancreas. In: Yamada T, Alpers DH, Laine L, et al, eds. Textbook of Gastroenterology. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2002:2147.	104.	Masson E, Le Marechal C, Delcenserie R, et al. Hereditary pancreatitis caused by a double gain-of-function trypsinogen mutation. Hum Genet. 2008;123:521-529.	105.	Witt H, Luck W, Hennies HC, et al. Mutations in the gene encoding the serine protease inhibitor, Kazal type 1 are associated with chronic pancreatitis. Nat Genet. 2000; 25:213-216.	106.	Hassan Z, Mohan V, Ali L, et al. SPINK1 is a susceptibility gene for fibrocalculous pancreatic diabetes in subjects from the Indian subcontinent. Am J Hum Genet. 2002;71:964-968.	107.	Schneider A, Suman A, Rossi L, et al. SPINK1/PSTI mutations are associated with tropical pancreatitis and type II diabetes mellitus in Bangladesh. Gastroenterol. 2002;123:1026-1030.	108.	Chen JM, Mercier B, Audrezet MP, et al. Mutational analysis of the human pancreatic secretory trypsin inhibitor (PSTI) gene in hereditary and sporadic chronic pancreatitis. J Med Genet. 2000;37:67.	109.	Pfutzer RH, Barmada MM, Brunskill AP, et al. SPINK1/PSTI polymorphisms act as disease modifiers in familial and idiopathic chronic pancreatitis. Gastroenterol. 2000;119:615-623.	110.	Cohn JA, Friedman KJ, Noone PG, Knowles MR, Silverman LM, Jowell PS. Relation between mutations of the cystic fibrosis gene and idiopathic pancreatitis. N Engl J Med. 1998;339:653-658.	111.	Whitcomb DC, LaRusch J, Krasinskas AM, et al. Com-mon genetic variants in the CLDN2 and PRSS1-PRSS2 loci alter risk for alcohol-related and sporadic pancreatitis. Nat Genet. 2012;44(12):1349-1356.	112.	Friedreich N. Disease of the pancreas. In: Ziemssen H, ed. Cyclopedia of the Practice of Medicine. New York: William Wood; 1878:549.	113.	Worning H. Alcoholic chronic pancreatitis. In: Beger HG, et al, eds. The Pancreas. London: Blackwell Sciences; 1998:672.	114.	Durbec JP, Sarles H. Multicenter survey of the etiology of pancreatic diseases. Relationship between the relative risk of developing chronic pancreatitis and alcohol, protein, and lipid consumption. Digestion. 1978;18:337-350.	115.	Lankisch PG, Lowenfels AB, Maisonneuve P. What is the risk of alcoholic pancreatitis in heavy drinkers? Pancreas. 2002;25:411-412.	116.	Layer P, Yamamoto H, Kalthoff L, Clain JE, Bakken LJ, DiMagno EP. The different courses of early and late-onset idiopathic and alcoholic chronic pancreatitis. Gastroenterol. 1994;107:1481-1487.	117.	Comfort MW, Gambrill EE, Baggenstoss AH. Chronic relapsing pancreatitis. A study of twenty-nine cases without associated disease of the biliary or gastro-intestinal tract. Gastroenterology. 1968;4:760-765.	118.	Kondo T, Hayakawa T, Shibata T, et al. Aberrant pancreas is not susceptible to alcoholic pancreatitis. Int J Pancreatol. 1991;8:245-252.	119.	Apte MV, Wilson JS. Alcohol-induced pancreatic injury. Best Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol. 2003;17:593-612.	120.	Niebergall-Roth E, Harder H, Singer MV. A review: acute and chronic effects of ethanol and alcoholic beverages on the pancreatic exocrine secretion in vivo and in vitro. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 1998;22:1570-1583.	121.	Sarles H, Bernard JP, Johnson C. Pathogenesis and epidemiology of chronic pancreatitis. Annu Rev Med. 1989;40:453-468.	122.	Imoto M, DiMagno EP. Cigarette smoking increases the risk of pancreatic calcification in late-onset but not early-onset idiopathic chronic pancreatitis. Pancreas. 2000;21:115-119.	123.	Rebours V, Vullierme MP, Hentic O, et al. Smoking and the course of recurrent acute and chronic alcoholic pancreatitis: adose-dependent relationship. Pancreas. 2012;41(8):1219-1224.	124.	Lowenfels AB, Maisonneuve P, Whitcomb DC. Risk factors for cancer in hereditary pancreatitis. International Hereditary Pancreatitis Study Group. Med Clin North Am. 2000;84:565-575.	125.	Goebell H, Steffen C, Baltzer G, et al. Stimulation of pancreatic secretion of enzymes by acute hypercalcaemia in man. Eur J Clin Invest. 1973;3:98-104.	126.	Bess MA, Edis AJ, van Heerden JA. Hyperparathyroidism and pancreatitis. Chance or a causal association? JAMA. 1980;243:246-247.	127.	Glueck CJ, Lang J, Hamer T, et al. Severe hypertriglyceridemia and pancreatitis when estrogen replacement therapy is given to hypertriglyceridemic women. J Lab Clin Med. 1994; 123:59-64.	128.	Etemad B, Whitcomb DC. Chronic pancreatitis: diagnosis, classification, and new genetic developments. Gastroenterol. 2001;120:682-707.	129.	Singer MV, Chari ST. Classification of chronic pancreatitis. In: Beger HG, et al, eds. The Pancreas. London: Blackwell-Science; 1998:665.	130.	Othersen HB, Jr, Moore FT, Boles ET. Traumatic pancreatitis and pseudocyst in childhood. J Trauma. 1968;8:535-546.	131.	Warshaw AL. Pancreas divisum and pancreatitis. In: Beger HG, et al, eds. The Pancreas. London: Blackwell-Science; 1998:364.	132.	Delhaye M, Engelholm L, Cremer M. Pancreas divisum: congenital anatomic variant or anomaly? Contribution of endoscopic retrograde dorsal pancreatography. Gastroenterol. 1985;89:951-958.	133.	Sugawa C, Walt AJ, Nunez DC, et al. Pancreas divisum: is it a normal anatomic variant? Am J Surg. 1987;153:62-67.Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   150801/03/19   6:47 PM 1509PANCREASCHAPTER 33	134.	Bertin C, Pellitier AL, Vullierme MP, et al. Pancreas divisum is not a cause of pancreatitis itself but acts as a partner of genetic mutations. Am J Gastroenterol. 2012;107(2):311-317.	135.	Yoshida K, Toki F, Takeuchi T, Watanabe S, Shiratori K, Hayashi N. Chronic pancreatitis caused by an autoimmune abnormality. Proposal of the concept of autoimmune pancreatitis. Dig Dis Sci. 1995;40:1561-1568.	136.	Ito T, Nakano I, Koyanagi S, et al. Autoimmune pancreatitis as a new clinical entity. Three cases of autoimmune pancreatitis with effective steroid therapy. Dig Dis Sci. 1997;42:1458-1468.	137.	Ko SB, Mizuno M, Yatabe Y, et al. Corticosteroids cor-rect aberrant CFTR localization in the duct and generate acinar cells in auto-immune pancreatitis. Gastroenterol. 2010;138(5):1988-1996.	138.	Stathopoulos G, Nourmand AD, Blackstone M, et al. Rapidly progressive sclerosing cholangitis following surgical treatment of pancreatic pseudotumor. J Clin Gastroenterol. 1995;21:143-148.	139.	Mohan V, Pitchumoni CS. Tropical chronic pancreatitis. In: Beger HG, et al, eds. The Pancreas. London: Blackwell-Science; 1998:688.	140.	Pitchumoni CS, Jain NK, Lowenfels AB, DiMagno EP. Chronic cyanide poisoning: unifying concept for alcoholic and tropical pancreatitis. Pancreas. 1988;3:220-222.	141.	Mohapatra S, Majumder S, Smyrk TC, et al. Diabetes mellitus is associated with an exocrine pancreatopathy. Conclusions from a review of literature. Pancreas. 2016;45(8):1104-1110.	142.	Majumder S, Zhang L, Philip N, et al. Exocrine pancreatopathy (EP) associated with diabetes mellitus (DM) is histologically distinct from chronic pancreatitis (CP): an international mulit-reader blinded study. Gastroenterol. 2016;150(4)suppl 1:S191 (abstr).	143.	Layer P, Kalthoff L, Clain JE, et al. Nonalcoholic chronic pancreatitis: two diseases? Dig Dis Sci. 1985;30:980-985.	144.	Ammann RW. Chronic pancreatitis in the elderly. Gastroenterol Clin North Am. 1990;19:905-914.	145.	Sinha A, Patel YA, Cruise M, et al. Preditors of post-operative pain relief in patients with chronic pancreatitis undergoing the Frey or Whipple procedure. J Gastrointest Surg. 2016;20:734-740.	146.	Cohn JA, Bornstein JD, Jowell PS, et al. Cystic fibrosis mutations and genetic predisposition to idiopathic chronic pancreatitis. Med Clin North Am. 2000;84:621-631.	147.	Kloppel G, Maillet B. Pathology of chronic pancreatitis. In: Beger HG, et al, eds. The Pancreas. London: Blackwell-Science; 1998:720.	148.	Nagai H, Ohtsubo K. Pancreatic lithiasis in the aged. Its clinicopathology and pathogenesis. Gastroenterol. 1984;86:331-338.	149.	Apte MV, Wilson JS. Stellate cell activation in alcoholic pancreatitis. Pancreas. 2003;27:316-320.	150.	McCarroll J, Phillips P, Santucci N, et al. Vitamin A induces quiescence in culture-activated pancreatic stellate cells—potential as an antifibrotic agent. Pancreas. 2003;27:396 (abstr).	151.	Schneider A, Whitcomb DC. Hereditary pancreatitis: a model for inflammatory diseases of the pancreas. Best Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol. 2002;16:347-363.	152.	Guy O, Robles-Diaz G, Adrich Z, Sahel J, Sarles H. Protein content of precipitates present in pancreatic juice of alcoholic subjects and patients with chronic calcifying pancreatitis. Gastroenterology. 1983;84:102-107.	153.	Sarles H, Dagorn JC, Giorgi D, Bernard JP. Renaming pancreatic stone protein as “lithostathine.” Gastroenterol. 1990;99:900-901.	154.	Watanabe T, Yonekura H, Terazono K, Yamamoto H, Okamoto H. Complete nucleotide sequence of human reg gene and its expression in normal and tumoral tissues. The reg protein, pancreatic stone protein, and pancreatic thread protein are one and the same product of the gene. J Biol Chem. 1990;265:7432-7439.	155.	Giorgi D, Bernard JP, Rouquier S, Iovanna J, Sarles H, Dagorn JC. Secretory pancreatic stone protein messenger RNA. Nucleotide sequence and expression in chronic calcifying pancreatitis. J Clin Invest. 1989;84:100-106.	156.	Goggin P, Johnson P. Pancreatic stones. In: Beger HG, et al, eds. The Pancreas. London: Blackwell-Science; 1998:711.	157.	Warshaw AL, Simeone J, Schapiro RH, Hedberg SE, Mueller PE, Ferrucci JT, Jr. Objective evaluation of ampullary stenosis with ultrasonography and pancreatic stimulation. Am J Surg. 1985;149:65-72.	158.	Freeny P. Radiology. In: Beger HG, et al, eds. The Pancreas. London: Blackwell-Science; 1998:728.	159.	Catalano MF, Lahoti S, Geenen JE, et al. Prospective evaluation of endoscopic ultrasonography, endoscopic retrograde pancreatography, and secretin test in the diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis. Gastrointest Endosc. 1998;48:11-17.	160.	Kahl S, Glasbrenner B, Leodolter A, Pross M, Schulz HU, Malfertheiner P. EUS in the diagnosis of early chronic pancreatitis: a prospective follow-up study. Gastrointest Endosc. 2002;55:507-511.	161.	Freeman ML, DiSario JA, Nelson DB, et al: Risk factors for post-ERCP pancreatitis: a prospective, multicenter study. Gastrointest Endosc. 2001;54:425-434.	162.	Nealon WH, Matin S. Analysis of surgical success in preventing recurrent acute exacerbations in chronic pancreatitis. Ann Surg. 2001;233:793.	163.	Cooper M, Makary MA, Ng Y, et al. Extent of pancreatic fibrosis as a determinant of symptom resolution after the Frey procedure: a clinico-pathologic analysis. J Gastrointest Surg. 2013;17(4):682-687.	164.	Ammann RW, Akovbiantz A, Largiader F, et al. Course and outcome of chronic pancreatitis. Longitudinal study of a mixed medical-surgical series of 245 patients. Gastroenterol. 1984;86:820-828.	165.	Bockman DE, Buchler M, Malfertheiner P, et al. Analysis of nerves in chronic pancreatitis. Gastroenterol. 1988;94: 1459-1469.	166.	Anaparthy R, Pasricha PJ. Pain and chronic pancreatitis: is it the plumbing or the wiring? Curr Gastroenterol Rep. 2008;10(2):101-106.	167.	Poulsen JL, Olesen SS, Frøkjaer et al. Pain and chronic pan-creatitis: a complex interplay of multiple mechanisms. World J Gastroenterol. 2013;19:7282-7291.	168.	Olesen SS, Juel J, Graversen C, et al. Pharmacological pain management in chronic pancreatitis. World J Gastroenterol. 2013;19:7292-7301.	169.	Grosen K, Olesen AE, Gram M, et al. Predictors of opioid effi-cacy in patients with chronic pain: a prospective multicenter observational cohort study. PLoS One. 2017;12(2): e0171723.	170.	DiMagno EP, Go VL, Summerskill WH. Relations between pancreatic enzyme outputs and malabsorption in severe pancreatic insufficiency. N Engl J Med. 1973;288:813-815.	171.	Rothenbacher D, Low M, Hardt PD, et al. Prevalence and determinants of exocrine pancreatic insufficiency among older adults: results of a population-based study. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2005;40(6):697-704.	172.	Dutta SK, Russell RM, Iber FL. Influence of exocrine pancreatic insufficiency on the intraluminal pH of the proximal small intestine. Dig Dis Sci. 1979;24:529-534.	173.	DiMagno MJ, DiMagno EP. Chronic pancreatitis. Curr Opin Gastroenterol. 2012;28(5):523-531.	174.	Malka D, Hammel P, Sauvanet A, et al. Risk factors for diabetes mellitus in chronic pancreatitis. Gastroenterol. 2000;119(5):1324-1332.Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   150901/03/19   6:47 PM 1510SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	175.	Couet C, Genton P, Pointel JP, et al. The prevalence of retinopathy is similar in diabetes mellitus secondary to chronic pancreatitis with or without pancreatectomy and in idiopathic diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Care. 1985;8:323-328.	176.	Hardt P, Brendel MD, Kloer HU, Bretzel RG. Is pancreatic diabetes (type 3c diabetes) underdiagnosed and misdiagnosed? Diabetes Care. 2008;31(suppl 2):S165-S169.	177.	Slezak LA, Andersen DK. Pancreatic resection: effects on glucose metabolism. World J Surg. 2001;25:452-460.	178.	Cui Y, Andersen DK. Pancreatogenic diabetes: special considerations for management. Pancreatol. 2011;11: 279-294.	179.	Seymour NE, Volpert AR, Lee EL, Andersen DK, Hernandez C.  Alterations in hepatocyte insulin binding in chronic pancreatitis: effects of pancreatic polypeptide. Am J Surg. 1995;169:105-109, discussion 110.	180.	Brunicardi FC, Chaiken RL, Ryan AS, et al. Pancreatic polypeptide administration improves abnormal glucose metabolism in patients with chronic pancreatitis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1996;81(10):3566-3572.	181.	Rabiee A, Galiatsatos P, Salas-Carrillo R, et al. Pancreatic polypeptide administration enhances insulin sensitivity and reduces the insulin requirement of patients on insulin pump therapy. J Diabetes Sci Technol. 2011;5(6):1521-1528.	182.	Gyr K, Agrawal NM, Felsenfeld O, Font RG. Comparative study of secretin and Lundh tests. Am J Dig Dis. 1975;20:506-512.	183.	Somogyi L, Cintron M, Toskes PP. Synthetic porcine secretin is highly accurate in pancreatic function testing in individuals with chronic pancreatitis. Pancreas. 2000;21:262-265.	184.	Denyer ME, Cotton PB. Pure pancreatic juice studies in normal subjects and patients with chronic pancreatitis. Gut. 1979;20:89-97.	185.	Tanner AR, Fisher D, Ward C, et al. An evaluation of the one-day NBT-PABA/14C-PABA in the assessment of pancreatic exocrine insufficiency. Digestion. 1984;29:42-46.	186.	Brugge W, Goff JS, Allen N. Development of a dual label Schilling test for pancreatic exocrine function based on the differential absorption of cobalamin malabsorption in pancreatic insufficiency. J Clin Invest. 1978;61:47-54.	187.	Haverback B, Dyce B, Gutentag P. Measurement of trypsin and chymotrypsin in stool: a diagnostic test for pancreatic exocrine function. Gastroenterology. 1986;44:588-597.	188.	Gullo L, Ventrucci M, Tomassetti P, Migliori M, Pezzilli R. Fecal elastase 1 determination in chronic pancreatitis. Dig Dis Sci. 1999;44:210-213.	189.	Hardt PD, Hauenschild A, Nalop J, et al. High prevalence of exocrine pancreatic insufficiency in diabetes mellitus. A multicenter study screening fecal elastase 1 concentrations in 1,021 diabetic patients. Pancreatol. 2003;3:395-402.	190.	DiMagno MJ, DiMagno EP. Chronic pancreatitis. Curr Opin Gastroenterol. 2010;26:490-498.	191.	Axon AT, Classen M, Cotton PB, et al. Pancreatography in chronic pancreatitis: international definitions. Gut. 1984; 25:1107-1112.	192.	Catanzaro A, Richardson S, Veloso H, et al. Long-term follow-up of patients with clinically indeterminate suspicion of pancreatic cancer and normal EUS. Gastrointest Endosc. 2003;58: 836-840.	193.	Lowenfels AB, Maisonneuve P, Cavallini G, et al. Prognosis of chronic pancreatitis: an international multicenter study. International Pancreatitis Study Group. Am J Gastroenterol. 1994;89:1467-1471.	194.	Miyake H, Harada H, Kunichika K, Ochi K, Kimura I. Clinical course and prognosis of chronic pancreatitis. Pancreas. 1987;2:378-385.	195.	Frey CF, Child CG, Fry W. Pancreatectomy for chronic pancreatitis. Ann Surg. 1976;184:403-413.	196.	Lowenfels AB, Maisonneuve P, Cavallini G, et al. Pancreatitis and the risk of pancreatic cancer. International Pancreatitis Study Group. N Engl J Med. 1993:328(20): 1433-1437.	197.	Liao KF, Lai SW, Li CI, Chen WC. Diabetes mellitus correlates with increased risk of pancreatic cancer: a population-based cohort study in Taiwan. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2012;27(4): 709-713.	198.	Brodovicz KG, Kou TD, Alexander CM, et al. Impact of dia-betes duration and chronic pancreatitis on the associa-tion between type 2 diabetes and pancreatic cancer risk. Diab Obes Metab. 2012;14:1123-1128.	199.	Aspelund G, Topazian MD, Lee JH, Andersen DK. Improved outcomes for benign disease with limited pancreatic head resection. J Gastrointest Surg. 2005;9:400-409.	200.	Sankaran S, Walt AJ. The natural and unnatural history of pancreatic pseudocysts. Br J Surg. 1975;62:37-44.	201.	Yeo CJ, Bastidas JA, Lynch-Nyhan A, Fishman EK, Zinner MJ, Cameron JL. The natural history of pancreatic pseudocysts documented by computed tomography. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1990;170:411-417.	202.	Goulet RJ, Goodman J, Schaffer R, Dallemand S, Andersen DK. Multiple pancreatic pseudocyst disease. Ann Surg. 1984;199:6-13.	203.	Vitas GJ, Sarr MG. Selected management of pancreatic pseudocysts: operative versus expectant management. Surgery. 1992;111:123-130.	204.	Warshaw AL, Jin GL, Ottinger LW. Recognition and clinical implications of mesenteric and portal vein obstruction in chronic pancreatitis. Arch Surg. 1987;122:410-415.	205.	Warshaw AL, Rattner DW. Timing of surgical drainage for pancreatic pseudocyst. Clinical and chemical criteria. Ann Surg. 1985;202:720-724.	206.	Baron TH, Harewood GC, Morgan DE, et al. Outcome differences after endoscopic drainage of pancreatic necrosis, acute pancreatic pseudocysts, and chronic pancreatic pseudocysts. Gastrointest Endosc. 2002;56:7-17.	207.	Kozarek RA, Brayko CM, Harlan J, et al. Endoscopic drainage of pancreatic pseudocysts. Gastrointest Endosc. 1985;31:322-327.	208.	Bell RH, Jr. Atlas of pancreatic surgery. In: Bell RH, Jr, Rikkers LF, Mulholland MW, eds. Digestive Tract Surgery. A Text and Atlas. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven; 1996:963.	209.	Park AE, Heniford BT. Therapeutic laparoscopy of the pancreas. Ann Surg. 2002;236:149-158.	210.	Hawes RH. Endoscopic management of pseudocysts. Rev Gastroenterol Disord. 2003;3:135-141.	211.	Heider R, Meyer AA, Galanko JA, et al. Percutaneous drainage of pancreatic pseudocysts is associated with a higher failure rate than surgical treatment in unselected patients. Ann Surg. 1999;229:781-787.	212.	Rao R, Fedorak I, Prinz RA. Effect of failed computed tomography-guided and endoscopic drainage on pancreatic pseudocyst management. Surgery. 1993;114:843-847, discussion 847-849.	213.	Lipsett PA, Cameron JL. Internal pancreatic fistula. Am J Surg. 1992;163:216-220.	214.	Uchiyama T, Suzuki T, Adachi A, et al. Pancreatic pleural effusion: case report and review of 113 cases in Japan. Am J Gastroenterol. 1992;87:387-391.	215.	Lipsett PA, Cameron JL. Treatment of ascites and fistulas. In: Beger HG et al, eds. The Pancreas. London: Blackwell-Science; 1998:788.	216.	Beger H, Schlosser W, Poch B, et al. Inflammatory mass in the head of the pancreas. In: Beger HG et al, eds. The Pancreas. London: Blackwell-Science; 1998:757.Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   151001/03/19   6:47 PM 1511PANCREASCHAPTER 33	217.	Friess H, Yamanaka Y, Buchler M, et al. A subgroup of patients with chronic pancreatitis overexpress the c-erb B-2 protooncogene. Ann Surg. 1994;220:183-192.	218.	Sakorafas GH, Sarr MG, Farley DR, et al. The significance of sinistral portal hypertension complicating chronic pancreatitis. Am J Surg. 2000;179:129-133.	219.	Amann ST, Toskes PP. Analgesic treatment. In: Beger HG et al, eds. The Pancreas. London: Blackwell-Science; 1998:766.	220.	Forsmark CE. Management of chronic pancreatitis. Gastroenterol. 2013;144:1282-1291.	221.	Halgreen H, Pedersen NT, Worning H. Symptomatic effect of pancreatic enzyme therapy in patients with chronic pancreatitis. Scand J Gastroenterol. 1986;21:104-108.	222.	Hildebrand P, Ensinck JW, Gyr K, et al. Evidence for hormonal inhibition of exocrine pancreatic function by somatostatin 28 in humans. Gastroenterol. 1992;103:240-247.	223.	Toskes PP, Forsmark CE, DeMeo MT, et al. A multicenter controlled trial of octreotide for pain of chronic pancreatitis. Pancreas. 1993;8:774.	224.	Malfertheiner P, Mayer D, Buchler M, et al. Treatment of pain in chronic pancreatitis by inhibition of pancreatic secretion with octreotide. Gut. 1995;36:450-454.	225.	Lieb JG, Shuster JJ, Theriaque D, et al. A pilot study of octreotide LAR vs. octreotide tid for pain and quality of life in chronic pancreatitis. J Pancreas. 2009;10:518-522.	226.	Gress F, Schmitt C, Sherman S, et al. Endoscopic ultrasound-guided celiac plexus block for managing abdominal pain associated with chronic pancreatitis: a prospective single center experience. Am J Gastroenterol. 2001;96:409-416.	227.	Jacob L, Geenen JE, Catalano MF, Geenen DJ. Prevention of pancreatitis in patients with idiopathic recurrent pancreatitis: aprospective nonblinded randomized study using endoscopic stents. Endoscopy. 2001;33:559-562.	228.	Aizawa T, Ueno N. Stent placement in the pancreatic duct prevents pancreatitis after endoscopic sphincter dilation for removal of bile duct stones. Gastrointest Endosc. 2001;54:209-213.	229.	Lau ST, Simchuk EJ, Kozarek RA, et al. A pancreatic ductal leak should be sought to direct treatment in patients with acute pancreatitis. Am J Surg. 2001;181:411-415.	230.	Canty TG, Sr, Weinman D. Management of major pancreatic duct injuries in children. J Trauma. 2001;50:1001-1007.	231.	Kim HS, Lee DK, Kim IW, et al. The role of endoscopic retrograde pancreatography in the treatment of traumatic pancreatic duct injury. Gastrointest Endosc. 2001;54:49-55.	232.	Heyries L, Barthet M, Delvasto C, et al. Long-term results of endoscopic management of pancreas divisum with recurrent acute pancreatitis. Gastrointest Endosc. 2002;55:376-381.	233.	Gabbrielli A, Mutignani M, Pandolfi M, et al. Endotherapy of early onset idiopathic chronic pancreatitis: results with long-term follow-up. Gastrointest Endosc. 2002;55:488-493.	234.	Kozarek RA, Brandabur JJ, Ball TJ, et al. Clinical outcomes in patients who undergo extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy for chronic calcific pancreatitis. Gastrointest Endosc. 2002;56:496-500.	235.	Nealon WH, Thompson JC. Progressive loss of pancreatic function in chronic pancreatitis is delayed by main pancreatic duct decompression. A longitudinal prospective analysis of the modified puestow procedure. Ann Surg. 1993;217:458-466; discussion 466-468.	236.	Andersen DK, Frey CF. The evolution of the surgery for chronic pancreatitis. Ann Surg. 2010;251(1):18-32.	237.	Link G. The treatment of chronic pancreatitis by pancreatostomy: a new operation. Ann Surg. 1911;53:768-782.	238.	Link G. Long term outcome of pancreatostomy for chronic pancreatitis. Ann Surg. 1935;101:287.	239.	Priestley JT, Comfort MW, Radcliffe J. Total pancreatectomy for hyperinsulinism due to an islet-cell adenoma: survival and cure at sixteen months after operation presentation of metabolic studies. Ann Surg. 1944;119:211-221.	240.	Whipple AO. Radical surgery for certain cases of pancreatic fibrosis associated with calcareous deposits. Ann Surg. 1946;124:991-1008.	241.	Fry WJ, Child CG III. Ninety-five per cent distal pancreatectomy for chronic pancreatitis. Ann Surg. 1965;162:543-549.	242.	Moody FG, Calabuig R, Vecchio R, et al. Stenosis of the sphincter of Oddi. Surg Clin North Am. 1990;70:1341-1354.	243.	Cattell RB. Anastomosis of the duct of Wirsung in palliative operation for carcinoma of the head of the pancreas. Surg Clin North Am. 1947;27:636-643.	244.	Duval MK, Jr. Caudal pancreatico-jejunostomy for chronic relapsing pancreatitis. Ann Surg. 1954;140:775-785.	245.	Zollinger RM, Keith LM, Jr, Ellison EH. Pancreatitis. N Engl J Med. 1954;251:497-502.	246.	Puestow CB, Gillesby WJ. Retrograde surgical drainage of pancreas for chronic relapsing pancreatitis. AMA Arch Surg. 1958;76:898-907.	247.	Partington PF, Rochelle RE. Modified Puestow procedure for retrograde drainage of the pancreatic duct. Ann Surg. 1960;152:1037-1043.	248.	Eleftheriadis N, Dinu F, Delhaye M. Long-term outcome after pancreatic stenting in severe chronic pancreatitis. Endoscopy. 2005;37:223-230.	249.	Gabbrielli A, Pandolfi M, Mutignani M, et al. Efficacy of main pancreatic-duct endoscopic drainage in patients with chronic pancreatitis, continuous pain, and dilated duct. Gastrointest Endosc. 2009;61:576-581.	250.	Morgan DE, Smith JK, Hawkins K, Wilcox CM. Endoscopic stent therapy in advanced chronic pancreatitis: relationships between ductal changes, clinical response, and stent patency. Am J Gastroenterol. 2003;98:821-826.	251.	Rosch T, Daniel S, Scholz M, et al. Endoscopic treatment of chronic pancreatitis: a multicenter study of 1000 patients with long-term follow-up. Endoscopy. 2002;34:765-771.	252.	Ponchon T, Bory RM, Hedelius F, et al. Endoscopic stenting for pain relief in chronic pancreatitis: results of a standardized protocol. Gastrointest Endosc. 1995;42:452-456.	253.	Vitale GC, Cothron K, Vitale EA, et al. Role of pancreatic duct stenting in the treatment of chronic pancreatitis. Surg Endosc. 2004;18:1431-1434.	254.	Bradley EL III. Long-term results of pancreatojejunostomy in patients with chronic pancreatitis. Am J Surg. 1987;153:207-213.	255.	Cahen DL, Gouma DJ, Nio Y, et al. Endoscopic versus surgical drainage of the pancreatic duct in chronic pancreatitis. N Engl J Med. 2007;356:676-684.	256.	Dite P, Ruzicka M, Zboril V, Novotny I. A prospective randomized trial comparing endoscopic and surgical therapy for chronic pancreatitis. Endoscopy. 2003;35:553-558.	257.	Aldridge MC, Williamson RC. Distal pancreatectomy with and without splenectomy. Br J Surg. 1991;78:976-979.	258.	Khanna A, Koniaris LG, Nakeeb A, et al. Laparoscopic spleen-preserving distal pancreatectomy. J Gastrointest Surg. 2005;9:733-738.	259.	Traverso LW, Longmire WP, Jr. Preservation of the pylorus in pancreaticoduodenectomy. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1978; 146:959-962.	260.	Huang JJ, Yeo CJ, Sohn TA, et al. Quality of life and outcomes after pancreaticoduodenectomy. Ann Surg. 2000;231:890-898.	261.	Sakorafas GH, Farnell MB, Nagorney DM, et al. Pancreato-duodenectomy for chronic pancreatitis: long-term results in 105 patients. Arch Surg. 2000;135:517-522; discussion 523.	262.	Jimenez RE, Fernandez-del Castillo C, Rattner DW,  et al. Outcome of pancreaticoduodenectomy with pylorus Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   151101/03/19   6:47 PM 1512SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIpreservation or with antrectomy in the treatment of chronic pancreatitis. Ann Surg. 2000;231:293-300.	263.	Mannell A, Adson MA, McIlrath DC, et al. Surgical management of chronic pancreatitis: long-term results in 141 patients. Br J Surg. 1988;75:467-472.	264.	Gall FP, Muhe E, Gebhardt C. Results of partial and total pancreaticoduodenectomy in 117 patients with chronic pancreatitis. World J Surg. 1981;5:269-275.	265.	Beger HG, Witte C, Krautzberger W, et al. Experiences with duodenum-sparing pancreas head resection in chronic pancreatitis. Chirurg. 1980;51:303-307.	266.	Beger HG, Krautzberger W, Bittner R, et al. Duodenum-preserving resection of the head of the pancreas in patients with severe chronic pancreatitis. Surgery. 1985;97:467.	267.	Beger HG, Schlosser W, Friess HM, et al. Duodenum-preserving head resection in chronic pancreatitis changes the natural course of the disease: a single-center 26-year experience. Ann Surg. 1999;230:512-519; discussion 519.	268.	Buchler MW, Friess H, Muller MW, et al. Randomized trial of duodenum-preserving pancreatic head resection versus pylorus-preserving Whipple in chronic pancreatitis. Am J Surg. 1995;169:65-69; discussion 69-70.	269.	Frey CF, Smith GJ. Description and rationale of a new operation for chronic pancreatitis. Pancreas. 1987;2:701-707.	270.	Frey CF, Amikura K. Local resection of the head of the pancreas combined with longitudinal pancreaticojejunostomy in the management of patients with chronic pancreatitis. Ann Surg. 1994;220:492-504; discussion 504-507.	271.	Andersen DK, Topazian MD. Pancreatic head excavation: a variation on the theme of duodenum-preserving pancreatic head resection. Arch Surg. 2004;139:375-379.	272.	Izbicki JR, Strate T, Yekebas EE, et al. Chronic pancreatitis. In: Yeo CJ, Dempsey DT, Klein AS, et al, eds. Shackleford’s Surgery of the Alimentary Tract. 6th ed. New York: Saunders; 2007:1218.	273.	Ho HS, Frey CF. The Frey procedure: combined local resection  of the head of the pancreas with longitudinal pancreaticojeju-nostomy. Operat Tech Gen Surg. 2001;4:153-167.	274.	Ho HS, Frey CF. The Frey procedure: local resection of pancreatic head combined with lateral pancreaticojejunostomy. Arch Surg. 2001;136:1353-1358.	275.	Farkas G, Leindler L, Daroczi M, et al. Organ-preserving pancreatic head resection in chronic pancreatitis. Br J Surg. 2003;90:2-32.	276.	Farkas G, Leindler L, Daroczi M, Farkas G, Jr. Prospective randomised comparison of organ-preserving pancreatic head resection with pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy. Langenbecks Arch Surg. 2006;391:338-342.	277.	Gloor B, Friess H, Uhl W, et al. A modified technique of the Beger and Frey procedure in patients with chronic pancreatitis. Dig Surg. 2001;18:21-25.	278.	Koninger J, Seiler CM, Sauerland S, et al. Duodenum-preserving pancreatic head resection—a randomized controlled trial comparing the original Beger procedure with the Berne modification (ISRCTN No. 50638764). Surgery. 2008;143:490-498.	279.	Izbicki JR, Bloechle C, Broering DC, et al. Extended drainage versus resection in surgery for chronic pancreatitis: a prospective randomized trial comparing the longitudinal pancreaticojejunostomy combined with local pancreatic head excision with the pylorus-preserving pancreatoduodenectomy. Ann Surg. 1998;228:771-779.	280.	Strate T, Bachmann K, Busch P, et al. Resection vs. drainage in treatment of chronic pancreatitis: long-term results of a randomized trial. Gastroenterology. 2008;134:1406-1411.	281.	Klempa I, Spatny M, Menzel J, et al. Pancreatic function and quality of life after resection of the head of the pancreas in chronic pancreatitis. A prospective, randomized comparative study after duodenum preserving resection of the head of the pancreas versus Whipple’s operation. Chirurg. 1995;66:350-359.	282.	Izbicki JR, Bloechle C, Knoefel WT, et al. Drainage versus resection in surgical therapy of chronic pancreatitis of the head of the pancreas: a randomized study. Der Cherurg. 1997;68:369-377.	283.	Strate T, Taherpour Z, Bloechle C, et al. Long-term follow-up of a randomized trial comparing the Beger and Frey procedures for patients suffering from chronic pancreatitis. Ann Surg. 2005;241:591-598.	284.	Keck T, Adam U, Makowiec F, et al. Shortand long-term results of duodenum preservation versus resection for the management of chronic pancreatitis: a prospective randomized study. Surg. 2012;152(3)suppl 1:S95-S102.	285.	Bachmann K, Tomkoetter L, Kutup A, et al. Is the Whipple procedure harmful for long-term outcomes of chronic pancreatitis? 15 year follow-up comparing the outcome after PPPD and Frey procedures in chronic pancreatitis. Ann Surg. 2013;258:815-821.	286.	Zheng Z, Xiang G, Tan C, et al. Pancreaticoduodenectomy vs. duodenum-preserving pancreatic head resection for the treatment of chronic pancreatitis. Pancreas. 2012;41:147-152.	287.	Riediger H, Adam U, Fischer E, et al. Long-term outcome after resection for chronic pancreatitis in 224 patients.  J Gastrointest Surg. 2007;11:949-959; discussion 959-960.	288.	Buchler MW, Friess H, Bittner R, et al. Duodenum-preserving pancreatic head resection: long-term results. J Gastrointest Surg. 1997;1:13-19.	289.	Ramesh H, Jacob G, Lekha V, Venugopal A. Ductal drainage with head coring in chronic pancreatitis with small-duct disease. J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Surg. 2003;10:366-372.	290.	Shrikhande SV, Kleeff J, Friess H, et al. Management of pain in small duct chronic pancreatitis. J Gastrointest Surg. 2006;10:227-233.	291.	Najarian JS, Sutherland DE, Baumgartner D, et al. Total or near total pancreatectomy and islet autotransplantation for treatment of chronic pancreatitis. Ann Surg. 1980;192:526-542.	292.	Robertson RP, Lanz KJ, Sutherland DE, et al. Prevention of diabetes for up to 13 years by autoislet transplantation after pancreatectomy for chronic pancreatitis. Diabetes. 2001;50:47-50.	293.	Sutherland DE, Radosevich DM, Bellin, MD, et al. Total pancreatectomy and islet autotransplantation for chronic pancreatits. J Am Coll Surg. 2012;214:409-426.	294.	Rastellini C. Donor and recipient selection in pancreatic islet transplantation. Curr Opin Organ Transplant. 2002;7:196-201.	295.	Chinnakotla S, Beilman GJ, Dunn TB, et al. Factors predicting outcomes after a total pancreatectomy and auto-transplantation leesons learned from over 500 cases. Ann Surg. 2015; 262:610-622.	296.	Chinnakotla S, Bellin MD, Schwarzenberg SJ, et al. Total pancreatectomy and islet autotransplantation in children for chronic pancreatitis: indication, surgical techniques, post-operative management, and long-term out-comes. Ann Surg. 2014;260:56-64.	297.	Richards ML, Gauger PG, Thompson NW, Kloos RG, Giordano T. Pitfalls in the surgical treatment of insulinoma. Surgery. 2002;132:1040-1049; discussion 1049.	298.	Howard TJ, Stabile BE, Zinner MJ, Chang S, Bhagavan BS, Passaro E, Jr. Anatomic distribution of pancreatic endocrine tumors. Am J Surg. 1990;159:258-264.	299.	Service FJ, Natt N, Thompson GB, et al. Noninsulinoma pancreatogenous hypoglycemia: a novel syndrome of hyper-insulinemic hypoglycemia in adults independent of mutations in Kir6.2 and SUR1 genes. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1999;84: 1582-1589.Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   151201/03/19   6:47 PM 1513PANCREASCHAPTER 33	300.	Cui YF, Elahi D, Andersen DK. Advances in the etiology and management of hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. J Gastrointest Surg. 2011; 15(10):1879-1888.	301.	Deol ZK, Frezza E, DeJong S, Pickleman J. Solitary hepatic gastrinoma treated with laparoscopic radiofrequency ablation. JSLS. 2003;7:285-289.	302.	Case CC, Wirfel K, Vassilopoulou-Sellin R. Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide-secreting tumor (VIPoma) with liver metastases: dramatic and durable symptomatic benefit from hepatic artery embolization, a case report. Med Oncol. 2002;19:181-187.	303.	Tanaka S, Yamasaki S, Matsushita H, et al. Duodenal somatostatinoma: a case report and review of 31 cases with special reference to the relationship between tumor size and metastasis. Pathol Int. 2000;50:146-152.	304.	Falconi M, Bartsch DK, Eriksson B, et al. ENETS Consensus Guidelines for the management of patients with digestive neuroendocrine neoplasms of the digestive system: well-differentiated pancreatic non-functioning tumors. Neuroendocrinology. 2012;95:120-134.	305.	Mazzaglia PJ, Berber E, Milas M, et al. Laparoscopic radiofrequency ablation of neuroendocrine liver metastases: a 10-year experience evaluating predictors of survival. Surgery. 2007;142:10-19.	306.	Kotteas EA, Syrigos KN, Saif MW. Profile of capecitabine/temozolomide combination in the treatment of well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumors. Onco Targets Ther. 2016;9:699-704.	307.	Howlader N, Noone AM, Krapcho M, et al, eds. SEER Cancer Statistics Review, 1975-2014. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. Available at: https://seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2014/. Accessed July 30, 2018.	308.	Gold EB, Goldin SB. Epidemiology of and risk factors for pancreatic cancer. Surg Oncol Clin N Am. 1998;7:67-91.	309.	Fisher WE. Diabetes. Risk factor for the development of pancreatic cancer or manifestation of the disease? World J Surg. 2001;25:503-508.	310.	Jean M, Lowy A, Chiao P, et al. The Molecular Biology of Pancreatic Cancer. New York: Springer-Verlag; 2002.	311.	Berger D, Fisher W. Inherited Pancreatic Cancer Syndromes. New York: Springer-Verlag; 2002.	312.	Biankin AV, Waddell N, Kassahn KS, et al. Pancreatic cancer genomes reveal aberrations in axon guidance pathway genes. Nature. 2012;491(7424):399-405.	313.	Biankin AV, Kench JG, Dijkman FP, et al. Molecular pathogenesis of precursor lesions of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. Pathology. 2003;35(1):14-24.	314.	Wilentz RE, Hruban RH. Pathology of cancer of the pancreas. Surg Oncol Clin N Am. 1998;7:43-65.	315.	Ritts R, Pitt H. CA19-9 in pancreatic cancer. Surg Oncol Clin N Am. 1998;7:93-101.	316.	Kung-Kai Kuo, Chao-Jen Kuo, Chiang-Yen Chiu, et al. Quantitative proteomic analysis of differentially expressed protein profiles involved in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma pancreas. 2016;45(1):71-83.	317.	Shailesh V Shrikhande, Savio George Barreto, Mahesh Goel, Supreeta Arya. Multimodality imaging of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma: a review of the literature. HPB (Oxford). 2012;14(10):658-668.	318.	Kim HJ, Conlon KC. Laparoscopic Staging. New York: Springer-Verlag; 2002.	319.	Shah RJ, Howell DA, Desilets DJ, et al. Multicenter randomized trial of the spiral Z-stent compared with the Wallstent for malig-nant biliary obstruction. Gastrointest Endosc. 2003;57:830-836.	320.	Lillemoe K, Cameron JL, Kaufman HS, Yeo CJ, Pitt HA, Sauter PK. Chemical splanchnicectomy in patients with unresectable pancreatic cancer. A prospective randomised trial. Ann Surg. 1993;217:447-455.	321.	Singh SM, Reber HA. Surgical palliation for pancreatic cancer. Surg Clin North Am. 1989;69:599-611.	322.	Nagaraja V, Eslick GD, Cox MR. Endoscopic stenting versus operative gastrojejunostomy for malignant gastric outlet obstruction-a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized and non-randomized trials. J Gastrointest Oncol. 2014;5(2):92-98.	323.	Herman J, Chang D, Goodman K, et al. Phase 2 multi-institutional trial evaluating gemcitabine and stereotactic body radiotherapy for patients with locally advanced unresectable pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Cancer. 2015;121(7):1128-1137.	324.	Casper ES, Green MR, Kelsen DP, et al. Phase II trial of gem-citabine (2,2’-difluorodeoxycytidine) in patients with adeno-carcinoma of the pancreas. Invest New Drugs. 1994;12:29-34.	325.	Moore MJ, Goldstein D, Hamm J, et al. National Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical Trials Group. Erlotinib plus gemcitabine compared with gemcitabine alone in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer: a phase III trial of the National Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical Trials Group. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25(15):1960-1966.	326.	Conroy T, Desseigne F, Ychou M, et al. Folfirinox versus gemcitabine for metastatic pancreatic cancer. N Engl J Med.  2011;364(19):1817-1825.	327.	Von Hoff DD, Ervin T, Arena FP, et al. Increased survival in pancreatic cancer with nab-paclitaxel plus gemcitabine. N Engl J Med. 2013;369(18):1691-1703. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1304369	328.	Wang-Gillam A, Li CP, Bodoky G, et al. Nanoliposomal irinotecan with fluorouracil and folinic acid in metastatic pancreatic cancer after previous gemcitabine-based therapy (NAPOLI-1): a global, randomised, open-label, phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2016;387(10018):545-557.	329.	Martin RC II, McFarland K, Ellis S, et al. Irreversable electroporation therapy in the management of locally advanced pancreatic adenocarcinoma. J Am Coll Surg. 2012; 215:361-369.	330.	Martin RC, Kwon D, Chalikonda S, et al. Treatment of 200 locally advanced (Stage III) pancreatic adenocarcinoma patients with irreversible electroporation: safety and efficacy. Ann Surg. 2015;262(3):486-494.	331.	Chua TC, Saxena A. Extended pancreaticoduodenectomy with vascular resection for pancreatic cancer: a systematic review.  J Gastrointest Surg. 2010;14:1442-1452.	332.	Gong Y, Zhang L, He T, et al. Pancreaticoduodenectomy combined with vascular resection and reconstruction for patients with locally advanced pancreatic cancer: a multicenter, retrospective analysis. PLoS One. 2013;8(8):e70340. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0070340	333.	Castleberry AW, Ci MM, White RR, et al. The impact of vascular resection on early postoperative outcomes after pancreaticoduodenectomy: an analysis of the American College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement Program Database. Ann Surg Oncol. 2012;19:4068-4077.	334.	Zureikat AH, Postlewait LM, Liu Y, et al. A multi-institutional comparison of perioperative outcomes of robotic and open pancreaticoduodenectomy. Ann Surg. 2016;264(4):640-649.	335.	Yamaguchi K, Kishinaka M, Nagai E, et al. Pancreatoduo-denectomy for pancreatic head carcinoma with or with-out pylorus preservation. Hepatogastroenterol. 2001;48: 1479-1485.	336.	Ohtsuka T, Yamaguchi K, Ohuchida J, et al. Comparison of quality of life after pylorus-preserving pancreatoduodenectomy and Whipple resection. Hepatogastroenterol. 2003; 50:846-850.Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   151301/03/19   6:47 PM 1514SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	337.	Van Buren G, Bloomston M, Hughes SJ, et al. A ran-domized prospective multicenter trial of pancreatico-duodenectomy with and without routine intraperitoneal drainage. Ann Surg. 2014;259(4):605-612. doi: 10.1097/SLA.0000000000000460	338.	Van Buren G, Bloomston M, Schmidt CR, et al.  A prospective randomized multicenter trial of distal pancreatectomy with and without routine intraperitoneal drainage. Ann Surg. 2017;266(3):421-431. doi: 10.1097/SLA.0000000000002375	339.	Bassi C1, Molinari E, Malleo G, et al. Early versus late drain removal after standard pancreatic resections: results of a prospective randomized trial. Ann Surg. 2010;252(2):207-214. doi: 10.1097/SLA.0b013e3181e61e88	340.	Keane FK, Wo JY, Ferrone CR, et al. Intraoperative radiotherapy in the era of intensive neoadjuvant chemotherapy and chemoradiotherapy for pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Am J Clin Oncol. Post Author Corrections: October 12, 2016.	341.	Birkmeyer JD, Finlayson SR, Tosteson AN, et al. Effect of hospital volume on in-hospital mortality with pancreaticoduodenectomy. Surgery. 1999;125(3):250-256.	342.	Gordon TA, Bowman HM, Tielsch JM, et al. Statewide regionalization of pancreaticoduodenectomy and its effect on in-hospital mortality. Ann Surg. 1998;228:71-78.	343.	Buchler M, Friess H, Klempa I, et al. Role of octreotide in the prevention of postoperative complications following pancreatic resection. Am J Surg. 1992;163:125-130; discussion 130-131.	344.	Montorsi M, Zago M, Mosca F, et al. Efficacy of octreotide in the prevention of pancreatic fistula after elective pancreatic resections: a prospective, controlled, randomized clinical trial. Surgery. 1995;117:26-31.	345.	Pederzoli P, Bassi C, Falconi M, et al. Efficacy of octreotide in the prevention of complications of elective pancreatic surgery. Italian Study Group. Br J Surg. 1994;81:265-269.	346.	Barnett SP, Hodul PJ, Creech S, et al. Octreotide does not prevent postoperative pancreatic fistula or mortality following pancreaticoduodenectomy. Am Surg. 2004;70:222-226; discussion 227.	347.	Hesse UJ, DeDecker C, Houtmeyers P, et al. Prospectively randomized trial using perioperative low-dose octreotide to prevent organ-related and general complications after pancreatic surgery and pancreatico-jejunostomy. World J Surg. 2005;29:1325-1328.	348.	Lowy AM, Lee JE, Pisters PW, et al. Prospective, randomized trial of octreotide to prevent pancreatic fistula after pancreaticoduodenectomy for malignant disease. Ann Surg. 1997;226:632-641.	349.	Suc B, Msika S, Piccinini M, et al. Octreotide in the prevention of intra-abdominal complications following elective pancreatic resection: a prospective, multicenter randomized controlled trial. Arch Surg. 2004;139:288-294; discussion 295.	350.	Allen PJ, Mithat G, Brennan MF, et al. Pasireotide for postoperative pancreatic fistula. N Engl J Med. 2014;370: 2014-2022. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1313688	351.	Yeo CJ, Cameron JL, Maher MM, et al. A prospective ran-domized trial of pancreaticogastrostomy versus pancreati-cojejunostomy after pancreaticoduodenectomy. Ann Surg. 1995;222(4):580-588; discussion 588-592.	352.	Wente MN, Shrikhande SV, Muller MW, et al. Pancreaticojejunostomy vs. pancreaticogastrostomy: systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Surg. 2007;193:171-183.	353.	Suzuki Y, Fujino Y, Tanioka Y, et al. Selection of pancreaticojejunostomy techniques according to pancreatic texture and duct size. Arch Surg. 2002;137:1044-1047; discussion 1048.	354.	Reid-Lombardo KM, Farnell MB, Crippa S, et al. Pancreatic anastomotic leakage after pancreaticoduodenectomy in 1,507 patients: a report from the Pancreatic Anastomotic Leak Study Group. J Gastrointest Surg. 2007;11:1451-1458.	355.	Dong Z, Xu J, Wang Z, Petrov MS. Stents for the prevention of pancreatic fistula following pancreaticoduodenectomy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016;(5):CD008914.  doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD008914.pub3	356.	Jang JY, Chang YR, Kim SW, et al. Randomized multicentre trial comparing external and internal pancreatic stenting during pancreaticoduodenectomy. Br J Surg. 2016;103(6):668-675. doi: 10.1002/bjs.10160.	357.	Sutton CD, Garcea G, White SA, et al. Isolated Roux-loop pancreaticojejunostomy: a series of 61 patients with zero postoperative pancreaticoenteric leaks. J Gastrointest Surg. 2004;8:701-705.	358.	Yang YM, Tian XD, Zhuang Y, et al. Risk factors of pancreatic leakage after pancreaticoduodenectomy. World  J Gastroenterol. 2005;11:2456-2461.	359.	Di Carlo V, Chiesa R, Pontiroli AE, et al. Pancreatoduodenectomy with occlusion of the residual stump by Neoprene injection. World J Surg. 1989;13:105-110; discussion 110-111.	360.	Tran K, Van Eijck C, Di Carlo V, et al. Occlusion of the pancreatic duct versus pancreaticojejunostomy: a prospective randomized trial. Ann Surg. 2002;236:422-428, discussion 428.	361.	Fisher WE, Chai C, Hodges SE, Wu MF, Hilsenbeck SG, Brunicardi FC. Effect of BioGlue on the incidence of pancreatic fistula following pancreas resection. J Gastrointest Surg. 2008;12:882-890.	362.	Lillemoe KD, Cameron JL, Kim MP, et al. Does fibrin glue sealant decrease the rate of pancreatic fistula after pancreaticoduodenectomy? Results of a prospective randomized trial. J Gastrointest Surg. 2004;8:766-772, discussion 772-774.	363.	Kazanjian KK, Hines OJ, Eibl G, Reber HA. Management of pancreatic fistulas after pancreaticoduodenectomy: results in 437 consecutive patients. Arch Surg. 2005;140:849-854, discussion 854-856.	364.	Bilimoria KY, Bentrem DJ, Ko CY, et al. National failure to operate on early stage pancreatic cancer. Ann Surg. 2007;246(2):173-180. doi: 10.1097/SLA.0b013e3180691579	365.	Group GTS. Further evidence of effective adjuvant combined radiation and chemotherapy following curative resection of pancreatic cancer. Cancer. 1997;59:2006-2010.	366.	Neoptolemos JP, Dunn JA, Stocken DD, et al. Adjuvant chemoradiotherapy and chemotherapy in resectable pancreatic cancer: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2001;358:1576-1585.	367.	Rocha FG1, Hashimoto Y, Traverso LW, et al. Interferon-based adjuvant chemoradiation for resected pancreatic head cancer: long-term follow-up of the Virginia Mason Protocol. Ann Surg. 2016;263(2):376-384. doi: 10.1097/SLA.0000000000001190	368.	Russo S, Saif MW. Neoadjuvant therapy for pancreatic cancer: an ongoing debate. Therap Adv Gastroenterol. 2016;9(4):429-436.	369.	Tachezy M, Gebauer F, Petersen C, et al. Sequential neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy (CRT) followed by curative surgery vs. primary surgery alone for resectable, non-metastasized pancreatic adenocarcinoma: NEOPA—a randomized multicenter phase III study (NCT01900327, DRKS00003893, ISRCTN82191749). BMC Cancer. 2014;14:411.	370.	Gingras MC, Covington KR, Chang DK, et al. Ampullary cancers harbor ELF3 tumor suppressor gene mutations and exhibit frequent WNT dysregulation. Cell Rep. 2016;14(4):907-919.	371.	Laffan TA, Horton KM, Klein AP, et al. Prevalence of unsuspected pancreatic cysts on MDCT. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2008;191(3):802-807. doi: 10.2214/AJR.07.3340	372.	Tanaka M, Adsay V, Chari S, et al. International consensus guidelines 2012 for the management of IPMN and MCN of the pancreas. Pacreatology. 2012(12):183-197.Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   151401/03/19   6:47 PM 1515PANCREASCHAPTER 33	373.	Brugge WR, Lewandrowski K, Lee-Lewandrowski E,  et al. Diagnosis of pancreatic cystic neoplasms: a report of the cooperative pancreatic cyst study. Gastroenterology. 2004;126:1330-1336.	374.	Khalid A, Zahid M, Finkelstein SD, et al. Pancreatic cyst fluid DNA analysis in evaluating pancreatic cysts: a report of the PANDA study. Gastrointest Endosc. 2009;69:1095-1102.	375.	Yoon WJ, Brugge WR. Pancreatic cystic neoplasms: diagnosis and management. Gastroenterol Clin North Am. 2012;41(1):103-118.	376.	Furukawa T, Hatori T, Fujita I, et al. Prognostic relevance of morphological types of intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms of the pancreas. Gut. 2011;60(4):509-516.	377.	Brugge WR. Management and outcomes of pancreatic cystic lesions. Dig Liver Dis. 2008;40(11):854-859.	378.	Boni L, Benevento A, Dionigi G, Cabrini L, Dionigi R. Primary pancreatic lymphoma. Surg Endosc. 2002;16:1107-1108.Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   151501/03/19   6:47 PM
# Chunk 8936
Brunicardi_Ch33_p1429-p1516.indd   151601/03/19   6:47 PMThis page intentionally left blank

The SpleenAdrian E. Park, Eduardo M. Targarona,  Adam S. Weltz, and Carlos Rodriguez-Otero Luppi 34chapterHISTORICAL BACKGROUNDThe spleen has been the subject of man’s musings since almost the establishment of the written word. It has been largely mis-understood, often maligned, and certainly underappreciated as a major organ for more than two millennia. The ancients, pre-sumably through patient observation and occasional anatomic exploration, often consigned the spleen to a vestigial role.Our current understanding of the central role played by the spleen in regulating the immune system and influencing meta-bolic and endocrine functions has been built upon knowledge gleaned only over the past few decades. Our early notions of the spleen as a dispensable filter of blood or seat of emotion have been dispelled as our understanding of its structure and function has evolved, informing our surgical approach to this worthy and fascinating organ. Many of the “founding fathers of medicine” have weighed in on the anatomy and function of the spleen over the centuries. Hippocrates in the fourth century BC was one of the first to write on the spleen.1-3 He taught broadly on the need for balance and equilibrium between the patient and his environment. Illness arose from disharmony in nature, particularly among the patient’s four humors: blood, phlegm, black bile (melancholia), and yellow bile. Hippocrates wrote of a direct connection between the brain and spleen and its particu-lar association with the black bile. These ideas would influence thinking about the role of the spleen for more than 1000 years.2Aristotle, later in the same era, famously stated that, “Nature makes nothing in vain,” yet held the spleen to be an organ of minor importance whose main role was to counterbal-ance the liver.4 He also described how the “hot character” of the spleen aided in digestion.Galen, in the second century AD, engaged in more seri-ous anatomic investigation espousing the early belief that func-tion followed structure. His investigations, though pioneering, lacked sufficient rigor, evidenced by his contention that black bile or melancholia flowed from the liver to the spleen and then through the short gastric vessels into the stomach to be excreted. The influence of Galen’s teaching endured for more than 1200 years. All the more remarkable considering the cur-rent hallowed measure of influence of surgical publication, the impact factor, which is most commonly calculated using a 2-year frame of reference.5,6In the early 17th century, several physician scientists, Mal-pighi being the most prominent, began testing hypotheses on splenic function by splenectomizing dogs. He reportedly fol-lowed several dogs 5 years postoperatively, noting their healthy survival though apparent ravenous hunger and enhanced sexual appetites. The spleen, still in the era of “balanced humors,” was thus felt to play a role in balancing various appetites as well. In addition to melancholy, the spleen became associated with anger and, paradoxically, was also seen as the “seat of laughter.”7The claim for the first human splenectomy may have pre-dated that of canine splenectomy. Andriano Zaccavello was credited in 1549 with having performed a splenectomy on a middle-aged woman. This claim remains shrouded in contro-versy, and the indication for the surgery and whether in fact splenectomy was performed have been called into question. The patient apparently survived, but may in fact have under-gone resection of an ovarian cyst rather than her spleen!8 Most patients who underwent splenectomy in the three centuries that followed fared badly. The vast majority of splenectomies per-formed were partial. Most of these patients required surgery for Historical Background	1517Embryology and Anatomy	1518Physiology and   Pathophysiology	1520Indications for Splenectomy	1522Benign Disorders / 1524Malignant Conditions / 1527Miscellaneous Disorders and  Lesions / 1529Imaging for Evaluation of   Size and Pathology	1532Preoperative Considerations	1532Vaccination and Patient Education / 1532Deep Vein Thrombosis Prophylaxis / 1533Splenectomy Techniques	1533Patient Preparation / 1533Open Splenectomy / 1533Laparoscopic Splenectomy / 1534Hand-Assisted Splenectomy / 1534Single-Incision Laparoscopic  Surgery Splenectomy / 1535Robotic Splenectomy / 1536Partial Splenectomy / 1536Inadvertent Intraoperative  Splenic Injury / 1538Preoperative Grading Score to Predict Technical Difficulty in Laparoscopic Splenectomy / 1536Splenectomy Outcomes	1538Overwhelming Postsplenectomy  Infection / 1538Complications / 1539Hematologic Outcomes / 1539Cancer / 1539Ultrasound / 1540Computed Tomography / 1540Plain Radiography / 1540Magnetic Resonance Imaging / 1540Angiography / 1541Nuclear Imaging / 1541Brunicardi_Ch34_p1517-p1548.indd   151723/02/19   2:36 PM 1518left upper quadrant stab wounds sustained in battles or duels resulting in partial or complete splenic prolapse.9It was in the early 18th century that the growing body of anatomic microstructural knowledge began to turn the tide on the long-held theory of health and disease deriving from a balance of the four humors. William Henson believed the spleen to be a ductless vascular gland similar to the thyroid and adrenals. In 1777, he wrote of the lymphatic nature of the spleen and its filtering function and even suggested its role in hematopoiesis.10Rudolf Virchow, one of the first to discover leukemia, implicated the spleen as figuring prominently in all leukemia patients. He suspected that the spleen was responsible for gen-erating the leukocytes in large quantities in these patients. There soon followed an enthusiastic effort by surgeons to cure leu-kemia by splenectomy. Dr. Thomas Bryant performed the first splenectomy in 1866 in a patient with leukemia. The patient died, as did all 14 patients who underwent splenectomy for leukemia over the next 15 years. After his second consecutive mortality in this setting, Bryant declared that “the operation is physiologically unsound & surgically unsafe for leukemia and should not be performed.”11 In 1908, Johnson reported a series of 99 splenectomies for leukemia with an 85% mortality rate. Unfortunately, it took several decades for his words to be heeded.In 1916, a medical student from Prague named Paul Kaznelson wrote on the key role played by the spleen in the destruction of platelets leading to the first reported (and success-ful) splenectomy for a patient with idiopathic thrombocytopenia purpura.2As surgeons’ experience with the procedure grew, the associated morbidity and mortality decreased. By 1920, the Mayo Clinic reported that splenectomy had a reduced mortality rate of 11%.1O’Donnell in 1929 was the first to describe fatal post-splenectomy sepsis in a child who had undergone the sur-gery for hemolytic anemia.3 It took Springer’s 1973 review of almost 2800 postsplenectomy patients and the 2.5% inci-dence of sepsis-induced mortality (vs. 0.01% in the general population) to reorient surgeons to more conservative splenic procedures.2,3The advent of minimally invasive surgery and laparo-scopic splenectomy in the early 1990s represented a clear advance, benefitting the patient through this evolution of sur-gical technique. Most large series of laparoscopic splenectomy for benign and malignant indication now report a mortality rate of <1%.12,13 As even more contemporary research reveals the spleen to play a central role in immune, metabolic, and endocrine function, it follows that the surgeon’s role going forward will be to preserve this organ and its functions when-ever possible.EMBRYOLOGY AND ANATOMYConsisting of an encapsulated mass of vascular and lymphoid tissue, the spleen is the largest reticuloendothelial organ in the body. Arising from the primitive mesoderm as an outgrowth of the left side of the dorsal mesogastrium, by the fifth week of gestation, the spleen is evident in an embryo 8 mm long.Development begins through the formation of the splanch-nic mesodermal plate, derived from the mesoderm, at embryonic day 12. The embryonic spleen is first colonized by erythroid and myeloid progenitor cells at 2 weeks of gestation. Follow-ing soon thereafter, the hematopoietic stem cells take up resi-dence in the forming spleen.14 The spleen assumes an important hematopoietic role until the fifth month of gestation. After birth, splenic erythropoietic function may persist in some hematologic disorders.15Key Points1	The human spleen plays a key immunologic role in defense against a number of organisms, particularly encapsulated bacteria.2	The spleen can cause significant morbidity and/or hema-tologic disturbance if it becomes hyperfunctioning (hyper-splenism) or hypertrophied (splenomegaly).3	There is a broad spectrum of nontraumatic diseases for which elective splenectomy can be curative or palliative. They can be broadly categorized as red blood cell disor-ders and hemoglobinopathies, white blood cell disorders, platelet disorders, bone marrow disorders, infections and abscesses, cysts and tumors, storage diseases and infiltra-tive disorders, and miscellaneous conditions.4	Inadvertent intraoperative splenic injury is a scenario for which every abdominal surgeon should be prepared. Avail-ability of a predetermined algorithm, with emphasis on the patient’s condition, facilitates intraoperative decision making.5	Partial splenectomy may be a suitable alternative to total splenectomy for certain conditions of hypersplen-ism or splenomegaly, particularly in children in whom preservation of splenic immunologic function is especially important.6	Preoperative splenic artery embolization for elective sple-nectomy has benefits and disadvantages. It may be most suitable in cases of enlarged spleen. Conclusive evidence is lacking.7	Vaccination of the splenectomized patient remains the most effective prevention strategy against OPSI. Preopera-tive vaccination before elective splenectomy is most prudent.8	Laparoscopic splenectomy provides equal hematologic outcomes with decreased morbidity compared with the open operation. The laparoscopic approach has emerged as the standard for elective, nontraumatic splenectomy.9	Overwhelming postsplenectomy infection (OPSI) is an uncommon but potentially grave disease. Children and those undergoing splenectomy for hematologic malig-nancy are at elevated risk.10	Antibiotic prophylactic strategies against OPSI vary widely. Data regarding their use are lacking.Brunicardi_Ch34_p1517-p1548.indd   151823/02/19   2:36 PM 1519THE SPLEENCHAPTER 34The organ continues its differentiation and migration to the left upper quadrant, where it comes to rest with its smooth, diaphragmatic surface facing posterosuperiorly.16The most common anomaly of splenic embryology is the accessory spleen. Present in up to 20% of the population, one or more accessory spleens may also occur in up to 30% of patients with hematologic disease. Over 80% of accessory spleens are found in the region of the splenic hilum and vascu-lar pedicle. Other locations for accessory spleens in descending order of frequency are the gastrocolic ligament, the pancreas tail, the greater omentum, the stomach’s greater curve, the splenocolic ligament, the small and large bowel mesentery, the left broad ligament in women, and the left spermatic cord in men (Fig. 34-1).10,16The abdominal surface of the diaphragm separates the spleen from the lower left lung and pleura and the ninth to eleventh ribs. The visceral surface faces the abdominal cavity and contains gastric, colic, renal, and pancreatic impressions. Spleen size and weight vary with age, with both diminishing in the elderly and in those with underlying pathologic conditions. The average adult spleen is 7 to 11 cm in length and weighs 150 g (range, 70–250 g).The spleen’s superior border separates the diaphragmatic surface from the gastric impression of the visceral surface and often contains one or two notches, which are particularly pro-nounced when the spleen is greatly enlarged.Of particular clinical relevance, the spleen is suspended in position by several ligaments and peritoneal folds to the colon (splenocolic ligament), the stomach (gastrosplenic liga-ment), the diaphragm (phrenosplenic ligament), and the kidney, ABCDEFGFigure 34-1. Sites where accessory spleens are found in order of importance. A. Hilar region, 54%; B. pedicle, 25%; C. tail of pan-creas, 6%; D. splenocolic ligament, 2%; E. greater omentum, 12%; F. mesentery, 0.5%; G. left ovary, 0.5%.Gastrosplenic ligamentLesser sacGreater omentumSplenocolic ligamentSustentaculum lienisPhrenicocolic ligamentFigure 34-2. Suspensory ligaments of the spleen.adrenal gland, and tail of the pancreas (splenorenal ligament) (Fig. 34-2). In a related historical footnote it was widely held less than 200 years ago that a “wandering spleen” led women to experience hypochondria. Dietl in 1863 finally clarified that “it was not a patient’s temperament but rather relaxation, exten-sion or the hypoplasia of splenic ligaments that made a spleen wander.”17 The gastrosplenic ligament contains the short gas-tric vessels; the remaining ligaments are avascular, with rare exceptions, such as in patients with portal hypertension. The relationship of the pancreas to the spleen also has important clinical implications. In cadaveric anatomic series, the tail of the pancreas has been demonstrated to lie within 1 cm of the splenic hilum 75% of the time and to actually abut the spleen in 30% of patients.2The spleen derives most of its blood from the splenic artery, the longest and most tortuous of the three main branches of the celiac artery. The splenic artery can be characterized by the pattern of its terminal branches. The distributed type of splenic artery is the most common (70%) and is distinguished by a short trunk with many long branches entering over three-fourths of the spleen’s medial surface. The less common magis-tral type of splenic artery (30%) has a long main trunk dividing near the hilum into short terminal branches, and these enter over 25% to 30% of the spleen’s medial surface. The spleen also receives some of its blood supply from the short gastric vessels that branch from the left gastroepiploic artery running within the gastrosplenic ligament. The splenic vein joins the superior mesenteric vein to form the portal vein and accommodates the major venous drainage of the spleen.When a normal, freshly excised spleen is sectioned, the cut surface is finely granular and predominantly dark red with whit-ish nodules distributed liberally across its expanse. This gross observation reflects the spleen’s microstructure. The splenic parenchyma is composed of two main elements: the red pulp, constituting approximately 75% of total splenic volume, and the white pulp (Fig. 34-3). At the interface between the red and white pulp is the narrow marginal zone.Brunicardi_Ch34_p1517-p1548.indd   151923/02/19   2:36 PM 1520SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIBlood enters the red pulp through cords comprised of fibro-blasts and reticular fibers, which contain many macrophages and lack an endothelial lining. The blood then passes from these “open” cords to venous sinuses, which are surrounded and sepa-rated by the same reticulum, and ultimately drains into tributar-ies of the splenic vein. An understanding of the microanatomy of these sinuses has elucidated the mechanical filtration function of the spleen. Unlike the cords of the red pulp, the sinuses of the red pulp are lined by endothelial cells. These cells contain unique stress fibers that connect the endothelial cells and that contain actin and myosin–like filaments capable of producing a sliding action. When activated, these filaments can create slits or gaps between the endothelial cells through which blood can then pass from the cords.14 Aging erythrocytes with stiffer mem-branes get stuck trying to pass into the sinus and are phagocy-tized by macrophages within the red pulp.15The red pulp thus serves as a dynamic filtration system, enabling macrophages to remove microorganisms, cellular debris, antigen-antibody complexes, and senescent erythrocytes from the circulation.Around the terminal millimeters of splenic arterioles, a periarticular lymphatic sheath replaces the native adventitia of the vessel. The sheath is comprised of T lymphocytes and intermittent aggregations of B lymphocytes or lymphoid fol-licles. When antigenically stimulated, the follicles, serving as centers of lymphocyte proliferation, develop germinal centers, which regress as the stimulus or infection subsides. This white pulp consists of nodules that normally are ≤1 mm in size but can increase to several centimeters when nodules coalesce, as occurs in certain lymphoproliferative disorders. At the junction between the white and red pulp is the marginal zone, where lymphocytes are more loosely aggregated.As well as serving as a transit area, the marginal zone is home to its own unique population of cells. Notably two spe-cific types of macrophages reside there, marginal zone macro-phages and marginal zone metallophilic macrophages. The former play an important role in the targeting and clearance of certain bacterial pathogens. The latter have been shown to be the main producers of interferons A and B in response to a viral challenge.14PHYSIOLOGY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGYThe spleen is contained by a 1to 2-mm thick capsule. In humans, the capsule is rich in collagen and contains some elas-tin fibers. Many mammals have splenic capsules and trabecu-lae with abundant smooth muscle cells, which upon autonomic stimulation contract to expel large volumes of stored blood into the general circulation. The human splenic capsule and trabecu-lae, by contrast, contain few or no smooth muscle cells.Total splenic inflow of blood is approximately 250 to 300 mL/min. Blood flows through successively tapering arteries to arterioles, traverses the white pulp, crosses the marginal zone, and enters the red pulp. From that entry, the flow rate through the spleen may vary greatly. Animal studies measuring the tran-sit times of isotopically labeled blood through the spleen have revealed three distinct velocities of flow. Humans have long been recognized to have both a fast or closed circulation—with blood passing directly from arterioles into venous sinuses—and a slower or open circulation. Most of the spleen’s filtration func-tion occurs via the slower circulation. During open circulation, blood percolates through the reticular space and splenic cords, thus gaining access through gaps or slits in the endothelial cell lining to the sinuses as previously described. Flowing into and out of the venous sinuses through these gaps, the blood is exposed to extensive contact with splenic macrophages. These are responsible for the innate immune response of the spleen, which occurs largely within the marginal zone. The white pulp, by contrast, is involved only in adaptive immunity. In addition, because the passage of plasma through these spaces does not slow in a similar manner, a temporary and unique adhesive con-tact between blood cells and components of the splenic cord may occur. That there is a selective slowing of blood cell flow versus plasma flow is further evidenced by the fact that within the spleen, the erythrocyte concentration (hematocrit) is twice that of the general circulation. During this contact with splenic macrophages, it is likely that the removal of both cellular debris and senescent blood cells occurs.18The process by which the spleen removes erythrocyte inclusions, such as Heinz bodies (intracellular altered hemo-globin), without cell lysis while red blood cells travel through the spleen is not well understood. The spleen acts as the major site for clearance from the blood of damaged or aged red blood cells and, in addition, has a part in the removal of abnormal white blood cells and platelets. A minimum of 2 days of the erythrocyte’s 120-day life cycle is spent sequestered in the spleen. Daily, approximately 20 mL of aged red blood cells are removed. Evidence suggests that, as erythrocytes age, previ-ously undetected antigens on their surfaces may attach to auto-antibodies in the circulation; then macrophages may bind to the antibodies and initiate phagocytosis. It is probable that the erythrocyte is damaged over time by multiple passages through the spleen as well as delayed transit through the congested and relatively hypoxic and acidotic environment of the splenic cords.The spleen can also serve as an extra medullary site for hematopoiesis, if required. Another role played by the spleen is in recycling iron. Erythrocytes in large numbers are destroyed intravascularly throughout the body. The released hemoglobin is then bound to haptoglobin, which is ultimately scav-enged from the circulation in the spleen.191Trabeculae (depicted as both capsular and white lined material)Splenic capsuleRed pulpWhite pulpFigure 34-3. Splenic architecture. (Used with permission from Ivan George, University of Maryland School of Medicine.)Brunicardi_Ch34_p1517-p1548.indd   152023/02/19   2:36 PM 1521THE SPLEENCHAPTER 34The spleen plays a vital, although not indispensable, role in host defense evidenced by the healthy survival of splenec-tomized patients. Both innate and adaptive immune responses (historically categorized as cell-mediated and humoral immu-nity) occur within the spleen.In addition to the previously noted activities of the mar-ginal zone macrophages, marginal zone B cells serve to detect circulating pathogens and respond quickly to either differenti-ate into immunoglobulin M (IgM)–producing plasma cells or to function as antigen-presenting cells (APCs), which facilitate pathogen removal and destruction.It is APC entry in the white pulp in particular that is key to the initiation of the adaptive immune response. Antigens are thus presented to immunocompetent centers within the lymphoid follicles. This gives rise to the elaboration of immunoglobulins (predominantly IgM). After an antigen challenge, such an acute IgM response results in the release of opsonic antibodies from the white pulp of the spleen. Antigen clearance is then facilitated by the splenic and hepatic reticuloendothelial systems.The structure and immunophysiology of the white pulp is very similar to that of lymph nodes, with the notable difference being that material enters the lymph node in the lymph whereas it is delivered to the white pulp in the blood.20The spleen also produces opsonins, tuftsin, and proper-din. Circulating monocytes are converted within the red pulp into fixed macrophages that account for the spleen’s remarkable phagocytic activity.The spleen also appears to be a major source of the protein properdin, important in the initiation of the alternate pathway of complement activation. The splenic reticuloendothelial system is better able to clear bacteria that are poorly or inadequately opsonized from the circulation than is the hepatic reticuloendo-thelial system. Encapsulated bacteria generally fit such a pro-file, hence the risk posed by pneumococcus and Haemophilus influenzae to an asplenic patient. There appears to be sufficient physiologic capacity within the complement cascade to with-stand the loss of tuftsin and properdin production without an increase in patient vulnerability after splenectomy.21-23In patients with chronic hemolytic disorders, splenic tissue may become permanently hypertrophied. The reticular spaces of the red pulp become distended with macrophages engorged with the products of erythrocyte breakdown, and splenomegaly can result. It is important to distinguish between splenomegaly and hypersplenism, two similar but distinct terms that are critical to understand when discussing splenic pathology. Splenomegaly refers simply to abnormal enlargement of the spleen. Splenomeg-aly is described variably within the surgical literature as moderate, massive, and hyper, which reflects a lack of con-sensus. Most would agree, however, that splenomegaly applies to organs weighing ≥500 g and/or averaging ≥15 cm in length.Massive splenomegaly similarly lacks a consensus defini-tion but has been described variably as spleens >1 kg in mass or >22 cm in length (Fig. 34-4).9 Spleens palpable below the left costal margin are thought to be at least double normal size, with an estimated weight of ≥750 g.24There is not a single, universally accepted standard, but most would agree that an ex vivo mass of >1 kg or a pole-to-pole length of >15 cm generally qualifies as splenomegaly. Hypersplenism often is found in association with splenomegaly but is not synonymous with it. Hypersplenism is defined as the presence of one or more cytopenias in the context of a normally functioning bone marrow.2ABCFigure 34-4. Splenomegaly. A. Computed tomography (CT) scan. B. Three-dimensional reconstruction of CT scan. C. Postoperative specimen.Brunicardi_Ch34_p1517-p1548.indd   152123/02/19   2:36 PM 1522SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIDisorders causing hypersplenism can be categorized as either (a) those in which increased destruction of abnormal blood cells occurs in an intrinsically normal spleen (e.g., hemolytic anemias) or (b) primary disorders of the spleen resulting in increased sequestration and destruction of normal blood cells (e.g., infiltrative disorders).The life cycles of cellular elements vary widely in human blood. A neutrophil in circulation has a normal half-life of approximately 6 hours. The spleen’s role in the normal clearance of neutrophils is not well established. It is clear that hypersplen-ism may result in neutropenia through sequestration of normal white blood cells or the removal of abnormal ones. Platelets, on the other hand, generally survive in the circulation for 10 days. Under normal circumstances, a third of the total platelet pool is sequestered in the spleen. Thrombocytopenia may result from excessive sequestration of platelets as well as accelerated platelet destruction in the spleen. Splenomegaly may result in sequestration of up to 80% of the platelet pool. The spleen may also contribute to the immunologic alteration of platelets, which leads to thrombocytopenia in the absence of splenomegaly (e.g., idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura [ITP]).25The immunologic functions of the spleen are consistent with those of other lymphoid organs. It is a site of bloodborne antigen presentation and the initiation of Tand B-lymphocyte activities involved in humoral and cellular immune responses. Alteration of splenic immune function often gives rise to anti-body production, which results in blood cell destruction.Although the spleen contributes to the process of eryth-rocyte maturation, in adult humans there is little evidence of normal hematopoietic function. The spleen does have a minor role in hematopoiesis in the fourth month in the human fetus, and reactivation can occur in childhood if the bone marrow fails to meet the hematologic needs. Splenic hematopoiesis giving rise to abnormal red blood cells is seen in adults with myelopro-liferative disorders. In addition, in response to some anemias, elements of the red pulp may revert to hematopoiesis.INDICATIONS FOR SPLENECTOMYGenerally speaking, splenectomy is performed for the purposes of cure or palliation of hematological disease including condi-tions of hypersplenism, to relieve the mass effect and symptoms associated with splenomegaly, to control infection or hemorrhage and finally to diagnose splenic pathology. For the purposes of this chapter, we will divide these indications into the following categories: (a) benign conditions, including red blood cell disor-ders, hemoglobinopathies, and platelet disorders (Table 34-1a); (b) malignant conditions, including white blood cell disorders, bone marrow disorders (myeloproliferative disorders) and tumors of the spleen (Table 34-1b); and (c) miscellaneous conditions and lesions of the spleen including infections and abscesses, cysts, vascular anomalies, and more (Table 34-1c). We will conclude this chapter with a brief discussion on splenic salvage.Overall, the most common indication for splenectomy is trauma to the spleen, whether external trauma (blunt or penetrat-ing) or iatrogenic injury (e.g., at the time of other operations). Inadvertent intraoperative injury to the spleen, necessitating removal, also called “incidental splenectomy” is discussed in a 3Table 34-1aIndications for and expected response to splenectomy in various benign diseases, including red blood cell disorders, hemoglobinopathies, and platelet disordersDISEASE/CONDITIONINDICATIONS FOR SPLENECTOMYRESPONSE TO SPLENECTOMYEssential thrombocythemiaOnly for advanced disease (i.e., transformation to myeloid metaplasia or AML) with severe symptomatic splenomegalyRelief of abdominal pain and early satietyGlucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency (G6PD)Excessive transfusion requirements; failure of medical therapy (controversial)May be curativeHereditary spherocytosisHemolytic anemia, recurrent transfusions, intractable leg ulcersImproves or eliminates anemiaIdiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP)Failure of medical therapy, recurrent disease75%–85% rate of long-term responsePolycythemia veraOnly for advanced disease (i.e., transformation to myeloid metaplasia or AML) with severe symptomatic splenomegalyRelief of abdominal pain and early satietyPyruvate kinase deficiencyOnly in severe cases, recurrent transfusionsDecreased transfusion requirement, palliative onlySickle cell diseaseHistory of acute sequestration crisis, splenic symptoms, or infarction (consider concomitant cholecystectomy)Palliative, variable responseThalassemiaExcessive transfusion requirements, symptomatic splenomegaly, infarction, or hypersplenismDiminished transfusion requirements, relief of symptomsThrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP)Excessive plasma exchange requirementTypically curativeWarm-antibody autoimmune hemolytic anemiaFailure of medical (steroid) therapy60%–80% response rate, recurrences commonBrunicardi_Ch34_p1517-p1548.indd   152223/02/19   2:36 PM 1523THE SPLEENCHAPTER 34Table 34-1bIndications for and expected response to splenectomy in various malignant diseases, including white blood cell disorders, myeloproliferative disorders, and nonhematologic tumors of the spleenDISEASE/CONDITIONINDICATIONS FOR SPLENECTOMYRESPONSE TO SPLENECTOMYAcute myeloid leukemia (AML)Intolerable symptomatic splenomegalyRelief of abdominal pain and early satietyChronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)Cytopenias and anemia75% response rateChronic myelogenous leukemia (CML)Symptomatic splenomegalyRelief of abdominal pain and early satietyChronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML)Symptomatic splenomegalyRelief of abdominal pain and early satietyMyelofibrosis (agnogenic myeloid metaplasia)Severe symptomatic splenomegaly76% clinical response at 1 y, high risk of hemorrhagic, thrombotic, and infectious complications (26%)Hairy cell leukemiaSevere symptomatic splenomegaly, severe transfusion requirements; failure of medical therapyCurativeHodgkin’s lymphomaSurgical staging in selected casesVariedNon-Hodgkin’s lymphomaCytopenias, symptomatic splenomegalyImproved complete blood count values, relief of symptomsMetastatic tumor of the spleen (most commonly breast, lung, and melanoma)If symptomatic, or as part of cancer treatmentVariedPrimary tumor of the spleenFor diagnosis and treatment of cancerVariedTable 34-1cIndications for and expected response to splenectomy in various miscellaneous conditionsDISEASE/CONDITIONINDICATIONS FOR SPLENECTOMYRESPONSE TO SPLENECTOMYAbscess of the spleenMultiloculated, or failure of conservative measures for unilocularCurativeAmyloidosisSymptomatic splenomegalyImproves symptoms; does not correct underlying diseaseFelty’s syndromeNeutropenia80% durable response rateGaucher’s diseaseHypersplenismImproves cytopenias; does not correct underlying diseaseNiemann-Pick diseaseSymptomatic splenomegalyImproves symptoms; does not correct underlying diseasePortal/sinistral hypertensionSplenic vein thrombosis, symptomatic splenomegalyPalliativeSarcoidosisHypersplenism or symptomatic splenomegalyImproves symptoms and cytopenias; does not correct underlying diseaseSplenic artery aneurysmBest for distal lesions near splenic hilumCurativeSymptomatic nonparasitic cystsPartial splenectomy for small cysts; unroofing for large cystsCurativeSymptomatic parasitic cystsTherapy of choiceCurative; exercise caution not to spill cyst contentsWandering spleenAbdominal pain or splenomegaly (venous congestion)CurativeTraumatic ruptureGrades 4/5, or failure of conservative management of lower gradesCurativeBrunicardi_Ch34_p1517-p1548.indd   152323/02/19   2:36 PM 1524SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIlater section. Management of splenic injury in the trauma patient is also beyond the scope of this chapter and discussed else-where. The most common indications for elective splenec-tomy are malignancy and hematologic autoimmune disorders, principally, idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) and autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA).Benign DisordersRed Blood Cell Disorders Congenital Hereditary Spherocytosis. Hereditary spherocytosis (HS) is the most common type of hemolytic anemia for which splenectomy is indicated and the third most common type of congenital hemo-lytic anemia overall.26 HS results from an inherited dysfunction or deficiency in one of the erythrocyte membrane proteins (alpha or beta spectrin, ankyrin, band 3 protein, or protein 4.2). The result-ing destabilization of the membrane lipid bilayer allows a patho-logic release of membrane lipids. The red blood cell assumes a more spherical, less deformable shape, and the spherocytic eryth-rocytes are sequestered and destroyed in the spleen and hemolytic anemia ensues. HS is inherited primarily (70–80% of the time) in an autosomal dominant fashion; the estimated prevalence in Western populations is roughly 1 in 2000.26Patients with typical HS forms may have mild jaundice. Splenomegaly usually is palpable on physical examination. Laboratory examination reveals varying degrees of anemia: patients with mild forms of the disease may not have anemia; patients with moderate to severe forms may have hemoglobin levels as low as 4 to 6 g/dL. The mean corpuscular volume is typically low to normal or slightly decreased. For screening, a combined elevated mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentra-tion and an elevated erythrocyte distribution width are an excel-lent predictor. Other laboratory indicators of HS include those providing evidence of rapid red blood cell destruction, includ-ing elevated reticulocyte count, elevated lactate dehydrogenase level, and increased level of unconjugated bilirubin. Sphero-cytes are readily apparent on peripheral blood film.Risks and benefits should be assessed carefully before splenectomy and cholecystectomy are performed for HS.27 The main indications are moderate to severe symptomatic hemo-lytic anemia, growth retardation, skeletal changes, leg ulcers, and extramedullary hemopoietic tumors in young patients.26,28 If gallstones coexist with spherocytosis, the gallbladder should be removed, but prophylactic cholecystectomy without gall-stones is controversial. Near total splenectomy is advocated in children. Dramatic clinical improvement—despite persistent hemolysis—usually occurs after splenectomy in patients with moderate to severe disease. Because children can be affected with HS, the timing of splenectomy is important and is aimed at reducing the diminutive possibility of overwhelming postsple-nectomy sepsis. Delaying such an operation until the patient is between the ages of 4 and 6—unless the anemia and hemolysis accelerate—is recommended by most experts.29Red Blood Cell Enzyme Deficiencies. Red blood cell enzyme deficiencies associated with hemolytic anemia may be classified into two groups: deficiencies of enzymes involved in glycolytic pathways, such as pyruvate kinase deficiency, and deficien-cies of enzymes needed to maintain a high ratio of reduced to oxidized glutathione in the red blood cell, protecting it from oxidative damage, such as glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency.304Pyruvate Kinase Deficiency Pyruvate kinase (PK) deficiency is the most common glycolytic defect causing congenital nons-pherocytic hemolytic anemia.31 Since its first description in the early 1960s, vast amounts of information have been elucidated about the genetic diversity of the disease, red blood cell clear-ance, long-term complications and treatment options includ-ing transfusion and splenectomy. PK deficiency affects people worldwide, with a slight preponderance among those of Northern European or Chinese descent. Its estimated prevalence in the Caucasian population is 51 per million.32,33 Clinical manifesta-tions of the disease vary widely, from transfusion-dependent severe anemia in early childhood to well-compensated mild ane-mia in adolescents or adults. Prenatal hydrops fetalis has also been reported.31 Pyruvate kinase enzyme activity is the gold standard for initial diagnostic testing or by detection of spe-cific mutations at the complementary DNA or genomic level. Splenomegaly is common, and in severe cases, splenectomy can alleviate transfusion requirements.31 As with other disorders that cause hemolytic anemia in children, splenectomy should be delayed if possible to at least 4 years of age to reduce the risk of postsplenectomy infection.Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency The most common red blood cell enzyme deficiency overall is G6PD deficiency. It is far more prevalent than PK deficiency with more than 400 million people affected worldwide, although most experience only moderate health risks and no longevity reduction.34 Clinical manifestations—chronic hemolytic ane-mia, acute intermittent hemolytic episodes, or no hemolysis—depend on the variant of G6PD deficiency. The mainstay of therapy is avoidance of drugs known to precipitate hemolysis in patients with G6PD deficiency. Transfusions are given in cases of symptomatic anemia. Conventional wisdom is that splenectomy is not indicated in this disease, and certainly the overwhelming majority of patients with G6PD deficiency will neither require nor benefit from splenectomy. However, one report described a small case series of six symptomatic G6PD deficiency patients who had severe hemolytic anemia and required transfusion, all of whom were identified to share a common mutation at exon 10. All underwent splenectomy. A complete response occurred in four patients (transfusion requirement eliminated), and a partial response occurred in one patient (transfusion requirement reduced); no follow-up data were provided for the remaining patient. This study indi-cates that for a carefully select group of patients with severe hemolytic anemia attributable to G6PD deficiency, splenec-tomy may be of benefit, although more data is needed before strong recommendation can be made.34Acquired Warm-Antibody Autoimmune Hemolytic Anemia. Autoim-mune hemolytic anemias (AIHAs) are characterized by the destruction of red blood cells, whose erythrocyte life span is diminished by autoantibodies leveled against antigens. AIHA is classified as either primary or secondary, depending on whether an underlying cause, such as a disease or toxin, is iden-tified. AIHA is also divided into “warm” and “cold” catego-ries, based on the temperature at which the autoantibodies exert their effect.35 In cold-agglutinin disease, severe symptoms are uncommon and splenectomy is almost never indicated; there-fore, this entity is not discussed further in this section. However, warm-antibody AIHA has clinical consequences with which the surgeon should be familiar.Brunicardi_Ch34_p1517-p1548.indd   152423/02/19   2:36 PM 1525THE SPLEENCHAPTER 34Warm-antibody AIHA, although occurring primarily in midlife, can affect individuals at all ages. The disorder is more common among women, and fully half of warm-antibody AIHA cases are idiopathic. Clinical presentation may be acute or gradual. Findings include mild jaundice and symptoms and signs of anemia. One-third to one-half of patients present with splenomegaly. Sometimes in such cases the spleen is palpable on physical examination. The diagnosis relies on demonstrat-ing hemolysis as indicated by anemia, reticulocytosis, and/or products of red blood cell destruction, including bilirubin, in the blood, urine, and stool. A positive result on direct Coombs’ test confirms the AIHA diagnosis by distinguishing autoimmune from other forms of hemolytic anemia.Treatment of AIHA depends on the severity of the disease and whether it is primary or secondary. Severe symptomatic anemia demands prompt attention, often requiring red blood cell transfusion. The mainstay treatment for both primary and secondary forms of symptomatic, unstable AIHA remains longterm corticosteroid administration.36 Therapy should continue until a response is noted by a rise in hematocrit and fall in reticu-locyte count, which generally occurs within 3 weeks.Clinical response to splenectomy for AIHA varies, and the evidence from a number of small case series is conflicting. For example, one 2004 series reported a favorable response to splenectomy in patients with AIHA secondary to chronic lym-phocytic leukemia, whereas more recent series found no benefit from splenectomy in patients with AIHA secondary to systemic lupus erythematosus or inflammatory bowel disease.37,38Favorable responses to splenectomy have been reported in patients with warm-antibody AIHA, with a recent series show-ing complete remission of refractory AIHA following lapa-roscopic splenectomy at 35-month follow-up in patients over 60 years old.36 Transient responses are more common, how-ever, and many patients eventually experience hemolysis again despite splenectomy.37,38 The decision regarding splenectomy in the case of AIHA should be individualized based on careful consideration of the clinical history and frank discussion with the patient. It is considered as a third-line therapy after failure of steroids or anti-CD20 antibody administration.39Hemoglobinopathies. Sickle cell disease is an inherited chronic hemolytic anemia that results from the mutant sickle cell hemoglobin (HbS) within the red blood cell and is inher-ited in an autosomal dominant fashion. Persons who inherit an HbS gene from one parent (heterozygous) are carriers; those who inherit an HbS gene from both parents (homozygous) have sickle cell anemia.40In sickle cell disease, the underlying abnormality is the mutation of adenine to thymine in the sixth codon of the β-globin gene, which results in the substitution of valine for glutamic acid as the sixth amino acid of the β-globin chain. Mutant β chains included in the hemoglobin tetramer create HbS. Deoxy-genated HbS is insoluble and becomes polymerized and sickled. The subsequent lack of deformability of the red blood cell, in addition to other processes, results in microvascular congestion, which may lead to thrombosis, ischemia, and tissue necrosis. The disorder is characterized by painful intermittent episodes.Sequestration occurs in the spleen, with splenomegaly resulting early in the disease course. In most patients, subse-quent infarction of the spleen and autosplenectomy occur at some later time. The most frequent indications for splenectomy in sickle cell disease are recurrent acute sequestration crises, hypersplenism, and splenic abscess. The occurrence of one major acute sequestration crisis, characterized by rapid painful enlargement of the spleen and circulatory collapse, generally is considered sufficient grounds for splenectomy. Both partial and total splenectomy have been shown to control clinical symp-toms in children but may not change hematologic parameters.41 Preoperative preparation should include special attention to adequate hydration and avoidance of hypothermia.Transfusions are often indicated for anemia, for mod-erately severe episodes of acute chest syndrome (i.e., a new infiltrate on chest radiograph associated with new symptoms, such as fever, cough, sputum production, or hypoxia), and pre-operatively before splenectomy. Patients experiencing stroke or a severe crisis may require hydration and an exchange trans-fusion, which may be performed manually or with automated apheresis equipment. Hydroxyurea is an oral chemotherapeutic agent that upregulates fetal hemoglobin, which interferes with polymerization of HbS and thus reduces the sickling process.42Thalassemia. Thalassemia is the term for a group of inherited disorders of hemoglobin synthesis prevalent among people of Mediterranean extraction and classified according to the hemo-globin chain (α, β, or γ) affected. As a group, the thalassemias are the most common genetic diseases known to arise from a single gene defect.43,44 Most forms of this disorder are inherited in Mendelian recessive fashion from asymptomatic carrier par-ents. In the so-called thalassemia belt that extends throughout the shores of the Mediterranean as well as through the Arabian Peninsula, Turkey, Iran, India, and southeastern Asia, the inci-dence of thalassemia is between 2.5% and 15%. However, thal-assemias have been found in people of all ethnic origins.44In all forms of thalassemia, the primary defect is absent or reduced production of hemoglobin chains. From this abnormal-ity, two significant consequences arise: (a) reduced functioning of hemoglobin tetramers, yielding hypochromia and microcy-tosis; and (b) unbalanced biosynthesis of individual α and β subunits, which results in insoluble red blood cells that cannot release oxygen normally and may precipitate with cell aging. Both underproduction of hemoglobin and excess production of unpaired hemoglobin subunits contribute to thalassemia-associated morbidity and mortality.A diagnosis of thalassemia major (homozygous form) is made by demonstrating hypochromic microcytic anemia asso-ciated with randomly distorted red blood cells and nucleated erythrocytes (target cells) on peripheral blood smear.7 Elevated reticulocyte count and white blood cell count are among the associated findings. Because α chains are needed to form both fetal hemoglobin and adult hemoglobin, α-thalassemia becomes symptomatic in utero or at birth. By contrast, β-thalassemia becomes symptomatic at 4 to 6 months because β chains are involved only in adult hemoglobin synthesis.The clinical spectrum of the thalassemias is wide. Heterozygous carriers of the disease are usually asymptomatic. Homozygous individuals, on the other hand, typically present before 2 years of age with pallor, growth retardation, jaundice, and abdominal swelling due to liver and spleen enlargement. Among other characteristics of thalassemia major are intractable leg ulcers, head enlargement, frequent infections, and the need for periodic blood transfusions. Untreated individuals usually die in late infancy or early childhood from severe anemia.7Treatment for thalassemia involves red blood cell transfu-sions to maintain a hemoglobin level of >9 mg/dL, along with Brunicardi_Ch34_p1517-p1548.indd   152523/02/19   2:36 PM 1526SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIintensive parenteral chelation therapy with deferoxamine. Sple-nectomy is indicated for patients with excessive transfusion requirements (>200 mL/kg per year), discomfort due to spleno-megaly, or painful splenic infarction. Careful assessment of the risk-benefit ratio is essential. Thalassemia patients are at high risk for pulmonary hypertension after splenectomy; however, the precise pathophysiology of this sequela remains unclear.45,46 The increase in infectious complications is likely to be due to a coexisting immune deficiency, in large part brought about by iron overload, which may be associated both with the thalas-semia itself and with transfusions. The disproportionately high rate of overwhelming postsplenectomy infection in thalassemia patients has led some investigators to consider partial splenec-tomy in children; some success in reducing mortality has been reported.47 However, splenectomy should be delayed until after the age of 4 years unless it is absolutely necessary.Platelet Disorders Idiopathic Thrombocytopenic Purpura Idiopathic thrombo-cytopenic purpura (ITP), also called immune thrombocytopenic purpura, is an autoimmune disorder characterized by a low platelet count and mucocutaneous and petechial bleeding. The low platelet count stems from premature removal of platelets opsonized by antiplatelet immunoglobulin G autoantibodies produced in the spleen. This clearance occurs through the inter-action of platelet autoantibodies with Fc receptors expressed on tissue macrophages, predominantly in the spleen and liver. The estimated incidence of ITP is 100 persons per million annually, about one-half of whom are children.48 Adult-onset and child-hood-onset ITP are strikingly different in their clinical course and management.Patients with ITP typically present with petechiae or ecchymoses, although some experience major bleeding from the outset. Bleeding may occur from mucosal surfaces in the form of gingival bleeding, epistaxis, menorrhagia, hematuria, or even melena. The severity of bleeding frequently corresponds to the deficiency in platelets: Patients with counts greater than 50,000/mm3 usually present with incidental findings; those with counts between 30,000 and 50,000/mm3 often have easy bruis-ing; those with platelet counts between 10,000 and 30,000/mm3 may develop spontaneous petechiae or ecchymoses; and those with counts less than 10,000/mm3 are at risk for internal bleeding.48 The incidence of major intracranial hemorrhage is approximately 1%, and it usually occurs early in the disease course. The duration of the bleeding helps to distinguish acute from chronic forms of ITP. Children often present at a young age (peak age of approximately 5 years) with sudden onset of petechiae or purpura several days to weeks after an infectious illness. In contrast, adults experience a more chronic form of disease with an insidious onset. Splenomegaly is uncommon with ITP in both adults and children, and its occurrence should prompt a search for a separate cause of thrombocytopenia. Up to 10% of children, however, have a palpable spleen tip.Diagnosis of ITP is based on exclusion of other possibili-ties in the presence of a low platelet count and mucocutane-ous bleeding. Other diseases resulting in secondary forms of ITP, such as systemic lupus erythematosus, antiphospholipid syndrome, lymphoproliferative disorders, human immunodefi-ciency virus (HIV) infection, and hepatitis C, should be identi-fied and treated when present. In addition, any history of use of a drug known to cause thrombocytopenia, such as certain antimicrobials, anti-inflammatories, antihypertensives, and 5Table 34-2Second-line treatment options for immune thrombocytopeniaSplenectomyAdvantages•	Effective, time-honored treatment•	Most effective response (overall 88%, partial 22%, complete 66%)Disadvantages•	Risk of overwhelming postsplenectomy infection•	Increased risk of thrombotic events•	Morbidity and mortality associated with an operationRituximabAdvantages•	Nonsurgical•	Good experience since 1999•	Initial immediate response 63%•	31% response at 2 yearsDisadvantages•	Severe toxicity in 2%–6%Thrombopoietin Receptor AgonistAdvantages•	Nonsurgical•	Oral agent self-administered weekly•	80% response rateDisadvantages•	Long-term treatment required•	Potential toxicity•	Long-term data lacking at this timeantidepressants, should be sought. In addition to low platelet count, another laboratory finding characteristic of ITP is the presence of large, immature platelets (megakaryocytes) on peripheral blood smear.The usual first line of therapy is oral prednisone at a dos-age of 1.0 to 1.5 mg/kg per day.49,50 No consensus exists as to the optimal duration of steroid therapy, but most responses occur within the first 3 weeks. Response rates range from 50% to 75%, but relapses are common. IV immunoglobulin, given at 1.0 g/kg per day for 2 to 3 days, is indicated for internal bleeding when platelet counts remain less than 5000/mm3, when extensive pur-pura exists, or to preoperatively boost platelets. IV immunoglob-ulin is thought to impair clearance of immunoglobulin G–coated platelets by competing for binding to tissue macrophage recep-tors. An immediate response is common, but a sustained remis-sion is not. The medical approach to ITP has been modified with the advent of rituximab and thrombopoietin receptor agonists.51 Therapeutic recommendations are summarized in Table 34-2. Splenectomy is selectively indicated for failure of medical ther-apy, for prolonged use of steroids with undesirable effects, and in selected cases after first relapse.7 Prolonged use of steroids can be defined in various ways, but a persistent need for more than 10 to 20 mg/d for 3 to 6 months to maintain a platelet count of greater than 30,000/mm3 generally prompts referral for sple-nectomy. Splenectomy is an effective option for refractory ITP and provides a permanent response without subsequent need for steroids in 75% to 85% of patients. Two recent reviews and meta-analyses have assessed the global results of splenectomy for ITP, specifically after the use of laparoscopic techniques. Brunicardi_Ch34_p1517-p1548.indd   152623/02/19   2:36 PM 1527THE SPLEENCHAPTER 34In 2004, Kojouri and colleagues reviewed 135 case series from 1966 to 2004, pooling 4955 patients.51 The long-term plate-let count response was assessed, as was the ability to predict response and the incidence of complications. Complete response was achieved in 66% of cases with a follow-up ranging from 1 to 153 months, and complete and partial responses occurred in as many as 88% of patients, regardless of the duration of follow-up. They also analyzed 12 preoperative demographic, clinical, and laboratory parameters and found no predictive capability of platelet response in any of them. Mortality was very low (1%), and morbidity was 10%. Limitations of this review included old case series and a low percentage of laparoscopic splenectomies. In a 2009 systemic review involving 1223 patients, Mikhael and colleagues evaluated the shortand long-term outcomes after laparoscopic splenectomy.52 The conversion rate to open sur-gery was 5.6%, and the immediate nonresponder rate was 8.2%; however, eventually a clinical response was achieved in 72% of the patients on long-term follow-up (5 years). The initial con-cerns regarding the potential for missing accessory spleens, lon-ger operative times, and increased cost related to laparoscopic versus open splenectomy have been resolved. Laparoscopy is now the approach of choice for elective splenectomy for ITP, with recent studies showing improved short-term results and comparable long-term results to conventional open splenectomy in this condition.53-56In children with ITP, the course is typically self-limited, with durable and complete remission in greater than 70% of patients regardless of therapy. Because of the good prognosis without treatment, the decision to intervene surgically is contro-versial and is largely to obviate intracranial hemorrhage as dis-cussed earlier. Thus, children with typical ITP—and certainly those without hemorrhage—are managed principally by obser-vation, with short-term therapy in select cases.57 Urgent sple-nectomy, in conjunction with aggressive medical therapy, may play a role in the rare circumstance of severe, life-threatening bleeding in both children and adults.Thrombotic Thrombocytopenic Purpura Thrombotic throm-bocytopenic purpura (TTP) is a serious disorder characterized by thrombocytopenia, microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, and neurologic complications. Abnormal platelet clumping occurs in arterioles and capillaries, reducing the lumen of these vessels and predisposing the patient to microvascular thrombotic epi-sodes. The reduced lumen size also causes shearing stresses on erythrocytes, which leads to deformed red blood cells subject to hemolysis. Hemolysis may also be due in part to sequestration and destruction of erythrocytes in the spleen. Research has dem-onstrated that the underlying abnormality is likely related to the persistence of unusually large multimers of von Willebrand fac-tor associated with platelet clumping in the patient’s blood.58,59TTP occurs in approximately 3.7 individuals per million, but this rare disorder’s dramatic clinical sequelae and favorable response to early therapy demand an understanding of its clini-cal presentation to ensure an early diagnosis. Clinical features of the disorder include petechiae, fever, neurologic symptoms, renal failure, and, infrequently, cardiac symptoms such as heart failure or arrhythmias. Petechial hemorrhages in the lower extremities are the most common presenting sign. Along with fever, patients may experience flu-like symptoms, malaise, or fatigue. Neurologic changes range from generalized headaches to altered mental status, seizures, and even coma. Generally, however, the mere presence of petechiae and thrombocytopenia is sufficient to lead to the diagnosis of TTP and consideration of treatment.The diagnosis is confirmed by the peripheral blood smear, which shows schistocytes, nucleated red blood cells, and baso-philic stippling. Although other conditions such as tight aortic stenosis or prosthetic valves may lead to the presence of schis-tocytes, these conditions generally are not accompanied by thrombocytopenia. TTP may be distinguished from autoimmune causes of thrombocytopenia, such as Evans’ syndrome (ITP and autoimmune hemolytic anemia) or systemic lupus erythemato-sus, by a negative result on Coombs’ test.Plasma exchange is the first-line therapy for TTP. This treatment consists of the daily removal of a single volume of the patient’s plasma and its replacement with fresh-frozen plasma until the thrombocytopenia, anemia, and associated symptoms are corrected. Therapy is then tapered over 1 to 2 weeks.40 Splenectomy should be considered in patients who experience relapse or who require multiple plasma exchanges to control severe symptoms, and generally is well tolerated without sig-nificant morbidity.59,60Malignant ConditionsWhite Blood Cell Disorders. The role of splenectomy in patients with white blood cell disorders varies. As for the myelogenous diseases mentioned previously, splenectomy for white blood cell disorders can be effective therapy for symp-tomatic splenomegaly and hypersplenism, improving some clinical parameters but generally not altering the course of the underlying disease or long-term prognosis. Historically, sple-nectomy has played a role during surgical staging for Hodg-kin’s disease, although this practice has become largely obsolete with the advent of imaging technologies (Computed tomogra-phy [CT] scan and 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography [18F-FDG PET]).61-63 Careful consideration of the intended benefits of splenectomy must be weighed against the significant perioperative and postsplenectomy risks in this often complex patient population.64Hairy Cell Leukemia Hairy cell leukemia (HCL) is an uncom-mon blood disorder, representing only 2% of all adult leukemias. HCL is characterized by splenomegaly, pancytopenia, and large numbers of abnormal lymphocytes in the bone marrow. These lymphocytes contain irregular hair-like cytoplasmic projections identifiable on the peripheral smear. Many HCL patients have few symptoms and require no specific therapy. Splenectomy for HCL was historically performed as a palliative procedure, alleviating the symptoms associated with splenomegaly and normalizing peripheral blood counts in the majority of patients, but not leading to morphological bone marrow remissions. However, with the advent of diverse new drugs (e.g., ritux-imab, pentostatin, cladribine), splenectomy has become rarely performed.65 Splenectomy should be considered after exhaustive systemic therapy or for those with nontraumatic rupture, and it has also been used to treat pregnant women with HCL to delay onset of chemotherapy.66Hodgkin’s Lymphoma Hodgkin’s Lymphoma (HL) is a dis-order of the lymphoid system characterized by the presence of Reed-Sternberg cells (which actually form the minority of the Hodgkin’s tumor). More than 90% of patients with HL pres-ent with lymphadenopathy above the diaphragm. Lymph nodes can become particularly bulky in the mediastinum, which may result in shortness of breath, cough, or obstructive pneumonia. Brunicardi_Ch34_p1517-p1548.indd   152723/02/19   2:36 PM 1528SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IILymphadenopathy below the diaphragm is rare on presen-tation but can arise with disease progression. The spleen is often an occult site of spread, but massive splenomegaly is not common. In addition, large spleens do not necessarily signify involvement.62Four major histologic types exist: lymphocyte predomi-nance type, nodular sclerosis type, mixed cellularity type, and lymphocyte depletion type. The histologic type, along with location of disease and symptomatology, influence survival for patients with HD. Stage I disease is limited to one anatomic region; stage II disease is defined by the presence of two or more contiguous or noncontiguous regions on the same side of the diaphragm; stage III disease involves disease on both sides of the diaphragm, but limited to lymph nodes, spleen, and Waldeyer’s ring (the ring of lymphoid tissue formed by the lin-gual, palatine, and nasopharyngeal tonsils); and stage IV disease includes involvement of the bone marrow, lung, liver, skin, gas-trointestinal tract, or any organ or tissue other than the lymph nodes or Waldeyer’s ring.62Staging laparotomy for HL is less commonly performed in the current era of minimally invasive surgery and advanced imaging techniques. More liberal use of diagnostic tools (CT scan and 18F-FDG PET) and chemotherapy for patients with HL has drastically reduced the indications for surgical staging. Current indications for surgical staging include clini-cal suspicion of lymphoma without evidence of peripheral disease or patients requiring restaging for suspicion of failure after chemotherapy.62,67Non-Hodgkin’s Lymphoma Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (NHL) encompasses all malignancies derived from the lymphoid sys-tem except classic HL.63 A proliferation of any one of the three predominant lymph cell types—natural killer cells, T cells, or B cells—may be included in the category of NHL. Because of the wide net cast by NHL, the clinical presentations of the dis-orders under its umbrella vary. The subentities of NHL may be clinically classified into nodal or extranodal, as well as indolent, aggressive, and very aggressive groups. Patients with indolent lymphomas may present with mild or no symptoms and seek medical attention for a swollen lymph node, whereas the aggres-sive and very aggressive lymphomas create easily noticeable symptoms, such as pain, swelling due to obstruction of vessels, fever, and night sweats. Surgical staging is no longer indicated for NHL because the combination of history and physical exam-ination, chest radiograph and abdominal/pelvic CT scan, biopsy of involved lymph nodes (including laparoscopically directed nodal and liver biopsies), and bone marrow biopsy is suffi-cient.63 Splenomegaly exists in some, but not all, forms of NHL. Splenectomy does not alter the natural history of the disease, but it is indicated in cases where a diagnosis cannot be established by obtaining peripheral tissue and clinical suspicion remains or for management of symptoms related to an enlarged spleen as well as for improvement of cytopenias.68-72Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia Chronic lymphocytic leuke-mia (CCL) is currently considered a subtype of NHL. The main characteristic of CLL is a progressive accumulation of old and nonfunctional lymphocytes.63,73 Symptoms of CLL are nonspe-cific and include weakness, fatigue, fever without illness, night sweats, and frequent bacterial and viral infections. The most fre-quent finding is lymphadenopathy. When the spleen is enlarged, it may be massive or barely palpable below the costal margin. Splenectomy is indicated to improve cytopenias and was shown to be 75% effective in a combined group of patients who had either CLL or nonmalignant HD.29 Splenectomy may facilitate chemotherapy in patients whose cell counts were prohibitively low before spleen removal. Palliative splenectomy also is indi-cated for symptomatic splenomegaly.Bone Marrow Disorders (Myeloproliferative Disorders).  The myeloproliferative disorders are characterized by an abnor-mal growth of cell lines in the bone marrow. They include chronic myeloid leukemia, acute myeloid leukemia, chronic myelomono-cytic leukemia, essential thrombocythemia, polycythemia vera, and myelofibrosis, also known as agnogenic myeloid metaplasia (see “Myelofibrosis [Agnogenic Myeloid Metaplasia]” later in this chapter). The common underlying problem leading to sple-nectomy in these disorders is symptomatic splenomegaly. Symp-toms due to splenomegaly are due to mass effect and consist of early satiety, poor gastric emptying, heaviness or pain in the left upper quadrant, and even diarrhea. Hypersplenism, when it occurs in these conditions, usually is associated with splenomeg-aly. Splenectomy performed in the setting of the myeloprolifera-tive disorders is generally for treatment of the pain, early satiety, and other symptoms of splenomegaly. Radiation has been used since 1903 to treat symptomatic splenomegaly in myeloprolif-erative disorders, but today it is principally used in situations in which splenectomy is not an option.Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia Chronic myelogenous leu-kemia (CML) is a disorder of the primitive pluripotent stem cells in the bone marrow that results in a significant increase in erythroid, megakaryotic, and pluripotent progenitors in the peripheral blood smear. The genetic hallmark is a transposition between the bcr gene on chromosome 9 and the abl gene on chromosome 22. CML accounts for 7% to 15% of all leukemias, with an incidence of 1.5 in 100,000 in the United States.44 It is often asymptomatic, but CML can cause fatigue, anorexia, sweating, and left upper quadrant pain and early satiety sec-ondary to splenomegaly. Enlargement of the spleen is found in roughly one-half of patients with CML. Current therapy includes imatinib or allogeneic stem cell transplantation. Splenectomy is indicated to relieve symptoms of massive splenomegaly, but it does not prevent blast crisis or alter the disease process.45,70Acute Myeloid Leukemia Like CML, acute myeloid leu-kemia (AML) involves the abnormal growth of stem cells in the bone marrow. Unlike CML, AML has a presentation that is more rapid and dramatic. The proliferation and accumula-tion of hematopoietic stem cells in the bone marrow and blood inhibit the growth and maturation of normal red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. Death usually results within weeks to months if AML goes untreated. The incidence of AML is approximately 9200 new cases each year in the United States, and it accounts for 1.2% of all cancer deaths.74 Patients with other myeloproliferative disorders, such as polycythemia vera, primary thrombocytosis, or myeloid metaplasia, are at increased risk for leukemic transformation to AML. Presenting signs and symptoms of AML include a viral-like illness with fever, malaise, and frequently bone pain due to the expansion of the medullary space. Standard treatment is combined induction therapy with daunorubicin, cytarabine, and stem cell transplan-tation. Splenectomy is indicated in AML only in the uncom-mon circumstance that left upper quadrant pain and early satiety become unbearable. The benefit must be weighed against the heightened risk of postsplenectomy infection in AML patients immunocompromised due to neutropenia and chemotherapy.74Brunicardi_Ch34_p1517-p1548.indd   152823/02/19   2:36 PM 1529THE SPLEENCHAPTER 34Chronic Myelomonocytic Leukemia Like CML and AML, chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML) is characterized by a proliferation of hematopoietic elements in the bone marrow and blood. CMML differs from CML in that it is associated with monocytosis in the peripheral smear (>1 × 103 monocytes/mm3) and in the bone marrow. Splenomegaly occurs in one-half of these patients, and splenectomy can result in symptomatic relief.75Essential Thrombocythemia Essential thrombocythemia (ET) represents abnormal growth of the megakaryocyte cell line, resulting in increased levels of platelets in the bloodstream. The diagnosis is made after the exclusion of other chronic myeloid disorders such as CML, polycythemia vera, and myelofibrosis that may also present with thrombocytosis.76 Clinical manifesta-tions of ET include vasomotor symptoms, thrombohemorrhagic events, recurrent fetal loss, and the transformation to myelofi-brosis with myeloid metaplasia or AML. Hydroxyurea is used to reduce thrombotic events in ET but does not alter transforma-tion to myelofibrosis or leukemia. Splenomegaly occurs in one-third to one-half of patients with ET. Splenectomy is not felt to be helpful in the early stages of ET and is best reserved for the later stages of disease, when myeloid metaplasia has devel-oped.69 Even in these circumstances, candidates should be cho-sen selectively because significant bleeding has been reported to complicate splenectomy in these patients.Polycythemia Vera Polycythemia vera (PV) is a clonal, chronic, progressive myeloproliferative disorder characterized by an increase in red blood cell mass, frequently accompanied by leukocytosis, thrombocytosis, and splenomegaly. Patients with PV typically enjoy longer survival than those affected by hematologic malignancies but remain at risk for transformation to myelofibrosis or AML. The disease is rare, with an annual incidence of 5 to 17 cases per million population.76,77 Physical findings include ruddy cyanosis, conjunctival plethora, hepato-megaly, splenomegaly, and hypertension. Treatment should be tailored to the risk status of the patient and ranges from phle-botomy and aspirin administration to the use of chemothera-peutic agents. As in ET, splenectomy is not helpful in the early stages of disease and is best reserved for patients with late-stage disease in whom myeloid metaplasia has developed and spleno-megaly-related symptoms are severe.76,77Myelofibrosis (Agnogenic Myeloid Metaplasia) The term myelofibrosis may be used to describe either the generic condi-tion of fibrosis of the bone marrow (which may be associated with a number of benign and malignant disorders) or a specific, chronic, malignant hematologic disease associated with sple-nomegaly, the presence of red blood cell and white blood cell progenitors in the bloodstream, marrow fibrosis, and extramed-ullary hematopoiesis, otherwise known as agnogenic myeloid metaplasia (AMM). AMM also can be referred to as myeloscle-rosis, idiopathic myeloid metaplasia, and osteosclerosis. In this chapter, the term myelofibrosis is synonymous with AMM.In AMM, fibrosis of the bone marrow is believed to be a response to a clonal proliferation of hematopoietic stem cells. Marrow failure is common. The true incidence of AMM is unknown due to the scarcity of epidemiologic data, but one study estimated its U.S. incidence at 1.46 per 100,000 popula-tion.78-80 The diagnosis is made by a careful examination of the peripheral blood smear and bone marrow. Nucleated red blood cells and immature myeloid elements in the blood are present in 96% of cases and strongly suggest the diagnosis. Teardrop poikilocytosis is another frequent finding. Care must be taken, however, to exclude a history of a primary neoplasm (such as lymphoma or adenocarcinoma of the stomach, lung, prostate, or breast) or tuberculosis because patients with these conditions may develop secondary myelofibrosis.Treatment depends on symptoms: Asymptomatic patients are closely followed, whereas symptomatic patients undergo therapeutic intervention targeted to their symptoms. The only curative therapy is allogeneic bone marrow transplantation in younger, high-risk patients. Supportive therapy for clinically symptomatic anemia includes steroids, danazol, erythropoietin, or blood transfusion.78,80 Splenomegaly-related symptoms are best treated with splenectomy. Although some chemotherapeu-tic agents (busulfan, hydroxyurea, interferon-α) and low-dose radiation can reduce splenic size, their discontinuation usually results in rapid splenic regrowth.A thorough preoperative workup must precede sple-nectomy in patients with AMM. The candidate must possess acceptable cardiac, pulmonary, hepatic, and renal reserve for the operation. The coagulation system should be examined; testing should include measurement of coagulation factors V and VIII and fibrin split products, platelet count, and bleeding time. Low platelet counts may require administration of ste-roids and/or platelet transfusion at the time of surgery. Sple-nectomy provides durable, effective palliation for nearly all patients with AMM, although postoperative complications are more common in patients with AMM than in those with other hematologic indications. The Mayo Clinic recently published its 30-year experience with 314 myelofibrosis patients who underwent splenectomy. Nearly half of the operations (49%) were performed to alleviate the mechanical symptoms of sple-nomegaly; the remainder were undertaken to manage anemia, thrombocytopenia, or portal hypertension. Response to splenec-tomy was 76% overall at 1 year; overall complication rate was 28%, including 21 perioperative deaths.80 Thrombosis, hemor-rhage, and infection complications were common, with preop-erative thrombocytopenia an independent predictor of mortality risk. These data underscore the severity of this malignancy and emphasize the need for careful patient selection when consider-ing splenectomy in AMM.79Tumors and Metastasis. Primary tumors of the spleen are typ-ically benign or malignant variants of vascular neoplasms. The most common primary tumors of the spleen are sarcomas, many of which have been linked to various environmental and occu-pational exposures such as vinyl chloride or thorium dioxide. Isolated splenic metastases are extremely unusual but may occur in the setting of a concomitant carcinoma.81 Lung carcinoma is the tumor that most commonly spreads to the spleen, although, colorectal, ovarian, and melanoma may also metastasize to the spleen.82,83 If after a thorough examination, an isolated splenic metastasis is confirmed, a laparoscopic splenectomy with intact spleen retrieval may be considered.81-83Miscellaneous Disorders and LesionsInfections and Abscesses. Primary infections of the spleen although uncommon in immunocompetent adults, are particu-larly reported in the immunocompromised population or those with a history of intravenous recreational drug abuse.84,85 The potential effects of certain systemic infections on the spleen merit close attention, mostly because of the dreaded risk of spontaneous splenic rupture. Infectious mononucleosis due to Brunicardi_Ch34_p1517-p1548.indd   152923/02/19   2:36 PM 1530SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIeither Epstein-Barr virus or cytomegalovirus infection imparts a small but often-discussed risk of spontaneous splenic rup-ture in both adults and children. The true incidence may be underreported, however. Recent case reports abound in the lit-erature regarding spontaneous splenic rupture due to a variety of infectious causes (malaria, Listeria infection, fungal infec-tions, dengue, and Q fever, to name a few) as well as a vari-ety of neoplastic and other noninfectious causes (lymphoma, angiosarcoma, amyloidosis, pregnancy). The presumed patho-physiologic mechanism is infiltration of the splenic paren-chyma with inflammatory cells, which distorts the architecture and fibrous support system of the spleen and thins the splenic capsule.86 In this setting, splenic rupture can occur spontane-ously or after a seemingly minor external trauma or even a Valsalva maneuver.Abscesses of the spleen are uncommon, with an incidence reported to be 0.14% to 0.7%.87-89 They occur more frequently in tropical locations, where they are associated with throm-bosed splenic vessels and infarction in patients with sickle cell anemia. Five distinct mechanisms of splenic abscess formation have been described: (a) hematogenous infection; (b) contigu-ous infection; (c) hemoglobinopathy; (d) immunosuppression, including HIV infection and chemotherapy; and (e) trauma. The presentation of splenic abscess frequently is delayed, with most patients enduring symptoms for 16 to 22 days before diagno-sis. Clinical manifestations include fever, left upper quadrant pain, leukocytosis, and splenomegaly in about one-third of patients. The diagnosis is confirmed by ultrasound or CT scan, which has a 95% sensitivity and specificity. Common organ-isms are aerobic microbes (streptococci and Escherichia coli), but other microorganisms have also been isolated (Mycobac-terium tuberculosis and Salmonella typhi). Upon discovery of a splenic abscess, broad-spectrum antibiotics should be initi-ated, with adjustment to more specific therapy based on culture results and continuation of treatment for a minimum of 14 days. Splenectomy is the operation of choice, but percutaneous and open drainage are options for patients who either cannot toler-ate splenectomy or where the clinical scenario warrants splenic preservation, particularly in children.90 Percutaneous drainage is often successful for patients with unilocular disease and may result in avoidance of splenectomy. Patients with multilocular disease will often require multiple drains and therefore often benefit from total splenectomy.Cysts. Splenic cysts (Fig. 34-5) can be categorized according to a number of criteria; one clinically relevant scheme is to char-acterize true splenic cysts as either parasitic or nonparasitic.86Parasitic Infections. Parasitic infection is the most common cause of splenic cysts worldwide, and the majority are due to Echinococcus species. These cysts are more commonly found in areas where the pathogen is endemic. Symptoms, when present, generally are related to the presence of a mass lesion in the left upper quadrant or a lesion that impinges on the stomach. Ultra-sound can establish the presence of a cystic lesion and occasion-ally incidentally detect asymptomatic lesions as well. Serologic testing for echinococcal antibodies can confirm or exclude the cystic lesion as parasitic, an important piece of informa-tion when planning operative therapy. Symptomatic parasitic cysts are best treated with splenectomy. Avoidance of spillage of parasitic cyst contents into the peritoneal cavity to avoid the possibility of anaphylactic shock is an important principle in surgical management despite its rare occurrence.91Cysts resulting from trauma are termed pseudocysts due to their lack of an epithelial cell lining. Less common examples of nonparasitic cysts are dermoid, epidermoid, and epithelial cysts.92 The treatment of nonparasitic cysts depends on whether or not they produce symptoms. Asymptomatic nonparasitic cysts may be observed with close follow-up by ultrasound to exclude significant growth or expansion. Patients should be advised of the risk of cyst rupture with even minor abdominal trauma if they elect nonoperative management for large cysts. Small symptomatic nonparasitic cysts may be excised with splenic preservation, and large symptomatic nonparasitic cysts may be unroofed. Both of these operations may be performed laparoscopically.86Storage Diseases and Infiltrative Disorders Gaucher’s Disease Gaucher’s disease is an inherited lipid stor-age disorder characterized by the deposition of glucocerebroside in cells of the macrophage-monocyte system. The underlying abnormality is a deficiency in the activity of a lysosomal hydro-lase. Abnormal glycolipid storage results in organomegaly, particularly hepatomegaly and splenomegaly.93,94 Patients with Gaucher’s disease frequently experience symptoms related to splenomegaly, including early satiety and abdominal discom-fort, and to hypersplenism, including thrombocytopenia, normo-cytic anemia, and mild leukopenia. These latter findings occur as a result of excessive sequestration of formed blood elements in the spleen. Other symptoms in patients with Gaucher’s dis-ease include bone pain, pathologic fractures, and jaundice. Splenectomy may alleviate hematologic abnormalities in these patients with hypersplenism, but it does not correct the underly-ing disease process.95Niemann-Pick Disease Niemann-Pick disease is an inherited disorder of abnormal lysosomal storage of sphingomyelin and cholesterol in cells of the macrophage-monocyte system. Four types of the disease (A, B, C, and D) exist, with unique clinical presentations. Types A and B result from a deficiency in lyso-somal hydrolase and are the forms most likely to demonstrate splenomegaly with its concomitant symptoms. Symptoms of splenomegaly are relieved by splenectomy.Amyloidosis Amyloidosis is a disorder of abnormal extra-cellular protein deposition and protein conformation disorder associated with a clonal plasma cell dyscrasia. There are mul-tiple forms of amyloidosis, each with its own individual clini-cal presentation, and the severity of disease may range from asymptomatic to multiorgan failure. Patients with primary amy-loidosis, associated with plasma cell dyscrasia, have splenic involvement in approximately 5% of cases. Secondary amy-loidosis, associated with chronic inflammatory conditions, also may present with an enlarged spleen and even spontaneous rup-ture.96 Symptoms of splenomegaly are relieved by splenectomy.Sarcoidosis Sarcoidosis is an inflammatory disease of young adults characterized by noncaseating granulomas in affected tissues. Signs and symptoms of the disease range in severity and typically are nonspecific, such as fatigue and malaise. Any organ system may be involved. The most commonly involved organ is the lung, followed by the spleen. Splenomegaly occurs in approximately 25% of patients. Massive splenomegaly (>1 kg) is rare with a reported incidence of 3%.97,98 Other affected tissues include the lymph nodes, eyes, joints, liver, spleen, and heart. When splenomegaly occurs and causes symp-toms related to size or hypersplenism, splenectomy effectively relieves symptoms and corrects hematologic abnormalities such Brunicardi_Ch34_p1517-p1548.indd   153023/02/19   2:36 PM 1531THE SPLEENCHAPTER 34as anemia and thrombocytopenia. Spontaneous splenic rupture has been reported in sarcoidosis.94Splenic Artery Aneurysm Although splenic artery aneurysm is rare, it is the most common visceral artery aneurysm. Women are four times more likely to be affected than men. The aneu-rysm usually arises in the middle to distal portion of the splenic artery.99,100 Indications for treatment include presence of symp-toms, pregnancy, intention to become pregnant, and presence of pseudoaneurysms associated with inflammatory processes. Aneurysm resection or ligation alone is acceptable for amenable lesions in the mid-splenic artery, but distal lesions in close prox-imity to the splenic hilum should be treated with concomitant splenectomy. An excellent prognosis follows elective treatment. Splenic artery embolization has been used to treat splenic artery aneurysm; however, this may result in painful splenic infarction or abscess.Portal Hypertension Portal hypertension can result from numerous causes but is usually due to liver cirrhosis. Sple-nomegaly and splenic congestion often accompany portal hypertension, which leads to sequestration and destruction of circulating cells in the spleen. Splenectomy is not indicated for hypersplenism per se in patients with portal hypertension as there is no correlation between the degree of pancytopenia and long-term survival in these patients.7 In rare circumstances in which splenectomy is required to reduce bleeding from esopha-geal varices exacerbated by thrombocytopenia, a concomitant splenorenal shunt procedure may be performed to decompress the portal system.Sinistral hypertension secondary to splenic vein thrombo-sis, on the other hand, is potentially curable with splenectomy. Patients that are bleeding from isolated gastric varices who have normal liver function test results, especially those with a pre-vious history of pancreatitis, should be examined for splenic vein thrombosis and treated with splenectomy if findings are positive.Idiopathic portal hypertension (IPH) is extremely rare, and it is characterized by the absence of cirrhosis or other clear etiologies such as hepatic or portal vein thrombosis, cardiac failure, or hematologic disorders.101-104 Hypersplen-ism often develops in these patients due to hyperactivity of the spleen; defined as a triad of splenomegaly, pancytopenia, 6ACBDFigure 34-5. A. Computed tomography (CT) scan of giant splenic cyst. B. Three-dimensional CT reconstruction of splenic cyst. C and D. Macroscopic aspect of a multicystic spleen lesion.Brunicardi_Ch34_p1517-p1548.indd   153123/02/19   2:37 PM 1532SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIand normocellularity of bone marrow warranting intervention by way of splenic artery embolization or splenectomy. Par-tial splenic embolization (PSE) has recently been utilized with good success in prohibitively high operative risk patients with severe hypersplenism.105Felty’s Syndrome The triad of rheumatoid arthritis, spleno-megaly, and neutropenia is called Felty’s syndrome. It exists in approximately 3% of all patients with rheumatoid arthritis, two-thirds of whom are women. Immune complexes coat the surface of white blood cells, which leads to their sequestration and clear-ance in the spleen with subsequent neutropenia. This neutro-penia (<2000 neutrophils/mm3) increases the risk for recurrent infections and often drives the decision for splenectomy. The size of the spleen is variable, from nonpalpable in 5% to 10% of patients to massively enlarged upwards of 4 times heavier than normal in others. Corticosteroids, hematopoietic growth factors, methotrexate, and splenectomy have all been used to treat the neutropenia of Felty’s syndrome. More recently, ritux-imab has been tried as a second line agent in refractory Felty’s syndrome.106,107Overall response to splenectomy is excellent, with >80% of patients showing a durable increase in white blood cell count. More than one-half of patients who had infections before surgery may clear their infections after surgery.108 Besides symptomatic neutropenia, other indications for sple-nectomy include transfusion-dependent anemia and profound thrombocytopenia.Wandering Spleen A very uncommon anatomic abnormality is the “wandering spleen.” In this condition, the spleen “floats” inside the abdominal cavity due to an anomaly during embryo-genesis and may present itself in a variety of ways includ-ing acute abdomen.109 The wandering spleen is not normally attached to adjacent viscera in the splenic fossa. This may lead to splenic torsion and infarction. Splenopexy or splenectomy may be required.110Partial Splenectomy and Splenic Salvage. The increased awareness of asplenia-related life-threatening complications such as overwhelming postsplenectomy infection (OPSI) has led to the development of parenchyma sparing splenic resec-tions for select patients and disorders. The first successful partial splenectomy was reported in 1979 by Shapiro and was followed by Uranus who would perform the first laparoscopic partial splenectomy in 1995.111,112 Previously, many surgeons had been reluctant to perform partial splenectomy because of the technical difficulties and bleeding risk. However, with a better understanding of the segmental vascular anatomy of the spleen and the development of improved laparoscopic skills and technologies, laparoscopic partial splenectomy has been used successfully in patients with hematologic diseases such as hereditary spherocytosis in children, who may benefit the most from splenic preservation, as well as for benign splenic cysts.113-119 The technique of partial splenectomy will be dis-cussed later in this chapter.IMAGING FOR EVALUATION OF SIZE AND PATHOLOGYThorough assessment of anatomic detail and functional status of the spleen are essential for proper surgical planning. Spe-cial preoperative consideration needs to be given to patients with splenomegaly because minimally invasive methods of resection may be fraught with additional difficulty in patients with very large spleens, even in skilled hands. Other indica-tions for splenic imaging include trauma, investigations of left upper quadrant pain, characterization of splenic lesions such as tumors, cysts, and abscesses, and guidance for percutaneous procedures.165,166Preoperative imaging of the spleen is primarily performed to obtain an accurate assessment of the splenic volume in order to confirm and document splenomegaly as well as to exclude any large splenic lesion that could affect the surgical resection plane. Identification of the presence of accessory spleens in the preoperative setting is also important, although lack of acces-sory tissue on the imaging should not preclude a thorough intra-operative search.The guidelines of the European Association for Endo-scopic Surgery suggest that for all patients in whom splenec-tomy is indicated, preoperative imaging should be obtained.24 Two of the most commonly used imaging modalities include ultrasound and CT, both enabling measurement of splenic size and volume. When desired, the splenic volume may be calcu-lated using a formula for the volume of a prolate ellipsoid:Volume (cc) = length (cm) × width (cm) × height (cm) × 0.52.64Other imaging modalities, although not as commonly used, include nuclear medicine studies and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).PREOPERATIVE CONSIDERATIONSAs part of preoperative discussion prior to splenectomy, patients should be consulted on potential complications associated with this procedure, including overwhelming postsplenectomy sepsis, splenic vein thrombosis, bleeding, arterial thrombosis (myocardial infarction, stroke), deep vein thrombosis, and pul-monary hypertension.Vaccination and Patient EducationConsidering that infection is the most common complication, patient education and vaccinations against encapsulated pathogens are the mainstay of preventive therapy.52,120 Although rare, the most feared and extreme infectious complica-tion is overwhelming postsplenectomy sepsis (OPSI). (See later section, “Overwhelming Postsplenectomy Infection,” for detailed discussion.) Patients undergoing splenectomy for hematologic or malignant indications have the greatest risk, whereas patients who undergo splenectomy for trauma or iatro-genic injury have the lowest risk. OPSI is more common in the pediatric population, with 4.4% of children less than 16 years of age versus 0.9% of adults developing this life-threatening condi-tion. The risk has been observed to be the greatest in the first  2 years after splenectomy; however, asplenic patients remain at lifelong risk.121-123 Considering that the spleen is the site for spe-cial adaptation of macrophages that target encapsulated organ-isms, asplenic patients are at higher risk of infection caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae (responsible for >50% of OPSI),  H influenzae type b, Neisseria meningitidis, and Capnocytoph-aga canimorsus (transmitted by dog bites).124In the setting of elective splenectomy, patients should be vaccinated two weeks prior to surgery to optimize anti-gen recognition and processing. If splenectomy is performed emergently, vaccinations can be administered postoperatively and consideration should be given to delaying administration 7Brunicardi_Ch34_p1517-p1548.indd   153223/02/19   2:37 PM 1533THE SPLEENCHAPTER 34for 2 weeks to avoid the transient immunosuppression asso-ciated with surgery. International guidelines also recommend annual influenza vaccine for asplenic patients. The influenza vaccination provides protection from influenza syndrome and secondary bacterial infection. This immunization is associated with a 54% reduced risk of death compared with unimmunized asplenic persons.125Preoperative and postoperative patient education regard-ing OPSI is paramount because patients with OPSI may rap-idly progress from a febrile illness to circulatory collapse and death within a matter of hours. In one study, 28% of asplenic patients were unaware of the potential infection risks, and the main reasons for this lack of awareness were that correct advice was not given or that that advice was forgotten.121,126 The use of currently available vaccines against pneumococcus and other encapsulated organisms has led to a drop in the overall inci-dence of OPSI to <1%. The mechanism by which vaccination protects asplenic patients is not entirely understood. Serum anti-body titers do not necessarily correspond to clinical immunity. Moreover, antibody levels after pneumococcus vaccination decline steadily within 5 to 10 years. Revaccination is reason-ably recommended for these patients, although the efficacy of this measure is not proven.121-124,126Deep Vein Thrombosis ProphylaxisDeep vein thrombosis (DVT) after splenectomy is not infre-quent, especially in cases involving splenomegaly and myelo-proliferative disorders.76 Risk of portal vein thrombosis (PVT) may reach 50% for patients presenting with both splenomegaly and myeloproliferative disorders.127,128Postsplenectomy PVT typically presents with anorexia, abdominal pain, leukocytosis, and thrombocytosis. Effective PVT treatment is possible by maintaining a high index of sus-picion, achieving early diagnosis with contrast enhanced CT, and starting anticoagulation immediately. DVT prophylaxis, including use of sequential compression devices and subcu-taneous administration of heparin (5000 U), should be initi-ated for patients undergoing splenectomy.16,77 Each patient’s risk factors for DVT should be evaluated, and when elevated risk exists (obesity, history of prior venous thromboembolism, known hypercoagulable state, older age), a postoperative anti-thrombotic regimen of up to two weeks of low molecular weight heparin should be maintained.SPLENECTOMY TECHNIQUESPatient PreparationAssessment of the potential need for transfusion of blood products and optimization of preoperative coagulation status are necessary. It is the authors’ practice to order blood typing and antibody screening tests for normosplenic patients under-going elective splenectomy. Anemic patients should be trans-fused before surgery to a hemoglobin level of 10 g/dL. In more complex cases, including patients with splenomegaly, at least 2 to 4 units of cross-matched blood should be available at the time of surgery. Thrombocytopenia may be transiently cor-rected with platelet transfusions. Thrombocytopenic patients preferably should not undergo transfusion before the day of surgery and ideally not before the intraoperative ligation of the splenic artery. Several authors recommended a platelet count of 30 × 109 / L before the surgery; this may require treatment with IV immunoglobulin or oral corticosteroids if the platelets are below this number. Pooled normal human immunoglobulin is effective in elevating the platelet count in approximately 75% of patients.129-131Patients who have been maintained on corticosteroid therapy preoperatively should receive parenteral corticosteroid therapy perioperatively. Bowel preparation is not routinely performed for patients undergoing elective splenectomy. All splenectomy patients do receive DVT prophylaxis, as discussed previously. After endotracheal intubation, a nasogastric (NG) tube is inserted for stomach decompression.Open SplenectomyAlthough laparoscopic surgery increasingly has achieved acceptance as the standard approach for normosplenic patients requiring splenectomy, open splenectomy (OS) is still widely practiced. The largest published series is a report of the Nationwide Inpatient Sample (NIS), where of 37,006 nontrau-matic splenectomies identified during a 6-year study period (2005–2010), 81.4% of those cases were approached by open surgery.132Traumatic rupture of the spleen continues as the most common indication for OS. Several other clinical scenarios favor an OS approach, including massive splenomegaly, ascites, portal hypertension, multiple prior operations, extensive splenic irradiation, and possible splenic abscess.During OS, the patient is placed in the supine position with the surgeon situated at the patient’s right. A left subcostal incision paralleling the left costal margin and lying two finger-breadths below it is preferred for most elective splenectomies. A midline incision is optimal for exposure when the spleen is ruptured or massively enlarged. The spleen is mobilized by dividing ligamentous attachments, usually beginning with the splenocolic ligament (Fig. 34-6). In patients with signifi-cant splenomegaly, once lesser sac access has been achieved through either the gastrosplenic or gastrohepatic attachments, ligating the splenic artery in continuity along the superior bor-der of the pancreas may be preferable. This maneuver may serve several purposes: allowing safer manipulation of the Figure 34-6. Splenocolic ligament is divided at the beginning of open splenectomy.Brunicardi_Ch34_p1517-p1548.indd   153323/02/19   2:37 PM 1534SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II5-mm cephalad working port5-mm camera port with 30’ scope2-mm accessory port (flank)10/12-mm caudad working portFigure 34-7. Patient positioning and trocar placement for laparoscopic splenectomy.spleen and dissection of the splenic hilum, facilitating some shrinkage of the spleen, and providing an autotransfusion of erythrocytes and platelets. Further medial mobilization of the spleen is achieved by incising its lateral peritoneal attachments, most notably the splenophrenic ligament. Then follows indi-vidual ligation and sequential division of the short gastric ves-sels, steps that if carefully executed reduce the risk of these vessels’ retracting and bleeding. Splenic hilar dissection then takes place. Whenever possible, care should be taken to dis-sect and individually ligate the splenic artery and vein (in that order) before dividing them. As noted in the discussion of splenic anatomy, the tail of the pancreas lies within 1 cm of the splenic hilum in 75% of patients; therefore, during hilar dissec-tion, great care must be taken to avoid injuring the pancreas. Once the spleen is excised, hemostasis is secured by irrigating, suctioning, and scrupulously inspecting the bed of dissection. The splenic bed is not routinely drained. A thorough search for accessory spleens must be undertaken when a hematologic disorder has occasioned splenectomy. At the completion of sur-gery, the nasogastric tube is removed.Laparoscopic SplenectomyLaparoscopic splenectomy (LS) has become the procedure of choice over the last two decades, since it has been first described Delaitre and Maignien in 1991.133 In fact, LS is now the gold standard for elective splenectomy in patients with normal-sized spleens. In experienced hands, LS is associated with decreased intraoperative blood loss, shorter hospital length of stay, and lower morbidity rates when compared to OS.134,135 Since the introduction of the lateral approach, most LS proce-dures are now performed with the patient in the right lateral decubitus position (Fig. 34-7).136 A midway “double-access” technique in which the patient is in a 45° right lateral decubitus position has also been advocated. This positioning permits con-comitant surgery, such as laparoscopic cholecystectomy, more easily than does the lateral approach. The double-access 8technique requires the placement of five or six trocars. The lateral approach routinely involves the use of three or four trocars posi-tioned as shown in Fig. 34-7. Use of an angled (30° or 45°) lapa-roscope (2, 5, or 10 mm) greatly facilitates the procedure. Exposure of the vital anatomy in a manner that allows for a more intuitive sequence of dissection, paralleling that of OS, may be considered an additional advantage of the lateral approach.Placement of trocars in the left upper quadrant should be performed under laparoscopic visualization, particularly if any degree of splenomegaly exists, because the latter can sig-nificantly reduce the available operating space. As with OS, the splenocolic ligament and the lateral peritoneal attachments are divided with resultant medial mobilization of the spleen. The short gastric vessels may be divided usually with hemo-static energy sources such as ultrasonic dissection, diathermy, or radiofrequency ablation. With the lower pole of the spleen gently retracted, the splenic hilum is accessible to further appli-cations of clips or an endovascular stapling device. The splenic artery and vein are divided separately when possible. Good long-term outcomes, however, are increasingly being achieved with mass hilar stapling (Fig. 34-8). Using the lateral approach with the spleen thus elevated, the surgeon can easily visualize the tail of the pancreas and avoid injury when placing the endo-vascular stapler within the sack and allows piecemeal extrac-tion; a blunt instrument should be used to disrupt and remove the spleen to avoid the risk of sack rupture, spillage of contents, and subsequent splenosis (Fig. 34-9 and Fig. 34-10).Hand-Assisted SplenectomyWhen LS is performed in patients with splenomegaly, there have been reports of high rates of both complications and con-version to open splenectomy.137 Hand-assisted laparoscopic surgery (HALS) has been described as an alternative to the LS approach.24,138,139 Spleens greater than 22 cm in craniocau-dal length or 19 cm in width may benefit from HALS over a purely laparoscopic approach.139 It has been reported that the Brunicardi_Ch34_p1517-p1548.indd   153423/02/19   2:37 PM 1535THE SPLEENCHAPTER 34Figure 34-8. Splenic hilum can be divided laparoscopically en masse once the spleen has been rotated medially having been mobi-lized from its lateral attachments.ABFigure 34-9. Spleen extraction. A. Spleen is placed into a ripstop nylon bag before morcellation. B. Splenic morcellation.use of this technique has resulted in a marked reduction in aver-age operative time for patients with massive splenomegaly (146 vs. 295 minutes). Although HALS does require a small incision (7–8 cm) for hand insertion and specimen extraction, no differences in length of stay were observed when comparing these patients to those managed purely laparoscopically.139When performing HALS splenectomy, patient position-ing is similar to that of LS (Fig. 34-11). For patients with mas-sive spleens, lateral positioning is altered slightly, such that the patient is placed supine with the left side elevated at 45°. Depending on the hand dominance of the surgeon, the hand-assist device can be placed in either a midline position for right-hand dominant or a subcostal position for left-hand dominant surgeons. A 7to 8-cm incision should be made 2 to 4 cm caudal to the inferior pole of the enlarged spleen. The hand-assisted technique allows for a tactile feedback and atraumatic manipu-lation of the enlarged spleen.The nondominant hand provides medial retraction and rotation of the spleen through a hand-assist port, while the domi-nant hand carries out the dissection using laparoscopic instru-ments. The anterior and posterior attachments of the spleen are taken down as in the laparoscopic approach, and the hilar pedicle is ligated using an endoscopic vascular stapler.Single-Incision Laparoscopic Surgery SplenectomySingle-incision laparoscopic surgery (SILS) splenectomy emphasizes the concept of surgery through one small transab-dominal incision rather than the standard multiple trocar sites, with theoretical benefits of less pain and better cosmetics. The incision can be hidden periumbilically and is used as the specimen extraction site at the end of the case. This approach for solid organs poses several technical challenges. Since all instruments are closely aligned together, “fencing” of instru-ments and the laparoscope and limited degrees of movement are commonly encountered. The spleen, being a solid organ, cannot be grasped, and thus retraction may be more challeng-ing in these cases. Furthermore, it has been reported that peri-umbilical port position may result in technical challenges when dealing with high body mass index or tall patients, precluding Brunicardi_Ch34_p1517-p1548.indd   153523/02/19   2:37 PM 1536SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 34-10. Morcellation and extraction of the spleen within nylon sac extending through the 10-mm trocar site. (Reproduced with per-mission from Park A, Marcaccio M, Sternbach M, et al: Laparoscopic vs open splenectomy, Arch Surg. 1999 Nov;134(11):1263-1269.)the surgeon from adequately reaching the spleen. Other alter-natives to single port placements have been reported, although to date, no proven benefits of SILS splenectomy have been demonstrated.140-142Robotic SplenectomyThe da Vinci surgical robot (Intuitive Surgical, Sunnyvale, CA) was cleared by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use in humans in the year 2000 and has been applied to clinical practice in a variety of abdominal procedures includ-ing splenectomy since 2002.143,144 The term robotic surgery, referencing the da Vinci device should more accurately be described as computer assisted surgery (CAS), as it requires a surgeon sitting at a console controlling distant end effectors. A truly robotic, automated system has not yet been devised nor deployed to perform splenectomy. The reported advantages of CAS have inspired many surgeons to investigate its potential and to broaden its application in the minimally invasive surgery armamentarium. Some of these advantages include increased degrees of freedom as compared to standard “straight-stick” lap-aroscopy, improved optics including three-dimensional imag-ing of the operative field, improved instrument stabilization and reduction in hand tremor, and finally purported enhanced ergonomic and comfort factors for the operating surgeon.145-147 However, detractors of this emerging technology cite high capi-tal expenses as well as on-going disposable costs and the loss of haptic feedback as major downsides of CAS such that the benefits of the robotic platform are still not fully clear in the extant literature. Recent studies suggest that ergonomic ben-efits of robotic surgery may not be as pronounced as previously thought, as “robotic surgeons” still manifested chronic pain related to poor ergonomics.148There have been few published works comparing conven-tional laparoscopic splenectomy to CAS splenectomy. In one recent retrospective case-matched analysis, the authors com-pared hospital length of stay, operating room times and cost between these two groups. Although they were able to conclude that the application of CAS was feasible and safe for splenec-tomy, they cited a nearly 30-minute increase in operative time and over $4000 increase in cost of the procedures.149 This is consistent with a prior study supporting the notion that robotic-assisted splenectomy takes longer and is more costly than con-ventional laparoscopic surgery.150Splenectomy has also been reported using a single-incision CAS approach.151 However, this procedure is likely associated with an even steeper learning curve than traditional multiport robotic-assisted splenectomy, which calls into question the util-ity of this technique.Robotic splenectomy has been performed in the pediatric population, also proving feasibility and safety, but much like the adult population, larger series are needed to determine the true benefits of this procedure as compared to conventional laparo-scopic splenectomy in children.152The role of CAS in the patient requiring more complex surgery, for example, partial splenectomy or resection of a mas-sive spleen, is yet to be determined. At present there appears to be no argument supporting the application of CAS over standard laparoscopy for routine splenectomy in terms of clinical or cost advantage. The entry into the market of competing devices is likely to favorably alter these considerations.Partial SplenectomyThe past few decades have witnessed ever-widening endorse-ment for and practice of partial splenectomy. This technique, initially reported in the early 18th century, is particularly indi-cated to minimize the risk of postsplenectomy sepsis in children. Certain lipid storage disorders leading to splenomegaly (e.g., Gaucher’s disease), some forms of traumatic splenic injury (blunt and penetrating), spherocytosis in children, and focal benign splenic lesions are amenable to treatment with partial splenectomy.153 Both the laparoscopic and open approaches for partial splenectomy have been well described.153 The spleen must be adequately mobilized, and the splenic hilar vessels attached to the targeted segment, ligated, and divided. The devascularized segment of spleen is transected along an obvi-ous line of demarcation.A useful technical tip is to transect the parenchyma 1 cm inside the ischemic demarcation line to minimize blood loss.154 Bleeding from the cut surface of the spleen usually is limited and can be controlled by various methods, including cauter-ization, argon coagulation, or application of direct hemostatic agents such as cellulose gauze and fibrin glue.Inadvertent Intraoperative Splenic InjuryInadvertent intraoperative injury to the spleen is a noted occur-rence in the surgical literature, familiar to and dreaded by the abdominal surgeon. The true incidence is unknown. The gravity of such injury is not to be underestimated. Significant short-term morbidity is associated with injury to the spleen, including increased blood loss, need for transfusion, and pro-longed hospital stay.155Intraoperative injury to the spleen has been linked with numerous operations, such as gastric fundoplication, colectomy, Brunicardi_Ch34_p1517-p1548.indd   153623/02/19   2:37 PM 1537THE SPLEENCHAPTER 34BCAFigure 34-11. A. Patient table placement for hand-assisted laparoscopic splenectomy (HALS) in case of splenomegaly. B and C. Intraopera-tive images of HALS.Brunicardi_Ch34_p1517-p1548.indd   153723/02/19   2:37 PM 1538SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIparaesophageal hernia repair, nephrectomy, and abdominal and pelvic vascular surgery. There are also reports of splenic injuries after endoscopic procedures, such as colonoscopy.Improper traction on the spleen against its peritoneal attachments is the most common mechanism of intraopera-tive injury. Capsular tears are the most common type of injury, but parenchymal lacerations and subcapsular hematomas also occur. The lower pole is more commonly injured, owing to its orientation and the greater concentration of peritoneal attach-ments found here.As with all hemorrhage, prompt temporary control of bleeding should be obtained by direct compression of the spleen itself, packing of the left upper quadrant, compression of the vessels at the splenic hilum, or pressure on the splenic artery at the superior pancreatic margin. The spleen should then be mobi-lized from its peritoneal attachments and the nature of the injury assessed. Overall, the patient’s condition is the primary deter-minant of whether splenic salvage can be attempted, although hilar injury is best managed by splenectomy. When dealing with capsular tears (most common injury), strong consideration should be given to splenorrhaphy techniques: application of topical hemostatics, suture plication of disrupted parenchyma with or without omental buttress, and the use of bioabsorbable mesh sheets.The time-honored surgical tenets of liberal exposure and visualization are particularly germane to the avoidance of splenic injury. Incisions and approaches must be tailored to both patient circumstances and surgeon experience. There is some evidence to support the assertion that use of the lapa-roscopic approach may reduce the incidence of splenic injury for certain operations. As with all hemorrhage, prompt tempo-rary control of bleeding is required. Direct compression of the spleen itself, packing of the left upper quadrant, compression of the vessels at the splenic hilum, or pressure on the splenic artery at the superior pancreatic margin can slow or stop hem-orrhage and allow more deliberate consideration of manage-ment options.The type of injury plays a role as well; it has been sug-gested that hilar injury is best managed by splenectomy.80 Bar-ring these unfavorable circumstances, however, and recalling that the majority of intraoperative splenic injuries are capsular tears, it is reasonable to expect that splenic preservation can be achieved in many appropriately selected situations. Presented with one of these situations, the surgeon has at his or her dis-posal a number of useful and well-described splenorrhaphy techniques: application of topical hemostatics, suture plication of disrupted parenchyma with or without omental buttress, and the use of bioabsorbable mesh sheets.Currently, incidental splenectomies during laparoscopic procedures such as colorectal resections are rare events, but they are associated with worse short-term outcomes.156Preoperative Grading Score to Predict Technical Difficulty in Laparoscopic SplenectomyA splenectomy grading system based on preoperative parame-ters was developed to predict the surgical difficulty and morbid-ity for elective laparoscopic splenectomies.157,158 Preoperative data concerning demographic, clinical, pathological, anatomi-cal, laboratory and radiological factors were compared with three surgical outcomes: operative time, intraoperative bleeding, and surgical conversion. Four preoperative parameters (male Table 34-3Difficulty ScoreAge≤40 years040–60 years1≥60 years2GenderFemale0.5Male1Pathology groupITP0.5Other benign1Malignant2Spleen weighta<400 gr1400–1000 gr3>1000 gr5Difficulty gradeLow≤4Medium4–6High≥6Note: Minimum possible score: 2 points; maximum possible score: 10 points.aSpleen weight formula: width (cm) × length (cm) × height (cm) ×  0.6 = splenic weight in grams.gender, age, type of pathology, and spleen weight) were found to be associated with a difficult splenectomy (Table 34-3). This grading score is simple to calculate from the physical examina-tion, laboratory tests, and US or CT images and could be highly practical in a daily clinical setting. It could facilitate training and development of skills while simultaneously fostering dissemina-tion of laparoscopic procedures.SPLENECTOMY OUTCOMESChanges in blood composition resulting from splenectomy include the appearance of Howell-Jolly bodies and siderocytes. After splenectomy, leukocytosis and increased platelet counts are common as well. Although platelet counts most often rise within 2 days, they may not peak for several weeks in patients with preoperative thrombocytopenia (see “Hematologic Out-comes” later). Similarly, within 1 day after splenectomy, the white blood cell count typically rises, and such elevation may continue for several months.Overwhelming Postsplenectomy InfectionThe prevalence of asplenia in the United States is estimated to be 1 million; which is comparable to the number of patients carrying the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).185,186 As with other forms of immunodeficiency, asplenic patients bear an increased susceptibility to specific types of infections for the remainder of their lives. Asplenic patients are at highest risk for infection with encapsulated organisms, most commonly Streptococcus pneumoniae, but also Haemophilus influenza Brunicardi_Ch34_p1517-p1548.indd   153823/02/19   2:37 PM 1539THE SPLEENCHAPTER 34(in particular subtype B) and Neisseria meningitides.21,185-192 Although the overwhelming majority of splenectomized patients experience no ill consequence from the absence of their spleen, the potentially catastrophic consequences of overwhelming postsplenectomy infection (OPSI) demand lifelong vigilance and intimate knowledge of appropriate precautions and preven-tative measures.ComplicationsComplications of splenectomy may be classified as pulmonary, hemorrhagic, infectious, pancreatic, and thromboembolic.12,159 Left lower lobe atelectasis is the most common complication after OS; pleural effusion and pneumonia also can occur. Hem-orrhage can occur intraoperatively or postoperatively, present-ing as subphrenic hematoma. Transfusions have become less common since the advent of LS, although the indication for operation influences the likelihood of transfusion as well. Sub-phrenic abscess and wound infection are among the periopera-tive infectious complications. The placement of a drain in the left upper quadrant may be associated with postoperative sub-phrenic abscess and is not routinely recommended. Pancreati-tis, pseudocyst, and pancreatic fistula are among the pancreatic complications that may result from intraoperative trauma to the pancreas during dissection of the splenic hilum.Hematologic OutcomesThe results of splenectomy may be appraised according to the level of hematologic response (e.g., rise in platelet and hemo-globin levels) in those disorders in which the spleen contributes to the hematologic problem. Hematologic responses may be divided into initial and long-term responses. For thrombocyto-penia, an initial response typically is defined as a rise in plate-let count within several days of splenectomy. Reported series demonstrate the effectiveness of LS in providing a long-term platelet response in approximately 80% of individuals with ITP (Table 34-4). These results are consistent with the long-term success rate associated with OS.For chronic hemolytic anemias, a rise in hemoglobin levels to >10 g/dL without the need for transfusion signifies a successful response to splenectomy. By this criterion, splenec-tomy has been reported to be successful for the vast majority of patients with chronic hemolytic anemia. For hemolytic anemia due to spherocytosis, the success rate is usually higher, ranging from 90% to 100%.Splenectomy results also may be examined in terms of surgical and postsurgical characteristics, including operative time, recovery time, and morbidity and mortality rates, all of which tend to vary according to hematologic indication (see Tables 34-4 and 34-5).12Results of few prospective, randomized trials comparing LS and OS have been published. However, several recent meta-analyses of published comparative series including 38 papers with more than 2914 patients indicate that the laparoscopic approach typically results in longer operative times, shorter hos-pital stays, lower morbidity rates, similar blood loss, and similar mortality rates compared with OS.12,120,136 Questions of the cost effectiveness of LS persist, although analysis of this issue is hindered by a lack of universally accepted metrics as well as a paucity of recent objective data. Proponents of LS argue that the generally higher operating room charges are offset by the reduced hospital stay and presumably shorter time of lost productivity.160-162 For those institutions with experienced per-sonnel and technical capability, the laparoscopic approach has emerged as the standard for elective, nontraumatic splenectomy.CancerA Taiwanese population-based study found that individuals who had splenectomy have higher risks of developing certain types of cancer (adjusted hazard ratios were 2.64 and 1.29 for nontraumatic and traumatic reasons, respectively). Splenectomy patients were found to have significantly higher risks in esopha-gus, stomach, liver, other head and neck, non-Hodgkin’s lym-phoma, and leukemia cancers. Although the exact mechanism for the possible association between splenectomy and cancer remains unclear, a plausible explanation is that the spleen is thought to be involved in immunological defenses and provides active response through humoral and cell-mediated pathways and that splenectomy may impair immune surveillance in the host.163,164Table 34-4Outcome after splenectomyOUTCOME VARIABLESTUDIES (N)PATIENTS (N)POOLED RESULTS AND CIPMortality382914–0.01 (–0–02, 0)1Complications Pooled382914–0.11 (–0.16, –0.05)<.00001 Minor362914–0.03 (–0.05, –0.01).13 Severe362745–0.07 (–0.11, –0.03)<.00001 Thrombosis352695–0.01 (–0.02, 0.01)1 Organ injury3426390.01 (–0, 0.02)1Acces. spleen2921350.02 (–0.01, 0.05).87Operative time18137057.4 min (43.3, 71.4)<.00001Blood loss10759–41 mL (–87, 4.71)<.00001Length of stay201566–2.48 d (–2.89, –2.07)<.00001Reproduced with permission from Bai YN, Jiang H, Prasoon P. A meta-analysis of perioperative outcomes of laparoscopic splenectomy for hematological diseases, World J Surg. 2012 Oct;36(10):2349-2345.Brunicardi_Ch34_p1517-p1548.indd   153923/02/19   2:37 PM 1540SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIUltrasoundUltrasound is the least invasive mode of splenic imaging. It is rapid, relatively easy to perform, and does not expose the patient to ionizing radiation. It is often the first imaging modality used to evaluate the spleen in a trauma patient, although questions of sensitivity and specificity remain.133,167 In the elective setting, such as for routine diagnostic purposes or for preoperative plan-ning, it is the least costly modality available, and the sensitivity of ultrasound for detecting textural lesions of the spleen can be quite good in experienced hands.168When examining a normal spleen, differentiation between red and white pulp is not possible, and a homogeneous acous-tic echotexture should be visualized. Splenic artery and vein patency may be assessed using Doppler imaging. Splenic artery anatomy has been classified commonly into two patterns: dis-tributed and magistral. This variability in vascular distribution visualized by Doppler imaging becomes important when there is consideration of performing a partial splenectomy due to the possibility of segmental blood flow and its effect on area of resection.Percutaneous ultrasound-guided procedures for splenic disease (e.g., cyst aspiration, biopsy), historically avoided due to the risk of hemorrhage and other complications, are becom-ing more common as the safety of these procedures has become increasingly demonstrated.165,166Computed TomographyCT affords a high degree of resolution and detail of the splenic parenchyma, vasculature, and its relationship to neighboring structures, making it the preferred imaging modality for many surgeons. CT has become an invaluable tool in the evaluation and management of the blunt trauma patient, and standardized scoring systems for splenic trauma based on CT images now aid in management decisions.169 In the nontrauma setting, CT is extremely useful for assessment of splenomegaly, identification of solid and cystic lesions, and guidance of percutaneous pro-cedures.3 The use of iodinated contrast material adds diagnostic clarity to CT imaging of the spleen, although at the cost of, the small but real risks, possible renal impairment or allergic reac-tions. Three-dimensional reconstruction after CT scan may help to predict the difficulty of the procedure and to choose the best surgical approach.170,171The appearance of normal splenic tissue on a noncon-trast CT is uniform parenchymal attenuation with values ranging between 40 and 60 Hounsfield units (HU).172 On a contrast-enhanced CT, the appearance of the spleen depends largely on the timing of the intravenous bolus administration of contrast material. Due to the different rates of flow through the red and white pulp, the spleen appears heterogeneously enhanc-ing during the first minute after initiation of intravenous admin-istration of contrast material during the arterial and early portal venous phases.23 The frequency of these artifacts increases with advancing patient age. When evaluating for splenic abscess, a contrast-enhanced CT should be utilized.64,173Three-dimensional CT volumetry is a novel modality that measures the volume of the spleen. This tool may be of some benefit in planning technically challenging cases involving sple-nomegaly. A recent retrospective review of laparoscopic sple-nectomy patients who underwent CT volumetry preoperatively demonstrated a higher conversion rate when the spleen was measured to be greater than 2700 cc.170 This information may aid in proper informed consent as well as preoperative planning to assist in determination of which patients may benefit from a minimally invasive or open surgical approach.139Plain RadiographyRarely is plain radiography used for primary splenic imaging. Plain films can indirectly provide an outline of the spleen in the left upper quadrant or suggest splenomegaly by revealing dis-placement of adjacent air-filled structures (e.g., the stomach or splenic flexure of the colon). Plain films may also demonstrate splenic calcifications. Splenic calcifications often are found in association with splenomegaly but are otherwise a nonspe-cific finding. Splenic calcifications can indicate a number of benign, neoplastic, or infectious processes, including phlebo-lith, splenic artery aneurysm, sickle cell changes, tumors (e.g., hemangioma, hemangiosarcoma, lymphoma), echinococcosis, or tuberculosis.168Magnetic Resonance ImagingAlthough MRI offers excellent detail and versatility in abdomi-nal imaging, it is more expensive than CT scan or ultrasound and offers no obvious advantage for primary imaging of the spleen. MRI can be a valuable adjunct to the more commonly used imaging techniques when splenic disease is suspected but not definitively diagnosed.168,173Magnetic resonance (MR) signal characteristics of the spleen are related to the relative ratio of red and white pulp and the relationship of the timing of the intravenous (IV) contrast bolus and the time of image acquisition. The spleen will gener-ally have a homogeneous MR signal on noncontrast images. Table 34-5Laparoscopic splenectomy results by hematologic indicationITP (N = 151)TTP (N = 7)ANEMIA (N = 40)MALIGNANCY (N = 28)OR time (min)128146149165EBL (mL)13796116238LOS (days)2.23.02.22.6Conversions from LS to OS3 (2%)1 (14%)1 (3%)1 (4%)Complications14 (9%)01 (3%)3 (11%)EBL = estimated blood loss; ITP = idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura; LOS = length of hospital stay; LS = laparoscopic splenectomy; OR = operating room; OS = open splenectomy; TTP = thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura.Data from Brunicardi FC, Andersen DK, Billiar TR, et al: Schwartz’s Principles of Surgery, 8th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2005.Brunicardi_Ch34_p1517-p1548.indd   154023/02/19   2:37 PM 1541THE SPLEENCHAPTER 34On contrast MRI, the spleen appears to have heterogeneous enhancement during the arterial phase of contrast enhancement.AngiographyAngiography of the spleen most commonly refers to inva-sive arterial imaging, and when it is combined with thera-peutic splenic arterial embolization (SAE), there are multiple applications for this procedure: localization and treatment of hemorrhage in select trauma patients; delivery of a variety of therapies in patients with cirrhosis or portal and sinistral hyper-tension and in transplant patients; and adjunct (or, more con-troversially, as an alternative) to splenectomy for treatment of hematologic disorders such as ITP or hypersplenism.174-176 Preoperative or intraoperative SAE for elective splenectomy is also a common, although not universal, practice. Few pro-spective data have been published in the last 5 years on pre-operative SAE.177 Preoperative SAE is purported not only to facilitate less intraoperative blood loss but also possibly to allow a laparoscopic approach in patients whose spleens had previ-ously been considered too large for, or otherwise not amenable to, safe laparoscopic resection. Limited success in using partial SAE as an alternative to therapeutic splenectomy in chronic ITP has been previously reported.178 Its detractors argue that  the need for increased analgesics and occasional extended hospital stay preoperatively, the possibility of pancreatitis, and the well-described risks of invasive arteriography associated with the passage of wires and catheters through the vasculature, may negate any presumed benefits of preoperative SAE.Nuclear ImagingRadioscintigraphy with technetium-99m sulfur colloid demon-strates splenic location and size. It may be especially helpful in locating accessory spleens after unsuccessful splenectomy for ITP and has recently proven useful in diagnosing splenosis.179,180 Unfortunately, no conclusive outcome benefit has been shown for preoperative technetium scanning before splenectomy.52,181 When dealing with diseases of platelet sequestration, indium-labeled autologous platelet scanning (ILAPS) demonstrates whether platelet sequestration is predominantly in the spleen, liver, or both. This becomes important in deciding whether or not a patient will benefit from a splenectomy. ILAPS is a nuclear imaging modality in which autologous platelets are reinfused into the patient after ex vivo labeling. Subsequent scintigraphy demonstrates the site(s) of platelet sequestration and clearance. It has been proposed that patients with purely or predominantly splenic sequestration determined by ILAPS may be more likely to respond to splenectomy than those exhibiting hepatic, mixed, or diffuse patterns.176An emerging and novel application for spleen scintigraphy may be as a noninvasive method to diagnose nonalcoholic ste-atohepatitis (NASH). Conventional imaging methods are reli-able for the detection of moderate to severe fatty changes in the liver, though they are not reliable for detecting NASH or hepatic fibrosis. NASH, which may lead to cirrhosis, can result from nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), the most common cause of steatosis. With the alarming rise of obesity worldwide, NAFLD is also increasingly common with prevalence rang-ing from 6.3% to 33%.15,182 The diagnosis of progression from NAFLD to NASH has been dependent on histologic assessment of tissue obtained from liver biopsy. Characteristics unique to NASH have been reported, among them the association of splenic enlargement, not seen to a similar degree in NAFLD.13In addition, the ratio of liver-to-spleen uptake determined by scintigraphy has been found to be predictably altered in NASH patients. The liver-to-spleen uptake ratio is significantly decreased in NASH patients, but not NAFLD patients, leading some to conclude that technetium-99m-phytate scintigraphy is a reliable tool to differentiate NASH from NAFLD.183 Although additional studies are needed to identify the role of these nuclear medicine studies in prognostication and monitoring of those patients at high risk for the development of NASH, recent stud-ies show promise in this regard.184Microbiology and Pathogenesis. Life-threatening infec-tion in the asplenic patient is attributable to four main factors: loss of splenic macrophages, diminished tuftsin production, loss of the spleen’s reticuloendothelial screening function, and dysregulated coagulation.187 In the normal host, these factors work in concert to eliminate opsonized bacteria from the blood-stream. This system is particularly suited for the removal of encapsulated bacteria, whose polysaccharide coating is a natu-ral defense against opsonization (S pneumoniae, H influenzae, and N meningitidis are the classic examples). Infections with protozoa that invade the red blood cell, such as Babesia microti (transmitted by tick bites), Ehrlichia, and Plasmodium, occur more frequently in splenectomized individuals than in normal hosts. Other potential infectious bacterial sources include group A streptococci, C canimorsus (transmitted by dog bites), group B streptococci, Enterococcus species, Bacteroides species, Salmonella species, and Bartonella species.124 In the absence of the spleen, elimination of these pathogens from the bloodstream falls solely to the liver, a process that has been demonstrated to be less effective.12,126 Further, the pathophysiology of infection in asplenic patients has also been implicated in their increased risk of thrombosis and pulmonary hypertension.187More recently, the bacterial patterns of splenectomy sepsis have been changing. After the introduction of vaccinations and new oral antibiotics, postsplenectomy patients can suffer from diverse strains of bacterial infection, which are not strictly cor-related with the splenic function. In recent cohort series, gram negative bacteria are prevalent, representing 45% to 50% of infections in asplenic patients.193,194 In vaccinated patients, the rate of sepsis by pneumococcus is very low. In fact, encapsulated bacteria, such as S pneumoniae, N meningitidis, and H influenzae, were rarely encountered in those series in whom vaccination was routinely adopted.193-196Sepsis by uncommon bacteria as well by protozoa infec-tions such as malaria and babesiosis are also known to affect asplenic patients.196-200Clinical Features. OPSI is uniformly fatal without treat-ment, and thus sepsis in a splenectomized patient is a medical  emergency.21,187,192 Therefore, any clinical suggestion of infec-tion, including seemingly isolated fevers, must be viewed with a high index of suspicion and treated empirically as thorough investigation proceeds. OPSI may begin with a relatively mild-appearing prodrome of symptoms. In addition to fever, nonspe-cific symptoms such as malaise, myalgias, headache, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, and others should be viewed with alarm in the asplenic patient. This process can progress rapidly to fulminant bacteremic septic shock, with hypotension, anuria, and disseminated intravascular coagulation.The true incidence of OPSI is not precisely known because defining criteria vary among published series. Overall lifetime risk remains low, ranging from <1% to 5%.12,21,126,201 Among 9Brunicardi_Ch34_p1517-p1548.indd   154123/02/19   2:37 PM 1542SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIthose who develop OPSI, some characteristics can be identified that impart greater risk. Reason for splenectomy is the single most influential determinant of OPSI risk. Case series demon-strate that those who undergo splenectomy for hematologic dis-ease (malignancy, myelodysplasia, or hemoglobinopathy) are far more susceptible to OPSI than patients who undergo sple-nectomy for trauma or iatrogenic reasons. Age is also an impor-tant consideration, with children 5 years of age or less and adults 50 years or older being at elevated risk. Finally, time interval from spleen removal must be considered. A large number of OPSI cases occur many years to decades after splenectomy.186,189 This observation underscores both the threat of this lethal dis-ease and the need for lifelong vigilance.Antibiotics and the Asplenic Patient. Antibiotic therapy for the asplenic patient can be considered in three contexts: therapy for established or presumed infections, prophylaxis in anticipation of invasive procedures (e.g., dental procedures), and general prophylaxis. The most critical action in the treat-ment of established or presumed OPSI is the immediate use of broad-spectrum intravenous antibiotics, ideally after the collec-tion of blood cultures. Vancomycin provides broad-spectrum Gram-positive coverage, including coverage against penicillin-resistant S pneumonia.190 Ceftriaxone should be added to include Gram-negative coverage for N meningitidis and H influenza.190 Early implementation of antibiotics and goal-directed therapy for sepsis can significant reduce mortality rates.21,191 For the lat-ter two indications, unfortunately, evidence supporting efficacy is scant, and guidelines for antibiotic prophylaxis are not uni-form. Optimal duration of chemoprophylaxis in children also remains unclear; however, a daily dose of antibiotics until 5 years of age or at least 5 years after splenectomy are commonly recommended, although some advocate continuation into at least early adulthood.121,122,192 Concerns regarding compliance and bacterial resistance have been raised, which have led some authors to suggest that lifelong daily antibiotic prophylaxis be recommended only for those patients whose antibody titers fail to respond appropriately to vaccination or, alternately, that asplenic patients be advised to carry at all times a reserve sup-ply of antibiotic to be self-administered at the earliest sign of infection.122 Considering the grave consequences of OPSI and its relatively low incidence, controlled trials resulting in mean-ingful data on this issue seem unlikely to be performed.Education. Several risk management strategies are com-monly recommended to patients following splenectomy, including wearing a medical bracelet, carrying a laminated medical alert card, possessing a medical letter with specific empiric therapy instructions (including drug names and dos-ages), and keeping a 5-day supply of standby antibiotics, par-ticularly when travel is anticipated.187,189 The need for a high index of suspicion, prompt action, and aggressive education of the patient, family, and medical providers cannot be overstated in asplenic patients.REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Moynihan B. The surgery of the spleen. Br J Surg. 1921 Jan 22; 1(3134):114-6.	2.	McClusky DA, 3rd, Skandalakis LJ, Colborn GL, Skandalakis JE. Tribute to a triad: history of splenic anatomy, physiology, and surgery—part 1. World J Surg. 1999;23(3):311-325.	3.	McClusky DA, 3rd, Skandalakis LJ, Colborn GL, Skandalakis JE. Tribute to a triad: history of splenic anatomy, physiology, and surgery-part 2. World J Surg. 1999;23(5):514-526.	4.	Aristotle. De Paribus Animalium [On the Parts of Animals]. Cambridge: Harvard University Press; 1961.	5.	Garfield E. Citation indexes for science; a new dimension in documentation through association of ideas. Science. 1955;122(3159):108-111.	6.	Cameron BD. Trends in the usage of ISI bibliometric data: uses, abuses, and implications. Libraries and the Academy. 2005;5(1):105-125.	7.	Foster M. Lectures on the History of Physiology During the Sixteenth, Seventeenth, and Eighteenth Centuries. Vol 164. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 1901.	8.	Wilkins BS. The spleen. Br J Haematol. 2002;117(2):265-274.	9.	Morgenstern L. A history of splenectomy. In: Hiatt JR, Phillips EH, Morgenstern L, eds. Surgical Disease of the Spleen. New York: Springer; 1997.	10.	Gray H. On the Structure and Use of the Spleen. London:  J.W. Parker and Son; 1854.	11.	Bryant T. Case of excision of the spleen for an enlargement of the organ, attended with leucocythaemia, with remarks. Guys Hosp Rep. 1867;13(412).	12.	Bickenbach KA, Gonen M, Labow DM, et al. Indications for and efficacy of splenectomy for haematological disorders. Br J Surg. 2013;100(6):794-800.	13.	Musallam KM, Khalife M, Sfeir PM, et al. Postoperative out-comes after laparoscopic splenectomy compared with open splenectomy. Ann Surg. 2013;257(6):1116-1123.	14.	Mebius RE, Kraal G. Structure and function of the spleen. Nat Rev Immunol. 2005;5(8):606-616.	15.	Tarantino G, Savastano S, Capone D, Colao A. Spleen: a new role for an old player? World J Gastroenterol. 2011;17(33):3776-3784.	16.	Morgenstern L, Skandalakis JE. Anatomy and embryology of the spleen. In: Hiatt JR, Phillips EH, Morgenstern L, eds. Surgical Diseases of the Spleen. Vol 15. Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag; 1997.	17.	Magowska A. Wandering spleen: a medical enigma, its natural history and rationalization. World J Surg. 2013;37(3):545-550.	18.	Bratosin D, Mazurier J, Tissier JP, et al. Cellular and molecular mechanisms of senescent erythrocyte phagocytosis by macro-phages. A review. Biochimie. 1998;80(2):173-195.	19.	Knutson M, Wessling-Resnick M. Iron metabolism in the reticuloendothelial system. Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol. 2003;38(1):61-88.	20.	Nolte MA, Belien JA, Schadee-Eestermans I, et al. A con-duit system distributes chemokines and small blood-borne molecules through the splenic white pulp. J Exp Med. 2003;198(3):505-512.	21.	Di Sabatino A, Carsetti R, Corazza GR. Post-splenectomy and hyposplenic states. Lancet. 2011;378(9785):86-97.	22.	Spelman D, Buttery J, Daley A, et al. Guidelines for the pre-vention of sepsis in asplenic and hyposplenic patients. Intern Med J. 2008;38(5):349-356.	23.	Davies JM, Lewis MP, Wimperis J, et al. Review of guidelines for the prevention and treatment of infection in patients with an absent or dysfunctional spleen: prepared on behalf of the British Committee for Standards in Haematology by a work-ing party of the Haemato-Oncology task force. Br J Haematol. 2011;155(3):308-317.	24.	Habermalz B, Sauerland S, Decker G, et al. Laparoscopic splenectomy: the clinical practice guidelines of the European Association for Endoscopic Surgery (EAES). Surg Endosc. 2008;22(4):821-848.	25.	Pozo AL, Godfrey EM, Bowles KM. Splenomegaly: investigation, diagnosis and management. Blood Rev. 2009;23(3):105-111.Brunicardi_Ch34_p1517-p1548.indd   154223/02/19   2:37 PM 1543THE SPLEENCHAPTER 34	26.	Iolascon A, Andolfo I, Barcellini W, et al. Recommendations regarding splenectomy in hereditary hemolytic anemias. Haematologica. 2017;102(8):1304-1313.	27.	Schilling RF. Risks and benefits of splenectomy versus no splenectomy for hereditary spherocytosis—a personal view. Br J Haematol. 2009;145(6):728-732.	28.	Barcellini W, Bianchi P, Fermo E, et al. Hereditary red cell membrane defects: diagnostic and clinical aspects. Blood Transfus. 2011;9(3):274-277.	29.	Casale M, Perrotta S. Splenectomy for hereditary spherocy-tosis: complete, partial or not at all? Expert Rev Hematol. 2011;4(6):627-635.	30.	Prchal JT, Gregg XT. Red cell enzymopathies. In: Hoffman R, ed. Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice. Vol 561. 3rd ed. New York: Churchill Livingstone; 2001.	31.	Grace RF, Zanella A, Neufeld EJ, et al. Erythrocyte pyru-vate kinase deficiency: 2015 status report. Am J Hematol. 2015;90(9):825-830.	32.	Beutler E, Gelbart T. Estimating the prevalence of pyruvate kinase deficiency from the gene frequency in the general white population. Blood. 2000;95(11):3585-3588.	33.	Carey PJ, Chandler J, Hendrick A, et al. Prevalence of pyru-vate kinase deficiency in northern European population in the north of England. Northern Region Haematologists Group. Blood. 2000;96(12):4005-4006.	34.	Hamilton JW, Jones FG, McMullin MF. Glucose-6phosphate dehydrogenase Guadalajara—a case of chronic non-spherocytic haemolytic anaemia responding to splenec-tomy and the role of splenectomy in this disorder. Hematology. 2004;9(4):307-309.	35.	Michel M. Classification and therapeutic approaches in auto-immune hemolytic anemia: an update. Expert Rev Hematol. 2011;4(6):607-618.	36.	Giudice V, Rosamilio R, Ferrara I, Seneca E, Serio B, Selleri C. Efficacy and safety of splenectomy in adult autoimmune hemolytic anemia. Open Med (Wars). 2016;11(1):374-380.	37.	Hill J, Walsh RM, McHam S, Brody F, Kalaycio M. Lapa-roscopic splenectomy for autoimmune hemolytic anemia in patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia: a case series and review of the literature. Am J Hematol. 2004;75(3):134-138.	38.	Plikat K, Rogler G, Scholmerich J. Coombs-positive autoim-mune hemolytic anemia in Crohn’s disease. Eur J Gastroen-terol Hepatol. 2005;17(6):661-666.	39.	Rigal D, Meyer F. Autoimmune haemolytic anemia: diagnosis strategy and new treatments (in French). Transfus Clin Biol. 2011;18(2):277-285.	40.	Rees DC, Williams TN, Gladwin MT. Sickle-cell disease. Lancet. 2010;376(9757):2018-2031.	41.	Rice HE, Englum BR, Rothman J, et al. Clinical outcomes of splenectomy in children: report of the splenectomy in congenital hemolytic anemia registry. Am J Hematol. 2015;90(3):187-192.	42.	Al-Salem AH. Indications and complications of splenec-tomy for children with sickle cell disease. J Pediatr Surg. 2006;41(11):1909-1915.	43.	Rachmilewitz EA, Giardina PJ. How I treat thalassemia. Blood. 2011;118(13):3479-3488.	44.	Phrommintikul A, Sukonthasarn A, Kanjanavanit R, Nawarawong W. Splenectomy: a strong risk factor for pul-monary hypertension in patients with thalassaemia. Heart. 2006;92(10):1467-1472.	45.	Sheikha AK, Salih ZT, Kasnazan KH, et al. Prevention of overwhelming postsplenectomy infection in thalassemia patients by partial rather than total splenectomy. Can J Surg. 2007;50(5):382-386.	46.	Dedeoglu S, Bornaun H. Pulmonary hypertension in chil-dren with beta thalassemia major, are splenectomy and high-ferritin levels related or not? J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2017;39(4):259-265.	47.	Cines DB, Blanchette VS. Immune thrombocytopenic purpura. N Engl J Med. 2002;346(13):995-1008.	48.	George JN. Sequence of treatments for adults with primary immune thrombocytopenia. Am J Hematol. 2012;87(suppl 1): S12-S15.	49.	Rodeghiero F, Besalduch J, Michel M, Provan D, Grotzinger K,  Thompson G. Treatment practices in adults with chronic immune thrombocytopenia—a European perspective. Eur J Haematol. 2010;84(2):160-168.	50.	Auger S, Duny Y, Rossi JF, Quittet P. Rituximab before splenectomy in adults with primary idiopathic thrombo-cytopenic purpura: a meta-analysis. Br J Haematol. 2012; 158(3):386-398.	51.	Kojouri K, Vesely SK, Terrell DR, George JN. Splenectomy for adult patients with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura: a systematic review to assess long-term platelet count responses, prediction of response, and surgical complications. Blood. 2004;104(9):2623-2634.	52.	Mikhael J, Northridge K, Lindquist K, Kessler C,  Deuson R, Danese M. Short-term and long-term failure of laparoscopic splenectomy in adult immune thrombocyto-penic purpura patients: a systematic review. Am J Hematol. 2009;84(11):743-748.	53.	Szold A, Kais H, Keidar A, Nadav L, Eldor A, Klausner JM. Chronic idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) is a surgi-cal disease. Surg Endosc. 2002;16(1):155-158.	54.	Keidar A, Feldman M, Szold A. Analysis of outcome of laparoscopic splenectomy for idiopathic thrombocyto-penic purpura by platelet count. Am J Hematol. 2005; 80(2):95-100.	55.	Tada K, Ohta M, Saga K, et al. Long-term outcomes of lapa-roscopic versus open splenectomy for immune thrombocyto-penia. Surg Today. 2018;48(2):180-185.	56.	Guan Y, Wang S, Xue F, et al. Long-term results of splenec-tomy in adult chronic immune thrombocytopenia. Eur J Haematol. 2017;98(3):235-241.	57.	Ahmed R, Devasia AJ, Viswabandya A, et al. Long-term outcome following splenectomy for chronic and persistent immune thrombocytopenia (ITP) in adults and children: sple-nectomy in ITP. Ann Hematol. 2016;95(9):1429-1434.	58.	Dubois L, Gray DK. Case series: splenectomy: does it still play a role in the management of thrombotic thrombocytope-nic purpura? Can J Surg. 2010;53(5):349-355.	59.	Targarona EM. Spleen, hematological disorders. In: Matteotti R,  Becker JM, Ashley SM, eds. Minimally Invasive Surgical Oncology: State-of-the-Art Cancer Management. New York: Springer Verlag; 2011.	60.	Joly BS, Coppo P, Veyradier A. Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. Blood. 2017;129(21):2836-2846.	61.	Townsend W, Linch D. Hodgkin’s lymphoma in adults. Lancet. 2012;380(9844):836-847.	62.	Shankland KR, Armitage JO, Hancock BW. Non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Lancet. 2012;380(9844):848-857.	63.	Habermann TM, Rai K. Historical treatments of in hairy cell leukemia, splenectomy and interferon: past and current uses. Leuk Lymphoma. 2011;52(suppl 2):18-20.	64.	Chow KU, Luxembourg B, Seifried E, Bonig H. Spleen Size is Significantly Influenced by Body Height and Sex: Estab-lishment of Normal Values for Spleen Size at US with a Cohort of 1200 Healthy Individuals. Radiology, 2016;279(1): 306-313.	65.	Casaccia M, Torelli P, Cavaliere D, et al. Laparoscopic lymph node biopsy in intra-abdominal lymphoma: high diagnostic accuracy achieved with a minimally invasive pro-cedure. Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech. 2007;17(3): 175-178.	66.	Thompson PA, Ravandi F. How I manage patients with hairy cell leukaemia. Br J Haematol. 2017;177(4):543-556.Brunicardi_Ch34_p1517-p1548.indd   154323/02/19   2:37 PM 1544SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	67.	Shanshal M, Haddad RY. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Dis Mon. 2012;58(4):153-167.	68.	Bennett M, Schechter GP. Treatment of splenic marginal zone lymphoma: splenectomy versus rituximab. Semin Hematol. 2010;47(2):143-147.	69.	Matutes E, Oscier D, Montalban C, et al. Splenic marginal zone lymphoma proposals for a revision of diagnostic, staging and therapeutic criteria. Leukemia. 2008;22(3):487-495.	70.	Misiakos EP, Bagias G, Liakakos T, Machairas A. Laparo-scopic splenectomy: current concepts. World J Gastrointest Endosc. 2017;9(9):428-437.	71.	Weledji EP, Orock GE. Surgery for non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. Oncol Rev. 2015;9(1):274.	72.	Weledji EP. Benefits and risks of splenectomy. Int J Surg. 2014;12(2):113-119.	73.	Ferrara F, Schiffer CA. Acute myeloid leukaemia in adults. Lancet. 2013;381(9865):484-495.	74.	Jabbour E, Kantarjian H. Chronic myeloid leukemia: 2012 update on diagnosis, monitoring, and management. Am J Hematol. 2012;87(11):1037-1045.	75.	Tefferi A. Polycythemia vera and essential thrombocythemia: 2012 update on diagnosis, risk stratification, and management. Am J Hematol. 2012;87(3):285-293.	76.	Logan MS, Watson CM, Nottingham JM. Symptomatic sple-nomegaly in polycythemia vera: a review of the indications for splenectomy and perioperative considerations. Am Surg. 2009;75(5):363-368.	77.	Tefferi A. How I treat myelofibrosis. Blood. 2011;117(13): 3494-3504.	78.	Mesa R. Myeloproliferative disorder-associated massive sple-nomegaly. Clin Adv Hematol Oncol. 2008;6(4):278, 281-272.	79.	Cervantes F. Myelofibrosis: biology and treatment options. Eur J Haematol Suppl. 2007;(68):13-17.	80.	Mesa RA, Nagorney DS, Schwager S, Allred J, Tefferi A. Palliative goals, patient selection, and perioperative platelet management: outcomes and lessons from 3 decades of sple-nectomy for myelofibrosis with myeloid metaplasia at the Mayo Clinic. Cancer. 2006;107(2):361-370.	81.	Lopez Monclova J, Targarona Soler E, Peraza Solis Y, et al. Laparoscopic approach for isolated splenic metastasis: com-prehensive literature review and report of 6 cases. Surg Lapa-rosc Endosc Percutan Tech. 2013;23(1):21-24.	82.	Gatenby PA, Mudan SS, Wotherspoon AC. Splenectomy for non-haematological metastatic malignant disease. Langen-becks Arch Surg. 2011;396(5):625-638.	83.	Cox TM, Aerts JM, Belmatoug N, et al. Management of non-neuronopathic Gaucher disease with special reference to pregnancy, splenectomy, bisphosphonate therapy, use of bio-markers and bone disease monitoring. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2008;31(3):319-336.	84.	Lee WS, Choi ST, Kim KK. Splenic abscess: a single insti-tution study and review of the literature. Yonsei Med J. 2011;52(2):288-292.	85.	Divyashree S, Gupta N. Splenic abscess in immunocompetent patients managed primarily without splenectomy: a series of 7 cases. Perm J. 2017;21:16-139.	86.	Comitalo JB. Laparoscopic treatment of splenic cysts. JSLS. 2001;5(4):313-316.	87.	Chun CH, Raff MJ, Contreras L, et al. Splenic abscess. Medicine (Baltimore). 1980;59(1):50-65.	88.	Nelken N, Ignatius J, Skinner M, Christensen N. Changing clinical spectrum of splenic abscess. A multicenter study and review of the literature. Am J Surg. 1987;154(1):27-34.	89.	Ooi LL, Leong SS. Splenic abscesses from 1987 to 1995. Am J Surg. 1997;174(1):87-93.	90.	Choudhury SR, Debnath PR, Jain P, et al. Conservative man-agement of isolated splenic abscess in children. J Pediatr Surg. 2010;45(2):372-375.	91.	Neumayr A, Troia G, de Bernardis C, et al. Justified concern or exaggerated fear: the risk of anaphylaxis in percutaneous treat-ment of cystic echinococcosis-a systematic literature review. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2011;5(6):e1154.	92.	Ingle SB, Hinge Ingle CR, Patrike S. Epithelial cysts of the spleen: a minireview. World J Gastroenterol. 2014;20(38):13899-13903.	93.	Guggenbuhl P, Grosbois B, Chales G. Gaucher disease. Joint Bone Spine. 2008;75(2):116-124.	94.	Xiao GQ, Zinberg JM, Unger PD. Asymptomatic sar-coidosis presenting as massive splenomegaly. Am J Med. 2002;113(8):698-699.	95.	Zimran A, Belmatoug N, Bembi B, et al. Demographics and patient characteristics of 1209 patients with Gaucher dis-ease: descriptive analysis from the Gaucher Outcome Survey (GOS). Am J Hematol. 2018;93(2):205-212.	96.	Kapoor P, Singh E, Radhakrishnan P, Mehta P. Splenectomy in plasma cell dyscrasias: a review of the clinical practice. Am J Hematol. 2006;81(12):946-954.	97.	Fordice J, Katras T, Jackson RE, et al. Massive splenomegaly in sarcoidosis. South Med J. 1992;85(7):775-778.	98.	Bachmeyer C, Fayand A, Georgin-Lavialle S, et al. Mas-sive splenomegaly indicating sarcoidosis. Am J Med. 2017;130(4):e141-e142.	99.	Obuchi T, Sasaki A, Nakajima J, Nitta H, Otsuka K,  Wakabayashi G. Laparoscopic surgery for splenic artery aneu-rysm. Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech. 2009;19(4):338-340.	100.	Sadat U, Dar O, Walsh S, Varty K. Splenic artery aneu-rysms in pregnancy—a systematic review. Int J Surg. 2008;6(3):261-265.	101.	Harmanci O, Bayraktar Y. Clinical characteristics of idiopathic portal hypertension. World J Gastroenterol. 2007;13(13):1906-1911.	102.	Romano M, Giojelli A, Capuano G, Pomponi D, Salvatore M. Partial splenic embolization in patients with idiopathic portal hypertension. Eur J Radiol. 2004;49(3):268-273.	103.	Boyer JL, Sen Gupta KP, Biswas SK, et al. Idiopathic por-tal hypertension. Comparison with the portal hypertension of cirrhosis and extrahepatic portal vein obstruction. Ann Intern Med. 1967;66(1):41-68.	104.	Okuda K, Nakashima T, Okudaira M, et al. Anatomical basis of hepatic venographic alterations in idiopathic portal hyper-tension. Liver. 1981;1(4):255-263.	105.	Ozturk O, Eldem G, Peynircioglu B, et al. Outcomes of partial splenic embolization in patients with massive splenomegaly due to idiopathic portal hypertension. World J Gastroenterol. 2016;22(43):9623-9630.	106.	Puksic S, Mitrovic J, Morovic-Vergles J. Rituximab: a safe treatment in a patient with refractory felty syndrome and recurrent infections. J Clin Rheumatol. 2017;23(1):70-71.	107.	Narvaez J, Domingo-Domenech E, Gomez-Vaquero C, et al. Biological agents in the management of Felty’s syn-drome: a systematic review. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 2012;41(5): 658-668.	108.	Rashba EJ, Rowe JM, Packman CH. Treatment of the neutro-penia of Felty syndrome. Blood Rev. 1996;10(3):177-184.	109.	Singh S, Raidoo S, Kuo K, Resnick K. Wandering spleen. A case of spontaneous hemoperitoneum in an HIV-positive patient with recurrent tuboovarian abscess. J Reprod Med. 2015;60(7-8):359-361.	110.	Montenovo MI, Ahad S, Oelschlager BK. Laparoscopic splenopexy for wandering spleen: case report and review of the literature. Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech. 2010;20(5):e182-184.	111.	Morgenstern L, Shapiro SJ. Techniques of splenic conserva-tion. Arch Surg. 1979;114(4):449-454.	112.	Uranus S, Pfeifer J, Schauer C, et al. Laparoscopic partial splenic resection. Surg Laparosc Endosc. 1995;5(2):133-136.Brunicardi_Ch34_p1517-p1548.indd   154423/02/19   2:37 PM 1545THE SPLEENCHAPTER 34	113.	Smith ST, Scott DJ, Burdick JS, Rege RV, Jones DB. Laparoscopic marsupialization and hemisplenectomy for splenic cysts. J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A. 2001;11(4): 243-249.	114.	Fan H, Zhang D, Zhao X, Pan F, Jin ZK. Laparoscopic partial splenectomy for large splenic epidermoid cyst. Chin Med J (Engl). 2011;124(11):1751-1753.	115.	Mouttalib S, Rice HE, Snyder D, et al. Evaluation of par-tial and total splenectomy in children with sickle cell dis-ease using an Internet-based registry. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2012;59(1):100-104.	116.	Buesing KL, Tracy ET, Kiernan C, et al. Partial splenectomy for hereditary spherocytosis: a multi-institutional review.  J Pediatr Surg. 2011;46(1):178-183.	117.	Hery G, Becmeur F, Mefat L, et al. Laparoscopic partial sple-nectomy: indications and results of a multicenter retrospective study. Surg Endosc. 2008;22(1):45-49.	118.	Dutta S, Price VE, Blanchette V, Langer JC. A laparoscopic approach to partial splenectomy for children with hereditary spherocytosis. Surg Endosc. 2006;20(11):1719-1724.	119.	Szczepanik AB, Meissner AJ. Partial splenectomy in the management of nonparasitic splenic cysts. World J Surg. 2009;33(4):852-856.	120.	Bai YN, Jiang H, Prasoon P. A meta-analysis of perioperative outcomes of laparoscopic splenectomy for hematological dis-orders. World J Surg. 2012;36(10):2349-2358.	121.	Jones P, Leder K, Woolley I, Cameron P, Cheng A, Spelman D. Postsplenectomy infection strategies for prevention in gen-eral practice. Aust Fam Physician. 2010;39(6):383-386.	122.	Denholm JT, Jones PA, Spelman DW, Cameron PU,  Woolley IJ. Spleen registry may help reduce the incidence of overwhelming postsplenectomy infection in Victoria. Med J Aust. 2010;192(1):49-50.	123.	Holdsworth RJ, Irving AD, Cuschieri A. Postsplenectomy sep-sis and its mortality rate: actual versus perceived risks. Br J Surg. 1991;78(9):1031-1038.	124.	Waghorn DJ. Overwhelming infection in asplenic patients: current best practice preventive measures are not being fol-lowed. J Clin Pathol. 2001;54(3):214-218.	125.	Bonanni P, Grazzini M, Niccolai G, et al. Recommended vac-cinations for asplenic and hyposplenic adult patients. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2017;13(2):359-368.	126.	Taylor MD, Genuit T, Napolitano LM. Overwhelming post-splenectomy sepsis and trauma: time to consider revaccina-tion? J Trauma. 2005;59(6):1482-1485.	127.	Targarona EM. Portal vein thrombosis after laparoscopic splenectomy: the size of the risk. Surg Innov. 2008;15(4): 266-270.	128.	Ruiz-Tovar J, Priego P. Portal vein thrombosis after splenic and pancreatic surgery. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2017;906: 241-251.	129.	British Committee for Standards in Haematology Gen-eral Haematology Task F. Guidelines for the investigation and management of idiopathic thrombocytopenic pur-pura in adults, children and in pregnancy. Br J Haematol. 2003;120(4):574-596.	130.	Martin Arnau B, Turrado Rodriguez V, Tartaglia E, Bollo Rodriguez J, Targarona EM, Trias Folch M. Impact of preop-erative platelet count on perioperative outcome after laparo-scopic splenectomy for idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura. Cir Esp. 2016;94(7):399-403.	131.	Rijcken E, Mees ST, Bisping G, et al. Laparoscopic sple-nectomy for medically refractory immune thrombocytope-nia (ITP): a retrospective cohort study on longtime response predicting factors based on consensus criteria. Int J Surg. 2014;12(12):1428-1433.	132.	Matharoo GS, Afthinos JN, Gibbs KE. Trends in splenectomy: where does laparoscopy stand? JSLS. 2014;18(4).	133.	Myers J. Focused assessment with sonography for trauma (FAST): the truth about ultrasound in blunt trauma. J Trauma. 2007;62(6 suppl):S28.	134.	Park A, Marcaccio M, Sternbach M, Witzke D, Fitzgerald P.  Laparoscopic vs open splenectomy. Arch Surg. 1999; 134(11):1263-1269.	135.	Winslow ER, Brunt LM. Perioperative outcomes of lapa-roscopic versus open splenectomy: a meta-analysis with an emphasis on complications. Surgery. 2003;134(4):647-653; discussion 654-645.	136.	Park A, Gagner M, Pomp A. The lateral approach to laparo-scopic splenectomy. Am J Surg. 1997;173(2):126-130.	137.	Pietrabissa A, Morelli L, Peri A, et al. Laparoscopic treatment of splenomegaly: a case for hand-assisted laparoscopic surgery. Arch Surg. 2011;146(7):818-823.	138.	Patel AG, Parker JE, Wallwork B, et al. Massive splenomeg-aly is associated with significant morbidity after laparoscopic splenectomy. Ann Surg. 2003;238(2):235-240.	139.	Kercher KW, Matthews BD, Walsh RM, Sing RF, Backus CL, Heniford BT. Laparoscopic splenectomy for massive spleno-megaly. Am J Surg. 2002;183(2):192-196.	140.	Monclova JL, Targarona EM, Vidal P, et al. Single incision versus reduced port splenectomy—searching for the best alternative to conventional laparoscopic splenectomy. Surg Endosc. 2013;27(3):895-902.	141.	Vatansev C, Ece I, Jr. Single incision laparoscopic splenec-tomy with double port. Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech. 2009;19(6):e225-e227.	142.	Barbaros U, Dinccag A. Single incision laparoscopic splenectomy: the first two cases. J Gastrointest Surg. 2009;13(8):1520-1523.	143.	Maeso S, Reza M, Mayol JA, et al. Efficacy of the Da Vinci surgical system in abdominal surgery compared with that of laparoscopy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Surg. 2010;252(2):254-262.	144.	Chapman WH, 3rd, Albrecht RJ, Kim VB, Young JA,  Chitwood WR, Jr. Computer-assisted laparoscopic splenec-tomy with the da Vinci surgical robot. J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A. 2002;12(3):155-159.	145.	Moore LJ, Wilson MR, Waine E, Masters RS, McGrath JS, Vine SJ. Robotic technology results in faster and more robust surgical skill acquisition than traditional laparoscopy. J Robot Surg. 2015;9(1):67-73.	146.	Park BS, Ryu DY, Son GM, Cho YH. Factors influenc-ing on difficulty with laparoscopic total extraperitoneal repair according to learning period. Ann Surg Treat Res. 2014;87(4):203-208.	147.	Smith CD, Farrell TM, McNatt SS, Metreveli RE. Assessing laparoscopic manipulative skills. Am J Surg. 2001;181(6):547-550.	148.	Lee GI, Lee MR, Green I, Allaf M, Marohn MR. Surgeons’ physical discomfort and symptoms during robotic surgery: a comprehensive ergonomic survey study. Surgical endoscopy. 2017;31(4):1697-1706.	149.	Gelmini R, Franzoni C, Spaziani A, Patriti A, Casciola L, Saviano M. Laparoscopic splenectomy: conventional versus robotic approach—a comparative study. J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A. 2011;21(5):393-398.	150.	Bodner J, Kafka-Ritsch R, Lucciarini P, Fish JH, 3rd, Schmid T. A critical comparison of robotic versus conventional laparo-scopic splenectomies. World J Surg. 2005;29(8):982-985; discussion 985-986.	151.	Corcione F, Bracale U, Pirozzi F, Cuccurullo D, Angelini PL.  Robotic single-access splenectomy using the Da Vinci Single-Site(R) platform: a case report. Int J Med Robot. 2014;10(1):103-106.	152.	Klein MD, Langenburg SE, Kabeer M, Lorincz A, Knight CG. Pediatric robotic surgery: lessons from a clinical experience. J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A. 2007;17(2):265-271.Brunicardi_Ch34_p1517-p1548.indd   154523/02/19   2:37 PM 1546SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	153.	Wang X, Wang M, Zhang H, Peng B. Laparoscopic partial splenectomy is safe and effective in patients with focal benign splenic lesion. Surg Endosc. 2014;28(12):3273-3278.	154.	de la Villeon B, Zarzavadjian Le Bian A, Vuarnesson H, et al. Laparoscopic partial splenectomy: a technical tip. Surg Endosc. 2015;29(1):94-99.	155.	Cadili A, de Gara C. Complications of splenectomy. Am J Med. 2008;121(5):371-375.	156.	Isik O, Aytac E, Ashburn J, et al. Does laparoscopy reduce splenic injuries during colorectal resections? An assess-ment from the ACS-NSQIP database. Surg Endosc. 2015;29(5):1039-1044.	157.	Rodriguez-Otero Luppi C, Targarona Soler EM, Balague Ponz C, et al. Clinical, anatomical, and pathological grading score to predict technical difficulty in laparoscopic splenectomy for non-traumatic diseases. World J Surg. 2017;41(2):439-448.	158.	Gonçalves D, Morais M, Costa-Pinho A, Bessa-Melo R, Graca L,  Costa-Maia J. Validation of a difficulty grading score in laparoscopic splenectomy. J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A. 2018;28(3):242-247.	159.	James AW, Rabl C, Westphalen AC, Fogarty PF, Posselt AM, Campos GM. Portomesenteric venous thrombosis after lapa-roscopic surgery: a systematic literature review. Arch Surg. 2009;144(6):520-526.	160.	Li B, Liu J, Shangguan Y, Liu B, Qi Y. Laparoscopy-assisted small incision splenectomy and open splenectomy in the treatment of hematologic diseases: a single-institution com-parative experience. Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech. 2013;23(3):309-311.	161.	Zhou J, Liu P, Yin Z, Zhao Y, Wang X. Safety and cost-effectiveness analysis of laparoscopic splenectomy by secondary pedicle division using monopolar electrocautery. Hepatogastroenterology. 2013;60(126):1302-1306.	162.	Cordera F, Long KH, Nagorney DM, et al. Open versus laparoscopic splenectomy for idiopathic thrombocytope-nic purpura: clinical and economic analysis. Surgery. 2003; 134(1):45-52.	163.	Sun LM, Chen HJ, Jeng LB, Li TC, Wu SC, Kao CH. Sple-nectomy and increased subsequent cancer risk: a nationwide population-based cohort study. Am J Surg. 2015;210(2): 243-251.	164.	Kristinsson SY, Gridley G, Hoover RN, Check D, Landgren O. Long-term risks after splenectomy among 8,149 cancer-free American veterans: a cohort study with up to 27 years follow-up. Haematologica. 2014;99(2):392-398.	165.	McInnes MD, Kielar AZ, Macdonald DB. Percutaneous image-guided biopsy of the spleen: systematic review and meta-analysis of the complication rate and diagnostic accu-racy. Radiology. 2011;260(3):699-708.	166.	Singh AK, Shankar S, Gervais DA, Hahn PF, Mueller PR. Image-guided percutaneous splenic interventions. Radio-graphics. 2012;32(2):523-534.	167.	Zarzaur BL, Kozar RA, Fabian TC, Coimbra R. A survey of American Association for the Surgery of Trauma member practices in the management of blunt splenic injury. J Trauma. 2011;70(5):1026-1031.	168.	Kamaya A, Weinstein S, Desser TS. Multiple lesions of the spleen: differential diagnosis of cystic and solid lesions. Semin Ultrasound CT MR. 2006;27(5):389-403.	169.	Thompson BE, Munera F, Cohn SM, et al. Novel computed tomography scan scoring system predicts the need for inter-vention after splenic injury. J Trauma. 2006;60(5):1083-1086.	170.	Filicori F, Stock C, Schweitzer AD, et al. Three-dimensional CT volumetry predicts outcome of laparoscopic splenectomy for splenomegaly: retrospective clinical study. World J Surg. 2013;37(1):52-58.	171.	Berindoague R, Targarona EM, Balague C, et al. Can we pre-dict immediate outcome after laparoscopic splenectomy for splenomegaly? Multivariate analysis of clinical, anatomic, and pathologic features after 3D reconstruction of the spleen. Surgical innovation. 2007;14(4):243-251.	172.	Vancauwenberghe T, Snoeckx A, Vanbeckevoort D,  Dymarkowski S, Vanhoenacker FM. Imaging of the spleen: what the clinician needs to know. Singapore Med J. 2015;56(3):133-144.	173.	Karakas HM, Tuncbilek N, Okten OO. Splenic abnormali-ties: an overview on sectional images. Diagn Interv Radiol. 2005;11(3):152-158.	174.	Dent D, Alsabrook G, Erickson BA, et al. Blunt splenic injuries: high nonoperative management rate can be achieved with selective embolization. J Trauma. 2004;56(5): 1063-1067.	175.	Koconis KG, Singh H, Soares G. Partial splenic emboliza-tion in the treatment of patients with portal hypertension: a review of the english language literature. J Vasc Interv Radiol. 2007;18(4):463-481.	176.	Cuker A, Cines DB. Evidence-based mini-review: is indium-labeled autologous platelet scanning predictive of response to splenectomy in patients with chronic immune thrombo-cytopenia? Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program. 2010;2010:385-386.	177.	Wu Z, Zhou J, Pankaj P, Peng B. Comparative treatment and literature review for laparoscopic splenectomy alone versus preoperative splenic artery embolization splenectomy. Surg Endosc. 2012;26(10):2758-2766.	178.	Mousa A, Armbruster J, Adongay J, AbuRahma AF. Splenic artery embolization as a treatment option for chronic pancyto-penia secondary to hypersplenism: a case report and review of literature. Vasc Endovascular Surg. 2012;46(6):501-503.	179.	Williams G, Rosen MP, Parker JA, Kolodny GM. Splenic implants detected by SPECT images of Tc-99m labeled damaged red blood cells. Clin Nucl Med. 2006;31(8): 467-469.	180.	Lui EH, Lau KK. Intra-abdominal splenosis: how clinical his-tory and imaging features averted an invasive procedure for tissue diagnosis. Australas Radiol. 2005;49(4):342-344.	181.	Balague C, Vela S, Targarona EM, et al. Predictive factors for successful laparoscopic splenectomy in immune thrombocy-topenic purpura: study of clinical and laboratory data. Surg Endosc. 2006;20(8):1208-1213.	182.	Sweet PH, Khoo T, Nguyen S. Nonalcoholic fatty liver dis-ease. Prim Care. 2017;44(4):599-607.	183.	Bolton-Maggs PH, Langer JC, Iolascon A, Tittensor P, King MJ; General Haematology Task Force of the British Committee for Standards in Haematology. Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of hereditary spherocytosis—2011 update. Br J Haematol. 2012;156(1):37-49.	184.	Tovo CV, de Mattos AZ, Coral GP, Branco FS, Suwa E,  de Mattos AA. Noninvasive imaging assessment of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: focus on liver scintigraphy. World J Gastro-enterol. 2015;21(15):4432-4439.	185.	Rubin LG, Schaffner W. Clinical practice. Care of the asplenic patient. N Engl J Med. 2014;371(4):349-356.	186.	Theilacker C, Ludewig K, Serr A, et al. Overwhelming post-splenectomy infection: a prospective multicenter cohort study. Clin Infect Dis. 2016;62(7):871-878.	187.	O’Neal HR, Jr, Niven AS, Karam GH. Critical illness in patients with asplenia. Chest. 2016;150(6):1394-1402.	188.	Chong J, Jones P, Spelman D, Leder K, Cheng AC. Over-whelming post-splenectomy sepsis in patients with asplenia and hyposplenia: a retrospective cohort study. Epidemiol Infect. 2017;145(2):397-400.	189.	Sinwar PD. Overwhelming post splenectomy infection  syndrome—review study. Int J Surg. 2014;12(12):1314-1316.	190.	Lynch AM, Kapila R. Overwhelming postsplenectomy infec-tion. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 1996;10(4):693-707.Brunicardi_Ch34_p1517-p1548.indd   154623/02/19   2:37 PM 1547THE SPLEENCHAPTER 34	191.	Brigden ML. Overwhelming postsplenectomy infection still a problem. West J Med. 1992;157(4):440-443.	192.	Dionne B, Dehority W, Brett M, Howdieshell TR. The asplenic patient: post-insult immunocompetence, infection, and vacci-nation. Surg Infect (Larchmt). 2017;18(5):536-544.	193.	Dendle C, Sundararajan V, Spelman T, Jolley D, Woolley I. Splenectomy sequelae: an analysis of infectious outcomes among adults in Victoria. Med J Aust. 2012;196(9):582-586.	194.	Ejstrud P, Kristensen B, Hansen JB, Madsen KM, Schonhey-der HC, Sorensen HT. Risk and patterns of bacteraemia after splenectomy: a population-based study. Scand J Infect Dis. 2000;32(5):521-525.	195.	Edgren G, Almqvist R, Hartman M, Utter GH. Splenectomy and the risk of sepsis: a population-based cohort study. Ann Surg. 2014;260(6):1081-1087.	196.	Leone G, Pizzigallo E. Bacterial infections following splenec-tomy for malignant and nonmalignant hematologic diseases. Mediterr J Hematol Infect Dis. 2015;7(1):e2015057.	197.	Yu RK, Shepherd LE, Rapson DA. Capnocytophaga canimor-sus, a potential emerging microorganism in splenectomized patients. Br J Haematol. 2000;109(4):679.	198.	Sica S, Di Mario A, Salutari P, et al. Morganella morganii pericarditis after resolvent splenectomy for immune pan-cytopenia following allogeneic bone marrow transplanta-tion for acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Clin Infect Dis. 1995;21(4):1052-1053.	199.	Demar M, Legrand E, Hommel D, Esterre P, Carme B. Plas-modium falciparum malaria in splenectomized patients: two case reports in French Guiana and a literature review. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2004;71(3):290-293.	200.	Rosner F, Zarrabi MH, Benach JL, Habicht GS. Babesiosis in splenectomized adults. Review of 22 reported cases. Am J Med. 1984;76(4):696-701.	201.	Okabayashi T, Hanazaki K. Overwhelming postsplenectomy infection syndrome in adults—a clinically preventable disease. World J Gastroenterol. 2008;14(2):176-179.Brunicardi_Ch34_p1517-p1548.indd   154723/02/19   2:37 PM
# Chunk 8937
Brunicardi_Ch34_p1517-p1548.indd   154823/02/19   2:37 PMThis page intentionally left blank

Abdominal Wall, Omentum, Mesentery, and RetroperitoneumScott Kizy and Sayeed Ikramuddin 35chapterABDOMINAL WALLGeneral ConsiderationsIncision and closure of the abdominal wall is among the most common surgical procedures performed. Knowledge of its lay-ered anatomy is critical in the management of surgical patients. Cranially defined by the costal margin and xiphoid process and caudally ending over the pubic bones of the pelvis, the abdomi-nal wall provides support and protection to the peritoneal and retroperitoneal organs.Surgical AnatomyEmbryologically, the abdominal wall is derived from the meso-derm and envelops the future abdominal contents as bilateral migrating layers originating from the paravertebral area. The leading bars of these sheets fuse in the midline as the linea alba at 7 weeks after gestation and reach the umbilicus at 8 weeks.The abdominal wall consists of nine distinct layers: skin, subcutaneous tissue, superficial fascia, external oblique muscle, internal oblique muscles, transversus abdominus muscle, trans-versalis fascia, preperitoneal adipose tissue, and peritoneum. The subcutaneous tissue is composed of superficial adipose tis-sue that is contiguous with Camper’s fascia anteriorly. Deep to this, Scarpa’s fascia consists of a fibrous matrix of tissue that fuses with the anterior layer of fascia of the flank and back.The muscles of the abdominal wall consist of the rectus abdominus medially and the external oblique, internal oblique, and transversus abdominis laterally. The rectus abdominus is a paired longitudinal muscle spanning the length of the abdomen. Divided by the linea alba, both rectus muscles originate at the pubic symphysis and crest and insert on the xiphoid process, the fifth and sixth ribs, and the seventh costal cartilage. Three ten-dinous insertions cross the rectus muscle along its length. The muscle is contained within an aponeurotic sheath formed from the fusion of differing components of the lateral fascial layers.Laterally, the three muscular layers (external oblique, internal oblique, and transversus abdominis) have obliquely oriented fibers relative to one another. The external oblique arises from the eighth rib and inserts medially into the linea alba and anterior iliac crests. The fibers of this muscular layer travel medial and caudal from its insertion. The internal oblique originates from the thoracolumbar fascia. Its fibers travels cra-nially and anteriorly, inserting on the lower costal margin and the xiphoid process. The deep muscular layer, the transversus abdominis muscle, begins at the costal margin and lumbar fas-cia, runs horizontally and anteriorly, and inserts on the linea alba, xiphoid process, and pubis symphysis (Fig. 35-1).Altogether, these muscular layers provide fascial aponeu-rotic sheaths anteriorly. These fascial layers provide variable contributions to the separate layers of the rectus sheath and ultimately fuse in the midline as the linea alba. The rectus sheath that encloses the rectus muscles has differing composi-tions above and below the arcuate line. The anterior rectus sheath is composed of the external oblique aponeurosis through-out its length. The internal oblique aponeurosis is bilaminar and contributes to the anterior and posterior rectus sheaths above the arcuate line. Below this line, the internal aponeurosis contrib-utes only to the anterior rectus sheath. The transversus abdomi-nis aponeurosis contributes the posterior rectus sheath above the arcuate line and the anterior rectus sheath below the arcuate line. Therefore, below the arcuate line, all the aponeurotic layers of the lateral musculature form the anterior sheath, leaving the transversalis fascia as the only posterior fascial covering. This layer is a weak fibrous layer separated from the peritoneum by preperitoneal fat (Fig. 35-2).Along the posterior abdominal wall are folds correspond-ing to underlying vasculature and embryologic remnants. The median umbilical fold is formed by the obliterated urachus trav-eling from the dome of the bladder to the umbilicus in the mid-line. The bilateral medial folds are formed by remnants of the umbilical arteries. Lastly, the lateral folds are associated with the inferior epigastric vessels.The deep blood supply of the abdominal wall is supplied mostly from the inferior and superior epigastric arteries. The superior epigastric artery is the final branch of the internal tho-racic artery. It enters the rectus sheath below the costal margin 1Abdominal Wall	1549General Considerations / 1549Surgical Anatomy / 1549Physiology / 1550Abdominal Surgical Incisions and  Closure / 1550Congenital Abnormalities / 1553Acquired Abnormalities / 1554Omentum	1557Surgical Anatomy / 1557Physiology / 1558Acquired Disorders / 1558Mesentery	1559Surgical Anatomy / 1559Sclerosing Mesenteritis / 1559Mesenteric Cysts / 1560Mesenteric Tumors / 1561Retroperitoneum	1561Surgical Anatomy / 1561Retroperitoneal Infections / 1561Retroperitoneal Fibrosis / 1562Brunicardi_Ch35_p1549-p1566.indd   154912/02/19   9:58 AM 1550Key Points1	There are differences in the anatomic structure in the rectus sheath above and below the arcuate line. Below the arcuate line, all the lateral fascial layers combine and travel anteriorly forming the anterior rectus sheath and leaving the posterior aspect of the lower portion of the rectus muscles without an aponeurotic covering. Above the arcuate line, the posterior rectus sheath is formed by a portion of the internal oblique aponeurosis and the transversus abdominus sheath, and the anterior rectus sheath is formed by the remaining fibers of the internal oblique and the external oblique aponeuroses.2	Two randomized trials have found that closure of midline incisions with small fascial stitches of five to eight mm length and five mm width is beneficial in preventing inci-sional hernias of the abdominal wall.3	Primary repair of ventral incisional hernias results in high recurrence rates, and repair utilizing other methods, includ-ing prosthetic mesh and component separation, are preferred techniques of repair.4	Laparoscopic incisional hernia repair results in similar recur-rence rates and wound infections, compared to open repair. Laparoscopic repair may result in a faster recovery and shorter hospitalization; however, there may be an increase in bowel injury when compared to an open repair.5	Desmoid tumors should be monitored for asymptomatic patients as there is a possibility of spontaneous regression. For patients with rapidly growing or symptomatic tumors resection is recommended. If complete pathologic resection is not achievable without significant morbidity, more modest resection is recommended along with treatment with adju-vant therapies.6	The omentum provides an immunogenic and fibrotic response to foreign stimuli, allowing the abdomen to wall off infections preventing diffuse peritonitis.7	The role of surgery in the treatment of sclerosing mesenteri-tis is minimal and is most often undertaken to obtain tissue for diagnosis. Most cases should be treated medically with surgical interventions reserved for cases of bowel obstruc-tion and ischemia.8	Surgical interventions for retroperitoneal fibrosis include obtaining tissue for pathologic diagnosis, relieving ureteral obstructions via ureterolysis or ureteral stenting, and reliev-ing vascular obstructions via endovascular stenting of affected vessels. Most cases are treated successfully with the use of steroids.and travels along the posterior surface of the anterior sheath and forms an anastomosis with the inferior epigastric artery at the umbilicus. The inferior epigastric artery arises from the external iliac artery. These arteries provide a collateral circula-tion between the vasculature of the upper and lower extremities (Fig. 35-3). The abdominal wall is also supplied by branches of the subcostal and lumbar arteries. Superficially, the abdominal wall subcutaneous and skin tissue is supplied by branches of the superficial epigastric arteries, femoral arteries, superficial exter-nal pudendal, and superficial circumflex arteries. Venous drain-age of the abdominal wall is variable but typically follows the aforementioned arteries. Above the umbilicus, the lymphatics of the abdominal wall drain into the superficial axillary nodes. Below the umbilicus, these drain into the inguinal nodes. Lym-phatics near the umbilicus can drain along the falciform liga-ment toward the hepatic nodes.Innervation of the abdominal wall is segmental, leading to a dermatomal sensory pattern. Afferent branches of the T4 to L1 nerve roots provide sensation of the abdominal wall (see Fig. 35-3). The muscles of the abdominal wall are inner-vated by the efferent branches of spinal nerves T6 to T12.PhysiologyAside from providing protection of the intraabdominal and retroperitoneal organs, the abdominal wall muscles assist with flexion, extension, and rotation of the torso along with the muscles of the back and trunk. Working as a unit, the rectus muscles and external/internal obliques activate to flex the trunk anteriorly and laterally. Rotation of the torso is performed by simultaneous stimulation of the contralateral external oblique and ipsilateral internal oblique. To rotate the torso to the right requires simultaneous contraction of the right internal oblique muscle and left external oblique muscle, and vice versa for leftward rotation. Altogether, the muscles of the abdominal wall can act to raise intraabdominal pressure providing assistance with respiration, coughs, defecation, uri-nation, and parturition.Abdominal Surgical Incisions and ClosureKnowledge of the abdominal wall anatomy is an important aspect of safe entry into the abdomen. The goal of an efficacious incision is to provide adequate exposure to perform the proce-dure with minimal perturbation of the abdominal wall function.Incisions for open abdominal surgery are generally located in proximity to operative targets. There are two general types of incisions: longitudinal or transverse/oblique (Fig. 35-4). There does not appear to be differences in early or late postoperative complications or recovery time between these two types of inci-sions. However, transverse incisions may be associated with lower incisional hernia rates but higher rates of wound infec-tions. Overall, without clear evidence of superiority the choice of incision remains a surgeon-dependent decision. Several retractor systems can be used to provide exposure using these open incisions. Examples include the Bookwalter, Omni-Tract, and Thompson retractors (Fig. 35-5).The most common longitudinal incision is the midline incision. Providing access to most intraabdominal organs and some retroperitoneal structures, the midline incision is carried down to the linea alba to allow access to the abdomen with mini-mal injury to skeletal muscles, nerves, and vessels. Paramedian longitudinal incisions are made lateral to the midline through the rectus sheath or in the pararectus location. These incisions restrict access to the contralateral abdomen and pelvis and risk damage to the musculature, vessels, and nerves.Closure of the midline incision requires reapproximation without undue tension or strangulation of the tissue to prevent Brunicardi_Ch35_p1549-p1566.indd   155012/02/19   9:58 AM 1551ABDOMINAL WALL, OMENTUM, MESENTERY, AND RETROPERITONEUMCHAPTER 35perioperative dehiscence or incisional hernia formation. Clas-sically, the midline fascia of the incision is closed using sutures placed 1 cm from the edge and a width of 1 cm apart. Two European randomized controlled trials demonstrated reduced rates of incisional hernia with shorter stitch width (5–8 mm) compared to the standard 1 cm stitches. Studies are ongoing in the United States at this time. Several studies have evaluated the use of prophylactic mesh implanta-tion in the closure of the midline incision. While these studies demonstrate reduced incisional hernia formation in the short-term, more long-term data is needed to determine the inci-dence of mesh-related complications. Furthermore, the optimal location of mesh implantation and type of mesh used are still being evaluated.When performing a transverse or oblique incision, a sur-geon can either divide or separate the muscle fibers of the abdom-inal wall. The classic McBurney’s incision for appendectomy, an oblique incision performed one-third of the way from the iliac spine to the umbilicus, is an example of a muscle-splitting approach. A subcostal incision can be used to access the upper abdomen, liver, gallbladder, spleen, pancreas, or adrenals. On closure of these incisions, two layers must be approximated. The deep layer includes the internal oblique, transversus abdominus muscle, and the transversalis fascia. The superficial layer includes the anterior aponeurotic tissue of the rectus sheath medially and the external muscle/aponeurosis laterally. A bilateral subcostal incision, or a chevron incision, can be used to access organs of the upper abdomen and diaphragm. A Mercedes-Benz modification includes a midline incision superiorly, providing further access to the upper abdomen or the lower mediastinum.Pelvic procedures are commonly performed through a Pfannenstiel incision. This incision is performed via a trans-verse skin incision carried down to the anterior rectus sheath. The sheath is also transversely incised and dissected off the underlying rectus muscle. The rectus muscles are separated, and access through the transversalis fascia is performed lon-gitudinally. Closure of this incision requires approximation of the peritoneum and rectus muscles and closure of the anterior rectus sheath.Laparoscopic port site incision placement must be care-fully planned based on approach angles and working distances both to the operative site and between ports. Placement of a 278910789106511L1L2L31010(A) Anterior view(B) Rectus abdominis (RA)(C) External oblique (EO)      (layer 1)(D) Internal oblique (IO)      (layer 2)(E) Transversus      abdominis (layer 3)Lateral viewsEOIliac crestIntertendinousband (IT)RAIOTARSRSRSEOEOEORAITRAITRAITRALinea albaPyramidalisITITFigure 35-1. Muscles of the anterior abdominal wall. A. The anterior abdominal wall musculature is shown with the rectus sheath reflected on the left side. B. Rectus abdominis. C. External oblique. D. Internal oblique. E. Transversus abdominus. (Reproduced with permission from Moore KL, Agur AM: Essential Clinical Anatomy, 5th edition. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2014.)Brunicardi_Ch35_p1549-p1566.indd   155112/02/19   9:58 AM 1552SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IInasogastric tube and Foley catheter may help to decompress the stomach and bladder reducing injury to these structures on entry. Initial entry into the abdomen may be completed using the open Hasson or closed Veress needle techniques. The Hasson tech-nique involves direct visualization and systematic opening of each fascial layer encountered on entry. The closed technique utilizes the Veress needle to access the abdomen in a controlled fashion. Access to the peritoneum is confirmed using one or a combination of several techniques (saline drop method or measurement of intraabdominal pressure), and gas insuffla-tion is begun. The abdomen can then be accessed using either a visual entry port or a nonvisualized entry port at the site of the needle track or an alternative site. Choice of entry method is still controversial and based on surgeon preference. Retrospec-tive reviews suggest that complications may be lower using the Hasson technique, but randomized trials (although small) have not found significant differences in techniques.Abdominal incisions can lead to significant patient mor-bidity. Complications include hematomas/seromas, surgical site infections, fascial dehiscence, incisional hernias, and nerve injuries among others. In general, minimizing opera-tive incision lengths to only that which is necessary for a safe operation is prudent to reduce these complications and morbidity.Right externaloblique muscleFibers of rightexternal obliqueaponeurosisFibers of leftinternal obliqueaponeurosisFibers passing from superficial to deep(and vice versa) at linea albaLeft internaloblique muscleIntermuscular exchange of fibers between aponeuroses ofcontralateral external and internal oblique muscles.Fibers of left externaloblique aponeurosis,which run deep on theright side and runningsuperficially on the leftsideDeep fibers of left external oblique aponeurosisUmbilical ringDeep fibers of right external oblique aponeurosisIntramuscular exchange of superficial and deepfibers within aponeuroses of contralateralexternal oblique muscles.  Transverse sections(B) Anterior view(A) Anterior viewsLineaalbaRectus abdominisAponeurosisof externalobliqueAponeurosisof internalobliqueAponeurosisof transversusabdominisParietal peritoneumSkinTransversus abdominisInternal obliqueExternal obliqueDeep membranous layerof subcutaneoustissueTransversalis fasciaExtraperitoneal fatRectussheathLinea alba(note fibers passingfrom superficial to deep,and vice versa, as inright side of figure A)Superficial fatty layer ofsubcutaneoustissueInvesting (deep) fascia:SuperficialIntermediateDeepFigure 35-2. Fiber direction and cross-sectional anatomy of the abdominal wall. A. Muscular and aponeurosis fiber direction of external and internal obliques. B. Cross-sectional anatomy of the anterior abdominal wall above and below the arcuate line. The posterior leaf of the rectus sheath exists above the arcuate line. Below this line, all aponeurotic sheaths converge and travel anterior to the rectus muscles, leaving  the posterior rectus uncovered by a fascial layer. (Reproduced with permission from Moore KL, Agur AM: Essential Clinical Anatomy,  5th edition. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2014.)Brunicardi_Ch35_p1549-p1566.indd   155212/02/19   9:58 AM 1553ABDOMINAL WALL, OMENTUM, MESENTERY, AND RETROPERITONEUMCHAPTER 35Congenital AbnormalitiesThe folds of mesodermal cells that form the abdominal wall lay-ers begin to form in the early weeks after gestation. The folds develop in the cephalic, caudal, and right/left lateral directions and converge at the umbilicus around 8 weeks. At around 6 weeks of development the contents of the abdominal cavity outgrow the space allowed by the surrounding layers of the Thoraco-abdominalnerves (T7-T11)Lateral cutaneous branchof subcostal nerve (T12)Anterior cutaneous branchof subcostal nerve (T12)Iliohypogastric nerve (L1)Ilio-inguinal nerve (L1)Xiphoid processAnterior superior iliac spine (ASIS)AnteriorcutaneousbranchesLateralcutaneousbranchesInguinal ligamentSuperiorepigastric a.External obliqueInternal oblique TransversusabdominisInferior epigastric a.Deep circumflexiliac a.Superficialepigastric a.Superficialcircumflex iliac a.External iliac a.Femoral a.Transversalis fasciaMusculophrenic a.11th posteriorintercostal a.10th posteriorintercostal a.Subcostal a.Internal thoracic a.Anterior viewFigure 35-3. Neurovascular anatomy of the anterior abdominal wall. The right image demonstrates the arteries of the deep abdominal wall. The superior epigastric and inferior epigastric form an anastomosis along the posterior aspect of the rectus muscle. The image on the left demonstrates the dermatomal distribution of cutaneous nerves of the abdominal wall. (Reproduced with permission from Moore KL, Agur AM: Essential Clinical Anatomy, 5th edition. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2014.)CDEFHGABFigure 35-4. Various open abdominal wall incisions. A. Mid-line incision. B. Paramedian incision. C. Right subcostal incision and “saber slash” extension (dashed line). D. Bilateral subcostal incision (also chevron incision) with “Mercedes Benz” extension (dashed line). E. Rocky-Davis incision and Weir extension (dashed line). F. McBurney incision. G. Transverse incision. H. Pfannen-stiel incision.Figure 35-5. Thompson retractor for exposure of intra-abdominal structures utilizing an upper midline incision.Brunicardi_Ch35_p1549-p1566.indd   155312/02/19   9:58 AM 1554SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIabdominal wall, resulting in temporary herniation of the abdom-inal contents through a central defect. At this time, the vitelline duct (omphalomesenteric duct) and allantois also pass through the central defect. The vitelline duct serves as a conduit to the embryologic midgut and the yolk sac. As the midgut develops outside of the abdomen, it undergoes a 270° counterclockwise rotation and reenters the abdomen at around 12 weeks. Failure of the midgut to reenter the abdomen leads to the congenital abdominal wall defect known as an omphalocele, in which the contents of the defect protrude through an open umbilicus and are covered by an amniotic/peritoneal membrane. Gastroschisis, on the other hand, results from either malformation or disrup-tion of the abdominal wall, either from genetic defects or vas-cular compromise. Gastroschisis presents as protruding viscera through a defect lateral to the umbilicus (usually along the right side) without the amniotic sac covering.The vitelline duct usually involutes at around the eighth to ninth week after gestation. Failure of vitelline duct regression can lead to several abnormalities depending on the spectrum of involution. This spectrum includes total persistence of the vitel-line duct leading to omphalomesenteric fistula causing drainage of intestinal contents at the umbilicus, to partial closure leading to omphalomesenteric cyst. If the vitelline remnant persists at the ileal border, a Meckel’s diverticulum forms. The vitelline duct may also persist as a fibrous attachment of the intestine to the abdominal wall predisposing the patient to bowel obstruc-tions. Fistulas, cysts, and fibrous attachments should be resected when diagnosed.The urachus is the proximal portion of the allantois form-ing as the bladder descends into its pelvic position. The urachus closes and forms the median umbilical ligament of the abdomi-nal wall as previously described. Failure of the urachus to close results in urinary fistula or cyst. These are treated by urachal excision and closure of the bladder defect.Acquired AbnormalitiesAbdominal Wall Hernias. A protrusion or bulge of abdomi-nal contents through the abdominal wall muscle/fascia repre-sents an abdominal wall hernia. This may be present at birth or acquired from weakening or disruption of the overlying fascia, or from failed healing of a surgical incision. Hernias may present as asymptomatic bulges that increase with Val-salva maneuvers, or with significant discomfort. On physical exam, the patient’s abdominal wall should be evaluated with the patient both standing and in the recumbent position. Her-nias may reduce spontaneously or with manual pressure. If a hernia is incarcerated, it cannot be reduced and generally requires surgical correction. If intestine is incarcerated in the hernia defect, bowel obstruction may ensue, which represents a surgical emergency. Incarcerated hernias present with sig-nificant pain, nausea, and vomiting. A hernia is considered strangulated if blood supply to its contents is compromised. Localized ischemia may lead to infarction and eventual perfo-ration if left untreated.Nonincisional hernias are named based on their location on the abdominal wall. Epigastric hernias are defects in the abdominal wall located between the umbilicus and the xiphoid process. These hernias are usually small but may be associ-ated with multiple defects. They result from multiple factors, including muscle weakness, congenitally weakened epigastric fascia, or increases in intra-abdominal pressure. Epigastric hernias rarely contain bowel and usually contain portions of the omentum or falciform ligament. Given the rarity of incarcera-tion, repair of an epigastric hernia is indicated for symptomatic patients only. Laparoscopic repair can be attempted, but this type of hernia usually can be managed with a small incision where the defect is closed with interrupted sutures.Umbilical hernias may be congenital or acquired. Umbili-cal hernias are common in newborns, especially in premature infants. Closure of an umbilical defect occurs after birth as the muscles of the rectus abdominis grow toward one another. Most umbilical hernias close spontaneously by 5 years of age and can be monitored as they will spontaneously resolve. Indications for repair include incarceration, symptomatic hernia, failure to decrease in size or if the defect fails to close by the age of 5 years.In adults, umbilical hernias form because of increased abdominal pressure due to pregnancy, obesity, or ascites. Females are at higher risk for this type of hernia than men. Small, asymptomatic hernias may be followed clinically. How-ever, if an umbilical hernia enlarges in size, causes symptoms, or incarcerates surgical treatment should be offered. Hernias can be repaired laparoscopically or with an open procedure. Mesh should be employed for large defects where the fascial edges cannot be approximated without tension. In this case, mesh should be placed as a sublay technique (below the fascia) and sutured in place to prevent migration.Patients with cirrhosis and associated ascites with an umbilical hernia pose a significant clinical dilemma. Umbilical defects enlarge in these patients because of high intra-abdominal pressure associated with uncontrolled ascites. With severe liver disease, these patients are at high risk of operative complica-tions. Most hernias contain ascites; however, omentum and bowel may also enter the defect. Given the high pressure, skin breakdown may ensue leading to hernia rupture or weeping as well as risk of spontaneous bacterial peritonitis. All attempts should be made to control the patient’s ascites prior to repair. Therefore, asymptomatic patients should be managed conserva-tively with aggressive management of ascites. Liver transplant candidates should undergo repair at the time of transplanta-tion as pretransplant repair has high morbidity and mortality. Patients with incarcerated hernias or with thinning or ruptured skin overlying the hernia should be treated emergently.Hernias that occur along the arcuate line are known as Spigelian hernias. While rare, these hernias form due to the anatomic weakness of lack of a posterior rectus sheath below the arcuate line. As the hernia develops, peritoneum that passes through the arcuate line will pass laterally toward the external oblique muscle given the overlying aponeurosis (Fig. 35-6). Most patients present with pain and swelling in the mid to lower abdomen. Incarceration is common as up to 20% of patients present with a nonreducible hernia. Given the high rate of incar-ceration, surgical repair is usually recommended. Either open or laparoscopic repair can be performed. The defect is closed by approximating the medial and lateral edges of the transversalis fascia to the rectus sheath.Incisional Hernias. Hernias that develop at sites of pre-vious abdominal incisions are known as incisional hernias. Hernias can develop at the site of any previous abdominal incision. Up to 20% of midline incisions will develop her-nias eventually. Vertical incisions may have a higher risk of hernia formation than transverse or oblique incisions. Upper Brunicardi_Ch35_p1549-p1566.indd   155412/02/19   9:58 AM 1555ABDOMINAL WALL, OMENTUM, MESENTERY, AND RETROPERITONEUMCHAPTER 35abdominal incisions are also at higher risk than lower inci-sions. Laparoscopic port sites may also develop hernias. The etiology of incisional hernias is complex. Several patient-derived factors increase the risk of hernia, including diabe-tes, immunosuppressant use, obesity, smoking, malnutrition, and connective tissue disorders. Local operative factors may also be implicated, including technique, wound infection, or high tension at the time of closure. Hernias can develop up to 10 years after surgery but normally occur in the early postop-erative period. Incisional hernias can present as asymptom-atic bulges or with severe discomfort. Multiple hernias can be present along the length of the incision. Elective surgery should be recommended in patients who are symptomatic. Small defects pose a higher risk of incarceration and should be repaired. To improve operative outcome, patient associated factors, including smoking and obesity, should be remedied prior to surgical repair.Surgical management of incisional hernias include either primary tissue or mesh repairs. Hernias can also be repaired via a laparoscopic or open approach. Simple suture repair is associ-ated with recurrence rates as high as 54%. A Cochrane review of several randomized controlled trials found that open mesh repair improved hernia recurrence rates when compared to simple closure (33% with simple repair vs. 16% with mesh repair). Mesh repairs are, however, associated with a higher rate of infections.To reduce tension at the suture line associated with pri-mary suture repair Ramirez described the components separa-tion technique in 1990. This procedure entails dividing portions of the bilateral external oblique aponeuroses forming musculo-fascial advancement flaps. The posterior rectus sheath can also be incised, allowing up to 10 cm of medial mobilization and ten-sionless approximation of the midline fascia. This technique can cause large skin flaps and initially had high rates of infection. Overtime, techniques have been developed to decrease flap for-mation and decreased rates of surgical site infection. Endoscopic component separation can also be used to mobilize flaps with minimal ischemia to overlying subcutaneous and skin tissue, theoretically decreasing infection rates. Mobilization of midline fascia is reduced with endoscopic methods. Mesh can also be utilized to reinforce the repair. Overall, component separation without mesh compares to standard mesh repair with respect to hernia recurrence, but precludes the risk of mesh implantation. When mesh is added to component separation, recurrence rates may be as low as 4% to 10% depending on follow up period.Mesh repair has become the standard for elective manage-ment of most incisional hernias. Position of mesh placement is controversial. Mesh can be placed above the midline fascia (overlay), bridged across fascial defects (interlay), underneath fascia (sublay), or within the abdominal cavity (underlay). A systematic review found that sublay placement of mesh may reduce hernia recurrence and prevent wound related compli-cations. The sublay technique is performed by developing the plane between the rectus muscle and the posterior sheath, and affixing mesh in this space. The anterior sheath can be approxi-mated if there is no tension.Material used for mesh manufacturing can be classified into two classes: synthetic and biologic. Synthetic meshes can be either permanent or degradable, while all biologic meshes are degradable. Permanent mesh is currently made of either poly-propylene, polyethylene terephthalate polyester, or expanded polytetrafluoroethylene. Permanent mesh is durable and of rel-atively low cost. Degradable synthetic mesh, including Vicryl mesh, is eventually eliminated and loses structural support, but it does offer the advantage of lower mesh infection rates. Degrad-able mesh is associated with high recurrence rates, but it can be used for temporary abdominal wall closure in contaminated or infected fields. Newer synthetic biomaterial meshes, includ-ing Gore BioA or Phasix, degrade over a longer period of time and may reduce recurrence rates, but long-term effectiveness is unknown. Biologic meshes are decellularized, collagen-rich porcine, bovine, or human tissue. These meshes are designed to allow host cellular ingrowth, promoting incorporation and eventual replacement of the mesh with host tissue. Biologic meshes are a high cost alternative to synthetic degradable mesh and can be used in infected fields. However, their efficacy in preventing recurrence is unclear. Composite products contain two components and are used during intraperitoneal repair. One side of composite mesh, which is placed on the abdominal wall side of implantation, is made of typical nondegradable synthetic material and promotes integration of host tissue. The other side is covered in a synthetic or biologic material, allowing contact with viscera and preventing adhesion formation. These materi-als include polyglactin, collagen, cellulose, titanium, omega-3, and hyaluronate. This allays concerns of direct mesh contact 3Figure 35-6. Computed tomography scan imaging of Spigelian hernia. Hernia contents traverse through the arcuate line but remain covered by the external oblique aponeurosis. (Reproduced with permission from Martin M, Paquette B, Badet N, et al: Spigelian hernia: CT findings and clinical relevance, Abdom Imaging. 2013 Apr;38(2):260-264.)Brunicardi_Ch35_p1549-p1566.indd   155512/02/19   9:58 AM 1556SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIwith viscera that may cause adhesions, erosion, and eventual fistula formation. Pore size and mesh weight are also important aspects of mesh design. Recently, large-pore, lightweight mesh has been developed. This was initially thought to delay incorpo-ration, but that has not been seen in practice. They do allow the theoretical advantage of increased incorporation of host tissue and potentially better elasticity and improved postoperative pain when compared to microporous heavier meshes. There is also initial data which suggests lower rates of mesh infection with the use of large pore mesh.Initially described by LeBlanc and Booth in 1993, laparo-scopic repair is now an accepted modality for treatment of inci-sional hernias. Several studies have found that laparoscopic repair has a lower incidence of surgical site and mesh infections compared to open repair. It also seems that lapa-roscopic repair allows faster recovery with less postoperative pain. A meta-analysis of 11 studies comparing laparoscopic and open ventral hernia repair found no difference in hernia recur-rence and lower rates of wound infection and wound drainage. There was however, a higher risk of bowel injury in the laparo-scopic group. Another meta-analysis of six randomized con-trolled trials had similar findings. Follow-up in these studies is relatively short, and more long-term data is needed at this time to compare these two modalities of repair.Laparoscopic hernia repair is performed by initially plac-ing lateral ports for midline defects and contralaterally placed ports for lateral defects. Adhesions between the abdominal wall and intestine are carefully taken down, and the hernia contents are completely reduced. The sac is normally left in situ. Once the fascial defect is defined, a mesh is properly shaped and fash-ioned over the hernia. Transfascial sutures are placed circum-ferentially to position the mesh with sufficient overlap (4–5 cm) with healthy abdominal wall. Spiral tacks may be placed accord-ing to surgeon preference. Even more recently, robotic surgery has been established as another surgical modality in the treat-ment of ventral hernias. The theoretical advantage of improved visualization and articulating instruments may improve out-comes, but the cost-effectiveness of robotic repair is unclear. Overall, more studies are needed to evaluate the role of robotics in ventral hernia surgery.Although still rare, given the increase in laparoscopic procedures, the incidence of laparoscopic port site hernias is becoming more common. Given the size of the hernias, there is a substantial risk of bowel strangulation and ischemia. These hernias commonly present as Richter’s hernia, or a hernia con-taining only a portion of bowel wall. A recent meta-analysis found that the incidence of port site hernia after laparoscopic procedure was less than 1%. Patients can present either early or several years after surgery. Risk factors are similar to other incisional hernias. The most common site of herniation is at an umbilical incision, but it may be found elsewhere. In adults, hernias usually occur in ports that are greater than 5 mm in size, but they can occur in any size ports in children. Depending on the timing of presentation, these are usually repaired via an open approach by increasing the size of the skin incision, reducing the hernia, and approximating all layers of fascia.Rectus Abdominis Diastasis. Rectus abdominis diastasis (diastasis recti) is an anatomic term referring to an abnormal separation of rectus muscles and a laxity at the linea alba. Although there is controversy regarding normal separation dis-tances between rectus muscles, a distance of two centimeters is usually considered abnormal in the midline abdomen above the umbilicus. This can either be a congenital or acquired abnor-mality. This is not a true hernia as the midline fascia is intact, and as such incarceration and strangulation do not occur. Risk factors for acquired rectus abdominis diastasis include condi-tions that elevate intraabdominal pressure, including obesity and pregnancy, as well as conditions which weaken the abdominal wall, including connective tissue disorders or prior abdominal surgery. Risk factors of developing a diastasis recti after preg-nancy include older age at the time of pregnancy, multiple preg-nancies, and recurrent ceasarean sections. Postpartum exercise reduces the risk of developing diasthesis recti. Most patients with diastasis recti can be diagnosed based on physical exam where a fusiform bulge is usually apparent. This bulge worsens with contraction of the rectus muscles or Valsalva maneuver. If imaging is needed, ultrasonography can be used to confirm dia-thesis and rule out hernia. CT scan can also be used to confirm diagnosis and measure distance between muscle pillars. Rectus diastasis does not require surgical repair and may be improved via weight loss and exercise. Indications for repair include dis-ability of abdominal wall muscular function or cosmesis. Sur-gical repair includes both open and laparoscopic plication of the rectus sheath. Mesh can also be used to bridge the muscle; however, complication rates increase with mesh usage. These procedures do, unfortunately, have a high risk of recurrence long term and introduce a new risk of incisional hernia.Rectus Sheath Hematoma. Disruption of one of the branches of the inferior epigastric artery as well as an inability to tampon-ade the hemorrhage results in a rectus sheath hematoma. This occurs commonly around the arcuate line where the artery and its branches are relatively fixed causing vulnerability to shearing forces. Several risk factors are associated with rectus hematoma formation via either proclivity to disruption of blood vessels or by inability to cease bleeding. Trauma to the abdominal wall, including iatrogenic trauma with laparoscopic trocar placement, can lead to disruption of blood vessels. Vigorous contraction of the rectus muscle, either with coughing, sneezing, or exercise, can also induce hemorrhage formation. Chronic pulmonary dis-ease can lead to hemorrhage because of coughing fits. Patients on anticoagulation also present with higher risk of hematoma formation. This condition presents with acute abdominal pain and a palpable abdominal wall mass. Rectus sheath hematoma may be mistaken with intraperitoneal pathology, including appendicitis if on the right side. However, in patients with rec-tus sheath hematomas, pain usually increases with contraction of the rectus muscles as opposed to intraperitoneal conditions. In addition, palpation of a mass that does not change during contraction of the rectus muscle, known as Fothergill’s sign, is also associated with rectus sheath pathology. The diagnosis should be confirmed via ultrasound or CT scan with intravenous contrast. Obtaining a type and screen, hemoglobin/hematocrit, and coagulation factors are critical in the management of these patients.Treatment of patients with rectus sheath hematoma depends on the hemodynamic stability of the patient as well as the size of the hematoma. Hemodynamically stable patients with small hematomas, stable serial hemoglobin/hematocrits, and normal coagulation factors may be observed without hospital-ization. Hemodynamically stable patients with larger or bilateral hematomas and decreases in hemoglobin should be monitored in the hospital setting, with serial hemoglobin levels, compres-sion of the hematoma, and bedrest. If anticoagulated, reversal is necessary and transfusions of packed red blood cells may 4Brunicardi_Ch35_p1549-p1566.indd   155612/02/19   9:58 AM 1557ABDOMINAL WALL, OMENTUM, MESENTERY, AND RETROPERITONEUMCHAPTER 35be required in some situations. Patients in hypovolemic shock should be aggressively resuscitated with the use of blood prod-ucts and treated via angiographic embolization. Angiographic intervention may also be required if the hematoma increases in size or if clinical deterioration occurs. Surgical therapy can be performed if angiographic intervention has failed. Surgical treatment includes operative evacuation of hematoma and liga-tion of bleeding vessels.Desmoid Tumors. Also known as aggressive fibromatosis, desmoid tumors are fibroblastic neoplasms with aggressive infiltrative behavior but no metastatic potential. These tumors can occur anywhere in the body but commonly occur in the abdomen or abdominal wall. Desmoid tumors are rare and usu-ally occur sporadically. They are, however, also associated with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), with an even greater risk in patients with Gardner’s syndrome. Of patients with FAP, 10% to 15% develop desmoid tumors. After prophylactic col-ectomy, desmoid tumors becomes the primary cause of death in patients with FAP. Risk factors for sporadic development of desmoid tumors include previous surgical incision, pregnancy, hormonal exposure, and trauma. Females have a higher pre-dilection for formation of desmoid tumors. Diagnosis can be performed via core-needle or incisional biopsy. Larger tumor size, young patient age, and extra-abdominal tumor location all predict poor recurrence free survival.The gold standard of treatment of abdominal wall desmoid tumors, historically, is margin-negative resection with immedi-ate mesh reconstruction. However, more recently there has been controversy as to whether complete microscopic resection is necessary. It is now commonly agreed that while complete microscopic resection is ideal, with the emergence of adjuvant therapy a positive margin may not require additional surgery, especially if re-resection would cause high morbidity. There is also some evidence to suggest a period of close watchful wait-ing, as some tumors appear to remain stable or even regress over time. In one cohort of 106 abdominal wall desmoids managed initially without surgery, 16% of patients went on to require surgery in a follow-up period of three years. Interestingly, 29 patients had spontaneous regression of their tumors over that time. The National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) now suggests initial close observation for patients with asymptomatic, non–life-threatening tumors. Surgery is indicated in patients with symptomatic disease, risk of invasion of surrounding structures, or enlarging tumors. There may be a role for adjuvant or neoadjuvant radiation therapy, although the data are unclear at this time. Primary radiation therapy may be an option for patients who are not surgical candidates. There may also be a role for systemic therapy, especially if tumors are unre-sectable. Options include hormonal therapy, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents, cytotoxic chemotherapies (doxorubicin or carboplatin), or imatinib.Other Abdominal Wall Tumors. Various tumors may also be found within the abdominal wall including lipomas and neu-rofibromas (Fig. 35-7). Surgical resection is recommended for symptomatic or enlarging lesions. Abdominal wall malignancies are exceedingly rare and include several histologic subtypes of sarcomas, dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans, schwannomas, and melanomas. Workup of abdominal wall tumors should include core needle biopsy or excisional biopsy if the tumor is small enough. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or CT scan with IV contrast should be utilized to define local extent of disease. MRI is preferred as this modality provides more detail on extent of disease. Chest CT should also be obtained to rule out pulmo-nary metastasis in high-grade tumors. Chest X-ray may be suf-ficient to stage tumors that are low grade, given the lower risk of distant disease. Surgical resection is the mainstay of treatment for nonmetastatic disease. For most soft tissue sarcomas, 1 cm margins are usually sufficient, but 2 cm margins may be needed for dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans. Tumors of the superficial abdominal wall should be resected with the underlying fascia, which may require use of mesh to prevent abdominal wall laxity or hernia.Given the rarity of these tumors, the efficacy of adjuvant or neoadjuvant chemoradiation is unclear. Adjuvant or neo-adjuvant therapy may be recommended in patients with large  (>5 cm) or high-grade tumors. Some centers administer neoad-juvant radiation therapy to patients with high-risk tumors to monitor response. Chemotherapy may also be used in certain situations. If tumors involve underlying viscera, en bloc resec-tion may be required. Primary closure may be feasible, but pros-thetic mesh use (even in the setting of bowel resection) may be required. Options for abdominal wall closure after resection include absorbable or biologic mesh reinforcement, and myocu-taneous flap reconstruction.OMENTUMSurgical AnatomyThe omentum is a fibrous adipose apron providing support and protection of the intraabdominal viscera. Embryologically, the omentum originated from the dorsal mesogastrium. Anatomi-cally, the omentum is divided into the greater and lesser omen-tums. The greater omentum begins to form during the fourth week of gestation. Initially, the omentum forms as a double-layered structure, with the spleen developing between the two layers. As development proceeds, the layers of mesentery fuse, the spleen assumes its position in the peritoneum, and the gas-trosplenic ligament forms. The greater omentum, therefore, is a double-layered sheet of visceral fibroadipose tissue descending from the greater curvature of the stomach, covering the small intestines. The omentum folds back on itself and attaches onto the anterior peritoneum of the transverse colon (Fig. 35-8). 5Figure 35-7. Abdominal wall lipoma.Brunicardi_Ch35_p1549-p1566.indd   155712/02/19   9:59 AM 1558SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIIn an adult, the greater omentum lies between the abdominal wall and the hollow viscera, usually extending into the pelvis. The greater omental tissue connecting the stomach to transverse colon, as well as the stomach to the spleen, are known as the gastrocolic and gastrosplenic ligaments, respectively. The blood supply to the greater omentum is derived from the right and left gastroepiploic arteries. The venous system parallels the arterial supply and ultimately drains into the portal system. Lymphatic drainage of the greater omentum occurs via the subpyloric or splenic nodes depending on laterality ultimately culminating in the celiac nodes and subsequently the thoracic duct.Forming the anterior boundary of the lesser sac, the lesser omentum extends between the liver and lesser curvature of the stomach. Also known as the hepatoduodenal and hepatogastric ligaments, the portal triad (including the common bile duct, por-tal vein, and hepatic artery) is located within the inferolateral margin of the lesser omentum. This free edge of lesser omentum forms the foramen of Winslow, which is used to encircle the portal triad during a pringle maneuver (see Fig. 35-8).PhysiologyInitially described by the British surgeon Rutherford Morison as the “policeman of the abdomen,” the greater omentum is under-stood as a peritoneal defense organ. The omentum forms fibrin adhesions at sites of inflammation, effectively attempting to wall off peritoneal infections. The greater omentum is known to respond to a foreign stimulus by expanding stro-mal tissue that expresses chemotactic, inflammatory, and hemo-static factors, which promote tissue inflammation and subsequent repair. Forming a fibrin bridge between omental tis-sue and the injured site allows passage of inflammatory factors and immune cells. The Graham Patch repair of a perforated ulcer utilizes the complex inflammatory interactions of the omentum to improve leak rates after repair.The visceral fat of the greater omentum is also involved in metabolic functions of the body. Increased visceral fat, including the greater omentum, is an independent risk factor for insulin resistance and high triglyceride levels. This may be, in part, mediated by the increase in visceral inflammation seen in intra-abdominal obesity. Several adipokines, or cell-signaling molecules secreted by adipose tissue, are secreted by the greater omentum and act on peripheral tissues, affecting metabolic health throughout the body.Acquired DisordersOmental Infarction. Omental infarction is a rare cause of acute abdominal pain. Omental infarction may be primary or 6DiaphragmGastrohepaticligamentRight colic (hepatic)flexureAscending colonGreater omentum(gastrocolic ligament)Falciform ligamentRound ligamentof liverHepatoduodenalligament (containingportal triad)Arrow passingthrough omentalforamen intoomental bursaGastrophrenicligamentCoronaryligament (cut)StomachSpleenDescending colonPhrenicocolicligamentInferior recess ofomental bursa(between layers ofgreater omentum)GastrocolicligamentTransverse colon(sectioned)GastrosplenicligamentLeft colic (splenic)flexureTransversemesocolonLiver:   Diaphragmatic   surface   Visceral surfaceAnterior view** Parts of greater omentum* Parts of lesser omentum********Figure 35-8. Greater and lesser omentum. The greater omentum begins along the greater curvature of the stomach, drapes over the transverse colon into the pelvis, and folds back on itself inserting along the posterior wall of the transverse colon. The greater omentum includes the gastrophrenic and gastro splenic ligament. The lesser omentum includes the gastrohepatic and hepatoduodenal ligaments, covering the lesser sac of the abdomen. The free lateral edge of the lesser omentum includes the portal triad, forming the foramen of Winslow below. (Reproduced with permission from Moore KL, Agur AM: Essential Clinical Anatomy, 5th edition. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2014.)Brunicardi_Ch35_p1549-p1566.indd   155812/02/19   9:59 AM 1559ABDOMINAL WALL, OMENTUM, MESENTERY, AND RETROPERITONEUMCHAPTER 35secondary depending on the etiology. Primary infarction may be caused by torsion of the omentum from sudden or force-ful movements, thrombosis or vasculitis of omental vessels, or omental venous outflow obstruction. Secondary causes of torsion are most often due to hernias, tumors, or adhesions. Only about 250 cases of primary omental infarction have been reported in the literature. This occurs most often in male and obese patients. Omental infarction may mimic other intra-abdominal pathologies such as appendicitis, cholecystitis, or diverticulitis. Abdominal exam usually demonstrates perito-neal tenderness, with a possible palpable mass. Ultrasonogra-phy (US) and abdominal CT scan are used to assist diagnosis. US may demonstrate a hyperechoic, noncompressible intra-abdominal mass attached to the abdominal wall. CT scan demonstrates a streaking whirling pattern of fatty tissue in the anterior abdomen (Fig. 35-9). Regardless, only a small percent-age of patients are preoperatively diagnosed. Omental infarction can be treated conservatively, but this leads to several possible complications, including abscess or adhesion formation. Lapa-roscopic exploration and resection of infarcted tissue is the usual treatment of choice and leads to rapid resolution of symptoms.Omental Cysts. Cystic lesions of the omentum are rare dis-orders, related in pathogenesis to mesenteric cysts. Most are thought to form through degeneration or inclusion of lymphatic structures. Case reports described these lesions presenting as vague abdominal pain or nausea or vomiting. Cysts may also present as a lead point for omental torsion and infarction. Physi-cal exam may or may not reveal evidence of an intra-abdominal mass. Cysts may also be diagnosed incidentally on imaging exams performed for other reasons. CT scan and US are largely diagnostic and reveal a well-circumscribed cystic appearing lesion arising from the greater omentum. A very small percent-age may transform to malignancy. Most are resected, especially if symptomatic, via open or laparoscopic approaches. Cysts may relapse if treated conservatively via laparoscopic unroofing or percutaneous drainage.Omental Neoplasms. Most omental neoplasms are meta-static disease. Ovarian cancer is the most common cancer to have omental involvement. Other metastatic cancers include gastrointestinal tract tumors, melanoma, endometrial cancer, and kidney cancer.Primary tumors of the omentum are exceedingly rare. Benign masses may include lipomas, myxomas, and desmoid tumors. Extra gastrointestinal stromal tumors are a rare malig-nant tumor of the omentum that have been described in several case series. These tumors share many genetic and immuno-phenotypic similarities to classical GISTS, including c-kit and PDGFRA mutations. In one review of case reports, the median age of diagnosis was noted to be 65 years and had equal predi-lection for male and female patients.MESENTERYSurgical AnatomyThe mesentery is a contiguous structure suspending and fix-ing bowel to the abdominal wall providing housing for arterial, venous, nervous, and lymphatic structures connecting hollow viscera with the body. The mesentery is derived from the meso-dermal germ layer becoming the dorsal mesentery. Previous theories of development included sliding and regression models of mesenteric development. However, with a new contiguous model of development of the mesentery, several key simple steps are proposed to take place. Initially, the mesentery provides a point of suspension from vascular connections. As the intestine and mesentery elongate, they undergo a 270° counterclockwise rotation leaving the primordial abdominal cavity. Eventually, the duodenum and ascending/descending colon flatten against the posterior abdominal wall returning the bowel back into the abdomen and taking its normal shape. The resultant develop-ment of the white line of Toldt along the lateral border of the ascending and descending large bowel provides an avascular fascial plan between the colon, its mesentery, and the underlying retroperitoneal space. The small intestine mesentery, transverse colon mesentery, and sigmoid colon mesentery remain mobile.Defects in the proper rotation and fixation of the bowel results in the spectrum of congenital disorders known as intesti-nal malrotation. In this scenario, the intestine and mesentery are simply suspended from vascular connection, making intestinal volvulus common. Defects that form in anatomical positions may act as routes for intestinal herniation. Common sites of her-niation include the paraduodenal or mesocolic areas, leading to either acute or chronic intestinal obstruction in pediatric or adult populations. Areas where mesenteric attachment is incomplete may predispose patients to volvulus. Attachments of the cecum may degrade overtime leading to an area of laxity and possible twisting. The sigmoid mesentery can also increase in size over time also leading to possible sigmoid volvulus. Rarely, other areas of the colon can develop volvulus if differential mesen-teric lengths form.Sclerosing MesenteritisSclerosing mesenteritis is a rare disorder characterized by idio-pathic fibrosis of the mesentery, affecting hollow viscera as well as mesenteric vessels. The disease is part of a spectrum of inflammation and fibrosis, which when localized is known as mesenteric lipodystrophy and when diffuse is known as mes-enteric panniculitis. The cause of this disease is unknown, but it may be instigated by antecedent abdominal surgery, an auto-immune disease, a paraneoplastic syndrome, a previous infec-tion (including typhoid, tuberculosis, influenza, and rheumatic fever), or vascular insult. This disease most commonly effects Figure 35-9. Computed tomography scan findings indicative of omental infarction. The area demonstrated by the bold arrow appears congested with a streaking whirling pattern of fatty tissue in the anterior abdomen. (Reproduced with permission from Barai KP, Knight BC: Diagnosis and management of idiopathic omental infarc-tion: A case report, Int J Surg Case Rep. 2011;2(6):138-140.)Brunicardi_Ch35_p1549-p1566.indd   155912/02/19   9:59 AM 1560SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIwhite patients between 50 and 70 years of age, although it has been rarely described in children. Most studies report a predi-lection for male patients. Most patients with this disease pres-ent with abdominal pain. Other symptoms include nausea and vomiting, weight loss, anorexia, and altered bowel habits. This may appear as a chronic or acute disorder. On physical exam, patients may be found to have tenderness and distension. Up to 50% of patients are found to have an abdominal mass that often transmits aortic pulsations.Abdominal CT with IV contrast is used to assist in diag-nosis (Fig. 35-10). The most common finding is that of a soft tissue mass with a higher density than normal mesenteric tis-sue. Although it is sometimes difficult to distinguish mesen-teric fibrosis from a mesenteric tumor, two CT findings may add specificity. The “tumor pseudocapsule” refers to a hypodense zone around the associated fibrotic mass, and the “fat ring sign” refers to an area of preserved fat near mesenteric vessels cours-ing through areas of fibrosis. These lesions may also be calcified on CT scan.Pathologic confirmation is required to confirm the diagno-sis. This usually requires laparoscopic or open biopsy to provide adequate tissue for confirmation. Treatment of sclerosing mesenteritis is complex, with surgery having a mini-mal role. Patients who present with bowel ischemia may require bowel and mesenteric resection; however, the extent and loca-tion of mesenteric involvement may preclude complete resec-tion. If obstructive symptoms are dominant, intestinal bypass may be indicated. Aggressive surgical treatment is not indicated because in many cases symptoms may improve with medical treatment or even without intervention. Steroids, hormonal ther-apy, colchicine, thalidomide, and cyclophosphamide have all been reported to be beneficial.Mesenteric CystsMesenteric cysts are a rare benign disorder with an incidence ranging from 1 in 27,000 to 1 in 250,000 admissions. Cysts are thought to be caused by disruption of the lymphatics in the mes-entery either by traumatic disruption, mechanical obstruction, or congenital lymphatic malformations. Most cysts are unilocular, but they also may have multiple loculations. They are usually lined with a single layer of columnar epithelial cells. Presenta-tion of mesenteric cyst is varied, with some being found inciden-tally on imaging exams and others causing acute abdominal pain because of cyst rupture or bowel torsion. Chronic symptoms are usually nonspecific, including abdominal pain or discomfort, anorexia, distension, nausea, vomiting, or changes in bowel habits. Symptoms are due to local compression of abdominal structures. Up to 45% of cysts are found incidentally.Physical exam revels an abdominal mass in up to 60% of patients. The classic Tillaux’s sign is an abdominal mass lesion that is only mobile laterally, contrasting omental cysts which are usually freely mobile in all directions. CT scan and ultra-sound can be used to make an accurate diagnosis. Cystic lesions usually appear as a fluid filled mass without solid components (Fig. 35-11). It can sometimes be difficult to differentiate cystic masses from solid tumors based on imaging. Mesenteric cys-tic lymphangioma may present as numerous cysts on imaging. Up to 3% of mesenteric cysts contain malignancy, mostly as a sarcomatous lesion. In one recently published series, 19% of patients harbored malignancy. Solid components within the cystic structure are associated with higher rates of malignancy.Most mesenteric cysts are treated surgically. Marsupial-ization and simple aspiration have high rates of recurrence and 7Figure 35-11. Computed tomography scan demonstrating a mes-enteric cyst. White arrow points to a homogenous cystic structure located in the mesentery of the small bowel. (Reproduced with per-mission from Jain V, DeMuro JP, Geller M, et al. A case of laparo-scopic mesenteric cyst excision. Case Rep Surg. 2012;2012:594095.)ABFigure 35-10. Computed tomography scan findings of sclerosing mesenteritis in (A) coronal view and (B) cross-sectional view. The area demonstrated with arrows depicts an area of higher density and edema representing inflamed mesentery. (Reproduced with per-mission from Daumas A, Agostini S, Villeret J, et al. Spontaneous resolution of severe, symptomatic mesocolic panniculitis: a case report, BMC Gastroenterol. 2012 Jun 6;12:59.)Brunicardi_Ch35_p1549-p1566.indd   156012/02/19   9:59 AM 1561ABDOMINAL WALL, OMENTUM, MESENTERY, AND RETROPERITONEUMCHAPTER 35are generally discouraged. Benign lesions should be enuclu-ated, and malignant cysts should be resected with clear margins. Intestines or surrounding viscera may require resection if the associated vasculature is excised. Resection can be performed either via a laparoscopic or open procedure.Mesenteric TumorsPrimary mesenteric tumors are rare but represent several histo-logic patterns. Benign tumors include desmoid tumors, lipomas, and cystic lymphangiomas. The most common malignant neo-plasm of the mesentery is lymphoma. On imaging, lymphoma may appear as bulky adenopathy, usually surrounding and not obstructing nearby structures. Lymphomas should not be resected, but they may require operative biopsy for diagnosis. Other malignant tumors of the mesentery include gastrointesti-nal stromal tumors, carcinoids, liposarcoma, leiomyosarcoma, malignant fibrous histiocytomoas, lipoblastomas, or lymphan-giosarcoma. Treatment of malignant mesenteric masses usually involves wide resection; however, given the proximity to mes-enteric vessels, resection may not be feasible or require removal of large portions of bowel.RETROPERITONEUMSurgical AnatomyThe retroperitoneum is bound by the peritoneum anteriorly, the iliopsoas and lumbar muscles posteriorly, the diaphragm superiorly, and the levator ani muscles inferiorly. It is divided into the three spaces: the anterior pararenal space, the perirenal space, and the posterior pararenal space (Fig. 35-12). The ante-rior pararenal space refers to the area anterior to the renal fascia but posterior to the peritoneum. This area contains the ascend-ing and descending colon, the duodenum, and the pancreas. Posterior to this space is the perirenal space, which houses the inferior vena cava, the aorta, kidneys, and adrenal glands. The posterior pararenal space is in continuity with preperitoneal fat of the anterior abdomen. Given the compliance of the anterior boundary of the retroperitoneum and the rigidity of other mar-gins, tumors, hematomas, and abscesses tend to expand anteri-orly toward the peritoneal cavity.With the expansion of minimally invasive techniques in surgery, the retroperitoneoscopic approach has emerged as a potential modality for access to retroperitoneal organs. Patients are positioned in the prone or lateral decubitus positions. The retroperitoneoscopic approach allows access to the kidneys, adrenal glands, and retroperitoneal lymph nodes. One system-atic review found no difference when comparing laparoscopic to retroperitoneoscopic adrenalectomy in terms of operative outcomes, complications, or postoperative recovery. Retroperi-toneoscopic approach did, however, lead to shorter hospital stay likely because of reduced postoperative pain. The majority of the studies evaluating the retroperitoneoscopic approach are retrospective, and more randomized trials are needed to provide further guidance.Retroperitoneal InfectionsInfections of the retroperitoneum can be due to primary hema-togenous spread of microbes or due to secondary infection from retroperitoneal or nearby organs. Examples include abscesses due to a perforated retrocecal appendix, diverticulitis, a con-tained perforated duodenal ulcer, iatrogenic perforation of the gastrointestinal tract, or pancreatitis. Patients may develop back, Inferiorvena cavaDiaphragmEsophagusAbdominal aortaSplenorenal ligamentPancreasRoot of transversemesocolonDuodenojejunaljunctionLeft kidneyPsoas majorInferior mesenteric arterySite of descending mesocolonRoot of sigmoidmesocolonRectumSite of barearea of liverHepatic portalveinDuodenumSuperiormesenteric vein and arterySite of ascending colonRoot of mesenteryTesticular (or ovarian) vesselsUreterAnterior viewRight kidneyRightparacolic gutterFigure 35-12. Anatomy of the retroperitoneum. (Reproduced with permission from Moore KL, Agur AM: Essential Clinical Anatomy, 5th edition. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2014.)Brunicardi_Ch35_p1549-p1566.indd   156112/02/19   9:59 AM 1562SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIflank, or groin pain and suffer from fevers or chills. Depend-ing on severity, patients may present with fulminant sepsis. Abscesses may become quite large given the substantial retro-peritoneal space. On physical exam, patients may present with erythema of the umbilicus or flank. Abscesses are usually found easily on CT scan of the abdomen with IV contrast, which can also show if the collection is loculated. Treatment of retroperi-toneal abscesses includes source control via treatment of the underlying condition, drainage of well-defined collections, and IV antibiotics. Image guided drainage is preferred, but it may be unsuccessful if the abscess is multiloculated or in an inacces-sible area. For these cases, operative drainage may be required. Given the insidious nature of this disease and a lack of abdomi-nal findings on physical exam, recognition of a retroperitoneal abscess may be delayed. Delays in diagnosis and insufficient drainage may lead to high morbidity and mortality. Depending on severity, mortality of retroperitoneal abscess can be as high as 25%. Rarely, patients may develop necrotizing fasciitis of the retroperitoneum, a condition with high mortality.Retroperitoneal FibrosisRetroperitoneal fibrosis is a rare disease characterized by inflammation and fibrosis of the tissue of the retroperitoneum. It exists as a spectrum of disease with chronic periaortitis, which affects the retroperitoneal tissue near large arteries of the retro-peritoneum. Fibrosis gradually expands, encasing the ureters, inferior vena cava, aorta, mesenteric vessels, or sympathetic nerves. Bilateral involvement is noted in up to 70% of cases. The condition may either be idiopathic or due to a secondary cause, including aortic aneurysms, pancreatitis, certain drugs (Ergot-derivatives, β-blockers, hydralazine, methyldopa, among others), malignancies (including lymphoma, carcinoids, sarco-mas, colorectal, breast, and others), infections such as tuber-culosis, radiation, retroperitoneal hematoma, surgery, asbestos, or tobacco use. Retroperitoneal fibrosis has been described in association with several autoimmune disorders including anky-losing spondylitis, systemic lupus erythematosus, Wegener’s granulomatosis, and polyarteritis nodosa.Idiopathic retroperitoneal fibrosis accounts for 70% of cases and is thought to be an immune-mediated disorder. Theo-ries regarding the pathogenesis of idiopathic fibrosis of the retro-peritoneum include exaggerated local reactions to aortic or iliac atherosclerosis or autoimmune deposition of fibroinflammatory cytokines. Retroperitoneal fibrosis is also a manifestation of IgG4-related disease, a multisystem disease characterized by lymphocytic infiltrate and variable degrees of fibrosis of sev-eral affected organs. One study has associated retroperitoneal fibrosis with the HLA-DRB1*03 allelle, which has been linked to autoimmune diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus, type 1 diabetes mellitus, and myasthenia gravis.Idiopathic retroperitoneal fibrosis is rare, with an incidence of 1.3 per 100,000 people per year. It most commonly affects individuals in the fourth to sixth decades of life. Some studies suggest a 2:1 male-to-female predominance, but others have not found a gender predilection. Patients with this condition present with nonspecific findings. Most patients are diagnosed after ure-teral obstruction. Patients may complain of dull or acute back or flank pain. Systemic complaints include anorexia, weight loss, nausea, vomiting, fever, and malaise. Decreased urinary out-put may ensue if the ureters become fibrotic. Because of renal artery impingement, patients are commonly hypertensive on exam. Other physical exam findings include lower extremity edema and diminished lower extremity pulses if the vessels of the lower extremities are compressed. New hydrocele or varico-cele can also be associated with fibrosis of the retroperitoneum. Laboratory analysis is also nonspecific. If there is renal obstruc-tion, patients may have elevated serum blood urea nitrogen and creatinine. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive pro-tein is elevated in most patients with retroperitoneal fibrosis. Antinuclear antibodies may also be elevated, highlighting the autoimmune nature of this disease.Contrast-enhanced CT scan is the modality of choice to visualize the extent of disease. On CT scan, fibrotic ret-roperitoneum appears to have similar attenuation to muscle tissue (Fig. 35-13). The fibrotic mass can appear to encase the aorta and often compresses the inferior vena cava. If renal insufficiency precludes the use of IV contrast, MRI can be used to clarify the extent of fibrosis. Renal US can also be used to document ureteral compression and hydronephrosis. In some cases, a compressing mass lesion can also be found on abdominal US. Lower-extremity US may show deep venous thrombosis.Pathologic examination of tissue is necessary to confirm the diagnosis and to rule out malignancy. Differential of ret-roperitoneal masses include lymphomas or sarcomas, desmoid Figure 35-13. Computed tomography findings of retroperitoneal fibrosis. Arrows point to a soft tissue mass surrounding the aorta and common iliac arteries. Also present is hydronephrosis of the right kidney because of ureteral compression. (Reproduced with permission from Vagilo A. Salvarani C, Buzio C. Retroperitoneal Fibrosis, Lancet. 2006 Jan 21;367(9506):241-251.)Brunicardi_Ch35_p1549-p1566.indd   156212/02/19   9:59 AM 1563ABDOMINAL WALL, OMENTUM, MESENTERY, AND RETROPERITONEUMCHAPTER 35tumors, and infections such as tuberculosis. Biopsy can be obtained either via image-guided or surgical techniques, which may be performed laparoscopically or during an open procedure.Once the diagnosis of retroperitoneal fibrosis is estab-lished, treatment is initiated. Surgical treatment is aimed at relieving ureteral obstruction either by ureterolysis or stenting. Surgery is reserved for patients who develop renal insufficiency as any surgical intervention in these patients car-ries several associated risks. In patients with secondary fibro-sis, treatment is aimed at the underlying etiology or discontinuation of the causative medication. For patients with idiopathic retroperitoneal fibrosis, corticosteroids are the mainstay of treatment. Patients are usually started on one month of high-dose prednisone, followed by maintenance therapy and subsequent taper. Alternatively, tamoxifen can be used if patients have contraindications to steroids. Within days of instituting therapy, symptoms and inflammatory markers should improve. Over the course of a few weeks, renal func-tion should improve. Interval imaging studies are usually obtained after 1 month to evaluate for efficacy. If steroids fail to cause regression of disease, patients can be started on immunosuppressant medications including methotrexate, aza-thioprine, cyclophosphamide, or mycophenolate mofetil. Recurrence of retroperitoneal fibrosis varies between studies from 10% to 30%. In patients who respond to steroid therapy, 5-year survival is as high as 90%.BIBLIOGRAPHYEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.Aguirre DA, Santosa AC, Casola G, Sirlin CB. Abdominal wall her-nias: imaging features, complications, and diagnostic pitfalls at multi-detector row CT. RadioGraphics. 2005;25:1501-1520.Ahmad G, Gent D, Henderson D, O’Flynn H, Phillips K, Watson A. Laparoscopic entry techniques. Cochrane Data-base Syst Rev. 2015;8:CD006583. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD006583.pub4Awaiz A, Rahman F, Hossain MB, et al. Meta-analysis and system-atic review of laparoscopic versus open mesh repair for elec-tive incisional hernia. Hernia. 2015;19:449-463. doi: 10.1007/s10029-015-1351-zBagade S, Khanna G. Imaging of omphalomesenteric duct remnants and related pathologies in children. Curr Probl Diagn Radiol. 2015;44:246-255.Beer GM, Schuster A, Seifert B, et al. The normal width of the linea alba in nulliparous women. Clin Anat. 2009;22(6):706-711. doi: 10.1002/ca.20836Berrevoet F, Vanlander A, Sainz-Barriga M, et al. Infected large pore meshes may be salvaged by topical negative pressure ther-apy. Hernia. 2013;17:67-73. doi: 10.1007/s10029-012-0969-3Bhangu A, Fitzgerald JE, Singh P, Battersby N, Marriott P, Pinkney T. Systematic review and meta-analysis of prophylactic mesh placement for prevention of incisional hernia follow-ing midline laparotomy. Hernia. 2013;17(4):445-455. doi: 10.1007/s10029-013-1119-2Bickenbach KA, Karanicolas PJ, Ammori JB, et al. Development of the ventral body wall in the human embryo. Ann Surg. 2013;227:276-281. doi: 10.1053/j.sempedsurg.2014.09.009Bickenbach KA, Karanicolas PJ, Ammori JB, et al. Up and down or side to side? A systematic review and meta-analysis examining the impact of incision on outcomes after abdominal surgery. Am J Surg. 2013;206:400-409. doi: 10.1016/j.amjsurg.2012.11.008Bilsel Y, Abci I. The search for ideal hernia repair; mesh materi-als and types. Int J Surg. 2012;10:317-321. doi: 10.1016/j.ijsu.2012.05.002Brown SR, Tiernan J. Transverse verses midline incisions for abdom-inal surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2005;(4):CD005199. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD005199.pub2Caro-Tarrago A, Olona Casas C, Jimenez Salido A, et al. Prevention of incisional hernia in midline laparotomy with an onlay mesh: a randomized clinical trial. World J Surg. 2014;38:2223-2230. doi: 10.1007/s00268-014-2510-6Conze J, Kingsnorth AN, Flament JB, et al. Randomized clinical trial comparing lightweight composite mesh with polyester or polypropylene mesh for incisional hernia repair. Br J Surg. 2005;92:1488-1493. doi: 10.1002/bjs.5208de Vries Reilingh TS, van Goor H, Rosman C, et al. “Compo-nents separation technique” for the repair of large abdominal wall hernias. J Am Coll Surg. 2003;196:32-37. doi: 10.1016/S1072-7515(02)01478-3Deerenberg EB, Harlaar JJ, Steyerberg EW, et al. Small bites versus large bites for closure of abdominal midline incisions (STITCH): a double-blind, multicentre, randomised con-trolled trial. Lancet. 2015;386(10000):1254-1260. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(15)60459-7DeMaria EJ, Moss JM, Sugerman HJ. Laparoscopic intraperito-neal polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) prosthetic patch repair of ventral hernia. Surg Endosc. 2000;14:326-329. doi: 10.1007/s004640020013den Hartog D, Dur AHM, Tuinebreijer WE, Kreis RW. Open surgi-cal procedures for incisional hernias. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008; doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD006438.pub2Ellis H. Applied anatomy of abdominal incisions. Br J Hosp Med. 2010;71:M36-M37. doi: 10.12968/hmed.2010.71.Sup3.46991Franz MG. The biology of hernia formation. Surg Clin North Am. 2008;88:1-15.García CM, Ruiz SG, Franco CC. Anatomy of the abdominal wall. In: Suárez Grau JM, Bellido Luque JA, eds. Advances in Lap-aroscopy of the Abdominal Wall Hernia. London: Springer; 2014:7-22.Halm JA, Heisterkamp J, Veen HF, Weidema WF. Long-term follow-up after umbilical hernia repair: are there risk factors for recurrence after simple and mesh repair. Hernia. 2005;9: 334-337. doi: 10.1007/s10029-005-0010-1Hanson J. Netter’s Clinical Anatomy. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2014.Hasson HM. A modified instrument and method for  laparoscopy. Am J Obset Gynecol. 1971;110:886-887.  doi: 10.1016/0002-9378(71)90593-XHegazy AA. Anatomy and embryology of umbilicus in newborns: a review and clinical correlations. Frontiers Med. 2016;10: 271-277. doi: 10.1007/s11684-016-0457-8Henrich K, Huemmer HP, Reingruber B, Weber PG. Gastroschisis and omphalocele: treatments and long-term outcomes. Ped Surg Int. 2008;24:167-173. doi: 10.1007/s00383-007-2055-yHoward JH, Pollock R. Intra-abdominal and abdominal wall des-moid fibromatosis. Oncol Ther. 2016;4:57-72.Inaba T, Okinaga K, Fukushima R, et al. Prospective randomized study of two laparotomy incisions for gastrectomy: midline incision versus transverse incision. Gastric Cancer. 2004;7: 167-171. doi: 10.1007/s10120-004-0291-6Le Huu Nho R, Mege D, Ouaïssi M, et al. Incidence and prevention of ventral incisional hernia. J Visc Surg. 2012;149:e3-e14.Lowe JB, Garza JR, Bowman JL, Rohrich RJ, Strodel WE. Endoscopically assisted “components separation” for closure of abdominal wall defects. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2000; 105(2):720-729.Luijendijk RW, Hop WCJ, van den Tol MP, et al. A compari-son of suture repair with mesh repair for incisional her-nia. N Engl J Med. 2000;343:392-398. doi: 10.1056/NEJM200008103430603Maingot R, Zinner M, Ashley SW. Maingot’s Abdominal Opera-tions. New York: McGraw-Hill Medical; 2013.8Brunicardi_Ch35_p1549-p1566.indd   156312/02/19   9:59 AM 1564SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIMcBurney C. IV. The incision made in the abdominal wall in cases of appendicitis, with a description of a new method of operat-ing. Ann Surg. 1894;20:38-43.Mekonen HK, Hikspoors JPJM, Mommen G, et al. Develop-ment of the ventral body wall in the human embryo. J Anat. 2015;227:673-685. doi: 10.1111/joa.12380Millbourn D, Cengiz Y, Israelsson L. Effect of stitch length on wound complications after closure of mid-line incisions. Arch Surg. 2009;144(11):1056-1059.Murphy KP, O’Connor OJ, Maher MM. Adult abdominal her-nias. Am J Roentgenol. 2014;202:W506-W511. doi: 10.2214/AJR.13.12071Mwachaka PM, Saidi HS, Odula PO, et al. Locating the arcuate line of Douglas: is it of surgical relevance? Clin Anat. 2010;23: 84-86. doi: 10.1002/ca.20877Nachiappan S, Markar S, Karthikesaligam A, et al. Prophylactic mesh placement in high-risk patients undergoing elective lapa-rotomy: a systematic review. World J Surg. 2013;37:1861-1871. doi: 10.1007/s00268-013-2046-1Palmer R. Safety in laparoscopy. J Reprod Med. 1974;13:1-5.Ponten JEH, Somers KYA, Nienhuijs SW. Pathogenesis of the epigastric hernia. Hernia. 2012;16:627-633. doi: 10.1007/s10029-012-0964-8Ramirez O, Ruas E, Dellon A. “Components separation” method for closure for abdominal-wall defects: an anatomic and clinical study. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1990;86(3):519-526.Rastegarpour A, Cheung M, Vardhan M, et al. Surgical mesh for ventral incisional hernia repairs: understanding mesh design. Plast Surg. 2016;24(1):41-50.Reilingh TS de V, van Goor H, Charbon JA, et al. Repair of giant midline abdominal wall hernias: “components separation tech-nique” versus prosthetic repair. World J Surg. 2007;31:756-763. doi: 10.1007/s00268-006-0502-xRozen WM, Ashton MW, Taylor GI. Reviewing the vascular supply of the anterior abdominal wall: redefining anatomy for increas-ingly refined surgery. Clin Anat. 2008;21:89-98. doi: 10.1002/ca.20585Salameh JR. Primary and unusual abdominal wall hernias. Surg Clin North Am. 2008;88:45-60. doi: 10.1016/j.suc.2007.10.004Sanders DL, Kingsnorth AN. The modern management of inci-sional hernias. BMJ. 2012;344:e2843. doi: 10.1136/bmj.e2843Seiler CM, Deckert A, Diener MK, et al. Midline versus trans-verse incision in major abdominal surgery: a randomized, double-blind equivalence trial (POVATI: ISRCTN60734227). Ann Surg. 2009;249(6):913-920.Skandalakis P, Odyseas Z, Skandalakis J, Petros M. Spigelian her-nia: surgical anatomy, embryology, and technique of repair. Am Surg. 2006;72:42-48.Timmermans L, de Goede B, van Dijk SM, et al. Meta-analysis of sublay versus onlay mesh repair in incisional hernia surgery. Am J Surg. 2014;207:980-988. doi: 10.1016/j.amjsurg.2013.08.030Wilder F, D’Angelo S, Crago AM. Soft tissue tumors of the trunk: management of local disease in the breast and chest and abdom-inal walls. J Surg Oncol. 2015;111:546-552. doi: 10.1002/jso.23843Zhang Y, Zhou H, Chai Y, Cao C, Jin K, Hu Z. Laparoscopic versus open incisional and ventral hernia repair: a systematic review and meta-analysis. World J Surg. 2014;38(9):2233-2240.  doi: 10.1007/s00268-014-2578-zOmentumAbdulAziz A, El Zalabany T, Al Sayed AR, Al Ansari A. Idiopathic  omental infarction, diagnosed and managed laparoscopi-cally: a case report. Case Rep Surg. 2013;2013:193546.  doi: 10.1155/2013/193546Anyfantakis D, Kastanakis M, Petrakis G, et al. Rectus sheath hematoma in a single secondary care institution: a retrospective study. Hernia. 2015;19(3):509-512.Collins D, Hogan AM, O’Shea D, Winter DC. The omentum: ana-tomical, metabolic, and surgical aspects. J Gastrointest Surg. 2009;13:1138-1146. doi: 10.1007/s11605-009-0855-1Dedemadi G, Georgoulis G, Kontopanos D, et al. Extragastroin-testinal stromal tumors of the omentum: review apropos of a case with a novel gain-of-function KIT mutation. J Gastrointest Cancer. 2009;40:73-78. doi: 10.1007/s12029-009-9089-4Giovanni C, Riccardo V, Grazia EM, et al. Laparoscopic treatment of an omental cyst: a case report and review of the literature. Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech. 2005;15(1):33-35.Katagiri H, Honjo K, Nasu M, et al. Omental infarction due to omental torsion. Case Rep Surg. 2013;2013:373810.  doi: 10.1155/2013/373810Kranendonk MEG, van Herwaarden JA, Stupkova T, et al. Inflam-matory characteristics of distinct abdominal adipose tissue  depots relate differently to metabolic risk factors for  cardiovascular disease. Atherosclerosis. 2017;239:419-427.  doi: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2015.01.035Morison R. Remarks on some functions of the Omentum. Br Med J. 1906;1(2350):76-78.Motie MR, Asadi M. Large omental cyst: a case report and review of the literature. Acta Medica Iranica. 2011;49(10):690-693.Mouaqit O, Jahid A, Ifrine L, et al. Primary omental gastrointestinal stromal tumors. Clin Res Hepatol Gastroenterol. 2011;35: 590-593. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.clinre.2010.11.012Occhionorelli S, Zese M, Cappellari L, et al. Acute abdomen due to primary omental torsion and infarction. Case Rep Surg. 2014;2014:208382. doi: 10.1155/2014/208382Park TU, Oh JH, Chang IT, et al. Omental infarction: case series and review of the literature. J Emerg Med. 2017;42:149-154. doi: 10.1016/j.jemermed.2008.07.023Platell C, Cooper D, Papadimitriou JM, Hall JC. The omentum. World J Gastroenterol. 2000;6:169-176. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v6.i2.169Rangel-Moreno J, Moyron-Quiroz JE, Carragher DM, et al. Omental milky spots develop in the absence of lymphoid tissue-inducer cells and support B and T cell responses to peritoneal antigens. Immunity. 2017;30:731-743. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2009.03.014Rao TN, Parvathi T, Suvarchala A. Omental lymphangioma in adults—rare presentation report of a case. Case Rep Surg. 2012;2012:629482. doi: 10.1155/2012/629482Schwartz R, Reames M, McGrath P, et al. Primary solid neoplasms of the greater omentum. Surgery. 1991;109:543-539.Seow-En I, Seow-Choen F, Lim TKH, Leow WQ. Primary omen-tal gastrointestinal stromal tumour (GIST) presenting with a large abdominal mass and spontaneous haemoperitoneum. BMJ Case Rep. 2014;2014:bcr2014205528. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2014-205528Tarantino G, Lobello R, Scopacasa F, et al. The contribution of omen-tal adipose tissue to adipokine concentrations in patients with the metabolic syndrome. Clin Invest Med. 2007;30:E192–E199.Uramatsu M, Saida Y, Nagao J, et al. Omental cyst: report of a case. Surg Today. 2001;31:1104-1106. doi: 10.1007/s595-001-8068-0Yoo E, Kim JH, Kim M-J, et al. Greater and lesser omenta: nor-mal anatomy and pathologic processes. RadioGraphics. 2007;27:707-720. doi: 10.1148/rg.273065085MesenteryAdams SD, Stanton MP. Malrotation and intestinal atre-sias. Early Hum Dev. 2017;90:921-925. doi: 10.1016/j.earlhumdev.2014.09.017Akram S, Pardi DS, Schaffner JA, Smyrk TC. Sclerosing  mesenteritis: clinical features, treatment, and outcome in ninety-two patients. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2017;5: 589-596. doi: 10.1016/j.cgh.2007.02.032Avincsal MO, Otani K, Kanzawa M, et al. Sclerosing mes-enteritis: a real manifestation or histological mimic of Brunicardi_Ch35_p1549-p1566.indd   156412/02/19   9:59 AM 1565ABDOMINAL WALL, OMENTUM, MESENTERY, AND RETROPERITONEUMCHAPTER 35IgG4-related disease? Pathol Int. 2016;66(3):158-163. doi: 10.1111/pin.12386Coffey JC, O’Leary DP. The mesentery: structure, function, and role in disease. Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2017;1(3): 238-247. doi: 10.1016/S2468-1253(16)30026-7Daskalogiannaki M, Voloudaki A, Prassopoulos P, et al. CT evalu-ation of mesenteric panniculitis. Am J Roentgenol. 2000;174: 427-431. doi: 10.2214/ajr.174.2.1740427Del Gobbo A, Bimbatti M, Ferrero S. A case report of mesenteric mucinous cystoadenoma with review of the literature. BMC Gastroenterol. 2010;10:105. doi: 10.1186/1471-230X-10-105Dequanter D, Lefebvre J, Belva P, Takieddine M, Vaneukem P. Mes-enteric cyst. A case treated by laparoscopy and a review of the literature. Surg Endosc. 2002;16(10):1493.Ezhapilli SR, Moreno CC, Small WC, et al. Mesenteric masses: approach to differential diagnosis at MRI with histopathologic correlation. J Magn Reson Imaging. 2014;40(4):753-769.  doi: 10.1002/jmri.24690Halabi WJ, Jafari MD, Kang CY, et al. Colonic volvulus in the United States: trends, outcomes, and predictors of mortality. Ann Surg. 2014;259(2):293-301.Horton KM, Lawler LP, Fishman EK. CT findings in sclerosing mesenteritis (panniculitis): spectrum of disease. RadioGraph-ics. 2003;23:1561-1567. doi: 10.1148/rg.1103035010Hussein MRA, Abdelwahed SR. Mesenteric panniculitis: an update. Exp Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2015;9:67-78.  doi: 10.1586/17474124.2014.939632Kikiros CS, Edis AJ. Mesenteric panniculitis resulting in bowel obstruction: response to steroids. N Z J Surg. 1989;59(3): 287-290. doi: 10.1111/j.1445-2197.1989.tb01565.xKirby R, Rajasagaram N, Ghusn M. Primary mesenteric gastroin-testinal stromal tumour. J Surg Case Rep. 2014;2014:rju050. doi: 10.1093/jscr/rju050Park I-S, Kye B-H, Kim H-S, et al. Primary mesenteric carcinoid tumor. J Korean Surg Soc. 2013;84:114-117. doi: 10.4174/jkss.2013.84.2.114Parra-Davila E, McKenney M, Sleeman D, et al. Mesenteric panniculitis: case report and literature review. Am Surg. 1998;64:768-771.Peng L, Yang L, Wu N, Wu B. Primary primitive neuroectoder-mal tumor arising in the mesentery and ileocecum: a report of three cases and review of the literature. Exp Ther Med. 2015;9(4):1299-1303. doi: 10.3892/etm.2015.2242Rajendran S, Khan A, Murphy M, O’Hanlon D. The diagnosis and treatment of a symptomatic mesenteric cyst. BMJ Case Reports. 2014;2014:bcr2013202410. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2013-202410Salar O, El-Sharkawy AM, Singh R, Speake W. Internal her-nias: a brief review. Hernia. 2013;17:373-377. doi: 10.1007/s10029-012-1023-1Tan JJ-Y, Tan K-K, Chew S-P. Mesenteric cysts: an institution experience over 14 years and review of literature. World J Surg. 2009;33:1961-1965. doi: 10.1007/s00268-009-0133-0van Putte-Katier N, van Bommel EFH, Elgersma OE, Hendriksz TR. Mesenteric panniculitis: prevalence, clinicoradiological presentation and 5-year follow-up. Br J Radiol. 2014;87:20140451. doi: 10.1259/bjr.20140451RetroperitoneumConstantinides VA, Christakis I, Touska P, Palazzo FF. System-atic review and meta-analysis of retroperitoneoscopic versus laparoscopic adrenalectomy. Br J Surg. 2012;99:1639-1648.  doi: 10.1002/bjs.8921Goenka AH, Shah SN, Remer EM. Imaging of the retroperitoneum. Radiol Clin North Am. 2017;50(2):333-355. doi: 10.1016/j.rcl.2012.02.004Huang S-H, Lo W-O, Lin C-M, et al. Retroperitoneal abscess: 7-year experience of 29 cases in a tertiary care center in Taiwan. Urol Sci. 2015;26:218-221. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.urols.2015.01.009Kermani TA, Crowson CS, Achenbach SJ, Luthra HS. Idio-pathic retroperitoneal fibrosis: a retrospective review of clini-cal presentation, treatment, and outcomes. Mayo Clin Proc. 2011;86(4):297-303. doi: 10.4065/mcp.2010.0663Knezevic S, Ignjatovic I, Lukic S, et al. Primary retroperitoneal mucinous cystadenoma: a case report. World J Gastroenterol. 2015;21(17):5427-5431. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v21.i17.5427Martorana D, Vaglio A, Greco P, et al. Chronic periaortitis and HLA–DRB1*03: another clue to an autoimmune origin. Arthri-tis Care Res. 2006;55:126-130. doi: 10.1002/art.21698Messiou C, Moskovic E, Vanel D, et al. Primary retroperitoneal soft tissue sarcoma: imaging appearances, pitfalls and diag-nostic algorithm. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2017;43(7):1191-1198.  doi: 10.1016/j.ejso.2016.10.032Miralas P, Skandalakis J. Surgical Anatomy of the retroperitoneal spaces part II: the architecture of the retroperitoneal space. Am Surg. 2010;76(1):33-42.Osman S, Lehnert B, Eloseimy S, et al. A comprehensive review of the retroperitoneal anatomy, neoplasms, and pattern of disease spread. Curr Probl Diagn Radiol. 2013;42(5):191-208.Scali EP, Chandler TM, Heffernan EJ, Coyle J, Harris AC,  Chang SD. Primary retroperitoneal masses: what is the  differential diagnosis? Abdom Imaging. 2015;40:1887-1903. doi: 10.1007/s00261-014-0311-xScheel P, Feeley N. Retroperitoneal fibrosis: the clinical, labora-tory, and radiographic presentation. Medicine (Baltimore). 2009;88(4):202-207.Stone JR. Aortitis, periaortitis, and retroperitoneal fibrosis, as mani-festations of IgG4-related systemic disease. Curr Opin Rheu-matol. 2011;23(1):88-94.Vaglio A, Salvarani C, Buzio C. Retroperitoneal fibrosis. Lancet. 2017;367(9506):241-251. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(06)68035-5van Bommel EFH, Siemes C, Hak LE, et al. Long-term renal and patient outcome in idiopathic retroperitoneal fibrosis treated with prednisone. Am J Kidney Dis. 2017;49:615-625.  doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2007.02.268Brunicardi_Ch35_p1549-p1566.indd   156512/02/19   9:59 AM
# Chunk 8938
Brunicardi_Ch35_p1549-p1566.indd   156612/02/19   9:59 AMThis page intentionally left blank

INTRODUCTIONSarcomas are a heterogeneous group of neoplasms that arise predominantly from cells of the embryonic mesoderm. While the majority of sarcomas are soft tissue sarcomas, other types of sarcoma include bone sarcomas (osteosarcoma, chondrosarcoma, and rare bone tumors like chordoma, angiosar-coma, and leiomyosarcoma of bone) and Ewing’s sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor, which can occur either in the bone or in the soft tissues. The primary focus of this chapter is soft tissue sarcomas. Most primary soft tissue sarco-mas originate in an extremity (50–60%); the next most common sites are the trunk (19%), retroperitoneum (15%), and head and neck (9%). The anatomic site of a primary sarcoma influ-ences treatment and outcome.1Soft tissue sarcomas include more than 70 histologic sub-types (Table 36-1). Historically, the most common subtypes in adults (excluding Kaposi’s sarcoma) were malignant fibrous histiocytoma (28%), liposarcoma (15%), leiomyosarcoma (12%), synovial sarcoma (10%), and malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor (6%).2 Today, malignant fibrous histiocytoma is classified as either leiomyosarcoma, pleomorphic undifferenti-ated sarcoma, myxofibrosarcoma, or dedifferentiated liposar-coma based on cellular differentiation and genetics. Embryonal/alveolar rhabdomyosarcomas are the most common soft tissue sarcomas of childhood, whereas pleomorphic rhabdomyosar-coma occurs predominantly in adults, and although it shares part 12of the name, it has a different biology and should not be treated as a pediatric sarcoma.During the past 25 years, patients with extremity sarcomas have been treated with a multimodality approach, which has led to some improvements in survival, local control, and quality of life.3 However, patients with abdominal sarcomas con-tinue to have high rates of recurrence and poor overall survival.4 The overall 5-year survival rate for patients with all stages of soft tissue sarcoma is 50% to 60%. Of the patients who die of sarcoma, most succumb to lung metastasis, which 80% of the time occurs within 2 to 3 years after initial diagnosis.INCIDENCEIn the United States in 2012, approximately 11,280 new cases of soft tissue sarcoma were diagnosed, and 3900 deaths were attributable to this disease.5 The incidence of soft tissue sarcomas increased 1.3% per year from 1995 to 2009, and subsequently leveled off while mortality rates increased slightly (0.5% per year) from 2001 to 2014.5 The true incidence of sarcoma is thought to be higher than reported, and gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) likely account for an additional 5000 new sarcoma cases per year.1 Overall, sarcomas affect 5 to 6 individuals per 100,000 inhabitants per year,6 accounting for less than 1% of all malignancies in adults and 15% of malignancies in children.7345Soft Tissue SarcomasRicardo J. Gonzalez, Alessandro Gronchi,  and Raphael E. Pollock 36chapterIntroduction1567Incidence1567Epidemiology1568Radiation Exposure / 1568Occupational Chemical Exposure / 1568Trauma / 1568Chronic Lymphedema / 1568Molecular Pathogenesis1569Translocation-Associated Sarcomas / 1569Amplification-Associated  Sarcomas / 1569Oncogenic Mutations / 1569Complex Genomic Rearrangements / 1570Initial Assessment1570Clinical Presentation / 1570Diagnostic Imaging / 1570Biopsy Techniques / 1571Pathologic Assessment and  Classification / 1572Staging and Prognostic Factors / 1573Treatment of Extremity and  Trunk Wall Sarcoma1574Surgery / 1575Radiation Therapy / 1577Systemic Therapy / 1578Concurrent Chemoradiation  Therapy / 1580Posttreatment Surveillance / 1580Management of Recurrent Sarcoma / 1581Special Clinical Situations1582Myxoid Liposarcoma / 1582Retroperitoneal Sarcoma / 1582Gastrointestinal Sarcoma / 1583Breast Sarcoma / 1584Uterine Sarcoma / 1584Gastrointestinal Stromal  Tumors1585Radiologic Assessment / 1585Management of Localized Disease / 1585Management of Locally Advanced or Metastatic Disease / 1585Multidisciplinary Treatment / 1586Postoperative Imatinib / 1586Preoperative Imatinib / 1587Desmoids1588Dermatofibrosarcoma  Protuberans1588Pediatric Sarcomas1589Rhabdomyosarcoma / 1589Nonrhabdomyosarcoma Soft Tissue Sarcomas / 1589Research Perspectives1590Conclusions1590Brunicardi_Ch36_p1567-p1598.indd   156701/03/19   6:38 PM 1568Table 36-1Relative frequency of histologic subtypes of soft tissue sarcomaHISTOLOGIC SUBTYPESNO.%Liposarcoma18815Leiomyosarcoma14812Unclassified sarcoma14011Synovial sarcoma12510Malignant peripheral nerve  sheath tumor726Rhabdomyosarcoma605Fibrosarcoma383Ewing sarcoma252Angiosarcoma252Osteosarcoma141Epithelioid sarcoma141Chondrosarcoma131Clear cell sarcoma121Alveolar soft part sarcoma71Malignant hemangiopericytoma50.4Data from Coindre JM, Terrier P, Guillou L, et al. Predictive value of grade for metastasis development in the main histologic types of adult soft tissue sarcomas: a study of 1240 patients from the French Federation of Cancer Centers Sarcoma Group, Cancer. 2001 May 15;91(10):1914-1926.EPIDEMIOLOGYExcept for malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors in patients with neurofibromatosis, sarcomas do not seem to result from progression or dedifferentiation of a benign soft tissue tumor. While most sarcomas are of unknown cause, a few sarcoma sub-types have been observed in settings suggesting etiology.Radiation ExposureExternal radiation therapy is a rare but well-established risk factor for soft tissue sarcoma that may be associated with radiation-induced mutations of the p53 gene.8 The incidence of sarcoma among patients who are often treated with radiation for cancer of the breast, cervix, ovary, testes, or lymphatic system is 8 to 50 times the general-population risk.9,10 In a review of 160 patients with postirradiation sarcomas, the most common histologic types were osteogenic sarcoma, pleomorphic undifferentiated sarcoma, angiosarcoma, and lymphangiosarcoma.9 The risk of developing a sarcoma increased with radiation dose, and the median time between radiation therapy and diagnosis of sarcoma was 10 years.9 A review of 44 patients with radiation-associated sarcomas identified between 1989 and 2009 noted that the average period from initial radiation treatment to diagnosis was 16 years and that radiation-associated sarcomas occurred most commonly in patients treated for breast cancer (36% of the patients in the series) and lymphoma (34% of the patients in the series).11 The 5-year overall survival rate for patients presenting without metastasis was 44%. A recent review of undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma characterizing outcomes between sporadic and radiation-associated presentation identified a higher incidence of local recurrence and worse overall and disease specific survival among patients who presented with radiation-associated undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma.12Occupational Chemical ExposureExposure to herbicides such as phenoxyacetic acids and to wood preservatives containing chlorophenols has been linked to an increased risk of soft tissue sarcoma.13 Several chemi-cal carcinogens, including thorium oxide (Thorotrast), vinyl chloride, and arsenic, have been associated with hepatic angiosarcomas.14TraumaAlthough patients with sarcoma often report a history of trauma, no causal relationship has been established. More often, a minor injury calls attention to a preexisting tumor.Chronic LymphedemaIn 1948, Stewart and Treves first described the association between chronic lymphedema after axillary dissection and sub-sequent lymphangiosarcoma (Fig. 36-1).15 Lymphangiosarcoma has been estimated to occur in 0.07% of patients who undergo axillary node dissection.16 It also has been reported to occur after filarial infections and in the lower extremities of patients with congenital lymphedema.17,18 Lymphangiosarcoma is gen-erally an aggressive tumor; average survival of patients with lymphangiosarcoma is 19 months.19Key Points1	Sarcomas are a heterogeneous group of tumors that can occur throughout the body and encompass more than 50 subtypes with distinct histologic lines of differentiation.2	Approximately two-thirds of soft tissue sarcomas arise in the extremities; the remaining one-third is distributed between the retroperitoneum, trunk, abdomen, head, and neck.3	Multimodality treatment, including surgical resection, radia-tion therapy, and, in selected cases, systemic chemotherapy, has been applied to patients with locally advanced, high-grade, extremity sarcomas.4	Overall 5-year survival rate for patients with all stages of soft tissue sarcoma is 50% to 60%.5	These rare tumors account for less than 1% of cancer in adults (estimated 10,000 cases per year in the United States) and represent 15% of cancers in children.6	The treatment algorithm for soft tissue sarcomas depends on tumor stage, site, and histology.7	Of the patients who die of sarcoma, most will succumb to metastatic disease in the lungs, which 80% of the time occurs within 2 to 3 years of the initial diagnosis.8	Progress in the understanding of soft tissue sarcoma biology is crucial for the development of new treatments.Brunicardi_Ch36_p1567-p1598.indd   156801/03/19   6:38 PM 1569SOFT TISSUE SARCOMASCHAPTER 36Figure 36-1. A 57-year-old with a chronic, progressive lymph-edema of the left upper extremity developed lymphangiosarcoma 10 years after breast cancer treatment.Table 36-2Fusion transcripts in soft tissue sarcomaDIAGNOSISCHROMOSOMAL ABNORMALITYGENES  INVOLVEDAlveolar rhabdomyosarcomat(2;13)(q35;q14)t(1;13)(p36;q14)PAX3-FKHRPAX7-FKHRAlveolar soft part sarcomat(X;17)(p11.2;q25)TFE3-ASPLAngiomatoid fibrous histiocytomat(12;16)(q13;p11)FUS-ATF1Clear cell sarcomat(12;22)(q13;q12)EWS-ATF1Congenital fibrosarcoma/congenital mesoblastic nephromat(12;15)(p13;q25)ETV6-NTRK3Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberanst(17;22)(q22;q13)PDFGB-COL1A1Desmoplastic small round cell tumort(11;22)(p13;q12)EWS-WT1Endometrial stromal sarcomat(7;17)(p15;q21)JAZF1-JJAZ1Ewing’s sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumort(11;22)(q24;q12)t(21;22)(q22;q12)t(7;22)(p22;q12)t(17;22)(q12;q12)t(2;22)(q33;q12)t(16;21)(p11;q22)EWS-FLI1EWS-ERGEWS-ETV1EWS-FEVEWS-E1AFFUS-ERGLow-grade fibromyxoid sarcomat(7;16)(q33;p11)FUS-CREB3I2Inflammatory myofibroblastic tumort(1;2)(q22;p23)t(2;19)(p23;p13)t(2;17)(p23;q23)TPM3-ALKTPM4-ALKCLTC-ALKMyxoid liposarcomat(12;16)(q13;p11)t(12;22)(q13;q12)TLS-CHOPEWS-CHOPMyxoid chondrosarcomat(9;22)(q22;q12)t(9;15)(q22;q21)t(9;17)(q22;q11)EWS-CHNTFC12-CHNTAF2N-CHNSynovial sarcomat(x;18)(p11;q11)SSX1-SYTSSX2-SYTSSX4-SYTMOLECULAR PATHOGENESISSarcomas can be broadly classified into three groups accord-ing to the genetic events underlying their development: specific translocations or gene amplification, defining oncogenic muta-tions, and complex genomic rearrangements.20 In general, sar-comas resulting from identifiable molecular events tend to occur in younger patients with histology suggesting a clear line of differentiation. The identifiable molecular events include point mutations, translocations causing overexpression of an autocrine grow factor, and oncogenic fusion transcription factor produc-ing a cellular environment prone to malignant transformation. In contrast, sarcomas without identifiable genetic changes or expression profile signatures tend to occur in older patients and exhibit pleomorphic cytology and p53 dysfunction.21 Improved understanding of the molecular pathogenesis of sarcomas has revealed several potential targets against which investigators are working to develop subtype-specific targeted therapy.Translocation-Associated SarcomasTo date, translocations have been identified in 14 subtypes of soft tissue sarcoma, accounting for 20% to 30% of all sarcomas22 (Table 36-2). Translocations result in in-frame gene fusion, which in turn results in fused products encoding oncoproteins that function as transcriptional activators or repressors.23,24 The best characterized gene fusions are in Ewing’s sarcoma (EWS-FLI1), clear cell sarcoma (EWS-ATF1), myxoid/round cell liposarcoma (TLS-CHOP), alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma (PAX3-FHKR), desmoplastic small round cell tumor (EWS-WT1), and synovial sarcoma (SS18-SSX). Fusion gene–related sarcomas have been estimated to account for 30% or more of all sarcomas.25Direct or indirect interactions between fusion transcripts and cell cycle regulators have been elucidated by several inves-tigators and identify these transcripts as potentially promising molecular therapeutic targets.26 However, fusion genes in sar-coma have been successfully targeted in only a few cases, in which fusion resulted in overexpression of a growth factor or growth factor receptor. Several growth factors and their recep-tors (e.g., epidermal growth factor receptor) previously reported to play an important role in autocrine or paracrine stimulation of carcinoma growth have been associated with high histologic grade and poor prognosis in soft tissue sarcomas.Amplification-Associated SarcomasOncogenes are genes that can induce malignant transformation and tend to drive cell proliferation. Several oncogenes have been associated with soft tissue sarcomas, including MDM2, N-myc, c-erbB2, and members of the ras family. These onco-genes produce specific oncoproteins that either play a role in nuclear function and cellular signal transduction or function as growth factors or growth factor receptors. This typically occurs in dedifferentiated liposarcoma, where the amplification of MDM2 drives the neoplastic process. Amplification of these genes has been shown to correlate with adverse outcome in sev-eral types of soft tissue sarcoma.23Oncogenic MutationsGISTs are the classic example of sarcomas in which tumorigen-esis is primarily driven by a single activating mutation, in the Brunicardi_Ch36_p1567-p1598.indd   156901/03/19   6:38 PM 1570SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIgene encoding KIT receptor tyrosine kinase or platelet-derived growth factor receptor-α (PDGFRA).20 The majority of GISTs have mutations in either exon 11 or exon 9 of KIT and respond dramatically to the tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib mesylate, although this treatment rarely produces cure.Complex Genomic RearrangementsThe largest group of sarcomas is the group with complex cytoge-netic alterations, which includes high-grade spindle cell sarco-mas and pleomorphic sarcomas.20 Many sarcomas in this group exhibit inactivation of tumor suppressor genes. The two genes most relevant to soft tissue sarcoma are retinoblastoma (Rb) and p53. Mutations or deletions in Rb can lead to retinoblastoma, the most common malignant ocular neoplasm of childhood. Survi-vors of retinoblastoma are at risk for developing soft tissue and bone sarcomas later in life. Patients with germline mutations in p53 (Li-Fraumeni syndrome) have a high incidence of soft tissue sarcomas Mutant p53 expression is thought to correlate with poor overall survival.23 Strategies to target p53 mutation are being investigated for treatment of some sarcomas.Neurofibromatosis type 1 (von Recklinghausen’s disease) occurs in approximately 1 of every 3000 people and is due to various mutations in the NF-1 tumor suppressor gene, located on chromosome 17. Patients with neurofibromatosis type 1 have an estimated 3% to 15% additional risk of malignant disease compared with the general population lifetime risk, including malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNST) and GIST. In turn, 25% to 50% of patients with MPNST have a mutation in NF-1.27INITIAL ASSESSMENTThe clinical behavior of most soft tissue sarcomas is determined by anatomic location (depth in relation to the investing fascia), histologic subtype and grade of aggressiveness, and size. The dominant pattern of metastasis is hematogenous, primarily to the lungs. Lymph node metastasis is rare (affecting <5% of patients) except in a few histologic subtypes, including epi-thelioid sarcoma, pediatric rhabdomyosarcoma, clear cell sar-coma, angiosarcoma, and, more rarely, synovial sarcoma and myxofibrosarcoma.28Clinical PresentationSoft tissue sarcomas most commonly present as an asymptom-atic mass. Extremity sarcomas may present as a deep venous thrombosis, particularly in patients without significant risk factors for thrombosis.29 Tumors in the distal extremities are generally smaller, whereas tumors in the proximal extremities and retroperitoneum can grow quite large before becoming apparent. Tumors often grow centrifugally and can compress surrounding normal structures. Infrequently, tumor impinge-ment on bone or neurovascular bundles produces pain, edema, and swelling. Less frequently, tumors cause obstructive gastro-intestinal symptoms or neurologic symptoms related to com-pression of lumbar or pelvic nerves. Often an extremity mass is discovered after a traumatic event that draws attention to a preexisting lesion.The differential diagnosis of a soft tissue mass should include consideration of lipoma (which is 100 times more com-mon than sarcoma), lymphangioma, leiomyoma, neurinoma, primary or metastatic carcinoma, melanoma, and lymphoma. Superficial small lesions (<5 cm) that are new or that are not enlarging as indicated by clinical history can be observed. Figure 36-2. A 55-year-old man with a leiomyosarcoma involving the inferior vena cava. Note the displacement of the inferior vena cava to the right hemiabdomen adjacent to the liver (arrow).Enlarging masses and masses larger than 5 cm or deep to the fascia should be evaluated with a history, imaging, and biopsy.30Diagnostic ImagingDiagnostic imaging of the primary should be performed before any invasive procedure to avoid the possibility of soft tissue swelling or hemorrhage complicating the image interpretation. Pretreatment diagnostic imaging is helpful for defining the size and anatomic location of a tumor and its proximity to adjacent structures; staging disease with respect to regional or metastatic spread; guiding percutaneous biopsy; and establishing whether a tumor is benign or malignant and low grade or high grade.Radiographs are useful in the evaluation of primary bone tumors but not in the evaluation of soft tissue sarcomas of the extremities unless there is underlying bone involvement from an adjacent soft tissue tumor or mineralization patterns sugges-tive of histologic subtype. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the preferred imaging technique for soft tissue sarcomas of the extremities, whereas computed tomography (CT) is most use-ful for evaluating retroperitoneal, intra-abdominal, and truncal sarcomas.31 CT of the chest should be performed to assess for lung metastases in patients with high-grade tumors larger than 5 cm; while chest X-ray is sufficient for smaller or low-grade lesions. Abdominal/pelvic CT should be performed in patients with myxoid round cell liposarcomas, leiomyosarcomas, epi-thelioid sarcomas, or angiosarcomas because of their propensity to metastasize to the abdomen and/or pelvis.1 Total Spine MRI has been advocated for myxoid round cell liposarcoma.1 MRI of the brain should be considered for patients with alveolar soft part sarcomas and angiosarcomas because of their propensity to metastasize to the brain.Ultrasonography. Ultrasonography may have a diagnostic role in patients with soft tissue sarcoma who cannot undergo MRI. Ultrasonography can also be a useful adjunct to MRI when findings on MRI are indeterminate and for delineating adjacent vascular structures. Finally, ultrasonography can be used for postoperative surveillance and to guide biopsies.Computed Tomography. Chest CT should be performed to evaluate for lung metastasis at presentation and before any radi-cal treatment. CT is also the preferred imaging technique for evaluating retroperitoneal sarcomas (Fig. 36-2).31 Current CT Brunicardi_Ch36_p1567-p1598.indd   157001/03/19   6:38 PM 1571SOFT TISSUE SARCOMASCHAPTER 36techniques can provide a detailed image of the abdomen and pelvis and can delineate adjacent organs and vascular struc-tures. For extremity sarcomas, CT may be useful if MRI is not available or cannot be used. When histologic assessment of an extremity sarcoma reveals a myxoid liposarcoma, CT of the abdomen and pelvis should be done because this subtype is known to metastasize to the abdomen.32Magnetic Resonance Imaging. MRI is the most useful imag-ing modality for extremity sarcomas because of its superior soft tissue contrast resolution and multiplanar capabilities. MRI accurately delineates muscle groups and distinguishes among bone, vascular structures, and tumor. Sagittal and coronal views allow evaluation of anatomic compartments in three dimensions (Fig. 36-3). Soft tissue sarcomas of the extremities usually present on MRI as a heterogeneous mass. Their signal inten-sity tends to be equal to or slightly higher than that of adjacent skeletal muscle on T1-weighted images and heterogeneous and high on T2-weighted images. Hemorrhagic, cystic, or necrotic changes may also be observed in the tumor. If adjacent vas-cular structures must be delineated, special MRI techniques may be performed, including magnetic resonance angiography. MRI may also be an important adjunct to cytologic analysis in distinguishing benign lesions such as lipomas, hemangiomas, schwannomas, neurofibromas, and intramuscular myxomas from their malignant counterparts. In patients undergoing pre-operative chemotherapy, contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MRI can be useful in evaluating intratumoral necrosis.MRI is also valuable for assessing tumor recurrence after surgery. A baseline image is usually obtained 3 months after surgery. Some clinicians forego routine postoperative imaging of the primary extremity tumor site in asymptomatic patients, citing the difficulties in detecting early recurrence in scarred, irradiated tissue.31 Others advocate routine imaging every 3 to  4 months for the first 2 years, every 6 months in years 3 through 5, and then annually.Positron Emission Tomography. Positron emission tomogra-phy (PET) is a functional imaging modality that measures tumor uptake of the glucose analog [18F] fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). Figure 36-3. A 62-year-old man presented with right thigh mass. Magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated an 18 × 15 cm2 dedifferentiated liposarcoma within the posterior compartment. Note the atypical fatty mass (left) with a large necrotic and peripherally enhancing nodule (left).PET imaging allows evaluation of the entire body. Although PET/CT may be useful in specific circumstances, FDG-PET is not currently recommended for the initial staging of patients with soft tissue sarcoma.Roberge and colleagues compared FDG-PET/CT versus chest CT alone in the initial staging of 75 patients with soft tissue sarcoma and found that only one patient had disease upstaged as a result of PET, whereas two had false-positive find-ings and three had indeterminate findings with no subsequent development of metastasis.33 Previous studies that reported a marginal benefit of PET/CT for detecting metastasis at the time of sarcoma staging included patients with more heterogeneous tumors, such as osseous tumors, soft tissue osteosarcomas, Ewing’s sarcoma, and rhabdomyosarcoma.34-36In patients with sarcoma, PET has primarily been used to assist  with tumor grading and to assess response to chemotherapy.37-40  In 50 patients with resectable high-grade soft tissue tumors scheduled for preoperative chemotherapy and tumor resection, a 35% or greater reduction in tumor FDG uptake following an initial cycle of chemotherapy was associated with histopathologic tumor response defined as pathologic necrosis in 95% or more of the resected specimen.41 While this is helpful in determining response controversy exists as to whether this translates into a predictor of overall survival.Biopsy TechniquesFine-Needle Aspiration. At centers where cytopathologists have experience with evaluation of mesenchymal tumors, fine-needle aspiration is an acceptable method of diagnosing most soft tissue sarcomas, particularly when the results correlate closely with clinical and radiologic findings.42 Fine-needle aspiration of primary tumors has a lower diagnostic accuracy rate (60–90%) than core needle biopsy and is often not sufficient for establish-ing a specific histologic diagnosis and grade.43 However, fine-needle aspiration is the procedure of choice to confirm or rule out the presence of a metastatic focus or local recurrence.44Although fine-needle aspiration of superficial lesions can often be done in the clinic, fine-needle aspiration of deeper tumors may need to be done by an interventional radiologist Brunicardi_Ch36_p1567-p1598.indd   157101/03/19   6:38 PM 1572SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIunder sonographic or CT guidance. Generally, a 21to 23-gauge needle is introduced into the mass after appropriate cleansing of the skin and injection of local anesthetic. Negative pressure is applied, and the needle is moved back and forth several times in various directions. After the negative pressure is released, the needle is withdrawn, and the contents of the needle are used to prepare smears.45 A cytopathologist then examines the slides to determine whether sufficient diagnostic material is present.Core Needle Biopsy. Core needle biopsy is safe, accurate,46,47 and economical48 and has become the preferred technique for diagnosing soft tissue lesions. Dupuy and colleagues found that core needle biopsy had an accuracy of 93% in 221 patients with musculoskeletal neoplasms.46Image guidance (ultrasound or CT) can prevent sam-pling of nondiagnostic necrotic or cystic areas of the tumor and thus increase the positive yield rate. Image guidance also per-mits biopsy of tumors in otherwise inaccessible locations and tumors located near vital structures with less risk of injury or complication.The tissue sample obtained from core needle biopsy is usually sufficient for several diagnostic tests, such as electron microscopy, cytogenetic analysis, and flow cytometry. The risk for needle track seeding is negligible, and the reported compli-cation rate for core needle biopsy is less than 1%.46,47Incisional Biopsy. Historically, an open surgical biopsy was the gold standard for achieving adequate tissue for definitive and specific histologic diagnosis of bone or soft tissue sarcomas. Contemporary guidelines recommend incisional biopsy when core needle biopsy cannot produce adequate tissue for diagnosis or when findings on core needle biopsy are nondiagnostic.The disadvantages of incisional biopsy include the need to schedule the procedure, the need for general anesthesia, and high costs. In addition, an inappropriately placed incision can necessitate more extensive definitive resection to incorporate the biopsy incision. In a series of 107 patients with soft tissue sarcoma, planned surgical treatments had to be changed because of poorly oriented biopsies in 25% of cases.49 Complication rates up to 17% have been reported after incisional biopsies.45 Potential complications include hematoma, infection, wound dehiscence, and tumor fungation, any of which can delay defini-tive treatment.45Incisional biopsies should be performed only by surgeons experienced in the management of soft tissue sarcoma, ideally in a center specializing in the treatment of sarcoma and by the surgeon who will perform the definitive surgery. The biopsy incision should be oriented longitudinally along the extremity to allow a subsequent wide local excision that encompasses the biopsy site, scar, and tumor en bloc minimizing the risk for increasing the complexity of the subsequent curative procedure. A poorly oriented biopsy incision often necessitates an exces-sively large surgical defect for a wide local excision, which in turn can result in a larger postoperative radiation therapy field to encompass all tissues at risk. Adequate hemostasis must be achieved at the time of biopsy to prevent dissemination of tumor cells into adjacent tissue planes by hematoma.Excisional Biopsy. Excisional biopsy can be performed for easily accessible (superficial) extremity or truncal lesions smaller than 3 cm. However, excisional biopsy rarely provides benefits over other biopsy techniques. Excisional biopsies should not be performed for lesions involving the hands and feet because such biopsies may complicate definitive reexcision. For sarcomas with initial diagnosis confirmed with excisional biopsy, microscopic residual disease has been reported in up to 69% of reexcision specimens50,51; without reexcision, the reported rate of local recurrence is 30% to 40% when margins are positive or uncertain.Wide en bloc excision is seldom performed as a diagnostic procedure. When en bloc excision is done for diagnosis, the mar-gin status is often not adequately evaluated during pathologic assessment of the specimen. Unless detailed descriptions of the surgical procedure and the pathology specimen are provided, the margins should be classified as uncertain or unknown, a classifi-cation associated with the same prognosis as resection margins that are positive for tumor cells. In patients with uncertain or unknown margins, reexcision should be performed if possible to ensure negative margins. The biopsy site or tract (if applicable) should be included en bloc with the re-resected specimen.Pathologic Assessment and ClassificationSarcoma is generally diagnosed by morphologic assessment based on microscopic examination of histologic sections by an experienced sarcoma pathologist. However, even expert sar-coma pathologists disagree on the specific histologic diagnosis and the tumor grade in 25% to 40% of cases.52Morphologic assessment can be supported by ancillary techniques, including conventional cytogenetics; immunohis-tochemistry; and molecular genetic testing, which is useful for classifying soft tissue sarcoma subtypes with multiple genetic aberrations. Other molecular diagnostic techniques include cytogenetic analysis, fluorescence in situ hybridization, and polymerase chain reaction–based methods.53 However, molecu-lar genetic techniques are associated with significant technical limitations and should be interpreted in the context of the sar-coma’s morphologic features.Some experts have suggested that pathologic classification of soft tissue sarcomas has more prognostic significance than does tumor grade when other pretreatment variables are taken into account. Tumors with limited metastatic potential include des-moid, atypical lipomatous tumor (also called well-differentiated liposarcoma), dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans, and solitary fibrous tumor. Tumors with an intermediate risk of metastatic spread usually have a large myxoid component and include myx-oid liposarcoma, myxofibrosarcoma, and extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma. Among the highly aggressive tumors with sub-stantial metastatic potential are angiosarcoma, clear cell sarcoma, pleomorphic and dedifferentiated liposarcoma, leiomyosarcoma, MPNST, rhabdomyosarcoma, and synovial sarcoma.It has recently been noted that malignant fibrous histio-cytoma is not associated with a distinct gene cluster, suggest-ing that malignant fibrous histiocytoma is not a separate tumor entity but rather a common morphologic appearance of various sarcoma subtypes.54,55 For example, most tumors initially diag-nosed as malignant fibrous histiocytoma in the retroperitoneum have been reclassified using genomic profiling as dedifferenti-ated liposarcomas,56 whereas those in the extremities have been reclassified as leiomyosarcoma, myxofibrosarcoma, or pleo-morphic undifferentiated sarcoma.Guidelines for the pathologic reporting of sarcoma have been established.1 Included in the report should be the primary diagnosis, anatomic site, depth, size, and histologic grade, pres-ence or absence of necrosis, status of excision margins and lymph nodes, TNM stage, and additional features of the tumor (i.e., mitotic rate and presence or absence of vascular invasion).Brunicardi_Ch36_p1567-p1598.indd   157201/03/19   6:38 PM 1573SOFT TISSUE SARCOMASCHAPTER 36Staging and Prognostic FactorsSoft tissue sarcoma is most commonly staged using either the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) system (generally used in the United States) or the World Health Organization sys-tem. A unique aspect of sarcoma staging is the inclusion of tumor grade, which is one of the most important prognostic factors.57The seventh edition of the AJCC staging system for soft tissue sarcomas is based on histologic grade of aggressive-ness, tumor size and depth, and the presence of nodal or distant metastases.58 This system does not apply to GIST, fibromatosis (desmoid tumor), Kaposi’s sarcoma, or infantile fibrosarcoma.Histologic Grade of Aggressiveness. Histologic grade is the most important prognostic factor for patients with soft tissue sarcoma. For accurate determination of grade, an adequate tis-sue sample must be appropriately fixed, stained, and reviewed by an experienced sarcoma pathologist. The features that define grade are cellularity, differentiation (good, moderate, or poor/anaplastic), pleomorphism, necrosis (absent, <50%, or ≥50%), and number of mitoses per high-power field (<10, 10–19, or ≥20). Tumor grade has been shown to predict metastasis and overall survival.59 Metastasis has been estimated to occur in 5% to 10% of low-grade lesions, 25% to 30% of intermediate-grade lesions, and 50% to 60% of high-grade lesions.The number of grades varies according to the classifica-tion system used. The most common classification systems, those of the National Cancer Institute and the French Federation of Cancer Centers, use three-tier tumor grades.60 The National Cancer Institute system is based primarily on histologic sub-type, location, and amount of necrosis. The French Federation of Cancer Centers system is based on tumor differentiation (good, moderate, or poor/anaplastic), number of mitoses per high-power field (<10, 10–19, or ≥20), and amount of tumor necrosis (absent, <50%, or ≥50%). A comparative analysis of the two systems suggested that the French Federation of Can-cer Centers system has better prognostic capability, predicting 5-year survival rates of 90%, 70%, and 40% for grade 1, 2, and 3 tumors, respectively.60Following the recommendation of the College of American  Pathologists, the committee that developed the 2008 AJCC  staging system changed the system from a four-grade to a three-grade system in which the grades are well differentiated (grade 1),  moderately differentiated (grade 2), and poorly differentiated (grade 3).61 Grade 1 is considered low grade, and grades 2 and 3 are considered high grade.Tumor Size and Location. Tumor size is an important prog-nostic variable in soft tissue sarcomas. Sarcomas have classi-cally been stratified into two size groups; T1 lesions are 5 cm or smaller, and T2 lesions are larger than 5 cm. The staging of soft tissue sarcomas has changed considerably in the eighth edition of the AJCC Cancer Staging Handbook.62 Previously, all soft tissue sarcoma sites were staged as one. In the new edi-tion, subsites have been created, and they include head and neck; extremity and trunk; gastrointestinal tract; genitourinary tract; viscera and peritoneum; gynecological sites; breast lung, pleura and mediastinum; and other histologies. Size criteria for head and neck tumors have been reduced from the classic cri-teria because of a worse prognosis at smaller sizes. Trunk and extremity sarcoma has been reclassified relative to size criteria for tumor stage, changing the four categories: T1 tumors are smaller than 5 cm; T2 tumors are 5 to 10 cm; T3 tumors are 10 to 15 cm; and T4 tumors are larger than 15 cm.62Figure 36-4. A 74-year-old man with a history of an extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma of the gluteal region developed multiple lung metastases.Anatomic tumor location was incorporated into the AJCC staging system in 1998. Soft tissue sarcomas above the superfi-cial investing fascia of the extremity or trunk are designated “a” lesions within the T category, whereas tumors invading or deep to the fascia and all retroperitoneal, mediastinal, and visceral tumors are designated “b” lesions. However, in this most recent AJCC staging system, the superficial versus deep distinction is less important and has been eliminated.62Nodal Metastasis. Overall, lymph node metastases arising from soft tissue sarcomas are rare,28 but the incidence of nodal involvement is higher for epithelioid sarcoma, pediatric rhab-domyosarcoma, clear cell sarcoma, synovial sarcoma, myxo-fibrosarcoma, and angiosarcoma. In the seventh edition of the AJCC staging system, sarcoma associated with nodal metas-tases was reclassified as stage III rather than stage IV because several studies reported better survival for patients with isolated regional lymph node metastases treated with radical lymphad-enectomy than for patients with distant metastases.28,63-65 How-ever, in the eighth edition of the AJCC, nodal disease has been revisited: N1 disease behaves similarly between stages III and IV and is now captured as stage IV.62 Patients with clinically or radiologically suspicious regional nodes should have metastases confirmed or ruled out by either fine-needle aspiration or core biopsy before radical lymphadenectomy.Distant Metastasis. Distant metastases occur most often in the lungs (Fig. 36-4). Selected patients with pulmonary metas-tases may survive for long periods after surgical resection and chemotherapy. Other potential sites of metastasis include bone (Fig. 36-5), brain (Fig. 36-6), and liver (Fig. 36-7). Visceral and retroperitoneal sarcomas have a higher incidence of liver and peritoneal metastases.Prognostic Factors. Prognostic variables in soft tissue sar-coma include primary tumor size, grade, and depth, all of which are incorporated into the staging system, as well as histology, Brunicardi_Ch36_p1567-p1598.indd   157301/03/19   6:38 PM 1574SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 36-5. A 36-year-old woman with history of multifocal sclerosing osteosarcoma of the humerus developed diffuse bony metastases 2 years after diagnosis.Figure 36-6. A 64-year-old man with a history of a T2 high-grade pleomorphic sarcoma of the thigh who developed brain metastases 14 months after diagnosis.Figure 36-7. A 33-year-old woman with osteosarcoma of the sternum  who presented with a liver metastasis 3 years after diagnosis.tumor site, and presentation (local recurrence or initial diagno-sis). Patient factors such as older age and gender have also been associated with recurrence and mortality in several studies.66 A positive microscopic margin and early recurrence after resection of an extremity sarcoma have been shown to be associated with decreased survival.67Several groups have reported that Ki-67, a proliferation marker, is correlated with a poor clinical outcome in high-grade extremity sarcomas.68,69 E-cadherin and catenins, proteins essen-tial for intercellular junctions, have been associated with poor outcome in patients with soft tissue sarcoma.68 Similarly, higher CD100 expression has been shown to correlate with higher pro-liferative potential and poorer outcome.69Prognostic Nomograms. Prognostic nomograms for soft tis-sue sarcoma have been introduced for use in patient counsel-ing, selecting appropriate surveillance strategies, and selecting patients for clinical trials.70 One such nomogram, developed by Kattan and colleagues at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, considers age, histology, grade, location, depth, and size to determine the likelihood of 12-year sarcoma-specific survival.70 Two validation studies using the nomogram demon-strated good predictive value.71 More recently, the same group of investigators developed histology subtype-specific nomo-grams for patients with liposarcoma, synovial sarcoma, and GIST72 and demonstrated that they were accurate in predicting disease-specific survival. Other investigators have just devel-oped a site-specific nomogram for patients with retroperitoneal sarcoma, demonstrating an accurate prediction of survival and disease recurrence.73TREATMENT OF EXTREMITY AND TRUNK  WALL SARCOMAThe goals of treatment of soft tissue sarcoma are to maxi-mize the likelihood of long-term recurrence-free survival while minimizing morbidity and maximizing function. In the past two decades, a multimodality treatment approach with optimal sequencing of treatments for individual patients has been shown to improve survival.74 Furthermore, patients with soft tissue sarcoma treated at high-volume centers have been shown to have improved survival and functional outcomes.75 Care at such centers is particularly important for patients with high-risk and advanced disease.The overall 5-year survival rate for patients with all stages of soft tissue sarcoma is 50% to 60%. For patients with extremity sarcomas, a multidisciplinary treatment approach has resulted in local control rates exceeding 90% and 5-year survival rates exceeding 70%. Most patients who die of soft tissue sarcoma die of metastatic disease, which becomes evident within 2 to 3 years of initial diagnosis in 80% of cases.Recommendations for evaluation and treatment of patients presenting with soft tissue masses are summarized in  Table 36-3.Brunicardi_Ch36_p1567-p1598.indd   157401/03/19   6:38 PM 1575SOFT TISSUE SARCOMASCHAPTER 36Table 36-3Recommendations for the management of soft  tissue masses1.	Soft tissue tumors that are enlarging or greater than 3 cm should be evaluated with radiologic imaging (ultrasonography or computed tomography [CT]), and a tissue diagnosis should be made using core needle biopsy.2.	Once a sarcoma diagnosis is established, obtain imaging (magnetic resonance imaging for extremity lesions and CT for other anatomic locations) and evaluate for metastatic disease with chest CT for intermediateor high-grade (grade 2 or 3) or large (T2) tumors.3.	A wide local excision with 1to 2-cm margins is adequate therapy for low-grade lesions and T1 tumors.4.	Radiation therapy plays a critical role in the management of large (T2), intermediateor high-grade tumors.5.	Patients with locally advanced high-grade sarcomas or distant metastases should be evaluated for chemotherapy.6.	An aggressive surgical approach should be taken in the treatment of patients with an isolated local recurrence or resectable distant metastases.SurgeryPrimary tumors with no evidence of distant metastasis are managed with surgery alone or, when wide pathologic margins cannot be achieved because of anatomic constraints and/or the grade is high, surgery plus radiation therapy. The type of surgical resection is determined by several factors, including tumor location, tumor size, depth of invasion, involvement of nearby structures, need for skin grafting or autogenous tissue reconstruction, and the patient’s performance status. In 1985, the National Institutes of Health developed a consensus statement recommending limb-sparing surgery for most patients with  high-grade extremity sarcomas.76 However, for patients  with primary or recurrent tumors that cannot be grossly resected with a limb-sparing procedure and preservation of function (<5% of patients), amputation remains the treatment of choice.Margin status after surgical resection has been shown to be an independent prognostic factor.77,78 The goal of surgical resec-tion is to achieve a complete resection because microscopically positive or grossly positive resection margins are associated with increased risk of local recurrence and death.79 If an unex-pected positive margin is found on pathologic examination of the resection specimen, reexcision should be performed if fea-sible. In patients with a positive margin, particularly in patients with macroscopic residual disease, local control is unlikely even with the addition of postoperative radiation therapy, emphasiz-ing the importance of a well-planned initial operation.80Wide Local Excision. The preferred treatment for extrem-ity sarcomas is wide local excision that includes resection of the biopsy site. The goal of wide local excision is to remove the tumor with approximately 1 to 2 cm of surrounding nor-mal soft tissue,77 but narrower margins may be necessary to preserve uninvolved critical neurovascular structures and may be adequate for patients undergoing radiation therapy.81 Dis-section should proceed through grossly normal tissue planes not abutting the tumor. Soft tissue sarcomas are generally sur-rounded by a zone of compressed reactive tissue that forms a pseudocapsule; this pseudocapsule should not be used to guide resection (enucleation) as microscopic disease exists within this reactive zone. If the tumor is adjacent to or displacing major neurovascular structures, these do not need to be resected, but the adventitia or perineurium should be removed.1 For some massive tumors of the extremities, wide local excision entails a radical or complete anatomic compartment resection. Surgical clips should be placed to delineate the extent of the resection bed for patients likely to require postoperative radiation therapy.Recent reports demonstrate encouraging results follow-ing radical en bloc resection with vascular reconstruction in the lower extremities.82,83 While en bloc resection with vascular reconstruction has been associated with increased rates of post-operative complications, reported local recurrence and 5-year survival rates are similar to those for patients not requiring ves-sel resection.84,85 Similarly, studies have shown acceptable func-tional outcomes with resection of the sciatic, tibial, and peroneal nerves with appropriate reconstruction and rehabilitation.86Bone invasion from extremity soft tissue sarcoma, which can generally be identified using high-quality cross-sectional imaging such as MRI, has been estimated to occur in about 5% of patients and is associated with reduced overall survival.87 In cases of bone invasion, bone resection is required to obtain an adequate surgical margin and to achieve local control. Although tumor resection and repair of skeletal defects are possible, the likelihood of postoperative complications may be increased, and functional outcomes may be less favorable. Lin and colleagues88 recently analyzed 55 patients with soft tissue sarcomas abutting bone and reported that in the absence of frank cortical bone pen-etration, periosteum was an adequate surgical margin in patients treated with wide local excision and radiation.Soft tissue sarcomas arising in the distal extremities, particularly the hands and feet, present unique technical chal-lenges. While distal-extremity tumors are often detected at a smaller size (<5 cm) than proximal-extremity tumors, resec-tion and reconstruction techniques are often more complex for distal-extremity tumors, and preoperative planning is criti-cal to obtain favorable functional outcomes. Identifying the proximity of the tumor to underlying critical structures (e.g., bone, tendon, or neurovascular structures) using MRI is essen-tial for surgical planning. In a reported series of patients with sarcomas of the hands or feet treated with limited surgery only, 32% of patients had local recurrences.89 Preservation of function and acceptable recurrence rates with limited surgery and adjuvant radiation therapy for soft tissue sarcomas of the distal extremities have been reported.90 For locally advanced tumors, repair of bone defects, vascular reconstruction, tendon transfers, and soft tissue reconstruction using regional or free flaps have resulted in good functional outcomes.91 Amputation remains a reasonable option for patients with soft tissue sar-comas of the distal extremities when acceptable oncologic or functional outcomes cannot be achieved using available limb salvage techniques.In an interesting study conducted in Ontario and Quebec, investigators found patients expecting a difficult recovery and patients with uncertain expectations had worse functional out-comes than patients anticipating an easy recovery, indicating that preoperative education including consultation with reha-bilitation services may optimize outcomes.92 Furthermore, all patients undergoing resection of extremity sarcomas should undergo physical therapy beginning immediately after surgery and continuing until maximum function is achieved.1Brunicardi_Ch36_p1567-p1598.indd   157501/03/19   6:38 PM 1576SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IILocoregional Lymphadenectomy. Several studies have reported improved survival for patients with isolated regional lymph node metastases treated with radical lymphadenectomy.28,63-65  Patients with clinically or radiologically suspicious regional nodes should have metastases confirmed by biopsy before radi-cal lymphadenectomy. An ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspi-ration or core biopsy of lymph nodes in selected patients with suspicious clinical or radiologic findings. The utility of sentinel lymph node biopsy has remained controversial despite the rec-ognition that several histologic subtypes of high-grade sarcoma are known to have a propensity for lymph node metastasis. However, there have been no prospective studies of the sen-sitivity and specificity of sentinel lymph node biopsy for such tumors, and as such, sentinel node biopsy for sarcoma should be performed in either highly selected patients or in the setting of a clinical trial.Amputation. Amputation is the treatment of choice for the 5% of patients with primary or recurrent extremity tumors whose tumors cannot be grossly resected with limb-sparing proce-dures and preservation of function. Historically, local excision of large, high-grade soft tissue sarcomas resulted in local fail-ure rates of 50% to 70%, even when a margin of normal tissue around the tumor was excised; consequently, radical resection or amputation was recommended. Today, however, the addition of radiation therapy to less radical surgical resection has made limb salvage possible in most cases.A comparison of amputation versus limb-sparing sur-gery followed by adjuvant radiation therapy performed by the National Cancer Institute between 1975 and 1981 demonstrated no significant difference between the two groups in local recur-rence or overall survival rate.93 Potter and colleagues50 later reviewed the entire National Cancer Institute experience with 123 patients treated with conservative surgery plus radiation therapy and 83 treated with amputation. The local recurrence rate was significantly higher in the surgery and adjuvant radia-tion therapy group: 8% versus 0% in the amputation group. However, survival rates did not differ between the groups. Several large single-institution studies have since also reported favorable local control rates with conservative resection plus radiation therapy.94-96Isolated Regional Perfusion. Isolated regional perfusion is a limb-sparing technique in which a soft tissue sarcoma is perfused with high concentrations of tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) and melphalan under hyperthermic conditions. The use of TNF-α is not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and is used only in European countries. The technique is generally used for locally advanced, multifo-cal, or locally recurrent disease; it has also served as a pallia-tive treatment to achieve local control for patients with distant metastases.Limb perfusion requires isolating the main artery and vein of the perfused limb from the systemic circulation. The ana-tomic approach is determined by tumor site: external iliac ves-sels are used for thigh tumors, femoral or popliteal vessels for calf tumors, and axillary vessels for upper extremity tumors. The vessels are dissected, and all collateral vessels are ligated. The main artery and vein are then cannulated and connected to a pump oxygenator similar to that used in cardiopulmonary bypass. Either a tourniquet or an Esmarch band is applied to the limb to achieve complete vascular isolation. Chemotherapeutic agents are then added to the perfusion circuit and circulated for 90 minutes. Systemic leakage from the perfused limb is moni-tored continuously with 99Tc-radiolabeled human serum albumin injected into the perfusate, and radioactivity above the precor-dial area is recorded with a Geiger counter. During the entire procedure, hyperthermia of the perfused limb is maintained by external heating and by warming the perfusate to 40°C. At the end of the procedure, the limb is washed out, the cannulas are extracted, and the blood vessels are repaired.Despite the 40-year history of using isolated limb per-fusion to treat extremity sarcomas, many questions about this technique remain to be answered. The optimal chemotherapeu-tic agent in the perfusion circuit, the benefits of hyperthermia, and the effectiveness of hyperthermic perfusion as neoadjuvant or adjuvant treatment remain to be elucidated. Studies published to date have involved heterogeneous patient groups and various chemotherapeutic agents. Despite these limitations, response rates from 18% to 80% and overall 5-year survival rates from 50% to 70% have been reported.97-101 However, survival out-comes following isolated limb perfusion have not yet been directly compared with survival outcomes after more conven-tional treatment approaches.In the initial report of isolated regional perfusion for extremity sarcomas, published in 1974, McBride reported results in 79 patients with extremity sarcomas who had been treated with isolated limb perfusion during the previous  14 years.97 All patients received melphalan and dactinomycin. The overall 5-year survival rate was 57%, and only 13 patients had subsequent amputation for recurrent disease. Over the next 20 years, isolated perfusion for treatment of extremity sarcoma fell out of favor for several reasons. Most notably, improved survival and decreased local recurrence rates could be obtained with less radical therapy, including conservative surgical exci-sion combined with radiation to allow limb sparing in patients who were previously thought to require amputation.A 1992 report by Lienard and colleagues101 renewed interest in isolated limb perfusion for extremity tumors. Those investigators reported a 100% response rate among patients with extremity melanomas and sarcomas treated with high-dose recombinant TNF-α plus interferon-γ and melphalan in an iso-lated perfusion circuit. This report led to larger studies geared specifically to patients with sarcoma. The largest of these stud-ies, the European Multicenter Study, was reported by Egger-mont and colleagues in 1996.99 In that study of 186 patients, the overall tumor response rate was 82%, and the clinical and pathologic complete response rate was 29%. Although all of the study participants were reported to initially be candidates for amputation, the rate of limb salvage following isolated limb perfusion was 82%.99 Subsequent studies have shown high local response and limb salvage rates and acceptable local and sys-temic toxic effects.102However, results in the United States have been inferior to those reported in Europe. In a study by Fraker and colleagues, the complete response rate was 26%, and an additional 30% of patients had a partial response. Fourteen patients (32%) under-went amputation for progressive tumors, while the remaining 30 patients (68%) were able to undergo limb-sparing surgery after isolated limb perfusion.100 The inferior results in the U.S.-based studies are thought to be due to patient selection biases and the degree of treatment before limb perfusion.While isolated limb perfusion for extremity sarcoma has fallen out of favor, recent reports of isolated limb infusion from the H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center have shown promising Brunicardi_Ch36_p1567-p1598.indd   157601/03/19   6:38 PM 1577SOFT TISSUE SARCOMASCHAPTER 36results.103 Patients with extremity sarcoma and who are con-sidered for amputation are offered the option of isolated limb infusion with high-dose melphalan and actinomycin-D on pro-tocol. Isolated limb infusion is a less invasive technique that can be repeated. Percutaneous cannulas are placed prior to infu-sion, the extremity is isolated similar to limb perfusion with an Esmarch band or tourniquet, and the perfusion is normothermic and acidotic. Results from a multicenter retrospective study have demonstrated an overall response rate of 58%, and after a median follow-up of 21 months, there was an overall limb sal-vage rate of 78%. The benefits over limb perfusion remain the ability to repeat the technique in patients with disease response and less operative morbidity and risk of vascular injury from open surgery and cannulation of the iliac vessels. Although to date the technique has been well established for patients with locally advanced extremity disease for melanoma, its applica-tion for advanced, locally recurrent extremity sarcoma deserves further study.Radiation TherapyRadiation therapy is part of the standard treatment for high-grade extremity and trunk wall soft tissue sarcomas either in the preor postoperative setting. Patients with low-grade tumors or small, superficial high-grade tumors that have been resected with adequate margins may safely avoid radiation therapy.The evidence supporting adjuvant radiation therapy for patients eligible for conservative surgical resection comes from two randomized trials104,105 and three large single-institution reports.106-108 In a randomized trial by the National Cancer Institute, 91 patients with high-grade extremity tumors were treated with limb-sparing surgery followed by chemotherapy alone or radiation therapy plus chemotherapy. The 10-year local control rate was 98% for patients receiving radiation therapy compared with 70% for those not receiving radiation therapy  (P = .0001).104 Similarly, in a randomized trial from Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 164 patients underwent conservative surgery followed by observation or brachytherapy. For patients with high-grade tumors, the 5-year local control rate was 66% in the observation group and 89% in the brachytherapy group (P = .003).105 For patients with low-grade tumors, no significant difference was observed between treatment groups.109Until recently, the standard treatment guidelines required radiation therapy after surgery for all patients with intermediate or high-grade tumors of any size. However, small tumors  (≤5 cm) have not generally been associated with local recurrence, and radiation therapy for such tumors may not be necessary.105 In a series of 174 patients reported by Geer and colleagues, post-operative radiation therapy did not improve 5-year local recur-rence or overall survival rates for patients with small soft tissue sarcomas.110 Karakousis and colleagues reported a 5-year local recurrence rate of 6% for 80 patients with extremity sarcomas treated with wide local excision and observation, a rate similar to that for the 64 patients who underwent resection with nar-rower surgical margins and postoperative radiation therapy.111The optimal mode of radiation therapy (external-beam radiation therapy, brachytherapy, or intensity-modulated radia-tion therapy [IMRT]) and timing of radiation therapy (preopera-tive, intraoperative, or postoperative) have yet to be defined. External-beam radiation therapy can be delivered using pho-tons or particle beams (electrons, protons, pions, or neutrons). Conventional fractionation is usually 1.8 to 2 Gy per day. CT is an integral part of radiation therapy, used to define the gross tumor volume and to estimate the margin of tissue at risk for microscopic tumor involvement. The optimal radiation margin is not well defined: a margin of 5 to 7 cm is standard, but some centers advocate wider margins for tumors larger than 15 cm. At most institutions, the typical preoperative dose is 50 Gy given in 25 fractions, and resection is performed 4 to 8 weeks after completion of radiation therapy to allow acute radiation changes to subside. Postoperative radiation therapy planning is based on tumor site, tumor grade, surgical margins, and institutional preferences. The entire surgical scar and drain sites should be included in the field so that a near-full dose can be administered to the superficial skin. Metallic clips placed in the tumor bed during surgery can help define the limits of the resection and aid in radiation therapy planning. Doses of 60 to 70 Gy are usually necessary for postoperative treatment.No consensus exists on the optimal sequence of radia-tion therapy and surgery. The available data come largely from single-institution, nonrandomized studies. Proponents of pre-operative radiation therapy note that multidisciplinary planning with radiation oncologists, medical oncologists, and surgeons is easier early in the course of therapy. In addition, for some radiosensitive histologic subtypes, such as myxoid liposarcoma, preoperative radiation therapy may shrink the tumor, facilitat-ing resection with negative margins. Furthermore, a tissue bed undisturbed by resection has better tissue oxygenation and can be successfully treated with lower doses of radiation. In addi-tion, Nielsen and colleagues112 demonstrated that preoperative radiation fields are smaller than postoperative radiation fields and that the average number of joints included in the field is lower with preoperative than postoperative radiation therapy, which may result in improved functional outcome. Critics of preoperative radiation therapy cite the difficulty of pathologic assessment of margins and the increased rate of postoperative wound complications.113 However, reconstructive surgical tech-niques with advanced tissue transfer procedures are being used more often in these high-risk wounds and reportedly result in better outcomes. The higher doses generally required for post-operative radiation therapy have also been shown to be associ-ated with greater long-term functional impairment.The only randomized comparison of preoperative and postoperative radiation therapy to date was performed by the National Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical Trials–Canadian Sarcoma Group.114 This trial was designed to examine compli-cations and functional outcome. The 190 patients enrolled from October 1994 to December 1997 were randomized to preopera-tive radiation therapy (50 Gy) or postoperative radiation therapy (66 Gy). With a median follow-up time of 3.3 years, the recur-rence and progression-free survival rates were similar in the two groups. The incidence of wound complications was higher in the preoperative group versus the postoperative group (35% vs. 17%), and the incidence of wound complications was signifi-cantly higher for tumors of the lower extremity (43%) than for those of the upper extremity (5%).114 Late radiation toxic effects (e.g., fibrosis, joint stiffness, and edema) were more common with postoperative than preoperative radiation therapy (48% vs. 32%) because of higher postoperative radiation doses and larger treatment field sizes.115Brachytherapy involves the placement of multiple radioactive seeds through catheters inserted in the tumor resection bed. The primary benefit of brachytherapy is the shorter overall treatment time of 4 to 6 days, compared to the 4 to 6 weeks generally required for preoperative or postoperative Brunicardi_Ch36_p1567-p1598.indd   157701/03/19   6:38 PM 1578SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIradiation therapy regimens. A cost-analysis comparison of adjuvant brachytherapy versus adjuvant external-beam irradiation for soft tissue sarcomas showed that costs were lower with brachytherapy.116 The implications of cost have been studied after radical resections and immediate adjuvant brachytherapy with either staged or immediate reconstruction noting a lower cost with staged reconstruction and tissue transfer techniques.117 Brachytherapy can also be used for recurrent disease previously treated with external-beam radiation. Guidelines established at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center recommend spacing the afterloading catheters in 1-cm increments while leaving a 2-cm margin around the surgical bed.105 After adequate wound healing is confirmed, usually after the fifth postoperative day, the catheters are loaded with seeds containing iridium-192 that deliver 42 to 45 Gy of radiation to the tumor bed over 4 to 6 days. Subsequent studies at the H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center that sought to determine outcomes between staged immediate and delayed reconstruction noted advantages in improved local control, wound healing, and less radiation-associated toxicity with staged reconstruction.118 The primary disadvantage of brachytherapy is that it requires significant expertise, extended inpatient hospital stays, and bed rest.IMRT delivers radiation more precisely to the tumor than external-beam irradiation while minimizing the volume of sur-rounding tissues exposed to high radiation doses. The proposed benefits of preoperative IMRT include reduced risk of postop-erative wound infections because of minimization of the dose to the skin119 and protection of underlying bone (e.g., femur) as a result of concave dose distributions.120 There have been no prospective randomized trials comparing the long-term out-comes following IMRT versus other types of radiation therapy. In a retrospective analysis of IMRT, patients with negative and positive/close (within 1 mm) margins were found to have 5-year local control rates of 94%.121 In addition, the rates of posttreat-ment edema and joint stiffness with IMRT were lower than the expected rates with conventional radiation therapy.Local toxic effects of radiation therapy vary according to radiation dose, field size, and timing (preoperative or postop-erative). With preoperative radiation therapy, the most frequent wound complications are wound dehiscence, wound necrosis, persistent drainage, infection, seroma formation, ulceration, and cellulitis.114 Postoperative irradiation of free flaps is often asso-ciated with wound complications, and patients should be advised that secondary surgical repair may be necessary; therefore, con-sideration for preoperative radiation rather than postoperative radiation for larger tumors requiring flap reconstruction is a logical and sound approach. Wound complication rates of 13% to 37% have been reported for preoperative radiation therapy, compared to 5% to 20% for postoperative radiation therapy.121 If catheters are loaded after the fifth postoperative day and/or if staged reconstruction is used, rates of wound complications after brachytherapy are improved if not similar to those after postoperative radiation therapy.118Long-term (chronic) effects of radiation therapy (those occurring >1 year after completion of therapy) are generally related to fibrosis/contractures, lymphedema, neurologic injury, osteitis, and fractures, all of which can cause substantial func-tional impairment.122 Variables associated with poorer func-tional outcome after radiation therapy include larger tumors, higher doses of radiation (>63 Gy), longer radiation fields (>35 cm), poor radiation technique, neural sacrifice, postop-erative fractures, and wound complications.115,123 Additionally, complications of any kind are less likely after treatment for upper extremity sarcoma than after treatment for lower extremity  sarcoma.113,114Definitive radiation therapy that delivers maximal-tissue-tolerance doses of radiation may be appropriate for selected patients with unresectable soft tissue sarcomas. In a study of 112 patients with unresectable soft tissue sarcomas, tumor size and radiation dose were found to influence local control and  survival.124 The local control rate was 51% for tumors smaller than 5 cm and 9% for tumors larger than 10 cm, and patients who received at least 64 Gy had better local control and survival.Systemic TherapyDespite improvements in local control rates, metastasis and death remain significant problems for patients with high-risk soft tissue sarcomas. Patients considered at high risk of death from sarcoma include those presenting with metastatic disease,  localized sarcomas at nonextremity sites, or sarcomas of  intermediateor high-grade histology larger than 5 cm.59,105Standard Chemotherapy. For most patients with sarcoma, results of conventional chemotherapy regimens have been poor. The chemosensitivity of soft tissue sarcoma varies by histologic subtype.30 Synovial sarcoma, myxoid/round cell liposarcoma, and uterine leiomyosarcoma are sensitive to chemotherapy,125 whereas pleomorphic liposarcoma, myxofibrosarcoma, epithe-lioid sarcoma, leiomyosarcoma, MPNSTs, angiosarcoma, and desmoplastic round cell tumors have intermediate sensitivity to chemotherapy. Relatively chemoresistant histologic subtypes include clear cell sarcoma, endometrial stromal sarcoma, alveo-lar soft part sarcoma, and extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma. Considering the variability of responses by histologic subtype, it is not surprising that clinical trials of standard chemotherapy, which often include heterogeneous populations with respect to tumor grade and histology, have demonstrated no overall sur-vival benefit.Doxorubicin and ifosfamide are the two most active agents against soft tissue sarcoma, with consistently reported response rates of 20% or greater and positive dose-response curves.126,127 The European guidelines recommend doxorubicin 75 mg/m2 every 3 weeks as first-line treatment for advanced disease.30 Treatment duration is based on response, but a maximum of six cycles is generally recommended because of the risk of cumula-tive cardiotoxicity. Ifosfamide is the recommended second-line treatment and is recommended for first-line treatment in patients with cardiac morbidity. The standard dose of ifosfamide is 9 to 10 g/m2; however, single-institution series using higher-dose regimens (>10 g/m2) or standard-dose ifosfamide combined with doxorubicin have shown response rates of 20% to 60%.127 Synovial sarcomas have been shown to be particularly sensi-tive to ifosfamide. Ifosfamide-associated toxic effects include hemorrhagic cystitis, neurotoxicity, and renal tubular acidosis. Historically, combination therapy with doxorubicin plus ifos-famide, dacarbazine, or both has resulted in increased response rates but no improvement in overall survival.128 Dacarbazine as a single agent has also demonstrated activity in clinical trials.Over the past decade, several additional chemotherapeutic agents, including gemcitabine, taxanes, and trabectedin, have been noted to be active against soft tissue sarcomas. Gemcitabine as a single agent was reported to produce responses in 18% of patients with advanced sarcoma.129 Gemcitabine combined with docetaxel has been reported to produce response rates as high as 53% in patients with uterine leiomyosarcoma.129,130 Gemcitabine Brunicardi_Ch36_p1567-p1598.indd   157801/03/19   6:38 PM 1579SOFT TISSUE SARCOMASCHAPTER 36combined with vinorelbine has also been associated with clini-cal benefit in patients with advanced sarcomas.131 The taxanes (docetaxel and paclitaxel) have been found to be active against angiosarcomas, particularly of the face and scalp, likely because of their potent antiangiogenic effects.132,133Novel Chemotherapeutic Agents. Aldoxorubicin is a doxo-rubicin derivative that serves as a prodrug of doxorubicin that covalently binds to albumin in the blood until reaching the acidic tumor environment releasing doxorubicin into the tis-sue. A recent international, multicenter, phase 2b, open-label, randomized study enrolled 126 patients from 2012 to 2013. Single-agent aldoxorubicin therapy showed superior efficacy over doxorubicin by prolonging progression-free survival and improving rates of 6-month progression-free survival and tumor response, warranting further study.134Trabectedin, a marine-derived alkaloid that binds DNA, affecting transcription and inducing the formation of DNA double-strand breaks, has shown benefit in the treatment of advanced soft tissue sarcomas, particularly leiomyosarcoma, myxoid liposarcoma, and other translocation-related sarcomas.135  Trabectedin is generally well tolerated but can be associated with prolonged and severe neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, and hepatic toxic effects.Palifosfamide is a stabilized formulation of the active metabolite of ifosfamide that has been reported to be better tolerated than ifosfamide.136 Early trials have suggested anti-tumor activity comparable or superior to that of ifosfamide without nephrotoxicity; however, recent negative results of the PICASSO III Trial, a phase 3, placebo-controlled study of doxorubicin with or without palifosfamide in patients with metastatic soft tissue sarcoma, have neatly secured the fate of palifosfamide in the treatment of soft tissue sarcoma.137Targeted Therapies. Several targeted agents are being investigated for the treatment of soft tissue sarcomas. Among these are tyrosine kinase inhibitors (e.g., imatinib, suni-tinib, sorafenib, and dasatinib) that have been developed and approved for treatment of GIST. Clinical data accumulated in phase 2 trials also support the use of tyrosine kinase inhibitors (e.g., imatinib, sorafenib, and sunitinib) in the management of other advanced sarcomas.128 Anti–vascular endothelial growth factor antibodies such as bevacizumab have demonstrated activity in patients with metastatic or unresectable angiosar-coma, solitary fibrous tumor, and epithelioid hemangioendo-thelioma.138 Pazopanib is an oral angiogenesis inhibitor that targets vascular endothelial growth factor receptors, platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR), and c-kit. In a recent phase 3 study, pazopanib showed efficacy against placebo in second or further line of therapy in patients with advanced soft tissue sarcoma.139 Inhibitors of the mammalian target of rapamycin pathway, including temsirolimus, everolimus, and ridaforolimus, have also shown activity against some soft tis-sue sarcomas (i.e., PEComas).140Olaratumab is a human antiplatelet-derived growth factor receptor α monoclonal antibody that has antitumor activity in human sarcoma xenografts. Recently, a phase 1b and random-ized phase 2 study of olaratumab and doxorubicin versus doxo-rubicin alone has demonstrated improvements in both objective response rates (18.2% vs. 11.9%, P = 0.34) and median over-all survival (26.5 vs. 14.7 months [stratified hazard ratio 0.46, 0.30–0.71, P = 0.0003]). Additional studies are warranted for this promising combination of agents.141Benefits of Systemic Therapy. The use of adjuvant and neoad-juvant chemotherapy for soft tissue sarcomas remains controver-sial. More than a dozen individual randomized trials of adjuvant chemotherapy have failed to demonstrate improvement in disease-free or overall survival for patients with soft tissue sarcoma. How-ever, several limitations of these individual trials may explain the lack of observed improvement. First, the chemotherapy regimens used were suboptimal, consisting of single-agent therapy (most commonly with doxorubicin) and insufficiently intensive dosing schedules. Second, the patient groups were not large enough to reveal clinically significant differences in survival rates. Finally, most studies included patients at low risk of metastasis and death, namely those with small (<5 cm) and low-grade tumors.The Sarcoma Meta-Analysis Collaboration analyzed 1568 patients from 14 trials of doxorubicin-based adjuvant chemotherapy to evaluate the effect of adjuvant chemotherapy on localized, resectable soft tissue sarcomas.142 At a median follow-up time of 9.4 years, doxorubicin-based chemotherapy significantly improved the time to local and distant recurrence and recurrence-free survival rates. However, the absolute benefit in overall survival was only 4%, which was not significant  (P = .12). In a subset analysis, patients with extremity tumors had a 7% benefit in terms of overall survival (P = .029).142After this meta-analysis, randomized controlled trials of more contemporary anthracycline/ifosfamide dosing combinations with relatively small numbers of patients have yielded conflicting results. In an Italian cooperative trial, adjuvant chemotherapy improved median disease-free and overall survival times in patients with high-risk extremity soft tissue sarcomas.143 In that study, 104 patients with high-grade tumors 5 cm or larger were randomized to definitive surgery or surgery plus adjuvant chemotherapy consisting of epirubicin (60 mg/m2 per day on days 1 and 2) and ifosfamide (1.8 g/m2 per day on days 1 through 5) for five cycles. With a median follow-up time of almost 5 years, disease-free survival times were 16 months in the surgery-alone group and 48 months in the combined-treatment group (P = .04), and median overall survival times were 46 months in the surgery-alone group and 75 months in the combined-treatment group (P = .03).143 However, several years later, the surgery-alone and combined-treatment groups had equivalent relapse rates and deaths, which resulted in statistically similar overall survival.144In an effort to further assess the role of chemotherapy in patients with stage III extremity sarcoma, a cohort analy-sis of the combined databases of The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center and Memorial Sloan-Kettering Can-cer Center was performed. Data on 674 patients with stage III extremity sarcoma who received either preoperative or postop-erative doxorubicin-based chemotherapy were reviewed. The 5-year disease-specific survival rate was 61%.145 Cox regres-sion analysis showed a time-varying effect of chemotherapy with an associated benefit during the first year while receiving chemotherapy. However, the clinical benefits of chemotherapy in patients with stage III sarcomas were not sustained beyond 1 year. Grobmyer and colleagues compared the outcomes of patients treated at two institutions (1990–2001) with surgery only or surgery plus preoperative chemotherapy containing doxorubicin and ifosfamide. In this analysis, chemotherapy was associated with an improvement in the 3-year disease-specific survival rate that was most pronounced in patients with tumors larger than 10 cm (62% for surgery alone vs. 83% for neoadju-vant chemotherapy and surgery).146Brunicardi_Ch36_p1567-p1598.indd   157901/03/19   6:38 PM 1580SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIMore recently, the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) completed a phase 3 ran-domized study (trial EORTC-62931; conducted from 1995 through 2003) comparing surgery alone versus surgery plus adjuvant ifosfamide (5 g/m2) plus doxorubicin (75 mg/m2) with growth factor support (lenograstim) every 21 days for five cycles in 351 patients with resected grade II or III soft tissue sarcoma at any site. The estimated relapse-free survival rate was 52% in both arms, and the overall survival rate was better in the control arm (69% vs. 64%).147 Although most individual studies are underpowered, data from all of these studies suggest that chemotherapy regimens that incorporate ifosfamide may provide some disease-free survival benefit but do not improve long-term overall survival for the majority of patients with soft tissue sarcoma.In 2008, two updates to the 1997 Sarcoma Meta-Anal-ysis Collaboration were published.148,149 O’Connor and col-leagues included all of the trials in the original meta-analysis and added data from four additional trials, for a total of 18 trials with 2170 patients.148 The results showed a benefit of chemotherapy in terms of disease-free survival at 5 years and recurrence-free survival at 10 years but again failed to demon-strate a benefit in terms of long-term overall survival. The sec-ond update, by Pervaiz and colleagues, which did not include the EORTC-62931 trial, showed that adjuvant chemotherapy was associated with a significant decrease in the risk of death (hazard ratio, 0.77; P = .01).149Because the evidence regarding adjuvant systemic therapy for stage III soft tissue sarcoma is inconclusive, considerable variation still exists in treatment recommendations even though patients with large, stage II or stage III soft tissue sarcomas are at high risk for recurrence and metastasis. Chemotherapy may be considered to downstage large tumors to enable limb-sparing procedures, particularly for tumors known to be chemosensi-tive. It is likely that subsets of high-risk patients with extremity soft tissue sarcoma defined on the basis of tumor size or histol-ogy derive significant benefit from systemic chemotherapy. For example, retrospective cohort analyses have noted a disease-specific survival benefit in patients with large, high-grade lipo-sarcomas and synovial sarcomas of the extremity treated with ifosfamide plus doxorubicin versus no chemotherapy.150Neoadjuvant (Preoperative) Chemotherapy. The use of neoadjuvant (preoperative) chemotherapy for soft tissue sarco-mas is based on the belief that only 30% to 50% of patients respond to standard adjuvant (postoperative) chemotherapy. The rationale for using neoadjuvant chemotherapy is that it enables oncologists to identify patients whose disease is sensi-tive to a particular chemotherapy regimen by assessing response while the primary tumor is in situ. Patients whose tumors do not respond to short courses of neoadjuvant chemotherapy can thus be spared the toxic effects of prolonged adjuvant chemotherapy. Another advantage of neoadjuvant chemotherapy is that it may shrink tumors, enabling less morbid operations. The theoreti-cal disadvantages of neoadjuvant chemotherapy are related to myelosuppression and potential postoperative wound healing complications.A recent randomized study comparing three preoperative cycles of full-dose anthracycline-ifosfamide–based chemother-apy with three preoperative plus two postoperative cycles of the same regimen in high-risk extremity and trunk wall soft tissue sarcomas showed equivalence between the two approaches, sug-gesting the possibility of limiting chemotherapy administration to the three preoperative courses, improving the ratio between toxicity and expected benefit.151A subanalysis on response showed how tumor attenuation on CT scan and MRI obtained by the administration of such preoperative treatment was associated with a higher percentage of pathologic necrosis152 and better outcome.153Eilber and colleagues examined treatment-induced patho-logic necrosis in patients who received neoadjuvant therapy for high-grade extremity sarcomas.154 The addition of ifosfamide to other agents (doxorubicin alone or doxorubicin and cisplatin) increased the rate of pathologic necrosis to 48% compared to 13% with other combinations. The 5and 10-year local recur-rence rates were significantly lower for patients with 95% or greater pathologic necrosis (6% and 11%, respectively) than for patients with less than 95% pathologic necrosis (17% and 23%, respectively).Concurrent Chemoradiation TherapyTreatment approaches that combine systemic chemotherapy with radiosensitizers and concurrent external-beam radiation therapy may improve disease-free survival by treating micro-scopic disease and enhancing the treatment of macroscopic disease. Concurrent chemoradiation therapy with doxorubicin-based regimens reportedly produces favorable local control rates for patients with sarcoma.150 Since those findings were published, several groups have evaluated routes of administra-tion, alternative chemotherapeutic agents, and the toxicity of combined therapies.Theoretical advantages notwithstanding, concurrent chemoradiation therapy decreases the total treatment time for patients with high-risk sarcoma. This decrease represents a sub-stantial advantage over current sequential combined-modality treatment approaches, for which the total duration of radiation therapy, chemotherapy, surgery, and rehabilitation frequently exceeds 6 to 9 months.Posttreatment SurveillanceCurrently, posttreatment surveillance is recommended for all patients with soft tissue sarcomas based on a few reports involving small numbers of patients, indicating that local recur-rence can be successfully treated with radical reexcision with or without radiation therapy.155,156 Similarly, several groups have reported that survival can be prolonged by resection of pulmo-nary metastases.157-159The National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) recommends a history and physical and chest CT or radiog-raphy every 3 to 6 months for 2 to 3 years after completion of treatment. Because most cases of distant metastasis occur within 2 to 3 years of initial diagnosis, the NCCN guidelines indicate that follow-up intervals can be lengthened to every 6 months, and imaging can be done annually during years 2 through 5.1 Consideration should also be given to imaging the primary tumor site; most experts recommend that the tumor site be evaluated every 6 months with MRI for extremity tumors or CT for intra-abdominal or retroperitoneal tumors. Guidelines have been established for using MRI to distinguish recurrences from typical postsurgical changes: a discrete nodule with low signal intensity on T1-weighted images and higher signal intensity on T2-weighted images that enhances after adminis-tration of intravenous contrast material is strongly suggestive of recurrence and should be biopsied. Ultrasonography may be an alternative to MRI or CT for assessing for recurrence in the extremities.Brunicardi_Ch36_p1567-p1598.indd   158001/03/19   6:38 PM 1581SOFT TISSUE SARCOMASCHAPTER 36Recurrence is common after surgery for abdominal soft tissue sarcomas. CT is useful for detecting recurrences at primary and distant anatomic sites in the abdomen and pelvis. After surgery, CT every 3 to 6 months during the first 2 years and every  6 months for 3 years thereafter has been recommended. However, today many experienced surgeons are advocating less aggressive imaging for asymptomatic patients, particularly after a second recurrence of retroperitoneal sarcoma, arguing that there is insufficient evidence to suggest that survival is improved by earlier detection.Whooley and colleagues reviewed the efficacy of the sur-veillance strategy used at Roswell Park Cancer Institute for 174 patients with soft tissue sarcomas of the extremities.160 Patients were evaluated every 3 months for the first 2 years, every 4 to  6 months during year 3, and every 6 months during years 4 and 5.  Local recurrence occurred in 18% of patients at a median time after completion of treatment of 14 months, and all but one of the recurrences were detected with physical examination alone. Fifty-seven patients had distant recurrences (at a median of  18 months after treatment), of which 36 were asymptomatic and diagnosed by surveillance imaging. The investigators determined that the positive predictive value of chest radiography during  follow-up was 92%.160 However, evaluation of the primary tumor site by CT or MRI was ineffective in detecting recurrences. The authors recommended that patient characteristics, location of the primary tumor, previous treatment, and physician familiarity with changes after surgery and radiation therapy should all be considered in determining the need for radiographic imaging.Management of Recurrent SarcomaUp to 20% of patients with extremity sarcoma develop locally recurrent disease, which is often accompanied by distant metastases; thus, all patients with recurrent extremity sarcoma should undergo a full staging assessment. Patients with microscopically positive surgical margins are at increased risk of local recurrence. In a series of 179 patients with locally recurrent extremity soft tissue sarcoma at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, the median interval to local recurrence was 16 months; 65% of patients developed a local recurrence by 2 years, and 90% by 4 years.155 The majority of patients (89%) were treated with additional limb-sparing surgery, and 73% received additional adjuvant therapy; the disease-specific survival after treatment of first local recurrence was 55% at 4 years. Independent prognostic factors for disease-specific survival after local recurrence included tumor grade, local recurrence size, and local recurrence-free interval. These data indicate that an isolated local recurrence should be treated aggressively with resection with negative margins.For patients with extremity sarcomas, achieving negative margins on resection of recurrent disease frequently requires amputation. However, in some patients with recurrent extrem-ity sarcoma, function-preserving resection combined with addi-tional radiation therapy, with or without chemotherapy, can produce acceptable rates of local control.161-163 Nori and col-leagues reported a local control rate of 69% among 40 patients with recurrent tumors treated with reexcision and brachytherapy to a median dose of 45 Gy.163 In a similar series, Midis and col-leagues reported that limb-sparing surgery was possible in 66% of patients, and the 5-year local recurrence-free survival rate was 72% in those patients.161The primary determinant of survival in patients with soft tissue sarcoma is the development of distant metastases. Patients with extremity sarcomas generally develop pulmonary metastases.160 Less common sites of metastasis for soft tissue sarcomas include bone (7%), liver (4%),49 and lymph nodes (5–7%).28 Myxoid liposarcoma of the extremity is known to metastasize to the abdomen and pelvis; therefore, staging CT of these regions must be performed before definitive local therapy is administered.32Management of Recurrent and Distant Metastatic Sarcoma.  In selected individuals with distant metastatic disease, surgical resection of a primary soft tissue sarcoma may be appropriate as a palliative procedure. The decision should be based on  the patient’s symptoms, which often include pain; ability to achieve local tumor control; comorbidities; anticipated morbidity of the surgical procedure; and the extent of metastases.The most common initial site of distant metastasis of soft tissue sarcomas is the lung. Selected patients with a limited number of pulmonary nodules (less than four nodules), long disease-free intervals, and no endobronchial invasion may become long-term survivors after pulmonary resection (Fig. 36-8); 15% to 40% of patients with complete resection of metastatic disease confined to the lung are long-term survivors.159,160,164 In a retrospective multi-institutional study of 255 patients with lung metastases, the 5-year overall survival rate after metastasectomy was 38%.157 Favorable prognostic factors in that study included microscopically tumor-free margins, age younger than 40 years, and grade 1 or 2 tumor.157 For patients who are surgical candidates, pulmonary resection alone can be more cost-effective than watchful waiting, chemotherapy, or chemotherapy plus surgery.158Chemotherapy for Distant Metastatic Sarcoma.  Doxorubicin, either alone or combined with other agents, has been the primary treatment modality for patients with advanced or distant metastatic sarcomas for several decades.128 Although most patients with metastatic disease are not curable, some Figure 36-8. A 69-year-old patient with a history of a dedifferenti-ated liposarcoma of the retroperitoneum developed a solitary lung metastasis 6 years after surgical resection.Brunicardi_Ch36_p1567-p1598.indd   158101/03/19   6:38 PM 1582SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIpatients with limited disease experience stabilization of disease with multidisciplinary treatment, which often includes surgery and radiation therapy in addition to chemotherapy. Several factors predict better outcome for patients with recurrent metastatic sarcoma undergoing chemotherapy, including good performance status, previous response to chemotherapy, younger age, absence of hepatic metastases, low-grade tumor, and long disease-free interval.165 Isolated liver metastases, if stable over several months, may be amenable to resection,166 radiofrequency ablation,167 or chemoembolization.168As data accumulate regarding the sensitivity of sarcoma subtypes to particular chemotherapies, it is critical that histologydriven treatment approaches be used. New therapies are also being identified based on the unique molecular signatures of sarcomas.128Palliative Radiation Therapy. Definitive radiation therapy can be considered when no acceptable surgical option is avail-able (e.g., in patients with significant medical comorbidities). In this setting, radiation doses greater than 63 Gy yielded superior tumor control, but doses greater than 68 Gy resulted in increased rates of major complications.169SPECIAL CLINICAL SITUATIONSMyxoid LiposarcomaMyxoid liposarcomas belong to the group of soft tissue sarco-mas with lipomatous differentiation. However, myxoid liposar-comas differ from the other liposarcoma subtypes with respect to morphology (i.e., myxoid stroma and lipomatous differen-tiation) and clinical behavior. Myxoid liposarcomas frequently present as slow-growing, deep tumors in the lower extremity and can metastasize to other soft tissue locations, including the retroperitoneum and extremities.170,171 For this reason, CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis is recommended for adequate stag-ing and surveillance of myxoid liposarcoma.Retroperitoneal SarcomaMost retroperitoneal tumors are malignant, and about one-third are soft tissue sarcomas. Also to be considered in the differen-tial diagnosis of a retroperitoneal tumor are primary germ cell tumors, lymphoma, and metastatic testicular cancer. Approxi-mately 1000 new cases of retroperitoneal sarcoma are diagnosed annually in the United States, and these tumors account for 10% to 15% of all adult tissue sarcomas. Approximately two-thirds of retroperitoneal sarcomas are high grade (either grade 2 or 3), and liposarcoma and leiomyosarcoma are the most common histologies.Retroperitoneal sarcomas generally present as large masses: 70% are larger than 10 cm at diagnosis.172 They typi-cally do not produce symptoms until they grow large enough to compress or invade contiguous structures, although pain, early satiety, and obstructive gastrointestinal symptoms may occur early in the disease course in some patients. Evaluation of a patient with a retroperitoneal mass begins with an accurate his-tory that should exclude signs and symptoms associated with lymphoma (e.g., fever and night sweats). A complete physical examination, with particular attention to all nodal basins and with a testicular examination in men, is critically important. Laboratory assessment can be helpful; elevated lactate dehy-drogenase levels may suggest lymphoma, and elevated β-human chorionic gonadotropin levels or α-fetoprotein levels may indi-cate a germ cell tumor.Figure 36-9. A 50-year-old man with a large right dedifferentiated liposarcoma. Note the atypical fat surrounding the right kidney and displacing the viscera to the left hemiabdomen and the large dedifferentiated mineralized solid nodule lateral to the right kidney.Although the general principles of evaluation and man-agement for retroperitoneal sarcomas are similar to those for extremity sarcomas, there are some differences. Contrast-enhanced CT of the abdomen and pelvis is used to define the extent of the tumor and its relationship to surrounding struc-tures, particularly vascular structures, for surgical planning; contrast-enhanced CT can also often distinguish between well-differentiated and dedifferentiated liposarcoma. CT imaging is also done to evaluate the liver for the evidence of metastases, the peritoneal cavity for evidence of discontiguous disease, and the kidneys for assessment of function. Angiography or mag-netic resonance arteriography/venography can also be used to delineate vascular anatomy when involvement of critical vascu-lar structures is suspected. Thoracic CT should be performed to evaluate for potential lung metastases because 11% of patients with retroperitoneal sarcoma present with synchronous meta-static disease. CT-guided core needle biopsy is appropriate to provide a tissue diagnosis; however, well-differentiated liposar-coma may be diagnosed with CT imaging alone, and negative biopsy findings should not delay operative intervention.Complete surgical resection is the most effective treatment for primary or recurrent retroperitoneal sarcoma (Fig. 36-9). En bloc resection often necessitates sacrificing contiguous struc-tures such as the colon, kidney, spleen, pancreas, psoas muscle, small bowel, inferior vena cava, and aorta.173 In a review of 25 patients who underwent resection of retroperitoneal sarcoma with major blood vessel involvement in a 16-year time span, postoperative morbidity and mortality rates were 36% and 4%, respectively. Vessel patency rates were greater than 88% with a median follow-up time of 19.3 months.83,174 Local control and survival rates were favorable in patients with tumor-free resec-tion margins. The authors concluded that vascular resection is the treatment of choice in sarcomas that involve major blood vessels in the retroperitoneum.83 Similar considerations were made by other groups reporting specifically on inferior vena cava resection in the context of multivisceral resection for ret-roperitoneal sarcoma and on surgical morbidity after extended surgical resection of retroperitoneal sarcoma. Extended proce-dures, including also vessels, are feasible and safe if carried out in experienced centers. While the goal of sarcoma resection is Brunicardi_Ch36_p1567-p1598.indd   158201/03/19   6:38 PM 1583SOFT TISSUE SARCOMASCHAPTER 36wide excision, this is unlikely to be achievable in most patients with retroperitoneal sarcomas. Surgery is considered marginal in most cases, even when macroscopically complete, but every attempt should be made to minimize this marginality by liberally resecting surrounding organs when involved. The extension of surgery should then take into consideration a trade-off between expected morbidity and benefit and should be best carried out at high-volume centers, where technical skills and knowledge of the natural history of this very rare disease can be found.In an analysis of 500 patients with retroperitoneal soft tissue sarcoma treated at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, the median survival time was 103 months for those who underwent complete resection versus 18 months for those who underwent incomplete resection or observation without resection.172 In general, surgical resection should not be offered unless radiographic evidence indicates the potential for complete resection; however, palliative surgical resection may be considered to reduce symptoms of intestinal obstruction, pain, or bleeding.175 In particular, in patients with atypical lipomatous tumors, an aggressive surgical approach including incomplete resection or debulking is justified to palliate symptoms and may provide a potential survival benefit.176 Such an approach is not justified for dedifferentiated liposarcomas or other high-grade retroperitoneal sarcomas because these tumors have high rates of distant metastasis and local recurrence.Adjuvant Therapy. Most studies have failed to show a sur-vival benefit from adjuvant chemotherapy for retroperitoneal sarcoma.177-179 Because of the high rates of local recurrence, radiation therapy has been proposed for treating microscopic residual disease as an adjunct to surgical resection. However, the optimal technique and timing of radiation therapy have not been established, and the potential benefits of radiation therapy must be weighed against the increased risk of treatment-related toxic effects.Radiation treatment of retroperitoneal sarcomas is com-plex because tumors are usually large, which necessitates large treatment fields close to radiosensitive structures (e.g., bowel). Several techniques have been used, including preoperative and postoperative external-beam radiation therapy, intraoperative radiation therapy, and brachytherapy.180 Preoperative radiation therapy is feasible and well tolerated. Toxic effects may be less severe with preoperative radiation therapy given that the tumor borders are definable, the tumor displaces radiosensitive viscera away from the treatment field, and effective doses of radiation may be lower preoperatively.181Several studies have shown favorable local control rates for intermediateand high-grade retroperitoneal sarcoma treated with preoperative radiation therapy and complete resection.180 However, most studies have failed to show a survival benefit.182 This situation prompted the initiation of a multicenter, ran-domized trial sponsored by the American College of Surgeons Oncology Group (ACOSOG) comparing surgery to surgery with preoperative radiation (ACOSOG Z9031). Unfortunately, the study was closed prematurely in 2006 because of low patient accrual. A similar study is now ongoing in Europe, sponsored by the Soft Tissue and Bone Sarcoma Group (STBSG) of the EORTC.Current recommendations for radiation therapy for patients with retroperitoneal sarcoma at high volumes centers are based on disease characteristics at presentation.183 For high-risk patients, defined as those with large, high-grade tumors or recurrent low-grade tumors, preoperative radiation therapy to a total dose of 50 Gy followed by surgical resection is considered. Postoperative radiation is discouraged unless the resected tumor bed is clearly away from dose-limiting structures.Treatment of Recurrence. Retroperitoneal sarcomas recur more often than extremity and trunk wall ones. Retroperito-neal leiomyosarcomas, in addition to recurring locally in the tumor bed and metastasizing to the lungs, frequently spread to the liver. Retroperitoneal sarcomas can also recur diffusely throughout the peritoneal cavity (sarcomatosis). Resection of recurrent retroperitoneal sarcoma is similar to resection of recurrent extremity sarcoma. However, the likelihood that a recurrent retroperitoneal sarcoma will be resectable declines precipitously with each recurrence. In a large series of patients treated at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, the authors were able to resect recurrent tumors in 57% of patients with a first recurrence but only 20% of patients with a second recur-rence and 10% of patients with a third recurrence.68 In up to 25% of patients, well-differentiated retroperitoneal liposarcoma recurs in a poorly differentiated form or recurs with areas of dedifferentiation. Dedifferentiated retroperitoneal liposarcoma is more aggressive than its well-differentiated precursor and has a greater propensity for distant metastasis.Gastrointestinal SarcomaPatients with gastrointestinal sarcoma most often present with nonspecific gastrointestinal symptoms that are determined by the site of the primary tumor. In a series from Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, early satiety and dyspepsia were noted in patients with tumors of the upper gastrointestinal tract, whereas tenesmus and changes in bowel habits were common in patients with tumors of the lower gastrointestinal tract.184 In a series of 80 patients with various smooth-muscle tumors of the gastrointestinal tract, Chou and colleagues185 identified the most common presenting symptoms and signs as gastrointes-tinal bleeding (44%), abdominal mass (38%), and abdominal pain (21%).Establishing the diagnosis of a gastrointestinal sarcoma preoperatively is often difficult. Radiologic assessment, includ-ing CT of the abdomen or pelvis, is sometimes useful to deter-mine the anatomic location, size, and extent of disease. Patients with localized disease frequently present with a large intra-abdominal mass. However, there is no radiographic evidence of regional lymph node metastases, which would be typical of an adenocarcinoma of similar size and anatomic location. In patients with advanced gastrointestinal sarcoma, CT may dem-onstrate disseminated intra-abdominal masses with or without concomitant ascites and invasion of tissue planes.Endoscopy (esophagoduodenoscopy or colonoscopy) has become the mainstay for evaluating symptoms related to the gastrointestinal tract. For tumors involving the stomach, upper endoscopy with endoscopic ultrasonography and biopsy are important diagnostic tests used to distinguish gastrointestinal sarcoma from adenocarcinoma of the stomach. Endoscopic biopsy of these tumors is preferred over CT-guided biopsy if feasible. This distinction is clinically significant because the extent of resection (local excision versus gastrectomy) and the role of regional lymphadenectomy differ for these two condi-tions. For gastrointestinal sarcomas, lymphatic spread is not the primary route of metastasis; consequently, lymphadenectomy is not routinely performed as part of resection. The general rec-ommendation for gastrointestinal sarcoma, based on published data and the primary pattern of distant (vs. local) failure, is to Brunicardi_Ch36_p1567-p1598.indd   158301/03/19   6:38 PM 1584SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIresect the tumor with a 2to 4-cm margin of normal tissue. However, some cases may be technically challenging because of the tumor’s anatomic location or size. For example, for gastric tumors located near the gastroesophageal junction, achieving adequate surgical margins may not be possible without a total or proximal subtotal gastrectomy. This recommendation is much different when considering resection of gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST) where a gross margin negative resection is rec-ommended are rarely is a total gastrectomy required. Similarly, large leiomyosarcomas arising from the stomach with invasion of adjacent organs should be resected together with the adjacent involved viscera en bloc.For sarcomas of the small or large intestine, segmental bowel resection is the standard treatment. For sarcomas of the jejunum, ileum, and colon, the tumor is excised en bloc with the involved segment of intestine and its mesentery; radical mesenteric lymphadenectomy is not attempted. For sarcomas originating in the rectum, the tumor resection technique is based on the anatomic location and size of the tumor. For small, low rectal lesions, clear margins may be achievable with a transanal excision. Large or locally invasive lesions may require more extensive operations for complete tumor extirpation.186,187Breast SarcomaSarcomas of the breast are rare tumors, accounting for less than 1% of all breast malignancies and less than 5% of all soft tissue sarcomas. A variety of histologic subtypes have been reported within the breast, including angiosarcoma, stromal sarcoma, fibrosarcoma, and malignant fibrous histiocytoma.Angiosarcoma of the breast accounts for about 50% of all sarcomas of the breast and has increasingly been associated with radiation therapy for treatment of primary breast cancer.10 The period between radiation therapy and diagnosis of radiation-associated breast sarcoma has been reported to range from  3 to 20 years, with an incidence of 0.3% at 10 years and 0.5% at 15 years.188 In a retrospective study of 55 patients with angiosarcoma of the breast, patients with radiation-associated angiosarcoma were on average 30 years older and were less likely to present with distant metastases than radiation-naive patients. Clinically, radiation-associated angiosarcoma of the breast may occur in the irradiated chest wall after mastectomy or in the irradiated breast following segmental resection. The findings at presentation of a patient with cutaneous angiosarcoma often include an expanding erythematous patch, red papular eruptions, bluish-black lesions, or bruise-like discoloration overlying an area of induration. Mammography is often nonspecific, and diagnosis requires punch or incisional biopsy.Cystosarcoma phyllodes are generally not considered to be sarcomas because these tumors are thought to originate from hormonally responsive stromal cells of the breast and are usu-ally benign. In patients with these tumors, infiltrating tumor margins, severe stromal overgrowth, atypia, and cellularity have all been identified as risk factors for metastases.189As with sarcomas at other anatomic sites, histopathologic grade and tumor size are important prognostic factors for sarco-mas of the breast. The likelihood of local recurrence increases as tumor size increases; tumors smaller than 5 cm are associated with better overall survival. Local and distant recurrences are more common in patients with high-grade lesions. Complete excision with negative margins is the primary therapy. Simple mastectomy confers no additional benefit if complete excision can be accomplished by segmental mastectomy. Because of low rates of regional lymphatic spread, axillary dissection is not rou-tinely indicated. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy or radiation ther-apy may be considered for patients with large, high-risk tumors.Uterine SarcomaSarcomas account for less than 5% of uterine malignancies. Uterine sarcomas have been classified into four histologic sub-groups: uterine leiomyosarcoma, endometrial stromal sarcoma, malignant mixed Müllerian tumor (carcinosarcoma), and undif-ferentiated endometrial sarcoma. Five-year overall survival rates for patients with uterine sarcoma are 30% to 50%.190 Total abdominal hysterectomy (TAH) is recommended for localized disease. Bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy is mandatory only in endometrial stromal sarcoma. Because uterine sarcomas are rare, the benefits of adjuvant therapy (e.g., chemotherapy, hor-monal therapy) have not been adequately evaluated. Pelvic post-operative irradiation has been studied instead in a randomized fashion. The results of such study have been reported, showing no benefit in survival in favor of radiation therapy.191Uterine leiomyosarcomas are smooth-muscle tumors and account for 35% to 40% of uterine sarcomas. Leiomyosarcoma can affect women in their twenties, although it is more com-monly diagnosed between 50 and 60 years of age. Standard treatment is TAH with or without ovarian preservation depend-ing on the patient’s wishes and menopausal status. Lymph node metastasis is present in less than 5% of patients at diagnosis, and lymphadenectomy is not recommended. Adjuvant pelvic radia-tion therapy can be considered for selected high-risk patients. Adjuvant chemotherapy is controversial. Gemcitabine plus docetaxel has been noted to be well tolerated and highly active, with a response rate of 53% in patients with unresectable uter-ine leiomyosarcoma.130 Doxorubicin and trabectedin have also demonstrated activity when used as firstor second-line therapy.Endometrial stromal sarcomas account for approximately 7% to 10% of uterine sarcomas. Mitotic count is used to clas-sify endometrial stromal sarcomas as low grade (<10 mito-ses per 10 high-power fields) or high-grade (>10 mitoses per  10 high-power fields). In general, low-grade tumors demon-strate an indolent clinical course, while high-grade tumors are more aggressive with a poorer prognosis. Unlike other uterine sarcomas subtypes, endometrial stromal sarcomas express pro-gesterone receptors and have been found to be responsive to hormonal manipulation as an adjuvant therapy or for treatment of recurrent disease.192,193 Surgical treatment for these tumors includes TAH and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy in premeno-pausal women; postoperative hormone replacement therapy is contraindicated.194 Recurrent or advanced disease may respond to antiestrogen therapy. Tamoxifen is not recommended because it may be proestrogenic in this setting.Malignant mixed müllerian tumor accounts for 50% of uterine sarcomas and arises predominantly in postmenopausal women. This tumor is regarded as epithelial and is treated not with agents typically used to treat sarcoma but with agents used to treat ovarian and endometrial cancers.Undifferentiated endometrial sarcoma is an aggressive malignancy that does not express estrogen or progesterone receptors. It is associated with a poor prognosis even in patients presenting with localized disease. TAH with or without pres-ervation of the ovaries is recommended; postoperative pelvic radiation therapy may also be administered. Systemic agents for other soft tissue sarcomas are used for recurrent and/or meta-static disease.Brunicardi_Ch36_p1567-p1598.indd   158401/03/19   6:38 PM 1585SOFT TISSUE SARCOMASCHAPTER 36GASTROINTESTINAL STROMAL TUMORSGISTs, which account for the majority of gastrointestinal sar-comas, have distinctive molecular features that have been char-acterized over the last decade. These tumors share phenotypic similarities with the intestinal pacemaker cells known as the interstitial cells of Cajal195; interstitial cells of Cajal and GIST cells express the hematopoietic progenitor cell marker CD34 and the growth factor receptor c-Kit.196 Expression of the c-Kit gene protein product, CD117, has emerged as an important defining feature of GISTs. Using these diagnostic criteria, the incidence of GIST has been estimated to be 6 to 15 cases per million individuals per year.197-199 Until recently, systemic treat-ment for patients with unresectable or metastatic GIST was of little benefit because these tumors were resistant to conventional chemotherapy. Since the recognition that KIT activation occurs in most GISTs, KIT inhibition has emerged as an adjunct to sur-gery in select patients with resectable disease and as a primary treatment modality for patients with stage IV disease.Approximately 80% of GISTs have a mutation in the gene encoding the KIT receptor tyrosine kinase, and 5% to 10% have a mutation in the gene encoding the related PDGFRA recep-tor tyrosine kinase; such mutations result in the expression of mutant proteins with constitutive tyrosine kinase activity.1 The remaining GISTs do not have a detectable mutation, but lack of a mutation does not preclude a diagnosis of GIST if the tumor is morphologically typical of GIST. The presence and type of KIT (exon 11 or exon 9) or PDGFRA (exon 18) muta-tion has been found to predict tumor response to imatinib. In a phase 2 trial, patients with KIT exon 11 mutations had bet-ter response rates (83.5% vs. 47.8%) and survival than those with KIT exon 9 mutations or those without KIT or PDGFRA mutation.200 These findings have subsequently been confirmed in two additional phase 3 trials conducted by the EORTC– Italian Sarcoma Group–Australasian Gastrointestinal Trials Group (EORTC-62005).201,202The most common locations for GISTs are the stomach (60%) and small intestine (30%), but GISTs can arise anywhere along the gastrointestinal tract.203 Gastric GISTs have been shown to be associated with a more favorable prognosis than GISTs at other sites.204 GISTs are most commonly diagnosed by upper endoscopy and/or CT of the abdomen as an incidental finding in an asymptomatic patient or in a patient being evalu-ated for symptoms of early satiety, abdominal pain, or gastroin-testinal bleeding. GIST most frequently metastasizes to the liver and/or abdominal cavity.Radiologic AssessmentStandard imaging techniques apply for GIST as for other intraabdominal sarcomas. In general, oral and IV contrast enhanced spiral CT is the staging modality of choice for GIST. CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis allows for assessment of the primary lesion and the presence or absence of intraabdomi-nal disseminated disease or metastatic disease to the liver (the two most common locations for distant metastasis of GIST). FDG-PET has been reported to be useful for preoperative stag-ing of GISTs because it may reveal early metastases and estab-lish baseline metabolic activity and may be considered in select patients where equivocal findings are identified on CT or in the setting of following metabolic response to therapy. PET has been shown to be highly sensitive in detecting early response to imatinib treatment and in predicting long-term response in patients with metastatic GIST. If PET is to be used for moni-toring response to therapy, baseline PET should be performed before initiation of treatment. Useful and effective CT-based criteria by Choi et al for detection of GIST and for predicting prognosis of GIST have also been proposed and may be used readily without incurring the cost and radiation exposure of PET/CT.205Management of Localized DiseaseComplete surgical resection with negative margins is the rec-ommended treatment for localized GISTs. Extended anatomic resection, wide margins, and lymphadenectomy are not required; therefore, total gastrectomy for gastric primaries is rarely required even with the largest of lesions. Resection of even locally advanced tumors is associated with improved survival.206 The 5-year survival rate for all patients with GISTs ranges from 20% to 44%, and the 5-year survival rate for patients with com-pletely excised early-stage tumors is up to 75%.206 An analysis of 200 patients by DeMatteo and colleagues found a disease-specific survival rate of 54% for patients with grossly complete resection of primary GIST, and the median survival duration for patients with metastatic disease was only 20 months.58As for other soft tissue sarcomas, tumor size has con-sistently been identified as an important prognostic factor for GIST. Mitotic activity has also been identified as an important prognostic factor and is generally categorized as fewer than 5, 5 to 10, or more than 10 mitoses per high-power field. The National Institutes of Health207 and the Armed Forces Insti-tute of Pathology203 have proposed prognostic criteria for risk stratification of surgically treated, localized primary GIST. Both groups take into account tumor size and mitotic count; the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology also includes tumor site as a prognostic variable. Accurate risk stratification is essential for selecting patients most likely to benefit from adjuvant treatment.Management of Locally Advanced or Metastatic DiseaseTreatment with imatinib mesylate (Gleevec, ST1571), a selec-tive inhibitor of the KIT protein tyrosine kinase, has resulted in impressive clinical responses in a large percentage of patients with unresectable or metastatic GISTs. On the basis of the initial results in a single patient with metastatic GIST, the EORTC Soft Tissue and Bone Sarcoma Group initiated a phase 1 study to test the safety and efficacy of imatinib.208 In that study, 53% of patients with GISTs had confirmed partial responses; investiga-tors concluded that imatinib is safe and effective against this disease.208 A multicenter, international trial of imatinib for GIST was begun in July 2000 at four treatment centers: Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Oregon Health Sciences University, Fox Chase Cancer Center, and University Hospital of Helsinki, Finland.209 A total of 147 patients with unresectable or metastatic GISTs were randomized to 400 or 600 mg of imatinib daily for up to 24 months. Objective response was demonstrated in 79 patients (54%); all had partial responses, and there was no significant difference in response rate between imatinib doses.210 Fourteen percent of patients experienced disease progression. The toxic-ity profile was acceptable; the predominant effects were gastro-intestinal effects (diarrhea, nausea), periorbital edema, muscle cramps, and fatigue. However, 21% of patients experienced serious (grade 3 or 4) adverse events, including gastrointestinal bleeding in 5% of patients, most likely related to the rapid tumor response of mural lesions.Brunicardi_Ch36_p1567-p1598.indd   158501/03/19   6:38 PM 1586SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIA phase 3 randomized Intergroup trial was simultaneously performed to assess the clinical activity of imatinib at two dose levels for patients with unresectable or metastatic GIST express-ing the c-Kit tyrosine kinase.211 From December 15, 2000, to September 1, 2001, 746 patients were accrued and randomized to low-dose (400 mg/d) or high-dose (800 mg/d) imatinib. The primary endpoint of the trial was survival. Preliminary toxicity data from 325 patients revealed a 23% incidence of grade 3 or 4 adverse events, including nausea and vomiting, gastrointestinal bleeding, abdominal pain, edema, fatigue, and rash.In February 2002, the FDA approved imatinib for treat-ment of GIST based on the results of these promising clinical trials. Both the Intergroup trial mentioned in the preceding paragraph and a separate phase 3 trial compared the efficacy of low-dose (400 mg/d) and high-dose (800 mg/d) imatinib in patients with metastatic or unresectable GISTs.212,213 Both stud-ies showed equivalent response rates and overall survival for the two doses but increased toxicity for the 800-mg/d dose. Current recommendations include consideration of dose escalation to 800 mg/d for patients who experience disease progression at a dose of 400 mg/d and for patients with advanced GIST and KIT exon 9 mutations.1,214The optimal duration of imatinib treatment, the duration of benefit from imatinib, and the long-term toxicity of imatinib have not been established. When feasible, imatinib should be continued in the absence of disease progression. A random-ized trial reported worse median progression-free survival in patients who stopped imatinib after 1 year than in patients who continued beyond 1 year (progression-free survival of 6 months vs. 18 months).215 Less than 4% of patients with GISTs have experienced serious adverse events with imatinib. Mild gastrointestinal toxicity is the most frequently reported adverse event, but gastrointestinal tract hemorrhage, presum-ably from rapid tumor necrosis, has also been reported. Thus, all patients with GISTs treated on clinical protocols should be evaluated and followed by a team of medical professionals that includes a surgeon.Many patients with GIST develop resistance to imatinib. Primary resistance is defined as clinical progression that devel-ops during the first 6 months of treatment and is most commonly seen in patients with KIT exon 9 mutation, PDGFRA exon 18 mutation, or no mutations.216 Secondary resistance is defined as progression that develops more than 6 months after the start of treatment in a patient with an initial response.217 Imatinib resis-tance should be managed by either dose escalation or transition to treatment with sunitinib.1In 2006, sunitinib malate (SU11248, Sutent, Pfizer) emerged as an alternative systemic treatment for patients unable to tolerate imatinib and patients with imatinib-refractory GIST. Sunitinib is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor that targets multiple kinases, including the vascular endothelial growth factor receptors, PDGFRA, KIT, and FLT3. Sunitinib has both antiangiogenic and antiproliferative activity. In a phase 3, randomized, placebo-controlled trial, sunitinib was associated with a significant improvement in median time to progression (27.3 weeks vs. 6.4 weeks with placebo) in patients with imatinib-resistant GIST.135 In addition, sunitinib therapy was well tolerated; diarrhea, fatigue, and nausea were the most common adverse effects. Sunitinib has also been associated with hand-foot skin reaction, hypertension, cardiotoxicity, and hypothyroidism.218-220 In 2006, sunitinib was approved by the FDA for treatment of patients with resistance or intolerance to imatinib.The third FDA-approved drug recently made available for treatment of patients with imatiniband sunitinib-resistant GIST is regorafenib. Regorafenib is a structurally unique inhibitor of multiple cancer-associated kinases, including KIT and PDGFR, with broad-spectrum anticancer activity in preclinical and early-phase trials. Because KIT and PDGFR-α remain drivers of GIST after resistance to imatinib and sunitinib, a multicenter, single-stage phase 2 trial examined regorafenib in patients with advanced GIST after failure of at least imatinib and sunitinib.221 Thirty-four patients were enrolled from February to December 2010 and given regorafenib orally, 160 mg daily, on days 1 to 21 of a 28-day cycle. Clinical benefit was noted in 79% of patients with a median progression-free survival of 10 months. This trial was then followed by a phase 3, international, placebo-controlled, randomized trial of regorafenib for metastatic GIST after failure of imatinib and sunitinib.222 Patients with progres-sion of disease on the placebo arm were crossed to the treatment arm of the study. Patients treated with regorafenib had a median progression-free survival of 4.8 months compared to 0.9 months on the placebo arm. Other tyrosine kinase inhibitors have dem-onstrated modest activity against GIST and target more than one family of protein kinases.223 Among these are sorafenib, dasatinib, and nilotinib for the treatment of imatinib-resistant GIST, and these are now generally reserved for therapy after progression with regorafenib.222Multidisciplinary TreatmentAlthough imatinib has improved survival of patients with advanced GIST, most patients with advanced GIST are not cured with imatinib. Some patients develop secondary resistance to imatinib with one or more sites of disease progression after 6 months of clinical response (Fig. 36-10A [before imatinib],  Fig. 36-10B [after imatinib]). The mechanisms of imatinib resistance are currently being investigated. Surgery has been shown to be beneficial for selected patients with isolated disease progression during imatinib therapy.224-227 Surgical resection of residual metastatic disease responding to imatinib-sensitive GIST has also been shown to result in progression-free survival in 70% to 96% of patients with imatinibor sunitinib-sensitive GISTs.226-228 The optimal timing of surgery in relation to ima-tinib therapy for patients with metastatic disease remains to be determined. It is not possible to compare outcomes for patients treated with kinase inhibitors alone and patients treated with kinase inhibitors plus surgical resection outside the context of randomized trials given the heterogeneity of patients and biases associated with selection of patients for surgical resection.Postoperative ImatinibGiven the promising results of imatinib therapy for metastatic and locally advanced GIST, the next step was to study the efficacy of imatinib as adjuvant (postoperative) treatment in patients with surgically resectable disease, particularly those at high risk for recurrence because of large tumor size or high mitotic count. The ACOSOG first evaluated the efficacy of  1 year of postoperative imatinib in a single-arm phase 2 trial with 106 patients with high-risk GIST and compared the results with historical controls. Adjuvant treatment with imatinib for GIST patients was then examined in two key trials. In the ACOSOG randomized, double-blind, phase 3 Z9001 study,230 treatment with 12 months of imatinib was compared with placebo, fol-lowing complete resection of a primary GIST smaller than 3 cm. Primary and secondary endpoints were recurrence-free survival Brunicardi_Ch36_p1567-p1598.indd   158601/03/19   6:38 PM 1587SOFT TISSUE SARCOMASCHAPTER 36ABFigure 36-10. A 57-year-old man with a history of a pelvic gastrointestinal stromal tumor involving the small bowel mesen-tery treated preoperatively with 6 months of imatinib (Gleevec).  A. Before imatinib. B. After imatinib.(RFS) and overall survival (OS), respectively. Results showed a significant benefit in RFS, but not OS, with 12 months of imatinib. Based on these results, imatinib for the adjuvant treat-ment of adult patients following resection of KIT-positive GIST was approved by the FDA in 2008 and by the European Medical Agency (EMA) in 2009.A more recent study conducted by the Scandinavian  Sarcoma Group (SSG) and the Sarcoma Group of the Arbe-itsgemeinschaft Internistische Onkologie (AIO; SSGXVIII/AIO trial) compared 12 versus 36 months of adjuvant imatinib  400 mg/d in patients with GIST at high risk of recurrence (defined as a GIST tumor diameter >10 cm, or mitotic count >10 per 50 high-powered fields, or tumor diameter >5 cm and mitotic count >5 per 50 high-power fields, or tumor rupture).231 Results showed that both RFS and OS significantly improved with 36 months of imatinib: the 5-year RFS rates for patients receiving 36 versus 12 months of imatinib were 65.6% versus 47.9%, respectively, and the 5-year OS rates were 92% versus 81.7%, respectively.The NCCN and the European Society of Medical Oncol-ogy now recommend that imatinib be considered for patients at intermediate or high risk of recurrence after resection and that at least 36 months of adjuvant imatinib be considered for patients at high risk of recurrence.232 Further, both the FDA and EMA updated the label, extending the duration of adjuvant therapy to at least 36 months in patients at high risk of recurrence.Whether longer treatment durations may be of further benefit is still an open question that will be addressed by future studies. However, paralleling what is commonly done in the metastatic setting, many investigators believe that even adju-vant imatinib should become a chronic therapy. While moving toward more prolonged adjuvant treatment durations, it is all the more essential to identify the appropriate patients to treat to avoid the burden of adverse events or increased financial liabil-ity for patients who will not derive therapeutic benefit from imatinib. Risk stratification based on patients’ risk of recur-rence is a key component to optimizing adjuvant treatment. The most practical stratification scheme to use for making a decision for adjuvant therapy is the modified National Insti-tutes of Health consensus criteria.233 High-risk GIST patients, whose tumor harbors a sensitive genotype, should be treated by adjuvant imatinib because they have a poor prognosis. On the contrary, neither low-risk nor intermediate-risk GIST patients need adjuvant therapy, even if their tumor carries a sensitive genotype. In fact, evidence has been provided that the out-come of these patients with intermediateor low-risk GIST is good. When using other risk stratification schemes, such as the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology table, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center nomogram, or the heat map,204,234,235 there is a consensus to treat all patients having 30% or higher risk of recurrence, if their tumor carries a sensitive genotype. There is also a consensus not to treat patients having 10% or less risk of recurrence, even if their tumor carries a sensitive genotype. All patients having a risk between 10% and 30% should be evaluated on a case-by-case basis, and advantages/disadvantages of treatment should be made clear and discussed with the patient. Whenever a decision for adjuvant therapy is made, treatment duration of at least 36 months should be con-sidered independently from the risk.Beside the risk of recurrence, the other important factor to consider is the tumor genotype. In other words, as found in both the metastatic and adjuvant settings, GIST tumors with KIT exon 11 and PDGFRA non-D842V mutations are sensitive to imatinib. Patients with these mutations are suitable for adjuvant imatinib if the risk determined by stratification tools is signifi-cant. Patients with KIT exon 9 mutations should also be treated; a higher dose (800 mg/d) may be more appropriate but remains to be studied clinically. Patients with PDGFRA D842V–mutated tumors should not be treated with adjuvant imatinib, nor should patients with KIT and PDGFRA wild-type tumors associated with neurofibromatosis type 1 or the pediatric GIST/Carney-Stratakis syndromes, whatever the risk. Patients with sporadic wild-type GIST could be treated on an individual basis.Preoperative ImatinibPatients with marginally resectable GIST or at significant risk for operative morbidity should be considered for preoperative imatinib with close monitoring. Since the optimal duration of preoperative therapy is unknown, imatinib should be continued until maximal response is achieved or until there is evidence of progression.236 Preoperative imatinib can be stopped imme-diately before surgery and resumed when oral medications are restarted.Brunicardi_Ch36_p1567-p1598.indd   158701/03/19   6:38 PM 1588SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIPreoperative imatinib in patients with primary GIST or resectable metastatic GIST has been evaluated in the context of two randomized phase 2 studies. The Radiation Treatment Oncology Group (RTOG 0132/ACRIN 6665) evaluated the efficacy of preoperative imatinib (600 mg/d) for 8 to 10 weeks before surgery and 24 months after surgery in patients with primary (n = 30) or potentially resectable recurrent or metastatic (n = 22) tumors.237 Primarily stable disease was noted during imatinib treatment, and the 2-year progression-free survival rates were 83% for primary GIST and 77% for recurrent or metastatic GIST. In another study, 19 patients undergoing surgical resection at a single institution were randomized to preoperative imatinib (600 mg/d) for 3, 5, or 7 days followed by surgical resection and postoperative imatinib for 24 months. The response rate assessed using FDG-PET was 69%, and the median disease-free survival time following treatment with surgery and imatinib was  46 months.238 Similar results were observed in a prospective series of patients treated at a major institution.239All of these studies show that neoadjuvant treatment is feasible, but to maximize the benefit of preoperative therapy, the following factors need to be considered. First, the patient should in principle have a favorable mutational status; other-wise, the treatment would be in vain, allowing the tumor to con-tinue growing. Fortunately, the majority of GISTs will respond, but it should not be forgotten that, especially in gastric loca-tion, the amount of insensitive mutations in the localized setting is less uncommon than what has been previously reported.240 However, we do not absolutely need to know the mutational status in advance, but we should be aware that mutation is an issue. Alternatively, if mutation status is not determined prior to treatment, we may also check response very early, either by CT, PET, or contrast-enhanced ultrasound. If a radiographic response is detected within a month, then the mutation status is likely favorable, and the treatment could be continued with-out necessarily pursuing mutation testing. If not, then mutation status should be investigated before continuing the treatment.Second, the resectability of the tumor and the extent of resection necessary should be considered. Other than presenta-tions of clearly inoperable tumors (which are usually treated with imatinib upfront) or symptomatic tumors requiring urgent intervention (hemorrhage, perforation, etc), there are few rea-sons today to perform extended procedures (i.e., multivisceral resections or formal organ resections) without first attempting preoperative therapy. For instance, patients with large GISTs who may require a long midline incision for resection may benefit from neoadjuvant imatinib to downstage the operation, potentially converting an open laparotomy approach to a laparo-scopic one. Another typical circumstance in which neoadjuvant therapy may be beneficial is in patients with GISTs arising in the esophagus, gastroesophageal junction, duodenum, or distal rectum. Preoperative treatment may shrink the tumor and allow a more conservative local excision. In general, such patients would normally undergo postoperative adjuvant treatment as well because of the expected recurrence risk. The chance of obtaining a response is high, and the benefit for tumor shrink-age obvious, so this approach should always be discussed with patients affected by bulky and/or poorly located disease (esoph-agus, gastroesophageal junction, duodenum, distal rectum) as well as for those who would be candidates for an adjuvant treat-ment anyway.Third, in the studies mentioned earlier, patients underwent surgery after a limited treatment duration (3 months at best).  It is now well known that the preoperative treatment may result in sustained tumor shrinkage if given for a longer duration. Sur-gical resection may then be performed between 6 and 12 months or sooner if treatment effect plateaus. This allows for optimal tumor shrinkage, or at least shrinkage to the point where there is no further benefit to be gained by further neoadjuvant therapy without the risk of developing secondary resistance.DESMOIDSDesmoid tumors are not low-grade sarcomas but can be locally aggressive, although they do not metastasize. Approximately half of these tumors arise in the extremities; the remaining lesions are located on the trunk or in the retroperitoneum. Abdominal wall desmoids are associated with pregnancy and are thought to be the result of hormonal influence. Although usually sporadic, desmoids may occur in association with famil-ial adenomatous polyposis, a presentation that is referred to as Gardner’s syndrome and is linked to germline mutations in the APC gene. Sporadic cases of desmoid fibromatosis are com-monly linked to mutations in CTNNB1, the gene for β-catenin.The primary therapy for desmoid tumors has long been considered surgical resection with wide local excision to achieve negative margins. However, local recurrence occurs in up to one-third of patients independently of the quality of surgical margins.241-243 Up to two-thirds of the patients operated on with positive margins do not recur. This is why there is growing evidence that the primary approach could be more conservative. Function-sparing operations should be the goal, even if a positive margin is left on a critical structure. Moreover, some authors advocate the possibility to observe patients at presentation, limiting surgery to those who progress or fail medical therapies. It has in fact been reported that by this approach, up to 50% of patients skip surgical resection.244,245 Radiation therapy may be effective in patients with unresectable tumors or as adjuvant therapy following surgery for recurrent disease, although long-term side effects and the risk of radiation-induced sarcoma should always be considered. When used, a dose of 50 to 54 Gy is usually recommended. Systemic treatment is another option when surgery is not indicated. Hormonal therapies such as tamoxifen have been reported to be beneficial, as have nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, which are known to affect the β-catenin signaling pathways. Chemotherapy is also effective, although usually reserved for patients with tumor-associated symptoms who have not responded to other interventions. Combinations of methotrexate and vinblastine have been shown to have activity, as have single-agent pegylated liposomal doxorubicin246 and sorafenib.247 Imatinib has also been studied with unconvincing results.248-250DERMATOFIBROSARCOMA PROTUBERANSDermatofibrosarcoma protuberans is a rare low-grade sarcoma arising in the dermis that rarely metastasizes but is locally aggressive. The overall annual incidence has been estimated at 4.2 cases per million individuals,251 and the incidence is higher among blacks than whites (6.5 vs. 3.9 per million per year). Approximately 40% of cases arise on the trunk, and most of the remaining tumors are distributed between the head and neck and the extremities. Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans presents as a nodular, cutaneous mass that grows slowly and persistently. Satellite lesions may be found in patients with larger tumors. Brunicardi_Ch36_p1567-p1598.indd   158801/03/19   6:38 PM 1589SOFT TISSUE SARCOMASCHAPTER 36Standard treatment is wide local excision, which generally results in local recurrence rates of less than 10%.252 Although local recurrence rates as high as 30% to 50% have been reported in population-based series, the associated 5-year survival rate is greater than 99%.251Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans arises from a specific chromosomal translocation involving chromosomes 17 and 22, in which the collagen 1 α 1 gene is fused to the gene for PDGF β-chain (PDGFB).253 The resultant deregulated expression of PDGFB leads to continuous activation of the PDGFR protein tyrosine kinase, which promotes tumor cell growth. The identification of this chromosomal translocation in more than 90% of cases of dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans has led to the development of targeted therapy. Inhibiting PDGFR with imatinib has been shown to induce clinical and radiologic improvement in patients with unresectable dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans.21 These data have resulted in the approval by the FDA of imatinib for treatment of patients with locally advanced dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans.PEDIATRIC SARCOMASSoft tissue sarcomas in children are relatively rare, accounting for 7% to 8% of all pediatric cancers and totaling approximately 600 new cases per year.254 Pediatric sarcomas have traditionally been divided into two groups: rhabdomyosarcoma and nonrhab-domyosarcoma soft tissue sarcomas.RhabdomyosarcomaAssociated with skeletal muscle, rhabdomyosarcomas are the most common soft tissue tumors among children younger than 15 years and can occur at any site comprised of striated muscle. Patients with these tumors generally present with a painless enlarging mass; about 24% of tumors are located in the geni-tourinary system, 20% in the extremities, 20% in the head and neck, 16% in the parameningeal region, and 22% in other sites.255Rhabdomyosarcoma is a small round cell tumor that dem-onstrates muscle differentiation upon light microscopy and immunohistochemical analysis. Two primary histologic sub-types account for 90% of cases: embryonal (70%) and alveolar (20%). Alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma is associated with cytoge-netic translocation [t(2:13)(q35:q14)] in 85% to 90% of cases and [t(1:13)(p36:q14)] in 10% of cases.256 These translocations affect biologic activity at the levels of protein function and gene expression, thereby affecting the control of cell growth, apopto-sis, differentiation, and motility and ultimately contributing to tumorigenic behavior.256 Whereas alveolar rhabdomyosarcomas often have translocations, most embryonal rhabdomyosarcomas have an allelic loss at chromosome 11p15.5 that is thought to inactivate a tumor suppressor gene.256,257 Both of these dis-tinct molecular subtypes of rhabdomyosarcoma are thought to have similar alterations in downstream targets such as the p53 and Rb pathways.256 Further insight into these genetic altera-tions may lead to a better understanding of the pathogenesis of rhabdomyosarcoma and provide novel targets for therapeutic approaches.Extent of disease is the strongest predictor of long-term outcome. Several staging systems for rhabdomyosarcoma are available. The Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study Group system is based on surgical-pathologic groupings. Multidis-ciplinary evaluation including pediatric oncologists, surgical subspecialists, and radiation oncologists is critical to plan the best treatment approach to maximize local tumor control while minimizing long-term treatment effects.Complete surgical resection is the treatment of choice for rhabdomyosarcoma when function and cosmesis can be preserved. Patients who are able to undergo a complete tumor resection with negative (group I) or microscopic surgical mar-gins (group II) are able to undergo less intensive systemic ther-apy and still have overall survival rates approaching 90%.258 At some anatomic sites, in particular the head and neck and genito-urinary system, surgery is often avoided because the associated morbidity would be substantial. Recent findings suggest that chemotherapy alone can adequately control many such tumors. In the second International Society of Paediatric Oncology study of rhabdomyosarcoma (MMT84), the choice of local treatment was based on response to initial chemotherapy such that radical surgery and radiation therapy were avoided in 66% of patients. Among the patients who subsequently developed local relapse, the 5-year overall survival rate after salvage therapy was 46%.258Unlike other soft tissue sarcomas, rhabdomyosarcomas have a high propensity for lymph node metastasis, with rates up to 20% to 30% for sites such as the extremities, parates-ticular nodes, and prostate. Lymph node sampling and, more recently, sentinel lymph node mapping have been used to evalu-ate regional node status in children with rhabdomyosarcoma.About 15% to 20% of patients with rhabdomyosarcoma have distant metastasis at presentation, most commonly (40–50% of cases) to the lungs, followed by bone marrow and bone. However, all patients with rhabdomyosarcoma are assumed to have micrometastatic disease at presentation. Therefore, multia-gent chemotherapy is recommended for all patients with rhab-domyosarcoma. Combination regimens including vincristine, dactinomycin, and cyclophosphamide continue to be the basis of effective curative therapy.254 Although various combinations including doxorubicin, ifosfamide, cisplatin, and etoposide have been shown to be active against rhabdomyosarcoma, they have not improved outcomes.258,259 Radiation therapy is given to most patients with microscopic residual disease (group II) after resection.The prognosis for children with rhabdomyosarcomas is related to tumor site, surgical-pathologic grouping, and tumor histology. The 5-year disease-free survival rate for all patients has been reported to be 65%. Five-year disease-free survival rates for patients in groups I, II, III, and IV have been reported to be 84%, 74%, 62%, and 23%, respectively (see Table 36-3).260Nonrhabdomyosarcoma Soft Tissue SarcomasApproximately 60% of soft tissue sarcomas in children are nonrhabdomyosarcomas. These include numerous histologic subtypes, which are generally categorized into four groups: (a) fibrosarcoma, (b) Kaposi’s sarcoma, (c) other “specified” soft tissue sarcomas (e.g., synovial, angiosarcoma, hemangiopericy-toma, leiomyosarcoma, liposarcoma, and extraosseous Ewing’s sarcoma), and (d) “unspecified” soft tissue sarcoma.261 The most common subtypes are synovial sarcoma, MPNST, and fibro-sarcoma. No single histology accounts for more than 15% of all cases.As with adult tumors, the evaluation of the soft tissue mass begins with a history and physical examination followed by imaging, which usually includes MRI. A CT scan of the chest is important for evaluation of metastatic disease. A core needle biopsy is generally required to establish a diagnosis. Surgery remains the primary treatment of nonrhabdomyosarcoma, and Brunicardi_Ch36_p1567-p1598.indd   158901/03/19   6:38 PM 1590SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIlocal control of large, high-grade tumors is improved with radia-tion therapy. The prognostic factors for children with nonrhab-domyosarcoma are similar to those for adults, and the role of chemotherapy for high-risk tumors is unclear, as for adults.RESEARCH PERSPECTIVESAs the molecular alterations associated with various sar-coma subtypes are elucidated, many new potential targets for therapeutic intervention will be identified. A wide variety of DNA alterations have been observed in sarcomas that result in mutated genes encoding proteins ranging from transcription fac-tors to tyrosine kinases to cytokines. The challenge in identify-ing therapeutic targets in sarcoma is to identify those that are specifically important to cellular function. The ideal therapeutic target has been described as a single molecule that is critical for pathogenesis, is expressed and active, is involved in a single pathway amenable to blockade (i.e., no alternative bypass path-ways exist), and is critical for sarcoma cell survival.25CONCLUSIONSSoft tissue sarcomas are a heterogeneous family of rare tumors, accounting for approximately 1% of malignancies in adults. The etiology in the vast majority of patients is sporadic, and the man-agement of such diverse tumors is complex. Diagnosis by light microscopy is inexact, but molecular diagnosis, although still in its infancy, holds great promise. The natural history of soft tissue sarcomas is well established. Approximately two-thirds of cases arise in the extremities, and the remaining one-third are distrib-uted between the retroperitoneum, trunk, abdomen, and head and neck. The management algorithm for soft tissue sarcomas is complex and depends on tumor stage, site, and histology. The most common site of metastasis is the lungs, and metastasis generally occurs within 3 years of diagnosis.Soft tissue sarcomas have unique molecular profiles that contribute to varying responses to systemic therapy. Doxorubicinbased regimens have been the mainstay of treatment for the past two decades; however, it is now clear that specific histologic subtypes have increased sensitivity to specific agents. For exam-ple, angiosarcomas are more sensitive to paclitaxel, while leio-myosarcoma is sensitive to gemcitabine and docetaxel. Progress in understanding of soft tissue sarcoma biology is crucial for the development of additional therapeutic targets. Drug engineering will enable molecular-based therapies to become increasingly incorporated into clinical trials and, with success, into standard treatment strategies for soft tissue sarco-mas in the near future.REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Demetri GD, Benjamin RS, Blanke CD, et al. NCCN Task Force report: management of patients with gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST)—update of the NCCN clinical practice guidelines. J Natl Compr Canc Netw. 2007;5(suppl 2):S1-S29; quiz S30.	2.	Coindre JM, Terrier P, Guillou L, et al. Predictive value of grade for metastasis development in the main histologic types of adult soft tissue sarcomas: a study of 1240 patients from the French Federation of Cancer Centers Sarcoma Group. Cancer. 2001;91:1914-1926.	3.	Gronchi A, Miceli R, Colombo C, et al. Primary extremity soft tissue sarcomas: outcome improvement over time at a single institution. Ann Oncol. 2011;22:1675-1681.	4.	Gronchi A, Pollock R. Surgery in retroperitoneal soft tissue sarcoma: a call for a consensus between Europe and North America. Ann Surg Oncol. 2011;18:2107-2110.	5.	American Cancer Society. Cancer Facts and Figures 2017. Available at: https://www.cancer.org/research/cancer-facts-statistics/all-cancer-facts-figures/cancer-facts-figures-2017 .html. Accessed August 3, 2018.	6.	Gatta G, Van Der Zwan JM, Casali PG, et al. Rare cancers are not so rare: the rare cancer burden in Europe. Eur J Cancer. 2011;47:2493-2511.	7.	Siegel R, Naishadham D, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2012.  CA Cancer J Clin. 2012;62:10-29.	8.	Gonin-Laurent N, Hadj-Hamou N, Vogt N, et al. RB1 and TP53 pathways in radiation-induced sarcomas. Oncogene. 2007;26:6106-6112.	9.	Brady MS, Gaynor JJ, Brennan MF. Radiation-associated sarcoma of bone and soft tissue. Arch Surg. 1992;127: 1379-1385.	10.	Vorburger SA, Xing Y, Hunt KK, et al. Angiosarcoma of the breast. Cancer. 2005;104:2682-2688.	11.	Riad S, Biau D, Holt GE, et al. The clinical and functional outcome for patients with radiation-induced soft tissue sarcoma. Cancer. 2012;118:2682-2692.	12.	Dineen SP, Roland CL, Feig R, et al. Radiation-associated undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma is associated with worse clinical outcomes than sporadic lesions. Ann Surg Oncol. 2015;22(12):3913-3920.	13.	Smith AH, Pearce NE, Fisher DO, et al. Soft tissue sarcoma and exposure to phenoxyherbicides and chlorophenols in  New Zealand. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1984;73:1111-1117.	14.	Huang HY, Li CF, Huang WW, et al. A modification of NIH consensus criteria to better distinguish the highly lethal subset of primary localized gastrointestinal stromal tumors: a subdi-vision of the original high-risk group on the basis of outcome. Surgery. 2007;141:748-756.	15.	Stewart FW. Lymphangiosarcoma in post-mastectomy lymphedema; a report of six cases in elephantiasis chirurgica. Cancer. 1948;1(1):64-81.	16.	Stewart NJ, Pritchard DJ, Nascimento AG, et al. Lymphan-giosarcoma following mastectomy. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 1995;320:135-141.	17.	Kelly-Hope LA, Thomas BC, Bockarie MJ, et al. Lymphatic filariasis in the Democratic Republic of Congo; micro-stratification overlap mapping (MOM) as a prerequisite for control and surveillance. Parasit Vectors. 2011;4:178.	18.	Pardini M, Bonzano L, Roccatagliata L, et al. Functional mag-netic resonance evidence of cortical alterations in a case of reversible congenital lymphedema of the lower limb: a pilot study. Lymphology. 2007;40:19-25.	19.	Schiffman S, Berger A. Stewart-Treves syndrome. J Am Coll Surg. 2007;204:328.	20.	Demicco EG, Maki RG, Lev DC, et al. New therapeutic targets in soft tissue sarcoma. Adv Anat Pathol. 2012;19: 170-180.	21.	Wunder JS, Nielsen TO, Maki RG, et al. Opportunities for improving the therapeutic ratio for patients with sarcoma.  Lancet Oncol. 2007;8:513-524.	22.	Guillou L, Benhattar J, Gengler C, et al. Translocation-positive low-grade fibromyxoid sarcoma: clinicopathologic and molec-ular analysis of a series expanding the morphologic spectrum and suggesting potential relationship to sclerosing epithelioid fibrosarcoma: a study from the French Sarcoma Group. Am J Surg Pathol. 2007;31:1387-1402.	23.	Levine EA. Prognostic factors in soft tissue sarcoma. Semin Surg Oncol. 1999;17:23-32.678Brunicardi_Ch36_p1567-p1598.indd   159001/03/19   6:38 PM 1591SOFT TISSUE SARCOMASCHAPTER 36	24.	Sorensen PH, Triche TJ. Gene fusions encoding chimaeric transcription factors in solid tumours. Semin Cancer Biol. 1996;7:3-14.	25.	Borden EC, Baker LH, Bell RS, et al. Soft tissue sarcomas of adults: state of the translational science. Clin Cancer Res. 2003;9:1941-1956.	26.	Oda Y, Tsuneyoshi M. Recent advances in the molecular pathology of soft tissue sarcoma: implications for diagnosis, patient prognosis, and molecular target therapy in the future. Cancer Sci. 2009;100:200-208.	27.	Karnes PS. Neurofibromatosis: a common neurocutaneous disorder. Mayo Clin Proc. 1998;73:1071-1076.	28.	Fong Y, Coit DG, Woodruff JM, et al. Lymph node metasta-sis from soft tissue sarcoma in adults. Analysis of data from a prospective database of 1772 sarcoma patients. Ann Surg. 1993;217:72-77.	29.	Benns M, Dalsing M, Sawchuck A, et al. Soft tissue sarcomas  may present with deep vein thrombosis. J Vasc Surg. 2006;43:788-793.	30.	Grimer R, Judson I, Peake D, et al. Guidelines for the manage-ment of soft tissue sarcomas. Sarcoma. 2010;2010:506182.	31.	Heslin MJ, Smith JK. Imaging of soft tissue sarcomas.  Surg Oncol Clin N Am. 1999;8:91-107.	32.	Pearlstone DB, Pisters PW, Bold RJ, et al. Patterns of recur-rence in extremity liposarcoma: implications for staging and follow-up. Cancer. 1999;85:85-92.	33.	Roberge D, Hickeson M, Charest M, et al. Initial McGill expe-rience with fluorodeoxyglucose PET/CT staging of soft-tissue sarcoma. Curr Oncol. 2010;17:18-22.	34.	Tateishi U, Yamaguchi U, Seki K, et al. Bone and soft-tissue sarcoma: preoperative staging with fluorine 18 fluorode-oxyglucose PET/CT and conventional imaging. Radiology. 2007;245:839-847.	35.	Iagaru A, Quon A, McDougall IR, et al. F-18 FDG PET/CT evaluation of osseous and soft tissue sarcomas. Clin Nucl Med. 2006;31:754-760.	36.	Piperkova E, Mikhaeil M, Mousavi A, et al. Impact of PET and CT in PET/CT studies for staging and evaluating treatment response in bone and soft tissue sarcomas. Clin Nucl Med. 2009;34:146-150.	37.	Schuetze SM. Utility of positron emission tomography in  sarcomas. Curr Opin Oncol. 2006;18:369-373.	38.	Schuetze SM, Rubin BP, Vernon C, et al. Use of positron emission tomography in localized extremity soft tissue sar-coma treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Cancer. 2004;103:339-348.	39.	Folpe AL, Lyles RH, Sprouse JT, et al. (F-18) fluorodeoxy-glucose positron emission tomography as a predictor of patho-logic grade and other prognostic variables in bone and soft tissue sarcoma. Clin Cancer Res. 2000;6:1279-1287.	40.	Eary JF, O’Sullivan F, Powitan Y, et al. Sarcoma tumor FDG uptake measured by PET and patient outcome: a retrospective analysis. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2002;29:1149-1154.	41.	Benz MR, Czernin J, Allen-Auerbach MS, et al. FDG-PET/CT imaging predicts histopathologic treatment responses after the initial cycle of neoadjuvant chemotherapy in high-grade  soft-tissue sarcomas. Clin Cancer Res. 2009;15:2856-2863.	42.	Kilpatrick SE, Geisinger KR. Soft tissue sarcomas: the use-fulness and limitations of fine-needle aspiration biopsy.  Am J Clin Pathol. 1998;110:50-68.	43.	Yang YJ, Damron TA. Comparison of needle core biopsy and fine-needle aspiration for diagnostic accuracy in musculoskel-etal lesions. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2004;128:759-764.	44.	Clark MA, Fisher C, Judson I, et al. Soft-tissue sarcomas in adults. N Engl J Med. 2005;353:701-711.	45.	Ayala AG, Ro JY, Fanning CV, et al. Core needle biopsy and fine-needle aspiration in the diagnosis of bone and soft-tissue lesions. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 1995;9:633-651.	46.	Dupuy DE, Rosenberg AE, Punyaratabandhu T, et al.  Accuracy of CT-guided needle biopsy of musculoskeletal  neoplasms. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 1998;171:759-762.	47.	Strauss DC, Qureshi YA, Hayes AJ, et al. The role of core nee-dle biopsy in the diagnosis of suspected soft tissue tumours.  J Surg Oncol. 2010;102:523-529.	48.	Skrzynski MC, Biermann JS, Montag A, et al. Diagnostic accuracy and charge-savings of outpatient core needle biopsy compared with open biopsy of musculoskeletal tumors.  J Bone Joint Surg. 1996;78:644-649.	49.	Huvos AG. The importance of the open surgical biopsy in  the diagnosis and treatment of bone and soft-tissue tumors. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 1995;9:541-544.	50.	Potter DA, Glenn J, Kinsella T, et al. Patterns of recurrence in patients with high-grade soft-tissue sarcomas. J Clin Oncol. 1985;3:353-366.	51.	Noria S, Davis A, Kandel R, et al. Residual disease following unplanned excision of a soft-tissue sarcoma of an extremity.  J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1996;78:650-655.	52.	Presant CA, Russell WO, Alexander RW, et al. Soft-tissue and bone sarcoma histopathology peer review: the frequency of disagreement in diagnosis and the need for second pathology opinions. The Southeastern Cancer Study Group experience. J Clin Oncol. 1986;4:1658-1661.	53.	Pfeifer J, Hill D, O’Sullivan M, et al. Diagnostic gold standard for soft tissue tumours: morphology or molecular genetics? Histopathology. 2002;37:485-500.	54.	Fletcher CD, Gustafson P, Rydholm A, et al. Clinicopatho-logic re-evaluation of 100 malignant fibrous histiocytomas: prognostic relevance of subclassification. J Clin Oncol. 2001;19:3045-3050.	55.	Tschoep K, Kohlmann A, Schlemmer M, et al. Gene expression profiling in sarcomas. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2007;63:111-124.	56.	Coindre JM, Hostein I, Maire G, et al. Inflammatory malig-nant fibrous histiocytomas and dedifferentiated liposarcomas: histological review, genomic profile, and MDM2 and CDK4 status favour a single entity. J Pathol. 2004;203:822-830.	57.	Coindre JM. Grading of soft tissue sarcomas: review and update. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2006;130:1448-1453.	58.	DeMatteo RP, Lewis JJ, Leung D, et al. Two hundred gastro-intestinal stromal tumors: recurrence patterns and prognostic factors for survival. Ann Surg. 2000;231:51-58.	59.	Coindre JM, Terrier P, Bui NB, et al. Prognostic factors in adult patients with locally controlled soft tissue sarcoma. A study of 546 patients from the French Federation of Cancer Centers Sarcoma Group. J Clin Oncol. 1996;14:869-877.	60.	Guillou L, Coindre JM, Bonichon F, et al. Comparative study of the National Cancer Institute and French Federation of Cancer Centers Sarcoma Group grading systems in a population of 410 adult patients with soft tissue sarcoma.  J Clin Oncol. 1997;15:350-362.	61.	Rubin BP, Fletcher CD, Inwards C, et al. Protocol for the examination of specimens from patients with soft tissue tumors of intermediate malignant potential, malignant soft  tissue tumors, and benign/locally aggressive and malignant bone tumors. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2006;130:1616-1629.	62.	Amin MB, Edge SB, Greene FL, et al. AJCC Staging Manual. 8th ed. New York: Springer; 2017.	63.	Lahat G, Tuvin D, Wei C, et al. New perspectives for staging  and prognosis in soft tissue sarcoma. Ann Surg Oncol. 2008;15:2739-2748.	64.	Atalay C, Altinok M, Seref B. The impact of lymph  node metastases on survival in extremity soft tissue sarcomas. World J Surg. 2007;31:1433-1437.	65.	Riad S, Griffin AM, Liberman B, et al. Lymph node metastasis in soft tissue sarcoma in an extremity. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2004;426:129-134.Brunicardi_Ch36_p1567-p1598.indd   159101/03/19   6:38 PM 1592SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	66.	Behranwala KA, A’Hern R, Omar AM, et al. Prognosis of lymph node metastasis in soft tissue sarcoma. Ann Surg Oncol. 2004;11:714-719.	67.	Grobmyer SR, Brennan MF. Predictive variables detailing the recurrence rate of soft tissue sarcomas. Curr Opin Oncol. 2003;15:319-326.	68.	Gronchi A, Lo Vullo S, Colombo C, et al. Extremity soft tissue sarcoma in a series of patients treated at a single  institution: local control directly impacts survival. Ann Surg. 2010;251:506.	69.	Heslin MJ, Cordon-Cardo C, Lewis JJ, et al. Ki-67 detected by MIB-1 predicts distant metastasis and tumor mortality in primary, high grade extremity soft tissue sarcoma. Cancer. 1998;83:490-497.	70.	Ch’ng E, Tomita Y, Zhang B, et al. Prognostic signifi-cance of CD100 expression in soft tissue sarcoma. Cancer. 2007;110:164-172.	71.	Kattan MW, Leung DH, Brennan MF. Postoperative nomo-gram for 12-year sarcoma-specific death. J Clin Oncol. 2002;20:791-796.	72.	Eilber FC, Kattan MW. Sarcoma nomogram: validation and a model to evaluate impact of therapy. J Am Coll Surg. 2007;205:S90-S95.	73.	Dalal KM, Kattan MW, Antonescu CR, et al. Subtype spe-cific prognostic nomogram for patients with primary liposar-coma of the retroperitoneum, extremity, or trunk. Ann Surg. 2006;244:381-391.	74.	Gronchi A, Miceli R, Shurell E, et al. Outcome prediction in primary resected retroperitoneal soft tissue sarcoma: histology-specific overall survival and disease-free survival nomograms built on major sarcoma center datasets. J Clin Oncol.  2013;31:1649-1655.	75.	Clasby R, Tilling K, Smith M, et al. Variable management of soft tissue sarcoma: regional audit with implications for spe-cialist care. Br J Surg. 1997;84:1692-1696.	76.	Gutierrez JC, Perez EA, Moffat FL, et al. Should soft tissue sarcomas be treated at high-volume centers? An analysis of 4205 patients. Ann Surg. 2007;245:952-958.	77.	National Institutes of Health. National Institutes of Health consensus development panel on limb-sparing treatment of adult soft tissue sarcoma and osteosarcomas, Vol. 3, Cancer Treatment Symposium, 1985. Available at: http://consensus.nih.gov/1984/1984SarcomasOsteosarcomas046html.	78.	McKee MD, Liu DF, Brooks JJ, et al. The prognostic significance of margin width for extremity and trunk sarcoma. J Surg Oncol. 2004;85:68-76.	79.	Herbert SH, Corn BW, Solin LJ, et al. Limb-preserving treat-ment for soft tissue sarcomas of the extremities. The signifi-cance of surgical margins. Cancer. 1993;72:1230-1238.	80.	Pisters P, Leung D, Woodruff J, et al. Analysis of prognostic factors in 1,041 patients with localized soft tissue sarcomas of the extremities. J Clin Oncol. 1996;14:1679-1689.	81.	Alektiar K, Velasco J, Zelefsky M, et al. Adjuvant radiotherapy  for margin-positive high-grade soft tissue sarcoma of the extremity. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2000;48:1051-1058.	82.	Kim BK, Chen YLE, Kirsch DG, et al. An effective preoperative  three-dimensional radiotherapy target volume for extremity soft tissue sarcoma and the effect of margin width on local control. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2010;77:843-850.	83.	McKay A, Motamedi M, Temple W, et al. Vascular recon-struction with the superficial femoral vein following major  oncologic resection. J Surg Oncol. 2007;96:151-159.	84.	Schwarzbach MH, Hormann Y, Hinz U, et al. Results of  limb-sparing surgery with vascular replacement for soft tissue sarcoma in the lower extremity. J Vasc Surg. 2005;42:88-97.	85.	Karakousis CP, Karmpaliotis C, Driscoll DL. Major vessel resec-tion during limb-preserving surgery for soft tissue sarcomas.  World J Surg. 1996;20:345-349; discussion 350.	86.	Ghert MA, Davis AM, Griffin AM, et al. The surgical and functional outcome of limb-salvage surgery with vascular reconstruction for soft tissue sarcoma of the extremity.  Ann Surg Oncol. 2005;12:1102-1110.	87.	Brooks A, Gold J, Graham D, et al. Resection of the sciatic, peroneal, or tibial nerves: assessment of functional status.  Ann Surg Oncol. 2002;9:41-47.	88.	Ferguson PC, Griffin AM, O’Sullivan B, et al. Bone invasion in extremity soft-tissue sarcoma: impact on disease outcomes. Cancer. 2006;106:2692-2700.	89.	Lin PP, Pino ED, Normand AN, et al. Periosteal margin in soft-tissue sarcoma. Cancer. 2007;109:598-602.	90.	Owens JC, Shiu MH, Smith R, et al. Soft tissue sarcomas of the hand and foot. Cancer. 2006;55:2010-2018.	91.	Schoenfeld GS, Morris CG, Scarborough MT, et al. Adjuvant radiotherapy in the management of soft tissue sarcoma involving the distal extremities. Am J Clin Oncol. 2006;29: 62-65.	92.	Ferguson PC. Surgical considerations for management of distal extremity soft tissue sarcomas. Curr Opin Oncol. 2005;17:366-369.	93.	Davidge K, Bell R, Ferguson P, et al. Patient expectations for surgical outcome in extremity soft tissue sarcoma. J Surg Oncol. 2009;100:375-381.	94.	Rosenberg SA, Tepper J, Glatstein E, et al. The treatment of soft-tissue sarcomas of the extremities: prospective randomized evaluations of (1) limb-sparing surgery plus radiation therapy compared with amputation and (2) the role of adjuvant chemotherapy. Ann Surg. 1982;196(3):305-315.	95.	Lindberg RD, Martin RG, Romsdahl MM, et al. Conservative  surgery and postoperative radiotherapy in 300 adults with  soft-tissue sarcomas. Cancer. 1981;47:2391-2397.	96.	Suit HD, Proppe KH, Mankin HJ, et al. Preoperative radiation therapy for sarcoma of soft tissue. Cancer. 1981;47:2269-2274.	97.	Leibel SA, Tranbaugh RF, Wara WM, et al. Soft tissue sarco-mas of the extremities: survival and patterns of failure with conservative surgery and postoperative irradiation compared to surgery alone. Cancer. 1982;50:1076-1083.	98.	McBride CM. Sarcomas of the limbs. Results of adjuvant  chemotherapy using isolation perfusion. Arch Surg. 1974;109:304-308.	99.	Hoekstra HJ, Schraffordt Koops H, Molenaar WM, et al. Results of isolated regional perfusion in the treatment of malignant soft tissue tumors of the extremities. Cancer. 1987;60:1703-1707.	100.	Eggermont AM, Schraffordt Koops H, Klausner JM, et al. Isolated limb perfusion with tumor necrosis factor and melphalan for limb salvage in 186 patients with locally advanced soft tissue extremity sarcomas. The cumulative multicenter European experience. Ann Surg. 1996;224:756-764; discussion  764-765.	101.	Fraker D, Alexander HR, Ross M. A phase II trial of isolated perfusion with high dose tumor necrosis factor and melphalan for unresectable extremity sarcomas. Soc Surg Oncol Proc. Abstract 53, 1999.	102.	Mullinax JE, Kroon HM, Thompson JF, et al. Isolated limb infusion as a limb salvage strategy for locally advanced extremity sarcoma. J Am Coll Surg. 2017;224(4):635-642.	103.	Lienard D, Ewalenko P, Delmotte JJ, et al. High-dose recombinant tumor necrosis factor alpha in combination with interferon gamma and melphalan in isolation perfusion of the limbs for melanoma and sarcoma. J Clin Oncol. 1992;10: 52-60.	104.	Grunhagen DJ, de Wilt JH, Graveland WJ, et al. Outcome and prognostic factor analysis of 217 consecutive isolated limb perfusions with tumor necrosis factor-alpha and melphalan for limb-threatening soft tissue sarcoma. Cancer. 2006;106: 1776-1784.Brunicardi_Ch36_p1567-p1598.indd   159201/03/19   6:38 PM 1593SOFT TISSUE SARCOMASCHAPTER 36	105.	Yang JC, Chang AE, Baker AR, et al. Randomized pro-spective study of the benefit of adjuvant radiation therapy in the treatment of soft tissue sarcomas of the extremity.  J Clin Oncol. 1998;16(1):197-203.	106.	Pisters PW, Harrison LB, Leung DH, et al. Long-term results of a prospective randomized trial of adjuvant brachytherapy in soft tissue sarcoma. J Clin Oncol. 1996;14:859-868.	107.	Suit HD, Spiro I. Role of radiation in the management of adult patients with sarcoma of soft tissue. Semin Surg Oncol. 1994;10:347-356.	108.	Barkley HT Jr, Martin RG, Romsdahl MM, et al. Treatment of soft tissue sarcomas by preoperative irradiation and conservative surgical resection. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1988;14:693-699.	109.	Wilson AN, Davis A, Bell RS, et al. Local control of soft tissue sarcoma of the extremity: the experience of a multidisciplinary sarcoma group with definitive surgery and radiotherapy.  Eur J Cancer. 1994;30A:746-751.	110.	Pisters PW, Harrison LB, Woodruff JM, et al. A prospective randomized trial of adjuvant brachytherapy in the management of low-grade soft tissue sarcomas of the extremity and superficial trunk. J Clin Oncol. 1994;12:1150-1155.	111.	Geer RJ, Woodruff J, Casper ES, et al. Management of small soft-tissue sarcoma of the extremity in adults. Arch Surg. 1992;127:1285-1289.	112.	Karakousis CP, Emrich LJ, Rao U, et al. Limb salvage in soft tissue sarcomas with selective combination of modalities.  Eur J Surg Oncol. 1991;17:71-80.	113.	Nielsen OS, Cummings B, O’Sullivan B, et al. Preoperative  and postoperative irradiation of soft tissue sarcomas: effect of radiation field size. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1991;21:1595-1599.	114.	Tseng JF, Ballo MT, Langstein HN, et al. The effect of preoperative radiotherapy and reconstructive surgery on wound complications after resection of extremity soft-tissue sarcomas. Ann Surg Oncol. 2006;13:1209-1215.	115.	O’Sullivan B, Davis AM, Turcotte R, et al. Preoperative versus postoperative radiotherapy in soft-tissue sarcoma of the limbs: a randomised trial. Lancet. 2002;359(9325):2235-2241.	116.	Davis AM, O’Sullivan B, Turcotte R, et al. Late radiation morbidity following randomization to preoperative versus postoperative radiotherapy in extremity soft tissue sarcoma. Radiother Oncol. 2005;75:48-53.	117.	Janjan NA, Yasko AW, Reece GP, et al. Comparison of charges related to radiotherapy for soft-tissue sarcomas treated by preoperative external-beam irradiation versus interstitial implantation. Ann Surg Oncol. 1994;1:415-422.	118.	Naghavi AO, Gonzalez RJ, Scott JG, et al. Staged reconstruction brachytherapy has lower overall cost in recurrent soft-tissue sarcoma. J Contemp Brachytherapy. 2017;9(1):20-29.	119.	Naghavi AO, Gonzalez RJ, Scott JG, et al. Implications of staged reconstruction and adjuvant brachytherapy in the treatment of recurrent soft tissue sarcoma. Brachytherapy. 2016;15(4):495-503.	120.	Griffin AM, Euler CI, Sharpe MB, et al. Radiation planning comparison for superficial tissue avoidance in radiotherapy for soft tissue sarcoma of the lower extremity. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2007;67:847-856.	121.	Hong L, Alektiar KM, Hunt M, et al. Intensity-modulated radiotherapy for soft tissue sarcoma of the thigh. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2004;59:752-759.	122.	Alektiar KM, Brennan MF, Singer S. Influence of site on the therapeutic ratio of adjuvant radiotherapy in soft-tissue sarcoma of the extremity. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2005;63:202-208.	123.	Cannon CP, Ballo MT, Zagars GK, et al. Complications of combined modality treatment of primary lower extremity  soft-tissue sarcomas. Cancer. 2006;107:2455-2461.	124.	Stinson SF, DeLaney TF, Greenberg J, et al. Acute and long-term effects on limb function of combined modality limb sparing therapy for extremity soft tissue sarcoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1991;21:1493-1499.	125.	Kepka L, DeLaney TF, Suit HD, Goldberg SI. Results of radia-tion therapy for unresected soft-tissue sarcomas. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2005;63(3):852-859.	126.	Ferrari A, Gronchi A, Casanova M, et al. Synovial sarcoma: a retrospective analysis of 271 patients of all ages treated at a single institution. Cancer. 2004;101:627-634.	127.	O’Bryan RM, Baker LH, Gottlieb JE, et al. Dose response evaluation of adriamycin in human neoplasia. Cancer. 1977;39:1940-1948.	128.	Patel SR, Vadhan-Raj S, Papadopolous N, et al. High-dose ifosfamide in bone and soft tissue sarcomas: results of phase II  and pilot studies—dose-response and schedule dependence.  J Clin Oncol. 1997;15:2378-2384.	129.	Movva S, Verschraegen C. Systemic management strategies for metastatic soft tissue sarcoma. Drugs. 2011;71:2115-2129.	130.	Patel SR, Gandhi V, Jenkins J, et al. Phase II clinical investi-gation of gemcitabine in advanced soft tissue sarcomas and window evaluation of dose rate on gemcitabine triphosphate accumulation. J Clin Oncol. 2001;19:3483-3489.	131.	Hensley ML, Maki R, Venkatraman E, et al. Gemcitabine and docetaxel in patients with unresectable leiomyosarcoma: results of a phase II trial. J Clin Oncol. 2002;20:2824-2831.	132.	Dileo P, Morgan JA, Zahrieh D, et al. Gemcitabine and vinorelbine combination chemotherapy for patients with advanced soft tissue sarcomas: results of a phase II trial. Cancer. 2007;109:1863-1869.	133.	Fata F, O’Reilly E, Ilson D, et al. Paclitaxel in the treatment of patients with angiosarcoma of the scalp or face. Cancer. 1999;86:2034-2037.	134.	Skubitz KM, Haddad PA. Paclitaxel and pegylated-liposo-mal doxorubicin are both active in angiosarcoma. Cancer. 2005;104:361-366.	135.	Chawla SP, Papai Z, Mukhametshina G, Sankhala K, et al. first-line aldoxorubicin vs doxorubicin in metastatic or locally advanced unresectable soft-tissue sarcoma: a phase 2b ran-domized clinical trial. JAMA Oncol. 2015;1(9):1272-1280.	136.	Demetri GD, van Oosterom AT, Garrett CR, et al. Efficacy and safety of sunitinib in patients with advanced gastrointestinal stromal tumour after failure of imatinib: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2006;368:1329-1338.	137.	Jung S, Kasper B. Palifosfamide, a bifunctional alkylator for the treatment of sarcomas. Invest Drugs J. 2010;13(1):38-48.	138.	Ryan CW, Merimsky O, Agulnik M, Blay JY, et al. PICASSO III:  a phase III, placebo-controlled study of doxorubicin with or without palifosfamide in patients with metastatic soft tissue sarcoma. J Clin Oncol. 2016;34(32):3898-3905.	139.	Agulnik M, Okuno S, Von Mehren M, et al. An open-label multicenter phase II study of bevacizumab for the treatment of angiosarcoma. J Clin Oncol. 2009;27:10522.	140.	Sleijfer S, Ray-Coquard I, Papai Z, et al. Pazopanib, a multikinase angiogenesis inhibitor, in patients with relapsed or refractory advanced soft tissue sarcoma: a phase II study from the European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer-Soft Tissue and Bone Sarcoma Group (EORTC study 62043). J Clin Oncol. 2009;27:3126-3132.	141.	Ganjoo KN. New developments in targeted therapy for soft tissue sarcoma. Curr Oncol Rep. 2010;12:261-265.	142.	Tap WD, Jones RL, Van Tine BA, et al. Olaratumab and doxorubicin versus doxorubicin alone for treatment of soft-tissue sarcoma: an open-label phase 1b and randomised phase 2 trial.  Lancet. 2016;388(10043):488-497.	143.	Adjuvant chemotherapy for localised resectable soft-tissue sarcoma of adults: meta-analysis of individual data. Sarcoma Meta-Analysis Collaboration. Lancet. 1997;350(9092):1647-1654.Brunicardi_Ch36_p1567-p1598.indd   159301/03/19   6:38 PM 1594SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	144.	Frustaci S, Gherlinzoni F, De Paoli A, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy for adult soft tissue sarcomas of the extremities and girdles: results of the Italian randomized cooperative trial. J Clin Oncol. 2001;19:1238-1247.	145.	Frustaci S, De Paoli A, Bidoli E, et al. Ifosfamide in the adjuvant therapy of soft tissue sarcomas. Oncology. 2003; 65(suppl 2):80-84.	146.	Cormier JN, Huang X, Xing Y, et al. Cohort analysis of patients with localized, high-risk, extremity soft tissue sarcoma treated at two cancer centers: chemotherapy-associated outcomes.  J Clin Oncol. 2004;22:4567-4574.	147.	Grobmyer SR, Maki RG, Demetri GD, et al. Neo-adjuvant chemotherapy for primary high-grade extremity soft tissue sarcoma. Ann Oncol. 2004;15:1667-1672.	148.	Woll P, Van Glabbeke M, Hohenberger P, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy (CT) with doxorubicin and ifosfamide in resected soft tissue sarcoma (STS): interim analysis of a randomised phase III trial. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:10008.	149.	O’Connor J, Chacón M, Petracci F, et al. Adjuvant chemother-apy in soft tissue sarcoma (STS): a meta-analysis of published data. ASCO Meeting Abstracts, 2008, Abstract 10526.	150.	Pervaiz N, Colterjohn N, Farrokhyar F, et al. A systematic meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials of adjuvant chemotherapy for localized resectable soft-tissue sarcoma.  Cancer. 2008;113:573-581.	151.	Eilber FC, Tap WD, Nelson SD, et al. Advances in chemo-therapy for patients with extremity soft tissue sarcoma. Orthop Clin North Am. 2006;37:15-22.	152.	Gronchi A, Frustaci S, Mercuri M, et al. Short, full-dose adju-vant chemotherapy in high-risk adult soft tissue sarcomas: a randomized clinical trial from the Italian Sarcoma Group and the Spanish Sarcoma Group. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30:850-856.	153.	Stacchiotti S, Collini P, Messina A, et al. High-grade soft-tissue sarcomas: tumor response assessment—pilot study to assess the correlation between radiologic and pathologic response by using RECIST and Choi Criteria. Radiology. 2009;251:447-456.	154.	Stacchiotti S, Verderio P, Messina A, et al. Tumor response assessment by modified Choi criteria in localized high-risk soft tissue sarcoma treated with chemotherapy. Cancer. 2012;118:5857.	155.	Eilber FC, Rosen G, Eckardt J, et al. Treatment-induced patho-logic necrosis: a predictor of local recurrence and survival in patients receiving neoadjuvant therapy for high-grade extremity  soft tissue sarcomas. J Clin Oncol. 2001;19:3203-3209.	156.	Eilber FC, Brennan MF, Riedel E, et al. Prognostic factors for survival in patients with locally recurrent extremity soft tissue sarcomas. Ann Surg Oncol. 2005;12:228-236.	157.	Singer S, Antman K, Corson JM, et al. Long-term salvage-ability for patients with locally recurrent soft-tissue sarcomas. Arch Surg. 1992;127:548-553; discussion 553-554.	158.	van Geel AN, Pastorino U, Jauch KW, et al. Surgical treatment of lung metastases: the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer-Soft Tissue and Bone Sarcoma Group study of 255 patients. Cancer. 1996;77:675-682.	159.	Porter GA, Cantor SB, Walsh GL, et al. Cost-effectiveness of pulmonary resection and systemic chemotherapy in the management of metastatic soft tissue sarcoma: a combined analysis from the University of Texas M. D. Anderson  and Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Centers. J Thorac  Cardiovasc Surg. 2004;127:1366-1372.	160.	Dossett LA, Toloza EM, Fontaine J, et al. Outcomes and clinical predictors of improved survival in a patients undergoing pulmonary metastasectomy for sarcoma. J Surg Oncol. 2015;112(1):103-106.	161.	Whooley BP, Mooney MM, Gibbs JF, et al. Effective  follow-up strategies in soft tissue sarcoma. Semin Surg Oncol. 1999;17:83-87.	162.	Midis GP, Pollock RE, Chen NP, et al. Locally recurrent soft tissue sarcoma of the extremities. Surgery. 1998;123:666-671.	163.	Karakousis CP, Proimakis C, Rao U, et al. Local recurrence and survival in soft-tissue sarcomas. Ann Surg Oncol. 1996; 3:255-260.	164.	Nori D, Schupak K, Shiu MH, et al. Role of brachytherapy in recurrent extremity sarcoma in patients treated with prior surgery and irradiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1991;20:1229-1233.	165.	Suri RM, Deschamps C, Cassivi SD, et al. Pulmonary resection for metastatic malignant fibrous histiocytoma: an analysis of prognostic factors. Ann Thorac Surg. 2005;80:1847-1852.	166.	Van Glabbeke M, van Oosterom AT, Oosterhuis JW, et al. Prognostic factors for the outcome of chemotherapy in advanced soft tissue sarcoma: an analysis of 2,185 patients treated with anthracycline-containing first-line regimens—a European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Soft Tissue and Bone Sarcoma Group Study. J Clin Oncol. 1999;17:150-157.	167.	Zacherl M, Bernhardt GA, Zacherl J, et al. Surgery for liver metastases originating from sarcoma-case series. Langenbecks Arch Surg. 2011;396:1083-1091.	168.	Jones RL, McCall J, Adam A, et al. Radiofrequency ablation is a feasible therapeutic option in the multi modality management of sarcoma. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2010;36:477-482.	169.	Maluccio MA, Covey AM, Schubert J, et al. Treatment of metastatic sarcoma to the liver with bland embolization. Cancer. 2006;107:1617-1623.	170.	Kepka L, Suit HD, Goldberg SI, et al. Results of radiation ther-apy performed after unplanned surgery (without re-excision) for soft tissue sarcomas. J Surg Oncol. 2005;92:39-45.	171.	Spillane AJ, Fisher C, Thomas JM. Myxoid liposarcoma—the frequency and the natural history of nonpulmonary soft tissue metastases. Ann Surg Oncol. 1999;6:389-394.	172.	Estourgie SH, Nielsen GP, Ott MJ. Metastatic patterns of extremity myxoid liposarcoma and their outcome. J Surg Oncol. 2002;80:89-93.	173.	Lewis JJ, Leung D, Woodruff JM, et al. Retroperitoneal  soft-tissue sarcoma: analysis of 500 patients treated and  followed at a single institution. Ann Surg. 1998;228:355-365.	174.	Bonvalot S, Raut CP, Pollock RE, et al. Technical consid-erations in surgery for retroperitoneal sarcomas: position paper from E-Surge, a Master Class in Sarcoma Surgery, and EORTC–STBSG. Ann Surg Oncol. 2012;19(9):2981-2991.	175.	Bonvalot S, Miceli R, Berselli M, et al. Aggressive surgery in retroperitoneal soft tissue sarcoma carried out at high-volume centers is safe and is associated with improved local control. Ann Surg Oncol. 2010;17:1507-1514.	176.	Yeh JJ, Singer S, Brennan MF, et al. Effectiveness of palliative procedures for intra-abdominal sarcomas. Ann Surg Oncol. 2005;12:1084-1089.	177.	Windham TC, Pisters PW. Retroperitoneal sarcomas. Cancer Control. 2005;12:36-43.	178.	Tierney JF, Mosseri V, Stewart LA, et al. Adjuvant chemo-therapy for soft-tissue sarcoma: review and meta-analysis of the published results of randomised clinical trials. Br J Cancer. 1995;72:469-475.	179.	Glenn J, Sindelar WF, Kinsella T, et al. Results of multimodality  therapy of resectable soft-tissue sarcomas of the retroperito-neum. Surgery. 1985;97:316-325.	180.	Singer S, Corson JM, Demetri GD, et al. Prognostic factors predictive of survival for truncal and retroperitoneal soft-tissue sarcoma. Ann Surg. 1995;221:185-195.	181.	Pawlik TM, Ahuja N, Herman JM. The role of radiation in retroperitoneal sarcomas: a surgical perspective. Curr Opin Oncol. 2007;19:359-366.	182.	Pawlik TM, Pisters PW, Mikula L, et al. Long-term results of two prospective trials of preoperative external beam radiotherapy  for localized intermediateor high-grade retroperitoneal soft tissue sarcoma. Ann Surg Oncol. 2006;13:508-517.Brunicardi_Ch36_p1567-p1598.indd   159401/03/19   6:38 PM 1595SOFT TISSUE SARCOMASCHAPTER 36	183.	Tzeng CW, Fiveash JB, Heslin MJ. Radiation therapy for retroperitoneal sarcoma. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2006;6:1251-1260.	184.	Ballo MT, Zagars GK, Pollock RE, et al. Retroperitoneal soft tissue sarcoma: an analysis of radiation and surgical treatment. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2007;67:158-163.	185.	Conlon KC, Casper ES, Brennan MF. Primary gastrointestinal sarcomas: analysis of prognostic variables. Ann Surg Oncol. 1995;2:26-31.	186.	Chou FF, Eng HL, Sheen-Chen SM. Smooth muscle tumors of the gastrointestinal tract: analysis of prognostic factors.  Surgery. 1996;119:171-177.	187.	Horowitz J, Spellman JE Jr, Driscoll DL, et al. An institutional review of sarcomas of the large and small intestine. J Am Coll Surg. 1995;180:465-471.	188.	Meijer S, Peretz T, Gaynor JJ, et al. Primary colorectal  sarcoma. A retrospective review and prognostic factor study of 50 consecutive patients. Arch Surg. 1990;125:1163-1168.	189.	Kirova YM, Vilcoq JR, Asselain B, et al. Radiation-induced sarcomas after radiotherapy for breast carcinoma: a large-scale single-institution review. Cancer. 2005;104:856-863.	190.	Chen WH, Cheng SP, Tzen CY, et al. Surgical treatment of phyllodes tumors of the breast: retrospective review of  172 cases. J Surg Oncol. 2005;91:185-194.	191.	Denschlag D, Masoud I, Stanimir G, et al. Prognostic  factors and outcome in women with uterine sarcoma.  Eur J Surg Oncol. 2007;33:91-95.	192.	Reed N, Mangioni C, Malmström H, et al. Phase III randomised study to evaluate the role of adjuvant pelvic radiotherapy in the treatment of uterine sarcomas stages I and II:  a European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer Gynaecological Cancer Group Study (protocol 55874). Eur J Cancer. 2008;44:808-818.	193.	Leunen M, Breugelmans M, De Sutter P, et al. Low-grade endometrial stromal sarcoma treated with the aromatase  inhibitor letrozole. Gynecol Oncol. 2004;95:769-771.	194.	Scribner DR Jr, Walker JL. Low-grade endometrial  stromal sarcoma preoperative treatment with Depo-Lupron and Megace. Gynecol Oncol. 1998;71:458-460.	195.	Grimer R, Judson I, Peake D, et al. Guidelines for the manage-ment of soft tissue sarcomas. Sarcoma. 2010;2010:506182.	196.	Kindblom LG, Remotti HE, Aldenborg F, et al. Gastrointesti-nal pacemaker cell tumor (GIPACT): gastrointestinal stromal tumors show phenotypic characteristics of the interstitial cells of Cajal. Am J Pathol. 1998;152:1259-1269.	197.	Hirota S, Isozaki K, Moriyama Y, et al. Gain-of-function mutations of c-kit in human gastrointestinal stromal tumors.  Science. 1998;279:577-580.	198.	Nilsson B, Bumming P, Meis-Kindblom JM, et al. Gastro-intestinal stromal tumors: the incidence, prevalence, clinical  course, and prognostication in the preimatinib mesylate era—a population-based study in western Sweden. Cancer. 2005;103:821-829.	199.	Rubio J, Marcos-Gragera R, Ortiz MR, et al. Population-based incidence and survival of gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GIST) in Girona, Spain. Eur J Cancer. 2007;43:144-148.	198.	Tran T, Davila JA, El-Serag HB. The epidemiology of malig-nant gastrointestinal stromal tumors: an analysis of 1,458 cases from 1992 to 2000. Am J Gastroenterol. 2005;100:162-168.	200.	Heinrich MC, Corless CL, Demetri GD, et al. Kinase muta-tions and imatinib response in patients with metastatic gastro-intestinal stromal tumor. J Clin Oncol. 2003;21:4342-4349.	201.	Debiec-Rychter M, Dumez H, Judson I, et al. Use of c-KIT/PDGFRAmutational analysis to predict the clinical response to imatinib in patients with advanced gastrointestinal stro-mal tumours entered on phase I and II studies of the EORTC Soft Tissue and Bone Sarcoma Group. Eur J Cancer. 2004;40:689-695.	202.	Heinrich MC, Owzar K, Corless CL, et al. Correlation of kinase genotype and clinical outcome in the North American Intergroup phase III trial of imatinib mesylate for treatment of advanced gastrointestinal stromal tumor: CALGB 150105 Study by Cancer and Leukemia Group B and Southwest Oncology Group. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26: 5360-5367.	203.	Miettinen M, Lasota J. Gastrointestinal stromal tumors: review on morphology, molecular pathology, prognosis, and differen-tial diagnosis. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2006;130:1466-1478.	204.	Miettinen M, Lasota J. Gastrointestinal stromal tumors: pathology and prognosis at different sites. Semin Diagn Pathol. 2006;2:70-83.	205.	Choi H, Charnsangavej C, Faria SC, et al. Correlation of computed tomography and positron emission tomography in patients with metastatic gastrointestinal stromal tumor treated at a single institution with imatinib mesylate: proposal of new computed tomography response criteria. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:1753-1759.	206.	Ng EH, Pollock RE, Munsell MF, et al. Prognostic factors influencing survival in gastrointestinal leiomyosarcomas. Implications for surgical management and staging. Ann Surg. 1992;215:68-77.	207.	Fletcher CD, Berman JJ, Corless C, et al. Diagnosis of gastro-intestinal stromal tumors: a consensus approach. Hum Pathol. 2002;33:459-465.	208.	van Oosterom AT, Judson I, Verweij J, et al. Safety and effi-cacy of imatinib (STI571) in metastatic gastrointestinal stromal  tumours: a phase I study. Lancet. 2001;358:1421-1423.	209.	Blanke CD, von Mehren M, Joensuu H, et al. Evaluation of the safety and efficacy of an oral molecularly targeted therapy, ST1571, in patients with unresectable metastatic gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) expressing C-KIT (CD117).  Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol. 2001;20:1.	210.	von Mehren M, Blanke C, Joensuu H, et al. High incidence of durable responses induced by imatinib mesylate (Gleevec) in patients with unresectable and metastatic  gastrointestinal stromal tumors. Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol. 2002; 21:1608.	211.	Demetri G, Rankin C, Fletcher C, et al. Phase III doserandomized study of imatinib mesylate (Gleevec, ST1571) for GIST; intergroup S0033 early results. Proc Am Soc  Clin Oncol. 2002;21:1651.	212.	Verweij J, Casali PG, Zalcberg J, et al. Progression-free  survival in gastrointestinal stromal tumours with high-dose imatinib: randomised trial. Lancet. 2004;364:1127-1134.	213.	Blanke CD, Rankin C, Demetri GD, et al. Phase III randomized, intergroup trial assessing imatinib mesylate at two dose levels in patients with unresectable or metastatic gastrointestinal stromal tumors expressing the kit receptor tyrosine kinase: S0033. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26:626-632.	214.	Zalcberg JR, Verweij J, Casali PG, et al. Outcome of patients with advanced gastro-intestinal stromal tumours crossing over to a daily imatinib dose of 800 mg after progression on  400 mg. Eur J Cancer. 2005;41:1751-1757.	215.	Blay JY, Le Cesne A, Ray-Coquard I, et al. Prospective multicentric randomized phase III study of imatinib in patients with advanced gastrointestinal stromal tumors comparing interruption versus continuation of treatment beyond  1 year: the French Sarcoma Group. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25: 1107-1113.	216.	Benjamin RS, Debiec-Rychter M, Le Cesne A, et al.  Gastrointestinal stromal tumors II: medical oncology and tumor response assessment. Semin Oncol. 2009;4:302-311.	217.	Maleddu A, Pantaleo MA, Nannini M, et al. Mechanisms of secondary resistance to tyrosine kinase inhibitors in gastrointestinal stromal tumours (review). Oncol Rep. 2009;21:1359-1366.Brunicardi_Ch36_p1567-p1598.indd   159501/03/19   6:38 PM 1596SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	218.	Chu D, Lacouture ME, Weiner E, et al. Risk of hand-foot skin reaction with the multitargeted kinase inhibitor sunitinib in patients with renal cell and non–renal cell carcinoma: a meta-analysis. Clin Genitourin Cancer. 2009;7:11-19.	219.	Zhu X, Stergiopoulos K, Wu S. Risk of hypertension and renal dysfunction with an angiogenesis inhibitor sunitinib: systematic review and meta-analysis. Acta Oncol. 2009;48:9-17.	220.	Chu TF, Rupnick MA, Kerkela R, et al. Cardiotoxicity asso-ciated with the tyrosine kinase inhibitor sunitinib. Lancet. 2007;370(9604):2011-2009.	221.	George S, Wang Q, Heinrich MC, et al. Efficacy and safety of regorafenib in patients with metastatic and/or unresectable GI stromal tumor after failure of imatinib and sunitinib: a multicenter  phase II trial. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30(19):2401-2407.	222.	Demetri GD, Reichardt P, Kang YK, et al. Efficacy and safety of regorafenib for advanced gastrointestinal stromal tumours after failure of imatinib and sunitinib (GRID): an international, multicentre, randomised, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2013;381(9863):295-302.	223.	Boyar MS, Taub RN. New strategies for treating GIST when imatinib fails. Cancer Invest. 2007;25:328-335.	224.	Cassier PA, Dufresne A, Fayette J, et al. Emerging drugs for the treatment of soft tissue sarcomas. Expert Opin Emerg Drugs. 2007;12:139-153.	225.	Andtbacka RH, Ng CS, Scaife CL, et al. Surgical resection of gastrointestinal stromal tumors after treatment with imatinib. Ann Surg Oncol. 2007;14:14-24.	226.	Desai J, Shankar S, Heinrich MC, et al. Clonal evolution of resistance to imatinib in patients with metastatic gastrointesti-nal stromal tumors. Clin Cancer Res. 2007;13:5398-5405.	227.	DeMatteo RP, Maki RG, Singer S, et al. Results of tyrosine kinase inhibitor therapy followed by surgical resection for metastatic gastrointestinal stromal tumor. Ann Surg. 2007;245:347-352.	228.	Raut CP, Posner M, Desai J, et al. Surgical management  of advanced gastrointestinal stromal tumors after treatment with targeted systemic therapy using kinase inhibitors.  J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:2325-2331.	229.	Gronchi A, Fiore M, Miselli F, et al. Surgery of residual disease following molecular-targeted therapy with imatinib mesylate in advanced/metastatic GIST. Ann Surg. 2007;245:341-346.	230.	DeMatteo RP, Ballman KV, Antonescu CR, et al. Placebocontrolled randomized trial of adjuvant imatinib mesylate following  the resection of localized, primary gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST). Lancet. 2009;373(9669):1097-1104.	231.	Joensuu H, Eriksson M, Sundby Hall K, et al. One vs three years of adjuvant imatinib for operable gastrointestinal stromal tumor: a randomized trial. JAMA. 2012;307(12):1265-1272.	232.	The ESMO/European Sarcoma Network Working Group. Gastrointestinal stromal tumors: ESMO clinical recommen-dations for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. Ann Oncol. 2012;23:49-55.	233.	Gold JS, Gönen M, Gutiérrez A, et al. Development and validation of a prognostic nomogram for recurrence-free sur-vival after complete surgical resection of localised primary  gastrointestinal stromal tumour: a retrospective analysis.  Lancet Oncol. 2009;10:1045-1052.	232.	Joensuu H, Vehtari A, Riihimäki J, et al. Risk of recur-rence of gastrointestinal stromal tumour after surgery: an analysis of pooled population-based cohorts. Lancet Oncol. 2012;13(3):265-274.	234.	Demetri GD, Antonia S, Benjamin RS, et al. Soft tissue  sarcoma. J Natl Compr Canc Netw. 2010;8:630-674.	235.	van der Zwan SM, DeMatteo RP. Gastrointestinal stromal tumor: 5 years later. Cancer. 2005;104:1781-1788.	236.	Eisenberg BL, Harris J, Blanke CD, et al. Phase II trial of neoadjuvant/adjuvant imatinib mesylate (IM) for advanced primary and metastatic/recurrent operable gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST): early results of RTOG 0132/ACRIN 6665. J Surg Oncol. 2008;99:42-47.	237.	McAuliffe JC, Hunt KK, Lazar AJF, et al. A randomized, phase II study of preoperative plus postoperative imatinib in GIST: evidence of rapid radiographic response and tem-poral induction of tumor cell apoptosis. Ann Surg Oncol. 2009;16:910-919.	238.	Fiore M, Palassini E, Fumagalli E, et al. Preoperative ima-tinib mesylate for unresectable or locally advanced primary gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST). Eur J Surg Oncol. 2009;35:739-745.	239.	Emile J, Brahimi S, Coindre J, et al. Frequencies of KIT and PDGFRA mutations in the MolecGIST prospective  population-based study differ from those of advanced GISTs.  Med Oncol. 2012;29:1765-1772.	240.	Gronchi A, Casali P, Mariani L, et al. Quality of surgery and outcome in extra-abdominal aggressive fibromatosis: a series of patients surgically treated at a single institution.  J Clin Oncol. 2003;21:1390-1397.	241.	Lev D, Kotilingam D, Wei C, et al. Optimizing treatment of desmoid tumors. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:1785-1791.	242.	Salas S, Dufresne A, Bui B, et al. Prognostic factors influencing progression-free survival determined from a series of sporadic desmoid tumors: a wait-and-see policy according to tumor presentation. J Clin Oncol. 2011;29: 3553-3558.	243.	Bonvalot S, Eldweny H, Haddad V, et al. Extra-abdominal primary fibromatosis: aggressive management could be avoided in a subgroup of patients. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2008;34: 462-468.	244.	Fiore M, Rimareix F, Mariani L, et al. Desmoid-type fibromatosis: a front-line conservative approach to select patients for surgical treatment. Ann Surg Oncol. 2009;16: 2587-2593.	245.	Constantinidou A, Scurr M, Jones R, et al. Treatment of aggressive fibromatosis with pegylated liposomal doxorubi-cin: The Royal Marsden Hospital experience. J Clin Oncol. (Meeting Abstracts), Abstract 10519, 2009.	246.	Gounder MM, Lefkowitz RA, Keohan ML, et al. Activity  of sorafenib against desmoid tumor/deep fibromatosis.  Clin Cancer Res. 2011;17:4082-4090.	247.	Dufresne A, Penel N, Salas S, et al. Updated outcome with long term follow-up of imatinib for the treatment of progres-sive or recurrent aggressive fibromatosis (desmoid tumor): a FNCLCC/French Sarcoma Group phase II trial. Age. 2009;40:59.	248.	Chugh R, Wathen JK, Patel SR, et al. Efficacy of imatinib in aggressive fibromatosis: results of a phase II multicenter  Sarcoma Alliance for Research through Collaboration (SARC) trial. Clin Cancer Res. 2010;16:4884-4891.	249.	Penel N, Le Cesne A, Bui B, et al. Imatinib for progressive and recurrent aggressive fibromatosis (desmoid tumors): an FNCLCC/French Sarcoma Group phase II trial with a  long-term follow-up. Ann Oncol. 2011;22:452-457.	250.	Criscione VD, Weinstock MA. Descriptive epidemiology of dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans in the United States, 1973 to 2002. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2007;56:968-973.	251.	Fiore M, Miceli R, Mussi C, et al. Dermatofibrosarcoma  protuberans treated at a single institution: a surgical disease with a high cure rate. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23:7669-7675.	252.	McArthur GA. Molecular targeting of dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans: a new approach to a surgical disease. J Natl Compr Canc Netw. 2007;5:557-562.Brunicardi_Ch36_p1567-p1598.indd   159601/03/19   6:38 PM 1597SOFT TISSUE SARCOMASCHAPTER 36	253.	Grovas A, Fremgen A, Rauck A, et al. The National  Cancer Data Base report on patterns of childhood cancers in the United States. Cancer. 1997;80:2321-2332.	254.	Meyer WH, Spunt SL. Soft tissue sarcomas of childhood.  Cancer Treat Rev. 2004;30:269-280.	255.	Barr FG, Chatten J, D’Cruz CM, et al. Molecular assays for chromosomal translocations in the diagnosis of pediatric soft tissue sarcomas. JAMA. 1995;273:553-557.	256.	Xia SJ, Pressey JG, Barr FG. Molecular pathogenesis of  rhabdomyosarcoma. Cancer Biol Ther. 2002;1:97-104.	257.	Scrable H, Witte D, Shimada H, et al. Molecular differential pathology of rhabdomyosarcoma. Genes Chromosomes  Cancer. 1989;1:23-35.	258.	Flamant F, Rodary C, Rey A, et al. Treatment of non-metastatic rhabdomyosarcomas in childhood and adolescence. Results of the second study of the International Society of Paediatric Oncology: MMT84. Eur J Cancer. 1998;34:1050-1062.	259.	Crist WM, Anderson JR, Meza JL, et al. Intergroup rhabdomyosarcoma study-IV: results for patients with nonmetastatic disease. J Clin Oncol. 2001;19:3091-3102.	260.	Crist WM, Garnsey L, Beltangady MS, et al. Prognosis in children with rhabdomyosarcoma: a report of the intergroup rhabdomyosarcoma studies I and II. Intergroup Rhabdomyo-sarcoma Committee. J Clin Oncol. 1990;8:443-452.	261.	Loeb DM, Thornton K, Shokek O. Pediatric soft tissue  sarcomas. Surg Clin North Am. 2008;88:615-627, vii.Brunicardi_Ch36_p1567-p1598.indd   159701/03/19   6:38 PM
# Chunk 8939
Brunicardi_Ch36_p1567-p1598.indd   159801/03/19   6:38 PMThis page intentionally left blank

Inguinal HerniasChandan Das, Tahir Jamil, Stephen Stanek,  Ziya Baghmanli, James R. Macho, Joseph Sferra,  and F. Charles Brunicardi 37chapterINTRODUCTIONInguinal herniorrhaphy is one of the most commonly performed operations in the United States.1 Based on estimates made by the National Center for Health Statistics, in 2010 nearly 515,000 inguinal hernia operations were performed in hospitals, and an additional 450,000 were performed in ambulatory surgery centers.1Approximately 75% of abdominal wall hernias occur in the groin. Of inguinal hernia repairs, 90% are performed in men, and 10% are performed in women. This is thought to be because the lifetime risk of inguinal hernia is 27% in men and 3% in women.2 The incidence of inguinal hernia in men has a bimodal distribution, with peaks before the first year of age and after age 40. Abramson demonstrated the age-dependence of inguinal hernias in 1978. Those age 25 to 34 years had a life-time prevalence rate of 15%, whereas those age 75 years and over had a rate of 47% (Table 37-1).3 Approximately 70% of femoral hernia repairs are performed in women; however, the most common subtype of groin hernia in men and women is still the indirect inguinal hernia. Inguinal hernias are five times more common than femoral hernias.4Globally, the inguinal hernia repair has become one of the most important procedures in improving quality of life and preventing disability. In one study, an international coopera-tive organization performed over 1033 hernia repairs on 926 patients, and their impact was measured in disability adjusted life years (DALYs). They were able to avoid 5014 DALYs or 5.41 DALYs per patient.5HistorySurgical repair of hernias has been documented as far back as in ancient Egyptian and Greek civilizations.4 In the past, early management of inguinal hernias often involved a conservative approach with operative management reserved only for compli-cations. Surgery often involved routine excision of the testicle, and wounds were closed with cauterization or allowed to close by secondary intention. These procedures were 1performed without aseptic technique, and infection and recur-rence rates were high.From the late 1700s to the early 1800s, physicians including Hesselbach, Cooper, Camper, Scarpa, Richter, and Gimbernat identified vital components of the inguinal region from cadaveric dissection. This improved understanding of the anatomy and pathophysiology of inguinal hernias. These findings, coupled with the development of aseptic technique, led surgeons such as Marcy, Kocher, and Lucas-Championnière to perform sac dissection, high ligation, and closure of the internal ring. This led to improved outcomes, but recurrence rates remained unacceptably high.At around this time, Bassini (1844–1924) pioneered a new method that transformed inguinal hernia repair into a success-ful venture with minimal morbidity. The success of the Bassini repair over its predecessors ushered in an era of tissue-based repairs. The Bassini repair was then modified into the McVay and Shouldice repairs. All three of these techniques, as well as modern variations such as the Desarda operation, are currently practiced.6The next major advancement in inguinal hernia repair was in the 1980s. At this time, Lichtenstein applied a piece of mesh to the floor of the inguinal canal, allowing for a truly tension-free repair. This technique demonstrated superior outcomes compared to previous tissue-based repairs. There were several other advantages of this process. In addition to being truly tension-free, the mesh could restore the strength of the transversalis fascia, and importantly, the technique had a very short learning curve. The superior outcomes have been widely reproduced regardless of hernia size and type, and they were achievable among both expert and nonexpert hernia surgeons.7With the advent of minimally invasive surgery, inguinal hernia repair underwent its most recent transformation. Laparo-scopic inguinal hernia repair offers an alternative approach, minimizes postoperative pain,8 and improves recovery. Since the initial description by Ger, the laparoscopic method has become more sophisticated. Refinements in approach and technique have Introduction1599History / 1599Anatomy / 1600Pathophysiology / 1604Diagnosis1606History / 1606Physical Examination / 1607Imaging / 1607Treatment1608Prophylactic Antibiotics / 1609Open Approach / 1609Laparoscopic Approach / 1613Robot-Assisted Inguinal Hernia  Repair / 1616Prosthesis Considerations / 1616Complications1618Hernia Recurrence / 1618Pain / 1619Cord and Testes Injury / 1620Laparoscopic Complications / 1620Hematomas and Seromas / 1621Outcomes1621Brunicardi_Ch37_p1599-p1624.indd   159929/01/19   2:02 PM 1600Key Points1	Conservative management of asymptomatic inguinal hernias is recommended.2	A thorough understanding of groin anatomy is essential to successful surgical treatment of inguinal hernias.3	Elective repair of inguinal hernias can be undertaken using a laparoscopic, robotic, or open approach.4	Robotic-assisted hernia surgery is quickly becoming adopted by general surgeons because of its better ergonomics and visualization.5	The use of prosthetic mesh as a reinforcement significantly improves recurrence rates, whether the repair is open or laparoscopic.6	Recurrence, pain, and quality of life are the metrics by which hernia repair outcomes are measured.7	Laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair results in less pain; how-ever, mastery of this technique has a longer learning curve.led to the development of the intraperitoneal onlay mesh,9,10 the transabdominal preperitoneal (TAPP) repair,11 and the totally extraperitoneal (TEP) repair.12 Irrespective of the approach, suc-cessful surgical treatment of inguinal hernias depends on a sound grasp of inguinal anatomy.AnatomyThe inguinal canal is an approximately 4to 6-cm long cone-shaped region situated in the anterior portion of the pelvic basin (Fig. 37-1). The canal begins on the posterior abdominal wall, where the spermatic cord passes through a hiatus in the transver-salis fascia also known as the deep (internal) inguinal ring. The canal concludes medially at the superficial (external) inguinal ring, the point at which the spermatic cord crosses a defect in the external oblique aponeurosis. The boundaries of the ingui-nal canal are the external oblique aponeurosis anteriorly, the internal oblique muscle laterally, the transversalis fascia and transversus abdominis muscle posteriorly, the internal oblique and transversus abdominis muscle superiorly, and the inguinal (Poupart’s) ligament inferiorly. The spermatic cord traverses the inguinal canal, and it contains three arteries, three veins, two nerves, the pampiniform venous plexus, and the vas deferens. It is enveloped in three layers of spermatic fascia.Additional important structures surrounding the inguinal canal include the iliopubic tract, the lacunar ligament, Cooper’s ligament, and the conjoined tendon (Fig. 37-2). The iliopubic tract is an aponeurotic band that begins at the anterior superior iliac spine and inserts into Cooper’s ligament from above. It forms on the deep inferior margin of the transversus abdominis and transversalis fascia. The shelving edge of the inguinal ligament is a structure that connects the iliopubic tract to the inguinal ligament. The iliopubic tract helps form the inferior margin of the internal inguinal ring as it courses medially, where it continues as the anteromedial border of the femoral canal. The lacunar ligament, or ligament of Gimbernat, is the triangular fanning of the inguinal ligament as it joins the pubic 2tubercle. Cooper’s (pectineal) ligament is the lateral portion of the lacunar ligament that is fused to the periosteum of the pubic tubercle. The conjoined tendon is commonly described as the fusion of the inferior fibers of the internal oblique and transversus abdominis aponeurosis at the point where they insert on the pubic tubercle.Inguinal hernias are generally classified as direct, indirect, or femoral based upon the site of herniation relative to surround-ing structures. Indirect hernias protrude lateral to the inferior epigastric vessels, through the deep inguinal ring. Direct hernias protrude medial to the inferior epigastric vessels, within Hesselbach’s triangle. The borders of the triangle are the ingui-nal ligament inferiorly, the lateral edge of rectus sheath medi-ally, and the inferior epigastric vessels superolaterally. Femoral hernias protrude through the small and inflexible femoral ring. They traverse the empty space between the femoral vein and the lymphatic channels. The borders of the femoral ring include the iliopubic tract and inguinal ligament anteriorly, Cooper’s liga-ment posteriorly, the lacunar ligament medially, and the femoral  vein laterally. The Nyhus classification categorizes hernia defects by location, size, and type (Table 37-2).Laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair requires a thorough knowledge of inguinal anatomy from a posterior perspective (Fig. 37-3). Intraperitoneal points of reference are the five peritoneal folds, bladder, inferior epigastric vessels, and psoas muscle (Fig. 37-4). Two potential spaces exist within the pre-peritoneum. Between the peritoneum and the posterior lamina of the transversalis fascia is Bogros’s (preperitoneal) space. This area contains preperitoneal fat and areolar tissue. The most medial aspect of the preperitoneal space, that which lies superior to the bladder, is known as the space of Retzius. The posterior perspective also allows visualization of the myopectineal orifice of Fruchaud, a relatively weak portion of the abdominal wall that is divided by the inguinal ligament (Fig. 37-5).The vascular space is situated between the posterior and anterior laminae of the transversalis fascia, and it houses the Table 37-1Inguinal hernia prevalence by ageAGE (Y)25–3435–4445–5455–6465–7475+Current prevalence (%)121520262934Lifetime prevalence (%)151928344047Current = repaired hernias excluded; lifetime = repaired hernias included.Brunicardi_Ch37_p1599-p1624.indd   160029/01/19   2:02 PM 1601INGUINAL HERNIASCHAPTER 37Abdominal ringLateral leafPubic tubercleSpermatic cordInterrupted sutures taken to suture the medial leaf to the inguinal ligament Interrupted sutures between the upper border of the strip and conjoined muscle and internal oblique muscleInternal oblique muscle seen through the splitting incision made in the medial leafReflected medial leaf after a strip has been separatedFigure 37-2. Ligaments that contribute to the inguinal canal include the inguinal ligament, Cooper’s ligament, and the lacunar ligament. The iliopubic tract originates and inserts in a similar fashion to the inguinal ligament, but in a deeper position. m. = muscle.Abdominal ringLateral leafMedial leafPubic tubercleSpermatic cordInterrupted sutures taken to suture the medial leaf to the inguinal ligament Figure 37-1. Location and orientation of the inguinal canal within the pelvic basin. Boundaries of the canal include: transversus abdominus and transversalis fascia posterior; internal oblique muscle superior; external oblique aponeurosis anterior; inguinal ligament inferior. m. = muscle.inferior epigastric vessels. The inferior epigastric artery supplies the rectus abdominis. It is derived from the external iliac artery, and it anastomoses with the superior epigastric, a continuation of the internal thoracic artery. The epigastric veins course paral-lel to the arteries within the rectus sheath, posterior to the rectus muscles. Inspection of the internal inguinal ring will reveal the deep location of the inferior epigastric vessels.Nerves of interest in the inguinal region are the ilioin-guinal, iliohypogastric, genitofemoral, and lateral femoral cutaneous nerves (Figs. 37-6 and 37-7). The ilioinguinal and iliohypogastric nerves arise together from the first lumbar nerve (L1). The ilioinguinal nerve emerges from the lateral border of the psoas major and passes obliquely across the quadratus lumborum. At a point just medial to the anterior Brunicardi_Ch37_p1599-p1624.indd   160129/01/19   2:02 PM 1602SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIInferior epigastric vesselsCooper’s ligamentPubic tubercleArcuate lineUmbilicusLinea albaRectus muscleDeepinguinalringIliopubictractExternal iliacvesselsIndirecthernia siteDirecthernia siteObturatorvesselsTransversusabdominismusclearchSuperioranteriorcrusSpermatic cordSpermatic vesselsFemoral canalFigure 37-3. Anatomy of the groin region from the posterior perspective.AA UmbilicusB Median umbilical ligament       (urachus)C Medial umbilical ligament       (obliterated umbilical vein)D Lateral umbilical ligament       (inferior epigastric vessels)E Lateral fossa (indirect hernia)F Medial fossa (direct hernia)G Supravesical fossaBEFBladderGCDFigure 37-4. Posterior view of intraperitoneal folds and associated fossa: A. Umbilicus. B. Median umbilical ligament. C. Medial umbilical ligament (obliterated umbilical vein). D. Lateral umbilical ligament (inferior epigastric vessels). E. Lateral fossa (indirect hernia). F. Medial fossa (direct hernia). G. Supravesical fossa. (Modified with permission from Rowe JS, Skandalakis JE, Gray SW: Multiple bilateral inguinal hernias, Am Surg. 1973 May;39(5):269-270.)Table 37-2Nyhus classification systemType IIndirect hernia; internal abdominal ring normal; typically in infants, children, small adultsType IIIndirect hernia; internal ring enlarged without impingement on the floor of the inguinal canal; does not extend to the scrotumType IIIADirect hernia; size is not taken into accountType IIIBIndirect hernia that has enlarged enough to encroach upon the posterior inguinal wall; indirect sliding or scrotal hernias are usually placed in this category because they are commonly associated with extension to the direct space; also includes pantaloon herniasType IIICFemoral herniaType IVRecurrent hernia; modifiers A–D are sometimes added, which correspond to indirect, direct, femoral, and mixed, respectivelysuperior iliac spine, it pierces the transversus and internal oblique muscles to enter the inguinal canal and exits through the superficial inguinal ring. It supplies somatic sensation to the skin of the upper and medial thigh. In males, it also inner-vates the base of the penis and upper scrotum. In females, it innervates the mons pubis and labium majus. The iliohypo-gastric nerve arises from T12–L1. After it pierces the deep abdominal wall, it courses between the internal oblique and transversus abdominis, supplying both. It then divides into lat-eral and anterior cutaneous branches. A common variant is for the iliohypogastric and ilioinguinal nerves to exit around the superficial inguinal ring as a single entity. The genitofemoral nerve arises from L1 to L2, courses along the retroperitoneum, and emerges on the anterior aspect of the psoas. It then divides into genital and femoral branches. The genital branch enters the inguinal canal lateral to the inferior epigastric vessels, and it courses ventral to the iliac vessels and iliopubic tract. In males, it travels through the superficial inguinal ring and sup-plies the ipsilateral scrotum and cremaster muscle. In females, it supplies the ipsilateral mons pubis and labium majus. The Brunicardi_Ch37_p1599-p1624.indd   160229/01/19   2:02 PM 1603INGUINAL HERNIASCHAPTER 37Epigastric vesselsInternal spermaticvesselsIliopsoas muscleIliopubictractMyopectinealorificeExternal iliac a. and v.Vas deferensObturator n.Obturator vesselsLacunar ligamentCooper's ligamentFigure 37-5. Posterior view of the myopectineal orifice of Fruchaud. a. = artery; n. = nerve; v. = vein.Ilioinguinal n.Iliohypogastric n.Iliac m.Lateral femoralcutaneous n.Femoral n.Inguinal ligamentGenitofemoral n.(femoral branch)(genital branch)Iliopectinal archPectineal ligamentIliopubic tractLacunar ligamentFigure 37-6. Retroperitoneal view of major inguinal nerves and their courses. m. = muscle; n. = nerve.femoral branch courses along the femoral sheath, supply-ing the skin of the upper anterior thigh. The lateral femoral cutaneous nerve arises from L2 to L3, emerges lateral to the psoas muscle at the level of L4, and crosses the iliacus mus-cle obliquely toward the anterior superior iliac spine. It then passes inferiorly to the inguinal ligament where it divides to supply the lateral thigh (Fig. 37-8).The preperitoneal anatomy seen in laparoscopic hernia repair led to characterization of important anatomic areas of interest, known as the triangle of doom, the triangle of pain, and the circle of death (Fig. 37-9).7 The triangle of doom is bordered medially by the vas deferens and laterally by the vessels of the spermatic cord. The contents of the space include the external iliac vessels, deep circumflex iliac vein, femoral nerve, and gen-ital branch of the genitofemoral nerve. The triangle of pain is a region bordered by the iliopubic tract and gonadal vessels, and it encompasses the lateral femoral cutaneous, femoral branch of the genitofemoral and femoral nerves. The circle of death is a vascular continuation formed by the common iliac, internal iliac, obturator, inferior epigastric, and external iliac vessels.Brunicardi_Ch37_p1599-p1624.indd   160329/01/19   2:03 PM 1604SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 37-7. Anterior view of the five major nerves of the inguinal region.Femoral branch ofgenitofemoral n.Ilioinguinal n.Lateral femoralcutaneous n.Medial and intermediatefemoral cutaneous nn.Saphenous n.Iliohypogastric n.Genital branch ofgenitofemoral n.Figure 37-8. Sensory dermatomes of the major nerves in the groin area. n. = nerve.PathophysiologyInguinal hernias may be congenital or acquired. Most adult inguinal hernias are considered acquired defects in the abdomi-nal wall. There is however, a known hereditary association that is not well understood.13 The most likely risk factor for inguinal hernia is weakness in the abdominal wall musculature; how-ever, there are several other risk-factors that have been studied (Table 37-3). Congenital hernias, which make up the majority of pediatric hernias, can be considered a developmental defect rather than an acquired weakness. During the normal course of development, the testes descend from the intra-abdominal space into the scrotum in the third trimester. Their descent is guided by the gubernaculum through an evagination of the peritoneum, which protrudes through the inguinal canal and becomes the processus vaginalis. Between 36 and 40 weeks’ gestation, the processus vaginalis closes and eliminates the peritoneal open-ing at the internal inguinal ring.14 Failure of the peritoneum to close results in a patent processus vaginalis (PPV). In preterm babies, indirect inguinal hernias as a result of PPV is very high (Fig. 37-10). However, overall, the risk of developing a symp-tomatic hernia during childhood in the presence of a known PPV is relatively low.15Overall, there is limited data regarding the etiology of inguinal hernia development. Several studies have documented strenuous physical activity as a risk factor for acquired inguinal hernia.16 A case-controlled study of over 1400 male patients with inguinal hernia revealed that a positive family history was associated with an eightfold lifetime incidence of Brunicardi_Ch37_p1599-p1624.indd   160429/01/19   2:03 PM 1605INGUINAL HERNIASCHAPTER 37Inferolateral border:iliopubic tractDeep circumflexiliac a. & v.Lateral border:reflected peritoneumLat. femoral cutaneous n.Ant. femoral cutaneous n. or other variable branchesFemoral br. of genitofemoral n.Femoral n.Superomedial border:gonadal vesselsLateral border:gonadal vesselsGenital branch ofgenitofemoral nerveIliac veinIliac arteryMedial border:ductus deferensPosterior border:peritoneal edgeDeep ringABFigure 37-9. Borders and contents of the (A) triangle of doom and (B) triangle of pain. a. = artery; Ant. = anterior; br. = branch; Lat. = lateral; n. = nerve; v. = vein. (Modified with permission from Colborn GL, Skandalakis JE: Laparoscopic cadaveric anatomy of the inguinal area, Probl Gen Surg. 1995;12(1):13-20.)inguinal hernia.17 Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease also significantly increases the risk of direct inguinal hernias, thought to be due to repeated instances of intra-abdominal pressure during coughing.18 Several studies have suggested a protective effect of obesity. In a large, population-based prospective study of American individuals (First National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey), the risk of inguinal hernia development in obese men was only 50% that of normal-weight men, while the risk in overweight men was 80% that of nonobese men. A possible explanation is the increased difficulty in detecting inguinal hernias in obese individuals.18Epidemiologic studies have identified risk factors that may predispose to a hernia. Microscopic examination of skin of inguinal hernia patients demonstrated significantly decreased ratios of type I to type III collagen. Type III collagen does not contribute to wound tensile strength as significantly as type I collagen. Additional analyses of similar skin revealed disaggregated collagen tracts with decreased collagen fiber density.19 Collagen disorders such as Ehlers-Danlos syndrome are also associated with an increased incidence of hernia formation (Table 37-4). Recent studies have found an association between concentrations of extracellular matrix Brunicardi_Ch37_p1599-p1624.indd   160529/01/19   2:03 PM 1606SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 37-3Presumed causes of groin herniationCoughingChronic obstructive pulmonary diseaseObesityStraining Constipation ProstatismPregnancyBirthweight <1500 gFamily history of a herniaValsalva’s maneuverAscitesUpright positionCongenital connective tissue disordersDefective collagen synthesisPrevious right lower quadrant incisionArterial aneurysmsCigarette smokingHeavy liftingPhysical exertionFigure 37-10. Varying degrees of closure of the processus vagi-nalis (PV). A. Closed PV. B. Minimally patent PV. C. Moderately patent PV. D. Scrotal hernia.Table 37-4Connective tissue disorders associated with groin herniationOsteogenesis imperfectaCutis laxa (congenital elastolysis)Ehlers-Danlos syndromeHurler-Hunter syndromeMarfan’s syndromeCongenital hip dislocation in childrenPolycystic kidney diseaseα1-Antitrypsin deficiencyWilliams syndromeAndrogen insensitivity syndromeRobinow’s syndromeSerpentine fibula syndromeAlport’s syndromeTel Hashomer camptodactyly syndromeLeriche’s syndromeTesticular feminization syndromeRokitansky-Mayer-Küster syndromeGoldenhar’s syndromeMorris syndromeGerhardt’s syndromeMenkes’ syndromeKawasaki diseasePfannenstiel syndromeBeckwith-Wiedemann syndromeRubinstein-Taybi syndromeAlopecia-photophobia syndromeDIAGNOSISHistoryWorkup for inguinal hernia begins with a detailed history. The most common symptom of inguinal hernia is a groin mass that protrudes while standing, coughing, or straining. It is sometimes described as reducible while lying down. Symptoms that are extrainguinal such as a change in bowel habits or urinary symptoms are far less common but should be recognized as having the potential to be ominous. The pain is thought to be due to compression of the nerves by the sac, causing generalized pressure, localized sharp pain, or referred pain. Referred pain may involve the scrotum, tes-ticle, or inner thigh.Important considerations of the patient’s history include the duration and timing of symptoms. Sudden onset symp-toms are more concerning. Questions should also be directed to characterize whether the hernia is reducible. Patients will often reduce the hernia by pushing the contents back into the abdomen, thereby providing temporary relief. As the defect size increases and more intra-abdominal contents fill the hernia sac, the hernia may become harder to reduce and incarcerate, prompting urgent surgical intervention.Certain elements of the review of systems such as chronic constipation, cough, or urinary retention should prompt the sur-geon to perform a thorough workup to rule out any underlying malignancy.elements and hernia formation.20 Although a significant amount of work remains to elucidate the biologic nature of hernias, current evidence suggests they have a multifactorial etiology with both environmental and hereditary influences.Brunicardi_Ch37_p1599-p1624.indd   160629/01/19   2:03 PM 1607INGUINAL HERNIASCHAPTER 37Figure 37-11. Digital examination of the inguinal canal.Table 37-5Differential diagnosis of groin herniaMalignancy Lymphoma Retroperitoneal sarcoma Metastasis Testicular tumorPrimary testicular Varicocele Epididymitis Testicular torsion Hydrocele Ectopic testicle Undescended testicleFemoral artery aneurysm or pseudoaneurysmLymph nodeSebaceous cystHidradenitisCyst of the canal of Nuck (female)Saphenous varixPsoas abscessHematomaAscitesPhysical ExaminationPhysical examination is essential to the diagnosis of inguinal hernia. The patient should be examined in a standing position to increase intra-abdominal pressure, with the groin and scro-tum fully exposed. Inspection is performed first, with the goal of identifying an abnormal bulge along the groin or within the scrotum. If an obvious bulge is not detected, palpation is per-formed to confirm the presence of the hernia.Palpation is performed by advancing the index fin-ger through the scrotum towards the external inguinal ring (Fig. 37-11). This allows the inguinal canal to be explored. The patient is then asked to perform a Valsalva maneuver to increase intraabdominal pressure. These maneuvers will reveal an abnor-mal bulge and allow the clinician to determine whether the her-nia is reducible or not. Examination of the contralateral side affords the clinician the opportunity to compare the presence and extent of herniation between sides. This is especially useful in the case of a small hernia. In addition to inguinal hernia, a number of other diagnoses may be considered in the differential of a groin bulge (Table 37-5).While very difficult to ascertain, there are certain physi-cal examination maneuvers that can be performed to help distinguish direct vs. indirect inguinal hernias. The inguinal occlusion test entails the examiner blocking the internal ingui-nal ring with a finger as the patient is instructed to cough. A controlled impulse suggests an indirect hernia, while persistent herniation suggests a direct hernia. Transmission of the cough impulse to the tip of the finger implies an indirect hernia, while an impulse palpated on the dorsum of the finger implies a direct hernia. When results of physical examination are com-pared against operative findings, there is a probability some-what higher than chance (i.e., 50%) of correctly diagnosing the type of hernia.21,22External groin anatomy is difficult to assess in obese patients, making the physical diagnosis of inguinal hernia chal-lenging. A further challenge to the physical examination is the identification of a femoral hernia. Femoral hernias should be palpable below the inguinal ligament, lateral to the pubic tubercle. In obese patients, a femoral hernia may be missed or misdiagnosed as a hernia of the inguinal canal. In contrast, a prominent inguinal fat pad in a thin patient, otherwise known as a femoral pseudohernia, may prompt an erroneous diagnosis of femoral hernia.ImagingIn the case of an ambiguous diagnosis, radiologic investigations may be used as an adjunct to history and physical examination. Imaging in obvious cases is unnecessary. The most common radiologic modalities include ultrasonography (US), computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Each technique has certain advantages over physical examination alone; however, each modality is associated with potential limitations.US is the least invasive technique and does not impart any radiation to the patient. Anatomic structures can be more easily identified by the presence of bony landmarks; however, because there are few bones in the inguinal canal, other structures such as the inferior epigastric vessels are used to define groin anatomy. Positive intra-abdominal pressure is used to elicit the herniation of abdominal contents. Movement of these contents through the canal is essential to making the diagnosis with US, Brunicardi_Ch37_p1599-p1624.indd   160729/01/19   2:03 PM 1608SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 37-12. Computed tomography scan depicting a large right inguinal hernia (arrow). A smaller left inguinal hernia is also visualized.and lack of this movement may lead to a false negative. A recent meta-analysis demonstrated that ultrasound detects inguinal hernia with a sensitivity of 86%, specificity of 77%.23 In thin patients, normal movement of the spermatic cord and posterior abdominal wall against the anterior abdominal wall may lead to false-positive diagnoses of hernia.24CT and MRI provide static images that are able to delin-eate groin anatomy, to detect groin hernias, and to exclude potentially confounding diagnoses (Fig. 37-12). Meta-analysis determined standard CT detects inguinal hernia with a sensitiv-ity of 80%, specificity of 65%. Although direct herniography has a higher sensitivity and specificity than CT, its invasiveness and limited availability restrict its routine use.23 As CT imaging increases in resolution, its sensitivity in detecting inguinal her-nia is expected to expand; however, this has yet to be clinically confirmed by surgical correlation.25MRI is most commonly utilized in cases where physical examination detects a groin bulge, but where ultrasonography is inconclusive. In a 1999 study of 41 patients with clinical find-ings of inguinal hernia, laparoscopy revealed that MRI was an effective diagnostic test with a sensitivity of 95%, specificity of 96%.26 The expense of MRI precludes its routine use to diag-nose inguinal hernias.TREATMENTSurgical repair of hernias can be performed open, laparoscopic, or with robotic assistance. Surgical repair is the definitive treat-ment of inguinal hernias. The most common reason for elective repair is pain. Incarceration and strangulation are the primary indications for urgent repair. Symptomatic hernias should be operated on electively, and minimally symptomatic or asymptomatic hernias should undergo watchful waiting.27 Repair of minimally symptomatic inguinal hernia in patients with significant medical comorbidities surgery should be deferred and the patient medically optimized. If despite optimal management of comorbidities, the patient remains high-risk, open repair under local anesthesia can be safely performed.28 Although the natural history of untreated inguinal hernias is 3poorly defined, the rates of incarceration and strangulation are low in the asymptomatic population. As a result, nonoperative management is an appropriate consideration in minimally symp-tomatic patients. Prospective studies and meta-analyses have demonstrated no difference in intention-to-treat outcomes, qual-ity of life, or cost-effectiveness between watchful waiting and elective repair among healthy inguinal hernia patients.27,29 A 2012 systematic review found that 72% of asymptomatic ingui-nal hernia patients developed symptoms and had surgical repair within 7.5 years of diagnosis.30 Nevertheless, the complication rates of immediate and delayed elective repair are equivalent.29,31 A nonoperative strategy is safe for minimally symptomatic inguinal hernia patients.32Nonoperative inguinal hernia treatment targets pain, pres-sure, and protrusion of abdominal contents in the symptomatic patient population. The recumbent position aids in hernia reduc-tion via the effects of gravity and a relaxed abdominal wall. Trusses externally confine hernias to a reduced state and inter-mittently relieve symptoms in up to 65% of patients; however, they do not prevent complications, and they may be associated with an increased rate of incarceration.33 The risks of incarcera-tion and strangulation appear to decrease over the first year, likely because gradual enlargement of the abdominal wall defect facilitates spontaneous reduction of hernia contents. The sheer volume of protruding tissue in an inguinal hernia does not nec-essarily signify severe morbidity.Femoral and symptomatic inguinal hernias carry higher complication risks, and so surgical repair is performed earlier for these patients. Irrespective of symptoms, one study found the 3-month and 2-year cumulative incidences of strangulation were 2.8% and 4.5%, respectively, for inguinal hernias and 22% and 45%, respectively, for femoral hernias.34 Data from the Swedish Hernia Registry demonstrates that emergent operation is associ-ated with a sevenfold increase in all-cause mortality over that of elective surgery among 107,838 groin hernia repairs.35 For this reason, it is recommended that femoral hernias and symptomatic inguinal hernias be electively repaired, when possible.Incarceration occurs when hernia contents fail to reduce; however, a minimally symptomatic, chronically incarcerated hernia may also be treated nonoperatively. Taxis should be attempted for incarcerated hernias without sequelae of strangulation, and the option of surgical repair should be discussed prior to the maneuver. To perform taxis, analgesics and light sedatives are administered, and the patient is placed in the Trendelenburg position. The hernia sac is elongated with both hands, and while slight countertraction is maintained, reduction of the contents is attempted circumferentially in a small stepwise fashion to ease their reduction into the abdomen.The indication for emergent inguinal hernia repair is impending compromise of intestinal contents. As such, strangu-lation of hernia contents is a surgical emergency. Clinical signs that indicate strangulation include tenderness, fever, leukocy-tosis, and hemodynamic instability. The hernia bulge is usu-ally warm, tender, and the overlying skin is often erythematous or discolored. Symptoms of bowel obstruction in patients with sliding or incarcerated inguinal hernias may also indicate stran-gulation. Taxis should not be performed when strangulation is suspected, as reduction of potentially gangrenous tissue into the abdomen may result in an intra-abdominal catastrophe. Preop-eratively, the patient should receive fluid resuscitation, naso-gastric decompression, and prophylactic intravenous antibiotics.Brunicardi_Ch37_p1599-p1624.indd   160829/01/19   2:03 PM 1609INGUINAL HERNIASCHAPTER 37Prophylactic AntibioticsThe debate as to whether or not to administer preoperative prophylactic antibiotics in elective inguinal hernia repair still remains controversial as elective hernia repair is considered a clean procedure and as such are exempt from SCIP surgical prophylaxis guidelines. A Cochrane review of 17 randomized controlled trials in 2012 revealed an overall decrease in infec-tion rates (3.1% vs. 4.5%, odds ratio [OR] 0.64, 95% confi-dence interval [CI] 0.50–0.82) when prophylactic antibiotics are administered in patients. In subgroup analyses, the differ-ence was smaller in patients without mesh placement (3.5% vs. 4.9%, OR 0.71, 95% CI 0.51–1.00) than in those with mesh placement (2.4% vs. 4.2%, OR 0.56, 95% CI 0.38–0.81). However, with inguinal hernia repair, overall wound infection rates were higher than those expected for clean operations, as a result, they were unable to definitively recommend for or against antimicrobial prophylaxis.36,37 Although there is no uni-versal guideline regarding the administration of prophylactic antibiotics for open elective hernia repair, the routine indexing of cases for quality improvement databases have resulted in the routine administration of prophylactic perioperative antibiotics in inguinal hernia repairs.Open ApproachThe most commonly performed type of hernia operation still remains the open inguinal hernia repair. These repairs can be performed tension-free with mesh or by reconstruction of the floor with tissue. Tissue repairs are less common and are pri-marily indicated in infected fields.Exposure of the anterior inguinal region is common to the open approaches. An oblique or horizontal incision is performed over the groin (Fig. 37-13). The incision begins two fingerbreadths inferior and medial to the anterior superior iliac spine. It is then extended medially for approximately 6 to  8 cm. The subcutaneous tissue is dissected using electrocautery. Scarpa’s fascia is divided to expose the external oblique aponeurosis. A small incision is made in the external oblique aponeurosis parallel to the direction of the muscle fibers. Standard groin incisionEx. obliqueSpermatic cordCamper’sfasciaScarpa’sfasciaHemostatExternal ringInguinalfloorSQ fatARepaireddefect intransversalisfasciaDirect herniasacIndirect herniasacIllioinguinal nerveBFigure 37-13. A. Layers of the abdominal wall in the anterior open approach to hernia repair. B. Identification of indirect and direct hernia sacs with retraction of the spermatic cord and ilioinguinal nerve. Ex. = external; SQ = subcutaneous.Brunicardi_Ch37_p1599-p1624.indd   160929/01/19   2:03 PM 1610SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 37-14. Anterior open exposure of the inguinal canal. m. = muscle; n. = nerve; v. = vein.Metzenbaum scissors are introduced and spread beneath the  fibers to sweep away the underlying ilioinguinal nerve.  The scissors are then used to incise the aponeurosis superior to the inguinal ligament, splitting the external inguinal ring.The flaps of the external oblique aponeurosis are elevated with Hemostat clamps. The internal oblique fibers are dissected bluntly from the overlying external oblique flaps. Dissection of the inferior flap reveals the shelving edge of the inguinal ligament. The iliohypogastric and ilioinguinal nerves are iden-tified and preserved. Effort should be made to avoid remov-ing nerves from their natural bed and disrupting the protective investing fascia. The pubic tubercle is identified, and the cord structures are dissected off of the pubis, encircled, and elevated with a Penrose drain. The cord is elevated 2 cm over the pubic symphysis in an avascular plane, and cremasteric fibers are pre-served to avoid injuring cord structures (Fig. 37-14).An indirect hernia sac will generally be found on the antero-medial surface of the spermatic cord after division of the crem-asteric muscle in the direction of its fibers. The genital nerve is visualized along the inferolateral surface of the cord adjacent to the external spermatic vein. The floor of the inguinal canal is fully assessed for direct hernias. If a hernia is not visualized upon entry into the inguinal canal, the preperitoneal space should be explored for a femoral hernia. In addition to sac identification, the vas deferens and vessels of the spermatic cord must be identi-fied to allow dissection of the sac from the cord. Blunt dissection facilitates dissection of the sac from the cord. The dissection is carried proximally toward the deep inguinal ring.In cases where the viability of sac contents is in question, the sac should be incised, and hernia contents should be evalu-ated for signs of ischemia. The defect should be enlarged to augment blood flow to the sac contents. Viable contents may be reduced into the peritoneal cavity, while nonviable contents resected. In elective cases, the sac may be amputated at the internal inguinal ring or inverted into the preperitoneum. Both methods are effective; however, patients undergoing sac exci-sion had significantly increased postoperative pain in a prospec-tive trial.38 Dissection of a densely adherent sac may result in injury to cord structures and should be avoided; however, sac ligation at the internal inguinal ring is necessary in these cases. A hernia sac that extends into the scrotum may require division within the inguinal canal as extensive dissection and reduction risks injury to the testicular blood supply, resulting in testicular swelling, orchitis, and atrophy.At this point, the inguinal canal is reconstructed, either with native tissue or with prostheses. The following sections describe the most commonly performed types of tissue-based and prosthetic-based reconstructions.Tissue Repairs. Tissue-based herniorrhaphy is a suitable alter-native when prosthetic materials cannot be used safely. Indica-tions for tissue repairs include operative field contamination, emergency surgery, and when the viability of hernia contents is uncertain.Bassini Repair The Bassini repair was a historic advancement in operative technique. Its current use is limited as modern tech-niques reduce recurrence. The original repair includes dissection of the spermatic cord, dissection of the hernia sac with high liga-tion, and extensive reconstruction of the floor of the inguinal canal (Fig. 37-15). After exposing the inguinal floor, the transversalis fascia is incised from the pubic tubercle to the internal inguinal ring. Preperitoneal fat is bluntly dissected from the upper margin of the posterior side of the transversalis fascia to permit adequate tissue mobilization. A triple-layer repair is then performed. The internal oblique, transversus abdominis, and transversalis fascia are fixed to the shelving edge of the inguinal ligament and pubic periosteum with interrupted sutures. The lateral aspect of the repair reinforces the medial border of the internal inguinal ring.Shouldice Repair The Shouldice repair recapitulates principles of the Bassini repair, and its distribution of tension over several tissue layers results in lower recurrence rates (Fig. 37-16). Dur-ing dissection of the cord, the genital branch of the genitofemoral nerve is routinely divided, resulting in ipsilateral loss of sensation to the scrotum in men or the mons pubis and labium majus in women. With the posterior inguinal floor exposed, an incision in the transversalis fascia is made between the pubic tubercle and internal ring. Care is taken to avoid injury to preperitoneal struc-tures, which are bluntly dissected to mobilize the upper and lower fascial flaps. At the pubic tubercle, the iliopubic tract is sutured to the lateral edge of the rectus sheath using a synthetic, nonab-sorbable, monofilament suture. This continuous suture progresses laterally, approximating the edge of the inferior transversalis flap to the posterior aspect of the superior flap. At the internal inguinal ring, the suture continues back in the medial direction, approxi-mating the edge of the superior transversalis fascia flap to the shelving edge of the inguinal ligament. At the pubic tubercle, this suture is tied to the tail of the original stitch. The next suture begins at the internal inguinal ring, and it continues medially, apposing the aponeuroses of the internal oblique and transversus abdominis to the external oblique aponeurotic fibers. At the pubic tubercle, the suture doubles back through the same structures lat-erally towards the tightened internal ring.McVay Repair The McVay repair addresses both inguinal and femoral ring defects. This technique is indicated for femoral hernias and in cases where the use of prosthetic material is contraindicated (Fig. 37-17). Once the spermatic cord has been isolated, an incision in the transversalis fascia permits entry into the preperitoneal space. The upper flap is mobilized by gentle blunt dissection of underlying tissue. Cooper’s ligament is bluntly dissected to expose its surface. A 2 to 4 cm relaxing incision is made in the anterior rectus sheath vertically from the Brunicardi_Ch37_p1599-p1624.indd   161029/01/19   2:03 PM 1611INGUINAL HERNIASCHAPTER 37SpermaticcordPoupart'sligament   Internal abdominaloblique muscleExternal abdominaloblique aponeurosisPreperitoneal fatTransversalis fasciaABEOTATFILIOFigure 37-15. Bassini repair. A. The transversalis fascia is opened. B. Reconstruction of the posterior wall by suturing the transver-salis fascia (TF), the transversus abdominis muscle (TA), and the internal oblique muscle (IO) medially to the inguinal ligament (IL) laterally. EO = external oblique aponeurosis.ABFigure 37-16. Shouldice repair. A. The iliopubic tract is sutured to the medial flap of the transversalis fascia and the internal oblique and transverse abdominis muscles. B. The second of the four suture lines, reversing toward the pubic tubercle approximating the inter-nal oblique and transversus muscles to the inguinal ligament. Two more suture lines affix the internal oblique and transversus muscles medially.Cooper’s ligamentFigure 37-17. McVay Cooper’s ligament repair.pubic tubercle. This incision is essential to reduce tension on the repair; however, it may result in increased postoperative pain and higher risk of ventral abdominal herniation. Using either interrupted or continuous suture, the superior transversalis flap is then fastened to Cooper’s ligament, and the repair is contin-ued laterally along Cooper’s ligament to occlude the femoral ring. Lateral to the femoral ring, a transition stitch is placed, affixing the transversalis fascia to the inguinal ligament. The transversalis is then sutured to the inguinal ligament laterally to the internal ring.Desarda Repair The Desarda hernia repair was recently described in 2001, and it consists of a mesh-free repair utilizing a strip of external oblique aponeurosis.An oblique skin incision is made, and dissection is carried down to the external oblique fascia. The integrity of the fascia is preserved as much as possible. The cremasteric muscle is then incised, and the spermatic cord along with the cremasteric muscle is separated from the inguinal floor. Excision of the sac is done in all cases except in small direct hernias, where it is inverted.The medial leaf of the external oblique aponeurosis is sutured to the inguinal ligament from the pubic tubercle to the abdominal ring using 1–0 Ethilon or Prolene interrupted sutures. The first two sutures are taken at the junction of the anterior rec-tus sheath and EOA. The last suture is taken so as to sufficiently Brunicardi_Ch37_p1599-p1624.indd   161129/01/19   2:03 PM 1612SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IInarrow the abdominal ring without constricting the spermatic cord (Fig. 37-18). Each suture is passed first through the ingui-nal ligament, then the transversalis fascia, and then the EOA. The index finger of the left hand is used to protect the femo-ral vessels and retract the cord structures laterally while taking lateral sutures. A splitting incision is then taken in the EOA, partially separating a strip. This splitting incision is extended medially up to the pubic symphysis and laterally 1 to 2 cm beyond the reconstructed abdominal ring.The free border of the strip of the EOA is now sutured to the internal oblique or conjoined tendon lying close to it with 1–0 Ethilon or Prolene interrupted sutures. This is followed by closure of the superficial fascia and the skin as usual.39-41Prosthetic Repairs. The popularization of tension-free pros-thetic mesh repairs signified a paradigm shift in the surgical concept of inguinal hernia pathophysiology. Mesh-based her-nioplasty is the most commonly performed general surgical procedure, owing to the technique’s efficacy and improved out-comes. The techniques of the most commonly performed pros-thetic repairs are presented in this section.Lichtenstein Tension-Free Repair The Lichtenstein technique allows for a tension-free repair of the inguinal floor by buttressing the floor with a prosthetic mesh (Fig. 37-18). Initial exposure and mobilization of cord structures is identical to other open approaches. The inguinal canal is dissected to expose the shelving edge of the inguinal ligament, the pubic tubercle, and sufficient area for mesh. The most commonly used mesh is “flat iron” shaped with a keyhole for cord egress, it is available in several sizes. It should be noted that when selecting the size, it must be large enough to extend 2 to 3 cm superior to Figure 37-18. The Desarda repair. A. The medial leaf of the external oblique aponeurosis is sutured to the inguinal ligament. 1 Medial leaf,  2 interrupted sutures taken to suture the medial leaf to the inguinal ligament, 3 pubic tubercle, 4 abdominal ring, 5 spermatic cord, 6 lateral leaf B. Undetached strip of the external oblique aponeurosis forming the posterior wall. 1 Reflected medial leaf after a strip has been separated, 2 internal oblique muscle seen through the splitting incision made in the medial leaf, 3 interrupted sutures between the upper border of the strip and conjoined muscle and internal oblique muscle, 4 interrupted sutures between the lower border of the strip and the inguinal ligament, 5 pubic tubercle, 6 abdominal ring, 7 spermatic cord, 8 lateral leaf.64123568751234Hesselbach’s Triangle. The medial edge of the mesh is affixed to the anterior rectus sheath such that it overlaps the pubic tubercle by 1.5 to 2 cm. This refinement to the original Lichtenstein technique minimizes medial recurrence.42For fixation of the inferior margin of the mesh, a per-manent, synthetic, monofilament suture is used taking care to avoid placing sutures directly into the periosteum of the pubic tubercle. Fixation is continued along the shelving edge of the inguinal ligament from medial to lateral, ending at the internal ring. The upper tail of the mesh is then fixed to the internal oblique aponeurosis and the medial edge to the rectus sheath using a synthetic, absorbable suture.In the case of a femoral hernia, a triangular extension of the inferior aspect of the mesh is sutured to Cooper’s ligament medially and to the inguinal ligament laterally. The lateral tails of the mesh are tailored to fit snugly around the cord at the internal ring, but not too tight to strangulate it. The tails are then sutured to the inguinal ligament with an interrupted stitch and placed beneath the external oblique aponeurosis.Plug and Patch Technique. A modification of the Lichtenstein repair, the Plug and Patch technique was developed by Gilbert and later popularized by Rutkow and Robbins.43 Prior to placing the prosthetic mesh patch over the inguinal floor, a three-dimensional prosthetic plug is placed in the space previously occupied by the hernia sac (Fig. 37-19). In the case of an indirect hernia, the plug is placed alongside the spermatic cord through the internal ring. Prosthetic plugs of various sizes are available, and one of appropriate size is fixed to the margins of the internal ring with interrupted sutures.44 For direct hernias, the sac is reduced, and the plug is sutured to Cooper’s ligament, the inguinal ligament, and Brunicardi_Ch37_p1599-p1624.indd   161229/01/19   2:03 PM 1613INGUINAL HERNIASCHAPTER 37Figure 37-19. Lichtenstein tension-free hernioplasty. m. =  muscle; n. = nerve; v. = vein.the internal oblique aponeurosis. While the technique has good overall outcomes, there have been some isolated case report series of complications involving the presence of the plug, including bowel obstruction and chronic pain.Wound Closure Once the reconstruction of the inguinal canal is complete, the cord contents are returned to their anatomic posi-tion. The external oblique aponeurosis is then reapproximated continuously from medial to lateral using an absorbable suture. The external ring should be reconstructed in close apposition to the spermatic cord to avoid the appearance of recurrence on future examination. Scarpa’s fascia and skin are appropriately closed.Laparoscopic ApproachLaparoscopic inguinal hernia repairs have become increas-ingly popular given the noninferiority studies, improved aes-thetics, and increased surgeon experience with the procedure. Principal endoscopic methods include the transabdominal preperitoneal (TAPP) repair, the totally extraperitoneal (TEP) repair, and the less-commonly performed intraperitoneal onlay mesh (IPOM) repair.Of note, awake patients do not tolerate abdominal insuffla-tion well; therefore, laparoscopic repair necessitates the admin-istration of general anesthesia and its inherent risks. Any patient with a contraindication to the use of general anesthesia should not undergo laparoscopic hernia repair. Occasionally, induction of general anesthesia may result in reduction of an incarcer-ated or strangulated inguinal hernia. If the surgeon suspects this might have occurred, the abdomen should be explored for non-viable tissue either via laparoscopy or upon conversion to an open laparotomy.The indications for laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair are similar to those for open repair. Most surgeons would agree that the endoscopic approach to bilateral or recurrent inguinal hernias is superior to the open approach.45 Concurrent inguinal hernia repair can be considered if a hernia patient is scheduled to undergo another laparoscopic procedure without gross contamination, such as prostatectomy.46,47 International Endohernia Society (IEHS) guidelines offer a grade A recommendation that TEP and TAPP are preferred alternatives to Lichtenstein repair for recurrent hernias after open anterior repair.48,49 The possibility of bilateral repair should be discussed with all patients undergoing endoscopic inguinal hernia surgery.The operating room configuration is identical for TAPP, TEP, and IPOM procedures. The patient is placed in the Trendelenburg position, and video screens are placed at the foot of the bed. The surgeon stands contralateral to the hernia, and the assistant stands opposite the surgeon. The patient’s arms are tucked to the sides. Figure 37-20 demonstrates a typical operating room setup for endoscopic inguinal hernia repair. The following sections outline the most commonly performed endoscopic inguinal hernia repair techniques.Transabdominal Preperitoneal Procedure. The transab-dominal approach confers the advantage of an intraperitoneal perspective, which is useful for bilateral hernias, large hernia defects, and scarring from previous lower abdominal surgery. The abdominal cavity is accessed using a dissecting trocar or open Hasson technique. Pneumoperitoneum to a level of 15 mmHg is achieved. Two 5-mm trocars are placed lateral and slightly inferior to the umbilical trocar, avoiding injury to the inferior epigastric vessels (Fig. 37-21). The patient is then placed in the Trendelenburg position, and the pelvis is inspected.The bladder, median and medial umbilical ligaments, external iliac, and inferior epigastric vessels are visualized. An incision is made in the peritoneum at the medial umbilical liga-ment, 3 to 4 cm superior to the hernia defect, and it is carried lat-erally to the anterior superior iliac spine. For bilateral inguinal hernia repair, bilateral peritoneal incisions are advisable, leav-ing a midline bridge of tissue to avoid injuring a potential patent urachus. The inferior edge of incised peritoneum is retracted, and the preperitoneum is dissected to expose the spermatic cord. If a direct hernia is encountered, the sac is inverted and fixed to Cooper’s ligament to prevent development of hematoma or seroma. An indirect hernia sac will usually protrude anterior to the spermatic cord. In this case, the sac is grasped and elevated superiorly from the cord and the space below is developed bluntly to allow for mesh placement. The sac is dissected from its adhesions, and the cord is skeletonized.The mesh usually measures 10 × 15 cm to completely cover the myopectineal orifice (Fig. 37-22). It is rolled length-wise and placed through the 12-mm trocar. It is unrolled in the preperitoneal space and secured medially to Cooper’s ligament using an endoscopic tacker. During this fixation, the surgeon palpates the end of the tacker from the abdominal surface to ensure its proper angle and to stabilize the pelvis. The mesh is then pulled taut and fixed laterally to the anterior superior iliac spine. Tacks are placed above the iliopubic tract to avoid injury to the lateral cutaneous nerve of the thigh and the femoral branch of the genitofemoral nerve. The peritoneal edges are reapproxi-mated using tacks or intracorporeal sutures as the mesh is sta-bilized. The peritoneum should be closed completely to avoid contact between the mesh and the intestine. The abdomen is desufflated, and the trocars are removed. The fascial defect of the 12-mm port and the skin incisions are appropriately closed.Totally Extraperitoneal Procedure. The advantage of the TEP repair is the access to the preperitoneal space without intra-peritoneal infiltration. Consequently, this approach minimizes the risk of injury to intra-abdominal organs and port site hernia-tion through an iatrogenic defect in the abdominal wall. As with TAPP, TEP is indicated for repair of bilateral inguinal hernias or Brunicardi_Ch37_p1599-p1624.indd   161329/01/19   2:03 PM 1614SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 37-20. Operating room setup for laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair.for unilateral hernias when scarring makes the anterior approach challenging.A small horizontal incision is made inferior to the umbi-licus. Subcutaneous tissue is dissected to the level of the ante-rior rectus sheath, which is then incised lateral to the linea alba. The rectus muscle is retracted superolaterally, and a dissecting balloon is advanced through the incision toward the pubic sym-physis. Under direct visualization with a 30° laparoscope, the balloon is inflated slowly to bluntly dissect the preperitoneal space (Fig. 37-23). The dissecting balloon is replaced with a 12-mm balloon trocar, and pneumopreperitoneum is achieved by insufflation to 15 mmHg. A 5-mm trocar is placed suprapubically in the midline, and another is placed inferior to the insufflation port (see Fig. 37-21). The patient is placed in the Trendelenburg position, and the operation proceeds in an identical fashion to TAPP. No modifications are necessary to repair bilateral ingui-nal hernias with the TEP approach. Any peritoneal rents should be repaired prior to desufflation to prevent mesh from contact-ing intraperitoneal structures. Following mesh placement, the preperitoneal space is desufflated slowly under direct vision to ensure proper mesh positioning. Trocars are removed, and the anterior rectus sheath is closed with an interrupted suture. If there Brunicardi_Ch37_p1599-p1624.indd   161429/01/19   2:03 PM 1615INGUINAL HERNIASCHAPTER 37BA Figure 37-21. Trocar placement for (A) transabdominal preperitoneal repair and (B) totally extraperitoneal repair.Figure 37-22. View of mesh placement in posterior repairs. A large mesh overlaps the myopectineal orifice.Figure 37-23. Balloon dissection of the preperitoneal space in a totally extraperitoneal inguinal hernia repair.Brunicardi_Ch37_p1599-p1624.indd   161529/01/19   2:04 PM 1616SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIis violation of the peritoneum during insufflation of the dissec-tion balloon and subsequent pneumoperitoneum, visualization can be compromised. To address this, a Veress needle or angio-catheter can be placed in the LUQ, which will allow desufflation of the peritoneum and restore visualization.Intraperitoneal Onlay Mesh Procedure. In contrast to TAPP and TEP, the IPOM procedure permits the posterior approach without preperitoneal dissection. It is an attractive procedure in cases where the anterior approach is unfeasible, in recurrent her-nias that are refractory to other approaches, or where extensive preperitoneal scarring would make TEP or TAPP challenging. Port placement and inguinal hernia identification are identical to TAPP. Hernia sac contents are reduced; however, the sac itself is not inverted from the preperitoneal space. Instead, mesh is placed directly over the defect and fixed in place with sutures or spiral tacks. Because these anchors are placed through the peritoneum without preperitoneal inspection, the lateral cutane-ous nerve of the thigh and the genitofemoral nerve are especially prone to injury. Furthermore, intraperitoneal mesh migration is a documented phenomenon that can lead to postoperative mor-bidity, recurrence, and reoperation.Robot-Assisted Inguinal Hernia RepairApplication of a robotic platform to hernia repair has been adapted by general surgeons across the country. The endowrist capabilities provides greatly improved manual dexterity and a relatively short learning curve. Though both total extraperito-neal repair and transabdominal preperitoneal repair can be adapted to a robotic platform, the latter has gained more traction among surgeons.Many papers have explored the efficacy and cost-effectiveness of robot-assisted herniorraphy. Retrospective data have had mixed results when comparing robot-assisted surgery vs. laparoscopy. One recent study has shown longer operative time,50 another analysis has shown increased cost.51 It should be noted, however, that there is a decrease in cost with robotic surgery as the volume of procedures increases at each center, though it is still unlikely that the costs will ever converge to that of laparoscopic surgery. A retrospective, single-institution study has shown greatly reduced complication rates with robotic assisted surgery in obese patients; however, this was compared against open inguinal hernia repair (10.8% vs. 3.2%, P = 0.047), the two groups were covariate matched for preoperative risk.52 Studies have also shown excellent long-term (36-month) quality of life indicators in robot-assisted TAPP, though this was a single surgeon survey.53 Further randomized trials will shed more light into cost issues as surgeons gain more experience with robotic application that would lead to shorter operative time and minimize additional instrument use.Similar to laparoscopy, robot-assisted repair is ideal for recurrent inguinal hernia patients who had previous anterior repair and bilateral hernias. Contraindications to robotic her-nia repair are the same as for laparoscopic repair and include coagulopathy and/or severe cardiopulmonary disease precluding induction of general anesthesia and pneumoperitoneum. Previ-ous preperitoneal repair is a relative contraindication along with the presence of a large incarcerated inguinal hernia.Patient evaluation should proceed similarly to workup for laparoscopic inguinal herniorraphy.Technique. Patients are instructed to void in preoperative area to avoid Foley catheter placement, though some surgeons advocate 4routine Foley catheter placement. Ideally, the operating table should have capability of synchronization with robotic arms to prevent injury to the patient during repositioning during the pro-cedure. The patient is placed in supine position with arms tucked at both sides. Appropriate padding of extremities is important to avoid neuropraxia and trauma from robotic arm movements. Three trocars are typically used for TAPP repair. Open Hasson technique is employed for initial trocar placement at umbilicus; this can be an 8-mm trocar or alternatively a 12-mm with a tele-scoped 8-mm trochar. Additionally, two 8-mm trocars are placed in each side of the mid-abdomen, slightly above the level of umbi-licus. After trocar placement, the robot is docked and targeted, and the patient is placed in Trendelenburg position. Typically, the surgeon will use robotic shears attached to electrocautery, Cadiere forceps, and a needle holder as the primary instruments. This combination provides optimal cost-effectiveness because the majority of the cost associated with robotic application is due to disposable instruments. Exposure starts with incising the parietal peritoneum from the medial umbilical ligament to the anterior superior iliac spine. A peritoneal flap is developed by blunt and sharp dissection with robotic shears in the prepreitoneal space. Special care is taken to leave the preperitoneal fat pad contain-ing nerves and vessels with the anterior abdominal wall. Small vessels can be coagulated with application of electrocautery with scissors. With the aid of pneumoperitoneum, the preference is first to perform a lateral dissection in the space of Bogros. Dissection continues in this plane laterally towards the anterior superior iliac spine. The generous development of a peritoneal flap will ensure successful mesh placement at the end. Then the space of Retzius is entered medially exposing the pubic symphysis. In the absence of haptic feedback, visual recognition of the pubic symphysis is crucial as this serves as an important landmark for further dis-section. Inferior epigastric vessels are readily identified. Next, an inferior peritoneal flap is developed to avoid rolling of mesh during closure. Direct, indirect, and femoral spaces are carefully examined. Cadiere forceps are then used to grasp the hernia sac to provide traction. Any cord lipoma is carefully dissected free from the cord structures, and the testicular vessels, pampiniform plexus, and ductus deferens are separated from hernia sac. These structures can usually be identified at the neck of sac. Reduction is successful when the sac stays reduced after traction is released. The next step is placement of the mesh. Lightweight barbed mesh and anatomically preshaped mesh are routinely used. Mesh should be an appropriate size to cover the myopectineal orifice entirely, and the peritoneal dissection will need to be large enough to accommodate this size mesh. It is rolled and placed through one of the ports by the bedside assistant. Then it is unrolled and placed in the pelvis overlapping the pubic symphysis by several centimeters medially; this is essential as the majority of recur-rences occur in this area. Utilization of tacking devices are not necessary, which helps to reduce procedural cost; however, this is surgeon preference. Finally, the peritoneal flap is placed back over the mesh layer and sutured back into place with a running locking suture that is facilitated by the increased intracorporeal dexterity of the robotic instruments. Then the fascia of the umbili-cal trochar site is closed with 0-absorbable suture (Fig 37-24), and the skin is closed with absorbable monofilament suture.Prosthesis ConsiderationsThe success of prosthetic repairs has generated considerable debate about the desirable physical attributes of mesh and their fixation. An ideal mesh should be easy to handle, flexible, Brunicardi_Ch37_p1599-p1624.indd   161629/01/19   2:04 PM 1617INGUINAL HERNIASCHAPTER 37Figure 37-24. Steps in robotic TAPP repair. A. Image of a direct inguinal hernia. B. There is no visible hernia on the contralateral side. C. Hernia contents and sac are dissected and cleared for mesh placement. D. Unrolling and placement of mesh E. Satisfactory placement of mesh. F. Closure of peritoneum. G. Completed repair of hernia with comparison to contralateral side.ABCDEFGBrunicardi_Ch37_p1599-p1624.indd   161729/01/19   2:04 PM 1618SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIstrong, immunologically inert, contraction-resistant, infection-resistant, and inexpensive to manufacture.54 The following section reviews the most common types of mesh and fixatives currently available.Synthetic Mesh Material. Polypropylene and polyester are the most common synthetic prosthetic materials used in her-nia repair. These materials are permanent and hydrophobic, and they promote a local inflammatory response that results in cellular infiltration and scarring with slight contraction in size. Other synthetic mesh materials are under investigation with the goals of minimizing postoperative pain and preventing infection or recurrence. In selecting mesh material, considerations include mesh absorbability, thickness, weight, porosity, and strength.Variations in the fiber diameter and fiber count of mesh materials categorize them as heavyweight or lightweight in den-sity, though there does not seem to be a universally agreed upon set of criteria for either. Commonly used lightweight mesh materi-als include β-d-glucan, titanium-coated polypropylene, and poly-propylene–poliglecaprone. These materials have greater elasticity and less theoretical surface area contact with surrounding tissues than their heavyweight counterparts.55 They are hypothesized to reduce scarring and chronic pain without compromising the strength of the repair. The use of lightweight mesh use in TEP and TAPP repairs is associated with fewer 3-month cumulative mesh-related complications.54 A 2012 meta-analysis of 2310 patients undergoing open or laparoscopic hernia repairs found a lower incidence of chronic pain (relative risk [RR] 0.61, CI 0.50–0.74) following use of lightweight mesh versus heavyweight mesh and no significant difference in rates of recurrence.55When available, lightweight mesh should be considered for all prosthetic repairs to minimize postoperative chronic pain. A disadvantage of currently available commercial pros-theses is their high cost. In settings where resources are limited, prosthetic repairs are performed using alternative materials. Polypropylene and polyethylene mosquito nets are inexpensive and ubiquitous in sub-Saharan Africa and India, and they have similar mechanical properties to commercially available hernio-plasty meshes. Meta-analysis of 577 hernioplasties performed using sterilized mosquito nets demonstrated similar rates of short-term mesh-related complications (6.1%) and recurrence (0.17%) to those using commercial meshes.56 Furthermore, the disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) prevented by inguinal hernia repair signify a comparable impact to that of vaccination in sub-Saharan Africa.57,58 Expensive prostheses are not neces-sarily needed for hernia surgery, whether in resource-limited or in resource-abundant settings, and the anticipated benefits should be evaluated with consideration of increased costs.Biologic Mesh. Although indications for the use of biologic prostheses have not been absolutely defined, they are commonly reserved for contaminated cases or when domain expansion is necessary in the face of high infection risk. This is partially on account of their high cost and high recurrence rates. There are numerous biologic materials available with differing properties, but in general, they have a lower tensile strength and subse-quently higher rates of rupture than synthetic prostheses.59 They also have varying degrees of tensile strength and tissue biocom-patibility between them. In ventral hernia repairs, xenograft material was associated with a lower rate of recurrence than allograft material.60 A review of biologic materials concludes cross-linked graft materials are more durable and less prone to failure than non–cross-linked grafts.61 Nevertheless, their 5diminished ability to remodel adversely affects rates of infec-tion and incorporation. While new prosthetic materials continue to be developed, no single biologic warrants routine use. These materials will continue to evolve, and they remain an important tool for challenging cases when used judiciously.Fixation Technique. Independent of prosthesis material, the method of its fixation remains disputed. Suturing, stapling, and tacking prostheses entail tissue perforation, which may cause inflammation, neurovascular injury, and chronic pain devel-opment. Conversely, improper prosthesis fixation may result in mesh migration, repair failure, meshoma pain, and hernia recurrence. Mesh may be fixed with fibrin-derived glue, and self-gripping mesh has been developed to minimize trauma to surrounding tissues and to reduce the risk for entrapment neuropathy. For hernias repaired via a strictly preperitoneal approach, prosthesis fixation may not be necessary at all.Fibrin glue fixation is a successful alternative to tack fixation in hernia repair with a synthetic prosthesis. Recent studies comparing fibrin glue fixation and suture fixation in open hernia repair show superior rates of chronic pain with both Lichtenstein and Plug and Patch techniques.62,63 Meta-analyses of endoscopic hernia repair determined the incidence of chronic postoperative pain after tacker fixation was significantly higher than after fibrin glue fixation, with one showing a relative risk of 4.64 (CI 1.9–11.7). Rates of other postoperative complications and recurrence were similar between both fixation methods.62,63 Glue fixation is a promising technical refinement, and several studies have shown long-term benefit; however, its questionable efficacy in larger hernias and cost remain considerations.In TEP repairs, fixation of mesh may not be compulsory. A prospective randomized trial comparing fixation and no fixation in TEP repairs found a significant increase in new pain and equiv-alent recurrence rates in the fixation group several months after repair.64 A 2012 meta-analysis comparing laparoscopic tacker mesh fixation to no mesh fixation found no statistically signifi-cant differences in operative duration, pain, mesh-related compli-cations, recurrence, or length of stay between the two methods.65 Studies of three-dimensional, ergonomically contoured mesh without fixation, as well as self-gripping meshes, have yielded similar results.66 In the preperitoneal approach, the reapproxi-mation of surrounding tissues and physiologic intra-abdominal pressure hypothetically prevent mesh migration. Due to higher theoretical risk of mesh migration, repair without fixation is not recommended for anterior or transperitoneal approaches.COMPLICATIONSAs with other clean operations, the most common complications of inguinal hernia repair include bleeding, infection, seroma, urinary retention, ileus, and injury to adjacent structures (Table 37-6). Complications specific to herniorrhaphy include hernia recurrence, chronic inguinal and pubic pain, and injury to the spermatic cord or testis. The incidence, prevention, and treatment of these complications are discussed in the ensuing section.Hernia RecurrenceWhen a patient develops pain, bulging, or a mass at the site of an inguinal hernia repair, clinical entities such as seroma, persistent cord lipoma, and hernia recurrence should be considered. Com-mon medical issues associated with recurrence include malnu-trition, immunosuppression, diabetes, steroid use, and smoking. Technical causes of recurrence include improper mesh size, tissue Brunicardi_Ch37_p1599-p1624.indd   161829/01/19   2:04 PM 1619INGUINAL HERNIASCHAPTER 37Table 37-6Complications of groin hernia repairsRecurrenceChronic groin pain Nociceptive  Somatic  Visceral Neuropathic  Iliohypogastric  Ilioinguinal  Genitofemoral  Lateral cutaneous  FemoralCord and testicular Hematoma Ischemic orchitis Testicular atrophy Dysejaculation Division of vas deferens Hydrocele Testicular descentBladder injuryWound infectionSeromaHematoma Wound Scrotal RetroperitonealOsteitis pubisProsthetic complications Contraction Erosion Infection Rejection FractureLaparoscopic Vascular injury  Intra-abdominal  Retroperitoneal  Abdominal wall  Gas embolism Visceral injury  Bowel perforation  Bladder perforation Trocar site complications  Hematoma  Hernia  Wound infection  Keloid Bowel obstruction  Trocar or peritoneal closure site hernia  Adhesions Miscellaneous  Diaphragmatic dysfunction  HypercapniaGeneral Urinary Paralytic ileus Nausea and vomiting Aspiration pneumonia Cardiovascular and respiratory insufficiencyischemia, infection, and tension in the reconstruction. A focused physical examination should be performed. As with primary her-nias, US, CT, or MRI can elucidate ambiguous physical findings. When a recurrent hernia is discovered and warrants reoperation, an approach through a virgin plane facilitates its dissection and exposure. Extensive dissection of the scarred field and mesh may result in injury to cord structures, viscera, large blood ves-sels, and nerves. After an initial anterior approach, the posterior endoscopic approach will usually be easier and more effective than another anterior dissection. Conversely, failed preperitoneal repairs should be approached using an open anterior repair.PainPain after inguinal hernia repair is classified into acute or chronic manifestations of three mechanisms: nociceptive (somatic), neuropathic, and visceral pain. Nociceptive pain is the most common of the three. Because it is usually a result of ligamentous or muscular trauma and inflammation, nociceptive pain is reproduced with abdominal muscle contraction. Treat-ment consists of rest, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and reassurance as it resolves spontaneously in most cases. Neuropathic pain occurs as a result of direct nerve dam-age or entrapment. It may present early or late, and it mani-fests as a localized, sharp, burning, or tearing sensation. It may respond to pharmacologic therapy and to local steroid or anes-thetic injections when indicated. Visceral pain refers to pain conveyed through afferent autonomic pain fibers. It is usually poorly localized and may occur during ejaculation as a result of sympathetic plexus injury.Chronic postoperative pain remains an important measure of clinical outcome that has been reported in as many as 63% of inguinal hernia repair cases.67-69 Despite the significant anatomic variation in the three inguinal nerves, literature reviews suggest identification of all three nerves is possible in 70% to 90% of cases.70 Meticulous nerve identification may prevent injury that results in debilitating chronic postoperative pain syndromes. Notwithstanding, moderate-to-severe pain adversely affects physical activity, social interactions, health care utilization, employment, and productivity in 6% to 8% of patients.67,68,71-74 Pain in this subset of patients comprises a tremendous individ-ual and societal burden.Postherniorrhaphy inguinodynia is a debilitating chronic complication. Its incidence is independent of the method of her-nia repair.73 Selective ilioinguinal, iliohypogastric, and genito-femoral neurolysis/neurectomy, removal of mesh and fixation material, and revision of the repair are the three most common options for treatment. Nevertheless, anatomic variation and cross-innervation of the inguinal nerves in the retroperitoneum and inguinal canal make selective neurectomy less reliable.75-78 When inguinodynia is refractory to pharmacologic and interven-tional measures, triple neurectomy with removal of meshoma is routinely performed with acceptable outcomes in the majority of patients.74,76,77,79-84 Refractory inguinodynia with concurrent orchialgia also requires resection of the paravasal nerves.84A relatively newly described technique that has cited good outcomes is the laparoscopic triple neurectomy. This involves laparoscopic approach to and division of the main trunks of the ilioinguinal and iliohypogastric nerves and additional division of the genitofemoral nerve in the lumbar plexus.84,85 Several studies with moderate numbers of patients treated showed dura-ble reduction in pain scores.Other chronic pain syndromes include local nerve entrapment, meralgia paresthesia, and osteitis pubis. At greatest Brunicardi_Ch37_p1599-p1624.indd   161929/01/19   2:04 PM 1620SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIrisk of entrapment are the ilioinguinal and iliohypogastric nerves in anterior repairs and the genitofemoral and lateral femoral cutaneous nerves in endoscopic repairs. Clinical manifestations of nerve entrapment mimic acute neuropathic pain, and they occur with a dermatomal distribution. Injury to the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve results in meralgia paresthesia, a condition characterized by persistent paresthesia of the lateral thigh. Initial treatment of nerve entrapment consists of rest, ice, NSAIDs, physical therapy, and possible local corticosteroid and anesthetic injection. This can be followed by a trial of gabapentin86 or its analogues. Osteitis pubis is characterized by inflammation of the pubic symphysis and usually presents as medial groin or symphyseal pain that is reproduced by thigh adduction. Avoiding the pubic periosteum when placing sutures and tacks reduces the risk of developing osteitis pubis. CT scan or MRI excludes hernia recurrence, and bone scan is confirmatory for the diagnosis. Initial treatment is identical to that of nerve entrapment; however, if pain remains intractable, orthopedic surgery consultation should be sought for possible bone resection and curettage. Irrespective of treatment, the condition often takes six months to resolve.87Cord and Testes InjuryInjury to spermatic cord structures may result in ischemic orchitis or testicular atrophy. Ischemic orchitis is most com-monly caused by injury to the pampiniform plexus and not to the testicular artery. It usually manifests within 1 week of ingui-nal hernia repair as an enlarged, indurated, and painful testis, and it is almost certainly self-limited. It occurs in <1% of pri-mary hernia repairs; however, this figure is larger for recurrent inguinal hernia repairs.88 US will demonstrate testicular blood flow to differentiate between ischemia and necrosis. Emergent orchiectomy is only necessary in the case of necrosis. Injury to the testicular artery itself may lead to testicular atrophy, which is manifest over a protracted period but does not always lead to testicular necrosis. This is because despite compromise of the artery, there is collateral flow from the inferior epigastric, vesi-cal, prostatic, and scrotal arteries that supply the testes, and in the case of insufficiency, there is atrophy. Treatment for isch-emic orchitis most frequently consists of reassurance, NSAIDs, and comfort measures. Intraoperatively, proximal ligation of large hernia sacs to avoid cord manipulation minimizes the risk of injury.Injury to the vas deferens within the cord may lead to infertility. In open inguinal hernia repairs, isolating the vas deferens along with the cord structures using digital manipulation may cause injury or disruption. In endoscopic approach, grasping the vas may result in a crush injury. Transections of the vas deferens should be addressed with a urologic consult and early anastomosis, if possible. Historically, surgeons and their patients speculated that synthetic material would increase the risks of mesh rejection, carcinogenesis, and inflammation; however, as mesh became used more frequently, these concerns did not manifest. Nevertheless, one study found prosthetic mesh may exert long-term deleterious effects upon the vas deferens, causing azoospermia.89 Similar studies report varied results, though. A recent prospective study from the Swedish Hernia Registry discovered no difference in rates of patient-reported infertility between the general population and patients who underwent either mesh or tissue-based inguinal hernia repair.90 Chronic scarring may lead to vas deferens obstruction, resulting in decreased fertility rates and a dysejaculation syndrome. Pain and burning during ejaculation are usually self-limited, and more common causes, such as sexually transmitted diseases, should be excluded.In females, the round ligament is the analog to the sper-matic cord, and it maintains uterine anteversion. Injury to the artery of the round ligament does not result in clinically signifi-cant morbidity.Laparoscopic ComplicationsIn general, the risks of the TEP technique mirror those of open anterior repairs, as the peritoneal space is not violated. Com-plications of transabdominal laparoscopy include urinary reten-tion, paralytic ileus, visceral injuries, vascular injuries, and less commonly, bowel obstruction, hypercapnia, gas embolism, and pneumothorax. The most common complications of endoscopic inguinal hernia repair are presented in this section.Urinary Retention. The most common cause of urinary reten-tion after hernia repair is general anesthesia, which is routine in endoscopic hernia repairs. Among 880 patients undergoing inguinal hernia repair with local anesthesia only, 0.2% devel-oped urinary retention, while the rate of urinary retention was 13% among 200 patients undergoing repair with general or spinal anesthesia.91 Overall, the risk of development of postop-erative urinary retention is 2% to 3%.92-95 Other risk factors for postoperative urinary retention include pain, narcotic analgesia, and perioperative bladder distention. Initial treatment of urinary retention requires decompression of the bladder with short-term catheterization. Patients will generally require an overnight admission and trial of normal voiding before discharge. Failure to void normally requires reinsertion of the catheter for up to a week. Chronic requirement of a urinary catheter is rare, though older patients may require prolonged catheterization. Risk of urinary retention can be minimized by ensuring voiding prior to surgery and minimization of perioperative fluid administration.96Ileus and Bowel Obstruction. The laparoscopic transab-dominal approach is associated with a higher incidence of ileus than other modes of repair. This complication is self-limited; however, it necessitates sustained inpatient observation, intra-venous fluid maintenance, and possibly nasogastric decom-pression. Abdominal imaging may be helpful to confirm the diagnosis and to exclude bowel obstruction. Prolonged absence of bowel function, in conjunction with a suspicious abdominal series, should raise concern for obstruction. In this case, CT of the abdomen is helpful to distinguish anatomic sites of obstruc-tion, inflammation, and ischemia. In TAPP repairs, obstruction occurs most commonly secondary to herniation of bowel loops through peritoneal defects or large trocar insertion sites; how-ever, the use of smaller trocars and the preponderance of TEP repairs have reduced the frequency of this complication. True obstruction warrants reoperation.Visceral Injury. Small bowel, colon, and bladder are at risk for injury in laparoscopic hernia repair. The presence of intra-abdominal adhesions from previous surgeries may predispose to visceral injuries. Direct bowel injuries may also result from tro-car placement. In reoperative abdominal surgery, open Hasson technique and direct visualization of trocars are recommended to reduce the likelihood of visceral injury. Bowel injury may also occur secondary to electrocautery and instrument trauma outside of the camera field. Missed bowel injuries are associated with increased mortality. If injury to the bowel is suspected, its entire length should be examined, and conversion to open repair may be necessary.Brunicardi_Ch37_p1599-p1624.indd   162029/01/19   2:04 PM 1621INGUINAL HERNIASCHAPTER 37Bladder injuries are less common than visceral injuries, and they are usually associated with perioperative bladder dis-tention or extensive dissection of perivesical adhesions. As with bladder injuries encountered in open surgery, cystotomies must be repaired in several layers with 1 to 2 weeks of Foley catheter decompression. A confirmatory cystogram may be performed before catheter removal to confirm healing of the injury.Vascular Injury. The most severe vascular injuries usually occur in iliac or femoral vessels, either by misplaced sutures in anterior repairs, endoscopic tacker use, or by trocar injury or direct dissection in laparoscopic repairs. In these cases, exsan-guination may be swift. Conversion to an open approach may be necessary, and bleeding should be temporarily controlled with mechanical compression until vascular control is obtained.The most commonly injured vessels in laparoscopic hernia repair include the inferior epigastrics and external iliac arter-ies. Although apparent upon initial approach, these vessels may be obscured during mesh positioning, and tacks or staples may injure them. Oftentimes, due to tamponade effect, injury to the inferior epigastric vessels is not apparent until the adjacent tro-car is removed. If injured, the inferior epigastrics may be ligated with a percutaneous suture passer or endoscopic vessel clips.If the tissue pressure exerted by pneumoperitoneum is greater than an injured vessel’s hydrostatic intraluminal pres-sure, bleeding will not manifest until pneumoperitoneum is released. The presentation of an inferior epigastric vein injury is often delayed because of this effect, and it may result in a significant rectus sheath hematoma. Accordingly, the surgeon should be aware of this intraoperative consideration.Hematomas and SeromasHematomas may present as localized collections or as dif-fuse bruising over the operative site. Injury to spermatic cord vessels may result in a scrotal hematoma. Although they are self-limited, characteristic dark blue discoloration of the entire scrotum may alarm patients. Intermittent warm and cold com-pression aids in resolution. Hematomas may also develop in the incision, retroperitoneum, rectus sheath, and peritoneal cavity. The latter three sites are more frequently associated with lapa-roscopic repair. Bleeding within the peritoneum or preperitoneal space may not be readily apparent on physical examination. For this reason, close monitoring of subjective complaints, vital signs, urine output, and physical parameters is necessary.Seromas are fluid collections that most commonly develop within one week of synthetic mesh repairs. Large hernia sac remnants may fill with physiologic fluid and mimic seromas. Patients often mistake seromas for early recurrence. Treatment consists of reassurance and warm compression to accelerate resolution. To avoid secondary infection, seromas should not be aspirated unless they cause discomfort or they restrict activ-ity for a prolonged time.OUTCOMESThe incidence of recurrence is the most-cited measure of post-operative outcome following inguinal hernia repair. In evaluat-ing the various available techniques, other salient signifiers of outcome include complication rates, operative duration, hospital stay, and quality of life. The following section summarizes the evidence-based outcomes of the various approaches to inguinal hernia repair.Among tissue repairs, the Shouldice operation is the most commonly performed technique, and it is most frequently executed at specialized centers. A 2012 meta-analysis from the Cochrane database demonstrated significantly lower rates of hernia recurrence (OR 0.62, CI 0.45–0.85) in patients undergoing Shouldice operations when compared with other open tissue-based methods.97 In experienced hands, the overall recurrence rate for the Shouldice repair is about 1%.98 Although it is an elegant procedure, its meticulous nature requires significant technical expertise to achieve favorable outcomes, and it is associated with longer operative duration and longer hospital stay. One study found the recurrence rate for Shouldice repairs decreased from 9.4% to 2.5% after surgeons performed the repair six times.99 Compared with mesh repairs, the Shouldice technique resulted in significantly higher rates of recurrence (OR 3.65,  CI 1.79–7.47); however, it is the most effective tissue-based repair when mesh is unavailable or contraindicated.97Hernia recurrence is drastically reduced as a result of the Lichtenstein tension-free repair.100 Compared with open elective tissue-based repairs, mesh repair is associated with fewer recur-rences (OR 0.37, CI 0.26–0.51) and with shorter hospital stay and faster return to usual activities.101,102 In a multi-institutional series, 3019 inguinal hernias were repaired using the Lichten-stein technique, with an overall recurrence rate of 0.2%.103 Among other tension-free repairs, the Lichtenstein technique remains the most commonly performed procedure worldwide. Meta-analysis demonstrates no significant differences in out-comes between the Lichtenstein and the Plug and Patch tech-niques; however, intra-abdominal plug migration and erosion into contiguous structures occurs in approximately 6% of cases.101,104,105 The Stoppa technique results in longer operative duration than the Lichtenstein technique. Nevertheless, postop-erative acute pain, chronic pain, and recurrence rates are similar between the two methods.106 Perhaps the most compelling advan-tage of the Lichtenstein technique is that nonexpert surgeons rapidly achieve similar outcomes to their expert counterparts. Guidelines issued by the European Hernia Society recommend the Lichtenstein repair for adults with either unilateral or bilat-eral inguinal hernias as the preferred open technique.102 Com-pared to open approaches, endoscopic primary inguinal hernia repair produces equivalent recurrence rates and improved recov-ery time, pain prevention, and return to normal activities.107 In a study of 168 patients randomized to either TEP or Lichtenstein repair, the 5-year recurrence rates were extremely low in both groups.108,109 Similarly, a study of 200 male patients randomized to either ambulatory TEP or Lichtenstein repair demonstrated no recurrences in either group after one year.110 Because endoscopic surgery requires specialized instruments and longer operative times, its cost is higher than conventional open repair; however, the potential financial benefit of shorter recovery and decreased pain may offset these costs in the long-term.Perhaps the most salient difference between open and endo-scopic techniques is the number of cases needed to develop techni-cal proficiency. In a randomized controlled trial performed by the VA Cooperative Study, two-year recurrence rates were 10.1% in patients undergoing endoscopic repair and 4.9% in those undergo-ing open repair, and the outcomes of endoscopic repairs improved after each surgeon performed at least 250 cases.111 More recently, Lal and colleagues found that surgeons sustained a decrease from 9% to 2.9% in postoperative recurrences after performing 100 TEP operations.112 Other studies also suggest surgeons develop proficiency in these endoscopic techniques after performing 30 67Brunicardi_Ch37_p1599-p1624.indd   162129/01/19   2:04 PM 1622SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIto 100 cases; however, this estimate has decreased precipitously since laparoscopic technique was first introduced.111,113,114Although controversy persists regarding the utility of TEP versus TAPP, reviews to date find no significant differences in operative duration, length of stay, time to recovery, or short-term recurrence rate between the two approaches. In TAPP repair, the risk of intra-abdominal injury is higher than in TEP repair. This finding prompted the IEHS to recommend TAPP should only be attempted by surgeons with sufficient experience.49 A Cochrane systematic review found rates of port-site hernias and visceral injuries were higher for the TAPP technique, while TEP may be associated with a higher rate of conversion to an alternative approach; however, neither finding was sufficiently compelling to recommend one technique over the other.114The frequency with which the aforementioned ingui-nal hernia repair techniques are performed reinforces the importance of broad experience. The authors recommend that surgeons become proficient in several techniques to address dif-ferent manifestations of inguinal hernias. Surgeons should tailor this experience to optimize outcomes for each patient.REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	National Center for Health Statistics. National Hospital Discharge Survey and National Survey of Ambulatory Surgery, 2010 . Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/index .htm. Accessed August 4, 2018.	2.	Abramson JH, Gofin J, Hopp C, et al. The epidemiology of inguinal hernia. A survey in western Jerusalem. J Epidemiol Community Health. 1978;32(1):59-67.	3.	Rutkow IM. Epidemiologic, economic, and sociologic aspects of hernia surgery in the United States in the 1990s. Surg Clin North Am 1998;78(6):941-951, v-vi.	4.	Johnson J, Roth JS, Hazey JW, et al. The history of open inguinal hernia repair. Curr Surg. 2004;61(1):49-52.	5.	Gil J, Rodriguez JM, Hernandez Aguera Q, et al. The usefulness of international cooperation in the repair of inguinal hernias in Sub-Saharan Africa. World J Surg. 2015;39(11):2622-2629.	6.	Shulman AG, Amid PK, Lichtenstein IL. A survey of non-expert surgeons using the open tension-free mesh patch repair for primary inguinal hernias. Int Surg. 1995;80(1):35-36.	7.	Spaw AT, Ennis BW, Spaw LP. Laparoscopic hernia repair: the anatomic basis. J Laparoendosc Surg. 1991;1(5):269-277.	8.	Scheuermann U, Niebisch S, Lyros O, Jansen-Winkeln B, Gockel I. Transabdominal preperitoneal (TAPP) versus Lichtenstein operation for primary inguinal hernia repair—a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. BMC Surg. 2017;17(1):55.	9.	Fitzgibbons RJ, Jr, Salerno GM, Filipi CJ, Hunter WJ, Watson P. A laparoscopic intraperitoneal onlay mesh technique for the repair of an indirect inguinal hernia. Ann Surg. 1994;219(2):144-156.	10.	Toy FK, Moskowitz M, Smoot RT, Jr, et al. Results of a prospective multicenter trial evaluating the ePTFE peritoneal onlay laparoscopic inguinal hernioplasty. J Laparoendosc Surg. 1996;6(6):375-386.	11.	Arregui ME, Davis CJ, Yucel O, Nagan RF. Laparoscopic mesh repair of inguinal hernia using a preperitoneal approach: a preliminary report. Surg Laparosc Endosc. 1992;2(1):53-58.	12.	Dulucq JL. Treatment of inguinal hernia by insertion of a subperitoneal patch under pre-peritoneoscopy (in French). Chirurgie. 1992;118(1-2):83-85.	13.	Burcharth J, Pommergaard HC, Rosenberg J. The inheritance of groin hernia: a systematic review. Hernia. 2013;17(2):183-189.	14.	Van Wessem KJ, Simons MP, Plaisier PW, Lange JF. The etiology of indirect inguinal hernias: congenital and/or acquired? Hernia. 2003;7(2):76-79.	15.	Weaver KL, Poola AS, Gould JL, Sharp SW, St Peter SD, Holcomb GW 3rd. The risk of developing a symptomatic inguinal hernia in children with an asymptomatic patent processus vaginalis. J Pediatr Surg. 2017;52(1):60-64.	16.	Flich J, Alfonso JL, Delgado F, Prado MJ, Cortina P. Inguinal hernia and certain risk factors. Eur J Epidemiol. 1992;8(2):277-282.	17.	Lau H, Fang C, Yuen WK, Patil NG. Risk factors for inguinal hernia in adult males: a case-control study. Surgery. 2007;141(2):262-266.	18.	Ruhl CE, Everhart JE. Risk factors for inguinal hernia among adults in the US population. Am J Epidemiol. 2007;165(10):1154-1161.	19.	Klinge U, Binnebösel M, Mertens PR. Are collagens the culprits in the development of incisional and inguinal hernia disease? Hernia. 2006;10(6):472-477.	20.	Franz MG. The biology of hernias and the abdominal wall. Hernia. 2006;10(6):462-471.	21.	Ralphs DN, Brain AJ, Grundy DJ, Hobsley M. How accurately can direct and indirect inguinal hernias be distinguished?  Br Med J. 1980;280(6220):1039-1040.	22.	Cameron AE. Accuracy of clinical diagnosis of direct and indirect inguinal hernia. Br J Surg. 1994;81(2):250.	23.	Robinson A, Light D, Kasim A, Nice C. A systematic review and meta-analysis of the role of radiology in the diagnosis of occult inguinal hernia. Surg Endosc. 2013;27(1):11-18.	24.	Jamadar DA, Jacobson JA, Morag Y, et al. Sonography of inguinal region hernias. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2006;187(1): 185-190.	25.	Burkhardt JH, Arshanskiy Y, Munson JL, Scholz FJ. Diagnosis of inguinal region hernias with axial CT: the lateral crescent sign and other key findings. Radiographics. 2011;31(2):E1-E12.	26.	van den Berg JC, de Valois JC, Go PM, Rosenbusch G. Detection of groin hernia with physical examination, ultrasound, and MRI compared with laparoscopic findings. Invest Radiol. 1999;34(12):739-743.	27.	Fitzgibbons RJ, Jr, Giobbie-Hurder A, Gibbs JO, et al. Watch-ful waiting vs repair of inguinal hernia in minimally symp-tomatic men: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2006;295(3): 285-292.	28.	Chen T, Zhang Y, Wang H, et al. Emergency inguinal hernia repair under local anesthesia: a 5-year experience in a teaching hospital. BMC Anesthesiol. 2015;16:17.	29.	van den Heuvel B, Dwars BJ, Klassen DR, Bonjer HJ. Is surgical repair of an asymptomatic groin hernia appropriate? A review. Hernia. 2011;15(3):251-259.	30.	Mizrahi H, Parker MC. Management of asymptomatic inguinal hernia: a systematic review of the evidence. Arch Surg. 2012;147(3):277-281.	31.	Thompson JS, Gibbs JO, Reda DJ, et al. Does delaying repair of an asymptomatic hernia have a penalty? Am J Surg. 2008;195(1):89-93.	32.	Miserez M, Peeters E, Aufenacker T, et al. Update with level 1 studies of the European Hernia Society guidelines on the treatment of inguinal hernia in adult patients. Hernia. 2014;18(2):151-163.	33.	Law NW, Trapnell JE. Does a truss benefit a patient with inguinal hernia? BMJ. 1992;304(6834):1092.	34.	Gallegos NC, Dawson J, Jarvis M, Hobsley M. Risk of strangulation in groin hernias. Br J Surg. 1991;78(10): 1171-1173.	35.	Nilsson H, Stylianidis G, Haapamäki M, Nilsson E, Nordin P. Mortality after groin hernia surgery. Ann Surg. 2007;245(4):656-660.Brunicardi_Ch37_p1599-p1624.indd   162229/01/19   2:04 PM 1623INGUINAL HERNIASCHAPTER 37	36.	Sanchez-Manuel FJ, Lozano-García J, Seco-Gil JL. Antibi-otic prophylaxis for hernia repair. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;(2):CD003769.	37.	Yin Y, Song T, Liao B, Luo Q, Zhou Z. Antibiotic prophylaxis in patients undergoing open mesh repair of inguinal hernia: a meta-analysis. Am Surg. 2012;78(3):359-365.	38.	Delikoukos S, Lavant L, Hlias G, Palogos K, Gikas D. The role of hernia sac ligation in postoperative pain in patients with elective tension-free indirect inguinal hernia repair: a prospective randomized study. Hernia. 2007;11(5):425-428.	39.	Desarda MP. Inguinal herniorrhaphy with an undetached strip of external oblique aponeurosis: a new approach used in 400 patients. Eur J Surg. 2001;167(6):443-448.	40.	Desarda MP. New method of inguinal hernia repair: a new solution. ANZ J Surg. 2001;71(4):241-244.	41.	Desarda MP. Physiological repair of inguinal hernia: a new technique (study of 860 patients). Hernia. 2006;10(2):143-146.	42.	Amid PK, Shulman AG, Lichtenstein IL. Critical scrutiny of the open “tension-free” hernioplasty. Am J Surg. 1993;165(3):369-371.	43.	Gilbert AI. Sutureless repair of inguinal hernia. Am J Surg. 1992;163(3):331-335.	44.	Millikan KW, Cummings B, Doolas A. The Millikan modified mesh-plug hernioplasty. Arch Surg. 2003;138(5):525-529; discussion 529-530.	45.	Voyles CR, Hamilton BJ, Johnson WD, Kano N. Meta-analysis of laparoscopic inguinal hernia trials favors open hernia repair with preperitoneal mesh prosthesis. Am J Surg. 2002;184(1):6-10.	46.	Antunes AA, Dall’oglio M, Crippa A, Srougi M. Inguinal hernia repair with polypropylene mesh during radical retropubic prostatectomy: an easy and practical approach.  BJU Int. 2005;96(3):330-333.	47.	Lee BC, Rodin DM, Shah KK, Dahl DM. Laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair during laparoscopic radical prostatectomy.  BJU Int. 2007;99(3):637-639.	48.	Bittner R, Arregui ME, Bisgaard T, et al. Guidelines for laparoscopic (TAPP) and endoscopic (TEP) treatment of inguinal hernia (International Endohernia Society [IEHS]). Surg Endosc. 2011;25(9):2773-2843.	49.	Bittner R, Montgomery MA, Arregui E, et al. Update of guidelines on laparoscopic (TAPP) and endoscopic (TEP) treatment of inguinal hernia (International Endohernia Society). Surg Endosc. 2015;29(2):289-321.	50.	Waite KE, Herman MA, Doyle PJ. Comparison of robotic versus laparoscopic transabdominal preperitoneal (TAPP) inguinal hernia repair. J Robot Surg. 2016;10(3):239-244.	51.	Higgins RM, Frelich MJ, Bosler ME, Gould JC. Cost analysis of robotic versus laparoscopic general surgery procedures. Surg Endosc. 2017;31(1):185-192.	52.	Kolachalam R, Dickens E, D’Amico L, et al. Early outcomes of robotic-assisted inguinal hernia repair in obese patients: a multi-institutional, retrospective study. Surg Endosc. 2018;32(1):229-235.	53.	Iraniha A, Peloquin J. Long-term quality of life and outcomes following robotic assisted TAPP inguinal hernia repair. J Robot Surg. 2018;12(2):261-269.	54.	Pickett LC. Prosthetic choice in open inguinal hernia repair. In: Jacob BP, Ramshaw B, eds. The SAGES Manual of Hernia Repair. New York: Springer; 2013:19-26.	55.	Sajid MS, Leaver C, Baig MK, Sains P. Systematic review and meta-analysis of the use of lightweight versus heavy-weight mesh in open inguinal hernia repair. Br J Surg. 2012;99(1):29-37.	56.	Sorensen CG, Rosenberg J. The use of sterilized mosquito nets for hernioplasty: a systematic review. Hernia. 2012;16(6): 621-625.	57.	Luboga S, Macfarlane SB, von Schreeb J, et al. Increasing access to surgical services in sub-saharan Africa: priorities for national and international agencies recommended by the Bellagio Essential Surgery Group. PLoS Med. 2009;6(12):e1000200.	58.	Jacobs DO. Improving surgical services in developing nations: getting to go. World J Surg. 2010;34(11):2509-2510.	59.	Earle DB, Mark LA. Prosthetic material in inguinal hernia repair: how do I choose? Surg Clin North Am. 2008;88(1):179-201.	60.	Beale EW, Hoxworth RE, Livingston EH, Trussler AP. The role of biologic mesh in abdominal wall reconstruction: a systematic review of the current literature. Am J Surg. 2012;204(4):510-517.	61.	Smart NJ, Bloor S. Durability of biologic implants for use in hernia repair: a review. Surg Innov. 2012;19(3):221-229.	62.	Campanelli G, Sfeclan C, Cavalli M, Biondi A. Reducing postoperative pain: the use of Tisseel for mesh fixation in inguinal hernia repair. Surg Technol Int. 2012;22:134-139.	63.	Fortelny RH, Petter-Puchner AH, Glaser KS, Redl H. Use of fibrin sealant (Tisseel/Tissucol) in hernia repair: a systematic review. Surg Endosc. 2012;26(7):1803-1812.	64.	Taylor C, Layani L, Liew V, Ghusn M, Crampton N, White S.  Laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair without mesh fixation, early results of a large randomised clinical trial. Surg Endosc. 2008;22(3):757-762.	65.	Sajid MS, Ladwa N, Kalra L, McFall M, Baig MK, Sains P. A meta-analysis examining the use of tacker mesh fixation versus glue mesh fixation in laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair. Am J Surg. 2013;206(1):103-111.	66.	Morrison JE, Jr, Jacobs VR. Laparoscopic preperitoneal inguinal hernia repair using preformed polyester mesh without fixation: prospective study with 1-year follow-up results in a rural setting. Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech. 2008;18(1):33-39.	67.	Aasvang E, Kehlet H. Surgical management of chronic pain after inguinal hernia repair. Br J Surg. 2005;92(7):795-801.	68.	Kehlet H. Chronic pain after groin hernia repair. Br J Surg. 2008;95(2):135-136.	69.	Reinpold WM, Nehls J, Eggert A. Nerve management and chronic pain after open inguinal hernia repair: a prospective two phase study. Ann Surg. 2011;254(1):163-168.	70.	Alfieri S, Amid PK, Campanelli G, et al. International guide-lines for prevention and management of post-operative chronic pain following inguinal hernia surgery. Hernia. 2011; 15(3):239-249.	71.	Callesen T, Beck K, Kehlet H. Prospective study of chronic pain after groin hernia repair. Br J Surg. 1999;86(12):1528-1531.	72.	Bay-Nielsen M, Perkins FM, Kehlet H; Danish Hernia Database. Pain and functional impairment 1 year after inguinal herniorrhaphy: a nationwide questionnaire study. Ann Surg. 2001;233(1):1-7.	73.	Aasvang EK, Bay-Nielsen M, Kehlet H. Pain and functional impairment 6 years after inguinal herniorrhaphy. Hernia. 2006;10(4):316-321.	74.	Aasvang EK, Kehlet H. The effect of mesh removal and selective neurectomy on persistent postherniotomy pain. Ann Surg. 2009;249(2):327-334.	75.	Rab M, Ebmer J, Dellon AL. Anatomic variability of the ilioinguinal and genitofemoral nerve: implications for the treatment of groin pain. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2001; 108(6):1618-1623.	76.	Loos MJ, Scheltinga MR, Roumen RM. Tailored neurectomy for treatment of postherniorrhaphy inguinal neuralgia. Surgery. 2010;147(2):275-281.	77.	Zacest AC, Magill ST, Anderson VC, Burchiel KJ. Long-term outcome following ilioinguinal neurectomy for chronic pain. J Neurosurg. 2010;112(4):784-789.	78.	Klaassen Z, Marshall E, Tubbs RS, Louis RG, Jr, Wartmann CT, Loukas M. Anatomy of the ilioinguinal and iliohypogastric Brunicardi_Ch37_p1599-p1624.indd   162329/01/19   2:04 PM 1624SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IInerves with observations of their spinal nerve contributions. Clin Anat. 2011;24(4):454-461.	79.	Starling JR, Harms BA, Schroeder ME, Eichman PL. Diagnosis and treatment of genitofemoral and ilioinguinal entrapment neuralgia. Surgery. 1987;102(4):581-586.	80.	Starling JR, Harms BA. Ilioinguinal, iliohypogastric, and genitofemoral neuralgia. In: Bendavid R, ed. Prostheses and Abdominal Wall Hernia. Austin, TX: RG Landes Co; 1994: 351-356.	81.	Amid PK. A 1-stage surgical treatment for postherniorrhaphy neuropathic pain: triple neurectomy and proximal end implantation without mobilization of the cord. Arch Surg. 2002;137(1):100-104.	82.	Kim DH, Murovic JA, Tiel RL, Kline DG. Surgical management of 33 ilioinguinal and iliohypogastric neuralgias at Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center. Neurosurgery. 2005;56(5):1013-1020; discussion 1013-1020.	83.	Madura JA, Madura JA 2nd, Copper CM, Worth RM. Inguinal neurectomy for inguinal nerve entrapment: an experience with 100 patients. Am J Surg. 2005;189(3):283-287.	84.	Amid PK, Chen DC. Surgical treatment of chronic groin and testicular pain after laparoscopic and open preperitoneal inguinal hernia repair. J Am Coll Surg. 2011;213(4):531-536.	85.	Chen DC, Hiatt JR, Amid PK. Operative management of refractory neuropathic inguinodynia by a laparoscopic ret-roperitoneal approach. JAMA Surg. 2013;148(10):962-967.	86.	Benito-Leon J, Picardo A, Garrido A, Cuberes R. Gabapentin therapy for genitofemoral and ilioinguinal neuralgia. J Neurol. 2001;248(10):907-908.	87.	LeBlanc KE, LeBlanc KA. Groin pain in athletes. Hernia. 2003;7(2):68-71.	88.	Fong Y, Wantz GE. Prevention of ischemic orchitis during  inguinal hernioplasty. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1992;174(5):399-402.	89.	Shin D, Lipshultz LI, Goldstein M, et al. Herniorrhaphy with polypropylene mesh causing inguinal vasal obstruction: a preventable cause of obstructive azoospermia. Ann Surg. 2005;241(4):553-558.	90.	Hallén M, Sandblom G, Nordin P, et al. Male infertility after mesh hernia repair: a prospective study. Surgery. 2011; 149(2):179-184.	91.	Finley RK, Jr, Miller SF, Jones LM. Elimination of urinary retention following inguinal herniorrhaphy. Am Surg. 1991;57(8):486-488; discussion 488-489.	92.	Aeberhard P, Klaiber C, Meyenberg A, Osterwalder A, Tschudi J. Prospective audit of laparoscopic totally extraperitoneal inguinal hernia repair: a multicenter study of the Swiss Association for Laparoscopic and Thoracoscopic Surgery (SALTC). Surg Endosc. 1999;13(11):1115-1120.	93.	Dulucq JL, Wintringer P, Mahajna A. Laparoscopic totally extraperitoneal inguinal hernia repair: lessons learned from 3,100 hernia repairs over 15 years. Surg Endosc. 2009;23(3):482-486.	94.	Kapiris S, Mavromatis T, Andrikopoulos S, Georgiades C, Floros D, Diamantopoulos G. Laparoscopic transabdominal preperitoneal hernia repair (TAPP): stapling the mesh is not mandatory.  J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A. 2009;19(3):419-422.	95.	Swadia ND. Laparoscopic totally extra-peritoneal inguinal hernia repair: 9 year’s experience. Hernia. 2011;15(3):273-279.	96.	Petros JG, Rimm EB, Robillard RJ, Argy O. Factors influencing postoperative urinary retention in patients undergoing elective inguinal herniorrhaphy. Am J Surg. 1991;161(4):431-433; discussion 434.	97.	Amato B, Moja L, Panico S, et al. Shouldice technique versus other open techniques for inguinal hernia repair. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;(4):CD001543.	98.	Glassow F. The Shouldice Hospital technique. Int Surg. 1986;71(3):148-153.	99.	Kingsnorth AN, Britton BJ, Morris PJ. Recurrent inguinal hernia after local anaesthetic repair. Br J Surg. 1991;68(4):273-275.	100.	Lichtenstein IL, Shulman AG, Amid PK. Use of mesh to prevent recurrence of hernias. Postgrad Med. 1990;87(1):155-158, 160.	101.	Scott NW, McCormack K, Graham P, Go PM, Ross SJ, Grant AM. Open mesh versus non-mesh for repair of femoral and inguinal hernia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2002;(4):CD002197.	102.	Simons MP, Aufenacker T, Bay-Nielsen M, et al. European Hernia Society guidelines on the treatment of inguinal her-nia in adult patients. Hernia. 2009;13(4):343-403.	103.	Shulman AG, Amid PK, Lichtenstein IL. The safety of mesh repair for primary inguinal hernias: results of 3,019 operations from five diverse surgical sources. Am Surg. 1992;58(4):255-257.	104.	Kingsnorth AN, Porter CS, Bennett DH, Walker AJ, Hyland ME, Sodergren S. Lichtenstein patch or Perfix plug-and-patch in inguinal hernia: a prospective double-blind randomized controlled trial of short-term outcome. Surgery. 2000;127(3):276-283.	105.	Li J, Ji Z, Li Y. Comparison of mesh-plug and Lichtenstein for inguinal hernia repair: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Hernia. 2012;16(5):541-548.	106.	Willaert W, De Bacquer D, Rogiers X, Troisi R, Berrevoet F. Open preperitoneal techniques versus lichtenstein repair for elective inguinal hernias. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;(7):CD008034.	107.	McCormack K, Scott NW, Go PM, Ross S, Grant AM; EU Hernia Trialists Collaboration. Laparoscopic tech-niques versus open techniques for inguinal hernia repair. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2003;(1):CD001785.	108.	Andersson B, Hallén M, Leveau P, Bergenfelz A, Westerdahl J. Laparoscopic extraperitoneal inguinal hernia repair versus open mesh repair: a prospective randomized controlled trial. Surgery. 2003;133(5):464-472.	109.	Hallén M, Bergenfelz A, Westerdahl J. Laparoscopic extraperitoneal inguinal hernia repair versus open mesh repair: long-term follow-up of a randomized controlled trial. Surgery. 2008;143(3):313-317.	110.	Lau H, Patil NG, Yuen WK. Day-case endoscopic totally extraperitoneal inguinal hernioplasty versus open Lichtenstein hernioplasty for unilateral primary inguinal hernia in males: a randomized trial. Surg Endosc. 2006;20(1):76-81.	111.	Neumayer L, Giobbie-Hurder A, Jonasson O, et al. Open mesh versus laparoscopic mesh repair of inguinal hernia. N Engl J Med. 2004;350(18):1819-1827.	112.	Lal P, Kajla RK, Chander J, Ramteke VK. Laparoscopic total extraperitoneal (TEP) inguinal hernia repair: overcoming the learning curve. Surg Endosc. 2004;18(4):642-645.	113.	Katkhouda N, Campos GM, Mavor E, Trussler A, Khalil M, Stoppa R. Laparoscopic extraperitoneal inguinal hernia repair. A safe approach based on the understanding of rectus sheath anatomy. Surg Endosc. 1999;13(12):1243-1246.	114.	Wake BL, McCormack K, Fraser C, Vale L, Perez J, Grant AM. Transabdominal pre-peritoneal (TAPP) vs totally extraperitoneal (TEP) laparoscopic techniques for ingui-nal hernia repair. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2005;(1): CD004703.Brunicardi_Ch37_p1599-p1624.indd   162429/01/19   2:04 PM
# Chunk 8940
Thyroid, Parathyroid, and AdrenalGeeta Lal and Orlo H. Clark 38chapterTHYROIDHistorical BackgroundGoiters (from the Latin guttur, throat), defined as an enlarge-ment of the thyroid, have been recognized since 2700 b.c. even though the thyroid gland was not documented as such until the Renaissance period. In 1619, Hieronymus Fabricius ab Aqua-pendente recognized that goiters arose from the thyroid gland. The term thyroid gland (Greek thyreoeides, shield-shaped) is, however, attributed to Thomas Wharton in his Adenographia (1656). In 1776, the thyroid was classified as a ductless gland by Albrecht von Haller and was thought to have numerous func-tions ranging from lubrication of the larynx to acting as a res-ervoir for blood to provide continuous flow to the brain, and to beautifying women’s necks. Burnt seaweed was considered to be the most effective treatment for goiters.The first accounts of thyroid surgery for the treatment of goiters were given by Roger Frugardi in 1170. In response to failure of medical treatment, two setons were inserted at right angles into the goiter and tightened twice daily until the goiter separated. The open wound was treated with caustic powder and left to heal. However, thyroid surgery continued to be hazardous with prohibitive mortality rates (>40%) until the latter half of the 19th century, when advances in general anesthesia, antisep-sis, and hemostasis enabled surgeons to perform thyroid sur-gery with significantly reduced mortality and morbidity rates. The most notable thyroid surgeons were Emil Theodor Kocher (1841–1917) and C.A. Theodor Billroth (1829–1894), who per-formed thousands of operations with increasingly successful results. However, as more patients survived thyroid operations, new problems and issues became apparent. After total thyroid-ectomy, patients (particularly children) became myxedematous with cretinous features. Myxedema was first effectively treated in 1891 by George Murray using a subcutaneous injection of an extract of sheep’s thyroid, and later, Edward Fox demonstrated that oral therapy was equally effective. In 1909, Kocher was awarded the Nobel Prize for medicine in recognition “for his works on the physiology, pathology, and surgery of the thyroid gland.”EmbryologyThe thyroid gland arises as an outpouching of the primitive foregut around the third week of gestation. It originates at the base of the tongue at the foramen cecum. Endoderm cells in the floor of the pharyngeal anlage thicken to form the medial thyroid anlage (Fig. 38-1) that descends in the neck anterior to structures that form the hyoid bone and larynx. During its descent, the anlage remains connected to the foramen cecum via an epithelial-lined tube known as the thyroglossal duct. The epithelial cells making up the anlage give rise to the thyroid fol-licular cells. The paired lateral anlages originate from the fourth branchial pouch and fuse with the median anlage at approxi-mately the fifth week of gestation. The lateral anlages are neu-roectodermal in origin (ultimobranchial bodies) and provide the calcitonin producing parafollicular or C cells, which thus come to lie in the superoposterior region of the gland. Thyroid fol-licles are initially apparent by 8 weeks, and colloid formation begins by the 11th week of gestation.Developmental AbnormalitiesThyroglossal Duct Cyst and Sinus. Thyroglossal duct cysts are the most commonly encountered congenital cervical anoma-lies. During the fifth week of gestation, the thyroglossal duct lumen starts to obliterate, and the duct disappears by the eighth week of gestation. Rarely, the thyroglossal duct may persist in whole or in part. Thyroglossal duct cysts may occur anywhere along the migratory path of the thyroid, although 80% are found in juxtaposition to the hyoid bone. They are usually asymptom-atic but occasionally become infected by oral bacteria, prompt-ing the patient to seek medical advice. Thyroglossal duct sinuses Thyroid	1625Historical Background / 1625Embryology / 1625Developmental Abnormalities / 1625Thyroid Anatomy / 1627Thyroid Histology / 1629Thyroid Physiology / 1629Evaluation of Patients With Thyroid Disease / 1633Benign Thyroid Disorders / 1634Solitary Thyroid Nodule / 1641Malignant Thyroid Disease / 1645Parathyroid	1663Historical Background / 1663Embryology / 1663Anatomy and Histology / 1664Parathyroid Physiology and Calcium Homeostasis / 1664Hyperparathyroidism / 1665Hypoparathyroidism / 1681Adrenal	1681Historical Background / 1681Embryology / 1681Anatomy / 1682Adrenal Physiology / 1682Disorders of the Adrenal Cortex / 1685Disorders of the Adrenal Medulla / 1693The Adrenal Incidentaloma / 1695Adrenal Insufficiency / 1697Adrenal Surgery / 1698Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   162501/03/19   11:20 AM 1626result from infection of the cyst secondary to spontaneous or surgical drainage of the cyst and are accompanied by minor inflammation of the surrounding skin. Histologically, thyroglos-sal duct cysts are lined by pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelium and squamous epithelium, with heterotopic thyroid tissue present in 20% of cases.The diagnosis usually is established by observing a 1to 2-cm, smooth, well-defined midline neck mass that moves upward with protrusion of the tongue. Routine thyroid imaging is not necessary, although thyroid scintigraphy and ultrasound have been performed to document the presence of normal thy-roid tissue in the neck. Treatment involves the “Sistrunk opera-tion,” which consists of en bloc cystectomy and excision of the central hyoid bone to minimize recurrence. Approximately 1% of thyroglossal duct cysts are found to contain cancer, which is usually papillary (85%). The role of total thyroidectomy in this setting is debated, but it is advised in patients with large tumors, particularly if there are additional thyroid nodules and evidence of cyst wall invasion or lymph node metastases.1 Squamous, Hürthle cell, and anaplastic cancers also have been reported but are rare. Medullary thyroid cancers (MTCs) are, however, not found in thyroglossal duct cysts.Lingual Thyroid. A lingual thyroid represents a failure of the median thyroid anlage to descend normally and may be the only thyroid tissue present. Intervention becomes necessary for obstructive symptoms such as choking, dysphagia, airway obstruction, or hemorrhage. Many of these patients develop hypothyroidism. Medical treatment options include administra-tion of exogenous thyroid hormone to suppress thyroid-stim-ulating hormone (TSH) and radioactive iodine (RAI) ablation followed by hormone replacement. Surgical excision is rarely needed but, if required, should be preceded by an evaluation of normal thyroid tissue in the neck to avoid inadvertently render-ing the patient hypothyroid.Ectopic Thyroid. Normal thyroid tissue may be found any-where in the central neck compartment, including the esopha-gus, trachea, and anterior mediastinum. Thyroid tissue has been observed adjacent to the aortic arch, in the aortopulmonary win-dow, within the upper pericardium, or in the interventricular septum. Often, “tongues” of thyroid tissue are seen to extend off the inferior poles of the gland and are particularly appar-ent in large goiters. Thyroid tissue situated lateral to the carotid sheath and jugular vein, previously termed lateral aberrant thyroid, almost always represents metastatic thyroid cancer in lymph nodes, and not remnants of the lateral anlage that had Buccalcavity1234EndodermMedian thyroiddiverticulumTracheo-esophageal tube1stpharyngealpouch2nd pouch 3rd pouch 4th pouch Figure 38-1. Thyroid embryology—early development of the median thyroid anlage as a pharyngeal pouch. (Reproduced with permission from Cady B, Rossi R: Surgery of the Thyroid and Para-thyroid Glands. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 1991.)Key Points1	There has been a paradigm shift in the surgical manage-ment of Graves’ disease with increased use of total or near-total thyroidectomy, rather than subtotal thyroidectomy.2	Familial nonmedullary thyroid cancer is increasingly being recognized as a separate entity. Surgeons must be aware of the potential for false-negative fine-needle aspi-ration biopsy in this setting.3	Fine-needle aspiration biopsies are now classified into six groups based on the risk of malignancy associated with each group (Bethesda criteria).4	Encapsulated follicular variants of papillary thyroid can-cers are now designated noninvasive follicular thyroid neoplasm with papillary-like nuclear features (NIFTP).5	Lobectomy or total/near-total thyroidectomy are consid-ered appropriate treatments for low-risk thyroid cancers. Some small papillary thyroid cancers (<1 cm) can be fol-lowed with active surveillance.6	Focused mini-incision parathyroidectomy, after appropri-ate localization, has become the procedure of choice for the treatment of sporadic primary hyperparathyroidism.7	Parathyroidectomy has been shown to improve the clas-sic and the so-called nonspecific symptoms and metabolic complications of primary hyperparathyroidism.8	Normocalcemic hyperparathyroidism is being increasingly recognized; however, there are no definitive guidelines for management.9	Very high calcium and parathyroid hormone levels in a patient with primary hyperparathyroidism should alert the surgeon to the presence of a possible parathyroid carcinoma.10	Subclinical Cushing’s syndrome is characterized by subtle abnormalities in corticosteroid synthesis, and many of its manifestations appear to be treated by adrenalectomy.11	Fine-needle aspiration biopsy has a very limited role in the evaluation of adrenal incidentalomas unless the patient has previously had a cancer and should only be performed after appropriate biochemical studies have been performed to rule out pheochromocytoma.12	Laparoscopic adrenalectomy has become the procedure of choice for excision of most adrenal lesions, except known or suspected cancers.Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   162601/03/19   11:20 AM 1627THYROID, PARATHYROID, AND ADRENALCHAPTER 38failed to fuse with the main thyroid, as previously suggested by Crile. Even if not readily apparent on physical examination or ultrasound imaging, the ipsilateral thyroid lobe contains a focus of papillary thyroid cancer (PTC), which may be microscopic.Pyramidal Lobe. Normally the thyroglossal duct atrophies, although it may remain as a fibrous band. In about 50% of indi-viduals, the distal end that connects to the thyroid persists as a pyramidal lobe projecting up from the isthmus, lying just to the left or right of the midline. In the normal individual, the pyra-midal lobe is not palpable, but in disorders resulting in thyroid hypertrophy (e.g., Graves’ disease, diffuse nodular goiter, or lymphocytic thyroiditis), the pyramidal lobe usually is enlarged and palpable.Thyroid AnatomyThe anatomic relations of the thyroid gland and surrounding structures are depicted in Fig. 38-2. The adult thyroid gland is brown in color and firm in consistency and is located posterior to the strap muscles. The normal thyroid gland weighs approx-imately 20 g, but gland weight varies with body weight and iodine intake. The thyroid lobes are located adjacent to the thy-roid cartilage and connected in the midline by an isthmus that is located just inferior to the cricoid cartilage. A pyramidal lobe is present in about 50% of patients. The thyroid lobes extend to the midthyroid cartilage superiorly and lie adjacent to the carotid sheaths and sternocleidomastoid muscles laterally. The strap muscles (sternohyoid, sternothyroid, and superior belly of the omohyoid) are located anteriorly and are innervated by the ansa cervicalis (ansa hypoglossi). The thyroid gland is enveloped by a loosely connecting fascia that is formed from the parti-tion of the deep cervical fascia into anterior and posterior divi-sions. The true capsule of the thyroid is a thin, densely adherent fibrous layer that sends out septa that invaginate into the gland, forming pseudolobules. The thyroid capsule is condensed into the posterior suspensory or Berry’s ligament near the cricoid cartilage and upper tracheal rings.Sup. thyroid a. and v.PyramidallobeCommon carotid a.Common carotid a.Thyroid cartilageInt. jugular v.Int. jugular v.Recurrent laryngeal n.Recurrentlaryngeal n.Vagus n.Vagus n.Vagus n.Arch of aortaThyrocervical trunkInf. thyroid v.Middle thyroid v.Ext. carotid a.Thyroidea ima a.(variable)TracheaSternocleido-mastoid m.Inf. thyroid a.Vertebralv. and a. Thyroid glandStrap musclesABFigure 38-2. Anatomy of the thyroid gland and surrounding structures, viewed anteriorly (A) and in cross-section (B). a. = artery;  m. = muscle; n. = nerve; v. = vein.Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   162701/03/19   11:20 AM 1628SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIBlood Supply. The superior thyroid arteries arise from the ipsilateral external carotid arteries and divide into anterior and posterior branches at the apices of the thyroid lobes. The infe-rior thyroid arteries arise from the thyrocervical trunk shortly after their origin from the subclavian arteries. The inferior thy-roid arteries travel upward in the neck posterior to the carotid sheath to enter the thyroid lobes at their midpoint. A thyroidea ima artery arises directly from the aorta or innominate in 1% to 4% of individuals to enter the isthmus or replace a missing inferior thyroid artery. The inferior thyroid artery crosses the recurrent laryngeal nerve (RLN), necessitating identification of the RLN before the arterial branches can be ligated. The venous drainage of the thyroid gland occurs via multiple small surface veins, which coalesce to form three sets of veins—the supe-rior, middle, and inferior thyroid veins. The superior thyroid  veins run with the superior thyroid arteries bilaterally. The middle vein or veins are the least consistent. The superior and middle veins drain directly into the internal jugular veins. The inferior veins often form a plexus, which drains into the bra-chiocephalic veins.Nerves. The left RLN arises from the vagus nerve where it crosses the aortic arch, loops around the ligamentum arteriosum, and ascends medially in the neck within the tracheoesophageal groove. The right RLN arises from the vagus at its crossing with the right subclavian artery. The nerve usually passes posterior to the artery before ascending in the neck, its course being more oblique than the left RLN. Along their course in the neck, the RLNs may branch, and pass anterior, posterior, or interdigitate with branches of the inferior thyroid artery (Fig. 38-3). The right RLN may be nonrecurrent in 0.5% to 1% of individuals and often is associated with a vascular anomaly. Nonrecurrent left RLNs are rare but have been reported in patients with situs inversus and a right-sided aortic arch. The RLN may branch in its course in the neck, and identification of a small nerve should alert the surgeon to this possibility. Identification of the nerves or their branches often necessitates mobilization of the most lateral and posterior extent of the thyroid gland, the tubercle of Zucker-kandl, at the level of the cricoid cartilage. The last segments of the nerves often course below the tubercle and are closely approximated to the ligament of Berry. Branches of the nerve may traverse the ligament in 25% of individuals and are particu-larly vulnerable to injury at this junction. The RLNs terminate by entering the larynx posterior to the cricothyroid muscle.The RLNs innervate all the intrinsic muscles of the larynx, except the cricothyroid muscles, which are innervated by the external laryngeal nerves. Injury to one RLN leads to paralysis of the ipsilateral vocal cord, which comes to lie in the parame-dian or the abducted position. The paramedian position results in a normal but weak voice, whereas the abducted position leads to a hoarse voice and an ineffective cough. Bilateral RLN injury may lead to airway obstruction, necessitating emergency trache-ostomy, or loss of voice. If both cords come to lie in an abducted position, air movement can occur, but the patient has an ineffec-tive cough and is at increased risk of repeated respiratory tract infections from aspiration.The superior laryngeal nerves also arise from the vagus nerves. After their origin at the base of the skull, these nerves 1) Nerve in tracheoesophageal    groove   R: 64%   L: 77% 4) Nerve between branches of     inferior thyroid artery  R: 7%   L: 67% 2) Nerve lateral to trachea    R: 28%   L: 17%    R: 8%   L: 6%5) Nerve posterior to artery    R: 53%   L: 69%    R: 37%   L: 24%3) Nerve far anterior6) Nerve anterior to artery7) Artery absent  R: 3%   L: 1%Figure 38-3. Relationship of recurrent laryngeal nerve to the inferior thyroid artery—the superior parathyroid is characteristically dorsal to the plane of the nerve, whereas the inferior gland is ventral to the nerve.Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   162801/03/19   11:20 AM 1629THYROID, PARATHYROID, AND ADRENALCHAPTER 38travel along the internal carotid artery and divide into two branches at the level of the hyoid bone. The internal branch of the superior laryngeal nerve is sensory to the supraglottic larynx. Injury to this nerve is rare in thyroid surgery, but its occurrence may result in aspiration. The external branch of the superior laryngeal nerve lies on the inferior pharyngeal constric-tor muscle and descends alongside the superior thyroid vessels before innervating the cricothyroid muscle. Cernea and col-leagues2 proposed a classification system to describe the rela-tionship of this nerve to the superior thyroid vessels (Fig. 38-4). The type 2a variant, in which the nerve crosses below the tip of the thyroid superior pole, occurs in up to 20% of individuals and places the nerve at a greater risk of injury. Therefore, the superior pole vessels should not be ligated en masse, but should be individually divided, low on the thyroid gland and dissected lateral to the cricothyroid muscle. Injury to this nerve leads to inability to tense the ipsilateral vocal cord and hence difficulty “hitting high notes,” difficulty projecting the voice, and voice fatigue during prolonged speech.Sympathetic innervation of the thyroid gland is provided by fibers from the superior and middle cervical sympathetic ganglia. The fibers enter the gland with the blood vessels and are vasomotor in action. Parasympathetic fibers are derived from the vagus nerve and reach the gland via branches of the laryngeal nerves.Parathyroid Glands. The embryology and anatomy of the parathyroid glands are discussed in detail in the “Parathyroid Gland” section of this chapter. About 85% of individuals have four parathyroid glands that can be found within 1 cm of the junction of the inferior thyroid artery and the RLN. The supe-rior glands are usually located dorsal to the RLN, whereas the inferior glands are usually found ventral to the RLN (Fig. 38-5).Lymphatic System. The thyroid gland is endowed with an extensive network of lymphatics. Intraglandular lymphatic ves-sels connect both thyroid lobes through the isthmus and also drain to perithyroidal structures and lymph nodes. Regional lymph nodes include pretracheal, paratracheal, perithyroidal, RLN, superior mediastinal, retropharyngeal, esophageal, and upper, middle, and lower jugular chain nodes. These lymph nodes can be classified into seven levels as depicted in Fig. 38-6. The central compartment includes nodes located in the area between the two carotid sheaths, whereas nodes lateral to the vessels are present in the lateral compartment. Thyroid can-cers may metastasize to any of these regions, although metas-tases to submaxillary nodes (level I) are rare (<1%). There also can be “skip” metastases to nodes in the lateral ipsilateral neck without central neck nodes.Thyroid HistologyMicroscopically, the thyroid is divided into lobules that contain 20 to 40 follicles (Fig. 38-7). There are about 3 × 106 follicles in the adult male thyroid gland. The follicles are spherical and average 30 μm in diameter. Each follicle is lined by cuboidal epithelial cells and contains a central store of colloid secreted from the epithelial cells under the influence of the pituitary hor-mone TSH. The second group of thyroid secretory cells is the  C cells or parafollicular cells, which contain and secrete the hor-mone calcitonin. They are found as individual cells or clumped in small groups in the interfollicular stroma and located in the upper poles of the thyroid lobes.Thyroid PhysiologyIodine Metabolism. The average daily iodine requirement is 0.1 mg, which can be derived from foods such as fish, milk, and eggs or as additives in bread or salt. In the stomach and jeju-num, iodine is rapidly converted to iodide and absorbed into the bloodstream, and from there it is distributed uniformly through-out the extracellular space. Iodide is actively transported into the thyroid follicular cells by an adenosine triphosphate (ATP)–dependent process. The thyroid is the storage site of >90% of the body’s iodine content and accounts for one-third of the plasma iodine loss. The remaining plasma iodine is cleared via renal excretion.Thyroid Hormone Synthesis, Secretion, and Transport.  The synthesis of thyroid hormone consists of several steps  1cmType 1Type 2aType 2bFigure 38-4. Relationship of the external branch of the superior laryngeal nerve and superior thyroid artery originally described by Cernea and colleagues.2 In type 1 anatomy, the nerve crosses the artery ≥1 cm above the superior aspect of the thyroid lobe. In type 2 anatomy, the nerve crosses the artery <1 cm above the thyroid pole (2a) or below (2b) it. (Reproduced with permission from Bliss RD, Gauger PG, Delbridge LW:Surgeon’s approach to the thyroid gland: surgical anatomy and the importance of technique, World J Surg. 2000 Aug;24(8):891-897.)Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   162901/03/19   11:20 AM 1630SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II(Fig. 38-8). The first, iodide trapping, involves active (ATP-dependent) transport of iodide across the basement mem-brane of the thyrocyte via an intrinsic membrane protein, the sodium/iodine (Na+/I–) symporter. Thyroglobulin (Tg) is a large  (660 kDa) glycoprotein, which is present in thyroid follicles and has four tyrosyl residues. The second step in thyroid hormone synthesis involves oxidation of iodide to iodine and iodination of tyrosine residues on Tg, to form monoiodotyrosines (MIT) and diiodotyrosines (DIT). Both processes are catalyzed by thyroid peroxidase (TPO). A recently identified protein, pen-drin, is thought to mediate iodine efflux at the apical membrane. The third step leads to coupling of two DIT molecules to form tetra-iodothyronine or thyroxine (T4), and one DIT molecule with one MIT molecule to form 3,5,3′-triiodothyronine (T3) or 3,3′,5′-triiodothyronine reverse (rT3). When stimulated by TSH, thyrocytes form pseudopodia, which encircle portions of cell membrane containing Tg, which in turn, fuse with enzymecontaining lysosomes. In the fourth step, Tg is hydrolyzed to release free iodothyronines (T3 and T4) and monoand diiodo-tyrosines. The latter are deiodinated in the fifth step to yield iodide, which is reused in the thyrocyte. In the euthyroid state, T4 is produced and released entirely by the thyroid gland, whereas only 20% of the total T3 is produced by the thyroid. Most of the T3 is produced by peripheral deiodination (removal of 5′-iodine from the outer ring) of T4 in the liver, muscles, kidney, and anterior pituitary, a reaction that is catalyzed by 5′-mono-deiodinase. Some T4 is converted to rT3, the metaboli-cally inactive compound, by deiodination of the inner ring of T4. In conditions such as Graves’ disease, toxic multinodular goi-ter, or a stimulated thyroid gland, the proportion of T3 released from the thyroid may be dramatically elevated. Thyroid hor-mones are transported in serum bound to carrier proteins such as T4-binding globulin, T4-binding prealbumin, and albumin. Only a small fraction (0.02%) of thyroid hormone (T3 and T4) is free (unbound) and is the physiologically active component. T3 is the more potent of the two thyroid hormones, although its circulating plasma level is much lower than that of T4. T3 is less tightly bound to protein in the plasma than T4, and so it enters tissues more readily. T3 is three to four times more active than T4 per unit weight, with a half-life of about 1 day, compared to approximately 7 days for T4.The secretion of thyroid hormone is controlled by the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis (Fig. 38-9). The hypo-thalamus produces a peptide, the thyrotropin-releasing hor-mone (TRH), which stimulates the pituitary to release TSH or thyrotropin. TRH reaches the pituitary via the portovenous circulation. TSH, a 28-kDa glycopeptide, mediates iodide trap-ping, secretion, and release of thyroid hormones, in addition to increasing the cellularity and vascularity of the thyroid gland. The TSH receptor (TSH-R) belongs to a family of G-protein–coupled receptors that have seven transmembrane-spanning domains and use cyclic adenosine monophosphate in the signal-transduction pathway. TSH secretion by the anterior pituitary is also regulated via a negative feedback loop by T4 and T3. Because the pituitary has the ability to convert T4 to T3, the latter is thought to be more important in this feedback control. T3 also inhibits the release of TRH.The thyroid gland also is capable of autoregulation, which allows it to modify its function independent of TSH. As an adap-tation to low iodide intake, the gland preferentially synthesizes Lower parathyroidUpper parathyroidInt. jugular v.Recurrent laryngeal n.ThyroidInferior thyroid a.Common carotid a. Figure 38-5. Relationship of the parathyroids to the recurrent laryngeal nerve. a. = artery; v. = vein.Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   163001/03/19   11:20 AM 1631THYROID, PARATHYROID, AND ADRENALCHAPTER 38T3 rather than T4, thereby increasing the efficiency of secreted hormone. In situations of iodine excess, iodide transport, per-oxide generation, and synthesis and secretion of thyroid hor-mones are inhibited. Excessively large doses of iodide may lead to initial increased organification, followed by suppression, a phenomenon called the Wolff-Chaikoff effect. Epinephrine and human chorionic gonadotropin hormones stimulate thyroid hormone production. Thus, elevated thyroid hormone levels are found in pregnancy and gynecologic malignancies such as hydatidiform mole. In contrast, glucocorticoids inhibit thyroid hormone production. In severely ill patients, peripheral thyroid hormones may be reduced, without a compensatory increase in TSH levels, giving rise to the euthyroid sick syndrome.Thyroid Hormone Function. Free thyroid hormone enters the cell membrane by diffusion or by specific carriers and is car-ried to the nuclear membrane by binding to specific proteins. T4 is deiodinated to T3 and enters the nucleus via active trans-port, where it binds to the thyroid hormone receptor. The T3 receptor is similar to the nuclear receptors for glucocorticoids, mineralocorticoids, estrogens, vitamin D, and retinoic acid. In humans, two types of T3 receptor genes (α and β) are located on chromosomes 3 and 17. Thyroid receptor expression depends on peripheral concentrations of thyroid hormones and is tissue specific—the α form is abundant in the central nervous sys-tem, whereas the β form predominates in the liver. Each gene product has a ligand-independent, amino-terminal domain;  IIVVIIIIIIIVVITrapezius m.Sternocleidomastoid m.Central neck nodesUpper jugular nodesSubmaxillary nodesParotidMiddle jugular nodesAnterior mediastinalnodesPosteriortriangleLower jugular nodesExternaljugularnodeSternocleido-mastoid m.Spinal accessory n.Jugulodigastric nodeDeep lateral nodesIntercalatednodeTransversecervical chainof nodesDigastric m.Mandibular &submandibularnodesSubmental nodeHyoidInternal jugularchain of nodesStrap muscleSuperior thyroid nodesAnterior superficialcervical nodesSupra-clavicular nodes ABFigure 38-6. A and B. Lymph nodes in the neck can be divided into six regions. Upper mediastinal nodes constitute level VII. m. = muscle; n. = nerve.Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   163101/03/19   11:20 AM 1632SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIa ligand-binding, carboxy-terminal domain; and centrally located DNA-binding regions. Binding of thyroid hormone leads to the transcription and translation of specific hormone-responsive genes.Thyroid hormones affect almost every system in the body. They are important for fetal brain development and skeletal mat-uration. T3 increases oxygen consumption, basal metabolic rate, and heat production by stimulation of Na+/K+ ATPase in various tissues. It also has positive inotropic and chronotropic effects on the heart by increasing transcription of the Ca2+ ATPase in the sarcoplasmic reticulum and increasing levels of β-adrenergic receptors and concentration of G proteins. Myocardial α recep-tors are decreased, and actions of catecholamines are amplified. Thyroid hormones are responsible for maintaining the normal hypoxic and hypercapnic drive in the respiratory center of the brain. They also increase gastrointestinal (GI) motility, leading to diarrhea in hyperthyroidism and constipation in hypothyroid-ism. Thyroid hormones also increase bone and protein turnover H2O2 GenerationIodinationDifferentiationGrowthHormone synthesisCREBCREMPAX-8TTF-1TTF-2XXXXXIP3PKCDAGPKAPIP2ATPcAMPPLCGqGSGIACTSHRTSHIGF-1 RIGF-1 NISIodide uptakeMITDITT3T4T3T4HydrolysisNADP+NADPHH2O2H2O22O2TPOTgTgTPOI or HOICouplingOrganificationMITDITMITDITT3T4DehalogenaseI–I–Figure 38-8. Thyroid follicular cell showing the major signaling pathways involved in thyroid cell growth and function and key steps in thy-roid hormone synthesis. The basal membrane of the cell in contact with the circulation and its apical surface contact the thyroid follicle. Thy-roid hormone synthesis is initiated by the binding of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) to the TSH receptor (TSHR), a G-protein–coupled transmembrane receptor, on the basal membrane. Activation leads to an increase in cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), phosphorylation of protein kinase A (PKA), and activation of target cytosolic and nuclear proteins. The protein kinase C (PKC) pathway is stimulated at higher doses of TSH. Iodide is actively transported into the cell via the Na/I symporter (NIS) and flows down an electrical gradient to the apical membrane. There, thyroid peroxidase (TPO) oxidizes iodide and iodinated tyrosyl residues on thyroglobulin (Tg) in the presence of peroxide (H2O2). Monoand diiodotyrosyl (MIT, DIT) residues are also coupled to form T4 and T3 by TPO. Thyroglobulin carrying T4 and T3 is then internalized by pinocytosis and digested in lysosomes. Thyroid hormone is released into the circulation, while MIT and DIT are deiodinated and recycled. ATP = adenosine triphosphate; CREB = cAMP response element binding protein; CREM = cAMP response element modulator;  DAG = diacylglycerol; IGF-1 = insulin-like growth factor 1; IP3 = inositol-3-phosphate; NADP+ = nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate, oxidized form; NADPH = nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate; PIP2 = phosphatidylinositol; PLC = phospholipase C; T3 = 3,5′,3-triiodothyronine; T4 = thyroxine. (Reproduced with permission from Kopp P: Pendred’s syndrome and genetic defects in thyroid hormone synthesis, Rev Endocr Metab Disord. 2000 Jan;1(1-2):109-121.)Figure 38-7. Normal thyroid histology—follicular cells surround colloid.Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   163201/03/19   11:20 AM 1633THYROID, PARATHYROID, AND ADRENALCHAPTER 38and the speed of muscle contraction and relaxation. They also increase glycogenolysis, hepatic gluconeogenesis, intestinal glucose absorption, and cholesterol synthesis and degradation.Evaluation of Patients With Thyroid DiseaseTests of Thyroid Function. A multitude of different tests are available to evaluate thyroid function. No single test is sufficient to assess thyroid function in all situations, and the results must be interpreted in the context of the patient’s clinical condition. TSH is the only test necessary in most patients with thyroid nodules that clinically appear to be euthyroid.Serum Thyroid-Stimulating Hormone (Normal 0.5–5 μU/mL)  The tests for serum TSH are based on the following principle: monoclonal TSH antibodies are bound to a solid matrix and bind serum TSH. A second monoclonal antibody binds to a separate epitope on TSH and is labeled with radioisotope, enzyme, or fluorescent tag. Therefore, the amount of serum TSH is propor-tional to the amount of bound secondary antibody (immunomet-ric assay). Serum TSH levels reflect the ability of the anterior pituitary to detect free T4 levels. There is an inverse relation-ship between the free T4 level and the logarithm of the TSH concentration—small changes in free T4 lead to a large shift in TSH levels. The ultrasensitive TSH assay has become the most sensitive and specific test for the diagnosis of hyperand hypo-thyroidism and for optimizing T4 therapy.Total T4 (Reference Range 55–150 nmol/L) and T3 (Reference  Range 1.5–3.5 nmol/L) Total T4 and T3 levels are measured by radioimmunoassay and measure both the free and bound components of the hormones. Total T4 levels reflect the output from the thyroid gland, whereas T3 levels in the nonstimulated thyroid gland are more indicative of peripheral thyroid hor-mone metabolism, and are, therefore, not generally suitable as a general screening test. Total T4 levels are increased not only in hyperthyroid patients, but also in those with elevated Tg levels secondary to pregnancy, estrogen/progesterone use, or congeni-tal diseases. Similarly, total T4 levels decrease in hypothyroidism and in patients with decreased Tg levels due to anabolic steroid use and protein-losing disorders like nephrotic syndrome. Indi-viduals with these latter disorders may be euthyroid if their free T4 levels are normal. Measurement of total T3 levels is impor-tant in clinically hyperthyroid patients with normal T4 levels, who may have T3 thyrotoxicosis. As discussed previously in “Thyroid Hormone Synthesis, Secretion, and Transport,” total T3 levels often are increased in early hypothyroidism.Free T4 (Reference Range 12–28 pmol/L) and Free T3  (3–9 pmol/L) These radioimmunoassay-based tests are a sensitive and accurate measurement of biologically active thy-roid hormone. Free T4 estimates are not performed as a routine screening tool in thyroid disease. Use of this test is confined to cases of early hyperthyroidism in which total T4 levels may be normal but free T4 levels are raised. In patients with end-organ resistance to T4 (Refetoff’s syndrome), T4 levels are increased, but TSH levels usually are normal. Free T3 is most useful in con-firming the diagnosis of early hyperthyroidism, in which levels of free T4 and free T3 rise before total T4 and T3. Free T4 levels may also be measured indirectly using the T3-resin uptake test. If free T4 levels are increased, fewer hormone binding sites are available for binding radiolabeled T3 that has been added to the patient’s serum. Therefore, more T3 binds with an ion-exchange resin, and the T3-resin uptake is increased.Thyrotropin-Releasing Hormone This test is useful to evalu-ate pituitary TSH secretory function and is performed by admin-istering 500 μg of TRH intravenously and measuring TSH levels after 30 and 60 minutes. In a normal individual, TSH levels should increase at least 6 μIU/mL from the baseline. This test also was previously used to assess patients with borderline hyperthyroidism but has largely been replaced by sensitive TSH assays for this purpose.Thyroid Antibodies Thyroid antibodies include anti-Tg, anti-microsomal, or anti-TPO and thyroid-stimulating immuno-globulin (TSI). Anti-Tg and anti-TPO antibody levels do not determine thyroid function, but rather indicate the underlying disorder, usually an autoimmune thyroiditis. About 80% of patients with Hashimoto’s thyroiditis have elevated thyroid anti-body levels; however, levels may also be increased in patients with Graves’ disease, multinodular goiter, and occasionally, thyroid neoplasms.Serum Thyroglobulin Tg is only made by normal or abnormal thyroid tissue. It normally is not released into the circulation in large amounts but increases dramatically in destructive pro-cesses of the thyroid gland, such as thyroiditis, or overactive states such as Graves’ disease and toxic multinodular goiter. The most important use for serum Tg levels is in monitoring patients with differentiated thyroid cancer for recurrence, partic-ularly after total thyroidectomy and RAI ablation. Elevated anti-Tg antibodies can interfere with the accuracy of serum Tg levels and should always be measured when interpreting Tg levels.ThyroidPortalsystemHypothalamusTRHTissueTSH++T4T4T4T3T3T3––II“Free”Figure 38-9. Hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid hormone axis. In both the hypothalamus and pituitary, 3,5′,3-triiodothyronine (T3) is primarily responsible for inhibition of thyrotropin-releasing hor-mone (TRH) and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) secretion.  T4 = thyroxine. (Reproduced with permission from Greenspan FS, Gardner D: Basic and Clinical Endocrinology, 6th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Education; 2001.)Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   163301/03/19   11:20 AM 1634SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IISerum Calcitonin (0–4 pg/mL Basal) This 32-amino-acid polypeptide is secreted by the C cells and functions to lower serum calcium levels, although in humans, it has only minimal physiologic effects. It is also a sensitive marker of MTC.Thyroid Imaging Radionuclide Imaging Both iodine-123 (123I) and iodine-131 (131I) are used to image the thyroid gland. The former emits low-dose radiation, has a half-life of 12 to 14 hours, and is used to image lingual thyroids or goiters. In contrast, 131I has a half-life of 8 to 10 days and leads to higher-dose radiation expo-sure. Therefore, this isotope is used to screen and treat patients with differentiated thyroid cancers for metastatic disease. The images obtained by these studies provide information not only about the size and shape of the gland, but also the distribution of functional activity. Areas that trap less radioactivity than the surrounding gland are termed cold (Fig. 38-10), whereas areas that demonstrate increased activity are termed hot. The risk of malignancy is higher in “cold” lesions (20%) compared to “hot” or “warm” lesions (<5%). Technetium Tc 99m pertech-netate (99mTc) is taken up by the thyroid gland and is increas-ingly being used for thyroid evaluation. This isotope is taken up by the mitochondria, but is not organified. It also has the advantage of having a shorter half-life and minimizes radiation exposure. It is particularly sensitive for nodal metastases. More recently, 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) combined with computed tomography (CT) is being increasingly used to screen for metastases in patients with thyroid cancer in whom other imaging studies are nega-tive. PET scans are not routinely used in the evaluation of thy-roid nodules; however, they may show clinically occult thyroid lesions. There are several recent reports of rates of malignancy in these lesions ranging from 14% to 63%. These incidentally Figure 38-10. Radioactive iodine scan of the thyroid, with the arrow showing an area of decreased uptake, a cold nodule.discovered nodules should be worked up by ultrasound and fine-needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB).Ultrasound Ultrasound is an excellent noninvasive and por-table imaging study of the thyroid gland with the added advan-tage of no radiation exposure. It is helpful in the evaluation of thyroid nodules, distinguishing solid from cystic ones, and pro-viding information about size and multicentricity. In addition, characteristics such as echotexture, shape, borders and presence of calcifications, and vascularity can provide useful information regarding risk of malignancy. Ultrasound is also especially help-ful for assessing cervical lymphadenopathy (Fig. 38-11) and to guide FNAB. An experienced ultrasonographer is necessary for the best results.Computed Tomography/Magnetic Resonance Imaging Scan CT and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies provide excellent imaging of the thyroid gland and adjacent nodes and are particularly useful in evaluating the extent of large, fixed, or substernal goiters (which cannot be evaluated by ultrasound) and their relationship to the airway and vascular structures. Noncontrast CT scans should be obtained for patients who are likely to require subsequent RAI therapy. If contrast is necessary, therapy needs to be delayed by several months. Combined PET-CT scans are increasingly being used for Tg-positive, RAI-negative tumors.Benign Thyroid DisordersHyperthyroidism. The clinical manifestations of hyperthy-roidism result from an excess of circulating thyroid hormone. Hyperthyroidism may arise from a number of conditions that are listed in Table 38-1. It is important to distinguish disorders such as Graves’ disease and toxic nodular goiters that result from increased production of thyroid hormone from those dis-orders that lead to a release of stored hormone from injury to the thyroid gland (thyroiditis) or from other nonthyroid gland–related conditions. The former disorders lead to an increase in RAI uptake (RAIU), whereas the latter group is characterized by low RAIU. Of these disorders, Graves’ disease, toxic mul-tinodular goiter, and solitary toxic nodule are most relevant to the surgeon.Diffuse Toxic Goiter (Graves’ Disease) Although originally described by the Welsh physician Caleb Parry in a posthumous article in 1825, this disorder is known as Graves’ disease after Robert Graves, an Irish physician who described three patients in 1835. Graves’ disease is by far the most common cause of hyperthyroidism in North America, accounting for 60% to 80% of cases. It is an autoimmune disease with a strong famil-ial predisposition, female preponderance (5:1), and peak inci-dence between the ages of 40 and 60 years. Graves’ disease is characterized by thyrotoxicosis, diffuse goiter, and extrathy-roidal conditions including ophthalmopathy, dermopathy (pre-tibial myxedema), thyroid acropachy, gynecomastia, and other manifestations.Etiology, Pathogenesis, and Pathology. The exact etiology of the initiation of the autoimmune process in Graves’ disease is not known. However, conditions such as the postpartum state, iodine excess, lithium therapy, and bacterial and viral infections have been suggested as possible triggers. Genetic factors also play a role, as haplotyping studies indicate that Graves’ disease is associated with certain human leukocyte antigen (HLA) hap-lotypes, including HLA-B8, HLA-DR3, and HLADQA1*0501 in Caucasian patients, whereas HLA-DRB1*0701 is protective Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   163401/03/19   11:20 AM 1635THYROID, PARATHYROID, AND ADRENALCHAPTER 38against it. Polymorphisms of the cytotoxic T-lymphocyte anti-gen 4 (CTLA-4) gene also have been associated with Graves’ disease development. CD40 has also been recognized as a Graves’ susceptibility gene. It has an important role in B-cell function and its upregulation leads to a lower threshold for B-cell activation. It can also lead to enhanced IL-6 secretion and activation of T-cells in thyrocytes leading to a local inflam-matory response. Other susceptibility genes include PTPN22 (encodes the lymphoid tyrosine phosphatase) and CD25, which encodes for the interleukin-2 receptor α-chain (IL-2Rα).3 Once initiated, the inflammatory process causes sensitized T-helper lymphocytes to stimulate B lymphocytes, which produce anti-bodies directed against the thyroid hormone receptor. TSIs or antibodies that stimulate the TSH-R, as well as TSH-binding inhibiting immunoglobulins or antibodies, have been described. The thyroid-stimulating antibodies stimulate the thyrocytes to grow and synthesize excess thyroid hormone, which is a hall-mark of Graves’ disease. Graves’ disease also is associated with other autoimmune conditions such as type 1 diabetes mellitus, Addison’s disease, pernicious anemia, and myasthenia gravis.Macroscopically, the thyroid gland in patients with Graves’ disease is diffusely and smoothly enlarged, with a concomitant increase in vascularity. Microscopically, the gland is hyperplastic, and the epithelium is columnar with minimal colloid present. The nuclei exhibit mitosis, and papillary pro-jections of hyperplastic epithelium are common. There may be aggregates of lymphoid tissue, and vascularity is markedly increased.Clinical Features. The clinical manifestations of Graves’ disease can be divided into those related to hyperthyroidism and those specific to Graves’ disease. Hyperthyroid symp-toms include heat intolerance, increased sweating and thirst, and weight loss despite adequate caloric intake. Symptoms of increased adrenergic stimulation include palpitations, nervous-ness, fatigue, emotional lability, hyperkinesis, and tremors. The most common GI symptoms include increased frequency of bowel movements and diarrhea. Female patients often develop amenorrhea, decreased fertility, and an increased incidence of miscarriages. Children experience rapid growth with early bone maturation, whereas older patients may present with cardiovas-cular complications such as atrial fibrillation and congestive heart failure.On physical examination, weight loss and facial flush-ing may be evident. The skin is warm and moist, and African American patients often note darkening of their skin. Tachycar-dia or atrial fibrillation is present, with cutaneous vasodilation leading to a widening of the pulse pressure and a rapid falloff in the transmitted pulse wave (collapsing pulse). A fine tremor, muscle wasting, and proximal muscle group weakness with hyperactive tendon reflexes often are present.Approximately 50% of patients with Graves’ disease also develop clinically evident ophthalmopathy, and dermopathy occurs in 1% to 2% of patients. It is characterized by deposi-tion of glycosaminoglycans, leading to thickened skin in the pretibial region and dorsum of the foot (Fig. 38-12). Eye symp-toms include lid lag (von Graefe’s sign), spasm of the upper eyelid revealing the sclera above the corneoscleral limbus (Dal-rymple’s sign), and a prominent stare, due to catecholamine excess. True infiltrative eye disease results in periorbital edema, conjunctival swelling and congestion (chemosis), proptosis, limitation of upward and lateral gaze (from involvement of the inferior and medial rectus muscles, respectively), keratitis, and even blindness due to optic nerve involvement. The etiology of Graves’ ophthalmopathy is not completely known; however, Figure 38-11. Thyroid ultrasound showing a lymph node (arrow) along the carotid artery.Table 38-1Differential diagnosis of hyperthyroidismINCREASED HORMONE SYNTHESIS (INCREASED RAIU)RELEASE OF PREFORMED HORMONE (DECREASED RAIU)Graves’ disease (diffuse toxic goiter)Toxic multinodular goiterToxic adenomaDrug induced—amiodarone, iodineThyroid cancerStruma ovariiHydatidiform moleTSH-secreting pituitary adenomaThyroiditis—acute phase of Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, subacute thyroiditisFactitious (iatrogenic) thyrotoxicosis“Hamburger thyrotoxicosis”RAIU = radioactive iodine uptake; TSH = thyroid-stimulating hormone.Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   163501/03/19   11:20 AM 1636SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIorbital fibroblasts and muscles are thought to share a common antigen, the TSH-R. Ophthalmopathy is thought to result from inflammation caused by cytokines released from sensitized killer T lymphocytes and cytotoxic antibodies. Gynecomas-tia is common in young men. Rare bony involvement leads to subperiosteal bone formation and swelling in the metacarpals (thyroid acropachy). Onycholysis, or separation of fingernails from their beds, is a commonly observed finding. On physical examination, the thyroid usually is diffusely and symmetrically enlarged, as evidenced by an enlarged pyramidal lobe. There may be an overlying bruit or thrill over the thyroid gland and a loud venous hum in the supraclavicular space.Diagnostic Tests. The diagnosis of hyperthyroidism is made by a suppressed TSH with or without an elevated free T4 or T3 level. If eye signs are present, other tests are generally not needed. However, in the absence of eye findings, an 123I uptake and scan should be performed. An elevated uptake, with a dif-fusely enlarged gland, confirms the diagnosis of Graves’ disease and helps to differentiate it from other causes of hyperthyroid-ism. Technetium scintigraphy (using pertechnetate, which is trapped by the thyroid, but not organified) can also be used to determine etiology. While technetium scans result in low range of normal uptake and high background activity, total-body radi-ation exposure is less than that of 123I scans. If free T4 levels are normal, free T3 levels should be determined, as they often are elevated in early Graves’ disease or toxic nodules (T3 toxi-cosis). Anti-Tg and anti-TPO antibodies are elevated in up to 75% of patients but are not specific. Elevated TSH-R or thyroidstimulating antibodies (TSAb) are diagnostic of Graves’ disease and are increased in about 90% of patients. CT or MRI scans of the orbits are useful in evaluating Graves’ ophthalmopathy.Treatment. Graves’ disease may be treated by any of three treatment modalities: antithyroid drugs, thyroid ablation with radioactive 131I, and thyroidectomy. The choice of treatment depends on several factors, as discussed in the following sections.Antithyroid Drugs Antithyroid medications generally are administered in preparation for RAI ablation or surgery. The drugs commonly used are propylthiouracil (PTU, 100 to 300 mg three times daily) and methimazole (10 to 30 mg three times daily, then once daily). Methimazole has a longer half-life and can be dosed once daily. Both drugs reduce thyroid hormone production by inhibiting the organic binding of iodine and the coupling of iodotyrosines (mediated by TPO). In addition, PTU also inhibits the peripheral conversion of T4 to T3, making it useful for the treatment of thyroid storm. Both drugs can cross the placenta, inhibiting fetal thyroid function, and are excreted in breast milk, although PTU has a lower risk of transplacental transfer. Methimazole also has been associated with congeni-tal aplasia; therefore, PTU is preferred in pregnant and breast-feeding women. Side effects of treatment include reversible granulocytopenia, skin rashes, fever, peripheral neuritis, poly-arteritis, vasculitis, hepatitis, and, rarely, agranulocytosis and aplastic anemia. Patients should be monitored for these pos-sible complications and should always be warned to stop PTU or methimazole immediately and seek medical advice should they develop a sore throat or fever. Treatment of agranulocy-tosis involves admission to the hospital, discontinuation of the drug, and broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy. Surgery should be postponed until the granulocyte count reaches 1000 cells/mm3.The dose of antithyroid medication is titrated as needed in accordance with TSH and T4 levels. Most patients have improved symptoms in 2 weeks and become euthyroid in about 6 weeks. Some physicians use the block-replace regimen, by adding T4 (0.05 to 0.10 mg) to prevent hypothyroidism and suppress TSH secretion, because some, but not all, studies sug-gest that this reduces recurrence rates. The length of therapy is debated. Treatment with antithyroid medications is associated ABFigure 38-12. A. Graves’ ophthalmopathy and (B) pretibial myx-edema. This patient demonstrates exophthalmos, proptosis, perior-bital swelling, congestion, and edema of the conjunctiva.Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   163601/03/19   11:20 AM 1637THYROID, PARATHYROID, AND ADRENALCHAPTER 38with a high relapse rate when these drugs are discontinued, with 40% to 80% of patients developing recurrent disease after a 1to 2-year course. Patients with small glands are less likely to recur, so that treatment for curative intent is reserved for patients with (a) small, nontoxic goiters less than 40 g; (b) mildly elevated thyroid hormone levels; (c) negative or low or titers of thyroid hormone receptor antibodies; and (d) rapid decrease in gland size with antithyroid medications. The catecholamine response of thyrotoxicosis can be alleviated by administering β-blocking agents. β-Blockade should be considered in all patients with symptomatic thyrotoxicosis and is recommended for elderly patients, those with coexistent cardiac disease, and patients with resting heart rates >90 bpm. These drugs have the added effect of decreasing the peripheral conversion of T4 to T3. Pro-pranolol is the most commonly prescribed medication in doses of about 20 to 40 mg four times daily. Higher doses are some-times required due to increased clearance of the medication. Caution should be exercised in patients with asthma. Calcium channel blockers are useful for rate control in patients in whom β-blockers are contraindicated.Radioactive Iodine Therapy (131I) RAI forms the mainstay of Graves’ disease treatment in North America. The major advan-tages of this treatment are the avoidance of a surgical procedure and its concomitant risks, reduced overall treatment costs, and ease of treatment. Antithyroid drugs are given until the patient is euthyroid and then discontinued to maximize drug uptake. The 131I dose is calculated after a preliminary scan and usu-ally consists of 8 to 12 mCi administered orally. After standard treatment with RAI, most patients become euthyroid within  2 months. However, only about 50% of patients treated with RAI are euthyroid 6 months after treatment, and the remain-ing are still hyperthyroid or already hypothyroid.4 After 1 year, about 2.5% of patients develop hypothyroidism each year. RAI also has been documented to lead to progression of Graves’ oph-thalmopathy (33% after RAI compared to 16% after surgery), and ophthalmopathy is more common in smokers. Although there is no evidence of long-term problems with infertility, and overall cancer incidence rates are unchanged, there is a small increased risk of nodular goiter, thyroid cancer,5 and hyperpara-thyroidism (HPT)6 in patients who have been treated with RAI. Patients treated with RAI have an unexplained increase in their overall and cardiovascular mortality rates when compared to the general population.RAI therapy is therefore most often used in older patients with small or moderate-sized goiters, those who have relapsed after medical or surgical therapy, and those in whom antithyroid drugs or surgery are contraindicated. Absolute contraindications to RAI include women who are pregnant (or planning pregnancy within 6 months of treatment) or breastfeeding. Relative contra-indications include young patients (i.e., especially children and adolescents), those with thyroid nodules, and those with oph-thalmopathy. Lack of access to a high-volume thyroid surgeon is also a consideration. The higher the initial dose of 131I, the earlier the onset and the higher the incidence of hypothyroidism.Surgical Treatment In North America, surgery is recom-mended when RAI is contraindicated as in patients who (a) have confirmed cancer or suspicious thyroid nodules, (b) are young, (c) desire to conceive soon (<6 months) after treatment, (d) have had severe reactions to antithyroid medications, (e) have large goiters (>80 g) causing compressive symptoms, and (f) are reluctant to undergo RAI therapy. Relative indications for thyroidectomy include patients, particularly smokers, with mod-erate to severe Graves’ ophthalmopathy, those desiring rapid control of hyperthyroidism with a chance of being euthyroid, and those demonstrating poor compliance to antithyroid medica-tions. Pregnancy is also a relative contraindication, and surgery should be used only when rapid control is needed and antithy-roid medications cannot be used. Surgery is best performed in the second trimester. The goal of thyroidectomy for Graves’ disease should be the complete and permanent control of the disease with minimal morbidity. Patients should be rendered euthyroid before operation with antithyroid drugs that should be continued up to the day of surgery. Lugol’s iodide solution or saturated potassium iodide generally is administered beginning 7 to 10 days preoperatively (three drops twice daily) to reduce vascularity of the gland and decrease the risk of precipitating thyroid storm. The major action of iodine in this situation is to inhibit release of thyroid hormone. If it is not possible to render the patient euthyroid prior to surgery (if the surgery is urgent or the patient is allergic to antithyroid medications), the patient can be prepared with β-blockade and potassium iodide alone. Steroids can be a useful adjunct in this situation.The extent of thyroidectomy to be performed used to be determined by the desired outcome (risk of recurrence vs. euthy-roidism) and surgeon experience. In patients with coexistent thyroid cancer and those who refused RAI therapy or had severe ophthalmopathy or life-threatening reactions to antithyroid medications (vasculitis, agranulocytosis, or liver failure), total or near-total thyroidectomy was recommended. Ophthalmopa-thy has been demonstrated to stabilize or improve in most patients after total thyroidectomy, presumably from removal of the antigenic stimulus. A subtotal thyroidectomy, leaving a 4to 7-g remnant, was recommended for all remaining patients. Dur-ing subtotal thyroidectomy, remnant tissue may be left on each side (bilateral subtotal thyroidectomy), or a total lobectomy can be performed on one side with a subtotal thyroidectomy on the other side (Hartley-Dunhill procedure). Results were similar with either procedure, but the latter procedure was theoretically associated with fewer complications and requires reentering only one side of the neck should recurrence require reoperation. Most studies, however, show no difference in the rates of com-plications with either approach, although patients undergoing a total resection had higher rates of temporary hypoparathyroid-ism. However, patients treated with subtotal thyroidectomy are prone to recurrence, the rates of which are dependent on rem-nant size. Based on the current evidence, recently revised guide-lines from the American Thyroid Association (ATA) recommend total or near-total thyroidectomy as the procedure of choice for the surgical management of Graves’ disease.7 Recurrent thyrotoxicosis usually is managed by radioiodine treatment.Toxic Multinodular Goiter Toxic multinodular goiters usu-ally occur in older individuals, who often have a prior history of a nontoxic multinodular goiter. Over several years, enough thyroid nodules become autonomous to cause hyperthyroidism. The presentation often is insidious in that hyperthyroidism may only become apparent when patients are placed on low doses of thyroid hormone suppression for the goiter. Some patients have T3 toxicosis, whereas others may present only with atrial fibrillation or congestive heart failure. Hyperthyroidism also can be precipitated by iodide-containing drugs such as contrast media and the antiarrhythmic agent amiodarone (Jod-Basedow 1Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   163701/03/19   11:20 AM 1638SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIhyperthyroidism). Symptoms and signs of hyperthyroidism are similar to Graves’ disease, but extrathyroidal manifestations are absent.Diagnostic Studies. Blood tests are similar to Graves’ disease with a suppressed TSH level and elevated free T4 or T3 levels. RAI uptake also is increased, showing multiple nodules with increased uptake and suppression of the remaining gland.Treatment. Hyperthyroidism must be adequately controlled. Both RAI and surgical resection may be used for treatment. When surgery is performed, near-total or total thyroidectomy is recommended to avoid recurrence and the consequent increased complication rates with repeat surgery. Care must be taken in identifying the RLN, which may be found laterally on the thy-roid (rather than posterior) or stretched anteriorly over a nodule. RAI therapy is reserved for elderly patients who represent very poor operative risks, provided there is no airway compression from the goiter and thyroid cancer is not a concern. However, because uptake is less than in Graves’ disease, larger doses of RAI often are needed to treat the hyperthyroidism. Furthermore, RAI-induced thyroiditis has the potential to cause swelling and acute airway compromise and leaves the goiter intact, with the possibility of recurrent hyperthyroidism.Toxic Adenoma Hyperthyroidism from a single hyperfunction-ing nodule typically occurs in younger patients who note recent growth of a long-standing nodule along with the symptoms of hyperthyroidism. Toxic adenomas are characterized by somatic mutations in the TSH-R gene, although G-protein–stimulating gene (gsp) mutations may occur also.8 Most hyperfunctioning or autonomous thyroid nodules have attained a size of at least  3 cm before hyperthyroidism occurs. Physical examination usu-ally reveals a solitary thyroid nodule without palpable thyroid tissue on the contralateral side. RAI scanning shows a “hot” nodule with suppression of the rest of the thyroid gland. These nodules are rarely malignant. Smaller nodules may be man-aged with antithyroid medications and RAI. Larger nodules can require higher doses, which can lead to hypothyroidism. Sur-gery (lobectomy and isthmusectomy) is preferred to treat young patients and those with larger nodules. Percutaneous ethanol injection (PEI) has been reported to have reasonable success rates but has not been directly compared with surgery.Thyroid Storm Thyroid storm is a condition of hyperthyroid-ism accompanied by fever, central nervous system agitation or depression, and cardiovascular and GI dysfunction, including hepatic failure. The condition may be precipitated by abrupt cessation of antithyroid medications, infection, thyroid or non-thyroid surgery, and trauma in patients with untreated thyrotoxi-cosis. Occasionally, thyroid storm may result from amiodarone administration or exposure to iodinated contrast agents or fol-lowing RAI therapy. This condition was previously associated with high mortality rates but can be appropriately managed in an intensive care unit setting. β-Blockers are given to reduce peripheral T4 to T3 conversion and decrease the hyperthyroid symptoms. Oxygen supplementation and hemodynamic support should be instituted. Nonaspirin compounds can be used to treat pyrexia, and Lugol’s iodine or sodium ipodate (intravenously) should be administered to decrease iodine uptake and thyroid hormone secretion. PTU therapy blocks the formation of new thyroid hormone and reduces peripheral conversion of T4 to T3. Corticosteroids often are helpful to prevent adrenal exhaustion and block hepatic thyroid hormone conversion.Hypothyroidism. Deficiency in circulating levels of thyroid hormone leads to hypothyroidism and, in neonates, to cretin-ism, which is characterized by neurologic impairment and men-tal retardation. Hypothyroidism also may occur in Pendred’s syndrome (associated with deafness) and Turner’s syndrome. Conditions that cause hypothyroidism are listed in Table 38-2.Clinical Features Failure of thyroid gland development or function in utero leads to cretinism and characteristic facies similar to those of children with Down syndrome and dwarfism. Failure to thrive and severe mental retardation often are present. Immediate testing and treatment with thyroid hormone at birth can lessen the neurologic and intellectual deficits. Hypothyroid-ism developing in childhood or adolescence results in delayed development and may also lead to abdominal distention, umbili-cal hernia, and rectal prolapse. In adults, symptoms in general are nonspecific, including tiredness, weight gain, cold intoler-ance, constipation, and menorrhagia. Patients with severe hypo-thyroidism or myxedema develop characteristic facial features due to the deposition of glycosaminoglycans in the subcutane-ous tissues, leading to facial and periorbital puffiness. The skin becomes rough and dry and often develops a yellowish hue from reduced conversion of carotene to vitamin A. Hair becomes dry and brittle, and severe hair loss may occur. There is also a characteristic loss of the outer two thirds of the eyebrows. An enlarged tongue may impair speech, which is already slowed, in keeping with the impairment of mental processes. Patients may also have nonspecific abdominal pain accompanied by disten-tion and constipation. Libido and fertility are impaired in both sexes. Cardiovascular changes in hypothyroidism include bra-dycardia, cardiomegaly, pericardial effusion, reduced cardiac output, and pulmonary effusions. When hypothyroidism occurs as a result of pituitary failure, other features of hypopituitarism, such as pale, waxy skin; loss of body hair; and atrophic genita-lia, may be present.Table 38-2Causes of hypothyroidismPRIMARY (INCREASED TSH LEVELS)SECONDARY (DECREASED TSH LEVELS)TERTIARYHashimoto’s thyroiditisPituitary tumorHypothalamic insufficiencyRAI therapy for Graves’ diseasePituitary resection or ablationResistance to thyroid hormonePostthyroidectomy  Excessive iodine intake  Subacute thyroiditis  Medications: antithyroid drugs, lithium  Rare: iodine deficiency, dyshormogenesis  RAI = radioactive iodine; TSH = thyroid-stimulating hormone.Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   163801/03/19   11:20 AM 1639THYROID, PARATHYROID, AND ADRENALCHAPTER 38Laboratory Findings Hypothyroidism is characterized by low circulating levels of T4 and T3. Raised TSH levels are found in primary thyroid failure, whereas secondary hypothyroidism is characterized by low TSH levels that do not increase following TRH stimulation. Thyroid autoantibodies are highest in patients with autoimmune disease (Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, Graves’ dis-ease) and may also be elevated in patients with nodular goiter and thyroid neoplasms. An electrocardiogram demonstrates decreased voltage with flattening or inversion of T waves.Treatment T4 is the treatment of choice and is administered in dosages varying from 50 to 200 μg per day, depending on the patient’s size and condition. Starting doses of 100 μg of T4 daily are well tolerated; however, elderly patients and those with coexisting heart disease and profound hypothyroidism should be started on a considerably lower dose such as 25 to 50 μg daily because of associated hypercholesterolemia and atherosclerosis. The dose can be slowly increased over weeks to months to attain a euthyroid state. A baseline electrocardiogram should always be obtained in patients with severe hypothyroidism before treat-ment. T4 dosage is titrated against clinical response and TSH levels, which should return to normal. The management of patients with subclinical hypothyroidism (normal T4, slightly raised TSH) is controversial. Some evidence suggests that patients with subclinical hypothyroidism and increased antithy-roid antibody levels should be treated because they will sub-sequently develop hypothyroidism. Patients who present with myxedema coma may require initial emergency treatment with large doses of IV T4 (300 to 400 μg), with careful monitoring in an intensive care unit setting.9Thyroiditis. Thyroiditis usually is classified into acute, sub-acute, and chronic forms, each associated with a distinct clinical presentation and histology.Acute (Suppurative) Thyroiditis The thyroid gland is inherently resistant to infection due to its extensive blood and lymphatic supply, high iodide content, and fibrous capsule. However, infectious agents can seed it (a) via the hematoge-nous or lymphatic route, (b) via direct spread from persistent pyriform sinus fistulae or thyroglossal duct cysts, (c) as a result of penetrating trauma to the thyroid gland, or (d) due to immu-nosuppression. Streptococcus and anaerobes account for about 70% of cases; however, other species also have been cultured.10 Acute suppurative thyroiditis is more common in children and often is preceded by an upper respiratory tract infection or otitis media. It is characterized by severe neck pain radiating to the jaws or ear, fever, chills, odynophagia, and dysphonia. Compli-cations such as systemic sepsis, tracheal or esophageal rupture, jugular vein thrombosis, laryngeal chondritis, and perichondritis or sympathetic trunk paralysis may also occur.The diagnosis is established by leukocytosis on blood tests and FNAB for Gram’s stain, culture, and cytology. CT scans may help to delineate the extent of infection and identify abscesses. A persistent pyriform sinus fistula should always be suspected in children with recurrent acute thyroiditis. The sensitivity of identification of fistulae in the acute setting is lowest for barium esophagography (50%) and best for direct endoscopy (100%), with CT scans being intermediate (80%). Both barium esopha-gogram and CT scans have improved sensitivity once the acute inflammation has resolved (100% and 83%, respectively), with CT being better at defining the accurate anatomic pathway and its relationship to the thyroid gland.11 Treatment consists of parenteral antibiotics and drainage of abscesses. Thyroidec-tomy may be needed for persistent abscesses or failure of open drainage. Patients with pyriform sinus fistulae require complete resection of the sinus tract, including the area of the thyroid where the tract terminates, to prevent recurrence. Transnasal flexible fiberoptic laryngoscopy is being increasingly used to identify the internal opening of the pyriform sinus tract and may also allow electrocauterization of the tract, and success rates similar to open surgery have been reported.Subacute Thyroiditis Subacute thyroiditis can occur in the painful or painless forms. Although the exact etiology is not known, painful thyroiditis is thought to be viral in origin or result from a postviral inflammatory response. Genetic pre-disposition may also play a role, as manifested by its strong association with the HLA-B35 haplotype. One model of patho-genesis suggests that viral or thyroid antigens, when presented by macrophages in the context of HLA-B35, stimulate cytotoxic T lymphocytes and damage thyroid follicular cells.Painful thyroiditis most commonly occurs in 30to 40-year-old women and is characterized by the sudden or grad-ual onset of neck pain, which may radiate toward the mandible or ear. History of a preceding upper respiratory tract infection often can be elicited. The gland is enlarged, exquisitely ten-der, and firm. The disorder classically progresses through four stages. An initial hyperthyroid phase, due to release of thyroid hormone, is followed by a second, euthyroid phase. The third phase, hypothyroidism, occurs in about 20% to 30% of patients and is followed by resolution and return to the euthyroid state in >90% of patients. A few patients develop recurrent disease.In the early stages of the disease, TSH is decreased, and Tg, T4, and T3 levels are elevated due to the release of pre-formed thyroid hormone from destroyed follicles. The erythro-cyte sedimentation rate is typically >100 mm/h. RAIU also is decreased (<2% at 24 hours), even in euthyroid patients, due to the release of thyroid hormones from destruction of the thyroid parenchyma. Painful thyroiditis is self-limited, and therefore, treatment is primarily symptomatic. Aspirin and other nonste-roidal anti-inflammatory drugs are used for pain relief, but ste-roids may be indicated in more severe cases. Short-term thyroid replacement may be needed and may shorten the duration of symptoms. Thyroidectomy is reserved for the rare patient who has a prolonged course not responsive to medical measures or for recurrent disease.Painless thyroiditis is considered to be autoimmune in ori-gin and may occur sporadically or in the postpartum period; the latter typically occurs at about 6 weeks after delivery in women with high TPO antibody titers in early pregnancy. This timing is thought to coincide with a decrease in the normal immune tolerance of pregnancy and consequent rebound elevation of antibody titers.Painless thyroiditis also is more common in women and usually occurs between 30 and 60 years of age. Physical exami-nation demonstrates a normal sized or minimally enlarged, slightly firm, nontender gland. Laboratory tests and RAIU are similar to those in painful thyroiditis, except for a normal erythrocyte sedimentation rate. The clinical course also paral-lels painful thyroiditis. Patients with symptoms may require β-blockers and thyroid hormone replacement. Thyroidectomy or RAI ablation is only indicated for the rare patient with recur-rent, disabling episodes of thyroiditis.Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   163901/03/19   11:20 AM 1640SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIChronic Thyroiditis Lymphocytic (Hashimoto’s) Thyroiditis. Lymphocytic thy-roiditis was first described by Hashimoto in 1912 as struma lymphomatosa—a transformation of thyroid tissue to lymphoid tissue. It is the most common inflammatory disorder of the thy-roid and the leading cause of hypothyroidism today.Etiology, Pathogenesis, and Pathology Hashimoto’s thyroid-itis is an autoimmune process that is thought to be initiated by the activation of CD4+ T (helper) lymphocytes with specificity for thyroid antigens. Once activated, T cells can recruit cyto-toxic CD8+ T cells to the thyroid. Hypothyroidism results not only from the destruction of thyrocytes by cytotoxic T cells but also by autoantibodies, which lead to complement fixation and killing by natural killer cells or block the TSH-R. Antibod-ies are directed against three main antigens—Tg (60%), TPO (95%), and TSH-R (60%)—and, less commonly, the sodium/iodine symporter (25%). Apoptosis (programmed cell death) also has been implicated in the pathogenesis of Hashimoto’s thyroiditis. Chronic thyroiditis also has been associated with increased intake of iodine and administration of medications such as interferon-α, lithium, and amiodarone. Support for an inherited predisposition includes an increased incidence of thyroid autoantibodies in first-degree relatives of patients with  Hashimoto’s thyroiditis compared to controls and the occur-rence of the autoantibodies and hypothyroidism in patients with specific chromosomal abnormalities such as Turner’s syn-drome and Down syndrome. Associations with HLA-B8, DR3, and DR5 haplotypes of the major histocompatibility complex also have been described. Alterations in CTLA4 have also been shown to increase the risk of developing Hashimoto’s thyroid-itis. Other associated genes include various cytokine genes, GITR (glucocorticoid-induced tumor necrosis factor-receptor) and STAT 3; however, these need further confirmatory studies.11On gross examination, the thyroid gland is usually mildly enlarged throughout and has a pale, gray-tan cut surface that is granular, nodular, and firm. On microscopic examination, the gland is diffusely infiltrated by small lymphocytes and plasma cells and occasionally shows well-developed germinal centers. Thyroid follicles are smaller than normal with reduced amounts of colloid and increased interstitial connective tissue. The fol-licles are lined by Hürthle or Askanazy cells, which are charac-terized by abundant eosinophilic, granular cytoplasm.Clinical Presentation Hashimoto’s thyroiditis is also more common in women (male-to-female ratio is 1:10 to 20) between the ages of 30 and 50 years old. The most common presenta-tion is that of a minimally or moderately enlarged firm granular gland discovered on routine physical examination or the aware-ness of a painless anterior neck mass, although 20% of patients present with hypothyroidism, and 5% present with hyperthy-roidism (Hashitoxicosis). In classic goitrous Hashimoto’s thy-roiditis, physical examination reveals a diffusely enlarged, firm gland, which also is lobulated. An enlarged pyramidal lobe often is palpable.Diagnostic Studies When Hashimoto’s thyroiditis is suspected clinically, an elevated TSH and the presence of thyroid autoan-tibodies usually confirm the diagnosis. FNAB with ultrasound guidance is indicated in patients who present with a solitary suspicious nodule or a rapidly enlarging goiter. Thyroid lym-phoma is a rare but well-recognized, ominous complication of chronic autoimmune thyroiditis and has a prevalence 80 times higher than expected frequency in this population than in a control population without thyroiditis. Studies of clonal simi-larity indicate that lymphoma may, in fact, evolve from Hashi-moto’s thyroiditis.12Treatment Thyroid hormone replacement therapy is indicated in overtly hypothyroid patients, with a goal of maintaining nor-mal TSH levels. The management of patients with subclinical hypothyroidism (normal T4 and elevated TSH) is controversial. A systematic review of cohort studies showed that in ageand sex-adjusted analyses, subclinical hypothyroidism is associated with a hazard ratio (HR) for coronary heart disease events of 1.89 (95% confidence interval [CI], 1.28 to 2.80; P <.001) and coronary heart disease mortality of 1.58 (95% CI, 1.10 to 2.27;  P = .005) for a TSH level of 10 to 19.9 mIU/L.13 The data for TSH levels of 5 to 10 mIU/L were less convincing. An evalu-ation of the 12 randomized controlled trials in this area only showed a trend toward improvement of some lipid parameters, and none of the included trials evaluated overall mortality or car-diac morbidity. For this reason, levothyroxine is recommended for all patients with TSH levels >10 μIU/mL and patients with levels of 5 to 10 μIU/mL in the presence of a goiter or anti-TPO antibodies. Treatment is also advised especially for middle-aged patients with cardiovascular risk factors such as hyperlipidemia or hypertension and in pregnant patients. Surgery may occa-sionally be indicated for suspicion of malignancy or for goiters causing compressive symptoms or cosmetic deformity.Riedel’s Thyroiditis Riedel’s thyroiditis is a rare variant of thyroiditis also known as Riedel’s struma or invasive fibrous thyroiditis that is characterized by the replacement of all or part of the thyroid parenchyma by fibrous tissue, which also invades into adjacent tissues. The etiology of this disorder is contro-versial, and it has been reported to occur in patients with other autoimmune diseases. This association, coupled with the pres-ence of lymphoid infiltration and response to steroid therapy, suggests a primary autoimmune etiology. Riedel’s thyroiditis also is associated with other focal sclerosing syndromes includ-ing mediastinal, retroperitoneal, periorbital, and retro-orbital fibrosis and sclerosing cholangitis, suggesting that it may, in fact, be a primary fibrotic disorder. It is now considered a manifestation of IgG4-related systemic disease characterized by elevated serum IgG4 levels and a lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate with an abundance of IgG4 bearing plasma cells.14 The disease occurs predominantly in women between the ages of 30 and  60 years old. It typically presents as a painless, hard anterior neck mass, which progresses over weeks to years to produce symptoms of compression, including dysphagia, dyspnea, chok-ing, and hoarseness. Patients may present with symptoms of hypothyroidism and hypoparathyroidism as the gland is replaced by fibrous tissue. Physical examination reveals a hard, “woody” thyroid gland with fixation to surrounding tissues. The diagnosis needs to be confirmed by open thyroid biopsy because the firm and fibrous nature of the gland renders FNAB inadequate.Surgery is the mainstay of the treatment. The chief goal of operation is to decompress the trachea by wedge excision of the thyroid isthmus and to make a tissue diagnosis. More extensive resections are not advised due to the infiltrative nature of the fibrotic process that obscures usual landmarks and struc-tures. Hypothyroid patients are treated with thyroid hormone replacement. Some patients who remain symptomatic have been reported to experience dramatic improvement after treatment with corticosteroids and tamoxifen. Mycophenolate mofetil and more recently rituximab has also been used to attenuate the Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   164001/03/19   11:20 AM 1641THYROID, PARATHYROID, AND ADRENALCHAPTER 38inflammatory process and led to dramatic symptom improve-ments in some patients.15Goiter. Any enlargement of the thyroid gland is referred to as a goiter. The causes of nontoxic goiters are listed in Table 38-3. Goiters may be diffuse, uninodular, or multinodular. Most non-toxic goiters are thought to result from TSH stimulation second-ary to inadequate thyroid hormone synthesis and other paracrine growth factors.16 Elevated TSH levels induce diffuse thyroid hyperplasia, followed by focal hyperplasia, resulting in nod-ules that may or may not concentrate iodine, colloid nodules, or microfollicular nodules. The TSH-dependent nodules progress to become autonomous. Familial goiters resulting from inher-ited deficiencies in enzymes necessary for thyroid hormone synthesis may be complete or partial. The term endemic goiter refers to the occurrence of a goiter in a significant proportion of individuals in a particular geographic region. In the past, dietary iodine deficiency was the most common cause of endemic goi-ter. This condition has largely disappeared in North America due to routine use of iodized salt and iodination of fertilizers, animal feeds, and preservatives. However, in areas of iodine deficiency, such as Central Asia, South America, and Indonesia, up to 90% of the population have goiters. Other dietary goitro-gens that may participate in endemic goiter formation include kelp, cassava, and cabbage. In many sporadic goiters, no obvi-ous cause can be identified.Clinical Features Most patients with nontoxic goiters are asymptomatic, although patients often complain of a pres-sure sensation in the neck. As the goiters become very large, compressive symptoms such as dyspnea and dysphagia ensue. Patients also describe having to clear their throats frequently (catarrh). Dysphonia from RLN injury is rare, except when malignancy is present. Obstruction of venous return at the tho-racic inlet from a substernal goiter results in a positive Pember-ton’s sign—facial flushing and dilatation of cervical veins upon raising the arms above the head (Fig. 38-13A). Sudden enlarge-ment of nodules or cysts due to hemorrhage may cause acute pain. Physical examination may reveal a soft, diffusely enlarged gland (simple goiter) or nodules of various size and consistency in case of a multinodular goiter. Deviation or compression of the trachea may be apparent.Diagnostic Tests Patients usually are euthyroid with normal TSH and low-normal or normal free T4 levels. If some nod-ules develop autonomy, patients have suppressed TSH levels or become hyperthyroid. RAI uptake often shows patchy uptake with areas of hot and cold nodules. FNAB is recommended in patients who have a dominant nodule or one that is painful or enlarging, as carcinomas have been reported in 5% to 10% of multinodular goiters. CT scans are helpful to evaluate the extent of retrosternal extension and airway compression (Fig. 38-13B).Treatment Most euthyroid patients with small, diffuse goi-ters do not require treatment. Some physicians give patients with large goiters exogenous thyroid hormone to reduce the TSH stimulation of gland growth; this treatment may result in decrease and/or stabilization of goiter size and is most effective for small diffuse goiters. Endemic goiters are treated by iodine administration. Surgical resection is reserved for goiters that (a) continue to increase despite T4 suppression, (b) cause obstruc-tive symptoms, (c) have substernal extension (considered a rela-tive indication by some groups), (d) have malignancy suspected or proven by FNAB, and (e) are cosmetically unacceptable. Near-total or total thyroidectomy is the treatment of choice, and patients require lifelong T4 therapy.Solitary Thyroid NoduleSolitary thyroid nodules are present in approximately 4% of individuals in the United States, whereas thyroid cancer has a much lower incidence of 40 new cases per 1 million. Therefore, it is of utmost importance to determine which patients with soli-tary thyroid nodule would benefit from surgery.History. Details regarding the nodule, such as time of onset, change in size, and associated symptoms such as pain, dyspha-gia, dyspnea, or choking, should be elicited. Pain is an unusual symptom and, when present, should raise suspicion for intra-thyroidal hemorrhage in a benign nodule, thyroiditis, or malig-nancy. Patients with MTC may complain of a dull, aching sensation. A history of hoarseness is worrisome, as it may be secondary to malignant involvement of the RLNs. Most impor-tantly, patients should be questioned regarding risk factors for malignancy, such as exposure to ionizing radiation and family history of thyroid and other malignancies associated with thy-roid cancer.External-Beam Radiation Low-dose therapeutic radiation has been used to treat conditions such as tinea capitis (6.5 cGy), thymic enlargement (100 to 400 cGy), enlarged tonsils and adenoids (750 cGy), acne vulgaris (200 to 1500 cGy), and other conditions such as hemangioma and scrofula. Radiation (approximately 4000 cGy) is also an integral part of the manage-ment of patients with Hodgkin’s disease. It is now known that a history of exposure to low-dose ionizing radiation to the thyroid gland places the patient at increased risk for developing thyroid cancer. The risk increases linearly from 6.5 to 2000 cGy, beyond which the incidence declines as the radiation causes destruc-tion of the thyroid tissue. The risk is maximum 20 to 30 years after exposure, but these patients require lifelong monitoring. During the nuclear fallout from Chernobyl in 1986, 131I release was accompanied by a marked increase in the incidence of both benign and malignant thyroid lesions noted within 4 years of exposure, particularly in children.17 Most thyroid carcinomas following radiation exposure are papillary, and some of these cancers with a solid type of histology and presence of RET/PTC translocations appear to be more aggressive. In general, there is a 40% chance that patients presenting with a thyroid nodule and a history of radiation have thyroid cancer. Of those patients who have thyroid cancer, the cancer is located in the dominant nodule in 60% of patients, but in the remaining 40% of patients, the cancer is in another nodule in the thyroid gland.Table 38-3Etiology of nontoxic goiterCLASSIFICATIONSPECIFIC ETIOLOGYEndemicIodine deficiency, dietary goitrogens (cassava, cabbage)MedicationsIodide, amiodarone, lithiumThyroiditisSubacute, chronic (Hashimoto’s)FamilialImpaired hormone synthesis from enzyme defectsNeoplasmAdenoma, carcinomaResistance to thyroid hormone—Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   164101/03/19   11:20 AM 1642SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIABFigure 38-13. A. Retrosternal extension of a large goiter may result in impeded flow in the superior vena cava, leading to dilated veins over the chest wall. This may become more prominent when patients raise their arms above the head—Pemberton’s sign. B. Computed tomography scan demonstrating retrosternal extension and consequent tracheal deviation and compression from a large goiter.Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   164201/03/19   11:20 AM 1643THYROID, PARATHYROID, AND ADRENALCHAPTER 38Family History A family history of thyroid cancer is a risk factor for the development of both medullary and nonmedullary thyroid cancer. Familial MTCs occur in isolation or in associa-tion with other tumors as part of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN2) syndromes. Nonmedullary thyroid cancers can occur in association with other known familial cancer syn-dromes such as Cowden’s syndrome, Werner’s syndrome (adult progeroid syndrome), familial adenomatous polyposis, and DICER 1 (Table 38-4). Nonmedullary thyroid cancers can also occur independently of these syndromes as the predominant tumors in the families, and in fact nonsyndromic FNMTC accounts for 95% of cases. The definition of familial nonmedul-lary thyroid cancer (FNMTC) is variable across the literature; however, in most studies, it is defined by the presence of two or more first-degree relatives with follicular cell–derived cancers. FNMTC is now recognized as a distinct clinical entity associated with a high incidence of multifocal tumors and benign thyroid nodules. Some studies report that these patients have higher locoregional recurrence rates and consequently shorter disease-free survival. Several candidate chromosomal loci that predispose to these tumors have been identified, includ-ing MNG1 (14q32), thyroid carcinoma with oxphilia (TCO, on 19p13.2), fPTC/papillary renal neoplasia (PRN, on 1q21), NMTC1 (2q21), and FTEN (8p23.1-p22). Susceptibility genes include SRGAP1 (12q14), TITF-1/NKX2.1 (14q13), FOXE1 (9q22), and the telomere-telomerase complex.18Physical Examination. The thyroid gland is best palpated from behind the patient and with the neck in mild extension. The cricoid cartilage is an important landmark, as the isthmus is situated just below it. Nodules that are hard, gritty, or fixed to surrounding structures such as the trachea or strap muscles are more likely to be malignant. The cervical chain of lymph nodes should be assessed as well as the nodes in the posterior triangle.Diagnostic Investigations. An algorithm for the workup of a solitary thyroid nodule is shown in Fig. 38-14.Fine-Needle Aspiration Biopsy FNAB has become the single most important test in the evaluation of thyroid masses and can be performed with or without ultrasound guidance. Ultrasound guidance is recommended for nodules that are difficult to pal-pate, for cystic or solid-cystic nodules that recur after the initial aspiration, and for multinodular goiters. A 23-gauge needle is inserted into the thyroid mass, and several passes are made while aspirating the syringe. After releasing the suction on the syringe, the needle is withdrawn and the cells are immediately placed on prelabeled dry glass slides; some are immersed in a 70% alcohol solution while others are air dried. A sample of the aspirate is also placed in a 90% alcohol solution for cytospin or cell pellet. The slides are stained by Papanicolaou’s or Wright’s stains and examined under the microscope. If a bloody aspirate is obtained, the patient should be repositioned in a more upright position and the biopsy repeated with a finer (25to 30-gauge) needle.After FNAB, the majority of nodules can be classified into several categories that determine further management. To address the issue of variability in the terminology of fine-needle aspiration (FNA), the National Cancer Institute (NCI) hosted the “NCI Thyroid Fine Needle Aspiration State of the Science Conference,” which then defined the Bethesda criteria for thyroid FNA.19 Accordingly, optimum cytology specimens should have at least six follicles each containing at least 10 to  15 cells from at least two aspirates.The FNA is classified as “nondiagnostic or unsatisfac-tory” in 2% to 20% of cases and typically results from a virtu-ally acellular specimen, cyst fluid, or the presence of blood or clotting artifact. The risk of malignancy in this setting ranges from 1% to 4%, and reaspiration under ultrasound guidance is recommended. A “benign” result is obtained in 60% to 70% of thyroid FNAs. The most common lesion in this setting is a follicular nodule (includes adenomatoid nodule, colloid nodule, and follicular adenoma). Other diagnoses include lymphocytic (Hashimoto’s) thyroiditis and granulomatous thyroiditis. False-negative results are reported in up to 3% of cases, and follow-up is recommended. A result of “atypia of unknown significance (AUS) or follicular lesion of unknown significance (FLUS)” is obtained in 3% to 6% of biopsies. The risk of malignancy in this scenario is difficult to determine; however, it is thought to be in the range of 5% to 15%. Clinical correlation and a repeat FNA are recommended for AUS lesions (which often results in 23Table 38-4Familial cancer syndromes involving nonmedullary thyroid cancerSYNDROMEGENEMANIFESTATIONTHYROID TUMORCowden’s syndromePTENIntestinal hamartomas, benign and malignant breast tumorsFTC, rarely PTC and Hürthle cell tumorsFAPAPCColon polyps and cancer, duodenal neoplasms, desmoidsPTC cribriform growth patternWerner’s syndromeWRNAdult progeroid syndromePTC, FTC, anaplastic cancerCarney complex type 1PRKAR1αCutaneous and cardiac myxomas, breast  and adrenal tumorsPTC, FTCMcCune-Albright syndromeGNAS1Polyostotic fibrous dysplasia, endocrine abnormalities, café-au-lait spotsPTC clear cellDICER 1 syndrome Pleuropulmonary blastoma, cystic nephroma, ovarian sex cord-stromal tumorsMultinodular goiter, thyroid cancerFAP = familial adenomatous polyposis; FTC = follicular thyroid cancer; PTC = papillary thyroid cancer.Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   164301/03/19   11:20 AM 1644SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIa more definitive interpretation), although clinical observation or surgery may be appropriate because of worrisome clinical or ultrasound findings. The category of “follicular neoplasm” is intended to identify nodules that might be follicular carcinomas. The term suspicious for a follicular neoplasm is preferred by some laboratories for this category because up to 35% of cases turn out not to be neoplasms but hyperplastic proliferations of follicular cells, most commonly those of multinodular goiter. Lobectomy is the preferred treatment for this result, and approx-imately 15% to 35% of lesions placed in this category prove to be malignant. Hürthle cell neoplasms are also included in this category. Most papillary and other carcinomas can be diagnosed by FNA, but the features are subtle at times, such as in follicular variant of papillary carcinomas. If the diagnosis is uncertain, the lesions are classified as “suspicious for malignancy.” Lobec-tomy or near-total thyroidectomy is recommended because 60% to 75% turn out to be malignant. This category also includes lesions suspicious for medullary carcinoma and lymphoma, and ancillary testing such as immunohistochemical analysis and flow cytometry may be helpful. The risk of malignancy in lesions classified as “malignant” by FNA is 97% to 99%, and near-total/total thyroidectomy is recommended.Laboratory Studies Most patients with thyroid nodules are euthyroid. Determining the blood TSH level is helpful. If a patient with a nodule is found to be hyperthyroid, the risk of malignancy is approximately 1%. Serum Tg levels cannot dif-ferentiate benign from malignant thyroid nodules unless the lev-els are extremely high, in which case metastatic thyroid cancer should be suspected. Tg levels are, however, useful in following patients who have undergone total thyroidectomy for thyroid cancer and also for serial evaluation of patients undergoing nonoperative management of thyroid nodules. Serum calcitonin levels should be obtained in patients with MTC or a family his-tory of MTC or MEN2. There is insufficient evidence to recom-mend routine calcitonin testing for all nodules. All patients with MTC should be tested for RET oncogene mutations and have a 24-hour urine collection with measurement of levels of vanil-lylmandelic acid (VMA), metanephrine, and catecholamine levels to rule out a coexisting pheochromocytoma. About 10% of patients with familial MTC and MEN2A have de novo RET mutations, so that their children are at risk for thyroid cancer.Imaging Ultrasound is helpful for detecting nonpalpable thy-roid nodules, differentiating solid from cystic nodules, and identifying adjacent lymphadenopathy. Ultrasound evaluation can identify features of a nodule that increase the a priori risk of malignancy, such as fine stippled calcification and enlarged regional nodes; however, a tissue diagnosis is strongly recom-mended before thyroidectomy.20 Ultrasound also provides a noninvasive and inexpensive method of following the size of suspected benign nodules diagnosed by FNAB and for identi-fying enlarged lymph nodes. Ultrasound elastography is used to evaluate tissue stiffness noninvasively. This technique takes advantage of the fact that malignant nodules tend to be harder than benign nodules and thus deform less compared with the surrounding normal thyroid parenchyma. Larger studies are warranted before elastography and newer techniques such as contrast-enhanced ultrasound can be routinely included in the evaluation of thyroid nodules.21 CT and MRI are unnecessary in the routine evaluation of thyroid tumors except for large, fixed, or substernal lesions. Scanning the thyroid with 123I or 99mTc is rarely necessary, and thyroid scanning currently is recom-mended in the assessment of thyroid nodules only in patients Solitary thyroid noduleFNABBenignMalignantNondiagnosticRepeatFNAB withu/sguidanceCystColloidnoduleAspirateReaccumulates x 3ThyroidectomyObserveContinuedgrowth,compressivesymptoms+/–FNABAUS/FLUSFN orSuspiciousfor FNSuspiciousformalignancyNear-total/ totalThyroidectomyRepeatFNABLobectomyLobectomy ornear-total/totalthyroidectomyFigure 38-14. Management of a solitary thyroid nodule based on Bethesda criteria. a = except in patients with a history of external radia-tion exposure or a family history of thyroid cancer; FNAB = fine-needle aspiration biopsy; AUS = atypia of unknown significance; FLUS =  follicular lesion of unknown significance; FN = follicular neoplasm.Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   164401/03/19   11:20 AM 1645THYROID, PARATHYROID, AND ADRENALCHAPTER 38who have follicular thyroid nodules on FNAB and a suppressed TSH. PET scanning does not play a major role in the primary evaluation of thyroid nodules.Management. Malignant tumors are treated by thyroidectomy, as discussed earlier and later in this chapter in “Surgical Treat-ment under Malignant Thyroid Disease.” Simple thyroid cysts resolve with aspiration in about 75% of cases, although some require a second or third aspiration. If the cyst persists after three attempts at aspiration, unilateral thyroid lobectomy is rec-ommended. Lobectomy also is recommended for cysts >4 cm in diameter or complex cysts with solid and cystic components, as the latter have a higher incidence of malignancy (15%). When FNAB is used in complex nodules, the solid portion should be sampled. If a colloid nodule is diagnosed by FNAB, patients should still be observed with serial ultrasound and Tg measure-ments. If the nodule enlarges, repeat FNAB often is indicated. Although controversial, levothyroxine in doses sufficient to maintain a serum TSH level between 0.1 and 1.0 μU/mL may also be administered. In areas with a high prevalence of iodine deficiency, this can decrease nodule size and potentially prevent the growth of new nodules. In iodine-sufficient populations, the data are less impressive. Randomized controlled trial analyses have shown that less than 25% of benign nodules shrink more than 50% with TSH suppression in iodine-replete populations. Thyroidectomy should be performed if a nodule enlarges on TSH suppression, causes compressive symptoms, or for cos-metic reasons. An exception to this general rule is the patient who has had previous irradiation of the thyroid gland or has a family history of thyroid cancer. In these patients, total or near-total thyroidectomy is recommended because of the high incidence of thyroid cancer and decreased reliability of FNAB in this setting.Malignant Thyroid DiseaseIn the United States, thyroid cancer accounts for <1% of all malignancies (2% of women and 0.5% of men) and is the most rapidly increasing cancer in women. Thyroid cancer is respon-sible for six deaths per million persons annually. Most patients present with a palpable swelling in the neck, which initiates assessment through a combination of history, physical exami-nation, and FNAB.Molecular Genetics of Thyroid Tumorigenesis. Several oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes are involved in thy-roid tumorigenesis,22 as depicted in Table 38-5. The RET proto-oncogene (Fig. 38-15) plays a significant role in the pathogenesis of thyroid cancers. It is located on chromosome 10 and encodes a receptor tyrosine kinase, which binds sev-eral growth factors such as glial-derived neurotrophic factor and neurturin. The RET protein is expressed in tissues derived from the embryonic nervous and excretory systems. Therefore, Table 38-5Oncogenes, tumor suppressor genes, and other genetic alterations implicated in thyroid tumorigenesisGENEFUNCTIONTUMOROncogenes  RETMembrane receptor with tyrosine  kinase activitySporadic and familial MTC, PTC (RET/PTC rearrangements)METSameOverexpressed in PTCTRK1SameActivated in some PTCTSH-RLinked to heterotrimeric G proteinHyperfunctioning adenomaGsα (gsp)Signal transduction molecule  (GTP binding)Hyperfunctioning adenoma, follicular adenomaRasSignal transduction proteinFollicular adenoma and carcinoma, PTCPAX8/PPARγ1OncoproteinFollicular adenoma, follicular carcinomaB-Raf (BRAF)Signal transductionPTC, tall cell and poorly differentiated, anaplasticCTNNB1 (β-catenin)Signal transductionUpregulated in poorly differentiated and anaplastic cancersTERT promoterChromosome integrityMutated in thyroid cancers including PTC, FTC and anaplastic cancersTumor suppressors  p53Cell cycle regulator, arrests cells  in G1, induces apoptosisDedifferentiated PTC, FTC, anaplastic cancersp16Cell cycle regulator, inhibits cyclin-dependent kinaseThyroid cancer cell linesPTENProtein tyrosine phosphataseFollicular adenoma and carcinomaOther genetic alterations  microRNASmall, noncoding RNASpecific types upregulated in papillary and some follicular carcinomasFTC = follicular thyroid cancer; GTP = guanosine triphosphate; MTC = medullary thyroid cancer; PTC = papillary thyroid cancer.Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   164501/03/19   11:20 AM 1646SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIReceptorGDNFTyrosinekinaseIntracellularExtracellularSubstrateATP620618811609634830804768= MEN2A & FMTC mutation= MEN2B mutation= FMTC mutation= Hirschsprung's disease    mutation918Figure 38-15. Structure of the RET tyrosine kinase receptor. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A (MEN2A) and type 2B (MEN2B), famil-ial medullary thyroid cancer (FMTC), and Hirschsprung’s disease result from germline mutations in the RET proto-oncogene. The extracel-lular domain binds the ligand glial-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) and contains 28 cysteine residues. Mutations in cysteine residues at codons 609, 611, 618, 620, and 634, which are in the juxtamembrane region of the receptor, are associated with MEN2A and FMTC. The ATP-binding site is located intracellularly near the site, which binds the substrate for the tyrosine kinase catalytic domain. Mutations at codon 918 (Met to Thr) alter the substrate binding pocket located in the intracellular region and cause MEN2B. FMTC is associated with mutations at codons 768 and 804. ATP = adenosine triphosphate. (Reproduced with permission from Wells S, Franz C. Medullary carcinoma of the thyroid gland, World J Surg. 2000 Aug;24(8):952-956.)RET disruption can lead to developmental abnormalities in organs derived from these systems, such as the enteric nervous system (Hirschsprung’s disease) and kidney. Germline muta-tions in the RET proto-oncogene are known to predispose to MEN2A, MEN2B, and familial MTCs, and somatic mutations have been demonstrated in tumors derived from the neural crest, such as MTCs (30%) and pheochromocytomas. The tyrosine kinase domain of RET can fuse with other genes by rearrange-ment. These fusion products also function as oncogenes and have been implicated in the pathogenesis of PTCs. At least 15 RET/PTC rearrangements have been described and appear to be early events in tumorigenesis. Young age and radiation expo-sure seem to be independent risk factors for the development of RET/PTC rearrangements. Up to 70% of papillary cancers in children exposed to the radiation fallout from the 1986 Cher-nobyl disaster carry RET/PTC rearrangements, the most com-mon being RET/PTC1 and RET/PTC3. These rearrangements confer constitutive activation of the receptor tyrosine kinases. RET/PTC3 is associated with a solid type of PTC that appears to present at a higher stage and to be more aggressive. It has now been established that RET/PTC signaling involves the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway via other signaling molecules such as Ras, Raf, and MEK. In normal cells, physi-ologic activation of Raf kinases occurs via direct interaction with guanosine triphosphate (GTP)–bound Ras, a membrane-bound small G protein. Activated Raf, a serine-threonine kinase, in turn phosphorylates MEK, another serine-threonine kinase. This leads to phosphorylation of ERK/MAPK, which phosphor-ylates regulatory molecules in the nucleus, thereby altering gene expression. Aberrant activation of the MAPK pathway leads to tumorigenesis. Aside from RET/PTC alterations, mutations in the Ras genes can also activate the MAPK pathway. Mutated RAS oncogenes have been identified in up to 20% to 40% of thyroid follicular adenomas and carcinomas, multinodular goi-ters, and papillary and anaplastic carcinomas. There are three Raf kinases, A-Raf, B-Raf (BRAF), and C-Raf. Mutations in BRAF also have been implicated in aberrant MAPK pathway activation and tumorigenesis. Of the various identified BRAF mutations, T1799A (V600E amino acid substitution) is the most common and occurs frequently in thyroid cancers. Interestingly, BRAF mutations occur in papillary and anaplastic tumors (aver-age prevalence of 44% and 22%, respectively),23 but not in fol-licular thyroid cancers, suggesting a role in the pathogenesis of these malignancies. Studies also show that BRAF mutations are associated with more aggressive clinicopathologic features, including larger tumor size, invasion, and lymphadenopathy, and may have a role as prognostic markers.The p53 gene is a tumor suppressor gene encoding a transcriptional regulator, which causes cell cycle arrest allow-ing repair of damaged DNA, thus helping to maintain genomic integrity. Mutations of p53 are rare in PTCs but common in undifferentiated thyroid cancers and thyroid cancer cell lines. Other cell cycle regulators and tumor suppressors such as p15 and p16 are mutated more commonly in thyroid cancer cell lines than in primary tumors. An oncogene resulting from the fusion of the DNA binding domain of the thyroid-transcription fac-tor PAX8 gene to the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma 1 (PPARγ1) has been noted to play an important role Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   164601/03/19   11:21 AM 1647THYROID, PARATHYROID, AND ADRENALCHAPTER 38in the development of follicular neoplasms, including follicular cancers. Mutations in the telomerase reverse transcriptase cata-lytic subunit (TERT) promoter unit have also been recently been identified in well-differentiated thyroid cancers and appear to be related to poor prognosis. Thyroid cancer stem cells have also been identified; however, their role in thyroid carcinogenesis remains to be determined.24 Mutations in the kinases PIK3CA and AKT1 are rare in thyroid cancers and tend to occur as late events in tumorigenesis.Specific Tumor Types Papillary Carcinoma Papillary carcinoma accounts for 80% of all thyroid malignancies in iodine-sufficient areas and is the predominant thyroid cancer in children and individuals exposed to external radiation. Papillary carcinoma occurs more often in women, with a 2:1 female-to-male ratio, and the mean age at presentation is 30 to 40 years. Most patients are euthyroid and present with a slow-growing painless mass in the neck. Dys-phagia, dyspnea, and dysphonia usually are associated with locally advanced invasive disease. Lymph node metastases are common, especially in children and young adults, and may be the presenting complaint. “Lateral aberrant thyroid” almost always denotes a cervical lymph node that has been invaded by metastatic cancer. Suspicion of thyroid cancer often originates through physical examination of patients and a review of their history. Diagnosis is established by FNAB of the thyroid mass or lymph node. Once thyroid cancer is diagnosed on FNAB, a complete neck ultrasound is strongly recommended to evalu-ate the contralateral lobe and for lymph node metastases in the central and lateral neck compartments. Distant metastases are uncommon at initial presentation, but may ultimately develop in up to 20% of patients. The most common sites are lungs, fol-lowed by bone, liver, and brain.Pathology. On gross examination, PTCs generally are hard and whitish and remain flat on sectioning with a blade, in contrast to normal tissue or benign nodular lesions that tend to bulge. Mac-roscopic calcification, necrosis, or cystic change may be appar-ent. Histologically, papillary carcinomas may exhibit papillary projections (Fig. 38-16A), a mixed pattern of papillary and fol-licular structures, or a pure follicular pattern (follicular variant). The diagnosis is established by characteristic nuclear cellular features. Cells are cuboidal with pale, abundant cytoplasm, crowded nuclei that may demonstrate “grooving,” and intranu-clear cytoplasmic inclusions (leading to the designation of Orphan Annie nuclei [Fig. 38-16B]), which allow diagnosis by FNAB. Psammoma bodies, which are microscopic, calcified deposits representing clumps of sloughed cells, also may be present. Mixed papillary-follicular tumors and follicular variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma (FVPTC) are classified as papil-lary carcinomas because they behave biologically as papillary carcinomas.  Two main subtypes of FVPTC are recognized: encapsulated and nonencapsulated (infiltrative). The for-mer is challenging to diagnose. Since the tumors have no invasion, the diagnosis relies on the finding of characteristic nuclei, which can be subjective. In addition, several studies have shown that the encapsulated tumors have an indolent behavior and are genetically distinct from their infiltrative counterparts. As such, these tumors are now designated noninvasive follicular thyroid neoplasm with papillary-like nuclear features (NIFTP).25 Multifocality is common in papillary carcinoma and may be present in up to 85% of cases on microscopic examination. Mul-tifocality is associated with an increased risk of cervical nodal metastases, and these tumors may rarely invade adjacent struc-tures such as the trachea, esophagus, and RLNs. Other variants of papillary carcinoma include tall cell, insular, columnar, dif-fuse sclerosing, clear cell, trabecular, and poorly differentiated types. These variants account for about 1% of all papillary car-cinomas and are generally associated with a worse prognosis.Minimal or occult/microcarcinoma refers to tumors of  1 cm or less in size with no evidence of local invasiveness through the thyroid capsule or angioinvasion, and that are not associated with lymph node metastases. They are nonpalpable and usually are incidental findings at operative, histologic, or autopsy examination. Studies have demonstrated occult PTC to be present in 2% to 36% of thyroid glands removed at autopsy. These tumors are also being identified more frequently due to the widespread use of ultrasound. These occult tumors are generally associated with a better prognosis than larger tumors, but they may be more aggressive than previously appreciated. About 25% of patients with these tumors have associated occult lymph node metastases.Prognostic Indicators. In general, patients with PTC have an excellent prognosis with a >95% 10-year survival rate. Sev-eral prognostic indicators have been incorporated into various 4Figure 38-16. A. Histomicrograph of a papillary thyroid cancer (hematoxylin-eosin stain). B. Fine-needle aspiration biopsy specimen from a papillary thyroid cancer showing typical intranuclear cytoplasmic inclusions in the center of the slide.Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   164701/03/19   11:21 AM 1648SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIstaging systems, which enable patients to be stratified into low-risk and high-risk groups. Unfortunately, all of these classifica-tion systems rely on data that are not available preoperatively.In 1987, Hay and colleagues26 at the Mayo Clinic proposed the AGES scoring system, which incorporates Age, histologic Grade, Extrathyroidal invasion, and metastases and tumor Size to predict the risk of dying from papillary cancer. Low-risk patients are young, with well-differentiated tumors, no metas-tases, and small primary lesions, whereas high-risk patients are older, with poorly differentiated tumors, local invasion, dis-tant metastases, and large primary lesions. The MACIS scale is a postoperative system modified from the AGES scale. This scale incorporates distant Metastases, Age at presentation (<40 or >40 years old), Completeness of original surgical resection, extrathyroidal Invasion, and Size of original lesion (in centime-ters) and classifies patients into four risk groups based on their scores. Cady proposed the AMES system27 to classify differen-tiated thyroid tumors into lowand high-risk groups using Age (men <40 years old, women <50 years old), Metastases, Extra-thyroidal spread, and Size of tumors (< or >5 cm). A simplified system by DeGroot and associates28 uses four groups—class I (intrathyroidal), class II (cervical nodal metastases), class III (extrathyroidal invasion), and class IV (distant metastases)—to determine prognosis. Another classification system is the TNM system (Tumor, Nodal status, Metastases; Table 38-6), which used by most medical centers in North America and has been recently updated.29 In this new version, minimal extrathyroidal extension is no longer considered T3a disease. Thyroglobulin doubling time (using levels obtained when TSH is <0.1 mIU/L) has also been demonstrated to be an independent prognostic marker for metastatic disease and recurrence.30Several molecular and genetic markers such as tumor DNA aneuploidy, decreased cyclic adenosine monophosphate response to TSH, increased epidermal growth factor binding, presence of N-ras and gsp mutations, overexpression of c-myc, and presence of p53 mutations also have been associated with a worse prognosis. The presence of BRAF V600E mutation, as previously mentioned, is associated with aggressive tumor characteristics, including extrathyroidal extension, older age at presentation, and lymph node and distant metastases. This muta-tion also appears to be an independent predictor of both tumor recurrence (even for early-stage disease) and tumor-related mortality. Some studies propose that BRAF mutation status on FNAB can be used to tailor initial management including more extensive initial surgical excision, high-dose postoperative RAI therapy, increased TSH suppression, and closer follow-up.31 The correlation of RET/PTC rearrangements and Ras mutations with prognosis is less clear. TERT promoter mutations have been associated with poor disease-specific and disease-free survival.Surgical Treatment. Most authors agree that patients with high-risk tumors (judged by any of the classification systems discussed earlier in “Prognostic Indicators”) or bilateral tumors should undergo total or near-total thyroidectomy. The optimal surgical strategy in the majority of patients with low-risk (small, unilateral) cancers was controversial for many years, with the focus of the debate centering around outcome data and risks associated with extent of thyroidectomy in this group of patients. Proponents of total thyroidectomy indicate that it enables the use of RAI to effectively detect and treat residual thyroid tissue or metastatic disease and makes serum Tg level a more sensitive marker of recurrent or persistent disease. It is also known that a significant proportion (33% to 50%) of patients who develop a recurrence die from their disease,32 and even though the data are retrospective, long-term, follow-up studies suggest that recur-rence rates are lowered and that survival is improved in patients undergoing near-total or total thyroidectomy28,32-36 (Fig. 38-17). In addition, diminished survival is noted in patients with low-risk disease (mortality rates of 5% at 10 to 20 years), and it is not possible to accurately risk stratify patients preoperatively. In the last 10 years, a large study of >50,000 patients with papillary cancer demonstrated that, in multivariate analyses, total thyroid-ectomy led to a significantly improved recurrence and survival for tumors >1 cm. Furthermore, the authors also showed that patients with tumors 1 to 2 cm in diameter who were treated with lobectomy had a 24% higher risk of recurrence and a 49% higher risk of thyroid cancer mortality.37 Based on this informa-tion, the American Thyroid Association 2009 guidelines for the evidence-based management of thyroid cancers recommended a near-total or total thyroidectomy for primary cancers >1 cm unless there are contraindications to the surgery.38 However, additional studies since then have demonstrated no survival dif-ferences based on initial surgical procedure when adjusting for complexity/risk and comorbid diseases.39 This finding, coupled with a trend for increased use of ultrasound and Tg measure-ments to assess for recurrences and the declining use of RAI ablation, led to revised guidelines in 2015. Accordingly, either near-total/total thyroidectomy or lobectomy constitute appropriate initial treatment for tumors >1 cm and <4 cm without extrathyroidal extension or lymph node involvement (cN0). Of note, the guidelines do state that the treatment team may elect near-total/total thyroidectomy to facilitate RAI ther-apy, enhance follow-up based on disease features, or if the patient expresses a preference for complete thyroid excision.40There has also been in change in the management of pap-illary microcarcinomas (<1 cm) since at least two trials from Japan have shown that active surveillance (defined as observa-tion without immediate surgery) can be a viable and safe first line of treatment for these very-low-risk tumors without extra-thyroidal extension or lymph node metastases.41 Tumors that progress during monitoring are treated by surgery. If surgery is chosen as initial treatment for these patients, a thyroid lobec-tomy is considered sufficient.When PTC is diagnosed by FNAB, the definitive operation can be done without confirming the diagnosis by frozen section during the operation. Patients with a nodule that is suspicious for papillary cancer should be treated by thyroid lobectomy, isthmu-sectomy, and removal of any pyramidal lobe or adjacent lymph nodes. If intraoperative frozen-section examination of a lymph node or primary tumor confirms carcinoma, completion total or near-total thyroidectomy is performed. If a definitive diagnosis cannot be made or the surgeon is concerned about the viability of the parathyroid glands or the status of the RLN, the opera-tion is terminated. When final histology confirms carcinoma, completion thyroidectomy is performed if deemed necessary based on risk-stratification. During thyroidectomy, enlarged or obviously involved central neck nodes should be removed (ther-apeutic central-compartment, level VI), along with nodes with known lateral neck metastases. Some investigators recommend routine bilateral central neck dissection due to the high inci-dence of microscopic metastases and data showing improved rates of recurrence and survival (compared to historic controls). 5Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   164801/03/19   11:21 AM 1649THYROID, PARATHYROID, AND ADRENALCHAPTER 38Table 38-6TNM classification of thyroid tumors PAPILLAEY or FOLLICULAR TUMORSDIAGNOSIS AGETUMORNODEMETASTASISSTAGE<55 yearsAny TAny NM0I<55 yearsAny TAny NM1II≥55 yearsT1N0/NXM0I≥55 yearsT1N1M0II≥55 yearsT2N0/NXM0I≥55 yearsT2N1M0II≥55 yearsT3a/T3bAny NM0II≥55 yearsT4aAny NM0III≥55 yearsT4bAny NM0IVA≥55 yearsAny TAny NM1IVBMEDULLARY THYROID CANCERTUMORNODEMETASTASISSTAGET1N0M0IT2N0M0IIT3N0M0IIT1–3N1aM0IIIT4aAny NM0IVAT1–3N1bM0IVAT4bAny NM0IVBAny TAny NM1IVCANAPLASTIC CANCERTUMORNODEMETASTASISSTAGET1–T3aN0/NXM0IVAT1–T3aN1M0IVBT3bAny NM0IVBT4Any NM0IVBAny TAny NM1IVCDEFINITIONSPrimary tumor (T)TX = Primary tumor cannot be assessedT0 = No evidence of primary tumorT1 = Tumor ≤2 cm in greatest dimension limited to the thyroid T1a = Tumor ≤1 cm in greatest dimension limited to the thyroid T1b = Tumor >1 cm but ≤2 cm in greatest dimension limited to the thyroidT2 = Tumor >2 cm but ≤4 cm in greatest dimension limited to the thyroidT3 = Tumor >4 cm limited to the thyroid, or gross extrathyroidal extension invading only strap muscles T3a = Tumor >4 cm limited to the thyroid T3b = Gross extrathyroidal extension invading only strap muscles (sternohyoid, sternothyroid, thyrohyoid, or omohyoid muscles) from a tumor of any sizeT4 = Includes gross extrathyroidal extension beyond the strap muscles T4a = Gross extrathyroidal extension invading subcutaneous soft tissues, larynx, trachea, esophagus, or recurrent laryngeal nerve from a tumor of any size T4b = Gross extrathyroidal extension invading prevertebral fascia or encasing the carotid artery or mediastinal vessels from a tumor of any sizeRegional lymph nodes (N)NX = Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessedN0 = No evidence of locoregional lymph node metastasis N0a = One or more cytologically or histologically confirmed benign lymph nodes N0b = No radiologic or clinical evidence of locoregional lymph node metastasisN1 = Metastasis to regional nodes N1a = Metastasis to level VI or VII (pretracheal, paratracheal, or prelaryngeal/Delphian, or upper mediastinal) lymph nodes. This can be unilateral or bilateral disease. N1b = Metastasis to unilateral, bilateral, or contralateral lateral neck lymph nodes (levels I, II, III, IV, or V) or retropharyngeal lymph nodesDistant Metastasis (M)M0 = No distant metastasisM1 = Distant metastasisUsed with the permission of the American College of Surgeons. Amin MB, Edge SB, Greene FL, et al. (Eds.) AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, 8th Ed. Springer New York, 2017.Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   164901/03/19   11:21 AM 1650SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIHowever, these risks need to be balanced with the increased risk of hypoparathyroidism with routine central neck dissection and the fact that some studies do not show any difference in recur-rence rates or rates of low or undetectable Tg levels. The updated 2015 ATA guidelines for thyroid cancer management suggest that prophylactic (ipsilateral or bilateral) dissection may be per-formed in patients with advanced (T3 or T4) papillary thyroid carcinoma, or if the lateral neck nodes are involved with tumor (N1b), or if the information will help in treatment planning.40 The American Head and Neck Society urges the involvement of multidisciplinary teams in the decision-making process for pro-phylactic CND and indicates that it can be considered in patients with high risk of recurrence (to include older or young age, mul-tifocal disease and extrathyroidal extension in addition to the aforementioned factors).42 Further prospective studies are needed before definitive recommendations can be made in this regard.Biopsy-proven lymph node metastases detected clini-cally or by imaging in the lateral neck in patients with papil-lary carcinoma are managed with modified radical or functional neck dissection,40 as described later in this chapter in “Thyroid Surgery.” Dissection of the posterior triangle and suprahyoid dissection usually are not necessary unless there is extensive metastatic disease in levels 2, 3, and 4, but should be performed when appropriate. Prophylactic lateral neck node dissection is not necessary in patients with PTC because these cancers do not appear to metastasize systemically from lymph nodes, and micrometastases often can be ablated with RAI therapy.Follicular Carcinoma Follicular carcinomas account for 10% of thyroid cancers and occur more commonly in iodinedeficient areas. The overall incidence of this tumor is declining in the United States, probably due to iodine supplementation and improved histologic classification. Women have a higher incidence of follicular cancer, with a female-to-male ratio of 3:1, and a mean age at presentation of 50 years old. Follicular cancers usually present as solitary thyroid nodules, occasion-ally with a history of rapid size increase, and long-standing goi-ter. Pain is uncommon, unless hemorrhage into the nodule has occurred. Unlike papillary cancers, cervical lymphadenopathy is uncommon at initial presentation (about 5%), although distant metastases may be present. In <1% of cases, follicular cancers may be hyperfunctioning, leading patients to present with signs and symptoms of thyrotoxicosis. FNAB is unable to distinguish benign follicular lesions from follicular carcinomas. Therefore, preoperative clinical diagnosis of cancer is difficult unless dis-tant metastases are present. Large follicular tumors (>4 cm) in older men are more likely to be malignant.Due to the limitations inherent in the FNAB diagnosis, a number of studies have focused on identifying molecular mark-ers to distinguish benign from malignant follicular lesions. Many of these genetic changes can be identified using tissue obtained during FNAB. While no single marker has met the ideal charac-teristics of being simple to use, reproducible, and cost-effective, several combinations of markers appear to be useful in differen-tiating benign from malignant lesions. A commonly used panel of seven genes used to “rule in” malignancy detects mutations in BRAF, Ras, RET/PTC, and PAX/PPARg and has been associated with a sensitivity of 57% to 75%, specificity of 97% to 100%, PPV of 87% to 100%, and NPV of 79% to 86% in the case of nodules consistent with Follicular/Hürthle cell neoplasm or sus-picious of the same.43 In contrast, the Afirma Gene Expression Classifier (GEC) uses a “rule out” strategy to identify benign nodules. This method uses material from additional FNA passes (in an RNA-preserving solution) to analyze a 167 gene panel, and the results obtained are reported as benign or suspicious.44 It is reported to have a lower PPV of 37% but a better NPV of 94% for Follicular/Hürthle cell neoplasms. Next generation sequenc-ing techniques have been used to enhance malignancy detection Less than near-totalthyroidectomyP = 0.02Less thannear-totalthyroidectomy00510152025303524681012Cumulative death (%)Near-total or totalthyroidectomyNear-totalor totalthyroidectomyYears after initial therapy04361135262907227218111200640290698555464416365131432092100032Figure 38-17. Improved survival in patients with papillary or follicular thyroid cancer following total or near-total thyroidectomy compared to those who underwent less than near-total thyroidectomy. (Reproduced with permission from Mazzaferri E, Jhiang S: Long-term impact of initial surgical and medical therapy on papillary and follicular thyroid cancer, Am J Med. 1994 Nov;97(5):418-428.)Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   165001/03/19   11:21 AM 1651THYROID, PARATHYROID, AND ADRENALCHAPTER 38by including additional mutations and gene arrangements. The advanced version of this assay (ThyroSeqV2) had a sensitivity of 90%, specificity of 93%, PPV of 83%, and NPV of 96% in a study of Follicular/Hüurthle cell neoplasm/suspicious of the same nodules, making it useful as both a “rule in” and “rule out” test.45 Of note, these assays have also been evaluated in “AUS/FLUS” and “suspicious for malignancy” nodules with varying results, i.e., the performance characteristics of these tests have been noted to change depending upon the prevalence of malig-nancy in the tested population (pretest probability). At this time, the ATA guidelines do not advise molecular testing in the work-up of “suspicious for malignancy” nodules. Molecular testing may be used to supplement cytology results for malignancy risk assessment in “AUS/FLUS” or “follicular/Hürthle cell neo-plasm/suspicious of the same” nodules depending on feasibility and informed patient preference.40 Expression arrays also have been used to investigate the role of microRNAs, which are a new class of small, noncoding RNAs that have been implicated in carcinogenesis. The specific microRNAs miR-197 and miR-346 are upregulated in follicular thyroid cancers46 and have the potential to be used as diagnostic markers. Additional studies have also demonstrated the feasibility of studying a panel of microRNAs in a small number of FNA samples. ThyGenX/ThyraMIR uses a mutation panel supplemented with 10 miRNA markers,47 whereas Rosetta GX Reveal is exclusively based on miRNA markers; however, both require further validation.48Pathology. Follicular carcinomas usually are solitary lesions, and the majority are surrounded by a capsule. Histologically, follicles are present, but the lumen may be devoid of colloid. Architectural patterns depend on the degree of differentiation demonstrated by the tumor. Malignancy is defined by the pres-ence of capsular and vascular invasion (Fig. 38-18). In general, minimally invasive tumors appear grossly encapsulated and have microscopic invasion through the tumor capsule without extension into the parenchyma and/or invasion into smallto medium-sized vessels (venous caliber) in or immediately out-side the capsule, but not within the tumor. On the other hand, widely invasive tumors demonstrate evidence of large vessel invasion and/or broad areas of tumor invasion through the cap-sule. They may, in fact, be unencapsulated. It is important to note that there is a wide variation of opinion among clinicians and pathologists with respect to the above definitions. Tumor infiltration and invasion, as well as tumor thrombus within the middle thyroid or jugular veins, may be apparent at operation.Surgical Treatment and Prognosis. Patients diagnosed by FNAB as having a follicular lesion should undergo thyroid lobectomy because at least 70% to 80% of these patients will have benign adenomas. Total thyroidectomy is recommended by some surgeons in older patients with follicular lesions  >4 cm because of the higher risk of cancer in this setting (50%) and certainly should be performed in patients with atypia on FNA, a family history of thyroid cancer, or a history of radiation exposure. Intraoperative frozen-section examination usually is not helpful, but it should be performed when there is evidence of capsular or vascular invasion or when adjacent lymphadenopa-thy is present. Total thyroidectomy should be performed when thyroid cancer is diagnosed. There is debate among experts about whether patients with minimally invasive follicular can-cers should undergo completion thyroidectomy because the prognosis is so good in these patients. A diagnosis of frankly invasive carcinoma or follicular carcinoma with angioinvasion, with or without capsular invasion, necessitates completion of total thyroidectomy primarily so that 131I can be used to detect and ablate metastatic disease. Prophylactic nodal dissection is not needed because nodal involvement is infrequent, but in the unusual patient with nodal metastases, therapeutic neck dissec-tion is recommended. Prophylactic central neck dissection may be considered in patients with large tumors. The cumulative mortality from follicular thyroid cancer is approximately 15% at 10 years and 30% at 20 years. Poor long-term prognosis is predicted by age over 50 years old at presentation, tumor size >4 cm, higher tumor grade, marked vascular invasion, extrathy-roidal invasion, and distant metastases at the time of diagnosis.Hürthle Cell Carcinoma Hürthle cell carcinomas account for approximately 3% of all thyroid malignancies and, under the World Health Organization classification, are considered to be a subtype of follicular thyroid cancer. Hürthle cell cancers also are characterized by vascular or capsular invasion and, there-fore, cannot be diagnosed by FNAB. Tumors contain sheets of eosinophilic cells packed with mitochondria, which are derived from the oxyphilic cells of the thyroid gland. Hürthle cell tumors differ from follicular carcinomas in that they are more often multifocal and bilateral (about 30%), usually do not take up RAI (about 5%), are more likely to metastasize to local nodes (25%) and distant sites, and are associated with a higher mortal-ity rate (about 20% at 10 years). Hence, they are considered to be a separate class of tumors by some groups.Management is similar to that of follicular neoplasms, with lobectomy and isthmusectomy being sufficient surgical treatment for unilateral Hürthle cell adenomas. When Hürthle cell neoplasms are found to be invasive on definitive paraffin-section histology, then total thyroidectomy should be performed. These patients should also undergo routine central neck node removal, similar to patients with MTC, and modified radical neck dissection when lateral neck nodes are palpable or identi-fied by ultrasonography. Although RAI scanning and ablation usually are ineffective, they probably should be considered to ablate any residual normal thyroid tissue and occasionally ablate tumors because there is no other good therapy.Postoperative Management of Differentiated Thyroid Cancer Radioiodine Therapy The issue of whether RAI therapy offers any benefit to patients with differentiated thyroid cancer Figure 38-18. Hematoxylin-eosin–stained section from follicular thyroid carcinoma showing capsular invasion.Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   165101/03/19   11:21 AM 1652SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIremains controversial in the absence of prospective, random-ized controlled trials. Long-term cohort studies by Mazzaferri and associates and DeGroot and colleagues demonstrate that postoperative RAI therapy reduces recurrence (Fig. 38-19) and provides a small improvement in survival, even in low-risk patients.28,34 Screening with RAI is more sensitive than chest X-ray or CT scanning for detecting metastases; however, it is less sensitive than Tg measurements for detecting metastatic disease in most differentiated thyroid cancers except Hürthle cell tumors. Screening and treatment are facilitated by the removal of all normal thyroid tissue, which effectively competes for iodine uptake. Metastatic differentiated thyroid carcinoma can be detected and treated by 131I in about 75% of patients. Multiple studies show that RAI effectively treats >70% of lung micrometastases that are detected by RAI scan in the presence of a normal chest X-ray, whereas the success rates drop to <10% with pulmonary macrometastases. Early detection therefore is very important to improve prognosis.Several features place patients at increased risk for local recurrences or metastases. The 2015 ATA guidelines use various features to risk-stratify tumors.40 Low-risk papillary  thyroid cancer includes those without local tumor invasion, all macroscopic tumor resected, absence of aggressive histol-ogy (e.g., tall cell, columnar cell carcinoma), no known dis-tant metastases (clinical or on RAI scan if done), no vascular invasion, clinical N0 or ≤5 pathologic N1 micrometastases  (<0.2 cm in largest dimension), intrathyroidal, encapsulated fol-licular variant of papillary thyroid cancer, intrathyroidal, well differentiated follicular thyroid cancer with capsular invasion and no or minimal (<4 foci) vascular invasion and intrathyroi-dal papillary microcarcinoma (unifocal or multifocal, including BRAFV600E mutated). Intermediate-risk tumors include those showing microscopic invasion of tumor into the perithyroidal soft tissues or RAI-avid metastatic foci in the neck on the first posttreatment whole-body RAI scan. This group also includes tumors with aggressive histology (e.g., tall cell, columnar cell carcinoma), papillary thyroid cancer with vascular invasion, clinical N1 or >5 pathologic N1 with all involved lymph nodes <3 cm in largest dimension and multifocal papillary microcar-cinoma with extra-thyroidal extension (ETE) and BRAFV600E mutated (if known). High-risk tumors include those demon-strating macroscopic invasion of tumor into the perithyroidal soft tissues (gross ETE), incomplete tumor resection, and pres-ence of distant metastases (or postoperative serum thyroglobu-lin suggestive of distant metastase) or pathologic N1 with any metastatic lymph node ≥3 cm in largest dimension. Follicular thyroid cancers with extensive vascular invasion (>4 foci of vascular invasion) also fall into this category. It is important to note that this risk assessment represents a continuum with recurrence rates from 1% to 2% for low-risk cancers to >50% for high-risk cancers.The current ATA guidelines recommend RAI therapy after surgical treatment for all patients with high-risk disease, i.e., those with gross ETE and M1 disease. RAI therapy is not rec-ommended for patients with papillary microcarcinomas, either uni -or multifocal. RAI remnant ablation is not routinely recom-mended after thyroidectomy for ATA low-risk DTC patients. However, it may be considered in patients with aggressive histology or vascular invasion. Consideration of RAI is recom-mended for patients with intermediate-risk disease and “gen-erally favored” for patients with microscopic ETE due to the risk of recurrent disease, large (>2–3 cm) or clinically evident lymph nodes (central, mediastinal, and lateral neck) or presence of extranodal extension. Advancing age may also favor RAI use. However, RAI is not needed for patients with a few (<5) microscopic nodal metastases in the central compartment in the absence of other adverse features as there is insufficient evi-dence for its utility in this setting. It is generally favored for patients with lateral neck disease. There is currently no estab-lished role for molecular testing in determining RAI therapy.Remnant ablation can be performed with either thyroid hormone withdrawal or recombinant TSH (rTSH) stimula-tion. This is based on randomized studies showing that both techniques are equally effective in preparing patients for abla-tion, with the latter being associated with an improved quality of life.49,50 In patients with ATA high-risk disease (including distant metastases), there is insufficient data to recommend thy-rogen-mediated ablation, and hormone withdrawal is preferred. Furthermore, if patients have comorbidities that can be exac-erbated by severe hypothyroidism (cardiac or psychiatric con-ditions), consideration should be given to thyrogen-mediated RAI. If hormone withdrawal is used, T4 therapy should be dis-continued for approximately 6 weeks before scanning with 131I. Patients should receive T3 during this time period to decrease the period of hypothyroidism. T3 has a shorter half-life than T4 (1 day vs. 1 week) and needs to be discontinued for 2 weeks to allow TSH levels to rise before treatment. Levels >30 mU/L are considered optimal, based on noncontrolled studies. A low-iodine diet also is recommended during this 2-week period. The usual protocol involved administering a screening dose of 1 to 3 mCi and measuring uptake 24 hours later. After a total thy-roidectomy, this value should be <1%. A “hot” spot in the neck after initial screening usually represents residual normal tissue in the thyroid bed. Some investigators recommend omitting the scanning dose altogether to minimize thyrocyte “stunning” and subsequent requirement for higher treatment doses. Others recommend scanning only if the size of the remnant cannot be determined by the operative report or ultrasound, or if the results would alter the decision to treat or the dose to be administered. Current guidelines recommend using either 123I or low-activity 131I (1to 3-mCi dose) and delivering a therapeutic dose within 72 hours.The recommended dose of RAI is 30 mCi if remnant abla-tion is performed after total thyroidectomy for ATA low-risk thyroid or intermediate-risk cancer with lower risk features (i.e., low-volume central neck nodal metastases with no other known gross residual disease or any other adverse features). If RAI is given for adjuvant treatment to treat suspected microscopic dis-ease (in the absence of metastatic disease), doses ranging from 30 to 150 mCi are recommended, and there is no solid evidence to show that higher doses reduce the recurrence rates for T3 and N1 disease in this setting.If patients have an elevated Tg level, but negative RAI scan on follow-up, some physicians recommend treating once with 100 mCi of 131I and repeating the imaging 1 to 2 weeks later. Approximately one-third of these patients demonstrate uptake on posttreatment imaging, and Tg levels usually decrease in these patients, documenting therapeutic benefit. The maxi-mum dose of radioiodine that can be administered at one time without performing dosimetry is approximately 200 mCi with a cumulative dose of 1000 to 1500 mCi. Up to 500 mCi can be given with proper pretreatment dosimetry. Recent studies also Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   165201/03/19   11:21 AM 1653THYROID, PARATHYROID, AND ADRENALCHAPTER 38Initial medical therapyall recurrencesNoneT4 aloneP< .05403530252015105P< .0001Years after initial therapyPercent cancer recurrences605040302010004035302520151050NoneT4 + RAI      T4 alone      T4 + RAI remnant ablation34/16315/230101/78922/1120/13551/6035/823/10217/4621/661/847/3782/541/6710/3264/390/386/2290/250/2610/1350/130/181/51Initial medical therapydistant recurrencesNoneT4 aloneP<.0002P<.02Years after initial therapyPercent distant recurrence35302520151050None        8/163         9/112     3/82        0/66     1/54        4/39       0/25         0/13T4 alone       19/789      15/603     7/462      0/378       2/326      4/229     8/135       1/51T4 + RAI         2/230        0/135     1/102      0/84         1/67        0/38       0/26         0/11T4 + RAI remnant ablationABFigure 38-19. Tumor recurrence at a median of 16.7 years after thyroid surgery. The numerator is the number of patients with recurrence, and the denominator is the number of patients in each time interval. The P values are derived from log-rank statistical analysis of 40-year life-table data. Figure shows that all recurrences (A) and distant metastases (B) were reduced in patients who received radioactive iodine (RAI) in addition to thyroxine (T4) therapy. (Reproduced with permission from Mazzaferri E, Kloos R: Current approaches to primary therapy for papillary and follicular thyroid cancer, Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Apr;86(4):1447-1363.)Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   165301/03/19   11:21 AM 1654SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIshow an increase in the number of second cancers in patients treated with RAI.51 The early and delayed complications of RAI therapy are listed in Table 38-7.Thyroid Hormone T4 is necessary as replacement therapy in patients after total or near-total thyroidectomy, and also has the additional effect of suppressing TSH and reducing the growth stimulus for any possible residual thyroid cancer cells. TSH suppression reduces tumor recurrence rates. Current guidelines advise maintaining initial TSH levels <0.1 mU/mL in patients with high-risk thyroid cancer and in the range of 0.1 to 0.5 mU/mL  in patients with intermediate-risk disease. For low-risk patients (with or without remnant ablation) with undetectable serum Tg levels, TSH levels can be maintained at the lower end of the reference range (0.5–2 mU/L). If these patients have low measureable Tg levels, it is recommended that TSH be maintained at or slightly below lower limit of normal (0.1 to  0.5 mU/L) while continuing surveillance for recurrence. In low-risk patients treated with lobectomy alone, it is advised to keep TSH in the mid to lower reference range (0.5–2 mU/L), and hor-mone therapy may be needed to maintain these levels. Further TSH suppression levels are determined by response to therapy. The risk of tumor recurrence must be balanced with the side effects associated with prolonged TSH suppression, including osteopenia and cardiac problems, particularly in older patients.Follow-Up of Patients With Differentiated Thyroid Cancer Thyroglobulin Measurement Tg and anti-Tg antibody levels should be measured initially at 6 to 12 month intervals and more frequently in patients with high-risk tumors. Further measure-ments are guided by response to therapy. Patients are considered to have an excellent response to treatment if suppressed Tg is <0.2 ng/mL and stimulated Tg is <1 ng/mL with negative imag-ing. In these patients, Tg levels can be followed every 12 to  24 months while on thyroid hormone as their risk of recurrence is low (1–4%). Patients with structurally or biochemically incomplete (negative imaging but suppressed Tg ≥1 ng/mL or stimulated Tg ≥10 ng/mL or rising anti-Tg levels) or indeter-minate responses (nonspecific imaging findings, suppressed Tg detectable but <1 ng/mL, and stimulated Tg detectable but  <10 ng/mL or stable or declining anti-Tg levels) require addi-tional investigations.40 Tg measurements in FNAB aspirates have also been shown to be useful in the detection of nodal metastatic disease.52Imaging After the first posttreatment scan, lowand some intermediate-risk patients with negative TSH-stimulated Tg and cervical ultrasound do not require routine diagnostic whole-body radioiodine scans. However, diagnostic whole-body scans 6 to 12 months after remnant ablation may be of value in the follow-up of patients with highor intermediate-risk patients with higher risk features. Other scenarios for follow-up scans include patients with abnormal uptake outside the thyroid bed on posttherapy scan, those with poorly informative postablation scans (e.g., due to high thyroid bed uptake), and patients with Tg antibodies.Cervical ultrasound be performed to evaluate the thyroid bed and central and lateral cervical nodal compartments at 6 and 12 months after thyroidectomy and then annually for at least 3 to 5 years, depending on the patient’s risk for recurrent disease and Tg status. Sonographically suspicious nodes ≥8 to 10 mm on the smallest diameter measurement should be biopsied for cytology as well as Tg measurement in the aspirate washout. Smaller nodes can be followed and biopsied if there is contin-ued growth. FDG-PET and PET-CT scans have been shown to be useful to localize recurrent or persistent thyroid cancer in patients who have Tg-positive, RAI scan–negative disease. FDG-PET can also be useful for the initial staging of patients with poorly differentiated thyroid carcinomas or Hürthle cell tumors, particularly in patients with other evidence of disease on imaging or Tg levels. In addition, they may be used as a prog-nostic tool in patients with metastatic disease and to evaluate the response to treatment in patients with metastatic or locally advanced disease.Additional Treatment Modalities Radiotherapy, Thermal Ablation, and Chemotherapy  External-beam radiotherapy is occasionally required to control unresectable, locally invasive, or recurrent disease and to treat metastases in support bones to decrease the risk of fractures. It also is of value for the treatment and control of pain from bony metastases when there is minimal or no RAIU. Stereotac-tic brain radiotherapy and intensity-modulated radiation therapy have both been used successfully for metastatic lesions. Percuta-neous thermal ablation by increasing (radiofrequency ablation) or decreasing temperature (cryoablation) in the lesion to induce irreversible cellular damage has shown promise for lung, bone, and liver lesions.53,54 Single-drug and multidrug chemotherapy has been used with little success in disseminated thyroid can-cer, and there is no role for routine chemotherapy. Doxorubicin (Adriamycin) and paclitaxel (Taxol) were previously the most frequently used agents. The former acts as a radiation sensitizer and should be considered in patients undergoing external-beam radiation.Novel Therapies These therapies are directed at the molecular pathways known to be involved in thyroid cancers. Sorafenib Table 38-7Complications of radioactive iodine therapy (131I) and doses at which they are observedACUTELONG-TERMNeck pain, swelling, and tendernessThyroiditis (if remnant present)Sialadenitis (50–450 mCi), taste dysfunctionHemorrhage (brain metastases)Cerebral edema (brain metastases, 200 mCi)Vocal cord paralysisNausea and vomiting  (50–450 mCi)Bone marrow suppression (200 mCi)HematologicBone marrow suppression (>500 mCi)Leukemia (>1000 mCi)FertilityOvarian/testicular damage, infertilityIncreased spontaneous abortion ratePulmonary fibrosisChronic sialadenitis, nodules, taste dysfunctionIncreased risk of cancerAnaplastic thyroid cancerGastric cancerHepatocellular cancerLung cancerBreast cancer (>1000 mCi)Bladder cancerHypoparathyroidismBrunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   165401/03/19   11:21 AM 1655THYROID, PARATHYROID, AND ADRENALCHAPTER 38and lenvatinib are U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and European Medical Agency (EMA)-approved for use in patients with advanced differentiated thyroid cancer that is non-responsive to RAI after evaluation in phase 3 placebo-controlled double blinded trials (the DECISION study and the SELECT study, respectively).55,56 Both drugs are multikinase inhibitors and target RET kinase and the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-receptor; however, lenvatinib also inhib-its the fibroblast growth factor and the platelet-derived growth factor receptor. Sorafenib demonstrated progression-free sur-vival (PFS) improvement by 5 months with about 12% partial response rates, whereas lenvatinib prolonged median PFS by 15.7 months compared with placebo with response rates of 65%, including some complete responses. Vandetanib is mainly a RET-kinase inhibitor, but it also affects the VEGF-receptor and epidermal growth factor receptor. It has been evaluated in a phase 2 trial and also demonstrated an improved PFS.57 However, none of the agents show improvements in overall survival. Moreover, they are associated with significant side effects (diarrhea, fatigue hypertension, hepatotoxicity, bleed-ing, and thrombosis) that affect patient quality of life. As such, they are considered only in patients with metastatic, rapidly progressive, symptomatic disease that is unable to respond to other local treatment approaches and generally in the context of clinical trials. Oncogenic kinase inhibitors that selectively inhibit the mutant V600E BRAF kinase (dabrafenib) has also shown promise in treating a subset of patients with advanced differentiated thyroid cancer.58Medullary Carcinoma MTC accounts for about 5% of thyroid malignancies and arises from the parafollicular or C cells of the thyroid, which, in turn, are derived from the ultimobranchial bod-ies. These cells are concentrated superolaterally in the thyroid lobes, and this is where MTC usually develops. C cells secrete calcitonin, a 32-amino-acid polypeptide that functions to lower serum calcium levels, although its effects in humans are mini-mal. Most MTCs occur sporadically. However, approximately 25% occur within the spectrum of several inherited syndromes such as familial MTC, MEN2A, and MEN2B. All these variants are known to result secondary to germline mutations in the RET proto-oncogene. The syndromes also are characterized by geno-type-phenotype correlations, with specific mutations leading to particular clinical manifestations. The salient clinical and genetic features of these syndromes are outlined in Table 38-8. Some clinical features of MEN2B patients are shown in Fig. 38-20.Table 38-8Clinical and genetic features of medullary thyroid cancer syndromesSYNDROMEMANIFESTATIONSRET MUTATIONSMEN2A MTC, pheochromocytoma, primary hyperparathyroidism, lichen planus amyloidosis Exon 10—codons 609, 611, 618, 620Exon 11—codon 634 (more commonly associated with pheochromocytoma and primary hyperparathyroidism)MEN2BMTC, pheochromocytoma, Marfanoid habitus, mucocutaneous ganglioneuromatosisExon 16—codon 918Familial MTCMTCCodons 609, 611, 618, 620, and 634  Codons 768, 790, 791, or 804 (rare)MEN2A and Hirschsprung’s diseaseMTC, pheochromocytoma, primary hyperparathyroidism, Hirschsprung’s diseaseCodons 609, 618, 620MEN2 = multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2; MTC = medullary thyroid cancer.BAFigure 38-20. Features of MEN2B: thickened lips (A) and mucosal neuromas (A and B).Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   165501/03/19   11:21 AM 1656SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIPatients with MTC often present with a neck mass that may be associated with palpable cervical lymphadenopathy (15% to 20%). Pain or aching is more common in patients with these tumors, and local invasion may produce symptoms of dys-phagia, dyspnea, or dysphonia. Distant blood-borne metastases to the liver, bone (frequently osteoblastic), and lung occur later in the disease. The female-to-male ratio is 1.5:1. Most patients present between 50 and 60 years old, although patients with familial disease present at a younger age. Medullary thyroid tumors secrete not only calcitonin and carcinoembryonic anti-gen (CEA), but also other peptides such as calcitonin gene–related peptide, histaminadases, prostaglandins E2 and F2α, and serotonin. Patients with extensive metastatic disease frequently develop diarrhea, which may result from increased intestinal motility and impaired intestinal water and electrolyte flux. About 2% to 4% of patients develop Cushing’s syndrome as a result of ectopic production of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH).Pathology. MTCs typically are unilateral (80%) in patients with sporadic disease and multicentric in familial cases, with bilateral tumors occurring in up to 90% of familial patients. Familial cases also are associated with C-cell hyperplasia, which is considered a premalignant lesion. Microscopically, tumors are composed of sheets of infiltrating neoplastic cells separated by collagen and amyloid. Marked heterogeneity is present; cells may be polygonal or spindle shaped. The presence of amyloid is a diagnostic finding, but immunohistochemistry for calcitonin is more commonly used as a diagnostic tumor marker. These tumors also stain positively for CEA and calcito-nin gene–related peptide.Diagnosis. The diagnosis of MTC is established by history, physical examination, raised serum calcitonin, or CEA levels, and FNAB cytology of the thyroid mass. Attention to family history is important because about 25% of patients with MTC have familial disease. Because it is not possible to distinguish sporadic from familial disease at initial presentation, all new patients with MTC should be screened for RET point mutations, pheochromocytoma, and HPT. Screening of patients with famil-ial MTC for RET point mutations has largely replaced using provocative testing with pentagastrin or calcium-stimulated calcitonin levels to make the diagnosis. Calcitonin and CEA are used to identify patients with persistent or recurrent MTC. Calcitonin is a more sensitive tumor marker, but CEA is a better predictor of prognosis.Treatment. The ATA published revised guidelines for the man-agement of medullary cancers in 2015.59 A neck ultrasound is recommended to evaluate the central and lateral neck compart-ments and the superior mediastinum. Serum calcitonin, CEA, calcium levels should also be measured, and RET proto-onco-gene mutation testing should be performed. Pheochromocy-tomas need to be excluded. If patients are found to have a pheochromocytoma, this must be operated on first. Primary hyperparathyroidism, if present, is treated at the time of  thyroidectomy. These tumors are generally (>50%) bilateral. Total thyroidectomy is the treatment of choice for patients with MTC because of the high incidence of multicentricity, the more aggressive course, and the fact that 131I therapy usually is not effective.Central compartment nodes frequently are involved early in the disease process, so that a bilateral prophylactic central neck node dissection should be routinely performed. In patients with palpable or imaging-detected cervical nodes, symptoms and signs of distant disease or calcitonin levels >500 pg/mL, additional imaging to include a neck and chest CT and a triple-phase liver CT or contrast-enhanced MRI and an axial MRI/bone scan is recommended to assess for metastatic disease. In patients with no distant disease but nodal involvement, an ipsilateral or bilateral lateral neck dissection (levels IIA, III, IV, and V)  is performed. Less aggressive neck surgery should be consid-ered to preserve speech and swallowing while maintaining locoregional control in patients with limited metastatic disease. The role of prophylactic lateral neck dissection is controversial and may be considered based on calcitonin levels. Some groups favor this procedure if central neck lymph nodes are involved or if the primary tumor is ≥1.5 cm.In the case of locally recurrent or widely metastatic dis-ease, tumor debulking is advised not only to ameliorate symp-toms of pain, flushing, and diarrhea, but also to decrease risk of death from recurrent central neck or mediastinal disease. External-beam radiotherapy is controversial but can be consid-ered for patients with resected T4 disease and for patients with unresectable residual or recurrent tumor and symptomatic bony metastases. Liver metastases tend to be multiple and are typi-cally not amenable to resection, percutaneous ethanol ablation, or radiofrequency ablation. However, chemoembolization may be helpful in this setting. There is no effective chemotherapy regimen.Various targeted therapies directed against the RET kinase have been investigated for the treatment of MTC.43 Many of these also inhibit VEGF receptor due to their close structural similarities. Sorafenib, sunitinib, lenvatinib, and cabozantinib are some such multikinase inhibitors, whereas axitinib and pazopanib act only on VEGFR. Vandetanib inhibits both targets and is also an EGF receptor inhibitor, and cabozantinib targets c-MET in addition to RET and VEGF receptor. Both drugs are currently approved by the FDA and EMA for the treatment of advanced and progressive MTC based on data that they prolong progression-free survival, in addition to reducing secretion of calcitonin and CEA.60,61 They are recommended as first-line sys-temic therapy in symptomatic patients with advanced MTC. An anti-CEA monoclonal antibody (labetuzumab) also has shown antitumor response in a small group of patients. Patients with recurrent/metastatic disease should be enrolled in well-designed clinical trials.In patients who have hypercalcemia and an increased PTH at the time of thyroidectomy, only obviously enlarged parathy-roid glands should be removed. The other parathyroid glands should be preserved and marked in patients with normocalce-mia, as only about 20% of patients with MEN2A develop HPT. When a normal parathyroid cannot be maintained on a vascu-lar pedicle, it should be removed, biopsied to confirm that it is a parathyroid, and then autotransplanted to the forearm of the nondominant arm, particularly in patients with MEN2A. Reim-plantation into the sternocleidomastoid muscle is also accept-able for patients with known MEN2B and familial MTC.Prophylactic total thyroidectomy is indicated in RET mutation carriers once the mutation is confirmed. The ATA guidelines stratify mutation into various risk levels to offer recommendations regarding age at which a prophylactic Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   165601/03/19   11:21 AM 1657THYROID, PARATHYROID, AND ADRENALCHAPTER 38Figure 38-21. Magnetic resonance imaging scan of a patient with anaplastic thyroid cancer. Note heterogeneity consistent with necrosis.thyroidectomy should be performed and to predict phenotypes, including pheochromocytomas.59 In general, in patients with less aggressive mutations (designated ATA moderate-risk), thy-roidectomy may be delayed >5 years, especially if there is a nor-mal annual serum calcitonin, neck ultrasound, less aggressive family history, or family preference. Children with MEN2A and mutations at codon 634 (designated high-risk) are advised to undergo thyroidectomy at <5 years of age, and those with MEN2B-related mutations (designated highest-risk) should undergo the procedure before age 1. Central neck dissection can be avoided in children who are RET-positive and calcitonin-negative with a normal ultrasound examination. When the cal-citonin is increased or the ultrasound suggests a thyroid cancer, a prophylactic central neck dissection is indicated.Postoperative Follow-Up and Prognosis. Patients are fol-lowed by annual measurements of calcitonin and CEA levels, in addition to history and physical examination. Other modalities used to localize recurrent disease include ultrasound, CT, MRI, and more recently, FDG-PET/CT scans. Prognosis is related to disease stage. The 10-year survival rate is approximately 80% but decreases to 45% in patients with lymph node involvement. Survival also is significantly influenced by disease type. It is best in patients with non-MEN familial MTC, followed by those with MEN2A, and then those with sporadic disease. Progno-sis is the worst (survival of 35% at 10 years) in patients with MEN2B. Performing prophylactic surgery in RET oncogene mutation carriers not only improves survival rates but also ren-ders most patients calcitonin free.Anaplastic Carcinoma Anaplastic carcinoma accounts for approximately 1% of all thyroid malignancies in the United States. Women are more commonly affected, and the majority of tumors present in the seventh and eighth decade of life. The typical patient has a long-standing neck mass, which rapidly enlarges and may be painful. Associated symptoms such as dys-phonia, dysphagia, and dyspnea are common. The tumor is large and may be fixed to surrounding structures or may be ulcerated with areas of necrosis (Fig. 38-21). Lymph nodes usually are palpable at presentation. Evidence of metastatic spread also may be present. Diagnosis is confirmed by FNAB revealing char-acteristic giant and multinucleated cells. Differential diagnoses on FNA can include lymphomas, medullary carcinomas, direct extension from a laryngeal carcinoma, or other metastatic car-cinomas or melanoma. When spindle cell elements are present, primary and metastatic sarcomas need to be considered as well. Immunohistochemical markers can aid with excluding other diagnoses. Core or incisional biopsy occasionally is needed to confirm the diagnosis, especially when there is necrotic material on the FNA.Pathology. On gross inspection, anaplastic tumors are firm and whitish in appearance. Microscopically, sheets of cells with marked heterogeneity are seen. The three main histologic growth patterns are spindle cell, squamoid, and pleomorphic giant cell. Tumors may show a predominance of one pattern or a mixture of various patterns. Foci of more differentiated thy-roid tumors, either follicular or papillary, may be seen, suggest-ing that anaplastic tumors arise from more well-differentiated tumors.Treatment and Prognosis. This tumor is one of the most aggressive thyroid malignancies, with few patients surviving  6 months beyond diagnosis. All forms of treatment have been disappointing. The ATA has published guidelines for the man-agement of patients with anaplastic cancer.62 Imaging (ultra-sound, CT, MRI, or PET-CT) should be obtained to assess resectability. All patients should have preoperative laryngos-copy to assess the status of the vocal cords. A total or near-total thyroidectomy with therapeutic lymph node dissection is rec-ommended for patients with an intrathyroidal mass (although lobectomy may also be appropriate, particularly if there is concern for vocal cord paralysis). If extrathyroidal extension is present, an en bloc resection should be considered if all gross disease can be removed (R1). Tracheostomy should be avoided as long as possible unless there is impending airway loss. Adjuvant radiation which should be offered to patients with a good performance status and no metastatic disease who desire aggressive management. Cytotoxic chemotherapy (with some combination of a taxane, anthracycline, and platinum) is typi-cally given concurrently and has been associated with prolonged survival, although these agents are also being used in a neoadju-vant fashion, particularly in patients with unresectable disease.Lymphoma Lymphomas account for <1% of thyroid malignan-cies, and most are of the non-Hodgkin’s B-cell type. Although the disease can arise as part of a generalized lymphomatous con-dition, most thyroid lymphomas develop in patients with chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis. Chronic antigenic lymphocyte stimu-lation has been suggested to result in lymphocyte transforma-tion. Patients usually present with symptoms similar to those of patients with anaplastic carcinoma, although the rapidly enlarg-ing neck mass often is painless. Patients may present with acute respiratory distress. Ultrasound can be useful for early diagno-sis, and lymphoma appears as a well-defined hypoechoic mass. The diagnosis usually is suggested by FNAB, but FNAB can be nondiagnostic, particularly in the setting of low-grade lym-phomas. Therefore, needle core or open biopsy may be neces-sary for definitive diagnosis. Staging studies should be obtained expeditiously to assess the extent of extrathyroidal spread.Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   165701/03/19   11:21 AM 1658SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITreatment and Prognosis. Patients with thyroid lymphoma respond rapidly to chemotherapy (CHOP—cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone), which also has been associated with improved survival. Combined treatment with radiotherapy and chemotherapy often is recommended. Thy-roidectomy and nodal resection are used to alleviate symptoms of airway obstruction in patients who do not respond quickly to the above regimens or who have completed the regimen before diagnosis. Prognosis depends on the histologic grade of the tumor and whether the lymphoma is confined to the thy-roid gland or is disseminated. The overall 5-year survival rate is about 50%; patients with extrathyroidal disease have markedly lower survival rates.Metastatic Carcinoma The thyroid gland is a rare site of metastases from other cancers, including kidney, breast, lung, and melanoma. Clinical examination and a review of the patient’s history often suggest the source of the metastatic dis-ease, and FNAB usually provides definitive diagnosis. Resec-tion of the thyroid, usually lobectomy, may be helpful in many patients, depending on the status of their primary tumor.Thyroid Surgery Conduct of Thyroidectomy Patients with any recent or remote history of altered phonation or prior neck or upper chest surgery that places the recurrent laryngeal or vagus nerves at risk should undergo vocal cord assessment by direct or indirect laryngos-copy before thyroidectomy. Laryngeal examination is also advised in patients with known posterior extension of thyroid cancer and extensive central nodal metastases.40 The patient is positioned supine, with a sandbag between the scapulae. The head is placed on a donut cushion, and the neck is extended to provide maximal exposure. A Kocher transverse collar incision, typically 3 to 5 cm in length, is placed in or parallel to a natu-ral skin crease 1 cm below the cricoid cartilage (Fig. 38-22A), although longer incisions may be needed. The subcutaneous tis-sues and platysma are incised sharply, and subplatysmal flaps are raised superiorly to the level of the thyroid cartilage and inferiorly to the suprasternal notch (Fig. 38-22B). The strap muscles are divided in the midline along the entire length of the mobilized flaps, and the thyroid gland is exposed. On the side to be approached first, the sternohyoid muscles are sepa-rated from the underlying sternothyroid muscle by blunt dissec-tion until the internal jugular vein and ansa cervicalis nerve are identified. The strap muscles rarely need to be divided to gain exposure to the thyroid gland. If this maneuver is necessary, the muscles should be divided high to preserve their innervation by branches of the ansa cervicalis. If there is evidence of direct tumor invasion into the strap muscles, the portion of involved muscle should be resected en bloc with the thyroid gland. The sternothyroid muscle is then dissected off the underlying thyroid by a combination of sharp and blunt dissection, thus exposing the middle thyroid veins. The thyroid lobe is retracted medially and anteriorly, and the lateral tissues are swept posterolaterally using a peanut sponge. The middle thyroid veins are ligated and divided (Fig. 38-22C). Attention is then turned to the midline where Delphian nodes and the pyramidal lobe are identified. The fascia just cephalad and caudad to the isthmus is divided. The superior thyroid pole is identified by retracting the thyroid first inferiorly and medially, and then the upper pole of the thy-roid is mobilized caudally and laterally. The dissection plane is kept as close to the thyroid as possible, and the superior pole vessels are individually identified, skeletonized, ligated, and divided low on the thyroid gland to avoid injury to the exter-nal branch of the superior laryngeal nerve (Fig. 38-22D). Once these vessels are divided, the tissues posterior and lateral to the superior pole can be swept from the gland in a posteromedial direction, to reduce the risk of damaging vessels supplying the upper parathyroid.The RLNs should then be identified, and the ATA 2015 guidelines strongly recommend visual identification in all cases.40 The course of the right RLN is more oblique than the left RLN. The nerves can be most consistently identified at the level of the cricoid cartilage. The parathyroids usually can be identified within 1 cm of the crossing of the inferior thyroid artery and the RLN, although they also may be ectopic in loca-tion. The lower pole of the thyroid gland should be mobilized by gently sweeping all tissues dorsally. The inferior thyroid vessels are dissected, skeletonized, ligated, and divided as close to the surface of the thyroid gland as possible to minimize devascular-ization of the parathyroids (extracapsular dissection) or injury to the RLN. The RLN is most vulnerable to injury in the vicinity of the ligament of Berry. The nerve often passes through this structure along with small crossing arterial and venous branches (Fig. 38-22E). Any bleeding in this area should be controlled with gentle pressure before carefully identifying the vessel and ligating it. Use of the electrocautery should be avoided in prox-imity to the RLN. Once the ligament is divided, the thyroid can be separated from the underlying trachea by sharp dissection. The pyramidal lobe, if present, must be dissected in a cephalad direction to above the level of the notch in the thyroid cartilage or higher in continuity with the thyroid gland. If a lobectomy is to be performed, the isthmus is divided flush with the trachea on the contralateral side and suture ligated. The procedure is repeated on the opposite side for a total thyroidectomy.Parathyroid glands located anteriorly on the surface of the thyroid that cannot be dissected from the thyroid with a good blood supply or that have been inadvertently removed during the thyroidectomy should be resected, confirmed as parathy-roid tissue by frozen section, divided into 1-mm fragments, and reimplanted into individual pockets in the sternocleido-mastoid muscle. The sites should be marked with silk sutures and a clip. Various novel techniques using indocyanine fluo-rescence angiography and near-infrared autofluorescence have shown utility in the identification and viability assessment of parathyroid glands; however, they are not routinely used at the present time.63,64 If a subtotal thyroidectomy is to be performed, once the superior pole vessels are divided and the thyroid lobe mobilized anteriorly, the thyroid lobe is cross-clamped with a Mayo clamp, leaving approximately 4 g of the posterior por-tion of the thyroid. The thyroid remnant is suture ligated, taking care to avoid injury to the RLN. Routine drain placement rarely is necessary. After adequate hemostasis is obtained, the strap muscles are reapproximated in the midline. The platysma is approximated in a similar fashion. The skin can be closed with subcuticular sutures or clips.Nerve Monitoring Intraoperative RLN and external laryngeal nerve monitoring techniques are being increasingly used during thyroid and parathyroid surgery. Both continuous monitoring using endotracheal tube electrodes and intermittent monitor-ing by periodic stimulation and laryngeal palpation are used. Many published studies have established the feasibility of nerve monitoring; however, none were able to show that the technique equivocally reduces nerve injury (particularly by experienced Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   165801/03/19   11:21 AM 1659THYROID, PARATHYROID, AND ADRENALCHAPTER 38Figure 38-22. Conduct of thyroidectomy. A. Correct placement of thyroidectomy incision. B. Raising subplatysmal flaps. C. Dissection of middle thyroid vein. D. Dissection of the superior pole vessels, which should be individually ligated. E. Dissection at the ligament of Berry. Note small artery and vein within the ligament and the recurrent laryngeal nerve coursing laterally. F. Endoscopic thyroidectomy via axillary incisions. m. = muscle; n. = nerve; v. = vein.IncorrectCricoid cartilageCorrectAPlatysmaCauteryFive straight clamps on dermisBMiddle thyroid v.CCricothyroid m.External branch ofsuperior laryngeal n.Superior thyroid vesselsDBrunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   165901/03/19   11:21 AM 1660SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IISmall artery & veinin ligament of BerryRecurrent laryngeal n.ThyroidEFFigure 38-22. (Continued)surgeons and especially when the RLN is routinely visually identified) until recently. In 2009, Barczynski and colleagues65 were the first to demonstrate in their prospective randomized trial with 2000 nerves at risk that neuromonitoring was asso-ciated with a statistically significant improvement in transient RLN injury rates when compared to the practice of visualiza-tion of the nerve alone and particularly in patients at higher risk of nerve injury. Of note, there was no difference in permanent RLN injury rates, and a later meta-analysis of all the published studies also failed to show a protective effect of neuromonitor-ing. Despite conflicting data, the technology has become widely adopted. The current ATA guidelines recommend that intraop-erative neural stimulation may be used to facilitate nerve iden-tification of the RLN and confirm its function, especially prior to proceeding with contralateral thyroidectomy.Minimally Invasive Approaches Several approaches to minimally invasive thyroidectomy have been described. Miniincision procedures use a small, 3-cm incision with no flap creation and minimal dissection to deliver the thyroid into the wound and then perform the pretracheal and paratracheal dissec-tion. Video assistance can be used to improve the visualization Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   166001/03/19   11:21 AM 1661THYROID, PARATHYROID, AND ADRENALCHAPTER 38via the small incision. Totally endoscopic approaches also have been described, via the supraclavicular, anterior chest, axillary, and breast approach. The axillary, anterior chest, and breast approaches eliminate the skin incision in the neck but are more invasive. The endoscopic approaches can also be performed with the assistance of robotic techniques. More recently, there have been studies of transoral robotic-assisted thyroidectomy in which the thyroid is approached through the oral cavity.66 These methods are feasible, but clear benefits over the “tradi-tional” open approach via small neck incisions have not been established.4Typically, endoscopic thyroidectomies are performed under general anesthesia. For the axillary approach, a 30-mm skin incision is made in the axilla, and 12-mm and 5-mm trocars are inserted through this incision (Fig. 38-22F). An additional 5-mm trocar is inserted adjacent to the incision. For the anterior chest approach, a 12-mm skin incision is made in the skin of the anterior chest approximately 3 to 5 cm below the border of the ipsilateral clavicle. Two additional 5-mm trocars are inserted by endoscopic guidance below the ipsilateral clavicle, and carbon dioxide (CO2) is then insufflated up to a pressure of 4 mmHg to facilitate creation of a working space. The anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle is then separated from the ster-nohyoid muscle to expose the sternothyroid muscle. The thy-roid gland is exposed by splitting the sternothyroid muscle. The lower pole is retracted upward and dissected from the adipose tissue to identify the RLN. As the RLN is exposed, Berry’s liga-ment is exposed and incised with a 5-mm clip or laparoscopic coagulating shears. The upper pole of the thyroid gland is sepa-rated from the cricothyroid muscle, and the external branch of the superior laryngeal nerve can be identified during this maneu-ver. The upper pole of the thyroid gland then is dissected free.Surgical Removal of Intrathoracic Goiter A goiter is consid-ered mediastinal if at least 50% of the thyroid tissue is located intrathoracically. Mediastinal goiters can be primary or second-ary. Primary mediastinal goiters constitute approximately 1% of all mediastinal goiters and arise from accessory (ectopic) thy-roid tissue located in the chest. These goiters are supplied by intrathoracic blood vessels and do not have any connection to thyroid tissue in the neck. The vast majority of mediastinal goi-ters are, however, secondary mediastinal goiters that arise from downward extension of cervical thyroid tissue along the fascial planes of the neck and derive their blood supply from the supe-rior and inferior thyroid arteries. Virtually all intrathoracic goi-ters can be removed via a cervical incision. Patients who have (a) invasive thyroid cancers, (b) had previous thyroid operations and may have developed parasitic mediastinal vessels, or (c) pri-mary mediastinal goiters with no thyroid tissue in the neck may require a median sternotomy for removal.49 The chest, however, should be prepared in most cases in the event it is necessary to perform a median sternotomy to control mediastinal bleeding or completely remove an unsuspected invasive cancer. The goiter is approached via a neck incision. The superior pole vessels and the middle thyroid veins are identified and ligated first. Early division of the isthmus helps with subsequent mobilization of the substernal goiter from beneath the sternum. Placement of large 1-0 or 2-0 sutures deep into the goiter, when necessary, helps deliver it. For patients in whom thyroid cancer is suspected or demonstrated in an intrathoracic gland, attempts should be made to avoid rupture of the thyroid capsule. When sternotomy is indicated, the sternum usually should be divided to the level of the third intercostal space and then laterally on one side at the space between the third and fourth ribs (Fig. 38-23).Central and Lateral Neck Dissection for Nodal Metastases  Central compartment (medial to the carotid sheath) lymph nodes frequently are involved in patients with papillary, medullary, and Hürthle cell carcinomas and should be removed at the time of thyroidectomy, preserving the RLNs and parathyroid glands. Central neck dissection is particularly important in patients with medullary and Hürthle cell carcinoma because of the high fre-quency of microscopic tumor spread and because these tumors cannot be ablated with 131I. An ipsilateral modified radical neck dissection is indicated in the presence of palpable cervical lymph nodes or prophylactically in some patients with medul-lary carcinoma.A modified radical (functional) neck dissection can be per-formed via the cervical incision used for thyroidectomy, which can be extended laterally (Fig. 38-24A) to the anterior margin of the trapezius muscle. The procedure involves removal of all fibro-fatty tissue along the internal jugular vein (levels II, III, and IV) and the posterior triangle (level V). In contrast to a radical neck dissection, the internal jugular vein, the spinal accessory nerve, the cervical sensory nerves, and the sternoclei-domastoid muscle are preserved unless they are adherent to or invaded by tumor. The procedure begins by opening the plane between the strap muscles medially and the sternocleidomas-toid muscle laterally. The anterior belly of the omohyoid muscle is retracted laterally, and the dissection is carried posteriorly until the carotid sheath is reached. The internal jugular vein is retracted medially with a vein retractor and the fibro-fatty tissue and lymph nodes are dissected away from it by a combination of sharp and blunt dissection. The lateral dissection is carried along the posterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle, remov-ing the tissue from the posterior triangle. The deep dissection plane is the anterior scalenus muscle, the phrenic nerve, the bra-chial plexus, and the medial scalenus muscle. The phrenic nerve is preserved on the scalenus anterior muscle, as are the cervical sensory nerves in most patients (Fig. 38-24B). Dissection along the spinal accessory nerve superiorly is most important because this is a frequent site of metastatic disease.123Figure 38-23. Conduct of thyroidectomy. Incisions for a partial sternotomy.Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   166101/03/19   11:21 AM 1662SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIComplications of Thyroid Surgery Nerves, parathyroids, and surrounding structures are all at risk of injury during thyroidec-tomy. Injury to the RLN may occur by severance, ligation, or traction, but should occur in <1% of patients undergoing thy-roidectomy by experienced surgeons. The RLN is most vulner-able to injury during the last 2 to 3 cm of its course, but also can be damaged if the surgeon is not alert to the possibility of nerve branches and the presence of a nonrecurrent nerve, par-ticularly on the right side. If the injury is recognized intraopera-tively, most surgeons advocate primary reapproximation of the perineurium using nonabsorbable sutures. Approximately 20% of patients are at risk of injury to the external branches of the 123McFee incisionABSpinal accessory n.Phrenic n.Vagus n.Scalenusanticus m.LymphnodesCarotid a. Internaljugular v.Figure 38-24. Conduct of neck dissection. A. Incisions for modified radical neck dissection. B. Anatomic relations of structures identified during a modified radical neck dissection. a. = artery; m. = muscle; n. = nerve.Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   166201/03/19   11:21 AM 1663THYROID, PARATHYROID, AND ADRENALCHAPTER 38superior laryngeal nerve, especially if superior pole vessels are ligated en masse. The cervical sympathetic trunk is at risk of injury in invasive thyroid cancers and retroesophageal goiters and may result in Horner’s syndrome. Transient hypocalcemia (from surgical injury or inadvertent removal of parathyroid tis-sue) has been reported in up to 50% of cases, but permanent hypoparathyroidism occurs <2% of the time. Postoperative hypocalcemia is more likely in patients who undergo concomi-tant thyroidectomy and central and lateral neck dissection and in patients with Graves’ disease. Postoperative hematomas or bleeding may also complicate thyroidectomies and rarely neces-sitate emergency reoperation to evacuate the hematoma. Bilat-eral vocal cord dysfunction with airway compromises requires immediate reintubation and tracheostomy. Seromas may need aspiration to relieve patient discomfort. Wound cellulitis and infection and injury to surrounding structures, such as the carotid artery, jugular vein, and esophagus, are infrequent.PARATHYROIDHistorical BackgroundIn 1849, the curator of the London Zoological Gardens, Sir Richard Owen, provided the first accurate description of the normal parathyroid gland after autopsy examination of an Indian rhinoceros. However, human parathyroids were not grossly and microscopically described until 1879 by Ivar Sandström, a med-ical student in Uppsala, Sweden. He suggested that these glands be named the glandulae parathyroideae, although their function was not known.The association of HPT and the bone disease osteitis fibrosa cystica (described by von Recklinghausen) was recog-nized in 1903. Calcium measurement became possible in 1909, and the association between serum calcium levels and the para-thyroid glands was established. The first successful parathyroid-ectomy was performed in 1925 by Felix Mandl on a 38-year-old man who had severe bone pain secondary to advanced osteitis fibrosa cystica. The patient’s condition dramatically improved after the operation, and he lived for another 7 years before dying of recurrent HPT or renal failure. In 1926, the first parathyroid operation was performed at Massachusetts General Hospital. Edward Churchill, assisted by an intern named Oliver Cope, operated on the famous sea captain Charles Martell for severe primary HPT (PHPT). It was not until his seventh operation, which included total thyroidectomy, that an ectopic adenoma was found substernally. Unfortunately, Captain Martell died 6 weeks later, likely due to laryngeal spasm and complications of renal stones and ureteral obstruction. The first successful para-thyroidectomy for HPT in the United States was performed on a 56-year-old woman in 1928 by Isaac Y. Olch at the Barnes Hospital in St. Louis, Missouri. At operation, a parathyroid ade-noma was found attached to the left lower lobe of the thyroid gland. Postoperatively, the patient developed tetany, requiring lifelong supplemental calcium.EmbryologyIn humans, the superior parathyroid glands are derived from the fourth branchial pouch, which also gives rise to the thyroid gland. The third branchial pouches give rise to the inferior para-thyroid glands and the thymus (Fig. 38-25). The parathyroids remain closely associated with their respective branchial pouch derivatives. The position of normal superior parathyroid glands is more consistent, with 80% of these glands being found near the posterior aspect of the upper and middle thyroid lobes, at the level of the cricoid cartilage. Approximately 1% of normal upper glands may be found in the paraesophageal or retro-esophageal space. Enlarged superior glands may descend in the tracheoesophageal groove and come to lie caudal to the inferior glands. Truly ectopic superior parathyroid glands are rare, but they may be found in the middle or posterior mediastinum or in the aortopulmonary window.51 As the embryo matures, the thy-mus and inferior parathyroids migrate together caudally in the neck. The most common location for inferior glands is within a distance of 1 cm from a point centered where the inferior thyroid artery and RLN cross. Approximately 15% of inferior glands Parathyroid IIIForamen caecumThyroglossal ductMedian thyroidThymusTracheaEsophagusFifth branchialpouchFourthbranchialpouchThirdbranchialpouchParathyroid IVUltimobranchialbodyMedian thyroidLateralthyroid or ultimobranchial bodyEsophagusParathyroid IVParathyroid IIIThymusABFigure 38-25. Parathyroid embryology. Figure demonstrates a schematic view of the pharynx of an 8to 10-mm embryo (A) and locations of the thyroid, parathyroid, and thymic tissues in a 13to 14-mm embryo (B). The lower parathyroids are derived from the third branchial pouch and migrate with the thymus, whereas the upper parathyroids are derived from the fourth branchial pouch and lie in close proximity to the ultimobranchial bodies. (Reproduced with permission from Randolph G: Surgery of the Thyroid and Parathyroid Glands. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier/Saunders; 2003.)Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   166301/03/19   11:21 AM 1664SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIare found in the thymus. The position of the inferior glands, however, tends to be more variable due to their longer migratory path. Undescended inferior glands may be found near the skull base, angle of the mandible, or superior to the upper parathyroid glands along with an undescended thymus. The frequency of intrathyroidal glands is about 2%.Anatomy and HistologyMost patients have four parathyroid glands. The superior glands usually are dorsal to the RLN at the level of the cricoid cartilage, whereas the inferior parathyroid glands are located ventral to the nerve. Normal parathyroid glands are gray and semitransparent in newborns but appear golden yellow to light brown in adults. Parathyroid color depends on cellularity, fat content, and vas-cularity. Moreover, they often are embedded in and sometimes difficult to discern from surrounding fat. Normal parathyroid glands are located in loose tissue or fat and are ovoid. They measure up to 7 mm in size and weigh approximately 40 to  50 mg each. Parathyroid glands usually derive their blood supply from branches of the inferior thyroid artery, although branches from the superior thyroid artery supply at least 20% of upper glands. Branches from the thyroidea ima, and vessels to the trachea, esophagus, larynx, and mediastinum may also be found. The parathyroid glands drain ipsilaterally by the superior, middle, and inferior thyroid veins.Akerström and colleagues,67 in an autopsy series of 503 cadavers, found four parathyroid glands in 84% of cases. Super-numerary glands were present in 13% of patients, most com-monly in the thymus. Only 3% of patients had less than four glands. Similar results were obtained in other dissection studies of 428 human subjects by Gilmour who reported a 6.7% inci-dence of supernumerary glands.68Histologically, parathyroid glands are composed of chief cells and oxyphil cells arranged in trabeculae, within a stroma composed primarily of adipose cells (Fig. 38-26). The parathy-roid glands of infants and children are composed mainly of chief cells, which produce parathyroid hormone (PTH). Acidophilic, mitochondria-rich oxyphil cells are derived from chief cells, can be seen around puberty, and increase in numbers in adult-hood. A third group of cells, known as water-clear cells, also are derived from chief cells, are present in small numbers, and are rich in glycogen. Although most oxyphil and water-clear Figure 38-26. Normal parathyroid histology showing chief cells interspersed with adipose cells.cells retain the ability to secrete PTH, their functional signifi-cance is not known.Parathyroid Physiology and Calcium HomeostasisCalcium is the most abundant cation in human beings and has several crucial functions. Extracellular calcium levels are 10,000-fold higher than intracellular levels, and both are tightly controlled. Extracellular calcium is important for excitationcontraction coupling in muscle tissues, synaptic transmission in the nervous system, coagulation, and secretion of other hormones. Intracellular calcium is an important second messenger regulat-ing cell division, motility, membrane trafficking, and secretion.  Calcium is absorbed from the small intestine in its inorganic form. Calcium fluxes in the steady state are depicted in Fig. 38-27.Extracellular calcium (900 mg) accounts for only 1% of the body’s calcium stores, the majority of which is sequestered in the skeletal system. Approximately 50% of the serum cal-cium is in the ionized form, which is the active component. The remainder is bound to albumin (40%) and organic anions such as phosphate and citrate (10%). The total serum calcium levels range from 8.5 to 10.5 mg/dL (2.1 to 2.6 mmol/L), and ionized calcium levels range from 4.4 to 5.2 mg/dL (1.1 to  1.3 mmol/L). Both concentrations are tightly regulated. The total serum calcium level must always be considered in its rela-tionship to plasma protein levels, especially serum albumin. For each gram per deciliter of alteration of serum albumin above or below 4.0 mg/dL, there is a 0.8 mg/dL increase or decrease in protein-bound calcium and, thus, in total serum calcium levels. Total and, particularly, ionized calcium levels are influenced by various hormone systems.Parathyroid Hormone. The parathyroid cells rely on a G-protein–coupled membrane receptor, designated the calcium-sensing receptor (CASR), to regulate PTH secretion by sensing extracellular calcium levels69 (Fig. 38-28). PTH secretion also is stimulated by low levels of 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D, cat-echolamines, and hypomagnesemia. The PTH gene is located on chromosome 11. PTH is synthesized in the parathyroid gland as a precursor hormone preproPTH, which is cleaved first to pro-PTH and then to the final 84-amino-acid PTH. Secreted PTH has a half-life of 2 to 4 minutes. In the liver, PTH is metabolized into the active N-terminal component and the relatively inactive C-terminal fraction. The C-terminal component is excreted by the kidneys and accumulates in chronic renal failure.PTH functions to regulate calcium levels via its actions on three target organs, the bone, kidney, and gut. PTH increases the resorption of bone by stimulating osteoclasts and promotes the release of calcium and phosphate into the circulation. At the kidney, calcium is primarily absorbed in concert with sodium in the proximal convoluted tubule, but fine adjustments occur more distally. PTH acts to limit calcium excretion at the dis-tal convoluted tubule via an active transport mechanism. PTH also inhibits phosphate reabsorption (at the proximal convoluted tubule) and bicarbonate reabsorption. It also inhibits the Na+/H+ antiporter, which results in a mild metabolic acidosis in hyper-parathyroid states. PTH and hypophosphatemia also enhance 1-hydroxylation of 25-hydroxyvitamin D, which is responsible for its indirect effect of increasing intestinal calcium absorption.Calcitonin. Calcitonin is produced by thyroid C cells and func-tions as an antihypercalcemic hormone by inhibiting osteoclast-mediated bone resorption. Calcitonin production is stimulated Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   166401/03/19   11:21 AM 1665THYROID, PARATHYROID, AND ADRENALCHAPTER 38Figure 38-27. Calcium balance and fluxes in a normal human. Solid arrows depict a direct effect, whereas dashed arrows depict an indirect effect. The thickness of the arrows is representative of the magnitude of the flux. ECF = extracellular fluid; PTH =  parathyroid hormone; VIT. = vitamin. (Reproduced with permission from Felig P, Frohman L: Endocrinology and Metabolism. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Education; 2001.)PTHPTHVIT. DECFCALCIUM900 mgKidneyUrine0.15 0.3 g900 1400 gBone0.25 0.5 g0.25 0.5 g0.25 0.5 g0.1 0.2 g0.4 1.5 g0.35 1.0 gVIT. DPTHby calcium and pentagastrin and also by catecholamines, chole-cystokinin, and glucagon. When administered intravenously to experimental animals, it produces hypocalcemia. At the kidney, calcitonin increases phosphate excretion by inhibiting its reab-sorption. Calcitonin plays a minimal, if any, role in the regula-tion of calcium levels in humans. However, it is very useful as a marker of MTC and in treating acute hypercalcemic crisis.Vitamin D. Vitamin D refers to vitamin D2 and vitamin D3, both of which are produced by photolysis of naturally occurring ste-rol precursors. Vitamin D2 is available commercially in pharma-ceutical preparations, whereas vitamin D3 is the most important physiologic compound and is produced from 7-dehydrocholes-terol, which is found in the skin. Vitamin D is metabolized in the liver to its primary circulating form, 25-hydroxyvitamin D.  Further hydroxylation in the kidney results in 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D, which is the most metabolically active form of  vitamin D. Vitamin D stimulates the absorption of calcium and phosphate from the gut and the resorption of calcium from  the bone.HyperparathyroidismHyperfunction of the parathyroid glands may be classified as primary, secondary, or tertiary. PHPT arises from increased PTH production from abnormal parathyroid glands and results from a disturbance of normal feedback control exerted by serum calcium. Elevated PTH levels may also occur as a compensa-tory response to hypocalcemic states resulting from chronic renal failure or GI malabsorption of calcium. This secondary HPT can be reversed by correction of the underlying problem (e.g., kidney transplantation for chronic renal failure). However, chronically stimulated glands may occasionally become autono-mous, resulting in persistence or recurrence of hypercalcemia after successful renal transplantation, resulting in tertiary HPT.Primary Hyperparathyroidism. PHPT is a common dis-order, affecting 100,000 individuals annually in the United States. PHPT occurs in 0.1% to 0.3% of the general population and is more common in women (1:500) than in men (1:2000). Increased PTH production leads to hypercalcemia via increased GI absorption of calcium, increased production of vitamin D3, and reduced renal calcium clearance. PHPT is characterized by increased parathyroid cell proliferation and PTH secretion that is independent of calcium levels.Etiology The exact cause of PHPT is unknown, although exposure to low-dose therapeutic ionizing radiation and familial predisposition account for some cases. Various diets and inter-mittent exposure to sunshine may also be related. Other causes include renal leak of calcium and declining renal function with age as well as alteration in the sensitivity of parathyroid glands to suppression by calcium. The latency period for development of PHPT after radiation exposure is longer than that for the development of thyroid tumors, with most cases occurring 30 to 40 years after exposure. Patients who have been exposed to radiation have similar clinical presentations and calcium levels when compared to patients without a history of radiation expo-sure. However, the former tends to have higher PTH levels and a higher incidence of concomitant thyroid neoplasms. Lithium therapy has been known to shift the set point for PTH secre-tion in parathyroid cells, thereby resulting in elevated PTH lev-els and mild hypercalcemia. Lithium stimulates the growth of abnormal parathyroid glands in vitro and also in susceptible patients in vivo. PHPT results from the enlargement of a single gland or parathyroid adenoma in approximately 80% of cases, multiple adenomas or hyperplasia in 15% to 20% of patients, and parathyroid carcinoma in 1% of patients. Existence of two enlarged glands or double adenomas is supported by bio-chemical (calcium and PTH), intraoperative PTH (IOPTH), molecular, and histologic data. This entity is less common in younger patients but accounts for up to 10% of older patients with PHPT. It should be emphasized that when more than one abnormal parathyroid gland is identified preoperatively or intra-operatively, the patient has hyperplasia (all glands abnormal) until proven otherwise.Genetics Most cases of PHPT are sporadic. However, PHPT also occurs within the spectrum of a number of inherited Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   166501/03/19   11:21 AM 1666SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIdisorders such as MEN1, MEN2A, isolated familial HPT, and familial HPT with jaw-tumor syndrome. All of these syndromes are inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion. PHPT is the earliest and most common manifestation of MEN1 and develops in 80% to 100% of patients by age 40 years old. These patients also are prone to pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors and pitu-itary adenomas and, less commonly, to adrenocortical tumors, lipomas, skin angiomas, and carcinoid tumors of the bronchus, thymus, or stomach. About 50% of patients develop gastrino-mas, which often are multiple and metastatic at diagnosis. Insu-linomas develop in 10% to 15% of cases, whereas many patients have nonfunctional pancreatic endocrine tumors. Prolactinomas occur in 10% to 50% of MEN1 patients and constitute the most common pituitary lesion. MEN1 has been shown to result from germline mutations in the MEN1 gene, a tumor suppressor gene located on chromosome 11q12-13 that encodes menin, a protein that is postulated to interact with the transcription factors JunD and nuclear factor-κB in the nucleus, in addition to replication protein A and other proteins.70 Most MEN1 mutations result in a nonfunctional protein and are scattered throughout the translated nine exons of the gene. This makes presymptomatic screening for mutation carriers difficult. MEN1 mutations also have been found in kindreds initially suspected to represent isolated famil-ial HPT. HPT develops in about 20% of patients with MEN2A and generally is less severe. MEN2A is caused by germline mutations of the RET proto-oncogene located on chromosome 10. In contrast to MEN1, genotype-phenotype correlations have been noted in this syndrome in that individuals with mutations at codon 634 are more likely to develop HPT. Patients with the familial HPT with jaw-tumor syndrome have an increased predisposition to parathyroid carcinoma. This syndrome maps to a tumor suppressor locus HRPT2 (CDC73 or parafibromin) on chromosome 1. Patients belonging to isolated HPT kindreds also appear to demonstrate linkage to HRPT2. More recently, a subset of patients with MEN-1 phenotype in the absence of MENIN mutations were found to harbor inactivating mutation NH2Ca2+Ca2+Ca2+[Ca2+]iCASRPKCCOOHG proteins PLCIns (1,4,5) P3Regulation of PTHParathyroid cellSystemic effectsKidney25(OH)D3LiverVitamin D1,25(OH)2D3BoneSmall intestineERCa2+Ca2+Ca2+Ca2+Ca2+Ca2+Figure 38-28. Regulation of calcium homeostasis. The calcium-sensing receptor (CASR) is expressed on the surface of the parathyroid cell and senses fluctuations in the concentration of extracellular calcium. Activation of the receptor is thought to increase intracellular cal-cium levels, which, in turn, inhibit parathyroid hormone (PTH) secretion via posttranslational mechanisms. Increased PTH secretion leads to an increase in serum calcium levels by increasing bone resorption and enhancing renal calcium reabsorption. PTH also stimulates renal 1-α-hydroxylase activity, leading to an increase in 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D, which also exerts a negative feedback on PTH secretion. PKC = protein kinase C; PLC = phospholipase C. (Reproduced with permission from Carling T: Molecular pathology of parathyroid tumors, Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Mar;12(2):53-58.)Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   166601/03/19   11:21 AM 1667THYROID, PARATHYROID, AND ADRENALCHAPTER 38in the tumor suppressor gene CDKN1B on chromosome 12p13 and given the diagnosis of MEN4.71,72 CDKN1B encodes p27kip1, which is involved in cyclin D1 signaling.Approximately 25% to 40% of sporadic parathyroid ade-nomas and some hyperplastic parathyroid glands have loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at 11q13, the site of the MEN1 gene. The parathyroid adenoma 1 oncogene (PRAD1 or CCND1), which encodes cyclin D1, a cell cycle control protein, is overexpressed in about 18% of parathyroid adenomas. This was demonstrated to result from a rearrangement on chromosome 11 that places the PRAD1 gene under the control of the PTH promoter. Sporadic parathyroid tumors also appear to carry alterations in cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor encoding genes, in particular somatic inactivating mutations of CDKN1B. Other chromosomal regions deleted in parathyroid adenomas and possibly reflecting loss of tumor suppressor genes include 1p, 6q, and 15q, whereas ampli-fied regions suggesting oncogenes have been identified at 16p and 19p. RET mutations are rare in sporadic parathyroid tumors. Sporadic parathyroid cancers are characterized by uniform loss of the tumor suppressor gene RB, which is involved in cell cycle regulation, and 60% have HRPT2 (CDC73) mutations. These alterations are rare in benign parathyroid tumors and may have implications for diagnosis. The p53 tumor suppressor gene is also inactivated in a subset (30%) of parathyroid carcinomas.73Clinical Manifestations Patients with PHPT formerly pre-sented with the “classic” pentad of symptoms (i.e., kidney stones, painful bones, abdominal groans, psychic moans, and fatigue overtones). With the advent and widespread use of auto-mated blood analyzers in the early 1970s, there has been an alteration in the “typical” patient with PHPT. They are more likely to be minimally symptomatic or asymptomatic. Currently, most patients present with weakness, fatigue, polydipsia, poly-uria, nocturia, bone and joint pain, constipation, decreased appe-tite, nausea, heartburn, pruritus, depression, and memory loss. Patients with PHPT also tend to score lower than healthy controls when assessed by general multidimensional health assessment tools such as the Medical Outcomes Study Short-Form Health Survey (SF-36) and other specific questionnaires. Furthermore, these symptoms and signs improve in most, but certainly not all, patients after parathyroidectomy. Truly “asymptomatic” PHPT appears to be rare, occurring in <5% of patients, as determined by prospectively administered questionnaires. Complications of PHPT are described in the following section.Renal Disease. Approximately 80% of patients with PHPT have some degree of renal dysfunction or symptoms. Kidney stones were previously reported in up to 80% of patients but now occur in about 20% to 25%. The calculi are typically com-posed of calcium phosphate or oxalate. In contrast, PHPT is found to be the underlying disorder in only 3% of patients pre-senting with nephrolithiasis. Nephrocalcinosis, which refers to renal parenchymal calcification, is found in <5% of patients and is more likely to lead to renal dysfunction. Chronic hypercalce-mia also can impair concentrating ability, thereby resulting in polyuria, polydipsia, and nocturia. The incidence of hyperten-sion is variable but has been reported to occur in up to 50% of patients with PHPT. Hypertension appears to be more common in older patients and correlates with the magnitude of renal dys-function and, in contrast to other symptoms, is least likely to improve after parathyroidectomy.Bone Disease. Bone disease, including osteopenia, osteoporo-sis, and osteitis fibrosa cystica, is found in about 15% of patients with PHPT. Increased bone turnover, as found in patients with osteitis fibrosa cystica, can be determined by documenting an elevated blood alkaline phosphatase level. Advanced PHPT with osteitis fibrosa cystica now occurs in <5% of patients. It has pathognomonic radiologic findings, which are best seen on X-rays of the hands and are characterized by subperiosteal resorption (most apparent on the radial aspect of the middle pha-lanx of the second and third fingers), bone cysts, and tufting of the distal phalanges (Fig. 38-29). The skull also may be affected and appears mottled with a loss of definition of the inner and outer cortices. Brown or osteoclastic tumors and bone cysts also may be present. Severe bone disease, resulting in bone pain and tenderness and/or pathologic fractures, is rarely observed nowa-days. However, reductions of bone mineral density (BMD) with osteopenia and osteoporosis are more common. Patients with normal serum alkaline phosphatase levels almost never have clinically apparent osteitis fibrosa cystica. HPT typically results in a loss of bone mass at sites of cortical bone such as the radius and relative preservation of cancellous bone such as that located at the vertebral bodies. Patients with PHPT, however, also may Figure 38-29. X-ray of the hand showing subperiosteal bone resorption most apparent along the radial aspect of the middle pha-lanx, characteristic of osteitis fibrosa cystica.Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   166701/03/19   11:21 AM 1668SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIhave osteoporosis of the lumbar spine that improves dramati-cally following parathyroidectomy. Fractures also occur more frequently in patients with PHPT, and the incidence of fractures also decreases after parathyroidectomy. Bone disease correlates with serum PTH and vitamin D levels.Gastrointestinal Complications. PHPT has been associated with peptic ulcer disease. In experimental animals, hypergastrin-emia has been shown to result from PTH infusion into blood ves-sels supplying the stomach, independent of its effects on serum calcium. An increased incidence of pancreatitis also has been reported in patients with PHPT, although this appears to occur only in patients with profound hypercalcemia (Ca2+ ≥12.5 mg/dL).  Patients with PHPT also have an increased incidence of choleli-thiasis, presumably due to an increase in biliary calcium, which leads to the formation of calcium bilirubinate stones.Neuropsychiatric Complications. Severe hypercalcemia may lead to various neuropsychiatric manifestations such as florid psy-chosis, obtundation, or coma. Other findings such as depression, anxiety, and fatigue are more commonly observed in patients with only mild hypercalcemia. The etiology of these symptoms is not known. Studies demonstrate that levels of certain neu-rotransmitters (monoamine metabolites 5-hydroxyindoleacetic  acid and homovanillic acid) are reduced in the cerebrospi-nal fluid of patients with PHPT when compared to controls. Electroencephalogram abnormalities also occur in patients with primary and secondary HPT and normalize following parathyroidectomy.Other Features. PHPT also can lead to fatigue and muscle weakness, which is prominent in the proximal muscle groups. Although the exact etiology of this finding is not known, muscle biopsy studies show that weakness results from a neuropathy, rather than a primary myopathic abnormality. Patients with HPT also have an increased incidence of chondrocalcinosis, gout, and pseudogout, with deposition of uric acid and calcium pyro-phosphate crystals in the joints. Calcification at ectopic sites such as blood vessels, cardiac valves, and skin also has been reported, as has hypertrophy of the left ventricle independent of the presence of hypertension. There is also evidence for subtle cardiovascular manifestations in mild disease, such as changes in endothelial function, increased vascular stiffness, and perhaps subtle diastolic dysfunction. Several large studies from Europe also suggest that PHPT is associated with increased death rates from cardiovascular disease and cancer even in patients with mild HPT, although this finding was not substantiated in North American studies.Physical Findings Parathyroid tumors are seldom palpable, except in patients with profound hypercalcemia or parathyroid cancer. A palpable neck mass in a patient with PHPT is more likely to be thyroid in origin or a parathyroid cancer. Patients also may demonstrate evidence of band keratopathy, a depo-sition of calcium in Bowman’s membrane just inside the iris of the eye. This nonspecific condition generally is caused by chronic eye diseases such as uveitis, glaucoma, and trauma but also may occur in the presence of conditions associated with high calcium or phosphate levels. Fibro-osseous jaw tumors, and/or the presence of familial disease in patients with PHPT and jaw tumors, if present, should alert the physician to the pos-sibility of parathyroid carcinoma.Differential Diagnosis Hypercalcemia may be caused by a multitude of conditions, as listed in Table 38-9. PHPT and malignancy account for >90% of all cases of hypercalcemia. PHPT is more common in the outpatient setting, whereas malig-nancy is the leading cause of hypercalcemia in hospitalized patients. PHPT can virtually always be distinguished from other diseases causing hypercalcemia by a combination of history, physical examination, and appropriate laboratory investigations.Hypercalcemia associated with malignancy includes three distinct syndromes. Although bone metastases may cause hypercalcemia, patients with solid tumors of the lung, breast, kidney, head and neck, and ovary often have humoral hyper-calcemia of malignancy, without any associated bony metas-tases. In addition, hypercalcemia also may be associated with hematologic malignancies such as multiple myeloma. Humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy is known to be mediated primar-ily by PTH-related peptide (PTHrP), which also plays a role in the hypercalcemia associated with bone metastases and multiple myeloma.Thiazide diuretics cause hypercalcemia by decreasing renal clearance of calcium. This corrects in normal patients within days to weeks after discontinuing the diuretic, but patients with PHPT continue to be hypercalcemic. Thiazide diuretics can, therefore, exacerbate underlying PHPT and can be used to unmask PHPT in patients with borderline hyper-calcemia. Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia 1 (FHH1) is a rare autosomal dominant condition with nearly 100% pen-etrance and results from inherited heterozygous mutations in the CASR gene located on chromosome 3.54 Homozygous germline mutations at this locus result in neonatal severe pri-mary hyperparathyroidism and calcemia, a condition that can rapidly prove fatal. Patients with FHH1 generally have lifelong hypercalcemia, which is not corrected by parathyroidectomy. A milder form of the disease known as familial hypercalciu-ric hypercalcemia results from germline inactivating mutations in the intracytoplasmic tail domain of the CaSR gene. These patients have an appropriate hypercalciuric response to elevated calcium and PTH in addition to hypermagnesemia and hyper-phosphaturia. Some cases benefit from parathyroidectomy. Recently two new types of FHH (2 and 3) have been described. These are associated with germline inactivating mutations of GNA11(19p13.3) and AP2S1(19q12.2) genes. Both mutations cause hypocalciuric hypercalcemia through aberrant inactiva-tion of CaSR signaling. Although clinical presentation in FHH2 is similar to FHH1, those with FHH3 tend to have higher PTH levels and osteomalacia.71Table 38-9Differential diagnosis of hypercalcemiaHyperparathyroidismMalignancy—hematologic (multiple myeloma), solid tumors (due to PTHrP)Endocrine diseases—hyperthyroidism, Addisonian crisis, VIPomaGranulomatous diseases—sarcoidosis, tuberculosis, berylliosis, histoplasmosisMilk-alkali syndromeDrugs—thiazide diuretics, lithium, vitamin A or  D intoxicationFamilial hypocalciuric hypercalcemiaPaget’s diseaseImmobilizationPTHrP = parathyroid hormone-related protein; VIP = vasoactive intestinal peptide.Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   166801/03/19   11:21 AM 1669THYROID, PARATHYROID, AND ADRENALCHAPTER 38Coexisting primaryhyperparathyroidismand malignancyIntact PTHNormalrangeHypo-parathyroidismPrimaryhyper-parathyroidismLimit ofdetectionHypercalcemiaassociatedwith malignancy968634Intact PTH (pg/mL of hPTH [1-84])Normal50020015010050Figure 38-30. Intact parathyroid hormone (PTH) measurement allows differentiation between the various causes of hypercalcemia. (Reproduced with permission from Endres DB, Villanueva R, Sharp CF, et al. Measurement of parathyroid hormone, Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am. 1989 Sep;18(3):611-629.)Hypercalcemia also is found in approximately 10% of patients with sarcoidosis secondary to increased 25-hydroxy vitamin D 1-hydroxylase activity in lymphoid tissue and pul-monary macrophages, which is not subject to inhibitory feed-back control by serum calcium. Thyroid hormone also has bone-resorption properties, thus causing hypercalcemia in thy-rotoxic states, especially in immobilized patients. Hemoconcen-tration appears to be an important factor in the hypercalcemia associated with adrenal insufficiency and pheochromocytoma, although the latter patients may have associated parathyroid tumors (MEN2A), and some pheochromocytomas are known to secrete PTHrP. Other endocrine lesions such as vasoactive intestinal peptide–secreting tumors may be associated with hypercalcemia due to increased secretion of PTHrP. Milk-alkali syndrome requires the ingestion of large quantities of calcium with an absorbable alkali such as that used in the treatment of peptic ulcer disease with antacids. Ingestions of large quantities of vitamins D and A are infrequent causes of hypercalcemia, as is immobilization.Diagnostic Investigations Biochemical Studies. The presence of an elevated serum cal-cium and intact PTH or two-site PTH levels, without hypocal-ciuria, establishes the diagnosis of PHPT with virtual certainty. These sensitive PTH assays use immunoradiometric or immu-nochemiluminescent techniques and can reliably distinguish PHPT from other causes of hypercalcemia. Furthermore, they do not cross-react with PTHrP (Fig. 38-30). In patients with Table 38-10Biochemical features of primary hyperparathyroidismSERUM TESTSALTERATIONCalciumIncreased, except in normocalcemic primary hyperparathyroidismIntact PTHIncreased or inappropriately highChlorideIncreased or high normalPhosphateDecreased or low normalChloride-to-phosphate ratioIncreased (usually >33)MagnesiumUnchanged or decreased (in patients with osteitis fibrosa cystica)Uric acidNormal or increasedAlkaline phosphataseNormal or increased (in the presence of high turnover bone disease)Acid-base statusMild hyperchloremic metabolic acidosisCalcium-to-creatinine clearance ratioGenerally >0.02 (vs. <0.01 in FHH) but there are exceptions1,25-dihydroxy vitamin DNormal or increasedUrine tests 24-h urinary calciumNormal or increasedBFHH = benign familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia; PTH = parathyroid hormone.metastatic cancer and hypercalcemia, intact PTH levels help to determine whether the patient also has concurrent PHPT. Although extremely rare, a patient with hypercalcemia may have a tumor that secretes PTH. FNAB of such a tumor for PTH levels or selective venous catheterization of the veins draining such tumors can help clarify the diagnosis.Patients with PHPT also typically have decreased serum phosphate (∼50%) and elevated 24-hour urinary calcium con-centrations (∼60%). A mild hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis also is present (80%), thereby leading to an elevated chloride-to-phosphate ratio (>33). Urinary calcium levels need not be measured routinely, except in patients who have not had previ-ously documented normocalcemia or have a family history of hypercalcemia to rule out FHH. In patients with FHH, 24-hour urinary calcium excretion is characteristically low (<100 mg/d). Furthermore, the serum calcium-to-creatinine clearance ratio (24-hour urine calcium/plasma total calcium/24-hour urine  creatinine/plasma creatinine) usually is <0.01 in patients with FHH, whereas it is typically >0.02 in patients with PHPT, although there are exceptions to this. Other biochemical features of PHPT are listed in Table 38-10. Elevated levels of alkaline phosphatase may be found in approximately 10% of patients with PHPT and are indicative of high-turnover bone disease. These patients are prone to developing postoperative hypocal-cemia due to bone hunger. Serum and urine protein electropho-resis may be necessary to exclude multiple myeloma.Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   166901/03/19   11:21 AM 1670SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIOccasionally, patients present with normocalcemic PHPT due to vitamin D deficiency, a low serum albumin, excessive hydration, a high-phosphate diet, or a low normal blood calcium set point. These patients have increased total PTH levels with or without increased blood ionized calcium levels and must be distinguished from patients with renal leak hypercalciuria who also have increased PTH levels due to excessive calcium loss in the urine. This can be accomplished by administering thiazide diuretics. In patients with idiopathic hypercalciuria, the urinary calcium level falls, and the secondary increase in the blood PTH level also decreases to normal, whereas patients with normocal-cemic HPT continue to have elevated urine calcium and blood PTH levels and may, in fact, become hypercalcemic.Radiologic Tests. In patients with profound hypercalcemia or PHPT associated with vitamin D deficiency, hand and skull X-rays may demonstrate osteitis fibrosa cystica, but this is rare in current clinical practice. BMD studies using dual-energy absorptiometry are being increasingly used to assess the effects of PHPT on bone. PHPT primarily leads to one loss at cortical sites such as the distal radius while bone density is preserved at sites such as the lumbar spine. Current evaluation of patients with PHPT includes vertebral imaging by X-ray or vertebral fracture assessment (VFA) or CT scan in addition to BMD stud-ies. Measurement of trabecular bone score (TBS) is optional. In addition, renal imaging by ultrasound, X-ray, or CT scan is also recommended. Parathyroid localization studies are not used to confirm the diagnosis of PHPT, but rather to aid in identify-ing the location of the offending gland(s), as discussed later in  “Preoperative Localization Tests.”Treatment Indications for Parathyroidectomy and Role of Medical Management. Most authorities agree that patients who have developed complications and have “classic” symptoms of PHPT should undergo parathyroidectomy. However, the treatment of patients with asymptomatic PHPT has been the subject of con-troversy, due, in part, to the fact that there is little agreement on what constitutes an asymptomatic patient.At the National Institutes of Health consensus conference in 1990, “asymptomatic” PHPT was defined as “the absence of common symptoms and signs of PHPT, including no bone, renal, gastrointestinal, or neuromuscular disorders.” To deter-mine the best course of action for these patients, it is important to consider the natural history of untreated PHPT and the out-comes of treatment options, both medical and surgical.With respect to the natural history, the panel advocated nonoperative management of these patients with mild PHPT based on observational studies, which suggested relative stabil-ity of biochemical parameters over time. However, the consen-sus panel considered certain patients to be candidates for surgery based on testing or other information indicating end-organ effects or a higher likelihood of disease progression, and this led to the establishment of initial guidelines for parathyroidectomy.74  Subsequently, another observational study on the natural history of treated versus untreated HPT was published by  Silverberg and colleagues.75 In their cohort of 52 patients with asymptomatic HPT followed without surgery, levels of serum and urinary calcium, PTH, alkaline phosphatase, and vitamin D metabolites remained relatively stable over a 10-year period in most patients. Average bone mass also remained relatively stable. However, the study also reported development of a new indication for surgery in 14 (27%) of 52 of their asymptom-atic patients and, because approximately 50% of their patients were initially treated surgically, overall, about 75% of patients were underwent parathyroidectomy. Age <50 years was predic-tive of progression, and patients undergoing parathyroidectomy showed not only normalization of calcium and PTH levels but also improved BMD at the spine and hip. Based on these and other studies, the guidelines were reassessed at a second work-shop on asymptomatic PHPT held at the National Institutes of Health in 2002.76Since that time, additional studies have provided further insights into the natural history of treated and untreated HPT. Three of these were randomized, controlled, prospective studies ranging in duration from 1 to 3.5 years. One was an observa-tional study (a continuation of the Columbia University PHPT Project) but was notable for its long duration of follow-up of  15 years.77 These studies confirmed the relative stability of vari-ous biochemical indices, thus validating the need for guidelines. However, the long-term study suggested that the stability was not indefinite as calcium levels tended to rise in years 13 to 15. In addition, the study also demonstrated that bone density mea-surements remained stable for 8 to 10 years, but cortical bone density worsened after year 10. More concerning was the fact that 60% of patients lost >10% of their BMD over the 15-year observation period. Furthermore, whether patients met the 2002 guidelines for surgery did not appear to predict the risk of pro-gressive disease, with 40% of patients undergoing follow-up eventually needing surgery. Although there are no randomized trials, registry data also suggest that fracture risk is increased for PHPT up to 10 years prior to diagnosis and treatment.Medical options for treating PHPT and its complications include antiresorptive treatments such as bisphosphonates, hor-mone replacement therapy (HRT), and selective estrogen recep-tor modulators such as raloxifene.78 Bisphosphonates and HRT are reasonable options in patients for whom skeletal protection is needed, as evidence from randomized, placebo-controlled trials indicates that these medications are very effective at decreasing bone turnover and increasing BMD in PHPT, with the effects being comparable to patients undergoing parathyroidectomy. Caution needs to be exercised due to the nonskeletal effects of HRT, and hence, bisphosphonates are preferred. There are no clinical studies regarding the effects of raloxifene on BMD in HPT, and none of these agents affects calcium or PTH levels. More recently, calcimimetics (modifiers of the sensitivity of the CASR) have been used in randomized, multicenter controlled trials and have been shown to decrease both serum calcium and PTH levels in both symptomatic and asymptomatic PHPT patients. Unfortunately, bone density failed to improve in medi-cally treated patients. Although this therapy shows promise, long-term outcome data are lacking, and their routine use is not advocated at this time, except in patients who are very poor operative risks or refuse surgery.Successful parathyroidectomy results in resolution of oste-itis fibrosa cystica and decreased formation of renal stones in symptomatic (classic) patients. In addition, it results in improved BMD (6% to 8% in the first year and up to 12% to 15% at  15 years) and fracture risk (by 50% at hip and upper arm and 30% overall) after adjustment for age, sex, and previous frac-tures over a 20-year observation period.75 There are also data to show that it improves a number of the nonspecific manifesta-tions of PHPT such as fatigue, polydipsia, polyuria and nocturia, Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   167001/03/19   11:21 AM 1671THYROID, PARATHYROID, AND ADRENALCHAPTER 38Table 38-11Indications for parathyroidectomy in patients with asymptomatic primary HPT (2014 NIH consensus conference guidelines)• Serum calcium >1 mg/dL above the upper limits of normal• GFR <60 mL/min; 24-h urine for calcium >400 mg/d (>10 mmol/d) and increased stone risk by biochemical stone risk analysis; presence of nephrolithiasis or nephrocalcinosis by X-ray, ultrasound, or CT• Substantially decreased bone mineral density at the lumbar spine, total hip, femoral neck, or distal radius (>2.5 SD below peak bone mass, T score <−2.5; vertebral fracture by X-ray, CT, MRI, or VFA)• Age <50 y• Long-term medical surveillance not desired or possibleGFR = glomerular filtration rate; HPT = hyperparathyroidism; NIH = National Institutes of Health; SD = standard deviation; VFA = vertebral fracture assessmentbone and joint pain, constipation, nausea, and depression in many patients. This also has been demonstrated using symptom questionnaires and various standardized general quality-of-life assessments such as the SF-36 and a specific parathyroidectomy assessment of symptoms scale.79 The increased death rate in patients with PHPT appears to be revers-ible by successful parathyroidectomy, at least in some studies. Lastly, parathyroidectomy can be accomplished with >95% suc-cess rates with minimal morbidity, even in elderly patients and is the only curative treatment option for PHPT. Previous inves-tigations have also documented that parathyroidectomy is more cost-effective than medical management or follow-up.80Given these findings, it is recommended that parathyroid-ectomy should be offered to virtually all patients except those in whom the operative risks are prohibitive. This is also acknowl-edged by the panel of the latest workshop, which stated that “even though patients may not meet the guidelines for surgi-cal intervention, it is always a reasonable option in those who do not have medical contraindications.” This was first stated in the 2008 guidelines and reiterated in the most recent revi-sion in 2014, which advised parathyroidectomy for patients with smaller elevations in serum calcium levels (>1 mg/dL above the upper limit of normal) and if BMD measured at any of three sites (radius, spine, or hip) is greater than 2.5 standard deviations below those of genderand race-matched, not age-matched, controls (i.e., peak bone density or T score [rather than Z score] <2.5). In addition, patients <50 years of age were advised to undergo parathyroidectomy. Parathyroidectomy is also indicated for creatinine clearance <60 cc/minute and urine calcium >400 mg/day in the presence of increased stone risk by biochemical stone risk analysis. The significant changes from the previous guidelines pertain to the fact that (a) patients with nephrolithiasis or nephrocalcinosis by X-ray, ultrasound, or CT scan and (b) those with vertebral fracture by X-ray, CT, MRI, or VFA are also candidates for parathyroidectomy.81,82 The current guidelines are summarized in Table 38-11.It is important to point out that the neurocognitive and neuropsychological aspects of PHPT remain a topic of con-troversy with respect to the guidelines for parathyroidectomy. Although there were more studies since the previous iteration 6of the guidelines, there were concerns that while some lacked adequate controls and were plagued by problems related to the instruments used to quantify these nonspecific symptoms, others showed variability in improvement of neurocognitive symptoms following parathyroidectomy. Similarly, uncertainty is also present concerning the cardiovascular consequences of mild HPT. Therefore, the workshop panel emphasizes that these criteria alone should not be used as guidelines for surgical intervention.Since there are no definitive criteria to indicate which patients with mild PHPT will develop progressive disease, more clinical studies are required. Patients who do not undergo sur-gery should undergo routine follow-up as outlined in the recent workshop summary statement, consisting of annual calcium and serum creatinine measurements, and measurements of BMD at three sites every 1 to 2 years.82Preoperative Localization Tests. Localization studies may be classified into noninvasive or invasive modalities. These stud-ies have variable performance characteristics, which, in turn, vary with operator and institutional experience, as outlined in  Table 38-12. Localization studies have permitted surgeons to perform more limited operations, some of them under local anesthesia. These “minimally invasive” procedures include uni-lateral and focused neck exploration, radio-guided parathyroid-ectomy, and several endoscopic or video-assisted approaches. The use of localization studies has been shown in some studies to be associated with lower morbidity rates (hypoparathyroidism and RLN injury) and decreased operative times, reduced dura-tion of hospital stay, and improved cosmetic outcomes, while maintaining success rates similar to those obtained with tradi-tional bilateral neck explorations. Some studies also show that use of localization studies may be more cost-effective. Overall, it has become routine to localize hyperfunctioning parathyroid glands before parathyroidectomy. It is important to point out that imaging is not a diagnostic approach, and the decision for exploration should be made before any imaging is performed.99mTc-labeled sestamibi (Fig. 38-31A) is the most widely used and accurate modality with a sensitivity >80% for detec-tion of parathyroid adenomas. Sestamibi (Cardiolite) initially was introduced for cardiac imaging and is concentrated in mitochondria-rich tissue. It was subsequently noted to be useful for parathyroid localization due to the delayed washout of the radionuclide from hypercellular parathyroid tissue compared to thyroid tissue. Sestamibi scans generally are complemented by neck ultrasound (Fig. 38-31B), which can identify adenomas with >75% sensitivity in experienced centers and is most useful in identifying intrathyroidal parathyroids. Single-photon emis-sion CT, particularly when used with CT, has been shown to be superior to other nuclear medicine–based imaging. Specifically, single-photon emission CT can indicate whether an adenoma is located in the anterior or posterior mediastinum (aortopulmo-nary window), thus enabling the surgeon to modify the opera-tive approach accordingly. CT and MRI scans are less sensitive than sestamibi scans, but they are helpful in localizing large paraesophageal and mediastinal glands. More recently, four-dimensional CT (4D-CT) has shown utility in parathyroid local-ization. This technique incorporates the perfusion of contrast in hyperfunctioning parathyroid tissue over time, thus providing functional information in addition to the anatomic information provided by conventional three-dimensional CT imaging. In one study, 4D-CT showed improved sensitivity of 88% compared to Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   167101/03/19   11:21 AM 1672SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIthat of sestamibi (65%) and ultrasound (57%) for lateralization of the enlarged gland and also showed superiority when local-ization to the correct quadrant was examined.83 A combination of 4D-CT and ultrasound has been reported to have a positive predictive value of 92% for single-gland disease and 75% for multiple-gland disease.IOPTH was initially introduced in 1993 and is used to determine the adequacy of parathyroid resection (Fig. 38-32).84 According to one commonly used criterion, when the PTH falls by 50% or greater 10 minutes after removal of a parathyroid tumor, as compared to the highest preremoval value, the test is considered positive, and the operation is terminated. IOPTH measurements, like localization studies, are less reliable in mul-tiglandular disease. Bilateral internal jugular vein sampling has also been used to lateralize tumors intraoperatively but is less accurate.Operative Approaches Unilateral parathyroid exploration was first carried out using intraoperative staining of a biopsy from the normal parathyroid gland with Sudan black dye to rule out a double adenoma. Initially, the choice of side to be explored was random, but the introduction of preoperative localization studies has enabled a more directed approach. In contrast, the focused approach identifies only the enlarged parathyroid gland, and no attempts are made to locate other parathyroid glands. Unilateral neck explorations have several advantages over bilateral neck exploration, including reduced operative times and complications, such as injury to the RLN and hypoparathyroidism. However, Table 38-12Commonly used parathyroid localization studiesSTUDYADVANTAGESDISADVANTAGESPreoperative, noninvasive Sestamibi-technetium-99m scanAllows planar and SPECT imagingFalse-positive tests due to thyroid neoplasms, lymphadenopathyUltrasoundIdentification of juxtaand intrathyroidal tumorsFalse-positive results due to thyroid nodules, cysts, lymph nodes, esophageal lesions Relatively inexpensiveFalse-negatives result from substernal, ectopic, and undescended tumorsCT scanLocalization of ectopic (mediastinal) glandsNot useful for juxtaor intrathyroidal glands  False-positive results from lymph nodes  Relatively high cost  Radiation exposure  Requires IV contrast  Interference from shoulders and metallic clipsMRI scanLocalization of ectopic tumorsExpensive No radiation exposureFalse-positive results from lymph nodes and thyroid nodules No IV contrastCannot be used in claustrophobic patientsFour-dimensional  CT scanStructural and functional informationSimilar to CT scanPreoperative, invasiveFNABCan distinguish parathyroid tumor from lymphadenopathy using PTH assayExperienced cytologist neededAngiogramProvides a road map for selective venous samplingExpensive Treatment of mediastinal tumors by embolizationExperienced radiologist needed  Neurologic complicationsVenous samplingUseful to lateralize tumor in equivocal cases or negative localization studiesExpensive, experienced radiologist neededIntraoperativePTH assayImmediate confirmation of tumor removalExpensive  Increased operative time, decreased accuracy in multiple-gland diseaseCT = computed tomography; FNAB = fine-needle aspiration biopsy; IV = intravenous; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging; PTH = parathyroid hormone; SPECT = single-photon emission computed tomography.Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   167201/03/19   11:21 AM 1673THYROID, PARATHYROID, AND ADRENALCHAPTER 38ABFigure 38-31. A. Sestamibi scan in a patient with primary hyperparathyroidism showing persistent uptake suggesting a left lower hypercel-lular parathyroid gland. B. Neck ultrasound in a patient with primary hyperparathyroidism showing a left lower parathyroid adenoma.most existing studies comparing the two approaches are retro-spective and do not analyze the results on an intent-to-treat basis. Another argument against a unilateral exploration is the risk of missing another adenoma on the opposite side of the neck. The incidence of double adenomas has been reported to range from 0% to 10%, with an increased incidence in elderly patients. The risk of missing a second adenoma is higher in populations with a higher incidence of multiple adenomas, such as those with famil-ial HPT, MEN syndromes, and the elderly. Another difficulty inherent with unilateral exploration is the inability to discern whether the combination of an abnormal gland and a normal gland on the initial side constitutes a single adenoma or asym-metric hyperplasia. A recently published update on the 5-year results of a randomized trial comparing unilateral versus bilateral neck exploration did not note any difference in the rates of recur-rent or persistent disease in the two groups of patients.85 These issues will only be resolved by a large, prospective, multicenter study or improved molecular analytic techniques.Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   167301/03/19   11:21 AM 1674SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIRadio-guided parathyroidectomy takes advantage of the ability of parathyroid tumors to retain 99mTc-sestamibi. Before sur-gery, 1 to 2 mCi of the isotope is injected, and a hand-held gamma probe is used to guide the identification of the enlarged gland, taking care to ensure the equilibration of radioactivity counts in all quadrants. Reported advantages include easier localization, par-ticularly in reoperative cases, and the ability to perform the pro-cedure under local anesthetic or sedation using smaller incisions. Many studies demonstrated the feasibility of this technique; how-ever, it is rarely used now, largely because it offers little advantage over preoperative sestamibi scans and is associated with increased operative times. Like preoperative scanning, it also has reduced accuracy in the presence of multiglandular disease.Endoscopic approaches include both video-assisted and total endoscopic techniques. Total endoscopic parathyroidec-tomy was first described by Gagner in 1996,86 and several other investigators have since reported on this technique. Although port placements are variable, as is the case with endoscopic thy-roidectomy, they all involve creation of a working space in the neck using CO2 insufflation, with the reported advantages being superior cosmesis and excellent visualization. Although feasi-ble, these techniques also have been associated with increased operating times, more personnel, and greater expense, and have, in general, not been useful for patients with multiglandu-lar disease, a large thyroid mass, or previous neck surgery and irradiation. Their greatest use has been in patients with tumors at ectopic sites such as the mediastinum where thoracoscopic parathyroidectomy is an excellent alternative to sternotomy. Robotic approaches using a gasless, transaxillary technique are also being used for parathyroidectomy. Reported advantages include improved three-dimensional magnified visualization, refined ergonomic control, more freedom of motion with multi-articulated instruments, and improved cosmetic result as a result of incision placement in the axilla.Studies have shown that if both sestamibi scan and neck ultrasound studies independently identify the same, enlarged parathyroid gland, and no other gland, it is indeed the abnormal gland in approximately 95% of cases. These patients with spo-radic PHPT are candidates for a focused neck exploration, an approach that is most commonly referred to as minimally inva-sive parathyroidectomy. A standard bilateral neck exploration is planned if parathyroid localization studies or IOPTH are not available; if the localizing studies fail to identify any abnormal parathyroid gland or identify multiple abnormal glands in patients with a family history of PHPT, MEN1, or MEN2A; or if a concomitant thyroid disorder requires bilateral exploration. In addition, finding a minimally abnormal parathy-roid gland on the side indicated by localization studies during focal exploration should prompt a bilateral exploration or at least the identification of a normal parathyroid gland on the same side. In patients with MEN1, HPT should be corrected before treatment of gastrinomas because gastrin levels decline after parathyroidectomy.Conduct of Parathyroidectomy (Standard Bilateral Explo-ration) An experienced parathyroid surgeon with a thor-ough knowledge of parathyroid anatomy and embryology and meticulous technique is crucial for the best surgical results. The procedure usually is performed under general anesthesia. The patient is positioned supine on the operating table with the neck extended. For a bilateral exploration, the neck is explored via a 3to 4-cm incision just caudal to the cricoid cartilage. The initial dissection and exposure is similar to that used for thy-roidectomy. After the strap muscles are separated in the midline, one side of the neck is chosen for exploration. In contrast to a thyroidectomy, the dissection during a parathyroidectomy is maintained lateral to the thyroid, making it easier to identify the parathyroid glands and not disturb their blood supply.Identification of Parathyroids. A bloodless field is important to allow identification of parathyroid glands. The middle thyroid veins are ligated and divided, thus enabling medial and anterior retraction of the thyroid lobe, with the aid of a peanut sponge or placement of 2-0 silk sutures into the thyroid. The space between the carotid sheath and thyroid is then opened by gentle sharp and blunt dissection, from the cricoid cartilage superiorly to the thy-mus inferiorly and the RLN is identified. Approximately 85% of the parathyroid glands are found within 1 cm of the junction of the inferior thyroid artery and RLNs. The upper parathyroid glands usually are superior to this junction and dorsal (posterior) to the nerve, whereas the lower glands are located inferior to the junction and ventral (anterior) to the recurrent nerve. Because parathyroid glands are partly surrounded by fat, any fat lobule at typical parathyroid locations should be explored because the normal or abnormal parathyroid gland may be concealed in the fatty tissue. The thin fascia overlying a “suspicious” fat lobule should be incised using a sharp curved hemostat and scalpel. This maneuver often causes the parathyroid gland to “pop” out. Alternatively, gentle, blunt peanut sponge dissection between the carotid sheath and the thyroid gland often reveals a “float” sign, suggesting the site of the abnormal parathyroid gland. Normal parathyroids are light beige and only slightly darker or brown compared to adjacent fat.Parathyroid tissue needs to be distinguished from normal or brown fat tissue, thyroid nodules, lymph nodes, and ectopic thymus. Lymph nodes generally are light beige to whitish gray in color, glassy, and multiple in number, whereas thyroid nod-ules generally are more vascular, firm, dark or reddish brown in color, and have a more variegated appearance. Intraoperatively, 7Standard 24 hr irma pg/ml2000160012008004000correlation r  =  0.9161r2 =  0.8393p value   <0.00010400800120016002000Figure 38-32. Correlation of the 10-minute incubation time quick parathyroid hormone assay with the 24-hour immunoradiometric (irma) parathyroid hormone assay from 138 paired intraoperative samples from 38 patients undergoing parathyroidectomy. (Repro-duced with permission from Irvin G, Dembrow VD, Prudhomme DL: Clinical usefulness of an intraoperative “quick parathyroid hormone” assay, Surgery. 1993 Dec;114(6):1019-1022.)Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   167401/03/19   11:21 AM 1675THYROID, PARATHYROID, AND ADRENALCHAPTER 38a suspicious nodule may be aspirated using a fine needle attached to a syringe containing 1 cc of saline. Very high PTH levels in the aspirate have been shown to be diagnostic in the intraopera-tive identification of parathyroid glands. Several characteristics such as size (>7 mm), weight, and color are used to distinguish normal from hypercellular parathyroid glands. Hypercellular glands generally are darker, more firm, and more vascular than normocellular glands. No single method is 100% reliable, and therefore, the parathyroid surgeon must rely on experience and, at times, advice from a pathologist to help distinguish normal from hypercellular glands. Although several molecular studies have shown use in distinguishing parathyroid adenomas from hyperplasia, this determination also must be made by the sur-geon intraoperatively by documenting the presence of a normal parathyroid gland.Location of Parathyroid Glands. The majority of lower para-thyroid glands are found in proximity to the lower thyroid pole (Fig. 38-33A). If not found at this location, the thyrothymic liga-ment and thymus should be mobilized. The upper end of the cervical thymus is gently grasped with a right-angle clamp, and the distal portion is bluntly dissected from perithymic fat with a peanut sponge. One can then “walk down” the thymus with suc-cessive right-angle clamps (Fig. 38-33B). Applying light tension along with a “twisting” motion helps to free the upper thymus. The carotid sheath also should be opened from the bifurcation to the base of the neck if the parathyroid tumor cannot be found. If these maneuvers are unsuccessful, an intrathyroidal gland should be sought by using intraoperative ultrasound, incising the thyroid capsule on its posterolateral surface, or by perform-ing an ipsilateral thyroid lobectomy and “bread-loafing” the thy-roid lobe. Preoperative or intraoperative ultrasonography can be useful for identifying intrathyroidal parathyroid glands. Rarely, the third branchial pouch may maldescend and be found high in the neck (undescended parathymus), anterior to the carotid bulb, along with the missing parathyroid gland. Upper para-thyroid glands are more consistent in position and usually are found near the junction of the upper and middle thirds of the gland, at the level of the cricoid cartilage (Fig. 38-33C). Ectopic upper glands may be found in carotid sheath, tracheoesopha-geal groove, retroesophageal, or in the posterior mediastinum. The locations of ectopic upper and lower parathyroid glands are shown in Fig. 38-34. Every attempt must be made to identify all four glands. Treatment depends on the number of abnormal glands.1. A single adenoma is presumed to be the cause of a patient’s PHPT if only one parathyroid tumor is identified and the other parathyroid glands are normal, a situation present in about 80% of patients with PHPT. Adenomas typically have an atrophic rim of normal parathyroid tissue, but this char-acteristic may be absent. The adenoma is dissected free of surrounding tissue, taking care to stay immediately adjacent to the tumor, without fracturing it. The vascular pedicle is clamped, divided, and ligated. Care should be taken to not rupture the parathyroid gland to decrease the risk of parathy-romatosis. If there is any question about the presumed nor-mal glands, one of them should be biopsied and examined by frozen section.2. If two abnormal and two normal glands are identified, the patient has double adenomas. Triple adenomas are pres-ent if three glands are abnormal and one is normal. Mul-tiple adenomas are more common in older patients with an incidence of up to 10% in patients >60 years old. The abnormal glands should be excised, provided the re-maining glands are confirmed as such, thus excluding asymmetric hyperplasia after biopsy and frozen section.3. If all parathyroid glands are enlarged or hypercellular, pa-tients have parathyroid hyperplasia that has been shown to occur in about 15% of patients in various series. These glands are often lobulated, usually lack the rim of normal Upper parathyroid glandRecurrentlaryngeal n.Inf. thyroid a. ThymusLowerparathyroidglandThyroidABCFigure 38-33. Conduct of parathyroidectomy. A. Exposure of the lower parathyroid gland near the inferior pole of the thyroid gland and anterior to the recurrent laryngeal nerve. B. A thymectomy may be necessary if the lower parathyroid cannot be found in its usual location, or if the patient has familial primary hyperparathyroid-ism or secondary hyperparathyroidism. C. Exposure of the upper parathyroid gland near the insertion of the recurrent laryngeal nerve at the level of the cricothyroid muscle. a. = artery; Inf. = inferior; n. = nerve.Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   167501/03/19   11:21 AM 1676SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIparathyroid gland seen in adenomas, and may be variable in size. It often is difficult to distinguish multiple adenomas from hyperplasia with variable gland size. Hyperplasia may be of the chief cell (more common), mixed, or clear cell type. Patients with hyperplasia may be treated by subtotal para-thyroidectomy or by total parathyroidectomy and autotrans-plantation, with the choice of procedure being determined by rates of recurrence, postoperative hypocalcemia, and failure rates of autotransplanted tissue. Initial studies demonstrated equivalent cure rates and postoperative hypocalcemia for the two techniques, with the latter having the added advantage of avoiding recurrence in the neck. However, autotrans-planted tissue may fail to function in about 5% of cases.All four parathyroid glands are identified and carefully mobilized. For patients with hyperplasia, a titanium clip is placed across the most normal gland, leaving a 50-mg rem-nant and taking care to avoid disturbing the vascular pedicle and that the gland is resected with a sharp scalpel. If possible, it is preferable to subtotally resect an inferior gland, which is more easily accessible in case of recurrence due to its anterior location with respect to the RLN. The resected parathyroid tis-sue is confirmed by frozen section or PTH assay. If the rem-nant appears to be viable, the remaining glands are resected. If there is any question as to the viability of the initially subtotally resected gland, another gland is chosen for subtotal resection, and the initial remnant is removed. Whenever multiple para-thyroids are resected, it is preferable to cryopreserve tissue, so that it may be autotransplanted should the patient become hypo-parathyroid. Parathyroid tissue usually is transplanted into the nondominant forearm. A horizontal skin incision is made over-lying the brachioradialis muscle a few centimeters below the antecubital fossa. Pockets are made in the belly of the muscle, and one to two pieces of parathyroid tissue measuring 1 mm each are placed into each pocket. A total of 12 to 14 pieces are transplanted. Autotransplanted tissue also has been reported to function when transplanted into fat.Indications for Sternotomy A sternotomy is usually not rec-ommended at the initial operation, unless the calcium level is >13 mg/dL. Rather, it is preferred to biopsy the normal glands and subsequently close the patient’s neck and obtain localiz-ing studies, if they were not obtained previously. Intraoperative PTH assay during the operation from large veins may be helpful. Using highly selective venous catheterization postoperatively also may be needed when noninvasive localization studies are negative, equivocal, or conflicting. Lower parathyroid glands tend to migrate into the anterior mediastinum in the thymus or perithymic fat and usually can be approached via a cervical inci-sion. A sternotomy is needed to deliver these tumors in approxi-mately 5% of cases. Generally, the gland can be approached by a partial sternotomy to the third intercostal space. The midline sternotomy can be extended to the left or right side as required. Upper glands tend to migrate to the posterior mediastinum in the tracheoesophageal groove. Mediastinal glands also may be found in the aortopulmonary window or pericardium, or attached to the ascending aorta, aortic arch, or its branches.Special Situations Normocalcemic Hyperparathyroidism. This disorder is becoming increasingly recognized in clinical practice (preva-lence from 0.5% to 16%) and is defined by the presence of an elevated PTH level with repeatedly normal calcium (including ionized calcium) levels. In addition, other secondary causes of elevated PTH should be ruled out, namely, vitamin D deficiency, osteomalacia, hypercalciuria (renal leak), and renal insufficiency. Data regarding the natural history of this disorder are limited. In a series of 37 patients, Lowe and colleagues87 showed that 19% of patients became frankly hyper-calcemic within 3 years. In addition, 57% developed osteoporo-sis, 11% developed fragility fractures, and 14% developed nephrolithiasis. Although the study had some limitations, it led the authors to suggest that normocalcemic HPT may represent a variant of “symptomatic” PHPT and may not be an early form of “asymptomatic” disease. Limited studies show that 800.811217440.222128040.20.8626Figure 38-34. Location of ectopic upper and lower parathyroid glands. (Reproduced with permission from Akerström G, Malmaeus J,  Bergström R: Surgical anatomy of human parathyroid glands, Surgery. 1984 Jan;95(1):14-21.)Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   167601/03/19   11:22 AM 1677THYROID, PARATHYROID, AND ADRENALCHAPTER 38parathyroidectomy is more likely to be unsuccessful in these patients. In the absence of strong data, no guidelines are avail-able for this entity.88 As such, most clinicians follow a conserva-tive course unless patients progress to the classic hypercalcemic form or develop nephrolithiasis, reduced bone mineral density, or fragility fractures.Parathyroid Carcinoma. Parathyroid cancer accounts for approximately 1% of PHPT cases. It may be suspected preop-eratively by the presence of severe symptoms, serum calcium levels  >14 mg/dL, significantly elevated PTH levels (five times normal), and a palpable parathyroid gland. Local invasion is quite common; approximately 15% of patients have lymph node metastases, and 33% have distant metastases at pre-sentation. Intraoperatively, parathyroid cancer is suggested by the presence of a large, gray-white to gray-brown parathyroid tumor that is adherent to or invasive into surrounding tissues like muscle, thyroid, RLN, trachea, or esophagus. Enlarged lymph nodes also may be present. Frozen sections are generally unreliable. Accurate diagnosis necessitates histologic examina-tion. The major diagnostic criteria include vascular or capsular invasion, trabecular or fibrous stroma, and frequent mitoses. It is, however, important to emphasize that these classic findings are not as frequently noted as previously reported, and some may be found in benign adenomas as well.Treatment of parathyroid cancer consists of neck explora-tion, with en bloc excision of the tumor and the ipsilateral thy-roid lobe, in addition to the removal of contiguous lymph nodes (tracheoesophageal, paratracheal, and upper mediastinal). The recurrent nerve is not sacrificed unless it is directly involved with tumor. Adherent soft tissue structures (strap muscles or other soft tissues) should also be resected.89 Modified radical neck dissection is recommended in the presence of lateral lymph node metastases. Prophylactic neck dissection is not advised. If the diagnosis is made postoperatively, a decision must be made regarding the adequacy of initial surgery based on a review of operative notes, pathology reports, localization studies, and cal-cium and PTH levels. If any question exists, histologic review by another experienced pathologist can be helpful. Additional procedures can include ipsilateral thyroid lobectomy with resec-tion of contiguous structures and lymph nodes if the features are typical or the patient remains hypercalcemic. Patients with equivocal pathologic findings and normocalcemia may be monitored closely. Reoperation is indicated for locally recur-rent or metastatic disease to control hypercalcemia. Adjuvant radiation therapy should be considered in patients at high risk of local recurrence such as those with close or positive margins, invasion of surrounding structures, or tumor rupture. Radiation may also be used as primary therapy in unresectable disease or for palliation of bone metastases. Chemotherapy is not very effective. Bisphosphonates have shown some effectiveness in treating hypercalcemia associated with parathyroid carcinoma. Cinacalcet hydrochloride, a calcimimetic, can reduce PTH lev-els by directly binding to the CASR cells on the parathyroid gland and has been shown to be useful in controlling hyper-calcemia in patients with refractory parathyroid carcinoma.90 Other promising approaches include antiparathyroid hormone immunotherapy, octreotide, and the telomerase inhibitor azido-thymidine, but additional investigations are needed in this area.Familial Hyperparathyroidism. PHPT may occur as a com-ponent of various inherited syndromes such as MEN1 and MEN2A. Inherited PHPT also can occur as isolated familial HPT (non-MEN) or familial HPT with jaw tumors. The diag-nosis of familial HPT is known or suspected in approximately 85% of patients preoperatively. Furthermore, patients with hereditary HPT generally have a higher incidence of multiglan-dular disease, supernumerary glands, and recurrent or persistent disease. Therefore, these patients warrant a more aggressive approach and are not candidates for various focused surgical approaches.91 Although not absolutely necessary, preoperative sestamibi scan and ultrasound can be obtained in patients with inherited HPT to identify potential ectopic glands. A standard bilateral neck exploration is performed, along with a bilateral cervical thymectomy, regardless of the results of localization studies. Both subtotal parathyroidectomy and total parathyroid-ectomy with autotransplantation are appropriate, and parathy-roid tissue also should be cryopreserved. If an adenoma is found in patients with familial HPT, the adenoma and the ipsilateral normal parathyroid glands are resected. The normal-appearing glands on the contralateral side are biopsied and marked, so that only one side of the neck will need to be explored in the event of recurrence. Patients with MEN2A require total thyroidectomy and central neck dissection for prevention/treatment of MTC, a procedure that places the parathyroids at risk. Moreover, HPT is less aggressive in these patients. Hence, only abnormal para-thyroid glands need to be resected at neck exploration. The other normal parathyroid glands should be marked with a clip.Neonatal Hyperparathyroidism. Infants with neonatal HPT present with severe hypercalcemia, lethargy, hypotonia, and mental retardation. This disorder is associated with homozygous mutations in the CASR gene. As indicated earlier, urgent total parathyroidectomy (with autotransplantation and cryopreserva-tion) and thymectomy are indicated. Subtotal resection is associ-ated with high recurrence rates.Parathyromatosis. Parathyromatosis is a rare condition char-acterized by the finding of multiple nodules of hyperfunctioning parathyroid tissue throughout the neck and mediastinum, usu-ally following a previous parathyroidectomy. The true etiology of parathyromatosis is not known. It is postulated to arise either from overgrowth of congenital parathyroid rests (ontogenous parathyromatosis) or seeding at surgery from rupture of parathy-roid tumors or subtotal resection of hyperplastic glands. Para-thyromatosis represents a rare cause of persistent or recurrent HPT92 and can be identified intraoperatively. Aggressive local resection of these deposits can result in normocalcemia but is rarely curative. Some studies suggest that these patients have low-grade carcinoma because of invasion into muscle and other structures distant from the resected parathyroid tumor.Postoperative Care and Follow-Up Patients who have under-gone parathyroidectomy are advised to undergo calcium level checks 2 weeks postoperatively, at 6 months, and then annu-ally. Recurrences are rare (<1%), except in patients with famil-ial HPT. Recurrence rates of 15% at 2 years and 67% at 8 years have been reported for MEN1 patients.Persistent and Recurrent Hyperparathyroidism. Per-sistence is defined as hypercalcemia that fails to resolve after parathyroidectomy and is more common than recurrence, which refers to HPT occurring after an intervening period of at least  6 months of biochemically documented normocalcemia.93 Recurrent disease is far less common than persistent HPT; however, both occur more frequently in the setting of familial HPT and MEN1, in particular. The most common causes for both these states include ectopic parathyroids, unrecognized 9Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   167701/03/19   11:22 AM 1678SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIhyperplasia, or supernumerary glands. More rare causes include parathyroid carcinoma, missed adenoma in a normal position, incomplete resection of an abnormal gland, parathyromatosis, or an inexperienced surgeon. The most common sites of ecto-pic parathyroid glands in patients with persistent or recurrent HPT are paraesophageal (28%), mediastinal (26%), intrathymic (24%), intrathyroidal (11%), carotid sheath (9%), and high cer-vical or undescended (2%) (Fig. 38-35).Once the diagnosis of persistent or recurrent HPT is sus-pected, it should be confirmed by the necessary biochemical tests. Other causes of an elevated serum PTH such as renal insufficiency, renal calcium leak, and GI tract abnormalities should be considered. A detailed family history should be per-formed to screen for familial disease, as this will influence the operative approach. In particular, a 24-hour urine collec-tion should be performed to rule out FHH. In redo-parathyroid surgery, the glands are more likely to be in ectopic locations, and postoperative scarring tends to make the procedure more technically demanding. Cure rates are generally lower (80–90%  compared with 95–99% for initial operation), and risk of injury to RLNs and permanent hypocalcemia are higher. Therefore, an evaluation of severity of HPT and the patient’s anesthetic risk (using the American Society of Anesthesiology classifica-tion of physical status or the Goldman cardiac index) is impor-tant. There are no published guidelines directly applicable to this group of patients. In general, patients with significant and ongoing problems such as recurrent kidney stones, a markedly elevated calcium level, or ongoing bone loss will need reex-ploration. Patients in whom the diagnosis remains in question or those with equivocal or minimal symptoms may be considered for conservative management. Preoperative localization studies are routinely performed. Noninvasive studies such as a sesta-mibi scan and ultrasound are obtained, supplemented by 4D-CT scans. If these studies are negative, discordant, or equivocal, obtaining an ultrasound-guided aspirate of a suspicious cervi-cal lesion or a highly selective venous catheterization for PTH levels (by an experienced angiographer) is recommended. Previ-ous operative notes and pathology reports should be carefully reviewed and reconciled with the information obtained from localization studies before any neck reexploration. An algorithm for the treatment of patients with recurrent and persistent HPT is shown in Fig. 38-36.Generally, these patients are approached with a focused exploration. The lateral approach is frequently used and can be achieved via the previous incision. The plane between the ster-nocleidomastoid and strap muscle is opened and allows for early identification of the RLN. Parathyroid tissue is cryopreserved routinely. Use of adjuncts, such as measuring intraoperative PTH levels, is critical to ensure adequate resection and avoid potentially harmful additional explorations. In case of difficult reexplorations, additional techniques such as bilateral internal jugular vein sampling for PTH, thyroid lobectomy on the side of the missing gland, cervical thymectomy, and ligation of the ipsi-lateral inferior thyroid artery (after lobectomy, to cause infarc-tion of the missing gland) may be needed. Blind mediastinal exploration is not recommended. In patients who are denied, refuse, or fail exploration, medical options such as cinacalcet may be considered.Figure 38-35. Anatomic location of ectopic parathyroid glands. Numbers represent number of glands found in each location, with a total of 54. (Reproduced with permission from Shen W, Düren M, Morita E, et al: Reoperation for persistent or recurrent primary hyperparathyroidism, Arch Surg. 1996 Aug;131(8):861-867.)High cervicalpositionCarotidsheathIntrathymicIntrathyroidalAnteriormediastinum(nonthymic)AortopulmonarywindowPosteriormediastinumParaesophageal5169213315C3C4C5C6C7T1T2T3T4Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   167801/03/19   11:22 AM 1679THYROID, PARATHYROID, AND ADRENALCHAPTER 38Recurrent or persistent HPT1) Confirm diagnosis2) Rule out FHH3) Review operative     notes and pathologyParathyroidectomyPositiveNegativeNoninvasivelocalization studiesNegativePositiveSelective venous catheterization for PTHIs tumorlocalized?Follow-upif mildhypercalcemia  ParathyroidectomyMedical therapyNoYesFigure 38-36. Management of recurrent and persistent hyperpara-thyroidism (HPT). FHH = familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia; PTH = parathyroid hormone.Hypercalcemic Crisis. Patients with PHPT may occasionally present acutely with nausea, vomiting, fatigue, muscle weak-ness, confusion, and a decreased level of consciousness—a complex referred to as hypercalcemic crisis. These symptoms result from severe hypercalcemia from uncontrolled PTH secre-tion, worsened by polyuria, dehydration, and reduced kidney function and may occur with other conditions causing hyper-calcemia. Calcium levels are markedly elevated and may be as high as 16 to 20 mg/dL. Parathyroid tumors tend to be large or multiple and may be palpable. Patients with parathyroid cancer or familial HPT are more likely to present with hypercalcemic crisis.Treatment consists of therapies to lower serum calcium levels followed by surgery to correct HPT. The mainstay of therapy involves rehydration with a 0.9% saline solution to keep urine output >100 cc/h. Once urine output is established, diure-sis with furosemide (which increases renal calcium clearance) is begun. If these methods are unsuccessful, other drugs may be used to lower serum calcium levels as outlined in Table 38-13. Occasionally, in life-threatening cases, hemodialysis may be of benefit.Secondary Hyperparathyroidism. Secondary HPT com-monly occurs in patients with chronic renal failure but also may occur in those with hypocalcemia secondary to inadequate cal-cium or vitamin D intake or malabsorption. The pathophysiol-ogy of HPT in chronic renal failure is complex and appears to be related to hyperphosphatemia (and resultant hypocalcemia), deficiency of 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D due to loss of renal tissue, low calcium intake, decreased calcium absorption, and abnormal parathyroid cell response to extracellular calcium or vitamin D in vitro and in vivo. Patients generally are hypocalce-mic or normocalcemic. Aluminum hydroxide, which often was used as a phosphate binder, has been shown to contribute to the osteomalacia observed in this disease. These patients gen-erally are treated medically with a low-phosphate diet, phos-phate binders, adequate intake of calcium and 1, 25-dihydroxy  vitamin D, and a high-calcium, low-aluminum dialysis bath. Calcimimetics have been shown to control parathyroid hyper-plasia and osteitis fibrosa cystica associated with secondary HPT in animal studies and to decrease plasma PTH and total and ionized calcium levels in humans.As the indications for parathyroidectomy were not well established, surgical treatment was traditionally recommended for patients with bone pain, pruritus, and (a) a calciumphosphate product ≥70, (b) calcium >11 mg/dL with markedly elevated PTH, (c) calciphylaxis, (d) progressive renal osteodys-trophy, and (e) soft tissue calcification and tumoral calcinosis, despite maximal medical therapy. Following the introduction of calcimimetics, there appears to have been a reduction in para-thyroidectomy rates. Parathyroidectomy has been reported to maintain biochemical targets for up to 5 years and improve bone density, fracture risk, calcinosis, hemoglobin levels, and even long-term survival. Studies also report that in a large series of patients on hemodialysis, calcimimetics increased the likelihood of achieving goal PTH (≤300 pg/mL), calcium, phosphate, and Ca × PO4 product, in addition to reducing the risk of fractures and cardiovascular complications.In the absence of randomized trials comparing medical ther-apy with parathyroidectomy, current recommendations from the National Kidney Foundation’s Kidney Disease Quality Outcomes Initiative (KDOQI) advise parathyroidectomy for patients on maximal medical therapy with (a) severe HPT (defined as PTH >800 pg/mL, (b) hypercalcemia, (c) osteoporosis or pathologic bone fracture, (d) Symptoms and signs such as pruritis, bone pain, severe vascular calcifications, myopathy, and (e) calci-phylaxis.94 Calciphylaxis is a rare, limband life-threatening complication of secondary HPT characterized by painful (some-times throbbing), violaceous, and mottled lesions usually on the extremities, which often become necrotic and progress to non-healing ulcers, gangrene, sepsis, and death. Skin biopsy can be helpful to make the diagnosis. These are critically ill, high-risk patients, but successful parathyroidectomy sometimes relieves symptoms. Not all patients with calciphylaxis will have high PTH levels, and parathyroidectomy should not be undertaken in the absence of documented hyperparathyroidism. Assessment of parathyroid mass is thought to be an important factor for pre-dicting the response to medical management. Therefore, some groups recommend parathyroidectomy if the glands are >1 cm (or >500 mm3) on ultrasound. These glands are more likely to have developed nodular hyperplasia and hence might be refrac-tory to medical management.Patients should undergo routine dialysis the day before surgery to correct electrolyte abnormalities. Localization stud-ies are not necessary but can identify ectopic parathyroid glands. A bilateral neck exploration is indicated. The parathyroid glands in secondary HPT are characterized by asymmetric enlargement and nodular hyperplasia. These patients may be treated by sub-total resection, leaving about 50 mg of the most normal parathy-roid gland or total parathyroidectomy and autotransplantation Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   167901/03/19   11:22 AM 1680SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIof parathyroid tissue into the brachioradialis muscle of the non-dominant forearm, with parathyroid cryopreservation. Upper thymectomy usually is performed because 15% to 20% of patients have one or more parathyroid glands situated in the thy-mus or perithymic fat. Some groups recommend total parathy-roidectomy without autotransplantation because it is associated with a lower rate of recurrence.95 While it may be preferable in patients with calciphylaxis, this procedure is contraindicated in patients eligible for renal transplant. Since the evidence needed to determine the superiority of one approach over another is lacking, the choice of procedure is influenced by surgeon pref-erence and experience and various patient factors, as indicated earlier.Tertiary Hyperparathyroidism. Generally, renal transplan-tation is an excellent method of treating secondary HPT, but some patients develop autonomous parathyroid gland function and tertiary HPT. Tertiary HPT can cause problems similar to PHPT, such as pathologic fractures, bone pain and worsened bone disease, renal stones, peptic ulcer disease, pancreatitis, and mental status changes. The transplanted kidney is also at risk from tubulointerstitial calcification and volume depletion. Similar to patients with secondary HPT, many patients with ter-tiary HPT are being treated with cinacalcet. Although the drug is effective and well-tolerated in these patients, the long-term effects on kidney allograft function are not known, and many of these patients have persistence of their hypercalcemic symp-toms. On the other hand, parathyroidectomy has been shown to lead to a more immediate and dramatic reduction in hypercal-cemic symptoms. As such, operative intervention is indicated if autonomous PTH secretion persists for >1 year after a successful transplant in patients with hypophosphatemia, low BMD/severe osteopenia, symptoms, and signs such as fatigue, pruritis, bone pain, peptic ulcer disease or nephrocalcinosis, provided they  are deemed operative candidates.96 All parathyroid glands should be identified. The traditional surgical management of these patients consisted of subtotal or total parathyroid-ectomy with autotransplantation and an upper thymectomy. Some authors suggest that these patients derive similar benefit from excision of only obviously enlarged glands, while avoid-ing the higher risks of hypocalcemia associated with the for-mer approach. Others recommend that all parathyroid glands be identified and subtotal parathyroidectomy be performed as long-term follow-up studies show that limited excisions in these patients are associated with an up to fivefold increased risk of recurrent or persistent disease. Further studies are needed to define the best operative approach for these patients.Complications of Parathyroid Surgery. Parathyroidectomy can be accomplished successfully in >95% of patients with minimal mortality and morbidity, provided the procedure is performed by a surgeon experienced in parathyroid surgery. Table 38-13Medications commonly used to treat hypercalcemiaMEDICATIONDOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATIONMECHANISM, ONSET OF ACTION,  AND DURATIONSIDE EFFECTSBisphosphonates (pamidronate, zolendronic acid preferred in patients with malignancy due to rapid action)60–90 mg IV over 4–24 hInhibits osteoclastic bone resorption; rapid onset, 2–3 dMay cause local pain and swelling, low-grade fever, lymphopenia, electrolyte abnormalities, osteonecrosis of the jaw in some patients (iv use)Calcitonin4 IU/kg SC/IMInhibits osteoclast function, augments renal calcium excretion; onset of action in hours; but short lived, therefore not useful as sole therapyTransient nausea and vomiting, abdominal cramps, flushing, and local skin reactionMithramycin (plicamycin)25 μg/kg/d IV for 3–4 dInhibits osteoclasts RNA secretion; rapid onset of action (12 h); peaks at 48–72 h and lasts days to several weeksMay cause renal, hepatic, and hematologic complications, nausea and vomitingGallium nitrate200 mg/m2 BSA/d IV for 5 dReduces urinary calcium excretion; onset of action delayed (5–7 d)Nephrotoxicity, nausea, vomiting, hypotension, anemia, hypophosphatemiaGlucocorticoidsHydrocortisone 100 mg IV q8hDelayed onset of action (7–10 d);  useful for hematologic malignancies, sarcoidosis,  vitamin D intoxication, hyperthyroidismHypertension, hyperglycemiaCalcimimetics (cinacalcet)Up to 90 mg 3 o 4 times per dayUseful in patients with parathyroid carcinoma and patients with chronic renal failureGastrointestinal complaints, hypotension, hypocalcemiaBSA = body surface area; IM = intramuscular; IV = intravenous; SC = subcutaneous.Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   168001/03/19   11:22 AM 1681THYROID, PARATHYROID, AND ADRENALCHAPTER 38Table 38-14Conditions causing hypocalcemiaHypoparathyroidism • Surgical • Neonatal • Familial • Heavy metal deposition • Magnesium depletionResistance to the action of parathyroid hormone • Pseudohypoparathyroidism • Renal failure • Medications—calcitonin, bisphosphonates, mithramycinFailure of normal 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D productionResistance to the action of 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin DAcute complex formation or deposition of calcium • Acute hyperphosphatemia • Acute pancreatitis • Massive blood transfusion (citrate overload) • “Hungry bones”Specific complications include transient and permanent vocal cord palsy and hypoparathyroidism. The latter is more likely to occur in patients who undergo four-gland exploration with biopsies, subtotal resection with an inadequate remnant, or total parathyroidectomy with a failure of autotransplanted tissue. Furthermore, hypocalcemia is more likely to occur in patients with high-turnover bone disease as evidenced by elevated pre-operative alkaline phosphatase levels. Vocal cord paralysis and hypoparathyroidism are considered permanent if they persist for >6 months. Fortunately, these complications are rare, occurring in approximately 1% of patients undergoing surgery by experi-enced parathyroid surgeons.Patients with symptomatic hypocalcemia or those with calcium levels <8 mg/dL are treated with oral calcium supple-mentation (up to 1–2 g every 4 hours). 1,25-Dihydroxy vitamin D (calcitriol [Rocaltrol] 0.25–0.5 μg twice a day) may also be required, particularly in patients with severe hypercalcemia and elevated serum alkaline phosphatase levels, preoperatively and with osteitis fibrosa cystica. Intravenous calcium supplementa-tion rarely is needed, except in cases of severe, symptomatic hypocalcemia.HypoparathyroidismHypocalcemia can be the result of a multitude of conditions, which are listed in Table 38-14. The parathyroid glands may be congenitally absent in DiGeorge syndrome, which also is characterized by lack of thymic development and, therefore, a thymus-dependent lymphoid system. By far, the most common cause of hypoparathyroidism is thyroid surgery, particularly total thyroidectomy with a concomitant central neck dissection. Patients often develop transient hypocalcemia due to ischemia of the parathyroid glands; permanent hypoparathyroidism is rare. Hypoparathyroidism also may occur after parathyroid surgery, which is more likely if patients undergo a subtotal resection or total parathyroidectomy with parathyroid autotransplantation.Acute hypocalcemia results in decreased ionized calcium and increased neuromuscular excitability. Patients initially develop circumoral and fingertip numbness and tingling. Mental symptoms include anxiety, confusion, and depression. Physical examination reveals positive Chvostek’s sign (contraction of facial muscles elicited by tapping on the facial nerve anterior to the ear) and Trousseau’s sign (carpopedal spasm that is elic-ited by occluding blood flow to the forearm with a blood pres-sure cuff for 2–3 minutes). Tetany, which is characterized by tonic-clonic seizures, carpopedal spasm, and laryngeal stridor, may prove fatal and should be avoided. Most patients with post-operative hypocalcemia can be treated with oral calcium and  vitamin D supplements; IV calcium infusion is rarely required except in patients with preoperative osteitis fibrosa cystica.ADRENALHistorical BackgroundEustachius provided the first accurate anatomic account of the adrenals in 1563. The anatomic division of the adrenals into the cortex and medulla was described much later, by Cuvier in 1805. Subsequently, Thomas Addison in 1855 described the features of adrenal insufficiency, which still bear his name. DeCreccio provided the first description of congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) occurring in a female pseudohermaphrodite in 1865. Pheochromocytomas were first identified by Frankel in 1885, but were not named as such until 1912 by Pick, who noted the characteristic chromaffin reaction of the tumor cells. Adren-aline was identified as an agent from the adrenal medulla that elevated blood pressure in dogs and was subsequently named epinephrine in 1897. The first successful adrenalectomies for pheochromocytoma were performed by Roux in Switzerland and Charles Mayo in the United States.In 1932, Harvey Cushing described 11 patients who had moon facies, truncal obesity, hypertension, and other features of the syndrome that now bears his name. Although several individuals prepared adrenocortical extracts to treat adrenalec-tomized animals, cortisone was first synthesized by Kendall. Aldosterone was identified in 1952, and the syndrome result-ing from excessive secretion of this mineralocorticoid was first described in 1955 by Conn.EmbryologyThe adrenal or suprarenal glands are two endocrine organs in one; an outer cortex and an inner medulla, each with distinct embryologic, anatomic, histologic, and secretory features. The cortex originates around the fifth week of gestation from mesodermal tissue near the gonads on the adrenogenital ridge  (Fig. 38-37). Therefore, ectopic adrenocortical tissue may be found in the ovaries, spermatic cord, and testes. The cortex dif-ferentiates further into a thin, definitive cortex and a thicker, inner fetal cortex. The latter is functional and produces fetal adrenal steroids by the eighth week of gestation, but undergoes involution after birth, resulting in a decrease in adrenal weight during the first three postpartum months. The definitive cor-tex persists after birth to form the adult cortex over the first  3 years of life. In contrast, the adrenal medulla is ectodermal in origin and arises from the neural crest. At around the same time as cortical development, neural crest cells migrate to the para-aortic and paravertebral areas and toward the medial aspect of the developing cortex to form the medulla. Most extra-adrenal neural tissue regresses but may persist at several sites. The larg-est of these is located to the left of the aortic bifurcation near the inferior mesenteric artery origin and is designated as the organ of Zuckerkandl. Adrenal medullary tissue also may be found in neck, urinary bladder, and para-aortic regions. Several Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   168101/03/19   11:22 AM 1682SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIfactors are involved in adrenal development and include insulin-like growth factor 2; gastric inhibitory peptide; and the dosagesensitive, sex-reversal adrenal hypoplasia (DAX1) gene.AnatomyThe adrenal glands are paired, retroperitoneal organs located superior and medial to the kidneys at the level of the elev-enth ribs. The normal adrenal gland measures 5 × 3 × 1 cm and weighs 4 to 5 g. The right gland is pyramidal shaped and lies in close proximity to the right hemidiaphragm, liver, and inferior vena cava (IVC). The left adrenal is closely associated with the aorta, spleen, and tail of the pancreas. Each gland is supplied by three groups of vessels—the superior adrenal arter-ies derived from the inferior phrenic artery, the middle adrenal arteries derived from the aorta, and the inferior adrenal arteries derived from the renal artery. Other vessels originating from the intercostal and gonadal vessels may also supply the adrenals. These arteries branch into about 50 arterioles to form a rich plexus beneath the glandular capsule and require careful dissec-tion, ligation, and division during adrenalectomy. In contrast to the arterial supply, each adrenal usually is drained by a single, major adrenal vein. The right adrenal vein is usually short and drains into the IVC, whereas the left adrenal vein is longer and empties into the left renal vein after joining the inferior phrenic vein. Accessory veins occur in 5% to 10% of patients—on the right, these vessels may drain into the right hepatic vein or the right renal vein; on the left, accessory veins may drain directly into the left renal vein. The anatomic relationships of the adre-nals and surrounding structures are depicted in Fig. 38-38.The adrenal cortex appears yellow due to its high lipid content and accounts for about 80% to 90% of the gland’s vol-ume. Histologically, the cortex is divided into three zones—the zona glomerulosa, zona fasciculata, and zona reticularis. The outer area of the zona glomerulosa consists of small cells and is the site of production of the mineralocorticoid hormone, aldo-sterone. The zona fasciculata is made up of larger cells, which often appear foamy due to multiple lipid inclusions, whereas the zona reticularis cells are smaller. These latter zones are the site of production of glucocorticoids and adrenal androgens. The adrenal medulla constitutes up to 10% to 20% of the gland’s volume and is reddish-brown in color. It produces the catechol-amine hormones epinephrine and norepinephrine. The cells of the adrenal medulla are arranged in cords and are polyhedral in shape. They often are referred to as chromaffin cells because they stain specifically with chromium salts.Adrenal PhysiologyCholesterol, derived from the plasma or synthesized in the adre-nal, is the common precursor of all steroid hormones derived from the adrenal cortex. Cholesterol initially is cleaved within mitochondria to 5-δ-pregnolone, which in turn is transported to the smooth endoplasmic reticulum where it forms the substrate for various biosynthetic pathways leading to steroidogenesis (Fig. 38-39).Mineralocorticoids. The major adrenal mineralocorticoid hormones are aldosterone, 11-deoxycorticosterone (DOC), and cortisol. Cortisol has minimal effects on the kidney due to hor-mone degradation. Aldosterone secretion is regulated primarily by the renin-angiotensin system. Decreased renal blood flow, decreased plasma sodium, and increased sympathetic tone all stimulate the release of renin from juxtaglomerular cells. Renin, in turn, leads to the production of angiotensin I from its pre-cursor angiotensinogen. Angiotensin I is cleaved by pulmo-nary angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) to angiotensin II; the latter is not only a potent vasoconstrictor, but it also leads to increased aldosterone synthesis and release. Hyperkalemia is another potent stimulator of aldosterone synthesis, whereas ACTH, pituitary pro-opiomelanocortin, and antidiuretic hor-mone are weak stimulators.Aldosterone is secreted at a rate of 50 to 250 μg/d (depend-ing on sodium intake) and circulates in plasma chiefly as a complex with albumin. Small amounts of the hormone bind to corticosteroid-binding globulin, and approximately 30% to 50% of secreted aldosterone circulates in a free form. The hormone has a half-life of only 15 to 20 minutes and is rapidly cleared via the liver and kidney. A small quantity of free aldosterone also is excreted in the urine. Mineralocorticoids cross the cell membrane and bind to cytosolic receptors. The receptor-ligand complex subsequently is transported into the nucleus where it induces the transcription and translation of specific genes. Aldo-sterone functions mainly to increase sodium reabsorption and potassium and hydrogen ion excretion at the level of the renal distal convoluted tubule. Less commonly, aldosterone increases sodium absorption in salivary glands and GI mucosal surfaces.9123678CA45BFigure 38-37. Cross-section of the embryo depicting adrenal development: (1) neural tube, (2) chorda, (3) aorta, (4) base of the mesentery, (5) digestive tube, (6) adrenal cortex, (7) undifferenti-ated gonad, (8) mesonephros, and (9) neural crest. Cells migrate from the neural crest to form the ganglia of the sympathetic trunk (A), sympathetic plexi (B), and the adrenal medulla and paraganglia (C). (Reproduced with permission from Avisse C, Marcus C, Patey M, et al: Surgical anatomy and embryology of the adrenal glands, Surg Clin North Am. 2000 Feb;80(1):403-415.)Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   168201/03/19   11:22 AM 1683THYROID, PARATHYROID, AND ADRENALCHAPTER 38AbdominalaortaInferiorvena cavaLeft inferiorphrenica. and v.Right phrenic a.Celiac trunkSuperiormesenteric a.Left adrenal gland Right adrenal gland Left superior adrenal aa.Right superior adrenal aa.Inferior adrenal a.Renal a. and v.Left adrenal v.Inferior adrenal a.Rightadrenalv.Middleadrenala.Figure 38-38. Anatomy of the adrenals and surrounding structures. a. = artery; v. = vein.Pregnenolone17˜-hydroxypregnenoloneAndrostenedioneDHEADHEASCortisolAldosteroneCholesterol12217˜-hydroxyprogesterone311-deoxycortisol42Progesterone311-deoxy-corticosterone4.5Corticosterone518-hydroxy-corticosterone567678Figure 38-39. Synthesis of adrenal steroids. The enzymes involved are (1) p450scc (cholesterol side chain cleavage), (2) 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, (3) p450c21 (21β-hydroxylase), (4) p450c11 (11β-hydroxylase), (5) p450c11AS (aldosterone synthase), (6) p450c17 (17α-hydroxylase activity), (7) p450c17 (17,20-lyase/desmolase activity), and (8) sulfokinase. DHEAS = dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate.Glucocorticoids. The secretion of cortisol, the major adrenal glucocorticoid, is regulated by ACTH secreted by the anterior pituitary, which, in turn, is under the control of corticotrophin-releasing hormone (CRH) secreted by the hypothalamus. ACTH is a 39-amino-acid protein, which is derived by cleavage from a larger precursor, pro-opiomelanocortin. ACTH is further cleaved into α-melanocyte-stimulating hormone and corticotrophin-like intermediate peptide. ACTH not only stimulates the secretion of glucocorticoids, mineralocorticoids, and adrenal androgens, but is also trophic for the adrenal glands. ACTH secretion may be Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   168301/03/19   11:22 AM 1684SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIstimulated by pain, stress, hypoxia, hypothermia, trauma, and hypoglycemia. ACTH secretion fluctuates, peaking in the morn-ing and reaching nadir levels in the late afternoon. Thus, there is a diurnal variation in the secretion of cortisol, with peak cortisol excretion also occurring in the early morning and declining dur-ing the day to its lowest levels in the evening (Fig. 38-40). Corti-sol controls the secretion of both CRH and ACTH via a negative feedback loop. A similar mechanism leads to the inhibition of CRH secretion by ACTH.Cortisol is transported in plasma bound primarily to corti-costeroid-binding globulin (75%) and albumin (15%). Approxi-mately 10% of circulating cortisol is free and is the biologically active component. The plasma half-life of cortisol is 60 to  90 minutes and is determined by the extent of binding and rate of inactivation. Cortisol is converted to diand tetrahydrocor-tisol and cortisone metabolites in the liver and the kidney. The majority (95%) of cortisol and cortisone metabolites are con-jugated with glucuronic acid in the liver, thus facilitating their renal excretion. A small amount of unmetabolized cortisol is excreted unchanged in the urine.Glucocorticoid hormones enter the cell and bind cytosolic steroid receptors. The activated receptor-ligand complex is then transported to the nucleus where it stimulates the transcription of specific target genes via a “zinc finger” DNA binding ele-ment. Cortisol also binds the mineralocorticoid receptor with an affinity similar to aldosterone. However, the specificity of mineralocorticoid action is maintained by the production of 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, an enzyme that inactivates cortisol to cortisone in the kidney. Glucocorticoids have impor-tant functions in intermediary metabolism but also affect con-nective tissue, bone, immune, cardiovascular, renal, and central nervous systems, as outlined in Table 38-15.Sex Steroids. Adrenal androgens are produced in the zona fasciculata and reticularis from 17-hydroxypregnenolone in response to ACTH stimulation. They include dehydroepiandros-terone (DHEA) and its sulfated counterpart (DHEAS), andro-stenedione, and small amounts of testosterone and estrogen. Adrenal androgens are weakly bound to plasma albumin. They exert their major effects by peripheral conversion to the more potent testosterone and dihydrotestosterone but also have weak intrinsic androgen activity. Androgen metabolites are conju-gated as glucuronides or sulfates and excreted in the urine. Dur-ing fetal development, adrenal androgens promote the formation of male genitalia. In normal adult males, the contribution of adrenal androgens is minimal; however, they are responsible for the development of secondary sexual characteristics at puberty. Adrenal androgen excess leads to precocious puberty in boys and virilization, acne, and hirsutism in girls and women.Catecholamines. Catecholamine hormones (epinephrine, norepinephrine, and dopamine) are produced not only in the central and sympathetic nervous system but also the adrenal medulla. The substrate, tyrosine, is converted to catechol-amines via a series of steps shown in Fig. 38-41A. Phenyletha-nolamine N-methyltransferase, which converts norepinephrine to epinephrine, is only present in the adrenal medulla and the organ of Zuckerkandl. Therefore, the primary catecholamine produced may be used to distinguish adrenal medullary tumors from those situated at extra-adrenal sites. Catecholamines are stored in granules in combination with other neuropeptides, ATP, calcium, magnesium, and water-soluble proteins called chromogranins. Hormonal secretion is stimulated by various stress stimuli and mediated by the release of acetylcholine at the preganglionic nerve terminals. In the circulation, these pro-teins are bound to albumin and other proteins. Catecholamines are cleared by several mechanisms including reuptake by sym-pathetic nerve endings, peripheral inactivation by catechol O-methyltransferase and monoamine oxidase, and direct excre-tion by the kidneys. Metabolism of catecholamines takes place 2520151050Noon4 PM8 PMMidnight4 AM8 AMNoonLunchSnackSnackDinnerSleepB’fast200180160140120100806040200Plasma ACTH (pg/mL)Plasma 11-ohcs (µg/dL) Figure 38-40. Diurnal variation in cortisol levels as determined by half-hourly sampling in a 16-year-old girl. (Reproduced with permission from Krieger DT, Allen W, Rizzo F, et al: Characterization of the normal temporal pattern of plasma corticosteroid levels, J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1971 Feb;32(2):266-284.)Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   168401/03/19   11:22 AM 1685THYROID, PARATHYROID, AND ADRENALCHAPTER 38Table 38-15Functions of glucocorticoid hormonesFUNCTION/SYSTEMEFFECTSGlucose metabolismIncreased hepatic glycogen deposition, gluconeogenesis, decreased muscle glucose uptake and metabolismProtein metabolismDecreased muscle protein synthesis, increased catabolismFat metabolismIncreased lipolysis in adipose tissueConnective tissueInhibition of fibroblasts, loss of collagen, thinning of skin, striae formationSkeletal systemInhibition of bone formation, increased osteoclast activity, potentiate the action of PTHImmune systemIncreases circulation of polymorphonuclear cells; decreases numbers of lymphocytes, monocytes, and eosinophils; reduces migration of inflammatory cells to sites of injuryCardiovascular systemIncreases cardiac output and peripheral vascular toneRenal systemSodium retention, hypokalemia, hypertension via mineralocorticoid effect, increased glomerular filtration via glucocorticoid effectsEndocrine systemInhibits TSH synthesis and release, decreased TBG levels, decreased conversion of T4 to T3PTH = parathyroid hormone; T3 = 3,5’,3-triiodothyronine; T4 = thyroxine; TBG = thyroxine-binding globulin; TSH = thyroid-stimulating hormone.primarily in the liver and kidneys and leads to the formation of metabolites such as metanephrines, normetanephrines, and VMA, which may undergo further glucuronidation or sulfation before being excreted in the urine (Fig. 38-41B).Adrenergic receptors are transmembrane-spanning mol-ecules that are coupled to G proteins. They may be subdivided into α and β subtypes, which are localized in different tissues, have varying affinity to various catecholamines, and mediate distinct biologic effects (Table 38-16). The receptor affinities for α receptors are—epinephrine > norepinephrine >> isopro-terenol; β1 receptors—isoproterenol > epinephrine = norepi-nephrine; and β2 receptors—isoproterenol > epinephrine >> norepinephrine.Disorders of the Adrenal CortexHyperaldosteronism. Hyperaldosteronism may be secondary to stimulation of the renin-angiotensin system from renal artery stenosis and to low-flow states such as congestive heart failure and cirrhosis. Hyperaldosteronism resulting from these condi-tions is reversible by treatment of the underlying cause. Primary hyperaldosteronism results from autonomous aldosterone secre-tion, which, in turn, leads to suppression of renin secretion. Pri-mary aldosteronism usually occurs in individuals between the ages of 30 to 50 years old and accounts for 1% of hypertension cases. It is associated with hypokalemia; however, more patients with Conn’s syndrome are being diagnosed with normal potas-sium levels. Most cases result from a solitary functioning adre-nal adenoma (∼70%) and idiopathic bilateral hyperplasia (30%). Adrenocortical carcinoma and glucocorticoid-suppressible  hyperaldosteronism are rare, each accounting for <1% of cases. Glucocorticoid-suppressible hyperaldosteronism is an auto-somal dominant form of hypertension in which aldosterone secretion is abnormally regulated by ACTH. This condition is caused by recombinations between linked genes encoding closely related isozymes, 11b-hydroxylase (CYP11B1), and aldosterone synthase (CYP11B2) generating a dysregulated chimeric gene with aldosterone synthase activity. This entity is now designated familial hyperaldosteronism type I (FH-I). Initially, FH-III referred to patients with massive adrenal hyper-plasia refractory to glucocorticoid administration. However, the term is now more commonly used to describe patients with pri-mary hyperaldosteronism due to germline KCNJ5 mutations. This gene encodes an inward rectifier potassium channel, and the mutations affected amino acids in or close to the chan-nel’s selectivity filter. Somatic gain of function mutations are found in up to 40% of aldosterone-producing adenomas (APA).  Familial hyperaldosteronism type II refers to families in which two first-degree relatives have been diagnosed with primary hyperaldosteronism (adenoma or hyperplasia) and in whom types I and III have been excluded. Other genes mutated in (APA) include CACNA1D (encodes a voltage-gated L-type calcium channel), ATP1A1 (encodes part of the Na+-K+-ATPase), ATP2B3 (encodes the plasma membrane Ca2+ ATPase), CACNA1H (encodes the α1 subunit of the T-type voltage calcium channel), and CTNNB1 (β-catenin).97Symptoms and Signs Patients typically present with hyperten-sion, which is long-standing, moderate to severe, and may be difficult to control despite multiple-drug therapy. Other symp-toms include muscle weakness, polydipsia, polyuria, nocturia, headaches, and fatigue. Weakness and fatigue are related to the presence of hypokalemia.Diagnostic Studies Laboratory Studies. Hypokalemia is a common finding, and hyperaldosteronism must be suspected in any hypertensive patient who presents with coexisting spontaneous hypokale-mia (K <3.2 mmol/L) or hypokalemia (<3 mmol/L) while on diuretic therapy, despite potassium replacements. However, it is important to note that up to 40% of patients with a confirmed aldosteronoma were normokalemic preoperatively. Once the diagnosis is suspected, further tests are necessary to confirm the diagnosis. Before testing, patients must receive adequate sodium and potassium. Antihypertensive medications should be held, if possible, and spironolactone, β-blockers, ACE inhibitors, and angiotensin II receptor blockers should be avoided. Patients with primary hyperaldosteronism have an ele-vated plasma aldosterone concentration level with a suppressed plasma renin activity; a plasma aldosterone concentrationto-plasma renin activity ratio of 1:25 to 30 is strongly sugges-tive of the diagnosis.98 False-positive results can occur, particularly in patients with chronic renal failure. Patients with primary hyperaldosteronism also fail to suppress aldosterone levels with sodium loading. This test can be performed by performing a 24-hour urine collection for cortisol, sodium, and aldosterone after 5 days of a high-sodium diet or alternatively giving the Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   168501/03/19   11:22 AM 1686SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 38-41. A. Synthesis of catecholamines. B. Metabolism of catecholamine hormones.Tyrosine hydroxylaseL-amino acid decarboxylase Dopamine-beta-hydroxylasePhenylethanolamine-N-methyltransferaseATyrosineDopa(L-dihydroxyphenylalanine)DopamineNorepinephrineEpinephrineMAOMAOMAOMAODihydroxymandelicacid3-methoxy-4-hydroxymandelic acidCOMTCOMTCOMTEpinephrineNorepinephrineMetanephrineNormetanephrineMAO Monoamine oxidase   COMT Catechol O-methyltransferaseBBrunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   168601/03/19   11:22 AM 1687THYROID, PARATHYROID, AND ADRENALCHAPTER 38Table 38-16Catecholamine hormone receptors and effects they mediateRECEPTORTISSUEFUNCTIONα1Blood vesselsContraction GutDecreased motility, increased sphincter tone PancreasDecreased insulin and glucagon release LiverGlycogenolysis, gluconeogenesis EyesPupil dilation UterusContraction SkinSweatingα2Synapse (sympathetic)Inhibits norepinephrine release PlateletAggregationβ1HeartChronotropic, inotropic Adipose tissueLipolysis GutDecreased motility, increased sphincter tone PancreasIncreased insulin and glucagon releaseβ2Blood vesselsVasodilation BronchiolesDilation UterusRelaxationpatient 2 L of saline while in the supine position, 2 to 3 days after being on a low-sodium diet. Plasma aldosterone level  <5 ng/dL or a 24-hour urine aldosterone <14 μg after saline loading essentially rules out primary hyperaldosteronism. Once the biochemical diagnosis is confirmed, further evaluation should be directed at determining which patients have a unilat-eral aldosteronoma vs. bilateral hyperplasia because surgery is almost always curative for the former, but usually not the latter. No biochemical studies can make this distinction with 100% sensitivity; thus, imaging studies are necessary.Radiologic Studies. CT scans with 0.5-cm cuts in the adrenal area can localize aldosteronomas with a sensitivity of 90%. A unilateral 0.5to 2-cm adrenal tumor with a normal-appearing contralateral gland confirms an aldosteronoma in the presence of appropriate biochemical parameters. MRI scans are less sen-sitive but more specific, particularly if opposed phase chemi-cal shift images are obtained. MRI scans also have increased use in pregnant patients or those unable to tolerate intravenous contrast. If adrenal hyperplasia is suspected, the algorithm depicted in Fig. 38-42 is useful. Selective venous catheteriza-tion and adrenal vein sampling (AVS) for aldosterone have been demonstrated to be 95% sensitive and 90% specific in localiz-ing the aldosteronoma. In this procedure, the adrenal veins are cannulated, and blood samples for aldosterone and cortisol are obtained from both adrenal veins and the vena cava after ACTH administration.99 Measurement of cortisol levels is necessary to confirm proper placement of the catheters in the adrenal veins. A greater than fourfold difference in the aldosterone-to-cortisol ratios between the adrenal veins indicates the presence of a uni-lateral tumor. Some investigators use this study routinely, but it is invasive, requires an experienced interventional radiolo-gist, and can lead to adrenal vein rupture in approximately 1% of cases. Therefore, most groups advocate use of this modal-ity selectively in ambiguous cases, when the tumor cannot be localized and in patients with bilateral adrenal enlargement to determine whether there is unilateral or bilateral increased secretion of aldosterone.100 Additional indications for forgoing AVS include patients who are suspected of having adrenocor-tical carcinoma, those with comorbid conditions precluding surgery and those with proven familial hyperaldosteronism type I or III. Scintigraphy with 131I-6β-iodomethyl noriodocho-lesterol (NP-59) also may be used for the same purpose. Like cholesterol, this compound is taken up by the adrenal cortex, but unlike cholesterol, it remains in the gland without undergo-ing further metabolism. Adrenal adenomas appear as “hot” nod-ules with suppressed contralateral uptake, whereas hyperplastic glands show bilaterally increased uptake. This test, however, is not widely available. Newer isotopes such as 11C-metomidate in conjunction with PET-CT have also shown promise in the localization of aldosteronomas.101AdrenalectomyBilateral hyperfunctionor failure to localizeMedical managementAdrenalectomyUnilateralincreased aldosteroneCT scan or MRIUnilateral adrenal tumorusually 0.5 2 cmin diameterBilaterallyabnormal or normaladrenals1) Selective venous    catheterization for     aldosterone and     cortisol     or2) NP-59 scanFigure 38-42. Management of an adrenal aldosteronoma. CT = computed tomography; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging.Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   168701/03/19   11:22 AM 1688SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 38-43. Some characteristic features of Cushing’s  syndrome—moon facies, hirsutism, and acne.Table 38-17Etiology of Cushing’s syndromeACTH-dependent (70%) • Pituitary adenoma or Cushing’s disease (∼70%) • Ectopic ACTH productiona (∼10%) • Ectopic CRH production (<1%)ACTH-independent (20–30%) • Adrenal adenoma (10–15%) • Adrenal carcinoma (5–10%) • Adrenal hyperplasia—pigmented micronodular cortical hyperplasia or gastric inhibitory peptide-sensitive macronodular hyperplasia (5%)Other • Pseudo-Cushing’s syndrome • Iatrogenic—exogenous administration of steroidsaFrom small cell lung tumors, pancreatic islet cell tumors, medullary thyroid cancers, pheochromocytomas, and carcinoid tumors of the lung, thymus, gut, pancreas, and ovary.ACTH = adrenocorticotropic hormone; CRH = corticotrophin-releasing hormone.Treatment Preoperatively, control of hypertension and ade-quate potassium supplementation (to keep K >3.5 mmol/L) are important. Patients generally are treated with spironolactone (an aldosterone antagonist), amiloride (a potassium-sparing diuretic that blocks sodium channels in the distal nephron), nifedipine (a calcium channel blocker), or captopril (an ACE inhibitor). Unilateral tumors producing aldosterone are best managed by adrenalectomy, either by a laparoscopic approach (preferred) or via a posterior open approach. If a carcinoma is suspected because of the large size of the adrenal lesion or mixed hormone secretion, an anterior transabdominal approach is preferred to permit adequate determination of local invasion and distal metastases. Only 20% to 30% of patients with hyperaldosteron-ism secondary to bilateral adrenal hyperplasia benefit from sur-gery, and as described, selective venous catheterization is useful to predict which patients will respond. For the other patients, medical therapy with spironolactone, amiloride, or triamterene is the mainstay of management. Glucocorticoid-suppressible hyperaldosteronism is treated by administering exogenous dexa-methasone at doses of 0.5 to 1 mg daily. Treatment with spirono-lactone may help decrease glucocorticoid requirements in this condition and avoid symptoms of Cushing’s syndrome. Postop-eratively, some patients experience transient hypoaldosteronism requiring mineralocorticoids for up to 3 months. Recent studies suggest that postresection hyperkalemia may be more common and last longer than previously appreciated; therefore, it should be screened for in patients who are older and who have had a longer duration of hypertension, impaired kidney function, and higher preoperative aldosterone levels, making them a high-risk group.102 Rarely, acute Addison’s disease may occur 2 to 3 days after adrenalectomy. Adrenalectomy is >90% successful in improving hypokalemia and about 70% successful in cor-recting hypertension. Patients who respond to spironolactone therapy and those with a shorter duration of hypertension with minimal renal damage are more likely to achieve improvement in hypertension, whereas male patients, those >50 years old, and those with multiple adrenal nodules, are least likely to benefit from adrenalectomy.Cushing’s Syndrome. Cushing described patients with a pecu-liar fat deposition, amenorrhea, impotence (in men), hirsutism, purple striae, hypertension, diabetes, and other features that con-stitute the syndrome (Fig. 38-43). He also recognized that sev-eral of these patients had basophilic tumors of the pituitary gland and concluded that these tumors produced hormones that caused adrenocortical hyperplasia, thus resulting in the manifestations of the syndrome. Today, the term Cushing’s syndrome refers to a complex of symptoms and signs resulting from hypersecretion of cortisol regardless of etiology. In contrast, Cushing’s disease refers to a pituitary tumor, usually an adenoma, which leads to bilateral adrenal hyperplasia and hypercortisolism. Cushing’s syndrome (endogenous) is a rare disease, affecting 10 in 1 mil-lion individuals. It is more common in adults but may occur in children. Women are more commonly affected (male-to-female ratio is 1:8). Although most individuals have sporadic disease, Cushing’s syndrome may be found in MEN1 families and can result from ACTH-secreting pituitary tumors, primary adre-nal neoplasms, or an ectopic ACTH-secreting carcinoid tumor (more common in men) or bronchial adenoma (more common in women).Cushing’s syndrome may be classified as ACTH-dependent  or ACTH-independent (Table 38-17). The most common cause of hypercortisolism is exogenous administration of steroids. However, approximately 70% of cases of endogenous Cush-ing’s syndrome are caused by an ACTH-producing pituitary tumor. Primary adrenal sources (adenoma, hyperplasia, and Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   168801/03/19   11:22 AM 1689THYROID, PARATHYROID, AND ADRENALCHAPTER 38Table 38-18Features of Cushing’s syndromeSYSTEMMANIFESTATIONGeneralWeight gain—central obesity, buffalo hump, supraclavicular fat padsIntegumentaryHirsutism, plethora, purple striae, acne, ecchymosisCardiovascularHypertensionMusculoskeletalGeneralized weakness, osteopeniaNeuropsychiatricEmotional lability, psychosis, depressionMetabolicDiabetes or glucose intolerance, hyperlipidemiaRenalPolyuria, renal stonesGonadalImpotence, decreased libido, menstrual irregularitiescarcinoma) account for about 20% of cases, and ectopic ACTH-secreting tumors account for <10% of cases. CRH also may be secreted ectopically in bronchial carcinoid tumors, pheochro-mocytomas, and other tumors. These patients are difficult to distinguish from those with ectopic ACTH production, but can be diagnosed by determining CRH levels. Patients with major depression, alcoholism, pregnancy, chronic renal failure, or stress also may have elevated cortisol levels and symptoms of hypercortisolism. However, these manifestations resolve with treatment of the underlying disorder, and these patients are deemed to have pseudo-Cushing’s syndrome.Primary adrenal hyperplasia may be micronodular, mac-ronodular, or massively macronodular. Adrenal hyperplasia resulting from ACTH stimulation usually is macronodular (3-cm nodules). Primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease is a rare cause of ACTH-independent Cushing’s syndrome, which is characterized by the presence of small (<5 mm), black adrenal nodules. Primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease may be associated with Carney complex (atrial myxomas, schwanno-mas, and pigmented nevi) and is thought to be immune related.Symptoms and Signs The classical features of Cushing’s syn-drome are listed in Table 38-18. Early diagnosis of this disease requires a thorough knowledge of these manifestations, coupled with a high clinical suspicion. In some patients, symptoms are less pronounced and may be more difficult to recognize, par-ticularly given their diversity and the absence of a single defin-ing symptom or sign. Progressive truncal obesity is the most common symptom, occurring in up to 95% of patients. This pattern results from the lipogenic action of excessive corti-costeroids centrally and catabolic effects peripherally, along with peripheral muscle wasting. Fat deposition also occurs in unusual sites, such as the supraclavicular space and posterior neck region, leading to the so-called buffalo hump. Purple striae are often visible on the protuberant abdomen. Rounding of the face leads to moon facies, and thinning of subcutaneous tis-sues leads to plethora. There is an increase in fine hair growth on the face, upper back, and arms, although true virilization is more commonly seen with adrenocortical cancers. Endocrine abnormalities include glucose intolerance, amenorrhea, and decreased libido or impotence. In children, Cushing’s syndrome is characterized by obesity and stunted growth. Patients with Cushing’s disease also may present with headaches, visual field defects, and panhypopituitarism. Hyperpigmentation of the skin, if present, suggests an ectopic ACTH-producing tumor with high levels of circulating ACTH.Diagnostic Tests The aims of diagnostic tests in the evalua-tion of patients suspected of having Cushing’s syndrome are twofold: to confirm the presence of Cushing’s syndrome and to determine its etiology (Fig. 38-44).Laboratory Studies. Cushing’s syndrome is characterized by elevated glucocorticoid levels that are not suppressible by exog-enous hormone administration and loss of diurnal variation. This phenomenon is used to screen patients using the overnight low-dose dexamethasone suppression test. In this test, 1 mg of a synthetic glucocorticoid (dexamethasone) is given at 11 p.m. and plasma cortisol levels are measured at 8 a.m. the following morning. Physiologically normal adults suppress cortisol levels to <3 μg/dL, whereas most patients with Cushing’s syndrome do not. False-negative results may be obtained in patients with mild disease; therefore, some authors consider the test positive only if cortisol levels are suppressed to <1.8 μg/dL. False-positive results can occur in up to 3% of patients with chronic renal fail-ure, depression, or those taking medications such as phenytoin, which enhance dexamethasone metabolism. In patients with a negative test but a high clinical suspicion, the classic low-dose dexamethasone (0.5 mg every 6 hours for eight doses, or 2 mg over 48 hours) suppression test or urinary cortisol measurement should be performed. Measurement of elevated 24-hour urinary cortisol levels is a very sensitive (95–100%) and specific (98%) modality of diagnosing Cushing’s syndrome and is particularly useful for identifying patients with pseudo-Cushing’s syn-drome. A urinary cortisol-free excretion of less than 100 μg/dL  (in most laboratories) rules out hypercortisolism. Recently, salivary cortisol measurements using commercially available kits also have demonstrated superior sensitivity in diagnosing Cushing’s syndrome and are being increasingly used. Overall, 24-hour urinary tests for free cortisol and the overnight dexa-methasone suppression test at the 5 μg/dL cutoff have the high-est specificity for the diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome.103Once a diagnosis of hypercortisolism is established, further testing is aimed at determining whether it is ACTH-dependent or ACTH-independent Cushing’s syndrome. This is best accom-plished by measurement of plasma ACTH levels (normal 10–100 pg/mL). Elevated ACTH levels are found in patients with adrenal hyperplasia due to Cushing’s disease (15–500 pg/mL) and those with CRH-secreting tumors, but the highest levels are found in patients with ectopic sources of ACTH (>1000 pg/mL). In con-trast, ACTH levels are characteristically suppressed (<5 pg/mL) in patients with primary cortisol-secreting adrenal tumors. The high-dose dexamethasone suppression test is used to distinguish between the causes of ACTH-dependent Cushing’s syndrome (pituitary vs. ectopic). The standard test (2 mg dexamethasone every 6 hours for 2 days) or the overnight test (8 mg) may be used, with 24-hour urine collections for cortisol and 17-hydroxy steroids performed over the second day. Failure to suppress urinary cortisol by 50% confirms the diagnosis of an ectopic ACTH-producing tumor. Patients suspected of having ectopic tumors should also undergo testing for MTC and pheochro-mocytoma. Bilateral petrosal vein sampling also is helpful for determining whether the patient has Cushing’s disease or ecto-pic Cushing’s syndrome.Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   168901/03/19   11:22 AM 1690SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIThe CRH test also is helpful in determining the etiology of Cushing’s syndrome. Ovine CRH (1 μg/kg) is administered intravenously, followed by serial measurements of ACTH and cortisol at 15-minute intervals for 1 hour. Patients with a primary adrenal hypercortisolism exhibit a blunted response (ACTH peak <10 pg/mL), whereas those with ACTH-dependent Cushing’s syndrome demonstrate a higher elevation of ACTH  (>30 pg/mL). CRH stimulation also can enhance the useful-ness of petrosal vein sampling. Patients with pituitary tumors also have a higher peak ACTH than those with ectopic ACTHproducing tumors.Radiologic Studies. CT and MRI scans of the abdomen can identify adrenal tumors with 95% sensitivity. They also are helpful in distinguishing adrenal adenomas from carcinomas, as discussed in the subsequent section “Adrenocortical Cancer.” MRI scans have the added advantage of allowing assessment of vascular anatomy. Adrenal adenomas appear darker than the liver on T2-weighted imaging. Radioscintigraphic imag-ing of the adrenals using NP-59 also can be used to distinguish adenoma from hyperplasia. Reports suggest that “cold” adrenal nodules are more likely to be cancerous, although this distinc-tion is not absolute. NP-59 scanning is most useful in identi-fying patients with an adrenal source of hypercortisolism and primary pigmented micronodular hyperplasia.Thin-section head CT scans are 22% sensitive, and  contrast-enhanced brain MRI scans are 33% to 67% sensitive at identifying pituitary tumors. Inferior petrosal sinus sampling for ACTH before and after CRH injection has been helpful in this regard and has a sensitivity approaching 100%. In this study, catheters are placed in both internal jugular veins and a periph-eral vein. A ratio of petrosal to peripheral vein ACTH level of >2 in the basal state and >3 after CRH stimulation is diagnostic 1) Overnight DST2) 24-hour urinary free cortisol3) 11:00 pm salivary cortisol1) Plasma ACTH2) High-dose DST and    urinary cortisolConfirm the diagnosisACTH gradient?Determine source of hypercortisolismDecreased ACTHLack of suppressionCT scan adrenalsIncreased ACTHPositive Increased ACTHLack of suppressionEquivocalresultsFurther testingBilateral petrosalvein samplingAdrenalsourcePituitarysourceEctopic ACTHsourceSTEPS IN DIAGNOSISDIAGNOSTIC STUDIESYesNoFigure 38-44. Diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome. ACTH = adrenocorticotropic hormone; CT = computed tomography; DST = dexamethasone suppression test.Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   169001/03/19   11:22 AM 1691THYROID, PARATHYROID, AND ADRENALCHAPTER 38of a pituitary tumor. In patients suspected of having ectopic ACTH production, CT or MRI scans of the chest and anterior mediastinum are performed first, followed by imaging of the neck, abdomen, and pelvis if the initial studies are negative.Treatment Laparoscopic adrenalectomy is the treatment of choice for patients with adrenal adenomas. Open adrenalectomy is reserved for large tumors (≥6 cm) or those suspected to be adrenocortical cancers. Bilateral adrenalectomy is curative for primary adrenal hyperplasia.The treatment of choice in Cushing’s disease is transsphe-noidal excision of the pituitary adenoma, which is successful in 80% of patients. Pituitary irradiation has been used for patients with persistent or recurrent disease after surgery. However, it is associated with a high rate of panhypopituitarism, and some patients develop visual deficits. This has led to increased use of stereotactic radiosurgery, which uses CT guidance to deliver high doses of radiotherapy to the tumor (photon or gamma knife) and also bilateral laparoscopic adrenalectomy. Patients who fail to respond to either treatment are candidates for pharmacologic therapy with adrenal inhibitors (medical adrenalectomy) such as ketoconazole, metyrapone, or aminoglutethimide.Patients with ectopic ACTH production are best managed by treating the primary tumor, including recurrences, if possible. Medical or bilateral laparoscopic adrenalectomy has been used to palliate patients with unresectable disease and those whose ectopic ACTH-secreting tumor cannot be localized.Patients undergoing surgery for a primary adrenal ade-noma secreting glucocorticoids require preoperative and post-operative steroids due to suppression of the contralateral adrenal gland. These patients are also at increased predisposition for infectious and thromboembolic complications, the latter due to a hypercoagulable state resulting from an increase in clotting factors including factor VIII and von Willebrand’s factor com-plex, and by impaired fibrinolysis. Duration of steroid therapy is determined by the ACTH stimulation test. Exogenous ste-roids may be needed for up to 2 years but are needed indefi-nitely in patients who have undergone bilateral adrenalectomy. This latter group of patients also may require mineralocorticoid replacement therapy. Typical replacement doses include hydro-cortisone (10–20 mg every morning and 5–10 mg every eve-ning) and fludrocortisone (0.05–0.1 mg/d every morning).Adrenocortical Cancer. Adrenal carcinomas are rare neo-plasms with a worldwide incidence of two per 1 million. These tumors have a bimodal age distribution, with an increased inci-dence in children and adults in the fourth and fifth decades of life. The majority are sporadic, but adrenocortical carcinomas also occur in association with germline mutations of p53 (Li-Fraumeni syndrome) and MENIN (multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1) genes. Loci on 11p (Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome), 2p (Carney complex), and 9q also have been implicated. Somatic p53 mutations are present in up to 33% of tumors, and LOH at the p53 locus has been reported in >85% of adreno-cortical carcinomas. In addition, insulin-like growth factor II is overexpressed in 90% of tumors, and approximately 30% harbor somatic activating mutations in the b-catenin gene. Recently identified genes mutated in adrenal cancers include ZNRF3 (an E3 ubiquitin ligase) and others involved in chromatin modeling and several microRNAs. Patterns of mutations may also help better define prognosis in adrenocortical cancers.104Symptoms and Signs Approximately 50% of adrenocorti-cal cancers are nonfunctioning. The remaining secrete cortisol (30%), androgens (20%), estrogens (10%), aldosterone (2%), or multiple hormones (35%). Patients with functioning tumors often present with the rapid onset of Cushing’s syndrome accompanied by virilizing features. Nonfunctioning tumors more commonly present with an enlarging abdominal mass and abdominal or back pain. Rarely, weight loss, anorexia, and nau-sea may be present.Diagnostic Tests Diagnostic evaluation of these patients begins with measurement of serum electrolyte levels to rule out hypokalemia, urinary catecholamines to rule out pheochromo-cytomas, an overnight 1-mg dexamethasone suppression test, and a 24-hour urine collection for cortisol, and 17-ketosteroids to rule out Cushing’s syndrome.CT and MRI scans are useful to image these tumors  (Fig. 38-45). The size of the adrenal mass on imaging studies is the single most important criterion to help diagnose malig-nancy. In the series reported by Copeland, 92% of adrenal can-cers were >6 cm in diameter.105 The sensitivity, specificity, and likelihood ratio of tumor size in predicting malignancy (based on Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results program data) were reported as 96%, 51%, and 2 for tumors ≥4 cm, and 90%, 78%, and 4.1 for tumors ≥6 cm.106 Other CT imaging charac-teristics suggesting malignancy include tumor heterogeneity, irregular margins, and the presence of hemorrhage and adjacent lymphadenopathy or liver metastases. Moderately bright signal intensity on T2-weighted images (adrenal mass–to–liver ratio 1.2:2.8), significant lesion enhancement, and slow washout after injection of gadolinium contrast also indicate malignancy, as does evidence of local invasion into adjacent structures such as the liver, blood vessels (IVC), and distant metastases. FDG-PET or PET-CT scans may have some utility in distinguishing benign from malignant lesions, as discussed in the section on incidentalomas. Once adrenal cancer is diagnosed, CT scans of the chest and pelvis or FDG-PET or PET-CT scans are per-formed for staging. The tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) staging system for adrenocortical carcinoma is depicted in Table 38-19. Up to 70% of patients present with stage III or IV disease.Pathology Most adrenocortical cancers are large, weigh-ing between 100 and 1000 g. On gross examination, areas of Figure 38-45. Computed tomography scan of the abdomen show-ing a left adrenocortical cancer with synchronous liver metastasis.Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   169101/03/19   11:22 AM 1692SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIhemorrhage and necrosis often are evident. Microscopically, cells are hyperchromatic and typically have large nuclei and prominent nucleoli. It is very difficult to distinguish benign adrenal adenomas from carcinomas by histologic examination alone. Capsular or vascular invasion is the most reliable sign of cancer. Weiss and associates studied a combination of nine criteria for their usefulness in distinguishing malignant from benign adrenal tumors: nuclear grade III or IV; mitotic rate greater than 5 per 50 high-power fields; atypical mitoses; clear cells comprising 25% or less of the tumor; a diffuse architecture; microscopic necrosis; and invasion of venous, sinusoidal, and capsular structure. Tumors with four or more of these criteria were likely to metastasize and/or recur.107 Rarely, the diagnosis of malignancy of a completely resected adrenal tumor is often only made in retrospect by the finding of metastatic disease many years later. Molecular markers such as Ki67 (indicating proliferative activity) can also be useful in this regard.Treatment The most important predictor of survival in patients with adrenal cancer is the adequacy of resection. Patients who undergo complete resection have 5-year actuarial survival rates ranging from 32% to 48%, whereas median survival is <1 year in those undergoing incomplete excision. Therefore, adrenocor-tical carcinomas are treated by excision of the tumor en bloc with any contiguously involved lymph nodes or organs such as the diaphragm, kidney, pancreas, liver, or IVC. This is best accomplished by open adrenalectomy via a generous subcostal incision or a thoracoabdominal incision (on the right side). The incisions should permit wide exposure, minimize chances of capsule rupture and tumor spillage, and allow vascular control of the aorta, IVC, and renal vessels, as needed.Mitotane or o,p-DDD or 1,1-dichloro-2-(o-chlorophenyl)-2-(p-chlorophenyl) ethane, which is a derivative of the insec-ticide DDT, has adrenolytic activity and has been used in the adjuvant setting and for the treatment of unresectable or metastatic disease. However, the therapeutic effectiveness is conflicting, and consistent improvement in survival rates is lacking. Moreover, the drug is associated with significant GI and neurologic side effects, particularly at the effective doses of 2 to 6 g/d. Terzolo and associates retrospectively evaluated the use of mitotane in the adjuvant setting and reported signifi-cantly increased recurrence-free survival in the treatment group, even in long-term follow-up.108,109 However, a study of several centers in the United States failed to show similar results.110 The routine use of this medication awaits evaluation in random-ized, controlled trials. Determination of blood mitotane levels is helpful to ascertain whether therapeutic and nontoxic levels are  present. Adrenocortical tumors commonly metastasize to the liver, lung, and bone.Surgical debulking is recommended for isolated, recurrent disease and has been demonstrated to prolong survival. Sys-temic chemotherapeutic agents used in this tumor include etopo-side, cisplatin, doxorubicin, and, more recently, paclitaxel, but consistent responses are rare, possibly due to the expression of the multidrug resistance gene (MDR-1) in tumor cells. In vitro data indicate that mitotane may be able to reverse this resistance when combined with various chemotherapeutic agents. Results from the First International Randomized Trial in Advanced or Metastatic Adrenocortical Carcinoma Treatment (FIRM-ACT) showed that patients receiving etoposide, doxorubicin, cispla-tin, and mitotane had better response rates and progression-free survival rates than patients receiving streptozotocin and  mitotane.111 There has been recent interest in the use of sura-min, a growth factor inhibitor, as therapy for adrenocortical carcinoma; however, this requires further study, particularly because this drug may be associated with significant neurotoxic-ity. Gossypol, a naturally occurring insecticide (from the cotton plant Gossypium species), also appears to inhibit the growth of adrenocortical cancer cell lines and tumors in vivo. However, poor response rates combined with high death rates in limited clinical studies have reduced enthusiasm for this agent. Adre-nocortical cancers also are relatively insensitive to conventional external-beam radiation therapy. However, this modality is used in the adjuvant setting in patients with incomplete resections and palliation of bony metastases. Ketoconazole, metyrapone, or aminoglutethimide may also be useful in controlling steroid hypersecretion. Targeted molecular therapies such as VEGF/EGF-receptor inhibitors, tyrosine-kinase inhibitors, and IGF-2 inhibitors have had disappointing results in patients with ACC.Sex Steroid Excess. Adrenal adenomas or carcinomas that secrete adrenal androgens lead to virilizing syndromes. Although women with virilizing tumors develop hirsutism, amenorrhea, infertility, and other signs of masculinization, such as increased muscle mass, deepened voice, and temporal bald-ing, men with these tumors are more difficult to diagnose and, hence, usually present with disease in advanced stages. Chil-dren with virilizing tumors have accelerated growth, premature development of facial and pubic hair, acne, genital enlargement, and deepening of their voice. Feminizing adrenal tumors are less common and occur in men in the third to fifth decades of life. These tumors lead to gynecomastia, impotence, and testicular atrophy. Women with these tumors develop irregular menses or dysfunctional uterine bleeding. Vaginal bleeding may occur in postmenopausal women. Girls with these tumors experience precocious puberty with breast enlargement and early menarche.Diagnostic Tests Virilizing tumors produce excessive amounts of the androgen precursor, DHEA, which can be measured Table 38-19TNM Staging for adrenocortical cancerTUMORNODEMETASTASISSTAGET1N0M0IT2N0M0IIT1N1M0IIIT2N1M0IIIT3Any NM0IIIT4Any NM0IIIAny TAny NM1IVPrimary tumor (T): T1, size ≤5 cm without local invasion; T2, size >5 cm without local invasion; T3, any size with local invasion but no involvement of adjacent organs; T4, any size with involvement of adjacent organs.Nodes (N): N0, no involvement of regional nodes; N1, positive regional lymph nodes.Metastasis (M): M0, no known distal metastases: M1, distant metastases present.Used with the permission of the American College of Surgeons. Amin MB, Edge SB, Greene FL, et al. (Eds.) AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, 8th Ed. Springer New York, 2017.Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   169201/03/19   11:22 AM 1693THYROID, PARATHYROID, AND ADRENALCHAPTER 38in plasma or urine as 17-ketosteroids. Patients with feminiz-ing tumors also have elevated urinary 17-ketosteroids in addi-tion to increased estrogen levels. Androgen-producing tumors often are associated with production of other hormones such as glucocorticoids.Treatment Virilizing and feminizing tumors are treated by adrenalectomy. Malignancy is difficult to diagnose histologi-cally but is suggested by the presence of local invasion, recur-rence, or distal metastases. Adrenolytic drugs such as mitotane, aminoglutethimide, and ketoconazole may be useful in control-ling symptoms in patients with metastatic disease.Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia. CAH refers to a group of disorders that result from deficiencies or complete absence of enzymes involved in adrenal steroidogenesis. 21-Hydroxylase (CYP21A2) deficiency is the most common enzymatic defect, accounting for >90% of cases of CAH. This deficiency pre-vents the production of 11-deoxycortisol and 11-DOC from progesterone precursors. Deficiency of glucocorticoids and aldosterone leads to elevated ACTH levels and overproduction of adrenal androgens and corticosteroid precursors such as 17hydroxyprogesterone and Δ4-androstenedione. These com-pounds are converted to testosterone in the peripheral tis-sues, thereby leading to virilization. Complete deficiency of 21-hydroxylase presents at birth with virilization, diarrhea, hypovolemia, hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, and hyperpig-mentation. Partial enzyme deficiency may present at birth or later with virilizing features. These patients are less prone to the salt wasting that characterizes complete enzyme deficiency. 11β-Hydroxylase deficiency is the second most common form of CAH and leads to hypertension (from 11-DOC accumula-tion), virilization, and hyperpigmentation. Other enzyme defi-ciencies include 3β-hydroxydehydrogenase and 17-hydroxylase deficiency. Congenital adrenal lipoid hyperplasia is the most severe form of CAH, which is caused by cholesterol desmolase deficiency. It leads to the disruption of all steroid biosynthetic pathways, thus resulting in a fatal salt-wasting syndrome in phe-notypic female patients.Diagnostic Tests The particular enzyme deficiency can be diagnosed by karyotype analysis and measurement of plasma and urinary steroids. The most common enzyme defi-ciency, absence of 21-hydroxylase, leads to increased plasma 17-hydroxyprogesterone and progesterone levels because these compounds cannot be converted to 11-deoxycortisol and 11-DOC, respectively. 11β-Hydroxylase deficiency is the next most common disorder and results in elevated plasma 11-DOC and 11-deoxycortisol. Urinary 17-hydroxyprogesterone, andro-gens, and 17-ketosteroids also are elevated. The dexamethasone suppression test (2–4 mg divided four times a day for 7 days) can be used to distinguish adrenal hyperplasia from neoplasia. CT, MRI, and iodocholesterol scans generally are used to local-ize the tumors.Treatment Patients with CAH traditionally have been man-aged medically, with cortisol and mineralocorticoid replacement to suppress the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. However, the doses of steroids required often are supraphysiologic and lead to iatrogenic hypercortisolism. More recently, bilateral laparoscopic adrenalectomy has been proposed as an alternative treatment for this disease and has been successfully performed in a limited number of patients for various forms of CAH.Disorders of the Adrenal MedullaPheochromocytomas. Pheochromocytomas are rare tumors with prevalence rates ranging from 0.3% to 0.95% in autopsy series and approximately 1.9% in series using biochemical screening. They can occur at any age, with a peak incidence in the fourth and fifth decades of life, and have no gender predilec-tion. Extra-adrenal tumors, also called functional paraganglio-mas, may be found at sites of sympathetic ganglia in the organ of Zuckerkandl, neck, mediastinum, abdomen, and pelvis. Pheo-chromocytomas often are called the 10 percent tumor because 10% are bilateral, 10% are malignant, 10% occur in pediatric patients, 10% are extra-adrenal, and 10% are familial.Pheochromocytomas occur in families with MEN2A and MEN2B in approximately 50% of patients. Both syndromes are inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion and are caused by germline mutations in the RET proto-oncogene. Another syndrome with an increased risk of pheochromocytomas is von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease, which also is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. This syndrome also includes retinal angioma, hemangioblastomas of the central nervous system, renal cysts and carcinomas, pancreatic cysts, and epi-didymal cystadenomas. The incidence of pheochromocytomas in the syndrome is approximately 14%. The gene causing VHL has been mapped to chromosome 3p and is a tumor suppres-sor gene. Pheochromocytomas also are included within the tumor spectrum of neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1 gene) and other neuroectodermal disorders (Sturge-Weber syndrome and tuberous sclerosis), Carney’s syndrome (gastric epithelioid leio-myosarcoma, pulmonary chondroma, and extra-adrenal para-ganglioma), MEN1 syndrome, and the familial paraganglioma and pheochromocytoma syndrome are caused by mutations in the succinyl dehydrogenase family of genes (SDHB, SDHC, and SDHD), which comprise portions of the mitochondrial complex II.112 More recently, mutations in SDHA and SDH5 have also been identified. Additional susceptibility loci include TMEM127 (involved in the mTORC1-signaling pathway) and MAX (myc-associated factor X).Symptoms and Signs Headache, palpitations, and diaphoresis constitute the “classic triad” of pheochromocytomas. Symp-toms such as anxiety, tremulousness, paresthesias, flushing, chest pain, shortness of breath, abdominal pain, nausea, vomit-ing, and others are nonspecific and may be episodic in nature. Cardiovascular complications such as myocardial infarction and cerebrovascular accidents may ensue. These symptoms can be incited by a range of stimuli including exercise, micturition, and defecation. The most common clinical sign is hyperten-sion. Pheochromocytomas are one of the few curable causes of hypertension and are found in 0.1% to 0.2% of hypertensive patients. Hypertension related to this tumor may be paroxys-mal with intervening normotension, sustained with paroxysms or sustained hypertension alone. Sudden death may occur in patients with undiagnosed tumors who undergo other surgeries or biopsy.Diagnostic Tests Biochemical Studies. Pheochromocytomas are diagnosed by testing 24-hour urine samples for catecholamines and their metab-olites as well as by determining plasma metanephrine levels.  Urinary metanephrines are 98% sensitive and also about 98% specific for pheochromocytomas, whereas VMA measure-ments are slightly less sensitive and specific. False-positive VMA tests may result from ingestion of caffeine, raw fruits, Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   169301/03/19   11:22 AM 1694SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIBAFigure 38-46. A left-sided pheochromocytoma (arrows) imaged by a computed tomography scan of the abdomen (A) and a metaiodoben-zylguanidine scan viewed posteriorly (B).or medications (α-methyldopa). Fractionated urinary catechol-amines (norepinephrine, epinephrine, and dopamine) also are very sensitive but less specific for pheochromocytomas. Because extraadrenal sites lack phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase, these tumors secrete norepinephrine, whereas epinephrine is the main hormone secreted from adrenal pheochromocytomas. Many physiologic and pathologic states can alter the levels of plasma catecholamines. Hence, they often are thought to be less accurate than urinary tests. Both epinephrine and norepi-nephrine should be measured, as tumors often secrete one or the other hormone. Sensitivities of 85% and specificities of 95% have been reported using cutoff values of 2000 pg/mL for norepinephrine and 200 pg/mL for epinephrine. Clonidine is an agent that suppresses neurogenically mediated catecholamine excess but not secretion from pheochromocytomas. A normal clonidine suppression test is defined by a decrease of basal cate-cholamine levels to <500 pg/mL within 2 to 3 hours after an oral dose of 0.3 mg of clonidine. Chromogranin A is a monomeric, acidic protein, which is stored in the adrenal medulla and other neuroendocrine tumors and released along with catecholamine hormones. It has been reported to have a sensitivity of 83% and a specificity of 96% and is useful in conjunction with catechol-amine measurement for diagnosing pheochromocytomas. Some studies have shown that plasma metanephrines should be the first-line test to identify pheochromocytomas, as the predictive value of a negative test is very high and normal levels exclude pheochromocytoma in patients with preclinical disease or dopa-mine secreting tumors. Although sensitivities of 96% to 100% have been reported, specificity is lower at 85% to 89% and may be much lower at 77% in elderly patients. Although attractive because of the simplicity of a blood test, measurement of plasma metanephrines is generally reserved for cases for which there is a high index of suspicion.Radiologic Studies. Radiologic studies are useful to localize tumors and to assess the extent of spread once the diagnosis has been made with biochemical tests. CT scans are 85% to 95% sensitive and 70% to 100% specific for pheochromocytomas (Fig. 38-46A). The scans should be performed without con-trast to minimize the risk of precipitating a hypertensive crisis, although some recent studies suggest that intravenous contrast may be used. Images should include the region from the dia-phragm to the aortic bifurcation so as to include the organ of Zuckerkandl. CT scans do not provide functional information and cannot definitively diagnose pheochromocytomas. MRI scans are 95% sensitive and almost 100% specific for pheo-chromocytomas because these tumors have a characteristic appearance on T2-weighted images or after gadolinium. MRI is also the study of choice in pregnant women as there is no risk of radiation exposure. Metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) is taken up and concentrated by vesicles in the adrenal medullar cells because its structure is similar to norepinephrine. Normal adrenal medullary tissue does not take up appreciable MIBG. 131I-radiolabeled MIBG is, therefore, useful for localizing pheo-chromocytomas (Fig. 38-46B), especially those in ectopic posi-tions. This test has a reported sensitivity of 77% to 89% and a specificity ranging from 88% to 100%.Treatment The medical management of pheochromocytomas is aimed chiefly at blood pressure control and volume repletion. Irreversible, long-acting α-blockers such as phenoxybenzamine are started 1 to 3 weeks before surgery at doses of 10 mg twice daily, which may be increased to 300 to 400 mg/d with rehydra-tion. Patients should be warned about orthostatic hypotension. β-Blockers such as propranolol at doses of 10 to 40 mg every  6 to 8 hours often need to be added preoperatively in patients who have persistent tachycardia and arrhythmias. β-Blockers should only be instituted after adequate α-blockade and hydration to avoid the effects of unopposed α stimulation (i.e., hypertensive crisis and congestive heart failure) and are typically initiated 3 to 4 days preoperatively. Patients also should be volume repleted preoperatively to avoid postoperative hypotension, which ensues with the loss of vasoconstriction after tumor removal. Other α-blockers such as prazosin, terazosin, and doxazosin, which are selective α1-adrenergic blockers, have a better side effect profile and are preferable to phenoxybenzamine when long-term Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   169401/03/19   11:22 AM 1695THYROID, PARATHYROID, AND ADRENALCHAPTER 38pharmacologic therapy is needed, as in patients with metastatic pheochromocytoma. Nicardipine is the most commonly used calcium channel blocker and inhibits norepinephrine-mediated calcium transport into vascular smooth muscle. When used as the primary mode of treatment, it appears to be just as effec-tive as αand β-blockade preoperatively and for intraoperative hemodynamics.113 In some patients, catecholamine-synthesis inhibitors such as α-methyl-p-l-tyrosine (metyrosine) may need to be added if standard αand β-blockade is poorly tolerated or is ineffective in reaching target blood pressure and when moder-ate intraoperative tumor manipulation is anticipated.Adrenalectomy is the treatment of choice for patients with pheochromocytoma. The chief goal of surgery is to resect the tumor completely with minimal tumor manipulation or rupture of the tumor capsule. Surgery should be performed with both noninvasive and invasive monitors, including an arterial line and central venous lines. In patients with congestive heart failure or underlying coronary artery disease, Swan-Ganz catheters may be necessary. Stress must be avoided during anesthesia induc-tion, and use of inhaled agents like isoflurane and enflurane are preferred because they have minimal cardiac depressant effects. Fentanyl, ketamine, and morphine should be avoided as they can potentially stimulate catecholamine release from the tumor. The common medications used for intraoperative blood pres-sure control include nitroprusside, nitroglycerin, phentolamine, and nicardipine. Intraoperative arrhythmias are best managed by short-acting β-blockers such as esmolol. Adrenalectomy usu-ally was performed via an open anterior approach to facilitate detection of bilateral tumors, extra-adrenal lesions, or metastatic lesions. However, most pheochromocytomas <5 cm in diameter can be safely resected laparoscopically. Postoperatively, these patients are prone to hypotension due to loss of adrenergic stim-ulation and consequent vasodilatation and therefore need large volume resuscitation.Hereditary Pheochromocytomas. Inherited pheochromo-cytomas tend to be multiple and bilateral. Generally, unilat-eral adrenalectomy is recommended in the absence of obvious lesions in the contralateral adrenal gland because of Addison’s disease, requiring lifelong steroid replacement in patients under-going bilateral adrenalectomy. For patients with tumors in both adrenal glands, cortical-sparing subtotal adrenalectomy may preserve adrenocortical function and avoid the morbidity of bilateral total adrenalectomy. Laparoscopic subtotal adrenal-ectomy has been shown to provide short-term clinical results comparable to total adrenalectomy, with reduced surgical morbidity and may be done as a unilateral or bilateral subtotal  procedure.114 However, these patients remain at risk for recur-rent pheochromocytoma, which has been reported in 20% of patients with VHL disease a median of 40 months after partial adrenalectomy, and in 33% of MEN2 patients followed for 54 to 88 months after surgery. Autotransplantation of adrenocortical tissue after total adrenalectomy may be another option for these patients. However, the transplanted cortical tissue rarely pro-vides full function, and steroid replacement usually is required.Malignant Pheochromocytomas. Approximately 12% to 29% of pheochromocytomas are malignant, and these tumors are associated with decreased survival. There are no definitive histologic criteria defining malignant pheochromocytomas. In fact, pleomorphism, nuclear atypia, and abundant mitotic fig-ures are seen in benign tumors. Capsular and vascular invasion may be seen in benign lesions as well. Malignancy usually is diagnosed when there is evidence of invasion into surrounding structures or distant metastases. The most common sites for met-astatic disease are bone, liver, regional lymph nodes, lung, and peritoneum, although the brain, pleura, skin, and muscles may also occasionally be involved. Some studies also suggest that older patient age and larger tumors are associated with a higher risk of malignancy. Although risk of malignancy increases with size for all pheochromocytomas, size does not seem to reliably predict malignancy in pheochromocytomas with local disease only.115 Given this difficulty of defining malignancy clinically (in the absence of metastatic disease), a number of other features such as DNA ploidy, tumor size, and necrosis, neuropeptide Y mRNA expression, and serum neuron-specific enolase expres-sion have been studied. Malignant pheochromocytomas are more likely to express p53 and bcl-2 and have activated telom-erase. Recent data suggest that flow cytometry and molecular markers such as expression of Ki-67, tissue inhibitor of metal-loproteinase, and COX-2 also have shown some use in deter-mining malignancy. When pheochromocytomas develop in the MEN syndromes, they rarely are malignant. In contrast, patients with germline SDHB mutations appear to have a higher propen-sity for extra-adrenal and malignant tumors. In general, soft tis-sue lesions are treated with resection if feasible. External-beam radiation can be used for unresectable lesions or symptomatic skeletal metastases. Therapeutic 131I-MIBG irradiation may be useful in patients with diffuse disease showing 123-I-MIBG uptake on a diagnostic scan. Chemotherapy regimens typically use cyclophosphamide, vincristine, and dacarbazine with vari-able response rates. However, molecular targeted therapies such as sunitinib have shown some promising results.The Adrenal IncidentalomaAdrenal lesions discovered during imaging performed for unre-lated reasons are referred to as incidentalomas. This definition excludes tumors discovered on imaging studies performed for evaluating symptoms of hormone hypersecretion or staging patients with known cancer. The incidence of these lesions iden-tified by CT scans ranges from 0.4% to 4.4%.Differential Diagnosis. The differential diagnosis of adre-nal incidentalomas is shown in Table 38-20. Nonfunctional cortical adenomas account for the majority (36–94%) of adre-nal incidentalomas in patients without a history of cancer. In a series of patients from the Mayo Clinic, no nonfunctional Table 38-20Differential diagnosis of adrenal incidentalomaFUNCTIONING LESIONSNONFUNCTIONING LESIONSBenignBenign Aldosteronoma Cortisol-producing   adenoma Sex steroid–producing   adenoma Pheochromocytoma Cortical adenoma Myelolipoma Cyst Ganglioneuroma HemorrhageMalignant Adrenocortical cancer Metastasis Malignant pheochromocytoma Adrenocortical cancerBrunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   169501/03/19   11:22 AM 1696SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIlesion progressed to cause clinical or biochemical abnormali-ties. However, other studies indicate that 5% to 20% of patients with apparently nonfunctioning cortical adenomas have under-lying, subtle abnormalities of glucocorticoid secretion, and a rare benign-appearing incidentaloma is a cancer.By definition, patients with incidentalomas do not have clinically overt Cushing’s syndrome, but subclinical Cushing’s syndrome is estimated to occur in approximately 8% of patients. This disorder is characterized by subtle fea-tures of cortisol excess, such as weight gain, skin atrophy, facial fullness, diabetes, and hypertension, accompanied by loss of normal diurnal variation in cortisol secretion, autonomous cor-tisol secretion, and resistance to suppression by dexamethasone. Total cortisol produced and 24-hour urinary cortisol levels may be normal. Examination of the natural history of subclinical Cushing’s syndrome indicates that, although most patients remain asymptomatic, some do progress to clinically evident Cushing’s syndrome. Furthermore, cases of postoperative adre-nal crisis from unrecognized suppression of the contralateral adrenal have been reported, making preoperative identification of this condition imperative, particularly in the era of early dis-charge following laparoscopic adrenalectomy.The adrenal is a common site of metastases of lung and breast tumors, melanoma, renal cell cancer, and lymphoma. In patients with a history of nonadrenal cancer and a unilat-eral adrenal mass, the incidence of metastatic disease has been reported to range from 32% to 73%. Myelolipomas are benign, biochemically nonfunctioning lesions composed of ele-ments of hematopoietic and mature adipose tissue, which are rare causes of adrenal incidentaloma. Other less commonly encountered lesions include adrenal cysts, ganglioneuromas, and hemorrhage.Diagnostic Investigations. The diagnostic workup of an adrenal incidentaloma is aimed at identifying patients who would benefit from adrenalectomy (i.e., patients with function-ing tumors and tumors at increased risk of being malignant). It is not necessary for asymptomatic patients whose imaging studies are consistent with obvious cysts, hemorrhage, myelolipomas, or diffuse metastatic disease to undergo additional investigations. All other patients should be tested for underlying hormonally active tumors using (a) a low-dose (1 mg) overnight dexametha-sone suppression test to rule out subclinical Cushing’s syndrome and 17-ketosteroids (if sex steroid excess is suspected); (b) a 24-hour urine collection for catecholamines, metanephrines, VMA, or plasma metanephrine to rule out pheochromocytoma; and (c) in hypertensive patients, serum electrolytes, plasma aldosterone, and plasma renin to rule out an aldosteronoma. In patients with a high index of suspicion for subclinical Cushing’s (those with hypertension, obesity, or diabetes), three tests (i.e., dexamethasone suppression test, salivary cortisol, and 24-hour urine free cortisol) may be used. Confirmatory tests can be per-formed based on the results of the initial screening studies.Determination of the malignant potential of an inciden-taloma is more difficult. The risk of malignancy in an adrenal lesion is related to its size. Lesions >6 cm in diameter have an approximate risk of malignancy of about 25%.82 However, this size cutoff is not absolute because adrenal carcinomas also have been reported in lesions <6 cm. Carcinomas account for 2% of lesions <4 cm and 6% of lesions 4.1 to 6 cm in size. This has led to increased use of the imaging characteristics of incidentalomas to predict malignancy. Benign adrenal adenomas tend to be homogeneous, well encapsulated, and have smooth and regular margins. They also tend to be hypoattenuating lesions (<10 Hounsfield units) on CT scanning. In contrast, adrenal cancers tend to be hyperattenuating (>18 Hounsfield units) and inhomo-geneous, have irregular borders, and may show evidence of local invasion or adjacent lymphadenopathy. On MRI T2-weighted imaging, adenomas demonstrate low signal inten-sity when compared to the liver (adrenal mass-to-liver ratio <1.4), whereas carcinomas and metastases have moderate inten-sity (mass-to-liver ratio 1.2:2.8). Pheochromocytomas are extremely bright, with mass-to-liver ratios >3. Unfortunately, the ranges overlap, and signal intensity is not 100% reliable for determining the nature of the lesion. Radionuclide imaging with NP-59 also has been used to distinguish between various adre-nal lesions, with some investigators suggesting that uptake of NP-59 was 100% predictive of a benign lesion (adenoma), whereas absence of imaging was 100% predictive of a nonade-nomatous lesion. However, the technique has not gained wide-spread acceptance because patients need to be given cold iodine 1 week before the study to prevent thyroid uptake, imaging needs to be delayed by 5 to 7 days after administration of the contrast, and false-positive and false-negative results occur. FDG-PET or PET-CT scans may have some utility in distin-guishing potentially malignant from benign lesions in cases of inconclusive CT densitometry. However, caution must be exer-cised for false-positive (some adenomas and pheochromocyto-mas) and false-negative results (small lesions or those with hemorrhage or necrosis).116 FNAB cannot be used to distinguish adrenal adenomas from carcinomas. This being said, FNAB is useful in the setting of a patient with a history of cancer and a solitary adrenal mass. The positive predictive value of FNAB in this situation has been shown to be almost 100%, although false-negative rates of up to 33% have been reported. Biopsies usually are performed under CT guidance, and appropriate testing to rule out pheochromocytomas should be undertaken before the procedure to avoid precipitating a hypertensive crisis.Management. An algorithm for the management of patients with incidentalomas is shown in Fig. 38-47. The AACE and American Association of Endocrine Surgeons (AAES) have published management guidelines for patients with adrenal incidentalomas.117 Patients with functional tumors or obviously malignant lesions should undergo adrenalectomy. The optimal management of patients with subclinical Cushing’s syndrome is controversial, especially due to the paucity of data from high-quality prospective trials. In general, operative intervention is advised in patients with subclinical Cushing’s syndrome with suppressed plasma ACTH levels and elevated urinary cortisol levels because these patients are at high risk for progression to overt Cushing’s syndrome. The adrenal incidentaloma guide-lines also recommend adrenalectomy in patients with worsening hypertension, abnormal glucose tolerance, or osteoporosis.For nonfunctional lesions, the risk of malignancy needs to be balanced with operative morbidity and mortality. The AACE/AAES guidelines recommend that lesions with suspicious fea-tures on imaging studies such as heterogeneity, irregular cap-sule, or adjacent nodes should be treated by adrenalectomy. Nonoperative therapy, with close periodic follow-up, is advised for lesions <4 cm in diameter with benign imaging characteris-tics, whereas adrenalectomy is recommended for lesions ≥4 cm in size due to the increased risk of cancer.1011Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   169601/03/19   11:22 AM 1697THYROID, PARATHYROID, AND ADRENALCHAPTER 38Questions1) Low dose DST2) Plasma metanephrines or 24 h urine catecholamines, VMA, metanephrines3) Plasma aldosterone, renin activity, electrolytesAdrenalectomyYesNoPast historyof cancer?YesSolitarymetastasisyesNoConsideradrenalectomySystemic therapySee question 3<4 cm,Benign imaging featuresNoRepeat imaging in 3–6 months, biochemicalevaluation annually˜4 cm, Indeterminate orsuspicious imagingfeaturesAdrenalectomy1Is the tumorfunctioning?2Is the tumormetastatic?3Is it at highrisk of beingmalignant?Figure 38-47. Management algorithm for an adrenal incidentaloma. CT = computed tomography; DST = dexamethasone suppression test; VMA = vanillylmandelic acid.However, several important points must be considered in the management of these patients. First, size criteria for malig-nancy are not definitive and are derived from a selected series of patients. Second, the actual size of adrenal tumors can be underestimated by at least 1 cm by modalities such as CT and MRI scans because tumors are larger in a cephalocaudal axis. Third, the natural history of incidentalomas is variable and depends on the underlying diagnosis, age of the study popula-tion, and the size of the mass. Older patients are more likely to have nonfunctioning adenomas. Existing data in terms of the long-term behavior of these nonfunctional lesions, although limited, indicate that malignant transformation is uncommon. Furthermore, tumors that increase in size by at least 1 cm over a 2-year follow-up period and those with subtle hormonal abnor-malities appear to be more likely to enlarge. Overt hormone overproduction is more likely in tumors >3 cm and those with increased NP-59 uptake. Surgeons are more likely to operate on a 40-year-old patient with a 4-cm lesion, while electing to follow an 80-year-old patient with a similar lesion but multiple concurrent comorbidities. Based on the above considerations, some surgeons use a size threshold for adrenalectomy with a nonfunctioning homogeneous tumor of 3 to 4 cm in young patients with no comorbidities and 5 cm in older patients with significant comorbidity.Lesions that grow during follow-up also are treated by adrenalectomy. Myelolipomas generally do not warrant adrenal-ectomy unless there is concern regarding malignancy, which is rare, or bleeding into the lesion, which is more likely in myelo-lipomas >4 cm in size. These tumors, even when large, can be removed laparoscopically. Resection of solitary adrenal metas-tases in patients with a history of nonadrenal cancer has been demonstrated to lead to prolonged patient survival. Suspected adrenal metastases also may be resected for diagnosis.There is no consensus regarding the follow-up of patients with adrenal incidentaloma. The AACE/AAES guidelines recommend repeating hormonal screening with a 1-mg dexa-methasone suppression test and urinary catecholamines and metabolites yearly for 5 years as the risk of hypersecretion appears to plateau after this time period. It also recommends repeat imaging at 3 to 6 months and then annually for 1 to  2 years. Less frequent imaging is reasonable or small (<2 cm), uniform, hypodense cortical nodules in patients without a his-tory of malignant disease. Adrenalectomy is recommended for lesions that grow ≥1 cm or if autonomous hormone secretion develops during follow-up.Adrenal InsufficiencyAdrenal insufficiency may be primary, resulting from adrenal dis-ease, or secondary, due to a deficiency of ACTH (Table 38-21). The most commonly encountered causes of primary adrenal insufficiency are autoimmune disease, infections, and meta-static deposits. Spontaneous adrenal hemorrhage can occur in patients with fulminant meningococcal septicemia (Water-house-Friderichsen syndrome). Bilateral adrenal hemorrhage also can occur secondary to trauma, severe stress, infection, and coagulopathies and, if unrecognized, is lethal. Exogenous glucocorticoid therapy with suppression of the adrenal glands is the most common cause of secondary adrenal insufficiency.Symptoms and Signs. Acute adrenal insufficiency should be suspected in stressed patients with any of the relevant risk factors. It may mimic sepsis, myocardial infarction, or pulmo-nary embolus and presents with fever, weakness, confusion, nausea, vomiting, lethargy, abdominal pain, or severe hypoten-sion. Chronic adrenal insufficiency, such as that occurring in patients with metastatic tumors, may be more subtle. Symptoms include fatigue, salt craving, weight loss, nausea, vomiting, and Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   169701/03/19   11:22 AM 1698SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIabdominal pain. These patients may appear hyperpigmented from increased secretion of CRH and ACTH, with increased α-melanocyte-stimulating hormone side-products.Diagnostic Studies. Characteristic laboratory findings include hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, eosinophilia, mild azote-mia, and fasting or reactive hypoglycemia. The peripheral blood smear may demonstrate eosinophilia in approximately 20% of patients. Adrenal insufficiency is diagnosed by the ACTH stimulation test. ACTH (250 μg) is infused intravenously, and cortisol levels are measured at 0, 30, and 60 minutes. Peak cor-tisol levels <20 μg/dL suggest adrenal insufficiency. ACTH levels also allow primary insufficiency to be distinguished from secondary causes. High ACTH levels with low plasma cortisol levels are diagnostic of primary adrenal insufficiency.Treatment. Treatment must be initiated based on clinical sus-picion alone, even before test results are obtained, or the patient is unlikely to survive. Management includes volume resuscita-tion with at least 2 to 3 L of a 0.9% saline solution or 5% dex-trose in saline solution. Blood should be obtained for electrolyte (decreased Na+ and increased K+), glucose (low), and cortisol (low) levels; ACTH (increased in primary and decreased in sec-ondary); and quantitative eosinophilic count. Dexamethasone (4 mg) should be administered intravenously. Hydrocortisone (100 mg intravenously every 8 hours) also may be used, but it interferes with testing of cortisol levels. Once the patient has been stabilized, underlying conditions such as infection should be sought, identified, and treated. The ACTH stimulation test should be performed to confirm the diagnosis. Glucocorticoids can then be tapered to maintenance doses (oral hydrocortisone 15–20 mg in the morning and 10 mg in the evening). Mineralo-corticoids (fludrocortisone 0.05–0.1 mg daily) may be required once the saline infusions are discontinued.Adrenal SurgeryChoice of Procedure. Adrenalectomy may be performed via a laparoscopic or open approach. In either approach, the gland may be approached anteriorly, laterally, or posteriorly via the retroperitoneum. The choice of approach depends on the size and nature of the lesion and expertise of the surgeon. Laparo-scopic adrenalectomy has rapidly become the standard proce-dure of choice for the excision of most benign-appearing adrenal lesions <6 cm in diameter. The role of laparoscopic adrenalec-tomy in the management of adrenocortical cancers is controver-sial. The data with respect to local tumor recurrence and intra-abdominal carcinomatosis from laparoscopic adrenalec-tomy for malignant adrenal tumors that were not appreciated as such, preoperatively or intraoperatively, are conflicting. Although laparoscopic adrenalectomy appears to be feasible and safe for solitary adrenal metastasis118 (provided there is no local invasion and the tumor can be resected intact), open adrenalec-tomy or laparoscopic-assisted open adrenalectomy is the safest option for suspected or known adrenocortical cancers and malig-nant pheochromocytomas. Technical considerations and surgeon experience, rather than absolute tumor size, usually determine the size threshold for laparoscopic resection. Hand-assisted lapa-roscopic adrenalectomy may provide a bridge between laparo-scopic adrenalectomy and conversion to an open procedure. There have been no randomized trials directly comparing open vs. laparoscopic adrenalectomy. However, studies have shown that laparoscopic adrenalectomy is associated with decreased blood loss, postoperative pain, and narcotic use; reduced length of hospital stay; and faster return to work.Laparoscopic Adrenalectomy. The procedure is performed under general anesthesia. Arterial lines are used routinely, and central lines are necessary for patients in whom massive fluid shifts are anticipated (e.g., those with large, active pheochro-mocytomas). A nasogastric tube and Foley catheter are rec-ommended. Routine preoperative antibiotics are not needed, except in patients with Cushing’s syndrome. The adrenals can be removed laparoscopically via a transabdominal (anterior or lateral) or retroperitoneal (lateral or posterior) approach. The lateral approach is preferred by most laparoscopic surgeons and uses gravity to aid retraction of surrounding organs. Patients, however, need to be repositioned for a bilateral procedure. The anterior transabdominal approach offers the advantage of a con-ventional view of the abdominal cavity and allows a bilateral adrenalectomy to be performed without the necessity of repo-sitioning the patient. The posterior retroperitoneal approach has also been gaining popularity in recent years, particularly in patients with previous anterior abdominal surgery and peri-toneal adhesions. In addition, several centers have successfully utilized robotic approaches for both lateral transabdominal and retroperitoneal laparoscopic adrenal surgery. Single incision laparoscopic adrenalectomy is another option. While these latter approaches are feasible,119 their widespread use awaits analysis of long-term outcomes data and cost analyses. The lateral trans-abdominal approach is widely used and described in detail in the following section.12Table 38-21Etiology of adrenal insufficiencyPRIMARYSECONDARYAutoimmune (autoimmune polyglandular disease  types I and II)Exogenous glucocorticoid therapyInfectious—TB, fungi, CMV, HIVBilateral adrenalectomyHemorrhage—spontaneous (Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome) and secondary to stress, trauma, infections, coagulopathy, or anticoagulantsPituitary or hypothalamic tumorsMetastasesPituitary hemorrhage (postpartum Sheehan’s syndrome)Infiltrative disorders—amyloidosis, hemochromatosisTrans-sphenoidal resection of pituitary tumorAdrenoleukodystrophy Congenital adrenal hyperplasia Drugs—ketoconazole, metyrapone, aminoglutethimide, mitotane CMV = cytomegalovirus; HIV = human immunodeficiency virus;  TB = tuberculosis.Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   169801/03/19   11:22 AM 1699THYROID, PARATHYROID, AND ADRENALCHAPTER 38Umbilicus1234Figure 38-48. Positioning of the patient and placement of trocars for a laparoscopic adrenalectomy. Four trocars are placed from the mid-clavicular to the anterior axillary line.Triangular ligamentInferiorvena cavaPancreasSpleenABLiverRight adrenalLeft adrenalFigure 38-49. Technique of laparoscopic adrenalectomy. Expo-sure of the right adrenal is facilitated by division of the triangular ligament (A) and dissection and reflection of the spleen and tail of the pancreas aids in identifying the left adrenal (B).Lateral Transabdominal Approach The patient is placed in the lateral decubitus position, and the operating table is flexed at the waist to open the space between the lower rib cage and the iliac crest (Fig. 38-48). The surgeon and assistant both stand on the same side, facing the front of the patient. Pneumoperi-toneum is created using a Veress needle or insufflation via a Hasson port. In general, four 10-mm trocars are placed between the midclavicular line medially and anterior axillary line later-ally, one to two fingerbreadths below the costal margin (see  Fig. 38-48), although additional ports may be placed, if needed. A 30° laparoscope is inserted through the second or midcla-vicular port. Most of the dissection is carried out via the two most lateral ports. However, the instruments and ports may be changed to provide optimum exposure, as needed.For a right adrenalectomy, a fan retractor is inserted through the most medial port to retract the liver. An atrau-matic grasper and an L-hook cautery are inserted via the two lateral ports for the dissection. The right triangular ligament is divided, and the liver is rotated medially (Fig. 38-49A). Rarely, the hepatic flexure of the colon may need mobilization during a right adrenalectomy. The right kidney is identified visually and by palpation with an atraumatic grasper. The adrenal gland is identified on the superomedial aspect of the kidney. Gerota’s fascia is incised with the hook cautery. Dissection of the adrenal is started superomedially and then proceeds inferiorly, dissect-ing around the adrenal in a clockwise manner. The periadrenal tissues are grasped or moved with a blunt grasper to facilitate circumferential dissection. The right adrenal vein is identified at its junction with the IVC, ligated with clips, and divided using endoscopic scissors. Alternatively, a vascular stapler may be used to divide the vein endoscopically. There may be a second adrenal vein on the right. Generally, two clips are left on the vena cava side. Although early identification of the adrenal vein is helpful to facilitate mobilization and prevent injury, it can be dissected whenever it is safe to do so. Early ligation of the adrenal vein makes it easier to mobilize the gland but may make subsequent dissection more difficult due to venous congestion. The arterial branches to the adrenal gland can be electrocoagu-lated if small or clipped and divided.For a left adrenalectomy, the fan retractor is used to retract the spleen. The splenic flexure is mobilized early, and the lat-eral attachments to the spleen and the tail of the pancreas are divided using the electrocautery (Fig. 38-49B). Gravity allows the spleen and the pancreatic tail to fall medially. The remain-der of the dissection proceeds similarly to that described for the right adrenal. In addition to the adrenal vein, the inferior phrenic vein, which joins the left adrenal vein medially, also needs to be Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   169901/03/19   11:22 AM 1700SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIABAnterior approachCThoracoabdominal approachPosterior approachFigure 38-50. Incisions for open adrenalectomy. Anterior approach (A), posterior approach (B), and thoracoabdominal approach (C).Anterior Approach The adrenals may be removed via a mid-line incision or bilateral subcostal incision (Fig. 38-50). The for-mer allows adequate infraumbilical exposure for examination of extra-adrenal tumors, whereas the latter provides better superior and lateral exposure. For the right side, the hepatic flexure of the colon is mobilized inferiorly, and the triangular ligament is incised to retract the liver medially and superiorly. A generous Kocher maneuver is used to mobilize the duodenum anteriorly and expose the retroperitoneal fat and the IVC (Fig. 38-51A). Gerota’s fascia is incised, and the gland is freed of surround-ing fibro-fatty tissue and the kidney inferiorly. The lateral and superior surfaces usually are mobilized first. Then, the short, right adrenal vein is dissected, ligated, and divided, taking care not to injure the hepatic veins and IVC. On the left side, the adrenal is located cephalad to the pancreatic tail and just lateral to the aorta. For large tumors, the adrenal is best approached by medial visceral rotation to mobilize the spleen, colon, and pan-creas toward the midline (Fig. 38-51B). An alternative approach is to enter the lesser sac by division of the gastrocolic ligament. The pancreas is mobilized superiorly by incision of its inferior dissected, doubly clipped, and divided. As with the right adrenal vein, the left-sided veins also can be divided with a vascular stapler. Once the dissection is complete, the area of the adrenal bed can be irrigated and suctioned. A drain is rarely necessary. The gland is placed in a nylon specimen bag, which is brought out via one of the ports after morcellation, if necessary.Posterior Retroperitoneal Approach The retroperitoneal approach provides a more direct access to the adrenal gland and avoids abdominal adhesions in patients who have had previous abdominal surgery. Furthermore, bilateral adrenalectomy can be performed without repositioning the patient. Intraoperative ultrasound is helpful for identifying the adrenal, but the dis-section and exposure are more difficult because the working space is limited. This makes vascular control difficult and also renders it unsuitable for large (>5 cm) lesions. This tech-nique is being increasingly used for small adenomas causing hyperaldosteronism.The patient is placed in the prone-jackknife position, and the operating table is flexed at the waist to open the space between the posterior costal margin and the pelvis. Palpation is used to identify the position of the twelfth rib. Percutane-ous ultrasound is performed to determine the outline of the underlying kidney and adrenal. When done laparoscopically, the surgeon stands on the side of the adrenal to be removed, and the assistant stands on the opposite side. A 1.5-cm incision is placed 2 cm inferior and parallel to the twelfth rib, laterally at the level of the inferior pole of the kidney. Gerota’s space is entered under direct vision using a 12-mm direct viewing trocar with a 0° laparoscope through the muscle layers of the posterior abdominal wall. Alternatively, blunt dissection with the surgeon’s finger also can identify the space behind Gerota’s fascia. The trocar is then replaced by a dissecting balloon, which is manually inflated using a hand pump under direct vision through the laparoscope. A 12-mm trocar is then reinserted into this space, and CO2 is insufflated to 12 to 15 mmHg pressure. The 0° laparoscope is replaced by a 45° laparoscope. Two addi-tional 5or 10-mm trocars are placed, one each on either side of the first port. Laparoscopic ultrasound then is used to help locate the adrenal gland and vessels. The adrenal dissection is begun at the superior pole and then proceeds to the lateral and inferior aspect. The medial dissection usually is performed last, and the vessels are identified and divided as described in the earlier “Lateral Transabdominal Approach” section.Open Adrenalectomy. Open adrenalectomy may be per-formed via four approaches, each with specific advantages and disadvantages. The anterior approach allows examination of the abdominal cavity and resection of bilateral tumors via a single incision. The posterior approach avoids the morbidity of a lapa-rotomy incision, especially in patients with cardiopulmonary disease and those prone to wound complications (Cushing’s syndrome) and avoids abdominal adhesions in patients who have undergone previous abdominal surgery. Recovery time is also quicker and hospitalization shorter. However, the retroperi-toneal exposure is difficult, particularly in obese patients, and the small working space makes it unsuitable for tumors >6 cm in diameter. The lateral approach is best for obese patients and for large tumors because it provides a bigger working space. The thoracoabdominal approach is most useful for en bloc resection of large (>10 cm), malignant lesions. However, it is associated with significant morbidity and should be used selectively.Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   170001/03/19   11:22 AM 1701THYROID, PARATHYROID, AND ADRENALCHAPTER 38ABRightadrenalSpleenPancreasPancreasColonLeftadrenal v.LeftkidneyFigure 38-51. Technique of open adrenalectomy. Exposure of the right adrenal is facilitated by a Kocher maneuver to mobilize the duodenum and upward retraction of the liver (A). The left adrenal can be exposed by medial visceral rotation of the spleen and pan-creas (B). v. = vein.peritoneal attachments, thus exposing the left kidney and adre-nal. The gland is then mobilized as on the right side.Posterior Approach The patient is placed prone on the operat-ing table, similar to the laparoscopic approach. A hockey stick or curvilinear incision may be used, and extended through the latissimus dorsi and sacrospinous fascia. The twelfth rib gener-ally is excised at its base, and the eleventh rib is retracted supe-riorly to reveal the pleura and the lateral arcuate ligament of the liver on the right side. The pleura also is mobilized cephalad, and the adrenal and kidney are identified. The superior aspect of the gland is dissected first, and the superior vessels are identi-fied and ligated. This prevents superior retraction of the adrenal gland. The remainder of the gland is then dissected and the adre-nal gland and tumor removed. The resulting space generally is filled with perinephric fat and closed in layers. A chest X-ray is obtained postoperatively to rule out a pneumothorax.Lateral Approach The patient is placed in a lateral position with the table flexed, and an incision is made between the elev-enth and twelfth ribs or subcostally. The dissection then is per-formed as indicated previously in “Anterior Approach.”Complications of Adrenal Surgery. Patients with Cushing’s syndrome are more prone to infectious (incisional and intra-abdominal abscess) and thrombotic complications. Creation of pneumoperitoneum may result in injury to various organs from Veress needle and trocar insertion, subcutaneous emphysema, pneumothorax, and hemodynamic compromise. Excessive retraction and dissection may lead to bleeding from injury to the IVC and renal vessels, or from injury to surrounding organs such as the liver, pancreas, spleen, and stomach. Postopera-tive hemodynamic instability may be evident in patients with pheochromocytomas, and patients are at risk of adrenal insuffi-ciency after bilateral adrenalectomy and sometimes after unilat-eral adrenalectomy (unrecognized Cushing’s syndrome or, very rarely, Conn’s syndrome). Long-term morbidity results mainly from injury to nerve roots during trocar insertion, which can lead to chronic pain syndromes or muscle weakness, although this is more of an issue in case of open procedures.Approximately 30% of patients who undergo bilateral adrenalectomy for Cushing’s disease are at risk of developing Nelson’s syndrome from progressive growth of the preexisting pituitary tumor. This leads to increased ACTH levels, hyper-pigmentation, visual field defects, headaches, and extraocular muscle palsies. Transsphenoidal pituitary resection is the ini-tial mode of therapy, and external-beam radiotherapy is used in patients with residual tumor or extrasellar invasion.REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Rayess HM, Monk I, Svider PF, Gupta A, Raza SN, Lin HS. Thyroglossal duct cyst carcinoma: a systematic review of clinical features and outcomes. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2017;156:794-802.	2.	Cernea CR, Ferraz AR, Nishio S, Dutra A, Jr, Hojaij FC, dos Santos LR. Surgical anatomy of the external branch of the superior laryngeal nerve. Head Neck. 1992;14:380-383.	3.	Pujol-Borrell R, Gimenez-Barcons M, Marin-Sanchez A, Colobran R. Genetics of Graves’ disease: special focus on the role of TSHR gene. Horm Metab Res. 2015;47:753-766.	4.	Hagen F, Ouellette RP, Chapman EM. Comparison of high and low dosage levels of I-131 in the treatment of thyrotoxicosis. N Engl J Med. 1967;277(11):559-562.	5.	Singer RB. Long-term comparative cancer mortality after use of radio-iodine in the treatment of hyperthyroidism, a fully reported multicenter study. J Insur Med. 2001;33:138-142.	6.	Cundiff JG, Portugal L, Sarne DH. Parathyroid adenoma after radioactive iodine therapy for multinodular goiter. Am J  Otolaryngol. 2001;22:374-375.	7.	Ross DS, Burch HB, Cooper DS, et al. 2016 American Thy-roid Association guidelines for diagnosis and management of hyperthyroidism and other causes of thyrotoxicosis.  Thyroid. 2016;26(10):1343-1421.	8.	Krohn K, Paschke R. Somatic mutations in thyroid nodular disease. Mol Genet Metab. 2002;75:202-208.Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   170101/03/19   11:22 AM 1702SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	9.	Jonklaas J, Bianco AC, Bauer AJ, et al. Guidelines for the treatment of hypothyroidism: prepared by the American Thy-roid Association task force on thyroid hormone replacement. Thyroid. 2014;24:1670-1751.	10.	Brook I. Microbiology and management of acute suppura-tive thyroiditis in children. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2003;67:447-451.	11.	Sheng Q, Lv Z, Xiao X, et al. Diagnosis and management of pyriform sinus fistula: experience in 48 cases. J Ped Surg. 2014;49:455-459.	12.	Moshynska O, Saxena A. Clonal relationship between Hashi-moto’s thyroiditis and thyroid lymphoma. J Clin Pathol. 2008;61(4):438-444.	13.	Rodondi N, den Elzen WP, Bauer DC, et al. Subclinical hypo-thyroidism and the risk of coronary heart disease and mortality. JAMA. 2010;304:1365-1374.	14.	Pusztaszeri M, Triponez F, Pache JC, Bongiovanni M. Rie-del’s thyroiditis with increased IgG4 plasma cells: evidence for an underlying IgG4-related sclerosing disease? Thyroid. 2012;22:964-968.	15.	Soh SB, Pham A, O’Hehir RE, Cherk M, Topliss DJ. Novel use of rituximab in a case of Riedel’s thyroiditis refractory to glucocorticoids and tamoxifen. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013;98:3543-3549.	16.	Knudsen N, Laurberg P, Perrild H, Bulow I, Ovesen L,  Jorgensen T. Risk factors for goiter and thyroid nodules. Thy-roid. 2002;12:879-888.	17.	Ron E. Thyroid cancer incidence among people living in areas contaminated by radiation from the Chernobyl accident. Health Phys. 2007;93:502-511.	18.	Peiling Yang S, Ngeow J. Familial non-medullary thyroid cancer: unraveling the genetic maze. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2016;23:R577-R595.	19.	Cibas ES, Ali SZ; Conference NCITFSotS. The Bethesda System for reporting thyroid cytopathology. Am J Clin Pathol. 2009;132(5):658-665.	20.	Nobrega LH, Paiva FJ, Nobrega ML, et al. Predicting malig-nant involvement in a thyroid nodule: role of ultrasonography. Endocr Pract. 2007;13:219-224.	21.	Chen M, Zhang KQ, Xu YF, Zhang SM, Cao Y, Sun WQ. Shear wave elastography and contrast-enhanced ultrasonog-raphy in the diagnosis of thyroid malignant nodules. Mol Clin Oncol. 2016;5:724-730.	22.	Penna GC, Vaisman F, Vaisman M, Sobrinho-Simoes M, Soares P. Molecular markers involved in tumorigenesis of thyroid carcinoma: focus on aggressive histotypes. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2016;150:194-207.	23.	Caronia LM, Phay JE, Shah MH. Role of BRAF in thyroid oncogenesis. Clin Cancer Res. 2011;17:7511-7517.	24.	Zane M, Scavo E, Catalano V, et al. Normal vs cancer thy-roid stem cells: the road to transformation. Oncogene. 2016;35:805-815.	25.	Nikiforov YE, Seethala RR, Tallini G, et al. Nomenclature revision for encapsulated follicular variant of papillary thy-roid carcinoma: a paradigm shift to reduce overtreatment of indolent tumors. JAMA Oncol. 2016;2(8):1023-1029.	26.	Hay ID, Grant CS, Taylor WF, McConahey WM. Ipsilateral lobectomy versus bilateral lobar resection in papillary thyroid carcinoma: a retrospective analysis of surgical outcome using a novel prognostic scoring system. Surgery. 1987;102:1088-1095.	27.	Cady B, Rossi R. An expanded view of risk-group definition in differentiated thyroid carcinoma. Surgery. 1988;104:947-953.	28.	DeGroot LJ, Kaplan EL, McCormick M, Straus FH. Natural history, treatment, and course of papillary thyroid carcinoma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1990;71:414-424.	29.	AJCC Cancer Staging Manual. 8th ed. New York: Springer-Verlag; 2017.	30.	Miyauchi A, Kudo T, Miya A, et al. Prognostic impact of serum thyroglobulin doubling-time under thyrotropin suppres-sion in patients with papillary thyroid carcinoma who under-went total thyroidectomy. Thyroid. 2011;21:707-716.	31.	Bhaijee F, Nikiforov YE. Molecular analysis of thyroid tumors. Endocr Pathol. 2011;22:126-133.	32.	Cady B, Sedgwick CE, Meissner WA, Wool MS, Salzman FA, Werber J. Risk factor analysis in differentiated thyroid cancer. Cancer. 1979;43:810-820.	33.	Lee JH, Lee ES, Kim YS. Clinicopathologic significance of BRAF V600E mutation in papillary carcinomas of the thyroid: a meta-analysis. Cancer. 2007;110:38-46.	34.	Mazzaferri EL, Jhiang SM. Long-term impact of initial surgical and medical therapy on papillary and follicular thyroid cancer. Am J Med. 1994;97(5):418-428.	35.	Hay ID, Grant CS, Bergstralh EJ, Thompson GB, van Heerden JA, Goellner JR. Unilateral total lobectomy: is it sufficient surgical treatment for patients with AMES low-risk papillary thyroid carcinoma? Surgery. 1998;124:958-964; discussion 64-66.	36.	Mazzaferri EL, Massoll N. Management of papillary and follicular (differentiated) thyroid cancer: new paradigms using recombinant human thyrotropin. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2002;9:227-247.	37.	Bilimoria KY, Bentrem DJ, Ko CY, et al. Extent of sur-gery affects survival for papillary thyroid cancer. Ann Surg. 2007;246:375-381; discussion 81-84.	38.	Cooper DS, Doherty GM, Haugen BR, et al. Management guidelines for patients with thyroid nodules and differentiated thyroid cancer. Thyroid. 2006;16:109-142.	39.	Adam MA, Pura J, Gu L, et al. Extent of surgery for papil-lary thyroid cancer is not associated with survival: an analysis of 61,775 patients. Ann Surg. 2014;260:601-605; discussion 605-607.	40.	Haugen BR, Alexander EK, Bible KC, et al. 2015 Ameri-can Thyroid Association Management guidelines for adult patients with thyroid nodules and differentiated thyroid cancer: the American Thyroid Association guidelines task force on thyroid nodules and differentiated thyroid cancer. Thyroid. 2016;26(1):1-133.	41.	Ito Y, Miyauchi A, Oda H. Low-risk papillary microcarci-noma of the thyroid: a review of active surveillance trials. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2018;44(3):307-315.	42.	Agrawal N, Evasovich MR, Kandil E, et al. Indications and extent of central neck dissection for papillary thyroid cancer: an American Head and Neck Society consensus statement. Head Neck. 2017;39:1269-1279.	43.	Nikiforov YE, Ohori NP, Hodak SP, et al. Impact of muta-tional testing on the diagnosis and management of patients with cytologically indeterminate thyroid nodules: a prospec-tive analysis of 1056 FNA samples. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011;96:3390-3397.	44.	Alexander EK, Kennedy GC, Baloch ZW, et al. Preoperative diagnosis of benign thyroid nodules with indeterminate cytol-ogy. N Engl J Med. 2012;367:705-715.	45.	Nikiforov YE, Carty SE, Chiosea SI, et al. Highly accu-rate diagnosis of cancer in thyroid nodules with follicular neoplasm/suspicious for a follicular neoplasm cytology by ThyroSeq v2 next-generation sequencing assay. Cancer. 2014;120:3627-3634.	46.	Weber F, Teresi RE, Broelsch CE, Frilling A, Eng C. A limited set of human MicroRNA is deregulated in follicular thyroid carcinoma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2006;91:3584-3591.	47.	Wylie D, Beaudenon-Huibregtse S, Haynes BC, Giordano TJ, Labourier E. Molecular classification of thyroid lesions by combined testing for miRNA gene expression and somatic gene alterations. J Pathol Clin Res. 2016;2:93-103.Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   170201/03/19   11:22 AM 1703THYROID, PARATHYROID, AND ADRENALCHAPTER 38	48.	Benjamin H, Schnitzer-Perlman T, Shtabsky A, et al. Ana-lytical validity of a microRNA-based assay for diagnosing indeterminate thyroid FNA smears from routinely prepared cytology slides. Cancer Cytopathol. 2016;124:711-721.	49.	Leboeuf R, Perron P, Carpentier AC, Verreault J, Langlois MF. L-T3 preparation for whole-body scintigraphy: a randomized-controlled trial. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2007;67:839-844.	50.	Lee J, Yun MJ, Nam KH, Chung WY, Soh EY, Park CS. Quality of life and effectiveness comparisons of thyroxine withdrawal, triiodothyronine withdrawal, and recombinant thyroid-stimulating hormone administration for low-dose radioiodine remnant ablation of differentiated thyroid carci-noma. Thyroid. 2010;20:173-179.	51.	Iyer NG, Morris LG, Tuttle RM, Shaha AR, Ganly I. Rising incidence of second cancers in patients with low-risk (T1N0) thyroid cancer who receive radioactive iodine therapy. Cancer. 2011;117:4439-4446.	52.	Snozek CL, Chambers EP, Reading CC, et al. Serum thyro-globulin, high-resolution ultrasound, and lymph node thyro-globulin in diagnosis of differentiated thyroid carcinoma nodal metastases. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2007;92:4278-4281.	53.	Wertenbroek MW, Links TP, Prins TR, Plukker JT, van der Jagt EJ, de Jong KP. Radiofrequency ablation of hepatic metastases from thyroid carcinoma. Thyroid. 2008;18:1105-1110.	54.	Cazzato RL, Bonichon F, Buy X, et al. Over ten years of sin-gle-institution experience in percutaneous image-guided treat-ment of bone metastases from differentiated thyroid cancer. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2015;41:1247-1255.	55.	Brose MS, Nutting CM, Jarzab B, et al. Sorafenib in radioac-tive iodine-refractory, locally advanced or metastatic differ-entiated thyroid cancer: a randomised, double-blind, phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2014;384:319-328.	56.	Schlumberger M, Tahara M, Wirth LJ, et al. Lenvatinib ver-sus placebo in radioiodine-refractory thyroid cancer. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:621-630.	57.	Leboulleux S, Bastholt L, Krause T, et al. Vandetanib in locally advanced or metastatic differentiated thyroid cancer: a randomised, double-blind, phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2012;13:897-905.	58.	Falchook GS, Millward M, Hong D, et al. BRAF inhibitor dabrafenib in patients with metastatic BRAF-mutant thyroid cancer. Thyroid. 2015;25:71-77.	59.	Wells SA, Jr, Asa SL, Dralle H, et al. Revised American Thy-roid Association guidelines for the management of medullary thyroid carcinoma. Thyroid. 2015;25:567-610.	60.	Thornton K, Kim G, Maher VE, et al. Vandetanib for the treat-ment of symptomatic or progressive medullary thyroid cancer in patients with unresectable locally advanced or metastatic disease: U.S. Food and Drug Administration drug approval summary. Clin Cancer Res. 2012;18:3722-3730.	61.	Elisei R, Schlumberger MJ, Muller SP, et al. Cabozan-tinib in progressive medullary thyroid cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31:3639-3646.	62.	Smallridge RC, Ain KB, Asa SL, et al. American Thyroid Association guidelines for management of patients with anaplastic thyroid cancer. Thyroid. 2012;22(11):1104-1139.	63.	Zaidi N, Bucak E, Yazici P, et al. The feasibility of indocyanine green fluorescence imaging for identifying and assessing the perfusion of parathyroid glands during total thyroidectomy.  J Surg Oncol. 2016;113:775-778.	64.	McWade MA, Paras C, White LM, et al. Label-free intraop-erative parathyroid localization with near-infrared autofluores-cence imaging. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014;99:4574-4580.	65.	Barczynski M, Konturek A, Cichon S. Randomized clini-cal trial of visualization versus neuromonitoring of recur-rent laryngeal nerves during thyroidectomy. Br J Surg. 2009;96:240-246.	66.	Clark JH, Kim HY, Richmon JD. Transoral robotic thyroid surgery. Gland Surg. 2015;4:429-434.	67.	Akerstrom G, Malmaeus J, Bergstrom R. Surgical anatomy of human parathyroid glands. Surgery. 1984;95:14-21.	68.	Gilmour J. The gross anatomy of the parathyroid glands.  J Pathol. 1938;46:133.	69.	Ward BK, Magno AL, Walsh JP, Ratajczak T. The role of the calcium-sensing receptor in human disease. Clin Biochem. 2012;45:943-953.	70.	Balogh K, Racz K, Patocs A, Hunyady L. Menin and its inter-acting proteins: elucidation of menin function. Trends Endo-crinol Metab. 2006;17:357-364.	71.	Duan K, Gomez Hernandez K, Mete O. Clinicopatho-logical correlates of hyperparathyroidism. J Clin Pathol. 2015;68:771-787.	72.	Pardi E, Mariotti S, Pellegata NS, et al. Functional character-ization of a CDKN1B mutation in a Sardinian kindred with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 4 (MEN4). Endocr Con-nect. 2015;4:1-8.	73.	Segiet OA, Deska M, Michalski M, Gawrychowski J, Wojnicz R. Molecular profiling in primary hyperparathyroidism. Head Neck. 2015;37:299-307.	74.	Proceedings of the NIH Consensus Development Confer-ence on diagnosis and management of asymptomatic primary hyperparathyroidism. Bethesda, Maryland, October 29-31, 1990. J Bone Miner Res. 1991;6(suppl 2):S1-S166.	75.	Silverberg SJ, Shane E, Jacobs TP, Siris E, Bilezikian JP. A 10-year prospective study of primary hyperparathyroid-ism with or without parathyroid surgery. N Engl J Med. 1999;341:1249-1255.	76.	Bilezikian JP, Khan AA, Potts JT, Jr. Third International Workshop on the Management of Asymptomatic Primary H.  Guidelines for the management of asymptomatic pri-mary hyperparathyroidism: summary statement from the third international workshop. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009;94:335-339.	77.	Rubin MR, Bilezikian JP, McMahon DJ, et al. The natu-ral history of primary hyperparathyroidism with or without parathyroid surgery after 15 years. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008;93:3462-3470.	78.	Marcocci C, Bollerslev J, Khan AA, Shoback DM. Medical management of primary hyperparathyroidism: proceedings of the fourth International Workshop on the Management of Asymptomatic Primary Hyperparathyroidism. J Clin Endocri-nol Metab. 2014;99:3607-3618.	79.	Pasieka JL, Parsons L, Jones J. The long-term benefit of parathyroidectomy in primary hyperparathyroidism: a 10-year prospective surgical outcome study. Surgery. 2009;146:1006-1013.	80.	Zanocco K, Angelos P, Sturgeon C. Cost-effectiveness analy-sis of parathyroidectomy for asymptomatic primary hyper-parathyroidism. Surgery. 2006;140:874-881; discussion 81-82.	81.	Udelsman R, Akerstrom G, Biagini C, et al. The surgical management of asymptomatic primary hyperparathyroidism: proceedings of the Fourth International Workshop. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014;99:3595-3606.	82.	Bilezikian JP, Brandi ML, Eastell R, et al. Guidelines for the management of asymptomatic primary hyperparathy-roidism: summary statement from the Fourth International Workshop. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014;99(10):3561-3569.	83.	Rodgers SE, Hunter GJ, Hamberg LM, et al. Improved pre-operative planning for directed parathyroidectomy with  4-dimensional computed tomography. Surgery. 2006;140:932-940; discussion 40-41.	84.	Sharma J, Milas M, Berber E, Mazzaglia P, Siperstein A, Weber CJ. Value of intraoperative parathyroid hormone moni-toring. Ann Surg Oncol. 2008;15(2):493-498.Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   170301/03/19   11:22 AM 1704SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	85.	Westerdahl J, Bergenfelz A. Unilateral versus bilateral neck exploration for primary hyperparathyroidism: five-year follow-up of a randomized controlled trial. Ann Surg. 2007;246:976-981.	86.	Gagner M. Endoscopic subtotal parathyroidectomy in patients with primary hyperparathyroidism. Br J Surg. 1996;83:875.	87.	Lowe H, McMahon DJ, Rubin MR, Bilezikian JP, Silver-berg SJ. Normocalcemic primary hyperparathyroidism: further characterization of a new clinical phenotype. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2007;92(8):3001-3005.	88.	Eastell R, Brandi ML, Costa AG, D’Amour P, Shoback DM, Thakker RV. Diagnosis of asymptomatic primary hyperpara-thyroidism: proceedings of the Fourth International Workshop. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014;99:3570-3579.	89.	Cetani F, Pardi E, Marcocci C. Update on parathyroid carci-noma. J Endocrinol Invest. 2016;39:595-606.	90.	Silverberg SJ, Rubin MR, Faiman C, et al. Cinacalcet hydro-chloride reduces the serum calcium concentration in inop-erable parathyroid carcinoma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2007;92:3803-3808.	91.	Iacobone M, Citton M, Viel G, Schiavone D, Torresan F. Surgi-cal approaches in hereditary endocrine tumors. Updates Surg. 2017;69:181-191.	92.	Twigt BA, van Dalen T, Vroonhoven TJ, Consten EC. Recur-rent hyperparathyroidism caused by benign neoplastic seeding: two cases of parathyromatosis and a review of the literature. Acta Chir Belg. 2013;113:228-232.	93.	Guerin C, Paladino NC, Lowery A, Castinetti F, Taieb D, Sebag F. Persistent and recurrent hyperparathyroidism. Updates Surg. 2017;69:161-169.	94.	Madorin C, Owen RP, Fraser WD, et al. The surgical manage-ment of renal hyperparathyroidism. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryn-gol. 2012;269:1565-1576.	95.	Qiu NC, Zha SL, Liu ME, et al. To assess the effects of para-thyroidectomy (TPTX versus TPTX+AT) for secondary hyper-parathyroidism in chronic renal failure: a meta-analysis. Int J Surg. 2017;44:353-362.	96.	Dulfer RR, Franssen GJH, Hesselink DA, Hoorn EJ, van Eijck CHJ, van Ginhoven TM. Systematic review of surgical and medical treatment for tertiary hyperparathyroidism. Br J Surg. 2017;104:804-813.	97.	Dutta RK, Soderkvist P, Gimm O. Genetics of primary hyper-aldosteronism. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2016;23:R437-R454.	98.	Galati SJ. Primary aldosteronism: challenges in diagno-sis and management. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am. 2015;44:355-369.	99.	Rossi GP, Auchus RJ, Brown M, et al. An expert consensus statement on use of adrenal vein sampling for the subtyping of primary aldosteronism. Hypertension. 2014;63:151-160.	100.	Funder JW, Carey RM, Mantero F, et al. The management of primary aldosteronism: case detection, diagnosis, and treatment: an Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2016;101:1889-1916.	101.	Powlson AS, Gurnell M, Brown MJ. Nuclear imaging in the diagnosis of primary aldosteronism. Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2015;22:150-156.	102.	Tahir A, McLaughlin K, Kline G. Severe hyperkalemia fol-lowing adrenalectomy for aldosteronoma: prediction, patho-genesis and approach to clinical management—a case series. BMC Endocr Disord. 2016;16:43.	103.	Pecori Giraldi F, Ambrogio AG, De Martin M, Fatti LM,  Scacchi M, Cavagnini F. Specificity of first-line tests for the diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome: assessment in a large series. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2007;92:4123-4129.	104.	Faillot S, Assie G. Endocrine tumours: the genomics of adre-nocortical tumors. Eur J Endocrinol. 2016;174:R249-R265.	105.	Copeland PM. The incidentally discovered adrenal mass. Ann Surg. 1984;199:116-122.	106.	Sturgeon C, Shen WT, Clark OH, Duh QY, Kebebew E. Risk assessment in 457 adrenal cortical carcinomas: how much does tumor size predict the likelihood of malignancy? J Am Coll Surg. 2006;202:423-430.	107.	Aubert S, Wacrenier A, Leroy X, et al. Weiss system revisited: a clinicopathologic and immunohistochemical study of 49 adrenocortical tumors. Am J Surg Pathol. 2002;26:1612-1619.	108.	Terzolo M, Angeli A, Fassnacht M, et al. Adjuvant mito-tane treatment for adrenocortical carcinoma. N Engl J Med. 2007;356:2372-2380.	109.	Berruti A, Grisanti S, Pulzer A, et al. Long-term outcomes of adjuvant mitotane therapy in patients with radically resected adrenocortical carcinoma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2017;102:1358-1365.	110.	Postlewait LM, Ethun CG, Tran TB, et al. Outcomes of adju-vant mitotane after resection of adrenocortical carcinoma: a 13-institution study by the US Adrenocortical Carcinoma Group. J Am Coll Surg. 2016;222:480-490.	111.	Fassnacht M, Terzolo M, Allolio B, et al. Combination chemo-therapy in advanced adrenocortical carcinoma. N Engl J Med. 2012;366:2189-2197.	112.	Rednam SP, Erez A, Druker H, et al. Von Hippel-Lindau and hereditary pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma syndromes: clinical features, genetics, and surveillance recommendations in childhood. Clin Cancer Res. 2017;23:e68-e75.	113.	Brunaud L, Boutami M, Nguyen-Thi PL, et al. Both preopera-tive alpha and calcium channel blockade impact intraoperative hemodynamic stability similarly in the management of pheo-chromocytoma. Surgery. 2014;156:1410-1417; discussion7-8.	114.	Scholten A, Valk GD, Ulfman D, Borel Rinkes IH, Vriens MR. Unilateral subtotal adrenalectomy for pheochromocytoma in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 patients: a feasible surgi-cal strategy. Ann Surg. 2011;254:1022-1027.	115.	Shen WT, Sturgeon C, Clark OH, Duh QY, Kebebew E. Should pheochromocytoma size influence surgical approach? A com-parison of 90 malignant and 60 benign pheochromocytomas. Surgery. 2004;136:1129-1137.	116.	McDermott S, O’Connor OJ, Cronin CG, Blake MA. Radio-logical evaluation of adrenal incidentalomas: current methods and future prospects. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012;26:21-33.	117.	Zeiger MA, Thompson GB, Duh QY, et al. The American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists and American Association of Endocrine Surgeons medical guidelines for the management of adrenal incidentalomas. Endocr Pract. 2009;15(suppl 1):1-20.	118.	Glenn JA, Kiernan CM, Yen TW, et al. Management of sus-pected adrenal metastases at 2 academic medical centers. Am J Surg. 2016;211:664-670.	119.	Economopoulos KP, Mylonas KS, Stamou AA, et al. Laparo-scopic versus robotic adrenalectomy: a comprehensive meta-analysis. Int J Surg. 2017;38:95-104.Brunicardi_Ch38_p1625-p1704.indd   170401/03/19   11:22 AM
# Chunk 8941
INTRODUCTIONIn his 1953 classic textbook entitled The Surgery of Infancy and Childhood, Dr. Robert E. Gross summarized the essential challenge of pediatric surgery: “Those who daily operate upon adults, even with the greatest of skill, are sometimes appalled—or certainly are not at their best —when called upon to operate upon and care for a tiny patient. Something more than diminu-tive instruments or scaled-down operative manipulations are necessary to do the job in a suitable manner.” To this day, surgi-cal residents and other trainees often approach the pediatric sur-gical patient with the same mix of fear, trepidation, and anxiety.  These same trainees often complete their pediatric surgical rotations with a profound respect for the resilience of young children to undergo complex operations and an appreciation for the precision required from their caregivers, both in the operat-ing room and during the perioperative period. Over the decades, the specialty of pediatric surgery has evolved considerably in its care for the smallest of surgical patients, such that in utero sur-gery is now an option in an increasing number of circumstances. Similarly, our understanding of the pathophysiology of the dis-eases that pediatric surgeons face has increased to the point that some pediatric surgical diseases are now understood at the level of molecular or cellular signaling pathways. Pediatric surgery provides the opportunity to intervene in a wide array of diseases and to exert a long-lasting impact on the lives of children and their grateful parents. The scope of diseases encountered in the standard practice of pediatric surgery is immense, with patients Pediatric SurgeryDavid J. Hackam, Jeffrey Upperman, Tracy Grikscheit,  Kasper Wang, and Henri R. Ford 39chapterIntroduction1705Pediatric Surgical Themes:  Pitfalls and Pearls1706General Considerations1707Fluid and Electrolyte Balance / 1707Acid-Base Equilibrium / 1707Blood Volume and Blood  Replacement / 1707Parenteral Alimentation  and Nutrition / 1708Venous Access / 1709Thermoregulation / 1709Pain Control / 1710Neck Masses1710Lymphadenopathy / 1710Thyroglossal Duct Remnants / 1710Branchial Cleft Anomalies / 1711Lymphatic Malformation / 1711Torticollis / 1712Respiratory System1712Congenital Diaphragmatic  Hernia (Bochdalek) / 1712Congenital Lobar Emphysema / 1714Bronchopulmonary Foregut  Malformations / 1715Bronchiectasis / 1716Foreign Bodies / 1716Esophagus1717Esophageal Atresia and Tracheoesophageal Fistula / 1717Corrosive Injury of the Esophagus / 1721Gastroesophageal Reflux / 1721Gastrointestinal Tract1722An Approach to the  Vomiting Infant / 1722Hypertrophic Pyloric Stenosis / 1722Intestinal Obstruction in the  Newborn / 1723Duodenal Obstruction / 1724Intestinal Atresia / 1724Malrotation and Midgut Volvulus / 1725Meconium Ileus / 1726Necrotizing Enterocolitis / 1727Short Bowel Syndrome / 1730Intussusception / 1731Appendicitis / 1731Intestinal Duplications / 1733Meckel’s Diverticulum / 1733Mesenteric Cysts / 1733Hirschsprung’s Disease / 1734Anorectal Malformations / 1735Jaundice1737The Approach to the  Jaundiced Infant / 1737Biliary Atresia / 1737Choledochal Cyst / 1739Deformities of the  Abdominal Wall1740Embryology of the Abdominal Wall / 1740Umbilical Hernia / 1740Patent Urachus / 1740Omphalocele / 1740Gastroschisis / 1741Prune-Belly Syndrome / 1743Inguinal Hernia / 1743Genitalia1744Undescended testis / 1744Vaginal Anomalies / 1745Ovarian Cysts and Tumors / 1745Ambiguous Genitalia / 1746Pediatric Malignancy1747Wilms’ Tumor / 1747Neuroblastoma / 1748Rhabdomyosarcoma / 1749Teratoma / 1750Liver Tumors / 1751Trauma in Children1751Mechanisms of Injury / 1751Initial Management / 1752Evaluation of Injury / 1752Injuries to the Central  Nervous System / 1752Thoracic Injuries / 1752Abdominal Injuries / 1752Fetal Intervention1753Fetal Surgery for Lower  Urinary Tract Obstruction / 1754Fetal Surgery for Myelomeningocele / 1754The EXIT Procedure / 1754Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   170512/02/19   11:26 AM 1706Key Points1	In infants with Bochdalek-type congenital diaphragmatic hernia, the severity of pulmonary hypoplasia and the resul-tant pulmonary hypertension are key determinants of sur-vival. Barotrauma and hypoxia should be avoided.2	During initial management of an infant with esophageal atresia and distal tracheoesophageal fistula, every effort should be made to avoid distending the gastrointestinal tract, especially when using mechanical ventilation. The patient should be evaluated for components of the VAC-TERRL (vertebral, anorectal, cardiac, tracheoesophageal, renal, radial limb) anomalies. Timing and extent of surgery are dictated by the stability of the patient.3	Although malrotation with midgut volvulus occurs most commonly within the first few weeks of life, it should always be considered in the differential diagnosis in a child with bilious emesis. Volvulus is a surgical emergency; therefore, in a critically ill child, prompt surgical interven-tion should not be delayed for any reason.4	When evaluating a newborn infant for vomiting, it is criti-cal to distinguish between proximal and distal causes of intestinal obstruction using both prenatal and postnatal history, physical examination, and abdominal radiographs.5	Risk factors for necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) include prematurity, formula feeding, bacterial infection, and intestinal ischemia. Critical to the management of infants with advanced (Bell stage III) or perforated NEC is timely and adequate source control of peritoneal contamination. Early sequelae of NEC include perforation, sepsis, and death. Later sequelae include short bowel syndrome and stricture.6	In patients with intestinal obstruction secondary to Hirschsprung’s disease, a leveling ostomy or endorectal pull-through should be performed using ganglionated bowel, proximal to the transition zone between ganglionic and aganglionic intestine.7	Prognosis of infants with biliary atresia is directly related to age at diagnosis and timing of portoenterostomy. Infants with advanced age at the time of diagnosis or infants who fail to demonstrate evidence of bile drainage after porto-enterostomy usually require liver transplantation.8	Infants with omphaloceles have greater associated morbid-ity and mortality than infants with gastroschisis due to a higher incidence of congenital anomalies and pulmonary hypoplasia. Gastroschisis can be associated with intestinal atresia, but not with other congenital anomalies. An intact omphalocele can be repaired electively, whereas gastros-chisis requires urgent intervention to protect the exposed intestine.9	Prognosis for children with Wilms’ tumor is defined by the stage of disease at the time of diagnosis and the histo-logic type (favorable vs. unfavorable). Preoperative che-motherapy is indicated for bilateral involvement, a solitary kidney, or tumor in the inferior vena cava above the hepatic veins. Gross tumor rupture during surgery auto-matically changes the stage to 3 (at a minimum).10	Injury is the leading cause of death in children older than 1 year of age. Blunt mechanisms account for the majority of pediatric injuries. The central nervous system is the most commonly injured organ system and the leading cause of death in injured children.ranging in age from the fetus to 18 years old, and it includes pathologies in the head and neck, thoracic, gastrointestinal, and genitourinary regions. This chapter is not designed to cover the entire spectrum of diseases a pediatric surgeon is expected to master; rather, it presents a synopsis of the most commonly encountered pediatric surgical conditions that a practicing gen-eral surgeon is likely to treat over the course of her or his career.PEDIATRIC SURGICAL THEMES:  PITFALLS AND PEARLSThis chapter focuses on the unique considerations regarding the diagnosis and management of surgical diseases in the pediatric population. Many surgical trainees approach the surgical care of children with some degree of fear and trepidation. As any pediatric caregiver will attest to, the surgical management of infants and children requires delicate, careful, and professional interactions with their parents. The stress that the parents of sick children experience in the hospital setting can, at times, be over-whelming. It is due, in part, to the uncertainty regarding a par-ticular prognosis, the feeling of helplessness that evolves when one is unable to care for one’s own child, and in certain cases, the guilt or remorse that one feels for not seeking medical care earlier, or for consenting to a particular procedure. Management of the sick child and his or her family requires not only a cer-tain set of skills but also a unique knowledge base. This section is included to summarize some important general principles in accomplishing this task.1.	Children are not little adults, but they are little people. In practical terms, this often-heard refrain implies that children have unique fluid, electrolyte, and medication needs. Thus, the dosage of medications and the administration of IV fluids should at all times be based on their weight. The corollary of this point is that infants and young children are extremely sensitive to perturbations in their normal physiology and may be easily tipped into fluid overload or dehydration.2.	Sick children whisper before they shout. Children with surgi-cal diseases can deteriorate very quickly. But before they dete-riorate, they often manifest subtle physical findings. These findings—referred to as “whispers”—may include signs such as tachycardia, bradycardia, hypothermia, fever, recurrent emesis, or feeding intolerance. Meticulous attention to these subtle findings may unmask the development of potentially serious, life-threatening physiological disturbances.3.	Always listen to the mother and the father. Surgical diseases in children can be very difficult to diagnose because children are often minimally communicative, and information that they communicate may be confusing, conflicting, or both. In all cases, it is wise to listen to the child’s parents, who have closely observed their child and know him or her best.  Most importantly, the child’s parents know with certainty Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   170612/02/19   11:26 AM 1707PEDIATRIC SURGERYCHAPTER 39whether or not the child is sick or not, despite not always knowing the precise diagnosis.4.	Pediatric tissue must be handled delicately and with pro-found respect.5.	Children suffer pain after surgery. Timely and adequate pain management must accompany surgical interventions.6.	Pay particular attention to the postoperative pediatric patient whose pain cannot be soothed by the administration of stan-dard amounts of analgesic agents. Ask yourself whether a sig-nificant yet unrecognized postoperative complication exists.GENERAL CONSIDERATIONSFluid and Electrolyte BalanceIn managing the pediatric surgical patient, an understanding of fluid and electrolyte balance is critical as the margin between dehydration and fluid overload is small. This is particularly true in infants, who have little reserve at baseline and even less when ill. Failure to pay meticulous attention to their hydration status can result in significant fluid overload or dehydration. Several surgical diagnoses such as gastroschisis or short-gut syndrome are characterized by a predisposition to fluid loss. Others require judicious restoration of intravascular volume in order to pre-vent cardiac failure as is the case in patients with congenital diaphragmatic hernia and associated pulmonary hypertension.The infant’s physiologic day is approximately eight hours in duration. Accordingly, careful assessment of the individual patient’s fluid balance, including fluid intake and output for the previous eight hours, is essential to prevent dehydration or fluid overload. Clinical signs of dehydration include tachycardia, decreased urine output, reduced skin turgor, depressed fonta-nelle, absent tears, lethargy, and poor feeding. Fluid overload is often manifested by the onset of a new oxygen requirement, respiratory distress, tachypnea, and tachycardia. The physi-cal assessment of the fluid status of each child must include a complete head-to-toe evaluation, with emphasis on determining whether perturbations in normal physiology are present.At 12 weeks’ gestation, the total body water of a fetus is approximately 94 cc/kg. By the time the fetus reaches full term, the total body water has decreased to approximately 80 cc/kg. Total body water drops an additional 5% within the first week of life, and by 1 year of life, total body water approaches adult levels, around 60 to 65 cc/kg. Parallel to the drop in total body water is the reduction in extracellular fluid. These changes are accelerated in the preterm infant who may face additional fluid losses due to coexisting congenital anomalies or surgery. Nor-mal daily maintenance fluids for most children can be estimated using the following formula:100 mL/kg for the first 10 kg, plus 50 mL/kg for  11 to 20 kg, plus 25 mL/kg for each additional  kilogram of body weight thereafter.Because IV (I.V.) fluid orders are written as milliliters per hour, this can be conveniently converted to:4 mL/kg/h up to 10 kg, add 2 mL/kg/h for  11 to 20 kg, and add 1 mL/kg/h for each additional  kilogram body weight thereafter.For example, a 26-kg child has an estimated maintenance fluid requirement of (10 × 4) + (10 × 2) + (6 × 1) = 66 mL/h in the absence of massive fluid losses or shock. A newborn infant with gastroschisis will manifest significant evaporative losses from the exposed bowel such that fluid requirements can be on the order of 150 to 180 cc/kg/day.Precise management of a neonate’s fluid status requires an understanding of changes in the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) and tubular function of the kidney. The term newborn’s GFR is approximately 21 mL/min/1.73 m2 compared to 70 mL/min/1.73 m2  in an adult. Within the first 2 weeks of life GFR increases to approximately 60, and by 2 years of age it is essentially at adult levels. The capacity to concentrate urine is very limited in preterm and term infants. In comparison to an adult who can concentrate urine to 1200 mOsm/kg, infants can concentrate urine at best to 600 mOsm/kg. While infants are capable of secreting antidiuretic hormone, ADH, the aquaporin water channel–mediated osmotic water permeability of the infant’s collecting tubules is severely limited compared to that of adults, leading to an insensitivity to ADH.Sodium requirements range from 2 mEq/kg per day in term infants up to 5 mEq/kg per day in critically ill preterm infants as a consequence of salt wasting. Potassium require-ments are on the order of 1 to 2 mEq/kg per day. Calcium and magnesium supplementation of IV fluids is essential to prevent laryngospasm, dysrhythmias, and tetany.Acid-Base EquilibriumAcute metabolic acidosis usually implies inadequate tissue perfusion and is a serious disorder in children. Potentially life-threatening causes that are specific for the pediatric population must be sought; they include intestinal ischemia from necro-tizing enterocolitis (in the neonate), midgut volvulus, or incar-cerated hernia. Other causes include chronic bicarbonate loss from the gastrointestinal tract or acid accumulation as in chronic renal failure. Respiratory acidosis implies hypoventilation, the cause of which should be apparent. Treatment of acute meta-bolic acidosis should be aimed at restoring tissue perfusion by addressing the underlying abnormality first. For severe meta-bolic acidemia where the serum pH is less than 7.25, sodium bicarbonate should be administered using the following guide-line: base deficit × weight in kilograms × 0.5 (in newborns). The last factor in the equation should be 0.4 for smaller children and 0.3 for older children. The dose should be diluted to a concentra-tion of 0.5 mEq/mL because full-strength sodium bicarbonate is hyperosmolar. One-half the corrective dose is given, and the serum pH is measured again. During cardiopulmonary resusci-tation (CPR), one-half the corrective dose can be given as an intravenous bolus and the other half given slowly intravenously.Respiratory alkalosis is usually caused by hyperventila-tion, which is readily correctable. Metabolic alkalosis most commonly implies gastric acid loss, as in the child with pyloric stenosis, or aggressive diuretic therapy. In the child with gastric fluid loss, IV fluids of 5% dextrose, 0.5% normal saline, and  20 mEq KCl/L usually correct the alkalosis.Blood Volume and Blood ReplacementCriteria for blood transfusion in infants and children remain poorly defined. The decision to transfuse a critically ill pediatric patient may depend on a number of clinical features that include the patient’s age, primary diagnosis, the presence of ongoing bleeding, coagulopathy, hypoxia, hemodynamic compromise, lactic acidosis, cyanotic heart disease, and overall severity of illness. A recent survey of transfusion practices among pediatric intensivists showed that the baseline hemoglobin levels that would prompt them to recommend RBC transfusion ranged from 7 to  13 g/dL. Patients with cyanotic heart disease are often transfused to  Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   170712/02/19   11:26 AM 1708SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIhigher hemoglobin values, although the threshold for transfusion in this population remains to be defined. In general terms, there is a trend towards an avoidance of the use of RBC products whenever possible as current studies suggest that lower hemoglobin concentrations are well tolerated by many groups of patients and that administration of RBCs may have unintended negative consequences, including perhaps an increase in predisposition to the development of necrotizing enterocolitis, although this finding is controversial. In addition, there is increasing evidence that PRBC transfusion may have adverse effects on the host immune in both children and adults. These effects are poorly understood but may include effects due to RBC storage and due to factors that are particular to the individual RBC donor. The TRIPICU randomized controlled trial by Lacroix et al in 2007, which was performed in stable critically ill children, determined that a restrictive Hb transfusion trigger (70 g/L) was as safe as a liberal Hb trigger (95 g/L) and was associated with reduced blood use. It remains uncertain whether this can be extrapolated to unstable patients. Expert opinion now generally favors an Hb transfusion trigger of 70 g/L in stable critically ill children, which is the same as the recommendation for adult patients (see Chapter 7).  A higher threshold should be considered if the child has symptomatic anemia or impaired cardiorespiratory function.A useful guideline for estimating blood volume for the newborn infant is approximately 80 mL/kg of body weight. When packed red blood cells are required, the transfusion requirement is usually administered in 10 mL/kg increments, which is roughly equivalent to a 500-mL transfusion for a 70-kg adult. The following formula may be used to determine the vol-ume (ml) of PRBC to be transfused:(Target hematocrit—Current Hematocrit)  × weight (kg) × 80/65 (65 represents the estimated  hematocrit of a unit of PRBC)As a general rule, blood is recommended for replacement of volume loss if the child’s perfusion is inadequate despite administration of 2 to 3 boluses of 20 mL/kg of isotonic crystalloid. Consideration should be given for the administration of 10 mL/kg of packed red blood cells as soon as possible. Type O  blood can be administered without a cross-match and is relatively safe; type-specific blood can be obtained quite quickly; however, unlike fully cross-matched blood, incompatibilities other than ABO and Rh may exist.In the child, coagulation deficiencies may rapidly assume clinical significance after extensive blood transfusion. It is advisable to have fresh frozen plasma and platelets available if more than 30 mL/kg have been transfused. Plasma is given in a dose of 10 to 20 mL/kg, and platelets are given in a dose of 1 unit/5 kg. Each unit of platelets consists of 40 to 60 mL of fluid (plasma plus platelets). Following transfusion of PRBCs to neonates with tenuous fluid balance, a single dose of a diuretic (such as furosemide 1 mg/kg) may help to facilitate excretion of the extra fluid load. Many clinicians prefer to administer fresh products to minimize the deleterious effects of red cell storage.In pediatric patients who have lost greater than 30 mL/kg with ongoing bleeding, consideration should be given to initia-tion of a massive transfusion protocol. Such a protocol involves transfusion, based on weight, of 1:1:1 transfusion of RBCs, plasma, and platelets.Parenteral Alimentation and NutritionThe nutritional requirements of the surgical neonate must be met in order for the child to grow and to heal surgical wounds. Table 39-1Nutritional requirements for the pediatric  surgical patientAGECALORIESPROTEIN(kcal/kg/d)(gram/kg/d)0–6 months100–12026 months–1 year1001.51–3 years1001.24–6 years9017–10 years70111–14 years55115–18 years451If inadequate protein and carbohydrate calories are given, the child may not only fail to recover from surgery but may also exhibit growth failure and impaired development of the central nervous system. In general terms, the adequacy of growth must be assessed frequently by determining both total body weight as well as head circumference. Neonates that are particularly predisposed to protein-calorie malnutrition include those with gastroschisis, intestinal atresia, or intestinal insufficiency from other causes, such as necrotizing enterocolitis. The protein and caloric requirements for the surgical neonate are shown in Table 39-1.Nutrition can be provided via either the enteral or parenteral routes. Whenever possible, the enteral route is preferred because it not only promotes the growth and function of the gastrointestinal system, it also ensures that the infant learns how to feed. There are various enteral feeding preparations available; these are outlined in Table 39-2. The choice of formula is based upon the individual clinical state of the child. Pediatric surgeons are often faced with situations where oral feeding is not possible. This problem can be seen in the extremely premature infant who has not yet developed the feeding skills, or in the infant with concomitant craniofacial anomalies that impair sucking, for example. In these instances, enteral feeds can be administered either a nasojejunal or a gastrostomy tube.When the gastrointestinal tract cannot be used because of mechanical, ischemic, inflammatory, or functional disorders, parenteral alimentation must be given. Prolonged parenteral nutrition is delivered via a central venous catheter. Peripheral IV alimentation can be given, utilizing less concentrated but greater volumes of solutions. Long-term parenteral nutrition should include supplemental copper, zinc, and iron to prevent the development of trace metal deficiencies. A major complica-tion of long-term total parenteral nutrition (TPN) is the devel-opment of parenteral nutrition–associated cholestasis, which can eventually progress to liver failure. To prevent this major complication, concomitant enteral feedings should be instituted, and the gastrointestinal tract should be used as soon as pos-sible. When proximal stomas are in place, gastrointestinal con-tinuity should be restored as soon as possible. Where intestinal insufficiency is associated with dilation of the small intestine, tapering or intestinal lengthening procedures may be beneficial. Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   170812/02/19   11:26 AM 1709PEDIATRIC SURGERYCHAPTER 39Table 39-2Formulas for pediatric surgical neonatesFORMULAkcal/mLPROTEIN (g/mL)FAT (g/mL)CARBOHYDRATE (g/mL)Human milk0.670.0110.040.07Milk-based formula    Enfamil 200.670.0150.0380.069Similac 200.670.0150.0360.072Soy-based formula    Prosobee0.670.020.0360.07Isomil0.670.0180.0370.068Special formula    Pregestimil.67.019.028.091Alimentum.67.019.038.068Preterm    Enfamil Premature.80.024.041.089Other strategies to minimize the development of TPN-related liver disease include meticulous catheter care to avoid infec-tion, which increases cholestatic symptoms, aggressive treat-ment of any infection, and early cycling of parenteral nutrition in older children who can tolerate not receiving continuous dextrose solution for a limited period. Evidence suggests that cholestasis eventually resolves in most cases after parenteral nutrition is discontinued, as measured by levels of total bili-rubin. Preliminary evidence suggests that substituting omega-3 fish oil lipid emulsion in parenteral nutrition for the standard soybean-based emulsions may prevent the development of TPN-related cholestasis and reverse the effects of established liver disease. A phase 2 trial to determine whether parenteral nutrition–associated liver disease can be reversed or its progres-sion halted by using a parenteral fat emulsion prepared from fish oil as measured by normalization of serum levels of hepatic enzymes and bilirubin is ongoing (ClinicalTrials.gov, identifier NCT00826020).Venous AccessObtaining reliable vascular access in an infant or child is an important task that often becomes the responsibility of the pedi-atric surgeon. The goal should always be to place the catheter in the least invasive, least risky, and least painful manner, and in a location that is most accessible and allows for use of the catheter without complications for as long as it is needed. In infants, cen-tral venous access may be established using a cutdown approach, either in the antecubital fossa, external jugular vein, facial vein, or proximal saphenous vein. If the internal jugular vein is used, care is taken to prevent venous occlusion. In infants over 3 kg and in older children, percutaneous access of the subclavian, internal jugular, or femoral veins is possible in most cases, and central access is achieved using the Seldinger technique. The use of ultrasound (US) is considered standard of care for placement of central lines in this population for the internal jugular vein and femoral veins, and it significantly improves the safety of the insertion procedure. The catheters are tunneled to an exit site separate from the venotomy site. Where available, PICC lines (peripherally inserted central catheters) may be placed, typically via the antecubital fossa. Regardless of whether the catheter is placed by a cutdown approach or percutaneously, a chest X-ray to confirm central location of the catheter tip and to exclude the presence of a pneumothorax or hemothorax is mandatory. When discussing the placement of central venous catheters with par-ents, it is important to note that the complication rate for central venous lines in children can be high. The incidence of catheter-related sepsis or infection remains a problem, yet should be less than 1% with meticulous attention to catheter insertion care and exit site management. Superior or inferior vena caval occlusion is a significant risk after the placement of multiple lines, particu-larly in the smallest premature patients.ThermoregulationCareful regulation of the ambient environment of infants and children is crucial as these patients are extremely thermolabile. Premature infants are particularly susceptible to changes in envi-ronmental temperature. Because they are unable to shiver and lack stores of fat, their potential for thermogenesis is impaired. The innate inability to regulate temperature is compounded by the administration of anesthetic and paralyzing agents. Since these patients lack adaptive mechanisms to cope with the envi-ronment, the environment must be carefully regulated. Attention to heat conservation during transport of the infant to and from the operating room is essential. Transport systems incorporating heating units are necessary for premature infants. In the operat-ing room, the infant is kept warm by the use of overhead heat-ing lamps, a heating blanket, warming of inspired gases, and coverage of the extremities and head with occlusive materials. During abdominal surgery, extreme care is taken to avoid wet and cold drapes. All fluids used to irrigate the chest or abdomen must be warmed to body temperature. Laparoscopic approaches for abdominal operations may result in more stable thermoregu-lation due to decreased heat loss from the smaller wound size. Constant monitoring of the child’s temperature is critical in a lengthy procedure, and the surgeon should continuously com-municate with the anesthesiologist regarding the temperature of the patient. The development of hypothermia in infants and chil-dren can result in cardiac arrhythmias or coagulopathy. These potentially life-threatening complications can be avoided by careful attention to thermoregulation.Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   170912/02/19   11:26 AM 1710SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIPain ControlAll children including neonates experience pain; the careful recognition and management of pediatric pain represents an important component of the perioperative management of all pediatric surgical patients. There is a range of pain manage-ment options that can improve the child’s well-being, as well as the parents’ sense of comfort. Given that morphine and fentanyl have an acceptable safety margin, they should be administered to neonates and children when indicated, bear-ing in mind that withholding analgesia poses a significant risk, as does administration of excessive analgesic agents. A recent randomized trial of neonates on ventilators showed that the use of a morphine infusion decreased the incidence of intraventricular hemorrhage by 50%. Additional analge-sic modalities include the use of topical anesthetic ointment (EMLA cream) and the use of regional anesthesia, such as caudal blocks for hernias and epidural or incisional catheter infusions (On-Q) for large abdominal or thoracic incisions. In surgical neonates that have been administered large con-centrations of narcotics over a prolonged period, transient physical dependence should not only be expected but also anticipated. When narcotics are discontinued, symptoms of narcotic withdrawal may develop, including irritability, rest-lessness, and episodes of hypertension and tachycardia. Early recognition of these signs is essential, as is timely treatment using nalaxone and other agents. It is important to admin-ister pain control in concert with a well-qualified and col-laborative pediatric pain-management team, which typically includes anesthesiologists with expertise in pain management, as well as advance practice nurses who can respond rapidly when the pain control is inadequate or excessive. By ensuring that the pediatric surgical patient has adequate analgesia, the surgeon ensures that the patient receives the most humane and thorough treatment and provides important reassurance to all other members of the healthcare team and to the family that pain control is a very high priority.NECK MASSESThe management of neck masses in children is determined by their location and the length of time that they have been pres-ent. Neck lesions are found either in the midline or lateral com-partments. Midline masses include thyroglossal duct remnants, thyroid masses, thymic cysts, or dermoid cysts. Lateral lesions include branchial cleft remnants, cystic hygromas, vascular mal-formations, salivary gland tumors, torticollis, and lipoblastoma (a rare benign mesenchymal tumor of embryonal fat occurring in infants and young children). Enlarged lymph nodes and rare malignancies such as rhabdomyosarcoma can occur either in the midline or laterally.LymphadenopathyThe most common cause of a neck mass in a child is an enlarged lymph node, which typically can be found laterally or in the midline. The patient is usually referred to the pedi-atric surgeon for evaluation after the mass has been present for several weeks. A detailed history and physical examination often helps determine the likely etiology of the lymph node and the need for excisional biopsy. Enlarged tender lymph nodes are usually the result of a bacterial infection (Staphy-lococcus or Streptococcus). Treatment of the primary cause (e.g., otitis media or pharyngitis) with antibiotics often is all that is necessary. However, when the involved nodes become fluctuant, incision and drainage are indicated. In many North American institutions, there has been an increasing prevalence of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus infection of the skin and soft tissues, leading to increased staphylococcal lymphadenitis in children. More chronic forms of lymphadeni-tis, including infections with atypical mycobacteria, as well as cat-scratch fever, are diagnosed based on serologic findings or excisional biopsy. The lymphadenopathy associated with infectious mononucleosis can be diagnosed based on serology. When the neck nodes are firm, fixed, and others are also pres-ent in the axillae or groin, or the history suggests lymphoma, excisional biopsy is indicated. In these cases, it is essential to obtain a chest radiograph to look for the presence of a medias-tinal mass. Significant mediastinal load portends cardiorespira-tory collapse due to loss of venous return and compression of the tracheobronchial tree with general anesthesia.Thyroglossal Duct RemnantsPathology and Clinical Manifestations. The thyroid gland buds off the foregut diverticulum at the base of the tongue in the region of the future foramen cecum at 3 weeks of embryonic life. As the fetal neck develops, the thyroid tissue becomes more anterior and caudad until it rests in its normal position. The “descent” of the thyroid is intimately connected with the development of the hyoid bone. Residual thyroid tis-sue left behind during the migration may persist and subse-quently present in the midline of the neck as a thyroglossal duct cyst. The mass is most commonly appreciated in the 2to 4-year-old child when the baby fat disappears and irregulari-ties in the neck become more readily apparent. Usually the cyst is encountered in the midline at or below the level of the hyoid bone and moves up and down with swallowing or with protrusion of the tongue. Occasionally it presents as an intrathyroidal mass. Most thyroglossal duct cysts are asymp-tomatic. If the duct retains its connection with the pharynx, infection may occur, and the resulting abscess will necessitate incision and drainage, occasionally resulting in a salivary fis-tula. Submental lymphadenopathy and midline dermoid cysts can be confused with a thyroglossal duct cyst. Rarely, midline ectopic thyroid tissue masquerades as a thyroglossal duct cyst and may represent the patient’s only thyroid tissue. Therefore, if there is any question regarding the diagnosis or if the thyroid gland cannot be palpated in its normal anatomic position, it is advisable to obtain a nuclear scan to confirm the presence of a normal thyroid gland. Although rarely the case in children, in adults the thyroglossal duct may contain thyroid tissue that can undergo malignant degeneration. The presence of malignancy in a thyroglossal cyst should be suspected when the cyst grows rapidly or when US demonstrates a complex anechoic pattern or the presence of calcification.Treatment. If the thyroglossal duct cyst presents with an abscess, treatment should first consist of drainage and antibiot-ics. Following resolution of the inflammation, resection of the cyst in continuity with the central portion of the hyoid bone and the tract connecting to the pharynx in addition to ligation at the foramen cecum (the Sistrunk operation), is curative in over 90% of patients. Lesser operations result in unacceptably high recur-rence rates, and recurrence is more frequent following infection. According to a recent review, factors predictive of recurrence included more than two infections prior to surgery, age under  2 years, and inadequate initial operation.Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   171012/02/19   11:26 AM 1711PEDIATRIC SURGERYCHAPTER 39Branchial Cleft AnomaliesPaired branchial clefts and arches develop early in the fourth gestational week. The first cleft and the first, second, third, and fourth pouches give rise to adult organs. The embryologic com-munication between the pharynx and the external surface may persist as a fistula. A fistula is seen most commonly with the second branchial cleft, which normally disappears, and extends from the anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle superiorly, inward through the bifurcation of the carotid artery, and enters the posterolateral pharynx just below the tonsillar fossa. In contrast, a third branchial cleft fistula passes posterior to the carotid bifurcation. The branchial cleft remnants may con-tain small pieces of cartilage and cysts, but internal fistulas are rare. A second branchial cleft sinus is suspected when clear fluid is noted draining from the external opening of the tract at the anterior border of the lower third of the sternomastoid muscle. Rarely, branchial cleft anomalies occur in association with bili-ary atresia and congenital cardiac anomalies, an association that is referred to as Goldenhar’s complex.Treatment. Complete excision of the cyst and sinus tract is necessary for cure. Dissection of the sinus tract is facilitated with passage of a fine lacrimal duct probe through the external opening into the tract and utilizing it as a guide for dissection. Injection of a small amount of methylene blue dye into the tract also may be useful. A series of two or sometimes three small transverse incisions in a “stepladder” fashion is preferred to a long oblique incision in the neck, which is cosmetically unde-sirable. Branchial cleft cysts can present as abscesses. In these cases, initial treatment includes incision and drainage with a course of antibiotics to cover Staphylococcus and Streptococ-cus species, followed by excision of the cyst after the infection resolves.Lymphatic MalformationEtiology and Pathology. Lymphatic malformation (cystic hygroma or lymphangioma) occurs as a result of sequestration or obstruction of developing lymph vessels in approximately 1 in 12,000 births. Although the lesion can occur anywhere, the most common sites are in the posterior triangle of the neck, axilla, groin, and mediastinum. The cysts are lined by endo-thelium and filled with lymph. Occasionally unilocular cysts occur, but more often there are multiple cysts “infiltrating” the surrounding structures and distorting the local anatomy. A particularly troublesome variant of lymphatic malformation is that which involves the tongue, floor of the mouth, and struc-tures deep in the neck. Adjacent connective tissue may show extensive lymphocytic infiltration. The mass may be apparent at birth or may appear and enlarge rapidly in the early weeks or months of life as lymph accumulates; most present by age 2 years (Fig. 39-1A). Extension of the lesion into the axilla or mediastinum occurs about 10% of the time and can be demon-strated preoperatively by chest X-ray, US, or computed tomo-graphic (CT) scan, although magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is preferable. Occasionally lymphatic malformations contain nests of vascular tissue. These poorly supported vessels may bleed and produce rapid enlargement and discoloration of the lesion. Infection within the lymphatic malformations, usually caused by Streptococcus or Staphylococcus, may occur. In the neck, this can cause rapid enlargement, which may result in airway compromise. Rarely, it may be necessary to carry out percutaneous aspiration of a cyst to relieve respiratory distress.The diagnosis of lymphatic malformation by prenatal US, before 30 weeks’ gestation, has detected a “hidden mortality” as well as a high incidence of associated anomalies, including abnormal karyotypes and hydrops fetalis. Occasionally, very large lesions can cause obstruction of the fetal airway. Such obstruction can result in the development of polyhydramnios by impairing the ability of the fetus to swallow amniotic fluid. In these circumstances, the airway is usually markedly distorted, which can result in immediate airway obstruction unless the air-way is secured at the time of delivery. Orotracheal intubation or emergency tracheostomy while the infant remains attached to the placenta, the so-called EXIT procedure (ex utero intrapar-tum technique) may be necessary to secure the airway.Treatment. The modern management of most lymphatic malformations includes image-guided sclerotherapy as first-line therapy, which often involves multiple injections. Cyst excision may be used in cases where injection is inadequate.  BAFigure 39-1. A. Left cervical cystic hygroma in a 2-day old baby. B. Intraoperative photograph showing a vessel loop around the spinal accessory nerve.Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   171112/02/19   11:26 AM 1712SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 39-2. Prenatal ultrasound of a fetus with a congenital dia-phragmatic hernia. Arrows point to the location of the diaphragm. Arrowhead points to the stomach, which is in the thoracic cavity.Total removal of all gross disease is often not possible because of the extent of the lymphatic malformation and its proximity to, and intimate relationship with, adjacent nerves, muscles, and blood vessels (Fig. 39-1B). Radical ablative surgery is not indicated for these lesions, which are always benign. Conservative excision and unroofing of remaining cysts is advised, with repeated partial excision of residual cysts and sclerotherapy if necessary, preserving all adjacent crucial structures. In cases in which surgical excision is performed, closed-suction drainage is recommended. Nevertheless, fluid may accumulate beneath the surgically created flaps in the area from which the lymphatic malformation was excised, requiring multiple needle aspirations. A combined sclerotherapy/resectional approach is particularly useful for masses that extend to the base of the tongue or the floor of the mouth.TorticollisThe presence of a lateral neck mass in infancy in association with rotation of the head towards the opposite side of the mass indicates the presence of congenital torticollis. This lesion results from fibrosis of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. The mass may be palpated in the affected muscle in approximately two-thirds of cases, or it may be diagnosed by US. Histologi-cally, the lesion is characterized by the deposition of collagen and fibroblasts around atrophied muscle cells. In the vast major-ity of cases, physical therapy based on passive stretching of the affected muscle is of benefit. Rarely, surgical transection of the sternocleidomastoid may be indicated.RESPIRATORY SYSTEMCongenital Diaphragmatic Hernia (Bochdalek)Pathology. The septum transversum extends to divide the pleural and coelomic cavities during fetal development. This precursor of the diaphragm normally completes separation of these two cavities at the posterolateral aspects of this mesen-chymally derived structure. The most common variant of a congenital diaphragmatic hernia is a posterolateral defect, also known as a Bochdalek hernia. Diaphragmatic defects allow abdominal viscera to fill the chest cavity. The abdominal cav-ity is small and underdeveloped and remains scaphoid after birth. Both lungs are hypoplastic, with decreased bronchial and pulmonary artery branching. Lung weight, lung volume, and DNA content are also decreased, and these findings are more striking on the ipsilateral side. This anomaly is encountered more commonly on the left (80–90%). Linkage analyses have recently implicated genetic mutations in syndromic variants of congenital diaphragmatic hernias. In many instances, there is a surfactant deficiency, which compounds the degree of respira-tory insufficiency. Amniocentesis with karyotype may identify chromosomal defects, especially trisomy 18 and 21. Associated anomalies, once thought to be uncommon, were identified in 65 of 166 patients in one study, predominately of the heart, fol-lowed by abdominal wall defects, chromosomal changes, and other defects.Prenatal ultrasonography is successful in making the diag-nosis of congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) as early as 15 weeks’ gestation, and early antenatal diagnosis is associated with worse outcomes. US findings include herniated abdominal viscera in the chest that may also look like a mass or lung anom-aly, changes in liver position, and mediastinal shift away from the herniated viscera (Fig. 39-2). Accurate prenatal prediction of outcome for fetuses who have CDH remains a challenge. One index of severity for patients with left CDH is the lung-to-head ratio (LHR), which is the product of the length and the width of the right lung at the level of the cardiac atria divided by the head circumference (all measurements in millimeters). An LHR value of less than 1.0 is associated with a very poor prognosis, whereas an LHR greater than 1.4 predicts a more favorable outcome. The utility of the LHR in predicting outcome in  patients with CDH has recently been questioned because of the tremendous interobserver variability in calculating this ratio for a par-ticular patient, as well as the lack of reliable measures to deter-mine postnatal disease severity. Because the LHR is not gestational age independent, Jani and colleagues proposed the introduction of a new measurement: the observed to expected (o/e) LHR, to correct for gestational age. The observed LHR may be expressed as a percentage of the expected mean for ges-tational age of the observed/expected lung-to-head ratio (o/e LHR), which is considered extreme if <15%, severe at 15% to 25%, moderate at 26% to 35%, and mild at 36% to 45%. The most reliable prenatal predictor of postnatal survival is absence of liver herniation, where in 710 fetuses, there was significantly higher survival rate in fetuses without herniation (74% without herniation vs. 45% with herniation).Following delivery, the diagnosis of CDH is made by CXR (Fig. 39-3). The differential diagnosis includes broncho-pulmonary foregut malformations, in which the intrathoracic loops of bowel may be confused for lung or foregut pathol-ogy. The vast majority of infants with CDH develop immedi-ate respiratory distress, which is due to the combined effects of three factors. First, the air-filled bowel in the chest compresses the mobile mediastinum, which shifts to the opposite side of the chest, compromising air exchange in the contralateral lung. Second, pulmonary hypertension develops. This phenomenon results in persistent fetal circulation with resultant decreased pulmonary perfusion and impaired gas exchange. Finally, the lung on the affected side is often hypoplastic, such that it is essentially nonfunctional. Varying degrees of pulmonary hypo-plasia on the opposite side may compound these effects. The second and third factors are thought to be the most important. Neonates with CDH are usually in respiratory distress requiring 1Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   171212/02/19   11:26 AM 1713PEDIATRIC SURGERYCHAPTER 39Figure 39-3. Chest X-ray showing a left congenital diaphragmatic hernia.ventilation and intensive care, and the overall mortality in most series is around 50%.Treatment. CDH care has been improved through effective use of improved methods of ventilation and timely cannula-tion for extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO). Many infants are symptomatic at birth due to hypoxia, hypercarbia, and metabolic acidosis. Prompt cardiorespiratory stabilization is mandatory. It is noteworthy that the first 24 to 48 hours after birth are often characterized by a period of relative stability with high levels of PaO2 and relatively good perfusion. This has been termed the “honeymoon period” and is often followed by progressive cardiorespiratory deterioration. In the past, cor-rection of the hernia was believed to be a surgical emergency, and patients underwent surgery shortly after birth. It is now accepted that the presence of persistent pulmonary hyperten-sion that results in right-to-left shunting across the open fora-men ovale or the ductus arteriosus, and the degree of pulmonary hypoplasia, are the leading causes of cardiorespiratory insuffi-ciency. Current management therefore is directed toward man-aging the pulmonary hypertension, and minimizing barotrauma while optimizing oxygen delivery. To achieve this goal, infants are placed on mechanical ventilation using relatively low or “gentle” settings that prevent overinflation of the noninvolved lung. Levels of PaCO2 in the range of 50 to 60 mmHg or higher are accepted as long as the pH remains ≥7.25. If these objec-tives cannot be achieved using conventional ventilation, high frequency oscillatory ventilation (HFOV) may be employed to avoid the injurious effects of conventional tidal volume venti-lation. Echocardiography will assess the degree of pulmonary hypertension and identify the presence of any coexisting cardiac anomaly. ICU goals include minimal sedation, meticulous atten-tion to endotracheal tube secretions, and gradual changes to ven-tilator settings to avoid inducing pulmonary hypertension via hypoxia. To minimize the degree of pulmonary hypertension, inhaled nitric oxide may be administered, and in some patients, this improves pulmonary perfusion. Nitric oxide is administered into the ventilation circuit and is used in concentrations up to 40 parts per million. Correction of acidosis using bicarbonate solution may minimize the degree of pulmonary hypertension. As the degree of pulmonary hypertension becomes hemody-namically significant, right-sided heart failure develops, and systemic perfusion is impaired. Administration of excess IV fluid will compound the degree of cardiac failure and lead to marked peripheral edema. Inotropic support using epinephrine, dopamine, and milrinone alone or in combination may be useful in optimizing cardiac contractility and maintaining mean arterial pressure.Infants with CDH who remain severely hypoxic despite maximal ventilatory care may be candidates for treatment of their respiratory failure ECMO, with access via venovenous (VV) or venoarterial (VA) routes. VV bypass is established with a single cannula through the right internal jugular vein, with blood removed from and infused into the right atrium by separate ports. VA bypass provides additional cardiac support, whereas VV bypass requires a well-functioning heart and relies on the lungs for some oxygenation as well. In VA ECMO, the right atrium is cannulated by means of the internal jugular vein and the aortic arch through the right common carotid artery. As much of the cardiac output is directed through the membrane oxygenator as is necessary to provide oxygenated blood to the infant and remove carbon dioxide. The infant is maintained on bypass until the pulmonary hypertension is resolved and lung function, as measured by compliance and the ability to oxy-genate and ventilate, is improved. This is usually seen within 7 to 10 days, but in some infants, it may take up several weeks to occur. Complications associated with ECMO increase after 14 days and include cannula malposition, bleeding in multiple locations, and infection. The use of ECMO is associated with significant risk. Because patients require systemic anticoagu-lation, bleeding complications are the most significant. They may occur intracranially or at the site of cannula insertion, and they can be life-threatening. Systemic sepsis is a significant problem and may necessitate decannulation. Criteria for plac-ing infants on ECMO include the presence of normal cardiac anatomy by echocardiography, the absence of fatal chromosome anomalies, and the expectation that the infant would die with-out ECMO. Traditionally, a threshold of weight greater than  2 kg and gestational age greater than 34 weeks has been applied, although success has been achieved at weights as low as 1.8 kg.  Upon decannulation, some centers repair the carotid artery. In instances in which the child is cannulated for a brief period  (5 days or less) this may be feasible. A recent study failed to show any benefit from repairing the carotid artery, although this finding remains to be studied further.A strategy that does not involve the use of ECMO but instead emphasizes the use of permissive hypercapnia and the avoidance of barotrauma may provide equal overall outcome in patients with CDH. This likely reflects the fact that mortality is related to the degree of pulmonary hypoplasia and the pres-ence of congenital anomalies, neither of which are correctable by ECMO.Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   171312/02/19   11:26 AM 1714SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 39-4. Congenital lobar emphysema of the left upper lobe in a 2-week-old boy. Mediastinal shift is present.The timing of diaphragmatic hernia repair still varies from center to center, particularly when the infant is on ECMO. In patients that are not on ECMO, repair should be performed once the hemodynamic status has been optimized. In neonates that are on ECMO, some surgeons perform early repair on bypass; oth-ers wait until the infant’s lungs are improved and the pulmonary hypertension has subsided and then repair the diaphragm and discontinue bypass within hours of surgery. Still others repair the diaphragm only after the infant is off bypass. Operative repair of the diaphragmatic hernia may be accomplished either by an abdominal or transthoracic approach and can be performed either via open or minimally invasive techniques. Through a subcostal incision the abdominal viscera are withdrawn from the chest, exposing the defect in the diaphragm. Care must be taken when reducing the spleen and liver, as bleeding from these structures can be fatal. The anterior margin is often apparent, while the posterior muscular rim is attenuated. If the infant is heparinized on bypass, minimal dissection of the muscular margins is per-formed. Electrocautery is used liberally to minimize postopera-tive bleeding. Most infants who require ECMO support prior to hernia repair have large defects, often lacking the medial and posterior margins. About three-fourths of infants repaired on bypass require prosthetic material to patch the defect, suturing it to the diaphragmatic remnant or around ribs or costal cartilages for the large defects. If there is adequate muscle for closure, a single layer of nonabsorbable horizontal mattress suture, pled-geted or not, closes the defect. Just before the repair is complete, a chest tube may be positioned in the thoracic cavity but is not mandatory. Patients repaired on ECMO are at risk for develop-ing a hemothorax, which can significantly impair ventilation. Anatomic closure of the abdominal wall may be impossible after reduction of the viscera. Occasionally, a prosthetic patch or acellular material may be sutured to the fascia to facilitate closure. The patch can be removed at a later time, and the ventral hernia can be closed at that time or subsequently. In patients who are deemed to be candidates for a minimally invasive approach (stable patients, >2 kg, no pulmonary hypertension), a thoraco-scopic repair may be safely performed although concerns have been raised about possible effects of the longer operative time for thoracoscopic repair and higher recurrence rates. If the dia-phragm has been repaired on ECMO, weaning and decannulation are accomplished as soon as possible. All infants are ventilated postoperatively to maintain preductal arterial oxygenation of 80 to 100 torr. Very slow weaning from the ventilator is necessary to avoid recurrent pulmonary hypertension.Fetal tracheal occlusion is an experimental prenatal ther-apy for the treatment of severe congenital diaphragmatic hernia that reverses lung hypoplasia. The rationale for this approach is that the occlusion of the fetal trachea leads to net accumula-tion of lung liquid under pressure, which results in the develop-ment of large fluid-filled lungs. The balloon may be placed into the trachea under laparoscopic guidance, then removed prior to delivery when maximal lung growth has been achieved. The use of fetal tracheal occlusion remains investigational, although early reports are promising.Congenital Lobar EmphysemaCongenital lobar emphysema (CLE) is a condition manifested during the first few months of life as a progressive hyperexpan-sion of one or more lobes of the lung. It can be life-threatening in the newborn period if extensive lung tissue is involved, but in the older infant and in cases in which the lesion is less severely distended it causes less respiratory distress. Air entering during inspiration is trapped in the lobe; on expiration, the lobe can-not deflate and progressively overexpands, causing atelectasis of the adjacent lobe or lobes. This hyperexpansion eventually shifts the mediastinum to the opposite side and compromises the other lung. CLE usually occurs in the upper lobes of the lung (left greater than right), followed next in frequency by the right middle lobe, but it also can occur in the lower lobes. It is caused by intrinsic bronchial obstruction from poor bronchial cartilage development or extrinsic compression. Approximately 14% of children with this condition have cardiac defects, with an enlarged left atrium or a major vessel causing compression of the ipsilateral bronchus.Symptoms range from mild respiratory distress to full-fledged respiratory failure with tachypnea, dyspnea, cough, and late cyanosis. These symptoms may be stationary or they may progress rapidly or result in recurrent pneumonia. Occasionally, infants with CLE present with failure to thrive, which likely reflects the increased work associated with the overexpanded lung. A hyperexpanded hemithorax on the ipsilateral side is pathogneumonic for CLE. Diagnosis is typically confirmed by chest X-ray that shows a hyperlucent affected lobe with adja-cent lobar compression and atelectasis. The mediastinum may be shifted as a consequence of mass effect to the contralateral side causing compression and atelectasis of the contralateral lung (Fig. 39-4). Although chest radiograph is usually sufficient, it is sometimes important to obtain at CT scan of the chest to clearly establish the diagnosis of CLE. This should be done only in the stable patient. Unless foreign body or mucous plugging is suspected as a cause of hyperinflation, bronchoscopy is not advisable because it can lead to more air trapping and cause life-threatening respiratory distress in a stable infant. Treatment is resection of the affected lobe, which can be safely performed using either an open or thoracoscopic approach. Unless symp-toms necessitate earlier surgery, resection can usually be per-formed after the infant is several months of age. The prognosis is excellent.Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   171412/02/19   11:26 AM 1715PEDIATRIC SURGERYCHAPTER 39Figure 39-5. Computed tomography scan of the chest showing a congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation of the left lower lobe.Figure 39-6. Intraoperative photograph showing left lower lobe congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation seen in Fig. 39-5.Bronchopulmonary Foregut MalformationsBronchopulmonary foregut malformations include foregut duplication cysts, congenital pulmonary airway malformations, and pulmonary sequestrations as discussed in the following sections.Congenital Pulmonary Airway Malformations. Previ-ously denoted as congenital cystic adenomatous malformation, (CCAM), congenital pulmonary airway malformations (CPAM) exhibits cystic proliferation of the terminal airway, producing cysts lined by mucus-producing respiratory epithelium, and elastic tissue in the cyst walls without cartilage formation. There may be a single cyst with a wall of connective tissue contain-ing smooth muscle. Cysts may be large and multiple (type I), smaller and more numerous (type II), or they may resemble fetal lung without macroscopic cysts (type III). CPAMs frequently occur in the left lower lobe. However, this lesion can occur in any location and may occur in more than one lobe on more than one side, although this is rare. Clinical symptoms range from none to severe respiratory failure at birth. Over time, these mal-formations can be subject to repeated infections and produce fever and cough in older infants and children. The diagnosis is usually confirmed by CT for surgical planning and charac-teristic features that might delineate other bronchopulmonary foregut malformations (Fig. 39-5). Prenatal US may suggest the diagnosis. Resection is curative and may need to be performed urgently in the infant with severe respiratory distress. Long term, there is a risk of malignant degeneration in unresected CPAMs, but this risk occurs over decades and has not been fully defined. As a result, resection of the affected lobe is usually per-formed (Fig. 39-6). Antenatal resection may be rarely indicated in those instances in which fetal development is complicated by hydrops as a result of the mechanical and vascular effects of the lung lesion.Pulmonary Sequestration. Pulmonary sequestration is uncommon and consists of a mass of lung tissue, usually in the left lower chest, occurring without the usual connections to the pulmonary artery or tracheobronchial tree, yet with a systemic blood supply from the aorta. There are two kinds of sequestra-tion. Extralobar sequestration is usually a small area of nonaer-ated lung separated from the main lung mass, with a systemic blood supply, located immediately above the left diaphragm. It is commonly found in cases of CDH. Intralobar sequestration more commonly occurs within the parenchyma of the left lower lobe but can occur on the right. There is no major connection to the tracheobronchial tree, but a secondary connection may be established, perhaps through infection or via adjacent intra-pulmonary shunts. The blood supply frequently originates from the aorta below the diaphragm; multiple vessels may be present (Fig. 39-7). Venous drainage of both types can be systemic or pulmonary. The cause of sequestration is unknown but most probably involves an abnormal budding of the developing lung that picks up a systemic blood supply and never becomes con-nected with the bronchus or pulmonary vessels. Sequestrations may, in some cases, exhibit mixed pathology with components consistent with CCAMs. Extralobar sequestration is asymptom-atic and is usually discovered incidentally on chest X-ray. If the diagnosis can be confirmed, e.g., by CT scan, resection is not necessary. Diagnosis of intralobar sequestration may be made prenatally and confirmed on postnatal CT scan. Alternatively, the diagnosis of intralobar sequestration may be established after repeated infections manifested by cough, fever, and con-solidation in the posterior basal segment of the left lower lobe. Increasingly the diagnosis is being made in the early months of life by US, and color Doppler often can be helpful in delin-eating the systemic arterial supply. Removal of the entire left lower lobe is usually necessary since the diagnosis often is made late after multiple infections. Occasionally segmental resection Figure 39-7. Arteriogram showing large systemic artery supply to intralobar sequestration of the left lower lobe.Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   171512/02/19   11:26 AM 1716SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIof the sequestered part of the lung can be performed using an open, or ideally, a thoracoscopic approach. If an open approach is used, it is important to open the chest through a low inter-costal space (sixth or seventh) to gain access to the vascular attachments to the aorta. These attachments may insert into the aorta below the diaphragm; in these cases, division of the ves-sels as they traverse the thoracic cavity is essential. Prognosis is generally excellent. However, failure to obtain adequate control of these vessels may result in their retraction into the abdomen and result in uncontrollable hemorrhage. It is also possible to perform a combined thoracoscopic and open approach, wherein the vessels are clipped and divided thoracoscopically and then the lesion safely removed through a limited thoracotomy.Bronchogenic Cyst. Bronchogenic cysts are duplication cysts originating from the airway, regardless of the identity of the lining epithelial identity. They can occur anywhere along the respiratory tract and can present at any age, although typically they present after accumulation of intraluminal contents and not within the newborn period. Histologically, they are hamartoma-tous and usually consist of a single cyst lined with an epithe-lium; the mesenchyme contains cartilage and smooth muscle. They are probably embryonic rests of foregut origin that have been pinched off from the main portion of the developing tra-cheobronchial tree and are closely associated in causation with other foregut duplication cysts such as those arising from the esophagus. Bronchogenic cysts may be seen on prenatal US but are discovered most often incidentally on postnatal chest X-ray. Although they may be completely asymptomatic, bronchogenic cysts may produce symptoms, usually compressive, depending on the anatomic location and size, which increases over time if there is no egress for building luminal contents. In the para-tracheal region of the neck they can produce airway compres-sion and respiratory distress. In the lung parenchyma, they may become infected and present with fever and cough. In addition, they may cause obstruction of the bronchial lumen with distal atelectasis and infection, or they may cause mediastinal com-pression. Rarely, rupture of the cyst can occur. Chest X-ray usu-ally shows a dense mass, and CT scan or MRI delineates the precise anatomic location of the lesion. Treatment consists of resection of the cyst, which may need to be undertaken in emer-gency circumstances for airway or cardiac compression. Resec-tion can be performed either as an open procedure, or more commonly using a thoracoscopic approach. If resection of a common wall will result in injury to the airway, resection of the inner epithelial cyst lining after marsupialization is acceptable.BronchiectasisBronchiectasis is an abnormal and irreversible dilatation of the bronchi and bronchioles associated with chronic suppura-tive disease of the airways. Usually patients have an underlying congenital pulmonary anomaly, cystic fibrosis, or immunologic deficiency. Bronchiectasis can also result from chronic infection secondary to a neglected bronchial foreign body. The symptoms include a chronic cough, often productive of purulent secretions, recurrent pulmonary infection, and hemoptysis. The diagnosis is suggested by a chest X-ray that shows increased bronchovas-cular markings in the affected lobe. Chest CT delineates bron-chiectasis with excellent resolution. The preferred treatment for bronchiectasis is medical, consisting of antibiotics, postural drainage, and bronchodilator therapy because many children with the disease show signs of airflow obstruction and bron-chial hyperresponsiveness. Lobectomy or segmental resection is indicated for localized disease that has not responded appro-priately to medical therapy. In severe cases, lung transplantation may be required to replace the terminally damaged, septic lung.Foreign BodiesThe inherent curiosity of children and their innate propensity to place new objects into their mouths to fully explore them place them at great risk for aspiration. Aspirated objects can be found either in the airway or in the esophagus; in both cases the results can be life-threatening.Airway Ingestion. Aspiration of foreign bodies most com-monly occurs in the toddler age group. Peanuts are the most common object that is aspirated, although other materials (pop-corn, for instance) may also be involved. A solid foreign body often will cause air trapping, with hyperlucency of the affected lobe or lung seen especially on expiration. Oil from the peanut is very irritating and may cause pneumonia. Delay in diagnosis can lead to atelectasis and infection. The most common ana-tomic location for a foreign body is the right main stem bronchus or the right lower lobe. The child usually will cough or choke while eating but may then become asymptomatic. Total respira-tory obstruction with tracheal foreign body may occur; however, respiratory distress is usually mild if present at all. A unilateral wheeze is often heard on auscultation. This wheeze often leads to an inappropriate diagnosis of “asthma” and may delay the correct diagnosis for some time. Chest X-ray will show a radi-opaque foreign body, but in the case of nuts, seeds, or plastic toy parts, the only clue may be hyperexpansion of the affected lobe on an expiratory film or fluoroscopy. Bronchoscopy confirms the diagnosis and allows removal of the foreign body. It can be a very simple procedure or it may be extremely difficult, espe-cially with a smooth foreign body that cannot be grasped easily or one that has been retained for some time. The rigid broncho-scope should be used in all cases, and utilization of the optical forceps facilitates grasping the inhaled object. Epinephrine may be injected into the mucosa when the object has been present for a long period of time, which minimizes bleeding. Bronchiectasis may be seen as an extremely late phenomenon after repeated infections of the poorly aerated lung and may require partial or total resection of the affected lobe. The differential diagnosis of a bronchial foreign body includes an intraluminal tumor (i.e., carcinoid, hemangioma, or neurofibroma).Foreign Bodies and Esophageal Injury. The most common foreign body in the esophagus is a coin, followed by small toy parts. Toddlers are most commonly affected. The coin is retained in the esophagus at one of three locations: the cricopharyngeus, the area of the aortic arch, or the gastroesophageal junction, all of which are areas of normal anatomic narrowing. Symptoms are variable depending on the anatomic position of the foreign body and the degree of obstruction. There is often a relatively asymptomatic period after ingestion. The initial symptoms are gastrointestinal, and include dysphagia, drooling, and dehydra-tion. The longer the foreign body remains in the esophagus with oral secretions unable to transit the esophagus, the greater the incidence of respiratory symptoms including cough, stridor, and wheezing. These findings may be interpreted as signs of upper respiratory infections. Objects that are present for a long period of time—particularly in children who have underlying neurological impairment—may manifest as chronic dysphagia. The chest X-ray is diagnostic in the case of a coin. A contrast swallow, or preferably an esophagoscopy, may be required for nonradiopaque foreign bodies. Coins lodged within the upper Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   171612/02/19   11:26 AM 1717PEDIATRIC SURGERYCHAPTER 39Figure 39-8. The five varieties of esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula. A. Isolated esophageal atresia. B. Esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula between proximal segment of esophagus and trachea. C. Esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula between distal esophagus and trachea. D. Esophageal atresia with fistula between both proximal and distal ends of esophagus and trachea.  E. Tracheoesophageal fistula without esophageal atresia (H-type fistula).esophagus for less than 24 hours may be removed using Magill forceps during direct laryngoscopy. For all other situations, the treatment is by esophagoscopy, rigid or flexible, and removal of the foreign body. In the case of sharp foreign bodies such as open safety pins, extreme care is required on extraction to avoid injury to the esophagus. Rarely, esophagotomy is required for removal, particularly of sharp objects. Diligent follow-up is required after removal of foreign bodies, especially batteries, which can cause strictures, and sharp objects, which can injure the underlying esophagus. In the case of a retained battery, this case should be handled as a surgical emergency, as the negative pole of the battery directly damages the surrounding tissue, and tracheoesophageal fistula, aortic exsanguination, and mediasti-nitis have all been described after local tissue necrosis at the site where the battery has lodged.ESOPHAGUSEsophageal Atresia and Tracheoesophageal FistulaThe management of esophageal atresia (EA) and tracheoesopha-geal fistula (TEF) is one of the most gratifying pediatric sur-gical conditions to treat. In the not so distant past, nearly all infants born with EA and TEF died. In 1939 Ladd and Leven achieved the first success repair by ligating the fistula, placing a gastrostomy, and reconstructing the esophagus at a later time. Subsequently, Dr. Cameron Haight, in Ann Arbor, Michigan, performed the first successful primary anastomosis for esopha-geal atresia, which remains the current approach for treatment of this condition. Despite the fact that there are several com-mon varieties of this anomaly and the underlying cause remains obscure, a careful approach consisting of meticulous periopera-tive care and attention to the technical detail of the operation can result in an excellent prognosis in most cases.Anatomic Varieties. The five major varieties of EA and TEF are shown in Fig. 39-8. The most commonly seen variety is esophageal atresia with distal tracheoesophageal fistula (type C),  which occurs in approximately 85% of the cases in most series. The next most frequent is pure esophageal atresia (type A), occurring in 8% to 10% of patients, followed by tracheoesophageal fistula without esophageal atresia (type E).  This occurs in 8% of cases and is also referred to as an H-type fistula, based upon the anatomic similarity to that letter  Figure 39-9. Barium esophagram showing H-type tracheoesophageal fistula (arrow).(Fig. 39-9). Esophageal atresia with fistula between both proximal and distal ends of the esophagus and trachea (type D) is seen in approximately 2% of cases, and type B, esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula between distal esophagus and trachea, is seen in approximately 1% of all cases.Etiology and Pathologic Presentation. The esophagus and trachea share a common embryologic origin. At approximately 4 weeks’ gestation, a diverticulum forms off the anterior aspect of the proximal foregut in the region of the primitive pharynx. This diverticulum extends caudally with progressive formation of the laryngo-tracheal groove, thus, creating a separate trachea and esophagus. Successful development of these structures is the consequence of extremely intricate interplay of growth and transcription factors necessary for rostral-caudal and anterior-posterior specification. The variations in clinically observed EA and TEF that must result in failure of successful formation of these structures are depicted in Fig. 39-8. While definitive genetic mutations have been difficult to identify in isolated EA-TEF, mutations in N-myc, Sox2, and CHD7 have been character-ized in syndromic EA-TEF with associated anomalies.Other congenital anomalies commonly occur in asso-ciation with EA-TEF. For instance, VACTERRL syndrome is associated with vertebral anomalies (absent vertebrae or hemi-vertebrae) and anorectal anomalies (imperforate anus), cardiac Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   171712/02/19   11:26 AM 1718SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 39-10. Type C esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula. Note the catheter that is coiled in the upper pouch and the presence of gas below the diaphragm, which confirms the presence of the tracheoesophageal fistula.defects, tracheoesophageal fistula, renal anomalies (renal agen-esis, renal anomalies), and radial limb hyperplasia. In nearly 20% of the infants born with esophageal atresia, some variant of congenital heart disease occurs.Clinical Presentation of Infants With Esophageal Atresia and Tracheoesophageal Fistula. The anatomic variant of infants with EA-TEF predicts the clinical presentation. When the esophagus ends either as a blind pouch or as a fistula into the trachea (as in types A, B, C, or D), infants present with exces-sive drooling, followed by choking or coughing immediately after feeding is initiated as a result of aspiration through the fistula tract. As the neonate coughs and cries, air is transmitted through the fistula into the stomach, resulting in abdominal dis-tention. As the abdomen distends, it becomes increasingly more difficult for the infant to breathe. This leads to further atelecta-sis, which compounds the pulmonary dysfunction. In patients with type C and D varieties, the regurgitated gastric juice passes through the fistula where it collects in the trachea and lungs and leads to a chemical pneumonitis, which further exacerbates the pulmonary status. In many instances, the diagnosis is actually made by the nursing staff who attempt to feed the baby and notice the accumulation of oral secretions.The diagnosis of esophageal atresia is confirmed by the inability to pass an orogastric tube into the stomach (Fig. 39-10). The dilated upper pouch may be occasionally seen on a plain chest radiograph. If a soft feeding tube is used, the tube will coil in the upper pouch, which provides further diagnostic cer-tainty. An important alternative diagnosis that must be consid-ered when an orogastric tube does not enter the stomach is that of an esophageal perforation. This problem can occur in infants after traumatic insertion of a nasogastric or orogastric tube. In this instance, the perforation classically occurs at the level of the piriform sinus, and a false passage is created, which prevents the tube from entering the stomach. Whenever there is any diag-nostic uncertainty, a contrast study will confirm the diagnosis of EA and occasionally document the TEF. The presence of a tracheoesophageal fistula can be demonstrated clinically by finding air in the gastrointestinal tract. This can be proven at the bedside by percussion of the abdomen and confirmed by obtain-ing a plain abdominal radiograph. Occasionally, a diagnosis of EA-TEF can be suspected prenatally on US evaluation. Typical features include failure to visualize the stomach and the pres-ence of polyhydramnios. These findings reflect the absence of efficient swallowing by the fetus.In a child with esophageal atresia, it is important to iden-tify whether coexisting anomalies are present. These include cardiac defects in 38%, skeletal defects in 19%, neurologi-cal defects in 15%, renal defects in 15%, anorectal defects in 8%, and other abnormalities in 13%. Examination of the heart and great vessels with echocardiography is important to exclude cardiac defects, as these are often the most important predictors of survival in these infants. The echocardiogram also demonstrates whether the aortic arch is left sided or right sided, which may influence the approach to surgical repair. Vertebral anomalies are assessed by plain radiography, and a spinal US is obtained if any are detected. A patent anus should be confirmed clinically. The kidneys in a newborn may be assessed clinically by palpation. A US of the abdomen will demonstrate the presence of renal anomalies, which should be suspected in the child who fails to make urine. The presence of extremity anomalies is suspected when there are missing digits and confirmed by plain radiographs of the hands, feet, forearms, and legs. Rib anomalies may also be present. These may include the presence of a 13th rib.Initial Management. The initial treatment of infants with EA-TEF includes attention to the respiratory status, decompression of the upper pouch, and appropriate timing of surgery. Because the major determinant of poor survival is the presence of other severe anomalies, a search for other defects including congeni-tal cardiac disease is undertaken in a timely fashion. The initial strategy after the diagnosis is confirmed is to place the neonate in an infant warmer with the head elevated at least 30°. A sump catheter is placed in the upper pouch on continuous suction. Both of these strategies are designed to minimize the degree of aspiration from the esophageal pouch. When saliva accumulates in the upper pouch and is aspirated into the lungs, coughing, bronchospasm, and desaturation episodes can occur, which may be minimized by ensuring the patency of the sump catheter.  IV antibiotic therapy is initiated, and warmed electrolyte solu-tion is administered. Where possible, the right upper extremity is avoided as a site to start an IV line, as this location may interfere with positioning of the patient during the surgical repair. Some surgeons place a central line in all patients to facilitate the admin-istration of antibiotics and total parenteral nutrition as needed.The timing of repair is influenced by the stability of the patient. Definitive repair of the EA-TEF is rarely a surgical emergency. If the child is hemodynamically stable and is oxy-genating well, definitive repair may be performed within 1 to  2 days after birth. This allows for a careful determination of the presence of coexisting anomalies and for selection of an expe-rienced anesthetic team.Management of Esophageal Atresia and Tracheoesopha-geal Fistula in the Preterm Infant. The ventilated, prema-ture neonate with EA-TEF and associated hyaline membrane disease represents a patient who may develop severe, progres-sive, cardiopulmonary dysfunction. The tracheoesophageal fis-tula can worsen the fragile pulmonary status as a result of recurrent aspiration through the fistula, and as a result of increased abdominal distention, which impairs lung expansion. Moreover, the elevated airway pressure that is required to ven-tilate these patients can worsen the clinical course by forcing air through the fistula into the stomach, thereby exacerbating the Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   171812/02/19   11:26 AM 1719PEDIATRIC SURGERYCHAPTER 39ABCEDAzygos VeinEsophagusEsophagusAzygos VeinFigure 39-11. Primary repair of type C tracheosophageal fistula. A. Right thoracotomy incision. B. Azygous vein transected, proximal and distal esophagus demonstrated, and fistula identified. C. Tracheoesophageal fistula transected and defect in trachea closed. D. End-to-end anastomosis between proximal and distal esophagus (posterior row). E. Completed anastomosis.degree of abdominal distention and compromising lung expan-sion. In this situation, the first priority is to minimize the degree of positive pressure needed to adequately ventilate the child. This can be accomplished using high frequency oscil-latory ventilation (HFOV). If the gastric distention becomes severe, a gastrostomy tube should be placed. This procedure can be performed at the bedside under local anesthetic, if necessary. The dilated, air-filled stomach can easily be accessed through an incision in the left-upper quadrant of the abdomen. Once the gastrostomy tube is placed and the abdominal pressure is relieved, the pulmonary status can paradoxically worsen. This is because the ventilated gas may pass preferentially through the fistula, which is the path of least resistance, and bypass the lungs thereby worsening the hypoxemia. To correct this problem, the gastrostomy tube may be placed under water seal, elevated, or intermittently clamped. If these maneuvers are to no avail, liga-tion of the fistula may be required. This procedure can be per-formed in the neonatal intensive care unit if the infant is too unstable to be transported to the operating room. These inter-ventions allow for the infant’s underlying hyaline membrane disease to improve, for the pulmonary secretions to clear, and for the infant to reach a period of stability so that definitive repair can be performed.Primary Surgical Correction. In a stable infant, definitive repair is achieved through performance of a primary esopha-goesophagostomy. There are two approaches to this operation: 2open thoracotomy or thoracoscopy. In the open approach, the infant is brought to the operating room, intubated, and placed in the lateral decubitus position with the right side up in prepara-tion for right posterolateral thoracotomy. If a right-sided arch was determined previously by echocardiography, consideration is given to performing the repair through the left chest, although most surgeons believe that the repair can be performed safely from the right side as well. Bronchoscopy may be performed to exclude the presence of additional, upper-pouch fistulae in cases of esophageal atresia (i.e., differentiation of types B, C, and D variants) and identification of a laryngeotracheoesopha-geal cleft.The operative technique for primary repair is as follows (Fig. 39-11). A retropleural approach is generally used as this technique prevents widespread contamination of the thorax if a postoperative anastomotic leak occurs. The sequence of steps is as follows: (a) mobilization of the pleura to expose the struc-tures in the posterior mediastinum; (b) division of the fistula and closure of the tracheal opening; (c) mobilization of the upper esophagus sufficiently to permit an anastomosis without tension and to determine whether a fistula is present between the upper esophagus and the trachea (forward pressure by the anesthesia staff on the sump drain in the pouch can greatly facilitate dissection at this stage of the operation; care must be taken when dissecting posteriorly to avoid violation of either the lumen of trachea and esophagus); (d) mobilization of the dis-tal esophagus (this needs to be performed judiciously to avoid Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   171912/02/19   11:26 AM 1720SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIdevascularization since the blood supply to the distal esopha-gus is segmental from the aorta; most of the esophageal length is obtained from mobilizing the upper pouch since the blood supply travels via the submucosa from above); (e) performing a primary esophagoesophageal anastomosis (most surgeons perform this procedure in a single layer using 5-0 sutures; if there is excess tension, the muscle of the upper pouch can be circumferentially incised without compromising blood supply to increase its length; many surgeons place a transanastomotic feeding tube in order to institute feeds in the early postoperative period); and (f) placement of a retropleural drain and closure of the incision in layers.When a minimally invasive approach is selected, the patient is prepared for right-sided, transthoracic thoracoscopic repair. The same steps as described earlier for the open repair are undertaken, and the magnification and superb optics that are provided by the thoracoscopic approach provide for superb visualization. Identification of the fistula is performed as a first step; this can be readily ligated and divided between tho-racoscopically placed sutures. The anastomosis is performed in a single layer. The thoracoscopically performed TEF repair requires clear and ongoing communication between the oper-ating surgeons and the anesthesiologist; visualization can be significantly reduced with sudden changes in lung inflation, potentially leading to the need to convert to an open repair. Although clear guidelines for patient selection for a thoraco-scopic repair as opposed to an open repair remain lacking, rea-sonable selection criteria include patients over 2.5 kg who are hemodynamically stable and without comorbidities.Postoperative Course. The postoperative management strat-egy of patients with EA-TEF is influenced to a great degree by the preference of the individual surgeon and the institutional culture. Many surgeons prefer not to leave the infants intubated postoperatively to avoid the effects of positive pressure on the site of tracheal closure. However, early extubation may not be possible in babies with preoperative lung disease either from pre-maturity or pneumonia or when there is any vocal cord edema. When a transanastomotic tube is placed, feeds are begun slowly in the postoperative period. Some surgeons institute parenteral nutrition for several days, using a central line. The retropleural drain is assessed daily for the presence of saliva, indicating an anastomotic leak. Many surgeons obtain a contrast swallow 1 week after repair to assess the caliber of the anastomosis and to determine whether a leak is present. If there is no leak, feedings are started. The principal benefit of the thoracoscopic approach is that postoperative pain is significantly reduced, as is the requirement for postoperative narcotic analgesia.Complications of Surgery. Anastomotic leak occurs in 10% to 15% of patients and may be seen either in the immediate post-operative period or after several days. Early leakage (i.e., within the first 24 to 48 hours) is manifested by a new pleural effusion, pneumothorax, and sepsis and requires immediate exploration. In these circumstances, the anastomosis may be completely dis-rupted, possibly due to excessive tension. Revision of the anas-tomosis may be possible. If not, cervical esophagostomy and gastrostomy placement is required, with a subsequent procedure to reestablish esophageal continuity. Anastomotic leakage that is detected after several days usually heals without intervention, particularly if a retropleural approach is used. Under these cir-cumstances, broad spectrum antibiotics, pulmonary toilet, and optimization of nutrition are important. After approximately a week or so, a repeat esophagram should be performed, at which time the leakage may have resolved.Strictures at the anastomosis are not infrequent (10–20%), particularly if a leak has occurred. A stricture may become apparent at any time, from the early postoperative period to months or years later. It may present as choking, gagging, or failure to thrive, but it often becomes clinically apparent with the transition to eating solid food. A contrast swallow or esoph-agoscopy is confirmatory, and simple dilatation is usually cor-rective. Occasionally, repeated dilatations are required. These may be performed in a retrograde fashion, during which a silk suture is placed into the oropharynx and delivered from the esophagus through a gastrostomy tube. Tucker dilators are then tied to the suture and passed in a retrograde fashion from the gastrostomy tube and delivered out of the oropharynx. Increas-ing sizes are used, and the silk is replaced at the end of the pro-cedure where it is taped to the side of the face at one end, and to the gastrostomy tube at the other. Alternatively, image-guided balloon dilation over a guide wire may be performed, using intraoperative contrast radiography to determine the precise location of the stricture and to assess the immediate response to the dilation.“Recurrent” tracheoesophageal fistula may represent a missed upper pouch fistula or a true recurrence. This may occur after an anastomotic disruption, during which the recurrent fis-tula may heal spontaneously. Otherwise, reoperation may be required. Recently, the use of fibrin glue has been successful in treating recurrent fistulas, although long-term follow-up is lacking.Gastroesophageal reflux commonly occurs after repair of EA-TEF, potentially due to alterations in esophageal motility and the anatomy of the gastroesophageal junction. The clinical manifestations of such reflux are similar to those seen in other infants with primary gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). A loose antireflux procedure, such as a Nissen fundoplication, is used to prevent further reflux, but the child may have feed-ing problems after antireflux surgery as a result of the intrinsic dysmotility of the distal esophagus. The fundoplication may be safely performed laparoscopically in experienced hands, although care should be taken to ensure that the wrap is not excessively tight.Special Circumstances. Patients with type E tracheoesoph-ageal fistulas (also called H-type) most commonly present beyond the newborn period. Presenting symptoms include recurrent chest infections, bronchospasm, and failure to thrive. The diagnosis is suspected using barium esophagography and confirmed by endoscopic visualization of the fistula. Surgical correction is generally possible through a cervical approach with concurrent placement of a balloon catheter across the fis-tula and requires mobilization and division of the fistula. Out-come is usually excellent.Patients with duodenal atresia and EA-TEF may require urgent treatment due to the presence of a closed obstruction of the stomach and proximal duodenum. In stable patients, treat-ment consists of repair of the esophageal anomaly and correc-tion of the duodenal atresia if the infant is stable during surgery. If not, a staged approach should be utilized consisting of ligation of the fistula and placement of a gastrostomy tube. Definitive repair can then be performed at a later point in time.Primary esophageal atresia (type A) represents a chal-lenging problem, particularly if the upper and lower ends are too far apart for an anastomosis to be created. Under these Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   172012/02/19   11:26 AM 1721PEDIATRIC SURGERYCHAPTER 39circumstances, treatment strategies include placement of a gas-trostomy tube and performing serial bougienage to increase the length of the upper pouch. This occasionally allows for primary anastomosis to be performed. Occasionally, when the two ends cannot be brought safely together, esophageal replacement is required using either a gastric pull-up or colon interposition (see the following section).Outcome. Various classification systems have been utilized to predict survival in patients with EA-TEF and to stratify treat-ment. A system devised by Waterston in 1962 was used to strat-ify neonates based on birth weight, the presence of pneumonia, and the identification of other congenital anomalies. In response to advances in neonatal care, the surgeons from the Montreal Children’s Hospital proposed a new classification system in 1993. In the Montreal experience only two characteristics inde-pendently affected survival: preoperative ventilator dependence and associated major anomalies. Pulmonary disease as defined by ventilator dependence appeared to be more accurate than pneumonia. When the two systems were compared, the Montreal system more accurately identified children at highest risk. Spitz and colleagues analyzed risk factors in infants who died with EA-TEF. Two criteria were found to be important predictors of outcome: birth weight less than 1500 g and the presence of major congenital cardiac disease. A new classification for predicting outcome in esophageal atresia was therefore proposed: group I: birth weight ≥1500 g, without major cardiac disease, survival 97% (283 of 293); group II: birth weight <1500 g, or major car-diac disease, survival 59% (41 of 70); and group III: birth weight <1500 g, and major cardiac disease, survival 22% (2 of 9).In general, surgical correction of EA-TEF leads to a sat-isfactory outcome with nearly normal esophageal function in most patients. Overall survival rates of greater than 90% have been achieved in patients classified as stable, in all the various staging systems. Unstable infants have an increased mortality (40–60% survival) because of potentially fatal associated cardiac and chromosomal anomalies or prematurity. However, the use of a staged procedure also has increased survival in even these high-risk infants.Corrosive Injury of the EsophagusInjury to the esophagus after ingestion of corrosive substances most commonly occurs in the toddler age group. Both strong alkali and strong acids produce injury by liquefaction or coag-ulation necrosis, and since all corrosive agents are extremely hygroscopic, the caustic substance will cling to the esophageal epithelium. Subsequent strictures occur at the anatomic nar-rowed areas of the esophagus, cricopharyngeus, midesophagus, and gastroesophageal junction. A child who has swallowed an injurious substance may be symptom-free but usually will be drooling and unable to swallow saliva. The injury may be restricted to the oropharynx and esophagus, or it may extend to include the stomach. There is no effective immediate anti-dote. Diagnosis is by careful physical examination of the mouth and endoscopy with a flexible or a rigid esophagoscope. It is important to endoscope only to the first level of the burn in order to avoid perforation. Early barium swallow may delineate the extent of the mucosal injury. It is important to realize that the esophagus may be burned without evidence of injury to the mouth. Although previously used routinely, steroids have not been shown to alter stricture development or modify the extent of injury and are no longer part of the management of caustic injuries. Antibiotics are administered during the acute period.The extent of injury is graded endoscopically as either mild, moderate, or severe (grade I, II, or III). Circumferential esophageal injuries with necrosis have an extremely high like-lihood of stricture formation. These patients should undergo placement of a gastrostomy tube once clinically stable. A string should be inserted through the esophagus either immediately or during repeat esophagoscopy several weeks later. When estab-lished strictures are present (usually 3 to 4 weeks), dilatation is performed. Fluoroscopically guided balloon dilation of the stric-ture is effective, which should be performed in association with esophagoscopy, and allows for a precise evaluation of the nature and extent of the stenosis. The procedure should be performed under general anesthesia, and care must be taken to ensure there is no airway injury. Dislodgment of the endotracheal tube can occur during this procedure, and careful communication with the anesthesiologist is critical during the procedure.In certain circumstances, especially if a gastrostomy tube has been placed, retrograde dilatation may be performed, using graduated dilators brought through the gastrostomy and advanced into the esophagus via the transesophageal string. Management of esophageal perforation during dilation should include antibiotics, irrigation, and closed drainage of the tho-racic cavity to prevent systemic sepsis. When recognition is delayed or if the patient is systemically ill, esophageal diver-sion may be required with staged reconstruction at a later time.Although the native esophagus can be preserved in most cases, severe stricture formation that does not respond to dila-tion is best managed by esophageal replacement. The most com-monly used options for esophageal substitution are the colon (right colon or transverse/left colon) and the stomach (gastric tubes or gastric pull-up). Pedicled or free grafts of the jejunum are rarely used. The right colon is based on a pedicle of the middle colic artery, and the left colon is based on a pedicle of the middle colic or left colic artery. Gastric tubes are fashioned from the greater curvature of the stomach based on the pedi-cle of the left gastroepiploic artery. When the entire stomach is used, as in gastric pull-up, the blood supply is provided by the right gastric artery. The neoesophagus may traverse (a) sub-sternally; (b) through a transthoracic route; or (c) through the posterior mediastinum to reach the neck. A feeding jejunostomy is placed at the time of surgery and tube feedings are instituted once the postoperative ileus has resolved. Long-term follow-up has shown that all methods of esophageal substitution can sup-port normal growth and development, and the children enjoy reasonably normal eating habits. Because of the potential for late complications such as ulceration and stricture, follow-up into adulthood is mandatory, but complications appear to dimin-ish with time.Gastroesophageal RefluxGastroesophageal reflux (GER) occurs to some degree in all children and refers to the passage of gastric contents into the esophagus. By contrast, gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) describes the situation where reflux is symptomatic. Typical symptoms include failure to thrive, bleeding, stricture formation, reactive airway disease, aspiration pneumonia, or apnea. Failure to thrive and pulmonary problems are particularly common in infants with GERD, whereas strictures and esopha-gitis are more common in older children and adolescents. GERD is particularly problematic in neurologically impaired children.Clinical Manifestations. Because all infants experience occasional episodes of GER to some degree, care must be taken Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   172112/02/19   11:26 AM 1722SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIbefore a child is labeled as having pathologic reflux. A history of repeated episodes of vomiting that interferes with growth and development, or the presence of apparent life-threatening events, are required for the diagnosis of GERD. In older chil-dren, esophageal bleeding, stricture formation, severe heartburn, or the development of Barrett’s esophagus unequivocally con-note pathologic reflux or GERD. In neurologically impaired children, vomiting due to GER must be distinguished from chronic retching.The workup of patients suspected of having GERD includes documentation of the episodes of reflux and evalua-tion of the anatomy. A barium swallow should be performed as an initial test. This will determine whether there is obstruction of the stomach or duodenum (due to duodenal webs or pyloric stenosis) and will determine whether malrotation is present. The frequency and severity of reflux should be assessed using a 24-hour pH probe study. Although this test is poorly tolerated, it provides the most accurate determination that GERD is present. Esophageal endoscopy with biopsies may identify the presence of esophagitis, and it is useful to determine the length of intra-abdominal esophagus and the presence of Barrett’s esophagus. Some surgeons obtain a radioisotope “milk scan” to evaluate gastric emptying, although there is little evidence to show that this test changes management when a diagnosis of GERD has been confirmed using the aforementioned modalities.Treatment. Most patients with GERD are treated initially by conservative means. In the infant, propping and thickening the formula with rice cereal are generally recommended. Some authors prefer a prone, head-up position. In the infant unrespon-sive to position and formula changes and the older child with severe GERD, medical therapy is based on gastric acid reduc-tion with an H2-blocking agent and/or a proton pump inhibitor. Medical therapy is successful in most neurologically normal infants and younger children, many of whom will outgrow their need for medications. In certain patients, however, medical treatment does not provide symptomatic relief and surgery is therefore indicated. The least invasive surgical option includes the placement of a nasojejunal or gastrojejunal feeding tube. Because the stomach is bypassed, food contents do not enter the esophagus, and symptoms are often improved. However, as a long-term remedy, this therapy is associated with several problems. The tubes often become dislodged, acid reflux still occurs, and bolus feeding is generally not possible. Fundoplica-tion provides definitive treatment for gastroesophageal reflux and is highly effective in most circumstances. The fundus may be wrapped around the distal esophagus either 360o (i.e., Nissen)  or to lesser degrees (i.e., Thal or Toupet). At present, the stan-dard approach in most children is to perform these procedures laparoscopically whenever possible. In children with feeding difficulties and in infants under 1 year of age, a gastrostomy tube should be placed at the time of surgery. Early postoperative complications include pneumonia and atelectasis, often due to inadequate pulmonary toilet and pain control with abdominal splinting. Late postoperative complications include wrap break-down with recurrent reflux, which may require repeat fundo-plication, and dysphagia due to a wrap performed too tightly, which generally responds to dilation. These complications are more common in children with neurologic impairment. The keys to successful surgical management of patients with GERD include careful patient selection and meticulous operative tech-nique. There are emerging concerns regarding the long-term use of acid reducing agents, which may increase the frequency with which antireflux procedures are performed in children, espe-cially those with neurological impairment.GASTROINTESTINAL TRACTAn Approach to the Vomiting InfantAll infants vomit. Because infant vomiting is so common, it is important to differentiate between normal and abnormal vomit-ing, which may be indicative of a potentially serious underlying disorder. In order to determine the seriousness of a particular infant’s bouts of emesis, one needs to characterize what the vomit looks like and how sick the baby is. Vomit that looks like feeds and comes up immediately after a feeding is almost always gastroesophageal reflux. This may or may not be of concern, as described earlier. Vomiting that occurs a short while after feed-ing, or vomiting that projects out of the baby’s mouth may be indicative of pyloric stenosis. By contrast, vomit that has any green color in it is always worrisome. This may be reflective of intestinal volvulus, an underlying infection, or some other cause of intestinal obstruction. A more detailed description of the management of these conditions is provided in the follow-ing sections.Hypertrophic Pyloric StenosisClinical Presentation. Infants with hypertrophic pyloric stenosis (HPS) typically present with nonbilious vomiting that becomes increasingly projectile, over the course of several days to weeks due to progressive thickening of the pylorus muscle. HPS occurs in approximately 1 in 300 live births and commonly in infants between 3 and 6 weeks of age. Male-to-female ratio is nearly 5:1.Eventually as the pyloric muscle thickening progresses, the infant develops a complete gastric outlet obstruction and is no longer able to tolerate any feeds. Over time, the infant becomes increasingly hungry, unsuccessfully feeds repeatedly, and becomes increasingly dehydrated. Wet diapers become less frequent, and there may even be a perception of less passage of flatus. HPS may be associated with jaundice due to an indi-rect hyperbilirubinemia, although the nature of this relation is unclear.The cause of HPS has not been determined. Studies have shown that HPS is found in several generations of the same family, suggesting a familial link. Recently, a genome-wide sig-nificant locus for pyloric stenosis at chromosome 11q23.3 was identified, and the single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) with the greatest significance was associated with part of the genome that regulates cholesterol. It is not clear how this links to the development of pyloric stenosis, but it does suggest a potential dietary link.Infants with HPS develop a hypochloremic, hypokale-mic metabolic alkalosis. The urine pH level is high initially, but eventually drops because hydrogen ions are preferentially exchanged for sodium ions in the distal tubule of the kidney as the hypochloremia becomes severe (paradoxical aciduria). While in the past the diagnosis of pyloric stenosis was most often made on physical examination by palpation of the typical “olive” in the right upper quadrant and the presence of visible gastric waves on the abdomen, current standard of care is to perform an US, which can diagnose the condition accurately in 95% of patients. Criteria for US diagnosis include a channel length of over 16 mm and pyloric thickness over 4 mm. It is important to note that younger babies may have lower values Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   172212/02/19   11:26 AM 1723PEDIATRIC SURGERYCHAPTER 39Pyloric “tumor”MucosaABCFigure 39-12. Fredet-Ramstedt pyloromyotomy. A. Pylorus deliv-ered into wound and seromuscular layer incised. B. Seromuscular layer separated down to submucosal base to permit herniation of mucosa through pyloric incision. C. Cross-section demonstrating hypertrophied pylorus, depth of incision, and spreading of muscle to permit mucosa to herniate through incision.for pyloric thickness and still be abnormal, and a close clinical correlation with the US result is mandatory. In cases in which the diagnosis remains unclear, upper gastrointestinal evaluation by contrast radiography will reveal delayed passage of contents from the stomach through the pyloric channel and a typical thickened appearance to the pylorus.Treatment. Given frequent fluid and electrolyte abnormali-ties at time of presentation, pyloric stenosis is never a surgical emergency. Fluid resuscitation with correction of electrolyte abnormalities and metabolic alkalosis is essential prior to induc-tion of general anesthesia for operation. For most infants, fluid containing 5% dextrose and 0.45% saline with added potassium of 2 to 4 mEq/kg over 24 hours at a rate of approximately 150 to 175 mL/kg for 24 hours will correct the underlying deficit. It is important to ensure that the child has an adequate urine output (>2 cc/kg per hour) as further evidence that rehydration has occurred.After resuscitation, a Fredet-Ramstedt pyloromyotomy is performed (Fig. 39-12). It may be performed using an open or laparoscopic approach. The open pyloromyotomy is per-formed through either an umbilical or a right upper quadrant transverse abdominal incision. The former route is cosmetically more appealing, although the transverse incision provides easier access to the antrum and pylorus. In recent years, the laparo-scopic approach has gained great popularity. Two randomized trials have demonstrated that both the open and laparoscopic approaches may be performed safely with equal incidence of postoperative complications, although the cosmetic result is clearly superior with the laparoscopic approach. Whether done through an open or laparoscopic approach, surgical treatment of pyloric stenosis involves splitting the pyloric muscle while leav-ing the underlying submucosa intact. The incision extends from just proximal to the pyloric vein of Mayo to the gastric antrum; it typically measures between 1 and 2 cm in length. Postop-eratively, IV fluids are continued for several hours, after which Pedialyte is offered, followed by formula or breast milk, which is gradually increased to 60 cc every 3 hours. Most infants can be discharged home within 24 to 48 hours following surgery. Recently, several authors have shown that ad lib feeds are safely tolerated by the neonate and result in a shorter hospital stay.The complications of pyloromyotomy include perforation of the mucosa (1–3%), bleeding, wound infection, and recur-rent symptoms due to inadequate myotomy. When perforation occurs, the mucosa is repaired with a stitch that is placed to tack the mucosa down and reapproximate the serosa in the region of the tear. A nasogastric tube is left in place for 24 hours. The outcome is generally very good.Intestinal Obstruction in the NewbornThe cardinal symptom of intestinal obstruction in the newborn  is bilious emesis. Prompt recognition and treatment of neonatal intestinal obstruction can truly be lifesaving.The incidence of neonatal intestinal obstruction is 1 in 2000 live births. The approach to intestinal obstruction in the newborn infant is critical for timely and appropriate interven-tion. When a neonate develops bilious vomiting, one must con-sider a surgical etiology. Indeed, the majority of newborns with bilious emesis have a surgical condition. In evaluating a poten-tial intestinal obstruction, it is helpful to determine whether the intestinal obstruction is either proximal or distal to the ligament  of Treitz. One must conduct a detailed prenatal and immediate postnatal history and a thorough physical examination. In all cases of intestinal obstruction, it is vital to obtain abdominal films in the supine and upright (or lateral decubitus) views to assess the presence of air-fluid levels or free air as well as how far downstream air has managed to travel. Importantly, one should recognize that it is difficult to determine whether a loop of bowel is part of either the small or large intestine, as neonatal bowel lacks clear features, such as haustra or plica circulares, normally present in older children or adults. As such, contrast imaging may be necessary for diagnosis in some instances.Proximal intestinal obstructions typically present with bil-ious emesis and minimal abdominal distention. The normal neo-nate should have a rounded, soft abdomen; in contrast, a neonate with a proximal intestinal obstruction typically exhibits a flat or scaphoid abdomen. On a series of upright and supine abdominal radiographs, one may see a paucity or absence of bowel gas, which normally should be present throughout the gastrointesti-nal tract within 24 hours. Of utmost importance is the exclusion of a malrotation with midgut volvulus from all other intestinal obstructions as this is a surgical emergency.Distal obstructions typically present with bilious emesis and abdominal distention. Passage of black-green meconium should have occurred within the first 24 to 38 hours. Of great 34Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   172312/02/19   11:26 AM 1724SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 39-13. Abdominal X-ray showing “double bubble” sign in a newborn infant with duodenal atresia. The two “bubbles” are numbered.importance, one should determine whether there is tenderness or discoloration of the abdomen, visible or palpable loops of intestine, presence or absence of a mass, and whether the anus is patent and in appropriate location. Abdominal radiographs may demonstrate calcifications may indicate complicated meconium ileus; pneumatosis and/or pneumoperitoneum may indicate necrotizing enterocolitis. A contrast enema may show whether there is a microcolon indicative of jejunoileal atresia or meconium ileus. If a microcolon is not present, then the diag-noses of Hirschsprung’s disease, small left colon syndrome, or meconium plug syndrome should be considered.Duodenal ObstructionWhenever the diagnosis of duodenal obstruction is entertained, malrotation and midgut volvulus must be excluded. This topic is covered in further detail later in this chapter. Other causes of duodenal obstruction include duodenal atresia, duodenal web, stenosis, annular pancreas, or duodenal duplication cyst. Duode-nal obstruction is easily diagnosed on prenatal US, which dem-onstrates the fluid-filled stomach and proximal duodenum as two discrete cystic structures in the upper abdomen. Associated polyhydramnios is common and presents in the third trimester. In 85% of infants with duodenal obstruction, the entry of the bile duct is proximal to the level of obstruction, such that vom-iting is bilious. Abdominal distention is typically not present because of the proximal level of obstruction. In those infants with obstruction proximal to the bile duct entry, the vomiting is nonbilious. The classic finding on abdominal radiography is the “double bubble” sign, which represents the dilated stomach and duodenum (Fig. 39-13). In association with the appropriate clin-ical picture, this finding is sufficient to confirm the diagnosis of duodenal obstruction. However, if there is any uncertainty, particularly when a partial obstruction is suspected, a contrast upper gastrointestinal series is diagnostic.Treatment. An orogastric tube is inserted to decompress the stomach and duodenum and the infant is given IV fluids to maintain adequate urine output. If the infant appears ill, or if abdominal tenderness is present, a diagnosis of malrotation and midgut volvulus should be considered, and surgery should not be delayed. Typically, the abdomen is soft, and the infant is very stable. Under these circumstances, the infant should be evaluated thoroughly for other associated anomalies. Approxi-mately one-third of newborns with duodenal atresia have asso-ciated Down syndrome (trisomy 21). These patients should be evaluated for associated cardiac anomalies. Once the workup is complete and the infant is stable, he or she is taken to the operat-ing room, and repair is performed either via an open approach or laparoscopically.Regardless of the surgical approach, the principles are the same. If open, the abdomen is entered through a transverse right upper quadrant supraumbilical incision under general endotra-cheal anesthesia. Associated anomalies should be searched for at the time of the operation. These include malrotation, ante-rior portal vein, a second distal web, and biliary atresia. The surgical treatment of choice for duodenal obstruction due to duodenal stenosis or atresia or annular pancreas is a duodeno-duodenostomy. This procedure can be most easily performed using a proximal transverse-to-distal longitudinal (diamond-shaped) anastomosis. In cases where the duodenum is extremely dilated, the lumen may be tapered using a linear stapler with a large Foley catheter (24F or greater) in the duodenal lumen. It is important to emphasize that an annular pancreas is never divided but rather is bypassed to avoid injury to the pancreatic ducts. Treatment of duodenal web includes vertical duodenot-omy, excision of the web, oversewing of the mucosa, and clos-ing the duodenotomy horizontally. Care must be taken to avoid injury to the bile duct, which opens up near the web in all cases. For this reason, some surgeons favor performing a duodeno-duodenostomy for children with duodenal web, although such an approach may lead to long-term complications associated with the creation of a blind section of duodenum between the web and the bypass, which can expand over time. Gastrostomy tube placement is not routinely performed. Recently reported survival rates exceed 90%. Late complications from repair of duodenal atresia occur in approximately 12% to 15% of patients and include megaduodenum, intestinal motility disorders, and gastroesophageal reflux.Specific consideration may be given to premature infants with duodenal obstruction. Whereas in the past pediatric sur-geons may have favored delayed repair until the child reached either term or a weight closer to 3 kg, there is no reason to wait, and once the child is stable from a pulmonary perspective, duo-denal repair can be performed in children as small as 1 kg quite safely, as long as there is meticulous attention to detail and a thorough knowledge of the anatomy.Intestinal AtresiaObstruction due to intestinal atresia can occur at any point along the intestinal tract. Intestinal atresias were previously thought to be the result of in utero mesenteric vascular accidents leading to segmental loss of the intestinal lumen, although more likely they are the result of developmental defects in normal intestinal organogenesis due to disruption of various signaling pathways such as fibroblast growth factor, bone morphogenic protein, and β-catenin pathways. The incidence of intestinal atresia has been estimated to be between 1 in 2000 to 1 in 5000 live births, with equal representation of the sexes. Infants with jejunal or ileal atresia present with bilious vomiting and progressive abdominal distention. The more distal the obstruction, the more distended the abdomen becomes, and the greater the number of obstructed loops on upright abdominal films (Fig. 39-14).In cases where the diagnosis of complete intestinal obstruction is ascertained by the clinical picture and the pres-ence of staggered air-fluid levels on plain abdominal films, the child can be brought to the operating room after appropriate resuscitation. In these circumstances, there is little extra infor-mation to be gained by performing a barium enema. By contrast, Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   172412/02/19   11:26 AM 1725PEDIATRIC SURGERYCHAPTER 39Figure 39-14. Intestinal obstruction in the newborn showing sev-eral loops of distended bowel with air fluid levels. This child has jejunal atresia.Figure 39-15. Operative photograph of newborn with “Christmas tree” type of ileal atresia.when there is diagnostic uncertainty, or when distal intestinal obstruction is apparent, a barium enema is useful to establish whether a microcolon is present and to diagnose the presence of meconium plugs, small left colon syndrome, Hirschsprung’s disease, or meconium ileus. Judicious use of barium enema is therefore required in order to safely manage neonatal intestinal obstruction, based on an understanding of the expected level of obstruction.Surgical correction of the small intestinal atresia should be performed relatively urgently, especially when there is a possibility of volvulus. At laparotomy, one of several types of atresia will be encountered. In type 1 there is a mucosal atre-sia with intact muscularis. In type 2, the atretric ends are con-nected by a fibrous band. In type 3A, the two ends of the atresia are separated by a V-shaped defect in the mesentery. Type 3B is an “apple-peel” deformity or “Christmas tree” deformity in which the bowel distal to the atresia receives its blood supply in a retrograde fashion from the ileocolic or right colic artery (Fig. 39-15). In type 4 atresia, there are multiple atresias with a “string of sausage” or “string of beads” appearance. Disparity in lumen size between the proximal distended bowel and the small diameter of collapsed bowel distal to the atresia has led to a num-ber of innovative techniques of anastomosis. However, under most circumstances, an anastomosis can be performed using the end-to-back technique in which the distal, compressed loop is “fish-mouthed” along its antimesenteric border. The proximal distended loop can be tapered as previously described. Because the distended proximal bowel rarely has normal motility,  the extremely dilated portion should be resected prior to per-forming the anastomosis.Occasionally the infant with intestinal atresia will develop ischemia or necrosis of the proximal segment secondary to volvulus of the dilated, bulbous, blind-ending proximal bowel. Under these conditions, primary anastomosis may be performed as described earlier. Alternatively, an end ileostomy and mucus fistula should be created, and the anastomosis should be deferred to another time after the infant stabilizes.Malrotation and Midgut VolvulusEmbryology. During the sixth week of fetal development, the midgut grows too rapidly to be accommodated in the abdominal cavity and therefore herniates into the umbilical cord. Between the 10th and 12th week, the midgut returns to the abdominal cavity, undergoing a 270° counterclockwise rotation around the superior mesenteric artery. Because the duodenum also rotates caudal to the artery, it acquires a C-loop, which traces this path. The cecum rotates cephalad to the artery, which determines the location of the transverse and ascending colon. Subsequently, the duodenum becomes fixed retroperitoneally in its third por-tion and at the ligament of Treitz, while the cecum becomes fixed to the lateral abdominal wall by peritoneal bands. The takeoff of the branches of the superior mesenteric artery elon-gates and becomes fixed along a line extending from its emer-gence from the aorta to the cecum in the right lower quadrant. Genetic mutations likely disrupt the signaling critical for normal intestinal rotation. For instance, mutations in the gene BCL6 resulting in absence of left-sided expression of its transcript lead to reversed cardiac orientation, defective ocular development, and malrotation. The essential role of the dorsal gut mesentery in mediating normal intestinal rotation and the role of the fork-head box transcription factor FOXF1 in formation of the dorsal mesentery in mice are consistent with the noted association of intestinal malrotation with alveolar capillary dysplasia, caused by mutations in FOXF1. If rotation is incomplete, the cecum remains in the epigastrium, but the bands fixing the duode-num to the retroperitoneum and cecum continue to form. This results in (Ladd’s) bands extending from the cecum to the lat-eral abdominal wall and crossing the duodenum, which creates the potential for obstruction. The mesenteric takeoff remains confined to the epigastrium, resulting in a narrow pedicle sus-pending all the branches of the superior mesenteric artery and the entire midgut. A volvulus may therefore occur around the mesentery. This twist not only obstructs the proximal jejunum but also cuts off the blood supply to the midgut. Intestinal obstruction and complete infarction of the midgut occur unless the problem is promptly corrected surgically.Presentation and Management. Midgut volvulus can occur at any age, though it is seen most often in the first few weeks of life. Bilious vomiting is usually the first sign of volvulus and all infants with bilious vomiting must be evaluated rapidly to ensure that they do not have intestinal malrotation with volvu-lus. The child with irritability and bilious emesis should raise particular suspicions for this diagnosis. If left untreated, vascular Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   172512/02/19   11:26 AM 1726SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 39-16. Abdominal X-ray of a 10-day-old infant with bil-ious emesis. Note the dilated proximal bowel and the paucity of distal bowel gas, characteristic of a volvulus.compromise of the midgut initially causes bloody stools, but it eventually results in circulatory collapse. Additional clues to the presence of advanced ischemia of the intestine include ery-thema and edema of the abdominal wall, which progresses to shock and death. It must be reemphasized that the index of sus-picion for this condition must be high, since abdominal signs are minimal in the early stages. Abdominal films show a paucity of gas throughout the intestine with a few scattered air-fluid levels (Fig. 39-16). When these findings are present, the patient should undergo immediate fluid resuscitation to ensure adequate per-fusion and urine output followed by prompt exploratory lapa-rotomy. In cases where the child is stable, laparoscopy may be considered.Often the patient will not appear ill, and the plain films may suggest partial duodenal obstruction. Under these condi-tions, the patient may have malrotation without volvulus. This is best diagnosed by an upper gastrointestinal series that shows incomplete rotation with the duodenojejunal junction displaced to the right. The duodenum may show a corkscrew effect diag-nosing volvulus, or complete duodenal obstruction, with the small bowel loops entirely in the right side of the abdomen. Barium enema may show a displaced cecum, but this sign is unreliable, especially in the small infant in whom the cecum is normally in a somewhat higher position than in the older child.When volvulus is suspected, early surgical intervention is mandatory if the ischemic process is to be avoided or reversed. Volvulus occurs clockwise, and it is therefore untwisted coun-terclockwise. This can be remembered using the memory aid “turn back the hands of time.” Subsequently, a Ladd’s proce-dure is performed. This operation does not correct the malro-tation, but it does broaden the narrow mesenteric pedicle to prevent volvulus from recurring. This procedure is performed as follows (Fig. 39-17). The bands between the cecum and the abdominal wall and between the duodenum and terminal ileum are divided sharply to splay out the superior mesenteric artery and its branches. This maneuver brings the straightened duodenum into the right lower quadrant and the cecum into the left lower quadrant. The appendix is usually removed to avoid diagnostic errors in later life. No attempt is made to suture the cecum or duodenum in place. With advanced ischemia, reduc-tion of the volvulus without the Ladd’s procedure is accom-plished, and a “second look” 24 to 36 hours later often may show some vascular recovery. A plastic transparent silo may be placed to facilitate constant evaluation of the intestine and to plan for the timing of reexploration. Clearly necrotic bowel can then be resected conservatively. With early diagnosis and cor-rection, the prognosis is excellent. However, diagnostic delay can lead to mortality or to short-gut syndrome requiring intes-tinal transplantation.A subset of patients with malrotation will demonstrate chronic obstructive symptoms. These symptoms may result from Ladd’s bands across the duodenum, or occasionally, from intermittent volvulus. Symptoms include intermittent abdominal pain and intermittent vomiting that may occasionally be bilious. Infants with malrotation may demonstrate failure to thrive, and they may be diagnosed initially as having gastroesophageal reflux disease. Surgical correction using Ladd’s procedure as described earlier can prevent volvulus from occurring and improve symp-toms in many instances. In these cases, a laparoscopic approach may be taken, where diagnosis of Ladd’s bands and direct visu-alization of the relevant anatomy may be achieved.Meconium IleusPathogenesis and Clinical Presentation. Infants with cystic fibrosis have characteristic pancreatic enzyme deficiencies and abnormal chloride secretion in the intestine that result in the production of viscous, water-poor meconium. This phenotype is explained by the presence of mutations in the CFTR gene. Meconium ileus occurs when this thick, highly viscous meco-nium becomes impacted in the ileum and leads to high-grade intestinal obstruction. Recently, additional mutations were identified in genes encoding multiple apical plasma membrane proteins of infants with meconium ileus. Meconium ileus can be either uncomplicated, in which there is no intestinal perforation, or complicated, in which prenatal perforation of the intestine has occurred or vascular compromise of the distended ileum devel-ops. Antenatal US may reveal the presence of intra-abdominal or scrotal calcifications, or distended bowel loops. These infants present shortly after birth with progressive abdominal disten-tion and failure to pass meconium with intermittent bilious emesis. Abdominal radiographs show dilated loops of intestine. Because the enteric contents are so viscous, air-fluid levels do not form, even when obstruction is complete. Small bubbles of gas become entrapped in the inspissated meconium in the dis-tal ileum, where they produce a characteristic “ground glass” appearance.The diagnosis of meconium ileus is confirmed by a con-trast enema that typically demonstrates a microcolon. In patients with uncomplicated meconium ileus, the terminal ileum is filled with pellets of meconium. In patients with complicated meco-nium ileus, intraperitoneal calcifications form, producing an eggshell pattern on plain abdominal X-ray.Management. The treatment strategy depends on whether the patient has complicated or uncomplicated meconium ileus. Patients with uncomplicated meconium ileus can be Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   172612/02/19   11:26 AM 1727PEDIATRIC SURGERYCHAPTER 39Figure 39-17. Ladd procedure for malrotation. A. Lysis of cecal and duodenal bands. B. Broadening the mesentery. C. Appendectomy.treated nonoperatively. Either dilute water-soluble contrast or  N-acetylcysteine (Mucomyst) is infused transanally via catheter under fluoroscopic control into the dilated portion of the ileum. Because these agents act by absorbing fluid from the bowel wall into the intestinal lumen, infants undergoing treatment are at risk of fluid and electrolyte abnormalities so that appropriate resuscitation of the infant during this maneuver is extremely important. The enema may be repeated at 12-hour intervals over several days until all the meconium is evacuated. Inability to reflux the contrast into the dilated portion of the ileum signi-fies the presence of an associated atresia or complicated meco-nium ilus, and thus warrants exploratory laparotomy. If surgical intervention is required because of failure of contrast enemas to relieve obstruction, operative irrigation with dilute contrast agent, N-acetylcysteine, or saline through a purse-string suture may be successful. Alternatively, resection of the distended ter-minal ileum is performed, and the meconium pellets are flushed from the distal small bowel. At this point, an end ileostomy may be created. The distal bowel may be brought up as a mucus fistula or sewn to the side of the ileum as a classic Bishop-Koop anastomosis. An end-to-end anastomosis may also be consid-ered in the appropriate setting (Fig. 39-18).Necrotizing EnterocolitisClinical Features. Necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) is the most frequent and lethal gastrointestinal disorder affecting the intestine of the stressed, preterm neonate. The overall mortal-ity ranges between 10% and 50%. Advances in neonatal care such as surfactant therapy as well as improved methods of mechanical ventilation have resulted in increasing numbers of Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   172712/02/19   11:26 AM 1728SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIProximalDistalABCDProximalDistalProximalDistalProximalDistalDistalProximalTypical operative findingEnd to backThomas taperBishop-Koop with distal ventMikulicz enterostomyFigure 39-18. Techniques of intestinal anastomosis for infants with small bowel obstruction. A. End-to-back distal limb has been incised, creating “fishmouth” to enlarge the lumen. B. Bishop-Koop; proximal distended limb joined to side of distal small bowel, which is vented by “chimney” to the abdominal wall. C. Tapering; portion of antimesenteric wall of proximal bowel excised, with longitudinal closure to minimize disparity in the limbs. D. Mikulicz double-barreled enterostomy is constructed by suturing the two limbs together and then exte-riorizing the double stoma. The common wall can be crushed with a special clamp to create a large stoma. The stoma can be closed in an extraperitoneal manner.low-birth-weight infants surviving neonatal hyaline membrane disease. An increasing proportion of survivors of neonatal respi-ratory distress syndrome will therefore be at risk for developing NEC. Consequently, it is estimated that NEC may eventually surpass respiratory distress syndrome as the principal cause of death in the preterm infant. This is especially relevant, as NEC is a significant risk factor for more severe respiratory distress in premature infants.Multiple risk factors have been associated with the devel-opment of NEC. These include prematurity, initiation of enteral feeding, bacterial infection, intestinal ischemia resulting from birth asphyxia, umbilical artery cannulation, persistence of a patent ductus arteriosus, cyanotic heart disease, and maternal cocaine abuse. Nonetheless, the mechanisms by which these  complex interacting etiologies lead to the development of the disease remain undefined. The only consistent epidemio-logic precursors for NEC are prematurity and enteral ali-mentation, representing the commonly encountered clinical situation of a stressed infant who is fed enterally. Of note, there is some debate regarding the type and strategy of enteral alimen-tation in the pathogenesis of NEC. A prospective randomized 5study showed no increase in the incidence of NEC despite an aggressive feeding strategy.The indigenous intestinal microbial flora has been shown to play a central role in the pathogenesis of NEC. The importance of bacteria in the pathogenesis of NEC is further supported by the finding that NEC occurs in episodic waves that can be abrogated by infection control measures, and the fact that NEC usually develops at least 10 days postnatally, when the GI tract is colonized by coliforms. More recently, outbreaks of NEC have been reported in infants fed formula contaminated with Enterobacter sakazakii. Common bacterial isolates from the blood, peritoneal fluid, and stool of infants with advanced NEC include Escherichia coli, Enterobacter, Klebsiella, and occasionally, coagulase-negative Staphylococ-cus species.NEC may involve single or multiple segments of the intes-tine, most commonly the terminal ileum, followed by the colon. The gross findings in NEC include bowel distention with patchy areas of thinning, pneumatosis, gangrene, or frank perforation. The microscopic features include the appearance of a “bland infarct” characterized by full thickness necrosis.Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   172812/02/19   11:26 AM 1729PEDIATRIC SURGERYCHAPTER 39Figure 39-19. Abdominal radiograph of infant with necrotizing enterocolitis. Arrows point to area of pneumatosis intestinalis.Clinical Manifestations. Infants with NEC present with a spectrum of disease. In general, the infants are premature and may have sustained one or more episodes of stress, such as birth asphyxia, or they may have congenital cardiac disease. The clin-ical picture of NEC has been characterized as progressing from a period of mild illness to that of severe, life-threatening sepsis by Bell and colleagues. Although not all infants progress through the various “Bell stages,” this classification scheme provides a useful format to describe the clinical picture associated with the development of NEC. In the earliest stage (Bell stage I), infants present with feeding intolerance. This is suggested by vomiting or by the presence of a large residual volume from a previous feeding in the stomach at the time of the next feed-ing. Following appropriate treatment, which consists of bowel rest and IV antibiotics, many of these infants will not progress to more advanced stages of NEC. These infants are colloqui-ally described as suffering from an “NEC scare” and represent a population of neonates who are at risk of developing more severe NEC if a more prolonged period of stress supervenes.Infants with Bell stage II have established NEC that is not immediately life-threatening. Clinical findings include abdomi-nal distention and tenderness, bilious nasogastric aspirate, and bloody stools. These findings indicate the development of intestinal ileus and mucosal ischemia, respectively. Abdominal examination may reveal a palpable mass indicating the pres-ence of an inflamed loop of bowel, diffuse abdominal tender-ness, cellulitis, and edema of the anterior abdominal wall. The infant may appear systemically ill, with decreased urine output, hypotension, tachycardia, and noncardiac pulmonary edema. Hematologic evaluation reveals either leukocytosis or leukope-nia, an increase in the number of bands, and thrombocytopenia. An increase in the blood urea nitrogen and plasma creatinine level may be found, which signify the development of renal dys-function. The diagnosis of NEC may be confirmed by abdomi-nal radiography. The pathognomonic radiographic finding in NEC is pneumatosis intestinalis, which represents invasion of the ischemic mucosa by gas producing microbes (Fig. 39-19). Other findings include the presence of ileus or portal venous gas. The latter is a transient finding that indicates the presence of severe NEC with intestinal necrosis. A fixed loop of bowel may be seen on serial abdominal radiographs, which suggests the possibility that a diseased loop of bowel, potentially with a localized perforation, is present. Although these infants are at risk of progressing to more severe disease, with timely and appropriate treatment, they often recover.Infants with Bell stage III have the most advanced form of NEC. Abdominal radiographs often demonstrate the presence of pneumoperitoneum, indicating that intestinal perforation has occurred. These patients may develop a fulminant course with progressive peritonitis, acidosis, sepsis, disseminated intravas-cular coagulopathy, and death.Pathogenesis of Necrotizing Enterocolitis. Several theories have been proposed to explain the development of NEC. In gen-eral terms, the development of diffuse pneumatosis intestinalis—which is associated with the development of stage II NEC—is thought to be due to the presence of gas within the wall of the intestine from enteric bacteria, suggesting the causative role of bacteria in the pathogenesis of NEC. Furthermore, the develop-ment of pneumoperitoneum indicates disease progression with severe disruption of the intestinal barrier (intestinal perforation). Finally, systemic sepsis with diffuse multisystem organ dysfunc-tion suggests the role for circulating proinflammatory cytokines in the pathogenesis of NEC. It has also been demonstrated that the premature intestine responds in an exaggerated fashion to bacterial products, rendering the host susceptible to barrier dys-function and the development of NEC. Various groups have shown that NEC pathogenesis requires activation of the bacterial receptor—Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4)—in the intestinal epithe-lium. The expression of TLR4 is significantly elevated in the premature infant intestine as compared with the full-term infant intestine, a consequence of the role that TLR4 plays in normal intestinal development. When the infant is born prematurely and TLR4 expression levels are elevated, subsequent activation of TLR4 by colonizing bacteria in the neonatal intensive care unit leads to the induction of a severe proinflammatory response and the development of NEC. It is noteworthy that breast milk—long known to be protective against NEC—is able to suppress TLR4 signaling and that synthetic TLR4 antagonists are known to prevent NEC in preclinical models, suggesting the possibility of preventive approaches for this disease.Treatment. In all infants suspected of having NEC, feedings are discontinued, a nasogastric tube is placed, and broad-spec-trum parenteral antibiotics are given. The infant is resuscitated, and inotropes are administered to maintain perfusion as needed. Intubation and mechanical ventilation may be required to main-tain oxygenation. Total parenteral nutrition is started. Subse-quent treatment may be influenced by the particular stage of NEC that is present. Patients with Bell stage I are closely moni-tored and generally remain NPO and on IV antibiotics for 7 to 10 days, prior to reinitiating enteral nutrition. If the infant fully recovers, feedings may be reinitiated.Patients with Bell stage II disease merit close observa-tion. Serial physical examinations are performed looking for the development of diffuse peritonitis, a fixed mass, progres-sive abdominal wall cellulitis or systemic sepsis. If infants fail to improve after several days of treatment, consideration should be given to exploratory laparotomy. Paracentesis may be per-formed, and if the Gram stain demonstrates multiple organisms and leukocytes, perforation of the bowel should be suspected, and patients should undergo laparotomy.Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   172912/02/19   11:26 AM 1730SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIIn the most severe form of NEC (Bell stage III), patients have definite intestinal perforation or have not responded to nonoperative therapy. Two schools of thought direct fur-ther management. One group favors exploratory laparotomy. At laparotomy, frankly gangrenous or perforated bowel is resected, and the intestinal ends are brought out as stomas. When there is massive intestinal involvement, marginally viable bowel is retained and a “second-look” procedure is carried out after the infant stabilizes (24–48 hours). Patients with extensive necrosis at the second look may be managed by placing a proximal diverting stoma, resecting bowel that is definitely not viable, and leaving questionably viable bowel behind, distal to the diverted segment. When the intestine is viable except for a localized perforation without diffuse peri-tonitis and if the infant’s clinical condition permits, intestinal anastomosis may be performed. In cases where the diseased, perforated segment cannot be safely resected, drainage cath-eters may be left in the region of the diseased bowel, and the infant is allowed to stabilize.An alternative approach to the management of infants with perforated NEC involves drainage of the peritoneal cavity. This may be performed under local anesthesia at the bedside, and it can be an effective means of stabilizing the des-perately ill infant by relieving increased intra-abdominal pres-sure and allowing ventilation. When successful, this method also allows for drainage of perforated bowel by establishing a controlled fistula. Approximately one-third of infants treated with drainage alone survive without requiring additional oper-ations. Infants that do not respond to peritoneal drainage alone after 48 to 72 hours should undergo laparotomy. This proce-dure allows for the resection of frankly necrotic bowel diver-sion of the fecal stream and facilitates more effective drainage. It is noteworthy that a recent randomized controlled trial dem-onstrated that outcomes were similar in infants with NEC that were treated either with primary peritoneal drainage or lapa-rotomy, although this study was criticized for the large number of patients who were excluded from randomization. There was also concern that a number of patients who were thought to have NEC may actually have had spontaneous intestinal per-foration, given their lack of pneumatosis and relatively early onset of presentation; these patients would be anticipated to improve after peritoneal drainage due to the more local nature of their disease process.Necrotizing Enterocolitis in Older Infants. Although NEC is typically a disease that affects preterm infants, several inde-pendent groups have reported a tendency for early onset of NEC in term and near-term infants. In these patients, the pattern of disease was found to be different from that found in premature infants. Specifically, NEC in older infants typically is localized to the end of the small intestine and beginning of the colon, sug-gestive of an ischemic pathophysiology. There are four pertinent associations that are observed in term infants that develop NEC: congenital heart disease, in utero growth restriction, polycythe-mia, and perinatal hypoxic-ischemic events. As with NEC in preterm infants, NEC in older patients is also associated with formula consumption and is very rare in exclusively breastfed infants. Patients with NEC at full term typically present with bloody stools and may be characterized by rapid onset of symp-toms and a fulminant course. Thus, although it is true that NEC is typically a disease of premature babies, in the appropriate setting, NEC can develop at any age.Spontaneous Intestinal Perforation Versus Necrotizing Enterocolitis. In addition to NEC, preterm infants with intes-tinal pathology may develop spontaneous intestinal perforation (SIP). SIP is a distinct clinical entity from NEC, and it is essen-tially a perforation in the terminal ileum. The histopathology of SIP is different from NEC. Specifically, the mucosa is intact and not necrotic, there is no sign of ischemia, and the submucosa is thinned at the site of perforation. In contrast to NEC, pneuma-tosis intestinalis is absent in SIP. Moreover, the demographics of NEC and SIP are slightly different, in that patients with SIP tend to be slightly more premature, smaller, and more likely to have been on inotropic support. SIP occurs in two separate time points, both within a few days after birth and approximately  10 days later, and in all cases, free air will be present, but pneu-matosis will be absent. Because patients with SIP have isolated disease without necrosis or systemic inflammation, they tend to have a better outcome and are likely to respond better to peri-toneal drainage. In short, the diagnosis of SIP versus NEC has important prognostic significance. Treatment for SIP should pri-marily be surgical, with intestinal resection and stoma creation, followed by stoma reversal once the child is stable.In both SIP and NEC, the timing of stoma closure is a mat-ter of ongoing debate. Whereas in the past, pediatric surgeons typically waited until the child reached 5 kg or so, experience indicates that there is no benefit in waiting this long, and chil-dren tolerate stoma closure very well when they are at much lower weights. One approach is to close the stoma when the cal-culated gestational age is approximately 38 to 40 weeks, which will, on average, be at approximately 6 weeks after the initial surgery. This time point is selected based on the observation that proinflammatory gene expression has normalized by then, and NEC recurrence is very unlikely.Outcome. Survival in patients with NEC is dependent on the stage of disease, the extent of prematurity, and the presence of associated comorbidities. Survival by stage has recently been shown to be approximately 85%, 65%, and 35% for stages I, II, and III, respectively. Strictures develop in 20% of medically or surgically treated patients, and a contrast enema is mandatory before reestablishing intestinal continuity. If all other factors are favorable, the ileostomy is closed when the child is between 2 and 2.5 kg. At the time of stoma closure, the entire intestine should be examined to search for areas of NEC. Patients who develop massive intestinal necrosis are at risk of developing short bowel syndrome, particularly when the total length of the viable intes-tinal segment is less than 40 cm. These patients require TPN to provide adequate calories for growth and development, and may develop parenteral nutrition associated cholestasis and hepatic fibrosis. In a significant number of these patients, transplantation of the liver and small bowel may be required.Short Bowel SyndromeShort bowel syndrome (SBS) is an extremely morbid condition with an increasing incidence. Various congenital and perinatal acquired conditions such as gastroschisis, malrotation, atresia, and NEC may lead to SBS. Medical and surgical treatment options carry high dollar and human costs and morbidities including multiple infections and hospitalizations for vascular access, liver failure in conjunction with parenteral nutrition–associated cholestasis, and death. Medical centers that have developed multidisciplinary clinics focused on treating children with short bowel syndrome have achieved significant success in Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   173012/02/19   11:26 AM 1731PEDIATRIC SURGERYCHAPTER 39preventing line infections, reducing cholestasis, and improving nutrition and feeding independence overall.IntussusceptionIntussusception is the leading cause of intestinal obstruction in the young child. It refers to the condition whereby a segment of intestine becomes drawn into the lumen of the more proximal bowel. The process usually begins in the region of the termi-nal ileum, and extends distally into the ascending, transverse, or descending colon. Rarely, an intussusception may prolapse through the rectum.The cause of intussusception is not clear, although one hypothesis suggests that hypertrophy of the Peyer’s patches in the terminal ileum from an antecedent viral infection acts as a lead point. Peristaltic action of the intestine then causes the bowel distal to the lead point to invaginate into itself. Idio-pathic intussusception occurs in children between the ages of approximately 6 and 24 months of age. Beyond this age group, one should consider the possibility that a pathologic lead point maybe present. These include polyps, malignant tumors such as lymphoma, enteric duplication cysts or Meckel’s diverticu-lum. Such intussusceptions are rarely reduced by air or con-trast enema, and thus the lead point is identified when operative reduction of the intussusception is performed.Clinical Manifestations. Since intussusception is frequently preceded by a gastrointestinal viral illness, the onset may not be easily determined. Typically, the infant develops paroxysms of crampy abdominal pain and intermittent vomiting. Between attacks, the infant may act normally, but as symptoms progress, increasing lethargy develops. Bloody mucus (“currant-jelly” stool) may be passed per rectum. Ultimately, if reduction is not accomplished, gangrene of the intussusceptum occurs, and perforation may ensue. On physical examination, an elongated mass is detected in the right upper quadrant or epigastrium with an absence of bowel in the right lower quadrant (Dance’s sign). The mass may be seen on plain abdominal X-ray but is more easily demonstrated on air or contrast enema.Treatment. Patients with intussusception should be assessed for the presence of peritonitis and for the severity of systemic illness. Following resuscitation and administration of IV antibi-otics, the child is assessed for suitability to proceed with radio-graphic versus surgical reduction. In the absence of peritonitis, the child should undergo radiographic reduction. If peritonitis is present, or if the child appears systemically ill, urgent lapa-rotomy is indicated.In the stable patient, the air enema is both diagnostic and may be curative, and it is the preferred method of diagnosis and treatment of intussusception. Air is introduced with a manom-eter, and the pressure that is administered is carefully monitored. Under most instances, this should not exceed 120 mmHg. Suc-cessful reduction is marked by free reflux of air into multiple loops of small bowel and symptomatic improvement as the infant suddenly becomes pain free. Unless both of these signs are observed, it cannot be assumed that the intussusception is reduced. If reduction is unsuccessful, and the infant remains stable, the infant should be brought back to the radiology suite for a repeat attempt at reduction after a few hours. This strategy has improved the success rate of nonoperative reduction in many centers. In addition, hydrostatic reduction with barium may be useful if pneumatic reduction is unsuccessful. The overall suc-cess rate of radiographic reduction varies based on the experi-ence of the center, and it is typically between 60% and 90%.If nonoperative reduction is successful, the infant may be given oral fluids after a period of observation. Failure to reduce the intussusception mandates surgery. which can be approached through an open or laparoscopic technique. In an open procedure, exploration is carried out through a right lower quadrant incision, delivering the intussuscepted mass into the wound. Reduction usually can be accomplished by gentle distal pressure, where the intussusceptum is gently milked out of the intussuscipiens (Fig. 39-20). Care should be taken not to pull the bowel out, as this can cause damage to the bowel wall. The blood supply to the appendix is often compromised, and appen-dectomy is therefore often performed. If the bowel is frankly gangrenous, resection and primary anastomosis is performed. In experienced hands, laparoscopic reduction may be performed, even in very young infants. This is performed using a 5-mm lap-aroscope placed in the umbilicus, and two additional 5 mm ports in the left and right lower quadrants. The bowel is inspected, and if it appears to be viable, reduction is performed by milking the bowel or using gentle traction, although this approach is nor-mally discouraged during manual reduction. Atraumatic bowel graspers allow the bowel to be handled without injuring it.IV fluids are continued until the postoperative ileus sub-sides. Patients are started on clear liquids, and their diet is advanced as tolerated. Of note, recurrent intussusception occurs in 5% to 10% of patients, independent of whether the bowel is reduced radiographically or surgically. Patients present with recurrent symptoms in the immediate postoperative period. Treatment involves repeat air enema, which is successful in most cases. In patients who experience three or more episodes of intussusception, the presence of a pathologic lead point should be suspected and carefully evaluated using contrast stud-ies. After the third episode of intussusception, many pediatric surgeons will perform an exploratory laparotomy to reduce the bowel and to resect a pathologic lead point if identified.AppendicitisPresentation. Correct diagnosis of appendicitis in children can be one of the most humbling and challenging tasks facing the pediatric surgeon. The classical presentation is known to all students and practitioners of surgery: generalized abdomi-nal pain that localizes to the right lower quadrant followed by nausea, vomiting, fever, and localized peritoneal irritation in the region of McBurney’s point. When children present in this Figure 39-20. Open reduction of intussusception showing how the bowel is milked backwards to relieve the obstruction.Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   173112/02/19   11:26 AM 1732SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IImanner, there should be little diagnostic delay. The child should be made NPO, administered IV fluids and broad-spectrum anti-biotics, and brought to the operating room for an appendec-tomy. However, children often do not present in this manner. The coexistence of nonspecific viral syndromes and the inability of young children to describe the location and quality of their pain often result in diagnostic delay. As a result, children with appendicitis often present with perforation, particularly those who are under 5 years of age. Perforation increases the length of hospital stay and makes the overall course of the illness sig-nificantly more complex.Diagnosis of Appendicitis in Children. There have been significant improvements in the role of radiographic studies in the diagnosis of acute appendicitis. While CT is quite reliable in making the diagnosis, US is very useful when performed in experienced centers and good visualization of the appendix is achieved. MRI may be performed where available with high specificity and sensitivity—and avoidance of radiation. US is very useful for excluding ovarian causes of abdominal pain. Despite these radiographic measures, the diagnosis of appendi-citis remains largely clinical, and each clinician should develop his or her own threshold to operate or to observe the patient. A reasonable practice guideline is as follows. When the diagno-sis is clinically apparent, appendectomy should obviously be performed with minimal delay. Localized right lower quadrant tenderness associated with low-grade fever and leukocytosis in boys should prompt surgical exploration. In girls, ovarian or uterine pathology must also be considered. When there is diag-nostic uncertainty, the child may be observed, rehydrated, and reassessed. In girls of menstruating age, an US may be obtained to exclude ovarian pathology (cysts, torsion, or tumor). If all studies are negative, yet the pain persists, and the abdominal findings remain equivocal, diagnostic laparoscopy may be employed to determine the etiology of the abdominal pain. The appendix should be removed even if it appears to be normal, unless another pathologic cause of the abdominal pain is defini-tively identified and the appendectomy would substantially increase morbidity.Surgical Treatment of Appendicitis. The definitive treat-ment for acute appendicitis is appendectomy. Prior to surgery, it is important that patients receive adequate IV fluids in order to correct dehydration that commonly develops as a result of fever and vomiting in patients with appendicitis. Patients should also be started on antibiotics (such as a second-generation cepha-losporin). Most surgeons will perform a laparoscopic appen-dectomy, which may have some advantage over removing the appendix through a single, larger incision. During the laparo-scopic appendectomy, a small incision is made at the umbilicus, and two additional incisions are made in the lower abdomen. The appendix is typically delivered through the umbilicus, and all incisions are then closed, with dissolvable sutures. If the appendix is not ruptured, the patient may start drinking liq-uids shortly after waking up from the operation, and may be advanced to a solid diet the next day. In general, the same steps are taken when appendectomy is performed through an open approach. The most common complication after appendectomy is a surgical site infection. Other risks—including bleeding or damage to other structures inside the abdomen—are extremely rare. Recovery from surgery is dependent upon the individual patient. Most children are back to school approximately 1 week from surgery and usually are allowed to return to full physical Figure 39-21. Computed tomography scan of the abdomen showing the presence of a ruptured appendix with pelvic fluid and a fecalith (arrow).activity after 2 to 3 weeks. During the recovery period, over-the-counter pain medication may be required. Older patients tend to require a longer time for full recovery.Management of the Child With Perforated Appendicitis.  The signs and symptoms of perforated appendicitis can closely mimic those of gastroenteritis and include abdominal pain, vom-iting, and diarrhea. Alternatively, the child may present with symptoms of intestinal obstruction. An abdominal mass may be present in the lower abdomen. When the symptoms have been present for more than 4 or 5 days, and an abscess is suspected, it is reasonable to obtain a computerized tomogram of the abdo-men and pelvis with IV, oral, and rectal contrast in order to visu-alize the appendix and the presence of an associated abscess, phlegmon, or fecalith (Fig. 39-21).An individualized approach is necessary for the child who presents with perforated appendicitis. When there is evidence of generalized peritonitis, intestinal obstruction or evidence of systemic toxicity, the child should undergo appendectomy. This should be delayed only for as long as is required to ensure ade-quate fluid resuscitation and administration of broad-spectrum antibiotics. The operation can be performed through an open or through a laparoscopic approach. One distinct advantage of the laparoscopic approach is that it provides excellent visualiza-tion of the pelvis and all four quadrants of the abdomen. At the time of surgery, adhesions are gently lysed, abscess cavities are drained and the appendix is removed. Drains are seldom used, and the skin incisions can be closed primarily. If a fecalith is identified outside the appendix on computerized tomography, every effort should be made to retrieve it and to remove it along with the appendix, if at all possible. Often, the child in whom symptoms have been present for more than 4 or 5 days will pres-ent with an abscess without evidence of generalized peritonitis. Under these circumstances, it is appropriate to perform image-guided percutaneous drainage of the abscess followed by broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy. The inflammation will generally subside within several days, and the appendix can be safely removed as an outpatient 6 to 8 weeks later. If the child’s symp-toms do not improve, or if the abscess is not amenable to per-cutaneous drainage, then laparoscopic or open appendectomy and abscess drainage is required. Patients who present with a phlegmon in the region of a perforated appendix may be man-aged in a similar manner. In general, children who are younger Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   173212/02/19   11:26 AM 1733PEDIATRIC SURGERYCHAPTER 39than 4 or 5 years of age do not respond as well to an initial nonoperative approach because their bodies do not localize or isolate the inflammatory process. Thus, these patients are more likely to require early surgical intervention. Patients who have had symptoms of appendicitis for no more than 4 days should probably undergo “early” appendectomy because the inflamma-tory response is not as excessive during that initial period and the procedure can be performed safely.Nonoperative Management of Acute Appendicitis. Despite the fact that surgical removal of the acutely inflammation appendix is effective in all cases, there has been a growing rec-ognition that certain children will respond to antibiotics alone and thus avoid surgery. Several trials have shown that acute appendicitis may be treated with antibiotics alone effectively in nearly 80% of patients. However, the failure rate is considered unacceptably high for many patients, who effectively will have suffered a delay from definitive care. Furthermore, the hetero-geneity of disease presentation, and varying degree of illness severity, make it quite difficult to predict who will respond to antibiotics alone. This question is currently being answered in the United States in the form of a randomized controlled trial that is recruiting over 1500 patients in eight states, which will be divided into antibiotic therapy versus surgery (ClinicalTrials.gov, identifier NCT02800785).Other Causes of Abdominal Pain That Mimic Appendi-citis in Children. As mentioned earlier, appendicitis can be one of the most difficult diagnoses to establish in children with abdominal pain, in part because of the large number of diseases that present in a similar fashion. Patients with urinary tract infection can present very similarly to those with appen-dicitis. However, patients with urinary tract infection are less likely to present with vomiting and are likely to also experience difficulty with urination, characterized by pressure, burning, and frequency. Constipation may be commonly confused with appendicitis in its earliest stages. However, patients with consti-pation rarely have fever and will not have abnormalities in their blood work. Ovarian torsion can mimic appendicitis, given the severe abdominal pain that accompanies this condition. How-ever, patients with ovarian torsion are generally asymptomatic until the acute onset of severe pain. By contrast, patients with appendicitis generally experience gradual onset of pain asso-ciated with nausea and vomiting. Finally, children and young adults are always at risk for the development of gastroenteritis. However, unlike appendicitis, patients with gastroenteritis gen-erally present with persistent vomiting and occasionally diar-rhea, which precedes the onset of the abdominal pain.Intestinal DuplicationsDuplications represent mucosa-lined structures that are in con-tinuity with the gastrointestinal tract. Although they can occur at any level in the gastrointestinal tract, duplications are found most commonly in the ileum within the leaves of the mesen-tery. Duplications may be long and tubular but usually are cystic masses. In all cases, they share a common wall with the intes-tine. Symptoms associated with enteric duplication cysts include recurrent abdominal pain, emesis from intestinal obstruction, or hematochezia. Such bleeding typically results from ulceration in the duplication or in the adjacent intestine if the duplication contains ectopic gastric mucosa. On examination, a palpable mass is often identified. Children may also develop intestinal obstruction. Torsion may produce gangrene and perforation.The ability to make a preoperative diagnosis of enteric duplication cyst usually depends on the presentation. CT, US, and technetium pertechnetate scanning can be very helpful. Occasionally, a duplication can be seen on small bowel follow-through or barium enema. In the case of short duplications, resection of the cyst and adjacent intestine with end-to-end anastomosis can be performed. If resection of long duplications would compromise intestinal length, multiple enterotomies and mucosal stripping in the duplicated segment will allow the walls to collapse and become adherent. An alternative method is to divide the common wall using the GIA stapler, forming a com-mon lumen. Patients with duplications who undergo complete excision without compromise of the length of remaining intes-tine have an excellent prognosis.Meckel’s DiverticulumA Meckel’s diverticulum is a remnant of a portion of the embryonic omphalomesenteric (vitelline) duct. It is located on the antimesenteric border of the ileum, usually within 2 ft of the ileocecal valve (Fig. 39-22). It may be found incidentally at surgery or may present with inflammation masquerading as appendicitis. Perforation of a Meckel’s diverticulum may occur if the outpouching becomes impacted with food, leading to dis-tention and necrosis. Occasionally, bands of tissue extend from the Meckel’s diverticulum to the anterior abdominal wall, and these may represent lead points around which internal hernias may develop. This is an important cause of intestinal obstruction in the older child who has a scarless abdomen. Similar to dupli-cations, ectopic gastric mucosa may produce ileal ulcerations that bleed and lead to the passage of maroon-colored stools. Pancreatic mucosa may also be present. Diagnosis may be made by technetium pertechnetate scans when the patient presents with bleeding. Treatment is surgical. If the base is narrow and there is no mass present in the lumen of the diverticulum, a wedge resection of the diverticulum with transverse closure of the ileum can be performed. A linear stapler is especially useful in this circumstance. When a mass of ectopic tissue is palpable, if the base is wide, or when there is inflammation, it is prefer-able to perform a resection of the involved bowel and end-to-end ileoileostomy.Mesenteric CystsMesenteric cysts are similar to duplications in their location within the mesentery. However, they do not contain any mucosa or muscular wall. Chylous cysts may result from congenital Figure 39-22. Operative photograph showing the presence of a Meckel’s diverticulum (arrow).Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   173312/02/19   11:26 AM 1734SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIlymphatic obstruction. Mesenteric cysts can cause intestinal obstruction or may present as an abdominal mass. The diagno-sis may be made by abdominal US or CT. Treatment involves surgical excision. This may require resection of the adjacent intestine, particularly for extensive, multicystic lesions. In cases where complete excision is not possible due to the close proxim-ity to vital structures, partial excision or marsupialization should be performed.Hirschsprung’s DiseasePathogenesis. In his classic textbook entitled Pediatric Sur-gery, Dr. Orvar Swenson, who is eponymously associated with one of the classic surgical treatments for Hirschsprung’s dis-ease, described this condition as follows: “Congenital megaco-lon is caused by a malformation in the pelvic parasympathetic system which results in the absence of ganglion cells in Auer-bach’s plexus of a segment of distal colon. Not only is there an absence of ganglion cells, but the nerve fibers are large and excessive in number, indicating that the anomaly may be more extensive than the absence of ganglion cells.” This narrative of Hirschsprung’s disease is as accurate today as it was more than 50 years ago and summarizes the essential pathologic fea-tures of this disease: absence of ganglion cells in Auerbach’s plexus and hypertrophy of associated nerve trunks. The cause of Hirschsprung’s disease remains incompletely understood, although current thinking suggests that the disease results from a defect in the migration of neural crest cells, which are the embryonic precursors of the intestinal ganglion cell. Under normal conditions, the neural crest cells migrate into the intes-tine from cephalad to caudad. The process is completed by the  12th week of gestation, but the migration from midtransverse colon to anus takes 4 weeks. During this latter period, the fetus is most vulnerable to defects in migration of neural crest cells. This may explain why most cases of aganglionosis involve the rectum and rectosigmoid. The length of the aganglionic segment of bowel is therefore determined by the most distal region that the migrating neural crest cells reach. In rare instances, total colonic aganglionosis may occur.Recent studies have shed light on the molecular basis for Hirschsprung’s disease. Patients with Hirschsprung’s disease have an increased frequency of mutations in several genes, including GDNF, its receptor Ret, or its coreceptor Gfra-1. Moreover, mutations in these genes also lead to aganglionic megacolon in mice, which provides the opportunity to study the function of the encoded proteins. Initial investigations indicate that GDNF promotes the survival, proliferation, and migration of mixed populations of neural crest cells in culture. Other studies have revealed that GDNF is expressed in the gut in advance of migrating neural crest cells and is chemoattrac-tive for neural crest cells in culture. These findings raise the possibility that mutations in the GDNF or Ret genes could lead to impaired neural crest migration in utero and the development of Hirschsprung’s disease.Clinical Presentation. The incidence of sporadic Hirschsprung’s disease is 1 in 5000 live births. There are reports of increased frequency of Hirschsprung’s disease in multiple generations of the same family. Occasionally, such families have mutations in the genes described earlier, includ-ing the Ret gene. Because the aganglionic colon does not permit normal peristalsis to occur, the presentation of children with Hirschsprung’s disease is characterized by a functional distal intestinal obstruction. In the newborn period, the most common symptoms are abdominal distention, failure to pass meconium, and bilious emesis. Any infant who does not pass meconium beyond 48 hours of life must be investigated for the presence of Hirschsprung’s disease. Occasionally, infants present with a dra-matic complication of Hirschsprung’s disease called enteroco-litis. This pattern of presentation is characterized by abdominal distention and tenderness, and it is associated with manifesta-tions of systemic toxicity that include fever, failure to thrive, and lethargy. Infants are often dehydrated and demonstrate a leukocytosis or increase in circulating band forms on hemato-logic evaluation. On rectal examination, forceful expulsion of foul-smelling liquid feces is typically observed and represents the accumulation of stool under pressure in an obstructed dis-tal colon. Treatment includes rehydration, systemic antibiotics, nasogastric decompression, and rectal irrigations while the diag-nosis of Hirschsprung’s disease is being confirmed. In children that do not respond to nonoperative management, a decompres-sive stoma is required. It is important to ensure that this stoma is placed in ganglion-containing bowel, which must be confirmed by frozen section at the time of stoma creation.In approximately 20% of cases, the diagnosis of Hirschsprung’s disease is made beyond the newborn period. These children have severe constipation, which has usually been treated with laxatives and enemas. Abdominal distention and failure to thrive may also be present at diagnosis.Diagnosis. The definitive diagnosis of Hirschsprung’s disease is made by rectal biopsy. Samples of mucosa and submucosa are obtained at 1 cm, 2 cm, and 3 cm from the dentate line. This can be performed at the bedside in the neonatal period without anes-thesia, as samples are taken in bowel that does not have somatic innervation and is thus not painful to the child. In older children, the procedure should be performed using IV sedation. The histo-pathology of Hirschsprung’s disease is the absence of ganglion cells in the myenteric plexuses, increased acetylcholinesterase staining, and the presence of hypertrophied nerve bundles.It is important to obtain a barium enema in children in whom the diagnosis of Hirschsprung’s disease is suspected. This test may demonstrate the location of the transition zone between the dilated ganglionic colon and the distal constricted aganglionic rectal segment. Our practice is to obtain this test before instituting rectal irrigations if possible so that the differ-ence in size between the proximal and distal bowel is preserved. Although the barium enema can only suggest, but not reliably establish, the diagnosis of Hirschsprung’s disease, it is very useful in excluding other causes of distal intestinal obstruction. These include small left colon syndrome (as occurs in infants of diabetic mothers), colonic atresia, meconium plug syndrome, or the unused colon observed in infants after the administration of magnesium or tocolytic agents. The barium enema in total colonic aganglionosis may show a markedly shortened colon. Some surgeons have found the use of rectal manometry helpful, particularly in older children, although it is relatively inaccurate.Treatment. The diagnosis of Hirschsprung’s disease requires surgery in all cases. The classic surgical approach consisted of a multiple stage procedure. This included a colostomy in the newborn period, followed by a definitive pull-through  operation after the child was over 10 kg. There are three viable options for the definitive pull through procedure that are currently used. Although individual surgeons may advocate one procedure over another, studies have demonstrated that the outcome after each type of operation is similar. For each of 6Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   173412/02/19   11:26 AM 1735PEDIATRIC SURGERYCHAPTER 39the operations that is performed, the principles of treatment include confirming the location in the bowel where the transition zone between ganglionic and aganglionic bowel exists, resecting the aganglionic segment of bowel, and performing an anastomosis of ganglionated bowel to either the anus or a cuff of rectal mucosa (Fig. 39-23).It is now well established that a primary pull-through pro-cedure can be performed safely, even in the newborn period. This approach follows the same treatment principles as a staged procedure and saves the patient from an additional surgical Figure 39-23. The three operations for surgical correction of Hirschsprung’s disease. A. The Duhamel procedure leaves the rec-tum in place and brings ganglionic bowel into the retrorectal space. B. The Swenson procedure is a resection with end-to-end anastomo-sis performed by exteriorizing bowel ends through the anus. C. The Soave operation is performed by endorectal dissection and removal of mucosa from the aganglionic distal segment and bringing the ganglionic bowel down to the anus within the seromuscular tunnel.procedure. Many surgeons perform the intra-abdominal dissec-tion using the laparoscope. This approach is especially useful in the newborn period as this provides excellent visualization of the pelvis. In children with significant colonic distention, it is important to allow for a period of decompression using a rectal tube if a single-staged pull-through is to be performed. In older children with very distended, hypertrophied colon, it may be prudent to perform a colostomy to allow the bowel to decom-press prior to performing a pull-through procedure. However, it should be emphasized that there is no upper age limit for per-forming a primary pull-through.Of the three pull-through procedures performed for Hirschsprung’s disease, the first is the original Swenson pro-cedure. In this operation, the aganglionic rectum is dissected in the pelvis and removed down to the anus. The ganglionic colon is then anastomosed to the anus via a perineal approach. In the Duhamel procedure, dissection outside the rectum is confined to the retrorectal space, and the ganglionic colon is anastomosed posteriorly just above the anus. The anterior wall of the gangli-onic colon and the posterior wall of the aganglionic rectum are anastomosed, using a stapler. Although both of these procedures are extremely effective, they are limited by the possibility of damage to the parasympathetic nerves that are adjacent to the rectum. To circumvent this potential problem, Soave’s proce-dure involves dissection entirely within the rectum. The rectal mucosa is stripped from the muscular sleeve, and the gangli-onic colon is brought through this sleeve and anastomosed to the anus. This operation may be performed completely from below. In all cases, it is critical that the level at which ganglion-ated bowel exists be determined. Most surgeons believe that the anastomosis should be performed at least 5 cm from the point at which ganglion cells are found. This avoids performing a pull-through in the transition zone, which is associated with a high incidence of complications due to inadequate emptying of the pull-through segment. Up to one-third of patients who undergo a transition zone pull through will require a reoperation.The main complications of all procedures include post-operative enterocolitis, constipation, and anastomotic stricture. There is also a reported incidence of recurrent Hirschsprung’s disease, which may reflect either residual aganglionic bowel left behind after the pull-through, or the presence of ischemia in the pulled-through segment leading to ganglion cell loss. Long-term results with the three procedures are comparable and generally excellent in experienced hands. These three procedures also can be adapted for total colonic aganglionosis in which the ileum is used for the pull-through segment.Anorectal MalformationsAnatomic Description. Anorectal malformations describe a spectrum of congenital anomalies that include imperforate anus and persistent cloaca. Anorectal malformations occur in approximately 1 in 5000 live births and affect males and females almost equally. The embryologic basis includes failure of descent of the urorectal septum. The level to which this septum descends determines the type of anomaly that is present, which subsequently influences the surgical approach.In patients with imperforate anus, the rectum fails to descend through the external sphincter complex. Instead, the rectal pouch ends “blindly” in the pelvis, above or below the levator ani muscle. In most cases, the blind rectal pouch com-municates more distally with the genitourinary system or with the perineum through a fistulous tract. Traditionally, anatomic Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   173512/02/19   11:26 AM 1736SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 39-24. Low imperforate anus in a male. Note the well-developed buttocks. The perineal fistula was found at the midline raphe.Figure 39-25. Imperforate anus in a female. A catheter has been placed into the fistula, which is in the vestibule of the vagina.description of imperforate anus has been characterized as either “high” or “low” depending on whether the rectum ends above the levator ani muscle complex or partially descends through this muscle (Fig. 39-24). Based upon this classification system, in male patients with high imperforate anus the rectum usually ends as a fistula into the membranous urethra. In females, high imperforate anus often occurs in the context of a persistent clo-aca. In both males and females, low lesions are associated with a fistula to the perineum. In males, the fistula connects with the median raphe of the scrotum or penis. In females, the fistula may end within the vestibule of the vagina, which is located immediately outside the hymen or at the perineum.Because this classification system is somewhat arbitrary, Peña proposed a classification system that specifically and unambiguously describes the location of the fistulous opening. In men, the fistula may communicate with: (a) the perineum (cutaneous perineal fistula); (b) the lowest portion of the poste-rior urethra (rectourethral bulbar fistula); (c) the upper portion of the posterior urethra (rectourethral prostatic fistula); or (d) the bladder neck (rectovesicular fistula). In females, the ure-thra may open to the perineum between the female genitalia and the center of the sphincter (cutaneous perineal fistula) or into the vestibule of the vagina (vestibular fistula) (Fig. 39-25). In both sexes, the rectum may end in a completely blind fashion (imperforate anus without fistula). In rare cases, patients may have a normal anal canal, yet there may be total atresia or severe stenosis of the rectum.The most frequent defect in males is imperforate anus with rectourethral fistula, followed by rectoperineal fistula, then rectovesical fistula or rectobladder neck. In females, the most frequent defect is the rectovestibular defect, followed by the cutaneous perineal fistula. The third most common defect in females is the persistent cloaca. This lesion represents a wide spectrum of malformations in which the rectum, vagina, and urinary tract meet and fuse into a single common channel. On physical examination, a single perineal orifice is observed, and it is located at the place where the urethra normally opens. Typi-cally, the external genitalia are hypoplastic.Associated Malformations. Approximately 60% of patients have an associated malformation. The most common is a urinary tract defect, which occurs in approximately 50% of patients. Skeletal defects are also seen, and the sacrum is most commonly involved. Spinal cord anomalies especially tethered cored are common, particularly in children with high lesions. Gastroin-testinal anomalies occur, most commonly esophageal atresia. Cardiac anomalies may be noted, and occasionally patients pres-ent with a constellation of defects as part of the VACTERLL syndrome (described earlier).Management of Patients With Imperforate Anus. Patients with imperforate anus are usually stable, and the diagnosis is readily apparent. Despite the obstruction, the abdomen is initially not distended, and there is rarely any urgency to intervene. The principles of management center around diagnosing the type of defect that is present (high vs. low), and evaluating the presence of associated anomalies. It may take up to 24 hours before the presence of a fistula on the skin is noted, and thus it is important to observe the neonate for some period of time before defini-tive surgery is undertaken. All patients should therefore have an orogastric tube placed and be monitored for the appearance of meconium in or around the perineum or in the urine. Investiga-tion for associated defects should include an US of the abdomen to assess for the presence of urinary tract anomaly. Other tests should include an echocardiogram and spinal radiographs. An US of the spine should be performed to look for the presence of a tethered cord. To further classify the location of the fistula as either “high” versus “low,” a lateral abdominal radiograph can be obtained with a radiopaque marker on the perineum. By placing the infant in the inverted position, the distance between the most distal extent of air in the rectum and the perineal surface can be measured. This study is imprecise, however, and may add little to the overall management of these patients.The surgical management of infants with imperforate anus is determined by the anatomic defect. In general, when a low lesion is present, only a perineal operation is required without a colostomy. Infants with a high lesion require a colostomy in the newborn period, followed by a pull-through procedure at approximately 2 months of age. When a persistent cloaca is present, the urinary tract needs to be carefully evaluated at the time of colostomy formation to ensure that normal emptying can occur and to determine whether the bladder needs to be drained by means of a vesicostomy. If there is any doubt about the type of lesion, it is safer to perform a colostomy rather than jeopardize the infant’s long-term chances for continence by an injudicious perineal operation.Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   173612/02/19   11:26 AM 1737PEDIATRIC SURGERYCHAPTER 39The type of pull-through procedure favored by most pedi-atric surgeons today is the posterior sagittal anorectoplasty (PSARP procedure), as described by Peña and DeVries. This involves placing the patient in the prone jack-knife position, dividing the levator ani and external sphincter complex in the midline posteriorly, dividing the communication between the gastrointestinal tract and the urinary tract, and bringing down the rectum after sufficient length is achieved. The muscles are then reconstructed and sutured to the rectum. The outcome of 1192 patients who had undergone this procedure has been reviewed by Peña and Hong. Seventy-five percent of patients were found to have voluntary bowel movements, and nearly 40% were considered totally continent. As a rule, patients with high lesions demonstrate an increase incidence of incontinence, whereas those with low lesions are more likely to be consti-pated. Management of patients with high imperforate anus can be greatly facilitated using a laparoscopic assisted approach, in which the patient is operated on in the supine position, and the rectum is mobilized down to the fistulous connection to the bladder neck. This fistulous connection is then divided, and the rectum is completely mobilized down to below the peritoneal reflection. The operation then proceeds at the perineum, and the location of the muscle complex is determined using the nerve stimulator. A Veress needle is then advanced through the skin at the indicated site, with the laparoscope providing guidance to the exact intrapelvic orientation. Dilators are then placed over the Veress needle, the rectum is then pulled through this perito-neal opening, and an anoplasty is performed.JAUNDICEThe Approach to the Jaundiced InfantJaundice is present during the first week of life in 60% of term infants and 80% of preterm infants. There is usually accumula-tion of unconjugated bilirubin, but there may also be deposition of direct bilirubin. During fetal life, the placenta is the principal route of elimination of unconjugated bilirubin. In the newborn infant, bilirubin is conjugated through the activity of glucoronyl transferase. In the conjugated form, bilirubin is water soluble, which results in its excretion into the biliary system and then into the gastrointestinal tract. Newborns have a relatively high level of circulating hemoglobin and relative immaturity of the conjugating machinery. This results in a transient accumulation of bilirubin in the tissues, which is manifested as jaundice. Physi-ologic jaundice is evident by the second or third day of life and usually resolves within approximately 5 to 7 days. By definition, jaundice that persists beyond 2 weeks is considered pathologic.Pathologic jaundice may be due to biliary obstruction, increased hemoglobin load, or to liver dysfunction. The workup of the jaundiced infant therefore should include a search for the following possibilities: (a) obstructive disorders, including biliary atresia, choledochal cyst, and inspissated bile syndrome; (b) hematologic disorders, including ABO incompatibility, Rh incompatibility, spherocytosis; (c) metabolic disorders, includ-ing α-1 antitrypsin deficiency, galactosemia; pyruvate kinase deficiency; and (d) congenital infection, including syphilis and rubella.Biliary AtresiaPathogenesis. Biliary atresia is a rare disease associated with significant morbidity and mortality. This disease is character-ized by a fibroproliferative obliteration of the biliary tree which progresses toward hepatic fibrosis, cirrhosis, and end-stage liver failure. The incidence of this disease is approximately 1 in 8000 to 1 in 18,000. The etiology of biliary atresia is likely multifac-torial. In the classic textbook, Abdominal Surgery of Infancy and Childhood, Ladd and Gross described the cause of biliary atresia as an “arrest of development during the solid stage of bile duct formation.” Previously proposed theories on the eti-ology of biliary atresia have focused on defects in hepatogen-esis, prenatal vasculogenesis, immune dysregulation, infectious agents, and exposure to toxins. More recently, genetic mutations in the cfc1 gene, implicated in left-right axis determinations, were identified in patients with biliary atresia-splenic malforma-tion syndrome. Additionally, the detection of higher incidence of maternal microchimerism in the livers of males with biliary atresia has led to the suggestion that consequent expression of maternal antigens may lead to an autoimmune process leading to inflammation and obliteration of the biliary tree. Recent ani-mal studies strongly implicate perinatal exposure to reovirus or rotavirus. Such viral exposure may lead to periportal inflamma-tion mediated by interferon-γ and other cytokines.Clinical Presentation. Infants with biliary atresia present with jaundice at birth or shortly thereafter. The diagnosis of biliary atresia is frequently not entertained by pediatricians in part because physiologic jaundice of the newborn is so common and biliary atresia is so uncommon. As such, it is not unusual for there to be a delay in diagnosis. However, infants with bili-ary atresia characteristically have acholic, pale gray appearing stools, secondary to obstructed bile flow. With further passage of time, these infants manifest progressive failure to thrive, and if untreated, develop stigmata of liver failure and portal hyper-tension, particularly splenomegaly and esophageal varices.The obliterative process of biliary atresia involves the common duct, cystic duct, one or both hepatic ducts, and the gallbladder, in a variety of combinations. The histopathology of patients with biliary atresia includes inflammatory changes within the parenchyma of the liver, as well as fibrous deposi-tion at the portal plates that is observed on trichrome staining of frozen tissue sections. In certain cases, bile duct prolifera-tion may be seen, a relatively nonspecific marker of liver injury. Approximately 25% of patients with biliary atresia have coin-cidental malformations, often associated with polysplenia, and may include intestinal malrotation, preduodenal portal vein, and intrahepatic vena cava.Diagnosis. In general, the diagnosis of biliary atresia is made utilizing a combination of studies, as no single test is suffi-ciently sensitive or specific. Fractionation of the serum bilirubin is performed to determine if the associated hyperbilirubinemia is conjugated or unconjugated. Workup commonly includes the analysis of TORCH infection titers as well as viral hepatitis. Typically, a US is performed to assess the presence of other causes of biliary tract obstruction, including choledochal cyst. The absence of a gallbladder is highly suggestive of the diagno-sis of biliary atresia. However, the presence of a gallbladder does not exclude the diagnosis of biliary atresia because in approxi-mately 10% of biliary atresia patients, the distal biliary tract is patent and a gall bladder may be visualized, even though the proximal ducts are atretic. It is important to note that the intrahe-patic bile ducts are never dilated in patients with biliary atresia. In many centers, a nuclear medicine scan using technetium 99m IDA (DISIDA), performed after pretreatment of the patient with phenobarbital, has proven to be an accurate and reliable study. Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   173712/02/19   11:26 AM 1738SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIIf radionuclide appears in the intestine, there is patency of the biliary tree, and the diagnosis of biliary atresia is excluded. If radionuclide is concentrated by the liver but not excreted despite treatment with phenobarbital, and the metabolic screen, particu-larly α1-antitrypsin determination, is normal, the presumptive diagnosis is biliary atresia. A percutaneous liver biopsy might potentially distinguish between biliary atresia and other sources of jaundice such as neonatal hepatitis. When these tests point to or cannot exclude the diagnosis of biliary atresia, surgical exploration is warranted. At surgery, a cholangiogram may be performed if possible, using the gallbladder as a point of access. This may be performed using a laparoscope. The cholangio-gram demonstrates the anatomy of the biliary tree, determines whether extrahepatic bile duct atresia is present, and evaluates whether there is distal bile flow into the duodenum. The cholan-giogram may demonstrate hypoplasia of the extrahepatic biliary system. This condition is associated with hepatic parenchymal disorders that cause severe intrahepatic cholestasis, including α1-antitrypsin deficiency and biliary hypoplasia (Alagille’s syn-drome). Alternatively, a cursory assessment of the extrahepatic biliary tree may clearly delineate the atresia.Inspissated Bile Syndrome. This term is applied to patients with normal biliary tracts who have persistent obstructive jaun-dice. Increased viscosity of bile and obstruction of the canaliculi are implicated as causes. The condition has been seen in infants receiving parenteral nutrition, but it is also encountered in con-ditions associated with hemolysis, or in cystic fibrosis. In some instances, no etiologic factors can be defined. Neonatal hepatitis may present in a similar fashion to biliary atresia. This disease is characterized by persistent jaundice due to acquired biliary inflammation without obliteration of the bile ducts. There may be a viral etiology, and the disease is usually self-limited. In this case, cholangiography is both diagnostic and therapeutic.Treatment. If the diagnosis of biliary atresia is confirmed intraoperatively, then surgical treatment is undertaken at the same setting. Currently, first-line therapy consists of creation of a hepatoportoenterostomy, as described by Kasai. The purpose of this procedure is to promote bile flow into the intestine. The procedure is based on Kasai’s observation that the fibrous tissue at the porta hepatis invests microscopically patent biliary duct-ules that, in turn, communicate with the intrahepatic ductal sys-tem (Fig. 39-26). Transecting this fibrous tissue at the portal Figure 39-26. Operative photograph showing Kasai portoenteros-tomy. Arrows denote the site of the anastomosis. Note the engorged liver.Figure 39-27. Schematic illustration of the Kasai portoenteros-tomy for biliary atresia. An isolated limb of jejunum is brought to the porta hepatis and anastomosed to the transected ducts at the liver plate.plate, invariably encountered cephalad to the bifurcating portal vein, opens these channels and establishes bile flow into a surgi-cally constructed intestinal conduit, usually a Roux-en-Y limb of jejunum (Fig. 39-27). Some authors believe that an intussus-cepted antireflux valve is useful in preventing retrograde bile reflux, although the data suggest that it does not impact out-come. A liver biopsy is performed at the time of surgery to determine the degree of hepatic fibrosis that is present. The diameter of bile ducts at the portal plate is predictive of likeli-hood of long-term success of biliary drainage through the por-toenterostomy. Numerous studies also suggest that the likelihood of surgical success is inversely related to the age at the time of portoenterostomy. Infants treated prior to 60 days of life are more likely to achieve successful and long-term biliary drainage than older infants. Although the outlook is less favor-able for patients after the 12th week, it is reasonable to proceed with surgery even beyond this time point, as the alternative is certain liver failure. It is noteworthy that a significant number of patients have had favorable outcomes after undergoing portoen-terostomy despite advanced age at time of diagnosis.Bile drainage is anticipated when the operation is carried out early; however, bile flow does not necessarily imply cure. Approximately one-third of patients remain symptom free after portoenterostomy, the remainder require liver transplantation due to progressive liver failure. Independent risk factors that predict failure of the procedure include bridging liver fibrosis at the time of surgery and postoperative cholangitic episodes. A review of the data of the Japanese Biliary Atresia Registry (JBAR), which 7Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   173812/02/19   11:26 AM 1739PEDIATRIC SURGERYCHAPTER 39includes the results of 1381 patients, showed that the 10-year survival rate was 53% without transplantation, and 66.7% with transplantation. A common postoperative complication is cholangitis. There is no effective strategy to completely eliminate this complication, and the effectiveness of long-term prophylactic antibiotics has not been fully resolved. The Childhood Liver Research and Education Network (ChiLDREN, formerly the Biliary Atresia Research Consortium) is an active consortium of 15 children’s hospitals in the United States, funded by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) that studies rare cholestatic liver diseases of infants and children (http://childrennetwork.org).  An NIH-funded, randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled trial designed to determine if adjuvant steroids improve outcome of infants undergoing Kasai portoenterostomy has been completed. This trial showed that among infants with biliary atresia who have undergone hepatoportoenterostomy, high-dose steroid therapy following surgery did not result in statistically significant treatment differences in bile drainage at 6 months, although a small clinical benefit could not be excluded. Steroid treatment was associated with earlier onset of serious adverse events in children with biliary atresia.Previous authors have published merits of revising the portoenterostomy in select patients if drainage of bile stops. Recently, Bondoc et al reported on their experience with revision of portoenterostomies. Specifically, the authors reported on 183 patients who underwent Kasai portoenterostomy for biliary atresia, of which 24 underwent revision for recurrence of nondrainage after successful bypass. Of the patients who underwent revision for nondrainage, 75% ultimately achieved drainage after the second procedure, of which nearly 50% survived long term with their native livers. The authors conclude that in selected patients in which bile flow was established following the Kasai procedure and then lost, revision of the portoenterostomy is a reasonable treatment option with good success.Choledochal CystClassification. The term choledochal cyst refers to a spec-trum of congenital biliary tract disorders that were previously grouped under the name idiopathic dilation of the common bile duct. After the classification system proposed by Alonso-Lej,  five types of choledochal cyst are described. Type I cyst is char-acterized by fusiform dilatation of the bile duct. This is the most common type and is found in 80% to 90% of cases. Type II choledochal cysts appear as an isolated diverticulum protruding from the wall of the common bile duct. The cyst may be joined to the common bile duct by a narrow stalk. Type III choledochal cysts arise from the intraduodenal portion of the common bile duct and are also known as choledochoceles. Type IVA cysts consist of multiple dilatations of the intrahepatic and extra-hepatic bile ducts. Type IVB choledochal cysts are multiple dilatations involving only the extrahepatic bile ducts. Type V (Caroli’s disease) consists of multiple dilatations limited to the intrahepatic bile ducts.Choledochal cyst is most appropriately considered the pre-dominant feature in a constellation of pathologic abnormalities that can occur within the pancreato-biliary system. Frequently associated with choledochal cyst is an anomalous junction of the pancreatic and common bile ducts. The etiology of choledochal cyst is controversial. Babbit proposed an abnormal pancreatic and biliary duct junction, with the formation of a “common channel” into which pancreatic enzymes are secreted. This process results in weakening of the bile duct wall by gradual enzymatic destruction, leading to dilatation, inflammation, and finally cyst formation. Not all patients with choledochal cyst demonstrate an anatomic common channel, which raises ques-tions regarding the accuracy of this model.Clinical Presentation. Choledochal cyst is more common in females than in males (4:1). Typically, these present in children beyond the toddler age group. The classic symptom triad consists of abdominal pain, mass, and jaundice. However, this complex is actually encountered in fewer than half of the patients. The more usual presentation is that of episodic abdominal pain, often recurring over the course of months or years, and generally asso-ciated with only minimal jaundice that may escape detection. If left undiagnosed, patients may develop cholangitis or pancreatitis. Cholangitis may lead to the development of cirrhosis and portal hypertension. Choledochal cyst can present in the newborn period, where the symptoms are very similar to those of biliary atresia. Often neonates will have an abdominal mass at presentation.Diagnosis. Choledochal cyst is frequently diagnosed in the fetus at a screening prenatal US. In the older child or adoles-cent, abdominal US may reveal a cystic structure arising from the biliary tree. CT will confirm the diagnosis. These studies will demonstrate the dimensions of the cyst and define its rela-tionship to the vascular structures in the porta hepatis, as well as the intrahepatic ductal configuration. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) is reserved for patients in whom confusion remains after evaluation by less invasive imag-ing modalities. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography may provide a more detailed depiction of the anatomy of the cyst and its relationship to the bifurcation of the hepatic ducts and into the pancreas.Treatment. The cyst wall is composed of fibrous tissue and is devoid of mucosal lining. As a result, the treatment of cho-ledochal cyst is surgical excision followed by biliary-enteric reconstruction. There is no role for internal drainage by cys-tenterostomy, which leaves the cyst wall intact and leads to the inevitable development of cholangitis. Rarely, choledochal cyst can lead to the development of a biliary tract malignancy. This provides a further rationale for complete cyst excision.Resection of the cyst may be performed via open or laparo-scopic approach, and where possible, requires circumferential dis-section. The posterior plane between the cyst and portal vein must be carefully dissected to accomplish removal. The pancreatic duct, which may enter the distal cyst, is vulnerable to injury dur-ing distal cyst excision but can be avoided by avoiding entry into the pancreatic parenchyma. In cases were the degree of pericystic inflammation is dense, it may be unsafe to attempt complete cyst removal. In this instance, it is reasonable to dissect within the posterior wall of the cyst, which allows the inner lining of the back wall to be dissected free from the outer layer that directly overlies the portal vascular structures. The lateral and anterior cyst, as well as the internal aspect of the back wall, is removed, yet the outer posterior wall remains behind. Cyst excision is accomplished, and the proximal bile duct is anastomosed to the intestinal tract typically via a Roux-en Y limb of jejunum. More recently, laparoscopic-assisted resections of choledochal cysts have been described. In these cases, the end-to-side jejunojeju-nostomy is performed extracorporeally, but the remainder of the procedure is completed utilizing minimally invasive techniques.The prognosis for children who have undergone com-plete excision of choledochal cyst is excellent. Complications include anastomotic stricture, cholangitis, and intrahepatic stone Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   173912/02/19   11:26 AM 1740SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIformation. These complications may develop a long time after surgery has been completed.DEFORMITIES OF THE ABDOMINAL WALLEmbryology of the Abdominal WallThe abdominal wall is formed by four separate embryologic folds: cephalic, caudal, right, and left lateral folds. Each of these is com-posed of somatic and splanchnic layers and develops toward the anterior center portion of the coelomic cavity, joining to form a large umbilical ring that surrounds the two umbilical arteries, the vein, and the yolk sac or omphalomesenteric duct. These struc-tures are covered by an outer layer of amnion, and the entire unit composes the umbilical cord. Between the 5th and tenth weeks of fetal development, the intestinal tract undergoes rapid growth outside the abdominal cavity within the proximal portion of the umbilical cord. As development is completed, the intestine gradu-ally returns to the abdominal cavity. Contraction of the umbilical ring completes the process of abdominal wall formation.Failure of the cephalic fold to close results in sternal defects such as congenital absence of the sternum. Failure of the caudal fold to close results in exstrophy of the bladder and, in more extreme cases, exstrophy of the cloaca. Interruption of central migration of the lateral folds results in omphalocele. Gastroschisis, originally thought to be a variant of omphalocele, possibly results from a fetal accident in the form of intrauterine rupture of a hernia of the umbilical cord, although other hypoth-eses have been advanced.Umbilical HerniaFailure of the umbilical ring to close results in a central defect in the linea alba. The resulting umbilical hernia is covered by nor-mal umbilical skin and subcutaneous tissue, but the fascial defect allows protrusion of abdominal contents. Hernias less than a cen-timeter in size at the time of birth usually will close spontaneously by 4 to 5 years of life and in most cases should not undergo early repair. Sometimes the hernia is large enough that the protrusion is disfiguring and disturbing to both the child and the family. In such circumstances, early repair may be advisable (Fig. 39-28).Figure 39-28. Umbilical hernia in a 1-year-old female.Umbilical hernias are generally asymptomatic protrusions of the abdominal wall. They are generally noted by parents or physicians shortly after birth. All families of patients with umbilical hernia should be counseled about signs of incarcera-tion, which is rare in umbilical hernias and more common in smaller (1 cm or less) rather than larger defects. Incarceration presents with abdominal pain, bilious emesis, and a tender, hard mass protruding from the umbilicus. This constellation of symp-toms mandates immediate exploration and repair of the hernia to avoid strangulation. More commonly, the child is asymptomatic and treatment is governed by the size of the defect, the age of the patient, and the concern that the child and family have regard-ing the cosmetic appearance of the abdomen. When the defect is small and spontaneous closure is likely, most surgeons will delay surgical correction until 5 years of age. If closure does not occur by this time or a younger child has a very large or symp-tomatic hernia, it is reasonable to proceed to repair.Repair of uncomplicated umbilical hernia is performed under general anesthesia as an outpatient procedure. A small curving incision that fits into the skin crease of the umbilicus is made, and the sac is dissected free from the overlying skin. The fascial defect is repaired with permanent or long-lasting absorb-able, interrupted sutures that are placed in a transverse plane. The skin is closed using subcuticular sutures. The postoperative recovery is typically uneventful and recurrence is rare, but it is more common in children with elevated intraabdominal pres-sures, such as those with a VP shunt.Patent UrachusDuring the development of the coelomic cavity, there is free communication between the urinary bladder and the abdominal wall through the urachus, which exits adjacent to the omphalo-mesenteric duct. Persistence of this tract results in a communi-cation between the bladder and the umbilicus. The first sign of a patent urachus is moisture or urine flow from the umbilicus. Recurrent urinary tract infection can result. The urachus may be partially obliterated, with a remnant beneath the umbilicus in the extraperitoneal position as an isolated cyst that may be identi-fied by US. A urachal cyst usually presents as an inflammatory mass inferior to the umbilicus. Initial treatment is drainage of the infected cyst followed by cyst excision as a separate proce-dure once the inflammation has resolved.In the child with a persistently draining umbilicus, a diag-nosis of patent urachus should be considered. The differential diagnosis includes an umbilical granuloma, which generally responds to local application of silver nitrate. The diagnosis of patent urachus is confirmed by umbilical exploration. The ura-chal tract is excised and the bladder is closed with an absorbable suture. A patent vitelline duct may also present with umbilical drainage. In this circumstance, there is a communication with the small intestine, often at the site of a Meckel’s diverticulum. Treatment includes umbilical exploration with resection of the duct remnant (Fig. 39-29).OmphalocelePresentation. Omphalocele refers to a congenital defect of the abdominal wall in which the bowel and solid viscera are covered by peritoneum and amniotic membrane (Fig. 39-30). The umbil-ical cord inserts into the sac. Omphalocele can vary from a small defect with intestinal contents to giant omphalocele in which the abdominal wall defect measures 4 cm or more in diameter and contains liver. The overall incidence is approximately 1 in 5000 Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   174012/02/19   11:26 AM 1741PEDIATRIC SURGERYCHAPTER 39Figure 39-29. Patent vitelline duct. Note the communication between the umbilicus and the small bowel at the site of a Meckel’s diverticulum.Figure 39-30. Giant omphalocele in a newborn male.live births, with 1 in 10,000 that are giant omphaloceles. Omphalocele occurs in association with special syndromes such as exstrophy of the cloaca (vesicointestinal fissure), the Beckwith-Wiedemann constellation of anomalies (macroglos-sia, macrosomia, hypoglycemia, and visceromegaly and omphalocele) and Cantrell’s Pentalogy (lower thoracic wall malformations [cleft sternum], ectopia cordis, epigastric omphalocele, anterior midline diaphragmatic hernia and cardiac anomalies). There is a 60% to 70% incidence of associated anomalies, especially cardiac (20–40% of cases) and chromo-somal abnormalities. Chromosomal anomalies are more common in children with smaller defects. Omphalocele is associated with prematurity (10–50% of cases) and intrauterine growth restriction (20% of cases).Treatment. Immediate treatment of an infant with omphalocele consists of attending to the vital signs and maintaining the body 8temperature. A blood glucose should be evaluated because of the association with Beckwith-Wiedemann. The omphalocele should be covered to reduce fluid loss, but moist dressings may result in heat loss and are not indicated. No pressure should be placed on the omphalocele sac in an effort to reduce its contents because this maneuver may increase the risk of rupture of the sac or may interfere with abdominal venous return. Prophylac-tic broad-spectrum antibiotics should be administered in case of rupture. The subsequent treatment and outcome is determined by the size of the omphalocele. In general terms, small to medium-sized defects have a significantly better prognosis than extremely large defects in which the liver is present. In these cases, not only is the management of the abdominal wall defect a significant challenge, but these patients often have concomitant pulmonary insufficiency that can lead to significant morbidity and mortality. If possible, and if the pulmonary status will permit it, a primary repair of the omphalocele should be undertaken. This involves resection of the omphalocele membrane and closure of the fas-cia. A layer of prosthetic material may be required to achieve closure. In infants with a giant omphalocele, the defect cannot be closed primarily because there is not adequate intraperitoneal domain to reduce the viscera (see Fig. 39-30). Some infants may have associated congenital anomalies that complicate surgical repair, and because cardiac anomalies are common, an echocar-diogram should be obtained prior to any procedure. If repair is contraindicated, such as with a very large defect, a nonopera-tive approach can be used. The omphalocele sac can be treated with topical treatments, which serve to harden the sac to allow for more protective coverage where muscle and skin cannot be used given the large defect. Various authors describe success with iodine-containing solutions, silver sulfadiazine, or saline, and some surgeons rotate these solutions because of the impact of iodine on the thyroid and the difficulty of cleaning off all of the silver sulfadiazine and its association with leukopenia. It typically takes 2 to 3 months before reepithelialization occurs. In the past, mercury compounds were used, but they have been discontinued because of associated systemic toxicity. After epi-thelialization has occurred, attempts should be made to achieve closure of the anterior abdominal wall but may be delayed by associated pulmonary insufficiency. Such procedures typically require complex measures to achieve skin closure, including the use of biosynthetic materials or component separation. In cases of giant omphalocele, prolonged hospitalization is typical. If the base is very narrow—which can occur even for babies with very large omphaloceles—it may be wise to open the base in order to allow the abdominal contents and the liver to reenter the abdominal cavity, and thereby achieve abdominal domain. This approach will, by necessity, require sewing in some synthetic material in order to achieve fascial closure, and prolonged hos-pitalization will be required to allow for skin coverage to occur. These patients require high amounts of caloric support, given the major demands for healing.GastroschisisPresentation. Gastroschisis represents a congenital anom-aly characterized by a defect in the anterior abdominal wall through which the intestinal contents freely protrude. Unlike omphalocele, there is no overlying sac, and the size of the defect is usually <4 cm. The abdominal wall defect is located at the junction of the umbilicus and normal skin, and is almost always to the right of the umbilicus (Fig. 39-31). The umbilicus becomes partly detached, allowing free communication with the Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   174112/02/19   11:26 AM 1742SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 39-31. Gastroschisis in a newborn. Note the location of the umbilical cord and the edematous, thickened bowel.Figure 39-32. Prenatal ultrasound of a 30-week gestation age fetus with a gastroschisis. Arrows point to the bowel outside within the amniotic fluid.Figure 39-33. Use of a silo in a patient with a gastroschisis to allow for the bowel wall edema to resolve so as to facilitate closure of the abdominal wall.abdominal cavity. The appearance of the bowel provides some information with respect to the in-utero timing of the defect. The intestine may be normal in appearance, suggesting that the rupture occurred relatively late during the pregnancy. More commonly, however, the intestine is thick, edematous, discol-ored, and covered with exudate, implying a more longstanding process. Progression to full enteral feeding is usually delayed, with diminished motility that may be related to these changes.Unlike infants born with omphalocele, associated anoma-lies are not usually seen with gastroschisis except for a 10% rate of intestinal atresia. This defect can readily be diagnosed  on prenatal US (Fig. 39-32). There is no advantage to perform-ing a cesarean section instead of a vaginal delivery. In a decade long retrospective review, early deliver did not affect the thick-ness of bowel peel, yet patients delivered before 36 weeks had significantly longer length of stay in the hospital and time to enteral feeds. Based upon these findings, it is thought that fetal well-being should be the primary determinant of delivery for gastroschisis.Treatment. All infants born with gastroschisis require urgent surgical treatment. Of equal importance, these infants require vigorous fluid resuscitation in the range of 160 to 190 cc/kg  per day to replace significant evaporative fluid losses. In many instances, the intestine can be returned to the abdominal cavity, and a primary surgical closure of the abdominal wall is per-formed. Some surgeons believe that they facilitate primary closure with mechanical stretching of the abdominal wall, thor-ough orogastric suctioning with foregut decompression, rectal irrigation, and evacuation of meconium. Care must be taken to prevent markedly increased abdominal pressure during the reduction, which will lead to compression of the inferior vena cava, respiratory embarrassment, and abdominal compartment syndrome. To avoid this complication, it is helpful to moni-tor the bladder or airway pressures during reduction. In infants whose intestine has become thickened and edematous, it may be impossible to reduce the bowel into the peritoneal cavity in the immediate postnatal period. Under such circumstances, a plastic spring-loaded silo can be placed onto the bowel and secured beneath the fascia or a sutured silastic silo constructed. The silo covers the bowel and allows for graduated reduc-tion on a daily basis as the edema in the bowel wall decreases (Fig. 39-33). It is important to ensure that the silo-fascia junc-tion does not become a constricting point or “funnel,” in which case the intestine will be injured upon return to the peritoneum. In this case, the fascial opening must be enlarged. Surgical clo-sure can usually be accomplished within approximately 1 to  2 weeks. A prosthetic piece of material may be required to bring the edges of the fascia together. If an atresia is noted at the time of closure, it is prudent to reduce the bowel at the first operation and return after several weeks once the edema has resolved to correct the atresia. Intestinal function does not typically return for several weeks in patients with gastroschisis. This is especially true if the bowel is thickened and edematous. As a result, these patients will require central line placement and institution of total parenteral nutrition in order to grow. Feeding advancement should be slow and typically requires weeks to arrive at full enteral nutrition.Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   174212/02/19   11:27 AM 1743PEDIATRIC SURGERYCHAPTER 39There has been recent success with the utilization of non-surgical closure of gastroschisis. In this technique, the umbili-cal cord is placed over the defect, which is then covered with a transparent occlusive dressing. Over the ensuing days, the cord provides a tissue barrier, and the defect spontaneously closes. This approach allows for nonsurgical coverage in a majority of cases of gastroschisis, even in the setting of very large openings. Questions remain regarding the long-term presence of umbilical hernias in these children and the total hospitalization.Prune-Belly SyndromeClinical Presentation. Prune-belly syndrome refers to a dis-order that is characterized by extremely lax lower abdominal musculature, dilated urinary tract including the bladder, and bilateral undescended testes (Fig. 39-34). The term prune-belly syndrome appropriately describes the wrinkled appearance of the anterior abdominal wall that characterizes these patients. Prune-belly syndrome is also known as Eagle-Barrett syn-drome as well as the triad syndrome because of the three major manifestations. The incidence is significantly higher in males. Patients manifest a variety of comorbidities. The most signifi-cant is pulmonary hypoplasia, which can be unsurvivable in the most severe cases. Skeletal abnormalities include dislocation or dysplasia of the hip and pectus excavatum.The major genitourinary manifestation in prune-belly syn-drome is ureteral dilation. The ureters are typically long and tortuous and become more dilated distally. Ureteric obstruction is rarely present, and the dilation may be caused by decreased smooth muscle and increased collagen in the ureters. Approxi-mately eighty percent of these patients will have some degree of vesicureteral reflux, which can predispose to urinary tract infection. Despite the marked dilatation of the urinary tract, most children with prune-belly syndrome have adequate renal parenchyma for growth and development. Factors associated with the development of long-term renal failure include the presence of abnormal kidneys on US or renal scan and persis-tent pyelonephritis.Treatment. Despite the ureteric dilation, there is currently no role for ureteric surgery unless an area of obstruction develops. The testes are invariably intraabdominal, and bilateral orchido-pexy can be performed in conjunction with abdominal wall recon-struction at 6 to 12 months of age. Despite orchiopexy, fertility in Figure 39-34. Eagle-Barrett (prune-belly) syndrome. Notice the lax, flaccid abdomen.a boy with prune-belly syndrome is unlikely as spermatogenesis over time is insufficient. Deficiencies in the production of pros-tatic fluid and a predisposition to retrograde ejaculation contrib-ute to infertility. Abdominal wall repair is accomplished through an abdominoplasty, which typically requires a transverse inci-sion in the lower abdomen extending into the flanks.Inguinal HerniaAn understanding of the management of pediatric inguinal her-nias is a central component of modern pediatric surgical prac-tice. Inguinal hernia repair represents one of the most common operations performed in children. The presence of an inguinal hernia in a child is an indication for surgical repair. The opera-tion is termed a herniorrhaphy because it involves closing off the patent processus vaginalis. This is to be contrasted with the hernioplasty that is performed in adults, which requires a recon-struction of the inguinal floor.Embryology. In order to understand how to diagnose and treat inguinal hernias in children, it is critical to understand their embryologic origin. It is very useful to describe these events to the parents, who often are under the misconception that the her-nia was somehow caused by their inability to console their crying child, or the child’s high activity level. Inguinal hernia results from a failure of closure of the processus vaginalis; a finger-like projection of the peritoneum that accompanies the testicle as it descends into the scrotum. Closure of the processus vaginalis normally occurs a few months prior to birth. This explains the high incidence of inguinal hernias in premature infants. When the processes vaginalis remains completely patent, a commu-nication persists between the peritoneal cavity and the groin, resulting in a hernia. Partial closure can result in entrapped fluid, which results in the presence of a hydrocele. A communicating hydrocele refers to a hydrocele that is in communication with the peritoneal cavity and can therefore be thought of as a hernia. Using the classification system that is typically applied to adult hernias, all congenital hernias in children are by definition indi-rect inguinal hernias. Children also present with direct inguinal and femoral hernias, although these are much less common.Clinical Manifestation. Inguinal hernias occur more com-monly in males than females (10:1) and are more common on the right side than the left. Infants are at high risk for incar-ceration of an inguinal hernia because of the narrow inguinal ring. Patients most commonly present with a groin bulge that is noticed by the parents as they change the diaper (Fig. 39-35). Figure 39-35. Right inguinal hernia in a 4-month-old male. The arrows point to the bulge in the right groin.Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   174312/02/19   11:27 AM 1744SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIOlder children may notice the bulge themselves. On examina-tion, the cord on the affected side will be thicker, and pressure on the lower abdomen usually will display the hernia on the affected side. The presence of an incarcerated hernia is mani-fested by a firm bulge that does not spontaneously resolve and may be associated with fussiness and irritability in the child. The infant that has a strangulated inguinal hernia will manifest an edematous, tender bulge in the groin, occasionally with over-lying skin changes. The child will eventually develop intestinal obstruction, peritonitis, and systemic toxicity.Usually an incarcerated hernia can be reduced. Occasion-ally this may require light sedation. Gentle pressure is applied on the sac from below in the direction of the internal inguinal ring. Following reduction of the incarcerated hernia, the child may be admitted for observation, and herniorrhaphy is per-formed within the next 24 hours to prevent recurrent incarcera-tion. Alternatively, the child may be scheduled for surgery at the next available time slot. If the hernia cannot be reduced, or if evidence of strangulation is present, emergency operation is necessary. This may require a laparotomy and bowel resection.When the diagnosis of inguinal hernia is made in an oth-erwise normal child, operative repair should be planned. Spon-taneous resolution does not occur, and therefore a nonoperative approach cannot ever be justified. An inguinal hernia in a female infant or child frequently contains an ovary rather than intestine. Although the gonad usually can be reduced into the abdomen by gentle pressure, it often prolapses in and out until surgical repair is carried out. In some patients, the ovary and fallopian tube constitute one wall of the hernial sac (sliding hernia), and in these patients, the ovary can be reduced effectively only at the time of operation. If the ovary is irreducible, prompt hernia repair is indicated to prevent ovarian torsion or strangulation.When a hydrocele is diagnosed in infancy and there is no evidence of a hernia, observation is proper therapy until the child is older than 12 months. If the hydrocele has not disappeared by 12 months, invariably there is a patent processus vaginalis, and operative hydrocelectomy with excision of the processus vaginalis is indicated. When the first signs of a hydrocele are seen after 12 months of age, the patient should undergo elective hydrocelectomy, which in a child is always performed through a groin incision. Aspiration of hydroceles is discouraged because almost all without a patent processus vaginalis will resorb spon-taneously and those with a communication to the peritoneum will recur and require operative repair eventually. Transillumi-nation as a method to distinguish between hydrocele and hernia is nonspecific. A noncommunicating hydrocele is better identi-fied by palpation of a nonreducible oval structure that appears to have a blunt end below the external ring, indicating an isolated fluid collection without a patent connection to the peritoneum.Surgical Repair. The repair of a pediatric inguinal hernia can be extremely challenging, particularly in the premature child with incarceration. A small incision is made in a skin crease in the groin directly over the internal inguinal ring. Scarpa’s fascia is seen and divided. The external oblique muscle is dis-sected free from overlying tissue, and the location of the exter-nal ring is confirmed. The external oblique aponeurosis is then opened along the direction of the external oblique fibers over the inguinal canal. The undersurface of the external oblique is then cleared from surrounding tissue. The cremasteric fibers are separated from the cord structures and hernia sac, and these are then elevated into the wound. Care is taken not to grasp the vas deferens. The hernia sac is then dissected up to the internal ring and doubly suture ligated. The distal part of the hernia sac is opened widely to drain any hydrocele fluid. When the hernia is very large and the patient very small, tightening of the internal inguinal ring or even formal repair of the inguinal floor may be necessary, although the vast majority of children do not require any treatment beyond high ligation of the hernia sac.Controversy exists regarding the role for exploration of an asymptomatic opposite side in a child with an inguinal hernia. Several reports indicate that frequency of a patent processus vaginalis on the side opposite the obvious hernia is approxi-mately 30%, although this figure decreases with increasing age of the child. Management options include never exploring the opposite side, to exploring only under certain conditions such as in premature infants or in patients in whom incarceration is pres-ent. The opposite side may readily be explored laparoscopically. To do so, a blunt 3-mm trochar is placed into the hernia sac of the affected side. The abdominal cavity is insufflated, and the 2.7-mm 70° camera is placed through the trochar such that the opposite side is visualized. The status of the processes vaginalis on the opposite side can be visualized. However, the presence of a patent processus vaginalis by laparoscopy does not always imply the presence of a hernia.There has been quite widespread adoption of laparoscopic approach in the management of inguinal hernias in children, especially those under the age of 2 years. This technique requires insufflation through the umbilicus and the placement of an extra-peritoneal suture to ligate the hernia sac. Proponents of this pro-cedure emphasize the fact that no groin incision is used, so there is a decreased chance of injuring cord structures, and that visu-alization of the contralateral side is achieved immediately. The long-term results of this technique have been quite excellent.Inguinal hernias in children recur in less than 1% of patients, and recurrences usually result from missed hernia sacs at the first procedure, a direct hernia, or a missed femoral hernia. All children should have local anesthetic administered either by caudal injection or by direct injection into the wound. Spinal anesthesia in preterm infant decreases the risk of postoperative apnea when compared with general anesthesia.GENITALIAUndescended testisEmbryology. The term undescended testicle (cryptorchidism) refers to the interruption of the normal descent of the testis into the scrotum. The testicle may reside in the retroperineum, in the internal inguinal ring, in the inguinal canal, or even at the external ring. The testicle begins as a thickening on the uro-genital ridge in the fifth to sixth week of embryologic life. In the seventh and eighth months, the testicle descends along the inguinal canal into the upper scrotum, and with its progress the processus vaginalis is formed and pulled along with the migrat-ing testicle. At birth, approximately 95% of infants have the testicle normally positioned in the scrotum.A distinction should be made between an undescended testicle and an ectopic testicle. An ectopic testis, by definition, is one that has passed through the external ring in the normal pathway and then has come to rest in an abnormal location over-lying either the rectus abdominis or external oblique muscle, or the soft tissue of the medial thigh, or behind the scrotum in the perineum. A congenitally absent testicle results from failure of normal development or an intrauterine accident leading to loss of blood supply to the developing testicle.Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   174412/02/19   11:27 AM 1745PEDIATRIC SURGERYCHAPTER 39Clinical Presentation. The incidence of undescended testes is approximately 30% in preterm infants, and 1% to 3% at term. For diagnosis, the child should be examined in the supine posi-tion, where visual inspection may reveal a hypoplastic or poorly rugated scrotum. Usually a unilateral undescended testicle can be palpated in the inguinal canal or in the upper scrotum. Occa-sionally, the testicle will be difficult or impossible to palpate, indicating either an abdominal testicle or congenital absence of the gonad. If the testicle is not palpable in the supine position, the child should be examined with his legs crossed while seated. This maneuver diminishes the cremasteric reflex and facilitates identification of the location of the testicle. If there is uncer-tainty regarding location of a testis, repeated evaluations over time may be helpful.It is now established that cryptorchid testes demonstrate an increased predisposition to malignant degeneration. In addition, fertility is decreased when the testicle is not in the scrotum. For these reasons, surgical placement of the testicle in the scrotum (orchidopexy) is indicated. It should be emphasized that this procedure does improve the fertility potential, although it is never normal. Similarly, the testicle is still at risk of malignant change, although its location in the scrotum facilitates poten-tially earlier detection of a testicular malignancy. Other reasons to consider orchidopexy include the risk of trauma to the testicle located at the pubic tubercle and incidence of torsion, as well as the psychological impact of an empty scrotum in a developing male. The reason for malignant degeneration is not established, but the evidence points to an inherent abnormality of the testicle that predisposes it to incomplete descent and malignancy rather than malignancy as a result of an abnormal environment.Treatment. Males with bilateral undescended testicles are often infertile. When the testicle is not present within the scrotum, it is subjected to a higher temperature, resulting in decreased spermatogenesis. Mengel and coworkers studied 515 undescended testicles by histology and demonstrated reduced spermatogonia after 2 years of age. It is now recommended that the undescended testicle be surgically repositioned by 1 year of age. Despite orchidopexy, the incidence of infertility is approx-imately two times higher in men with unilateral orchidopexy compared to men with normal testicular descent.The use of chorionic gonadotropin occasionally may be effective in patients with bilateral undescended testes, suggest-ing that these patients are more apt to have a hormone insuf-ficiency than children with unilateral undescended testicle. The combination of micro-penis and bilateral undescended testes is an indication for hormonal evaluation and testoster-one replacement if indicated. If there is no testicular descent after a month of endocrine therapy, operative correction should be undertaken. A child with unilateral cryptorchidism should have surgical correction of the problem. The operation is typi-cally performed through a combined groin and scrotal incision. The cord vessels are fully mobilized, and the testicle is placed in a dartos pouch within the scrotum. An inguinal hernia often accompanies a cryptorchid testis. This should be repaired at the time of orchidopexy.Patients with a nonpalpable testicle present a challenge in management. The current approach involves laparoscopy to identify the location of the testicle. If the spermatic cord is found to traverse the internal ring or the testis is found at the ring and can be delivered into the scrotum, a groin incision is made and an orchidopexy is performed. If an abdominal testis is identified that is too far to reach the scrotum, a two-staged Fowler-Stephens approach is used. In the first stage, the testicular vessels are clipped laparoscopically, which promotes the development of new blood vessels along the vas deferens. Several months later, the second stage is performed during which the testis is mobilized laparoscopically along with a swath of peritoneum with collateralized blood supply along the vas. Preservation of the gubernacular attachments with its collaterals to the testicle may confer improved testicular survival following orchidopex in over 90%. It is, nonetheless, preferable to preserve the testicular vessels whenever possible and complete mobilization of the testicle with its vessels intact.Vaginal AnomaliesSurgical diseases of the vagina in children are either congenital or acquired. Congenital anomalies include a spectrum of dis-eases that range from simple defects (imperforate hymen) to more complex forms of vaginal atresia, including distal, proxi-mal, and, most severe, complete. These defects are produced by abnormal development of müllerian ducts and/or urogenital sinus. The diagnosis is made most often by physical examina-tion. Secretions into the obstructed vagina produce hydrocol-pos, which may present as a large, painful abdominal mass. The anatomy may be defined using US. Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging provides the most thorough and accurate assessment of the pelvic structures. Treatment is dependent on the extent of the defect. For an imperforate hymen, division of the hymen is curative. More complex forms of vaginal atresia require mobi-lization of the vaginal remnants and creation of an anastomosis at the perineum. Laparoscopy can be extremely useful, both in mobilizing the vagina, in draining hydrocolpos, and in evaluat-ing the internal genitalia. Complete vaginal atresia requires the construction of skin flaps or the creation of a neovagina using a segment of colon.The most common acquired disorder of the vagina is the straddle injury. This often occurs as young girls fall on blunt objects which cause a direct injury to the perineum. Typical manifestations include vaginal bleeding and inability to void. Unless the injury is extremely superficial, patients should be examined in the operating room where the lighting is optimal and sedation can be administered. Examination under anesthe-sia is particularly important in girls who are unable to void, suggesting a possible urethral injury. Vaginal lacerations are repaired using absorbable sutures, and the proximity to the ure-thra should be carefully assessed. Prior to hospital discharge, it is important that girls are able to void spontaneously. In all cases of vaginal trauma, it is essential that the patient be assessed for the presence of sexual abuse. In these cases, early contact with the sexual abuse service is necessary so that the appropriate microbiologic and photographic evidence can be obtained.Ovarian Cysts and TumorsPathologic Classification. Ovarian cysts and tumors may be classified as nonneoplastic or neoplastic. Nonneoplastic lesions include cysts (simple, follicular, inclusion, paraovarian, or cor-pus luteum), endometriosis, and inflammatory lesions. Neo-plastic lesions are classified based on the three primordia that contribute to the ovary: mesenchymal components of the uro-genital ridge, germinal epithelium overlying the urogenital ridge, and germ cells migrating from the yolk sac. The most common variety is germ cell tumors. Germ cell tumors are classified based on the degree of differentiation and the cellular components Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   174512/02/19   11:27 AM 1746SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIinvolved. The least differentiated tumors are the dysgermino-mas, which share features similar to the seminoma in males. Although these are malignant tumors, they are extremely sensi-tive to radiation and chemotherapy. The most common germ cell tumors are the teratomas, which may be mature, immature, or malignant. The degree of differentiation of the neural elements of the tumor determines the degree of immaturity. The sex cord stromal tumors arise from the mesenchymal components of the urogenital ridge. These include the granulosa-theca cell tumors and the Sertoli-Leydig cell tumors. These tumors often produce hormones that result in precocious puberty or hirsutism, respec-tively. Although rare, epithelial tumors do occur in children. These include serous and mucinous cystadenomas.Clinical Presentation. Children with ovarian lesions usually present with abdominal pain. Other signs and symptoms include a palpable abdominal mass, evidence of urinary obstruction, symp-toms of bowel obstruction, and endocrine imbalance. The surgical approach depends on the appearance of the mass at operation (i.e., whether it is benign-appearing or is suspicious for malignancy). In the case of a simple ovarian cyst, surgery depends on the size of the cyst and the degree of symptoms it causes. In general, large cysts (over 4–5 cm) in size should be resected, as they are unlikely to resolve, may be at risk of torsion, and may mask an underlying malignancy. Resection may be performed laparoscopically, and ovarian tissue should be spared in all cases.Surgical Management. For ovarian lesions that appear malignant, it is important to obtain tumor markers including α-fetoprotein (teratomas), LDH (dysgerminoma), β-human cho-rionic gonadotropin (choriocarcinoma), and CA-125 (epithelial tumors). Although the diagnostic sensitivity of these markers is not always reliable, they provide material for postoperative follow-up and indicate the response to therapy. When a malig-nancy is suspected, the patient should undergo a formal cancer operation. This procedure is performed through either a mid-line incision or a Pfannenstie approach. Ascites and peritoneal washings should be collected for cytologic study. The liver and diaphragm are inspected carefully for metastatic disease. An omentectomy is performed if there is any evidence of tumor present. Pelvic and para-aortic lymph nodes are biopsied, and the primary tumor is resected completely. Finally, the contra-lateral ovary is carefully inspected, and if a lesion is seen, it should be biopsied. Dysgerminomas and epithelial tumors may be bilateral in up to 15% of cases. The surgical approach for a benign lesion of the ovary should include preservation of the ipsi-lateral fallopian tube and preservation of the noninvolved ovary.Ovarian Cysts in the Newborn. Ovarian cysts may be detected by prenatal US. The approach to lesions less than 4 cm should include serial US evaluation every 2 months or so as many of these lesions will resolve spontaneously. Consid-eration should be given to laparoscopic excision of cysts larger than 4 cm to avoid the risks of ovarian torsion or development of abdominal symptoms. For smaller lesions, resolution occurs by approximately 6 months of age. A laparoscopic approach is preferable in these cases. By contrast, complex cysts of any size require surgical intervention at presentation to exclude the pos-sibility of malignancy.Ambiguous GenitaliaEmbryology. Normal sexual differentiation occurs in the sixth fetal week. In every fetus, wolffian (male) and müllerian (female) ducts are present until the onset of sexual differentiation. Normal sexual differentiation is directed by the sex determining region of the Y chromosome (SRY). This is located on the distal end of the short arm of the Y chromosome. SRY provides a genetic switch that initiates gonadal differentiation in the mammalian urogenital ridge. Secretion of Müllerian-inhibiting substance (MIS) by the Sertoli cells of the seminiferous tubules results in regression of the müllerian duct, the anlage of the uterus, Fal-lopian tubes, and the upper vagina. The result of MIS secretion therefore is a phenotypic male. In the absence of SRY in the Y chromosome, MIS is not produced, and the müllerian duct derivatives are preserved. Thus, the female phenotype prevails.In order for the male phenotype to develop, the embryo must have a Y chromosome, the SRY must be normal with-out point mutations or deletions, testosterone and MIS must be produced by the differentiated gonad, and the tissues must respond to these hormones. Any disruption of the orderly steps in sexual differentiation may be reflected clinically as variants of the intersex syndromes.These may be classified as (a) true hermaphroditism (with ovarian and testicular gonadal tissue), (b) male pseudohermaph-roditism (testicles only), (c) female pseudohermaphroditism (ovarian tissue only), and (d) mixed gonadal dysgenesis (usually underdeveloped or imperfectly formed gonads).True Hermaphroditism This represents the rarest form of ambiguous genitalia. Patients have both normal male and female gonads, with an ovary on one side and a testis on the other. Occasionally, an ovotestis is present on one or both sides. The majority of these patients have a 46,XX karyotype. Both the tes-tis and the testicular portion of the ovotestis should be removed.Male Pseudohermaphroditism This condition occurs in infants with an XY karyotype but deficient masculinization of the external genitalia. Bilateral testes are present, but the duct structures differentiate partly as phenotypic females. The causes include inadequate testosterone production due to biosynthetic error, inability to convert testosterone to dihy-drotestosterone due to 5α-reductase deficiency or deficiencies in androgen receptors. The latter disorder is termed testicular feminization syndrome. Occasionally, the diagnosis in these children is made during routine inguinal herniorrhaphy in a phenotypic female at which time testes are found. The testes should be resected due to the risk of malignant degeneration, although this should be performed only after a full discussion with the family has occurred.Female Pseudohermaphroditism The most common cause of female pseudohermaphroditism is congenital adrenal hyper-plasia. These children have a 46,XX karyotype but have been exposed to excessive androgens in utero. Common enzyme deficiencies include 21-hydroxylase, 11-hydroxylase, and 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase. These deficiencies result in overproduction of intermediary steroid hormones, which results in masculinization of the external genitalia of the XX fetus. These patients are unable to synthesize cortisol. In 90% of cases, deficiency of 21-hydroxylase causes adrenocorticotropic hor-mone (ACTH) to stimulate the secretion of excessive quantities of adrenal androgen, which masculinizes the developing female (Fig. 39-36). These infants are prone to salt loss, and require cortisol replacement. Those with mineralocorticoid deficiency also require fluorocortisone replacement.Mixed Gonadal Dysgenesis This syndrome is associated with dysgenetic gonads and retained mullerian structures. The typical karyotype is mosaic, usually 45XO,46XY. A high incidence of Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   174612/02/19   11:27 AM 1747PEDIATRIC SURGERYCHAPTER 39Figure 39-36. Ambiguous genitalia manifest as enlarged clitoris and labioscrotal folds in a baby with the adrenogenital syndrome.malignant tumors occur in the dysgenetic gonads, most com-monly gonadoblastoma. Therefore, they should be removed.Management. In the differential diagnosis of patients with intersex anomalies, the following diagnostic steps are necessary: (a) evaluation of the genetic background and family history;  (b) assessment of the anatomic structures by physical exami-nation, US, and/or chromosome studies; (c) determination of biochemical factors in serum and urine to evaluate the presence of an enzyme defect; and (d) laparoscopy for gonadal biopsy. Treatment should include correction of electrolyte and volume losses, in cases of congenital adrenal hyperplasia, and replace-ment of hormone deficiency. Surgical assignment of gender should never be determined at the first operation. Although his-torically female gender had been assigned, there is abundant and convincing evidence that raising a genotypic male as a female has devastating consequences, not only anatomically but also psychosocially. This is particularly relevant given the role of preand postnatal hormones on gender imprinting and identity. In general terms, surgical reconstruction should be performed after a full genetic workup and with the involvement of pediatric endocrinologists, pediatric plastic surgeons, and ethicists with expertise in gender issues. Discussion with the family also plays an important role. This approach will serve to reduce the anxi-ety associated with these disorders and will help to ensure the normal physical and emotional development of these patients.PEDIATRIC MALIGNANCYCancer is the second leading cause of death in children after trauma and accounts for approximately 11% of all pediatric deaths in the United States. The following description will be restricted to the most commonly encountered tumors in children.Wilms’ TumorClinical Presentation. Wilms’ tumor is the most common primary malignant tumor of the kidney in children. There are approximately 500 new cases annually in the United States, and most are diagnosed between 1 and 5 years with the peak inci-dence at age 3. Advances in the care of patients with Wilms’ tumor has resulted in an overall cure rate of roughly 90%, even in the presence of metastatic spread. The tumor usually develops in otherwise healthy children as an asymptomatic mass in the flank or upper abdomen. Frequently, the mass is discovered by a parent while bathing or dressing the child. Other symptoms include hypertension, hematuria, obstipation, and weight loss. Occasionally the mass is discovered following blunt abdominal trauma.Genetics of Wilms’ Tumor. Wilms’ tumor can arise from both germline and somatic mutations and can occur in the presence or absence of a family history. Nearly 97% of Wilms’ tumors are sporadic in that they occur in the absence of a heritable or congenital cause or risk factor. When a heritable risk factor is identified, the affected children often present at an earlier age, and the tumors are frequently bilateral. Most of these tumors are associated with germline mutations. It is well established that there is a genetic predisposition to Wilms’ tumor in WAGR syndrome, which consists of Wilms’ tumor, aniridia, genitouri-nary abnormalities, and mental retardation. In addition, there is an increased incidence of Wilms’ tumor in certain overgrowth conditions, particularly Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome and hemihypertrophy. WAGR syndrome has been shown to result from the deletion of one copy each of the Wilms’ tumor gene, WT1, and the adjacent aniridia gene, PAX6, on chromosome 11p13. Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome is an overgrowth syn-drome that is characterized by visceromegaly, macroglossia, and hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia. It arises from mutations at the 11p15.5 locus. There is evidence to suggest that analysis of the methylation status of several genes in the 11p15 locus could predict the individual risk to the development of Wilms’ tumor. Importantly, most patients with Wilms’ tumor do not have mutations at these genetic loci.Surgical Treatment. Before operation, all patients suspected of having Wilms’ tumor should undergo abdominal and chest computerized tomography. These studies characterize the mass, identify the presence of metastases, and provide information on the opposite kidney (Fig. 39-37). CT scanning also indicates the presence of nephrogenic rests, which are precursor lesions to Wilms’ tumor. An abdominal US should be performed to evalu-ate the presence of renal vein or vena caval extension.The management of patients with Wilms’ tumor has been carefully analyzed within the context of large studies involving thousands of patients. These studies have been coordinated by the National Wilms’ Tumor Study Group (NWTSG) in North America and the International Society of Paediatric Oncology Figure 39-37. Wilms’ tumor of the right kidney (arrow) in a 3-year-old girl.Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   174712/02/19   11:27 AM 1748SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 39-3Staging of Wilms’ tumorStage I: Tumor limited to the kidney and completely excised.Stage II: Tumor that extends beyond the kidney but is completely excised. This includes penetration of the renal capsule, invasion of the soft tissues of the renal sinus, or blood vessels within the nephrectomy  specimen outside the renal parenchyma containing tumor. No residual tumor is apparent at or beyond the margins of excision.a  Stage III: Residual nonhematogenous tumor confined to the abdomen. Lymph nodes in the abdomen or pelvis contain tumor. Peritoneal contamination by the tumor, such as by spillage or biopsy of tumor before or during surgery. Tumor growth that has penetrated through the peritoneal surface. Implants are found on the peritoneal surfaces. Tumor extends beyond the surgical margins either microscopically or grossly. Tumor is not completely resectable because of local infiltration into vital structures. The tumor was treated with preoperative chemotherapy with or without biopsy. Tumor is removed in greater than one piece.Stage IV: Hematogenous metastases or lymph node involvement outside the abdomino-pelvic region.Stage V: Bilateral renal involvement.International Neuroblastoma Staging SystemStage 1: Localized tumor with complete gross resection, with or without microscopic residual diseaseStage 2A: Localized tumor with incomplete gross excision; representative ipsilateral nonadherent lymph nodes negative for tumorStage 2B: Localized tumor with or without complete gross excision, with ipsilateral nonadherent lymph nodes positive for tumor. Enlarged contralateral lymph nodes must be negative microscopicallyStage 3: Unresectable unilateral tumor crossing midline, with or without regional lymph node involvement; or localized unilateral tumor with contralateral regional lymph node involvement; or midline tumorStage 4: Any primary tumor with dissemination to distant lymph nodes, bone, bone marrow, liver, skin, and/or other organsStage 4S: In infants <1 year of age; localized primary tumor with dissemination limited to skin, liver, and/or bone marrowInternational Neuroblastoma Risk Group Staging SystemL1 Localized tumor not involving vital structures as defined by the list of IDRFs and confined to one body compartmentL2 Locoregional tumor with the presence of one or more IDRFsM Distant metastatic disease (except MS)MS Metastatic disease in children <18 months confined to skin, liver, and bone marrow aRupture or spillage confined to the flank, including biopsy of  the tumor, is no longer included in stage II and is now included in stage III.(SIOP), mainly involving European countries. Significant dif-ferences in the approach to patients with Wilms’ tumor have been highlighted by these studies. NWTSG supports a strat-egy of surgery followed by chemotherapy in most instances, whereas the SIOP approach is to shrink the tumor using preoper-ative chemotherapy. There are instances were preoperative che-motherapy is supported by both groups, including the presence of bilateral involvement or inferior vena cava involvement that extends above the hepatic veins and involvement of a solitary kidney by Wilms’ tumor. The NWTSG proponents argue that preoperative therapy in other instances results in a loss of impor-tant staging information, and therefore places patients at higher risk for recurrence; alternatively, it may lead to overly aggres-sive treatment in some cases and greater morbidity. However, the overall survival rates are not different between the NWTSG and SIOP approaches.The goal of surgery is complete removal of the tumor. It is crucial to avoid tumor rupture or injury to contiguous organs. A sampling of regional lymph nodes should be included, and all suspicious nodes should be sampled. Typically, a large transverse abdominal incision is made, and a transperitoneal approach is used. The opposite side is carefully inspected to ensure that there is no disease present. Although historically this involved the complete mobilization of the contralateral kidney, current evidence indicates that preoperative, high-resolution CT scanning is of sufficient accuracy for the detection of clinically significant lesions if they are present. Provided only unilateral disease is present, a radical nephroureterectomy is then performed with control of the renal pedicle as an initial step. If there is spread above the hepatic veins, an intrathoracic approach may be required. If bilateral disease is encountered, both lesions are biopsied, and chemotherapy is administered followed by a nephron-sparing procedure.Chemotherapy. Following nephroureterectomy for Wilms’ tumor, the need for chemotherapy and/or radiation therapy are determined by the histology of the tumor and the clinical stage of the patient (Table 39-3). Essentially, patients who have  dis-ease confined to one kidney completely excised surgically receive a short course of chemotherapy and can expect a 97% 4-year survival, with tumor relapse rare after that time. Patients with more advanced disease or with unfavorable histol-ogy receive more intensive chemotherapy and radiation. Even in stage IV, high cure rates may be achieved. The survival rates are worse in the small percentage of patients considered to have unfavorable histology.NeuroblastomaClinical Presentation. Neuroblastoma is the third most com-mon pediatric malignancy and accounts for approximately 10% of all childhood cancers. The vast majority of patients have advanced disease at the time of presentation, and unlike Wilms’ tumor, in which cure is expected in the vast majority of patients, the overall survival of patients with neuroblastoma is significantly lower. Over 80% of cases present before the age of 4 years, and the peak incidence is two years of age. Neuro-blastomas arise from the neural crest cells and show different levels of differentiation. The tumor originates most frequently in the adrenal glands, posterior mediastinum, neck, or pelvis but can arise in any sympathetic ganglion. The clinical presen-tation depends on the site of the primary and the presence of metastases.9Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   174812/02/19   11:27 AM 1749PEDIATRIC SURGERYCHAPTER 39Two-thirds of these tumors are first noted as an asymp-tomatic abdominal mass. The tumor may cross the midline, and a majority of patients will already show signs of metastatic disease. Occasionally, children may experience pain from the tumor mass or from bony metastases. Proptosis and perior-bital ecchymosis may occur due to the presence of retrobulbar metastasis. Because they originate in paraspinal ganglia, neuro-blastomas may invade through neural foramina and compress the spinal cord, causing muscle weakness or sensory changes. Rarely, children may have severe watery diarrhea due to the secretion of vasoactive intestinal peptide by the tumor, or with paraneoplastic neurologic findings including cerebellar ataxia or opsoclonus/myoclonus. The International Neuroblastoma Stag-ing System and the International Neuroblastoma Risk Group Staging System are provided in Table 39-3.Diagnostic Evaluation. Since these tumors derive from the sympathetic nervous system, catecholamines and their metabo-lites will be produced at increased levels. These include elevated levels of serum catecholamines (dopamine, norepinephrine) or urine catecholamine metabolites: vanillylmandelic acid (VMA) or homovanillic acid (HVA). Measurement of VMA and HVMA in serum and urine aids in the diagnosis and in monitoring ade-quacy of future treatment and recurrence. The minimum criterion for a diagnosis of neuroblastoma is based on one of the following: (a) an unequivocal pathologic diagnosis made from tumor tissue by light microscopy (with or without immunohistology, electron microscopy, or increased levels of serum catecholamines or uri-nary catecholamine metabolites); (b) the combination of bone marrow aspirate or biopsy containing unequivocal tumor cells and increased levels of serum catecholamines or urinary catechol-amine metabolites as described earlier.The patient should be evaluated by abdominal computer-ized tomography, which may show displacement and occasion-ally obstruction of the ureter of an intact kidney (Fig. 39-38). Prior to the institution of therapy, a complete staging workup should be performed. This includes radiograph of the chest, bone marrow biopsy, and radionuclide scans to search for metastases. Any abnormality on chest X-ray should be followed up with CT of the chest.Prognostic Indicators. A number of biologic variables have been studied in children with neuroblastoma. An open biopsy is required in order to provide tissue for this analysis. Hyperdip-loid tumor DNA is associated with a favorable prognosis, and Figure 39-38. Abdominal neuroblastoma arising from the right retroperitoneum (arrow).N-myc amplification is associated with a poor prognosis regard-less of patient age. The Shimada classification describes tumors as either favorable or unfavorable histology based on the degree of differentiation, the mitosis-karyorrhexis index, and the pres-ence or absence of schwannian stroma. In general, children of any age with localized neuroblastoma and infants younger than 1 year of age with advanced disease and favorable disease char-acteristics have a high likelihood of disease-free survival. By contrast, older children with advanced-stage disease have a sig-nificantly decreased chance for cure despite intensive therapy. For example, aggressive multiagent chemotherapy has resulted in a 2-year survival rate of approximately 20% in older children with stage IV disease. Neuroblastoma in the adolescent has a worse long-term prognosis regardless of stage or site and, in many cases, a more prolonged course.Surgery. The goal of surgery is complete resection. However, this is often not possible at initial presentation due to the exten-sive locoregional spread of the tumor at the time of presenta-tion. Under these circumstances, a biopsy is performed, and preoperative chemotherapy is provided based upon the stage of the tumor. After neoadjuvant treatment has been administered, surgical resection is performed. The principal goal of surgery is to obtain at least 95% resection without compromising major structures. Abdominal tumors are approached through a trans-verse incision. Thoracic tumors may be approached through a posterolateral thoracotomy or through a thoracoscopic approach. These may have an intraspinal component. In all cases of intra-thoracic neuroblastoma, particularly those at the thoracic inlet, it is important to be aware of the possibility of a Horner’s syn-drome (anhidrosis, ptosis, meiosis) developing. This typically resolves, although it may take many months to do so.Neuroblastoma in Infants. Spontaneous regression of neu-roblastoma has been well described in infants, especially in those with stage 4S disease. Regression generally occurs only in tumors with a near triploid number of chromosomes that also lack N-myc amplification and loss of chromosome 1p. Recent studies indicate that infants with asymptomatic, small, low-stage neuroblastoma detected by screening may have tumors that spontaneously regress. These patients may be observed safely without surgical intervention or tissue diagnosis.RhabdomyosarcomaRhabdomyosarcoma is a primitive soft tissue tumor that arises from mesenchymal tissues. The most common sites of origin include the head and neck (36%), extremities (19%), genitourinary tract (2%), and trunk (9%), although the tumor can arise virtually anywhere. The clinical presentation of the tumor depends on the site of origin. The diagnosis is confirmed with incisional or excisional biopsy after evaluation by MRI, CT scans of the affected area and the chest, and bone marrow biopsy. The tumor grows locally into surrounding structures and metastasizes widely to lung, regional lymph nodes, liver, brain, and bone marrow. The staging system for rhabdomyosarcoma is based upon the TNM system, as established by the Soft Tissue Sarcoma Committee of the Children’s Oncology Group. It is shown in Table 39-4. Surgery is an important component of the staging strategy and involves biopsy of the lesion and evaluation of lymphatics. Primary resection should be undertaken when complete excision can be performed without causing disability. If this is not possible, the lesion is biopsied, and intensive che-motherapy is administered. It is important to plan the biopsy so that it does not interfere with subsequent resection. After the Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   174912/02/19   11:27 AM 1750SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IItumor has decreased in size, resection of gross residual disease should be performed. Radiation therapy is effective in achieving local control when microscopic or gross residual disease exists following initial treatment. Patients with completely resected tumors of embryonal histology do well without radiation ther-apy, but radiation therapy benefits patients with group I tumors with alveolar or undifferentiated histology.Prognosis. The prognosis for rhabdomyosarcoma is related to the site of origin, resectability, presence of metastases, number of metastatic sites, and histopathology. Primary sites with more favorable prognoses include the orbit and nonparameningeal head and neck, paratestis and vagina (nonbladder, nonprostate genitourinary), and the biliary tract. Patients with tumors less than 5 cm in size have improved survival compared to children with larger tumors, while children with metastatic disease at diagnosis have the poorest prognosis. Tumor histology influ-ences prognosis and the embryonal variant is favorable while the alveolar subtype is unfavorable.TeratomaTeratomas are tumors composed of tissue from all three embry-onic germ layers. They may be benign or malignant, they may arise in any part of the body, and they are usually found in mid-line structures. Thoracic teratomas usually present as an anterior mediastinal mass. Ovarian teratomas present as an abdominal mass often with symptoms of torsion, bleeding, or rupture. Ret-roperitoneal teratomas may present as a flank or abdominal mass.Mature teratomas usually contain well-differentiated tis-sues and are benign, while immature teratomas contain vary-ing degrees of immature neuroepithelium or blastemal tissues. Immature teratomas can be graded from 1 to 3 based on the amount of immature neuroglial tissue present. Tumors of higher grade are more likely to have foci of yolk sac tumor. Malignant germ cell tumors usually contain frankly neoplastic tissues of germ cell origin (i.e., yolk sac carcinoma, embryonal carcinoma, germinoma, or choriocarcinoma). Yolk sac carci-nomas produce α-fetoprotein (AFP), while choriocarcinomas produce β-human chorionic gonadotropin (BHCG) resulting in elevation of these substances in the serum, which can serve as tumor markers. In addition, germinomas can also produce elevation of serum BHCG but not to the levels associated with choriocarcinoma.Table 39-4Staging of RhabdomyosarcomaSTAGESITESTSIZENM1Orbit, nonparameningeal head and neck, genitourinary  (other than kidney, bladder, and prostate), and biliaryT1 or T2a or bAny NM02Bladder/prostate, extremity, cranial parameningeal, otherT1 or T2a N0 or NXM03Bladder/prostate, extremity, cranial parameningeal, otherT1 or T2aN1M0   bAny NM04AllT1 or T2a or bAny NM1T1 = tumor confined to anatomic site of origin; T2 = tumor extension and/or fixed to surrounding tissues; a = ≤5 cm; b = >5 cm; N0 = regional nodes not clinically involved; N1 = regional nodes clinically involved; NX = regional node status unknown; M0 = no distant metastasis; M1 = metastasis present.Clinical group:Group 1: Localized disease, completely resected, no regional lymph node involvement.Group 2: Localized disease, gross total resection but microscopic residual disease; or regional lymph nodes involved.Group 3: Localized disease with gross residual disease after incomplete resection or biopsy only.Group 4: Metastatic disease at diagnosis.Figure 39-39. Sacrococcygeal teratoma in a 2-day-old boy.Sacrococcygeal Teratoma. Sacrococcygeal teratoma usually presents as a large mass extending from the sacrum in the new-born period. Diagnosis may be established by prenatal US. In fetuses with evidence of hydrops and a large sacrococcygeal teratoma, prognosis is poor; thus, prenatal intervention has been advocated in such patients. The mass may be as small as a few centimeters in diameter or as massive as the size of the infant (Fig. 39-39). The tumor has been classified based upon the location and degree of intrapelvic extension. Lesions that grow predominantly into the presacral space often present later in childhood. The differential diagnosis consists of neural tumors, lipoma, and myelomeningoceles.Most tumors are identified at birth and are benign. Malig-nant yolk sac tumor histology occurs in a minority of these tumors. Complete resection of the tumor as early as possible is essential. The rectum and genital structures are often distorted by the tumor but usually can be preserved in the course of resection. Perioperative complications of hypothermia and hemorrhage can occur with massive tumors and may prove lethal. This is of particular concern in small, preterm infants with large tumors. The cure rate is excellent if the tumor is excised completely.  Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   175012/02/19   11:27 AM 1751PEDIATRIC SURGERYCHAPTER 39The majority of patients who develop recurrent disease are sal-vageable with subsequent platinum-based chemotherapy.Liver TumorsMore than two-thirds of all liver tumors in children are malig-nant. There are two major histologic subgroups: hepatoblastoma and hepatocellular carcinoma. The age of onset of liver cancer in children is related to the histology of the tumor. Hepatoblastoma is the most common malignancy of the liver in children, with most of these tumors diagnosed before 4 years of age. Hepatocel-lular carcinoma is the next most common, with a peak age inci-dence between 10 and 15 years. Malignant mesenchymomas and sarcomas are much less common but constitute the remainder of the malignancies. The finding of a liver mass does not necessar-ily imply that a malignancy is present. Nearly 50% of all masses are benign, and hemangiomas are the most common lesion.Most children with a liver tumor present with an abdomi-nal mass that is usually painless, which the parents note while changing the child’s clothes or while bathing the child. The patients are rarely jaundiced but may complain of anorexia and weight loss. Most liver function tests are normal. AFP levels are increased in 90% of children with hepatoblastomas but much less commonly in other liver malignancies. Radiographic evaluation of these children should include an abdominal CT scan to identify the lesion and to determine the degree of local invasiveness (Fig. 39-40). For malignant appearing lesions, a biopsy should be performed unless the lesion can be completely resected easily. Hepatoblastoma is most often unifocal, while hepatocellular carcinoma is often extensively invasive or multi-centric. If a hepatoblastoma is completely removed, the majority of patients survive, but only a minority of patients have lesions amenable to complete resection at diagnosis.A staging system based on postsurgical extent of tumor and surgical resectability is shown in Table 39-5. The overall survival rate for children with hepatoblastoma is 70%, but it is only 25% for hepatocellular carcinoma. Children diagnosed with stage I and II hepatoblastoma have a cure rate of greater than 90% compared to 60% for stage III and approximately 20% for stage IV. In children diagnosed with hepatocellular carcinoma, those with stage I have a good outcome, whereas stages III  and IV are usually fatal. The fibrolamellar variant of hepatocel-lular carcinoma may have a better prognosis.Surgery. The abdominal CT scan usually will determine the resectability of the lesion, although occasionally this can only Figure 39-40. Computed tomography of the abdomen showing a hepatocellular carcinoma in a 12-year-old boy.be determined at the time of exploration. Complete surgical resection of the tumor is the primary goal and is essential for cure. For tumors that are unresectable, preoperative chemother-apy should be administered to reduce the size of the tumor and improve the possibility for complete removal. Chemotherapy is more successful for hepatoblastoma than for hepatocellular carcinoma. Areas of locally invasive disease, such as the dia-phragm, should be resected at the time of surgery. For unre-sectable tumors, liver transplantation may be offered in select patients. The fibrolamellar variant of hepatocellular carcinoma may have a better outcome with liver transplantation than other hepatocellular carcinomas.TRAUMA IN CHILDRENInjury is the leading cause of death among children older than 1 year. In fact, trauma accounts for almost half of all pediatric deaths, more than cancer, congenital anomalies, pneumonia, heart disease, homicide, and meningitis combined. Death from unintentional injuries accounts for 65% of all injury-related deaths in children younger than 19 years. Motor vehicle colli-sions are the leading cause of death in people age 1 to 19 years, followed by homicide or suicide (predominantly with firearms) and drowning. Each year, approximately 20,000 children and teenagers die as a result of injury in the United States. For every child who dies from an injury, it is calculated that 40 others are hospitalized and 1120 are treated in emergency departments. An estimated 50,000 children acquire permanent disabilities each year, most of which are the result of head injuries. Thus, the problem of pediatric trauma continues to be one of the major threats to the health and well-being of children.Specific considerations apply to trauma in children that influence management and outcome. These relate to the mecha-nisms of injury, the anatomic variations in children compared to adults, and the physiologic responses.Mechanisms of InjuryMost pediatric trauma is blunt. Penetrating injuries are seen in the setting of gun violence, falls onto sharp objects, or penetra-tion by glass after falling through windows. Age and gender significantly influence the patterns of injury. Male  children between 14 and 18 years of age are exposed to contact sports, gun violence, and in some jurisdictions drive motor vehicles. As a result, they have a different pattern of injury than younger children, characterized by higher injury severity scores. In the infant and toddler age group, falls are a 10Table 39-5Staging of pediatric liver cancerStage I: No metastases, tumor completely resectedStage II: No metastases, tumor grossly resected with microscopic residual disease (i.e., positive margins); or tumor rupture, or tumor spill at the time of surgeryStage III: No distant metastases, tumor unresectable or resected with gross residual tumor, or positive lymph nodesStage IV: Distant metastases regardless of the extent of liver involvementData from Douglass E, Ortega J, Feusner J, et al. Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCA) in children and adolescents: results from the Pediatric Intergroup Hepatoma Study (CCG 8881/POG 8945), Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol. 1994;13:A-1439.Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   175112/02/19   11:27 AM 1752SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIcommon cause of severe injury. Injuries in the home are extremely common. These include falls, near-drownings, caustic ingestion, and nonaccidental injuries.Initial ManagementThe goals of managing the pediatric trauma patient are similar to those of adults and follow Advanced Trauma Life Support guidelines as established by the American College of Surgeons Committee on Trauma. Airway control is the first priority. In a child, respiratory arrest can proceed quickly to cardiac arrest. It is important to be aware of the anatomic differences between the airway of the child and the adult. The child has a large head, shorter neck, smaller and anterior larynx, floppy epiglottis, short trachea, and large tongue. The size of the endotracheal tube can be estimated by the formula (age + 16)/4. It is important to use uncuffed endotracheal tubes in children younger than 8 years in order to minimize tracheal trauma. After evaluation of the airway, breathing is assessed. It is important to consider that gastric distention from aerophagia can severely compromise respirations. A nasogastric tube should therefore be placed early during the resuscitation if there is no head injury suspected, or an orogastric tube in cases of head injury. Pneumothorax or hemothorax should be treated promptly. When evaluating the circulation, it is important to recognize that tachycardia is usu-ally the earliest measurable response to hypovolemia. Other signs of impending hypovolemic shock in children include changes in mentation, delayed capillary refill, skin pallor, and hypothermia. IV access should be rapidly obtained once the patient arrives in the trauma bay. The first approach should be to use the antecubital fossae. If this is not possible, a cut-down into the saphenous at the groin can be performed quickly and safely. Intraosseous cannulation can provide temporary access in children and young adults until IV access is established. US-guided central line placement in the groin or neck should be considered in patients in whom large bore peripheral IV access is not obtained. Blood is drawn for cross-match and evaluation of liver enzymes, lipase, amylase, and hematologic profile after the IV lines are placed.In patients who show signs of volume depletion, a  20 mL/kg bolus of saline or lactated Ringer’s should be promptly given. If the patient does not respond to three boluses, blood should be transfused (10 mL/kg). The source of bleeding should be established. Common sites include the chest, abdomen, pel-vis, extremity fractures, or large scalp wounds. These should be carefully sought. Care is taken to avoid hypothermia by infusing warmed fluids and by using external warming devices.Evaluation of InjuryAll patients should receive an X-ray of the cervical spine, chest, and abdomen with pelvis. All extremities that are suspicious for fracture should also be evaluated by X-ray. Plain cervical spine films are preferable to performing routine neck CT scans in the child, as X-rays provide sufficient anatomic detail. But if a head CT is obtained, it may be reasonable to obtain images down to C-2 since odontoid views in small children are difficult to obtain. In most children, it is possible to diagnose clinically sig-nificant cervical spine injuries using this approach while mini-mizing the degree of radiation exposure. Screening blood work that includes AST, ALT, and amylase/lipase is useful for the evaluation of liver and pancreatic injures. Significant elevation in these tests requires further evaluation by CT scanning. The child with significant abdominal tenderness and a mechanism of injury that could cause intra-abdominal injury should undergo abdominal CT scanning using IV and oral contrast in all cases. There is a limited role for diagnostic peritoneal lavage (DPL) in children as a screening test. However, this can be occasionally useful in the child who is brought emergently to the operating room for management of significant intracranial hemorrhage. At the time of craniotomy, a DPL, or alternatively, a diagnostic laparoscopy, can be performed concurrently to identify abdomi-nal bleeding. Although focused abdominal US (FAST exam) is extremely useful in the evaluation of adult abdominal trauma, it is not widely accepted in the management of pediatric blunt abdominal trauma. In part, this relates to the widespread use of nonoperative treatment for most solid-organ injuries. Thus, a positive abdominal US scan would not alter this approach in a hemodynamically stable patient.Injuries to the Central Nervous SystemThe central nervous system (CNS) is the most commonly injured organ system and is the leading cause of death among injured children. In the toddler age group, nonaccidental trauma is the most common cause of serious head injury. Findings suggestive of abuse include the presence of retinal hemorrhage on fundo-scopic evaluation and intracranial hemorrhage without evidence of external trauma (indicative of a shaking injury) and fractures at different stages of healing on skeletal survey. In older children, CNS injury occurs most commonly after falls and bicycle and motor vehicle collisions. The initial head CT can often underesti-mate the extent of injury in children. Criteria for head CT include any loss of consciousness or amnesia to the trauma, or inabil-ity to assess the CNS status as in the intubated patient. Patients with mild, isolated head injury (GCS 14-15) and negative CT scans can be discharged if their neurologic status is normal after 6 hours of observation. Young children and those in whom there is multisystem involvement should be admitted to the hospital for observation. Any change in the neurologic status warrants neu-rosurgical evaluation and repeat CT scanning. In patients with severe head injury (GCS 8 or less), urgent neurosurgical consulta-tion is required. These patients are evaluated for intracranial pres-sure monitoring and for the need to undergo craniotomy.Thoracic InjuriesThe pediatric thorax is pliable due to incomplete calcification of the ribs and cartilages. As a result, blunt chest injury com-monly results in pulmonary contusion, although rib fractures are infrequent. Diagnosis is made by chest radiograph and may be associated with severe hypoxia requiring mechanical ventila-tion. Pulmonary contusion usually resolves with careful venti-lator management and judicious volume resuscitation. Children who have sustained massive blunt thoracic injury may develop traumatic asphyxia. This is characterized by cervical and facial petechial hemorrhages or cyanosis associated with vascular engorgement and subconjunctival hemorrhage. Management includes ventilation and treatment of coexisting CNS or abdomi-nal injuries. Penetrating thoracic injuries may result in damage to the lung or to major disruption of the bronchi or great vessels.Abdominal InjuriesIn children, the small rib cage and minimal muscular coverage of the abdomen can result in significant injury after seemingly minor trauma. The liver and spleen in particular are relatively unprotected and are often injured after direct abdominal trauma. Duodenal injuries are usually the result of blunt trauma, which may arise from child abuse or injury from a bicycle handlebar. Duodenal hematomas usually resolve without surgery.  Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   175212/02/19   11:27 AM 1753PEDIATRIC SURGERYCHAPTER 39Small intestinal injury usually occurs in the jejunum in the area of fixation by the ligament of Treitz. These injuries are usually caused by rapid deceleration in the setting of a lap belt. There may be a hematoma on the anterior abdominal wall caused by a lap belt, the so-called seat belt sign (Fig. 39-41A). This should alert the caregiver to the possibility of an underlying small bowel injury (Fig. 39-41B), as well as to a potential lumbar spine injury (Chance fracture).The spleen is injured relatively commonly after blunt abdominal trauma in children. The extent of injury to the spleen is graded (Table 39-6), and the management is governed by the injury grade. Current treatment involves a nonoperative approach in most cases, even for grade 4 injuries, assuming the patient is hemodynamically stable. This approach avoids surgery in most cases. All patients should be placed in a monitored unit, and type-specific blood should be available for transfusion. When nonoperative management is successful, as it is in most cases, an extended period of bed rest is prescribed. This optimizes the chance for healing and minimizes the likelihood of reinjury. A typical guideline is to keep the children on extremely restricted activity for 2 weeks longer than the grade of spleen injury (i.e., a child with a grade 4 spleen injury receives 6 weeks of restricted activity). In children who have an ongoing fluid requirement, BAFigure 39-41. Abdominal computed tomography of patient who sustained a lapbelt injury. A. Bruising is noted across the abdomen from the lapbelt. B. At laparotomy, a perforation of the small bowel was identified.or when a blood transfusion is required, exploration should not be delayed. At surgery, the spleen can often be salvaged. If a splenectomy is performed, prophylactic antibiotics and immuni-zations should be administered to protect against overwhelming post splenectomy sepsis. The liver is also commonly injured after blunt abdominal trauma. A grading system is used to character-ize hepatic injuries (Table 39-7), and nonoperative management is usually successful (Fig. 39-42). Recent studies have shown that associated injuries are more significant predictors of out-come in children with liver injuries than the actual injury grade. Criteria for surgery are similar to those for splenic injury and primarily involve hemodynamic instability. The intraoperative considerations in the management of massive hepatic injury are similar in children and adults. Renal contusions may occur after significant blunt abdominal trauma. Nonoperative management is usually successful, unless patients are unstable due to active renal bleeding. It is important to confirm the presence of a nor-mal contralateral kidney at the time of surgery.FETAL INTERVENTIONOne to the most exciting developments in the field of pediatric surgery has been the emergence of fetal surgery. In general terms, performance of a fetal intervention may be justified in the setting where a defect is present that would cause devastating consequences to the infant if left uncorrected. For the vast majority of congenital anomalies, postnatal surgery is the preferred modality. However, in specific circumstances, fetal surgery may offer the best possibility for a successful outcome.  Table 39-6Grading of splenic injuriesGrade I: Subcapsular hematoma, <10% surface area capsular tear, <1 cm in depthGrade II: Subcapsular hematoma, nonexpanding, 10%–50% surface area; intraparenchymal hematoma, nonexpanding, <2 cm in diameter; capsular tear, active bleeding, 1–3 cm, does not involve trabecular vesselGrade III: Subcapsular hematoma, >50% surface area or expanding; intraparenchymal hematoma, >2 cm or expanding; laceration >3 cm in depth or involving trabecular vesselsGrade IV: Ruptured intraparenchymal hematoma with active bleeding; laceration involving segmental or hilar vessels producing major devascularizatrion (>25% of spleen).Grade V: Shattered spleen; hilar vascular injury that devascularizes spleenTable 39-7Liver injury grading systemGrade I: Capsular tear <1 cm in depthGrade II: Capsular tear 1–3 cm in depth, <10 cm lengthGrade III: Capsular tear >3 cm in depthGrade IV: Parenchymal disruption 25%–75% of hepatic lobe or 1–3 Couinaud’s segmentsGrade V: Parenchymal disruption >75% of hepatic lobe or >3 Couinaud’s segments within a single lobe, injury to retrohepatic vena cavaReproduced with permission from Moore EE, Cogbill TH, Malangoni MA, et al: Organ injury scaling, Surg Clin North Am. 1995 Apr;75(2):293-303.Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   175312/02/19   11:27 AM 1754SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 39-43. The EXIT procedure (ex utero intrapartum treat-ment) in a 34-week gestation age baby with a large cervical tera-toma. Intubation is being performed while the fetus is on placental support.Figure 39-42. Abdominal computed tomography in a child dem-onstrating a grade 3 liver laceration (arrows).Fetal Surgery for MyelomeningoceleMyelomeningocele refers to a spectrum of anomalies in which portions of the spinal cord are uncovered by the spinal column. This leaves the neural tissue exposed to the injurious effects of the amniotic fluid, as well as to trauma from contact with the uterine wall. Nerve damage ensues, resulting in varying degrees of lower extremity paralysis as well as bowel and bladder dys-function. Initial observations indicated that the extent of injury progressed throughout the pregnancy, which provided the ratio-nale for fetal intervention. The current in utero approach for the fetus with myelomeningocele has focused on obtaining cover-age of the exposed spinal cord. The efficacy of in utero treat-ment versus postnatal repair was recently compared in a large multicenter trial as described earlier and showed that prenatal surgery for myelomeningocele reduced the need for shunting and improved motor outcomes at 30 months but was associ-ated with maternal and fetal risks. The results of this study have paved the way for the acceptance of in utero repair of myelome-ningocele in certain centers with the experience and expertise to perform this procedure safely.The EXIT ProcedureThe EXIT procedure is an abbreviation for ex utero intrapar-tum treatment. It is utilized in circumstances where airway obstruction is predicted at the time of delivery due to the pres-ence of a large neck mass, such as a cystic hygroma or teratoma (Fig. 39-43), or congenital tracheal stenosis. The success of the procedure is dependent upon the maintenance of utero-placen-tal perfusion for a sufficient duration to secure the airway. To achieve this, deep uterine relaxation is obtained during a cae-sarian section under general anesthesia. Uterine perfusion with warmed saline also promotes relaxation and blood flow to the placenta. On average, between 20 and 30 minutes of placental perfusion can be achieved. The fetal airway is secured either by placement of an orotracheal tube or performance of a tracheos-tomy. Once the airway is secured, the cord is cut, and a defini-tive procedure may be performed to relieve the obstruction in the postnatal period. In general terms, cystic neck masses such as lymphangiomas have a more favorable response to an EXIT procedure as compared to solid tumors, such as teratomas, par-ticularly in premature infants.The decision to perform a fetal intervention requires careful patient selection, as well as a multidisciplinary center that is dedicated to the surgical care of the fetus and the mother. Patient selection is dependent in part upon highly accurate prenatal imaging that includes US and MRI. Significant risks may be associated with the performance of a fetal surgical procedure, to both the mother and the fetus. From the maternal viewpoint, open fetal surgery may lead to uterine bleeding due to the uterine relaxation required during the procedure. The long-term effects on subsequent pregnancies remain to be established. For the fetus, in utero surgery carries the risk of premature labor and amniotic fluid leak. As a result, these procedures are performed only when the expected benefit of fetal intervention outweighs the risk to the fetus of standard postnatal care. Currently, open fetal intervention may be efficacious in certain instances of large congenital lung lesions with hydrops, large teratomas with hydrops, twin-twin transfusion syndrome, certain cases of congenital lower urinary tract obstruction, and myelomeningocele. The Management of Myelomeningocele Study, which was funded by the NIH, compared prenatal with postnatal repair of myelomeningocele, and determined that prenatal repair was associated with improved motor skills and independent walking. There are ongoing trials for the evaluation of fetal tracheal occlusion in the setting of severe congenital diaphragmatic hernia, from which early results are very promising. The field has undertaken a rigorous evaluation of the potential benefit of prenatal as compared to postnatal management of many of these conditions, given the significant risk that may be associated with fetal therapy.Fetal Surgery for Lower Urinary Tract ObstructionLower urinary tract obstruction refers to a group of diseases characterized by obstruction of the distal urinary system. Com-mon causes include the presence of posterior urethral valves and urethral atresia, as well as other anomalies of the urethra and bladder. The pathologic effects of lower urinary tract obstruc-tion lie in the resultant massive bladder distention that occurs, which can lead to reflux hydronephrosis. This may result in oligohydramnios, and cause limb contractures, facial anoma-lies (Potter sequence), and pulmonary hypoplasia. Carefully selected patients with lower urinary tract obstruction may ben-efit from vesicoamniotic shunting. By relieving the obstruction and improving renal function, fetal growth and lung develop-ment may be preserved.Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   175412/02/19   11:27 AM 1755PEDIATRIC SURGERYCHAPTER 39BIBLIOGRAPHYEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.Adzick NS, Thom EA, Spong CY, et al. A randomized trial of prenatal versus postnatal repair of myelomeningocele. N Engl J Med. 2011;364:993-1004.Adzick NS, Thom EA, Spong CY, et al. A randomized trial of prenatal versus postnatal repair of myelomeningocele. N Engl J Med. 2011;364:993-1004.American Academy of Pediatrics Section on Orthopaedics; American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Pediatric Emergency Medicine; American Academy of Pediatrics Section on Critical Care, et al. Management of pediatric trauma. Pediatrics. 2008;121(4):849-854.Andersen B, Kallehave F, Andersen HK. Antibiotics versus placebo for prevention of postoperative infection after appendicectomy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2003;(2):CD001439.Anderson KD, Rouse TM, Randolph JG. A controlled trial of corticosteroids in children with corrosive injury of the esophagus.  N Engl J Med. 1990;323(10):637-640.Azarow K, Messineo A, Pearl R, Filler R, Barker G, Bohn D. Congenital diaphragmatic hernia—a tale of two cities: the Toronto experience. J Pediatr Surg. 1997;32(3):395-400.Ballance WA, Dahms BB, Shenker N, Kliegman RM. Pathology of neonatal necrotizing enterocolitis: a ten-year experience.  J Pediatr. 1990;117(1 pt 2):S6-S13.Barraco RD, Cheng JD, Bromberg WJ, et al. Child passenger safety: an evidence-based review. J Trauma. 2010;69(6):1588-1590.Barthel ER, Pierce JR, Goodhue CJ, Burke RV, Ford HR, Upperman JS. Can a pediatric trauma center improve the response to a mass casualty incident? J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012;73(4):885-889.Bell MJ, Ternberg JL, Feigin RD, et al. Neonatal necrotizing enterocolitis. Therapeutic decisions based upon clinical staging. Ann Surg. 1978;187(1):1-7.Bezerra JA, Spino C, Magee JC, et al. Use of corticosteroids after hepatoportoenterostomy for bile drainage in infants with biliary atresia: the START randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2014;311:1750-1759.Bohn D. Congenital diaphragmatic hernia. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2002;166(7):911-915.Boloker J, Bateman DA, Wung JT, Stolar CJ. Congenital diaphragmatic hernia in 120 infants treated consecutively with permissive hypercapnea/spontaneous respiration/elective repair. J Pediatr Surg. 2002;37(3):357-366.Bouchard S, Johnson MP, Flake AW, et al. The EXIT procedure: experience and outcome in 31 cases. J Pediatr Surg. 2002; 37(3):418-426.Branstetter BF, Weissman JL, Kennedy TL, Whitaker M. The CT appearance of thyroglossal duct carcinoma. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2000;21(8):1547-1550.Bratton S, Annich G. Packed red blood cell transfusions for critically ill pediatric patients: when and for what conditions?  J Pediatr. 2003;142:95-97.Breneman JC, Lyden E, Pappo AS, et al. Prognostic factors and clinical outcomes in children and adolescents with metastatic rhabdomyosarcoma—a report from the Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study IV. J Clin Oncol. 2003;21(1): 78-84.Brown RL. Epidemiology of injury and the impact of health disparities. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2010;22(3):321-325.Bruner JP, Tulipan N, Paschall RL, et al. Fetal surgery for myelomeningocele and the incidence of shunt-dependent hydrocephalus. JAMA. 1999;282(19):1819-1825.Callaghan WM, MacDorman MF, Rasmussen SA, Qin C, Lackritz EM. The contribution of preterm birth to infant mortality rates in the United States. Pediatrics. 2006;118(4):1566-1573.Cassady G, Crouse DT, Kirklin JW, et al. A randomized, controlled trial of very early prophylactic ligation of the ductus arteriosus in babies who weighed 1000 g or less at birth. N Engl J Med. 1989;320(23):1511-1516.Chertin B, De Caluwé D, Gajaharan M, Piaseczna-Piotrowska A, Puri P. Is contralateral exploration necessary in girls with unilateral inguinal hernia? J Pediatr Surg. 2003;38(5): 756-757.Choi RS, Vacanti JP. Preliminary studies of tissue-engineered intestine using isolated epithelial organoid units on tubular synthetic biodegradable scaffolds. Transplant Proc. 1997;29(1-2):848-851.Cikrit D, Mastandrea J, West KW, Schreiner RL, Grosfeld JL. Necrotizing enterocolitis: factors affecting mortality in 101 surgical cases. Surgery. 1984;96(4):648-655.Cohen J, Schanen NC. Branchial cleft anomaly, congenital heart disease, and biliary atresia: Goldenhar complex or Lambert syndrome? Genet Couns. 2000;11(2):153-156.Cohn SL, London WB, Huang D, et al. MYCN expression is not prognostic of adverse outcome in advanced-stage neuroblastoma with nonamplified MYCN. J Clin Oncol. 2000;18(21):3604-3613.Collins SR, Griffin MR, Arbogast PG, et al. The rising prevalence of gastroschisis and omphalocele in Tennessee. J Pediatr Surg. 2007;42(7):1221-1224.Cook RC, Blinman TA. Nutritional support of the pediatric trauma patient. Semin Pediatr Surg. 2010;19(4):242-251.Coppes MJ, Haber DA, Grundy PE. Genetic events in the development of Wilms’ tumor. N Engl J Med. 1994;331(9):586-590.Cotterill SJ, Pearson ADJ, Pritchard J, et al. Clinical prognostic factors in 1277 patients with neuroblastoma: results of the European Neuroblastoma Study Group “Survey” 1982-1992. Eur J Cancer. 2000;36(7):901-908.Crystal P, Hertzanu Y, Farber B, Shabshin N, Barki Y. Sonographically guided hydrostatic reduction of intussusception in children. J Clin Ultrasound. 2002;30(6):343-348.Davidson GH, Flum DR, Talan DA, et al. 2017 Comparison of outcomes of antibiotic drugs and appendectomy (coda) trial: a protocol for the pragmatic randomised study of appendicitis treatment. BMJ Open. 2017;7(11):e016117.Deprest J, Gratacos E, Nicolaides KH. Fetoscopic tracheal occlusion (FETO) for severe congenital diaphragmatic hernia: evolution of a technique and preliminary results. US Obstet Gynecol. 2004;24:121-126.DeRusso PA, Ye W, Shepherd R, et al; Biliary Atresia Research  Consortium. Growth failure and outcomes in infants  with biliary atresia: a report from the Biliary Atresia Research Consortium. Hepatology. 2007;46(5):1632-1638.Doné E, Gucciardo L, Van Mieghem T, et al. Prenatal diagnosis, prediction of outcome and in utero therapy of isolated congenital diaphragmatic hernia. Prenat Diagn. 2008;28(7):581-591.Dunn J, Fonkalsrud E, Atkinson JB. Simplifying the Waterston’s stratification of infants with tracheoesophageal fistula. Am Surg. 1999;65(10):908-910.Ein SH, Njere I, Ein A. Six thousand three hundred sixty-one pediatric inguinal hernias: a 35-year review. J Pediatr Surg. 2006;41(5):980-986.Evans GS, Flint N, Somers AS, Eyden B, Potten CS. The development of a method for the preparation of rat intestinal epithelial cell primary cultures. J Cell Sci. 1992;101(pt 1): 219-231.Feenstra B, Geller F, Carstensen L, et al. Plasma lipids, genetic variants near APOA1, and the risk of infantile hypertrophic pyloric stenosis. JAMA. 2013;310:714-721.Ferrari A, Bisogno G, Cassanova M, et al. Paratesticular rhabdomyosarcoma: report from the Italian and German Cooperative Group. J Clin Oncol. 2002;20(2):449-455.Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   175512/02/19   11:27 AM 1756SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFisher JC, Jefferson RA, Arkovitz MS, Stolar CJ. Redefining outcomes in right congenital diaphragmatic hernia. J Pediatr Surg. 2008;43:373-379.Freedman AL, Johnson MP, Smith C, et al. Long-term outcome in children after antenatal intervention for obstructive uropathies. Lancet. 1999;354:374-377.Gajewski JL, Johnson VV, Sandler SG, Sayegh A, Klumpp TR. A review of transfusion practice before, during, and after hematopoietic progenitor cell transplantation. Blood. 2008;112(8):3036-3047.Geiger S, Bobylev A, Schadelin S, Mayr J, Holland-Cunz S, Zimmermann P. Single-center, retrospective study of the outcome of laparoscopic inguinal herniorrhaphy in children. Medicine (Baltimore). 2007;96:e9486.Geisler DP, Jegathesan S, Parmley M, et al. Laparoscopic exploration for the clinically undetected hernia in infancy and childhood. Am J Surg. 2001;182:693-696.Geneviève D, de Pontual L, Amiel J, Sarnacki S, Lyonnet S.  An overview of isolated and syndromic oesophageal atresia. Clin Genet. 2007;71:392-399.Georgeson K. Laparoscopic-assisted pull-through for Hirschsprung’s disease. Semin Pediatr Surg. 2002;11:205-210.Georgeson K. Results of laparoscopic antireflux procedures in neurologically normal infants and children. Semin Laparosc Surg, 2002;9(3):172-176.Georgoula C, Gardiner M. Pyloric stenosis a 100 years after Ramstedt. Arch Dis Child. 2012;97:741-745.Gollin GA, Abarbanell AA, Baerg J, et al. Peritoneal drainage as definitive management of intestinal perforation in extremely low-birth-weight infants. J Pediatr Surg. 2003;38:1814.Gorsler C, Schier F. Laparoscopic herniorrhaphy in children.  Surg Endosc. 2003;17:571-573.Grant D, Abu-Elmagd K, Reyes J, et al. 2003 report of the  intestine transplant registry: a new era has dawned.  Ann Surg. 2005;241:607-613.Grikscheit TC, Ochoa ER, Ramsanahie A, et al. Tissueengineered large intestine resembles native colon with appropriate in vitro physiology and architecture. Ann Surg. 2003; 238:35-41.Gura KM, Lee S, Valim C, et al. Safety and efficacy of a fishoil-based fat emulsion in the treatment of parenteral nutritionassociated liver disease. Pediatrics. 2008;121:e678-e686.Guthrie S, Gordon P, Thomas V, et al. Necrotizing enterocolitis among neonates in the United States. J Perinatol. 2003;23:278.Hackam D, Caplan M. Necrotizing enterocolitis: pathophysiology from a historical context. Semin Pediatr Surg. 2018;27:11-18.Hackam DJ, Filler R, Pearl R. Enterocolitis after the surgical treatment of Hirschsprung’s disease: risk factors and financial impact. J Pediatr Surg. 1998;33:830-833.Hackam DJ, Potoka D, Meza M, et al. Utility of radiographic hepatic injury grade in predicting outcome for children after blunt abdominal trauma. J Pediatr Surg. 2002;37:386-389.Hackam DJ, Reblock K, Barksdale E, et al. The influence of Down’s syndrome on the management and outcome of children with Hirschsprung’s disease. J Pediatr Surg. 2003;38:946-949.Hackam DJ, Superina R, Pearl R, et al. Single-stage repair of Hirschsprung’s disease: a comparison of 109 patients over  5 years. J Pediatr Surg. 1997;32:1028-1031.Hamner CE, Groner JI, Caniano DA, Hayes JR, Kenney BD. Blunt intraabdominal arterial injury in pediatric trauma patients: injury distribution and markers of outcome. J Pediatr Surg. 2008;43:916-923.Harnoss JC, Zelienka I, Probst P, et al. Antibiotics versus surgical therapy for uncomplicated appendicitis: systematic review and meta-analysis of controlled trials (PROSPERO 2015: CRD42015016882). Ann Surg. 2016;265:889-900.Harrison MR. Fetal surgery: trials, tribulations, and turf.  J Pediatr Surg. 2003;38:275-282.Harrison MR, Keller RL, Hawgood S, et al. A randomized trial of fetal endoscopic tracheal occlusion for severe fetal congenital diaphragmatic hernia. N Engl J Med. 2003;349:1916-1924.Harrison MR, Sydorak RM, Farrell J, et al. Fetoscopic temporary tracheal occlusion for congenital diaphragmatic hernia: prelude to a randomized, controlled trial. J Pediatr Surg. 2003;38:1012-1020.Heath JK. Transcriptional networks and signaling pathways that govern vertebrate intestinal development. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2010;90:159-192.Hedrick H, Flake A, Crombleholme T, et al. History of fetal diagnosis and therapy: Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia experience. Fetal Diagn Ther. 2003;18:65-82.Hilton EN, Manson FD, Urquhart JE, et al. Left-sided embryonic expression of the BCL-6 corepressor, BCOR, is required for vertebrate laterality determination. Hum Mol Genet. 2007;16:1773-1782.Hirschl RB, Philip WF, Glick L, et al. A prospective, randomized pilot trial of perfluorocarbon-induced lung growth in newborns with congenital diaphragmatic hernia. J Pediatr Surg. 2003;38:283-289.Huh JW, Raghupathi R. New concepts in treatment of pediatric traumatic brain injury. Anesthesiol Clin. 2009;27(2):213-240.Hutchings L, Willett K. Cervical spine clearance in pediatric trauma: a review of current literature. J Trauma. 2009;67(4):687-691.Jani J, Nicolaides KH, Keller RL, et al. Observed to expected lung area to head circumference ratio in the prediction of survival in fetuses with isolated diaphragmatic hernia. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 2007;30:67-71.Jani JC, Peralta CF, Nicolaides KH. Lung-to-head ratio: a need to unify the technique. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 2012;39:2-6.Johnigan RH, Pereira KD, Poole MD. Community-acquired methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus in children and adolescents: changing trends. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2003;129(10):1049-1052.Johnson MP, Sutton LN, Rintoul N, et al. Fetal myelomeningocele repair: short-term clinical outcomes. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2003;189:482-487.Kalapurakal J, Li S, Breslow N, et al. Influence of radiation therapy delay on abdominal tumor recurrence in patients with favorable histology Wilms’ tumor treated on NWTS-3 and NWTS-4: a report from the National Wilms’ Tumor Study Group.  Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2003;57:495-499.Kamata S, Ishikawa S, Usui N, et al. Prenatal diagnosis of abdominal wall defects and their prognosis. J Pediatr Surg. 1996;31:267-271.Kantarci S, Al-Gazali L, Hill RS, et al. Mutations in LRP2, which encodes the multiligand receptor megalin, cause Donnai-Barrow and facio-oculo-acoustico-renal syndromes. Nat Genet. 2007;39:957-959.Katzenstein HM, Krailo MD, Malogolowkin M, et al. Hepatocellular carcinoma in children and adolescents: results from the Pediatric Oncology Group and the Children’s Cancer Group Intergroup Study. J Clin Oncol. 2002;20:2789-2797.Kim HB, Fauza D, Garza J, Oh JT, Nurko S, Jaksic T. Serial transverse enteroplasty (STEP): a novel bowel lengthening procedure. J Pediatr Surg. 2003;38:425-429.Kim HB, Lee PW, Garza J, et al. Serial transverse enteroplasty for short bowel syndrome: a case report. J Pediatr Surg. 2003;38:881-885.Kim JR, Suh CH, Yoon HM, et al. Performance of MRI for suspected appendicitis in pediatric patients and negative appendectomy rate: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Magn Reson Imaging. 2018;47(3):767-778.Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   175612/02/19   11:27 AM 1757PEDIATRIC SURGERYCHAPTER 39Kliegman RM. Models of the pathogenesis of necrotizing enterocolitis. J Pediatr. 1990;117:S2-S5.Kliegman RM, Fanaroff AA. Necrotizing enterocolitis. N Engl J Med. 1984;310:1093-1103.Koivusalo AI, Korpela R, Wirtavuori K, Piiparinen S, Rintala RJ, Pakarinen MP. A single-blinded, randomized comparison of laparoscopic versus open hernia repair in children. Pediatrics. 2009;123:332-337.Konkin D, O’hali W, Webber EM, Blair GK. Outcomes in esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula. J Pediatr Surg. 2003;38:1726-1729.Kosloske AM. Operative techniques for the treatment of neonatal necrotizing enterocolitis. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1979;149:740-744.Kosloske AM. Indications for operation in necrotizing enterocolitis revisited. J Pediatr Surg. 1994;29:663-666.Kosloske AM, Lilly JR. Paracentesis and lavage for diagnosis of intestinal gangrene in neonatal necrotizing enterocolitis.  J Pediatr Surg. 1978;13:315-320.Lacroix J, Hebert PC, Hutchison JS, et al. Transfusion strategies for patients in pediatric intensive care units. N Engl J Med. 2007;356:1609-1619.Langer J, Durrant A, de la Torre L, et al. One-stage transanal Soave pullthrough for Hirschsprung disease: a multicenter experience with 141 children. Ann Surg. 2003;238:569-583.Levitt MA, Ferraraccio D, Arbesman M, et al. Variability of inguinal hernia surgical technique: a survey of North American pediatric surgeons. J Pediatr Surg. 2002;37:745-751.Lille ST, Rand RP, Tapper D, Gruss JS. The surgical management of giant cervicofacial lymphatic malformations. J Pediatr Surg. 1996;31:1648-1650.Limmer J, Gortner L, Kelsch G, Schutze F, Berger D. Diagnosis and treatment of necrotizing enterocolitis. A retrospective evaluation of abdominal paracentesis and continuous postoperative lavage. Acta Paediatr Suppl. 1994;396:65-69.Lintula H, Kokki H, Vanamo K. Single-blind randomized clinical trial of laparoscopic versus open appendicectomy in children. Br J Surg. 2001;88:510-514.Lipshutz G, Albanese C, Feldstein V, et al. Prospective analysis of lung-to-head ratio predicts survival for patients with prenatally diagnosed congenital diaphragmatic hernia. J Pediatr Surg. 1997;32:1634-1636.Little D, Rescorla F, Grosfeld J, et al. Long-term analysis of children with esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula. J Pediatr Surg. 2003;38:852-856.Loeb DM, Thornton K, Shokek O. Pediatric soft tissue sarcomas. Surg Clin North Am. 2008;88:615-627.Luig M, Lui K. Epidemiology of necrotizing enterocolitis—part I: changing regional trends in extremely preterm infants over 14 years. J Paediatr Child Health. 2005;41:169-173.Lynch L, O’Donoghue D, Dean J, O’Sullivan J, O’Farrelly C,  Golden-Mason L. Detection and characterization of hemopoietic stem cells in the adult human small intestine.  J Immunol. 2006;176:5199-5204.Maheshwari A, Patel RM, Christensen RD. Anemia, red blood cell transfusions, and necrotizing enterocolitis. Semin Pediatr Surg. 2018;27:47-51.Mallick IH, Yang W, Winslet MC, Seifalian AM. Ischemia-reperfusion injury of the intestine and protective strategies against injury. Dig Dis Sci. 2004;49:1359-1377.Marianowski R, Ait Amer JL, Morisseau-Durand MP, et al. Risk factors for thyroglossal duct remnants after Sistrunk procedure in a pediatric population. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2003;67:19-23.Maris JM, Weiss MJ, Guo C, et al. Loss of heterozygosity at 1p36 independently predicts for disease progression but not decreased overall survival probability in neuroblastoma patients: a Children’s Cancer Group Study. J Clin Oncol. 2000;18:1888-1899.Martinez-Tallo E, Claure N, Bancalari E. Necrotizing enterocolitis in full-term or near-term infants: risk factors. Biol Neonate. 1997;71:292-298.Meyers RL, Book LS, O’Gorman M, et al. High-dose steroids, ursodeoxycholic acid, and chronic intravenous antibiotics improve bile flow after Kasai procedure in infants with biliary atresia. J Pediatr Surg. 2003;38:406-411.Miyano T, Yamataka A, Kato Y, et al. Hepaticoenterostomy after excision of choledochal cyst in children: a 30-year experience with 180 cases. J Pediatr Surg. 1996;31:1417-1421.Molik KA, West KW, Rescorla F, et al. Portal venous air: the poor prognosis persists. J Pediatr Surg. 2001;36:1143-1145.Moss R, Dimmitt R, Henry M, et al. A meta-analysis of peritoneal drainage versus laparotomy for perforated necrotizing enterocolitis. J Pediatr Surg. 2001;36:1210-1213.Moss RL, Das JB, Raffensperger JG. Necrotizing enterocolitis and total parenteral nutrition-associated cholestasis. Nutrition. 1996;12:340-343.Moyer V, Moya F, Tibboel F, et al. Late versus early surgical correction for congenital diaphragmatic hernia in newborn infants. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2002;CD001695.Mullassery D, Ba’ath ME, Jesudason EC, Losty PD. Value of liver herniation in prediction of outcome in fetal congenital diaphragmatic hernia: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 2010;35:609-614.Nadler E, Stanford A, Zhang X, et al. Intestinal cytokine gene expression in infants with acute necrotizing enterocolitis: interleukin-11 mRNA expression inversely correlates with extent of disease. J Pediatr Surg. 2001;36:1122-1129.Neville HL, Andrassy RJ, Lally K, et al. Lymphatic mapping with sentinel node biopsy in pediatric patients. J Pediatr Surg. 2000;35:961-964.Nino DF, Sodhi CP, Hackam DJ. Necrotizing enterocolitis: new insights into pathogenesis and mechanisms. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2016;13:590-600.Nio M, Ohi R, Miyano T, et al. Fiveand 10-year survival rates after surgery for biliary atresia: a report from the Japanese Biliary Atresia Registry. J Pediatr Surg. 2003;38:997-1000.O’Donovan DJ, Baetiong A, Adams K, et al. Necrotizing enterocolitis and gastrointestinal complications after indomethacin therapy and surgical ligation in premature infants with patent ductus arteriosus. J Perinatol. 2003;23: 286-290.Olutoye OO, Coleman BG, Hubbard A, et al. Prenatal diagnosis and management of congenital lobar emphysema. J Pediatr Surg. 2000;35:792-795.Ortega JA, Douglass EC, Feusner J, et al. Randomized comparison of cisplatin/vincristine/fluorouracil and cisplatin/continuous infusion doxorubicin for treatment of pediatric hepatoblastoma: a report from the Children’s Cancer Group and the Pediatric Oncology Group. J Clin Oncol. 2000;18:2665.Pandya S, Heiss K. Pyloric stenosis in pediatric surgery: an evidence based review. Surg Clin North Am. 2012;92:527-539,  vii-viii.Panesar J, Higgins K, Daya H, et al. Nontuberculous mycobacterial cervical adenitis: a ten-year retrospective review. Laryngoscope. 2003;113:149-154.Pedersen A, Petersen O, Wara P, et al. Randomized clinical trial of laparoscopic versus open appendicectomy. Br J Surg. 2001;88:200-205.Pena A, Guardino K, Tovilla J, et al. Bowel management for fecal incontinence in patients with anorectal malformations. J Pediatr Surg. 1998;33:133-137.Poenaru D, Laberge J, Neilson IR, et al. A new prognostic classification for esophageal atresia. Surgery. 1993;113:426-432.Potoka D, Schall L, Ford H. Improved functional outcome for severely injured children treated at pediatric trauma centers.  J Trauma. 2001;51:824-832.Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   175712/02/19   11:27 AM 1758SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIPotoka DA, Schall LC, Ford H. Risk factors for splenectomy in children with blunt splenic trauma. J Pediatr Surg. 2002;37:294-299.Powers CJ, Levitt MA, Tantoco J, et al. The respiratory advantage of laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication. J Pediatr Surg. 2003;38:886-891.Pritchard-Jones K. Controversies and advances in the management of Wilms’ tumour. Arch Dis Child. 2002;87:241-244.Puapong D, Kahng D, Ko A, et al. Ad libitum feeding: safely improving the cost-effectiveness of pyloromyotomy. J Pediatr Surg. 2002;37:1667-1668.Quinton AE, Smoleniec JS. Congenital lobar emphysema—the disappearing chest mass: antenatal ultrasound appearance. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 2001;17:169-171.Rai SE, Sidhu AK, Krishnan RJ. Transfusion-associated necrotizing enterocolitis re-evaluated: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Perinat Med. 2018;46(6):665-676.Reyes J, Bueno J, Kocoshis S, et al. Current status of intestinal transplantation in children. J Pediatr Surg. 1998;33:243-254.Rosen NG, Hong AR, Soffer S, et al. Rectovaginal fistula: a common diagnostic error with significant consequences in girls with anorectal malformations. J Pediatr Surg. 2002;37:961-965.Rothenberg S. Laparoscopic Nissen procedure in children. Semin Laparosc Surg. 2002;9:146-152.Sandler A, Ein S, Connolly B, et al. Unsuccessful air-enema reduction of intussusception: is a second attempt worthwhile? Pediatr Surg Int. 1999;15:214-216.Sarioglu A, McGahren ED, Rodgers BM. Effects of carotid artery repair following neonatal extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. Pediatr Surg Int. 2000;16:15-18.Schier F, Montupet P, Esposito C. Laparoscopic inguinal herniorrhaphy in children: a three-center experience with 933 repairs. J Pediatr Surg. 2002;37:395-397.Schonfeld D, Lee LK. Blunt abdominal trauma in children.  Curr Opin Pediatr. 2012;24:314-318.Shamberger R, Guthrie K, Ritchey M, et al. Surgery-related factors and local recurrence of Wilms tumor in National Wilms Tumor Study 4. Ann Surg. 1999;229:292-297.Shimada H, Ambros I, Dehner L, et al. The International  Neuroblastoma Pathology Classification (the Shimada  system). Cancer. 1999;86:364-372.Shivakumar P, Campbell KM, Sabla GE, et al. Obstruction of extrahepatic bile ducts by lymphocytes is regulated by IFNgamma in experimental biliary atresia. J Clin Invest. 2004;114:322-329.Simons SHP, van Dijk M, van Lingen R, et al. Routine morphine infusion in preterm newborns who received ventilatory support: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2003;290:2419-2427.Soffer SZ, Rosen NG, Hong AR, et al. Cloacal exstrophy: a unified management plan. J Pediatr Surg. 2000;35:932-937.Spitz L, Kiely E, Morecroft J, et al. Oesophageal atresia: at-risk groups for the 1990s. J Pediatr Surg. 1994;29:723-725.Sun L, Rommens JM, Corvol H, et al. Multiple apical plasma membrane constituents are associated with susceptibility to meconium ileus in individuals with cystic fibrosis. Nat Genet. 2012;44:562-569.Teich S, Barton D, Ginn-Pease M, et al. Prognostic classification for esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula: Waterston versus Montreal. J Pediatr Surg. 1997;32:1075-1079.Teitelbaum D, Coran A. Reoperative surgery for Hirschsprung’s disease. Semin Pediatr Surg. 2003;12:124-131.Thibeault DW, Olsen SL, Truog W, et al. Pre-ECMO predictors of nonsurvival in congenital diaphragmatic hernia.  J Perinatol. 2002;22:682-683.Tolia V, Wureth A, Thomas R. Gastroesophageal reflux disease: review of presenting symptoms, evaluation, management, and outcome in infants. Dig Dis Sci. 2003;48:1723-1729.Tsao K, St Peter SD, Sharp SW, et al. Current application of thoracoscopy in children. J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A. 2008;18:131-135.Tulipan N, Sutton L, Bruner J, et al. The effect of intrauterine myelomeningocele repair on the incidence of shunt-dependent hydrocephalus. Pediatr Neurosurg. 2003;38:27-33.Vargas JV, Vlassov D, Colman D, Brioschi ML. A thermodynamic model to predict the thermal response of living beings during pneumoperitoneum procedures. J Med Eng Technol. 2005;29:75-81.Wang KS, Shaul DB. Two-stage laparoscopic orchidopexy with gubernacular preservation: preliminary report of a new approach to the intraabdominal testis. J Pediatr Endosurg Innovative Tech. 2004;8:252-255.Wenzler D, Bloom D, Park J. What is the rate of spontaneous testicular descent in infants with cryptorchidism? J Urol. 2004;171:849-851.Wildhaber B, Coran A, Drongowski R, et al. The Kasai portoenterostomy for biliary atresia: a review of a 27-year experience with 81 patients. J Pediatr Surg. 2003;38:1480-1485.Wood JH, Partrick DA, Johnston RB, Jr. The inflammatory response to injury in children. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2010;22:315-320.Xu J, Adams S, Liu YC, Karpelowsky J. Nonoperative management in children with early acute appendicitis: a systematic review.  J Pediatr Surg. 2017;52:1409-1415.Yang EY, Allmendinger N, Johnson SM, Chen C, Wilson JM, Fishman SJ. Neonatal thoracoscopic repair of congenital diaphragmatic hernia: selection criteria for successful outcome. J Pediatr Surg. 2005;40:1369-1375.Brunicardi_Ch39_p1705-p1758.indd   175812/02/19   11:27 AM
# Chunk 8942
UrologyAhmad Shabsigh, Michael Sourial, Fara F. Bellows, Christopher McClung, Rama Jayanthi, Stephanie Kielb, Geoffrey N. Box, Bodo E. Knudsen, and Cheryl T. Lee 40chapterANATOMYThe anatomic structures that generally require urologic man-agement include the kidneys, adrenal glands, ureters, bladder, prostate, seminal vesicles, vas deferens, penis, urethra, scrotum, and testes. These organs are located in retroperitoneal or extra-peritoneal spaces. However, a transperitoneal approach may be utilized to access the kidney, ureters, bladder, or retroperitoneal lymph nodes during certain urologic operations.Kidney and Adrenal GlandThe kidneys are paired retroperitoneal organs that are invested in a fibro-fatty layer of tissue known as Gerota’s fascia. This natural barrier helps to tamponade bleeding and thus may provide renal and hemodynamic protection in cases of renal trauma or spontaneous renal hemorrhage. It also may assist in preventing tumor invasion into surrounding struc-tures in the case of large renal masses. The kidneys are bor-dered posterolaterally by the quadratus lumborum muscle and posteromedially by the psoas muscle. Additionally, the diaphragm drapes across the posterior aspect of the superior pole of each kidney.The left kidney is bordered anterolaterally by the spleen and descending colon. The pancreatic tail borders the antero-medial left kidney. The right kidney is bordered anterolaterally by the liver and the ascending colon. The second portion of the duodenum may be encountered near the right renal vessels and thus sometimes requires anteromedial reflection, known as the Kocher maneuver, to achieve intraoperative vascular control during right renal surgery.The kidneys are end organs, which are responsible for their vulnerability to infarction. The renal arteries extend from the aorta and then branch into several segmental arteries and arterioles before becoming glomeruli. Each artery runs poste-rior to their respective renal vein. Occasionally, an accessory renal artery will arise, but in general, each kidney receives a single main renal artery. Each renal vein drains directly into the IVC and is located anteriorly to its respective renal artery when entering the kidney. The right renal vein is much shorter than the left and does not receive collateral venous drainage. The left renal vein passes anteriorly to the aorta and receives drainage from the left gonadal vein, the left inferior adrenal vein, and a lumbar vein.The collecting system of the kidney begins as minor caly-ces near the renal papillae and then coalesces into major calyces. Major calyces join to form the renal pelvis, which then tapers down to the ureteropelvic junction (UPJ), from which the ureter emanates. The pelvis is located posterior to its respective renal artery.The adrenal gland is superomedial to its respective kidney within Gerota’s fascia. Adrenal arterial supply arises from mul-tiple sources: the inferior phrenic artery, aortic branches, and renal arterial branches. Venous drainage mirrors arterial supply. On the right side, the adrenal gland drains directly into the IVC. The right adrenal vein can be quite short (<1 cm) and can be Anatomy	1759Kidney and Adrenal Gland / 1759Ureter / 1760Bladder and Prostate / 1760Penis / 1760Scrotum and Testes / 1760Infection	1761Cystitis / 1761Pyelonephritis / 1761Prostatitis / 1761Epididymo-Orchitis / 1761Balanitis and Balanoposthitis / 1762Urinary Tract Obstruction	1762Urolithiasis / 1762Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia / 1763Urethral Stricture / 1764Other Causes of Obstruction / 1764Genitourinary Trauma	1764Kidneys / 1765Ureters / 1765Bladder / 1766Urethral Injuries / 1766External Genital Injuries / 1767Emergencies	1768Acute Urinary Retention / 1768Testicular Torsion / 1769Fournier’s Gangrene / 1769Priapism / 1769Paraphimosis / 1770Emphysematous Pyelonephritis / 1770Urologic Malignancies	1770Bladder Cancer / 1770Testicular Cancer / 1771Kidney Cancer / 1772Prostate Cancer / 1774Urethral Cancer / 1775Common Urologic Conditions	1775Urinary Incontinence and Voiding Dysfunction / 1775Erectile Dysfunction / 1775Pediatric Urology	1776Hypospadias / 1776Urinary Tract Infections in Children / 1777Prenatal Hydronephrosis / 1777Cryptorchidism / 1777Brunicardi_Ch40_p1759-p1782.indd   175901/03/19   6:34 PM 1760Key Points1	Most small ureteral calculi will pass spontaneously or with the use of medical expulsive therapy, but larger stones (>6 mm) are better treated with ureteral stenting or lithotripsy.2	Benign prostatic hyperplasia can be managed effectively with medical therapy or minimally invasive endoscopic and robotic surgical techniques depending on the urinary symp-toms, patient bother, prostate size, and patient’s therapeutic choice. 3	Patients with recurrent urethral stricture after endoscopic treatment are unlikely to derive sustained benefit from future endoscopic therapies and should be referred for urethral reconstruction.4	The vast majority of renal trauma can be treated conserva-tively, with early surgical intervention reserved for persistent bleeding, renal vascular, or ureteral injuries.  5	Extraperitoneal bladder ruptures can be treated conserva-tively, but intraperitoneal ruptures typically require surgical repair.6	Testicular torsion is an emergency where successful testicu-lar salvage is inversely related to the delay in repair, so cases with a high degree of clinical suspicion should not wait for a radiologic diagnosis.7	Fournier’s gangrene is a rapidly progressive and potentially lethal condition that requires aggressive débridement and close follow-up due to the frequent need for repeat débridement.8	The management of early stage prostate cancer has changed significantly, with a much greater emphasis on risk stratifi-cation.  Low risk patients are largely treated with active surveillance. 9	Treatments for urinary incontinence and voiding dysfunction are varied depending on the etiology, severity, and bother of the symptom.  Behavior modification, bladder retraining, and medical therapies can all be effective in improving symptoms without the need for surgery.a source of significant bleeding if inadvertently injured during renal or adrenal surgery.UreterThe ureters are smooth muscle–based tubular structures that connect the renal pelvis to the bladder. The blood supply arises from the surrounding vasculature. The proximal blood supply inserts on the medial aspect of the ureter and arises from the aorta and renal artery, and the distal blood supply inserts lat-erally and arises from the surrounding iliac vessels and their branches. The arterial supply inserts via a fatty layer of tissue around the ureter, and thus surgical preservation of the periure-teral tissue is essential to maintain vascularization and achieve successful ureteral reconstruction.The ureters initially course along the psoas muscle and then run distally along the pelvic sidewall. They generally pass posterior to the uterine arteries, making them susceptible to injury during hysterectomy. The ureters enter the bladder lat-erally and pass through the bladder wall at an oblique angle, which helps prevent reflux of urine during bladder filling. The ureters propel urine into the bladder via the ureteral orifices.Bladder and ProstateThe bladder is located extraperitoneally in the pelvis and pos-terior to the pubis. A portion of the bladder dome is draped by peritoneum, and rupture or injury at this location can result in intraperitoneal urine leakage and subsequent chemical peritoni-tis. The average adult bladder holds approximately 500 mL of urine; however, in rare cases, capacity can reach up to or greater than 1000 mL, in which case the bladder extends towards the umbilicus. The sigmoid colon lies adjacent to the bladder and can fistulize to the lateral wall or dome of the bladder in cases of diverticulitis or colon cancer. The rectum lies posteriorly to the bladder in men, and the uterus and vagina lie posteriorly to the bladder in women.The prostate is a walnut-shaped gland that encircles the urethra and is located in males immediately beneath the blad-der neck. Smooth muscle fibers distribute throughout the gland, which can contract and facilitate bladder outlet obstruction. The average prostate measures approximately 30 mL in volume. Puboprostatic ligaments suspend the prostate to the pubis, and in the instance of pelvic trauma, shearing forces can cause disrup-tion of the posterior urethra (known as pelvic fracture urethral injury). The external urethral sphincter houses the membranous urethra and sits just below the apex of the prostate. Vasculature to the bladder and prostate arises from the superior and inferior vesical arteries, which branch from the internal iliac arteries.PenisThe penis is comprised of three bodies: two corpora cavernosa, which are responsible for erection, and the corpus spongiosum, which surrounds the urethra and gives rise to the glans penis. These three structures are all encased by skin and dartos fascia, as well as an inner investing layer of fascia called Buck’s fascia. The corpora cavernosa are spongy sinusoidal bodies that expand with parasympathetic neural stimulation to create an erection. Thick fascia, called tunica albuginea, assists in producing rigid-ity during erection. Each corpus cavernosum features a centrally located cavernosal artery, which arises from the penile artery. A porous septum separates the two corpora and allows for trans-corporal blood exchange. The corpus spongiosum is located on the ventrum of the penis. The corpus spongiosum lacks a tough fascia similar to tunica albuginea and thus does not exhibit the same rigidity during erection.Scrotum and TestesThe scrotum is a potential space that surrounds the testes, epididymis, and spermatic cords. The scrotum is comprised of many layers aside from skin and dartos fascia, and each derives from a particular layer of the anterior abdominal wall. The external spermatic fascia arises from the external oblique fascia, the cremasteric fascia arises from the internal oblique fascia, and the internal spermatic fascia arises from the transver-sus abdominis fascia. The testes are separated from the scrotal layers by the visceral and parietal layers of the tunica vaginalis, between which hydroceles form. The spermatic cord contains Brunicardi_Ch40_p1759-p1782.indd   176001/03/19   6:34 PM 1761UROLOGYCHAPTER 40the vas deferens, the venous pampiniform plexus, and arterial blood supply to the superior pole of the testis via three separate sources. The testicular artery arises directly from the aorta; the deferential artery, which supplies the vas deferens, arises from the internal iliac artery; and the cremasteric artery, which sup-plies the cremaster musculature, arises from the external iliac artery. The presence of multiple arterial sources provides col-lateral flow and prevents ischemia in the event of injury to a particular vascular branch. The venous pampiniform plexus can dilate to form a palpable or visible varicocele, which can serve as an etiology of chronic testicular pain or infertility.INFECTIONCystitisUncomplicated cystitis usually presents as new onset urinary frequency, urgency, and dysuria. Patients may also report lower back pain, suprapubic pain, foul-smelling urine, or gross hema-turia. Urinalysis with microscopy assists with diagnosis by confirming the presence of pyuria, hematuria, and bacteriuria. Office dipstick may be helpful, as the presence of nitrites reflects bacterial colonization and the presence of leukocyte esterase reflects pyuria. Risk factors for the development of uncompli-cated cystitis include female gender, sexual activity, and use of spermicides.1 Three days of antibiotics are generally sufficient for treatment of uncomplicated cystitis. Fluoroquinolones and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole are well tolerated and are eas-ily available. Nitrofurantoin, which is also commonly used for uncomplicated cystitis, requires 5 days of treatment. Men with uncomplicated cystitis should undergo 7 days of treatment.Complicated cystitis may arise in the setting of structural or functional urinary tract abnormalities, recent urinary tract instru-mentation, recent antimicrobial use, immunosuppressed states, pregnancy, or hospital-acquired infection. Symptoms may be simi-lar to uncomplicated cystitis but can progress to pyelonephritis if left untreated. Elderly or very young patients tend to exhibit leth-argy, change in mental status, or anorexia, which may confound the diagnosis of a urinary tract infection. Patients may require hos-pitalization if febrile or if symptoms are severe. Treatment consists of 10 to 14 days of antibiotics. Fluoroquinolones or trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole are usually effective and should be administered based on culture results and/or regional bacteriograms. Asymp-tomatic bacteriuria does not require treatment unless detected dur-ing pregnancy or if urinary tract instrumentation is planned.1PyelonephritisPyelonephritis arises when a bladder infection ascends proxi-mally along the ureters to the renal parenchyma. It may also result from hematogenous spread, such as in the case of intra-venous drug abuse or in patients with bacteremia from other sources. Patients with pyelonephritis may present with fevers, flank pain, nausea, vomiting, and lower urinary tract symptoms. Physical exam may reveal tenderness of the costovertebral angle. Patients may appear toxic, with poor oral intake. Labora-tory evaluation may reveal leukocytosis with elevated neutro-phils. Urinalysis usually demonstrates the presence of pyuria and bacteriuria, and urine culture should be sent prior to start-ing broad-spectrum antibiotics. Imaging should be considered to rule out obstruction, which could prolong the recovery period despite appropriate antimicrobial treatment.Acute pyelonephritis requires 7 to 14 days of antibiotic therapy. Mild or moderate cases, even if febrile, can safely be treated as an outpatient with oral antibiotics. Fluoroquino-lones and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole are ideal for treating pyelonephritis. Nitrofurantoin should not be used as it does not penetrate renal parenchyma. Patients with concern for sepsis or inability to tolerate oral intake may require hospitalization with IV antibiotics while awaiting culture results. Fevers may persist for up to 72 hours despite appropriate treatment. The presence of persistent fevers or symptoms after this time period warrants cross-sectional imaging to rule out renal or perinephric abscess. Treatment for renal or perinephric abscess usually consists of percutaneous drainage and broad-spectrum IV antibiotics.ProstatitisAcute prostatitis is marked by fever, suprapubic or perineal pain, and new onset lower urinary tract symptoms, namely dys-uria, frequency, urgency, changes in stream caliber, or difficulty emptying the bladder. It is most often caused by urinary patho-gens. Digital rectal exam may reveal a tender and soft pros-tate. Bladder drainage with a Foley or suprapubic tube may be required if urinary retention is present. Treatment consists of a long-term course (4–6 weeks) of antibiotics. If not treated in a timely fashion, acute prostatitis can develop into severe sepsis or a prostatic abscess. Prostatic abscesses may require drainage via a transurethral approach or transrectal needle aspiration.Chronic prostatitis may be bacterial or abacterial. Symptoms in both cases include perineal, suprapubic, or penile pain, along with urinary frequency, urgency, or change in stream caliber. Men may also report pain in the groin, lower back, or testes. Fever is not observed in chronic prostatitis, and onset may occur over many months. Patients with chronic bacterial prostatitis may also report recurrent UTIs, with cultures consistently exhibiting the same bacteria. Differentiation between the two etiologies requires culture of expressed prostatic secretion to confirm the presence or absence of bacteria. Treatment of chronic bacterial prostatitis includes long-term antibiotics and α-blockers.Chronic abacterial prostatitis is also known as chronic pel-vic pain syndrome (CPPS). Symptoms are similar to chronic bacterial prostatitis, but generally do not respond well to long-term antibiotics for treatment. It is generally somewhat more difficult to achieve symptomatic relief when treating CPPS, and options include α-blockers, NSAIDs, neuromodulators, and/or pelvic floor physical therapy.2Epididymo-OrchitisEpididymitis refers to inflammation of the epididymis. In most cases of bacterial infection, the testis is also affected, thus is encompassed by the term “epididymo-orchitis.” Common eti-ologies include sexually transmitted infection, especially in younger males, or urinary tract infection, which is more com-monly seen in older males. Other possible etiologies include underlying congenital urologic abnormality or incomplete blad-der emptying. Symptoms include pain and swelling of the epi-didymis and testis. Some men may report nausea or vomiting, which arises as a result of irritation of the spermatic cord. Uri-nary symptoms may be present, but absence of symptoms does not rule out bacterial epididymo-orchitis. Physical exam gen-erally reveals a tender, swollen epididymis and testis. Scrotal skin erythema or reactive hydrocele may be present as well. A complete blood count should be performed to rule out leukocy-tosis, and urinalysis with urine culture should be collected prior to initiation of antibiotics. Urethral swab should be performed if sexually transmitted infection is a possible etiology. The clini-cal presentation of testicular torsion can be quite similar to that of Brunicardi_Ch40_p1759-p1782.indd   176101/03/19   6:34 PM 1762SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIepididymo-orchitis. It may be quite difficult to clinically differenti-ate the two entities, but one should keep in mind that the onset of torsion tends to be slightly more acute (within 4–8 hours) than that of epididymo-orchitis (which generally arises over the course of 24–48 hours). Scrotal ultrasound can assist in diagnosis; how-ever, in cases of severe orchitis, testicular flow can be compro-mised, which may raise concern for torsion. Scrotal exploration should be considered in any equivocal case: a missed torsion can result in testicular loss secondary to necrosis.Treatment of epididymo-orchitis consists of single dose of ceftriaxone and azithromycin if there is concern for sexu-ally transmitted infection, as well as 14 days of oral antibiotic therapy, NSAIDs, and scrotal support. If the patient exhibits fevers or toxic presentation, hospitalization with IV antibiotics may be required.Balanitis and BalanoposthitisBalanitis refers to inflammation of the glans penis. Balano-posthitis arises when the foreskin is also involved. Common etiologies include fungal infection, bacterial infection, contact dermatitis, or local trauma. Exam reveals a diffusely erythema-tous and warm glans penis, with inner preputial erythema as well if balanoposthitis is present. Treatment includes appropri-ate hygiene, topical antibiotics or antifungals, and occasionally topical steroids. If there is an inappropriate response to treat-ment, the differential diagnosis should include malignancy, pso-riasis, or infectious agents such as HPV.3URINARY TRACT OBSTRUCTIONUrolithiasisRenal stone disease is a common problem that is a major health care burden to society today. The prevalence of stone disease in the United States has increased over the past several decades as reported by the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), and was estimated at 8.8% for the period between 2007 and 2010.4 This prevalence has increased with factors such as global warming, poor diet choices, and the obesity trend. Overall, the total estimated annual expenditure for individuals with claims for a diagnosis of urolithiasis was almost $2.1 billion in 2000, representing a 50% increase since 1994.5 Risk factors for stone formation include dietary habits, family history, white race, geographical location or occupa-tional exposure to heat/dehydration, intestinal disease, and male gender, although the gender gap is decreasing.6 More recently, stone formation has also been associated with obesity, metabolic syndrome, and diabetes mellitus.7,8Stones are most commonly composed of calcium oxa-late. Other stone compositions include calcium phosphate, uric acid, cystine, medication-related, and infectious stones (stru-vite or carbonate apatite) or a mix thereof. Stone composition can vary based on a number of underlying pathophysiological processes. For example, hyperoxaluria may be seen in patients who have undergone small bowel resection, particularly the ter-minal ileum. This can result in an increase in unabsorbed fatty acids and bile salts which undergo saponification by binding with calcium in the bowel. The increase in unbound oxalate is absorbed by the large intestine and subsequently excreted in the urine, favoring the formation of calcium oxalate stones. Uric acid stones will form in a context of acidic urinary pH, low uri-nary volume, and high oral intake of purines. Countering these factors by alkalinizing the urine and increasing urine output Figure 40-1. Struvite (infectious) stones are evident on a plain radiograph of the abdomen. The red arrows highlight a left Stag-horn calculus filling the renal pelvis and calyces and several stones in the right lower pole of the kidney.may lead to dissolution of uric acid stones and reduced fur-ther formation.9 Proteus species, Klebsiella species, and other urease-producing bacteria metabolize urea into ammonium and bicarbonate. The alkaline milieu (pH >7) predisposes to infec-tious (struvite) stones with the precipitation of magnesium, ammonium, and phosphate (Fig. 40-1).Evaluation for first-time stone formers should include a complete medical history and physical exam, basic metabolic panel, calcium, uric acid, urinalysis and culture, and radio-graphic imaging. A noncontrast computed tomography (CT) scan is the most sensitive (98%) and specific (97%) exam to detect urolithiasis10 and can provide additional anatomical infor-mation useful for surgical planning, although its use in recurrent stone formers should be balanced by cost and radiation expo-sure. Low-dose CT is currently the preferred imaging study for patients with a body mass index (BMI) <30. This imaging study uses less than one-third of the estimated effective ionizing radiation dose (3 mSv) compared to standard dose noncontrast CT (10 mSv),10 while maintaining excellent sensitivity (95%) and specificity (97%).11 Plain abdominal X-ray can be used to follow radiopaque stones such as calcium-containing stones or struvite stones, although at times struvite can be difficult to see on plain X-ray, especially when the fragments are small. Uric acid and triamterene stones are radiolucent on plain abdominal X-ray but will be visible on noncontrast CT. A full metabolic evaluation with a 24-hour urine collection is indicated in recur-rent stone formers, high-risk stone formers, or interested first-time stone formers.12The natural history of stones is variable and depends pri-marily on their size and location. Smaller and more distal stones are much more likely to pass spontaneously without the need for surgical intervention.13,14 Patients with ureteral stones ≤10 mm can be offered a period of observation if their pain is well controlled without signs of infection or renal insuf-ficiency. α-Blockers, which inhibit ureteral peristalsis, have been shown in meta-analyses to be particularly useful in patients with distal ureter stones ≤10 mm, improving the rate of stone passage from 54% to 77%,15,16 with shortened time to expulsion and fewer colic episodes.171Brunicardi_Ch40_p1759-p1782.indd   176201/03/19   6:34 PM 1763UROLOGYCHAPTER 40Patients who have not passed their stone after a 4to 6-week observation period, those with larger stones, or those who desire immediate intervention, may be offered one of three definitive surgical interventions: shockwave lithotripsy (SWL), ureteroscopy (URS), or percutaneous nephrolithotomy (PCNL). Open surgical management of stones has been relegated to historic interest for the most part with less than 1% of stone surgery needing to be done open with access to modern endou-rologic equipment. The choice of the procedure will depend primarily on stone-related factors (e.g., stone size, location, and composition/density), and patient-related factors (e.g., comor-bidities, coagulopathy, obesity, renal anatomy, and surrounding structures).Shockwave lithotripsy is the procedure associated with the least morbidity and the lowest complication rate but is also associated with a lower success rate at treating stones as a single procedure and requires the patient to pass the stone fragments afterwards.15,16 The modality can be used for stones in the prox-imal ureter (particularly if <10 mm) or non–lower-pole renal stones <2 cm.15,16 The stone is located under fluoroscopic guid-ance, which is coupled to an extracorporeal lithotripter aimed at the stone. The stone is fragmented in a completely nonin-vasive manner. Complications associated with this procedure include subcapsular or perinephric renal hematoma and ureteral obstruction by stone fragments (“Steinstrausse”; Fig. 40-2). Ureteroscopy is the procedure of choice for patients with middle or distal ureteral stones. It also has a higher success rate than SWL in treating >10-mm proximal ureteral stones and renal stones.15,16 This procedure involves advancing a semi-rigid or flexible ureteroscope to the level of the stone and fragmenting it under direct visualization, often using a holmium:YAG laser. The surgeon is able to visualize the stone during fragmentation and thereby has some control over how small the fragments are. In addition, stone fragments may also be actively removed with a small nitinol stone basket. This is where the procedure may have an advantage over SWL. However, many patients have a ureteral stent placed after ureteroscopy, and, although tempo-rary, this remains a major source of morbidity for the patient. Specific complications of URS include ureteral injury or stric-ture. PCNL is reserved for patients with larger or more complex Figure 40-2. Ureteral obstruction in a patient with Steinstrausse. A plain abdominal radiograph (KUB) demonstrates Steinstrausse in the right distal ureter between the white arrows.stone burden, and requires a percutaneous tract into the kidney. Most stones larger than 2 cm are treated with PCNL although there is a role for PCNL for smaller stones located in the lower pole of the collecting system.18,19 More powerful lithotripters (pneumatic, ultrasound) and larger instruments (stone graspers) can be used to fragment and remove these larger stones through the percutaneous tract. Complications include injury to adjacent organs, acute and delayed renal bleeding due to pseudoaneu-rysm or arteriovenous fistula formation, sepsis, or renal pelvis perforation.General preventative measures include correcting dietary habits, particularly increasing fluid intake to produce >2.5 liters of urine per day, limiting sodium, reducing animal protein intake, and monitoring foods high in oxalate. Medical therapy such as thiazide diuretics (helpful for hypercalciuria), urinary alkalization with potassium citrate, or allopurinol may also be indicated depending on the clinical situation.12Benign Prostatic HyperplasiaBenign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) refers to the histological findings of smooth muscle and fibroblast/epithelial cell pro-liferation in the transition zone of the prostate. Lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) may be secondary to benign prostatic enlargement (BPE) causing progressive bladder outlet obstruc-tion but may also be due to numerous other conditions (e.g., urethral stricture, infection, overactive or neurogenic bladder, malignancy). Although some male patients with LUTS may have BPE, not all patients with an enlarged prostate have LUTS. The prevalence of LUTS attributed to BPH in men over the age of 50 is estimated at 50% to 75% and increases with age with a prevalence of 80% in men over the age of 70.20 The treatment modalities have dramatically evolved over the past decades, with medical management typically used for first-line therapy. Endoscopic and minimally invasive techniques are used for those failing or intolerant of medical therapy.Men with BPH/LUTS are evaluated with a complete his-tory and physical exam including digital rectal exam. LUTS should be clearly defined, in addition to their severity and degree of bother. Validated questionnaires to quantify the patient’s symptoms and degree of bother include the American Urologi-cal Association Symptom Index (AUA-SI) and the International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS).21,22 Complications of BPH such as urinary retention, incontinence, renal failure, hema-turia, or recurrent infections should also be considered. Basic workup includes a urinalysis and culture to rule out infection. After an informative discussion about the risks and benefits of prostate cancer screening, a serum PSA is measured when life expectancy is >10 years and if the diagnosis of prostate can-cer will alter management.23 Other diagnostic testing such as cystoscopy, cytology, postvoid residual (PVR), urodynamics, and radiologic imaging of the prostate, although not done rou-tinely, may be required in patients with a definite indication (e.g., hematuria), uncertain diagnosis, poor response to therapy, or for surgical planning.24The first line of treatment is most commonly pharmaco-therapy for those men with bothersome symptoms. α-Blockers work by relaxing the smooth muscle of the prostate and bladder neck. All α-blocker agents are equally effective,25 and their side effects may include orthostatic hypo-tension, dizziness, asthenia, headache, nasal congestion, and retrograde ejaculation. Their effect is usually seen within days. Five-α reductase inhibitors (5-ARIs) block the conversion of 2Brunicardi_Ch40_p1759-p1782.indd   176301/03/19   6:34 PM 1764SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IItestosterone to dihydrotestosterone (DHT), the hormone primar-ily responsible for BPH progression. These reduce prostatic size by 20% to 25%,26 but their effects are seen only after 4 to 6 months. Side effects include erectile dysfunction, decreased libido, and, rarely, gynecomastia. 5-ARIs, but not α-blockers, can alter disease progression as demonstrated by two landmark tri-als, the MTOPS27 and CombAT28 trials. These trials evaluated combination therapy using α-blockers and 5-ARIs. Patients on 5-ARIs, particularly those with larger prostates, had a reduced risk of both developing acute urinary retention and requiring surgical intervention. More recently, daily phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors, which are most often used for erectile dysfunction (ED), have now been approved for treating patients with BPH. These can be particularly valuable in patients with concomitant ED.29,30Surgical modalities for BPH continue to evolve towards less invasive endoscopic procedures. Transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) remains the mainstay of endoscopic pro-cedures, with low treatment failure and complication rates.31 TUR syndrome is associated with prolonged use of hypotonic irrigation fluid, resulting in fluid overload and dilutional hypo-natremia. Symptoms include nausea/vomiting, bradycardia and hypertension, pulmonary edema, mental status changes, and rarely death. Other endoscopic modalities used today include bipolar TURP and various laser procedures (e.g., Ho:YAG laser enucleation of the prostate, Ho:YAG laser ablation of the prostate, and photoselective vaporization of the prostate) with the goal of enucleating or vaporizing prostatic tissue. Normal saline is used for irrigation with these modalities, which greatly reduces the risk of TUR syndrome. Generally, laser procedures have been associated with shorter catheterization time and length of stay with comparable improvements in LUTS to open prostatectomy or TURP.32-34 Open, and more recently laparo-scopic and robotic simple prostatectomy can also be performed for patients with moderate-severe, bothersome LUTS due to BPH. These are usually reserved for patients with larger pros-tatic volumes (>100 cc), or patients requiring concomitant blad-der surgery (e.g., bladder diverticulectomy or stones).23Urethral StrictureA urethral stricture is an area of scarring or fibrosis that causes concentric narrowing of the urethra, impeding the flow of urine as it drains from the bladder. Strictures occur at a prevalence of 0.9% of the population in the United States.35 Causes of urethral stricture disease include trauma (19%), iatrogenic causes (33%), inflammatory causes (15%), and idiopathic causes (33%).36 Symptoms of urethral stricture disease include incomplete emptying, weak urinary stream, urinary urgency/frequency, and pain.37,38The anatomy of the urethra in men can be divided into the following segments proceeding from cephalad to caudad: prostatic, membranous, bulbous (the area between the pelvic floor and the penoscrotal junction), and penile. A stricture can occur in any segment of the urethra, but it is most common in the bulbar urethra.Options to treat urethral stricture disease can be divided into two general categories: endoscopic and surgical reconstruc-tion. Endoscopic treatments include a urethral dilation or stric-ture incision with a cystoscope. The latter is referred to as a direct vision internal urethrotomy. The success rate of one endo-scopic attempt to treat a urethral stricture is around 30%.39 The success of repeat endoscopic treatments of a urethral stricture drops to 13%, and recurrent dilations have been associated with the need for more complex reconstructive surgeries for definitive management.39,40 For that reason, com-mon practice is to attempt one endoscopic intervention prior to referral for reconstructive surgery.Surgical reconstruction of the urethra, referred to as a ure-throplasty, can be divided into two general categories: excisional and tissue substitution. An excisional repair involves resection of the strictured segment of the urethra, and direct anastomo-sis of the two healthy urethral ends. This repair technique is generally reserved for membranous strictures and short bulbar strictures. Tissue substitution involves augmenting a narrowed urethral lumen with free tissue grafts. The most common tissue substitute is buccal (oral) mucosal graft.Other Causes of ObstructionRetroperitoneal fibrosis (RPF) is a rare cause of ureteric obstruction secondary to an inflammatory and fibrotic pro-cess of the retroperitoneal structures. Most cases (>70%) are idiopathic. Identifiable causes in the remaining cases include periaortic inflammation due to aneurysms, medications (e.g., methysergide, ergot derivatives, β-blockers, phenacetin), infec-tions (e.g., tuberculosis, schistosomiasis), and malignancy (e.g., lymphoma, multiple myeloma, sarcoma). Symptoms are non-specific and may include general abdominal discomfort or back pain, flank pain due to ureteral obstruction, or lower extremity edema due to vena caval compression. Laboratory abnormali-ties such as normocytic anemia, an elevated C-reactive protein, or ESR are identified in about two-thirds of cases.41 The classic radiological findings consist of a well-defined retroperitoneal soft tissue mass encasing the great vessels with medialization of the ureters. Contrast enhancement on CT scan, magnetic reso-nance imaging (MRI), and positron emission tomography (PET) scan can also be used to monitor disease activity and assess response to treatment.42Patients with symptomatic renal obstruction, renal insuf-ficiency, or signs of infection should be decompressed with either ureteral stents or nephrostomy and monitored for postob-structive diuresis. Biopsy of the retroperitoneal mass to exclude malignancy should be considered prior to commencing treat-ment. Steroid therapy remains the mainstay of medical treat-ment, although other immunosuppressive agents have been described.43 If medical treatment fails, open or minimally inva-sive bilateral ureterolysis with intraperitonealization or omental wrapping of the ureters is indicated.Ureteral obstruction secondary to tumor (benign or malig-nant) is commonly encountered. Ureteral stenting can be tried initially, but it fails in approximately one-half of cases.44 Other strategies such as percutaneous nephrostomy, ureteral stenting in tandem, metallic, and metal-mesh stents have been described. Metallic stents may be more cost-effective due to less frequent stent exchanges,45-47 although cost savings may be offset by the limited life expectancy in this patient population.44GENITOURINARY TRAUMAGenitourinary (GU) trauma is rare. Approximately 10% of vic-tims of abdominal trauma will have a urologic injury.48 Any portion of the GU tract can be injured including the follow-ing: kidneys, ureters, bladder, urethra, and the external genita-lia including the testicles. Mechanisms of trauma parallel other injury mechanisms, the majority of which include blunt and penetrating injuries. This section will be divided into the man-agement of each organ involved in the GU system.3Brunicardi_Ch40_p1759-p1782.indd   176401/03/19   6:34 PM 1765UROLOGYCHAPTER 40Table 40-1The American Association for the Surgery of Trauma (AAST) renal trauma grading systemGRADEDESCRIPTIONMANAGEMENT1Contusion or nonenlarging subcapsular perirenal hematomaGenerally managed conservatively.2Perinephric hematoma without obvious parenchymal laceration on CT, or a <1 cm laceration into the cortex of the kidneyGenerally managed conservatively in a stable patient.3>1 cm laceration into the cortex without involvement of the collecting systemGenerally managed conservatively in a stable patient.4A deep laceration into the collecting system with evidence of urinary extravasation on CT, or a segmental renal artery or vein injury with  contained hematoma, or partial vessel laceration,  or vessel thrombosisCan be observed expectantly in the stable patient, but may require subsequent urgent or delayed repair. Renal artery embolization may be an option for those who fail conservative therapy.5Renal pedicle injury or multiple deep renal lacerations (“shattered kidney”)Patients often require surgical exploration, but stable patients with only parenchymal injury may be safely treated conservatively.CT = computed tomography.KidneysThe prime goal of renal trauma management is preservation of renal function. Renal trauma has become largely nonop-erative in modern times, especially in the setting of lowto intermediate-grade renal injuries from a blunt mechanism of action. The role of angioembolization through vascular and interventional radiology has further increased this nonopera-tive management.49,50The first goal of renal trauma is to accurately grade the renal injury. The gold standard test to diagnose and stage a renal injury includes a CT scan with IV contrast, with delayed images. In most centers, this is referred to as a “CT urogram,” in which delayed contrast imaging delineates the upper urinary tract collecting system. Criteria that would mandate renal imaging include the presence of gross hematuria, microscopic hematuria with hypotension, and mechanisms increasing the prevalence of renal injury (sudden deceleration injuries, flank contusion, etc). The American Association for the Surgery of Trauma (AAST) renal trauma grading system is described in Table 40-1.51,52The management of renal injuries depends not only on the grade but also on the injury mechanism and clinical symptoms. Absolute indications for surgical or radiological intervention on renal trauma include life-threatening hemorrhage, renal pedicle avulsion, or pulsatile/expanding retroperitoneal hematoma. Moreover, those suffering penetrating renal trauma with a ret-roperitoneal hematoma should undergo exploration when hemo-dynamic instability exists.In a hemodynamically stable patient with a renal injury, renal trauma should be initially observed. Data suggests that this approach may even be feasible in the setting of isolated, penetrating renal injuries.53 Conservative management entails bed rest and hemodynamic monitoring. Patients with a grade 4 renal injury (Fig. 40-3A to D) should be treated in the same manner, and a repeat CT scan should be done to make certain that the urinary extravasation has resolved.54 Otherwise, urinoma and subsequent abscess formation may occur. If uri-nary extravasation is persistent, placement of a ureteral stent or nephrostomy tube should be considered.Across the board, the most common surgery for renal sur-gery in modern times is unfortunately a nephrectomy.55 Early renal vascular control may minimize nephrectomy rates.56 This is accomplished by isolating the renal vascular medially prior to opening the perinephric hematoma. If uncontrolled bleeding is encountered once the hematoma is opened, occlusion of the renal vasculature can be performed. At that time, a renorrhaphy can be safely done as can a nephrectomy in the setting of a grade 5 renal injury.UretersThere is no association between the magnitude of ureteral injury and the degree of hematuria that is present.57 A high index of suspicion is required. Diagnosis requires either a CT urogram, IVP, or a cystoscopy with a retrograde pyelogram. Unlike renal injury, the ureters more commonly are injured through iatro-genic mechanisms. Common surgical procedures in which the ureters are injured include gynecological, colorectal, and uro-logical surgeries. The repair of ureteric injuries depends on the time of identification from initial injury, location, and length of the injured ureteral segment involved.Iatrogenic ureteral injuries should be initially managed with ureteral stent placement when possible. When stenting is not fea-sible, open repair may be attempted when the patient presents shortly after injury. When stent placement is not feasible or when presentation is delayed, nephrostomy tube placement should be considered until formal repair can be safely done.Ureteral injuries of traumatic origin (penetrating injuries, multiple intra-abdominal traumas) should be repaired during the index admission when possible. Hemodynamically stable patients undergoing laparotomy for other reasons in which a high index of suspicion of a ureteral injury is present should have ureteral exploration. Stable patients in this same situation that are identified to have a ureteral injury should have primary repair at the time of exploration. If a patient is hemodynamically unstable, the ureter can be ligated with subsequent nephrostomy tube placement. Ureteral repair can then be delayed until the patient is stable for surgery.4Brunicardi_Ch40_p1759-p1782.indd   176501/03/19   6:34 PM 1766SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIABCDFigure 40-3. Grade 4 renal injury as demonstrated on abdominal computed tomography imaging with intravenous contrast. A. The yellow arrow points to extravasated contrast in the right perirenal fat. B and C. The right kidney has been fractured, as seen at the yellow arrow. Hematoma and extravasated contrast are seen in the mid-anterior pole of the kidney. D. Coronal view. The yellow arrow reveals the upper pole renal fracture with disruption of the collecting system.The definitive operative management of a ureteral injury depends on the location and the extent of devitalization. It is important to debride devitalized ends of the ureter, whether it is from a contusion via a gunshot wound or an iatrogenic ther-mal injury. Upper ureteral injuries that are short can generally be resected and anastomosed primarily.58 Ureteral mobilization with preservation of ureteral adventitia to maintain vascular supply can aid in bridging short defects. In modern times, more aggressive maneuvers to directly anastomose more proximal ureteral injuries to the bladder are possible. Maneuvers used to bridge the defect of ureteral length for direct anastomosis to the bladder include the following: bladder mobilization with liga-tion of the contralateral bladder pedicles, psoas hitch (tacking the bladder down to the ipsilateral psoas tendon), and the Boari flap with downward nephropexy. Creation of a Boari flap uti-lizes a tubularized flap of anterior bladder wall to bridge long defects. Bridging defects as high as the proximal ureter have been reported in association with this technique.59 When blad-der-to-ureter anastomosis is not possible with these maneuvers, the remaining options include trans-ureteroureterostomy (anas-tomosing the injured ureter to the contralateral ureter), creation of an ileal ureter, or renal auto transplantation to the pelvis.BladderThe bladder can be injured through iatrogenic and classic trau-matic mechanisms. Indications for bladder imaging include gross hematuria in the setting of injuries with a correlation for bladder injury. The most common clinical scenario is gross hematuria associated with a pelvic fracture, which is associated with a 29% chance of bladder laceration.60 Diagnosis of bladder injuries requires either a CT cystogram or a fluoroscopic cysto-gram. The sensitivities and specificities of these two modalities are similar.61,62 The bladder should be filled with approximately 300 cc of contrast for either of these imaging modalities. Contrast may be visible at the sight of injury, within the perito-neal space (Fig. 40-4A), or in the perivesical space (Fig. 40-4B). Simply capping the Foley catheter alone on a delayed excretory phase of abdominal CT imaging is insufficient to diagnose a bladder injury.61Two general categories of bladder injuries are extraperito-neal and intraperitoneal injuries. An intraperitoneal injury requires repair during the index admission after the patient has been resuscitated. Delayed repairs are associated with abdominal sepsis. Conversely, extra peritoneal injuries can gen-erally be managed with Foley catheter drainage alone. Situa-tions in which extraperitoneal bladder injuries should be treated with operative repair include complex injuries involving bone spicules from a pelvic fracture within the laceration and concur-rent rectal or bladder lacerations, which increase the possibility of fistula formation. Bladder neck injuries should also be treated operatively during the index admission as these injuries occa-sionally do no heal with Foley catheter drainage alone. Repeat cystography should be done 7 to 14 days later prior to Foley removal to ensure that the laceration, or operative repair, has healed.63Urethral InjuriesCommon mechanisms of trauma of the urethra include pelvic fracture associated injuries and straddle injuries. Pelvic fracture associated injuries occur at the level of the membranous urethra, whereas straddle injuries occur at the level of the bulbar urethra. The clinical hallmark of a urethral injury is blood at the meatus. A retrograde urethrogram should be done when this clinical sign is present to diagnose an injury, prior to attempted Foley cath-eter placement (Fig. 40-5A).64,65The initial step in management of a urethral injury is bladder drainage to prevent urinoma formation and subsequent abscess formation. In general, this is accomplished through 5Brunicardi_Ch40_p1759-p1782.indd   176601/03/19   6:35 PM 1767UROLOGYCHAPTER 40Figure 40-4. Intraperitoneal and extraperitoneal bladder injuries. A. During a computed tomography (CT) cystogram, intraperitoneal contrast is seen within the peritoneal space at the red arrow. B. During  a CT cystogram, extravesical contrast is seen contained within the extraperitoneal space at the red arrow.ABFigure 40-5. A. Retrograde urethrogram showing an area of nar-rowing at the double white arrow. This indicates a bulbar urethral stricture. B. After urethroplasty, a retrograde urethrogram demon-strates a normal-appearing and patent bulbar urethra at the arrow.ABplacement of an SP tube. After stabilization, some centers per-form “primary urethral alignment.” This is a dual antegrade and retrograde endoscopic procedure utilizing fluoroscopy to bridge the urethral defect and to place a Foley catheter across the injury. Subsequent restructure rates are high, but the severity of stricture formation may be less when primary alignment is performed.66 If patients are managed with an SP tube alone, the site of disruption leaves the patient with a urethral stricture and subsequent restructure. This requires a treatment with a urethro-plasty after the patient’s period of convalescence has resolved (Fig. 40-5B).Penetrating injuries to the anterior urethra are rare. In a hemodynamically stable patient with an uncomplicated injury, it is expert opinion to perform exploration with primary repair during index admission. Complicated injuries with extensive tissue devitalization should be managed with SP tube urinary diversion and delayed reconstruction.67External Genital InjuriesPenile fractures classically occur with excessive torqueing of the erect penis. This excessive torqueing results in rupture of the tunica albuginea, the fascial coating of the erectile bodies. Common symptoms include immediate detumescence with subsequent development of a hematoma. Clinical history and examination alone are sufficient to warrant surgical exploration with primary suture repair of the corporal body laceration. For equivocal cases, ultrasonography or an MRI may be done.68,69 Up to 10% of penile fractures are associated with urethral inju-ries. Blood at the meatus signifies the possibility of a coexisting urethral injury. This should be evaluated with either a retrograde urethrogram or cystoscopy at the time of repair.Scrotal trauma generally occurs from a blunt mechanism. Injuries to the testis, epididymis, and spermatic cord may occur. Hematomas with subsequent ecchymosis are common with such injuries. Testicular rupture occurs with fracture of the fascial coating of the testicle, called the tunica albuginea. This may occur with blunt or penetrating mechanisms. The most spe-cific findings on ultrasonography are loss of testicular contour and heterogeneous echotexture of parenchyma. The highest reported sensitivity for testicular rupture on ultrasound is 93%.70 With diagnosis of a testicular rupture or when a high index of Brunicardi_Ch40_p1759-p1782.indd   176701/03/19   6:35 PM 1768SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIBladderUrethraPosterior prostateAnterior prostateABFigure 40-6. Coudé catheter. A. A schematic drawing of a lat-eral view of the prostatic urethra showing the upward angulation at the bladder neck, which a coudé catheter is helpful in negotiating. B. The tip of a coudé catheter. Note the curved tip, which should always point to 12 o’clock when inserted.suspicion is present (especially with penetrating trauma), explo-ration should be performed. Testicular salvage rates are high in modern times and involve suture repair of the site of rupture.70 When primary repair is not possible, a simple orchiectomy should be performed.EMERGENCIESAcute Urinary RetentionAcute urinary retention (AUR) can happen in men or women and results from a variety of causes, although it most commonly occurs in men with benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH).71,72 Other chronic causes of poor bladder emptying, such as diabetic neuropathy, urethral stricture, multiple sclerosis, or Parkinson’s disease, can result in episodes of complete urinary retention, often when the bladder becomes overdistended. This frequently occurs in the hospital setting when patients have limited mobil-ity and are receiving medications that decrease bladder con-tractility, including opiates or anticholinergics. Constipation, a common side effect of those medications, can itself worsen uri-nary retention. Significant hematuria can result in the formation of blood clots, which may block the urethra and cause retention.Although some patients receiving large doses of narcot-ics or those with chronically decompensated bladders may not experience discomfort, most patients with AUR have significant pain. Untreated severe urinary retention (often accompanied by overflow incontinence) may result in acute renal failure. Treat-ment should include placement of a urethral catheter as quickly as possible. However, BPH or urethral strictures often make the placement of a catheter difficult. For men with BPH, a coude (French for curved) catheter is helpful in negotiating past the angulation in the prostatic urethra (Fig. 40-6A). The curved por-tion (which is angled in line with the balloon port) is maintained at the 12 o’clock position as it is passed through the urethra (Fig. 40-6B). A common mistake is to use a smaller catheter to bypass the enlarged prostate. However, a larger (18F to 20F) catheter is less flexible and is more likely to push into the blad-der rather than curl in the prostatic urethra.Smaller catheters, however, are quite useful for bypass-ing a urethral stricture. A urethral stricture should be suspected when the catheter meets resistance closer to the meatus, as many strictures occur in the distal urethra, which is narrower than the proximal portion. Using a 12F or 14F catheter often will allow the passage of the catheter into the bladder. If cath-eter placement is not successful, a urologic consultation should be requested. The urologist can either choose to (a) use a cys-toscope, guidewire, and urethral dilators to dilate the stricture and place a Council-tip catheter via Seldinger technique; or (b) place a suprapubic tube approximately two fingerbreadths above the pubic symphysis. With regard to the suprapubic tube, ultrasound-guidance or aspiration with a finder needle should be used first to localize the bladder and avoid intra-abdominal contents, although bowel injury is unlikely with a distended bladder filling the pelvis. If hematuria is the cause of retention, continuous bladder irrigation often is necessary to prevent clot formation. This is done through a large three-way catheter that has an additional port for fluid inflow. Fluid is infused by grav-ity only because the use of higher pressure may result in bladder rupture if outflow is occluded.Once the bladder is adequately drained, the cause of AUR should be addressed. For men with suspected BPH, an α-blocker such as tamsulosin should be started, and these have been shown to increase the likelihood of a successful trial without a catheter.73 Although finasteride and dutasteride (5α-reductase inhibitors) have been shown to reduce the incidence of urinary retention by 50%, they require several months to take effect and are most beneficial in large prostates; therefore, they will not provide significant benefit in the short term. Narcotics should be tapered as tolerated, and constipation should be treated.Acute spinal cord compression, which is accompanied by saddle paresthesias, is a neurologic emergency that requires neurosurgical or orthopedic consultation. In most cases, except severe neurologic injuries, patients will be able to resume void-ing, and the catheter can be removed after 1 to 2 days. Postvoid residuals should be checked with a portable ultrasound device (bladder scanner) or by “straight” catheterization to determine the residual amount of urine left after the patient tries to empty his or her bladder. In patients with severe liver dysfunction, the bladder scanner may inadvertently misinterpret ascites for urine. The inability to void or the presence of a postvoid residual over 200 mL is concerning for development of another episode of AUR. Patients may be given the option of an indwelling cath-eter for another few days with a subsequent voiding trial or to perform clean intermittent catheterization (CIC), whereby, after Brunicardi_Ch40_p1759-p1782.indd   176801/03/19   6:35 PM 1769UROLOGYCHAPTER 40Figure 40-7. Fournier’s gangrene. A. Necrotic scrotal skin from Fournier’s gangrene. B. Debridement of gangrenous tissue. Note the extensive debridement, which is commonly required. The right testicle required removal in this case (the left is wrapped in gauze), but typically, the testes are not involved with the necrotic process.predetermined intervals (4–6 hours) or after voiding attempts, the patient passes a catheter into the bladder and empties it. This is the preferred method because it reduces the likelihood of infections from indwelling catheters and may improve blad-der functionality. However, most patients are resistant to this approach.Testicular TorsionThe differential diagnosis of acute scrotal pain includes testicu-lar torsion.74 This usually occurs in neonates or adolescent boys but may be observed in other age groups. The blood supply to the testicle is compromised due to twisting of the spermatic cord within the tunica vaginalis, resulting in ischemia to the epididy-mis and the testis. In newborns, an extravaginal torsion also can occur with twisting of the tunica vaginalis and spermatic cord together. Risk factors for torsion include undescended testis, testicular tumor, and a “bell-clapper” deformity—poor guber-nacular fixation of the testicles to the scrotal wall.Clinical history is vital for diagnosis.75 Patients describe a sudden onset of pain at a distinct point in time, with subsequent swelling. Physical examination may demonstrate a swollen, asymmetric scrotum with a tender, high-riding testicle. Children normally have a brisk cremasteric reflex that usually is lost in the setting of torsion. The diagnosis is made by clinical history and examination but can be supported by a Doppler ultrasound, which typically shows decreased intratesticular blood flow rela-tive to the contralateral testis. If an ultrasound is not promptly available, timely surgical exploration should be performed.Immediate surgical exploration can salvage an ischemic testis.76 At the time of surgery, the contralateral testes also must be explored and fixed to the dartos fascia due to the pos-sibility that the same anatomic defect allowing torsion exists on the contralateral side. Midline (along the median raphe) or bilateral transverse scrotal incisions are made. Once the testis is detorsed, it should be assessed for viability after being given time for normal blood flow to resume. One can assess the blood flow using intraoperative Doppler or by incis-ing the tunica vaginalis and observing tissue viability. The testes are fixed to the dartos fascia with a small, nonabsorbable suture on their medial, lateral, and dependent aspects, taking care to ensure that the spermatic cord is not twisted before doing so. An orchiectomy should be performed to avoid later risk of abscess formation only if the testis is clearly necrotic.Fournier’s GangreneFournier’s gangrene is a necrotizing fasciitis of the male geni-talia and perineum that can be rapidly progressive and fatal if not treated promptly (Fig. 40-7). The mortality rate has been reported to be as high as 67%.77 Risk factors for Fournier’s gangrene include perirectal abscesses, diabetes, obesity, and chronic alcoholism.78 The often polymicrobial infection spreads along dartos, Scarpa’s, and Colles’ fascia. Clinical signs include perineal and scrotal pain, inflammation, necrosis, and crepitus.78 The diagnosis is largely made on clinical suspicion; however, radiographic findings on CT imaging often assist with the diag-nosis, including soft tissue air associated with fluid collections within the deep fascia.79Prompt and aggressive surgical debridement of nonvia-ble tissue and broad spectrum antibiotics are necessary to prevent further spread (Fig. 40-7A). Fecal diversion with endorectal tubes serve as an option for conservative fecal diversion.80 If there is damage to the external anal sphincter, 67patients may require a colostomy. Patients frequently require return trips to the operating room for further debridement. Negative pressure wound therapy systems have been shown to reduce hospitalization time by aiding in wound healing.81 Reconstructive strategies involving skin grafting are needed when large tissue defects result from extensive tissue damage.PriapismPriapism is a persistent erection for greater than 4 hours unre-lated to sexual stimulation.82 Priapism is divided into two types, based on the underlying pathophysiology. The most common type—low-flow/ischemic priapism—is a medical emergency. On examination, the penis is very tender, and both cavernosal bodies will be rigid while the glans will be flaccid. Decreased venous outflow with persistent inflow results in increased intracorporal pressure and tumescence, which is the normal process of erection. Diminished arterial inflow due to elevated Brunicardi_Ch40_p1759-p1782.indd   176901/03/19   6:35 PM 1770SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIintrapenile pressure usually is brief under normal circumstances. Priapism is essentially a compartment syndrome. With pro-longed erection (priapism), the sustained decrease in arterial inflow ultimately causes tissue hypoxia, acidosis, and edema and results in long-term fibrosis and impotence, and sometimes frank necrosis. Risk factors include sickle cell disease or trait, malignancy, medications, cocaine abuse, certain antidepres-sants, and total parenteral nutrition.82-84 If a cause is not identi-fied, a hematologic workup is necessary to rule out malignancy or blood dyscrasias.The management of priapism is rapid detumescence with the goal of preservation of future erectile function. The ability to achieve normal erections is directly related to the length of the episode of priapism. Ischemic priapism can be confirmed with a penile blood gas from the cavernosal bodies demonstrating hypoxic, acidotic blood. Initial management can include sys-temic treatment of the underlying disorder (fluid and oxygen for sickle cell patients) but this should be done concurrently with an active treatment to reduce the priapism.82 The initial intervention may be therapeutic aspiration or injection of sym-pathomimetics (phenylephrine). Insertion of a large-gauge needle (16–21 gauge) into the lateral aspect of one corporal body allows thorough aspiration and irrigation of both corporal bod-ies because of widely communicating intercavernosal channels. Injection of phenylephrine (diluted 100–500 mcg/mL and given in 1 mL increments every 3–5 minutes for up to 1 hour before determining failure) into the corporal bodies works to cause vasoconstriction, but the patient should be monitored for acute hypertension and reflex bradycardia especially in patients with high cardiovascular risk.A surgical shunt is sometimes necessary to resolve the episode if phenylephrine fails. Distal (corporoglanular) shunts should be performed first because they are the easiest to perform and the lowest amount of complications. A Winter shunt uses a large biopsy needle to create holes between the glans and cor-pora; however, if this fails, an operative procedure can be per-formed to remove the distal tips from each corpora (Al-Ghorab). Proximal shunts such as Grayhack (corporal-saphenous vein) or Quackel (proximal cavernosumspongiosum) shunts may be required in refractory cases.The other form of priapism (high-flow/traumatic priapism) is rare and is related to penile or perineal trauma resulting in a cavernous artery–corporal body fistula. This form is not painful because it is not related to ischemia and can be managed con-servatively with observation. Many cases will resolve with time; those that do not can undergo selective arterial embolization.82ParaphimosisParaphimosis is a common problem that represents a true medi-cal emergency for uncircumcised men. When the foreskin is retracted for prolonged periods, constriction of the glans penis may ensue. This is particularly likely in hospitalized patients who are confined to bed or who have altered mental status and are unable to respond to pain. Delay can be catastrophic as penile necrosis may occur due to ischemia. Penile blocks, pain medication, and sedation are sometimes necessary before manual reduction. It is useful to apply firm pressure to the edematous distal penis for several minutes.85 Although painful, this reduction in penile edema can be the key to success. With the fingers pulling the constricting band distally, the thumbs can push the glans penis back into normal location. Compres-sion wraps have shown some benefit without the need for the physician to use hand compression.86 If the foreskin cannot be manually reduced, surgical intervention is required.Emphysematous PyelonephritisEmphysematous pyelonephritis is a life-threatening infection that results from complicated pyelonephritis by gas-producing organisms. It is an acute necrotizing infection of the kidney that occurs predominantly in diabetic patients.87 Patients frequently present with sepsis and ketoacidosis. Escherichia coli appears to be the most frequent organism responsible for this infection. Patients require supportive care, IV antibiotics, and relief of any urinary tract obstruction. Third-generation cephalosporins have been suggested as the initial antibiotic of choice and fluoroqui-nolones avoided due to high rates of resistance.88 Emphysema-tous pyelonephritis can be subdivided based on the extent of infection. Cases where gas is isolated to the kidney frequently can be managed conservatively with the placement of a neph-rostomy tube to allow drainage of purulent material. When there is extensive involvement of the perirenal tissue, conservative management may not be successful and strong consideration should be given to nephrectomy, particularly if the patient is displaying signs of sepsis.89,90UROLOGIC MALIGNANCIESBladder CancerEpidemiology and Presentation. In 2018, 81,190 men and women will be diagnosed with bladder cancer, and 17, 240 will die from their disease.91 The disease is highly prevalent, with over 700,000 patients living with the disease in the United States as of 2016. Men have nearly three times the incidence of women. Tobacco use is the most frequent risk factor, followed by occupational exposure to various carcinogenic materials such as industrial solvents (e.g., aromatic amines). Other risk fac-tors include arsenic, radiation, cyclophosphamide, and chronic exposure to foreign bodies (stones and catheters) and specific urinary parasites. The most common bladder cancer histology in the United States is urothelial carcinoma (UC), accounting for 90% of tumors, which tends towards a better prognosis as  compared to the rarer forms, including squamous cell carcinoma (<10%), adenocarcinoma (1–2%), and small cell cancer (<1%). Unfortunately, there is no reliable screening test for bladder cancer, although patients felt to be at high risk may undergo urine sampling for microhematuria or abnormal cytology. Smoking cessation should be advised in all tobacco users as a preventive measure. The most common symptoms at presentation are hema-turia (gross or microscopic) and/or irritable voiding (urgency, frequency, and dysuria). Office cystoscopy is an effective means to diagnose bladder cancer.Staging. Clinical staging is completed with CT or MRI to assess intraabdominal nodal and visceral sites of metastasis. The upper tracts should be evaluated with CT urography or retro-grade pyelography. Chest radiograph provides initial evaluation of the thorax and mediastinum. A bone scan should be obtained if the patient complains of bone pain, has known locally advanced or metastatic disease, or an unexplained elevation in the serum alkaline phosphatase level. Pathologic staging has been outlined by the American Joint Committee on Cancer.92Transurethral resection of bladder tumor (TURBT) should include an examination under anesthesia (EUA) and sampling of the bladder muscular wall to fully assess depth of invasion. The presence of induration or a mass on EUA denotes extravesical Brunicardi_Ch40_p1759-p1782.indd   177001/03/19   6:35 PM 1771UROLOGYCHAPTER 40tumor extension and may alter the patient’s treatment plan. It may also be appropriate to biopsy multiple areas of mucosa to identify multifocal carcinoma in situ (CIS). Restaging TURBT within 2 to 6 weeks is recommended in the patient with incom-plete, under-sampled, or uncertain resection. This is especially important in the patient with Tis, Ta, or T1 disease, as well as the patient with suspected T2 disease who is being considered for a bladder preservation treatment strategy. Invasion into the lamina propria and certainly the muscular wall demonstrates increased potential for distant metastases; muscle invasion is rarely treated completely with TURBT and requires additional therapy for adequate local control.Recurrence rates of non–muscle-invasive bladder can-cers are high, ranging from 50% to 70%.93 Adjuvant treatment strategies have thus been adopted after TURBT to reduce these rates. Intravesical chemotherapy used in conjunction with TURBT can reduce the risk of recurrence by 44% to 73% in patients with primary Ta and T1 tumors and by 38% to 65% in patients with recurrent Ta, T1, and Tis tumors when compared to TURBT alone.94 Intravesical immunotherapy using bacil-lus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) also provides a significant reduc-tion in recurrence that is greater than 50% in this population. Despite improved rates of disease-free survival, standard induc-tion courses of intravesical chemotherapy and immunotherapy do not improve disease-specific survival.94 However, when an induction course of BCG is followed by a series of maintenance doses consisting of weekly BCG given for 3 weeks at 3, 6, 12, 18, 24, 30, and 36 months after induction, disease-free and over-all survival can be prolonged.95 In patients who fail an initial or maintenance course of intravesical therapy, it may be rea-sonable to try another agent; however, one must consider the risk of progression and not delay definitive treatment. Roughly 15% to 30% of patients presenting with non–muscle-invasive tumors will eventually progress to muscle invasion. Radical cys-tectomy remains the most effective single-modality treatment for patients with muscle-invasive bladder cancer, refractory high-risk non–muscle-invasive disease, and especially lymph node–negative disease with a reported 10-year recurrence-free survival of organ-confined lymph node–negative (<pT2N0) dis-ease between 69% and 87%.94,96,97Surgical Considerations. Cystectomy is indicated in the treat-ment of refractory NMIBC or to assert local control for muscle invasive bladder cancer (MIBC).98 Effective local control in the pelvis is achieved in 93% of cases with cystectomy. Indica-tions for partial cystectomy are limited and generally apply to isolated tumors or those within diverticulum. Classic teaching suggests that patients with CIS should not be candidates, though the use of intravesical BCG to treat CIS may have broadened this application. For patients with MIBC, neoadjuvant systemic chemotherapy with M-VAC or gemcitabine and cisplatin (prior to cystectomy) offers a survival advantage when compared to radical cystectomy alone.98Robotic approaches for cystectomy are increasingly used, but the urinary diversion is still usually performed through an open incision. The benefits of the robotic portion are decreased blood loss during the pelvic dissection (due to the pneumoperi-toneum). However, recent evidence (randomized controlled trials of open vs. robot-assisted radical cystectomy) did not demonstrate any difference in oncologic efficacy or complica-tion rates.Complications of bladder cancer surgery involve bladder perforation during transurethral resection of the bladder tumor, which require catheter drainage for several days if small (com-mon) or open repair if large and intraperitoneal (rare). Cys-tectomy and urinary diversion may result in prolonged ileus, bowel obstruction, intestinal anastomotic leak, urine leak, or rectal injury. A urine leak from the ureteroileal anastomoses is a common cause of ileus, intra-abdominal urinoma, abscess formation, and wound dehiscence. Deep venous thrombosis is common after cystectomy due to the advanced age of most patients, proximity of the iliac veins to the resection and lymph node dissection, and the presence of malignancy. The utility of subcutaneous heparin in the perioperative period can minimize the risk of venous thromboembolism. Contemporary series from high volume centers report readmission rates of 25%, complica-tion rates of 50% to 60%, and perioperative mortality in the first 90 days at 5% to 10%.99,100Urinary diversion can be accomplished using an incon-tinent or continent abdominal stoma or orthotopic continent reconstruction. The evolution of patient selection and surgical technique has led to improved outcomes for orthotopic diver-sion, although there are still patients who are better served with an ileal conduit. Motivated patients are considered for ortho-topic neobladder diversion if they have a preoperative serum creatinine less than 2.0 mg/mL, normal preoperative bowel function, a negative urethral margin based on intraoperative frozen section at the time of cystectomy, and an intact sphincter after complete tumor resection.Alternatives to cystectomy include observation, systemic chemotherapy, radiation therapy, or a combination of chemo-therapy and radiation. These modalities may be required in patients who are a poor surgical risk, who refuse surgery, or who are elderly.Bladder preservation using radiation as the definitive ther-apy may be feasible in selected patients. In this context, trimo-dality therapy is preceded by aggressive TURBT and offers an improved rate of survival when performed in conjunction with chemotherapy. Up to 42% 5-year disease-specific survival can be achieved in patients with preserved bladders, with the best overall survival outcome in younger patients with lower stage tumors without lymphovascular or nodal involvement.More recently, immunotherapeutic treatments have shown significant promise in the treatment of locally advanced and metastatic bladder cancer. Five agents have recently been approved for patients who have progressed on or after platinum-based chemotherapy or have progressed within 12 months of neoadjuvant or adjuvant treatment. These agents include PD-L1 inhibitors (atezolizumab, avelumab, durvalumab) and PD-1 inhibitors (nivolumab and pembrolizumab). Response rates for these agents are ∼15% to 20% but may have extended median overall survival as much as 10.3 months when compared to chemotherapy.101,102Testicular CancerTesticular cancer is the most common cancer in men age 20 to 40 years and the second most common cancer in young men age 15 to 19 years. Metastases to the testis (usually lymphoma in older men) are rare. In 2018 there were 9310 new cases and 400 deaths from the disease.91 The incidence of testis cancer varies around the world.103 It contains a heterogeneous group of tumors, of which 95% are germ cell tumors; the rest originate from stromal cells (Leydig or Sertoli cells). Germ cell tumors can be classified as either seminomatous or nonseminomatous. Seminoma constitutes more than 50% of all testis cancer. The Brunicardi_Ch40_p1759-p1782.indd   177101/03/19   6:35 PM 1772SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 40-8. Scrotal ultrasound of the right testis. A heteroge-neous echoic mass is seen.incidence of bilateral GCT is approximately 2.5%.104,105 There are four established risk factors for testis cancer: cryptorchidism, family history of testis cancer, a personal history of testis can-cer, and intratubular germ cell neoplasia. Most patients present with testicular pain or a testicular mass. Respiratory symptoms, back pain, weight loss, or gynecomastia may indicate metastatic disease (10–20%). A testicular mass is considered malignant till proven otherwise. Similarly, retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy in young men should be considered metastatic testicular cancer.Standard initial workup includes scrotal ultrasound (Fig. 40-8) and serum tumor markers (α-fetoprotein, quanti-tative human chorionic gonadotropin, and lactate dehydroge-nase). Most consider percutaneous biopsy contraindicated due to the rare but historical risk of disturbing the natural lymphatic drainage to the retroperitoneum and possible seeding of the scrotum.106 Radical inguinal orchiectomy is the gold standard treatment for excision of the primary tumor. Partial orchiec-tomy through an inguinal approach may be considered in some cases, including a suspected diagnosis of lymphoma. Chest and abdominal axial imaging are the main staging tools. Testicular cancer has a very predictable pattern of spread. Right testicular cancer tends to metastasize to the interaortocaval lymph node, followed by paracaval and paraaortic lymph nodes. Left-sided testicular cancer rarely crosses to the paracaval lymph nodes.107 Clinical TNM staging includes local stage, distant metastasis, and tumor markers.Depending on the stage and histology of the primary tumor, multiple treatment options are available. These include active surveillance, retroperitoneal lymph node dissection (RPLND), and adjuvant chemotherapy or radiation therapy. Active surveillance for localized disease follows a tight sched-ule of physical exams, tumor markers and imaging studies. The cancer recurs in 20% to 30% of patients on active surveillance. The presence of embryonal carcinoma and vascular invasion seem to be interrelated predictors of recurrence.108 Recurrence usually occurs within the first 2 years and in the retroperito-neum.109 Pure seminoma is radiosensitive; stages I, IIa, and IIb disease can be treated with external-beam radiation to the retro-peritoneal nodes. Alternatively, a single dose of carboplatin for stage I seminoma was found to be just as effective as radiation therapy.110 More advanced seminoma is treated with platinum-based systemic chemotherapy.Stages I to IIA nonseminomatous testis cancer is poten-tially cured with RPLND or chemotherapy.111 Persistently high tumor markers after radical orchiectomy or high-stage meta-static germ cell tumors warrant systemic chemotherapy. Due to the high rates of teratoma or viable germ cell tumor, postchemo-therapy bulky masses are resected by RPLND or other surgi-cal procedures. The overall survival rate of localized disease is outstanding (99% at 5 years). Patients with more advanced distant metastatic disease (stage III) have 75% survival rates. The overall prognosis is generally better for seminomatous than nonseminomatous germ cell tumors.112Surgical Considerations. Radical orchiectomy is done through an inguinal incision extending from the external inguinal ring to the internal inguinal ring. The spermatic cord is ligated at the internal ring with long silk sutures for easier identification during a future RPLND. Integrity of the scrotal skin during orchiectomy is important. Complications of radi-cal orchiectomy include scrotal hematoma, chronic pain, and hernia.For RPLND, a midline incision is usually made from the xiphoid process to the pubic symphysis. All the lymphatic tissue is removed from the targeted areas using the classical split and roll technique, and all lumbar vessels are tied. Postganglionic sympathetic nerve sparing is possible in most cases for pres-ervation of ejaculatory function.113 Robotic-assisted RPLND is growing, with faster recovery time and similar short term oncologic results.114 Complications after RPLND include bowel obstruction, excessive bleeding, chylous ascites, and ejaculatory dysfunction.Kidney CancerRenal cell carcinoma (RCC) results in approximately 3.8% of all new cancers, with an estimated 65,340 new cases and 14,970 deaths related to kidney cancer in 2018.91 Despite several advancements with immune-based and targeted molecular ther-apies demonstrating durable clinic responses, RCC still remains primarily a surgical disease and classically does not respond to conventional chemotherapy regimens or radiation therapy.Most patients diagnosed with RCC in the modern era typically present with an incidentally discovered renal mass on abdominal radiographic imaging. Differential diagnosis of a renal mass includes malignant tumors (e.g., RCC, urothelial carcinoma, sarcomas, lymphoma, metastasis), benign tumors (e.g., cysts, angiomyolipoma, oncocytoma), and inflammatory lesions (e.g. abscesses, xanthogranulomatous pyelonephritis, tuberculosis). Renal CT imaging with intravenous contrast remains the single most important radiographic test to delineate the nature of the mass. In general, any solid renal mass that enhances by more than 15 Hounsfield units is an RCC until proven otherwise. However, even if there is contrast enhance-ment on axial imaging, approximately 15% to 30% of solid renal masses are benign on final surgical pathology.115 Renal tumor biopsy can help distinguish between malignant or benign tumors, but this has not been widely adopted by the urological community, despite series showing their high diagnostic yield, concordance with surgical pathology, and safety.116-118 Biopsy remains particularly useful in patients considering surveillance or thermoablative therapy, or in patients with suspicion of metastasis or lymphoma.Major recognized risk factors for RCC include smoking, obesity, and hypertension. Although most RCCs are discovered incidentally, some patients present with signs or symptoms Brunicardi_Ch40_p1759-p1782.indd   177201/03/19   6:35 PM 1773UROLOGYCHAPTER 40which may be the result of local tumor growth (e.g., flank pain, hematuria, perirenal hematoma), paraneoplastic syndromes (e.g., hypertension, weight loss, hypercalcemia, polycythemia/anemia, abnormal liver function tests), or metastatic disease. RCC metastasizes primarily to the lungs, lymph nodes, bone, liver, adrenal glands, and brain. Familial RCC subtypes with classical clinical manifestations are also well described. The von Hippel-Lindau disease, occurring as a result of a mutation in the tumor suppressor gene VHL (3p25-26), commonly mani-fests itself with clear cell RCC, pheochromocytomas, retinal angiomas, central nervous system hemangioblastomas, pancre-atic cysts, and other tumors. Other familial syndromes include hereditary papillary RCC (papillary type 1 RCC), familial leiomyomatosis (papillary type 2 RCC), and Birt-Hogg-Dube syndrome (chromophobe RCC, hybrid oncocytic tumors, and oncocytoma). Familial RCC syndromes should be suspected in younger patients and patients with multicentric and/or bilateral tumors.Clear cell RCC is the most common subtype, accounting for 70% to 80% of all RCCs. Papillary RCC occurs in 10% to 15%, type 1 being associated with a better prognosis, and type 2 a worse prognosis. Other subtypes include chromophobe RCC, collecting duct carcinoma, and unclassified type.RCC may locally progress and cause invasion of the renal capsule and perirenal fat or the collecting system. RCC may also directly progress into the venous system in the form of a tumor thrombus that can extend into the IVC and into the right atrium. Staging is the single most important prognostic factor for RCC.119,120 Studies demonstrate a 70% to 90% 5-year survival rate for organ confined disease (stages I–II), compared to 0% to 10% for patients with systemic metastases (stage IV).119 Other important prognostic factors include histological subtype,121 tumor size, lymph node involvement, and site of metastases.122Management options for small renal masses (<4 cm) includes active surveillance, thermoablative techniques, or sur-gical excision (Fig. 40-9). Percutaneous or laparoscopic ther-moablative techniques (cryoablation, radiofrequency ablation, high-intensity focused ultrasound) have been used to treat small renal masses, but they are associated with an increased risk of local recurrence.123,124Since the first laparoscopic radical nephrectomy described by Clayman et al in 1991,125 minimally invasive Figure 40-9. Computed tomography scan of the abdomen with intravenous and oral contrast. A small mid right posterior mass is seen.Figure 40-10. Intraoperative image of a small renal mass in prepa-ration for partial nephrectomy.surgical approaches, including laparoscopy with robotic assis-tance, have virtually supplanted open procedures for localized RCC (Fig. 40-10). Partial nephrectomy is most appropriate for patients with small tumors, solitary kidney, bilateral tumors, or familial RCC. Some tumors may not be amenable to abla-tive therapies or partial nephrectomy, in which case radical nephrectomy would be employed.126Radical nephrectomy involves removal of the entire kidney with dissection external to Gerota’s fascia. The colon is retracted medially after incising the white line of Toldt, fol-lowed by meticulous hilar dissection with ligation of the renal artery and vein. The adrenal gland is usually spared unless the tumor involves the gland or is immediately adjacent to it. Lymphadenectomy remains controversial, and it is usually per-formed in patients with adenopathy on preoperative imaging or in patients with palpable lymph nodes intraoperatively. In partial nephrectomy, renal artery clamping is often performed to minimize blood loss while the tumor is excised. The goal is to remove the tumor with negative surgical margins while minimizing warm ischemia time to preserve as many func-tional nephrons as possible. With increasing experience, partial nephrectomy is now also performed on much more complex renal masses, including completely endophytic, central, and hilar tumors. Very large tumors or tumors with vena-caval thrombi can be removed robotically in experienced hands,127,128 but most are still removed using an open approach.In minimally invasive surgery, both partial and radical nephrectomy can be done via either a transperitoneal or retro-peritoneal approach. In open cases, a subcostal flank approach provides direct access to the retroperitoneum and is preferred for lower pole exposure, but it can limit access to the hilum, particularly with large renal masses. The anterior subcostal approach is preferred for larger renal masses. Bilateral ante-rior subcostal incisions (chevron incision) provides excellent vascular exposure (e.g., IVC thrombectomy, bilateral tumors). Midline incisions are usually reserved for renal trauma and for reconstructive procedures. Less commonly performed, the thoracoabdominal approach involves access usually above the 10th rib and is used for large upper pole or adrenal masses, IVC thrombectomy, or tumors involving adjacent structures. Complications include injury to adjacent organs, and for partial nephrectomy, pseudoaneurysms/arteriovenous fistula formation and delayed urinary leak.Brunicardi_Ch40_p1759-p1782.indd   177301/03/19   6:35 PM 1774SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIProstate CancerProstate cancer is the most common noncutaneous cancer in men; 164,690 new cases of prostate cancer were diagnosed in 2018 and 29,430 men died from their disease.91 Screening for prostate cancer with detailed history, digital rectal examination, and serum prostate specific antigen (PSA) tests have changed the natural history of the disease. Since the introduction of pros-tate cancer screening in the mid-1980s, the incidence of meta-static prostate cancer has decreased by half. Currently 99% of newly diagnosed patients will survive more than 10 years.91While early screening for African American patients or patients with a family history of prostate cancer is widely accepted, screening for all men is more controversial. Despite data from large randomized clinical trials showing a decrease in mortality after prostate cancer screening, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommended against the routine use of prostate cancer screening.129 Its recommendation was based on the harm and toxicity of overtreatment of nonlethal disease.130 The American Urologic Association subsequently recom-mended informed and shared decision-making and screening for high-risk disease for men between the ages of 55 and 69 with a life expectancy more than 10 years.131If the digital rectal examination is abnormal or if the PSA level is above expected for patients’ age and size of the prostate, a prostate biopsy is usually performed. Newer tests such as the 4K score, prostate health index, and PCA3 are sometimes used to inform the decision to proceed with biopsy. Recently, MRI fusion transrectal ultrasound-guided biopsy improved the accu-racy of prostate biopsy.Since most patients survive the disease, risk stratification systems are routinely utilized to guide staging and treatment. Clinical TNM stage, serum PSA levels, and the Gleason grading system are utilized in clinical practice. More recently, genetic testing on biopsy specimen was included in national guidelines. Historically, the Gleason scoring (GS) system included a pri-mary and secondary score based on the most common and sec-ond most common histologic patterns. Grades range from 1 for the most differentiated to 5 for the least. The grades are added to create a resultant Gleason score.132 However, since no patients are assigned a score of less than 5 anymore, the grading system has been modified to a scale from 1 to 5. Grade one includes a GS of 3 + 3 = 6 or less, grade 2 for GS 3 + 4, grade 3 for GS 4 + 3, grade 4 for GS 4 + 4 and grade 5 for Gleason score of 9 or 10.133 Imaging studies like CT and bone scans are used to rule out metastatic disease in high-risk patients. The two most common sites of metastatic disease are pelvic/retroperitoneal lymph nodes and boney structures. Modern CT PET scans have a limited role at this point.Treatment for localized prostate cancer is guided by can-cer aggressiveness and patient’s preferences. Active sur-veillance is recommended for patients with low-risk disease grade 1–2, early-stage disease (cT1c), and small volume disease as determined by biopsy. Large prospective cohorts and randomized clinical trials have established the safety of this approach.134,135 The risk of progression to metastatic disease with close follow-up and repeat prostate biopsies is less than 2% in over 12 years. Radical prostatectomy and pelvic lymph node dissection (robotic, laparoscopic, or open), image modulated radiation therapy (IMRT), and brachytherapy are the standard of care for curative treatments. All provide equal cancer specific survival for low and intermediate risk cancers. For higher risk prostate cancer patients, both surgery and IMRT with androgen 8Figure 40-11. The da Vinci Surgical System used commonly for radical prostatectomy.deprivation therapy provide excellent cancer control. Cryother-apy, or high intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU) and focal therapy are emerging options that may be acceptable for some patients with low-risk disease.Level I evidence has established the role of adjuvant radia-tion therapy after radical prostatectomy for patients with posi-tive surgical margins, extracapsular extension, and high-grade disease.136,137 After definitive treatment of localized prostate cancer, rising PSA is an extremely reliable indicator of recur-rence or progression. However, it may take over 10 years for metastasis to appear on imaging studies.138 Once prostate cancer  metastasizes, it is no longer curable. Medications that lower serum testosterone or androgen receptor blockers are able to control the disease, often for years. In addition, chemotherapy, immunotherapy, and radioisotope therapy at different stages of the disease increase the life expectancy of the patients or improve the quality of life. The cancer inevitably becomes resis-tant to these treatments. Nevertheless, patients with incurable prostate cancer can live many years, and a large number die of causes other than prostate cancer.Over the past few years, we have witnessed major devel-opments in the management of metastatic castrate resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC). New agents that interrupt androgen synthesis (e.g., abiraterone acetate)139,140 and new modulators of androgen receptors (e.g., enzalutamide)141,142 have significantly improved the life expectancy of patients with both androgen sensitive and resistant metastatic prostate cancer. Similarly, innovations in immunotherapy and chemotherapy delivery have advanced the management of advanced prostate cancer.Surgical Considerations. Open radical retropubic prostatec-tomy is done through a lower midline incision from below the umbilicus to the pubic symphysis. After entering the space of Retzius, the external iliac, obturator, and internal iliac lymph nodes are removed. The cavernosal nerves located on the pos-terolateral surface of the prostate capsule are usually spared on the side(s) with low risk of extracapsular extension of the dis-ease. Then the prostate is removed in a retrograde fashion, and the urethrovesical anastomosis is completed in an interrupted fashion.Robotic radical prostatectomy using the da Vinci robotic surgical system (Fig. 40-11) is now the most common tech-nique (over 90% of all patients in the United States) for the Brunicardi_Ch40_p1759-p1782.indd   177401/03/19   6:35 PM 1775UROLOGYCHAPTER 40surgical treatment of localized prostate cancer. Robotic surgery has lower blood loss and faster convalescence, less bladder neck contracture, and lower early postoperative complications. Some data show a faster return of continence and lower rates of erectile dysfunction. The most common postoperative compli-cations include infection, urine leaks, ileus, lymphocele, and, very rarely, rectal or ureteral injury.To minimize the impact of these side effects, researchers have used different ablative techniques to obliterate the areas of significant cancer. By avoiding the need for whole gland radia-tion or removal, these focal ablative therapies aim to balance the long-term impact on quality of life with survival. Laser, high-focused ultrasound, cryotherapy, and photodynamic ablations have showed similar results in early studies.Urethral CancerUrethral carcinoma (UC) is a rare disease, the true incidence of which is unknown. It accounts for less than 1% of genito-urinary cancers.143,144 It is a disease of the older adult. Risk fac-tors include chronic inflammation from sexually transmitted diseases (human papillomavirus 16 and 18 in squamous cell carcinoma),145 chronic urethral stricture, and indwelling cath-eterization. Furthermore, urethral diverticulum and recurrent urinary tract infections increase the risk for women.The majority of patients present with irritative and obstructive voiding symptoms, bleeding, or a palpable mass. Urothelial carcinoma is the most common histology; 29% of women have adenocarcinoma, and both genders can have squamous cell carcinoma. Untreated or refractory UC typically metastasizes through lymphatic channels to the inguinal and pelvic lymph nodes and hematologically to distant organs. Cys-toscopic biopsy establishes the diagnoses. An MRI of the pelvis is extremely helpful for defining local extension of the disease while CT scans of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis identify meta-static disease. Finally, it is also important to evaluate the entire urinary tract.The 5-year overall survival rates for distal urethral tumors is significantly better than for proximal cancers, 68% versus 40%, respectively.143,146 The median 5-year cancer-specific sur-vival is approximately 46%.144 Prognosis is dictated by patients’ age, race, clinical stage, and location of the tumor.If feasible, local endoscopic resection for low-volume, low-stage disease is preferable. Adjuvant intravesical instilla-tion of Bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) should be considered for patients with proximal noninvasive disease.147 Due to the paucity of robust data, management of locally advanced dis-ease is more challenging. Either radical cystectomy or radiations are acceptable options. Unfortunately, local recurrence rates are high after aggressive monotherapy (63%).148 More recent data support the use of multimodal therapy.149,150 Small series of combinations of perioperative chemotherapy, surgery, and radiation indicate the best cancer control.151COMMON UROLOGIC CONDITIONSUrinary Incontinence and Voiding DysfunctionUrinary incontinence is defined as the involuntary loss of urine. This is more common in women than men for a variety of rea-sons, including anatomic differences such as a shorter urethra and risk factors such as childbirth. Many patients may also suf-fer from bothersome symptoms without leakage of urine such as overactive bladder (frequency and urgency of urination and often nocturia), or obstructive symptoms such as hesitancy, weak stream, and incomplete bladder emptying. These condi-tions can have a negative impact on quality of life,152-154 but they are also associated with serious health issues, including depres-sion, anxiety, social isolation,155 and even falls and fractures in the elderly.156Urinary incontinence can be divided into several catego-ries, although patients (particularly women) may suffer from more than one type.157 Urge incontinence is the involuntary loss of urine associated with an urge to void. Stress leakage occurs with increases in intra-abdominal pressure, such as coughing or sneezing, and may relate to loss of sphincteric function, urethral hypermobility from pelvic floor laxity (often related to parity), or following prostate surgery in men. Overflow incontinence occurs in the setting of obstruction, with urine leakage occurring with movement causing over-flow of urine from a distended bladder. Genitourinary fistulas typically result in the most severe form of incontinence with constant leakage of urine regardless of presence or absence of activity or movement. Examples include vesicovaginal or ureterovaginal fistulae most often due to gynecologic surgery, or rectourethral fistulae in men from cancer, radiation, or sur-gical intervention.Treatments for urinary incontinence and voiding dysfunc-tion are varied depending on the etiology, severity, and bother of the symptom. Urge leakage and overactive blad-der can be treated by (a) behavioral modification (timed void-ing, adjustment to fluid intake, timing of diuretic medication, and improved constipation); (b) bladder retraining (pelvic floor physical therapy158); (c) medications (anticholinergics159 and β-3 agonists160); or (d) minimally invasive procedures (sacral neuro-modulation,161 percutaneous tibial nerve stimulation,162 or blad-der chemodenervation with detrusor botulinum toxin injection163).Stress incontinence in women can be addressed by pelvic floor strengthening exercises, vaginally placed removable sup-port with a pessary, injection of urethral bulking agent, or sling procedures using polypropylene mesh or autologous tissue. In men, stress leakage is due to either iatrogenic causes or neuro-logic disease. Treatments include strengthening exercises as in women, slings, or implantation of an artificial urinary sphincter.  Overflow incontinence treatment is directed at the cause of obstruction, often benign prostatic enlargement in men, with bladder drainage, medications such as α-blockers or 5-α reduc-tase inhibitors, or surgical removal of the obstructing gland. When fistulas are present, adherence to surgical principles such as tension-free multilayer closure, nonoverlapping suture lines, and tissue interposition when possible offers the highest likeli-hood for success.Erectile DysfunctionErectile dysfunction (ED) is defined as the inability to achieve and maintain an erection adequate for sexual intercourse. For-merly, this was known as a type of sexual dysfunction, but it is now understood that ED may be an early symptom of cardiovas-cular disease due to endothelial dysfunction. ED is a common disease for men later in life with a prevalence rate believed to range anywhere from 30% to 50% depending on age. Two large population-based studies, the Massachusetts Male Aging Study (MMAS) and the European Male Aging Study (EMAS), exam-ined men age 40 to 79 years and found that ED rates increased with age.164,1659Brunicardi_Ch40_p1759-p1782.indd   177501/03/19   6:35 PM 1776SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIErections are triggered via sexual stimulation setting off a cascade of events. Nitric oxide is released from nerve fibers and activating guanylyl cyclase leading to an increase in cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP). The cGMP pathway leads to smooth muscle relaxation within the corpora cavernosa allow-ing blood to fill the lacunar spaces. Once the lacunar spaces are full, the expanded tissue compresses the subtunical venules thereby trapping blood within the penis and blocking venous out-flow. Phosphodiesterase type-5 hydrolyzes cGMP to reverse the process.166There are multiple mechanisms leading to ED including vasculogenic, neurogenic, iatrogenic, and psychologic, but often it is multifactorial. Vasculogenic ED can be a result of cardiovascular disease and endothelial dysfunction leading to cavernosal artery insufficiency. Diseases such as hypertension (odds ratio [OR] 1.35–3.04), diabetes (OR 2.57), dyslipidemia (OR 1.83), and tobacco abuse (OR 1.4) all may increase the risk for ED.167 Nerve injuries due to diseases (diabetes, Parkin-son’s, multiple sclerosis, spinal cord injury) or surgery (radical prostatectomy, abdominoperineal resection, and other radical pelvic procedures) can lead to interruptions in the nerve signal-ing that causes nitric oxide release and therefore lead to ED. Iatrogenic causes may be a result of surgery (described earlier) or medication use, as in some antihypertensives, opiates, anti-androgens, and psychotherapeutics.168 Psychogenic ED, a com-mon reaction to stress and anxiety, is a result of noradrenaline release causing smooth muscle contraction and thereby inhibit-ing erections.169Treatment for ED begins with lifestyle modification by identifying any reversible risk factors such as stress/anxiety, medications, unhealthy diets, lack of exercise, and tobacco abuse.170 Medical therapy then begins with the use of phospho-diesterase type-5 inhibitors (PDE5i). These work by prolonging the activity of cGMP, leading to continued smooth muscle relax-ation allowing more blood inflow into the penis. Common drugs include sildenafil, tadalafil, vardenafil, and avanafil. They differ in time to peak concentration (lowest in avanafil, sildenafil, and vardenafil), half-life (highest in tadalafil), and the impact of lip-ids in foods (sildenafil and vardenafil must be taken on an empty stomach). Common side effects include a headache, heartburn, facial flushing, nasal congestion, and myalgias.171 Patients on nitrate-containing medications should not be given PDE5i due to the risk of severe hypotension. Vision related conditions like macular degeneration, retinitis pigmentosa, and nonarter-itic anterior ischemic optic neuropathy are cause for increased awareness and possible ophthalmologic consult.172Second-line options for ED include vacuum erection devices (VED), intracavernosal injections (ICI), and intraure-thral suppositories. The VED is a mechanical device composed of a cylinder placed around the penis which then uses a vacuum to create negative pressure and pull blood into the penis. In order for blood to stay in the penis after the vacuum is released, a tight constriction band must be placed at the base of the penis. There is poor compliance due to difficulty with use and the common reactions of petechia, temporary paresthesia, color changes, and the penis being cold to touch.173,174 Alternatively, ICI uses vasoactive substances (prostaglandin E1 [alprostadil], papaverine, and phentolamine) either alone or in combination to trigger the erection cascade.168 Patients are trained to give themselves a self-injection when they want an erection, and it takes approximately 5 to 15 minutes until they are fully rigid if they respond. With ICI, there is greater concern for prolonged Figure 40-12. A three-piece penile implant for the treatment of erectile dysfunction. The prosthesis is composed of two cylinders placed in the penis, a fluid reservoir placed in the pelvis (upper left), and a pump placed within the scrotum (bottom left).erection or priapism, so dose titration must be closely moni-tored. Intraurethral suppositories are composed of alprostadil in the form of a pellet which is then placed in the urethra and mas-saged for absorption. With suppository use, there are concerns about efficacy (only 46–65%) and compliance due to a burning sensation that limits the interest of some users.175,176Third-line treatment of ED is with surgery placement of a penile prosthesis. There are three main types (malleable, two-piece, and three-piece). The malleable device does not inflate/deflate and merely bends in and out of position for intercourse. The two-piece and three-piece devices are inflatable and dif-fer on the presence of a separate fluid reservoir. The two-piece device has the fluid maintained in the lower half of the penile cylinders, whereas, the three-piece device has a fluid reservoir placed in the pelvis or abdominal wall (Fig. 40-12). Overall, the inflatable prosthesis has high patient and partner satisfaction rates, >92% and >91%, respectively.177PEDIATRIC UROLOGYHypospadiasHypospadias, a condition which may be considered a form of incomplete maturation of the genitalia, is a common abnormal-ity that occurs in 1 out of 250 to 300 newborn boys. The most obvious aspect of hypospadias is a urethral opening that is not at the tip of the glans, and 70% to 80% of affected babies will have a meatus on the mid to distal shaft or proximal glans. A lesser number will have more proximal openings, whether penoscrotal, scrotal, or perineal. In addition to an abnormally located meatus, boys usually have deficient ventral foreskin. Associated penile Brunicardi_Ch40_p1759-p1782.indd   177601/03/19   6:35 PM 1777UROLOGYCHAPTER 40curvature, more common in the severe varieties, is referred to as chordee.No diagnostic studies are needed for the majority of boys with hypospadias as there is typically no increased risk of renal or bladder anomalies. Children with associated cryptorchidism, especially with proximal hypospadias and a nonpalpable tes-tis, have an increased risk of a having a coexisting disorder of sexual differentiation (DSD) and need to undergo a thorough evaluation including hormonal studies, karyotype, and pelvic ultrasonography.178Distal hypospadias can usually be repaired in one stage with success rates of greater than 95%. Most would advocate a staged approach to proximal hypospadias with correction of penile curvature at the first stage and formal urethral reconstruc-tion at the second.179 Adults with corrected hypospadias usually have normal sexual function and fertility.Urinary Tract Infections in ChildrenUrinary tract infections (UTI) are common in children, and there is a greater chance of underlying anatomic abnormalities. Children may have conditions such as vesicoureteral reflux, ureteropelvic junction obstruction, ureteroceles, or ectopic ure-ters as causes of these infections. Because of this association, in the past all children with febrile infections would undergo complete evaluations including renal ultrasonography (US) as well as invasive studies such as voiding cystourethrogra-phy (VCUG). However, defining pyelonephritis as having a positive renal cortical scan, only 30% to 40% of children with febrile UTI will have reflux. Thus the majority of children with febrile infections, and a greater percentage of those with afe-brile infections (cystitis), will be anatomically normal.180 These data have led to a change in imaging guidelines for children with UTI.Guidelines put out by the American Academy of Pediat-rics have markedly changed the way children with infections are evaluated.181 These guidelines suggest that infants less than 2 months of age with febrile infections should undergo both a renal US and VCUG. Children between 2 months and 2 years who have their first documented infection only need have a renal ultrasound performed. A VCUG is only needed if there are abnormalities detected on the ultrasound such as hydrone-phrosis, scarring, or other evidence of anatomic abnormality. A VCUG may also be performed if a child has recurrent infections despite empirical treatment. These guidelines do not address children older than 2 years of age but one can assume that simi-lar algorithms of treatment would be appropriate.There is now greater understanding that most children with UTIs, whether pyelonephritis or cystitis, have some ele-ment of bladder and/or bowel dysfunction as the major factor in the development of the infection. Thus, all children with UTIs need to have a thorough assessment of daily bladder and bowel habits. The latter may be difficult to ascertain in younger children, but bowel dysfunction, even subclinical, may be the most important factor in the development of UTIs. Behavioral therapies such as regular and complete voiding in conjunction with a bowel program should be considered the mainstay of the prevention of infections as opposed to prophylactic antibiotics.Prenatal HydronephrosisAntenatal imaging will show hydronephrosis in nearly 1% of all babies. Though the majority of children will have benign hydro-nephrosis of no clinical significance, it may also be related to vesicoureteral reflux, ureteropelvic junction obstruction, ectopic ureter/ureteroceles, and other upper tract abnormalities. Typi-cally, nothing needs to be done for these children until after birth, at which point a baseline renal ultrasound can be per-formed. Other studies such as a VCUG or Lasix renal scans can then be done depending on the degree of dilation. Diagnosis of upper tract obstruction is usually based on progressive worsen-ing of dilation or renal function on serial examinations.Special consideration must be given for children with bilateral hydronephrosis or hydronephrosis associated with a solitary kidney, especially if linked to oligohydramnios. Since fetal urine production accounts for much of the amniotic fluid, low levels can be a sign of a severe abnormality of the urinary tract. Reduced amniotic fluid is of great consequence since nor-mal lung development is dependent on normal amniotic fluid volumes and children with oligohydramnios can be born with significant pulmonary insufficiency. Boys with bilateral hydro-nephrosis and low amniotic fluid are at high risk for having posterior urethral valves (PUV). Boys with PUV have as much as a 25% risk of developing end stage renal disease at some point in their lives.182 Prenatal intervention such as placement of vesicoamniotic shunts have not been shown to reduce the risk of renal failure.CryptorchidismCryptorchidism or undescended testes (UDT) is a common condition occurring in 3% of full term and 30% of premature babies. Many of these testes will descend spontaneously due to the normal gonadotropin release that occurs in the first few months of life, so the true incidence is roughly 1% of boys. Untreated cryptorchidism will lead to testis damage, and there is evidence that permanent changes may occur by 3 years of age. Ideally, surgical treatment should occur prior to this age. UDT is usually an isolated finding, but it may occur as a part of a systemic condition such as Prader-Willi, Eagle-Barrett, or other such complex multisystem syndrome. Surgery is the treatment of choice; hormonal treatment has no role.The consequences of untreated cryptorchidism include infertility and malignant degeneration. One study on fertility suggested that men with a history of unilateral cryptorchidism will have no difference in paternity rates compared to normal controls. In contrast, men with bilateral cryptorchidism have up to a 50% rate of infertility.183 There is data to suggest that orchidopexy in the first year of life is associated with better total sperm counts in adulthood.184 With regard to malignancy, untreated UDT has a fivefold increase risk of tumor develop-ment compared to the normal population. However, there is data to suggest that prepubertal orchidopexy is protective and that these boys only have a twofold greater risk.185REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Schaeffer A, Matulewicz R, Klumpp D. Infections of the urinary tract. In: Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Partin AW, et al, eds. Campbell-Walsh Urology. 11th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.	2.	Polackwich AS, Shoskes DA. Chronic prostatitis/chronic pel-vic pain syndrome: a review of evaluation and therapy. Pros-tate Cancer Prostatic Dis. 2016;19(2):132-138.	3.	Link R, Rosen T. Cutaneous diseases of the external genitalia. In: Wein AJ KL, Partin AW, et al, ed. Campbell-Walsh Urology. 11 ed. Philadelphia, Penn: Elsevier; 2016.Brunicardi_Ch40_p1759-p1782.indd   177701/03/19   6:35 PM 1778SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	4.	Scales CD, Smith AC, Hanley JM, Saigal CS, Project UDiA. Prevalence of kidney stones in the United States. Eur Urol. 2012;62(1):160-165.	5.	Pearle MS, Calhoun EA, Curhan GC, Project UDoA. Uro-logic diseases in America project: urolithiasis. J Urol. 2005;173(3):848-857.	6.	Scales CD, Curtis LH, Norris RD, et al. Changing gender prevalence of stone disease. J Urol. 2007;177(3):979-982.	7.	Taylor EN, Stampfer MJ, Curhan GC. Diabetes mellitus and the risk of nephrolithiasis. Kidney Int. 2005;68(3):1230-1235.	8.	Taylor EN, Stampfer MJ, Curhan GC. Obesity, weight gain, and the risk of kidney stones. JAMA. 2005;293(4):455-462.	9.	Heilberg IP. Treatment of patients with uric acid stones. Urolithiasis. 2016;44(1):57-63.	10.	Fulgham PF, Assimos DG, Pearle MS, Preminger GM. Clini-cal effectiveness protocols for imaging in the management of ureteral calculous disease: AUA technology assessment.  J Urol. 2013;189(4):1203-1213.	11.	Poletti PA, Platon A, Rutschmann OT, Schmidlin FR, Iselin CE, Becker CD. Low-dose versus standard-dose CT protocol in patients with clinically suspected renal colic. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2007;188(4):927-933.	12.	Pearle MS, Goldfarb DS, Assimos DG, et al. Medical management of kidney stones: AUA guideline. J Urol. 2014;192(2):316-324.	13.	Hubner WA, Irby P, Stoller ML. Natural history and current concepts for the treatment of small ureteral calculi. Eur Urol. 1993;24(2):172-176.	14.	Miller OF, Kane CJ. Time to stone passage for observed ureteral calculi: a guide for patient education. J Urol. 1999;162 (3 Pt 1):688-690; discussion 690-681.	15.	Assimos D, Krambeck A, Miller NL, et al. Surgical management of stones: American Urological Associa-tion/Endourological Society guideline, PART I. J Urol. 2016;196(4):1153-1160.	16.	Assimos D, Krambeck A, Miller NL, et al. Surgical management of stones: American Urological Associa-tion/Endourological Society guideline, PART II. J Urol. 2016;196(4):1161-1169.	17.	Lu Z, Dong Z, Ding H, Wang H, Ma B, Wang Z. Tamsulosin for ureteral stones: a systematic review and meta-analysis of a randomized controlled trial. Urol Int. 2012;89(1):107-115.	18.	Albala DM, Assimos DG, Clayman RV, et al. Lower pole I: a prospective randomized trial of extracorporeal shock wave lith-otripsy and percutaneous nephrostolithotomy for lower pole nephrolithiasis-initial results. J Urol. 2001;166(6):2072-2080.	19.	Ozturk U, Sener NC, Goktug HN, Nalbant I, Gucuk A, Imamoglu MA. Comparison of percutaneous nephroli-thotomy, shock wave lithotripsy, and retrograde intrarenal surgery for lower pole renal calculi 10-20 mm. Urol Int. 2013;91(3):345-349.	20.	Egan KB. The epidemiology of benign prostatic hyperplasia associated with lower urinary tract symptoms: prevalence and incident rates. Urol Clin North Am. 2016;43(3):289-297.	21.	Barry MJ, Fowler FJ, O’Leary MP, et al. The American Urological Association symptom index for benign prostatic hyperplasia. The Measurement Committee of the American Urological Association. J Urol. 1992;148(5):1549-1557;  discussion 1564.	22.	O’Leary M. The importance of standardisation and validation of symptom scores and quality of life: the urologist’s point of view. Eur Urol. 1997;32(suppl 2):48-49.	23.	McVary KT, Roehrborn CG, Avins AL, et al. Update on AUA guideline on the management of benign prostatic hyperplasia. J Urol. 2011;185(5):1793-1803.	24.	Nickel JC, Herschorn S, Corcos J, et al. Canadian guidelines for the management of benign prostatic hyperplasia. Can J Urol. 2005;12(3):2677-2683.	25.	Djavan B, Marberger M. A meta-analysis on the efficacy and tolerability of alpha1-adrenoceptor antagonists in patients with lower urinary tract symptoms suggestive of benign pros-tatic obstruction. Eur Urol. 1999;36(1):1-13.	26.	Roehrborn CG, Boyle P, Nickel JC, Hoefner K, Andriole G, Investigators AAaAS. Efficacy and safety of a dual inhibitor of 5-alpha-reductase types 1 and 2 (dutasteride) in men with benign prostatic hyperplasia. Urology. 2002;60(3):434-441.	27.	McConnell JD, Roehrborn CG, Bautista OM, et al. The long-term effect of doxazosin, finasteride, and combination therapy on the clinical progression of benign prostatic hyperplasia.  N Engl J Med. 2003;349(25):2387-2398.	28.	Roehrborn CG, Barkin J, Siami P, et al. Clinical outcomes after combined therapy with dutasteride plus tamsulo-sin or either monotherapy in men with benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) by baseline characteristics: 4-year results from the randomized, double-blind combination of Avodart and Tamsulosin (CombAT) trial. BJU Int. 2011;107(6):946-954.	29.	McVary KT, Monnig W, Camps JL, Young JM, Tseng LJ, van den Ende G. Sildenafil citrate improves erectile function and urinary symptoms in men with erectile dysfunction and lower urinary tract symptoms associated with benign pros-tatic hyperplasia: a randomized, double-blind trial. J Urol. 2007;177(3):1071-1077.	30.	Wang C. Phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors and benign prostatic hyperplasia. Curr Opin Urol. 2010;20(1):49-54.	31.	Wasson JH, Reda DJ, Bruskewitz RC, Elinson J, Keller AM, Henderson WG. A comparison of transurethral surgery with watchful waiting for moderate symptoms of benign prostatic hyperplasia. The Veterans Affairs Cooperative Study Group on Transurethral Resection of the Prostate. N Engl J Med. 1995;332(2):75-79.	32.	Montorsi F, Naspro R, Salonia A, et al. Holmium laser enu-cleation versus transurethral resection of the prostate: results from a 2-center, prospective, randomized trial in patients with obstructive benign prostatic hyperplasia. J Urol. 2004;172 (5 pt 1):1926-1929.	33.	Tan AH, Gilling PJ, Kennett KM, Frampton C, Westenberg AM, Fraundorfer MR. A randomized trial comparing holmium laser enucleation of the prostate with transurethral resection of the prostate for the treatment of bladder outlet obstruction secondary to benign prostatic hyperplasia in large glands  (40 to 200 grams). J Urol. 2003;170(4 Pt 1):1270-1274.	34.	Elzayat EA, Elhilali MM. Holmium laser enucleation of the prostate (HoLEP): long-term results, reoperation rate, and possible impact of the learning curve. Eur Urol. 2007;52(5):1465-1471.	35.	Anger JT, Buckley JC, Santucci RA, Elliott SP, Saigal CS,  Urologic Diseases in America P. Trends in stricture management among male Medicare beneficiaries: underuse of urethro-plasty? Urology. 2011;77(2):481-485.	36.	Fenton AS, Morey AF, Aviles R, Garcia CR. Anterior ure-thral strictures: etiology and characteristics. Urology. 2005;65(6):1055-1058.	37.	Nuss GR, Granieri MA, Zhao LC, Thum DJ, Gonzalez CM. Presenting symptoms of anterior urethral stricture disease: a disease specific, patient reported questionnaire to measure outcomes. J Urol. 2012;187(2):559-562.	38.	Bertrand LA, Warren GJ, Voelzke BB, et al. Lower urinary tract pain and anterior urethral stricture disease: prevalence and effects of urethral reconstruction. J Urol. 2015;193(1):184-189.	39.	Pal DK, Kumar S, Ghosh B. Direct visual internal urethrotomy: is it a durable treatment option? Urol Ann. 2017;9(1):18-22.	40.	Hudak SJ, Atkinson TH, Morey AF. Repeat transurethral manipulation of bulbar urethral strictures is associated with increased stricture complexity and prolonged disease dura-tion. J Urol. 2012;187(5):1691-1695.Brunicardi_Ch40_p1759-p1782.indd   177801/03/19   6:35 PM 1779UROLOGYCHAPTER 40	41.	Pipitone N, Vaglio A, Salvarani C. Retroperitoneal fibrosis. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol. 2012;26(4):439-448.	42.	Cronin CG, Lohan DG, Blake MA, Roche C, McCarthy P,  Murphy JM. Retroperitoneal fibrosis: a review of clini-cal features and imaging findings. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2008;191(2):423-431.	43.	Li KP, Zhu J, Zhang JL, Huang F. Idiopathic retroperitoneal fibrosis (RPF): clinical features of 61 cases and literature review. Clin Rheumatol. 2011;30(5):601-605.	44.	Elsamra SE, Leavitt DA, Motato HA, et al. Stenting for malig-nant ureteral obstruction: Tandem, metal or metal-mesh stents. Int J Urol. 2015;22(7):629-636.	45.	Lopez-Huertas HL, Polcari AJ, Acosta-Miranda A, Turk TM. Metallic ureteral stents: a cost-effective method of managing benign upper tract obstruction. J Endourol. 2010;24(3):483-485.	46.	Taylor ER, Benson AD, Schwartz BF. Cost analysis of metal-lic ureteral stents with 12 months of follow-up. J Endourol. 2012;26(7):917-921.	47.	Baumgarten AS, Hakky TS, Carrion RE, Lockhart JL, Spiess PE. A single-institution experience with metallic ureteral stents: a cost-effective method of managing deficiencies in ureteral drainage. Int Braz J Urol. 2014;40(2):225-231.	48.	McAninch JW. Genitourinary trauma. World J Urol. 1999;17(2):65.	49.	Breyer BN, McAninch JW, Elliott SP, Master VA. Minimally invasive endovascular techniques to treat acute renal hemor-rhage. J Urol. 2008;179(6):2248-2252; discussion 2253.	50.	Hotaling JM, Sorensen MD, Smith TG 3rd, Rivara FP,  Wessells H, Voelzke BB. Analysis of diagnostic angiography and angioembolization in the acute management of renal trauma using a national data set. J Urol. 2011;185(4):1316-1320.	51.	Moore EE, Shackford SR, Pachter HL, et al. Organ injury scaling: spleen, liver, and kidney. J Trauma. 1989;29(12): 1664-1666.	52.	Anselmo da Costa I, Amend B, Stenzl A, Bedke J. Contem-porary management of acute kidney trauma. Journal of Acute Disease. 2016;5(1):29-36.	53.	Jansen JO, Inaba K, Resnick S, et al. Selective non-operative management of abdominal gunshot wounds: survey of prac-tise. Injury. 2013;44(5):639-644.	54.	Dugi DD 3rd, Morey AF, Gupta A, Nuss GR, Sheu GL, Pruitt JH. American Association for the Surgery of Trauma grade 4 renal injury substratification into grades 4a (low risk) and 4b (high risk). J Urol. 2010;183(2):592-597.	55.	McClung CD, Hotaling JM, Wang J, Wessells H, Voelzke BB. Contemporary trends in the immediate surgical management of renal trauma using a national database. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2013;75(4):602-606.	56.	Atala A, Miller FB, Richardson JD, Bauer B, Harty J, Amin M. Preliminary vascular control for renal trauma. Surg Gyne-col Obstet. 1991;172(5):386-390.	57.	Elliott SP, McAninch JW. Ureteral injuries from external violence: the 25-year experience at San Francisco General Hospital. J Urol. 2003;170(4 Pt 1):1213-1216.	58.	Elliott SP, McAninch JW. Ureteral injuries: external and iat-rogenic. Urol Clin North Am. 2006;33(1):55-66, vi.	59.	Mauck RJ, Hudak SJ, Terlecki RP, Morey AF. Central role of Boari bladder flap and downward nephropexy in upper ure-teral reconstruction. J Urol. 2011;186(4):1345-1349.	60.	Morey AF, Iverson AJ, Swan A, et al. Bladder rupture after blunt trauma: guidelines for diagnostic imaging. J Trauma. 2001;51(4):683-686.	61.	Quagliano PV, Delair SM, Malhotra AK. Diagnosis of blunt bladder injury: A prospective comparative study of com-puted tomography cystography and conventional retrograde cystography. J Trauma. 2006;61(2):410-421; discussion 421-412.	62.	Wirth GJ, Peter R, Poletti PA, Iselin CE. Advances in the man-agement of blunt traumatic bladder rupture: experience with 36 cases. BJU Int. 2010;106(9):1344-1349.	63.	Inaba K, McKenney M, Munera F, et al. Cystogram follow-up in the management of traumatic bladder disruption. J Trauma. 2006;60(1):23-28.	64.	Elgammal MA. Straddle injuries to the bulbar urethra: management and outcome in 53 patients. Int Braz J Urol. 2009;35(4):450-458.	65.	Mouraviev VB, Coburn M, Santucci RA. The treatment of posterior urethral disruption associated with pelvic fractures: comparative experience of early realignment versus delayed urethroplasty. J Urol. 2005;173(3):873-876.	66.	Koraitim MM. Effect of early realignment on length and delayed repair of postpelvic fracture urethral injury. Urology. 2012;79(4):912-915.	67.	Morey AF, Brandes S, Dugi DD, 3rd, et al. Urotrauma: AUA guideline. J Urol. 2014;192(2):327-335.	68.	Nasser TA, Mostafa T. Delayed surgical repair of penile frac-ture under local anesthesia. J Sex Med. 2008;5(10):2464-2469.	69.	el-Assmy A, el-Tholoth HS, Mohsen T, Ibrahiem el HI. Does timing of presentation of penile fracture affect outcome of surgical intervention? Urology. 2011;77(6):1388-1391.	70.	Buckley JC, McAninch JW. Use of ultrasonography for the diagnosis of testicular injuries in blunt scrotal trauma. J Urol. 2006;175(1):175-178.	71.	Fitzpatrick JM, Desgrandchamps F, Adjali K, et al. Man-agement of acute urinary retention: a worldwide survey of 6074 men with benign prostatic hyperplasia. BJU Int. 2012;109(1):88-95.	72.	Fitzpatrick JM, Kirby RS. Management of acute urinary reten-tion. BJU Int. 2006;97(suppl 2):16-20; discussion 21-12.	73.	Zeif HJ, Subramonian K. Alpha blockers prior to removal of a catheter for acute urinary retention in adult men. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009(4):Cd006744.	74.	Ringdahl E, Teague L. Testicular torsion. Am Fam Physician. 2006;74(10):1739-1743.	75.	Srinivasan A, Cinman N, Feber KM, Gitlin J, Palmer LS. History and physical examination findings predictive of tes-ticular torsion: an attempt to promote clinical diagnosis by house staff. J Pediatr Urol. 2011;7(4):470-474.	76.	Pogorelic Z, Mustapic K, Jukic M, et al. Management of acute scrotum in children: a 25-year single center experience on 558 pediatric patients. Can J Urol. 2016;23(6):8594-8601.	77.	Norton KS, Johnson LW, Perry T, Perry KH, Sehon JK, Zibari GB. Management of Fournier’s gangrene: an eleven year ret-rospective analysis of early recognition, diagnosis, and treat-ment. Am Surg. 2002;68(8):709-713.	78.	Oguz A, Gümüs M, Turkoglu A, et al. Fournier’s gangrene: a summary of 10 years of clinical experience. In: Int Surg. 2015;100:934-941.	79.	Sherman J, Solliday M, Paraiso E, Becker J, Mydlo JH. Early CT findings of Fournier’s gangrene in a healthy male. Clin Imaging. 1998;22(6):425-427.	80.	Rosen DR, Brown ME, Cologne KG, Ault GT, Strumwasser AM. Long-term follow-up of Fournier’s Gangrene in a tertiary care center. J Surg Res. 2016;206(1):175-181.	81.	Ozkan OF, Koksal N, Altinli E, et al. Fournier’s gangrene cur-rent approaches. Int Wound J. 2016;13(5):713-716.	82.	Montague DK, Jarow J, Broderick GA, et al. American Uro-logical Association guideline on the management of priapism. J Urol. 2003;170(4 Pt 1):1318-1324.	83.	Anele UA, Le BV, Resar LMS, Burnett AL. How I treat pria-pism. Blood. 2015;125(23):3551-3558.	84.	Burnett AL, Sharlip ID. Standard operating procedures for priapism. J Sex Med. 2013;10(1):180-194.	85.	Mackway-Jones K, Teece S. Ice, pins, or sugar to reduce para-phimosis. Emerg Med J. 2004;21(1):77-78.Brunicardi_Ch40_p1759-p1782.indd   177901/03/19   6:35 PM 1780SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	86.	Pohlman GD, Phillips JM, Wilcox DT. Simple method of paraphimosis reduction revisited: point of technique and review of the literature. J Pediatr Urol. 2013;9(1): 104-107.	87.	Ubee SS, McGlynn L, Fordham M. Emphysematous pyelone-phritis. BJU Int. 2011;107(9):1474-1478.	88.	Lu YC, Hong JH, Chiang BJ, et al. Recommended initial antimicrobial therapy for emphysematous pyelonephritis: 51 cases and 14-year-experience of a tertiary referral center. Medicine (Baltimore). 2016;95(21):e3573.	89.	Misgar RA, Mubarik I, Wani AI, Bashir MI, Ramzan M, Laway BA. Emphysematous pyelonephritis: a 10-year experience with 26 cases. Indian J Endocrinol Metab. 2016;20(4):475-480.	90.	Lu YC, Chiang BJ, Pong YH, et al. Predictors of failure of conservative treatment among patients with emphysematous pyelonephritis. BMC Infect Dis. 2014;14:418.	91.	Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2018. CA Cancer J Clin. 2018;68(1):7-30.	92.	American Joint Committee on Cancer. Urinary bladder. In: Edge SB, Byrd DR, Compton CC, Fritz AG, L. GF, Trotti A,  eds. AJCC Cancer Staging Handbook: From the AJCC Cancer Staging Manual. 7th ed. New York: Springer-Verlag; 2010:569-577.	93.	Sylvester RJ, van der Meijden AP, Oosterlinck W,  et al. Predicting recurrence and progression in individual patients with stage Ta T1 bladder cancer using EORTC risk tables: a combined analysis of 2596 patients from seven EORTC trials. Eur Urol. 2006;49(3):466-465; discussion 475-467.	94.	Babjuk M, Bohle A, Burger M, et al. EAU guidelines on non–muscle-invasive urothelial carcinoma of the bladder: update 2016. Eur Urol. 2017;71(3):447-461.	95.	Lamm DL, Blumenstein BA, Crissman JD, et al. Maintenance bacillus Calmette-Guerin immunotherapy for recurrent TA, T1 and carcinoma in situ transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder: a randomized Southwest Oncology Group Study.  J Urol. 2000;163(4):1124-1129.	96.	Fernandez-Gomez J, Solsona E, Unda M, et al. Prognostic factors in patients with non–muscle-invasive bladder cancer treated with bacillus Calmette-Guerin: multivariate analysis of data from four randomized CUETO trials (see comment). Eur Urol. 2008;53(5):992-1001.	97.	Fernandez-Gomez J, Madero R, Solsona E, et al. The EORTC tables overestimate the risk of recurrence and progression in patients with non–muscle-invasive bladder cancer treated with bacillus Calmette–Guérin: external validation of the EORTC risk tables. Eur Urol. 2011;60(3):423-430.	98.	Chang SS, Bochner BH, Chou R, et al. Treatment of non-metastatic muscle-invasive bladder cancer: AUA/ASCO/ASTRO/SUO guideline. J Urol. 2017;198(3):552-559.	99.	Shabsigh A, Korets R, Vora KC, et al. Defining early morbid-ity of radical cystectomy for patients with bladder cancer using a standardized reporting methodology. Eur Urol. 2009;55(1):164-174.	100.	Johnson SC, Smith ZL, Golan S, Rodriguez JF, 3rd, Smith ND, Steinberg GD. Temporal trends in perioperative morbid-ity for radical cystectomy using the National Surgical Quality Improvement Program database. Urol Oncol. 2017;35(11):659 e613-659 e619.	101.	Balar AV. Immune checkpoint blockade in metastatic urothe-lial cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2017;35(19):2109-2112.	102.	Godwin JL, Hoffman-Censits J, Plimack E. Recent devel-opments in the treatment of advanced bladder cancer. Urol Oncol. 2018;36(3):109-114.	103.	Znaor A, Lortet-Tieulent J, Jemal A, Bray F. International variations and trends in testicular cancer incidence and mor-tality. Eur Urol. 2014;65(6):1095-1106.	104.	Che M, Tamboli P, Ro JY, et al. Bilateral testicular germ cell tumors: twenty-year experience at M. D. Anderson Cancer Center. Cancer. 2002;95(6):1228-1233.	105.	Powles TB, Bhardwa J, Shamash J, Mandalia S, Oliver T. The changing presentation of germ cell tumours of the testis between 1983 and 2002. BJU Int. 2005;95(9):1197-1200.	106.	Capelouto CC, Clark PE, Ransil BJ, Loughlin KR. A review of scrotal violation in testicular cancer: is adjuvant local ther-apy necessary? J Urol. 1995;153(3 Pt 2):981-985.	107.	Donohue JP, Zachary JM, Maynard BR. Distribution of nodal metastases in nonseminomatous testis cancer. J Urol. 1982;128(2):315-320.	108.	Pont J, Holtl W, Kosak D, et al. Risk-adapted treatment choice in stage I nonseminomatous testicular germ cell cancer by regarding vascular invasion in the primary tumor: a prospec-tive trial. J Clin Oncol. 1990;8(1):16-20.	109.	Divrik RT, Akdogan B, Ozen H, Zorlu F. Outcomes of sur-veillance protocol of clinical stage I nonseminomatous germ cell tumors-is shift to risk adapted policy justified? J Urol. 2006;176(4 pt 1):1424-1429; discussion 1429-1430.	110.	Oliver RT, Mead GM, Rustin GJ, et al. Randomized trial of carboplatin versus radiotherapy for stage I seminoma: mature results on relapse and contralateral testis cancer rates in MRC TE19/EORTC 30982 study (ISRCTN27163214).  J Clin Oncol. 2011;29(8):957-962.	111.	Hartmann M, Siener R, Krege S, et al. [Results of the ran-domised phase III study of the German Testicular Cancer Study Group. Retroperitoneal lymphadenectomy versus one cycle BEP as adjuvant therapy for non-seminomatous testicular tumours in clinical stage I.] Der Urologe Ausg A. 2009;48(5):523-528.	112.	N H, AM N, M K, et al. SEER Cancer Statistics Review, 1975-2014, National Cancer Institute. Bethesda, MD. Available at: https://seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2014/, based on November 2016 SEER data submission, posted to the SEER web site. 2017. Accessed August 9, 2018.	113.	Luz MA, Kotb AF, Aldousari S, et al. Retroperitoneal lymph node dissection for residual masses after chemotherapy in nonseminomatous germ cell testicular tumor. World J Surg Oncol. 2010;8:97.	114.	Pearce SM, Golan S, Gorin MA, et al. Safety and early onco-logic effectiveness of primary robotic retroperitoneal lymph node dissection for nonseminomatous germ cell testicular cancer. Eur Urol. 2017;71(3):476-482.	115.	Frank I, Blute ML, Cheville JC, Lohse CM, Weaver AL, Zincke H. Solid renal tumors: an analysis of patho-logical features related to tumor size. J Urol. 2003;170 (6 pt 1):2217-2220.	116.	Richard PO, Jewett MA, Tanguay S, et al. Safety, reliability and accuracy of small renal tumour biopsies: results from a multi-institution registry. BJU Int. 2017;119(4):543-549.	117.	Richard PO, Jewett MA, Bhatt JR, et al. Renal tumor biopsy for small renal masses: a single-center 13-year experience. Eur Urol. 2015;68(6):1007-1013.	118.	Marconi L, Dabestani S, Lam TB, et al. Systematic review and meta-analysis of diagnostic accuracy of percutaneous renal tumour biopsy. Eur Urol. 2016;69(4):660-673.	119.	Lane BR, Kattan MW. Prognostic models and algorithms in renal cell carcinoma. Urol Clin North Am. 2008;35(4): 613-625; vii.	120.	Kanao K, Mizuno R, Kikuchi E, et al. Preoperative prog-nostic nomogram (probability table) for renal cell carcinoma based on TNM classification. J Urol. 2009;181(2):480-485; discussion 485.	121.	Krejci KG, Blute ML, Cheville JC, Sebo TJ, Lohse CM, Zincke H. Nephron-sparing surgery for renal cell carcinoma: clinicopathologic features predictive of patient outcome. Urology. 2003;62(4):641-646.Brunicardi_Ch40_p1759-p1782.indd   178001/03/19   6:35 PM 1781UROLOGYCHAPTER 40	122.	Mekhail TM, Abou-Jawde RM, Boumerhi G, et al. Validation  and extension of the Memorial Sloan-Kettering prognos-tic factors model for survival in patients with previously untreated metastatic renal cell carcinoma. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23(4):832-841.	123.	Smith ZL. Current status of minimally invasive surgery for renal cell carcinoma. Curr Urol Rep. 2016;17(6):43.	124.	Kunkle DA, Uzzo RG. Cryoablation or radiofrequency ablation of the small renal mass : a meta-analysis. Cancer. 2008;113(10):2671-2680.	125.	Clayman RV, Kavoussi LR, Soper NJ, et al. Laparoscopic nephrectomy: initial case report. J Urol. 1991;146(2):278-282.	126.	Motzer RJ, Jonasch E, Agarwal N, et al. Kidney cancer, ver-sion 2.2017, NCCN clinical practice guidelines in oncology. J Natl Compr Canc Netw. 2017;15(6):804-834.	127.	Abaza R. Initial series of robotic radical nephrectomy with vena caval tumor thrombectomy. Eur Urol. 2011;59(4):652-656.	128.	Gill IS, Metcalfe C, Abreu A, et al. Robotic level III infe-rior vena cava tumor thrombectomy: initial series. J Urol. 2015;194(4):929-938.	129.	Schroder FH, Hugosson J, Roobol MJ, et al. Screening and prostate cancer mortality: results of the European Ran-domised Study of Screening for Prostate Cancer (ERSPC) at 13 years of follow-up. Lancet. 2014;384(9959):2027-2035.	130.	Moyer VA, Force USPST. Screening for prostate cancer: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2012;157(2):120-134.	131.	Carter HB, Albertsen PC, Barry MJ, et al. Early detection of prostate cancer: AUA Guideline. J Urol. 2013;190(2): 419-426.	132.	Gleason DF, Mellinger GT. Prediction of prognosis for pros-tatic adenocarcinoma by combined histological grading and clinical staging. J Urol. 1974;111(1):58-64.	133.	Epstein JI, Zelefsky MJ, Sjoberg DD, et al. A contemporary prostate cancer grading system: a validated alternative to the gleason score. Eur Urol. 2016;69(3):428-435.	134.	Hamdy FC, Donovan JL, Lane JA, et al. 10-year outcomes after monitoring, surgery, or radiotherapy for localized prostate cancer. N Engl J Med. 2016;375(15):1415-1424.	135.	Chung MS, Lee SH. Current status of active surveillance in prostate cancer. Investig Clin Urol. 2016;57(1):14-20.	136.	Wiegel T, Bartkowiak D, Bottke D, et al. Adjuvant radiother-apy versus wait-and-see after radical prostatectomy: 10-year follow-up of the ARO 96-02/AUO AP 09/95 trial. Eur Urol. 2014;66(2):243-250.	137.	Thompson IM, Tangen CM, Paradelo J, et al. Adjuvant radiotherapy for pathological T3N0M0 prostate cancer significantly reduces risk of metastases and improves sur-vival: long-term followup of a randomized clinical trial.  J Urol. 2009;181(3):956-962.	138.	Pound CR, Partin AW, Eisenberger MA, Chan DW, Pear-son JD, Walsh PC. Natural history of progression after PSA elevation following radical prostatectomy. JAMA. 1999;281(17):1591-1597.	139.	Ryan CJ, Smith MR, Fizazi K, et al. Abiraterone acetate plus prednisone versus placebo plus prednisone in chemother-apy-naive men with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (COU-AA-302): final overall survival analysis of a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 3 study. Lancet Oncol. 2015;16(2):152-160.	140.	Logothetis CJ, Basch E, Molina A, et al. Effect of abiraterone acetate and prednisone compared with placebo and predni-sone on pain control and skeletal-related events in patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer: explor-atory analysis of data from the COU-AA-301 randomised trial. Lancet Oncol. 2012;13(12):1210-1217.	141.	Loriot Y, Miller K, Sternberg CN, et al. Effect of enzalutamide on health-related quality of life, pain, and skeletal-related events in asymptomatic and minimally symptomatic, che-motherapy-naive patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (PREVAIL): results from a randomised, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2015;16(5):509-521.	142.	Sternberg CN, de Bono JS, Chi KN, et al. Improved outcomes in elderly patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer treated with the androgen receptor inhibitor enzalu-tamide: results from the phase III AFFIRM trial. Ann Oncol. 2014;25(2):429-434.	143.	Dalbagni G, Zhang ZF, Lacombe L, Herr HW. Male ure-thral carcinoma: analysis of treatment outcome. Urology. 1999;53(6):1126-1132.	144.	Swartz MA, Porter MP, Lin DW, Weiss NS. Incidence of primary urethral carcinoma in the United States. Urology. 2006;68(6):1164-1168.	145.	Cupp MR, Malek RS, Goellner JR, Espy MJ, Smith TF.  Detection of human papillomavirus DNA in primary squa-mous cell carcinoma of the male urethra. Urology. 1996;48(4): 551-555.	146.	Dinney CP, Johnson DE, Swanson DA, Babaian RJ, von Eschenbach AC. Therapy and prognosis for male ante-rior urethral carcinoma: an update. Urology. 1994;43(4): 506-514.	147.	Gofrit ON, Pode D, Pizov G, Zorn KC, Katz R, Shapiro A. Prostatic urothelial carcinoma: is transurethral prostatectomy necessary before bacillus Calmette-Guerin immunotherapy? BJU Int. 2009;103(7):905-908.	148.	Gakis G, Witjes JA, Comperat E, et al. EAU guidelines on primary urethral carcinoma. Eur Urol. 2013;64(5):823-830.	149.	Gakis G, Morgan TM, Daneshmand S, et al. Impact of perioperative chemotherapy on survival in patients with advanced primary urethral cancer: results of the international collaboration on primary urethral carcinoma. Ann Oncol. 2015;26(8):1754-1759.	150.	Kent M, Zinman L, Girshovich L, Sands J, Vanni A. Com-bined chemoradiation as primary treatment for invasive male urethral cancer. J Urol. 2015;193(2):532-537.	151.	Dayyani F, Pettaway CA, Kamat AM, Munsell MF, Sircar K, Pagliaro LC. Retrospective analysis of survival outcomes and the role of cisplatin-based chemotherapy in patients with ure-thral carcinomas referred to medical oncologists. Urol Oncol. 2013;31(7):1171-1177.	152.	Aguilar-Navarro S, Navarrete-Reyes AP, Grados-Chavarria BH, Garcia-Lara JM, Amieva H, Avila-Funes JA. The sever-ity of urinary incontinence decreases health-related quality of life among community-dwelling elderly. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2012;67(11):1266-1271.	153.	Bettez M, Tu le M, Carlson K, et al. 2012 update: guidelines for adult urinary incontinence collaborative consensus docu-ment for the Canadian urological association. Can Urol Assoc J. 2012;6(5):354-363.	154.	Tennstedt SL, Chiu GR, Link CL, Litman HJ, Kusek JW, McKinlay JB. The effects of severity of urine leakage on qual-ity of life in Hispanic, white, and black men and women: the Boston community health survey. Urology. 2010;75(1):27-33.	155.	Ramage-Morin PL, Gilmour H. Urinary incontinence and loneliness in Canadian seniors. Health Rep. 2013;24(10): 3-10.	156.	Brown JS, Vittinghoff E, Wyman JF, et al. Urinary inconti-nence: does it increase risk for falls and fractures? Study of Osteoporotic Fractures Research Group. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2000;48(7):721-725.	157.	Abrams P, Cardozo L, Fall M, et al. The standardisation of terminology in lower urinary tract function: report from the standardisation sub-committee of the International Conti-nence Society. Urology. 2003;61(1):37-49.	158.	Dumoulin C, Hunter KF, Moore K, et al. Conservative management for female urinary incontinence and pelvic Brunicardi_Ch40_p1759-p1782.indd   178101/03/19   6:35 PM 1782SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIorgan prolapse review 2013: Summary of the 5th Interna-tional Consultation on Incontinence. Neurourol Urodyn. 2016;35(1):15-20.	159.	Chapple C, Khullar V, Gabriel Z, Dooley JA. The effects of antimuscarinic treatments in overactive bladder: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur Urol. 2005;48(1):5-26.	160.	Chapple CR, Cardozo L, Nitti VW, Siddiqui E, Michel MC. Mirabegron in overactive bladder: a review of efficacy, safety, and tolerability. Neurourol Urodyn. 2014;33(1):17-30.	161.	van Kerrebroeck PE, van Voskuilen AC, Heesakkers JP, et al. Results of sacral neuromodulation therapy for urinary voiding dysfunction: outcomes of a prospective, worldwide clinical study. J Urol. 2007;178(5):2029-2034.	162.	Burton C, Sajja A, Latthe PM. Effectiveness of percutane-ous posterior tibial nerve stimulation for overactive bladder: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Neurourol Urodyn. 2012;31(8):1206-1216.	163.	Rovner E, Kennelly M, Schulte-Baukloh H, Zhou J, Haag-Molkenteller C, Dasgupta P. Urodynamic results and clinical outcomes with intradetrusor injections of onabotulinum-toxinA in a randomized, placebo-controlled dose-finding study in idiopathic overactive bladder. Neurourol Urodyn. 2011;30(4):556-562.	164.	Johannes CB, Araujo AB, Feldman HA, Derby CA, Kleinman KP, McKinlay JB. Incidence of erectile dysfunction in men 40 to 69 years old: longitudinal results from the Massachusetts male aging study. J Urol. 2000;163(2):460-463.	165.	Corona G, Lee DM, Forti G, et al. Age-related changes in gen-eral and sexual health in middle-aged and older men: results from the European Male Ageing Study (EMAS). J Sex Med. 2010;7(4 Pt 1):1362-1380.	166.	Lue TF. Erectile dysfunction. N Engl J Med. 2000;342(24): 1802-1813.	167.	Francis ME, Kusek JW, Nyberg LM, Eggers PW. The con-tribution of common medical conditions and drug exposures to erectile dysfunction in adult males. J Urol. 2007;178(2): 591-596; discussion 596.	168.	Yafi FA, Jenkins L, Albersen M, et al. Erectile dysfunction. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2016;2:16003.	169.	McCabe MP, Althof SE. A systematic review of the psycho-social outcomes associated with erectile dysfunction: does the impact of erectile dysfunction extend beyond a man’s inability to have sex? J Sex Med. 2014;11(2):347-363.	170.	The process of care model for evaluation and treatment of erectile dysfunction. The Process of Care Consensus Panel. Int J Impot Res. 1999;11(2):59-70; discussion 70-54.	171.	Yuan J, Zhang R, Yang Z, et al. Comparative effective-ness and safety of oral phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors for erectile dysfunction: a systematic review and network meta-analysis. Eur Urol. 2013;63(5):902-912.	172.	Giuliano F, Jackson G, Montorsi F, Martin-Morales A, Raillard P. Safety of sildenafil citrate: review of 67 double-blind placebo-controlled trials and the postmarket-ing safety database. Int J Clin Pract. 2010;64(2):240-255.	173.	Baltaci S, Aydos K, Kosar A, Anafarta K. Treating erectile dysfunction with a vacuum tumescence device: a retro-spective analysis of acceptance and satisfaction. Br J Urol. 1995;76(6):757-760.	174.	Ganem JP, Lucey DT, Janosko EO, Carson CC. Unusual complications of the vacuum erection device. Urology. 1998;51(4):627-631.	175.	Guay AT, Perez JB, Velasquez E, Newton RA, Jacobson JP. Clinical experience with intraurethral alprostadil (MUSE) in the treatment of men with erectile dysfunction. A retrospec-tive study. Medicated urethral system for erection. Eur Urol. 2000;38(6):671-676.	176.	Fulgham PF, Cochran JS, Denman JL, et al. Disappointing initial results with transurethral alprostadil for erectile dys-function in a urology practice setting. J Urol. 1998;160 (6 pt 1):2041-2046.	177.	Rajpurkar A, Dhabuwala CB. Comparison of satisfaction rates and erectile function in patients treated with silde-nafil, intracavernous prostaglandin E1 and penile implant surgery for erectile dysfunction in urology practice. J Urol. 2003;170(1):159-163.	178.	Kaefer M, Diamond D, Hendren WH, et al. The incidence of intersexuality in children with cryptorchidism and hypospa-dias: stratification based on gonadal palpability and meatal position. J Urol. 1999;162(3 pt 2):1003-1006; discussion 1006-1007.	179.	Keays MA, Dave S. Current hypospadias management: Diag-nosis, surgical management, and long-term patient-centred outcomes. Can Urol Assoc J. 2017;11(1-2 suppl 1):S48-S53.	180.	Preda I, Jodal U, Sixt R, Stokland E, Hansson S. Normal dimercaptosuccinic acid scintigraphy makes voiding cystoure-thrography unnecessary after urinary tract infection. J Pediatr. 2007;151(6):581-584, 584.e581.	181.	Roberts KB. Urinary tract infection: clinical practice guide-line for the diagnosis and management of the initial UTI in febrile infants and children 2 to 24 months. Pediatrics. 2011;128(3):595-610.	182.	Bilgutay AN, Roth DR, Gonzales ET, Jr., et al. Posterior urethral valves: risk factors for progression to renal failure.  J Pediatr Urol. 2016;12(3):179 e171-e177.	183.	Lee PA. Fertility after cryptorchidism: epidemiology and other outcome studies. Urology. 2005;66(2):427-431.	184.	Feyles F, Peiretti V, Mussa A, et al. Improved sperm count and motility in young men surgically treated for cryptorchidism in the first year of life. Eur J Pediatr Surg. 2014;24(5):376-380.	185.	Pettersson A, Richiardi L, Nordenskjold A, Kaijser M, Akre O. Age at surgery for undescended testis and risk of testicular cancer. N Engl J Med. 2007;356(18):1835-1841.Brunicardi_Ch40_p1759-p1782.indd   178201/03/19   6:35 PM
# Chunk 8943
GynecologySarah M. Temkin, Thomas Gregory,  Elise C. Kohn, and Linda Duska 41chapterPATHOPHYSIOLOGY AND MECHANISMS OF DISEASEThe female reproductive system includes the external (vulva including the labia, clitoris, and vaginal opening) sex organs as well as the internal organs (uterus and cervix, fallopian tubes, and ovaries) that function in human reproduction. The female reproductive tract has a multitude of tightly regulated functions. The ovaries produce the ova (egg cells) and hormones necessary for maintenance of reproductive function. The fallopian tubes accommodate transit of an ovum to the uterus and provide a location for fertilization. The uterus accommodates an embryo that develops into the fetus. The cervix provides a barrier between the external and internal genital tract. Ongoing activities, such as angiogenesis and physiologic invasion, are necessary in order for the reproductive organs to fulfill their purpose and are usurped in disease. Immune surveillance is regulated in a fashion that allows implantation, placentation, and development of  the fetus.Because the pelvis contains a multitude of spatially and temporally varied functions, pathologies range from mechanical events, such as ovarian torsion or ruptured ectopic pregnancy, to infection, such as pelvic inflammatory disease, to mass effects, including leiomyomata and malignancy, that can present with similar and even overlapping symptoms and signs. An acute abdomen presentation in a woman of child bearing potential can range from pregnancy-related catastrophes, to appendicitis, to a hemorrhagic ovarian cyst.The ongoing rupture, healing, and regrowth of the ovarian capsule and endometrium during the menstrual cycle use the same series of biologic and biochemic events that are also active in pathologic events such as endometriosis and endometriomas, mature teratomas, dysgerminomas, and progression to malig-nancy. Genetic abnormalities, both germ line and somatic, that may cause competence and/or promote disease are increasingly well understood. Incorporation of genetic and genomic infor-mation in disease diagnosis and assessment has altered how we diagnose and follow disease, in whom we increase our diligence in searching for disease, and ultimately how we use the drug and other therapeutic armamentarium available to the treating physician.These points will be incorporated with surgical approaches into discussions of anatomy, diagnostic workup, infection, sur-gical and medical aspects of the obstetric patient, pelvic floor dysfunction, and neoplasms.ANATOMYClinical gynecologic anatomy centers on the pelvis (L. basin). Aptly named, the bowl-shaped pelvis houses the confluence and intersection of multiple organ systems. Understanding 1Pathophysiology and Mechanisms  of Disease	1783Anatomy	1783Structure and Support of the Pelvis and Genitalia / 1784Vulva / 1785Vagina / 1785Uterus / 1785Cervix / 1785Fallopian Tubes / 1786Ovaries / 1786Fibrovascular Ligaments and Avascular Tissue Planes / 1786Vasculature and Nerves of the  Pelvis / 1787Evaluation and Diagnosis	1787Elements of a Gynecologic History / 1787The Gynecologic Examination / 1787Commonly Used Testing / 1789Common Office Procedures for  Diagnosis / 1790Benign Gynecologic Conditions	1791Vulvar Lesions / 1791Vaginal Lesions / 1793Cervical Lesions / 1794Uterine Corpus / 1794Procedures Performed for Structural Causes of Abnormal Uterine  Bleeding / 1796Benign Ovarian and Fallopian Tube Lesions / 1801Other Benign Pelvic Pathology / 1802Pregnancy-Related Surgical Conditions	1804Conditions and Procedures Performed Before Viability / 1804Conditions and Procedures Performed After Viability / 1805Pelvic Floor Dysfunction	1807Evaluation / 1807Surgery for Pelvic Organ Prolapse / 1807Surgery for Stress Urinary  Incontinence / 1808Gynecologic Cancer	1809Vulvar Cancer / 1809Vaginal Cancer / 1810Cervical Cancer / 1811Uterine Cancer / 1813Ovarian Cancer / 1815Minimally Invasive  Gynecologic Surgery	1820Hysteroscopy / 1820Laparoscopy / 1820Robotic Surgery / 1820Complications Pertinent to  Gynecologic Surgery / 1821Brunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   178318/02/19   4:33 PM 1784those structural and functional relationships is essential for the surgeon and allows an appreciation for the interplay of sexual function and reproduction as well as a context for understanding gynecologic pathology.Structure and Support of the Pelvis and GenitaliaThe bony pelvis is comprised by the sacrum posteriorly and  the ischium, ilium, and pubic bones anteromedially. It supports the upper body and transmits the stresses of weight bearing to the lower limbs in addition to providing anchors for the supporting tissues of the pelvic floor.1 The opening of the pelvis is spanned by the muscles of the pelvic diaphragm (Fig. 41-1).  The muscles of the pelvic sidewall include the iliacus, the psoas, and the obturator internus muscle (Fig. 41-2). These muscles contract tonically and include, from anterior to posterior, bilaterally, the pubococcygeus, puborectalis, iliococcygeus, and coccygeus muscles. The first two of these muscles contribute fibers to the fibromuscular perineal body. The urogenital hiatus is bordered laterally by the pubococcygeus muscles and anteriorly by the symphysis pubis. It is through this muscular defect that the urethra and vagina pass, and it is the focal point for the study of disorders of pelvic support such as cystocele, rectocele, and uterine prolapse.Pudendal nerveand arterySuperficial transverseperineii muscleIschiocavernosusmuscleVestibularbulbClitorisPubicramusUrethralmeatusBulbocavernosusmuscleBartholin’sglandPerinealmembranePerinealbodyExternal analsphincterGluteusmaximusAnusVaginalintroitusLevator animusclesFigure 41-1. Deeper muscles of the pelvic floor.Key Points1	Gynecologic causes of acute abdomen include PID and tubo-ovarian abscess, ovarian torsion, ruptured ectopic pregnancy, septic abortion. Pregnancy must be ruled out early in assessment of reproductive age patients presenting with abdominal or pelvic pain.2	The general gynecology exam must incorporate the whole physical examination in order to adequately diagnosis and treat gynecologic disorders.3	Benign gynecologic pathologies that are encountered at the time of surgery include endometriosis, endometriomas, fibroids, and ovarian cysts.4	It is critical that abnormal lesions of vulva, vagina, and cervix are biopsied for diagnosis before any treatment is planned; postmenopausal bleeding should always be investigated to rule out malignancy.5	Pelvic floor dysfunction (pelvic organ prolapse, urinary and fecal incontinence) is common; 11% of women will undergo a reconstructive surgical procedure at some point in their lives.6	Pregnancy confers important changes to both the cardio-vascular system and the coagulation cascade. Trauma in pregnancy must be managed with these changes in mind.7	Early-stage cervical cancer is managed surgically, whereas chemoradiation is preferred for stages Ib2 and above.8	Risk-reducing salpingo-oopherectomy is recommended in women with BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations.9	Optimal debulking for epithelial ovarian cancer is a criti-cal element in patient response and survival. The preferred postoperative therapy for optimally debulked advanced-stage ovarian epithelial ovarian cancer is intraperitoneal chemotherapy.10	Long-term sequelae of intestinal and urologic injury can be avoided by intraoperative identification.Brunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   178418/02/19   4:33 PM 1785GYNECOLOGYCHAPTER 41VulvaThe labia majora form the cutaneous boundaries of the lateral vulva and represent the female homologue of the male scrotum (Fig. 41-4). The labia majora are fatty folds covered by hair-bearing skin in the adult. They fuse anteriorly over the ante-rior prominence of the symphysis pubis, the mons pubis. The deeper portions of the adipose layers are called Colles fascia and insert onto the inferior margin of the perineal membrane, limiting spread of superficial hematomas inferiorly. Adjacent and medial to the labia majora are the labia minora, smaller folds of connective tissue covered laterally by non–hair-bearing skin and medially by vaginal mucosa. The anterior fusion of the labia minora forms the prepuce and frenulum of the clitoris; posteriorly, the labia minora fuse to create the fossa navicularis and posterior fourchette. The term vestibule refers to the area medial to the labia minora bounded by the fossa navicularis and the clitoris. Both the urethra and the vagina open into the vestibule. Skene’s glands lie lateral and inferior to the urethral meatus. Cysts, abscesses, and neoplasms may arise in these glands.Erectile tissues and associated muscles are in the space between the perineal membrane and the vulvar subcutaneous tissues (see Fig. 41-1). The clitoris is formed by two crura and is suspended from the pubis. Overlying the crura are ischio-cavernosus muscles, which run along the inferior surfaces of the ischiopubic rami. Extending medially from the inferior end of the ischiocavernosus muscles are the superficial transverse perinei muscles. These terminate in the midline in the perineal body, caudal and deep to the posterior fourchette. Vestibular bulbs lie just deep to the vestibule and are covered laterally by bulbocavernosus muscles. These originate from the perineal body and insert into the body of the clitoris. At the inferior end of the vestibular bulbs are Bartholin’s glands, which connect to the vestibular skin by ducts.VaginaThe vagina is an elastic fibromuscular tube opening from the vestibule running superiorly and posteriorly, passing through the perineal membrane. The lower third is invested by the superficial and deep perineal muscles; it incorporates the ure-thra in its anterior wall and has a rich blood supply from the vaginal branches of the external and internal pudendal arteries. The upper two-thirds of the vagina are not invested by muscles. This portion lies in opposition to the bladder base anteriorly and the rectum and posterior pelvic cul-de-sac superiorly. The cervix opens into the posterior vaginal wall bulging into the vaginal lumen.UterusThe typically pear-shaped uterus consists of a fundus, cornua, body, and cervix. It lies between the bladder anteriorly and the rectosigmoid posteriorly. The endometrium lines the inside cavity and has a superficial functional layer that is shed with menstruation and a basal layer from which the new functional layer is formed. Sustained estrogenic stimulation without asso-ciated progestin maturation can lead to hyperplastic changes or carcinoma. Adenomyosis is a condition in which benign endo-metrial glands infiltrate into the muscle or myometrium of the uterus. The myometrium is composed of smooth muscle and the contraction of myometrium is a factor in menstrual pain and is essential in childbirth. The myometrium can develop benign smooth muscle neoplasms known as leiomyoma or fibroids.CervixThe cervix connects the uterus and vagina and projects into the upper vagina. The vagina forms an arched ring around the cervix described as the vaginal fornices—lateral, anterior, and posterior. The cervix is about 2.5-cm long with a fusiform endo-cervical canal lined by columnar epithelium lying between an internal and external os, or opening. The vaginal surface of the cervix is covered with stratified squamous epithelium, similar to that lining the vagina. The squamo-columnar junction, also referred to as the transformation zone, migrates at different stages of life and is influenced by estrogenic stimulation. The transformation zone develops as the columnar epithelium is replaced by squamous metaplasia. This transformation zone is Internal iliac     arteryLateral sacralarterySuperiorglutealarteryInferior gluteal     arteryCoccygeus muscleInternal pudendalarteryUterine arteryMiddle rectal     arteryObturator internusmuscleObturator  arterySuperior vesical       arteryExternal iliac     arteryCommon iliac     arteryFigure 41-2. The muscles and vasculature of the pelvis.Hypogastric plexusObturator nerveVesical plexusUterovaginal plexus Rectal plexusLeft pelvic plexusSacral plexusSympathetic ganglionFigure 41-3. The nerve supply of the female pelvis.Brunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   178518/02/19   4:33 PM 1786SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIvulnerable to human papilloma virus (HPV) infection and resul-tant premalignant changes. These changes can be detected by microscopic assessment of cervical cytological (or Pap) smear. If the duct of a cervical gland becomes occluded, the gland dis-tends to form a retention cyst or Nabothian follicle.Fallopian TubesThe bilateral fallopian tubes arise from the upper lateral cornua of the uterus and course posterolaterally within the upper border of the broad ligament. The tubes can be divided into four parts. The interstitial part forms a passage through the myometrium. The isthmus is the narrow portion extending out about 3 cm from the myometrium. The ampulla is thin-walled and tortuous with its lateral end free of the broad ligament. The infundibulum is the distal end fringed by a ring of delicate fronds or fimbriae. The fallopian tubes receive the ovum after ovulation. Peristal-sis carries the ovum to the ampulla where fertilization occurs. The zygote transits the tube over the course of 3 to 4 days to the uterus. Abnormal implantation in the fallopian tube is the most common site of ectopic pregnancies. The tubes may also be infected by ascending organisms, resulting in tubo-ovarian abscesses. Scarring of the fallopian tubes can lead to hydrosal-pinx. Recent evidence suggests most high-grade serous ovarian cancer originates in the fallopian tubes.OvariesThe ovaries are attached to the uterine cornu by the proper ovarian  ligaments, or the utero-ovarian ligaments. The ovaries are sus-pended from the lateral pelvis by their vascular pedicles, the infundibulopelvic ligaments (IP) or ovarian arteries. These are also called the suspensory ligaments of the ovaries, and cor-respond to the genital vessels in the male. The IP’s are paired branches from the abdominal aorta arising just below the renal arteries. They merge with the peritoneum over the psoas major muscle and pass over the pelvic brim and the external iliac ves-sels. The ovarian veins ascend at first with the ovarian arteries, then track more laterally. The right ovarian vein ascends to drain BladderUterusRound ligamentExternal iliacartery and veinFallopian tubeOvarianvesselsOvarian ligamentBroad ligamentUterosacral ligamentSigmoid colonUreterOvaryFigure 41-5. Internal pelvic anatomy, from above.Figure 41-4. External genitalia. (Reproduced with permission from Rock J, Jones HW: TeLinde’s Operative Gynecology, 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2003.)ClitorisLabiumminusLabiummajusMouth ofBartholin’s glandFossa navicularisFourchetteAnusHymenVaginaSkene’sductsUrethralorificePrepuce ofclitorisdirectly into the inferior vena cava while the left vein drains into the left renal vein. Lymphatic drainage follows the arteries to the para-aortic lymph nodes. The ovaries are covered by a single layer of cells that is continuous with the mesothelium of the peritoneum. Beneath this is a fibrous stroma within which are embedded germ cells. At ovulation, an ovarian follicle ruptures through the ovarian epithelium.Fibrovascular Ligaments and Avascular  Tissue PlanesFigure 41-5 is a view of the internal genitalia and deep pelvis as one would approach the pelvis from a midline abdominal incision. The central uterus and uterine cervix are supported by the pelvic floor muscles (Fig. 41-5). They are suspended by Brunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   178618/02/19   4:34 PM 1787GYNECOLOGYCHAPTER 41the lateral fibrous cardinal, or Mackenrodt’s ligament, and the uterosacral ligaments,  which insert into the paracervical fascia medially and into the muscular sidewalls of the pelvis laterally. Posteriorly, the uterosacral ligaments provide support for the vagina and cervix as they course from the sacrum lateral to the rectum and insert into the paracervical fascia. Emanating from the uterine cornu and traveling through the inguinal canal are the round ligaments, eventually attaching to the subcutaneous tissue of the mons pubis. The peritoneum enfolding the adnexa (tube, round ligament, and ovary) is referred to as the broad ligament, which separates the pelvic cavity into an anterior and posterior component.The peritoneal reflections in the pelvis anterior and pos-terior to the uterus are referred to as the anterior and posterior cul-de-sacs. The latter is also called the pouch or cul-de-sac of Douglas. On transverse section, seven avascular, and therefore important, surgical planes can be identified (Fig. 41-6). These include the right and left lateral paravesical and right and left pararectal spaces, and from anterior to posterior, the retropubic or prevesical space of Retzius and the vesicovaginal, rectovagi-nal, and retrorectal or presacral spaces.These avascular tissue planes are often preserved and provide safe surgical access when the intraperitoneal pelvic anatomy is distorted by tumor, endometriosis, adhesions, or infection. Utilizing the avascular retroperitoneal planes, the ure-ter can be traced into the pelvis as it crosses the distal common iliac arteries laterally into the pararectal space and then courses inferior to the ovarian arteries and veins until crossing under the uterine arteries into the paravesical space just lateral to the cervix. After traveling to the cervix, the ureters course down-ward and medially over the anterior surface of the vagina before entering the base of the bladder in the vesicovaginal space.Vasculature and Nerves of the PelvisThe rich blood supply to the pelvis arises largely from the internal  iliac arteries except for the middle sacral artery originating at the aortic bifurcation and the ovarian arteries originating from the abdominal aorta. There is also collateral flow and anastomo-ses to the pelvic vessels from the inferior mesenteric artery. The internal iliac, or hypogastric, arteries divide into anterior and pos-terior branches. The latter supply lumbar and gluteal branches. From the anterior division of the hypogastric arteries arise the Prevesical spaceParavesical spaceVesicovaginalspaceVesicouterine ligamentCardinal ligamentUterosacralligamentRetrovaginal spaceRetrorectal spaceSacrumRectumPararectal spaceCervicalfasciaCervixVesicalfasciaBladderPubovesical ligamentFigure 41-6. The avascular spaces of the female pelvis.obturator, uterine, pudendal, middle rectal, inferior gluteal, along with superior and middle vesical arteries (see Fig. 41-2).The major motor nerves found in the pelvis are the sci-atic, obturator, and femoral nerves (Fig. 41-3). Also important to the pelvic surgeon are the ilioinguinal, iliohypogastric and genitofemoral nerves, which arise as upper abdominal nerves, but are encountered on the most caudal portion of the anterior abdominal wall and the ventral portion of the external genitalia. Sympathetic fibers course along the major arteries and para-sympathetics form the superior and inferior pelvic plexus. The pudendal nerve arises from S2–S4 and travels laterally, exiting the greater sciatic foramen, hooking around the ischial spine and sacrospinous ligament, and returning via the greater sciatic foramen. It travels through Alcock’s canal and becomes the sen-sory and motor nerve of the perineum (see Figs. 41-1 and 41-3). The motor neurons serve the tonically contracting urethral and anal sphincter, and direct branches from the S2–S4 nerves serve the levator ani muscles. During childbirth and other excessive straining, this tethered nerve (along with the levator ani muscles)  is subject to stretch injury and is at least partially responsible for many female pelvic floor disorders.EVALUATION AND DIAGNOSISElements of a Gynecologic HistoryA complete history is a seminal part of any assessment  (Table 41-1). Many gynecologic diseases can present with broad constitutional symptoms, occur secondary to other conditions, or be related to medications. A full history should include particular attention to family history, organ system history, including breast, gastrointestinal, and urinary tract symptoms, and a careful medication, anesthesia, and surgical history. The key elements of a focused gynecologic history include the following:•	Date of last menstrual period•	History of contraceptive and postmenopausal hormone use•	Obstetrical history•	Age at menarche and menopause (method of menopause, [e.g., drug, surgical])•	Menstrual bleeding pattern•	History of pelvic assessments, including cervical smear and HPV DNA results•	History of pelvic infections, including HPV and HIV status•	Sexual history•	Prior gynecologic surgery(s)The Gynecologic ExaminationFor many young women, their gynecologist is their primary care physician. When that is the case, it is necessary that a full medical and surgical history be taken and that, in addition to the pelvic examination, the minimum additional examination should include assessment of the thyroid, breasts, and cardiopul-monary system. Screening, reproductive counseling, and age-appropriate health services should be available to women of all ages with or without a routine pelvic examination, but the deci-sion to proceed with regular, annual pelvic examinations in oth-erwise healthy women is controversial.2,3 The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recently evaluated the current evidence regarding the balance of benefits and harms of performing screening pelvic examinations in asymptomatic, nonpregnant adult women and concluded that the evidence is insufficient.32Brunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   178718/02/19   4:34 PM 1788SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIThe pelvic examination starts with a full abdominal exam-ination. Inguinal node evaluation is performed before placing the patient’s legs in the dorsal lithotomy position (in stirrups). A flexible, focused light source is essential, and vaginal instru-ments including speculums of variable sizes and shapes (Graves and Pederson), including pediatric sizes, are required to assure that the patient’s anatomy can be fully and comfortably viewed.The external genitalia are inspected first, noting the distri-bution of pubic hair, the skin color and contour, the Bartholin and Skene’s glands, and perianal area. Abnormalities are docu-mented and a map with measurements of abnormalities drawn. A warmed lubricated speculum is inserted into the vagina and gently opened to identify the cervix if present or the vaginal apex if not. To avoid confounding the location of pelvic pain with immediate speculum exam, or if there is a concern that a malignancy is present, careful digital assessment of a vaginal mass and location may be addressed prior to speculum place-ment in order to avoid abrading a vascular lesion and inducing hemorrhage. The speculum would then be inserted just short of the length to the mass in order to view that area directly before advancing. An uncomplicated speculum exam includes examination of the vaginal sidewalls, assessment of secretions, including culture if necessary, and collection of the cervical cytologic specimen and HPV test if indicated (see “Common Screening”).A bimanual examination is performed by placing two fin-gers in the vaginal canal; one finger may be used if patient has significant vaginal atrophy or has had prior radiation with ste-nosis (Fig. 41-7). Carefully and sequentially assess the size and shape of the uterus by moving it against the abdominal hand, and the adnexa by carefully sweeping the abdominal hand down the side of the uterus. The rectovaginal examination, consisting of one finger in the vagina and one in the rectal vault, is used to further examine and characterize the location, shape, fixation, size, and complexity of the uterus, adnexa, cervix, and anterior and posterior cul-de-sacs. The rectovaginal exam also allows examination of the uterosacral ligaments from the back of the uterus sweeping laterally to the rectal finger and the sacrum, as well as assessment of the rectum and anal canal for masses.It is critical that presurgical assessments include a full gen-eral examination. This is particularly important with potential oncologic diagnoses or infectious issues in order to assure that the proposed surgery is both safe and appropriate. Issues such as sites of metastatic cancer or infection, associated bleeding and/Table 41-1Key elements of the gynecologic historyISSUEELEMENTS TO EXPLOREASSOCIATED ISSUESMenstrual historyAge at menarche, menopause.Bleeding pattern, postmenopausal bleeding, spotting between periods.Any medications (warfarin, heparin, aspirin, herbals, others) or personal or family history that might lead to prolonged bleeding timesIdentifies abnormal patterns related to endocrine, structural, infectious, and oncologic etiologiesObstetrical historyNumber of pregnancies, dates, type of deliveries, pregnancy loss, abortion, complicationsIdentifies predisposing pregnancy for GTD, possible surgical complicationsSexual historyPartners, practices, protection; pregnancy intentionGuide the assessment of patient risk, risk-reduction strategies, the determination of necessary testing, and the identification of anatomical sites from which to collect specimens for STD testingInfectious diseasesSexually transmitted diseases and treatment and/or testing for theseAlso need to explore history of other GI diseases that may mimic STD (Crohn’s, diverticulitis)Contraceptive historyPresent contraception if appropriate, prior use, type and durationConcurrent pregnancy with procedure or complications of contraceptivesCytologic screeningFrequency, results (normal, prior abnormal Pap), any prior surgery or diagnoses, HPV testing historyProlonged intervals increase risk of cervical cancerRelationship to anal, vaginal, vulvar cancersPrior gynecologic surgeryType (laparoscopy, vaginal, abdominal); diagnosis (endometriosis? ovarian cysts? tubo-ovarian abscess?); actual pathology if possibleAssess present history against this background (for example, granulosa cell pathology, is it now recurrent?)Pain historySite, location, relationship (with urination, with menses, with intercourse at initiation or deep penetration, with bowel movements), referralAssesses relationship to other organ systems,  and potential involvement of these with process. Common examples presenting as pelvic pain,  ureteral stone, endometriosis with bowel  involvement, etcBrunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   178818/02/19   4:34 PM 1789GYNECOLOGYCHAPTER 41or clotting issues and history, and drug exposure, allergies, and current medications must be addressed.Commonly Used Testinga-Human Chorionic Gonadotropin Testing. Qualitative uri-nary pregnancy tests for human chorionic gonadotropin (b-hCG) are standard prior to any surgery in a woman of reproductive age and potential, regardless of contraception history. In addition, serum quantitative b-hCG testing is appropriate for evaluation of suspected ectopic pregnancy, gestational trophoblastic dis-ease, or ovarian mass in a young woman. In the case of ectopic pregnancy, serial levels are required when a pregnancy cannot be identified in the uterine cavity by imaging. As a general rule, 85% of viable, very early intrauterine pregnancies will have at least a 66% rise in the b-hCG level over 48 hours.Table 41-2Features of common causes of vaginitis BACTERIAL VAGINOSISVULVOVAGINAL CANDIDIASISTRICHOMONIASISPathogenAnaerobic organismsCandida albicansTrichomonas vaginalis% of vaginitis403020pH>4.5<4.5>4.5Signs and symptomsMalodorous, adherent dischargeWhite discharge, vulvar erythema, pruritus, dyspareuniaMalodorous purulent discharge, vulvovaginal erythema, dyspareuniaWet mountClue cellsPseudohyphae or budding yeasts in 40% of casesMotile trichomonadsKOH mount Pseudohyphae or budding yeasts in 70% of cases Amine test+−−TreatmentMetronidazole 500 mg twice a day for 7 d or 2 g single dose, metronidazole or clindamycin vaginal creamOral fluconazole 150 mg single dose, vaginal antifungal preparationsMetronidazole 2 g single dose and treatment of partner+ = positive; − = negative; KOH = potassium hydroxide.Figure 41-7. Bimanual abdominovaginal palpation of the uterus.Microscopy of Vaginal Discharge. During a speculum exam, a cotton-tipped applicator is used to collect the vaginal dis-charge; it is smeared on a slide with several drops of 0.9% nor-mal saline to create a saline wet mount. A cover slide is placed and the slide is evaluated microscopically for the presence of mobile trichomonads (Trichomonas vaginalis) or clue cells (epithelial cells studded with bacteria, seen in bacterial vagi-nosis; Table 41-2). A potassium hydroxide (KOH) wet mount is the slide application of the collected vaginal discharge with 10% KOH; this destroys cellular elements. The test is posi-tive for vaginal candidiasis when pseudohyphae are seen (see  Table 41-2).Chlamydia/Gonorrhea Testing. Nucleic acid amplification testing (NAAT) has emerged as the diagnostic test of choice for N gonorrhea and C trachomatis. A vaginal swab, endocervical swab, and/or urine sample, can be used for this test.Cervical Cancer Screening and Prevention. HPV infection is required for the development of epithelial cervical carcino-mas (squamous and adenocarcinomas), and HPV DNA can be identified in virtually all primary cervical malignancies. HPV is a ubiquitous double-stranded DNA virus commonly acquired in the female lower genital tract through sexual contact. After entry into the cell, the HPV protein E6 degrades the tumor sup-pressor p53, resulting in deregulation of cell cycle arrest. E7 inactivates the tumor suppressor RB and releases E2F transcrip-tion factors, causing cellular hyperproliferation. More than 100 HPV types have been identified, and up to 40 of these subtypes infect the anogenital region. At least 12 are considered high-risk or oncogenic, and HPV genotypes 16 and 18 cause approxi-mately 70% of cervical cancers worldwide.4Recent cervical cytology guidelines have increased the intervals between screenings for most women given the known natural history of HPV-related cervical dysplasia progression to cancer and the high negative predictive value of a negative HPV test.6 The current recommendations call for cervical smear screening every 3 to 5 years in women ages 21 to 65 years. If an Brunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   178918/02/19   4:34 PM 1790SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIHPV test performed at the same time also is negative, test-ing should be repeated every 5 years for women ages 30 to 65 years. Screening is not recommended for women age older than 65 or without a cervix (prior hysterectomy) unless they have a history of high-grade precancerous lesions. Women with a history of cervical dysplasia, HPV infection, or cervical cancer need more frequent screening based on their diagnosis. Primary high-risk HPV (hrHPV) screening is also an acceptable alterna-tive to cytologic screening for women ages 30-65 because of an increased detection of high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (HSIL) and increased negative predictive value.6HPV Vaccine. Three HPV vaccines have been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA).7 In 2006, a quad-rivalent (4vHPV) vaccine was approved that targets HPV 16 and 18, which cause 70% of cervical cancers, and HPV geno-types 6 and 11, which cause 90% of genital warts. In Decem-ber 2014, a nine-valent vaccine (9cHPV) was introduced to replace the 4vHPV vaccine, which includes protection against the HPV strains covered by the first generation of 4vHPV as well as five other HPV strains responsible for 20% of cervical cancers (HPV-31, HPV-33, HPV-45, HPV-52, and HPV-58).7 The 9vHPV may be used to continue or complete a series started with a different HPV vaccine product. Vaccination with 9vHPV after completion of 4vHPV at least 12 months earlier is safe and may provide protection against additional HPV strains. A biva-lent vaccine that targets HPV genotypes 16 and 18 with a dif-ferent adjuvant that may have led to higher immunogenicity was approved in 2009 but is no longer marketed in the United States.Vaccination generates high concentrations of neutralizing antibodies to HPV L1 protein, the antigen in all HPV vaccines. The vaccines are highly immunogenic, activating both humoral and cellular immune responses. Multiple randomized clinical trials have demonstrated nearly 100% efficacy in the preven-tion of the HPV subtype-specific precancerous cervical cell changes.7,8 These major clinical trials have used prevention of HSIL as the efficacy endpoints. Vaccination does not protect women who are already infected with HPV-16 or -18 at the time of vaccination.Current recommendations include HPV vaccination for boys and girls at age 11 or 12 years. (Vaccination can be started at age 9.) The Advisory Committee on Immunization Prac-tices (ACIP) also recommends vaccination for females aged 13 through 26 years and males aged 13 through 21 years not adequately vaccinated previously. Catch-up vaccination is also recommended through age 26 years for gay, bisexual, and other men who have sex with men, transgender people, and for immu-nocompromised persons (including those with HIV infection) not adequately vaccinated previously.8 Two doses are given 6 to 12 months apart for patients with an intact immune system, age less than 15 years; three doses are recommended for those ages 15 to 26 years and immunocompromised persons.10 Cervical cancer screening continues to play an important role in detection and treatment of premalignant cervical lesions and prevention of cervical cancer in these high-risk patients and is currently recommended following HPV vaccination.Serum Cancer Antigen 125. Cancer antigen (CA) 125 is a large membrane glycoprotein belonging to the wide mucin family commonly used as a tumor marker in patients known to have ovarian cancer. An elevated CA-125 in the patient without known ovarian cancer should be interpreted in conjunction with patient information and symptoms as well as imaging. In the setting of an adnexal mass, the serum CA-125 test may help with triage of a patient to the appropriate surgical management. The test should be used with caution as it is a nonspecific test and may be elevated with multiple benign conditions including endometriosis, fibroids, infection, and pregnancy and may even vary with the menstrual cycle. For these reasons, the CA-125 test is less useful in the premenopausal woman for triaging an adnexal mass. In the postmenopausal woman, a CA-125 greater than 35 in the setting of a complex adnexal mass merits referral of the patient to a gynecologic oncologist.10Common Office Procedures for DiagnosisVulvar/Vaginal Biopsy. Any abnormal vulvar or vaginal lesion including skin color changes, raised lesions, or ulcer-ations should be biopsied. Local infiltration with local anes-thetic is followed by a 3to 5-mm punch biopsy appropriate to the lesion. The specimen is elevated with Adson forceps and cut from its base with scissors. The vaginal biopsy can sometimes be difficult to perform because of the angle of the lesion. After injection with local anesthetic, traction of the area with Allis forceps and direct resection of the lesion with scissors or cervi-cal biopsy instrument (Schubert, Kevorkian, etc) can achieve an adequate biopsy.Colposcopy and Cervical Biopsy. In cases of an abnormal Pap smear cytology or positive HPV testing, a colposcopy is performed for a histologic evaluation. A colposcope is used to achieve 2x to 15x magnification of the cervix. Once the cer-vix is visualized, cervical mucus, if present, is removed, and then 3% acetic acid is applied to the cervix for one minute. This application dehydrates cells and causes dysplastic cells with dense nuclei to appear white. The lining of the cervix consists of squamous epithelium on the ectocervix, whereas columnar epithelium lines the endocervical canal. The ectocervix there-fore appears smooth and pale pink in color while the endocervix forms epithelial fronds or “grape-like” structures visible through the colposcope. The junction between columnar and squamous cell types is called the squamocolumnar junction (SCJ), which in younger women is usually visible on the ectocervix. When columnar epithelium extends onto the ectocervix, it appears as a red zone surrounding the os and is called ectropion or ectopy. The transformation zone (TZ) is the area between mature squa-mous epithelium distally and columnar epithelium proximally, and it is the site of active squamous metaplasia. For colposcopy to be deemed adequate, the entire SCJ must be visualized dur-ing an adequate colposcopy. Areas with acetowhite, punctation, mosaicism, or atypical blood vessels seen during colposcopy may represent dysplasia or cancer and should be biopsied. A green filter enhances visualization of blood vessels by making them appear darker in contrast to the surrounding epithelium.An alternative to dilute acetic acid is Lugol’s solution—a concentrated solution of iodine that reacts with the glycogen in normal squamous epithelium to make it appear dark brown. High-grade CIN lesions have low amounts of glycogen because the epithelium is poorly differentiated, and hence they do not turn brown with Lugol’s solution. This is termed Lugol’s nonstaining or Lugol’s negative. Historically, this used to be referred to as the Schiller’s test. Lugol’s can be useful for determining whether a colposcopically equivocal area warrants biopsy: Lugol’s staining areas are most likely normal epithelium, whereas Lugol’s nonstaining areas may be CIN, metaplasia,  or inflammation.Brunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   179018/02/19   4:34 PM 1791GYNECOLOGYCHAPTER 41Endometrial Biopsy. Endometrial sampling should be per-formed before planned hysterectomy if there is a history of bleeding between periods, heavy and/or frequent menstrual peri-ods, or postmenopausal bleeding. A patient with the potential for pregnancy should have a pregnancy test before the procedure. A pipelle endometrial biopsy can be performed in the office and is a cost-effective and safe procedure that is generally well tolerated by patients. The pipelle is a flexible polypropylene suction cannula with an outer diameter of 3.1 mm. The pipelle is inserted through the endocervix after cervical cleaning, and the depth of the uterine cavity is noted. If difficulty in entering the endometrium with the pipelle is encountered, a tenaculum may be used to straighten the cervix and/or an OS-finder may be use-ful in overcoming resistance within the endocervix. The endo-metrial specimen is obtained by pulling on the plunger within the pipelle, creating a small amount of suction. The pipelle is rotated and pulled back from the fundus to the lower uterine segment within the cavity to access all sides.11 Additional passes may be needed in order to acquire an adequate amount of tis-sue. If office biopsy is not possible due to patient discomfort or cervical stenosis, a dilatation and curettage in the operating room may be indicated depending on the clinical circumstances.Evaluation for Fistula. When a patient presents with copi-ous vaginal discharge, the provider should be concerned about a fistula with the urinary or gastrointestinal tract. A simple office procedure can be performed when there is a concern for a vesi-covaginal fistula. A vaginal tampon is placed followed by instil-lation of sterile blue dye through a transurethral catheter into the bladder; a positive test is blue staining of the tampon. If the test is negative, one can evaluate for a ureterovaginal fistula. The patient is given phenazopyridine, which changes the color of urine to orange. If a tampon placed in the vagina stains orange, the test is positive. Alternatively, the patient can be given an intravenous injection of indigo carmine.Rectal fistula must be considered when a patient reports stool evacuation per vagina. It can be identified in a similar fashion using a large Foley catheter placed in the distal rectum through which dye may be injected, or with the use of an oral charcoal slurry and timed examination. Common areas for fis-tulae are at the vaginal apex, at the site of a surgical incision, or around the site of a prior episiotomy or perineal repair after a vaginal delivery.BENIGN GYNECOLOGIC CONDITIONSVulvar LesionsPatients presenting with vulvar symptoms should be carefully interviewed and examined, and a vulvar biopsy should be obtained whenever the diagnosis is in question, the patient does not respond to treatment, or premalignant and malignant disease is suspected. Vulvar conditions such as contact derma-titis, atrophic vulvovaginitis, lichen sclerosis, lichen planus, lichen chronicus simplex, Paget’s disease, Bowen’s disease, and invasive vulvar cancer are common particularly in postmeno-pausal women. Systemic diseases like psoriasis, eczema, Crohn’s disease, Behçet’s disease, vitiligo, and seborrheic der-matitis may also involve the vulvar skin.Leukoplakias. There are three types of leukoplakia, a flat white abnormality. Lichen sclerosis is the most common cause of leukoplakia.12 There are two peaks of onset: prepubertal girls and perimenopausal or postmenopausal women.13 Classically, it results in a figure-of-eight pattern of white epithelium around the anus and vulva resulting in variable scarring and itching, and less commonly pain. Diagnosis is confirmed with biopsy, and treatment consists of topical steroids. An established association between lichen sclerosis and vulvar squamous cell carcinoma estimates risk of malignant transformation up to 5%.13Lichen planus is a cause of leukoplakia with an onset in the fifth and sixth decade of life. Lichen planus, in contrast to lichen sclerosis which is limited to the vulva and perianal skin, can involve the vagina and oral mucosa, and erosions occur in the majority of patients leading to a variable degree of scarring. Patients usually have a history and dysuria and dyspareunia, and complain of a burning vulvar pain. Histology is not specific, and biopsy is recommended. Treatment is with topical steroids. Systemic steroids are indicated for severe and/or unresponsive cases.Lichen simplex chronicus is the third cause of leukoplakia, but is distinguished from the other lichen diseases by epidermal thickening, absence of scarring, and a severe intolerable itch.13 Intense scratching is common, and contributes to the severity of the symptoms and predisposes the cracked skin to infections. Treatment consists of cessation of the scratching which some-times requires sedation, elimination of any allergen or irritant, suppression of inflammation with potent steroid ointments, and treatment of any coexisting infections.Bartholin’s Cyst or Abscess. Bartholin’s glands, great ves-tibular glands, are located at the vaginal orifice at the four and eight o’clock positions; they are rarely palpable in normal patients. They are lined with cuboidal epithelium and secrete mucoid material to keep the vulva moist. Their ducts are lined with transitional epithelium, and their obstruction secondary to inflammation may lead to the development of a Bartholin’s cyst or abscess. Bartholin’s cysts or abscesses are usually symptom-atic and are easily diagnosed on examination. Infections are usu-ally polymicrobial. Treatment consists of incision and drainage and placement of a Word catheter, a small catheter with a bal-loon tip, for 2 to 3 weeks to allow for formation and epitheliali-zation of a new duct. Recurrent cysts or abscesses may require marsupialization, but on occasion these necessitate excision of the whole gland. Marsupialization is performed by incising the cyst or abscess wall and securing its lining to the skin edges with interrupted sutures.14 Cysts or abscesses that fail to resolve after drainage and those occurring in patients over 40 years old should be biopsied to exclude malignancy.Molluscum Contagiosum. Molluscum contagiosum presents with dome-shaped papules and are caused by the poxvirus. The papules are usually 2 to 5 mm in diameter and classically have a central umbilication. They are spread by direct skin contact, and present on the vulva, as well as abdomen, trunk, arms, and thighs. Lesions typically clear in several months, but they can be treated with cryotherapy, curettage, or cantharidin, a topical blistering agent.Genital Ulcers. The frequency of the infectious etiologies of genital ulcers varies by geographic location. The most common causes of sexually transmitted genital ulcers in young adults in the United States are, in descending order of prevalence, herpes simplex virus (HSV), syphilis, and chancroid.15 Other infec-tious causes of genital ulcers include lymphogranuloma vene-reum and granuloma inguinale. Noninfectious etiologies include Behçet’s disease, neoplasms, and trauma. Table 41-3 outlines a rational approach to their evaluation and diagnosis.3Brunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   179118/02/19   4:34 PM 1792SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIVulvar Condyloma. Condylomata acuminata (anogenital warts) are viral infections caused by HPV.16 Genital infection with HPV is the most common sexually transmitted infection in the United States today. HPV 6 and 11 are the most common low-risk types and are implicated in 90% of cases of genital warts.17 Women with immunosuppression due to HIV or solid organ transplant are at higher risk of vulvar condyloma than immunocompetent women.18,19 Genital warts are skin-colored or pink and range from smooth flattened papules to verrucous papilliform lesions. Lesions may be single or multiple and extensive. Diagnosis should be confirmed with biopsy as verru-cous vulvar cancers can be mistaken for condylomata.20 If small, self-administered topical imiquimod 5% cream or trichloroace-tic acid for in-office applications may be tried. Extensive lesions may require surgical modalities that include cryotherapy, laser ablation, cauterization, and surgical excision.Paget’s Disease of the Vulva. Paget’s disease of the vulva is an intraepithelial disease of unknown etiology that affects Table 41-3Clinical features of genital ulcers syndromes HERPESSYPHILISCHANCROIDLYMPHOGRANULOMA VENEREUMGRANULOMA INGUINALE (DONOVANOSIS)PathogenHSV type 2 and less commonly HSV type 1Treponema palladiumHaemophilus ducreyiChlamydia trachomatis L1-L3Calymmato-bacterium granulomatisIncubation period2–7 days2–4 weeks  (1–12 weeks)1–14 days3 days–6 weeks1–4 weeks  (up to 6 months)Primary lesionVesiclePapulePapule or pustulePapule, pustule, or vesiclePapuleNumber of lesionsMultiple, may coalesceUsually oneUsually multiple,  may coalesceUsually oneVariableDiameter (mm)1–25–152–202–10VariableEdgesErythematousSharply demarcated, elevated, round,  or ovalUndermined, ragged, irregularElevated, round,  or ovalElevated, irregularDepthSuperficialSuperficial or deepExcavatedSuperficial or deepElevatedBaseSerous, erythematousSmooth, nonpurulentPurulentVariableRed and rough (“beefy”)IndurationNoneFirmSoftOccasionally firmFirmPainCommonUnusualUsually very tenderVariableUncommonLymph-adenopathyFirm, tender, often bilateralFirm, nontender, bilateralTender, may suppate, usually unilateralTender, may suppurate, loculated, usually unilateralPseudo-adenopathyTreatmentacyclovir (ACV) 400 mg POI three times a day for 7–10 days for primary infection and 400 mg PO three times a day for 5 days for episodic managementPrimary, secondary, and early latent  (<1 year): benzathine PCN-G 2.4 million U IM × 1Late latent (>1 year) and latent of unknown duration: benzathine PCN-G 2.4 million units IM every week × 3azithromycin 1 g po or ceftriaxone 250 mg IM × 1 OR Ciprofloxacin 500 mg  po twice a day for 3 daysErythromycin base  500 mg po three times a day for  7 daysDoxycycline 100 mg  po twice a day × 21 days ORErythromycin base 500 mg po four times a day for 21 daysDoxycycline 100 mg  po twice a day for 3 weeks until all lesions have healedSuppressionacyclovir 400 mg  po twice a day  for those with  frequent outbreaks    Data from Stenchever M, Droegemueller W, Herbst A, et al: Comprehensive Gynecology, 4th ed. St Louis, MO: Elsevier/Mosby; 2001.Brunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   179218/02/19   4:34 PM 1793GYNECOLOGYCHAPTER 41mostly postmenopausal women in their sixth decade of life. It causes chronic vulvar itching and is sometimes associated with an underlying invasive vulvar adenocarcinoma or invasive cancers of the breast, cervix, or gastrointestinal tract. Grossly, the lesion is variable but usually confluent, raised, erythema-tous to violet, and waxy in appearance. Biopsy is required for diagnosis; the disease is intraepithelial and characterized by Paget’s cells with large pale cytoplasm. Treatment is assess-ment for other potential concurrent adenocarcinomas and then surgical removal by wide local resection of the involved area with a 2-cm margin. Free margins are difficult to obtain because the disease usually extends beyond the clinically visible area.21 Intraoperative frozen section of the margins can be done; how-ever, Paget’s vulvar lesions have a high likelihood of recurrence even after securing negative resection margins.Vulvar Intraepithelial Neoplasia.  Two pathologically dis-tinct premalignant lesions of the vulva are currently recog-nized. Vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia (VIN) of usual type (uVIN) is caused by the HPV virus, tends to occur in younger women, and presents as multifocal disease. VIN of differenti-ated type (dVIN) develops independently of HPV and is typi-cally unifocal and seen in postmenopausal women. VIN is similar to its cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) counterpart in the cervix. In 2012, the pathologic terminology of HPV-related disease in the anogenital region was harmonized into a two-tier system where LSIL is equivalent to uVIN 1 and HSIL encompasses uVIN 2 and uVIN 3.22 Additional risk factors for the development of VIN include HIV infection, immunosup-pression, smoking, vulvar dermatoses such as lichen sclerosis, CIN, and a history of cervical cancer. Vulvar pruritus is the most common complaint in women with symptoms. Lesions may be vague or raised, and they may be velvety with sharply demar-cated borders. Diagnosis is made with a vulvar skin biopsy and multiple biopsies are sometimes necessary. Evaluation of the perianal and anal area is important as the disease may involve these areas. Once invasive disease is ruled out, treatment usually involves wide surgical excision; however, the treatment approaches may also include 5% imiquimod cream, CO2 laser ablation, or cavitational ultrasonic surgical aspiration (CUSA), and depends on the number of lesions and their severity. When laser ablation is used, a 1-mm depth in hair-free areas is usually sufficient, while hairy lesions require ablation to a 3-mm depth because the hair follicles’ roots can reach a depth of 2.5 mm. Unfortunately, VIN tends to recur in up to 30% of cases, and high-grade lesions will progress to invasive disease in approxi-mately 10% of patients if left untreated.23Vaginal LesionsVaginitis (see Table 41-2). Vulvovaginal symptoms are extremely common, accounting for over 10 million office visits per year in the United States. The causes of vaginal complaints are commonly infectious in origin, but they include a number of noninfectious causes, such as chemicals or irritants, hormone deficiency, foreign bodies, systemic diseases, and malignancy. Symptoms include abnormal vaginal discharge, pruritus, irrita-tion, burning, odor, dyspareunia, bleeding, and ulcers. A puru-lent discharge from the cervix should always raise suspicion of upper genital tract infection even in the absence of pelvic pain or other signs.Normal vaginal discharge is white or transparent, thick, and mostly odorless. It increases during pregnancy, with use of estrogen-progestin contraceptives, or at mid-cycle around the time of ovulation. Complaints of foul odor and abnormal vaginal discharge should be investigated. Candidiasis, bacte-rial vaginosis, and trichomoniasis account for 90% of vaginitis cases. The initial workup includes pelvic examination, vagi-nal pH testing, microscopy, vaginal cultures if microscopy is normal, and gonorrhea/Chlamydia NAAT (see earlier section, “Common Screening and Testing”).24 The pH of normal vaginal secretions is 3.8 to 4.4, which is hostile to growth of pathogens, and pH greater than or equal to 4.9 is indicative of a bacterial or protozoal infection. Treatment of vaginal infection before anticipated surgery is appropriate, particularly for BV, which may be associated with a higher risk for vaginal cuff infections (Fig. 41-8).Bacterial Vaginosis Bacterial vaginosis (BV) accounts for 50% of vaginal infections. It results from reduction in concentration of the normally dominant lactobacilli and increase in concentration of anaerobic organisms like Gardnerella vaginalis, M hominis, Bacteroides species, and others.25 Diagnosis is made by microscopic demonstration of clue cells. The discharge typically produces a fishy odor upon addition of KOH (amine or Whiff test). Initial treatment is usually a 7-day course of metronidazole.Vulvovaginal Candidiasis Vulvovaginal candidiasis (VVC) is the most common cause of vulvar pruritus. It is generally caused by C albicans and occasionally by other Candida species. It is common in pregnancy, diabetics, patients taking antibiotics, and in immunocompromised hosts. Initial treatment is usually with topical antifungals, although one dose oral antifungal treatments is also effective.Trichomonas Vaginalis Trichomoniasis is a sexually transmit-ted infection of a flagellated protozoan and can present with malodorous, purulent discharge. It is typically diagnosed with visualization of the trichomonads during saline wet mount microscopy. Initial treatment is usually a 7-day course of metronidazole.Gartner’s Duct Cyst. A Gartner’s duct cyst is a remnant of the Wolffian tract; it is typically found on the lateral vaginal walls. Patients can be asymptomatic or present with complaints of dyspareunia or difficulty inserting a tampon. If symptom-atic, these cysts may be surgically excised or marsupialized. If surgery is planned, preoperative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) should be obtained to determine the extent of the cyst and verify the diagnosis.Vaginal Condyloma. The etiology and treatment of vaginal condyloma is similar to vulvar condyloma (see earlier section, “Vulvar Condyloma”).Vaginal Intraepithelial Neoplasia. Vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia, or VaIN, is similar to VIN and is classified based on the degree of epithelial involvement as mild (I), moderate (II), severe (III), or carcinoma in situ.26 Upwards of 65% to 80% of VaIN or vaginal cancers are associated with HPV infection. Typically, a patient will have a history of cervical dysplasia and a prior hysterectomy. The majority of lesions are located in the upper one-third of the vagina. Lesions are usually asymptomatic and found incidentally on cytological screening. Biopsy at the time of colposcopy is diagnostic and rules out invasive disease. VaIN is treated with laser ablation, surgical excision, or topical 5-FU therapy.4Brunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   179318/02/19   4:34 PM 1794SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IICervical LesionsBenign Cervical Lesions. Benign lesions of the cervix include endocervical polyps, nabothian cysts (clear, fluid filled cysts with smooth surfaces), trauma (such as delivery-related cervi-cal tear or prior cervical surgery), malformation of the cervix, and cervical condyloma. For endocervical polyps, exploration of the base of the polyp with a cotton swab tip to identify that it is cervical and not uterine and to identify the stalk characteris-tics can help identify the appropriate surgical approach. Small polyps with identifiable base can be removed by grasping the polyp with ring forceps and slowly rotating it until separated from its base. Use of loop electroexcisional procedure (LEEP) is appropriate for larger lesions. Laser or other ablative procedures are appropriate for condyloma proven by biopsy.Cervical Intraepithelial Neoplasia. Following HPV expo-sure, dysplastic changes are common. Low grade dysplasia (cer-vical intraepithelial neoplasia [CIN] I) can be observed and will most often regress to normal within 2 years. However, for girls or women in whom HPV infection is persistent, progression to high-grade cervical dysplasia (CIN II or III) usually require additional treatment due to the high risk of transformation to malignancy. Excisional procedures serve the therapeutic pur-pose of removal of dysplastic cells, and a diagnostic purpose as histologic review to rule out concomitant early stage cervical cancer can be performed. Either a LEEP or cold knife conization (CKC) may be used for surgical excision of the squamocolum-nar junction (SCJ) and outer endocervical canal. Risks of both procedures include bleeding, postprocedure infection, cervical stenosis, and risk of preterm delivery with subsequent pregnan-cies. The benefit of a LEEP is that it can be performed in the office under local anesthesia. A looped wire attachment for a standard monopolar electrosurgical unit is used to perform a LEEP excision. Loops range in a variety of shapes and sizes to accommodate different sizes of cervix. Optimally, one pass of the loop should excise the entire SCJ. Hemostasis of the remain-ing cervix is achieved with the ball electrode and ferrous sulfate paste (Monsel’s solution).A cervical cold knife conization allows for an excision where the margin status is not obscured by cauterized artifact. This may be particularly useful when the endocervical margin is of interest, or in cases of adenocarcinoma in situ and microin-vasive squamous cell carcinoma, where margin status dictates the type and need for future therapy. After injection with dilute vasopressin and the placement of stay sutures at three and nine o’clock on the cervix, a #11 blade is used to circumferentially excise the conical biopsy. Hemostasis is achieved with the cau-tery or Monsel’s solution.Uterine CorpusThe average age of menarche, or first menstrual period, in the United States is 12 years and 5 months. Duration of normal menstruation is between 2 to 7 days, with a flow of less than 80 mL,  cycling every 21 to 35 days.27 Nonpregnant patients, who present with heavy bleeding and are 35 years of age and older or have risk factors for endometrial cancer, must be ruled out for malignancy as the first step in their management (see earlier section, “Endometrial Biopsy”).Abnormal Uterine Bleeding. The classification of abnormal uterine bleeding (AUB) has been recently updated.28 Abnormal uterine bleeding may be heavy (AUB/HMB) or intermenstrual (AUB/IMB) and is further divided into acute and chronic cat-egories. Acute AUB is an episode of heavy bleeding that is of sufficient quantity to require immediate intervention to pre-vent further blood loss. Acute AUB may occur in the setting of chronic AUB. Women with acute AUB should be assessed Vaginal dischargeand/or pruritusInterviewExamWet & KOH mountsVaginal pHMetronidazoleorClindamycinCandidiasisAntifungalsTrichomoniasispH <4.5HyphaeBudding yeastspH >4.5TrichomonadspH >4.5Clue cellsPositive whiff testUlcersPruritic lesionsVaginalatrophyAtrophic vaginitisTopical estrogenBiopsyOral metronidazoleBacterialvaginosisFigure 41-8. Treatment algorithm for vulvovaginitis.Brunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   179418/02/19   4:34 PM 1795GYNECOLOGYCHAPTER 41rapidly to determine acuity, determine most the likely etiol-ogy of bleeding, and choose the appropriate treatment. Chronic AUB is abnormal uterine bleeding present for most of the previ-ous 6 months.The many causes of AUB are further divided into two cat-egories: structural causes and nonstructural causes. Structural causes include polyps, adenomyosis, leiomyomata, and malig-nancy. Nonstructural causes can include coagulopathy, ovulatory dysfunction, endometrial effects, and iatrogenic causes. Clini-cal screening for underlying disorders of hemostasis is recom-mended in women with heavy menses since menarche, and other risk factors such as bleeding with dental work, epistaxis one or more times per month, or a family history of bleeding symptoms. Poly-, oligo-, and amenorrhea are menstrual cycles of less than 21 days, longer than 35 days, or the absence of uterine bleeding for 6 months or a period equivalent to three missed cycles.Endometrial Polyps. Endometrial polyps are localized hyper-plastic growth of endometrial glands and stroma around a vas-cular core forming sessile or pedunculated projections from the surface of the endometrium.29 Endometrial polyps are rarely neo-plastic (<1%) and may be single or multiple. Many are asymp-tomatic; however, they are responsible for about 25% of cases of abnormal uterine bleeding, usually metrorrhagia. Polyps are common in patients on tamoxifen therapy and in periand post-menopausal women. Up to 2.5% of patients with a polyp may harbor foci of endometrial carcinoma.30 Diagnosis can be made with saline-infused hysterosonography, hysterosalpingogram, or by direct visualization at the time of hysteroscopy. Defini-tive treatment, in the absence of malignancy, involves resection with operative hysteroscopy or by sharp curettage.Adenomyosis. Adenomyosis refers to ectopic endometrial glands and stroma situated within the myometrium. When dif-fuse, it results in globular uterine enlargement secondary to hyperplasia and hypertrophy of the surrounding myometrium. Adenomyosis is very common, tends to occur in parous women, and is frequently an incidental finding at the time of surgery. Symptoms include menorrhagia, dysmenorrhea, and diffuse globular uterine enlargement. MRI typically reveals islands within the myometrium with increased signal intensity.31 Defini-tive diagnosis is obtained via hysterectomy and pathologic examination.Uterine Leiomyomas. Leiomyomas, also known colloqui-ally as fibroids, are the most common female pelvic tumor and occurs in response to growth of the uterine smooth muscle cells (myometrium). They are common in the reproductive years, and by age 50. Leiomyomas are described according to their anatomic location (Fig. 41-9) as intramural, subserosal, submu-cosal, pedunculated, and cervical. Rarely, they can be ectopic.27 Most are asymptomatic; however, abnormal uterine bleeding caused by leiomyomas is the most common indication for hys-terectomy in the United States. Other manifestations include pain, pregnancy complications, and infertility. Pain may result from degenerating myomas that outgrow their blood supply or from compression of other pelvic organs such as the bowel, bladder, and ureters. Hormonal changes during pregnancy can cause significant enlargement of preexisting myomas, which may lead to significant distortion of the uterine cavity resulting in recurrent miscarriages, fetal malpresentations, intrauterine growth restriction, obstruction of labor or abnormal placenta-tion, and the subsequent need for cesarean delivery, abruption, preterm labor, and pain from degeneration.SubserousPedunculatedSubmucousProlapsedIntercavitaryIntramuralFigure 41-9. Types of uterine myomas.Menorrhagia resulting from leiomyomas can be severe at times, requiring hospitalization or transfusion. Examination typically reveals an enlarged and irregular uterus. Diagnosis is usually made by transvaginal ultrasonography. Other diagnos-tic modalities, including MRI, computed tomography (CT), and hysterosalpingogram or saline-infused hysterosalpingography, are especially useful in the cases of submucosal and intrauterine myomas. Management options of leiomyomas are tailored to the individual patient depending on her age and desire for fertil-ity and the size, location, and symptoms of the myomas. Con-servative management options include oral contraceptive pills (OCPs), medroxyprogesterone acetate, GnRH agonists, uterine artery embolization, myomectomy, and hysterectomy.32-34 Uter-ine artery embolization is contraindicated in patients planning future pregnancy and may result in acute degeneration of myo-mas requiring hospitalization for pain control. Myomectomy is indicated in patients with infertility thought secondary to fibroids and for those with symptomatic fibroids who wish to preserve their reproductive capacity. Hysterectomy is the only definitive therapy. Treatment with GnRH agonists for 3 months prior to surgery may be administered in anemic patients, and it may allow them time to normalize their hematocrit, avoiding transfusions; GnRH also decreases blood loss at hysterectomy and shrinks the myomas by an average of 30%. The latter may make the preferred vaginal surgical approach more feasible.Endometrial Hyperplasia. Endometrial hyperplasia is caused by chronic unopposed hyperestrogenic state (relative absence of progesterone) and is characterized by proliferation of endo-metrial glands resulting in increased gland-to-stroma ratio. It can be asymptomatic or, more commonly, result in abnormal vaginal bleeding. Hyperplasia can be either simple or complex, based on the architecture of the glands. Of greater importance is the presence or absence of nuclear atypia, described by the WHO classification.35 A classic retrospective review suggested that untreated endometrial hyperplasia progresses to malig-nancy in 1%, 3%, 8%, and 29% of cases of simple, complex, simple with atypia, and complex hyperplasia with atypia, respectively.36 A more modern prospective study noted that of patients who had complex atypical hyperplasia on endometrial biopsy performed prior to hysterectomy, 42.5% had cancer at the time of hysterectomy.37 Simple and complex hyperplasias can be treated with progestins, and women should have repeat Brunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   179518/02/19   4:34 PM 1796SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIendometrial sampling in 3 to 6 months. Atypical hyperplasia is considered a premalignant condition and is treated ideally with simple hysterectomy. If preservation of fertility is desired or surgery is contraindicated, treatment with high-dose progestins such as megesterol acetate 40 to 160 mg per day or with a pro-gesterone IUD usually reverses these lesions. Close follow-up and repeated sampling are necessary.The reliability of the pathologic diagnosis of complex atypical hyperplasia is poor, and better and more objective clas-sifications predictive of malignant endometrial behavior are needed.38 These observations led to the new classification of endometrial intraepithelial neoplasia (EIN). In 2014, the WHO Classification system introduced the diagnosis of EIN into a binary system that aligns with clinical options: hyperplasias are divided into hyperplasia without atypia, and EIN. The new clas-sification is intended to have clinical implications: hyperplasia without atypia may be managed with hormonal therapy, while EIN should be considered a premalignant lesion.The new classification moves the focus away from cyto-logic atypia and puts more emphasis on glandular crowding and complexity. While atypia is still important, proliferations can get to EIN without it. For example, the diagnosis of EIN includes cases that lack overt cytologic atypia but show a distinct popu-lation from the background epithelium. Morphometric data is utilized to calculate the so-called D-score, which takes into account percentage of stroma, glandular complexity, and gland pleomorphism in an objective manner. A D-score of less than 1 connotes a high rate of progression to endometrial cancer and therefore a diagnosis of EIN. EIN is more predictive than CAH of underlying endometrial malignancy.39 Most pathology reports are provided with both diagnoses as the transition is made.Clinicians should be careful to not confuse EIN with endometrial intraepithelial carcinoma (EIC). EIC is a precursor lesion for serous endometrial cancer, and women with a preop-erative diagnosis of EIC should always have hysterectomy and appropriate surgical staging performed.Procedures Performed for Structural Causes of Abnormal Uterine BleedingDilation and Curettage. The patient is placed on the operat-ing table in a lithotomy position, and the vagina and cervix are prepared as for any vaginal operation. The cervix is grasped on the anterior lip with a tenaculum. Some traction on the cervix is necessary to straighten the cervical canal and the uterine cavity. A uterine sound is inserted into the uterine cavity, and the depth of the uterus is noted. The cervical canal is then systematically dilated beginning with a small cervical dilator. Most operations can be performed after the cervix is dilated to accommodate a number 8 or 9 Hegar dilator or its equivalent. Dilatation is accomplished by firm, constant pressure with a dilator directed in the axis of the uterus (Fig. 41-10). The endometrial cavity is then systemically scraped with a uterine curette. Using the larg-est curette available or suction curettage is a safer choice than a small curette, which tends to cause perforation with less pres-sure. Uterine perforation is the major complication of dilatation and curettage, diagnosed when the operator finds no resistance to a dilator or curette. Laparoscopy can identify any damage to vessels or bowel if clinically indicated. A uterine perforation through the fundus of the uterus with a dilator or uterine sound is low risk for injury and may be observed without laparoscopy if there is no significant vaginal bleeding noted.CommonductstonesearcherBACFigure 41-10. Dilatation and curettage of the uterus.Brunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   179618/02/19   4:34 PM 1797GYNECOLOGYCHAPTER 41Hysteroscopy. Hysteroscopy, like laparoscopy, has gained widespread support for use both for diagnosis and treatment of intrauterine pathology and for ablation of the endometrium as an alternative to hysterectomy for the treatment of abnormal uterine bleeding. Hysteroscopes can have an objective lens that is offset from the long axis from 0° to 30°.Diagnostic Hysteroscopy The diagnostic hysteroscope usu-ally has an external diameter of 5 mm. Some diagnostic sheaths allow passage of flexible instruments for biopsy and cutting. Following dilation of the cervix, a diagnostic hysteroscope is placed, and the uterine cavity is distended with the media of choice. Inspection of the cavity includes identifying the uter-ine fundus, cornua, and any other anomalies to include polyps, leiomyomas, or uterine septum. A dilation and curettage or directed polypectomy with forceps can be performed following identification.Newer office hysteroscopes can be used to perform hyster-oscopy in the office. A paracervical block is placed, and a flex-ible 3-mm hysteroscope is used. Generally, office hysteroscopy is performed only for diagnostic purposes.Operative Hysteroscopy An operative hysteroscope is wider than a diagnostic hysteroscope and usually has an inte-gral unipolar or bipolar resecting loop identical to a urologic resectoscope. Electrolyte contacting media are incompatible with conventional monopolar resectocopic instruments, but electrolyte-free isotonic solutions such as 5% mannitol, 1.5% glycine and 3% sorbitol are acceptable. Large volume deficits have been associated with secondary hyponatremic hypervol-emia due to their metabolism to free water after intravasation. Fluid-management systems are available to monitor the amount of distension media lost during hysteroscopy in order to prevent fluid overload. When fluid deficits reach 1000 to 1500 mL, the procedure should be terminated, and the patient’s serum elec-trolytes should be assessed.40 If bipolar instruments are used, resectoscopic instruments can be used without the unique issues related to electrolyte-free hypotonic solutions.43Hysteroscopic Polypectomy Removal of an intrauterine polyp can be performed following diagnostic hysteroscopy through grasping with a polyp forceps. Alternatively, using operative hysteroscopy the base of the polyp is incised with hysteroscopic scissors. The hysteroscope, sleeve, and polyp are removed simultaneously because most polyps will not fit through the operating channel. Extremely large polyps may have to be removed piecemeal. Any residual base of the polyp may be removed with biopsy forceps.Endometrial Ablation A common treatment for abnormal uterine bleeding in the absence of endometrial hyperplasia is ablation of the endometrium. Historically, this was performed with an operative hysteroscope using an electrosurgical “roller ball,” where the endometrium was destroyed down to the myo-metrium in a systematic fashion. Currently, hysteroscopic endo-metrial ablation has been widely supplanted by various devices, including heated free fluid, cryotherapy, thermal balloon, microwave, and radiofrequency electricity. Most ablation tech-niques result in amenorrhea in approximately half the patients and decreased menstruation in another third of the patients over the first year of therapy.42 Subsequent hysterectomy fol-lowing endometrial ablation is common with rates as high as 40%.43Ablation is not recommended in postmenopausal women.Myomectomy Myomectomy (Fig. 41-11) is the removal of fibroids, and it can be treatment for abnormal uterine bleeding, bulk symptoms, or infertility. Hemostasis during myomectomy can be aided medically by direct injection of dilute vasopressin. Submucosal leiomyoma can be removed safely hysteroscopi-cally. Because myoma tissue is relatively dense, a power cut-ting instrument is required. The most common method is use of electrosurgery. Both pedunculated and submucosal fibroids are shaved into small pieces with the hysteroresectoscope. Stalk resection should only be done to release a pedunculated fibroid if it is 10 mm or less in size; larger fibroids are difficult to remove in one piece without excessive cervical dilatation.44Subserosal, or pedunculated fibroids may require an open or laparoscopic approach depending on the size and location or the leiomyoma. In addition to vasopressin, hemostasis can be further managed through the placement of a Penrose drain around the base of the uterus, pulled through small perforations in the broad ligament lateral to the uterine blood supply on either side and clamped to form a tourniquet for uterine blood flow. An incision is then made through the uterine serosa into the myoma. The pseudocapsule surrounding the tumor is identified, and the tumor is bluntly dissected out with scissors, or bluntly if open. Vessels to the myoma are dessicated with the electrosurgical unit. Several myomas may be removed through a single incision, depending upon size. The uterine incisions are then closed with absorbable sutures to obliterate the dead space and provide hemostasis. The uterine serosa is closed with a 3-0 absorbable suture, placed subserosally if possible. Because myomectomies are associated with considerable postoperative adhesion formation, barrier techniques are used to decrease adhesion formation.During a laparoscopic myomectomy, hemostasis is assisted by intrauterine injection of dilute vasopressin (10 U in 50 mL) at the site of incision, similar to an open procedure. This is usually performed percutaneously with a spinal needle. Pedunculated leiomyomas can be excised at the base using scissors or a power instrument. Intramural leiomyomas require deep dissection into the uterine tissue, which must be closed subsequently with laparoscopic suturing techniques. Removing the specimen may require morcellation; this should be performed after placement of the specimen in a bag. Although power morcellators were previously used for this purpose, an FDA warning in 2014 has virtually eliminated their use. Severe complications including damage to surrounding bowels and vascular structures caused by the spinning blade of the morcellator were reported. Multiple reports of benign tissues such as leiomyoma and endometriosis scattering and dispersing onto abdominal organ surfaces lead-ing to inflammation, infection, and intestinal obstruction often requiring additional surgical interventions and treatments were made. The unintentional dissemination of malignant cells wors-ens prognosis if an undiagnosed malignancy (most frequently leiomyosarcoma) was morcellated. Although contained morcel-lation (in a bag) may reduce these risks, informed consent to the patient is prudent.45Total Abdominal Hysterectomy (Fig. 41-12) After the abdomen is entered, the upper abdomen is examined for evi-dence of extrapelvic disease, and a suitable retractor is placed in the abdominal incision. The uterus is grasped at either cornu with clamps and pulled up into the incision. The round ligament is identified and divided. The peritoneal incision is extended from the round ligament to just past the ovarian hilum, lat-eral the infundibulopelvic ligament, if the ovaries are to be removed. The retroperitoneal space is bluntly opened, the ure-ter identified on the medial leaf of the broad ligament, and the Brunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   179718/02/19   4:34 PM 1798SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIinfundibulopelvic ligament isolated, clamped, cut, and suture-ligated; a similar procedure is carried out on the opposite side. If the ovaries are to be left in situ, the ureter is identified and an opening below the utero-ovarian ligament and fallopian tube created. The fallopian tube and utero-ovarian ligament are clamped, cut, and ligated. The bladder is mobilized by sharply dissecting it free of the anterior surface of the uterus and cervix. Clamps are placed on the uterine vessels at the cervicouterine junction, and the vessels are cut and suture-ligated. The cardinal ligaments are then serially clamped, cut, and ligated. Follow-ing division of the remaining cardinal ligaments, the uterus is elevated and the vagina clamped. The cervix is amputated from the vagina with scissors or a knife. Sutures are placed at each lateral angle of the vagina, and the remainder of the vagina is closed with a running or interrupted absorbable suture. Pelvic reperitonealization is not necessary.Transvaginal Hysterectomy (Fig. 41-13) Vaginal hysterectomy is the preferred approach in patients in whom the uterus descends and the pubic arch allows enough space for a vaginal operation. A bladder catheter can be placed before the procedure and the patient is placed in a lithotomy position. A weighted vaginal speculum is placed in the vagina, and the cervix is grasped with a tenaculum and pulled in the axis of the vagina. Injection of the cervix and paracervical tissue with analgesic with epinephrine may be helpful in defining planes and decreasing obscuring bleeding. A circumferential incision may be made with a scalpel or scissors. The posterior cul-de-sac is identified and entered with scissors. A long, weighted speculum is then placed through this opening into the peritoneal cavity. Metzenbaum scissors are used to dissect anteriorly on the cervix down to the pubocervical-vesical fascia, reflecting the bladder off the lower uterine segment. When the peritoneum of the anterior cul-de-sac is identified, it is entered with the scissors, and a retractor is placed in the defect. The uterosacral ligaments are identified, doubly clamped, cut, and ligated. Serial clamps are placed on the parametrial structures above the uterosacral ligament; these pedicles are cut and ligated. At the cornu of the uterus, the tube, round ligament, and utero-ovarian ligament of the ovary are doubly clamped and cut. The procedure is carried out usually concurrently on the opposite side, and the uterus is removed. The pelvis is inspected for hemostasis; all bleeding must be meticulously controlled at this point.The pelvic peritoneum is closed with a running purse-string suture incorporating the uterosacral and ovarian pedicles, those that were held. This exteriorizes those areas that might tend to bleed. The sutures attached to the ovarian pedicles are cut. The vagina may be closed with interrupted mattress stitches, ABCDEFFigure 41-11. Myomectomy.Brunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   179818/02/19   4:34 PM 1799GYNECOLOGYCHAPTER 41Figure 41-12. Hysterectomy.BladderBladderRound ligamentRound ligamentFallopian tubeFallopian tubeOvaryBADCFEOvarian ligamentUterinevesselsUreterUreterCardinalligamentUterusBrunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   179918/02/19   4:34 PM 1800SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIincorporating the uterosacral ligaments into the corner of the vagina with each lateral stitch. On occasion, the uterus, which is initially too large to remove vaginally, may be reduced in size by morcellation (Fig. 41-14). After the uterine vessels have been clamped and ligated, serial wedges are taken from the central portion of the uterus in order to reduce the uterine mass. This procedure will allow the vaginal delivery of even very large uterine leiomyomas.Laparoscopic Hysterectomy The advantages of laparoscopy over laparotomy include decreased postoperative pain, shorter hospital stays, and reduced blood loss. Laparoscopy has been used to augment vaginal hysterectomy to avoid laparotomy in patients with known pelvic adhesions, endometriosis, or to ensure removal of the entire ovary if oophorectomy is planned or an adnexal mass is present. Over 20% of benign hysterec-tomies performed in the United States are estimated to be per-formed laparoscopically.46Although multiple variations in technique exist, there are three basic laparoscopic approaches for hysterectomy: lapa-roscopic-assisted vaginal hysterectomy (LAVH), total lapa-roscopic hysterectomy (TLH), and laparoscopic supracervical hysterectomy (LSH). The technically simplest is the LAVH. A multiple-port approach is used to survey the peritoneal cavity, and any pelvic adhesions are lysed. The round ligaments are then occluded and divided, and the uterovesical peritoneum and peritoneum lateral to the ovarian ligament are incised. The course of the ureter and any adhesions or implants, such as endometriosis that might place the ureter in the way of the surgical dissection, are carefully dissected. Next, the proximal uterine blood supply is dissected for identification and then occluded with a laparoscopic energy device. When the ova-ries are removed, the infundibulopelvic ligaments containing the ovarian vessels are divided. If the ovaries are conserved, the utero-ovarian ligament and blood vessels are divided and occluded. In many cases, the posterior cul-de-sac is also incised laparoscopically and the uterosacral ligaments separated with an energy device. The amount of dissection that is done prior to the vaginal portion depends on individual patient characteristics and operator comfort with the vaginal approach, and it may include as little as ovarian and adhesion management to full dissection, including bladder dissection, with only the last vaginal incision done by the vaginal approach. During a TLH, the vaginal inci-sion is performed laparoscopically, and the vaginal incision may be closed with laparoscopic suturing. This procedure is used for the indications listed earlier and also when lack of uterine descent makes the vaginal approach impossible.VaginaVaginaGIHCardinalligamentVaginaFigure 41-12. (Continued)Brunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   180018/02/19   4:34 PM 1801GYNECOLOGYCHAPTER 41During an LSH, the uterine vessels are divided after the bladder is dissected from the anterior uterus. The ascending branches of the uterine arteries are occluded, and the entire uterine fundus is amputated from the cervix. The endocervix is either cauterized or cored out. The fundus is then morcellated and removed an abdominal port. The end result is an intact cer-vix, with no surgical dissection performed below the uterine artery. This approach avoids both a large abdominal incision and a vaginal incision. The risks of LSH including subsequent bothersome bleeding from the remaining endometrium or endo-cervix and cancer risk from the residual cervical stump combin-ing with concerns about power morcellation (see earlier section, “Myomectomy”) have made this procedure less attractive.Benign Ovarian and Fallopian Tube LesionsThe most common ovarian benign findings include functional follicular cysts, endometriomas (due to ovarian endometriosis), and serous cystadenomas or cystadenofibromas. These can present with varying degrees or pelvic pain, or sometimes be completely asymptomatic. Ultrasound is the best initial imaging modality for evaluating ovarian abnormalities.Ovarian Cystectomy. When a cystic lesion persists or causes pelvic pain, surgical intervention is usually justified. Perform-ing a cystectomy with ovarian preservation is recommended in women who desire future fertility. Whether the cystectomy is performed laparoscopically or by laparotomy, the procedure is Figure 41-13. Vaginal hysterectomy.Brunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   180118/02/19   4:34 PM 1802SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIinitiated with inspection of the peritoneal cavity, peritoneum, diaphragm, liver, and pelvis. In the absence of signs of malig-nancy, pelvic washings are obtained, and the ovarian capsule is incised superficially sharply or with the electrosurgical unit. The cyst is shelled out carefully through the incision. During laparos-copy, it is placed in a bag, intact if possible, and the bag opening is brought through a 10-mm port. If a cyst should rupture before removal, contents are aspirated thoroughly, and the cyst wall is removed and sent for pathologic evaluation. The peritoneal cavity is copiously rinsed with Ringer’s lactate solution. This is especially important when a dermoid cyst is ruptured because the sebaceous material can cause a chemical peritonitis unless all the visible oily substance is carefully removed. A cyst may need to be drained to facilitate removal, but only after bag edges are completely out of the abdomen assuring no leakage within the abdomen. Hemostasis of the ovary is achieved with bipolar electrocoagulation, but the ovary is usually not closed. If there are solid growths within the cyst, it should be sent for frozen section to verify the absence of the malignancy. If malignancy is detected, immediate definitive surgery is recommended.Removal of Adnexa. Indications for removal of adnexae include persistent ovarian cyst, pelvic pain, concern for malig-nancy, and risk reduction surgery in women with genetic predis-position for ovarian or endometrial cancers (BRCA1/2 mutation carrier, Lynch syndrome). In general, the peritoneum lateral to the infundibulopelvic (IP) ligament is incised in a parallel fashion to allow retroperitoneal dissection and identification of the ureter. Once this has been accomplished, the IP ligament is ligated with suture or an energy source (ultrasonic or bipolar). The remaining posterior leaf of the broad ligament is incised toward the uterus in a direction parallel to the utero-ovarian liga-ment to avoid ureteral injury. The fallopian tube and utero-ovarian ligaments are then ligated with either suture or an energy source. If performed laparoscopically, the specimen(s) is/are removed in a bag as described earlier.Tubal Sterilization. As in diagnostic laparoscopy, a oneor two-port technique can be used. Fallopian tubes are occluded in the mid-isthmic section, approximately 3 cm from the cornua, using clips, elastic bands, or bipolar electrosurgery. With elec-trosurgery, approximately 2 cm of tube should be desiccated. Pregnancy rates after any of these techniques have been reported Figure 41-14. Uterine morcellation through the vagina.in the range of 3 per 1000 women. Complete removal of the fal-lopian tube (salpingectomy) at the time of tubal sterilization for the purposes of ovarian cancer prevention has recently become more common.47A transvaginal tubal occlusion technique may also be used for tubal sterilization. A routine hysteroscopy is first performed to inspect the cavity and identify the tubal ostia. The tubal insert introducer sheath is then placed into the working channel of the hysteroscope. The insert is then threaded into the fallopian tube. Following this procedure, the patient must undergo a hys-terosalpingogram to confirm tubal occlusion at 3 months post procedure. Prior to the hysterosalpingogram, the patient is coun-seled to use a reliable birth control method. Transvaginal tubal sterilization has been associated with perforation of the uterus and/or fallopian tubes, identification of inserts in the abdominal or pelvic cavity, persistent pain, and suspected allergic or hyper-sensitivity reactions.Other Benign Pelvic PathologyChronic Pelvic Pain. Chronic pelvic pain is defined as pain below the umbilicus that has lasted at least 6 months or causes functional disability, requiring treatment. While there can be gastrointestinal and urologic causes of chronic pelvic pain, gynecologic causes are frequently identified. Oftentimes, a surgical evaluation is needed for diagnosis and/or intervention. The most common gynecologic causes of chronic pelvic pain include endometriosis, adenomyosis, uterine leiomyomas, and adhesive disease.Endometriosis Endometriosis is the finding of ectopic endo-metrial glands and stroma outside the uterus. It affects 10% of the general population, and it is an incidental finding at the time of laparoscopy in more than 20% of asymptomatic women. Chronic pelvic pain (80%) and infertility (20–50%) are the two most common symptoms.27 The pathophysiology of endometrio-sis is poorly understood; etiologic theories explaining dissemi-nation of endometrial glands include retrograde menstruation, lymphatic and vascular spread of endometrial glands, and coe-lomic metaplasia. Endometriosis commonly involves the ova-ries, pelvic peritoneal surfaces, and uterosacral ligaments. Other possible sites include the rectovaginal septum, sigmoid colon, intraperitoneal organs, retroperitoneal space, ureters, incisional scars, umbilicus, and even the thoracic cavity. Involvement of the fallopian tubes may lead to scarring, blockage, and subse-quent infertility. Ovarian involvement varies from superficial implants to large complex ovarian masses called endometriomas or “chocolate cysts.” Endometriomas are found in approximately one-third of women with endometriosis and are often bilateral.While endometriosis can be totally asymptomatic, com-plaints vary from mild dyspareunia and cyclic dysmenorrhea, to debilitating chronic pelvic pain with dysmenorrhea. Less com-mon manifestations include painful defecation, hematochezia, and hematuria if there is bowel and/or bladder involvement. Catamanial pneumothorax has been reported from endometrio-sis implanted in the pleura. Pelvic examination in symptomatic patients typically demonstrates generalized pelvic tenderness, nodularity of the uterosacral ligaments, and at times a pelvic mass may be appreciated if an endometrioma is present. The severity of symptoms does not correlate with the degree of clini-cal disease present. Endometriosis commonly causes of eleva-tions in serum CA-125. Definitive diagnosis usually requires laparoscopy and visualization of the pathognomonic endome-triotic implants. These appear as blue, brown, black, white, or yellow lesions that can be raised and at times puckered giving Brunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   180218/02/19   4:34 PM 1803GYNECOLOGYCHAPTER 41Table 41-4Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommended treatment of pelvic inflammatory disease (2015)RECOMMENDED INTRAMUSCULAR/ORAL REGIMENSCeftriaxone 250 mg IM in a single dosePLUSDoxycycline 100 mg orally twice a day for 14 dayswith* or withoutMetronidazole 500 mg orally twice a day for 14 daysORCefoxitin 2 g IM in a single dose and Probenecid, 1 g orally administered concurrently in a single dosePLUSDoxycycline 100 mg orally twice a day for 14 dayswith or withoutMetronidazole 500 mg orally twice a day for 14 daysOROther parenteral third-generation cephalosporin  (e.g., ceftizoxime or cefotaxime)PLUSDoxycycline 100 mg orally twice a day for 14 dayswith* or withoutMetronidazole 500 mg orally twice a day for 14 daysRECOMMENDED PARENTERAL REGIMENSCefotetan 2 g IV every 12 hoursPLUSDoxycycline 100 mg orally or IV every 12 hoursORCefoxitin 2 g IV every 6 hoursPLUSDoxycycline 100 mg orally or IV every 12 hoursORClindamycin 900 mg IV every 8 hoursPLUSGentamicin loading dose IV or IM (2 mg/kg), followed by a maintenance dose (1.5 mg/kg) every 8 hours. Single daily dosing (3–5 mg/kg) can be substituted.ALTERNATIVE PARENTERAL REGIMENAmpicillin/Sulbactam 3 g IV every 6 hoursPLUSDoxycycline 100 mg orally or IV every 12 hours*The addition of metronidazole to treatment regimens with third-generation cephalosporins should be considered until the need for extended anaerobic coverage is ruled out.Data from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2015 Sexually Transmitted Diseases Treatment Guidelines: Pelvic Inflammatory Disease.them a “gunpowder” appearance. Biopsy is not routinely done but should be obtained if the diagnosis is in doubt.Treatment is guided by severity of the symptoms and whether preservation of fertility is desired and varies from expectant, to medical, to surgical.48,49 Expectant management is appropriate in asymptomatic patients. Those with mild symp-toms can be managed with oral contraceptive pills and/or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory analgesia; moderate symptoms are treated with medroxyprogesterone acetate. Severe symptoms are treated with gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH) ago-nists to induce medical pseudomenopause.Surgical management for endometriosis varies depend-ing on the age and fertility desires of the patient. A diagnos-tic laparoscopy with biopsies may be indicated to confirm the diagnosis of endometriosis. If endometriosis is suspected, an operative laparoscopy with ablation of endometriotic implants usually decreases the severity of pelvic pain. Ablation of endo-metriotic implants can be performed with CO2 laser or elec-trocautery, and/or resection of deep endometriotic implants.48 Endometriomas can cause pain and if found should be treated by ovarian cystectomy. Complete resection of the cyst wall is required as recurrence of the endometrioma is common after partial removal. Unfortunately, endometriosis is a chronic dis-ease, and conservative therapy, medical or surgical, provides only temporary relief, with the majority of patients relapsing with 1 to 2 years. For patients with severe debilitating symp-toms who do not desire future fertility and have not responded to conservative management extirpative surgery to remove the uterus, ovaries, and fallopian tubes; this intervention is curative and should be considered.Although endometriosis is not generally thought to be a premalignant lesion, there is an increased risk of type I ovar-ian cancer in women with a history of endometriosis.50 Molecu-lar evidence that endometriosis is likely a precursor lesion to clear cell carcinoma and endometrioid carcinomas includes the presence of mutations in both PIK3CA and ARID1A in benign endometriotic lesions in close proximity, suggesting that loss of expression of these genes likely occurs early in the development of endometrioid carcinomas.51,52Pelvic Adhesive Disease Pelvic adhesions usually are related to previous surgery, endometriosis, or infection, the latter of which can be either genital (i.e., pelvic inflammatory disease) or extragenital (e.g., ruptured appendix) in origin. Adhesions can be lysed mechanically and preferably with minimal cautery.Pelvic Inflammatory Disease. Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) is an inflammatory disorder of the upper female genital tract, including any combination of endometritis, salpingitis, tubo-ovarian abscess, and pelvic peritonitis. Sexually transmitted organisms, especially N gonorrhoeae and C trachomatis, are implicated in many cases although microorganisms that comprise the vaginal flora (e.g., anaerobes, G vaginalis, Haemophilus influenzae, enteric Gram-negative rods, and Streptococcus agalactiae) have been implicated as well. PID can additionally result from extension of other pelvic and abdominal infections, such as appendicitis and diverticulitis, or may be precipitated by medical procedure, such as hysterosalpingography, endometrial biopsy, or dilation and curettage.53,54The presentation of PID can be subtle. Differential diagnosis includes appendicitis, cholecystitis, inflammatory bowel disease, pyelonephritis, nephrolithiasis, ectopic pregnancy, and ovarian torsion. Long-term sequelae can include infertility, chronic pelvic pain, and increased risk of ectopic pregnancy. Because of the severity of these sequelae, presumptive treatment is recommended in young, sexually active women experiencing pelvic or lower abdominal pain, when no cause for the illness other than PID can be identified and if cervical motion tenderness, uterine tenderness, or adnexal tenderness is present on examination. Because of the psychosocial complexity associated with a diagnosis of PID, additional criteria should be used to enhance the specificity of the minimum clinical criteria when possible. These include the following: oral temperature >101°F (>38.3°C); abnormal cervical mucopurulent discharge or cervical friability; presence Brunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   180318/02/19   4:34 PM 1804SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIof abundant numbers of white blood cells on saline microscopy of vaginal fluid; elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate; elevated C-reactive protein; and laboratory documentation of cervical infection with N gonorrhoeae or C trachomatis. Laparoscopy can be used to obtain a more accurate diagnosis of salpingitis and a more complete bacteriologic diagnosis and is often useful in ruling out other causes of peritonitis. Laparoscopic findings may include swollen erythematous tubes with purulent exudates.55Several outpatient parenteral and oral antimicrobial regi-mens have been effective in achieving clinical and microbio-logic cure. Hospitalization for intravenous antibiotics may be necessitated in cases of where surgical emergencies cannot be ruled out, tubo-ovarian abscess is identified, pregnancy, severe illness (nausea and vomiting, or high fever), inability to follow or tolerate an outpatient oral regimen; or failure of outpatient oral antimicrobial therapy. Treatment of a tubo-ovarian abscess may include placement of a percutaneous drain in addition to intravenous antibiotics.55Surgical intervention becomes necessary if medical therapy fails or if the patient becomes unstable. Hysterec-tomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy is the procedure of choice; however, conservative surgery must be considered in young patients desiring future fertility. The abdomen should be explored for metastatic abscesses, and special attention must be paid to bowel, bladder, and ureteral safety due to the friabil-ity of the infected tissue and the adhesions commonly encoun-tered at the time of surgery. Placement of an intraperitoneal drain and mass closure of the peritoneum, muscle, and fascia with delayed-absorbable sutures is advised. Conservative sur-gery, when feasible, may be attempted by laparoscopy and may involve unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy or drainage of the abscess and liberal irrigation of the abdomen and pelvis.53PREGNANCY-RELATED SURGICAL CONDITIONSMany pregnant women will undergo invasive diagnostic proce-dures for prenatal diagnosis, and in the United States, nearly one-third of all births are cesarean deliveries.56 About 1 in 500 pregnant women will require surgery for nonob-stetrical issues.57,58 Diagnostic challenges and physiologic changes due to pregnancy, as well as the unique anesthesia risks and potential risks to the pregnancy, should be kept in mind whether the primary surgeon is an obstetrician, gynecologist, or a general surgeon (Table 41-5).58Trauma in the obstetric patient requires stabilization of the mother while considering the fetal compartment.58,59 Trauma-related hypovolemia may be compounded by pregnancy-induced decreases in systemic vascular resistance, and when supine, the weight of the gravid uterus on the vena cava. When feasible, a left lateral tilt should be instituted to improve venous return to the right heart. Later in pregnancy, the small bowel is dis-placed into the upper abdomen, making it vulnerable to complex injury from penetrating upper abdominal trauma. Though small bowel is displaced from the pelvis, the dramatic increase in pel-vic blood flow can lead to rapid blood loss due to penetrating pelvic trauma, fractures, or avulsion of pelvic vessels. Gastric motility is decreased increasing the risk of aspiration. Peritoneal signs may be attenuated by the stretching of the abdominal wall. Several coagulation factors are also increased in pregnancy, increasing the likelihood for thromboembolic events, but also giving the unsuspecting surgeon false security when low-normal levels are observed during resuscitative efforts. Only the third 5Table 41-5Physiologic changes due to pregnancyCardiovascular changes Increased cardiac output Increased blood volume Increased heart rate Decreased blood pressure Decreased systemic vascular resistance Decreased venous return from lower extremitiesRespiratory changes Increased minute ventilation Decreased functional residual capacityGastrointestinal changes Decreased gastric motility Delayed gastric emptyingCoagulation changes Increased clotting factors (II, VII, VIII, IX, X) Increased fibrinogen Increased risk for venous thromboembolismRenal changes Increased renal plasma flow and GFR Ureteral dilationReproduced with permission from Gabbe S NJ, Simpson J: Obstetrics: Normal and Problem Pregnancies, 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier/Saunders; 2012.trimester fetus has any ability to autoregulate in the context of decreased uterine blood flow and oxygen delivery. In the third trimester, perimortem cesarean delivery should be considered as part of maternal resuscitation in cases of maternal hemodynamic collapse. Though treating the maternal compartment is the pri-mary concern, it should also be recognized that the fetus will be impacted significantly by maternal hypotension, as blood may be shunted away from the uterus.Conditions and Procedures Performed  Before ViabilityAmniocentesis/Chorionic Villus Sampling. Noninvasive prenatal testing has for the most part replaced invasive fetal testing. Amniocentesis is a procedure in which amniotic fluid is aspirated from the uterine cavity and sent for genetic or labora-tory testing typically under ultrasound guidance with a 20to 22-gauge needle. This procedure may be used to confirm abnor-mal noninvasive testing.Miscarriage and Pregnancy Terminations. Spontaneous pregnancy loss is common. Although the miscarriage rate among women who know they are pregnant is roughly 10% to 20%, if the start of pregnancy is set to fertilization, rates are as high as 50%. Chromosomal abnormalities are the underlying cause of miscarriage and are present in over half of cases. Patient may report cramping, bleeding and passage of tissue. If products of conception are not passed, diagnosis can be made by transvagi-nal ultrasound if an empty gestational sac is identified or an embryo is noted to not have a heartbeat. Treatment can include expectant management, medical management with misoprostol, or surgical management with dilation and curettage.60Half of all pregnancies in the United States are unintended, and many of these are undesired. Additional reasons for termi-nation of pregnancy include fetal anomalies such as trisomies, fetal infections, and maternal health. Medical terminations are Brunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   180418/02/19   4:34 PM 1805GYNECOLOGYCHAPTER 41available up to 10 weeks of gestation, and surgical terminations can be performed to viability. Rates of pregnancy termination have been declining due decreasing access to abortion ser-vices and widespread availability of long-acting contraceptives (LARC). LARCs are safe, effective, easy to use and protect against unintended pregnancy for up to 10 years.61Up to 15 weeks’ gestation, manual vacuum aspiration can be used following cervical dilation to mechanically evacuate the fetus or embryo, placenta, and membranes by suction using a manual syringe. Alternatively, cervical dilation and suction curettage can be performed. The uterine cervix is grasped with a tenaculum, then mechanically dilated occasionally using adjunc-tive prostaglandins, and an appropriately sized vacuum cannula is inserted into the uterus and rotated on its axis to remove the products of conception. Dilation and extraction is performed for pregnancies in the second trimester. The additional cervical dilation required at greater gestational ages is usually a two-step (often over 2 days) process. Osmotic dilators are placed within the cervix a day prior to the procedure and expand as water is absorbed, passively dilating the endocervical canal. These are removed immediately prior to the procedure and mechanical dilation is then performed as needed. Forceps are then used to remove fetal parts. Curettage of the postabortal uterus must be approached carefully because the uterus is extremely soft and perforation can occur with very little warning. Complications are rare (particularly when contrasted to the risks of pregnancy and term delivery) but include infection, hemorrhage due to uterine atony, cervical lacerations, uterine perforations, and inadvertent bowel injury from the vacuum cannula or forceps.Cerclage. Cervical insufficiency is defined as painless cervical dilation leading to recurrent second trimester pregnancy loss, or shortened cervical length as determined by transvaginal ultra-sound, or advanced cervical change before 24 weeks’ gestation in a woman with either prior preterm birth/loss or significant risk factors for insufficiency. A cervical cerclage refers to a procedure in which suture or synthetic tape is used to circum-ferentially reinforce the cervix to improve pregnancy outcome in at-risk patients.62 Shirodkar and McDonald techniques have been described63,64; both involve transvaginally placing a non-absorbable suture at the uterocervical junction to lengthen and close the cervix. An abdominal cerclage of the lower uterine segment performed laparoor by laparotomy can be considered for a patient with a severely shortened or absent cervix who has previously failed a transvaginal cerclage.Ectopic Pregnancies. Extrauterine pregnancies are most com-monly located along the fallopian tubes but can also implant on the ovary. Rarely, implantation can occur primarily on other abdominal organs or peritoneal surfaces. A high index of suspi-cion and early diagnosis typically includes an abnormal rise in b-hCG assays and presence of an adnexal mass on transvaginal ultrasound. Early ectopic pregnancies can be managed medi-cally with a methotrexate injection; however, close follow-up with twice-weekly b-hCG testing is required. Laparoscopy is the definitive management and can be used either as primary treatment or when medical management fails. The tube should be removed (salpingectomy) in its entirety if the ectopic is iden-tified within the fallopian tube. This can be performed using a vessel sealing device or even an endo-loop and endo-shears. Laparotomy is reserved for unstable patients with a known hemoperitoneum where Kelly clamps can be placed along the mesosalpinx to control bleeding. Cornual ectopic pregnancies may require wedge resection of the uterine serosa and myo-metrium, which is then closed in two layers.65 Linear salpin-gostomy along the antimesenteric border and removal of the products of conception is now rarely used due to low rates of postoperative tubal function and high recurrent ectopic pregnan-cies presumably due to scarring.Conditions and Procedures Performed  After ViabilityObstetric Lacerations and Repair. At the time of vaginal delivery, perineal lacerations are common. These lacerations involve, in varying degrees, the vaginal mucosa, the muscular elements inserting onto the perineal body, the levator ani, and in 4% to 5% of vaginal deliveries, the anal sphincter or anorectal mucosa. Although episiotomies were historically cut prophy-lactically to prevent unstructured tearing of the perineum, this practice has fallen out of favor as the benefit of episiotomy has not been demonstrated.Perineal Laceration First-degree tears involve only the perineal skin and may or may not need to be reapproximated. Second-degree tears involve the perineal body and can gener-ally be repaired with some variation using a single continuous, nonlocking suture technique, typically a 2-0 or 3-0 synthetic delayed absorbable suture. The apex of the vaginal epithelial is approximated first including epithelium and underlying tissue to build up the rectovaginal septum. Upon reaching the hymenal ring, the perineal body and bulbocavernosus muscle are reap-proximated, and a transition stitch is placed from the vaginal mucosa, which was repaired along a horizontal plane, to the deep perineal layer, which lies in a vertically-oriented plane. A running closure is then completed incorporating the deep peri-neal tissues from the introitus to the extent of the perineal defect. At this point, the perineal skin is closed from inferior to superior in a subcuticular fashion and tied just inside the introitus.Third-degree lacerations extend through the perineal body and involve the external anal sphincter, while fourth-degree lac-erations involve the internal anal sphincter and rectal mucosa. When present, thirdand fourth-degree lacerations should be repaired first before proceeding with the second-degree repair. This is accomplished by first closing the anal mucosa, and then identifying and closing the internal anal sphincter in a second layer. The external anal sphincter is then identified, and the muscular cylinder is reconstructed by suturing the severed ends together using either an end-to-end or overlapping technique. Although these are typically straightforward layered closures, knowledge of the anatomy is important. Incomplete reconstruc-tion, particularly of thirdor fourth-degree lacerations, can contribute to future pelvic floor disorders, as well as the devel-opment of fistulae or incontinence.Cervical and Vaginal Lacerations Significant lacerations to the cervix or vagina may also occur during childbirth, particu-larly with instrumented deliveries or macrosomic infants. These lacerations may present as persistent bleeding, not readily rec-ognized due to their location, and often in association with a firmly contracted uterus. Vaginal lacerations may be repaired primarily but should only be closed after deeper tissues are inspected to insure no active bleeding. Cervical lacerations can be repaired in a running, locking fashion, insuring that the apex of the laceration is incorporated in the closure. If the apex is challenging to reach, the closure can be started more distally using the suture to apply traction so that the apex may be closed.Brunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   180518/02/19   4:34 PM 1806SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIPuerperal Hematoma Trauma during childbirth can occasion-ally result in significant hematoma formation with or without a visible laceration. These hematomas may hide significant blood loss and most commonly occur in the vulva, paravaginal, and pelvic retroperitoneum. Typical presentation is pain and mass effect. Small hematomas can be managed conservatively with close observation and patient monitoring. Though there are no evidence-based size criteria, an unstable patient or expand-ing hematomas should prompt surgical intervention. After the hematoma is incised and drained, diffuse venous oozing is usu-ally encountered rather than a single bleeding vessel. Hemo-stasis can be achieved using electrosurgery or fine absorbable suture, though caution must be used due to the proximity of bowel, bladder, and ureters to some hematomas. Pressure on the vulva or packing the vagina, rather than the hematoma cavity, may prevent further bleeding.Cesarean Deliveries. Typical indications for cesarean deliv-ery include nonreassuring fetal status, breech or other malpre-sentations, triplet and higher order gestations, cephalopelvic disproportion, failure to progress in labor, placenta previa, and active genital herpes. Previous low transverse cesarean deliv-ery is not a contraindication to subsequent vaginal birth after cesarean; however, much of the increase in cesarean delivery in the past two decades is attributable to planned repeat cesareans. Cesarean deliveries typically are performed via a lower anterior (caudal) uterine transverse incision because there is decreased blood loss, and the uterine rupture rate with future pregnancies is about 0.5% (Fig. 41-15). A prior classical cesarean delivery is an absolute indication for a planned repeat cesarean delivery because of a high rate of uterine rupture during labor, unlike with the lower anterior uterine transverse incision. Abdominal access is obtained by a Pfannenstiel, Maylard or vertical inci-sion. Once the abdomen is entered, a vesicouterine reflection is created if a low transverse uterine incision is planned. The uter-ine incision is then made and extended laterally, avoiding the uterine vessels. After amniotomy, the baby is delivered, and the uterus is closed. Approximately 1000 mL of blood is typically lost during a cesarean delivery. Along with rapid closure of the uterine incision, uterotonics, such as intravenous oxytocin, are administered. A classical, vertical, uterine incision is made in EDABCFigure 41-15. Uterine incisions for cesarean delivery. (Reproduced with permission from Gabbe S, Niebyl J, Simpson J: Obstetrics: Normal and Problem Pregnancies, 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier/ Churchill Livingstone; 2007.)certain very early viable gestations, or in the case of certain transverse lies or abnormal placentation. Infection, excessive blood loss due to uterine atony, and urinary tract and bowel inju-ries are potential complications at the time of cesarean delivery. The risk of those injuries, as well as abnormal placentation (pla-centa accreta, increta, and percreta) rises with each subsequent cesarean delivery. Bleeding can only be controlled in some instances by performing a cesarean hysterectomy.Postpartum Hemorrhage. Postpartum hemorrhage is an obstetrical emergency that can follow either vaginal or cesarean delivery. Hemorrhage is usually caused by uterine atony, trauma to the genital tract, or rarely, coagulation disorders. Hemorrhage may also be caused by abnormal placentation (also called mor-bidly adherent placenta). Management consists of mitigating potential obstetric causes while simultaneously acting to avert or treat hypovolemic shock. In the absence of atony, the genital tract should be thoroughly evaluated for trauma. Atony is the most common cause of postpartum hemorrhage. It is typically treated with fundal massage and uterotonics such as oxytocin, methylergonovine, carboprost tromethamin, and misoprostol. When aggressive medical management fails, surgical manage-ment may be necessary and life-saving.66Uterine Curettage Retained products of conception may result in uterine atony. It may be possible to remove retained prod-ucts via manual extraction or with ring forceps. Bedside ultra-sound may be helpful in localization. When clinical suspicion is high, uterine curettage is indicated. A blunt, large curette, banjo curette, is introduced and removal of retained tissue typi-cally results in contraction of the myometrium and cessation of bleeding.Procedures Short of Hysterectomy As bleeding from post-partum hemorrhage becomes increasingly acute, interventions short of hysterectomy should be carried out expeditiously while supporting the hemodynamic status of the patient and prepar-ing for possible definitive surgery. A number of techniques for packing and tamponade of the uterus have been described, including a balloon device reported by Bakri and colleagues.67 These are typically left in place for 24 to 36 hours and appear to be safe and often effective conservative measures short of laparotomy and hysterectomy. The B-Lynch compression suture may control bleeding of atony at the time of cesarean section. A suture is placed through the hysterotomy, around the fundus of the uterus anterior to posterior, and then through the posterior lower uterine segment, to the contralateral side. At this point, the steps are reversed with the suture brought around the fundus posterior to anterior, through the contralateral side of the hys-terotomy, and then tied in the midline to compress the uterus. Additional procedures described include the O’Leary uterine artery ligation and the hypogastric artery ligation. “O’Leary stitches” are a series of sutures placed around the branches of the uterine artery and through the myometrium, resulting in compression of the vessels against the uterus. Hypogastric artery ligation entails the isolation of the internal iliac artery at its bifurcation with the external iliac artery. The hypogastric artery is ligated at least 3 cm distal to the bifurcation to avoid compromising the posterior division.Postpartum/Cesarean Hysterectomy A cesarean or postpar-tum (absent a prior cesarean delivery) hysterectomy involves the same steps as in a nonpregnant patient, but it is distinctly different due to the engorged vessels and the pliability of the tis-sues. If a cesarean section has been performed, occasionally the Brunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   180618/02/19   4:34 PM 1807GYNECOLOGYCHAPTER 41incision can be used for traction to keep the vessels and tissues attenuated. Vascular pedicles should be secured with clamps, but not ligated until both uterine arteries have been secured, to fully control bleeding. Lack of typical anatomic landmarks requires careful identification of the ureters and the dilated cervix visu-ally or by palpation, to separate from the bladder and vagina (Fig. 41-16). This procedure is often done for life-threatening hemorrhage, thus appropriate blood products, including packed red blood cells, fresh frozen plasma, platelets, and fibrinogen should be on call and are usually required. Fibrinogen is typi-cally elevated in a pregnant woman, such that a low-normal fibrinogen level can be cause for alarm, and further fibrinogen may be required before consumptive coagulopathy reverses. A massive transfusion protocol is helpful.Abnormal Placentation. Placenta accreta describes the clinical condition when the placenta invades and is inseparable from the uterine wall. When the chorionic villi invades the myometrium, the term placenta increta is used; whereas placenta percreta describes invasion through the myometrium and serosa, and even into adjacent organs such as the bladder. Abnormal placentation has increased in parallel to the cesarean section rate in the United States. When cytotrophoblasts invade decidualized endometrium and encounter a uterine scar, they do not encounter the normal myometrial signals to stop invasion. In the setting of a placenta previa, the presence of a uterine scare is a particular risk for placenta accreta with rates of 11%, 40%, and 61% for one, two, or three prior cesarean deliveries, respectively.68 Ultrasound or MRI can assist in the diagnosis, depending on the experience and comfort of the imager.69,70Women at risk for abnormal placentation should ideally be identified during pregnancy and be prepared for cesarean sec-tion followed by cesarean hysterectomy. Since the blood supply to the gravid uterus is 500 cc per minute, these surgeries have the potential to have very high blood loss, which can then lead to the development of disseminated intravascular coagulation. Over 50% of cases require more than 4 units of blood transfused. BladderUreter identifiedClamps on uterine vesselsFigure 41-16. Demonstration of location of distal ureter and  bladder, and their relationship to uterine vessels. (Reproduced with permission from Nichols DH: Gynecologic and Obstetric Surgery, Vol. 1. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 1993.)Unintentional bladder or ureteral injuries are common as well due to impaired visualization and poor dissection planes. For these reasons, patients with suspected placenta accreta should be delivered in a tertiary care center with a multidisciplinary team that has the capacity for massive blood transfusion pro-tocol. While some sites have implemented protocols involving interventional radiology with placement of occlusive balloons in the uterine arteries prior to delivery, these protocols have not been shown to decrease morbidity or overall blood loss. Postop-erative embolization should be available. Even with scheduled delivery in a well-resourced setting with a highly experienced and prepared multidisciplinary team, the morbidity of abnormal placentation is high. ICU stays are common, and maternal mor-tality as high as 7% has been reported.69Delayed hysterectomy where the placenta is left in situ after delivery of the baby if there is not significant bleeding and the mother is stable is advocated by certain centers but remains controversial.71 The risks of leaving the placenta in utero include later hemorrhage, infection, and sepsis. Planned hysterectomy at 6 to 12 weeks postpartum is recommended unless subsequent fertility is strongly desire.69-71PELVIC FLOOR DYSFUNCTIONPelvic floor disorders can be categorized, from a urogyneco-logic perspective, into three main topics: female urinary incontinence and voiding dysfunction, pelvic organ pro-lapse, and disorders of defecation.72 Approximately 11% of women will undergo surgery for incontinence or prolapse.73 The normal functions of support, storage, and evacuation can be altered by derangements in neuromuscular function both cen-trally and peripherally and through acquired changes in connec-tive tissue. Reconstructive surgeons aim to repair or compensate for many of these losses.EvaluationDiagnostic evaluations, in addition to the history and examina-tions previously described, can aid in the diagnosis of many pel-vic floor disorders. Cystoscopy, multichannel urodynamics, and/or fluoroscopic evaluation of the urinary tract can be obtained for patients with urinary incontinence or voiding dysfunction.74 Defecography, anal manometry, and endorectal ultrasound may be useful for diagnosis of defecatory dysfunction. A standard-ized examination called the pelvic organ prolapse quantifica-tion (POP-Q)74 helps to clarify which vaginal compartment, and therefore which specific structure, has lost its anatomic integrity in women with uterovaginal prolapse. Finally, dynamic MRI and pelvic floor electromyography has growing utility for all three disorders.Surgery for Pelvic Organ ProlapseMany factors are important in determining which reconstruc-tive operation is optimal for a given patient with pelvic organ prolapse. Surgical decisions are often based on case series and expert opinions that may not have universal applicability. How-ever, the few reports with the highest level of evidence sug-gests that failure rates for prolapse reconstruction may be twice as high using the vaginal approach when compared with the abdominal route.75,76Colporrhaphy. Anterior colporrhaphy, also known as an “anterior repair,” is performed for a symptomatic cystocele. The procedure begins with incision of the anterior vaginal epithelium 6Brunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   180718/02/19   4:34 PM 1808SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIin a midline sagittal direction. The epithelium is dissected away from the underlying vaginal muscularis. The vaginal muscularis is plicated with interrupted delayed absorbable stitches, after which the epithelium is trimmed and reapproximated. The vaginal canal is therefore shortened and narrowed proportionate to the amount of removed epithelium. Posterior colporrhaphy is performed for a symptomatic rectocele. This procedure is performed in a similar manner, often including the distal pubococcygeus muscles in the plication. Recently, in attempts to decrease surgical failures alluded to previously, many surgeons have opted to utilize grafts and meshes to augment these vaginally performed procedures. Unfortunately, the apparent number of postoperative complications, including mesh erosion, pelvic pain, and dyspareunia, prompted the FDA to publish a warning encouraging a much more limited use of vaginal mesh for prolapse repair until greater surveillance and more rigorous studies could be completed.77Sacrospinous and Uterosacral Ligament Fixations. Both the sacrospinous ligament fixation (SSLF) and uterosacral ligament fixation (USLF) procedures are vaginal procedures that suspend the apex of the vagina using native tissue for treatment of apical prolapse. The sacrospinous ligament is found embedded in and continuous with the coccygeus muscle, which extends from the ischial spine to the lateral surface of the sacrum. The procedure begins with entry into the rectovaginal space, usually by incising the posterior vaginal wall at its attachment to the perineal body. The space is developed to the level of the vaginal apex and the rectal pillar is penetrated to gain access to the pararectal space. A long-ligature carrier is used to place sutures medial to the ischial spine, through the substance of the ligament-muscle complex. Structures at risk in this procedure include the pudendal neurovascular bundle, the inferior gluteal neurovascular bundle, lumbosacral plexus, and sciatic nerve. After the stitches are placed, the free ends are sewn to the undersurface of the vaginal cuff. The sacrospinous stitches are tied to firmly approximate the vagina to the ligament without suture bridging.When using the uterosacral ligaments for repair of prolapse, it is important to recall that these structures are not “ligaments” in the true sense of the word, but rather condensations of smooth muscle, collagen, and elastin. Several support sutures are placed from the lateral-most portion of the vaginal cuff to the distal-most part of the ligament, and the medial vaginal cuff to the proximal ligament. Intraoperative evaluation of the lower urinary tract is important to confirm the absence of ureteral compromise.Colpocleisis. Colpocleisis is reserved for patients who are elderly, who do not wish to retain coital ability, and for whom there is good reason not to perform a more extensive recon-structive operation. A colpocleisis removes of part or all of the vaginal epithelium, obliterating the vaginal vault and leaving the external genitalia unchanged. The procedure can be performed with or without a hysterectomy. Successive purse-string sutures through the vaginal muscularis are used to reduce the prolapsed organs to above the level of the levator plate.Sacrocolpopexy. The procedure with the lowest risk of recurrence for patients with prolapse of the vaginal apex is an abdominal sacral colpopexy. In these patients, the natural apical support structure, the cardinal–uterosacral ligament complex, is often damaged and attenuated. The abdominal placement, as opposed to vaginal placement, of graft material to compensate for defective vaginal support structures is well described.78 Api-cal support defects rarely exist in isolation, and the sacrocol-popexy may be modified to include the anterior and posterior vaginal walls as well as the perineal body in the suspension. Sacrocolpopexies can be performed via laparotomy as well as via laparoscopy or robotically. Like rectopexies and low anterior resections, deep pelvic access is needed. Significant suturing at varied angles is required. The advent of the DaVinci robotic laparoscopic system has made visualization and adequate place-ment of the mesh and sutures easier to perform when using the minimally invasive approach.During a sacrocolpopexy, a rigid stent (usually an EEA sizer) is placed into the vagina to facilitate its dissection from the overlying bladder and rectum and to allow the graft material to be spread evenly over its surface. A strip of synthetic mesh is fixed to the anterior and posterior vaginal walls. The peritoneum overlying the presacral area is opened, extending to the poste-rior cul-de-sac. The sigmoid colon is retracted medially, and the anterior surface of the sacrum is skeletonized. Two to four permanent sutures are placed through the anterior longitudinal ligament in the midline, starting at the S2 level and proceeding distally. The sutures are passed through the graft at an appropri-ate location to support the vaginal vault without tension. The peritoneum is then closed with an absorbable running suture. The most dangerous potential complication of sacrocolpopexy is sacral hemorrhage.Surgery for Stress Urinary IncontinenceStress incontinence is believed to be caused by lack of urethro-vaginal support (urethral hypermobility) or intrinsic sphincter deficiency (ISD). ISD is a term applied to a subset of stress-incontinent patients who have particularly severe symptoms, including urine leakage with minimal exertion. This condition is often recognized clinically as the low pressure or “drainpipe” urethra. The urethral sphincter mechanism in these patients is severely damaged, limiting coaptation of the urethra. Standard surgical procedures used to correct stress incontinence share a common feature: partial urethral obstruction that achieves ure-thral closure under stress.Burch Procedure. Despite the wide acceptance of midurethral sling procedures, a retropubic urethropexy procedure called the Burch procedure is still performed for stress incontinence.79 The space of Retzius is approached extraperitoneally, from an abdominal approach, allowing the bladder to be mobilized from the surrounding adipose tissue and lateral pelvis. Two pairs of large-caliber nonabsorbable sutures are placed through the peri-urethral vaginal wall, one pair at the midurethra and one at the urethrovesical junction. Each stitch is then anchored to the ipsi-lateral Cooper’s (iliopectineal) ligament. The sutures are tied to give preferential support to the urethrovesical junction relative to the anterior vaginal wall without overcorrection. Long-term outcome studies up to 10 years have shown the Burch procedure yields cure rates of 80% to 85%.Tensionless Sling. The tension-free vaginal tape (TVT) is a modified sling that uses a strip of polypropylene mesh. Unlike traditional sling procedures, the mesh is positioned at the midurethra, not the urethrovesical junction, and it is not sutured or otherwise fixed into place. Advantages of TVT include the ability to perform the procedure under local anesthesia on an outpatient basis. Small subepithelial tunnels are made bilater-ally to the descending pubic rami through an anterior vaginal wall incision. A specialized conical metal needle coupled to a handle is used to drive one end of the sling through the peri-neal membrane, space of Retzius, and through one of two small suprapubic stab incisions. The tape is set in place without any Brunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   180818/02/19   4:34 PM 1809GYNECOLOGYCHAPTER 41tension after bringing up the other end of the tape through the other side. Recently, multiple modifications have been made to carry the tape through the bilateral medial portions of the obtu-rator space (TVT-O). Risks of the procedure include visceral injury from blind introduction of the needle, bleeding, and nerve and muscle injury in the obturator space. Additionally, voiding dysfunction and delayed erosion of mesh into the bladder or urethra has been seen.Urethral Bulking Injections. A transurethral or periurethral injection of bulking agents is indicated for patients with intrin-sic sphincter deficiency. Several synthetic injectable agents, such as polydimethylsiloxane and calcium hydroxylapatite are now used, as glutaraldehyde cross-linked (GAX) bovine dermal collagen is no longer commercially available.80 Anesthesia is easily obtained by using intraurethral 2% lidocaine jelly and/or transvaginal injection of the periurethral tissues with 5 mL of 1% lidocaine. The material is injected underneath the urethral mucosa at the bladder neck and proximal urethra at multiple positions, until mucosal bulk has improved. Patients must dem-onstrate a negative reaction to a collagen skin test prior to injec-tion. The long-term cure rate is 20% to 30%, with an additional 50% to 60% of patients demonstrating improvement.72 Repeat injections are frequently necessary because of migration and dissolution of the collagen material.Mesh in Reconstructive Pelvic Surgery. As noted earlier, pelvic reconstructive surgery frequently uses polypropylene mesh to augment procedures in the hopes of providing long-lasting repair. However, use of permanent mesh is associated with complications, most notably mesh erosion. In 2011, the FDA issued an updated statement to stipulate the risks when using transvaginally inserted mesh for prolapse.81 Ultimately, this has led to categorizing transvaginal mesh products as class III devices in 2016. In addition to appropriate patient selection, and extensive informed consent, the American Urogynecologic Society recommends appropriate training to perform the proce-dures and manage the complications.82,83GYNECOLOGIC CANCERVulvar CancerVulvar cancer is the fourth most common gynecologic cancer. The mean age at diagnosis is 65, though this has trended down over the last several decades.84 Evidence supports an HPV-dependent pathway of carcinogenesis with risk factors similar to VIN in approximately 60% of cases. A second pathway inde-pendent of HPV is associated with chronic inflammation, vul-var dystrophy.85 Patients usually present with a vulvar ulcer or mass. Pruritus is a common complaint, and vulvar bleeding or enlarged inguinal lymph nodes are signs of advanced disease. Careful evaluation of the patient is necessary to rule out con-current lesions of the vagina and cervix. Biopsy is required and should be sufficiently deep to allow evaluation of the extent of stromal invasion. Vulvar carcinomas are squamous in 90% of cases. Other less common histologies include melanoma (5%), basal cell carcinoma (2%), and soft tissue sarcomas (1–2%).Spread of vulvar carcinoma is by direct local extension and via lymphatic microembolization. Hematogenous spread is uncommon except for vulvar melanoma. Lymphatic spread seems to follow a stepwise, predictable pattern traveling from superficial, above the cribriform fascia, to deep inguinofemo-ral nodes and ultimately the pelvic, external iliac, nodal basin  Superficial inferiorepigastric v.Superficialexternalpudendal v.Superficial femorallymph nodesGreat saphenous v.Fossa ovalisSuperficialcircumflex iliac v.Superficial inguinallymph nodesInguinal ligamentExternalinguinal ringRound ligamentFigure 41-17. Lymphatic drainage of the vulva delineated by Stanley Way.(Fig. 41-17).86,87 The node of Cloquet is an important sentinel node situated in the route of spread to the pelvic lymph nodes.Staging and primary surgical treatment are typically pre-formed as a single procedure and tailored to the individual patient (Table 41-6). Surgical staging accounts for the most important prognostic factors including tumor size, depth of invasion, inguinofemoral node status, and distant spread. The most conservative procedure should be performed in view of the high morbidity of aggressive surgical management. This typi-cally involves radical resection of the vulvar tumor targeting a 1 to 2 cm margin around the lesion, and carried to the deep perineal fascia of the urogenital diaphragm with and ipsilateral or bilateral inguinofemoral lymphadenectomy (Fig. 41-18). For tumors ≤2 cm in size with ≤1 mm invasion (FIGO stage IA),  lymphadenectomy may be safely omitted, and wide local or Table 41-62009 FIGO staging of vulvar carcinomaIATumor confined to the vulva or perineum, ≤2 cm in size with stromal invasion ≤1 mm, negative nodes1BTumor confined to the vulva or perineum, >2 cm in size or with stromal invasion >1 mm, negative nodesIITumor of any size with adjacent spread (1/3 lower urethra, 1/3 lower vagina, anus), negative nodesIIIATumor of any size with positive inguino-femoral lymph nodes(i) 1 lymph node metastasis ≥5 mm(ii) 1–2 lymph node metastasis(es) of <5 mmIIIB(i) 2 or more lymph nodes metastases ≥5 mm(ii) 3 or more lymph nodes metastases <5 mmIIICPositive node(s) with extracapsular spreadIVA(i) Tumor invades other regional structures (2/3 upper urethra, 2/3 upper vagina), bladder mucosa, rectal mucosa, or fixed to pelvic bone(ii) Fixed or ulcerated inguino-femoral lymph nodesIVBAny distant metastasis including pelvic lymph nodesModified with permission from Pecorelli S: Revised FIGO staging for carcinoma of the vulva, cervix, and endometrium, Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 2009 May;105(2):103-104.Brunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   180918/02/19   4:34 PM 1810SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIradical local excision are adequate. Patients with IB tumors have deeper invasion but negative nodes and therefore carry an excellent prognosis. Stage II includes patients with local exten-sion and negative nodes and therefore carry a prognosis similar to other node-negative patients.Stage III disease includes patients with lymph node metas-tases, and stage IV disease is either locally advanced or distant metastasis. Treatment options for stage III and stage IV dis-ease include (a) chemoradiation followed by limited resection if needed; (b) radical vulvectomy; and (c) radical vulvectomy coupled with pelvic exenteration. External beam radiotherapy combined with radiosensitizing chemotherapy of cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) is emerging as the preferred initial management of advanced disease, followed by limited surgical resection of residual disease.88-90 Reconstruction of the vulva and groin, if needed, can be accomplished using grafts and rota-tional or myocutaneous flaps depending on the size and type of defect.Inguinofemoral lymphadenectomy is indicated beyond clinical stage IA. Unilateral lymphadenectomy is recom-mended for lateralized lesions or bilateral for central lesions that cross the midline, or those involving the periclitoral area (Figs. 41-19 and 41-20). Complications of complete inguino-femoral lymphadenectomy include wound dehiscence or infec-tion and lymphedema. Sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB) is an alternative to inguinofemoral lymphadenectomy for selected patients with stage I or II disease and no palpable inguinofemo-ral nodes. SLNB appears to be effective in detecting inguino-femoral lymph node metastases without increasing the risk of groin recurrence while avoiding the morbidities associated with complete inguinofemoral lymphadenectomy. Several prospec-tive studies support this approach.91,92 However, it is recognized that successful SLNB depends on operator experience. Surgeons with limited experience in SLNB (have performed fewer than 10 of these procedures) may choose to perform complete groin node dissection or use this procedure only for tumors that are less than 2 cm in size.Nodal failure in the groin and pelvis is difficult to treat successfully, and attention to primary management of these areas is key. Postoperative adjuvant inguinal and pelvic radio-therapy is indicated when inguinal lymph nodes are positive and is superior to pelvic lymphadenectomy, which has been largely abandoned. It is also indicated when the vulvectomy margins are positive or close positive for disease and further surgical management is not anatomically feasible.Vaginal CancerVaginal carcinoma is a rare gynecologic malignancy and accounts for about 3% of cancers affecting the female repro-ductive system.84 Squamous cell carcinomas account for 85% to 90% of cases; more than two-thirds of vaginal cancers are diagnosed in women 60 years of age or older. Risk factors are similar to other HPV-related cervical and vulvar cancers. Rare clear cell carcinoma of the vagina is associated to in utero expo-sure to diethylstilbestrol (DES), which is now largely of his-torical interest due to aging of the exposed cohort.93 Patients with vaginal cancer usually present with postmenopausal and/or postcoital bleeding and may also complain of vaginal discharge, vaginal mass, dysuria, hematuria, rectal bleeding, or pelvic pain, which may be indicative of advanced disease. Diagnosis is made via biopsy of suspicious lesions, which may require colposcopic guidance.85Figure 41-18. Extent of modified radical hemivulvectomy for stages I and II squamous cancer of the vulva.Superficial femoral nodesCribriformfasciaDeep femoral nodesFemoral a.Femoral n.Sartorius m.Iliopsoas m.FemurEpidermuslateralmedialAdductor longusPectineus m.Femoral v.Camper’s fasciaFigure 41-19. The anatomy of the inguinal triangle by cross-section.Pubic tubercleFemoral v.Sapheno-femoraljunctionFigure 41-20. Landmarks for choosing an incision for an inguinal lymphadenectomy.Brunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   181018/02/19   4:34 PM 1811GYNECOLOGYCHAPTER 41Vaginal cancer is staged clinically by pelvic exam, chest X-ray, cystoscopy, and proctoscopy (Table 41-7).94 Vaginal cancer spreads by local extension to adjacent pelvic structures, by lymphatic embolization to regional lymph nodes, and, less commonly, via the hematogenous route. Lymphatic drainage is complex, but in general, lesions in the upper vagina drain to the pelvic lymph nodes while lesions involving the lower third drain to the inguinofemoral lymph nodes.Stage I disease, involving the upper vagina, may be treated surgically or with intracavitary radiation therapy.86,87,95 Surgery consists of a radical hysterectomy, upper vaginectomy, and bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy. Stage I disease in the mid to lower vagina is treated with radiation and concurrent chemo-therapy. External beam pelvic radiation is the mainstay of treat-ment for stages II to IV and may be followed by intracavitary Table 41-7FIGO staging of vaginal carcinoma0Carcinoma in situ; intraepithelial neoplasia grade 3ITumor limited to the vaginal wallIITumor has involved the subvaginal tissue but has not extended to the pelvic wallIIITumor extends to the pelvic wallIVTumor has extended beyond the true pelvis or has involved the mucosa of the bladder or rectumIVATumor invades bladder and/or rectal mucosa and/or direct extension beyond the true pelvisIVBDistant metastasisand/or interstitial brachytherapy. Prognosis for treated early stage disease is excellent with more than 90% 5-year survival rates. Advanced stage disease, however, carries a poor progno-sis with only 15% to 40% 5-year survival rates.Cervical CancerGeneral Principles.  There are over 12,000 new cases of cervical cancer and over 4000 cervical cancer deaths annually in the United States.96 It is a major killer worldwide causing 275,000 deaths annually.97 Risk factors for cervical squamous cell and adenocarcinoma, the two most common histologies, are largely related to acquisition of and immune response to carcinogenic subtypes of the HPV virus. Cervical screening is correlated with early identification and treatment of preinvasive disease.98 Cervical cancer is most commonly identified in women with long intervals between screenings, or with no prior screening. It is also associated with early age at first intercourse, multiple sexual partners, smoking, and oral contraceptive use.Early cervical cancer is usually asymptomatic, though irregu-lar or postcoital bleeding may be present, particularly in more advanced disease. The diagnosis of cervical cancer is made by cervical biopsy, either of a gross lesion or a colposcopically-identified lesion. Cervical cancer is staged clinically due to the high disease burden in the developing world.99 Despite the prog-nostic value of clinical staging, in the developed world, surgical and radiologic staging is used to determine the extent of tumor spread and identify lymph node involvement. Lymph node metastasis is common and one of the most important prognostic factors in this disease, and positron emission tomography scans are useful in pretreatment planning and determination of radia-tion fields for women with locally advanced disease. Staging and management options are outlined in Table 41-8.7Table 41-82009 FIGO cervical cancer staging and management optionsSTAGEDESCRIPTIONOPTIONS FOR MANAGEMENT0Carcinoma in situAdenocarcinoma in situ: simple hysterectomy, may be followed for fertility preservation if all margins negative on coneSquamous cell carcinoma in situ: local excision with LEEP or cone or laser ablationIConfined to the cervixA1: Confined to the cervix, diagnosed only by microscopy with invasion of ≤3 mm in depth and lateral spread ≤7 mmA2: Confined to the cervix, diagnosed with microscopy with invasion of >3 mm and <5 mm with lateral spread ≤7 mmB1: Clinically visible lesion or greater than A2, ≤4 cm in greatest dimensionB2: Clinically visible lesion, >4 cm in greatest dimensionA1 and some A2: fertility preservation through large cone followed by close monitoring, followed by hysterectomyB1 and B2: radical hysterectomy or chemoradiation; radical trachelectomy with uterine preservation for childbearing is under investigation for highly selected patients with small lesionsIIA1: Involvement of the upper two-thirds of the vagina, without parametrial invasion, ≤4 cm in greatest dimensionA2: >4 cm in greatest dimensionB: Parametrial involvementFor some IIA radical hysterectomy may be consideredIIA and B: chemoradiation is preferredIIIA. Involvement of the lower third of the vaginaB. Involvement of a parametria to the sidewall or obstruction of one or both ureters on imagingChemoradiationIVA. Local involvement of the bladder or rectumB. Distant metastasesA. ChemoradiationB. Chemotherapy with palliative radiation as indicatedData from Pecorelli S: Revised FIGO staging for carcinoma of the vulva, cervix, and endometrium, Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 2009 May;105(2):103-104.Brunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   181118/02/19   4:34 PM 1812SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIProcedures for Cervical Cancer Treatment. Certain cervical cancers that are confined to the cervix may be treated surgically. Very small lesions (less than 7 mm wide, less than 3 mm deep) with no LVSI may be treated with simple hysterectomy. In a woman who desires future fertility, a cone biopsy with negative surgical margins may be an acceptable alternative. Any tumor larger than this (larger than stage IA1) should be treated with radical hysterectomy or in special cases radical trachelectomy for fertility preservation. Some authors advocate a large cone biopsy with lymph node dissection for stage IA2 tumors in patients who desire future fertility, though this recommenda-tion is somewhat controversial. Tumors that are greater than 4 cm in size are most often treated with chemoRT even if they Figure 41-21. Radical hysterectomy.BAUterusOvaryFallopian tubeCRound ligamentVesicouterinefoldUterinevesselsEDPararectalspaceLymphnodesParavesical spaceFExternal iliac vesselsInternal iliac arteryGHISuperior vesicalarteryUterine arteryare confined to the cervix, given the high likelihood of need for postoperative radiotherapy due to cervical risk factors.Radical Hysterectomy This procedure may be performed via laparotomy, or increasingly via a minimally invasive (laparo-scopic or robotic) approach.100 The key elements are dissection of the pelvic and periaortic nodes and the dissection of the para-metrium from the pelvic sidewall to allow en bloc removal with the uterus. The principle steps of an open procedure are demon-strated in Fig. 41-21. In contrast to a typical simple hysterectomy, the radical hysterectomy involves dissection much closer to the bowel, bladder, ureters, and great vessels, resulting in a higher complication rate to these organs. Additionally, disruption of the Brunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   181218/02/19   4:35 PM 1813GYNECOLOGYCHAPTER 41MUreterVaginaJKOvary and ligamentFallopian tubeUreterLUterosacralligamentFigure 41-21. (Continued)nerves supplying the bladder and the rectum, which traverse the cardinal and uterosacral ligaments, may result in temporary or long-term bladder and bowel dysfunction. Radical hysterecto-mies allow for the maintenance of the ovaries since the incidence of metastases to this area is very low, providing a clear advantage of surgery over radiation therapy in the younger patient.Radical Trachelectomy Interest in fertility preservation with stages IA1 and 2, and stage IB1 lesions has led to the develop-ment of methods of radical trachelectomy with uterine preserva-tion. This procedure depends on an adequate blood supply to the uterus from the ovarian anastamoses, as the cervical portion is removed. The lower uterine segment closed with a cerclage and attached directly to the vaginal cuff. The rates of recurrence, pregnancy outcomes, and the best surgical candidates for this surgery are still under study,101 but there are sufficient numbers and experience, both obstetric and surgical, to suggest that this procedure is oncologically safe and allows live births.Pelvic Exenteration for Recurrent Disease (Fig. 41-22)  Cervical cancer recurrences after primary surgical management are treated with radiation. Surgery may be a consideration in selected patients with recurrent cervical cancer who have received maximal radiation therapy. If the recurrence is locally confined with no evidence of spread or metastatic disease, then pelvic exenteration may be considered. Attempted exenteration procedures are aborted intraoperatively if metastatic disease is found. Exenteration is tailored for the disease size and location and may be supralevator or extend below the levator ani muscle and require vulvar resection. Reconstruction of the pelvis may require a continent urinary pouch (if radiation enteritis is limited) or ileal conduit and colostomy, as well as rebuilding of the pelvic floor and vagina with grafts or myocutaneous flaps.Uterine CancerEndometrial Cancer. Endometrial cancer is the most com-mon gynecologic malignancy and fourth most common cancer in women.96 It is most common in menopausal women in the fifth decade of life; up to 15% to 25% of cases occur prior to menopause, and 1% to 5% occur before age 40. Risk factors for the most common type of endometrial cancer include increased exposure to estrogen without adequate opposition by progester-one, either endogenous (obesity, chronic anovulation) or exog-enous (hormone replacement). Additional risk factors include diabetes, Lynch II syndrome (hereditary nonpolyposis coli syn-drome), and prolonged use of tamoxifen. Tamoxifen is a mixed agonist/antagonist ligand for the estrogen receptor. It is an ago-nistic in the uterus and an antagonistic to the breast and ovary. Protective factors for endometrial cancer include smoking and use of combination oral contraceptive pills. Adenocarcinomas are the most prevalent histologic type.Endometrial adenocarcinomas have historically been divided into type I and type II tumors with five classic histologic subtypes. Type I tumors are estrogen-dependent endometrioid Brunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   181318/02/19   4:35 PM 1814SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 41-22. Pelvic exenteration.histology and have a relatively favorable prognosis; they can be broken down further by presence or absence of microsatellite instability. Type II endometrial cancers are estrogen-independent, aggressive, and characterized by nonendometrioid, serous or clear cell, histology, or carcinosarcoma.102 Emerging data, however, suggest that the molecular features could provide reproducible subtypes that have the potential to guide and refine treatment. The most comprehensive molecular study of endometrial cancer to date has been The Cancer Genome Atlas, which included a combination of whole genome sequencing, exome sequencing, microsatellite instability assays, copy number analysis, and proteomics.103 Molecular information was used to classify 232 endometrial cancer patients into four groups: POLE ultramutated, MSI hypermutated, copy number low, and copy number high that correlated with progression-free survival.103 Two practical pared-down classification systems to identify four molecular subgroups with distinct prognostic outcomes have been described.104,105Postmenopausal bleeding is the most common presenta-tion of endometrial cancer and often permits early stage diag-nosis, resulting in a favorable prognosis. Abnormal bleeding should prompt endometrial evaluation and sampling, which is usually done with an office endometrial biopsy, though at times requires operative curettage or diagnostic hysteroscopy. Transvaginal ultrasonography (TVUS) often reveals a thickened endometrial stripe. An endometrial stripe measuring 5 mm or more in a postmenopausal patient with vaginal bleeding raises concern and should be followed by endometrial sampling; patients with stripe of 4 mm or less rarely have occult malig-nancy, and TVUS may thus be used to triage patients before invasive endometrial sampling. Even with a normal endometrial stripe, endometrial sampling should be performed for persistent postmenopausal bleeding. Uterine cancer is surgically staged and is graded based on the degree of histologic differentiation of the glandular components (Table 41-9).99 Grade is an important prognostic factor, independent of stage.Treatment is surgical, and most commonly involves hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, peritoneal cytology, and resection of any gross disease.87 Evidence supports equivalent oncologic outcomes with minimally invasive approaches.106 The inclusion and utility of lymphadenectomy remains an area of controversy. If a lymph node dissection is performed, it may be performed via laparotomy or laparoscopy. Generally, the bilateral pelvic and para-aortic lymph nodes are removed. The pelvic node dissection includes: bilateral removal of nodal tissue from the distal one-half of each common iliac artery, the anterior and medial aspect of the proximal half of the external iliac artery and vein, and the distal half of the  obturator fat pad anterior to the obturator nerve. Most of  the pelvic lymph nodes lie anterior, medially, and posteriorly to the  external and internal iliac vessels and the obturator nerve. There are a few nodes that lie lateral to these structures, between  the vessels and the pelvic sidewall, and these are generally removed in a complete dissection. The para-aortic lymph nodes include resection of nodal tissue over the distal vena cava from the level of the inferior mesenteric artery to the mid right common iliac artery and between the aorta and the left ureter from the inferior mesenteric artery to the left mid common iliac artery. Some also advocate resection of lymph nodes between the IMA and the gonadal vessels, as some uterine fundal tumors may drain directly into these lymph nodes.107The need for postoperative intervention is individualized based on the histology, stage, and risk factors such as age, lym-phvascular space invasion, and histology. Early-stage patients Table 41-92009 International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics staging of carcinoma of the uterine corpusI ATumor confined to the uterus, no or <½ myometrial invasionI BTumor confined to the uterus, >½ myometrial invasionIICervical stromal invasion, but not beyond uterusIII ATumor invades serosa or adnexaIII BVaginal and/or parametrial involvementIII C1Pelvic-node involvementIII C2Para-aortic involvementIV ATumor invasion bladder and/or bowel mucosaIV BDistant metastases including abdominal metastases and/or inguinal lymph nodesData from Pecorelli S: Revised FIGO staging for carcinoma of the vulva, cervix, and endometrium, Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 2009 May;105(2):103-104.Brunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   181418/02/19   4:35 PM 1815GYNECOLOGYCHAPTER 41are typically cured with surgery alone, while patients with high-intermediate risk factors, as defined by collaborative tri-als groups, commonly receive intracavitary brachytherapy to decrease local recurrence.108,109 Patients with advanced disease and high-grade histologies commonly receive platinum-based chemotherapy with or without radiation.Similar to the case with vulvar cancer described earlier, sentinel node biopsy is becoming more prevalent in endome-trial cancer. A sentinel lymph node biopsy may be considered in apparent uterine-confined malignancy when there is no metasta-sis demonstrated by imaging studies or no obvious extrauterine disease at exploration. For this procedure, most frequently the cervix is injected with ICG dye, and the immunofluorescence detecting camera is used either robotically or laparoscopically to identify the sentinel node. If no node is mapped, a full lymph-adenectomy is generally advised.110Lynch Syndrome. Lynch syndrome, a cancer family syn-drome also known as hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC), is an autosomal dominant inherited predisposition to develop colorectal carcinoma and extracolonic cancers, pre-dominantly including tumors of the uterus and ovaries, now also including breast cancer.111 Genes involved in HNPCC are those required for proper single-strand DNA repair via the mismatch repair pathway; most commonly involved are MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2. The risk of colorectal carcinoma is as high as 75% by age 75 years. Affected women have a 40% and 10% lifetime risk of developing uterine and ovarian cancers, respec-tively. Surveillance has not been proven to identify disease in early stage for these patients, though it is recommended and should include annual cervical cytology, mammography, trans-vaginal ultrasonography, CA-125 measurements, and an endo-metrial biopsy. Risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy with hysterectomy is now being recommended for women who have completed childbearing, ideally 5 to 10 years earlier than the first case of endometrial or ovarian cancer in the family. Dys-regulation of the mismatch repair pathway leads to the micro-satellite instability phenotype, now known be associated with susceptibility to select immunotherapy agents.Uterine Sarcomas. Uterine sarcomas arise from the uterine muscle and connective tissue elements and are typically aggres-sive tumors with a poorer prognosis compared to the more common endometrial carcinomas. The most common histopath-ologic types are endometrial stromal sarcomas, undifferentiated endometrial sarcomas, and leiomyosarcomas. Risk factors are challenging to assess but may include prior pelvic radiation and tamoxifen exposure. Patients typically present with bleeding or mass effects, although some are discovered incidentally at the time of hysterectomy for other indications. Leiomyosarcoma is the most common uterine sarcoma, and hysterectomy with salpingoophorectomy is the treatment of choice. Lymph node metastases are rare in sarcomas in general, and in the absence of palpable nodes or extrauterine disease. There are limited data to support cytoreduction when extrauterine disease is present. The benefits of adjuvant therapy are unknown. Advanced disease is typically treated with systemic chemotherapy.112Ovarian CancerEpithelial Ovarian, Tubal, and Primary Peritoneal Cancer.  Ovarian cancer is a rare disease affecting 1 in 70 women with a median age at diagnosis of 62 years.96 Epithelial malignancies make up the vast majority of ovarian cancers. The majority of women (70%) are diagnosed at with advanced staged disease leading to the poor survival associated with this malignancy. Survival in advanced disease is due both to late diagnosis and lack of effective second-line cytotoxic therapy for the major-ity of patients who relapse following initial clinical complete response to platinum-based chemotherapy. Despite multiple pro-spective population based trials evaluating the use of CA-125, ultrasound, or combinations of these tests for early detection of disease, a mortality benefit to screening programs has not been demonstrated.113-116 Symptoms for either benign or malignant ovarian tumors are nonspecific but frequent, and they include bloating, pelvic or abdominal pain, difficulty eating or feeling full quickly, and urinary symptoms of urgency or frequency,117 which form the basis of an ovarian cancer symptom index (Table 41-10). When newly developed and persistent, these symptoms should prompt an evaluation specifically targeted for identification of gynecologic malignancy.The histologic heterogeneity of ovarian cancer has long been recognized, but with the emergence of more robust clini-copathologic, molecular, and genetic data over the past decade these distinctions have become more clearly defined. Type I tumors consist of low-grade serous (LGS), low-grade endome-trioid, clear cell carcinomas (CCC), and mucinous carcinomas and are characterized by mutations in KRAS, BRAF, PTEN, PIK3CA, CTNNB1, ARID1A, and PPP2R1A. Type II ovarian cancers are the most common of the ovarian cancer histotypes, consisting of high-grade serous (70%), high-grade endometri-oid, carcinosarcoma, and undifferentiated carcinomas. Type II tumors are defined by TP53 mutations, which are rare in type I cancers.118-121 Each of these types have distinct risk factors and potential precursor lesions.121Risk factors for development of ovarian cancer include hormonal factors such as early menarche, late menopause, and nulliparity. The use of oral contraceptives reduces risk of ovar-ian carcinoma—this risk reduction persists for up to 30 years after cessation of use.122 Additionally, tubal ligation and hyster-ectomy decrease population level epithelial ovarian cancer risk. Genetic predisposition to breast or ovarian cancer is the most important known risk for the development of ovarian cancer, and 18% to 24% of ovarian carcinomas may arise in conjunction with a hereditary predisposition.123-128 Germline genetic muta-tions are far more common among type II ovarian cancers, while endometriosis and hormonal factors predispose to type I ovarian malignancies.121,126,129Since 2007, the National Comprehensive Cancer Network guidelines began recommending that all women diagnosed with ovarian cancer receive genetic testing as up to 20% of ovarian cancer patients are BRCA1/2 mutation carriers.127,130-134 Although family history of breast and/or epithelial ovarian cancer is one of the strongest factors for lifetime risk of having breast or epithelial ovarian cancer, up to 50% of women with ovarian cancer who test positive for a BRCA mutation have no fam-ily history of either malignancy, supporting the importance of testing all women with a personal diagnosis of ovarian cancer, regardless of family history. The identification of deleterious mutations allows for cascade testing. Relatives of the affected patient are referred for genetic testing limited to the identified mutation. The lifetime risk for the development of ovarian can-cer for carriers of mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes Brunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   181518/02/19   4:35 PM 1816SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIis estimated to be between 20% and 45% and 10% and 20%, respectively.123,130,135One of the challenges associated with early detection of ovarian cancer has historically been the lack of an identifiable precursor lesion. In 2001, however, “dysplastic changes” in the fallopian tubes removed from women with increased risk of developing ovarian carcinoma were first described.136 Subse-quent careful microscopic examination using a newly developed “sectioning and extensively examining of the fimbriated end” protocol (SEE-FIM) of the grossly normal fallopian tubes and ovaries from women with BRCA1/2 mutations revealed occult tubal cancer and precancers designated as serous tubal intraepi-thelial carcinoma. The relationship between serous tubal intraep-ithelial carcinomas and high-grade serous and endometrioid cancers is supported by the ubiquitous presence of TP53 muta-tions and their typical location within the fimbriated end of the fallopian tube.118,121,137 High-grade, serous epithelial cancers of the ovary, fallopian tube, and peritoneum are now recognized to have a common fallopian tubal precursor lesion and often com-bined under the rubric of epithelial ovarian cancer (HGSOC).For women at increased risk of ovarian cancer, the only confirmed prevention strategy is risk-reducing salpingo-oopherectomy.138,139 The lifetime risk of HGSOC is reduced to under 3% with risk-reducing salpingo-oopherectomy.  A modern understanding of the fallopian tube as the site of origin for many ovarian cancers has led to the suggestion that opportunistic salpingectomy could be implemented as a potential cancer prevention strategy in the general population. Scandinavian population-based cohort studies have demon-strated a significant decrease in epithelial ovarian cancer  following salpingectomy.140,141 Opportunistic salpingectomy is feasible among women undergoing tubal ligation, hysterectomy, or other pelvic surgery.142 Early Staged Ovarian Cancer. Early stage epithelial ovarian cancer has an excellent outcome. Low grade, stages IA and B disease can be cured in up to 90% to 95% of cases by a complete surgical procedure. The prevailing position in the United States  is that such patients do not benefit from chemotherapy.143 8The standard of care for women with stages IC and II, and all women with grade 3 or clear cell histology, is adjuvant che-motherapy with 3 to 6 cycles of platinumand taxane-based chemotherapy.144Advanced Ovarian Cancer. A pelvic mass with ascites, an omental cake, and an elevated CA-125 is pathognomonic for advanced ovarian cancer. CT scan is the imaging modality of choice to evaluate the upper abdomen and potential resect-ability of disease. Concerning physical or radiographic exam findings should prompt referral to a gynecologic oncologist (Table 41-10), as studies demonstrate inferior patient outcome for women who have had primary surgery by nongynecologic oncologists.The objectives of surgery in ovarian cancer are threefold. The first is to make the histologic diagnosis. The second is to assess the extent of disease through complete surgical staging (Tables 41-11 and 41-12). When epithelial ovarian cancer is identified on frozen section and disease is grossly limited to the pelvis, complete staging with node dissection will upstage nearly one-third of patients.145 The third objective is (when feasible) surgical cytoreduction or debulking. The extent of disease upon entering the abdomen and the residual disease upon completion of the debulking surgery are independent prognostic variables for patient outcome. The Gynecologic Oncology Group has defined optimal residual disease as residual tumor  ≤1 cm in the largest diameter. However, more contemporary data suggest that the most favorable survival outcomes are associated with complete cytoreduction to no gross residual disease.146 Decisions about the benefits and risks of radical debulking for individual presentations and diverse pathology depend on the age and medical stability of the patient, as well as the pathologic type of the cancer.The publication of two randomized prospective trials of neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NACT) for ovarian cancer has led to a questioning of the dogma of maximum surgical effort. Both trials revealed no survival difference compared to primary deb-ulking.147,148 In a patient who is medically compromised or in whom complete primary cytoreduction is unlikely, neoadjuvant Table 41-10Ovarian cancer symptom index (2007) and ACOG guidelines for patient referral to gynecologic oncologyOVARIAN CANCER  SYMPTOM INDEXACOG GUIDELINES FOR REFERRAL OF PREMENOPAUSAL WOMEN WITH MASS SUSPICIOUS FOR OVCAACOG GUIDELINES FOR REFERRAL OF  POSTMENOPAUSAL WOMEN WITH MASS  SUSPICIOUS FOR OVCADevelopment of, change in,  and/or persistence in:1 or more of:1 or more of:BloatingCA-125 >200 U/mLElevated CA-125Pelvic or abdominal painAscitesAscitesDifficulty eating or feeling full  quicklyEvidence of abdominal or distant  metastasisNodular or fixed pelvic massUrinary symptoms of urgency  or frequencyFamily history of 1 or more first degree  relatives with ovarian or breast cancerEvidence of abdominal or distant metastasisFamily history of one or more first-degree relatives with ovarian or breast cancer  ACOG = American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists.Data from Goff BA, Mandel LS, Drescher CW, et al. Development of an ovarian cancer symptom index: possibilities for earlier detection. Cancer. 2007;109:221-227; Dearking AC, Aletti GD, McGree ME, Weaver AL, Sommerfield MK, Cliby WA. How relevant are ACOG and SGO guidelines for referral of adnexal mass? Obstet Gynecol. 2007;110:841-848.Brunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   181618/02/19   4:35 PM 1817GYNECOLOGYCHAPTER 41Table 41-112014 International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics staging of epithelial ovarian cancerITumor confined to ovaries or fallopian tube(s)T1IATumor limited to one ovary (capsule intact) or fallopian tubeNo tumor on ovarian or fallopian tube surfaceNo malignant cells in the ascites or peritoneal washingsT1aIBTumor limited to both ovaries (capsules intact) or fallopian tubesNo tumor on ovarian or fallopian tube surfaceNo malignant cells in the ascites or peritoneal washingsT1bICTumor limited to one or both ovaries or fallopian tubes, with any of the following:IC1 Surgical spill intraoperativelyIC2 Capsule ruptured before surgery or tumor on ovarian or fallopian tube surfaceIC3 Malignant cells present in the ascites or peritoneal washingsT1cIITumor involves one or both ovaries or fallopian tubes with pelvic extension (below pelvic brim)  or peritoneal cancer (Tp)T2IIAExtension and/or implants on the uterus and/or fallopian tubes/and/or ovariesT2aIIBExtension to other pelvic intraperitoneal tissuesT2bIIITumor involves one or both ovaries, or fallopian tubes, or primary peritoneal cancer, with cytologically or histologically confirmed spread to the peritoneum outside the pelvis and/or metastasis to the retroperitoneal lymph nodesT3IIIAMetastasis to the retroperitoneal lymph nodes with or without microscopic peritoneal involvement beyond the pelvisT1, T2, T3aN1IIIA1Positive retroperitoneal lymph nodes only (cytologically or histologically proven) IIIA1(i)Metastasis ≤10 mm in greatest dimension (note this is tumor dimension and not lymph node dimension)T3a/T3aN1IIIA1(ii)Metastasis >10 mm in greatest dimension IIIA 2Microscopic extrapelvic (above the pelvic brim) peritoneal involvement with or without positive retroperitoneal lymph nodesT3a/T3aN1IIIBMacroscopic peritoneal metastases beyond the pelvic brim ≤2 cm in greatest dimension, with or without metastasis to the retroperitoneal lymph nodesT3b/T3bN1III CMacroscopic peritoneal metastases beyond the pelvic brim >2 cm in greatest dimension, with or without metastases to the retroperitoneal nodes (Note 1)T3c/T3cN1IVDistant metastasis excluding peritoneal metastases  Stage IV A: Pleural effusion with positive cytologyStage IV B: Metastases to extra-abdominal organs (including inguinal lymph nodes and lymph nodes outside of abdominal cavity) (Note 2)Any T, any N, M1Reproduced with permission from Mutch DG, Prat J: 2014 FIGO staging for ovarian, fallopian tube and peritoneal cancer, Gynecol Oncol. 2014 Jun; 133(3):401-404.Table 41-12Components of comprehensive surgical staging and debulking of epithelial ovarian cancerVertical abdominal incision adequate to visualize the diaphragmsEvacuation of ascitesPeritoneal washings of each pelvic gutter and diaphragmEn bloc hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oopherectomyInfragastric omentectomyRetroperitoneal and pelvic lymph node dissectionExamination of the entire bowelRandom biopsies of apparently uninvolved areas of peritoneum, pericolic gutters, diaphragmchemotherapy followed by interval debulking may be more appropriate and is supported by recent randomized controlled trials. Typically, treatment with NACT includes three cycles of platinum-based chemotherapy prior to open debulking, then three additional cycles after surgery. Diagnostic laparoscopic evaluation prior to cytoreductive surgery has been suggested as a means to avoid unnecessary laparotomy, resulting in subop-timal cytoreduction. Patients deemed not to be candidates for cytoreduction could proceed immediately to NACT at the time of tissue collection for definitive diagnosis. A Fagotti predictive index ≥8 (Table 41-13) is a predictor of suboptimal cytoreduc-tion in advanced ovarian cancer with reasonable sensitivity and high specificity.149 These recommendations currently apply to HGSOC, clear cell cancer, and high-grade endometrioid ovarian Brunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   181718/02/19   4:35 PM 1818SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIcancers. Low-grade tumors are less chemotherapy sensitive, and primary surgical resection is recommended when feasible. Standard of care adjuvant therapy of advanced stage epithe-lial ovarian cancer remains intravenous platinumand tax-ane-based chemotherapy.150 In 2006, the National Cancer Institute issued a clinical alert indicating that combination intrave-nous/intraperitoneal platinum/taxane postoperative chemotherapy should be considered first line for women with optimally cytore-duced EOC. This was the result of completion and analysis of three independent randomized clinical trials showing a significant survival advantage for intraperitoneal therapy.151,152 Intraperitoneal (IP) therapy is administered via an implanted 9.6 French venous port catheter with the port placed over the right or left costal 9margin. The catheter is tunneled caudad with insertion through the fascia in the lower abdomen and the tip in the pelvis. The IP cath-eter may be placed at the time of surgical debulking via an open laparotomy approach or prior to initiating chemotherapy via a laparoscopic approach. In some centers, the IP catheter may be placed by interventional radiology with CT guidance.Patients who have suboptimally debulked advanced stage disease and/or who are not candidates for intraperitoneal ther-apy should receive intravenous adjuvant chemotherapy. Interest has increased in both dose dense IV chemotherapy dosing as well as incorporation of biologic agents.Secondary cytoreduction upon recurrence can be con-sidered (Table 41-14). Patients who have had a disease-free Table 41-13Laparoscopic assessment of advanced ovarian cancer to predict surgical resectabilityLAPAROSCOPIC FEATURESCORE 0SCORE 2Peritoneal carcinomatosisCarcinomatosis involving a limited area (along the paracolic gutter or the pelvic peritoneum) and surgically removable by peritonectomyUnresectable massive peritoneal involvement as well as with a miliary pattern of distributionDiaphragmatic diseaseNo infiltrating carcinomatosis and no nodules confluent with the most part of the diaphragmatic surfaceWidespread infiltrating carcinomatosis or nodules confluent with the most part of the diaphragmatic surfaceMesenteric diseaseNo large infiltrating nodules and no involvement of the root of the mesentery as would be indicated by limited movement of the various intestinal segmentsLarge infiltrating nodules or involvement of the root of the mesentery indicated by limited movement of the various intestinal segmentsOmental diseaseNo tumor diffusion observed along the omentum up to the large stomach curvatureTumor diffusion observed along the omentum up to the large stomach curvatureBowel infiltrationNo bowel resection was assumed and no miliary carcinomatosis on the ansae observedBowel resection assumed or miliary carcinomatosis on the ansae observedStomach infiltrationNo obvious neoplastic involvement of the  gastric wallObvious neoplastic involvement of the gastric wallLiver metastasesNo surface lesionsAny surface lesionTable 41-14Guidelines for secondary therapy of epithelial ovarian cancerTIME FROM COMPLETION OF PRIMARY THERAPYDEFINITIONINTERVENTIONProgression on therapyPlatinum-refractoryNo value of secondary debulking unless remediating complication such as bowel obstructionNon–platinum-based chemotherapyConsider clinical trialProgression within 6 months of completion of primary therapyPlatinum-resistantNo value of secondary debulking unless remediating complication such as bowel obstructionNon–platinum-based chemotherapy consider adding bevacizumabConsider clinical trialProgression after 6 months post completion of primary therapyPlatinum-sensitiveConsider secondary debulking if greater than 12 months intervalConsider platinum +/− taxane +/− bevacizumab, +/− pegylated liposomal doxorubicin, +/− gemcitabineConsider maintenance PARP inhibitorConsider clinical trialBrunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   181818/02/19   4:35 PM 1819GYNECOLOGYCHAPTER 41period of at least 12 months following an initial complete clini-cal response to surgery and initial chemotherapy, who have no evidence of carcinomatosis on imaging, and who have disease that can be completely resected are considered optimal candi-dates. A randomized controlled trial reported in abstract form demonstrated a benefit of secondary cytoreduction under strict entry criteria (DESKTOP3); the GOG-0213 study of secondary cytoreduction is maturing. Debulking surgery done after subse-quent relapses or in women with early recurrence has not been shown to result in an outcome benefit and should be used only to palliate disease complications.The most common cause of palliative surgery is bypass of bowel obstruction. The majority of women with advanced ovarian cancer will eventually develop and potentially die from malignant bowel obstruction. While management of these cases is controversial, in some cases surgical correction has been shown to prolong life and improve quality of life.153 Nonsurgical options include placement of a venting gastrostomy tube, per-formed endoscopically or surgically. Management of malignant bowel obstruction in women with recurrent advanced disease should be individualized.Chemotherapy is the mainstay of therapy for recurrent EOC. Treatment approaches are based upon platinum sensitivity.154 Referral to an oncologist with specific expertise in chemothera-peutic treatment of ovarian cancer and access to clinical trials is important. In determining secondary and subsequent ther-apy, consideration of prior therapies, sites of disease, organs at risk from cancer, organs sustaining injury from prior ther-apy, and quality of life desires of patient should be taken into consideration.Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors. Ovarian germ cell tumors occur most commonly in women under age 30. The most common benign germ cell neoplasm is the mature cystic teratoma; approximately 1% of teratomas contain a secondary malig-nancy arising from one of the components, most commonly squamous cell cancer and most commonly in postmenopausal women. Malignant germ cell tumors often grow and dissemi-nate rapidly and are symptomatic. The rapid growth may be accompanied by torsion or rupture, producing an acute abdo-men and the need for emergent intervention. Because they are derived from primordial germ cells, many produce charac-teristic tumor markers. Immature teratomas comprise a sig-nificant proportion of malignant germ cell tumors and may be associated with elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) or α-fetoprotein (AFP). Excluding teratomas, the most common malignant germ cell tumor is dysgerminoma, made up of pure undifferentiated germ cells. Bilaterality occurs in up to 15% of patients; lactate dehydrogenase is commonly elevated, and elevated b-hCG may occur.Less common malignant germ cell tumors include endo-dermal sinus or yolk sac tumors, embyronal carcinomas, mixed germ cell neoplasms, polyembryomas, and choriocarcinomas. Endodermal sinus tumors may have elevated AFP levels in the blood while embryonal and mixed germ cell tumors may have elevated b-hCG, LDH, or AFP. Tumor markers are useful to fol-low during surveillance and definitive therapy. Other than com-pletely resected stage I, grade I immature teratoma, adjuvant chemotherapy with a platinum-containing regimen has been his-torically recommended.155 Because of the high response rates to chemotherapy and the long-term toxicity of treatment, a “watch and wait” approach with treatment only upon recurrence has been suggested as safe for selected, well-staged patients with germ cell tumors.156 The cure rate remains high, near 90% even when metastatic disease is present; recurrent disease is more difficult to eradicate.155Fertility preservation is the standard surgical approach for ovarian germ cell tumors as disease tends to be diagnosed at stage I, and salvage chemotherapy is overall extremely suc-cessful. Staging should include removal of the involved ovary, biopsy of any suspicious areas, pelvic and para-aortic node dis-section, and omentectomy. Hysterectomy or removal of the sec-ond ovary is rarely indicated.Growing teratoma syndrome is a rare sequela of germ cell malignancies. Characteristically, during or after chemotherapy slow-growing tumors will increase in size and may even com-press surrounding organs. Malignant transformation within these masses has been described. Treatment is with surgical resection.157Ovarian Sex Cord-Stromal Tumors. Sex cord-stromal cell tumors, rare tumors, are derived from cells that support and surround the oocyte and can present with symptoms referable to endocrine activity of the tumor. These include granulosa cell tumors (female differentiated), fibroma-thecomas, and Sertoli-Leydig cell tumors (male differentiated). Granulosa cell tumors are the most common in this group and are a low-grade malignancy with fewer than 3% bilaterality. They are treated with conservative surgery, similar to germ cell tumors in young women.155 Hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy is recommended for women who have completed childbearing. Nodal staging can be safely omitted in the absence of grossly involve nodes and fertility preservation is possible in disease limited to one ovary, the most common presentation. Debulking surgery is recommended for more extensive disease. These tumors and the thecomas in the same class often stimulate estrogen production and can be found in association with endometrial hyperplasia and cancer (5%). Granulosa cell tumors can recur over a prolonged period given their low rate of proliferation and tendency for local or intraperitoneal recurrence. Inhibin has been shown to be elaborated by these tumors and often is followed to identify recurrence of the disease. The Sertoli/Leydig cell tumors can present with virilization as a primary symptom. Evaluation of the ovary when this symptom is found is always of value.Gestational Trophoblastic Disease. Gestational trophoblas-tic disease (GTD) is a spectrum of abnormal pregnancy–related trophoblastic proliferations. Premalignant histologic types include partial and complete hydatidiform moles. Primary sur-gery for diagnosis and initial therapy is a suction dilatation and curettage. Clinically, partial moles present as missed abortions and usually resolve with observation. Partial moles are triploid, usually XXY, which can result from dispermic fertilization of an egg. A previously described classical presentation of hyper-emesis gravidarum, hyperthyroidism, preeclampsia, pulmonary trophoblastic embolization, and uterine size larger than dates is rarely seen today because of routine ultrasound assessments during early pregnancy. Even in the first trimester, however, a characteristic “snow storm” appearance may be seen on ultra-sound. Pathologic examination will demonstrate no fetal tissue and have a diploid karyotype resulting from paternal duplication occurring after loss of maternal genetic material, or occasionally Brunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   181918/02/19   4:35 PM 1820SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIwith dispermic fertilization of an empty egg. Often associated theca lutein ovarian cysts, which can be greater than 6 cm in diameter, are seen on ultrasound. They should be followed without surgical intervention as they resolve with removal or treatment of the GTD. Following uterine evacuation, patients with molar pregnancies must be followed closely with weekly b-hCGs until normal for 3 weeks and then monthly for at least 6 months. Contraception should be provided to allow for sur-veillance. Any increase in b-hCG should trigger further evalua-tion and consideration of chemotherapy.158,159Invasive moles, choriocarcinoma, and placental site tro-phoblastic tumors are malignant disorders. Invasive moles are diagnosed following the diagnosis of a molar pregnancy if any of the following are demonstrated: (a) a plateau of b-hCG lasts for four measurements over a period of 3 weeks or longer; (b) a rise in b-hCG for three consecutive weekly measurements over at least a period of 2 weeks or more; or (c) b-hCG level remains elevated for 6 months or more. Metastatic GTD can present on the cervix, vagina, liver, lung, or brain and should not be man-aged surgically. In a woman of reproductive age, a diagnosis of metastatic GTN can be made without biopsy if a b-hCG is found to be elevated in the setting of widespread metastatic disease. In fact, given the incidence of bleeding complications biopsy is not recommend.Chemotherapy is the primary recommended therapy. Per 2000 FIGO staging and classification, a risk score of 6 and below is classified as low risk and above 6 is considered high risk (Table 41-15). Low-risk patients are treated with single agent chemotherapy (methotrexate or actinomycin-D); high-risk patients receive multiagent chemotherapy. In either case, chemotherapy continues until b-hCG levels have normalized. Modern salvage and cure rates are high, with 5-year survival of high-risk patients reported as high as 90%.160 Twelve months of surveillance with contraception is recommended following treatment in order to allow complete surveillance for relapse.Beyond dilation and curettage, surgery may have a role in the management of GTD. Hysterectomy is recommended for placental site trophoblastic tumors for which metastasis is rare. Laparotomy may be indicated in the cases of uncontrolled intra-abdominal or uterine bleeding. Neurosurgery may be required if there is intracranial bleeding or increased intracranial pressure due to metastatic disease.159MINIMALLY INVASIVE GYNECOLOGIC SURGERYHysteroscopySee earlier section, “Hysteroscopy” under “Procedures Per-formed for Structural Causes of Abnormal Uterine Bleeding.”LaparoscopyThe standard method for gynecologic laparoscopy follows the same methods as all minimally invasive surgery. In general, a camera port is placed near the umbilicus. Sometimes it must be placed more cephalad if the patient has a larger fibroid uterus. Two additional ports are placed laterally, usually just superior and medial to the anterior superior iliac spines. Single site lapa-roscopic procedures may improve cosmesis and reduce post-operative pain, but challenges including lack of triangulation and instrument crowding at the umbilicus make this technique challenging to apply to more complex procedures.161Robotic SurgeryOver the last decade, there has been increased use of robot-ics for gynecologic surgery. With the DaVinci robotic system, the surgeon sits at a console and visualizes the operative field with three-dimensional optics. The use of robotic surgery has been described for virtually every gynecologic procedure that has been performed abdominally or laparoscopically. The lapa-roscopic instruments are “wristed” and move as the surgeon’s hands/fingers move the actuators at the console. Robotic surgery Table 41-15International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics/World Health Organization scoring system for gestational trophoblastic disease based on prognostic factors SCORE 0124Age<40>40––Antecedent pregnancyMoleAbortionTermInterval from index pregnancy, months<44–67–12>12Pretreatment hCG   mIU/mL<103>103–104>104–105>105Largest tumor size including uterus, cm–3–4≥5–Site of metastases including uterusLungSpleen, kidneyGastrointestinal tractBrain, liverNumber of metastases identified–1–45–8>8Previous failed chemotherapy––Single drugTwo or more drugsBrunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   182018/02/19   4:35 PM 1821GYNECOLOGYCHAPTER 41uses a camera port, two to three robotic ports, and an accessory port. More meticulous dissection, improved visualization, and ability to operate with lower intra-abdominal pressures make the robotic platform advantageous, especially in obese patients. Longer set-up time and increased cost, however, are distinct disadvantages. The robotic unit costs up to $2.3 million and is associated with annual maintenance costs of $180,000 a year.162There is significant data to support robotic surgery in gynecologic malignancy; however, most procedures can be per-formed successfully with either robotic or laparoscopic platform depending on operator comfort and skill set. One large study sug-gested a lower conversion to laparotomy rate for robotic versus laparoscopic hysterectomy, but this was not statistically signifi-cant: conversion to laparotomy for laparoscopic hysterectomy  was 9.9% compared with 4.9% for robotic cases (P =.06).163Complications Pertinent to Gynecologic SurgeryAbdominal Wall Vessels. The vessel at greatest risk of injury during the lateral trocar placement is the inferior epigastric artery. The superficial epigastric vessels and the superficial circumflex iliac vessels can be injured as well (Fig. 41-23). The primary methods to avoid vessel injury are knowledge of the vessels at risk and their visualization prior to trocar placement, when possible. The superficial vessels often can be seen and avoided by transillumination of the abdominal wall with the laparoscope. In contrast, the larger inferior epigastric vessels cannot be seen by transillumination because of their deeper location; these vessels often can be seen laparoscopically and avoided as they course along the peritoneum between the lateral umbilical fold of the bladder and the insertion of the round ligament into the inguinal canal. Anatomic variation and anastomoses between vessels make it impossible to know the exact location of all the abdominal wall vessels. For this reason, other strategies also should be used to avoid vessel injury, including the use of trocars with conical tips rather than pyramid tips and the use of the smallest trocars possible lateral to the midline.Intestinal Injury. Another potentially serious complication of laparoscopic surgery is injury to either small or large intestines. 10An estimated incidence of bowel injury during laparoscopic gynecologic surgery is estimated to be 0.13%, 41% of which had a delayed diagnosis.164 Bowel injury can occur at the time of trocar insertion, especially if the patient has had previous abdominal procedures that often result in bowel adhesions to the anterior abdominal wall peritoneum, but rates appear simi-lar regardless of entry technique. Due to the proximity of sur-gery to the bowel, thermal injury due to electrosurgery is also frequently implicated in intestinal injury. Time to diagnosis in these cases is typically several days postoperatively as a thermal injury takes time to mature and necrose.Urologic Injuries. A risk of injury to the urogenital tract is inherent to gynecologic surgery due to proximity. Prevention of injury and intraoperative recognition and repair are crucial to avoiding long-term sequelae. Most urogenital fistulae are the result of unrecognized injuries to the urogenital tract at the time of surgery.Bladder Injury. Placement of a Foley catheter prior to gyne-cologic surgery is critical to reducing risk of bladder injuries. Bladder injury during open or laparoscopic surgery results from retroperitoneal perforation during lower trocar placement or during sharp dissection of the bladder from the lower uterine segment during hysterectomy. The latter of these two situa-tions is usually recognized intraoperatively; the first sign of the former may be postoperative hematuria, lower-port incisional drainage, or pneumoturia during laparoscopy. Once diagnosed, large defects require layered closure, whereas smaller defects usually close spontaneously within days or weeks with the aid of transurethral catheter drainage.Ureteral Injury. Although ureteral injury is rare, occurring in less than 1% of gynecologic procedures, it is the most serious of the complications related to gynecologic surgery, particularly if unrecognized.165,166 There are three anatomic locations where the ureter is at risk during gynecologic procedures (see Fig. 41-5): (a) the ureter descends over the pelvic brim as it courses over the bifurcation of the common iliac artery into the external and internal iliac arteries just below the ovarian vessels; (b) in the pelvis, the ureter courses along the lateral aspect of the broad ligament to enter the base of the broad ligament; and (c) the ure-ter is found less than 2 cm lateral to the cervix, passing under the uterine artery and then medially over the anterior vaginal for-nix before entering the trigone of the bladder—this is the most common location of ureteral injury. Ureteral injuries, including complete ligation, partial resection, or thermal injuries, usually will manifest within hours to days of surgery. Complete obstruc-tion most often manifests as flank pain, whereas the first sign of partial or complete transection may be symptoms of intra-abdominal irritation caused by urine leakage. Transperitoneal thermal injuries resulting from fulguration of endometriosis may be similar to those after transection, but the appearance of symp-toms may be delayed several days until tissue necrosis occurs.Routine cystoscopy following hysterectomy is advocated by some gynecologists. For procedures performed for prolapse or incontinence where injury to the urinary tract is highest, rou-tine cystoscopy is recommended. Consideration of a surgeon’s individual complication rate and the difficulty of an individ-ual procedure are considerations for the provision of routine cystoscopy.166Vaginal Vault Dehiscence. This complication of hysterec-tomy seems to be more common in laparoscopic and robotic   DeepvesselsSuperficial   vessels   Inferiorepigastric    DeepcircumflexiliacSuperficial epigastricSuperficialcircumflex      iliacFigure 41-23. Location of anterior abdominal wall blood vessels.Brunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   182118/02/19   4:35 PM 1822SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIsurgeries. This may be due to the use of cautery in dividing the vaginal cuff or in the method of vaginal closure when done mini-mally invasively. Vaginal closure of the cuff appears to decrease the rate of vaginal cuff dehiscence in MIS hysterectomy.Hemodynamically stable women without bowel eviscera-tion may be candidates for transvaginal repair without abdomi-nal exploration. Vaginal approach may also be appropriate in select cases of evisceration in which the bowel can be com-pletely evaluated vaginally. Since bowel evisceration can lead to peritonitis and sepsis, all women with bowel eviscerations are considered to have a surgical emergency, and surgery should not be delayed for imaging. In most cases of bowel eviscera-tion, evaluation of the bowel by laparoscopy or laparotomy is indicated to ensure bowel integrity.REFERENCES	1.	Anson B. Atlas of Human Anatomy. Philadelphia: WB Saunders,  1950.	2.	Force USPST. Screening for gynecologic conditions with pel-vic examination: US Preventive Services Task Force recom-mendation statement. JAMA. 2017;317:947-953.	3.	McNicholas C, Peipert JF. Is it time to abandon the routine pel-vic examination in asymptomatic nonpregnant women? JAMA. 2017;317:910-911.	4.	Schiffman M, Wentzensen N, Wacholder S, Kinney W, Gage JC, Castle PE. Human papillomavirus testing in the prevention of cervical cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2011;103:368-383.	5.	US Preventive Services Task Force. Cervical cancer: screen-ing. Available at: https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Document/RecommendationStatementFinal/cervi-cal-cancer-screening2. Accessed August 11, 2018. 	6.	US Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for Cervical CancerUS Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement. JAMA. 2018;320(7):674-686. 	7.	Petrosky E, Bocchini Jr JA, Hariri S, et al. Use of 9-valent human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine: updated HPV vac-cination recommendations of the advisory committee on immunization practices. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2015;64:300-304.	8.	Paavonen J, Naud P, Salmeron J, et al. Efficacy of human papillomavirus (HPV)-16/18 AS04-adjuvanted vaccine against cervical infection and precancer caused by onco-genic HPV types (PATRICIA): final analysis of a double-blind, randomised study in young women. Lancet. 2009;374: 301-314.	9.	Meites E. Use of a 2-dose schedule for human papillomavi-rus vaccination—updated recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2016;65(49):1405-1408.	10.	Gynecologists ACoOa. ACOG committee opinion: number 280, December 2002. The role of the generalist obstetrician-gynecologist in the early detection of ovarian cancer. Obstet Gynecol. 2002;100(6):1413-1416.	11.	Mutch DG, Powell MA, Allsworth JE, Taylor NP, Brooks RA. How accurate is Pipelle sampling: a study by Huang et al. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2007;196:280-281.	12.	Margesson LJ. Vulvar disease pearls. Dermatol Clin. 2006;24:145-155.	13.	McPherson T, Cooper S. Vulval lichen sclerosus and lichen planus. Dermatol Ther. 2010;23:523-532.	14.	Downs MC, Randall HW, Jr. The ambulatory surgical manage-ment of Bartholin duct cysts. J Emerg Med. 1989;7:623-626.	15.	Workowski KA, Berman SM. Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines, 2006. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2006;55:1-94.	16.	Stanley M. Chapter 17: genital human papillomavirus infec-tions—current and prospective therapies. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr. 2003;(31):117-124.	17.	Habel LA, Van Den Eeden SK, Sherman KJ, McKnight B, Stergachis A, Daling JR. Risk factors for incident and recur-rent condylomata acuminata among women. A population-based study. Sex Transm Dis. 1998;25:285-292.	18.	Massad LS, Xie X, Darragh T, et al. Genital warts and vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia: natural history and effects of treat-ment and human immunodeficiency virus infection. Obstet Gynecol. 2011;118:831-839.	19.	Tan H-H, Goh C-L. Viral infections affecting the skin in organ transplant recipients. American J Clin Dermatol. 2006;7:13-29.	20.	Brodell LA, Mercurio MG, Brodell RT. The diagnosis and treatment of human papillomavirus-mediated genital lesions. Cutis. 2007;79:5-10.	21.	Fanning J, Lambert HC, Hale TM, Morris PC, Schuerch C. Paget’s disease of the vulva: prevalence of associated vulvar adenocarcinoma, invasive Paget’s disease, and recurrence after surgical excision. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1999;180:24-27.	22.	Darragh TM, Colgan TJ, Cox JT, et al. The lower anogenital squamous terminology standardization project for hpv-asso-ciated lesions: background and consensus recommendations from the college of American pathologists and the American society for colposcopy and cervical pathology. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2012;136:1266-1297.	23.	Modesitt SC, Waters AB, Walton L, Fowler WC Jr, Van Le L.  Vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia III: occult cancer and the impact of margin status on recurrence. Obstet Gynecol. 1998;92:962-966.	24.	Anderson MR, Klink K, Cohrssen A. Evaluation of vaginal complaints. JAMA. 2004;291:1368-1379.	25.	Eschenbach DA, Davick PR, Williams BL, et al. Prevalence of hydrogen peroxide-producing Lactobacillus species in normal women and women with bacterial vaginosis. J Clin Microbiol. 1989;27:251-256.	26.	Cardosi RJ, Bomalaski JJ, Hoffman MS. Diagnosis and man-agement of vulvar and vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am. 2001;28:685-702.	27.	Stenchever M, Droegemueller W, Herbst A, Mishell D. Com-prehensive Gynecology. St Louis: Mosby; 2001.	28.	The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Management of acute abnormal uterine bleeding in non-pregnant reproductive-aged women. ACOG Committe Opin-ion. Reaffirmed 2017. Available at: https://www.acog.org/Clinical-Guidance-and-Publications/Committee-Opinions/Committee-on-Gynecologic-Practice/Management-of-Acute-Abnormal-Uterine-Bleeding-in-Nonpregnant-Reproductive-Aged-Women. Accessed August 11, 2018.	29.	Van Bogaert LJ. Clinicopathologic findings in endometrial polyps. Obstet Gynecol. 1988;71:771-773.	30.	Costa-Paiva L, Godoy CE, Jr, Antunes A, Jr, Caseiro JD, Arthuso M, Pinto-Neto AM. Risk of malignancy in endome-trial polyps in premenopausal and postmenopausal women according to clinicopathologic characteristics. Menopause. 2011;18:1278-1282.	31.	Byun JY, Kim SE, Choi BG, Ko GY, Jung SE, Choi KH. Dif-fuse and focal adenomyosis: MR imaging findings. Radio-graphics. 1999;19:S161-S170.	32.	Filicori M, Hall DA, Loughlin JS, Rivier J, Vale W, Crowley  WF, Jr. A conservative approach to the management of uter-ine leiomyoma: pituitary desensitization by a luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone analogue. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1983;147:726-727.	33.	Matsuo H, Maruo T. GnRH analogues in the manage-ment of uterine leiomyoma (in Japanese). Nippon Rinsho. 2006;64(suppl 4):75-79.Brunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   182218/02/19   4:35 PM 1823GYNECOLOGYCHAPTER 41	34.	Szabo E, Nagy E, Morvay Z, Palko A, Csernay L. Uterine artery embolization for the conservative management of leio-myoma (in Hungarian). Orv Hetil. 2001;142:675-680.	35.	Mutter GL. Diagnosis of premalignant endometrial disease.  J Clin Pathol. 2002;55:326-331.	36.	Kurman RJ, Kaminski PF, Norris HJ. The behavior of endome-trial hyperplasia. A long-term study of “untreated” hyperplasia in 170 patients. Cancer. 1985;56:403-412.	37.	Trimble CL, Kauderer J, Zaino R, et al. Concurrent endome-trial carcinoma in women with a biopsy diagnosis of atypi-cal endometrial hyperplasia: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Cancer. 2006;106:812-819.	38.	Zaino RJ, Kauderer J, Trimble CL, et al. Reproducibility of the diagnosis of atypical endometrial hyperplasia: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Cancer. 2006;106:804-811.	39.	Baak JP, Mutter GL, Robboy S, et al. The molecular genet-ics and morphometry-based endometrial intraepithelial neo-plasia classification system predicts disease progression in endometrial hyperplasia more accurately than the 1994 World Health Organization classification system. Cancer. 2005;103:2304-2312.	40.	Cooper JM, Brady RM. Intraoperative and early postoperative complications of operative hysteroscopy. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am. 2000;27:347-366.	41.	Worldwide AAMIG. AAGL practice report: practice guide-lines for the management of hysteroscopic distending media: (replaces hysteroscopic fluid monitoring guidelines. J Am Assoc Gynecol Laparosc. 2000;7:167-168.). J Minim Invasive Gynecol. 2013;20:137-148.	42.	ACOG Practice Bulletin. Clinical management guidelines for obstetrician-gynecologists. Number 81, May 2007. Obstet Gynecol. 2007;109:1233-1248.	43.	Longinotti MK, Jacobson GF, Hung Y-Y, Learman LA. Prob-ability of hysterectomy after endometrial ablation. Obstet Gynecol. 2008;112:1214-1220.	44.	van Dongen H, Emanuel MH, Wolterbeek R, Trimbos JB, Jansen FW. Hysteroscopic morcellator for removal of intra-uterine polyps and myomas: a randomized controlled pilot study among residents in training. J Minim Invasive Gynecol. 2008;15:466-471.	45.	Steller CJ, Miller CE. Uterine Morcellation 15. Hyster-ectomy: a comprehensive surgical approach. JSLS. 2017; 21(1):e2016.00095.	46.	Cohen SL, Vitonis AF, Einarsson JI. Updated hysterectomy surveillance and factors associated with minimally invasive hysterectomy. JSLS. 2014;18:e2014.00096.	47.	Creinin MD, Zite N. Female tubal sterilization: the time has come to routinely consider removal. Obstet Gynecol. 2014;124:596-599.	48.	Boing C, Kimmig R. Surgical management of endometriosis— an overview (in German). Gynakol Geburtshilfliche Rundsch. 2007;47:124-131.	49.	Petta CA, Matos AM, Bahamondes L, Faundes D. Current practice in the management of symptoms of endometriosis: a survey of Brazilian gynecologists. Rev Assoc Med Bras. 2007;53:525-529.	50.	Pearce CL, Templeman C, Rossing MA, et al. Association between endometriosis and risk of histological subtypes of ovarian cancer: a pooled analysis of case–control studies.  Lancet Oncol. 2012;13:385-394.	51.	Wiegand KC, Shah SP, Al-Agha OM, et al. ARID1A muta-tions in endometriosis-associated ovarian carcinomas. N Engl J Med. 2010;363:1532-1543.	52.	Yamamoto S, Tsuda H, Takano M, Tamai S, Matsubara O. Loss of ARID1A protein expression occurs as an early event in ovarian clear-cell carcinoma development and frequently coexists with PIK3CA mutations. Mod Pathol. 2012;25: 615-624.	53.	Soper DE. Pelvic inflammatory disease. Obstet Gynecol. 2010;116:419-428.	54.	Brunham RC, Gottlieb SL, Paavonen J. Pelvic inflammatory disease. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:2039-2048.	55.	Control CfD, Prevention. Sexually transmitted diseases treat-ment guidelines, 2015. Ann Emerg Med. 2015;66:526-528.	56.	Menacker F, Hamilton BE. Recent trends in cesarean delivery in the United States. NCHS Data Brief. 2010;(35):1-8.	57.	Dietrich CS 3rd, Hill CC, Hueman M. Surgical diseases pre-senting in pregnancy. Surg Clin North Am. 2008;88:403-419, vii-viii.	58.	Gabbe S, Niebyl J, Simpson J. Obstetrics: Normal and Problem Pregnancies. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2012.	59.	Brown HL. Trauma in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol. 2009;114:147-160.	60.	Early pregnancy loss. Practice Bulletin No. 150. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Obstet Gynecol. 2015;125:1258-1267.	61.	Secura GM, Madden T, McNicholas C, et al. Provision of no-cost, long-acting contraception and teenage pregnancy. N Engl J Med. 2014;2014:1316-1323.	62.	Owen J, Mancuso M. Cervical cerclage for the prevention of preterm birth. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am. 2012;39:25-33.	63.	McDonald IA. Suture of the cervix for inevitable miscarriage. J Obstet Gynaecol Br Emp. 1957;64:346-350.	64.	Shirodkar V. New method of operative treatment for habitual abortions in the second trimester of pregnancy. Antiseptic. 1955;52:299.	65.	Stock L, Milad M. Surgical management of ectopic pregnancy. Clin Obstet Gynecol. 2012;55:448-454.	66.	Porreco RP, Stettler RW. Surgical remedies for postpartum hemorrhage. Clin Obstet Gynecol. 2010;53:182-195.	67.	Bakri YN, Amri A, Abdul Jabbar F. Tamponade-balloon for obstetrical bleeding. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2001;74:139-142.	68.	Silver RM, Landon MB, Rouse DJ, et al. Maternal morbid-ity associated with multiple repeat cesarean deliveries. Obstet Gynecol. 2006;107:1226-1232.	69.	Silver RM, Barbour KD. Placenta accreta spectrum: accreta, increta, and percreta. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am. 2015; 42:381-402.	70.	American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists.  Placenta Accreta Committee Opinion, Number 529. Obstet Gynecol. 2012;120:207-211.	71.	Sentilhes L, Ambroselli C, Kayem G, et al. Maternal out-come after conservative treatment of placenta accreta. Obstet  Gynecol. 2010;115:526-534.	72.	Walters M, Karram M. Urogynecology and Reconstructive Pelvic Surgery. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2007.	73.	Olsen AL, Smith VJ, Bergstrom JO, Colling JC, Clark AL. Epidemiology of surgically managed pelvic organ prolapse and urinary incontinence. Obstet Gynecol. 1997;89:501-506.	74.	Bump RC, Mattiasson A, Bo K, et al. The standardization of terminology of female pelvic organ prolapse and pelvic floor dysfunction. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1996;175:10-17.	75.	Benson JT, Lucente V, McClellan E. Vaginal versus abdomi-nal reconstructive surgery for the treatment of pelvic support defects: a prospective randomized study with long-term out-come evaluation. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1996;175:1418-1421; discussion 1421-1412.	76.	Maher CF, Qatawneh AM, Dwyer PL, Carey MP, Cornish A, Schluter PJ. Abdominal sacral colpopexy or vaginal sacrospi-nous colpopexy for vaginal vault prolapse: a prospective ran-domized study. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2004;190:20-26.	77.	Center for Devices and Radiological Health. Urogynecologic surgical mesh: update on the safety and effectiveness of trans-vaginal placement for pelvic organ prolapse. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/downloads/medicaldevices/safety/alert-sandnotices/ucm262760.pdf. Accessed August 11, 2018.Brunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   182318/02/19   4:35 PM 1824SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	78.	Nygaard IE, McCreery R, Brubaker L, et al. Abdominal sacrocolpopexy: a comprehensive review. Obstet Gynecol. 2004;104:805-823.	79.	Tanagho EA. Colpocystourethropexy: the way we do it.  J Urol. 1976;116:751-753.	80.	Reynolds WS, Dmochowski RR. Urethral bulking: a urology perspective. Urol Clin North Am. 2012;39:279-287.	81.	The US Food and Drug Administration. Urogynecologic surgi-cal mesh: update on the safety and effectiveness of transvaginal placement for pelvic organ prolapse. Safety Communication. Silver Spring, MD; 2011.	82.	American Urogynecologic Society’s Guidelines Development Committee. Guidelines for providing privileges and creden-tials to physicians for transvaginal placement of surgical mesh for pelvic organ prolapse. Female Pelvic Med Reconstr Surg. 2012;18:194-197.	83.	American Urogynecologic Society’s Guidelines Development Committee. Guidelines for privileging and credentialing phy-sicians for sacrocolpopexy for pelvic organ prolapse. Female Pelvic Med Reconstr Surg. 2013;19:62-65.	84.	Siegel R, Naishadham D, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2012. CA Cancer J Clin. 2012;62:10-29.	85.	Carter JS, Downs LS, Jr. Vulvar and vaginal cancer. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am. 2012;39:213-231.	86.	Berek JS, Hacker NF. Practical Gynecologic Oncology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins; 2010.	87.	Disaia P, Creasman W. Clinical Gynecologic Oncology. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2012.	88.	Montana GS, Thomas GM, Moore DH, et al. Preoperative chemo-radiation for carcinoma of the vulva with N2/N3 nodes: a gynecologic oncology group study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2000;48:1007-1013.	89.	Moore DH, Thomas GM, Montana GS, Saxer A, Gallup DG, Olt G. Preoperative chemoradiation for advanced vulvar  cancer: a phase II study of the Gynecologic Oncology Group. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1998;42:79-85.	90.	Shylasree TS, Bryant A, Howells RE. Chemoradiation for advanced primary vulval cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011:CD003752.	91.	Levenback CF, Ali S, Coleman RL, et al. Lymphatic mapping and sentinel lymph node biopsy in women with squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva: a gynecologic oncology group study. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30:3786-3791.	92.	Te Grootenhuis NC, van der Zee AG, van Doorn HC, et al. Sentinel nodes in vulvar cancer: long-term follow-up of the GROningen INternational Study on Sentinel nodes in Vulvar cancer (GROINSS-V) I. Gynecol Oncol. 2016;140:8-14.	93.	Goodman A, Schorge J, Greene MF. The long-term effects of in utero exposures—the DES story. N Engl J Med. 2011;364:2083-2084.	94.	Beller U, Benedet JL, Creasman WT, et al. Carcinoma of the vagina. FIGO 6th Annual report on the results of treatment in gynecological cancer. Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 2006;95 (suppl 1): S29-S42.	95.	Barakat RMM, Randall M. Principles and Practice of Gyne-cologic Oncology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams, and Wilkins; 2009.	96.	Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2017. CA Cancer J Clin. 2017;67:7-30.	97.	Jemal A, Bray F, Center MM, Ferlay J, Ward E, Forman D. Global cancer statistics. CA Cancer J Clin. 2011;61:69-90.	98.	Wright TC, Jr, Massad LS, Dunton CJ, Spitzer M, Wilkinson EJ, Solomon D. 2006 consensus guidelines for the manage-ment of women with cervical intraepithelial neoplasia or ade-nocarcinoma in situ. J Low Genit Tract Dis. 2007;11:223-239.	99.	Pecorelli S. Revised FIGO staging for carcinoma of the vulva, cervix, and endometrium. Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 2009;105:103-104.	100.	Pikaart DP, Holloway RW, Ahmad S, et al. Clinical-patho-logic and morbidity analyses of Types 2 and 3 abdominal radical hysterectomy for cervical cancer. Gynecol Oncol. 2007;107:205-210.	101.	Kim CH, Abu-Rustum NR, Chi DS, et al. Reproductive out-comes of patients undergoing radical trachelectomy for early-stage cervical cancer. Gynecol Oncol. 2012;125:585-588.	102.	Leslie KK, Thiel KW, Goodheart MJ, De Geest K, Jia Y, Yang S. Endometrial cancer. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am. 2012;39:255-268.	103.	Cancer Genome Atlas Research N, Kandoth C, Schultz N,  et al. Integrated genomic characterization of endometrial  carcinoma. Nature. 2013;497:67-73.	104.	Stelloo E, Bosse T, Nout RA, et al. Refining prognosis and iden-tifying targetable pathways for high-risk endometrial cancer; a TransPORTEC initiative. Mod Pathol. 2015;28(6):836-844.	105.	Talhouk A, McConechy MK, Leung S, et al. A clinically appli-cable molecular-based classification for endometrial cancers. Br J Cancer. 2015;113:299-310.	106.	Walker JL, Piedmonte MR, Spirtos NM, et al. Recurrence and survival after random assignment to laparoscopy versus laparotomy for comprehensive surgical staging of uterine  cancer: Gynecologic Oncology Group LAP2 study. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30:695-700.	107.	Whitney C, Spirtos N. Gynecologic Oncology Group Surgical  Procedures Manual. Philadelphia: Gynecologic Oncology Group; 2009.	108.	Creutzberg CL, Nout RA, Lybeert ML, et al. Fifteen-year radiotherapy outcomes of the randomized PORTEC-1 trial for endometrial carcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2011;81:e631-e638.	109.	Keys HM, Roberts JA, Brunetto VL, et al. A phase III trial of surgery with or without adjunctive external pelvic radia-tion therapy in intermediate risk endometrial adenocarci-noma: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Gynecol Oncol. 2004;92:744-751.	110.	Holloway RW, Abu-Rustum NR, Backes FJ, et al. Sentinel lymph node mapping and staging in endometrial cancer:  a Society of Gynecologic Oncology literature review with consensus recommendations. Gynecologic Oncology. 2017;146:405-415.	111.	Aarnio M, Mecklin JP, Aaltonen LA, Nystrom-Lahti M, Jarvinen HJ. Life-time risk of different cancers in hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) syndrome. Int J Cancer. 1995;64:430-433.	112.	Reichardt P. The treatment of uterine sarcomas. Ann Oncol. 2012;23(suppl 10):x151-x157.	113.	Jacobs IJ, Menon U, Ryan A, et al. Ovarian cancer screening and mortality in the UK Collaborative Trial of Ovarian Cancer Screening (UKCTOCS): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2016;387:945-956.	114.	Buys SS, Partridge E, Black A, et al. Effect of screening on ovarian cancer mortality: the prostate, lung, colorectal and ovarian (PLCO) cancer screening randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2011;305:2295-2303.	115.	van Nagell Jr JR, Miller RW, DeSimone CP, et al. Long-term survival of women with epithelial ovarian cancer detected by ultrasonographic screening. Obstet Gynecol. 2011;118:1212-1221.	116.	Kobayashi H, Yamada Y, Sado T, et al. A randomized study of screening for ovarian cancer: a multicenter study in Japan. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2008;18:414-420.	117.	Goff BA, Mandel LS, Drescher CW, et al. Development of an ovarian cancer symptom index: possibilities for earlier detec-tion. Cancer. 2007;109:221-227.	118.	Kurman RJ, Shih Ie M. Molecular pathogenesis and extraovar-ian origin of epithelial ovarian cancer—shifting the paradigm. Hum Pathol. 2011;42:918-931.Brunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   182418/02/19   4:35 PM 1825GYNECOLOGYCHAPTER 41	119.	Jarboe EA, Folkins AK, Drapkin R, Ince TA, Agoston ES, Crum CP. Tubal and ovarian pathways to pelvic epithelial cancer: a pathological perspective. Histopathology. 2009; 55:619.	120.	Steffensen KD, Waldstrom M, Grove A, Lund B, Pallisgard N, Jakobsen A. Improved classification of epithelial ovarian cancer: results of 3 Danish cohorts. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2011;21:1592-1600.	121.	Kurman RJ, Shih Ie M. The dualistic model of ovarian car-cinogenesis: revisited, revised, and expanded. Am J Pathol. 2016;186:733-747.	122.	Collaborative Group on Epidemiological Studies of  Ovarian C. Ovarian cancer and oral contraceptives: collabora-tive reanalysis of data from 45 epidemiological studies includ-ing 23 257 women with ovarian cancer and 87 303 controls. Lancet. 2009;371:303-314.	123.	Al Bakir M, Gabra H. The molecular genetics of hereditary and sporadic ovarian cancer: implications for the future.  Br Med Bull. 2014;112:57-69.	124.	Weissman SM, Weiss SM, Newlin AC. Genetic testing by  cancer site: ovary. Cancer J. 2012;18:320-327.	125.	Walsh T, Casadei S, Lee MK, et al. Mutations in 12 genes for inherited ovarian, fallopian tube, and peritoneal carcinoma identified by massively parallel sequencing. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011;108:18032-18037.	126.	Walker JL, Powell CB, Chen LM, et al. Society of Gyneco-logic Oncology recommendations for the prevention of ovar-ian cancer. Cancer. 2015;121:2108-2120.	127.	Pal T, Permuth-Wey J, Betts JA, et al. BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations account for a large proportion of ovarian carcinoma cases. Cancer. 2005;104:2807-2816.	128.	Norquist BM, Harrell MI, Brady MF, et al. Inherited muta-tions in women with ovarian carcinoma. JAMA Oncol. 2016;2:482-490.	129.	Wentzensen N, Poole EM, Trabert B, et al. Ovarian can-cer risk factors by histologic subtype: an analysis from the Ovarian Cancer Cohort Consortium. J Clin Oncol. 2016;34: 2888-2898.	130.	Antoniou A, Pharoah PDP, Narod S, et al. Average risks of breast and ovarian cancer associated with BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations detected in case series unselected for family his-tory: a combined analysis of 22 studies. Am J Human Genet. 2003;72:1117-1130.	131.	Alsop K, Fereday S, Meldrum C, et al. BRCA mutation  frequency and patterns of treatment response in brca mutation– positive women with ovarian cancer: a report from the Australian Ovarian Cancer Study Group. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30:2654-2663.	132.	Arts-de Jong M, de Bock GH, van Asperen CJ, Mourits MJE, de Hullu JA, Kets CM. Germline BRCA1/2 mutation testing is indicated in every patient with epithelial ovarian cancer: a systematic review. Eur J Cancer. 2016;61:137-145.	133.	Zhang S, Royer R, Li S, et al. Frequencies of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations among 1,342 unselected patients with inva-sive ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol. 2011;121:353-357.	134.	Daly MB, Axilbund JE, Buys S, et al. Genetic/familial high-risk assessment: breast and ovarian. J Natl Compr Canc Netw. 2010;8:562-594.	135.	Mavaddat N, Peock S, Frost D, et al. Cancer risks for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers: results from pro-spective analysis of EMBRACE. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr. 2013;105:812-822.	136.	Piek JM, van Diest PJ, Zweemer RP, et al. Dysplastic changes in prophylactically removed Fallopian tubes of women predisposed to developing ovarian cancer. J Pathol. 2001;195:451-456.	137.	Kuhn E, Kurman R, Shih I-M. Ovarian cancer is an imported disease: fact or fiction? Curr Obstet Gynecol Rep. 2012;1:1-9.	138.	Kauff ND, Satagopan JM, Robson ME, et al. Risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy in women with a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation. N Engl J Med. 2002;346:1609-1615.	139.	ACOG. Elective and risk-reducing salpingo-oopherectomy. ACOG Practice Bulletin. 2008;89:1-12.	140.	Madsen C, Baandrup L, Dehlendorff C, Kjær SK. Tubal ligation and salpingectomy and the risk of epithelial ovarian cancer and borderline ovarian tumors: a nationwide case– control study. Acta Obstetricia et Gynecologica Scandinavica. 2015;94:86-94.	141.	Bijron JG, Seldenrijk CA, Zweemer RP, Lange JG,  Verheijen RH, van Diest PJ. Fallopian tube intraluminal tumor spread from noninvasive precursor lesions: a novel meta-static route in early pelvic carcinogenesis. Am J Surg Pathol. 2013;37:1123-1130.	142.	McAlpine JN, Hanley GE, Woo MM, et al. Opportunistic sal-pingectomy: uptake, risks, and complications of a regional initiative for ovarian cancer prevention. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2014;210:e471.	143.	Young RC, Walton LA, Ellenberg SS, et al. Adjuvant therapy in stage I and stage II epithelial ovarian cancer. N Engl J Med. 1990;322:1021-1027.	144.	Bell J, Brady MF, Young RC, et al. Randomized phase III trial of three versus six cycles of adjuvant carboplatin and paclitaxel in early stage epithelial ovarian carcinoma: a Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Gynecol Oncol. 2006;102:432-439.	145.	Young RC, Decker DG, Wharton JT, et al. Staging laparotomy in early ovarian cancer. JAMA. 1983;250:3072-3076.	146.	Chang SJ, Hodeib M, Chang J, Bristow RE. Survival impact of complete cytoreduction to no gross residual disease for advanced-stage ovarian cancer: a meta-analysis. Gynecol Oncol. 2013;130:493-498.	147.	Vergote I, Trope CG, Amant F, et al. Neoadjuvant chemo-therapy or primary surgery in stage IIIC or IV ovarian cancer.  N Engl J Med. 2010;363:943-953.	148.	Kehoe S, Hook J, Nankivell M, et al. Primary chemotherapy versus primary surgery for newly diagnosed advanced ovar-ian cancer (CHORUS): an open-label, randomised, controlled, non-inferiority trial. Lancet. 2015;386:249-257.	149.	Gómez-Hidalgo NR, Martinez-Cannon BA, Nick AM, et al. Predictors of optimal cytoreduction in patients with newly diagnosed advanced-stage epithelial ovarian cancer: time to incorporate laparoscopic assessment into the standard of care. Gynecol Oncol. 2015;137:553-558.	150.	McGuire WP, Hoskins WJ, Brady MF, et al. Cyclophospha-mide and cisplatin compared with paclitaxel and cisplatin in patients with stage III and stage IV ovarian cancer [see com-ments]. N Engl J Med. 1996;334:1-6.	151.	Armstrong DK, Bundy BN, Wenzel L, et al. Intraperitoneal cisplatin and paclitaxel in ovarian cancer. N Engl J Med. 2006;354:34-43.	152.	Walker JL, Armstrong DK, Huang HQ, et al. Intraperitoneal catheter outcomes in a phase III trial of intravenous versus intraperitoneal chemotherapy in optimal stage III ovarian and primary peritoneal cancer: a Gynecologic Oncology Group Study. Gynecol Oncol. 2006;100:27-32.	153.	Chi DS, Phaeton R, Miner TJ, et al. A prospective outcomes analysis of palliative procedures performed for malignant intestinal obstruction due to recurrent ovarian cancer. Oncolo-gist. 2009;14:835-839.	154.	Markman M, Reichman B, Hakes T, Jones W. Responses to second-line cisplatin-based intraperitoneal therapy in ovarian cancer: influence of a prior response to intravenous cisplatin. J Clin Oncol. 1991;9:1801-1805.	155.	Gershenson DM. Treatment of ovarian cancer in young women. Clin Obstet Gynecol. 2012;55:65-74.	156.	Mangili G, Sigismondi C, Lorusso D, et al. The role of stag-ing and adjuvant chemotherapy in stage I malignant ovarian Brunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   182518/02/19   4:35 PM 1826SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIgerm cell tumors (MOGTs): the MITO-9 study. Ann Oncol. 2017;28:333-338.	157.	Merard R, Ganesan R, Hirschowitz L. Growing teratoma syn-drome: a report of 2 cases and review of the literature. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2015;34:465-472.	158.	Lurain JR. Gestational trophoblastic disease II: classification and management of gestational trophoblastic neoplasia. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2011;204:11-18.	159.	Ngan HYS, Seckl MJ, Berkowitz RS, et al. Update on the diagnosis and management of gestational trophoblastic dis-ease. Int J Gynecol Obstet. 2015;131:S123-S126.	160.	Seckl MJ, Sebire NJ, Berkowitz RS. Gestational trophoblastic disease. Lancet. 2010;376:717-729.	161.	Sinha R, Sundaram M, Mahajan C, et al. Single-incision total laparoscopic hysterectomy. J Minim Access Surg. 2011;7:78-82.	162.	Sinha RY, Raje SR, Rao GA. Three-dimensional lapa-roscopy: principles and practice. J Minim Access Surg. 2017;13:165-169.	163.	Gaia G, Holloway RW, Santoro L, Ahmad S, Di Silverio E, Spinillo A. Robotic-assisted hysterectomy for endome-trial cancer compared with traditional laparoscopic and laparotomy approaches: a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol. 2010;116:1422-1431.	164.	Llarena NC, Shah AB, Milad MP. Bowel injury in gyneco-logic laparoscopy: a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol. 2015;125:1407-1417.	165.	Sharp HT, Adelman MR. Prevention, recognition, and man-agement of urologic injuries during gynecologic surgery. Obstet Gynecol. 2016;127:1085-1096.	166.	Teeluckdharry B, Gilmour D, Flowerdew G. Urinary tract injury at benign gynecologic surgery and the role of cystos-copy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol. 2015;126:1161-1169.	167.	Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually Trans-mitted Diseases Treatment Guidelines: Pelvic Inflammatory Disease. Available: https://www.cdc.gov/std/tg2015/pid.htm. Accessed August 11, 2018.	168.	Dearking AC, Aletti GD, McGree ME, Weaver AL, Som-merfield MK, Cliby WA. How relevant are ACOG and SGO guidelines for referral of adnexal mass? Obstet Gynecol. 2007;110:841-848.	169.	Mutch DG, Prat J. 2014 FIGO staging for ovarian, fallopian tube and peritoneal cancer. Gynecol Oncol. 2014;133:401-404.Brunicardi_Ch41_p1783-p1826.indd   182618/02/19   4:35 PM
# Chunk 8944
NeurosurgeryAshwin G. Ramayya, Saurabh Sinha,  and M. Sean Grady 42chapterOverview	1827Neuroanatomy	1827Neurologic Examination	1829Diagnostic Studies / 1829Neurologic and Neurosurgical   Emergencies	1831Raised Intracranial Pressure / 1831Brain Stem Compression / 1833Stroke / 1833Seizure / 1833Trauma	1833Head Trauma / 1833Spine Trauma / 1842Peripheral Nerve Trauma / 1847Cerebrovascular Disease	1849Ischemic Diseases / 1849Thrombotic Disease / 1849Embolic Disease / 1849Hemorrhagic Diseases / 1850Tumors of the Central Nervous   System	1854Intracranial Tumors / 1854Metastatic Tumors / 1854Glial Tumors / 1855Neural Tumors and Mixed Tumors / 1857Neural Crest Tumors / 1857Miscellaneous Tumors / 1857Embryologic Tumors / 1858Spinal Tumors / 1859Future Directions / 1861Spine: Basic Concepts	1861Stability / 1861Neural Compression / 1862Patterns of Disease / 1862Spine Fusion Surgery / 1865Spinal Instrumentation / 1865Arthrodesis / 1866Peripheral Nerve	1866Peripheral Nerve Tumors / 1866Entrapment Neuropathies / 1867Autoimmune and Inflammatory  Disorders / 1867Infection	1867Cranial / 1867Spine / 1868Functional Neurosurgery	1869Epilepsy Surgery / 1869Deep Brain Stimulation / 1869Trigeminal Neuralgia / 1871Stereotactic Radiosurgery	1871Arteriovenous Malformations / 1872Vestibular Schwannomas / 1872Intracranial Metastases / 1872Congenital and Developmental   Anomalies	1872Dysraphism / 1872Spina Bifida Occulta / 1872Spina Bifida With  Myelomeningocele / 1872Encephalocele / 1872Craniosynostosis / 1872Hydrocephalus / 1873Chiari I Malformation / 1873OVERVIEWNeurologic surgery provides the operative and nonoperative man-agement (i.e., prevention, diagnosis, evaluation, treatment, criti-cal care, and rehabilitation) of disorders of the central, peripheral, and autonomic nervous systems (ANSs). Such disorders include those of the brain, meninges, skull and skull base, and their blood supply, including surgical and endovascular treat-ment of disorders of the intracranial and extracranial vasculature supplying the brain and spinal cord; disorders of the pituitary gland; disorders of the spinal cord, meninges, and vertebral col-umn, including those that may require treatment by fusion, instru-mentation, or endovascular techniques; and disorders of the cranial and spinal nerves throughout their distribution.An accurate history is the first step toward neurologic diagnosis. A history of trauma or of neurologic symptoms is of obvious interest, but general constitutional symptoms are also important. Neurologic disease may have systemic effects, while diseases of other systems may affect neurologic function. The patient’s general medical ability to withstand the physi-ologic stress of anesthesia and surgery should be understood. A detailed history from the patient and/or family, along with a reliable physical examination, will clarify these issues.NEUROANATOMYAn understanding of neuroanatomy is the foundation of com-prehensive neurologic examination and diagnosis. Salient fea-tures will be considered, from cephalad to caudad. The cerebral hemispheres (or telencephalon) consist of the cerebral cortex, underlying white matter, the basal ganglia, hippocampus, and amygdala. The cerebral cortex is the most recently evolved part of the nervous system. Its functions are mapped to discrete ana-tomic areas. The frontal areas are involved in executive function, decision making, and restraint of emotions. The motor strip, or precentral gyrus, is the most posterior component of the frontal lobes, and is arranged along a homunculus with the head inferior and lateral to the lower extremities superiorly and medially. The motor speech area (Broca’s area) lies in the left posterior inferior frontal lobe in almost all right-handed people and in up to 90% of left-handed people. The parietal lobe lies between the central sulcus anteriorly and the occipital lobe posteriorly. The postcen-tral gyrus is the sensory strip, also arranged along a homunculus. The rest of the parietal lobe is involved with awareness of one’s body in space and relative to the immediate environment, body orientation, and spatial relationships. The occipital lobes are most posterior. The visual cortex is arrayed along the apposing 1Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   182701/03/19   7:16 PM 1828medial surfaces of the occipital lobes. The left occipital lobe receives and integrates data from the left half of each retina. A left occipital lesion would therefore result in an inability to see objects right of center. The temporal lobes lie below the Sylvian fissures. The hippocampus, amygdala, and lower optic radia-tions (Meyer’s loops) are important components of the temporal lobe and are involved in memory, emotion, and vision, respec-tively. The receptive speech area (Wernicke’s area) typically is found in the area of the left posterior superior temporal lobe and inferior parietal lobe. The basal ganglia include the caudate, putamen, globus pallidus, subthalamic nucleus, substantia nigra, and nucleus accumbens. These structures are involved in the selection, activation and termination of movement, and facilitate learning of appropriate context-dependent motor behaviors.Lying deep to the cerebral hemispheres is the diencepha-lon, which includes the thalamus and hypothalamus. The thala-mus is a key processor and relay circuit for most motor and sensory information traveling to or from cortex. The hypothala-mus regulates homeostasis via the autonomic and neuroendo-crine systems.The brain stem consists of the midbrain (mesencephalon), pons (metencephalon), and medulla (myelencephalon). Longi-tudinal fibers run through the brain stem, carrying motor and sensory information between the cerebral hemispheres and spi-nal cord. The corticospinal tract is the major motor tract, while the medial lemniscus and spinothalamic tracts are the major sensory tracts. The nuclei of cranial nerves III through XII are also located within the brain stem. These nerves relay the motor, sensory, and special sense functions of the eye, face, mouth, and throat.The cerebellum arises from the dorsal aspect of the brain stem. It integrates somatosensory, vestibular, and motor infor-mation for coordination and timing of movement. Midline, or vermian, lesions lead to truncal ataxia. Lateral, or hemispheric, lesions lead to tremor and dyscoordination in the extremities.The ventricular system is the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)–containing contiguous space inside the brain, continuous with the subarachnoid space outside the brain. The paired lateral ventricles consist of temporal, occipital, and frontal horns, as well as the main body. CSF travels from each lateral ventricle through the foramina of Monroe to the third ventricle, located between the left and right thalami. CSF then drains through the cerebral aqueduct to the fourth ventricle within the brain stem. The foramen of Magendie (midline) and paired foram-ina of Luschka (lateral) drain to the subarachnoid space. The approximate CSF volume in an average adult is 150 mL, and the choroid plexus produces approximately 500 mL of CSF per day.The spinal cord starts at the bottom of the medulla and extends caudally through the spinal canal to the first lumbar ver-tebra, approximately. Motor tracts (efferent pathways) continue from the brain stem down via the lateral and anterior corticospi-nal tracts to anterior horn cells, and then exit via ventral nerve roots. Sensory information (afferent pathways) enters via dorsal nerve roots, travels cranially via the dorsal columns (proprio-ception and fine touch) or spinothalamic tract (pain and tem-perature), and into the brain stem. Paired nerves exit the spinal cord at each level. There are 31 pairs: 8 cervical, 12 thoracic,  5 lumbar, 5 sacral, and 1 coccygeal.The dorsal and ventral nerve roots at each level fuse to form mixed motor-sensory spinal nerves and spread through the body to provide innervation to muscles and sensory organs. The C5–T1 spinal nerves intersect in the brachial plexus and divide to form the main nerve branches to the arm, including the median, ulnar, and radial nerves. The L2–S4 spinal nerves intersect in the lumbosacral plexus, and divide to form the main nerve branches to the leg, including the femoral and sciatic nerves.The principal motor tract of the spinal cord is the cortico-spinal tract. It is a two-neuron path, including an upper motor neuron and a lower motor neuron. The upper motor neuron cell body is located within the motor strip of the cerebral cortex. The axon travels through the internal capsule to the brain stem, decussates at the brain stem–spinal cord junction, and travels down the contralateral corticospinal tract to the lower motor Key Points1	Neurologic surgery specializes in primarily surgical manage-ment of central, peripheral, and autonomic nervous system disorders.2	Although clinical examination is paramount, neurosurgical diagnosis and treatment are aided largely by a variety of modalities, such as magnetic resonance imaging and intra-cranial pressure monitoring.3	The common treatment goals for traumatic brain and spinal injury are aimed at preventing secondary insults of hypoxia and hypotension.4	Aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage remains one of the most morbid and intensive neurosurgical diseases. Endovas-cular therapy is a growing technology that allows for safer securing of ruptured aneurysms.5	Brain tumors can arise from primary or metastatic tissues. Treatment typically involves resection, followed by radia-tion and/or chemotherapy, depending on the type and grade of tumor.6	Spinal instrumentation is used for surgical stabilization of many types of spinal instability, including traumatic, infec-tious, oncologic, and degenerative.7	Infection of the nervous system is a serious and prevalent medical problem. Operative management is indicated for most conditions in which there is symptomatic compression of neural structures.8	Functional neurosurgery via device implantation is a rapidly evolving discipline that has already become the standard of care in treating medically refractory Parkinson’s disease and essential tremor. A wider variety of deep brain stimulation targets will treat additional neuropsychiatric diseases.9	Stereotactic radiosurgery is a powerful treatment option for intracranial disease, whether it is primary or adjunct. Gamma knife surgery can be used to treat tumors, vascular malfor-mations, and cranial neuralgias.Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   182801/03/19   7:16 PM 1829NEUROSURGERYCHAPTER 42neuron in the anterior horn at the appropriate level. The lower motor neuron axon then travels via peripheral nerves to its tar-get muscle. Damage to upper motor neurons typically results in hyperreflexia and mild atrophy. Damage to lower motor neurons results in flaccidity and significant atrophy.The two major sensory tracts are three-neuron pathways. Fine touch and proprioceptive signals enter the spinal cord via the dorsal root ganglia and then ascend ipsilaterally via the dorsal columns. Then they synapse and decussate in the lower medulla, travel up the contralateral medial lemniscus to make a second synapse in the thalamus, and then finally ascend to the sensory cortex. Pain and temperature fibers first synapse in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord at their entry level, decussate, and then travel up the contralateral spinothalamic tracts to the thalamus. The second synapse occurs in the thalamus, and the output axons ascend to the sensory cortex.The aforementioned motor and sensory tracts together constitute the somatic nervous system. In addition to this sys-tem, the ANS is the other constituent of the nervous system. The ANS carries messages for homeostasis and visceral regu-lation from the central nervous system (CNS) to target struc-tures such as arteries, veins, the heart, sweat glands, and the digestive tract.1 CNS control of the ANS arises particularly from the hypothalamus and the nucleus of the tractus solitarius. The ANS is divided into the sympathetic, parasympathetic, and enteric systems. The sympathetic system drives the “fight or flight” response, using epinephrine to increase heart rate, blood pressure, blood glucose, and temperature, as well as to dilate the pupils. It arises from the thoracolumbar spinal segments. The parasympathetic system promotes the “rest and digest” state and uses acetylcholine to maintain basal metabolic func-tion under nonstressful conditions. Parasympathetic fibers arise from cranial nerves III, VII, IX, and X, and from the second to fourth sacral segments. The enteric nervous system controls the complex synchronization of the digestive tract, especially the pancreas, gallbladder, and small and large bowels. It can run autonomously but is regulated by the sympathetic and parasym-pathetic systems.NEUROLOGIC EXAMINATIONThe neurologic examination is divided into several components and generally is done from head to toe. First, one must assess men-tal status. A patient may be awake, lethargic (will follow com-mands and answer questions, but then returns to sleep), stuporous (difficult to arouse), or comatose (no purposeful response to voice or pain). Cranial nerves may be thoroughly tested in the awake patient, but pupil reactivity, eye movement, facial symmetry, and gag are the most relevant measures when mental status is impaired. Motor testing is based on maximal effort of major muscle groups in those able to follow commands, while assessing for amplitude and symmetry of movement to deep central pain may be all that is possible for stuporous patients. Table 42-1 details scoring for motor assessment tests. Characteristic motor reactions to pain in patients with depressed mental status include withdrawal from stimulus, localization to stimulus, flexor (decorticate) posturing, extensor (decerebrate) posturing, or no reaction (in order of wors-ening pathology). Figure 42-1 diagrams the clinical patterns of posturing. This forms the basis of determining the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) motor score, as detailed in Table 42-2. Light touch, proprioception, temperature, and pain testing may be useful in awake patients but is often impossible without good cooperation.  It is critical to document sensory patterns in spinal cord injury (SCI) patients. Muscle stretch reflexes should be examined. Often com-paring left to right or upper extremity to lower extremity reflexes for symmetry is the most useful for localizing a lesion. Check for ankle-jerk clonus or up-going toes (Babinski’s test). Presence of either is pathologic and signifies upper motor neuron disease.Diagnostic StudiesPlain Films. Plain X-rays of the skull may demonstrate frac-tures, osteolytic or osteoblastic lesions, radiolucent foreign bodies, or pneumocephaly (air in the head). Plain films of the cervical, thoracic, and lumbar spine are used to assess for evi-dence of bony trauma or soft tissue swelling suggesting fracture. Spinal deformities and osteolytic or osteoblastic pathologic pro-cesses also will be apparent. However, the use of plain films has decreased given the rapid availability and significantly increased detail of computed tomography (CT) scans. They are typically used for assessing alignment in patients with known fractures, for intraoperative localization, and postoperative assessment of spinal instrumentation.Computed Tomography. The noncontrast CT scan of the head is an extremely useful diagnostic tool in the setting of new focal neurologic deficit, decreased mental status, or trauma. It is rapid and almost universally available in hospitals in the United States. Its sensitivity allows for the detection of acute hemorrhage. Fine-slice CT scanning of the spine is helpful for defining bony anatomy and pathology and is the method of choice for iden-tifying fractures of the spine. By providing an assessment of spinal alignment, CT scans can provide an indirect assessment of ligamentous injury, for example, “Rule of Spence” for assess-ing transverse ligament injury during Jefferson fractures (see “Spine Trauma” section later in this chapter). Conventional con-trast-enhanced CT scan will help show neoplastic or infectious processes. In the current era, contrast CT generally is used for those patients who cannot undergo magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanning due to pacemakers or metal in the orbits (see following section for discussion of CT angiography, venogra-phy, and perfusion).Magnetic Resonance Imaging. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) provides excellent imaging of soft tissue structures in the head and spine. It is a complex and evolving science. Several of the most clinically useful MRI sequences are worth describing. T1 sequences made before and after gadolin-ium administration are useful for detecting neoplastic and infec-tious processes. T2 sequences facilitate assessment of 2Table 42-1Motor scoring systemGRADEDESCRIPTION0No muscle contraction1Visible muscle contraction without movement across the joint2Movement in the horizontal plane, unable to overcome gravity3Movement against gravity4Movement against some resistance5Normal strengthBrunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   182901/03/19   7:16 PM 1830SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 42-2The Glasgow Coma Scale scoreaMOTOR RESPONSE VERBAL RESPONSE EYE-OPENING RESPONSE Obeys commands6Oriented5Opens spontaneously4Localizes to pain5Confused4Opens to speech3Withdraws from pain4Inappropriate words3Opens to pain2Flexor posturing3Unintelligible sounds2No eye opening1Extensor posturing2No sounds1  No movement1    aAdd the three scores to obtain the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score, which can range from 3 to 15. Add “T” after the GCS if intubated and no verbal score is possible. For these patients, the GCS can range from 3T to 10T.lesion-associated edema in the brain and neural compression in the spine by the presence or absence of bright T2 CSF signals. Fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) imaging is a T2 sequence with suppression of the CSF signal, so as to emphasize lesions and edema, particularly adjacent to the ventricles. Diffu-sion-weighted images is the gold-standard for identifying isch-emic stroke within 12 hours of symptom onset.2 Gradient echo sequences (GRE) can be used to identify acute-subacute blood products and are used to assess for micro-hemorrhages in trau-matic diffuse axonal injury (DAI), amyloid angiopathy, and also in the diagnosis of cavernous malformations. In the spine, short-tau inversion recovery (STIR) or fat-suppressed T2 sequences are useful for assessing for the acuity of fractures (by measuring bone edema), and identifying ligamentous injury.CT and MR Angiography. Recent advances in CT technol-ogy such as short acquisition times with multidetector technol-ogy has allowed for imaging of vascular anatomy. Fine-slice CT scans can be combined with a timed-bolus of intravenous contrast in the arterial phase (angiography, CTA) and venous phase (venography, CTV) to assess arterial and venous vascu-lature, respectively. Although traditional catheter-based angiog-raphy still serves as the gold-standard, CTA and CTV provide Figure 42-1. Patterns of motor responses associated with various lesions. A. Left hemispheric lesion with right hemiplegia and left local-ization. B. Deep cerebral/thalamic lesion with bilateral flexor posturing. C. Midbrain or pontine lesion with bilateral extensor posturing. D. Medullary lesion with general flaccidity. (Adapted with permission from Rengachary SS, Ellenbogen RG: Principles of Neurosurgery, 2nd ed.  New York, NY: Elsevier/Mosby; 2005.)Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   183001/03/19   7:16 PM 1831NEUROSURGERYCHAPTER 42noninvasive alternative for the initial screening assessment and follow-up of patients with suspected or known vascular lesions, as well as the evaluation of vasospasm. Similarly, fine-slice time-of-flight axial images can be reformatted in three dimen-sions to build MRI angiograms and MRI venograms. MRI angiograms can detect stenosis of the cervical carotid arteries or intracranial aneurysms >3 mm in diameter. MRI venograms can assess the dural venous sinuses for patency or thrombosis. Two-dimensional time of flight imaging performs vascular reconstructions purely based on flow and does not require gado-linium contrast administration.CT and MR Perfusion. Perfusion scans have recently emerged as a method to a global assessment of the vascular integrity in the cerebral hemispheres, which is very important in the assess-ment of ischemic stroke (see “Stroke”). CT perfusion scans gen-erate quantitative color maps that indicate various physiologic parameters such as cerebral blood flow (CBF), cerebral blood volume (CBV), and mean transit time (MTT) through quan-titative analysis of rapidly acquired image sequences during intravenous contrast administration. Similar to perfusion CT, perfusion MRI can be used to generate quantitative color maps of relative cerebral CBV and MTT. These perfusion-based mea-sures can be used along with diffusion-weighted imaging in the evaluation of ischemic stroke, particularly to identify an isch-emic “penumbra” or tissue that is ischemic but not yet infarcted, and may be salvageable with intervention.3,4Angiography. Transarterial catheter-based angiography remains the gold standard for evaluation of vascular pathology of the brain and spine. The current state of the art is biplanar imaging to reduce dye load and facilitate interventional proce-dures. Digital subtraction technologies minimize bony inter-ference in the resultant images. Bilateral carotid arteries and bilateral vertebral arteries may be injected and followed through arterial, capillary, and venous phases for a complete cerebral angiogram.Electroencephalography. Electroencephalography (EEG) involves measuring weak electrical signals from the brain that are transmitted through the skull through electrodes that are applied to the scalp. The voltage fluctuations detected by EEG are thought to reflect summed membrane potentials from under-lying brain tissue. Clinically, EEG is useful for detecting sei-zures, interictal markers of epileptogenic tissue, and widespread abnormalities in brain function, such as diffuse encephalopathy. EEG is also used in concert with electrical stimulation to detect sensory evoked potentials that can be useful for intraoperative mapping during cranial and spine surgery.Electromyography and Nerve Conduction Studies.  Electromyography and nerve conduction studies (EMG/NCS) are useful for assessing the function of peripheral nerves. EMG records muscle activity in response to a proximal stimulation of the motor nerve. NCS record the velocity and amplitude of the nerve action potential. EMG/NCS typically is performed approximately 3 to 4 weeks after an acute injury, as nerves distal to the injury continue to transmit electrical impulses normally until degeneration of the distal nerve progresses.Invasive Monitoring. The most reliable monitor, always, is an alert patient with a reliable neurologic examination. If a reliable neurologic examination is not possible due to the pres-ence of brain injury, sedatives, or paralytics, or if there is active and unstable intracranial pathology, invasive monitoring is required. There are several methods of monitoring intracranial physiology. The methods described in the following sections are bedside intensive care unit (ICU) procedures that allow for continuous monitoring. Both procedures involve making a small hole in the skull with a hand-held drill. They generally are placed in the right frontal region to minimize the neurologic impact of possible complications such as hemorrhage.External Ventricular Drain. An external ventricular drain is also known as a ventriculostomy. A perforated plastic catheter is inserted into the frontal horn of the lateral ventricle. An uninter-rupted fluid column through a rigid tube allows transduction of intracranial pressure (ICP). CSF also can be drained to reduce ICP or sampled for laboratory studies.Intraparenchymal Physiologic Monitoring. Intraparenchy-mal monitors can be inserted into the brain through a threaded post locked securely into a burr hole, commonly referred to as a bolt. A bolt allows ICP monitoring with a fiber-optic pressure transducer, but it is smaller and less invasive than a ventriculos-tomy and may be associated with fewer complications, although the data do not clearly support this. Furthermore, a bolt can also be used to introduce probes to measure brain tissue oxygenation, brain temperature, and to perform microdialysis of parenchymal samples; however, the utility of these latter measures in clinical practice is still under investigation. Patients with severe brain injury due to trauma or aneurysmal hemorrhage may benefit from placement of these sensors in addition to a ventriculos-tomy to drain CSF for control of ICP. Such monitoring requires two twist-drill holes, which may be placed on adjacent or oppo-site sides of the head.NEUROLOGIC AND NEUROSURGICAL EMERGENCIESRaised Intracranial PressureICP normally varies between 4 and 14 mmHg. Sustained ICP levels above 20 mmHg can injure the brain. The Monro-Kellie doctrine states that the cranial vault is a rigid structure, and therefore, the total volume of the contents determines ICP. The three normal contents of the cranial vault are brain tis-sue, blood, and CSF. The brain’s contents can expand due to swelling from traumatic brain injury (TBI), stroke, or reactive edema. Blood volume can increase by extravasation to form a hematoma, or by reactive vasodilation in a hypoventilating, hypercarbic patient. CSF volume increases in the setting of hydrocephalus. Figure 42-2 demonstrates the classic CT find-ings of hydrocephalus. The addition of a lesion, such as a tumor or abscess, also will increase ICP. The pressure-volume curve depicted in Fig. 42-3 demonstrates a compensated region with a small ΔP/ΔV, and an uncompensated region with large ΔP/ΔV.  In the compensated region, increased volume is offset by decreased volume of CSF and blood.Increased ICP can injure the brain in several ways. Focal mass lesions cause shift and herniation. Temporal lesions push the uncus medially and compress the midbrain. This phenom-enon is known as uncal herniation. The posterior cerebral artery (PCA) passes between the uncus and midbrain and may be occluded, leading to an occipital infarct. Masses higher up in the hemisphere can push the cingulate gyrus under the falx cerebri. This process is known as subfalcine herniation. The anterior cerebral artery (ACA) branches run along the medial surface of the cingulate gyrus and may be occluded in this case, leading to medial frontal and parietal infarcts. Diffuse increases in pressure Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   183101/03/19   7:16 PM 1832SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIin the cerebral hemispheres can lead to central, or transtento-rial, herniation. Increased pressure in the posterior fossa can lead to upward central herniation or downward tonsillar hernia-tion through the foramen magnum. Uncal, transtentorial, and tonsillar herniation can cause direct damage to the brain stem. Figure 42-4 diagrams patterns of herniation.Patients with increased ICP, or intracranial hypertension, often will present with headache, nausea, vomiting, and progres-sive mental status decline. Cushing’s triad is the classic presen-tation of hypertension, bradycardia, and irregular respirations. Focal neurologic deficits such as hemiparesis may be present if there is a focal mass lesion causing the problem. Patients with these symptoms should undergo an immediate head CT and rapid neurosurgical evaluation.Initial management of intracranial hypertension includes airway protection and adequate ventilation. A bolus of man-nitol up to 1 g/kg causes free water diuresis, increased serum osmolality, and extraction of water from the brain. The effect is delayed by about 20 minutes and has a transient benefit. Driv-ing serum osmolality above 300 mOsm/L is of indeterminate benefit and can have deleterious cardiovascular side effects, such as hypovolemia that leads to hypotension and decreased brain perfusion. A ventriculostomy and/or craniectomy may be needed for definitive decompression.It is critical to note that lethargic or obtunded patients often have decreased respiratory drive. This causes the partial pressure of arterial carbon dioxide (Paco2) to increase, resulting in cerebral vasodilation and worsening of intracranial hyperten-sion. This cycle causes a characteristic “crashing patient,” who rapidly loses airway protection, becomes apneic, and herniates. Emergent intubation and ventilation to reduce Paco2 to roughly 35 mmHg can reverse this process.Figure 42-2. Head computed tomography scan demonstrating hydrocephalus. The third ventricle (3rd) is widened and rounded, the anterior horns of the lateral ventricles are plump, and pressure-driven flow of cerebrospinal fluid into brain parenchyma adjacent to the ventricles is seen (arrowhead). This is known as transepen-dymal flow of cerebrospinal fluid.Intracranial volume (arbitrary units)Intracranial pressure (mmHg)0102030405060708090100110120130102030405060708090100˜V˜P˜V˜P˜V˜PLow complianceecnailpmoc oNecnailpmoc hgiHFigure 42-3. Pressure-volume curve demonstrating the effect of changing the volume of intracranial contents on intracranial pressure. Note the compensated zone, with little change of pressure with change of volume, and the uncompensated zone, with significant change of pres-sure with change of volume. (Adapted with permission from Ellenbogen RG, Abdulrauf SI, Sekhar LN: Principles of Neurosurgery, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier/Saunders; 2012.)Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   183201/03/19   7:16 PM 1833NEUROSURGERYCHAPTER 42Brain Stem CompressionThe posterior fossa (brain stem and cerebellum) requires special consideration because the volume of the posterior fossa within the cranial vault is small. Posterior fossa lesions such as tumors, hemorrhage, or stroke can cause mass effect that can rapidly kill the patient in two ways. Occlusion of the fourth ventricle can lead to acute obstructive hydrocephalus, raised ICP, herniation, and eventually death. This mass effect can also lead directly to brain stem compression (Fig. 42-5). Symptoms of brain stem compression include hypertension, agitation, and progressive obtundation, followed rapidly by brain death. A patient exhibit-ing any of these symptoms needs an emergent neurosurgical evaluation for possible ventriculostomy or suboccipital crani-ectomy (removal of the bone covering the cerebellum). This situation is especially critical, as expeditious decompression can lead to significant functional recovery.StrokePatients presenting with acute focal neurologic deficits at a clearly defined time of onset (i.e., when the patient was last seen in a normal state of health) must be evaluated as rapidly as possible. An emergent head CT scan should be done. The study is often normal because CT changes from ischemic stroke may take up to 24 hours to appear (Fig. 42-6). A patient with a clinical diagnosis of acute stroke <4.5 hours old, without hemor-rhage on CT, may be a candidate for thrombolytic therapy with tissue plasminogen activator (tPA). When a proximal large-vessel obstruction is suspected, patients should be evaluated for endovascular mechanical thrombectomy if therapy can be initiated within 6 to 8 hours of symptom onset. Intravenous tPA should be given regardless, but a noninvasive intracranial vas-cular study such as CT angiography should also be obtained in these cases. An emergent MRI is helpful but not always diag-nostically necessary.SeizureA seizure is defined as an uncontrolled synchronous organiza-tion of neuronal electrical activity. A new-onset seizure often signifies an irritative mass lesion in the brain, particularly in adults, in whom tumors commonly present with seizure. Patients with traumatic intracranial hemorrhage are at risk for seizure. In addition to airway and ventilatory problems, a seizing patient is also at risk for neural excitotoxicity if the activity is prolonged, such as in status epilepticus. Any patient with a new-onset sei-zure should have imaging of the brain after the seizure is con-trolled and the patient is resuscitated.TRAUMATrauma is the leading cause of death in children and young adults; however, the incidence of death and disability from trauma has been slowly decreasing. This decline is partly attrib-utable to increased awareness of safety devices such as seat belts and motorist helmets. Nonetheless, trauma remains a major cause of morbidity and mortality, and it can affect every major organ system in the body. The three main areas of neurosurgical focus are: traumatic brain injury (TBI), spinal cord injury (SCI), and peripheral nerve injury.Head TraumaGlasgow Coma Scale Score. The initial assessment of the trauma patient includes the primary survey, resuscitation, 1324Figure 42-4. Schematic drawing of brain herniation patterns. 1. Subfalcine herniation. The cingulate gyrus shifts across midline under the falx cerebri. 2. Uncal herniation. The uncus (medial tem-poral lobe gyrus) shifts medially and compresses the midbrain and cerebral peduncle. 3. Central transtentorial herniation. The dien-cephalon and midbrain shift caudally through the tentorial inci-sura. 4. Tonsillar herniation. The cerebellar tonsil shifts caudally through the foramen magnum. (Reproduced with permission from Wilkins RH, Rengachary SS: Neurosurgery, 2nd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill Education; 1996.)Figure 42-5. Maturing cerebellar stroke seen as a hypodense area in the right cerebellar hemisphere (arrowhead) on head computed tomography in a patient with rapidly progressing obtundation  2 days after the initial onset of symptoms. Swelling of the infarcted tissue causes posterior fossa mass effect. The fourth ventricle is obliterated and not visible, and the brain stem is being compressed.Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   183301/03/19   7:16 PM 1834SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIsecondary survey, and definitive care. Neurosurgical evalua-tion begins during the primary survey with the determination of the GCS score (usually referred to simply as the GCS) for the patient. The GCS is determined by adding the scores of the best responses of the patient in each of three categories. The motor score ranges from 1 to 6, verbal from 1 to 5, and eyes from 1 to 4. The GCS therefore ranges from 3 to 15, as detailed in Table 42-2. Tracheal intubation or severe facial or eye swelling can impede verbal and eye responses. In these circumstances, the patient is given the score of 1 with a modifier, such as verbal “1T” where T = tube.Scalp Injury. Blunt or penetrating trauma to the head can cause injury to the densely vascularized scalp, and significant blood loss can result. Direct pressure initially controls the bleeding, allowing close inspection of the injury. If a simple laceration is found, it should be copiously irrigated and closed primarily. If the laceration is short, a single-layer, percutaneous suture clo-sure will suffice. If the laceration is long or has multiple arms, the patient may need debridement and closure in the operating room, with its superior lighting and wider selection of instru-ments and suture materials. Careful reapproximation of the galea will provide a more secure closure and better hemostasis. ACBFigure 42-6. A. Head computed tomography scan of a patient with a 4-day-old stroke that occluded the right middle cerebral and posterior cerebral arteries. The infarcted tissue is the hypodense (dark) area indicated by the arrowheads. The patient presented with left-sided weakness and left visual field loss, but then became less responsive, prompting this head computed tomography. Note the right-to-left midline shift.  B. Same patient status post decompressive right hemicraniectomy. Note the free expansion of swollen brain outside the normal confines of the skull. C. Patient with a right middle cerebral artery ischemic stroke with areas of hemorrhagic conversion, seen as hyperdense (bright) areas within the infarcted tissue. This patient also required hemicraniectomy for severe mass effect. Note the lack of midline shift postoperatively.Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   183401/03/19   7:16 PM 1835NEUROSURGERYCHAPTER 42Blunt trauma also can cause crush injury with subsequent tissue necrosis. These wounds require debridement and consideration of advancement flaps to cover the defect.Skull Fractures. The usual classification system for bony fractures may be applied to the skull. The fracture may be characterized by skull X-rays or head CT.5 A closed fracture is covered by intact skin. An open, or compound, fracture is associated with disrupted overlying skin. The fracture lines may be single (linear); multiple and radiating from a point (stellate); or multiple, creating fragments of bone (comminuted). Closed skull fractures do not normally require specific treatment. Open fractures require repair of the scalp and operative debridement. Indications for craniotomy include depression greater than the cranial thickness, intracranial hematoma, and frontal sinus involvement.6 Skull fractures generally indicate that a signifi-cant amount of force was transmitted to the head and should increase the suspicion for intracranial injury. Fractures that cross meningeal arteries can cause rupture of the underlying vessels and subsequent epidural hematoma (EDH) formation.Depressed skull fractures may result from a focal injury of significant force. The inner and outer cortices of the skull are disrupted, and a fragment of bone is pressed in toward the brain in relation to adjacent intact skull. The fragment may overlap the edge of intact bone, or it may plunge completely below the level of adjacent normal skull. The inner cortex of the bone fragments often has multiple sharp edges that can lacerate dura, brain, and vessels. Craniotomy is required to ele-vate the fracture, repair dural disruption, and obtain hemostasis in these cases (Fig. 42-7). However, fractures overlying dural venous sinuses require restraint. Surgical exploration can lead to life-threatening hemorrhage from the lacerated sinus.Fractures of the skull base are common in head-injured patients, and they indicate significant impact. They are gener-ally apparent on routine head CT, but they should be evaluated with dedicated fine-slice coronal-section CT scan to document and delineate the extent of the fracture and involved structures. If asymptomatic, they require no treatment. Skull base fractures requiring intervention include those with an associated cranial nerve deficit or CSF leak. A fracture of the temporal bone, for instance, can damage the facial or vestibulocochlear nerve, resulting in vertigo, ipsilateral deafness, or facial paralysis. A communication may be formed between the subarachnoid space and the middle ear, allowing CSF drainage into the pharynx via the Eustachian tube or from the ear (otorrhea). Extravasation of blood results in ecchymosis behind the ear, known as Battle’s sign. A fracture of the anterior skull base can result in anos-mia (loss of smell from damage to the olfactory nerve), CSF drainage from the nose (rhinorrhea), or periorbital ecchymosis, known as raccoon eyes.Copious clear drainage from the nose or ear makes the diagnosis of CSF leakage obvious. Often, however, the drain-age may be discolored with blood or small in volume if some drains into the throat. In indeterminate cases, it is important to consider radiographic findings on the CT scan near the fracture that suggest CSF leak, such as pneumocephalus, subarachnoid, or intraparenchymal blood at the fracture site. The “halo” test assesses for a double ring when a drop of the fluid is allowed to fall on an absorbent surface, but it has been shown to have poor clinical utility.7 The fluid can be sent for β-2 transferrin testing, a carbohydrate-free isoform of transferrin exclusively found in the CSF; however, these tests often take 1 to 2 weeks to result and also can be difficult to incorporate into clinical practice.BAFigure 42-7. A. Bone-window axial head computed tomography (CT) of a patient who presented aphasic after being struck with the bot-tom of a beer bottle. CT demonstrates a depressed skull fracture in the left posterior temporoparietal area. B. Brain-window axial head CT demonstrating intraparenchymal hematoma caused by laceration of cortical vessels by the edge of the fractured bone. Arrowhead indicates traumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage in the sylvanian fissure.Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   183501/03/19   7:16 PM 1836SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIMany CSF leaks will heal with elevation of the head of the bed for several days. An elevation of the head of the bed reduces the hydrostatic pressure of the CSF fluid column in the cranial vault, near the site of the defect. As such, when the CSF leak is in the lumbar thecal sac, the head of the bed should be flat so as to maximize hydrostatic pressure of the CSF fluid column at the cranial vault, away from the site of the defect. In addi-tion, lumbar drain can be used to reduce CSF pressure. When there is a contraindication, to lumbar drain placement (such as an intracranial mass lesion or hematoma), an extraventricular drain should be used for CSF diversion. Although persistent CSF leaks have been shown to increase the risk of meningitis,8 there is no evidence supporting the use of prophylactic antibi-otic use for preventing meningitis in patients with CSF leaks.9Traumatic cranial neuropathies generally can be managed conservatively, with documentation of the extent of impairment and signs of recovery. Patients with traumatic facial nerve pal-sies may benefit from a course of steroids, although their benefit is unproven. Patients with facial nerve palsy of abrupt onset, who do not respond to steroids within 48 to 72 hours, may be considered for surgical decompression of the petrous portion of the facial nerve. Patients also may present with delayed-onset facial nerve palsy. Again, steroids are used and surgery can be considered, with mixed results.Closed Head Injury. Closed head injury (CHI) is the most common type of TBI and a significant cause of morbidity and mortality in the United States. There are two important factors that affect the outcome of CHI in general. The initial impact causes the primary injury, defined as the immediate injury to neurons from transmission of the force of impact. The long, delicate axons of the neurons can shear as they undergo differ-ential acceleration or deceleration along their projecting path-ways. Prevention strategies, such as wearing helmets, remain the best means to decrease disability from primary injury. Sub-sequent neuronal damage due to the sequelae of trauma is referred to as secondary injury. Hypoxia, hypotension, hydro-cephalus, intracranial hypertension, thrombosis, and intracranial hemorrhage may all be mechanisms of secondary injury. One focus of basic research in TBI, critical care medicine, and neurosurgical intervention is to decrease the effects of sec-ondary injury.The Brain Trauma Foundation’s most recent summary of management recommendations for TBI patients was published in 2016 and is endorsed by the American Association of Neuro-logical Surgeons, Congress of Neurological Surgeons, and the World Health Organization.10 The guidelines standardize the care of these patients with the hope of improving outcomes. Level I recommendations are based on a body of high-quality evidence, such as large, well-received randomized controlled trials. Level II and III recommendations are based on moderate and low quality evidence, respectively. Some of the common patterns of CHI, including concussion, contusion, and diffuse axonal injury, are discussed in “Types of Closed Head Injury.”11Initial Assessment The initial evaluation of a trauma patient remains the same whether or not the primary surveyor suspects head injury. The first three elements of the ABCDs of resus-citation—airway, breathing, and circulation—must be assessed and stabilized. Hypoxia and hypotension are known to worsen outcome in TBI (due to secondary injury), making cardiopul-monary stabilization critical. Patients who cannot follow com-mands require intubation for airway protection and ventilatory control. The fourth element, assessment of “D,” for disability, is undertaken next. Motor activity, speech, and eye opening can be assessed in a few seconds and a GCS score assigned.The following is an example of how a primary surveyor may efficiently assess disability and GCS: Approach the patient and enter his or her field of view. Observe whether the patient is visually attentive. Clearly command: “Tell me your name.” Then ask the patient to lift up two fingers on each side sequen-tially, and wiggle the toes. A visually or verbally unresponsive patient should be assessed for response to peripheral stimuli such as nail-bed pressure, or deep central painful stimulation, such as a firm, twisting pinch of the sensitive supraclavicular skin. Watch for eye opening and movement of the extremities, whether purposeful or reflexive. Assess the verbal response. The motor, verbal, and eye-opening scores may be correctly assigned using this rapid examination. An initial assessment of the probability of significant head injury can be made, assuming that pharmacologic and toxic elements have not obscured the examination. The surveyor must also take note of any external signs of head injury, including bleeding from the scalp, nose, or ear, or deformation of the skull or face.Classification TBI can be classified as mild, moderate, or severe. For patients with a history of head trauma, classifica-tion is as follows: severe head injury if the GCS score is 3 to 8, moderate head injury if the GCS score is 9 to 12, and mild head injury if the GCS score is 13 to 15. Many patients present to emergency rooms and trauma bays with a history of TBI. A tri-age system must be used to maximize resource utilization while minimizing the chance of missing occult or progressing injuries.TBI patients who are asymptomatic, who have only headache, dizziness, or scalp lacerations, and who did not lose consciousness, have a low risk for intracranial injury and may be discharged home without a head CT scan.12,13 Head-injured patients who are discharged should be sent home with reliable family or friends who can observe the patient for the first postin-jury day. Printed discharge instructions, which describe moni-toring for confusion, persistent nausea, weakness, or speech difficulty, should be provided to the caretaker. The patient should return to the emergency department for evaluation of such symptoms.Patients with a history of altered consciousness, amne-sia, progressive headache, skull or facial fracture, vomiting, or seizure have a moderate risk for intracranial injury and should undergo a prompt head CT. If the CT is normal, and the neuro-logic examination has returned to baseline (excluding amnesia of the event), then the patient can be discharged to the care of a responsible adult, again with printed criteria for returning to the emergency room. Otherwise the patient must be admitted for a 24-hour observation period.Patients with depressed consciousness, focal neurologic deficits, penetrating injury, depressed skull fracture, or changing neurologic examination have a high risk for intracranial injury. These patients should undergo immediate head CT and admis-sion for observation or intervention as needed.Types of Closed Head Injury Concussion A concussion is defined as temporary neuronal dysfunction following nonpenetrating head trauma. The head CT is normal, and deficits resolve over minutes to hours. Defini-tions vary; some require transient loss of consciousness, while others include patients with any alteration of mental status. Memory difficulties, especially amnesia of the event, are very 3Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   183601/03/19   7:16 PM 1837NEUROSURGERYCHAPTER 42common. Concussions may be graded. One method is the Col-orado grading system.14 Head trauma patients with confusion only are grade 1, patients with amnesia are grade 2, and patients who lose consciousness are grade 3. Studies have shown that the brain remains in a hypermetabolic state for up to a week after injury. The brain is also much more susceptible to injury from even minor head trauma in the first 1 to 2 weeks after concus-sion. This is known as second-impact syndrome, and patients should be informed that, even after mild head injury, they might experience memory difficulties or persistent headaches. Return to play guidelines after sports-related concussions are contro-versial and are under active debate.15Contusion A contusion is a bruise of the brain, and occurs when the force from trauma is sufficient to cause breakdown of small vessels and extravasation of blood into the brain. The contused areas appear bright on CT scan, as seen in Fig. 42-8. The frontal, occipital, and temporal poles are most often involved. The brain sustains injury as it collides with rough, bony surfaces. Contu-sions themselves rarely cause significant mass effect as they represent small amounts of blood in injured parenchyma rather than coherent blood clots. Edema may develop around a contu-sion, causing mass effect. Contusions may enlarge or progress to frank hematoma, particularly during the first 24 hours. Contu-sions also may occur in brain tissue opposite the site of impact. This is known as a contre-coup injury. These contusions result from deceleration of the brain against the skull.Diffuse Axonal Injury Diffuse axonal injury (DAI) is caused by damage to axons throughout the brain, due to rotational acceleration and then deceleration. Axons may be completely disrupted and then retract, forming axon balls. Small hemor-rhages can be seen in more severe cases, especially on MRI. Hemorrhage is classically seen in the corpus callosum and the dorsolateral midbrain. DAI can be considered to be a severe form of a concussion, often with irreversible consequence. It can often explain a poor neurological examination (such as impaired arousal) in cases without clear radiographic signs of global bran injury, particularly when there is damage in struc-tures, such as the pontine reticular activating system or bilateral thalami, that are necessary for arousal. In these cases, alternative explanations of poor arousal, such as a basilar thrombus, must also be investigated.Penetrating Injury These injuries are complex and must be evaluated individually. The two main subtypes are missile (e.g., due to bullets or fragmentation devices) and nonmissile (e.g., due to knives or ice picks). Some general principles apply. If available, skull X-rays and CT scans are useful in assessing the nature of the injury. Cerebral angiography must be considered if the object passes near a major artery or dural venous sinus. Operative exploration is necessary to remove any object extend-ing out of the cranium, as well as for debridement, irrigation, hemostasis, and definitive closure. Small objects contained within brain parenchyma are often left in place to avoid iat-rogenic secondary brain injury. High-velocity missile injuries (from high-powered hunting rifles or military weapons) are especially deadly, because the associated shock wave causes cavitary tissue destruction of an area that is much larger than the projectile itself. Projectiles that penetrate both hemispheres or traverse the ventricles are almost universally fatal. Antibiot-ics are given to decrease the chances of meningitis or abscess formation; however, the evidence supporting the use of antibi-otics following missile injury is weak and largely comes from retrospective case studies and expert opinion. Recent guidelines published in regard to preventing combat-related infections recommend antimicrobial therapy for 5 days or until resolu-tion of the associated CSF leak, albeit with limited supporting evidence.16Traumatic Intracranial Hematomas. The various traumatic intracranial hematomas contribute to death and disability sec-ondary to head injury. Hematomas can expand rapidly and cause brain shift and subsequent herniation. Emergent neurosurgical evaluation and intervention often are necessary.Epidural Hematoma EDH is the accumulation of blood between the skull and the dura. EDH usually results from arte-rial disruption, especially of the middle meningeal artery. The dura is adherent to bone, and some pressure is required to dis-sect between the two. On head CT, the blood clot is bright, biconvex in shape (lentiform), and has a well-defined border that usually respects cranial suture lines. An EDH is typically found over the convexities but may rarely occur in the posterior fossa as well. EDH has a classic, three-stage clinical presenta-tion that is probably seen in only 20% of cases. The patient is initially unconscious from the concussive aspect of the head trauma. The patient then awakens and has a “lucid interval,” while the hematoma subclinically expands. As the volume of the hematoma grows, the decompensated region of the pressure-volume curve is reached, ICP increases, and the patient rapidly becomes lethargic and herniates. Uncal herniation from an EDH classically causes ipsilateral third nerve palsy and contralateral hemiparesis.Open craniectomy for evacuation of the congealed clot and hemostasis generally is indicated for EDH. In some cases, EDH can be caused from bony venous bleeding that is self-limited Figure 42-8. Severe bilateral contusions in the basal aspect of the frontal lobes, caused by the brain moving over the rough, irregular skull base during sudden cranial acceleration.Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   183701/03/19   7:16 PM 1838SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIand may not require surgical intervention. Generally, patients who meet all of the following criteria may be managed conser-vatively: clot volume <30 cm3, maximum thickness <1.5 cm, and GCS score >8.10 Prognosis after successful evacuation is better for EDH than subdural hematoma (SDH). EDHs are associ-ated with lower-energy trauma with less resultant primary brain injury. Good outcomes may be seen in 85% to 90% of patients, with rapid CT scan and intervention.11 In some cases, EDH can also be caused by dural venous sinus tears that rapidly expand and are typically associated with a high degree of morbidity when treated surgically.Acute Subdural Hematoma An acute SDH is the result of an accumulation of blood between the arachnoid membrane and the dura. Acute SDH usually results from venous bleed-ing, typically from tearing of a bridging vein running from the cerebral cortex to the dural sinuses. The bridging veins are sub-ject to stretching and tearing during acceleration/deceleration of the head because the brain shifts in relation to the dura, which firmly adheres to the skull. Elderly and alcoholic patients are at higher risk for acute SDH formation after head trauma due to brain atrophy.On head CT scan, the clot is bright or mixed-density, cres-cent-shaped (lunate), may have a less distinct border, and does not cross the midline due to the presence of the falx. Most SDHs occur over the cerebral hemispheres, but they may also occur between the hemispheres or layer over the tentorium.Open craniotomy for evacuation of acute SDH is indicated for any of the following: thickness >1 cm, midline shift >5 mm, or GCS drop by two or more points from the time of injury to hospitalization. Nonoperatively managed hematomas may sta-bilize and eventually reabsorb, or evolve into chronic SDHs.17 This management requires frequent neurologic examinations until the clot stabilizes based on serial head CT scans.The prognosis for functional recovery is significantly worse for acute SDH than EDH because it is associated with greater primary injury to brain parenchyma from high-energy impacts. Prompt recognition and intervention minimizes sec-ondary injury. The elderly patients with low admission GCS, or high postoperative ICP do poorly, with as few as 5% attaining functional recovery.18Chronic Subdural Hematoma Chronic SDH is a collection of blood breakdown products that is at least 2 to 3 weeks old. Acute hematomas are bright white (hyperdense) on CT scan for approximately 3 days, after which they fade to isodensity with brain, and then to hypodensity after 2 to 3 weeks. A true chronic SDH will be nearly as dark as CSF on CT. Traces of white are often seen due to small, recurrent hemorrhages into the col-lection. These small bleeds may expand the collection enough to make it symptomatic. This phenomenon is referred to as an  acute-on-chronic SDH. Figure 42-9 demonstrates the CT appearance of an acute-on-chronic SDH. Vascularized mem-branes form within the hematoma as it matures. These mem-branes may be the source of acute hemorrhage.Chronic SDHs often occur in patients without a clear his-tory of head trauma as they may arise from minor head injury. Alcoholics, the elderly, and patients on anticoagulation are at higher risk for developing chronic SDH. Patients may present with headache, seizure, confusion, contralateral hemiparesis, or coma.A chronic SDH >1 cm or any symptomatic SDH should be surgically drained. Unlike acute SDH, which consists of a thick, congealed clot, chronic SDH typically consists of a viscous fluid with the texture and dark brown color reminiscent of motor oil. A simple burr hole can effectively drain most chronic SDHs. However, the optimal treatment of chronic SDH remains con-troversial.19 Recent data suggest that open craniotomy is effec-tive at reducing recurrence, but may be associated with more short-term complications.20 Most authorities agree that burr hole drainage should be attempted first to obviate the risks of formal craniotomy.21 A single burr hole placed over the dependent edge of the collection can be made, and the space is copiously irri-gated until the fluid is clear. A second, more anterior burr hole can then be placed if the collection does not drain satisfactorily due to containment by membranes. The procedure is converted to open craniotomy if the SDH is too congealed for irrigation drainage, the complex of membranes prevents effective drain-age, or persistent hemorrhage occurs that cannot be reached with bipolar cautery through the burr hole. The required surgi-cal prepping and draping are always performed to allow simple conversion to craniotomy, and the scalp incision and burr holes are placed to allow easy incorporation into larger skin flaps.There are various strategies to prevent reaccumulation of blood. Subdural or subgaleal drains may be left in place for 1 to 2 days. Subdural drains have been shown to reduce the risk of recurrence, whereas corticosteroid use in this patient popula-tion has been associated with higher morbidity without benefit.20 Mild hydration and bedrest with the head of the bed flat may Figure 42-9. Head computed tomography scan of an elderly patient with progressing left hemiplegia and lethargy, demonstrat-ing an acute-on-chronic subdural hematoma. History revealed that the patient sustained a fall 4 weeks before presentation. Arrowheads outline the hematoma. The acute component is slightly denser and is seen as the hyperdense area in the dependent portion.Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   183801/03/19   7:16 PM 1839NEUROSURGERYCHAPTER 42encourage brain expansion. High levels of inspired oxygen may help draw nitrogen out of the cavity. Regardless of the strategy used, follow-up head CT scans are required postoperatively and approximately 1 month later to document resolution.Intraparenchymal Hemorrhage Isolated hematomas within the brain parenchyma are most often associated with hyper-tensive hemorrhage or arteriovenous malformations (AVMs). Bleeding may occur in a contused area of brain. Mass effect from developing hematomas may present as a delayed neuro-logic deficit. Delayed traumatic intracerebral hemorrhage is most likely to occur within the first 24 hours. Patients with contusion on the initial head CT scan should be reimaged 24 hours after the trauma to document stable pathology. Indica-tions for craniotomy include: any clot volume >50 cm3 or a clot volume >20 cm3 with referable neurologic deterioration (GCS 6–8) and associated midline shift >5 mm or basal cistern compression.22Pneumocephalus Pneumocephalus, or air in the intracranial cavity, is commonly seen in neurosurgical patients following head trauma or following intracranial surgery.23 Pneumoceph-alus requires a defect in the skull that allows air to enter the intracranial cavity. This may occur following may represent an iatrogenic defect created following cranial surgery or follow-ing head trauma. Approximately 66% of postcraniotomy CT scans demonstrate some extent of pneumocephalus.24 The iden-tification of pneumocephalus following head trauma can offer important clues about the extent of injury, such as the presence of skull based fractures or a CSF leak. In rare cases, pneumo-cephalus can also be seen in association with skull based tumors or infections.A tension pneumocephalus occurs when the intracranial air pocket is under tension which can result in life threatening herniation if left untreated. This is a neurosurgical emergency and requires an urgent neurosurgical consultation. Two radio-graphic features have been associated with a tension pneumo-cephalus25 (Fig. 42-10). First, the “Mount Fuji” sign, where the air pocket separates the frontal lobes and widens the inter-hemi-spheric fissure, mimicking the silhouette of Mount Fuji. Second, the “air bubble” sign, where there are multi-focal pockets of air throughout the subarachnoid cisterns, putatively within the sub-arachnoid space. These radiographic findings are helpful clues; however, the diagnosis of tension pneumocephalus also requires a worsening neurological exam consistent with increased intra-cranial pressure and impending herniation. A burr hole may be used to relieve intracranial pressure per the discretion of the neurosurgical team.When not associated with tension dynamics, the clinical significance and management of pneumocephalus depends on the underlying mechanism. There are thought to be two major mechanisms by which pneumocephalus develops.24 First, the “ball valve” mechanism involves the passage of air into the intracranial cavity during periods of positive pressure, whereby the defect in the skull acts as a one-way valve. In these cases, management involves avoiding positive pressure ventilation, and laying the head of the bed flat to minimize air traveling upwards into the cranial cavity. Second, the “inverted bottle” mechanism involves air entering the intracranial space due to a negative pressure gradient created by the drainage of CSF. In most cases, drainage occurs through a traumatic or iatrogenic CSF leak, but it may also occur through ventricular or lumbar drainage. In these cases, management should be focused on minimizing CSF drainage through the defect. If the CSF leak is at the skull base, as is the case following basilar skull fractures, or those involving the mastoid air cells, then the head of bed must be elevated so as to reduce hydrostatic pressure in the ven-tricular CSF fluid column, and controlled CSF diversion can be performed using an extraventricular or lumbar drain (see “Skull Fractures” for further discussion). Definitive repair of the skull-based defect can also be considered, but this is often done on an elective basis. In general, nontension pneumocephalus will resolve on its own with time as it is resorbed into the blood stream. Supplemental 100% oxygen may be used to increase the rate of resorption by increasing the diffusion gradient of nitro-gen-predominant intracranial air pocket and the blood stream.26Management of Traumatic Brain Injury General Medical Management Several medical steps may be taken to minimize secondary injury and the systemic con-sequences of head injury. Patients with a documented CHI and evidence of intracranial hemorrhage or a depressed skull fracture should receive a 1 g Keppra loading dose, followed by 1 week of therapeutic maintenance Keppra, typically 500 mg  twice a day. Antiseizure prophylaxis has been shown to decrease the incidence of early posttraumatic seizures.27 There is no evi-dence to support long-term use of prophylactic antiepileptic agents. Even though the clinical studies supporting early anti-seizure prophylaxis used phenytoin, Keppra is typically used in clinical practice due to a more favorable side effect profile. Blood glucose levels should be closely monitored by free blood sugar checks and controlled with sliding scale insulin. Fevers also should be evaluated and controlled with antipyretics, as well as source-directed therapy when possible. Hyperglycemia and hyperthermia are toxic to injured neurons and contribute to secondary injury. Head-injured patients have an increased prevalence of peptic ulceration and GI bleeding. Peptic ulcers occurring in patients with head injury or high ICP are referred to as Cushing’s ulcers. Ulcer prophylaxis should be used. Com-pression stockings or athrombic pumps should be used when the patient cannot be mobilized rapidly for prophylaxis of deep venous thrombosis.Steroids and Traumatic Brain Injury Per a level 1 recom-mendation (high-quality evidence) from the Brain Trauma Foundation,10 steroids are not recommended for the management of TBI or reduction of elevated ICP. Also, high-dose methyl-prednisolone is contraindicated in severe TBI. A large random-ized controlled trial (CRASH; n = 9673, 6-month follow-up,28 Figure 42-10. CT image on left illustrates “Mt. Fuji sign” (arrow-head) and intraparnchymal air (arrow). CT image on R illustrates brain herniation into the ethmoid sinus (arrowhead).Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   183901/03/19   7:16 PM 1840SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIdemonstrated an increased risk of 6-month mortality in severe TBI (GCS 3–8) that received methylprednisolone (47%), as compared to placebo (42%, P = 0.0024). This effect was also present when analyzing TBI of all severity levels (25.7% meth-ylprednisolone vs. 22.3% placebo, P = 0.0001).Blood Pressure Management Blood pressure management in TBI is a complex issue. On one hand, hypotension results in hypoperfusion that may worsen brain injury that occurs follow-ing TBI. On another hand, hypertension may result in expansion of intracranial hematomas that are often seen in TBI.There is clear evidence from retrospective studies, that frank hypotension (SBP <90 mmHg) is associated with increased mortality in TBI, particularly in the prehospital setting and during resuscitation.29 A large retrospective cohort study  (n = 15,733) identified hypotension thresholds that were associ-ated with an increased risk of mortality in patients with TBI of varying age.30 Based on these data, the Brain Trauma Founda-tion guidelines10 provide a level III (low-quality) recommenda-tion that maintaining systolic blood pressures >100 mmHg (ages 50–69 years), or >110 mmHg (ages 15–49 years or >70 years) may be considered to reduce mortality and improve outcomes. More recently, a large retrospective study31 demonstrated a dose-dependent relation between the duration of prehospital hypotension and increased mortality in patients with TBI, such that a 10-point increase in systolic blood pressure across a broad range (40–119 mmHg) was associated with an 18.8% decrease in adjusted odds of inhospital mortality. These results suggest that having a single “hypotension threshold” may not be suf-ficient in management of TBI and may require more aggressive management than currently employed. Furthermore, an impor-tant and underappreciated consideration in blood pressure man-agement is the baseline blood pressure of the patient. Future studies should assess blood pressure management goals that are tailored to each individual patient’s baseline blood pressure.On the other hand, hypertension in TBI may have impli-cations for intracranial hematoma expansion. It is common in clinical practice to recommend that systolic blood pressures are maintained <160 mmHg to mitigate the risk of hematoma expan-sion. Evidence supporting this practice is largely extrapolated from non-TBI patients. A small retrospective study (n = 69)32 demonstrated an increased risk of postcraniotomy intracranial hematoma in patients with intraoperative hypertension (62% vs. 34% controls, P <0.001), and postoperative hyperten-sion in the first 12 hours after surgery (62% vs. 25% controls,  P <0.001). A recent large retrospective study in patients with anti-coagulant-associated intracranial hematoma demonstrated that lowering SBP to less than 160 mmHg within 4 hours of admis-sion was associated with a reduced risk of hematoma expan-sion (n = 691, 33.1% <160 mmHg vs. 52.4 % in ≥160 mmHg;  P <.001).33 However, there are no specific recommendations from the Brain Trauma Foundation on a hypertension threshold to avoid in patients with traumatic intracranial hematoma.Anticoagulation Reversal and Prophylaxis Patients with intracranial hematoma who are on anticoagulation for car-diovascular indications (atrial fibrillation, cardiac stents, or mechanical valves) or stroke prevention present a challenging population. Anticoagulation reversal is important to reduce the risk of hematoma expansion; however, anticoagulant reversal is also associated with thrombotic cardiovascular complications. A recent retrospective study in patients with nontraumatic, oral-anticoagulant–associated intracranial hematoma showed that lowering the INR to <1.3 within 4 hours of admission was an independent predictor of hematoma expansion (n = 853; 19.8% vs. 41.5% in INR of ≥1.3; P <.001). Furthermore, this study showed that the risk of ischemic complications was greater in patients that were not restarted on oral anticoagulation as com-pared to those that were subsequently restarted (n = 719; 5.2% vs. 15%, no restart, P <0.001); however, they did not observe a significant increase in the risk of hemorrhage with anticoagula-tion restart (n = 719; 8.1%, vs. 6.6%, P = 0.48). The median time to anticoagulation restart was 30 days after discharge (inter-quartile range 18–65), as such, these data do not speak to risks and benefits of restarting anticoagulation in the acute post-bleed interval. It is important to note that the risks and benefits of restarting anticoagulation will vary based on the individual patient and the patient’s indications for anticoagulation (e.g., mechanical heart valve vs. atrial fibrillation). As such, close collaboration between the neurosurgery and cardiology teams are important in optimizing a management strategy for these patients.Anticoagulation prophylaxis for prevention of venous thrombosis also involves a risk-benefit analysis. Per a level III (low-quality) recommendation of Brain Trauma Foundation Guidelines,10 anticoagulation prophylaxis with low-molecular-weight heparin or low-dose unfractionated heparin may be used to reduce the risk of venous thrombosis, even though it is associ-ated with an increased risk of intracranial hematoma expansion. It may be reasonable to initiate prophylactic anticoagulation  24 hours after an intracranial hematoma is deemed to be stable. A single-center retrospective study (n = 236) found that such a strategy was associated with a decreased risk of DVT (0% vs. 5.6% (n = 6), P <0.001), but did not observe significant differ-ences in the rates of pulmonary embolism (0.78% (n = 1) vs. 3.74% (n = 4), P = 0.18) or intracranial hematoma expansion (0.7% [1] vs. 2.8% [3], P = 0.3). However, because of the low rate of clinical events observed in this series, the study may have been underpowered to identify small differences in pulmonary embolism or hematoma expansion.Indications for Invasive Intracranial Monitoring In patients with severe TBI (GCS <8), the Brain Trauma Founda-tion guidelines endorse a level IIB recommendation (low-quality of evidence) for ICP and cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP) to reduce short-term mortality (within 2 weeks of hospitalization). They also provide level IIB recommendations for treating ICP >22 mmHg and treating CPP level between 60 and 70 mmHg to optimize outcomes. These recommendations are supported by a recent retrospective cohort study (n = 459)34 that identified ICP and CPP thresholds that best discriminated between survi-vors and nonsurvivors in severe TBI, and also between survivors with “poor” and “favorable’ outcomes (Glasgow Outcome Scale 1–3 vs. 4–6). A large, multicenter randomized controlled trial performed in 6 hospitals in Equador and Bolivia did not sup-port the claim that intracranial monitoring in severe TBI results in improved clinical outcomes. Chestnut et al in 2012 did not observe a significant difference in mortality or favorable out-comes (as assessed by the Glasgow Outcome Scale) when severe TBI patients were managed with an intracranial monitor (n = 56), or with imaging and clinical exam (n = 53, P = 0.43). Advanced multimodal monitoring such as brain tissue oxygen (PbrO2) mon-itoring, jugular bulb monitoring of arteriovenous oxygen content difference (AVDO2), cerebral autoregulation with TCD, and micro dialysis are under active investigation. Only jugular bulb monitoring of AVDO2 is associated with a level III (poor-quality evidence) recommendation to guide management in severe TBI. Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   184001/03/19   7:16 PM 1841NEUROSURGERYCHAPTER 42The Brain Tissue Oxygen Monitoring in TBI (BOOST) trials are actively investigating the added benefit of brain tissue oxygen-ation beyond intracranial pressure monitoring in severe TBI.Decompressive Craniectomy for Severe TBI Decompressive craniectomy can be performed to relieve intracranial pressure associated with diffuse cerebral edema in cases of severe TBI without mass lesions (e.g., extra-axial hematoma). This is a controversial issue as there is a paucity of high-quality evi-dence providing clear support for or against this intervention. The DECRA trial (a multicenter, randomized, controlled trial, n = 155) compared bifrontal decompressive craniectomy to medical management for the treatment of patients with severe TBI and elevated intracranial pressure refractory to first-tier therapies (ICP >20 mmHg for at least 15 minutes within an hour). They found no significant difference in mortality at six months, and found that functional outcomes (as measured by the Extended Glasgow Outcome Scale) were worse in patients who underwent surgery. They found a clear improvement in ICP and number of days in the ICU in patients that underwent surgery as compared to medical management. Of note, they used an intention-to-treat analysis, such that 18% of patients in the medical management group underwent a delayed cra-niotomy as a life-saving procedure. More recently, the RES-CUE-ICP trial36 (a multicenter, randomized, controlled trial, n = 408) compared decompressive craniotomy and ongoing medical care in patients with severe TBI (without mass lesions) with elevated ICP (>25 mmHg) refractory to firstand second-tier interventions (medical management and ventriculostomy). Patients were randomized to either receive a barbiturate infu-sion (medical group) or undergo decompressive craniotomy (surgery group; unilateral hemicraniectomy vs. bifrontal crani-otomy depending on degree of bilateral swelling and surgeon discretion). Again, they used an intention-to-treat analysis such that 37% of patients of the medical group underwent decom-pressive hemicraniectomy. At 6 months, decompressive crani-ectomy in patients with traumatic brain injury and refractory intracranial hypertension resulted in lower mortality and higher rates of vegetative state, lower severe disability, and upper severe disability than medical care. The rates of moderate dis-ability and good recovery were similar in the two groups. The recent Brain Trauma Foundation Guidelines offer a level II  (moderate-quality) recommendation against performing a bifrontal decompressive hemicraniectomy to improve func-tional outcomes at 6 months in patients with severe TBI with diffuse injury and no mass lesions, and with elevated ICP that is medically refractory. They note that this procedure has been demonstrated to reduce time in the ICU and ICP. However, they have not made an updated recommendation since the results of the RESCUE-ICP trial have been published.The results of the DECRA and RESCUE-ICP trials suggest caution and careful consideration prior to perform-ing decompressive craniotomy in treating severe TBI without mass lesions. There is now evidence that this procedure can be lifesaving and reduce mortality at 6 months; however, it is not clear that the survivors have a favorable functional outcome (as grossly measured by the Extended Glasgow Outcome Scale). By improving ICP and reducing time in the ICU, it may hasten the recovery process by allowing patients to begin rehabilita-tion earlier. Also, several unanswered questions remain. For example, might outcomes be improved if decompressive cra-niectomy was performed earlier, prior to the patient develop-ing refractory ICP, and presumably secondary brain injury? As such, the decision of whether or not to perform decompressive craniotomy must be carefully considered within the context of each individual patient’s clinical scenario, the patient’s avail-able social support system, and the family’s disposition and goals of care.Vascular Injury. Trauma to the head or neck may cause damage to the carotid or vertebrobasilar systems. Generally, dissection refers to violation of the vessel wall intima. Blood at arterial pressures can then open a plane between the intima and media, within the media, or between the media and adventitia. The newly created space within the vessel wall is referred to as the false lumen. Tissue or organs supplied by dissected ves-sels may subsequently be injured in several ways. Expansion of the hematoma within the vessel wall can lead to narrowing of the true vessel lumen and reduction or cessation of distal blood flow. Slow-flowing or stagnant blood within the false lumen exposed to thrombogenic vessel wall elements may thrombose. Pieces of thrombus may then detach and cause distal embolic arterial occlusion. Also, the remaining partial-thickness vessel wall may rupture, damaging adjacent structures.Traumatic dissection may occur in the carotid artery (ante-rior circulation) or the vertebral or basilar arteries (posterior cir-culation). Dissections may be extradural or intradural. Intradural dissection can present with subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH). Traditional angiography remains the basis of diagnosis and characterization of arterial dissection. Angiographic abnormali-ties include stenosis of the true lumen, or “string-sign,” visible intimal flaps, and the appearance of contrast in the false lumen. Four-vessel cerebral angiography should be performed when suspicion of dissection exists.Historically, patients with documented arterial dissec-tion have been anticoagulated with heparin and then warfarin to prevent thromboembolic stroke. Trauma patients often have concomitant absolute or relative contraindications to anticoagu-lation, complicating management. Antiplatelet therapy is often implemented in lieu of full anticoagulation, however, there is no randomized clinical trial comparing the two therapies.37 Consider surgical or interventional techniques for persisting embolic disease and for vertebral dissections presenting with SAH. Surgical options include vessel ligation and bypass graft-ing. Interventional radiology techniques include stenting and vessel occlusion. Occlusion techniques require sufficient col-lateral circulation to perfuse the vascular territory previously supplied by the occluded vessel.Carotid Dissection Carotid dissection may result from neck extension combined with lateral bending to the opposite side, or trauma from an incorrectly placed shoulder belt tightening across the neck in a motor vehicle accident. Extension or bend-ing stretches the carotid over the bony transverse processes of the cervical vertebrae, while seat belt injuries cause direct trauma. Symptoms of cervical carotid dissection include con-tralateral neurologic deficit from brain ischemia, headache, and ipsilateral Horner’s syndrome from disruption of the sympa-thetic tracts ascending from the stellate ganglion on the surface of the carotid artery. The patient may complain of a bruit.Traumatic vessel wall injury to the portion of the carotid artery running through the cavernous sinus may result in a carotid-cavernous fistula (CCF). This creates a high-pressure, high-flow pathophysiologic blood flow pattern. CCFs clas-sically present with pulsatile proptosis (the globe pulses out-ward with arterial pulsation), retro-orbital pain, and decreased visual acuity or loss of normal eye movement (due to damage Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   184101/03/19   7:16 PM 1842SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIto cranial nerves III, IV, and VI as they pass through the cav-ernous sinus). Symptomatic CCFs should be treated to preserve eye function. Fistulae may be closed by balloon occlusion using interventional neuroradiology techniques. Fistulae with wide necks are difficult to treat and may require total occlusion of the parent carotid artery.Vertebrobasilar Dissection Vertebrobasilar dissection may result from sudden rotation or flexion/extension of the neck, chiropractic manipulation, or a direct blow to the neck. Com-mon symptoms are neck pain, headache, and brain stem stroke or SAH. The risks and benefits of aspirin therapy are unclear when a vertebral dissection extends intracranially. The theoreti-cally increased friability of the vessel wall may increase the risk of SAH when coupled with an antiplatelet agent. Consultation of a stroke neurologist is recommended in this situation.Brain Death. Brain death occurs when there is an absence of signs of brain stem function or motor response to deep central pain in the absence of pharmacologic or systemic medical con-ditions that could impair brain function.Clinical Examination A neurologist, neurosurgeon, or inten-sivist generally performs the clinical brain death examination. Two examinations consistent with brain death 12 hours apart, or one examination consistent with brain death followed by a consistent confirmatory study generally is sufficient to declare brain death (see following paragraphs). Hospital regulations and local laws regarding documentation should be followed closely.Establish the absence of complicating conditions before beginning the examination. The patient must be normotensive, euthermic, and oxygenating well. The patient may not be under the effects of any sedating or paralytic drugs.Documentation of no brain stem function requires the fol-lowing: nonreactive pupils; lack of corneal blink, oculocephalic (doll’s eyes), oculovestibular (cold calorics) reflexes; and loss of drive to breathe (apnea test). The apnea test demonstrates no spontaneous breathing even when Paco2 is allowed to rise above 60 mmHg.Deep central painful stimuli are provided by bilateral forceful twisting pinch of the supraclavicular skin and pressure to the medial canthal notch. Pathologic responses such as flexor or extensor posturing are not compatible with brain death. Spi-nal reflexes to peripheral pain, such as triple flexion of the lower extremities, are compatible with brain death.Confirmatory Studies Confirmatory studies are performed after a documented clinical examination consistent with brain death. A study consistent with brain death may obviate the need to wait 12 hours for a second examination. This is especially important when the patient is a potential organ donor, as brain-dead patients often have progressive hemodynamic instability. Lack of cerebral blood flow consistent with brain death may be documented by cerebral angiography or technetium radio-nuclide study. A “to-and-fro” pattern on transcranial Doppler ultrasonography indicates no net forward flow through the cere-bral vasculature, consistent with brain death. An electroenceph-alogram (EEG) documenting electrical silence has been used but generally is not favored because there is often significant artifact which impairs interpretation.Spine TraumaThe spine is a complex biomechanical structure. The spine pro-vides structural support for the body as the principal compo-nent of the axial skeleton, while protecting the spinal cord and nerve roots. Trauma may fracture bones or cause ligamentous disruption. Often, bone and ligament damage occur together. Damage to these elements reduces the strength of the spine and may cause instability, which compromises both supportive and protective functions. Spine trauma may occur with or without neurologic injury.Neurologic injury from spine trauma is classified as either incomplete or complete. If there is some residual motor or sensory neurologic function below the level of the lesion, as assessed by clinical examination, the injury is defined as incom-plete.38 A patient with complete neurologic dysfunction persist-ing 24 hours after injury has a very low probability of return of function in the involved area.Neurologic injury from spine trauma may occur immedi-ately or in delayed fashion. Immediate neurologic injury may be due to direct damage to the spinal cord or nerve roots from pen-etrating injuries, especially from stab wounds or gunshots. Blunt trauma may transfer sufficient force to the spine to cause acute disruption of bone and ligament, leading to subluxation, which is a shift of one vertebral element in relation to the adjacent level. Subluxation decreases the size of the spinal canal and neu-ral foramina and causes compression of the cord or roots. Such neural impingement can also result from retropulsion of bone fragments into the canal during a fracture. Transection, crush injury, and cord compression impairing perfusion are mecha-nisms leading to SCI. Delayed neurologic injury may occur dur-ing transportation, examination of an improperly immobilized patient, or during a hypotensive episode.The Mechanics of Spine Trauma. Trauma causes a wide variety of injury patterns in the spine due to its biomechanical complexity. A mechanistic approach facilitates an understand-ing of the patterns of injury, as there are only a few types of forces that can be applied to the spine. Although these forces are discussed individually, they often occur in combination. Several of the most common injury patterns are then presented to illus-trate the clinical results of these forces applied at pathologically high levels.Flexion/Extension Bending the head and body forward into a fetal position flexes the spine. Flexion loads the spine anteriorly (the vertebral bodies) and distracts the spine posteriorly (the spi-nous process and interspinous ligaments). High flexion forces occur during front-end motor vehicle collisions, and backward falls when the head strikes first. Arching the neck and back extends the spine. Extension loads the spine posteriorly and distracts the spine anteriorly. High extension forces occur dur-ing rear-end motor vehicle collisions (especially if there is no headrest), frontward falls when the head strikes first, or diving into shallow water.Compression/Distraction Force applied along the spinal axis (axial loading) compresses the spine. Compression loads the spine anteriorly and posteriorly. High compression forces occur when a falling object strikes the head or shoulders, or when landing on the feet, buttocks, or head after a fall from height. A pulling force in line with the spinal axis distracts the spine. Dis-traction unloads the spine anteriorly and posteriorly. Distraction forces occur during a hanging, when the chin or occiput strikes an object first during a fall, or when a passenger submarines under a loose seat belt during a front-end motor vehicle collision.Rotation Force applied tangential to the spinal axis rotates the spine. Rotation depends on the range of motion of interverte-bral facet joints. High rotational forces occur during off-center Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   184201/03/19   7:16 PM 1843NEUROSURGERYCHAPTER 42impacts to the body or head or during glancing automobile accidents.Patterns of Injury. Certain patterns of injury resulting from combinations of the previously mentioned forces occur com-monly and should be recognized during plain film imaging of the spine. Always completely evaluate the spine. A patient with a spine injury at one level has a significant risk for additional injuries at other levels.Cervical The cervical spine is more mobile than the thoraco-lumbar spine. Stability comes primarily from the multiple liga-mentous connections of adjacent vertebral levels. Disruption of the cervical ligaments can lead to instability in the absence of fracture. The mass of the head transmits significant forces to the cervical spine during abrupt acceleration or deceleration, increasing risk for injury.Jefferson Fracture A Jefferson fracture is a bursting fracture of the ring of C1 (the atlas) due to compression forces. There are usually two or more fractures through the ring of C1. The open-mouth odontoid view may show lateral dislocation of the lateral masses of C1. The rule of Spence states that 7 mm or greater combined dislocation indicates disruption of the transverse liga-ment. The transverse ligament stabilizes C1 with respect to C2. Jefferson fractures dislocated <7 mm usually are treated with a rigid collar, while those dislocated 7 mm or greater usually are treated with a halo vest. Surgical intervention is not indicated.Odontoid Fractures The odontoid process, or dens, is the large ellipse of bone arising anteriorly from C2 (the axis) and projecting up through the ring of C1 (the atlas). Several strong ligaments connect the dens to C1 and to the base of the skull. Odontoid fractures usually result from flexion forces. Odontoid fractures are classified as type I, II, or III. A type I fracture involves the tip only. A type II fracture passes through the base of the odontoid process. A type III fracture passes through the body of C2. Types II and III are considered unstable and should be externally immobilized or fused surgically. Surgery often is undertaken for widely displaced fractures (poor chance of fus-ing) and for those that fail external immobilization. Type I frac-tures usually fuse with external immobilization only.Hangman’s Fracture Traditionally considered a hyperexten-sion/distraction injury from placement of the noose under the angle of the jaw, hangman’s fractures also may occur with hyperextension/compression, as with diving accidents, or hyper-flexion. The injury is defined by bilateral C2 pars interarticularis fractures. The pars interarticularis is the bone between superior and inferior facet joints. Thus, the posterior bony connection between C1 and C3 is lost. Hangman’s fractures heal well with external immobilization. Surgery is indicated if there is spinal cord compression or after failure of external immobilization.Jumped Facets—Hyperflexion Injury The facet joints of the cervical spine slope forward. In a hyperflexion injury, the supe-rior facet can “jump” over the inferior facet of the level above if the joint capsule is torn. Hyperflexion/rotation can cause a unilateral jumped facet, whereas hyperflexion/distraction leads to bilateral jumped facets. Patients with unilateral injury usually are neurologically intact. Those with bilateral injury, however, typically suffer from spinal cord damage, since the anteropos-terior diameter of the spinal canal is compromised by bilateral injury, leading to spinal cord compression (Fig. 42-11).Thoracolumbar The thoracic spine is stabilized significantly by the rib cage. The lumbar spine has comparatively large vertebrae. Thus, the thoracolumbar spine has a higher thresh-old for injury than the cervical spine. A three-column model is useful for categorizing thoracolumbar injuries.39 The anterior longitudinal ligament and the anterior half of the vertebral body constitute the anterior column. The posterior half of the ver-tebral body and the posterior longitudinal ligament constitute the middle column. The pedicles, facet joints, laminae, spinous processes, and interspinous ligaments constitute the posterior column.Compression Fracture Compression fracture is a compression/flexion injury causing failure of the anterior column only. It is stable and not associated with neurologic deficit, although the patient may still have significant pain (Fig. 42-12).Burst Fracture Burst fracture is a pure axial compression injury causing failure of the anterior and middle columns. It is unstable, and perhaps half of patients have neurologic deficit due to compression of the cord or cauda equina from bone frag-ments retropulsed into the spinal canal.Chance Fracture Chance fracture is a flexion-distraction injury causing failure of the middle and posterior columns, sometimes with anterior wedging. Typical injury is from a lap seat-belt hyperflexion with associated abdominal injury. It often is unsta-ble and associated with neurologic deficit.Fracture-Dislocation Fracture-dislocation is failure of the anterior, middle, and posterior columns caused by flexion/dis-traction, shear, or compression forces. Neurologic deficit can result from retropulsion of middle column bone fragments into the spinal canal, or from subluxation causing decreased canal diameter (Fig. 42-13).Initial Assessment and Management. The possibility of a spine injury must be considered in all trauma patients. A patient with no symptoms referable to neurologic injury, a normal neu-rologic examination, no neck or back pain, and a known mecha-nism of injury unlikely to cause spine injury is at minimal risk for significant injury to the spine. Victims of moderate or severe trauma, especially those with injuries to other organ systems, usually fail to meet these criteria or cannot be assessed ade-quately. The latter often is due to impaired sensorium or signifi-cant pain. Because of the potentially catastrophic consequences of missing occult spine instability in a neurologically intact patient, a high level of clinical suspicion should govern patient care until completion of clinical and radiographic evaluation.The trauma patient should be kept on a hard, flat board with straps and pads used for immobilization. A hard cervical collar is kept in place. These steps minimize forces transferred through the spine and therefore decrease the chance of causing dislocation, subluxation, or neural compression during transport to the trauma bay. The patient is then moved from the board to a flat stretcher. The primary survey and resuscitation are com-pleted. Physical examination and initial X-rays follow.For the examination, approach the patient as described in “Neurologic Examination” earlier in this chapter. Evaluation for spine or SCI is easier and more informative in awake patients. If the patient is awake, ask if he or she recalls details of the nature of the trauma, and if there was loss of consciousness, numbness, or inability to move any or all limbs. Assess motor function by response to commands or pain, as appropriate. Assess pinprick, light touch, and joint position, if possible. Determining the ana-tomically lowest level of intact sensation can pinpoint the level of the lesion along the spine. Testing sensation in an ascending fashion will allow the patient to better discern the true stimulus Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   184301/03/19   7:16 PM 1844SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIas opposed to determine when it is extinguished. Document muscle stretch reflexes, lower sacral reflexes (i.e., anal wink and bulbocavernosus), and rectal tone.American Spinal Injury Association Classification The American Spinal Injury Association provides a method of clas-sifying patients with spine injuries. The classification indicates completeness and level of the injury and the associated deficit. A form similar to that shown in Fig. 42-14 should be available in the trauma bay and completed for any spine injury patient. The association also has worked to develop recommendations and guidelines to standardize the care of SCI patients in an effort to improve the quality of care.Neurologic Syndromes. Penetrating, compressive, or isch-emic cord injury can lead to several characteristic presentations Figure 42-11. A. Lateral cervical spine X-ray of an elderly woman who struck her head during a backward fall. Arrowhead points to jumped facets at C5–C6. Note the anterior displace-ment of the C5 body with respect to the C6 body. B. Sagittal T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging of the same patient, revealing compromise of the spinal canal and compression of the cord. Note the bright signal within the cord at the level of compression, indicating spinal cord injury. C. Lateral cervical spine X-ray of same patient after application of cervical trac-tion and manual reduction. Note restoration of normal alignment. D. Lateral cervical spine X-ray after posterior cervical fusion to restabilize the C5–C6 segment of the spine.ABCDBrunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   184401/03/19   7:16 PM 1845NEUROSURGERYCHAPTER 42Figure 42-12. A. Lateral lumbar spine X-ray showing a compres-sion fracture of L2. Arrowhead points to anterior wedge deformity. Note the posterior wall of the vertebral body has retained normal height and alignment. B. Axial computed tomography scan through the same fracture. Arrowhead demonstrates a transverse discontinu-ity in the superior endplate of the L2 body.ABFigure 42-13. Sagittal reconstruction of an axial fine-slice com-puted tomography scan through the lumbar spine demonstrating a severe fracture-dislocation through the body of L2.based on the anatomy of injury. The neurologic deficits may be deduced from the anatomy of the long sensory and motor tracts and understanding of their decussations (Fig. 42-15). Four pat-terns are discussed. First, injury to the entire cord at a given level results in anatomic or functional cord transection with total loss of motor and sensory function below the level of the lesion. The typical mechanism is severe traumatic vertebral subluxation reducing spinal canal diameter and crushing the cord. Second, injury to half the cord at a given level results in Brown-Séquard syndrome, with loss of motor control and proprioception ipsilat-erally and loss of nociception and thermoception contralaterally. The typical mechanism is a stab or gunshot wound. Third, injury to the interior gray matter of the cord in the cervical spine results in a central cord syndrome, with upper extremity worse than lower extremity weakness and various degrees of numbness. The typical mechanism is transient compression of the cervical cord by the ligamentum flavum buckling during traumatic neck hyperextension. This syndrome occurs in patients with preex-isting cervical stenosis. Fourth, injury to the ventral half of the cord results in the anterior cord syndrome, with paralysis and loss of nociception and thermoception bilaterally. The typical mechanism is an acute disc herniation or ischemia from anterior spinal artery occlusion.Studies. Anteroposterior and lateral plain films provide a rapid survey of the bony spine. Plain films detect fractures and dislo-cations well. Adequate visualization of the lower cervical and upper thoracic spine often is impossible because of the shoul-der girdle. Complete plain film imaging of the cervical spine includes an open-mouth view to assess the odontoid process and the lateral masses of C1. Fine-slice CT scan with sagittal and coronal reconstructions provides good detail of bony anatomy and is good for characterizing fractures seen on plain films, as well as visualizing C7–T1 when not well seen on plain films. MRI provides the best soft tissue imaging. Canal compromise from subluxation, acute disc herniations, or ligamentous disrup-tion is clearly seen. MRI also may detect EDHs or damage to the spinal cord itself, including contusions or areas of ischemia.Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   184501/03/19   7:16 PM 1846SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIIndications for Screening for Vascular Injury With Cer-vical Spine Trauma It is important to consider the pres-ence of blunt cerebrovascular injury in patents with cervical spine trauma; however, the specific indications for obtaining a screening CT angiography study are controversial. Many trauma centers rely on the Denver Criteria.40 These criteria indicate that screening should be employed for a cervical ver-tebral body or transverse foramen fracture, subluxation, or ligamentous injury at any level, or any fracture at the level of C1–C3, among other indications such as concerning mecha-nism, Lefort mid-face fractures, or basilar fractures through the carotid canal.  A recent single-center retrospective study41 (n = 1717 cervical spine fractures) found a higher risk of ver-tebral artery injury only in the setting of fractures of C1 and C2 (combined), those that involve the transverse foramen, or had significant subluxation. They did not find that “high-risk” cervical spine fractures as defined by the Denver Criteria were associated with an increased risk of blunt cerebrovascular injury. Based on these data, we feel that it is appropriate to use a more defined set of screening criteria as outlined by Lock-wood et al to reduce cost and contrast-exposure in patients with cervical spine fractures.Figure 42-14. The American Spinal Injury Association system for categorizing spinal cord injury patients according to level and degree of neurologic deficit.Dorsal column(touch, vibration)Corticospinal tract(upper motor)Anterior horn(lower motor)Spinothalmic tract(pain, temperature)TransectionCentral cordBrown-SequardAnterior spinal a.Figure 42-15. Spinal cord injury patterns. a. = artery. (Adapted with permission from Hoff J, Boland M: Neurosurgery, in Schwartz SI: Principles of Surgery, 7th ed., New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Education; 1999.)Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   184601/03/19   7:16 PM 1847NEUROSURGERYCHAPTER 42Definitive Management Spinal-Dose Steroids Several studies have investigated the use of methylprednilosone in acute spinal cord injury. The National Acute Spinal Cord Injury studies (NASCIS I, II, and III)  provided some support for the view that administration of high-dose methylprednilosone in acute spinal cord injury results in improved neurologic outcomes. A post-hoc analy-sis performed as part of NASCIS II demonstrated improved neurologic outcomes if methylprednilosone was administered within 8 hours of injury. A post-hoc analysis in NASCIS III showed improved outcomes at 6 weeks and 6 months, but not  1 year when methylprednilosone was administered within 3 and  8 hours of injury.42,43,44 However, these findings are tempered by the fact that these benefits were modest and only demonstrated in post-hoc analyses, and by the high rate of medical compli-cations associated with corticosteroid administration. All three NASCIS trials showed that methylprednilosone was associated with a higher rate of complications such as pneumonia, severe sepsis, and poor wound healing. A recent Cochrane review did not observe a significant increase in complications or mortal-ity associated with methylprednilosone administration in acute spinal cord injury, but did observe a trend towards this effect.45 Despite the lack of clear evidence on this issue, the most recent acute spinal cord injury guidelines provide a controversial level I recommendation against the use of corticosteroids in acute spinal cord injury.46 Some authors have argued for the use of methylprednilosone within 8 hours of acute spinal cord injury in carefully selected patients (e.g., young males that are less prone to medical complications associated with corticosteroids47). Thus, clear consensus on the use of spinal-dose steroids does not exist.48 A decision to use or not use spinal-dose steroids may be dictated by local or regional practice patterns, especially given the legal liability issues surrounding SCI. Patients with gunshot or nerve root (cauda equina) injuries, or those who are pregnant, <14 years old, or on chronic steroids were excluded from the NASCIS studies and should not receive spinal-dose steroids. In addition to steroids, hypothermia for SCI has also received attention. There is even less evidence supporting the use of this treatment, and thus, it is not currently recommended.49Orthotic Devices Rigid external orthotic devices can stabilize the spine by decreasing range of motion and minimizing stress transmitted through the spine. Commonly used rigid cervical orthoses include Philadelphia and Miami-J collars. Cervical collars are inadequate for C1, C2, or cervicothoracic instability.  Cervicothoracic orthoses brace the upper thorax and the neck, improving stabilization over the cervicothoracic region. Minerva braces improve high cervical stabilization by brac-ing from the upper thorax to the chin and occiput. Halo vest assemblies provide the most external cervical stabilization. Four pins are driven into the skull to lock the halo ring in position. Four posts arising from a tight-fitting rigid plastic vest immobilize the halo ring. Lumbar stabilization may be provided by thoracolumbosacral orthoses. A variety of compa-nies manufacture lines of spinal orthotics. A physician familiar with the technique should fit a halo vest. Assistance from a trained orthotics technician improves fitting and adjustment of the other devices.Surgery Neurosurgical intervention has two goals: decompres-sion of the spinal cord and nerve roots, and stabilization of the spine. When spinal cord injury is caused by a hyperflexiondistraction injury that results in cord compression and an unstable spine, both surgical decompression and fusion are typically required. However, in cases of a hyperextension injury causing central cord syndrome due to chronic cervical stenosis, surgi-cal decompression may be needed without the need for inter-nal fixation. In cases where there significant anterolisthesis (subaxial cervical jumped or perched facets), reduction of the fracture may be important for both decompression and stabili-zation. However, in some cases, reduction of the fracture may not be sufficient for decompression, and further decompressive surgery may still be needed.50Several controversial topics require consideration here. First, the timing of surgery has been a controversial topic. In the past, it has been suggested that patients with incomplete injury, or a deteriorating exam warrant emergent decompres-sion, whereas patients with complete injuries can undergo sur-gery in a nonemergent manner. It is important to appreciate the risks of taking a medically unstable patient to surgery, such as a polytrauma patient with hemorrhagic shock or a complete spinal cord injury patient in neurogenic shock. However, there are clear benefits to early surgical decompression: it can allow early mobilization, aggressive nursing care, and physical ther-apy. Furthermore, a recent prospective cohort study found that the odds of observing a two-point increase in ASIA grade at  6 months was higher in patients that underwent surgery within 24 hours, as compared to those that underwent surgery after 24 hours.51 These data suggest that a subpopulation of patients may significantly benefit from early surgery; however, the char-acteristics of these patients were not described, suggesting a het-erogeneous population in terms of preoperative ASIA grade and imaging.In general, spine trauma patients with complete neurologic deficit, without any signs of recovery, or those without any neu-rologic deficits who have bony or ligamentous injury requiring open fixation, may be medically stabilized before undergoing surgery. Surgical stabilization may be indicated for some inju-ries that would eventually heal with conservative treatment. Solid surgical stabilization may also allow a patient to be man-aged with a rigid cervical collar who would otherwise require halo-vest immobilization.Continued Care. Regional SCI centers with nurses, respira-tory therapists, pulmonologists, physical therapists, physiat-rists, and neurosurgeons specifically trained in caring for these patients may improve outcomes. Frequently encountered ICU issues include hypotension due to neurogenic shock (due to loss of sympathetic tone) and aspiration pneumonia. The recent guidelines recommend maintaining MAPs >85 for 7 days after injury.46 Chronically, prevention and treatment of deep venous thrombosis, autonomic hyperreflexia, and decubitus ulcer for-mation are important. Many patients with cervical or high tho-racic cord injuries require prolonged ventilatory support until the chest wall becomes stiff enough to provide resistance for diaphragmatic breathing. Patients with high cervical cord inju-ries (C4 or above) will often require permanent ventilatory sup-port. Patients should be transferred to SCI rehabilitation centers after stabilization of medical and surgical issues.Peripheral Nerve TraumaThe peripheral nervous system extends throughout the body and is subject to injury from a wide variety of trauma. Periph-eral nerves transmit motor and sensory information from the CNS to the body. An individual nerve may have pure motor, pure sensory, or mixed motor and sensory functions. The key Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   184701/03/19   7:16 PM 1848SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIinformation-carrying structure of the nerve is the axon. The axon transmits information from the neuronal cell body and may measure from <1 mm to >1 m in length. Axons that travel a significant distance are often covered with myelin, which is a lipid-rich, electrically insulating sheath formed by Schwann cells. Myelinated axons transmit signals much more rapidly than unmyelinated axons because the voltage shifts and currents that define action potentials effectively jump from gap to gap over the insulated lengths of the axon.Axons, whether myelinated or unmyelinated, travel through a collagenous connective tissue known as endoneurium. Groups of axons and their endoneurium form bundles known as fascicles. Fascicles run through a tubular collagenous tissue known as perineurium. Groups of fascicles are suspended in mesoneurium. Fascicles and their mesoneurium run through another tubular collagenous tissue known as epineurium. The epineurium and its contents form the nerve.There are four major mechanisms of injury to peripheral nerves. Nerves may be lacerated, stretched, compressed, or contused. Knives, passing bullets, or jagged bone fractures may lacerate nerves. Adjacent expanding hematomas or dislocated fractures may stretch nerves. Expanding hematomas, external orthoses such as casts or braces, or blunt trauma over a super-ficial nerve may compress or crush nerves. Shock waves from high-velocity bullets may contuse nerves. These mechanisms of injury cause damage to the various anatomic components of the nerve. The patterns of damage are categorized in “Types of Injury.”Certain nerve segments are particularly vulnerable to injury. The following four characteristics make a nerve seg-ment more vulnerable: proximity to a joint, superficial course, passage through a confined space, and being fixed in position.Types of Injury. The traditional classification system for peripheral nerve injury is the Seddon classification. Seddon described three injury patterns as defined in the “Neurapraxia,” “Axonotmesis,” and “Neurotmesis” sections. The Seddon clas-sification provides a simple, anatomically based approach to peripheral nerve injury.52Neurapraxia Neurapraxia is defined as the temporary failure of nerve function without physical axonal disruption. Axon degeneration does not occur. Return of normal axonal function occurs over hours to months, often in the 2to 4-week range.Axonotmesis Axonotmesis is the disruption of axons and myelin. The surrounding connective tissues, including endo-neurium, are intact. The axons degenerate proximally and dis-tally from the area of injury. Distal degeneration is known as Wallerian degeneration. Axon regeneration within the con-nective tissue pathways can occur, leading to restoration of function. Axons regenerate at a rate of 1 mm per day. Significant functional recovery may occur for up to 18 months. Scarring at the site of injury from connective tissue reaction can form a neuroma and interfere with regeneration.Neurotmesis Neurotmesis is the disruption of axons and endoneurial tubes. Peripheral collagenous components, such as the epineurium, may or may not be intact. Proximal and distal axonal degeneration occurs. The likelihood of effective axonal regeneration across the site of injury depends on the extent of neuroma formation and on the degree of persisting anatomic alignment of the connective tissue structures. For instance, an injury may damage axons, myelin, and endoneurium, but leave perineurium intact. In this case, the fascicle sheath is intact, and appropriate axonal regeneration is more likely to occur than if the sheath is interrupted.Management of Peripheral Nerve Injury. The sensory and motor deficits should be accurately documented. Deficits are usually immediate. Progressive deficit suggests a process such as an expanding hematoma and may warrant early sur-gical exploration. Clean, sharp injuries may also benefit from early exploration and reanastomosis. Most other peripheral nerve injuries should be observed. EMG/NCS studies should be done 3-6 to weeks postinjury if deficits persist. Axon seg-ments distal to the site of injury will conduct action potentials normally until Wallerian degeneration occurs, rendering EMG/NCS before 3 weeks uninformative. Continued observation is indicated if function improves. Surgical exploration of the nerve may be undertaken if no functional improvement occurs over  3 months. If intraoperative electrical testing reveals conduction across the injury, continue observation. In the absence of con-duction, the injured segment should be resected and end-to-end primary anastomosis attempted. However, anastomoses under tension will not heal. A nerve graft may be needed to bridge the gap between the proximal and distal nerve ends. The sural nerve often is harvested, as it carries only sensory fibers and leaves a minor deficit when resected. The connective tissue structures of the nerve graft may provide a pathway for effective axonal regrowth across the injury.Patterns of Injury Brachial Plexus The brachial plexus may be injured in a variety of ways. Parturition or a motorcycle accident can lead to plexus injury due to dislocation of the glenohumeral joint. Attempting to arrest a fall with one’s hands can lead to a stretch injury of the plexus due to abrupt movement of the shoulder girdle. An api-cal lung (Pancoast) tumor can cause compression injury to the plexus. There are many patterns of neurologic deficits possible with injury to the various components of the brachial plexus, and understanding them all would require extensive neuroana-tomic discussion. Two well-known eponymous syndromes are Erb’s palsy and Klumpke’s palsy. Injury high in the plexus to the C5 and C6 roots resulting from glenohumeral dislocation causes Erb’s palsy with the characteristic “bellhop’s tip” posi-tion. The arm hangs at the side, internally rotated. Hand move-ments are not affected. Injury low in the plexus, to the C8 and T1 roots, resulting from stretch or compression injury, causes Klumpke’s palsy with the characteristic “claw hand” deformity. There is weakness of the intrinsic hand muscles, similar to that seen with ulnar nerve injury.Radial Nerve The radial nerve courses through the axilla, then laterally and posteriorly in the spiral groove of the humerus. Improper crutch use can cause damage to the axillary portion. The section of the nerve traversing the spiral groove can be damaged by humerus fractures or pressure from improper posi-tioning during sleep. This classically occurs when the patient is intoxicated and is called “Saturday night palsy.” The key find-ing is wrist drop (i.e., weakness of hand and finger extensors). Axillary (proximal) injury causes triceps weakness in addition to wrist drop.Common Peroneal Neuropathy The common peroneal nerve forms the lateral half of the sciatic nerve (the medial half being the tibial nerve). It receives contributions from L4, L5, S1, and S2. It emerges as a separate nerve in the popliteal fossa and laterally wraps around the fibular neck, after which it splits to Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   184801/03/19   7:16 PM 1849NEUROSURGERYCHAPTER 42form the deep and superficial peroneal nerves. The superficial, fixed location at the fibular neck makes the common peroneal nerve susceptible to compression. The classic cause of traumatic peroneal neuropathy is crush injury from a car bumper striking the lateral aspect of the leg at the knee. Symptoms of common peroneal neuropathy include foot drop (weakness of the tibialis anterior), eversion weakness, and numbness over the anterolat-eral surface of the lower leg and dorsum of the foot. In contrast, a foot drop due to L5 radiculopathy spares eversion because the S1 fibers are intact. Surgical exploration of a common peroneal crush lesion is typically a low yield endeavor. Rare cases may be due to compressive fibers or adhesions that may be lysed, with the possibility of return of function.CEREBROVASCULAR DISEASECerebrovascular disease is the most frequent cause of new, rapid-onset, nontraumatic neurologic deficit. It is far more common than seizures or tumors. Vascular structures are subject to a vari-ety of chronic pathologic processes that compromise vessel wall integrity. Diabetes, high cholesterol, high blood pressure, and smoking – common comorbidities in the general population – are important risk factors for vascular disease. These conditions can lead to vascular damage by such mechanisms as atheroma deposition causing luminal stenosis, endothelial damage promot-ing thrombogenesis, and weakening of the vessel wall result-ing in aneurysm formation or dissection. These processes may coexist. For instance, a vessel containing an atheromatous plaque will have a decreased luminal diameter. The plaque also may have compromised endothelium, providing the opportunity for thrombus formation, which can lead to acute total occlusion of the remaining lumen. Aneurysms and dissection often occur in atheromatous vessels. Specific patterns of disease relevant to the cerebrovascular system include atheromatous and thrombotic carotid occlusion, brain ischemia from proximal embolic disease, vessel wall rupture leading to hemorrhage, and rupture of abnor-mal, thin-walled structures, specifically aneurysms and AVMs.Ischemic DiseasesIschemic stroke accounts for approximately 85% of acute cerebrovascular events. Symptoms of acute ischemic stroke vary based on the functions of the neural tissues supplied by the occluded vessel, and the presence or absence of collateral circulation. The circle of Willis provides extensive collateral circulation, as it connects the right and left carotid arteries to each other and each to the vertebrobasilar system. Patients with complete occlusion of the carotid artery proximal to the circle of Willis may be asymptomatic if the blood flow patterns can shift and provide sufficient circulation to the ipsilateral cerebral hemisphere from the contralateral carotid and the basilar artery. However, the anatomy of the circle of Willis is highly variable. Patients may have a congenitally hypoplastic or missing com-municating artery with resultant bilateral ACA supply by one carotid, or the PCA may be supplied by the carotid artery rather than the basilar. Similarly, one vertebral artery is often domi-nant and the other is hypoplastic. These variations may make disease in a particular vessel more neurologically devastating than in a patient with full collateral circulation. Occlusion distal to the circle of Willis generally results in a stroke in the territory supplied by that particular artery.Neurologic deficit from occlusive disease may be tempo-rary or permanent. A patient with sudden-onset focal neurologic deficit that resolves within 24 hours has had a transient ischemic attack (TIA). A patient with permanent deficit has had a com-pleted stroke.Thrombotic DiseaseThe most common area of neurologically significant vessel thrombosis is the carotid artery in the neck. Disease occurs at the carotid bifurcation. Thrombosis of a carotid artery chronically narrowed by atheroma can lead to acute carotid occlusion. As discussed previously, this can be asymptomatic due to sufficient collateralization. The more common concern is thromboem-bolus. Intracranial arterial occlusion by local thrombus formation may occur, but it is rare compared to embolic occlusion.Management. Complete occlusion of the carotid artery with-out referable neurologic deficit requires no treatment. A patient with new neurologic deficit and an angiographically confirmed complete carotid occlusion contralateral to the symptoms should be considered for emergent carotid endarterectomy.53 Surgery should be performed within 2 hours of symptom onset and should not be performed on obtunded or comatose patients. These restrictions significantly reduce the number of opera-tive candidates. In nonemergent cases, the results of the large-scale North American Symptomatic Carotid Stenosis Trial (NASCET) demonstrated a stroke reduction benefit to surgical revascularization in patients with severe stenosis, defined as occlusion of 70% to 99% of the carotid.54 Practice guidelines recommend revascularization at this level of stenosis even if asymptomatic. Surgical options for these patients include both carotid endarterectomy and carotid stenting, which have been shown to produce equal outcomes over long-term follow-up.55Embolic DiseaseEmboli causing strokes may originate from a number of sources, including: the left atrium in atrial fibrillation, a hypokinetic left ventricular wall segment, valvular vegetations, an atheromatous aortic arch, stenotic/atheromatous carotid bifurcations, or from the systemic venous system in the presence of a right-to-left shunt, such as a patent foramen ovale. The majority of emboli enter the anterior (carotid) circulation rather than the posterior (vertebro-basilar) circulation. Characteristic clinical syndromes result from embolic occlusion of various vessels within these circulations.Common Types of Strokes Anterior Cerebral Artery Stroke The ACA supplies the medial frontal and parietal lobes as it courses into the inter-hemispheric fissure. Due to its vascular supply of the motor cortex, ACA stroke characteristically results in contralateral leg weakness.Middle Cerebral Artery Stroke The MCA supplies the lateral frontal and parietal lobes and the temporal lobe. MCA stroke results in contralateral face and arm weakness. Dominant-hemisphere MCA stroke causes language deficits due to its sup-ply of Broca’s area, Wernicke’s area, and the white matter tracts that connect the two. Proximal MCA occlusion with ischemia and swelling in the entire MCA territory can lead to significant intracranial mass effect and midline shift (see Fig. 42-6), termed malignant MCA stroke.Posterior Cerebral Artery Stroke The PCA supplies the occipital lobe. PCA stroke results in a contralateral homony-mous hemianopsia (see Fig. 42-6).Posterior Inferior Cerebellar Artery Stroke The PICA sup-plies the lateral medulla and the inferior half of the cerebellar Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   184901/03/19   7:16 PM 1850SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIhemispheres. PICA stroke results in nausea, vomiting, nystag-mus, dysphagia, ipsilateral Horner’s syndrome, and ipsilateral limb ataxia. The constellation of symptoms resulting from PICA occlusion is referred to as the lateral medullary or Wallenberg’s syndrome.Management. Ischemic stroke management has two goals: reopen the occluded vessel and maintain blood flow to ischemic “penumbra” tissues bordering the vascular territory. Reopen-ing the vessel has historically been attempted with recombinant tPA.56 tPA administration within 3 hours of the onset of neu-rologic deficit improves outcome at 3 months. In the setting of suspected ischemic stroke, a head CT must be performed immediately to differentiate ischemic from hemorrhagic stroke. Intracranial hemorrhage, major surgery within the previous  2 weeks, GI or genitourinary hemorrhage in the previous 3 weeks, platelet count less than 100,000/µL, and systolic blood pressure >185 mmHg are among the contraindications to tPA therapy.In recent years, a paradigm shift in ischemic stroke man-agement has occurred with the advent of endovascular mechani-cal thrombectomy. Though tPA can be effective for strokes of smaller vessels, it produces recanalization in only 20% of large vessel ischemic strokes, and even less for internal carotid artery occlusion.57 In mechanical thrombectomy, the intracra-nial circulation is accessed endovascularly, and stent-retriever devices can be deployed to definitively remove clot and stent open involved vessels. Initial investigations into the technol-ogy began in 1999 with varied success. Technological advances proceeded, and in 2015, large-scale clinical trials investigating mechanical thrombectomy for large vessel occlusion were pub-lished. The MR-CLEAN trial was one of these. In this trial, 500 patients were randomized to tPA and medical therapy vs. mechanical thrombectomy. The latter group had a significantly better 90-day outcome. A domino effect ensued in which four other similarly large-scale trials (e.g., REVASCAT)58 were ter-minated early.Benefits to mechanical thrombectomy include less strin-gent criteria than tPA administration, focused therapy, and time windows between 6 and 12 hours in trials. Currently, mechani-cal thrombectomy is being used for large vessel occlusion within 6 hours of symptom onset for those patients not eligible for tPA, which accounts for about 10% of ischemic stroke. Its indica-tions and associated technology continue to evolve. It should be noted that current guidelines still support tPA as first-line therapy even for those eligible for mechanical thrombectomy.Patients not eligible for tPA or mechanical thrombectomy require hemodynamic optimization and neurologic monitoring. Admit such patients to the ICU stroke service for blood pres-sure management and frequent neurologic checks. Permissive hypertension allows for maximal cerebral perfusion. Systolic blood pressure >180 mmHg may require treatment, but the opti-mal mean arterial pressure goal is between 100 and 140 mmHg. Give normal saline solution without glucose (which could injure neurons in the penumbra due to osmotic fluid shift), and aim for normovolemia. A stroke patient who worsens clinically should undergo repeat head CT to evaluate for hemorrhage or increas-ing mass effect from swelling, which typically peaks 3 to 5 days after the stroke. Significant swelling from an MCA or cerebellar stroke may cause herniation and brain stem injury. A decom-pressive hemicraniectomy or suboccipital craniectomy can be a life-saving intervention for these select stroke patients. In stud-ies of malignant MCA syndrome, decompressive hemicraniec-tomy showed favorable mortality and functional outcomes.59 This treatment option, however, should be considered with the understanding of potentially poor functional recovery regardless of therapy. One study showed that less than half of malignant MCA patients who underwent decompressive hemicraniectomy returned home following rehabilitation, which is even fewer for those undergoing medical therapy.60Hemorrhagic DiseasesIntracranial hemorrhage from abnormal or diseased vascular structures accounts for approximately 15% of acute cerebrovas-cular events. Hypertension and amyloid angiopathy account for most intraparenchymal hemorrhages, although AVMs, aneu-rysms, venous thrombosis, tumors, hemorrhagic conversion of ischemic infarct, and fungal infections also may be the cause. The term intracranial hemorrhage is frequently used to signify intraparenchymal hemorrhage and will be used here. Intracra-nial hemorrhage causes local neuronal injury and dysfunction and also may cause global dysfunction due to mass effect if sufficiently large. The Intracerebral Hemorrhage (ICH Score) is commonly used to risk-stratify these patients, and it takes into account GCS, age, hemorrhage volume, presence of intraven-tricular hemorrhage, and location to predict mortality. AVM or aneurysm rupture (along with trauma, discussed previously in this chapter) result in subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) because the major cerebral and cortical blood vessels travel in the sub-arachnoid space, between the pia and the arachnoid membranes. SAH can cause immediate concussive-like neuronal dysfunc-tion by exposure of the brain to intra-arterial pressure pulsa-tions during the hemorrhage. Moreover, it can cause delayed ischemia from cerebral arterial vasospasm, which can present as acute worsening of the patient’s neurological status days to weeks after the injury. Patients presenting with intracranial hemorrhages that do not follow typical patterns should undergo cerebral angiography or MRI to evaluate for possible underlying lesions, such as AVM or tumor.Hemorrhagic stroke most commonly occurs within the basal ganglia or cerebellum. The patient is usually hypertensive on admission and has a history of poorly controlled hyperten-sion. Such patients are more likely to present with lethargy or obtundation compared to those who suffer an ischemic stroke. Depressed mental status results from mass effect from the hema-toma in deep structures, which can produce midline shift or herniation. Ischemic stroke does not cause mass effect acutely. Therefore, patients are more likely to present with normal con-sciousness and a focal neurologic deficit. Hemorrhagic strokes tend to present with a relatively gradual decline in neurologic function as the hematoma expands, rather than the immediately maximal symptoms caused by ischemic stroke. Table 42-3 pro-vides a listing of relative incidences of intracranial hemorrhage by anatomic distribution.Hypertension. Hypertension increases the relative risk of intracranial hemorrhage by approximately fourfold, likely due to chronic degenerative vasculopathy. Hypertensive hemor-rhages often present in the basal ganglia, thalamus, or pons, and result from breakage of small perforating arteries that branch off of much larger parent vessels (Fig. 42-16).Most hypertensive hemorrhages should be medically man-aged. The hematoma often contains intact, salvageable axons because the blood dissects through and along neural tracts, and surgical clot evacuation destroys these axons. Factors potentially favoring surgery include: superficial clot location, young age, nondominant hemisphere, rapid deterioration, and significant Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   185001/03/19   7:16 PM 1851NEUROSURGERYCHAPTER 42Table 42-3Anatomic distribution of intracranial hemorrhages and correlated symptoms% OF INTRACRANIAL HEMORRHAGESLOCATIONCLASSIC SYMPTOMS50Basal ganglia (putamen, globus pallidus), internal capsuleContralateral hemiparesis15ThalamusContralateral hemisensory loss10–20Cerebral white matter (lobar)Depends on location (weakness, numbness, partial loss of visual field)10–15PonsHemiparesis; may be devastating10CerebellumLethargy or coma due to brain stem compression and/or hydrocephalus1–6Brain stem (excluding pons)Often devastatingFigure 42-16. A. Head computed tomography scan of a patient with left-sided weakness and progressive lethargy reveals a right basal ganglia hemorrhage (arrowhead). The blood clot is bright white. Hypodensity around the clot represents cerebral edema. There is blood within the ventricular system. B. Another patient with intraventricular extension of a basal ganglia hemorrhage. The patient developed right-sided weak-ness and then lethargy. Head computed tomography indicated hydrocephalus. A ventriculostomy was placed for cerebrospinal fluid drainage (arrowhead indicates cross-sectional view of the catheter entering the anterior horn of the right lateral ventricle).mass effect. However, the most comprehensive randomized clinical trials to date did not show an overall improved outcome in surgically evacuated intracranial hemorrhage, except for the subgroup of patients with clot <1 cm from the cortical surface.61 More recent studies have assessed the role of minimally-invasive catheter evacuation of clot; these investigations are ongoing.62 Medical management remains the gold standard, however, and includes moderate blood pressure control, normalizing platelet and clotting function, phenytoin or levetiracetam for seizure prophylaxis, and electrolyte management. Intubate patients who cannot clearly follow commands to prevent aspiration and hypercarbia. Follow and document the neurologic examination and communicate with the family regarding appropriateness for rehabilitation vs. withdrawal of care.Amyloid Angiopathy. The presence of pathologic amyloid deposition in the media of small cortical vessels compromises vessel integrity and tends to cause more superficial (lobar) hemorrhages than hypertensive intracranial hemorrhage. Amy-loid laden vessels may hemorrhage multiple times. The super-ficial location of amyloid hemorrhages may make surgical evacuation less morbid compared to typical deep hypertensive hemorrhages. Nonetheless, medical management and family counseling should be approached similarly to patients with hypertensive hemorrhages.Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   185101/03/19   7:16 PM 1852SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 42-5The Hunt-Hess clinical grading system for subarachnoid hemorrhageHUNT-HESS GRADECLINICAL PRESENTATION0Asymptomatic; unruptured aneurysm1Awake; asymptomatic or mild headache;  mild nuchal rigidity2Awake; moderate to severe headache, cranial nerve palsy (e.g., cranial nerve III or IV), nuchal rigidity3Lethargic; mild focal neurologic deficit  (e.g., pronator drift)4Stuporous; significant neurologic deficit  (e.g., hemiplegia)5Comatose; posturingTable 42-4Prevalence of cerebral aneurysm by locationPREVALENCEANEURYSM LOCATION  (VERNACULAR NAME)Anterior  circulation 85%   30% Anterior communicating artery (A-Comm)25% Posterior communicating artery (P-Comm)20% Middle cerebral artery bifurcation10% OtherPosterior  circulation 15% 10% Basilar artery, most frequently at the basilar tip5% Vertebral artery, usually at the posterior inferior cerebellar arteryCerebral Aneurysm. An aneurysm is a focal dilatation of the vessel wall and is most often a balloon-like outpouching, but may also be fusiform. Aneurysms usually occur at branch points of major vessels (e.g., internal carotid artery bifurca-tion), or at the origin of smaller vessels (e.g., posterior com-municating artery or ophthalmic artery). Approximately 85% of aneurysms arise from the anterior circulation (carotid) and 15% from the posterior circulation (vertebrobasilar). Table 42-4 shows the percentage distribution of cerebral aneurysms by location. Aneurysms are thin walled and at risk for rupture. The major cerebral vessels, and therefore aneurysms, lie in the subarachnoid space. Rupture results in SAH. The aneurys-mal tear may be small and seal quickly, or it may not. SAH may consist of a thin layer of blood in the CSF spaces, or thick layers of blood around the brain and extending into brain parenchyma, resulting in a clot with mass effect. Because the meningeal linings of the brain are sensitive with free nerve endings, SAH usually results in a sudden, severe “thunderclap” headache. A patient will classically describe “the worst head-ache of my life.” Presenting neurologic symptoms may range from mild headache to coma to sudden death. The Hunt-Hess grading system categorizes patients clinically (Table 42-5). The World Federation of Neurological Surgery (WFNS) SAH Grading Scale is also used for this purpose. The Fisher Scale and a more recent modified form use head CT characteristics, described in the following section, to stratify patients based on risk of vasospasm-induced delayed cerebral ischemia. Both scales are used in conjunction as a quick way to communicate severity of aneurysmal SAH.Patients with symptoms suspicious for SAH should have a head CT immediately. Acute SAH appears as a bright signal in the fissures and CSF cisterns around the base of the brain, as shown in Fig. 42-17. CT is rapid, noninvasive, and approxi-mately 95% sensitive. In patients with suspicious symptoms but negative head CT, a lumbar puncture (LP) should be per-formed. An LP with xanthochromia and high red blood cell counts (usually 100,000/mL), which do not decrease between tubes 1 and 4, is consistent with SAH. Negative CT and LP essentially rules out SAH. Patients diagnosed with SAH require four-vessel cerebral angiography within 24 hours to assess for aneurysm or other vascular malformation. Cathe-ter angiography remains the gold standard for assessing the patient’s cerebral vasculature, relevant anomalies, and pres-ence, location, and morphology of the cerebral aneurysms. Figure 42-18A demonstrates the typical anteroposterior digital subtraction angiographic view of a cerebral aneurysm. Figure 42-18B shows the anatomy of the circle of Willis in a simplified graphic representation to assist in visualizing the locations of various cerebral aneurysms.SAH patients should be admitted to the neurologic ICU. Hunt-Hess grade 4 and 5 patients require intubation and hemo-dynamic monitoring and stabilization. The current standard of care for ruptured aneurysms requires early aneurysmal occlu-sion. There are two options for occlusion. The patient may undergo craniotomy with microsurgical dissection and place-ment of a titanium clip across the aneurysm neck to exclude the aneurysm from the circulation and reconstitute the lumen of the parent vessel. The second option is to utilize an endovascular approach for treatment, which has traditionally taken the form of “coiling.” The patient is taken to the interventional neuro-radiology suite for placement of looped titanium coils inside the aneurysm dome. The coils support thrombosis and prevent Figure 42-17. Non contrast CT scan on the left shows diffuse subarachnoid blood in the cisterns with some concentration in the region of the anterior cerebral arteries. This is confirmed by the image on the right, a CT angiogram, where the arrow indicates an anterior communicating artery aneurysm.Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   185201/03/19   7:16 PM 1853NEUROSURGERYCHAPTER 42Figure 42-18. A. Anteroposterior view after injection of contrast dye in the right internal carotid artery demonstrates an aneurysm of the middle cerebral artery bifurcation. B. Figure depicting the anatomy of the circle of Willis and the common sites for aneu-rysms. ICA = internal cerebral artery; MCA = middle cerebral artery. (Reproduced with permission from Osborn AG: Handbook of Neuroradiology: Brain and Skull. St. Louis, MO: Mosby-Year Book, Inc; 1991.)AIntracranial aneurysumsAnteriorcommunicating artery30% – 35%MCA bifurcation20%Basilar5%Posterior fossaMiscellaneous sites distalto circle of Willis1% – 3%ICA/posteriorcommunicating30% – 35%Bblood flow into the aneurysm. Newer endovascular options include flow diversion and stent-assisted coiling. Factors favor-ing craniotomy and clipping include young age, good medical condition, and broad aneurysm necks. Factors favoring coil-ing include age, medical comorbidities, and narrow aneurysm necks. Due to coil migration or compaction over time, surgical clipping is believed to result in a more definitive cure. The decision to clip or coil is complex and should be fully explored. Practice standards have changed in recent years with the advent of more nuanced endovascular techniques and treatment options, as described earlier. Current guidelines favor endovas-cular therapy as the preferred first-line approach. The Interna-tional Subarachnoid Aneurysm Trial researchers suggested that endovascular occlusion resulted in better mortality outcomes for certain types of cerebral aneurysms, although this trial was marred by poor selection and randomization techniques, and the validity of its conclusions have been questioned.63 Long-term outcomes may be better in younger patients with clipped aneurysms, as demonstrated in the Barrow Ruptured Aneurysm Trial (BRAT).64 However, this trial has a number of similar criticisms as well. Debate also continues regarding optimal care for unruptured intracranial aneurysms, with a recent large-scale study showing no clear benefit to open surgical vs. endovascu-lar approaches.65SAH patients often require 1 to 3 weeks of ICU care after aneurysm occlusion for medical complications that accompany neurologic injury. In addition to routine ICU concerns, SAH patients are also at risk for cerebral vasospasm. In vasospasm, cerebral arteries constrict pathologically and can cause isch-emia or stroke from 4 to 21 days after SAH. Current vasospasm prophylaxis includes maintenance of optimal perfusion with hypertension and mild hypervolemia, as well as administration of nimodipine, a calcium channel blocker that may decrease the incidence and degree of spasm, though its mechanism is debated. Neurointerventional options for treating symptomatic vasospasm include intra-arterial papaverine or nicardipine, and balloon angioplasty for larger caliber vessels.Aneurysmal SAH has an approximate mortality rate of 50% in the first month. Approximately one-third of survivors return to pre-SAH function, and the remaining two-thirds have mild to severe disability. Most require rehabilitation after hospitalization.Arteriovenous Malformations. AVMs are abnormal, dilated arteries and veins without an intervening capillary bed. The nidus of the AVM contains a tangled mass of vessels but no neural tissue. AVMs may be asymptomatic or present with SAH, intra-parenchymal hemorrhage, or seizures. Small AVMs present with hemorrhage more often than large AVMs, which tend to present with seizures. Headache, bruit, or focal neurologic deficits are less common symptoms. AVMs hemorrhage at an average rate of 2% to 4% a year. Figure 42-19 demonstrates the angiographic appearance of an AVM in arterial and venous phases.For unruptured AVMs, recent evidence from over two hundred patients supports medical management alone rather than intervention due to risk of stroke.66 Because AVM rupture can present radiographically as SAH, it is important to consider several management differences as compared to aneurysmal SAH. Definitive therapy for the AVM usually is delayed 3 to 4 weeks to allow the brain to recover from acute injury. There is less risk of devastating early rebleeding from AVMs, and vasospasm is much less common. Three therapeutic modalities for AVMs are currently in common use: microsurgical exci-sion, interventional radiology or endovascular embolization, and stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS). AVMs that are large, near eloquent cortex, or that drain to deep venous structures are con-sidered high grade and more difficult to surgically resect with-out causing a significant neurologic deficit. Radiosurgery can treat these lesions, although it is limited to lesions <3 cm in diameter and has a 2-year lag time (i.e., the AVM may bleed in the interval). Embolization reduces flow through the AVM. It is usually considered adjunctive therapy, but it may serve as the sole treatment for deep, inaccessible lesions.4Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   185301/03/19   7:16 PM 1854SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITUMORS OF THE CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEMA wide variety of tumors affect the brain and spine. Primary benign and malignant tumors arise from the various elements of the CNS, including neurons, glia, and meninges. Tumors metas-tasize to the CNS from many primary sources. Presenta-tion varies widely depending on relevant neuroanatomy. Prognosis depends on histology and anatomy. Modern brain tumor centers use team approaches to CNS tumors, as patients may require a combination of surgery (including newer, more minimally invasive approaches), radiation therapy, chemother-apy, SRS, and research protocol enrollment for studies assessing the efficacy of newer approaches such as immunotherapy. Tumors affecting the peripheral nervous system are discussed in the “Peripheral Nerve” section.Intracranial TumorsIntracranial tumors can cause brain injury from mass effect, dys-function or destruction of adjacent neural structures, swelling, or abnormal electrical activity (seizures). Supratentorial tumors commonly present with focal neurologic deficit, such as contra-lateral limb weakness, visual field deficit, headache, or seizure. Infratentorial tumors often cause increased ICP due to hydro-cephalus from compression of the fourth ventricle, leading to headache, nausea, vomiting, or diplopia. Cerebellar hemisphere or brain stem dysfunction can result in ataxia, nystagmus, or cranial nerve palsies. Infratentorial tumors rarely cause seizures.All patients with symptoms concerning for brain tumor should undergo MRI with and without gadolinium. Gadolinium-based contrast can identify locations of blood-brain barrier break-down of tumors and, when used in conjunction with other MRI sequences, is essential in narrowing the differential diagnosis. Ini-tial management of a patient with a symptomatic brain tumor gen-erally includes dexamethasone for reduction of vasogenic edema, and phenytoin or levetiracetam if the patient has seized. Patients with significant weakness, lethargy, or hydrocephalus should be admitted for observation until definitive care is administered.Metastatic TumorsCerebral metastases are the most common type of intracranial tumor. Prolonged cancer patient survival and improved CNS imaging have increased the likelihood of diagnosing cerebral metastases. The sources of most cerebral metastases are (in decreasing frequency): lung, breast, kidney, GI tract, and mela-noma. Lung and breast cancers account for more than half of cerebral metastases. Metastatic cells usually travel to the brain hematogenously and frequently seed the gray-white junction due to characteristic blood vessel caliber change. Other com-mon locations are the cerebellum and the meninges. Menin-geal involvement may result in carcinomatous meningitis, also known as leptomeningeal carcinomatosis. MRI preand post-contrast administration is the study of choice for evaluation.  Figure 42-20 demonstrates bilateral cerebellar metastases. These lesions are typically well circumscribed, round, and multiple. Such findings should prompt a metastatic work-up, including CT scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis, and a bone scan.Management largely depends upon the primary tumor, overall tumor burden, patient’s medical condition, and location and number of metastases. The beliefs of the patient and family regarding aggressive care must be considered, with the primary goal of optimizing survival time while maintaining or improv-ing neurological function. Neurosurgical intervention can be indicated for a number of reasons. Biopsy can be obtained to provide a tissue diagnosis and further direct therapy. Hydro-cephalus from increased intracranial pressure due to intracranial tumor burden can be temporized via placement of a ventricu-loperitoneal shunt. Craniotomy can be used for debulking of intracranial tumor burden or resection. Data from random-ized controlled trials have supported the use of craniotomy for tumor resection plus whole-brain radiation therapy (WBRT) or stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) for patients with a single surgically accessible metastatic lesion, compared to radiation therapy alone. In one randomized trial assessing surgery and WBRT vs. WBRT alone, local recurrence decreased and median 5ABFigure 42-19. A. Lateral view after injection of contrast dye in the left internal carotid artery demonstrates a 3 × 4 cm left frontal arteriove-nous malformation indicated by arrowheads. This image was taken 1.06 seconds after dye injection, and is referred to as an arterial phase image. B. Same view taken 4.10 seconds after dye injection, providing a venous phase image. The arrow points to the arteriovenous malfor-mation nidus. The arrowheads indicate two pathologically enlarged draining veins. ACA = anterior cerebral artery; ICA = internal carotid artery; MCA = middle cerebral artery.Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   185401/03/19   7:16 PM 1855NEUROSURGERYCHAPTER 42survival increased from 15 to 40 weeks.67 For multiple metas-tases, it should be noted that craniotomy primarily for resec-tion is typically not indicated unless all detectable metastases can be resected. It may however still be useful for symptomatic relief from a primary lesion. Recent data suggest that SRS (e.g. Gamma Knife) may be applied to multiple metastases in one session with improved outcome.68Glial TumorsGlial cells provide the anatomic and physiologic support for neurons and their processes in the brain. Tumors arising from glial cells are termed gliomas, and they represent the most com-mon primary brain tumor. The several types of glial cells give rise to distinct primary CNS neoplasms.Astrocytoma. Astrocytoma is the most common primary CNS neoplasm. The term glioma often is used to refer to astrocyto-mas specifically, excluding other glial tumors. Astrocytomas are graded from I to IV. Grades I and II are referred to as low-grade astrocytoma or low grade glioma, grade III as anaplastic astro-cytoma, and grade IV as glioblastoma multiforme (GBM). Prog-nosis varies significantly between grades I/II, III, and IV, but not between I and II. Median survival is 8 years after diagnosis with a low-grade tumor, 2 to 3 years with an anaplastic astrocytoma, and roughly 1 year with a GBM. GBMs account for almost two-thirds of all astrocytomas, anaplastic astrocytomas account for two-thirds of the rest, and low-grade astrocytomas the remainder. Fig. 42-21 demonstrates the typical appearance of a GBM.The great majority of astrocytomas infiltrate adjacent brain. Juvenile pilocytic astrocytomas and pleomorphic xantho-astrocytomas are exceptions. These tumors are circumscribed, low grade, and associated with a good prognosis. Histologic features associated with higher grade include hypercellularity, nuclear atypia, and endovascular hyperplasia. Necrosis is pres-ent only with GBMs; it is required for the diagnosis.Gross total resection should be attempted for suspected astrocytomas. Motor cortex, language centers, deep or midline structures, or brainstem location may make this impossible without unacceptable, devastating neurologic deficit. Advanced imaging, such as diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) and functional MRI (fMRI), are seeing increased use as means of assessing peritumoral structure and function to guide surgical decision-making. However, some lesions may be in such precarious regions as to be limited to stereotactic needle biopsy specimen. Gross total resection followed by fractioned radiotherapy (FRT) improves survival for all grades, although radiation therapy may be delayed until recurrence in low-grade tumors. Alongside FRT, adjuvant chemotherapy with temozolomide was demon-strated in a randomized controlled trial to increase short-term survival rate.69 Bevacizumab, an anti-VEGF antibody, is another treatment option under investigation. There are various ongoing research studies for GBM adjuvant therapy; these should be dis-cussed with the patient and family. Other options include Iotrex-containing balloons for conformal radiation brachytherapy (Glia-Site), placed in the resection cavity at the time of surgery ABFigure 42-20. A. Precontrast T1-weighted axial magnetic resonance imaging demonstrating bilateral hemorrhagic cerebellar metastases. Patient presented with ataxia and then lethargy progressing to deep coma. This patient has total effacement of the fourth ventricle and severe brain stem compression. The fourth ventricle cerebrospinal fluid space should be at the tip of the arrowhead. Patient recovered to normal mental status after emergent posterior fossa craniotomy. B. Postcontrast T1-weighted axial magnetic resonance imaging demonstrating a ring-enhancing lesion in the lateral left temporal lobe with moderate edema. The uncus (U) is compressing the left cerebral peduncle (CP) and displacing the brain stem to the right.Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   185501/03/19   7:17 PM 1856SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIfor recurrence. Adjuvant therapy remains marginally effective; survival has changed little over the last several decades.Oligodendroglioma. Oligodendroglioma accounts for approx-imately 10% of gliomas, arising from the oligodendrocytes that create myelin in the CNS. They often present with seizures. Calcifications and hemorrhage on CT or MRI suggest the diag-nosis. Oligodendrogliomas are also graded from I to IV; grade portends prognosis. Prognosis is better overall than for astro-cytomas. Median survival ranges from 2 to 7 years for high-est and lowest grade tumors, respectively. Aggressive resection improves survival. Many oligodendrogliomas will respond to procarbazine, lomustine (CCNU), and vincristine (PCV) che-motherapy. A particular chromosomal deletion, 1p19q, has been associated with robust response to the chemotherapeutic agent temozolomide. Radiation has not been clearly shown to prolong survival.Recent updates to brain tumor classification by the WHO (discussed in the following section) note that high-grade (at least II or III) oligodendrogliomas and astrocytomas are classi-fied together as diffuse gliomas. In fact, more similarity is seen between high-grade astrocytomas and oligodendrolgiomas than between high-grade astrocytomas and low-grade astrocytomas. Further discussion of this nosology is beyond the scope of this chapter, but implications for the future of neuro-oncology are discussed here.Ependymoma. The lining of the ventricular system consists of cuboidal/columnar ependymal cells from which ependy-momas may arise. Although most pediatric ependymomas are supratentorial, two-thirds of adult ependymomas are infratento-rial. Supratentorial ependymomas arise from the lateral or third ventricles. The infratentorial tumors arise from the floor of the fourth ventricle (i.e., off the posterior brainstem). The most com-mon symptoms are headache, nausea, vomiting, or vertigo, sec-ondary to increased ICP from obstruction of CSF flow through the fourth ventricle. The tumors may grow out the foramina of Luschka to form a cerebellopontine angle mass. They may also spread through the CSF to form “drop mets” in the spinal canal. The two main histologic subtypes are papillary and anaplastic, the latter characterized by increased mitotic activity and areas of necrosis. Gross total resection often is impossible because the tumor arises from the brain stem. The goal of surgery is to achieve maximal resection without injuring the very delicate brainstem. Suboccipital craniotomy and midline separation of the cerebellar hemispheres allows access to tumors in the fourth ventricle. Postoperative radiation therapy significantly improves survival. Patients with CSF spread documented by LP or con-trast MRI should also have whole-spine radiation plus focused doses to visualized metastases.Choroid Plexus Papilloma. The choroid plexus is composed of many small vascular tufts covered with cuboidal epithelium. It represents part of the interface between blood and brain. The choroid cells create CSF from blood via ultrafiltration and release it into the ventricular system. Choroid plexus papil-lomas and choroid plexus carcinomas (rare, mostly pediatric) may arise from these cells. Papillomas usually occur in infants (typically supratentorial in the lateral ventricle) but also occur in adults (usually infratentorial in the fourth ventricle). Papillomas ABFigure 42-21. A. Postcontrast T1-weighted axial magnetic resonance imaging demonstrating a ring-enhancing lesion in the anteromedial right temporal lobe with central necrosis (dark area) consistent with glioblastoma multiforme. B. T2-weighted axial magnetic resonance imaging with extensive bright signal signifying peritumoral edema seen with glioblastoma multiformes.Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   185601/03/19   7:17 PM 1857NEUROSURGERYCHAPTER 42are well circumscribed and vividly enhance due to extensive vasculature. Like ependymomas, adult choroid plexus papillo-mas usually present with symptoms of increased ICP. Treatment is surgical excision. Total surgical excision is curative; recurrent papillomas should be re-resected. Radiation and chemotherapy are not indicated for papillomas. Radiation is adjunctive to aggressive surgery for carcinomas, but the results are generally poor.Neural Tumors and Mixed TumorsNeural and mixed tumors are a diverse group that includes tumors variously containing normal or abnormal neurons and/or normal or abnormal glial cells. Primitive neuroectodermal tumors arise from bipotential cells, capable of differentiating into neurons or glial cells.Medulloblastoma. Medulloblastoma is classically described as the most common type of primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET), although this term has been removed in the latest WHO classification of central nervous system tumors. Most occur in the first decade of life, but there is a second peak around age 30. Medulloblastoma is the most common malignant pediatric brain tumor. They are usually midline. Most occur in the cerebellum and present with symptoms of increased ICP. Histologic char-acteristics include densely packed small round cells with large nuclei and scant cytoplasm. They are generally not encapsulated, frequently disseminate within the CNS, and should undergo sur-gical resection followed by radiation therapy and chemotherapy.Ganglioglioma. Ganglioglioma is a mixed tumor in which both neurons and glial cells are neoplastic. They occur in the first three decades of life, often in the medial temporal lobe, as circumscribed masses that may contain cysts or calcium and may enhance. The presenting symptom is usually a seizure, due to the medial temporal location. Patients have a good prognosis after complete surgical resection.Neural Crest TumorsMultipotent neural crest cells develop into a variety of dispa-rate cell types, including smooth muscle cells, sympathetic and parasympathetic neurons, melanocytes, Schwann cells, and arachnoid cap cells. They migrate in early development from the primitive neural tube throughout the body.Miscellaneous TumorsMeningioma. Meningiomas are derived from arachnoid cap cells of the arachnoid mater. They appear to arise from the dura mater grossly and on MRI and are commonly referred to as dural-based tumors. The most common intracranial locations are along the falx (Fig. 42-22), the convexities (i.e., over the cerebral hemispheres), and the sphenoid wing. Less common locations include the foramen magnum, olfactory groove, and inside the lateral ventricle. Most are slow growing, encapsu-lated, benign tumors. Aggressive atypical or malignant menin-giomas may invade adjacent bone or cerebral cortex. Previous cranial irradiation increases the incidence of meningiomas. Approximately 10% of patients with a meningioma have multiple meningiomas. Total resection is curative, although involvement with small perforating arteries or cranial nerves may make total resection of skull base tumors impossible with-out significant neurologic deficit. The Simpson grading scale is used to characterize the extent of resection. Small, asymptom-atic meningiomas can be followed until symptomatic or until significant growth is documented on serial imaging studies. Atypical and malignant meningiomas may require postoperative radiation. Patients may develop recurrences from the surgical bed or distant de novo tumors.Vestibular Schwannoma (Acoustic Neuroma). Vestibular schwannomas predominantly arise from the superior half of the vestibular portion of the vestibulocochlear nerve (cranial nerve VIII) (Fig. 42-23). Commonly, patients present with progressive hearing loss, tinnitus, or balance difficulty. Large tumors may cause brain stem compression and obstructive hydrocephalus. Bilateral acoustic neuromas are pathognomonic for neurofibro-matosis type 2 (NF2), a syndrome resulting from mutation of chromosome 22. NF2 patients have an increased incidence of spinal and cranial meningiomas and gliomas.Vestibular schwannomas may be treated with microsur-gical resection or SRS (Gamma Knife radiosurgery or linear accelerator technology). The main complication with treatment is damage to the facial nerve (cranial nerve VII), which runs through the internal auditory canal with the vestibulocochlear nerve. Risk of facial nerve dysfunction increases with increasing tumor diameter. SRS is preferred for tumors <3 cm, and micro-surgical resection for those >3 cm (SRS can be supplemented for any residual tumor following resection).Pituitary Adenoma. Pituitary adenomas arise from the anterior pituitary gland (adenohypophysis). Tumors <1 cm diameter are considered microadenomas; larger tumors are macroadenomas. Figure 42-22. Postcontrast T1-weighted coronal magnetic reso-nance imaging demonstrating a brightly enhancing lesion arising from the falx cerebri with moderate edema and mass effect on the right lateral ventricle. This is a falcine meningioma. Note also the small separate meningioma arising from the dura over the cerebral convexity.Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   185701/03/19   7:17 PM 1858SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIPituitary tumors may be functional (i.e., secrete endocrinologi-cally active compounds at pathologic levels) or nonfunctional (i.e., secrete nothing or inactive compounds). Functional tumors are often diagnosed when quite small, due to endocrine dysfunc-tion. The most common endocrine syndromes are Cushing’s disease, due to adrenocorticotropic hormone secretion, ForbesAlbright syndrome, due to prolactin secretion, and acromegaly, due to growth hormone secretion. Nonfunctional tumors are typically diagnosed as larger lesions causing mass effects such as visual field deficits due to compression of the optic chiasm or panhypopituita-rism due to compression of the gland. Figure 42-24 demonstrates a large pituitary adenoma. Hemorrhage into a pituitary tumor causes abrupt symptoms of headache, visual disturbance, decreased men-tal status, and endocrine dysfunction. This is known as pituitary apoplexy.Symptomatic pituitary tumors should be decompressed surgically to eliminate mass effect and/or to attempt an endo-crine cure. However, prolactin-secreting tumors (prolactinomas) usually shrink with dopaminergic therapy alone. First-line phar-macotherapy for small prolactinomas is cabergoline, a dopamine agonist that inhibits production and secretion of prolactin, and is preferred over bromocriptine for its superior side effect profile. Consider surgery for prolactinomas with persistent mass effect or endocrinologic dysfunction in spite of adequate dopamine agonist therapy. Most pituitary tumors are approached transna-sally via the transsphenoidal approach, and minimally invasive, endoscopic surgical techniques are being used increasingly.Hemangioblastoma. Hemangioblastomas occur almost exclusively in the posterior fossa, with about 20% occurring in patients with von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease, a multisys-tem neoplastic disorder. Other tumors associated with VHL are renal cell carcinoma, pheochromocytoma, and retinal angio-mas. Many appear as cystic tumors with an enhancing tumor on the cyst wall known as the mural nodule. Surgical resection is curative for sporadic (non-VHL associated) tumors. Pathology reveals abundant thin-walled vascular channels; internal debulk-ing may be bloody. En bloc resection of the mural nodule alone, leaving the cyst wall, is sufficient.Lymphoma. CNS lymphoma may arise either primarily in the CNS or secondarily from systemic disease. Recent rising inci-dence may be due to growing transplant and AIDS populations. Presenting symptoms include mental status changes, headache due to increased ICP, and cranial nerve palsy due to lymphoma-tous meningitis (analogous to carcinomatous meningitis). Often, lymphoma appears hyperdense on CT due to dense cellularity. Most lesions typically enhance with contrast on MRI, and can be differentiated by diffusion restriction on diffusion-weighted sequences. Surgical excision is not indicated. A stereotactic needle biopsy specimen usually confirms the diagnosis. Sub-sequent treatment includes steroids, whole-brain radiation, and chemotherapy. Intrathecal methotrexate is an additional treat-ment option.Embryologic TumorsEmbryologic tumors result from embryonal remnants that fail to involute completely or differentiate properly during development.Craniopharyngioma. Craniopharyngiomas are benign cystic lesions that occur in the sellar region that occur most frequently in children. A second peak of incidence also exists around  50 years of age. Craniopharyngiomas arise from remnant embry-onic tissue in the pituitary stalk. Calcification occurs in all pedi-atric and roughly half of adult craniopharyngiomas. Symptoms result from compression of adjacent structures, especially the optic chiasm. Pituitary or hypothalamic dysfunction or hydro-cephalus may develop. Treatment is primarily surgical. Excision ABFigure 42-23. A. Postcontrast T1-weighted axial magnetic resonance imaging demonstrating a brightly enhancing mass on the right ves-tibular nerve with an enhancing tail going into the internal auditory canal (arrowhead). Pathology demonstrated vestibular schwannoma. B. Postcontrast T1-weighted sagittal magnetic resonance imaging of the same lesion, indicated by the arrowhead. Note small incidental meningioma at the top of the scan.Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   185801/03/19   7:17 PM 1859NEUROSURGERYCHAPTER 42is somewhat easier in children, as the tumor is often soft and easily suctioned. Adult tumors are often firm and adherent to adjacent vital structures. Visual loss, pituitary endocrine hypo-function, diabetes insipidus, and cognitive impairment from basal frontal injury are common complications.Epidermoid. Epidermoid tumors are cystic lesions with strati-fied squamous epithelial walls from trapped ectodermal cell rests that grow slowly and linearly by desquamation into the cyst cavity. The cysts contain keratin, cholesterol, and cellu-lar debris (Fig. 42-25). They occur most frequently in the cer-ebellopontine angle and may cause symptoms due to brainstem compression. Recurrent bouts of aseptic meningitis may occur due to release of irritative cyst contents into the subarachnoid space (Mollaret’s meningitis). Treatment is surgical drainage and removal of the cyst wall. Intraoperative spillage of cyst contents may lead to severe chemical meningitis and must be avoided by containment and aspiration.Dermoid. Dermoids are less common than epidermoid tumors. They contain hair follicles and sebaceous glands in addition to a squamous epithelium. Dermoids may be found anywhere along the craniospinal axis. They are more commonly midline structures and are associated with more anomalies than epidermoids. They may be associated with trauma, as from a lumbar puncture that drags skin structures into the spine. Bacterial meningitis may occur when dermoids are associated with a dermal sinus tract. Treatment of symptomatic lesions is surgical resection, again with care to control cyst contents.Teratoma. Teratomas are germ cell tumors that arise in the midline, often in the pineal region (the area behind the third ventricle, above the midbrain and cerebellum). They contain elements from all three embryonal layers: ectoderm, meso-derm, and endoderm. Teratomas may contain skin, cartilage, GI glands, and teeth. Teratomas with more primitive features are more malignant, while those with more differentiated tissues are more benign. Surgical excision may be attempted. However, the prognosis for malignant teratomas is very poor.Spinal TumorsApproximately 20% of CNS tumors occur in the spine, and a wide variety of spinal tumors exist. Unlike cranial tumors, the majority of spinal tumors are histologically benign. Under-standing two major spinal concepts—stability and neural com-pression—facilitates an understanding of the effects of spinal tumors. Destruction of bones or ligaments can cause spinal  instability, leading to deformities such as compression, kyphosis, subluxation, all of which harbor the potential for subsequent neural compression. Tumor growth in the spinal canal or neu-ral foramina can cause direct compression of the spinal cord or nerve roots and cause pain and loss of function. Classically, the pain is worse at night. Anatomic categorization provides the most logical approach to these tumors. Certain tumors present in characteristic locations. An understanding of the anatomy leads to an understanding of the clinical presentation and possible therapeutic options.Extradural Tumors. Extradural tumors account for approxi-mately 55% of spinal tumors. This category includes tumors Figure 42-24. Postcontrast T1-weighted sagittal magnetic reso-nance imaging demonstrating a large sellar/suprasellar lesion (arrowheads) involving the third ventricle superiorly and abut-ting the midbrain and pons posteriorly. The patient presented with progressive visual field and acuity loss. Pathology and lab work revealed a nonfunctioning pituitary adenoma.Figure 42-25. Postcontrast T1-weighted axial magnetic resonance imaging demonstrating a nonenhancing mass in the left cerebello-pontine angle with brain stem compression. White arrowhead indi-cates interface of tumor and brain stem. Black arrowhead indicates deformed fourth ventricle. Pathology revealed epidermoid tumor.Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   185901/03/19   7:17 PM 1860SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIarising within the bony vertebral structures and from within the epidural space. Destruction of the bone can lead to instability and fractures, causing pain and/or deformity. Epidural expan-sion can lead to spinal cord or nerve root compression with myelopathy, radiculopathy, or a combination thereof.Metastatic Tumors Metastatic tumors are the most common extradural tumors. Spinal metastases most commonly occur in the thoracic and lumbar vertebral bodies because the greatest volume of red bone marrow is found in these regions. The most common primary sources of spine metastasis are lymphoma, lung, breast, and prostate. Other sources include renal, colon, thyroid, sarcoma, and melanoma. Most spinal metastases create osteolytic lesions. Osteoblastic, sclerotic lesions suggest pros-tate cancer in men and breast cancer in women.Patients with progressive neurologic dysfunction due to a metastatic lesion should undergo urgent surgery followed by radiation therapy.70 Patients with debilitating pain may undergo radiation therapy with close observation for neurologic deterio-ration. Preoperative neurologic function correlates with postop-erative function. Patients may lose function over hours. These patients should be given high-dose IV dexamethasone, taken immediately to MRI, and then to the OR or radiation therapy suite. Indications for surgery include failure of radiation ther-apy, spinal instability, recurrence after radiation therapy, and the need for diagnosis in cases of unknown primary tumors. Most cases with significant bone involvement require both decom-pression and fusion. Bony fusion usually takes 2 to 3 months. Prognosis governs operative decisions. Surgery is unlikely to improve quality of life for patients with a life expectancy of 3 months or less, but it is likely to improve quality of life for patients with life expectancy of 6 months or more. Benefit for patients with 3to 6-months’ life expectancy is unclear and requires frank discussion with the patient and family. Patients who are unlikely to tolerate general anesthesia, are already completely paralyzed, or who have very radiosensitive tumors such as multiple myeloma and lymphoma, should not generally undergo surgery.Management Principles of Spinal Cord Compression in Metastatic Cancer of the Spine Spinal cord compression due to tumor burden is important to distinguish because it can, as with any other form of cord compression, cause paralysis and loss of bowel and bladder function. A randomized controlled trial demonstrated that patients with spinal cord compression from metastatic tumor have better outcomes with decompres-sive surgery and radiotherapy compared to radiotherapy alone.70 Patients with radiosensitive tumors, such as multiple myeloma and lymphoma, are excluded from this group. Another impor-tant tool in assessing these patients is the SINS (Spinal Instabil-ity Neoplastic Score). This scale grades the utility of operative intervention in metastatic cancer to the spine on the basis of pain, deformity, location, type of bone lesion, integrity of verte-bral body, and posterior element involvement.71Primary Tumors Hemangiomas are benign tumors found in 10% of people at autopsy. They occur in the vertebral bodies of the thoracolumbar spine and are frequently asymptomatic. They are often vascular and may hemorrhage, causing pain or neurologic deficit. Large hemangiomas can destabilize the spine and predispose to fracture. Osteoblastic lesions include osteoid osteoma and osteoblastoma. The latter tends to be larger and more destructive. Aneurysmal bone cysts are nonneoplastic, expansile, lytic lesions containing thin-walled blood cavities that usually occur in the lamina or spinous processes of the cer-vicothoracic spine. They may cause pain or sufficiently weaken the bone to cause a fracture. Cancers arising primarily in the bony spine include Ewing’s sarcoma, osteosarcoma, chondro-sarcoma, and plasmacytoma.Intradural Extramedullary Tumors Intradural extramed-ullary tumors constitute approximately 40% of spinal tumors and arise from the meninges or nerve root elements. They may compress the spinal cord, causing myelopathy, or the nerve roots, causing radiculopathy. The most common intradural extramedullary tumors are typically benign, slow growing, and well circumscribed. Rare benign epidural masses include arach-noid cysts, dermoids, and epidermoids. Rare malignant epidural tumors include metastases and high-grade gliomas, or “drop” metastases from posterior fossa gliomas.Meningioma Meningiomas arise from the arachnoidea mater. They appear to be dural based and enhance on MRI. An enhanc-ing “dural tail” may be seen. They occur most commonly in the thoracic spine (Fig. 42-26) but also arise in the cervical and lumbar regions. Some spinal meningiomas grow into the Figure 42-26. T2-weighted sagittal magnetic resonance imaging of the midthoracic spine demonstrating a well-encapsulated tumor arising from the dura posteriorly and compressing the spinal cord. Arrowhead points to dorsal location of the mass. The patient pre-sented with worsening gait and lower extremity spasticity. Pathol-ogy demonstrated meningioma.Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   186001/03/19   7:17 PM 1861NEUROSURGERYCHAPTER 42epidural space. Growth causes cord compression and progres-sive myelopathy with hyperreflexia, spasticity, and gait difficul-ties. Surgical excision is the treatment of choice. The surgeon often finds a clean margin between the tumor, dura, and spinal cord, allowing en bloc resection without damage to the cord.Schwannoma Schwannomas are derived from peripheral nerve sheath Schwann cells. They are benign, encapsulated tumors that rarely undergo malignant degeneration. While two-thirds are entirely intradural, one-sixth are entirely extradural, and one-sixth have a classic “dumbbell” shape from intradural and extra-dural components. Symptoms result from radiculopathy, often presenting as pain or myelopathy. Symptomatic lesions should be surgically resected. The parent nerve root usually can be pre-served. Patients with multiple schwannomas likely have NF2. In these patients, a careful neurologic examination is needed to determine which lesions are symptomatic and require resection.Neurofibroma In contrast to schwannomas, neurofibromas tend to appear more fusiform and to grow within the parent nerve, rather than forming an encapsulated mass branching off the nerve. Neurofibromas are benign but not encapsulated. They present similarly to schwannomas, and the two may be difficult to differentiate on imaging. Salvage of the parent nerve is more challenging with neurofibromas. To improve the likelihood of total resection, thoracic and high cervical nerve roots may be sacrificed with minimal deficit. Patients with multiple neurofi-bromas likely have NF1, also known as von Recklinghausen’s neurofibromatosis. Resection for symptomatic lesions should be offered.Intramedullary Tumors. Intramedullary tumors constitute approximately 5% of spinal tumors. They arise from within the parenchyma of the spinal cord. Common presenting symptoms are local dysesthesia, burning pain, radicular pain, sensory loss, weakness, or sphincter dysfunction. Patients with such symp-toms should undergo MRI of the entire spine with and without enhancement.Ependymoma Ependymomas are the most common intramed-ullary tumors in adults. There are several histologic variants. The myxopapillary type occurs in the conus medullaris or the filum terminale in the lumbar region and has the best progno-sis after resection. The cellular type occurs more frequently in the cervical cord. Many spinal ependymomas have cystic areas and may contain hemorrhage. Surgical removal can improve function. A distinct tumor margin often exists, allowing safer excision. Postoperative radiation therapy after subtotal resection may prolong disease control.Astrocytoma Astrocytomas are the most common intramedul-lary tumors in children, although they also occur in adults. They may occur at all levels, although more often in the cervical cord. The tumor may interfere with the CSF-containing central canal of the spinal cord, leading to a dilated central canal, referred to as syringomyelia (syrinx). Spinal astrocytomas are usually low grade, but complete excision is rarely possible due to the nonencapsulated, infiltrative nature of the tumor. As a result, patients with astrocytomas fare worse overall than patients with ependymomas.Other Tumors. Other types of rare tumors include high-grade astrocytomas, dermoids, epidermoids, teratomas, hemangiomas, hemangioblastomas, and metastases. Patients usually present with pain. Prognosis generally depends on preoperative func-tion and the histologic characteristics of the lesion.Future DirectionsFuture directions in the neurosurgical management of brain tumors are related to improved genetic characterization of brain tumors and technological advances. Regarding the former, the recent update of the World Health Organization classification of central nervous system tumors, alluded to earlier in this chap-ter, emphasizes an integrated classification approach utilizing both histologic and molecular characteristics.72 The addition of the latter feature underscores significant advances in the genet-ics of CNS tumors, which are being translated to treatment. Immunotherapy, for example, is an active area of research in the treatment of GBM. In this approach, immune cells such as T cells and dendritic cells are leveraged to target tumor-specific tissue. These approaches will play an important role as adjuvant therapy to neurosurgical approaches.Recent advances in neurosurgical technology are being used to address previous operative limitations. Intraoperative fluorescein is being studied as a means of marking abnor-mal tissue that appears grossly normal in order to maximize resection and minimize recurrence. Indications for SRS are expanding and provide a noninvasive option that can be used as monotherapy or as supplemental therapy to operative inter-vention. Moreover, new minimally invasive techniques, such as MRI-guided laser interstitial thermal therapy (MRgLITT), are actively being studied for less morbid access to otherwise difficult-to-reach tumors.SPINE: BASIC CONCEPTSThe spine is a complex structure and is subject to an extensive array of pathologic processes, including degeneration, inflam-mation, infection, neoplasia, and trauma. Discussions of spine trauma, tumor, and infection are addressed separately in this chapter in the “Infection—Spine,” “Spinal Tumors,” and “Spine Trauma” sections. General concepts, common patterns of dis-ease, and basic operative interventions are presented here.The spine consists of a series of stacked vertebrae, inter-vening discs, and longitudinal ligaments. The vertebrae consist of the vertebral body anteriorly and the pedicles, articular facets, laminae, and spinous processes posteriorly. The intervertebral discs have two components. The tough, fibrous ring that runs around the outer diameter of the two adjacent vertebral bodies is known as the annulus fibrosus. The spongy material inside the ring of the annulus is known as the nucleus pulposus. The annu-lus and the nucleus provide a cushion between adjacent verte-bral bodies, absorb forces transmitted to the spine, and allow some movement between the vertebral bodies. The ligaments stabilize the spine by limiting the motion of adjacent vertebrae.Stability and neural compression are the two concepts crit-ical to understanding the mechanics and pathologic processes affecting the spine.StabilityThe spinal column is the principal structural component of the axial spine, and it must bear significant loads. The vertebrae increase in size from the top to the bottom of the spine, cor-relating with the increased total loads that the more caudal ele-ments must bear. The cervical spine is the most mobile. Cervical stability depends greatly on the integrity of the ligaments that run from level to level. The thoracic spine is the least mobile, due to the stabilizing effect of the rib cage. The lumbar spine has relatively massive vertebrae, supports heavy loads, and has Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   186101/03/19   7:17 PM 1862SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIintermediate mobility. The sacral spine is fused together and has no intrinsic mobility. The load borne by the lumbar spine is transmitted to the sacrum, and then the pelvis through the sacro-iliac joints. The coccyx is the most inferior segment of the spine and has no significant contribution to load bearing or mobility.A stable spine is one that can bear normally experienced forces resulting from body mass, movement, and muscle con-traction, while maintaining normal structure and alignment. An unstable spine will shift or sublux under these forces. The determinants of spinal stability vary throughout the cervical, thoracic, and lumbar portions. In elementary form, stability depends on the structural integrity of the hard, bony elements of the vertebral column, as well as the tensile integrity and security of the supporting ligamentous attachments. Plain X-rays and  CT scans are sensitive for detecting bony defects such as frac-tures or subluxation, while MRI better detects disruptions of the soft tissues, including ligaments and intervertebral discs. Specific patterns of abnormalities seen on imaging studies may suggest or diagnose spinal instability.A common form of nontraumatic spinal instability is lum-bar spondylolisthesis, which is typically a forward slippage of a lumbar vertebra relative to the lower vertebra on which it rests. This results from congenital or degenerative disruption of the pars interarticularis, the critical bridge of bone that spans adja-cent facet joints. In the setting of a pars defect, there is no solid bony connection between the adjacent vertebrae. The spine is unstable and anterior listhesis (slippage) may result. Patients typically present with severe low back pain that is exacerbated with movement and load bearing (mechanical low back pain). Radiculopathy in this setting indicates neuroforaminal compres-sion. Figure 42-27 demonstrates an L4 and L5 spondylolisthesis.Neural CompressionBesides providing a stable, central element of the body’s support structure, the spine also protects the spinal cord and nerve roots as they pass through the neural foramina to form the peripheral nervous system. In a healthy spine, the spinal cord and nerve roots are suspended in CSF, free of mechanical compression. Patho-logic processes that can lead to CSF space impingement and neural compression include: hypertrophic degenerative changes in the intervertebral discs and facet joints, expansion of epidural masses such as tumors or abscesses, and subluxation (i.e., slip-page) of adjacent vertebral bodies. Subluxation may be due to trauma that exceeds the spine’s load-bearing capabilities and leads to structural failure, or chronic structural degradation by degenerative disease, infection, or tumor. Subluxation reduces the cross-sectional area of the central canal and the neural foramina (see Fig. 42-10B). Reduced central canal area can lead to myelop-athy. Reduced neural foraminal area can lead to radiculopathy.Myelopathy. Compression of the spinal cord can cause distur-bance of function known as myelopathy. This dysfunction may be secondary to the direct effects of compression, cord isch-emia due to reduced perfusion, or pathologic changes due to repeated cord trauma. These mechanisms lead to demyelination of the corticospinal tracts, which are long descending motor tracts. Corticospinal tract damage leads to upper motor neuron signs and symptoms, including hyperreflexia, spasticity, and weakness. These mechanisms also cause damage to the dorsal columns, which carry ascending proprioception, vibration, and two-point discrimination information. Loss of proprioception makes fine motor tasks and ambulation difficult.Radiculopathy. Compression of the nerve roots causes distur-bance of root function, known as radiculopathy. Characteristic features of radiculopathy include lower motor neuron signs and symptoms (hyporeflexia, atrophy, and weakness) and sensory dis-turbances such as numbness or tingling sensations (paresthesias), burning sensations (dysesthesias), and shooting (radicular) pain. Myelopathy and radiculopathy often present together in diseases that involve the central canal and the neural foramina. This com-bination can lead to lower motor neuron dysfunction at the level of disease, and upper motor neuron dysfunction below that level.Patterns of DiseaseCervical Radiculopathy. The cervical nerve roots exit the central canal above the pedicle of the same-numbered verte-bra and at the level of the higher adjacent intervertebral disc. For example, the C6 nerve root passes above the C6 pedicle at the level of the C5–C6 discs. The cervical nerve roots may be compressed acutely by disc herniation, or chronically by hypertrophic degenerative changes of the discs, facets, and liga-ments. Table 42-6 summarizes the effects of various disc her-niations. Most patients with acute disc herniations will improve without surgery. NSAIDs or cervical traction may help alle-viate symptoms. Patients whose symptoms do not resolve or who have significant weakness should undergo decompressive  surgery. The two main options for nerve root decompression are anterior cervical discectomy and fusion (ACDF) and posterior cervical foraminotomy (keyhole foraminotomy). ACDF allows more direct access to and removal of the pathology (anterior to the nerve root). However, the procedure requires fusion because discectomy causes a collapse of the interbody space and instabil-ity will likely occur. Figure 42-28 demonstrates a C6–C7 ACDF with the typical interposed graft and plating system. Keyhole foraminotomy allows for decompression without requiring Figure 42-27. Lateral lumbar spine X-ray demonstrates a 25% anterior slippage of L4 on L5 due to a defect in the L4 pars interar-ticularis. This is called spondylolisthesis.Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   186201/03/19   7:17 PM 1863NEUROSURGERYCHAPTER 42Table 42-6Cervical disc herniations and symptoms by levelLEVELFREQUENCY (%)ROOT INJUREDREFLEXWEAKNESSNUMBNESSC4–C52C5—DeltoidShoulderC5–C619C6BicepsBiceps brachiiThumbC6–C769C7TricepsWrist extensors (wrist drop)Second and third digitsC7–T110C8—Hand intrinsicsFourth and fifth digitsAdapted with permission from Greenberg MS. Handbook of Neurosurgery, 7th ed. New York, NY: Thieme; 2010.BAFigure 42-28. A. Anteroposterior cervical spine X-ray showing the position of an anterior cervical plate used for stabilization after C6–C7 discectomy. Patient presented with right triceps weakness and dysesthesias in the right fifth digit. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a right paracentral C6–C7 herniated disc compressing the exiting C7 nerve root. B. Lateral cervical spine X-ray of the same patient clearly demonstrates the position of the plate and screws. The allograft bone spacer placed in the drilled-out disc space is also apparent.fusion, but it is less effective for removing centrally located canal pathology.Cervical Spondylotic Myelopathy. The term spondylosis refers to diffuse degenerative and hypertrophic changes of the discs, intervertebral joints, and ligaments, which collectively result in spinal stenosis. Spinal cord dysfunction (myelopathy) due to cord compression from cervical spinal degenerative dis-ease is therefore referred to as cervical spondylotic myelopathy (CSM). Classically CSM presents with spasticity and hyper-reflexia due to corticospinal tract dysfunction, upper extremity weakness and atrophy from degeneration of the motor neu-rons in the anterior horns of the spinal gray matter, and loss of lower extremity proprioception due to dorsal column injury.  Figure 42-29 demonstrates typical findings. Some patients com-plain of difficulty buttoning shirts, using utensils, and ambulating. Spondylosis is usually diffuse, so the usual treatment for CSM is multilevel (usually C3–C7) cervical laminectomy, although patients with disease localized over one to three levels may be can-didates for anterior decompression and fusion. Fig. 42-30 demon-strates the postoperative appearance of a vertebral corpectomy and fusion for CSM. Thorough cervical laminectomy decompresses the cord posteriorly. Patients often have slow recovery due to the extensive chronic changes in the cervical cord and may benefit from rehabilitation programs. The other disease that classically presents with combined upper and lower motor neuron symp-toms is amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Care must be taken Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   186301/03/19   7:17 PM 1864SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIto avoid offering cervical laminectomy to a patient with undi-agnosed ALS. Two findings help differentiate CSM from ALS: cranial nerve dysfunction such as dysphagia (not typically caused by cervical spine disease) and sensory disturbance (not found  in ALS).Thoracic Disc Herniation. Thoracic disc herniation accounts for <1% of herniated discs. A patient may present with radicular pain or sensorimotor changes in the lower extremities due to cord compression. A posterior approach via midline incision and lami-nectomy should be avoided because of the high incidence of cord injury from manipulation and retraction. Anterior approaches via thoracotomy minimize risk to the cord and allow excellent access to the disc. The radicular arteries running from the aorta to the thoracic cord should be spared, when possible, to avoid ischemia. Alternatively, a posterolateral approach is possible via resection of the rib head and facet joint. Finally, a transpedicular approach may be attempted for lateral disc herniations.73Lumbar Radiculopathy. Lumbar nerve roots exit the thecal sac, pass over the higher adjacent disc space, and exit the canal under the pedicle of the same-numbered vertebra. Therefore, the L5 nerve root passes over the L4–L5 disc space and exits under the L5 pedicle (Fig. 42-31). Lumbar discs may herniate with or without a history of trauma or straining. Normally they cause lancinating (radicular) pain down the leg (Table 42-7). Most acute herniated lumbar discs improve symptomatically without surgery. Surgery is indicated for symptoms persisting more than 6 to 8 weeks, progressive motor deficit (e.g., foot drop), or for patients with incapacitating pain not manage-able with analgesics. A recent randomized control trial (Spine Patients Outcome Research Trial [SPORT])74 did not observe significant differences between patients randomized to undergo surgery vs. conservative management when using an intent-to-treat analysis. Because of the high amount of bi-directional cross-over between the surgery and conservative group, a sub-sequent reanalysis of the data as observational cohort analysis, demonstrated improved functional outcomes in terms of pain and physical function, more so at 3 months than at 2 years.74Discectomy is performed using a midline incision, partial removal of the overlying laminae (hemilaminectomy or lami-notomy), identification of the thecal sac and nerve root, and extraction of disc fragments. Free-floating disc fragments may be found. Often, however, the herniated disc material is still contained within the annulus, requiring incision of the poste-rior longitudinal ligament and curettage of the disc space. After lumbar discectomy, approximately two-thirds of patients will have complete relief of pain, and up to 85% will have significant improvement.Neurogenic Claudication. Neurogenic claudication is char-acterized by low back and leg pain that occurs while walking and is relieved by stopping, leaning forward, or sitting. It is normally caused by degenerative lumbar stenosis causing com-pression of the cauda equina. Neurogenic claudication must be distinguished from vascular claudication, which tends to resolve quickly with cessation of walking. There is typically no need to change position, and the pain follows a stocking distribution rather than a dermatomal distribution. Pallor and coldness of the feet, and normal neurologic examination are also typical, though diabetic patients may present a challenge with microvascular Figure 42-29. T2-weighted sagittal magnetic resonance imaging of the cervical spine showing multilevel degenerative changes caus-ing spinal stenosis that is worst at C5–C6. Note the bright signal within the cord at that level, consistent with myelopathy.Figure 42-30. Lateral cervical spine X-ray status post C5 corpec-tomy for cervical spondylotic myelopathy. This involves removal of the C4–C5 disc, C5 vertebral body, and C5–C6 disc, decom-pressing at two levels. A bone strut is visible bridging C4 to C6. The plate and screws stabilize the segments.Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   186401/03/19   7:17 PM 1865NEUROSURGERYCHAPTER 42neuropathy. Patients with neurogenic claudication have a slowly progressive course and may be surgical candidates when their pain interferes with their lifestyle. The usual surgery is an L3 to L5 lumbar laminectomy to decompress the nerve roots. A recent randomized control trial did not observe a significant difference in outcomes between surgical and conservative management of lumbar stenosis at 1 year.75 Thus, surgical management of lum-bar stenosis should be reserved for patients that do not improve with physical therapy.Cauda Equina Syndrome. Cauda equina syndrome is due to compression of the cauda equina and may result from massive disc herniation, EDH, epidural abscess, tumor, or subluxation from trauma. Patients with cauda equina compression often present with urinary retention, saddle anesthesia, or progressing leg weakness. Saddle anesthesia is numbness in the perineum, genitals, buttocks, and upper inner thighs. Patients with sus-pected cauda equina syndrome should undergo immediate MRI of the lumbar spine to evaluate for a surgical lesion. Mass lesions should be removed urgently via laminectomy to preserve sphincter function and ambulation.Spine Fusion SurgeryFusion surgery is often required for patients with spinal instabil-ity resulting from disease, surgical intervention, or both. Fusion procedures lock adjacent vertebrae together. Fusion occurs when the body forms a solid mass of bone incorporating the adjacent vertebrae, eliminating normal intervertebral move-ment. Stabilization and immobilization promote bony fusion. Internal instrumentation and external orthoses are often used to stabilize and immobilize the fused spinal segments.Spinal InstrumentationInternal fixation devices for spinal segmental immobilization have been developed for all levels of the spine. Most spinal instrumentation constructs have two elements. The first element is a device that solidly attaches to the vertebral bodies. Options include wires wrapped around laminae or spi-nous processes, hooks placed under the lamina or around the pedicles, or screws placed in the pedicles or the vertebral bodies. The second element is a device that traverses vertebral seg-ments. Options include rods and plates that lock directly to the wires, hooks, or screws at each vertebral level. Spinal instru-mentation devices are available for anterior and posterior fusion in the cervical, thoracic, and lumbar regions. Most modern spi-nal instrumentation devices are made of titanium to minimize problems with future MRI scanning (Fig. 42-32). All spinal instrumentation constructs will eventually fail by loosening or breaking if bony fusion does not occur.6ABFigure 42-31. A. T2-weighted sagittal magnetic resonance imaging shows an L5–S1 disc herniation causing significant canal compromise and displacement of nerve roots. B. T2-weighted axial magnetic resonance imaging of the same patient shows the large left paracentral disc herniation at L5–S1. Arrowheads delineate the extent of the herniation. The arrow indicates the right S1 nerve root passing through free of compression. The left S1 nerve root is under severe compression and is not seen.Table 42-7Lumbar disc herniations and symptoms by levelLEVELFREQUENCY (%)ROOT INJUREDREFLEXWEAKNESSNUMBNESSL3–L45L4PatellarQuadricepsAnterior thighL4–L545L5—Tibialis anterior (foot drop)Great toeL5–S150S1AchillesGastrocnemiusLateral footAdapted with permission from Greenberg MS. Handbook of Neurosurgery, 7th ed. New York, NY: Thieme; 2010.Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   186501/03/19   7:17 PM 1866SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 42-32. A. Lateral lumbar spine X-ray showing pedicle screws and connecting rods used to stabilize L4 with respect to L5. This instrumentation was placed as part of a fusion operation to stabilize progressive L4–L5 spondylolisthesis with intractable low back pain. B. Anteroposterior lumbar spine X-ray showing L3 to L5 instrumentation with pedicle screws and connecting rods. The patient had previously sustained an L4 burst fracture. Note the sig-nificant loss of height of the L4 body compared to adjacent levels. The small row of staples to the right delineates the incision over the iliac crest used to harvest cancellous bone as a nonstructural osteoinductive autograft fusion designed to induce formation of a solid bone bridge from L3 to L5 (arthrodesis).ArthrodesisArthrodesis refers to the obliteration of motion or instability by incorporating the relevant components into a solid mass of bone. Arthrodesis must occur in any fused segment to have long-term stability. Failure of arthrodesis results in failed fusion, often in the form of a fibrous nonunion. The rates of successful fusion are higher in the cervical spine than the lum-bar spine. Arthrodesis requires ingrowth of new bone formed by the patient’s osteoblasts across the unstable defect. Insert-ing graft material, such as autograft or allograft, into the defect provides a bridge for osteoblasts and promotes fusion. The term autograft refers to the patient’s own bone, often harvested from the iliac crest. Iliac crest bone graft is a source of both cortical and cancellous bone. Cortical bone provides structural support, while cancellous bone provides a matrix for bony ingrowth. The term allograft refers to sterilized bone from human tissue banks. Allografts also may be cortical, cancellous, or both. Allograft lacks the array of osteoinductive endogenous compounds intrinsic to autograft, although supplemental products such as demineralized bone matrix paste can be added to encourage new bone formation. Other techniques for increasing the rates of suc-cessful fusion are being developed, including the integration of osteoinductive bone morphogenetic proteins, known as BMPs, into the fusion constructs.Dynamic stabilization refers to the creation of spinal sta-bility without achieving a bony fusion. The concept applies to both cervical and lumbar motion segments. Artificial lumbar and cervical disc replacement therapies are recent developments in degenerative spine disease that address this concept. How-ever, their use is limited to very select cases. Another motion preservation technique that may hold promise is segmental “soft” stabilization.77 In cases of degenerative spondylolisthe-sis, such systems in the lumbar spine allow for decompressive laminectomy without increasing slippage. In theory, adjacent level facets and discs are spared the stresses of a neighboring bony fusion moment arm.PERIPHERAL NERVECommon pathologic processes that compromise function of the peripheral nervous system include mechanical compression, ischemia, inflammation, and neoplasia.Peripheral Nerve TumorsMost peripheral nerve tumors are benign and grow slowly. Significant pain increases the likelihood that the patient has a malignant tumor. Treatment for peripheral nerve tumors is sur-gical resection to establish diagnosis and evaluate for signs of malignancy. These tumors have various degrees of involvement with the parent nerve. Some can be resected with minimal or no damage to the nerve. Tumors that grow within the nerve often contain functioning fascicles. Total excision of these tumors requires sacrifice of the parent nerve. The choice of subtotal resection, nerve preservation, and observation, vs. total resec-tion with nerve sacrifice depends on tumor histology and the function of the parent nerve.Schwannoma. Schwannomas are the most common peripheral nerve tumors, also referred to as neurilemomas or neurinomas. Most occur in the third decade of life. These benign tumors arise from Schwann cells, which form myelin in peripheral nerves. The most characteristic presentation is a mass lesion with point tenderness and shooting pains on direct palpation. Spontaneous ABBrunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   186601/03/19   7:17 PM 1867NEUROSURGERYCHAPTER 42or continuous pain suggests malignancy. Schwannomas tend to grow slowly and eccentrically on parent nerves. The eccentric location and discrete encapsulated nature of these tumors often allow total resection without significant damage to the parent nerve. Subtotal resection and observation is reasonable for schwannomas entwined in important nerves, as the incidence of malignant transformation is extremely low.Neurofibroma. Neurofibromas arise within the nerve and tend to be fusiform masses, unlike schwannomas, which tend to grow out of the nerve. Neurofibromas often present as a mass that is tender to palpation. They usually lack the shooting pains char-acteristic of schwannomas. Neurofibromas are often difficult to resect completely without sacrifice of the parent nerve. Neuro-fibromas have a higher incidence of malignant transformation; therefore, patients with known residual tumors require close observation. Patients with NF1 often have multiple neurofibro-mas. These patients should be offered resection for symptomatic tumors. Risk of malignant degeneration is up to 10%. Malignant neurofibromas have the histologic characteristics of sarcoma.Malignant Nerve Sheath Tumors. Malignant nerve sheath tumors include solitary sarcomas, degenerated neurofibromas, and neuroepitheliomas. Patients with malignant peripheral nerve tumors typically complain of constant pain, rather than pain only on palpation, and are more likely to have motor and sensory deficits in the distribution of the parent nerve. Treat-ment for these tumors is radical excision. This often requires sacrifice of the parent nerve. Invasion of nearby soft tissues may occur and necessitate wide resection or amputation in an attempt to prevent systemic metastasis.Entrapment NeuropathiesEntrapment neuropathy presents as neurologic dysfunction in nerves passing through a pathologically small, fixed space. Nerve dysfunction may result directly from chronic, repetitive pressure on the nerve, or from ischemic damage due to impaired perfusion.77 Entrapment causing dysfunction of nerve signaling may be associated with numbness, paresthesias, weakness, or muscle atrophy. The two most common sites of entrapment neu-ropathy are the ulnar nerve at the medial aspect of the elbow and the median nerve at the wrist. Usually EMG/NCS demon-strate slowing across the entrapped segment of nerve. Mechani-cal peripheral nerve disorders resulting from trauma (brachial plexus disruption, radial nerve damage from humerus fractures, and common peroneal nerve crush injuries) are discussed in the section “Trauma.”Ulnar Neuropathy. The ulnar nerve has contributions from the C7, C8, and T1 nerve roots, arises from the medial cord of the brachial plexus, and supplies most of the intrinsic hand mus-cles (interossei and third and fourth lumbricals) and sensation to the fourth and fifth digits. It passes posteriorly to the medial epicondyle at the elbow in the condylar groove. This segment is superficial and subject to external compression and repeti-tive minor impacts. Patients with ulnar entrapment at the elbow present with numbness and tingling in the medial palm, as well as the fourth and fifth digits. Motor deficits include weakness and wasting of the intrinsic hand muscles. Treatment for symp-tomatic ulnar entrapment neuropathy is surgical exploration and incision of the fibrous aponeurotic arch that overlies the nerve. A 6-cm curvilinear incision centered between the medial epi-condyle and the olecranon allows exploration of up to 10 cm of nerve and lysis of compressive tissues.Carpal Tunnel Syndrome. The median nerve has contribu-tions from the C5 to T1 nerve roots, arises from the medial and lateral cords of the brachial plexus, and supplies the muscles of wrist and finger flexion and sensation to the palmar aspect of the first, second, and third digits. The median nerve passes through the carpal tunnel in the wrist, lying superficial to the four deep and four superficial flexor tendons. The transverse carpal liga-ment is a tough, fibrous band that forms the roof of the carpal tunnel. The ligament attaches to the pisiform and hamate medi-ally and the trapezium and scaphoid laterally. Patients complain of numbness and tingling in the supplied digits, clumsiness, and worsening with sleep or repetitive wrist movement. Patients may notice wasting of the thenar eminence. Treatment for symptomatic carpal tunnel syndrome unresponsive to splinting, analgesics, and rest is surgical division of the flexor retinacu-lum. This often provides prompt relief of pain symptoms and slow recovery of numbness and strength.Autoimmune and Inflammatory DisordersThese are not surgical diseases, but they merit brief mention as they are included in the differential diagnosis for new-onset weakness. Their characteristic presentations help distinguish them from weakness due to structural lesions.Guillain-Barré Syndrome. Guillain-Barré syndrome is an acute inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculopathy often occurring after viral infection, surgery, inoculations, or myco-plasma infections. Patients classically present with weakness ascending from the legs to the body, arms, and even cranial nerves. Symptoms usually progress over 2 to 4 weeks and then resolve. Care is supportive. Respiratory weakness may require ventilatory support.Myasthenia Gravis. Myasthenia gravis is an autoimmune process in which antibodies form to the acetylcholine recep-tors of muscles, leading to fluctuating weakness. Most patients have either thymic hyperplasia or thymoma. The most common symptoms are diplopia, ptosis, dysarthria, and dysphagia. More severe cases have limb or respiratory involvement. Weakness worsens with repetitive movement. Treatment is with acetylcho-linesterase inhibitors and possible thymectomy.Eaton-Lambert Syndrome. Eaton-Lambert syndrome is an autoimmune process with antibodies to the presynaptic calcium channels. This is a paraneoplastic syndrome most commonly associated with oat cell carcinoma. Patients have weakness of proximal limb muscles that improves with repetitive movement. This diagnosis must prompt oncologic evaluation.INFECTIONCNS infections of interest to neurosurgeons include those that cause focal neurologic deficit due to mass effect, require surgi-cal aspiration or drainage because antibiotic therapy alone is insufficient, cause mechanical instability of the spine, or occur after neurosurgical procedures.CranialOsteomyelitis. The skull is highly vascular and resistant to infections. Osteomyelitis of the skull may develop by contigu-ous spread from pyogenic sinus disease or from contamination by penetrating trauma. Staphylococcus aureus and S epidermidis  are the most frequent causative organisms. Patients usually present with redness, swelling, and pain. Contrast head CT aids 7Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   186701/03/19   7:17 PM 1868SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIdiagnosis and shows the extent of involved bone, along with associated abscesses or empyema. Osteomyelitis treatment entails surgical debridement of involved bone followed by  2 to 4 months of antibiotics. Craniotomy wound infections are a special concern because performing a craniotomy creates a devascularized free bone flap susceptible to infection and not penetrated by antibiotics. These wounds must be debrided and the bone flaps removed and discarded. Subsequent care involves appropriate antibiotic therapy, observation for signs of recurrent infection off antibiotics, and return to the OR for titanium or methylmethacrylate cranioplasty 6 to 12 months later.Subdural Empyema. Subdural empyema is a rapidly progres-sive pyogenic infection. The subdural space lacks significant barriers to the spread of the infection, such as compartmental-ization or septations. Subdural empyemas usually occur over the cerebral convexities. Potential infectious sources include sinus disease, penetrating trauma, and otitis. Streptococci and staphylococci are the most frequent sources. Presenting symp-toms include fever, headache, neck stiffness, seizures, or focal neurologic deficit. Neurologic deficit results from inflammation of cortical blood vessels, leading to thrombosis and stroke. The most common deficit is contralateral hemiparesis. Patients with suggestive symptoms should undergo rapid contrast CT scan. LP frequently fails to yield the offending organism and risks herniation due to mass effect. Typical treatment is wide hemi-craniectomy, dural opening, and lavage. The pus may be thick or septated, making burr hole drainage or small craniotomy insufficient. Patients then require 1 to 2 months of antibiotics. Subdural empyema has 10% to 20% mortality risk and common chronic sequelae, including development of a seizure disorder and residual hemiparesis. However, many patients do make a good recovery.Brain Abscess. Brain abscess is encapsulated infection within the brain parenchyma. It may spread hematogenously in patients with endocarditis or intracardiac or intrapulmonary right-to-left shunts, by migration from the sinuses or ear, or via direct seed-ing by penetrating trauma. Disorganized cerebritis often pre-cedes formation of the organized, walled-off abscess. Patients may present with nonspecific symptoms such as headache, nau-sea, or lethargy, or with focal neurologic deficit such as hemi-paresis. Alternatively, patients may present in extremis if the abscess ruptures into the ventricular system. Abscesses appear as well-demarcated, ring-enhancing, thin-walled lesions on  CT scan and MRI, and often have associated edema and mass effect. Patients require antibiotic therapy after needle aspira-tion or surgical evacuation. Antibiotic therapy without surgical evacuation may be considered for patients with small, multiple, or critically located abscesses. Abscesses that are large, cause mass effect, decreased mental status, or that fail to decrease in size after 1 week of antibiotics, should be evacuated. Nonsurgical  management still requires aspiration or biopsy specimen for organism culture and sensitivities. Blood and CSF cultures rarely give definitive diagnosis. Removal of an encapsulated abscess significantly shortens the length of antibiotic therapy required to eliminate all organisms. Common chronic sequelae after suc-cessful treatment include seizures or focal neurologic deficit.SpinePyogenic Vertebral Osteomyelitis. Pyogenic vertebral osteomyelitis is a destructive bacterial infection of the vertebrae, usually of the vertebral body. Vertebral osteomyelitis frequently results from hematogenous spread of distant disease, but may occur as an extension of adjacent disease, such as psoas abscess or perinephric abscess. S aureus and Enterobacter spp. are the most frequent etiologic organisms. Patients usually present with fever and back pain. Diabetics, IV drug abusers, and dialysis patients have increased incidence of vertebral osteomyelitis. Epidural extension may lead to compression of the spinal cord or nerve roots with resultant neurologic deficit. Osteomyelitis presents a lytic picture on imaging and must be distinguished from neoplastic disease. Adjacent intervertebral disc involve-ment occurs frequently with pyogenic osteomyelitis, but rarely with neoplasia. Plain films and CT help assess the extent of bony destruction or deformity such as kyphosis. MRI shows adjacent soft tissue or epidural disease. Most cases can be treated suc-cessfully with antibiotics alone, although the organism must be isolated to steer antibiotic choice. Blood cultures may be positive. Surgical intervention may be required for debridement when antibiotics alone fail, or for stabilization and fusion in the setting of instability and deformity.Tuberculous Vertebral Osteomyelitis. Tuberculous verte-bral osteomyelitis, also known as Pott’s disease, occurs most commonly in underdeveloped countries and in the immuno-compromised. Several features differentiate tuberculous osteo-myelitis from bacterial osteomyelitis. The infection is indolent and symptoms often progress slowly over months. Tuberculosis rarely involves the intervertebral disc. The involved bodies may have sclerotic rather than lytic changes. Multiple nonadjacent vertebrae may be involved. The upper lumbar and lower tho-racic vertebrae are most commonly affected. Diagnosis requires documentation of acid-fast bacilli. Treatment involves long-term antimycobacterial drugs. Patients with spinal instability or neural compression from epidural inflammatory tissue should undergo debridement and fusion as needed.Discitis. Primary infection of the intervertebral disc space, or discitis, is most commonly secondary to postoperative infec-tions. Spontaneous discitis occurs more commonly in children. S aureus and S epidermidis account for most cases. The pri-mary symptom is back pain. Other signs and symptoms include radicular pain, fevers, paraspinal muscle spasm, and localized tenderness to palpation. Many cases will resolve without anti-biotics, which generally are given for positive blood or biopsy specimen cultures or persistent constitutional symptoms. Most patients will have spontaneous fusion across the involved disc and do not need debridement or fusion.Epidural Abscess. Epidural abscesses may arise from or spread to the adjacent bone or disc, so distinguishing between vertebral osteomyelitis or discitis and a spinal epidural abscess may be difficult. The most common presenting signs and symp-toms are back pain, fever, and tenderness to palpation of the spine. The most significant risk of epidural abscess is weakness progressing to paralysis due to spinal cord or nerve root dam-age. Cord and root damage may be due to direct compression or to inflammatory thrombosis resulting in venous infarction.  S aureus and Streptococcus spp. are the most common organisms. Methicillin-resistant S aureus now constitutes a significant pro-portion of these infections, as high as 40%.78 The source may be hematogenous spread, local extension, or operative contamina-tion. MRI best demonstrates the epidural space and degree of neural compromise. Patients with spinal epidural abscess and neurologic compromise should undergo surgical debridement for decompression and diagnosis, followed by culture-directed Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   186801/03/19   7:17 PM 1869NEUROSURGERYCHAPTER 42antibiotic therapy. Relative contraindications to surgery include prohibitive comorbidities or total lack of neurologic function below the involved level. Patients with no neurologic deficits and an identified organism may be treated with antibiotics alone and very close observation. However, this management strat-egy remains somewhat controversial because these patients can undergo rapid and irreversible neurologic decline. Most epidural abscesses can be accessed via laminectomy without fusion. Col-lections predominantly anterior to the cervical or thoracic cord may require anterior approach and fusion.FUNCTIONAL NEUROSURGERYEpilepsy SurgerySeizures result from uncontrolled neuronal electrical activity. Seizures may result from irritative lesions in the brain, such as tumors or hematomas, or from physiologic or structural abnor-malities. Seizures may involve a part of the brain (focal) or the entire brain (generalized). Focal seizures may be associated with normal consciousness (simple) or decreased conscious-ness (complex). All generalized seizures cause loss of con-sciousness. Focal seizures may secondarily generalize. Patients with multiple unprovoked seizures over time are considered to have epilepsy. The type of epilepsy depends on such factors as type of seizures, electroencephalographic (EEG) findings, associated syndromes, and identifiable etiologies. All patients with unexplained seizures (i.e., no obvious cause such as head trauma or alcohol withdrawal) require thorough neurologic evaluation, including imaging to evaluate for a mass lesion. Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) form the first line of therapy for epilepsy, initially as monotherapy, then as combination ther-apy. Epilepsy patients who have failed satisfactory trials of sev-eral AED combination regimens may be candidates for surgical intervention. Lack of seizure control or patient intolerance of the medications may constitute failure. Epilepsy surgery can decrease the frequency of seizures by resection of the electrical source of the seizures, or decrease the severity of seizures by disconnecting white matter tracts through which the abnormal electrical activity spreads. Four types of epilepsy surgery are discussed in sections that follow. Epilepsy surgery appears to be extremely underused, given the relatively low risk of the procedures, and the crippling social and economic effects of uncontrolled or partially controlled epilepsy.79 Patients with symptoms, imaging abnormalities, and EEG analysis compat-ible with a specific seizure focus are most likely to have good results from epilepsy surgery.Anterior Temporal Lobectomy. Medial temporal lobe struc-tural abnormalities can lead to complex partial seizures (CPS). Many patients with CPS have poor seizure control on medi-cations. Patients with CPS may have significant reduction in seizure frequency or cessation of seizures after resection of the anterior temporal lobe. The amygdala and the head of the hip-pocampus are removed as part of the lobectomy. Resection may be taken back approximately 4.5 cm from the temporal tip in the language-dominant hemisphere, and 6 cm from the temporal tip in the language nondominant hemisphere, with low risk of significant neurologic deficits.80 The two main risks of anterior temporal lobectomy are memory impairment and visual loss. Removal of the hippocampus in a patient with an atrophied or nonfunctional contralateral hippocampus causes a global mem-ory deficit. Interruption of the optic radiations, which carry visual signals from the contralateral superior visual quadrants of both eyes, causes a contralateral superior quadrantanopia, known as a pie in the sky field cut.Corpus Callosotomy. Patients with generalized seizures, atonic seizures associated with drop attacks, or absence sei-zures, who are found to have bilaterally coordinated patho-logic cortical discharges on EEG and who fail AED therapy, may be candidates for corpus callosotomy. The corpus cal-losum is a large white matter tract that connects the cerebral hemispheres. Loss of consciousness requires simultaneous seizure activity in both hemispheres. Focal or partial seizures may spread via the corpus callosum to the contralateral hemi-sphere, causing generalization and loss of consciousness. Divi-sion of the corpus callosum can interrupt this spread. Patients may have decreased numbers of seizures and/or fewer epi-sodes of lost consciousness. Usually only the anterior half or two-thirds of the corpus callosum is divided, as more extensive division increases the risk of disconnection syndrome. Patients with disconnection syndrome are unable to match objects in the opposite visual hemifields, to identify objects held in one hand with the other hemifield, and to write with the left hand or name objects held in the left hand (in left hemisphere–dominant patients).Hemispherectomy. Children with intractable epilepsy, struc-tural anomalies in one hemisphere, and contralateral hemiple-gia, may have improved seizure control after resection of the hemisphere (anatomic hemispherectomy) or disruption of all connections to the hemisphere (functional hemispherectomy). Functional hemispherectomy often is preferred over anatomic hemispherectomy because of the high incidence of complica-tions such as hematoma formation and ventriculoperitoneal shunt dependence associated with the latter.Vagus Nerve Stimulation. Neuromodulatory treatments like vagus nerve stimulation (VNS), approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 1997, are less invasive and offer some titratability in addition to reversibility unlike the resec-tive surgical options previously described. Since first reported in 1985, VNS has proven to be efficacious in certain patient populations for several disorders such as treatment-resistant major depressive disorder, bipolar disorder, and epilepsy. In VNS, a pulse generator is placed under the skin in the chest and is connected to the vagus nerve by an electrical lead. Chronic, intermittent VNS has been proven to be an effective option for patients suffering from medically refractory seizures who are not candidates for surgical resection. Although only a small minority of patients will be entirely seizure-free, three blinded, randomized-controlled trials have examined VNS and demon-strated significant clinical improvement compared to sham.81-83 Generally VNS is well-tolerated and safe, as device implantation is associated with a low rate of perioperative complications. Addi-tionally, the majority of side effects are stimulation-dependent and thus, reversible. For the most part, VNS is limited in its appli-cation because it can only exert its effects by altering neural activ-ity via the vagus nerve. Procedures with brain region-specificity are being investigated.Deep Brain StimulationThe following summary of deep brain stimulation (DBS) will include a review of the current FDA-approved indications, as well the expanding applications of this therapy, currently being investigated preclinically and in clinical trials. While the Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   186901/03/19   7:17 PM 1870SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IImechanism of action of DBS continues to elude our understand-ing, it is well established that administering electrical stimula-tion to a nucleus in the brain known to be involved in a given disease can disrupt the pathologic signals emanating to or from this brain region. A fine electrical lead is placed in a deep brain nucleus and connected to pulse generators placed in the chest in a manner similar to cardiac pacemakers. Connector wires travel from the generators in the subcutaneous space up the neck and in the subgaleal space in the head, to connect the pulse gen-erators to the electrical leads. Proper lead placement is accom-plished with stereotactic guidance. A frame is rigidly fixed to the patient’s head, and an MRI is obtained with the frame in place. Calculation of the coordinates of the millimeter-sized deep brain nuclei is performed in relation to the three-dimensional space defined by the fixed frame, allowing for accurate targeting of the nucleus (Fig. 42-33). Postoperatively, the pulse generators can be interrogated and adjusted with hand-held, transcutane-ous, noninvasive devices as needed for symptom control.Essential Tremor. Essential tremor is the most common movement disorder in the western world and is characterized by action tremor (4–8 Hz rhythmic oscillations) of the hands, forearms, head, and voice. Essential tremor often starts in the third or fourth decade of life and increases in frequency and amplitude with age. β-Blockers can decrease symptoms, but patients with poor medical control and significant functional impairment significantly benefit from placement of a deep brain stimulator in the contralateral ventralis intermediate nucleus of the thalamus. In properly selected patients, DBS of this region of the thalamus appears to provide robust and durable symptom control.84,85Parkinson’s Disease. Parkinson’s disease is a progressive dis-order characterized by rigidity, bradykinesia, and resting tremor, due to loss of dopamine-secreting neurons in the substantia nigra. Dopaminergic agents such as levodopa/carbidopa and anticholinergic agents such as amantadine and selegiline form the basis of medical therapy. Patients with poor medical control or significant drug side effects may benefit significantly from placement of bilateral deep brain stimulators in the subthalamic nuclei. Although the globus pallidus interna has also been a widely targeted area, the subthalamic nuclei is now the most accepted target in deep brain stimulation for Parkinson’s disease.86 Deep brain stimulation provides durable symp-tom relief with good postoperative neuropsychologic function in properly selected patients.87Recently, a large randomized controlled trial compared bilat-eral DBS (n = 121) to best medical therapy in advanced Parkin-son’s disease (n = 134).88 The DBS group did significantly better in both motor function and quality of life. While adverse events were 3.8 times more likely in the DBS group, 99% of these events had resolved by 6 months. There was a 0.8% risk of death due to the procedure, and there was no difference in risk of adverse events when comparing older (≥70 years) to younger patients (<70 years). Thus, the benefits of DBS over medical therapy are clear, especially when considering quality of life measures.Another recent randomized controlled trial focused on defining the optimal targets for DBS in Parkinson’s disease.89 While the subthalamic nucleus (STN) and the globus pallidus interna (GPi) have been successfully targeted in the past, a direct comparison of the two was lacking. In this study, 299 subjects were randomized to receive either bilateral STN or GPi stimula-tors and were evaluated for 2 years. The primary outcome was motor function, as assessed by part III of the Unified Parkin-son’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS). The study found no sig-nificant difference in motor improvement between target sites. However, a significant difference was found in a secondary outcome measuring depression. On the Beck Depression Inven-tory, the pallidal stimulation group improved slightly compared with the STN group, which actually worsened slightly. Never-theless, the actual incidence of depressive episodes requiring prolonged or new hospitalization was 2.6% and 0.7% in GPi and STN, respectively, which was not significantly different. On the other hand, the STN group was found to require less adjunctive dopaminergic pharmacotherapy than the GPi group. In terms of overall severe adverse events, there was no difference between groups. The investigators concluded that both target sites are effective and that nonmotor factors such as psychiatric symp-toms may be a consideration in DBS target selection.Dystonia. The FDA humanitarian device exemption has been made for DBS for dystonia but is limited to patients ≥7 years of age with primary dystonia, including generalized and/or seg-mental dystonia, hemidystonia, or cervical dystonia (torticollis). Dystonia is characterized by sustained muscle contractions that cause repetitive movements and involuntary postures. Cognitive function is typically spared, and pharmacological therapy is fre-quently inadequate. The positive impact of DBS on Parkinson’s and essential tremor has led neurologists and neurosurgeons to direct their attention to DBS for treatment of idiopathic focal and generalized dystonia.Although the pathophysiology of idiopathic dystonia is unclear, positron emission tomography studies have shown disturbed glucose metabolism in the GPi, suggesting secondary pathologic activation of the motor cortex. Indeed, the GPi is cur-rently considered the most efficacious target for dystonia, and controlled trials indicate approximately a 50% improvement in motor function and disability.90 Since many patients undergoing 8Figure 42-33. Fast spin echo coronal magnetic resonance imaging demonstrating position of deep brain stimulator leads in the subtha-lamic nuclei bilaterally. The electrodes appear thick and wavy due to magnetic susceptibility artifact.Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   187001/03/19   7:17 PM 1871NEUROSURGERYCHAPTER 42surgery for dystonia are children and young adults, DBS is an attractive surgical option because it can be titrated, revised, and reversed according to individual needs and growth patterns.Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder. The safety and efficacy of DBS, as well as its titratability and reversibility, that have been demonstrated for the treatment of movement disorders in the 1990s and 2000s has spawned an increasing interest and awareness of the capabilities of nonlesional surgical treatments for diseases of the brain. An obvious outgrowth of DBS for movement disorders has been the treatment of medically refrac-tory psychiatric disorders. Despite the dark history of frontal leucotomy procedures that dominated the early 20th century, nonlesional DBS for psychiatric disorders are now considered potential treatment strategies.Functional neuroimaging has implicated certain brain regions in the pathogenesis of a variety of psychiatric disorders. The FDA has approved a humanitarian device exemption for DBS targeting the ventral capsule/ventral striatum for severe obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). Recent case reports and pilot studies have reported remission in patients suffering from refractory OCD following DBS. A pilot study using a blinded, staggered-onset design found that four (66.7%) of six patients met a stringent criterion as “responders” (≥35% improvement), according to the Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale after 12 months of stimulation.91 In this study, patients did not improve during the sham phase. Adverse events were generally mild and modifiable with setting changes, and stimulation inter-ruption led to rapid yet reversible development of depressive symptoms in two cases. Thus, DBS has promise as a therapy of last resort for carefully selected cases of severe OCD.Expanding Indications of Deep Brain Stimulation. There are multiple disorders, both psychiatric and neurologic, that have exhibited significant promise as potential indications for DBS in large-scale trials. Recently, there have been reports of significant improvements in refractory depression with DBS. Lozano and colleagues performed an open label study with extended follow-up on 20 patients targeting an area within the subcallosal cin-gulate gyrus (SCG) with bilateral DBS.92 At the last follow-up visit in this study (range: 3–6 years), the average response rate was 64%, according to the Hamilton Rating Scale for Depres-sion. Of note, impairment in social functioning was improved, and no significant adverse events were reported. Because two patients died by suicide during depressive relapses, it remains unclear if DBS can only improve quality of life or significantly suppress relapses and extend life-span in this extremely delicate patient population. Of note, as seen in OCD, the ventral capsule/ventral striatum has also been targeted for depression, as well as the nucleus accumbens directly, which lies within the ventral striatum. Studies of DBS in this region report an approximate 40% to 60% response rate, and results from a recent, multicenter randomized controlled trial are pending.93DBS as a potential therapy for epilepsy targeting the ante-rior nucleus of the thalamus has been investigated in a multi-center, double-blind, randomized trial (SANTE).94 In this trial, the group receiving DBS showed a 29% greater reduction in seizure frequency in relation to the sham group in the last month of the blinded phase. Complex partial and the “most severe” seizures were significantly reduced in the cohort who had the stimulator on DBS-on group. After the blinded phase of the trial was complete, 54% of patients had a seizure reduction of at least 50%. Fourteen patients were seizure-free for at least 6 months; eight were seizure-free for at least one year, four for at least two years, and one patient for more than four years. Because of the modest benefit during the blinded phase of this trial, FDA-approval has yet to be granted to DBS for epilepsy targeting the thalamus in the United States, though approval has been given in Europe and Canada.The region-specific, neuromodulatory capabilities of DBS have inspired the open label use of this technique in many other neurologic and psychiatric disorders, including but not limited to Tourette syndrome, Huntington’s disease, and Alzheimer dis-ease. Preclinical studies of both substance abuse and obesity have also shown promise.95,96 The opportunity to model reward-seeking behaviors associated with these disorders in animals provides the ability to not only test safety but also study mecha-nisms and inform the design of future clinical trials.Trigeminal NeuralgiaTrigeminal neuralgia, also known as tic douloureux, is charac-terized by repetitive, unilateral, sharp, and lancinating pains in the distribution of, typically, the second, but sometimes third, branch of cranial nerve V, the trigeminal nerve. The patient may describe a “trigger point,” an area on the face that elicits the pain when touched. A current leading etiologic hypothesis for trigeminal neuralgia is irritation and pulsatile compression of the root entry zone of the nerve by an artery in the posterior fossa, usually a loop of the superior cerebellar artery. The pain is excruciating and can be debilitating. Medical therapy, including carbamazepine and amitriptyline, may reduce the frequency of events. Options for medically refractory cases include percuta-neous injection of glycerol into the path of the nerve, periph-eral transection of the nerve branches, SRS, and microvascular decompression (MVD).MVD involves performing a small posterior fossa crani-otomy on the side of the symptoms, retraction of the cerebellar hemisphere, and exploration of cranial nerve V. If an artery is found near the nerve, the vessel is freed of any adhesions and nonabsorbable material is placed between the nerve root and the artery. MVD remains the first definitive management option because SRS is associated with a substantial incidence of facial numbness.97,98STEREOTACTIC RADIOSURGERYThe term stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) refers to techniques that allow delivery of high-dose radiation that conforms to the shape of the target and has rapid isodose fall-off, minimiz-ing damage to adjacent neural structures. The two most common devices used for conformal SRS for intracranial lesions are the LINAC (linear accelerator) and the gamma knife. LINAC delivers a focused beam of x-ray radiation from a port that arcs part way around the patient’s head. Linear accelerators are commonly used to provide fractionated radiation for lesions outside the CNS. They are found in most radiation oncology departments. After upgrades to the software and collimators, SRS can be performed with these existing units. The gamma knife delivers 201 focused beams of gamma radiation from cobalt sources through a specially designed colander-like helmet. Gamma knife units are used only for intracranial disease and cost up to $5 million; thus, they are most appropriate in high patient–volume centers. There is ongoing debate in the literature 9Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   187101/03/19   7:17 PM 1872SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIregarding the two technologies.99-101 Both continue to evolve, allowing more precise and complex isodose conformation to complex lesions. Most lesions can be treated equally well with either technology. Lesions abutting the medulla or the spinal cord should not be treated with SRS because these structures do not tolerate the radiation dose delivered to structures within mil-limeters of the target. Also, medullary or spinal cord compres-sion can result from swelling of the lesion after the radiosurgery dose, resulting in devastating neurologic deficit.Proton beam is an evolving SRS technology that may play a specialized role in treatment of lesions where posttarget exit-ing radiation limits photon-based therapies.102 For example, the physical properties of photons cause destruction upon entry and exit from tissue, which can be particularly harmful to skull-base or clival lesions such as chordoma, in which the exiting pathway travels through the brain stem. Proton beam therapy uses accel-erated protons, which dissipate energy upon impact and do not cause additional exiting damage. Currently, there are very few centers using this technology.CyberKnife is another radiosurgery system that has neu-rosurgical application. It is a frameless, robotic, LINAC-based system that allows for targeting of spinal neoplasms with higher resolution than conventional external beam radiotherapy.103 Using imaging tracking in real time, the CyberKnife is able to adjust to breathing artifact and patient movement. The applica-tion of this technology is rapidly growing.Arteriovenous MalformationsSRS has been found to be an effective stand-alone therapy for AVMs up to 3 cm in diameter. SRS is best for lesions that are dif-ficult to access surgically due to high likelihood of postoperative neurologic deficit. However, SRS is not effective for lesions >3 cm. Effective obliteration and elimination of the risk of hemorrhage takes 2 to 3 years. Overall, there is an approximately 2% annual incidence of AVM hemorrhage,104 although one study found a 50% decrease in hemorrhage rate during the latency period before angiographic obliteration.105 Nonetheless, surgical excision remains the preferred therapeutic modality, while SRS is reserved for cases deemed very high risk for surgery due to location or patient factors.106 Some patients with large AVMs who undergo surgery will have unresectable residual lesions. In these patients, SRS may be used as an effective adjunctive therapy.Vestibular SchwannomasSRS has been introduced as a therapeutic alternative to micro-surgical resection for vestibular schwannomas up to 2.5 cm in maximum diameter. SRS provides high rates of tumor growth arrest and possible reduction in size with low rates of facial nerve palsy. Patients with functional ipsilateral preprocedure hearing may be more likely to retain functional hearing postpro-cedure than with microsurgery. The limitations of SRS include inability to treat tumors >2.5 cm, the possibility of radiation-induced malignant transformation of these benign tumors, and lack of long-term follow-up. SRS centers are accumulating experience with these tumors and accumulating data on long-term results.107,108 The indications for microsurgery and SRS will continue to evolve. Either approach should be undertaken at a high-volume center, as studies show the patient outcomes improve with increased surgeon experience.109Intracranial MetastasesPatients with solitary or multiple intracranial metastases may be treated primarily with SRS.110 Patients have improved survival after SRS compared to no treatment or WBRT, and similar sur-vival to patients undergoing total surgical resection. Patients with lesions >3 cm in diameter or evidence of ICH should undergo surgical decompression rather than SRS. Some studies show improved survival with up to seven intracranial masses. Patients with multiple intracranial masses have almost zero long-term survival, and most will die of their intracranial dis-ease. Patients with intracranial metastases live 3 to 6 months on average with medical care and WBRT. This can be extended to 9 to 16 months with SRS or surgery, depending on tumor type, age, and patient condition.111CONGENITAL AND DEVELOPMENTAL ANOMALIESDysraphismDysraphism describes defects of fusion of the neural tube involving the neural tube itself, or overlying bone or skin. Dys-raphism may occur in the spine or head. Neural tube defects are among the most common congenital abnormalities. Prenatal vitamins, especially folic acid, reduce the incidence of neural tube defects.Spina Bifida OccultaSpina bifida occulta is congenital absence of posterior vertebral elements. The spinous process is always missing, the laminae may be missing to various degrees, but the underlying neural tissues are not involved. Spina bifida occulta is found in 25% of the general population, and it is asymptomatic unless associated with other developmental abnormalities.Spina Bifida With MyelomeningoceleSpina bifida with myelomeningocele describes the congenital absence of posterior vertebral elements with protrusion of the meninges through the defect, with underlying neural structural abnormalities. Common findings include weakness and atrophy of the lower extremities, gait disturbance, urinary incontinence, constipation, and deformities of the foot. Myelomeningoceles arising from the high lumbar cord usually cause total paraly-sis and incontinence, while those arising from the sacral cord may have only clawing of the foot and partial urinary function loss. Myelomeningocele patients often have hydrocephalus and a Chiari II malformation, an abnormal downward herniation of the cerebellum and brain stem through the foramen magnum. Patients with abnormal protrusion of meninges through the bony defect without abnormalities of the underlying neural tissue have a meningocele. Most of these patients are neurologically normal.EncephaloceleHerniation of brain encased in meninges through the skull that forms an intracranial mass is referred to as encephalocele. Herniation of meninges without brain tissue is referred to as a meningocele. Most occur over the convexity of the skull. More rarely, the tissue protrudes through the skull base into the sinuses. Treatment involves excision of the herniated tissue and closure of the defect. Most patients with encephaloceles and meningoceles have impaired cognitive development. Patients with greater amounts of herniated neural tissue tend to have more severe cognitive deficits.CraniosynostosisCraniosynostosis is the abnormal early fusion of a cranial suture line with resultant restriction of skull growth in the affected area Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   187201/03/19   7:17 PM 1873NEUROSURGERYCHAPTER 42Figure 42-34. A. Axial head computed tomography scan revealing dilated ventricular system. Note dilated atria of the lateral ventricles (arrowheads) and rounded third ventricle (arrow). The large size of the ventricles and lack of transependymal flow indicate a chronic process (contrast to Fig. 42-2). The patient had normal-pressure hydrocephalus and had improved ambulation after placement of a ventriculoperitoneal shunt. B. Higher cut from same scan showing ventricular catheter in place in the frontal horn of the right lateral ventricle.ABand compensatory bulging at the other sutures. Skull growth occurs at the cranial sutures for the first 2 years of life, at the end of which the skull has achieved >90% of its eventual adult size. Fusion of the sagittal suture, or sagittal synostosis, results in a boat-shaped head, known as scaphocephaly. Unilateral coronal synostosis results in ipsilateral forehead flattening and outward deviation of the orbit, known as plagiocephaly. The contralat-eral normal forehead appears to bulge by comparison. Bilat-eral coronal synostosis results in a broad, flattened forehead, known as brachycephaly, and is often associated with maxil-lary hypoplasia and proptosis. Unilateral or bilateral lambdoid synostosis results in flattening of the occiput. Occipital flat-tening can result from abnormal suture fusion (synostosis), or from physical remolding of the skull caused by always placing the baby in the supine position for sleep (known as positional plagiocephaly). Placing the baby in the prone position or tilted onto the contralateral side may restore near-normal skull shape in most cases of lambdoid synostosis, avoiding surgery. Treat-ment for synostoses in general is surgical, involving resection of the fused suture, or more complex reconstructive techniques for severe or refractory cases.HydrocephalusExcess CSF in the brain that results in enlarged ventricles is known as hydrocephalus. CSF flows from the ventricles to the subarachnoid space and is then absorbed into the venous blood through the arachnoid granulations. Hydrocephalus may be classified as communicating or obstructive (outlined in the next two sections), and congenital or acquired. Congenital lesions associated with or causing hydrocephalus include stenosis of the cerebral aqueduct, Chiari malformation, myelomeningo-cele, and intrauterine infection. Acquired hydrocephalus may result from occlusion of arachnoid granulations by meningitis, germinal matrix hemorrhage, or SAH. CSF pathways may be occluded by adjacent tumors (Fig. 42-34).Communicating Hydrocephalus. Obstruction at the level of the arachnoid granulations constitutes communicating hydro-cephalus. This usually causes dilation of the lateral, third, and fourth ventricles equally. The most common causes in adults are meningitis and SAH. Hydrocephalus may be transient after SAH, with reestablishment of normal CSF absorption after the protein content of the CSF returns to normal and the granula-tions reopen.Obstructive Hydrocephalus. Obstruction of CSF pathways is known as obstructive hydrocephalus. Ventricles proximal to the obstruction dilate, while those distal to the obstruction remain normal in size. Typical patterns include dilation of the lateral ventricles due to a colloid cyst occluding the foramen of Monro, dilation of the lateral and third ventricles due to a tectal (midbrain) glioma or pineal region tumor occluding the cerebral aqueduct, or dilation of the lateral and third ventricles with obliteration of the fourth ventricle by an intraventricular tumor of the fourth ventricle. Obstructive hydrocephalus may present precipitously and require urgent shunting to prevent herniation.Chiari I MalformationChiari I malformation is the caudal displacement of the cer-ebellar tonsils below the foramen magnum. It may be seen as an incidental finding on MRI scans in asymptomatic patients. Symptomatic patients usually present with headache, neck pain, or symptoms of myelopathy, including numbness or weakness in the extremities. A syrinx may be associated, but the brain stem and lower cranial nerves are normal in Chiari I malfor-mations. Chiari II malformations are more severe and involve caudal displacement of the lower brain stem and stretching of the lower cranial nerves. Symptomatic patients may be treated with suboccipital craniectomy to remove the posterior arch of the foramen magnum, along with removal of the posterior ring Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   187301/03/19   7:17 PM 1874SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 42-35. T1-weighted sagittal magnetic resonance imaging of a patient with a Chiari I malformation. The large arrowhead points to the cerebellar tonsils. The small arrowhead points to the posterior arch of the foramen magnum.of C1. Removal of these bony structures relieves the compres-sion of the cerebellar tonsils and cervicomedullary junction, and may allow reestablishment of normal CSF flow patterns. Figure 42-35 demonstrates typical MRI appearance of a Chiari I malformation.REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Kandel E, Schwartz J, Jessell T. Principles of Neural Science, 4th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill Professional; 2000.	2.	Schellinger PD, Bryan RN, Caplan LR, et al. Evidence-based guideline: The role of diffusion and perfusion MRI for the diagnosis of acute ischemic stroke. Report of the Therapeutics and Technology Assessment Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology. Neurology. 2010;75(2):177-185.	3.	Wintermark M, Flanders AE, Velthuis B, et al. Perfusion-CT assessment of infarct core and penumbra. Stroke. 2006;37(4):979-985.	4.	Takasawa M, Jones PS, Guadagno JV, et al. How reliable is perfusion MR in acute stroke? Stroke. 2008;39(3):870-877.	5.	Masters SJ, McClean PM, Arcarese JS, et al. Skull x-ray examinations after head trauma. Recommendations by a multidisciplinary panel and validation study. N Engl J Med. 1987;316:84-91.	6.	Bullock MR, Chesnut R, Ghajar J, et al. Surgical man-agement of depressed cranial fractures. Neurosurgery. 2006;58:S56-S60.	7.	Dula DJ, Fales W. The ‘ring sign’: is it a reliable indicator for cerebral spinal fluid? Annals of emergency medicine. 1993 Apr 1; 22(4):718-20.	8.	Sonig A, Thakur JD, Chittiboina P, Khan IS, Nanda, A. Is posttraumatic cerebrospinal fluid fistula a predictor of post-traumatic meningitis? A US Nationwide Inpatient Sample database study. Neurosurgical Focus. 2012;32(6):E4.	9.	Ratilal BO, Costa J, Sampaio C, Pappamikail L. Antibiotic pro-phylaxis for preventing meningitis in patients with basilar skull fractures. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015;(4):CD004884.	10.	Carney N, Totten AM, OMReilly C, et al. Guidelines for the management of severe traumatic brain injury. Neuro-surgery. 2017;80(1):6-15.	11.	Brain Trauma Foundation, American Association of Neuro-logical Surgeons, Congress of Neurological Surgeons. Guide-lines for the management of severe traumatic brain injury.  J Neurotrauma. 2007;24:S91-S95.	12.	Ingebrigtsen T, Romner B. Routine early CT-scan is cost sav-ing after minor head injury. Acta Neurologica Scandinavica. 1996;93:207-210.	13.	Stein SC, Ross SE. The value of computed tomographic scans in patients with low-risk head injuries. Neurosurgery. 1990;26:638-640.	14.	Kelly JP, Nichols JS, Filley CM, et al. Concussion in sports. Guidelines for the prevention of catastrophic outcome. JAMA. 1991;266:2867-2869.	15.	McCrory P, Meeuwisse WH, Aubry M, et al. Consensus state-ment on concussion in sport: the 4th International Conference on Concussion in Sport held in Zurich, November 2012. Br J Sports Med. 2013;47(5):250-258.	16.	Forgione MA, Moores, LE, Wortmann GW; Prevention of Combat-Related Infections Guidelines Panel. Prevention of infections associated with combat-related central nervous system injuries. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2011;71(2): S258-S263.	17.	Bullock MR, Chesnut R, Ghajar J, et al. Surgical man-agement of acute subdural hematomas. Neurosurgery. 2006;58:S16-S24.	18.	Howard MA III, Gross AS, Dacey RG Jr, et al. Acute subdural hematomas: an age-dependent clinical entity (see comment). J Neurosurg. 1989;71:858-863.	19.	Hamilton MG, Frizzell JB, Tranmer BI. Chronic subdural hematoma: the role for craniotomy reevaluated. Neurosurgery. 1993;33:67-72.	20.	Almenawer SA, Farrokhyar F, Hong C, et al. Chronic subdural hematoma management: a systematic review and meta-analysis of 34829 patients. Ann Surg. 2014;259(3):449-457.	21.	Lega BC, Danish SF, Malhotra NR, Sonnad SS, Stein SC. Choosing the best operation for chronic subdural hema-toma: a decision analysis: clinical article. J Neurosurg. 2010;113(3):615-621.	22.	Bullock MR, Chesnut R, Ghajar J, et al. Surgical manage-ment of traumatic parenchymal lesions. Neurosurgery. 2006;58:S25-S46.	23.	Dandy WE. Pneumocephalus (intracranial penumatocele or aerocele). Arch Surg. 1926;12(5):949-982.	24.	Schirmer CM, Heilman CB, Bhardwaj A. Pneumocepha-lus: case illustrations and review. Neurocrit Care. 2010; 13(1):152-158.	25.	Ishiwata Y, Fujitsu K, Sekino T, et al. Subdural tension pneu-mocephalus following surgery for chronic subdural hema-toma. J Neurosurg. 1988;68(1):58-61.	26.	Gore PA, Maan H, Chang S, Pitt AM, Spetzler RF, Nakaji P. Normobaric oxygen therapy strategies in the treatment of post-craniotomy pneumocephalus. 2008;108(5):926-929.	27.	Temkin NR, Dikmen SS, Wilensky AJ, et al. A random-ized, double-blind study of phenytoin for the prevention of post-traumatic seizures. N Engl J Med. 1990;323:497-502.	28.	Edwards P, Arango M, Balica L, et al. Final results of MRC CRASH, a randomised placebo-controlled trial of intrave-nous corticosteroid in adults with head injury-outcomes at  6 months. Lancet. 2005;365(9475):1957-1959.	29.	Chesnut RM, Marshall LF, Klauber MR, et al. The role of sec-ondary brain injury in determining outcome from severe head injury. J Trauma. 1993;34(2):216-222.	30.	Berry C, Ley EJ, Bukur M, et al. Redefining hypotension in traumatic brain injury. Injury. 2012;43(11):1833-1837.Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   187401/03/19   7:17 PM 1875NEUROSURGERYCHAPTER 42	31.	Spaite DW, Hu C. Bobrow BJ, et al. Mortality and prehos-pital blood pressure in patients with major traumatic brain injury: implications for the hypotension threshold. JAMA Surg. 2017;152(4):360-368.	32.	Basali A, Mascha EJ, Kalfas I, Schubert A. Relation between perioperative hypertension and intracranial hemorrhage after craniotomy. J Am Soc Anesthesiol. 2000;93(1):48-54.	33.	Kuramatsu JB, Gerner ST, Schellinger PD, Glahn J, Endres M, Sobesky J, Flechsenhar J, Neugebauer H, Jüttler E, Grau A, Palm F. Anticoagulant reversal, blood pressure levels, and anti-coagulant resumption in patients with anticoagulation-related intracerebral hemorrhage. Jama. 2015 Feb 24;313(8):824-36.	34.	Sorrentino E, Diedler J, Kasprowicz M, et al. Critical thresh-olds for cerebrovascular reactivity after traumatic brain injury. Neurocrit Care. 2012;16(2):258-266.	35.	Cooper DJ, Rosenfeld JV, Murray L, et al. Decompressive craniectomy in diffuse traumatic brain injury. N Engl J Med. 2011;364(16):1493-1502.	36.	Hutchinson PJ, Kolias AG, Timofeev IS, et al. Trial of decompressive craniectomy for traumatic intracranial hypertension. N Engl J Med. 2016;375(12):1119-1130.	37.	Lyrer P, Engelter S. Antithrombotic drugs for carotid artery dissection. Stroke. 2004;35:613-614.	38.	Maynard FM Jr, Bracken MB, Creasey G, et al. International standards for neurological and functional classification of spi-nal cord injury. American Spinal Injury Association. Spinal Cord. 1997;35:266.	39.	Denis F. The three column spine and its significance in the classification of acute thoracolumbar spinal injuries. Spine. 1983;8:817-831.	40.	Biffl WL, Cothren CC, Moore EE, et al. Western Trauma Association critical decisions in trauma: screening for and treatment of blunt cerebrovascular injuries. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2009;67(6):1150-1153.	41.	Lockwood MM, Smith GA, Tanenbaum J, Lubelski D, Seicean A, Pace J, Benzel EC, Mroz TE, Steinmetz MP. Screening via CT angiogram after traumatic cervical spine fractures: nar-rowing imaging to improve cost effectiveness. Experience of a Level I trauma center. Journal of Neurosurgery: Spine. 2016 Mar;24(3):490-5.	42.	Bracken MB, Shepard MJ, Collins WF, et al. A randomized, controlled trial of methylprednisolone or naloxone in the treatment of acute spinal-cord injury. Results of the second national acute spinal cord injury study (see comment). N Engl J Med. 1990;322:1405-1411.	43.	Bracken MB, Shepard MJ, Collins WF Jr, et al. Methyl-prednisolone or naloxone treatment after acute spinal cord injury: 1-year follow-up data. Results of the second national acute spinal cord injury study (see comment). J Neurosurg. 1992;76:23-31.	44.	Bracken MB, Shepard MJ, Holford TR, et al. Admin-istration of methylprednisolone for 24 or 48 hours or tirilazad mesylate for 48 hours in the treatment of acute spinal cord injury: results of the Third National Acute Spinal Cord Injury Randomized Controlled Trial. JAMA. 1997;277(20):1597-1604.	45.	Bracken MB. Steroids for acute spinal cord injury. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;(1):CD001046.	46.	Walters BC, Hadley MN, Hurlbert RJ, et al. Guidelines for the management of acute cervical spine and spinal cord injuries: 2013 update. Neurosurgery. 2013;60:82-91.	47.	Fehlings M. Recommendations regarding the use of methyl-prednisolone in acute spinal cord injury: making sense out of the controversy [editorial]. Spine J. 2001;26(suppl):S56-S57.	48.	Hugenholtz H, Cass DE, Dvorak MF, et al. High-dose meth-ylprednisolone for acute closed spinal cord injuryord injuryyy Injury Random Can J Neurol Sci. 2002;29:227-235.	49.	Resnick DK, Kaiser MG, Fehlings M, et al. Hypothermia and Human Spinal Cord Injury: Position Statement and Evidence Based Recommendations From the AANS/CNS Joint Section on Disorders of the Spine and the AANS/CNS Joint Section on Trauma. Washington: AANS/CNS Joint Section of Disorders of the Spine and Peripheral Nerves; 2007.	50.	Vaccaro AR, Falatyn SP, Flanders AE, Balderston RA, Northrup BE, Cotler JM. Magnetic resonance evaluation of the intervertebral disc, spinal ligaments, and spinal cord before and after closed traction reduction of cervical spine disloca-tions. Spine. 1999;24(12):1210-1217.	51.	Fehlings MG, Vaccaro A, Wilson JR, et al. Early versus delayed decompression for traumatic cervical spinal cord injury: results of the Surgical Timing in Acute Spinal Cord Injury Study (STASCIS). PloS One. 2012;7(2):e32037.	52.	Seddon HJ. Three types of nerve injury. Brain. 1943;66:237.	53.	North American Symptomatic Carotid Endarterectomy Trial Collaborators. Beneficial effect of carotid endarterectomy in symptomatic patients with high-grade carotid stenosis. (see comment). N Engl J Med. 1991;325:443-445.	54.	Ferguson GG, Eliasziw M, Barr HW, et al. The North Amer-ican Symptomatic Carotid Endarterectomy Trial : surgical results in 1415 patients. Stroke. 1999;30(9):1751-1758.	55.	Brott TG, Howard G, Roubin GS, et al; CREST Investigators. Long-term results of stenting versus endarterectomy for carotid-artery stenosis. N Engl J Med. 2016;374(11):1021-1031.	56.	The National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke rt-PA Stroke Study Group. Tissue plasminogen activator for acute ischemic stroke. (see comment). N Engl J Med. 1995;333:1581-1588.	57.	Bhatia R, Hill MD, Shobha N, et al. Low rates of acute recana-lization with intravenous recombinant tissue plasminogen acti-vator in ischemic stroke: real-world experience and a call for action. Stroke. 2010;41(10):2254-2258.	58.	Jovin TG, Chamorro A, Cobo E, et al; REVASCAT Trial Inves-tigators. Thrombectomy within 8 hours after symptom onset in ischemic stroke. N Engl J Med. 2015;372(24):2296-2306.	59.	J0. J24 E, Unterberg A, Woitzik J, et al. Hemicraniectomy in older patients with extensive middle-cerebral-artery stroke.  N Engl J Med. 2014;370(12):1091-1100.	60.	Pledl HW, Hoyer C, Rausch J, et al. Decompressive hemi-craniectomy in malignant middle cerebral artery infarction: the ‘real world’ beyond studies. Eur Neurol. 2016;76(1-2): 48-56.	61.	Mendelow AD, Gregson BA, Fernandes HM, et al. Early surgery versus initial conservative treatment in patients with spontaneous supratentorial intracerebral haematomas in the International Surgical Trial in Intracerebral Haemorrhage (STICH): a randomised trial. Lancet. 2005;365:387-397.	62.	Fam MD, Hanley D, Stadnik A, et al. Surgical performance in minimally invasive surgery plus recombinant tissue plasmino-gen activator for intracerebral hemorrhage evacuation phase III clinical trial. Neurosurgery. 2017;81(5):860-866.	63.	Molyneux A, Kerr R, Stratton I, et al. International sub-arachnoid aneurysm trial (ISAT) of neurosurgical clipping versus endovascular coiling in 2143 patients with ruptured intracranial aneurysms: a randomised trial (see comment) (reprint in J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis 11:304, 2002). Lancet. 2002;360:1267-1274.	64.	Mitchell P, Kerr R, Mendelow AD, et al. Could late rebleeding overturn the superiority of cranial aneurysm coil embolization over clip ligation seen in the international subarachnoid aneu-rysm trial? J Neurosurg. 2008;108:437-442.	65.	Raftopoulos C, Goffette P, Vaz G, et al. Surgical clipping may lead to better results than coil embolization: results from a series of 101 consecutive unruptured intracranial aneurysms. Neurosurgery. 2003;52:1280-1287, discussion 1287-1290.Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   187501/03/19   7:17 PM 1876SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	66.	Mohr JP, Parides MK, Stapf C; International ARUBA Inves-tigators. Medical management with or without interventional therapy for unruptured brain arteriovenous malformations (ARUBA): a multicentre, non-blinded, randomised trial. Lancet. 2014;383(9917):614-621.	67.	Patchell RA, Tibbs PA, Walsh JW, et al. A randomized trial of surgery in the treatment of single metastases to the brain.  N Engl J Med. 1990;322:494-500.	68.	Aoyama H, Shirato H, Tago M, et al. Stereotactic radiosurgery plus whole-brain radiation therapy vs stereotactic radiosurgery alone for treatment of brain metastases: a randomized con-trolled trial. JAMA. 2006;295:2483-2491.	69.	Stupp R, Mason WP, van den Bent MJ; European Organisa-tion for Research and Treatment of Cancer Brain Tumor and Radiotherapy Groups; National Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical Trials Group. Radiotherapy plus concomitant and adjuvant temozolomide for glioblastoma. N Engl J Med. 2005;352(10):987-996.	70.	Patchell RA, Tibbs PA, Regine WF, et al. Direct decompres-sive surgical resection in the treatment of spinal cord compres-sion caused by metastatic cancer: a randomised trial. Lancet. 2005;366:643-648.	71.	Fisher CG, DiPaola CP, Ryken TC, et al. A novel classifi-cation system for spinal instability in neoplastic disease: an evidence-based approach and expert consensus from the Spine Oncology Study Group. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2010;35(22): E1221-E1229.	72.	Louis DN, Perry A, Reifenberger G, et al. The 2016 World Health Organization Classification of Tumors of the Central Nervous System: a summary. Acta Neuropathol. 2016;131(6):803-820.	73.	Le Roux PD, Haglund MM, Harris AB. Thoracic disc disease: experience with the transpedicular approach in twenty con-secutive patients. Neurosurgery. 1993;33:58-66.	74.	Weinstein JN, Lurie JD, Tosteson TD, et al. Surgical vs nonop-erative treatment for lumbar disk herniation: the Spine Patient Outcomes Research Trial (SPORT) observational cohort. JAMA. 2006;296(20):2451-2459.	75.	Delitto A, Piva SR, Moore CG, Fritz JM, Wisniewski SR, Josbeno DA, Fye M, Welch WC. Surgery versus nonsurgical treatment of lumbar spinal stenosis: a randomized trial. Annals of internal medicine. 2015 Apr 7;162(7):465-73.	76.	Mulholland RC, Sengupta DK. Rationale, principles, and experimental evaluation of the concept of soft stabilization. Eur Spine J. 2002;11:S198-S205.	77.	Dawson D, Hallett M, Wilbourn A. Entrapment Neuropathie. 3rd ed. Baltimore: Lippincott Raven; 1999.	78.	Darouiche RO. Spinal epidural abscess. N Engl J Med. 2006;355:2012-2020.	79.	Benbadis SR, Heriaud L, Tatum WO, et al. Epilepsy surgery, delays and referral patterns patients controlled? Seizure. 2003;12:167-170.	80.	Rausch R, Kraemer S, Pietras CJ, et al. Early and late cogni-tive changes following temporal lobe surgery for epilepsy (see comment). Neurology. 2003;60:951-959.	81.	Ben-Menachem E, Manon-Espaillat R, Ristanovic R, et al. Vagus nerve stimulation for treatment of partial seizures. A controlled study of effect on seizures. First International Vagus Nerve Stimulation Study Group. Epilepsia. 1994;35:616-626.	82.	Handforth A, DeGiorgio CM, Schachter SC, et al. Vagus nerve stimulation therapy for partial-onset seizures: a randomized active-control trial. Neurology. 1998;51:48-55.	83.	Amar AP, Heck CN, Levy ML, et al. An institutional experi-ence with cervical vagus nerve trunk stimulation for medically refractory epilepsy: rationale, technique, and outcome. Neuro-surgery. 1998;1265-1276.	84.	Fields JA, Troster AI, Woods SP, et al: Neuropsychologi-cal and quality of life outcomes 12 months after unilateral thalamic stimulation for essential tremor. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2003;74:305-311.	85.	Rehncrona S, Johnels B, Widner H, et al. Long-term efficacy of thalamic deep brain stimulation for tremor: double-blind assessments. Mov Disord. 2003;18:163-170.	86.	Kleiner-Fisman G, Herzog J, Fisman DN, et al. Subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation: summary and meta-analysis of outcomes. Mov Disord. 2006;21:S290-S304.	87.	Perozzo P, Rizzone M, Bergamasco B, et al. Deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus in Parkinsonor: es 12 mocomparison of preand postoperative neuropsychological evaluation. J Neurol Sci. 2001;192:9-15.	88.	Weaver FM, Follett K, Stern M, et al. Bilateral deep brain stimulation vs. best medical therapy for patients with advanced Parkinson disease: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2009;301:63-73.	89.	Follett KA, Weaver FM, Stern M, et al. Pallidal versus sub-thalamic deep-brain stimulation for ParkinsonWeaver FM, S N Engl J Med. 2010;362(22):2077-2091.	90.	Vidailhet M, Vercueil L, Houeto JL, et al. Bilateral deep-brain stimulation of the globus pallidus in primary generalized dys-tonia. N Engl J Med. 2005;352(5):459-467.	91.	Goodman WK, Foote KD, Greenberg BD, et al. Deep brain stimulation for intractable obsessive compulsive disorder: pilot study using a blinded, staggered-onset design. Biol  Psychiatry. 2010;67:535-542.	92.	Lozano AM, Giacobbe P, Hamani C, et al. A multicenter pilot study of subcallosal cingulate area deep brain stimu-lation for treatment-resistant depression. J Neurosurg 2012;116:315-322.	93.	Bewernick BH, Kayser S, Sturm V, et al. Long-term effects of nucleus accumbens deep brain stimulation in treatment-resistant depression: evidence for sustained efficacy. Neuro-psychopharmacology 2012;37:1975-1985.	94.	Fisher R, Salanova V, Witt T, et al. Electrical stimulation of the anterior nucleus of thalamus for treatment of refractory epilepsy. Epilepsia. 2010;51:899-908.	95.	Vassoler FM, Schmidt HD, Gerard ME, et al. Deep brain stimulation of the nucleus accumbens shell attenuates cocaine priming-induced reinstatement of drug seeking in rats. J Neurosci. 2008;28:8735-8739.	96.	Halpern CH, Tekriwal A, Santollo J, et al. Amelioration of binge eating by nucleus accumbens shell deep brain stimu-lation in mice involves D2 receptor modulation. J Neurosci. 2013;33(17):7122-7129.	97.	Barker FG II, Jannetta PJ, Bissonette DJ, et al. The long-term outcome of microvascular decompression for trigeminal neu-ralgia. N Engl J Med. 1996;334:1077-1083.	98.	Kondo A. Microvascular decompression surgery for trigeminal neuralgia. Stereotact Funct Neurosurg. 2001;77:187-189.	99.	Bova FJ, Goetsch SJ. Modern linac stereotactic radiosurgery systems have rendered the gamma knife obsolete. Medical Physics. 2001;28:1839-1841.	100.	Konigsmaier H, de Pauli-Ferch B, et al. The costs of radio-surgical treatment: comparison between gamma knife and linear accelerator. Acta Neurochirurgica. 1998;140: 1110-1111.	101.	Suh JH, Barnett GH, Miller DW, et al. Successful conver-sion from a linear accelerator-based program to a gamma knife radiosurgery program: The Cleveland Clinic experience.  Stereot Funct Neurosurg. 1999;72:159-167.	102.	Chen CC, Chapman P, Petit J, et al. Proton radiosurgery in neurosurgery. Neurosurg Focus. 2007;23:E5.	103.	Gerszten PC, Ozhasoglu C, Burton SA, et al. CyberKnife frameless stereotactic radiosurgery for spinal lesions: clinical experience in 125 cases. Neurosurgery. 2004;55:89-98, discus-sion 98-99.Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   187601/03/19   7:17 PM 1877NEUROSURGERYCHAPTER 42	104.	Karlsson B, Lax I, Soderman M. Risk for hemorrhage during the 2-year latency period following gamma knife radiosurgery for arteriovenous malformations. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2001;49:1045-1051.	105.	Maruyama K, Kawahara N, Shin M, et al. The risk of hemor-rhage after radiosurgery for cerebral arteriovenous malforma-tions. N Engl J Med. 2005;352:146-153.	106.	Pan DH, Guo WY, Chung WY, et al. Gamma knife radiosur-gery as a single treatment modality for large cerebral arterio-venous malformations. J Neurosurg. 2000;93:113-119.	107.	Regis J, Pellet W, Delsanti C, et al. Functional outcome after gamma knife surgery or microsurgery for vestibular schwan-nomas. J Neurosurg. 2002;97:1091-1100.	108.	Shin M, Ueki K, Kurita H, et al. Malignant transformation of a vestibular schwannoma after gamma knife radiosurgery. Lancet. 2002;360:309-310.	109.	Elsmore AJ, Mendoza ND. The operative learning curve for vestibular schwannoma excision via the retrosigmoid approach. Br J Neurosurg. 2002;16:448-455.	110.	Gerosa M, Nicolato A, Foroni R, et al. Gamma knife radio-surgery for brain metastases: a primary therapeutic option.  J Neurosurg. 2002;97:515-524.	111.	Pollock BE, Brown PD, Foote RL, et al. Properly selected patients with multiple brain metastases may benefit from aggressive treatment of their intracranial disease. J Neurooncol. 2003;61:73-80.Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   187701/03/19   7:17 PM
# Chunk 8945
Brunicardi_Ch42_p1827-p1878.indd   187801/03/19   7:17 PMThis page intentionally left blank

Orthopedic SurgeryNabil A. Ebraheim, Bert J. Thomas, Freddie H. Fu, Bart Muller, Dharmesh Vyas, Matt Niesen,  Jonathan Pribaz, and Klaus Draenert 43chapterIntroduction	1880Orthopedic Trauma	1881Introduction / 1881Open Fractures / 1881Compartment Syndrome / 1883Treatment of Fractures   and Dislocations	1883Clavicle Fractures / 1883Scapula Fractures / 1883Shoulder Dislocations / 1884Proximal Humerus Fractures / 1884Humeral Shaft Fractures / 1884Distal Humerus Fractures / 1885Elbow Dislocations / 1885Radial Head Fractures / 1886Olecranon Fractures / 1886Forearm Fractures / 1886Distal Radius Fractures / 1886Scaphoid Fractures / 1887Pelvic Fractures / 1887Acetabular Fractures / 1888Hip Dislocations / 1888Hip Fractures / 1888Femoral Shaft Fractures / 1890Distal Femur Fractures / 1890Knee Dislocations / 1890Patella/Extensor Mechanism  Injuries / 1891Tibial Plateau Fractures / 1891Tibial Shaft Fractures / 1891Tibial Plafond (Pilon) Fractures / 1892Ankle and Subtalar Dislocations / 1892Ankle Fractures / 1893Maisonneuve Fractures / 1893Calcaneal Fractures / 1893Talus Fractures / 1894Foot Fractures / 1894Sports Medicine	1895Introduction / 1895Shoulder	1895Rotator Cuff / 1895Shoulder Instability / 1896Posterior Dislocation of the  Shoulder / 1896Superior Labrum and Biceps  Tendon / 1896Impingement Syndromes / 1896The Acromioclavicular Joint / 1897Knee	1897Menisci / 1897Collateral Ligaments / 1898Cruciate Ligaments / 1898Posterolateral Corner / 1899Hip	1899Femoroacetabular Impingement / 1899Spine	1900Spinal Trauma / 1900Occipital Cervical Dislocation / 1900Fractures of C1  (Jefferson Fracture) / 1900Fractures of C2  (Odontoid Fracture) / 1900Hangman’s Fractures of C2 / 1901Compression Fracture of the  Cervical Spine / 1901Burst Fractures of the  Cervical Spine / 1901Unilateral and Bilateral  Facet Dislocation / 1901Clay-Shoveler’s Injury / 1902Fractures of the Thoracic and   Lumbar Spine	1902Thoracic Lumbar Spine Injury / 1902Compression Fracture / 1902Burst Fracture / 1902Seatbelt Injuries (Flexion Distraction Injuries) / 1902Fracture Dislocations of the Spine / 1903Disc Herniation / 1903Cauda Equina Syndrome / 1903Spinal Stenosis / 1903Back Pain and Degenerative  Disc Disease / 1904Scoliosis / 1904Idiopathic Scoliosis / 1904Neuromuscular Scoliosis / 1904Joint Reconstruction	1904Introduction to Arthritis / 1904Examination of the Patient / 1904Nonoperative Management and Prevention of Arthritis / 1905Injections / 1905Surgical Management of Arthritis / 1906Computer Navigation, Robotics, and  Joint Arthroplasty / 1908Fixation Options in Joint  Arthroplasty / 1910Complications in Joint  Arthroplasty / 1910Orthopedic Pathology and   Oncology	1910Diagnosis of Malignant  Bone Tumors / 1910Osteosarcoma	1911Intramedullary Osteosarcoma / 1911Parosteal Osteosarcoma / 1912Periosteal Osteosarcoma / 1912Paget’s Sarcoma / 1912Radiation-Induced Sarcoma / 1912Ewing’s Sarcoma	1912Cartilage-Forming Tumors	1912Chondrosarcomas / 1912Fibrous Lesions of Bone	1912Desmoplastic Fibroma / 1912Malignant Fibrous Histiocytoma  of Bone / 1913Malignant Vascular Tumors / 1913Miscellaneous Tumors	1913Giant Cell Tumor of Bone / 1913Adamantinoma and Osteofibrous Dysplasia / 1913Primary Lymphoma of Bone / 1914Chordoma / 1914Multiple Myeloma / 1914Metastatic Bone Tumors	1914Pediatric Orthopedics	1915Birth Injuries / 1915Skeletal Growth / 1915Pediatric Fractures / 1916Classification of Growth Plate  Injuries / 1916Diaphyseal Injuries in a Pediatric  Patient / 1916Fractures of the Pediatric Hip / 1916Fractures of the Femoral Shaft / 1916Pediatric Ankle Fractures / 1917Pediatric Elbow Fractures / 1917Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   187922/02/19   10:40 AM 1880Key Points1	The main principle of internal fixation for fracture care (most commonly intramedullary nails or plate and screw fixation) is to create a stable construct that will allow the fracture to heal in proper length, alignment, and rotation.2	In open fractures, early administration of intravenous antibiotics is important to avoid infection. An external fixator is used when the wound is grossly contaminated, and definitive treatment of the wound is delayed until the wound is sufficiently clean. Early wound coverage is important.3	Early diagnosis and treatment of compartment syndrome is important in order to prevent irreversible damage to the muscles and the nerves, which is time sensitive. Emergency fasciotomy by releasing the tight fascia is a limb-saving procedure.4	Fractures of the scapula are typically the result of a high-energy trauma with a high incidence of associated injuries that typically involve the ribs and the lungs.5	The shoulder is one of the most commonly dislocated joints, and most dislocations are anterior. Posterior dislo-cations may be missed and are typically associated with seizures or electric shock. Anterior-posterior and axillary views of the shoulder are necessary for the diagnosis.6	Isolated humeral shaft fractures are usually treated conser-vatively. The radial nerve spirals around the humeral shaft and is at risk for injury; therefore, a careful neurovascular exam is important. The patient should be checked for wrist drop.7	Hemorrhage from pelvic trauma can be life-threatening. An important first line of treatment in the emergency department is resuscitation of the patient with fluids, including blood, and the application of a pelvic binder or sheet that is wrapped tightly around the pelvis to control bleeding.8	In spinal injury, spinal stability must be assessed, and the patient should be immobilized until there is further under-standing of the injury. A computed tomography scan is more reliable in assessing spine injury than plain radiographs.9	Spinal cord injuries can be complete or incomplete, and every attempt should be made to avoid further injury. Patients should be triaged to trauma centers since trauma center care is associated with reduced paralysis and improved outcome.10	According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the National Health Interview Survey, approximately 55 million adults have been diagnosed with some form of arthritis. This number is projected to grow substantially in the future.11	A combination of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medica-tions, physiotherapy, and weight loss with the help of a dietary consultation, and physical therapy are typically the first line of treatment for knee osteoarthritis. Weight loss of as little as 11 lbs (5 kg) has been shown to decrease the risk of developing knee osteoarthritis in women by 50%.12	Minimally invasive surgical techniques improve cosmesis and allow for early rehabilitation. However, they may be associated with decreased visualization intraoperatively, associated risks of component malposition, intraoperative fracture, and nerve or vascular injury.Developmental Disease	1917Developmental Dysplasia of  the Hip / 1917Treatment of DDH / 1918Legg-Calvé-Perthes Disease / 1918Slipped Capital Femoral Epiphysis / 1918Lower Extremity Rotational  Abnormalities / 1918Congenital Talipes  Equinovarus (Clubfoot) / 1918Osgood-Schlatter Disease / 1918INTRODUCTIONEvery physician should be familiar with orthopedics and ortho-pedic surgery. Anyone who cares for patients in an outpatient or emergency room setting will find that the majority of presenting complaints involve the musculoskeletal system. A basic under-standing of the principles of care for musculoskeletal conditions is essential for the health care profession.For physicians, the field of orthopedics offers an array of subspecialties with such diversity that it seems that “there is something for everyone.” Trauma specialists have the satis-faction of physically putting complex fractures back together. Sports medicine offers remarkably rapid recovery in athletes who have suffered fibrocartilage and ligament tears with ever-improving arthroscopic techniques and instrumentation. Spine surgeons see remarkable results from their minimally inva-sive microscopic techniques, while also managing massive deformities with new instrumentation and open surgery. Joint reconstruction is one of our most exciting subspecialties, work-ing with orthopedic bioengineers to develop improved designs, biomaterials, and minimally invasive surgical approaches for faster return to function for patients debilitated by arthritis and injury. Musculoskeletal oncology offers the intellectual chal-lenge of arriving at appropriate differential diagnoses as well as the technical challenge of limb salvage and major reconstruc-tive surgery. Pediatric orthopedics is an especially challenging and rewarding subspecialty because of the remarkable ability of children to heal their fractures quickly and remodel their bones. The incredible array of congenital and developmental disorders makes pediatrics a uniquely intellectually challenging field as well. The authors hope that our readers will share our enthusi-asm for orthopedic surgery and all of its subspecialties: trauma, sports, spine, joint replacement, musculoskeletal oncology, foot and ankle, hand, and pediatric orthopedics.Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   188022/02/19   10:40 AM 1881ORTHOPEDIC SURGERYCHAPTER 43ORTHOPEDIC TRAUMAIntroductionMusculoskeletal injuries resulting from trauma include frac-tures of bones, damage to joints, and injuries to soft tissues. Long bone fractures can be described as transverse, oblique, spiral, segmental, or comminuted (Fig. 43-1). The goals of treat-ing musculoskeletal injuries are to restore the normal anatomy, stabilize fractures to allow early mobility and minimize com-plications related to multiple system trauma, and to repair or reconstruct these injuries to restore function.Fractures frequently result from high-energy trauma as well as from falls onto an extremity (Fig. 43-2). The majority of fractures can heal well with immobilization, which stabilizes the fracture while new bone forms at the fracture site. Methods of immobilization can vary and depend on the fracture being treated. The most common tool used in orthopedics to treat fractures is immobilization with a splint, cast, or braces, and their proper application is important to successfully treat the injury without causing additional problems. A successful splint contains adequate padding on the underlying skin, particularly over bony prominences, to prevent pressure or burns that can be caused by plaster. Splints, which are not circumferential, are preferred for acute injuries because they allow room for swell-ing that inevitably occurs after a fracture. The splint may later be changed to a cast as the swelling subsides.Fractures that are displaced or angulated require closed reduction to properly realign the bone. This is done using anal-gesia, local or general anesthesia, and often muscle relaxation. Reduction is performed with axial traction and reversal of the mechanism of injury in order to restore length, rotation, and angu-lation. A splint is then applied and can be gently molded to help hold the reduction in place. It is important to obtain X-rays after a closed reduction to verify acceptable alignment of the fracture, and to perform a neurovascular exam to ensure the splint is not too tight or that manipulation did not change the neurovascular status. Careful monitoring with timely clinical and radiological examination is necessary in the outpatient setting.For certain fractures, splint or cast immobilization is inad-equate, and in these instances internal fixation or external fixa-tion is used. A variety of implants can be used to stabilize the fracture such as screws, plates, rods, and external fixators. The main principle of orthopedic implants for fracture care is to cre-ate a stable construct that will allow the fracture to heal in proper length, alignment, and rotation. Screws can be placed across a fracture to create compression at the fracture site, which promotes healing. Plates can be placed on the cortex of bones and held with screws, which creates a long area of fixa-tion to stabilize the fracture. Intramedullary rods are commonly used for long bone fractures, such as the femur and tibia (Fig. 43-3A,B). Usually, the fracture is reamed prior to the insertion of the rod into the intramedullary canal. Screws can then be placed across the cortices of the bone through holes in the rod proximal and distal to the fracture to create a locked construct that further stabilizes the rod. When the fracture is locked proximally and distally, this is called static locking. In situations where patients are severely injured and cannot safely undergo more invasive open surgery, damage control orthope-dics is done by utilizing an external fixator. External fixators are also used when the soft tissues are too swollen or injured to allow for surgical incisions to be safely made. The wrinkle test is helpful in guiding the most suitable time for definitive sur-gery. An external fixation device can be used to temporarily immobilize the fracture, especially if the fracture is open and contaminated. External fixators involve pins placed into bone proximal and distal to the fracture (through healthy tissues), which are then connected by strong rods on the outside of the extremity, creating a stable construct.Open FracturesAn open fracture occurs when the bone breaks through the skin. These typically result from high-energy injuries and are often associated with significant damage to the surrounding soft tissues and contamination of the wound. These injuries are classified into three types according to the Gustillo-Anderson Classification.•	Type I injuries are low energy and wounds are usually less than 1 cm.•	Type II injuries have a wound length of 2 to 10 cm with mod-erate soft tissue damage and wound contamination.1ABCDEFFigure 43-1. Types of fractures. A. Normal bone. B. Transverse. C. Oblique. D. Spiral. E. Segmental. F. Comminuted.Figure 43-2. Transverse tibia fracture and segmental fibula fracture.Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   188122/02/19   10:40 AM 1882SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II•	Type III injuries are high-energy wounds usually greater than 10 cm in length with extensive muscle devitalization. The wound is highly contaminated with extensive soft tissue damage.These injuries require immediate administration of antibi-otics and irrigation and debridement of the wound. The goal of the treatment is to achieve fracture healing and to prevent wound infections and osteomyelitis. They are frequently associated with injuries to surrounding vessels and nerves, which must be addressed as well. When the wound is contami-nated, an external fixator is initially used (Fig. 43-4A,B). Often, definitive treatment of the fracture is delayed until the wound is 2ABFigure 43-3. A. Transverse femur fracture. B. Intramedullary rod stabilizes femur fracture.ABFigure 43-4. A. Gustillo-Anderson fracture type III open fracture. B. Image of external fixator of the tibia.Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   188222/02/19   10:40 AM 1883ORTHOPEDIC SURGERYCHAPTER 43sufficiently cleaned and healthy soft tissue is available to cover the fracture. Early coverage of the wound is important to avoid infection. Usually a large wound in the proximal or middle third of the tibia can be covered using local muscle flaps, while the distal third of the tibia will require a free flap. In general, an increase in Gustillo grade is associated with an increase in infec-tion risk.Compartment SyndromeCompartment syndrome is an orthopedic emergency caused by significant swelling within a compartment of an injured extrem-ity that jeopardizes blood flow and microcirculation to the limb. Increased pressure within the compartment compromises perfu-sion to muscles and nerves and can cause ischemia or necrosis. Patients complain of pain that is greater than expected for the injury or surgery. There may be an increase in analgesic require-ments. Early high index of suspicion is necessary for timely diagnosis and treatment of compartment syndrome. The usual clinical findings are pain, swelling, and pain with passive stretch of the compartment muscles. Numbness, paralysis, and the absence of a pulse are late findings. While the diagnosis is usu-ally based on clinical exam, compartment pressures can be mea-sured with needles placed into the compartment, which is necessary in unconscious patients and those who will not coop-erate with the exam. Compartment pressure within 30 mmHg of the diastolic pressure is diagnostic of compartment syndrome. When compartment syndrome is suspected, emergent fasciot-omy (Fig. 43-5A,B) must be performed in which the overlying tight fascia is released through long incisions. Fasciotomy must be done as soon as possible to prevent damage to muscles and nerves that will result in irreversible necrosis and Volkmann’s ischemic contractures with severe loss of function.TREATMENT OF FRACTURES AND DISLOCATIONSClavicle FracturesFractures of the clavicle are one of the most common fractures in orthopedics. They typically occur following a fall onto the shoulder. The majority of clavicle fractures occur in the middle third of the clavicle. Since the clavicle is subcutaneous, the frac-ture is often evident on inspection. Most clavicle fractures can be treated nonoperatively with a sling, early range of motion exercises, and gradual return to normal activities. Fractures that are significantly displaced and shortened or that penetrate or tent the skin are treated with open reduction and internal fixa-tion, typically with plate and screw fixation.Distal clavicle fractures are less common and may occur with coracoclavicular ligament ruptures. These injuries can be more troublesome and are at risk for nonunion if the bone ends are not in contact. If there is displacement of the fracture and the fracture is proximal to the coracoclavicular ligament, surgical management is often recommended.Acromioclavicular (AC) joint injuries occur from either a fall directly onto the shoulder or onto an outstretched hand and can result in tears of the acromioclavicular and cora-coclavicular ligaments. A step-off, or separation, of the AC joint may be apparent on radiographs. The majority of these injuries can be treated with a sling and gentle range of motion. Although controversial, injuries resulting in severe displacement of the clavicle at the AC joint usually require open reduction and surgical repair, especially in athletes and manual workers.The sternoclavicular (SC) joint is the only articulation between the upper extremity and the axial skeleton. Injuries to this joint are rare. Anterior dislocations occur more frequently, and although closed reduction can be attempted, recurrence of the dislocation is typical. Patients are given a sling and the out-come is usually good, despite the visible bump and swelling. Posterior SC joint dislocations are rare and not grossly visible and can be easily missed. They can be dangerous injuries, result-ing in pulmonary or neurovascular compromise. Therefore, closed or open reduction under general anesthesia is recom-mended with a cardiac surgeon back-up.Scapula FracturesFractures of the scapula often result from significant high-energy trauma (Fig. 43-6) with about 80% associated injuries, 3Compartmentsyndrome ofthe forearmABFigure 43-5. A. Image showing compartment syndrome of the forearm. B. Fasciotomy of the leg. Notice gaping of the wound and bulging of the muscles.Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   188322/02/19   10:40 AM 1884SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IImost commonly involving the head, ribs, and lungs. Pulmonary injuries occur in over one-third of patients. Most scapula fractures are treated nonoperatively with a sling and early range of motion. Surgery is performed when there is involve-ment of the glenoid with a major articular step-off or if there is a glenoid rim fracture with subluxation of the joint.Shoulder DislocationsThe shoulder is the most commonly dislocated large joint. Most dislocations are anterior. They are often associated with injuries to the anterior inferior glenoid labrum (Bankart lesion), impac-tion fractures of the humeral head (Hill-Sachs lesion) (Fig. 43-7), and rotator cuff tears in the elderly. The axillary nerve is at risk of being injured in shoulder dislocation. If the patient is unable to raise the arm after reduction of shoulder dislocation, then it is most likely due to a rotator cuff tear in the elderly and axillary nerve injury in the young.There is a high recurrence rate that correlates with the age of the patient at the time of dislocation. There is a 90% redislocation rate if the patient is younger than 20 years of age. Posterior dislocations are associated with seizures or electric shock. Adequate radiographs are required to diagnose a shoul-der dislocation, with the axillary view being the most important. The patient’s shoulder is usually locked in internal rotation with limitation of external rotation and axillary view will show the posterior dislocation (Fig. 43-8A,B). If proper X-rays are not performed, then dislocations can be missed and can result in significant disability to the patient. A computed tomography (CT) scan should be performed if an axillary view is unable to be obtained. In general, dislocation of the shoulders can be managed with closed reduction followed by a short period of sling immobilization.Proximal Humerus FracturesProximal humerus fractures occur most frequently in elderly female patients following a fall onto the shoulder, though they can also occur following high-energy trauma in young patients. They have historically been classified by the number of fracture fragments using Neer’s classification (Fig. 43-9), which divides the proximal humerus into four parts: the humeral head, greater tuberosities, lesser tuberosities, and the humeral shaft. Treat-ment is determined by the displacement of the fracture frag-ments, the amount of angulation of the fracture, and the amount of comminution (which means multiple fracture fragments). If there is suspicion of an intra-articular fracture, CT scan is often indicated. The majority of proximal humerus fractures are mini-mally displaced and can be treated with sling immobilization, followed by early shoulder motion and pendulum exercises. Physiotherapy should be started within 2 weeks of the injury to prevent stiffness, especially in the elderly. Displaced fractures and fractures involving the humeral head are at increased risk for osteonecrosis, and therefore surgery is often recommended. If there is adequate bone stock and the fracture can be success-fully reduced, open reduction internal fixation with plate and screw fixation is the treatment of choice. Older patients with osteoporosis, comminuted fractures, head-splitting fractures, and four-part fractures or fracture dislocations are typically treated with a prosthetic replacement of the humeral head or a hemiarthroplasty. Reverse shoulder arthroplasty is gaining popularity in the elderly as well.Humeral Shaft FracturesThe majority of humeral shaft fractures can heal with nonsurgi-cal management if they are within an acceptable degree of angulation. The radial nerve spirals around the humeral shaft and is at risk for injury; therefore, a careful neurovascular exam is important. If you have a patient with a humeral shaft fracture, check the patient for wrist drop (Fig. 43-10). Most radial nerve injuries are neurapraxias, or stretching of the nerve, and function typically returns within 3 to 4 months. A spiral fracture of the distal one-third of the humeral shaft is commonly associated with neurapraxia of the radial nerve, and this fracture is called a Holstein-Lewis fracture. Humeral shaft fractures are typically treated with a coaptation splint or functional bracing, which consists of a plastic clamshell brace with Velcro straps. Criteria for acceptable alignment are less than 20° anterior angulation, less than 30° varus/valgus angulation, and less than 3 cm shortening. Radial nerve palsy is not a contraindication to conservative treatment. Close follow-up with serial radiographs 456Figure 43-6. Scapula fracture. Notice the body and the glenoid are involved.Figure 43-7. Hill-Sachs humeral head impaction fracture and Bankart lesion, which is an avulsion of the anterior inferior labrum.Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   188422/02/19   10:40 AM 1885ORTHOPEDIC SURGERYCHAPTER 43is important to verify healing of the fracture, and gentle motion exercises are begun within 1 to 2 weeks. Fractures with signifi-cant angulation are most commonly treated with open reduc-tion and plate fixation, with care to protect the radial nerve as it often lies close to the fracture site. Intramedullary nailing can also be performed, though it carries the risk of shoulder pain from the nail insertion. A plate is usually more stable than a nail and allows early weight-bearing through the humerus. Sponta-neous recovery of radial nerve palsy can occur up to 6 months after injury. The patient should have an EMG to monitor recov-ery of the nerve. In an open fracture of the humeral shaft with radial nerve palsy, the nerve should be explored for the possibil-ity of a significant nerve injury or laceration.Distal Humerus FracturesFractures of the distal humerus result from falls onto the elbow or onto an outstretched arm. Supracondylar fractures occurring above the elbow joint are most common and do not involve the articular surface. Minimally displaced fractures can occasion-ally be treated with a posterior long arm splint, with the elbow typically flexed to 90°. However, fixation is often recommended to allow early range of motion and prevent stiffness. Fractures involving the articular surface are treated with plate fixation, and depending on the fracture pattern they may require more than one (usually anatomically contoured) plate. As with other intra-articular fractures, the goals of treatment are anatomic reduction of the joint surface with stable fixation, restoration of the anatomic alignment of the joint, and early range of motion. Severely comminuted fractures, especially in the elderly, may be treated with a total elbow replacement. Fractures about the elbow are notorious for developing stiffness and therefore early motion of the elbow is paramount to a successful outcome. Range of motion should be started as soon as the patient can tolerate therapy.Elbow DislocationsDislocations of the elbow are common and typically occur posteriorly after a fall on an outstretched hand. A dislocation results in injury to the joint capsule and rupture of the lateral collateral ligament, with possible involvement of the medial collateral ligament, as well as possible fractures of the radial head and coronoid. This combination of injuries is called the “terrible triad,” which is a challenging injury and carries the Figure 43-8. A. Posterior shoulder dislocation showing limitation of external rotation. B. Axillary view sowing posterior dislocation of the shoulder.Figure 43-9. Four-part proximal humeral head fracture.Figure 43-10. Radial nerve palsy due to humeral shaft fracture causing wrist drop.Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   188522/02/19   10:40 AM 1886SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIworst prognosis. Simple elbow dislocations should be urgently reduced with the patient under sedation and treated with a short period of immobilization, utilizing a posterior splint. Stiffness of the elbow is a common complication following elbow dislocations and therefore only short-term immobiliza-tion (about 7–10 days) followed by early range of motion is recommended.Dislocations associated with fractures may be treated sur-gically if there is any instability of the elbow joint. The “terrible triad” is an unstable injury comprising of an elbow disloca-tion as well as fractures to the radial head and coronoid, which requires surgery. Surgery includes repair of the torn lateral col-lateral ligament, fixation or replacement of the radial head, and possible fixation of the coronoid, depending on the size of this fracture fragment.Radial Head FracturesMost fractures of the radial head can be treated nonoperatively, simply with a sling for 1 to 2 days followed by motion exercises. Surgery is recommended if there is a displaced fracture, if the fracture blocks pronation or supination of the forearm, if there is an associated dislocation of the elbow, or if the patient has associated wrist pain (Essex-Lopresti fracture). Surgery can be fixation or replacement. If the fracture can be well reduced, it is fixed with 1 or 2 screws. If the radial head is fractured into multiple pieces, the treatment of choice is a radial head replace-ment with a metallic implant. Simple excision of the radial head can also be performed in low demand patients with an isolated radial head fracture; otherwise, it may lead to instability of the elbow and the wrist over time.Olecranon FracturesOlecranon fractures usually occur following a fall directly onto a flexed elbow (Fig. 43-11). Nondisplaced fractures are treated with a splint in 45° to 90° of flexion for a short time followed by range of motion exercises to prevent stiffness. Because the triceps inserts on the olecranon, the pull of the muscle often causes active extension of the elbow and displacement of the fracture, and therefore the olecranon fracture should be fixed surgically. Simple transverse fractures can be fixed with a tension band construct, which consists of wire passing through the ulna, distal to the fracture, and wrapped in a figure-of-8 fashion around two or more pins placed proximally into the olecranon, crossing and stabilizing the fracture. This tension band construct creates a compressive force across the articular aspect of the fracture that will promote healing. Fractures that are comminuted or have large fragments are usually treated with plate and screw fixation. Excision of the olecranon with advancement of the triceps can be done in elderly patients when the fracture involves less than 50% of the joint surface. Because of the subcutaneous location of the olecranon, symp-tomatic hardware is a frequent complication, causing irritation to the patient; it may need to be removed after the fracture has healed. Stiffness of the elbow is another complication seen in a large number of patients.Forearm FracturesForearm fractures are common injuries that result from high-energy trauma or from falls onto an outstretched arm. Both bone forearm fractures generally require surgery with plate and screw fixation. The radius has a bow and rotates around the straight ulna for proper pronation and supination of the forearm, and therefore this anatomic relationship needs to be restored to maintain function. An isolated fracture of the ulna shaft, or a “nightstick fracture,” occurs from a direct blow to the side of the forearm. These can usually be treated in a cast, splint, or brace. Fractures that are angulated or displaced can be treated with open reduction and plate fixation. A Monteggia fracture is a fracture of the proximal third of the ulna associated with a radial head dislocation. The radial head dislocation may be missed. Careful evaluation of the radiograph, especially the relation-ship with the radial head to the capitellum is necessary for the diagnosis of this injury. These fractures are common in children and rare in adults. These injuries require surgery to fix the ulna fracture with plate and screw fixation and to reduce the radial head dislocation. A Galeazzi fracture is a fracture of the distal third radial shaft associated with distal radioulnar joint (DRUJ)  injury at the wrist. If the fracture of the radius is less than 7.5 cm from the joint, the distal radioulnar joint is injured in a large number of cases. After the radius is fixed with plate and screw fixation, the DRUJ is assessed for stability and may need wires placed across the joint temporarily.Distal Radius FracturesDistal radius fractures commonly occur in older patients due to a fall or osteoporosis. In younger patients, these fractures usu-ally occur due to high-energy trauma. A Colles fracture is a low energy fracture that is extra-articular and usually dorsally displaced. It has a characteristic appearance of a fork, naming the fracture the “dinner-fork” deformity. A Smith’s fracture is a reverse Colles fracture, usually extra-articular and volarly displaced. A Chauffer’s fracture involves the radial styloid process and may cause occult carpal disruption. A Barton’s fracture can be either volar or dorsal. It is a fracture dislocation of the radiocarpal joint, with an intra-articular volar or dorsal fracture.Every attempt should be made to rule out fractures that extend intra-articularly into the wrist joint or involve the DRUJ. Patients should be evaluated for a median nerve injury and osteoporosis if suspected. Loss of thumb extension from extensor pollicus longus tendon rupture can occur especially in nondisplaced distal radius fractures. Treatment is often a closed Figure 43-11. Displaced olecranon fracture.Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   188622/02/19   10:40 AM 1887ORTHOPEDIC SURGERYCHAPTER 43reduction and immobilization. Surgery utilizing a variety of sur-gical techniques is done for unstable fractures as well as those with significant intra-articular involvement.Scaphoid FracturesScaphoid fracture is the most common fracture of the carpal bone. Its diagnosis can be easily missed, and the fracture can lead to nonunion and avascular necrosis. It usually occurs in the waist of the scaphoid but can occur in the proximal or distal pole. Proximal scaphoid fracture will have a higher inci-dence of avascular necrosis due to interruption of the retro-grade blood supply. Tenderness in the anatomic snuffbox after trauma should be considered a scaphoid fracture until proven otherwise. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) will be help-ful in early diagnosis if no fracture is visible on an X-ray. A thumb spica cast is used for stable nondisplaced fracture, while reduction and screw fixation of the fracture is usually done for displaced fractures. The dorsal approach is used for proximal fractures, and the volar approach is used for the majority of other fractures.Pelvic FracturesPelvic fractures are indicative of high-energy trauma and are associated with head, chest, abdominal, and urogenital injuries. Hemorrhage from pelvic trauma can be life-threatening and patients can present with hemodynamic instability, requiring significant fluid resuscitation and blood transfusions. The bleed-ing that occurs is often due to injury to the venous plexus in the posterior pelvis or from the fracture itself. It can also be due to a large vessel injury such as the superior gluteal artery at the greater sciatic notch. Immediate resuscitation with fluids and blood is critical. In hemodynamically unstable patients, blood, fresh frozen plasma, and platelets are given in a 1:1:1 ratio. These patients may require surgical exploration or interven-tional radiology embolization to stop the bleeding. An important first-line treatment in the emergency department is the application of a pelvic binder or sheet that is wrapped tightly around the pelvis to help control bleeding. This is important when there is an increase in the volume of the pelvis by the anteroposterior compression mechanism (an open book mechanism). The pelvic binder is clearly the initial management of an unstable open book fracture of the pelvis with bleeding. Traction pins may be applied in the emergency department if there is vertical migration of the hemipelvis. An external fixator may also be placed in the operating room, but it is less fre-quently used. Other associated injuries are bladder and urethral injuries that manifest with bleeding from the urethral meatus or blood in the urinary catheter, and these need to be assessed with a retrograde urethrogram.The pelvis is a ring structure made up of the sacrum and the two innominate bones that are held together by strong liga-ments. Because it is a ring, displacement can only occur if the ring is disrupted in two places. This may occur either from frac-tures of the bones or tears of the ligaments that can cause dis-location. When you see an anterior fracture of the ring, check for a posterior injury (Fig. 43-12). There are three main fracture patterns that occur from trauma to the pelvis. An anteroposterior force to the pelvis causes an “open book” injury pattern in which the pelvis springs open, hinged on the intact posterior ligaments with widening of the pubic symphysis. A lateral compression pattern results from a crush injury that causes fractures to the ilium, sacrum, and pubic rami. Vertical shear injuries are very unstable since they result from disruption of the strong posterior pelvic ligaments and are associated with significant blood loss and visceral injuries. Fractures of the sacrum may be difficult to see on X-ray, and therefore CT scans are often needed to completely visualize the fracture pattern. The sacral nerves pass through foramen in the sacrum, and therefore fractures that are close to the foramen can result in nerve injuries. Fractures that involve the sacral canal have a high incidence of nerve injuries and cauda equina syndrome. Fractures that involve the ala of the sacrum may involve the L5 nerve root. Vertical fractures of the 7ABFigure 43-12. A. Pelvic fracture showing anterior and posterior disruption of the pelvis. B. Image depicting a vertical shear fracture with cephalad migration of the hemi-pelvis.Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   188722/02/19   10:40 AM 1888SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIsacrum can be highly unstable even after fixation and may be associated with sacral nerve root injuries.Treatment of pelvic fractures depends on the fracture pat-tern. Stable, minimally displaced fractures such as many lower energy lateral compression fractures can be treated nonopera-tively with protected weight-bearing. Open book injuries in which the pubic symphysis is widened more than 2.5 cm may require an anterior plate, and if the posterior pelvic ligaments are also injured, the patient will need posterior fixation. Pos-terior stabilization is typically performed with screws placed percutaneously through the ilium into the sacrum to stabilize the pelvis posteriorly, and a plate is applied over the pubic symphy-sis for anterior stabilization. Displaced sacral fractures and iliac wing fractures are treated with screws or plates, while pubic rami fractures can usually be managed nonoperatively. While most pelvic fractures are caused by high-energy trauma, elderly patients with osteoporotic bone can also suffer pelvic fractures after a fall, usually fracturing the pubic rami. Since these are stable injuries, they can be managed nonoperatively with pro-tected weight-bearing.Acetabular FracturesThe acetabulum forms the socket of the hip joint, and fractures occur when the femoral head is driven into the acetabulum in the setting of high-energy trauma. Sciatic nerve function should be examined carefully after an acetabulum fracture. It is impor-tant to rule out dislocation of the hip, which should be reduced immediately to prevent avascular necrosis of the femoral head. Usually 45° oblique views, called Judet views, are utilized. CT scans are very important to visualize the fracture pattern. According to Judet and Letournel, there are ten acetabular fracture patterns: five simple and five complex fracture types (Fig. 43-13). These fractures often require surgery in order to obtain anatomic reduction and to minimize the development of degenerative arthritis.Hip DislocationsHip dislocations almost always result from high-energy trauma; they most commonly occur posteriorly and less commonly ante-riorly (Fig. 43-14). They can cause injury to the sciatic nerve, which runs directly posterior to the hip joint. Examine the patient for foot drop and numbness at the top of the foot. Hip dislocation can be simple, or it may be associated with a fracture of the acetabulum or femoral head. Hip dislocations need to be emergently reduced because of the risk of osteonecrosis of the femoral head if the reduction is delayed. Closed reduction is usually successful with adequate sedation or under general anes-thesia. Once reduction is done, a CT scan is ordered to define the extent of the injury. A CT scan will show associated frac-tures, trapped intraarticular fracture fragments, and the congru-ity of the reduction. If the reduction is unsuccessful, or if there is a fracture fragment inside the joint, then an open reduction is indicated. Hip dislocations that are associated with a femoral head fracture are at increased risk for osteonecrosis of the femo-ral head and posttraumatic osteoarthritis. The femoral head frac-ture associated with hip dislocation is called a Pipkin fracture. If the dislocation is associated with posterior wall fractures, the stability of the hip joint should be assessed carefully, even if the fragment is small. This is usually done by an examination of the patient under anesthesia.Hip FracturesHip fractures are an extremely common injury seen in orthope-dics and are associated with significant morbidity and mortal-ity. They most often occur in elderly patients after ground level falls, are much more common in women than men, and occur more commonly in patients with osteoporosis. The three most common fractures in the elderly are those of the wrist, spine, and hip. Patients who suffer hip fractures are at increased risk for many complications, including deep vein thrombosis, pul-monary embolism, pneumonia, deconditioning, pressure sores, and even death. The mortality rate in the first year following a hip fracture is around 25%. One of the most important rea-sons for performing surgery is to prevent these complications because getting patients out of bed and walking as soon as pos-sible diminishes their risk for many of these adverse events. Performing early surgery also decreases the complications in these patients. Therefore, surgery is almost always the treat-ment of choice for hip fractures. The type of surgery performed is determined by the anatomic location of the fracture and the fracture pattern. Surgery should be performed as soon as pos-sible, typically within 24 to 48 hours; however, since many of these patients suffer other comorbidities, they must be properly medically optimized before surgery. The goals of surgery are to minimize pain, restore hip function, and allow early mobi-lization, the importance of which cannot be overemphasized. The functional outcome for patients following a hip fracture is largely based on their level of mobility and independence Figure 43-13. Types of acetabular fractures.Figure 43-14. Posterior and anterior dislocation.Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   188822/02/19   10:40 AM 1889ORTHOPEDIC SURGERYCHAPTER 43before their injury. Many patients become less independent, may require assistive devices to help them walk, and some may require a long-term nursing or rehabilitation facility. Hip frac-tures can be femoral neck fractures, intertrochanteric fractures, or subtrochanteric fractures (Fig. 43-15).Femoral Neck Fractures. Femoral neck fractures occur within the capsule of the hip joint. The main blood supply to the femo-ral neck and head comes from the deep branches of the medial femoral circumflex arteries, which run along the femoral neck, and when the fracture is displaced, there is an interruption in the blood supply of the femoral head, which can lead to osteonecro-sis. Femoral neck fractures that are nondisplaced have a low risk of disruption of blood flow and therefore can be treated with in situ internal fixation. Three partially threaded cancellous screws are placed through a small incision over the lateral proximal femur, directed through the femoral neck and into the femoral head. Patients can usually begin protected weight-bearing imme-diately after surgery. Displaced femoral neck fractures will likely disrupt the blood supply and therefore need to be treated with a prosthetic replacement in older adults. Most commonly a hemi-arthroplasty is performed in which the femoral head and neck are replaced with a metal head and neck into the femoral canal. Higher demand patients and those who have osteoarthritis of the hip joint and hip pain before their fracture may receive a total hip replacement, in which the acetabulum is also replaced with a prosthesis, typically a plastic cup inside a metal shell. Patients can begin weight-bearing immediately after surgery. Displaced femoral neck fractures in young patients are the result of a high-energy trauma and are usually treated by reduction with screw fixation. The reduction may be closed or open.Intertrochanteric Hip Fractures. Intertrochanteric hip frac-tures occur between the greater and lesser trochanters of the proximal femur. Because the blood supply to this area is abun-dant, osteonecrosis is uncommon, and therefore these fractures can be treated with reduction and internal fixation. Displaced fractures need to be realigned, and this often involves placing the patient on a fracture table where traction and rotation can be applied to the affected leg to reduce the fracture. There are two devices that can be used. In stable fractures, a sliding hip screw includes a large screw placed from the lateral cortex of the proximal femur across the fracture and into the femoral neck and head, followed by a side plate along the lateral cortex of the femur, which is then fixed to the shaft with screws. A cephalom-edullary nail includes a nail placed down the medullary canal of the femur and a large screw that engages the nail as it is passed from the lateral cortex up into the neck and head. Nails are usually used in unstable fractures and allow protected weight-bearing postoperatively. The reverse oblique intertrochanteric fracture is a specific type of fracture that exits on the lateral cortex (Fig. 43-16). This is best treated with a cephalomedullary Figure 43-15. Types of hip fractures.Figure 43-16. Classic intertrochanteric fracture and reverse oblique fracture. Notice that the fracture line of the reverse oblique fracture exits on the lateral cortex.Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   188922/02/19   10:40 AM 1890SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IInail; a dynamic hip screw is the wrong device to be used in reverse oblique fractures because it will lead to sliding, shorten-ing, and medial displacement of the fracture.Subtrochanteric Hip Fractures. Subtrochanteric hip frac-tures occur in the proximal femoral shaft just distal to the lesser trochanter in an area of high biomechanical stresses. While they can occur in older adult patients after a fall, they are also seen in high-energy trauma. Because of the forces of muscles attached to the fractured segments, they tend to be significantly displaced (Fig. 43-17) and may be difficult to reduce. They are most often treated with a long cephalomedullary nail that includes a screw distally to lock the nail in place and prevent rotation of the femur. Fixed angle plates or blade plates are sometimes used in the treatment of subtrochanteric fractures. In most cases, pro-tected weight-bearing can begin soon after surgery. Complica-tions usually include malunion and nonunion of the fracture.Bisphosphonate-related subtrochanteric fractures are an example of insufficiency fractures that may be related to the long-term use of bisphosphonates. These fractures have been recently identified. An intramedullary nail is the treatment of choice for this fracture.Femoral Shaft FracturesFractures of the femoral shaft are caused by high-energy trauma and may be associated with other severe injuries. Long bone fractures, such as femoral shaft fractures, put these patients at risk for complications such as thromboembolic events and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), and therefore it is important to fix these quickly, typically within 24 hours. They are most commonly fixed with an intramedullary nail that can be placed antegrade (from the piriformis fossa or greater tro-chanter down the canal) or retrograde (through an incision into the knee joint and up the canal), with screws placed through proximal and distal holes to lock the nail in place, creating a stable construct to allow weight-bearing. Trauma patients who are hemodynamically unstable or who have other life-threatening injuries are treated temporarily with an external fixator until they can safely undergo surgery. This is called “damage control orthopedics.” The base deficit and lactic acid levels are moni-tored and used as guides to indicate if the patient is adequately resuscitated. When their levels are normal, it means the tissue is adequately oxygenated and the patient can undergo definitive fixation of the femur.Distal Femur FracturesDistal femur fractures are the result of a fall from a height or from high-energy trauma. They can also occur in elderly patients with osteoporotic bone after a fall onto the knee. While nondisplaced fractures in the elderly may be treated nonoper-atively with a hinged knee brace and early motion exercises, most require surgery. These fractures can involve the articu-lar surface of the knee joint, so anatomic reduction of the joint surface is crucial. They are fixed with plates and screws, often utilizing a locking construct. The plate is placed over the lateral, or rarely the medial cortex depending on the fracture pattern. A retrograde intramedullary rod inserted through the knee can also be used, especially in extraarticular fracture patterns. The goal of surgery is to achieve anatomic reduction, stable fixation, and allow early knee range of motion. Intra-articular fractures require the patient to be non–weight-bearing until the frac-ture shows signs of healing. Complications of these fractures include nonunion, malunion, and stiffness of the knee. Be aware of Hoffa fractures, a coronal fractures that usually involve the lateral femoral condyle. They can be missed on X-rays, but they are easily diagnosed by CT scan. It may need a different fixa-tion than that required for the associated supracondylar fracture component.Knee DislocationsDislocation of the knee is a rare but devastating injury that can be limb-threatening. Some dislocations spontaneously reduce and can be underdiagnosed. When the knee dislocates, the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) and posterior cruciate liga-ment (PCL) are torn, and various degrees of injury occur to the lateral collateral ligament (LCL), medial collateral ligament (MCL), posterolateral corner, joint capsule, and menisci. How-ever, the danger is due to the close proximity of the popliteal artery, which runs directly behind the knee and may kink or sustain a tear of the intimal wall when the knee dislocates. A neurovascular exam is extremely important, focusing on the common peroneal nerve and the vascular status of the extrem-ity, followed by immediate reduction of the knee and repeat neurovascular exam. If the pulses are normal, the ankle brachial index (ABI) should be measured. If the ABI is more than 0.9, then the patient should be monitored with serial examination. If the ABI is less than 0.9, then a CTA or an arterial duplex ultra-sound should be performed. If there is evidence of diminished pulses after reduction, an angiogram must be performed. If the pulses are absent after reduction, immediate surgical explora-tion and/or repair should be done by a vascular surgeon. Pro-phylactic fasciotomy of the leg is usually done. Time is critical to reestablish the circulation of the limb. If ischemia time is more than 8 hours, then there is a very high rate of amputation. With regard to the ligamentous injuries, an external fixator may be initially used to stabilize the unstable knee and protect the reduction. Subsequently, an MRI will identify what structures have been torn. Because a dislocation causes so much damage to the knee, a delayed multiligamentous reconstruction is recom-mended on an elective basis in order to stabilize the knee joint.  Figure 43-17. Illustration showing subtrochanteric fracture with the deforming forces of the muscle.Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   189022/02/19   10:40 AM 1891ORTHOPEDIC SURGERYCHAPTER 43Stiffness and instability of the knee are common complications after this injury.Patella/Extensor Mechanism InjuriesThe extensor mechanism is comprised of the quadriceps ten-don, the patella, and the patella ligament. This mechanism func-tions to extend the knee. Injuries can result after a fall directly onto the knee or from forcible contraction of the quadriceps. It is important to examine the knee for the ability to actively extend the knee. Quadriceps tendon ruptures, patella fractures, or patella ligament ruptures can result in a loss of active knee extension requiring surgery. Nondisplaced patella fractures with intact active knee extension can be treated nonoperatively with a cast or knee immobilizer, holding the knee in full extension, and weight-bearing is permitted. Displaced or comminuted frac-tures require surgery with tension band wiring and/or screws. Symptomatic hardware is a common complication. Acute osteo-chondral fractures can be managed with internal fixation. Quad-riceps tendon and patella tendon ruptures with loss of active knee extension are treated with suture repair. After surgery, the knee is held in extension, and knee flexion is slowly increased over several weeks using a hinged knee brace.Patella dislocations are common injuries that occur when the femur is forcibly internally rotated on an externally rotated tibia while the foot is planted on the ground. They typically dislocate laterally and often relocate spontaneously. The medial patellofemoral ligament is the primary stabilizer of the patella. Patients present with a significant knee effusion and medial-sided tenderness. During the physical exam, these patients may elicit a positive apprehension test, in which a lateral force to the patella elicits pain and the sensation of an impending dis-location. Dislocated patellas can be reduced by extending the knee and manual reduction and are treated with temporary knee immobilization. Make sure that there is no fracture or loose bod-ies, which would be an indication for surgery. MRIs will show the classic bone bruise and edema involving the medial facet of the patella and the lateral condyle of the femur. There is a high rate of recurrent dislocation with nonoperative treatment, which may require surgical intervention.Tibial Plateau FracturesThe tibial plateau is comprised of the articular surfaces and underlying cancellous bone of the medial and lateral plateaus of the proximal tibia. Fractures of the plateau result from axial loads sustained in falls from a height or high-energy trauma, and they are often associated with injuries to the menisci and cartilage of the knee. Fractures can involve the medial, lat-eral, or both plateaus with significant comminution, angula-tion, and depression, creating a challenging injury to fix. The Schatzker classification is commonly used in tibial plateau fractures (Fig. 43-18).•	Type I: Lateral split fracture•	Type II: Lateral split-depressed fracture•	Type III: Lateral pure depression fracture•	Type IV: Medial plateau fracture•	Type V: Bicondylar fracture•	Type VI: Metaphyseal-diaphyseal disassociationMeniscal tears occur more on the lateral side and tend to be peripheral tears, especially if there is more than 6 mm depres-sion or separation of the joint. Type IV, which is the medial tibial plateau fracture, could be a variant of a knee dislocation. The ankle brachial index (ABI) should be used in this situation and in more complex types of tibial plateau fractures. Clinically, laxity of more than 10° may indicate instability of the fracture; however, the test may be painful and hard to perform. A CT scan is important to visualize the intra-articular involvement of the fracture. Minimally displaced fractures may be treated nonoperatively with strict non–weight-bearing until the fracture heals. Fractures associated with displaced articular fragments require surgery in order to restore the smooth contour of the articular surface. They are treated with plates and screws placed medially, laterally, or both. Stabilization of a posteromedial fragment may require a separate posteromedial approach. Since there is often a depression of the cancellous bone, bone graft or bone substitutes, particularly calcium phosphate which resists compression, may be needed to buttress the articular surface and restore the anatomic alignment of the tibia. Patients are kept strictly non–weight-bearing for several months until the fracture begins to heal, though early range of motion is encouraged to prevent stiffness. Repair of ligament or meniscus injuries may also be indicated at the time of surgery. Knee stiffness and osteoarthritis are common complications of these injuries. The goal of the surgery is to restore joint stability and alignment.Tibial Shaft FracturesTibial shaft fractures are the most common long bone frac-tures and occur following high-energy trauma, direct blows, and severe twisting injuries. Trauma and direct blows to the Figure 43-18. Tibial plateau fracture classification.Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   189122/02/19   10:40 AM 1892SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IItibia result in transverse or comminuted fracture patterns, while torsional injuries cause spiral fractures. Fractures with minimal angulation can be treated with reduction and casting, followed by transition to a functional brace and slow return to weight-bearing. Such fractures may need to be immobi-lized for several months since these fractures can be slow to heal. Most tibial shaft fractures, especially comminuted and angulated fractures, are treated with an intramedullary nail placed down the tibial canal, with interlocking screws placed proximally and distally. Weight-bearing can begin soon after surgery. Proximal third tibial fractures are challenging and can result in malalignment, usually valgus and apex anterior angulation. Knee pain is common after intramedullary rod placement. Plate and screw fixation can also be used; how-ever, since the tibia is subcutaneous, hardware placed along the shaft can increase the risk of wound complications, mak-ing intramedullary nailing the preferred treatment. Fibula shaft fractures often occur along with tibial shaft fractures, though they usually heal well without surgery. Tibial frac-tures, both closed and open, can be associated with compart-ment syndrome. Patients usually have pain out of proportion with swelling of the leg and pain with passive stretch. Com-partment pressure within 30 mmHg of the diastolic pressure is diagnostic of compartment syndrome.Tibial Plafond (Pilon) FracturesThe tibial plafond is the distal tibial articular surface of the ankle joint. Pilon fractures are typically high-energy injuries that usu-ally result from axial compression. These injuries can cause significant soft tissue injury, severely comminuted intra-articular and metaphyseal fragments (Fig. 43-19A,B), and wound heal-ing problems, making these fractures very difficult to treat. Due to the soft tissue injury, these fractures are initially treated with external fixation until the swelling subsides, which may take several days to weeks. The wrinkle test is helpful in this situation to assess when the soft tissues are amenable to defini-tive fixation. A CT scan is usually obtained after the fracture is stabilized by an external fixator. The CT scan will clearly define the fracture fragments and helps in planning the surgical approach and fixation. Minimal incision techniques and mini-mal fixation are becoming popular in some situations. The main goal of surgery is to restore the articular surface. Fixation of the fibula in order to maintain and establish anatomic length is done in some cases. Bone grafts or bone substitutes may be used to fill the void in the metaphyseal region. A variety of fixation techniques may be used including plates to stabilize the metaphysis to the diaphysis. Patients are kept non–weight-bearing for many months until the fracture heals. Despite best efforts, patients may suffer from ankle pain and stiffness, arthri-tis, wound healing problems, infection, nonunion, and some patients may eventually require ankle fusion. Early fixation of pilon fractures with plates can increase the incidence of wound complications significantly.Ankle and Subtalar DislocationsAnkle Dislocations. The ankle joint is a complex hinge joint comprised of the distal tibial plafond, medial malleolus, and lateral malleolus and their articulation with the talus. Several ligaments also contribute to the stability of the ankle joint, including the deltoid ligament medially, the syndesmotic liga-ments between the tibia and fibula, and the anterior talofibular, posterior talofibular, and calcaneofibular ligaments laterally. Dislocations of the ankle joint result from a severe twisting injury and often occur with fractures. At times, dislocations FibulaTibiaTalusABFigure 43-19. A. Tibial pilon fracture with comminution. B. Pilon fracture and its main fracture fragments.Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   189222/02/19   10:40 AM 1893ORTHOPEDIC SURGERYCHAPTER 43can place significant pressure on the overlying skin and can cause neurovascular compromise; therefore, prompt reduction is extremely important followed by splinting.Subtalar Dislocations. Subtalar dislocations can be medial or lateral, depending on the position of the foot. The medial dislocation is more common. Lateral dislocations are less com-mon, can be open, and are more likely to be associated with fractures. Irreducible lateral subtalar dislocations may occur from a trapped tibialis posterior tendon, which will block the reduction. The main complication of subtalar dislocations is subtalar arthritis.Ankle FracturesAnkle fractures are very common and result from a twisting injury to the ankle. The patterns of ankle fractures depend on the direction of force and the position of the foot and ankle at the time of injury. The goals of treating ankle fractures are to restore the anatomy of the ankle joint and to restore the length and rota-tion of the fibula. Initial treatment includes closed reduction and placement of a well-padded splint in order to protect the skin. Swelling can be a significant problem, so elevation of the foot is encouraged. Surgery may be delayed until the skin condition permits. Fractures of the ankle may be:1.	Isolated malleolar fractures, usually the lateral malleolus or the medial malleolus.2.	Bimalleolar fractures that involve the lateral and medial malleolus. Please note that the deltoid ligament may be in-jured instead of the medial malleolus.3.	Trimalleolar fractures that involve the lateral malleolus, medial malleolus, and posterior malleolus.Lateral Malleolus Fractures. Isolated fractures of the lateral malleolus with less than 3 mm displacement and no talar shift may be stable. An external rotation stress radiograph or a grav-ity test is used to assess the competency of the deltoid ligament, with the goal of the test to exclude deltoid injury. If the patient has a deltoid injury, in addition to the fibular fracture, then the patient will need surgery. The fracture will require anatomic reduction in order to restore normal ankle joint congruity. The talus can sublux laterally following lateral malleolus fractures, and even 1 millimeter of talar shift decreases the surface contact between the talus and the tibia by 40%, increasing the risk of developing arthritis. Open reduction and internal fixation of the fibula is usually done with plate and screws.Medial Malleolar Fractures. An isolated fracture of the medial malleolus is usually an avulsion-type injury. Minimally displaced fractures can be treated with a cast or walking boot, while displaced fractures are usually fixed with screws.Bimalleolar Fractures. Fractures to both the medial and lat-eral malleoli usually require surgery. These injuries are more unstable, and the talus will often sublux or completely dislo-cate laterally. They are treated by reducing and fixing both malleoli during surgery. Occasionally, the posterior articular surface of the distal tibia, or posterior malleolus, can be frac-tured as well, resulting in a trimalleolar ankle fracture. Often it is a small fragment and does not need to be fixed; however, if it involves a significant amount of the articular surface, the posterior malleolus should be fixed with screws placed either anteriorly, posteriorly, or with an antiglide plate. In all ankle fractures, especially in ones associated with deltoid rupture, a syndesmotic injury should be considered. After the fixation of the fractures, an intraoperative external rotation stress test will diagnose syndesmotic injury.Syndesmosis Injuries. The syndesmosis is comprised of several ligaments between the distal tibia and fibula that pro-vide stability to the ankle joint by resisting axial, rotational, and translational forces. The syndesmosis can be disrupted at the time of ankle fractures and requires special attention (Fig. 43-20). Widening of the space between the distal tibia and fibula after fixing the fractures is indicative of a syndesmo-sis injury, and an intraoperative external rotation stress radio-graph can be helpful for evaluation. Such injuries are treated with one or two screws placed laterally from the fibula into the tibia, parallel to the ankle joint. Patients are kept non–weight-bearing for several weeks. The screws are often removed after 3 to 6 months, though they can be left in place and are typically asymptomatic.Maisonneuve FracturesA Maisonneuve fracture is a fracture of the proximal fibula associated with fracture of the medial malleolus or rupture of the deltoid ligament. There is always an associated syndesmotic injury (Fig. 43-21). Diagnosis may be difficult, and the injury may be missed. These injuries require surgical treatment with fixation of the syndesmosis by screws from the fibula to the tibia.Calcaneal FracturesCalcaneal fractures usually occur following a fall from a height and are often associated with other injuries, including lum-bar spine fractures. There is a high incidence of compartment Figure 43-20. Ankle fracture with syndesmotic injury (white arrow).Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   189322/02/19   10:40 AM 1894SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIsyndrome of the foot associated with calcaneal fractures. These injuries are often intra-articular and can result in collapse of the weight-bearing posterior facet of the calcaneus. The Bohler angle, which is normally between 20° and 40°, would be reduced or even flattened. CT scans are useful to better visualize the fracture pattern. Some fractures can be treated nonoperatively in a well-padded splint with patients being kept non–weight-bearing  for up to 12 weeks. Displaced intraarticular fractures can be treated surgically once the swelling subsides and the wrinkle test is positive. Surgery can be done with lag screws or with plate and screw fixation. Despite adequate treatment, calcaneal fractures can be debilitating injuries, leading to significant heel pain and arthritis. The outcome of surgery depends on the com-minution of the fracture and degree of articular involvement. The more fragments seen on a CT scan, the worse the outcome for the patient. Wound complications are a problem for calca-neal fractures with the risk being even higher in diabetics, smok-ers, and in open fractures. Open calcaneal fractures have a high rate of amputation.Talus FracturesFractures of the talus commonly result from forced dorsiflexion of the ankle, causing the talar neck to impact on the anterior distal tibia. The dominant blood supply is the artery of the tarsal canal. The blood supply to the talus can be jeopardized after a displaced fracture and may lead to osteonecrosis (Fig. 43-22), which is an unfortunately common complication following talus fractures. The incidence of osteonecrosis depends on the degree of displacement of the fracture. The Hawkin’s sign is a sub-chondral lucency that is seen on the mortise X-ray at 6 weeks and indicates that there is vascularity of the talus. This indicates that there is no avascular necrosis. Nondisplaced fractures are treated with a cast and have a 15% risk of osteonecrosis, while displaced fractures are often treated surgically with screw fixa-tion. There is a high risk of osteonecrosis, ranging from 30% to 100%. Subtalar arthritis is the most common complication from this injury. Varus malunion that results from inadequate reduc-tion is the most preventable complication. This complication leads to a decreased subtalar range of motion and eversion. With varus malunion, the patient will walk with the foot internally rotated.Foot FracturesThe tarsal bones, including the navicular, the cuboid, and the three cuneiform bones, link the hind foot to the metatarsals and provide mechanical stability to the arch of the foot. Isolated fractures to these bones are rare and are often treated nonopera-tively with a cast or boot. Cuboid fractures are also known as “nutcracker fractures” and may indicate a Lisfranc injury. Stress fractures of the navicular can be occult, and a diagnosis may be challenging to make in a patient that complains of foot pain. An MRI may be needed for diagnosis. Treatment is often a short leg non–weight-bearing cast. The Lisfranc ligament, which con-nects the second metatarsal base to the medial cuneiform, is an important stabilizer of the midfoot. Lisfranc injuries can be seen following torsional forces to the foot or from crush injuries. These injuries can be missed and often require surgery because anatomic reduction is extremely important for a successful outcome. Open reduction and internal fixation is the technique used for Lisfranc fractures. Primary arthrodesis is often used for purely ligamentous injuries. The main complication of Lisfranc injuries is posttraumatic arthritis. Metatarsal fractures similarly result from twisting or crush injuries and most can be treated Figure 43-21. Maisonneuve fracture showing proximal fibular fracture and associated ankle injury with disruption of syndesmosis.Figure 43-22. Displaced talar neck fracture. Notice the interrup-tion of the blood supply in the talus.Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   189422/02/19   10:40 AM 1895ORTHOPEDIC SURGERYCHAPTER 43nonoperatively with a hard-soled shoe and weight-bearing as tolerated. The base of the fifth metatarsal, however, warrants close attention. Fifth metatarsal fractures at the metaphyseal-diaphyseal junction (fourth and fifth metatarsal articulation) are called Jones fractures. These fractures can jeopardize blood flow, are at risk for nonunion, and may be associated with cav-ovarus hindfoot. Jones fractures need close follow-up to assess for healing if treated by short-leg cast and non–weight-bearing. In athletes and active young patients, screw fixation is usually used to stabilize the fracture. Injuries to the metatarsal-phalangeal joints and phalangeal fractures can be treated symptomatically or with buddy taping with weight-bearing as tolerated in a hard-soled shoe.SPORTS MEDICINEIntroductionSports medicine deals with the prevention and treatment of inju-ries related to sports and exercise. These injuries encompass various areas in the musculoskeletal system. In recent years, sports-related injuries have increased, and the sports medicine field has been expanding. There are multiple factors leading to this increase in sports-related injuries. They include athletes participating in one sport year-round, more “weekend warriors” participating in sporting activity, and increased expectations for higher performance.The orthopedic subspecialty of sports medicine treats a broad spectrum of patients, ranging from children who have just started participating in their first sports to the specialized care of professional athletes. Medical treatment of athletes, recreational or professional, can be complex as shortand long-term outcomes are influenced by the higher demand that athletes put on their bodies. Additionally, the orthopedic sports medicine specialist does not only treat the patient’s injuries but also has to consider the patient’s attempted return to his or her previous level of activity. “Getting back in the game” is sometimes subject to pressure and competing interests from third parties (e.g., team members, coaches, parents, fans). This can make the athlete’s treatment and the rehabilitation a chal-lenging process.Surgical intervention for ligament and cartilage injuries in sports medicine patients is usually done using arthroscopic techniques. The most frequently injured joints are the shoulder, knee, and hip. Therefore, treatment of common injuries in these joints will be the scope of this section.SHOULDERRotator CuffRotator cuff injuries are among the most common reasons to visit an orthopedic sports specialist. Often, these injuries are associated with forceful or repeated overhead and pulling movements. The rotator cuff provides shoulder movement and glenohumeral joint stability, and injuries can typically lead to pain, weakness, and restricted movement of the arm. Over recent years, improvement of surgical indications, operative techniques, and rehabilitation protocols has led to better out-comes. Studies suggest that arthroscopic techniques are equal or superior to open techniques for most indications. Contro-versies surrounding rotator cuff repair remain and include use of acromioplasty, enhancement of healing with orthobiologics (Fig. 43-23), singlevs. double-row fixation, and the treatment ABrotator cuff teargreater tuberosity/RC attachment siterotator cuff repairCFigure 43-23. Imaging and treatment of rotator cuff tears. A. Magnetic resonance imaging coronal T2 image showing a full-thickness and moderately retracted tear (arrow) of the supraspinatus tendon. B. Arthroscopic image showing the supraspinatus tendon tear as viewed from a posterior portal during the surgery. C. Arthroscopic image showing completion of repair of the supraspinatus tendon tear using suture anchors imbedded in the greater tuberosity of the humerus and attached sutures that capture and reduce the torn tendon to its native insertion site.Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   189522/02/19   10:40 AM 1896SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIof massive or large tears. Rehabilitation after surgery plays an important role to restore strength, motion, and function and, ultimately, to return the patient to his or her previous level of activity. The standard rehabilitation protocol is made up of three consecutive stages: immobilization, passive exercise, and active exercise. Immobilization can be established by using a sling, and passive exercises should be initiated by the therapist in the first 4 to 6 weeks after surgery. The therapist moves the arm in different positions to improve range of motion (ROM) while providing support. After 4 to 6 weeks, active exercises can be gradually introduced. At 8 to 12 weeks, muscle strength and improvement of arm control are increased by starting a strength-ening exercise program.Shoulder InstabilityThe most common etiology for shoulder instability is related to trauma, especially shoulder dislocation. After a shoulder has dislocated, it becomes vulnerable to repeat episodes of instability and may develop into a chronic problem. Most of the shoulder’s stability is provided dynamically by the rotator cuff and stati-cally by the shoulder capsule and ligaments. The most com-mon dislocation is in the anterior-inferior direction. Typically, patients with an anterior dislocation present with pain and an externally rotated shoulder. Younger patients are more sus-ceptible to suffer from repeat dislocations than older patients. The position of the humeral head with respect to the glenoid and other bony pathology can be identified with radiographs. Views from different angles should be obtained to thoroughly evaluate the patient; an anterior-posterior (AP) view, a glenoid  (axillary) view, and a “Y” view of the shoulder are recom-mended in assessing this injury. Immediate reduction of the glenohumeral joint is paramount to the initial treatment of this injury. Repeat radiographs should be attained to ensure that the humeral head is appropriately positioned. As soft tissue struc-tures are typically damaged in these injuries, an MRI can be obtained to evaluate these structures.Relocation of the shoulder is generally accomplished with the patient in supine position and the arm under gentle traction and slight abduction. Some sedation is helpful as it relaxes the patient’s musculature. Whether or not to immobilize a first-time-dislocated shoulder remains controversial, as does the position of immobilization. Additionally, some surgeons argue that early surgical repair of capsulolabral structures is appropri-ate as the recurrence rate in the young population is high and may lead to more extensive bony involvement and ultimately more invasive open procedures.Prolonged immobilization is not recommended because this will often lead to substantial stiffness in the shoulder and does not appreciably decrease the redislocation rate. Unfor-tunately, many patients experience recurrent dislocations, in which case surgical stabilization of the shoulder should be con-sidered. Arthroscopic stabilization procedures have been the gold standard treatment for the majority of injuries related to shoulder dislocations, typically a tear of the anteroinferior cap-sulolabral complex (Bankart lesion). There are a subset of inju-ries, typically involving large glenoid bony lesions, that require more extensive intervention with a Latarjet procedure or bone grafting. After surgery, the shoulder is temporarily immobi-lized with a sling. When the sling is removed, exercises will be started to rehabilitate the shoulder, improve ROM, and prevent scarring. Strengthening exercises will gradually be added to the rehabilitation plan.Posterior Dislocation of the ShoulderPosterior dislocations of the shoulder are rare and could be missed. This dislocation can occur due to electric shock or sei-zures. Examination of the patient will show limitation in exter-nal rotation of the shoulder. The shoulder will be locked in an internally rotated position. The posterior dislocation could be missed on the AP view of the shoulder, and an axillary view should be obtained to avoid missing the injury.Superior Labrum and Biceps TendonThe labrum is a structure that helps to deepen the shoulder socket and stabilize the glenohumeral joint. Additionally, it serves as an attachment point for many of the shoulder ligaments, as well as the long head of the biceps tendon. A superior labrum ante-rior and posterior (SLAP) lesion may occur in the superior part of the labrum, usually anterior and posterior to the attachment of the biceps tendon, with occasional involvement of the biceps tendon in certain cases. Injuries to the superior labrum can be caused by trauma or by repetitive shoulder motion, such as in throwing athletes. Radiographs are generally obtained to evalu-ate for concomitant bony injuries or osteoarthritic changes. The labrum itself, and other soft tissue, is better visualized with MRI with addition of a gadolinium arthrogram adding sensitivity for labral injury detection (Fig. 43-24). A coronal view MRI will clearly show the condition of the superior labrum.Conservative and operative treatments have had mixed results depending on the patient’s age, activity level, type of tear, and presence of concomitant injuries. If symptoms do not improve with adequate physical therapy and/or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), surgical intervention is usu-ally indicated. Some SLAP injuries involve the biceps tendon, which may require either tenotomy or tenodesis.After surgical repair, the shoulder needs to be immobilized to protect the repair and allow for healing. Usually a sling is used for 4 weeks after surgery. Then a physical therapy program will gradually start improving range of motion and prevent scar formation and stiffness from developing. As healing progresses, exercises to strengthen the shoulder muscles and the rotator cuff will gradually be added to the program typically around 4 to 6 weeks after surgery. Return to early interval throwing can generally be allowed around 3 to 4 months after surgery.Impingement SyndromesAfter minor trauma or repetitive injury, patients may experi-ence pain and discomfort which can be due to irritation of the tissues in the subacromial space. In many cases these shoulder impingement syndromes are caused by simple bursitis or ten-donitis of the long head of the biceps or supraspinatus tendon. Occasionally, impingement syndromes can progress to tears of the supraspinatus tendon, which can be confirmed by MRI or ultrasound.The goal of treatment is to reduce pain and restore func-tion. Initial treatment is generally nonsurgical and involves rest, NSAIDs, and physical therapy. If pain is not adequately relieved, an injection of a local anesthetic and corticosteroid may be helpful, for both therapeutic and diagnostic purposes.If conservative treatment does not relieve pain, surgery is recommended, with the goal to excise the bursa and create more subacromial space. Generally, surgery is performed arthroscopi-cally and encompasses bursectomy and subacromial decompres-sion via acromioplasty. If the rotator cuff (supraspinatus tendon) is also injured, arthroscopic repair is usually indicated to restore Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   189622/02/19   10:40 AM 1897ORTHOPEDIC SURGERYCHAPTER 43function and can be accompanied by a bony resection of the inferior portion of the acromion.The Acromioclavicular JointThe acromioclavicular joint is a gliding synovial joint com-prised of the lateral end of the clavicle and medial facet of the acromion, and it has limited mobility. The joint is stabilized by three ligaments: the superior acromioclavicular ligament, the inferior acromioclavicular ligament, and the coracoclavicular ligament. Injuries to these ligaments are commonly sustained by a lateral blow to the shoulder while playing contact sports such as football and ice hockey and may cause displacement of the joint. An acromioclavicular sprain is also referred to as a shoul-der separation. The least severe, types I and II, are typically treated conservatively. Treatment of type III injuries, where the clavicle is displaced up to 100%, is controversial. Some advo-cate for early surgical intervention, while others recommend symptomatic treatment followed by ligament reconstruction if symptoms persist. Types IV to VI, where the coracoclavicular ligaments are completely torn and the clavicle is significantly displaced, are often treated surgically.KNEEThe knee is the largest joint in the human body and is a pivotal hinge joint, which allows flexion and extension as well as some medial and lateral rotation. The knee bears tremendous axial loads as well as torsional and sheer forces, making it vulnerable to both acute injury and the development of osteoarthritis. In sports, the major stabilizing structures such as the ACL and the medial collateral ligament (MCL) are frequently injured. Other common knee injuries involve the menisci, posterolateral corner (PLC), posterior cruciate ligament (PCL), and patellofemoral joint.MenisciThe menisci are crescent-shaped pieces of fibrocartilage that provide joint stability, shock absorption, load distribution, and proprioception to the knee. Sudden meniscal tears often happen during sports, usually during contact or twisting injuries to the knee. Symptoms associated with a meniscus tear include pain, swelling, stiffness, catching, and locking of the knee. Radio-graphs are typically obtained to assess for a concomitant bony injury, the presence of (early) osteoarthritis, and leg alignment abnormalities. However, since menisci are radiolucent and are not seen on radiographs, an MRI is obtained to assess the status of the menisci and the soft tissue surrounding the knee joint (Fig. 43-25). Small tears on the outer edge of the meniscus may not cause symptoms, and provided the knee is stable, nonsurgi-cal treatment may be sufficient.The most commonly performed surgical procedure for meniscus tears is partial (subtotal) meniscectomy. However, it has become increasingly clear over recent years that pres-ervation of the load-distributing function of the meniscus is important in preventing the development of early osteoar-thritis. Research into the use of orthobiologics (e.g., micro-fracture of the notch, fibrin clot) for meniscal repairs has expanded the indications for repair rather than excising the torn fragment, especially if the fragment is large. Tears have been reported in virtually all portions of the meniscus, with radial and longitudinal tears being the most common. Menis-cal root tears are less common, but they are increasingly being recognized as devastating injuries that cause serious alterations of knee contact forces. Surgical techniques are developing to repair the root to restore its function. Meniscus transplantation may be an option for young patients with a largely deficient meniscus.ABLIGHTlabral repairglenoidhumeralheadCFigure 43-24. Imaging and treatment of a shoulder glenoid labrum tear. A. Magnetic resonance imaging axial T1 image showing a tear of the posterior superior labrum (arrow). B. Arthroscopic image with the patient in the lateral decubitus position showing detachment of the torn labrum away from the glenoid. C. Arthroscopic image demonstrating repair of the labrum to its attachment site using anchors in the glenoid and sutures that fixes the labrum to the glenoid.Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   189722/02/19   10:41 AM 1898SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIThe paradigm of treatment of torn menisci is shifting thanks to the development of superior surgical techniques, use of orthobiologics, and promising first results with root repair and meniscus transplantations. Nowadays, physicians are well informed on the significance of meniscal preservation when there is potential for healing.Directly after surgery, the knee is immobilized with a brace and weight-bearing is protected to allow the meniscus to heal. When healing is complete, range of motion and strength will need to be regained. Physical therapy is an integral com-ponent of healing and return to play, which usually is allowed between 4 and 6 months after surgery.Collateral LigamentsThe MCL is the most frequently injured knee ligament, which usually occurs after excessive valgus stress of the knee. In more severe injuries, tearing of the meniscus and ACL can also occur, which is known as the “unhappy triad.” This is most often seen in contact sports with a lateral blow to a planted leg, causing a significant valgus force.The MCL has good healing potential, and grade I and II injuries usually improve with bracing and activity modifica-tion. Grade III injuries may also improve with conservative treatment, and often these injuries are initially treated non-operatively. The majority of MCL injuries occur in the mid-substance or at the femoral insertion side. There is a small subset of tibial-sided grade III tears that are associated with worse clinical outcome following conservative treatment, and therefore surgical repair is often recommended. Recon-struction is rare because surgical repair is usually effective in restoring the MCL. LCL injuries are much less common than MCL ligament injuries, but, similarly, most are man-aged conservatively.With return of range of motion and normal gait pattern, patients are functionally progressed towards return to sports. A functional brace during sports is often advised.Cruciate LigamentsThe cruciate ligaments are situated centrally within the intercon-dylar notch of the knee. The biomechanical function of both the ACL and the PCL is complex and three-dimensional, but both play an important role in providing anteroposterior and rota-tional stability of the knee.ACL tears are a common sports injury, especially in sports involving sudden stopping and cutting (e.g., soccer, basketball) or contact (e.g., football). A torn ACL will result in altered knee biomechanics and kinematics and thus can potentially lead to the early development of degenerative changes. Since a torn ACL will not heal on its own, surgical ACL reconstruction is generally the treatment of choice in patients who are young and active. Patients with a more sedentary lifestyle and who experi-ence no persisting or disabling instability in daily life may be effectively treated with conservative management (i.e., bracing and physical therapy).ABCFigure 43-25. Imaging and treatment of a knee lateral and meniscus tear. A. Magnetic resonance imaging sagittal T2 image of the knee showing a displaced bucket-handle lateral meniscus tear (arrow). B. Arthroscopic image showing the remnant rim of the lateral meniscus prior to reduction and fixation of the torn bucket-handle fragment. C. Arthroscopic image after the torn segment is reduced and fixed to the remaining meniscus and the lateral capsule using suture.Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   189822/02/19   10:41 AM 1899ORTHOPEDIC SURGERYCHAPTER 43A patient with an ACL tear typically presents with pain and swelling, instability, loss of ROM, joint line tenderness (if there is an associated meniscus injury), and discomfort while walking. The Lachman’s exam is the best clinical test for an ACL tear. Radiographs are obtained to evaluate joint condi-tion and possible associated osseous injuries. To visualize the ACL and other soft tissue in the knee, an MRI should be obtained. Although an MRI is not required to make the diag-nosis, the information it provides is invaluable with regard to objectifying anatomic characteristics by taking measurements, assessing concomitant injuries, and presurgical planning in gen-eral (Fig. 43-26).Reconstruction is performed with use of a tendon-graft that will replace the native ACL. Commonly used graft sources include the patellar, hamstrings, and quadriceps tendons. These tendons can be harvested from the same knee (i.e., autografts) during the same procedure. Alternatively, a cadaver graft (i.e., allograft) can be used. Both have their associated benefits, including the absence of donor site morbidity with an allograft and better healing potential with an autograft. As such, it is important to have a discussion with the patient and provide the necessary information for them to make an informed decision regarding graft type.Injuries of the PCL are less common than other knee ligaments. Frequently seen causes are a bent knee hitting a dashboard in a car accident or falling on a knee that is bent during running. A rupture of the PCL is usually better tolerated  than ACL rupture, since many tears (i.e., grades I and II) have the potential to heal on their own and do not result in much knee instability. Most grade I and II injuries are treated non-operatively. Combined PCL/PLC, PCL/MCL, and grade III PCL injuries do present a challenge with regard to appropriate management. Chronic PCL-deficient (grade III) knees have an increased incidence of osteoarthrosis, particularly in the patel-lofemoral and medial knee compartments. Indication for sur-gery is influenced by age, activity level, and the presence of concomitant injuries. Different surgical techniques have been proposed; the most common are the “inlay” technique and the transtibial technique.The goal of cruciate ligament (both ACL and PCL) reconstruction is to restore native knee kinematics, provide the patient with the best potential for a successful outcome, and to prevent the development of long-term complications, such as osteoarthrosis.Posterolateral CornerCritical structures of the posterolateral corner are the LCL, pop-liteus tendon, and popliteofibular ligament. These structures each contribute to the static and dynamic stability of the knee and are commonly seen in combination with other ligamentous injuries, most notably the ACL. It is important to evaluate the PLC after any knee injury as a deficient PLC causes altered knee biomechanics and subsequently increases the stress on sur-rounding stabilizing structures. As such, it has been shown that a deficient PLC is a primary cause of graft failure in cruciate ligament reconstruction.Acute high-grade injuries of the PLC with obvious defi-cient structures require surgical intervention. Since primary repair becomes increasingly difficult as time between injury and surgery increases, a cut-off of 2 to 3 weeks is usually the limit to repair the deficient structures. With more chronic PLC injuries or midsubstance tears, reconstruction is recommended to restore knee stability.HIPFemoroacetabular ImpingementFemoroacetabular impingement (FAI) is a pathologic condi-tion that refers to impingement of the anterior femoral head-neck junction against the anterosuperior acetabular labrum. This is frequently caused by abnormal bony offset at the femoral head-neck junction and is called CAM impingement, which usually affects young males. On the other hand, a  Pincer lesion usually occurs due to abnormal acetabular version and excessive anterolateral acetabular bony rim coverage, or a combination of these, which usually occurs in females. Recognition of FAI can be clinically and radiologically dif-ficult. However, familiarity with this disorder is essential AxyzBCDEFigure 43-26. Magnetic resonance imaging of a torn anterior cruciate ligament (ACL). A–C. Proton density sagittal cuts, showing antero-posterior tibial insertion site length measurement “x,” intra-articular ligament length measurement “y,” and ACL inclination angle measure-ment “z.” Oblique (in the same plane as the ACL runs) coronal cuts showing a complete ACL tear with separate images of a PL bundle tear (D) and an anteromedial bundle tear (E).Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   189922/02/19   10:41 AM 1900SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIbecause FAI can lead to labral tears, cartilage delamination, and, if untreated, osteoarthritis.Commonly, patients present with anterior groin pain exacerbated by activities involving hip flexion or pain over the greater trochanter, as well as grinding or popping. Patients report pain with flexion and internal rotation, and after pro-longed sitting. On examination, there is a decrease in internal rotation that appears out of proportion to the loss of the other ranges of motion, and flexion can also be limited. The impinge-ment test, elicited by 90° of flexion and adduction and internal rotation of the hip, is almost always positive, signified by pain in the groin region.The imaging findings of FAI can be seen on plain radio-graphs, CT scan, MRI, and magnetic resonance angiography. Some of the abnormalities seen include abnormal lateral femo-ral head/neck offset seen as a lateral femoral neck bump, os acetabuli, synovial herniation pits, acetabular over-coverage, hyaline cartilage abnormalities, and labral tears.Treatment of FAI has traditionally been surgical and has evolved from open surgical treatment with acetabuloplasty, to combined open-arthroscopic–assisted techniques, to all arthroscopic techniques. Hip arthroscopy is becoming increas-ingly popular and is being more frequently applied for this indi-cation. This popularity is largely the result of studies reporting on improvement of functional outcome measures with follow-up of 10 years in some studies and with relatively low compli-cation rates.SPINESpinal TraumaIn spinal injury, spinal stability must be assessed and the patient immobilized until the spine is cleared. CT scan is more reliable in assessing spine injury than plain radiographs. In patients with ankylosing spondylitis, an MRI is the best study to rule out occult fracture and epidural bleeding. When neurologic deficits are present a decompressive procedure may be indi-cated. In spinal cord compression, prompt decompression should be performed. Spinal cord injuries should be triaged to trauma centers since trauma center care is associated with reduced paralysis.Occipital Cervical DislocationMotor vehicle accidents can cause dislocation of the occiput on the condyles of the atlas (C1). Most patients with this injury suffer cervical cord injury and do not survive. Traction on the spine is contraindicated. Treatment consists of stabilization and fusion in situ using a screw plate from the mid cervical spine to the occiput.Fractures of C1 (Jefferson Fracture)Fracture of the C1 ring was described by Jefferson in 1920. The thin anterior and posterior rings of the C1 vertebra fracture with axial loads. C1 fracture causes the lateral masses of C1 to spread, which can be visible on an open-mouth view. A lateral view of the C-spine may show the fracture; however, this injury could be missed due to inadequate visualization of the occipitocervical junction. CT scan is the ideal study for a Jefferson Fracture. The transverse ligament may be ruptured with a Jefferson fracture, and this will render the fracture unstable, which can cause injury to the spinal cord (Fig. 43-27). Jefferson fractures may be associ-ated with other spine fractures. This injury is rarely associated with neurologic injury. The treatment of a Jefferson fracture is based on the integrity of the transverse ligament. The integrity of the transverse ligament is assessed by the amount of C1 lat-eral mass displacement determined by open-mouth radiograph and CT scan. Significantly displaced fractures (less than 7 mm) indicate disruption of the transverse ligament. An increase in the atlanto-dense interval (ADI) may indicate a transverse ligament injury. Normally, the ADI is less than 3 mm, as seen on the lat-eral view. An unstable injury with a rupture of the transverse ligament may need a posterior C1-C2 fusion.Bracing with a cervicothoracic orthosis or a halo ring and vest is the recommended treatment for nondisplaced and mini-mally displaced fractures; significantly displaced unstable frac-tures require more definitive surgical treatment.Fractures of C2 (Odontoid Fracture)Half of normal cervical rotation occurs at the atlantoaxial joint. The odontoid (Dens) is a small bony process which arises from the body of C2, and articulates with the body of C1 (the Atlas). There are three types of odontoid fractures (Fig. 43-28). Type I fractures are the most common and are avulsion fractures off the tip of the dens. Type I fractures occur when there is tension applied to the alar ligaments (which span from the tip of the odontoid to the skull bypassing the C1 vertebra). Type I frac-tures are stable and managed nonoperatively.Type II fractures, at the base of the odontoid, results from lateral loading forces. Operative stabilization in patients with a high risk of fracture nonunion is the preferred treatment since immobilization in a halo vest results in nonunion rates ranging 89Figure 43-27. Jefferson fracture with and without ligamentous injury. Note the increased ADI and the potential compression of the spinal cord (orange color).Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   190022/02/19   10:41 AM 1901ORTHOPEDIC SURGERYCHAPTER 43from 20% to 80%. The risk of nonunion includes displacement greater than 5 mm, angulation greater than 10 degrees, age over 50 years, smoking, and delayed diagnosis more than 4 weeks. Nonunion occurs due to interruption of the blood supply. Trans-fixing the odontoid fracture with a screw maintains rotational movement. Posterior fusion of C1 on C2 is another option, but this results in decreased cervical spine rotation; 50% of rotation of the cervical spine comes from C1 and C2 joint.Type III fractures extend into the body of C2, below the origin of the odontoid process. The cancellous bone is rich in blood supply and usually heals well. Type III fractures are gen-erally treated with a halo brace.Hangman’s Fractures of C2Hangman’s Fractures are a bilateral fracture of the pars inter-articularis (Fig. 43-29). The spinal canal is usually widened, and neurological deficits rarely occur (Fig. 43-30). It results from sudden extension forces on the neck. Treatment is simple immobilization in a halo vest. Higher energy injuries causing severe extension forces can dislocate the C2-3 facet complex and damage the C2-3 disc. Significantly displaced Hangman’s fractures are managed by internal fixation and bone grafting between C2 and C3. When the fracture is severely angulated, it may indicate a flexion distraction injury, and traction on the C-spine may exacerbate the injury.Compression Fracture of the Cervical SpineIn C3 to C7 an axial load can cause fracture of the endplate while preserving the posterior cortex of the vertebral body. These fractures generally heal well and are treated nonopera-tively with analgesics and a cervical brace.Burst Fractures of the Cervical SpineBurst Fractures of the cervical spine usually result from axial loads such as in diving and motor vehicle accidents. The injury results in displacement of bony fragments into the canal, injur-ing the spinal cord. Burst fractures are treated surgically by anterior decompression (corpectomy) and reconstruction using a bone graft strut stabilized with a plate and screws.Unilateral and Bilateral Facet DislocationThis injury is usually associated with motor vehicle accidents. A restrained passenger can suffer forced flexion with distrac-tion resulting in dislocation of the facets. The diagnosis can be made on lateral radiographs. Unilateral facet dislocation can be missed on an X-ray. It usually shows less than 25% sublux-ation on an X-ray, and it affects the nerve roots. Bilateral facet dislocation will have more than 50% subluxation on an X-ray and may cause severe spinal cord injury. Treatment consists of closed reduction with axial traction utilizing cranial tongs, grad-uated application of weight, and periodic X-rays. The patient is kept awake for safety concerns. A closed reduction should not be done if the patient is not awake. Facet dislocations could be associated with disc herniation. An MRI is the study of choice to rule out disc herniations and should be done prior to reduc-tion in an unconscious patient or prior to open reduction and/or surgical fixation. When a reduction is obtained, the patient is taken to surgery for fusion, which may be performed anteriorly Figure 43-28. The three types of Odontoid fractures.Figure 43-29. Lateral view shows displaced hangman’s fracture.Figure 43-30. Hangman’s fracture cross-section view shows wid-ening of the canal, and therefore the spinal cord is not affected.Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   190122/02/19   10:41 AM 1902SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIor posteriorly. Anterior surgery is necessary if the patient has an associated herniated disc.Clay-Shoveler’s InjuryClay-shoveler’s injury can result from a motor vehicle accident or from shoveling soil or clay. The injury (of C6, C7, T1, and T2) is the result of avulsion fracture of the spinous process by the paraspinal muscle forces (Fig. 43-31). The fracture is treated nonoperatively with analgesics and a soft collar.FRACTURES OF THE THORACIC AND  LUMBAR SPINEThoracic Lumbar Spine InjuryThe ribs stabilize fractures of the thoracic spine, making these fractures more stable than similar fractures of the lumbar spine. Neurologic injuries are more common in the thoracic and proxi-mal lumbar spine because of the presence of the spinal cord, which ends at the L2 level, as well as the small spinal canal diameter of the thoracic spine.Compression FractureCompression fractures result from osteoporosis as well as trauma. Compression fractures involve a fracture of the anterior part of the vertebral body without associated posterior cortex fracture. Thoracolumbar compression fractures are treated non-operatively with braces and analgesics.Burst FractureBurst fractures are caused by falls and high-energy automo-bile accidents. The posterior cortex fracture (middle column involvement) differentiates the burst fracture from a compres-sion fracture. The injury may be associated with neurological deficits due to retropulsion of bone into the canal. A vertical lamina fracture may contain an invaginated segment of the dura mater with accompanying nerve root injury and dural tear. Wid-ening of the pedicle in an AP view of the spine will indicate a burst fracture. CT scan will define the bony injury, and an MRI will show compression of the neural elements and any injury to the posterior ligaments.Treatment is nonoperative with an orthoses and mobiliza-tion of the patient if the fracture is stable. Surgery is done for decompression and destabilization of the spine if the patient has neurologic deficits or if the fracture is unstable.Seatbelt Injuries (Flexion Distraction Injuries)A seatbelt injury occurs when there is acute forward flexion of the trunk and anterior (i.e., seatbelt) restraint. The pelvis and upper torso move forward, and failure of the spine under tension begins with the posterior elements. Tearing of the dorsal fascia, the interspinous ligament, dislocation of the facets, and tearing of the discs occurs. Seatbelt injury may be bony or ligamen-tous (Fig. 43-32). The bone of the spinous process, the lamina, the pedicles, and the vertebral body fail in tension (“chance Figure 43-32. Seatbelt injuries (flexion-distraction injuries) can be bony or ligamentous.Figure 43-31. Fracture of the transverse process of C6 or C7.Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   190222/02/19   10:41 AM 1903ORTHOPEDIC SURGERYCHAPTER 43fracture”). The bony injury could be stable. Flexion distraction injuries involving the soft tissue, with injury to the posterior spine elements, are usually unstable. This unstable injury will require internal fixation and fusion with bone grafting. This spine injury may be associated with a colon injury, especially in children.Fracture Dislocations of the SpineFracture dislocations of the spine displace the bony elements by translation or rotation, resulting in canal narrowing and nerve injury.Reduction of the displaced bones is the best way to improve the canal dimensions.Patients with fracture dislocations of the spine and par-tial nerve function can recover. Fracture dislocations are treated operatively with surgical stabilization.Disc HerniationDisc herniation, most common between ages of 20 and 50, can occur in the cervical, thoracic, or the lumbar spine, and consists of a tear of the annulus allowing the nucleus pulposus material to extrude through the annulus and enter the canal, pressing on the exiting nerve or the “traversing” nerve roots. In the cervical spine, spinal cord compression can occur.Symptoms of most disc herniations resolve within 8 weeks as the nerve root accommodates and inflammation recedes. The bulk of the extruded nucleus pulposus resorbs over time. When symptoms persist beyond 6 to 8 weeks, surgery with excision of the involved disc and decompression of the nerve roots may be indicated.In cervical disc herniation, an anterior approach to the spine is performed with dissection through a transverse incision on the neck. Dissection is carried between the trachea, esopha-gus medially, and the carotid sheath laterally. The disc is then removed. The disc space is usually filled with bone graft to fuse the vertebrae. A locking screw low profile titanium plate is then attached to the vertebrae.Posterior decompression and laminotomy exposes the pos-terior elements of the spine. A portion of the lamina is removed to allow access to the canal to correct foraminal impingement or to remove lateral disc herniations. While the posterior approach does not require fusion with plates and screws, central disc her-niation cannot be managed through a posterior approach since the spinal cord cannot be safely retracted.In thoracic spine disc herniation, the posterior approach is contraindicated because it may lead to paralysis.For lumbar disc herniation, a midline incision is used, and laminotomy allows visualization of the lateral recess. Retraction of the dura allows visualization of the traversing nerve roots as well as of the disc fragment.Cauda Equina SyndromeCauda equina syndrome is uncommon and occurs from a central disc herniation (Fig. 43-33). This can be a difficult diagnosis to make; however, it is a true emergency, and a delay in diagnosis can lead to permanent impairment. The patient will complain of back pain with bilateral leg pain. Bladder and bowel diffi-culty such as incontinence and frequency, saddle anesthesia, decreased perianal sensation, impotence, diminished rectal tone, and motor deficits. MRI will show a central disc herniation. Treatment is with urgent diagnosis and urgent surgical decom-pression. The results are better if the decompression is done within 48 hours of onset of symptoms. A central disc herniation causing cauda equina should be differentiated from a postero-lateral disc herniation. The posterolateral disc herniation usu-ally affects a nerve root and can be treated conservatively, at least initially. In the case of central disc herniation, it affects the cauda equina (the lumbosacral nerve roots), and this is a surgical emergency. Spontaneous recovery does not occur, and the outcome is catastrophic, including permanent loss of bowel and bladder control as well as the ability to have an erection if treatment is delayed.Spinal StenosisA loss of hydration of the discs causes loss of disc height and bulging of annular tissue and the ligamentum flavum, which effectively narrows the canal (spinal stenosis). Osteophyte for-mation on the facet joints can also cause nerve impingement. Cervical stenosis can cause myelopathic symptoms (hyper-reflexia, problems with fine hand dexterity, balance problems resulting in gait disturbance, weakness, and pain). In patients with low back pain and gait disturbance, obtain an MRI of the cervical spine to rule out cervical myelopathy. Pathology of the lumbo-sacral spine does not cause gait disturbances.Lumbar stenosis causes neurogenic claudication (pro-gressive pain, weakness, and numbness in the legs). The clau-dication symptoms result from standing and walking, which increases lumbar lordosis. Extension of the spine decreases the spinal canal diameter as well as the foramen size and worsens the condition. The symptoms resolve with sitting and bending forward (i.e., over a shopping cart) (Fig. 43-34). Flexion of the spine increases the spinal canal diameter as well as the foramen size and decrease the symptoms. The patient may have a normal neurologic exam, and it is important to study the vascular status of the patient and differentiate between neurologic and vascular claudication. Examine the pulses, prescribe a noninvasive vas-cular study if necessary. In general, walking causes the symp-toms for both conditions, and standing relieves the vascular claudication symptoms. Spinal stenosis is treated with NSAIDs, epidural steroid injections, and physical therapy. Resistant cases may require surgical decompression.Spinal stenosis usually occurs in patients over 50 years of age. With degenerative spondylolisthesis or scoliosis, fusion with instrumentation is usually required to prevent progression of the deformity.Figure 43-33. Image showing central disc herniation affecting the cauda equina and the classic posterolateral disc herniation affecting a nerve root.Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   190322/02/19   10:41 AM 1904SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIBack Pain and Degenerative Disc DiseaseBack pain occurs in the majority of adults but is usually self-limited, resolving in 1 to 2 weeks. Chronic unremitting back pain may suggest the possibility of infection, malignancy, or metastatic disease.While radiographs are one option in the management of disabling low back pain, they are ineffective at ruling out malig-nancy, and radiographic findings correlate poorly with symp-toms. Patients with severe degenerative symptoms may have no pain, while others with mild degenerative findings complain of severe pain. The potential for secondary gain and psychiatric problems and the unpredictable results of spine fusion add to the difficulty of diagnosis and choosing a treatment plan.Intervertebral disc replacement prostheses are experimen-tal in the treatment of degenerative disc disease. The potential for loosening, creation of wear debris, and bone loss complicat-ing revision surgery are concerns, as are the proximity of the device to the spinal canal and the great vessels.ScoliosisScoliosis is a lateral curvature of the spine. Lateral bending of the spine is always accompanied by rotational deformity (coupling).In order to measure the severity of scoliosis, lines are drawn along the endplates of the vertebral bodies at either end of the curve, and the angle formed when these lines intersect determines the magnitude of the curve.Scoliotic curves are classified as congenital, degenera-tive, metabolic (mucopolysaccharidoses), neurogenic (cerebral palsy), and myogenic curves (muscular dystrophy). Idiopathic scoliosis is the most common form and represents a spectrum of genetic disease.Adults with scoliosis may present with axial pain and imbalance in posture. Treatment for scoliosis may include anti-inflammatory medications, therapy, and activity modification. In severe cases with objective deformity, surgical correction of the deformity may be indicated.Idiopathic ScoliosisThe majority of idiopathic scoliosis curves become apparent during adolescence and progress during skeletal growth. Ini-tial management consists of observation. Rapidly progressing curves are treated with braces. Brace treatment is recommended for curves between 20 and 40 degrees. For patients with large curves, surgical intervention may be needed using rods with grafting and fusion.Neuromuscular ScoliosisNeurologic conditions such as polio and cerebral palsy can lead to “uncompensated” scoliosis curves where the patient is unable to lean with his upper body to restore balance. Scoliosis correc-tion surgery may be needed to facilitate sitting balance and to avoid skin breakdown caused by pelvic obliquity.JOINT RECONSTRUCTIONIntroduction to ArthritisArthritis refers to a large number of medical conditions, includ-ing osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, septic arthritis, and post-traumatic arthritis. Each has the potential to lead to loss of articular cartilage lining the joints. According to the CDC and the National Health Interview Survey, approximately 55 million adults (22% of the U.S. population) have been diag-nosed with some form of arthritis. This number is pro-jected to grow to an astounding 67 million adults by 2030 (or 25% of the U.S. population).Arthritis causes pain, loss of range of motion, decreased ability to perform work duties or participate in social functions, and decreased quality of life. The number of individuals suffer-ing from arthritic conditions will continue to rise as the “baby boomer” generation enters old age and the prevalence of obesity rises in the U.S. population, as age and obesity are two major factors in the onset of arthritis.Examination of the PatientA thorough history and physical examination is indicated for all orthopedic patients. Patient history should include loca-tion, quality, severity, timing, and radiation of pain along with any referred pain, associated signs and symptoms, modify-ing factors, or prior treatments, including both conservative and surgical measures. Other details within the history and physical examination are equally important in establishing a diagnosis and successfully developing a treatment plan. If you listen carefully to your patients, they will often tell you their diagnosis.For example, location of “hip pain” can narrow a dif-ferential diagnosis. Patients with activity-related groin pain often are found to have hip arthritis, whereas patients with 10Figure 43-34. Person is seen bending over shopping cart to improve symptoms.Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   190422/02/19   10:41 AM 1905ORTHOPEDIC SURGERYCHAPTER 43peritrochanteric pain (lateral hip pain) may be suffering from trochanteric bursitis. The importance of listening and focusing on the patient’s description of location and type of pain cannot be overemphasized.Physical examination should begin by observing the patient’s gait, both with and without assistive devices if pos-sible. This demonstrates the extent of the patient’s functional deficit and the effect of the patient’s pain. Typical gait pat-terns include antalgic gait due to pain, or a “Trendelenburg gait” (Fig. 43-35) where abductor weakness may lead to a poor outcome following total hip arthroplasty. Other aspects of the exam include assessment of leg length discrepancy, joint con-tractures, skin changes, assessment for prior surgical incisions to identify prior treatments or plan future surgical approaches, neurovascular status, and strength, as well as range of motion. These details document functional status and help to formulate a differential diagnosis. Patients with “hip pain” may have lumbar spinal stenosis, radiculopathy, or vascular disease that may play a large role in their presentation. Once an appropriate physi-cal examination is performed, weight-bearing radiographs are needed. Advanced imaging, including CT and MRI, are rarely indicated in the initial workup. Once a diagnosis is made, spe-cific treatment directed towards the patient’s condition can be initiated. The goals of treatment are to improve pain, preserve motion, and maximize patient function, independence, and qual-ity of life.Nonoperative Management and Prevention of ArthritisNonoperative measures to treat arthritis include weight loss, activity modification, rest, physical therapy, NSAIDs, bracing, and assistive devices such a cane or walker. These treatments have the potential to decrease symptoms and improve function and quality of life. For example, holding a cane on the opposite side of the symptomatic extremity reduces the forces across the hip joint and subsequently decreases hip pain (Fig. 43-36). In nearly all cases, it is best to treat patients nonoperatively prior to recommending surgery.Health and exercise can also play a role in the prevention of arthritis. Weight loss of as little as 11 lbs (5 kg) has been shown to decrease the risk of developing knee osteoarthritis in 11women by 50%. Similarly, patients who engage in regu-lar physical activity have a lower incidence of arthritis. However, despite nonoperative treatment, surgical intervention may be required to effectively manage patient symptoms.InjectionsJoint injections are commonly performed into the knee and shoulder. Common injections into the knee include corticoste-roids and hyaluronic-acid gels. Corticosteroid injections can decrease inflammation within the joint. These injections are usually administered in combination with a local anesthetic, such as lidocaine, in order to provide more immediate relief for both diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. If the patient has immediate relief of pain with injection of the joint, this localizes the source of the patient’s pain to the joint and may assist with diagnosis. Diagnostic hip injections are particularly helpful in distinguishing pain resulting from hip versus lumbar spine pathology. Any benefit received is therapeutic for the patient. Hyaluronic acid injections in the knee are frequently used and are commonly referred to as “viscosupplementation.” The viscosity of the synovial fluid is increased by hyaluronic acid, but its role and mechanism are not well defined yet. There is a risk of joint infection, cartilage injury from the needle, hemarthrosis, and failure to receive benefit. Short-term altered glucose metabolism in diabetic patients is common with cor-ticosteroid injections. The efficacy of hyaluronic acid injec-tions has been questioned by recent evidence summarized in the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons’ Clinical Practice Guidelines.Figure 43-35. Trendelenburg Gait resulting from weakness of abductor muscles.Figure 43-36. Holding the cane on the opposite side of the pathol-ogy is beneficial in decreasing arthritis pain in the hip.Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   190522/02/19   10:41 AM 1906SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IISurgical Management of ArthritisThe most commonly performed procedure for arthritis of a major joint is arthroplasty, or joint replacement. Joint replace-ments, including hip and knee arthroplasty, are considered two of the most successful procedures performed in all of surgery. However, nonarthroplasty options exist and are typically per-formed for certain indications and goals.Osteotomy. Osteotomy is cutting of the bone to change the position of the fragments, thereby improving rotation, align-ment, or angulation. Osteotomy can be performed for both con-genital and acquired deformities that contribute to the patient’s pain or development or progression of disease. Pelvic and femo-ral osteotomy can be utilized in the treatment of developmen-tal dysplasia of the hip. The position of the acetabulum can be altered with pelvic osteotomies in order to provide more appro-priate coverage of the femoral head, which is typically deficient anteriorly and laterally. Femoral osteotomies can be performed to correct version and varus/valgus deformity of the femoral neck. Osteotomies are performed to obtain more normal align-ment and coverage of the femoral head within the acetabulum to prevent or delay future disease.An osteotomy commonly used in the knee is a proxi-mal tibia osteotomy. An adult patient who presents with iso-lated medial compartment knee arthritis and associated varus deformity would be a candidate for a valgus-producing (high tibial) osteotomy. An osteotomy that realigns the knee into slight valgus has the potential to off-load the medial com-partment, slow disease progression, and prevent or delay the need for further procedures (unicompartmental or total knee arthroplasties).Arthrodesis. Arthrodesis is a treatment option for severe arthritis where the overlying articular cartilage is removed and two opposing bones heal together with the use of hardware (internal or temporary external fixation) often supplemented by bone graft. After successful arthrodesis, no motion is possible through the joint and the source of pain is removed. Arthrodesis of large joints, such as the knee, shoulder, or hip, are typically explored as an option in the face of infection, in older adult, low-demand patients or in young, active patients who are con-sidered too young for a joint replacement (out of concern for component wear and the need for early revision). Arthrodesis can also serve as a “last resort” procedure in orthopedics when joint preserving treatments fail due to fracture or infection. Ankle arthrodesis is the primary procedure performed in adult patients with traumatic arthritis of the ankle.Joint Arthroplasty/Joint Replacement. Joint arthroplasty is the most common option for patients suffering from pain associated with arthritis in a joint. The surfaces of the bones are replaced after removing the damaged articular cartilage. The amount of bone and the determination of how to make the bone cuts is made based on preoperative radiographs and templating, cutting guides, anatomic measurements, and soft tissue/ligament balancing. The cut bony surfaces are covered with new compo-nents, usually made of metal, ceramic, or polyethylene. These new components are sized to appropriately match the patient, based on templated preoperative radiographs, intraoperative measurements, and examination for stability, leg length, align-ment, and range of motion.If all compartments or surfaces of the joint are replaced, the arthroplasty is referred to as a total joint arthroplasty. In comparison, if only one surface or compartment of the joint is replaced, it is referred to as hemiarthroplasty (hip, shoulder) or unicompartmental arthroplasty (knee). Total hip and knee arthroplasties are considered among the most successful of all surgical procedures performed in terms of patient outcome and improvement in pain.Hip Arthroplasty Background Hip arthroplasty is utilized for end stage arthri-tis in the hip that has failed a reasonable trial of nonoperative measures (Fig. 43-37). Conventional hip arthroplasty commonly refers to total hip arthroplasty where both the femoral head and acetabulum are replaced or resurfaced, respectively. Finally, hemiarthroplasty describes the replacement of the femoral head and neck with a stemmed femoral component in isolation. The acetabulum is not addressed surgically.History of Hip Arthroplasty The history of hip arthroplasty (hip replacement) may be broken down into “Pre-Charnley” and “Post-Charnley” eras, referring to the significant contri-butions of Sir John Charnley to the evolution of hip arthro-plasty. Prior to Charnley’s contributions, hip arthroplasty consisted of a variety of procedures with highly variable results. Early attempts at relieving hip pain were made with interpositional arthroplasty, where tissue layers, plastic, or metal were placed between the worn articular surfaces. Frac-ture of the interposed material or loosening of components often led to failure.Later attempts introduced stemmed components to improve fixation. One of the earliest femoral components was designed by Austin-Moore. This prosthesis replaced the femoral head and neck with a metal component secured into the femoral shaft with a stem extending down the diaphysis. This prosthesis was utilized in hemiarthroplasty for many years and served as Figure 43-37. Osteoarthritis femoral head. Note erosion of weight-bearing cartilage and peripheral osteophytes.Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   190622/02/19   10:41 AM 1907ORTHOPEDIC SURGERYCHAPTER 43a step in the development of total hip arthroplasty with the later addition of the acetabular component.Surgical Approaches to the Hip A variety of approaches to the hip joint have been utilized in joint arthroplasty, includ-ing anterior approach (Smith Petersen), anterolateral approach (Watson-Jones), lateral approach (Hardinge), and posterior approach (Kocher Langenbach). Each approach contains a unique set of advantages and disadvantages. The following is a brief summary of the most common approaches that are utilized in total hip arthroplasty.Anterior approach (Smith Petersen): This approach is an internervous and intermuscular approach. It utilizes the inter-nervous plane between the femoral nerve and superior gluteal nerve. Superficially, the plane between the sartorius (femo-ral nerve) and tensor fasciae lata (superior gluteal nerve) is dissected in the deep layer and the plane between the rectus femoris (femoral nerve) and gluteus medius (superior glu-teal nerve) is dissected. Advantages to this approach include supine positioning, use of intraoperative fluoroscopy for acetabular component positioning, and discontinuation of all ambulatory assistive devices 1 week earlier than other approached. Downsides include difficult preparation and placement of the femoral component with higher rate of femoral fracture/femoral component revision, higher rate of wound complications, and lack of a true extensile approach.Posterior approach (Kocher–Langenbach): The posterior approach is a muscle-splitting approach without an interner-vous plane. After incising the skin and subcutaneous fat, the fascia lata is incised along with the gluteus maximus. The short external rotators are exposed and dissected, includ-ing the piriformis, superior and inferior gemelli, obturator internus and externus, and quadratus femoris. This allows internal rotation of the hip along with flexion and adduction to dislocate the hip. The posterior approach with posterior soft tissue repair has no increased rate of dislocation com-pared to the anterior approach. The posterior approach is extensile and provides excellent exposure of both the femur and acetabulum for complex and revision cases.Lateral approach (Hardinge): While there have been many modifications to the original Hardinge approach, first described in 1982, most involve releasing the anterior one-third of the gluteus medius, underlying minimus, abductor tendon, and vastus lateralis distally in one sleeve off of the greater trochanter. The capsule is then incised to expose the hip joint. Care must be taken to protect the superior gluteal nerve during this exposure, which lies 5 cm proximal to the tip of the greater trochanter.Exposure of the acetabulum is excellent with the modified Hardinge approach, which is extensile. However, access to the posterior column is limited compared to the posterior approach. The increased risk of postoperative Trendelenburg gait, other pathologic gait, and heterotopic ossification compared to all other approaches to the hip have made it far less commonly performed than the posterior approach. Minimally invasive total hip arthroplasty is associated with decreased visualiza-tion intraoperatively and associated risks of component malposition, intraoperative fracture, and nerve or vascular injury. In fact, the only documented benefit of minimally inva-sive techniques appears to be a smaller incision, but with increased soft tissue tension intraoperatively comes the risk of compromised wound healing and periprosthetic joint infection.Bearing Surfaces in Hip Arthroplasty The most common combination of bearing surfaces used in total hip arthroplasty is a metal (generally cobalt chrome) or ceramic prosthetic head, articulating with a polyethylene liner. Metal on metal (MOM) articulations have largely been abandoned in total hip arthro-plasty as they are associated with production of metal ions that deposit in solid organs, pseudotumors that are locally destruc-tive to soft tissue/bone, and risk of early failure (Fig. 43-38). Ceramic on ceramic articulations have the lowest friction of all current bearing combinations. However, ceramic may fracture or squeak in ceramic on ceramic total hip arthroplasties.Alignment of Hip Arthroplasty Components Proper align-ment of hip arthroplasty components is vital to a successful procedure and patient outcome. Surgeons aim for appropriate alignment of components to restore a functional and stable range of motion. This is accomplished with combined version of the femoral and acetabular components, appropriate abduc-tion of the acetabular components, and staying true to Sir John Charnley’s principles: establishing a low friction articulation, 12Figure 43-38. Failed ceramic on metal hip arthroplasty components. Note the metallic staining on the ceramic femoral head.Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   190722/02/19   10:41 AM 1908SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IImedializing the acetabular component and center of rotation and restoring abductor length and tension with restoration of appropriate length and femoral offset. Inappropriate placement of components can lead to early failure, accelerated component wear, dislocation, need for revision surgery, as well as poor patient outcomes and satisfaction.Knee Arthroplasty Background Knee arthroplasty is indicated for end-stage arthritis that has failed a reasonable trial of nonoperative mea-sures (Figs. 43-39 and 43-40). Knee arthroplasty commonly refers to total knee arthroplasty where the distal femur, tibia, and patella are resurfaced after any remaining articular cartilage and a layer of subchondral bone are resected. A unicompartmental knee arthroplasty consists of replacing one compartment of the knee, most commonly the medial compartment.Surgical Approach to the Knee Total knee arthroplasty is generally accomplished through a medial parapatellar approach. This approach utilizes a longitudinal skin incision extending, on average, 5 cm proximal to the patella to the medial aspect of the tibial tubercle distally. Dissection is carried down to the capsule. To gain access to the joint, an arthrotomy is performed medial to the patella extending proximally along the most medial aspect of the quadriceps tendon and distally just medial to the patellar tendon. This approach provides excellent exposure to all three compartments of the knee after patellar dislocation.Once the joint surfaces are adequately exposed, remain-ing articular cartilage and a thin layer of underlying bone are removed prior to placement of prosthetic components. Bone cuts are made based on preoperative templating, cutting guides, ligament balancing, and anatomic measurements (Figs. 43-41 and 43-42).Bearing Surfaces in Knee Arthroplasty The femoral com-ponent consists of a metal prosthetic cap sized to fit the normal shape of the distal femur. The tibia is cut perpendicular to the anatomic and mechanical axis, and a flat, stemmed, metal tray is placed that serves as a base plate for a polyethylene bearing surface. The patella is usually resurfaced with a polyethylene component.Two types of primary total knee arthroplasty systems exist, including cruciate retaining and posterior stabilized systems. As the name implies, with cruciate retaining systems, the PCL is retained in hopes of preserving more normal knee structures and minimizing bone loss, while in posterior stabilized systems the ligament is sacrificed and the components are designed to accommodate for the loss. These two systems have equivalent results in knee arthroplasty.Alignment and Balancing in Knee Arthroplasty Appropri-ate sizing and positioning of the components and balancing of the size and geometry of bony gaps in flexion and extension are essential for a successful knee arthroplasty. Inappropriate com-ponent position can lead to early wear and failure, instability, pain, and stiffness.Computer Navigation, Robotics, and Joint ArthroplastyComputer-navigated joint arthroplasty has the theoretical ben-efit of more accurate and consistent placement of arthroplasty components through intraoperative feedback to the surgeon regarding component position, planned bone cuts, and align-ment. Disadvantages include increased costs of the technology, prolonged operative times, and risk of infection/fracture at the sites of intraoperative sensor placement within bone. Use of Figure 43-39. Valgus deformity. Osteoarthritis of lateral compart-ment right knee.Figure 43-40. Osteoarthritis of both knees. Note varus alignment of right knee and valgus alignment of left knee (windswept deformity).Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   190822/02/19   10:41 AM 1909ORTHOPEDIC SURGERYCHAPTER 43ABFigure 43-41. A. Varus knee with osteoarthritis. B. Right total knee replacement.Figure 43-42. Computer-assisted robotic targeting arm for total knee replacement.Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   190922/02/19   10:41 AM 1910SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIcomputer navigation in total joint arthroplasty has been shown to minimize outliers in alignment, but there has been no proven benefit in survival or function secondary to computer-navigated or robotic-assisted joint replacement.Fixation Options in Joint ArthroplastyComponents in hip and knee arthroplasty can be secured with cement or biologic fixation. The cement most commonly used is polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA). PMMA serves as a grout between the component and the bone surface. Components secured without cement are grit blasted or porous coated to allow bony on growth or ingrowth, respectively. Hydroxyapatite can also be utilized on implant surfaces to promote bone ingrowth or ongrowth through osteoconductive properties. A majority of hip joint arthroplasty components are now secured without cement, where initial fixation of components is accomplished through press fit techniques. In knee arthroplasty, cement utilization is generally preferred. In hip replacement patients where biologic fixation is unreliable, such as older adults, osteoporotic or previ-ously irradiated cement may be a better option. With revision total hip arthroplasty, cement fixation of components has been shown to lead to earlier mechanical failure.Osteolysis and Aseptic Loosening. Osteolysis is a term used to describe abnormal resorption of bone. Osteolysis can be caused by underlying infection, metastatic disease, or in case of joint replacement, the production of wear debris. Even with appropriately positioned components, some wear of the bear-ing surfaces is expected over time. However, wear rates as well as the size and amount of wear debris differs with the bearing surface. Friction in ceramic on ceramic articulations is the low-est of all bearing surfaces; however, there is increased risk of component fracture and postoperative “squeaking.” In metal or ceramic on polyethylene articulations, wear debris is produced, and polyethylene particles are phagocytized by local macro-phages. Activated macrophages lead to an osteolytic process and bone resorption. Particulate methylmethacrylate cement debris can also play a role in osteolysis by damaging the polyethylene bearing surface. Osteolysis has been shown to be significantly decreased with the advent and use of highly cross-linked poly-ethylene. Improperly positioned components or patient-related factors such as high impact activities can lead to increased wear. A substantial osteolytic response may occur and lead to compo-nent micromotion and aseptic loosening. Patients who present to clinic with pain following joint arthroplasty and an increas-ing zone of osteolysis in the periprosthetic region frequently need revision surgery (Fig. 43-43). Alternative bearing surfaces continue to be explored in hopes of decreasing component wear, associated osteolysis, and aseptic loosening.Complications in Joint ArthroplastyThe risk of any complication following joint arthroplasty proce-dures falls in the range of 5% to 10%. Risks shared by hip and knee arthroplasties include infection, intraoperative or postop-erative fracture, vascular injury, need for intraoperative or post-operative blood transfusion, nerve injury or nerve palsy (most commonly involving the deep peroneal nerve and loss of ankle dorsiflexion), stress shielding, component fracture or wear, and medical complications, including venous thromboembolic dis-ease (DVT and PE), myocardial infarction, or cerebrovascular accident. Complications unique to total hip arthroplasty include dislocation, leg length discrepancy, and iliopsoas impingement or tendonitis.Dislocation Following Hip Arthroplasty. Dislocation can result from malpositioned components (inadequate com-bined version of the femoral stem and acetabular component; extremes of inclination of the acetabular component), noncom-pliance, cognitive or neuromuscular disorders, compromised soft tissue envelope from revision surgery, fracture, or insuf-ficient restoration of length and/or offset. Comparable disloca-tion rates have been found with anterolateral, lateral, anterior, and posterior with soft tissue repair (approximately 0.5%) approaches. History, physical examination, and radiographs are vital to proper treatment of dislocation. Closed reduction can usually be performed with conscious sedation and gentle traction or manipulation. Rarely, open reduction may be neces-sary. Component position should be assessed in patients with multiple dislocations. Patients with recurrent dislocations and suboptimally positioned components may require component revision. Patients with recurrent dislocations and properly posi-tioned components should be considered for conversion to a device with a larger prosthetic head (dual mobility construct) or a constrained total hip arthroplasty implant that provides improved stability.ORTHOPEDIC PATHOLOGY AND ONCOLOGYDiagnosis of Malignant Bone TumorsHistory. Diagnosis of musculoskeletal tumors begins with a thorough patient history. A history of unremitting pain unre-lated to activity or pain that interferes with sleep suggests malig-nancy. Patient age can help in establishing a differential. Round Figure 43-43. Failed total knee replacement. Note subsided, loose, tibial component.Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   191022/02/19   10:41 AM 1911ORTHOPEDIC SURGERYCHAPTER 43blue cell lesions are most likely neuroblastoma in a 5-year-old, Ewing’s sarcoma in a 10-year-old, lymphoma in a 20-year-old, and myeloma in a 60-year-old. Gender also aids in the differen-tial. For instance, giant cell tumor is more common in females, while osteosarcoma is more common in males. Multiple bone involvement may suggest enchondromas (Ollier disease, Maffucci’s syndrome) or osteochondromas (multiple hereditary exostoses).Laboratory Tests. Laboratory tests determine the level of cellular turnover (lactate dehydrogenase [LDH]) or of bone destruction (calcium, alkaline phosphatase). Elevated prostate-specific antigen (PSA) suggests prostate cancer.Imaging. Radiographic studies are critical in the diagnosis of bony tumors. Radiographs can help assess the aggressive-ness of the tumor. Four questions should be addressed when assessing radiographs: (a) Where is the tumor—in which bone (Table 43-1) and in which part of the bone is the lesion? (Table 43-2) (b) What is the tumor doing to the bone (clinical behavior)? (c) What is the bone doing to the tumor (biologic response)? and (d) What is the matrix pattern? Matrix is the acellular interstitial substance produced by tumor cells. Particu-lar attention should be paid to the junction between the tumor and the host bone since this margin can also indicate the aggres-siveness of the tumor. Ewing’s sarcoma has a characteristic “onion skin” periosteal reaction pattern. This reaction pattern also occurs in other tumors and infections.OSTEOSARCOMAThe most common primary malignant bone tumor is osteosar-coma (Fig. 43-44). Osteosarcomas are classified as osteoblas-tic, chondroblastic, fibroblastic, telangiectatic, round cell, or MFH-like, according to the predominant cell type. Most osteo-sarcomas present in patients between 10 and 20 years of age. Secondary osteosarcomas occur in older patients in abnormal bone affected by Paget’s disease, radiation, or bone infarct.Intramedullary OsteosarcomaThis is the most common primary sarcoma of the bone. It usu-ally occurs in the distal femur or the proximal tibia in young people. This condition may also occur at the proximal humerus, proximal femur, or pelvis. It usually presents itself as a high-grade extracompartmental disease. It can metastasize to the bone, which is called a “skip lesion,” but the lung is the primary site of metastases. Long term survival is 75% with adequate treatment. The response to chemotherapy (98% necrosis of the Table 43-1Common locations of bone tumorsFEMURDistal posteriorParosteal osteosarcomaDistal anteriorPeriosteal osteosarcoma, periosteal chondroma or chondrosarcoma, myositis ossificansTIBIAAdamantinoma, chondromyxoid, fibromaHANDS AND FEETEnchondroma, exostosisCalcaneusUnicameral bone cyst, lipoma, chondroblastoma, osteosarcomaSPINEAnteriorMetastatic, myeloma, Paget’s disease, vascular malformation, giant cell tumorPosteriorOsteoid osteoma, osteoblastoma; aneurysmal bone cystPELVISMetastatic, myeloma, chondrosarcoma, giant cell tumor, aneurysmal bone cyst, Paget’s disease, Ewing’s SarcomaSACRUMChordoma (midline), chondrosarcoma, giant cell tumor, aneurysmal bone cyst, lymphomaRIBSMetastatic, myeloma, fibrous dysplasia, chondrosarcomaTable 43-2Tumor location in boneEpiphysisChondroblastoma, clear cell chondrosarcoma, giant cell tumor (GCT), infection, dysplasia epiphysealis hemimelica (DEH)MetaphysisMost common site of involvementDiaphysisF-Fibrous dysplasia, EG-Eosinophilic Granuloma, N-Nonossifying Fibroma, O-Osteoid osteoma, M-Myeloma, A-Adamantinoma, S-Simple Bone Cyst, H-Histiocytosis, I-InfectionFigure 43-44. Osteosarcoma.Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   191122/02/19   10:41 AM 1912SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IItumor after chemotherapy is a good sign) and the stage of the disease determines the prognosis. Young patients may present with pain and swelling, with X-rays showing plastic lesions in some areas of destruction with periosteal reaction called “Codman’s Triangle.” X-rays may show bone formation with a sunburst appearance. MRI should involve the entire bone to diagnose the skip metastasis. CT scans of the chest are usually done to find primary metastases. Alkaline phosphatase is usu-ally high. Diagnosis is typically confirmed with a biopsy, which is done after staging the tumor. Proper biopsy technique should be employed, which includes longitudinal incisions. As a gen-eral rule, the biopsy should be done by the same surgeon who will provide the definitive treatment for the patient. Treatment of osteosarcoma will be preoperative chemotherapy and wide resection, followed by postoperative chemotherapy.Parosteal OsteosarcomaParosteal osteosarcoma is a low-grade surface osteosarcoma that appears as if it were stuck on the bone, especially in the pos-terior distal femoral metaphysis (80%). The differential diagno-sis includes osteochondroma and myositis ossificans. Treatment consists of wide excision. The prognosis is 95% 5-year survival as it is a low-grade tumor.Periosteal OsteosarcomaPeriosteal osteosarcoma is a high-grade tumor. It occurs on the anterior surface of the distal femur or proximal tibia. The lesion appears chondroblastic on histology. Radiographs show scalloping of the underlying cortex with a “sunburst” periosteal reaction. Treatment is chemotherapy and wide surgical excision. The 5-year survival rate is 80%.Paget’s SarcomaPaget’s sarcoma is a rare complication of Paget’s disease. In Paget’s disease with multiple bone involvement, osteogenic sar-coma, fibrosarcoma, chondrosarcoma, and MFH have occurred, most often in the pelvis, but also in the femur, humerus, spine, and skull. This malignant transformation occurs in less than 1% of patients. The patient will complain of new onset pain and swelling. The physician must have a high index of suspicion in patients with Paget’s who previously had no pain. Imaging may demonstrate osteolytic areas and loss of normal fatty marrow and multifocal lesions. Treatment of Paget’s sarcoma is chemo-therapy and wide surgical excision. The prognosis is poor, and the 5-year survival rate is less than 10%.Radiation-Induced SarcomaThe three criteria for diagnosis of radiation-induced sarcoma are (a) histology different from the original lesion, (b) sarcoma develops in the irradiated field, and (c) a 3to 5-year latent period between radiation and sarcoma development. Radiation for carcinoma of the breast and cervix can result in osteosar-coma, chondrosarcoma, fibrosarcoma, or MFH. Treatment is a combination of chemotherapy and surgery.EWING’S SARCOMAEwing’s sarcoma is the second most common primary bone tumor in patients under 25 years of age. The typical presenta-tion is a tumor in the diaphysis of long bones, especially the femur. It can also be seen in the pelvis, the proximal tibia, and proximal humerus, and it is usually seen in young white males. It has a t(11:22) translocation and positive CD99. The patient may have pain and fever with an elevated sedimentation rate and WBC count; the condition may be confused with an infection. An “onion skin” periosteal reaction may be seen on radiographs. A large soft-tissue extension from the primary bone tumor may be seen, and histology reveals a small, round, blue cell tumor (Fig. 43-45). Diagnosis is confirmed with bone marrow biopsy specimen. Bone scan can identify multiple lesions. Treatment is chemotherapy and surgery or radiation therapy for spine or pelvic lesions.CARTILAGE-FORMING TUMORSChondrosarcomasChondrosarcomas typically occur in male patients over 40 years of age, and they are the third most common primary bone malignancies. Primary chondrosarcomas can form clear cell, mesenchymal, or dedifferentiated neoplastic cartilage. Secondary chondrosarcomas may also develop in preexisting lesions such as exostoses or enchondromas. Pelvis, shoulder, and ribs are common locations. Chondroid or “popcorn” cal-cifications are typical on radiographs. Clear cell chondrosar-coma and mesenchymal chondrosarcoma occur in younger patients (second to fifth decades of life). Clear cell chondro-sarcomas are low-grade lesions that often affect the epiphyses. The dedifferentiated chondrosarcoma is a high-grade chondro-sarcoma with a less than 10% survival rate. It has a biomor-phic histology, with a chondroid component and a high-grade spindle cell component.The treatment of chondrosarcoma is surgical excision, since cells are not chemosensitive or radiosensitive. For high-grade lesions, wide or radical resection is recommended. Pelvic and scapular chondrosarcomas have a high recurrence rate, and adjuvant chemotherapy does not improve survival rates.FIBROUS LESIONS OF BONEDesmoplastic FibromaDesmoplastic fibroma is a rare tumor occurring in the mandible, femur, pelvis, radius, or tibia in young adults. It presents as a painful lesion. Radiographs show a metadiaphyseal “soap bubble” appearance and endosteal scalloping. Histology resembles Figure 43-45. Ewing’s sarcoma.Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   191222/02/19   10:41 AM 1913ORTHOPEDIC SURGERYCHAPTER 43desmoid tumors or fibromatosis. Recommended treatment is wide excision to avoid recurrence.Malignant Fibrous Histiocytoma of BoneMFH occurs in the metadiaphysis of long bones after condi-tions like nonossifying fibromas and bone infarcts. It may pres-ent with pain or by a pathologic fracture. Radiographs typically show destructive lesions with soft-tissue extension. Histology resembles osteosarcoma with pleomorphic spindle cells, his-tiocytes, and giant cells, but no neoplastic osteoid formation. Treatment is chemotherapy and wide surgical excision.Malignant Vascular TumorsHemangioendothelioma. Hemangioendothelioma is a malig-nant neoplasm arising from vascular endothelium in long bones and most often occurs in the lower extremity. Radiographs show a metadiaphyseal lytic lesion with a “soap bubble” appearance. Histology reveals eosinophilic cells in a basophilic stroma. Lesions may be multifocal. Treatment consists of curettage for low-grade lesions and wide excision +/radiation therapy for high-grade lesions.Hemangiopericytoma. Hemangiopericytoma is usually a solitary lesion occurring in the soft tissues or the axial skeleton and proximal long bones in middle-aged or older adult males. Histology reveals branching “staghorn” vascular spaces. The tumor cells resemble cells normally seen adjacent to capillaries. Treatment is wide excision.Angiosarcoma of Bone. Angiosarcoma is a soft tissue malig-nancy usually seen in older adult males; chronic vascular stasis is a risk factor. Histology reveals vascular channels with ana-plasia. Treatment is wide excision, or if the tumor is surgically inaccessible, radiation.MISCELLANEOUS TUMORSGiant Cell Tumor of BoneGiant cell tumor is a benign aggressive tumor. Fifty per-cent of these tumors occur around the knee, especially at the distal femur and the proximal tibial. Giant cell tumors may also occur in the distal radius, proximal humerus, and pelvis (especially the sacrum ala) in women 20 to 40 years of age. Presenting complaints include pain and pathologic fracture. Imaging reveals eccentric, epimetaphyseal lytic lesions erod-ing the subchondral bone. Histology reveals multinucleate giant cells and mononuclear stromal cells. An abundance of giant cells in the field can help establish the diagnosis, and the nuclei of giant cells appear the same as the stroma cells (all nuclei look similar) (Fig. 43-46). Giant cell tumors must be differentiated from the Brown tumor of hyperparathy-roidism. While both have giant cells, hyperparathyroidism affects multiple areas, and the serum calcium is not normal. Epiphyseal lesions such as chondroblastoma should also be part of the differential diagnosis. These tumors can occasion-ally metastasize to the chest. Primary malignant giant cell tumor has a poor prognosis. Treatment of giant cell tumors is with curettage and high-speed burr. Recurrence rates are high with simple curettage, and the use of adjuvants such as cryosurgery, phenol, or polymethylmethacrylate bone cement may help decrease recurrence rates. After pathologic fractures, wide excision with reconstruction or amputation may be required.Adamantinoma and Osteofibrous DysplasiaAdamantinomas are low-grade malignant tumors usually seen in the tibia (Fig. 43-47). Adamantinomas are capable of metas-tasizing to the lung. The patient may present with pain and/or bowing of the tibia. X-ray reveals multiple lucent lesions on the cortex of the tibia. Histology reveals a biphasic tumor with nests of epithelial cells and fibrous stroma (see Fig. 43-46). Osteofibrous dysplasia is considered the precursor to ada-mantinoma and should be part of the differential diagnosis. Osteofibrous dysplasia is a benign lesion, usually occurring in children, at the anterior tibia, which is treated with obser-vation. The treatment of adamantinoma is with wide surgical excision.Figure 43-46. Giant cell tumor.Figure 43-47. Typical location of adamantinoma.Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   191322/02/19   10:41 AM 1914SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIPrimary Lymphoma of BonePrimary lymphoma accounts for about 5% of all neoplasms of bone. Long bone involvement is more frequent than spine. Lym-phoma of bone typically occurs in males in their forties. Histol-ogy reveals large B cell lymphomas. Treatment is a combination of chemotherapy and radiation. Surgery may be required for stabilization of pathologic fractures.ChordomaChordoma arises from notochordal remnants in the sacrum. It is usually midline in location. These tumors are found in middle-aged to older men and presents with bladder and bowel symptoms due to involvement of the cauda equina. Visual-ization of the lesion may be difficult because of the bowel gas shadow. Diagnosis may be delayed. An MRI shows a destructive extensile midline lesion with a large soft tissue mass. Histology shows epithelioid cells arranged in cords with vacuolated foamy physaliferous cells. These cells are keratin positive. Treatment is surgical excision and muscle flaps and a mesh for reconstruction. Urinary diversion and colostomy may be needed for loss of bladder and bowel control. Local recurrence is common.Multiple MyelomaMyeloma, the most common primary bone malignancy, is a pro-liferative disorder of B cells with plasma cells producing immu-noglobins. These plasma cells have a classic eccentric nucleus giving a “signet ring” appearance (Fig. 43-48). Evidence of monoclonal protein in the serum and/or urine (Bence Jones proteinuria), and hypercalcemia, renal insufficiency, anemia, or bone disease are usually present.Presenting symptoms in myeloma range from bone pain and osteopenia to focal lytic lesions with pathologic fractures and hypercalcemia. Myeloma protein 1-α stimulates osteo-clast formation. Osteoclast activating factors increase recep-tor activator of nuclear factor κB ligand (RANKL) in the bone marrow. RANKL induces osteoclast differentiation and acti-vation. Myeloma cells inhibit osteoblast differentiation and activity. Serum and urine electrophoresis detect the M protein. Workup also includes complete blood cell count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, calcium levels, renal function assessment, β2-microglobulin levels, and a skeletal survey. X-ray will show multiple punched out lytic lesions. Bone scans may be cold in about 30% of cases. The SPEP, UPEP, and bone marrow biopsy are helpful in diagnosis. Histology will show atypical plasma cells with eccentric nuclei, its appearance resembles a “signet ring (Fig. 43-49).” Plasmacytoma is a solitary tumor with a negative bone marrow biopsy, usually treated with radiation to the lesion. Myeloma is treated with bisphosphonates, chemo-therapy, stem cell transplantation, and radiation therapy. Surgi-cal stabilization and irradiation is done for pathologic fractures or impending fractures. Many patients with myeloma develop a vertebral compression fracture. Kyphoplasty can be useful in providing pain relief. The risks of cement extravasation and related complications are lower with kyphoplasty than with ver-tebroplasty. If there is instability or if there is neural compres-sion, surgical stabilization may be required.METASTATIC BONE TUMORSMetastatic bone tumors are more common than primary bone tumors. Metastatic tumors affect the lung, liver, and bone. Cancers that commonly metastasize to bone are breast, lung, thyroid, kidney, and prostate. In patients older than 40 years of age, metastases and myeloma are the most common causes of destructive lesions in bone. The most common site of involve-ment is the axial skeleton, especially the thoracic spine, and proximal ends of long bones, especially the proximal femur. Lung and renal cell carcinomas can metastasize distal to the knee and elbow. Malignant cells are able to detach from one location and set up a focus at a distant site. The tumor activates osteoclasts and causes destruction of the bone, a mechanism that involves the RANK/RANKL pathway. The patient may present with pain, pathologic fractures, or the manifestation of hypercalcemia. Workup of a patient with a suspected metastatic disease to bone and an unknown primary tumor should include CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis. The extent of the disease is evaluated by bone scans (myeloma and thyroid are usually cold in bone scans), mammography, tumor markers, serum, and urine electrophoresis (SPEP and UPEP). A biopsy may be nec-essary to rule out primary bone lesions if the primary site is not identified. Treatment of bone tumors depends on the diagnosis, as metastatic tumors are treated differently than primary bone tumors. Metastatic tumors are usually treated by bisphospho-nates and by surgical stabilization with postoperative radiation if warranted. Primary bone tumors are usually treated by wide excision with chemotherapy in high-grade tumors (chondrosar-coma are treated only with wide excision). Radiation therapy can be used in Ewing’s.Multiple myelomaEccentricnucleusSignet ring appearanceFigure 43-48. Signet ring.Figure 43-49. Multiple Myeloma showing the eccentric nuclei and the signet appearance of cells.Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   191422/02/19   10:41 AM 1915ORTHOPEDIC SURGERYCHAPTER 43PEDIATRIC ORTHOPEDICSBirth InjuriesNeonatal Brachial Plexus Palsy. Injury of the brachial plexus during delivery occurs in 2 births in every 1000. Large birth weight, forceps delivery, breech presentation, and pro-longed second stage of labor with shoulder dystocia are risk factors. Brachial plexus injury usually represents a stretch injury on the nerve roots of the upper or lower plexus.Upper plexus injuries (Erb-Duchenne) are lesions mani-fested by weakness of shoulder abductors and external rota-tors as well as the elbow flexors (Fig. 43-50). The hand is not involved. It has a good prognosis, if the biceps function is pres-ent early.In lower plexus injury, the hand is involved, with defor-mity of the fingers. An ipsilateral Horner’s Syndrome consist-ing of ptosis, myosis, anhidrosis, and enophthalmos may occur indicating a preganglionic injury of the T1 cervical sympathetic nerve. This condition has a poor prognosis.Management is therapy and gentle, passive range-of-motion exercises to preserve motion in the shoulder and prevent muscle contractures and joint incongruency in the early neonatal period while awaiting return of neurologic function and motor reinnervation. Early surgical intervention for the brachial plexus is indicated in infants who did not recover elbow flexion by 3 months of age, as they are anticipated to have a poor chance of full recovery.Surgical intervention includes microsurgical repair proce-dures in the form of neurolysis, nerve transfer, or nerve grafts. Later orthopedic reconstruction such as muscle rebalancing procedures may be considered to improve function around the shoulder.Cerebral Palsy. Cerebral palsy results from an injury to the brain, which may be associated with mental impairment. Cere-bral palsy is classified as spastic, athetotic, or ataxic and may present with spasticity, hemiplegia, diplegia, or scoliosis. The typical cerebral palsy patient is hyperreflexic with increased muscle tone and spasm. Treatment includes tendon lengthen-ing procedures, release of contractures, and tendon transfers to maintain motion and function.Figure 43-50. Erb’s point.Reserve zone(resting zone)Proliferative zoneHypertrophic zoneZone ofmaturationZone ofdegenerationWWeaWeWeaWeaWeaWeaWeaWWWWWWWWWWWWWWWkkzkzkzkzkkzkzkzkzkzkkkkkkkk zkkkkkzkkoWeak zoneZone ofprovisionalcalcificationFigure 43-51. Different zones of the growth plate.Hip dislocation or subluxation results from unbalanced muscle forces in many cerebral palsy patients. Early treatment consists of soft tissue releases in the form of adductor tendon releases, iliopsoas releases, and immobilization in an abduction brace.In older children with severe deformity, bony procedures in the form of open reduction and femoral or acetabular osteoto-mies are usually required. Femoral head resection is considered to be a salvage procedure in nonambulatory patients with pain-ful dislocated hips.Knee flexion contractures are treated with hamstring muscle lengthenings and immobilization in knee extension braces.Foot and ankle deformities are treated even in nonambu-latory patients to facilitate shoe wear. The most common foot deformity in cerebral palsy is an equinovalgus foot caused by heel cord contracture and peroneal spasm. Tendon balancing is usually necessary, and bony reconstruction may also be needed in severe cases.Skeletal GrowthInjury, inflammatory disease, and developmental disorders in actively growing bones requires special attention to preserve the growth plates. The pediatric skeleton is incompletely ossi-fied making the diagnosis of an injury difficult, since signifi-cant portions of the skeleton are invisible on radiographs. The epiphysis, generally containing an articular surface, is found at the ends of the long bone. The physis, or growth plate, is found beneath the epiphysis. The physis is divided into spe-cific zones: the reserve zone, the zone of proliferation, and the hypertrophic zone. The hypertrophic zone has three phases: the maturation zone, the degenerative zone, and the zone of calcification (Fig. 43-51).Injury or insult to the growth plate can lead to premature growth arrest or angular deformity of the limb. Surrounding the metaphyseal and diaphyseal bone is the periosteum. This meta-bolically active layer of tissue synthesizes new bone onto the diaphyseal and metaphyseal bone and provides circumferential growth of the bones.Ossification centers in the epiphysis appear in a predict-able order and can help determine “bone age.”Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   191522/02/19   10:41 AM 1916SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIPediatric FracturesIn a pediatric patient, the epiphyseal growth plate is unossified and weak and is at risk of fracture. Reduction and stabiliza-tion of epiphyseal fractures is critical to minimize permanent growth disturbances and deformity. Fractures near the growth plate have significant potential to remodel. For example, 80% of the growth of the humerus occurs from the proximal humeral growth plate; therefore, severely displaced proximal humeral fracture can remodel in the younger age group.Classification of Growth Plate InjuriesSalter and Harris described a useful classification for epiphyseal fractures (Fig. 43-52). A Salter-Harris type I injury is a simple transverse fracture through the physis. A Salter-Harris type II fracture contains a component of fracture through the growth plate in continuity with a fracture of the metaphysis. A Salter-Harris type III fracture occurs through the epiphysis and exits through the growth plate, while a Salter-Harris type IV fracture extends through the physis from the metaphysis into the epiphy-sis. A Salter-Harris type V fracture is a crushing injury to the physis. Type III and type IV involve the joint.Treatment of growth plate fracture requires anatomic reduction of the fragments, closed or open. If internal fixation is used, avoid placing the hardware across the growth plate to minimize the chance of injury and premature growth plate clo-sure. When hardware needs to be placed across the physis, it should be limited to smooth K-wires. The most common com-plication is a physeal arrest resulting in leg length discrepancy (LLD) and/or angular deformity. Complete arrest will lead to LLD. Partial arrest will result in angulation in the area of the bar, bridge, and fusion. If less than 50% of the physis is involved and the patient has two years of growth remaining, the bar is usually resected with interposition of fat graft. If the bar (fusion area) is more than 50%, the surgeon will complete the arrest on the same side and will do a contralateral epiphysiodesis on the other extremity.Distal femur physeal fractures are known to have a high rate of leg length discrepancy and angular deformity. The injury will need an anatomical reduction and close follow-up. Parents need to be counseled about the poor prognosis associated with these fractures.Diaphyseal Injuries in a Pediatric PatientLong bone diaphyseal fractures are generally treated closed. Pediatric patients are capable of extensive remodeling so that an angular deformity within the plane of an adjacent joint is often completely remodeled by the growth of the child. Older children do not remodel as well. A 10° angulation in both bones of the forearm in a child over an age of 10 years may cause significant limitation of rotation of the forearm. When internal fixation of a diaphyseal fracture is required, fixation through the physis is avoided.Fractures of the Pediatric HipFractures of the pediatric hip can occur with high-energy trauma, and there is a high rate of avascular necrosis. Pedi-atric patients with hip fractures may be treated with a spica cast. The spica cast includes the abdomen, lower back, pelvis, and lower limb, and derives its name from the resemblance of the plaster wrap over the hip to wheat “spica.” Closed or open reduction and internal fixation is done in fractures with severe displacement. Avascular necrosis is the most common complication after hip fractures. The incidence depends on the age of the patient and the type of the fracture. Children between 3 and 8 years old with very proximal fractures such as transphyseal fractures have the highest incidence of avas-cular necrosis.Fractures of the Femoral ShaftConsider child abuse if a femoral shaft fracture occurs before the walking age. Femoral shaft fractures in a child younger than 6 months are usually treated by a Pavlik harness or spica cast. A child between 6 months and 5 years with an acceptable shortening of the femur is usually treated by an immediate spica cast. The child between 5 years and 11 years is usu-ally treated by surgery. If the fracture is transverse, flexible IM nails may be used, especially if the child weighs less than 100 lbs (45 kg). If the fracture is too proximal or too distal, or if the fracture is comminuted and unstable, a submuscu-lar bridge plate is usually used; alternatively, an external fix-ator may also be used, especially in multiple trauma patients. If the patient is older than 11 years, an interlocking IM rod with a lateral trochanteric entry is used. Insertion of IM rod in younger children can cause avascular necrosis of the femoral head due to interruption of the blood supply. Refracture of the femur is a risk after using an external fixator. Overgrowth of the injured femur with leg length discrepancy can occur in children between 2 and 10 years of age.Figure 43-52. Classification of growth plate injuries.Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   191622/02/19   10:41 AM 1917ORTHOPEDIC SURGERYCHAPTER 43Pediatric Ankle FracturesPediatric ankle fractures include several types. Salter-Harris type I and type II usually involve the fibula, and the fracture may not be apparent. The patient may present with pain and swelling. Salter-Harris type III usually involves fracture of the medial malleolus or avulsion of the anterior inferior tibiofibular ligament from the tibia. It is called a Tillaux fracture. Tillaux fractures occur because the lateral part of the ankle is not fused and it is weak. Triplane fractures are complex ankle fractures in older children as a result of partial closure of the growth plate, and they appear as a Salter II in the lateral view and as a Salter III in an AP view (Fig. 43-53). Salter-Harris I and II fractures are usually managed with casting. Salter-Harris III or IV fractures are usually managed by closed or open reduction and internal fixation. Smooth percutaneous pins or screws are utilized, avoiding the physis.Pediatric Elbow FracturesManagement of pediatric elbow fractures is complex. Famil-iarity with the timing of the ossification centers’ appearance aids in diagnosis. Distal humeral physeal separation can occur from child abuse and can be mistaken for an elbow dislocation. A lateral condylar fracture of the elbow is a significant injury, and when it is displaced it will need anatomical surgical reduc-tion. Medial epicondyle fractures of the elbow are usually treated conservatively unless they are severely displaced. It is associated with elbow dislocation in 50% of cases. When the elbow is reduced, the fragment may lodge in the joint itself and must be removed and fixed. In supracondylar fractures of the humerus (Fig. 43-54), the neurovascular status of the extrem-ity must be assessed carefully before, during, and after treat-ment. The anterior interosseous nerve could be injured, and the patient may not be able to make an “OK sign” (Fig. 43-55). The brachial artery may also be injured. Closed reduction, pos-sible open reduction, and percutaneous pinning is usually done for these fractures. The procedure should be done emergently if there is concern about the vascular status of the extremity. Close follow-up for maintenance of reduction and neurovas-cular status is needed.DEVELOPMENTAL DISEASEDevelopmental Dysplasia of the HipDevelopmental dysplasia of the hip (DDH) involves a spectrum of disease that includes dysplasia, subluxation, or dislocation of the hip. Teratologic hip dislocation is a different entity in which the hip is dislocated in utero and irreducible on neonatal examination, usually associated with neuromuscular conditions and genetic syndromes. Developmental dysplasia of the hip is most often seen in firstborn females with a positive family history or with breech birth.Untreated hip dislocations can lead to a dysplastic acetab-ulum, and they should be recognized and treated early. New-borns are examined for hip instability within the first 72 hours HumerusFigure 43-54. Supracondylar fracture of the humerus.Figure 43-55. Unable to make the “OK” sign due to interosseous nerve injury.Figure 43-53. Triplane fracture of the ankle in children.Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   191722/02/19   10:42 AM 1918SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIof life. Ortolani’s test consists of gentle elevation and abduction of the femur causing a palpable click in the relocation of a dis-located hip. Barlow’s test is gentle adduction and depression of the femur, which causes a palpable click as the hip slips into a dislocated position. In older infants (older than 3 months), limited abduction of the involved hip is an important finding. Infants with a dislocated or dislocatable hip will have apparent length discrepancies of the femur when the hip is positioned at 90° (Galeazzi test).Since the bones are not ossified at birth, X-ray images of the acetabulum and femoral head are not reliable for diag-nosis. Ultrasound is the imaging modality of choice in the neonatal period and can often demonstrate a dislocated or dislocatable hip.Treatment of DDHThe main goal in the treatment of DDH is to achieve stable concentric reduction of the hip.•	Neonate to 6 months: Early treatment with abduction and flexion in a Pavlik harness for 6 to 12 weeks is usually suf-ficient. Avoid severe abduction and flexion in the Pavlik har-ness to avoid the risk of avascular necrosis of the femoral head and femoral nerve palsy.•	Children 6 to 18 months: Closed reduction and application of hip spica cast is indicated in this age group and in those children who failed Pavlik harness treatment.•	Children older than 18 months: Open reduction and cap-sulorrhaphy is indicated in this age group. A variety of procedures, including femoral shortening and pelvic osteoto-mies, are done in older age groups and in more severe cases. Osteonecrosis of the femoral head is a possible complication of treatment and can result in pain and decreased range of motion.Legg-Calvé-Perthes DiseaseOsteonecrosis of the proximal femoral epiphysis can cause flattening of the femoral head called Legg-Calvé Perthes disease. The age at presentation is between 4 and 8 years of age and occurs more in males, usually affecting one side. Younger age at presentation (less than 6 years old) will have a better prognosis. The patient presents with groin or knee pain, decreased hip motion, and a limp. Treatment includes traction, physical therapy, abduction exercises, and crutches. Restoration of range of motion is important. Femoral and pelvic osteotomies may be needed in extreme cases and in older children.Slipped Capital Femoral EpiphysisChildren ages 10 to 16 years can develop displacement of the epiphysis on the femoral neck with no history of injury. The slippage occurs through the weak zone (hypertrophic zone) of the growth plate. When slippage occurs in young patients, check for endocrine disorders such as hypothyroid-ism, renal osteodystrophy, and growth hormone deficiency. Slipped capital femoral epiphysis (SCFE) is associated with African-American heritage and obesity, and it is more com-mon in boys than in girls. One-quarter of cases are bilateral. In patients with endocrine etiology, the condition is usually bilateral. Patients generally present with groin and anterior thigh pain, and the patient may have antalgic gait and a limp. Patient may present with knee pain that can lead to missing the diagnosis. In pediatric patients with knee pain, the ipsi-lateral hip should be assessed as well.Examination of the patient will show obligatory external rotation with flexion and loss of internal rotation of the hip. Obtain AP and frog leg lateral views of both the hips.Slipped epiphysis is classified as either stable or unstable on the basis of the patient’s ability to bear weight. It is classi-fied as stable if the patient is able to bear weight and the risk of osteonecrosis is less than 10%. It is classified as unstable if the patient is unable to bear weight even with crutches, and the incidence of avascular necrosis is high.Treatment for slipped capital femoral epiphysis patients is percutaneous screw fixation through the femoral neck to engage the epiphysis, causing the growth plate to close. Reduc-tion of the slipped epiphysis is not recommended because of an increased risk of avascular necrosis. One screw is usually adequate to prevent further slip.Lower Extremity Rotational AbnormalitiesIntoeing can result from femoral anteversion, tibial torsion, and metatarsus adductus. Mild degree of intoeing is normal in young children 3 to 5 years of age.Excessive internal rotation of the femur will usually cor-rect by age 8. Severe rotation with functional impairment that does not correct by age 10 or 11 may require rotational femoral osteotomy.Tibial torsion is the most common cause of intoeing in toddlers and could be bilateral. The condition usually resolves without treatment.Metatarsus adductus in infants will also resolve spontane-ously in most cases.Congenital Talipes Equinovarus (Clubfoot)Clubfoot is a congenital disorder, and its etiology is not known. Clubfoot is a common problem associated with con-tractures of the medial tendons of the foot, a tight Achilles tendon, and contractures of the ankle, hindfoot, and midfoot. The foot is usually small, and it is in the equinus, varus, cavus, and adduction position. Talipes equinovarus can be corrected by sequential corrective casting of the foot. The serial manip-ulation and the casting technique is called the Ponseti tech-nique, and it has a high success rate. A successful program of casting may be complete in 1 to 5 months. In patients with severe disease or who initiate treatment after 9 months of age, surgical release of contracted soft tissues may be necessary. The procedure is called posteromedial soft tissue release and tendon lengthening.Osgood-Schlatter DiseaseOsgood-Schlatter disease is a common problem most often seen in athletically active adolescents, especially in sprint-ers and jumpers. It is a traction apophysitis of tibial tubercule (Figs. 43-56 and 43-57). One must know the difference between the epiphysis, apophysis, and physis. This disorder is charac-terized by ossification in the distal patellar tendon at the point of its tibial insertion, and it is thought to result from mechani-cal stress on the tendinous insertion. The disease presents with severe local pain and tenderness in the area of the tibial tubercle. Radiographs may show calcified ossicles within the tendon at its insertion.Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   191822/02/19   10:42 AM 1919ORTHOPEDIC SURGERYCHAPTER 43Treatment for the disease is activity restriction and anti-inflammatory drugs. The majority of patients improve with con-servative treatment, and athletic participation can be resumed. Usually, symptoms regress after skeletal maturity or after activ-ity modification. In refractory cases, surgery in the form of ossicle excision is rarely done.BIBLIOGRAPHYEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.TraumaBhandari M, Devereaux PJ, Tornetta III P, et al. Operative man-agement of displaced femoral neck fractures in elderly patients: an international survey. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2005;87(9):2122-2130.Bond CD, Shin AY, McBride MT, Dao KD. Percutaneous screw fixation or cast immobilization for nondisplaced scaphoid frac-tures. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2001;83(4):483-488.Bone LB, Johnson KD, Weigelt J, et al. Early vs. delayed stabiliza-tion of femoral fractures. A prospective randomized study.  J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1989;71:336-340.Bottlang M, Krieg JC, Mohr M, Simpson TS, Madey SM. Emergent management of pelvic ring fractures with use of circumferential compression. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2002;84-A(suppl 2):43-47.Burgess AR, Eastridge BJ, Young JWR, et al. Pelvic ring disrup-tions: Effective classification system and treatment protocols. J Trauma. 1990;30(7):848-856.De Ugarte DA, Morizono K, Elbarbary A, et al. Comparison of multi-lineage cells from human adipose and bone marrow. Cells, Tissue, and Organs. 2003;174:101-109.Dragoo JL, Samimi B, Zhu M, et al. Tissue-engineered cartilage and bone using stem cells from human infrapatellar fat pads. JBJS. 2003;85-B:740-747.Ebraheim N, Cooper J, Siddiqui S. Compartment syndrome book-let. University of Toledo Medical Center. March 1, 2018. Avail-able at: www.utoledo.edu/med/cme/pdf/Compartment%20Syndrome%20Booklet%20and%20Post%20Test%20water marked.pdf. Accessed August 14, 2018.Ebraheim N, Cooper J, Corba L. Synopsis of fractures and dislo-cations. University of Toledo Medical Center. March 1, 2018. Available at: www.utoledo.edu/med/cme/pdf/Synopsis%20of%20Fractures%20and%20Dislocations%20Booklet%20and%20Post%20Test%20Watermarked.pdf. Accessed August 13, 2018.Ebraheim N, Lea J, Cooper J, Corba L. Orthopaedic emergencies booklet. University of Toledo Medical Center. March 1, 2018. Available at: www.utoledo.edu/med/cme/pdf/Orthopedic%20Emergencies%20Booklet%20and%20Post%20Test%20Water marked.pdf. Accessed August 14, 2018.Frankle MA, Herscovici D, DiPasquale TG, Vasey MB, Sanders RW. A comparison of open reduction and internal fixation and primary total elbow arthroplasty in the treatment of intraar-ticular distal humerus fractures in women older than age 65.  J Ortho Trauma. 2003;17(7):473-480. Holstein A, Lewis GB. Fractures of the humerus with radial-nerve paralysis. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1963;45:1382-1388.Lauge-Hansen N. Fractures of the ankle. II. Combined experimental-surgical and experimental-roentgenologic investigations. Arch Surg. 1950;60:957-985.Leslie IJ, Dickson RA. The fractured carpal scaphoid. Natu-ral history and factors influencing outcome. Bone Joint J. 1981;63(2):225-230.Letournel E. Acetabulum fractures: classification and management. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 1980;151:81-106.Lin J. Treatment of humeral shaft fractures with humeral locked nail and comparison with plate fixation. J Trauma. 1998;44(5):859-864.Liporace FA, Adams MR, Capo JT, et al. Distal radius fractures.  J Orthop Trauma. 2009;23(10):739-748.McQueen MM, Gaston P, Court-Brown CM. Acute compartment syndrome: who is at risk? J Bone Joint Surg Br. 2000;82(2): 200-203.Figure 43-57. Differences between physis, epiphysis, and apophysis.Figure 43-56. Osgood Schlatter lesion.Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   191922/02/19   10:42 AM 1920SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIMoran CG, Wenn RT, Sikand M, Taylor AM. Early mortality after hip fracture: is delay before surgery important? J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2005;87:483-489.Moro JK, Werier J, MacDermid JC, Patterson SD, King GJ. Arthro-plasty with a metal radial head for unreconstructible fractures of the radial head. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2001;83-A(8):1201-1211.Neer CS. Displaced proximal humeral fractures. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1970;52(6):1077-1089.Nicoll EA. Fractures of the tibial shaft: a survey of 705 cases.  J Bone Joint Surg Br. 1964;46:373-387.Nork SE, Cannada LK. Hip dislocations and femoral head and neck fractures. In: Baumgaertner MR, Tornetta P III, eds. Orthopaedic Knowledge Update: Trauma 3. Rosemont: American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons; 2005:365-376.Ring D, Jupiter JB, Zilberfarb J. Posterior dislocation of the elbow with fractures of the radial head and coronoid. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2002;84:547-551.Ring D, Quintero J, Jupiter JB. Open reduction and internal fixa-tion of fractures of the radial head. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2002;84-A(10):1811-1815.Roberts CS, Pape HC, Jones AL. Damage control orthopaedics: evolving concepts in the treatment of patients who have sus-tained orthopaedic trauma. Instr Course Lect. 2005;54: 447-462.Ross G, McDevitt ER, Chronister R, Ove PN. Treatment of sim-ple elbow dislocation using immediate motion protocol. Am J Sports Med. 1999;27:308-311.Sanders S, Tejwani N, Egol KA. Traumatic hip dislocation. Bull NYU Hosp Jt Dis. 2010;68(2):91-96.Sarmiento A, Kinman PB, Galvin EG, et al. Functional bracing of fractures of the shaft of the humerus. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1977;59:596-601.Schatzker J, McBroom R, Bruce DD. The tibial plateau fracture: the Toronto experience 1968-1975. ClinOrthop. 1979;138:94-104.Schemitsch EH, Richards RR. The effect of malunion on functional outcome after plate fixation of fractures of both bones of the forearm in adults. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1992;74(7):1068-1078.Schmidt AH, Asnis SE, Haidukewych GI, et al. Femoral neck frac-tures. Instr Course Lect. 2005;54:417-445.Schutz M, Ruedi TP. Principles of internal fixation. In: Buchholz C. Rockwood and Green’s Fractures in Adults. Philadelphia: Wolters Kluwer Health; 2014.Shin SSS. Circulatory and vascular changes in the hip following traumatic hip dislocation. ClinOrthop. 1979;140:255-261.Sidor ML, Zuckerman JD, Lyon T, Koval K, Cuomo F, Schoen-berg N. The Neer classification system for proximal humeral fractures. An assessment of interobserver reliabil-ity and intraobserver reproducibility. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1993;75(12):1745-1750.Tidermark J, Ponzer S, Svensson O, Söderqvist A, et al. Internal fixation compared with total hip replacement for displaced femoral neck fractures in the elderly: a randomised, controlled trial. J Bone Joint Surg Br. 2003;85(3):380-388.Tile MM. Acute pelvic fracture II. Principles of management. J Am Acad Orthop. 1996;4:152-161.Tile MM. Acute pelvic fracture: I. Causation and classification.  J Am Acad Orthop. 1996;4:143-151.Wolfe SW. Distal radius fractures. Green’s Operative Hand Surgery. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Churchill Livingstone; 2011:561-638.Yagishita K, Thomas BJ. Use of allograft for large Hill-Sachs lesion associated with anterior glenohumeral dislocation. A case report. Injury. 2002;33:791-794.SportsAllaire R, Muriuki M, Gilbertson L, Harner CD. Biomechani-cal consequences of a tear of the posterior root of the medial meniscus. Similar to total meniscectomy. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2008;90(9):1922-1931.Araujo P, Van Eck CF, Torabi M, Fu FH. How to optimize the use of MRI in anatomic ACL reconstruction. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc. 2013;21(7):1495-1501.Arnoczky SP, Warren RF, Spivak JM. Meniscal repair using an exogenous fibrin clot. An experimental study in dogs. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1988;70(8):1209-1217.Baer GS, Harner CD. Clinical outcomes of allograft versus auto-graft in anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction. Clin Sports Med. 2007;26(4):661-681.Brophy RH, Marx RG. The treatment of traumatic anterior insta-bility of the shoulder: nonoperative and surgical treatment. Arthroscopy. 2009;25:298-304.Byers PD, Contepomi CA, Farkas TA. A post mortem study of the hip joint. Including the prevalence of the features of the right side. Ann Rheum Dis. 1970;29(1):15-31.Byrd JWT, Jones KS. Arthroscopic femoroplasty in the manage-ment of cam-type femoroacetabular impingement. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2009;467:739-746.Byrd JWT, Jones KS. Prospective analysis of hip arthroscopy with 10-year follow-up. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2010;468: 741-746.Carey JL, Dunn WR, Dahm DL, Zeger SL, Spindler KP. A sys-tematic review of anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction with autograft compared with allograft. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2009;91(9):2242-2250.Clarke MT, Arora A, Villar RN. Hip arthroscopy: complications in 1054 cases. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2003;(406):84-88.Fetto JF, Marshall JL. Medial collateral ligament injuries of the knee: a rationale for treatment. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 1978;(132):206-218.Frost A, Zafar MS, Maffulli N. Tenotomy versus tenodesis in the management of pathologic lesions of the tendon of the long head of the biceps brachii. Am J Sports Med. 2009;37(4):828-833.Ganz R, Parvizi J, Beck M, et al. Femoroacetabular impingement: a cause for osteoarthritis of the hip. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2003;417:112-120.Gartsman GM. Arthroscopic management of rotator cuff disease. J Am Acad Orthop Surg. 1998;6(4):259-266.Harner CD, Mauro CS, Lesniak BP, et al. Biomechanical conse-quences of a tear of the posterior root of the medial meniscus. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2009;91(suppl 2):257-270.Harner CD, Vogrin TM, Höher J, et al. Biomechanical analysis of a posterior cruciate ligament reconstruction. Deficiency of the posterolateral structures as a cause of graft failure. Am J Sports Med. 2000;28(1):32-39.Hovelius L. The natural history of primary anterior dislocation of the shoulder in the young. J Orthop Sci. 1999;4(4):307-317.Ilizaliturri VM, Orozco-Rodriguez L, Acosta-Rodríguez E, et al. Arthroscopic treatment of cam-type femoroacetabular impinge-ment: preliminary report at 2 years minimum follow-up.  J Arthroplasty. 2008;23:226-234.Jakobsen BW, Johannsen HV, Suder P, et al. Primary repair versus conservative treatment of first-time traumatic anterior disloca-tion of the shoulder: a randomized study with 10-year follow-up. Arthroscopy. 2007;23:118-123.Lafosse L, Lejeune E, Bouchard A, et al. The arthroscopic Latar-jet procedure for the treatment of anterior shoulder instability. Arthroscopy. 2007;23(11):1242.e1-e5.LaPrade RF, Resig S, Wentorf F, Lewis JL. The effects of grade III posterolateral knee complex injuries on anterior cruciate liga-ment graft force. A biomechanical analysis. Am J Sports Med. 1999;27(4):469-475.Larson CM, Giveans MR. Arthroscopic management of femoroac-etabular impingement: early outcomes measures. Arthroscopy. 2008;24:540-546.Li H, Tao H, Cho S, et al. Difference in graft maturity of the recon-structed anterior cruciate ligament 2 years postoperatively: a comparison between autografts and allografts in young men Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   192022/02/19   10:42 AM 1921ORTHOPEDIC SURGERYCHAPTER 43using clinical and 3.0-T magnetic resonance imaging evalua-tion. Am J Sports Med. 2012;40(7):1519-1526.MacGillivray JD, Stein BES, Park M, et al. Comparison of tibial inlay versus transtibial techniques for isolated posterior cruciate ligament reconstruction: minimum 2-year follow-up. Arthroscopy. 2006;22:320-328.Mohtadi NG, Hollinshead RM, Sasyniuk TM, et al. A randomized clinical trial comparing open to arthroscopic acromioplasty with mini-open rotator cuff repair for full-thickness rotator cuff tears: disease-specific quality of life outcome at an aver-age 2-year follow-up. Am J Sports Med. 2008;36(6):1043-1051.Morse K, Davis AD, Afra R, et al. Arthroscopic versus mini-open rotator cuff repair: a comprehensive review and meta-analysis. Am J Sports Med. 2008;36:1824-1828.Nho SJ, Shindle MK, Sherman SL, et al. Systematic review of arthroscopic rotator cuff repair and mini-open rotator cuff repair. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2007;89:127-136.Pallis M, Svoboda SJ, Cameron KL, et al. Survival comparison of allograft and autograft anterior cruciate ligament reconstruc-tion at the United States Military Academy. Am J Sports Med. 2012;40(6):1242-1246.Philippon MJ, Briggs KK, Yen YM, et al. Outcomes following hip arthroscopy for femoroacetabular impingement with associ-ated chondrolabral dysfunction: minimum two-year follow-up.  J Bone Joint Surg Br. 2009;91:16-23.Ranawat A, Baker CL, Henry S, et al. Posterolateral corner injury of the knee: evaluation and management. J Am Acad Orthop Surg. 2008;16(9):506-518.Rugg CM, Hettrich CM, Ortiz S, Wolf BR; MOON Shoulder Insta-bility Group, Zhang AL. Surgical stabilization for first-time shoulder dislocators: a multicenter analysis. J Shoulder Elbow Surg. 2018;27(4):674-685.Sampson TG. Complications of hip arthroscopy. Clin Sports Med. 2001;20:831-835.Samuelsson K, Andersson D, Karlsson J. Treatment of anterior cru-ciate ligament injuries with special reference to graft type and surgical technique: an assessment of randomized controlled tri-als. Arthroscopy. 2009;25:1139-1174.Sekiya JK, West RV, Groff YJ, et al. Clinical outcomes following isolated lateral meniscal allograft transplantation. Arthroscopy. 2008;22:771-780.Seldes RM, Tan V, Hunt J, et al. Anatomy, histologic features, and vascularity of the adult acetabular labrum. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2001;382:232-240.Seon JK, Song EK. Reconstruction of isolated posterior cruciate ligament injuries: a clinical comparison of the transtibial and tibial inlay techniques. Arthroscopy. 2006;22:27-32.Silliman JF, Hawkins RJ. Classification and physical diagnosis of instability of the shoulder. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 1993;291:7-19.Simovitch R, Sanders B, Ozbaydar M, et al. Acromioclavicular joint injuries: diagnosis and management. J Am Acad Orthop Surg. 2009;17(4):207-219.Snyder SJ, Karzel RP, Del Pizzo W, Ferkel RD, Friedman MJ. SLAP lesions of the shoulder. Arthroscopy. 1990;6(4):274-279.Swenson TM, Harner CD. Knee ligament and meniscal injuries. Current concepts. Orthop Clin North Am. 1995;26(3):529-546.Tannast M, Siebenrock KA, Anderson SE. Femoroacetabular impingement: radiographic diagnosis—what the radiologist should know. Am J Roentgenol. 2007;188(6):1540-1552.Tashman S, Kolowich P, Collon D, et al. Dynamic function of the ACL-reconstructed knee during running. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2007;454:66-73.Van Eck CF, Lesniak BP, Schreiber VM, et al. Anatomic singleand double-bundle anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction flow-chart. Arthroscopy. 2010;26:258-268.Verma NN, Dunn W, Adler RS, et al. All-arthroscopic versus mini-open rotator cuff repair: a retrospective review with minimum 2-year follow-up. Arthroscopy. 2006;22:587-594.Weaver JK, Dunn HK. Treatment of acromioclavicular injuries, especially complete acromioclavicular separation. J Bone Joint Surg. 1972;54(6):1187-1194.Wolf RS, Zheng N, Weichel D. Long head biceps tenotomy versus tenodesis: a cadaveric biomechanical analysis. Arthroscopy. 2005;21:182-185.SpineAnderson LD, D’alonzo RT. Fractures of the odontoid process of the axis. J Bone Joint Surg. 1974;56(8):1663-1674.Apuzzo ML, Heiden JS, Weiss MH, Ackerson TT, Harvey JP, Kurze T. Acute fractures of the odontoid process: an analysis of 45 cases. J Neurosurg. 1978 Jan;48(1):85-91.Asher MA, Burton DC. Adolescent idiopathic scoliosis: natural history and long term treatment effects. Scoliosis. 2006;1(1):2.Bailitz J, Starr F, Beecroft M, et al. CT should replace three-view radiographs as the initial screening test in patients at high, moderate, and low risk for blunt cervical spine injury: a prospective comparison. J Trauma. 2009;66(6):1605-1609.Bellabarba C, Mirza SK, West GA, et al. Diagnosis and treatment of craniocervical dislocation in a series of 17 consecutive survivors during an 8-year period. J Neurosurg Spine. 2006;4(6): 429-440.Ben Galim PJ, Sibai T, Hipp JA, et al. Internal decapitation: survival after head to neck dissociation injuries. Spine. 2008;33(16):1744-1749.Bransford RJ, Alton TB, Patel AR, Bellabarba C. Upper cervical spine trauma. J Am Acad Orthop Surg. 2014;22(11):718-729.Ceroni D, Mousny M, Lironi A, Kaelin A. Pediatric seatbelt inju-ries: unusual Chance’s fracture associated with intra-abdominal lesions in a child. Eur Spine J. 2004;13(2):167-171.Deyo RA, Mirza SK, Martin BI, Kreuter W, Goodman DC, Jarvik JG. Trends, major medical complications, and charges associ-ated with surgery for lumbar spinal stenosis in older adults. JAMA. 2010;303(13):1259-1265.Dimar JR, Glassman SD, Raque GH, Zhang YP, Shields CB. The influence of spinal canal narrowing and timing of decompres-sion on neurologic recovery after spinal cord contusion in a rat model. Spine. 1999;24:1623-1633.Elgafy H, Bransford RJ, Chapman JR. Epidural hematoma associ-ated with occult fracture in ankylosing spondylitis patient: a case report and review of the literature. J Spinal Disord Tech. 2011;24(7):469-473.El-Khoury GY, Kathol MH, Daniel WW. Imaging of acute injuries of the cervical spine: value of plain radiography, CT, and MR imaging. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 1995;164(1):43-50.Fehlings MG, Sekhon LH, Tator C. The role and timing of decompression in acute spinal cord injury. Spine. 2001;26: s101-s110.Fehlings MG, Tator CH. An evidence-based review of decompres-sive surgery in acute spinal cord injury: rationale, indications, and timing based on experimental and clinical studies. J Neuro-surg Spine. 1999;91:1-11.Genevay S, Courvoisier DS, Konstantinou K, et al. Clinical classification criteria for neurogenic claudication caused by lumbar spinal stenosis. The N-CLASS criteria. Spine J. 2018;18(6):941-947.Joaquim AF, Patel AA, Schroeder GD, Vaccaro AR. A simplified treatment algorithm for treating thoracic and lumbar spine trauma. J Spinal Cord Med. 2018;7:1-11.Kesterson L, Benzel E, Orrison W, Coleman J. Evaluation and treat-ment of atlas burst fractures (Jefferson fractures). J Neurosurg. 1991;75(2):213-220.Kwon BK, Vaccaro AR, Grauer JN, Fisher CG, Dvorak MF. Subaxial cervical spine trauma. J Am Acad Orthop Surg. 2006;14(2):78-89.Li XF, Dai LY, Lu H, Chen XD. A systematic review of the manage-ment of hangman’s fractures. Eur Spine J. 2006;15(3):257-269.Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   192122/02/19   10:42 AM 1922SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIMacias CA, Rosengart MR, Puyana JC, et al. The effects of trauma center care, admission volume, and surgical volume on paralysis after traumatic spinal cord injury. Ann Surg. 2009;249(1):10-17.McAFEE PC, Yuan HA, Lasda NA. The unstable burst fracture. Spine. 1982;7(4):365-373.Negrini S, Aulisa AG, Aulisa L, et al. 2011 SOSORT guidelines: orthopaedic and rehabilitation treatment of idiopathic scoliosis during growth. Scoliosis. 2012;7(1):3.Reid AB, Letts RM, Black GB. Pediatric Chance fractures: associa-tion with intra-abdominal injuries and seatbelt use. J Trauma. 1990;30(4):384-391.Rorabeck CH, Rock MG, Hawkins RJ, Bourne RB. Unilateral facet dislocation of the cervical spine. An analysis of the results of treatment in 26 patients. Spine. 1987;12(1):23-27.Shapiro S. Medical realities of cauda equina syndrome secondary to lumbar disc herniation. Spine. 2000;25(3):348-352.Shields CB, Zhang YP, Shields LB, Han Y, Burke DA, Mayer NW.  The therapeutic window for spinal cord decompression in a rat spinal cord injury model. J Neurosurg Spine. 2005;3: 302-307.Spector LR, Madigan L, Rhyne A, Darden B 2nd, Kim D. Cauda equina syndrome. J Am Acad Orthop Surg. 2008;16(8):471-479.Tambe AD, Panikkar SJ, Millner PA, Tsirikos AI. Current concepts in the surgical management of adolescent idiopathic scoliosis. Bone Joint J. 2018;100-B(4):415-424.Weiss HR, Negrini S, Rigo M, et al. Indications for conservative management of scoliosis (guidelines). Scoliosis. 2006;1(1):5.Wolf A, Levi L, Mirvis S, Ragheb J, Huhn S, Rigamonti D,  Robinson WL. Operative management of bilateral facet  dislocation. J Neurosurg. 1991;75(6):883-890.Joint ReconstructionAbu-Amer Y, Darwech I, Clohisy JC. Aseptic loosening of total joint replacements: mechanisms underlying osteolysis and potential therapies. Arthritis Res Ther. 2007;9(suppl 1):S6.Alazzawi S, Bardakos NV, Hadfield SG, Butt U, Beer ZH, Field RE. Patient-reported complications after elective joint replacement surgery: are they correct? Bone Joint Surg Br. 2012;94(8):1120-1125.American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons. Treatment of Osteo-arthritis of the Knee: Evidence-Based Guideline. 2nd ed. May 18, 2013. Available at: www.aaos.org/cc_files/aaosorg/research/guidelines/treatmentofosteoarthritisofthekneeguideline.pdf. Accessed August 14, 2018.Beckenbaugh RD, Ilstrup DM. Total hip arthroplasty. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1978;60(3):306-313.Berry DJ, Von Knoch M, Schleck CD, Harmsen WS. Effect of fem-oral head diameter and operative approach on risk of disloca-tion after primary total hip arthroplasty. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2005;87(11):2456-2463.Bergin PF, Doppelt JD, Kephart CJ, et al. Comparison of mini-mally invasive direct anterior vs. posterior total hip arthroplasty.  J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2011;93(15):1392-1398.Berstock JR, Blom AW, Beswick AD. A systematic review and meta-analysis of complications following the posterior and lat-eral surgical approaches to total hip arthroplasty. Ann R Coll Surg Engl. 2015;97(1):11-16.Callahan LF, Rao J, Boutaugh M. Arthritis and women’s health: prevalence, impact, and prevention. Am J Prev Med. 1996;12(5):401-409.Chechik O, Khashan M, Lador R, Salai M, Amar E. Surgical approach and prosthesis fixation in hip arthroplasty world wide. Arch Orthop Trauma Surg. 2013;133:1595-1600.Cheng YJ, Hootman JM, Murphy LB, Langmaid GA, Helmick CG. Prevalence of doctor-diagnosed arthritis and arthritis-attribut-able activity limitation—United States, 2007-2009. MMWR. 2010;59(39):1261-1265.Davis CM III, Berry DJ, Harmsen WS. Cemented revision of failed uncemented femoral components of total hip arthroplasty.  J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2003;85-A(7):1264-1269.Felson DT, Zhang Y. An update on the epidemiology of knee and hip osteoarthritis with a view to prevention. Arthritis Rheum. 1998;41(8):1343-1355.Furner SE, Hootman JM, Helmick CG, Bolen J, Zack MM. Health-related quality of life of US adults with arthritis: analysis of data from the behavioral risk factor surveillance system, 2003, 2005, and 2007. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2011;63(6):788-799.Haaker RG, Tiedjen K, Ottersbach A, Rubenthaler F, Stockheim M, Stiehl JB. Comparison of conventional versus computer-navigated acetabular component insertion. J Arthroplasty. 2007;22(2):151-159.Hardinge K. The direct lateral approach to the hip. J Bone Joint Surg Br. 1982;64(1):17-19.Hootman JM, Helmick CG. Projections of U.S. prevalence of arthritis and associated activity limitations. Arthritis Rheum. 2006;54(1):266-229.Hürlimann M, Schiapparelli FF, Rotigliano N, Testa E, Amsler F, Hirschmann MT. Influence of surgical approach on hetero-topic ossification after total hip arthroplasty—is minimal inva-sive better? A case control study. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2017;18(1):27.Jewett BA, Collis DK. High complication rate with anterior total hip arthroplasties on a fracture table. Clin Orthop Rel Res. 2010;469(2):503-507.Johnston RC, Brand RA, Crowninshield RD. Reconstruction of the hip. A mathematical approach to determine optimum geometric relationships. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1979;61:639-652.Jones CW, Jerabek SA. Current role of computer navigation in total knee arthroplasty. J Arthroplasty. 2018;33(7):1989-1993.Kim YH, Park JW, Kim JS. Computer-navigated versus conven-tional total knee arthroplasty: a prospective randomized trial. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2012;94(22):2017-2024.Kurtz S, Ong K, Lau E, Mowat F, Halpern M. Projections of primary and revision hip and knee arthroplasty in the  United States from 2005 to 2030. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2007;89(4):780-785.Kwon MS, Kuskowski M, Mulhall KJ, Macaulay W, Brown TE, Saleh KJ. Does surgical approach affect total hip arthroplasty dislocation rates? Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2006;447:34-38.Maratt JD, Gagnier JJ, Butler PD, Hallstrom BR, Urquhart AG, Roberts KC. No difference in dislocation seen in anterior vs posterior approach total hip arthroplasty. J Arthroplasty. 2016;31(9):127-130.Meneghini, R. Michael, et al. Direct anterior approach: risk factor for early femoral failure of cementless total hip arthroplasty: a multicenter study. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2017;99(2):99-105.Miller, Larry E., et al. Does surgical approach affect outcomes in total hip arthroplasty through 90 days of follow-up? A systematic review with meta-analysis. J Arthroplasty. 2018;33(4):1296-1302.Murphy L, Schwartz TA, Helmick CG, et al. Lifetime risk of symptomatic knee osteoarthritis. Arthritis Rheum. 2008;59(9):1207-1213.Pai VS. A modified direct lateral approach in total hip arthroplasty. J Orthop Surg. 2002;10(1):35-39.Penninx BW, Messier SP, Rejeski WJ, et al. Physical exercise and the prevention of disability in activities of daily liv-ing in older persons with osteoarthritis. Arch Intern Med. 2001;161(19):2309-2316.Pivec R, Johnson AJ, Mears SC, et al. Hip arthroplasty. Lancet. 2012;380(9855):1768-1777.Pospischill M, Kranzl A, Attwenger B, Knahr K. Minimally inva-sive compared with traditional transgluteal approach for total hip arthroplasty: a comparative gait analysis. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2010;92(2):328-337.Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   192222/02/19   10:42 AM 1923ORTHOPEDIC SURGERYCHAPTER 43Sassoon A, Nam D, Nunley R, et al. Systematic review of patient-specific instrumentation in total knee arthroplasty: new but not improved. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2015;473(1):151-158.Shih M, Hootman JM, Kruger J, Helmick CG. Physical activity in men and women with arthritis National Health Interview Survey, 2002. Am J Prev Med. 2006;30(5):385-393.Soong M, Rubash HE, Macaulay W. Dislocation after total hip arthroplasty. Am Acad Orthop Surg. 2004;12:314-321.Taunton MJ, Trousdale RT, Sierra RJ, Kaufman K, Pagnano MW. John Charnley award: Randomized Clinical Trial of Direct Anterior and Miniposterior Approach THA: Which Provides Better Functional Recovery? Clin Orthop Rel Res. 2018;476(2):216-229.Tronzo RG. Surgical approaches to the hip. Surgery of the Hip Joint. New York: Springer; 1984:75-113.Vail T, Callaghan J. Minimal incision total hip arthroplasty. J Am Acad Orthop Surg. 2007;15:707-715.Whatling GM, Dabke HV, Holt CA, Jones L, Madete J, Alderman PM, Roberts P. Objective functional assessment of total hip arthroplasty following two common surgical approaches: the posterior and direct lateral approaches. Proc Inst Mech Eng H. 2008;222(6):897-905.Whiteside LA. Soft tissue balancing: the knee. J Arthroplasty. 2002;17(4):23-27.Orthopedic OncologyAndresen KJ, Sundaram M, Unni KK, Sim FH. Imaging features of low-grade central osteosarcoma of the long bones and pelvis. Skeletal Radiol. 2004;33(7):373-379.Becker N. Epidemiology of multiple myeloma. In: Moehler T, Goldschmidt H, eds. Multiple Myeloma. Berlin: Springer; 2011:25-35.Chakarun CJ, Forrester DM, Gottsegen CJ, Patel DB, White EA, Matcuk Jr GR. Giant cell tumor of bone: review, mim-ics, and new developments in treatment. Radiographics. 2013;33(1):197-211.Coleman RE. Clinical features of metastatic bone disease and risk of skeletal morbidity. Clin Cancer Res. 2006;12(20): 6243s-6249s.Dai X, Ma W, He X, Jha RK. Review of therapeutic strategies for osteosarcoma, chondrosarcoma, and Ewing’s sarcoma. Med Sci Monit. 2011;17(8):RA177-190.Gaspar N, Hawkins DS, Dirksen U, et al. Ewing sarcoma: current management and future approaches through collaboration.  J Clin Oncol. 2015;33(27):3036-3046.Giuffrida AY, Burgueno JE, Koniaris LG, Gutierrez JC, Duncan R, Scully SP. Chondrosarcoma in the United States (1973 to 2003): an analysis of 2890 cases from the SEER database. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2009;91(5):1063-1072.Inwards CY, Wenger D. Parosteal osteosarcoma. In: Tumors and Tumor-Like Lesions of Bone. London: Springer; 2015: 217-226.Jawad MU, Cheung MC, Min ES, Schneiderbauer MM, Koniaris LG, Scully SP. Ewing’s sarcoma demonstrates racial disparities in incidence-related and sex-related differences in outcome: an analysis of 1631 cases from the SEER database, 1973-2005. Cancer. 2009;115(15):3526-3536.Klenke FM, Wenger DE, Inwards CY, Rose PS, Sim FH. Giant cell tumor of bone: risk factors for recurrence. Clin Orthopaed Relat Res. 2011;469(2):591-599.Kyle RA, Rajkumar SV. Criteria for diagnosis, staging, risk strati-fication and response assessment of multiple myeloma.  Leukemia. 2009;23(1):3-9.Luetke A, Meyers PA, Lewis I, Juergens H. Osteosarcoma treat-ment–where do we stand? A state of the art review. Cancer Treat Rev. 2014;40(4):523-532.Mankin HJ, Hornicek FJ. Paget’s sarcoma: a historical and outcome review. Clin Orthopaed Relat Res. 2005;438:97-102.Mirabello L, Troisi RJ, Savage SA. Osteosarcoma incidence and survival rates from 1973 to 2004: data from the sur-veillance, epidemiology, and end results program. Cancer. 2009;115(7):1531-1543.Most MJ, Sim FH, Inwards CY. Osteofibrous dysplasia and ada-mantinoma. J Am Acad Orthop Surg. 2010;18(6):358-366.Rougraff BT. Evaluation of the patient with carcinoma of unknown origin metastatic to bone. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2003;415(suppl):S105-S109.Spychalski JN, Thomas BJ. Treatment and rehabilitation of patho-logic fractures. State of the Art Reviews: Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation. 1995;9(1):77-92.Visuri T, Pukkala E, Paavolainen P, Pulkkinen P, Riska EB. Cancer risk after metal on metal and polyethylene on metal total hip arthroplasty. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 1996; (329 suppl):S280-S289.Walcott BP, Nahed BV, Mohyeldin A, Coumans JV, Kahle KT,  Ferreira MJ. Chordoma: current concepts, management, and future directions. Lancet Oncol. 2012;13(2):e69-e76.Pediatric OrthopedicsBoardman MJ, Herman MJ, Buck B, Pizzutillo PD. Hip fractures in children. J Am Acad Orthop Surg. 2009;17(3):162-173.Brown JH, DeLuca SA. Growth plate injuries: Salter-Harris clas-sification. Am Fam Phys. 1992;46(4):1180-1184.Crawford AH, Mehlman CT, Slovek RW. The fate of untreated developmental dislocation of the hip: Longterm follow-up of eleven patients. J Pediatr Orthop. 1999;19(5):641-644; 369(9572):1541-1552.Foad SL, Mehlman CT, Ying J. The epidemiology of neonatal bra-chial plexus palsy in the United States. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2008;90:1258-1264.Flynn JM, Schwend RM. Management of pediatric femoral shaft fractures. J Am Acad Orthop Surg. 2004;12(5):347-359.Gilbert A, Khouri N, and Carloiz H. Birth palsy of the brachial plexus—surgical exploration and attempted repair in twenty one cases (in French). Rev Chir Orthop Reparatrice Appar Mot. 1980;66:33-42.Herring JA, Tachdjian MO. Tachdjian’s Pediatric Orthopedics. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders/Elsevier; 2014.Jessel RH, Zurakowski D, Zilkens C, Burstein D, Gray ML,  Kim YJ. Radiographic and patient factors associated with pre-radiographic osteoarthritis in hip dysplasia. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2009;91(5):1120-1129.Jowett CR, Morcuende JA, Ramachandran M. Management of con-genital talipes equinovarus using the Ponseti method: a system-atic review. J Bone Joint Surg Br. 2011;93(9):1160-1164.Kim HK. Legg-Calve-Perthes disease. J Am Acad Orthop Surg. 2010;18(11):676-686.Lee SS, Mahar AT, Miesen D, Newton PO. Displaced pediat-ric supracondylar humerus fractures: biomechanical analy-sis of percutaneous pinning techniques. J Pediatr Orthop. 2002;22(4):440-443.Lincoln TL, Suen PW. Common rotational variations in children. J Am Acad Orthop Surg. 2003;11(5):312-320.Loder RT, Aronsson DD, Weinstein SL, Breur GJ, Ganz R, Leunig M. Slipped capital femoral epiphysis. Instr Course Lect. 2008;57:473-498.Mahan ST, Katz JN, Kim YJ. To screen or not to screen? A decision analysis of the utility of screening for developmental dysplasia of the hip. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2009;91(7):1705-1719.Murray AW, Wilson NI. Changing incidence of slipped capital fem-oral epiphysis: a relationship with obesity? J Bone Joint Surg Br. 2008;90(1):92-94.O’Donnell S. Pediatric ankle fractures. In: The Orthopedic Consult Survival Guide. New York: Springer; 2017:265-269.Palocaren T, Holmes L, Rogers K, Kumar SJ. Outcome of in situ pinning in patients with unstable slipped capital femoral Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   192322/02/19   10:42 AM 1924SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITokmakova KP, Stanton RP, Mason DE. Factors influenc-ing the development of osteonecrosis in patients treated for slipped capital femoral epiphysis. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2003;85(5):798-801.Trousdale RT. Acetabular osteotomy: indications and results. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2004;429:182-187.Wainwright AM, Auld T, Benson MK, Theologis TN. The clas-sification of congenital talipes equinovarus. Bone Joint J. 2002;84(7):1020-1024.Weiler R, Ingram M, Wolman R. Osgood-Schlatter disease. Br Med J (Online). 2011;1:343.epiphysis: assessment of risk factors associated with avascular necrosis. J Pediatr Orthop. 2010;30(1):31-36.Parsch K, Weller S, Parsch D. Open reduction and smooth Kirschner wire fixation for unstable slipped capital femoral epiphysis. J Pediatr Orthop. 2009;29(1):1-8.Rosenbaum P, Paneth N, Leviton A, et al. A report: the definition and classification of cerebral palsy April 2006. Dev Med Child Neurol Suppl. 2007;109(suppl 109):8-14.Sjöberg I, Erichs K, Bjerre I. Cause and effect of obstetric  (neonatal) brachial plexus palsy. Acta Paediatrica. 1988;77(3): 357-364.Stevenson DA, Mineau G, Kerber RA, Viskochil DH, Schaefer C, Roach JW. Familial predisposition to developmental dysplasia of the hip. J Pediatr Orthop. 2009;29(5):463-466.Brunicardi_Ch43_p1879-p1924.indd   192422/02/19   10:42 AM
# Chunk 8946
Surgery of the Hand and WristScott D. Lifchez and Brian H. Cho 44chapterINTRODUCTIONThe highly mobile, functional, and strong hand is a major dis-tinguishing point between humans and the nonhuman primates. The hand is an essential participant for activities of daily living, vocation, and recreational activities. The hand is even adaptable enough to read for the blind and speak for the mute. The under-lying goal of all aspects of hand surgery is to maximize mobil-ity, sensibility, stability, and strength while minimizing pain. These goals are then maximized to the extent possible given the patient’s particular pathology. Hand surgery is a regional specialty.Hand surgeons integrate components of neurologic, ortho-pedic, plastic, and vascular surgery in the care of patients with disorders of the upper extremities.1ANATOMY OF THE HAND AND WRISTIn order to understand any disorder of the hand, one must under-stand the anatomy of the underlying structures. Examina-tion of the hand is based on demonstrating the function or lack thereof of each of these structures.BonesThe hand is highly mobile in space to allow maximum flex-ibility in function. As such, a number of directions particular to the hand are necessary in order to properly describe posi-tion, motion, and so on.1 Palmar (or volar) refers to the anterior surface of the hand in the anatomic position; dorsal refers to the posterior surface in the anatomic position. The hand can rotate at the wrist level; rotation to bring the palm down is called 2Introduction	1925Anatomy of the Hand   and Wrist	1925Bones / 1925Muscles Affecting the Hand and  Wrist / 1926Tendons and Pulleys / 1929Vascular / 1929Nerve / 1930Hand Examination	1931Emergency Department/Inpatient Consultation / 1931Hand Imaging	1932Plain X-Rays / 1932Computed Tomography / 1932Ultrasonography / 1932Magnetic Resonance  Imaging / 1933Angiography / 1933Trauma	1933Fractures and Dislocations / 1934Tendons / 1935Nerve Injuries / 1936Vascular Injuries / 1936Anesthesia	1936Local Anesthesia / 1936Hand Surgery Under Local  Anesthesia / 1938Postoperative Pain Management / 1938Special Considerations	1938Amputations and Replantation / 1938Fingertip Injuries / 1938High-Pressure Injection Injuries / 1939Compartment Syndrome / 1939Complications	1943Nonunion / 1943Stiffness / 1943Neuroma / 1943Regional Pain Syndromes / 1943Nerve Compression	1943Carpal Tunnel Syndrome / 1944Cubital Tunnel Syndrome / 1944Other Sites of Nerve Compression / 1945Degenerative Joint Disease	1945Small Joints (Metacarpophalangeal and Interphalangeal)	1945Wrist / 1945Rheumatoid Arthritis / 1946Dupuytren’s Contracture	1947Infections	1947Cellulitis / 1947Abscess / 1948Collar-Button Abscess / 1948Osteomyelitis / 1949Pyogenic Arthritis / 1949Necrotizing Infections / 1949Infectious Flexor Tenosynovitis / 1950Felon / 1951Paronychia / 1951Tumors	1952Benign Soft Tissue Tumors / 1953Malignant Soft Tissue Tumors— Cutaneous / 1955Malignant Soft Tissue Tumors—Noncutaneous / 1956Benign Bone Tumors / 1956Malignant Bone Tumors / 1957Secondary Metastatic Tumors / 1958Burns	1958Acute Management / 1958Surgical Management / 1959Reconstruction / 1959Special Considerations / 1960Vascular Disease	1960Progressive Thrombotic Disease / 1960Systemic Vasculopathy / 1960Vasospastic Disorders / 1961Congenital Differences	1961Failure of Formation / 1961Failure of Differentiation / 1961Duplication / 1961Overgrowth / 1961Constriction Band Syndrome / 1961Generalized Skeletal Anomalies and Syndromes / 1961Reconstructive Transplantation   of the Upper Extremity	1962Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   192520/02/19   2:48 PM 1926pronation, and rotation to bring the palm up is called supina-tion. Because the hand can rotate in space, the terms medial and lateral are avoided. Radial and ulnar are used instead as these terms do not vary with respect to the rotational position of the hand. Abduction and adduction, when used on the hand, refer to movement of the digits away from and toward the middle finger, respectively (Fig. 44-1).The hand is comprised of 19 bones arranged in five rays.2 A ray is defined as a digit (finger or thumb) from the metacarpal base to the tip of the digit (Fig. 44-2A). The rays are numbered 1 to 5, beginning with the thumb. By convention, however, they are referred to by name: thumb, index, middle, ring, and small. There are five metacarpals, comprising the visible palm of the hand. Each digit has a proximal and a distal phalanx, but only the fingers have a middle phalanx as well. The metacarpopha-langeal (MP) joint typically allows 90° of flexion with a small amount of hyperextension. In addition, the fingers can actively abduct (move away from the middle finger) and adduct (move toward the middle finger). The thumb, in contrast, moves prin-cipally in the flexion-extension arc at the MP joint. Although there can be laxity in the radial and ulnar direction, the thumb cannot actively move in these directions at the MP level. The proximal interphalangeal joint (PIP) is the critical joint for  finger mobility. Normal motion is 0° to 95° (full extension to flexion). The distal interphalangeal joint (DIP) also moves only in a flexion-extension plane from 0° to 90° on average. The thumb interphalangeal joint (IP) also moves only in a flexion-extension plane. Its normal motion is highly variable between individuals, but averages 0° to 80°.Each of the MP and IP joints has a radial and ulnar col-lateral ligament to support it. The IP joint collateral ligaments are on tension with the joint fully extended. For the fingers, the MP joint collateral ligaments are on tension with the joint bent 90°. Collateral ligaments have a tendency to contract when not placed on tension; this becomes relevant when splinting the hand (see later “Trauma” section on splinting).The wrist consists of eight carpal bones divided into two rows (see Fig. 44-2B).2 The proximal row consists of the scaph-oid, lunate, and triquetrum. The lunate is the principle axis of motion of the hand onto the forearm. It bears approximately 35% of the load of the wrist onto the forearm. The scaphoid is shaped like the keel of a boat and bears 55% of the load of the hand onto the forearm, but it also serves as the principle link between the proximal and distal rows, allowing for motion while maintaining stability. Both the scaphoid and the lunate articulate with the radius. The triquetrum resides ulnar to the lunate. It does not interact with the ulna proximally; rather, it interacts with a cartilage suspended between the ulnar styloid and the distal radius called with triangular fibrocartilage com-plex (TFCC) (see Fig. 44-2B). The remaining 10% of load of the hand onto the forearm is transmitted through the TFCC.3The distal row consists of four bones. The trapezium resides between the scaphoid and the thumb metacarpal. Dis-tally, it has a saddle-shaped surface, which interacts with a reciprocally saddle-shaped base of the thumb metacarpal to allow for high mobility of the thumb carpometacarpal (CMC) joint in radial-ulnar and palmar-dorsal directions and opposition (Fig. 44-1B). The trapezoid rests between the scaphoid and the index finger metacarpal. The capitate, the largest carpal bone and first to ossify in a child, lies between the lunate and the middle finger metacarpal, but it also interacts with the scaph-oid on its proximal radial surface. The index and middle finger CMC joints are highly stable and have minimal mobility. The hamate is the ulnar-most bone in the distal row, sitting between the triquetrum proximally and the ring and small finger metacar-pals distally. The ring and small finger CMC joints are mobile, principally in the flexion-extension direction.The pisiform is a carpal bone only by geography. It is a sesamoid bone within the FCU tendon (see following section). It does not bear load and can be excised, when necessary, without consequence.Muscles Affecting the Hand and WristThe wrist is moved by multiple tendons that originate from the forearm and elbow. The digits of the hand are moved by both intrinsic (originating within the hand) and extrinsic (originating in the forearm) muscles. All of these muscles are innervated by the median, radial, or ulnar nerves (or their branches) (Fig. 44-3).Three muscles flex the wrist, all of which originate from the medial epicondyle of the humerus. The flexor carpi radialis (FCR, median nerve) inserts on the volar base of the index fin-ger metacarpal. The flexor carpi ulnaris (FCU, ulnar nerve) also originates from the proximal ulna and inserts on the volar base of the small finger metacarpal. The palmaris longus (PL) tendon does not insert on a bone; it inserts on the palmar fascia, located deep to the skin in the central proximal palm, and is absent in up to 15% of patients. The FCR also deviates the wrist radially, whereas the FCU deviates the wrist ulnarly.All three wrist extensors are innervated by the radial nerve or its branches. The extensor carpi radialis longus (ECRL) Key Points1	Surgery of the hand is a regional specialty, integrating com-ponents of neurologic, orthopedic, plastic, and vascular surgery.2	Understanding hand anatomy is the key to proper diagnosis of injury, infection, and degenerative disease of the hand.3	After evaluation and/or treatment, patients should be splinted to protect the injured digits and keep the collateral ligaments of the injured joints on tension (metacarpophalangeal joints flexed, interphalangeal joints extended).4	Healing of an injured or diseased structure in the hand is not the endpoint of treatment; the goal of any intervention must be to obtain structure healing, relief of pain, and maximiza-tion of function.5	If a patient managed conservatively for cellulitis does not improve within 24 to 48 hours of appropriate intravenous antibiotics, abscess must be suspected.6	Clinical examination, particularly noting the area of greatest tenderness and/or inflammation, is the most useful diagnos-tic tool for hand infections.Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   192620/02/19   2:48 PM 1927SURGERY OF THE HAND AND WRISTCHAPTER 44originates from the distal shaft of the humerus and inserts on the dorsal base of the index finger metacarpal. The extensor carpi radialis brevis (ECRB) originates from the lateral epicondyle of the humerus and inserts on the dorsal base of the middle finger metacarpal. The extensor carpi ulnaris (ECU) also originates from the lateral epicondyle of the humerus and inserts on the dorsal base of the small finger metacarpal. The ECRL deviates the wrist radially, whereas the ECU deviates the wrist ulnarly.The long flexors of the fingers all originate from the medial epicondyle of the humerus. The flexor digitorum super-ficialis (FDS) inserts on the base of the middle phalanx of each finger and primarily flexes the PIP joint. The flexor digitorum profundus (FDP) inserts on the base of the distal phalanx and primarily flexes the DIP joint. The flexor pollicis longus (FPL) originates more distally, from the ulna, radius, and interosseous membrane between them in the forearm. It inserts on the base of the distal phalanx of the thumb and primarily flexes the IP joint. All of these tendons can also flex the more proximal joint(s) in their respective rays. All of these muscles are innervated by the median nerve (or its branches) except the FDP to the ring and small fingers, which are innervated by the ulnar nerve.The extrinsic extensors of the fingers and thumb are all innervated by the posterior interosseous nerve (PIN, branch of the radial nerve). The extensor digitorum communis (EDC) originates from the lateral epicondyle of the humerus and extends the MP joints of the fingers. Unlike most tendons that attach directly into a bone, the EDC tendons do not insert on the dorsal base of the proximal phalanx, but rather into a soft tissue sling called the sagittal hood, which surrounds the proximal phalanx base and pulls up on the volar surface in a ABCDFigure 44-1. Directions of finger, hand, and wrist motion. A. Finger abduction (white arrows) and adduction (black arrows). B. Thumb radial (black arrow) and palmar (white arrow) abduction. C. Thumb and small finger opposition. D. Hand/wrist pronation (black arrow) and supination (white arrow).Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   192720/02/19   2:48 PM 1928SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIhammock-like manner. More distally in the dorsal forearm, the extensor indices proprius (EIP) and extensor digiti quinti (EDQ) originate from the ulna, radius, and posterior interosseous mem-brane and insert on the sagittal hood of the index and small fingers, respectively.The thumb has three separate extrinsic extensors. All of these originate from the dorsal ulna in the mid-forearm and are innervated by the PIN. The abductor pollicis longus (APL) inserts on the radial base of the thumb metacarpal to produce some extension, but mostly abduction. The extensor pollicis ECRL/ECRBEPLEDQECUTCL23455432Radial AANUlnarSCHMedian NAPLEPBFPLPFCREIP/EDCFigure 44-3. Cross-section of the wrist at the midcarpal level. The relative geography of the neurologic and tendinous structures can be seen. The transverse carpal ligament (TCL) is the roof of the carpal tunnel, passing volar to the median nerve and long flexor tendons. The TCL is also the floor of the ulnar tunnel, or Guyon’s canal, passing dorsal to the ulnar artery and nerve. The wrist and digital extensor tendons are also seen, distal to their compartments on the distal radius and ulna. Bones: C = capitate; H = hamate; P = pisiform; S = scaphoid. Tendons (flexor digitorum superficialis is volar to flexor digitorum profundus within the carpal tunnel): 2 = index finger; 3 = middle finger; 4 = ring finger; 5 = small finger. A = artery; APL = abductor pollicis longus; ECRB = extensor carpi radialis brevis; ECRL = extensor carpi radialis longus; ECU = extensor carpi ulnaris; EDC = extensor digitorum communis; EDQ = extensor digiti quinti; EIP = extensor indices proprius; EPB = extensor pollicis brevis; EPL = extensor pollicis longus; FCR = flexor carpi radialis; FPL = flexor pollicis longus; N = nerve.ABFigure 44-2. Bony architecture of the hand and wrist. A. Bones of the hand and digits. All rays have metacarpophalangeal (MP) joints. The fingers have proximal and distal interphalangeal joints (PIP and DIP), but the thumb has a single interphalangeal (IP) joint. B. Bones of the wrist. The proximal row consists of the scaphoid, lunate, and capitate. The distal row bones articulate with the metacarpals: the trapezium with the thumb, the trapezoid with the index, the capitate with the middle, and the hamate with the ring and small. The pisiform bone is a sesamoid within the flexor carpi ulnaris tendon. It overlaps the triquetrum and hamate but does not contribute to a carpal row. CMC = carpometacarpal; TFCC = triangular fibrocartilage complex.Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   192820/02/19   2:48 PM 1929SURGERY OF THE HAND AND WRISTCHAPTER 44brevis (EPB) inserts on the base of the thumb proximal pha-lanx. The extensor pollicis longus (EPL) inserts on the base of the thumb distal phalanx.The intrinsic muscles of the hand are what allow humans fine, subtle movements of the hand. Microsurgery, typing, and even video gaming would be difficult, if not impossible, without them.The thenar muscles originate from the volar radial surface of the scaphoid and trapezium and the flexor retinaculum. The abductor pollicis brevis (APB) inserts on the radial base of the thumb proximal phalanx and abducts the thumb in a radial and volar direction. The opponens pollicis (OP) inserts on the radial distal aspect of the thumb metacarpal and draws the thumb across the palm toward the small finger. The flexor pollicis bre-vis (FPB) inserts on the base of the thumb proximal phalanx and flexes the thumb MP joint. The APB, OP, and superficial head of the FPB are all innervated by the thenar motor branch of the median nerve.The lumbrical muscles are unique in the body in that they originate from a tendon. Each finger’s lumbrical originates from the FDP tendon in the palm. The lumbrical tendon passes along the radial aspect of the digit to flex the MP and extend the IP joints. The index and middle lumbricals are median nerve inner-vated, and the ring and small finger lumbricals are ulnar nerve innervated.The hypothenar muscles originate from the pisiform, hamate, and flexor retinaculum and insert on the ulnar base of the small finger proximal phalanx. The abductor digiti quinti (ADQ) abducts the small finger. The opponens digiti quinti (ODQ) brings the small finger across the palm in reciprocal motion to the OP. The flexor digiti quinti (FDQ) flexes the small finger metacarpal. All of these muscles are innervated by the ulnar nerve.The interosseous muscles occupy the space between the metacarpal bones. Their tendons insert on the bases of the proxi-mal phalanges. All act to flex the MP joints and extend the IP joints. The three palmar interosseous muscles adduct the fin-gers. The four dorsal interosseous muscles abduct the fingers. The adductor pollicis originates from the middle finger metacar-pal and inserts on the ulnar base of the thumb proximal phalanx. It acts to adduct the thumb. All of these muscles, as well as the deep head of the FPB, are innervated by the ulnar nerve.Tendons and PulleysMultiple pulleys pass over or surround the extrinsic tendons en route to or within the hand. Their purpose is to maintain tendon position near the bone, allowing maximal translation of tendon excursion into joint motion.The most well known of the wrist-level pulleys is the flexor retinaculum, also known as the transverse carpal liga-ment. It attaches to the scaphoid tubercle and trapezium radially and the hook of the hamate bone and pisiform ulnarly. Deep to this ligament, between the scaphoid (radially) and the hamate (ulnarly), pass the FDS, FDP, and FPL tendons as well as the median nerve. This area is also known as the carpal tunnel (see Fig. 44-3).On the dorsum of the wrist, the extensor retinaculum is divided into six compartments. Beginning on the radial aspect of the radius, the first compartment contains the APL and EPB tendons. The second holds the ECRL and ECRB tendons. The EPL passes through the third compartment. The fourth com-partment contains the EIP and EDC tendons, the fifth the EDQ, and the sixth the ECU. The sixth compartment is located on the ulnar aspect of the distal ulna. Although the compartments end at the radiocarpal/ulnocarpal joints, the relative geography of the tendons is preserved over the carpal bones (see Fig. 44-3).In the hand, the pulleys maintain the long flexor tendons in close apposition to the fingers and thumb. There are no extensor pulleys within the hand. Each finger has five annular and three cruciate pulleys (Fig. 44-4). The second and fourth (A2 and A4) pulleys are the critical structures to prevent bowstringing of the finger.3 The remaining pulleys can be divided as needed for sur-gical exposure or to relieve a stricture area.VascularTwo major arteries serve the hand. The radial artery travels under the brachioradialis muscle in the forearm. At the junc-tion of the middle and distal thirds of the forearm, the artery becomes superficial and palpable, passing just radial to the FCR tendon. At the wrist level, the artery splits into two branches. The smaller, superficial branch passes volarly into the palm to contribute to the superficial palmar arch. The larger branch passes dorsally over the scaphoid bone, under the EPL and EPB tendons (known as the anatomic snuffbox) and back volarly between the proximal thumb and index finger metacarpals to form the superficial palmar arch.The ulnar artery travels deep to the FCU muscle in the forearm. When the FCU becomes tendinous, the ulnar artery resides deep and slightly radial to it. At the wrist, the artery travels between the hamate and pisiform bones superficial to the transverse carpal ligament (known as Guyon’s canal) into the palm. The larger, superficial branch forms the superficial A5C3A4C2A3C1A2A1Figure 44-4. Drawing of anteroposterior and lateral view of the pulley system.Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   192920/02/19   2:48 PM 1930SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIpalmar arch. The deeper branch contributes to the deep palmar arch (Fig. 44-5A). In 97% of patients, at least one of the deep or superficial palmar arches is intact, allowing for the entire hand to survive on the radial or ulnar artery.5Each digit receives a radial and ulnar digital artery. For the thumb, the radial digital artery may come from the deep palmar arch or the main body of the radial artery. The larger ulnar digi-tal artery comes off the deep arch as either a discrete unit, the princeps pollicis artery, or less frequently as the first common digital artery, which then splits into the radial digital artery to the index finger and the ulnar digital artery to the thumb. The second, third, and fourth digital arteries typically branch off the superficial palmar arch and pass over the similarly named inter-osseous spaces respectively, ultimately dividing into two proper digital arteries each. The ulnar digital artery of the small finger comes off as a separate branch from the superficial arch. Within the finger, the proper digital arteries travel lateral to the bones and tendons, just palmar to the midaxis of the digit, but dorsal to the proper digital nerves (Fig. 44-5B).NerveThree principal nerves serve the forearm, wrist, and hand: the median, radial, and ulnar nerves. The most critical of these from a sensory standpoint is the median nerve. The median nerve begins as a terminal branch of the medial and lateral cords of the brachial plexus. It receives fibers from C5–T1. The palmar cuta-neous branch of the median nerve separates from the main body of the nerve 6 cm proximal to the volar wrist crease and serves the proximal, radial-sided palm. The main body of the median nerve splits into several branches after the carpal tunnel: a radial digital branch to the thumb, an ulnar digital nerve to the thumb, and a radial digital nerve to the index finger (sometimes begin-ning as a single first common digital nerve); the second common digital nerve that branches into the ulnar digital nerve to the index finger and the radial digital nerve to the middle finger; and a third common digital nerve that branches into the ulnar digital nerve to the middle finger and a radial digital nerve to the ring finger. The digital nerves provide volar-sided sensation from the metacarpal head level to the tip of the digit. They also, through their dorsal branches, provide dorsal-sided sensation to the dig-its from the midportion of the middle phalanx distally via dorsal branches. The thenar motor branch of the median nerve most commonly passes through the carpal tunnel and then travels in a recurrent fashion back to the thenar muscles. Less commonly, the nerve passes through or proximal to the transverse carpal ligament en route to its muscles.In the forearm, the median nerve gives motor branches to all of the flexor muscles except the FCU, and the ring and small finger portions of the FDP. Distal median motor fibers (with the exception of those to the thenar muscles) are carried through a large branch called the anterior interosseous nerve.The ulnar nerve is a terminal branch of the medial cord of the brachial plexus. It receives innervation from C8 and T1 roots. The FCU and FDP (ring/small) receive motor fibers from the ulnar nerve. In the distal forearm, 5 cm above the head  of the ulna, the nerve gives off a dorsal sensory branch. Once in the hand, the nerve splits into the motor branch and sensory branches. The motor branch curves radially at the hook of the hamate bone to innervate the intrinsic muscles, as described ear-lier. The sensory branches become the ulnar digital nerve to the small finger and the fourth common digital nerve, which splits into the ulnar digital nerve to the ring finger and the radial digi-tal nerve to the small finger. The sensory nerves provide distal dorsal sensation similar to the median nerve branches.The radial nerve is the larger of two terminal branches of the posterior cord of the brachial plexus. It receives fibers from C5–T1 nerve roots. It innervates all of the extensor muscles of the forearm and wrist through the PIN branch except for the ECRL, which is innervated by the main body of the radial nerve in the distal upper arm. There is no ulnar nerve contribution to extension of the wrist, thumb, or finger MP joints. As noted ear-lier, the ulnar innervated intrinsic hand muscles are the principle ABFigure 44-5. Arteries of the hand and finger. A. Relative position of the superficial and deep palmar arches to the bony structures and each other; note the radial artery passes dorsal to the thumb metacarpal base, through the first web space, and anterior to the index metacarpal base as it forms the deep arch. B. The neurovascular bundles lay volar to the midaxis of the digit with the artery dorsal to the nerve; Grayson’s ligament (volar) and Cleland’s ligament (dorsal) connect the bone to the skin surrounding the bundle.Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   193020/02/19   2:48 PM 1931SURGERY OF THE HAND AND WRISTCHAPTER 44extensors of the finger IP joints, although the long finger exten-sors (EDC, EIP, EDQ) make a secondary contribution to this function.In the proximal dorsal forearm, the superficial radial nerve (SRN) is the other terminal branch of the radial nerve. It travels deep to the brachioradialis muscle until 6 cm proximal to the radial styloid, where it becomes superficial. The SRN provides sensation to the dorsal hand and the radial three and a half dig-its up to the level of the mid-middle phalanx (where the dorsal branches of the proper digital nerves take over, as described earlier). The dorsal branch of the ulnar nerve provides sensation to the ulnar one and a half digits and dorsal hand in complement to the SRN.HAND EXAMINATIONEmergency Department/Inpatient ConsultationA common scenario in which the hand surgeon will be intro-duced to the patient is in trauma or other acute situations. The patient is evaluated by inspection, palpation, and provocative testing.On inspection, one should first note the position of the hand. The resting hand has a normal cascade of the fingers, with the small finger flexed most and the index finger least  (Fig. 44-6). Disturbance of this suggests a tendon or skeletal problem. Also note any gross deformities or wounds and what deeper structures, if any, are visible in such wounds. Observe for abnormal coloration of a portion or all of the hand (this can be confounded by ambient temperature or other injuries), edema, and/or clubbing of the fingertips.Palpation typically begins with the radial and ulnar artery pulses at the wrist level. Pencil Doppler examination can sup-plement this and evaluate distal vessels. A pulsatile signal is normally detectable by pencil Doppler in the pad of the finger at the center of the whorl of creases. Discrepancies between digits should be noted. If all other tests are inconclusive, pricking the involved digit with a 25-gauge needle should produce bright red capillary bleeding. If an attached digit demonstrates inadequate or absent blood flow (warm ischemia), the urgency of complet-ing the evaluation and initiating treatment markedly increases.Sensation must be evaluated prior to any administration of local anesthetic. At a minimum, light and sharp touch sensation should be documented for the radial and ulnar aspects of the tip of each digit. Beware of writing “sensation intact” at the con-clusion of this evaluation. Rather, one should document what was tested (e.g., “light and sharp touch sensation present and symmetric to the tips of all digits of the injured hand”). For a more detailed evaluation of hand sensation, two-point discrimi-nation may be assessed using a bent paperclip or monofilament. In the setting of a sharp injury, sensory deficit implies a lacer-ated structure until proven otherwise. Once sensation has been evaluated and documented, the injured hand can be anesthetized for patient comfort during the remainder of the examination (see below).Ability to flex and extend the wrist and digital joints is typically examined next. At the wrist level, the FCR and FCU tendons should be palpable during flexion. The wrist exten-sors are not as readily palpated due to the extensor retinaculum. Ability to flex the DIP joint (FDP) is tested by blocking the finger at the middle phalanx level. To test the FDS to each  finger, hold the remaining three fingers in slight hyperextension and ask the patient to flex the involved digit (Fig. 44-7). This maneuver makes use of the fact that the FDP tendons share a common muscle belly. Placing the remaining fingers in exten-sion prevents the FDP from firing, and allows the FDS, which has a separate muscle belly for each tendon, to fire. Strength in grip, finger abduction, and thumb opposition is tested and compared to the uninjured side. Range of motion for the wrist, MP, and IP joints should be noted and compared to the opposite side.If there is suspicion for closed space infection, the hand should be evaluated for erythema, swelling, fluctuance, and localized tenderness. The dorsum of the hand does not have fascial septae; thus, dorsal infections can spread more widely than palmar ones. The epitrochlear and axillary nodes should be palpated for enlargement and tenderness. Findings for spe-cific infectious processes will be discussed in the “Infections” section.ABFigure 44-6. In the normal resting hand, the fingers assume a slightly flexed posture from the index finger (least) to the small finger (most). A. Anteroposterior view. B. Lateral view.Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   193120/02/19   2:48 PM 1932SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIAdditional exam maneuvers and findings, such as those for office consultations, will be discussed with each disease pro-cess covered later in this chapter.HAND IMAGINGPlain X-RaysAlmost every hand evaluation should include plain X-rays of the injured or affected part. A standard, anteroposterior, lateral, and oblique view of the hand or wrist (as appropriate) is rapid, inexpensive, and usually provides sufficient information about the bony structures to achieve a diagnosis in conjunction with the symptoms and findings.6Lucencies within the bone should be noted. Most com-monly, these represent fractures, but they can on occasion rep-resent neoplastic or degenerative processes. Great care should be taken to evaluate the entire X-ray, typically beginning away from the area of the patient’s complaint. Additional injuries can be missed, which might affect the treatment plan selected and eventual outcome.Congruency of adjacent joints should also be noted. The MP and IP joints of the fingers should all be in the same plain on any given view. Incongruency of the joint(s) of one finger implies fracture with rotation. At the wrist level, the proxi-mal and distal edge of the proximal row and proximal edge of the distal row should be smooth arcs, known as Gilula’s arcs  (Fig. 44-8A). Disruption of these implies ligamentous injury or possibly dislocation (Fig. 44-8B).7Computed TomographyComputed tomography (CT) scanning of the hand and wrist can provide additional bony information when plain X-rays are insufficient. Comminuted fractures of the distal radius can be better visualized for number and orientation of fragments. Scaphoid fractures can be evaluated for displacement and com-minution preoperatively as well as for the presence of bony bridging postoperatively (Fig. 44-9). Recent studies have sug-gested that in the setting of suspected scaphoid fractures with negative radiographs, the use of CT scans may decrease the healthcare costs and patient morbidity.8 CT scans are also useful for CMC fractures of the hand where overlap on a plain X-ray lateral view may make diagnosis difficult.Unlike the trunk and more proximal extremities, CT scans with contrast are less useful to demonstrate abscess cavities due to the small area of these spaces.UltrasonographyUltrasonography has the advantages of being able to demon-strate soft tissue structures and being available on nights and weekends. Unfortunately, it is also highly operator dependent. In the middle of the night when magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is not available, ultrasound may be able to demonstrate a Figure 44-7. The examiner holds the untested fingers in full exten-sion, preventing contracture of the flexor digitorum profundus. In this position, the patient is asked to flex the finger, and only the flexor digitorum superficialis will be able to fire.ABFigure 44-8. Gilula’s arcs are seen shown in this normal patient (A) and in a patient with a scaphoid fracture and perilunate dislocation (B).Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   193220/02/19   2:48 PM 1933SURGERY OF THE HAND AND WRISTCHAPTER 44Figure 44-9. A. Preoperative images demonstrate a nonunion of a scaphoid fracture sustained 4 years earlier. B. Postoperatively, cross-sectional imaging with a computed tomography scan in the coronal plan demonstrates bone crossing the previous fracture line. This can be difficult to discern on plain X-rays due to overlap of bone fragments.ABlarge deep infection in the hand but is rarely more useful than a thorough clinical examination. Additionally, the use of dynamic ultrasound may be used to evaluate tendon motion and aid in the diagnosis of tendon pathology or injury.9Magnetic Resonance ImagingMRI provides the best noninvasive visualization of the soft tis-sue structures. With contrast, MRI can demonstrate an occult abscess. Unfortunately, it is often not available on an urgent basis for hand issues when this information is often needed. MRI can also demonstrate soft tissue injuries such as cartilage or ligament tears or tendonitis (usually by demonstrating edema in the area in question). It can demonstrate occult fractures that are not sufficiently displaced to be seen on X-ray or CT (again, by demonstrating edema). MRI can also demonstrate vascular disturbance of a bone, as in a patient with avascular necrosis of the scaphoid (Fig. 44-10).AngiographyAngiography of the upper extremity is rarely used. In many cen-ters, MRI and CT angiography provide sufficient resolution of the vascular structures to make traditional angiography unnec-essary. Also, primary vascular disease of the upper extremity is relatively uncommon. In the trauma setting, vascular distur-bance usually mandates exploration and direct visualization of the structures in question, and angiography is thus obviated.For a patient with vascular disease of the upper extrem-ity, angiography of the upper extremity is usually performed through a femoral access much like with the leg. An arterial catheter can be used to deliver thrombolytic drugs to treat a thrombotic process.TRAUMAThe upper extremity–injured patient may have additional inju-ries to other parts of the body. All injured patients should receive an appropriate trauma survey to look for additional injuries.The patient with upper extremity trauma is evaluated as described in the “Hand Examination” section. Sensory exami-nation should be performed early. Once sensory status has been documented, administration of local anesthesia can provide comfort to the patient during the remainder of the evaluation Figure 44-10. T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging shows perfused bone as white. In this patient, there is the absence of white-ness where the scaphoid should be (dashed circle), consistent with avascular necrosis.Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   193320/02/19   2:48 PM 1934SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIand subsequent treatment. Patients with nonclean wounds who received fewer than three prior doses of tetanus toxoid (or more than 5 years since last tetanus vaccination) or have an unknown history of prior doses should receive tetanus immunoglobulin as well as tetanus vaccination.10Fractures and DislocationsFor dislocations and displaced fractures, a visible deformity is often present. Nondisplaced fractures may not show a gross deformity but will have edema and tenderness to palpation at the fracture site. A fracture is described by its displacement, rotation, and angulation. A fracture is also described in terms of comminution and the number and complexity of fracture fragments. Displacement is described as a percentage of the diameter of the bone; rotation is described in degrees of supina-tion or pronation with respect to the rest of the hand; angula-tion is described in degrees. To avoid confusion, it is useful to describe which direction the angle of the fracture points. All injuries should be evaluated for nearby wounds (open) that may introduce bacteria into the fracture site or joint space.Once the initial force on the fracture ceases, the tendons passing beyond the fracture site provide the principal deforming force. Their force is directed proximally and, to a lesser extent, volarly. Based on this, the stability of a fracture can be deter-mined by the orientation of the fracture with respect to the shaft of the bone. Transverse fractures are typically stable. Oblique fractures typically shorten. Spiral fractures typically rotate as they shorten and thus require surgical treatment.Fractures of the tuft of the distal phalanx are common. Catching of a finger in a closing door is a common causative mechanism. These fractures are often nondisplaced and do not require treatment beyond protection of the distal phalanx from additional trauma while the fracture heals.Displaced transverse fractures of the phalanges can usu-ally be reduced with distraction. The distal part is pulled away from the main body of the hand and then pushed in the direc-tion of the proximal shaft of the finger, and then distraction is released. Postreduction X-rays should routinely be performed to document satisfactory reduction. Oblique and spiral frac-tures usually are unstable after reduction. The involved digit(s) should be splinted until appropriate surgical intervention can be performed.Articular fractures of the IP and MP joints are worrisome because they may compromise motion. Chip fractures must be evaluated for instability of the collateral ligaments. If the joint is stable, the patient should initially be splinted for comfort. Motion therapy should be instituted early (ideally within the first week) to prevent stiffness. For larger fractures, the patient should be splinted until surgical treatment can be performed. In surgery, the fracture is typically internally fixated to allow for early motion, again with the goal of preventing stiffness.11,12Dislocations of the PIP joints produce traction on the neurovascular structures but usually do not lacerate them. In general, the patient should not be sent home with a joint that remains dislocated. Most commonly, the distal part is dorsal to the proximal shaft and sits in a hyperextended position. For this patient, the examiner gently applies pressure to the base of the distal part until it passes beyond the head of the proximal phalanx. Once there, the relocated PIP joint is gently flexed, confirming the joint is in fact reduced. The joint is splinted in slight flexion to prevent redislocation. On occasion, the head of the proximal phalanx may pass between the two slips of the FDS tendon. For these patients, the joint may not be reducible in a closed fashion.Angulated fractures of the small finger metacarpal neck (“boxer’s fracture”) are another common injury seen in the ER. Typical history is that the patient struck another individual or rigid object with a hook punch. These are often stable after reduction using the Jahss maneuver (Fig. 44-11).13Fractures of the thumb metacarpal base are often unstable. The Bennett fracture displaces the volar-ulnar base of the bone. The remainder of the articular surface and the shaft typically dislocate dorsoradially and shorten. The thumb often appears grossly shortened, and the proximal shaft of the metacarpal may reside at the level of the trapezium or even the scaphoid on X-ray. In a Rolando fracture, a second fracture line occurs between the remaining articular surface and the shaft. These fractures nearly always require open reduction and internal fixation.Most nondisplaced fractures do not require surgical treat-ment. The scaphoid bone of the wrist is a notable exception to this rule. Due to peculiarities in its vascular supply, particularly vulnerable at its proximal end, nondisplaced scaphoid fractures can fail to unite in up to 20% of patients even with appropriate immobilization. Recent developments in hardware and surgi-cal technique have allowed stabilization of the fracture with minimal surgical exposure. One prospective randomized series of scaphoid wrist fractures demonstrated shortening of time to union by up to 6 weeks in the surgically treated group, but no difference in rate of union.14 Surgery may be useful in the younger, more active patient who would benefit from an earlier return to full activity.Ligament injuries of the wrist can be difficult to recognize. Patients often present late and may not be able to localize their pain. In severe cases, the ligaments of the wrist can rupture to the point of dislocation of the capitate off the lunate or even the lunate off the radius. Mayfield and colleagues classified the progression of this injury into four groups.15 In the most severe group, the lunate dislocates off the radius into the carpal tunnel. In some circumstances, the scaphoid bone may break rather than Figure 44-11. The Jahss maneuver. The surgeon fully flexes the patient’s small finger into the palm and secures it in his distal hand. The proximal hand controls the wrist and places the thumb on the patient’s fracture apex (the most prominent dorsal point). The examiner distracts the fracture, pushes dorsally with the distal hand (up arrow), and resists dorsal motion with the proximal hand (down arrow).Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   193420/02/19   2:48 PM 1935SURGERY OF THE HAND AND WRISTCHAPTER 44the scapholunate ligament rupturing. Attention to the congru-ency or disruption of Gilula’s arcs will help the examiner to recognize this injury. For patients with type 4 (most severe) and some with type 3 injury, the examiner should also evaluate for sensory disturbance in the median nerve distribution because this may indicate acute carpal tunnel syndrome and necessitate more urgent intervention. Although the Mayfield pattern of injury is most common, force can also transmit along alternate paths through the carpus.16After reduction of fractures and dislocations (as well as after surgical repair of these and many other injuries), the hand must be splinted in a protected position. For the fingers, MP joints should be splinted 90°, and the IP joints at 0° (called the intrinsic plus position). The wrist is generally splinted at 20° extension because this puts the hand in a more functional posi-tion. This keeps the collateral ligaments on tension and helps prevent secondary contracture. In general, one of three splints should be used for the emergency department (ED) patient (Fig. 44-12). The ulnar gutter splint uses places plaster around the ulnar border of the hand. It is generally appropriate for small finger injuries only. Dorsal plaster splints can be used for injuries of any of the fingers. Plaster is more readily con-toured to the dorsal surface of the hand than the volar surface, particularly in the setting of trauma-associated edema. For thumb injuries, the thumb spica splint is used to keep the thumb radially and palmarly abducted from the hand. Lastly, sugar tong splints include a volar and dorsal slab that includes the elbow in order to prevent supination and pronation. Sugar tong splints are most often used in the setting of acute distal radius or ulna fractures.TendonsInjuries to the flexor and extensor tendons compromise the mobility and strength of the digits. On inspection, injury is nor-mally suspected by loss of the normal cascade of the fingers. The patient should be examined as described earlier to evaluate for which tendon motion is deficient. If the patient is unable to cooperate, extension of the wrist will produce passive flexion of the fingers and also demonstrate a deficit. This is referred to at the tenodesis maneuver.Flexor tendon injuries are described based on zones  (Fig. 44-13). Up until 40 years ago, zone 2 injuries were always reconstructed and never repaired primarily due to concern that the bulk of repair within the flexor sheath would prevent tendon glide. The work of Dr. Kleinert and colleagues at the University of Lou-isville changed this “axiom” and established the principle of pri-mary repair and early controlled mobilization postoperatively.17 Flexor tendon injuries should always be repaired in the operat-ing room. Although they do not need to be repaired on the day 3Figure 44-12. Commons splints used for hand injuries/surgeries. A. Ulnar gutter splint. The ring and small fingers are included and maintain an interphalangeal (IP) joint extension and metacarpopha-langeal (MP) joint flexion to 90°. B. Dorsal four-finger splint. As  with the ulnar gutter splint, finger MP joints are flexed to 90° with IP joints kept fully extended. C. Thumb spica splint. One easy method to fabricate is to place one slab of plaster radially over the wrist and thumb with a second square of plaster over the thenar eminence, which joins the first. D. Sugar tong splint. This dorsal and volar slab splints immobilizes the wrist and elbow in neutral and 90° positions, respectively.Figure 44-13. The zones of flexor tendon injury. I. Flexor digito-rum superficialis insertion to the flexor digitorum profundus inser-tion. II. Start of the A1 pulley to the flexor digitorum superficialis insertion. III. End of the carpal tunnel to the start of the A1 pulley. IV. Within the carpal tunnel. V. Proximal to the carpal tunnel.Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   193520/02/19   2:48 PM 1936SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIof injury, the closer to the day of injury they are repaired, the easier it will be to retrieve the retracted proximal end in surgery. The laceration should be washed out and closed at the skin level only using permanent sutures. The hand should be splinted as described earlier; one notable difference is that the wrist should be splinted at slight flexion (about 20°) to help decrease the retracting force on the proximal cut tendon end.Extensor tendons do not pass through a sheath in the fin-gers. As such, bulkiness of repair is less of a concern. With proper supervision/experience and equipment, primary extensor tendon repair can be performed in the ED.Very distal extensor injuries near the insertion on the dor-sal base of the distal phalanx may not have sufficient distal ten-don to hold a suture. Closed injuries, called mallet fingers, can be treated with extension splinting of the DIP joint for 6 contin-uous weeks. For patients with open injuries, a dermatotenodesis suture is performed. A 2-0 or 3-0 suture is passed through the distal skin, tendon remnant, and proximal tendon as a mattress suture. Using a suture of a different color than the skin clos-ing sutures will help prevent removing the dermatotenodesis suture(s) too soon. The DIP joint is splinted in extension.More proximal injuries are typically repaired with a 3-0 braided permanent suture. Horizontal mattress or figure-of-eight sutures should be used, two per tendon if possible. Great care should be used to ensure matching the appropriate proximal and distal tendon ends. The patient is splinted with IP joints in extension and the wrist in extension per usual. MP joints should be splinted in 45° flexion, sometimes less. Although this posi-tion is not ideal for MP collateral ligaments, it is important for taking tension off of the tendon repairs.Nerve InjuriesIn the setting of a sharp injury, a sensory deficit implies a nerve laceration until proven otherwise. For blunt injuries, even dis-placed fractures and dislocations, nerves are often contused but not lacerated and are managed expectantly. Nerve repairs require appropriate microsurgical equipment and suture; they should not be performed in the ED. As with tendons, nerve injuries do not require immediate exploration. However, earlier exploration will allow for easier identification of structures and less scar tissue to be present. The nerve must be resected back to healthy nerve fascicle prior to repair. Delay between injury and repair can thus make a difference between the ability to repair a nerve primarily or the need to use a graft. The injured hand should be splinted with MPs at 90° and IPs at 0°, as described earlier.Vascular InjuriesVascular injuries have the potential to be limb or digit threaten-ing. A partial laceration of an artery at the wrist level can poten-tially cause exsanguinating hemorrhage. Consultations for these injuries must be evaluated urgently.Initial treatment for an actively bleeding wound should be direct local pressure for no less than 10 continuous minutes. If this is unsuccessful, an upper extremity tourniquet inflated to 100 mmHg above the systolic pressure should be used. One should keep this tourniquet time to less than 2 hours to avoid tissue necrosis. Once bleeding is controlled well enough to evaluate the wound, it may be cautiously explored to evaluate for bleeding points. One must be very cautious if attempting to ligate these to ensure that adjacent structures such as nerves are not included in the ligature.The hand must be evaluated for adequacy of perfusion to the hand as a whole as well as the individual digits. Capillary refill, turgor, Doppler signal, and bleeding to pinprick all pro-vide useful information regarding vascular status. The finger or hand with vascular compromise requires urgent operative explo-ration. Unlike the complete amputation, in which the amputated part can be cold preserved (see later section, “Amputation and Replantation”), devascularization without amputation produces warm ischemia, which is tolerated only for a matter of hours.For the noncritical vascular injury, two treatment options exist. Simple ligation will control hemorrhage. At least one of the palmar arterial arches is intact in 97% of patients, so this will usually not compromise hand perfusion.5 Each digit also has two arterial inflows and can survive on one (see “Amputations and Replantation” section). In the academic hospital setting, however, consideration should be given to repairing all vascular injuries. Instructing a resident in vascular repair in the noncriti-cal setting will produce a more skilled and prepared resident for when a critical vascular injury does arise.ANESTHESIALocal AnesthesiaAnesthetic blockade can be administered at the wrist level, digi-tal level, or with local infiltration as needed. Keep in mind that all local anesthetics are less effective in areas of inflammation.The agents most commonly used are lidocaine and bupiva-caine. Lidocaine has the advantage of rapid onset, whereas bupi-vacaine has the advantage of long duration (average 6–8 hours).18 Although bupivacaine can produce irreversible heart block in high doses, this is rarely an issue with the amounts typically used in the hand. For pediatric patients, the tolerated dose is 2.5 mg/kg. This can be easily remembered by noting that when using 0.25% bupivacaine, 1 mL/kg is acceptable dosing.A commonly held axiom is that epinephrine is unaccept-able to be used in the hand. Several recent large series have dispelled this myth.19 Epinephrine should not be used in the fingertip and not in concentrations higher than 1:100,000 (i.e., what is present in commercially available local anesthetic with epinephrine). Beyond that, its use is acceptable and may be use-ful in an ED where tourniquet control may not be available. Also, because most ED procedures are done under pure local anesthesia, many patients will not tolerate the discomfort of the tourniquet beyond 30 minutes.20 Epinephrine will provide hemostasis and also prolong the effect of the local anesthetic.Studies have reported that the addition of sodium bicar-bonate (NaHCO3) in order to buffer local anesthetic solutions and decrease the pain experienced during the administration of local anesthetic.21 This decrease in pain has been attributed to decreasing the acidity of local anesthetic solutions. In the clinical setting, the mixing of 8.4% sodium bicarbonate with 1% lidocaine with 1:100,000 epinephrine in a 1:9 ratio is ade-quate to provide a decrease in pain during the injection of local anesthetic.22Simple lacerations, particularly on the dorsum of the hand, can be anesthetized with local infiltration. This is performed in the standard fashion.Blocking of the digital nerves at the metacarpal head level is useful for volar injuries distal to this point and for dorsal injuries beyond the midpoint of the middle phalanx (via dor-sal branches of the proper digital nerves). Fingertip injuries are particularly well anesthetized by this technique. A digit can be anesthetized via a flexor sheath approach or via the dorsal web space (Fig. 44-14A,B).Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   193620/02/19   2:48 PM 1937SURGERY OF THE HAND AND WRISTCHAPTER 44Figure 44-14. Local anesthesia can be administered at the digital or the wrist level. A. A single injection into the flexor tendon sheath at the metacarpal head level provides complete anesthesia for the digit. B. Alternatively, one can inject from a dorsal approach into the web space on either side. C. The superficial radial nerve is blocked by infiltrating subcutaneously over the distal radius from the radial artery pulse to the distal radioulnar joint. The dorsal sensory branch of the ulnar nerve is blocked in similar fashion over the distal ulna. D. To block the ulnar nerve, insert the needle parallel to the plane of the palm and deep to the flexor carpi ulnaris tendon; aspirate to confirm the needle is not in the adjacent ulnar artery. E. To block the median nerve, insert the needle just ulnar to the palmaris longus tendon into the carpal tunnel. One should feel two points of resistance: one when piercing the skin, the second when piercing the antebrachial fascia.Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   193720/02/19   2:48 PM 1938SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIBlocking one or more nerves as they cross the wrist can provide several advantages: anesthesia for multiple injured dig-its, avoiding areas of inflammation where the local anesthetic agent may be less effective, and avoiding injection where the volume of fluid injected may make treatment harder (such as fracture reduction). Four major nerves cross the wrist: the median nerve, SRN, ulnar nerve, and dorsal sensory branch of the ulnar nerve (Fig. 44-14C–E). When blocking the median and ulnar nerves, beware of intraneural injection, which can cause irreversible neural scarring. If the patient complains of severe paresthesias with injection or high resistance is encountered, the needle should be repositioned.Hand Surgery Under Local AnesthesiaWide awake hand surgery is surgery that is performed under sur-geon-administered local anesthesia with field sterility but with-out the use of sedation or a tourniquet. A major benefit of this approach is the reduction of healthcare costs due to the elimination of an anesthesia provider and postoperative monitoring because only local anesthesia is used. Further benefits of sedation-free sur-gery include decreased time spent in the hospital for surgery and the ability of patients to follow instructions during surgery. This advantage is evident during flexor tendon repairs, where intra-operative active movement allows direct visualization of the tendon repair under active movement.23 Perceived weaknesses of sedation-free surgery include patient intraoperative anxiety and fear of pain during the administration of local anesthetic. A study by Davison et al, however, found that patients undergoing carpal tunnel release under wide awake local had no difference in anxiety or pain compared to patients undergoing carpal tunnel release with sedation.24Postoperative Pain ManagementSince the recognition of pain as the fifth vital sign in the early 2000s, the number of opioid prescriptions has risen dramati-cally. Accordingly, over the last decade, the United States has seen an increase the number of deaths due to prescription opi-oid overdose. Deaths due to opioid overdose now exceeds the number of deaths caused by heroin and cocaine combined. As healthcare providers, it is essential that we adequately treat post-operative pain with the minimal amount of narcotics necessary. A recent study by Rodgers et al identified that the majority of patients undergoing elective hand surgery used prescription pain medication for only 2 or fewer days after surgery. Many patients achieved adequate pain control with over-the-counter pain med-ication and were often left with unused opioid analgesics.25Accordingly, there has been increased emphasis on educat-ing prescribers on the recognition of opioid abuse and guide-lines for appropriate opioid prescribing. Approaches such as multimodal pain management and opioid prescription protocols have shown to achieve adequate pain control while also reduc-ing excess opioid prescriptions.26SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONSAmputations and ReplantationAfter replantation was first reported, replantation was attempted for nearly all amputations.27 Over the ensuing decades, more stringent guidelines have been established regarding what should be replanted. Indications for replantation include ampu-tations of the thumb, multiple digit amputations, and amputa-tions in children. Relative contraindications to replantation include crush injuries, injuries to a single digit distal to the PIP joint, and patients who are unable to tolerate a long surgical procedure. As with all guidelines, one should evaluate the par-ticular needs of the injured patient.In preparation for replantation, the amputated part and proximal stump should be appropriately treated. The ampu-tated part should be wrapped in moistened gauze and placed in a sealed plastic bag. This bag should then be placed in an ice water bath. Do not use dry ice, and do not allow the part to contact ice directly; frostbite can occur in the amputated part, which will decrease its chance of survival after replantation. Bleeding should be controlled in the proximal stump by as mini-mal a means necessary, and the stump should be dressed with a nonadherent gauze and bulky dressing.For digital amputations deemed unsalvageable, revision amputation can be performed in the ED if appropriate equip-ment is available. Bony prominences should be smoothed off with a rongeur and/or rasp. Great care must be taken to identify the digital nerves and resect them back as far proximally in the wound as possible; this helps decrease the chance of painful neuroma in the skin closure. Skin may be closed with perma-nent or absorbable sutures; absorbable sutures will spare the patient the discomfort of suture removal several weeks later. For more proximal unsalvageable amputations, revision should be performed in the operating room to maximize vascular and neural control.Prostheses can be made for amputated parts. The more proximal the amputation, the more important to function the prosthesis is likely to be. Although finger-level prostheses are generally considered cosmetic, patients with multiple finger amputations proximal to the DIP have demonstrable functional benefit from their prosthesis as well.28Fingertip InjuriesFingertip injuries are among the most common pathologies seen in an ED. The usual history is that a door closed on the finger (commonly the middle, due to its increased length) or something heavy fell on the finger.Initial evaluation should include: wound(s) including the nail bed, perfusion, sensation, and presence and severity of fractures. For the common scenario, complex lacerations with minimally displaced fracture(s) and no loss of perfusion, the wound is cleansed, sutured, and splinted in the ED. To properly assess the nail bed, the nail plate (hard part of the nail) should be removed. A Freer periosteal elevator is well suited for this purpose. Lacerations are repaired with 6-0 fast gut suture. Great care must be taken when suturing because excessive traction with the needle can further lacerate the tissue. After repair, the nail folds are splinted with the patient’s own nail plate (if avail-able) or with aluminum foil from the suture pack. This is done to prevent scarring from the nail folds down to the nail bed that would further compromise healing of the nail.In some situations, tissue may have been avulsed in the injury and be unavailable for repair. Choice of treatment options depends on the amount and location of tissue loss (Fig. 44-15). Historically, wounds less than 1 cm2 with no exposed bone can be treated with local wound care and secondary intention. Recently, studies have reported that wounds with an average size of 1.75 cm2 have healed well with excellent functional and aesthetic results.29 For larger wounds or wounds or with bone exposed, one must decide if the finger is worth preserving at the current length or if shortening to allow for primary closure is a Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   193820/02/19   2:48 PM 1939SURGERY OF THE HAND AND WRISTCHAPTER 44better solution. A useful guideline is the amount of fingernail still present; if greater than 50% is present, local or regional flap coverage may be a good solution.If sufficient local tissue is present, homodigital flaps can be considered. A wide range of antegrade and retrograde homodig-ital flaps can be mobilized to cover the defect. Some carry sen-sation or can receive nerve coaptation to recover sensation over time.30 For the thumb only, the entire volar skin including both neurovascular bundles can be raised and advanced distally up to 1.5 cm2.31 The thumb receives separate vascularity to its dorsal skin from the radial artery. This flap is not appropriate for the fingers. Patients retain full sensibility in the advanced skin and can be mobilized within days of surgery (Fig. 44-16A–C).For wounds too large to cover with homodigital tissue, regional flaps can be considered. The skin from the distal radial thenar eminence can be raised as a random pattern flap  (Fig. 44-16D–F). The finger is maintained in flexion for 14 to 21 days until division of the flap pedicle and inset of the flap. Some authors have reported prolonged stiffness in patients over 30 years old, but careful flap design helps minimize this  complication.32 Alternatively, the skin from the dorsum of the middle phalanx of an adjacent digit can be raised as a flap to cover the volar P3 (Fig. 44-16G–I). The flap is inset at 14 to  21 days. Long-term studies have shown this flap develops sen-sation over time.33Patients with fingertip injures must be assessed for the possibility of salvage of the injured digit(s) taken within the context of the patient’s recovery needs and goals. The surgeon then matches the available options to the particular patient needs.High-Pressure Injection InjuriesHigh-pressure devices are commonly used for cleaning and applications of liquids such as lubricants and paint. Most commonly, the inexperienced worker accidentally discharges the device into his nondominant hand at the base of the digit. Severity of injury depends on the amount and type of liquid injected; hydrophobic compounds cause greater damage.34These injuries are typically quite innocuous to inspection. They are, however, digit-threatening emergencies. The patient should be informed of the severity of the injury, and explora-tion is ideally performed within 6 hours of injury. Up to 50% of such injuries result in loss of the digit, but early recogni-tion and treatment are associated with increased chance of digit  survival.35 Early frank discussion with the patient and initiation of appropriate treatment produce the best results and medicole-gal protection.Compartment SyndromeCompartment syndromes can occur in the forearm and/or the hand. As in other locations, these are potentially limb-threat-ening issues. Principle symptoms are pain in the affected com-partments, tense swelling, tenderness to palpation over the compartment, and pain with passive stretch of the muscles of the compartment.36 Pulse changes are a late finding; normal pulses do not rule out compartment syndrome.There are three compartments in the forearm and four groups of compartments in the hand. The volar forearm is one compartment. On the dorsum of the forearm, there is the dorsal compartment as well as the mobile wad compartment, begin-ning proximally over the lateral epicondyle. In the hand, the thenar and hypothenar eminences each represent a compart-ment. The seven interosseous muscles each behave as a separate compartment.Compartment syndrome can be caused by intrinsic and extrinsic causes. Intrinsic causes include edema and hematoma due to fracture. Extrinsic causes include splints and dressings that are circumferentially too tight and intravenous infiltrations. Infiltrations with hyperosmolar fluids such as X-ray contrast are particularly dangerous, because additional water will be drawn in to neutralize the hyperosmolarity.Measurement of compartment pressures can be a useful adjunct to assessment of the patient. The Stryker pressure mea-surement device or similar device is kept in many operating rooms for this purpose. The needle is inserted into the compart-ment in question, a gentle flush with 0.1 to 0.2 cc of saline clears the measurement chamber, and a reading is obtained. Studies have disagreed about whether the criterion is a measured pres-sure (30–45 mmHg, depending on the series) or within a certain amount of the diastolic blood pressure.37Compartment releases are performed in the operating room under tourniquet control. Release of the volar forearm compartment includes release of the carpal tunnel. As the inci-sion travels distally, it should pass ulnar and then curve back radially just before the carpal tunnel. This avoids a linear inci-sion across a flexion crease and also decreases the chance of injury to the palmar cutaneous branch of the median nerve. One dorsal forearm incision can release the dorsal compartment and the mobile wad. In the hand, the thenar and hypothenar com-partments are released each with a single incision. The interos-seous compartments are released with incisions over the index and ring metacarpal shafts. Dissection then continues radial and ulnar to each of these bones and provides release of all the mus-cle compartments. Any dead muscle is debrided. Incisions are left open and covered with a nonadherent dressing. The wounds are reexplored in 2 to 3 days to assess for muscle viability. Often the incisions can be closed primarily, but a skin graft may be needed for the forearm.Fingertip injuryGreater than 50%nailbed remainingHeal by secondaryintentionSufficient same digittissueVolar V-YNoNoNoNoYesYesYesYesCross-finger flapBilateral V-YMoberg flap(Thumb only)Shorten bone forprimary stumpclosureTissue lossThenar flapWound <1 cm2 andno exposed bonePrimary repairFigure 44-15. Treatment algorithm for management of fingertip injuries. See text for description of flaps.Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   193920/02/19   2:48 PM 1940SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 44-16. Local flaps for digital tip coverage. A–C. For thumb injuries, Moberg described elevation of the entire volar skin with both neurovascular bundles for distal advancement. Sensation to the advanced skin is maintained. D–F. An 8-year-old girl underwent fingertip replantation that did not survive. A thenar flap was transferred to cover the defect. Some authors advise against its use in patients over 30 years old. G–I. In this 45-year-old man, the entire skin of P3 of the long finger was avulsed and unrecoverable. A cross-finger flap was transferred and provides excellent, durable coverage. The border of the flap and surrounding skin is still apparent 4.5 months after surgery.Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   194020/02/19   2:49 PM 1941SURGERY OF THE HAND AND WRISTCHAPTER 44Figure 44-16. (Continued)Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   194120/02/19   2:49 PM 1942SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 44-16. (Continued)Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   194220/02/19   2:49 PM 1943SURGERY OF THE HAND AND WRISTCHAPTER 44If the examiner feels the patient does not have a compart-ment syndrome, elevation and serial examination are manda-tory. When in doubt, it is safer to release an early compartment syndrome than wait to release and risk muscle necrosis. Pro-gression of compartment syndrome can lead to Volkmann’s ischemic contracture with muscle loss and scarring that may compress nerves and other critical structures. Medicolegally, it is far easier to defend releasing an early compartment syn-drome than delaying treatment until the process has progressed to necrosis and/or deeper scarring.COMPLICATIONSNonunionAny fractured bone has the risk of failing to heal. Fortunately, in the fingers and hand, this is a rare problem. Tuft injuries, where soft tissue interposes between the fracture fragments, have rela-tively higher risk of this problem. The nonunited tuft can be treated with debridement and bone grafting or revision amputa-tion depending on the needs and goals of the patient. Phalan-geal and metacarpal nonunions are also quite rare. They can similarly be treated with debridement of the nonunion, grafting, and rigid fixation.38 More proximally, the scaphoid bone of the wrist has a significant risk of nonunion even if nondisplaced (see Fig. 44-9A). Any patient suspected of a scaphoid injury, namely those with tenderness at the anatomic snuffbox, should be placed in a thumb spica splint and reevaluated within 2 weeks even if initial X-rays show no fracture. Scaphoid nonunions can be quite challenging to repair, and immobilization at the time of injury in a thumb spica splint is essentially always warranted.39StiffnessThe desired outcome of any hand injury is a painless, mobile, functional hand. Multiple factors can contribute to decreased mobility, including complex injuries of soft tissue and bone, noncompliance of the patient with postoperative therapy, and inappropriate splinting. The surgeon performing the initial eval-uation can greatly impact this last factor. The goal of splinting is to keep the collateral ligaments on tension (MPs at 90°, IP joints straight). For severe cases of stiffness, mobilization sur-geries such as tenolysis and capsulotomies can be performed, but these rarely produce normal range of motion.40 Prevention of joint contractures with appropriate splinting and early, pro-tected mobilization is the best option to maximize mobility at the end of healing. Healing of an injured or diseased structure in the hand is not the endpoint of treatment; the goal of any inter-vention must be to obtain structure healing, relief of pain, and maximization of function.NeuromaAny lacerated nerve will form a neuroma. A neuroma consists of a ball of scar and axon sprouts at the end of the injured nerve.41 In unfavorable circumstances, this neuroma can become painful. The SRN is particularly notorious for this problem. By provid-ing proximal axon sprouts a target, nerve repair is an excellent preventive technique. In some circumstances, such as injuries requiring amputation, this is not possible. As mentioned earlier, the surgeon should resect the nerve stump as far proximally in the wound as possible to avoid the nerve stump healing in the cutaneous scar to minimize this risk.For the patient who develops a painful neuroma, nonsurgi-cal treatments are initiated first. The neuroma can be identified by the presence of a Tinel’s sign. Therapy techniques of desen-sitization, ultrasound, and electrical stimulation have all proven useful. Corticosteroid injection to the neuroma has also proven useful in some hands.When these techniques fail, surgery is contemplated. The neuroma can be resected, but a new one will form to replace it. The nerve ending can be buried in muscle or even bone to pre-vent the neuroma from residing in a superficial location where it may be impacted frequently.Regional Pain SyndromesInjuries to the upper extremity can occasionally result in the patient experiencing pain beyond the area of initial injury. Reflex sympathetic dystrophy and sympathetic mediated pain are two terms that have been used in the past to describe this phenomenon. Both are inaccurate, as the sympathetic nervous system is not always involved. Current terminology for this condition is complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS). Type I  occurs in the absence of a documented nerve injury; type II occurs in the presence of one.42CRPSs manifest as pain beyond the area of initial inju-ries. There is often associated edema and changes in hair and/or sweat distribution. Comparison to the unaffected side is useful to better appreciate these findings. There are currently no imag-ing studies that can be considered diagnostic for CRPS.43For the patient in whom the diagnosis of CRPS is not clear, no definitive diagnostic study exists. Patients suspected of CRPS should be referred for aggressive hand therapy. Brief trials of oral corticosteroids have been successful in some series. Referral to a pain management specialist including a trial of stel-late ganglion blocks is also frequently employed.NERVE COMPRESSIONNerves conduct signals along their axonal membranes toward their end organs. Sensory axons carry signals from distal to proximal; motor axons from proximal to distal. Myelin from Schwann cells allows faster conduction of signals. Signals jump from the start of one Schwann cell to the end of the cell (a loca-tion called a gap junction) and only require the slower mem-brane depolarization in these locations.Nerve compression creates a mechanical disturbance of the nerve.44 In early disease, the conduction signal is slowed across the area of compression. When compression occurs to a sufficient degree for a sufficient time, individual axons may die. On a nerve conduction study, this manifests as a decrease in amplitude. Muscles receiving motor axons may show electri-cal disturbance on electromyogram (EMG) when sufficiently deprived of their axonal input.Compression of sensory nerves typically produces a com-bination of numbness, paresthesias (pins and needles), and pain. Knowledge of the anatomic distribution of the peripheral nerves can aid in diagnosis. Sensory disturbance outside an area of dis-tribution of a particular nerve (e.g., volar and dorsal radial-sided hand numbness for median nerve) makes compression of that nerve less likely. Diseases that cause systemic neuropathy (e.g., diabetes) can make diagnosis more difficult.Nerve compression can theoretically occur anywhere along a peripheral nerve’s course. The most common sites of nerve compression in the upper extremity are the median nerve at the carpal tunnel, ulnar nerve at the cubital tunnel, and ulnar nerve at Guyon’s canal. Other, less common locations of nerve 4Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   194320/02/19   2:49 PM 1944SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIcompression are described as well. In addition, a nerve can become compressed in scar due to a previous trauma.Carpal Tunnel SyndromeThe most common location of upper extremity nerve compres-sion is the median nerve at the carpal tunnel, called carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS). The carpal tunnel is bordered by the scaphoid bone radially, the lunate and capitate bones dorsally, and the hook of the hamate bone ulnarly (see Fig. 44-3). The transverse carpal ligament, also called the flexor retinaculum, is its super-ficial border. The FPL, four FDS, and four FDP tendons pass through the carpal tunnel along with the median nerve. Of these 10 structures, the median nerve is relatively superficial and radial to the other nine.An estimated 53 per 10,000 working adults have evidence of CTS. The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health website asserts, “There is strong evidence of a positive association between exposure to a combination of risk factors (e.g., force and repetition, force and posture) and CTS.”45 There is disagreement among hand surgeons regarding whether occur-rence of CTS in a patient who does repetitive activities at work represents a work-related injury.Initial evaluation of the patient consists of symptom inven-tory: location and character of the symptoms, sleep disturbance due to symptoms, history of dropping objects, and difficulty manipulating small objects such as buttons, coins, or jewelry clasps.46Physical examination should begin with inspection. Look for evidence of wasting of the thenar muscles. Tinel’s sign should be tested over the median nerve from the volar wrist flexion crease to the proximal palm, although this test has significant interexam-iner variability.47 Applying pressure over the carpal tunnel while flexing the wrist has been shown in one series to have the high-est sensitivity when compared to Phalen’s and Tinel’s signs.48 Strength of the thumb in opposition should also be tested.Early treatment of CTS consists of conservative man-agement. The patient is given a splint to keep the wrist at 20° extension worn at nighttime. Many patients can have years of symptom relief with this management. As a treatment and diag-nostic modality, corticosteroid injection of the carpal tunnel is often employed. Mixing local anesthetic into the solution pro-vides the benefit of early symptom relief (corticosteroids often take 3–7 days to provide noticeable benefit), and report of postin-jection anesthesia in the median nerve distribution confirms the injection went into the correct location. Multiple authors have shown a strong correlation to relief of symptoms with cortico-steroid injection and good response to carpal tunnel release.49When lesser measures fail or are no longer effective, carpal tunnel release is indicated. Open carpal tunnel release is a time-tested procedure with documented long-term relief of symptoms. A direct incision is made over the carpal tun-nel, typically in line with where the ring finger pad touches the proximal palm in flexion. Skin is divided followed by palmar fascia. The carpal tunnel contents are visualized as they exit the carpal tunnel. The transverse carpal ligament is divided with the median nerve visualized and protected at all times. Improve-ment in symptoms is typically noted by the first postoperative visit, although symptom relief may be incomplete for patients with long-standing disease or systemic nerve-affecting diseases such as diabetes.Endoscopic techniques have been devised to address CTS. All involve avoidance of incising the skin directly over the carpal tunnel. In experienced hands, endoscopic carpal tunnel release provides the same relief of CTS with less intense and shorter lasting postoperative pain. After 3 months, however, the results are equivalent to open release.50 In inexperienced hands, there may be a higher risk of injury to the median nerve with the endoscopic techniques; this procedure is not for the occasional carpal tunnel surgeon.Cubital Tunnel SyndromeThe second most common location of upper extremity nerve compression is the ulnar nerve where it passes behind the elbow at the cubital tunnel. The cubital tunnel retinaculum passes between the medial epicondyle of the humerus and the olec-ranon process of the ulna. It stabilizes the ulnar nerve in this location during elbow motion. Over time, or sometimes after trauma, the ulnar nerve can become less stabilized in this area. Motion of the elbow then produces trauma to the nerve as it impacts the retinaculum and medial epicondyle.Cubital tunnel syndrome may produce sensory and motor symptoms.51 The small finger and ulnar half of the ring fin-gers may have numbness, paresthesias, and/or pain. The ulnar nerve also innervates the dorsal surface of the small finger and ulnar side of the ring finger, so numbness in these areas can be explained by cubital tunnel syndrome. The patient may also report weakness in grip due to effects on the FDP tendons to the ring and small fingers and the intrinsic hand muscles. Patients with advanced disease may complain of inability to fully extend the ring and small finger IP joints.Physical examination for cubital tunnel syndrome begins with inspection. Look for wasting in the hypothenar eminence and the interdigital web spaces. When the hand rests flat on the table, the small finger may rest in abduction with respect to the other fingers; this is called Wartenberg’s sign. Tinel’s sign is often present at the cubital tunnel. Elbow flexion and the shoulder internal rotation tests are affective maneuvers to aid in the diagnosis of cubital tunnel syndrome.52 Grip strength and finger abduction strength should be compared to the unaffected side. Froment’s sign can be tested by placing a sheet of paper between the thumb and index finger and instructing the patient to hold on to the paper while the examiner pulls it away without flexing the finger or thumb (this tests the strength of the adduc-tor pollicis and first dorsal interosseous muscles). If the patient must flex the index finger and/or thumb (FDP-index and FPL, both median nerve supplied) to maintain traction on the paper, this is a positive response.Early treatment of cubital tunnel syndrome begins with avoiding maximal flexion of the elbow. Splints are often used for this purpose. Corticosteroid injection is rarely done for this condition; unlike in the carpal tunnel, there is very little space within the tunnel outside of the nerve. Injection in this area runs a risk of intraneural injection, which can cause permanent scar-ring of the nerve and dysfunction.When conservative management fails, surgery has been contemplated. Treatment options include releasing the cubital tunnel retinaculum with or without transposing the nerve ante-rior to the elbow. While some authors advocate anterior trans-position into the flexor-pronator muscle group with the goal of maximizing nerve recovery, recent studies have demonstrated equivalent results between transposition and in situ release of the nerve even in advanced cases. For this reason, the simpler in situ release, either open or endoscopic, is preferred by many surgeons.53Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   194420/02/19   2:49 PM 1945SURGERY OF THE HAND AND WRISTCHAPTER 44Other Sites of Nerve CompressionAll nerves crossing the forearm have areas described where compression can occur.51 The median nerve can be compressed as it passes under the pronator teres. The ulnar nerve can be compressed as it passes through Guyon’s canal. The radial nerve, or its posterior interosseous branch, can be compressed as it passes through the radial tunnel (distal to the elbow where the nerve divides and passes under the arch of the supinator muscle). The SRN can be compressed distally in the forearm as it emerges from under the brachioradialis tendon, called  Wartenberg’s syndrome. As mentioned previously, any nerve can become compressed in scar at the site of a previous trauma.DEGENERATIVE JOINT DISEASEAs with other joints in the body, the joints of the hand and wrist can develop degenerative changes. Symptoms typically begin in the fifth decade of life. Symptoms consist of joint pain and stiffness and often are exacerbated with changes in the weather. Any of the joints can become involved. As the articular carti-lage wears out, pain typically increases and range of motion decreases. The patient should always be asked to what degree symptoms are impeding activities.Physical findings are documented in serial fashion from the initial visit and subsequent visits. Pain with axial loading of the joint may be present. Decreased range of motion may be a late finding. Instability of the collateral ligaments of the joint is uncommon in the absence of inflammatory arthritis.Plain X-rays are typically sufficient to demonstrate arthri-tis. Initially, the affected joint has a narrower radiolucent space between the bones. As joint degeneration progresses, the joint space further collapses. Bone spurs, loose bodies, and cystic changes in the bone adjacent to the joint all may become appar-ent. X-ray findings do not always correlate with patient symp-toms. Patients with advanced X-ray findings may have minimal symptoms, and vice versa. Treatment is initiated and progressed based on the patient’s symptoms regardless of imaging findings.Initial management begins with rest of the painful joint. Splints are often useful, but may significantly impair the patient in activities and thus are frequently used at nighttime only. Oral nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications such as ibuprofen and naproxen are also useful. Patients on anticoagulants and antiplatelet medications may not be able to take these, and some patients simply do not tolerate the gastric irritation side effect even if they take the medication with food.For patients with localized disease affecting only one or a few joints, corticosteroid injection may be contemplated. Nee-dle insertion can be difficult since these joint spaces are quite narrow even before degenerative disease sets in. Also, many corticosteroid injections are suspensions, not solutions; injected corticosteroid will remain in the joint space and can be seen as a white paste if surgery is performed on a joint that has been previously injected.Small Joints (Metacarpophalangeal and Interphalangeal)When conservative measures fail, two principal surgical options exist: arthrodesis and arthroplasty. The surgeon and patient must decide together as to whether conservative measures have failed. Surgery for arthritis, whether arthrodesis or arthroplasty, is performed for the purpose of relieving pain. Arthrodesis, fusion of a joint can be performed with a tension band or axial compression screw techniques.54 Both methods provides excel-lent relief of pain and is durable over time. However, it comes at the price of total loss of motion.Silicone implant arthroplasty has been available for over 40 years.55 Rather than a true replacement of the joint, the  silicone implant acts as a spacer between the two bones adja-cent to the joint. This allows for motion without bony contact that would produce pain. Long-term studies have shown that all implants fracture over time, but usually continue to preserve motion and pain relief.56In the past 15 years, resurfacing implant arthroplasties have become available for the small joints of the hand. Multiple different materials have been used to fabricate such implants. These are designed to behave as a true joint resurfacing (as knee and hip arthroplasty implants are) and have shown promising outcomes in shortand intermediate-term studies.56 Neither the silicone nor the resurfacing arthroplasties preserve (or restore) full motion of the MP or PIP joints.WristThe CMC joint of the thumb, also called the basilar joint, is another common location of arthritis pain. Pain in this joint par-ticularly disturbs function because the CMC joint is essential for opposition and cylindrical grasp. Patients will typically com-plain of pain with opening a tight jar or doorknob and strong pinch activities such as knitting. Conservative management is used first, as described earlier. Prefabricated, removable thumb spica splinting can provide excellent relief of symptoms for many patients.Multiple surgical options exist for thumb CMC arthritis. Many resurfacing implants have been used in the past; often they have shown good shortand intermediate-term results and poor long-term results. Resection of the arthritic trapezium provides excellent relief of pain; however, many authors feel that stabi-lization of the thumb metacarpal base is necessary to prevent shortening and instability.57 Some surgeons have demonstrated excellent long-term results from resection of the trapezium without permanent stabilization of the metacarpal base.58 For both of these operations, the thumb base may not be sufficiently stable to withstand heavy labor. For these patients, fusion of the thumb CMC in mild opposition provides excellent pain relief and durability. The patient must be warned preoperatively that he will not be able to lay his hand flat after the surgery. This loss of motion can be problematic when the patient attempts to tuck in clothing or reach into a narrow space.59Degenerative change of the radiocarpal and midcarpal joints is often a consequence of scapholunate ligament injury. Often the initial injury goes untreated, with the patient believ-ing it is merely a “sprain”; the patient is first diagnosed with the initial injury when he presents years later with degenerative changes.Degenerative wrist changes associated with the scaph-olunate ligament follow a predictable pattern over many years, called scapholunate advanced collapse or SLAC wrist.60 Because of this slow progression (Fig. 44-17A), patients can usually be treated with a motion-sparing procedure. If there is truly no arthritic change present, the scapholunate ligament can be reconstructed.If arthritis is limited to the radiocarpal joint, two motion-sparing options are available. The proximal carpal row (scaphoid, lunate, and triquetrum) can be removed (proximal row carpectomy [PRC]). The lunate facet of the radius then Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   194520/02/19   2:49 PM 1946SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIarticulates with the base of the capitate, whose articular surface is similar in shape to that of the base of the lunate. Studies have shown maintenance of approximately 68% of the wrist flexion-extension arc and 72% of hand strength compared to the con-tralateral side.61 Alternatively, the scaphoid can be excised, and four-bone fusion (lunate, capitate, hamate, and triquetrum) can be performed. This maintains the full length of the wrist and the lunate in the lunate facet of the radius. Some series have shown better strength but less mobility with this technique, oth-ers have shown equivalent results to the PRC.62 The four-bone fusion does appear to be more durable for younger patients and/or those who perform heavy labor.If the patient presents with pancarpal arthritis or motion-sparing measures have failed to alleviate pain, total wrist fusion is the final surgical option. The distal radius is fused, through the proximal and distal carpal rows to the third metacarpal, typi-cally with a dorsal plate and screws. Multiple long-term studies have shown excellent pain relief and durability; this comes at the cost of total loss of wrist motion. This is surprisingly well tolerated in most patients, especially if the other hand/wrist is unaffected. The only activity of daily living that cannot be done with a fused wrist is personal toileting.Rheumatoid ArthritisRheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an inflammatory arthritis that can affect any joint in the body. Inflamed synovium causes articular cartilage breakdown with pain and decreased range of motion. The goals of hand surgery for the RA patient are relief of pain, improvement of function, slowing progression of disease, and improvement in appearance.63 In addition, swelling of the joint due to the inflammation can cause laxity and even failure of the collateral ligaments supporting the joints. Recent advances in the medical care of RA have made the need for surgical care of these patients far less common than in previous decades.MP joints of the fingers are commonly affected. The base of the proximal phalanx progressively subluxates and eventu-ally dislocates volarly with respect to the metacarpal head. The collateral ligaments, particularly on the radial side, stretch out and cause the ulnar deviation of the fingers characteristic of the rheumatoid hand. In more advanced cases, the joint may not be salvageable (Fig. 44-17B). For these patients, implant arthro-plasty is the mainstay of surgical treatment. Silicone implants have been used for over 40 years with good results.64 The sili-cone implant acts as a spacer between proximal and distal bone, rather than as a true resurfacing arthroplasty. The radial col-lateral ligament must be repaired to appropriate length to cor-rect the preoperative ulnar deviation of the MP joint. Extensor tendon centralization is then performed, as needed, at the end of the procedure.For MP joint and PIP joint disease, fusion is an option. However, since RA usually affects multiple joints, fusion is typically avoided due to impaired function of adjacent joints, which would leave a severe motion deficit to the finger.Failure of the support ligaments of the distal radioulnar joint (DRUJ) leads to the caput ulnae posture of the wrist with the ulnar head prominent dorsally. As this dorsal prominence becomes more advanced, the ulna head, denuded of its cartilage to act as a buffer, erodes into the overlying extensor tendons. Extensor tenosynovitis, followed ultimately by tendon rupture, begins ulnarly and proceeds radially. Rupture of the ECU ten-don may go unnoticed due to the intact ECRL and ECRB ten-dons to extend the wrist. EDQ rupture may go unnoticed if a sufficiently robust EDC tendon to the small finger exists. Once the fourth compartment (EDC) tendons begin to fail, the motion deficit is unable to be ignored by the patient.Surgical solutions must address the tendon ruptures as well as the DRUJ synovitis and instability and ulna head break-down that led to them.65 Excision of the ulna head removes the bony prominence. The DRUJ synovitis must also be resected. Figure 44-17. Arthritis of the hand and wrist. A. This patient injured her scapholunate ligament years prior to presentation. The scapholunate interval is widened (double arrow), and the radioscaphoid joint is degenerated (solid oval), but the radiolunate and lunocapitate joint spaces are well preserved (dashed ovals). B. This patient has had rheumatoid arthritis for decades. The classic volar subluxation of the metacarpophalangeal joints of the fingers (dashed oval) and radial deviation of the fingers are apparent.Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   194620/02/19   2:49 PM 1947SURGERY OF THE HAND AND WRISTCHAPTER 44Alternatively, the DRUJ can be fused and the ulna neck resected to create a pseudoarthrosis to allow for rotation. For both pro-cedures, the remaining distal ulna must be stabilized. Multiple techniques have been described using portions of FCU, ECU, wrist capsule, and combinations thereof.The ruptured extensor tendons are typically degenerated over a significant length. Primary repair is almost never pos-sible, and the frequent occurrence of multiple tendon ruptures makes repair with graft less desirable due to the need for mul-tiple graft donors.Strict compliance with postoperative therapy is essential to maximizing the surgical result. Due to the chronic inflam-mation associated with RA, tendon and ligament repairs will be slower to achieve maximal tensile strength. Prolonged night-time splinting, usually for months, helps prevent recurrence of extensor lag. Finally, the disease may progress over time. Reconstructions that were initially adequate may stretch out or fail over time. Medical management is the key to slowing dis-ease progression and maximizing the durability of any surgical reconstruction.DUPUYTREN’S CONTRACTUREIn 1614, a Swiss surgeon named Felix Plater first described con-tracture of multiple fingers due to palpable, cord-like structures on the volar surface of the hand and fingers. The disease state he described would ultimately come to be known as Dupuytren’s contracture. Dupuytren’s name came to be associated with the disease after he performed an open fasciotomy of a contracted cord before a class of medical students in 1831.66The palmar fascia consists of collagen bundles in the palm and fingers. These are primarily longitudinally oriented and reside as a layer between the overlying skin and the underlying tendons and neurovascular structures. There are also connections from this layer to the deep structures below and the skin above. Much is known about the progression of these structures from their normal state (called bands) to their contracted state (called cords), but little is known on how or why this process begins.Increased collagen deposition leads to a palpable nodule in the palm. Over time, there is increased deposition distally into the fingers. This collagen becomes organized and linearly ori-ented. These collagen bundles, with the aid of myofibroblasts, contract down to form the cords, which are the hallmark of the symptomatic patient. Detail of the molecular and cell biology of Dupuytren’s disease is beyond the scope of this chapter but is available in multiple hand surgery texts.67Most nonoperative management techniques will not delay the progression of disease. Corticosteroid injections may soften nodules and decrease the discomfort associated with them but are ineffective against cords. Splinting has similarly been shown not to retard disease progression.Recently, several minimally invasive treatment approaches have been described for the treatment of Dupuytren’s disease.68 Disruption of the cord with a needle is an effective means of releasing contractures, particularly at the MP joint level. Long-term studies have demonstrated more rapid recovery from needle fasciotomy, as the procedure is called, but more durable results with fasciectomy.69 Injectable clostridial collagenase was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration in 2009, and although it has shown good early results, treatment costs remain high.70For patients with advanced disease including contrac-tures of the digits that limit function, surgery is the mainstay of therapy. Although rate of progression should weigh heavily in the decision of whether or not to perform surgery, general guidelines are MP contractures greater than or equal to 30° and/or PIP contractures greater than or equal to 20°.71Surgery consists of an open approach through the skin down to the involved cords. Skin is elevated off of the under-lying cords. Great care must be taken to preserve as much of the subdermal vascular plexus with the elevated skin flaps to minimize postoperative skin necrosis. All nerves, tendons, and blood vessels in the operative field should be identified. Once this is done, the involved cord is resected while keeping the critical deeper structures under direct vision. The skin is then closed, with local flap transpositions as needed, to allow for full extension of the fingers that have been released (Fig. 44-18).Alternative cord resection techniques include removal of the skin over the contracture (dermatofasciectomy). This requires a skin graft to the wound and should only be done if skin cannot be separated from the cords and local tissue cannot be rearranged with local flaps to provide closure of the wound.Complications of surgical treatment of Dupuytren’s dis-ease occur in as many as 24% of cases.72 Problems include digi-tal nerve laceration, digital artery laceration, buttonholing of the skin, hematoma, swelling, and pain, including some patients with CRPS (see earlier section on CRPS). Digital nerve injury can be quite devastating, producing annoying numbness at best or a painful neuroma in worse situations.Hand therapy is typically instituted within a week of sur-gery to begin mobilization of the fingers and edema control. The therapist can also identify any early wound problems because he or she will see the patient more frequently than the surgeon. Extension hand splinting is maintained for 4 to 6 weeks, with nighttime splinting continued for an additional 6 to 8 weeks. After this point, the patient is serially followed for evidence of recurrence or extension of disease.INFECTIONSTrauma is the most common cause of hand infections. Other predisposing factors include diabetes, neuropathies, and immu-nocompromised patients. Proper treatment consists of incision and drainage of any collections followed by debridement, obtain-ing wound cultures, antibiotic therapy, elevation, and immobi-lization. Staphylococcus and Streptococcus are the offending pathogens in about 90% of hand infections. Infections caused by intravenous drug use or human bites and those associated with diabetes will often be polymicrobial, including gram-positive and gram-negative species. Heavily contaminated injuries require anaerobic coverage. Although α-hemolytic Streptococcus and Staphylococcus aureus are the most commonly encountered pathogens in human bites, Eikenella corrodens is isolated in up to one-third of cases and should be considered when choosing antimicrobial therapy. Ziehl-Neelsen staining and cultures at 28°C to 32°C in Lowenstein-Jensen medium must be performed if there is a suspicion for atypical mycobacteria.73CellulitisCellulitis is characterized by a nonpurulent diffuse spreading of inflammation characterized by erythema, warmth, pain, swell-ing, and induration. Skin breakdown is a frequent cause, but Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   194720/02/19   2:49 PM 1948SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 44-18. Dupuytren’s disease. A. This patient has cords affecting the thumb, middle, ring, and small fingers. B. The resected specimens are shown. C. Postoperatively, the patient went on to heal all his incisions and, with the aid of weeks of hand therapy, recover full motion.often no inciting factor is identified. Group A α-hemolytic Streptococcus is the most common offending pathogen and causes a more diffuse spread of infection. S aureus is the second most common offending pathogen and will cause a more local-ized cellulitis. The diagnosis of cellulitis is clinical. Septic arthritis, osteomyelitis, an abscess, a deep-space infection, and necrotizing fasciitis are severe infectious processes that may initially mimic cellulitis. These must be ruled out appropriately before initiating treatment, and serial exams should be con-ducted to ensure proper diagnosis. Treatment of cellulitis con-sists of elevation, splint immobilization, and antibiotics  that cover both Streptococcus and Staphylococcus. Intravenous antibiotics are usually initiated for patients with severe comorbidities and those who fail to improve on oral antibiotics after 24 to 48 hours. Failure to improve after 24 hours indicates a need to search for an underlying abscess or other infectious cause.735AbscessAn abscess will present much like cellulitis, but they are two clinically separate entities. The defining difference is an area of fluctuance. Skin-puncturing trauma is the most common cause.  S aureus is the most common pathogen, followed by Streptococcus. Treatment consists of incision and drainage with appropriate debridement, wound cultures, wound packing, elevation, immo-bilization, and antibiotics. The packing should be removed in 12 to 24 hours or sooner if there is clinical concern, and warm soapy water soaks with fresh packing should be initiated. Most should be allowed to heal secondarily. Delayed primary clo-sure should only be performed after repeat washouts for larger wounds where complete infection control has been achieved.Collar-Button AbscessThis is a subfascial infection of a web space and is usually caused by skin trauma that becomes infected; it often occurs in Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   194820/02/19   2:49 PM 1949SURGERY OF THE HAND AND WRISTCHAPTER 44laborers. The adherence of the palmar web space skin to the pal-mar fascia prevents lateral spread, so the infection courses dor-sally, resulting in both palmar web space tenderness and dorsal web space swelling and tenderness. The adjacent fingers will be held in abduction with pain on adduction (Fig. 44-19). Incision and drainage, often using separate volar and dorsal incisions, is mandatory, and follows the same treatment as for any abscess or deep-space infection.OsteomyelitisOsteomyelitis in the hand usually occurs due to an open fracture with significant soft tissue injury. The presence of infected hard-ware, peripheral vascular disease, diabetes, and alcohol or drug abuse are also predisposing factors. Presentation includes per-sistent or recurrent swelling with pain, erythema, and possible drainage. It will take 2 to 3 weeks for periosteal reaction and osteopenia to be detected on radiographs. Bone scans and MRI Figure 44-19. Collar-Button abscess A. The fingers surround-ing the involved (second) web space rest in greater abduction than the other fingers. B. Dorsal and volar drainage incisions are made, separated by a bridge of intact web skin; a Penrose drain prevents the skin from closing too early.are useful modalities to aid in diagnosis. Erythrocyte sedimenta-tion rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) have low specific-ity but are useful for monitoring the progress of treatment, with CRP being more reliable. Treatment consists of antibiotics alone in the early stage as long as there is favorable response. All necrotic bone and soft tissue, if present, must be debrided. Initial intravenous antibiotic therapy should cover S aureus, the most common pathogen, and should then be adjusted according to bone cultures. Antibiotic therapy is continued for 4 to 6 weeks once the patient clinically improves and there is no further need for debridement. For osteomyelitis in the setting of an acute fracture with internal fixation in place, the hardware should be left in place as long as it is stable and the fracture has not yet healed. If the hardware is unstable, it must be replaced. An external fixation device may be useful in this setting. If osteo-myelitis occurs in a healed fracture, all hardware and necrotic bone and soft tissue must be removed.74Pyogenic ArthritisInfection of a joint will progress quickly to severe cartilage and bony destruction if not addressed quickly. Direct trauma and local spread of an infection are the most common causes. Hema-togenous spread occurs most commonly in patients who are immunocompromised. S aureus is the most common pathogen, followed by Streptococcus species. Neisseria gonorrhoeae is the most common cause of atraumatic septic arthritis in an adult less than 30 years of age. Presentation includes exacerbation of pain with any joint movement, severe pain on axial load, swell-ing, erythema, and tenderness. Radiographs may show a foreign body or fracture, with widened joint space early in the process and decreased joint space late in the process due to destruc-tion. Joint aspiration with cell count, Gram stain, and culture is used to secure the diagnosis. Treatment of nongonococcal septic arthritis includes open arthrotomy, irrigation, debridement, and packing the joint or leaving a drain in place. Intravenous antibi-otics are continued until there is clinical improvement, followed by 2 to 4 weeks of additional oral or intravenous antibiotics. Gonococcal septic arthritis is usually treated nonoperatively. Intravenous ceftriaxone is first-line therapy. Joint aspiration may be used to obtain cultures and decrease joint pressure.75Necrotizing InfectionsNecrotizing soft tissue infections occur when the immune system is unable to contain an infection, leading to extensive spread with death of all involved tissues. This is different from an abscess, which forms when a functioning immune system is able to “wall off” the infectious focus. Necrotizing infections can result in loss of limb or life, even with prompt medical care.Bacteria spread along the fascial layer, resulting in the death of soft tissues, which is in part due to the extensive blood vessel thrombosis that occurs. An inciting event is not always identified. Immunocompromised patients and those who abuse drugs or alcohol are at greater risk, with intravenous drug users having the highest increased risk. The infection can by monoor polymicrobial, with group A β-hemolytic Streptococcus being the most common pathogen, followed by α-hemolytic  Streptococcus, S aureus, and anaerobes. Prompt clinical diag-nosis and treatment are the most important factors for salvag-ing limbs and saving life. Patients will present with pain out of proportion with findings. Appearance of skin may range from normal to erythematous or maroon with edema, induration, and blistering. Crepitus may occur if a gas-forming organism Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   194920/02/19   2:49 PM 1950SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIis involved. “Dirty dishwater fluid” may be encountered as a scant grayish fluid, but often there is little to no discharge. There may be no appreciable leukocytosis. The infection can progress rapidly and can lead to septic shock and disseminated intravas-cular coagulation. Radiographs may reveal gas formation, but they must not delay emergent debridement once the diagnosis is suspected. Intravenous antibiotics should be started imme-diately to cover gram-positive, gram-negative, and anaerobic bacteria. Patients will require multiple debridements, and the spread of infection is normally wider than expected based on initial assessment.73Necrotizing myositis, or myonecrosis, is usually caused by Clostridium perfringens due to heavily contaminated wounds. Unlike necrotizing fasciitis, muscle is universally involved and found to be necrotic. Treatment includes emergent debride-ment of all necrotic tissue along with empirical intravenous antibiotics.Wet gangrene is most common in diabetics with renal failure and an arteriovenous shunt. It is usually polymicrobial. Patients will present with a necrotic digit that is purulent and very malodorous, with rapidly evolving pain, swelling, skin discoloration, and systemic collapse. Emergent treatment is the same as for other necrotizing infections, and amputation of the involved digit or extremity must often be performed.Infectious Flexor TenosynovitisFlexor tenosynovitis (FTS) is a severe pathophysiologic state causing disruption of normal flexor tendon function in the hand. A variety of etiologies are responsible for this process. Most acute cases of FTS are due to purulent infection. FTS also can occur secondary to chronic inflammation as a result of diabetes, RA, crystalline deposition, overuse syndromes, amyloidosis, psoriatic arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, and sarcoidosis.The primary mechanism of infectious FTS usually is penetrating trauma. Most infections are caused by skin flora, including both Staphylococcus and Streptococcus species. Bac-teria involved vary by etiology of the infection: bite wounds (Pasteurella multocida—cat, E corrodens—human); diabetic patients (Bacteroides, Fusobacterium, Haemophilus species, gram-negative organisms); hematogenous spread (Mycobacte-rium tuberculosis, N gonorrhoeae); or water-related punctures (Vibrio vulnificus, Mycobacterium marinum). Infection in any of the fingers may spread proximally into the wrist, carpal tun-nel, and forearm, also known as Parona’s space.76Suppurative FTS has the ability to rapidly destroy a  finger’s functional capacity and is considered a surgical emer-gency. Suppurative FTS results from bacteria multiplying in the closed space of the flexor tendon sheath and culture-rich synovial fluid medium causing migration of inflammatory cells and subsequent swelling. The inflammatory reaction within the closed tendon sheath quickly erodes the paratenon, leading to adhesions and scarring, as well as increase in pressures within the tendon sheath that may lead to ischemia. The ultimate con-sequences are tendon necrosis, disruption of the tendon sheath, and digital contracture.Patients with infectious FTS present with pain, redness, and fever (Fig. 44-20). Physical examination reveals Kanavel’s “cardinal” signs of flexor tendon sheath infection: finger held in slight flexion, fusiform swelling, tenderness along the flexor ten-don sheath, and pain over the flexor sheath with passive exten-sion of the digit.77 Kanavel’s signs may be absent in patients who are immunocompromised, have early manifestations of Figure 44-20. Suppurative flexor tenosynovitis of the ring finger. A. The finger demonstrates fusiform swelling and flexed posture. B. Proximal exposure for drainage. C. Distal drainage incision.Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   195020/02/19   2:49 PM 1951SURGERY OF THE HAND AND WRISTCHAPTER 44infection, have recently received antibiotics, or have a chronic, indolent infection.If a patient presents with suspected infectious FTS, empiric intravenous antibiotics should be initiated. Prompt medical ther-apy in early cases may prevent the need for surgical drainage. For healthy individuals, empiric antibiotic therapy should cover Staphylococcus and Streptococcus. For immunocompromised patients (including diabetics) or infections associated with bite wounds, empiric treatment should include coverage of gram-negative organisms as well.78Adjuncts to antibiotics include splint immobilization (intrinsic plus position preferred) and elevation until infec-tion is under control. Hand rehabilitation (i.e., range-of-motion exercises and edema control) should be initiated once pain and inflammation are under control.If medical treatment alone is attempted, then initial inpa-tient observation is indicated. Surgical intervention is necessary if no obvious improvement has occurred within 12 to 24 hours.Several surgical approaches can be used to drain infectious FTS. The method used is based on the extent of the infection. Michon developed a classification scheme that can be use-ful in guiding surgical treatment (Table 44-1).79 Figure 44-20 (B and C) demonstrates drainage of a stage II FTS. A Brunner incision allows better initial exposure but may yield difficul-ties with tendon coverage if skin necrosis occurs. A 16-gauge catheter or 5-French pediatric feeding tube then is inserted into the tendon sheath through the proximal incision. The sheath is copiously irrigated with normal saline. Avoid excessive fluid extravasation into the soft tissue because the resulting increase in tissue pressure can lead to necrosis of the digit. The catheter is removed after irrigation. The incisions are left open. Some surgeons prefer a continuous irrigation technique for a period of 24 to 48 hours. The catheter is sewn in place, and a small drain is placed at the distal incision site. Continuous or intermittent irrigation every 2 to 4 hours with sterile saline can then be per-formed through the indwelling catheter.After surgery, an intrinsic plus splint is applied, the hand is elevated, and the appropriate empiric antibiotic coverage is instituted while awaiting culture results. The hand is reexamined the following day. Whirlpool therapy and range of motion are begun. Drains are removed before discharge from the hospital. The wounds are left open to heal by secondary intention. In severe cases, repeat irrigation and operative debridement may be required.Antibiotic therapy is guided by culture results as well as clinical improvement. Once there is no further need for debride-ment, a 7to 14-day course of oral antibiotics is generally prescribed. Consultation with an infectious disease specialist should be considered early in order to maximize efficiency and efficacy of therapy.FelonA felon is a subcutaneous abscess of the fingertip and is most commonly caused by penetrating trauma. S aureus is the most common pathogen. The fingertip contains multiple septa con-necting the distal phalanx to the skin. These septa are poorly compliant, and presence of an abscess will increase pressure and lead to severe pain and tissue death. Patients will experience erythema, swelling, and tenderness of the volar digital pad. Oral antibiotics may resolve the infection if diagnosed very early, but incision and drainage is indicated when fluctuance is identified. A digital block should be performed, followed by a longitudi-nal incision over the point of maximal fluctuance (Fig. 44-21). Transverse and lateral incisions should be avoided, and the incision should never extend across the distal phalangeal joint crease. Deep incision should not be performed as this may cause seeding of bacteria into the flexor tendon sheath. The wound is irrigated and packed, with warm soapy water soaks and packing changes initiated within 24 hours and performed two to three times daily until secondarily healed. Antibiotic coverage should cover for Staphylococcus and Streptococcus species.73ParonychiaParonychia is an infection beneath the nail fold. The nail plate can be viewed as an invagination into the dorsal skin extend-ing down to the distal phalanx periosteum. Predisposing factors include anything that causes nail trauma, such as manicures, artificial nails, or nail biting. The infection may spread around Table 44-1Michon’s stages of suppurative flexor tenosynovitis and appropriate treatmentSTAGEFINDINGSTREATMENTIIncreased fluid in sheath, mainly a serous exudateCatheter irrigationIIPurulent fluid, granulomatous synoviumMinimal invasive drainage ±  indwelling catheter irrigationIIINecrosis of the tendon, pulleys, or tendon sheathExtensive open debridement and possible amputationBAFigure 44-21. Felon. A. Lateral view of the digit showing fluctu-ance between the skin of the pad and the underlying distal phalanx bone. B. The authors prefer to drain felons with a longitudinal inci-sion (dashed line) directly over the area of maximal fluctuance.Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   195120/02/19   2:49 PM 1952SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIthe nail plate from one side to the other, or it may extend into the pulp and result in a felon. An acute paronychia is usually caused by S aureus or Streptococcal species. Patients report pain, ery-thema, swelling, and possibly purulent drainage involving the periungual tissue. Treatment consists of warm water soaks and oral antibiotics if diagnosed early. If purulence or fluctu-ance is present, then a freer elevator or 18-gauge needle can be passed along the involved nail fold to decompress the collection  (Fig. 44-22). If the infection involves the eponychial fold, a small proximally based flap of eponychium is created by using a scalpel, followed by irrigation and packing. The nail plate must be removed if the infection extends beneath the nail plate. Packing is kept in place for 24 to 48 hours, followed by warm water soaks and local wound care. Usually, the wound cannot be repacked once the dressing is removed.73A chronic paronychia is most commonly caused by Can-dida species and is most often found in patients who perform jobs involving the submersion of their hands in water or other moist environments. These develop into thickened nails with callus-like formation along the nail folds and may occasion-ally become red and inflamed. They do not respond to antibi-otic treatment, and nail plate removal with marsupialization of the skin proximal to the eponychial fold will allow the wound to heal secondarily. The environmental factors leading to the chronic paronychia must also be corrected in order for treatment to be successful.All hand infections other than cellulitis will require surgi-cal management. Clinical examination, particularly noting the area of greatest tenderness and/or inflammation, is the single most useful diagnostic tool to localize any puru-lence requiring drainage. Specific recommendations for differ-entiating among the possible locations of hand infection are included in the diagnostic algorithm shown in Fig. 44-23.TUMORSTumors of the hand and upper extremity can be classified as benign soft tissue tumors; malignant soft tissue tumors (subclas-sified into cutaneous and noncutaneous malignancies); benign bony tumors; malignant bony tumors; and secondary metastatic tumors. Initial investigation for any mass starts with a complete 6ABAFigure 44-22. Paronychia. A. Fluctuance in the nail fold is the hallmark of this infection. B. The authors prefer to drain a paro-nychia using the bevel of an 18-gauge needle inserted between the nail fold and the nail plate at the location of maximal fluctuance.NondiagnosticFractureForeign bodyCellulitisadmit, IV Abxserial examSite of fluctuanceEntire fingerseYoNPyogenic FTSKanavel’ssigns presentMRI if nofluctuanceSubcutaneousabscessThenarabscessMidpalmabscessHypothenarabscessDistalLoss ofpalmarconcavityRadial toIF MCUlnar toSF MCWeb spaceabscessPalmPain withaxial loadingof jointPyogenic vs.crystallinearthritisConsiderarthrocentesisNo improvementin 48 hoursHand inflammationPlain X-raysPartial fingerDorsalCenteredon jointBetweendigitsLocalized fluctuanceFigure 44-23. Diagnostic algorithm. Diagnostic workup for a patient with hand inflammation to evaluate for infection. See text for details about particular infectious diagnoses. Abx = antibiotics; FTS = flexor tenosynovitis; IF MC = index finger metacarpal; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging; SF MC = small finger metacarpal.Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   195220/02/19   2:49 PM 1953SURGERY OF THE HAND AND WRISTCHAPTER 44history and physical exam. Hand and/or wrist X-rays should be obtained in every patient presenting with a mass unless clearly not indicated (e.g., a superficial skin lesion with no aggressive/malignant features). The workup proceeds in an orderly fashion until a diagnosis is obtained. Once a benign diagnosis is secured (by strong clinical suspicion in an experienced hand surgeon, radiographic evidence, or tissue biopsy), further workup is not needed; this may occur at any point in the workup of a mass.Most hand masses are benign and can be readily diagnosed without advanced imaging or tissue biopsy. When necessary, additional workup may include baseline laboratory studies, CT and/or MRI of the involved region, and a bone scan or positron emission tomography (PET) scan. Staging of a malignant tumor may occur before biopsy if a malignancy is strongly suspected, or it may occur after formal biopsy. Staging includes a chest X-ray and CT with intravenous contrast of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis to detect possible metastasis. Biopsy of the mass is always the last step of a workup and should occur only after all other available information has been gathered. Any mass that is over 5 cm in size, is rapidly increasing in size (as judged by an experienced surgeon or oncologist), is symptomatic or painful, or has an aggressive clinical or radiographic appearance war-rants workup and biopsy to rule out malignancy.CT scans are useful for detecting bony tumor extension across planes and identifying tumors of small bones, such as the carpal bones. MRI is useful for evaluating soft tissue tumor involvement (e.g., which muscle compartments are involved) as well as intramedullary lesions. Most soft tissue tumors will appear dark on T1-weighted images and bright on T2-weighted images. Hematomas, hemangiomas, lipomas, liposarcomas, and adipose tissue will appear bright on T1-weighted images and dark on T2-weighted images. Scintigraphy uses methylene diphosphonate attached to technetium-99m. This complex will attach to hydroxyapatite. Immediate uptake is seen in areas of increased vascularity, such as infection, trauma, and neoplasia. Increased uptake 2 to 3 hours later is seen in “pooled” areas where new bone formation has occurred. This modality is useful for detecting areas of tumor invasion or metastases not other-wise seen on prior CT, MRI, or radiographs.Biopsy is reserved for masses that cannot be diagnosed as benign based on prior clinical and radiographic exams. Needle biopsy is not reliable for primary diagnosis, but it can be use-ful for recurrent or metastatic disease. Open excisional (if mass is less than 5 cm in size) or incisional (if mass is greater than  5 cm in size) biopsy is the most common biopsy method. Proper surgical oncologic technique is strictly adhered to in order to prevent tumor spread into uninvolved tissues or compartments. This includes making all incisions longitudinally using sharp dissection and meticulous hemostasis; carrying the incision directly down to the tumor with no development of tissue planes (i.e., making a straight-line path from skin to tumor); incising through the fewest number of muscle compartments; and avoid-ing critical neurovascular structures. The CT or MRI images will help determine the best surgical approach for biopsy or resection in order to avoid uninvolved compartments and criti-cal structures.80Benign Soft Tissue TumorsGanglion Cyst. This is the most common soft tissue tumor of the hand and wrist, comprising 50% to 70% of all soft tis-sue tumors in this region. They can occur at any age but are most common in the second to fourth decades with a slight predilection toward females. Patients may report a slowgrowing soft mass that may fluctuate in size and can sometimes be associated with mild pain. Compressive neuropathies may be seen if they occur in Guyon’s canal or the carpal tunnel, but they are uncommon. There are no reports of malignant degeneration. History and physical exam are usually sufficient to establish a diagnosis. Occurrence by location is as follows: 60% to 70% occur on the dorsal wrist between the third and fourth exten-sor compartments and are connected by a stalk to the scaph-olunate ligament (Fig. 44-24); 18% to 20% occur on the volar wrist; and 10% to 12% occur in the digits as volar retinacular or flexor tendon sheath cysts. The cyst transilluminates. There is always a stalk that communicates with the underlying joint or tendon sheath. The cyst wall is composed of compressed col-lagen fibers with no epithelial or synovial cells present. Clear viscous mucin fills the cyst and is composed of glucosamine, albumin, globulin, and hyaluronic acid. The etiology is unclear. The most accepted theory currently is Angelides’ who proposed that repeated stress of a joint, ligament, or tendon sheath causes an increase of mucin-producing cells and subsequent mucin pro-duction. The increased mucin production dissects superficially and coalesces into a cyst. The successful treatment of dorsal ganglion cysts by excising only the stalk supports this theory.80Treatment consists of observation if asymptomatic. If symptoms exist or the patient desires removal for cosmetic appearance, aspiration of the cyst may be performed with a Figure 44-24. Dorsal wrist ganglion cyst. These typically occur between the third and fourth dorsal extensor compartments and have a stalk connecting the base of the cyst to the scapholunate ligament.Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   195320/02/19   2:49 PM 1954SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIsuccessful cure rate ranging from 15% to 89%. The benefit of injected steroids is inconclusive. Aspiration of a volar wrist ganglion cyst can be dangerous due to the potential of injur-ing neurovascular structures. Open excision and arthroscopic excision of the cyst stalk are surgical options for cysts that are not amendable to aspiration. A recent meta-analysis reported recurrence rates after either needle aspiration, open excision, and arthroscopic excision as 59%, 21%, and 6%, respectively.81Mucous Cyst. A mucous cyst is a ganglion cyst of the DIP joint. They occur most commonly in the fifth to seventh decades, and the underlying cause is associated osteoarthritis of the DIP joint. They are slow growing and usually occur on one side of the ter-minal extensor tendon between the DIP joint and the eponych-ium. The earliest clinical sign is often longitudinal grooving of the involved nail plate followed by a small enlarging mass and then attenuation of overlying skin. X-rays will show signs of osteoarthritis within the DIP joint. Heberden nodes (osteophytes within the DIP joint) are often seen on X-ray.Possible treatment includes observation, aspiration, or excision. If the cyst is not draining and the overlying skin is intact, the patient may be offered reassurance. A draining cyst poses risk of DIP joint infection due to the tract communicating with the DIP joint and should be excised. If the cyst is symp-tomatic, painful, or the patient desires removal for cosmetic pur-poses, excision should be performed. Any osteophytes in the DIP joint must be removed to reduce recurrence. Aspiration is an option for treatment, but this poses the risk of DIP joint infec-tion through seeding of bacteria into the joint or by the devel-opment of a draining sinus tract. It is generally not performed.Giant Cell Tumor of the Tendon Sheath. Also known as a xanthosarcoma, fibrous xanthoma, localized nodular synovitis, sclerosing hemangioma, or pigmented villonodular tenosynovi-tis, giant cell tumor of the tendon sheath is the second most com-mon soft tissue mass of the hand and wrist. It is a benign lesion with no clear pathogenesis. The tumor is a growth of polyclonal cells with no risk of malignant transformation. Despite the simi-larity in name, it is not histopathologically related to giant cell tumor of the bone.82Giant cell tumor of the tendon sheath occurs as a firm slow-growing painless mass over months to years and will often feel bumpy or nodular, which is a distinguishing characteristic helpful for diagnosis. It has a predilection for occurring in close proximity to joints along flexor surfaces of the wrist, hands, and digits (especially the PIP joints of the radial digits) and occurs most commonly between the second and fifth decades  (Fig. 44-25A). These tumors do not transilluminate. Direct extension into joints and ligaments can make complete exci-sion difficult. Gross appearance of the tumor will show a wellcircumscribed nodular firm mass with a deep brown color due to the large amount of hemosiderin content, which is easily detected on histologic staining (Fig. 44-25B). Multinucleated giant cells and hemosiderin-laden macrophages are characteristic.80This tumor is not visible on radiographs. Approximately 20% will show extrinsic cortical erosion on X-ray. This is a risk factor for recurrence, and removal of the cortical shell should be considered. MRI is useful for delineating involvement with tendons, ligaments, and joints.The standard treatment is marginal excision. These tumors will often grow next to or around neurovascular bundles, and an Allen’s test should always be performed preoperatively to con-firm adequate blood supply by both ulnar and radial arteries as Figure 44-25. Giant cell tumor of tendon sheath. A. The mass pro-duces lobulated enlargement of the external finger. B. The excised giant cell tumor has a multilobulated, tan-brown appearance.ABwell as dual blood supply to an involved digit via the ulnar and radial proper digital arteries. It is important to completely excise the stalk because this will greatly reduce tumor recurrence even in the setting of residual tumor. If tumor is suspected to have extended into the joint, the joint must be opened and all tumor removed. Despite this being a benign lesion, local recurrence is varies widely from 4% to 44%. Some variants can mimic more aggressive processes, and malignancy must be considered if aggressive features are identified, such as direct bony invasion.82Lipoma. Lipomas of the hand and wrist may occur in multiple anatomic locations, including subcutaneous tissues; intramus-cularly (especially thenar or hypothenar muscles); deep spaces; carpal tunnel or Guyon’s canal; and rarely bone or nerve. They typically present as a painless, slow-growing, soft, and mobile mass over a period of months to years. Painful findings sug-gest close approximation to a neurovascular structure or, less commonly, a malignant lesion such as liposarcoma. Lipomas do not transilluminate. They resemble mature fat histologically. X-rays typically reveal no abnormality. MRI is a helpful imag-ing modality to evaluate a lipoma and will show signal charac-teristics that are suggestive of adipose tissue.80Asymptomatic lesions with no aggressive findings may be observed. Marginal excision is recommended for symptomatic, painful, or enlarging lipomas or those that cause dysfunction. MRI is recommended for deep lipomas to evaluate proxim-ity or involvement of critical structures, followed by marginal excision if MRI findings are consistent with a lipoma. If MRI findings are not consistent with a lipoma, incisional biopsy is warranted. Recurrence after marginal excision is rare.80Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   195420/02/19   2:50 PM 1955SURGERY OF THE HAND AND WRISTCHAPTER 44Schwannoma. A schwannoma, also known as a neurilem-moma, is a type of benign peripheral nerve sheath tumor. It is the most common benign peripheral nerve sheath tumor of the upper extremity.83 The majority occur as single solitary masses. Patients with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) or 2 (NF2) may develop multiple schwannomas involving large peripheral nerve trunks or bilateral acoustic schwannomas, respectively. These tumors arise from the Schwann cell and occur most often in the middle decades of life. They grow as painless, slow-growing, firm, round, well-encapsulated masses with a predilection toward flexor surfaces of the forearm and palm (given their presence of large nerves). Schwannomas grow from the peripheral nerve sheath and are usually connected by a pedicled stalk. The tumor is well demar-cated and can be readily separated from the nerve fascicles  (Fig. 44-26). Unlike neurofibromas, they do not grow within the nerve. Paresthesias or other neurologic findings may occur, but they are usually absent, as is the Tinel’s sign. Findings such as pain, paresthesias, or numbness should raise concern for a tumor causing a compressive neuropathy or a tumor that is malignant.83Histologic exam reveals Antoni type A palisades of spindle cells with large oval nuclei with interlacing fascicles. Less cellular regions appear as Antoni type B areas. Mutations of the schwanomin gene on chromosome 22 are found in 50% of sporadic cases and 100% of acoustic schwannomas in patients with NF2.84Surgical treatment is reserved for symptomatic tumors and those that require biopsy to rule out a malignant process. An MRI should be obtained prior to surgery to confirm that the tumor is not located within the nerve (i.e., a neurofibroma) and that it is consistent with a schwannoma. Operative treatment involves excisional biopsy. If the tumor is adherent to adjacent soft tissue or not encapsulated, incisional biopsy is performed and excision is delayed pending pathology results. Malignant degeneration is exceedingly rare.83Malignant Soft Tissue Tumors—CutaneousSquamous Cell Carcinoma. Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is the most common primary malignant tumor of the hand, accounting for 75% to 90% of all malignancies of the hand. Eleven percent of all cutaneous SCC occurs in the hand.85 It is the most common malignancy of the nail bed. Risk factors include sun exposure, radiation exposure, chronic ulcers, immu-nosuppression, xeroderma pigmentosa, and actinic keratosis. Marjolin’s ulcers represent malignant degeneration of old burn or traumatic wounds into an SCC and are a more aggressive type. Transplant patients on immunosuppression have a fourfold increased risk, and patients with xeroderma pigmentosa have a 65 to 200–fold increased risk of developing an SCC.86 They often develop as small, firm nodules or plaques with indistinct margins and surface irregularities ranging from smooth to ver-ruciform or ulcerated (Fig. 44-27). They are locally invasive, with 2% to 5% lymph node involvement. Metastasis rates of up to 20% have been reported in radiation or burn wounds. Stan-dard treatment is excision with 0.5to 1.0-cm margins. Other treatment options include curettage and electrodessication, cryotherapy, and radiotherapy.85Basal Cell Carcinoma. Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is the sec-ond most common primary malignancy of the hand, accounting for 3% to 12%; 2% to 3% of all BCCs occur on the hand. Risk fac-tors are similar for SCC and include chronic sun exposure, light complexion, immunosuppression, inorganic arsenic exposure, and Gorlin’s syndrome. Presentation includes a small, well-defined nodule with a translucent, pearly border and overlying telangi-ectasias (Fig. 44-28). Metastasis is very rare. Standard treatment is excision with 5-mm margins. Other treatment options include curettage and electrodessication, cryotherapy, and radiotherapy.Melanoma. Melanoma accounts for approximately 4% of skin cancers and is responsible of 80% of all deaths from skin  cancer. Approximately 2% of all cutaneous melanomas occur in the hand.87 Risk factors include sun exposure (especially blis-tering sunburns as a child), dysplastic nevi, light complexion, family history of melanoma, immunosuppression, and congenital Figure 44-26. Schwannomas grow as a firm, round, well-encapsulated mass within the epineurium of a peripheral nerve. Schwannomas are able to be separated from the nerve fascicles relatively easily because they do not infiltrate between them (unlike neurofibromas).Figure 44-27. Squamous cell carcinoma involving the nail fold and nail bed. Note the wart-like and ulcerated appearance.Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   195520/02/19   2:50 PM 1956SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IInevi. Pigmented lesions with irregular borders, color changes, increase in growth, or change in shape are suggestive of mela-noma. Breslow thickness is the most important factor in predicting survival for a primary melanoma. Melanoma in situ lesions should be surgically excised with 0.5 cm margins. For lesions up to 1 mm in thickness, 1-cm margins should be used. Two centimeter mar-gins should be used for lesions over 1 mm in thickness.88 Sentinel lymph node biopsy is done for lesions over 1 mm in thickness or for any lesion that is over 0.76 mm in thickness and exhibits ulcer-ation or high mitotic rate.89 Any clinically palpable lymph node requires a formal lymph node dissection of the involved basin, as do sentinel lymph nodes positive for melanoma. Lymph node dis-section has not been shown to offer any long-term survival ben-efit, but the information gained from sentinel lymph node biopsy (or lymph node dissection) does offer valuable staging informa-tion that is important for prognosis. For cases of subungual mela-nomas, DIP amputation is the current standard of care. A recent study reported similar recurrence and survival rates when com-paring patients treated with either DIP amputations or wide local excision; however, there was insufficient evidence to conclude if one treatment was superior to another.90Malignant Soft Tissue Tumors—NoncutaneousPrimary soft tissue sarcomas of the upper extremity are very rare. Approximately 12,000 new cases of sarcomas are diag-nosed each year and of those, only 15% occur in upper  extremity.80 Statistical inference is limited due to the rare occur-rence of these tumors, but mortality rate is very high despite the aggressive treatments. Fewer than 5% of soft tissue sarcomas of the upper extremity will develop lymph node metastasis. Cutaneous malignancies must be considered in the differential diagnosis for any patient with palpable lymph nodes in the setting of any upper extremity mass. Any lesion of the upper extremity that is over 5 cm in diameter, rapidly enlarges, or is painful should be considered malignant until proven otherwise.91Treatment for soft tissue sarcomas can range from pallia-tive debulking to attempted curative resection. Many muscles of the upper extremity and their compartments cross joints (e.g., forearm flexors). Any malignancy within a compartment mandates complete resection of that compartment, and there-fore, amputations must often be performed at levels much more proximal than the level of the actual tumor. Many soft tissue sarcomas are not responsive to radiation or chemotherapy, and use of these adjuvant treatments must be decided upon after discussion with medical and radiation oncologists in a multi-disciplinary team. Several studies have shown higher mortality rates in patients who undergo initial tumor biopsy of sarcomas at institutions from which they do not ultimately receive treatment. These studies recommend biopsy be performed at the institution at which definitive treatment will be provided.92 Institutions best suited for such treatment should have pathologists familiar with soft tissue sarcomas, medical and radiation oncologists, surgical oncologists, and a multidisciplinary tumor board.An in-depth review of each type of soft tissue sarcoma is beyond the scope of this chapter. Epithelioid sarcoma is the most common primary soft tissue sarcoma of the upper extremity and usually presents as a benign-like slow-growing mass during the third or fourth decades. It has a propensity for the forearm, palm, and digits. Spread to lymph nodes has been reported. It typically spreads along fascial planes.80 Synovial sarcoma is argued by some to be the most common primary soft tissue sarcoma of the hand and wrist, but the paucity of case reports is inconclusive. It is a high-grade malignancy that is painless and slow-growing and usually occurs adjacent to, but not involving, joints. It is most common in the second to fifth decades of life. Tumor size (greater than 5 cm) is positively correlated with mortality. Other sarcomas include malignant fibrous histiocytoma, liposarcoma, fibrosarcoma, dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans, and malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors, and more information can be found in further selected reading.93 The majority of metastases to the hand involve secondary bone tumors and are discussed later in the section, “Secondary Metastatic Tumors.”Benign Bone TumorsPrimary benign bone tumors of the hand and wrist make up a total of 7% of all primary benign bone tumors in the body. Benign tumors of cartilage origin comprise 79% of all primary benign bone tumors of the hand and wrist.94Enchondroma. This is the most common primary benign bone tumor of the hand and wrist and is of cartilage origin. Up to 90% of all bone tumors in the hand and wrist are enchondromas, with 35% to 54% of all enchondromas occurring in the hand and wrist. They are often found incidentally on X-rays taken for other reasons (e.g., hand trauma). They are usually solitary and favor the diaphysis of small tubular bones and are most com-mon in the second and third decades of life. The most common location is in the proximal phalanges, followed by the metacar-pals and then middle phalanges. Enchondroma has never been reported in the trapezoid. Presentation is usually asymptomatic, but pain may occur if there is a pathologic fracture or impending fracture. The etiology is believed to be from a fragment of carti-lage from the central physis. Histology shows well-differentiated hyaline cartilage with lamellar bone and calcification.94Figure 44-28. Basal cell carcinoma of the dorsal hand with sur-rounding telangiectasia.Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   195620/02/19   2:50 PM 1957SURGERY OF THE HAND AND WRISTCHAPTER 44Figure 44-29. Enchondroma. A. X-ray of the phalanx demon-strates a well-defined central lucency. Surrounding cortex may thin or thicken. Thinning of the cortex contributes to risk of pathologic fracture. B. Intraoperative fluoroscopy after curettage of the tumor. A radiopaque ribbon is used to occupy the defect to help ensure that there is no tumor (similarly radiolucent to the defect after curettage) left behind prior to bone grafting.BATwo variants of enchondroma include Ollier’s disease (multiple enchondromatosis) and Maffucci’s syndrome (multi-ple enchondromatosis associated with multiple soft tissue hem-angiomas). Malignant transformation is very rare in the solitary form, but there is a 25% incidence by age 40 in Ollier’s patients and a 100% life-time incidence in Maffucci’s patients. When malignant transformation does occur, it is almost uniformly a chondrosarcoma with pain and rapid growth.95Diagnosis is usually made based on history, physical exam, and X-rays. There is a well-defined, multilobulated cen-tral lucency in the metaphysis or diaphysis that can expand caus-ing cortical thinning or, sometimes, thickening (Fig. 44-29A). Further imaging is seldom needed, but a CT would be the study of choice.Observation is indicated for asymptomatic enchondromas with no risk of impending fracture, followed by annual X-rays for 2 years. If a pathologic fracture is found, it is treated with immobilization until fracture union and then surgically treated. If there is any uncertainty as to whether it is an enchondroma, incisional biopsy is indicated, and definitive treatment is postponed pending final pathology. Symptomatic lesions and those with impending fracture are treated surgically. Surgical treatment consists of an open incisional biopsy and confirmation by frozen section that it is well-differentiated hyaline cartilage. Curettage and high-speed burring are used to ablate the tumor. Intraoperative fluoroscopy is used to confirm complete ablation (Fig. 44-29B). The defect is then packed with bone graft or bone substitute. Recurrence ranges from 2% to 15%. X-rays should be obtained serially after surgery.94Periosteal Chondroma. Periosteal chondromas are benign bone tumors of cartilage origin that arise most commonly within or adjacent to periosteum at the metaphyseal-diaphyseal junc-tion in phalanges. They occur usually in the second or third decade as solitary lesions with pain, swelling, deformity, and possible pathologic fracture. X-rays reveal a subperiosteal lytic, unilobular lesion with erosion into adjacent cortex. There is often a rim of sclerosis. Histologically, they appear as aggres-sive cartilage with atypia, and it can be difficult to differentiate these from chondrosarcomas.94Diagnosis involves X-rays with incisional biopsy to con-firm the benign diagnosis and avoid unnecessary amputation. Treatment includes en bloc resection of periosteum and cortico-cancellous bone. Recurrence is less than 4%.Osteoid Osteoma. This is a tumor of bone origin. Approxi-mately 5% to 15% of all osteoid osteomas occur in the hand and wrist and are most often found in the proximal phalanx or car-pus. They usually occur in the second or third decade and pres-ent with a deep, dull ache that is classically worse at night and relieved by nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). X-rays reveal a central lucency that is usually less than 1 cm in diameter surrounded by reactive sclerosis. Bone scan or CT is helpful to secure the diagnosis.96Treatment consists of NSAID therapy only, and resolu-tion occurs at an average of 33 months. If the patient does not wish to undergo prolonged discomfort with conservative ther-apy, curettage or percutaneous ablation of the nucleus may be performed.96Giant Cell Tumor of Bone. Giant cell tumors of bone make up only 4% to 5% of all benign bone tumors in the body, and only 12% of these occur in the hand or wrist. Although its name is similar to that of “giant cell tumor of tendon sheath,” they are two separate tumors and do not share the same clinical or histo-pathologic characteristics. Approximately 2% occur in the hand and 10% occur in the distal radius; those within the distal radius are more aggressive. They usually occur in the fourth decade with pain and swelling and possibly pathologic fracture.97Giant cell tumor of the bone is unique in that it is benign on histology but does have metastatic potential and can cause death. It should be considered a low-grade malignancy.97 Workup includes a CT of the chest and total-body scintigra-phy to evaluate for metastases and multifocal lesions and MRI to evaluate the extent of local tissue involvement. The recom-mended treatment consists of surgical resection of the involved phalanges or metacarpals and wide excision of entire carpal rows. Treatment with curettage and adjuvant treatments only results in a high rate of recurrence. Local and systemic surveil-lance must be done for at least 10 years because metastasis has been reported to occur as late as 10 years postoperatively.97,98Malignant Bone TumorsMalignant primary and secondary bone tumors of the hand, like soft tissue malignancies, are exceedingly rare. An in-depth Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   195720/02/19   2:50 PM 1958SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIreview is beyond the scope of this chapter. The same principles for soft tissue sarcomas of the upper extremity apply here with regard to evaluation, biopsy, and treatment.Chondrosarcoma comprises 41% of all primary malignant bone tumors of the hand and wrist but only 1.5% of all chon-drosarcomas overall. It is most likely to occur from malignant degeneration from a preexisting lesion, with enchondromatosis and osteochondromatosis being the most common. It usually presents as a slow-growing, painless mass in the fourth to sixth decades and can be difficult to differentiate from its benign counterparts. X-ray reveals endosteal erosion, cortical expan-sion, cortical destruction, and calcification. Metastasis has never been reported for chondrosarcomas of the hand. Chondrosarco-mas are not responsive to chemotherapy or radiation.99Osteosarcoma of the hand is exceedingly rare; only 0.18% of osteosarcomas occur in the hand. It usually presents as a painful swelling with pathologic fracture in the fifth to eighth decades of life. Radiation exposure is believed to be a possible risk factor. X-ray findings vary widely, with 90% of tumors occurring at a metaphyseal location. Findings include an osteo-blastic or osteolytic lesion, cortical breakthrough with soft tissue extension, a “sunburst” pattern radially, or periosteal elevation (Codman’s triangle). The presence or absence of metastasis is the most important prognostic factor, with a 5-year survival of 70% in the absence of metastases and a 5-year survival of 10% if present. Preoperative chemotherapy is usually given, but radi-ation therapy plays no role.100Secondary Metastatic TumorsMetastases to the hand or wrist are rare, with only 0.1% of skel-etal metastases occurring in the hand. The majority of metas-tases to the hand are bone lesions, but soft tissue metastases have been reported. The most common primary site is the lung (40%), followed by the kidney (13%) and the breast (11%). Approximately 16% will have no known diagnosis of cancer.101 The most common sites are the distal phalanges, followed by the proximal and middle phalanges, metacarpals, and carpus. Patients will present with pain, swelling, and erythema. Dif-ferential diagnosis includes felon, gout, osteomyelitis, trauma, RA, or skin cancer. Treatment of a hand or wrist metastatic lesion must not interfere with treatment of the primary cancer. Treatment is usually palliative (simple excision or amputa-tion). The average life expectancy for these patients is less than  6 months.101BURNSThe palm of the hand makes up approximately 1% of the total body surface area. A burn involving the entire hand and digits is unlikely to cause life-threatening injury or shock, but seem-ingly small burns to the hand may cause severe permanent loss of function if not treated appropriately. Burns to the hand can cause serious shortand long-term disability. All burns to the hand are considered severe injuries that warrant transfer to a dedicated burn center for specialized treatment. This manage-ment will include a multidisciplinary team consisting of hand surgeons, burn surgeons, burn-specialized nurses, occupational therapists, case managers, and social workers.Superficial burns involve damage to the epidermis only and present with erythema, no blistering, and full sensation with blanching of skin. These will heal without scarring. Super-ficial partial-thickness burns involve damage to the papillary dermis; all skin appendages are preserved, and therefore, these readily reepithelialize with minimal to no scarring. Superficial partial-thickness burns are sensate and present with pain, ery-thema, blistering, and blanching of skin. Topical dressings are the mainstay of treatment. Deep partial-thickness burns involve damage to the reticular dermis with damage to skin appendages, as well as the dermal plexus blood vessels and nerves. These have decreased sensation and no cap refill and appear pale or white. Blistering may be present. Damage to the skin append-ages and blood supply in the dermal plexus precludes spontane-ous healing without scar. Excision with skin grafting is needed. Third-degree burns involve full-thickness damage through the dermis and are insensate with no blistering. They appear dry, leathery, and even charred.Acute ManagementAdvanced trauma life support guidelines should be followed. After primary survey, circulation to the hand should be assessed. Palpation and Doppler ultrasound should be used to evaluate blood flow within the radial and ulnar arteries, the pal-mar arches, and digital blood flow at the radial and ulnar aspect of each volar digital pad. A sensorimotor exam should be per-formed. Objective evidence of inadequate perfusion (i.e., deteri-orating clinical exam with changes in or loss of pulse or Doppler signal) indicates the need for escharotomy, especially in the set-ting of circumferential burns. Escharotomy may be performed at bedside with scalpel or electrocautery under local anesthesia or intravenous sedation. In the forearm, axially oriented midra-dial and midulnar incisions are made for the entire extent of the burn. Escharotomy should proceed as distally as necessary into the wrist and hand to restore perfusion. Digital escharotomies are made via a midaxial (the middle of the longitudinal axis on sagittal view) incision over the radial aspects of the thumb and small finger and the ulnar aspects of the index, middle, and ring fingers.102 These locations for digital escharotomies avoid pain-ful scars on the heavy-contact surfaces of each respective digit. After primary survey, vascular, and sensorimotor exams are complete, careful documentation should be made of all burns. This is best done with a Lund and Browder chart and includes location, surface area, and initial depth of burn.The burns should be dressed as soon as examination is complete. Gauze moistened with normal saline is a good initial dressing because it is easy, readily available, and will not leave ointment or cream on the wounds, which can hinder frequent examinations in the initial period. It is critical that no dressing is wrapped in a circumferential manner around any body part. Edema and swelling can lead to extremity ischemia if a circum-ferential dressing is in place. It is important to maintain body temperature above 37°C, especially in burn patients who have lost thermoregulatory function of the skin and now have moist dressings in place. The hands should be elevated above heart level to decrease edema formation, which can hinder motion and lead to late scar contracture. The hand should be splinted in the intrinsic plus position with the MPs flexed to 90° (placing MP collateral ligaments under tension), the IPs in straight extension (prevents volar plate adhesion), and the wrist in approximately 15° of extension.103 In rare cases, Kirschner wires or heavy steel wires/pins are needed to keep a joint in proper position. These are placed percutaneously through the involved joint and serve as a temporary joint stabilizer.After the primary and secondary surveys are complete, the wound should be evaluated again. Devitalized tissue should be Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   195820/02/19   2:50 PM 1959SURGERY OF THE HAND AND WRISTCHAPTER 44debrided. Wounds should be cleansed twice daily, typically with normal saline. Second-degree superficial burns may be dressed with Xeroform gauze and bacitracin. Silver sulfadiazine cream is another option for any secondor third-degree wound. It cov-ers gram-positive and gram-negative microbes, but it does not penetrate eschar. It should be applied at least one-sixteenth of an inch thick. Sulfamylon can be used in conjunction with silver sulfadiazine or alone. It deeply penetrates eschar and tissues and has good gram-positive coverage.Surgical ManagementAny burn wound will eventually heal with proper wound care. However, this may involve unacceptable scarring, deformity, contractures, pain, and unstable wounds that are prone to breakdown. The goal is to restore preinjury function as much as possible with a wound that is durable, supple, nonpainful, and allows the patient to return to society as an active member. Local wound care is the ideal treatment for wounds that can heal completely within 14 days while not sacrificing function. For deep partial-thickness or full-thickness burns, early surgical excision and skin grafting is necessary.103Considerable controversy surrounds the need, timing, and method of grafting burns. Careful consideration must be given to the patient’s overall status, their preinjury state, and the type of work and recreational activities they enjoyed in order to have a better understanding of which issues should be addressed. Tangential excision of the wounds should be performed under tourniquet to minimize blood loss and is carried down to viable tissue. Avoid excising through fascia  (epimysium) overlying muscles or exposing tendons, bone, joint capsules, or neurovascular structures. Tissues capable of receiv-ing a skin graft include well-vascularized fat, muscle, perineu-rium, paratenon, perichondrium, and periosteum. Exposure of deep structures without an adequately graftable bed mandates further coverage before skin grafting can occur (discussed later in “Reconstruction”).Once there is an adequate bed, grafting is the next step. If there is any doubt as to whether the wound bed can support a skin graft, a temporary dressing such as Allograft (human cadaver skin) should be placed and the patient reexamined fre-quently for signs of granulation tissue and wound bed viability. It can remain in place for up to 14 days before rejection and can serve as a way of “testing” if a wound is ready to receive a skin graft. Skin grafts to the dorsum of the hand are typi-cally split-thickness sheet grafts (not meshed), as sheet grafts have a superior aesthetic appearance. Skin grafts to the palmar aspects of the hand should be full-thickness in order to provide the dermal durability needed for daily functions. Skin grafts are secured with staples, sutures, fibrin glue, or even skin glue. It is important to bolster every skin graft. This prevents shearing loss and also keeps the skin graft in contact with the wound bed, preventing fluid collections that can lead to graft loss. A bol-ster may consist of a tie-over bolster and a splint or a negativepressure dressing. The hand should be splinted in intrinsic plus for 7 days after skin grafting. Once the graft is adherent, hand therapy should begin, consisting of active and passive range-of-motion exercises and modalities.103ReconstructionReconstruction of burn wounds can begin as early as the acute setting and continue into the subacute and late stages. Burns may initially be superficial but later convert to deep burns (especially with grease, oil, and alkali burns) due to infection, tissue desiccation, or continued trauma, or they may be deep from the outset of injury. Debridement or excision of burns may result in exposure of viable muscle, bone, tendon, cartilage, joints, and neurovascular structures, as well as loss of fascial layers that are required for overlying soft tissue to glide during movement. Simply skin grafting these exposed structures will result in unstable wounds that are prone to chronic breakdown. Soft tissue contractures will develop as the skin grafts adhere to the structures, effectively anchoring them in static position. This is especially true for tendons, where gliding capability is paramount for function. Flap coverage is required in these situ-ations. The reversed radial forearm flap is a local flap and is often the first choice for flap coverage of the hand. If the zone of injury or size of defect precludes its use, other skin and fat flaps, including the free lateral arm, free anterolateral thigh, or even free parascapular flaps, may be useful, provided the patient can tolerate a free tissue transfer (see Chapter 45) operation  (Fig. 44-30). The digits may also be buried subcutaneously in the lower abdominal skin or groin crease. Vascular ingrowth from the digits into the abdominal or groin skin occurs over  2 to 3 weeks, allowing division of the flap(s) and achieving full-thickness coverage of the wounds.104An acellular dermal regenerative substitute (e.g., Integra) may be used for wounds that have exposed structures and require more durability than is offered by a skin graft such as full-thickness loss overlying the extensor tendons of the wrist and hand.105 Dermal substitute is a good option for wounds that are not extensive enough to warrant a flap and for patients who are poor candidates for an extensive surgery. Integra is com-posed of acellular cross-linked bovine tendon collagen and gly-cosaminoglycan with an overlying silicone sheet. It is applied much like a skin graft. After incorporation in 14 to 21 days, it is capable of accepting a skin graft (after removing the silicone sheet). Conceptually, it works by replacing the lost dermis and adds durability to a wound bed. It may be reapplied multiple times to the same area if thicker neodermis is desired. Although cultured autologous keratinocytes have been used, they are expensive, time-consuming, and do not provide prompt or durable coverage.Web space contractures are the most common deformity resulting after hand burns. They may occur late despite the best efforts. In the normal web space, the leading edge of the volar Figure 44-30. Free anterolateral thigh flap reconstruction of a large dorsal hand wound. Once wound coverage is stable, this flap will need to be surgically revised to achieve proper contour.Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   195920/02/19   2:50 PM 1960SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIaspect of the web is distal to the dorsal aspect. This is reversed in web space contractures and limits digit abduction. Local modified Z-plasty (double-opposing Z-plasty) is the preferred treatment (Fig. 44-31).Special ConsiderationsChemical burns pose a risk to healthcare providers and should be considered hazardous material. They must also be removed from the patient or continued burn injury will occur. A complete discussion of all chemicals causing burns is beyond the scope of this chapter. Hydrofluoric acid produces a slow onset of severe pain and continues to penetrate deeper structures. It avidly binds tissue and circulating calcium and can lead to hypocalcemia and cardiac arrest. The wound should be irrigated copiously with water followed by topical or intra-arterial injection of calcium gluconate. Chromic acid burns should be treated with immediate lavage, phosphate buffer soaks and immediate surgical excision. Cement can result in chemical burns and should be treated with immediate irrigation and topical antibacterial ointments. Alka-line and acid burns require copious irrigation with water, with alkali burns often requiring hours of irrigation. Phenol burns should be irrigated with dilute polyethylene glycol wash fol-lowed by high-flow water lavage.106VASCULAR DISEASEVascular disease encompasses a broad spectrum of disorders leading to compromised perfusion to the hand and digits and may potentially cause ischemia and necrosis. Chronic vascular disorders tend to develop slowly and are typically seen in older patients. This includes progressive thrombosis, aneurysms, sys-temic vasculopathy, and vasospastic disorders. Disorders unique or common to the hand are discussed in the following sections.Progressive Thrombotic DiseaseHypothenar hammer syndrome involves occlusion of the ulnar artery at the wrist and is the most common occlusive vascular disorder of the upper extremity. The etiology is believed to be chronic trauma to the ulnar artery as it exits Guyon’s canal. The classic example is a construction worker who frequently uses heavy equipment, such as jackhammers, that cause prolonged vibration and repetitive impact on the ulnar aspect of the palm. This causes periadventitial arterial damage that results in scar-ring and eventual compression, as well as medial and intimal damage.107 The artery then becomes weakened and prone to aneurysm and/or thrombosis. If a thrombus forms, it may embo-lize, producing digital ischemia. Symptoms may be chronic or acute and include pain, numbness and tingling, weakness of grip, discoloration of the fingers, and even gangrene or ulcers of the fingertips.If acute in onset, proximal occlusions may be extracted with a balloon catheter or, sometimes, under direct vision via an arteriotomy. Very distal embolism may require infusion of thrombolytics to dissolve clots and allow reperfusion. Large-vessel acute embolism and reperfusion may result in edema and compartment syndrome, requiring fasciotomy. A high index of suspicion must be maintained.For the more common scenario of chronic, progres-sive occlusion, the involved segment of ulnar artery should be resected. There is disagreement in the literature regarding whether simple ligation and excision is sufficient for patients with sufficient distal flow or if all patients should undergo vas-cular reconstruction.108 The authors’ personal preference is to reconstruct all patients.Systemic VasculopathyBuerger’s disease (thromboangiitis obliterans) is an inflamma-tory occlusive disease affecting small and medium-sized arter-ies and veins. It is strongly influenced by smoking and will often resolve upon smoking cessation. The disease is classified into acute, intermediate, and chronic, depending on histologic progression of the disease. Migratory phlebitis occurs distal to the elbow, resulting in ischemia, rest pain, and ulceration and necrosis of the digits. It can continue to cause more proximal ischemia and ultimately lead to loss of the hands. Treatment must start with smoking cessation. Failure to stop smoking will make any surgical intervention unsuccessful. Arteriography is useful to determine arterial flow and whether bypass is possible. ABFigure 44-31. Z-plasty release of web space contracture. A. First web space burn contracture. B. Immediate postoperative result.Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   196020/02/19   2:50 PM 1961SURGERY OF THE HAND AND WRISTCHAPTER 44If direct bypass is not possible, alternatives include arteriali-zation of the venous system by connecting the dorsal venous network to the brachial artery or possible free microvascular omental transfer beneath the dorsal forearm or hand for indirect revascularization.109Vasospastic DisordersRaynaud’s syndrome results from excessive sympathetic ner-vous system stimulation. Perfusion is diminished and fingers often become cyanotic. Although the onset of the symptoms is benign, chronic episodes can result in atrophic changes and painful ulceration or gangrene of the digits. Raynaud’s disease occurs without another associated disease. This disease predom-inately affects young women and is often bilateral. The vascular system is structurally intact without any obstructions. There is no ulceration, gangrene, or digit loss. In contrast, Raynaud’s phenomenon is associated with an underlying connective tissue disorder, such as scleroderma. Arterial stenosis is present due to disease changes in blood vessels as a result of the specific medical disorder.110Scleroderma is an autoimmune connective tissue disorder resulting in fibrosis and abnormal collagen deposition in tissue. Many organs can be affected, with the skin most commonly and noticeably involved. In this disease, blood vessels are injured by intimal fibrosis leading to microvascular disease. The ves-sels become subject to Raynaud’s phenomenon, and patients develop painful, ulcerated, and sometimes necrotic digits.109,110Sympathectomy can provide pain relief and healing of ulcers for patients with scleroderma and Raynaud’s phenom-enon. In this procedure, adventitia is stripped from the radial artery, ulnar artery, superficial palmar arch, and digital arter-ies in various combinations based on the affected digits being treated. The decrease in sympathetic tone allows for vasodila-tion and increased blood flow. If the patient notes significant distal pain relief and/or previously ischemic tissue improves in color after a test administration of local anesthetic, sympathec-tomy may provide the same results in a long-term fashion.111 Recently, several studies have investigated the use of botulinum toxin on improving digital perfusion in patients with Raynaud’s. Reports have shown improved objective measurements of hand function 8-12 weeks after injection.112CONGENITAL DIFFERENCESCongenital differences in a newborn can be particularly dis-abling as the child learns to interact with the environment by using the hands. The degree of anomaly can range from minor, such as a digital disproportion, to severe, such as total absence of a forearm bone. In recent years, increasing knowledge of the molecular basis of embryonic limb development has sig-nificantly enhanced the understanding of congenital differences. Congenital hand differences have an incidence of 1:1500 births. The two most common differences encountered are syndactyly and polydactyly.113There are numerous classification systems for hand dif-ferences. The Swanson classification, adopted by the American Society for Surgery of the Hand, delineates seven groups orga-nized based on anatomic parts affected by types of embryonic failures.114,115Failure of FormationThe failure of the formation of parts is a group of congenital differences that forms as a result of a transverse or longitudinal arrest of development. Conditions in this group include radial club hand, a deformity that involves some or all of the tissues on the radial side of the forearm and hand, and ulnar club hand, which involves underdevelopment or absence of the ulnar-sided bones.Failure of DifferentiationThe failure of the differentiation of parts comprises conditions where the tissues of the hand fail to separate during embryo-genesis. Syndactyly, in which two or more fingers are fused together, is the most common congenital hand deformity and occurs in 7 out of every 10,000 live births. There is a famil-ial tendency to develop this deformity. This deformity often involves both hands, and males are more often affected than females. Syndactyly is classified as either simple (soft tissue only) or complex (bone and/or cartilage also involved), and complete (full length of the digits) or incomplete (less than the full length).Surgical release of syndactyly requires the use of local flaps to create a floor for the interdigital web space and to partially surface the adjacent sides of the separated digits  (Fig. 44-32). Residual defects along the sides of the separated fingers are covered with full-thickness skin grafts. Surgery usu-ally is performed at 6 to 12 months of age.DuplicationDuplication of digits is also known as polydactyly. Radial polydactyly is usually manifests as thumb duplication. Wassel described a classification system for thumb duplications based on the level of bifurcation.116 When two thumbs are present in the same hand, they are rarely both normal in size, alignment, and mobility. In the most common form of thumb duplication, a single broad metacarpal supports two proximal phalanges, each of which supports a distal phalanx. Optimal reconstruction requires merging of elements of both component digits. Usually the ulnar thumb is maintained. If the duplication occurs at the MP joint, the radial collateral ligament is preserved with the metacarpal and attached to the proximal phalanx of the retained ulnar thumb. Surgery is usually performed at 6 to 12 months of age. Ulnar-sided polydactyly may often be treated by simple excision of the extra digit.OvergrowthOvergrowth of digits is also known as macrodactyly, which causes an abnormally large digit. In this situation, the hand and the forearm also may be involved. In this rare condition, all parts of a digit are affected; however, in most cases, only one digit is involved, and it is usually the index finger. This condition is more commonly seen in males. Surgical treatment of this condi-tion is complex, and the outcomes may be less than desirable. Sometimes, amputation of the enlarged digit provides the best functional result.Constriction Band SyndromeUnderdeveloped fingers or thumbs are associated with many congenital hand deformities. Surgical treatment is not always required to correct these deformities. Underdeveloped fingers may include the following: small digits (brachydactyly), miss-ing muscles, underdeveloped or missing bones, or absence of a digit.Generalized Skeletal Anomalies and SyndromesThis is a rare and complex group of unclassified problems.Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   196120/02/19   2:50 PM 1962SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIRECONSTRUCTIVE TRANSPLANTATION OF THE UPPER EXTREMITYHand transplantation was first performed in humans in the late 1990s both in Louisville, Kentucky, and Lyon, France.117 The treating surgeons were able to successfully remove an upper extremity from a brain-dead donor, attach it to an upper extrem-ity amputee, and have the tissue survive. In the subsequent  15 years, many additional centers have achieved technical suc-cess with upper extremity transplantation as well.The technical considerations of hand transplantation have proven to be only the beginning of challenges in bring-ing this treatment option to the general public. Replantation of an amputated limb was first reported by Malt in 1962.118 In a limb replantation, there is a zone of injury, and cold preser-vation of the amputated part does not begin immediately. In a limb transplant, the harvest can be done as proximally as neces-sary to ensure that only healthy tissue is present on both sides  of the repair and to obviate the need for limb shortening, and cold preservation of the amputated part can begin immediately after harvest.A major concern regarding the use of limb transplanta-tion is the immunosuppression medications required to prevent rejection of the transplanted limb. Unlike organ transplantation, which provides a critical organ without which the recipient could not survive or would require chronic mechanical support (e.g., hemodialysis), the absence of one or even multiple limbs does not represent an immediate threat to a patient’s survival. Multiple studies have documented the nephrotoxic and other side effects of tacrolimus (FK 506), the principle antirejection agent used in transplant immunomodulation protocols.119,120Due to these concerns, much research has been directed at minimizing the amount of antirejection medication as well as promoting tolerance or even chimerism. Donor bone mar-row transplantation to the limb transplant recipient has been shown to be beneficial toward this purpose and is part of the limb transplant protocol in some centers.121,122 Recent research with donor bone marrow infusions has shown that lower lev-els of immunosuppressive drugs may be possible, as well as fewer immunosuppressive agents.121 Further research is needed in order to determine the efficacy and utility of donor bone mar-row transfusions and how they impact transplant recipients in the short and long term.The final challenge in consideration of a patient for limb transplantation is selection of an appropriate candidate. There are multiple patient factors that need to be considered to deter-mine if a patient is an appropriate candidate for hand transplan-tation. These include medical concerns, such as immunologic issues (both antibodies and the presence of occult neoplasms or indolent viruses such as cytomegalovirus), hematologic issues including coagulopathies, and anatomic issues such as quality of skin envelope and amputation level of the bone and neuro-muscular structures. Psychological and social factors must also be considered related to the recipient’s ability to comply with postoperative medication and therapy protocols as well as to cope with a continuous visible presence of a limb originating from another person.123The promise of upper limb transplantation as a recon-structive technique remains high. Both civilian and military amputees stand to receive a marked functional benefit from this treatment. With the number of transplants performed worldwide ABCFigure 44-32. Syndactyly. A. Hand of a 1-year-old patient with complex syndactyly between the long and ring fingers. Complex syndactyly refers to fingers joined by bone or cartilaginous union, usually in a side-to-side fashion at the distal phalanges. B. Antero-posterior radiograph. C. The syndactyly is divided with interdigitat-ing full-thickness flaps, a dorsal trapezoidal-shaped flap to resurface the floor of the web space, and full-thickness skin grafts. Note the skin grafts on the ulnar and radial sides of the new web space.Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   196220/02/19   2:50 PM 1963SURGERY OF THE HAND AND WRISTCHAPTER 44approaching 100 as well as decades of animal research, under-standing of how best to use this technique from functional, patient safety, and cost-effectiveness standpoints continues to grow.REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	American Society for Surgery of the Hand. The Hand: Examination and Diagnosis. 3rd ed. New York: Churchill  Livingstone; 1990:5-13.	2.	Moore KL. The Upper Limb. Clinically Oriented Anatomy. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; 1992:501-635.	3.	Schuind F, Cooney WP, Linscheid RL, An KN, Chao EY. Force and pressure transmission through the normal wrist. A theoretical two-dimensional study in the posteroanterior plane. J Biomech. 1995;28(5):587-601.	4.	Gordon JA, Stone L, Gordon L. Surface markers for locating the pulleys and flexor tendon anatomy in the palm and fingers with reference to minimally invasive incisions. J Hand Surg Am. 2012;37:913-918.	5.	Dumanian GA, Segalman K, Buehner JW, Koontz CL,  Hendrickson MF, Wilgis EF. Analysis of digital pulse-volume recordings with radial and ulnar artery compression. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1998;102:1993-1998.	6.	Green DP. General principles. In: Green DP, Hotchkiss RN, Pedersen WC, Wolfe SW, eds. Green’s Operative Hand Sur-gery. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone; 2005:3-24.	7.	Gilula LA. Carpal injuries: analytic approach and case exer-cises. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 1979;133:503-517.	8.	Karl JW, Swart E, Strauch RJ. Diagnosis of occult scaphoid fractures: a cost-effectiveness analysis. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2015;97(22):1860-1868.	9.	Dezfuli B, Taljanovic MS, Melville DM, Krupinski EA,  Sheppard JE. Accuracy of high-resolution ultrasonography in the detection of extensor tendon lacerations. Ann Plast Surg. 2016;76(2):187-192.	10.	Kretsinger K, Broder KR, Cortese MM, et al. Preventing teta-nus, diphtheria, and pertussis among adults: use of tetanus tox-oid, reduced diphtheria toxoid and acellular pertussis vaccine recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immuni-zation Practices (ACIP) and recommendation of ACIP, sup-ported by the Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory  Committee (HICPAC), for use of Tdap among health-care personnel. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2006;55(Rr-17):1-37.	11.	Hastings H 2nd, Carroll C 4th. Treatment of closed articu-lar fractures of the metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal joints. Hand Clin. 1988;4:203-227.	12.	Liodaki E, Xing SG, Mailaender P, Stang F. Management of difficult intra-articular fractures or fracture dislocations of the proximal interphalangeal joint. J Hand Surg Eur Vol. 2015;40(1):16-23.	13.	Jahss SA. Fractures of the metacarpals: a new method of reduction and immobilization. J Bone Joint Surg. 1938;20(1):178-186.	14.	Bond CD. Percutaneous screw fixation or cast immobilization for nondisplaced scaphoid fractures. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2001;83-a(4):483-488.	15.	Mayfield JK, Johnson RP, Kilcoyne RF. The ligaments of the human wrist and their functional significance. Anat Rec. 1976;186(3):417-428.	16.	Apostolides JG, Lifchez SD, Christy MR. Complex and rare fracture patterns in perilunate dislocations. Hand (N Y). 2011;6(3):287-294.	17.	Kleinert HE, Kutz JE, Atasoy E, Stormo A. Primary repair of flexor tendons. Orthop Clin North Am. 1973;4(4): 865-876. This key manuscript changed the “axiom” and established that zone two flexor tendon injuries could be immediately repaired primarly.	18.	Vinycomb TI, Sahhar LJ. Comparison of local anesthetics for digital nerve blocks: a systematic review. J Hand Surg Am. 2010;39(4):744-751.e5.	19.	Lalonde D, Bell M, Benoit P, Sparkes G, Denkler K, Chang P.  A multicenter prospective study of 3110 consecutive cases of elective epinephrine use in the fingers and hand: the Dalhousie Project clinical phase. J Hand Surg Am. 2005;30:1061-1067. This large case series supports that the use of lidocaine with epinephrine is safe to use in the hand.	20.	Yousif NJ, Grunert BK, Forte RA, Matloub HS, Sanger JR. A comparison of upper arm and forearm tourniquet tolerance.  J Hand Surg Br. 1993;18:639-641.	21.	Lee HJ, Cho YJ, Gong HS, Rhee SH, Park HS, Baek GH. The effect of buffered lidocaine in local anesthesia: a pro-spective, randomized, double-blind study. J Hand Surg Am. 2013;38(5):971-975.	22.	Best CA, Best AA, Best TJ, Hamilton DA. Buffered lidocaine and bupivacaine mixture—the ideal local anesthetic solution? Plast Surg (Oakv). 2015;23(2):87-90.	23.	Higgins A, Lalonde DH, Bell M, McKee D, Lalonde JF. Avoiding flexor tendon repair rupture with intraoperative total active movement examination. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2010; 126(3):941-945.	24.	Davison PG, Cobb T, Lalonde DH. The patient’s perspective on carpal tunnel surgery related to the type of anesthesia: a prospective cohort study. Hand (N Y). 2013;8(1):47-53.	25.	Rodgers J, Cunningham K, Fitzgerald K, Finnerty E. Opioid consumption following outpatient upper extremity surgery.  J Hand Surg Am. 2012;37(4):645-650.	26.	Stanek JJ, Renslow MA, Kalliainen LK. The effect of an educational program on opioid prescription patterns in hand surgery: a quality improvement program. J Hand Surg Am. 2015;40(2):341-346.	27.	Komatsu S, Tamai S. Successful replantation of a com-pletely cut-off thumb: case report. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1968;42:374-377.	28.	Lifchez SD, Marchant-Hanson J, Matloub HS, Sanger JR, Dzwierzynski WW, Nguyen HH. Functional improvement with digital prosthesis use after multiple digit amputations.  J Hand Surg Am. 2005;30:790-794.	29.	Weichman KE, Wilson SC, Samra F, Reavey P, Sharma S, Haddock NT. Treatment and outcomes of fingertip injuries at a large metropolitan public hospital. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2013;131(1):107-112.	30.	Bickel KD, Dosanjh A. Fingertip reconstruction. J Hand Surg Am. 2008;33(8):1417-1419.	31.	Moberg E. The treatment of mutilating injuries of the upper limb. Surg Clin North Am. 1964;44:1107-1113.	32.	Melone CP, Jr, Beasley RW, Carstens JH, Jr. The thenar flap—an analysis of its use in 150 cases. J Hand Surg Am. 1982;7(3):291-297.	33.	Johnson RK, Iverson RE. Cross-finger pedicle flaps in the hand. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1971;53(5):913-919.	34.	Cannon TA. High-pressure injection injuries of the hand. Orthop Clin North Am. 2016;47(3):617-624.	35.	Bekler H, Gokce A, Beyzadeoglu T, Parmaksizoglu F. The sur-gical treatment and outcomes of high-pressure injection inju-ries of the hand. J Hand Surg Eur Vol. 2007;32(4):394-399.	36.	Kalyani BS et al. Compartment syndrome of the forearm: a systematic review. J Hand Surg Am. 2011;36(3):535-543.	37.	Staudt JM, Smeulders MJ, van der Horst CM. Normal com-partment pressures of the lower leg in children. J Bone Joint Surg Br. 2008;90(2):215-219.	38.	Al-Qattan MM, Abou Al-Shaar H, Al Mugaren FM. Non-union without avascular necrosis of finger phalangeal neck Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   196320/02/19   2:50 PM 1964SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIfractures in children: report of 4 cases. J Hand Surg Am. 2014;39(8):1529-1534.	39.	Munk B, Larsen CF. Bone grafting the scaphoid nonunion: a systematic review of 147 publications including 5,246 cases of scaphoid nonunion. Acta Orthop Scand. 2004;75(5):618-629.	40.	Curtis RM. Capsulectomy of the interphalangeal joints of the fingers. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1954;36-a(6):1219-1232.	41.	Brogan DM, Kakar S. Management of neuromas of the upper extremity. Hand Clin. 2013;29(3):409-420.	42.	Zimmerman RM, Astifidis RP, Katz RD. Modalities for complex regional pain syndrome. J Hand Surg Am. 2015;40(7):1469-1472.	43.	Schurmann M, Zaspel J, Löhr P, et al. Imaging in early post-traumatic complex regional pain syndrome: a comparison of diagnostic methods. Clin J Pain. 2007;23(5):449-457.	44.	Mackinnon SE. Pathophysiology of nerve compression. Hand Clin. 2002;18(2):231-241.	45.	US Department of Health and Human Services. Hand/wrist musculoskeletal disorders (carpal tunnel syndrome, hand/wrist tendonitis, and hand-arm vibration syndrome): evidence for work-relatedness. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/docs/97-141/pdfs/97-141.pdf. Accessed August 16, 2018.	46.	American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons. Management of Carpal Tunnel Syndrome Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guideline. Available at: https://www.aaos.org/uploadedFiles/PreProduction/Quality/Guidelines_and_Reviews/guidelines/CTS%20CPG_2.29.16.pdf. Accessed August 16, 2018.	47.	Lifchez SD, Means KR, Jr, Dunn RE, Williams EH, Dellon AL. Intraand inter-examiner variability in performing Tinel’s test. J Hand Surg Am. 2010;35(2):212-216.	48.	Williams TM, Mackinnon SE, Novak CB, McCabe S, Kelly L.  Verification of the pressure provocative test in carpal tunnel syndrome. Ann Plast Surg. 1992;29(1):8-11.	49.	Marshall S, Tardif G, Ashworth N. Local corticosteroid injec-tion for carpal tunnel syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007(2):Cd001554.	50.	Trumble TE, Diao E, Abrams RA, Gilbert-Anderson MM. Single-portal endoscopic carpal tunnel release compared with open release : a prospective, randomized trial. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2002;84-a(7):1107-1115. Carpal tunnel release is one of the most common procedures performed by hand sur-geons. This study by Trumble highlights that although patients undergoing endoscopic carpal tunnel release have less pain in the immediate postoperative period, clinical outcomes after 3 months show no difference compared to traditional open approaches.	51.	Mackinnon SE, Novak CB. Compression neuropathies. In: Wolfe SW, Hotchkiss RN, Kozin SH, Cohen MS, eds. Green’s Operative Hand Surgery. 7th ed. Amsterdam:  Elsevier; 2016:921-958. This chapter does well to explain the mechanism, pathophysiology, and treatment for compression neuropathies in the upper extremity.	52.	Ochi K, Horiuchi Y, Tanabe A, Morita K, Takeda K, Ninomiya K. Comparison of shoulder internal rotation test with the elbow flexion test in the diagnosis of cubital tunnel syndrome. J Hand Surg Am. 2011;36(5):782-787.	53.	Goldfarb CA, Sutter MM, Martens EJ, Manske PR. Incidence of re-operation and subjective outcome following in situ decompression of the ulnar nerve at the cubital tunnel. J Hand Surg Eur Vol. 2009;34:379-383.	54.	Kocak E, Carruthers KH, Kobus RJ. Distal interphalangeal joint arthrodesis with the Herbert headless compression screw: outcomes and complications in 64 consecutively treated joints. Hand (N Y). 2011;6(1):56-59.	55.	Swanson AB. Implant resection arthroplasty of the proximal interphalangeal joint. Orthop Clin North Am. 1973;4:1007-1029.	56.	Adkinson JM, Chung KC. Advances in small joint arthroplasty of the hand. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2014;134(6):1260-1268.	57.	Naram A, Lyons K, Rothkopf DM, et al. Increased complica-tions in trapeziectomy with ligament reconstruction and ten-don interposition compared with trapeziectomy alone. Hand (N Y). 2016;11(1):78-82.	58.	Gray KV, Meals RA. Hematoma and distraction arthroplasty for thumb basal joint osteoarthritis: minimum 6.5-year follow-up evaluation. J Hand Surg Am. 2007;32(1):23-29.	59.	Kenniston JA, Bozentka DJ. Treatment of advanced carpo-metacarpal joint disease: arthrodesis. Hand Clin. 2008;24(3): 285-294, vi-vii.	60.	Watson HK, Ballet FL. The SLAC wrist: scapholunate advanced collapse pattern of degenerative arthritis. J Hand Surg Am. 1984;9(3):358-365.	61.	Wall LB, Didonna ML, Kiefhaber TR, Stern PJ. Proximal row carpectomy: minimum 20-year follow-up. J Hand Surg Am. 2013;38(8):1498-1504.	62.	Goldfarb CA, Stern PJ, Kiefhaber TR. Palmar midcarpal instability: the results of treatment with 4-corner arthrodesis. J Hand Surg Am. 2004;29(2):258-263.	63.	Chung KC, Pushman AG. Current concepts in the man-agement of the rheumatoid hand. J Hand Surg Am. 2011;36(4):736-747; quiz 747. Surgical treatment for rheu-matoid arthritis of the hand has decreased due to the advances in medical management. This article serves as thorough review for hand surgeons on the treatment of rheumatoid  hand.	64.	Swanson AB. Silicone rubber implants for replacement of arthritis or destroyed joints in the hand. Surg Clin North Am. 1968;48(5):1113-1127.	65.	Fujita S, Masada K, Takeuchi E, Yasuda M, Komatsubara Y, Hashimoto H. Modified Sauve-Kapandji procedure for disorders of the distal radioulnar joint in patients with rheu-matoid arthritis. Surgical technique. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2006;88(Suppl 1 Pt 1):24-28.	66.	Elliot D, Ragoowansi R. Dupuytren’s disease secondary to acute injury, infection or operation distal to the elbow in the ipsilateral upper limb—a historical review. J Hand Surg Br. 2005;30(2):148-156.	67.	Eaton C. Dupuytren disease. In: Wolfe SW, Hotchkiss RN, Kozin SH, Cohen MS, eds. Green’s Operative Hand Surgery. 7th ed. Amsterdam: Elsevier; 2016.	68.	Murphy A, Lalonde DH, Eaton C, et al. Minimally inva-sive options in Dupuytren’s contracture: aponeurotomy, enzymes, stretching, and fat grafting. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2014;134(5):822e-829e.	69.	van Rijssen AL, ter Linden H, Werker PM. Five-year results of a randomized clinical trial on treatment in Dupuytren’s disease: percutaneous needle fasciotomy versus limited fas-ciectomy. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2012;129:469-477. Although percutaneous needle fasciotomy is less invasive than limited fasciectomy, this study showed that fasciectomy provided more durable and lasting results.	70.	Hurst LC, Badalamente MA, Hentz VR, et al. Injectable colla-genase clostridium histolyticum for Dupuytren’s contracture. N Engl J Med. 2009;361:968-979.	71.	Saar JD, Grothaus PC. Dupuytren’s disease: an overview. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2000;106:125-134.	72.	Crean SM, Gerber RA, Le Graverand MP, Boyd DM,  Cappelleri JC. The efficacy and safety of fasciectomy and fas-ciotomy for Dupuytren’s contracture in European patients: a structured review of published studies. J Hand Surg Eur Vol. 2011;36:396-407.	73.	McDonald LS, Bavaro MF, Hofmeister EP, Kroonen LT. Hand infections. J Hand Surg Am. 2011;36(8):1403-1412.Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   196420/02/19   2:50 PM 1965SURGERY OF THE HAND AND WRISTCHAPTER 44	74.	Honda H, McDonald JR. Current recommendations in the management of osteomyelitis of the hand and wrist. J Hand Surg Am. 2009;34(6):1135-1136.	75.	Murray PM. Septic arthritis of the hand and wrist. Hand Clin. 1998;14(4):579-587, viii.	76.	Boles SD, Schmidt CC. Pyogenic flexor tenosynovitis. Hand Clin. 1998;14(4):567-578.	77.	Kanavel AB. The treatment of acute suppurative tenosynovi-tis—discussion of technique. In: Infections of the Hand; A Guide to the Surgical Treatment of Acute and Chronic Sup-purative Processes in the Fingers, Hand, and Forearm. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lea and Febiger; 1925:985.	78.	Giladi AM, Malay S, Chung KC. A systematic review of the management of acute pyogenic flexor tenosynovitis. J Hand Surg Eur Vol. 2015;40(7):720-728.	79.	Michon J. Phlegmon of the tendon sheaths (in French). Ann Chir. 1974;28(4):277-280.	80.	Athanasian E. Bone and soft tissue tumors. In: Wolfe SW, Hotchkiss RN, Kozin SH, Cohen MS, eds. Green’s Operative Hand Surgery. 7th ed. Amsterdam: Elsevier; 2016.	81.	Head L, Gencarelli JR, Allen M. Wrist ganglion treatment: systematic review and meta-analysis. J Hand Surg Am. 2015;40(3):546-553.e8.	82.	Lanzinger WD, Bindra R. Giant cell tumor of the tendon sheath. J Hand Surg Am. 2013;38(1):154-157; quiz 157.	83.	Phalen GS. Neurilemomas of the forearm and hand. Clin Orthop. 1976;114:219-222.	84.	Lekanne Deprez RH, Bianchi AB, Groen NA, et al. Fre-quent NF2 gene transcript mutations in sporadic menin-giomas and vestibular schwannomas. Am J Hum Genet. 1994;54:1022-1029.	85.	TerKonda SP, Perdikis G. Non-melanotic skin tumors of the upper extremity. Hand Clin. 2004;20:293-301.	86.	Webber T, Wolf JM. Squamous cell carcinoma of the hand in solid organ transplant patients. J Hand Surg Am. 2014;39(3):567-570.	87.	English C, Hammert WC. Cutaneous malignancies of the upper extremity. J Hand Surg Am. 2012;37(2):367-377.	88.	Coit DG, Thompson JA, Andtbacka R, et al. Melanoma, version 2.2016. J Natl Compr Canc Netw. 2016;14(4): 450-473.	89.	Dummer RA, Hauschild A, Lindenblatt N, et al. Cutane-ous malignant melanoma: ESMO clinical recommenda-tions for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. Ann Oncol. 2009;20(Suppl 4):129-131.	90.	Cochran AM. Subungual melanoma: a review of current treat-ment. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2014;134(2):259-273.	91.	Mahajan A. The contemporary role of the use of radiation therapy in the management of sarcoma. Surg Oncol Clin N Am. 2000;9(3):503-524, ix.	92.	Mankin HJ, Mankin CJ, Simon MA. The hazards of the biopsy, revisited. Members of the Musculoskeletal Tumor Society. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1996;78(5):656-663.	93.	Murray PM. Soft tissue sarcoma of the upper extremity. Hand Clin. 2004;20(3):325-333, vii. The subject of soft tissue sarcomas is very broad and specific. This article by Murray provides a concise and accurate summary of soft tissue sarco-mas of the upper extremity.	94.	Unni KK, Dahlin DC. Dahlin’s Bone Tumors: General Aspects and Data on 11,087 Cases. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven; 1996.	95.	Henderson M, Neumeister MW, Bueno RA, Jr. Hand tumors: II. Benign and malignant bone tumors of the hand. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2014;133(6):814e-821e.	96.	Marcuzzi A, Acciaro AL, Landi A. Osteoid osteoma of the hand and wrist. J Hand Surg Br. 2002;27(5):440-443.	97.	Maloney WJ, Vaughan LM, Jones HH, Ross J, Nagel DA. Benign metastasizing giant-cell tumor of bone. Report of three cases and review of the literature. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 1989(243):208-215.	98.	Oliveira VC, van der Heijden L, van der Geest IC, et al. Giant cell tumours of the small bones of the hands and feet: long-term results of 30 patients and a systematic literature review. Bone Joint J. 2013;95-b(6):838-845.	99.	Ogose A, Unni KK, Swee RG, et al. Chondrosarcoma of small bones of the hands and feet. Cancer. 1997;80:50-59.	100.	Okada K, Wold LE, Beabout JW, et al. Osteosarcoma of the hand: a clinicopathologic study of 12 cases. Cancer. 1993;72:719-725.	101.	Amadio PC, Lombardi RM. Metastatic tumors of the hand.  J Hand Surg Am. 1987;12:311-316.	102.	Sheridan RL. Acute hand burns in children: management and long-term outcome based on a 10-year experience with 698 injured hands. Ann Surg. 1999;229:558-564.	103.	Pan BS, Vu AT, Yakuboff KP. Management of the acutely burned hand. J Hand Surg Am. 2015;40(7):1477-1484; quiz 1485.	104.	Herndon D. Total Burn Care. 2nd ed. London: WB Saunders; 2002.	105.	Haslik W, Kamolz LP, Nathschläger G, et al. First experi-ences with the collagen-elastin matrix Matriderm as a der-mal substitute in severe burn injuries of the hand. Burns. 2007;33:364-368.	106.	Robinson EP, Chhabra AB. Hand chemical burns. J Hand Surg Am. 2015;40(3):605-612; quiz 613.	107.	Conn J Jr, Bergan JJ, Bell JL. Hypothenar hammer syndrome: posttraumatic digital ischemia. Surgery. 1970;68(6):1122-1128.	108.	Lifchez SD, Higgins JP. Long-term results of surgical treat-ment for hypothenar hammer syndrome. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2009;124(1):210-216.	109.	Michelotti BM, Rizzo M, Moran SL. Connective tissue disor-ders associated with vasculitis and vaso-occlusive disease of the hand. Hand Clin. 2015;31(1):63-73.	110.	Hotchkiss R, Marks T. Management of acute and chronic vas-cular conditions of the hand. Curr Rev Musculoskelet Med. 2014;7(1):47-52.	111.	Ruch DS, Holden M, Smith BP, et al. Periarterial sympathec-tomy in scleroderma patients: intermediate-term follow-up.  J Hand Surg Am. 2002;27:258-264.	112.	Uppal L, Dhaliwal K, Butler PE. A prospective study of the use of botulinum toxin injections in the treatment of  Raynaud’s syndrome associated with scleroderma. J Hand Surg Eur Vol. 2014;39(8):876-880.	113.	Ekblom AG, Laurell T, Arner M. Epidemiology of congenital upper limb anomalies in 562 children born in 1997 to 2007: a total population study from Stockholm, Sweden. J Hand Surg Am. 2010;35(11):1742-1754.	114.	Swanson AB. A classification for congenital limb malfor-mations. J Hand Surg Am. 1976;1:8-22. Swanson developed the seven key categories for the organization of congenital limb malformations later adopted by the American Society for Surgery of the Hand.	115.	Bates SJ, Hansen SL, Jones NF. Reconstruction of congeni-tal differences of the hand. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2009;124 (1 Suppl):128e-143e.	116.	Wassel HD. The results of surgery for polydactyly of the thumb. A review. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 1969;64: 175-193.	117.	Lee WP, Mathes DW. Hand transplantation: pertinent data and future outlook. J Hand Surg Am. 1999;24:906-913.	118.	Malt RA, McKhann CF. Replantation of severed arms. JAMA. 1964;189:716.Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   196520/02/19   2:50 PM 1966SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	119.	Starzl TE, Fung J, Jordan M, et al. Kidney transplantation under FK 506. JAMA. 1990;264:63-67.	120.	Gorantla VS, Brandacher G, Schneeberger S, et al. Favoring the risk-benefit balance for upper extremity transplantation: the Pittsburgh Protocol. Hand Clin. 2011;27:511-520.	121.	Schneeberger S, Gorantla VS, Brandacher G, et al. Upperex-tremity transplantation using a cell-based protocol to mini-mize immunosuppression. Ann Surg. 2013;257:345-351.	122.	Brandacher G, Lee WP, Schneeberger S. Minimizing immu-nosuppression in hand transplantation. Expert Rev Clin Immu-nol. 2012;8(7):673-683; quiz 684.	123.	Shores JT. Recipient screening and selection: who is the right candidate for hand transplantation. Hand Clin. 2011;27:539-543.Brunicardi_Ch44_p1925-p1966.indd   196620/02/19   2:50 PM
# Chunk 8947
Plastic and Reconstructive SurgeryRajiv Y. Chandawarkar, Michael J. Miller,   Brian C. Kellogg, Steven A. Schulz, Ian L. Valerio, and Richard E. Kirschner 45chapterINTRODUCTIONPlastic and reconstructive surgery is a unique subspecialty of surgery that consists of a set of techniques intended to mod-ify the amount, position, quality, or organization of tissues in order to restore function and appearance. The name of the field is derived from the Greek word plastikos, which means “to mold.” An object is considered plastic if its shape can be modi-fied without destruction. In this sense, all human tissues have some degree of plasticity. They can be nondestructively modi-fied if the surgeon adheres to certain principles. Understanding and applying these principles to solve clinical problems is the essence of plastic and reconstructive surgery. Although informal references to this type of surgery can be found in the modern literature as early as the 17th century, American surgeon John Staige Davis published the first textbook dedicated to the field in 1919, entitled Plastic Surgery—Its Principles and Practice. He coined the term that we have used to refer to the specialty ever since. Science has always evolved in a nonlinear fashion: seminal discoveries in different parts of the world have all col-lectively fueled progress and addressed an unmet need. The evolution of plastic and reconstructive surgery has followed the same path: the Edwin Smith Papyrus1 (Egypt, 1600 b.c.)  (Fig. 45-1) described facial reconstruction; the Shushruta Samhita (India, 1500 b.c.) (Fig. 45-2) described nasal reconstruction; and Aulus Cornelius Celsus (Rome, 1 a.d.) described opera-tions for facial reconstruction. The underlying impetus for this evolution is the common unmet need for restoring defects, be they congenital, traumatic, or functional.This strong thread of advances in reconstructive surgery continues even today. What does seem under-recognized is that the clinical practice of plastic and reconstructive surgery touches on every other area of surgery. Enhanced reconstructive capabilities strengthen all other specialties significantly, such as the ability to safely perform radical cancer operations, sal-vage traumatic limbs, or extend the reach of neonatal medicine by congenital reconstruction. Each surgical specialty encoun-ters problems that might be addressed by some form of tissue repair, modification, rearrangement, transfer, or replacement. Since its inception, plastic surgeons have routinely responded to the medical needs of the society and helped restore form and function. One of the most powerful examples of this response is the advances that occurred as a result of World Wars I and II. Walter Yeo, a sailor injured at the Battle of Jutland, is assumed to have received plastic surgery in 1917. The photograph shows him before (Fig. 45-3, left) and after (right) receiving a flap surgery performed by Gillies.The Gulf war and the conflicts in the Middle East have prompted several revolutionary reconstructive surgical advances in limb salvage, microsurgery, supermicrosurgery, hand, face, and abdominal wall transplantation. Plastic surgeons have also targeted muscle reinnervation, tissue engineering, and regenera-tive medicine.When society calls, plastic surgeons rise to the challenge and create novel methods to address its needs. For example, neurosurgeons at times must replace or stabilize bone in the cranium or spine, and healthy soft tissue coverage is essen-tial for optimal healing. Head and neck surgeons face tissue replacement problems in order to restore normal function and appearance after major tumor ablation. Thoracic surgeons must manage bronchopleural fistulae, esophageal defects, or loss of chest wall integrity after trauma or tumor resection. Cardiolo-gists and cardiac surgeons at times face complicated wound Introduction	1967Purpose	1969General Principles	1969Skin Incisions / 1969Incision Repair / 1970Wound Healing / 1971Phases of Wound Healing / 1971Reconstructive Surgery	1974Reconstructive Strategies   and Methods	1974Skin Grafts and Skin Substitutes / 1975Pediatric Plastic Surgery	1981Congenital Craniofacial Anomalies / 1981Reconstructive Surgery   in Adults	2001Maxillofacial injuries and Fractures / 2002Mandible Fractures / 2002Frontal Sinus Fractures / 2003Orbital Fractures / 2004Zygomaticomaxillary Complex  Fractures / 2004Nasoorbitalethmoid and Panfacial Fractures / 2005Posttraumatic Extremity  Reconstruction / 2005Oncologic Reconstructive Surgery / 2008Breast Reconstruction / 2009Oncoplastic Breast Reconstruction / 2009Implant-based Reconstruction / 2009Tissue Flaps and Breast Implants / 2010Autologous Tissue Reconstruction / 2010Accessory Procedures / 2011Trunk and Abdominal  Reconstruction / 2011Pelvic Reconstruction / 2012Other Clinical Circumstances / 2012Aesthetic Surgery and Medicine	2016Aesthetic Surgery of the Face / 2017Aesthetic Surgery of the Breast / 2018Aesthetic Surgery of the Body / 2018Suction Lipectomy / 2022Autologous Fat Grafting / 2024Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   196701/03/19   6:26 PM 1968Figure 45-1. The Edwin Smith papyrus (Egypt, 1600 b.c.).Figure 45-2. Statue of Shushruta, considered the “founding father of surgery” in India.Key Points1	It is critical to understand the physiologic basis and ratio-nale of wound healing in order to further assimilate surgi-cal and nonsurgical care of wounds and methods of wound care.2	Understanding the reconstructive choices in tissue repair cases is critical for any surgeon. The principles of soft tis-sue and skin repair are important for the reconstruction of defects, whether in a trauma situation of after excision of lesions.3	Children with cleft and craniofacial differences have com-plex medical, surgical, and social needs. Coordinated, interdisciplinary team care is crucial to success.4	Robin sequence, characterized by micrognathia, glossop-tosis, and airway obstruction, can be managed with prone positioning, tongue-lip adhesion, mandibular distraction osteogenesis, or tracheostomy.5	The first-line treatment for high-risk hemangiomas is oral propranolol, which can induce rapid involution and has a more favorable side effect profile than systemic steroids.6	The coordination of care for patients in a trauma depart-ment is an important part of a surgeon’s role, whether that role be as a trauma emergency department surgeon or a surgeon in practice.7	The careful evaluation of a patient in a polytrauma involves a thorough assessment of internal and soft tissue injuries, planning of care, and the appropriate triage of reconstructive procedures. As a leader in a trauma bay of the trauma service, the surgeon typically assumes a cap-tain’s role in decision-making.8	Principles of oncologic reconstruction have evolved sig-nificantly, and a deeper understanding of these reconstruc-tive choices is essential for a surgeon who is often the first point of contact for cancer patients and responsible for making critical referrals.9	The combined work of general surgeons and reconstruc-tive plastic surgeons has revolutionized the care of abdom-inal wall defects, including ventral hernias, repair after tumor ablation, and bariatric surgery.10	Any critical care unit or a medical surgical team that takes care of debilitated patients needs a detailed understanding of pressure sores, including their etiology and the recon-structive options that are available to these patients.infections, sternal osteomyelitis, or failure of soft tissue cov-erage that leads to exposure and contamination of implanted devices such as left ventricular assist devices or cardiac pace-makers. Orthopedic surgeons managing segmental bone defects in the extremities at times require replacement by surgical transfer of vascularized bone segments rather than conventional bone grafts or alloplastic substitutes. Urologists, colorectal sur-geons, and gynecologists who commonly perform surgery in the perineum encounter nonhealing wounds or fistulae. All of these problems may be managed or potentially prevented by judicious application of tissue methods developed and practiced by plastic and reconstructive surgeons.Plastic and reconstructive surgery is field characterized by innovation, and it has yielded important contributions to other surgical specialties. These include notable advances in hand and upper extremity surgery, craniofacial surgery, peripheral nerve surgery, and reconstructive microsurgery. Entirely new fields of have emerged from plastic surgery research. Joseph E. Murray, a Boston plastic surgeon, and his team performed the first renal transplantation procedures and laid the foundation for modern organ transplantation, an achievement for which he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Medicine in 1990 (Fig. 45-4). This spirit of innovation continues with ongoing active research by plastic surgeons in composite tissue allotransplantation, tis-sue engineering, biomaterials, cell transplantation, regenerative medicine, computer-assisted surgical planning, medical appli-cation of three-dimensional manufacturing methods, infection control, and outcomes research. Plastic and reconstructive sur-gery is a vibrant field that brings tremendous value to people’s health and quality of life through life-changing reconstructive, restorative, and transformative surgeries.Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   196801/03/19   6:26 PM 1969PLASTIC AND RECONSTRUCTIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 45Figure 45-3. Walter Yeo, a sailor injured at the Battle of Jutland in 1917.Figure 45-4. Joseph E. Murray, MD, awarded the Nobel Prize in Medicine in 1990.PURPOSEThe purpose of this chapter is to inform about the general prin-ciples of plastic and reconstructive surgery, which apply to all areas of surgery, and to provide current examples of practice. Studying this chapter will help the reader to understand (a) the principles of plastic surgery that translate into other surgi-cal specialties; (b) the kind of clinical problems that may be addressed using plastic surgery techniques; and (c) the types of research found in plastic and reconstructive surgery. It will make clearer the nature of the field and its role in the multidis-ciplinary care environment of modern healthcare.GENERAL PRINCIPLESGeneral principles of plastic surgery relate to technical aspects of incision planning and wound repair. These principles apply to all surgical disciplines. As such, every surgeon can benefit from learning and applying them. Previously, tremendous emphasis was placed on simply understanding the nature of skin, which is completely justified; however, over the past few years plastic surgical focus has expanded to include the entire integument. Muscles, fascia, fat, skeletal framework, nerves, vascular net-works, and their dynamic interactions have become far more important factors that are choreographed in most reconstructive processes.Skin IncisionsFrom a surgical viewpoint, the skin is a multilayered tissue formed by dermis and epidermis. It is the largest organ in the human body and exists in a state of dynamic equilibrium from the balance of tension created by external and internal factors. Externally, skin and underlying subcutaneous tissue are acted on by gravity and clothing. Internal factors include skin elasticity, which is simply the ability to stretch and return to prestretch architecture upon removal of the stretch. The dermis is com-posed of different types of collagen and elastic protein fibers (elastin), and epidermis, composed primarily of cells anchored together in various stages of maturation. The skin serves impor-tant functions of thermoregulation, affording tactile sensation, and protection from foreign materials and microorganisms. Areas of skin exposed to view in normal clothing play a sig-nificant role in personal appearance and social interaction. As a result, even favorable scars from surgical incisions can have an undesirable effect on personal appearance. Thoughtful place-ment and performance of a surgical incision will minimize the risk of adverse consequences that can result in shortand long-term morbidity.Human skin exists in a resting state of tension caused by gravity and its conformation over underlying structures between sites that are tethered by subcutaneous fibrous tissue, which secure the deep surface of the dermis to underlying points of fixation. When the skin is incised linearly, the wound edges separate in a predicable fashion forming an ellipse with the long axis perpendicular to the lines of greatest tension. These tension lines are often called “Langer’s lines,” after Carl Langer, a 19th century anatomist from Vienna who first described them based on studies in fresh cadavers (Fig. 45-5). Later, Borges described relaxed skin tension lines, which follow furrows formed when the skin is relaxed and are produced by pinching the skin. Inci-sions placed parallel to these lines often heal with less conspicu-ous scar because the skin often has natural wrinkles following these lines and there is less tension perpendicular to the orien-tation of the wound1 (Fig. 45-6). Based on these principles,2 a recommended pattern for incisions can be made (Fig. 45-7).Using the proper technique for creating and repairing skin incisions ensures uncomplicated wound healing with few distorting surface scars. The epidermis and superficial dermis should be incised sharply with a scalpel. The incision is then continued through the deep dermis and subdermal plexus of blood vessels with electrocautery. This technique helps to mini-mize collateral tissue injury along the wound margins to facili-tate prompt and reliable healing. It is essential to maintain the orientation of the scalpel or electrocautery blade perpendicular to the surface of the skin in order to facilitate accurate reap-proximation during wound closure. As the incision is deepened through the subcutaneous tissue to expose underlying structures, it is important to avoid creating multiple pathways through the tissue, which can create focal areas of devitalized tissue that form a nidus of infection or lead to delayed wound healing. The Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   196901/03/19   6:26 PM 1970SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 45-5. “Langer’s lines,” named after Carl Langer, a  19th century anatomist from Vienna.Figure 45-6. Lines of relaxed skin tension.Figure 45-7. Planning of incisions based on lines of skin tension.surgeon should extend the incision through the subcutaneous fat by tracing the same line each time with the scalpel or electrocau-tery in order to reach the deeper structures.Traumatic wounds do not permit the same careful plan-ning that is possible with incisions made in undamaged skin. Nevertheless, optimum repair of traumatic lacerations involves similar principles applicable in nontraumatic circumstances. The surgeon must remove as much traumatized tissue as pos-sible from the wound edges, converting the uncontrolled trau-matic wound into a controlled surgical wound. All devitalized tissue is excised. The same principles of making incisions perpendicular to the skin surface and avoiding creating mul-tiple pathways through the subcutaneous tissues apply. In this process, an attempt can be made to reorient the wound into a more favorable direction. A variety of methods are available to perform this reorientation, and they often involve creating small local flaps of undamaged tissue using geometric tissue rearrangements. These techniques will be considered later in this chapter. Following these principles increases the likelihood of uncomplicated wound healing and reduces the need for later treatment of unfavorable scars. However, there are situations in which the direction of the incision has been preestablished, as in acute lacerations, burns, or old contracted and distorting scars. In these circumstances, the principles of proper incision placement can be combined with simple surgical techniques to reorient the scar and lessen the deformity.When making an incision in an area of previous scar-ring, such as in a scar revision or a reoperation, it is preferable to completely excise the scar when making the skin incision and not simply make the incision through the old scar. Closing scarred wound edges increases the likelihood of delayed wound healing, infections, and unfavorable new scars. It only takes a few moments to make the skin incision outside of the area of scarring through unscarred skin. Once the skin incisions on each side of the previous scar reach into the subcutaneous tissue, then the surface scar can be removed completely at the subder-mal level. This approach ensures that the final repair relies on undamaged tissues, thus facilitating uncomplicated healing and lowering the risk of an unfavorable scar.Incision RepairA well-performed skin incision sets the stage for an accurate repair that minimizes the risk of unfavorable scarring. An unfa-vorable scar is characterized by excessive amount of collagen Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   197001/03/19   6:26 PM 1971PLASTIC AND RECONSTRUCTIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 45deposition,4 leading to hypertrophic scarring or keloid formation (Fig. 45-8). The difference between them is that a hypertrophic scar stops growing 6 months after the injury, whereas a keloid continues to grow, even growing well beyond its borders. Accu-rate approximation and stabilization of the skin edges helps to minimize the amount of collagen deposition required for skin healing. The most important layer to approximate is the dermis because this layer contains the healing elements such as blood supply and cellular elements that create the extracellular matrix necessary for healing. Optimal wound closure involves placing deep dermal sutures followed by superficial sutures that incorpo-rated the upper layers of the dermis and epidermis. Absorbable deep dermal sutures have the advantage of disappearing over time; however, they can promote prolonged inflammation dur-ing this process. Nonabsorbable sutures minimize inflammation and might be indicated in individuals who are particularly prone to scar formation. A step-off between each side of the wound should be avoided because an uneven surface on each side of the wound can cause a shadow that accentuates the presence of the scar. Stability between the two wound edges is important because motion between the two sides of the wound prolongs the inflammatory phase of healing and requires additional col-lagen to be deposited. The timing of suture removal depends on the type of suture placed in the superficial closure. Sutures placed at the surface that go deep into the dermis can leave addi-tional scarring at the entry and exit points of the suture mate-rial in addition to the incisional scar. Sutures like this should be removed within the first week. If the superficial sutures are placed more shallowly in the dermis, there is a reduced tendency to form additional scarring. A subcuticular suture may be used instead of simple sutures. This type of technique avoids the risk of additional scarring along the wound edge; however, it can be more difficult to accurately reapproximate the skin edges with-out a step-off between the two sides.Wound HealingIn the United States, nonhealing wounds affect about 3 to 6 mil-lion people, with persons 65 years and older accounting for 85% of these events. The annual cost of this problem is estimated to be as high as $25 billion for hospital admissions, antibiotics, and local wound care.3Normal wound healing is achieved through four highly choreographed, overlapping biophysiologic phases: hemostasis, inflammation, proliferation, and tissue remodeling or resolu-tion. Each phase initiates a cascading set of processes critical to the desired result of a healed wound.1Figure 45-8. Hypertrophic scar (left) and keloid (right).Figure 45-9. Phases of wound healing.Hypertrophic ScarKeloidBlood clotBlood vesselScabFibroblastFibroblastsproliferatingFreshlyhealedepidermisFreshlyhealeddermisMacrophageSubcutaneousfatBleedingInflammatoryProliferativeRemodelingSeveral factors impede wound healing and need to be understood so that they can be mitigated. Successful mitiga-tion of these adverse factors requires precise, least-traumatic surgical technique that incorporates new methods of prevention and treatment of infection and an understanding of the role of microbial behavior, including the formation of biofilm. Because chronic diseases such as diabetes, vascular insufficiency, and obesity are on the rise, there must be a better understanding of chronic versus acute wounds and how comorbid conditions affect wound healing. Lastly, the impact of age, gender, and nutrition becomes more important as the population of aging patients increases.Phases of Wound HealingThere are different processes that characterize healing in sev-eral types of tissue, such as skin, muscle, or bone, and there is a strong underlying mechanism that is best understood in terms of a simple skin injury. The process of wound healing is com-prised of four integrated processes that overlap: (a) bleeding and hemostasis, (b) inflammation, (c) proliferation, and (d) tissue modeling or resolution (Fig. 45-9).These processes occur in sequence over a 1-year duration, but they also significantly overlap and work in terms of a “con-tinuum of processes” rather than discrete “stop-and-go” phases. As shown in Fig. 45-9, each phase is characterized by several Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   197101/03/19   6:26 PM 1972SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIwell-defined processes that are dominated by cellular as well as noncellular elements, such as platelets, macrophages, and cyto-kines, that act in concert.Hemostasis. This phase of healing occurs immediately after tissue injury. The most important cells that play a role in the hemostatic process are platelets that degranulate and result in the formation of a clot. The extracellular matrix that supports the tissue framework and otherwise acts as a barrier is now open to the vascular compartment, resulting in the release of several factors into the wound. In addition, the release of proteins— otherwise stored within the extracellular matrix—and the presi-dent cells act as further stimulants that start the hemostatic pro-cess. Inflammatory plasma proteins and leukocytes also migrate into the wound. On the cellular level, the plasma membrane of each platelet contains several receptors for collagen (glycopro-tein 1A and 2A). Once these receptors are activated, glycolated granules holding multiple factors that activate hemostasis and inflammation are disrupted, releasing bioactive factors that stimulate platelet aggregation, vasoconstriction, and the subse-quent activation of the clotting cascade. As these initial platelet activation factors are released, there is a subsequent push that influences angiogenesis inflammation. These systemic immune response platelet-derived factors include biologically active proteins, such as PDGF, TGF-β, and VEGF, as well as other cytokines, such as PF4 and CD40L.In addition to the release of these factors, the binding of selected proteins within the already developed fibroblasts and the combination of two elements within the extracellular matrix create a chemotactic gradient that activates cell recruitment, cell migration, and cell differentiation and promotes tissue repair. This has been demonstrated clinically in several instances, including orthopedic surgery, cardiac surgery, and certain types of skin repair, where autologous platelet transfusions have shown to accelerate the healing process.The subsequent fate of the platelet plug is determined by the amount of circulating fibrinogen. The vascular system interacts with the sympathetic nervous system by eliciting vasoconstriction from the actions of cytokines, prostaglandins, and catecholamines. There is also an alteration of capillary permeability caused by histaminic responses and the mediation of VEGF, which is released from micelles and the damaged endothelium. This highly interactive process results in decreasing blood loss while simultaneously delivering bioactive proteins and cells into the wound environment that kick start the inflammatory process.Inflammation. This is the second phase of wound healing and arguably overlaps the hemostatic face. Polymorphonuclear leu-kocytes (PMNs) and macrophages appear in the wound right after platelets, and their primary role is mainly to act as scav-engers. They clear the wound environment of debris, foreign material, bacteria, dead tissue cells and any other devitalized issues that would otherwise impede the healing process. Both macrophages and PMNs aid in phagocytosis and the secretion of free articles that kill bacteria and reduce the bioburden. Cel-lular migration into the wound is highly controlled by bioactive agents within the wound and within the vascular compart-ment. These include cytokines, integrins, selection, and other collagen-derived substances that act in concert. Through anti-body activation, polymorphonuclear cells also interact with the humoral system to facilitate the key functions of cell activation, recruitment, and proliferation, as well as migration from the intravascular compartment to the extracellular matrix. Within 48 hours of tissue injury, PMNs and macrophages are recruited to the wound in very large numbers, heralding the inflamma-tory response. As described in other chapters in this text, macro-phages possess a very large repertoire of functions, all of which are geared towards removing the nonviable elements in the wound and recruiting other cell types into the wound that facili-tate angiogenesis, fibroblast function, and subsequent repair. A summary of various macrophage-related functions is broadly classified into 7 major categories:1.	Phagocytosis2.	Release of reactive oxygen species that result in cellular kill-ing specifically related towards bacterial lysis3.	Release of nitric oxide that is deadly to several otherwise antibody-resistant bacteria4.	Cytokine release of interleukins (IL1, IL2, IL4, and IL12)5.	Angiogenesis via VEGF that promotes capillary budding6.	Recruitment of other cells into the wound that continue the healing process7.	Different homeostatic roles of macrophages and Langerhans cells, including wound repair, follicle regeneration, salt bal-ance, and cancer regression and progression in the skinInterestingly, the inflammatory phase determines the dif-ference between chronic and acute wounds. Uncomplicated wounds heal within 4 to 6 weeks. If they continue to remain nonhealing beyond this time, they are termed chronic. Several local and systemic factors affect the inflammatory phase of wound healing directly. These include pressure, tissue hypoxia, infection, tissue contamination, desiccation, and maceration. Systemic factors include age, stress, and comorbid conditions such as diabetes, vascular insufficiency, immunocompromise, malnourishment, obesity, and smoking. The common thread, however, in all nonhealing chronic wounds is the persistence of proinflammatory conditions. These specific tissue deficits result in a chronic cycle of chronically migrating inflammatory cells (PMNs, macrophages) that scavenge early healing tissue, degrade the newly formed matrix proteins, and then cyclically recover only to restart the inflammatory phase. This cycle leads to a chronically unstable wound that is unable to progress to the next phases of healing: cell proliferation, tissue remodeling, and resolution.Biofilm One of the recent discoveries in the area of biofilm is an important microbial factor that impedes healing by affecting inflammatory processes in the wound-healing continuum. Biofilm comprises a colony of microorganisms enveloped with a matrix of extracellular polymers also known as extracellular polymeric substance (EPS) (Fig. 45-10). EPS affects chronic and acute dermal wounds. Its life cycle and effects on the bacterial colonies it protects are shown in  Figs. 45-11 and 45-12. These include antibiotic resistance; latency (the ability to enter into latent states during inhospitable conditions); increasing species diversity; and quorum sensing (bacteria in the biofilm engage in a type of decision-making process in which behavior is coordinated through a “chemical” vocabulary).Proliferation. This phase is arguably the first step towards restoration of tissue continuity. It is characterized by the pro-duction of extracellular matrix by the fibroblast, the most prominent cell type in the proliferative phase. Fibroblasts are Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   197201/03/19   6:26 PM 1973PLASTIC AND RECONSTRUCTIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 45Figure 45-10. Slough that also comprises biofilm.Figure 45-11. The lifecycle of biofilm.Figure 45-12. Biofilm is a barrier to wound healing.V. choleraebiofilmPhytoplanktonMetabolicallyactive cellMetabolicallyquiescent  cellPlanktonic V. choleraeMSHA pilusAquatic environmentFlagellumDetritusZooplanktonSmall intestineTCPSheddingIngestionReleaseTCPbundlingMucusHuman hostStoolthe architects of wound healing and appear in the wound right at the end of the inflammatory phase. Collectively, fibroblasts support several major functions that lead to tissue repair, includ-ing the formation of collagen and the structural creation of the extracellular matrix. The formation of fibrin and fibronectin that is precipitated from the blood clot results in the formation of a provisional extracellular matrix that serves as a scaffold. Typically, this matrix can be compared to the framework of a building without any walls or windows. The protein scaf-fold serves as a solid framework that subsequently hosts cells including human macrophages and fibroblasts. Simultane-ous VEGF-derived angiogenesis promotes the formation of small vascular loops, known as capillary buds, that proliferate within the fibroblast matrix. Paradoxically, the major activat-ing factor responsible for the formation of capillary buds is low oxygen tension. Poor oxygenation of the tissues increases Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   197301/03/19   6:26 PM 1974SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIthe expression of hypoxia inducible factor (HIF) by endothe-lial cells. Specific DNA sequences of cells that regulate angio-genesis are turned on by HIF. This paradoxical negative loop is directly related to a low oxygen tension within the tissues. Subsequent release of the epidermal growth factor EGF and the transforming growth factor TGF-α by several cell types, including macrophages, platelets, and keratinocytes, strengthen the newly formed extracellular matrix. Once a robust scaffold is built, the epidermal cells from the edges of the wound on all sides migrate towards the center of the wound. This process is facilitated by several factors, including angiogenesis, neovas-cularization, and the release of fibroblast growth factor TGF-β and epidermal growth factor. The formation of the extracellular matrix is the key process that leads to subsequent reepithelial-ization. The extracellular matrix is primarily made of collagen. The different types of collagen that occur more predominantly in different types of tissues characterize the type of healing that occurs. Specifically, type I is present in scar tissues. After the formation of collagen, the fibers are now attached to form a provisional fibrin matrix. After a variety of complicated signal-ing that includes the transcription and processing of collagen messenger RNA, the collagen gets attached to hydroxylation of protein and lysine. The hydroxyproline in the collagen is responsible for the stable helical confirmation that is critical for the formation of a robust strong scar. It then transforms itself into a classical triple helical structure that is subsequently modified through glycosylation. It is important to realize that increased collagen stability is directly related to the degree of hydroxylation of the collagen and that fragile forms of colla-gen (which result in a fragile scar) are largely due to increases in nonhydroxylated collagen forms. Certain diseases including scurvy (vitamin C deficiency) or other diseases that are pre-dominantly anaerobic in their nature can cause the formation of week nonhydroxylated collagen, which is fragile and can easily undergo denaturation and lysis.The next step is the cleavage of the procollagen N and C terminal peptides. A very important extracellular enzyme called lysyl oxidase is responsible for the strengthening of collagen by the formation of strong, stable cross-linkages. Microscopic examination of stable mature scars reveals that strong cross-linkages present in the intramolecular and the intermolecular compartments directly correlate with strength and stability. Epi-dermal cells migrate over the scaffold, and after the epithelial bridge is completed, enzymes are released to dissolve the attach-ment at the base of the overlying scab that falls off.Contraction is one of the key end phases of proliferation. Typically, contraction starts approximately 7 days from tissue injury, when the fibroblasts differentiate into myofibroblasts. Myofibroblasts are similar to smooth muscle cells, have the same amount of actin (responsible for mobility), and are responsible for contraction it peaks at around 10 days post injury but can continue for several weeks. Myofibroblasts attach to the extra cellular matrix (ECM) at the wound edges and to each other as well as to the wound edges via desmosomes and the fibronexus, through which actin in the myofibroblast is linked across the cell membrane to molecules in the extracellular matrix like fibro-nectin and collagen. This in turn facilitates the myofibroblasts to pull the ECM when they contract, thus reducing the wound size. Wounds contract at the rate of 0.75 mm to 1 mm daily. The formation of a strong, contracted, cross-linked collagen scar with reepithelization heralds the end of the proliferative phase. Contraction usually does not occur symmetrically; instead, most wounds have an “axis of contraction” that allows for greater organization and alignment of cells with collagen.Remodeling/Maturation. The remodeling phase is also termed the maturation phase. It is primarily characterized by the remodeling of collagen through a balance between collagen for-mation and collagen lysis that results in the formation of a strong scar. Biochemically, the collagen is remodeled from type III to type I and is also accompanied by complete reepithelialization of the wound. The lysis of collagen is mediated by collagenases that are secreted by various cells—fibroblasts, neutrophils, and macrophages—each of which can cleave the collagen molecule at different but specific locations on all three chains and break it down to characteristic three-quarter and one-quarter pieces. These collagen fragments undergo further denaturation and digestion by other proteases. There is significant remodeling of the collagen during this process. It is aligned along tension lines, and significant reabsorption of water from the collagen fibers result in a denser alignment and stronger cross-linking. The remodeling phase establishes a new equilibrium with the forma-tion of an organized scar. Several molecules, including TGF-β, which induces intracellular signaling of SMAD proteins, play an important role in the remodeling phase. Using SM 80 knockout mice and transgenic animals, a critical role of the SMAD path-way in the formation of scar has been delineated. This process is also facilitated by apoptosis and programmatic cell death, which helps to former a thinner scar that is stronger and more cosmeti-cally appealing. This phase begins 3 weeks after the injury and continues for over 1 year. One must realize that despite the best cross-linking, scar tissue is weaker than injured skin and regains only 80% of its uninjured tensile strength. As it matures fur-ther, it becomes less red and less vascular because the reduced biologic activity within the scar renders the vascular capillaries redundant and they apoptose.RECONSTRUCTIVE SURGERYReconstructive surgery restores normal anatomy and function using plastic surgery methods of tissue repair, rearrangement, and replacement. Tissues can be missing or damaged as a con-sequence of trauma, cancer, degeneration, congenital abnor-malities, and aging. The primary adverse consequence of lost or impaired tissue is functional disability, which includes physical, psychologic, or social dysfunction. The clinical objective is to reestablish normal anatomy, function, and appearance in order to restore the patient as closely as possible to normal health. The most useful techniques transfer and modify tissues in the form of tissue grafts and surgical flaps.RECONSTRUCTIVE STRATEGIES AND METHODSThe main aim of wound healing is to achieve a closed wound. Ordinarily, wounds heal via three main mechanisms:1.	Primary intention: This type of healing occurs in a clean wound without any apparent tissue loss. Mostly seen in surgical incisions that have been approximated (primary closure), healing by primary intention can only be imple-mented when the closure of the wound is precise and there is minimal disruption to the local tissue or the epithelial basement membrane. Typically, this wound seals off within 24 hours. Healing is faster than healing by secondary inten-tion, and there is the least amount of scarring.2Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   197401/03/19   6:26 PM 1975PLASTIC AND RECONSTRUCTIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 452.	Secondary intention: Tissue loss following major trauma results in the formation of granulation tissue, which results in a broader scar (see earlier section, “Phases of Wound Healing”).3.	Tertiary intention (delayed primary closure or second-ary suture): The wound is initially cleaned, debrided, and observed, typically 4 or 5 days before closure. Examples of this type of healing include healing through the use of tissue grafts, including skin grafts and substitutes.Skin Grafts and Skin SubstitutesSkin grafting methods date back millennia to ancient India, where they were used to resurface nasal defects. They were introduced in the modern era by Guiseppe Baronio, an Italian physician who studied skin grafting techniques in sheep and published his work entitled Degli Innesti Animali (On Grafting in Animals) in 1804.4It is important to know the basic anatomic structure of skin in order to understand the principles of skin grafting. Skin is comprised of the epidermis, the dermis, specialized sensory nerve endings, and various skin appendages that lubricate and protect the skin as well as contribute to functions such as ther-moregulation. The epidermis is a layer of cells that affords pri-mary barrier function. It begins with a layer of cells called the basal layer. These are cuboidal-shaped cells that multiply and differentiate into flattened, keratinized squamous cells, which progressively migrate from the basal layers until they are finally released from the surface in a process known as desquamation. The junction between the dermis and the epidermis is composed of projections from the dermis into the epidermis, which are called dermal papillae. This feature secures the epidermis to the dermis by resisting sheer forces transmitted from the skin surface, helping to prevent separation of the epidermis from the dermis. The dermis contains sebaceous glands, whereas sweat glands and hair follicles are actually located below the dermis in the subcutaneous tissue and traverse the dermis and epithe-lium to reach the body surface. The dermal thickness and con-centration of skin appendages vary widely from one location to another on the body. The blood supply to the skin occurs in a variety of patterns that form the basis for transferring tissue-containing skin, which will be discussed later in this chapter. Regardless of the pattern, there is a network of vessels just below the dermis called the subdermal plexus that supplies the skin immediately above and is important in thermoregulation. Finally, terminal vessels and capillaries fill the dermis and pen-etrate the dermal papillae to perfuse the cellular elements of the dermis and epidermis.Skin grafting methods include split-thickness skin grafts (STSG), full-thickness skin grafts (FTSG), and composite tissue grafts. Each has its advantages and disadvantages, and select-ing the best technique for a given circumstance depends on the reconstructive requirements, the quality of the recipient wound bed, and the availability of donor site tissue.Split-Thickness Grafts. An STSG is the simplest method of tissue transfer. The name is derived from how these grafts are harvested by cutting through (i.e., splitting) the dermis at various levels. Thin STSGs are harvested through the superficial levels of the dermis. Thick grafts are harvested through deeper layers and include a larger amount of dermal tissue. The impor-tant characteristics of STSGs are determined by the thickness of dermis present in the graft. Thin grafts undergo less primary contraction after harvest because they contain fewer elements of the dermal extracellular matrix such as elastic fibers. Thick grafts undergo greater amounts of primary contraction. This is important to remember when harvesting the graft because it is necessary to obtain sufficient tissue in order to restore the defect. On the other hand, thin grafts allow the wound to undergo a greater amount of contraction in a process traditionally referred to secondary contraction of the graft. This becomes important if the wound is adjacent to a mobile structure such as the oral commissure, which might be distorted as healing progresses. Thin grafts also have improved chances of complete engraft-ment, or “taking,” as they contain mostly epidermis, which has low metabolic demands, in contrast to thicker grafts that contain more dermis with greater metabolic needs.A variety of techniques have been described to maximize the surface area that can be covered by harvested skin amount while minimizing the size of the donor site.5 One approach is to process the harvested skin into micrografts using devices spe-cially designed for this purpose in the operating room. Another method is fractional skin harvesting, which involves harvesting a large number of full-thickness skin tissue columns that are then seeded onto the wound surface. The traditional method, however, is to mesh the graft. Meshed grafts usually also have enhanced reliability of engraftment because the fenestrations allow for egress of wound fluid and excellent contour match-ing of the wound bed by the graft. The fenestrations in meshed grafts must epithelialize by secondary intention from the sur-rounding graft skin. The major drawbacks of meshed grafts are poor cosmetic appearance and high rates of secondary contrac-tion. Meshing ratios used usually range from 1:1.5 to 1:6, with higher ratios associated with magnified drawbacks related to meshing. For any case, a decision to mesh the graft must be balanced against the disadvantages. Other differences between thin and thick STSGs include final durability, pigmentation, and tendency to desiccation of the final result. The distinguishing characteristics of skin grafts types based on thickness are sum-marized in Fig. 45-13.STSG donor sites heal by regeneration from dermal and epidermal elements remaining in the harvest site. Recesses between dermal papillae projecting into the dermis are lined by basal cells. These cells migrate across the wound surface and Figure 45-13A. Skin grafts categorized based on thickness.ThinIntermediateSplit skinThickFull thicknessskinABrunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   197501/03/19   6:26 PM 1976SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIDermal content1° contraction2° contractionEngraftmentDurabilityPigmentationResist desiccationRecipient bedAppearanceSTSG(thin) ++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++STSG(thick)FTSGBFigure 45-13B. Characteristics of skin grafts.reepithelialize it. During this process, the donor site must be kept moist and free of bacterial contamination. Depending on the thickness of the graft, uncomplicated donor site epitheliali-zation typically is complete in 2 weeks. In most cases, it should be protected from mechanical shear and drying until the new skin matures with epidermal and dermal thickening and reac-tivation of sebaceous and sweat glands. Part of managing the donor site includes minimizing pain. Some recommended treat-ments include (a) subcutaneous anesthetic injection of adren-aline-lidocaine; (b) ice application; (c) topical agents such as lidocaine and bupivacaine; and (d) hydrocolloidand polyure-thane-based wound dressings accompanied with fibrin sealant.6 Maintaining air-tight coverage using transparent adhesive film dressing can protect the donor site during reepithelialization and minimize pain.Full-Thickness Grafts. By definition, full-thickness skin grafts include the epidermis and the complete dermis. When harvesting and preparing this type of skin graft, the surgeon must carefully remove any retained subcutaneous tissue from the deep surface of the dermis in order to maximize the poten-tial for engraftment. Full-thickness grafts are associated with the greatest amount of primary contraction, the least amount of secondary contraction, the highest durability, and ultimately the best cosmetic appearance. As a result, they are frequently used in reconstructing superficial wounds of the face and the hands. These grafts require clean, well-vascularized recipient beds free of bacterial colonization, previous irradiation, or fibrous wound tissue. They also work poorly in wounds associated with previ-ous radiation treatments in cancer patients. The harvest site for an FTSG must be closed primarily because no skin elements remain in the area of harvest.Skin Substitutes. Skin substitutes are typically types of extra-cellular matrices that are often acellular in nature and are either human-derived (allografts), animal-derived (xenografts), tissue engineered, or a combination of the three.7 These substitutes most often are employed to replace lost dermal and/or epider-mal skin layers resulting from burns, trauma, and other super-ficial injuries to the outer skin layers. While a complete review of all of these commercially available materials is beyond the scope of this chapter, the benefits and applications of these use-ful adjuncts is growing, and they been have shown to play an important role in current as well as future reconstructive, regen-erative, and restorative measures for tissue and skin replace-ment. Essentially, they act similarly to grafts as they rely on revascularization and autologous cell repopulation of the con-struct in order to “take” and become part of the lost anatomic structure they are acting to restore.Graft Take. Skin graft healing, or “take,” occurs in three phases: imbibition, inosculation, and revascularization. Plas-matic imbibition takes place during the first 24 to 48 hours after placement of the graft onto the defect. During this time, the graft is held in place by a thin film of fibrin, and the cellular elements survive by diffusion of oxygen and substrate from plasma pres-ent in the open wound. After 48 hours, a fine vascular network forms from capillaries and small blood vessels in the wound bed and advances through the fibrin layer toward the graft. These new vascular buds encounter open, cut end vessels on the deep surface of the dermis of the graft and line up, forming loose anastomoses that begin to allow blood flow and the transfer of some nutrients and oxygen. This phase is called inosculation and is the period during which the graft is most at risk for fail-ure. If the tenuous alignment of vessels between the wound bed and the graft are disrupted, then the final phase of healing will not occur. Events that can cause graft failure at this time include mechanical shear, formation of a seroma or hematoma, or bac-terial contamination. The final phase of engraftment is called revascularization. During this phase, firmer vascular anastomo-ses are formed as the vessels heal, and the graft becomes per-fused from the wound bed. Signs of perfusion, such as improved coloration and evidence of capillary refill, confirm engraftment and graft take. In most circumstances, these phases are complete by 4 to 5 days after graft placement. The dressing used after placing the skin graft is a critical part of success. It must prevent desiccation and shear stress from disrupting the graft, especially during the critical period of inosculation. Tie-over bolster dress-ings are a traditional method. Topical negative pressure wound dressings have been demonstrated to increase quantity and qual-ity of split-thickness skin graft take compared to traditional bol-ster dressings. The benefits are particularly evident in wounds with irregular surface contours in areas that might be difficult to avoid motion.8After skin graft take, the graft remains subject to late fail-ure due to mechanical shear, desiccation, or bacterial infection. Depending on the location and clinical setting, the graft should continue to be protected using dressings, topical moisturizing creams, or antibacterial medications as indicated until stable healing obtains in up to 2 weeks.Composite Grafts. Composite grafts contain other types of tissue besides skin. Additional elements must have low met-abolic requirements in order to survive the time required for revascularization. Composite grafts might include subcutane-ous fat, cartilage, perichondrium, and small amounts of muscle. Indications for composite grafts are limited to small areas with specialized tissue requirements such as nasal reconstruction. For example, excision of a skin cancer involving the nasal lobule may create a composite defect that involves internal nasal lin-ing, supporting nasal cartilage, and external skin. The ear is a good donor site for a composite graft of tissue with a good color match for the face and small amounts of tissue configured natu-rally to simulate the contours of the nose. For example, harvest of tissue from the root of the helix of the ear causes a relatively inconspicuous donor site. The donor site for composite tissue grafts must be repaired with primary closure.Surgical Flaps. A surgical flap is a unit of tissue harvested from a donor site and transferred to another location for Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   197601/03/19   6:26 PM 1977PLASTIC AND RECONSTRUCTIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 45reconstructive purposes. The term “flap” is derived from tech-niques of adjacent skin tissue transfers fashioned as flaps of skin that were elevated and folded into the defect. The distinguishing feature of a surgical flap is having a blood supply independent of the injured area. A graft must go through the phases of heal-ing described previously as it derives a new blood supply from the wound bed. A flap is brought to the wound with its own blood supply. This allows restoring tissue in areas of poor blood supply or with tissue requirements greater than what can be sup-ported through a period of diffusion only.There are a tremendous variety of surgical flaps that can be created depending on the individual patient’s reconstructive needs and available tissues. The challenge of reconstructive sur-gery is to design an appropriate flap to restore the defect with a minimal amount of morbidity related to the flap donor site. The different kinds of flaps can be broadly classified by three distinct characteristics: (a) the types of tissue contained, (b) the proximity to the defect, and (c) the pattern of blood supply.The first way to classify different types of surgical flaps is by what tissue they contain. Nearly any type of vascularized tissue can be transferred as a surgical flap. One of the most com-mon is a cutaneous flap, which contains skin and subcutaneous tissue. Another versatile type is a muscle flap, which contains only muscle. Musculocutaneous flaps contain a portion of mus-cle along with the overlying skin and all the intervening tissues. An osseous flap contains a segment of bone, and an osteocuta-neous flap includes skin as well as the bone. Flaps can also be designed to include fascia and peripheral nerves. Visceral flaps contain segments of jejunum, stomach, colon, or the greater omentum. The choice of flap depends upon the reconstructive needs and availability of tissue.The second way to classify surgical flaps is by their prox-imity to the defect. The location and distance between the flap donor site and the defect usually dictate the method required to transfer the tissue with preservation of the blood supply. Local flaps have a donor site located immediately adjacent to the defect.9 Regional flaps are harvested from the same anatomic region as the defect. Distant flaps are harvested and trans-ferred from outside the anatomic region of the defect. Dur-ing the transfer of all of these flaps, the blood supply remains attached to the source anatomic region. The tissue transmitting the blood supply is called the flap pedicle. When the blood supply is not divided during the transfer, it is referred to as a pedicled flap. If the distance between the donor site and the defect exceeds the length of the pedicle, the vessels can Figure 45-14. Limberg flap.be divided and then reattached to uninjured vessels within or adjacent to the defect after the tissue is placed there. This technique is called a free tissue transfer, and flaps transferred in this fashion are called free flaps because for some period of time during the procedure the tissue of the flap is completely separated, or free, of the patient. The diameter of the blood vessels that supply common surgical flaps is usually less than 5 mm. Repairing blood vessels of this caliber is considered microvascular surgery, and techniques for doing this are part of reconstructive microsurgery.The third and perhaps most important way to classify dif-ferent surgical flaps is by the pattern of their blood supply.10 Using this criterion, flaps are traditionally divided into random pattern flaps, axial pattern flaps, musculocutaneous flaps, fas-ciocutaneous flaps, direct cutaneous flaps, perforator flaps, and free flaps. These designations are based on how vessels reach from the deeper, usually named, arteries and veins to the super-ficial tissues and skin. These are described in greater detail in the following section.Random Pattern Flaps. The simplest flap designs are random pattern flaps, so named because the blood supply is based on unnamed vessels in the attached base of the flap that perfuse through the subdermal plexus.11 Random flaps are typically used to reconstruct relatively small, full-thickness defects, and they are designed following geometric principles of skin rearrange-ment with a traditional length-to-width ratio of 3:1. Exceptions to this principle regarding reliable dimensions abound, however, because of the variability in the patterns of perfusion and the density of the subdermal plexus in different regions of the body.Random pattern flaps can be further subdivided based on the geometry of the transfer. Examples of this are transposition flaps, advancement flaps, and interpolated flaps. A transposition flap is fashioned adjacent to an area needing reconstruction and rotated into the defect. Large transposition flaps can require a skin graft to close the donor site. To avoid this problem, spe-cialized types of transposition flaps have been devised. One that is particularly useful is called a Z-plasty. In this technique, two flaps are rotated, each into the donor site of the other, to rearrange the tissues in a way that redirects the lines of tension and lengthens the central limb. Another is the rhomboid (Lim-berg) flap (Fig. 45-14). In this technique, a skin flap is precisely designed with opposing 60° and 120° angles at the corners of a rhomboid designed immediately adjacent to the defect. This design can be modified to allow the flap to rotate into the defect Area withmaximum laxityABCD120°60°Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   197701/03/19   6:26 PM 1978SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIwith primary closure of the donor site with minimal distortion of the surrounding tissues as shown in the case of a gluteal repair (Fig. 45-15A–B, by complex closure; Fig. 45-15C–E, by modi-fied Limberg flap). Modifications on the angle, including the Dufourmental modification, cause the parametric configuration to be optimized based on the defect12 (Fig. 45-16). Rotational flaps are a type of transposition that is semicircular in design, allowing the tissue to be rotated and permitting primary closure. Advancement flaps differ from transposition flaps because the tissue is moved forward from the donor site along the flap’s long axis rather than being rotated about a point. Two common vari-ants include the rectangular advancement flap (Fig. 45-17) and the V-Y advancement flap (Fig. 45-18). Finally, interpolation flaps rotate about a pivot point but are used to transfer tissue ABCDEFigure 45-15. Reconstruction of a gluteal defect using complex closure and reconstruction of a gluteal defect using a modified Limberg flap.Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   197801/03/19   6:26 PM 1979PLASTIC AND RECONSTRUCTIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 45Figure 45-16. Dufourmental modification.Figure 45-17. Rectangular advancement flap.Figure 45-18. V-Y flap closure.BABYXZCADEF˜1˜2°Advancement flapABCDinto a nonadjacent area with an intervening portion of undam-aged tissue between the donor site and the defect (Fig. 45-19).Axial Pattern Flaps. Historically, surgeons made an increas-ing variety of surgical flaps to address a greater assortment of reconstructive problems. In the process, they noticed that some of these flaps routinely violated the strict limitations of accepted length-to-width ratio. Further investigation demon-strated that these flaps had significant arteries running parallel to the long axis of the flap. These flaps became known as axial pattern flaps.12 The earliest example of this type of flap is the deltopectoral flap, originally described in 1971 by Bakamjian  (Fig. 45-20A,B). This flap is based on cutaneous vessels perfo-rating from inside the chest from the internal mammary artery and vein. After entering the subcutaneous tissues, they travel obliquely from the sternal border toward the deltoid area of the arm. Long flaps can be designed based on these vessels, which can reach into the head and neck to provide thin tissue from the upper chest to restore defects, especially after tumor ablation. Other important and useful axial pattern flaps are the groin flap and the posterior thigh flap.Musculocutaneous Flaps. The vascular pattern of musculo-cutaneous flaps arises from major vessels that primarily supply a muscle and then secondarily supply the skin through multiple small vessels traversing between the superficial surface of the muscle and the subdermal plexus. The discovery of this pat-tern of cutaneous blood supply was a major breakthrough in reconstructive surgery because it made it possible to transfer units of tissue much larger than was possible with random or axial pattern flaps, enabling plastic surgeons to restore a greater range of deformities. Mathes and Nahai classified individual muscles into five types (I–V) according to the number and dom-inance of the vascular pedicles supplying each13 (Table 45-1). There may be advantages to including muscle in a surgical flap besides ensuring adequate blood supply to the overlying skin. The classic example is breast reconstruction using a latissimus dorsi myocutaneous flap (Fig. 45-21A–C). Here, the latissimus muscle is harvested pedicled on the thoracodorsal vessels and transposed anteriorly onto the chest wall. Muscle is a highly vascularized tissue that is bulky and deformable. It can help to repair visible surface contour deformities by increasing the pro-jection of tissue in the defect to reach the level of the surround-ing undamaged tissues. It can also easily contour to fill spaces in a complicated wound surface, thus helping to prevent small fluid collections in recesses, which can be a harbor bacteria and become a nidus of infection. It is also possible to provide func-tional restoration using musculocutaneous flaps by coapting the motor nerve of the muscle in the flap to a corresponding motor nerve in the defect. This method can be used to restore motor function in patients with motor loss in the extremities or face.Fasciocutaneous Flaps. Rather than having a blood supply primarily from underlying muscle, the skin and subcutaneous tissues of some anatomic regions are supplied from vessels communicating with the underlying superficial or deep fascia. Such flaps are referred to as fasciocutaneous flaps. The artery and vein of the flap pedicle passes between rather than through muscles, form a plexus of vessels within the fascia, and then send multiple small vessels to the subdermal plexus to perfuse the skin. There are clinical circumstances when a fasciocutane-ous flap might have advantages over a musculocutaneous flap. Fasciocutaneous flaps are usually thinner compared to muscu-locutaneous flaps. They also do not create a functional loss of muscle in the donor site. Mathes and Nahai classified fasciocu-taneous flaps into types A, B, and C (Table 45-2) based on how the vascular pedicle reaches the fascia from the major vessels deep to the fascia and muscles. Sural perforator fasciocutaneous flaps (Fig. 45-22A–D) are a modern example of reconstructing lower extremity defects that would be difficult to reconstruct without microvascular surgery.Direct Cutaneous Flaps. Some surgical flaps have a vascu-lar pedicle that reaches directly to the superficial tissues and subdermal plexus without passing through a muscle or fascia plexus. These are called direct cutaneous flaps.Perforator Flaps. The final kind of surgical flap classified by the pattern of blood supply is the perforator propeller flap.14,15 The geometric measurements that are critical to its success are summarized in Fig. 45-23. Reconstructive procedures based Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   197901/03/19   6:27 PM 1980SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 45-19. Forehead flap for nasal reconstruction.ADBECFon these flaps are the result of complementary advances in our understanding of cutaneous blood supply and improved surgical techniques.Ian Taylor and a team of investigators from Melbourne, Australia, discovered that the blood supply to all portions of the skin was organized into discreet units, which they called angiosomes18. Analogous to dermatomes that describe the patterns of cutaneous sensation supplied by single sensory nerves, the cutaneous perfusion is organized into angiosomes supplied by a single arteries. These arteries arise from source blood vessels located deep to other structures like muscle and fascia and penetrate through as perforating vessels. Often the artery is accompanied by two venae commitantes, but in many regions an additional venous drainage system is present in the superficial planes. The territories of adjacent angiosomes over-lap similarly to how dermatomes overlap. An angiosome is defined by the limits of an artery’s terminal branching. At the borders, these arterioles form anastomoses with the neighbor-ing angiosome. The vessels that pass between these anatomic angiosomes are called choke vessels. In life, these may open or close in response to physiologic changes in order to increase or decrease, respectively, an artery’s dynamic angiosome momen-tarily. Accordingly, at any given time point, the dynamic angio-some of an artery may be approximated by the volume of tissue stained by an intravascular administration of fluorescein into that artery (indicating the reach of blood flow from that artery into tissues). The potential angiosome of an artery is the vol-ume of tissue that can be included in a flap that has undergone conditioning (see the following section). Both the dynamic and potential angiosomes extend beyond the anatomic angiosome of an artery. Although the angiosome concept provides some guidance to the size and volume limits of a flap harvest, there remains no quantifiable method to predict safe flap harvest lim-its with precision.Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   198001/03/19   6:27 PM 1981PLASTIC AND RECONSTRUCTIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 45Figure 45-20A, B. Deltopectoral flap for cheek reconstruction.Table 45-1Mathes-Nahai classification of muscular flapsCLASSIFICATIONVASCULAR SUPPLYEXAMPLEType IOne vascular pedicleGastrocnemiusType IIDominant and minor pedicles (the flap cannot survive based only on the minor pedicles)GracilisType IIITwo dominant pediclesRectus abdominisType IVSegmental pediclesSartoriusType VOne dominant pedicle with secondary segmental pedicles (the flap can survive based only on the secondary pedicles)Pectoralis majorALimit of areatubed ondeep aspectSkinGraftsBTissue Expansion. Tissue expansion is a technique that increases the amount of tissue in a surgical flap by first plac-ing an inflatable device into the tissue beneath the planned flap and gradually expanding the tissue by regular inflation. Staged reconstruction using tissue expansion can significantly increase the amount of local, well-matched tissue for transfer while decreasing donor site morbidity. The most common method of skin expansion involves the placement of an inflatable silicon elastomer similar to a balloon with a filling port that is gener-ally positioned in an easily accessible location beneath the skin. After wound healing, the device is gradually inflated by serial injections of sterile saline solution into the filling port. The process can require several weeks, depending on the amount of expansion and compliance of the tissues. When expansion is complete, the expander is removed, and the resulting expanded tissue is transferred into the defect.The process of expanding flaps confers physiologic bene-fits that increase the reliability of the flap tissue. Histologically, expanded skin demonstrates thickened dermis with enhanced vasculature and diminished subcutaneous fat. Studies have shown that the increased amount of skin is the result of actual generation of new tissue. Also, the blood supply to an expanded flap is improved because of the period of delay associated with expansion process and the capsule formed around the device is highly vascular and contributes to the quality of blood supply.16The disadvantages of tissue expansion have to do with pos-sible complications, which include infection, hematoma, seroma, expander extrusion, implant failure, skin necrosis, pain, and peripheral nerve injury. Furthermore, an inflated expander is vis-ible, and the temporary deformity may cause patients distress.Tissue expansion has found particular usefulness in man-aging giant congenital nevi, secondary reconstruction of exten-sive burn scars, scalp reconstruction, and breast reconstruction. Expanders are available in a multitude of shapes and sizes, depending on the reconstructive needs. The technique permits reconstruction with tissue of similar color, texture, and thick-ness, with minimal donor site morbidity.PEDIATRIC PLASTIC SURGERYCongenital Craniofacial AnomaliesIn 1981, Whitaker et al introduced a simple classification sys-tem to help conceptualize the vast array of congenital pathology involving the craniofacial region.17 Based on anatomy, etiology, and current treatment principles, most cra-niofacial anomalies can be classified into one of four categories: clefts, synostoses, atrophy-hypoplasia, or hypertrophy-hyper-plasia-neoplasia (Table 45-3).Clefts. Arguably, no operation in plastic surgery is more demanding of reconstructive principle and aesthetic intuition 3Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   198101/03/19   6:27 PM 1982SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 45-21. Breast reconstruction (right side) with a latissimus flap.B  Preop, right mastectomy and left previous implant reconstructionC  Postoperative: bilateral latissimus flap with implantSkin usedfor flapLatissimusdorsimuscleClosedincisionImplantundermusclesLatissimusdorsi flapin placeATable 45-2Nahai-Mathes classification of fasciocutaneous flapsCLASSIFICATIONVASCULAR SUPPLYEXAMPLEType ADirect cutaneous vessel that penetrates the fasciaTemporoparietal fascial flapType BSeptocutaneous vessel that penetrates the fasciaRadial artery forearm flapType CMusculocutaneous vessel that penetrates the fasciaTransverse rectus abdominis myocutaneous flapthan a cleft lip repair. Orofacial clefting is the most common birth defect in the world. Cleft lip, with or without cleft palate (CL/P), occurs spontaneously among Caucasian populations in approximately 1 out of every 1000 births. It is over twice as common (1 in 450) among Asians and Native Americans and half as common (1 in 2000) in African Americans. There is a predilection among males, who are twice as likely to be affected as females. Left-sided cleft lip is twice as common as right and nine times as common as bilateral. Of patients born with CL/P, 29% have associated anomalies, which can range from minor physical differences to major organ involvement. While a fam-ily history of CL/P remains the strongest known predictive factor, other extrinsic risk factors include maternal smoking or early exposure to the anticonvulsant drug phenytoin.18Epidemiologically, isolated cleft palate (CP) appears to be distinctly different from CL/P. CP occurs in 1 of every 2000 live births. It is twice as common in females, and it demonstrates no racial or ethnic preponderance. Nearly half of patients with iso-lated CP have a diagnosable syndrome and additional congeni-tal anomalies. Evaluation by a geneticist is therefore indicated in all babies born with isolated CP. Like CL/P, isolated CP is multifactorial. Known environmental risk factors include mater-nal smoking or alcohol consumption, folate deficiency, use of steroids or anticonvulsant medications, or retinoid (vitamin A) excess.Some familial patterns of orofacial clefting have been linked to specific genetic mutations. Van der Woude syndrome, an autosomal dominant form of CL/P associated with lower lip pits, is caused by an IRF6 gene mutation (Fig. 45-24).23 Stick-ler syndrome should be suspected in patients with isolated CP, Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   198201/03/19   6:27 PM 1983PLASTIC AND RECONSTRUCTIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 45Figure 45-22. Reconstruction of a lateral malleolar defect using a reverse sural perforator flap.Figure 45-23. Geometric considerations for a propeller flap.ABCDABaDefectPerforatorbc+CDwith associated eye defects, sensorineural hearing loss, and joint abnormalities. This constellation of findings is due to an autosomal dominant mutation in a procollagen gene. Stickler is also the most common syndrome associated with Pierre Robin sequence (micrognathia, glossoptosis, and respiratory distress).19 These examples help emphasize the importance of early genetic workup for patients in whom a syndrome is suspected.Embryology of the Lip and Palate The “primary palate,” which includes the nostril sill, upper lip, alveolus, and hard pal-ate anterior to the incisive foramen, forms from fusion between the medial nasal and maxillary prominences during weeks 4 through 7 of gestation.20,24 Development of the hard palate pos-terior to the incisive foramen and the soft palate, which are col-lectively known as the “secondary palate,” occurs during weeks Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   198301/03/19   6:27 PM 1984SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 45-24. Van der Woude syndrome.Table 45-3Classification of craniofacial anomalies211. Clefts2. Synostoses3. Atrophy–hypoplasia4. Hypertrophy–hyperplasia–neoplasia6 through 12 of gestation. The lateral palatine processes initially hang vertically on either side of the developing tongue. Around week 8, these palatal shelves rotate into a horizontal orientation, bringing their free edges into close proximity with the nasal septum. Midline fusion then commences, proceeding posteriorly from the incisive foramen (Fig. 45-25).23Normal and Cleft Anatomy There are several key defining characteristics of the lip that make its surgical repair so chal-lenging. On the surface, the philtrum of the upper lip is com-prised of paired philtral columns and a central philtral dimple. The white roll passes along the vermilion-cutaneous junction, peaking at the base of the philtral columns and dipping centrally to form Cupid’s bow. Deep to the surface, the paired orbicularis oris muscles originate lateral to the oral commissures and encir-cle the mouth, decussating in the midline and sending off dermal insertions to the philtrum. This intrinsic muscle of the lip pro-vides oral competence and assists with speech production and facial expression. Continuity of the orbicularis oris muscle is disrupted in babies born with a cleft lip. Aberrant muscle inser-tion into the piriform aperture laterally and the anterior nasal spine medially contributes to the hallmark appearance of cleft lip and nasal deformity (Fig. 45-26).20,25Clefts of the lip can be described as unilateral or bilateral and microform, incomplete, or complete. Microform cleft lip is the most minor variant and may manifest as subtly as a small notch in the vermilion. An incomplete cleft lip, by definition, requires an intact nasal sill. The term can otherwise be applied to a wide spectrum of anomaly, ranging from a partial cleft of the lip alone (Fig. 45-27A) to a near-complete cleft of the entire primary palate. A complete cleft lip involves all structures of the primary palate in their entirety, extending through the nasal sill and opening into the anterior nasal floor (Fig. 45-27B).20,26The normal palate functions primarily as a speech organ, but it is also intimately involved in feeding, swallowing, and breathing. The soft palate, or velum, together with lateral and posterior pharyngeal walls, can be conceptualized as a valve that regulates the passage of air through the nasopharynx. The paired levator veli palatini muscles descend from the cranial base and decussate in the midline to form a sling within the soft palate. This sling acts to elevate the velum against the posterior pharyngeal wall, effectively closing the velopharyngeal port. In patients with cleft palate, the levator muscles are unable to cross the midline. Instead, they run parallel to the cleft margin and insert aberrantly into the posterior edge of the hard palate (Fig. 45-28A,B). Air is allowed to leak through the nose dur-ing attempts to suck or speak. This inability to build negative or positive intraoral pressure makes either task difficult, if not impossible. The tensor veli palatini muscles, which normally function to vent and drain the Eustachian tubes, are also dis-rupted in cleft anatomy. Eustachian tube dysfunction predis-poses patients to frequent bouts of otitis media, which can lead to permanent hearing loss if left untreated.20The most clinically useful system to describe cleft pal-ate morphology is the Veau classification. A Veau I cleft is midline and limited to the soft palate alone, whereas a Veau II cleft may extend further anteriorly to involve the midline of the posterior hard palate (the “secondary palate”). A Veau III cleft is a complete unilateral cleft of primary and secondary pal-ates, in which the cleft extends through the lip, the alveolus, the entire length of the nasal floor on the cleft side, and the midline of the soft palate. Veau IV clefts are bilateral complete clefts of the primary palate that converge at the incisive foramen and continue posteriorly through the entire secondary palate  (Fig. 45-29A,B). Not included in the Veau classification is the submucous cleft palate, which occurs when there is clefting of the soft palate musculature beneath intact mucosa. Submucous cleft palate classically presents as the triad of a bifid uvula, a midline translucency called the “zona Pellucida” and a palpable notch of the posterior hard palate.21Presurgical Infant Orthopedics Current literature suggests aesthetic outcomes in patients with complete unilateral or bilateral clefts may be improved by reestablishing more nor-mal skeletal, cartilaginous, and soft tissue relationships prior to definitive lip repair. Presurgical infant orthopedics (PSIO) can help to narrow wide clefts and align dental arches in prepara-tion for surgery. Some methods of PSIO, such as nasoalveolar molding (NAM), provide the added benefits of elongating the columella and improving nasal tip asymmetry.22 The most com-mon barrier to PSIO implementation is its imposition on fami-lies, who must be willing and able to keep frequent follow-up appointments for appliance adjustment. An excellent alternative to PSIO is a lip adhesion procedure, in which a complete cleft is surgically converted to an incomplete cleft. This preliminary stage of lip repair restores soft tissue continuity at the nasal sill, which helps to realign the underlying dental arches and reap-proximate the soft tissues. In addition, the nasal deformity can be improved, both by repositioning of the cleft side alar base and placement of nasal conformers.23Cleft Lip Repair Although cleft lip surgery can be traced to antiq-uity, it was not until the first half of the 20th century that sur-geons began to realize the inadequacy of a straight-line repair. In 1955, Ralph Millard pioneered his “rotation-advancement” tech-nique, which was the first to address upper lip length deficiency while preserving intricate philtral anatomy (Fig. 45-29C).24 The back-cut is designed high on the medial lip element just beneath the columella, enabling a downward rotation and leveling of Cupid’s bow, while the lateral lip element is advanced into the Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   198401/03/19   6:27 PM 1985PLASTIC AND RECONSTRUCTIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 45Figure 45-25. Facial prominences and their contributions to facial development. Cleft lip results from failure of fusion between maxillary and medial nasal (a component of frontonasal) prominences.ACDEBrotation defect. Although other techniques exist, most lip repairs performed today are minor modifications of Millard’s original rotation-advancement principle.20Bilateral cleft lip presents an even greater set of challenges to the reconstructive surgeon. With no overlying orbicularis oris muscle, an unrestrained premaxilla rotates anteriorly, com-pletely displacing the incisor-bearing portion of the alveolus from the maxillary dental arch. Orbicularis continuity must be restored over an often protuberant premaxilla. The surgeon must carefully recreate the appearance of a symmetrical philtrum and median labial tubercle. Prototypical markings for bilateral cleft lip repair are demonstrated in Fig. 45-30A,B.20Any surgical approach to bilateral cleft lip repair would be incomplete without addressing the nasal stigmata, which include a short or absent columella, a poorly defined and underprojected nasal tip, and malpositioned lower lateral cartilages.25 Primary nasoplasty at the time of lip repair has become an increasingly common practice. Nasal skin and soft tissue are dissected free from the underlying cartilaginous framework, allowing for suture manipulation of lower lateral cartilages to improve tip symmetry, support, and projection.20Cleft Palate Repair The primary goal of palatoplasty is to enable normal speech development. A successful palate repair is one that results in a robust, layered reconstruction of the cleft and restoration of functional velar anatomy. The two most com-mon techniques employed for soft palate repair are intravelar veloplasty (IVV) and Furlow double-opposing Z-plasty. Para-mount to each technique is the complete release of aberrant levator muscle insertions from the posterior edge of the hard palate. This maneuver untethers the velum anteriorly, enabling maximal levator muscle excursion in the superior and posterior directions postoperatively.21Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   198501/03/19   6:27 PM 1986SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 45-27. Variations in unilateral cleft lip morphology. Left unilateral incomplete cleft lip.Figure 45-26. Hallmarks of unilateral cleft lip deformity include depression of the nasal tip and flaring of the alar base on the cleft side, deviation of the caudal septum and columella toward the non-cleft side, and deficient lip height (short philtral column) on the cleft side with cephalad rotation of the cleft side of cupid’s bow.ABIntravelar veloplasty requires meticulous dissection of the levator muscles with retropositioning and reconstruction of the sling mechanism in the posterior aspect of the soft palate. A Furlow double-opposing Z-plasty involves cleverly designed mirror image Z-plasties on the oral and nasal sides of the soft palate where the central limb of each Z-plasty is the cleft. The posteriorly based flap of mucosa on each surface of the palate incorporates the underlying levator muscle. Transposition of these flaps across the cleft lengthens the palate and, in a man-ner similar to IVV, corrects levator malposition. Lateral relax-ing incisions can be utilized to relieve tension on the closure, if necessary (Fig. 45-31A–C).21,31 In experienced hands, both techniques have demonstrated excellent speech outcomes and low fistula rates. However, direct comparison between the two methods has been difficult due to ongoing evolution of the IVV technique and wide variability in the extent of dissection between performing surgeons.26Clefts involving the hard palate (Veau II–IV) often require additional maneuvers for reconstruction. Wide undermining of the nasal floor mucosa in the subperiosteal plane facilitates the nasal-side repair. As palatal mucoperiosteum is thicker and less pliable, the oral-side closure generally requires the use of relax-ing incisions along the lingual side of the alveolar ridge. Addi-tional medialization of the palatal soft tissue can be obtained by increasing isolation of the greater palatine neurovascular pedicle, which emerges from its foramen near the posterolateral aspect of the hard palate. Narrow Veau II clefts may be closed on the oral side by medialization of bilateral bipedicled muco-periosteal flaps (von Langenbeck palatoplasty), while wider clefts may require detachment of one or both flaps anteriorly for additional medialization (Bardach two-flap palatoplasty). Lateral relaxing incisions are left open, and typically heal by secondary intention within two weeks (Fig. 45-32).21,27Complications of palate repair include oronasal fistula, velopharyngeal dysfunction, obstructive sleep apnea, and mid-face growth deficiency. Reported fistula rates vary widely in the literature, but increased incidence has been correlated with less experienced surgeons, wider clefts, and bilateral clefts.21,22 Few oronasal fistulae are amenable to closure with simple local tissue rearrangement. More commonly, a complete reelevation of palatal mucosa is required in order to obtain a tension-free layered closure. In the case of large or recurrent fistulae, there may be insufficient tissue available locally, and recruitment of regional healthy tissue from the buccal mucosa or tongue may be necessary.32Velopharyngeal dysfunction (VPD) is caused by incom-plete closure of the velopharyngeal port, which results in air leaking through the nose during speech. Approximately 20% of patients develop VPD after primary palatoplasty. After insuring complete release and proper orientation of levator muscles, a posterior pharyngeal flap or a sphincter pharyngoplasty may be required to decrease the size of the velopharyngeal gap, allowing Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   198601/03/19   6:27 PM 1987PLASTIC AND RECONSTRUCTIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 45Figure 45-28. Left unilateral complete cleft lip.AponeurosisAHamulusTensor muscleLevator muscleUvulus muscleAponeurosisBHamulusTensor muscleAccessory muscleLevator muscleFigure 45-29. A. Normal anatomy: the levator veli palatini muscle forms a muscular sling in the posterior aspect of the soft palate. B. Cleft anatomy: the levator veli palatini muscles turn anteriorly, run along the cleft margin, and insert aberrantly into the posterior edge of the hard palate. C. Rotation-advancement markings and repair for a unilateral complete cleft lip.ABCnasal air escape during speech.21 These operations carry a risk of obstructive sleep apnea, so preoperative polysomnography is indicated to rule out significant sleep-disordered breathing at baseline.Timeline for Repair The longstanding debate regarding opti-mal timing for lip and palate repair is ongoing. Central to this controversy is the impact of early surgical intervention on speech outcomes and midface growth. Current evidence sug-gests earlier palate repair is better for speech but more detri-mental to midface growth.21 Cleft care algorithms represent a compromise. Most experts perform lip repair between 3 and  6 months of age.33,34 Palate repair should be completed prior to the onset of speech development, usually around 10 to 12 months of age. The alveolar cleft is often repaired secondarily with a can-cellous bone graft from the iliac crest. This operation provides bony support for the permanent teeth that will erupt adjacent to the cleft, and it is usually performed around 7 to 9 years of age. Orthognathic surgery and secondary rhinoplasty, if necessary, are delayed until skeletal maturity. The treatment timeline used at Nationwide Children’s Hospital can be seen in Fig. 45-33.Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   198701/03/19   6:28 PM 1988SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIABFigure 45-30. A. Bilateral cleft lip repair diagram. B. Bilateral cleft lip repair.ABCFigure 45-31. Furlow double opposing Z-plasty. A. Oral side markings. B. Nasal side markings. Note that the levator veli pala-tini muscle remains attached to the posteriorly based flap on each surface. C. Flap transposition and closure. The levator veli pala-tini muscle bundles, being attached to the posteriorly based flaps, are reoriented transversely and retrodisplaced as a result of flap transposition.Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   198801/03/19   6:28 PM 1989PLASTIC AND RECONSTRUCTIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 45Figure 45-34. The Tessier classification of craniofacial clefts. Numbered lines designate soft tissue manifestations (above) of the underlying skeletal clefts (below).Lip adhesion(1–2 months)Lip and primarynose repair(3–6 months)Orthognathicsurgery*(skeletal maturity)Definitiverhinoplasty*(after jaw surgery)Palate repair(10–12 months)Lip or noserevision*(> 6 years)VPD surgery*(4–7 years)Alveolar bonegrafting(7–11 years)Figure 45-32. Traditional von Langenbeck palatal repair with bilateral bipedicled mucoperiosteal flap.Figure 45-33. The treatment timeline used at Nationwide Children’s Hospital.The Importance of Team in Cleft Care Children born with CL/P require expertise of medical professionals from many different disciplines. In addition to experienced craniofacial surgeons, cleft teams typically consist of otolaryngologists, pediatricians, speech pathologists, feeding specialists, pediatric dentists, orthodontists, geneticists, psychologists, nurses, and social workers. Each member is an integral part of the team and absolutely essential for the delivery of comprehensive cleft care.21Atypical Craniofacial Clefts Beyond the familiar scope of clefts confined to the lip and palate, there exist myriad forms of clefting that may affect the craniofacial skeleton. Sound epide-miologic studies of these atypical craniofacial clefts have been precluded by their extreme rarity, but rough estimates place them on the order of 100 times less common than CL/P. As a result, definitive causality has not been established. With the exception of some well-defined syndromes that include atypical craniofacial clefts, genetics does not appear to play a significant part in their pathogenesis. Some extrinsic factors that have been implicated include radiation, prenatal infections, early gesta-tional exposure to teratogenic drugs or chemicals, and amniotic bands. Metabolic derangements and vascular disturbances have also been hypothesized to play a role.27While CL/P can be logically explained as an embryologic failure of fusion between facial processes, the location of the atypical craniofacial clefts is not well-accounted for by this theory. In the 1960s, Weston and Johnston used animal mod-els to demonstrate the vast contributions of neural crest cells to mesynchymal development of the face. They postulated that failure of these cells to penetrate into the developing face could lead to breakdown of the surrounding epithelia and result in atypical craniofacial clefts. The last 30 years has seen contin-ued refinement of this theory. Most recent evidence suggests that neural crest cells form developmental rests or ossification centers within the well-known facial processes. An abnormal number or impaired differentiation of these ossification centers may better explain the locations of clefts that seem to follow no known embryologic fusion plane.33In 1974, Paul Tessier published detailed anatomic obser-vations of a large series of children with atypical craniofacial clefts. He introduced a simple numbering system to classify these clefts based strictly on involved anatomy.28 Clefts were assigned numbers 0 to 14 as they radiate around the orbit. Num-bers 0 to 7 describe facial clefts, while 8 to 14 described cranial clefts. Fig. 45-34 illustrates the paths of soft tissue clefts (above) and their corresponding skeletal clefts (below).33,35A number 0 facial cleft and its number 14 cranial extension are midline clefts, which may be characterized by tissue defi-ciency or excess. Holoprosencephaly, a term used to describe a 10234568910111213141413121110987665432130334301122347Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   198901/03/19   6:28 PM 1990SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIfailed cleavage of the prosencephalon into two separate cere-bral hemispheres, presents as a midline tissue deficiency that causes variable degrees of hypotelorism and upper lip and nasal deformity. Mildly affected patients may have near-normal intel-ligence, while severely affected cases are incompatible with life. Representing the opposite end of the spectrum, patients with median cleft face dysmorphism typically present with a median clefts of the lip and/or premaxilla midline tissue excess, hypertelorism, bifid cranium, and a normal underlying CNS  (Fig. 45-35A,B).33Tessier clefts 1, 2, and 3 originate at the cupids bow. All proceed cephalad through the piriform aperture and affect the nose. While number 1 and 2 clefts spare the orbit, number 3 clefts create continuity between the orbit, maxillary sinus, nasal and oral cavities. Clefts 4, 5, and 6 begin lateral to cupids bow, spare the nose, and pass cephalad to affect the orbit and lower eyelid. The number 7 cleft, otherwise known as craniofacial microsomia, extends transversely along a line from the oral com-missure to the auricular tragus. Underlying skeletal clefts can involve the mandible, maxilla, orbit, and cranium. Tessier clefts 8 through 10 continue to radiate laterally and superiorly around the orbit. Cranial extensions are numbered such that the sum of the facial cleft and its corresponding cranial extension is always 14. For example, the number 1 facial cleft continues as the number 13 cranial cleft, and the number 5 facial cleft continues as the number 9 cranial cleft.33,35 Clefts can be unilateral or bilateral and ABFigure 45-35. Tessier 0-14 clefts. A. Holoprosencephaly. Note the midline tissue deficiency, hypotelorism, and the rudimentary nose known as a “proboscis.” The degree of facial deformity in patients with holoprosencephaly typically reflects the degree to which the underlying CNS is affected. B. Median cleft face dysmorphism. Note the marked midline tissue excess and hypertelorism. Although this patient exhibits an obvious encephalocele, CNS function is usually normal.may occur in any combination. The constellation of bilateral Tes-sier clefts 6, 7, and 8 has been well-described within the context of Treacher Collins syndrome, in which patients exhibit malar hypoplasia, lower eyelid colobomas, and downward-slanting palpebral fissures (Fig. 45-36A–C).33Treatment of atypical craniofacial clefts varies widely with each unique patient. Classical approaches to surgical man-agement involved excision of atrophic soft tissue along cleft margins with reconstruction by local tissue rearrangement, with or without underlying bone grafting. Unfortunately, this meth-odology gives little consideration to the aesthetic units of the face, and the resulting scars often cause postoperative deformi-ties of their own. Ortiz-Monasterio and Taylor proposed a new treatment philosophy based on the following tenants:1.	Restoration of the craniofacial skeleton2.	Reconstruction with skin and soft tissue with like color and texture3.	Generous use of tissue expanders4.	Aesthetic unit and subunit reconstruction5.	Scar location at limits of aesthetic subunits6.	Symmetrical repositioning of key facial landmarksFig. 45-37 demonstrates the dramatic improvement in aes-thetic outcome that is attainable when abiding by this treatment philosophy.29Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   199001/03/19   6:28 PM 1991PLASTIC AND RECONSTRUCTIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 45ABCFigure 45-36. A child with Treacher Collins syndrome and the hallmark combination of Tessier clefts 6, 7, and 8. Note the downward-slanting palpebral fissures and profound malar hypoplasia due to complete absence of zygomas.Barring immediate danger to vital structures such as the eye, the timing of reconstruction can be determined on a case-by-case basis. Soft tissue clefts can be excised and closed by classical measures within the first year of life. However, bony reconstruction should be delayed until at least 5 to 6 years of age to minimize iatrogenic impairment of facial growth. Serial tissue expansion of the cheek prior to this time may be necessary to excise unfavorable scars and reorient them along aesthetic subunit boundaries. Preoperative imaging, such as computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), is necessary to fully characterize the defects and plan the opera-tion. Additional preoperative workup should include anesthe-sia evaluation and labs, as these operations can be lengthy and accompanied by significant blood loss. Preparedness for blood transfusion is imperative.33,34Craniofacial clefts are typically approached through a combination of bicoronal and oral vestibular incisions. Various osteotomies have been described to reposition components of Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   199101/03/19   6:28 PM 1992SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 45-37. (left) Eight-year-old girl with significant deformity from local tissue rearrangement to reconstruct a right Tessier no. 4 cleft. (center) Schematic depicting current scars with a solid line and proper scars with a dotted line. (right) Same patient after serial tissue expan-sion and relocation of scars along borders of aesthetic units.the craniofacial skeleton, such as the orbits, maxilla, and man-dible. These may be used in conjunction with bone grafts from the calvarium, ribs or iliac crest, and fixation can be achieved with standard techniques using bioresorbable plates or sutures.33Craniosynostosis. The term “craniosynostosis” refers to pre-mature fusion of one or more calvarial sutures. It occurs in up to 1 out of every 2000 live births, and single-suture, nonsyndromic patients account for 85% of cases. Of these, isolated sagittal cra-niosynostosis is the most common form, while lamdoidal is the least common. Normal suture maintenance is driven by underly-ing brain growth and a complex biochemical interplay between the suture and the underlying dura mater.30 Multiple genes have been implicated in the development of craniosynostosis, the most notable of which being FGFR and TWIST. Fifty percent of these present as de novo mutations, and most exhibit an autoso-mal dominant inheritance pattern. Environmental associations, such as maternal smoking, have been postulated, but definitive causality has not been proven.31According to Virchow’s law, patients with craniosynosto-sis exhibit a predictable pattern of deformity that results from an arrest of cranial growth perpendicular to the prematurely fused suture, with a compensatory increase in growth parallel to the affected suture (Fig. 45-38). Isolated sagittal craniosynostosis, Patent suturesFused midline sutureFigure 45-38. (left) Patent sutures permit normal cranial growth in all directions. (right) Craniosynostosis results in restricted cranial growth across the synostotic suture with a compensatory increased growth parallel to the synostotic suture (Virchow’s law).for example, results in restricted cranial growth in the transverse direction and a compensatory increase in the anterior-posterior diameter of the head with frontal and/or occipital bossing. This head shape is commonly referred to as “scaphocephaly.”  Fig. 45-39 depicts various other isolated craniosynostoses and the patterns of deformity that ensue.36All patients with craniosynostosis should be screened for intracranial hypertension. It has been estimated that up to 17% of patients with single-suture involvement may develop elevated intracranial pressure (ICP). This risk approaches 50% in patients with multisuture craniosynostosis.36 Signs and symptoms of increased ICP may include headache, inconsolability, nausea, vomiting, lethargy, sleep apnea, developmental delay, bulging fontanelles, hydrocephalus, papilledema, or loss of vision.36,38 Facial dysmorphism and a strong family history should raise suspicion for syndromic etiology, as seen in Apert, Crouzon, Pfeiffer, and Saethre-Chotzen syndromes, among others.Diagnosis of craniosynostosis begins with physical exam. A recent prospective multicenter study suggests 98% accu-racy of diagnosis based upon physical exam findings alone. Palpable ridges may be present on the cranium but are not pathognomonic for craniosynostosis. The much more reliable physical exam finding involves recognition of the distinct pat-terns of cranial growth that result from premature fusion of one or more sutures. Dysmorphic facies, suspicion for multisuture involvement, or any degree of uncertainty in the diagnosis can be clarified with adjunctive imaging. While skull plain films can provide useful information, 3D computed tomography has emerged as the new gold standard imaging modality for diag-nosing craniosynostosis.37The goals of treatment for craniosynostosis are to achieve a more normalized head shape and to treat or prevent nega-tive impacts on development that may result from increased ICP.37 In general, two approaches exist: (a) strip craniectomy procedures and (b) remodeling procedures. Simply put, strip craniectomy procedures remove the synostotic suture in order to disinhibit cranial growth across the affected suture. Adjunc-tive techniques, such as cranial spring or distractor placement versus postoperative helmet therapy are frequently combined with strip craniectomies to improve aesthetic outcomes. Many surgeons who perform these procedures will do so as early as  Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   199201/03/19   6:28 PM 1993PLASTIC AND RECONSTRUCTIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 45NormocephalyScaphocephalyTrigonocephaly AnteriorplagiocephalyBrachycephalyPosteriorplagiocephalyFigure 45-39. Patterns of single-suture cranio-synostosis. Scaphocephaly results from sagittal synostosis. Trigonocephaly results from metopic synostosis. Anterior plagiocephaly results from unilateral coronal synostosis. Brachycephaly results from bilateral coronal synostosis. Posterior plagiocephaly results from unilateral lambdoidal synostosis.6 to 12 weeks of life to take advantage of early rapid brain growth, which helps drive cranial expansion after release of the synostotic suture. In addition, younger patients have a better capacity to heal the resulting cranial defects due to the high osteogeneticity of the underlying dura, which decreases substan-tially with age.37 Remodeling procedures go further to normalize head shape by complete removal, rearrangement, and replace-ment of abnormal areas of the calvarium. Given the limited efficacy of the aforementioned strip craniectomy techniques in patients older than 6 months of age, cranial vault remodeling is generally accepted as the definitive treatment for craniosynos-tosis in this age group.36Advantages of strip craniectomy procedures include shorter operative times, less blood loss, and shorter hospital stays, while disadvantages include an inability to treat complex deformities from multisuture involvement, inability to treat areas of compensatory increased cranial growth, and the neces-sity for secondary hardware removal procedures. Remodeling procedures offer a more definitive correction of head shape in a single surgical procedure at the cost of increased operative times, higher rate of blood transfusions, and increased length of hospital stays.37The complexity of patients with syndromic craniosynosto-ses, such as Crouzon or Apert syndrome, mandates multidisci-plinary care from an experienced team of subspecialists. These patients may present with urgent airway obstruction, danger-ously elevated ICP, and/or vision-threatening globe protrusion (Fig. 45-40A–C).23 Early surgical interventions, such as strip craniectomy or posterior cranial vault distraction, are designed to increase cranial volume and therefore decrease ICP. Although optimal timing of definitive reconstruction is debatable, results of cranial vault remodeling and midface advancement surgeries appear more stable and demonstrate less relapse when delayed.32 Hearing, speech, and feeding difficulties are common among patients with syndromic craniosynostoses. As always, the psy-chosocial implications of such profound facial differences make social workers and psychologists indispensable members of the team.23Atrophy and Hypoplasia. Two conditions that exemplify the atrophy and hypoplasia class of craniofacial anomalies are progressive hemifacial atrophy and Robin sequence. Progres-sive hemifacial atrophy, otherwise known as Parry-Romberg syndrome, is a rare, acquired, idiopathic atrophy of the skin, subcutaneous tissue, muscle, and occasionally bone affecting one side of the face (Fig. 45-41). With a typical onset during the first or second decade of life, this self-limiting condition progresses with an indolent course for 2 to 10 years before sta-bilizing, or “burning out.” The pathogenesis of Parry-Romberg syndrome is not well understood. Autoimmune processes such as scleroderma, chronic neurotropic viral infections, trigeminal neuritis, intracerebral vascular malformations, and increased sympathetic nerve activity have all been postulated to play a role. After progression of atrophy ceases, the mainstay of treat-ment is volume and contour restoration with autologous fat grafting. More severe cases may require microvascular transfer of free tissue, such as the parascapular fasciocutaneous flap.33Robin sequence is defined as the triad of micrognathia, glossoptosis, and airway obstruction (Fig. 45-42).23 Cleft palate is present in up to 90% of affected patients, though it is not an obligatory component of the diagnosis. The cause of this condi-tion is not known, but many believe mandibular hypoplasia to be the inciting event. According to this theory, micrognathia (small jaw) prevents forward migration of the tongue during gestational development. Glossoptosis results, where the tongue remains flipped dorsally into an obstructive position within the oropharyngeal airway. The first step in management is prone positioning, which utilizes gravity to bring the mandible and tongue base forward and alleviate the upper airway obstruction. More severely affected babies may require emergent endotra-cheal intubation at the time of delivery in order to secure the airway.34A diagnosable syndrome can be expected in over 50% of patients born with Robin sequence. Stickler syndrome (congeni-tal ocular, orofacial, auditory, and articular anomalies), which is the leading cause of childhood blindness due to retinal detach-ment, is the most commonly associated syndrome. For this reason, ophthalmology and genetics evaluations are indicated in all patients with Robin sequence. Additionally, a thorough airway evaluation by an otolaryngologist is necessary to con-firm obstruction at the level of the tongue base and to rule out intrinsic airway anomalies or obstruction at lower levels of the respiratory tract.41Babies who are mildly affected can often be managed nonsurgically with prone positioning alone. Close monitoring is required because obstructive symptoms do not always fol-low a linear course to resolution. High caloric expenditure on Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   199301/03/19   6:28 PM 1994SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIABCFigure 45-40. A and B. Frontal and lateral views of a young girl affected by Crouzon syndrome. Brachycephaly is appreciable on the lateral view, which results from bicoronal craniosynostosis. This patient also exhibits exorbitism and significant midface hyposplasia. C. A patient with Crouzon syndrome whose severe exorbitism has led to exposure keratitis.Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   199401/03/19   6:29 PM 1995PLASTIC AND RECONSTRUCTIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 45Figure 45-41. Child with progressive hemifacial atrophy, other-wise known as Parry-Romberg syndrome.Figure 45-42. An infant with Robin sequence. Marked microgna-thia and glossoptosis cause respiratory distress due to upper airway obstruction at the level of the tongue base. Note the presence of sternal retraction during inspiration.increased work of breathing, in combination with reflux and feeding difficulties that are ubiquitous in this population, may manifest as poor weight gain over time. Persistent failure to thrive indicates a failure of conservative management.41Robin sequence patients with single-level obstruction at the tongue base who have failed conservative measures should be considered for surgical airway management.41 Tongue-lip adhesion (TLA) is designed to bring the tongue base forward and out of the airway by temporarily sewing the under-surface of the tongue to the mucosal surface of the lower lip. Adhesions are typically reversed within the first year of life as significant mandibular growth and improved muscle tone of the tongue result in a stable airway.35Another option to treat upper airway obstruction in patients with Robin sequence is mandibular distraction osteogenesis (MDO). In this procedure, osteotomies are made in bilateral mandibular rami, and distractor devices are applied that enable a gradual (1–2 mm/day) lengthening of the mandible. As the mandible is brought forward, the tongue base follows, result-ing in enlargement of the oropharyngeal airway. Specific risks include injury to tooth buds, inferior alveolar or marginal man-dibular nerves, and disruption of mandibular growth potential.41In Robin sequence, patients who fail or are not candidates for less invasive surgical maneuvers, tracheostomy remains the definitive option for airway control. Figure 45-43 represents an algorithm for management of children with Robin sequence proposed on the basis that TLA is less invasive and does not preclude subsequent MDO in the event of failure.42 However, 4one option has not been proven to be significantly better than the other, and many surgeons prefer MDO as a first-line intervention.Hypertrophy, Hyperplasia, and Neoplasia. Numerous hypertrophic, hyperplastic, or neoplastic processes can affect the craniofacial region. The presence of certain vascular anomalies in the face can result in hypertrophy of surrounding bone or soft tissue.19 Patients with neurofibromatosis-1 may similarly present with hemifacial hypertrophy related to the presence of an underlying plexiform neurofibroma.36 Fibrous dysplasia is a focal error in osteoblast differentiation that leads to replacement of normal bone with a disorganized mass of bony trabeculae and fibrous tissue. Seventy percent of lesions are monostotic, and MandibulardistractionosteogenesisLaryngotrachealanomaly?Treat anomaly +/– tracheostomyPronepositioningObservationTongue-lip adhesionObservationFigure 45-43. Algorithm for management of children with Robin sequence.Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   199501/03/19   6:29 PM 1996SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIthe remaining 30% are polyostotic. In the craniofacial region, fibrous dysplasia typically presents in childhood with pain and progressive asymmetry. Patients with McCune-Albright syn-drome have polyostotic fibrous dysplasia, café au lait spots, and hyperfunctioning endocrinopathies, which classically manifest as precocious puberty. Lesions have a distinct “ground glass” appearance on CT scan. Small, monostotic fibrous dysplasia lesions can occasionally be resected completely and recon-structed with bone grafts. More commonly, surgical debulking and contouring is the treatment of choice.37Vascular Anomalies. Vascular anomalies affect approxi-mately 5.5% of the population. They can be broadly categorized as either tumors or malformations.38 Vascular tumors are char-acterized histologically by endothelial cell proliferation, with or without luminal structure. In contrast, vascular malformations are collections of abnormally developed vessels without signifi-cant endothelial cell turnover.39Hemangiomas Hemangiomas are the most common vascular tumor in children, presenting in up to 20% of premature infants. Females are four times as likely to be affected as males, and darker-skinned individuals are rarely affected. These benign tumors are believed to be collections of primitive blood vessels formed from angioblasts. Hemangiomas can occur anywhere throughout the body, with the liver being the most common extracutaneous site.46The natural history of hemangiomas is highly predict-able depending on the timing of presentation and early clinical course. Infantile hemangiomas appear shortly after birth, usu-ally between 2 weeks and 2 months of life. Cutaneous infantile hemangiomas may initially resemble a red scratch or bruise, while subcutaneous or visceral lesions go unnoticed. Rapid growth ensues over the next 9 to 12 months (“the proliferative phase”). During this time, cutaneous lesions become bright red and tense, while subcutaneous lesions may present as deep soft tissue masses with a bluish/purplish hue. After plateau of the proliferative phase, infantile hemangiomas reliably undergo a slow regression (“involution”), which is usually complete by  4 years of age. History alone can help differentiate a congenital hemangioma, which is fully formed at birth, from an infantile one. Congenital hemangiomas may exhibit rapidly involuting (RICH), noninvoluting (NICH), or partially involuting (PICH) clinical courses. History and physical is often sufficient to diagnose a hemangioma. Doppler ultrasound has become the imaging modality of choice, while MRI is typically reserved to confirm the diagnosis in cases of uncertainty.40Most hemangiomas can be observed and allowed to invo-lute spontaneously. High-risk lesions that may require early intervention include ulcerated and bleeding hemangiomas; periocular hemangiomas, which can occlude the visual axis and lead to blindness; hemangiomas in the beard distribution, which place the patient at risk for upper airway obstruction  (Fig. 45-44); and posterior midline lumbosacral hemangiomas, which may indicate underlying spinal dysraphism and cause cord compression. Patients with three or more hemangiomas should be screened by ultrasound for involvement of abdomi-nal viscera, as large hepatic lesions may lead to high-output heart failure. Large segmental hemangiomas in the cranial nerve V distribution (Fig. 45-45) should raise suspicion for PHACES association (Posterior fossa malformations, Heman-giomas, Arterial anomalies, Cardiac defects, Eye anomalies, Sternal defects).46 The LUMBAR association (Lower body Figure 45-44. Hemangiomas in the beard distribution.hemangiomas, Urogenital anomalies, Myelopathy, Bony defor-mities, Anorectal/Arterial malformations, Renal anomalies) should be considered in patients with large infantile hemangio-mas of the lumbosacral region or lower extremities.41Oral propranolol therapy has emerged as the first-line treatment for complicated or high-risk infantile hemangio-mas. When administered during the proliferative phase, this nonselective beta adrenergic receptor blocker causes rapid invo-lution of the hemangioma. Several randomized, controlled trials have demonstrated oral propranolol to cause a greater decrease in lesion size compared to placebo and steroid therapy.42 In addition, many clinicians believe the side effect profile of pro-pranolol (hypoglycemia, sleep disturbances, hypotension, bra-dycardia, bronchospasm) to be more favorable than that of systemic steroids.43While hemangioma involution may result in no visible sequelae, up to 50% of patients are left with a residual fibrofatty mass with atrophic, hypopigmented and/or telangiectatic over-lying skin (Fig. 45-46A,B). If the residual deformity is troubling to the patient, surgical excision may be indicated.46Vascular Malformations Vascular malformations are collec-tions of abnormally formed vessels that demonstrate minimal endothelial cell turnover. They are present at birth and grow slowly in proportion with the patient. Vascular malformations are classified on the basis of anatomic origin of the abnormal vessels: capillary malformations (CM), venous malformations (VM), lymphatic malformations (LM), and arteriovenous mal-formations (AVM). These classes can be further categorized into “slow-flow” or “fast-flow” lesions (Table 45-4).46Capillary malformations, formerly known as “port wine stains,” present at birth as flat, pink patches of skin. They typi-cally darken with age and may develop a thickened or “cob-blestoned” appearance. CMs may be found anywhere on the body, and overgrowth of underlying soft tissue or bone can occur. History and physical is sufficient to diagnose isolated CMs, but syndromic associations do exist that would warrant 5Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   199601/03/19   6:29 PM 1997PLASTIC AND RECONSTRUCTIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 45Figure 45-45. Large segmental hemangiomas in the cranial nerve V distribution.Figure 45-46. Twenty-year-old female with a capillary malformations of the right cheek. A. Before and (B) after pulsed-dye laser treatment.ABTable 45-4Classification of vascular malformationsSLOW FLOWFAST FLOWCapillary malformationsVenous malformationsLymphatic malformationsArteriovenous malformationsfurther work-up.46 Sturge-Weber syndrome often presents with CMs in the V1/V2 nerve distributions of the face and may be accompanied by vascular malformations of the underlying lep-tomeninges or globe. Patients are at high risk for seizure, stroke, and glaucoma, for which pharmacologic prophylaxis may be indicated.44 The mainstay of treatment of CMs is pulsed-dye laser therapy (Fig. 45-47A, pre procedure; Fig. 45-47B post pro-cedure). Other surgical interventions, if necessary, are aimed at addressing soft tissue or bony overgrowth.46Venous malformations are lobulated collections of dilated veins that typically involve skin, mucosa, or subcutaneous tis-sue, although 50% demonstrate deeper involvement. Lesions may or may not be noted at the time of birth. VMs generally grow in proportion to the patient but may undergo accelerated growth during puberty or pregnancy. Swelling of the mass may occur with dependent positioning or Valsalva maneuvers, such as crying. On exam, superficial VMs are soft, compressible masses with a bluish hue. Firm, tender nodules may be present, which represent calcifications known as phleboliths. Deeper, intramuscular VMs may present with pain or increased extrem-ity circumference, while lesions of the GI tract may simply pres-ent with bleeding. MRI with contrast is the imaging modality of choice, although ultrasound can be used in infants and young children to avoid sedation. Observation is indicated for asymp-tomatic lesions. Compression of involved extremities helps alleviate pain and swelling and prevent thrombosis and phlebo-lith formation. Due to the high risk of recurrence after surgi-cal excision, the first line of treatment for symptomatic VMs is sclerotherapy. Surgery is reserved for small, well-localized lesions amenable to complete resection; extremity lesions near major peripheral nerves; or residual deformities after sclero-therapy (Fig. 45-48A, before laser; Fig. 45-48B, after laser; and  Fig. 45-48C, after limited resection).46Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   199701/03/19   6:29 PM 1998SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIABABCFigure 45-47. A. A 3-year-old patient with an involuting hem-angioma of the right cheek. B. The same patient at 8 years of age showing minimal sequelae after completion of involution.Figure 45-48. A 5-year-old boy with venous malformation of the lower lip. A. Initial presentation. B. After three sclerotherapy treat-ments. C. Six weeks after surgical debulking of residual fibrotic tissue.Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   199801/03/19   6:29 PM 1999PLASTIC AND RECONSTRUCTIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 45Figure 45-49. A. Lymphatic malformation of the neck. B. After sclerotherapy with significant skin excess. C. Seven months after resection of excess skin.Lymphatic malformations, previously referred to as “cys-tic hygromas,” are collections of abnormal lymph channels that may cross multiple tissue planes and cause swelling, pain, bleeding, or bony overgrowth. LMs are classified as macrocys-tic, microcystic or combined. Large, macrocystic lesions can alter form and impair function locally through mass effect. Cuta-neous components of LMs present as vesicles that may bleed or become infected. While superficial lesions can be diagnosed by history and physical exam alone, deeper lesions require MRI ABCto confirm the diagnosis and assess the extent of the disease. Asymptomatic LMs can be observed. Sclerotherapy is the treat-ment of choice for all macrocysts. Symptomatic microcystic LMs have been treated with oral sirolimus, and draining cutane-ous vesicles have been successfully ablated with CO2 laser ther-apy. Recurrence after surgery is common; therefore, excision is reserved for severely symptomatic lesions no longer amenable to sclerotherapy or small, well-localized lesions where excision can be curative (Fig. 45-49A–C).46Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   199901/03/19   6:30 PM 2000SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIArteriovenous malformations are abnormal vascular con-nections between arteries and veins without intervening capil-lary beds. AVMs involving the skin appear pink and are warm to the touch. A palpable pulse or thrill may be present from the fast-flow shunting of blood from arterial to venous circu-lation. Lack of local capillaries can cause a painful, ischemic ulceration of the skin. Patients with large AVMs are at risk for development of congestive heart failure. Doppler ultrasound is the imaging modality of choice, but MRI is often obtained to provide additional information on the extent of the lesion. Observation is appropriate for asymptomatic AVMs. For symp-tomatic AVMs, embolization is frequently employed 24 to  72 hours prior to excision to minimize operative blood loss. Excision or embolization alone is rarely curative and highly likely to recur. Indications for surgery include small, well-localized AVMs; focal deformities that result from an AVM; or symptomatic AVMs not amenable to embolization.46When multiple types of vascular malformations cohabi-tate, they are collectively referred to as combined malforma-tions. Patients with Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome demonstrate a combined capillary, venous, and lymphatic malformation of an extremity resulting in bony and/or soft tissue overgrowth  (Fig. 45-50).45Figure 45-50. A patient with Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome involv-ing the right lower extremity. The combined capillary, venous, and lymphatic malformations result in generalized overgrowth of the extremity.Table 45-5Classification of CMN’sPROJECTED ADULT DIAMETERCMN CLASSIFICATION<1.5 cmSmall≥1.5 cm and <11 cmMedium≥11 cm and ≤20 cmLarge>20 cmGiantCongenital Melanocytic Nevi. Congenital melanocytic nevi (CMN) are hyperpigmented lesions present at birth that result from ectopic rests of melanocytes within the skin. They can be distinguished histologically from acquired nevi by their exten-sion into the deep dermis, subcutaneous tissue, or muscle.46 Depending on their size and location, CMNs may cause severe disfigurement and accompanying psychologic distress. Classi-fication is based on projected diameter of the largest dimension on the fully-grown adult (Table 45-5)47. While CMNs are gener-ally common (1% incidence), only 1 in 20,000 children are born with a giant lesion. At birth, CMNs often appear flat, brown and hairless. They grow in proportion with the patient and may develop color variegation, verrucous thickening, hypertrichosis, erosions, or ulcerations over time. CMNs carry an estimated 0.7% to 2.9% lifetime risk of melanoma, with the majority of cases presenting before puberty. Patients with giant CMNs, multiple satellite lesions, or trunk lesions appear to be at higher risk for malignancy. Melanomas can develop within the CMN itself, but they may also present as primary cancers at distant, extra-cutaneous sites, such as the GI tract or the central nervous system. Patients with CMNs require regular skin surveillance by a dermatologist. A biopsy is indicated for concerning changes in color or shape, nodularity, or ulceration. If melanoma is diag-nosed, management should proceed in accordance with standard melanoma treatment guidelines.55CMNs with multiple (>20) satellite lesions or midline CMNs over the trunk or calvaria should raise suspicion for neu-rocutaneous melanosis, a condition resulting from melanoblast proliferation in the central nervous system (CNS). In addition to the risk of CNS melanoma, patients with neurocutaneous melanosis may suffer from developmental delay, seizures, intracranial hemorrhages, hydrocephalus, cranial nerve palsies, or tethered spinal cord. High-risk patients should be evaluated by MRI between 4 and 6 months of age. While asymptomatic patients may be followed with serial MRI, patients with symp-tomatic neurocutaneous melanosis often succumb to their dis-ease within 2 to 3 years of diagnosis.54The goals in surgical management of CMN are (a) to decrease cancer risk, (b) to reduce symptoms, (c) to improve appearance, (d) to improve psychosocial health, and (e) to maintain function.54 It is important to note that the risk of mela-noma is not eliminated even with complete excision of a CMN. Indeed, a definitive cancer risk reduction from surgical excision of CMNs has yet to be proven. Management paradigms have therefore shifted from complete excision and reconstruction to maximal excision and reconstruction without compromis-ing function or aesthetic outcome.55 From serial excisions or skin grafting, to tissue expansion or free tissue transfer, plastic surgeons have drawn from the entire armamentarium in meet-ing the substantial reconstructive challenges posed by giant CMNs. Treatment plans must be grounded in principle: “tissue Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   200001/03/19   6:30 PM 2001PLASTIC AND RECONSTRUCTIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 45losses should be replaced in kind,” and “reconstruct by units.”48  Figure 45-51A–C shows an infant with a giant CMN of the pos-terior trunk and right flank preoperatively; at end of the first round of tissue expansion; and at the culmination of three rounds of tissue expansion, excision, and closure by local tissue rearrangement.49Figure 45-51. A. An infant with a giant CMN of the posterior trunk and right flank. B. Tissues expanders were placed under adjacent normal skin in preparation for first-stage excision. C. The same patient at 11 years of age after three rounds of tissue expansion and excision.ABCRECONSTRUCTIVE SURGERY IN ADULTSReconstructive surgery applies techniques that modify tissues in order to restore a normal function and appearance in a patient with congenital or acquired deformities. The most common causes of acquired deformities are traumatic injuries and cancer.Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   200101/03/19   6:30 PM 2002SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIWe will focus first on trauma. Although any anatomic region can be subjected to injuries that might require reconstruc-tive surgery, traumatic fractures, and soft tissue damage in the head and neck and extremities are most common.  The manner in which these reconstructive steps are conducted is criti-cal. Reconstructive surgery involves the coordination of many specialties and must occur according to a particular time-line, involving complex system-based practice.Maxillofacial Injuries and FracturesManagement of maxillofacial injuries typically occurs in the context of multiple trauma. Concomitant injuries beyond the face are the rule rather than the exception. The first phase of care is activation of the advanced trauma life support proto-cols. The most common life-threatening considerations in the facial trauma patient are airway maintenance, control of bleed-ing, identification and treatment of aspiration, assessment for closed head injuries, and identification of other injuries. Once the patient’s condition has been stabilized and life-threatening injuries managed, attention is directed to diagnosis and manage-ment of craniofacial injuries.Physical examination of the face focuses first on assess-ment of soft tissue injuries as manifested by surface contusions and lacerations. Part of this process is intranasal and intraoral examination. Associated injuries to the underlying facial skel-eton are determined by observation, palpation, and digital bone examination through open lacerations. Signs of a facial frac-ture include contour abnormalities, irregularities of normally smooth contours such as the orbital rims or inferior border of the mandible, instability, tenderness, ecchymosis, facial asym-metry, or displacement of facial landmarks. Traditional plain radiographs have largely been replaced by high-resolution CT, which is widely available at emergency centers that typically receive these patients. Reformatting raw scans into coronal, sag-ittal, and 3D views is a valuable method to elucidate and plan treatment for complex injuries.The facial skeleton can be divided into the upper third, middle third, and lower third. The upper third is comprised bounded inferiorly by the superior orbital rim and is formed by the frontal bone. The middle third is the most complex and is formed primarily by the maxilla, nasal bones, and zygoma. The lower third is inferior to the oral cavity and is formed by the mandible. The functional structure of the midface may be understood as a system of buttresses formed by the frontal, maxillary, zygomatic, and sphenoid bones. These buttresses are oriented vertically and horizontally and distribute forces applied to the bones in order to maintain their shape and position with-out fracturing. There are three paired vertical buttresses called the nasomaxillary, zygomaticomaxillary, and pterygomaxillary buttresses. The horizontal buttresses of the midface pass through the superior and inferior orbital rims and hard palate. A guiding principle of facial facture management is to restore the integrity of these buttresses.Mandible FracturesMandibular fractures are common injuries that may lead to permanent disability if not diagnosed and properly treated. The mandibular angle, ramus, coronoid process, and condyle are points of attachment for the muscles of mastication, including the masseter, temporalis, lateral pterygoid, and medial pterygoid muscles (Fig. 45-52). Fractures are frequently multiple. Altera-tions in dental occlusion usually accompany mandible fractures. Malocclusion is caused by forces exerted on the mandible of the 6CoronoidprocessRamusAngleBodySymphysisCondyleFigure 45-52. Mandibular anatomy.many muscles of mastication on the fracture segments. Den-tal occlusion is perhaps the most important basic relationship to understand about fracture of the midface and mandible. The Angle classification system describes the relationship of the maxillary teeth to the mandibular teeth. Class I is normal occlu-sion, with the mesial buccal cusp of the first maxillary molar fitting into the intercuspal groove of the mandibular first molar. Class II malocclusion is characterized by anterior (mesial) posi-tioning, and class III malocclusion is posterior (distal) posi-tioning of the maxillary teeth with respect to the mandibular teeth (Fig. 45-53). These occlusal relationships guide clinical management.The goals of surgical treatment include restoration of den-tal occlusion, fracture reduction and stable fixation, and soft Figure 45-53. Angle classification. Class I: The mesial buccal cusp of the maxillary first molar fits into the intercuspal groove of the mandibular first molar. Class II: The mesial buccal cusp of the maxillary first molar is mesial to the intercuspal groove of the mandibular first molar. Class III: The mesial buccal cusp of the maxillary first molar is distal to the intercuspal groove of the man-dibular first molar.IIIIIIBrunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   200201/03/19   6:30 PM 2003PLASTIC AND RECONSTRUCTIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 45tissue repair. Nonsurgical treatment may be used in situations in which there is minimal displacement, preservation of the pretraumatic occlusive relationship, normal range of motion, and no significant soft tissue injury. Operative repair involves first establishing and stabilizing dental occlusion and holding in place with maxillomandibular fixation to stabilize the relation-ships between the mandible and maxilla. The simplest method for this is to apply arch bars to the maxillary and mandibular teeth then use secure them together using interdental wires. Alternatives are sometimes indicated (e.g., screws placed into the bone of the maxilla and mandible that serve as posts for spanning the maxilla and mandible with wires), especially for patients with poor dentition. Once the dental relationships are established, then the fractures can then be reduced and fixed using wire or plates and screws that are specially designed for this purpose. The fracture is surgically exposed using multiple incisions, depending on the location of the fracture and condi-tion of the soft tissues. The fracture is visualized and manually reduced. Fixation may be accomplished using traditional inter-fragment wires, but plating systems are generally superior. The mandibular plating approach follows two schools of thought: rigid fixation as espoused by the Association for Osteosynthe-sis/Association for the Study of Internal Fixation and less rigid but functionally stable fixation (Champy technique). Regardless of the approach, it is important to release maxillomandibular fixation and begin range of motion as soon as possible to pre-vent temporomandibular joint ankylosis. Fractures immediately inferior to the mandibular condyles, called subcondylar frac-tures, are unique in that there is ordinarily minimal displace-ment because the fragments are less subject to displacement from muscle forces and there is little bone available across the ClosedOpenYesYesNoNoAnteriortable onlyAnterior andposteriortables ObservationAnterior ORIFAnterior ORIFAnterior ORIFCranialization of sinusObliteration of NF ductbone grafting orificefat/fascial grafting orificeflap coverage of cavityremoval of posterior tableburring of mucosa-----ExplorationEstablish DiagnosisPhysical examCT scanDepressed?CSF leak ordisplacedposterior wall?Figure 45-54. Algorithm for the treatment of frontal sinus fracture. CSF = cerebrospinal fluid; CT = computed tomography; NF = nasofrontal; ORIF = open reduction, internal fixation.fracture line to permit fixation. These are most often treated with maxillomandibular fixation alone.Important considerations in postoperative management are release from maxillary-mandibular fixation and resumption of range of motion as soon as possible to minimize the risk of tem-poromandibular joint ankylosis. Complications to be avoided include infection, nonunion, malunion, malocclusion, facial nerve injury, mental nerve injury, and dental fractures.Frontal Sinus FracturesThe frontal sinus is located in the upper third of the face. It is actually a paired structure ordinarily fused in the midline imme-diately superior to the orbital rims. It has an anterior bony table that defines the contour of the forehead and a posterior table that separates the sinus cavity from the underlying dura of the intra-cranial frontal fossa. The anterior table is a relatively weak and subject to fracture when it sustains a direct forceful blow, mak-ing frontal sinus fractures relatively common in facial trauma. Each sinus drains through the medial floor into its frontonasal duct, which empties into the middle meatus within the nose.Treatment of a frontal sinus fracture depends on the frac-ture characteristics as shown in the algorithm (Fig. 45-54). The diagnosis is established by physical examination and confirmed by CT scan. Closed fractures that are not depressed and caus-ing a visible deformity may be observed. Depressed or open fractures must be explored. Fractures that involve only the anterior table are reduced and fixed using interosseous wires or miniature plates and screws. Fractures of the posterior table without disruption of the dura evidenced by leaking cerebro-spinal fluid can be treated in similar fashion. When the dura is disrupted, excising the bone and mucosa or the posterior table Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   200301/03/19   6:30 PM 2004SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIand obliterating the nasofrontal duct with a local graft or flap converts with frontal sinus into the anterior frontal fossa of the cranial vault, “cranializing” it.Orbital FracturesTreatment of all orbital injuries begins with a careful examina-tion of the globe, which often is best completed by a specialist to assess visual acuity and ocular mobility and to rule out globe injury. Fractures may involve the orbital roof, the orbital floor, or the lateral or medial walls (Fig. 45-55). The most common fracture involves the floor because this is the weakest bone. This type of fracture is referred to as an orbital a “blow-out” frac-ture because the cause is usually direct impact to the globe that results in a sudden increase in intraorbital pressure with failure of the orbital floor. The typical history is either a direct blow Figure 45-55. Facial bone anatomy.FrontalTemporalSphenoidZygomaMaxillaSphenoidFrontalZygomaMaxillaTemporalABduring an altercation or a sports-related event with a small ball directly striking the orbit. Because the medial floor and inferior medial wall are made of the thinnest bone, fractures occur most frequently at these locations. These injuries may be treated with observation only if they are isolated and small without signs of displacement or limitation of mobility of the globe. However, surgical treatment is generally indicated for large fractures or ones associated with enophthalmos (retrusion of the globe), which suggests increased intraorbital volume and restriction of upward gaze on the injured side, with entrapment of inferior orbital tissues or double vision (diplopia) persisting greater than 2 weeks.28 There are a variety of options for surgical exposure of the orbital floor, including the transconjunctival, subciliary, and lower blepharoplasty incisions. All provide good access for accurate diagnosis and treatment, which involves reducing orbital contents and repairing the floor with either autologous bone or synthetic materials. Late complications include per-sistent diplopia, enophthalmos, or displacement of the lower eyelid ciliary margin inferiorly (ectropion) or rolling inward (entropion). Entropion causes the eyelashes to brush constantly against the cornea and is very uncomfortable. Each of these sequelae has procedures for repair should they occur.Orbital floor fractures can be associated with fractures of the lateral or inferior orbital rim. These are typically a compo-nent of facial fractures that extend beyond the orbit involving the zygomatic and maxillary bones and are discussed in more detail in the next section.It is important to be aware of two adverse associated con-ditions seen at times in patients with orbital fractures. The first is superior orbital fissure syndrome. Cranial nerves III (oculo-motor nerve), IV (trochlear nerve), and VI (abducens nerve), and the first division of cranial nerve V (VI, trigeminal nerve) pass into the orbit from the base of the skull and into the orbit through the superior orbital fissure. Direct fractures of the pos-terior orbit or localized swelling caused by a fracture nearby can cause compression of these nerves. Symptoms include eyelid ptosis, protrusion of the globe (proptosis), paralysis of the extra-ocular muscles, and anesthesia supraorbital and trochlear nerve distributions. The second condition to remember is orbital apex syndrome. This is the most severe circumstance in which supe-rior orbital fissure syndrome is combined with signs of optic nerve (cranial nerve II) compression manifested visual changes ranging up to complete blindness. This is a medical emergency that requires immediate treatment to prevent permanent loss of function.Zygomaticomaxillary Complex FracturesThe zygoma defines the lateral contour of the middle third of the face and forms the lateral and inferior borders of the orbit. It articulates with the sphenoid bone in the lateral orbit, the maxilla medially and inferiorly, the frontal bone superiorly, and the temporal bone laterally. It forms the anterior portion of the zygomatic arch, articulating with the zygomatic projection of the temporal bone. The temporalis muscle, a major muscle of mastication, passes beneath the zygomatic arch and inserts on the coronoid process of the mandible.Fractures of the zygomatic bone may involve the zygo-matic arch alone or any of its other portions and bony relation-ships. Isolated arch fractures manifest as a flattened, wide facial appearance with edema and ecchymosis. Typically, they are also associated with pain or limited mobility of the mandible. Nondisplaced fractures may be treated without surgery, but Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   200401/03/19   6:30 PM 2005PLASTIC AND RECONSTRUCTIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 45displaced or comminuted fractures should be reduced and stabi-lized. This can be accomplished using an indirect approach from above the hairline in the temporal scalp, the so-called “Gilles approach,” or directly through a coronal incision in severe fractures.A common fracture pattern is called the zygomaticomaxil-lary complex (ZMC) fracture. This involves the zygomatic arch, the inferior orbital rim, the zygomaticomaxillary buttress, the lateral orbital wall, and the zygomaticofrontal buttress. Muscle forces acting on the fracture segment tend to rotate it laterally and inferiorly, thereby expanding the orbital volume, limiting mandibular excursion, creating an inferior cant to the palpebral fissure, and flattening the malar eminence. ZMC fractures are almost always accompanied on physical examination by altered sensation in the infraorbital nerve distribution and a subconjunc-tival hematoma.Treatment of displaced ZMC fractures is surgical. Each fracture site is exposed through incisions strategically placed to gain access but minimize disfiguring facial scars afterwards. These include an incision in the upper eyelid, exposing the zygomaticofrontal buttress and lateral orbital wall; a subtarsal or transconjunctival incision in the lower eyelid, exposing the orbital floor and infraorbital rim; and a maxillary gingivobuc-cal sulcus incision, exposing the zygomaticomaxillary buttress. Severe fractures involving the arch require wide exposure through a coronal incision.Nasoorbitalethmoid and Panfacial FracturesNasoorbitalethmoid (NOE) fractures are defined anatomically by a combination of injuries that involve the medial orbits, the nasal bones, the nasal processes of the frontal bone, and the frontal processes of the maxilla. If improperly treated, these injuries cause severe disfigurement and functional deficits from nasal airway collapse, medial orbital disruption, displacement of medial canthus of the eyelids, and nasolacrimal apparatus dysfunction. Telecanthus is abnormally wide separation of the medical canthus of the eyelids and is produced by a splaying apart of the nasomaxillary buttresses to which the medial can-thal ligaments are attached. NOE fractures require surgical man-agement with open reduction and internal fixation. At times, the thin bones are so comminuted that they are not salvageable and must be replaced or augmented using autologous bone grafts or synthetic materials. Each fragment is carefully identified, returned to a normal anatomic position, and fixed in place using plates and screws or interosseous wiring all bone fragments meticulously, potentially with primary bone grafting, to restore their normal configuration. The key to the successful repair of NOE fractures is to carefully reestablish the nasomaxillary buttress and to restore the normal points of attachment of the medial canthal ligaments.NOE fractures are typically caused by such extreme forces that they are frequently associated with intracranial injuries and multiple other facial bone fractures in a presentation referred to as a panfacial fracture. These may involve any combination of the fractures described previously. The challenge of these injuries is to reestablish normal relationships of key anatomic landmarks. A combination of salvable bone fragments, autolo-gous bone grafting, and synthetic materials accomplishes this.Posttraumatic Extremity ReconstructionThe primary goal in posttraumatic extremity reconstruction is to maximize function. When structural integrity, motor function, and sensation can be reasonably preserved, then extremity salvage may be attempted. Otherwise, severe injuries require amputation best performed following reconstructive surgery principals that set the stage for maximizing function with pros-thetics and minimizing chronic pain and risk of tissue break-down. Microvascular surgical techniques are an essential part of extremity trauma surgery, allowing replantation of amputated parts or transfer of vascularized bone and soft tissue when tis-sue in zone of injury cannot be salvaged. Soft tissue techniques combined with advances in bone fixation and regeneration with distraction have proven tremendous benefit for patients with severe limb-threatening extremity trauma. Current state-of-the-art techniques require multidisciplinary cooperation between orthopedic, vascular, and plastic surgeons as presented in the algorithm (Fig. 45-56). Reconstructive techniques include the use of vascularized bone, bone distraction techniques, external fixation, nerve grafts and transfers, composite tissue flaps, and functioning muscle transfers tailored to the given defect. The future promises further advances with routine application of vascularized composite allografts, engineered tissue replace-ments, and computer animated prosthetics controlled intuitively by patients via sensors that are placed on the amputation stump and able to detect impulses transmitted through undamaged peripheral nerves remaining in the extremity.Common causes of high-energy lower extremity trauma include road traffic accidents, falls from a height, direct blows, sports injuries, and gunshots. As with maxillofacial trauma, the first phase of care is activation of the advanced trauma life support protocols. The most common life-threatening consider-ations are airway maintenance, control of bleeding, and identi-fication of other injuries. Once the patient’s condition has been stabilized and life-threatening injuries managed, attention is directed to diagnosis and management of the extremity. Tetanus vaccine and antibiotics should be provided as soon as possible for open wounds.Systematic evaluation of the traumatized extremity helps to ensure no important findings are missed. Physical examina-tion to assess the neurovascular status, soft tissue condi-tion, and location of bone fractures forms the foundation of ordering imaging studies to provide details of bone and vas-cular injuries. Evidence of absent pulses is an indication to con-sider Doppler ultrasound examination followed by angiography to detail the exact nature of the injury. The blood supply must be immediately restored to devascularized extremities. Crush injuries might be associated with compartment syndrome, in which tissue pressure due to swelling in the constricted facial compartments exceeds capillary perfusion pressure and causes nerve and muscle ischemia. In the early stages of compartment syndrome, findings include pain on passive stretch of the com-partment’s musculature in a pale, pulseless extremity without evidence of direct vascular injury. Neurologic changes consist-ing of paresthesias followed by motor paralysis are late signs. Once recognized, decompressive fasciotomies must be per-formed as soon as possible to prevent permanent tissue loss. Compartment syndrome can be a late event after fracture reduc-tion and fixation (either internal or external), so the extremity must be reevaluated regularly in the early postoperative period. This is especially true in situations where there has been a period of ischemia prior to successful revascularization.Several scoring systems for extremity trauma severity have been suggested to aid in treatment planning. Open fractures can be classified according to a system devised by Gustilo and 7Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   200501/03/19   6:30 PM 2006SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIReconstructableKnee functionalAdequate soft tissueDirty woundDirty woundClean woundFoot availableFoot not availableClean woundInadequate soft tissueKnee irreparableUnreconstructableTraumaticbelow kneeinjuryAmputationLimbreconstruction/replantationDelayedclosurePrimaryclosureFoot filetfree flapParascapularfree flapImmediatefree flapDelayedfree flapPrimaryreconstructionBelow kneesalvageBelow kneesalvageAbove kneeamputationFigure 45-56. Algorithm of posttraumatic extremity reconstruction.colleagues. Grades I and II are open fractures with minimal soft tissue disruption. Grade III injuries most often require consider-ation of soft tissue reconstruction. Grade IIIA are open fractures with severe soft tissue injury but adequate soft tissues to repair. Grade IIIB involves a loss of soft tissue that will require some technique for tissue replacement. Grade IIIC involves a vascular injury requiring reconstruction. For the most severe injuries, the most important decision is whether to attempt extremity salvage or proceed with amputation. Patients with extensive fracture comminution, bone or soft tissue loss, wound contamination, and devascularization have a poor prognosis. Extremity salvage requires multiple operations and a prolonged period of rehabili-tation and physical therapy. The loss of plantar sensation histori-cally favored below-knee amputation, but this is no longer an absolute recommendation. A final decision to attempt salvage must be made within the context of comorbidities, socioeco-nomic considerations, patient motivation, and overall rehabilita-tive potential.The first step in surgical management is complete debride-ment of all devitalized tissue. Early one-stage wound coverage and bony reconstruction is generally advocated and should be performed jointly by extremity trauma orthopedic and plastic surgical teams.50 It is acceptable for reconstruction to be deferred briefly if the adequacy of debridement is certain. Negative pres-sure wound therapy is useful between debridement and defini-tive reconstruction to control the wound drainage and prevent bacterial contamination. When there is segmental bone loss, it is advisable to achieve soft tissue closure prior to performing osse-ous reconstruction. Preparation for later restoration of the bone requires steps to prevent the soft tissue from collapsing into the space where bone is needed. A common technique for this is to fill the space with antibiotic-impregnated beads or an antibiotic spacer at the time of soft tissue restoration until definitive bony reconstruction is possible. An external fixation may be needed, if there is segmental bone loss (Fig. 45-57A,B).The sequence for reconstruction is meticulous debride-ment of nonviable tissue, fracture reduction and stabilization, vascular repair if necessary, and finally restoration of the soft tissue coverage. A multidisciplinary team of specialists works together to perform these procedures in order to obtain the best outcomes. Orthopedic and plastic surgeons perform wound debridement. Orthopedic surgeons then reduce and stabilize the fractures. Vascular surgeons reconstruct damage major vessels. Finally, plastic and reconstructive surgeons perform soft tissue coverage. Ideally, each operating team completes their part of the procedure sequentially during the same anesthetic.Choices for soft tissue coverage of open fractures include split-thickness skin grafts, temporary skin substitutes fol-lowed later by skin grafting, local rotation flaps, or free tissue transfers. Selecting the most appropriate option depends on the quality of the local tissues and location of the soft tissue defect relative to the underlying fracture and fixation hard-ware. The guiding principle is to be certain that the source of tissue transferred into the defect is outside of the zone of injury. When flaps are selected, either fasciocutaneous or muscular flaps may be indicated depending on tissue avail-ability, wound bed contours, and surgeon preferences. Uneven wound surface contours are more reliably obliterated with a Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   200601/03/19   6:30 PM 2007PLASTIC AND RECONSTRUCTIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 45Figure 45-57A, B. An external fixation for segmental bone loss.Figure 45-58. A. Defect ulnar side of the forearm, with an external fixator. B. Propeller flap. C. Flap is inset. D. Six weeks post operation.ABpliable muscle flap. Fasciocutaneous flaps may provide more durable coverage in areas subject to abrasion or pressure from footwear, for example, on the foot or around the ankle. Some defects can be covered with flaps containing both skin and muscle if indicated. Ideal coverage for weight-bearing areas should be able to resist pressure and shear and provide sensa-tion. Split-thickness skin grafts are reasonable for coverage of exposed healthy muscle or soft tissue. Local flaps may be used to cover smaller defects as long as uninjured tissue is located nearby. These may be designed as traditional random or axial ABCDflaps, but the most advanced techniques are based on under-lying perforators that allow extremely versatile flap designs customized to the defect. These flaps are designed with a per-forating vessel at the base near to the defect and a long axis extending an equal distance opposite. The flap is elevated and rotated into the defect in a motion reminiscent of an airplane propeller, which gives rise to the designation “propeller flap” for this kind of reconstruction (Fig. 45-58A, defect ulnar side of the forearm, with an external fixator; Fig. 45-58B, propel-ler flap; Fig. 45-58C, flap is inset; Fig. 45-58D, 6 weeks after Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   200701/03/19   6:31 PM 2008SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIthe operation). The advantages of this technique are that it does not impair muscle function and it can often complete a complex reconstruction without the need for microvascular surgery.When requirements exceed the potential for skin grafts or local flaps, tissue must be transferred from distant sites. The reconstructive choices differ based on the anatomic location of the defect and the extent of damage. This is often the case for major injuries in the middle or lower third of the leg where bones are covered with thin soft tissue and less donor tissue is available. A traditional method is to obtain tissue by creating a pedicled flap from the opposite, uninjured extremity. Cross-leg flaps remain effective, but indications are limited to circum-stances where microsurgery is not possible or in young children who are less prone to risks associated with prolonged immobi-lization necessary for these flaps, such as joint stiffness or deep vein thrombosis. Free tissue transfer is the preferred alternative. The general principles of reconstructive microsurgery in lower extremity trauma are to select recipient vessels outside of the zone of injury, select donor tissue suitable for the defect with minimal risk of donor site morbidity, and ensure there is bone stability before reconstruction using either internal or external fixation. For example, a latissimus dorsi muscle flap provides a large amount of tissue for reconstruction, but loss of the latis-simus function can make it more difficult for the patient to use crutches for ambulation during rehabilitation. Muscle or fascio-cutaneous flaps each have a role in selected circumstances.51 Bone can also be added to help fracture repair.52 Free flaps can also be designed as “flow-through” flaps, which reconstruct missing segments of major vessels and provide soft tissue or bone coverage.53After wound healing, proper physical and/or occupational therapy and rehabilitation is essential for the best long-term out-comes. This often requires many months of consistent retrain-ing and conditioning in order to return to the functional status enjoyed by the patient before injury. Properly fitted orthotic appliances and footwear provide essential protection against pressure-related complications and can improve function. Late complications such as osteomyelitis may appear, evidenced by signs of infection months or even years after reconstruction. Very often this is caused by inadequate debridement at the time of initial surgery.Tumor locationPrimaryreconstructive optionSecondaryreconstructive optionLower-extremity bone sarcomacomposite resectionDistal femur/proximal tibiaPedicled gastrocnemius ±soleusDistally-based pedicledALT; anterior bipedicledfasciocutaneous flap; pedicledsural artery flap; free flapMid/distal tibiaPrimary closurePedicled gastrocneumius± soleus; propeller,keystone flaps; free flapProximal/mid-femurPrimary closurePedicled ALT;Pedicled rectusabdominis; free flapWhen limb salvage either is not possible or is not in the best interest of the patient, amputation is indicated. Maxi-mizing limb length, providing durable soft tissue coverage, and managing peripheral nerves to avoid chronic pain help to ensure good functional recovery using extremity prosthet-ics. Ideally, local tissues are used; however, when they are unavailable or inadequate, the amputated part can be a use-ful source of skin grafts or tissues for microvascular free transfers to the stump, which preserves length and avoids a more proximal amputation. Transected nerves from ampu-tation procedures can be managed using a technique called targeted muscle reinnervation (TMR). TMR surgery takes the transected peripheral nerves resulting from the amputation procedure, and a nerve transfer is then performed to freshly deinnervated motor nerves within the residual limb or stump. By performing these nerve transfers, the sensory and mixed-motor sensory nerves typically transected during amputation are given fresh motor nerves to rapidly reinnervate, which can directly aid in bioprosthetic function and improve pain control. The improvement in pain is a result of reducing phantom limb pain and symptomatic neuroma formation. This technique has shown to be a major advance over traditional traction neurec-tomy techniques, which often contribute to increased phan-tom and residual limb pain rates and a much higher chance of symptomatic neuroma formation compared to TMR.54Oncologic Reconstructive SurgeryOncology-related reconstructive surgery has broad applica-tions in specialty of plastic and reconstructive surgery. Solid tumors necessarily destroy normal tissues, and surgical treat-ment involves excising the tumor with a margin of uninvolved normal tissue, which adds to the extent of tissue loss. As is illustrated in the case of a lower extremity sarcoma, recon-structive strategies are meticulously designed as an algorithm for effective functional and cosmetic restoration (Fig. 45-59) . Chemotherapy and radiation have side effects and com-plications that can cause tissue loss, leading to functional and cosmetic deformities that can be improved with recon-structive surgery. The goal of comprehensive cancer treatment is to restore the patient to full health, which includes normal function and appearance.8Figure 45-59. Algorithm for effective functional and cosmetic restoration after resection of a lower extremity sarcoma.Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   200801/03/19   6:31 PM 2009PLASTIC AND RECONSTRUCTIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 45Reconstructive surgery in the context of oncology has sev-eral distinctive aspects compared to the larger field of recon-structive surgery in general. The procedure must be highly reliable in order to avoid surgical complications that might interfere with adjuvant therapies.Breast ReconstructionBreast cancer is the most common malignancy besides skin can-cer in women and the second leading cause of cancer-related death for women in the United States. Breast reconstruction is an important part of comprehensive cancer treatment. A number of studies have shown that breast reconstruction, both imme-diate and delayed, does not impede standard oncologic treat-ment, does not delay detection of recurrent cancer, and does not change the overall mortality associated with the disease.46-48Preoperative counseling of the breast cancer patient regarding reconstruction options should include discussion of the timing and technique of reconstruction. It is important to ensure that the patient has realistic expectations of outcome and an understanding of the number of procedures that might be necessary to perform in order to obtain the best outcome. The plastic surgeon and surgical oncologist must maintain close communication to achieve optimal results.Delayed breast reconstruction occurs any time after the mastectomy is performed, usually 3 to 6 months after the opera-tion, depending on the patient’s circumstances and reasons for not electing immediate reconstruction. Although good out-comes can be obtained, it is more difficult to achieve a result that is similar to the preoperative breast shape and size because of established scarring of the chest wall. Nevertheless, it is a good option for patients who are undecided or not candidates for immediate reconstruction because of advanced disease or comorbidities.Immediate reconstruction is defined as initiation of the breast reconstructive process at the time of the ablative sur-gery. Patients are considered candidates for immediate recon-struction who are in general good health and have stage I or stage II disease determined primarily by the size and location of the tumor. There are selected exceptions, such as when an extensive resection requires chest wall coverage. Breast recon-struction might be performed in these cases, but it is really incidental to achieving chest wall coverage. Disadvantages of immediate reconstruction include the potential delay of adju-vant therapy in the event of postoperative complications. Also, if there is uncertainty regarding the need to adjuvant radiation therapy, decision-making regarding immediate reconstruction is a challenge. Breast reconstructions by all techniques are adversely affected by radiation therapy, and many surgeons feel reconstruction should be delayed until at least 6 months after treatment.Once the patient chooses to have immediate reconstruction, she must select a reconstructive technique. In patients selected for breast conservation, oncoplastic tissue rearrangement can be performed to minimize adverse effects of lumpectomy on breast appearance. For patients electing total mastectomy there are essentially three options: (a) tissue expansion followed by breast implant placement, (b) combined tissue flaps with breast implants, and (c) autologous tissue flaps only. After examining the patient, the surgeon then should describe those methods for which the patient is a satisfactory candidate. The patient should then be encouraged to choose based on her goals and an under-standing of the advantages and disadvantages of each technique.Oncoplastic Breast ReconstructionBreast conservation therapy (BCT) consists of excision of the breast tumor with a surrounding margin of normal tissue com-bined with postoperative whole-breast irradiation. Although the overall survival for properly selected patients is shown to be comparable to total mastectomy and reconstruction, the breast can often be distorted and unnatural appearing after treatment. The area of the lumpectomy may create a depression with con-tour deformity, and contraction of the lumpectomy space over time can distract the nipple out of alignment and create an asym-metry with the contralateral breast. This is especially true for women with small breasts in whom a high percentage of breast volume is removed with the lumpectomy.Oncoplastic surgery refers to the set of techniques devel-oped to lessen breast deformity from a partial mastectomy. One of the most common methods of minimizing adverse effects on breast appearance of is to rearrange the skin, parenchyma, and nipple location of the breast at the time of tumor extirpation using surgical techniques developed for breast aesthetic surgery. This procedure involves elevating the skin from the underlying glandular tissue, mobilizing the nipple on a vascular pedicle, and preserving as much of the vascularized glandular tissue as possible. After lumpectomy, the tissue is rearranged to shift glandular tissue into the defect and redrape the skin and nipple onto the new breast mound. After healing and completion of radiotherapy, a contralateral conventional mastopexy or breast reduction can be performed on the contralateral side to achieve symmetry.Implant-Based ReconstructionImmediate breast reconstruction based entirely on the use of implanted devices is initially the most expedient technique. Sometimes it is possible to place a full-size implant at the time of mastectomy when the breasts are small (volume <400 cc) and the patient is a young nonsmoker with good chest wall muscula-ture. In most patients, however, a period of tissue expansion is required. The tissue expander is inserted beneath the pectoralis major and serratus anterior muscles at the time of the mastec-tomy and partially inflated. Alternatively, the tissue expander can be placed only under the pectoralis major muscle or even completely on top of the chest wall muscles then covered with acellular dermal matrix directly beneath the mastectomy skin flaps. Total muscle coverage is the traditional approach, but these alternatives may be suitable only for well-selected patients. Expansion usually requires 6 to 8 weeks to complete, and an implant exchange is performed typically 3 months later. The advantages of this technique are that it involves minimum additional surgery at the time of the mastectomy, has a recovery period essentially the same of that of the mastectomy alone, and creates no additional scarring. The disadvantages of this technique are the length of time necessary to complete the entire reconstruction (up to 1 year), the requirement for a minimum of two operative procedures, and a less predictable cosmetic result due to complete reliance on devices. Also, the patient awak-ens from surgery without a full-size breast and during the time of expansion must accept a breast of abnormal size and shape. Although the final shape of the breast may be satisfactory, it may lack a natural consistency due to the superficial placement of the device, especially when saline-filled implants are used. Finally, breast implants may develop late complications such as capsular contracture, infection, or extrusion. This method is ideal for a slender, small-breasted woman with minimal ptosis Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   200901/03/19   6:31 PM 2010SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIwho wish to avoid additional scarring and time for convales-cence. It may also be suitable for women undergoing bilateral reconstruction because symmetry is more easily achieved if both breasts are restored using the same technique. Women who elect this type of immediate reconstruction must understand that breast implants do not have an unlimited service life and that additional surgery will be likely be required to replace the breast implant at some time in the future.Tissue Flaps and Breast ImplantsThe latissimus dorsi musculocutaneous flap is the most com-mon transfer used in combination with breast implants. Other flaps may also be used, depending on patient preference and tissue availability. The principal advantage in using a tissue flap is immediate replacement of missing skin and soft tissue. In cases where there is already adequate breast skin, then a muscle only may be transferred to provide suitable implant coverage. The implant allows the final breast volume to be accurately reproduced to match the contralateral breast or, in bilateral reconstruction, adjust the breast size according to the patient’s desires. The advantages of this technique are that the implant is protected by abundant tissue, a period of tissue expansion is avoided, and the full benefit of preserving the breast skin is realized to achieve a natural-appearing breast. The disadvantage of this technique compared to implants alone is that it results in additional scarring and requires a longer period of recovery. For many patients, this approach represents an acceptable com-promise between implant-only reconstruction and autologous tissue reconstruction, incorporating some of the advantages and disadvantages of each.Autologous Tissue ReconstructionImmediate reconstruction using only autologous tissue is the most elaborate method of breast reconstruction but consis-tently yields the most durable, natural-appearing results. Breast implants cannot match the ability of the autologous tissue to conform to the breast skin and envelop and simulate natural breast parenchyma. The most useful flap is the transverse rec-tus abdominis musculocutaneous (TRAM) flap, although other ABPreoperativePostoperativeImmediate right DIEP FlapFigure 45-60. A. Preoperation right breast cancer. B. After mastectomy and immediate reconstruction with a DIEP flap.donor areas are also possibilities in selected cases. Autologous reconstruction is usually the best option in patients who require adjuvant radiation therapy.55The TRAM flap may be transferred to the chest using a variety of methods, depending on the circumstances of the individual patient. As a pedicled flap, it is transferred based on the superior epigastric vessels and tunneled beneath the skin to reach the mastectomy defect. As a free flap, it is based on the inferior epigastric vessels that are revascularized by micro-vascular anastomosis to vessels on the chest wall nearby the mastectomy defect. Often the microvascular technique using the deep inferior epigastric perforator (DIEP) flap is preferred because there is less risk of partial flap loss or localized areas of fat necrosis due to a more reliable blood supply (Fig. 45-60A, before operation on right breast; Fig. 45-60B, after mastectomy and immediate reconstruction with a DIEP flap). In immediate reconstruction with an axillary dissection, the axillary vessels are completely exposed and free of scar following the lymph node dissection in patients without previous surgery and radiation. In women being treated for recurrence with previous axillary sur-gery, the axillary vessels are less reliable, and plans should be made for the possibility of using the internal mammary vessels. The internal mammary vessels have become the most common recipient vessels for free tissue transfer in breast reconstruction in the contemporary era of sentinel lymph node biopsy that is used as a technique to perform axillary lymph node dissection in a more limited number of patients. Regardless of the technique used to transfer the tissue, the donor site is closed in a similar manner as an abdominoplasty, by repairing the abdominal wall and advancing the upper abdominal skin downward. The umbi-licus is preserved on its vascular stalk brought to the surface through a small incision immediately above its location on the abdominal wall (Fig. 45-61A,B). Other donor sites including the buttock may be used in transferring the skin and fat supplied by the inferior gluteal artery perforator (IGAP) or the superior gluteal perforator as the main blood supply.The advantages of using this technique are complete res-toration of the breast mound in a single stage, avoidance of Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   201001/03/19   6:31 PM 2011PLASTIC AND RECONSTRUCTIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 45Figure 45-61A, B. Preand postoperative images following IGAP flap.Figure 45-62A, B. Preand postoperative images following IGAP flap, nipple reconstruction, and tattooing.ABPreoperativePostoperativeDelayed right IGAP Flappotential problems associated with breast implants, and con-sistently superior cosmetic results. The disadvantages are the magnitude of the operation, additional scarring, risks of devel-opment of abdominal bulges, and a longer period of convales-cence. Although the initial cost is greater, over the long term the total cost appears to be less because of less need for second-ary procedures to exchange implants, achieve suitable cosmetic appearance, or care for implant-related problems. This is the best operation for patients who want the most natural breast res-toration possible and who are less concerned about the amount of surgery, scarring, and recovery period.Accessory ProceduresAfter complete healing of the breast mound from the initial stages of reconstruction, refinements and accessory procedures may be performed at a later time to optimize the natural appear-ance of the reconstructed breast. These may include soft tissue ABBefore nipple reconstructionPostoperativeBilateral IGAP Flapmodifications of the breast mound revision, repositioning or the breast implant, scar revisions, autologous fat grafting, and nip-ple-areola complex reconstruction. A variety of methods have been described for nipple reconstruction. They are all based on local tissue rearrangements or skin grafts to create a projecting piece of skin and subcutaneous tissue that simulates the natural nipple (Fig. 45-62A,B). The pigmentation of the areola may be simulated with tattooing of colored pigments selected to match the normal coloration of the patient’s original anatomy.Trunk and Abdominal ReconstructionIn the torso, as in most areas of the body, the location and size of the defect and the properties of the deficient tissue determine choice of reconstructive method. A distinction is made between partial-thickness and full-thickness defects when deciding between grafts, flaps, synthetic materials, or a combina-tion of techniques. Unlike the head and the lower leg, the trunk 9Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   201101/03/19   6:31 PM 2012SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIharbors a relative wealth of regional transposable axial pattern flaps that allow sturdy reconstruction, only rarely requiring dis-tant free tissue transfer. Indeed, the trunk serves as the body’s arsenal, providing its most robust flaps to rebuild its largest defects.The chest wall is a rigid framework designed to resist both the negative pressure associated with respiration and the positive pressure from coughing and from transmitted intra-abdominal forces. Furthermore, it protects the heart, lungs, and great vessels from external trauma. Reconstructions of chest wall defects must restore these functions. When a full-thick-ness defect of the chest wall involves more than four, this is usually an indication for the need for rigid chest wall recon-struction usually using synthetic meshes made of polypropyl-ene, polyethylene, or polytetrafluoroethylene, which may be reinforced with polymethylmethacrylate acrylic. In contami-nated wounds, biologic materials are preferred, such as acel-lular dermal matrix allografts. For soft tissue restoration, the pectoralis major muscle is commonly used as a pedicled flap for coverage of the sternum, upper chest, and neck. It may be mobilized and transferred on a vascular pedicle based on the pectoral branch of the thoracoacromial artery or a vascular supply based on perforators from the internal mammary ves-sels. Either flap design is useful in covering the sternum after dehiscence or infection occurring as a complication of median sternotomy or with sternal resection for tumor extirpation. For the lower third of the sternum, a rectus abdominis muscle flap based on the superior epigastric vessels or the deep inferior epigastric vessels is useful. If based on the inferior blood sup-ply, it must be transferred as a free flap with recipient vessels outside of the zone in injury. The latissimus dorsi musculocu-taneous flap is useful for chest wall reconstructions in places other than the anterior midline. Similar to the pectoralis major muscle, it may be transferred on either a single blood supply that is based on the thoracodorsal vessels from the subscapular system or on vessels perforating from deeper source vessels near to the posterior midline. The serratus anterior muscle can be included on the same vascular pedicle to further increase its surface area. Finally, the trapezius muscle flap, based on the transverse cervical vessels, is generally used as a pedicled flap to cover the upper midback, base of neck, and shoulder. The superior portion of the muscle along with the acromial attach-ment and spinal accessory nerve must be preserved to maintain normal shoulder elevation function.The abdominal wall also protects the internal vital organs from trauma, but with layers of strong torso-supporting mus-cles and fascia rather than with osseous structures. The goals of reconstruction are restoration of structural integrity, prevention of visceral herniation, and provision of dynamic muscular sup-port. Although abdominal wall defects may occur in association with oncologic tumor resections, the most common etiology is fascial dehiscence after laparotomy. When a reconstruction plan is being formulated, careful physical examination and review of the medical history will help prevent selection of an otherwise sound strategy that, because of previous incisions and trauma, is destined for failure.Superficial defects of the abdominal skin and subcutane-ous tissue are usually easily controlled with skin grafts, local advancement flaps, or tissue expansion. Defects of the under-lying musculofascial structures are more difficult to manage. The abdominal wall fascia requires a minimal-tension closure to avoid dehiscence, recurrent incisional hernia formation, or abdominal compartment syndrome. Prosthetic meshes are frequently used to replace the fascia in clean wounds and in operations that create myofascial defects. When the wound is contaminated, as in infected mesh reconstructions, enterocuta-neous fistulas, or viscus perforations, prosthetic mesh is avoided because of the risk of infection. The technique of component separation procedure has proven beneficial for closing large midline defects with autologous tissue and avoiding prosthetic materials. This procedure involves advancement of bilateral flaps composed of the anterior rectus fascia rectus and oblique muscles after lateral release. Midline defects measuring up to 10 cm superiorly, 18 cm centrally, and 8 cm inferiorly can be closed using this method.Techniques based on rearranging and reinforcing abdomi-nal wall elements might be inadequate for extremely large or full-thickness abdominal wall defects. For these defects, regional flaps or free flaps are required. Pedicled flaps from the thigh are useful, such as the tensor fasciae latae pedicled flap, based on the ascending branch of the lateral circumflex femoral vessels, or the anterolateral thigh flap, based on the descending branch of the lateral circumflex vessels. Bilateral flaps might be required.Pelvic ReconstructionAnother important area for consideration of reconstructive surgical procedures is in the perineum.56 The perineal region is part of the specialized part of the trunk that supports the pelvic outlet lying between the pubic symphysis, the coccyx, the inferior rami of the pubis, and the ischial tuberosities. Sup-port is provided by the urogenital diaphragm, the deep and superficial fasciae, and the skin. Specialized anatomic struc-tures pass through the perineum. Posteriorly is the anus, and anteriorly are the genitalia and urethra. Treatment of tumors involving this area often require a combination of surgery and radiation. The resulting loss of tissue and healing impairment coupled with the nonyielding nature of the bony pelvic outlet can result in unique reconstructive requirements that often are best addressed with tissue transfer. The reconstruction must achieve wound healing and restore support to the pelvic con-tents, accommodate urinary and bowel function, and finally restore the penis in men and the vagina and vulva in women. Local flaps, regional flaps, or free tissue transfer all have pos-sible application depending on the extent of the resection and local tissue compromise.Other Clinical CircumstancesBesides trauma and cancer, other etiologies can cause functional and cosmetic deformities due to tissue impairment for which reconstructive surgery has value. These include pressure sores, diabetic foot ulcers, and lymphedema.Pressure Sores. A pressure ulcer is defined as tissue injury caused by physical pressure applied to the tissues from an exter-nal source at a magnitude that exceeds capillary perfusion pres-sure. Prolonged tissue ischemia leads to local tissue necrosis. Pressure ulcers tend to occur in people debilitated by advanced age, chronic illness, poor nutrition, prolonged immobilization, motor paralysis, or inadequate sensation. Spinal cord injury patients are especially prone to developing pressure sores. Pres-sure sores can also occur in healthy individuals who undergo prolonged surgical operations and parts of the body support-ing the weight of the patient on the operating table (e.g., the occiput, the sacral prominence, the heels of the feet) are improp-erly padded.57Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   201201/03/19   6:31 PM 2013PLASTIC AND RECONSTRUCTIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 45Pressure sores are an important contributor to morbidity in patients suffering from limited mobility. Most can be prevented by diligent nursing care in an attentive, cooperative patient. Preventing pressure ulcers requires recognition of susceptible and utilizing appropriate measures to reduce pres-sure on areas of the body at risk. This involves frequent position changes while sitting or supine and the use of pressure-reducing medical equipment such as low-air-loss mattresses and seat cushions and heel protectors. Malnourishment, poor glucose control in diabetics, poor skin hygiene, urinary or bowel incon-tinence, muscle spasms, and joint contractures all increase the risk of pressure sore formation. Mitigating these factors is essential before embarking on a complex reconstructive treat-ment plan. Successful reconstruction also requires a cooperative and motivated patient with good social support.Surgical treatment of pressure ulcers is based on wound depth. The staging system is summarized in Fig. 45-63.58 Stage I and II ulcers are treated nonsurgically with local wound care and interventions to relieve pressure on the affected area. Patients with stage III or IV ulcers should be evaluated for surgery. Important features for preoperative assessment include the extent of soft tissue infection, the presence of con-taminated fluid collection or abscess, osteomyelitis, and com-munication with deep spaces (e.g., joint space, urethra, colon, or spinal canal). Laboratory blood tests and imaging studies help establish whether soft tissue or bone infection is present. Plain radiographs are usually adequate to rule out osteomyeli-tis; CT and MRI are helpful when plain films are equivocal. Necrotic tissue and abscesses should be surgically debrided without delay to prevent or treat systemic sepsis. Bone must also be excised if it appears involved, as evidenced by poor bleeding, softness, or frank purulence. Patients with high spinal cord injuries at or above the level of the fifth thoracic vertebra may experience sudden extreme elevation of blood pressure, an 10Stage 1Observable pressure related alteration of intact skin whose indicators as compared to the adjacent or opposite area of the body may include changes in one or more of the following: skin temperature (warmth or coolness), tissue consistency (firm or boggy feel), and/or sensation (pain, itching). The ulcer appears as a defined area of persistent redness in lightly pigmented skin, whereas in darker skin tones the ulcer may appear with persistent red, blue of purple hues.Stage 2Partial thickness skin loss involving epidermis and/or dermis. The ulcer is superficial and presents clinically as an abrasion, blister, or shallow crater.Stage 3Full thickness skin loss involving damage or necrosis of subcutaneous tissue that may extend down to but not through underlaying fascia. The ulcer presents clinically as a deep crater with or without undermining of adjacent tissue.Stage 4Full thickness skin loss with extensive destruction, tissue necrosis or damage to muscle, bone, or supporting structures (for example, tendon or joint capsule). Undermining and sinus tracts may also be associated with Stage 4 pressure ulcers.ABCD Figure 45-63. The staging system for pressure sores.autonomic-mediated event called hyperreflexia. This condition must be immediately recognized and treated to prevent intra-cranial and retinal hemorrhage, seizures, cardiac irregularities, and death.After adequate debridement, the pressure ulcer can be treated nonsurgically in patients who have shallow wounds with healthy surrounding tissues capable of healing secondarily with offloading pressure. Nonsurgical treatment is also best in patients for whom surgery is contraindicated because of previ-ous surgery or comorbidities. For surgical candidates, primary closure is rarely performed because an inadequate amount of quality surrounding tissue prevents closure without tension, making the repair predisposed to failure. Split-thickness skin grafting can be useful for shallow ulcers with well-vascularized wound beds on which shear forces and pressure can be avoided after repair, a rare circumstance in most patients with pressure ulcers.The mainstay of surgical treatment is tissue transfer fol-lowing several guiding principles. Local muscle or musculocu-taneous flaps are suitable for areas of heavy contamination and complex wound surface contours. Durability requires the ability to consistently off-load of the area of reconstruction postopera-tively. Fasciocutaneous flaps afford more durable reconstruc-tion when off-loading is not possible. The anatomic location is an important determinant of flap choice. Once a donor site is selected, a flap of adequate size is designed and transferred in a way that avoids suture lines in the area under pressure. Large flaps also permit readvancement if the patient experiences a recurrent ulcer in the same area. Sacral pressure sores may be managed with fasciocutaneous or musculocutaneous flaps based on the gluteal vessels. Ischial pressure sores may be man-aged with gluteal flaps or flaps transferred from the posterior thigh, such as the posterior thigh flap based on the descend-ing branch of the inferior gluteal artery. Trochanteric ulcers Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   201301/03/19   6:31 PM 2014SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 45-64. Flap reconstruction of pressure ulcers. Top row: Preoperative and 1-month postoperative photos of a stage IV sacral decubitus ulcer treated with a myocutaneous gluteus maximus flap. Bottom row: Preoperative and 1-month postoperative photos of a stage IV trochan-teric ulcer treated with a myocutaneous V-Y tensor fasciae latae flap.may be managed with musculocutaneous flaps based on the tensor fasciae latae, rectus femoris, or vastus lateralis muscles  (Fig. 45-64). The obligatory loss of motor function associated with using these flaps adds no additional functional impairment in patients already paralyzed as a result of strokes or spinal cord injuries.Proper postoperative care after flap reconstruction of pressure ulcers is critical for success. Low-pressure, air fluid-ized beds help to off-load the affected area and prevent new areas of involvement during the first 7 to 10 days of healing. Other important measures are adequate nutritional support and medications to prevent muscle spasms. Careful coordination with patient care providers is planned preoperatively in order to avoid gaps in care that can lead to early recurrent ulceration. Care of the pressure ulcer patient is a labor-intensive process that requires attention to detail by the surgeon, nurses, thera-pists, caseworkers, and family.Diabetic Foot Ulceration. The pathophysiology of primary diabetic lower limb complications has three main components: (a) peripheral neuropathy (motor, sensory, and autonomic), (b) peripheral vascular disease, and (c) immunodeficiency. Altered foot biomechanics and gait caused by painless col-lapse of ligamentous support, foot joints, and foot arches change weight-bearing patterns. Blunted pain allows cutane-ous ulceration to begin. With breakdown of the skin barrier function, polymicrobial infections become established. Bac-terial invasion is often fostered by poor blood supply due to peripheral vascular disease coupled with microangiopathy. Finally, local host defenses may be less effective in resisting bacteria because of poor blood supply and impaired cellular function. Cutaneous ulcerations may progress painlessly to involve deeper soft tissues and bone. The ultimate endpoint of this process is such severe tissue damage that extremity amputation is the only treatment remaining. More than 60% of nontraumatic lower extremity amputations occur in diabetics. The age-adjusted lower extremity amputation rate in diabet-ics (5.0 per 1000 diabetics) was approximately 28 times that of people without diabetes (0.2 per 1000 people).59 Improved patient education and medical management, early detection of foot problems, and prompt intervention play important roles in improving the chances of limb preservation.60The best approach to managing diabetic patients with lower extremity wounds is to involve a multidisciplinary team composed of a plastic and reconstructive surgeon, a vascular surgeon, an orthopedic surgeon, a podiatrist, an endocrinolo-gist specializing in diabetes, a nutritionist, and a physical or Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   201401/03/19   6:31 PM 2015PLASTIC AND RECONSTRUCTIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 45occupational therapist. This brings together the greatest level of expertise to manage bone and soft tissue issues as well as the underlying disease and medical comorbidities. Treatment begins with rigorous control of blood glucose levels and a thor-ough assessment of comorbidities. In addition to careful detail-ing of the extent of the wound and the tissues involved, physical examination documents sensory deficits and vascular status. Plain radiographs, MRI, bone scintigraphy, and angiography or duplex Doppler ultrasound imaging may be indicated. A patient with significant vascular disease may be a candidate for lower extremity endovascular revascularization or open bypass.61 Nerve conduction studies may diagnose surgically reversible neuropathies at compressive sites and aid in decisions about whether to perform sensory nerve transfers to restore plantar sensibility.60 Antibiotic and fungal therapies should be guided by tissue culture results.Surgical management starts with debridement of devital-ized tissues. Methods of wound closure are dictated by the extent and location of the remaining defect. Negative pressure wound dressings may be appropriate for superficial defects in an effort to allow secondary healing or as a temporizing measure until definitive wound closure can be achieved. Skin grafts might be indicated at times but cannot be expected to provide durable cov-erage in weight-bearing or high-shear areas. Local and regional flaps can be considered if the extremity is free of significant occlusive peripheral vascular or combined with vascular bypass. Microvascular free tissue transfers are appropriate when defects are large or when local flaps are not available. Combination lower extremity bypass and free flap coverage has proved benefi-cial for the treatment of the diabetic foot in terms of healing and reduction of disease progression (Table 45-6). Consultation with a podiatrist or an orthopedic surgeon who specializes in foot and ankle problems can be considered to improve foot biomechanics and manage bony prominences that act as pressure points on the soft tissue to reduce the risk of recurrent ulceration. Proper foot-wear (including orthotic devices and off-loading shoe inserts), hygiene, and toenail and skin care are essential.60Lymphedema. Lymphedema is the abnormal accumulation of protein-rich fluid in the interstitial spaces of the tissues. It is a complex disorder with both congenital and acquired causes. No universally effective remedy has been devised, but a variety of treatment methods including reconstructive surgery have been effective in carefully selected patients.It is important to be familiar with the fundamentals of lymph physiology in order to understand the rationale for the various forms of lymphedema treatment. Lymph fluid is formed at the capillary level where there is a net outflow of fluid and serum proteins from the intravascular space into the intersti-tium. In the average adult, this amounts to approximately 3 liters of fluid daily. Open-ended lymph capillaries collect this fluid where the lymphatic endothelial cells form loose intercellular connections that freely allow fluid to enter. From here, the net-work of specialized vascular structures gathers the extravasated fluid and transports it back into central circulation. The system is a high-volume transport mechanism that clears proteins and lipids from the interstitial space primarily by means of differ-ential pressure gradients. Lymph fluid enters the lymph vessels driven by colloid and solute concentration gradients at the capil-lary level. Flow is sustained in the larger vessels through direct contractility of the lymph vessel walls and by indirect compres-sion from surrounding skeletal muscle activity. Throughout the system, one-way valves prevent reverse flow. The lymphatic vessels course throughout the body alongside the venous sys-tem, into which they eventually drain via the major thoracic and cervical ducts at the base of the neck.Under normal conditions, there is a balance between fluid formation and lymph transport capacity. With congenital hypo-plasia or acquired obstruction, there is a reduction in transport capacity resulting in accumulation of fluid and protein in the interstitium. Localized fluid stagnation, hypertension, and valvu-lar incompetence further degrade transport capacity and acceler-ate lymph fluid accumulation edema. Dissolved and suspended serum proteins, cellular debris, and waste products of metabolism elicit an inflammatory response with associated with fibrovas-cular proliferation and collagen deposition leading to firm, non-pitting swelling characteristic of chronic, long-standing edema. Lymphoscintigraphy can help detail the lymphatic anatomy and quantify lymphatic flow. MRI can provide additional informa-tion about the larger caliber lymphatic vessels, possibly helping to identify specific points of obstruction.Primary lymphedema is caused by congenital hypopla-sia and is classified clinically based on the age of the affected individual when swelling first appears. Lymphedema present at birth is an autosomal dominant disorder sometimes referred to as Milroy’s disease. Lymphedema praecox occurs near the time of puberty but can appear up to age 35. This form tends to occur in females and usually affects the lower extremity. It accounts for more than 90% of cases. Finally, lymphedema tarda appears after the age of 35 years and is relatively rare.Secondary lymphedema is the acquired form of the dis-order and is more common than congenital causes. Worldwide the most common etiology is parasitic infestation with filarial, a highly specialized nematode transmitted by blood-eating insects Table 45-6Some reconstructive options for the diabetic footAREA OF DEFECTRECONSTRUCTIVE OPTIONSForefootV-Y advancementToe island flapSingle toe amputationLisfranc’s amputationMidfootV-Y advancementToe island flapMedial plantar artery flapFree tissue transferTransmetatarsal amputationHindfootLateral calcaneal artery flapReversed sural artery flapMedial plantar artery flap ± flexor digitorum brevisAbductor hallucis muscle flapAbductor digiti minimi muscle flapFree tissue transferSyme’s amputationFoot dorsumSupramalleolar flapReversed sural artery flapThinner free flaps (e.g., temporoparietal fascia, radial forearm, groin, thinned anterolateral thigh flaps)Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   201501/03/19   6:31 PM 2016SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 45-65. Algorithm for lymphedema management.YesNoYesNoYesNoSymptomatic LymphedemaAmenable to physiologic lymphatic procedures?Suitable lymphatic vessels on MRL or ICGL for LVA?Secondary to surgery and/or XRT?LVA ±VLNTLiposuction ±excisionLVAonlyVLNTonlyConsider furtherLVA or VLNTInadequate response?Secondary to surgery and/or XRT?Severe functional impairment?Excess soft tissue? Skin changes?Yes• Responsive to nonsurgical therapy, but symptoms plateaued or worsening• Significant pitting edemaNo• Minimal or no improvement with nonsurgical therapy• Minimal to absent pitting edemafound mostly in developing countries. In nonaffected areas of the world, the most common cause of secondary lymphedema is regional lymphatic vessel destruction associated with can-cer treatment. It often occurs in the upper extremity of women treated with surgery and radiation therapy for breast cancer. In the lower extremities, it is associated with neoplasms treated with inguinal or retroperitoneal lymph node dissection.The goal of lymphedema treatment is to minimize func-tional and cosmetic disability caused by chronic enlargement and to prevent infection of the involved extremity. The foun-dations of management are patient education and nonsurgical interventions, which include limb elevation, external compres-sive garments and devices, and manual lymphatic massage, sometimes referred to as complex decongestive physiother-apy. The patient must use protective gloves or garments when engaged in activities that might cause minor skin injury, such as gardening, smoking cigarettes, and cooking. Interstitial lymph fluid is prone to infection. When signs of infection appear, prompt treatment that often includes hospitalization with intravenous antibiotics is essential to prevent severe infection and further destruction of remaining lymphatic sys-tem and worsening of lymphedema.When nonsurgical methods fail, surgery can be consid-ered as a treatment option. Surgical operations for lymphedema are either ablative, designed to remove excess lymphedematous tissues, or reconstructive, intended to restore lymph function and improve transport capacity. These choices are presented in Fig. 45-65. Ablative procedures range from minimally invasive measures such as suction lipectomy to complete excision of skin and subcutaneous tissue down to muscle fascia with split-thickness skin grafting. Contemporary reconstructive procedures establish new connections between the venous and lymphatic systems somewhere proximal to the point of obstruction. A variety of methods have been described, including lympholymphatic, lym-phovenous, lymph node venous anastomoses, and vascularized lymph node transfer. Each of these procedures can yield suc-cess, and it has become clear that patient selection is perhaps the most important aspect of surgical care because the patient must be matched to the procedure most likely to yield improved con-trol of swelling and prevent infection. Reconstructive surgery is not generally a cure for the condition, but rather it is intended to ease management challenges and reduce the risks of infection. After surgery, continued use of nonsurgical techniques is still required for optimal results.AESTHETIC SURGERY AND MEDICINEAesthetic, or cosmetic, surgery is an important part of the spe-cialty of plastic surgery. The American Medical Association defines cosmetic surgery as “surgery performed to reshape normal structures of the body to improve the patient’s appear-ance and self-esteem.” It is a natural extension of surgical tech-niques for tissue modification traditionally developed for other reasons. Because aesthetic surgery primarily relates to personal appearance and attractiveness and not a particular disease pro-cess, there has been a tendency to dismiss the health value of Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   201601/03/19   6:31 PM 2017PLASTIC AND RECONSTRUCTIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 45aesthetic surgery. Nevertheless, personal appearance plays an important role in psychosocial health. Physical attractiveness plays a role in the marketplace with well-documented influence on employment opportunities, advancement, and earnings.62 The multibillion industry of products and services designed to opti-mize appearance, which spans a wide spectrum between simple cosmetics to elaborate surgical procedures, bears testament to the perceived value by the general population.Important work demonstrates a link between aesthetic sur-gery and psychosocial health. Surgery performed on the face,63 nose,64 ears,65 breast,66 and body67 can positively affect quality of life on multiple scales. There is a clear association between one’s personal appearance and success in the marketplace. As the primary benefits of aesthetic surgery are related to the psy-chosocial outcomes, it is important to assess the state of psycho-logical health prior to offering aesthetic surgery. A variety of preoperative psychological comorbidities can adversely affect outcomes, most notably a syndrome known as body dysmor-phic disorder,68 present in individuals who manifest a preoccu-pation with one or more perceived defects or flaws in physical appearance that are not observable or appear slight to others.69 Performing a surgical procedure to modify personal appearance in such an individual is associated with a high risk of a poor outcome.It is important for all surgeons to have an appreciation of the methods of patient evaluation, surgical techniques, and typical outcomes that might be anticipated in aesthetic sur-gery. Patients seek aesthetic surgery when they are unable to achieve a personal standard of physical appearance without sur-gical modification of various body parts that most affect their appearance. This is especially true for features that are visible in public and strong determinants of appearance, such as the face, breasts, abdomen, and buttocks. The etiology of undesir-able characteristics of form or skin quality can be familial or acquired through natural processes of aging, injury, cancer, or degeneration. Unwanted changes in appearance that result from these processes may still fall within the range of normal appearance yet fall short of the patient’s personal aesthetic ideal. Patient assessment requires an understanding of personal and cultural ideals of appearance. The surgeon must be knowledge-able about the various surgical and nonsurgical techniques that might be considered to address the patient’s concerns.In practical terms, there are both reconstructive and cos-metic elements to almost every plastic surgery case, and the def-inition of “normal” structure is sometimes very subjective and difficult to quantify. Nevertheless, there are patients for whom it is a priority to make surgical changes to their bodies in the clear absence of a functional deformity. Aesthetic surgery patients present a unique challenge to the plastic surgeon because the most important outcome parameter is not truly appearance, but patient satisfaction. Optimally, a good cosmetic outcome will be associated with a high level of patient satisfaction. For this to be the case, the plastic surgeon must do a careful analysis of the patient’s motivations for wanting surgery, along with the patient’s goals and expectations. The surgeon must make a rea-sonable assessment that the improvements that can be achieved through surgery will meet the patient’s expectations. The sur-geon must appropriately counsel the patient about the magni-tude of the recovery process, the exact location of scars, and potential complications. If complications do occur, the surgeon must manage these in a manner that preserves a positive doctor-patient relationship.Figure 45-66. Incisions for cervicofacial rhytidectomy.Aesthetic Surgery of the FaceA thorough evaluation of the patient who presents for facial aes-thetic surgery begins with acquiring a clear understanding of the patient’s primary concern regarding appearance. Examination focuses on that region but takes into consideration overall facial appearance that might be contributing to the patient’s concerns but of which the patient is unaware. The skin quality is care-fully assessed as well as the location, symmetry, and position of each critical feature of facial appearance such as scalp hairline, forehead length, eyebrow shape and position, eyelid configu-ration, nasal proportions, and shape of the lips. Overall facial proportions are assessed, such as the prominence of the orbital rims and malar areas, the chin projection, and contours along the margin of the mandible. An appropriately performed facelift can yield an aesthetically pleasing result (Fig. 45-66).A variety of procedures have been described for modify-ing facial appearance. Nonsurgical interventions topical treat-ments of the skin surface include chemical and laser facial peels. Injections of biocompatible materials made of processed biologic proteins (e.g., collagen, hyaluronic acid) or synthetic materials such as polymethylmethacrylate can modify the depth of facial wrinkles and fullness of facial structures such as the lips. Appearance can also be modified using neuromodulators to block facial muscle function to reduce undesirable move-ments of facial landmarks or deepening of facial wrinkles. Sur-gical interventions may be employed when the structure and position of facial features require modifications greater than what may be achieved with nonsurgical procedures. Browlift operations raise the position of the eyebrows (Fig. 45-67). Blepharoplasty is a set of procedures that modify the shape and position of the upper and lower eyelids. Facelift modifies the configuration and amount of facial skin and subcutaneous Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   201701/03/19   6:31 PM 2018SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIstructures to correct features such as deep nasolabial folds, skin redundancy along the inferior border of the mandible, and loss of definition of neck contours. Rhinoplasty involves a complex set of procedures to modify the size, shape, and airway function of the nose (Fig. 45-68).Aesthetic Surgery of the BreastSurgery to modify the shape, volume, and nipple position of the breast are among the most common aesthetic procedures. Figure 45-67. Facelift. A. Preoperative appearance. B. Postopera-tive appearance.ABBreast reduction surgery reduces the amount of both skin and breast tissue volume and modifies the position of the nipple on the breast mound (Fig. 45-69). The most common indication is to treat symptoms of large breasts known as macromastia, which is associated with a symptomatic triad of upper back pain, bra strap grooving, and skin rashes under the fold of the breasts. Unilateral breast reduction is often performed to achieve breast symmetry after contralateral postmastectomy breast reconstruc-tion. As with all breast surgery, achieving a natural and cos-metically acceptable appearance is essential to a satisfactory outcome. Mastopexy techniques share many aspects with breast reduction except that breast volume is preserved and only the amount of skin and location of the nipple are modified. Funda-mental to the success of the procedure is the establishment of symmetric and proper nipple position. Nipple ptosis is graded by the nipple position relative to the inframammary fold.Many patients seek surgical intervention to increase breast size in a procedure known as augmentation mammoplasty  (Fig. 45-70). Breast volume is increased by insertion of a syn-thetic implant specifically designed for this purpose. Modern breast implants are manufactured from various formulations of silicone polymers. The implant shell, which is on contact with the tissues, is always made from silicone elastomer. The filling material can be either silicone or saline, depending on the patient and surgeon preference. As with any surgical proce-dure that involves implanting synthetic materials, the surgeon must fully understand the nature of the materials and be able to inform the patient of all known risks and benefits.The pervasive risk of breast cancer among women man-dates careful consideration of the impact of any breast surgery on cancer screening, diagnosis, and treatment. Preoperative breast cancer screening consistent with current American Can-cer Society guidelines should be performed for all patients undergoing elective breast reshaping surgery. After breast augmentation surgery, routine screening mammograms are no longer considered adequate. Patients with breast implants must have diagnostic mammograms where a radiologist studies the images at the time of the study to ensure they completely visual-ize the breast tissue.Gynecomastia is a condition of excess breast tissue in males. It can be caused by a wide range of medical disorders, including liver dysfunction, endocrine abnormalities, genetic syndromes (e.g., Klinefelter’s syndrome), renal disease, tes-ticular tumors, adrenal or pituitary adenomas, secreting lung carcinomas, and male breast cancer. Pharmacologic agents associated with the potential side effect of breast enlargement include marijuana use, digoxin, spironolactone, cimetidine, the-ophylline, diazepam, and reserpine. Although all of these pos-sible causes must be considered in any patient presenting with gynecomastia, the majority of patients have idiopathic enlarge-ment of the breast parenchyma, often occurring in teenagers. Surgical correction of this condition as often indicated.Aesthetic Surgery of the BodyAesthetic surgery may be applied to the torso and extremities. The most common circumstance is following massive weight loss, typically as a result of bariatric surgery. Morbid obesity stretches the skin and supporting ligaments that tether it to the underlying fascial framework. Decreasing the amount of sub-cutaneous fat often results in significant skin laxity that creates body contour deformities. Improvement can be achieved only through skin excision. Therefore, all body-contouring surgery Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   201801/03/19   6:31 PM 2019PLASTIC AND RECONSTRUCTIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 45ANaso-frontal angleNaso-labial angleTip-columellar angleLower lateral cartilageUpper lateral cartilageBCFigure 45-68. A. Rhinoplasty anatomy. B. Preoperative appear-ance. C. Postoperative appearance.Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   201901/03/19   6:31 PM 2020SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 45-69. Inferior pedicle reduction mammaplasty.De-epithelializedareaExcised arearepresents a trade of excess skin for scar, and this must be emphasized during patient consultation. The patient willing to accept scars in exchange for improved contour is likely to be satisfied with the procedures. With the increased number of bar-iatric surgery procedures over the past decade, body-contouring surgery has become very popular and is emerging as a new sub-specialty of plastic surgery.Excess skin and subcutaneous tissue on the anterior abdominal wall creates a redundancy that can hang over the pubic area called an abdominal wall pannus. It can cause dif-ficulty dressing and maintaining proper personal hygiene. A panniculectomy is a procedure that removes the redundant skin and subcutaneous tissue of the pannus. If additional contouring of the abdominal wall is performed, the procedure is known as abdominoplasty. During this procedure, not only is the pannus excised but the maximum amount of skin is excised to tighten the abdominal wall. Optimum contouring typically requires tightening of the underlying abdominal wall by suturing the midline and transposing the umbilicus as the upper abdominal skin is advanced inferiorly. At times additional skin must be excised transversely, requiring a concurrent vertical incision to remove skin in two vectors (Fig. 45-71). Possible complications include skin necrosis, persistent paresthesias of the abdominal wall, seroma, and wound separation. Necrosis of the umbili-cus may complicate preservation of that structure if the stalk is excessively long or an umbilical hernia is repaired. Adding a Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   202001/03/19   6:32 PM 2021PLASTIC AND RECONSTRUCTIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 45Figure 45-70. Placement of breast implant. A. Subglandular. B. Subpectoral.Figure 45-69. (Continued)ImplantBAPectoralis majormusclevertical resection increases the incidence of skin necrosis, espe-cially at the confluence of scars in the lower abdomen.Brachioplasty, or arm lift, excises excess skin and subcu-taneous tissue from the arms. It results in improved contour but leaves a visible longitudinal scar on the medial aspect of the arm. Therefore, it is reserved for patients with excessive skin in that region. The patient willing to accept the scar can be happy with the results. Complications include distal seroma and wound separation. Paresthesias in the upper arm and forearm may occur secondary to injury of sensory nerves passing through the resec-tion area, though this rarely affects function. Incisions that cross the axilla must be designed to avoid axillary contractures that limit shoulder mobility.Thigh and buttock lifts treat loose skin on the thighs and buttocks. A variety of methods have been described, and applica-tion requires proper patient selection in order to obtain the best outcome. The lateral thighs can be lifted simultaneously during abdominoplasty with one scar along the belt line. If the lift is continued on the posterior torso, a buttocks lift can be performed as well. This procedure is referred to as a circumferential lower body lift. Contouring the medial thighs typically requires an inci-sion in the groin crease. Firmly anchoring the deep thigh fascia to Colles’ fascia is essential to help prevent spreading of the labia. In cases of severe excess skin on the inner thighs, a long verti-cal incision is necessary. Complications of thigh and buttock lift include seroma, wound separation, skin necrosis, and change in the shape of the genital region (with possible sexual dysfunction).Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   202101/03/19   6:32 PM 2022SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIABFigure 45-71. A. Preoperative photo of 35-year-old woman after gastric bypass and massive weight loss. B. Patient 12 months after a fleurde-lis abdominoplasty.Suction LipectomyLiposuction is a technique that involves the removal of adipose tissue through minimal incisions using a hollow suction can-nula system. The key consideration in determining acceptable candidates for this body contouring technique directly relies on the patient’s inherent skin elasticity, which provides the sought-after retraction of skin over the lipoaspirated adipose depot to improve area contour. Thus, assessment of skin tone is a vital part of the preoperative patient evaluation. If there is excessive skin laxity in the body area to be treated, it may worsen after liposuction and contribute to contour irregularities, voids, and abnormal appearance.This technique can be highly effective in the correctly chosen patient as the access port sites provide minimally vis-ible scars and can remove significant amounts of fatty tissue to improve contour. However, it is worth mentioning that liposuc-tion is not considered a weight-loss treatment; rather, it is a tool for addressing unwanted and troublesome adipose depots. Typi-cally, the best candidates for liposuction are individuals who are close to their goal weight and have focal adipose deposits that are resistant to diet and exercise (Fig. 45-72). The suction cannula system removes adipose tissue by avulsing fat into the small holes located within the cannula tip. As the cannula is repeatedly passed throughout the adipose planes to remove the fat, one can often visualize and feel the reduction in the fat depot area treated. In general, larger-diameter cannulas remove adi-pose tissue at a faster rate yet carry a higher risk of causing contour irregularities such as grooving and/or uneven removal of fat. Newer liposuction technologies employing ultrasonic or laser probes to heat and emulsify fat via cavitation before suc-tion are gaining increasing application because they also aid in better tightening of the overlying skin envelope. However, use of these technologies also increases the chance and incidence of tissue damage and injury from the heat of the cannula and can cause burn injury to skin and underlying structures.A major advance in the field of liposuction involves appli-cation of tumescent local anesthesia. This method involves the infiltration of very dilute lidocaine and epinephrine (lidocaine 0.05% and epinephrine 1:1,000,000) in large volumes through-out the subcutaneous tissues prior to suction removal of fatty tissue. Tumescent volumes can range from one to three times the anticipated aspirate volume. The dilute lidocaine provides sufficient anesthesia to allow the liposuction to be performed without additional agents in some instances. However, in cases where large volumes of fat are to be removed or in cases where multiple sites are to be addressed, then sedation and/or general anesthesia is often preferred. With tumescent anesthesia, the absorption of the dilute lidocaine from the subcutaneous tissue is very slow, with peak plasma concentrations occurring approx-imately 10 hours after the procedure. Therefore, the standard lidocaine dosing limit of 7 mg/kg may be safely exceeded. Cur-rent recommendations suggest a limit of 35 mg/kg of lidocaine with tumescent anesthesia. A very important component of the tumescent anesthetic solution is diluted epinephrine, which has proved to limit blood loss during the procedure.Safety issues are paramount for liposuction because of potential fluid shifts postoperatively and hypothermia. If ≥5000 mL of aspirate is to be removed, the procedure should be Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   202201/03/19   6:32 PM 2023PLASTIC AND RECONSTRUCTIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 45ABCFigure 45-72. A and B. Preoperative photos of a 22-year-old woman with focal adipose deposits on the trunk and extremities. C. Patient  3 months after surgery.Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   202301/03/19   6:32 PM 2024SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIperformed in an accredited acute care hospital facility. After the procedure, vital signs and urinary output should be monitored overnight in an appropriate facility by qualified and competent staff familiar with perioperative care of the liposuction patient.Autologous Fat GraftingThe concept of reinjecting fat tissue harvested by liposuction has been put into practice for decades. Key to the technique is a pro-cessing step in which the sterilely collected fat is separated from the aqueous (primarily tumescent fluid) and free lipid fractions. This can be done by centrifugation and/or filtering. Ideally, the prepared adipose grafts are then injected into the tissues using specially designed blunt-tipped cannulas that provide for micro-graft injection. Small aliquots of fat grafts are injected with each cannula pass to deposit the grafts within the vascularized tissues of the recipient bed. Autologous fat grafting has gained increased interest and has been applied to various areas of aesthetic and reconstructive surgery. Specific applications include fat grafting to augment areas where fat atrophy is commonplace (aging of the face or hands), to enhance breast aesthetics and/or other breast reconstruction techniques, gluteal augmentation, or to address contour deformities or irregularities caused by iatrogenic, trau-matic, oncologic, or congenital processes.REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Martin, Andrew J. (2005-07-27). “Academy Papyrus to be Exhibited at the Metropolitan Museum of Art” (Press release). The New York Academy of Medicine. Archived from the origi-nal on November 27, 2010.	2.	Borges AF, Alexander JE. Relaxed skin tension lines, Z-plasties on scars, and fusiform excision of lesions. Br J Plast Surg. 1962;15:242-254.	3.	Wilhelmi BJ, Blackwell SJ, Phillips LG. Langer’s lines: to use or not to use. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1999;104:208-214.	4.	Staylor A. Wound care devices: growth amid uncertainty. Med Tech Insight. 2009;11(1):32-47.	5.	Baronio G. On Grafting in Animals. Boston: Boston Medical Library; 1985.		This is a modern publication of the classic 18th century work by Guiseppi Baronio who studied skin grafting in animals. Baronio’s work represents the first preclinical animal study of a surgical procedure. The logo of the most important professional organization dedicated to plastic surgery research, the Plastic Surgery Research Council, is based on Baronio’s illustration of a sheep with multiple grafted areas of skin on the back.	6.	Singh M, Nuutila K, Kruse C, Robson MC, Caterson E,  Eriksson E. Challenging the conventional therapy: emerging skin graft techniques for wound healing. Plast Reconstruct Surg. 2015;136(4):524e-530e.	7.	Sinha S, Schreiner AJ, Biernaskie J, Nickerson D, Gabriel VA. Treating pain on skin graft donor sites: review and clini-cal recommendations. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2017;83(5): 954-964.	8.	Kagan RJ, Peck MD, Ahrenholz DH, et al. Surgical manage-ment of the burn wound and use of skin substitutes: an expert panel white paper. J Burn Care Res. 2013;34(2):e60-e79.		A variety of skin substitutes are available for repairing areas of skin loss from injuries such as deep partial-thickness or full-thickness burns. This article provides a nice summary of con-temporary options.	9.	Azzopardi EA, Boyce DE, Dickson WA, et al. Application of topical negative pressure (vacuum-assisted closure) to split-thickness skin grafts: a structured evidence-based review. Ann Plast Surg. 2013;70(1):23-29.	10.	Maciel-Miranda A, Morris SF, Hallock GG. Local flaps, including pedicled perforator flaps: anatomy, technique, and applications. Plast Reconstruct Surg. 2013;131(6): 896e-911e.	11.	Kunert P. Structure and construction: the system of skin flaps. Ann Plast Surg. 1991;27(6):509-516; discussion 517-518.	12.	McGregor IA, Morgan G. Axial and random pattern flaps. Br J Plastic Surg. 1973;26(3):202-213.	13.	Rajabi A, Dolovich AT, Johnston JD. From the rhombic transpo-sition flap toward Z-plasty: an optimized design using the finite element method. J Biomech. 2015;48(13):3672-3678.	14.	Bakamjian VY, Long M, Rigg B. Experience with the medially based deltopectoral flap in reconstructive surgery of the head and neck. Br J Plast Surg. 1971;24(2):174-183.	16.	Geddes CR, Morris SF, Neligan PC. Perforator flaps: evo-lution, classification, and applications. Ann Plast Surg. 2003;50(1):90-99.	17.	Sinna R, Boloorchi A, Mahajan AL, Qassemyar Q, Robbe M. What should define a “perforator flap”? Plast Reconstr Surg. 2010;126(6):2258-2263.	18.	Taylor GI, Palmer JH. The vascular territories (angiosomes) of the body: experimental study and clinical applications. Br J Plast Surg. 1987;40(2):113-141.		This is the classic article studying blood supply to the skin that introduced the angiosome concept and transformed our under-standing of the anatomic basis of surgical flap design. The blood supply was shown to be a continuous three-dimensional network of vessels in all tissue layers. The anatomical territory of a source artery corresponded in both the skin and deep tissues and gave rise to the angiosome concept.	19.	Buchanan PJ, Kung TA, Cederna PS. Evidence-based medicine: wound closure. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2014;134(6):1391-1404.		This is an excellent summary of the basic principles of wound healing. It explains the physiologic basis and rationale for vari-ous wound care methods, including dressings, negative pressure wound therapy, skin and dermal substitutes, and tissue expan-sion. This is basic knowledge that is important for all surgeons to understand.	20.	Whitaker LA, Pashayan H, Reichman J. A proposed new classification of craniofacial anomalies. Cleft Palate J. 1981;18(3):161-176.	21.	Monson LA, Kirschner RE, Losee JE. Primary repair of cleft lip and nasal deformity. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2013;132(6): 1040e-1053e.	22.	Fattah AY. Craniofacial syndromes: genetics, embryology, and clinical relevance. In: Bentz ML, Bauer BS, Zuker RM, eds. Principles & Practice of Pediatric Plastic Surgery. Boca Raton: CRC Press; 2016:393-452.	23.	Hoffman WY, Fisher DM. Unilateral cleft lip repair. In: Bentz ML, Bauer BS, Zuker RM, eds. Principles & Practice of Pediatric Plastic Surgery. Boca Raton: CRC Press; 2016: 453-478.	24.	van Aalst JA, Kolappa KK, Sadove M. MOC-PSSM CME article: nonsyndromic cleft palate. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2008; 121(1 suppl):1-14.	25.	Garfinkle JS, Grayson BH. Nasoalveolar molding and columella elongation in preparation for the primary repair of unilateral and bilateral cleft lip and palate. In: Losee JE, ed. Craniofacial, Head and Neck Surgery and Pediatric Plastic Surgery. Philadel-phia: Elsevier; 2013:1223-1251.	26.	Kirschner REA, Losee JE. Lip adhesion. In: Losee J, Kirschner RE, eds. Comprehensive Cleft Care. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 2016:781-792.		This is the definitive textbook on pediatric plastic surgery that covers each aspect in depth.	27.	Hoffman WY. Cleft palate. In: Losee JE, ed. Craniofacial, Head and Neck Surgery and Pediatric Plastic Surgery. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2013:568-583.Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   202401/03/19   6:32 PM 2025PLASTIC AND RECONSTRUCTIVE SURGERYCHAPTER 45	28.	Moe KS, Murr AH, Wester ST. Orbital Fractures. Facial Plast Surg Clin North Am. 2018 May;26(2):237-251. doi: 10.1016/j.fsc.2017.12.007. Review. PubMed PMID:  29636153.	29.	Fattah AY. Craniofacial syndromes: genetics, embryology, and clinical relevance. In: Bentz ML, Bauer BS, Zuker RM, eds. Principles & Practice of Pediatric Plastic Surgery. Boca Raton: CRC Press; 2016:393-452.	30.	Patel PK, Kawamoto HK, Jr. Atypical craniofacial clefts. In: Bentz ML, Bauer BS, Zuker RM, eds. Principles & Prac-tice of Pediatric Plastic Surgery. Boca Raton: CRC Press; 2016:663-723.	31.	Tessier P. Anatomical classification facial, cranio-facial and latero-facial clefts. J Maxillofac Surg. 1976;4(2):69-92.	32.	Monasterio FO, Taylor JA. Major craniofacial clefts: case series and treatment philosophy. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2008;122(2):534-543.	33.	Forrest CR, Nguyen PD, Smith DM. Craniosynostosis. In: Bentz ML, Bauer BS, Zuker RM, eds. Principles & Practice of Pedi-atric Plastic Surgery. Boca Raton: CRC Press; 2016:595-647.	34.	Fearon JA. Evidence-based medicine: craniosynostosis. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2014;133(5):1261-1275.	35.	Persing JA. MOC-PS(SM) CME article: management consider-ations in the treatment of craniosynostosis. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2008;121(4 suppl):1-11.	36.	Taylor JA, Bartlett SP. What’s new in syndromic craniosynosto-sis surgery? Plast Reconstr Surg. 2017;140(1):82e-93e.	37.	Vaienti L, Soresina M, Menozzi A. Parascapular free flap and fat grafts: combined surgical methods in morphological resto-ration of hemifacial progressive atrophy. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2005;116(3):699-711.	38.	Evans KN, Sie KC, Hopper RA, Glass RP, Hing AV, Cunning-ham ML. Robin sequence: from diagnosis to development of an effective management plan. Pediatrics. 2011;127(5):936-948.	39.	Kirschner RE, Low DW, Randall P, et al. Surgical airway man-agement in Pierre Robin sequence: is there a role for tongue-lip adhesion? Cleft Palate Craniofac J. 2003;40(1):13-18.	40.	Overdiek A, Feifel H, Schaper J, Mayatepek E, Rosenbaum T.  Diagnostic delay of NF1 in hemifacial hypertrophy due to plexiform neurofibromas. Brain Dev. 2006;28(5):275-280.	41.	Ricalde P, Magliocca KR, Lee JS. Craniofacial fibrous dyspla-sia. Oral Maxillofac Surg Clin North Am. 2012;24(3):427-441.	42.	Mulliken JB, Glowacki J. Hemangiomas and vascular malfor-mations in infants and children: a classification based on endo-thelial characteristics. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1982;69(3):412-422.	43.	Greene AK, Phillips JH. Vascular anomalies. In: Bentz ML, Bauer BS, Zuker RM, eds. Principles & Practice of Pediatric Plastic Surgery. Boca Raton: CRC Press; 2016:199-230.	44.	Biswas A, Pan X, Meyer M, et al. Urinary excretion of microRNA-126 is a biomarker for hemangioma proliferation. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2017;139(6):1277e-1284e.	45.	Iacobas I, Burrows PE, Frieden IJ, et al. LUMBAR: association between cutaneous infantile hemangiomas of the lower body and regional congenital anomalies. J Pediatr. 2010;157(5): 795-801.e1-e7.	46.	Taylor CW, Horgan K, Dodwell D. Oncological aspects of breast reconstruction. Breast. 2005 Apr;14(2):118-30. Review. PubMed PMID: 15767181.	47.	Nicholas Zdenkowski, Butow P, Tesson S, Boyle F. A system-atic review of decision aids for patients making a decision about treatment for early breast cancer. Breast. 2016 Apr;26:31-45. doi: 10.1016/j.breast.2015.12.007. Epub 2016 Jan 8. Review. PubMed PMID: 27017240.	48.	Cho BC, McCready DR. Oncologic principles in breast recon-struction. Clin Plast Surg. 2007 Jan;34(1):1-13; abstract v. Review. PubMed PMID: 17307067.	49.	Jacob AG, Driscoll DJ, Shaughnessy WJ, Stanson AW, Clay RP, Gloviczki P. Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome: spectrum and man-agement. Mayo Clin Proc. 1998;73(1):28-36.	50.	Arneja JS, Gosain AK. Giant congenital melanocytic nevi. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2009;124(1 suppl):1e-13e.	51.	Arad E, Zuker RM. The shifting paradigm in the management of giant congenital melanocytic nevi: review and clinical appli-cations. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2014;133(2):367-376.	52.	Millard DR. Principlization of Plastic Surgery. 1st ed. Boston/Toronto: Little, Brown; 1986.	53.	Corcoran J, Bauer BS. Cutaneous lesions. In: Bentz ML, Bauer BS, Zuker RM, eds. Principles & Practice of Pediatric Plastic Surgery. Boca Raton: CRC Press; 2016:453-478.	54.	Bosse MJ et al. An analysis of outcomes of reconstruction or amputation after leg-threatening injuries. N Engl J Med. 2002;347(24):1924-1931.	55.	Gustilo RB, Merkow RL, Templeman D. The management of open fractures. J Bone Joint Surg. 1990;72(2):299-304.	56.	Crowley DJ, Kanakaris NK, Giannoudis PV. Debridement and wound closure of open fractures: the impact of the time factor on infection rates. Injury. 2007;38(8):879-889.	57.	Cho EH, Shammas RL, Carney MJ, et al. Muscle versus fascio-cutaneous free flaps in lower extremity traumatic reconstruc-tion: a multicenter outcomes analysis. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2018;141(1):191-199.	58.	Yazar S, Lin CH, Wei FC. One-stage reconstruction of compos-ite bone and soft-tissue defects in traumatic lower extremities. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2004;114(6):1457-1466.	59.	Gurney JK(1), Stanley J(2), York S(3), Rosenbaum D(4), Sar-fati D(2). Risk of lower limb amputation in a national preva-lent cohort of patients with diabetes. Diabetologia. 2018 Mar;61(3):626-635. doi: 10.1007/s00125-017-4488-8. Epub 2017 Nov 3.	60.	Wukich DK, Raspovic KM. What Role Does Function Play in Deciding on Limb Salvage versus Amputation in Patients With Diabetes? Plast Reconstr Surg. 2016 Sep;138(3 Suppl):188S-95S. doi: 10.1097/PRS.0000000000002713. Review. PubMed PMID: 27556759.	61.	Nelson JA, Disa JJ. Breast reconstruction and radiation therapy: an update. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2017;140:60S-68S.		Radiation therapy has an adverse effect on all forms of breast reconstruction. The need for radiation therapy affects the opti-mal timing and technique for breast reconstructive surgery. It is helpful for all surgeons caring for breast cancer patients to have an understanding of the issues involved, and this paper provides an excellent summary of the issues surrounding breast reconstruction and radiation therapy.	62.	Weichman KE, Matros E, Disa JJ. Reconstruction of peripelvic oncologic defects. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2017;140(4):601e-612e.		General surgeons often encounter problems in the perineum. This article offers an excellent summary of how to manage surgical problems in this region. It provides a review of anat-omy, the types of problems encountered, and appropriate local, regional, or free-flap options based on the location of the defect and donor-site characteristics.	63.	Cushing CA, Phillips LG. Evidence-based medicine: pres-sure sores. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2013;132(6):1720-1732.		Pressure sores are a common problem affecting surgical patients of all types, and it is important for all surgeons to understand how to prevent and treat them. This paper provides an excellent overview of the problem, with emphasis on risk factors, patho-physiology, classification, and treatment options. Most impor-tantly, it reviews steps for the prevention of pressure sores.64.	Edsberg LE, Black JM, Goldberg M, McNichol L, Moore L, Sieggreen M. Revised National Pressure Ulcer Advisory Panel pressure injury staging system: revised pressure injury staging system. J Wound Ostomy Continence Nurs. 2016;43(6):585-597.	65.	Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2017 National Diabetes Statistics Report, 2017. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/data/statistics/statistics-report.html. Accessed January 20, 2019.Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   202501/03/19   6:32 PM 2026SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	66.	Clemens MW, Attinger CE, Colen LB. Foot reconstruction. In: Mathes SJ, ed. Plastic Surgery. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2006:1403.	67.	Hinchliffe RJ, Andros G, Apelqvist J, et al. A systematic review of the effectiveness of revascularization of the ulcerated foot in patients with diabetes and peripheral arterial disease. Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2012;28(suppl 1):179-217.	68.	Johnson SK, Podratz KE, Dipboye RL, Gibbons E. Physi-cal attractiveness biases in ratings of employment suitability: tracking down the “beauty is beastly” effect. J Soc Psychol. 2010;150(3):301-318.	69.	Jacono A, Chastant RP, Dibelius G. Association of patient self-esteem with perceived outcome after face-lift surgery. JAMA Facial Plast Surg. 2016;18(1):42-46.	70.	Schwitzer JA, Sher SR, Fan KL, Scott AM, Gamble L, Baker SB. Assessing patient-reported satisfaction with appearance and quality of life following rhinoplasty using the FACE-Q appraisal scales. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2015;135(5):830e-837e.	71.	Papadopulos NA, Niehaus R, Keller E, et al. The psychologic and psychosocial impact of otoplasty on children and adults.  J Craniofac Surg. 2015;26(8):2309-2314.	72.	McGrath MH. The psychological safety of breast implant sur-gery. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2007;120(7 suppl 1):103S-109S.	73.	Papadopulos NA, Staffler V, Mirceva V, et al. Does abdomino-plasty have a positive influence on quality of life, self-esteem, and emotional stability? Plast Reconstr Surg. 2012;129(6):957e-962e.	74.	Shridharani SM, Magarakis M, Manson PN, Rodriguez ED. Psychology of plastic and reconstructive surgery: a systematic clinical review. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2010;126(6):2243-2251.	75.	American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. 5th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Association; 2013.Brunicardi_Ch45_p1967-p2026.indd   202601/03/19   6:32 PM
# Chunk 8948
Anesthesia for Surgical PatientsJunaid Nizamuddin and Michael O’Connor 46chapterBRIEF HISTORY OF ANESTHESIAThe discovery of anesthesia is one of the seminal American con-tributions to the world. Along with infection control and blood transfusion, anesthesia has enabled surgery to occupy its fundamental place in medicine. Before the advent of anes-thesia in the 1840s, many substances and methods had been tried in the search for pain relief and better operating conditions. Patients were typically restrained by several attendants, and only the most stoic could tolerate the screams heard in the oper-ating theater.BeginningsHorace Wells (1815–1848), a dentist, first pursued using nitrous oxide for the relief of pain in surgical procedures in 1844.1 After experimenting on himself, Wells attempted to demonstrate the analgesic effects of nitrous oxide for a dental procedure at Harvard Medical School in 1845. The public demonstration was a failure, at least partially, due to improper administration of the gas. Wells never recovered from his humiliating experience and eventually committed suicide. However, he does hold a place in history as the first person to recognize and use the only anesthetic from the 1800s that is still in use today—nitrous oxide.Ether DayWilliam Morton (1819–1868) was a dentist and partner of Horace Wells. After taking a course in anesthesia from Wells, Morton left the partnership in Hartford, Connecticut, and established himself in Boston. He continued his interest in anesthesia, but using diethyl ether instead of nitrous oxide. Ether proved a good choice. He practiced the administration of ether on a 11dog and then used it when extracting teeth from patients in his office. On October 16, 1846, Morton gave the first pub-lic demonstration of ether as an anesthetic for Johns Collins Warren, a distinguished surgeon and one of the founders of Massachusetts General Hospital. In attendance in the surgi-cal amphitheater were several surgeons, medical students, and a newspaper reporter. After induction of anesthesia, Warren successfully removed a vascular mass from the patient’s neck with no ill effects (Fig. 46-1). The description of this public demonstration of ether was published in the Boston Medical and Surgical Journal (now The New England Journal of Medicine).2 The stature of Warren lent considerable credence to the advent of surgical anesthesia. The news spread rapidly, and surgeons around the world were quick to adopt this new invention. Massachusetts General Hospital has restored and preserved the original amphi-theater where the demonstration took place, now called the Ether Dome. The description of the public demonstration of ether was voted as the most important article published in the history of The New England Journal of Medicine in its first 200 years.3The Modern EraAnesthesia has developed rapidly over the past century. Inhaled anesthetics, initially discovered fortuitously by observation, have been synthetically produced and remain the mainstay of anesthetic maintenance. The advent of the hollow syringe and needle and discovery of rapidly acting of intravenous anesthet-ics allowed for rapid induction of anesthesia. Development of endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation revolution-ized the delivery of inhaled anesthetics. The discovery of local anesthetics led to the development of peripheral nerve blocks Brief History of Anesthesia	2027Beginnings / 2027Ether Day / 2027The Modern Era / 2027Basic Pharmacology	2028Pharmacokinetics and  Pharmacodynamics / 2028Administration, Distribution, Metabolism, and Elimination / 2029Pharmacodynamics / 2029Potency, Efficacy, Lethal Dose, and Therapeutic Index / 2029Anesthetic Agents	2029Inhaled Anesthetics / 2029Local Anesthetics / 2031Neuromuscular Blockers / 2031Anesthetic Monitoring	2032Perioperative Evaluation and   Preparation	2033ASA Physical Status Assessment / 2034Airway Evaluation / 2034Cardiovascular Disease / 2034Pulmonary Disease / 2035Renal Disease / 2036Hepatic Disease / 2036Endocrine Disease / 2036Preoperative Fasting / 2036Patients With Advanced  Directives / 2036Risk Estimation / 2036Intraoperative Management	2036General Anesthesia / 2036Monitored Anesthesia Care / 2039Regional Anesthesia/Acute Pain / 2039Recovery And Complications	2039The Postanesthesia Care Unit / 2039Enhanced Recovery After Surgery Pathways / 2039Acute Postoperative Pain / 2039Malignant Hyperthermia / 2040Cardiovascular Complications / 2040Respiratory Failure / 2040Neurologic and Psychiatric  Complications / 2040Conclusion	2040Brunicardi_Ch46_p2027-p2044.indd   202701/03/19   11:03 AM 2028Figure 46-1. Robert Cutler Hinckley, The First Operation with Ether. (Reproduced with permission from Boston Medical Library in the Francis A. Countway Library of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts.)Key Points1	The discovery of anesthesia was one of the most important advances and has enabled surgery to occupy its fundamental place in medicine.2	Advances in anesthetic monitoring have made the admin-istration of anesthesia safer than ever. Types of cardiovas-cular monitors include arterial catheters, central venous and pulmonary artery catheters, and transesophageal echocardiography.3	A detailed preoperative evaluation should be performed on each patient when circumstances allow, with special atten-tion devoted to functional status. The American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association guidelines for pre-operative evaluation can guide workup.4	The American Society of Anesthesiologists has developed specific guidelines for preoperative fasting to mitigate the risk of aspiration of gastric contents; individual patients may need more stringent preoperative fasting periods and/or rapid sequence inductions.5	The American Society of Anesthesiologists has developed an algorithm for management of the difficult airway. Nota-bly, in patients in whom both intubation and ventilation are impossible, the algorithm calls for placement of a laryngeal mask airway as the next step.and spinal anesthesia. Concurrently, physiologic monitoring techniques have advanced to make the administration of anes-thesia safer than ever.Initially, anesthesia was given by medical students, nurses, and dentists, but eventually became a physician specialty of medicine of its own. The American Board of Anesthesiology was formed in 1938. Over the past 50 years, anesthesiology has increasingly specialized and also spread outside the operating room into critical care, pain management, and perioperative medicine.BASIC PHARMACOLOGYPharmacokinetics and PharmacodynamicsPharmacodynamics is the study of what a drug does to the body; pharmacokinetics is the study of what the body does to a drug. Brunicardi_Ch46_p2027-p2044.indd   202801/03/19   11:04 AM 2029ANESTHESIA FOR SURGICAL PATIENTSCHAPTER 46The conduct of anesthesia is predicated upon the pharmacody-namics and pharmacokinetics of the drugs used.4Administration, Distribution, Metabolism, and EliminationAdministration of a drug affects its pharmacokinetics, as there will be different rates of drug entry into the circulation. For example, medications administered via the oral route are subject to first-pass effect of the portal circulation; this can be bypassed with the IV, nasal, or sublingual route. Other routes of drug administration include transdermal, intramuscular, subcutaneous, or inhalation.Distribution is the delivery of a drug from the systemic circulation to the tissues. Once a drug has entered the systemic circulation, the rate at which it will enter the tissues depends on the blood flow into that tissue, as well as the molecular size of the drug, lipid solubility, capillary permeability, polarity, plasma protein and tissue binding, and volume of distribution, the fluid volume in which the drug distributes. The distribution or redis-tribution of drugs can play a critical role in shaping their clinical use. For instance, clinically, the effect of propofol is terminated by its redistribution into fatty tissues and not metabolism of the drug.Metabolism is the permanent breakdown of original compounds into smaller metabolites. Drug elimination varies widely; some drugs are excreted unchanged by the body, some decompose via plasma enzymes, and some are degraded in the liver. Many drugs rely on multiple pathways for metabolism and elimination (i.e., metabolized by liver enzymes and then excreted by the kidney).Context-sensitive half time is the time required for blood concentrations of a drug to decrease by 50% after its discontinu-ation, which is determined by the interaction of the duration of administration, distribution and accumulation, and metabolism and excretion. Fig. 46-2 illustrates the context sensitive half-time for commonly used anesthetics and opioids.4PharmacodynamicsPharmacodynamics, or how the plasma concentration of a drug translates into its effect on the body, depends on biologic vari-ability, receptor physiology, and clinical evaluations of the actual drug. An agonist is a drug that causes a response (acti-vates a receptor). A full agonist produces the full receptor/tissue response, and a partial agonist elicits less than the maximum response induced by a full agonist. An antagonist is a drug that blocks agonist mediated responses. An additive effect means that a second drug acts with the first drug and will produce an effect that is equal to the algebraic summation of both drugs. A synergistic effect means that two drugs interact to produce an effect that is greater than expected from the two drugs’ alge-braic summation. Tolerance, desensitization, or tachyphylaxis occurs when a larger than expected dose is required to produce a response. Tolerance usually results from chronic drug exposure, either through enzyme induction (e.g., alcohol) or depletion of neurotransmitters (e.g., cocaine).4Potency, Efficacy, Lethal Dose, and Therapeutic IndexThe potency of a drug is the dose required to produce a given effect, such as pain relief or a change in heart rate. The aver-age sensitivity to a particular drug can be expressed through the calculation of the effective dose; ED50 would have the desired effect in 50% of the general population. The efficacy of any therapeutic agent is its power to produce a desired effect. Two drugs may have the same efficacy but different potencies. Dose-response curves show the relationship between the dose of a drug administered (or the resulting plasma concentration) and the pharmacologic effect of the drug. The lethal dose (LD50) of a drug produces death in 50% of animals to which it is given, and the toxic dose (TD50) is the dose that elicits a toxicity in 50% of humans to which it is given. The ratio of the toxic dose and effective dose, TD50/ED50, is the therapeutic index. A drug with a high therapeutic index is safer than a drug with a low or narrow therapeutic index.4ANESTHETIC AGENTSInhaled AnestheticsInhaled anesthetics have greatly advanced since the original dem-onstration with ether. Modern agents provide faster induction and emergence and provide all of the major characteristics of general anesthesia: unconsciousness, analgesia, and muscle relaxation.Minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) is a measure of anesthetic potency. It is the ED50 of an inhaled agent (i.e., the dose required to prevent movement in response to skin incision in 50% of patients). The higher the MAC, the less potent an agent is. Advantages and disadvantages of inhaled anesthetics are shown in Table 46-1.5Nitrous Oxide. Nitrous oxide has a low solubility and is a weak anesthetic agent, but it has the most rapid onset and offset. Because 600500400300Duration of infusion (min)2001000020406080100120140Time required for plasmalevels to drop by 50% (min)AEtomidateMidazolamPropofolSufentanilFentanylRemifentanil600500400300Duration of infusion (min)2001000020406080100120140Time required for plasmalevels to drop by 50% (min)BFigure 46-2. Context-sensitive half time for commonly used anesthetics (A) and opioids (B). The vertical axis represents the half-time, or the time required for plasma concentrations of the drug to drop by 50%. The horizontal axis represents the duration of a continuous infusion. (Reproduced with permission from Longnecker DE, Mackey SC, Newman MF, et al: Anesthesiology, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Education; 2018.)Brunicardi_Ch46_p2027-p2044.indd   202901/03/19   11:04 AM 2030SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 46-1Advantages and disadvantages of inhaled anestheticsANESTHETICADVANTAGESDISADVANTAGESNitrous OxideNo odor, taste, or pungencyRapid uptake and eliminationAnalgesic effectMinimal cardiovascular depressionMinimal biotransformationInexpensiveAirspace expansionIncreased nausea and vomitingInhibits methionine synthaseEnvironmental pollutantSupports combustionIsofluraneGood muscle relaxationBronchodilationStable heart rateInexpensiveSlow uptake and eliminationSevoflurane Rapid uptake and eliminationNot pungentBreakdown to compound A in circuitMore expensive than isofluraneDesflurane  Rapid uptake and eliminationVery low biotransformationAirway irritantRequires electric/heated vaporizerExpensiveData from Longnecker DE, Brown DL, Newman MF, et al: Anesthesiology, 2nd ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Ediucation; 2012.its MAC is 104%, it must be combined with other agents to pro-vide general anesthesia. A recent randomized controlled trial demonstrated that use of 70% nitrous oxide, given as part of a general anesthetic, did not increase the risk of death or major adverse cardiovascular events.6 Nitrous oxide has been shown to increase the rate of postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV).Volatile Agents. The volatile inhaled anesthetics are gener-ally more soluble in blood than nitrous oxide, are more potent, and thus require lower inspired concentrations. Currently, iso-flurane, sevoflurane, and desflurane are the agents that are most commonly used. Older agents, including halothane, which was associated with hepatotoxicity, are no longer widely used.Isoflurane is the most inexpensive and widely available of the agents currently used. Sevoflurane has relatively rapid uptake and elimination. It is also not pungent and is therefore commonly used for inhalational induction. Desflurane has the most rapid uptake and elimination of the three most commonly used volatile agents. It is also the most expensive, requires a heated-electric vaporizer, and is an airway irritant. All of the volatile inhalational agents as well as the depolarizing neu-romuscular blocker succinylcholine are triggering agents for malignant hyperthermia.5Intravenous Agents. Intravenous agents are used to produce unconsciousness, analgesia, muscle relaxation, and/or amnesia. They include barbiturates, propofol, benzodiazepines, ketamine, etomidate, opioids, and nonopioid analgesics.7Barbiturates Barbiturates used in anesthesia include thio-pental and methohexital. These drugs act as agonists at the γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptor, which inhibit excitatory synaptic transmission. Clinically, they produce a rapid, smooth induction of general anesthesia and wear off quickly. They cause hypotension and myocardial depression in a dose-dependent manner. Barbiturates are seldom used in modern anesthesia, with the exception of methohexital, which is still commonly used dur-ing electroconvulsive therapy.Propofol Propofol is an alkylated phenol that inhibits synaptic transmission through its effects at the GABA receptor. It has a short duration, rapid recovery, and low incidence of nausea and vomiting. Consequently, it is the induction agent of choice. Propofol causes hypotension in a dose-dependent manner, and it should be used cautiously in patients with cardiac disease or hypovolemia. Continuous infusion of propofol is commonly used for sedation in the intensive care unit setting. Continuous infusions of propofol are also used for moderate-to-deep seda-tion for many procedures and are also commonly incorporated into total intravenous anesthetics (TIVA), most commonly for neurosurgical procedures. Propofol is an irritant and frequently causes pain on injection. Propofol also has anticonvulsant properties.Benzodiazepines Benzodiazepines are most commonly used to reduce anxiety and produce amnesia. Midazolam, which has a rapid onset and relatively short duration of action, is by far the most commonly used benzodiazepine in anesthesia. Lorazepam and diazepam are still sometimes used as anxiolytics or amnes-tics. Benzodiazepines act as agonists at the GABAA receptor. They produce sedation, vasodilation, and respiratory depres-sion in a dose-dependent manner. They should be used with caution when given with opioids because a synergistic reaction causing respiratory depression is common. Oral midazolam is commonly used for anxiolysis in children. Benzodiazepines are excellent anticonvulsants and only rarely cause allergic reac-tions. Benzodiazepines should be administered cautiously in older adult patients due to the heightened risk of delayed awak-ening and postoperative delirium.Etomidate Etomidate is an imidazole derivative used for IV induction. Its rapid and almost complete hydrolysis to inactive metabolites results in rapid offset. Like the IV agents mentioned earlier, etomidate acts on the GABA receptor. Etomidate has little direct effect on cardiac output and heart rate; induction doses thus cause less reduction in blood pressure than seen with propofol. Etomidate is associated with pain on injection. Nota-bly, etomidate causes adrenal suppression,8,9 although whether a single dose of etomidate given at induction causes clinically relevant adrenal suppression remains controversial.10-13Dexmedetomidine Dexmedetomidine is an IV α2-adrenergic agonist, administered as a continuous infusion, and has both sedative and analgesic properties. It is useful for sedation in an intensive care unit setting and as an adjunct to general anes-thesia, especially as part of a total intravenous anesthetic. Side effects include hypotension and bradycardia in a dose-dependent  manner. It does not cause respiratory depression at commonly used doses and is thus particularly useful for procedural seda-tion for patients at high risk of respiratory complications. It is synergistic with opiates and thus can be used to facilitate an opiate-sparing anesthetic.14,15Ketamine Ketamine differs from the aforementioned IV agents in that it produces analgesia as well as amnesia. Its principal Brunicardi_Ch46_p2027-p2044.indd   203001/03/19   11:04 AM 2031ANESTHESIA FOR SURGICAL PATIENTSCHAPTER 46action is on the N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor. It is a dissociative anesthetic, producing a cataleptic gaze with nystag-mus. Patients may experience delirium and hallucinations while regaining consciousness. The addition of benzodiazepines has been shown to reduce the incidence of these side effects. Ket-amine typically increases heart rate and blood pressure, which may cause myocardial ischemia in patients with coronary dis-ease. Ketamine is often used in acutely hypovolemic patients to maintain blood pressure via sympathetic stimulation. Impor-tantly, ketamine is a direct myocardial depressant in patients who are catecholamine depleted, and it can produce profound hypotension and low cardiac output in such patients. Ketamine is a bronchodilator and is sometimes used as an induction agent in asthmatic patients. It can increase intracranial pressure and intraocular pressure, and thus its use in patients with trauma to the head and neck is controversial. Ketamine can be admin-istered intramuscularly to induce anesthesia in patients who would not tolerate an inhalational induction or IV placement, such as patients with developmental delay.Opioid Analgesics The commonly used opioids—morphine, codeine, hydromorphone, meperidine, and the fentanyl-based compounds—act on µ-receptors in the brain and spinal cord. The main side effects of opioids are euphoria, sedation, con-stipation, and respiratory depression, which also are mediated by µ-receptors in a dose-dependent fashion. Although opioids have differing potencies required for effective analgesia, equi-analgesic doses of opioids result in equal degrees of respiratory depression. Thus, there is no completely safe opioid analgesic, and no reason to suppose that one opioid is safer than another. The synthetic opioid fentanyl and its analogues sufentanil, alfentanil, and remifentanil are used in the operating room. They differ pharmacokinetically in their lipid solubility, tissue binding, and elimination profiles and thus have differing poten-cies and durations of action. Fentanyl, which is highly lipid-soluble, accumulates in tissues and exhibits a steep increase in its context-sensitive half-time with infusions. Remifentanil is remarkable in that it undergoes rapid hydrolysis that is unaf-fected by sex, age, weight, or renal or hepatic function, even after prolonged infusion. Alfentanil and sufentanil are seldom used, having largely been replaced by remifentanil in the mod-ern era. Morphine and meperidine have active metabolites that are renally excreted and thus should be used with caution or avoided in patients with renal insufficiency.Naloxone, an opioid antagonist, can be used to rapidly reverse the effects of opioids, and is commonly used to rescue patients from opioid-associated respiratory depression. Nalox-one is poorly absorbed orally and is also often combined with oral opioids to prevent abuse by injection use of the combined drug. Methylnaltrexone and alvimopan are both peripheral opi-oid antagonists and can reverse the opioid side effect of consti-pation without affecting analgesia.16,17Nonopioid Analgesics Ketorolac is a parenteral nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) that produces analgesia by reducing prostaglandin formation via inhibition of the enzyme cyclooxygenase (COX). Intraoperative use of ketorolac reduces postoperative need for opioids. Ketorolac along with other NSAIDs can cause major side effects, including bleeding, plate-let dysfunction, and acute kidney injury and should be used cau-tiously in elderly patients or patients with renal insufficiency.Acetaminophen is an analgesic drug and antipyretic; its site of action is in the central nervous system. Use of acetaminophen has been shown to reduce opioid requirements postoperatively. Long available in an orally administered form as well as a rec-tal suppository, an intravenous formulation of acetaminophen is now available which has become widely used in the postopera-tive setting.18Lidocaine is a local anesthetic commonly used for local infiltration, nerve blocks, or epidural infusions. Recently, intra-venous infusions of lidocaine have been shown to be beneficial in the perioperative period. A large meta-analysis of 42 trials with 2800 patients showed that intravenous lidocaine infusions modestly reduced postoperative pain, reduced opioid require-ments, and shortened time to recovery of bowel function for patients undergoing abdominal surgery.19Local AnestheticsLocal anesthetics act on sodium channels to block transmission of neural impulses. They are divided into two groups based on their chemical structure: the amides and the esters. In general, the amides are metabolized in the liver, and the esters are metabo-lized by plasma cholinesterases, which yield metabolites with slightly higher allergic potential than the amides. Amides include lidocaine, bupivacaine, mepivicaine, prilocaine, and ropivicaine. Lidocaine has a fairly rapid onset and is shorter acting. Ropivic-aine and bupivacaine have a slower onset and are longer lasting. All three are commonly used for local infiltration and regional nerve blocks. Amides are 95% metabolized in the liver, with a minority excreted unchanged in the kidneys. Prilocaine and mepivicaine are seldom used in anesthesia at present. Esters include cocaine, procaine, chloroprocaine, tetracaine, and ben-zocaine. Esters are hydrolyzed in the blood by plasma esterases.When used in large quantities over a short period of time, local anesthetic levels can rise in the blood and cause central nervous system (CNS) toxicity and cardiovascular toxicity. Symptoms of CNS toxicity include restlessness, tinnitus, and slurred speech and can progress to seizures and coma. Car-diovascular toxicity may manifest as hypotension, conduction abnormalities leading to heart block, and ventricular arrhyth-mias, and it may lead to cardiac arrest. The type of local anes-thetic used affects the risk of developing toxicity; bupivicaine is most often associated with cardiovascular toxicity. Other risk factors for local anesthetic systemic toxicity include cumulative dose, site of injection, and preexisting renal, hepatic, or cardiac disease in the patient.20 In addition to treating symptomatology, local anesthetic systemic toxicity can be treated with intrave-nous administration of lipid emulsion.21Neuromuscular BlockersWhile general anesthetics provide muscle relaxation, they usu-ally do so at a much deeper anesthetic depth than required for amnesia and hypnosis. For this reason, neuromuscular blockers are commonly administered to attain adequate relaxation at lev-els of anesthesia sufficient to produce hypnosis, amnesia, and analgesia. Neuromuscular blockers block conduction at the neu-romuscular junction of skeletal muscle.22The two categories of neuromuscular blockers in use are depolarizing and nondepolarizing blockers. Character-istics of neuromuscular blockers currently used are summa-rized in Table 46-2. Succinylcholine is the only depolarizing agent used currently. It binds to acetylcholine receptors on the postjunctional membrane in the neuromuscular junction and causes depolarization of muscle fibers. The rapid onset (less than 60 seconds) and rapid offset (5–8 minutes) of succinyl-choline make it ideal for management of the airway in certain Brunicardi_Ch46_p2027-p2044.indd   203101/03/19   11:04 AM 2032SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 46-2Commonly used neuromuscular blockersAGENTTYPEINTUBATING DOSECONSIDERATIONSSuccinylcholineDepolarizer1 mg/kgCan cause severe hyperkalemiaContraindicated in burns, denervating conditionsExcessive or prolonged use can lead to phase II blockRocuroniumNondepolarizer0.6 mg/kg1.2 mg/kg for RSIPrimarily hepatic metabolismCan be reversed with suggamadex or acetylcholinesterase inhibitorVecuroniumNondepolarizer0.1 mg/kgPrimarily hepatic metabolismCan be reversed with suggamadex or acetylcholinesterase inhibitorCisatracuriumNondepolarizer0.1 mg/kgHoffman degradationCan be reversed with an acetylcholinesterase inhibitorRSI = rapid sequence inductionsituations.23 Succinylcholine has several adverse effects includ-ing transient hyperkalemia, which can be severe or even fatal for patients with burns and denervating injuries. Succinylcholine can cause bradycardia, which can be severe in children. It is also associated with transient increases in intracranial and intraocular pressure. The depolarization caused by succinylcholine causes skeletal muscles to fasciculate, which in turn, can result in post-operative myalgias. Succinylcholine is a known trigger of malig-nant hyperthermia in susceptible individuals. Succinylcholine is broken down by psuedocholinesterase; patients who are homo-zygous for pseudocholinestrase deficiency will have prolonged neuromuscular blockade, typically lasting for several hours.There are several nondepolarizing neuromuscular block-ing agents in clinical use. Long-acting agents including pan-curonium are no longer widely used. Intermediate-duration neuromuscular blockers include the steroid-based drugs vecuronium and rocuronium, which are metabolized by the liver as well as by the kidney, and the benzylisoquinolone drugs atra-curium and cisatracurium, which undergo breakdown in plasma known as Hofmann elimination. All nondepolarizers reversibly bind to the postsynaptic terminal in the neuromuscular junc-tion and prevent acetylcholine from depolarizing the muscle. Muscle blockade occurs without fasciculation and without the subsequent side effects seen with succinylcholine. Neuromus-cular blockade with nondepolarizing drugs is typically reversed. Failure to adequately reverse neuromuscular blockade is associ-ated with an increased risk of perioperative respiratory failure and death. Reversal agents include acetylcholinesterase inhibi-tors including neostigmine, edrophonium, or pyridostigmine that are given concurrently with muscarinic-anticholinergics, almost always atropine or glycopyrrolate. Recently, suggama-dex, a chelating agent, has been approved for use as a reversal agent for reversal of neuromuscular blockade by the steroid paralytics rocuronium and vecuronium. When given at a very high dose, suggamadex can even rapidly reverse the effect of an intubating dose of a steroid neuromuscular blocker.ANESTHETIC MONITORINGOver the past several decades, advancement in anesthetic moni-toring has made administration of anesthesia safer than ever. The goal of anesthetic monitoring is to continuously moni-tor the patients’ cardiovascular status, pulmonary status, respiratory physiology, anesthetic depth, concentration of gases administered, and temperature. The American Society of Anesthesiology (ASA) has established standards for basic intra-operative monitoring that are listed in Table 46-3. Types of anesthetic monitoring are listed in Table 46-4.Cardiovascular monitoring includes continuous ECG monitoring as well as blood pressure monitoring, which is to be measured and recorded at least every 5 minutes. Blood pressure monitoring can be done using noninvasive blood pressure cuff measurements or invasively using an arterial catheter. Other car-diovascular monitors include monitoring of central venous pres-sure, pulmonary artery pressure, and cardiac output. In high-risk 22Table 46-3American Society of Anesthesiologists standards for basic intraoperative monitoringStandardsStandard 1: Qualified anesthesia personnel shall be present in the room throughout the conduct of all general anesthetics and regional and monitored anesthesia care.Standard 2: Oxygenation, ventilation, circulation, and temperature shall be continually evaluated Oxygenation  Inspired gas oxygen analyzer  Pulse oximetry  Monitoring of patient clinical status Ventilation  Auscultation  Observation of the patient  Observation of reservoir bag  End-tidal carbon dioxide analysis Circulation  Continuous electrocardiogram display  Heart rate and blood pressure recorded at least every   5 minutes  Evaluation of circulation: auscultation of heart sounds,   palpation of pulse, pulse oximetry, blood pressure monitoring with noninvasive means or intra-arterial catheter pressure measurement Temperature  Core and/or skin temperatureReproduced with permission from Longnecker DE, Mackey SC, Newman MF, et al: Anesthesiology, 3rd ed. New York, NY:  McGraw-Hill Education; 2018.Brunicardi_Ch46_p2027-p2044.indd   203201/03/19   11:04 AM 2033ANESTHESIA FOR SURGICAL PATIENTSCHAPTER 46Table 46-4Types of anesthesia monitors and their propertiesTYPE OF MONITORWHAT IS MEASUREDINVASIVENESSPOTENTIAL FOR COMPLICATIONSPhysical examinationHeart sounds, breath sounds, pulse, color, mental status, etcNoninvasive–Pulse oximetryArterial oxygen saturationNoninvasive–Arterial catheterBlood pressure, acid/base statusInvasive++Noninvasive blood pressure measurementBlood pressureNoninvasive+/–ElectrocardiographyCardiac rhythm, rate, ST segmentsNoninvasive–CapnographyVentilatory, circulatory statusNoninvasive–Electroenceophalogram, bispectral index, etcBrain function, depth of anesthesiaNoninvasive+/–Temperature probeBody temperatureNoninvasive to invasive+/–Central venous pressure, pulmonary artery pressureCardiac function, volume statusInvasive+++Transesophageal echocardiogramCardiac function, volume statusInvasive+++Adapted with permission from Longnecker DE, Mackey SC, Newman MF, et al: Anesthesiology, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Education; 2018.anesthetics such as liver transplantation and cardiac surgery, transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) is employed to moni-tor myocardial function and volume status. Intraoperative TEE can also be used to guide surgeons when performing complex cardiac surgeries, including cardiac valve replacements.Monitoring of oxygenation and ventilation includes use of continuous pulse oximetry, monitoring of exhaled end-tidal carbon dioxide (ETCO2), and monitoring of fraction of inspired oxygen. End tidal CO2 monitoring also provides important infor-mation about systemic perfusion. During cardiac arrest, there is no delivery of CO2 to the lungs, and the end-tidal CO2 is thus very low or zero; a sudden spike in end tidal CO2 during cardio-pulmonary resuscitation correlates with return of spontaneous circulation.24 Modern ventilators also measure peak and plateau inspiratory airway pressure and minute ventilation. Adequacy of oxygenation and ventilation can also be confirmed by arterial blood gas analysis.Temperature monitoring is performed using a temperature probe, usually inserted in the esophagus or nasopharynx. Core body temperature can be measured with temperature sensing Foley catheters. Temperature can also be measured at the skin.Several monitors exist that measure depth of anesthesia, including the bispectral index (BIS) monitor and the SedLine monitor. While these monitors were designed to prevent aware-ness under anesthesia, a multicenter trial of over 6000 patients showed that titrating anesthetic concentration to the BIS moni-tor was not superior to titrating anesthetic depth to end-tidal anesthetic concentration with goal MAC greater than 0.7.25Peripheral nerve stimulators should be used to moni-tor depth of neuromuscular blockade. A train-of-four monitor delivers four successive stimuli over 2 seconds. Presence of four twitches without fade with a ratio of the height of the first twitch to the height of the fourth twitch at least 0.9 suggests adequate reversal of neuromuscular blockade.26 The presence of one or two twitches (absence of the last two or three) is generally suffi-cient for the relaxation required for almost any kind of abdomi-nal or thoracic operation.PERIOPERATIVE EVALUATION AND PREPARATIONThe ASA has adopted basic standards for the evaluation of patients before surgery. These standards require the anesthe-siologist to evaluate the medical status of the patient, develop a plan of anesthetic care, and discuss this plan with the patient and/or the patient’s legal guardian.A preoperative evaluation includes an appropriately detailed medical history, current drug therapy, appropriate physical examination, and review of laboratory and specific testing results. Based on these findings, the anesthesiologist may conclude that a patient is not in optimal medical condition to undergo elective surgery. These findings and opinions are then discussed with the patient’s primary physician or surgeon, and the surgery may be delayed (or cancelled) until the patient’s medical condition is further evaluated and optimized.The medical history obtained at the preoperative visit should include the patient’s previous exposure and experi-ence with anesthesia, as well as any family history of problems with anesthesia. History of atopy is an important aspect of this evaluation in that it may predispose patients to form antibodies against antigens that may be represented by agents administered during the perioperative period. Concurrent medications should be fully evaluated when circumstances allow, and adverse inter-actions with agents administered during the perioperative period need to be considered. A review of the function of major organ systems should also be performed. The physical examination is targeted primarily at the central nervous system, cardiovascular system, lungs, and airway.Laboratory testing should be based on the patient’s con-dition and the proposed procedure. Otherwise healthy patients usually do not need laboratory testing for minor procedures. Preoperative testing may be necessitated by findings on physi-cal examination; for example, an electrocardiogram should be obtained if an irregular heart rhythm is noted, and an echo-cardiogram may be indicated if a new murmur is observed on Brunicardi_Ch46_p2027-p2044.indd   203301/03/19   11:04 AM 2034SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIauscultation. Chest imaging or pulmonary function testing may be indicated if abnormalities are noted on pulmonary examina-tion and may be pertinent to the administration of the anesthetic or the recovery from anesthesia and surgery. Urine pregnancy testing is typically performed on the day of surgery in women of childbearing age.ASA Physical Status AssessmentThe ASA classification system is a scale used to risk-stratify patients for anesthesia and surgery. The scale, ranging from physical status I to VI, is shown in Table 46-5. Patients under-going emergent surgery are denoted by an “E”; for example, an otherwise healthy patient undergoing an appendectomy for appendicitis would be classified as ASA IE. Mortality has shown to increase with increasing ASA physical status, and it has been shown to be higher for patients undergoing emergency surgery.27Airway EvaluationAirway examination can identify most patients in whom management of the airway and conventional endotracheal CLASS 1: Soft palate, fauces, uvula, pillarsCLASS 2: Soft palate, fauces, portion of uvulaCLASS 3: Soft palate, base of uvulaCLASS 4: Hard palate onlyMALLAMPATI CLASSIFICATIONCLASS 1CLASS 2CLASS 3CLASS 4Figure 46-3. The Mallampati classification.Table 46-5American Society of Anesthesiologists physical status classificationASA PHYSICAL STATUSDESCRIPTIONIA healthy patient without systemic diseaseIIA patient with mild systemic diseaseIIIA patient with severe systemic diseaseIVA patient with severe systemic disease that is a constant threat to lifeVA moribund patient not expected to survive without the operationVIA declared brain-dead patient whose organs are being removed for donationData from American Society of Anesthesiologists: ASA Physical Status Classification System Developed. ASA House of Delegates/Executive Committee. Amended: October 15, 2014.intubation may be difficult. It is vitally important to recognize such patients before administering medications that induce apnea. The Mallampati classification (Fig. 46-3) is based on the structures visualized with maximal mouth opening and tongue protrusion in the sitting position.28 Patients with higher Mallampati classification, in combination with other airway abnormalities, can be difficult to intubate. Other predictors of difficult intubation include short neck, immobility of the neck,29 a large overbite, a small mandible, or the inability to shift the lower incisors in front of the upper incisors. The thyromental distance, the distance from the thyroid cartilage to the tip of the chin should be greater than 6 cm; thyromental distance of less than 6 cm has been associated with difficult intubation.30 Obesity is also a risk factor for difficult intubation, and neck circumference has been identified as a risk factor for both dif-ficult intubation as well as difficult mask ventilation.31Cardiovascular DiseaseCardiac risk is widely regarded as the most important risk associated with anesthesia and surgery, and it has been the focus of an enormous amount of scholarship over the past four decades. The revised cardiac risk index incorporates six patient and surgical factors to assess a patient’s risk of major adverse cardiac events in the perioperative period: history of ischemic heart disease, congestive heart failure, cerebrovascular dis-ease, diabetes requiring insulin, chronic kidney disease with baseline creatinine greater than 2, and whether the surgery is in a high-risk area, namely major vascular, intraperitoneal, or intrathoracic. In 2014, the American College of Cardiology and the American Heart Association published guidelines for perioperative workup and management of patients with cardio-vascular disease; a simplified version is seen in Fig. 46-4 . Notably, this guideline stresses the importance of func-tional status in determining need for further evaluation; patients with good functional status can typically proceed to surgery without additional evaluation. Functional capacity is measured in metabolic equivalents (METs), with patients unable to attain 4 METs considered to have poor functional status. Activities representing 4 METs including walking up a flight of stairs, climbing a hill, or walking on level ground at 3 to 4 miles per hour.3233Brunicardi_Ch46_p2027-p2044.indd   203401/03/19   11:04 AM 2035ANESTHESIA FOR SURGICAL PATIENTSCHAPTER 46These recent guidelines have minimized the role of routine screening. Preoperative electrocardiograms and stress testing are unnecessary for asymptomatic patients undergoing low-risk surgery.Special attention is required for patients with coronary stents. Elective surgery should be delayed a stent has been inserted, which allows time for it to stabilize and the risk of in-stent thrombosis to decrease. The ACC/AHA guidelines rec-ommend delaying elective surgery for 30 days after bare metal stent placement and for 1 year after drug eluting stent place-ment. Dual antiplatelet therapy should be continued for urgent or emergent procedures that take place before the minimum recommended waiting period.32 For semi-elective surgeries in patients with drug-eluting stents, where the risk of delaying sur-gery is greater than the risk of in-stent thrombosis, ACC/AHA guidelines recommend surgery be delayed for 180 days.Current recommendation is that β-blockers and statins should be continued in patients who are on them chronically. β-Blockers may be started in the perioperative period for patients with multiple RCRI risk factors or who are at intermediate or high risk for myocardial ischemia. If started in the perioperative period, β-blockers should be started long enough before sur-gery to ascertain their safety, and not on the day of surgery.32,33 Recent large randomized trials have demonstrated excess risk of mortality and stroke simultaneously with decreased risk of myocardial events in moderateand high-risk patients who are newly treated with β-blockers in the periprocedural setting.34,35Implanted cardiac devices including pacemakers and implantable cardioverter-defibrillators also have important peri-operative implications. A 2011 ASA practice advisory stressed the importance of determining whether electromagnetic interfer-ence is likely to occur during the planned procedure, determin-ing the current function and necessity of the implanted device, determining whether reprogramming or temporary disabling of the device is advantageous, having alternative therapy available for the time that the device is unavailable, and restoring device function in the postoperative period.36Pulmonary DiseaseChronic pulmonary disease is an increasingly recognized cause of morbidity and mortality in surgical patients. For patients with asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, exercise toler-ance and the frequency and severity of exacerbations should be evaluated. A focused history, including prior admissions and intubations for exacerbations, should be obtained. Treatment with bronchodilators in the perioperative setting is appropri-ate, although there is no literature to either guide this care or to document a benefit from it. Most inhaled anesthetics act as bronchodilators.37 Desflurane can be an airway irritant, and it is often avoided in patients with reactive airway disease.The incidence of obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) has risen with the incidence of obesity. In 2014 the ASA published guide-lines for perioperative management of patients with OSA. These guidelines highlight the importance of identifying patients with obstructive sleep apnea during preoperative evaluation and obtaining a sleep study if appropriate. They also highlight the importance of the development of protocols by anesthesiologists and surgeons to manage OSA in the perioperative setting. There is consensus that these patients should not be extubated until they are completely awake, and that they should be treated with ACC/AHA algorithm of cardiac evaluation for noncardiac surgeryProceed to surgery with medical riskreduction and perioperative surveillancePostpone surgery until stabilized or correctedNo clinicalpredictorsProceed with surgeryProceed with surgery˜1 clinicalpredictorsIntermediate riskor vascular surgeryProceed with surgeryProceed to surgery with heart ratecontrol or consider noninvasive testingif it will change managementEmergency surgeryActive cardiac conditions• Unstable coronary syndromes (unstable or severe angina, recent MI)• Decompensated heart failure (HF; new onset, NYHA class IV)• Significant arrhythmias (Mobitz ll or third-degree heart block,   supraventricular tachycardia or atrial fibrillation with rapid ventricular   rate (>100), symptomatic ventricular arrhythmia or bradycardia, new  ventricular tachycardia)• Severe valvular disease (severe aortic or mitral stenosis)Step 1Step 2Low-risk surgery (risk <1%)• Superficial or endoscopic• Cataract, breast• Ambulatory surgeryStep 3Functional capacityGood; ≥4 METS (can walk flight of stairs without symptoms)Step 4Clinical predictors• Ischemic heart disease• Compensated or prior HF• Cerebrovascular disease (stroke, TIA)• Diabetes mellitus• Renal insufficiencyStep 5Figure 46-4. Simplified cardiac evaluation for noncardiac surgery. (Data from Eagle KA, Berger PB, Calkins H, et al: ACC/AHA guideline update for perioperative cardiovascular evaluation for noncardiac surgery–executive summary: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines (Committee to Update the 1996 Guidelines on Perioperative Cardiovascular Evaluation for Noncardiac Surgery), J Am Coll Cardiol. 2002 Feb 6;39(3):542-553.)Brunicardi_Ch46_p2027-p2044.indd   203501/03/19   11:04 AM 2036SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IInoninvasive positive pressure ventilation in the postoperative period as indicated.38Renal DiseaseManagement of anesthesia in patients with chronic renal insuf-ficiency requires close attention to perioperative fluid man-agement and acid-base and electrolyte homeostasis. Doses of opioids and neuromuscular agents are typically reduced and dosing intervals increased to compensate for decreased renal excretion. Cisatracurium is often chosen as the muscle relax-ant in patients with severe renal insufficiency because its elimi-nation is unchanged by renal failure. Sugammadex, a reversal agent for steroid-based neuromuscular blockers, is not currently recommended for use in patients with advanced chronic kidney disease or end-stage renal disease.Hepatic DiseaseHepatic dysfunction has many causes, and it can compel significant changes in anesthetic care. First, anesthetic agents metabolized in the liver can accumulate in these patients and may have a longer duration of effect. To mitigate this, short-acting agents are strongly preferred in these patients. Hypoalbuminemia can paradoxically increase the free plasma levels of drugs, which can also exagger-ate their effects. In patients with substantial ascites, high intra-abdominal pressure may increase the risk of passive gastric reflux, and thus many such patients are managed as if they have a full stomach, regardless of how long they have been NPO. In patients with significant hepatocellular dysfunction and/or portal hyperten-sion, the combination of thrombocytopenia and coagulation factor deficiency not only increase the risk of bleeding associated with surgery, they also are relative or absolute contraindications to a variety of anesthetic techniques, such as subarachnoid blocks and epidural anesthesia. Presence of esophageal varices increases the risk of gastric tubes and transesophageal echocardiography.Endocrine DiseasePerioperative management of the diabetic patient can be espe-cially challenging. A hemoglobin A1c level should be obtained if a recent level is not available, as an increased A1c level is asso-ciated with an increase in perioperative complications including wound infections.39-41 Several institutions have implemented pro-tocols for glucose management for diabetic patients undergoing surgery, although recommendations differ on appropriate target glucose levels.39,42,43 Perhaps the most important thing for a prac-titioner to know and remember is that the difference between type 1 and type 2 diabetes is important, and that these two differ-ent diseases require different approaches to their management. In general, patients with type 2 diabetes have a lower risk of becom-ing hypoglycemic, tend to have higher blood sugars at baseline, and tolerate higher levels of serum glucose without significant acute hazard. Patients with type 1 diabetes, who are deficient in insulin production and thus require insulin administration to pre-vent ketosis, are far more likely to become hypoglycemic when subjected to stress, and they are also at risk for developing keto-acidosis with hyperglycemia. Patients with type 1 diabetes merit more careful monitoring of their blood sugars in the periopera-tive setting than patients with type 2 diabetes.44-47Preoperative FastingThe ASA has developed specific guidelines for preoperative fasting to mitigate the risk of aspiration of gastric contents. Table 46-6 shows guidelines for preoperative food and fluid intake for elective procedures. Individual patients may need lengthier fasting times than the guidelines indicate. Notably, a rapid sequence induction and intubation should be considered in patients who are at higher risk for aspiration such as those with very symptomatic gastroesophageal reflux, achala-sia, gastroparesis, or dysmotility, regardless of fasting status.48Patients With Advanced DirectivesPatients with do not resuscitate (DNR) and/or do not intu-bate (DNI) orders present a unique challenge. Patients or their power-of-attorney may choose to rescind these directives in the perioperative period, maintain them as originally ordered, or modify them to allow for a limited resuscitation. Both the ASA and the American College of Surgeons recommend that preoperative discussions with the patient and their family clarify the patient’s wishes, and both societies emphasize that policies that mandate uniform enforcement or disregarding of all DNR orders take away patients’ right to self-determination.49,50Risk EstimationSeveral risk calculators have been developed to estimate peri-operative morbidity and mortality. The American College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement Program (NSQIP) surgical risk calculator allows for estimation of risk of eight different adverse outcomes, including mortality.51 The Society of Thoracic Surgeons risk calculator estimates risk of morbidity and mortality after cardiac surgical procedures.52 While such risk estimators can provide widely differing esti-mates or may be inaccurate in certain situations,53 they are still invaluable aids for discussions with patients and their families about high-risk surgery.INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENTGeneral AnesthesiaGeneral anesthesia remains the cornerstone of anesthesia prac-tice; many surgical procedures cannot be done under regional techniques or monitored anesthesia care with sedation.The induction of general anesthesia can precipitate cata-strophic anesthetic complications. Many different techniques can be used to induce general anesthesia, each with significant advantages and disadvantages.Intravenous induction, used primarily in adults, quickly produces unconsciousness, and depending on the agent used, apnea as well. Propofol, the most common induction agent currently used, can cause hypotension due to its myocardial depressing and vasodilatory properties. Hypertension and 4Table 46-6Guidelines for food and fluid intake before elective surgeryTIME BEFORE SURGERYFOOD OR FLUID INTAKEUp to 8 hoursFood and fluids as desiredUp to 6 hoursaLight meal, infant formulaUp to 4 hoursBreast milkUp to 2 hoursClear liquids onlyaLight meal refers to a limited amount of easily digestible food, such as toast or crackers. Individual patients may need lengthier fasting times than these guidelines indicate.Adapted with permission from Longnecker DE, Mackey SC, Newman MF, et al: Anesthesiology, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Education; 2018.Brunicardi_Ch46_p2027-p2044.indd   203601/03/19   11:04 AM 2037ANESTHESIA FOR SURGICAL PATIENTSCHAPTER 46tachycardia commonly occur during laryngoscopy or other sig-nificant airway stimulation.The goal of a rapid sequence induction (RSI) is to achieve secure protection of the airway with a cuffed endotracheal tube without ever mask ventilating a patient. It is intended to prevent vomiting and aspiration, and it is routinely employed in patients at heightened risk for aspiration. There are no randomized con-trolled trials that demonstrate any kind of outcome benefit of rapid sequence induction in such patients, but it is nevertheless routinely employed for this purpose in the United States.Pediatric patients are often not amenable to preoperative IV catheter placement. Hence, inhalation induction of anesthe-sia is commonly used in children, with IV placement occur-ring after induction. Even among children, however, patients at heightened risk for aspiration or with a full stomach may be best managed with preoperative IV placement and an IV induction. Patients with developmental delay may not be amenable to pre-operative IV placement or inhalational induction of anesthesia. In such patients, intramuscular administration of an agent such as ketamine is often required to induce anesthesia.Airway Management. Most anesthesiologists prefer to secure the airway of a patient undergoing general anesthesia, and this is usually accomplished immediately after anesthesia has been induced. The airway may be managed in several ways, includ-ing by face mask, with a laryngeal mask airway (LMA), or, most definitively, by endotracheal intubation with a cuffed endotracheal tube. Nasal and oral airways can help establish a patent airway in a patient being ventilated with a mask by creat-ing an air passage behind the tongue.The LMA is a cuffed supraglottic oral airway that is inserted through the oropharynx and ideally positioned just above the glottis opening. It is passed blindly, and the inflated cuff creates a seal around the laryngeal inlet. An LMA does not protect against aspiration and should generally not be used in patients with a high risk of aspiration.Tracheal intubation requires a skilled operator and proper equipment. In most elective anesthetics, attempts to intubate the trachea are facilitated by the administration of muscle relaxants in a patient who is already under a general anesthetic. Intubation is typically performed under direct visualization with a laryn-goscope, watching the endotracheal tube pass through the vocal cords into the trachea. To obtain a direct line of sight, the patient is placed in the sniffing position. The neck is flexed at the lower cervical spine and extended at the atlanto-occipital joint. This flexion and extension are amplified during laryngoscopy. Laryn-goscope blades can be curved (Macintosh) or straight (Miller) blades. Laryngoscopic views are typically reported in a classi-fication system developed by Cormack and Lehane (Fig. 46-5).Management of the Difficult Airway. Some patients have physical characteristics or a history suggestive of difficulty in placing an endotracheal tube. A short neck, limited neck mobil-ity, small interincisor distance, short thyromental distance, and high Mallampati classes may all represent a challenge to Figure 46-5. Laryngoscopic views obtained per Cormack and Lehane.Figure 46-6. Video laryngoscopy with the GlideScope.endotracheal intubation. Several tools have been developed to assist in management of the difficult airway.The Glidescope, a video laryngoscope, allows for visualiza-tion of the larynx on a video screen (Fig. 46-6). Having more of a bend than a standard curved Macintosh blade, it can be advanta-geous for visualizing and intubating the trachea in patients with large tongues or relatively anterior glottis openings. Placement of the endotracheal tube once the larynx has been visualized can still be challenging. A recent study of ICU patients requiring intubation showed that video laryngoscopy did not improve first-pass orotracheal intubation success rate and was associated with higher rates of severe life-threatening complications.54The intubating laryngeal mask airway (ILMA) is an advanced form of LMA designed to maintain a patent airway and facilitate tracheal intubation. The ILMA can be placed in anticipated or unexpectedly difficult airways as an airway res-cue device and as a guide for intubating the trachea. The device itself is substantially more rigid than other laryngeal mask airways, and includes a handle which the operator can use to displace the opening of the device. A specially manufactured endotracheal tube can be passed blindly through the ILMA into the larynx, or the ILMA can be used as a conduit for a flex-ible fiberoptic scope. Experience with airway management in general and the use of this device in particular is essential for its effective use in emergency situations; operators with little experience will enjoy little success with this device.The flexible fiberoptic intubation bronchoscope is the gold standard for difficult intubation. It is indicated in difficult or compromised airways where neck extension is not desirable or in cases with risk of dental damage. The flexible bronchoscope allows excellent visualization of the airway and glottic open-ing. This technique can be used for oral and nasal intubation, for awake or asleep intubation, and for intubation in the awake, spontaneously ventilating patient whose airway has been treated with topical local anesthetic.The ASA has developed an algorithm for management of the difficult airway (Fig. 46-7).55 Notably, in patients in whom Brunicardi_Ch46_p2027-p2044.indd   203701/03/19   11:04 AM 2038SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 46-7. ASA difficult airway algorithm. (Reproduced with permission from Apfelbaum JL, Hagberg CA, Caplan RA, et al: Practice guidelines for management of the difficult airway: an updated report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Management of the Difficult Airway, Anesthesiology. 2013 Feb;118(2):251-270.)Brunicardi_Ch46_p2027-p2044.indd   203801/03/19   11:04 AM 2039ANESTHESIA FOR SURGICAL PATIENTSCHAPTER 46both intubation and ventilation are impossible, the algorithm calls for placement of an LMA with ventilation attempted through the LMA.Monitored Anesthesia CareMonitored anesthesia care (MAC) is when a patient under-goes a procedure under local anesthesia under the care of an anesthesiologist who can provide sedation as indicated. Seda-tion is administered to a level that allows the patient to main-tain airway reflexes and breath spontaneously. Advantages of MAC anesthesia include reduced invasiveness, as the airway is not manipulated, and faster recovery. ASA standard moni-tors must be used, including capnography, which allows for rapid detection of apnea or hypoventilation. In some instances, most commonly for gastroenterology procedures, patients are administered an intravenous anesthetic that is often classified as a MAC, even though the patient is so deeply anesthetized that they have no significant response to significant airway stimula-tion; the airway is monitored by the anesthesia provider and secured if necessary.Regional Anesthesia/Acute PainRegional anesthesia allows for selective blockade and is an excellent anesthetic option for several different types of pro-cedures. Regional anesthesia can also provide excellent post-operative pain control. Regional techniques include neuraxial blockade, including spinal and epidural anesthetics, peripheral nerve blocks, and truncal blocks.Spinal anesthetics (also referred to as subarachnoid blocks) can be used for lower extremity, lower abdominal, pelvic, and urologic and gynecologic procedures. A small caliber needle (typically 25-gauge or smaller) is inserted into the intrathecal space in the cauda aquina and below the conus medularis, and a small volume of local anesthetic is injected. Duration and level of the block in the spinal cord is affected by the anesthetic used, the dose employed, and baricity of solution injected. Complica-tions can include hypotension, bradycardia, postdural puncture headache, injury to local structures or nerves, and hematoma formation. The American Society of Regional Anesthesia pub-lishes guidelines regarding safe intervals to perform neuraxial anesthetics after the administration of anticoagulant and anti-platelet agents.An epidural catheter can be used as a primary anesthetic for a procedure, or it can be placed preoperatively and used in conjunction with a general anesthetic for postoperative pain control. Epidural catheters can be placed in the thoracic or lumbar spine and can remain in place for days after surgery. A dilute local anesthetic and/or opioid is administered through the catheter to provide analgesia. Complications of epidural anesthesia are similar to that of spinal anesthesia. In addition to improved pain control, benefits of epidural anesthesia include reduced pulmonary complications56 and decreased duration of postoperative ileus.57Peripheral nerve blockade can also be used to provide sur-gical anesthesia as well as postoperative analgesia, particularly for surgeries of the upper or lower extremities. The nerve or plexus of interest is located with ultrasound and/or peripheral nerve stimulator, and local anesthetic is injected around the nerve. Single-shot nerve blocks allow for surgical anesthesia and immediate postoperative analgesia and can last for several hours. Flexible catheters can also be placed in proximity to nerves to allow for continuous infusion and blockade that can continue for several days. Complications of peripheral nerve blocks include injury to nerves or nearby structures and local anesthetic systemic toxicity.Recently, truncal blocks have become more commonly and widely used for the treatment of postoperative pain. Trun-cal blocks include the transversus abdominis plane (TAP) block, the rectus sheath block, the pectoral nerve block, and the serra-tus anterior plane block. These truncal blocks are usually done under ultrasound guidance with local anesthetic injected in the appropriate plane. Truncal blocks are typically performed as part of a multimodal approach to postoperative pain. Limited evidence suggests that use of truncal blocks decreases postop-erative opioid requirements.58,59RECOVERY AND COMPLICATIONSThe Postanesthesia Care UnitThe advent of the modern postanesthesia care unit represents a major advance in the safety of perioperative care, as the close monitoring that occurs there can prevent or expedite the man-agement of a variety of serious complications. Ventilation, oxygenation, hemodynamics, temperature, nausea, and pain are closely monitored in the PACU, with close attention also given to urine output, ongoing bleeding, and drainage. To be dis-charge eligible, patients should have returned to their baseline mental status, be oxygenating and ventilating adequately, have adequate pain control, and have stable vital signs. There are multiple scoring systems that can be used assess suitability for discharge from PACU.60-62 Postoperative hemorrhage, hyper-tension or hypotension, myocardial ischemia, arrhythmias, and altered mental status commonly manifest in the postoperative care unit. Postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) occurs in 20% to 30% of surgical cases,63 and it is a common cause of increased PACU length of stay and increased cost of PACU stay.64 For this reason, many or most patients undergoing gen-eral anesthesia receive prophylactic antiemetics.Enhanced Recovery After Surgery PathwaysEnhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) pathways are multi-modal perioperative care pathways designed to hasten recovery after elective surgery. These pathways may include preoperative education and counseling, preoperative optimization, limiting preoperative bowel preparation, limiting preoperative fasting, providing multimodal analgesia (including regional anesthesia) as appropriate, minimizing intraoperative fluid administration, and early mobilization. ERAS pathways have been shown to reduce duration of hospitalization and reduce cost of periopera-tive care.65-67Acute Postoperative PainThe management of postoperative pain has changed dra-matically in the modern era, with multimodal approaches and regional techniques reducing the use of opiates. Regardless, opioids remain the mainstay of intraoperative and postoperative analgesia, especially for larger and more invasive procedures. Patients with chronic pain or opiate tolerance can present a unique challenge in the perioperative period, and they can ben-efit from regional and multimodal approaches. Such patients may benefit from early involvement of an acute pain medicine specialist.For the past decade, pain has been described as the fifth vital sign, and physicians have been strongly encouraged to 5Brunicardi_Ch46_p2027-p2044.indd   203901/03/19   11:04 AM 2040SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIaggressively treat pain in their patients. Generally speaking, physicians sought to accomplish this goal through the more liberal use of opiates. Opioid prescription has thus soared in recent years. Some studies suggest that 3% to 7% of surgical patients prescribed opioids in the postoperative period continue to use them for a prolonged period after surgery,68,69 suggesting that opioid abuse often begins in the postoperative period. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has recently declared that prescription drug abuse is an epidemic.70 Physi-cians and surgeons will have to continue to seek the fine line between adequate pain control and prescribing patterns that enable dependence.Malignant HyperthermiaMalignant hyperthermia (MH) is a hereditary, life-threatening, hypermetabolic disorder, developing during or after receiving general anesthesia. The clinical incidence of MH ranges from 1:10000 to 1:250,000.71 A genetic predisposition and expo-sure to one or more triggering agents are necessary to evoke MH. Triggering agents include all volatile anesthetics (e.g., isoflurane, sevoflurane, and desflurane) and the depolarizing neuromuscular blocker succinylcholine. Volatile anesthetics and/or succinylcholine cause a rise in the myoplasmic cal-cium concentration in susceptible patients, causing persistent muscle contraction, the production of large quantities of car-bon dioxide and lactic acid, and a relentless increase in body temperature.MH is often an autosomal dominant disorder associated with several gene loci, predominantly the ryanodine receptor gene RYR1. MH can be diagnosed with the caffeine-contracture halothane test, which requires a muscle biopsy. Genetic testing can be helpful after an episode of MH. There is no simple, reli-able blood screening test yet available for diagnosis.The classic MH crisis entails a hypermetabolic state with tachycardia and increased end-tidal CO2. Relentless muscle con-traction causes respiratory and metabolic acidosis, as well as rhabdomyolysis, arrhythmias, hyperkalemia, and even sudden cardiac arrest. Hyperthermia typically occurs after the episode is well under way. Treatment must be aggressive and begin as soon as a case of MH is suspected. Volatile anesthetics should be stopped immediately and dantrolene given at an initial dose of 2.5 mg/kg intravenously. The national MH hotline should be contacted for help in managing any patient with MH. Patients should be monitored in the intensive care setting for possible recrudescence of MH.Cardiovascular ComplicationsHemodynamic perturbations are a common in the periopera-tive period. Arrhythmias may begin before, during, and after an anesthetic, and are particularly common after cardiothoracic and esophageal surgery. Hypotension may be due to anemia, hypovolemia, myocardial ischemia or dysfunction, or other less common events such as pulmonary embolism and ana-phylactic reactions. Hypertension is also common, particularly when antihypertensive regimens are altered in the perioperative period.Respiratory FailureRespiratory insufficiency and failure occur frequently in the postoperative period. Respiratory depression can occur as a con-sequence of residual neuromuscular blockade, residual inhaled anesthetics, or opioids. Mechanical airway obstruction can be ameliorated by rescue maneuvers, or insertion of an oral or nasal airway. It is imperative to evaluate and treat anesthesia-related causes of respiratory insufficiency. The opioid antagonist nalox-one can be given for opioid related respiratory insufficiency, and an additional reversal agent can be given for residual neuromus-cular weakness. Respiratory failure can reasonably be managed with noninvasive positive pressure ventilation in many cases72; patients who fail this or are unlikely to benefit from it should be intubated. High-flow nasal cannula is increasingly being used for postextubation respiratory failure,73 and several studies have demonstrated its benefit in postoperative patients.74-77Neurologic and Psychiatric ComplicationsPerioperative neurologic and psychiatric complications include stroke, both ischemic and hemorrhagic, postoperative delirium, and postoperative cognitive dysfunction. Treatment of periop-erative stroke may be difficult as initiation of anticoagulation or thrombolysis may not be safe after surgery. Postoperative delirium is common and transient. Treatment includes reorienta-tion, treatment of pain, workup for metabolic, hemodynamic, or respiratory perturbations, and consideration of the side effects of the anesthetics and analgesics administered. Antipsychotics such as haloperidol can be useful in the treatment of postopera-tive delirium.78 Postoperative cognitive dysfunction (POCD) is a decline in cognitive function that may last days or may persist for months. Risk factors for persistent POCD include advanced age, history of prior stroke, and lower educational level.79 POCD rates among older adult patients have been shown to be as high as 40% at hospital discharge and 12% 3 months after surgery. Notably, a causal link has not been established between administration of anesthesia and development of POCD, sug-gesting that it may be the physiologic stress of the perioperative experience that may lead to a decline in cognitive function in such patients.80CONCLUSIONThe practice of anesthesia has improved dramatically over the past century. Advances in training, pharmacology, anesthesia equipment, and monitoring have not only made anesthesia dra-matically safer but have also allowed ever sicker patients to benefit from surgery.REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Haridas RP. Horace wells’ demonstration of nitrous oxide in Boston. Anesthesiology. 2013;119:1014-1022.	2.	Bigelow HJ. insensibility during surgical operations produced by inhalation. Boston Med Surg J. 1846;35:309-317. This arti-cle, published in the predecessor to the New England Journal of Medicine, described the first public demonstration of ether at the Massachusetts General Hospital.	3.	Buckley K. The most important article in NEJM history. 2012. Available at: https://blogs.nejm.org/now/index.php/explore-the-history-of-medical-discoveries/2012/01/26/. Accessed August 20, 2018.	4.	Kim TK OS, Johnson KB. Basic Principles of pharmacology. In: Miller RD, Eriksson LI, Fleisher LA, Wiener-Kronish JP, Cohen N, Young WL, eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015:590-613.	5.	Forman SA, Benkwitz C. Pharmacology of inhalational anesthetics. In: Longnecker DE, Brown DL, Newman MF, Zapol WM, eds. Anesthesiology. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2012:596-616.Brunicardi_Ch46_p2027-p2044.indd   204001/03/19   11:04 AM 2041ANESTHESIA FOR SURGICAL PATIENTSCHAPTER 46	6.	Myles PS, Leslie K, Chan MT, et al. The safety of addition of nitrous oxide to general anaesthesia in at-risk patients hav-ing major non-cardiac surgery (ENIGMA-II): a randomised, single-blind trial. Lancet (London, England). 2014;384: 1446-1454. This randomized, controlled trial demonstrated the safety of a largely nitrous-oxide based general anesthetic technique.	7.	Dershwitz M RC. Pharmacology of intravenous anesthetics. In: Longnecker DE, Brown DL, Newman MF, Zapol WM, eds. Anesthesiology. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2012:687-702.	8.	Wagner RL, White PF, Kan PB, et al. Inhibition of adrenal steroidogenesis by the anesthetic etomidate. N Engl J Med. 1984;310:1415-1421.	9.	Annane D, Sebille V, Charpentier C, et al. Effect of treat-ment with low doses of hydrocortisone and fludrocortisone on mortality in patients with septic shock. JAMA. 2002;288: 862-871.	10.	McPhee LC, Badawi O, Fraser GL, et al. Single-dose etomidate is not associated with increased mortality in ICU patients with sepsis: analysis of a large electronic ICU database. Crit Care Med. 2013;41:774-783.	11.	Absalom A, Pledger D, Kong A. Adrenocortical function in critically ill patients 24 h after a single dose of etomidate. Anaesthesia. 1999;54:861-867.	12.	Hohl CM, Kelly-Smith CH, Yeung TC, et al. The effect of a bolus dose of etomidate on cortisol levels, mortality, and health services utilization: a systematic review. Ann Emerg Med. 2010;56:105-113.e105.	13.	Mozanski M, Tomaszewski D, Rybicki Z, et al. Etomidate, but not thiopental, decreases serum cortisol concentration in mor-bidly obese patients. A randomized controlled trial. Anaesthe-siol Intensive Ther. 2016;48:7-12.	14.	Su S, Ren C, Zhang H, et al. The Opioid-sparing effect of perioperative dexmedetomidine plus sufentanil infusion dur-ing neurosurgery: a retrospective study. Front Pharmacol. 2016;7:407.	15.	Jessen Lundorf L, Korvenius Nedergaard H, Moller AM. Peri-operative dexmedetomidine for acute pain after abdominal sur-gery in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016;2:Cd010358.	16.	Rosow CE, Dershwitz M. Pharmacology of opioid anesthetics. In: Longnecker DE, Brown DL, Newman MF, Zapol WM, eds. Anesthesiology. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2012:703-724.	17.	Kraft M, MacLaren R, Du W, et al. Alvimopan (Entereg) for the management of postoperative ileus in patients undergoing bowel resection. Pharm Therapeut. 2010;35:44-49.	18.	Chen L MJ, Mao J. Nonopioid pain medications, In: Miller RD, Eriksson LI, Fleisher LA, Wiener-Kronish JP, Cohen N, Young WL, eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015:915-918.	19.	Weibel S, Jokinen J, Pace NL, et al.. Efficacy and safety of intravenous lidocaine for postoperative analgesia and recovery after surgery: a systematic review with trial sequential analysis. Br J Anaesth. 2016;116:770-783.	20.	Christie LE, Picard J, Weinberg GL. Local anaesthetic systemic toxicity. BJA Educ. 2015;15:136-142.	21.	Heavner JE. Pharmacology of local anesthetics. In: Longnecker DE, Brown DL, Newman MF, Zapol WM, eds. Anesthesiology. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2012:767-782.	22.	Naguib M, Lien C, Meistelman C. Pharmacology of neuromus-cular blocking drugs. In: Miller RD, Eriksson LI, Fleisher LA, Wiener-Kronish JP, Cohen N, Young WL, eds. Miller’s Anes-thesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015:958-994.	23.	Naguib M, Samarkandi AH, El-Din ME, et al. The dose of succinylcholine required for excellent endotracheal intubating conditions. Anesth Analg. 2006;102:151-155.	24.	Kodali BS, Urman RD. Capnography during cardiopulmonary resuscitation: current evidence and future directions. J Emerg Trauma Shock. 2014;7:332-340. This article reviews the impor-tance of capnography during cardiopulmonary resuscitation.	25.	Avidan MS, Jacobsohn E, Glick D, et al. Prevention of intraoperative awareness in a high-risk surgical population. N Engl J Med. 2011;365:591-600. This landmark study dem-onstrated no reduction of intraoperative awareness rates with use of the bispectral index monitor over monitoring anesthetic gas concentration.	26.	Lien CA, Kopman AF. Current recommendations for monitor-ing depth of neuromuscular blockade. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 2014;27:616-622.	27.	Hopkins TJ, Raghunathan K, Barbeito A, et al. Associations between ASA physical status and postoperative mortality at 48 h: a contemporary dataset analysis compared to a historical cohort. Perioper Med (London, England). 2016;5:29.	28.	Mallampati SR, Gatt SP, Gugino LD, et al. A clinical sign to predict difficult tracheal intubation: a prospective study. Can Anaesth Soc J. 1985;32:429-434. Dr. Mallampati’s land-mark study set the standard for preoperative airway exami-nation, and the classification system described assists with prediction of difficult intubation.	29.	Crosby ET. Airway management in adults after cervical spine trauma. Anesthesiology. 2006;104:1293-1318.	30.	Shiga T, Wajima Z, Inoue T, et al. Predicting difficult intuba-tion in apparently normal patients: a meta-analysis of bedside screening test performance. Anesthesiology. 2005;103:429-437.	31.	Riad W, Vaez MN, Raveendran R, et al. Neck circumference as a predictor of difficult intubation and difficult mask ventilation in morbidly obese patients: a prospective observational study. Eur J Anaesthesiol. 2016;33:244-249.	32.	Fleisher LA, Fleischmann KE, Auerbach AD, et al. 2014 ACC/AHA guideline on perioperative cardiovascular evaluation and management of patients undergoing noncardiac surgery: executive summary: a report of the American College of  Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2014;130:2215-2245. The ACC/AHA guidelines have set the standard for preoperative cardiovascular evaluation and management for patients undergoing noncardiac surgery.	33.	London MJ, Hur K, Schwartz GG, et al. Association of peri-operative beta-blockade with mortality and cardiovascu-lar morbidity following major noncardiac surgery. JAMA. 2013;309:1704-1713.	34.	Blessberger H, Kammler J, Domanovits H, et al. Periopera-tive beta-blockers for preventing surgery-related mortality and morbidity. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014;Cd004476.	35.	Devereaux PJ, Yang H, Yusuf S, et al. Effects of extended-release metoprolol succinate in patients undergoing non-cardiac surgery (POISE trial): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet (London, England). 2008;371:1839-1847.	36.	American Society of Anesthesiologists. Practice advisory for the perioperative management of patients with cardiac implantable electronic devices: pacemakers and implantable cardioverter-defibrillators: an updated report by the American Society of  Anesthesiologists task force on perioperative management of patients with cardiac implantable electronic devices. Anesthesiology. 2011;114:247-261.	37.	Mutlu GM, Factor P, Schwartz DE, et al. Severe status asthmat-icus: management with permissive hypercapnia and inhalation anesthesia. Crit Care Med. 2002;30:477-480.	38.	American Society of Anesthesiologists. Practice guidelines for the perioperative management of patients with obstructive sleep apnea: an updated report by the American Society of Anesthesi-ologists task force on perioperative management of patients with obstructive sleep apnea. Anesthesiology. 2014;120:268-286.	39.	Stryker LS, Abdel MP, Morrey ME, et al. Elevated postop-erative blood glucose and preoperative hemoglobin A1C are Brunicardi_Ch46_p2027-p2044.indd   204101/03/19   11:04 AM 2042SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIassociated with increased wound complications following total joint arthroplasty. J Bone Joint Surg. 2013;95:808-814, s801-s802.	40.	Alserius T, Anderson RE, Hammar N, et al. Elevated glycosyl-ated haemoglobin (HbA1c) is a risk marker in coronary artery bypass surgery. Scand Cardiovasc J. 2008;42:392-398.	41.	Halkos ME, Puskas JD, Lattouf OM, et al. Elevated preopera-tive hemoglobin A1c level is predictive of adverse events after coronary artery bypass surgery. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2008;136:631-640.	42.	Dhatariya K, Levy N, Kilvert A, et al. NHS Diabetes guideline for the perioperative management of the adult patient with dia-betes. Diabet Med. 2012;29:420-433.	43.	Joshi GP, Chung F, Vann MA, et al. Society for Ambulatory Anesthesia consensus statement on perioperative blood glucose management in diabetic patients undergoing ambulatory sur-gery. Anesth Analg. 2010;111:1378-1387.	44.	Sudhakaran S, Surani SR. Guidelines for perioperative manage-ment of the diabetic patient. Surg Res Pract. 2015;2015:284063.	45.	Sebranek JJ, Lugli AK, Coursin DB. Glycaemic control in the perioperative period. Br J Anaesth. 2013;111(suppl 1):i18-i34.	46.	Duncan AE. Hyperglycemia and perioperative glucose man-agement. Curr Pharm Des. 2012;18:6195-6203.	47.	Lipshutz AKM, Gropper MA. Perioperative glycemic control: an evidence-based review. Anesthesiology. 2009;110:408-421.	48.	American Society of Anesthesiologists. Practice guidelines for preoperative fasting and the use of pharmacologic agents to reduce the risk of pulmonary aspiration: application to healthy patients undergoing elective procedures: an updated report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists com-mittee on standards and practice parameters. Anesthesiology. 2011;114:495-511.	49.	American College of Surgeons. Statement on advance direc-tives by patients: “do not resuscitate” in the operating room. Bull Am Coll Surg. 2014;99:42-43.	50.	American Society of Anesthesiologists. Ethical guidelines for the anesthesia care of patients with do-not-resuscitate orders or other directives that limit treatment. Available at: https://www .asahq.org/resources/ethics-and-professionalism. Accessed August 20, 2018.	51.	Bilimoria KY, Liu Y, Paruch JL, et al. Development and evalu-ation of the universal ACS NSQIP surgical risk calculator: a decision aid and informed consent tool for patients and sur-geons. J Am Coll Surg. 2013;217:833-842.e831-833.	52.	Prins C, De Villiers Jonker I, Smit FE, et al. Cardiac surgery risk-stratification models. Cardiovasc J Africa. 2012;23:160-164.	53.	Johnson C, Campwala I, Gupta S. Examining the validity of the ACS-NSQIP Risk Calculator in plastic surgery: lack of input specificity, outcome variability and imprecise risk calculations. J Invest Med. 2017;65:722-725.	54.	Lascarrou JB, Boisrame-Helms J, Bailly A, et al. Video laryngoscopy vs direct laryngoscopy on successful first-pass orotracheal intubation among ICU patients: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2017;317:483-493. This recent study showed no difference in rates of successful first-pass intubation between direct laryngoscopy and video laryngoscopy.	55.	Apfelbaum JL, Hagberg CA, Caplan RA, et al. Prac-tice guidelines for management of the difficult airwayan updated report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists task force on management of the difficult airway. Anesthesi-ology. 2013;118:251-270. The ASA Difficult Airway Algorithm, last updated in 2013, provides guidelines for management of patients with expected or unexpected difficult airways.	56.	Popping DM, Elia N, Marret E, et al. Protective effects of epi-dural analgesia on pulmonary complications after abdominal and thoracic surgery: a meta-analysis. Arch Surg. (Chicago, IL 1960). 2008;143:990-999; discussion 1000.	57.	Manion SC, Brennan TJ. Thoracic epidural analgesia and acute pain management. Anesthesiology. 2011;115:181-188.	58.	Bashandy GMN, Elkholy AHH. Reducing postoperative opioid consumption by adding an ultrasound-guided rectus sheath block to multimodal analgesia for abdominal cancer surgery with midline incision. Anesthesiol Pain Med. 2014; 4:e18263.	59.	Ris F, Findlay JM, Hompes R, et al. Addition of transversus abdominis plane block to patient controlled analgesia for lapa-roscopic high anterior resection improves analgesia, reduces opioid requirement and expedites recovery of bowel function. Ann R Coll Surg Engl. 2014;96:579-585.	60.	Palumbo P, Tellan G, Perotti B, et al. Modified PADSS (post anaesthetic discharge scoring system) for monitoring outpa-tients discharge. Ann Ital Chir. 2013;84:661-665.	61.	Phillips NM, Street M, Kent B, et al. Post-anaesthetic discharge scoring criteria: key findings from a systematic review. Int J Evid Based Healthc. 2013;11:275-284.	62.	Phillips NM, Haesler E, Street M, et al. Post-anaesthetic dis-charge scoring criteria: a systematic review. JBI Libr Syst Rev. 2011;9:1679-1713.	63.	Watcha MF, White PF. Postoperative nausea and vomit-ing. Its etiology, treatment, and prevention. Anesthesiology. 1992;77:162-184.	64.	Habib AS, Chen YT, Taguchi A, et al. Postoperative nausea and vomiting following inpatient surgeries in a teaching hospital: a retrospective database analysis. Curr Med Res Opin. 2006;22: 1093-1099.	65.	Eskicioglu C, Forbes SS, Aarts MA, et al. Enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) programs for patients having colorectal surgery: a meta-analysis of randomized trials. J Gastrointest Surg. 2009;13:2321-2329.	66.	Sammour T, Zargar-Shoshtari K, Bhat A, et al. A programme of enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) is a cost-effective intervention in elective colonic surgery. N Z Med J. 2010; 123:61-70.	67.	Reurings JC, Spanjersberg WR, Oostvogel HJ, et al. A prospec-tive cohort study to investigate cost-minimisation, of Traditional open, open fAst track recovery and laParoscopic fASt track mul-timodal management, for surgical patients with colon carcinomas (TAPAS study). BMC Surg. 2010;10:18.	68.	Carroll I, Barelka P, Wang CK, et al. A pilot cohort study of the determinants of longitudinal opioid use after surgery. Anesth Analg. 2012;115:694-702.	69.	Clarke H, Soneji N, Ko DT, et al. Rates and risk factors for pro-longed opioid use after major surgery: population based cohort study. BMJ. 2014;348:g1251.	70.	CDC grand rounds: prescription drug overdoses—a U.S. epi-demic. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2012;61:10-13.	71.	Rosenberg H, Pollock N, Schiemann A, et al. Malignant hyper-thermia: a review. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2015;10:93.	72.	Jaber S, Lescot T, Futier E, et al. Effect of noninvasive ventila-tion on tracheal reintubation among patients with hypoxemic respiratory failure following abdominal surgery: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2016;315:1345-1353.	73.	Hernandez G, Vaquero C, Gonzalez P, et al. Effect of postextu-bation high-flow nasal cannula vs conventional oxygen therapy on reintubation in low-risk patients: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2016;315:1354-1361.	74.	Corley A, Bull T, Spooner AJ, et al. Direct extubation onto high-flow nasal cannulae post-cardiac surgery versus standard treatment in patients with a BMI >/=30: a randomised con-trolled trial. Intensive Care Med. 2015;41:887-894.	75.	Ansari BM, Hogan MP, Collier TJ, et al. A randomized con-trolled trial of high-flow nasal oxygen (optiflow) as part of an enhanced recovery program after lung resection surgery. Ann Thorac Surg. 2016;101:459-464.Brunicardi_Ch46_p2027-p2044.indd   204201/03/19   11:04 AM 2043ANESTHESIA FOR SURGICAL PATIENTSCHAPTER 46	76.	Parke R, McGuinness S, Dixon R, et al. Open-label, phase II study of routine high-flow nasal oxygen therapy in cardiac sur-gical patients. Br J Anaesth. 2013;111:925-931.	77.	Stephan F, Barrucand B, Petit P, et al. High-flow nasal oxygen vs noninvasive positive airway pressure in hypoxemic patients after cardiothoracic surgery: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2015;313:2331-2339.	78.	Vijayakumar B, Elango P, Ganessan R. Post-operative delirium in elderly patients. Indian J Anaesth. 2014;58:251-256.	79.	Monk TG, Weldon BC, Garvan CW, et al. Predictors of cogni-tive dysfunction after major noncardiac surgery. Anesthesiology. 2008;108:18-30.	80.	Crosby G, Culley DJ, Hyman BT. Preoperative cognitive assessment of the elderly surgical patient: a call for action. Anesthesiology. 2011;114:1265-1268.Brunicardi_Ch46_p2027-p2044.indd   204301/03/19   11:04 AM
# Chunk 8949
Brunicardi_Ch46_p2027-p2044.indd   204401/03/19   11:04 AMThis page intentionally left blank

Surgical Considerations in  Older AdultsAnne M. Suskind and Emily Finlayson 47chapterINTRODUCTIONAs the population ages, an increasing number of older adults will develop surgical diseases. The segment of the U.S. popu-lation age 65 and older is expected to double by 2050. Older adults present unique challenges in surgical management and decision-making. The accumulation of comorbid conditions and physiologic vulnerability that occurs with age put older adults at high risk for major morbidity and mortality after sur-gery. It is essential that surgeons approach this population with a new set of skills and knowledge to provide optimal care for this vulnerable population. A comprehensive understanding of the unique vulnerabilities of older adults—geriatric syndromes and risk factors—are required to accurately estimate surgical risk, inform surgical decision-making, and guide perioperative management. In this chapter, we will (a) discuss the physiologic conditions that are common in older adults that are essential for surgical risk assessment of older adults considering surgery, (b) describe best practices in perioperative care in the older adult, and (c) discuss special considerations and common pitfalls for surgical conditions that are common in the older adult.GERIATRIC SYNDROMESApproximately one-third of older individuals undergoing vascu-lar and urologic surgery suffer from geriatric syndromes.1,2 This term is used to describe clinical conditions that do not fit into discrete disease categories but that can substantially negatively impact quality of life and result in disability. Geriat-ric syndromes often involve multiple underlying factors and organ systems (i.e., multiple causation of a unified manifesta-tion3) and include frailty, falls, delirium, malnutrition, dizziness, syncope, urinary incontinence, and pressure ulcers among oth-ers. These syndromes can be present before surgery and/or 1develop as a result of surgery and hospitalization.1,2 Further-more, close attention to both the presence and development of geriatric syndromes among surgical candidates is important and often overlooked, making caring for older surgical patients unique compared to their younger and healthier counterparts.FrailtyFrailty is among the most widely studied geriatric syndrome in the surgical literature. Frail older individuals are at high risk for adverse events in the face of stressors such as surgery. They are more likely to experience surgical complications, delayed recovery, falls, and to develop functional impairment. Frailty is also associated with a higher risk of death. It Is believed that frailty is a chronic, progressive condition that represents a spec-trum; less frail individuals may be responsive to strategies or interventions to ameliorate its clinical manifestations, while more frail individuals may demonstrate an irreversible predeath condition with limited life expectancy.4Frailty has been shown to be independently predictive of poor postoperative outcomes. Makary et al studied 594 older patients presenting for elective surgery at a university hospital and demonstrated that frail individuals were at increased risk of postoperative complications (OR 2.54; 95% CI 1.12–5.77), lon-ger length of stay (incidence rate ratio 1.69; 95% CI 1.28–2.23), and discharge to a skilled or assisted living facility after previ-ously living at home (OR 20.48; 95% CI 5.54-75.68).5 Similar findings have been echoed throughout the surgical literature inclusive of vascular, colorectal, cardiac, urologic, and other types of procedures.6-11Definitions of frailty fall into two broad models; a pheno-typic model and a deficits accumulation model. The phenotypic model was originally described by Linda Fried using data from the Cardiovascular Health Study, which is an observational study of community-dwelling men and women age 65 years and Introduction	2045Geriatric Syndromes	2045Frailty / 2045Falls / 2047Delirium / 2047Preoperative Assessment	2047Best Practices: Preoperative  Assessment / 2048Frailty Assessment / 2049Cognitive and Behavioral Assessment / 2049Medical Assessment / 2050Nutritional Assessment / 2051Psychosocial Considerations / 2052Medication Review / 2052Patient Counseling / 2052Preoperative Preparation	2052Patient Goals, Preferences, and  Advance Directives / 2052Preoperative Fasting / 2053Antibiotic Prophylaxis and Venous Thromboembolism Prevention / 2053Surgical Prehabilitation / 2053Palliative Care Services for Older  Surgical Patients / 2053Special Considerations	2054Functional Recovery / 2054Cancer Surgery / 2055Emergency Surgery / 2055Cardiovascular Surgery / 2055Valve Replacement / 2055Endovascular Aortic Surgery / 2056Palliative Surgery / 2056Summary	2056Brunicardi_Ch47_p2045-p2060.indd   204528/02/19   2:08 PM 2046Table 47-1Criteria used to define frailty• Weight loss: “In the last year, have you lost more than 10 pounds unintentionally (i.e., not due to dieting or exercise)?” If yes, then frail for weight loss criterion. At follow-up, weight loss was calculated as: (Weight in previous year – current measured weight)/(weight in previous year) = K. If K ≥0.05 and the subject does not report that he/she was trying to lose weight (i.e., unintentional weight loss of at least 5% of previous year’s body weight), then frail for weight loss = Yes.• Exhaustion: Using the CES-D Depression Scale, the following two statements are read. (a) I felt that everything I did was an effort; (b) I could not get going. The question is asked “How often in the last week did you feel this way?” 0 = rarely or none of the time (<1 day), 1 = some or a little of the time (1–2 days), 2 = a moderate amount of the time (3–4 days), or 3 = most of the time. Subjects answering “2” or “3” to either of these questions are categorized as frail by the exhaustion criterion.• Physical Activity: Based on the short version of the Minnesota Leisure Time Activity questionnaire, asking about walking, chores (moderately strenuous), mowing the lawn, raking, gardening, hiking, jogging, biking, exercise cycling, dancing, aerobics, bowling, golf, singles tennis, doubles tennis, racquetball, calisthenics, swimming. Kcals per week expended are calculated using standardized algorithm. This variable is stratified by gender. Men: Those with Kcal of physical activity per week <383 are frail. Women: Those with Kcals per week <270 are frail.• Walk Time, stratified by gender and height (gender-specific cutoff a medium height). Men Height ≤173 cm Height >173 cmCutoff for time to walk 15 feet criterion for frailty≥7 seconds≥6 seconds Women Height ≤159 cm Height >159 cm≥7 seconds≥6 seconds• Grip Strength, stratified by gender and body mass index (BMI) quartiles: Men BMI ≤24 BMI 24.1–26 BMI 26.1–28 BMI >28Cutoff for grip strength (Kg) criterion for frailty≤29≤30≤30≤32 Women BMI ≤23 BMI 23.1–26 BMI 26.1–29 BMI >29≤17≤17.3≤18≤21Reproduced with permission from Fried LP, Tangen CM, Walston J, et al. Frailty in older adults: evidence for a phenotype, J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2001 Mar;56(3):M146-M156.older. Individuals in this cohort underwent baseline evaluations and had 4 to 7 years of follow-up with annual examinations and surveillance for the following outcomes: incident disease, hos-pitalization, falls, disability, and mortality. Based on observa-tions in these individuals over time, the following criteria were identified to define frailty: weight loss, exhaustion, physical activity, walk time, and grip strength (Table 47-1). The pres-ence of one or two of these factors is associated with intermedi-ate risk for poor outcomes, i.e., a “prefrail” phenotype, and the presence of three or more of these factors is associated with high risk for poor outcomes, i.e., a “frail” phenotype.12 This study additionally demonstrated that frailty is strongly associated Key Points1	Frailty, dementia, and functional impairment are significant contributors to morbidity and mortality after surgery. Assess-ment of these risk factors is essential in an older population.2	Geriatric perioperative pathways are effective in preventing delirium, a morbid and costly postoperative complication that is associated with cognitive decline.3	Population-based data demonstrate that mortality after emer-gency surgery and high-risk cancer surgery is substantially higher in older adults that in a younger population.4	Impaired cardiac function is responsible for more than half of the postoperative deaths in older adult patients, so careful attention must be paid to intravascular volume status in the perioperative period.5	Many frail elders experience significant and sustained func-tional decline after surgery.6	Older adults with acute abdominal pathology—appendicitis, cholecystitis—often do not have fever, elevated white blood cell count, or physical findings of peritonitis.Brunicardi_Ch47_p2045-p2060.indd   204628/02/19   2:08 PM 2047SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS IN OLDER ADULTSCHAPTER 47with several major chronic diseases, including cardiovascular disease, pulmonary disease, and diabetes; however, not all frail individuals demonstrated these associations. The same is true for disability. While there is some overlap between frailty and disability, not all frail individuals are disabled. These findings suggest that while there may be overlap between these three constructs in some individuals, frailty is a distinct process from both comorbidity and disability.12Alternatively, the deficit accumulation model, developed by Rockwood et al, suggests that frailty is defined by discrete failures of redundant physiologic systems. The more deficits that occur, the more likely it is that adverse outcomes will result. Using data from the Canadian Study of Health and Aging, a longitudinal study of individuals age 65 and older, the authors developed a frailty index represented by the cumulative pro-portion of 92 accumulated deficits, which include symptoms, signs, functional impairments, and laboratory abnormalities. They demonstrated that deficits accumulated at a rate of 3% per year in their cohort, represented a gamma distribution, and increased with chronological age; they proposed that this model be used as a proxy for aging and mortality.13While these models are helpful to conceptualize frailty, no one model is all inclusive, and each may have applicability in different settings. For example, the frailty phenotype does not include items on cognition or mood and may not be easily appli-cable to the busy clinical setting.14 The deficits accumulation model is ideal for use in large databases, such as the American College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement Project (ACS-NSQIP),15 and may be helpful for research and public health and policy purposes, but it is not practical for clini-cal care. Measurement of frailty in the clinical setting will be discussed later in this chapter.While frailty is often defined as a geriatric syndrome, it is also plausible that other geriatric syndromes (i.e., urinary incontinence, falls, pressure ulcers, delirium, and functional decline) may demonstrate shared risk factors that lead to frailty. In turn, frailty may also cause more risk factors and more geriat-ric syndromes.16 Regardless of the association and directionality between frailty and other geriatric syndromes, identification of each is essential in the preoperative setting in order to help risk stratify and potentially to mitigate risk for patients considering surgical intervention.FallsOlder adults are at markedly increased risk of falls, and one in three adults age 65 and older report falling in the last year. The incidence of falls increases with age, and close to 60% of individuals who have fallen in the last year will fall again within the following year. Falls are associated with subsequent declines in functional status, greater likelihood of nursing home placement, increased use of medical services, and development of a fear of falling. Approx-imately half of older individuals who fall are unable to get up, resulting in a “long lie,” which is further associated with lasting functional declines.17 In fact, falls can be so detrimental to older individuals that the Joint Commission (United States) established fall prevention as one of its national safety goals in 2015.18Causes of falls can be multifactorial, as with other geri-atric syndromes. Factors include age-related declines, chronic disease, medications, environmental factors, changing positions, routine activities, risk-taking behaviors, acute illness, or situ-ational hazards such as the unfamiliar setting of hospitals and long-term care facilities.17It has been shown that preoperative falls are associated with poor postoperative outcomes among patients undergoing elective surgery. One study looking at 7982 such patients found that a preoperative history of one, two, or three or more falls predicted postoperative falls at 30 days (adjusted OR 2.3, 3.6, 5.5, respectively) and 1 year (adjusted OR 2.3, 3.4, 6.9, respec-tively), in addition to predicting a decline in functional status at 30 days (adjusted OR 1.2, 2.4, 2.4, respectively) and 1 year (adjusted OR 1.3, 1.5, 3.2, respectively) and in-hospital compli-cations (adjusted OR 1.2, 1.3, 2.0, respectively).18 Furthermore, preoperative falls are a major predictor of poor postoperative outcomes and may be a valuable preoperative assessment tool as part of routine preoperative care.DeliriumDelirium is a disorder of attention and awareness that develops acutely and tends to fluctuate, as defined by the new Diagnos-tic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5) criteria. Delirium is so common among older adults that up to one third of patients age 70 and older admitted to the hospital experiences delirium, half of which have delirium on admission and the other half of which develop delirium dur-ing the hospitalization itself.19 Rates of delirium among older patients undergoing surgery ranges from 4% to 5% in cataract and urologic procedures to 50% to 60% in infrarenal AAA repair or hip fracture surgery.20 Patients who develop postopera-tive delirium have a twoto threefold increased risk of mortality within the first year after surgery.21Preoperative assessment should focus on the identifi-cation of risk factors for delirium including age 70 years or older, cognitive impairment, limited physical function, history of alcohol abuse, abnormal serum sodium, potassium or glu-cose, intrathoracic surgery, and AAA surgery. Preoperative assessment and documentation of mental status is imperative in order to establish a baseline for postoperative comparison. Intraoperative blood loss is another risk factor for postopera-tive delirium, and patients with a postoperative hematocrit less than 30% are at increased risk, irrespective of baseline risk fac-tors. Postoperatively, undertreatment of pain is an important risk factor for delirium. Management of fluid, electrolyte and metabolic abnormalities, optimization of blood loss replace-ment, maintenance of circadian rhythms, and cautious prescrip-tion of medication and pain management are among the most important methods by which to minimize the risk of postop-erative delirium among surgical patients.20 Furthermore, many commonly used medications may induce delirium and should be avoided. They include drugs with anticholinergic properties, corticosteroids, merperidine, and sedative hypnotics. Finally, postoperative care bundles have been shown to successfully reduce the incidence of delirium. These strategies include sensory enhancement (glasses, hearing aids), early mobility, cognitive orientation and therapeutic activities, and sleep proto-cols. Treatment of postoperative delirium should focus on treat-able etiologies (Fig. 47-1), and pharmacologic treatment should be reserved for patients who are at risk of harming themselves or others.PREOPERATIVE ASSESSMENTPreoperative assessment in older adults is more complex than in younger individuals, as there are many unique characteris-tics that require consideration. The purpose of the assessment Brunicardi_Ch47_p2045-p2060.indd   204728/02/19   2:08 PM 2048SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 47-1. Useful algorithm to determine preoperative management of the acutely delirious patient.is not to “clear” the patient for surgery but rather to minimize risks and optimize good outcomes. The ACS NSQIP and the American Geriatrics Society (AGS) published best practice guidelines to help optimize this process. Preoperative planning should be pro-active, commencing at the time of surgical decision-making, if not sooner. To this end, the ACS NSQIP/AGS produced best practice guidelines and a preoperative management checklist to provide a framework for thinking about critical issues in this patient population (Table 47-2).22 In addition to these issues, they emphasize the importance of planning analgesia strategies, making efforts to minimize opioid use and to prevent functional and cognitive decline, obtaining multidisciplinary consultation early and early involvement of allied health staff (i.e., physical or occupational therapy), and anticipating home health needs that may be required at discharge.23Best Practices: Preoperative AssessmentFunctional Assessment. As previously discussed, poor phys-ical function prior to surgery is associated with higher risk of major postoperative complications, increased need for intensive WORKUPPhysical exam• Check surgical wound• Check for tubes/lines/drains• Urinalysis• CBC, BMP• May consider: TSH, NH3, LFT, EtoH/tox• Blood/sputum/urine cultures-Vital signs, pulse ox, pain assessmentMedication reviewLaboratory evaluation:---Chest XRSubstance abuse history--PHARMACOLOGIC MANAGEMENT:ONLY FOR AGITATED DELIRIUM AND PATIENT SAFETYAgent of choice: Low dose Haloperidol0.5 mg PO: 1–2 hours for effect, may redose in 60 m0.5 mg IM/IV: 20–40 min to take effect, may redosein 30 mMost patients respond to total of 1–2 mgCheck 12 lead EKG, hold if QTc >500----Use benzos only if there is a concern for withdrawalDIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS DRUG!!! Electrolytes, environment change Lack of drugs (withdrawal), lack of sleep Infection, idiopathic Restraints, reduced sensory input (vision/hearing) Intracranial (CVA, bleed, post-ictal, meningitis) Urinary retention, or fecal impaction Metabolic, includes PE/MI, uremia, ammonia, thyroidDELIRIUMAlways check the medication list – there is acumulative effect burden, any new medicationor recent dose change is suspectAlgorithm for the acutelydelirious patient.For prevention in at risk patientsplease refer to opposite side.Why are they delirious?Common Delirium Inducing MedicationsRisk FactorsPrecipitating Factors, in aaddition to SURGERYPhysical restraintsMalnutrition3 medication classes addedBladder catheterUncontrolled pain-----PREVENTION/CONSERVATIVE MANAGEMENTSensory enhancement: Hearing aids, glasses at bedsideMobilizationCognitive orientation and stimulationSleep enhancementMedication reviewNormalize environment• Get rid of tethers• Keep room calm and quiet• Encourage family/caregiver involvement------Address/remove precipitating factors or agentsIf MB consider hospitalist consult--Are they a danger tothemselves or others?Age >65Cognitive impairmentComorbidity burdenPoor functional statusHearing/vision impairmentDepression------Anticholinergics: Tricyclics, antihistamines,H2-blockers, antimuscarinics, antispasmodics,promethazine, olanzapine, paroxetineCorticosteroids: methylprednisone, prednisoneMeperidineSedative hypnotics: benzos, zolpidem----Nu-DESC Screen: ScoreEach item scored 0–2• Disorientation• Inappropriate behavior• Inappropriate communication• Illusions/hallucinations• Psychomotor retardationIs your patient acutely delirious?Yes?Differential and workupBrunicardi_Ch47_p2045-p2060.indd   204828/02/19   2:08 PM 2049SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS IN OLDER ADULTSCHAPTER 47Table 47-2Immediate preoperative management checklist from the ACS NSQIP/AGS1. Confirm and document patient goals and treatment preferences, including advance directives2. Confirm and document patient’s health care proxy or surrogate decision-maker3. In patients with existing advance directives, discuss new risks associated with the surgical procedure and an approach for potentially life-threatening problems consistent with the patient’s values and preferences4. Consider shortened fluid fast (clear liquids up to two hours before anesthesia)5. Adhere to existing best practices regarding antibiotic and venous thromboembolism prophylaxis6. Ensure nonessential medications have been stopped and essential medications have been takenAdapted with permission from Mohanty S, Rosenthal RA, Russell MM, et al: Optimal Perioperative Management of the Geriatric Patient: A Best Practices Guideline from the American College of Surgeons NSQIP and the American Geriatrics Society, J Am Coll Surg. 2016 May;222(5):930-947.rehabilitation services, increased rates of discharge to a skilled or assisted nursing facility, and higher mortality.24-26 Assessment of physical function and performance status in the preoperative setting are recommended by the ACS NSQIP/AGS best practice guidelines.22 There are several methods by which to measure physical function. Overall functional status may be ascertained by assessing the ability of an individual to perform activities of daily living (ADLs) and instrumental ADLs. ADLs include dressing, bathing, toileting, transferring, continence, and eating independently.25 Instrumental ADLs measure an individual’s ability to live independently and include the ability to perform the following tasks: shopping, laundry, mode of transportation, ability to handle finances, responsibility for won medications, food preparation, and housekeeping.27In addition to assessment of ADLs and instrumental ADLs, the surgeon should also assess for deficits in vision, hearing, and swallowing, inquire about history of falls in the past year, evaluate for limitations in gait and mobility, and determine risk for falls, which can be performed via the timed up and go test (TUGT). This test measures gait and mobility impairment and is associated with increased risk for falls in ambulatory individu-als. All that is required to perform this test are a chair, a mark 10 feet in front of the chair, and a stopwatch. Individuals are instructed to do the following while being timed:1.	Stand up from the chair (without using arm rests, if possible)2.	Walk to the mark (10 feet in front of them)3.	Turn4.	Walk back to the chair5.	Sit down in the chairA time of ≥15 seconds indicates high risk of falls and should prompt referral to physical therapy for further assessment.In a prospective cohort of individuals age 65 and older undergoing surgery, the TUGT times were stratified into three groups that strongly correlated with varying risk for postop-erative complications and 1-year mortality. These groups were “slow” (≥15 seconds), “intermediate” (11–14 seconds), and “fast” (≤10 seconds). Postoperative complications and 1-year mortality in the slow group were significantly higher com-pared to those in the fast group, 52% to 77% versus 11% to 13% for complications, and 31% compared to 3% for mortality, respectively.9Frailty AssessmentAs stated earlier, frailty is an important consideration in preop-erative planning for older individuals. Measurement of frailty can take several forms. One method is to apply the operational definition put forth by Fried (see Table 47-1), which has been applied to surgical patients and shown to be an independent pre-dictor of postoperative adverse events, increased length of stay, and higher likelihood of discharge to a skilled or assisted living facility.5The frailty phenotype, however, may be cumbersome to apply in the busy clinical setting. To this end, Robinson proposed alternative definitions and methods for frailty mea-surement. One such method includes the following criteria: cog-nitive impairment (Mini-Cog score of ≤3), poor nutrition (serum albumin ≤3), history of falls (≥1 fall in the past 6 months), and low hematocrit (<35%).26 A second definition includes func-tional impairment (TUGT ≥15 seconds and dependence in any ADL) and comorbidity (Charlson index score ≥3).28Cognitive and Behavioral AssessmentPreoperative cognitive impairment is strongly linked to postop-erative delirium, worse surgical outcomes, longer hospital stays, increased risk of functional decline, and even mor-tality. History and cognitive assessment are important to con-sider early on in all surgical candidates age 65 years and older in the preoperative setting. The Mini-Cog, consisting of the three-item recall and clock draw tests, can be used to complete this assessment (Table 47-3). If possible, someone who knows the patient well (such as a spouse or family member) should be interviewed about the presence and evolution of any cognitive decline in the patient. If decline is present, the patient should be referred to a primary care physician, geriatrician, or mental health specialist for further evaluation. Documentation of pre-operative cognitive status will further assist in the identification of any postoperative cognitive dysfunction.22 Risk factors for postoperative delirium should also be assessed in the preopera-tive period and are detailed in Table 47-4.In addition to measuring cognitive status, assessing the patient’s decision-making capacity is also important to deter-mine the patient’s ability to provide informed surgical consent. It is helpful to ask the patient to describe, in his/her own words, the important features of the discussion, the condition and indi-cations for surgery, and the risks, benefits, and alternatives to surgery. There are four legally-relevant criteria for decision-making capacity22:1.	The patient can clearly indicate his/her treatment choice.2.	The patient understands the relevant information communi-cated by the physician.3.	The patient acknowledges his/her medical condition, treat-ment options, and likely outcomes.4.	The patient can engage in a rational discussion about the treatment options.Depression should also be screened for in the preoperative setting, as up to 11% of the population age 71 years and older in the United States suffer from this condition.29 Risk factors 2Brunicardi_Ch47_p2045-p2060.indd   204928/02/19   2:08 PM 2050SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 47-4Risk factors for postoperative deliriumCognitive and behavioral disorders:• Cognitive impairment and dementia• Untreated or inadequately controlled pain• Depression• Alcohol use• Sleep deprivationDisease or illness related:• Severe illness or comorbidities• Renal insufficiency• Anemia• HypoxiaMetabolic:• Poor nutrition• Dehydration• Electrolyte abnormalitiesFunctional impairments:• Poor functional status• Immobilization• Hearing or vision impairmentOther:• Older age ≥70 years• Polypharmacy and use of psychotropic medications	(benzodiazepines, anticholinergics, and antihistamines)• Risk of urinary retention or constipation, presence of urinary catheterReproduced with permission from Chow WB, Rosenthal RA, Merkow RP, et al. Optimal preoperative assessment of the geriatric surgical patient: a best practices guideline from the American College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement Program and the American Geriatrics Society, J Am Coll Surg. 2012 Oct;215(4):453-466.Table 47-3Cognitive assessment: three-item recall and clock draw1. Get the patient’s attention and say:	 “I am going to say three words that I want you to remember now and later.	 These words are banana, sunrise, chair.	 Please say them for me now.”	Give the patient three tries to repeat the words. If unable  after three tries, go to next item.2. Say all of the following phrases in the order indicated:	 “Please draw a clock in the space below. Start by drawing a large circle. Put all the numbers in the circle and set the hands to show 11:10 (10 past 11).”	If the subject has not finished clock drawing in 3 minutes,  discontinue and ask for recall items.3. Say: “What were the three words I asked you to remember?”Scoring:• 3 item recall (0-3 points): 1 point for each correct word• Clock draw (0-2 points): 0 points for abnormal clock;  2 points for normal clock A normal clock has all of the following elements:	 1. All numbers 1-12, each only once, are present in the correct order and direction (clockwise) inside the circle.	 2. Two hands are present, one pointing to 11 and one pointing to 2.	 3. Any clock missing any of these elements is scored abnormal. refusal to draw a clock is scored abnormalTotal score of 0, 1, or 2 suggests possible impairmentTotal score of 3, 4, or 5 suggests no impairmentReproduced with permission from Borson S, Scanlan J, Brush M, et al. The mini-cog: a cognitive ‘vital signs’ measure for dementia screening in multi-lingual elderly, Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2000 Nov;15(11):1021-1027.for depression in older adults include female gender, disability, bereavement, and sleep disturbance. Poor health status, cogni-tive impairment, living alone, and new medical illness may also contribute to depression.30The Patient Health Questionnaire-2 (PHQ-2) can be used to screen for depression via the following two questions31:1.	In the past 12 months, have you ever had a time when you felt sad, blue, depressed, or down for most of the time for at least two weeks?2.	In the past 12 months, have you ever had a time, lasting at least two weeks, when you didn’t care about the tings things that you usually care about or when you didn’t enjoy the things that you usually enjoy?If a patient answers yes to either question, further revalu-ation with a primary care physician, geriatrician, or psychiatrist is recommended.Screening for alcohol and substance abuse is also recom-mended, as alcohol use is common among older adults. Up to 13% of men and 8% of women ≥65 years consume at least  2 drinks per day and 14.5% of men and 3.3% of women con-sume 5 or more drinks per day.32 Alcohol and substance abuse are associated with increased rates of postoperative mortality and complications including pneumonia, sepsis, wound infec-tion and disruption, and prolonged length of stay.33,34 The ACS NSQIP/AGS recommend screening for alcohol and substance abuse among older individuals with the modified CAGE ques-tionnaire in combination with prescribing daily multivitamins. including folic acid and high dose (100 mg) oral or parenteral thiamine to patients who drink alcohol.22,35Medical AssessmentA thorough medical assessment should be performed in all older operative candidates and should include a cardiac evaluation, pulmonary evaluation, nutritional assessment, and medication evaluation and management where appropriate.Cardiac adverse events are the most common cause of serious perioperative morbidity and mortality among patients undergoing noncardiac operations and occur more commonly in older adults.36,37 For these reasons, cardiac evalu-ation may be helpful to identify older patients with higher risk for cardiac complications who may be candidates for periopera-tive optimization. This evaluation should follow the American College of Cardiology and the American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) algorithm for cardiac evaluation and care. This is a step-wise approach that incorporates the following factors: (a) urgency of surgery (whether the procedure is an emergency); the (b) presence of active major cardiac risk factors (i.e., unsta-ble coronary syndromes, decompensated heart failure, signifi-cant arrhythmias or severe valvular disease) that would necessitate referral to a cardiologist; (c) if risk factors for stable coronary artery disease are present, then calculation of risk for major adverse cardiac events using the ACS NSQIP calculator 3Brunicardi_Ch47_p2045-p2060.indd   205028/02/19   2:08 PM 2051SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS IN OLDER ADULTSCHAPTER 47is recommended; (d) if the patient is at low risk for major car-diac events (<1%) then no further testing is needed; (e) if the patient is at elevated risk of major cardiac events, then determi-nation of functional capacity with an objective measure or scale may be helpful; (f) if functional capacity is poor, then additional testing such as pharmacological stress testing, may be helpful; and finally (g) if testing does not impact care, then one should proceed to surgery or consider alternative treatment strategies.38 Routine electrocardiograms are not indicated in older patients undergoing low-risk surgery in the absence of other risk factors.39-41The combined effect of depletion of intravascular volume, age-related impairment of response to catecholamines, and increased myocardial relaxation time adversely affects the cardiac function of an older adult patient under stress in the perioperative period. Aging has been demonstrated to cause a decrease in cardiac output by approximately 1% per year. Older individuals fail to augment heart rate to the same extent as younger individuals. More importantly, the ability to increase cardiac output with aging is dependent on ventricular dilatation, which is determined by preload. Therefore, careful attention must be paid to volume status in the perioperative period. Over one half of all postoperative deaths in older adult patients and 11% of postoperative complications are a result of impaired car-diac function under physiologic stress. Incomplete emptying of the ventricle at end systole and subsequent reduction in ejection fraction is characteristic of the aging heart. Reduced distensibil-ity, in addition to acute stressors, leads to impaired coronary perfusion and cardiac ischemia.An important predictor of surgical outcomes and cardiac complications in the older adult is congestive heart failure (CHF). CHF is present in approximately 10% of patients older than 65 years and is the leading cause of postoperative morbid-ity and mortality. This prevalence will likely increase as per-cutaneous interventions and medical therapy prolongs survival from myocardial ischemia and acute myocardial infarction. Therefore, identifying correctable and uncorrectable cardiovas-cular disease is critical before elective surgical interventions.Common pulmonary postoperative complications in older adults include atelectasis, pneumonia, and prolonged mechanical ventilation.42 These complications can contribute significantly to overall morbidity and mortality among older adults, affecting up to 15% of individuals ≥70 years in the postoperative setting.22,43 Risk factors for postoperative pulmonary complications include both patient and procedure-related factors. Patient-related fac-tors include age >60, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) class II  or greater, functional dependence, congestive heart failure, obstructive sleep apnea, pulmonary hypertension, current ciga-rette use, impaired sensorium, preoperative sepsis, weight loss >10% in 6 months, serum albumin <3.5 mg/dL, and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) ≥7.5 mmol/L (≥1.5 mg/dL). Surgical related fac-tors include prolonged operation of greater than 3 hours, surgi-cal site, emergency operation, general anesthesia, perioperative transfusion, and residual neuromuscular blockade after an opera-tion. Of note, obesity, well-controlled asthma, and diabetes are not risk factors for postoperative pulmonary complications. It is recommended that patients with COPD and asthma that is not well controlled undergo preoperative optimization of pulmonary function and other general recommendations include smoking cessation, preoperative intensive inspiratory muscle training, and selective chest radiograph and pulmonary function testing.22In general, the use of routine preoperative screening com-bined with the high cost of unnecessary testing dispute the use of a routine battery of preoperative screening tests in all patients. Instead, it is preferable to perform selected tests in high-risk patients based on history, physical exam, known comorbidities, and the type of procedure being planned.22Nutritional AssessmentNutritional status should also be performed in older adults prior to surgery, as poor nutrition is potentially modifiable and related to increased risk of postoperative complications. The most com-mon adverse events related to poor nutritional status are infec-tious complications (i.e., surgical site infections, pneumonia, urinary tract infections), wound complications (i.e., dehiscence and anastomotic leaks), and increased length of stay. The ACS NSQIP/AGS best practice guidelines recommend the following to screen for poor nutritional status:1.	Document height and weight and calculate body mass index (BMI). A BMI <18.5 kg/m2 places an individual at risk and should prompt referral for full nutritional assessment.2.	Measure baseline serum albumin and prealbumin levels. Serum albumin <3.0 g/dL (with no evidence of hepatic or renal dysfunction) should prompt referral for full nutritional assessment.3.	Inquire about unintentional weight loss in the last year. Unintentional weight loss >10% to 15% in the past 6 months is associated with severe nutritional risk and should prompt assessment by a dietician.22The American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition (ASPEN) argues that measurement of serum albumin and pre-albumin reflect the severity of the inflammatory response rather than true poor nutritional status. Instead, they favor a more indi-vidualized approach whereby the presence of any of the follow-ing six factors would classify an individual with malnutrition:1.	Insufficient energy intake. Severe malnutrition in the context of chronic illness is defined as <75% of estimated energy requirement for ≥1 month.2.	Weight loss. Severe malnutrition in the context of chronic illness is defined as >5% weight loss in 1 month, >7.5% weight loss in 3 months, >10% weight loss in 6 months, and >20% weight loss in 1 year.3.	Loss of muscle mass. Severe malnutrition is defined as severe muscle wasting of the temples, clavicles, shoulders, interosseous muscles, scapula, thigh, and calf.4.	Loss of subcutaneous fat. Severe malnutrition is defined as loss of subcutaneous fat (e.g., orbital, triceps, fat overlying the ribs).5.	Localized or generalized fluid accumulation that may sometimes mask weight loss. This can be demonstrated by fluid accumulation evident on exam (e.g., extremities, vulvar/scrotal edema, or ascites).6.	Diminished functional status as measured by hand grip strength. Measurements for grip strength are based on nor-mative standards supplied by the manufacturer of the mea-surement device.44Regardless of the method used to measure nutritional sta-tus, attention to the diagnosis and management of malnutrition in the perioperative setting is imperative to optimize postopera-tive outcomes.4Brunicardi_Ch47_p2045-p2060.indd   205128/02/19   2:08 PM 2052SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIPsychosocial ConsiderationsAnxiety, depression, substance abuse, and social isolation are common, underdiagnosed conditions in older adults. Careful screening can identify these potential barriers to recovery, safe discharge after surgery, and maintenance of independence.Medication ReviewCareful review and documentation of the patient’s complete med-ication history is important in the preoperative setting. The review should include the use of nonprescription agents, including over-the-counter, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), vitamins, eye drops, topical agents, and herbal products.Additionally, it is important to discontinue medications that should be avoided prior to surgery in order to minimize potential adverse events and interactions. These include dis-continuation of all nonessential medications that are associated with increased surgical risk and medications with potential for drug interactions with anesthesia. Herbal medication should be stopped at least 7 days prior to surgery, and the Beers criteria should be reviewed. Medications with potential for withdrawal (e.g., selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor [SSRIs], tricyclic antidepressants, benzodiazepines, antipsychotics, monoamine oxidase inhibitors [MAOIs], β-blockers, clonidine, statins, and corticosteroids) in addition to angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor blockers should be con-tinued unless hypertension is well controlled. Medications that are associated with increased risk for postoperative delirium should also be avoided and replaced with safer medications. For example, benzodiazepines should be stopped or reduced, where possible. Pain should be adequately controlled and meperi-dine should be avoided for pain management. Caution should be used when prescribing antihistamine H1 antagonists (such as diphenhydramine/Benadryl) and medications with antihista-mine effects. Of note, there is no increased risk associated with neuroleptics (antipsychotics) and digoxin and no conclusive evi-dence against using H2 agonists, tricyclic antidepressants, anti-Parkinson medications, steroids, NSAIDs, and antimuscarinics in the perioperative setting.Certain medications, such as β-blockers or statins, may be beneficial to start preoperatively in order to reduce risk of perioperative adverse events such as cardiac complications and stroke. There are ACC/AHA guidelines to support the use of perioperative β-blockers in patients who are already taking them, particularly those with independent cardiac indications such as arrhythmia or history of myocardial infarction and in patients who are undergoing intermediate risk or vascular surgery with no known coronary artery disease or with multiple clinical risk factors for ischemic heart disease. Statins should be started as soon as possible prior to surgery in patients who have known vascular disease, elevated low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, or ischemia on thallium testing. They may also be considered in patients undergoing vascular and intermediate-risk surgery.Additionally, medications doses should be adjusted based on renal function. Older patients are at greater risk for renal impairment and chronic kidney disease; furthermore, adjustment of medications that are renally cleared is an important consider-ation. Glomerular filtration rate (GFR), rather than creatinine, is the best overall measure of renal function due to the fact that the ratio of GFR to creatinine decreases with increasing age.22Finally, medication use is very common among the older population, and older individuals should be monitored for polypharmacy and potential adverse interactions. This is of real concern since 40% of individuals age 65 years and older are taking five or more medications prescribed by more than one doctor.45 Additionally, 68% of older adults use over-the-counter medications, dietary supplements, or both concurrently with prescription medications.46 Of note, polypharmacy has been associated with increased risk of cognitive impairment, morbidity, and mortality, and the risk of adverse drug reactions increases with a greater number of medications.45,47Patient CounselingDetermination of the patient’s preferences and expectations prior to surgery is an essential component to preoperative assessment and decision making. One study demonstrated that agreement between patients and their surrogates (primary care providers and close family members) was poor, despite patients predicting that their physicians (90%) and family members (87%) would accurately represent their wishes. Instead, they found that per-cent of agreement ranged from 59% to 88%, suggesting that sub-stituted judgement may not be a good proxy for an individual patient’s wishes.48 Another study looked at older patients with limited life expectancy due to cancer, congestive heart failure, or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and found that 99% of patients would undergo a low-burden treatment to restore current health (with the alternative being death), but that 74% and 89% would forgo treatment if it resulted in severe functional or cognitive impairment, respectively.49 Furthermore, it is imperative that the surgeon have a substantive discussion with the patient prior to sur-gery to determine their preferences and expectations and that fam-ily members and potential decision-making surrogates be involved. The ACS NSQIP/AGS Guidelines recommend that the following four points be included in these conversations:1.	Ensure that the patient has an advance directive and desig-nated health care proxy.2.	Discuss treatment goals and plans with the patient to ensure that the physician understands the patient’s preferences and expectations. This should be documented in the medical record.3.	The surgeon should describe the expected postoperative course and possible complications, including the potential for functional decline and need for rehabilitation or nursing home care, if relevant.4.	The physician should determine the patient’s family and social support systems. If support is insufficient, then a referral to a social worker should be considered.22The American College of Surgeons has created a checklist for the optimal preoperative assessment of the geriatric surgical patient (see Table 47-2).PREOPERATIVE PREPARATIONIn the immediate preoperative period, careful planning is essen-tial to optimize the care of the frail older patient.Patient Goals, Preferences, and Advance DirectivesIt is important that surgeons have a good understanding of patients’ goals and wishes surrounding their medical care, par-ticularly towards the end of life. This should be established in the clinic setting prior to surgery and should be confirmed Brunicardi_Ch47_p2045-p2060.indd   205228/02/19   2:08 PM 2053SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS IN OLDER ADULTSCHAPTER 47and documented throughout the process. Additionally, patients should be encouraged to designate a health care proxy to help with this process, should they be unable to make their own med-ical decisions. The healthcare team should also consider early palliative care consultation in individuals with poor prognoses who are electing to undergo surgery, particularly if they have a life expectancy of less than 6 months.Preoperative FastingHistorically, preoperative fasting began at midnight the night before elective surgery, whereby, patients were not permitted to have any oral intake of either liquids or solids. However, more recent literature suggests that there may be no clear benefit to extended periods of fasting greater than 6 hours.50 Based on the American Society of Anesthesiologists 2011 practice guidelines for all adults, fasting should take the form of stopping clear liq-uids at least 2 hours before elective procedures, stopping light food intake and/or nonhuman milk 6 hours before elective pro-cedures and stopping fried, fatty foods and meat at least 8 hours before elective procedures. Of note, patients with comorbidities or diseases that can affect gastric emptying (i.e., diabetes, hiatal hernia) may require additional periods of fasting.Antibiotic Prophylaxis and Venous Thromboembolism PreventionAntibiotic prophylaxis for older adults should comply with standard guidelines put forth by The Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America/Surgical Infection Society/American  Society of Health-System Pharmacists/Infectious Disease Society. Older adults who receive appropriate preoperative antibiotics demonstrate a mortality benefit at 60 days.51,52 Appropriate antibiotics should be administered within 60 minutes prior to surgical incision.Older adults are at higher risk for venous thromboem-bolism (VTE), making VTE risk stratification among this population essential. Older individuals undergoing orthopedic procedures (i.e., total hip or knee arthroplasty) or who have suffered a hip fracture should be treated with low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) (starting either 13 hours or more pre-operatively or 12 hours or more postoperatively) for a minimum of 10 to 14 days and up to 35 days. Older adults undergoing nonorthopedic surgery (i.e., general, abdominopelvic, bariatric, vascular plastic/reconstructive, and thoracic surgery) should have LMWH or low-dose unfractionated heparin (LDUH) and mechanical prophylaxis with intermittent pneumatic compres-sion (IPC). Older adults undergoing craniotomy/spinal surgery or cardiac surgery should have IPC. Finally, older individuals who experienced major trauma and spinal cord injury should use LDUH/LMWH and IPC if not contraindicated.23Surgical PrehabilitationOne purpose of the preoperative assessment is to identify potentially modifiable risk factors in order to optimize surgi-cal outcomes. Several prehabilitation programs have emerged in order to help meet this need and have demonstrated prom-ising results. One of the first of such programs was referred to as the Proactive Care of Older People undergoing surgery (POPS) study in the United Kingdom’s National Health Service (NHS). This project was designed to decrease complications leading to increased hospital length of stay among at-risk older adults undergoing elective surgery. The authors performed a structured geriatric team intervention to identify at-risk patients and to then facilitate coordinated multidisciplinary care in the form of daily inpatient rounds, weekly multidisciplinary meet-ings, and biweekly ward rounds led by a POPS consultant/clini-cal nurse specialist. Outcomes in surgical patients undergoing the POPS intervention were compared to those among patients not undergoing the intervention. The POPS group had fewer postoperative complications, including lower rates of pneumo-nia (4% vs. 20%, P = 0.008) and delirium (4% vs. 19%, P = 0.028), better pain control (2% vs. 30%, P <0.001), lower rates of delayed mobilization (9% vs. 28%, P = 0.-12) and lower rates of inappropriate catheter use (7% vs. 37%, P = 0.046). They also demonstrated a reduction in hospital length of stay by 4.5 days.53The Michigan Surgical Home and Optimization Program (MSHOP) is another example of a successful prehabilitation program. This is a structured, home-based preoperative train-ing program that targets physical, nutritional, and psychological  interventions. The intervention included the following four com-ponents: (a) a home-based walking program with daily remind-ers and feedback; (b) incentive spirometry instructions starting one week prior to surgery; (c) education on nutrition, stress management, and care planning; and (d) resources for smoking cessation, when appropriate. Eighty-two percent of individu-als enrolled in the study were actively engaged in the program. Compared to individuals who did not undergo the intervention, patients enrolled in the trial demonstrated a 31% reduction in hospital length of stay and a 28% reduction in cost.64 Collec-tively, the POPS study and the MSHOP studies are illustrative of the notion that attention to preand perioperative assessment in the older population result in improved postoperative out-comes that benefit the patient, hospital, and health care system.Palliative Care Services for Older Surgical PatientsAmong seriously ill individuals, palliative care services have the potential to increase quality of life, improve symptoms and patient satisfaction, and reduce caregiver burden.55-57 The role of palliative care in older surgical patients is not as well under-stood, and it is not widely understood in the surgical population.58 Over a decade ago, the American College of Surgeons Pallia-tive Care Workgroup identified core competencies of surgical palliative care.59 The two key elements of palliative care—pain management and communication skills—are essential. For sur-geons who frequently care for individuals at high risk of mor-bidity and mortality, there are six additional core competency domains: patient care, medical knowledge, practice-based learn-ing, interpersonal skills, communication skills, and profession-alism (Table 47-5).Emerging data suggests that surgical patients benefit from the addition of palliative care principles and services. An interventional trial evaluating a decision-making interven-tion considering procedures that included information about health status and prognosis increased the likelihood of choosing less aggressive treatment options among patients with frailty (OR 3.41, 95% CI 1.39–8.39) or dementia (OR 1.66, 95% CI 1.06–2.64).60 In a study of preoperative care consultation in frail older adults, Ernst et al found that preoperative palliative care consultations were associated with reduced mortality.61 Several studies have found that postoperative palliative care improves symptoms, including uncertainly, symptom distress, and depres-sion, and improves quality of life.62-63Brunicardi_Ch47_p2045-p2060.indd   205328/02/19   2:08 PM 2054SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 47-5Core Competencies in surgical palliative careDOMAINCOMPETENCYPatient Care      Possess the capacity to guide the transition from curative and palliative goals of treatment to palliative goals alone based on patient information and preferences, scientific and outcomes evidence, and sound clinical judgmentPerform an assessment and gather essential clinical information about symptoms, pain, and sufferingPerform palliative procedures competently and with sound judgment to meet patient goals of care at the end of lifeProvide management of pain and other symptoms to alleviate sufferingCommunicate effectively and compassionately bad news and poor prognosesConduct a patient and family meeting regarding advance directives and end-of-life decisionsExercise sound clinical judgment and skill in the withdrawal and withholding of life supportMedical knowledge     Acute and chronic pain managementNon-pain symptom managementEthical and legal basis for advance directives, informed consent, withdrawal and withholding of life support, and futilityGrief and bereavement in surgical illnessQuality of life outcomes and prognosticationRole of spirituality at the end of lifeInterpersonal and communication skillsSurgeons must be competent and compassionate communicators with patients, families, and other health care providers. They should be effective in communicating bad news and prognosis and in redefining hope in the context of cultural diversity. The interdisciplinary nature of palliative care requires that the surgeon is skilled as both a leader and a member of an interdisciplinary team and maintains collegial relationships with other health care providers.ProfessionalismSurgeons must maintain professional commitment to ethical and empathic care, which is patient focused, with equal attention to relief of suffering along with curative therapy. Respect and compassion for cultural diversity, gender, and disability is particularly important around rituals and bereavement at the end of life. Maintenance of ethical standards in the withholding and withdrawal of life support is essential.Systems-based practiceSurgeons must be aware and informed of the multiple components of the health care system that provide palliative and end-of-life care. Surgeons should be knowledgeable and willing to refer patients to hospice, palliative care consultation, pain management, pastoral care, social services, etc., and to understand resource utilization and reimbursement issues involved.Data from Mohanty S, Rosenthal RA, Russell MM, et al: Optimal Perioperative Management of the Geriatric Patient: A Best Practices Guideline from the American College of Surgeons NSQIP and the American Geriatrics Society, J Am Coll Surg. 2016 May;222(5):930-947.SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONSFunctional RecoveryIn the past decade, there has been increasing attention to the examination of functional outcomes after major surgery in the geriatric population. In a large prospective cohort study of patients age 60 years and older undergoing abdominal surgery, Lawrence et al found that older adults required several months to fully return to basic activities of daily living (ADLs) and up to 6 months to become independent in more complex instrumental activities of daily living (IADLs).65 Older adults are frequently discharged to postacute facilities even when they are functional dependent at baseline and have an uncomplicated postoperative course.66Among frail older adults, functional decline after surgery is often substantial and sustained. Studies examining functional outcomes after surgery among nursing home residents have demonstrated that the majority of nursing home residents who undergo surgery do not return to baseline levels of function post-operatively.67-68 Among residents who underwent colectomy for cancer, 53% were dead after 1 year and over half of 1-year survi-vors experienced functional decline.68 For residents who undergo lower extremity bypass, half die within a year of surgery.67 At  1 year, 13% of the initial vascular surgery cohort was ambulatory, and 18% had maintained or improved their baseline functional status—calling into question the efficacy of this procedure in the nursing home. A study of hip fracture repair in nursing home resi-dents found that over a third of residents died and over half of resi-dents had died or experienced functional decline within 180 days after fracture. Residents with multiple comorbidities and advanced cognitive impairment and those who did not undergo surgical cor-rection of the fracture experienced the worst outcomes.5Brunicardi_Ch47_p2045-p2060.indd   205428/02/19   2:08 PM 2055SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS IN OLDER ADULTSCHAPTER 47Cancer SurgeryApproximately 50% of cancer diagnoses are currently made in patients age 70 years or older.69 It is predicted that the increase in the older adult population will account for up to a 50% increase in the number of patients undergoing oncologic procedures by the year 2020. The increased life expectancy of the geriatric patient coupled with the increasing incidence of cancer with advancing age will lead to an increased prevalence of malignant disease requiring surgical intervention. This is an area of great interest given that randomized clinical trials to determine the out-comes of older adult patients undergoing curative resections, as well as neoadjuvant and adjuvant therapy, are lacking. In addi-tion, older adult patients are rarely included in clinical trials; therefore, treatment decisions are often based on individual sur-geon experience and nongeriatric data, and they may be flawed by inherent biases regarding the outcome of complete oncologic resections in older adult patients. Surgeons may also be reluctant to expose older patients to the toxic effects of chemotherapy and radiation without proven efficacy in this geriatric population. This highlights the need for research targeting the specific needs of older adult patients with malignancy to aid in the development of specific treatment guidelines for various cancers within this age cohort.Numerous studies have documented increased risk of post-operative morbidity and mortality in older adults with cancer. Evaluation of a national surgical registry found that older adults undergoing major gastrointestinal surgery have substan-tially higher risks of complications and death than individuals younger than 65 years.70 The impact of age on risk was present across all operations but had most impact in liver and rectal surgery. Surgeons are challenged to decide whether major sur-gery is justified in older adult patients, especially those with limited life expectancy. Effectiveness of oncologic surgery in older adult patients depends on whether a cure can be achieved safely without compromise to functional status or quality of life. Postoperative life expectancy should be improved by surgery, or, at the very least, not diminished.Emergency SurgeryEmergent surgery caries exceptionally high risk for older adult patients. In an analysis of patients age 90 years and older, 90-day mortality after emergency gastrointestinal procedures was 54%.71 In a large cohort of patients undergoing endovas-cular repair for ruptured aortic aneurysm, 30-day mortality was 35% after primary aortic repair and 52% after open conversion of endovascular aortic repair.72Frail institutionalized elders are at substantial risk for poor surgical outcomes after emergent surgery. In an analysis of over 70,000 nursing home residents who underwent emer-gent abdominal operations (surgery for bleeding ulcer, chole-cystectomy, appendectomy, and colectomy), operative mortality was twoto threefold higher than among matched community-dwelling elders.73 In addition, invasive life-sustaining interven-tions after surgery were significantly higher in the nursing home population than among noninstitutionalized Medicare enrollees, ranging from 18% vs. 5%, respectively, after cholecystectomy to 55% vs. 43%, respectively, after ulcer surgery. The combined effects of poor nutrition, decreased cogni-tion, and immune impairments due to nutritional or phar-macologic factors create a treacherous circumstance for older adult patients with poorly defined symptoms or who pres-ent with more advanced disease. In acute abdominal conditions, such as acute appendicitis and acute cholecystitis, one-third of older adult patients will lack an elevated white blood cell count, one-third will lack fever, and one-third will lack physical find-ings of localized peritonitis.74 These deficits contribute to a threefold higher rate of perforated appendicitis and of gangrene of the gallbladder in older adult patients compared to young patients. An “unimpressive” physical exam in an older adult patient with acute onset of abdominal symptoms should never be taken as a sign of the absence of surgical disease.Cardiovascular SurgeryWith advances in cardiopulmonary bypass technique, myocar-dial protection, and improved perioperative care, coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) and valve replacement operations have become safer in older patients. When considering cardiovascular surgery in elders, it is essential to consider that advanced age is not the strongest predictor of poorer outcomes or increased mor-tality compared in older patients. It has been demonstrated that emergency operations, preoperative New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional class 3 or greater, and chronic renal failure are the strongest independent predictors of increased operative mortality.75 In one study, preoperative renal dysfunction, cere-brovascular disease, valve surgery, and catastrophic state were independent predictors of increased mortality in older adult patients.76 Older adult patients with non–dialysis-dependent renal dysfunction had a 60% chance of death during a 5-year follow-up period compared to 25% in older adult patients with-out a history of renal dysfunction. Similarly, the presence of cerebrovascular disease resulted in a two-fold increase in mor-tality among older adult patients.76 Even patients who were 80 years of age or more did not have any significant increase in surgical risk and within this population, and the 4-year actuarial survival was 70.5% with an event-free survival of 60.6%.There has been an increase in definitive operative interven-tion to older patients with operable coronary artery disease. The Society of Thoracic Surgeons reports that perioperative mortality rates range from 1.6% in patients 51 to 60 years of age to 7.7% in those 81 to 90 years of age.77 Older patients are more likely to have significant three-vessel disease accompanied by poor ejec-tion fraction, left ventricular hypertrophy, significant valvular disease, and previous history of myocardial infarction than are younger patients.77 Older patients also are more likely to be clas-sified as NYHA functional class 3 or higher and are more likely to present on an emergent basis, in part because of reluctance to provide elective surgical intervention because of presumptive poorer outcome. Despite the increased risk of morbidity and mortality compared to younger patients, older adult patients, including those >80 years old, can undergo CABG with accept-able mortality risk. The overall mortality rate is approximately 7% to 12% for older adult patients, including those in whom CABG is performed under emergency conditions. The mortality rate decreases to approximately 2.8% when CABG is performed electively with careful preoperative evaluation.78Valve ReplacementAs the population ages, the incidence of senile calcific aortic stenosis and referral for aortic valve replacement are increas-ing. The operative mortality from aortic valve replacement is estimated to be between 3% and 10%, with an average of approximately 7.7%.76 If aortic stenosis is allowed to progress without operative intervention, CHF will ensue. The average survival of these patients is approximately 1.5 to 2 years. If a patient is deemed fit for operative intervention, age should not 6Brunicardi_Ch47_p2045-p2060.indd   205528/02/19   2:08 PM 2056SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIbe a deterrent, especially considering the potential to increase life expectancy. It has been recommended that the carefully selected, minimally symptomatic octogenarian with aortic ste-nosis should be considered a low-risk patient and be expected to experience an uneventful operative course and expedient recov-ery. More importantly, if elective procedures are delayed until symptoms or left ventricular dysfunction develop, patients may suffer from unnecessary increased operative risk and mortality.75  Early intervention results in a demonstrable improvement in quality of life in these patients, with many improving their NYHA functional classification.Older patients are candidates for mitral valve surgery when ischemic regurgitation is present. Surgery for mitral valve disease carries a higher morbidity and mortality risk than for aortic intervention, with an estimated mortality rate as high as 20%.77 Left ventricular function usually is compromised in patients requiring intervention, leading to a poorer outcome in these patients. The surgical outcome for mitral valve proce-dures depends on the extent of the disease, age of the patient, presence of pulmonary hypertension, and extent of coronary artery disease. The presence of comorbid conditions combined with the emergent nature of surgery in a large percentage of older patients further worsens the outcome. Therefore, a deci-sion regarding management of mitral valve disease should be individualized to each patient. Another concern regarding older patients who are candidates for valve disease surgery is the additional need for coronary revascularization—an important contributor to morbidity and mortality from surgical interven-tion. To mitigate risk, an older patient with multiple comorbid conditions in need of a combined procedure should only have critically stenosed vessels bypassed.79 Neurologic complications from valve surgery are particularly common in older patients. It has been estimated that approximately 30% of patients  >70 years old who undergo valve procedures develop either transient or permanent neurologic dysfunction.22 This often is a result of embolism from debris dislodged from the valve during the procedure or from a formed thrombus in the right atrium.An important consideration in valve replacement proce-dures in older patients is the type of prosthesis to be used. Older patients are at increased risk from bleeding-associated anticoagu-lation complications. This risk is especially significant in patients who have experienced falls and minor trauma that have resulted in intracranial hemorrhage. To avoid the lifelong requirement for anticoagulants, bioprosthetic valves should be used in place of mechanical valves whenever possible.79 Although the biopros-thetic valves are not as durable as mechanical valves, studies demonstrate excellent structural integrity 10 years post proce-dure, making it an appropriate choice in older patients.Transcatheter aortic valve implantation/replacement (TAVI/TAVR) is increasingly being used to treat aortic stenosis. Initially, this technique was reserved for individuals with high surgical risk. A systematic review of transcatheter aortic valve implantation versus surgical aortic valve replacement revealed that, compared to surgical repair, the transcatheter approach may have similar or better early and midterm outcomes, including among lowto intermediate-risk patients.80 Furthermore, there is increasing evidence that suggests TAVI results in acceptable long-term results in the older adult population.81,82Endovascular Aortic SurgeryWith increasing use of screening abdominal CT scans and ultrasounds for evaluation of various abdominal complaints, abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAA) are being identified with greater frequency, The percentage of AAA rises from about 1% at age 55 to 60 years to approximately 10% in patients 80 years of age or older.83 Historically, very old patients were deemed poor operative candidates for the traditional open repair given the frequent presence of comorbid conditions and limited car-diopulmonary reserve to tolerate a major operation or the many hours of required operative time and general anesthesia. The dissemination of endovascular techniques for repair of AAA, however, has shifted the risk-benefit ratio for operative inter-vention, allowing greater life expectancy for the elective repair of this potentially life-threatening condition with the benefits of a minimally invasive approach.Multiple studies have demonstrated that endovascular aortic repair (EVAR) is feasible and efficacious in older adult patients, including those previously considered unfit for open repair. EVAR is a minimally invasive technique in which a pros-thetic graft is introduced into the aortic lumen via the common femoral artery to exclude the aortic aneurysm sac. EVAR sig-nificantly reduces operative and anesthesia times, blood loss, intensive care needs, length of stays, and major postoperative morbidity associated with open AAA repair. This procedure also can be done using epidural anesthesia for high-risk candi-dates who may tolerate general anesthesia poorly (Fig. 47-2).Careful consideration of the life expectancy and the risk of rupture dictate the necessity for intervention. EVAR remains a viable option in older adult patients. Nonoperative management is justified in frail older adult patients with multiple comorbidi-ties and reduced life expectancy whose operative risks outweigh the risk of rupture and in those who are unlikely to survive long enough to benefit from the repair.Palliative SurgeryPalliative surgery is defined as surgical intervention targeted to alleviate a patient’s symptoms, thus improving the patient’s quality of life despite minimal impact on the patient’s survival.54 With an increasing number of older patients presenting with advanced disease, surgeons must be familiar with the concept of palliation to control symptoms. This concept focuses on pro-viding the maximal benefit to the patient using the least-invasive  intervention. Ideally, this intervention leads to symptom relief and preservation of the quality of life in terminal disease states by alleviating symptoms such as intractable vomiting and severe pain. The success of palliative surgery is a careful bal-ance between achieving symptom relief without the develop-ment of new symptoms from the intervention itself. A recent meta-analysis of outcomes after palliative surgery for malignant bowel obstruction from peritoneal carcinomatosis revealed that although palliative surgery can benefit some patients, many patients experience serious complications, incomplete resolu-tion of symptoms, and substantial hospitalization relative to the patient’s remaining survival time.84 It is essential to provide patients with realistic information about expected outcomes after palliative surgery to ensure that this surgical intervention is in line with their care preferences. The core competencies for surgical palliative care are shown in Table 47-5.SUMMARYMajor surgery in older adults requires careful consideration. In addition to chronic medical conditions, many elders have geriat-ric syndromes that put them at high risk for increased morbidity, Brunicardi_Ch47_p2045-p2060.indd   205628/02/19   2:08 PM 2057SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS IN OLDER ADULTSCHAPTER 47Figure 47-2. Endovascular repair of abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAAs) has gained favor for suitable older adult patients to prevent rupture. Through minimal groin incisions, this 82-year-old patient underwent repair of an AAA and right iliac artery aneurysm and was discharged on post-op day 2.mortality, and poor functional recovery after surgery. Screen-ing for and optimization of multiple domains of vulnerability is essential to improve outcomes in this vulnerable population. Furthermore, the incorporation of palliative care principles into the surgical care of frail elders will improve patient-centered decision-making, symptom management, and quality of life.REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	McRae PJ, Peel NM, Walker PJ, de Looze JW, Mudge AM. Geri-atric syndromes in individuals admitted to vascular and urology surgical units. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2014;62(6):1105-1109.	2.	McRae PJ, Walker PJ, Peel NM, et al. Frailty and geriatric syndromes in vascular surgical ward patients. Ann Vasc Surg. 2016;35:9-18.	3.	Flacker JM. What is a geriatric syndrome anyway? J Am Geri-atr Soc. 2003;51(4):574-576.	4.	Fried LP. Frailty. In: Medina-Walpole A, Pacala JT, Potter JF, eds. Geriatric Review Syllabus. 9th ed. New York: American Geriatrics Society; 2016.	5.	Makary MA, Segev DL, Pronovost PJ, et al. Frailty as a pre-dictor of surgical outcomes in older patients. J Am Coll Surg. 2010;210(6):901-908.	6.	Suskind AM, Jin C, Cooperberg MR, et al. Preoperative frailty is associated with discharge to skilled or assisted living facili-ties after urologic procedures of varying complexity. Urology. 2016;97:25-32.	7.	Suskind AM, Walter LC, Jin C, et al. Impact of frailty on compli-cations in patients undergoing common urological procedures: a study from the American College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement database. BJU Int. 2016;117(5):836-842.	8.	Robinson TN, Wu DS, Pointer L, Dunn CL, Cleveland JC Jr, Moss M. Simple frailty score predicts postoperative complica-tions across surgical specialties. Am J Surg. 2013;206(4):544-550.	9.	Robinson TN, Wu DS, Sauaia A, et al. Slower walking speed forecasts increased postoperative morbidity and 1-year mortal-ity across surgical specialties. Ann Surg. 2013;258(4):582-588; discussion 588-590.	10.	Revenig LM, Canter DJ, Kim S, et al. Report of a simplified frailty score predictive of short-term postoperative morbidity and mortality. J Am Coll Surg. 2015;220(5):904-911 e901.	11.	Revenig LM, Canter DJ, Master VA, et al. A prospective study examining the association between preoperative frailty and postoperative complications in patients undergoing minimally invasive surgery. J Endourol. 2014;28(4):476-480.	12.	Fried LP, Tangen CM, Walston J, et al. Frailty in older adults: evidence for a phenotype. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2001;56(3):M146-M156.	13.	Mitnitski AB, Mogilner AJ, Rockwood K. Accumulation of def-icits as a proxy measure of aging. Sci World J. 2001;1:323-336.	14.	Sternberg SA, Wershof Schwartz A, Karunananthan S, Bergman H, Mark Clarfield A. The identification of frailty: a systematic literature review. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2011;59(11):2129-2138.	15.	Velanovich V, Antoine H, Swartz A, Peters D, Rubinfeld I. Accumulating deficits model of frailty and postoperative mor-tality and morbidity: its application to a national database.  J Surgical Res. 2013;183(1):104-110.	16.	Inouye SK, Studenski S, Tinetti ME, Kuchel GA. Geriatric syndromes: clinical, research, and policy implications of a core geriatric concept. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2007;55(5):780-791.	17.	Berry SD, Kiel DP. Falls. In: Medina-Walpole A, Pacala JT, Potter JF, eds. Geriatric Review Syllabus. 9th ed. New York: American Geriatrics Society; 2016.	18.	Kronzer VL, Jerry MR, Ben Abdallah A, et al. Preoperative falls predict postoperative falls, functional decline, and surgical complications. EBioMedicine. 2016;12:302-308.Brunicardi_Ch47_p2045-p2060.indd   205728/02/19   2:08 PM 2058SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	19.	Marcantonio ER. Delirium. In: Medina-Walpole A, Pacala JT, Potter JF, eds. Geriatric Review Syllabus. 9th ed. New York: American Geriatrics Society; 2016.	20.	Christmas C, Pacala JT. Perioperative care. In: Medina-Walpole A, Pacala JT, Potter CT, eds. Geriatric Review Syllabus. 9th ed. New York: American Geriatrics Society; 2016.	21.	McCusker J, Cole M, Abrahamowicz M, Primeau F,  Belzile E. Delirium predicts 12-month mortality. Arch Int Med. 2002;162(4):457-463.	22.	Chow WB, Rosenthal RA, Merkow RP, et al. Optimal preop-erative assessment of the Surgeons National Surgical Qual-ity Improvement Program and the American Geriatrics Society. J Am Coll Surg. 2012;215(4):453-466.	23.	Mohanty S, Rosenthal RA, Russell MM, Neuman MD,  Ko CY, Esnaola NF. Optimal Perioperative Management of the Geriatric Patient: A Best Practices Guideline from the American College of Surgeons NSQIP and the American Geriatrics Society. J Am Coll Surg. 2016;222(5):930-947.	24.	Stefan M, Iglesia Lino L, Fernandez G. Medical consultation and best practices for preoperative evaluation of older adult patients. Hosp Pract. 2011;39(1):41-51.	25.	Shelkey M, Wallace M. Katz index of independence in activities of daily living (ADL). Director. 2000;8(2):72-73.	26.	Robinson TN, Eiseman B, Wallace JI, et al. Redefining geri-atric preoperative assessment using frailty, disability and co-morbidity. Ann Surg. 2009;250(3):449-455.	27.	Graf C. The Lawton instrumental activities of daily liv-ing (IADL) scale. http://ConsultGeri/try-this/issue-23.pdf,  January 14, 2016.	28.	Robinson TN, Wallace JI, Wu DS, et al. Accumulated frailty characteristics predict postoperative discharge institutionaliza-tion in the geriatric patient. J Am Coll Surg. 2011;213(1):37-42; discussion 42-34.	29.	Steffens DC, Fisher GG, Langa KM, Potter GG, Plassman BL. Prevalence of depression among older Americans: the Aging, Demographics and Memory Study. Int Psychogeriatr. 2009;21(5):879-888.	30.	Cole MG, Dendukuri N. Risk factors for depression among older adult community subjects: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Psychiatry. 2003;160(6):1147-1156.	31.	Li C, Friedman B, Conwell Y, Fiscella K. Validity of the Patient Health Questionnaire 2 (PHQ-2) in identifying major depres-sion in older people. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2007;55(4):596-602.	32.	Blazer DG, Wu LT. The epidemiology of at-risk and binge drinking among middle-aged and older adult community adults: National Survey on Drug Use and Health. Am J Psychiatry. 2009;166(10):1162-1169.	33.	Nath B, Li Y, Carroll JE, Szabo G, Tseng JF, Shah SA. Alcohol exposure as a risk factor for adverse outcomes in elective sur-gery. J Gastrointest Surg. 2010;14(11):1732-1741.	34.	Tonnesen H, Kehlet H. Preoperative alcoholism and postopera-tive morbidity. Br J Surg. 1999;86(7):869-874.	35.	National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. CAGE Questionnaire. 2002. Available at: https://pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/aa65/aa65.htm. Accessed August 21, 2018.	36.	Gal J, Bogar L, Acsady G, Kertai MD. Cardiac risk reduction in non-cardiac surgery: the role of anaesthesia and monitoring techniques. Eur J Anaesthesiol. 2006;23(8):641-648.	37.	Puig-Barbera J, Marquez-Calderon S, Vila-Sanchez M. Car-diac complications of major elective non-cardiac surgery: incidence and risk factors (in Spanish). Rev Esp Cardiol. 2006;59(4):329-337.	38.	Fleisher LA, Fleischmann KE, Auerbach AD, et al. 2014 ACC/AHA guideline on perioperative cardiovascular evalu-ation and management of patients undergoing noncardiac surgery: executive summary: a report of the American  College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on practice guidelines. Developed in collaboration with the American College of Surgeons, American Society of Anesthesiologists, American Society of Echocardiography, American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, Heart Rhythm Society, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, and Society of Vascular Medicine Endorsed by the Society of Hospital Medicine. J Nucl Cardiol. 2015;22(1):162-215.	39.	Ansaloni L, Catena F, Chattat R, et al. Risk factors and inci-dence of postoperative delirium in older adult patients after elective and emergency surgery. Br J Surg. 2010;97(2):273-280.	40.	Landesberg G, Beattie WS, Mosseri M, Jaffe AS,  Alpert JS. Perioperative myocardial infarction. Circulation. 2009;119(22):2936-2944.	41.	Smetana GW, Macpherson DS. The case against routine preop-erative laboratory testing. Med Clin North Am. 2003;87(1):7-40.	42.	Smetana GW, Cohn SL, Lawrence VA. Update in perioperative medicine. Ann Intern Med. 2004;140(6):452-461.	43.	Johnson RG, Arozullah AM, Neumayer L, Henderson WG, Hosokawa P, Khuri SF. Multivariable predictors of postop-erative respiratory failure after general and vascular surgery: results from the patient safety in surgery study. J Am Coll Surg. 2007;204(6):1188-1198.	44.	White JV, Guenter P, Jensen G, et al. Consensus statement: Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics and American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition: characteristics recom-mended for the identification and documentation of adult malnutrition (undernutrition). JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 2012;36(3):275-283.	45.	Barnett SR. Polypharmacy and perioperative medications in the older adult. Anesthesiol Clin. 2009;27(3):377-389.	46.	Qato DM, Alexander GC, Conti RM, Johnson M, Schumm P, Lindau ST. Use of prescription and over-the-counter medications and dietary supplements among older adults in the United States. JAMA. 2008;300(24):2867-2878.	47.	Hajjar ER, Cafiero AC, Hanlon JT. Polypharmacy in older adult patients. Am J Geriatr Pharmacother. 2007;5(4):345-351.	48.	Seckler AB, Meier DE, Mulvihill M, Paris BE. Substituted judgment: how accurate are proxy predictions? Ann Intern Med. 1991;115(2):92-98.	49.	Fried TR, Bradley EH, Towle VR, Allore H. Understanding the treatment preferences of seriously ill patients. N Engl J Med. 2002;346(14):1061-1066.	50.	American Society of Anesthesiologists C. Practice guidelines for preoperative fasting and the use of pharmacologic agents to reduce the risk of pulmonary aspiration: application to healthy patients undergoing elective procedures: an updated report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Com-mittee on Standards and Practice Parameters. Anesthesiology. 2011;114(3):495-511.	51.	Classen DC, Evans RS, Pestotnik SL, Horn SD, Menlove RL, Burke JP. The timing of prophylactic administration of antibi-otics and the risk of surgical-wound infection. N Engl J Med. 1992;326(5):281-286.	52.	Silber JH, Rosenbaum PR, Trudeau ME, et al. Preopera-tive antibiotics and mortality in the older adult. Ann Surg. 2005;242(1):107-114.	53.	Harari D, Hopper A, Dhesi J, Babic-Illman G, Lockwood L, Martin F. Proactive care of older people undergoing surgery (‘POPS’): designing, embedding, evaluating, and funding a comprehensive geriatric assessment service for older elective surgical patients. Age Ageing. 2007;36(2):190-196.	54.	Englesbe MJ, Grenda DR, Sullivan JA, et al. The Michigan Surgical Home and Optimization Program is a scalable model to improve care and reduce costs. Surgery. 2017;161(6): 1659-1666.	55.	Temel JS, Greer JA, Muzikansky A, et al. Early palliative care for patients with metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer. N Eng J Med. 2010;363(8):733-742.Brunicardi_Ch47_p2045-p2060.indd   205828/02/19   2:08 PM 2059SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS IN OLDER ADULTSCHAPTER 47	56.	Kavialieratos D, Corbelli J, Zhang D, et al. Association between palliative care and patient and caregiver outcomes. A systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA. 2016;316(20):2104-2114.	57.	Zimmermann C, Swami N, Krzyzanowska M, et al. Early palliative care for patients with advanced cancer: a clusterrandomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2014;383(9930): 1721-1730.	58.	Olmsted CL, Johnson AM, Kaboli P, et al. Use of pal-liative care and hospice among surgical and medical spe-cialties in the Veterans Health Administration. JAMA Surg. 2014;149(11):1169-1175.	59.	Surgeons Palliative Care Workgroup. Office of Promoting  Excellence in End-of-Life Care: Surgeon’s Palliative Care Work-group report from the field. J Am Coll Surg. 2003;197(4):661-686.	60.	Moorhouse P, Mallery LH. Palliative and therapeutic harmoni-zation: a model for appropriate decision-making in frail older adults. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2012;60(12):2326-2332.	61.	Ernst KF, Hall DE, Schmid KK, et al. Surgical palliative care consultations over time in relationship to systemwide frailty screening. JAMA Surg. 2014;149(11):1121-1126.	62.	McCorkle R, Dowd M, Ercolano E, et al. Effects of a nursing intervention on quality of life outcomes in post-surgical women with gynecological cancers. Psychooncology. 2009;18(1):62-70.	63.	McCorkle R, Strumpf NE, Nuamah IF, et al. A specialized home care intervention improves survival among older post-surgical cancer patients. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2000;48(12):1707-1713.	64.	Englesbe MJ, Grenda DR, Sullivan JA, et al. The Michigan Sur-gical Home and Optimization Program is a scalable model to improve care and reduce costs. Surgery. 2017;161(6):1659-1666.	65.	Lawrence VA, Hazuda HP, Cornell JE, et al. Functional inde-pendence after major abdominal surgery in the older adult. J Am Coll Surg. 2004;199(5):762-772.	66.	Balentine CJ, Naik AD, Berger DH, et al. Postacute care after major abdominal surgery in older adult patients: intersection of age, functional status, and postoperative complications. JAMA Surg. 2016;151(8):759-766.	67.	Oresanya L, Zhao S, Gan S, et al. Functional outcomes after lower extremity revascularization in nursing home residents: a national cohort study. JAMA Intern Med. 2015;175(6):951-957.	68.	Finlayson E, Zhaao S, Boscardin WJ, et al. Functional status after colon cancer surgery in older adult nursing home residents.  J Am Geriatr Soc. 2012;60(5):967-673.	69.	Pasetto LM, Lise M, Monfardini S. Preoperative assessment of older adult cancer patient. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2007;64:10.	70.	Yeo HL, O’Mahoney PR, Lachs M, et al. Surgical oncol-ogy outcomes in the aging US population. J Surg Res. 2016;205(1):11-18.	71.	Sudlow A, Tuffaha H, Strearns AT, et al. Outcomes of surgery in patients aged >=90 years in the general surgical setting. Ann R Coll Surg Engl. 2018;24:1-6.	72.	Scali ST, Runge SJ, Feezor RJ, et al. Outcomes after endovas-cular aneurysm repair conversion and primary aortic repair for urgent and emergency indications in the Society for Vascular Surgery Quality Initiative. J Vasc Surg. 2016;64(2):338-347.	73.	Finlayson E, Wang L, Landefeld CS, et al. Major abdominal surgery in nursing home residents: a national study. Ann Surg. 2011;254(6):921-926.	74.	Zenilman ME. Surgery in the older adult. Curr Probl Surg. 1998;35:99-179.	75.	Cerillo AG, Kodami AA, Solinas M, et al. Aortic valve surgery in the older adult patient: a retrospective review. Interact Car-diovasc Thorac Surg. 2007;6:308-313.	76.	Srinivasan AK, Oo AY, Grayson AD, et al. Mid-term survival after cardiac surgery in older adult patients: analysis of predic-tors for increased mortality. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2004;3:289-293.	77.	Davis EA, Gardner TJ, Gillinov AM, et al. Valvular disease in the older adult: influence on surgical results. Ann Thorac Surg. 1993;55:333-337.	78.	Richmond TS, Kaunder D, Strumpf N, et al. Characteristics and outcomes of serious traumatic injury in older adults. J Am Geri-atr Soc. 2002;50:215-222.	79.	Aziz S, Grover FL. Cardiovascular surgery in the older adult. Cardiol Clin. 1999;17:213-231.	80.	Garguilo G, Sannino A, Capodanno D, et al. Transcatheter aortic valve implantation versus surgical aortic valve replace-ment: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med. 2016;165(50):334-344.	81.	Chakos A, Wilson-Smith A, Arora S, et al. Long term outcomes of transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI): a systematic review of 5-year survival and beyond. Ann Cardiothorac Surg. 2017;6(5):432-443.	82.	D’Onofrio A, Facchin M, Besola L, et al. Intermediate clini-cal and hemodynamic outcomes after transcatheter aortic valve implantation. Ann Thorac Surg. 2016;101:881-8; discussion 888.	83.	Biebl M, Lau LL, Hakaim AG, et al. Midterm outcomes of endo-vascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair in octogenarians: a single institution’s experience. J Vasc Surg. 2004;40:435-442.	84.	Olson P, Pinkerton C, Brasel KJ, et al. Palliative surgery for malignant bowel obstruction from carcinomatosis: a system-atic review. JAMA Surg. 2014;149(4):383-392.Brunicardi_Ch47_p2045-p2060.indd   205928/02/19   2:08 PM
# Chunk 8950
Brunicardi_Ch47_p2045-p2060.indd   206028/02/19   2:08 PMThis page intentionally left blank

Ethics, Palliative Care, and Care  at the End of LifeDaniel E. Hall, Eliza W. Beal, Peter A. Angelos,  Geoffrey P. Dunn, Daniel B. Hinshaw,  and Timothy M. Pawlik48chapterDedicated to the advancement of surgery along its scientific and moral side. June 10, 1926, dedication on the Murphy Auditorium, the first home of the American College of SurgeonsWHY ETHICS MATTEREthical concerns involve not only the interests of patients but also the interests of surgeons and society. Surgeons choose among the options available to them because they have particu-lar opinions regarding what would be good (or bad) for their patients. Aristotle described practical wisdom (Greek: phronesis)  as the capacity to choose the best option from among several imperfect alternatives (Fig. 48-1).1 Frequently, surgeons are confronted with clinical or interpersonal situations in which there is incomplete information, uncertain outcomes, and/or complex personal and familial relationships. The capacity to choose wisely in such circumstances is the challenge of surgi-cal practice.DEFINITIONS AND OVERVIEWBiomedical ethics is the system of analysis and deliberation dedicated to guiding surgeons toward the “good” in the prac-tice of surgery. One of the most influential ethical “systems” in the field of biomedical ethics is the principalist approach as articulated by Beauchamp and Childress.2 In this approach to ethical issues, moral dilemmas are deliberated using four guiding principles: autonomy, beneficence, nonmaleficence, and justice.2The principle of autonomy respects the capacity of indi-viduals to choose their own destiny, and it implies that indi-viduals have a right to make those choices. It also implies an obligation for physicians to permit patients to make autonomous choices about their medical care. Beneficence requires that proposed actions aim at and achieve something good whereas nonmaleficence aims at avoiding concrete harm: primum non nocere.* Justice requires fairness where both the benefits and burdens of a particular action are distributed equitably.The history of medical ethics has its origins in antiquity. The Hippocratic Oath along with other professional codes has guided the actions of physicians for thousands of years. However, the growing technical powers of modern medicine raise new questions that were inconceivable in previous gen-erations. Life support, dialysis, and modern drugs, as well as organ and cellular transplantation, have engendered new moral and ethical questions. As such, the ethical challenges faced by the surgeon have become more complex and require greater attention.The case-based paradigm for bioethics is used when the clinical team encounters a situation in which two or more val-ues or principles come into apparent conflict. The first step is to clarify the relevant principles (e.g., autonomy, beneficence, nonmaleficence, and justice) and values at stake (e.g., self-determination, quality of life). After identifying the principles and values that are affecting the situation, a proposed course of action is considered given the circumstances.Much of the discourse in bioethics adopts this “principal-ist” approach in which the relevant principles are identified, weighed, and balanced, and then applied to formulate a course of action. This approach to bioethics is a powerful technique for thinking through moral problems because the four princi-ples help identify what is at stake in any proposed course of action. However, the principles themselves do not resolve ethi-cal dilemmas. Working together, patients and surgeons must use wise judgment to choose the best course of action for the specific case.Why Ethics Matter	2061Definitions and Overview	2061Specific Issues in Surgical Ethics	2062Informed Consent / 2062The Boundaries of Autonomy: Advance Directives and Powers of Attorney / 2064Withdrawing and Withholding  Life-Sustaining Therapies / 2065Living Donor Liver Transplantation / 2066Palliative Care	2066General Principles of Palliative Care / 2066Concepts of Suffering, Pain, Health, and Healing / 2067Effective Communication and Negotiating the Goals of Care / 2067Care at the End of Life	2068The Syndrome of Imminent Demise / 2068Common Symptoms at the End of Life and Their Management / 2068Pronouncing Death / 2072Aid in Dying / 2072Professional Ethics: Conflict of   Interest, Research, and  Clinical Ethics	2072Conflict of Interest / 2072Research Ethics / 2072Special Concerns in Surgical Research / 2072Surgical Innovation / 2073The Ethics of Authorship / 2073Clinical Ethics: Disclosure of Errors / 2074*“First do no harm.”Brunicardi_Ch48_p2061-p2076.indd   206119/02/19   1:49 PM 2062Figure 48-1. Bust of Aristotle. Marble, Roman copy after a Greek bronze original by Lysippos from 330 b.c. (From http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Aristotle_Altemps_Inv8575.jpg: Ludovisi Collection, Accession number Inv. 8575, Palazzo Altemps, Location Ground Floor, Branch of the National Roman Museum. Photographer/-source Jastrow [2006] from Wikipedia.)Choosing wisely requires the virtue of practical wisdom first described by Aristotle (see Fig. 48-1). Along with the other cardinal virtues of courage, justice and temperance, practical wisdom is a central component of virtue ethics which comple-ment principalist ethics by guiding choices toward the best options for treatment. Practical wisdom cannot be learned from books and is developed only through experience. The appren-ticeship model of surgical residency fosters the development of practical wisdom through experience. More than teaching merely technical mastery, surgical residency is also moral training. In fact, the sociologist Charles Bosk argues that the “postgraduate training of surgeons is above all things an ethical training.”3SPECIFIC ISSUES IN SURGICAL ETHICSInformed ConsentAlthough a relatively recent development, the doctrine of informed consent is one of the most widely established tenets of modern biomedical ethics. During the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, most physicians practiced a form of benign paternalism whereby patients were rarely involved in the deci-sion-making process regarding their medical care, relying instead on the beneficence of the physician. Consensus among the wider public eventually changed such that surgeons are now expected to have an open discussion about diagnosis and treatment with the patient to obtain informed consent. In the United States, the legal doctrine of simple consent dates from the 1914 decision in Schloendorff vs. The Society of New York Hospital regarding a case in which a surgeon removed a diseased uterus after the patient had consented to an examination under anesthesia, but with the express stipulation that no operative excision should be performed. The physician argued that his decision was justified by the beneficent obligation to avoid the risks of a second anes-thetic. However, Justice Benjamin Cardozo stated:Every human being of adult years and sound mind has a right to determine what shall be done with his body; and a surgeon who performs an operation without his patient’s consent commits an assault, for which he is liable in damages . . . except in cases of emergency, where the patient is unconscious, and where it is neces-sary to operate before consent can be obtained.4Having established that patients have the right to deter-mine what happens to their bodies, it took some time for the modern concept of informed consent to emerge from the ini-tial doctrine of simple consent. The initial approach appealed to a professional practice standard whereby physicians were obligated to disclose to patients the kind of information that experienced surgeons customarily disclosed.5 However, this dis-closure was not always adequate for patient needs. In the 1972 Key Points1	The physician should document that the patient or surrogate has the capacity to make a medical decision.2	Sufficient details regarding diagnosis and treatment options should be disclosed to the patient so that the patient can pro-vide informed consent.3	Living wills are written to anticipate treatment options and choices in the event that a patient is rendered incompetent by a terminal illness.4	The durable power of attorney for healthcare identifies sur-rogate decision makers and invests them with the authority to make healthcare decisions on behalf of patients in the event that they are unable to speak for themselves.5	Surgeons should encourage their patients to complete a liv-ing will and clearly identify their surrogates early in the course of treatment.6	Earlier referrals and wider use of palliative and hospice care may help more patients achieve their goals at the end of life.7	Seven requirements for the ethical conduct of clinical research studies have been articulated: value, scientific validity, fair subject selection, favorable risk-benefit ratio, independent review, informed consent, and respect for enrolled subjects.8	Individuals working together on research endeavors should have clear discussions early in the planning process about authorship, and those discussions should be continued throughout the project or study.9	Disclosure of error is consistent with recent ethical advances in medicine toward more transparency, openness with patients, and the involvement of patients in their care.Brunicardi_Ch48_p2061-p2076.indd   206219/02/19   1:49 PM 2063ETHICS, PALLIATIVE CARE, AND CARE AT THE END OF LIFECHAPTER 48Patient establishes selfas decision-makerNoYesEngage patientdirectly in informedconsent process andin all aspects of careIdentify patient’s culturalidentity and, if possible,explicit preferences formaking decisions,including degree of familyinvolvementMaintain heightenedawareness of patient-family or patient-surrogate interactionsMake sure family orother surrogate is willingparticipant in informedconsent processContinuously reassessfor signs that patient isunhappy with current role ininformed consent processSecure private discussionwith patient and remindpatient of right toinformed consent processMake sure patient hasnot deferred decision-making involuntarilyFigure 48-2. Algorithm for navigating the process of informed consent. (Modified with permission from Childers R, Lipsett A, Pawlik T. Informed consent and the surgeon, J Am Coll Surg. 2009 Apr;208(4):627-634.)landmark case, Canterbury vs. Spence, the court rejected the professional practice standard in favor of the reasonable person standard whereby physicians are obliged to disclose to patients all information regarding diagnosis, treatment options, and risks that a “reasonable patient” would want to know in a similar situation. Rather than relying on the practices or consensus of the medical community, the reasonable person standard empow-ers the public (reasonable persons) to determine how much information should be disclosed by physicians to ensure that consent is truly informed. The court did recognize, however, that there are practical limits on the amount of information that can be communicated or assimilated.5 Subsequent litigation has revolved around what reasonable people expect to be disclosed in the consent process to include the nature and frequency of potential complications, the prognostic life expectancy,6 and the surgeon-specific success rates.4 Despite the litigious environ-ment of medical practice, it is difficult to prosecute a case of inadequate informed consent so long as the clinician has made a concerted and documented effort to involve the patient in the decision-making process.Adequate informed consent entails at least four basic ele-ments: (a) the physician documents that the patient or surrogate has the capacity to make a medical decision; (b) the sur-geon discloses to the patient details regarding the diagno-sis and treatment options sufficiently for the patient to make an informed choice; (c) the patient demonstrates understanding of the disclosed information before (d) authoriz-ing freely a specific treatment plan without undue influence (Fig. 48-2). These goals are aimed at respecting each patient’s prerogative for autonomous self-determination. To accomplish these goals, the surgeon needs to engage in a discussion about the causes and nature of the patient’s disease, the risks and ben-efits of available treatment options, as well as details regarding what patients can expect after an operative intervention includ-ing possible outcomes and complications.7-14Certain clinical settings make obtaining informed consent challenging. For example, obtaining consent for emergency surgery can be difficult, as the clinical team is forced to make decisions with incomplete information. Emergency consent requires the surgeon to consider if and how possible interven-tions might save a patient’s life, and if successful, what kind of disability might be anticipated. Surgical emergencies are one of the few instances where the limits of patient autonomy are freely acknowledged, and surgeons are empowered by law and ethics to act promptly in the best interests of their patients according to the surgeon’s judgment. Most applicable medi-cal laws require physicians to provide the standard of care to incapacitated patients, even if it entails invasive procedures without the explicit consent of the patient or surrogate. If at all possible, surgeons should seek the permission of their patients to provide treatment, but when emergency medical conditions render patients unable to grant that permission, and when delay is likely to have grave consequences, surgeons are legally and ethically justified in providing whatever surgical treatment the surgeon judges necessary to preserve life and restore health.4 This justification is based on the social consensus that most people would want their lives and health protected in this way, and this consensus is manifest in the medical profession’s gen-eral orientation to preserve life. It may be that subsequent care may be withdrawn or withheld when the clinical prognosis is clearer, but in the context of initial resuscitation of injured patients, incomplete information makes clear judgments about the patient’s ultimate prognosis or outcome impossible.The pediatric population also presents unique challenges for the process of consent. For many reasons, children and ado-lescents cannot participate in the process of giving informed 1122Brunicardi_Ch48_p2061-p2076.indd   206319/02/19   1:49 PM 2064SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIconsent in the same way as adults. Depending on their age, children may lack the cognitive and emotional maturity to participate fully in the process. In addition, depending on the child’s age, their specific circumstances, as well as the local jurisdiction, children may not have legal standing to fully par-ticipate on their own independent of their parents. The use of parents or guardians as surrogate decision makers only partially addresses the ethical responsibility of the surgeon to involve the child in the informed consent process. The surgeon should strive to augment the role of the decision makers by involving the child in the process. Specifically, children should receive age-appropriate information about their clinical situation and therapeutic options delivered in an appropriate setting and tone so that the surgeon can solicit the child’s “assent” for treatment. In this manner, while the parents or surrogate decision makers formally give the informed consent, the child remains an inte-gral part of the process.Certain religious practices can present additional chal-lenges when treating minor children whose parents disallow medically indicated blood transfusions; however, case law has made clear the precedent that parents, regardless of their held beliefs, may not place their minor children at mortal risk. In such a circumstance, the physician should seek counsel from the hospital medicolegal team, as well as from the institutional ethics team. Legal precedent has, in general, established that the hospital or physician can proceed with providing all necessary care for the child.Obtaining “consent” for organ donation deserves spe-cific mention.15 Historically, discussion of organ donation with families of potential donors was performed by transplant professionals, who were introduced to families by intensivists after brain death had been confirmed and the family had been informed of the fact of death. In other instances, consent might be obtained by intensivists caring for the donor, as they were assumed to know the patient’s family and could facilitate the process. However, issues of moral “neutrality” as part of end-of-life care in the intensive care unit have caused a shift in how  obtaining “consent” for organ donation is handled. Responsibility for obtaining consent from the donor family is now vested in trained “designated requestors” (or “organ procurement  coordinators”)16 or by “independent” intensivists who do not have a therapeutic clinical relationship with the potential donor.17 In this way, the donor family can be allowed to make the decision regarding donation in a “neutral” environment without erosion of the therapeutic relationship with the treating physician or perceived undue pressure from the transplant team.The process of informed consent also can be limited by the capacity of patients to assimilate information in the context of their illness. For example, despite the best efforts of surgeons, evidence suggests that patients rarely retain much of what is dis-closed in the consent conversation, and they may not remember discussing details of the procedure that become relevant when postoperative complications arise.18 It is important to recognize that the doctrine of informed consent places the most emphasis on the principle of autonomy precisely in those clinical situa-tions when, because of their severe illness or impending death, patients are often divested of their autonomy.The Boundaries of Autonomy: Advance Directives and Powers of AttorneySevere illness and impending death can often render patients incapable of exercising their autonomy regarding medical decisions. One approach to these difficult situations is to make decisions in the “best interests” of patients, but because such decisions require value judgments about which thoughtful peo-ple frequently disagree, ethicists, lawyers, and legislators have sought a more reliable solution. Advance directives of various forms have been developed to carry forward into the future the autonomous choices of competent adults regarding healthcare decisions. Furthermore, the courts often accept “informal” advance directives in the form of sworn testimony about state-ments the patient made at some time previous to their illness. When a formal document expressing the patient’s advance directives fails to exist, surgeons should consider the comments patients and families make when asked about their wishes in the setting of debilitating illness.Living wills are written to anticipate treatment options and choices in the event that a patient is incapacitated by a terminal illness. In the living will, the patient indicates which treatments she wishes to permit or prohibit in the setting of terminal illness. The possible treatments addressed often include mechanical ventilation, cardiopulmonary resuscitation, artificial nutri-tion, dialysis, antibiotics, or transfusion of blood products. Unfor-tunately, living wills are often too vague to offer concrete guidance in complex clinical situations, and the language (“termi-nal illness,” “artificial nutrition”) can be interpreted in many ways. Furthermore, by limiting the directive only to “terminal” conditions, it does not provide guidance for common clinical sce-narios like advanced dementia, delirium, or persistent vegetative states where the patient is unable to make decisions, but is not “terminally” ill. Perhaps even more problematic is the evidence that demonstrates that healthy patients cannot reliably predict their preferences when they are actually sick. This phenomenon is called “affective forecasting” and applies to many situations. For example, the general public estimates the health-related qual-ity of life (HRQoL) score of patients on dialysis at 0.39, although dialysis patients themselves rate their HRQoL at 0.56.19 Similarly, patients with colostomies rated their HRQoL at 0.92, compared to a score of 0.80 given by the general public for patients with colostomies.19 For these and other reasons, living wills are often unable to provide the extent of assistance they promise.20An alternative to living wills is the durable power of attor-ney for healthcare in which patients identify surrogate decision makers and invest them with the authority to make healthcare decisions on their behalf in the event that they are unable to speak for themselves. Proponents of this approach hope that the surrogate will be able to make decisions that reflect the choices that the patients themselves would make if they were able. Unfortunately, several studies demonstrate that surrogates are not much better than chance at predicting the choices patients make when the patient is able to state a preference. For example, a recent meta-analysis found that surrogates predicted patients’ treatment preferences with only 68% accuracy.21 These data reveal a flaw in the guiding principle of surrogate decision making: Surrogates do not necessarily have privileged insight into the autonomous preferences of patients. However, the dura-ble power of attorney at least allows patients to choose the person who will eventually make prudential decisions on their behalf and in their best interests; therefore, respecting the judgment of the surrogate is a way of respecting the self-determination of the incapacitated patient.22There is continuing enthusiasm for a wider use of advance directives. In fact, the 1991 Patient Self Determination Act requires all U.S. healthcare facilities to (a) inform patients of 334Brunicardi_Ch48_p2061-p2076.indd   206419/02/19   1:49 PM 2065ETHICS, PALLIATIVE CARE, AND CARE AT THE END OF LIFECHAPTER 48their rights to have advance directives, and (b) to document those advance directives in the chart at the time any patient is admitted to the healthcare facility.4 However, only a minority of patients in U.S. hospitals have advance directives despite concerted efforts to teach the public of their benefits and pro-vide resources to help patients prepare and maintain them. For example, the ambitious SUPPORT trial used specially trained nurses to promote communication between physicians, patients, and their surrogates to improve the care and decision making of critically ill patients. Despite this concerted effort, the interven-tion demonstrated “no significant change in the timing of do not resuscitate (DNR) orders, in physician-patient agreement about DNR orders, in the number of undesirable days (patients’ experiences), in the prevalence of pain, or in the resources consumed.”23Some of the reluctance around physician–patient agree-ment about DNR orders may reflect patient and family anxiety that DNR orders equate to “do not treat.” Patients and families should be assured, when appropriate, that declarations of DNR/do not intubate will not necessarily result in a change in ongoing routine clinical care. The issue of temporarily rescinding DNR/do not intubate orders around the time of an operative procedure may also need to be addressed with the family.Patients should be encouraged to clearly identify their sur-rogates, both formally and informally, early in the course of treatment and before any major elective operation. Often, around the time of surgery or at the end of life, there are limits to patient autonomy in medical decision-making. Seeking an advance directive or surrogate decision maker requires time that is not always available when the clinical situation deterio-rates. As such, these issues should be clarified as early as pos-sible in the patient–physician relationship.Withdrawing and Withholding Life-Sustaining TherapiesThe implementation of various forms of life support technol-ogy raise a number of legal and ethical concerns about when it is permissible to withdraw or withhold available therapeu-tic technology. There is general consensus among ethicists that there are no philosophic differences between withdrawing (stopping) or withholding (not starting) treatments that are no longer beneficial.24 However, the right to refuse, withdraw, and withhold beneficial treatments was not established before the landmark case of Karen Ann Quinlan. In 1975, Quinlan lapsed into a persistent vegetative state requiring ventilator support. After several months without clinical improvement, Quinlan’s parents asked the hospital to withdraw ventilator support. The hospital refused, fearing prosecution for euthanasia. The case was appealed to the New Jersey Supreme Court where the justices ruled that it was permissible to withdraw ventilator support.25 This case established a now commonly recognized right to with-draw “extraordinary” life-saving technology if it is no longer desired by the patient or the patient’s surrogate.The difference between “ordinary” and “extraordinary” care, and whether there is an ethical difference in withhold-ing or withdrawing “ordinary” vs. “extraordinary” care, has been an area of much contention. The 1983 Nancy Cruzan case highlighted this issue. In this case, Cruzan had suffered severe injuries in an automobile crash that rendered her in a persistent vegetative state. Cruzan’s family asked that her tube feeds be withheld, but the hospital refused. The case was appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, which ruled that the tube feeding could be withheld if her parents demonstrated “clear and convincing evidence” that the incapacitated patient would have rejected the treatment.26 In this ruling, the court essentially ruled that there was no legal distinction between “ordinary” vs. “extraor-dinary” life-sustaining therapies.27 In allowing the feeding tube to be removed, the court accepted the principle that a competent person (even through a surrogate decision maker) has the right to decline treatment under the Fourteenth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution. The court noted, however, that there has to be clear and convincing evidence of the patient’s wishes (con-sistent with the principle of autonomy) and that the burdens of the medical intervention should outweigh its benefits (consistent with the principles of beneficence and nonmaleficence).In deliberating the issue of withdrawing vs. withholding life-sustaining therapies, the principle of “double effect” is often mentioned. According to the principle of “double effect,” a treatment (e.g., opioid administration in the terminally ill) that is intended to help and not harm the patient (i.e., relieve pain) is ethically acceptable even if an unintended consequence (side effect) of its administration is to shorten the life of the patient (e.g., by respiratory depression). Under the principle of double effect, a physician may withhold or withdraw a life-sustaining therapy if the surgeon’s intent is to relieve suffering, not to has-ten death. The classic formulation of double effect has four ele-ments (Fig. 48-3).Withholding or withdrawing of life-sustaining therapy is ethically justified under the principle of double effect if the phy-sician’s intent is to relieve suffering, not to kill the patient. Thus, in managing the distress of the dying, there is a fundamental eth-ical difference between titrating medications rapidly to achieve relief of distress and administering a very large bolus with the 55Double effectConditionsActionGood effectBad effectGood effectBad effectActIntrinsic moral wrongAgentIntendsGood effectBad effect1234ActBad effectGood effectFigure 48-3. The four elements of the double effect principle: (1) The good effect is produced directly by the action and not by the bad effect. (2) The person must intend only the good effect, even though the bad effect may be foreseen. (3) The act itself must not be intrinsically wrong, or needs to be at least neutral. (4) The good effect is sufficiently desirable to compensate for allowing the bad effect.Brunicardi_Ch48_p2061-p2076.indd   206519/02/19   1:49 PM 2066SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIintent of causing apnea. It is important to note, however, that although the use of opioids for pain relief in advanced illness is frequently cited as the classic example of the double effect rule, opioids can be used safely without significant risk. In fact, if administered appropriately, in the vast majority of instances the rule of double effect need not be invoked when administering opioids for symptom relief in advanced illness.28In accepting the ethical equivalence of withholding and withdrawing of life-sustaining therapy, surgeons can make dif-ficult treatment decisions in the face of prognostic uncertainty.24 In light of this, some important principles to consider when con-sidering withdrawal of life-sustaining therapy include: (a) Any and all treatments can be withdrawn. If circumstances justify withdrawal of one therapy (e.g., IV pressors, antibiotics), they may also justify withdrawal of others; (b) Be aware of the sym-bolic value of continuing some therapies (e.g., nutrition, hydra-tion) even though their role in palliation is questionable; (c) Before withdrawing life-sustaining therapy, ask the patient and family if a spiritual advisor (e.g., pastor, imam, rabbi, or priest) should be called; and (d) Consider requesting an ethics consult.Although the clinical setting may seem limited, a range of options usually exists with respect to withdrawing or with-holding treatment, allowing for an incremental approach, for example (a) continuing the current regimen without adding new interventions or tests; (b) continuing the current regimen but withdrawing elements when they are no longer beneficial; and (c) withdrawing and withholding all treatments that are not tar-geted to relieve symptoms and maximize patient comfort.34The surgeon might consider discussing the clinical situ-ation with the patient or proxy decision maker, identify the various therapeutic options, and delineate the reasons why with-holding or withdrawing life-sustaining therapy would be in the patient’s best interest. If the patient (or designated proxy deci-sion maker) does not agree with withholding or withdrawing life-sustaining therapy, the surgeon should consider involving consultants who have participated in the patient’s care, experts in palliative or end-of-life care or recommend a second medical opinion. If the second opinion corroborates that life-sustaining therapy should be withheld or withdrawn but the patient/family continues to disagree, the surgeon should consider assistance from institutional resources such as the ethics committee and hospital administration. Although the surgeon is not ethically obligated to provide treatment that he or she believes is futile, the surgeon is responsible for continued care of the patient, which may involve transferring the patient to a surgeon who is willing to provide the requested intervention.24Living Donor Liver TransplantationOne unique ethical issue that deserves special mention is that of living donor liver transplantation. Living donor kidney transplantation has been practiced for almost 50 years and has become a routine part of clinical care, but living donor liver transplantation was first performed in the late 1980s with par-ent-to-child grafts and in the late 1990s for adult-to-adult grafts. These procedures are unique in that there are two patients, one with a diseased organ who requires intervention to be made well and one who is healthy and is being made unwell, albeit usu-ally temporarily, during the intervention. Performing an ethi-cal analysis of this situation requires considering both risks and benefits to each of the patients individually.For the recipient, the benefits of receiving a living donor organ as opposed to a deceased donor organ are many: first, there is reduced risk of death on the waitlist, and second, there is a potential for improved post-transplant outcomes due to improved matching between relatives and the absence of hemo-dynamic instability often present before organ procurement in a deceased donor.30 Furthermore, the use of living donor organs is supported by the principal of utility, maximizing efficient use of organs.32The benefit to the organ donor is in fulfillment of an altru-istic ideal and satisfaction associated with having extended the recipient’s life, while the risks are those associated with partial hepatectomy, a procedure that is not without risks including postoperative complications and mortality, the risk of which is estimated to be 0.15%.29 The ethical concern in this case is hav-ing possibly violated the principle of nonmaleficence.This particular ethical issue emphasizes the importance of truly informed consent. The donor should be provided with information on local complication and mortality rates and allowed sufficient time to consider the risks and benefits with-out pressure from healthcare workers.30 Furthermore, experi-enced centers have recommended that living donors have access to sufficient resources and strong support from an institutions’ ethics committee, given substantial pressure exerted by the criti-cal illness of a family member.31PALLIATIVE CAREGeneral Principles of Palliative CarePalliative care is a coordinated, interdisciplinary effort that aims to relieve suffering and improve quality of life for patients and their families in the context of serious illness.33 It is offered simultaneously with all other appropriate medical treatment, and its indication is not limited to situations associated with a poor prognosis for survival. Palliative care strives to achieve more than symptom control, but it should not be confused with noncurative treatment.The World Health Organization defines palliative care as “an approach that improves the quality of life of patients and their families facing the problems associated with life-threat-ening illness, through the prevention and relief of suffering by means of early identification and impeccable assessment and treatment of pain and other problems, physical, psychosocial, and spiritual.”34 Palliative care is both a philosophy of care and an organized, highly structured system for delivering care.Palliative care includes the entire spectrum of intervention for the relief of symptoms and the promotion of quality of life. No specific therapy, including surgical intervention, is excluded from consideration. Therefore, surgeons have valuable contri-butions to make to palliative care. In fact, the term palliative care was coined in 1975 by Canadian surgeon, Balfour Mount. Furthermore, surgical palliative care can be defined as the treat-ment of suffering and the promotion of quality of life for seri-ously or terminally ill patients under the care of surgeons.36 The standard of palliative treatment lies in the agreement between patient and physician that the expected outcome is relief from distressing symptoms, lessening of pain, and improvement of quality of life. The decision to intervene is based on the treat-ment’s ability to meet the stated goals, rather than its impact on the underlying disease.The fundamental elements of palliative care consist of pain and nonpain symptom management, communication among patients, their families, and care providers, and conti-nuity of care across health systems and through the trajectory Brunicardi_Ch48_p2061-p2076.indd   206619/02/19   1:49 PM 2067ETHICS, PALLIATIVE CARE, AND CARE AT THE END OF LIFECHAPTER 48of illness. Additional features of system-based palliative care are team-based planning that includes patient and family; close attention to spiritual matters; and psychosocial support for patients, their families, and care providers, including bereave-ment support.Indications for palliative care consultation in surgical practice include: (a) patients with conditions that are progres-sive and life-limiting, especially if characterized by burdensome symptoms, functional decline, and progressive cognitive defi-cits; (b) assistance in clarification or reorientation of patient/family goals of care; (c) assistance in resolution of ethical dilemmas; (d) situations in which a patient/surrogate declines further invasive or curative treatments with stated preference for comfort measures only; (e) patients who are expected to die imminently or shortly after hospital discharge; and (f) provision of bereavement support for patient care staff, particularly after loss of a colleague under care36 (Table 48-1). Although all patients, regardless of prognosis, may benefit from the services of a palliative care physician, hospice care is a specific form of palliative care intended for patients who have an estimated prognosis of 6 months or less to live. Hospice care is covered under Medicare Part A, and benefits may be continued beyond the original 6 months of estimated survival if physicians certify that life expectancy remains limited to 6 months or less. Although most Americans indicate a preference to die at home, nearly 75% die in an institutional setting. Earlier referral and wider use of the hospice benefit may help more patients achieve their goal of dying at home.Concepts of Suffering, Pain, Health, and HealingPalliative care specifically addresses the individual patient’s experience of suffering due to illness. Indeed, the philosophi-cal origins of palliative care began with attention to suffering and the existential questions suffering engenders. More than mere technologic evolution in the management of symptoms, the early proponents of palliative care sought a revolution in the moral foundations of medicine that challenged the assumptions that so often seemed to result in futile invasive intervention, and identified many of the problems that were subsequently taken up by medical ethicists. This reorientation of the goals of medical care from a focus on disease and its management to the patient’s experience of illness focuses attention on the purpose of medicine and the meaning of health and healing.Over the past half century, several concepts and theo-ries about the nature of pain, suffering, and health have been proposed in service of the evolving conceptual framework of palliative care. For example, while considering the differences between disease-oriented and illness-oriented approaches to the care of seriously ill patients, psychiatrist Arthur Kleinman wrote, “There is a moral core to healing in all societies. [Healing] is the central purpose of medicine . . . the purpose of medicine is both control of disease processes and care for the illness experience. Nowhere is this clearer than in the relationship of the chronically ill to their medical system: For them, the control of disease is by definition limited; care for the life problems created by the disorder is the chief issue.”33The relief of pain has been the clinical foundation for hospice and palliative care. Pain is defined by the International Association for the Study of Pain as “an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience associated with actual or potential tissue damage, or described in terms of such damage.”38 For purposes of interdisciplinary palliative care, Saunders’s concept of “total pain”37 is a more useful definition and is frequently used as the basis for palliative assessments. Total pain is the sum total of four principal domains of pain: physical, psychologic, social or socioeconomic, and spiritual. Each of these contributes to, but is not synonymous with, suffering.Effective Communication and Negotiating the Goals of CareChanging the goals of care from cure to palliation near the end of life can be both emotionally and clinically challenging. It depends on determination of a clear prognosis and can be aided by effective communication. Unfortunately, prognostication can be notoriously difficult and inaccurate in advanced illness, and Christakis has argued that, to a large degree, physicians have abdicated their traditional responsibility to provide clear prognosis regarding incurable disease and approaching death.40 However, there are validated tools for prognosis in critical ill-ness (APACHE, MODS, etc.), and with most advanced diseases, functional status is the most powerful predictor of survival. For example, patients with advanced metastatic cancer who are rest-ing or sleeping for 50% or more of normal waking hours and require some assistance with activities of daily living (ADL) have a projected survival of weeks, and patients who are essen-tially bedfast and dependent for ADL have a projected survival of days to a week or two at best. Table 48-2 shows a simple prognostic tool to aid clinicians in recognizing patients nearing the end of life.Alternatively, the Karnofsky Performance Scale is a scale of functional status ranging from 100 (high level of function) to 0 (death). It is commonly used in palliative care to roughly assess a patient’s anticipated needs as well as prognosis. The Palliative Performance Scale41 is a validated42 expansion of the Karnofsky Performance Scale that includes five palliative-focused domains, including ambulation, activity level, self-care, intake, and level of consciousness, in addition to evidence of disease. The Missoula-Vitas Quality of Life Index is a 25-question scale specifically for palliative care and hospice patients that scores symptoms, function, interpersonal relationships, well-being, and spirituality. Updates and Spanish versions are available.39Regardless of the prognostic tool used, the prognosis should be conveyed to the patient and family. If done well, communication and negotiation with patients and families about advanced terminal illnesses can potentially avoid great 66Table 48-1Indications for palliative care consultationPatients with conditions that are progressive and life-limiting, especially if characterized by burdensome symptoms, functional decline, and progressive cognitive deficitsAssistance in clarification or reorientation of patient/family goals of careAssistance in resolution of ethical dilemmasSituations in which patient/surrogate declines further invasive or curative treatments with stated preference for comfort measures onlyPatients who are expected to die imminently or shortly after hospital dischargeProvision of bereavement support for patient care staff, particularly after loss of a colleague under careBrunicardi_Ch48_p2061-p2076.indd   206719/02/19   1:49 PM 2068SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 48-2Simple prognostication tool in advanced illness (especially cancer)FUNCTIONAL LEVELPERFORMANCE STATUS (ECOG)PROGNOSISAble to perform all basic ADLs independently and some IADLs2MonthsResting/sleeping up to 50% or more of waking hours and requiring some assistance with basic ADLs3Weeks to a few monthsDependent for basic ADLs and bed-to-chair existence4Days to a few weeks at mostThese observations apply to patients with advanced, progressive, incurable illnesses (e.g., metastatic cancer refractory to treatment).Basic ADL = activities of daily living (e.g., transferring, toileting, bathing, dressing, and feeding oneself); IADL = instrumental activities of daily living (e.g., more complex activities such as meal preparation, performing household chores, balancing a checkbook, shopping, etc.); ECOG = Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group functional (performance) status.Table 48-3Communicating unfavorable news: important principles• Setting: Find a quiet, private place to meet. Sit down close to the patient.• Listen: Clarify the patient’s and/or the family’s understanding of the situation.• “Warning shot”: Prepare patient and family and obtain their permission to communicate bad news (e.g., “I’m afraid I have bad news.”).• Silence: Pause after giving bad news. Allow patient/family to absorb/react to the news.• Encourage: Convey hope that is realistic and appropriate to the circumstances (e.g., patient will not be abandoned; symptoms will be controlled).psychologic harm and help make a difficult transition easier. To communicate effectively and compassionately, it is helpful to pursue an organized process similar to the structured history and physical central to the evaluation of any patient. One such structured approach to delivering unfavorable news proposes six steps that can be easily learned by clinicians: (a) getting started by selection of the appropriate setting, introductions, and seating; (b) determining what the patient or family knows; (c) determining what the patient or family wants to know; (d) giving the information; (e) expressing empathy; and (f) establishing expectations, planning, and aftercare (Table 48-3).43 Success with this approach to breaking bad news is critically depen-dent upon the clinician’s ability to empathically respond to the patient’s (and family’s) reaction to the news.44 The empathic response does not require the surgeon to share the same emo-tions of the patient, but it does require the surgeon to identify the patient’s emotion and accurately reflect that awareness back to the patient. Such effective communication may be facilitated by involving other members of the healthcare team who have developed relationships with the patient and their family. Patient assessment in these conversations should give the highest prior-ity to identifying and responding to the most immediate source of distress. Relieving a pressing symptom is prerequisite for a more thorough search for other potential sources of suffering, and the assessment process itself can be therapeutic if conducted in a respectful and gentle manner.CARE AT THE END OF LIFEThe process of dying and the care of a patient at the time of death is a distinct clinical entity that demands specific skills from physicians. The issues specific to dying and the available tools for compassionate care at the end of life are addressed in this section.The Syndrome of Imminent Demise34,45In a patient who has progressed to the terminal stage of an advanced illness (e.g., cancer), a number of signs provide evi-dence of imminent death. As terminally ill patients progress toward death, they become increasingly bedbound, requiring assistance for all basic ADL. There is a steady decrease in desire and requests for food and fluids. More distressing to the dying patient is a progressively dry mouth that may be confused by the treating team as thirst. It is often exacerbated by anticholinergic medications, mouth breathing, and supplemental oxygen (O2) administered without humidification.With progressive debility, fatigue, and weight loss, it is common for terminally ill patients to experience increasing dif-ficulty swallowing. This may result in aspiration episodes and an inability to swallow tablets, requiring alternative routes for medication administration (e.g., IV, SC, PR, sublingual, buccal, or transdermal). In addition to the increased risk of aspiration, patients near death develop great difficulty clearing oropharyn-geal and upper airway secretions, leading to noisy breathing or the so-called “death rattle.” As death approaches, the respiratory pattern may change to increasingly frequent periods of apnea often following a Cheyne-Stokes pattern of rapid, progressively longer breaths leading up to an apneic period. As circulatory instability develops near death, patients may exhibit cool and mottled extremities. Periods of confusion are often accompanied by decreasing urine output and episodes of fecal and urinary incontinence.A number of cognitive changes occur as death approaches. Patients who are in the last days of life may demonstrate some signs of confusion or delirium. Agitated delirium is a promi-nent feature of a difficult death. Other cognitive changes that may be seen include a decreased interest in social interactions, increased somnolence, reduced attention span, disorientation to time (often with altered sleep-wake cycles), and an altered dream life, including vivid “waking dreams” or visual halluci-nations. Reduced hearing and visual acuity may be an issue for some patients; however, patients who appear comatose may still be aware of their surroundings. Severely cachectic patients may lose the ability to keep their eyes closed during sleep because of loss of the retro-orbital fat pad.Common Symptoms at the End of Life and Their Management34,45,46The three most common, major symptoms that threaten the comfort of dying patients in their last days are respiratory Brunicardi_Ch48_p2061-p2076.indd   206819/02/19   1:49 PM 2069ETHICS, PALLIATIVE CARE, AND CARE AT THE END OF LIFECHAPTER 48Table 48-4Principles of pharmacotherapy in palliative care• Believe patient report of symptoms.• Modify pathologic process when possible and appropriate.• In terminally ill patients, avoid medications not directly linked to symptom control.• Use a multidisciplinary approach.• Consider nonpharmacologic approaches whenever possible.• Engage participation of clinical pharmacist in treatment plan.• Select drugs that can multitask (i.e., use haloperidol for agitated delirium and nausea).• For pain, use adjuvant medications when possible  (see Table 48-7).• When using opioids, spare when possible (adjuvant medication, local or regional anesthetics, surgical interventions, etc.).• Avoid fixed combination drugs.• Avoid excessive cost.• Select agents with minimum side effects.• Anticipate and prophylax against side effects.• For older adult patients, the hypoproteinemic, the azotemic: “Start low and go slow.”• Oral route whenever possible and practical.• No intramuscular injections.• Scheduled dosing, not as needed, for persistent symptoms.• Stepwise approach. (See the World Health Organization Analgesic Ladder for pain, Table 48-5.)• Reassess continuously and titrate to effect.• Use equianalgesic doses when changing opioids  (see Table 48-5).• Assess the patient’s and family’s comprehension of management plan.Table 48-5The World Health Organization’s three-step ladder for control of cancer pain30Step 1:	mild pain (visual analogue scale, 1–3)	Nonopioid ± adjuvant medicationStep 2:	moderate pain (visual analogue scale, 4–6)	Opioid for mild to moderate pain and nonopioid ± an adjuvantStep 3:	severe pain (visual analogue scale, 7–10)	Opioid for moderate to severe pain ± nonopioid ± an adjuvantThe primary treatment of dyspnea (air hunger) in the dying is opioids, which should be cautiously titrated to increase com-fort and reduce tachypnea to a range of 15 to 20 breaths per minute. Air movement across the face generated by a fan can sometimes be quite helpful. If this is not effective, empirical use of supplemental O2 by nasal cannula (2–3 L/min) may bring some subjective relief, independent of observable changes in pulse oximetry. Supplemental O2 should be humidified to avoid exacerbation of dry mouth. Typical starting doses of an immedi-ate release opioid for breathlessness should be one-half to two-thirds of a starting dose of the same agent for cancer pain. For patients already on opioids for pain, a 25% to 50% increment in the dose of the current immediate release agent for breakthrough pain often will be effective in relieving breathlessness in addi-tion to breakthrough pain.The availability and variety of drugs should not prevent consideration of nonpharmacologic therapy. Massage therapy, music therapy, art therapy, guided imagery, hypnosis, physi-cal therapy, pet therapy, and others play a constructive role not only for the relief of symptoms but also for promoting a sense of hope through improving function, aesthetic pleasure, and social connectedness. Talents and capacities neglected during the treatment and progression of disease can be recovered even in the most advanced stages of illness.Pain is often less of a problem in the last days of life because the reduced activity level is associated with lower inci-dent pain. This, combined with lower renal clearance of opioids, may result in greater potency of the prescribed agents. Severe pain crises are fortunately rare, but when they are inadequately addressed, can cause great and lasting distress (complicated grief) for loved ones who witness the final hours or days of agony. Such situations may require continuous administration of parenteral opioids. As death approaches and patients become less verbal, it is important to assess pain frequently, including the use of close observation for nonverbal signs of distress (e.g., grimacing, increased respiratory rate). Adequate dosing of opi-oid analgesics may require alternate route(s) of administration other than oral as patients become more somnolent or develop swallowing difficulties. Opioids should not be stopped abruptly, even if the patient becomes nonresponsive, because sudden withdrawal can cause severe distress.49,50Cognitive failure at the end of life is manifested in most patients by increasing somnolence and delirium. Gradually increasing somnolence can be accompanied by periods of dis-orientation and mild confusion, and it may respond to the reas-suring presence of loved ones and caregivers with minimal need for medications. A more distressing form of delirium also can distress, pain, and cognitive failure. General principles that are applicable to symptom management in the last days of life include (a) anticipating symptoms before they develop; (b) minimizing technologic interventions (usually manage symp-toms with medications); and (c) planning alternative routes for medications in case the oral route fails. It may be possible to cautiously reduce the dose of opioids and other medications as renal clearance decreases near the end of life, but it is important to remember that increased somnolence and decreasing respira-tions are prominent features of the dying process independent of medication side effects. Sudden cessation of opioid analgesics near the end of life could precipitate withdrawal symptoms, and therefore medications should not be stopped for increasing som-nolence or slowed respirations.The principles of pharmacotherapy for pain and non-pain symptoms in the palliative care setting are outlined in Table 48-4. The World Health Organization,35 the United States Agency for Healthcare Policy and Research,47 the Academy of Hospice and Palliative Medicine,48 and many other agencies have endorsed a “step ladder” approach to cancer pain man-agement that can predictably result in satisfactory pain control in most patients (Table 48-5). More refractory pain problems require additional expertise, and occasionally, more invasive approaches (Tables 48-6 and 48-7).Brunicardi_Ch48_p2061-p2076.indd   206919/02/19   1:49 PM 2070SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 48-6Analgesics for persistent painDRUGINITIAL DOSING (ADULT, >60 kg)COMMENTSMild persistent pain, visual analogue scale (VAS) 1–3 Acetaminophen (Tylenol)325–650 mg PO four times a day Maximum = 3200 mg/24 hUse <2400 mg if other potentially hepatotoxic drugs taken. Acetaminophen contained in concurrent nonprescription medications can easily exceed maximum daily allowable dose. Aspirin600–1500 mg PO four times a dayGastric bleeding, platelet dysfunction Choline magnesium trisalicylate (Trilisate)750–1500 mg PO twice a dayUseful for avoiding platelet dysfunction Ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin)200–400 mg PO four times a day Maximum = 3200 mg/24 hGastropathy, nephropathy, decreased platelet aggregation Naproxen (Naprosyn)250 mg PO twice a day Maximum = 1300 mg/24 hAvailable as a transcutaneous gelModerate persistent pain, VAS 4–6 Hydrocodone (Vicodin, Lortab)5–7.5 mg PO every 4 hoursMost prescribed drug in the United StatesAcetaminophen in compounded drug limits use to moderate pain Oxycodone5 mg PO every 4 hoursSold as single agent or compounded with aspirin or acetaminophenSlow release form available (Oxycontin)Severe persistent pain, VAS 7–10 Morphine10 mg PO every 2–4 hours 2–4 mg IV, SC every 1–2 hoursStandard drug for comparison to alternative opioids. Avoid or caution when giving to older adults, patients with diminished glomerular filtration rate, or liver disease. Slow release PO form available (MS Contin). Hydromorphone1–3 mg PO, PR every 4 hours 1 mg IV, SC every 1–2 hoursSuppository form availableOral dose forms limited to 4 mg maximum Fentanyl, transdermal12 μg/h patch every 72 hoursNot for acute pain management. Do not use on opioid-naive patients. Absorption unpredictable in cachectic patients. MethadoneConsultation with pain management, clinical pharmacists, or palliative care/hospice services skilled in methadone use is recommended for those inexperienced in prescribing methadone.Not a first-line agent, although very effective, especially for pain with a neuropathic componentVery inexpensiveCan be given PO, IV, SC, PR, sublingually, and vaginallyIts long half-life makes dosing more difficult than alternative opioids and close monitoring is required when initiating.Numerous medications, alcohol, and cigarette smoking can alter its serum levels.Physicians who write methadone prescriptions for pain should specify this indication. Methadone use for drug withdrawal treatment requires special licensure.Risk factors for NSAID-induced nephropathy include: advanced age, decreased glomerular filtration rate, congestive heart failure, hypovolemia, pressors, hepatic dysfunction, concomitant nephrotoxic agents. Dose reduction and hydration reduce risk.Opioids compounded with aspirin or acetaminophen are limited to treatment of moderate persistent pain because of dose-limiting toxicities of acetaminophen and aspirin.Slow-release preparations of morphine and oxycodone may be given rectally.Timed-release tablets or patches should never be crushed or cut.Opioid analgesics are the agents of choice for severe cancer-related pain. Sedation is a common side effect when initiating opioid therapy. Tolerance to this usually develops within a few days. If sedation persists beyond a few days, a stimulant (methylphenidate 2.5–5 mg PO twice a day) can be given.Initiate bowel stimulant prophylaxis for constipation when prescribing opioids unless contraindicated.Adjuvant or coanalgesic agents are drugs that enhance analgesic efficacy of opioids, treat concurrent symptoms that exacerbate pain, or provide independent analgesia for specific types of pain (e.g., a tricyclic antidepressant for treatment of neuropathic pain). Coanalgesics can be initiated for persistent pain at any visual analogue scale level. Gabapentin is commonly used as an initial agent for neuropathic pain.No place for meperidine (Demerol), propoxyphene (Darvon, Darvocet, or mixed agonist-antagonist agents [Stadol, Talwin]) in management of persistent pain.Always consider alternative approaches (axial analgesia, operative approaches, etc.) when managing severe persistent pain.Note: These are not recommendations for specific patients. The interand intraindividual variability to opioids requires individualizing dosing and titration to effect.Adapted with permission from Cameron JL: Current Surgical Therapy, 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2008.Brunicardi_Ch48_p2061-p2076.indd   207019/02/19   1:49 PM 2071ETHICS, PALLIATIVE CARE, AND CARE AT THE END OF LIFECHAPTER 48Table 48-7Examples of adjuvant medications for treatment of neuropathic, visceral, and bone painaDRUG CLASSINITIAL DOSING (ADULT, >60 kg)COMMENTSTricyclic antidepressants Best for continuous burning or tingling   pain and allodynia Efficacy for pain not due to   antidepressant effectAmitriptyline 10–25 mg PO before bedNortriptyline 10–25 mg PO one per daySedating properties may be useful for relief of other concurrent symptoms. Side effects may precede benefit. Avoid in older adult patients due to anticholinergic side effects. Dose generally less than that required   for antidepressant effectDoxepin 10–25 mg PO before bedLess anticholinergic effect Dose titrated up every few days until   effect. Pain may respond to  alternative antidepressants if no response to initial agent.Imipramine 10–25 mg PO one per day Anticonvulsants For shooting, stabbing painGabapentin 100–1200 mg PO three times a day. Titrate up rapidly as needed. Max: 3600 mg daily in divided dosesCommonly used first-line agent. Generally well tolerated. Does not require blood level monitoring. Carbamazepine 200 mg PO every  12 hoursPregabalin starting dose 25–50 mg  PO three times a dayEffective. Well studied. Requires blood monitoring.Does not require blood monitoring. Valproic acid 250 mg PO three times a day Local anesthetics Systemic use requires monitoring.   Nebulized local anesthetics (lidocaine, bupivacaine) can be used for severe, refractory cough.Lidocaine transdermal patch 5%. Apply to painful areas. Max: 3 simultaneous patches over 12 hours (each patch contains 700 mg lidocaine).Lidocaine/prilocaine topical. Apply to painful areas.Systemic toxicity can result from applying more than recommended number per unit time and in patients with liver failure. Effective for postherpetic neuralgia.MiscellaneousBisphosphonates (pamidronate, zoledronic acid)For bone pain and reduced incidence of skeletal complications secondary to malignancy—best results in myeloma and breast cancer. Contraindicated in renal failure. Calcitonin nasal sprayRefractory bone pain DexamethasoneFor bone pain, acute nerve compression, visceral pain secondary to tumor infiltration or luminal obstruction by reducing inflammatory component of tumor Radionuclides (Sr-89)For malignant bone pain secondary to osteoclastic activity. 4–6 wk delay in benefit. Requires adequate bone marrow reserve. For prognosis of more than 3 mo. OctreotideReduces GI secretions that contribute to visceral painaRecommendations are based on experience of practitioners of hospice and palliative medicine and in some instances do not reflect current clinical trials.Brunicardi_Ch48_p2061-p2076.indd   207119/02/19   1:49 PM 2072SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIdevelop, manifested by increasing agitation that may require the use of neuroleptic medications. Increasing amounts of opioids and/or benzodiazepines may exacerbate the delirium (especially in the elderly).Pronouncing Death51If the body is hypothermic or has been hypothermic, such as a drowning victim pulled from the water in the winter, the phy-sician should not declare death until warming attempts have been made. In the hospital, hospice, or home setting, the dec-laration of death becomes part of the medical or legal record of the event. There are a number of physical signs of death a physician should look for in confirming the patient’s demise: complete lack of responsiveness to verbal or tactile stimuli, absence of heart beat and respirations, fixed pupils, skin color change to a waxen hue as blood settles, gradual poikilothermia, and sphincter relaxation with loss of urine and feces. For deaths in the home with patients who have been enrolled in hospice, the hospice nurse on call should be contacted immediately. In some states, deaths at home may require a brief police investiga-tion and report. For deaths in the hospital, the family must be notified (in person, if possible). A coroner or medical examiner may need to be contacted under specific circumstances (e.g., deaths in the operating room), but most deaths do not require their services. The pronouncing physician will need to complete a death certificate according to local regulations. Survivors may also be approached, if appropriate, regarding potential autopsy and organ donation. Finally, it is important to accommodate religious rituals that may be important to the dying patient or the family. Bereavement is the experience of loss by death of a person to whom one is attached. Mourning is the process of adapting to such a loss in the thoughts, feelings, and behaviors that one experiences after the loss.52 Although grief and mourn-ing are accentuated in the immediate period around death, it is important to note that patients and families may have begun the process of bereavement well before the time of death as patients and families grieve incremental losses of independence, vitality, and control. In addition to the surviving loved ones, it is impor-tant to acknowledge that caregivers also experience grief for the loss of their patients.53,54Aid in DyingFive European countries, Canada, and six U.S. states have legal-ized physician-assisted suicide, medical assistance in dying, or aid-in-dying, in some form, ranging from hospital-based pro-grams to provision of fatal doses of medications for home self-administration.55-57 Medical assistance in dying is a complex ethical and legal issues with divergent opinions among the pub-lic and healthcare providers.58,59 While aid-in-dying laws passed in the United States vary somewhat, these laws essentially all allow physicians to prescribe a lethal dose of medication to men-tally, competent, terminally ill adult patients for the purpose of achieving the end of life.60,61 Key areas of ethical consideration in this area include the benefit and harm of death; the relation-ship between passive euthanasia, active euthanasia, withholding treatment, and withdrawing treatment; the morality of physician and nursing participation in deliberately causing death; and the management of conscientious objection.60,62 Although surgeons outside of the critical care arena may only infrequently be asked to participate in aid-in-dying, it is important to be familiar with local legislation so that appropriate information can be provided to patients who request it.PROFESSIONAL ETHICS: CONFLICT OF INTEREST, RESEARCH, AND CLINICAL ETHICSConflict of InterestConflicts of interest for surgeons can arise in many situations in which the potential benefits or gains to be realized by the surgeon are, or are perceived to be, in conflict with the respon-sibility to put the patient’s interests before the surgeon’s own. Conflicts of interest for the surgeon can involve actual or per-ceived situations in which the individual stands to gain mon-etarily by his or her role as a physician or investigator. In the academic community, monetary gain may not be the primary factor. Instead, motivators such as power, tenure, or authorship on a publication may serve as potential sources of conflict of interest. For example, the accrual of subjects in research studies or patients in surgical series may ensure surgeons better author-ship or more financial gains. The dual-role of the surgeon-scien-tist therefore needs to be considered because the duty as surgeon can conflict with the role of scientist or clinical researcher.Research EthicsOver the last three decades in the United States, the ethical requirements for the conduct of human subject research have been formalized and widely accepted. Although detailed informed consent is a necessary condition for the conduct of ethically good human subject research, other factors also deter-mine whether research is designed and conducted ethically. Emanuel and colleagues63 described seven requirements for all clinical research studies to be ethically sound: (a) value—enhancement(s) of health or knowledge must be derived from the research; (b) scientific validity—the research must be methodologically rigorous; (c) fair subject selection—scientific objectives, not vulnerability or privilege, and the potential for and distribution of risks and benefits, should deter-mine communities selected as study sites and the inclusion cri-teria for individual subjects; (d) favorable risk-benefit ratio—within the context of standard clinical practice and the research protocol, risks must be minimized, potential benefits enhanced, and the potential benefits to individuals and knowl-edge gained for society must outweigh the risks; (e) independent review—unaffiliated individuals must review the research and approve, amend, or terminate it; (f) informed consent—individuals should be informed about the research and pro-vide their voluntary consent; and (g) respect for enrolled subjects—subjects should have their privacy protected, the opportunity to withdraw, and their well-being monitored.63Special Concerns in Surgical ResearchA significant issue for clinical surgical research is that many surgical studies are retrospective in nature and are not com-monly undertaken in a prospective, double-blind, randomized fashion. For a randomized trial to be undertaken, the researchers should be in a state of equipoise—that is, there must be a state of genuine uncertainty on the part of the clinical investigator or the expert medical community regarding the comparative thera-peutic merits of each arm in a trial.64 To randomize subjects to receive two different treatments, a researcher must believe that the existing data are not sufficient to conclude that one treat-ment strategy is better than another. In designing surgical trials, surgeons usually have biases that one treatment is better than another and often have difficulty maintaining the state of equi-poise. As such, it is frequently difficult to demonstrate that a 77Brunicardi_Ch48_p2061-p2076.indd   207219/02/19   1:49 PM 2073ETHICS, PALLIATIVE CARE, AND CARE AT THE END OF LIFECHAPTER 48Table 48-8ICMJE criteria for authorshipAccording to ICMJE best practices recommendations, authors should fulfill each of the following four criteria67:1. Substantial contributions to the conception or design of the work; or the acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data for the work2. Drafting the work or revising it critically for important intellectual content3. Final approval of the version to be published4. Agreement to be accountable for all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are appropriately investigated and resolvedContributors who do not fulfill all four criteria should be named in the manuscript in the acknowledgment section.Adapted with permission from Cameron JL: Current Surgical Therapy, 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2008.randomized trial is necessary or feasible, and treatment options that question the validity of clinical tenets are difficult to accept. Meakins has suggested that a slightly different hierarchy of evi-dence applies to evidence-based surgery.65A second major issue for surgical trials is whether it is ethically acceptable to have a placebo-controlled surgical trial. Some commentators have argued that sham surgery is always wrong because, unlike a placebo medication that is harmless, every surgical procedure carries some risk.66 Others have argued that sham operations are essential to the design of a valid ran-domized clinical trial because, without a sham operation, it is not possible to know if the surgical intervention is the cause of improvement in patient symptoms or whether the improve-ment is due to the effect of having surgery.67,68 Most surgeons readily agree that designing an appropriately low-risk sham sur-gical procedure would create problems for the surgeon-patient relationship in that the surgeon would need to keep the sham a secret.69 In this sense, a sham surgical arm of a trial is very different from a placebo medication in that there cannot be blinding of the surgeon as to which procedure was undertaken. As a result, to have a sham surgery arm in a clinical trial, the interactions between the surgeon and the subject must be lim-ited, and the surgeon performing the procedure should not be the researcher who follows the subject during the trial. Despite difficulties with designing a surgical trial in which the surgeon could ethically perform a sham operation, there are specific cir-cumstances that allow for placebo operations to be conducted, so long as certain criteria are met and are analyzed on a case by case basis.70,71Surgical InnovationAn important issue is whether surgical innovation should be treated as research or as standard of care. Throughout history, many advances in surgical techniques and technologies have resulted from innovations of individual surgeons crafted dur-ing the course of challenging operations—such innovations and technologies have served to move the field of surgery forward.72 In the Korean and Vietnam wars, military guidelines for treat-ment of vascular injuries recommended ligation and amputation rather than interposition grafting of vascular injuries. Individual surgeons chose to ignore those guidelines and subsequently demonstrated the value of the reconstructive techniques that ultimately became the standard of care. It is debated whether modifications to an accepted surgical technique in an individual patient based on their circumstances and within the skill and judg-ment of an individual surgeon should require the same type of prior approval that enrollment in a clinical trial would warrant.73 However, if a surgeon decides to use a new technique on sev-eral occasions and to study the outcomes, Institutional Review Board approval and all other ethical requirements for research  are necessary. These situations require strict oversight as well as explicit consent by the patient.74 In particular, when developing new and innovative techniques, the surgeon should work in close consultation with his or her senior colleagues, including the chairperson of the department. Frequently, more senior individuals can provide sage ethical advice regarding what constitutes minor innovative changes in a technique vs. true novel research.Compared to the formalized process for new drug approval by the Food and Drug Administration, the process for a surgeon developing an innovative operation can be relatively unregu-lated and unsupervised.The Ethics of AuthorshipAuthorship specifies who is responsible for published research. It confers both recognition for academic achievement as well as responsibility for the academic integrity of the published con-tent. Authorship is the stock in trade of productivity for aca-demic surgeons, and it plays a significant role in promotion and tenure. It can also be commodified in the form of intellectual property and patents in which the author and the author’s insti-tution have vested interests. Yet it can also become a liability if a given piece of work becomes embroiled in accusations of plagiarism, data fabrication, or other academic misconduct.In the past, criteria for authorship were unspecified: Those submitting manuscripts simply listed the authors with little or no need to substantiate their contribution to the work. Unfortu-nately, this informal process led to confusion and even abuse. For example, there has been a long tradition of awarding author-ship to the investigator who supervised or obtained funding for research, regardless of that person’s specific contribution to the manuscript. However, current recommendations specify that supervision and funding, by themselves, are insufficient criteria for authorship, and thus such individuals should only be included as authors if they make direct contributions to the work.75,76 A more disturbing example is the practice of “ghost writing” by which senior investigators publish industry-written research under their own name to bolster their productivity while providing a luster of academic integrity to industry.To address these conflicts of interest and to provide guid-ance to investigators, the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE) provides recommendations on criteria for authorship so that individuals who contributed to the intel-lectual content of a work get appropriate credit and that all those listed as authors take responsibility and are accountable for the published work. The ICMJE recommendations for authorship can be found in Table 48-8.75 Furthermore, the ICMJE recom-mends that each author should be able to identify the contribu-tion that each other author made to the work and be confident regarding the integrity of their co-authors. The ICMJE also recommends that individuals who do not meet these criteria be acknowledged in the manuscript, providing appropriate pro-cedures for such acknowledgement. Additionally, the ICMJE Brunicardi_Ch48_p2061-p2076.indd   207319/02/19   1:49 PM 2074SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIspecifically excludes certain types of contributions including acquisition of funding, general supervision of a research group, administrative support, writing assistance, technical editing, language editing, and proofreading.75Many journals have adopted these criteria, operational-izing them at the time of submission by having each author specify his or her contributions. These contributions are then disclosed in the published manuscript to further specify how credit and responsibility is shared.77 This approach has been shown to provide valuable information and has proved feasible in several journals, including The Lancet.78As research becomes increasingly interdisciplinary with ever-expanding teams of contributors, it can be difficult to determine which contributions warrant full authorship rather than simple acknowledgement. Individuals working together on research endeavors should have clear discussions early in the planning process about authorship, and those discus-sions should be continued throughout the project or study.Clinical Ethics: Disclosure of ErrorsDisclosure of error—either in medical or research matters—is important, but often difficult (see Chapter 12). Errors of judg-ment, errors in technique, and system errors are responsible for most errors that result in complications and deaths. Hospitals are evaluated based on the number of complications and deaths that occur in surgical patients, and surgeons traditionally review their complications and deaths in a formal exercise known as the  mortality and morbidity conference, or M&M. The exercise places importance on the attending surgeon’s responsibility for errors made, whether he or she made them themselves, and the value of the exercise is related to the effect of “peer pressure”— the entire department knows about the case—on reducing repeated occurrences of such an error. Although a time-honored ritual in surgery, the M&M conference is nonetheless a poor method for analyzing causes of error and for developing methods to prevent them. Moreover, the proceedings of the M&M con-ference are protected from disclosure by the privilege of “peer review,” and the details are thus rarely shared with patients or those outside the department.A report from the United States Institute of Medicine titled “To Err Is Human” highlighted the large number of medi-cal errors that occur and encouraged efforts to prevent patient harm.79 Medical errors are generally considered to be “prevent-able adverse medical events.”80 Medical errors occur with some frequency, and the question is what and how should patients be informed that a medical error has occurred.81Disclosure of error is consistent with the ethical virtue of candor (e.g., transparency and openness) and the ethical prin-ciple of respect for persons by involving patients in their care. In contrast, failing to disclose errors to patients under-mines public trust in medicine and potentially compro-mises adequate treatment of the consequences of errors and effective intervention to prevent future errors. In addition, fail-ure to self-disclose medical errors can be construed as a breach of professional ethics, as it is a failure to act in the patient’s best interests. Information regarding a medical error may be needed so that patients can make independent and well-informed deci-sions about future aspects of their care. The principles of auton-omy and justice dictate that surgeons need to respect individuals by being fair in providing accurate information about all aspects of their care—even when an error has occurred.Disclosing one’s own errors is therefore part of the ethi-cal standard of honesty and putting the patient’s interests above one’s own. Disclosing the errors of others is more complicated and may require careful consideration and consultation. Sur-geons sometimes discover that a prior operation has included an apparent error; an injured bile duct or a stenotic anastomosis may lead to the condition for which the surgeon is now treating the patient. Declaring a finding as an “error” may be inaccurate, however, and a nonjudgmental assessment of the situation is usually advisable. When clear evidence of a mistake is at hand, the surgeon’s responsibility is defined by his or her obligation to act as the patient’s agent.REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Aristotle. Nichomachean Ethics, Book VI. In Ackrill J, ed. A New Aristotle Reader. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press; 1987:416.	2.	Beauchamp TL, Childress JF. Principles of Biomedical Ethics, 3rd ed. New York: Oxford University Press; 1989.	3.	Bosk C. Forgive and Remember, 2nd ed. Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 2003 (1979).	4.	McCullough LB, Jones JW, Brody BA, eds. Surgical Ethics. New York: Oxford University Press; 1998.	5.	Faden RR, Beauchamp TL. A History and Theory of Informed Consent. New York: Oxford University Press; 1986.	6.	Bernat JL, Peterson LM. Patient-centered informed consent in surgical practice. Arch Surg. 2006;141:86-92.	7.	Schneider CE. The Practice of Autonomy: Patients, Doctors, and Medical Decisions. New York: Oxford University Press; 1998.	8.	Robb A, Etchells E, Cusimano MD, et al. A randomized trial of teaching bioethics to surgical residents. Am J Surg. 2005;189:453-457.	9.	Steinemann S, Furoy D, Yost F, et al. Marriage of professional and technical tasks: a strategy to improve obtaining informed consent. Am J Surg. 2006;191:696-700.	10.	Guadagnoli E, Soumerai SB, Gurwitz JH, et al. Improving dis-cussion of surgical treatment options for patients with breast cancer: local medical opinion leaders versus audit and perfor-mance feedback. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2000;61:171-175.	11.	Braddock CH III, Edwards KA, Hasenberg NM, et al. Informed decision making in outpatient practice: time to get back to basics. JAMA. 1999;282:2313-2320.	12.	Leeper-Majors K, Veale JR, Westbrook TS, et al. The effect of standardized patient feedback in teaching surgical resi-dents informed consent: results of a pilot study. Curr Surg. 2003;60:615-622.	13.	Courtney MJ. Information about surgery: what does the public want to know? ANZ J Surg. 2001;71:24-26.	14.	Newton-Howes PA, Dobbs B, Frizelle F. Informed con-sent: what do patients want to know? N Z Med J. 1998;111: 340-342.	15.	Streat S. Clinical review: moral assumptions and the pro-cess of organ donation in the intensive care unit. Crit Care. 2004;8:382-388.	16.	Williams MA, Lipsett PA, Rushton CH, et al. The physician’s role in discussing organ donation with families. Crit Care Med. 2003;31:1568-1573.	17.	Pearson IY, Zurynski Y. A survey of personal and professional attitudes of intensivists to organ donation and transplantation. Anaesth Intensive Care. 1995;23:68-74.	18.	Sulmasy DP, Lehmann LS, Levine DM, et al. Patients’ percep-tions of the quality of informed consent for common medical procedures. J Clin Ethics. 1994;5:189-194.	19.	Ubel PA, Loewenstein G, Jepson C. Whose quality of life? A commentary exploring discrepancies between health state 8899Brunicardi_Ch48_p2061-p2076.indd   207419/02/19   1:49 PM 2075ETHICS, PALLIATIVE CARE, AND CARE AT THE END OF LIFECHAPTER 48evaluations of patients and the general public. Qual Life Res. 2003;12:599-607.	20.	Schneider CE. After autonomy. Wake Forest Law Review. 2006;41:411.	21.	Shalowitz DI, Garrett-Mayer E, Wendler D. The accuracy of surrogate decision makers: a systematic review. Arch Intern Med. 2006;166(5): 493-497.	22.	Sulmasy DP, Hughes MT, Thompson RE, et al. How would terminally ill patients have others make decisions for them in the event of decisional incapacity? A longitudinal study. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2007;55:1981-1988.	23.	SUPPORT Principle Investigators. A controlled trial to improve care for seriously ill hospitalized patients. The study to under-stand prognoses and preferences for outcomes and risks of treatments (SUPPORT). The SUPPORT Principal Investigators. JAMA. 1995;274:1591-1598.	24.	Pawlik TM. Withholding and withdrawing life-sustain-ing treatment: a surgeon’s perspective. J Am Coll Surg. 2006;202:990-994.	25.	In re Quinlan. 355 A2d 647 (JN). Vol 429 US 9221976.	26.	Cruzan vs. Director, Missouri Dept of Health, 497(1990).	27.	Annas GJ. Nancy Cruzan and the right to die. N Engl J Med. 1990;323:670-673.	28.	Sykes N, Thorns A. The use of opioids and sedatives at the end of life. Lancet Oncol. 2003;4:312-318.	29.	Trotter JF, Adam R, Lo CM, Kenison J. Documented deaths of hepatic lobe donors for living donor liver transplantation. Liver Transpl. 2006;12(10):1485-1488.	30.	Singer PA, Siegler M, Whitington PF, et al. Ethics of liver transplantation with living donors. N Engl J Med. 1989;321(9):620-622.	31.	Fournier V, Foureur N, Rari E. The ethics of living donation for liver transplant: beyond donor autonomy. Med Healthcare Philos. 2013;16(1):45-54.	32.	Shapiro RS, Adams M. Ethical issues surrounding adult-to-adult living donor liver transplantation. Liver Transpl. 2000; 6(6 suppl 2):S77-S80.	33.	Kleinman A. The Illness Narratives. Suffering, Healing & the Human Condition. New York: Basic Books; 1988.	34.	Nelson KA, Walsh D, Behrens C, et al. The dying cancer patient. Semin Oncol. 2000;27:84.	35.	WHO. Definition of palliative care, 2008. World Health Orga-nization. Available at: http://www.who.int/cancer/palliative/definition/en/. Accessed August 29, 2018.	36.	Dunn G. Surgical palliative care. In: Mosby, ed. Current Surgical Therapy, 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2008.	37.	Saunders C. The challenge of terminal care. In: Symington T, Carter R, eds. Scientific Foundations of Oncology. London:  Heineman; 1976:673.	38.	International Association for the Study of Pain, Subcommittee on Taxonomy. Part II. Pain Terms: a current list with definitions and notes on usage. Pain. 1979;6:249.	39.	Byock IR, Merriman MP. Measuring quality of life for patients with terminal illness: the Missoula-VITAS quality of life index. Palliat Med. 1998;12:231-244.	40.	Christakis NA, Lamont EB. Extent and determinants of error in doctors’ prognoses in terminally ill patients: prospective cohort study. BMJ. 2000;320:469-472.	41.	Anderson F, Downing GM, Hill J, et al. Palliative performance scale (PPS): a new tool. J Palliat Care. 1996;12:5-11.	42.	Morita T, Tsunoda J, Inoue S, et al. Validity of the palliative performance scale from a survival perspective. J Pain Symptom Manage. 1999;18:2-3.	43.	Buckman R. How to Break Bad News. A Guide for Healthcare Professionals. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press; 1992.	44.	Kubler-Ross E. On Death and Dying. London: Routledge; 1973.	45.	Twycross R, Lichter I. The terminal phase. In: Doyle D, Hanks G, MacDonald N, eds. Oxford Textbook of Palliative Medicine. New York: Oxford University Press; 1998:977.	46.	Hinshaw DB. Spiritual issues in surgical palliative care. Surg Clin North Am. 2005;85:257-272.	47.	Jacox A, Carr D, Payne R, et al. Management of cancer pain. AHCPR Publication No. 94-052: Clinical Practice Guideline No. 9. Rockville: US Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service; 1994.	48.	Storey P, Knight C. UNIPAC Three: Assessment and Treat-ment of Pain in the Terminally Ill. 2nd ed. New York: Mary Ann Liebert Inc; 2003.	49.	Rubenfeld GD, Crawford SW. Principles and practice of with-drawing life-sustaining treatment in the ICU. In: Curtis JR, Rubenfeld GD, eds. Managing Death in the Intensive Care Unit. New York: Oxford University Press; 2001.	50.	Rousseau P. Existential distress and palliative sedation. Anesth Analg. 2005;101:611-612,	51.	The EPEC-O Project, Educating Physicians in End-of-Life Care-Oncology: Module 6: Last Hours of Living. Bethesda: National Cancer Institute; 2007.	52.	Worden J. Bereavement Care. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins; 2002.	53.	Bishop JP, Rosemann PW, Schmidt FW. Fides ancilla medici-nae: on the ersatz liturgy of death in biopsychosociospiritual medicine. Heythrop J. 2008;49:20.	54.	Schroeder-Sheker T. Transitus: A Blessed Death in the Modern World. Mt. Angel: St. Dunstan’s Press; 2001.	55.	Li M, Watt S, Escaf M, et al. Medical assistance in dying—implementing a hospital-based program in Canada. N Engl J Med. 2017;376(21):2082-2088.	56.	Emanuel EJ, Onwuteaka-Philipsen BD, Urwin JW, Cohen J. Attitudes and practices of euthanasia and physician-assisted suicide in the United States, Canada, and Europe. JAMA. 2016;316:79-90.	57.	Trice Loggers E, Starks H, Shannon-Dudley M, Back AL, Appelbaum FR, Stewart FM. Implementing a Death with  Dignity program at a comprehensive cancer center. N Engl J Med. 2013;368:1417-1424.	58.	Rhee JY, Callaghan KA, Stahl A, et al. Physician-assisted sui-cide and euthanasia is incompatible with medicine: a response from medical students. Crit Care Med. 2017;45(6):e626-e627. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000002354.	59.	Vogelstein E. Evaluating the American Nurses Associa-tion’s arguments against nurse participation in assisted suicide. Nurs Ethics. 2017;969733017694619. doi: 10.1177/0969733017694619.	60.	Sharpe JT. Is there a significant moral distinction between active and passive euthanasia? Critique. 2011;5:11-16.	61.	Buchbinder M. Aid-in-dying laws and the physician’s duty to inform. J Med Ethics. 2017;43(10):666-669. doi: 10.1136/medethics-2016-103936.	62.	Goligher EC, Ely EW, Sulmasy DP, et al. Physician-assisted suicide and euthanasia in the ICU: a dialogue on core ethi-cal issues. Crit Care Med. 2017;45(2):149-155. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000001818.	63.	Emmanuel EJ, Wendler D, Grady C. What makes clinical research ethical? JAMA. 2000;283:2701-2711.	64.	Freedman B. Equipoise and the ethics of clinical research.  N Engl J Med. 1987;317:141-145.	65.	Meakins J. Innovation in surgery. The rules of evidence. Am J Surg. 2002;183:399-405.	66.	Lefering R, Neugebauer E. Problems of randomized controlled trials in surgery. Paper presented at: Nonrandomized Compara-tive Clinical Studies. Heidelberg, 1997.	67.	Flum DR. Interpreting surgical trials with subjective out-comes: avoiding UnSPORTsmanlike conduct. JAMA. 2006;296:2483-2485.Brunicardi_Ch48_p2061-p2076.indd   207519/02/19   1:49 PM 2076SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	68.	Moseley JB, O’Malley K, Petersen NJ, et al. A controlled trial of arthroscopic surgery for osteoarthritis of the knee. N Engl J Med. 2002;347:81. Summary for patients in: J Fam Pract. 2002;51:813.	69.	Angelos PA. Sham surgery in research: a surgeon’s view. Am J Bioeth. 2003;3:65-66.	70.	Miller FG. Sham surgery: an ethical analysis. Sci Eng Ethics. 2004;10:157-166.	71.	Angelos P. Sham surgery in clinical trials. JAMA. 2007;297:1545-1546, author reply 1546.	72.	Riskin DJ, Longaker MT, Gertner M, et al. Innovation in sur-gery: a historical perspective. Ann Surg. 2006;244:686-693.	73.	Biffl WL, Spain DA, Reitsma AM, et al. Responsible develop-ment and application of surgical innovations: a position state-ment of the Society of University Surgeons. J Am Coll Surg. 2008;206(6):1204-1209.	74.	McKneally MF, Daar AS. Introducing new technologies: pro-tecting subjects of surgical innovation and research. World J Surg. 2003;27:930-934.	75.	International Committee of Medical Journal Editors. Defin-ing the role of authors and contributors. Available at: http://www.icmje.org/recommendations/browse/roles-and-respon-sibilities/defining-the-role-of-authors-and-contributors.html> Accessed August 29, 2018.	76.	Eggert LD. Best practices for allocating appropriate credit and responsibility to authors of multi-authored articles. Front Psychol. 2011;2:196.	77.	Rennie D, Yank V, Emanuel L. When authorship fails. A proposal to make contributors accountable. JAMA. 1997;278(7):579-585.	78.	Yank V, Rennie D. Disclosure of researcher contributions: a study of original research articles in The Lancet. Ann Intern Med. 1999;130(8):661-670.	79.	Kohn LT, Corrigan JM, Donaldson MS. To Err Is Human:  Building a Safer Health System. Washington: National Academy  Press; 2000.	80.	Brennan TA, Leape LL, Laird NM, et al. Incidence of adverse events and negligence in hospitalized patients. Results of the Harvard Medical Practice Study I. N Engl J Med. 1991;324:370-376.	81. Hebert PC, Levin AV, Robertson G. Bioethics for clinicians: 23. Disclosure of medical error. CMAJ. 2001;164:509-513.Brunicardi_Ch48_p2061-p2076.indd   207619/02/19   1:49 PM
# Chunk 8951
Global SurgeryKatherine E. Smiley, Haile T. Debas,  Catherine R. deVries, and Raymond R. Price 49chapterINTRODUCTIONModern surgery can save lives, help expand economies, and offer hope to individuals and communities. Prior to the accep-tance and availability of aseptic technique to prevent or decrease infections, and improved anesthesia for controlling pain, sur-gery as a specialty was held in very low esteem by medical doc-tors and the general public. Over the last 100 years, surgery has developed into a highly regarded discipline that not only pro-vides opportunities for curing certain diseases but also fulfills a special role in preventing and mitigating disability.Yet, surgery is currently unavailable to most people world-wide. The vast majority—90%—of the world’s population receives only 10% of the surgical care delivered. Said another way, 90% of surgical resources are consumed by the most privi-leged 10% of the world’s population. More than 5 billion people lack access to safe, timely, and affordable surgical care.1 Very few surgical procedures occur in countries spending less than U.S. $100 per person on health care per year compared to coun-tries spending greater than U.S. $1000 per person (Fig. 49-1).2Examples of disparities abound. In many countries, including the wealthiest, islands of poverty coexist within cities replete with material resources. Tertiary level hospitals operate within eyesight of slums whose inhabitants have no access to even basic care. Most of the people without access—people in rural areas and in countries with poor infrastructure—are the very people most at risk for death or disability due to lack of surgical care. Often the poor accept and endure many painful and potentially correctable fatal conditions as a fact of life.3-6 Care for trauma and obstetrical emergencies is considered a basic surgical need but is absent in many rural regions. Other chronic conditions—often equally debilitating—progress to death or serious disability due to lack of available, safe surgery and anesthesia.Many factors contribute to the disparity in access to surgi-cal care. Poverty, a primary risk factor for all types of diseases, is a major obstacle hindering access to surgery. Healthcare pro-fessionals, including surgeons, migrate from areas of need due to a lack of infrastructure (hospitals, roadways, and stable elec-trical sources), limited supplies and equipment, lack of human resources, few opportunities for professional development, and concerns for personal safety. Until recently, there has been a significant lack of information regarding the burden of surgical disease and surgery’s positive impact on communities. Current research substantiates that investment in surgical care improves economies and is an integral and necessary component of global health.7,8Disparities in care and outcomes are multidimensional, and no simple solution exists to improve access to appro-priate and affordable surgical care. Yet, five major forces are reshaping priorities and strategies leading the charge for the globalization of surgical care.1.	The epidemiologic transition of diseases from primarily in-fectious to more chronic conditions2.	The mobile nature of the world’s populations, allowing peo-ple to move freely between more isolated areas of the world, leading to a more integrated global community3.	Ubiquitous information access exponentially enabling wide-spread participation in understanding and designing innova-tive opportunities for high-quality surgical care4.	A revolution for equity and human rights where the world’s poor are demanding benefits to surgical care similar to those found in high-income countries (HICs)5.	Recognition of the cost-effectiveness of surgical care and its potential to build economies, demonstrating the value of in-cluding surgery in global health strategies9-12The greatest burden of disease occurs in areas where human resources—physicians, nurses, pharmacists, and other healthcare workers—are scarce (Fig. 49-2).13 The proportion of physicians is low both in high-population areas and in areas where the population is growing most rapidly (Fig. 49-3).14,15 Fully trained surgeons and anesthesiologists comprise only a small proportion of the total number of the Human Resources in Health (HRH), and efforts to meet the 12Introduction	2077Defining Global Surgery	2079Global Surgery Ecosystem / 2079Human Resources / 2081Burden of Surgical Disease / 2081Strategies for Development	2086Essential Surgery: Current and  Evolving Concepts / 2086Outreach and Engagement / 2087International Organizations / 2088Global Surgery and Public Health / 2091Cancer Initiatives / 2098Integrating Value into Global  Surgery / 2102Advanced Surgical Care for  Resource-Poor Areas / 2102Academic Global Surgery / 2103Ethics / 2105Innovation in Global Surgery / 2106The Future for Global Surgery	2106Brunicardi_Ch49_p2077-p2112.indd   207713/02/19   5:53 PM 2078surgical needs are now embracing a multifaceted approach, including advanced care practitioners. The Lancet Commission on Global Surgery estimates that an additional 143 million sur-gical procedures are needed each year in LMICs to prevent death and disability caused by lack of care.16The potential benefits of surgical care for economic pro-ductivity are astounding. Considering that the annual eco-nomic loss from road traffic injuries alone exceeds U.S. $500 billion globally, a panel of expert economists at the Copenhagen Consensus of 2012, including four Nobel prize lau-reates, prioritized strengthening surgical capacity as the eighth most cost-effective investment for addressing the world’s most pressing problems. The Consensus reconvened in 2015, syn-chronizing their recommendations to the United Nations’ Sus-tainable Development Goals, and reaffirmed that surgery-related initiatives (i.e., circumcision and skilled obstetrical support), offer the best “value-for-money” in terms of alleviating world poverty.17-19 The Lancet Commission on Global Surgery, a research and advisory working group with contributors from 110 nations, echoed these sentiments. Surgery should be viewed as an investment rather than a cost.16,20Much of the economic modeling and strengthening of political will related to surgical and anesthesia care has been carried out by collaborative groups and consortia including aca-demic, nongovernmental, and other organizations. The efforts of these groups truly coalesced in 2015, when several major consensus statements from governmental organizations, such as the World Bank and the World Health Assembly, recognized the importance of surgery in public health for the first time. 3$100$101-400$401-1000> $100012,00010,00080006000400020000Number of procedures/100,000 populationUS dollars/person healthcare/yearFigure 49-1. Worldwide distribution of surgical procedures. (Data from Weiser TG, Regenbogen SE, Thompson KD, et al. An estima-tion of the global volume of surgery: a modelling strategy based on available data, Lancet. 2008 Jul 12;372(9633):139-144.)Key Points1	There are five major forces reshaping priorities and strate-gies for the globalization of surgical care:a.	The epidemiologic transition of diseasesb.	The mobile nature of the world’s populationsc.	Ubiquitous information accessd.	A revolution for equity and human rightse.	Recognition of the cost-effectiveness of surgical care for treatment and prevention of disease2	The burden of disease is greatest in areas where human resources—physicians, nurses, pharmacists, and other healthcare workers—are the least.3	Surgery should be viewed as an investment rather than a cost.4	The key components of the global surgery ecosystem include technology, education, community, healthcare, business, and multidisciplinary engagement between a variety of disciplines.5	Understanding and addressing the necessary communica-tion, energy, and transportation technologies along with the underlying cultural context represent the foundation critical to implementing sustainable infrastructure for appropriate surgical care.6	There has been a significant shift from communicable, maternal, neonatal, and nutritional causes of disease to noncommunicable causes, many of which require surgi-cal care.7	Patients and their communities in lowand middle-income countries (LMICs) bear a much greater share of the burden of cancer than high-income countries (HICs).8	Globally, trauma has become a leading cause of death and disability; 90% of trauma deaths occur in LMICs.9	Essential surgical services should be integrated into com-prehensive health care delivery, with the potential to avert 1.5 million deaths per year in LMICs.10	Surgery is gaining an increasingly recognized role for improving public health, having a role in prevention as well as treatment.11	The cost-effectiveness of surgical care has been demon-strated, and its value as a public health investment is increasingly understood by policymakers.12	Developing capabilities for surgical care has the ability to promote system-strengthening in resource-poor countries and to mitigate migration of health professionals at all levels.13	Academic global surgery provides a unique environment to study health systems, identify solutions and implement them collaboratively, fulfilling many institutions’ mis-sions to strengthen multidisciplinary training, advocacy, and research.14	Surgical innovations that bring value by balancing cost with quality designed for challenging energy environ-ments will foster equity in surgical care for LMICs.Brunicardi_Ch49_p2077-p2112.indd   207813/02/19   5:53 PM 2079GLOBAL SURGERYCHAPTER 49The third edition of World Bank’s Disease Control Priorities (DCP3) and the World Health Assembly’s Resolution 68.15 both specifically discuss the vital nature of surgical care as part of any health system.7,21 Such resolutions represent a sea change in terms of how the global policy community views surgical care for LMICs and, indeed, the entire world.This chapter examines the ongoing need to expand and strengthen surgical care globally, explores some of the signifi-cant challenges of global surgery, and presents potential guid-ing concepts along with examples of successful strategies for sustainable surgical development.DEFINING GLOBAL SURGERYGlobal Surgery EcosystemTo understand how surgery fits into healthcare systems and to understand its unique needs, it is helpful to consider global surgery as an ecosystem. The emerging field of global surgery considers surgical care to be a fundamental component of global health. As a system with both local and international scope, global surgery encompasses not just the medical and technical aspects of surgical care, but also the societal and environmental context in which surgery is per-formed. Global surgery also refers to a worldwide lens through which we view challenges collaboratively; thus, global sur-geons may focus on resource-limited areas where needs are profound, but the ultimate goal should be to make surgical care equitable, accessible, and affordable for every human being.22 Surgery as an ecosystem considers the diverse but interrelated systems that must be functional for quality surgical care to be delivered. Only part of these systems falls within the tradi-tional training of surgeons. Yet, modern surgical care requires these systems to work in a coordinated fashion to support three priorities critical for expanding surgery globally—accessibility, affordability, and innovation (Fig. 49-4). Global surgery is a way to consider a “systems-based practice” beyond a single hospital or community, for the benefit of people worldwide. Many interrelated components of this surgical ecosystem orig-inate outside the hospital.Disparities in surgical care have geographical, socioeco-nomic, and cultural components. Most people who live in major cities in the northern and western hemispheres take for granted a functioning energy grid. The development of energy beyond major cities has enabled wealthier communities to imagine, and indeed, to expect healthcare to be available at all times and affordable. Yet, a lack of reliable energy sources is a major limiting factor. Communication and transportation technologies, for example, the mobile phone and air and ground travel, have dramatically progressed in highand middle-income countries but are still rudimentary in poor countries. Many of the current disparities in health care, particularly surgical care, are due to the lack of penetration of these technologies. Under-standing and addressing the necessary communication, energy, and transportation deficits as well as the underlying cultural nuances are necessary to support the sustainable development of surgical care.Electricity is necessary for all modern surgery. Anesthe-sia monitoring, operating room lighting, cautery, suction, and patient warming devices all require sources of electricity that are stable, without huge electrical surges. Only in the last 50 years or so could stable electricity be expected in most wealthy cities. However, in rural areas of even wealthy countries, electricity remains unpredictable (Fig. 49-5).23In poorer countries, the cost and availability of electric-ity is frequently the limiting factor for more advanced diagnos-tic and therapeutic technology—from laboratories that require refrigeration to radiology in all of its various branches. Modern design for surgical devices has, for the most part, not taken into account the wide range of energy environments where surgery is practiced. Fragile instruments and monitors that cannot survive the rigors of the real working environment limit the types of surgery that can be provided.4535302520151050Percent of global disease burdenPercent of global workforceAmericasEuropeWesternPacificSouth-EastAsiaAfricaEasternMediterranean* Even with grants and loans from abroad.054045303520251015Africa suffers from 24% of the global burden of disease but has access to only 3% of health workers and less than 1% of the world's financial resources.*Figure 49-2. Distribution of healthcare workers by burden of disease in WHO regions. (Reproduced with permission from Intermountain Healthcare.)Brunicardi_Ch49_p2077-p2112.indd   207913/02/19   5:53 PM 2080SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIComponents of the Global Surgery Ecosystem. Improve-ments in energy, transportation, and communication are criti-cal to support the growth of surgical care.9 Building capacity for surgical care requires interaction between the various com-ponents that create a functioning, sustainable system. When surgeons think of surgery, they usually think in terms of science and hands-on technical expertise. However, global surgery requires a broader understanding of systems in other disciplines. Surgeons must work collaboratively with engineers and busi-ness leaders to develop technology that can function in lower 0–1717–3434–50Physicians (per 10,000 population)2005–201050–67200,000,000–600,000,0000–200,000,000600,000,000–1,400,000,000Population20120.48%–1.96%1.96%–3.45%3.45%–4.93%Population growth rate2012–1.01%– –0.48%Figure 49-3. Number of physicians, world populations, and world population growth rates. (Reproduced with permission from World Health Organization, 2018 (Density of Physicians [total number per 1000 population]); 2013 World Population Data Sheet Interactive Map; World Bank, population growth (annual %) map.)Brunicardi_Ch49_p2077-p2112.indd   208013/02/19   5:53 PM 2081GLOBAL SURGERYCHAPTER 49resource environments. These innovations can provide a source of economic growth for the community, which in turn supports better health care (Fig. 49-6).No sustainable surgical system in the modern age can function without specialists in bioengineering, sterile process, supply chain, hospital safety, and waste management. These often unappreciated colleagues make possible the daily practice of surgery. Similarly, specialists in anesthesia, nursing, and the diagnostic specialties of radiology, pathology, and laboratory services are fundamental to a fully functional surgical service.Human ResourcesPrimary care physicians, nurses, midwives, or advanced care practitioners (ACPs) provide much of the basic surgical and anesthetic care in LMICs. Where regulations allow, “task sharing,” or training ACPs to deliver surgery and anesthesia services previously allowed only under the purview of fully trained specialists, can provide expanded access to care.24-26 Non-MD practitioners, known as assistant medical officers (AMOs) or “tecnicos de cirurgia” in Mozambique, often have extensive operative experience, including obstetrical care, and are the pri-mary surgical providers in some regions.27-29 Task sharing with ACPs also occurs in the United States and other countries where they fill a need otherwise unmet by specialists even in major tertiary care centers.30 However, concerns about the quality of care, lack of adequate supervision, and the effect on prestige and professional development for specialists and ACPs, continue to be topics for debate.31,32Migration of practitioners to economically and culturally favorable locales is universal and not restricted to low-resource countries.33,34 However, the net impact on poor countries is greater. In a 2004 study, more than 23% of U.S. physicians received their medical training from other countries; of these 64% were from low-income countries.35 Using 2013 data, another study showed annual emigration rates of sub-Saharan physicians to the United States are increasing, despite a World Health Organization Global Code of Practice in 2010 aimed at LMIC workforce retention.36 Investments in training greater numbers of doctors in these countries, including surgical spe-cialists, have been only partially successful in meeting demand in poor countries. Until economic conditions improve or oppor-tunities for professional development increase, and incentives enticing migration of health care workers to high-income countries abate, it is unlikely that the most skilled practitio-ners will remain in resource-poor areas beyond their immediate obligations.37-41Burden of Surgical DiseaseEpidemiologic Transition of Disease. The population on Earth currently stands at more than 7 billion. While the rate of growth has slowed in recent years, projections estimate that AccessibilityAffordabilityInnovationGLOBALSURGERYFigure 49-4. Global surgery priorities. (Reproduced with permission from University of Utah Center for Global Surgery and Intermountain Healthcare.)Figure 49-5. Map of world electrification. (Reproduced with permission from NASA, Visible Earth, Available at: http://visibleearth.nasa.gov/view.php?id=79765.)Brunicardi_Ch49_p2077-p2112.indd   208113/02/19   5:53 PM 2082SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIthe population will continue to grow to 9 billion by 2050.42 Population characteristics are changing rapidly. According to United Nations’ estimates, the entire world is aging even in low-income countries, and by 2050, 2 billion people will be over the age of 60. Currently, Asia is home to 55% of the world’s population over the age of 60.43 Just before the year 2020, the percentage of the world’s population over age 65 years is predicted to surpass the percentage of children under age 5 years, on an unprecedented reversal of trajectories for both age demographics. While this represents a victory for infectious disease control, the dramatic increase in longevity will present new challenges in terms of treating noncommu-nicable disease in the older adult population.44 At the same time, Sub-Saharan Africa’s population is experiencing a much different trend: a current “baby boom” will lead the region to quadruple its population, from 960 million to 4 billion, by the year 2100.45Until recently, infectious diseases dominated public health strategy. Now with major scourges like polio isolated to rela-tively small regions of the world, and HIV and malaria decreas-ing in their relative impact worldwide, chronic diseases and their complications, as well as the effects of aging, are gaining dominance in health care needs. Many of these chronic diseases are best approached by surgery.The lack of metrics and paucity of data identifying the unmet burden of surgical need in many countries have been obstacles facing global surgery initiatives. The 2010 Global Burden of Disease Study was the first worldwide comprehensive burden of disease evaluation since the initial 1990 epidemiologic study. Using the disability-adjusted life year (DALY), a metric that captures both premature mortality and the prevalence and severity of illnesses, disease burdens were calculated for 291 causes in 21 regions of the world (including 187 countries) for 1990, 2005, and 2010 to enable identification of significant trends over time.46 While the global DALYs remained stable from 1990 to 2010, the study identified a significant shift from communicable, maternal, neonatal, and nutritional causes of disease to noncommuni-cable causes (Fig. 49-7).47In 2015, the previous estimate by the second edition of Disease Control Priorities in 2006 of an 11% global surgical dis-ease burden was updated to 30%, obtained from provider-based survey data from the Lancet Commission.1,10 Using country-wide population surveys (the Surgeons OverSeas Assessment of Surgical Need Survey [SOSAS]) in Sierra Leone, Rwanda, and Nepal, the overall presence of surgically treatable condi-tions was 11.2%, with 25.6% of deaths potentially avoidable had surgical care been available. Applying these percentages to the 48 low-income countries, as defined by the World Bank, suggests that there are 288.2 million people currently living with surgically treatable conditions; providing improved access to surgical care could prevent 5.6 million deaths per year.48-50 Untreated acute and chronic surgical conditions represent a sig-nificant unmet burden of disease that has major impact on the economies of these nations.7,16,51Cancer. Patients and their communities in LMICs bear a much greater share of the burden of cancer than HICs. The dramatic increase in the proportion of reported cancer cases in LMICs is a result of population growth, aging populations, and decreased mortality from infectious diseases. In 1970, only 15% of newly reported cancer cases worldwide were from the developing world; by 2008, this proportion rose dramatically to 58% and is expected to grow to 70% by 2030.52 Since 2013, the second leading cause of death world-wide has been cancer, and an estimated 20% of all global surgery is now cancer-related.53 Previously thought to be a 67ElectricityLaundrySupply chainKnowledgeCultureHealthcareFamily supportGeographyPatientRoad/travel infrastructurePre-hospital careSpiritualityExpectationsLaboratory servicesHospital safetyAdministrationBusinessHealthcarePublic healthInsurersRegulatory agenciesTechnologyPublic policyEducationSURGICALECOSYSTEMBioengineeringWaste managementSterile processingAnesthesiologyRadiologyNursingPharmacyPathologyRESOURCESCOMMUNITYMULTIDISCIPLINARY ENGAGEMENTSURGICAL CARE INFRASTRUCTUREValue-driven outcomesPatient-centered careFigure 49-6. The global surgery ecosystem requires broad integration of many fields in a multidisciplinary context. (Reproduced with permission from Intermountain Healthcare.)Brunicardi_Ch49_p2077-p2112.indd   208213/02/19   5:53 PM 2083GLOBAL SURGERYCHAPTER 49disease almost exclusive to high-income countries, nearly two-thirds of the 7.6 million cancer deaths worldwide occur in LMICs. Mortality from cancer correlates inversely with a country’s economy for certain treatable cancers, including breast, testicular, and cervical cancer—LMICs have higher case fatality rates than HICs (Fig. 49-8).52,54For example, breast cancer case fatality rates illustrate the great disparity in outcomes between regions. Case fatality rates in East Africa reach an unacceptable 59% compared to 19% in the United States.54 In LMICs, patients have very lim-ited access to screening. They present for care with much later stages of cancer. In Haiti, after the great earthquake in 2010, with its initial onslaught of orthopedic injuries, many aid orga-nizations found themselves faced with the unmet underlying burden of disease, including late-stage breast cancer and other tumors (Fig. 49-9). The DCP3 has devoted an entire chapter to cancer screening in LMICs, emphasizing the importance of proper infrastructure for screening and treatment, as well as considering cost-effectiveness and ethical concerns related to screening and subsequent treatment of detected cancers.55 The number and quality of training programs in surgical oncology is also inversely related to a country’s income, leaving LMICs with few adequately trained providers. Collaborative training programs between HIC and LMIC centers, as well as tele-teaching and mobile consultation, may address this shortage in a relatively low-cost, high-impact way.56Trauma. Trauma has become a leading cause of death (5.8 million people per year) and disability around the world; 90% of trauma deaths occur in LMICs.57 Approximately 32% more people die as a result of injuries than from malaria, tuberculosis, and HIV/AIDS combined, representing 10% of the world’s deaths (Fig. 49-10).58,59 The major causes of death from injuries are road traffic accidents (RTAs), suicides, homicides, falls, drownings, and burns; in every category except burns, almost twice as many men die compared to women.60847354354101119902010% Worldwide DALYsCommunicable, maternal, neonatal, nutritionalNoncommunicableInjuriesFigure 49-7. Shift in disease burden 1990–2010. (Reproduced with permission from Intermountain Healthcare.)ThyroidHighHigh-middleLow-middleLow0.80.60.40.20.0Ratio of mortality to incidenceIncome classBreastCervicalTesticularProstateColorectalFigure 49-8. Ratio of mortality to incidence by solid tumor type and country income (2008). (Reproduced with permission from Intermountain Healthcare.)Brunicardi_Ch49_p2077-p2112.indd   208313/02/19   5:53 PM 2084SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIOver 1.25 million people die from RTAs, causing LMICs to lose 3% of their GDP; 50 million more people incur nonfatal injuries, many with resulting lifelong disabilities.61 Globally, RTAs are the main cause of death for young people between the ages of 15 and 29. Forty-nine percent of all traffic deaths are among pedestrians, cyclists, and motorcycles.62 In the United States, a patient presenting with an injury in a rural community has a higher mortality than those from an urban setting.63 This disparity is much more pronounced in eco-nomically disadvantaged societies, where seriously injured patients from road traffic accidents are twice as likely to die compared to similarly injured patients in a high-income set-ting (Fig. 49-11).58,64 Additionally, death is much more likely to occur in the prehospital settings for injured patients from low-income countries. The lack of integrated communication and emergency transportation systems contribute to prehospital risk, while the lack of infrastructure, supplies, and personnel contribute to inhospital mortality.The number of deaths from RTAs has remained the same between 2007 and 2013. The predicted increase in mortality from RTAs, expected from the increase in population and global motorization, did not materialize, suggesting that interventions to improve global road safety (i.e., The Decade of Action for Road Safety 2011–2020) may be having some success in pre-venting deaths from RTAs.62Burns. The World Health Organization estimates that 265,000 people die of burn injuries each year, mostly (95%) from LMICs; the vast majority never present for medical care.65 Scalds and electrical burns represent another significant source of death and disability. Women and children in LMICs are most likely to be burned in domestic kitchens; men are more likely to be burned in the workplace. The economic and social impact from long hospitalizations and from the resulting disfigurement provides a significant negative stigma causing ostracism and rejection.Of all the forms of trauma worldwide, burns are the only type that predominantly afflict women and children. Southeast Asia accounts for 27% of burn-related deaths worldwide; 70% of people dying from burns in this region are women.66 Cooking on wood, charcoal, or low kerosene stoves also puts children at risk, particularly from scalding (Fig. 49-12). Small children in the WHO African region have triple the number of burn deaths as children worldwide. Con-trast this with the United States, where more burns and burn deaths affect men.People living in rural areas suffer disproportionately because there are fewer facilities capable of managing the acute and chronic aspects of burns and because the population is gen-erally poorer. Surgical grafting and management of contractures is often best done in specialized burn centers, but these are rare in LMICs. Telemedicine has been shown to be effective in man-aging burns and preventing complications, and now, in the era of high resolution mobile phones, it can effectively diagnose and triage many burn patients appropriately.67 Telemedicine can also be useful in providing much-needed education of rural providers in basic burn care (Box: Telemedicine and Tele-education at the University of Utah).6801234567Deaths per year (millions)InjuryHIV/AIDS, TB, and malariaInjuries and violence:the scale of the problemFigure 49-10. Injuries and violence: the scale of the problem. (Reproduced with permission from World Health Organization, Geneva. Injuries and violence: the facts. http://www.who.int/ violence_injury_prevention/key_facts/VIP_key_fact_1.pdf.)Figure 49-9. Underlying unmet cancer burden in Haiti (2010). (Reproduced with permission from Intermountain Healthcare. Photo contributor: R. Dirk Noyes, MD.)Brunicardi_Ch49_p2077-p2112.indd   208413/02/19   5:54 PM 2085GLOBAL SURGERYCHAPTER 49Figure 49-11. Change in traffic fatality risk (deaths per 10,000 persons, 1975–1998). (Reproduced with permission from Intermountain Healthcare.)Telemedicine and Tele-education at the University of UtahThe University of Utah’s Burn Center has utilized Project ECHO (Extension for Community Healthcare Outcomes), an HIPAA-compliant tele-education platform developed at the University of New Mexico. Project ECHO provides live, free, interactive educational materials to rural physicians, nurses, and EMTs in eight surrounding states.69 This model has been expanded internationally through the University of New Mexico to 21 countries, with the potential to drastically improve the knowledge base of providers in many resource-limited settings.70Direct patient care has also been achieved at the University of Utah’s Burn Center, through their Telemedicine outreach program. “TeleBurn” currently provides approximately 400 video consultations per year, serving 80 sites in five surrounding states that lack specialized burn care. For a region like the Intermountain West, where travel can be limited by inclement weather and long distances, the TeleBurn program provides better access to specialty care, at lower costs to patients.71Figure 49-12. Domestic kitchen: risk factor for burns in women and children in LMICs. (Used with permission from James H. Kenney, Jr.)CanadaAustriaFranceIndiaChinaUnited StatesColumbiaBotswana400350250200150100500–50–100High income countriesLow income countriesHigh income countriesLow income countriesPercentage changeBrunicardi_Ch49_p2077-p2112.indd   208513/02/19   5:54 PM 2086SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IISTRATEGIES FOR DEVELOPMENTEssential Surgery: Current and Evolving ConceptsDr. Jim Yong Kim, President of the World Bank, aptly stated that surgery is an “indivisible, indispensable part of health care.”72 The wisdom of this statement has been supported by the findings of two landmark publications in 2015: Disease Control Priorities, third edition (DCP3), and the Lancet Com-mission on Global Surgery 2030 (LCGS).7,16 According to the DCP3, “the provision of essential surgical procedures would avert 1.5 million deaths a year or 6.7% of all avertable deaths in LMICs,” and according to the Lancet Commission, 5 billion people do not have access to safe, affordable surgical and anes-thesia care when needed. Taken together, these and other find-ings suggest that without the provision of accessible, affordable essential surgical care in all LMICs, the lofty goal of another Lancet Commission report, Global Health 2035: A World Con-verging Within a Generation, would be unachievable.73 This earlier Lancet Commission believes that, with adequate invest-ment in global health, all countries could reduce their infectious, maternal, and childhood mortality rates down to those currently seen in the best-performing middle-income countries (e.g., the 4C countries: Chile, China, Costa Rica, and Cuba) within a gen-eration by 2035. They also make the interesting observation that the LMICs can use their own resources for much of the funding needed.The critical role of essential surgical and anesthesia ser-vices in global health, in general, and in saving lives and disabil-ities in LMICs, in particular, has been established by fact-based evidence and analysis provided by the two landmark publica-tions of 2015, DCP3 and LCGS. Table 49-1 summarizes the key findings and recommendations of the two publications.The DCP3 adopted a working definition of essential sur-gical conditions as those that (a) are primarily or extensively treated by surgery; (b) have a large health burden; and (c) can be successfully treated by a surgical procedure that is cost-effective and feasible to promote globally. Using this def-inition, the DCP3 identified 44 essential procedures, most of which can be performed in first-level hospitals (Table 49-2).74 The first-level (district) hospital is the appropriate platform to provide essential surgical service. These procedures rank among the most cost-effective of all interventions and include those that treat injuries, obstetric complications (including fistulas), abdominal emergencies, cataracts, and congenital anomalies.The LCGS Report, based on extensive research and analy-sis of factual evidence, provides recommendations to improve access to safe, affordable anesthesia and surgical care in LMICs. Essential surgical services should be integrated into a compre-hensive platform of healthcare delivery. At the core of delivery of essential surgery is the first (district) hospital, which must be capable of delivering three bellwether essential surgery pro-cedures (hysterectomy, laparotomy, and treatment of an open fracture). A hospital that can provide these three procedures safely is presumed to have the necessary expertise in general and orthopedic surgery, obstetrics, and anesthesia to perform all essential surgical procedures.The cost of untreated surgical conditions is huge and, until now, not recognized. At the present time, some 33 million individuals face catastrophic health expenditure for surgical and anesthesia care in LMICs. The LCGS estimates that it would cost U.S. $420 billion to scale up the surgical workforce 9Table 49-1Key findings and recommendations from the Disease Control Priorities (DCP3) and the Lancet Commission for Global Surgery (LCGS)DCP3LCGSProvision of essential surgery in LMICs would prevent 1.5 million deaths, or 6.7% of all avertable deaths5 billion people lack access to safe, affordable surgical and anesthesia care when neededEssential surgical procedures rank among the most cost-effective of all health interventions143 million more operations are needed in LMICs, where only 6% of all worldwide procedures are now doneEffective and affordable measures (such as task-sharing) increase access to surgical care33 million face catastrophic health expenditure from surgery and anesthesia care each yearInvestments must be made to expand capacity buildingWithout urgent investment, LMICs will lose US $12.3 trillion in economic productivity between 2015 and 2030Substantial disparities exist between countries in safety of surgical and anesthetic care. Feasible and affordable measures (e.g., surgical safety checklist) improve safety and qualitySurgery is an indivisible, indispensable part of health care. Surgical care should be part of the National Health Care System, and should be “available, accessible, safe, timely, and affordable.”Universal coverage of essential surgery should be publicly financed early on the path to universal health coverage LMIC = Low and Middle Income CountryTable 49-2Essential surgical procedures that can be performed in first level (District) hospitals (DCP3)Obstetric Complications Severe postpartum hemorrhage, obstructed labor, prolonged labor, eclampsia, prolapsed cord, fetal distress, tubal pregnancy, postabortion endometritis/myometritis, postabortion sepsis, intrauterine fetal deathTrauma and Violence Major limb fracture/injury, joint dislocation, major soft tissue injury, pneumo/hemothorax, ruptured spleenAcute Surgical Emergencies Strangulated hernia, intestinal obstruction, intestinal perforation, appendicitis, liver abscess, major wound infection, osteomyelitis/septic arthritisNonacute Surgical Conditions Congenital hernia, hernia, breast cancer, chronic osteomyelitis, hydrocele, urethral stricture, prostatic hypertrophy, cataract, eye injuryBrunicardi_Ch49_p2077-p2112.indd   208613/02/19   5:54 PM 2087GLOBAL SURGERYCHAPTER 49to have 20 surgical, anesthetic, and obstetric providers (SAOPs) per 100,000 population in LMICs by 2030. This figure must be compared to the U.S. $20.7 trillion loss in global economy that surgical conditions would be responsible for.Recent studies have shown that essential surgical condi-tions account for about 18% of the global burden of disease. Investment in essential surgical services is critical and should be done early in the path towards universal health coverage (UHC). The barriers to essential surgical services in LMICs are formi-dable. The shortage in surgical workforce is huge, and it is clear that the deficit cannot be satisfactorily addressed without task sharing. Infrastructure deficits (clinics, hospitals, equipment, drugs, blood banks, etc) are equally enormous. The first (district) hospital is the important platform for delivery of essential surgical services. The DCP3 estimates that it would cost U.S. $43 million annually of additional spending to provide universal coverage of essential surgery applicable to first-level hospitals worldwide.Outreach and EngagementMany models for outreach and engagement have had a positive impact on the accessibility of surgery. Organizations participat-ing in outreach are guided by a wide range of motivations and resources (Fig. 49-13). Some organizations are purely humani-tarian and service oriented; others are primarily educational. Some even use the promise of healthcare to advance political, religious, or personal agendas.Many patients have benefited from the multitude of service-oriented volunteer “missions” providing much needed surgical care that would otherwise have been unavailable. While volun-teerism and medical missions provide needed clinical surgical care for underserved populations, they may not be a sustainable solution to long-term manpower shortages for health.75 Com-prehensive initiatives are necessary to engage local healthcare professionals and organizations, governments, and academic institutions to build sustainable capacity.76Charitable Surgical Delivery Platforms. A significant bur-den of surgical disease is addressed through charitable organi-zations. The DCP3 divides these charitable surgical delivery platforms into two types: temporary delivery platforms and spe-cialty surgical hospitals (Table 49-3).77Short-term charitable surgical platforms bring entire surgi-cal teams along with equipment and supplies needed to operate in local facilities for a short period of time. Local physicians provide the majority of follow-up care.78-80 Self-contained plat-forms bring the entire surgical infrastructure (fully functional operating rooms, postoperative recovery capability) through various modes of transportation: airplanes, ships, trucks, and buses. These self-contained platforms tend to stay in-country longer, may still provide short-term care, and tend not to leave behind any physical structure.78,80,81Little information exists on outcomes and cost-effectiveness of these temporary surgical platforms. Where no other services Politicians/AdministratorsResourcesFinancialHumanPoliticalMotivationsHumanitarianEducationalAcademicPoliticalOtherCataractHerniaVesico-vaginalfistulaLaparoscopicsurgeryEducatorsIndividualpeopleHealthcareprovidersCountryProvinceUrban vs.RuralDisease(technique specific)GeographicTargeted audienceGlobalsurgery initiativesPoliticians/administratorsFigure 49-13. Global surgery initiatives. (Reproduced with permission from Intermountain Healthcare.)Brunicardi_Ch49_p2077-p2112.indd   208713/02/19   5:54 PM 2088SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIexist, they may provide needed services. However, some of these charitable organizations report higher complications rates in lower-resource settings, which seem to increase even more with complex procedures. Some of these platforms include edu-cation for local care providers along with clinical care. While some question their ability to sustainably train local surgical teams, one charitable partnership with short-term, concentrated surgical training trips over 9 years documented a countrywide transition from open cholecystectomy to laparoscopic cholecys-tectomy in Mongolia.82Specialty surgical hospitals establish entire hospitals or facilities within existing hospitals. Some target specific diseases (Addis Ababa Fistula Hospital) while others provide a wide range of surgical and medical services (Pan-African Academy of Christian Surgeons [PAACS] mission hospitals); many are supported through partnerships with various charitable and gov-ernmental organizations.77International OrganizationsUnited Nations. Committed to maintaining international peace, developing friendly relations between nations, and promoting better standards of living (conquering hunger, dis-ease, and illiteracy) and human rights, representatives from 51 nations in 1945 signed the United Nations (UN) Charter at the United Nations Conference on International Organization in San Francisco, California.83 There are now 193 member states.84 The UN promotes a social justice agenda advocating for world-wide health, engagement of philanthropies, and civil society in global health initiatives, and it supports the sustainable develop-ment goals (SDGs).85Sustainable Development Goals. In September 2000, the UN led a worldwide, organized effort to set benchmarks for social, economic, and environmental development. Leaders from 189 countries agreed on eight specific “millennium devel-opment goals” (MDGs), spanning poverty, mortality, education, sustainability, and development.86The MDGs created a framework for improvement that some criticized as unattainable; nevertheless nearly 1 billion people were lifted out of extreme poverty, and primary education for girls made measurable improvements.87 Still, many challenges, including some related to lack of surgical care, remained. In 2015, the UN General Assembly reconvened to raise the bar yet again, in what was declared a “supremely ambitious and transforma-tive vision.”88 Eight MDGs became 17 SDGs with 169 specific targets, to be achieved by 2030 (Table 49-4).85 Most relevant to the global surgeon is SDG #3, “good health and well-being,” which builds upon the MDGs’ primarily maternaland child-mortality focus, as well as communicable disease prevention. SDG #3 broadens the focus to nine health targets, including a one-third reduction in deaths by noncommunicable diseases, as well as halving the rate of deaths and injuries from road traffic accidents by 2020. In addition, a novel push to strengthen and retain the global health workforce and systems for protection and prevention of disease also falls squarely within the realm of the surgical provider. Finally, the SDGs have garnered praise for closely involving local stakeholders, versus the expert consensus that produced the MDGs. Funding to work towards achievement of the SDGs is also divided between wealthier and poorer nations, whereas the MDGs relied primarily on funding from HICs to sup-port their mission.89World Health Organization. The initial UN Conference in 1945 voted to establish a new international health organization. The Constitution of the World Health Organization (WHO) was approved and ratified in 1948.83 The first World Assembly in 1948 established malaria, tuberculosis, venereal diseases, maternal and child health, sanitary engineering, and nutrition as WHO priorities. One of the WHO’s greatest public health sto-ries is the worldwide eradication of smallpox that began with the USSR proposal for the WHO-led program in 1958 culminating in the last identified case in Somalia in 1977.While the disease burden from communicable diseases has abated in large part from these successful international coopera-tive interventions, little has been done to address the growing global burden of surgical disease. Despite the laudable aims of the 1978 Declaration of Alma Alta, which expressed the need for urgent action for the world community to protect and pro-mote health for all people, the declaration did so by crowning primary health care as the key to achieving the goal of health for all—which was then accepted by the member countries in the World Health Organization.90 Although the Alma Ata slogan Table 49-3Examples of charitable surgical delivery platformsTemporary DeliveryShort-Term Trips World Surgical Foundation Kenya Orthopedic Program APRIDEC Medical Outreach Group Self-Contained Mobile Surgical Platforms Mercy Ships Cinterandes FoundationSpecialty Surgical Hospitals Addis Ababa Fistula Hospital Aravind Eye Hospital Mission Hospitals (PAACS*)*Pan-African Association of Christian hospitalsTable 49-4Sustainable development goals 1No poverty 2Zero hunger 3Good health and well-being 4Quality education 5Gender equality 6Clean water and sanitation 7Affordable and clean energy 8Decent work and economic growth 9Industry, innovation, and infrastructure10Reduced inequalities11Sustainable cities and communities12Responsible consumption and production13Climate action14Life below water15Life on land16Peace, justice, and strong institutions17Partnerships for the goalsBrunicardi_Ch49_p2077-p2112.indd   208813/02/19   5:54 PM 2089GLOBAL SURGERYCHAPTER 49“health for all by 2000” did not materialize, it did galvanize efforts for global partnerships for healthcare improvements and poverty reduction. In 2015, the World Health Assembly (WHA) published resolution WHA 68.15, which proclaimed surgical and anesthesia care as a crucial component of primary care worldwide—for the first time in history. The resolution urged member states to complete nine actions, including prioritizing a core set of emergency and essential surgery and anesthesia services at the primary care level, ensuring access to essential medications and infection control techniques, and developing policies for providers’ minimum skills, among others. Addition-ally, the Director-General of the WHO was asked to complete ten actions related primarily to policyand advocacy-related endeavors at the international level. The resolution was voted in unanimously by 194 member states.91The Violence and Injury Prevention Program (VIP) and the Global Initiative for Emergency and Essentials Surgical Care (GIEESC) are two programs related to surgery within the WHO that began before 2008. But as a response to a growing recognition of the significant unmet surgical need, in 2008 the WHO for the first time included basic surgery as a component for community primary health care (Fig. 49-14).92The Global Initiative for Emergency and Essential Surgical  Care. The Clinical Procedures (CPR) team in the WHO Department of Essential Health Technologies (EHT) convened a multidisciplinary group of experts from various surgical disci-plines, professionals, and civic leaders from national and inter-national organizations, as well as representatives from various WHO departments, in December 2005 in Geneva, Switzerland to formally organize the Global Initiative for Emergency and Essential Surgical Care (GIEESC).93 GIEESC’s main aim was to assist member states with capacity strengthening in the safe Waste disposalinspectionMammographyAlcoholismHerniaPlacentapraeviaTrafficaccidentConsultantsupportReferral formulti-drugresistanceReferral forcomplicationsGenderviolenceSurgeryMaternityEnvironmental health labTraining centreTrainingsupportCancerscreeningcentreWomen’sshelterAlcoholicsanonymousCommunitymentalhealth unitEmergencydepartmentHospitalSpecialized careDiagnosticservicesTB controlcentreDiabetes clinicCTscanCytologylabDiagnostic supportPap smearsSelf-helpgroupLiaisoncommunityhealth workerOtherOtherSocialservicesNGOsSpecialized prevention servicesCommunityPrimary-care team:continuous,comprehensive,person-centred careFigure 49-14. Emergency and essential surgery: an integral component of primary care. (Reproduced with permission from The World Health Report 2008—primary Health Care (Now More Than Ever). http://www.who.int/whr/2008/en/.)Mongolia GIEESCThe WHO situational analysis tool, developed in 2007 to assess the availability of emergency and essential surgical care (EESC) at individual health facilities, has been utilized to document limited infrastructure, human resources, procedures, equipment, and supplies available for even basic EESC in many countries.95 For example, there were no trained surgeons or anesthetists at 44 first-referral hospitals in Mongolia.3 Only 66% of the facilities had electricity, and 45% had running water (Fig. 49-15).Most facilities lacked any policy for EESC, disaster preparedness, basic equipment to provide EESC, or any and appropriate use of emergency and essential surgical care (procedures, equipment) at resource-limited healthcare facilities through training and education programs. The training program was built around the WHO Integrated Management of Emer-gency and Essential Surgical Care (IMEESC) tool kit.94 The tool kit included best practice protocols, guidelines on policies, training curriculum, emergency equipment, teaching slides, and monitoring and evaluation instructions. Additionally, low-cost editions of the manual Surgical Care at the District Hospital have been made available in local languages. As of 2015, GIEESC had over 2100 members in 140 countries.95 A Mongolian edition facilitated early expansion of GIEESC throughout the country. Mongolia has improved basic infrastructure, human resources, and capabilities; and the use of the tool kit system has led to its incorporation into the countrywide healthcare plan96 (Box: Mongolia GIEESC).Brunicardi_Ch49_p2077-p2112.indd   208913/02/19   5:54 PM 2090SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 49-15. First Level (Soum) Hospital (left); Suturing of lacerated tongue by natural light (right). (Reproduced with permission from Intermountain Healthcare. Photo contributor: Raymond R. Price, MD.)BayankhongorKhentiiBayan-UlgiiBulganTuvDundgobiKhovdAltaiUvurkhangaiDornodDarkhanUulSukhbaatarOrkhonGobi-Sumber187 Soum doctors from 14 Aimags (Soum doctors = Doctor of health care centers)657 Surgeons and anesthesia doctors from aimag and city hospitals 29 Midwife and feldshers from rural provinces50 Nurses from rural provincesFigure 49-16. EESC Project: Mongolia 2004–2010. (Reproduced with permission from Henry JA, Orgoi S, Govind S, et al: Strengthening surgical services at the soum (first-referral) hospital: the WHO emergency and essential surgical care (EESC) program in Mongolia, World J Surg. 2012 Oct;36(10):2359-2370.)access to training for EESC. Adopting a health systems strengthening approach to rectify these glaring deficiencies, Mongolia implemented a nationwide EESC program involving 14 of the 21 provinces (Aimags) from 2004 to 2010 (Fig. 49-16).96 In 6 years, dramatic improvements in short-term process measures were identified using the WHO Monitoring and Process form: 57.1% increase in availability of emergency rooms; 59.1% increase in the supply of emergency tool kits; and a 73.6% increase in the recording of emergency cases (Figs. 49-17 and 49-18).96 More importantly, countrywide morbidity and mortality dropped significantly (Fig. 49-19).97Violence and Injury Prevention. The Violence and Injury Prevention (VIP) program promotes numerous activities to assist countries to prevent and mitigate the consequences of violence and injury.98 While injury prevention is paramount, VIP provides guidance for strengthening trauma systems in countries of all economic levels to improve emergency care and rehabilitation. VIP encourages development of systematic data collection and analysis to better guide appropriate interventions. Prevention programs include the WHO Helmet initiative, while the Essential Trauma Care Project (EsTC) creates standards for the care of injured patients and promotes systematic capacity building. VIP advocates support for the UN Decade of Action for Road Safety 2011–2020 and initiatives to achieve SDG 3.6, Brunicardi_Ch49_p2077-p2112.indd   209013/02/19   5:54 PM 2091GLOBAL SURGERYCHAPTER 49halving the number of global deaths and injuries from road traf-fic accidents by 2020, and SDG 11.2, which aims to provide access to safe, affordable, accessible, and sustainable transport systems for all by 2030.99WHO Safe Surgery Saves Lives Initiative. Surgeons have always sought ways to prevent perioperative complications. Aseptic technique, one of the greatest forms of prevention in surgical care, requires vigilant reinforcement to prevent serious wound infections. In resource-limited areas inad-equate perioperative monitoring, lack of critical medications, and poor documentation place patients at increased risk for serious complications. The WHO Safe Surgery Saves Lives Initiative is a worldwide attempt to prevent perioperative complications.100Deaths from surgery occur at 0.4% to 0.8% globally; however, they may exceed 5% to 10% in developing countries. There are about 1 million deaths and 7 million disabling com-plications related to surgery worldwide, 50% of which are estimated to be preventable. The WHO Safe Surgery Saves Lives initiative targets preventable surgical injuries.100 The initiative identified 10 basic and essential objectives that can help prevent perioperative injuries (Table 49-5).101 A simple, three-stage checklist (initiated as the patient enters the operat-ing room, just before the procedure, and just prior to the patient leaving the room) implemented in eight high-, middle-, and low-income countries found a 50% reduction in the failure to meet basic safety standards resulting in a 50% decrease in mor-tality (Fig. 49-20).102Global Surgery and Public HealthSurgical care is increasingly recognized as an integral compo-nent of public health. Traditional teaching portrays sur-gery as the antithesis of public health: treating the individual instead of the community, reactionary instead of pre-ventative, and too expensive especially for countries with devel-oping economies. Yet in reality, surgery and public health share many priorities and would benefit from greater integration in many areas (Fig. 49-21). For example, providing access to obstetrical care or birth attendants for every delivery could 10BeforeAfter0102030405060Wound debridementWound suturing, dressing, suture removalIncision and drainage of abscessesResuscitationFracture managementPenetrating injuriesBlunt injuriesAmputationBurns managementSkin graftingContracture releaseChest tube insertionCricothyroidotomy/TracheostomyRemoval of foreign bodyVenous peripheral cutdownUterine rupture/ectopic pregnancySuprapubic puncture/cystostomyLocal anaesthestic inÿltrationFigure 49-17. Surgical procedures performed 1 to 2 years post training (13 Soum hospitals evaluated). (Reproduced with permission from Henry JA, Orgoi S, Govind S, et al: Strengthening surgical services at the soum (first-referral) hospital: the WHO emergency and essential surgical care (EESC) program in Mongolia, World J Surg. 2012 Oct;36(10):2359-2370.)Brunicardi_Ch49_p2077-p2112.indd   209113/02/19   5:54 PM 2092SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIprevent the majority of vesicovaginal fistulas and markedly decrease the most common cause of maternal death—hemorrhage—for entire communities. Ninety percent of mortal-ity from injury occurs in LMICs, providing another area for surgical teams to lead preventative, population-based strategies to improve public health.103 Male circumcision is another exam-ple of a well-documented preventative, minor surgical proce-dure, capable of reducing the transmission of HIV.104,1050102030405060708090Establishmentof emergencyroomSupply ofemergency kitsRecording ofemergencycare casesInstructions onfacility andinstrumentusageBeforeAfterFigure 49-18. Pilot Soum hospitals’ evaluation 2 years post training. (Reproduced with permission from Henry JA, Orgoi S, Govind S, et al: Strengthening surgical services at the soum (first-referral) hospital: the WHO emergency and essential surgical care (EESC) program in Mongolia, World J Surg. 2012 Oct;36(10):2359-2370.).60.50.40.30.20.10.00200120022003200420052006200720082009Percentage of deathsPercentage of complicationsFigure 49-19. Surgical morbidity and mortality: Mongolia 2001–2009. (Reproduced with permission from Intermountain Healthcare.)Brunicardi_Ch49_p2077-p2112.indd   209213/02/19   5:54 PM 2093GLOBAL SURGERYCHAPTER 49devotes an entire volume to essential surgery, emphasizing its importance as a key part of health worldwide.7 There are three significant developments helping to accelerate the integration of surgery and public health:1.	Improved understanding of the burden of surgical disease and its significant component of the overall burden of global disease2.	Recognition that surgery has a primary, secondary, and ter-tiary preventative role (Table 49-6)3.	Documentation that surgical care can be cost-effective for community-based healthcareTable 49-5Ten basic and essential objectives for safe surgery (WHO*)1.	Operate on the correct patient at the correct site2.	Use method known to prevent harm from anesthetic administration, while protecting the patient from pain3.	Recognize and effectively prepare for life-threatening loss of airway or respiratory function4.	Recognize and effectively prepare for risk of high blood loss5.	Avoid inducing any allergic or adverse drug reaction known to be a significant risk for the patient6.	Consistently use method known to minimize risk of surgical site infection7.	Prevent inadvertent retention of instruments or sponges in surgical wounds8.	Secure and accurately identify all surgical specimens9.	Effectively communicate and exchange critical patient information for the safe conduct of the operation10.	Establish routine surveillance of surgical capacity, volume, and results*WHO: World Health Organization.Data from WHO Guidelines for Safe Surgery 2009.PreventiondiagnosistreatmentrehabilitationSurgeryPublichealthFigure 49-21. Overlapping priorities of surgery and public health. (Reproduced with permission from Intermountain Healthcare.)Even after Learmonth presented his landmark lecture in 1949 “The Contributions of Surgery to Preventive Medicine” at the University of London’s Heath Clark Lecture series, surgery has been neglected as a component of public health.106,107 DCP3 Before induction of anaesthesia Before skin incisionBefore patient leaves operating roomSurgical safety checklist(with at least nurse and anaesthetist)(with nurse, anaesthetist and surgeon)(with nurse, anaesthetist and surgeon)This checklist is not intended to be comprehensive. Additions and modifications to fit local practice are encouraged.Nurse verbally confirms: The name of the procedure Completion of instrument, sponge and needle counts Specimen labeling (read specimen labels aloud, including patient name) Whether there are any equipment problems to be addressedTo surgeon, anaesthetist and nurse: What are the key concerns for recovery and management of this patient?Based on the WHO Surgical Safety Checklisthttp://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2009/9789241598590_eng_Checklist.pdf© World Health Organization 2009 All rights reservedHas the patient confirmed his/her identity,site, procedure, and consent? YesIs the site marked? Yes Not applicableIs the anaesthesia machine and medicationcheck complete? YesIs the pulse oximeter on the patient andfunctioning? YesDoes the patient have a:Known allergy? No YesDifficult airway or aspiration risk? No Yes, and equipment/assistance availableRisk of >500 ml blood loss (7 ml/kg in children)? No Yes, and two IVs/central access and fluids planned Confirm all team members have introduced themselves by name and role. Confirm the patient’s name, procedure, and where the incision will be made.Has antibiotic prophylaxis been given within the last 60 minutes? Yes Not applicableAnticipated critical eventsto Surgeon: What are the critical or non-routine steps? How long will the case take? What is the anticipated blood loss?To anaesthetist: Are there any patient-specific concerns?To nursing team: Has sterility (including indicator results) been confirmed? Are there equipment issues or any concerns?Is essential imaging displayed? Yes Not applicableFigure 49-20. Surgical safety checklist. (Reproduced with permission from WHO surgical safety checklist, 2009, http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2009/9789241598590_eng_Checklist.pdf. © World Health Organization 2009 All rights reserved.)Brunicardi_Ch49_p2077-p2112.indd   209313/02/19   5:54 PM 2094SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIStrategies for Integration of Global Surgery and Public Health. Three areas stand out as opportunities for integration of global surgery and public health: education, professional societies, and multinational health policy organizations. From an education standpoint, several universities in HICs have developed formal programs for the study of surgery and public health.108,109Diseases commonly present in very late stages in LMICs and in disadvantaged populations in developed countries. Many morbid conditions could have been cured while localized in their earlier stages and likely eradicated by a local surgical pro-cedure. Early recognition and treatment of surgically correctable diseases is a critical preventive role for surgery. Many surgical procedures are not only a form of tertiary prevention, but are also forms of primary prevention (Table 49-7).110Assigning Disease Priorities. Global surgery interventions can be prioritized to identify those conditions in which clini-cians and public health professionals should collaborate most closely—targeting those diseases that impose the largest bur-den on a society and have a highly successful surgical outcome (Table 49-8).94,111 There are four broad, high-priority areas where surgery has an important role for public health interventions: trauma care; obstetrical emergencies; acute-surgical emergen-cies; and nonacute surgical conditions that significantly affect the quality of life (Table 49-9).10Trauma Care. The Essential Trauma Care Project (EsTC) begun in 2001 is a collaboration effort between the International Association for Trauma Surgery and Intensive Care, an inte-grated society within the International Society of Surgery-Societe-Internationale Chirurgie (ISS-SIC) and the World Health Organization (WHO), specifically the Violence and Injury Prevention unit. The project culminated in a document that identified 11 core essential trauma care services (“the rights of the injured patient”) that ought to be available at all levels of healthcare facilities (Table 49-10).112 In addition, the docu-ment delineated 260 human and physical resources that should be available based on the type of facility (Table 49-11).Table 49-6Prevention strategiesPREVENTION STRATEGYTARGETGOAL1. PrimaryRoot causes of diseaseEliminate or reduce risk of developing illness2. SecondaryIllness or disease at earliest stagesLimit progression of disease3. TertiaryDisease at later stagesCure or limit the effect of existing diseaseData from deVries C, RR Price: Global Surgery and Public Health:  A New Paradigm, 1st ed. Sudbury, MA: Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC; 2012.Table 49-7The role of surgery for primary prevention of cancerTERTIARY SURGICAL PROCEDUREPRIMARY CANCER PREVENTEDBreast lumpectomy for ductal carcinoma in situBreastColonoscopic polypectomyColonColposcopy and excisionCervicalResection of actinic keratosisSkinResection of leukoplakia and erythroplakiaOralData from Riviello R, Meara JG, Rogers SO. Comemntary: Cancer Care and Control–the role of surgery. Global Surgery and Anesthesia, 2010. http://www.ghdonline.org/surgery/discussion/cancer-care-and-control-the-role-of-surgery/.Table 49-8Prioritization of surgical conditionsPRIORITY*PUBLIC HEALTH BURDENSURGICAL PROCEDURE SUCCESSFULCOST-EFFECTIVE AND FEASIBLE TO PROMOTE GLOBALLY1HighHighlyHighly2ModerateModeratelyModerately3LowNeither highly or moderatelyLow*Priority one implies that all three conditions must be met. The priority should be shifted to 2 or 3 if any of the conditions are moderate or low.Data from Mock C, Cherian M, Juillard C, et al: Developing priorities for addressing surgical conditions globally: furthering the link between surgery and public health policy, World J Surg. 2010 Mar;34(3):381-385.Table 49-9The role of surgery for public health strategiesTrauma carePrevention of death and chronic disability by the provision of timely, expert, and complete surgical careObstetrical emergenciesTimely surgical intervention in obstructed labor, in preand post-partum hemorrhage, and other obstetrical complicationsAcute surgical emergenciesProvision of competent surgery to treat a wide range of emergency abdominal and nonabdominal conditionsNonacute surgical conditionsSurgical care for several elective conditions that have a significant effect on the quality of life such as cataract, otitis media, clubfoot, and herniasData from Jamison DT, Breman JG, Measham AR et al: Disease Control Priorities in Developing Countries, 2nd ed. New York, NY: Oxford University Press for the World Bank; 2006.Brunicardi_Ch49_p2077-p2112.indd   209413/02/19   5:54 PM 2095GLOBAL SURGERYCHAPTER 49The EsTC recommendations provide a cost-effective framework for LMICs to improve their trauma care. These recommendations have been used as a planning guide and as an advocacy statement. To catalyze strengthening trauma and emergency care in lowand middle-income countries, in 2007, the WHA adopted a resolution on emergency care systems (resolution WHA 60.22).113,114 This first-ever WHA resolution dedicated specifically to trauma care highlights the importance accorded by world governments in caring for their injured.Quality improvement programs provide inexpensive tools to strengthen trauma systems. National trauma registries, integral for trauma research, can be used to monitor and improve patient outcomes.115,116 Yet very few trauma regis-tries exist in LMICs.117,118 The World Bank stated, “It is criti-cal for LMICs to create or strengthen existing trauma systems to improve outcomes.”119,120 Trauma systems exist in varying states of development in different countries, and even within countries. Initiatives to strengthen trauma systems target the full spectrum of services: prevention, prehospital and defini-tive hospital care, rehabilitation, and process improvement and patient safety initiatives. Nearly 2 million lives could be saved each year if LMICs could design and implement simple trauma care initiatives that reduced the case fatality rates among seri-ously injured patients to equal those in HICs (Fig. 49-22).119,120 In one Canadian province, introducing simple prehospital Table 49-10Essential trauma care services1.	Obstructed airway appropriately maintained2.	Impaired breathing supported3.	Pneumothorax and hemothorax promptly diagnosed and treated4.	Bleeding promptly stopped (internal or external)5.	Shock recognized and treated appropriately (I.V. fluids)6.	Timely decompression of space occupying lesions to prevent secondary brain injury7.	Abdominal injuries diagnosed and promptly repaired (intestinal injuries and others)8.	Disabling extremity injuries corrected9.	Potentially unstable spine injuries identified and managed (early immobilization)10.	Minimize consequences of injuries by appropriate rehabilitative services11.	Medication to provide above services and relieve pain readily availableData from Mock C, Joshipura M, Goosen J, et al: Overview of the Essential Trauma Care Project, World J Surg. 2006 Jun;30(6):919-929.Table 49-11Airway management recommendations for physical and human resources based on type of facility (sample from EsTC*) FACILITY LEVELKNOWLEDGE AND SKILLSBASICGENERAL PRACTITIONERSPECIALISTTERTIARYAssessment of airway compromiseEEEEManual maneuvers (chin lift, jaw thrust)EEEEInsertion of oral or nasal airwayDEEEEndotracheal IntubationDDEEEquipment and supplies    Oral or nasal airwayDEEELaryngoscopeDDEEEndotracheal tubeDDEECapnographyIDDDE: essential; D: desirable; I: irrelevant (not usually to be considered as the level in question).*EsTC: Essential Trauma Care.Data from Mock C, Lromand JD, Goosen J, et al: Guidelines for essential trauma care. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2004.Kumasi,Ghana0LowMiddleCountry incomeHigh20406080Fatalities (percent)(ISS ˜9)Monterrey,MexicoSeattle,WashingtonUnited StatesFigure 49-22. Case fatality rates for severely injured people, 1998.  Note: ISS = injury severity score. Income classifications are based on status at the time of the study. Ghana is now a lower-middle income country, and Mexico is an upper-middle-income country. (Reproduced with permission from Intermountain Healthcare.)Brunicardi_Ch49_p2077-p2112.indd   209513/02/19   5:54 PM 2096SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIinterventions and improving the focus on trauma at the policy level demonstrated consistent improvement in trauma-related morbidity and mortality, over a relatively short time period (Fig. 49-23).121Obstetrical and Other Acute Surgical Emergencies.  Reduction of maternal deaths and long-term disability are high priorities for the international community.122 Despite the 44% reduction in maternal deaths from 1990 to 2015, approxi-mately 830 women—mostly in LMICs—still die daily from preventable causes related to pregnancy and childbirth.123 For every maternal death, 30 women are incapacitated by chronic problems that reduce their quality of life and ability to care for their families. High priority surgical procedures to improve maternal health include cesarean section, hysterectomy for postpartum bleeding and uterine rupture, management of ectopic pregnancy, and dilatation and curettage.111 In 2015, the LCGS reported that maternal mortality was closely related to density of surgical, anesthetic, and obstetrical providers (SAOPs). They showed that maternal mortality throughout the world appeared to decrease—by 13.1% on average—for every 10 unit increase in SAOPs per 100,000 persons, a strong argument for addressing maldistribution of providers related to surgical disease.16In terms of nonobstetrical acute surgical emergencies, about 90% could be addressed by developing the capability to care for the 10 most common acute surgical conditions in any local region. While a few types of disease processes vary by geo-graphical location, there are many that are universal, including appendicitis, strangulated hernia, small bowel obstruction, per-forated peptic ulcer, fractures, lacerations, and wounds.Nonacute Surgical Conditions. Even common nonacute conditions can have significant impact on the quality of life. Hernias can prevent otherwise healthy individuals from work-ing, especially in societies where the economy relies heavily on manual labor. Cleft lip and cleft palate deformities interfere with the ability to speak or eat properly and predispose affected indi-viduals to chronic ear infections leading to hearing loss. Many live in isolation because social ostracism prevents them from attending school, marrying, or holding jobs.124 Plastic surgeons who pioneered global outreach for reconstructive procedures for cleft lip and palate opened the door for subsequent outreach by other specialties, including ophthalmology, orthopedics, general surgery, urology, and dentistry.125-127The most common form of blindness is caused by cata-racts. Cataracts decrease the quality of life and the socioeco-nomic status for both the blind person and his or her family. The fact that 90% of blind people no longer work reveals the extra burdens carried by the family members who care for them.128 The Himalayan Cataract Project (HCP) is a highly successful initiative focusing on cataracts in Asia and Africa. HCP pri-orities and measurable outcomes illustrate how combining key public health concepts with a comprehensive approach to sur-gical care creates a model for curing disease, building econo-mies, and delivering hope in resource-poor areas9 (Box: The  Himalayan Cataract Project: A Sustainable Public Health Approach for Curing Blindness).1992–930%10%20%30%Trauma mortality40%50%60%1993–941994–951995–961996–971997–981998–991999–002000–012001–021990: Government ofQuebec deÿnes traumacare as a priority1993: Four Quebechospitals designatedlevel 1 trauma centers1993: Introduction ofguidelines aimed atreducing prehospital times1995: Implementation oftriage and transfer protocolsbased on injury severity1995: Designation oflevel II and III centers1996–97: Specializedtrauma centersdesignated2002: Eliminationof MDs fromprehospital care1994–95: Traumabecomes a priority inlevel 1 centers2000: Guidelines todecrease MD dispatch toprehospital traumaFigure 49-23. Improvement in mortality among severely injured patients in Canada through evolving interventions. Note: Inclusion criteria specified death as a result of injury or an injury severity score (ISS) exceeding 12, a prehospital index exceeding 3, two or more injuries with an abbreviated injury scale score of 3 or higher, or a hospital stay exceeding 3 days. (Adapted with permission from Liberman M, Mulder D, Lavoie A et al. Implementation of a Trauma Care System: Evolution through Evaluation, J Trauma. 2004 Jun;56(6):1330-1335.)Brunicardi_Ch49_p2077-p2112.indd   209613/02/19   5:54 PM 2097GLOBAL SURGERYCHAPTER 49The Himalayan Cataract Project (HCP): A Sustainable Public Health Approach for Curing BlindnessAccording to the WHO criteria, 285 million people worldwide are visually disabled. Of that population, 39 million are classified as bilaterally blind; 90% live in the developing world where poor water quality, lack of sanitation, malnutrition, and inadequate services cause a higher incidence of eye disease.128 The most common cause of avoidable blindness in LMICs is cataract (43%). Nepal has one of the highest incidences of cataracts partially due to increased exposure to ultraviolet sunlight encountered at its higher elevations; 62% of total blindness in Nepal is due to cataracts.129In 1995, Sanduk Ruit joined forces with Geoffrey Tabin to establish the Himalayan Cataract Project (HCP). In the early 1990s, difficult geography with inadequate transportation, the high cost of intraocular lenses, and a lack of trained ophthalmologists, assistants, and nurses limited access to cataract surgery for the poor.HCP developed and defined six priorities, each with an associated public health principle and outcome measurement that provided the basis for assessing success and for implementing change (Fig. 49-24). HCP’s care model targeted the entire population of blind people with cataracts regardless of the ability to pay. Since most of the potential patients lived in remote areas, HCP found it imperative to take cataract surgery to the local communities. The Tilganga Institute of Ophthalmology (TIO) in Katmandu, Nepal, has served as a base from which 493 doctors and over 19,000 ophthalmic personnel of all levels have received training since 1994. Through the TIO and its outreach programs, over 4,657,748 people have been screened, and more than 307,611 eye surgeries have been performed since 1994 (Fig. 49-25).130The TIO developed an ophthalmology residency training program implementing standards set forth by the American Academy of Ophthalmology. In addition to the formal residency program for ophthalmologists, HCP established training programs for community eye care workers in a three-year Ophthalmic Assistant Training Program.Ruit developed an innovative sutureless technique for cataract surgery yielding equivalent results to those in developed countries but also reproducible in resource-constrained areas. By redesigning the intraocular lens implant and mass producing it locally in Nepal for U.S. $4, Ruit and Tabin provided a low-cost alternative to the higher-priced lens produced in developed countries. A local business—the Fred Hollows Intraocular Lens Factory—mass produces the lenses and supports the local economy by creating a new sustainable business.131HCP also designed a compassion-driven, culturally acceptable method for cost-recovery that involves a sliding scale for payment: 45% of patients pay U.S. $120; 20% pay a smaller amount based on their economic situation; and 35% receive cataract surgery for free.With the rapidity and scale of success experienced in Nepal, HCP and TIO began expanding their efforts globally. HCP is now actively working to replicate and proliferate their model in countries throughout South Asia and Africa by developing high-quality eye care systems, supporting local institutions, and training local doctors and ophthalmic personnel. Since 2005, HCP has trained over 300 ophthalmic personnel from 19 countries.HCPprioritiesPublic healthprinciplesImplementationAccessibleAppropriateDisruptive technologySustainable growthAffordableSustainabilityHumanitarianHigh qualityInnovationDirect impactAffordabilityReplicationEntire populationCare at local levelCare comparable to western standardsDisease with high incidence/prevalenceDesigned $4 lensLocal businessSkills transferBuilding infrastructureDelivery model$20 cost/cataractMeet needs of current populationCulturally and economically acceptableFigure 49-24. Himalayan cataract project priorities, public health principles, and outcome measurements. (Redrawn from Himalayan Cataract Project and Tilganga Eye Center, Cureblindness.org, 129-131, by permission. Illustration reproduced with permission from Intermountain Healthcare.)Brunicardi_Ch49_p2077-p2112.indd   209713/02/19   5:54 PM 2098SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IICancer InitiativesSurgery for cancer in public health plays a role not only for curative surgery, but also for early diagnosis, prevention, and palliation.52,110,132,133 Solid tumors, in their early stages, presents insidiously as a nonacute surgical problem. Due to cancer’s recent recognition as a leading cause of death, cancer has been identified as a health priority in LMICs. Most solid tumors are incurable without surgery and at a minimum require surgical excision of the primary lesion.110It is often not appreciated that surgeons provide a signif-icant amount of primary care and are the principle providers involved in endoscopic screening and treatment of gastrointes-tinal tumors in LMICs. In countries without specialized ser-vices, low-cost and effective treatment options combining early prevention and treatment with off-patent drug use have led to coverage of cancer treatment in several middle-income coun-tries’ national health insurance plans.52 Cancer care provides significant opportunity for including surgery in community-wide public health programs as a high priority according to the prioritization model (see Table 49-6); cancer has a high public health burden, is treated with highly successful procedures, and can be cost-effective and feasible globally. In 2009, a coalition of leaders in cancer care and public health organized the Global Task Force on Expanded Access to Cancer Care and Control in Developing Countries (GTFCCC).134 GTFCCC’s mission is to expand access to cancer prevention, detection, and care in LMICs. Successful partnerships have already been entered into Haiti, Rwanda, Mexico, Malawi, and Jordan.Cost-Effectiveness of Surgical Care. Funders in healthcare look for measurable return on their investments. While compari-son of outcomes and objective measures would be ideal, reality demonstrates that healthcare budgets more commonly are dic-tated by politics rather than actual need. Nevertheless, in a world of limited resources and tightening budgets for healthcare, cost-effective analyses of various options for intervention are critical for policy makers. Comparing various options that have differ-ent outcomes is an approach called cost-utility analysis (CUA). Surgical interventions can be evaluated by specific diseases or conditions, or by systems or services required to support the delivery of surgical care. In 1990, the World Bank defined the Disability Adjusted Life Year (DALY) as the sum of Years of Life Lost (YLL) due to premature mortality in the population and the Years Lost due to Disability (YLD) for people living with the health condition or its consequences (DALY = YLL + YLD). Evaluating the cost per DALY averted is one approach for comparing the cost-utility between medical and surgical interventions. Recent surgical cost/DALY studies identifying the cost-effectiveness of various types of surgical care have allowed surgical initiatives to be considered when prioritizing public health initiatives.The World Bank arbitrarily defined U.S. $100 per DALY averted per day in low-income countries as highly cost-effective. Compared to other public health initiatives, developing basic and emergency surgical care at the district level hospital is as cost-effective as, or more so, than typical public health programs such as retroviral treatments for HIV/AIDS or immunization for measles (Fig. 49-26).135-139Using the WHO’s cost-effectiveness standards, investing in emergency obstetrical systems, including timely caesarean delivery, can also be considered “highly cost-effective” for 48 of 49 countries in which there are currently inadequate numbers of cesarean deliveries.140,141 The median cost per DALY averted by cesarean-section was $304. In addition, the cost-benefit ratio in 46 of 49 countries was >1, suggesting that investment in cae-sarean delivery is a viable economic proposition.Inguinal hernia repair is one of the most common opera-tions performed worldwide. Tension-free inguinal hernia repairs performed with mosquito netting or polypropylene mesh were cost-effective in Western Ecuador and Western Ghana ($78.18 per DALY and $12.88 per DALY averted, respectively).136,142 Using mosquito netting in India was 3700 times cheaper than using traditional polypropylene mesh.143Using “value of lost output” (VLO) data representing 90% of the world’s population, it is estimated that U.S. $20.7 trillion would be lost between 2015 and 2030 due to unmet surgical needs and their inherent morbidity and mortality.144 Projected 1119941996199820002002200420062008201020122014201635,00030,00025,00020,00015,00010,00050000SurgeriesYearFigure 49-25. Eye surgeries at Tilganga Eye Center and outreach. Note: 2015 was the year of a devastating earthquake in Nepal. (Redrawn from Himalayan Cataract Project and Tilganga Eye Center, Cureblindness.org, 129-131, by permission. Illustration reproduced with permission from Intermountain Healthcare.)Brunicardi_Ch49_p2077-p2112.indd   209813/02/19   5:54 PM 2099GLOBAL SURGERYCHAPTER 49economic losses of such magnitude have underlined the impor-tance of prioritizing surgical infrastructure and the cost-effective nature of many interventions within the surgical realm.Factors Affecting Utilization and Outcome for Surgical Care. There are three major factors that severely limit utiliza-tion of surgical services:1.	Socioeconomic and cultural factors2.	Accessibility of facilities3.	Quality of care (Fig. 49-27)145The decision to seek timely care is affected by the costs associated with time off from work and inability to support the family during the absence, transportation and lodging, and the surgical services themselves. Cultural and religious tradi-tions may define acceptability of various treatment options. For example, many people in Mongolia refuse to have surgery on Tuesdays as this is viewed as a “bad luck” day. Understanding local customs and cultural concerns can improve utilization of surgical services.At the intersection of cost and culture are “willingness to pay” (WTP) models, which predict how a society’s perceived costs of obtaining care versus tolerating a medical condition will lead to or prevent them from seeking care. Such calcula-tions can inform which policies are most likely to yield improved health for a country or region, and they rely heavily on per capita gross domestic product (GDP) and DALYs averted. It is vital to understand that these models, and the policies they inform, are context-dependent. What is perceived as socially valuable in Tanzania may be seen as overpriced or unnecessary in Haiti. As global surgical advocates work with public health experts to strengthen surgical systems, it will be important to remember that context, culture, and cost are indivisible from one another.146Austere environments, difficult terrain, and long distances from health care facilities significantly delay or prevent access to surgical care. Triage and transfer guidelines along with tele-medicine have the potential to mitigate the limitations of geog-raphy. However, without adequately trained care providers and support staff, the risk for poor outcomes is increased.Recognizing these three important factors for increasing utilization and outcomes, Mongolia initiated a public health approach for the management of gallbladder disease incorpo-rating minimally invasive surgery (Box: The Public Health Approach to Management of Gallbladder Disease in Mongolia).Figure 49-26. Cost-effectiveness of surgical interven-tions, compared to two key medical interventions. Note: DALY = disability-adjusted life year. (Reproduced with permission from Intermountain Healthcare.)Orthopedic surgery tripTrauma centerCesarean deliveryHydrocephalus repairTrachoma surgeryCleft lip and palate repairHernia repairSurgical hospitalCataract surgeryObstetric hospitalMeasles vaccinationAntiviral therapy for HIV$1/DALY$10/DALY$100/DALY$1000/DALYRange Cost/DALY (2012 US$)Figure 49-27. Factors affecting utilization and outcome of surgical care. (Adapted with permission from UNFPA United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA); Setting stan-dards for emergency obstetric and new-born care; Available from: https://www.unfpa.org/resources/setting-standardsemergency-obstetric-and-newborn-care. Illustration reproduced with permission from Intermountain Healthcare.)Socioeconomic/cultural factorsAccessibility offacilitiesQuality ofcarePhase IDecision toseek carePhase IIIdentifying & reachingmedical facilityPhase IIIReceipt of adequate &appropriate treatmentFactors affectingutilization & outcomePhases of delayBrunicardi_Ch49_p2077-p2112.indd   209913/02/19   5:54 PM 2100SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIThe Public Health Approach to Management of Gallbladder Disease in MongoliaMongolia, the most sparsely populated country in the world, covers a large geographic area nestled between China and Siberia.147 The austere environment with extremes of weather, dry deserts, and high mountains present significant obstacles for road building limiting transportation for patients in the vast rural areas (Fig. 49-28). Significant deficiencies in infrastructure, supplies, equipment, and human resources at primary healthcare facilities exist: sporadic electricity, no fully qualified surgeons or anesthesiologists, and less than half the facilities with running water.3 In 2006, Healthcare expenditures reached only U.S. $23.2 per capita.148,149The second most common cause of inpatient morbidity in Mongolia has transitioned to gastrointestinal diseases with liver disease, appendicitis, and gallbladder disease the top three causes.150 While laparoscopic cholecystectomy was introduced in Mongolia in 1994, by 2005 only 2% of gallbladders were removed laparoscopically, and then, only in the capital city.151 A cohort study in 2005 comparing open with laparoscopic cholecystectomy by Dr. Sergelen, the chief of surgery at the Health Sciences University of Mongolia (HSUM), found the wound infection rate to be significantly lower, hospital stays shorter, and hospital expenditures 50% less with laparoscopy compared to open cholecystectomy.152Dr. Sergelen formulated a plan to expand access to laparoscopic surgery throughout Mongolia. This plan targeted the three main areas affecting utilization and outcome:1. Quality of Care:a. Develop a laparoscopic training didactic and practical course to train surgical teams and transfer skills safely.b. Improve the surgical infrastructure for each facility.c. Expand the surgical residency to include laparoscopic training.2. Accessibility of Quality Care:a. Begin training surgical teams in the capital city, but then expand them to four carefully selected regional diagnostic treatment and referral centers (RDTRCs) in all four quadrants of the country.b. Invite industry to offer cost-affordable supplies and replacement parts to sustain the laparoscopic equipment in Mongolia.3. Socioeconomic/Cultural Factors:a. Educate the public on the increased benefits of laparoscopic surgery so they would initiate lobbying efforts demanding the government increase funding for these services.b. Educate government leaders about the need and benefit of laparoscopic cholecystectomy for the Mongolian people.The strategic initiative that began by expanding laparoscopic cholecystectomy within the capital city and then to the four key Regional Diagnostic and Treatment Referral Centers (RDTRCs) created the foundation for countrywide access to high-quality modern surgery for a regionally prevalent disease (Fig. 49-29).147,153In 2011, through a multinational partnership (HSUM, the Dr. WC Swanson Family Foundation (SFF), the Society of American Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic Surgeons (SAGES), and the University of Utah Department of Surgery), Mongolia experienced a Figure 49-28. Rural Ger. (Used with permission from Michelle K. Price.)Brunicardi_Ch49_p2077-p2112.indd   210013/02/19   5:54 PM 2101GLOBAL SURGERYCHAPTER 49dramatic transformation from open to laparoscopic cholecystectomy; laparoscopic replaced open cholecystectomy and became the primary method to remove the gallbladder in Mongolia (Fig. 49-30).154As people began to see their neighbors return to functional ability faster with the laparoscopic approach, the Mongolian people developed increased trust in their healthcare providers and the quality of care they could receive. The Ministry of Health committed increased funding for laparoscopic surgery and changed existing laws making it easier for hospitals to purchase the needed equipment and supplies solidifying the needed financial and business models to support laparoscopic surgery in Mongolia.By 2016, with the introduction of laparoscopic training into the surgical residency program and development of laparoscopic fellowship training for surgical teams from outlying provinces, 17 of 21 provinces now provide laparoscopic cholecystectomy allowing patients the benefits of less pain, smaller incisions, fewer wound infections, and more rapid return to work (Fig. 49-31).KhovdChoybalsanUlaanbaatarErdenetArvaikheerMurunArvaikheer regionaldiagnostic and treatmentreferral centerHospital #1Hospital #2Cancer hospitalNomun hospitalMurungeneral hospitalErdenet regionaldiagnostic and treatmentreferral centerKhovd regionaldiagnostic and treatmentreferral centerChoybalsan regionaldiagnostic and treatmentreferral centerRussiaChinaFigure 49-29. The public health approach to expanding laparoscopy to the regional diagnostic treatment and referral centers of Mongolia (RDTRCs). (Reproduced with permission from Intermountain Healthcare.)20050204060Percent of total cases801002006200720082009Year2010201120122013U1BAU1BR1BR1BR2R3BR3R4BR2R5BR4R5BR6BU2BU2BU1U3AU1Ap ˜ 0.001CROSSOVER FROM OPEN TO LAP CHOLE(SAGES)(SAGES)RURALURBANU1BAU1BR1BR1BR2R3BR3R4BR2R5BR4R5BR6BU2BU2BU1U3AU1A(SAGES)= Open= Laparoscopy= Plan for countrywide   lap surgery expansion= Advanced course= Basic course= UrbanN= RuralN= Center numberABURNFigure 49-30. Transition from open to laparoscopic cholecystectomy in Mongolia. (Reproduced with permission from Wells KM, Lee YJ, Erdene S, et al: Building operative care capacity in a resource limited setting: The Mongolian model of the expansion of sustainable laparo-scopic cholecystectomy, Surgery. 2016 Aug;160(2):509-517.)Brunicardi_Ch49_p2077-p2112.indd   210113/02/19   5:54 PM 2102SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIIntegrating Value into Global SurgeryAnother topic closely related to quality is the concept of value in healthcare, often described in terms of the value equation. The value equation states that value equals quality plus service, divided by cost. In this model, systems that generate high-quality care, at lower costs, produce greater value for stakeholders in that system (i.e., patients, physicians, insurers, and hospitals). This discussion is most pertinent in high-income countries such as the United States, where rising healthcare expenditures are cause for worry. It is also relevant in LMICs, where proposed interventions to improve quality must also control cost. A bidi-rectional exchange of information related to surgical systems between HICs and LMICs may provide one strategy for reduc-tion of cost in HICs and maximization of quality in LMICs.Advanced Surgical Care for Resource-Poor AreasLimited financial, physical, and human resources, political and social conflicts, and austere environments cause many to believe that advanced surgical care is inappropriate in resource poor countries.111,155-157 Misconception of the needs and abilities of people in LMICs cause some policymakers to discount the desire of people worldwide for advanced surgical care.144 Developing these capabilities in resource-poor coun-tries has the potential to decrease overall cost and actually develop the infrastructure necessary to entice physicians and other healthcare workers to remain in their own countries. Establishing advanced surgical care requires expertise and ser-vices that symbiotically support and improve general medical care. Therefore, many developing countries are actively build-ing capacity and capability to provide the full spectrum of modern surgical care locally.158As economies improve and the benefits of laparoscopic surgery for resource-poor areas become better delineated, patients and doctors, surgical societies, ministries of health, and industries are demanding the benefits of minimally invasive surgery for patients and communities.150,159-165 The economic impact of laparoscopy may be even greater in LMICs than in developed countries.166 Worldwide, surgeons have identified laparoscopic training as one of their greatest needs. In a 2010 survey, developing laparoscopic and endoscopic skills were identified as the most important skills desired by surgeons from the West Africa College of Surgeons (WACS) (Fig. 49-32).167Transplantation is another area of great interest to people in poor countries partly because of the high prevalence of kidney failure and because chronic dialysis facilities are limited. Hepatoma and liver failure are very common in countries with a strong prevalence of hepatitis B and C. Transplantation has become the treatment of choice for end-stage kidney disease in developed countries as it dramatically improves the qual-ity of life and increases survival rates compared to medical  management.168 Yet, transplantation eludes most of the developing world. Initial attempts to transport critically ill patients from LMICs to developed countries for kidney transplantation were cost-prohibitive.169 With the alarming increase in the rate at which young people have been presenting with kidney disease in developing countries, the increased utilization placed on the few dialysis machines has been overwhelming.170 Dialysis units which previously were utilized three times a week, now oper-ate 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, and cannot begin to provide the needed services to the multitudes needing treatment. Even programs to develop peritoneal dialysis cannot fully ease the demand.12Remaining states without laparoscopic surgery capabilityLaparoscopic Surgery expanded with internal Mongolian trainersLaparoscopic Surgery developed with HSUM/SFF/SAGES/U of U partnershipBayankhongorArhangaiKhovsgolZavkhanUvsKhentiiBayan-UlgiiBulganTuvDundgobiOmnogoviDomogoviKhovdGovi-altaiUvurkhangaiDornodSelengeDarkhanUulSukhbaatarOrkhonGobi-SumberFigure 49-31. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy expanded to 17 of 21 provinces in Mongolia by 2016. (Data from Raymond Price via personal communication with Dr. Erdene Sergelen. Illustration reproduced with permission from Intermountain Healthcare.)Brunicardi_Ch49_p2077-p2112.indd   210213/02/19   5:54 PM 2103GLOBAL SURGERYCHAPTER 49The majority of kidney transplants in developing countries are from living related donation because of cultural and legal prohibitions precluding cadaveric transplantation. Laparoscopic living related donation has the potential to increase the volun-tary donor pool as patients have less postoperative pain, return to work and activities quicker, and have much better cosmesis than open surgery.171 Ethical concerns exist for nonrelated dona-tions, however, because of concern for coercion in some coun-tries. Adapting to the limited resources, surgeons have described various cost-saving techniques to facilitate the laparoscopic approach in resource poor areas, such as using endoclips instead of staplers for vascular control, modifications to the surgical approach, and suprapubic extraction of the kidney rather than endocatch removal.171-173Academic Global SurgeryThere has been a paradigm shift from traditional reliance on intermittent short-term volunteerism toward a strengthening of the education and research pillars for surgical healthcare in developing regions, a role ideally suited for academic sur-gery. Global surgery is emerging as a new academic field of endeavor (Table 49-12). Academic institutions have histori-cally pioneered discovery in disease causation and treatment. As globalization expands, academic surgical programs are begin-ning to respond by broadening their vision and mission. This vision and mission includes interdisciplinary and collaborative approaches to designing innovative, affordable surgical care that is accessible to all through research, education, development, and advocacy.174,175Responding to the challenges of disparities, new genera-tions of students, faculty, philanthropists, private industry lead-ers, and policymakers have demonstrated a growing passion to address global surgery as part of global health.176,177 Prior to 1984, only 0.32% of physicians and 0.12% of nurses were involved in international health (either paid or volunteer).178 Recently, interest in global health has exploded among medical students, residents, and faculty in the United States.179,180Figure 49-32. West African College of  Surgeons: most desired skills. CT = computed tomography; MRI = magnetic resonance imag-ing. (Adapted with permission from Akporiaye L. Trigen survey: West African College of Surgeons. Trigen, Lagos, Nigeria. Unpublished data. 2010. Illustration reproduced with permission from Intermountain Healthcare.)706050403020100Open surgical skills(suturing, dissection)Minimal access skillsEndoscopic skillsSurgical critical careIntraoperative respiratory &hemodynamic monitoringRadiologic image interpretation(ultrasound, CT, MRI)Ultrasound skillsTable 49-12Examples of academic global surgery programsINSTITUTIONNAME OF GLOBAL SURGERY CENTERBrigham and Women’s HospitalCenter for Surgery and Public HealthEmory University School of MedicineGlobal Surgery ProgramHarvard Medical SchoolProgram in Global Surgery and Social ChangeKing’s College LondonKing’s Center for Global Health and Health PartnershipsMcGill UniversityCentre of Global SurgeryOregon Health and Sciences UniversityGlobal Health Advocacy Program in SurgeryUniversity of British ColumbiaBranch for International Surgical CareUniversity of California San FranciscoCenter for Global Surgical StudiesUniversity of ChicagoGlobal Surgery ProgramUniversity of UtahCenter for Global SurgeryBrunicardi_Ch49_p2077-p2112.indd   210313/02/19   5:54 PM 2104SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIAcademic involvement in global surgery provides train-ing for the next generation of surgical leaders where they can learn the necessary skills to develop systems for quality and affordable surgical care, both locally and internationally. Leaders for the 21st century will need to know how to provide outstanding cost-effective clinical care for all environments.Global Surgery programs use a variety of methods to engage faculty, residents, and students to foster an envi-ronment of creativity and innovation necessary to generate new ideas for solving some of the most vexing problems in global health. For example, some academic collabora-tive programs introduce medical, engineering, and business students to the fascinating world of medical device innova-tion focusing on a variety of communities with very limited resources.181,182 Other academic endeavors include global surgery resident rotations, fellowships, journal clubs, classes (locally and online), certificates, Masters of Public Health, bilateral exchange programs, and a variety of educational, research, and entrepreneurial meetings (local, national, and international). Many of these activities provide opportuni-ties for collaborative scholarly work (journal publications, books, book chapters, films, grants, research trials) that pres-ent new avenues for academic advancement supporting both colleagues from abroad as well as the home institution. More importantly, Ministries of Health are responding to results of these scholarly works by designing policies that include surgi-cal care in their countrywide health plans.Partnering academic programs from high-income coun-tries with LMICs and/or with NGOs provides opportuni-ties for collaboration183 (Box: Academic Global Surgery 13Global surgery engagementsLEVEL OF INTEGRATIONAssociationAllianceCollaborationPartnership+–Figure 49-33. Training outcomes from NGO/academic partner-ship. (Reproduced with permission from IVUmed and Intermoun-tain Healthcare.)Academic Global Surgery PartnershipsA. Rwanda Human Resources for Health (HRH) ProgramThe Rwanda Human Resources for Health (HRH) program is an ambitious 7-year long program of the Ministry of Health (MOH) of Rwanda, funded by the U.S. Government and the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria. The HRH Program seeks to greatly expand and improve Rwanda’s health care workforce by strengthening national training programs of specialized physicians, nurses, oral health providers, and health managers. The HRH Program is also designed to strengthen the capacity of academic institutions in Rwanda to sustain the training programs initiated and supported by the HRH Program through (a) recruitment and retention of Rwandan faculty, (b) transfer of knowledge and skills to Rwandan faculty, (c) establishment of additional academic partnerships and collaborations between Rwandan academic institutions and U.S. academic institutions. Currently, 22 U.S. academic medical centers and universities are participating in this program, in collaboration with the University of Rwanda—College of Medicine and Health Sciences (UR-CMHS) training faculty. Since the launch of the program in 2012, U.S. institutions have deployed about 100 faculty members per year across these four health-related professions. The recruited U.S. faculty are twinned with UR faculty and senior trainees, paired along common goals and interests, and together they engage in a diversity of activities—including teaching, training, research, clinical care, and care delivery improvement projects.The program is currently in its fifth year (August 2016–July 2017). Focusing our discussion on the surgical disciplines, the annual intake of postgraduate students (residents) has dramatically increased. The anesthesiology residency, whose annual matriculation ranged from zero to three residents, now routinely admits 10 new residents yearly. The surgery residency has divided into the four specialties of general surgery, orthopedics, urology, and neurosurgery. Annual matriculation across all for programs now ranges from 15 to 20 compared to 3 to 6, prior to the HRH program’s support of the surgery department. In July 2016, UR graduated eight new general surgeons and one new urologist, the largest output to date. Similar training output is noted across the other disciplines and specialties as well. As a result, Rwanda is now on track to achieve most of its targets for the health workforce. Most graduates are deployed across provincial hospitals to provide specialty level care in a decentralized fashion, while a portion are maintained at the teaching hospitals to be recruited as new faculty. The HRH Program also aims to strengthen the quality of the training programs through competency-based training and pedagogic innovation, improvements in infrastructure and equipment within the schools at the CMHS and the teaching hospitals, and stronger administration of the training programs. As the HRH program comes into its final years, efforts are underway towards faculty professional development program that will both ensure that the UR-CMHS is able to Partnerships). Global surgery engagements exist along a con-tinuum from simple associations, to alliances, collaborations, or formal partnerships (Fig. 49-33). A true partnership usually involves specified and joint rights and responsibilities. The other engagements vary depending on the amount of integra-tion between the institutions and organizations. Successful sustainable progress for global surgery can occur within any of the different levels of engagement. Many partnerships begin with a simple association or alliance before growing into a formal partnership.Academic Global Surgery helped progress the founda-tional knowledge in defining the burden of surgical disease, clarifying the cost-effectiveness of surgical care, and estab-lishing baseline values of surgical capacity.184 Further work is necessary to move beyond data collection and to use this foun-dational knowledge to now develop interventional strategies and stimulate sustainable solutions for accessible, affordable, appropriate surgical care for all.185Brunicardi_Ch49_p2077-p2112.indd   210413/02/19   5:54 PM 2105GLOBAL SURGERYCHAPTER 49continue making the aforementioned human resource gains independent of this large foreign aid grant, and that the relationships and collaborations forged between academic institutions may continue to grow and find new avenues for productive work together.186—Robert Riviello, MD, MPH, FACSB. Coordinating Nongovernmental Organizations (NGO) and Academic Organizations: IVUmedNonprofit organizations (NGO) have filled a niche in establishing surgical care in countries where training centers and healthcare systems are historically nonexistent or understaffed. More recently, professional organizations have developed a focus on specific diseases or patient groups and have become a resource for education and training in poor countries.For more than 20 years, the IVUmed NGO has focused on urological education and hands-on training in Africa, Asia, and Latin America. IVUmed evolved from a need identified by plastic surgeons that had seen many children with hypospadias and other urological anomalies, such as exstrophy, when providing care for children with cleft lip and palate. Adult surgeons were not trained in the delicate reconstruction of pediatric genitourinary anomalies, and pediatric surgeons were not trained in endoscopic or reconstructive urological surgery. The program has expanded to support training in all aspects of urological care, including adult reconstruction, oncology, and endoscopic management of stones and prostatic disease.As a nonprofit organization, IVUmed is a partnership between surgeons, anesthesiologists and nurses, academic medical centers, urological professional associations, industry, and the public with urologic surgery training in more than 20 countries. It also provides North American trainees scholarships to travel to low-resource countries to learn and to share knowledge gained in their own programs. Many former scholars become mentors for other residents when they complete their training. The sites with the longest collaborations have developed their own educational programs in general urology or subspecialty areas and are now providing advanced training and care locally (see Fig. 49-33).C. Cancer Disparities Consortium in West AfricaNoncommunicable diseases, such as cancer, are a major public health problem in lowand middle-income countries (LMIC). In many LMIC, surgeons, due to the lack of medical oncologists, treat all stages of noninfectious related cancers, such as breast and colorectal cancer (CRC). In 2011, to address the disparity in outcomes for patients with cancer in West Africa compared to the United States, a research and training collaboration was formed between the Obafemi Awolowo University Teaching Hospital in Nigeria and Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center (MSK) in New York. This relationship has now grown to become a consortium of five Nigerian hospitals and the Global Cancer Disparity Initiative Team at MSK.The consortium began by focusing on important questions regarding CRC: how can early stage patients be identified; what are the demographics of CRC patients in Nigeria; and is the biology of CRC different in Nigeria compared to the USA? These questions are being answered, with the support of two NIH grants, by creating a robust prospective database with a matching biobank. With over 250 patients, the consortium can now describe the metastatic patterns, stages of presentation, and risk factors for CRC in West Africa. Given that over 65% of patients present with stage IV disease, the development of a risk model to identify patients with early stage disease is a priority. This is being accomplished with a 400-patient prospective trial of colonoscopy in patients over 45 years of age with rectal bleeding in three Nigerian cities. Future projects include studying new technologies for CRC and breast cancer screening.—Peter Kingham, MD, FACSEthicsThe ethics involved in working outside one’s own country are complex. While a practitioner’s scope of practice is usually constrained by regulation in America and Europe, in many countries the limits of what one can do are neither regulated nor enforced. Guidelines for what should be done, where, and under what circumstances are beyond the expertise of some ministries of health. Some problems are so episodic that they are not anticipated, and few guidelines exist. For example, in natural disasters and emergencies, should any willing provider from any country be granted permission to provide care? Should specific disaster-related training be encouraged or required?187,188 In the nonacute setting, should practitioners not licensed or credentialed in their home environments be allowed to perform volunteer surgery in other countries? What entity should oversee the flow of volunteer practitioners? Can a standard set of guidelines meet the needs of most countries? Currently, there is little cross-national agreement between state entities, like ministries of health and independent organizations and individuals. While many countries require at least temporary licensure, some do not. In many cases enforce-ment is inconsistent.With respect to research, the poor historically have not received benefit from research performed on them. In inter-national studies, even local collaborators have been left out of study design and publication.189 As internet communications have improved, these lapses are no longer tolerated.190 Informed consent for surgical procedures, in the appropriate language and respectful of local customs, is becoming the norm. Few hospitals outside academic medical centers have institutional review boards (IRBs) to oversee the implementation and review of clinical research. In recent years, peer reviewed journals have become more mindful of attribution of credit, and authors are strongly encouraged to design and report studies with local input at all levels.With regard to transplantation, many countries have laws against cadaveric transplants because of the very real concern for illegal marketing of organs. Even living-donor Brunicardi_Ch49_p2077-p2112.indd   210513/02/19   5:54 PM 2106SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IItransplantation has seen effects of coercion in some regions and for some populations such as prisoners. Nevertheless, the need and popular desire for transplantation is accelerating acquisition of skills and technology to make transplantation available worldwide.191Finally, what is considered ethical in one country or com-munity might be considered highly unethical in another. Con-sent for surgery may in one setting rest with the patient, but in another, with the community or family. Values about privacy vary markedly from region to region. Health information in many cultures is considered to be a community concern, not the personal property of an individual patient.Innovation in Global SurgeryThe pressing need for surgical care at all levels and the shortage of fully trained surgeons, anesthesiologists, and support personnel as well as equipment and supplies means that opportunities abound for innovation. Innovations in education, including simulation, can shorten the time necessary for learn-ing technical skills. Gaming technology can teach algorithms for interpretation of X-rays and ultrasounds. Telemedicine/tele-health is transforming education through combinations of clini-cal case-based learning and massively open online courses (MOOC) (Box: Telemedicine). The potential for education innovation in surgery beyond the apprenticeship system cham-pioned by Halsted in 1904 is vast.14Sophisticatedtechnology thatsimplifiesLow-cost,innovativebusiness modelsEconomicallycoherent valuenetworkRegulations and standards thatfacilitatechangeFigure 49-34. Elements of disruptive innovation. (Reproduced with permission from Intermountain Healthcare.)Innovation that radically changes the way we do things and that changes a paradigm of a service or system is called “disruptive”; it abruptly changes an older and more expensive system in favor of a less expensive, more widely available technology or process. The ability for disruptive innovations to transform products and services into affordable realities requires three main factors: a sophisticated technology that simplifies, a low-cost business model, and an economically coherent value network (Fig. 49-34).195Regulations and standards that vary between countries and locales can facilitate or impede disruptive change. While disrup-tions often are not qualitatively superior to the status quo, they make the process both less expensive and more accessible, and through multiple iterations, ultimately improve quality as they cycle through the transformative process.Decentralizing education, laboratory testing, and medical records have been made possible through free and open-source software, apps, and devices such as smart phones, tablets, and laptop computers. Monitoring and imaging devices and lapa-roscopic instruments designed for low resource environments have the potential to not only improve accessibility in poor countries but also to radically reduce surgical costs in wealthy ones.196THE FUTURE FOR GLOBAL SURGERYSurgeons of the future will need to educate themselves in areas that have not historically been taught in surgical curricula. Beyond the technical aspects of surgical practice, there is a complex ecosystem that supports surgical care. Surgeons must become more aware of the complexities of cost in order to be able to shape the environment in which they work. They must understand better what patients are seeking from the surgical experience, rather than focusing primarily on a narrow view of what surgery might have to offer. Surgeons must engage in policy development and advocate for affordable and accessible surgical care without sacrificing quality. Thoughtful technology design can focus on improving quality and on decreasing cost, both in poor and wealthy countries. Building surgical capac-ity through a health systems-focused approach, with robust data collection, and establishment of global surgery centers of Telementoring in Global SurgeryOne excellent example of successful telementoring in surgery is a program started by Allan Okrainec, MD, a minimally invasive surgeon at the University of Toronto, and Georges Azzie, MD, a pediatric surgeon at Toronto’s Hospital for Sick Children. In the mid-2000s, the two imagined utilizing laparoscopic box trainers and videoconferencing technology via Skype to teach minimally invasive techniques to surgeons in LMICs.192 As part of the “Go Global” Initiative of the Society of American Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic Surgeons (SAGES), Dr. Okrainec’s team traveled to Botswana in 2007 to teach a 3-day Fundamentals of Laparoscopic Surgery (FLS) course in person. Although only two of twenty surgeons achieved certification, average posttest scores showed promising improvement.Realizing that continued mentorship promotes success, Dr. Okrainec’s team reconfigured their teaching model to include telesimulation. In 2009, they carried out an 8-week course in FLS, with weekly meetings via videoconference and real-time simulation demonstration and feedback between Botswana and Toronto. This time, 100% of participants in the tele-simulation group attained certification.193 Subsequently, the team expanded its program to Colombia, with similar success in skill acquisition.194 Since 2009, the program has expanded to 15 countries, with satellite telesimulation sites in Colombia and Ukraine. They have trained more than 300 individuals in FLS skills around the world.Brunicardi_Ch49_p2077-p2112.indd   210613/02/19   5:54 PM 2107GLOBAL SURGERYCHAPTER 49excellence will stimulate improvements in the provision of sur-gical and anesthesia services.197 Further integration of surgical care into national health plans of governments should encour-age increased investments and political will necessary to create capacity, leading to timely, quality surgical care to all without risk of financial ruin.16,91 Our colleagues in public health and the World Bank, Paul Farmer and Jim Kim, have challenged us: “We need our surgical colleagues to speak fluently about rebuilding infrastructure, training, personnel, and delivering high-quality care to the very poorest.”106REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Shrime MG, Bickler SW, Alkire BC, Mock C. Global burden of surgical disease: an estimation from the provider perspec-tive. Lancet Glob Health. 2015;3(suppl 2):S8-S9.	2.	Weiser TG, Regenbogen SE, Thompson KD, et al. An esti-mation of the global volume of surgery: a modelling strategy based on available data. Lancet. 2008;372(9633):139-144.	3.	Chang L, Lacy BE, Spiegel BM. Quantifying surgical and anesthetic availability at primary health facilities in Mongolia. World J Surg. 2011;35(2):272-279.	4.	Contini S, Taqdeer A, Cherian M, et al. Emergency and essen-tial surgical services in Afghanistan: still a missing challenge. World J Surg. 2010;34(3):473-479.	5.	Choo S, Perry H, Hesse AA, et al. Assessment of capacity for surgery, obstetrics and anaesthesia in 17 Ghanaian hos-pitals using a WHO assessment tool. Trop Med Int Health. 2010;15(9):1109-1115.	6.	Kushner AL, Cherian MN, Noel L, Spiegel DA, Groth S, Etienne C. Addressing the Millennium Development Goals from a surgical perspective: essential surgery and anes-thesia in 8 lowand middle-income countries. Arch Surg. 2010;145(2):154-159.	7.	Debas HT, Donkor P, Gawande A, Jamison DT, Kruk ME, Mock CN, eds. Essential Surgery. Disease Control Priori-ties. 3rd ed. Vol 1. Washington, DC: World Bank; 2015. doi: 10.1596/978-1-4648-0346-8.	8.	Alkire BC, Shrime MG, Dare AJ, Vincent JR, Meara JG. Global economic consequences of selected surgical diseases: a modeling study. Lancet Glob Health. 2015;3:S21-S27.	9.	deVries C, Price RR. Global Surgery and Public Health: A New Paradigm. 1st ed. Sudbury, MA: Jones and Bartlett Learning; 2012:300.	10.	Debas HT. Surgery. In: Jamison DT, ed. Disease Control Pri-orities in Developing Countries. 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press; 2006:1245-1259.	11.	Chao TE, Sharma K, Mandigo M, et al. Cost-effectiveness of sur-gery and its policy implications for global health: a systematic review and analysis. Lancet Glob Health. 2014;2(6):e334-e345.	12.	Grimes CE, Henry JA, Maraka J, et al. Cost-effectiveness of surgery in lowand middle-income countries: a systematic review. World J Surg. 2014;38(1):252-263.	13.	International Finance Corporation. The Business of Health in Africa: Partnering with the Private Sector to Improve Peo-ple’s Lives. Available at: https://www.unido.org/sites/default/files/2016-01/IFC_HealthinAfrica_Final_0.pdf. Accessed August 22, 2018.	14.	Central Intelligence Agency. CIA World Fact Book. 2018. Available at: https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/. Accessed August 22, 2018.	15.	World Health Organization. World Health Statistics 2012. Available at: http://www.who.int/gho/publications/world_health_statistics/2012/en/. Accessed August 22, 2018.	16.	Meara JG, Leather AJM, Hagander L, et al. Global surgery 2030: evidence and solutions for achieving health, welfare, and economic development. Lancet. 2015;386(9993):569-624.	17.	Casey KM. Putting the “global” back in global health. Arch Surg. 2012;147(5):404-407.	18.	Copenhagen Consensus Center. Nobel Laureates: More should be spent on hunger, health: top economists identify the smart-est investments for policy-makers and philanthropists. 2012. Available at: https://www.copenhagenconsensus.com/sites/default/files/CC12+Results+Press+Release+Final_0.pdf.	19.	Kydland F, Stokey N, Schelling T, et al. Post-2015 consensus. Copenhagen Consensus Available at: http://www.copenhagen-consensus.com/sites/default/files/outcomedocument_col.pdf. Accessed August 22, 2018.	20.	Lancet Commissioners. The Lancet Commission on global surgery, 2015. Available at: http://www.lancetglobalsurgery .org/lancet-commissioners. Accessed August 22, 2018.	21.	68th World Health Assembly. Emergency and Essential Surgi-cal Care, World Health Organization. Available at: http://who .int/surgery/wha-eb/en/	22.	Dare AJ, Grimes CE, Gillies R, et al. Global Surgery: defining an emerging global health field. Lancet. 2014;384:2245-2247.	23.	deVries CR, Rosenberg JS. Global surgical ecosys-tems: a need for systems strengthening. Ann Glob Health. 2016;82(4):605-613.	24.	Chu K, Rosseel P, Gielis P, Ford N. Surgical task shifting in Sub-Saharan Africa. PLoS Med. 2009;6:e1000078.	25.	Sheldon GF, Ricketts TC, Charles A, King J, Fraher EP, Meyer A. The global health workforce shortage: role of surgeons and other providers. Adv Surg. 2008;42:63-85.	26.	Crisp N, Chen L. Global supply of health professionals. New Engl J Med. 2014;370:950-957.	27.	Mkandawire N, Ngulube C, Lavy C. Orthopaedic clinical officer program in Malawi: a model for providing orthopaedic care. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2008;466(10):2385-2391.	28.	Pereira C, Cumbi A, Malalane R, et al. Meeting the need for emergency obstetric care in Mozambique: work performance and histories of medical doctors and assistant medical officers trained for surgery. BJOG. 2007;114(12):1530-1553.	29.	Kruk ME, Pereira C, Vaz F, Bergström S, Galea S. Economic evaluation of surgically trained assistant medical officers in performing major obstetric surgery in Mozambique. BJOG. 2007;114(10):1253-1260.	30.	Sherwood KL, Price RR, White TW, Stevens MH, Van Boerum DH. A role in trauma care for advanced practice clinicians. JAAPA. 2009;22(6):33-36, 41.	31.	Ozgediz D, Kijjambu S, Galukande M, et al. Africa’s neglected surgical workforce crisis. Lancet. 2008;371:627-628.	32.	Rodriguez MI, Gordon-Maclean C. The safety, efficacy and acceptability of task sharing tubal sterilization to midlevel providers: a systematic review. Contraception. 2014;89(6):504-511.	33.	Mullan, F. The metrics of the physician brain drain. N Engl J Med. 2005;353(17):1810-1818.	34.	Humphries N, McAleese S, Matthews A, Brugha R. “Emigra-tion is a matter of self-preservation. The working conditions...are killing us slowly”: qualitative insights into health professional emigration from Ireland. Hum Resour Health. 2015;13:35.	35.	Hagopian A, Thompson MJ, Fordyce M, Johnson KE, Hart LG. The migration of physicians from sub-Saharan Africa to the United States of America: measures of the African brain drain. Hum Resour Health. 2004;2(1):17.	36.	Tankwanchi AB, Vermund SH, Perkins DD. Moni-toring Sub-Saharan African physician migration and recruitment post-adoption of the WHO code of practice: tem-poral and geographic patterns in the United States. PLoS One. 2015;10(4):e0124734.Brunicardi_Ch49_p2077-p2112.indd   210713/02/19   5:54 PM 2108SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	37.	Hagander LE, Hughes CD, Nash K, et al. Surgeon migra-tion between developing countries and the United States: train, retain, and gain from brain drain. World J Surg. 2013;37(1):14-23.	38.	Mills EJ, Schabas WA, Volmink J, et al. Should active recruit-ment of health workers from Sub-Saharan Africa be viewed as a crime? Lancet. 2008;371:685-688.	39.	McCoy D, Bennett S, Witter S, et al. Salaries and incomes of health workers in sub-Saharan Africa. Lancet. 2008;371(9613):675-681.	40.	Riviello R, Ozgediz D. International medical graduates and the global surgical workforce: the perspective from the other side. J Am Coll Surg. 2008;207(1):143-144.	41.	World Health Organization. Health workers for all and all for health workers. The Kampala declaration and agenda for global action. Available at: http://www.who.int/workforceal-liance/Kampala%20Declaration%20and%20Agenda%20web%20file.%20FINAL.pdf. Accessed August 22, 2018.	42.	Global population to pass 10 billion by 2100, UN projections indicate. UN News. May 3, 2011. Available at: http://www .un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=38253#.UST1tDfheSp.	43.	Population ageing and development: ten years after Madrid. available at: http://www.un.org/esa/population/publications/popfacts/popfacts_2012-4.pdf. Accessed August 22, 2018.	44.	He W, Goodkind D, Kowal P. An Aging World: 2015. Available at: https://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/publi-cations/2016/demo/p95-16-1.pdf. Accessed August 22, 2018.	45.	Husain I, Patierno K, Zosa-Feranil I, et al. Fostering Eco-nomic Growth, Equity, and Resilience in Sub-Saharan Africa: the Role of Family Planning. Available at: https://www.prb.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/pace10.16-report-FosteringEconomic-Growth-Equity.pdf. Accessed August 22, 2018.	46.	Salomon JA, Vos T, Hogan DR. Common values in assessing health outcomes from disease and injury: disability weights measurement study for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. Lancet. 2012;380(9859):2129-2143.	47.	Murray CJ, Vos T, Lozano R, et al. Disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) for 291 diseases and injuries in 21 regions, 1990-2010: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. Lancet. 2012;380(9859):2197-2223.	48.	Groen RS, Samai M, Stewart KA, et al. Untreated surgical con-ditions in Sierra Leone: a cluster randomised, cross-sectional, countrywide survey. Lancet. 2012;380(9847):1082-1087.	49.	Petroze RT, Groen RS, Niyonkuru F, et al. Estimating opera-tive disease prevalence in a low-income country: results of a nationwide population survey in Rwanda. Surgery. 2013;153(4):457-464.	50.	Gupta S, Groen RS, Kyamanywa P, et al. Surgical care needs of low-resource populations: an estimate of the prevalence of surgically treatable conditions and avoidable deaths in 48 countries. Lancet. 2015;385(suppl 2):S1.	51.	Duda RB, Hill AG. Surgery in developing countries: should surgery have a role in population-based health care? Am Coll Surg Bull. 2007;92(5):12-18, 35.	52.	Farmer P, Frenk J, Knaul FM, et al. Expansion of cancer care and control in countries of low and middle income: a call to action. Lancet. 2010;376(9747):1186-1193.	53.	The Global Burden of Disease Cancer Collaboration. The global burden of cancer 2013. JAMA Oncol. 2015;1:505-527.	54.	Mody GN, Nduaguba A, Ntirenganya F, Riviello R. Char-acteristics and presentation of patients with breast cancer in Rwanda. Am J Surg. 2013;205:409-413.	55.	Gelband H, Jha P, Sankaranarayanan R, Horton S, eds.  Cancer: Disease Control Priorities. 3rd ed. Vol 3. Washington, DC: World Bank; 2015.	56.	Hoekstra HJ, Wobbes T, Heineman E, et al. Fighting global disparities in cancer care: a surgical oncology view. Ann Surg Oncol. 2016;23:2131-2136.	57.	Mock C, Joshipura M, Goosen J, Maier R. Overview of the Essential Trauma Care Project. World J Surg. 2006;30:919-929.	58.	Mock C. Strengthening care for the injured globally. J Trauma. 2011;70(6):1307-1316.	59.	World Health Organization. Injury and violence: the facts. 2004 Available at: http://www.who.int/violence_injury_pre-vention/key_facts/VIP_key_fact_1.pdf. Accessed August 22, 2018.	60.	World Health Organization. Violence and Injury Prevention: Injury and violence: the facts. Available at: http://www.who .int/violence_injury_prevention/key_facts/VIP_key_facts .pdf?ua=1. Accessed August 22, 2018.	61.	Lozano R, Naghavi M, Foreman K, et al. Global and regional mortality from 235 causes of death for 20 age groups in 1990 and 2010: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Dis-ease Study 2010. Lancet. 2012;380(9859):2095-2128.	62.	World Health Organization. Global status report on road safety 2015. Available at: http://www.who.int/violence_injury_pre-vention/road_safety_status/2015/en/. Accessed August 22, 2018.	63.	American College of Surgeons. Rural Trauma Team Devel-opment Course. 3rd ed. Available at: https://www.facs.org/quality-programs/trauma/education/rttdc. Accessed August 22, 2018.	64.	Kopits E, Cropper M. Traffic fatalities and economic growth. Accid Anal Prev. 2005;37:169-178.	65.	World Health Organization. Burns. Available at: http://www .who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs365/en/. Accessed August 22, 2018.	66.	World Health Organization. A WHO Plan for Burn Preven-tion and Care. Available at: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/97852/9789241596299_eng.pdf?sequence. Accessed August 22, 2018.	67.	Saffle JR, Edelman L, Theurer L, Morris SE, Cochran A. Telemedicine evaluation of acute burns is accurate and cost-effective. J Trauma. 2009;67(2):358-365.	68.	Shokrollahi K, Sayed M, Dickson W, et al. Mobile phones for the assessment of burns: we have the technology. Emerg Med J. 2007;24(11):753-755.	69.	Keough GJ, Matherly AF, Cochran A. Expanding burn care knowledge in a rural region through project exten-sion for community healthcare outcomes. JAMA Surg. 2017;152(4):401-402.	70.	New Mexico School of Medicine. Project ECHO. Available at: https://echo.unm.edu. Accessed August 22, 2018.	71.	The University of Utah Health. Telemedicine: teleburn care. Available at: http://healthcare.utah.edu/burncenter/telemedi-cine.php. Accessed August 22, 2018.	72.	Kim JY. Opening address to the inaugural “The Lancet Commission on Global Surgery” meeting. The World Bank. January 17, 2014. Boston, MA. http://www.lancetglobalsur-gery.org/january-videos	73.	Jamison DT, Summers LH, Alleyne G, et al. Global health 2035: a world converging within a generation. Lancet. 2013;82(9908):1898-1955.	74.	Luboga S, Macfarlane SB, von Schreeb J, et al. Increasing access to surgical services in Sub-Saharan Africa: priorities for national and international agencies recommended by the Bellagio Essen-tial Surgery Group. PLoS Med. 2009;6(12):e1000200.	75.	Kingham TP, Price RR, Casey KM, Rogers SO, Kushner AI. Beyond volunteerism: augmenting surgical care in resource-limited settings. Bull Am Col Sur. 2011;96(7):16-21.	76.	Gosselin RA, Gyamfi YA, Contini S. Challenges of meet-ing surgical needs in the developing world. World J Surg. 2011;35(2):258-261.	77.	Shrime MG, Sleemi A, Ravilla TD. Specialized surgical plat-forms. In: Essential Surgery: Disease Control Priorities. 3rd ed. Vol 1. Washington DC: World Bank; 2015:231-244.Brunicardi_Ch49_p2077-p2112.indd   210813/02/19   5:54 PM 2109GLOBAL SURGERYCHAPTER 49	78.	APRIDEC Medical Outreach Group. Available at: http://apridec .org. Accessed August 22, 2018.	79.	Price R, Sergelen O, Unursaikhan C. Improving surgical care in Mongolia: a model for sustainable development. World J Surg. 2013;37(7):1492-1499.	80.	Cheng LH, McColl L, Parker G. Thyroid surgery in the UK and on board the Mercy Ships. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2012;50(7):592-596.	81.	Rodas E, Vicuna A, Merrell RC. Intermittent and mobile surgical services: logistics and outcomes. World J Surg. 2005;29(10):1335-1339.	82.	Wells KM, Lee YJ, Erdene S, et al. Building operative care capacity in a resource limited setting: the Mongolian model of the expansion of sustainable laparoscopic cholecystec-tomy. Surgery. 2016;160(2):509-517.	83.	The United Nations. Origin and History. Available at: http://www.un.org/en/about-un/index.html. Accessed August 22, 2018.	84.	The United Nations. About the UN: Overview. Available at: http://www.un.org/en/sections/about-un/overview/index.html. Accessed August 22, 2018.	85.	The United Nations. Sustainable Development Goals: 17 Goals to Transform Our World. Available at: http://www .un.org/sustainabledevelopment/sustainable-development-goals/. Accessed August 22, 2018.	86.	The University of Manchester Brooks World Poverty Insti-tute. The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs): A Short History of the World’s Biggest Promise. Available at: https://www.unidev.info/Portals/0/pdf/bwpi-wp-10009.pdf. Accessed August 22, 2018.	87.	Millenium Development Goals and Beyond 2015. 2018. United Nations Millennium Project, http://www.un.org/mil-lenniumgoals/bkgd.shtml.	88.	The United Nations. Transforming Our World: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. United Nations General Assembly, Seventieth session, 25 September 2015. Available at: http://www.un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/RES/70/1&Lang=E. Accessed August 22, 2018.	89.	Kumar S, Kumar N, Vivekadhish S. Millennium development goals (MDGS) to sustainable development goals (SDGS): addressing unfinished agenda and strengthening sustainable development and partnership. Indian J Community Med. 2016;41:1-4.	90.	Alma Ata Declaration. October 31, 2012. Available at: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alma_Ata_Declaration. Accessed 2018.	91.	Price R, Makasa E, Hollands M. World Health Assem-bly Resolution WHA68.15: strengthening emergency and essential surgical care and anesthesia as a component of universal health coverage—addressing the public health gaps arising from lack of safe and accessible surgical and anesthetic services. World J Surg. 2015;39:2115-2125.	92.	World Health Organization. Primary Health Care: Now More than Ever. Available at: http://www.who.int/whr/2008/whr08_en.pdf. Accessed August 22, 2018.	93.	World Health Organization. Report: WHO Meeting Towards a Global Initiative for Emergency and Essential Surgical Care (GIEESC). 2005. Available at: http://www.who.int/ surgery/mission/GIEESC2005_Report.pdf. Accessed August 22, 2018.	94.	Spiegel DA, Abdullah F, Price RR, Gosselin RA, Bickler SW. World health organization global initiative for emergency and essential surgical care: 2011 and beyond. World J Surg. 2012;1462-1469.	95.	World Health Organization. WHO Global Initiative for Emer-gency and Essential Surgical Care Sixth Biennial and Tenth Anniversary Meeting. Available at: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/206541/1/WHO_HIS_SDS_2016.11_eng .pdf?ua=. Accessed August 22, 2018.	96.	Henry JA, Orgoi S, Govind S, Price RR, Lundeg G, Kehrer B. Strengthening surgical services at the Soum (First-referral) hos-pital: the WHO emergency and essential surgical care (EESC) program in Mongolia. World J Surg. 2012;36(10):2359-2370.	97.	Indicators of Surgical Operation (Mongolia 2001-2009). 2010 [cited 2017 March 25]; Available from: www.doh.gov.mn.	98.	World Health Organization. Injury and violence: the facts. Available at: http://www.who.int/violence_injury_preven-tion/key_facts/VIP_key_facts.pdf?ua=1. Accessed August 22, 2018.	99.	The United Nations. United Nations Road Traffic Collabo-ration: UN General Assembly adopts a resolution “Improv-ing global road safety.” Available at: http://www.who.int/violence_injury_prevention/media/news/2016/15_04/en/. Accessed August 22, 2018.	100.	Haynes AB, Weiser TG, Berry WR, et al. A surgical safety checklist to reduce morbidity and mortality in a global popula-tion. N Engl J Med. 2009;360(5):491-499.	101.	World Health Organization. WHO guidelines for safe surgery 2009: Safe surgery saves lives. Available at: http://apps.who .int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/44185/9789241598552_eng .pdf?sequence=1. Accessed August 22, 2018.	102.	World Health Organization WHO surgical safety checklist. Available at: http://www.who.int/patientsafety/safesurgery/checklist/en/. Accessed August 22, 2018.	103.	Peden M, McGee K, Krug E. Injury: A Leading Cause of the Global Burden of Disease. Geneva: World Health Organiza-tion; 2002.	104.	Auvert B, Taljaard D, Lagarde E, Sobngwi-Tambekou J, Sitta R, Puren A. Randomized, controlled intervention trial of male circumcision for reduction of HIV infection risk: the ANRS 1265 Trial. PLOS Med. 2005;3(5):e226.	105.	Weiss HA, Quigley MA, Hayes RJ. Male circumcision and risk of HIV infection in sub-Saharan Africa: a systematic review and meta-analysis. AIDS. 2000;14:2361-2370.	106.	Farmer PE, Kim JY. Surgery and global health: a view from beyond the OR. World J Surg. 2008;32(4):533-536.	107.	Learmonth J. The Contributions of Surgery to Preven-tive Medicine. London: Oxford University Press, Geoffrey  Cumberlege, Publisher to the University; 1951:55.	108.	Brigham and Women’s Hospital. Center for Surgery and Pub-lic Health. Available at: http://www.brighamandwomens.org/research/labs/CenterforSurgeryandPublicHealth/default.aspx. Accessed August 22, 2018.	109.	UC San Diego School of Medicine, Department of Surgery. Available at: https://medschool.ucsd.edu/som/surgery/educa-tion/Pages/Global-Surgery.aspx	110.	Riviello R, Meara JG, Rogers SO. Commentary: cancer care and control—the role of surgery. Global Surgery and Anes-thesia 2010. Available at: http://www.ghdonline.org/surgery/discussion/cancer-care-and-control-the-role-of-surgery/. Accessed August 22, 2018.	111.	Mock C, Cherian M, Juillard C, et al. Developing priorities for addressing surgical conditions globally: furthering the link between surgery and public health policy. World J Surg, 2010;34(3):381-385.	112.	Mock C, Lormand JD, Goosen J, Joshipura M, Peden M, Guidelines for Essential Trauma Care. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2004:106.	113.	Sixtieth World Health Assembly. Health systems: emergency-care systems. Available at: http://www.wpro.who.int/mnh/A60_R22-en.pdf. Accessed August 22, 2018.	114.	Mock C. WHA resolution on trauma and emergency care ser-vices. Inj Prev. 2007;13(4):285-286.	115.	Haider AH, Hashmi ZG, Gupta S, et al. Benchmark-ing of trauma care worldwide: the potential value of an International Trauma Data Bank (ITDB). World J Surg. 2014;38(8):1882-1891.Brunicardi_Ch49_p2077-p2112.indd   210913/02/19   5:54 PM 2110SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	116.	Mann NC, Mullins RJ, MacKenzie EJ, et al. Systematic review of published evidence regarding trauma system effectiveness. J Trauma. 1999;47(3 suppl):S25-S33.	117.	O’Reilly GM, Joshipura M, Cameron PA, Gruen R. Trauma registries in developing countries: a review of the published experience. Injury. 2013;44(6):713-721.	118.	Stelfox HT, Joshipura M, Chadunchachai W, et al. Trauma quality improvement in low and middle income countries of the Asia-Pacific region: a mixed methods study. World J Surg. 2012;36(8):1978-1992.	119.	Gosselin R, Charles A, Joshipura M, et al. Surgery and Trauma Care. Disease Control Priorities. 3rd ed. Vol 1. New York: World Bank; 2015.	120.	Mock C, Joshipura M, Arreola-Risa C, Quansah R. An esti-mate of the number of lives that could be saved through improvements in trauma care globally. World J Surg. 2012;36(5):959-963.	121.	Liberman M, Mulder D, Lavoie A, et al. Implementation of a trauma care system: evolution through evaluation. J Trauma. 2004;56:1330-1335.	122.	Khan KS, Wojdyla D, Say L, Gülmezoglu AM, Van Look PF. WHO analysis of causes of maternal death: a systematic review. Lancet. 2006;367(9516):1066-1074.	123.	World Health Organization. Maternal mortality fact sheet. 2016 Available at: http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs348/en/index.html. Accessed August 22, 2018.	124.	Corlew DS. Perspectives on plastic surgery and global health. Ann Plast Surg. 2009;62(5):473-477.	125.	Smile Train. 2017. Available at: http://www.smiletrain.org/. Accessed August 22, 2018.	126.	Operation Smile. 2017. Available at: http://www.operations-mile.org/. Accessed August 22, 2018.	127.	ReSurge International. 2016. Available at: http://resurge.org/home/home.cfm. Accessed August 22, 2018.	128.	World Blindness Overview. 2017. Available at: http://www .cureblindness.org/world-blindness/. Accessed August 22, 2018.	129.	Nepal. 2017. Available at: http://www.cureblindness.org/where/himalayas/nepal/. Accessed August 22, 2018.	130.	Tilganga Eye Centre. 2017. Available at: http://www.cureblindness.org/what/infrastructure/specialty-hospitals/ tilganga/. Accessed August 22, 2018.	131.	HCP’s Eye Care Model. 2017. Available at: http://www.cure-blindness.org/what/hcp-eye-care-model/. Accessed August 22, 2018.	132.	Kushner A. Malawi esophageal cancer palliative care program. In: Kingham P, ed. Quarterly Newsletter, Society of Interna-tional Humanitarian Surgeons. New York; Society of Interna-tional Humanitarian Surgeons: 2009.	133.	Agarwal G, Ramakant P, Forgach ER, et al. Breast cancer care in developing countries. World J Surg. 2009;33(10):2069-2076.	134.	Global Task Force on Expanded Access to Cancer Care and Control in Developing Countries: 2017 Available at: http://gtfccc.harvard.edu/icb/icb.do?keyword=k69586&tabgroupid= icb.tabgroup132925. Accessed August 22, 2018.	135.	Ozgediz D, Riviello R. The “other” neglected diseases in global public health: surgical conditions in sub-Saharan Africa. PLoS Med. 2008;5(6):e121.	136.	Shillcutt SD, Clarke MG, Kingsnorth AN. Cost-effectiveness of groin hernia surgery in the Western Region of Ghana. Arch Surg. 2010;145(10):954-961.	137.	Gosselin RA, Heitto M. Cost-effectiveness of a district trauma hospital in Battambang, Cambodia. World J Surg. 2008;32(11):2450-2453.	138.	Gosselin RA, Thind A, Bellardinelli A. Cost/DALY averted in a small hospital in Sierra Leone: what is the relative contribu-tion of different services? World J Surg. 2006;30(4):505-511.	139.	McCord C, Chowdhury Q. A cost effective small hospital in Bangladesh: what it can mean for emergency obstetric care. Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 2003;81(1):83-92.	140.	Alkire BC, Vincent JR, Burns CT, Metzler IS, Farmer PE, Meara JG. Obstructed labor and caesarean delivery: the cost and benefit of surgical intervention. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e34595.	141.	Murray CJ. Quantifying the burden of disease: the techni-cal basis for disability-adjusted life years. Bull World Health Organ. 1994;72:429-445.	142.	Shillcutt SD, Sanders DL, Teresa Butrón-Vila M, Kingsnorth AN. Cost-effectiveness of inguinal hernia surgery in north-western ecuador. World J Surg. 2013;37(1):32-41.	143.	Tongaonkar RR, et al. Preliminary multicentric trial of cheap indigenous mosquito-net cloth for tension-free hernia repair. Indian J Surg. 2003;65(1):89-95.	144.	Alkire BC, Shrime MG, Dare AJ, et al. The global economic consequences of selected surgical diseases: a modelling study. Lancet Glob Health. 2015;3(suppl 2):S21-S27.	145.	United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA); Providing emer-gency obstetric and newborn care to all in need. Available at: http://www.unfpa.org/public/mothers/pid/4385. Accessed August 22, 2018.	146.	Marseille E, Larson B, Kazi DS, et al. Thresholds for the cost-effectiveness of interventions: alternative approaches. Bull World Health Organ. 2015;93:118-124.	147.	Price R, Sergelen O, Unursaikhan C. Improving surgical care in Mongolia: a model for sustainable development. World J Surg. 2012;37:1492-1499.	148.	Gunsentsoodol B, Nachin B, Dashzeveg T. Surgery in Mongo-lia. Arch Surg. 2006;141(12):1254-1257.	149.	List of countries by total health expenditure per capita. Avail-able at: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_countries_by_total_health_expenditure_%28PPP%29_per_capita. Accessed August 22, 2018.	150.	Health Indicators 2007, National Center for Health Development:Ulaanbataar. Ministry of Health, Mongolia. Available at: http://www.chd.mohs.mn/images/pdf/sma/uzuulelt/ENGLISH2007.pdf. Accessed October 30, 2018.	151.	Rusher AH. Outreach surgery. Surgical technology arrives in Mongolia. Bull Am Coll Surg. 1999;84(3):21-25.	152.	Sergelen O. Development of laparoscopic surgery in Mongolia. 2006. Available at: http://www.gfmer.ch/Medical_education_En/PGC_RH_2006/Reviews/pdf/Orgoi_laparoscopy_2006.pdf. Accessed August 22, 2018.	153.	Straub CM, Price RR, Matthews D, Handrahan DL, Sergelen D. Expanding laparoscopic cholecystectomy to rural Mongo-lia. World J Surg. 2011;35(4):751-759.	154.	Wells KM, Lee YJ, Erdene S, et al. Building operative care capacity in a resource limited setting: the Mongolian model of the expansion of sustainable laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Surgery. 2016;160(2):509-517.	155.	Manning RG, Azziz AQ. Should laparoscopic cholecystec-tomy be practiced in the developing world? The experience of the first training program in Afghanistan. Ann Surg. 2009; 249(5):794-798.	156.	Contini S, Taqdeer A, Gosselin RA. Should laparoscopic cho-lecystectomy be practiced in the developing World? The expe-rience of the first training program in Afghanistan. Ann Surg. 2010;251(3):574; author reply 575.	157.	Alfa-Wali M, Antoniou A. Should laparoscopic cholecys-tectomy be practiced in the developing world? Ann Surg. 2010;251(2):387; author reply 387-388.	158.	Castadot RG, Magarick RH, Sheppard L, Burkman RT. A review of ten years’ experience with surgical equipment in international health programs. Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 1986;24(1):53-60.Brunicardi_Ch49_p2077-p2112.indd   211013/02/19   5:54 PM 2111GLOBAL SURGERYCHAPTER 49	159.	Udwadia TE. Navigating laparoscopic surgery into the next decade in developing countries—a personal perspec-tive. Langenbecks Arch Surg. 2007;392(1):99-104.	160.	Udwadia TE. One world, one people, one surgery. Surg Endosc. 2001;15(4):37-343.	161.	Vargas G, Price RR, Sergelen O, Lkhagvabayar B, Batcholuun P, Enkhamagalan T. A successful model for laparoscopic train-ing in Mongolia. Int Surg. 2012;97(4):363-371.	162.	Clegg-Lamptey JN, Amponsah G. Laparoscopic cholecystec-tomy at the Korle Bu Teaching Hospital, Accra, Ghana: an initial report. West Afr J Med. 2010;29(2):113-116.	163.	Baigrie RJ, Stupart D. Introduction of laparoscopic colorectal cancer surgery in developing nations. Br J Surg. 2010;97(5):625-627.	164.	Udwadia TE. Low-cost laparoscopic cholecystectomy. (Br J Surg. 2002; 89:1602-1607). Br J Surg. 2003;90(6):761.	165.	Piukala S. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy: complications and experiences in Tonga. Pac Health Dialog. 2006;13(2): 107-110.	166.	Udwadia TE, Udwadia RT, Menon K, et al. Laparoscopic sur-gery in the developing world. An overview of the Indian scene. Int Surg. 1995;80(4):371-375.	167.	Akporiaye L. Trigen survey: West African College of Sur-geons. Trigen, Lagos, Nigeria. Unpublished data. 2010.	168.	Al-Bazzaz PH. Kidney transplantation in Erbil, Iraq: a single-center experience. Saudi J Kidney Dis Transpl. 2010;21(2):359-362.	169.	Basinda SL, Maro EE, McLarty DG, Young AE, Wing AJ. Ten Tanzanian transplants: problems and perspectives. Postgrad Med J. 1988;64(756):778-782.	170.	Korle-Bu to begin kidney transplant in last quarter. 2012. Available at: http://www.ghanaweb.com/GhanaHomePage/NewsArchive/artikel.php?ID=238839. Accessed August 22, 2018.	171.	Kumar A, Dubey D, Gogoi S, Arvind NK. Laparoscopy-assisted live donor nephrectomy: a modified cost-effective approach for developing countries. J Endourol. 2002;16(3):155-159.	172.	Kumar A, Chaudhary H, Srivastava A, Raghavendran M. Laparoscopic live-donor nephrectomy: modifications for developing nations. BJU Int. 2004;93(9):1291-1295.	173.	Simforoosh N, Basiri A, Tabibi A, Shakhssalim N. Laparo-scopic donor nephrectomy—an Iranian model for developing countries: a cost-effective no-rush approach. Exp Clin Trans-plant. 2004;2(2):249-253.	174.	Wells KM, Price RR, Finlayson SG, deVries CR. Fundamen-tals for establishing and maintaining an academic centre for global surgery: the University of Utah Experience. Lancet Glob Health. 2014;2(S47):47.	175.	Price RR, Butler MW, deVries CR, Abdullah F. Promoting, developing, and sustaining academic global surgery programs. In: Swaroop M, Krishnaswami S, eds. Academic Global Surgery. New York: Springer International Publishing; 2016.	176.	Banerjee A. Medical electives: a chance for international health. J R Soc Med. 2010;103(1):6-8.	177.	Powell AC, Casey K, Liewehr DJ, Hayanga A, James TA, Cherr GS. Results of a national survey of surgical resident interest in international experience, electives, and volun-teerism. J Am Coll Surg. 2009;208(2):304-312.	178.	Baker TD, Weisman C, Piwoz E. U.S. physicians in international health. Report of a current survey. JAMA. 1984;251(4):502-504.	179.	Busnaina I. Medical school admissions doctor. 2012. Available at: https://www.usnews.com/education/blogs/medical-school-admissions-doctor/2012/04/09/medical-students-should-consider-overseas-clinical-experience.	180.	Provenzano AM, Graber LK, Elansary M, Khoshnood K, Rastegar A, Barry M. Short-term global health research projects by U.S. medical students: ethical challenges for partnerships. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2010;83(2):211-214.	181.	University of Utah Health: Transforming Healthcare through Innovation: Center for Medical Innovation. Available from: http://healthsciences.utah.edu/center-for-medical-innovation/	182.	Stanford University: Extreme: Design for Extreme Affordabil-ity. Available at: https://extreme.stanford.edu.)	183.	Busse H, Azazh A, Teklu S, et al. Creating change through collaboration: a twinning partnership to strengthen emergency medicine at Addis Ababa University/Tikur Anbessa Special-ized Hospital—a model for international medical education partnerships. Acad Emerg Med. 2013;20(12):1310-1318.	184.	Blair KJ, Paladino L, Shaw PL, Shapiro MB, Nwomeh BC, Swaroop M. Surgical and trauma care in lowand middle-income countries: a review of capacity assessments. J Surg Res. 2017;210:139-151.	185.	Carlson LC, Lin JA, Ameh EA, et al. Moving from data col-lection to application: a systematic literature review of surgi-cal capacity assessments and their applications. World J Surg. 2015;39(4):813-821.	186.	Cancedda C, Riviello R, Wilson K, et al. Building workforce capacity abroad while strengthening global health programs at home: participation of seven Harvard-affiliated institutions in a health professional training initiative in Rwanda. Acad Med. 2017;92(5):649-658.	187.	Sztajnkrycer MD, Madsen BE, Alejandro Báez A. Unstable ethical plateaus and disaster triage. Emerg Med Clin North Am. 2006;24(3):749-768.	188.	Ramsey KM, Weijer CR. Ethics of surgical training in devel-oping countries. World J Surg. 2007;31(11):2067-2069; discussion 2070-2071.	189.	Zumla A, Costello A. Ethics of healthcare research in develop-ing countries. J R Soc Med. 2002;95(6):275-276.	190.	Kushner AL, Kyamanywa P, Adisa CA, et al. Editorial policy on co-authorship of articles from lowand middle-income countries. World J Surg, 2011;35:2367-2368.	191.	Cameron JS, Hoffenberg R. The ethics of organ transplanta-tion reconsidered: paid organ donation and the use of executed prisoners as donors. Kidney Int. 1999;55(2):724-732.	192.	International Surgery Canada. Telementoring in Botswana. Available at: http://internationalsurgerycanada.com/telemen-toring-in-botswana. Accessed August 22, 2018.	193.	Okrainec A, Henao O, Azzie G. Telesimulation: an effec-tive method for teaching the fundamentals of laparoscopic surgery in resource-restricted countries. Surg Endosc. 2010;24(2):417-422.	194.	Henao O, Escallon J, Green J, et al. Fundamentals of lapa-roscopic surgery in Colombia using telesimulation: an effective educational tool for distance learning. Biomedica. 2013;33(1):107-114.	195.	Christensen CM, Grossman JH, Hwang J. The Innovator’s Prescription. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2009:441.	196.	Beck M. New low-cost surgical tool could help patients in third world. The Wall Street Journal. September 23,  2016.	197.	Ng-Kamstra JS, Greenberg SLM, Abdullah F, et al. Global Surgery 2030: a Roadmap for high income country actors. BMJ Global Health. 2016;1(1):e000011.Brunicardi_Ch49_p2077-p2112.indd   211113/02/19   5:54 PM
# Chunk 8952
Brunicardi_Ch49_p2077-p2112.indd   211213/02/19   5:54 PMThis page intentionally left blank

ENHANCED RECOVERY AFTER SURGERYHistory and Overview of Enhanced RecoveryAs anesthetic techniques, antibiotics, and minimally invasive surgery have improved surgical care over the centuries, fur-ther strategies to continue to improve patient outcomes have emerged. A novel perioperative regimen for patients following colon surgery using early oral nutrition, early mobilization, and epidural analgesia was first described in 1995 by Professor Hen-rik Kehlet from Copenhagen, Denmark in a small group of nine patients.1 He subsequently outlined a more detailed multimodal approach to perioperative care in 1997, reducing length of stay to a median of 2 days following sigmoid resection, and thus, has been described as the founder of enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS).2,3 Soon thereafter, several others duplicated that applying standard perioperative care protocols could reduce length of stay following colon surgery.4The ERAS Study Group was founded in 2001 by Professor Ken Fearon and Professor Olle Ljungqvist to further expand on the ideas proposed by Professor Kehlet. As there was a great discrepancy between actual practices and evidence-based best practices, as well as geographical and practitioner variations in care, the group desired to create a consensus on best practices with guidelines that could be employed in the clinical arena. The primary goal of ERAS is to treat the surgical patient in a multidisciplinary team approach throughout the perioperative course with the unified goal of accelerating functional recov-ery and optimizing patient outcomes based on evidence-based medicine (Fig. 50-1).In order to develop the key tenets of ERAS, the details of preoperative care, intraoperative surgical and anesthetic tech-nique, and postoperative care were scrutinized and standards for each facet of care were developed (Fig. 50-2).ERAS and its associated principles truly represented a paradigm shift in perioperative care, breaking from the clas-sical teaching of prolonged fasting postoperatively until signs of bowel function, excessive fluid administration, and delayed postoperative mobilization. Instead, mitigating the metabolic and stress responses to surgery through multimodal care and uti-lizing evidenced based medicine allows for “fast-track” recov-ery and improved outcomes.Each facet of perioperative care may have modest benefit to the patient when applied alone, but when an integrated, mul-timodal enhanced recovery pathway (ERP) is used, the benefi-cial effects become synergistic. Patients return to presurgical functional states faster, spend less time in the hospital, and expe-rience less morbidity.5 Furthermore, resource utilization is reduced, healthcare system cost is less, and societal cost is lower with faster return to work and reduced homecare needs.6 Though initial studies of ERP were primarily performed for colorectal surgery, ERP can be applied to a wide variety of specialties in the inpatient and outpatient setting including urology, orthopedics, and gynecology. Preoperative OptimizationFirst proposed in 1949 by the anesthesiologist, Dr. J. Albert Lee, a preanesthetic and presurgical evaluation by an anesthesiolo-gist is associated with improved outcomes for the efficiency of the operating room, the hospital, and most importantly, the patient.7 The use of a preoperative evaluation results in identify-ing patients at elevated respiratory risk, a 55% decrease in pre-operative testing, an 88% reduction in case cancellations, reduction in day of surgery delays, reduced total length of stay, a positive impact on hospital finances with cost reduction, and lower in-hospital mortality.8-13 Therefore, while it is very impor-tant for the surgeon to see the patient prior to a surgery, it is also 1Optimizing Perioperative Care: Enhanced Recovery and  Chinese MedicineJennifer Holder-Murray, Stephen Esper,  Zhiliang Wang, Zhigang Cui, and Xima Wang 50chapterEnhanced Recovery after Surgery	2113History and Overview of Enhanced Recovery / 2113Preoperative Optimization / 2113Metabolic Stress Response to Surgery / 2116Preoperative Fasting and Preoperative Carbohydrate Loading / 2117Intraoperative Considerations / 2117Perioperative Pain Management / 2119Postoperative Nausea and Vomiting Prevention / 2121Early Nutrition and Postoperative Ileus Prevention / 2121Mobilization / 2122ERAS in CRS / 2122ERAS in Hepatopancreaticobiliary  Surgery / 2123ERAS in Gastrectomy and  Esophagectomy / 2123ERAS in Bariatric Surgery / 2123ERAS in Other Surgical Specialties / 2123Setting Up an ERAS Program / 2124Traditional Chinese Medicine in   Surgical Patients	2124History of Traditional Chinese  Medicine / 2124Preoperative Nutritional  Optimization / 2126Bowel Preparation for Surgery / 2126Preoperative Optimization During Sepsis and Infection / 2126Perioperative Pain Management / 2127Postoperative Nausea and Vomiting Prevention / 2127Early Nutrition and Postoperative Ileus Prevention / 2127Traditional Chinese Medicine in Common Surgical Conditions / 2127Brunicardi_Ch50_p2113-p2136.indd   211301/03/19   9:39 AM 2114Key Points1	Enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) is a paradigm shift in the surgical care of patients. As a multimodal, integrated, evidence-based care pathway, ERAS optimizes patient care in the preoperative, intraoperative, and post-operative setting in order to achieve best patient outcomes. Patients recover faster, experience less physiological stress, enjoy shorter stays in the hospital, and have fewer complications.2	Setting appropriate expectations, optimizing nutritional and physical status through prehabilitation, and treating medical comorbidities optimizes patients before surgery.3	Achieving normovolemia both intraoperatively and post-operatively is important in order to maintain perfusion without volume overload, as hypervolemia and hypovo-lemia are both associated with significant complications. Goal-directed therapy approaches maintain normovolemia with zero fluid balance.4	Intravenous normal saline administration results in hyper-chloremia, which has been associated with increased mor-tality and morbidity.5	As pain is a subjective response and cannot therefore be experienced while unconscious, the use of opioids intraop-eratively should generally be avoided in order to minimize the multiorgan system side effects of these medications. Additionally, avoiding intraoperative opioids actually improves postoperative pain scores and reduces the need for postoperative opioids.6	Multimodal analgesia, which includes oral or IV nonopioid analgesia and regional analgesic techniques, can reduce postoperative physiological stress and decrease complica-tions associated with surgery as part of a pain management regimen. Multimodal analgesia has been shown to reduce the number of opioids required for analgesia.7	The strategies for avoiding postoperative nausea and vom-iting include the avoidance of general anesthesia, the use of totally intravenous anesthesia, avoidance of nitrous oxide and volatile agents, minimizing intraoperative and postoperative opioids, and adequate hydration.8	Enhanced recovery after surgery care pathways can be applied to numerous types of surgery including colorectal, liver, pancreas, bariatric, gynecologic, and urologic sur-gery with success.9	Traditional Chinese medicine has been practiced for thou-sands of years and serves as a distinct cultural heritage of China. Its unique theories and methods are still applied widely in the practice of modern medicine, including dis-ease prevention, disease treatment, and perioperative management.10	Acupuncture and transcutaneous electroacupuncture can reduce the number of opioids utilized in the perioperative setting. Additionally, acupuncture, transcutaneous elec-troacupuncture, and some Chinese herb decoctions are effective in the prevention and treatment of postoperative nausea and vomiting.highly important for the patient to have an opportunity to dis-cuss the upcoming perisurgical and perianesthetic experience with a physician that is trained in the realm of periopera-tive optimization. Setting Expectations and Patient Education. Setting expectations in the preoperative clinic helps to orient patients regarding the entire surgical experience, from what they are expected to do at home before the surgery to the entire length of the recovery both in the hospital and at home. Information on the procedure and typical recovery should be clear, well defined, and consistently reinforced from all healthcare person-nel that interact with the patient. Clear expectations of goals prior to surgery, in the hospital, and after discharge should be communicated long before the surgery. Expected length of stay and disposition should also be clearly communicated in order to optimize timely discharge. The preoperative clinic helps in this role and to establish the patient as the leader in his or her own care. The patient must understand that his or her active partici-pation throughout the perioperative experience will facilitate the recovery. A surgeon can do an operation. An anesthesiologist can keep a patient alive while the patient asleep. However, in reality, it is up to the patient to make his or her own care a prior-ity. If individuals train for a race, should they not also prepare for their procedure so that the recovery is swift? The optimiza-tion for success at surgery begins preoperatively with smoking cessation, exercise, and nutrition, but it also continues in the hospital and after discharge with pain control, physical activ-ity, discharge planning, and returning to daily activities. Clear expectations at each point in the perioperative continuum, which are communicated to the patient, will improve the perioperative experience for the patient and the provider.According to Costa, “Evidence shows that patients suffer needlessly due to inadequate preoperative preparation and lack of information regarding their postoperative course as indicated by reports of unexpected pain, fatigue, and the inability to care for oneself.”14 Patients enter physician offices and procedures with a great deal of fear and anxiety related to the identification of a disease, the consequences of treatment of this disease, and/or the fear of death. Eliciting the patient’s concerns and provid-ing optimal communication and education can allay much of this fear and anxiety. There is a substantial perioperative cul-ture change that is brought about by the elements of ERAS, and many patients have personally had or have had a close relative that has experienced surgery that likely did not include many 2ERAS: Team-centered approachPatientSurgical teamPreoperative nursing teamAnesthesiology teamPACU nursing teamInpatient nursing teamOffice/clinic teamERAS educatorPharmacyERAS project managerInformation technological teamFigure 50-1. Enhanced recovery multidisciplinary team. ERAS = enhanced recovery after surgery; PACU = postanesthesia care unit.Brunicardi_Ch50_p2113-p2136.indd   211401/03/19   9:39 AM 2115OPTIMIZING PERIOPERATIVE CARE: ENHANCED RECOVERY AND CHINESE MEDICINECHAPTER 50components of ERAS. Therefore, this culture change must be clearly disseminated to the patients and include new fasting guidelines, analgesic management, and patient participation in preoperative optimization. Patients can then anticipate and plan for certain events and sensations, such as what and when to eat and drink, how to exercise, what medications will be used, what tubes or lines will be present, and what criteria are used for dis-charge and return to daily activities. This kind of teaching has been defined as a therapeutic communication to help the patient face and cope with the surgical procedure in a calm manner.15Approximately 90 million people have difficulty under-standing and subsequently acting upon health information dis-tributed to them.16 Further, the ability of patients to process and understand basic information to make appropriate health decisions is directly related to socioeconomic status and to Caucasian race; furthermore, the readability of patient-directed healthcare material may be too advanced for comprehension by much of the surgical population.17,18 Thus, it is appropriate for patient information material to be at no higher than a sixth grade reading level, friendly, clear, concise, and simply designed. The employment of audiovisual aids may assist some patients as well.Nutrition. Surgery results in a significant catabolic stress response on the body, triggering inflammation and nutrient depletion. This stress response results in downstream effects on numerous organ systems and can lead to a higher risk of post-operative complications. Ensuring preoperative adequate nutri-tion is imperative before a large surgical procedure in order to mitigate adverse outcomes.While enteral or parenteral nutritional supplementation can be considered for the most nutritionally compromised patient, the enteral route is always preferred if clinically appropriate and can be adequately achieved in a timely fashion. Two main approaches to preoperative enteral nutrition include standard oral nutrition supplements and immunonutrition supplements, each providing extra protein and calories to supplement the diet. There is no statistical difference in infections, complications, and length of hospital stay between patients given standard oral versus immunonutrition supplements.19Standard oral nutrition products are high in protein, contain vitamins and minerals, and are widely available. Immunonutrition supplements usually similarly contain high protein, vitamins, and minerals, but they also have the addition of arginine to improve immunity and tissue repair and omega-3 fatty acids to mediate the inflammatory response.19 The exact dosage of arginine and omega-3 fatty acids that contribute to improved outcomes is not known. Standard oral nutrition prod-ucts may contain no or lesser quantities of arginine and omega-3 fatty acids when compared to immunonutrition supplements. The exact duration and frequency of supplementation have not been established; however, it is clear that the use of standard oral nutrition products has a positive impact on surgical out-comes by reducing postsurgical complications.19Exercise and Prehabilitation. Prehabilitation is defined as “the process of enhancing the functional capacity of the indi-vidual to enable him or her to withstand a stressful event.”20,21 Both exercise and prehabilitation, which have, heretofore, focused on cardiopulmonary rehabilitation prior to surgery, are very important to optimization of patient outcomes. Peri-operative cardiopulmonary exercise testing and prehabilitation in relation to ERAS programs around the world have been ana-lyzed, and it is noted that a reduction in fitness prior to sur-gery is associated with increased mortality and morbidity in the postoperative arena.22 Patients who actively exercise even when suffering from documented coronary artery disease, heart failure, hypertension, diabetes, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, depression, dementia, cancer, and stroke have better outcomes.23-36 Furthermore, other literature supports the signifi-cant merits of exercise therapy and cardiopulmonary exercise therapy before and after major surgery, with the ability to reduce infection, hospital-associated complications, length of stay, and postoperative mortality.37There is a significant amount of evidence indicating that exercise training is feasible and safe in patients with a spec-trum of severe cardiac and pulmonary diseases as many of these patients require surgery to manage other disease processes. A randomized controlled trial involving 246 low-risk patients undergoing cardiac surgery reported a 1-day reduction in ICU stay and a reduced hospital length of stay in the intervention group.38 Cardiopulmonary fitness was found to be a strong independent predictor of survival after lung surgery, especially for non–small cell lung cancer.39 Preliminary nonrandomized Preoperative phasePatient education & set expectationsSmoking & alcohol cessationPrehabilitation with diet & exerciseShortened fastingAntimicrobial prophylaxisVTE prophylaxisMinimize bowel preparationIntraoperative phasePain blocksMinimally invasive surgeryGoal-directed fluid therapyMultimodal pain reliefPrevention of PONVAvoidance of tubes, drains, linesNormothermiaPostoperative phaseGoal-directed fluid therapyPrevention of PONVEarly ambulationEarly feedingMultimodal pain reliefEarly urinary catheter removalDefined discharge criteriaFigure 50-2. Phases and components of an enhanced recovery after surgery pathway. VTE = venous thromboembolism; PONV = postopera-tive nausea and vomiting.Brunicardi_Ch50_p2113-p2136.indd   211501/03/19   9:39 AM 2116SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIdata from patients undergoing elective rectal cancer surgery within an ERAS program have shown the feasibility of provid-ing a cardiopulmonary exercise interval training program that is delivered three times per week for 6 weeks in a hospital setting after neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy and before surgery.40 The interval following neoadjuvant therapy offers a unique window of time to improve the fitness and nutrition of many oncologic patients, which is especially important as these patients can often be some of the most debilitated.The addition of physical fitness and activity to a preopera-tive regimen for elderly patients undergoing major abdominal surgery significantly improved mortality, discharge to home versus a care facility, and length of stay.41 While this study showed that patients benefited from 60-minute sessions 2 to  4 weeks prior to surgery, even brief therapy before surgery, ranging from 1 day to 7 days before major abdominal surgery, have been associate with a significant decrease in postopera-tive complications.42,43 Therefore, some oncologic or semiurgent patients may actually benefit from preoperative cardiopulmo-nary exercise programs.Smoking Cessation. Clearly tobacco use, especially smok-ing, has been well documented across all surgical specialties to increase postoperative mortality, as well as increase postopera-tive complications including prolonged ventilation, pneumonia, deep venous thrombosis, wound infection, delayed wound heal-ing, and reduced bone fusion.44-47 Physiologically, the carbon monoxide and nicotine from tobacco products increase heart rate and blood pressure and the body’s demand for oxygen. Nic-otine also causes vasoconstriction, reducing perfusion to many tissue beds. Obviously, it is advantageous for patients to cease smoking preoperatively. There is debate about the duration of the nicotine free days needed preoperatively to offer best out-comes, though the literature suggests that the longer duration of smoking cessation prior to surgery portends better outcomes.48 This is likely to allow for bronchiolar and collagen remodeling and the several weeks following last exposure that are needed to achieve blood free of nicotine and its derivatives.Metabolic Stress Response to SurgeryMultiple organ systems interact in numerous metabolic and inflammatory cascades following the stress response to surgery leading to insulin resistance and protein catabolism (Fig. 50-3). Neuroendocrine responses, stress hormones cascades, activation of cytokine, and immune reactions all occur, leading to a cata-bolic state.49 Central to this metabolic and inflammatory cas-cade is the development of insulin resistance, whereby a normal insulin concentration results in a subnormal biologic response. As insulin is the main anabolic hormone involved in glucose control, fat metabolism, and protein balance, insulin resistance disrupts many metabolic pathways.Hyperglycemia from insulin resistance results from an increase in glucose production and a decrease in glucose uptake by the periphery. In a fed state, insulin levels surge to 6 to  8 times basal levels, which stops glucose production and increases peripheral glucose uptake threeto fourfold.50 When fasting, insulin levels remain in a relative steady state with minimal effects on glucose and protein metabolism. Even when insulin levels increase to three times basal levels, there is no increase in peripheral glucose uptake. Therefore, in the postoperative fast-ing state, without the assistance of exogenous insulin, peripheral Counterregulatory hormonescytokinesGlycogenolysisGlucoseLipolysisInsulinresistanceWhole-bodyprotein catabolismGluconeogenesisHypothalamusPituitaryGlycerolAmino acidsAcute-phaseproteinsHyperglycemiaPyruvateGlycolysisProteolysisLactateInjury siteAfferentsensorynervesSympathetic nervesHumoral agentsNeural impulsesFigure 50-3. Metabolic stress response to surgery results in insulin resistance. (Reproduced with permission from McGill University Health Center Patient Education Office, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.)Brunicardi_Ch50_p2113-p2136.indd   211601/03/19   9:39 AM 2117OPTIMIZING PERIOPERATIVE CARE: ENHANCED RECOVERY AND CHINESE MEDICINECHAPTER 50glucose uptake is reduced. The resulting hyperglycemia can be corrected, however, with the use of exogenous insulin, and when normoglycemia is achieved in the perioperative period, the main components of metabolism also normalize.51The preoperative and postoperative fasting state triggers insulin resistance resulting in a catabolic state with gluconeo-genesis and protein breakdown. Following prolonged fasting states with stress such as following surgery, protein catabolism can be increased several fold over baseline. As less glycogen is stored in the muscle and loss of lean body mass occurs, there is less muscle function and therefore less capacity to mobilize.In addition to the typical metabolic effects of surgery, pain has been demonstrated to increase insulin resistance. In healthy male volunteers undergoing painful stimulation, glucose uptake was reduced as a direct result of decreased insulin sensitivity.52 In addition, serum cortisol, epinephrine, and free fatty acids were all increased following painful stimulation.Elective surgery results in a state of insulin resistance, with the magnitude of surgery corresponding to a decrease in insulin sensitivity.53 For example, the difference in insulin sen-sitivity following laparoscopic cholecystectomy versus open cholecystectomy is 2.5-fold. More complex abdominal surgery such as an open colorectal resection results in a 3.5-fold increase in insulin resistance over laparoscopic cholecystectomy. As lev-els of insulin resistance increase, complications also increase.54 In addition to an association with complications, insulin resis-tance has been shown to be an independent predictor of length of stay.53The increased postoperative complications associated with insulin resistance may be not only from the direct meta-bolic effects of insulin on glucose but also from free radical formation. In peripheral tissues that are independent of insulin metabolism, and therefore do not store glycogen, the increased plasma glucose levels result in greater glycolysis and oxygen free radical formation. This leads to alterations in gene expres-sion, which in turn propagates a cycle of increased inflamma-tion causing even more insulin resistance.55 Elective surgery has been implicated in increased inflammatory gene pathways and changes in insulin signaling genes in both adipose and skeletal muscle tissues.56,57Components of an ERP may offset the metabolic and stress responses of surgery. Preoperative carbohydrate supple-mentation has been shown to counter the catabolic effects of the fasted state by stimulating glucose uptake and transition-ing metabolism to a more anabolic state with improved insulin sensitivity.58 Preoperative carbohydrate supplementation also reduces protein loss and improves muscle strength postopera-tively.59-61 When preoperative carbohydrate supplementation is added to epidural analgesia, there is even greater improvement in insulin resistance.62Preoperative Fasting and Preoperative Carbohydrate LoadingTraditionally, patients have been instructed to fast for 6 to  12 hours before surgery to reduce the risk of aspiration of gastric contents during the induction of anesthesia. This fasting state results in a prolonged period without nutrients or hydration prior to and during surgery, and it can lead to insulin resistance, hyper-glycemia, failure to achieve a postsurgical anabolic state, and sometimes, the need for insulin. Both European and American Societies of Anesthesiology guidelines have supported the use of clear liquid oral intake up to 2 hours prior to surgery with the exception of patients with gastroparesis, intestinal obstruction, or dysphagia.63-65 Carbohydrate oral intake up to 2 hours prior to surgery does not increase aspiration in healthy adults under-going elective surgery and in fact reduces preoperative hunger, thirst, anxiety, and nausea.66,67 In addition, a fasting time of 2 to 4 hours versus more than 4 hours actually results in smaller gastric volume and a higher gastric pH value.68-75 Nevertheless, prior to the introduction of ERAS, the dogma of prolonged nothing-by-mouth status widely adopted many decades ago had little advocacy to change, despite evidence supporting more lib-eral fasting parameters. Current guidelines support fasting from clear liquids for 2 hours and solid food for 6 hours.Preoperative carbohydrate loading prior to surgery in the form of a carbohydrate rich clear liquid improves patient nausea and discomfort over preoperative water hydration or a prolonged fasting state.76 It may also have further benefits over low carbohydrate clear liquid beverages or fasting by changing the overnight fasting state to a fed state and thus altering glu-cose, protein, and fat metabolism by increasing postoperative insulin sensitivity.77-79 Furthermore, in patients whose expected length of stay is greater than 2 days, there is a significant length of stay reduction in patients that receive preoperative carbohy-drate loading.80 The best carbohydrate loading drink is unclear as studies are heterogeneous and the carbohydrate content is variable. Nevertheless, the carbohydrate drink should be hypo-osmolar for faster gastric emptying, result in a fed state with full glycogen stores, and reduce postoperative insulin resis-tance. The most commonly studied carbohydrate loading drink includes 100 g of carbohydrate the evening prior and 50 g of carbohydrate 2 to 3 hours prior to surgery.Intraoperative ConsiderationsSurgical Considerations. Prevention of surgical site infection consists of the use of mechanical, chemical, and/or antimicro-bial modalities. Mechanical and chemical methods include the use of patient bathing preoperatively and skin preparation with betadine, chlorhexidine, or similar chemical in order to limit the microbial content of the skin. Additionally, the appropriate use of antimicrobial prophylaxis should be employed and follow guidelines specific to the type of surgery and for duration of antibiotic prophylactic administration.Minimally invasive surgical approaches should be con-sidered as minimally invasive techniques have demonstrated improved outcomes across surgical specialties, including reduc-tions in length of stay and postoperative complications. Addi-tionally, the use of catheters or drains should be limited unless necessary, as these hinder the patient’s perceived ability for ambulation.81-84Hypothermia Prevention. Hypothermia is a common periop-erative problem. Up to 90% of all patients undergoing elective surgery suffer from inadvertent postoperative hypothermia.85,86 Those at highest risk include patients over the age of 60 years, and/or patients that have malnourishment, preexisting hypo-thermia, preexisting medical comorbidities that impair body temperature regulation (including advanced diabetes with neu-ropathy and hypothyroidism), who are undergoing general anes-thesia, and who are undergoing a major long surgery. Further, in patients who experience hypothermia, surgical complications are increased, including impaired wound healing, wound infec-tion, pressure ulcers, cardiac disorders including arrhythmia and infarction, as well as increased bleeding requiring blood transfu-sion (Table 50-1).Brunicardi_Ch50_p2113-p2136.indd   211701/03/19   9:39 AM 2118SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 50-1Relative risk of elective surgical complications secondary to hypothermia86 RELATIVE RISK95% CONFIDENCE INTERVALSImpaired wound healing3.251.35–7.84Cardiac disorders4.491–20.16Blood transfusion1.331.06–1.66The reasons for hypothermia are multifactorial. Radiation, the transfer of heat by electromagnetic waves through space without a medium, accounts for 50% to 70% of heat loss. Con-vection, the loss of heat through ambient air stream, accounts for 15% to 25% of heat loss. Evaporation accounts for 5% to 20%, and conduction accounts for 3% to 5%.85 Temperature reduction can also be accelerated by cold intravenous fluids, low operating room temperatures, and a decreased thermoregu-latory threshold, which occurs during the administration of gen-eral anesthesia. Further, the ability to compensate for reduction in body temperature is also compromised by muscle relaxation and anesthesia in general, as these processes impair shivering and thermoregulatory vasoconstriction.87 There are steps to take to prevent this hypothermia including active, convective heating using clean, filtered, forced-air warming blankets in patients in the preoperative area (prewarming) and also during anesthesia; thermal insulation; warmer ambient operating room tempera-tures, warmed irrigation solutions during surgery; and warmed infusions and blood products.88-99Venous Thromboembolism Prophylaxis. Venous throm-boembolism (VTE), which includes deep venous thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism (PE), is the number one cause of potentially preventable death in common but preventable causes of morbidity and mortality in the perioperative patient. Several national quality improvement organizations have cited VTE prophylaxis for patients at risk as a priority for individual physicians and for hospitals because this intervention reduces adverse patient outcomes and hospital costs.Surgical patients have increased risk for VTE due to advanced age, multiple medical comorbidities, prolonged pro-cedure times, the inflammatory and hypercoagulable state of surgery, and immobility. Specific risk factors include major general, vascular, or orthopedic surgery; lower extremity paral-ysis due to spinal cord injury; fracture of the pelvis, hip, or long bones; multiple trauma; cancer; prior VTE; age 40 years and higher; obesity; immobility; oral contraceptive use; hypervis-cosity syndromes; and severe cardiopulmonary disease (prior myocardial infarction, congestive heart failure, chronic obstruc-tive pulmonary disease).Postoperative DVT is usually asymptomatic, and fatal PE can often be the first sign of VTE. DVT occurs after approxi-mately 25% of all major surgeries without prophylaxis, and PE occurs after 7%. Since screening modalities (such as venous duplex imaging) in asymptomatic patients have low sensitivity to detect clot, the best approach is to systematically apply pre-vention strategies to all patients undergoing surgery, with treat-ment choices based on patient-related and procedure-related risks.VTE prophylaxis is therefore an important component in optimal perioperative care and current surgical practice and should be included in all practice guidelines. Appropriate VTE prophylaxis should be given preoperatively, intraopera-tively, and postoperatively based upon current guidelines for the surgery type.100 Examples of nonpharmacologic methods include early ambulation, graduated compression stockings, and intermittent pneumatic compression devices. Pharmaco-logic methods include the use of low dose unfractionated hepa-rin, low molecular weight heparin, and in some case, factor Xa inhibitors.Perioperative Fluid Management. Current and traditional fluid management strategies, which are based on a fixed fluid requirement per patient per case, have failed to improve out-comes. More modern goal-directed therapy (GDT) intravenous fluid approaches rely on the use of advanced medical devices, including esophageal Doppler monitors and other noninvasive cardiac output or bioimpedence models to determine whether or not patients are “fluid responsive” during surgery.101 In the setting of a normal ejection fraction, fluid is only administered when the expectation is that cardiac output will increase, and vasopressors are utilized if the aforementioned devices show fluid will not increase cardiac output. Excess fluid in certain general surgical cases can cause ileus and bowel edema, and in cardiac cases, it can cause hemodilution. Patients random-ized to restricted and liberal fluid resuscitation strategies found a clear linear relationship between total fluids administered (and weight gain) and complications following colorectal surgery including pulmonary edema and tissue-healing complications.102 Further multiple studies exist demonstrating fewer complica-tions with normovolemia than with liberal strategies of fluid resuscitation.102-108It must be understood that goal-directed therapy does, in no way, mean reduction in fluid administration. For some pro-cedures, it may be necessary to administer more than anticipated fluid volumes (orthopedics), while for others, the opposite may be true (abdominal). Normovolemia is important to maintain perfusion without volume overload. Thus, the idea behind goal-directed therapy is to maintain zero fluid balance coupled with minimal weight gain or loss. Hypovolemia is associated with reduced circulating blood volume, decreased renal perfusion, altered coagulation, microcirculation compromise, and endothe-lial dysfunction, among other processes. Hypervolemia is asso-ciated with splanchnic edema, decreased pulmonary gas exchange secondary to pulmonary edema, impaired wound heal-ing, anastomotic dehiscence, decreased mobility, altered coagu-lation, and endothelial dysfunction, amidst others processes109 (Fig. 50-4). Esophageal Doppler is a mode by which ultrasound is used to monitor and guide intraoperative fluid management has been used quite frequently. The use of this device for fluid optimi-zation has been studied in several randomized controlled trials or meta-analyses, all of which showed a significant reduction in length of stay of up to 4 days.110,111 Reductions in length of stay have been seen in gastrointestinal surgery, trauma surgery, urologic surgery, and also the orthopedic population.112-116 Alter-native devices such as arterial waveform analyzers and pulse oximeter waveform analyzers have been studied and may be promising with the added advantage of lower cost over esopha-geal Doppler.Postoperatively, once the patient is adequately tolerat-ing at least a liquid diet and maintaining adequate hydration, 3Brunicardi_Ch50_p2113-p2136.indd   211801/03/19   9:39 AM 2119OPTIMIZING PERIOPERATIVE CARE: ENHANCED RECOVERY AND CHINESE MEDICINECHAPTER 50supplemental intravenous fluids should be minimized or ter-minated. The use of Dopplers or other volume status wave form analyzers have not been studied in the nonventilated postoperative patient and therefore cannot be used to reli-ably assess volume status. Clinical judgment based on patient factors, surgery type, and the clinical findings should be considered in the decision to continue intravenous flu-ids. However, once the patient is able to maintain adequate hydration, supplemental fluids should be used judiciously to limit fluid overload, tissue and lower extremity edema, and the constraints that the intravenous medication pole has upon patient-initiated ambulation.It is not enough to have normovolemia, but one must also consider the type of fluid that should be used for resuscitation. From a recent Cochrane review, there is no evidence that col-loids are superior to crystalloid for resuscitation in patients.117 Therefore, crystalloid fluids should generally be the primary intravenous fluid during the perioperative course. In cardiac sur-gery, the utilization of 0.9% normal saline solution was associ-ated with hyperchloremia and poor postoperative outcomes, including higher length of stay and increased mortality.118 Fur-ther, a more balanced crystalloid, such as Plasma-Lyte, was associated with improved outcomes in 22,851 surgical patients.119 In this study, there was a 2.05 odds ratio predictor of mortality with normal saline. Other complications such as acute kidney injury, gastrointestinal complications, major hemor-rhage, and major infection were also increased in the group of patients that were hyperchloremic after normal saline adminis-tration. Based on such evidence, it would seem prudent to pro-ceed with a more balanced solution, such as PlasmaLyte, to reduce complications. Perioperative Pain ManagementAccording to the International Association for the Study of Pain (IASP) Taxonomy, the definition of pain is described as “an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience associated with actual or potential tissue damage, or described in terms of such damage.”120 There are two important implications of this: pain is completely subjective in that it is whatever the patient says it is, and patients cannot experience pain while unconscious.121 This has some effects on how the anesthesiologist treats sympathetic stimulation in the operating room. Heretofore, elevations in heart rate and blood pressure were treated with opioid medica-tions, as these sympathetic markers were considered surrogates for patients experiencing pain while under general anesthesia. However, other medications can be used to treat the sympa-thetic response to surgery such as β-blockers and deepening the anesthesia without administering opioid medications while the patient is unable to experience the pain.The mainstay of alleviating pain has historically relied almost exclusively on opioids, especially with the usage of patient controlled analgesia devices (PCAs). However, limiting opioids in the perioperative setting is of substantial benefit. Opi-oids, in fact, reduce pain immediately after administration. However, they also worsen pain scores after they wear off, increase postoperative opioid requirements, increase nausea and vomiting, cause respiratory depression, reduce gastrointestinal motility, worsen urinary retention, induce endocrine dysfunc-tion, and suppress the immune system.87 There have been a number of randomized controlled trials that have shown that as opioid administration increases, pain scores and postoperative nausea and vomiting increase.121-129 Exposure to any fentanyl or opioid in the operating room worsens postoperative pain scores and should therefore be limited or omitted.122,123,127,129 Opioid containing PCAs have been the standard for opioid administra-tion because of their safety and efficacy in patients to control the administration of opioids. However, because a PCA only offers opioid medication, there is the possibility that the desired analgesic effect will be associated with the aforemen-tioned complications of opioids. Despite their disadvantages, opioids are still quite useful in the treatment of pain. However, the ERAS protocols focus on opioids as a single component of a comprehensive pain relief strategy, not as the mainstay for treatment. Instead, multimodal 45Complications andpostoperative morbidityNormovolemiaVolume statusHypervolemia consequences• Hyperchloremic acidosis• Pulmonary edema• Impaired wound healing• Anastamotic dehiscence• Decreased tissue perfusion• Altered coagulation• Multiple organ failureHypovolemia consequences• Reduced intravascular volume• Hypotension• Endothelial dysfunction• Altered coagulation• Decreased renal blood flow• HypoxiaFigure 50-4. Volume status affects postoperative morbidity. (Reproduced with permission from Francis N, Kennedy RH, Ljungqvist O, et al: Manual of Fast Track Recovery for Colorectal Surgery. London: Springer-Verlag; 2012.)Brunicardi_Ch50_p2113-p2136.indd   211901/03/19   9:39 AM 2120SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 50-2Analgesic medications ADVANTAGESDISADVANTAGESOpioids141Relieve pain immediately after administrationWorsen pain scores after opioids wear offIncrease postoperative opioid requirementsCentral Nervous System: Euphoria/dysphoria Sedation Respiratory depression Nausea/vomiting Cough suppressionCardiovascular: Bradycardia/tachycardia Arterial/venous dilationRenal: Antidiuretic Increased sodium resorption Urinary retentionGastrointestinal: Decreased motility Constipation Biliary colicEndocrine: Stimulates release of antidiuretic hormone Stimulates release of prolactin Stimulates release of somatotropin Decreases luteinizing hormoneImmunologic: Decreased immune system function Cancer growthNSAIDs142Reduce inflammationSynergistic effect with opioidsRenal insufficiencyIncreased bleedingDelay healingAdverse cardiovascular riskLocal anesthetics140Opioid-sparing effectDecrease PONVReduce ileusPossible anticancer effectCardiac toxicityCentral nervous system toxicityKetamine136,137,143Opioid-sparing effectMay prevent opioid-induced hyperalgesia and chronic pain syndromesDysphoriaHallucinationsGabapentinoids130-135Opioid-sparing effectReduce opioid side effectsReduce postoperative painVisual disturbancesanalgesia should be emphasized by utilizing multiple medi-cations to limit postoperative pain and therefore opioid use. Multimodal analgesia mitigates the side effects of opioids by opioid reduction and enhances pain management. Preoperative and postoperative administration of acetaminophen and cele-coxib or other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, as well as gabapentin have been shown to be efficacious.130-135 Intra-operatively, the utilization of ketamine, lidocaine, and magne-sium, act as adjunctive measures to limit pain and have been utilized to reduce the utilization of opioids in the postoperative period.136-140 Administration of lidocaine and ketamine can also be continued in the postoperative setting (Table 50-2).Neuraxial opioid analgesia, the administration of opioids through either the intrathecal or epidural route, can be accom-plished by either a single shot (both spinal and epidural) or catheter-based therapy (epidural). The use of opioids by this route was shown to have improved pain relief when compared to preoperative oral, IV, or intramuscular morphine.144 Further, neuraxial opioid analgesia is associated with lower postopera-tive pain scores in adults and children who undergo surgery.145 Neuraxial analgesia can also be performed with local anesthetic only. Finally, the American Pain Society (APS) recommends the utilization of such postoperative analgesic methods in patients who undergo major surgeries, including thoracic and abdominal Brunicardi_Ch50_p2113-p2136.indd   212001/03/19   9:39 AM 2121OPTIMIZING PERIOPERATIVE CARE: ENHANCED RECOVERY AND CHINESE MEDICINECHAPTER 50procedures, cesarean sections, and hip and lower-extremity sur-geries; this is especially recommended for patients at risk for cardiopulmonary complications or prolonged ileus.145Multimodal analgesia can also include regional analgesic techniques such as peripheral nerve blocks, paravertebral blocks, plexus blocks, and local infiltration, which can reduce postoperative physiological stress and decrease complications associated with surgery as part of a regimen.146 These techniques have been shown to reduce the amount of opioids required for analgesia and also have been shown to reduce the adverse events seen with epidural local anesthetics (such as urinary reten-tion and hypotension) and/or opioid-containing PCAs. Postoperative Nausea and Vomiting PreventionPostoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) is very common and can cause significant distress to patients, with the incidence of vomiting at approximately 30%, nausea at 50%, and the com-bination of PONV as high as 80%. All result in poor patient satisfaction, increased recovery room length of stay, and higher costs to the health-care system.147-152 This could further increase the time to first feeding, which in turn may prolong ileus and/or hospital stay.Dr. Gan and colleagues developed a consensus guideline for the management of nausea and vomiting and details the risk and possible choices for the treatment of PONV.153 Risk factors include female sex, history of PONV or motion sick-ness, nonsmoking, younger age, general versus regional anes-thesia, use of volatile anesthetics and nitrous oxide, postoperative opioids, duration of anesthesia, and the type of surgery including cholecystectomy, laparoscopy, gynecologi-cal, and strabismus. The strategies for avoiding PONV include the avoidance of general anesthesia, the use of totally intravenous anesthesia, avoidance of nitrous oxide and volatile agents, minimizing intraoperative and postoperative opioids, and adequate hydration.150,152,154-159 The medications to prevent, abort, and reduce PONV include perphenazine, aprepitant, dexamethasone, scopolamine, dolasetron, granisetron, and ondansetron, among others.160-164 PONV should be tar-geted before it occurs for optimal prevention (Fig. 50-5). Early Nutrition and Postoperative Ileus PreventionPostoperative ileus is the most common cause of prolonged hospital stay and readmissions following surgery on the diges-tive tract, occurring in up to 19% of cases.165 Not only is this adverse to the individual patient clinically, this also results in doubling of the total cost of the index hospital stay and thus carries a tremendous socioeconomic impact globally.166 Numer-ous risk factors contribute to postoperative ileus and include open surgery, increased surgery length of time, blood transfu-sion, fasting, fluid overload, opioids, postoperative nausea and vomiting, and other pharmacological agents. While some risk factors are unavoidable in certain patients, others are modifi-able, and therefore minimization of the risk of postoperative ileus is achievable.Nasogastric tubes (NGTs) were previously used prophy-lactically to prevent ileus, limit distension on the gastrointestinal anastomosis, as well as to prevent pulmonary complications. However, NGT use actually delays return of gastrointesti-nal activity and increases pulmonary complications without preventing anastomotic leaks in numerous types of surgery, including gastroduodenal, biliary, trauma, and esophageal.167-169 Therefore, the routine use of NGTs for prophylaxis should be avoided.Addressing the numerous risk factors for postoperative ileus has a benefit on the reduction of the incidence of postoper-ative ileus. For example, mitigating the surgical trauma through 67Risk Factors:History of PONV/motion sicknessNonsmokerFemale sexPostoperative opioidsEmetogenic surgeryLow:Choose 1 treatmentMedium/High:Choose 2 treatmentsTotally intravenous anesthesiaRegional anesthesiaDexamethasoneAntidopaminergic5-HT3 antagonistDimenhydrinateScopolaminePatientPerphenazineFigure 50-5. Risk factors of and treatment options for postoperative nausea and vomiting. PONV = postoperative nausea and vomiting.Brunicardi_Ch50_p2113-p2136.indd   212101/03/19   9:39 AM 2122SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIminimally invasive surgery and meticulous surgery with mini-mal blood loss reduces postoperative ileus, either directly by limiting the inflammatory response with smaller incisions or indirectly through reduced opioid use.170-174 Anesthetic tech-nique can also aid in prevention of postoperative nausea and vomiting, which in turn reduces the need for parenteral opioids, a known risk factor for postoperative ileus. Multimodal pain strategies and neuraxial blocks reduce opioid use and therefore minimize nausea, improve early enteral nutrition, limit intra-venous fluid administration, and improve ambulation. Main-tenance of normovolemia in the perioperative setting should be achieved as fluid overload and dehydration both negatively affect return of bowel function, length of stay, and complica-tions.105,106,175 Clearly, each facet of the perioperative care pro-cess is intricately intertwined to the next and has implications in total body homeostasis.Other measures may also assist in the prevention of post-operative ileus; however, the role of each in the setting of an ERAS pathway is unclear. Chewing gum is hypothesized to reduce postoperative ileus by stimulating the cephalovagal reflex and is considered a form of sham feeding. Prior to the introduction of ERAS, the use of chewing gum in multiple abdominal surgeries demonstrated faster intestinal recovery with variable impact on length of stay.176-178 Following the use of ERAS and associated early enteral feeding, the benefit of chewing gum is less clear.179,180 Alvimopan is a mu opioid recep-tor antagonist that is administered prior to surgery and twice daily postoperatively. Pooled analysis of phase III trials dem-onstrated a reduction in postoperative NGT use, faster return of bowel function, and earlier discharge by 0.7 days.181 However, following ERAS implementation, small studies demonstrate a reduction in ileus and length of stay with the use of alvimopan in open surgeries without a benefit in laparoscopic surgery.182-184MobilizationThough no metric of mobilization has been clearly defined, early mobilization following surgery is an important compo-nent of ERAS that accelerates the return to baseline functional status. Prolonged postoperative bedrest leads to decondition-ing, increased deep venous thrombosis risk, and loss of muscle mass. Deterioration of mobility and activities of daily living can be seen in older patients after only 2 days of hospitalization.185 Therefore, preoperative encouragement of an exercise program and perioperative mobilization can have dramatic impacts on not only the elderly but all patients undergoing surgery. Patients that begin a preoperative exercise program are more active post-operatively and have a faster return to baseline exercise capacity when compared to patients undergoing a postoperative exercise program.186 As patients in an ERAS program are directed to spend time out of bed and to ambulate, early mobilization is therefore encouraged. Many other facets of ERAS will assist in this early mobilization: postoperative nausea prevention, limit-ing drain use, and improved pain control. Setting preoperative expectations of mobility through patient education in the clinic setting and postoperative nursing unit engagement in promot-ing mobility provide the proper setting for improved patient compliance with early and frequent mobilization. However, compliance with this is highly variable and difficult to track and may be hindered if pain in inadequately controlled or if the patient is tethered to devices such as drains, catheters, and IVs. As with other components of ERAS, engagement of all provid-ers of patient care from outpatient nursing, to inpatient nursing, physicians, and physical therapists, will improve compliance not only with mobility but often with other components as well. Reinforcement of expectations can be achieved with preopera-tive educational pamphlets, postoperative daily task lists, mobil-ity logs, and pedometers.ERAS in CRSAs the initial development of ERAS pathways occurred in colon surgery patients, the largest preponderance of data exists in this surgical specialty with the first ERAS guidelines developed in 2012 after many studies demonstrated positive outcomes apply-ing the basic tenets of ERAS surgery.81 In 1997, Henrik Kehlet published the initial series of patients, applying novel periopera-tive care strategies to colon resection patients.2,3 Following this, several groups also applied these principles to colon resection patients. These studies demonstrated that the principles of early mobilization, early feeding, and optimized intravenous fluid administration resulted in patients tolerating a diet sooner, faster return of bowel function, and earlier discharge.187-189 Further-more, these studies elucidated reduction in complications such as urinary tract infections, ileus, and cardiopulmonary compli-cations. Nygren et al also demonstrated that muscle strength and lung function were less reduced after colon resection within an enhanced recovery protocol compared to traditional periopera-tive care.187 Additionally, as ERAS is expected to diminish the metabolic and hormonal stress response to surgery, attenuation of TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, and IFG-γ occurred after ERAS cases when compared to traditional perioperative care, and cortisol levels were not found to increase immediately postoperatively in ERAS, while those with traditional perioperative care experi-enced immediate and sustained cortisol elevation.190Larger series of patients followed with Delaney et al pub-lishing a single institutional experience of 1000 consecutive laparoscopic colectomy patients with short length of stay and low readmission and mortality rates.191 The protocol was further applied to rectal surgery with success.187,192 Meta-analyses and systematic reviews demonstrate less opioid use, shorter length of stay, decreased morbidity, and no increase in readmission rates for laparoscopic or open colon or rectal resections when an ERAS protocol is utilized.193-197 Several groups have even discharged patients in as little as 24 hours following colon resec-tion, with Gignoux et al even discharging patients on the same day.198-200 ERAS can also be applied to octogenarian patients with compliance to the protocols and with no increased readmis-sion or mortality rates.201 Also, patients with diverting stomas can benefit from ERAS protocols, though diverting ileostomy may slightly delay discharge over patients with no ileostomy.202Adherence to the numerous tenets of ERAS is inversely related to length of stay postoperatively in colorectal sur-gery.203,204 When compliance with ERAS measures is lower, length of stay is longer. The strongest predictors for shorter duration of stay include preoperative carbohydrate loading, no nasogastric tube, early mobilization, early oral nutrition, totally intravenous anesthesia, early removal of urinary catheter, and the use of nonopioid analgesia. Predictors for deviation from an ERAS program and thus resultant longer length of stay include pathologic diagnosis, intraoperative complications, high blood loss, surgery length, lack of mobilization, emesis, persistent use of intravenous fluids, reinsertion of urinary catheter, and poor pain control.205-208 Though readmissions are no higher than traditional perioperative care, several factors have been impli-cated in readmission, including poor ERAS compliance and Brunicardi_Ch50_p2113-p2136.indd   212201/03/19   9:39 AM 2123OPTIMIZING PERIOPERATIVE CARE: ENHANCED RECOVERY AND CHINESE MEDICINECHAPTER 50preoperative neoadjuvant chemoradiation.209,210 Predictive tools using artificial neural networks may assist in clinical decision-making.209 The most common reasons for readmission include bowel obstruction and skin and soft tissue infection. While patient and quality outcomes are clearly important, the added benefit of cost savings has been demonstrated. Surgery using the tenets of ERAS is both less costly for direct and indirect costs to the hospital and effective.211 Furthermore, patients in an ERAS program returned to work faster and had less caregiver burden, resulting in huge indirect savings as well.6ERAS in Hepatopancreaticobiliary SurgeryAn initial experience applying an ERAS protocol in 61 con-secutive patients undergoing liver resection demonstrated 92% of patients tolerating a diet on postoperative day 1, a reduction in length of stay from 8 to 6 days, and no increased readmis-sions or morbidity.212 A subsequent randomized trial in patients undergoing open major liver resection demonstrated a length of stay reduction from 7 to 4 days with a decrease in medically related postoperative complications and no increase in surgi-cal complications or readmission; ERAS patients also reported improved quality of life over controls.213 Several meta-analyses have similarly supported the use of ERAS protocols in liver surgery, citing reduced morbidity, hospital stays, cost, and time to recovery of bowel function without increasing mortality or readmission rates.214-216 When adherence to all elements of an ERAS protocol for liver resection was less, hospital length of stay was longer.217In 2012, the ERAS Society published recommendations for patients undergoing pancreaticoduodenectomy after several studies published early outcomes in this surgical population.82 Patients undergoing pancreaticoduodenectomy often have high rates of delayed gastric emptying; the use of ERAS has reduced the incidence of delayed gastric emptying by nearly half, thus allowing earlier feeding in this complex patient population.218,219 Additionally, multiple prospective cohort or retrospective stud-ies have shown that ERAS protocols offer significant benefit to patients undergoing both distal pancreatectomy and pancre-aticoduodenectomy with reduced hospital stay and complica-tions.220-226 Several meta-analyses or systematic reviews have confirmed shorter length of stays, decreased complications, and lower cost with ERAS protocols.227-230 Furthermore, the use of ERAS protocols in elderly patients undergoing pancreaticoduo-denectomy continue to show improved outcomes in length of stay and morbidity, showing that ERAS protocols allow this more fragile patient population to recover faster.231,232ERAS in Gastrectomy and EsophagectomyPatients undergoing foregut surgery have notoriously been sub-jected to prolonged periods of nasogastric tube decompression and resultant starvation while surgical dogma dictated this fast-ing time diminished the risk of complications from anastomotic leak. Nevertheless, more liberal removal of the nasogastric tube and limited fasting, as components of ERAS protocols, have demonstrated improved recovery and outcomes. Randomized controlled trials demonstrate that removal of the nasogastric tube in the operating room and early feeding, as components in an ERAS program, result in shorter length of stay, fewer grade III or higher postoperative complications, and faster return to baseline weight and functional status.233,234 Multiple nonran-domized studies and meta-analyses verify reduction in length of stay and no increase in complications.235-238 In 2014, consen-sus guidelines for ERAS after gastrectomy were published, and these include no routine use of nasogastric decompression, early feeding within the first postoperative day, and early consider-ation for nutritional support if the patient is malnourished or unable to maintain at least 60% of caloric requirements.239Esophagectomy surgery is notoriously complicated and fraught with complications secondary to multiple factors includ-ing surgical complexity and medical comorbidity. Postoperative management is governed by the idiosyncrasies of the operating surgeon more so than many other specialties and therefore het-erogeneous. While studies of ERAS in gastrectomy suggest no routine use of nasogastric tubes and include early feeding, most ERAS programs for esophagectomy encompass all components not related to feeding, but prolonged nasogastric decompression remains.240 Many of these patients, however, do receive early enteral nutrition through the use of jejunostomy tubes com-monly placed at the time of resection. When defined protocols are followed in this cohort of patients, length of stay is reduced, and complications and readmissions are, at a minimum, not increased.241-243 Systematic reviews demonstrate a reduction in length of stay, anastomotic leak, and pulmonary complications without increased mortality or readmission.244,245ERAS in Bariatric SurgeryBariatric surgeons have applied clinical pathways to both the preoperative and postoperative periods for many years, which have resulted in improved outcomes. The adoption of ERAS protocols in these clinical pathways has offered further success for these patients. A randomized trial for laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy demonstrated a reduced length of stay to 1 day post-operatively in ERAS patients, and others have also discharged patients on postoperative day 1 following Roux-en-Y gastric bypass.246-248 Furthermore, earlier discharge of patients on post-operative day 1 has not been demonstrated to increase resource utilization, with no increase in patient phone calls, emergency department visits, or readmissions.249 A meta-analysis confirms success of ERAS in bariatric surgery with reduction of length of stay without increase in complication or complication sever-ity, while a second meta-analysis demonstrates an increase in minor complications without increasing patient morbidity.250,251 Following a thorough review of the literature supporting its use, the ERAS Society published guidelines for ERAS bariatric pro-tocols in 2016.84ERAS in Other Surgical SpecialtiesThough ERAS has been applied more broadly to complex abdominal surgery, there is surprising little data in its use in large ventral hernia repair and other abdominal wall reconstruc-tive techniques. Three studies report experience in open large ventral hernia repair with varying techniques of abdominal wall reconstruction including myofascial release.252-254 Each study cites faster return of gastrointestinal function and reduction in length of stay by up to 2.5 days. Furthermore, there were no increases in readmission, postoperative complications, or reop-eration. Though no long-term follow-up, there is no report that early feeding results in intestinal compromise from “tight” clo-sure or early hernia recurrence. In fact, as ERAS reduces the incidence of postoperative vomiting and ileus, it is likely very beneficial for this patient population.ERAS has been introduced to non–general surgery subspe-cialties as well. Complex urological procedures such as radical cystectomy have trialed ERAS over the last decade with favor-able results. In this patient population, length of stay was reduced, and complications were similar to or reduced when Brunicardi_Ch50_p2113-p2136.indd   212301/03/19   9:39 AM 2124SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIcompared to baseline controls.255-257 Similarly, ERAS has been applied to both minimally invasive and open complex cytore-ductive gynecological oncology surgery with favorable results for earlier discharge and decreased pain.258-263 Total joint replacement surgery in orthopedics has also used ERAS with improved early mobility, a significant length of stay reduc-tion, and decreased morbidity.264,265 Setting Up an ERAS ProgramThe successful implementation of an enhanced recovery pro-gram depends heavily upon cultural change and excellent orga-nizational behavior. As the ERAS program encompasses so many facets of patient care, the implementation team should not only include surgeons and anesthesiologists but also inpa-tient and outpatient nurses, pharmacists, information technology specialists, compliance officers, and hospital administration.Initial strategy for ERAS implementation should define the scope of practice change by identifying the current state and the goal state of care. Protocol content can be discussed in a small group of engaged stakeholders. Once the protocol ele-ments are defined, all stakeholders should review and discuss the protocol in detail in order to identify barriers to implementa-tion, identify solutions to these barriers, and finalize the proto-col. This allows for all stakeholders to remain engaged and have ownership in the protocol. Appropriate informational resources for hospital and office staff education are created in order to have a thorough and successful educational campaign. Patient informational resources should also be developed in order to set clear expectations throughout the perioperative process. Addi-tionally, and importantly, standardized order sets are also devel-oped to ensure that all components of an ERAS program have little variation in order to improve compliance. A final imple-mentation date is defined after coordinating that all stakeholders are indeed ready for launch. Appropriate educational campaigns are performed in a timely fashion prior to final implementation to outpatient office staff, inpatient units, preoperative and post-operative care units, operating room personnel and physicians, and midlevel providers and trainees (Fig. 50-6).Compliance and auditing should be done with relative frequency in the beginning, from weekly to biweekly and then monthly. Team meetings with all stakeholders present allow the team to address any issues in timely fashion with a mul-tidisciplinary approach and thus upholds accountability. The frequency of checkpoint meetings can be reduced over time. Sharing data of successes and failures keeps the team engaged. It is also recommended that a financial team be employed. The financial savings after adoption of an ERAS protocol can be substantial from reduction in length of stay, medication use, and resource utilization. Ideally, a portion of the cost savings should be funneled back into the ERAS program in order to ensure program maintenance and compliance and also to assist with expansion to other service lines or patient care improvement projects.TRADITIONAL CHINESE MEDICINE IN SURGICAL PATIENTSHistory of Traditional Chinese MedicineTraditional Chinese medicine is one of China’s outstanding national cultural heritages and the quintessence of China, shar-ing a deep history and common homology with the Chinese culture.266 It is derived from the rich experience and theoretical knowledge that Chinese people have used to combat disease for thousands of years. The achievements of traditional Chinese medicine caught the attention of the world because it examines each function of the human organism and adjusts those func-tions to achieve ultimate balance.Traditional Chinese medicine is the oldest medicine in China. It is a medical system with unique theory, style, diagno-ses, and treatments, which were gradually formed throughout the historical medical practice of the Chinese nation. Its devel-opment not only depended on the practice but also resulted from the systemic mode of thinking and Chinese philosophy of protecting life shape. Yet, it is a traditional subject that still stands in the modern world of science.Traditional Chinese medicine theory mainly resulted from the summary of practice and was continuously enriched and developed in practice. As early as 2000 years ago, Huang Di Nei Jing wrote the earliest existing theory of traditional Chinese medicine in China, and it summarized the treatment experience and medical theory to that time. Combining the achievements of other natural science branches and simple materialism and dialectical thinking of the Chinese culture, Huang Di Nei Jing comprehensively expounded the knowledge of human anatomy, physiology, and pathology and also stated the diagnosis, treat-ment, and prevention of disease, thus founding the preliminary theoretical basis of traditional Chinese medicine.Based on herbal remedies of primitive people, Shen Nong Ben Cao was the earliest existing monograph on herbal pharma-cology in China.267 It summed the study of herbology to date, including 365 kinds of drugs until the Han Dynasty. Long-term clinical practice and modern scientific research show that the effects of the drugs described in the book are mostly correct.In the third century, the famous physician Zhongjing Zhang of the Eastern Han Dynasty delved into the classical medical books such as Su Wen, Zhen Jing, and Nan Jing and extensively collected the effective prescriptions, combining this with his own clinical experience. He published a famous book about typhoid fever, Shang Han Bing Za Lun. This book established the theoretical system and treatment principles that applied dialectical therapy of Chinese medicine and influenced the future of traditional Chinese medicine.In 610 a.d., Yuanfang Chao et al wrote Treatise on  the Etiology of Various Diseases, which is the earliest exiting mono-graph on causes of symptomatology in China. This book also recorded the intestinal anastomosis, abortion, tooth extraction, and other operations, indicating the breadth of surgery practiced at that time. Subsequently, the ancient Chinese government in 659 a.d. issued Tang Xiu Ben Cao; it was not only the first phar-macopoeia of ancient China but also the first national pharma-copoeia of the world. It was published 883 years earlier than the Nuremberg Pharmacopoeia, which was issued by the European Nuremberg government in 1542 a.d.The Tang Dynasty physician Simiao Sun authored Bei Ji Qian Jin Yao Fang and Qian Jin Yi Fang. In these two books, clinical subjects, acupuncture, dietary therapy, disease preven-tion, and life preservation were discussed. These were an out-standing achievement of the time, especially in the prevention and treatment of nutritional deficiency diseases.Between the 12th and 14th centuries, i.e., the Jin and Yuan eras of China, several new Chinese medicine theories emerged. There were four representative scholars. Wansu Liu (1120–1200 a.d.) thought the symptoms of shanghan (exogenous febrile disease) were related to “excessive internal heat,” so the herbal 8Brunicardi_Ch50_p2113-p2136.indd   212401/03/19   9:39 AM 2125OPTIMIZING PERIOPERATIVE CARE: ENHANCED RECOVERY AND CHINESE MEDICINECHAPTER 50Figure 50-6. Implementation process of an enhanced recovery after surgery pathway. ERAS = enhanced recovery after surgery; CRNA = certified registered nurse anesthetist; NP = nurse practitioner; PA = physician assistant; IT = information technology; PACU = postanesthesia care unit; APP = advanced practice provider; LOS = length of stay; PCA = patient-controlled analgesia.Define ERAS teamSite workflow meetingsCommunication & trainingImplementation & initial monitoringDefine site-specific teamleaders:• Anesthesiologist• Surgeon• Quality nurse coordinatorDefine implementation teammembers, including:Anesthesiologists, surgeons,nurses, CRNAs, NPs, PAs,fellows, residents, ITIntro team meeting• General ERAS overview with core leadership teamDiscuss protocol logistics and workflow:• Site meetings to discuss logistics of implementing ERASEscalation of site issues tocore team• Site leadership to escalate issues to leadership teamImplementation planning:• Site leadership team to ensure all workflow issues have been addressed and implementation date plannedProtocol & order set training:• Clinic• Pre-Op nurses• PACU nurses & anesthesia• Floor nurses• APPsMonthly monitoring of keyoutcomes × 3 mos(minimum):Including: Overall LOS, Post-OpLOS, 30-day readmission andPCA utilization, and othersMonthly meeting × 3 mos(minimum):• Discussion of initialimplementation issues• Include all members of site-specific implementation teamImplement protocol &order set go-liveMonthly checkpointmeeting with ERASleadershipGo-live communication:ERAS site coordinator tocommunicate go-live date forprotocol & order set to siteteam and ERAS projectmanagerGo-live date must be givento ERAS PM at least 1month prior to go-liveERAS nurse educator toliaise with site championsERAS order set to beimplemented up to twoweeks prior to theprotocol for order entryERAS leadership teamto provide outcomesto ERAS site teamBrunicardi_Ch50_p2113-p2136.indd   212501/03/19   9:39 AM 2126SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIcharacteristics of cold and cool were used in treatment, and this was known as the “cold and cool” treatment style. Congzheng Zhang (approximately 1156–1228 a.d.) thought the cause of disease was “exogenous evil” (exogenous pathogenic factor) invading the human body; therefore, the treatment focused on “eliminating evil,” through the diaphoresis, emetic, and/or purgative methods, which were known as the “offensive pre-cipitation” style. Dongyuan Li (1180–1251 a.d.) proposed that “internal injury of viscera causes various diseases,” and pyretic tonification of the spleen and stomach was emphasized in the treat-ment, known as the “invigorating the spleen” style. Zhenheng Zhu (1281–1358 a.d.) thought “yang was always excessive, while yin was always insufficient” in the body, so the treatment was focused on nourishing yin and cutting down heat, which was known as the “nourishing yin” style.In approximately the 11th century, the Chinese began to use human pox vesicle exposure as vaccination to prevent smallpox and thus pioneered the field of medical immunology and vaccination. In the 17th to 19th centuries, due to the epi-demics of infectious diseases, the seasonal febrile disease theory developed. This theory broke the traditional Chinese medicine long-term conception that the pathogens invaded from the sur-face to the inside of the body. In the mid-17th century when bacteriology had not yet appeared, this was undoubtedly a great pioneering work and laid the groundwork for the epidemiology of the spread of disease.In the period from the Opium War (1838–1842 a.d.) to the founding of the People’s Republic of China in 1949 a.d., Western medicine was introduced to the continent of China. However, Western medicine and Chinese medicine theories were unique to each other. There was almost no interchange between them, either in theory or in practice; yet together, they formed a unique and relatively mature theoretical system. In the 1920s to 1930s, Western medicine proposed abolishing Chinese medicine. At the same time, Chinese medicine did not deny the merits of Western medicine but thought that Chinese medicine was superior to Western medicine. However, there were several advocates to combine the theories who published such works as “Chinese Medicine for Main, Western Medicine for Use,” “Using Their Respective Strengths, Reaching the Same Goal by Different Means,” and “Chinese Medicine Treat Internal Disease, Western Medicine Treat Surgical Disease.”268 In short, the pervasive opinion was to learn from the other’s strong points to make up for one’s deficiencies. This forged the trail for establishing modern Chinese integrative medicine.In the past decade, a series of significant progresses and breakthroughs have been made in the modern study of tradi-tional Chinese medicine theory and its application to clinical practice. For example, acupuncture anesthesia can be used for small splint fixation, and the treatment of acute abdomen inte-grates both traditional Chinese and Western medicine.269 Most lately, Tu Yo Yo’s team found that artemisinin, derived from the wormwood plant, treats malaria, and the team was awarded the Nobel Prize in 2015.Clearly, integration of traditional Chinese medicine with modern science and technology will advance knowledge and treatment. Modern diagnostic instruments and techniques have become auxiliary methods of clinical diagnosis and treatment of traditional Chinese medicine, making up for the deficiency of the traditional “four ways of diagnosis” methods and improv-ing the accuracy and efficiency of traditional Chinese medicine diagnosis and treatment. Thus, modern science and technology’s infiltration, transformation, and integration in all aspects of Chi-nese medicine will be one of the distinctive characteristics of the future development of Chinese medicine.In summary, traditional Chinese medicine and pharmacy are an important part of the splendid culture of the Chinese nation, making outstanding contributions over thousands of years because of its systemic theory, distinctive treatment methods, sig-nificant efficacy, and abundant historical documentation. Modern Chinese medicine includes traditional Chinese medicine and thus offers integrated and superior health service. This integration of Eastern and Western medical ideas and philosophies are important for the future of this modern medical era.270 Preoperative Nutritional OptimizationMany surgical abdominal diseases have a long incubation period before clinical presentation, during which time the patients may develop malnutrition including specific nutrient deficiencies and hypoproteinemia. These comorbidities directly influence the sur-gical treatment and postoperative effect of the patient undergoing an operation. In this setting, some experts advocate the use of parenteral nutrition and other adjunctive nutritional measures. These measures can often improve the patient’s nutritional sta-tus, but they are difficult to popularize because of the high cost of treatment and common complications with parenteral nutrition.In traditional Chinese medicine theory, it is thought that there are a variety of “asthenic symptoms” in patients who need surgical treatment and that applying the treatment principle of “treating deficiency with tonification” improves conditions throughout the body. On the basis of the traditional Chinese medicine theory of the “concept of holism” and “treatment according to syndrome differentiation,” the all nourishing decoction (Shiquan Dabu decoction) and Buzhong Yiqi decoc-tion are used in patients with the “deficiency of vital energy and blood syndrome” before surgery and have achieved good results.271-275 Similar success has been shown with the Shenmai injection and Astragalus injection.276,277 For example, when tra-ditional Chinese medicine is used effectively to treat patients with breast cancer before an operation, it enhances the general body status, improves the patient’s energy, and regulates the liver and kidney functions, which ultimately promotes the suc-cess of the operation and controls progression of the tumor.278,279Bowel Preparation for SurgeryIn gastrointestinal surgery, the method of “purgation and offen-sive precipitation” is used in preparation for the operation. Either Large Chengqi decoction or Seasoning Chengqi decoc-tion significantly increases the gastrointestinal motility and washes the gastrointestinal stagnation to prepare the bowel for surgery. These decoctions also improve visceral blood flow and peritoneal absorption, promote early recovery of postoperative bowel function, and prevent superimposed infection of the intes-tine and the effect of endotoxin.280,281Preoperative Optimization During Sepsis and InfectionDue to infection, endotoxemia, blood loss, and other factors, many critically ill patients will deteriorate or progress to shock. Initial surgery during profound shock may be counterproductive until adequate resuscitation is achieved. In addition to resuscita-tion, blood transfusion, and antimicrobial treatment if indicated for sepsis, the traditional Chinese medicine treatment based on dialectics can help to create a favorable condition for surgery, if indicated.9Brunicardi_Ch50_p2113-p2136.indd   212601/03/19   9:39 AM 2127OPTIMIZING PERIOPERATIVE CARE: ENHANCED RECOVERY AND CHINESE MEDICINECHAPTER 50For traumatic shock and anaphylactic shock patients, the use of flavored pure ginseng decoction supplemented by blood transfusion and other comprehensive antishock measures, can rapidly raise blood pressure and provide a more optimal set-ting for surgical treatment.282 Qingdan decoction and Qingyi decoction, which are composed of herbs to clear away heat and toxins, remove stasis, purge the bowel, and are used to treat acute obstructive suppurative cholangitis and hemorrhagic and/or necrotizing pancreatitis.283-285Perioperative Pain ManagementThe application of traditional Chinese medicine in perioperative pain management is has become more prevalent in recent years. Research of acupuncture for analgesia began in the 1950s in China and has developed into a combined acupuncture and medicine anesthesia that is currently recognized by the medical field.286 During surgery, the combined anesthesia is composed of acupuncture and opioid drugs. Experimental data show that the combined acupuncture anesthesia could reduce the dose of opioid by 50%.287 Acupuncture also helps the management of postoperative pain by enhancing the level of the endogenous opioid, encephalin. Encephalin restrains the pain signal from being transmitted to the central nervous system, blocks the body’s reaction to pain, and increases the pain threshold accord-ingly.288 In several clinical trials, the needed doses of opioid at 8, 24, and 72 hours postoperatively were reduced in acupuncture groups compared to control groups.289 In addition, electroacu-puncture has been demonstrated to be effective at alleviating postoperative pain and assisting in recovery. One randomized controlled trial shows electroacupuncture significantly reduced the dose of fentanyl used, improved the quality of recovery and decreased the incidence of anesthesia related side effects for patients undergoing surgery.290 Postoperative Nausea and Vomiting PreventionPONV is a common complication after surgery. Acupuncture and herbs can be applied to prevent and treat PONV. Acupunc-ture or transcutaneous electroacupuncture improves stress-induced impairment in gastric motility functions, significantly inhibits the frequency of transient lower esophageal sphincter relaxations in response to gastric distention, and suppresses retrograde peristaltic contraction.291-293 In clinical trials, intra-operative P6 acupuncture point (Neiguan acupoint) stimulation during surgery significantly reduces the incidence of PONV over 24 hours, and the efficacy of P6 stimulation is similar to that of commonly used antiemetic drugs in the prevention of PONV.294 Furthermore, electroacupuncture restrains the release of gastrointestinal peptides and consequently relieves PONV with an efficacy comparable to ondansetron.295 Moreover, a randomized, prospective, double-blinded clinical trial shows that auricular acupressure within 24 hours postoperatively has a similar effect to prevent PONV.296Additionally, some Chinese herb decoctions, such as Liu Jun Zi decoction and Cheng Qi decoction, administrated periop-eratively, show possible effectiveness to reduce the severity of PONV and to relieve abdominal distension.297,298Early Nutrition and Postoperative Ileus PreventionIn traditional Chinese medicine, acupuncture and decoctions have a role in the prevention of postoperative ileus. For example, early acupuncture on Zusanli, Shangjuxu, and Xijuxu acupoints, combined with early enteral nutrition, can effectively improve gastrointestinal function and shorten the length of stay after sur-gery.299 In addition, Dachengqi decoction applied to patients after laparotomy improves gastric dysrhythmia, promotes intestinal peristalsis, and enhances gastrointestinal motility.300,301 Further-more, in one randomized trial, the combination of Simo decoc-tion and acupuncture reduces the incidence of postoperative ileus and shortens hospital stay for patient undergoing abdominal sur-gery when compared to the perioperative use of chewing gum.302 Other traditional Chinese medicine methods such as electroacu-puncture combined with Evodia hot compress, confers benefit in postoperative recovery of gastrointestinal function of patients who have undergone abdominal surgery.303Traditional Chinese Medicine in Common Surgical ConditionsColon Surgery. Several traditional Chinese medicine decoc-tions can assist in bowel preparation prior to surgery. For exam-ple, during the bowel cleansing before surgery, Dachengqi decoction can be used to promote bowel peristalsis and evacua-tion, thus preventing contamination during surgery and reducing the risk of postoperative complications of infection. Addition-ally, after colon surgery, traditional Chinese medicine therapies such as acupuncture and decoctions prevent postoperative ileus, reduce the incidence of PONV, and promote the recovery of colon function. As a result, traditional Chinese medicine can shorten the hospital stay after colon surgery.Appendicitis. In general, patients suffering from acute appen-dicitis will undergo appendectomy. Exceptionally, when a case of acute simple appendicitis or a periappendiceal abscess is encountered, Chinese herbs together with antibiotics can serve as an alternative treatment. In early acute simple appendicitis, oral Qinghua decoction can help the appendix infection resolve without surgical management.304 This nonsurgical treatment also can be applied to patients with periappendiceal abscess that is unsuitable for surgery. These Chinese medicine herbs activate blood flow, dissolve stasis, clear heat, and remove toxicity.Biliary Disease. Cholelithiasis is a common disease of the biliary tract that can result in cholecystitis and the possible need for cholecystectomy. Several traditional Chinese medicine herbs can relieve the symptoms of acute cholecystitis and delay the progression of the disease, possibly preventing the need for cholecystectomy. These Chinese medicine herbs are composed of herbs for clearing heat and secreting bile (Qing Re Li Dan), herbs for promoting circulation of Qi and relieving pain (Xing Qi Zhi Tong), and herbs for clearing heat and promoting diure-sis (Qing Re Li Shi). According to different Chinese medicine therapies, the use of these herbs can also be applied to patients postoperatively from abdominal or biliary surgery to adjust bili-ary excretion and/or prevent cholestasis.Unfortunately, severe cholecystitis or cholangitis may progress to liver abscess. When a liver abscess develops, per-cutaneous catheter drainage and Chinese medicine herbs are applied in Chinese medicine practice.305 Generally, in the early stage of abscess, Chinese medicine herbs are used for clearing heat and removing toxicity (Qing Re Jie Du) and for promoting blood circulation and removing blood stasis (Huo Xue Hua Yu). When abscess is evident, Chinese medicine herbs for clearing heat and cooling blood are added.305 The main function of these Chinese medicine herbs is to relieve infection, reduce inflam-mation, and activate intestinal motility in order to evacuate the 10Brunicardi_Ch50_p2113-p2136.indd   212701/03/19   9:39 AM 2128SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IItoxicity, reduce the inflammatory response, and thus hasten recovery.Pancreas Surgery. In recent years, the early use of traditional Chinese medicine and enteral nutrition treatment in patients after pancreaticoduodenectomy, can help to hasten recovery in gastrointestinal function, improve nutritional status and immune function, and also reduce postoperative complications. The combined use of total parenteral nutrition and Astragalus  injection can improve the nutrition status of patients with obstructive jaundice and improve the immune function of these patients.306 All Nourishing (Shiquan Dabu) decoction has the role of increasing the level of plasma albumin and hemoglobin, which can be used as a recipe in surgical nutrition therapy.307Intestinal Obstruction. Adhesive ileus is the most com-mon type of small intestinal obstruction and also is the kind to which traditional Chinese medicine therapies apply widely. The methods of traditional Chinese medicine treatment include acupuncture, Chinese herbal enema, and gastrointestinal intuba-tion. Acupuncture or transcutaneous electroacupuncture applied to acupoints such as Zusanli point, Neiguan point, Zhongwan point, and Tianshu point has remarkable regulatory effects on gastrointestinal function and can promote relief of obstruction.308 Dachengqi decoction combined with the Chinese medicine herbs for clearing heat and removing toxicity (Qing Re Jie Du), and for promoting blood circulation and removing blood stasis (Huo Xue Hua Yu), can enhance gastrointestinal motility, improve blood circulation of the intestine, reduce intestinal capillary perme-ability, protect the barrier function of the intestinal mucosa, and help inflammatory edema to resolve.309 Additionally, acupunc-ture, Chinese herbal enema, and gastrointestinal intubation can shorten the time of the obstructive event and reduce the length of stay in patients suffering from adhesive intestinal obstruction.310 These methods of traditional Chinese medicine treatment can also be applied to the treatment of postoperative ileus.REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Bardram L, Funch-Jensen P, Jensen P, et al. Recovery after lap-aroscopic colonic surgery with epidural analgesia, and early oral nutrition and mobilisation. Lancet. 1995;345:763-764.	2.	Kehlet H. Multimodal approach to control postopera-tive pathophysiology and rehabilitation. Br J Anaesth. 1997;78:606-617.	3.	Kehlet H, Mogensen T. Hospital stay of 2 days after open sigmoidectomy with a multimodal rehabilitation programme. Br J Surg. 1999;86:227-230.	4.	Delaney CP, Fazio VW, Senagore AJ, et al. “Fast track” post-operative management protocol for patients with high co-mor-bidity undergoing complex abdominal and pelvic colorectal surgery. Br J Surg. 2001;88:1533-1538.	5.	Nicholson A, Lowe MC, Parker J, et al. Systematic review and meta-analysis of enhanced recovery programmes in surgical patients. Br J Surg. 2014;101:172-188.	6.	Lee L, Mata J, Ghitulescu GA, et al. Cost-effectiveness of enhanced recovery versus conventional perioperative manage-ment for colorectal surgery. Ann Surg. 2015;262:1026-1033.	7.	Lee JA. The anaesthetic out-patient clinic. Anaesthesia. 1949;4:169-174.	8.	Chase CR, Merz BA, Mazuzan JE. Computer assisted patient evaluation (CAPE): a multi-purpose computer system for an anesthesia service. Anesth Analg. 1983;62:198-206.	9.	Fischer SP. Development and effectiveness of an anesthesia preoperative evaluation clinic in a teaching hospital. Anesthe-siology. 1996;85:196-206.	10.	van Klei WA, Moons KG, Rutten CL, et al. The effect of out-patient preoperative evaluation of hospital inpatients on can-cellation of surgery and length of hospital stay. Anesth Analg. 2002;94:644-649.	11.	Gibby GL. How preoperative assessment programs can be justified financially to hospital administrators. Int Anesthesiol Clin. 2002;40:17-30.	12.	Ferschl MB, Tung A, Sweitzer B, et al. Preoperative clinic visits reduce operating room cancellations and delays. Anes-thesiology. 2005;103:855-859.	13.	Blitz JD, Kendale SM, Jain SK, et al. preoperative evalua-tion clinic visit is associated with decreased risk of in-hospital postoperative mortality. Anesthesiology. 2016;125:280-294.	14.	Costa MJ. The lived perioperative experience of ambula-tory surgery patients. AORN J. 2001;74:874-881.	15.	Kruzik N. Benefits of preoperative education for adult elective surgery patients. AORN J. 2009;90:381-387.	16.	Nielsen-Bohlman L, Panzer AM, Kindig DA, eds. Health Literacy: A Prescription to End Confusion. Washington DC; 2004.	17.	Stallings E. Literacy and culture as determinants of health: Designing education for improved outcomes. Drew University, 2015.	18.	Badarudeen S, Sabharwal S. Assessing readability of patient education materials: current role in orthopaedics. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2010;468:2572-2580.	19.	Hegazi RA, Hustead DS, Evans DC. Preoperative stan-dard oral nutrition supplements vs immunonutrition: results of a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Am Coll Surg. 2014;219:1078-1087.	20.	Ditmyer MM, Topp R, Pifer M. Prehabilitation in preparation for orthopaedic surgery. Orthop Nurs. 2002;21:43-51; quiz 52-54.	21.	Topp R, Ditmyer M, King K, et al. The effect of bed rest and potential of prehabilitation on patients in the intensive care unit. AACN Clin Issues. 2002;13:263-276.	22.	Levett DZ, Grocott MP. Cardiopulmonary exercise testing, prehabilitation, and enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS). Can J Anaesth. 2015;62:131-142.	23.	Thompson PD, Franklin BA, Balady GJ, et al. Exercise and acute cardiovascular events placing the risks into perspective: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Metabolism and the Council on Clinical Cardiology. Circulation. 2007;115: 2358-2368.	24.	Thompson PD, Buchner D, Pina IL, et al. Exercise and physi-cal activity in the prevention and treatment of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease: a statement from the Council on Clini-cal Cardiology (Subcommittee on Exercise, Rehabilitation, and Prevention) and the Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity,  and Metabolism (Subcommittee on Physical Activity). Circulation. 2003;107:3109-3116.	25.	Belardinelli R, Georgiou D, Cianci G, et al. Randomized, con-trolled trial of long-term moderate exercise training in chronic heart failure: effects on functional capacity, quality of life, and clinical outcome. Circulation. 1999;99:1173-1182.	26.	Mandic S, Myers J, Selig SE, et al. Resistance versus aerobic exercise training in chronic heart failure. Curr Heart Fail Rep. 2012;9:57-64.	27.	O’Connor CM, Whellan DJ, Lee KL, et al. Efficacy and safety of exercise training in patients with chronic heart failure: HF-ACTION randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2009;301:1439-1450.	28.	Cornelissen VA, Buys R, Smart NA. Endurance exercise bene-ficially affects ambulatory blood pressure: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Hypertens. 2013;31:639-648.Brunicardi_Ch50_p2113-p2136.indd   212801/03/19   9:39 AM 2129OPTIMIZING PERIOPERATIVE CARE: ENHANCED RECOVERY AND CHINESE MEDICINECHAPTER 50	29.	Cornelissen VA, Smart NA. Exercise training for blood pres-sure: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Am Heart Assoc. 2013;2:e004473.	30.	Hayashino Y, Jackson JL, Fukumori N, et al. Effects of supervised exercise on lipid profiles and blood pressure con-trol in people with type 2 diabetes mellitus: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2012;98:349-360.	31.	Thomas DE, Elliott EJ, Naughton GA. Exercise for type 2 diabetes mellitus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2006;CD002968.	32.	Waschki B, Kirsten A, Holz O, et al. Physical activity is the strongest predictor of all-cause mortality in patients with COPD: a prospective cohort study. Chest. 2011 140:331-342.	33.	Cooney GM, Dwan K, Greig CA, et al. Exercise for depres-sion. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;CD004366.	34.	Forbes D, Thiessen EJ, Blake CM, et al. Exercise programs for people with dementia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013:CD006489.	35.	Saunders DH, Sanderson M, Brazzelli M, et al. Physical fit-ness training for stroke patients. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013:CD003316.	36.	Des Guetz G, Uzzan B, Bouillet T, et al. Impact of physical activity on cancer-specific and overall survival of patients with colorectal cancer. Gastroenterol Res Pract. 2013:340851.	37.	Hoogeboom TJ, Dronkers JJ, Hulzebos EH, et al. Merits of exercise therapy before and after major surgery. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 2014;27:161-166.	38.	Arthur HM, Daniels C, McKelvie R, et al. Effect of a preoper-ative intervention on preoperative and postoperative outcomes in low-risk patients awaiting elective coronary artery bypass graft surgery. A randomized, controlled trial. Ann Intern Med. 2000;133:253-262.	39.	Jones LW, Watson D, Herndon JE, et al. Peak oxygen con-sumption and long-term all-cause mortality in nonsmall cell lung cancer. Cancer. 2010;116:4825-4832.	40.	West MA, Lythgoe D, Barben CP, et al. Cardiopulmonary exercise variables are associated with postoperative morbid-ity after major colonic surgery: a prospective blinded obser-vational study. Br J Anaesth. 2014;112:665-671.	41.	Dronkers JJ, Chorus AMJ, van Meeteren NLU, et al. The asso-ciation of pre-operative physical fitness and physical activ-ity with outcome after scheduled major abdominal surgery. Anaesthesia. 2013;68:67-73.	42.	Fagevik Olsen M, Hahn I, Nordgren S, et al. Randomized controlled trial of prophylactic chest physiotherapy in major abdominal surgery. Br J Surg. 1997;84:1535-1538.	43.	Kundra P, Vitheeswaran M, Nagappa M, et al. Effect of pre-operative and postoperative incentive spirometry on lung functions after laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech. 2010;20:170-172.	44.	Krueger JK, Rohrich RJ. Clearing the smoke: the scientific rationale for tobacco abstention with plastic surgery. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2001;108:1063-1073; discussion 1074-1077.	45.	Furlong C. Smoking cessation and its effects on outcomes of surgical interventions. London Health Observatory and Barnet PCT, 2005. Available at: www.LHO.org.uk.	46.	Ngaage DL, Martins E, Orkell E, et al. The impact of the duration of mechanical ventilation on the respiratory outcome in smokers undergoing cardiac surgery. Cardiovasc Surg. 2002;10:345-350.	47.	Cole CW, Hill GB, Farzad E, et al. Cigarette smoking and peripheral arterial occlusive disease. Surgery. 1993;114: 753-756; discussion 756-757.	48.	Theadom A, Cropley M: Effects of preoperative smoking ces-sation on the incidence and risk of intraoperative and postop-erative complications in adult smokers: a systematic review. Tob Control. 2006;15:352-358.	49.	Ljungqvist O, Fearon K, Little R. In Gibney M, Elia M, Ljungqvist O, et al, eds. The Human Nutrition Textbook Series. Oxford, UK: Blackwell Science; 2005.	50.	Nygren J, Thorell A, Efendic S, et al. Site of insulin resis-tance after surgery: the contribution of hypocaloric nutrition and bed rest. Clin Sci (Lond). 1997;93:137-146.	51.	Brandi LS, Frediani M, Oleggini M, et al. Insulin resistance after surgery: normalization by insulin treatment. Clin Sci (Lond). 1990;79:443-450.	52.	Greisen J, Juhl CB, Grofte T, et al. Acute pain induces insulin resistance in humans. Anesthesiology. 2001;95:578-584.	53.	Thorell A, Nygren J, Ljungqvist O. Insulin resistance: a marker of surgical stress. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care. 1999;2:69-78.	54.	Sato H, Carvalho G, Sato T, et al. The association of preop-erative glycemic control, intraoperative insulin sensitivity, and outcomes after cardiac surgery. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010;95:4338-4344.	55.	Brownlee M. The pathobiology of diabetic complications: a unifying mechanism. Diabetes. 2005;54:1615-1625.	56.	Witasp A, Nordfors L, Schalling M, et al. Increased expres-sion of inflammatory pathway genes in skeletal muscle during surgery. Clin Nutr. 2009;28:291-298.	57.	Witasp A, Nordfors L, Schalling M, et al. Expression of inflammatory and insulin signaling genes in adipose tissue in response to elective surgery. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010;95:3460-3469.	58.	Svanfeldt M, Thorell A, Hausel J, et al. Effect of “preop-erative” oral carbohydrate treatment on insulin action—a randomised cross-over unblinded study in healthy subjects. Clin Nutr. 2005;24:815-821.	59.	Henriksen MG, Hessov I, Dela F, et al. Effects of preop-erative oral carbohydrates and peptides on postoperative endocrine response, mobilization, nutrition and muscle function in abdominal surgery. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 2003;47:191-199.	60.	Crowe PJ, Dennison A, Royle GT. The effect of pre-operative glucose loading on postoperative nitrogen metabolism. Br J Surg. 1984;71:635-637.	61.	Yuill KA, Richardson RA, Davidson HI, et al. The admin-istration of an oral carbohydrate-containing fluid prior to major elective upper-gastrointestinal surgery preserves skeletal muscle mass postoperativel—a randomised clini-cal trial. Clin Nutr. 2005;24:32-37.	62.	Soop M, Carlson GL, Hopkinson J, et al. Randomized clinical trial of the effects of immediate enteral nutrition on metabolic responses to major colorectal surgery in an enhanced recovery protocol. Br J Surg. 2004;91:1138-1145.	63.	Practice guidelines for preoperative fasting and the use of pharmacologic agents to reduce the risk of pulmonary aspi-ration: application to healthy patients undergoing elective procedures: a report by the American Society of Anesthesi-ologist Task Force on Preoperative Fasting. Anesthesiology. 1999;90:896-905.	64.	American Society of Anesthesiologists Committee. Practice guidelines for preoperative fasting and the use of pharmaco-logic agents to reduce the risk of pulmonary aspiration: appli-cation to healthy patients undergoing elective procedures: an updated report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Committee on Standards and Practice Parameters. Anesthesi-ology. 2011;114:495-511.	65.	Smith I, Kranke P, Murat I, et al. Perioperative fasting in adults and children: guidelines from the European Society of Anaesthesiology. Eur J Anaesthesiol. 2011;28:556-569.	66.	Hausel J, Nygren J, Lagerkranser M, et al. A carbohydrate rich drink reduces preoperative discomfort in elective surgery patients. Anesth Analg. 2001;93:1344-1350.Brunicardi_Ch50_p2113-p2136.indd   212901/03/19   9:39 AM 2130SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	67.	Brady M, Kinn S, Stuart P. Preoperative fasting for adults to prevent perioperative complications. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2003;CD004423.	68.	Agarwal A, Chari P, Singh H. Fluid deprivation before operation. The effect of a small drink. Anaesthesia. 1989; 44:632-634.	69.	Hutchinson A, Maltby JR, Reid CR. Gastric fluid volume and pH in elective inpatients. Part I: coffee or orange juice versus overnight fast. Can J Anaesth. 1988;35:12-15.	70.	Maltby JR, Sutherland AD, Sale JP, et al. Preoperative oral fluids: is a five-hour fast justified prior to elective surgery? Anesth Analg. 1986;65:1112-1116.	71.	McGrady EM, Macdonald AG. Effect of the preoperative administration of water on gastric volume and pH. Br J Anaesth. 1988;60:803-805.	72.	Phillips S, Hutchinson S, Davidson T. Preoperative drinking does not affect gastric contents. Br J Anaesth. 1993;70:6-9.	73.	Read MS, Vaughan RS. Allowing pre-operative patients to drink: effects on patients’ safety and comfort of unlimited oral water until 2 hours before anaesthesia. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 1991;35:591-595.	74.	Sutherland AD, Maltby JR, Sale JP, et al. The effect of pre-operative oral fluid and ranitidine on gastric fluid volume and pH. Can J Anaesth. 1987;34:117-121.	75.	Yagci G, Can MF, Ozturk E, et al. Effects of preoperative car-bohydrate loading on glucose metabolism and gastric contents in patients undergoing moderate surgery: a randomized, con-trolled trial. Nutrition. 2008;24:212-216.	76.	Hausel J, Nygren J, Lagerkranser M, et al. A carbohydrate-rich drink reduces preoperative discomfort in elective surgery patients. Anesth Analg. 2001;93:1344-1350.	77.	Smith MD, McCall J, Plank L, et al. Preoperative carbohy-drate treatment for enhancing recovery after elective surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014;CD009161.	78.	Soop M, Nygren J, Myrenfors P, et al. Reoperative oral car-bohydrate treatment attenuates immediate postoperative insulin resistance. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2001;280(4): E576-E583.	79.	Nygren J, Soop M, Thorell A, et al. Preoperative oral car-bohydrates and postoperative insulin resistance. Clin Nutr. 1999;18:117-120.	80.	Awad S, Varadhan KK, Ljungqvist O, et al. A meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials on preoperative oral carbohydrate treatment in elective surgery. Clin Nutr. 2013;32:34-44.	81.	Gustafsson UO, Scott MJ, Schwenk W, et al. Guidelines for perioperative care in elective colonic surgery: Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS[R]) Society recommenda-tions. Clin Nutr. 2012;31:783-800.	82.	Lassen K, Coolsen MM, Slim K, et al. Guidelines for peri-operative care for pancreaticoduodenectomy: Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS[R]) Society recommenda-tions. World J Surg. 2013;37:240-258.	83.	Nygren J, Thacker J, Carli F, et al. Guidelines for peri-operative care in elective rectal/pelvic surgery: Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS[R]) Society recommenda-tions. Clin Nutr. 2012;31:801-816.	84.	Thorell A, MacCormick AD, Awad S, et al. Guidelines for perioperative care in bariatric surgery: Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) Society recommendations. World J Surg. 2016;40(9):2065-2083.	85.	Torossian A, Brauer A, Hocker J, et al. Preventing inadver-tent perioperative hypothermia. Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2015; 112:166-172.	86.	Moola S, Lockwood C. Effectiveness of strategies for the management and/or prevention of hypothermia within the adult perioperative environment. Int J Evid Based Healthc. 2011;9:337-345.	87.	Barash PG CB, Stoelting RK. Clinical Anesthesia. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2006:1400.	88.	Jin Y, Tian J, Sun M, et al. A systematic review of randomised controlled trials of the effects of warmed irrigation fluid on core body temperature during endoscopic surgeries. J Clin Nurs. 2011;20:305-316.	89.	Roberson MC, Dieckmann LS, Rodriguez RE, et al. A review of the evidence for active preoperative warming of adults undergoing general anesthesia. AANA J. 2013;81:351-356.	90.	Horn EP, Schroeder F, Gottschalk A, et al. Active warming during cesarean delivery. Anesth Analg. 2002;94:409-414.	91.	Horn EP, Bein B, Bohm R, et al. The effect of short time periods of pre-operative warming in the prevention of peri-operative hypothermia. Anaesthesia. 2012;67:612-617.	92.	Vanni SM, Braz JR, Modolo NS, et al. Preoperative combined with intraoperative skin-surface warming avoids hypother-mia caused by general anesthesia and surgery. J Clin Anesth. 2003;15:119-125.	93.	Kellam MD, Dieckmann LS, Austin PN. Forced-air warm-ing devices and the risk of surgical site infections. AORN J. 2013;98:354-366; quiz 367-369.	94.	Galvao CM, Marck PB, Sawada NO, et al. A systematic review of the effectiveness of cutaneous warming systems to prevent hypothermia. J Clin Nurs. 2009;18:627-636.	95.	De Witte JL, Demeyer C, Vandemaele E. Resistive-heating or forced-air warming for the prevention of redistribution hypo-thermia. Anesth Analg. 2010;110:829-833.	96.	Sessler DI, McGuire J, Sessler AM. Perioperative thermal insulation. Anesthesiology. 1991;74:875-879.	97.	Alderson P, Campbell G, Smith AF, et al. Thermal insula-tion for preventing inadvertent perioperative hypothermia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014;CD009908.	98.	Sessler DI. Complications and treatment of mild hypothermia. Anesthesiology. 2001;95:531-543.	99.	Andrzejowski JC, Turnbull D, Nandakumar A, et al. A ran-domised single blinded study of the administration of pre-warmed fluid vs active fluid warming on the incidence of peri-operative hypothermia in short surgical procedures. Anaesthesia. 2010;65:942-945.	100.	Douketis JD. The 2016 American College of Chest Physicians treatment guidelines for venous thromboembolism: a review and critical appraisal. Intern Emerg Med. 2016;11:1031-1035.	101.	Reid TR, Race ER, Wolff BH, et al. Enhanced in vivo therapeu-tic response to interferon in mice with an in vitro interferon-resistant B-cell lymphoma. Cancer Res. 1989;49:4163-4169.	102.	Brandstrup B, Tonnesen H, Beier-Holgersen R, et al. Effects of intravenous fluid restriction on postoperative complications: comparison of two perioperative fluid regi-mens: a randomized assessor-blinded multicenter trial. Ann Surg. 2003;238:641-648.	103.	Gonzalez-Fajardo JA, Mengibar L, Brizuela JA, et al. Effect of postoperative restrictive fluid therapy in the recovery of patients with abdominal vascular surgery. Eur J Vasc Endo-vasc Surg. 2009;37:538-543.	104.	Holte K, Foss NB, Andersen J, et al. Liberal or restrictive fluid administration in fast-track colonic surgery: a randomized, double-blind study. Br J Anaesth. 2007;99:500-508.	105.	Lobo DN, Bostock KA, Neal KR, et al. Effect of salt and water balance on recovery of gastrointestinal function after elective colonic resection: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2002;359:1812-1818.	106.	MacKay G, Fearon K, McConnachie A, et al. Randomized clinical trial of the effect of postoperative intravenous fluid restriction on recovery after elective colorectal surgery. Br J Surg. 2006;93:1469-1474.	107.	McArdle GT, McAuley DF, McKinley A, et al. Preliminary results of a prospective randomized trial of restrictive versus Brunicardi_Ch50_p2113-p2136.indd   213001/03/19   9:39 AM 2131OPTIMIZING PERIOPERATIVE CARE: ENHANCED RECOVERY AND CHINESE MEDICINECHAPTER 50standard fluid regime in elective open abdominal aortic aneu-rysm repair. Ann Surg. 2009;250:28-34.	108.	Vermeulen H, Hofland J, Legemate DA, et al. Intravenous fluid restriction after major abdominal surgery: a randomized blinded clinical trial. Trials. 2009;10:50.	109.	Francis N, Kennedy RH, Ljunggvist O, Mythen M. Manual of Fast Track Recovery for Colorectal Surgery. London: Springer; 2012.	110.	Walsh SR, Tang T, Bass S, et al. Doppler-guided intra-operative fluid management during major abdominal sur-gery: systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Clin Pract. 2008;62:466-470.	111.	Giglio MT, Marucci M, Testini M, et al. Goal-directed haemo-dynamic therapy and gastrointestinal complications in major surgery: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Br J Anaesth. 2009;103:637-646.	112.	Gan TJ, Soppitt A, Maroof M, et al. Goal-directed intraopera-tive fluid administration reduces length of hospital stay after major surgery. Anesthesiology. 2002;97:820-826.	113.	Noblett SE, Snowden CP, Shenton BK, et al. Randomized clinical trial assessing the effect of Doppler-optimized fluid management on outcome after elective colorectal resection. Br J Surg. 2006;93:1069-1076.	114.	Pillai P, McEleavy I, Gaughan M, et al. A double-blind ran-domized controlled clinical trial to assess the effect of Dop-pler optimized intraoperative fluid management on outcome following radical cystectomy. J Urol. 2011;186:2201-2206.	115.	Sinclair S, James S, Singer M. Intraoperative intravascular volume optimisation and length of hospital stay after repair of proximal femoral fracture: randomised controlled trial. BMJ. 1997;315:909-912.	116.	Wakeling HG, McFall MR, Jenkins CS, et al. Intraopera-tive oesophageal Doppler guided fluid management shortens postoperative hospital stay after major bowel surgery. Br J Anaesth. 2005;95:634-642.	117.	Perel P, Roberts I, Ker K. Colloids versus crystalloids for fluid resuscitation in critically ill patients. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;CD000567.	118.	McCluskey SA, Karkouti K, Wijeysundera D, et al. Hyper-chloremia after noncardiac surgery is independently associated with increased morbidity and mortality: a propensity-matched cohort study. Anesth Analg. 2013;117:412-421.	119.	Shaw AD, Bagshaw SM, Goldstein SL, et al. Major complica-tions, mortality, and resource utilization after open abdominal surgery: 0.9% saline compared to Plasma-Lyte. Ann Surg. 2012;255:821-829.	120.	IASP. Part III: pain terms, a current list with definitions and notes on usage. In: Merskey H, ed. Classification of Chronic Pain. 2nd ed. Seattle: IASP Press; 1994:209-214.	121.	Thiele RH HT. Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS): Protocol in Colorectal Surgery. Second Annual Monitoring  Conference, UPMC Department of Anesthesiology.  Pittsburgh, PA, 2014.	122.	Chia YY, Liu K, Wang JJ, et al. Intraoperative high dose fen-tanyl induces postoperative fentanyl tolerance. Can J Anaesth. 1999;46:872-877.	123.	Collard V, Mistraletti G, Taqi A, et al. Intraoperative esmolol infusion in the absence of opioids spares postoperative fen-tanyl in patients undergoing ambulatory laparoscopic chole-cystectomy. Anesth Analg. 2007;105:1255-1262.	124.	Coloma M, Chiu JW, White PF, et al. The use of esmolol as an alternative to remifentanil during desflurane anesthesia for fast-track outpatient gynecologic laparoscopic surgery. Anesth Analg. 2001;92:352-357.	125.	Crawford MW, Galton S, Naser B. Postoperative morphine consumption in children with sickle-cell disease. Paediatr Anaesth. 2006;16:152-157.	126.	Gottschalk A, Durieux ME, Nemergut EC. Intraopera-tive methadone improves postoperative pain control in patients undergoing complex spine surgery. Anesth Analg. 2011;112:218-223.	127.	Guignard B, Bossard AE, Coste C, et al. Acute opioid toler-ance: intraoperative remifentanil increases postoperative pain and morphine requirement. Anesthesiology. 2000;93:409-417.	128.	Mendel HG, Guarnieri KM, Sundt LM, et al. The effects of ketorolac and fentanyl on postoperative vomiting and analge-sic requirements in children undergoing strabismus surgery. Anesth Analg. 1995;80:1129-1133.	129.	Sukhani R, Vazquez J, Pappas AL, et al. Recovery after propo-fol with and without intraoperative fentanyl in patients under-going ambulatory gynecologic laparoscopy. Anesth Analg. 1996;83:975-981.	130.	Rorarius MG, Mennander S, Suominen P, et al. Gabapentin for the prevention of postoperative pain after vaginal hyster-ectomy. Pain. 2004;110:175-181.	131.	Parikh HG, Dash SK, Upasani CB. Study of the effect of oral gabapentin used as preemptive analgesia to attenuate post-operative pain in patients undergoing abdominal surgery under general anesthesia. Saudi J Anaesth. 2010;4:137-141.	132.	Pandey CK, Sahay S, Gupta D, et al. Preemptive gabapentin  decreases postoperative pain after lumbar discoidectomy.  Can J Anaesth. 2004;51:986-989.	133.	Pandey CK, Priye S, Singh S, et al. Preemptive use of gaba-pentin significantly decreases postoperative pain and rescue analgesic requirements in laparoscopic cholecystectomy.  Can J Anaesth. 2004;51:358-363.	134.	Dirks J, Fredensborg BB, Christensen D, et al. A randomized study of the effects of single-dose gabapentin versus placebo on postoperative pain and morphine consumption after mas-tectomy. Anesthesiology. 2002;97:560-564.	135.	Dierking G, Duedahl TH, Rasmussen ML, et al. Effects of gabapentin on postoperative morphine consumption and pain after abdominal hysterectomy: a randomized, double-blind trial. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 2004;48:322-327.	136.	Bell RF, Dahl JB, Moore RA, et al. Peri-operative ketamine for acute post-operative pain: a quantitative and qualitative systematic review (Cochrane review). Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 2005;49:1405-1428.	137.	Celerier E, Rivat C, Jun Y, et al. Long-lasting hyperalgesia induced by fentanyl in rats: preventive effect of ketamine. Anesthesiology. 2000;92:465-472.	138.	Seyhan TO, Tugrul M, Sungur MO, et al. Effects of three dif-ferent dose regimens of magnesium on propofol requirements, haemodynamic variables and postoperative pain relief in gyn-aecological surgery. Br J Anaesth. 2006;96:247-252.	139.	Dube L, Granry JC. The therapeutic use of magnesium in anesthesiology, intensive care and emergency medicine: a review. Can J Anaesth. 2003;50:732-746.	140.	Vigneault L, Turgeon AF, Cote D, et al. Perioperative intra-venous lidocaine infusion for postoperative pain control: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Can J Anaesth. 2011;58:22-37.	141.	Benyamin R, Trescot AM, Datta S, et al. Opioid complications and side effects. Pain Physician. 2008;11:S105-S120.	142.	de Cosmo G. The use of NSAIDs in the postoperative perioid: advantage and disadvantages. J Anesth Crit Care. 2015;3(4).	143.	Kurdi MS, Theerth KA, Deva RS. Ketamine: current applica-tions in anesthesia, pain, and critical care. Anesth Essays Res. 2014;8:283-290.	144.	American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Acute Pain Management. Practice guidelines for acute pain manage-ment in the perioperative setting: an updated report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Acute Pain Management. Anesthesiology. 2012;116:248-273.Brunicardi_Ch50_p2113-p2136.indd   213101/03/19   9:39 AM 2132SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	145.	Chou R, Gordon DB, de Leon-Casasola OA, et al. Manage-ment of postoperative pain: a clinical practice guideline from the American Pain Society, the American Society of Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine, and the American Society of Anesthesiologists’ Committee on Regional Anesthesia, Executive Committee, and Administrative Council. J Pain. 2016;17:131-157.	146.	De Pinto M, Dagal A, O’Donnell B, et al. Regional anes-thesia for management of acute pain in the intensive care unit. Int J Crit Illn Inj Sci. 2015;5:138-143.	147.	Fortier J, Chung F, Su J. Unanticipated admission after ambulatory surgery—a prospective study. Can J Anaesth. 1998;45:612-619.	148.	Gold BS, Kitz DS, Lecky JH, et al. Unanticipated admis-sion to the hospital following ambulatory surgery. JAMA. 1989;262:3008-3010.	149.	Hill RP, Lubarsky DA, Phillips-Bute B, et al. Cost-effectiveness of prophylactic antiemetic therapy with ondansetron, droperi-dol, or placebo. Anesthesiology. 2000;92:958-967.	150.	Sinclair DR, Chung F, Mezei G. Can postoperative nausea and vomiting be predicted? Anesthesiology. 1999;91:109-118.	151.	Koivuranta M, Laara E, Snare L, et al. A survey of postopera-tive nausea and vomiting. Anaesthesia. 1997;52:443-449.	152.	Apfel CC, Laara E, Koivuranta M, et al. A simplified risk score for predicting postoperative nausea and vomiting: con-clusions from cross-validations between two centers. Anesthe-siology. 1999;91:693-700.	153.	Gan TJ, Diemunsch P, Habib AS, et al. Consensus guidelines for the management of postoperative nausea and vomiting. Anesth Analg. 2014;118:85-113.	154.	Apfel CC, Korttila K, Abdalla M, et al. A factorial trial of six interventions for the prevention of postoperative nausea and vomiting. N Engl J Med. 2004;350:2441-2451.	155.	Apfel CC, Philip BK, Cakmakkaya OS, et al. Who is at risk for postdischarge nausea and vomiting after ambulatory sur-gery? Anesthesiology. 2012;117:475-486.	156.	Kranke P, Apefel CC, Papenfuss T, et al. An increased body mass index is no risk factor for postoperative nausea and vom-iting. A systematic review and results of original data. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 2001;45:160-166.	157.	Scuderi PE, James RL, Harris L, et al. Multimodal antiemetic management prevents early postoperative vomiting after out-patient laparoscopy. Anesth Analg. 2000;91:1408-1414.	158.	Tramer M, Moore A, McQuay H. Omitting nitrous oxide in general anaesthesia: meta-analysis of intraoperative aware-ness and postoperative emesis in randomized controlled trials. Br J Anaesth. 1996;76:186-193.	159.	Tramer M, Moore A, McQuay H. Meta-analytic comparison of prophylactic antiemetic efficacy for postoperative nausea and vomiting: propofol anaesthesia vs omitting nitrous oxide vs total i.v. anaesthesia with propofol. Br J Anaesth. 1997;78:256-259.	160.	Tramer MR, Reynolds DJ, Moore RA, et al. Efficacy, dose-response, and safety of ondansetron in prevention of postop-erative nausea and vomiting: a quantitative systematic review of randomized placebo-controlled trials. Anesthesiology. 1997;87:1277-1289.	161.	Schnabel A, Eberhart LH, Muellenbach R, et al. Efficacy of perphenazine to prevent postoperative nausea and vomit-ing: a quantitative systematic review. Eur J Anaesthesiol. 2010;27:1044-1051.	162.	Gan TJ, Apfel CC, Kovac A, et al. A randomized, double-blind comparison of the NK1 antagonist, aprepitant, versus ondan-setron for the prevention of postoperative nausea and vomit-ing. Anesth Analg. 2007;104:1082-1089.	163.	Wang JJ, Ho ST, Lee SC, et al. The use of dexamethasone for preventing postoperative nausea and vomiting in females undergoing thyroidectomy: a dose-ranging study. Anesth Analg. 2000;91:1404-1407.	164.	Bailey PL, Streisand JB, Pace NL, et al. Transdermal scopol-amine reduces nausea and vomiting after outpatient laparos-copy. Anesthesiology. 1990;72:977-980.	165.	Delaney CP, Senagore AJ, Viscusi ER, et al. Postoperative upper and lower gastrointestinal recovery and gastrointesti-nal morbidity in patients undergoing bowel resection: pooled analysis of placebo data from 3 randomized controlled trials. Am J Surg. 2006;191:315-319.	166.	Asgeirsson T, El-Badawi KI, Mahmood A, et al. Postopera-tive ileus: it costs more than you expect. J Am Coll Surg. 2010;210:228-231.	167.	Nelson R, Tse B, Edwards S. Systematic review of prophy-lactic nasogastric decompression after abdominal operations.  Br J Surg. 2005;92:673-680.	168.	Nelson R, Edwards S, Tse B. Prophylactic nasogastric decom-pression after abdominal surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2005;CD004929.	169.	Daryaei P, Vaghef Davari F, Mir M, et al. Omission of naso-gastric tube application in postoperative care of esophagec-tomy. World J Surg. 2009;33:773-777.	170.	Chapuis PH, Bokey L, Keshava A, et al. Risk factors for prolonged ileus after resection of colorectal cancer: an observational study of 2400 consecutive patients. Ann Surg. 2013;257:909-915.	171.	Lacy AM, Garcia-Valdecasas JC, Pique JM, et al. Short-term outcome analysis of a randomized study comparing laparo-scopic vs open colectomy for colon cancer. Surg Endosc. 1995;9:1101-1105.	172.	Schwenk W, Bohm B, Haase O, et al. Laparoscopic versus conventional colorectal resection: a prospective randomised study of postoperative ileus and early postoperative feeding. Langenbecks Arch Surg. 1998;383:49-55.	173.	Shussman N, Brown MR, Johnson MC, et al. Does nasogastric tube decompression get used less often with laparoscopic and hand-assisted compared with open colectomy? Surg Endosc. 2013;27:4564-4568.	174.	Uemura K, Tatewaki M, Harris MB, et al. Magnitude of abdominal incision affects the duration of postoperative ileus in rats. Surg Endosc. 2004;18:606-610.	175.	Varadhan KK, Lobo DN. A meta-analysis of randomised con-trolled trials of intravenous fluid therapy in major elective open abdominal surgery: getting the balance right. Proc Nutr Soc. 2010;69:488-498.	176.	Ho YM, Smith SR, Pockney P, et al. A meta-analysis on the effect of sham feeding following colectomy: should gum chewing be included in enhanced recovery after surgery pro-tocols? Dis Colon Rectum. 2014;57:115-126.	177.	Purkayastha S, Tilney HS, Darzi AW, et al. Meta-analysis of randomized studies evaluating chewing gum to enhance postoperative recovery following colectomy. Arch Surg. 2008;143:788-793.	178.	Short V, Herbert G, Perry R, et al. Chewing gum for postop-erative recovery of gastrointestinal function. Cochrane Data-base Syst Rev. 2015;CD006506.	179.	Atkinson C, Penfold CM, Ness AR, et al. Randomized clinical trial of postoperative chewing gum versus standard care after colorectal resection. Br J Surg. 2016;103:962-970.	180.	Lim P, Morris OJ, Nolan G, et al. Sham feeding with chewing gum after elective colorectal resectional surgery: a random-ized clinical trial. Ann Surg. 2013;257:1016-1024.	181.	Delaney CP, Wolff BG, Viscusi ER, et al. Alvimopan, for post-operative ileus following bowel resection: a pooled analysis of phase III studies. 2007; Ann Surg 245:355-363.	182.	Adam MA, Lee LM, Kim J, et al. Alvimopan provides addi-tional improvement in outcomes and cost savings in enhanced recovery colorectal surgery. Ann Surg. 2016;264:141-146.	183.	Barletta JF, Asgeirsson T, El-Badawi KI, et al. Introduction of alvimopan into an enhanced recovery protocol for colectomy Brunicardi_Ch50_p2113-p2136.indd   213201/03/19   9:39 AM 2133OPTIMIZING PERIOPERATIVE CARE: ENHANCED RECOVERY AND CHINESE MEDICINECHAPTER 50offers benefit in open but not laparoscopic colectomy. J Lapa-roendosc Adv Surg Tech A. 2011;21:887-891.	184.	Keller DS, Flores-Gonzalez JR, Ibarra S, et al. Is there value in alvimopan in minimally invasive colorectal surgery? Am J Surg. 2016;212:851-856.	185.	Hirsch CH, Sommers L, Olsen A, et al. The natural history of functional morbidity in hospitalized older patients. J Am Geriatr Soc. 1990;38:1296-1303.	186.	Gillis C, Li C, Lee L, et al. Prehabilitation versus rehabilita-tion: a randomized control trial in patients undergoing colorec-tal resection for cancer. Anesthesiology. 2014;121:937-947.	187.	Nygren J, Soop M, Thorell A, et al. An enhanced-recovery protocol improves outcome after colorectal resection already during the first year: a single-center experience in 168 con-secutive patients. Dis Colon Rectum. 2009;52:978-985.	188.	Teeuwen PH, Bleichrodt RP, Strik C, et al. Enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) versus conventional postoperative care in colorectal surgery. J Gastrointest Surg. 2010;14:88-95.	189.	Zargar-Shoshtari K, Connolly AB, Israel LH, et al. Fast-track surgery may reduce complications following major colonic surgery. Dis Colon Rectum. 2008;51:1633-1640.	190.	Ren L, Zhu D, Wei Y, et al. Enhanced Recovery After Sur-gery (ERAS) program attenuates stress and accelerates recov-ery in patients after radical resection for colorectal cancer: a prospective randomized controlled trial. World J Surg. 2012;36:407-414.	191.	Delaney CP, Brady K, Woconish D, et al. Towards optimizing perioperative colorectal care: outcomes for 1,000 consecutive laparoscopic colon procedures using enhanced recovery path-ways. Am J Surg. 2012;203:353-355; discussion 355-356.	192.	Keane C, Savage S, McFarlane K, et al. Enhanced recovery after surgery versus conventional care in colonic and rectal surgery. ANZ J Surg. 2012;82:697-703.	193.	Esteban F, Cerdan FJ, Garcia-Alonso M, et al. A multicen-tre comparison of a fast track or conventional postoperative protocol following laparoscopic or open elective surgery for colorectal cancer surgery. Colorectal Dis. 2014;16:134-140.	194.	Gouvas N, Gogos-Pappas G, Tsimogiannis K, et al. Imple-mentation of fast-track protocols in open and laparoscopic sphincter-preserving rectal cancer surgery: a multicenter, comparative, prospective, non-randomized study. Dig Surg. 2012;29:301-309.	195.	Greco M, Capretti G, Beretta L, et al. Enhanced recovery program in colorectal surgery: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. World J Surg. 2014;38:1531-1541.	196.	Vlug MS, Wind J, van der Zaag E, et al. Systematic review of laparoscopic vs open colonic surgery within an enhanced recovery programme. Colorectal Dis. 2009;11:335-343.	197.	Zhuang CL, Huang DD, Chen FF, et al. Laparoscopic versus open colorectal surgery within enhanced recovery after sur-gery programs: a systematic review and meta-analysis of ran-domized controlled trials. Surg Endosc. 2015;29:2091-2100.	198.	Garulli G, Lucchi A, Berti P, et al. “Ultra” E.R.A.S. in laparoscopic colectomy for cancer: discharge after the first flatus? A prospective, randomized trial. Surg Endosc. 2017;31:1806-1813.	199.	Gignoux B, Pasquer A, Vulliez A, et al. Outpatient colec-tomy within an enhanced recovery program. J Visc Surg. 2015;152:11-15.	200.	Lawrence JK, Keller DS, Samia H, et al. Discharge within 24 to 72 hours of colorectal surgery is associated with low readmission rates when using Enhanced Recovery Pathways. J Am Coll Surg. 2013;216:390-394.	201.	Pawa N, Cathcart PL, Arulampalam TH, et al. Enhanced recovery program following colorectal resection in the elderly patient. World J Surg. 2012;36:415-423.	202.	Anderin K, Gustafsson UO, Thorell A, et al. The effect of diverting stoma on postoperative morbidity after low anterior resection for rectal cancer in patients treated within an ERAS program. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2015;41:724-730.	203.	Group EC: the impact of enhanced recovery protocol compli-ance on elective colorectal cancer resection: results from an international registry. Ann Surg. 2015;261:1153-1159.	204.	Bakker N, Cakir H, Doodeman HJ, et al. Eight years of expe-rience with enhanced recovery after surgery in patients with colon cancer: impact of measures to improve adherence.  Surgery. 2015;157:1130-1136.	205.	Boulind CE, Yeo M, Burkill C, et al. Factors predicting devia-tion from an enhanced recovery programme and delayed dis-charge after laparoscopic colorectal surgery. Colorectal Dis. 2012;14:e103-110.	206.	Keller DS, Bankwitz B, Woconish D, et al. Predicting who will fail early discharge after laparoscopic colorectal surgery with an established enhanced recovery pathway. Surg Endosc. 2014;28:74-79.	207.	Oh HK, Ihn MH, Son IT, et al. Factors associated with failure of enhanced recovery programs after laparoscopic colon can-cer surgery: a single-center retrospective study. Surg Endosc. 2016;30:1086-1093.	208.	Smart NJ, White P, Allison AS, et al. Deviation and failure of enhanced recovery after surgery following laparoscopic colorectal surgery: early prediction model. Colorectal Dis. 2012;14:e727-e734.	209.	Francis NK, Luther A, Salib E, et al. The use of artificial neu-ral networks to predict delayed discharge and readmission in enhanced recovery following laparoscopic colorectal cancer surgery. Tech Coloproctol. 2015;19:419-428.	210.	Francis NK, Mason J, Salib E, et al. Factors predicting 30-day readmission after laparoscopic colorectal cancer surgery within an enhanced recovery programme. Colorectal Dis. 2015;17:O148-O154.	211.	Lee L, Li C, Landry T, et al. A systematic review of economic evaluations of enhanced recovery pathways for colorectal sur-gery. Ann Surg. 2014;259:670-676.	212.	van Dam RM, Hendry PO, Coolsen MM, et al. Initial experience with a multimodal enhanced recovery pro-gramme in patients undergoing liver resection. Br J Surg. 2008;95:969-975.	213.	Jones C, Kelliher L, Dickinson M, et al. Randomized clini-cal trial on enhanced recovery versus standard care following open liver resection. Br J Surg. 2013;100:1015-1024.	214.	Ni TG, Yang HT, Zhang H, et al. Enhanced recovery after sur-gery programs in patients undergoing hepatectomy: a meta-analysis. World J Gastroenterol. 2015;21:9209-9216.	215.	Wang C, Zheng G, Zhang W, et al. Enhanced recovery after surgery programs for liver resection: a meta-analysis. J Gas-trointest Surg. 2017;21:472-486.	216.	Yang R, Tao W, Chen YY, et al. Enhanced recovery after surgery programs versus traditional perioperative care in laparoscopic hepatectomy: a meta-analysis. Int J Surg. 2016; 36:274-282.	217.	Xu X, Wang Y, Feng T, et al. Nonstrict and individual enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) in partial hepatec-tomy. Springerplus. 2016;5:2011.	218.	Balzano G, Zerbi A, Braga M, et al. Fast-track recovery pro-gramme after pancreaticoduodenectomy reduces delayed gastric emptying. Br J Surg. 2008;95:1387-1393.	219.	Zouros E, Liakakos T, Machairas A, et al. Improvement of gastric emptying by enhanced recovery after pancreaticoduo-denectomy. Hepatobiliary Pancreat Dis Int. 2016;15:198-208.	220.	Abu Hilal M, Di Fabio F, Badran A, et al. Implementation of enhanced recovery programme after pancreatoduodenectomy: a single-centre UK pilot study. Pancreatology. 2013;13:58-62.	221.	Braga M, Pecorelli N, Ariotti R, et al. Enhanced recovery after surgery pathway in patients undergoing pancreaticoduodenec-tomy. World J Surg. 2014;38:2960-2966.Brunicardi_Ch50_p2113-p2136.indd   213301/03/19   9:39 AM 2134SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	222.	Coolsen MM, van Dam RM, Chigharoe A, et al. Improving outcome after pancreaticoduodenectomy: experiences with implementing an enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) program. Dig Surg. 2014;31:177-184.	223.	Dai J, Jiang Y, Fu D. Reducing postoperative complications and improving clinical outcome: enhanced recovery after surgery in pancreaticoduodenectomy—a retrospective cohort study. Int J Surg. 2017;39:176-181.	224.	Morgan KA, Lancaster WP, Walters ML, et al. Enhanced recovery after surgery protocols are valuable in pancreas sur-gery patients. J Am Coll Surg. 2016;222:658-664.	225.	Pecorelli N, Capretti G, Balzano G, et al. Enhanced recovery pathway in patients undergoing distal pancreatectomy: a case-matched study. HPB (Oxford). 2017;19:270-278.	226.	Richardson J, Di Fabio F, Clarke H, et al. Implementation of enhanced recovery programme for laparoscopic distal pancre-atectomy: feasibility, safety and cost analysis. Pancreatology. 2015;15:185-190.	227.	Coolsen MM, van Dam RM, van der Wilt AA, et al. Sys-tematic review and meta-analysis of enhanced recovery after pancreatic surgery with particular emphasis on pancreatico-duodenectomies. World J Surg. 2013;37:1909-1918.	228.	Kagedan DJ, Ahmed M, Devitt KS, et al. Enhanced recovery after pancreatic surgery: a systematic review of the evidence. HPB (Oxford). 2015;17:11-16.	229.	Lei Q, Wang X, Tan S, et al. Application of enhanced recovery after surgery program in perioperative management of pancre-aticoduodenectomy: a systematic review (in Chinese). Zhong-hua Wei Chang Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2015;18:143-149.	230.	Xiong J, Szatmary P, Huang W, et al. Enhanced recovery after surgery program in patients undergoing pancreaticoduode-nectomy: a PRISMA-compliant systematic review and meta-analysis. Medicine (Baltimore). 2016;95:e3497.	231.	Coolsen MM, Bakens M, van Dam RM, et al. Implement-ing an enhanced recovery program after pancreaticoduo-denectomy in elderly patients: is it feasible? World J Surg. 2015;39:251-258.	232.	Partelli S, Crippa S, Castagnani R, et al. Evaluation of an enhanced recovery protocol after pancreaticoduodenectomy in elderly patients. HPB (Oxford). 2016;18:153-158.	233.	Tanaka R, Lee SW, Kawai M, et al. Protocol for enhanced recovery after surgery improves short-term outcomes for patients with gastric cancer: a randomized clinical trial.  Gastric Cancer. 2017;20(5):861-871.	234.	Mingjie X, Luyao Z, Ze T, et al. Laparoscopic radical gastrec-tomy for resectable advanced gastric cancer within enhanced recovery programs: a prospective randomized controlled trial. J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A. 2017;27(9):959-964.	235.	Abdikarim I, Cao XY, Li SZ, et al. Enhanced recovery after surgery with laparoscopic radical gastrectomy for stomach carcinomas. World J Gastroenterol. 2015;21:13339-13344.	236.	Beamish AJ, Chan DS, Blake PA, et al. Systematic review and meta-analysis of enhanced recovery programmes in gas-tric cancer surgery. Int J Surg. 2015;19:46-54.	237.	Chen ZX, Liu AH, Cen Y. Fast-track program vs traditional care in surgery for gastric cancer. World J Gastroenterol. 2014;20:578-583.	238.	Makuuchi R, Sugisawa N, Kaji S, et al. Enhanced recov-ery after surgery for gastric cancer and an assessment of preoperative carbohydrate loading. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2017;43:210-217.	239.	Mortensen K, Nilsson M, Slim K, et al. Consensus guidelines for enhanced recovery after gastrectomy: Enhanced Recov-ery After Surgery (ERAS[R]) Society recommendations. Br J Surg. 2014;101:1209-1229.	240.	Gemmill EH, Humes DJ, Catton JA. Systematic review of enhanced recovery after gastro-oesophageal cancer surgery. Ann R Coll Surg Engl. 2015;97:173-179.	241.	Ford SJ, Adams D, Dudnikov S, et al. The implementation and effectiveness of an enhanced recovery programme after oesophago-gastrectomy: a prospective cohort study. Int J Surg. 2014;12:320-324.	242.	Schmidt HM, El Lakis MA, Markar SR, et al. accelerated recovery within standardized recovery pathways after esopha-gectomy: a prospective cohort study assessing the effects of early discharge on outcomes, readmissions, patient satisfac-tion, and costs. Ann Thorac Surg. 2016;102:931-939.	243.	Tang J, Humes DJ, Gemmil E, et al. Reduction in length of stay for patients undergoing oesophageal and gastric resec-tions with implementation of enhanced recovery packages. Ann R Coll Surg Engl. 2013;95:323-328.	244.	Findlay JM, Gillies RS, Millo J, et al. Enhanced recovery for esophagectomy: a systematic review and evidence-based guidelines. Ann Surg. 2014;259:413-431.	245.	Markar SR, Karthikesalingam A, Low DE. Enhanced recovery pathways lead to an improvement in postoperative outcomes following esophagectomy: systematic review and pooled anal-ysis. Dis Esophagus. 2015;28:468-475.	246.	Barreca M, Renzi C, Tankel J, et al. Is there a role for enhanced recovery after laparoscopic bariatric surgery? Preliminary results from a specialist obesity treatment center. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2016;12:119-126.	247.	Hahl T, Peromaa-Haavisto P, Tarkiainen P, et al. Outcome of laparoscopic gastric bypass (LRYGB) with a program for enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS). Obes Surg. 2016;26:505-511.	248.	Lemanu DP, Singh PP, Berridge K, et al. Randomized clinical trial of enhanced recovery versus standard care after laparo-scopic sleeve gastrectomy. Br J Surg. 2013;100:482-489.	249.	Rickey J, Gersin K, Yang W, et al. Early discharge in the bar-iatric population does not increase post-discharge resource utilization. Surg Endosc. 2017;31:618-624.	250.	Malczak P, Pisarska M, Piotr M, et al. Enhanced recovery after bariatric surgery: systematic review and meta-analysis. Obes Surg. 2017;27:226-235.	251.	Singh PM, Panwar R, Borle A, et al. Efficiency and safety effects of applying ERAS protocols to bariatric surgery: a sys-tematic review with meta-analysis and trial sequential analysis of evidence. Obes Surg. 2017;27:489-501.	252.	Fayezizadeh M, Petro CC, Rosen MJ, et al. Enhanced recov-ery after surgery pathway for abdominal wall reconstruction: pilot study and preliminary outcomes. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2014;134:151S-159S.	253.	Jensen KK, Brondum TL, Harling H, et al. Enhanced recovery after giant ventral hernia repair. Hernia. 2016;20:249-256.	254.	Majumder A, Fayezizadeh M, Neupane R, et al. Ben-efits of multimodal enhanced recovery pathway in patients undergoing open ventral hernia repair. J Am Coll Surg. 2016;222:1106-1115.	255.	Arumainayagam N, McGrath J, Jefferson KP, et al. Introduc-tion of an enhanced recovery protocol for radical cystectomy. BJU Int. 2008;101:698-701.	256.	Cerruto MA, De Marco V, D’Elia C, et al. Fast track surgery to reduce short-term complications following radical cystectomy and intestinal urinary diversion with Vescica Ileale Padovana neobladder: proposal for a tailored enhanced recovery pro-tocol and preliminary report from a pilot study. Urol Int. 2014;92:41-49.	257.	Mukhtar S, Ayres BE, Issa R, et al. Challenging boundaries: an enhanced recovery programme for radical cystectomy. Ann R Coll Surg Engl. 2013;95:200-206.	258.	Campos PAC, Martinez JG, Fernandez PJG, et al. Periop-erative fast track program in intraoperative hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC) after cytoreduc-tive surgery in advanced ovarian cancer. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2011;37:543-548.Brunicardi_Ch50_p2113-p2136.indd   213401/03/19   9:39 AM 2135OPTIMIZING PERIOPERATIVE CARE: ENHANCED RECOVERY AND CHINESE MEDICINECHAPTER 50	259.	Chapman JS, Roddy E, Ueda S, et al. enhanced recovery path-ways for improving outcomes after minimally invasive gyne-cologic oncology surgery. Obstet Gynecol. 2016;128:138-144.	260.	de Groot JJ, van Es LE, Maessen JM, et al. Diffusion of Enhanced Recovery principles in gynecologic oncology sur-gery: is active implementation still necessary? Gynecol Oncol. 2014;134:570-575.	261.	Lindemann K, Kok PS, Stockler M, et al. enhanced recov-ery after surgery for advanced ovarian cancer: a system-atic review of interventions trialed. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2017;27:1274-1282.	262.	Marx C, Rasmussen T, Jakobsen DH, et al. The effect of accel-erated rehabilitation on recovery after surgery for ovarian malignancy. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2006;85:488-492.	263.	Wijk L, Franzen K, Ljungqvist O, et al. Implementing a structured enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) protocol reduces length of stay after abdominal hysterectomy. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2014;93:749-756.	264.	Khan SK, Malviya A, Muller SD, et al. Reduced short-term complications and mortality following enhanced recovery pri-mary hip and knee arthroplasty: results from 6,000 consecu-tive procedures. Acta Orthop. 2014;85:26-31.	265.	Scott NB, McDonald D, Campbell J, et al. The use of enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) principles in Scot-tish orthopaedic units—an implementation and follow-up at 1 year, 2010-2011: a report from the Musculoskeletal Audit, Scotland. Arch Orthop Trauma Surg. 2013;133:117-124.	266.	Zhou B, Sun R. About the cultural support of the develop-ment of traditional chinese medicine. The 12th National Symposium on Chinese Medicine Culture. 74-79.	267.	Yang M, Li J. Analysis on the development of tradi-tional chinese medicine. Contemporary Medicine Forum. 2014;12:277-278.	268.	Yu M. Chinese medicine and Western medicine: two kinds of philosophies and two different cultures of medicine. Journal of Zhengzhou University of Light Industry (Social Science). 2012;13:7-12.	269.	Yue X. The Historical stages of the formation and develop-ment of traditional Chinese medicine. Guangming Journal of Chinese Medicine(CJGMCM). 2012;27:207-210.	270.	Tong X, Zhang Z, Li A. The confusion of chinese medicine development and its countermeasures. Chinese Journal of Basic Medicine in Traditional Chinese Medicine. 2003;9:52-55.	271.	Geng D. Research progress of shiquan dabu decoction. Chinese Traditional Patient Medicine. 2003;25:837-840.	272.	Han D, Chen Z, Xing B. Therapeutic rules of analogous pre-scriptions for tonify and replenish the middle qi. Chinese Archives of Traditional Chinese Medicine. 2010;28:595-598.	273.	Liu K, Wang B. Influences of Buzhong Yiqi Decoction on gastrointestinal feunction and nutrition status of gastric carcinoma after operation. Chinese Journal of Experimental Traditional Medical Formulae. 2015;21:152-156.	274.	Su P, Li W. The effect of Shiquan Dabu Decoction tegether with enteral nutrition for patients with lung cancer after sur-gery. Journal of Nanjing University of Traditional Chinese Medicine. 2015;31:17-20.	275.	Yang A, Xiang F, Yang L. Effect of Shiquan Dabu Tang com-bined with Wuwei Xiaodu Yin on immune functions in post-operative Qi and blood deficiency patients with esophagus cancer. Chinese Journal of Experimental Traditional Medical Formulae. 2016;22:174-178.	276.	Cui J. The effects of Shenmai injection on cellular immuno-logic function in the perioperative patients with gastroentero-logical tumors. Pract Clin Med. 2007;8:39-41.	277.	Liang C. Clinical observation on the protective effect of huangqi injection on the myocardium of coronary heart dis-ease in the perioperative period. Shan Xi Journal of Tradi-tional Chinese Medicine. 2011;17:17-18.	278.	Ruan L, Deng Y. Study of effect of xiaoaiping in enhanc-ing efficacy of neoadjuvant chemotherapy for breast cancer and its mechanism. Journal of Chinese Materia Medica. 2005;40:749-752.	279.	Tan M, Guo Z, Bin X. The effect of elemene local intra-arte-rial infusion to apoptosis and proliferation in breast cancer. Chinese J Clin Oncol. 2001;28:267-269.	280.	Wu X. Research on Acute Abdomen. 1st ed. China; 1988.	281.	Xie J, Wu X. Research on three cheng qi decoction used in the bowel preparation. Chinese Journal of Surgery of Integrated Traditional and Western Medicine. 1996;2:355-357.	282.	Li X. Flavored pure ginseng decoction treating 75 cases of traumatic shock. Journal of Emergency in Traditional Chinese Medicine. 2003;12:413.	283.	Ji C, Liu J, Chen H. Effect of Qingdan Decoction combined with biliary decompression on the liver function and inflam-matory factors in acute cholangitis severe type rats. Journal of Traditional Chinese Medicine. 2013;54:512-515.	284.	Wang X, Zhang X. The effect of Qingyi decoction on bacte-rial and endotoxin translocation from intestine in acute hem-orrhagic necrotizing pancreatitis in rat. Chinese Journal of General Surgery. 2010;19:255-258.	285.	Yao G, Wu X. Clinical study of treatment of severe acute pancreatitis with Qingyi decoction. Chinese Journal of Surgery of Integrated Traditional and Western Medicine. 1997;3:244-246.	286.	Han J. Research on acupuncture anesthesia-analgesia. Acupunct Res. 2016;41:377-387.	287.	Arranz L, Guayerbas N, Siboni L. Effect of acupuncture treat-ment on the immune function impairment found in anxious women. Am J Chinese Med. 2007;35:35-51.	288.	Liu Y. The effect of transcutaneous electroacupuncture on serum level of glucocose and cortisol in patient underwent thyroidectomy. Chinese Journal of Traditional Medical  Science and Technology. 2013;20:180-181.	289.	Sun Y, Gan TJ, Dubose JW, et al. Acupuncture and related techniques for postoperative pain: a systematic review of randomized controlled trials. Br J Anaesth. 2008;101:151-160.	290.	Zhang Q, Gao Z, Wang H, et al. The effect of pre-treatment with transcutaneous electrical acupoint stimulation on the quality of recovery after ambulatory breast surgery: a pro-spective, randomised controlled trial. Anaesthesia. 2014;69: 832-839.	291.	Zou D, Chen WH, Iwakiri K, et al. Inhibition of transient lower esophageal sphincter relaxations by electrical acu-point stimulation. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2005;289:G197-G201.	292.	Shiotani A, Tatewaki M, Hoshino E, et al. Effects of elec-troacupuncture on gastric myoelectrical activity in healthy humans. Neurogastroenterol Motil. 2004;16:293-298.	293.	Tatewaki M, Strickland C, Fukuda H, et al. Effects of acupuncture on vasopressin-induced emesis in con-scious dogs. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2005;288:R401-R408.	294.	Arnberger M, Stadelmann K, Alischer P, et al. Monitoring of neuromuscular blockade at the P6 acupuncture point reduces the incidence of postoperative nausea and vomiting. Anesthe-siology. 2007;107:903-908.	295.	El-Deeb AM, Ahmady MS. Effect of acupuncture on nausea and/or vomiting during and after cesarean section in compari-son with ondansetron. J Anesth. 2011;25:698-703.	296.	Feng C, Popovic J, Kline R, et al. auricular acupressure in the prevention of postoperative nausea and emesis a randomized controlled trial. Bull Hosp Jt Dis (2013). 2017;75:114-118.	297.	Okuno S, Hirayama K, Inoue J. Effects of rikkunshito on the postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) after laparoscopic gynecological surgery. Masui. 2008;57:1502-1509.Brunicardi_Ch50_p2113-p2136.indd   213501/03/19   9:39 AM 2136SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	298.	Zhang X, Zhang D, Yang Y. Effects of Houpupaiqi Heji on the gastrintestinal function of patients after gastric cancer surgery. Mod Oncol. 2015;23:1268-1270.	299.	Zhang X, Yuan H, Qin W. Study on early enteral nutrition combined with acupuncture to promote the recovery of gastro-intestinal function in patients after surgery. Chinese Journal of Surgery of Integrated Traditional and Western Medicine. 2016;22:542-545.	300.	Jian W, Heng L, Hui QQ. Effect of Da-Cheng-Qi-Tang on gastrointestinal motility in patients undergoing laparotomy. Hepatogastroenterology. 2011;58:1887-1892.	301.	You S, Wu X, Liu M. Effects of dachengqi decoction on gut hormones and intestinal movement after cholecystectomy. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 1994;14:522-524.	302.	Yang Y, Zuo HQ, Li Z, et al. Comparison of efficacy of simo decoction and acupuncture or chewing gum alone on postop-erative ileus in colorectal cancer resection: a randomized trial. Sci Rep. 2017;7:37826.	303.	Chen Z, Cao L, Wen Z, et al. Study of Evodia hot compress plus electro-acupuncture in patients who have undergone abdominal surgery. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015;8:16167-16174.	304.	Wu X. Practice of Abdominal Surgery. 3rd ed. Tianjin Science and Technology Press; 2004.	305.	Cui Z, Kong D. 74 cases of biiliary liver abscess treated with integrated traditional and western medicine. Chinese Journal of Surgery of Integrated Traditional and Western Medicine. 2014;20:167-169.	306.	Sun S, Xu W. Effects of TPN and immune regulator radix astragali on postoperative patients of obstructive jaundice.  J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 2002;9:151-157.	307.	Ma X, Yang W, Zhang X. The study of effect of shiquan dabu decoction in surgeical nutrition therapy. Beijing Journal of Traditional Chinese Medicine. 1991;4:31-32.	308.	Dong Y, Cui Z. Acupuncture research on adhesive intestinal obstruction. Clin J Chinese Med. 2001;3:86-88.	309.	Li G, Ma J, Shang H, et al. Application of Dechengqi decoc-tion in abdominal surgery. World Chinese Journal of Diges-tion. 2008;16:1672-1676.	310.	Li H, Hong Y, Huang M. Clinical effect observation of Chinese herbal enema, external application and acupuncture in adhe-sive ileus. Journal of Guangzhou University of Traditional Chinese Medicine. 2007;24:282-285.Brunicardi_Ch50_p2113-p2136.indd   213601/03/19   9:39 AM
# Chunk 8953
Understanding, Evaluating, and Using Evidence for Surgical PracticeAndrew J. Benjamin, Andrew B. Schneider,  Jeffrey B. Matthews, and Gary An 51chapterINTRODUCTIONThe singular importance of this chapter rests on the following chain of reasoning:1.	The state of surgical science and knowledge is constantly changing.2.	The education of a surgeon is a continuous process.3.	Surgeons need to know how to evaluate new surgical knowl-edge to maintain their education in order to best serve their patients.4.	This chapter provides guidance as to how surgeons might navigate, interpret and apply this new knowledge.Notably, this reasoning also applies to the process of acquisition of new knowledge itself, which explains why this inaugural chapter on evidence-based medicine is occurring in the 11th edition of this book. Recognizing the impermanence and fluidity of knowledge is a critical insight for the responsible surgeon, but so too is realizing that “good practice” cannot occur without reference points as to what should be done given the current imperfect state of knowledge. These dual recognitions inform the organization of this chapter, which introduces and describes the currently accepted approach to evidence-based medicine, and then follows by noting a series of current issues that anticipate the likelihood that what is meant by “evidence-based medicine” will evolve over the coming years. Also note that this chapter is not intended to be a primer on statistics and clinical trial design; there are entire textbooks devoted to those subjects. Rather, this chapter will focus on how those tools are aggregated and presented in order to inform a surgeon how to keep abreast with current developments in practice.WHAT IS EVIDENCE-BASED MEDICINE?For centuries, the practice of medicine was guided primarily by anecdotal experience, often based on rationales that did not arise from a rigorous scientific process and sustained by the fundamental barriers associated with being able to learn from one’s experience (e.g., cognitive bias). For example, treatments such as bloodletting and purging were based on ostensible prin-ciples of bodily humors originating from the Ancient Greeks, and persisted well into the 18th century despite repeated disas-trous outcomes. To a great degree, the goal of the Scientific Method, through its emphasis on skepticism and falsifiability, is predicated upon overriding observational/experiential bias by the application of rigorous methodology statistical analysis. The dangers of bias were recognized at the dawn of the Scien-tific Era, and continue to manifest today (Box: The History and Sources of Bias in Biomedical Literature).Introduction2137What is Evidence-Based  Medicine?2137Searching for Information:  Patient/Population, Intervention, Comparison, and Outcome / 2139Types of Studies / 2139Hierarchies of Evidence / 2140Tools to Evaluate a Body of  Evidence / 2140Synthesis of Evidence—Clinical  Guidelines / 2142The Challenges of Applying  EBM to Surgery2144Analysis of a Surgical Randomized  Control Trial / 2144Internal Validity / 2144External Validity / 2146Additional Challenges to Conducting  a Surgical RCT / 2146Use and Misuse of Statistical Significance2147Type I and Type II Errors / 2147P Values / 2147Alternative to P Values / 2148How do the Tools of  EBM Perform?2148External Consistency / 2148Internal Consistency / 2148System Issues / 2148Validity / 2149Implications of EBM / 2149The Alternatives to EBM2149What can Researchers do to  Improve the Validity of  Research Findings?2149The History and Sources of Bias in Biomedical LiteratureIn Sir Francis Bacon’s initial description of the scientific method in his Novum Organum1 he notes what he terms the “idols of the mind,” in essence recognizing and classifying the sources of cognitive bias that limit the reliability of sub-jective observation and interpretation. These “idols” are:•	Idols of the tribe (Idola tribus): A humans’ tendency to per-ceive more order and regularity in systems than truly exists, and arises from their preconceived ideas about things•	Idols of the cave (Idola specus): Arising from an individ-ual’s personal limitations in reasoning due to particular personalities, subjective likes and dislikesBrunicardi_Ch51_p2137-p2152.indd   213728/02/19   4:19 PM 2138•	Idols of the marketplace (Idola fori): Arising from the con-fusion in the use of language and taking some words in sci-ence to have a different meaning than their common usage•	Idols of the theatre (Idola theatri): Arising from the following of academic dogma and not asking questions about the worldThese descriptions still resonate today, illustrating just how long the dangers of cognitive bias have been recognized, and just how embedded those tendencies may be. For instance, the following are sources of bias in biomedical literature:•	Publication bias: publishers incentivized to accept posi-tive results•	Prevailing field bias: supporting entrenched opinions•	Citation bias: tendency to cite positive studies•	Time-lag bias: delay the reporting of negative results•	Reporting bias: emphasizing positive over negative resultsKey Points1	Cognitive bias is inescapable, and limits the ability of both individual practitioners and the surgical field in general, to advance and improve in a scientific fashion. Evidence Based Medicine is an attempt to codify the process of interpret-ing experience, assessing the literature and translating it into practice.2	Dealing with and interpreting the vast amount of surgical literature available on the Internet can be daunting, and this task can be aided by the application of identified formats for executing online search. The PICO (Patient/Population, Intervention, Comparison and Outcome) format is a com-monly used method for codifying online search.3	Not all literature or evidence is created equal. There exist various approaches, such as the Oxford Center for Evidence Based Medicine (CEBM) Levels of Evidence or the GRADE (Grading and Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation) system, that have been developed to provide guidance in assessing and reifying scientific literature.4	The conversion of evidence into clinical practice often mani-fests in the creation of clinical guidelines. As with all things related to evidence based medicine, not all guidelines are created equal, and therefore there are certain characteristics that can be used to evaluate the quality of a particular clini-cal guideline.5	There are specific challenges in the application of evidence based medicine to surgery, not least of which is the difficulty in performing a truly randomized clinical trial. The  CONSORT (Consolidated Standard of Reporting Clinical Trials) guidelines were developed to serve as minimal rec-ommendations for reporting randomized clinical trials.6	The well-known saying “There are lies, damn lies and then statistics” points to the recognition that statistical tools can be prone to misuse, and emphasizes the need to understand the appropriate application, limits of and interpretation of reported statistics.7	Evidence based medicine has not thus far been held to its own standards of evidence. Recognizing that available “evidence” is a constantly shifting landscape should warn one against the dangers of epistemic certainty, and further emphasizes the fact that surgical education is an ongoing and perpetual process.In the medical field, the transition from accumulated anec-dote to true statistical analysis can be seen in the emergence of clinical epidemiology as a field in 1938, which began to shift the focus from descriptions of individual patients to trends affect-ing entire populations. This shift, however, was accompanied by new challenges, as different means of turning anecdotal experience into statistics (e.g., case series, observational stud-ies, retrospective studies, prospective studies) meant that now practitioners needed to be able to compare these “scientific” presentations against each other in order to best establish their practices. The processes and methods of aggregating, compar-ing, and translating these different types of data from the medi-cal literature into clinical practice were explicitly established in the latter part of the 20th century, particularly arising from efforts at McMaster University, which eventually led to a fun-damental framework for literature-informed medical decision-making known as evidence-based medicine (EBM).EBM is defined as the “conscientious, explicit and judi-cious use of current best evidence in making decisions about treating individual patients.”2,3 This term was coined by Gordon Guyatt in 1991, focusing on assessing the credibility of the medical literature, understanding the presented results, and applying the information to individual practice. EBM is defined by three epistemological principles4:•	Principle 1: Not all evidence is created equal, and the practice of medicine should be based on the best available evidence•	Principle 2: The pursuit of truth is best accomplished by evaluation of the totality of the evidence, and not selecting evidence that favors a particular claim•	Principle 3: Clinical decision-making requires consideration of patients’ values and preferenceThe adoption of EBM in the discipline of surgery has lagged compared to nonsurgical specialties. To a great extent, this is due to the challenges of achieving the highest level of evidence noted in principle 1: definitive conclusions from a randomized controlled trial (RCT). A literature analysis of MEDLINE from 1966 to 2000 demonstrated that only 15.1% of the 134,689 RCTs evaluated a surgical topic.5 In the early days of EBM during the 1990s, surgical RCTs accounted for only 7% of published articles in surgical journals; most of the articles were retrospective studies and case series,6 which are essentially aggregated anecdotes. Over the next decade, the rela-tive frequency of RCTs in surgery further decreased, account-ing for 3.4% of all publications in 2003.5 As a result, most of the available evidence to guide surgical practice today remains based on retrospective reviews, nonrandomized trials, and expert opinion. The barriers to performing prospective RCTs in surgery remain substantial: standardization of clinical pre-sentation and, of course, accounting for variations in operative technique and the ability to blind studies to reduce experimental bias. The relative paucity in RCTs in surgery make it even more 1Brunicardi_Ch51_p2137-p2152.indd   213828/02/19   4:19 PM 2139UNDERSTANDING, EVALUATING, AND USING EVIDENCE FOR SURGICAL PRACTICECHAPTER 51important that surgeons understand the best-practice methods to critically appraise available evidence, while recognizing the limitations and potential pitfalls of those methods, in order to optimize their practice and decision-making regarding patient care when high quality evidence may not be available. Herein we present the steps of such a workflow, starting with an initial search for information, identification of the classes of informa-tion that such a search can return, and then guidelines by which that information is evaluated, compared, and aggregated.Searching for Information: Patient/Population, Intervention, Comparison, and OutcomeTechnology has substantively changed how information can be sought and retrieved. Online search engines such as  MEDLINE via PubMed, which contains over 26 million  citations, have dramatically enhanced the ability to access bio-medical literature.7 However, there is a very real potential for such access to become overwhelming. Effective and efficient use of search engines can be enhanced by framing the clinical question in a format designed to improve the relevancy of search results. PICO is one such format, where the acronym stands for Patient/Population, Intervention, Comparison, and Outcome.8•	Patient or population is the specific group of individuals for which the questions is being asked.•	Intervention is the treatment or technique of interest for the defined patient or population. Intervention might be a proce-dure, such as “laparoscopic appendectomy” or be defined as an exposure of interest, such as “smoking.”•	Comparison is the alternative treatment or technique to which you are comparing the intervention. Terms might include, for example, “open appendectomy” or “observation.”•	Outcome of interest is the final step of the PICO format. Examples include “mortality,” “operative time,” and “wound infection.”As with all online search strategies, there is a trade-off between the specificity of the search and the breadth of the returned items. When using PICO to inform clinical decision-making, it is generally advantageous to be as precise and specific as possible when initiating a search: this increases the likelihood the search will return information most germane to the particular clinical scenario. This is accomplished by the use of “AND” in the framing of the search to encompass the set of questions of interest. For example, one could construct a query consisting of a particular procedure, with a particular method, with a particular outcome metric, such as “(distal pancreatectomy) AND splenectomy AND (splenic preservation) AND morbidity” to frame a PICO question.Types of StudiesPrinciple 1 of EBM states that not all evidence is created equal; therefore, evaluating the evidentiary quality of the results of an online search requires classifying the returned search items by type of study. As noted earlier, acknowledging that the “gold standard” level of evidence, RCTs, are rare in the surgical literature, the application of EBM to surgery requires increased familiarity with the types of alternative studies available, with their relative strengths and weaknesses. These types are listed below:•	Meta-analysis: A meta-analysis is a technique to combine similarly published data in order to increase the overall 2statistical power compared to each study individually. The amount of interstudy heterogeneity (methods, study popula-tion, endpoints, etc.) should be limited to allow for the gen-eration of informative conclusions. The pooling of similar studies enables researchers to generate a new statistical con-clusion based on a substantially larger sample size. These approaches, though useful, have their limitations: the inclu-sion of inappropriate studies and the mislabeling of a meta-analysis leading to inaccurate conclusions. Attention should be directed toward this type of evidence when clinical guide-lines do not exist.•	Systematic Review: Like meta-analyses, systematic reviews use standardized methods to search for and appraise studies in order to attempt to reduce bias. However, systematic reviews do not utilize quantitative methods to summarize the results. For this reason, systematic reviews are often not considered to provide the same strength of evidence as a meta-analysis.•	Cross-Sectional Studies: In a cross-sectional study, expo-sures and outcomes are measured at a single point in time. The prevalence of the outcome is then compared in patients who did and did not have the exposure. Multiple exposures and outcomes can be measured at the same time, which is an advantage; however, there are important limitations. One significant limitation is that a temporal relationship cannot  be determined between exposure and outcome because they are measured simultaneously. These studies will often form the foundation for more definitive studies.•	Case Control Study: In a case-control study, cohorts are determined by the presence or absence of a particular out-come of interest. This is in contrast to a cross-sectional study where samples are determined by the presence or absence of an exposure. Once the samples have been identi-fied based upon outcome, then possible prior exposures are identified, and the odds of those exposures are compared between cohorts.•	Case Series: A Case Series involves a report of a small group of patients that share specified clinical features; this gener-ally does not include description of a control group. Case series are prevalent in the field of surgery, and some of the most famous eponymous procedures originated from case series, including the Whipple procedure9 and Nissen fundo-plication.10 This type of study provides weak evidence due to issues with patient selection, biases, and confounding factors. However, the findings from a case series can be used to gen-erate hypotheses for a randomized control trial.•	Expert Opinion: Expert opinions represent the lowest level of evidence and is representative of a clinician’s individual experience and anecdotes. Prior to evidence-based medicine, expert opinion was the primary means of teaching medicine and shaping the field. However, the opinions of clinicians can vary substantially leading to a wide range of potential unproven treatments for a medical issue. Thus, expert opinion should only be solicited in the complete absence of evidence in the literature.It should also be noted that irrespective of the type of study or recommendation, there are additional factors that can contribute to bias in publication. To a great degree these are extrapolations of the sources of individual cognitive bias, but writ large across an entire community (see Box: The History and Sources of Bias in Biomedical Literature).Brunicardi_Ch51_p2137-p2152.indd   213928/02/19   4:19 PM 2140SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIHierarchies of EvidenceThe original architects of EBM codified the notion that certain types of evidence are superior to others based on charac-teristics of study design, depicting this concept as a “pyra-mid,” with expert opinion comprising the base of the pyramid and randomized controlled trials at the peak (Fig. 51-1). Although conceptually appealing, this initial attempt to “rank” the evidence was relatively simplistic and rested on unproven assumptions that RCT were inherently superior to observational studies. While RCTs theoretically provide higher quality evi-dence compared to observational studies, RCTs can also have significant limitations and biases (see later section, “The Chal-lenges of Applying EBM to Surgery”). Furthermore, translating the results from well-crafted RCTs can be challenging, where the specific restrictive criteria for executing a high-quality RCT can inherently limit its applicability to clinical scenarios not specifically noted or tested in the RCT. Therefore, one could find oneself in the situation of trying to compare an RCT on a related but clearly distinct use case with a well performed obser-vational study that more closely approximated the clinical sce-nario in question. This led to the subsequent development of more refined frameworks to assess the quality of evidence in order to try and address these issues, although there is currently no consensus on a single framework. The current situation is that while many newer systems have devised ways in which studies can move up and down the pyramid, for well-designed studies, the pyramid largely remains intact.The initial hierarchies of evidence were limited because they entangled the method of evidence collection with underly-ing study design. They failed to recognize principle 2 of EBM: “the pursuit of truth is best accomplished by evaluation of the totality of evidence” and the principle that “health claims be based upon systematic reviews which summarize the best avail-able evidence.”4 The earliest hierarchies positioned systematic reviews at the top of the pyramid followed by RCTs; how-ever, this classification failed to acknowledge that systematic reviews can summarize any type of evidence. Cohort studies, case-control studies, and even case reports can be the subject of systematic review. The importance of systematic review in EBM cannot be understated: systematic reviews are the most 3cited type of study, and these studies are essential for the devel-opment of clinical guidelines and influencing the direction of future studies.2,11 When applied in a timely manner, systematic reviews have resulted in major practice changes, for example, encouraging early postoperative enteral feeding compared to parenteral nutrition to prevent sepsis.12Tools to Evaluate a Body of EvidenceBy 2002, over 100 unique evidence rating systems existed,2 and the differences among them may be nontrivial. Depending upon the specific criteria used, the “strength” of evidence might dif-fer widely from system to system. For example, the American Association of Orthopedic Surgeons (AAOS) published guide-lines in 2009 for prevention of venous thromboembolism (VTE) in patients undergoing hip or knee surgery that conflicted with the widely used American College of Chest Physician (ACCP) guidelines, despite having access to the same data. While the ACCP considered VTE prophylaxis to be a grade 1 recommen-dation with level A evidence, the AAOS recommendation var-ied based upon risk of pulmonary embolism and bleeding, with no recommendation being greater than B and all recommenda-tions being based upon level III evidence.13 In the following section we present a few of the most widely accepted tools for assessing the quality of evidence.CEBM Levels of Evidence. One of the most widely adopted systems for grading evidence is the Oxford Center for Evi-dence Based Medicine (CEBM) Levels of Evidence. The origi-nal CEBM system was released in 2000 and was subsequently updated in 2011. Earlier systems of evidence ranking were criti-cized because they categorically placed randomized trials above observational studies, although observational studies and even anecdotes can occasionally give the “best” evidence in certain clinical situations. CEBM was therefore developed to not only improve the ranking of evidence but also to aid clinicians in quickly searching for the best evidence available for a given clinical question (Table 51-1). It is designed as both a tool for traditional critical appraisal as well as a pragmatic system that clinicians can use to answer clinical questions in real time. It can be used as a heuristic that clinicians and patients can utilize to answer clinical questions quickly and without resorting to preap-praised sources.14 The CEBM Levels of Evidence system begins with choosing a clinical question from the first column of the table provided by the creators (see Table 51-1) (for example, “How common is the problem?”, “Does this intervention help?”, or “Is this test worthwhile?”). Therefore, each row of the CEBM Levels of Evidence represents a series of steps one should fol-low to find the best evidence for the question chosen. Strong evidence is likely to be found in columns to the left of the table, while weak evidence will be found in columns to the right. After completing a clinical query using the table, a final “level” of evidence is assigned on a scale from 1 to 5 based upon the types of studies found to answer the initial question (1 = highest rated evidence; 5 = lowest rated evidence). However, the levels are not intended to provide one with a definitive judgment regarding the quality of evidence. There may be cases where “lower level” evi-dence—for example, an observational study with a large treat-ment effect—provides stronger evidence than a “higher level” study, such as a systematic review with an inconclusive result.CEBM should be thought of as a hierarchy of the likely best evidence. An advantage of CEBM is that it allows the potential of resorting to individual studies for the best evidence, while other systems generally assume that there is a systematic RCTCohort studyCase control studyCase seriesCase reportsAnimal researchIn-vitro researchExpert experience/opinionFigure 51-1. Evidence-based hierarchy.Brunicardi_Ch51_p2137-p2152.indd   214028/02/19   4:19 PM 2141UNDERSTANDING, EVALUATING, AND USING EVIDENCE FOR SURGICAL PRACTICECHAPTER 51Table 51-1Oxford center for evidence-based medicine 2011 levels of evidenceQUESTIONSTEP 1 (LEVEL 1*)STEP 2 (LEVEL 2*)STEP 3 (LEVEL 3*)STEP 4 (LEVEL 4*)STEP 5 (LEVEL 5)How common is the problem?Local and current random sample surveys (or censuses)Systematic review of surveys that allow matching to local circumstances**Local non-random sample**Case-series**n/aIs this diagnostic or monitoring test accurate? (Diagnosis)Systematic review of cross-sectional studies with consistently applied reference standard and blindingIndividual cross-sectional studies with consistently applied reference standard and blindingNon-consecutive studies, or studies without consistently applied reference standards**Case-control studies, or “poor or non-independent reference standard**Mechanism-based reasoningWhat will happen if we do not add a therapy? (Prognosis)Systematic review of inception cohort studiesInception cohort studiesCohort study or control arm of randomized trial*Case-series or case-control studies, or poor quality prognostic cohort study**n/aDoes this intervention help? (Treatment Benefits)Systematic review of randomized trials or n-of-1 trialsRandomized trial or observational study with dramatic effectNon-randomized controlled cohort/follow-up study**Case-series, case-control studies, or historically controlled studies**Mechanism-based reasoningWhat are the COMMON harms? (Treatment Harms)Systematic review of randomized trials, systematic review of nested case-control studies n-of-1 trial with the patient you are raising the question about, or observational study with dramatic effectIndividual randomized trial or (exceptionally) observational study with dramatic effectNon-randomized controlled cohort/follow-up study (post-marketing surveillance) provided there are sufficient numbers to rule out a common harm. (For long-term harms the duration of follow-up must be sufficient.)**Case-series, case-control, or historically controlled studies**Mechanism-based reasoningWhat are the RARE harms? (Treatment Harms)Systematic review of randomized trials or n-of-1 trialRandomized trial or (exceptionally) observational study with dramatic effect   Is this (early detection) test worthwhile? (Screening)Systematic review of randomized trialsRandomized trialNon-randomized controlled cohort/follow-up study**Case-series, case-control, or historically controlled studies**Mechanism-based reasoning*Level may be graded down on the basis of study quality, Imprecision, Indirectness (study PICO does not match questions PICO), because of inconsistency between studies, or because the absolute effect size is very small; Level may be graded up if there is a large or very large effect size.**As always, a systematic review is generally better than an individual study.How to cite the Levels of Evidence TableOCEBM Levels of Evidence Working Group*. “The Oxford 2011 Levels of Evidence”.Oxford Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine. http://www.cebm.net/index.aspx?o=5653*OCEBM Table of Evidence Working Group = Jeremy Howick, Iain Chalmers (James Lind Library), Paul Glasziou, Trish Greenhaigh, Carl Heneghan, Alessandro Liberati, Ivan Moschetti, Bob Phillips, Hazel Thornton, Olive Goddard, and Mary HodgkinsanBrunicardi_Ch51_p2137-p2152.indd   214128/02/19   4:19 PM 2142SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIDefinitions of GRADE Evidence QualityHigh quality – Further research is very unlikely to change confidence in the estimate of effect.Moderate quality – Further research is likely to have an important impact confidence in the estimate of effect and may change the estimate.Low quality – Further research is very likely to have an important impact on confidence in the estimate of effect and is likely to change the estimate.Very low quality – Any estimate of effect is very uncertain.review available. Additionally, other systems are built around considering the strength of evidence for therapeutic effects and harms, while CEBM allows appraisal of evidence for prevalence of disease, accuracy of diagnostic tests, prognosis, therapeutic effects, rare harms, common harms, and usefulness of screening.Grading and Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and Evaluation. Alternatively, the Grading and Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) system classifies the quality of evidence into one of four levels: high, moderate, low, and very low15 (Box: Definitions of GRADE Evidence Quality). Evidence quality in the GRADE system is not assigned solely on study design. For example, a randomized controlled trial begins at “high quality,” but may be demoted due to one or more of the following: study limitations, inconsistent results, indirectness of evidence, imprecision, or reporting bias. Alternatively, observational studies (cohort or case-control studies) start as “low quality” but may be upgraded if there is a large magnitude of the treatment effect, evidence of a dose-response relationship, or if all plausible biases would decrease the magnitude of a treatment effect. Thus, the GRADE system of evaluating the quality of evidence provides more granularity than the traditional hierarchy system, which assigns quality based upon study design alone. Although the GRADE system has significant advantages, it is more complex and has a steeper learning curve than traditional systems. Finally, GRADE is intended for appraising a body of evidence, such as in a systematic review.In addition to providing a transparent approach to grading evidence quality, the GRADE system outlines an approach to the development and assignment of strength to clinical recommendations. GRADE’s sophisticated hierarchy of evidence allows the system to protect against both superficial assessment and unwarranted confidence in all classes of study design. Since its development, the increasing use of GRADE has resulted in higher quality and rigor of systematic reviews due to standards outlined by the system.15 In creating a recommendation regarding a body of evidence, GRADE allows experts to account for limitations in bodies of evidence comprising of RCTs, while also allowing for the rating of observational studies as high quality in cases where RCTs are not feasible (i.e., an RCT cannot ethically be performed). GRADE therefore potentially allows for observational studies to provide definitive evidence of causal association (e.g., alcohol causing cirrhosis or asbestos causing mesothelioma) where RCTs may not be ethical or necessary.One of the major advantages of GRADE is that it specifi-cally addresses the process of moving from evidence to recom-mendations. The process begins with the creation of a summary of findings table. A summary of findings table consists of a presentation not only of evidence quality but also estimates of the relative and absolute effects of patient-centered outcomes  (Fig. 51-2). The summary of findings format was created to min-imize framing effects, where different raters may come to varied conclusions based upon identical information due to the infor-mation having a contrasting presentation in terms of gain versus loss.16 GRADE and similar EBM systems specifically takes into consideration judgement of risk versus benefit, resource use, feasibility, and equity to attempt to make decision-making as consistent as possible across a range of reviewers.2 Despite all of the aforementioned considerations when constructing a guide-line, it is important to realize that patient values or preferences may immediately invalidate any recommendation. Evidence is often constructed based upon measurement of outcomes such as morbidity, mortality, or survival; however, patients may be more concerned with quality of life or avoiding invasive inter-ventions. GRADE attempts to acknowledges this intrinsic vari-ability within its system of grading.In terms of the overall strength of a recommendation that GRADE can assign, two grades are possible: “strong” and “weak.” A strong recommendation is one where positive effects of an intervention clearly outweigh the negative effects or vice versa. A weak recommendation is one where the asso-ciation is less clear, either because of low quality evidence or because the evidence clearly suggests that the positive and negative effects are similar. However, quality of evidence is not the only factor that affects the strength of a recommenda-tion (Table 51-2). Factors such as uncertainty of patient values or whether an intervention is an appropriate use of resources can play a role in the strength of a recommendation as well. Therefore, it is important to note that a “strong” or “weak” rec-ommendation may be given regardless of the classification of the evidence. For example, there is a strong recommendation that patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome be treated with PPI. This recommendation is made despite weak evidence to support this practice because the potential benefits far out-weigh the potential risks.17Although the systems for grading evidence are well devel-oped, it is important to remember that the studies used for evi-dence are judged based on their internal validity, or the extent to which a causal conclusion is warranted based upon applica-tion of the results to the study population. This means that care must be exercised when applying a recommendation to a given patient, as the external validity of a recommendation, or gener-alizability of a causal conclusion to populations outside of the scope of the original studies, may not be appropriate. Therefore, all evidence must be applied within the context of the patient in front of you.Synthesis of Evidence—Clinical GuidelinesThe Institute of Medicine defines a clinical guideline as “state-ments that include recommendations, intended to optimize patient care, that are informed by a systematic review of evidence and an assessment of the benefits and harms of alterna-tive care options.”18 Clinical guidelines may reflect previous published studies of varying design and quality, as well as expert opinion, and often represent the highest level of applied clinical evidence. Numerous guidelines have been published; however, like individual studies, even guidelines can vary in quality. The highest quality and most clinically useful guide-lines tend to have the following qualities:4Brunicardi_Ch51_p2137-p2152.indd   214228/02/19   4:19 PM 2143UNDERSTANDING, EVALUATING, AND USING EVIDENCE FOR SURGICAL PRACTICECHAPTER 51Summary of findings:Compression stockings compared with no compression stockings for people taking long flightsPatients or population: Anyone taking a long flight (lasting more than 6 hours)Settings: International air travelIntervention: Compression stockings1Comparison: Without stockingsOutcomesIllustrative comparative risks* (95% CI)Relativeeffect(95% CI)Number ofparticipants(studies)Qualityof theevidence(GRADE)Comments Assumed riskCorresponding riskWithout stockingsWith stockingsSymptomaticdeep vein thrombosis (DVT)See comment  See comment  Not estimable2821(9 studies)See comment0 participants developed symptomatic DVT  in these studies.Symptom-lessdeep vein thrombosis Low risk population2RR 0.10(0.04 to 0.26) 2637(9 studies) ++++High10 per 10001 per 1000  (0 to 3)High risk population230 per 10003 per 1000(1 to 8)Superficial vein thrombosis13 per 10006 per 1000(2 to 15)RR 0.45(0.18 to 1.13)1804(8 studies)+++OModerate3 OedemaPost-flight values measured on a scale from 0, no oedema, to 10, maximum oedema.The mean oedema score ranged across control groups from6 to 9.The mean oedema score in the intervention groups was on average4.7 lower(95% CI –4.9 to –4.5). 1246(6 studies)++OOLow4 Pulmonary embolusSee commentSee commentNot estimable2821(9 studies)See comment0 participants developed pulmonary embolus in these studies.5DeathSee commentSee commentNot estimable2821(9 studies)See comment0 participants died in these studies.Adverse effectsSee commentSee commentNot estimable1182(4 studies)See commentThe tolerability of the stockings was described as very good with no complaints of side effects in 4 studies.6*The basis for the assumed risk is provided in footnotes. The corresponding risk (and its 95% confidence interval) is based on the assumed risk in the intervention group and the relative effect of the intervention (and its 95% CI).CI: Confidence interval; RR: Risk ratio GRADE: GRADE Working Group grades of evidence (see explanations)11 All the stockings in the 9 trials included in this review were below-knee compression stockings. In four trials the compression strength was 20–30 mmHg at the ankle. It was 10–20 mmHg in the other four trials. Stockings come in different sizes. If a stocking is too tight around the knee it can prevent essential venous return causing the blood to pool around the knee. Compression stockings should be fitted properly. A stocking that is too tight could cut into the skin on a long flight and potentially cause ulceration and increased risk of DVT. Some stockings can be slightly thicker than normal leg covering and can be potentially restrictive with tight foot wear. It is a good idea to wear stockings around the house prior to travel to ensure a good, comfortable fitting. Stockings were put on 2 to 3 hours before the flight in most of the trials. The availability and cost of stockings can vary.2Two trials recruited high risk participants defined as those with previous episodes of DVT, coagulation disorders, severe obesity, limited mobility due to bone or joint problems, neoplastic disease within the previous two years, large varicose veins or, in one of the studies, participants taller than 190 cm and heavier than 90 kg. The incidence for 7 trials that excluded high risk participants was 1.45% and the incidence for the 2 trials that recruited high-risk participants (with at least one risk factor) was 2.43%. We have rounded these off to 10 and 30 per 1000 respectively.3The confidence interval crosses no difference and does not rule out a small increase.4The measurement of oedema was not validated or blinded to the intervention. All of these studies were conducted by the same investigators.5If there are very few or no events and the number of participants is large, judgement about the quality of evidence (particularly judgements about precision) may be based on the absolute effect. Here the quality rating may be considered “high” if the outcome was appropriately assessed and the event, in fact, did not occur in 2821 studied participants.6None of the other trials reported adverse effects, apart from 4 cases of superficial vein thrombosis in varicose veins in the knee region that were compressed by the upper edge of the stocking in one trial.Figure 51-2. Example of a “summary of findings” table.Brunicardi_Ch51_p2137-p2152.indd   214328/02/19   4:19 PM 2144SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 51-2Factors that affect the strength of a recommendationFACTOREXAMPLES OF STRONG RECOMMENDATIONSEXAMPLES OF WEAK RECOMMENDATIONSQuality of evidenceMany high quality randomized trials have shown the benefit of inhaled steroids in asthmaOnly case series have examined the  utility of pleurodesis in pneumothoraxUncertainty about the balance between desirable and undesirable effectsAspirin in myocardial infarction reduces mortality with minimal toxicity, inconvenience, and costWarfarin in low risk patients with atrial fibrillation results in small stroke reduction but increased bleeding risk and substantial inconvenienceUncertainty or variability in values and preferencesYoung patients with lymphoma will invariably place a highervalue on the life prolonging effects of chemotherapy than on treatment toxicityOlder patients with lymphoma may not place a higher value on the life prolonging effects of chemotherapy than on treatment toxicityUncertainty about whether the intervention represents a wise use of resourcesThe low cost of aspirin as prophylaxis against stroke in patients with transient ischemic attacksThe high cost of clopidogrel and of combination dipyridamole and aspirin as prophylaxis against stroke in patients with transient ischaemic attacks1.	An explicit description of development and funding pro-cesses that is publicly available.2.	A transparent process that minimizes bias, distortion, and conflicts of interest.3.	Developed by a multidisciplinary panel composed of: clini-cians, methodological experts, and representatives, includ-ing a patient or consumer, of populations expected to be affected by the guideline.4.	Utilizes rigorous systematic evidence review and considers quality, quantity, and consistency of the aggregate of avail-able evidence.5.	Summarizes evidence about potential benefits and harms relevant to each recommendation.6.	Explains the parts that values, opinion, theory, and clinical experience play in deriving recommendations.7.	Provides a rating of the level of confidence in the evidence underpinning each recommendation and a rating of the strength of each recommendation.8.	Undergoes extensive external review that includes an open period for public comment.9.	Has a mechanism for revision when new evidence becomes available.Depending upon the clinical question, such guidelines are often interpreted as the standard of care. However, multiple clinical guidelines may be applicable with respect to various aspects of a given clinical situation and must not be followed blindly without considering specific situational issues through the lens of an experienced clinician. Moreover, guidelines do not (and probably cannot) exist for all clinical situations. Clini-cians often must resort to other resources to enrich the context in which decisions are made, and, as with all evidence, care must be taken not to extrapolate the application of a clinical guideline beyond its specific conditions.THE CHALLENGES OF APPLYING EBM TO SURGERYAs noted earlier, the application of EBM to surgery has lagged behind other fields of medicine, and this has been attributed to the difficulty in establishing a sufficient mass of evidence with the “gold standard” RCT. Here we describe the process of evaluating the quality of a RCT and note the challenges related to the execution of a high-quality RCT in a surgical context.Analysis of a Surgical Randomized  Control TrialSufficient knowledge of the trial’s methodological accuracy and results are essential for critical appraisal. However, less than half of journal articles adequately report the study design.19 This deficiency led to the development of the Consoli-dated Standards of Reporting Trials (CONSORT) guidelines in 1992, which was subsequently revised in 2010.20 These guide-lines are a minimal set of recommendations for reporting RCTs (blinding, randomization, etc) to facilitate critical appraisal. Many of the surgical journals now require completion of a CONSORT checklist prior to submission of the RCT manu-script (Fig. 51-3). Establishing this requirement has standard-ized the way articles are presented and analyzed. The two key aspects to focus on when assessing a RCT are internal and external validity.Internal ValidityDetermining the degree that the results of the RCT are accurate and consistent for the sample patients is called internal validity. Without internal validity, a study cannot be properly appraised, as the study was not constructed properly to answer the hypoth-esis without avoiding bias or confounding factors.21 The internal validity of a RCT requires the evaluation of several properties: randomization, blinding, equivalence among groups, complete-ness of follow-up, and accuracy of analysis. These properties are discussed in the following section.Randomization. Randomization is the creation of participant groups with similar known and unknown prognostic factors to achieve the goal of eliminating selection bias. For example, if the investigator can decide which treatment the patient receives, he or she may assign a participant to a study arm that is more favorable for that specific patient. On outcomes analysis, certain groups may have an overestimated treatment effect due to patient selec-tion and not necessarily the intervention itself. The methodology 5Brunicardi_Ch51_p2137-p2152.indd   214428/02/19   4:19 PM 2145UNDERSTANDING, EVALUATING, AND USING EVIDENCE FOR SURGICAL PRACTICECHAPTER 51SectionItem NoChecklist itemTitle and Abstract1aIdentification as a randomized trial in the title1bStructured summary of trial design, methods, results, and conclusionsBackground and Objectives2aScientific background and explanation of rationale2bSpecific objectives or hypothesesTrial Design3aDescription of trial design (such as parallel, factorial) including allocation ratio3bImportant changes to methods after trial commencement with reasonsParticipants4aEligibility criteria for participants4bSettings and locations where the data were collectedInterventions5The interventions for each group with sufficient details to allow replication, including how and when they were administeredOutcomes6aCompletely defined pre-specified primary and secondary outcome measures, including how and when they were assessed6bAny changes to trial outcomes after the trial commenced, with reasonsSample size7aHow sample size was determined7bWhen applicable, explanation of any interim analyses and stopping guidelinesRandomization: Sequence Generation8aMethod used to generate the random allocation sequence8bType of randomization; details of any restriction (such as blocking and block size)Allocation concealment mechanism9Mechanism used to implement the random allocation sequenceImplementation10Who generated the random allocation sequence, who enrolled participants, and who assigned interventionsBlinding11aIf done, who was blinded after assignment to interventions and how11bIf relevant, description of the similarity of interventionsResults Participant flow13aFor each group, the numbers of participants who were randomly assigned, received intended treatment, and were analyzed for the primary outcome13bFor each group, losses and exclusions after randomization, together with reasonsRecruitment14aDates defining the periods of recruitment and follow-up14bWhy the trial ended or was stoppedBaseline data15A table showing baseline demographic and clinical characteristics for each groupNumbers analyzed16For each group, number of participants (denominator) included in each analysis and whether the analysis was by original assigned groupsOutcomes and  estimation17aFor each primary and secondary outcome, results for each group, and the estimated effect size and its precision (such as 95% confidence interval)17bFor binary outcomes, presentation of both absolute and relative effect sizes is recommendedAncillary analyses18Results of any other analyses performed, including subgroup analyses and adjusted analyses, distinguishing pre-specified from exploratoryHarms19All important harms or unintended effects in each groupDiscussion Limitations20Trial limitations, addressing sources of potential bias, imprecision, and, if relevant, multiplicity of analysesGeneralizability21Generalizability (external validity, applicability) of the trial findingsInterpretation22Interpretation consistent with results, balancing benefits and harms, and considering other relevant evidenceOther Information Registration23Registration number and name of trial registryProtocol24Where the full trial protocol can be accessed, if availableFunding25Sources of funding and other support (such as supply of drugs), role of fundersFigure 51-3. CONSORT checklist. (Reproduced with permission from Schulz KF, Altman DG, Moher D, et al: CONSORT 2010 statement: updated guidelines for reporting parallel group randomised trials, Int J Surg. 2011;9(8):672-677.)Brunicardi_Ch51_p2137-p2152.indd   214528/02/19   4:19 PM 2146SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIof randomization should always be reported and carefully ana-lyzed by the reader. Certain approaches of randomization called quasi-random allocation (date of birth, day of week, participant number, etc.) are not truly random and cannot be fully concealed from study personnel. Additionally, the concept of randomization eliminating bias is only theoretical. To truly ensure the probability of confounders being equally balanced between groups, a trial must be repeated indefinitely. Understanding this impracticality, we accept that randomization will suffice.Blinding. Blinding aims to reduce certain biases that can affect the outcome of the study. A subject’s knowledge of the group that they were randomized can lead to a performance bias, which can influence subjective outcomes (placebo effect). Importantly, authors should be explicitly clear regarding which groups (sub-jects, clinicians, assessors) are blinded and avoid using non-specific phrases such as “double-blinded” or “triple-blinded.” Achieving blinding and minimizing bias is a major hurdle in the execution of surgical RCTs, where there are the ethical dilemmas surrounding “sham” or placebo surgery22 (though for a counter-argument, see reference no. 23). Moreover, blinding is impossible when comparing an operative versus a nonoperative intervention.Equivalence Among Groups. During accrual, randomiza-tion helps to ensure that each group in the study shares equiva-lent baseline demographics and unmeasured biases. However, throughout the study, each group should be treated equally (excluding the actual intervention) with respect to the number of clinical visits, diagnostic tests, etc. Enforcing the same pro-tocol to each study participant further decreases sources of bias and provides increased validity when performing final analysis.Completeness of Follow-Up. Attrition bias is the differences that occur between the groups when participants withdraw from the study. A pattern can usually be identified (the treatment, side effects of treatment, long follow-up time, or other factors) that leads to withdrawal from the study. These events can hinder the ability to interpret the results of the study, and researchers should consider these implications during trial design. Furthermore, the mechanism of attrition may manifest in a bias; patients who elect to remain in a study may in fact select for characteristics that affect or determine efficacy (see the following section).Accuracy of Analysis. Analyzing the results of only partici-pants who completed all follow-up visits throughout the study can lead to skewed and inaccurate conclusions. Thus, most RCTs follow the principle of intention-to-treat (ITT) analysis. ITT analysis includes study participants who underwent initial randomization assignment regardless of events that transpired after randomization; thus ITT analysis is often described as “once randomized, always analyzed.” Removal of noncompli-ers from statistical analysis may overestimate the effect size of the intervention. Furthermore, in clinical practice, a portion of patients will be noncompliant, and thus ITT analysis will more accurately represent the overall population.External ValidityThe goal of an RCT is to show a causative relationship between an intervention and an outcome. However, to change clinical practice, the results of the RCT must be both relevant and gen-eralizable to the clinical population; this assessment is called external validity.Number Needed to Treat. The number needed to treat (NNT) is defined as the number of patients that undergo the interven-tion before a single patient benefits compared to the control group in the trial. It is computed as the inverse of the risk dif-ference between two groups. The smaller the NNT, the more efficacious a treatment. For example, in an RCT comparing laparoscopic cholecystectomy to observation to prevent recur-rent idiopathic acute pancreatitis, the number needed to treat was five patients.24 The NNT should also be weighed against the adverse effects of the intervention.Number Needed to Harm. While NNT reports the number of patients who undergo the intervention before a single patient benefits, number needed to harm (NNH) describes how many patients undergo the intervention for one person to have an adverse event. The higher the NNH, the safer a treatment is. In general, interventions with a low NNT and high NNH are pre-ferred. However, NNT and NNH should not be used in isolation when determining the appropriateness of intervention as neither number takes into account the degree of benefit to harm.Generalizability of Results. RCTs have specific exclusion and inclusion criteria to recruit a study population that is homogenous with the goal of limiting sources of bias. While this method is appropriate for RCTs, the results may not directly translate to “real-world” situations with greater heterogeneity within the potential target population (see prior comment in “Hierarchies of Evidence”), leading to a potentially significant discrepancy between trial results and their implementation for day-to-day clinical decisions. In addition, RCTs often come to a conclusion that determines the best treatment for the “average” patient enrolled in the trial. However, most patients are not “average,” and therefore the proposed conclusion may not be relevant. Additional studies about the intervention of interest in more heterogeneous populations can help convince physicians to change their clinical practice; these correlate to phase 4 pharmaceutical trials and point to the importance of continued postpractice change data collection and analysis. More importantly, principle 3 of EBM, which states that “clinical decisions should be influenced by patient values and preference,” needs to be accounted for, especially with the implementation of a new practice guideline or pattern.Additional Challenges to Conducting a Surgical RCTIn addition to methodological issues that might limit the reli-ability of a RCT, there are also considerable logistical barriers to performing a RCT. These are not trivial factors, and they contribute heavily to the number and size of RCTs that can be done, particularly in surgical populations.Recruitment. One of the most challenging aspects of an RCT is recruiting an adequate number of patients to provide a high and sufficient degree of statistical power to demonstrate a measurable difference between interventions. This becomes exponentially more difficult with the prevalence of certain rare diseases. To help overcome low accrual, many trials expand their study to other hospitals and facilities at the expense of increased heterogeneity. While this may decrease internal valid-ity, the benefit is the increase in external validity.Learning Curves and Expertise-Based Design. Pharma-ceutical-based RCTs normally have higher internal validity compared to surgical trials because of the effect of surgeon experience and technique affecting patient outcomes; this is especially impactful when new surgical procedures are intro-duced. While the administration of a drug is a straightforward process without measurable deviation, the same cannot be said Brunicardi_Ch51_p2137-p2152.indd   214628/02/19   4:19 PM 2147UNDERSTANDING, EVALUATING, AND USING EVIDENCE FOR SURGICAL PRACTICECHAPTER 51Table 51-3Decisions regarding the null hypothesisTABLE OF ERROR TYPES NULL HYPOTHESIS (H0) ISTRUEFALSEDecision about null hypothesis (H0) RejectType I error (false positive)Correct inference (true positive)Fail to rejectCorrect inference (true negative)Type II error (false negative)regarding surgery. Novel surgical procedures have defined learning curves even for the most experienced surgeons. During this learning process, surgeon inexperience, either in technical features of the procedure or procedure-related decision-making, can lead to adverse patient outcomes. Thus, neglecting the learn-ing curve can lead to an underestimation of the success of the experimental intervention; conversely, accounting for the learn-ing curve can be necessary in assessing how a new procedure can best be disseminated across the community. Furthermore, beyond the evaluation of new procedures, even with established procedures each individual surgeon is likely to have acquired throughout his/her career unique techniques and habits when operating on patients. This heterogeneity of surgeon experience and technique can limit standardization for a trial intervention.To help solve the issue of surgeon heterogeneity and inex-perience, RCTs can employ “expertise-based design.” In this method, patients remain randomized to either the intervention or control, but the operating surgeons are experts in the surgery they are performing. This technique is already followed during cross-specialty RCTs, such as open gastrostomy tube placement versus interventional-radiology (IR) gastrostomy tube place-ment. However, this does not model every day clinical practice because not all surgeons are considered experts in the procedure described in a particular trial.All-or-None Situation. Despite continual pressure to prove treatment effect by using a RCT, there are situations when conducting a trial does not make ethical or common sense. A famous example is from the British Medical Journal in 2003 that questioned as to why there are no RCTs evaluating the use of parachutes during gravitational free-fall.25 The authors state that the evidence to support the use of parachutes is purely observational yet it is considered a “gold standard” practice. This demonstrates the concept of an all-or-none situation, where the study population exposed to a risk experiences the outcome and none of the population experiences the outcome with  the intervention. Performing an RCT on this type of situation would be dangerous and unethical, and thus purely observational data can provide a high degree of sufficient evidence.Noninferiority Trials. As reviewed earlier, trialing a new therapy compared to a placebo or sham raises serious ethical issues, especially when an effective therapy has already been established. Moreover, a portion of randomized control trials today are evaluating secondary endpoints, such as quality of life, safety, and cost efficiency of a new therapy compared to the existing gold standard. These studies are called noninferiority trials, with the intent to prove efficacy that is not worse than the existing therapy. For example, a 2004 study compared open versus laparoscopic colectomy for colon cancer. The aim was to show similar oncologic endpoints with improved secondary outcomes (improved cosmesis, decreased postoperative pain, decreased hernia incidence).26 The prevalence of these trials have increased substantially from under 100 in 2005 to nearly 600 in 2015.27 The most important consideration when evaluating this type of trial is the prespecified margin of noninferiority, a value that is largely arbitrary in the literature.28USE AND MISUSE OF STATISTICAL SIGNIFICANCEThe use of statistical methods is central to the scientific process; it is only through statistics that the problem of induction29 can be addressed. While this chapter is not intended to be 6a comprehensive description of statistical methods, understand-ing the appropriate application of statistical tools is critical to being able to assess the conclusions presented in the literature, and therefore we present a summary of those statistical terms that are most germane to being able to interpret a clinical study.Type I and Type II ErrorsBy necessity, statistical testing requires declaration of a null hypothesis, usually corresponding to the “default” state (i.e., no difference or the patient is healthy). The alternative hypothesis would then negate the stated null hypothesis (i.e., there is a dif-ference or the patient is unhealthy). The result of a statistical significance test may either reject or accept the null hypothesis, and this result can correspond with the true state (a correct deci-sion) or not correspond with the true state (an error). Two types of error are possible (Table 51-3).Type I Error. A type I error occurs when the null hypothesis is rejected but is actually true in the population. This may also be referred to as a false positive. The type I error rate, denoted by the Greek letter α (alpha), is the probability that the null hypothesis is rejected given that it is true. The error rate may also be referred to as the significance level, and often a value of 0.05, or 5%, is frequently used in the literature.Type II Error. A type II error is the failure to reject the null hypothesis when the null hypothesis is false. This error may also be referred to as a false negative. The type II error rate is denoted by the Greek letter β (beta), and is related to the power of a study. Power can range from 0 to 1, and as power increases, there is decreasing probability of making a type II error. Power is related to three main factors: (a) the statistical significance criterion of the study, (b) the magnitude of the effect of interest, and (c) the sample size used to detect the effect. Power analysis can be used to calculate the minimum sample size required for a study so that one can be likely to detect an effect of a given size.P ValuesThe P value was an innovation most closely associated with Sir Ronald Fisher, one of the founders of modern statistics. The definition of a P value is the probability of an observed result given the assumption that the null hypothesis is true. The arbi-trary value established for a result having statistical significance rather than “pure chance” is less than 1 in 20 defined as a P value less than 0.05.30 Put differently, the chance of making a false-positive conclusion is 5% at a P value of 0.05 (type I error). This risk of making a false-positive conclusion is called a “type I error.” Importantly, the P value reported in the study is specific for that study’s patient sample and may not be gen-eralizable to the overall population. The probability of a false positive report not actually having an association depends not Brunicardi_Ch51_p2137-p2152.indd   214728/02/19   4:19 PM 2148SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIonly on the associated P value, but also the prior probability that the association is real and the statistical power of the given study.31,32 The basis of this is due to perpetual undersampling of all possible relationships in a given scientific domain. This will inherently lead to type I errors with respect to all clinical pos-sibilities. Recently, statisticians have postulated that utilizing a P value of 0.05 will lead to wrong conclusions at least 30% of the time and may be even higher with underpowered studies.33The use of P values also categorizes statistical conclusions in a binary format. Should a P value of 0.049 be significant but a 0.051 not be significant? Furthermore,  P values provide no insight into the effect size being measured. Simply, an intervention may be statistically significant but lack any clinical significance. Purely utilizing a P value to determine the value of research findings without assessing the effect size, confidence interval, and power of the study can be misleading.Despite these flaws identified in P values, the frequency of their appearance in modern literature has continued to increase.34 Each reader should be carefully skeptical of  P values and await replication with similar significance for confirmation. Fisher did not anticipate or endorse the use of the modern P <0.05 criteria. Rather, he envisioned that experiments would be repeated until the investigator was sure that he or she had learned how to use the experimental intervention to get a predictable result.Alternative to P ValuesOne potential alternative to Fisher’s approach and the limita-tion of P values is Bayesian statistics. The common element of Bayesian statistics is to provide a probability of a hypothesis being true by using prior knowledge or empirical data to esti-mate four probabilities:1.	The probability that the hypothesis is true.2.	The probability that the hypothesis is true given the observed data.3.	The probability that the alternative hypothesis is true.4.	The probability that the data would have been observed if the alternative hypothesis is true.These parameters are used to calculate a Bayes factor, or a ratio of the likelihood probability of two competing hypotheses. One difficulty for many studies is that there can be very little reli-able data that can be used to estimate these probability parameters.It is important to remember that both P values and Bayes factors are mathematically defined entities, and many of the issues that have arisen with P values are due to how they are interpreted by scientists and clinicians. A false interpretation of a Bayes fac-tor is just as troublesome as a false interpretation of a P value.HOW DO THE TOOLS OF EBM PERFORM?As mentioned previously, GRADE has been widely adopted by national and international medical societies, health-related branches of government, healthcare regulatory bodies, and online medical resources such as UpToDate.16 Widespread use of the system has emphasized consistency in the rating of guidelines and an easy to understand strength assessment based upon evi-dence quality. However, at the heart of any EBM system is a central paradox: as systems have evolved during the EBM move-ment, there is no evidence that the systems themselves are reliable.7External ConsistencyGRADE is one of several EBM systems that aim to evaluate evidence and create recommendations, but it is unknown how it compares with other previously established systems.The GRADE Working Group attempted to address this question by comparing six different systems (The American College of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based Guidelines, Australian National Health and Medical Research Council Guidelines, Oxford Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine, Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network, U.S. Preventive Services Task Force Recommendations, U.S. Task Force on Community Preventive Services Recommendations) on 12 criteria to assess the overall usefulness of each approach. The authors found that there was poor agreement about the sensibility of the six systems.35 Given that there is no agreed upon or proven gold standard, one may be concerned about the lack of external consistency among different systems. GRADE was constructed to overcome these issues; however, the system’s ability to do so has never been formally assessed.The example of the Surviving Sepsis Campaign (SSC), an important attempt to produce guidelines to improve the care of patients with sepsis or septic shock, suggests that GRADE has not overcome these problems. The endorsement of the SSC by many influential organizations underscores its importance. Nonetheless, the SSC illustrates some of the important difficul-ties with grading in general and with the GRADE system (Box: Examples of Inconsistent Use of EBM).Examples of Inconsistent Use of EBMSurviving Sepsis Campaign•	The Surviving Sepsis Campaign recommended rapid use of intravenous antibiotics in their 2004 guidelines, which was given a grade of “E,”36 corresponding to a recommenda-tion based upon level IV or V evidence, or the lowest levels possible.•	In the 2008 update, the same recommendation was given; however, it was given a grade of 1B/1D (depend-ing on if shock was present), corresponding to a “strong” recommendation.37•	Between 2004 and 2008, three additional studies were published; however, none were randomized controlled trials or came to conclusions that were different than the numerous studies that were published prior to 2004.38-40 Internal ConsistencyIn 2005, the GRADE working group published a pilot study of the system which found varied levels of agreement on the qual-ity of evidence for the outcomes in question among 17 asses-sors (kappa values [Box: The Kappa Coefficient] for agreement beyond chance ranged from 0 to 0.82; mean k = 0.27; k <0 for four judgements). The authors concluded that “judgements about evidence and recommendations are complex” and stated that with discussion they could resolve most disagreements.41 No assessment of reliability or proof of usefulness has been presented regarding the GRADE system since these findings.42System IssuesThe GRADE group considers the “strength” of their recom-mendations to reflect “the degree of confidence that the desir-able effects of adherence to a recommendation outweigh the The Kappa CoefficientThe Kappa coefficient is a statistic that measures inter-rater agreement for qualitative items. It is thought to be a more robust measure than simple percent agreement since κ takes into account the possibility of the agreement occurring by chance. In general, κ values < 0 indicate no agreement,  0 to 0.2 slight agreement, 0.21 to 0.4 fair agreement, 0.41 to 0.60 moderate agreement, 0.61 to 0.80 substantial agreement, and 0.81 to 1 as almost perfect agreement.Brunicardi_Ch51_p2137-p2152.indd   214828/02/19   4:19 PM 2149UNDERSTANDING, EVALUATING, AND USING EVIDENCE FOR SURGICAL PRACTICECHAPTER 51Internal ConsistencyIn 2005, the GRADE working group published a pilot study of the system which found varied levels of agreement on the qual-ity of evidence for the outcomes in question among 17 asses-sors (kappa values [Box: The Kappa Coefficient] for agreement beyond chance ranged from 0 to 0.82; mean k = 0.27; k <0 for four judgements). The authors concluded that “judgements about evidence and recommendations are complex” and stated that with discussion they could resolve most disagreements.41 No assessment of reliability or proof of usefulness has been presented regarding the GRADE system since these findings.42System IssuesThe GRADE group considers the “strength” of their recom-mendations to reflect “the degree of confidence that the desir-able effects of adherence to a recommendation outweigh the The Kappa CoefficientThe Kappa coefficient is a statistic that measures inter-rater agreement for qualitative items. It is thought to be a more robust measure than simple percent agreement since κ takes into account the possibility of the agreement occurring by chance. In general, κ values < 0 indicate no agreement,  0 to 0.2 slight agreement, 0.21 to 0.4 fair agreement, 0.41 to 0.60 moderate agreement, 0.61 to 0.80 substantial agreement, and 0.81 to 1 as almost perfect agreement.undesirable effects.”43 However, at the same time, the GRADE system allows the strength of a given recommendation to exist independent of the quality of evidence that underpins that recom-mendation. The GRADE Working Group states that “separating the judgements regarding the quality of evidence from judge-ments about the strength of recommendations is a critical and defining feature of this new grading system.”42 However, such a system allows for “high quality” evidence for small effects while “low quality” evidence with a strong recommendation is highly implausible except for certain obvious observations.Finally, the touted advantage of the leveling process in determining the quality of evidence requires significant indi-vidual adjudication. A given study design begins at a level of quality and can be upgraded or downgraded based on several judgments regarding adequacy of blinding, follow-up, consis-tency, generalizability, and effect size. Graders are supposed to balance the level of quality using these factors, yet each is fun-damentally different and cannot be simply added or subtracted, and it is therefore up to individual judgment as to how to weigh each factor.ValidityThe GRADE system is well described in a series of publica-tions; however, none of the publications provide validation, data, or proof of the usefulness of the system. The only pub-lication with data is mentioned earlier, which showed a low kappa for interobserver agreement.41 Based upon the systematic tenets of EBM and lack of literature-based proof for the effec-tiveness of GRADE, there would not be a basis for its use in creating recommendations. For example, no RCT assessing the effect of using EBM on patient outcomes has been undertaken. Therefore, EBM does not satisfy its own requirements and is, ironically, a form of systematic expert opinion. There is no data to suggest that systematic EBM approaches are superior to the decision-making capabilities of competent physicians with knowledge of the recent medical literature.Implications of EBMThe GRADE Working Group suggests that “strong recommen-dations should require little debate and would be implemented in most circumstances.”42 Although most strong recommenda-tions are likely accurate, definitive recommendations may have unintended consequences. For example, a definitive recom-mendation may have the effect of limiting debate or further research on a topic where the recommendation is misguided, and there are numerous examples where “strong” recommenda-tions were later retracted. High-level EBM recommendations concluded that antibiotic prophylaxis should be used in necro-tizing pancreatitis based upon multiple prospective randomized controlled trials, meta-analyses, and systematic reviews.14,44,45 These recommendations were later reversed, as additional tri-als showed that there was no benefit to antibiotic use in these patients.46A valid concern regarding EBM is that established systems may lead to “strong” recommendations that are hard to challenge. This may even lead to situations where life-saving prospective studies are deemed “unethical” due to the presence of high-level, strong recommendations. As such, some groups have even issued warnings about converting practice guidelines into law.47,48THE ALTERNATIVES TO EBMEBM is appealing due to its ability to reduce and cope with uncer-tainty; however, the ability to mitigate uncertainty is not without drawbacks. The various EBM systems that exist are not always consistent in their evaluation of evidence, and even a single sys-tem may assign varying grades based on several subjective fac-tors. Finally, the performance of EBM in improving patient care has never been validated. Therefore, while most certainly a useful tool, the limitations of EBM must be recognized to avoid blind adherence to guidelines and oversimplification of the complex clinical decision making that occurs in daily clinical care.Although striving for certainty is understandable, it is con-trary to the reality of medicine in which decisions regarding indi-vidual patients are inherently complex. In fact, as science strives for “precision” and “individualized” medicine, EBM’s focus of creating guidelines to care for the “average” patient will exist as a paradox. The best physicians function on a foundation of scien-tific theory expressed in a setting of practical knowledge gained in a local context, or tacit knowledge. This is how complex phys-iology and pathology are combined to make a specific decision for an individual patient. Therefore, although it is tempting to think that EBM makes surgery more scientific, one must remem-ber that EBM itself is not founded in scientific principal.So, what is the alternative? The alternative is a common-sense application of scientific principals and healthy skepticism for the ongoing use of EBM as a guideline for practice. This allows physicians to use published guidelines, applied within the context of their practice, until a grading system has defini-tively been shown to positively affect patient outcomes or more precise application of patient data is made possible. Recommen-dations certainly can be useful information; however, clinicians should also understand that there is a nuance with respect to adherence to guidelines and that much lies outside the reaches of EBM. As such, understanding that daily clinical practice involves hundreds of decisions that require varying proportions of explicit and tacit knowledge is important in devising a system where guidelines are flexible and receptive to continual feed-back based upon the experiences of practicing physicians.WHAT CAN RESEARCHERS DO TO IMPROVE THE VALIDITY OF RESEARCH FINDINGS?Although it is impossible to know the truth with absolute certainty, researchers can take steps to ensure that the posttest probability is maximized. First, researchers can attempt to obtain better-powered evidence. Although even high-powered, low-bias meta analyses are not perfect, they do approach a theoretical “gold standard” of research, and although increasing power is important in arriving at correct conclusions, even high-powered studies can have significant biases. Additionally, obtaining large-scale evidence may not be possible for many research questions.Brunicardi_Ch51_p2137-p2152.indd   214928/02/19   4:19 PM 2150SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IICrisis of Reproducibility and Medical Reversal: Implications for EBM“You keep using that word. I do not think it means what you think it means.”—Inigo Montoya from The Princess BrideThis chapter started by noting that the landscape of scientific knowledge is constantly evolving and that this fact impacts how we use and evaluate evidence as well. This 11th edition of Schwartz’s Principles of Surgery is being produced at a particularly volatile period in biomedical research as basic assumptions as to how scientific literature determines what constitutes “evidence” are being reassessed in a critical fashion. We believe it does a disservice to our readers if we fail to note and describe these trends, as they directly affect the basis of this chapter. The reassessment of biomedical literature and clinical trials can be loosely grouped into two distinct, but related topics: the crisis of reproducibility and the issue of medical reversal.The Crisis of ReproducibilityOver the past decade it has become increasingly recognized that certain medical studies, held forth as index publications upon which were based either fundamental precepts of practice or to justify entire directions of drug discovery, could not be repro-duced independently. This failure strikes at a fundamental assumption of science: that well performed studies with sufficient statistical significance represented generalizable knowledge that could be built upon. However, estimates of irreproducibility range from 75% to 90% based on mathematical inference, and practical investigations have shown as few as 0 in 52 observa-tional study findings being confirmed by randomized controlled trials (RCTs).49 Methodological errors in study design, patient selection, or research practices have been proposed as major contributing factors in the debate over replication of scientific stud-ies. However, despite the importance of replicating research findings, there is increasing concern that in modern research there is an intrinsic bias towards positive results in publication. Biases in study design, data collection, data analysis, or presentation of findings can lead to research findings when they do not truly exist. As bias increases, the positive predictive value (PPV) of a given finding being true decreases considerably. The overall effect of bias again depends on both the power and prestudy odds of a given study. In some fields, it may in fact be the case that research findings are simply a measure of the prevailing bias. Medical research operates in areas with low preand poststudy probability for true findings, meaning it may be quite common that observed effect sizes varying around the null hypothesis (what one would expect from chance alone) are simply measuring the prevailing bias of a given field.In addition to bias, the globalization of research means that at any given time it is almost a certainty that multiple research teams are investigating the same question or topic. Despite this fact, research findings by single teams are often considered in isolation, and the first to report a finding receives significantly more attention than subsequent studies. Suppose multiple research teams are investigating a given question with the null hypothesis being that there is no difference in treatment two treatment strategies. The probability that at least one of the groups will claim a significant research finding increases, and the positive predictive value decreases as the number of research teams increases. Unfortunately, there is little way to control for this phenomenon other than increasing the power of each individual study.Due to the combination of the aforementioned factors, the current framework of research means it is quite difficult to end up with a PPV >50%. Based on mathematical principles, even a well-constructed, adequately powered RCT with a pretest probability of 50% will arrive at a true conclusion only about 85% of the time.31 These findings limit the available literature upon which evidence-based medicine (EBM) relies and place a greater burden on practitioners when they are attempting to analyze and draw conclusions from what they find.Medical ReversalA related topic that directly impacts how EBM is carried out is that of medical reversal. This term was introduced by Vinay Prasad and Adam Cifu in 201150,51 to describe the process and pitfalls by which a previously established practice or drug falls out of favor because it is subsequently identified not to work. As such, the issue of medical reversal is impacted by the decision for a particular therapy to become adopted in the first place (ostensibly based on the principles of EBM) and the barriers to how subsequent evi-dence (either acquired through studies, or, more importantly, upon a more critical reassessment of the basis of its initial adoption) can reverse a prior recommendation. The set of intersecting issues related to medical reversal are highly complex (interested readers are encouraged to delve into the growing list of reports on this topic), but in terms of EBM, central issues addressed in medical reversal pertain to the use of surrogate endpoints in clinical trials, the presentation/misrepresentation of clinical trial effects, the effect of bias (academic and economic) in trial reporting and dissemination, and the strength and reliability of alternatives to RCTs (for all their flaws). As with the crisis of reproducibility, understanding the factors of medical reversal directly impacts what is appropriately considered “evidence” when executing EBM, placing greater responsibility on the surgical practitioner when deter-mining what is appropriate or optimal care.It should come as no surprise to the attentive reader that many of the issues related to the crisis of reproducibility and medical reversal refer back to the sources of bias and potentially perverse incentives originally noted by Francis Bacon back in 1620 (Box: The History and Sources of Bias in Biomedical Literature).Brunicardi_Ch51_p2137-p2152.indd   215028/02/19   4:19 PM 2151UNDERSTANDING, EVALUATING, AND USING EVIDENCE FOR SURGICAL PRACTICECHAPTER 51Second, as was noted previously, multiple teams often simultaneously address a given research question, and it is not proper to focus on any one study in isolation. Instead, clinicians should focus on the body of evidence in its entirety. A poten-tial solution would be connecting groups through networking of data. This would allow for more accurate analysis and drawing of conclusions, although it would require a significant change in the culture of academic research practices.Today, clinicians rely on the statistics provided in a scien-tific study to provide a summary of the results. We place trust and confidence that the paper’s biostatistician accurately and truthfully calculated these statistics without incorporating con-scious bias. Each article should completely answer four ques-tions regarding the results of the study:1.	What is the statistical significance of the results?2.	What is the effect size and is this clinical relevant?3.	What is the confidence interval?4.	What is the underlying power of the study to detect a mean-ingful difference?Significant progress has been made since the adoption of EBM; however, the current direction of EBM-based guidelines have focused on populations as opposed to the complex, nuanced interactions that occur on a case by case basis. Algorithmic protocols actually serve to steer the focus away from an individual patient, at times leading to a disconnect between patients and physicians when physicians propose treatment based upon guidelines that do not adhere to that patient’s goals and values. So what can surgeons do to combat this, and how should they practice? One must ask: “What is the best course of action for this patient, in these circumstances, at this point in their illness or condition?” Therefore, evidence must be synthesized and then individualized for each patient encounter by interconnecting it with the ethics, personality, and values associated with the case at hand. Tools such as risk calculators are useful in informing discussion, but they should by no means be definitive evidence to recommend for or against a particular treatment. Judgment remains necessary in the practice of medicine, and therefore guidelines should be thought of as “rules of thumb” that require context as opposed to “rules of law.”REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Bacon F, Fowler T. Bacon’s Novum Organum. Oxford: Clarendon Press; 1878.	2.	Djulbegovic B, Guyatt GH. Progress in evidence-based medi-cine: a quarter century on. Lancet. 2017;390(10092):415-423.  Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(16) 31592-6. Accessed August 27, 2018.	3.	Sackett DL, Rosenberg WM, Gray JA, Haynes RB, Richardson WS. Evidence based medicine: what it is and what it isn’t. BMJ. 1996;312(7023):71-72.	4.	Djulbegovic B, Guyatt GH, Ashcroft RE. Epistemologic inquiries in evidence-based medicine. Cancer Control. 2009;16(2):158-168.	5.	Wente MN, Seiler CM, Uhl W, Buchler MW. Perspectives of evidence-based surgery. Dig Surg. 2003;20(4):263-269.	6.	Solomon MJ, McLeod RS. Clinical studies in surgical journals—have we improved? Dis Colon Rectum. 1993;36(1):43-48.	7.	Pollock AV. Surgical evaluation at the crossroads. Br J Surg. 1993;80(8):964-966.	8.	Richardson WS, Wilson MC, Nishikawa J, Hayward RS. The well-built clinical question: a key to evidence-based decisions. ACP J Club. 1995;123(3):A12-A13.	9.	Whipple AO, Parsons WB, Mullins CR. Treatment of carcinoma of the ampulla of vater. Ann Surg. 1935;102(4):763-779.	10.	Nissen R. A simple operation for control of reflux esophagitis (in German). Schweiz Med Wochenschr. 1956;86(suppl 20): 590-592.	11.	Patsopoulos NA, Analatos AA, Ioannidis JP. Relative citation impact of various study designs in the health sciences. JAMA. 2005;293(19):2362-2366.	12.	Moore FA, Feliciano DV, Andrassy RJ, et al. Early enteral feeding, compared with parenteral, reduces postoperative septic complications. The results of a meta-analysis. Ann Surg. 1992;216(2):172-183.	13.	Eikelboom JW, Karthikeyan G, Fagel N, Hirsh J. American Association of Orthopedic Surgeons and American College of Chest Physicians guidelines for venous thromboembolism prevention in hip and knee arthroplasty differ: what are the implications for clinicians and patients? Chest. 2009;135(2): 513-520.	14.	Bassi C, Larvin M, Villatoro E. Antibiotic therapy for prophylaxis against infection of pancreatic necrosis in acute pancreatitis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2003;(4):CD002941.	15.	Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Vist GE, et al. GRADE: an emerg-ing consensus on rating quality of evidence and strength of recommendations. BMJ. 2008;336(7650):924-926.	16.	Higgins JPT, Green S, eds. Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions. Version 5.1.0. The Cochrane Collabo-ration; 2011. Available at: https://handbook-5-1.cochrane.org. Accessed August 27, 2018.	17.	Delle Fave G, Kwekkeboom DJ, Van Cutsem E, et al. ENETS Consensus Guidelines for the management of patients with gastroduodenal neoplasms. Neuroendocrinology. 2012;95(2):74-87.	18.	Graham R, Mancher M, Miller Wolman D, Greenfield S, Steinberg E, eds. Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on Standards for Developing Trustworthy Clinical Prac-tice Guidelines. Clinical Practice Guidelines We Can Trust. Washington DC: National Academies Press; 2011.	19.	Adie S, Harris IA, Naylor JM, Mittal R. CONSORT compliance in surgical randomized trials: are we there yet? A systematic review. Ann Surg. 2013;258(6):872-878.	20.	Schulz KF, Altman DG, Moher D; Consort Group. CON-SORT 2010 statement: updated guidelines for reporting par-allel group randomised trials. Int J Surg. 2011;9(8):672-627.	21.	Higgins JPT, Altman DG, Gøtzsche PC, et al. The Cochrane Collaboration’s tool for assessing risk of bias in randomised trials. BMJ. 2011;343:d5928.	22.	Das AK. Randomised clinical trials in surgery: a look at the ethical and practical issues. Indian J Surg. 2011;73(4): 245-250.	23.	Wartolowska K, Judge A, Hopewell S, et al. Use of placebo controls in the evaluation of surgery: systematic review. BMJ. 2014;348:g3253.	24.	Raty S, Pulkkinen J, Nordback I, et al. Can laparoscopic cholecystectomy prevent recurrent idiopathic acute pancreatitis? A prospective randomized multicenter trial. Ann Surg. 2015; 262(5):736-741.	25.	Smith GC, Pell JP. Parachute use to prevent death and major trauma related to gravitational challenge: systematic review of randomised controlled trials. BMJ. 2003;327(7429): 1459-1461.	26.	Clinical Outcomes of Surgical Therapy Study Group, Nelson H, Sargent DJ, et al. A comparison of laparoscopically assisted and open colectomy for colon cancer. N Engl J Med. 2004;350(20):2050-2059.Brunicardi_Ch51_p2137-p2152.indd   215128/02/19   4:19 PM 2152SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	27.	Mauri L, D’Agostino RB Sr. Challenges in the design and interpretation of noninferiority trials. N Engl J Med. 2017;377(14):1357-1367.	28.	Ho PM, Peterson PN, Masoudi FA. Evaluating the evi-dence: is there a rigid hierarchy? Circulation. 2008; 118(16):1675-1684.	29.	Hume D, Norton DF, Norton MJ. A Treatise of Human Nature. Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press; 2000.	30.	Dahiru T. P-value, a true test of statistical significance?  A cautionary note. Ann Ib Postgrad Med. 2008;6(1):21-26.	31.	Ioannidis JP. Why most published research findings are false. PLoS Med. 2005;2(8):e124.	32.	Wacholder S, Chanock S, Garcia-Closas M, El Ghormli L, Rothman N. Assessing the probability that a positive report is false: an approach for molecular epidemiology studies. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2004;96(6):434-442.	33.	Colquhoun D. An investigation of the false discovery rate and the misinterpretation of P values. R Soc Open Sci. 2014;1(3): 140216.	34.	Chavalarias D, Wallach JD, Li AH, Ioannidis JP. Evolution of reporting P values in the biomedical literature, 1990-2015. JAMA. 2016;315(11):1141-1148.	35.	Atkins D, Eccles M, Flottorp S, et al. Systems for grading the quality of evidence and the strength of recommendations  I: critical appraisal of existing approaches The GRADE Working Group. BMC Health Serv Res. 2004;4(1):38.	36.	Dellinger RP, Carlet JM, Masur H, et al. Surviving Sepsis Campaign guidelines for management of severe sepsis and septic shock. Crit Care Med. 2004;32(3):858-873.	37.	Dellinger RP, Levy MM, Carlet JM, et al. Surviving Sepsis Campaign: international guidelines for management of severe sepsis and septic shock: 2008. Crit Care Med. 2008;36(1): 296-327.	38.	Houck PM, Bratzler DW, Nsa W, Ma A, Bartlett JG. Timing of antibiotic administration and outcomes for Medicare patients hospitalized with community-acquired pneumonia. Arch Intern Med. 2004;164(6):637-644.	39.	Kumar A, Haery C, Paladugu B, et al. The duration of hypotension before the initiation of antibiotic treatment is a critical determinant of survival in a murine model of Escherichia coli septic shock: association with serum lactate and inflammatory cytokine levels. J Infect Dis. 2006;193(2):251-258.	40.	Proulx N, Frechette D, Toye B, Chan J, Kravcik S. Delays in the administration of antibiotics are associated with mortality from adult acute bacterial meningitis. QJM. 2005;98(4):291-298.	41.	Atkins D, Briss PA, Eccles M, et al. Systems for grading the quality of evidence and the strength of recommendations II: pilot study of a new system. BMC Health Serv Res. 2005;5(1):25.	42.	Kavanagh BP. The GRADE system for rating clinical guidelines. PLoS Med. 2009;6(9):e1000094.	43.	The GRADE Working Group. 2018. Available at: http://www .gradeworkinggroup.org. Accessed August 27, 2018.	44.	Sharma VK, Howden CW. Prophylactic antibiotic administration reduces sepsis and mortality in acute necrotizing pancreatitis: a meta-analysis. Pancreas. 2001;22(1):28-31.	45.	Bassi C, Mangiante G, Falconi M, Salvia R, Frigerio I, Pederzoli P. Prophylaxis for septic complications in acute necrotizing pancreatitis. J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Surg. 2001;8(3):211-215.	46.	Villatoro E, Mulla M, Larvin M. Antibiotic therapy for prophylaxis against infection of pancreatic necrosis in acute pancreatitis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010;(5):CD002941.	47.	Fein IA, Corrato RR. Clinical practice guidelines: culture eats strategy for breakfast, lunch, and dinner. Crit Care Med. 2008;36(4):1360-1361.	48.	Jacobson PD. Transforming clinical practice guidelines into legislative mandates: proceed with abundant caution. JAMA. 2008;299(2):208-210.	49.	Begley CG, Ioannidis JP. Reproducibility in science: improv-ing the standard for basic and preclinical research. Circ Res. 2015;116(1):116-126.	50.	Prasad V, Cifu A. Medical reversal: why we must raise the bar before adopting new technologies. Yale J Biol Med. 2011;84(4):471-478.	51.	Prasad V, Gall V, Cifu A. The frequency of medical reversal. Arch Intern Med. 2011;171(18):1675-1676.Brunicardi_Ch51_p2137-p2152.indd   215228/02/19   4:19 PM
# Chunk 8954
Ambulatory SurgeryMarcus Adair, Stephen Markowiak, Hollis Merrick, James R. Macho, Kara Richardson, Moriah Muscaro, Munier Nazzal, and F. Charles Brunicardi 52chapterINTRODUCTIONAmbulatory SurgeryAmbulatory Surgery is a multidisciplinary field in which surgi-cal procedures are performed on patients who are not expected to be admitted to the hospital. The field includes procedures performed on patients in the setting of hospital outpatient departments (HOPDs), freestanding ambulatory surgery cen-ters (ASCs), and those performed in doctor’s offices. The word ambulatory comes from the Latin ambulare, which means “to walk,” indicating that the patients arrived at the procedure on their own and departed after the procedure to their home environment.1Improved anesthesia techniques, the development of min-imally invasive procedures, and changes to healthcare policy (particularly healthcare funding) have been the driving fac-tors behind the increase in ambulatory surgery. Prior to these advances, almost all surgery was performed in an inpatient hos-pital setting. Any outpatient surgeries were minor, performed in physicians’ offices, and paid for by Medicare and insurers as part of the physician’s office visit reimbursement.2Since the early 1980s, the volume of ambulatory surgery has increased in the United States.2,3 Between 1981 and 2005, the number of outpatient surgeries nationwide grew almost 10-fold to over 32.0 million per year. Outpatient procedures grew from 19% to 60% of all surgical procedures, by volume, in the United States from 1981 to 2011.2,4,5 Strong financial incentives exist for hospi-tals to shift some surgeries to an outpatient setting. The number of Medicare-certified ASCs has also increased steadily, from fewer than 300 in the early 1980s2 to 5532 in 2016 (Fig. 52-1).5By definition, procedures at ASCs and physician’s offices are performed without the full resources of a hospital. The press has sensationalized a few adverse patient outcomes in these set-tings and made claims about the overall safety based on these isolated events. However, much of the convenience, high patient satisfaction rates, and cost-efficiency of ambulatory surgery is lost when performed in a hospital setting. Thus, the challenge underlying ambulatory surgery is performing safe operations on carefully selected patients in a manner that is patient-family–centric and economical.A majority of large hospitals also have their own outpatient surgery departments that exist within the hospital. ASCs per-form procedures faster and more efficiently than HOPDs and at higher volume than both HOPDs and physicians’ offices. Addi-tionally, the number of certified, freestanding ASCs nationwide has eclipsed the total number of hospitals by more than 1000 centers.5 For these reasons, a plurality of outpatient surgical vol-ume in the United States is now performed in ASCs. It is critical for the modern surgeon to have a grasp of the unique clinical challenges and economic impacts of ambulatory surgery.Ambulatory Surgery CentersASCs are independent healthcare that offer patients the conve-nience of having surgery performed safely without admission to a hospital. ASCs provide only elective surgical services rather than emergency care. According to the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS), effective May 18, 2009, “ASCs are any distinct entity that operates exclusively for the purpose of providing surgical services to patients not requiring hospi-talization and which the expected duration of services would not exceed 24 hours following an admission.”4 Ambulatory sur-gery centers should not be confused with office-based surgery practices or with other outpatient centers that provide diagnos-tic services or primary healthcare, such as urgent care centers, community health centers, mobile diagnostic units, or rural health clinics. ASCs are distinguished from these other health-care facilities by (a) their use of a referral system for accept-ing patients and (b) their maintenance of a dedicated operating room. The first feature means that any patient who wants to be treated in an ambulatory surgery center must first consult a Introduction2153Ambulatory Surgery / 2153Ambulatory Surgery Centers / 2153Aspects Leading to  Increased Utilization / 2154History of Ambulatory  Surgery and Ambulatory  Surgery Centers2154Procedures Performed2156Benefits of Ambulatory  Surgery Centers2156Factors Contributing to  Popularization of ASCs / 2157Regulation, Costs, and Quality2158Regulation / 2158Costs / 2158Quality / 2159Ownership / 2159Potential for Conflict of Interest / 2159Challenges2159Reimbursement / 2159Patient Selection / 2159ASCs vs. Hospital Outpatient  Departments vs. Office-Based  Surgical Suites / 2160Aging Population / 2160Conclusion2160Brunicardi_Ch52_p2153-p2162.indd   215328/02/19   4:17 PM 2154199660005000Number of ASCs4000300020001000019982000200220042006200820102012Figure 52-1. Number of Medicare-certified ambulatory surgery centers from 1996 to 2013.Key Points1	Define ambulatory surgery and the unique aspects of ambu-latory surgery centers (ASCs).2	Understand the history of ambulatory surgery and ASCs in the United States.3	Review the most common procedures performed in ASCs compared to those performed in a hospital setting.4	Discuss the financial benefits for patients and physicians within the structure of ASCs as they pertain to physician ownership, healthcare systems partnerships, and insurance reimbursement.5	Understand the regulatory and accreditation processes that affect ASCs.6	Predict how anticipated medical advances, technological development, and an aging population will affect the field of ambulatory surgery.primary healthcare provider (PCP) and choose to have the con-dition treated by surgery rather than an alternative approach. The second characteristic means that all ASCs must have at least one dedicated operating room and the equipment needed to per-form surgery safely and ensure quality patient care.1 Patients who choose to have surgery in an ASC arrive on the day of their procedure, have their surgery in a fully equipped operating room, and recover under the care of a highly-skilled anesthesia team, all without hospital admission.Aspects Leading to Increased UtilizationTechnological Developments. Improvements in anesthe-sia have facilitated the safe practice of outpatient surgery by the use of new medications, improved techniques in regional anesthesia, and better management of postoperative pain. The development of minimally invasive surgical techniques such as fiberoptic endoscopy, arthroscopy, ophthalmologic procedures, and laparoscopic and robotic surgery have made it possible for patients to be discharged the on the same day as the surgery.Reduced Cost for Patients Without Compromise in Quality  of Care. Ambulatory surgery facilities are highly specialized centers originating from a service model rather than the tradition hospital model. This approach allows for streamlined processes and reduced costs. Staffing is the largest cost for most healthcare facilities including ASCs, thus same-day surgery eliminates the need for overnight nursing and support staff.ASCs Offer Reduced Cost for Healthcare Systems. A review of commercial medical claims data found that annual U.S. healthcare costs are reduced by approximately $3.8 billion due to the availability of ASCs. Patients save more than $1.5 bil-lion due to lower deductibles and coinsurance payments. Over the next decade, ASCs are expected to save the U.S. healthcare system between $32.5 and $57.6 billion. This cost reduction is driven by the fact that, in general, ASC prices are significantly lower than HOPD prices for the same procedure in all mar-kets, regardless of payer.6 Table 52-1 displays the cost savings compared to hospital outpatient departments for the most com-monly performed procedures at ASCs nationwide. While most hospitals offer outpatient surgery, ambulatory surgery centers are regarded as a superior choice for certain procedures because of facility efficiencies and price regulation under the outpatient prospective payment system.6HISTORY OF AMBULATORY SURGERY AND AMBULATORY SURGERY CENTERSAmbulatory surgical practice traces its history from the early work of itinerant dental surgeons who traveled their circuits by horseback and trains. They frequently operated in hotel rooms and then moved on. In 1909, James Nicoll (Fig. 52-2), a pediatric surgeon in Scotland, wrote of his experiences with ambulatory anesthesia and surgery on nearly 9000 children as outpatients during a 10-year interval at Glasgow Royal Hospi-tal for Sick Children.8 Operations included cleft lip and palate repair, correction of pyloric stenosis, mastoidectomy, repair of inguinal and umbilical hernias, and management of spina bifida and depressed skull fractures. Nicoll pleaded with his fellow surgeons to perform more pediatric operations on an outpatient basis, stating that “a large number of the cases at present treated in-door constitutes a waste of the resources of a children’s hos-pital . . . . The results obtained in the out-patient department at a tithe [small part] of the cost are equally good.”8Ralph Waters (Fig. 52-3) was a pioneer in the field of ambulatory surgery. He developed an office-based practice in Sioux City, Iowa in 1919. Waters used nitrous oxide, morphine, and scopolamine. He believed medical conditions had to be well controlled prior to surgery and that certain medical condi-tions precluded outpatient care. In these ways, Waters’ clinic became the prototype for the modern free-standing ASC. Waters subsequently went on to establish the first academic residency program for training anesthesiologists at the University of Wisconsin.9Prior to the advent of freestanding ASCs, the concept of ambulatory surgery first needed to gain acceptance in the form of HOPDs. In 1959, Eric Webb and Horace Graves advocated out-patient surgery because of a shortage of hospital beds in Vancou-ver. The first HOPD in the United States was established in 1962 at the University of California, Los Angeles by David Cohen and John Dillon, who also sought to address a shortage of hospital beds. These efforts proved to be safe and cost-effective.9Brunicardi_Ch52_p2153-p2162.indd   215428/02/19   4:17 PM 2155AMBULATORY SURGERYCHAPTER 52Figure 52-2. James Henderson Nicoll, pediatric surgeon. (Repro-duced with permission from University of Glasgow Archives & Special Collections, University collection, GB 248 PH/PR 2475.)Figure 52-3. Ralph Milton Waters, anesthesiologist. (Used with permission from the American Society of Anesthesiologists.)Table 52-1Comparison of top 10 procedures performed at ASCs vs. hospitals nationwideTOP 10 PROCEDURES PERFORMED AT AMBULATORY SURGICAL CENTERS BY VOLUME AND CPT CODENUMBER PERFORMEDAVG PAY  PER CLAIMSAVINGS  AT ASCTOP 10 PROCEDURES PERFORMED AT HOSPITAL OUTPATIENT DEPARTMENTS (HOPD) BY VOLUME AND CPT CODENUMBER PERFORMEDAVG PAY  PER CLAIM 1. Cataract surgery with  intraoccular lens(66984)1155, 283$959$219 1. Subcutaneous tissue debridement (11042)841,517$213 2. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy with biopsy (43239)524,082$301$110 2. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy with biopsy (43239)628,900$411 3. Colonoscopy and biopsy (45380)416,218$352$172 3. Aspiration/injection of  joint (20610)578,407$141 4. Colonoscopy with lesion removal (45385)331,565$401$20 4. Cataract surgery with IOL implant (66984)512,191$1,178 5. Spine epidural injection foraminal (64483)282,962$335  5. Colonoscopy and biopsy (45380)472,886$524 6. Postlaser cataract surgery capsulotomy (66821)275,760$227  6. Colonoscopy with lesion removal (45385)350,001$421 7. Spine epidural injection lumbar, sacral (62311)210,159$358$120 7. Spine epidural injection lumbar, sacral (62311)326,956$478 8. Injection, paravertebral  facet joint (64493)174,450$306  8. Insertion of temporary bladder catheter (51702)308,614$69 9. Diagnostic colonoscopy (45378)157,951$401$100 9. Appl. of multilayer compression system (29581)303,026$9710. Colorectal screening, high-risk individual (G0105)128,181$33310. Diagnostic colonoscopy (45378)253,350$501The first truly freestanding ASC, “SurgiCenter,” was opened in Phoenix, Arizona by Wallace A. Reed and John L. Ford in 1970 (Fig. 52-4). Reed and Ford were committed to pro-viding timely, convenient, and comfortable surgical services to patients in their community, and therefore, avoiding more imper-sonal venues like regular hospitals. Prior to opening SurgiCen-ter, Reed and Ford were frustrated with having patients wait 6 weeks or more to get elective surgery, and in some cases, found surgeries canceled because the rooms booked were needed for emergencies.9Brunicardi_Ch52_p2153-p2162.indd   215528/02/19   4:17 PM 2156SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIFigure 52-4. Image of “SurgiCenter” in 1970. (Used with permission from Banner Health.)Figure 52-5. George Isaac Minimally Invasive Surgery Center at the University of Toledo Medical Center. (Used with permission from University of Toledo.)In its first 6 months, Surgicenter performed more than 1200 operations by 153 surgeons. No adverse cardiac events occurred during the procedures, and only one patient was hos-pitalized following surgery (due to poorly controlled diabetes, not because of the operation itself).10 SurgiCenter’s incredible success resulted in more than 400 visitors touring the facility in the first year in order to learn about the new model for patient care.11 Reed and Ford realized that a tremendous need existed for freestanding, independent ASCs. According to Reed, this propelled the formation of what eventually became the Ambula-tory Surgery Center Association (ASCA), a major credentialing body within the field of ambulatory surgery.11The Orkand Report of 1976, a U.S. government–spon-sored study of outpatient surgery, concluded that ambulatory surgical facilities can significantly reduce costs while main-taining the same high quality of surgical and anesthetic care achieved in hospitals.12The Society for Ambulatory Anesthesia (SAMBA) was established in 1984 to further the development of ambulatory anes-thesiology as a subspecialty. The field continued to advance with the publication of Wetchler’s Anesthesia for Ambulatory Surgery in 1985, the introduction of the journal Ambulatory Surgery in 1993, and with the first state requiring accreditation for all outpatient facilities (California in 1996). Many other states have since adopted these high standards and require accreditation of ASCs. CMS now requires certification for all ASCs (Fig. 52-5 and 52-6).5PROCEDURES PERFORMEDBy 1982, CMS had approved payments to ASCs for more than 200 procedures. Steady growth in the number of ASCs (Fig. 52-7) and the number of surgical procedures performed in the outpatient setting, including HOPDs, has continued since. Each year physicians perform more than 23 million procedures in ASCs. This shift toward outpatient procedures has increased due to advancements in medical practice and technology that have reduced the need for overnight hospital stays. Most patients, except those with complicated health conditions, can be served in the outpatient setting. Common ASC procedures include colonoscopies, cataract surgeries, tonsillectomies, and arthroscopic orthopedic surgeries. CMS currently approves and reimburses more than 3500 procedures in the ASC setting.5 New developments continue to expand the scope of ASCs.ASCs may perform surgeries in several specialties or dedi-cate their services to one specialty, such as eye care or sports medicine. The procedure must not pose a significant safety risk and not require an overnight stay when performed in an ASC. The types of surgical procedures performed in ASCs have undergone significant changes in recent years. Many of the early ASCs were outpatient centers for plastic surgery. Advances in minimally invasive surgical techniques in other specialties, how-ever, led to the establishment of ASCs for orthopedic, dental, and ophthalmologic procedures. See Fig. 52-8 for a recent anal-ysis of specialty services provided by ASCs nationwide.BENEFITS OF AMBULATORY SURGERY CENTERSSince their founding over 40 years ago, ASCs have grown exponentially. These distinct entities have provided physi-cians an avenue to provide specialized, efficient, and quality Figure 52-6. ProMedica Parkway Surgery Center. (Used with permission from ProMedica Health Systems.)Brunicardi_Ch52_p2153-p2162.indd   215628/02/19   4:17 PM 2157AMBULATORY SURGERYCHAPTER 5219486171118694117415 (AK)2 (GU)21 (HI)12218366426347196924956081693533941724 (PR)1 (VI)67136104523318610125122779923413411626 (NH)56 (MA)10 (RI)48 (CT)269 (NJ)23 (DE)345 (MD)3 (DC)79452Figure 52-7. As of June 2017, California has 794 ASCs, making it the leading state in terms of number of ASCs. It is followed by Florida with 417 ASCs and Texas with 366 ASCs. Vermont and the U.S. Virgin Islands have the lowest number of ASCs with one each.13Painmanagement10%Urology5%Orthopedics15%Plastic8%Gi14%Ophthalmology30%Other18%Figure 52-8. Specialties served in ASCs. GI = gastroenterology. (Reproduced with permission from Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, 2011.)care to patients who need surgical procedures. Patient satisfac-tion with same-day surgery has remained relatively high since ASCs started in 1970. It is important to recognize that patients undergoing generally nonemergent surgery that does not require a hospital stay are relatively satisfied overall. Historically, the field of ambulatory surgery has been associated with very high patient satisfaction.14-15 In the future, the CMS Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers and Systems (CAHPS) sur-vey will report on nationwide patient satisfaction with ASCs and HOPDs.16Factors Contributing to Popularization of ASCsCost. In many cases an outpatient procedure performed in an ASC is between one-half to one-third the cost as the same pro-cedure performed in a hospital. In large part, ASCs affect cost savings by eliminating overnight hospitalizations and emer-gency procedures. ASCs perform fewer extensive diagnostic tests and dispense fewer medications. These facilities are not staffed around the clock and are not encumbered by the need for expensive and highly specialized equipment as are hospitals. For example, the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission found that a cataract operation cost only $942 at an ambulatory surgery center in 2001 as opposed to $1334 at a hospital. Figures for an endoscopy and biopsy of the upper digestive tract were $429 and $359; for a diagnostic colonoscopy, $429 and $401; and for epi-dural anesthesia, $320 and $183, respectively5,7 (see Table 52-1).Organization, staffing, and specialization may play a large role in the cost differences between ASCs and HOPDs. On aver-age, patients who were treated in ASCs spend 31.8 fewer min-utes undergoing procedures than patients who were treated in HOPDs. ASCs could generate savings of $363 to $1000 per outpatient case.4Comfort. Whereas most hospitals keep patients recovering from a surgical procedure in separate rooms, in an ASC the patient usually can spend the recovery period after surgery with their loved ones. Limiting the number of delays and disruption of emergent cases allows the surgeon to spend more time with the patient in the preoperative and postoperative areas.17-19Convenience. Because ASCs usually schedule routine cases lasting no longer than 2 hours (average 30–45 minutes), and handle no emergency cases, scheduling is typically accurate. By avoiding the logjam, ASCs reduce the waiting time for elective procedures. A study by Hair et al reviewing Medicare patients again showed freestanding ASCs performed surgeries in less time than hospital-based ASCs overall and for procedures on various anatomic systems that resulted in reduced total time spent in facility with earlier discharge.19 These results corrobo-rate the notion that freestanding ASCs tend to be more efficient than HOPDs.20 One possible advantage for patients would be that they are able to leave an ASC relatively quickly after their surgery, resulting in less time away from work and family. This may be particularly true for pediatric patients or parents.Efficiency. This advantage is particularly important to sur-geons. It takes much less time to prepare an operating room in a specialized ASC for the next patient than in a standard hospital. Improved efficiency allows the surgeon to treat more Brunicardi_Ch52_p2153-p2162.indd   215728/02/19   4:17 PM 2158SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIpatients in the same amount of time than he or she would be able to do in a hospital; some surgeons maintain that they can do three times the number of procedures in an ASC as they could in a hospital setting. Many doctors prefer working in an ASC because they can set the standards for staffing, safety precautions, and postoperative care, rather than having these things decided for them by a hospital manager.1 Trentman and coauthors discuss several factors that affect patient flow and could result in differences in preoperative and recovery times for outpatient procedures between ASCs and hospitals.20 For example, compared to the situation in hospitals, in ASCs sur-geons are more likely to be assigned to a single operating room for all cases, which reduces delays; the operating room often is closer to the preoperative and recovery rooms because facili-ties are smaller; teams of staff have clearer and more consistent roles, with less personnel turnover; and staffing is not done by shifts—that is, staff members go home only after all cases are finished, which creates incentives to work quickly. In addition, hospitals may be more likely to have emergency add-on and bring-back cases for more complex cases that compete with outpatient procedures for operating room time.3,5,19 These dif-ferences suggest that hospitals would have to adopt a substan-tially different and highly specialized organizational model to achieve the same efficiencies as ASCs.REGULATION, COSTS, AND QUALITYRegulationHealthcare facilities in the United States are highly regulated by federal and state entities. ASCs are included in this over-sight, with both federal and state laws and regulations govern-ing all aspects of them. Independent observers evaluate the safety and quality of care provided in ASCs through three pro-cesses: Medicare certification, state licensure, and voluntary accreditation.To obtain Medicare certification, ASCs must meet the Medicare certification requirements, known as the Conditions for Coverage. These conditions include specifying standards for administration of anesthesia, quality evaluation, operating and recovery rooms, medical staff, nursing services, and other aspects of care. An ASC must have an inspection conducted by a state official or a representative of an organization that the government has authorized to conduct that inspection. These inspectors visit the ASC to verify that it meets established stan-dards. Each state determines the specific requirements ASCs must meet for licensure. An ASC does not have to be certi-fied by Medicare in order to be accredited by JCAHO; how-ever, most ASCs provide care to Medicare beneficiaries, so it is important to meet their requirements in order to be reimbursed appropriately. Medicare inspection and certification of ambu-latory surgery centers is a separate process from professional accreditation.To obtain state licensure, many states have independent rules and regulations as well as associated fees. These third-party bodies can include Accreditation Association for Ambulatory Healthcare (AAAHC), American Association for Accreditation of Ambulatory Surgery Facilities (AAAASF), and the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO). In states for which accreditation is not mandated, ASCs may undergo voluntary accreditation through these same associations. In 37 states, any party looking to open an ASC must demonstrate a need for the ASC to exist.21 State licensure requirements generally exist for both healthcare facilities and healthcare professionals.14There was previously controversy as to whether accredi-tation status affects safety outcomes. In multivariate analyses that controlled for facility volume and patient characteristics, patients at Joint Commission–accredited facilities were still significantly less likely to be hospitalized after colonoscopy. Specifically, compared with patients treated in nonaccredited ASCs regulated by the state agency, patients treated at accred-ited facilities were less likely to be hospitalized within 7 to 30 days after surgery.22 All accredited ASCs must meet spe-cific standards that are evaluated during on-site inspections. Patients who visit accredited ASCs can be assured that those medical facilities have rigorous checkpoints to ensure high standards.The Ambulatory Surgery Center Association (ASCA) or ASC Association has an integral role to ensure top-quality healthcare from the nation’s ASCs. The ASCA was established when the two leading national ASC associations—Federated Ambulatory Surgery Association (FASA) and the American Association of Ambulatory Surgery Centers (AAASC)—merged. The ASCA serves as the national membership orga-nization as well as the advocacy group for ASCs.21 The ASCA works with legislative and regulatory bodies, liaises with other organizations to improve access, reduce the costs of healthcare, encouraging insurance coverage of outpatient procedures, and works to establish standards for ASCs. ASCA requires all of its facility members to be accredited, licensed, or Medicare certi-fied. The ASCA was instrumental in forming the accrediting body that is now the largest accreditor of ambulatory surgery centers in the country.22CostsToday, more than 5300 Medicare-certified ASCs offer simi-lar services compared to those performed at HOPDs, and do so at a more efficient rate with lower costs. ASCs are able to accomplish this by decreasing administrative and overhead expenses.5 Expenses for an ASC include staff wages, insur-ance, utilities, rent, janitorial services, as well as resources necessary to handle patient records, including technology sys-tems. ASCs are able to schedule procedures without the risk of surgeries getting moved or cancelled due to emergencies. Additionally, ASCs enable patients to go home on the same day, therefore spending less time with staff in postoperative recovery rooms.Starting in 1982, Medicare has covered surgical proce-dures provided in ASCs.21 There are two primary elements of total cost in a surgical procedure: the cost of physicians’ pro-fessional services and cost of the facility. Typically, providers bill for professional service separately, whereas facility costs are paid to the ASCs. Currently Medicare provides separate payments for 3500 surgical procedures under the ASC pay-ment system.5 The payment system is maintained by CMS, which adjusts fees annually to maintain budget neutrality. Through the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003, payments to ASCs are based on the Outpatient Prospective Payment System (OPPS) and capped at no more than 59% of what is paid to hospitals for the same service.5During the period of 2008 to 2011, the growth in number of ASCs plateaued. The system saved an estimated $7.5 bil-lion for the Medicare program and its beneficiaries.5 However, Brunicardi_Ch52_p2153-p2162.indd   215828/02/19   4:17 PM 2159AMBULATORY SURGERYCHAPTER 52growth in procedure volume during this time was greater in ASCs than in hospitals.3 This suggests that physicians and patients still preferred using ASCs, possibly due to advantages in cost, convenience, comfort, or the inability for hospitals to meet demand for outpatient surgeries.QualityThe majority of ambulatory surgery centers ensure safety through maintaining certification and licensing of the facili-ties and associated staff. There are strict regulations in place at both the state and federal level that ensure quality in ASCs, which have been detailed earlier. ASCs are held to the same high standard of care as all U.S. medical facilities. They have comparable rates of use of perioperative antibiotics, patient falls, wrong-site surgery, and use of safety checklists.23 Nation-wide and among all procedures, from 2014 to 2016 fewer than 2% of all visits to ASCs resulted in an unplanned hospital visit within 7 days.5 Of these hospital visits, 1.6% were emergency department or observation stays, and 0.6% were unplanned inpatient admissions.24 CMS is working to develop a new qual-ity measure that will track unplanned hospitalizations after care at an ASC. This would help create increasing data on the quality of ASCs. Due to the isolated nature of ASCs, provid-ers are often unaware when a patient goes to the emergency department or is admitted to an unaffiliated hospital following a procedure. Thus, such a measure from the CMS will help educate providers and allow for continued quality improve-ment among ASCs.Looking at the general surgical population, cholecys-tectomy represents a key procedure to track because it is frequently performed, requires technical skill, and can result in serious complications. Provided appropriate patient selec-tion, outpatient cholecystectomy has been demonstrated to be safely performed in ASCs. ASCs charge significantly less for performing this procedure after controlling for the variety of indications (median of $6028 for ASCs compared to $10,876 for HOPDs).25OwnershipIn 2017, 90% of ASCs have partial or complete physician own-ership, while 25% to 30% of ASCs are at least partially owned by hospitals, as compared to HOPDs, which are by definition owned and operated exclusively by the hospital. A trend is developing for hospitals to purchase ASC ownership stakes due to their cost efficiency and as a means of diversifying revenue streams.26 Physicians have been a driving force in the devel-opment of ASCs through their ownership and building of new facilities. Ownership of an ASC provides many clear advantages to the physician because of the increased control and autonomy over their practice. Some advantages include ease of scheduling, shorter waiting times to get patients in for elective surgery, and the ability to hire specially trained and highly skilled staff. Phy-sicians can also avoid the bureaucracies of a hospital, including having elective surgeries cancelled to make room for emergent surgeries and delays due to more complicated surgeries. They can also ensure that the facility has specialized equipment for their particular specialty and can design the facility to meet their specific needs.26 Furthermore, physicians who perform surgeries in their own ASCs receive a share of the ASC’s facility payment in addition to payment for their professional services. This could present a conflict of interest in terms of referring patients and lowering the threshold for surgery, as discussed further in the next section.Potential for Conflict of InterestApproximately 90% of ASCs nationwide have at least some physician ownership stake. Many are joint ventures between hospitals and physicians.27 Increasing investment in these cen-ters may be explained in a number of ways, including an attempt by providers to assert greater control over their professional lives, such as by having greater authority in scheduling sur-geries and in purchasing equipment. Alternatively, this invest-ment trend may be explained by declining reimbursements for physician services and rising practice costs. These economic pressures have intensified providers’ interest in nontraditional revenue sources, such as ASC investment, as a means of gen-erating income.Ownership entitles physicians to collect a share of the facil-ity’s profits from referrals, in addition to their professional fees. One potential conflict of interest is that physician-owners might lower their thresholds for intervention, exposing the patient and healthcare system to the harm and cost associated with unneces-sary treatment. After differences between patients and health-care markets are adjusted for, physicians with ownership in an ASC have been found to perform a higher number of procedures compared with nonowner physicians at the same facilities.27 It has been noted that the increase in outpatient surgery at ASCs was more than double the decline in similar procedures per-formed in the hospital setting.28-29The other potential conflict in physician ASC ownership is in regard to patient referral. There is some evidence that physi-cians with an ownership stake may refer well-insured patients to their own facilities while referring Medicare and Medicaid patients to hospital outpatient clinics.30-32Regardless of the reason for increasing investment in and utilization of ASCs, it is important to note that ASC owner-ship creates a potential conflict of interest for physicians. In the United States, physician financial interests are heavily regulated by the Stark Law. This can be either a financial investment, employment, or compensation agreement. To avoid conflicts of interest and potential legal violations, physicians should consult with attorneys and advisors knowledgeable in medical law and ethics prior to entering a financial relationship.33CHALLENGESReimbursementSavings from use of ASCs are primarily to the patient and health-care system. Reimbursement to ASCs for services provided is, as a direct result, lower than reimbursement paid to hospitals for the same procedures. It is up to ASCs, which operate as private corporations, to find profit and viability by keeping their costs low through efficiency and staffing. Some steps suggested to improve the financial viability of maintaining an ASC include increasing the variety of procedures offered and grouping sur-geries in such a way as to maximize staffing usage.34Patient SelectionSafe use of ASCs is based on identification of patients who are unlikely to require admission to a hospital after their procedure. Thus far, ASCs do very well in this aspect. Unplanned admis-sions after ambulatory surgery occur in approximately 0.5% to 2.0% of cases.5,35-37 In the future, ASCs will be challenged to reduce this unplanned admission rate even further.Patients with Medicaid insurance, lower median household income, and a greater preoperative comorbidity burden have the Brunicardi_Ch52_p2153-p2162.indd   215928/02/19   4:17 PM 2160SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIhighest odds of unplanned acute care use. These patients may benefit from interventions that enhance and streamline postop-erative follow-up.38 Additionally, the potential costs associated with postoperative acute care following procedures performed in ASCs are not insignificant. Patient specific predictors of unplanned hospital admission include age 65 years or older, anticipated operating time longer than 120 minutes, cardiac comorbidities, peripheral vascular disease, cerebrovascular dis-ease, malignancy, positive for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and regional or general anesthesia use.39The strongest predictor for unplanned inpatient hospital admission was the individual patient’s own history of previ-ous hospitalizations, particularly among older adults. African American and Hispanic individuals also have had a markedly elevated risk of inpatient hospital admission, possibly related to cultural or socioeconomic issues of access to care.40 These mea-sures may provide a valuable target for quality improvement, cost improvement, and innovation.ASCs vs. Hospital Outpatient Departments vs. Office-Based Surgical SuitesCompetition is increasing among ASCs, HOPDs, and office-based surgical practices. The same improvements in anesthe-sia and surgical equipment that made outpatient surgery in a freestanding ASCs safe to perform have also led to a growing number of office based surgical suites and HOPDs. Procedures such as dental, ophthalmologic, endoscopy, cosmetic surgery, and liposuction are increasingly being performed in office-based facilities.41Physicians’ offices are under lower regulatory oversight in comparison to ASCs and HOPDs. This has resulted in the phenomenon of “practice drift,” whereby physicians perform procedures outside of their typical scope of practice. Despite several high-profile adverse events in lay media, prospective studies have demonstrated office-based surgical suites to be of similar safety.41,42 A recent, large study in the area of cosmetic surgery compared hospital-based procedures with office-based surgical suites and with ASCs and found accredited office-based surgical suites to be a safe alternative to ASCs and hospitals.43Aging PopulationWith increased risk of complications from surgery, the older adult population present a unique challenge to ASCs. ASCs must be prepared for complications that may arise from operating on older patients, and they must do so without the same resources as a hospital. The potential benefit of outpatient surgery for elderly patients is substantial, however, as older adults often suffer from postoperative cognitive dysfunction in an inpatient setting, which may be minimized with early discharge.44 Addi-tional benefits include lower cost to patients on fixed incomes and increased time and comfort at home.CONCLUSIONASCs represent a large benefit to society because of their poten-tial to reduce the financial burden of the healthcare system on the economy. At the same time, ASCs also provide high-quality care which is patient and family centered and convenient for providers. ASCs reduce the length of stay and minimize surgi-cal delays and cancellations. In the future, ASC quality will be rigorously tracked due to more regulatory oversight and data collection. The future of ambulatory surgical centers remains bright. Case numbers are increasing across many specialties, including general surgery, plastic surgery, vascular, urologic, and orthopedic practices. Surgeons should follow the matura-tion of ambulatory surgery closely.REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Senagore EAJ. Ambulatory surgery centers. In: Encyclopedia of Surgery. 1st ed. Farmington Hills, MI: Gale Group; 2004:37-43.	2.	Hall MJ, Schwartzman A, Zhang J, Liu X. Ambulatory surgery data from hospitals and ambulatory surgery centers: United States, 2010. Natl Health Stat Report. 2017;(102):1-15.	3.	Cullen KA, Hall MJ, Golosinskiy A. Ambulatory surgery in the United States, 2006. Natl Health Stat Report. 2009;(11):1-25.	4.	Munnich EL, Parente S. Procedures take less time at ambu-latory surgery centers, keeping costs down and ability to meet demand up. Health Affairs 2014;33(5):764-769.	5.	Medicare Payment Advisory Commission. 2018. Report to the Congress: Medicare Payment Policy. Washington, DC: MedPAC. Available at: http://www.medpac.gov/-documents-/reports. Accessed August 27, 2016.	6.	Advancing Surgical Care Association. Medicare cost savings tied to ASCs. 2013. Available at: http://www.advancingsurgicalcare.com/medicarecostsavings. Accessed August 27, 2018.	7.	Definitive Healthcare. Top 10 outpatient procedures at ASCs and hospitals. 2014. Available at: https://www.definitivehc.com/news/top-10-outpatient-procedures-at-ascs-and-hospitals. Accessed August 27, 2018.	8.	Nicoll J. The surgery of infancy. Br Med J. 1909;18:753-754.	9.	Eger EI, Saidman LJ, Westhorpe RN, eds. The Wondorous Story of Anesthesia. New York: Springer; 2014.	10.	The report. Arizona Republic. Sept. 10, 1970.	11.	Ambulatory Surgery Center Association. Looking back and looking forward where it all began. FASA Update. May/June 2004.	12.	Orkand DS. Comparative Evaluation of Costs, Quality, and System Effects of Ambulatory Surgery Performed in Alterna-tive Settings: Final Report. Washington: U.S. Dept. of Health, Education, and Welfare, Health Care Financing Administra-tion, Office of Policy Planning and Research; 1977.	13.	Ambulatory Surgery Center Association. Number of ASCs per State. ASCs: a positive trend in healthcare. Advancing Surgi-cal Care. June 2017. Available at: https://www.ascassociation.org/advancingsurgicalcare/asc/numberofascsperstate. Accessed August 27, 2018.	14.	Koenig L, Doherty J, Dreyfus J, Xanthapoulos J. An Analysis of Recent Growth of Ambulatory Surgical Centers. KNG Con-sulting. June 5, 2009. Available at: http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.512.4498&rep=rep1&type= pdf	15.	Colorado Ambulatory Surgery Center Association. Ambulatory surgery center history. Available at: https://www.coloradoasc.org/general-resources/asc-history/. Accessed August 27, 2018.	16.	Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Overview. www .cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-Fee-for-Service-Payment/ASCPayment/index.html.	17.	Manchikanti L. Ambulatory surgery centers and interven-tional techniques: a look at long-term survival. Pain Physician. 2011;14(2):177-215.	18.	Ambulatory Surgery Center Association. What is an ASC? Available at: https://www.advancingsurgicalcare.com/ advancingsurgicalcare/asc/whatisanasc, Accessed August 27, 2018.	19.	Hair B, Hussey P, Wynn B. A comparison of ambulatory periop-erative times in hospitals and freestanding owners. Am J Surg. 2012;204(1):23-27.	20.	Trentman TL, Mueller JT, Gray RJ, Pockaj BA, Simula DV. Outpatient surgery performed in an ambulatory surgery center Brunicardi_Ch52_p2153-p2162.indd   216028/02/19   4:17 PM 2161AMBULATORY SURGERYCHAPTER 52versus a hospital: comparison of perioperative time intervals. Am J Surg. 2010;200(1):64-67.	21.	Rechtoris M. 51 things to know about the ASC industry. Becker’s ASC Review. Available at: https://www.beckersasc.com/asc-turnarounds-ideas-to-improve-performance/50-things-to-know-about-the-asc-industry-2017.html. Accessed August 27,  2018.	22.	Ambulatory Surgery Center Association. Medicare certifi-cation. Available at: www.ascassociation.org/federalregula-tions/medicarecertification. Accessed August 27, 2018.	23.	Ambulatory Surgery Center Quality Collaboration. Quarterly Report, 2nd Quarter 2018. http://www.ascquality.org/qualityre-port.cfm.	24.	Dickson V. CMS seeks closer look at quality of care at ambu-latory surgical centers. Modern Healthcare. 2017. Available at: http://www.modernhealthcare.com/article/20170711/NEWS/170719987. Accessed August 27, 2018.	25.	Paquette IM, Smink D, Finlayson SR. Outpatient cholecys-tectomy at hospitals versus freestanding ambulatory surgical  centers. J Am Coll Surg. 2008;206(2):301-305.	26.	Ambulatory Surgery Center Association. Benefits of physician ownership. 2011. Available at: https://www.advancingsurgicalcare. com/asc/benefitsofphysicianownership. Accessed August 27, 2018.	27.	Becker’s Hospital Review. ASC ownership trends in 2017: more complex joint venture deals. Available at: www.beckershospitalreview.com/hospital-transactions-and-valuation/asc-ownership-trends-in-2017-more-complex-joint-venture-deals.html. Accessed August 27, 2018.	28.	Conrad DA, Sales A, Liang SY, et al. Impact of financial incen-tives on physician productivity in medical groups. Health Serv Res. 2002;37(4):885-906.	29.	Hollenbeck BK, Dunn RL, Suskind AM, Strope SA, Zhang Y, Hollingsworth JM. Ambulatory surgery centers and their intended effects on outpatient surgery. Health Serv Res. 2015;50(5):1491-1507.	30.	Plotzke MR, Courtmanche C. Does procedure profitability impact whether an outpatient surgery is performed at an ambu-latory surgery center or a hospital? Health Econ. 20(7):817-830.	31.	Mitchell JM. Effect of physician ownership of specialty hos-pitals and ambulatory surgery centers on frequency of use of outpatient orthopedic surgery. Arch Surg. 2010;145(8):732-738.	32.	Gable JR, Fahlman C, Kang R, Wozniak G, Kletke P, Hay JW. Where do I send thee? Does physician-ownership affect referral patterns to ambulatory surgery centers? Health Affairs. 2008;27(3):165-174.	33.	U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Office of the Inspector General. A Roadmap for New Physicians: Fraud & Abuse Laws. Available at: oig.hhs.gov/compliance/physician-education/01laws.asp. Accessed August 27, 2018.	34.	American College of Surgeons. Should your health care system invest in an ambulatory surgery center? A decision-making framework [Internet]. Bulletin of the American College of Surgeons. 2017 [cited 2018 Nov 28]; Available from: http://bulletin.facs.org/2017/11/should-your-health-care-system-invest-in-an-ambulatory-surgery-center-a-decision-making-framework/.	35.	Mezei G, Chung F. Return hospital visits and hospital readmis-sions after ambulatory surgery. Ann Surg. 1999;230(5):721-727.	36.	Twersky R, Fishman D, Homel P. What happens after discharge? Return hospital visits after ambulatory surgery. Anesth Analg. 1997;84:319-324.	37.	Fox JP, Vashi AA, Ross JS, Gross CP. Hospital based, acute care after ambulatory center discharge. Surgery. 2014;155(5): 743-753.	38.	Molina G, Neville BA, Lipsitz SR, Gibbons L, Childers AK, et al. Postoperative acute care use after freestanding ambulatory surgery. J Surg Res. 2016;205(2):331-340.	39.	Fleisher LA, Pasternak LR, Lyles A. A novel index of ele-vated risk of inpatient hospital admission immediately fol-lowing outpatient surgery. Arch Surg. 2007;142(3):263-268.	40.	Fleisher LA, Pasternak LR, Herbert R, Anderson GF. Inpa-tient hospital admission and death after outpatient surgery in elderly patients: importance of patient and system charac-teristics and location of care. Arch Surg. 2004;139(1):67-72.	41.	Urman RD, Punwani N, Shapiro FE. Office-based surgical and medical procedures: educational gaps. Ochsner J 2012; 12(4):383-388.	42.	Coldiron B, Shreve E, Balkrishnan R. Patient injuries from surgical procedures performed in medical offices: three years of Florida data. Dermatol Surg. 2004;30(12 pt 1):1435-1443, discussion 1443.	43.	Gupta V, Parikh R, Nguyen L, et al. Is office-based surgery safe? Comparing outcomes of 183,914 aesthetic surgical procedures across different types of accredited facilities. Aesthet Surg J. 2017;37(2):226-235.	44.	Aurini L, White P. Anesthesia for the elderly outpatient.  Curr Opin Anesthesiol. 2014;27:563-575.Brunicardi_Ch52_p2153-p2162.indd   216128/02/19   4:17 PM
# Chunk 8955
Brunicardi_Ch52_p2153-p2162.indd   216228/02/19   4:17 PMThis page intentionally left blank

BACKGROUNDIntroductionThe basic American surgical training model is patterned after that established by William Steward Halsted at the Johns Hopkins Hospital in the late 19th century. By tradition, it has consisted of a regulated apprenticeship system with incremental increases in clinical responsibility for resident surgeons over a specified period of time culminating with the expectation that independent surgical practice will be possible at its conclu-sion. While this approach has served well throughout the 20th century, the pace of changes in healthcare delivery and society itself has driven the need for new approaches to education and training. Among the important changes that the surgical training community has had to confront are an expanding array of medi-cal and surgical therapies, complex, new and sometimes disrup-tive technologies advancing at a dizzying pace, and increasing recognition of the opportunities for errors and adverse outcomes because of inadequate preparation for this new world of surgical practice.1 Appreciation of the scale and insidious consequences of medical errors began to take hold in the 1990s when the groundbreaking Institute of Medicine report “To Err is Human” presented to the public a dire picture of the frequency and impli-cations of medical errors.2 Among the proposed new approaches to deal with this problem was the use of simulation training.Simulation is the imitation of an actual or possible real-world condition or event. The degree to which a simulation resembles its real-world counterpart describes its fidelity. There are innumerable specific applications of simulation to train or assess human performance on anticipated real-world tasks. As such, it is a valuable tool with great potential to increase safety in high-stakes undertakings such as commercial aviation, military training, and nuclear power generation. These are a few areas where such training has been implemented successfully. With the advent of widely available digital computing, the level of technology applied to simulation and simulators has made near-complete fidelity possible. Moreover, the enormous expense associated with full motion flight simulation, for example, has been made acceptable by safety gains that benefit entire popula-tions. In medicine, there has been gradual acceptance of the role of simulation to achieve these same goals, and this has led to an array of simulation methods and uses that specifically target surgical providers at all levels. The fundamental justification for commitment of resources to simulation is an ethical one: to reduce patient risk associated with invasive surgical procedures or management of complex clinical problems. Simulation meth-ods provide opportunities for surgical learners to practice their skills under safe conditions in preparation for clinical experi-ences and to be assessed and deemed ready for those encounters.Skills Labs and Skills TrainingThe history of surgical skills training outside the clinical oper-ating room (OR) is a long one, involving practice of surgical skills and procedures using various models, including animals and cadavers. Newer training practices, including simulation use in a laboratory setting, have emerged that focus on objec-tive assessment of skill and establishment of specific, defined levels of proficiency. These assessment-based approaches are relatively recent educational developments and are being imple-mented as a means to improve surgeon skill in a safe setting for both learners and patients.3 The use of inanimate benchtop mod-els to test surgical skills required a leap into the world of vali-dation of measurement methodologies. The most important of these pioneering efforts was the implementation of the objective Skills and SimulationNeal E. Seymour and Carla M. Pugh 53chapterBackground2163Introduction / 2163Skills Labs and Skills Training / 2163Scientific Underpinnings of  Simulator Use / 2165Simulation in Graduate Medical  Education / 2165“Bootcamps” / 2166Specific Simulation Training and Assessment Applications2166Training Basic Surgical Skills / 2166Fundamentals of Laparoscopic  Surgery / 2168Bench Models for Training  Specific Procedural Skills / 2168Transfer of Training / 2169Virtual Reality / 2169Virtual Reality for Flexible  Endoscopy / 2172Virtual Reality for Endovascular Interventions / 2173Patient-Specific VR Surgery  Simulation / 2174Robotic Surgery Simulators / 2174Fundamentals of Robotic  Surgery / 2174Nontechnical Skills2175High-Fidelity Patient Simulation and Team Skills / 2175Error Prevention2177Simulation and Patient  Outcomes2178Simulation Training for the  Practicing Surgeon and  Maintenance of Skill2179Future Considerations2179Brunicardi_Ch53_p2163-p2186.indd   216322/02/19   4:39 PM 2164Key Points1	Learning basic skills at the point of care imposes inef-ficiencies that might very well endanger support for the education mission.2	In 2006, the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education Residency Review Committee for Surgery instituted a formal requirement for simulation training in surgical residency.3	Procedural skills training in a simulated environment has been shown to transfer to the real-life clinical setting.4	Early studies of virtual reality training using both  proficiency-based and non–proficiency-based training methods showed it to be an effective means of improving laparoscopic skill both in the lab and in the operating room compared to non–virtual reality trained controls.5	Use of proficiency-based training in the context of a larger curriculum appears to be the best way to achieve good training results irrespective of the training platform used.6	When assessing simulator validity, researchers have noted that the use of robotic surgery simulators does translate to the clinical environment and the learning curve for initial console training for surgeons is significantly decreased.7	Simulation training for communication and other  teamwork-pertinent nontechnical skills requires learners to be embedded in realistic scenarios pertinent to a healthcare team’s actual clinical responsibilities.8	Simulation technology allows trainees the opportunity to execute a variety of tasks and procedures while also expe-riencing the cognitive demands of surgery, including error correction and surgical planning decisions.9	The immediate future of simulation in surgery will likely see expanded use of proficiency-based training given the consistent demonstrations of effectiveness in improving surgeon skills and improved educational outcomes as mea-sured in clinical settings.10	Advances in wearables, motion tracking, and sensor tech-nologies allow for a wide variety of hybrid and augmented experiences in simulation as well as extensive opportuni-ties for the development of new performance metrics.structured assessment of technical skills (OSATS) program by educators at the University of Toronto.4,5 Using a series of repro-ducible physical models of surgical tasks (excision of a skin lesion, bowel anastomosis, insertion of a T tube, and abdominal wall closure) and carefully designed rating instruments, it was possible to show validity of these measurements when com-pared with skill manifested during surgery in animal models. This demonstration of practical measurement of skill in the lab, where observation for skills rating purposes can be more read-ily achieved, was seminal in sparking both additional interest in lab-based training and in simulation as a mainstream educa-tional method for surgeons.The advent of laparoscopic general surgery in the late 1980s and early 1990s, a disruptive technology at that time, was a major driver for the use of surgical simulation to gain unfa-miliar and nonintuitive skills needed to safely perform limited-access videoscopic surgery. The recognition that bile duct injury risk is increased by surgeon inexperience stimulated interest in simulation in order to separate a component of the psychomotor learning curve for laparoscopy from the clinical OR and patient  by transfering it to the training lab.6-8 At the same time, interest in the science of skills acquisition and measurement made efforts to gain surgical proficiency with simulation more meaningful. The measured performance characteristics of experienced sur-geons came to be appreciated as useful learning targets for less experienced surgical learners, and the concept of proficiency-based training began to be implemented successfully not only for research purposes but also for formative education.9As simulation began to be used more extensively and skills labs either evolved or merged with multidisciplinary education centers using simulation as a primary instructional method, recognition of such centers as focal points for surgical education also grew. The American College of Surgeons (ACS) Education Division recognized early on that simulation training was an important educational method that surgeons could take advantage of and began to explore ways to facilitate growth and implement training centers. In 2006, the ACS began to accredit education centers engaged in simulation training as Level 1 (comprehensive) and Level 2 (focused) Education Institutes.10 The consortium of 95 institutes, as of early 2017, now spans the globe with centers across the United States and Canada as well as several institutions outside of North America.In 2007, the American College of Surgeons and the Asso-ciation of Program Directors in Surgery (APDS) initiated a project to provide a standardized skills curriculum for surgi-cal residents. These efforts produced the modular ACS-APDS skills curricula that represent the first comprehensive and widely available resource that prescribes simulation experi-ences as the principal means to achieve educational objectives.11 The resources and curricula are readily available to residency programs to address surgical resident learning needs and to facilitate simulation lab use as mandated by the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME). The three components of the curriculum are basic technical skills, proce-dural skills, and team skills. Although these have been acknowl-edged to be valuable and have been utilized to meet resident training needs, implementation has been limited according to a recent survey of residency programs.12 Elements of the basic skills curriculum were reported to be used by 36% of respon-dents while procedural and team training modules were reported to be in use by about half as many programs. Nonetheless, the article notes that simulation methods had permeated surgical education and the various stakeholder organizations had taken steps to either endorse or implement programs for simulation use. The need to explore simulation-based education, as stated by the Surgical Council on Resident Education (SCORE), sug-gests a pathway by which simulation methods might become fully integrated into standardized cognitive elements of surgical residency curriculum.13 Based on current trends, a competency framework can be envisioned that combines advanced forms of Brunicardi_Ch53_p2163-p2186.indd   216422/02/19   4:39 PM 2165SKILLS AND SIMULATIONCHAPTER 53standards-based learning using simulation and measured per-formance in the OR for purposes of trainee advancement and certification.Scientific Underpinnings of Simulator UseThe assumption that surgical technical skills can be effec-tively learned and tested outside the OR serves as the basis for simulation based assessment of skills before, during, and following training. This capability permits the explicit descrip-tion of understandable surgeon performance characteristics including those that can be characterized as desirable training goals (e.g., “expert”). The effectiveness of specific models of training can also be ascertained by comparative studies examin-ing educational endpoints, such as rate of learning, or testable performance either in simulations or in clinical settings. Sim-ulation-based learning has been described using various peda-gogical models to help educators understand and leverage the most effective strategies to achieve educational goals. The most fundamental concept used to justify time spent in skills training is the prospect of achieving progressively higher levels of skill pertinent to clinical care. For medical care providers, this pro-gression is commonly related to the learning model described by Dreyfus and Dreyfus.14 This model depicts changes in specific mental functions (recollection, recognition, decision, awareness) associated with incremental steps in the progres-sion from novice status to that of expert (Fig. 53-1). The rel-evance of Anders Ericsson’s description of deliberate practice to development of clinical skills is also widely accepted.15 This is predicated on the concept that “expert” performance is fun-damentally different than normal performance and results from behaviors that “reflect a life-long period of deliberate effort to improve performance in a specific domain.”16 The drive to achieve mastery in surgery, provides an aspirational model for the surgeon’s use of simulation because the opportunity for deliberate, repetitive practice of numerous skills in the clinical setting alone is insufficient and in many cases nearly impossi-ble. For this concept to be translated into effective educational results, simulation-based education must be of high quality, and the curricular framework created for its use must be directed toward carefully crafted, attainable, and clinically relevant edu-cational goals.Simulation in Graduate Medical EducationSurgery residency has been a particular area of focus for simula-tion use in assessment and training. The need for safe and rapid skills development is especially important in this group of learn-ers whose time in training is limited and for whom every hour spent in education must be prioritized for highest impact. The added direct costs of operative care in training institutions has also provides a strong imperative to conduct training that mini-mizes negative implications of resident involvement in surgical cases.17 Learning basic skills at the point of care imposes inef-ficiencies that might very well endanger support for the education mission.11. Transcends reliance on rules, guidelines, and maxims2. Intuitive grasp of situations based on deep understanding3. Has a vision of what is possible4. Uses an analytical approach in new situationsExpertProÿcient1. Holistic view of situation2. Prioritizes importance of aspects3. Perceives deviations from the normal pattern4. Employs maxims for guidance, with meanings that adapt to the situation at handNovice1. Rigid adherence to taught rules or plans2. No exercise of discretionary judgementAdvancedbeginner1. Limited situational perception2. All aspects of work treated separately with equal importanceCompetent1. Coping with crowdedness (multiple activities, information)2. Some perception of actions in relation to goals3. Deliberate planning4. Formulates routinesFigure 53-1. Dreyfus model describing stepwise skills development. In surgery, specific stages of expertise are achieved through cognitive learning, technical practice, and experience and are defined by specific cognitive and behavioral characteristics affecting how we perceive, process, and act in the task environment. (Reproduced with permission from University of South Australia; Teaching and Learning in Health Sciences: https://lo.unisa.edu.au/mod/book/view.php?id=611284&chapterid=104113.)Brunicardi_Ch53_p2163-p2186.indd   216522/02/19   4:39 PM 2166SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIDespite early examples of excellence in simulation lab use and fairly wide availability, a survey of residency programs in 2006 suggested the quality of usage for laparoscopic skills training was probably low and that more than half did not use a defined curriculum.18  Also in 2006, the ACGME Residency Review Committee (RRC) for Surgery instituted a formal requirement for simulation training in surgical residency.19 While the core program requirement did not define any specific educational objectives, performance outcomes, or specific methods to be used, there was a mandate that simulation in surgical education be objectives-based and that it be incorpo-rated into residency curricula within 2 years. As of 2016, the relevant core program requirement indicates that “resources must include simulation and skills laboratories” and that “these facilities must address acquisition and maintenance of skills with a competency-based method of evaluation.”20 Since the original notification of the need to conduct this training, man-dated activities have expanded with the pairing of ACGME statements and new American Board of Surgery (ABS) require-ments for certifications in Fundamentals of Laparoscopic Surgery (FLS; instituted for 2010 residency graduates) and in Fundamentals of Endoscopic Surgery (FES; instituted for 2018 residency graduates). Both of these certifications demand lab-based practice in order to successfully pass respective technical skill test components.Both high and low technology and fidelity, off-the-shelf, simulation training solutions have become available for sur-gery residents’ lab-based training. Curricular content such as the ACS-APDS skills modules are readily available to facilitate a sufficient level of implementation to meet the RRC require-ments, although preparation methods have not been specifically prescribed by either the ACGME or the ABS. In 2015, the ABS issued a new requirement for a comprehensive multilevel Flexible Endoscopy Curriculum (FEC) paired with FES certification. This curriculum states explicitly that experiential requirements at the lower levels can be met with simulation methods but it is left to individual programs to decide what preparatory practice in simulation might consist of for their own residents.21Options for simulation use in surgical training are cur-rently numerous and can be implemented with basic facilities and equipment, but the determination to use these methods suc-cessfully requires considerable effort that is greatly aided by fully motivated and engaged faculty members with protected time. There are now numerous guides and recommendations for successful surgical simulation lab start-ups.18,22-24“Bootcamps”Preparatory training for surgery residency both before and immediately after the start of residency is now a widely used educational practice. The rationale for these programs includes early development of basic skills that would be of obvious use to the new trainee as well as determination of the status of basic skills that would serve as a needs assessment to model curricu-lar efforts expected to be most appropriate for the individual resident.25-27 The suggestion that new interns will render safer care has been garnered from results of intensive, short-duration preparatory training that shows higher level of skills measured in simulation are feasible compared to the “control” situation of not using such training.28 However, none of the current reports address whether intensive preparatory training addresses the “July Effect” by improving clinical effectiveness during the earliest months of training.28Much of the training and assessment during these pro-grams is accomplished using simulation methods. No stan-dardized approach has yet been suggested, and at the present time the impact of specific simulation components is difficult to assess for senior students entering surgical training, or new interns. Sound recommendations on this await further study. A single meta-analysis of postgraduate “boot camp” programs both prior to or at the start of residency found that all programs utilized high and low technology simulation methods as “a key component.”29 Although the analysis included all medical spe-cialties, 93% of the studies were surgical in nature, underscor-ing the perceived value of this preparatory training for new surgeons. The examined studies were those where preand posttraining effects were measured in some way. The compiled data revealed that trainees who completed the programs had uni-formly strong increases in skills development, knowledge, and confidence. In 2014 the ABS, ACS, APDS, and Association for Surgical Education, citing the evidence of effectiveness of these now numerous preparatory courses, officially endorsed them as a useful method to position fourth-year students and interns for early success in residency.30 Whether preresidency exposure to surgical simulation can influence a medical student’s decision to pursue a surgical career remains to be determined.SPECIFIC SIMULATION TRAINING AND ASSESSMENT APPLICATIONSTraining Basic Surgical SkillsThe use of the simulation lab to train open, laparoscopic, and flexible endoscopic basic skills in preparation for care and prac-tice clinical constitutes the most accessible and widely adopted set of simulation training practices. In connection with these, the term “proficiency-based” training (sometimes used synony-mously with competency-based or objectives-based) is often used, and can be defined as the use of meaningful performance standards as educational goals for training. Implicit in the term is the expectation that if proficiency standards are achieved, a learner will be better positioned to perform to a desirable stan-dard in the clinical setting. Even these most basic skills have been shown to improve with proficiency-based training.31 Addi-tional benefits of proficiency-based approaches to basic surgical skills include knowledge of a surgical learner’s specific educa-tional needs and design of a larger skills curriculum roadmap that envisions progression to more advanced skills training.Educators at Southern Illinois University implemented a program of intensive lab-based practice of basic skills as a pre-liminary requirement to participate in operative cases. Termed “Verification of Proficiency,” this program targets junior train-ees for assessment of skill using OSATS-like rating instruments, but its unique feature is the definition of a minimal level of skill that would permit a resident to assume the role of operator for specific case types.32,33More recently, the concept of “proficiency-based  progression” has been used to describe a formalized process of use of sequenced proficiency standards and a continuum of progres-sively more advanced and challenging simulation experiences as a potential future model of training.34 Such a model would span whatever period of time was necessary for each learner to progress from basic surgical skills to more advanced ones.Open Surgical Skills. A variety of benchtop models for prac-tice and assessment of basic open skills are available, the most 2Brunicardi_Ch53_p2163-p2186.indd   216622/02/19   4:39 PM 2167SKILLS AND SIMULATIONCHAPTER 53Table 53-1ACS-APDS basic skills curriculum components•	Asepsis and instrument identification•	Knot tying•	Suturing•	Skin flaps•	Skin grafts•	Urethral catheterization•	Airway management•	Chest tube insertion•	Central line insertion•	Surgical biopsy•	Laparotomy opening and closure•	Basic laparoscopy skills•	Advanced laparoscopy skills•	Hand-sewn bowel anastomosis•	Stapled bowel anastomosis•	Arterial anastomosisFigure 53-2. Abdominal wall closure model made from commonly available materials using instructions in the ACS-APDS Basic Skills Curriculum module for this task.well-known of which are the OSATS tasks that remain in use more than 20 years after their inception. The ACS-APDS Basic Skills Curriculum (Table 53-1) is a useful resource for this.Generally, lower-fidelity models are more cost effec-tive for repetitive training because durability with reuse may be better than high-fidelity physical models and replacement costs can be minimized for many tasks. Examples can include simple models for abdominal wall closure (Fig. 53-2). The use of low-fidelity models in well-formulated curricular train-ing can be very effective in increasing resident skill, although high-quality measurement can be labor intensive. Bowel and vascular anastomosis training has been an especially impor-tant point of focus given their prominence and highly technical nature in clinical practice. In a recent analysis of resident expe-rience with gastrointestinal anastomosis, Nemeth reported that although frequently performed (average 67 per resident), stapled anastomosis experience predominates during training (91% of laparoscopic procedures and 82% of open ones), suggesting a relatively small clinical experience with hand-sewn anastomotic methods, which remain critically relevant.35 Simulated bowel anastomosis models are widely available (Fig. 53-3), and there are numerous reports of successful curriculum-based devel-opment of this core technical skill generally utilizing OSATS rating instruments.36-38 Although further study is required to demonstrate a clinical effect of this training, other experience strongly suggests that use of proficiency-based anastomosis training should be the next step. In an example of how this could be used for trainee benefit, Palter conducted a randomized trial of use of a proficiency-based technical skills and cognitive cur-riculum for abdominal wall closure.39 The technical skills com-ponent utilized a low-fidelity model for an OSATS assessments of both lab and OR performance. Residents in the intervention arm performed better on both clinical abdominal wall closure and a test of procedural knowledge than controls.Basic Laparoscopic Manipulative Skills. Current evidence supports the concept that basic laparoscopic skills should be developed in the training lab, avoiding safety concerns as well as the expenditure of time and effort that would result from learning in clinical settings. Specific programs for basic laparo-scopic skills development coupled with skills assessment were set forth 20 years ago at a time when this need was newly articu-lated for surgeons at all levels.7,40,41 These utilized videoscopic training “boxes” for two-handed practice using laparoscopic instruments to manipulate box contents. Programs such as the Rosser drills employed various dexterity tasks emphasizing time for task completion as a measure of performance. Later, McGill investigators began to apply greater scientific rigor to the design Brunicardi_Ch53_p2163-p2186.indd   216722/02/19   4:39 PM 2168SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIABFigure 53-3. A. Hand-sewn GI anastomosis from the ACS-APDS Basic Skills Curriculum module for this task. A full instructional presen-tation is available with the curriculum along with an assessment instrument for the educator to use. B. OSATS stapled bowel anastomosis model. (Reproduced with permission from de Montbrun SL, Macrae H Simulation in surgical education, Clin Colon Rectal Surg. 2012 Sep;25(3):156-165.)and testing of basic skills curricula, with a particular focus on the ability to characterize the skills acquisition process and dif-ferences between learner groups based on careful repetitive  measurement.42 Further study showed that performance, mea-sured using these bench training tasks, correlated with perfor-mance measured in vivo animal models.43 In addition to helping learners prepare for basic tissue manipulation, training on basic tasks were found to shorten the learning curves for more com-plex laparoscopic tasks such as suturing.44Fundamentals of Laparoscopic SurgeryFundamentals of Laparoscopic Surgery (FLS) was devised by minimally invasive surgical leaders in the Society of American Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic Surgeons as a means to assess laparoscopic surgical knowledge and skills for the purposes of certification of basic ability.45 This program represents the first broadly applied effort to demonstrate achievement of a specified level of basic surgical skill with such specific test-ing. Although most utilized by surgical residents, the resulting skills certification is applicable to a broad range of learners, including surgeons in practice as well as laparoscopic sur-geons in specialties other than general surgery. FLS consists of separate tests of knowledge and technical ability. The lat-ter component required integration of simulation tasks with a high degree of validation for both effectiveness in discerning skill and relevance to the respective clinical tasks. The McGill Inanimate System for Training and Evaluation of Laparoscopic Skills (MISTELS) tasks were selected as the technical skills assessment component.46 These were developed independently from the FLS program and adapted to the FLS based on the predictive value of a subset of the tasks for clinical skills mani-fested in the OR. These tasks have remained core features of the certifying examination and have been extensively studied both as training curriculum components and as predictors of clinical performance.47,48 Recent work has suggested that spe-cific proficiency-based training can increase pass rates on FLS to 100%, supporting the general suppositions about the benefits of this model of training.49The more recently available FES serves a similar purpose to FLS for flexible endoscopy.50 This certification adds the important feature of use of a virtual reality flexible endoscopy simulator as one of the platforms for delivery of the technical skills test.Bench Models for Training Specific  Procedural SkillsProcedure-specific simulation offers a unique opportunity to practice and evaluate wholesome surgical skill. This includes training and evaluating the relationship between basic and com-plex technical skills and surgical decision-making. While the majority of procedural simulation trainers focus on bedside procedures such as central venous catheter placement, blad-der catheterization, and intubation, a number of trainers also have been designed to simulate more complex procedures such as laparoscopic ventral hernia, laparoscopic colectomy, and robotic nephrectomy.51-53 Currently, both virtual reality and physical or hybrid models are used for procedure-specific  simulations.54 While each technology has specific benefits, there is still a critical need for fabrication and design approaches that are efficient, cost effective, and produce anatomically accurate models with realistic tissue properties.55 A number of groups have explored the use of three-dimensional (3D) printing with varying degrees of success.56,57 As the printing substrate materi-als and 3D machines continue to decrease in price and increase in ease of use, there will likely be a significant upsurge in the use of this approach to facilitate development of procedure spe-cific simulations. In addition to full immersion virtual reality, a number of groups are still exploring the benefits of computer-based learning for training procedure-specific surgical skills.58The training and assessment benefits of procedure-specific simulation are numerous. Not only does it allow an opportunity to assess technical skill in the context of a multistep procedure, forced errors and critical decisions can be combined with this technology, allowing for a more in-depth learning experience and skills assessment. By way of example, two multistep bed-side procedures were modified: bladder catheterization and central venous catheter insertion. Both simulations had embed-ded clinical scenarios, which if executed incorrectly in real life might produce patient injury due to incorrect technique or equipment choices. During the implementation of these modi-fied, multistep procedures, it was possible to identify individual cognitive and technical errors that serve as opportunities for additional training.59,60 The ACS-APDS Procedural Skills Curriculum was developed to complement the Basic Skills Curriculum and offers detailed learning objectives for a vari-ety of surgical procedures. The goal of this curriculum was to address holistic surgical skills in a context where both technical Brunicardi_Ch53_p2163-p2186.indd   216822/02/19   4:39 PM 2169SKILLS AND SIMULATIONCHAPTER 53Table 53-2ACS-APDS procedural skills curriculum components•	Laparoscopic ventral hernia repair•	Open colon resection, lap right colon resection•	Laparoscopic sigmoid resection•	Open right colon resection•	Laparoscopic/open bile duct exploration•	Laparoscopic ventral/incisional hernia repair (porcine model)•	Laparoscopic appendectomy•	Laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication•	Sentinal node biopsy and axillary lymph node dissection•	Open inguinal/femoral hernia repair•	Laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair•	Laparoscopic/open splenectomy•	Laparoscopic/open cholecystectomy•	Gastric resection and peptic ulcer disease•	Parathyroidectomy/thyroidectomyand cognitive performance could be assessed at the same time.11 The simulation scenarios defined for this curriculum are listed in Table 53-2.Similar to the literature on basic skills training and assess-ment, procedural skills training and assessment has been shown to benefit learners when delivered via a structured curriculum. In addition, procedural skills training in a simulated environ-ment has been shown to transfer to the real-life clinical setting. In 2005, Issenberg et al published a review of the features and uses of simulation training that lead to effective learning.61 After reviewing 109 articles that specifically used simulation as an educational intervention and not for assessment alone, Issenberg and colleagues noted that feedback, repetitive practice, and curricular intervention were among the top three features that lead to effective learning. Of note, in this same article, it was noted that simulator validity was at the bottom of the list of features that lead to effective learning. In essence, trainees need protected time to engage in simulation-based learning exercises that have a high-level focus on deliberate and repetitive practice based on personalized feedback. This model is very similar to that used to train professional athletes.62Transfer of TrainingThe determination that simulation-based education is effective requires assessment of training effect in either the clinical setting or one with a demonstrated relationship to a clinical setting. The latter might result from comparison to a validated “gold standard” training method. Establishing a relationship between lab-based training and performance in the OR requires validated measures of operative skills such as the widely used Global Assessment of Operative Laparoscopic Skills (GOALS) method described by Vassiliou.63 The majority of studies of laparoscopic simulation training that examine transfer of skills to the clinical OR make comparisons to control groups without highly structured and non-simulation based training. The results of these studies should eliminate any doubts that surgical learners, especially students and residents, can achieve training benefits from both proficiency-based and timeor repetitionor session number-based simulation practice. When the results of proficiency-based training are dissected out from the other models of training, consistently higher levels of clinical or 3animal OR performance is observed with such training compared to without.64-67 In one such review of skills transfer studies conducted between 2007 and 2013, Dawe reported results for general surgery and gynecology procedures using different virtual reality and non-VR laparoscopic simulation platforms (Table 53-3).48,67-77 For the 12 randomized controlled trials with surgical residents as study subjects, all but one showed significantly better clinical performance for intervention groups compared to non–simulation-trained controls.The comprehensive reviews of skills transfer data under-score the wide disparities in study design characteristics, metrics, simulator types, and the difficulties in comparing effectiveness of different simulation interventions. The “transfer effectiveness ratio” (TER) has been forwarded as a means of expressing the relative magnitude of the training effect and may provide a basis for comparison of cost or time efficiency of different training methods.78 To determine TER for a simulation training effort, one would calculate the difference in clinical effort (time or some other measure such as number of cases) between simulator-trained and alternative-trained groups to achieve a desired level of clinical performance, divided by training time received by the simulator-trained group.Korndorffer raised concerns with studies of transfer of training when, irrespective of the improved results in lab performance with proficiency-based practice, residents studied by their group did not readily meet performance standards for more advanced skills set by expert surgeons in practice.79 Looking for opportunities to maximize the effectiveness of simulation training, Stefanidis proposed training to “automaticity” by adding a secondary visuospatial task to practice with laparoscopic suturing, but only after proficiency levels were achieved with more standard laparoscopic suturing practice.80 It was suggested that the added attentional challenge likely prompted the achievement of automaticity, the end result of which was much greater performance than was seen for proficiency-based practice alone. It is not clear, however, that simply adding to task difficulty improves training results if learner capabilities are not taken into account. In a separate study, Stefanidis also reported that increased task difficulty during proficiency-based training causes measurable increases in cognitive workload and that when confronted with these challenges, novice learners did not perform better than those in proficiency-based training at a lower level of difficulty, suggesting a possible mismatch between task challenges and capacity to learn.81 More work is required to characterize the proper balance of training difficulty and the capacity for learning in specific learners or learner groups.Virtual RealityThe use of virtual reality (VR) simulation as a way to deliver training experiences in surgery was proposed by Satava in 1993.82 Within a few years, practical applications of this technology led to the first commercially available laparoscopic simulators and studies to determine their value. The earliest and most functional VR platform was MIST-VR which permitted manipulation of abstract virtual objects using a realistic physical interface that transduced instrument motion into actions that could be observed in the virtual environment (Fig. 53-4).83 Even without a force feedback apparatus and haptic, or “sense of touch,” cues expected with instrument–instrument or instrument–object interactions, learners could experience the psychomotor challenges of videolaparoscopy and iteratively train until Brunicardi_Ch53_p2163-p2186.indd   216922/02/19   4:39 PM 2170SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 53-3Randomized trials studying the effects of virtual reality training on surgical and OB-GYN resident operative performance vs. control trainees without virtual reality trainingAUTHOR (YEAR)PARTICIPANTS (N)  AND SIMULATORPROCEDURE ASSESSEDCONCLUSIONAhlberg et al68 (2007)PGY 1–2 surgery residentsIG (7); Lap Sim VR simulatorCG (6) no simulationLaparoscopic cholecystectomyIG made fewer errors (P = 0.004), exposure (P = 0.040),  clipping and tissue division (P <0.008), and dissection (P <0.031) compared with CGBanks et al69 (2007)PGY 1 GYN residentsIG (10); Limbs & Things  box trainerCG (10) no simulationBilateral tubal ligationIG scored higher than CG with all three evaluation tools: task-specific checklist (P = 0.002),  OSATS (P = 0.003), pass-fail grade  (P = 0.003)Cosman et al70 (2007)Junior surgical traineesIG (5); Lap Sim VR simulatorCG (5) no simulationLaparoscopic cholecystectomy  (clip application and cystic artery division)IG had fewer errors (P = 0.05), better bimanual coordination (P = 0.05), higher global score  (P = 0.04) than CGGala et al71 (2013)GYN residentsIG (48); FLS box trainerCG (54) no simulationPomeroy bilateral tubal ligationIG had higher OSATS progression score than  CG (P = 0.03)Hogle et al72 (2009)PGY 1 surgery residentsIG (6); Lap Sim VR simulatorCG (6) no simulationLaparoscopic cholecystectomyNo significant difference between IG and CG in GOALSDomain areas of depth perception, bimanual dexterity, efficiency, tissue handling, autonomyLarsen et al73 (2009)Firstand second-year OB-GYN registrarsIG (13); Lap Sim VR simulatorCG (11) no simulationSalpingectomyIG had higher score than CG in OSA-LS scale  (P <0.001). IG completed procedure faster than CG (P <0.001)Sroka et al48 (2010)PGY 1–3 surgery residentsIG (8); FLS box trainerCG (8) no simulationLaparoscopic cholecystectomy (excision from  liver bed)IG had higher total GOALS score than CG  (P <0.001) and better GOALS domain scores  for bimanual dexterity (P = 0.04), tissue handling (P = 0.04)Van Sickle  et al74 (2008)PGY 3, 5–6 surgery residentsIG (11); MIST-VR simulatorCG no simulationNissen fundoplication (placement of intracorporeal sutures)IG completed task in less time (P <0.003), committed fewer errors (P <0.01), and had fewer needle manipulations (P <0.05) than CGZendejas et al75 (2011)Surgery residentsIG (26); Guildford MATTU TEP hernia task trainerCG (24) no simulationTEP inguinal hernia repairIG faster on first procedure (P <0.001) and had higher participation rates (P <0.001). For subsequent repairs IG remained faster than CG. GOALS score higher for IG (P = 0.001). Complications and overnight stay less likely for first TEP procedure in IG (P <0.05).Palter et al76 (2012)PGY 2–4 surgery residentsIG (9); curriculum including simulation training on LapSim VR simulatorCG (9) no simulationRight hemicolectomyIG had higher OSATS score (P = 0.030) than CG.IG able to perform more operative steps than CG  (P = 0.021)Palter et al77 (2013)PGY 1–2 surgery residentsIG (9); curriculum including simulation training on LapSim VR simulator and on FLS box trainerCG (9) no simulationCholecystectomyIG had higher OSATS scores for first four procedures (P = 0.004, P = 0.036, P = 0.021, P = 0.023)PGY = postgraduate year; IG = intervention group; CG = control group; VR = virtual reality; OSATS = Objective Structured Assessment of Technical Skills; GOALS = Global Operative Assessment of Laparoscopic Skills; OSA-LS = Objective Structured Assessment of Laparoscopic Salpingectomy;  TEP = totally extraperitoneal.Simulators: LapSim VR simulator (Surgical Science, Gothenburg, Sweden); laparoscopic stimulator and Minimal Access Therapy Unit (MATTU) (Limbs and Things, Bristol, UK); Fundamentals of Laparoscopic Surgery (FLS) Training Box simulator (SAGES, Los Angeles, California, USA); Minimally Invasive Surgical Trainer—Virtual Reality (MIST-VR; Mentice, Gothenburg, Sweden).Modified with permission from Dawe SR, Pena GN, Windsor JA, et al. Systematic review of skills transfer after surgical simulation-based training,  Br J Surg. 2014 Aug;101(9):1063-1076.Brunicardi_Ch53_p2163-p2186.indd   217022/02/19   4:39 PM 2171SKILLS AND SIMULATIONCHAPTER 53ABFigure 53-4. The surgical interface for MIST VR (A), consisting of rightand left-handed laparoscopic instruments on a gimbaled mount that transduces instrument motions into digital spatial data, which determine the location and actions of instruments in the virtual space (shown in B) in the course of manipulating two-handed virtual objects. Although basic renderings of geometric shapes, these virtual objects could be grasped, positioned, and treated with electrosurgery instruments, and they were shown to be an effective means to transfer skills to clinical surgery despite a relatively low level of fidelity to human tissues and absence of haptic feedback in the instrument interface.Table 53-4Studies comparing laparoscopic operative performance after training on virtual reality simulators vs. videoscopic box trainersAUTHOR (YEAR)STUDY ARMS (N)SUBJECTSPROFICIENCY-BASED TRAINING?CONCLUSIONSHamilton et al92  (2002)VR (24)Box trainer (25)Firstand second-year  surgical residentsNoImproved rater-blinded global assessments of laparoscopic cholecystectomy for VR but not box-trainer trained subjectsYoungblood  et al93 (2005)VR (16)Box trainer (17)No training (13)Medical studentsNoVR-trained students performed better than box trainer-trained on selected tasks in live porcine model. Both trained groups outperformed nontrained.Diesen et al94  (2011)VR (10)Box trainer (8)InternsMedical studentsNoNo difference in interval blinded video assessments of animal OR task performanceVR = virtual reality; OR = operating room.performance goals for precision, efficiency, and error avoidance were achieved. Performance measurement was automated and included time, instrument motion, and electrosurgery use metrics, as well as a tally of the occurrence of predefined errors. All metrics were free of human observer bias. Early studies of VR training using both proficiency-based and non–proficiency-based training methods showed it to be an effective means of improving laparoscopic skill both in the lab and in the operating room compared to non-VR trained controls.68,84-87 Since the first studies of this type were performed almost 20 years ago, several comprehensive reviews of the growing body of literature on VR have continued to support the conclusion that skills acquired in VR transfer to the clinical setting (Table 53-3), not only for laparoscopy, but also for flexible endoscopy, sinuscopic surgery, and endovascular interventions.66,67,88-91 Largely due to small study sizes and some 4design limitations, the quality of evidence of these studies is consistently described as below level I.Based on available evidence, expanded use of VR for  skills training could be justified, but few comparisons of training effectiveness have been made between physical laparoscopic video trainer (“box” trainer) and laparoscopic VR simulator-based training. Crossover studies designed to determine if training in one environment improves performance in the other have not been especially helpful in defining the value of either. Only a few studies have compared the effects of the two training methods on OR performance (Table 53-4). Although some advantage has been suggested, the prevailing view is that both can be used for highly effective laparoscopic practice. Until better comparisons are made, use of proficiency-based training in the context of a larger curriculum appears to be the best way to achieve good training results irrespective of the training platform used.5Brunicardi_Ch53_p2163-p2186.indd   217122/02/19   4:39 PM 2172SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIVR simulator systems are significant capital investments for simulation centers that have competing procurement priori-ties. In a prospective randomized trial, Orzech analyzed the cost impact of each type of training across Canadian residency pro-grams and found that the transfer of training effect was greater for VR as compared to the box trainer group. However, box trainer use was found to be more cost effective except in larger residencies.95 Although the reasons for the latter finding require further analysis, the high acquisition costs of VR systems can be offset by an economy of scale benefit not realized with physical models where staffing for purposes of task setup and assess-ment and consumable items related to many tasks represent additive costs. Flexible endoscopy VR simulator device sharing was shown to work effectively for a skills acquisition program across a network of Texas institutions where procurement of numerous such simulators might not be practical.96The role of haptics has been debated for laparoscopic VR simulators since the inclusion of sophisticated force feedback hardware adds substantially to the cost of surgical VR as well as to system computing demands. In simulated endoscopic and laparoscopic procedures, effective haptic cues are important contributors to the fidelity of the experience. For basic skills acquisition these features have not been shown to offer significant advantages over nonhaptic VR systems, although for more advanced skills haptic cues may permit greater precision of instrument use.97,98 However, surgical VR has advanced to the point where inventories of procedure types offered on specific commercially available systems are quite extensive and these will inevitably increase and encompass entire procedures. The realism of the user experience, including the haptic experience, may prove essential to effective learning of advanced surgical skills in a new generation of VR devices. The current generation of laparoscopic simulators are highly capable devices with a high degree of graphical realism, full haptic features, and numerous tasks available for training basic and procedural skills for general surgical, urologic, and gynecologic procedures (Fig. 53-5).Despite encouraging progress made in VR simulation, two separate publications in 2007 and 2015 identified ongoing com-putational challenges in development of very high-fidelity simu-lations for surgery.99,100 These include the unique VR problems of modeling human tissues and the added demands of rendering the appropriate deformations when tissues are manipulated. One of the practical examples of this is that of guidewire behavior during VR as compared to real-life endovascular procedures, where variable elasticity characteristics of blood vessel walls were observed to result in real tissue or wire deformations that the VR software could not depict accurately.101 Also identified were disparities between levels of resourcing for surgical VR versus mainstream computer gaming, raising important ques-tions on how the full power of this technology can be realized to more fully simulate complex operations with a high degree of fidelity and realism.Virtual Reality for Flexible EndoscopyThe use of virtual reality simulation to train for flexible endos-copy procedures is now well established and supported by consistent evidence of both skills transfer. Sedlack compared colonoscopy skills between small groups of inexperienced VR-trained and nontrained gastroenterology fellows and found that VR training resulted in farther progression into the colon, better inspection skills, and a higher percentage of completed studies (those that reached the cecum).102 This performance advantage extended out to 30 posttraining procedures. In the years since that report, four randomized controlled trials of VR training with blinding to training status during posttraining clinical colonos-copy have been conducted.103-106 Despite methodological issues with each of these trials (no proficiency-based training, unsuper-vised VR practice on one, vaguely defined training characteris-tics of control groups), all but one showed training benefits for Figure 53-5. Three different current generation laparoscopic virtual reality simulators. A. LapVR VR Simulator, CAE Healthcare, Sarasota, FL. B. Simbionix LAP Mentor VR simulator, Littleton, CO. C. LapSim VR simulator, Surgical Science AB, Gothenburg, Sweden.ABCBrunicardi_Ch53_p2163-p2186.indd   217222/02/19   4:39 PM 2173SKILLS AND SIMULATIONCHAPTER 53ABFigure 53-6. Representation of patient-specific aortic vascular anatomy during simulation of endovascular aortic replacement (EVAR) for abdominal aortic aneurysm, with distal graft limbs in the ballerina (A. crossed) and standard (B. uncrossed) configurations. This example of patient-specific rehearsal requires preparation the virtual aorta from a DICOM (Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine) format file of patient computed tomography (CT) or CT angiogram imaging data. Image is rendered on ANGIO Mentor VR simulator (3D Systems, Littleton, CO). (Reproduced with permission from Pakeliani D, Van Herzeele I, Lachat ML, et al: EVAR 2020: Training Future Aortic Spe-cialists. Emerging needs and the role of simulation. Endovascular Today 2017  March;16(3):95-100.)previously inexperienced VR-trained residents versus controls, especially in the earlier posttraining clinical cases based on either subjective determination of competency or measurement of procedure length. The study that did not show improved clini-cal performance compared to controls was a noninferiority com-parison to control subjects with undefined patient-based training where the two groups performed comparably well. Randomized trials of VR training for upper endoscopy have shown signifi-cant performance advantages in both procedure length and sub-jective assessment of competency compared to both nontrained and patient-based training control groups.107-109Based on the highly standardized test environment that can be experienced in VR and concurrent validity to clinical endos-copy, the SAGES FES program utilizes VR flexible endoscopy simulation for certification of skills. Systematic review of pub-lished literature on VR flexible endoscopy skills cite the need for better quality evidence in support of best training practices and improved patient outcomes.110 Further study is required, especially in the area of proficiency-based VR flexible endos-copy training, which has been generally underutilized.Virtual Reality for Endovascular InterventionsVirtual reality simulation has been shown to be an effective alternative to training with animal or cadaver models for catheter-based vascular interventions. Current simulations allow development of basic guidewire and catheter handling skills, as well as practice in use of fluoroscopy, angioplasty, and stenting techniques. Procedural training for coronary, carotid, renal, neuro, peripheral vascular, and other interven-tions are feasible with measurement of learner performance in numerous areas such as procedure and fluoroscopy time, con-trast use, and intervention effectiveness. Simulators display fluoroscopy images and allow for the selection and insertion of virtual catheter, balloon, and stent types, which are pertinent to the procedure being performed (Fig. 53-6). In small randomized trials, VR training has been shown to increase residents’ periph-eral angioplasty skills with transfer of lab-acquired skills to the clinical OR.111,112 After having previously shown that VR simu-lator assessment can effectively discriminate the level of clini-cal experience with carotid artery stenting among experienced interventionalists, Van Herzeele demonstrated that experienced interventionalists could also significantly increase carotid artery stenting skills following a 2-day intensive course of didactic and VR training for this procedure.113,114 Following training, decreased procedure and fluoroscopy time and decreased time for placement and retrieval of the embolic protection device were observed. Although differing clinical outcomes were not seen in this small study, it was noted that internal carotid artery spasm frequency decreased after training.The incorporation of actual patient vascular anatomic information taken from computerized tomography data into a vascular interventional simulation as an aid to procedural plan-ning or technical procedure performance has been referred to as “mission rehearsal” or more commonly now, procedure specific rehearsal or procedure specific simulation. It has been described most extensively for carotid artery stenting procedures and high-lights how VR simulation can be directed toward the immedi-ate problems of clinical practice. Cates’ brief report of a single procedure was followed by small studies further demonstrat-ing the feasibility and general impressions of the value of this method.115-117 In a randomized comparison of trainees who per-formed either part-task rehearsal or rehearsal of the entire proce-dure, Willaert reported that a similar performance benefit could be achieved, suggesting a potentially more time-efficient way to train, although the embolic protection device was in place slightly longer in the part-task-trained group.118Brunicardi_Ch53_p2163-p2186.indd   217322/02/19   4:39 PM 2174SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIIn a recent multinational European study, Desender and colleagues randomized a series of 100 patients scheduled to undergo elective endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR) for infrarenal aortic aneurysm to either have their procedure rehearsed with VR simulation preoperatively or to have the pro-cedure performed without rehearsal.119 There were 26% fewer minor errors, 76% fewer major errors, and a 27% fewer errors causing procedural delay in the VR rehearsal group. In addition, this group had significantly fewer angiograms performed to visualize proximal and distal graft landing zones. In a follow-up of this study, Desender reported that patient-specific rehearsal before EVAR resulted in alteration of the operative plan for proximal landing zone (54%), distal landing zone (76%), stent graft main body size (16%), contralateral limb size (34%) or orientation (16%), and iliac extension size (28%). Ninety-two percent of these changes were implemented during the actual EVAR case.119Patient-Specific VR Surgery SimulationIn addition to patient specific rehearsal for endovascular inter-ventions, VR simulations for OR surgical procedures have begun to use patient imaging data to rehearse procedures preop-eratively. While many surgeons consciously and subconsciously mentally rehearse procedures before entering the operating room, this process does not allow for fully explicit informa-tion sharing between team members. Moreover, even when the surgeon verbalizes a plan for other members of the OR team after the mental rehearsal, it is not uncommon to unintentionally exclude important details that team members may value. The use of anatomically accurate VR simulations, based on patient-specific anatomy, may allow for team-based rehearsals and reduce the risk of human error. In addition, VR-based rehearsals may also facilitate doctor-patient communication.120Patient-specific VR simulations have recently emerged for a variety of complex operations including pancreatectomies, hepatectomies, renal surgery, and hand surgery.120-123 For one of the renal surgery simulations, patient-specific computed tomog-raphy (CT) data was captured and used to create 3D imaging for incorporation into the simulation.122 The anatomical accuracy of various structures such as arteries, veins, ureters, and even tumors was reported to be high. Another group compared the appearance of individual vascular structures while performing several patient-specific virtual hepatectomies simultaneously with real-life hepatectomies and also noted a high degree of accuracy. In addition, similar to the way CT angiograms are used in the OR for surgical planning, this group was able to increase and decrease the transparency level of the patient spe-cific VR simulation and use it both as a real-time operative guide (minimal transparency mode) as well as an operative planning guide (high transparency–vessel only view). This enabled one system to be used seamlessly throughout the actual operation.123According to reports, the time needed to create patient-specific VR simulations is relatively short. On average, it took approximate 2.5 hours each for both the hepatectomy and pan-createctomy simulations.120 In addition, compared to the use of 3D printed simulations, patient-specific VR simulations are readily reusable and do not consume as many resources. While these recent advances are quite promising, patient-specific VR simulators are a new technology, and thus additional studies are required to more fully understand the pros and cons of introduc-ing this technology into the patient care arena. As there contin-ues to be major improvements in patient-specific 3D rendering, including organ and tissue deformation in reaction to surgical manipulation, this increases the possibility of even more sophis-ticated and accurate VR simulations that can be used for pre-operative planning and rehearsing for complicated procedures.Robotic Surgery SimulatorsAfter the da Vinci surgical system was first introduced in the United States in 1999, a number of simulation systems for teaching robotic surgery emerged. While there have been sev-eral versions of the da Vinci system deployed worldwide, the basic system components usually include dual hand controls, foot pedals, and a controllable 3D camera.124 Consistency in these system components allow for similar consistency in simu-lation design and delivery. Currently, there are four different simulators geared towards imparting some level of competency in using the da Vinci System: the SEP-Robot (SurgicalSim Educational Platform Robot; SimSurgery, Oslo, Norway); RoSS (Robotic Surgery Simulator-Simulated Surgical Systems, San Jose, CA); dV-Trainer (Mimic Simulation, Seattle, WA), and the da Vinci Skills Simulator (Intuitive Surgical, Santa Clara, CA).124,125 The SEP-Robot is a desktop-like system for training robotic skills in a VR graphical interface. The da Vinci Skills Simulator, also called the “backpack,” is a hardware system that loads VR simulations into the actual da Vinci console.126 The RoSS and dV-Trainer systems are stand-alone devices with surgical controls resembling those of the da Vinci system.124 These simulators largely focus on hand-eye coordination, tissue manipulation, suturing and knot tying.127 The major benefit of VR simulators for training da Vinci robotic skills is that they produce performance metrics including time, error measures, and motion analysis.124 These simulators are increasingly being used for training novice surgeons in robotic skills for a variety of surgical specialties.When assessing simulator validity, researchers have noted that the use of robotic surgery simulators does translate to the clinical environment and the learning curve for initial console training for surgeons is significantly decreased.124,126 Unfortunately, the available robotic surgery simulators still come with a high sticker price and varying agreement on the level of fidelity that is currently present in these technologies.124 These deficiencies are likely due to the early stage of the robotic surgery approach, and it is likely that cheaper and more sophis-ticated systems will be available in the near future.128Fundamentals of Robotic SurgeryThe Fundamentals of Robotic Surgery (FRS) is a robotic surgi-cal skills training and assessment program designed to provide a proficiency-based curriculum of basic technical skills to prepare surgeons for performing robotic surgery procedures across a wide range of specialties. The FRS program was developed over a 2-year period by subject matter experts from multiple surgi-cal societies, surgical educational societies, surgical boards, and other governing organizations through a series of four consensus conferences, which included over 80 international robotic sur-gery experts, behavioral psychologists, medical educators, stat-isticians, and psychometricians.129 The multidisciplinary team of experts agreed upon the critical skills and tasks to be included in a comprehensive basic curriculum, and a task deconstruction was performed to identify the tasks, subtasks, and errors that needed to be measured. A modified Delphi methodology was then used to create a matrix of specific robotic surgery tasks, common errors, desired outcomes, and quantitative metrics to 6Brunicardi_Ch53_p2163-p2186.indd   217422/02/19   4:39 PM 2175SKILLS AND SIMULATIONCHAPTER 53Table 53-5The four online modules for the fundamentals of robotic surgery curriculumModule 1Introduction to Surgical Robotic Systems, includes an overview of minimally invasive surgery, advantages of robotic assisted surgery, components of robotic systems, and system functionalityModule 2Didactic Instructions for Robotic Surgery Systems, provides an overview of robotic surgery systems, as well as detailed information regarding the pre-, intra-, and postoperative phasesModule 3Psychomotor Skills Curriculum, consists of background and general principles of the psychomotor tasks, an introduction to the physical model on which the tasks are performed, and general scoring guidelines for all the tasks, followed by detailed descriptions of each task, including the targeted primary and secondary skills and metricsModule 4Team Training and Communication Skills, includes background on the degradation of situation awareness and the TeamSTEPPS process followed by detailed content covering communication, situational awareness, mutual support, leadership, the preoperative phase, robotic docking, intraoperative phase, postoperative phase, and a review of five scenariossupport those outcomes. Finally, a second round classic Delphi anonymous rating was used to ensure concurrence, prioritize the task rankings, and eliminate low-scoring tasks.All trainees must first complete an online curriculum consisting of four modules. Each of the four online modules is followed by a short quiz, requiring a minimum of 70% cor-rect to proceed in the training (Table 53-5). The curriculum also includes a cumulative, cognitive test following completion of all modules.ABFigure 53-7. A. The simulated abdominal cavity for training in the Fundamentals of Robotic Surgery. B. The 18-cm removable dome model featuring well-defined areas for executing each of the seven psychomotor exercises outlined in Table 53-6. (Used with permission from the Institute for Surgical Excellence.)Following online course completion, trainees must com-plete seven psychomotor exercises using a surgical robot, a simulated abdomen, and an 18-cm, removable dome model (Fig. 53-7).The psychomotor exercises consist of the following tasks: docking/instrument insertion, ring tower transfer, knot tying, railroad track, 3rd arm cutting, puzzle piece dissection, and ves-sel energy dissection (Table 53-6).NONTECHNICAL SKILLSFor surgeons, the term “nontechnical skills” refers to the cog-nitive knowledge and teamwork-related abilities that must be integrated with psychomotor skills and abilities. There are no sharp demarcations between these areas of skill, but different simulation methods are suitable for training each, and all should be addressed.High-Fidelity Patient Simulation and Team SkillsRecognition of the role of human factors in the occurrence of preventable errors has spawned various efforts to train behav-iors conducive to high-performing teams. Crew resource man-agement (CRM) training utilizing simulation has been credited with increased safety in aviation.130,131 Lessons learned from CRM have been adapted to medical training with simulators focusing on medical team performance in complex clinical situ-ations. This development came about in the 1990s driven pri-marily by anesthesiologists responsible for establishing the first high-fidelity simulation environments.132,133 These were devel-oped for simulation of crisis-level events where management could be practiced under realistic but safe conditions.134-136 Such training could be scaled to involve a single learner to focus on clinical management up to an entire care team able to practice team processes. Development of a program for such training requires an understanding of the principles underlying team effectiveness and the specific characteristics of an expert team. In a 2012 discussion paper on team-based health care emerging from the Best Practices Innovation Collaborative of the Institute of Medicine (IOM) Roundtable on Value & Science-Driven Health Care, such principles were clearly laid out following a careful analysis of effective medical teams across the country (Table 53-7).137 This document provides an excellent review of characteristics and values that surgical teams can aspire to. The necessity to train these skills has been widely accepted as Brunicardi_Ch53_p2163-p2186.indd   217522/02/19   4:39 PM 2176SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IITable 53-6The seven psychomotor dome tasks for the fundamentals of robotic surgery curriculumTask 1: Docking/Instrument InsertionThe first psychomotor exercise provides training and assessment of proper docking and instrument insertion using the simulated abdomen.Task 2: Ring Tower TransferThe trainee removes a ring from the right middle tower and places it on the lower left tower. Primary skills assessed include hand, eye, and instrument coordination, camera navigation, and use of the camera pedal.Task 3: Knot TyingThe trainee ties a surgeon’s knot to approximate two eyelets such that they touch each other. Primary skills assessed include appropriate handling of suture material and tying secure knots.Task 4: Railroad TrackThe trainee must perform horizontal mattress suturing through a series of target points to approximate the tissue. Primary skills assessed include holding and manipulation of the needle, following the curve of the needle, utilizing the full range of motion of the endowrist, and using graspers.Task 5: 3rd Arm CuttingThe trainee must switch control between different instruments to use the monopolar scissors to cut a simulated vein. Primary skills assessed include switching between and controlling multiple robot arms and cutting.Task 6: Puzzle Piece DissectionIn this task, the trainee must cut and remove a puzzle shape without incising the underlying tissue or cutting outside of the lines. Primary skills assessed include dissection, cutting, atraumatic tissue handling, sharp dissection, and blunt dissection.Task 7: Vessel Energy DissectionThe trainee must dissect through a fat layer to expose a vessel then coagulate the vessel at two points and finally cut the vessel between the two coagulated points. Primary skills assessed include accurate activation and use of energy sources, dissection of vessels and tissues, cutting and coagulation of vessels, and multiple arm control.Table 53-7Principles of team-based health care•	Shared goals: The team—including the patient and, where appropriate, family members or other support persons—works to establish shared goals that reflect patient and family priorities, and can be clearly articulated, understood, and supported by all team members.•	Clear roles: There are clear expectations for each team member’s functions, responsibilities, and accountabilities, which optimize the team’s efficiency and often make it possible for the team to take advantage of division of labor, thereby accomplishing more than the sum of its parts.•	Mutual trust: Team members earn each other’s trust, creating strong norms of reciprocity and greater opportunities for shared achievement.•	Effective communication: The team prioritizes and continuously refines its communication skills. It has consistent channels for candid and complete communication, which are accessed and used by all team members across all settings.•	Measurable processes and outcomes: The team agrees  on and implements reliable and timely feedback on successes and failures in both the functioning of the team and achievement of the team’s goals. These are used to track and improve performance immediately and over time.Reproduced with permission from Mitchell P, Wynia M, Golden R,  et al. Core Principles & Values of Effective Team-Based Health Care. Discussion Paper. Institute of Medicine, October 2012.a means of increasing the safety of healthcare. There are meth-ods to accomplish medical team training that do not involve simulation, but high-fidelity patient simulation has proven to be highly effective in increasing health care team competency, and systematic reviews have given evidence based endorsement of this approach.138Simulation training for communication and other teamwork-pertinent nontechnical skills requires learners to be embed-ded in realistic scenarios pertinent to a healthcare team’s 7actual clinical responsibilities where activities and interactions prompted by the simulated clinical circumstances can be prac-ticed and observed. The computer-driven high-fidelity manikin simulator serving as the “patient” at the center of these activities can be monitored and controlled to demonstrate realistic physi-ology consistent with the clinical condition needed for the  scenario.139 Software-driven, physiologic changes from the baseline state can occur in response to either manual commands or programmed adjustments to accurately depict, for example, new, ongoing and unexpected clinical developments with blood loss, sepsis, or myocardial ischemia. Basic interventions such as airway management, drug administration and wound care for moulaged body parts can also be performed. Hybrid simulations using both manikin and open abdominal or laparoscopic surgi-cal simulators have also been used to extend scenarios to an operating room setting, with all members of the surgical team engaged in their role-specific tasks.136,140,141 These events can be conducted in a dedicated simulation suite or in an actual clinical area where it would be termed in situ simulation.The postsimulation debriefing is an essential compo-nent of simulation-based team training. This is where learning points are reinforced and progress towards desired knowledge, attitudes, and behavior can be developed.142,143 Participants are prompted to reflect on the events of the simulation and to openly discuss positive and negative aspects of the experience. The debriefing environment and discussion ought to be open, nonjudgmental, and directed at improvement in individual and overall team performance. A facilitator with strong content knowledge should ensure that the discussion includes identifica-tion of gaps between the observed and desired performance. An Brunicardi_Ch53_p2163-p2186.indd   217622/02/19   4:39 PM 2177SKILLS AND SIMULATIONCHAPTER 53effective facilitator is cognizant of the need to keep the debrief-ing learner-centric and to keep discussion focused on oppor-tunities for improvement. Although debriefing is uniformly viewed as essential to health care team simulation effectiveness and structured debriefing models are frequently cited as highly effective, there is no consensus on which specific methods, including video review debriefings, represent best practices.144 Quality of implementation is consistently cited as the most important contributing factor to effectiveness of debriefing.The complexity of team-managed clinical events makes measurement of team performance challenging, but several assessment tools have been developed and used successfully in simulation settings. NOTECHS (Non-Technical Skills) and the NOTSS (Non-Technical Skills for Surgeons) instruments have been used to study nontechnical abilities of individuals in surgi-cal teams.141,145-147 The principal focus of these rating scales is on the quality and effectiveness of situational awareness and com-munication. Instruments such as the Mayo High Performance Teamwork scale or the surgery-specific OTAS (Observational Team Assessment Scale) place focus on the team dynamics that extend beyond the single team member.148,149 These have been used to detect changes in team performance with training. Rosen suggested a framework for a best practices approach to team performance assessment in simulation that details specific appli-cations of measurement techniques in the simulation training environment.150Simulation training directed at nontechnical skills has been shown to improve clinical performance and improve knowledge and attitudes about team functioning as measured in simulated surgical settings such as the trauma bay and the OR for interdis-ciplinary surgical teams and for surgical trainees.136,151-154 Two systematic reviews of simulation training to increase team skills in the operating room consistently bear out this result, but both also cited the small number of studies where simulation training effects were investigated in the clinical OR setting and lack of evidence of improved clinical outcomes with such training.155,156ERROR PREVENTIONError avoidance and prevention are the overarching goals of sur-gical care and the time-honored focus of surgical training.157 Fac-ulty who are responsible for training the next generation of highly qualified surgeons must facilitate the delicate balance between resident autonomy and patient safety. From a training perspective, gradual increases in patient responsibility, autonomous decision-making, and operative action provide a critical opportunity for independent hands-on performance, critical thinking, and action-based skill assessment. However, resident autonomy must be bal-anced with the goal of delivering high-quality, error-free patient care. A key component to achieving residency training goals includes exposure to techniques and strategies for avoiding errors. The relationship between errors and patient safety is well estab-lished in the literature and is also the cornerstone of the case review process for surgical morbidity and mortality conferences.158 Simulation technology allows trainees the opportunity to execute a variety of tasks and procedures while also experiencing the cognitive demands of surgery, including error correction and surgical planning decisions. Fig. 53-8 presents a framework for categorizing surgical errors that may take place on the cognitive-motor continuum.159Simulation-based curricular approaches to exposing and training surgical errors include (a) the use of error-enabled 8CognitiveError preventionWhat will prevent an error?Knows the anatomy: right  technique; natural hx of  disease; how to avoid  an errorSelect the right operation; the right stitch; the right instrumentWhat should you be  concerned about?Cognitive-motorError recognitionEstimate errorrisk for: technicalapproach andpatient selectionWhich of thesemay result in anerror?Error rescueWhat areyour optionsfor errorrescue?Describewhat youwould do ifError preventionPre-error makesadjustments totechnical approachbased on errorpreventionError recognitionNear miss recognitionfollowed by correctiveactionError rescuePost-error knows andexecutes options forerror correctionIdentify propertechnique;potential error:error riskKnows -surgicaloptionsExample: Plansahead of time toadjust tensionduring knot tyingbased on tissuetypeExample: Recognizesthat the first knot wasa little tight then makesan adjustment to getthe second knot justrightExample: First knotpulled throughRescue: Freshenstissue edge, placesa new stitchError loopFigure 53-8. A framework for understanding error prevention, error recognition, and error rescue/correction during both the cognitive phase as well as the cognitive-motor phase where there is fluid integration and updating of motor and cognitive decisions. This fluid integration allows for an error loop, as each decision is based on the results of each motor action in a dynamic fashion where an error can take place with each decision or action. (Reproduced with permission from Pugh CM, Santacaterina S, DaRosa DA, et al: Intra-operative decision making: more than meets the eye, J Biomed Inform. 2011 Jun;44(3):486-496.)Brunicardi_Ch53_p2163-p2186.indd   217722/02/19   4:39 PM 2178SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIsimulations, where the learner can make any of a variety of errors during the course of the task; and (b) the use of forced-error simulations, where the learner experiences a specific, usually unexpected error and demonstrates error management as well as options for correction. Error management is a human factors process that includes making, detecting, and correcting errors.160,161 Several studies show that there is wide variation in the timing and type of operative decisions that residents make when interacting with an error-enabled simulation.112,162-164 Specific error training simulations have been developed using a cognitive task analysis approach to guide the design of error scenarios. Cognitive task analysis involves the use of structured interviews to explore how experts approach the error management process, including intraoperative decision-making and technical approaches.165,166 The error-enabled approach allows for a broad assessment of learning needs. The forced-error approach allows instructors to engage in specific error management skills and metrics. Error-enabled and forced-error surgical simulation trainers have been used in a variety of research and training modules to allow observation and assessment of surgical residents as they independently perform operative procedures and practice the error management process.112,166,167Another approach to error training and assessment is the use of assessments that focus on errors. Current assessment tools for surgical skills include task-specific and global rating scales, final product analysis, and documentation of critical fail-ures.160,168 These existing tools for assessing surgical residents largely focus on manual techniques and procedure time and do not capture the cause of resident performance failures.169 Use of error-related theories in human factors allows for the devel-opment of error-centric skills assessments.161,170,171 One study used previously developed human error classifications, includ-ing omission versus commission and cognitive versus technical as a means of assessing surgical residents.162 Omission errors were defined as failure to perform a step entirely. Commis-sion errors represented failure to perform a step correctly. For example, failure to measure the hernia defect was categorized as an omission error, whereas measuring the hernia defect with an inaccurate method was categorized as a commission error. Errors in information, diagnosis, and strategy were categorized as cognitive, and errors in action, procedure, or mechanics were classified as technical. Use of assessment surveys with this type of differentiation allows for development of error metrics in sur-gery and focused error training and feedback.172SIMULATION AND PATIENT OUTCOMESSurgical simulation training is intended to make patient care safe and free of avoidable errors and to maximize opportunities for good clinical outcomes. The Kirkpatrick four-level scale (Table 53-8) characterizes educational intervention effects, including those that might improve surgeon performance in clinical settings (Kirkpatrick level 3) or those that might actually improve patient outcomes (Kirkpatrick level 4).173 Despite the expanding use of simulation in proficiency-based practice models over at least 15 years, there are surprisingly few studies of simulation-based surgical training that can be described as Kirkpatrick level 4. On the other hand, there are numerous studies showing that clinician performance during the course of clinical care is improved after simulation training (Kirkpatrick level 3). As detection of changes in clinical Table 53-8Kirkpatrick level scale of educational outcomesKIRKPATRICK LEVELLEVEL DESCRIPTIONDESCRIPTION FOR SIMULATIONLevel 1ReactionDid the learner perceive value in using a simulator or participating in simulation training?Level 2LearningDid the learner’s knowledge, skill, or attitude improve as a result of the simulation training?Level 3Behavioral changeDid the knowledge, skills, and attitudes acquired during simulation transfer to the clinical environment?Level 4Institutional impactDid the simulation training program lead to improved patient outcomes?Data from Cox T, Seymour N, Stefanidis D: Moving the Needle: Simulation’s Impact on Patient Outcomes, Surg Clin North Am.  2015 Aug;95(4):827-838.outcomes can be quite challenging, it may be difficult to isolate simulation training effects from numerous other factors that can also affect patient outcomes. When looking specifically at a low-frequency complication event such as bile duct injury with laparoscopic cholecystectomy, the detection of a small, positive training effect is statistically improbable. However, the use of available Kirkpatrick level 3 data to support assumptions about training benefits is fully supportable given the preponderance of literature showing such benefit.The best current evidence for improved patient outcomes with simulation is that of technical and cognitive training for central venous catheter (CVC) insertion. In 2009, Barsuk et al monitored catheter-related bloodstream infection incidence in an ICU setting over a 32-month period before and after institu-tion of proficiency-based simulation training. After simulation-trained medical residents began performing CVC insertion, an 85% reduction in these infections was observed (3.2 per 1000 catheter-days reduced to 0.50 infections per 1000 catheter-days).174 Subsequently, the same group reported that the finan-cial savings realized with these improved outcomes amounted to a 7:1 return of the investment for the training.175 In a similar sin-gle unit observational study, Burden et al reported a reduction in catheter-related bloodstream infection incidence from 6.47 per 1000 catheter days to 2.44 per 1000 catheter days after training intervention and comparable financial savings with shorter ICU and hospital stays.176 Single cohort studies have inherent weak-nesses, but a somewhat smaller randomized trial of simulation training versus traditional apprenticeship model-trained controls also showed this reduced infection incidence (1.0 vs. 3.4 infec-tions per 1000 catheter-days, respectively).177Riley and colleagues conducted a study in three small community hospitals, administering TeamSTEPPS (Team  Strategies and Tools to Enhance Performance and Patient Safety) didactic team training to perinatal care teams at one hospital, TeamSTEPPS with an accompanying program of in situ simula-tions at a second, and no intervention at the third hospital, which Brunicardi_Ch53_p2163-p2186.indd   217822/02/19   4:39 PM 2179SKILLS AND SIMULATIONCHAPTER 53served as the study control.178,179 The simulation interventions were designed to involve triage, labor and delivery, and OR components of care. Perinatal outcomes were assessed using the Weighted Adverse Outcomes Score (WAOS). Simulation train-ing resulted in improved clinical results with a 37.4% decrease in WAOS observed in the simulation intervention group, while similar benefit was not observed in either the didactic-trained or control groups.TeamSTEPPS with supplemental simulation training was also studied by Capella and colleagues for team performance and patient outcomes in trauma care.180 Trauma resuscitations for successive 2-month periods separated by didactic and scenario-based simulation training to subjectively-defined proficiency levels (33 before training, 40 after training) were assessed in multiple teamwork domains including overall performance using the TPOT (Trauma Team Performance Observation Tool). Significant improvements were observed post training in leader-ship, situational monitoring, mutual support, communication, and overall scoring. In addition, time to OR was also observed to decrease. Steinemann and colleagues reported on a larger number of trauma resuscitations, 141 before and 103 after in situ trauma bay patient simulation training with accompanying didactic instruction.181 Although significant improvements in patient outcomes were not observed in this study, resuscitation time did decrease following training.In a comprehensive review of literature examining simula-tion impact on patient outcomes, Zendejas identified 50 stud-ies purporting to show patient outcomes.182 For the majority of these, the quality of clinical outcomes evidence was considered low, and appropriate validity data were reported for results in only a small number of published reports. In a subsequent review of 1328 articles resulting from an exhaustive literature search, Cox identified 12 individual articles that reported suf-ficient patient outcomes data to be considered Kirkpatrick level 4.183 Concerns regarding the relatively few studies of this nature are primarily methodological and relate to the prepon-derance of use of the observational preand posttraining study model with its inherent bias risk, rather than randomized con-trolled trials. These studies have also tended to be quite limited in size. In surgery, the general areas of surgeon performance that have lent themselves to study of educational outcomes in the clinical setting after simulation training include technical abilities and observable behaviors during team-based activi-ties. The use of decreased operative time or technical errors as clinical outcomes after simulation training might suggest, but do not clearly establish, a patient safety or other efficacy benefit. However, these metrics have frequently been used to make the case for the potential for such benefits in skills transfer studies for procedures such as laparoscopic cholecystectomy and lapa-roscopic hernia repair.56,63 There is a clear need to obtain high quality evidence of how proficiency-based simulation training impacts surgical patient outcomes.In a recent study examining intern response to pediatric codes, simulation training was shown to significantly reduce the time to request help, to initiate bag-mask ventilation, and to ini-tiate chest compressions.184 Citing the rarity of pediatric codes, investigators measured this effect in in mock code situations using patient simulators. This use of a high-fidelity simulation environment as a surrogate for clinical events, that might oth-erwise be difficult to observe, may be the only practical model available for the study of provider performance outcomes with educational interventions.SIMULATION TRAINING FOR THE PRACTICING SURGEON AND MAINTENANCE OF SKILLGiven the current requirement for FLS and FES certification in residency, some authors have posed the important question of whether such certification should be applied more broadly to surgeons in practice.185 In a 2012 press release, both the ACS and SAGES made the recommendation that all surgeons per-forming laparoscopy obtain FLS certification. The potential to lower malpractice litigation risk under a self-insurance model was used as justification to certify 37 surgeons in FLS in the Harvard system in 2009.186 In a recent report, surgical oncolo-gists new to minimally invasive inguinal lymph node dissec-tion (MILND) were FLS tested prior to performance of their first clinical procedures, which were video-assessed using the GOALS scoring method.187 The FLS score was shown to corre-late with both GOALS results and operative time but not lymph node yield. However, evidence that a lab-based technical and cognitive skills test predicts observed operative technical skill in practicing surgeons is promising and warrants investigative follow-up.At the present time, the American Board of Surgery’s requirements for Maintenance of Certification (MOC) do not specifically include any certification of technical skills that might use surgical simulation.188 Nonetheless, simulation training and testing can be made available to surgeons in practice to provide an avenue for specific training. Although most investigations of VR use for laparoscopy have examined basic skills acquisition in the lab setting far in advance of any measured impact in the clinical OR, a recent innovative study of the use of a VR simulator for “warm-up” practice immediately before a procedure showed that this improved OR performance.189 As new surgical procedures and technologies are introduced to clinical practice, simulation training solutions could serve just as important a purpose to prepare for these as simulation training methods currently serve for laparoscopic surgery. In a recent publication relating to practicing surgeons, Sullivan et al. provide a framework for development of simulation-based certification models for both trainees and faculty surgeons.190FUTURE CONSIDERATIONSSimulation-based training and assessment is firmly established in surgical education, especially in graduate medical education where learners have been more extensively studied than any other simulation user group. The immediate future of simulation in surgery will likely see expanded use of proficiency-based training given the consistent demonstrations of effectiveness in improving surgeon skills and improved educa-tional outcomes as measured in clinical settings.The question of what types of simulation-based assess-ments and training activities might be possible raises questions of where technological advances might open new opportunities.191 The advancement of virtual reality is inevitable, and much richer virtual experiences entering the mainstream in surgical educa-tion seems likely in the near future. Three-dimensional printing technology has been growing in its use and applications and has greatly facilitated the development of anatomically accurate bench top simulations for complex surgical procedures. Some of the materials allow for elegant instrument-based dissections, including the use of electrosurgery.192-1949Brunicardi_Ch53_p2163-p2186.indd   217922/02/19   4:39 PM 2180SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIAdvances in wearables, motion tracking, and sensor tech-nologies allow for a wide variety of hybrid and aug-mented experiences in simulation as well as extensive opportunities for the development of new performance metrics. One study using sensor technology for evaluating clinical breast examination skills noted key performance differences in expe-rienced physicians. Both the sensor data and sensor-guided video analysis allowed for skill quantifications that were previ-ously unknown but critical to performance excellence.195-196Opportunities for remote collaboration are now greatly improved with higher internet speeds, improvements in aug-mented reality technology, and ever-increasing camera reso-lution. VIPAR (Virtual Interactive Presence and Augmented Reality) allows for the visual field of a surgeon to be converted to a simulation and projected in a remote location.197-198 As such, the system allows for intraoperative collaboration and telementoring.199Irrespective of what new simulation and engineering tech-nologies emerge, these technologies are here not just to stay but to grow as assessment and educational tools. This presents abundant opportunities for simulation leaders in surgery to improve the delivery of care by defining best practice in sim-ulation applications and keeping step with current and future changes in surgical practice.REFERENCESEntries highlighted in bright blue are key references.	1.	Leape LL. Error in medicine. JAMA. 1994;272(23):1851-1857.	2.	To err is human: building a safer health system. Washington, DC: National Academy Press, Institute of Medicine; 1999.	3.	Satava RM. Historical review of surgical simulation—a personal perspective. World J Surg. 2008;32(2):141-148.	4.	Martin JA, Regehr G, Reznick R, et al. Objective struc-tured assessment of technical skill (OSATS) for surgical residents. Br J Surg. 1997;84(2):273-278.	5.	Reznick R, Regehr G, MacRae H, Martin J, McCulloch W. Testing technical skill via an innovative “bench station” examination. Am J Surg. 1997;173(3):226-230.	6.	A prospective analysis of 1518 laparoscopic cholecystec-tomies. The Southern Surgeons Club. N Engl J Med. 1991; 324(16):1073-1078.	7.	Rosser JC, Rosser LE, Savalgi RS. Skill acquisition and assessment for laparoscopic surgery. Arch Surg. 1997; 132(2):200-204.	8.	Derossis AM, Bothwell J, Sigman HH, Fried GM. The effect of practice on performance in a laparoscopic simulator.  Surg Endosc. 1998;12(9):1117-1120.	9.	Gallagher AG, Ritter EM, Champion H, et al. Virtual reality simulation for the operating room: proficiency-based training as a paradigm shift in surgical skills training. Ann Surg. 2005;241(2):364-372.	10.	Sachdeva AK. Establishment of American College of Surgeons-accredited Education Institutes: the dawn of a new era in surgical education and training. J Surg Educ. 2010;67(4):249-250.	11.	Scott DJ, Dunnington GL. The new ACS/APDS Skills Curriculum: moving the learning curve out of the operating room. J Gastrointest Surg. 2008;12(2):213-221.	12.	Korndorffer JR, Arora S, Sevdalis N, et al. The American College of Surgeons/Association of Program Directors in Surgery National Skills Curriculum: adoption rate, challenges and strategies for effective implementation into surgical residency programs. Surgery. 2013;154(1):13-20.	13.	Bell RH. Surgical council on resident education: a new organization devoted to graduate surgical education. J Am Coll Surg. 2007;204(3):341-346.	14.	Carraccio CL, Benson BJ, Nixon LJ, Derstine PL. From the educational bench to the clinical bedside: translating the Dreyfus developmental model to the learning of clinical skills. Acad Med. 2008;83(8):761-767.	15.	Ericsson KA. Deliberate practice and acquisition of expert performance: a general overview. Acad Emerg Med. 2008;15(11):988-994.	16.	Ericsson KA, Krampe RT, Tesch-Romer C. The role of deliberate practice in the acquisition of expert performance. Psychol Rev. 1993;100(3):363-406.	17.	Bridges M, Diamond DL. The financial impact of teaching surgical residents in the operating room. Am J Surg. 1999;177(1):28-32.	18.	Gould JC. Building a laparoscopic surgical skills training laboratory: resources and support. JSLS. 2006;10(3):293-296.	19.	Britt LD, Richardson JD. Residency review committee for surgery: an update. Arch Surg. 2007;142(6):573-575.	20.	ACGME Program Requirements for Graduate Medical Education in General Surgery. Revised Common Program Requirements effective: July 1, 2018. Available at: https://www.acgme.org/Portals/0/PFAssets/ProgramRequirements/440GeneralSurgery2018.pdf?ver=2017-10-03-110315-270. Accessed August 27, 2018.	21.	American Board of Surgery. Flexible Endoscopy Curriculum for General Surgery Residents. 2014. Available at: https://www .absurgery.org/xfer/abs-fec.pdf. Accessed August 27, 2018.	22.	Haluck RS, Satava RM, Fried G, et al. Establishing a simulation center for surgical skills: what to do and how to do it. Surg  Endosc. 2007;21(7):1223-1232.	23.	Friedell ML. Starting a simulation and skills laboratory: what do I need and what do I want? J Surg Educ. 2010;67(2):112-121.	24.	Meier AH. Running a surgical education center: from small to large. Surg Clin North Am. 2010;90(3):491-504.	25.	Brunt LM, Halpin VJ, Klingensmith ME, et al. Accelerated skills preparation and assessment for senior medical students entering surgical internship. J Am Coll Surg. 2008;206(5): 897-904; discussion 904-897.	26.	Fernandez GL, Page DW, Coe NP, et al. Boot cAMP: educational outcomes after 4 successive years of preparatory simulation-based training at onset of internship. J Surg Educ. 2012;69(2):242-248.	27.	Krajewski A, Filippa D, Staff I, Singh R, Kirton OC. Implementation of an intern boot camp curriculum to address clinical competencies under the new Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education supervision requirements and duty hour restrictions. JAMA Surg. 2013;148(8):727-732.	28.	Cohen ER, Barsuk JH, Moazed F, et al. Making July safer: simulation-based mastery learning during intern boot camp. Acad Med. 2013;88(2):233-239.	29.	Blackmore C, Austin J, Lopushinsky SR, Donnon T. Effects of postgraduate medical education “boot camps” on clinical skills, knowledge, and confidence: a meta-analysis. J Grad Med Educ. 2014;6(4):643-652.	30.	American Board of Surgery; American College of Surgeons; Association of Program Directors in Surgery; Association for Surgical Education. Statement on surgical preresidency preparatory courses. Surgery. 2014;156(5):1059-1060.	31.	Gomez PP, Willis RE, Schiffer BL, Gardner AK, Scott DJ. External validation and evaluation of an intermediate proficiency-based knot-tying and suturing curriculum. J Surg Educ. 2014;71(6):839-845.	32.	Sanfey H, Ketchum J, Bartlett J, et al. Verification of proficiency in basic skills for postgraduate year 1 residents. Surgery. 2010;148(4):759-766; discussion 766-757.10Brunicardi_Ch53_p2163-p2186.indd   218022/02/19   4:39 PM 2181SKILLS AND SIMULATIONCHAPTER 53	33.	Sanfey H, Dunnington G. Verification of proficiency: a prerequisite for clinical experience. Surg Clin North Am. 2010;90(3):559-567.	34.	Satava RM, Gallagher AG. Next generation of procedural skills curriculum development: proficiency-based progression. J Health Spec. 2015;3:198-205.	35.	Nemeth ZH, Lazar EL, Paglinco SR, et al. Experience of general surgery residents in the creation of small bowel and colon anastomoses. J Surg Educ. 2016;73(5):844-850.	36.	Jensen AR, Wright AS, McIntyre LK, et al. Laboratory-based instruction for skin closure and bowel anastomosis for surgical residents. Arch Surg. 2008;143(9):852-858; discussion 858-859.	37.	Olson TP, Becker YT, McDonald R, Gould J. A simulation-based curriculum can be used to teach open intestinal anastomosis. J Surg Res. 2012;172(1):53-58.	38.	Egle JP, Malladi SV, Gopinath N, Mittal VK. Simulation training improves resident performance in hand-sewn vascular and bowel anastomoses. J Surg Educ. 2015;72(2):291-296.	39.	Palter VN, Grantcharov T, Harvey A, Macrae HM. Ex vivo technical skills training transfers to the operating room and enhances cognitive learning: a randomized controlled trial. Ann Surg. 2011;253(5):886-889.	40.	Melvin WS, Johnson JA, Ellison EC. Laparoscopic skills enhancement. Am J Surg. 1996;172(4):377-379.	41.	Rosser JC, Rosser LE, Savalgi RS. Objective evaluation of a laparoscopic surgical skill program for residents and senior surgeons. Arch Surg. 1998;133(6):657-661.	42.	Derossis AM, Fried GM, Abrahamowicz M, et al. Development of a model for training and evaluation of laparoscopic skills. Am J Surg. 1998;175(6):482-487.	43.	Fried GM, Derossis AM, Bothwell J, Sigman HH. Comparison of laparoscopic performance in vivo with performance measured in a laparoscopic simulator. Surg Endosc. 1999;13(11):1077-1081; discussion 1082.	44.	Stefanidis D, Hope WW, Korndorffer JR, Markley S, Scott DJ. Initial laparoscopic basic skills training shortens the learning curve of laparoscopic suturing and is cost-effective. J Am Coll Surg. 2010;210(4):436-440.	45.	Peters JH, Fried GM, Swanstrom LL, et al. Development and validation of a comprehensive program of education and assessment of the basic fundamentals of laparoscopic surgery. Surgery. 2004;135(1):21-27.	46.	Fraser SA, Klassen DR, Feldman LS, et al. Evaluating laparoscopic skills: setting the pass/fail score for the MISTELS system. Surg Endosc. 2003;17(6):964-967.	47.	Fried GM, Feldman LS, Vassiliou MC, et al. Proving the value of simulation in laparoscopic surgery. Ann Surg. 2004;240(3):518-525; discussion 525-518.	48.	Sroka G, Feldman LS, Vassiliou MC, et al. Fundamentals of laparoscopic surgery simulator training to proficiency improves laparoscopic performance in the operating room—a randomized controlled trial. Am J Surg. 2010;199(1):115-120.	49.	Scott DJ, Ritter EM, Tesfay ST, et al. Certification pass rate of 100% for fundamentals of laparoscopic surgery skills after proficiency-based training. Surg Endosc. 2008;22(8):1887-1893.	50.	Vassiliou MC, Dunkin BJ, Fried GM, et al. Fundamentals of endoscopic surgery: creation and validation of the hands-on test. Surg Endosc. 2014;28(3):704-711.	51.	Pugh C, Plachta S, Auyang E, Pryor A, Hungness E. Outcome measures for surgical simulators: is the focus on technical skills the best approach? Surgery. 2010;147(5):646-654.	52.	Lin E, Szomstein S, Addasi T, et al. Model for teaching laparoscopic colectomy to surgical residents. Am J Surg. 2003;186(1):45-48.	53.	Ghazi A, Stone J, Candela B, Richards M, Joseph J. Simulated inanimate model for physical learning experience (simple) for robotic partical nephrectomy using a 3-D printed kidney model. J Urol. 2015;193(4S):e778.	54.	Kim M, Ni T, Cendan J, Kurenov S, Peters J. A haptic-enabled toolkit for illustration of procedures in surgery (TIPS).  Stud Health Technol Inform. 2007;125:209-213.	55.	Khan IS, Kelly PD, Singer RJ. Prototyping of cerebral vasculature physical models. Surg Neurol Int. 2014;5:11.	56.	Olivieri LJ, Su L, Hynes CF, et al. “Just-in-time” simulation training using 3-D printed cardiac models after congenital cardiac surgery. World J Pediatr Congenit Heart Surg. 2016;7(2):164-168.	57.	Anderson JR, Thompson WL, Alkattan AK, et al. Three-dimensional printing of anatomically accurate, patient specific intracranial aneurysm models. J Neurointerv Surg. 2016;8(5):517-520.	58.	Cendan J, Kim M, Kurenov S, Peters J. Developing a multimedia environment for customized teaching of an adrenalectomy. Surg Endosc. 2007;21(6):1012-1016.	59.	Nathwani JN, Law KE, Ray RD, et al. Resident performance in complex simulated urinary catheter scenarios. J Surg Res. 2016;205(1):121-126.	60.	O’Connell-Long BR, Ray RD, Nathwani JN, Fiers RM, Pugh CM. Errors in bladder catheterization: are residents ready for complex scenarios? J Surg Res. 2016;206(1):27-31.	61.	Issenberg SB, McGaghie WC, Petrusa ER, Lee Gordon D, Scalese RJ. Features and uses of high-fidelity medical sim-ulations that lead to effective learning: a BEME systematic review. Med Teach. 2005;27(1):10-28.	62.	University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston. Surgeons, athletic, musical pros join forces to devise new surgical training program. ScienceDaily.com. Available at: https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2015/09/150918081113.htm. Accessed August 27, 2018.	63.	Vassiliou MC, Feldman LS, Andrew CG, et al. A global assessment tool for evaluation of intraoperative laparo-scopic skills. Am J Surg. 2005;190(1):107-113.	64.	Sturm LP, Windsor JA, Cosman PH, et al. A systematic review of skills transfer after surgical simulation training. Ann Surg. 2008;248(2):166-179.	65.	Palter VN, Grantcharov TP. Simulation in surgical education. CMAJ. 2010;182(11):1191-1196.	66.	Zendejas B, Brydges R, Hamstra SJ, Cook DA. State of the evidence on simulation-based training for laparoscopic surgery: a systematic review. Ann Surg. 2013;257(4): 586-593.	67.	Dawe SR, Pena GN, Windsor JA, et al. Systematic review of skills transfer after surgical simulation-based training.  Br J Surg. 2014;101(9):1063-1076.	68.	Ahlberg G, Enochsson L, Gallagher AG, et al. Proficiency-based virtual reality training significantly reduces the error rate for residents during their first 10 laparoscopic cholecystectomies. Am J Surg. 2007;193(6):797-804.	69.	Banks EH, Chudnoff S, Karmin I, Wang C, Pardanani S. Does a surgical simulator improve resident operative performance of laparoscopic tubal ligation? Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2007;197(5):541.e541-545.	70.	Cosman PH, Hugh TJ, Shearer CJ, et al. Skills acquired on virtual reality laparoscopic simulators transfer into the operating room in a blinded, randomised, controlled trial. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2007;125:76-81.	71.	Gala R, Orejuela F, Gerten K, et al. Effect of validated skills simulation on operating room performance in obstetrics and gynecology residents: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol. 2013;121(3):578-584.	72.	Hogle NJ, Chang L, Strong VE, et al. Validation of laparoscopic surgical skills training outside the operating room: a long road. Surg Endosc. 2009;23(7):1476-1482.	73.	Larsen CR, Soerensen JL, Grantcharov TP, et al. Effect of virtual reality training on laparoscopic surgery: randomised controlled trial. BMJ. 2009;338:b1802.Brunicardi_Ch53_p2163-p2186.indd   218122/02/19   4:39 PM 2182SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	74.	Van Sickle KR, Ritter EM, Baghai M, et al. Prospective, randomized, double-blind trial of curriculum-based training for intracorporeal suturing and knot tying. J Am Coll Surg. 2008;207(4):560-568.	75.	Zendejas B, Cook DA, Bingener J, et al. Simulation-based mastery learning improves patient outcomes in laparo-scopic inguinal hernia repair: a randomized controlled trial. Ann Surg. 2011;254(3):502-509; discussion 509-511.	76.	Palter VN, Grantcharov TP. Development and validation of a comprehensive curriculum to teach an advanced minimally invasive procedure: a randomized controlled trial. Ann Surg. 2012;256(1):25-32.	77.	Palter VN, Orzech N, Reznick RK, Grantcharov TP. Validation of a structured training and assessment curriculum for technical skill acquisition in minimally invasive surgery: a randomized controlled trial. Ann Surg. 2013;257(2):224-230.	78.	Aggarwal R, Ward J, Balasundaram I, et al. Proving the effectiveness of virtual reality simulation for training in laparoscopic surgery. Ann Surg. 2007;246(5):771-779.	79.	Korndorffer JR, Dunne JB, Sierra R, et al. Simulator training for laparoscopic suturing using performance goals translates to the operating room. J Am Coll Surg. 2005;201(1):23-29.	80.	Stefanidis D, Scerbo MW, Montero PN, Acker CE, Smith WD. Simulator training to automaticity leads to improved skill transfer compared with traditional proficiency-based training: a randomized controlled trial. Ann Surg. 2012;255(1):30-37.	81.	Stefanidis D, Korndorffer JR, Markley S, et al. Closing the gap in operative performance between novices and experts: does harder mean better for laparoscopic simulator training?  J Am Coll Surg. 2007;205(2):307-313.	82.	Satava RM. Virtual reality surgical simulator. The first steps. Surg Endosc. 1993;7(3):203-205.	83.	Wilson MS, Middlebrook A, Sutton C, Stone R, McCloy RF. MIST VR: a virtual reality trainer for laparoscopic surgery assesses performance. Ann R Coll Surg Engl. 1997;79(6):403-404.	84.	Seymour NE, Gallagher AG, Roman SA, et al. Virtual reality training improves operating room performance: results of a randomized, double-blinded study. Ann Surg. 2002;236(4):458-463; discussion 463-454.	85.	Grantcharov TP, Kristiansen VB, Bendix J, et al. Randomized clinical trial of virtual reality simulation for laparoscopic skills training. Br J Surg. 2004;91(2):146-150.	86.	Schijven MP, Jakimowicz JJ, Broeders IA, Tseng LN. The Eindhoven laparoscopic cholecystectomy training course—improving operating room performance using virtual reality training: results from the first E.A.E.S. accredited virtual reality trainings curriculum. Surg Endosc. 2005;19(9):1220-1226.	87.	Aggarwal R, Tully A, Grantcharov T, et al. Virtual reality simulation training can improve technical skills during laparoscopic salpingectomy for ectopic pregnancy. BJOG. 2006;113(12):1382-1387.	88.	Larsen CR, Oestergaard J, Ottesen BS, Soerensen JL. The efficacy of virtual reality simulation training in laparoscopy: a systematic review of randomized trials. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2012;91(9):1015-1028.	89.	Nagendran M, Gurusamy KS, Aggarwal R, Loizidou M, Davidson BR. Virtual reality training for surgical trainees in laparoscopic surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013(8):CD006575.	90.	Piromchai P, Avery A, Laopaiboon M, Kennedy G, O’Leary S. Virtual reality training for improving the skills needed for performing surgery of the ear, nose or throat. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015(9):CD010198.	91.	See KW, Chui KH, Chan WH, Wong KC, Chan YC. Evidence for endovascular simulation training: a systematic review.  Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2016;51(3):441-451.	92.	Hamilton EC, Scott DJ, Fleming JB, et al. Comparison of video trainer and virtual reality training systems on acquisition of laparoscopic skills. Surg Endosc. 2002;16(3):406-411.	93.	Youngblood PL, Srivastava S, Curet M, et al. Comparison of training on two laparoscopic simulators and assessment of skills transfer to surgical performance. J Am Coll Surg. 2005;200(4):546-551.	94.	Diesen DL, Erhunmwunsee L, Bennett KM, et al. Effectiveness of laparoscopic computer simulator versus usage of box trainer for endoscopic surgery training of novices. J Surg Educ. 2011;68(4):282-289.	95.	Orzech N, Palter VN, Reznick RK, Aggarwal R, Grantcharov TP. A comparison of 2 ex vivo training curricula for advanced laparoscopic skills: a randomized controlled trial. Ann Surg. 2012;255(5):833-839.	96.	Van Sickle KR, Buck L, Willis R, et al. A multicenter, simulation-based skills training collaborative using shared GI Mentor II systems: results from the Texas Association of Surgical Skills Laboratories (TASSL) flexible endoscopy curriculum. Surg Endosc. 2011;25(9):2980-2986.	97.	Panait L, Akkary E, Bell RL, et al. The role of haptic feedback in laparoscopic simulation training. J Surg Res. 2009;156(2):312-316.	98.	Thompson JR, Leonard AC, Doarn CR, Roesch MJ, Broderick TJ. Limited value of haptics in virtual reality laparoscopic cholecystectomy training. Surg Endosc. 2011;25(4):1107-1114.	99.	Seymour NE, Røtnes JS. Challenges to the development of complex virtual reality surgical simulations. Surg Endosc. 2006;20(11):1774-1777.	100.	Olasky J, Sankaranarayanan G, Seymour NE, et al. Identifying opportunities for virtual reality simulation in surgical education: a review of the proceedings from the Innovation, Design, and Emerging Alliances in Surgery (IDEAS) Conference: VR Surgery. Surg Innov. 2015;22(5):514-521.	101.	Gindre J, Bel-Brunon A, Rochette M, et al. Patient-specific finite-element simulation of the insertion of guidewire during an EVAR procedure: guidewire position prediction validation on 28 cases. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 2017;64(5):1057-1066.	102.	Sedlack RE, Kolars JC. Computer simulator training enhances the competency of gastroenterology fellows at colonoscopy: results of a pilot study. Am J Gastroenterol. 2004;99(1):33-37.	103.	Ahlberg G, Hultcrantz R, Jaramillo E, Lindblom A, Arvidsson D. Virtual reality colonoscopy simulation: a compulsory practice for the future colonoscopist? Endoscopy. 2005;37(12):1198-1204.	104.	Cohen J, Cohen SA, Vora KC, et al. Multicenter, randomized, controlled trial of virtual-reality simulator training in acquisition of competency in colonoscopy. Gastrointest Endosc.  2006;64(3):361-368.	105.	Park J, MacRae H, Musselman LJ, et al. Randomized controlled trial of virtual reality simulator training: transfer to live patients. Am J Surg. 2007;194(2):205-211.	106.	Haycock A, Koch AD, Familiari P, et al. Training and transfer of colonoscopy skills: a multinational, randomized, blinded, controlled trial of simulator versus bedside training. Gastrointest Endosc. 2010;71(2):298-307.	107.	Ferlitsch A, Schoefl R, Puespoek A, et al. Effect of virtual endoscopy simulator training on performance of upper gastrointestinal endoscopy in patients: a randomized controlled trial. Endoscopy. 2010;42(12):1049-1056.	108.	Ende A, Zopf Y, Konturek P, et al. Strategies for training in diagnostic upper endoscopy: a prospective, randomized trial. Gastrointest Endosc. 2012;75(2):254-260.	109.	Shirai Y, Yoshida T, Shiraishi R, et al. Prospective randomized study on the use of a computer-based endoscopic simulator for training in esophagogastroduodenoscopy. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2008;23(7 pt 1):1046-1050.Brunicardi_Ch53_p2163-p2186.indd   218222/02/19   4:39 PM 2183SKILLS AND SIMULATIONCHAPTER 53	110.	Walsh CM, Sherlock ME, Ling SC, Carnahan H. Virtual reality simulation training for health professions trainees in gastrointestinal endoscopy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012(6):CD008237.	111.	Chaer RA, Derubertis BG, Lin SC, et al. Simulation improves resident performance in catheter-based intervention: results of a randomized, controlled study. Ann Surg. 2006;244(3):343-352.	112.	Hseino H, Nugent E, Lee MJ, et al. Skills transfer after proficiency-based simulation training in superficial femoral artery angioplasty. Simul Healthc. 2012;7(5):274-281.	113.	Van Herzeele I, Aggarwal R, Choong A, et al. Virtual reality simulation objectively differentiates level of carotid stent experience in experienced interventionalists. J Vasc Surg. 2007;46(5):855-863.	114.	Van Herzeele I, Aggarwal R, Neequaye S, et al. Experienced endovascular interventionalists objectively improve their skills by attending carotid artery stent training courses. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2008;35(5):541-550.	115.	Cates CU, Patel AD, Nicholson WJ. Use of virtual reality simulation for mission rehearsal for carotid stenting. JAMA. 2007;297(3):265-266.	116.	Hislop SJ, Hedrick JH, Singh MJ, et al. Simulation case rehearsals for carotid artery stenting. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2009;38(6):750-754.	117.	Willaert W, Aggarwal R, Bicknell C, et al. Patient-specific simulation in carotid artery stenting. J Vasc Surg. 2010; 52(6):1700-1705.	118.	Willaert W, Aggarwal R, Harvey K, et al. Efficient implementation of patient-specific simulated rehearsal for  the carotid artery stenting procedure: part-task rehearsal.  Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2011;42(2):158-166.	119.	Desender L, Van Herzeele I, Lachat M, et al. A multicentre trial of patient specific rehearsal prior to EVAR: impact on procedural planning and team performance. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2017;53(3):354-361.	120.	Endo K, Sata N, Ishiguro Y, et al. A patient-specific surgical simulator using preoperative imaging data: an interactive simulator using a three-dimensional tactile mouse. J Comp Surg. 2014;1(10).	121.	Eschweiler J, Stromps JP, Fischer M, et al. Development of a biomechanical model of the wrist joint for patient-specific model guided surgical therapy planning: Part 1. Proc Inst Mech Eng H. 2016;230(4):310-325.	122.	Makiyama K, Yamanaka H, Ueno D, et al. Validation of a patient-specific simulator for laparoscopic renal surgery.  Int J Urol. 2015;22(6):572-576.	123.	Oshiro Y, Yano H, Mitani J, et al. Novel 3-dimensional virtual hepatectomy simulation combined with real-time deformation. World J Gastroenterol. 2015;21(34):9982-9992.	124.	Liu M, Curet M. A review of training research and virtual reality simulators for the da Vinci surgical system. Teach Learn Med. 2015;27(1):12-26.	125.	Bric J, Connolly M, Kastenmeier A, Goldblatt M, Gould JC. Proficiency training on a virtual reality robotic surgical skills curriculum. Surg Endosc. 2014;28(12):3343-3348.	126.	Lyons C, Goldfarb D, Jones SL, et al. Which skills really matter? Proving face, content, and construct validity for a commercial robotic simulator. Surg Endosc. 2013;27(6):2020-2030.	127.	Abboudi H, Khan MS, Aboumarzouk O, et al. Current status of validation for robotic surgery simulators—a systematic review. BJU Int. 2013;111(2):194-205.	128.	Moglia A, Ferrari V, Morelli L, et al. A systematic review of virtual reality simulators for robot-assisted surgery. Eur Urol. 2016;69(6):1065-1080.	129.	Smith R, Patel V, Satava R. Fundamentals of robotic surgery: a course of basic robotic surgery skills based upon a 14-society consensus template of outcomes measures and curriculum development. Int J Med Robot. 2014;10(3):379-384.	130.	Helmreich RL. On error management: lessons from aviation. BMJ. 2000;320(7237):781-785.	131.	Helmreich RL, Davies JM. Anaesthetic simulation and lessons to be learned from aviation. Can J Anaesth. 1997;44(9):907-912.	132.	Gaba DM, DeAnda A. A comprehensive anesthesia simulation environment: re-creating the operating room for research and training. Anesthesiology. 1988;69(3):387-394.	133.	Gaba DM. Improving anesthesiologists’ performance by simulating reality. Anesthesiology. 1992;76(4):491-494.	134.	Boet S, Bould MD, Fung L, et al. Transfer of learning and patient outcome in simulated crisis resource management: a systematic review. Can J Anaesth. 2014;61(6):571-582.	135.	Fung L, Boet S, Bould MD, et al. Impact of crisis resource management simulation-based training for interprofessional and interdisciplinary teams: a systematic review. J Interprof Care. 2015;29(5):433-444.	136.	Paige JT, Kozmenko V, Yang T, et al. High-fidelity, simulation-based, interdisciplinary operating room team training at the point of care. Surgery. 2009;145(2):138-146.	137.	Mitchell P, Wynia M, Golden R, et al. Core principles & values of effective team-based health care. Discussion Paper, Institute of Medicine. 2012. Available at: https://www.nationalahec.org/pdfs/vsrt-team-based-care-principles-values.pdf. Accessed August 27, 2018.	138.	Eddy K, Jordan Z, Stephenson M. Health professionals’ experience of teamwork education in acute hospital settings: a systematic review of qualitative literature. JBI Database System Rev Implement Rep. 2016;14(4):96-137.	139.	Cooper JB, Taqueti VR. A brief history of the development of mannequin simulators for clinical education and training. Qual Saf Health Care. 2004;13 Suppl 1:i11-18.	140.	Paige JT, Kozmenko V, Yang T, et al. Attitudinal changes resulting from repetitive training of operating room personnel using of high-fidelity simulation at the point of care. Am Surg. 2009;75(7):584-590; discussion 590-581.	141.	Powers KA, Rehrig ST, Irias N, et al. Simulated laparoscopic operating room crisis: An approach to enhance the surgical team performance. Surg Endosc. 2008;22(4):885-900.	142.	Fanning RM, Gaba DM. The role of debriefing in simulation-based learning. Simul Healthc. 2007;2(2):115-125.	143.	Paige JT, Arora S, Fernandez G, Seymour N. Debriefing 101: training faculty to promote learning in simulation-based training. Am J Surg. 2015;209(1):126-131.	144.	Levett-Jones T, Lapkin S. The effectiveness of debriefing in simulation-based learning for health professionals: a systematic review. JBI Libr Syst Rev. 2012;10(51): 3295-3337.	145.	Undre S, Koutantji M, Sevdalis N, et al. Multidisciplinary crisis simulations: the way forward for training surgical teams. World J Surg. 2007;31(9):1843-1853.	146.	Yule S, Flin R, Maran N, et al. Surgeons’ non-technical skills in the operating room: reliability testing of the NOTSS behavior rating system. World J Surg. 2008;32(4): 548-556.	147.	Yule S, Parker SH, Wilkinson J, et al. Coaching non-technical skills improves surgical residents’ performance in a simulated operating room. J Surg Educ. 2015;72(6):1124-1130.	148.	Malec JF, Torsher LC, Dunn WF, et al. The mayo high performance teamwork scale: reliability and validity for evaluating key crew resource management skills. Simul Healthc. 2007;2(1):4-10.	149.	Healey AN, Undre S, Vincent CA. Developing observational measures of performance in surgical teams. Qual Saf Health Care. 2004;13(suppl 1):i33-40.	150.	Rosen MA, Salas E, Wilson KA, et al. Measuring team performance in simulation-based training: adopting best practices for healthcare. Simul Healthc. 2008;3(1):33-41.Brunicardi_Ch53_p2163-p2186.indd   218322/02/19   4:39 PM 2184SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART II	151.	Knudson MM, Khaw L, Bullard MK, et al. Trauma training in simulation: translating skills from SIM time to real time.  J Trauma. 2008;64(2):255-263; discussion 263-254.	152.	Hamilton NA, Kieninger AN, Woodhouse J, et al. Video review using a reliable evaluation metric improves team function in high-fidelity simulated trauma resuscitation. J Surg Educ. 2012;69(3):428-431.	153.	Gettman MT, Pereira CW, Lipsky K, et al. Use of high fidelity operating room simulation to assess and teach communication, teamwork and laparoscopic skills: initial experience. J Urol. 2009;181(3):1289-1296.	154.	Dedy NJ, Bonrath EM, Zevin B, Grantcharov TP. Teaching nontechnical skills in surgical residency: a systematic review of current approaches and outcomes. Surgery. 2013;154(5): 1000-1008.	155.	Tan SB, Pena G, Altree M, Maddern GJ. Multidisciplinary team simulation for the operating theatre: a review of the literature. ANZ J Surg. 2014;84(7-8):515-522.	156.	Cumin D, Boyd MJ, Webster CS, Weller JM. A systematic review of simulation for multidisciplinary team training in operating rooms. Simul Healthc. 2013;8(3):171-179.	157.	Darosa DA, Pugh CM. Error training: missing link in surgical education. Surgery. 2012;151(2):139-145.	158.	Birkmeyer JD, Finks JF, O’Reilly A, et al. Surgical skill and complication rates after bariatric surgery. N Engl J Med. 2013;369(15):1434-1442.	159.	Schmidt RA, Lee TD. Motor Learning and Performance: From Principles to Application. 5th ed. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics; 2014.	160.	Kontogiannis T. User strategies in recovering from errors in man-machine systems. Safety Science. 1999;32(1):49-68.	161.	Rasmussen J. Human errors: A taxonomy for describing human malfunction in industrial installations. J Occup Accident. 1982;4(2-4):311-333.	162.	D’Angelo AL, Law KE, Cohen ER, et al. The use of error analysis to assess resident performance. Surgery. 2015;158(5):1408-1414.	163.	Pugh CM, DaRosa DA, Santacaterina S, Clark RE. Faculty evaluation of simulation-based modules for assessment of intraoperative decision making. Surgery. 2011;149(4):534-542.	164.	Tang B, Hanna GB, Cuschieri A. Analysis of errors enacted by surgical trainees during skills training courses. Surgery. 2005;138(1):14-20.	165.	Clark RE, Pugh CM, Yates KA, et al. The use of cognitive task analysis to improve instructional descriptions of procedures.  J Surg Res. 2012;173(1):e37-42.	166.	Law KE, Ray RD, D’Angelo AD, et al. Exploring senior residents’ intraoperative error management strategies: a potential measure of performance improvement. J Surg Educ. 2016;73(6):e64-e70.	167.	Pugh CM, Santacaterina S, DaRosa DA, Clark RE. Intra-operative decision making: more than meets the eye. J Biomed Inform. 2011;44(3):486-496.	168.	Schmitz CC, DaRosa D, Sullivan ME, et al. Development and verification of a taxonomy of assessment metrics for surgical technical skills. Acad Med. 2014;89(1):153-161.	169.	Falcone JL, Hamad GG. The American Board of Surgery Certifying Examination: a retrospective study of the decreasing pass rates and performance for first-time examinees. J Surg Educ. 2012;69(2):231-235.	170.	Reason JT. Human Error. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press; 1990.	171.	Hooper BJ, O’Hare DP. Exploring human error in military aviation flight safety events using post-incident classification systems. Aviat Space Environ Med. 2013;84(8):803-813.	172.	Wiegmann DA. Analysis of error management strategies during cardiac surgery: theoretical and practical implications. Paper presented at: Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, 2010.	173.	Yardley S, Dornan T. Kirkpatrick’s levels and education “evidence.” Med Educ. 2012;46(1):97-106.	174.	Barsuk JH, Cohen ER, Feinglass J, McGaghie WC, Wayne DB. Use of simulation-based education to reduce catheter-related bloodstream infections. Arch Intern Med. 2009;169(15):1420-1423.	175.	Cohen ER, Feinglass J, Barsuk JH, et al. Cost savings from reduced catheter-related bloodstream infection after simulation-based education for residents in a medical intensive care unit. Simul Healthc. 2010;5(2):98-102.	176.	Burden AR, Torjman MC, Dy GE, et al. Prevention of central venous catheter-related bloodstream infections: is it time to add simulation training to the prevention bundle? J Clin Anesth. 2012;24(7):555-560.	177.	Khouli H, Jahnes K, Shapiro J, et al. Performance of medical residents in sterile techniques during central vein catheterization: randomized trial of efficacy of simulation-based training. Chest. 2011;139(1):80-87.	178.	Riley W, Davis S, Miller K, et al. Didactic and simulation nontechnical skills team training to improve perinatal patient outcomes in a community hospital. Jt Comm J Qual Patient Saf. 2011;37(8):357-364.	179.	Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. TeamSTEPPS Guide to Action: Creating a Safety Net for your Healthcare Organization. Available at: https://www.onlineregistrationcenter .com/company_images/347/TeamSTEPPS_GuideToAction .pdf. Accessed August 27, 2018.	180.	Capella J, Smith S, Philp A, et al. Teamwork training improves the clinical care of trauma patients. J Surg Educ. 2010;67(6):439-443.	181.	Steinemann S, Berg B, Skinner A, et al. In situ, multidisciplinary, simulation-based teamwork training improves early trauma care. J Surg Educ. 2011;68(6):472-477.	182.	Zendejas B, Brydges R, Wang AT, Cook DA. Patient outcomes in simulation-based medical education: a systematic review.  J Gen Intern Med. 2013;28(8):1078-1089.	183.	Cox T, Seymour N, Stefanidis D. Moving the needle: simulation’s impact on patient outcomes. Surg Clin North Am. 2015;95(4):827-838.	184.	Ross JC, Trainor JL, Eppich WJ, Adler MD. Impact of simulation training on time to initiation of cardiopulmonary resuscitation for first-year pediatrics residents. J Grad Med Educ. 2013;5(4):613-619.	185.	Hafford ML, Van Sickle KR, Willis RE, et al. Ensuring competency: are fundamentals of laparoscopic surgery training and certification necessary for practicing surgeons and operating room personnel? Surg Endosc. 2013;27(1): 118-126.	186.	Derevianko AY, Schwaitzberg SD, Tsuda S, et al. Malpractice carrier underwrites Fundamentals of Laparoscopic Surgery training and testing: a benchmark for patient safety. Surg Endosc. 2010;24(3):616-623.	187.	Zendejas B, Jakub JW, Terando AM, et al. Laparoscopic skill assessment of practicing surgeons prior to enrollment in a surgical trial of a new laparoscopic procedure. Surg Endosc. 2017;31(8):3313-3319.	188.	Buyske J. Forks in the road: the assessment of surgeons from the American Board of Surgery perspective. Surg Clin North Am. 2016;96(1):139-146.	189.	Calatayud D, Arora S, Aggarwal R, et al. Warm-up in a virtual reality environment improves performance in the operating room. Ann Surg. 2010;251(6):1181-1185.	190.	Sullivan SA, Anderson BM, Pugh CM. Development of technical skills: education, simulation, and maintenance of certification. J Craniofac Surg. 2015;26(8):2270-2274.Brunicardi_Ch53_p2163-p2186.indd   218422/02/19   4:39 PM 2185SKILLS AND SIMULATIONCHAPTER 53	191.	Badash I, Burtt K, Solorzano CA, Carey JN. Innovations in surgery simulation: a review of past, current and future techniques. Ann Transl Med. 2016 Dec;4(23):453.	192.	Gause CD, Hsiung G, Schwab B, et al. Advances in pediatric surgical education: a critical appraisal of two consecutive minimally invasive pediatric surgery training courses.  J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A. 2016;26(8):663-670.	193.	Cheung CL, Looi T, Lendvay TS, Drake JM, Farhat WA. Use of 3-dimensional printing technology and silicone modeling in surgical simulation: development and face validation in pediatric laparoscopic pyeloplasty. J Surg Educ. 2014;71(5):762-767.	194.	Chan HH, Siewerdsen JH, Vescan A, et al. 3D rapid prototyping for otolaryngology-head and neck surgery: applications in image-guidance, surgical simulation and patient-specific modeling. PLoS One. 2015;10(9):e0136370.	195.	Laufer S, Cohen ER, Kwan C, et al. Sensor technology in assessments of clinical skill. N Engl J Med. 2015 Feb 19;372(8):784-786.	196.	Laufer S, D’Angelo AD, Kwan C, et al. Rescuing the Clinical Breast Examination: Advances in Classifying Technique and Assessing Physician Competency. Ann Surg. 2016 Sep 21.	197.	Shenai MB, Dillavou M, Shum C, et al. Virtual interactive presence and augmented reality (VIPAR) for remote surgical assistance. Neurosurgery. 2011;68(1 suppl):200-207; discussion 207.	198.	Shenai MB, Tubbs RS, Guthrie BL, Cohen-Gadol AA. Virtual interactive presence for real-time, long-distance surgical collaboration during complex microsurgical procedures.  J Neurosurg. 2014;121(2):277-284.	199.	Ponce BA, Jennings JK, Clay TB, et al. Telementoring: use of augmented reality in orthopaedic education: AAOS exhibit selection. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2014;96(10):e84.Brunicardi_Ch53_p2163-p2186.indd   218522/02/19   4:39 PM
# Chunk 8956
Brunicardi_Ch53_p2163-p2186.indd   218622/02/19   4:39 PMThis page intentionally left blank

Web-Based Education and Implications of Social MediaLillian S. Kao and Michael E. Zenilman 54chapterINTRODUCTIONSurgical education has changed significantly over the past two decades. Disruptive forces such as work hour restrictions and the advent of laparoscopy have forced educators to rethink how and where to teach residents. Technologies, including the inter-net and web-based applications, have further enabled educators to redesign surgical education (Fig. 54-1). The internet has become an integral tool not just in surgical education but also in Americans’ lives by changing the way that people communicate with each other, access information, and conduct their daily lives. Today, almost 9 in 10 American adults use the internet. Furthermore, the internet has revolutionized education by allowing for expanded reach, asynchronous learning whereby students and instructors do not have to be on the same time schedule, and multimedia materials.Like internet usage, social media has seen a rise in adop-tion over the past decade. Social media is a term that encom-passes multiple computer-mediated platforms that are used for creating and sharing information, ideas, and other content. Social media facilitates communication and interactions across virtual networks. Commonly used platforms include Facebook, Twitter, Snapchat, and Instagram. Social media can be used for multiple purposes including social and professional network-ing; however, this chapter will focus on its uses in surgical education.WEB-BASED EDUCATIONWeb-based educational resources include lectures and webi-nars, simulators, assessment tools, and interactive mentoring and coaching. Furthermore, entire web-based curricula have been developed that can link to online resources such as journal articles, interactive anatomy modules, and videos of operations. There are multiple advantages to web-based education. For sur-gical trainees, web-based educational materials allow access regardless of time of day or night, provide interactive tools for learning (i.e., anatomy), and videos for viewing operations and procedures. Furthermore, for practicing surgeons, web-based educational resources include forums for sharing challenging cases and procuring advice, activities for obtaining continuing 12education, and rapid access to information about new technolo-gies and research. However, there may also be disadvantages in terms of costs and technical problems.Multiple studies have evaluated learning outcomes after implementation of web-based educational interventions. In sur-gical education, these interventions may be used to teach patient care and decision-making via online case studies, convey knowledge using online didactic materials, or introduce surgical skills. However, studies evaluating these interventions tend to be nonrandomized, small, and single center. A 2008 systematic review and meta-analysis by Cook et al evaluated the effect of internet-based learning across healthcare in general. The review suggested that internet-based learning is better than no interven-tion but has similar effectiveness as traditional educational methods. A more recent 2015 systematic review by Jayakumar et al focused on web-based education in surgery. They reported a positive effect, but the majority of studies included in the review lacked a control. Based on the current literature, the internet should be considered one tool among many that can facilitate learning. However, further studies are necessary to identify the key elements that improve effectiveness. Web-based educational materials should be developed keeping adult learning theories and principles in mind.Web-based surgical curricula have been developed both at an institutional and at a national level. A widely-used curricu-lum is the Surgical Council on Resident Education (SCORE) curriculum, which is available via an online portal. Developed in 2006, SCORE is based on the six core competencies required of a graduating resident: patient care, medical knowledge, professionalism, communication, practice-based learning, and systems-based practice. SCORE is the result of an ongoing col-laborative effort of the American Board of Surgery, American College of Surgeons, American Surgical Association, Asso-ciation of Program Directors in Surgery, Association for  Surgical Education, Residency Review Committee for Surgery of the Accreditation Council of Graduate Medical Education, and Society of American Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic  Surgeons. The SCORE curriculum provides content for topics to be covered during a 5-year general surgery residency and is adding fellowship-level content as well. The SCORE Portal modules for each topic include learning objectives, discussion 3Introduction2187Web-Based Education2187Social Media–Based Education2188What is Social Media? / 2188Journal Clubs / 2190Live-Tweeting Conferences / 2190Interactive Forums and  Communities / 2190Public Education / 2192Pitfalls in Web and Social  Media–Based Education2192Implications and Future  Directions2194Brunicardi_Ch54_p2187-p2196.indd   218713/02/19   2:37 PM 2188Disruptive forces1995200020052010ImpactSurgical educationEnabling technologiesFigure 54-1. The relationship between disruptive forces, enabling technologies, and surgical education. (Reproduced with permission from Pugh CM, Watson A, Bell RH, Jr, et al. Surgical education in the internet era. J Surg Res. 2009 Oct;156(2):177-182.)Key Points1	The internet has become an integral tool not just in surgical education but also in Americans’ lives by changing the way that people communicate with each other, access informa-tion, and conduct their daily lives.2	The internet has revolutionized surgical education by allow-ing for expanded reach—asynchronous learning whereby students and instructors do not have to be on the same time schedule—and multimedia materials such as interactive les-sons and videos.3	Despite the appeal of web-based education, systematic reviews and meta-analyses have failed to identify high-quality studies demonstrating that it is superior to standard educational methods in improving learning outcomes.4	Web-based and virtual reality simulators can be used both to teach technical skills and to assess performance. Virtual reality simulators have been effective in training surgeons on technical skills that translate to operating room performance.5	Online and social media–based journal clubs can overcome barriers associated with traditional journal clubs such as lack of a convenient time and no local clinical or methodological experts. However, they may require more time and commit-ment from the leaders, and they may not be as effective as traditional, in-person, faculty-moderated journal clubs.6	Social media rapidly and exponentially increases the spread of information.7	Multiple pitfalls exist with regards to web and social media–based education, including but not limited to: (a) need for more widespread adoption and use, (b) lack of accuracy and regulatory oversight over educational content, (c) issues regarding patient confidentiality and privacy, (d) nondisclo-sure of conflicts of interest, and (e) paucity of evidence for effectiveness of these materials for improving knowledge, attitudes, skills, and outcomes.8	Social media has become a necessary component of surgical practice.questions, text resources and videos, and self-assessment quizzes. Although improvements in quality examination per-formance among residencies that subscribe to SCORE are prom-ising, no studies have definitely demonstrated that SCORE use improves resident knowledge, skills, or clinical performance.Web-based education can also be used for assessing and teaching surgical skills. In 2013, Birkmeyer et al performed a study that correlated surgical skills in bariatric surgery, based on blinded reviews of videotaped operations, to clini-cal outcomes. The ability to discriminate surgeons with good and poor technical skills using video-based assessments has signifi-cant implications for training surgeons and for evaluating their performance. With regards to training, multiple web-based and virtual reality simulators have been developed that allow resi-dents to practice tasks and skills repetitively at their own pace and on their own time. These simulators can quantify efficiency of motion and time to complete a task as well as provide 4real-time feedback. These metrics have been demonstrated to have construct validity (in that they measure what they are sup-posed to be measuring) and criterion validity (in that they cor-relate with operative performance). For example, randomized trials have demonstrated that surgical simulation training corre-lates with decreased operative time and improves subjectively rated performance on technical skills in the live setting. Web-based assessments have also been used in combination with physical simulators to provide similar metrics.With regards to surgeons in practice, there has been increased enthusiasm for the use of video-based coaching to complement intraoperative teaching. In particular, postopera-tive review of videotaped procedures allows surgeons to receive individualized feedback about opportunities for improvement without the time constraints or pressures of the operating room. Randomized trials of surgical coaching in simulated settings suggests benefits over traditional simulator training, and larger trials in a live setting are ongoing. Although most coaching occurs face-to-face, there are opportunities to use web-based coaching. As an example, telementoring has been used to proc-tor surgeons in the operating room, even across the globe.Barriers to web-based education include the up-front costs for development and the need for technical expertise. As already noted, web-based education for teaching knowledge may not be more effective than traditional methods. On the other hand, simulation and video-based coaching hold significant prom-ise in improving training in and assessment of surgical skills. However, widespread implementation of video-based coaching will require a culture shift for surgeons to accept assistance and resources such as time, availability of coaches, and finances. Ongoing studies will provide data regarding the effectiveness of these educational strategies.SOCIAL MEDIA–BASED EDUCATIONWhat is Social Media?Social media is a term describing websites and web-based applications that enable users to share ideas, information, and Brunicardi_Ch54_p2187-p2196.indd   218813/02/19   2:37 PM 2189WEB-BASED EDUCATION AND IMPLICATIONS OF SOCIAL MEDIACHAPTER 54@Twitteruser1@Twitteruser2A@Twitteruser1@Twitteruser2BFigure 54-2. Social media usage can be (a) unidirectional or (b) bidirectional. User names on Twitter are denoted by “@”. A. @Twitteruser2 is following @Twitteruser1. She is receiving all of his messages in her Twitter feed. However, @Twitteruser1 does not follow her back and therefore does not receive her messages in return. B. @Twitteruser1 and @Twitteruser2 follow each other. Therefore, they each receive each other’s messages in their Twitter feeds.content through virtual networking. Although social media is often used to interact with friends and family, social media can also be used for educational and professional purposes. Examples include Twitter-based journal clubs, Facebook-based discussion forums, and professional networking sites such as LinkedIn or ResearchGate. Social media platforms can serve different purposes including social networking, microblogging, blogging, photo sharing, video sharing, and crowdsourcing.Commonly used social media platforms in surgery include Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube. Facebook is the most popular social networking site; it can be accessed via desktops, laptops, and mobile phones. It allows users to exchange information, photos, and videos with specified contacts or “friends” with whom there is a two-way relationship. Twitter is another popu-lar social media platform. It is a microblogging site that, like Facebook, allows exchange of messages and photos but limits messages or tweets to 140 characters or less. Twitter users may have one or two-way relationships with other users. Followers of a user receive all of that person’s tweets in their Twitter feed. YouTube is a social media platform that allows users to share videos.Social media usage in surgery may be unidirectional or bidirectional (Fig. 54-2). For example, journals such as the  New England Journal of Medicine may have a large number of followers but may be following very few users back. Given that the number of journal articles published daily has risen expo-nentially, particularly with the advent of open access journals, keeping up with the surgical literature can be overwhelming. Following journals on social media is one strategy for staying updated. Although conventional media outlets such as newspa-pers and news channels may draw attention to practice-changing studies, social media is another platform by which such infor-mation can be promoted and disseminated by journals. Many surgical journals have an online and social media presence, and many have social media editors who curate the posted materials. Popular social media platforms for journals include Facebook and Twitter. Both platforms allow journals to post text, figures, and links to abstracts or journal articles. Both platforms allow others to share information or comment on articles. However, Twitter restricts text to 140 characters. A recent innovation that may counteract the limited number of allowed characters is the visual abstract, which is a concise pictorial representation of an article’s key points (Fig. 54-3). Recently, a prospective, case-control crossover study was performed whereby tweets about articles from Annals of Surgery were either accompanied by a visual abstract or tweeted with text alone. Accompaniment of a tweet with a visual abstract resulted in a threefold increase in article visits. Thus, the majority of journal followers may merely receive the information about new publications (uni-directional flow of information). However, users may also choose to respond to posts with comments (bidirectional flow of information).Surgicaltreatment ASurgicaltreatment BOutcomesComplications15%11%MortalityAuthor A et al. Journal. Date.Journal Logo8%4%Comparison of Surgical Treatment A VersusSurgical Treatment BPatients with disease XFigure 54-3. A visual abstract is a graphical summary of the main results of a journal article.Brunicardi_Ch54_p2187-p2196.indd   218913/02/19   2:37 PM 2190SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIJournal ClubsJournals may promote bidirectional flow of information by hosting social media–based journal clubs. From an educational standpoint, journal clubs have traditionally served not only as an adjunct to lectures but also as a forum to teach about critical appraisal of the literature. Furthermore, when facilitated by faculty with clinical expertise on the subject being discussed, surgical trainees can bet-ter evaluate how to incorporate the evidence into practice. How-ever, barriers to traditional journal clubs may include poor participation, lack of a convenient time, or absence of local exper-tise in either the clinical topic or research methodology. Social media–based journal clubs can help to overcome these barriers by allowing for asynchronous discussion and expert moderators. Online journal clubs can be carried out in real time, but they also allow respondents to comment hours or even days later to a conversation. Multiple specialties, including surgery, have developed social media–based journal clubs. Tips for suc-cessfully launching an online journal club can be garnered from the expanding experience with them (Table 54-1).Social media–based journal clubs in surgery have been conducted via Facebook, Twitter, or a combination of the two platforms. They have also taken the form of a blog. Although commonly associated with personal journals or diaries, blogs can also be found on professional websites that are updated frequently by a person or group (i.e., by a journal or surgical society). Conversations from journal club discussions can also be compiled and summarized into a transcript either manually or using web-based applications such as Storify. These transcripts can be posted on the journal website or shared. Furthermore, 5aTable 54-1Ten tips for setting up an online journal club TIP 1Create an online home page that serves as a launching pad for your journal club discussions 2Develop and register a hashtag on Twitter 3Incorporate not only Twitter but other collaborative platforms as part of your online journal club 4Ensure that the time of the journal club is convenient for your target audience 5Help prepare participants by aggregating other online resources relevant to the article 6Consider inviting the authors of the featured article or other experts in the field 7Suggest journal club participants consider using specific Twitter management applications during the Tweet chat 8Engage the participants to cultivate and incentivize more discussion 9Connect to the online community by following and engaging with other relevant social media accounts10Link back to the original paper by inserting a comment on PubMed CommonsData from Chan TM, Thoma B, Radecki R, et al. Ten steps for setting up an online journal club, J Contin Educ Health Prof. 2015 Spring;35(2):148-154.summaries from either in-person or online journal clubs can be added to the PubMed citation via PubMed Commons.Preliminary data suggests that online journal clubs increase discussion about articles, views of the abstract, and downloads (Fig. 54-4). For example, the International Gen-eral Surgery Journal Club held four moderated discussions of journal articles on Twitter between March and June 2014. The reviewed articles covered topics relating to bariatric surgery (March), venous thromboembolism in trauma (April), diverticu-litis (May), and contralateral prophylactic mastectomy for breast cancer (June). Although the authors and invited experts only moderated discussions for 3 days, Twitter activity increased in the days preceding and following these discussions. Further-more, daily views of the article and downloads increased cor-respondingly. Thus, online journal clubs are a potential strategy for increasing surgeon education about seminal articles.While social media–based journal clubs hold much appeal, there is a paucity of data regarding their effectiveness in teach-ing participants about critical appraisal skills. A multicenter randomized trial compared journal clubs moderated by a faculty member to online discussions. Surgical resi-dents in both arms utilized modules developed by the Evidence Based Reviews in Surgery Steering Committee; these modules include the relevant guide to critical appraisal and a method-ological and clinical review. Residents randomized to the mod-erated group scored higher on a validated test evaluating critical appraisal skills. Further study is required to assess the effective-ness of social media–based journal clubs in disseminating new knowledge as well as in teaching critical appraisal.Live-Tweeting ConferencesTraditionally, surgeons have attended regional and national conferences to network, learn new information relevant to their practice, and exchange ideas. However, with the advent of social media, surgeons no longer have to physically attend a conference to perform all those activities. Live-tweeting is a term used to describe the posting of comments on Twitter about an event while it is ongoing. Multiple surgical and nonsurgical societies have adopted Twitter to expand the reach of their conferences. By denoting tweets as emanating from a specific conference with a unique hashtag, the reach and number of impressions can actually be measured (Fig. 54-5). The reach refers to the number of unique recipients of messages from a specific group of Twitterers (or people posting on Twitter). Impressions refers to each time a message was delivered to a recipient; a recipient may receive the same message more than once. Neither reach nor impressions measure whether the recipient read the tweet. As an example of how reach and impressions can be used to provide metrics for social media, the Healthcare Hashtag Project allows registered conference hashtags to track the latest tweets, the most prolific Twitterers of conference-related tweets, the most commonly mentioned Twitterers, and the number of impressions (Fig. 54-6) (https://www.symplur.com/healthcare-hashtags/). As noted in the figure, social media rapidly and exponentially increases the spread of information. Transcripts of conference-related tweets can also be assembled to allow a conversation thread to be organized into a cohesive discussion.Interactive Forums and CommunitiesInteractive forums and communities are another method by which both the internet and social media can be used for 5b6Brunicardi_Ch54_p2187-p2196.indd   219013/02/19   2:37 PM 2191WEB-BASED EDUCATION AND IMPLICATIONS OF SOCIAL MEDIACHAPTER 54ATimeDaily HTML Views & PDF Downloads of Featured Article During Each of 4 Monthly IGSJC Twitter Journal ClubsTweets025050075010001250Tweet Activity on #IGSJC10. Mar24. Mar7. Apr21. Apr5. May19. May2. JunB0100Number of HTML Views PDF Downloads200300400100Dates of Journal Club +/–5 DaysMarch 3-5June 4-50255075HTML ViewPDF DownloadFigure 54-4. Impact of a social media–based journal club on Twitter activity, hypertext markup language (HTML) views, and portable document format (PDF) downloads. A. Activity during a Twitter-based journal club such as the International General Surgery Journal Club (IGSJC) can be tracked by denoting the journal club related tweets with a hashtag (#IGSJC). Twitter activity increased during each of four journal clubs. B. Daily HTML views and PDF downloads of featured articles also increased around the time period of the four Twitter journal clubs. (Unpublished data from Sarah Bryczowski and Michael E. Zenilman.)@Twitteruser14 followers(3 unique, 1 shared)Reach: 7 unique usersImpressions: 8 impressionsEach user receivedtweet from@Twitteruser1:1 impression eachReceivedtweet fromboth users:2impressionsEach user receivedtweet from@Twitteruser2:1 impression each@Twitteruser24 followers(3 unique, 1 shared)Figure 54-5. Difference between reach and impressions in Twitter. If there are two Twitter users and each has three unique followers and one shared follower, then there are seven unique recipients of their combined tweets. Their total reach is seven unique users. If both users tweet the same message, then one user will have received the message twice. However, each time the message was delivered counts as an impression; thus, the followers will have a total of eight impressions.Brunicardi_Ch54_p2187-p2196.indd   219113/02/19   2:37 PM 2192SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IIImpressionsTweetsParticipantsAvg Tweets/HourAvg Tweets/Participant4272298443,601The Numbers@User1 123@User2 65@User3 62@User4 46@User5 42@User6 32@User7 21@User8 19@User9 17@User10 16Top 10 by Mentions@User3 27@User11 25@User7 23@User4 23@User12 19@User13 13@User14 12@User15 11@User2 10@User1 9Top 10 by Tweets@User13 103,937@User24 80,956@User4 42,976@User3 40,911@User6 28,966@User41 22,534@User52 14,566@User72 13,514@User35 11,965@User68 9862Top 10 by ImpressionsThe #Surgery Conference In˜uencersFigure 54-6. Example of conference analytics from Healthcare Hashtags (https://www.symplur.com/healthcare-hashtags/). Sur-gery conferences can tag tweets by using a prespecified hashtag (i.e., #SurgeryConference) to denote conference-related messages. These can then be tracked. A mention occurs when a user includes another user’s name in the tweet. Note in the example that even if there are only a few users tweeting about a conference, the number of impressions can be large if several of those users have a large number of followers. For example, @User13 only tweeted 13 times but had 103,937 impressions.educational purposes. They are examples of crowdsourcing whereby information is gathered by enlisting the assistance of a large number of participants. Crowdsourcing often involves the general public or a loosely defined group of individuals as opposed to outsourcing, which tasks a project to a specific company or group. For example, Wikipedia is an example of crowdsourcing. In surgery, an example of crowdsourcing are the web-based communities formed by the American College of Surgeons. Members can belong to one or more communities which are based on specialty (i.e., general surgery or endocrine surgery), geography (i.e., Florida Chapter), level of education (i.e., medical students or senior surgeons), special interest (i.e., surgeon writers), or issue (i.e., quality improvement and advo-cacy). Members can post and respond to discussion threads that cover a wide range of topics including advice for challenging cases, surgical history, and political issues.An example of a social media–based interactive forum is the International Hernia Collaboration (IHC) which is housed on Facebook. Participants include not only surgeons but also healthcare providers and industry representatives interested in improving outcomes after hernia surgery. Membership in the IHC is limited to those who have been vetted and approved. The forum allows members to ask for advice on difficult cases, debate controversial topics, post step-by-step instructions on procedures or management strategies, and disseminate informa-tion rapidly to a wide audience. Collaborative forums such as the IHC allow for real-time, interactive, case-based, continuing education.Public EducationThe educational opportunities provided by the internet and social media are not limited to healthcare providers. The inter-net and social media are also being increasingly used to educate patients and their families. There are multiple media through which health education is spread, including, but not limited to, online or social media discussion forums run by patients, patient support groups, healthcare providers, or healthcare orga-nizations; blogs or newsrooms; or electronic and mobile health patient portals. Social media allows patients rapid access to information regardless of time or location. However, as noted in the following section, the accuracy of social media–based educational materials cannot be guaranteed, and patients should utilize caution in relying on the information to make important healthcare decisions.PITFALLS IN WEB AND SOCIAL MEDIA–BASED EDUCATIONDespite the many advantages of web and social media–based education, significant potential pitfalls still remain. First, widespread adoption and utilization is a challenge. Although internet and mobile phone usage is prevalent, effec-tiveness of web-based educational materials is dependent upon trainees’ and surgeons’ uptake of the technology and available resources. Despite increasing availability of the internet and mobile technology, not all surgeons use it for educational pur-poses. For example, a systematic review and meta-analysis by Guraya et al found that three out of four medical students use social networking sites, but only one out of five uses them for educational purposes. Furthermore, lack of utilization can impact educational effectiveness. In the previously mentioned multicenter trial comparing a moderated journal club to an online version, low participation in the Internet journal club was postulated to be a significant factor in the poorer perfor-mance on a critical appraisal test. More attention to instruc-tional design may improve uptake and effectiveness. A systematic review and meta-analysis by Cook et al determined that features such as interactivity, practice exercises, repeti-tion, and feedback are associated with improved learning out-comes. The authors also noted that the evidence base upon which to design internet-based learning programs is limited by poor study methodology, failure to use conceptual frame-works, and lack of adherence to reporting standards. Thus, while the aforementioned features should be considered in designing future web and social media–based educational pro-grams, further evidence-based guidance is needed.Second, the quality of information available online and via social media may not be accurate or reliable. Multiple reports have been published regarding the inaccuracies of web-based educational materials. Surgeons and surgical trainees should carefully evaluate the source of educational material, search for conflicts of interest that may result in biased information, assess how recently the information was updated, and cross-check references. The lay public may have more difficulty in identifying trustworthy surgical educational materials on the internet. Healthcare providers should guide patients to reputable websites and to encourage discussion regarding the accuracy of the content.Third, useful dialog and advice about difficult cases must be balanced with ethical considerations surrounding patient con-fidentiality and privacy. Appropriate safeguards must be taken 7Brunicardi_Ch54_p2187-p2196.indd   219213/02/19   2:37 PM 2193WEB-BASED EDUCATION AND IMPLICATIONS OF SOCIAL MEDIACHAPTER 54Table 54-2The American College of Physicians Ethics, Professionalism and Human Rights Committee; the American College of Physicians Council of Associates; and the Federation of State Medical Boards Special Committee on Ethics and Professionalism published a position paper on online medical professionalismPosition 1Use of online media can bring significant educational benefits to patients and physicians, but it may also pose ethical challenges. Maintaining trust in the profession and in patient–physician relationships requires that physicians consistently apply ethical principles for preserving the relationship, confidentiality, privacy, and respect for persons to online settings and communications.Position 2The boundaries between professional and social spheres can blur online. Physicians should keep the two spheres separate and comport themselves professionally in both.Position 3Email or other electronic communications should only be used by physicians in an established patient–physician relationship and with patient consent. Documentation about patient care communications should be included in the patient’s medical record.Position 4Physicians should consider periodically “self-auditing” to assess the accuracy of information available about them on physician-ranking websites and other sources online.Position 5The reach of the internet and online communications is far and often permanent. Physicians, trainees, and medical students should be aware that online postings may have future implications for their professional lives.Data from Farnan JM1, Snyder Sulmasy L, Worster BK, et al: Online medical professionalism: patient and public relationships: policy statement from the American College of Physicians and the Federation of State Medical Boards, Ann Intern Med. 2013 Apr 16;158(8):620-627.to ensure that patients cannot be identified based on provided information, that patients have consented to have their informa-tion posted anonymously, and that all case-related comments are appropriate and professional. While common sense should be utilized in posting about patient cases, only a few organizations have published guidelines for how to safeguard against potential pitfalls. In 2013, the American College of Physicians Ethics, Professionalism, and Human Rights Committee; the American College of Physicians Council of Associates; and the Federa-tion of State Medical Boards Special Committee on Ethics and  Professionalism published a position statement about online medical education (Table 54-2). The paper stated that “Maintain-ing trust in the profession and in patient–physician relationships requires that physicians consistently apply ethical principles for preserving the relationship, confidentiality, privacy, and respect for persons to online settings and communications.”Fourth, conflicts of interest must be clearly stated. Jour-nals require authors to declare relevant conflicts of interest, but multiple studies suggest that these often go unreported. Simi-larly, conflicts of interest should be disclosed on social media. However, such disclosures may be more difficult on social media due to the limited number of allowable characters (i.e., 140 characters for Twitter) or to the way information is propa-gated. For example, a surgeon may disclose an industry relation-ship on an original tweet, but the disclosure may not appear in subsequent comments of a discussion thread. Surgeons post-ing on social media must make it their ethical and professional obligation to disclose their conflicts of interest. Furthermore, users of social media content must be aware of the potential for bias introduced by undisclosed conflicts of interest and per-form due diligence in assessing the reliability of the source. Lastly, regulatory bodies and professional organizations should publish standardized guidelines for disclosing on social media or develop mechanisms by which disclosure can be publicly accessed (such as the Open Payments database).Fifth, professionalism must always be maintained. Sur-geons posting content on the web or on social media must be aware that information will be widely disseminated and avail-able for posterity; messages posted on social media cannot be fully retracted. As already mentioned, surgeons must strive to maintain patient privacy, ensure accuracy of information, and disclose conflicts of interest. Furthermore, surgeons must be aware of unintentional interpretations of messages (i.e., as discriminatory or unprofessional). Multiple studies of health-care providers’ social media sites have identified potentially and clearly unprofessional content; these studies have included medical students, residents, and practicing surgeons. Despite the prevalence of unprofessional content, few surgical residency programs have formal institutional social media policies. Fur-thermore, the American College of Physicians and Federation of State Medical Boards position statement only addresses a few of the issues surrounding web-based activities including for patient and physician education (Table 54-3).Table 54-3Online medical professionalism and educationPOSITIONS ON PROFESSIONALISM IN ONLINE PATIENT AND PHYSICIAN EDUCATION•	The Internet can be a powerful tool for education.•	Physicians should guide patients to high quality online resources that are accurate and objective. These sites should have peer-reviewed content or have verifiable mechanisms for quality control of information.•	Online resources for learning can be used by patients and physicians.•	The internet and social networking can be used to improve public health. Physicians engaged in online communities should ensure the security of the networks and restriction of participation to verified users. Clinical scenarios should not contain any personal identifying information, and patient consent should be obtained before sharing the vignette.•	Discussion of frustrations online undermines trust and professionalism and should be avoided.Data from Farnan JM1, Snyder Sulmasy L, Worster BK, et al: Online medical professionalism: patient and public relationships: policy statement from the American College of Physicians and the Federation of State Medical Boards, Ann Intern Med. 2013 Apr 16;158(8):620-627.Brunicardi_Ch54_p2187-p2196.indd   219313/02/19   2:37 PM 2194SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONSPART IILastly, studies evaluating the effectiveness of web-based education have had varied results. A recent systematic review by Taveira-Gomes et al assessed 251 articles using computer-based learning methodologies in medical education; the num-ber of articles on this topic has increased over time. The most commonly used metrics for evaluating the effectiveness of these methodologies were assessments of knowledge, attitudes, and skills. The majority of studies reported positive effects on these outcomes, although the more rigorous studies (i.e., randomized trials) were less likely to find a positive effect. Online activ-ity (i.e., number of posts or views) was tracked in a few stud-ies, but results were conflicting regarding whether increased engagement correlated with improved performance. This review suggests that high-quality studies are needed of web-based edu-cational interventions and that these studies need to include measures of clinical performance and outcomes.IMPLICATIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONSThe Society of University Surgeons’ Social and Legislative Committee issued a position statement entitled: “Social media is a necessary component of surgery practice.” Given the rapid pace with which technology is advancing and the familiar-ity of the current generation (Generation Z) with the inter-net, surgeons have no choice but to harness the power of the internet and social media or risk being left behind. Many jour-nals are phasing out print versions, and several journals are already online only. Furthermore, textbooks may also become a relic from the past as publishers move towards developing digi-tal versions that include interactive graphics, audio, and video.As surgical education continues to evolve, future directions may include broader indications for utilization of weband social media-based resources. For example, video-based coaching with face-to-face discussions have been used postoperatively to sup-plement intraoperative teaching. However, preoperative crowd-sourcing in planning a challenging case or intraoperative video telementoring are other applications of video-based coaching.Future research efforts should focus on identifying the most effective formats and components of web and social media–based educational interventions, using rigorous methods to compare educational methods, and measuring clinical out-comes. Moreover, standardized guidelines should be instituted in order to safeguard against ethical and professional misconduct.BIBLIOGRAPHYBirkmeyer JD, Finks JF, O’Reilly A, Oerline M, et al; Michigan Bariatric Surgery Collaborative. Surgical skill and complica-tion rates after bariatric surgery. N Engl J Med. 2013;369(15): 1434-1442. This study correlated blinding reviewer ratings of videotaped laparoscopic gastric bypass procedures to clinical outcomes. Greater skill was associated with lower rates of com-plications, reoperations, readmissions, and emergency depart-ment visits.Bresnahan ER, Huynh DTK, Jacob B. Social media and education in hernia repair. In: Hope WW, Cobb WS, Adrales GL, eds. Textbook of Hernia. Cham: Springer International Publishing; 2017:373-379. This book chapter describes the International Hernia Collaboration, which is a Facebook-based community of practicing surgeons, trainees, and industry representatives. The goals of the collaboration include exchange of ideas and advice regarding patient care, discussion and debate of controversial topics in hernia management, and dissemination of information to a global audience.Chan TM, Thoma B, Radecki R, et al. Ten steps for setting up an online journal club. J Contin Educ Health Prof. 2015; 35(2):148-154. Written by a multidisciplinary group of authors, this article provides 10 helpful hints for setting up an online journal club, using examples from existing journal clubs.Cook DA, Levinson AJ, Garside S, Dupras DM, Erwin PJ, Montori VM. Instructional design variations in internet-based learn-ing for health professions education: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Acad Med. 2010;85(5):909-922. This systematic review and meta-analysis of 51 studies, including 30 random-ized trials, identified several key features of internet-based learning interventions that were associated with improved learning outcomes: interactivity, practice exercises, repeti-tion, and feedback. However, the evidence base upon which to design internet-based learning programs is limited by poor study designs, failure to use conceptual frameworks, and lack of adherence to reporting standards.Cook DA, Levinson AJ, Garside S, Dupras DM, Erwin PJ, Montori VM. Internet-based learning in the health professions: a meta-analysis. JAMA. 2008;300(10):1181-1196. This meta-analysis of 201 studies reported that internet-based instruction had a positive effect on educational outcomes as compared to no intervention, but that there was similar effectiveness between internet-based instruction and traditional educational methods.Farnan JM, Synder Sulmasy L, Worster BK, Chaudhry HJ, Rhyne JA, Arora VM; American College of Physicians Ethics, Profes-sionalism and Human Rights Committee; American College of Physicians Council of Associates; Federation of State Medical Boards Special Committee on Ethics and Professionalism. Online medical professionalism: patient and public rela-tionships: policy statement from the American College of  Physicians and the Federation of State Medical Boards. Ann Intern Med. 2013;158(8):620-627. This position statement pro-vides recommendations on issues relating to professional use of the internet and social media including but not limited to: use of social media for nonclinical purposes, patient confidentiality in online discussions, and use of web-based patient education resources.Guraya SY. The usage of social networking sites by medical stu-dents for educational purposes: a meta-analysis and systematic review. N Am J Med Sci. 2016;8(7):268-278. This review of 10 articles published between 2004 and 2014 suggested that although 75% of medical students use social networking sites, only 20% use them for academic or educational purposes. Fur-thermore, none of these studies evaluated whether use of social media improved academic performance.Ibrahim AM, Lillemoe KD, Klingensmith ME, Dimick JE. Visual abstracts to disseminate research on social media: a prospective, case-control crossover study. Ann Surg. 2017;266(6):e46-e48. This prospective, case-control crossover study compared the impact of tweets alone versus tweets accompanied by a visual abstract on article visits; there was a threefold increase when visual abstracts accompanied the tweets.Jayakumar N, Brunckhorts O, Dasgupta P, Khan MS, Ahmed K. e-Learning in surgical education: a systematic review. J Surg Educ. 2015;72(6):1145-1157. This systematic review of 38 studies suggested that while the majority of studies evaluating electronic learning in surgical education demonstrate a positive effect, most lack a proper control.McLeod RS, MacRae HM, McKenzie ME, Victor JC, Brasel KJ; Evidence Based Reviews in Surgery Steering Committee. A moderated journal club is more effective than an Internet journal club in teaching critical appraisal skills: results of a multicenter randomized controlled trial. J Am Coll Surg. 8Brunicardi_Ch54_p2187-p2196.indd   219413/02/19   2:37 PM 2195WEB-BASED EDUCATION AND IMPLICATIONS OF SOCIAL MEDIACHAPTER 542010;211(6):769-776. This multicenter randomized trial reported that surgical residents who participated in a journal club moderated by a faculty member scored higher on a vali-dated test of critical appraisal than those who participated in an online journal club.Pugh CM, Watson A, Bell RH Jr, et al. Surgical education in the internet era. J Surg Res. 2009;156(2):177-182. This article describes the factors that led to a change in surgical education over the last two decades.Taveira-Gomes T, Ferreira P, Taveira-Gomes I, Severo M, Ferreira MA. What are we looking for in computer-based learning inter-ventions in medical education? A systematic review. J Med Internet Res. 2016;18(8):e204. This systematic review assessed recent studies on computer-based learning (CBL) for types of software platforms and interventions and adherence to current recommendations for CBL research.Brunicardi_Ch54_p2187-p2196.indd   219513/02/19   2:37 PM
